Polynesian Religion (Edward Smith Craighill Handy, 1927)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/polynesianreligi0000hand). Handy's Bishop Museum synthesis of Polynesian religion - tapu, mana, gods and ritual across Hawaii, Tahiti, Samoa and New Zealand.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Library of the 
““urel Divinity School 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 
| 

BY 

E. 8S. CRAIGHILL HANDY 

BERNICE P. BrsHop MusEUM 

BULLETIN 34 

y 

A Se | 
d\_ LIBRARY / 

BAYARD DOMINICK EXPEDITION 

PUBLICATION NUMBER 12 

Property ef ~ # 
PACIFIC Slesca: RACK 
LIBRARY Graduate Theological 
Union Library 

HONOLULU, HAWAII 
PUBLISHED BY THE MUSEUM 

1927 

CONTENTS 

Page 

ETEROCUCt Oli te Meee oes Martyr netce te Dement fore rier wade oc. 5 a AM 7 WEED Wer eee ae 3 
Philosophygo tether te ligion eat eee wegen ea ee Mere ewe. gran reece ee 9 
COSMO COTY gene ee eee ERT Oe ca ere |, Se. eS. be EN ees Oe 9 
INAtunew aE SVC Ich dima ish see ee wee eee ene ee es eee ee 25 
AEN GP, SR SC SAL ak BAIRD ar EUROS, 50 ote id ed UU ROO Be ores ce Et A, 26 

INAtU emda lis ti Cues eters = ae eee te ER IROLLS, CgeD “SOS 6 Re cA BA PE Wey FOS Sta dt 34 
PRA DU recta no 2 ee ee lace FN leek es ame Ce EL Sc ee VN oe 43 
Releases trome psy Chicei ii lerice. tcc emcees tee tee ed ee 50 
Manisepsychicenatite st teers. ea FR ers. Paw eT oe eee 54 
Destinyaotws ol sites. exe eee aE PEW ER rN shar ee Or 65 
Deities eee id ete coe" 8 ea Some gO a ee Bae Si cs eh Wn 8 en ee a 87 
Godsrandins pinitsiaeeue sn eaten SUE Lek ede vad ae 87 
Phew Spremierg Beilior te eetieeat «aren tat ee ate lent hk UR Oye Aree 95 
hetinajotepantheonsesee se teed A tre once eee he oe pA) te) Op Oy oe ee 98 

DOC eRIO NeW OLSILDS tet aoe Pears ae ein eee Ree pL BS pete yt 2 121 
@Hiectsmveneratedt s- .cot eee ee Oe eee eed ne ee feel eee 121 
butane nteriiedia tics, ee. sate teen we ee ee et eee 135 
bWheadivinesChietas: 6 cll t ae en et ee On ee ee ee ee 138 

“ID SVSe TT CS eter Bete a NRCan ace Irene nox UNO at em etIene eay PI Santora: TL Oo 149 

Ee DB LODING He Ceci Rte tecet oe Ler sce cae ta Teaco ade Si cry ipa ee a 159 
SACHECEDlA CES ae Me eren ere Seren ee Mendy sic Be Pak da EE SN EA as EO ee 166 
iPlacevotathestempleninathe scult) teen ey ee ey pene 177 
Offering strand sacrifices yes eee epee Ue ete ee PS ee ve ee 183 
leastinion mn a ae ut ure oa bes VERN ee eR NR ab in aw ee 2 oe Oe 195 

fay CLOT ODEN ekece exter: rete ees, eee Lene A et nL SROs e017 0 Aee 197 
hia nti gy eyes ve eel eel cad Sede A Rl ae ed Ne vas a ere 208 
IDESIVCrT eee” v. eee ag Sie eae eos De ae es es pe RE RE ae ANU ra el UA 210 
TROTUERS. as 0) lek CS eae IRs Oe er rN SN ese ONS SN Seay PE RRs 5k SR Nee 15. 212 
BEC EN TT eS pee meen See AE Ay Rete Bees 135) EE eg ee Poe eRe ae tr eR Se ea 212 
RutesmoceeChild MOOG wanid sviOUt tee once One eto coe Ne ceae ee ee ee 217 
VUGY Tein OC Meee ET Te os I OE NOE I) eet ne RPE 2 Shan a.nd PE! 6 227 

SIC KTS 5 mR Ne eee Ce at Eve et Se eh CONE bea Andee A 233 

LENE Cavey tal? Selkiacs ¢ Sc A E ch Sante Mela er SORA Ae ener Peer RNC OL Pena LR A IAN Ere nen S02, cue Y 248 
DeticationmaniGmmmenotialia testi vials | seco 5. cre ek ese een ne 259 
AVS Tem a Paces SS dd TPE No 2 oe og ee cs Se ame ge 265 
(Wonsecratecaeind ist isvspee= eee eee ce le ee LS ee ah a 9s eet ke 282 
Seasofia Mere til it vaenee ees eer ee eA a aed ek tenes al nae ee en On ee 296 
Ethno gta phivemcom sid Ora tions wees eee see ce ae tec, ee ere 312 
eihemlndoseoly nectar () pet eee me ean cee any ie eee ee ome et eine Sere 312 
ebhemebanoaloaw cliltyeemee see ert oe at J ce te Se Bele eS eee 321 

HP OUKTIStV. em aM ms OTTO WU ie EL ATES esr ase ees pana oe ee ee eee een EI 328 
GreTe rralMnCONIC LUIS Of nemee tre =e near ig SEL PU oa ere eee coe Se eo eR eae ere 330 
[Behe OYE EN DSO NY ) cecesetetysee Atl os umn ee EER Iaas eee an Ree eRe Sealer ee cs Fee bel Se Se Me eee eet 331 
LP ECNES Se ha ca All eid os et PR Any EP he BOE ee Ee OE eh oer ae Net orer B 337 

119@7 

AN ANCIENT HAWAIIAN PRAYER 

Na Aumakua mai ka la hiki a ka la kau, 
Mai ka hookui a ka halawai; 

Na Aumakua ia ka hina kua, ia ka hina alo, 
Ja kaa akau i ka lani. 

O kiha i ka lani, 

Owe i ka lani 

Nunulu i ka lani, 

Kaholo i ka lani, 

Eia ka pulapula a oukou, 

E malama oukou ia ia . . ! 

Ye ancestral guardians from the sun’s rising to the sun’s setting, 
From heaven and earth’s joining at the horizon; 
Ye ancestral guardians backward leaning, forward bending, 
On the right hand in the heavens. 
There is a breathing in the heavens, 
A murmuring in the heavens, 
A reverberation in the heavens, 
A quickening in the heavens: 
Here is your child, 
Safeguard him! 

Polynesian Religion 

By 
E. S. Craicuint, HAnpDy 

INTRODUCTION 

This study seeks to present as simply as possible an interpretative expo- 
sition of the essential elements of belief and practice characteristic of the 
ancient worship of the Polynesian peoples. It is the product of three 
years of literary research devoted to this subject in preparation of a thesis, 
which was presented at Harvard University in 1920 for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy in Anthropology, and of five years of subsequent per- 
sonal investigation in the different island groups of Polynesia. The illustra- 
tions are therefore drawn both from literature and from evidence obtained 
directly from natives in the course of personal investigation. 

The impelling interest in this pursuit has been the search for underlying 
meanings in the religion and the discovery of the principles upon which 
the religion was founded. The needs of interpretative exposition of the 
native philosophy have throughout had the primary influence in moulding 
the study and determining its form and content. At the same time, an 
attempt has been made to create an adequate depiction of the Polynesian 
worship which up to this time never has been described as a unified system, 
and to do so in a manner worthy of a religion which to me seems to deserve 
a place among the most advanced of the classic nature cults. 

In describing this religion it has been found best not to use the terms 
generally employed in academic description of natural religion because they 
fit very imperfectly the Polynesian religious modes when these were allowed 
to unfold their meanings and relationships after their own fashion. In the com- 
position of the Polynesian worship will be found magic, animism, animatism, 
fetichism, and totemism, as well as phenomena which exemplify all higher 
phases of religious belief up through polytheism and polydemonism, even 
to a distinct tendency toward monotheism. But neither the whole nor any 
part of the Polynesian system of worship is subject to isolation within the 
narrow confines cf any academic pigeonhole without loss of much of its 
essential significance, for no item is to be fully understood except in the 
light of the whole complex of thought and custom of which it was a part. 
In only one pigeonhole may Polynesian religious phenomena be safely 

4 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

placed for reference, and that is a very large one, labeled “Polynesian 
Culture in its Entirety.” \ 

A general use of the word “magic,” in particular, is avoided here because 
of its many connotations and limitations. The term carries with it, certainly 
for all readers unfamiliar with modern interpretation of primitive thought, 
and for most students and theorists in this field, the suggestion of the 
miraculous. Indeed, the word is defined in the Encyclopedia Britannica 
(11th ed.) as “the general term for the practice and power of wonder- 
working, as depending on the employment of supposed supernatural 
agencies.” To the Polynesian mind there was nothing miraculous about 
the existence of psychic rapport between objects or persons, or in nature 
as a whole. Furthermore, the connotation of the word is bad, for it carries 
the suggestion of an inferior grade of practice such as enchantment and 
witchcraft. "To use such a word to denote all the theory and practice based 
on the principle of psychic rapport as a law in psychic nature is to name 
the principle after the least important of its manifestations. In describing 
the Polynesian religion, it would be as inappropriate to apply this term to 
the higher manifestations of this principle of rapport as to call the venera- 
tion of the distant and exalted ancestral deities necromancy. In this study 
the term magic will be employed only in discussing the manipulations of 
private practitioners such as healers and witches, whose methods were 
founded upon, but were not the source of, the principle of psychic rapport. 

It has been my experience, in working directly with natives in Polynesia, 
that an ethnologist who holds before himself the ideal of true description 
and unbiased record must, so far as he is able, lose all preconceptions and 
seek to come into rapport with the native mind, making himself a medium 
for the expression of the native thought. For the trained ethnologist enter- 
ing the field for the first time, the most dangerous of all preconceptions are 
those growing out of accepted theoretical interpretations in which he has 
been schooled on the one hand, and out of comparative knowledge of other 
cultures, on the other. 

What is striven for in this work is to cast the description of the Poly- 
nesian worship in the mould of the native thought itself. To realize such 
an ideal even in a small degree necessitates the student’s surrendering all 
preconceptions. While in the field he must even learn at times to bring 
into abeyance the reasoning faculty of his mind, so that his thought may by 
an unconscious process accommodate itself to that which he seeks to appre- 
hend, and be permeated by it. By a habitual cultivation of a receptive and 
non-critical attitude of feeling and thought, the student comes by degrees 
into sympathetic rapport with his subject and his people. Gradually he 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 5 

learns how to sink his mind, so to speak, into the depths of his subject. 
It goes without saying that the habit of “entering in” must be controlled, 
otherwise the mind practising this species of devotional exercise in the 
interests of science may find itself unable to rise to the surface to reveal 
its discoveries. The sincere student who desires to understand the inner 
meaning of any religion must be capable of a certain degree of self-sur- 
render and adaptation. The day is rapidly passing, it is to be hoped, in 
which the study of religious beliefs as purely objective phenomena, capable 
of explanation in the light of reason alone, will be an accredited academic 
method of interpreting any of the manifestations of worship. Religion, 
essentially an expression of a subjective reaction to experience, if it is to 
be truly interpreted, requires the mystical and intuitional equally as much 
as the logical faculty of the mind. 

Feeling and emotion have first place, thinking and intellection second, 
as sources of the native’s psychic consciousness, which dominated every 
phase of his life. So feeling must come first, and intellection second, with 
the student who would comprehend.!’ By no amount of hard thinking or 
skillful ratiocination will a pure intellectualist be able to understand the 
sense or feeling of psychic power in nature which is the basis of the mana 
concept and worship through rapport. The intellect unaided is incapable of’ 
comprehending the native’s sense of the immanence of power and of invisible 
presences in nature. In fact these are difficult to explain to any one who does 
not know from personal experience how it feels to be alone, or in company 
with emotionally sensitive natives, in the vastnesses of sea and mountains, in 
the silence of verdant forestland, or the bleakness of desert places. Nor can 
any one fully comprehend the meaning of personal mana who has not asso- 
ciated with and felt the authority and magnetism of those born and bred with 
the consciousness of chiefly divinity and power. In the native’s highly sensi- 
tized and powerful emotional nature is to be found the mainspring of his 
religious expression. His intellect, being of a high order—for he came of 
high class stock endowed with advanced teachings (see Ethnographic Con- 
siderations )—successfully interpreted his feelings in a logical system of 
religious philosophy. 

The word psychic as here employed signifies all that for the Polynesian 
pertained to the supersensory, the physically intangible and invisible, aspect 
of nature. “Psychic” rather than “spiritual” is chosen as the proper term 
to describe this phase of the native’s consciousness because the “spiritual” 
word implies a sense of moral aspiration such as is only faintly discernible 
in the Polynesian worship. The native religious sense was spiritistic rather 

1 When it comes to description, however, the order must be reversed in presentation in a 
study such as that which follows, which attempts scientific, rather than artistic, interpretation. 

6 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

than spiritual, and may therefore be spoken of as psychic. While some 
of the native concepts were admittedly spiritual in the highest modern 
sense of the word, most of them had to do with lower orders of beings 
and practices, half of them destructive and evil, that cannot be termed 
spiritual except with a total disregard for the accepted modern signification 
of the term. 

For the native, the events of his psychic life were as clearcut as those 
of his physical existence. Of the two the psychic played the greater part 
in determining his behavior, for it was regarded as being the precursor 
of the physical. The psychic and physical were believed to be comple- 
mentary in every activity and experience, being accepted as inseparable 
component elements in worldly existence. The physical was conceived to be 
consequent on the psychic. ‘The prerequisite for successful worldly enter- 
prise was favorable orientation of the controlling psychic powers and influ- 
ences. Hence it was that rites initiated, accompanied, and ended all im- 
portant activities. When the native planted, tended his crops, and harvested, 
he did so psychically as well as physically, ritual including consecration, 
purification, prayers, charms, and offerings, accompanying every phase of 
his physical husbandry. In canoe making he attempted by means of his 
rites to establish a perfect psychic atmosphere for his work and psychically 
to insure perfection in detail, as he essayed the construction of a materially 
perfect canoe with his tools. When he went to war, or on a fishing expe- 
dition, all the stages of the enterprise were enacted synchronously in their 
psychic as well as their physical aspects in order that the unseen powers 
might be favorably orientated. Birth and death and all intervening events 
of importance in the life of the individual were psychic as well as physical 
experiences, calling for appropriate ceremonial as well as for practical 
measures on the part of those affected. The sense that every object and 
occurrence visible in nature manifested the embodiment or influence of 
some being or force that was imminent but invisible so filled the native’s 
mind that in every phase of his life his first effort was always devoted 
to establishing the proper psychic conditions and connections. 

For a correct view, it is necessary to understand that to the native 
there was no gulf between the “natural” and the “supernatural.” Subjec- 
tive and objective reactions being unified in his mind as objective experi- 
ence, the psychic and the physical were regarded as complementary aspects 
of nature, the word nature here signifying all that for the Polynesian con- 
stituted his world of perceptive experience, including both the physical and 
the psychic. The physical and psychic were clearly distinguished; but they 
should not be characterized as natural and supernatural, for the psychic 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 7 

aspect of all things was as much a part of their nature as the physical. 
The psychic man and the physical man were considered to be quite distinct, 
though definitely interdependent in such a way that influence, vitalizing 
or destructive, brought to bear upon the psychic aspect would produce 
physical effects. In the same way all physical objects and activities were 
capable of being affected through the psychic, for all things had_ their 
complementary and interdependent psychic and physical aspects. This 
belief, which bridges, or rather fills in, the gulf between the “natural” and 
the “supernatural” is one of the fundamental points that must be grasped 
in studying this religion. 

In the psychic realm or aspect of nature there was believed to exist 
motivating force, both as a free and all pervasive energy, and embodied in 
various classes of individual psychic beings. The practices of the religion 
are built upon two methods of contacting this force, through appeal to 
conscious embodiments or agents of the divine energy, and through the 
innate rapport or sympathy believed to exist in the psychic realm. 

In the approach through appeal, psychic entities assumed to be conscious 
beings were appealed to by means of supplication and the presentation of 
food and gifts, and by entertainment at feasts and festivals. ‘Temples, 
carvings, and other objects were made as shrines and votive offerings. 

The approach through psychic rapport availed itself of a sympathy felt 
or believed to exist psychically between objects and beings, and within and 
throughout nature. Since all objects were supposed by the Polynesians to 
be conscious entities, an exact definition of “sympathy” as used in this 
connection is indicated by a literal translation of the word, which means 
“feeling with” (sum-pathos). It was thought that influence could be trans- 
mitted and effects produced directly or through some medium, or that an 
automatic flow of the dynamic power in nature could be induced and 
directed. In the practices based upon the principle of sympathetic rapport 
there was generally some medium—words, objects, or persons—through 
which the influence was transmitted. The principle of rapport is the 
basis of most of the rules of tapu, the use of verbal spells in which words 
endowed with power were uttered rhythmically and forcibly, chanting, pos- 
ture and gesture dancing, service of objects, places, and persons as mediums 
and instruments, the transference of influence into or through offerings and 
sacrifices, and the use of physical mediums in black magic. 

The fusion of the approach through rapport with that through appeal 
is exhibited in the fact that the very gods who were appealed to as con- 
scious personal agents were at the same time regarded as potent mediums 
capable of being automatic transmittors of power. A specific example of 

8 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

this fusion is to be found in the use of skulls in the Polynesian cult. These 
were at certain times treated as embodiments of conscious beings, while at 
other times they served as mere instruments through which power was sup- 
posed automatically to flow. The merging of the two modes of approach 
is again illustrated most interestingly in the part played by the sacred chief 
in New Zealand. Here, when the chief of the tribe received the first fruits 
offerings he did so as the first-born of the people and as high priest of 
their ancestral gods. But when at another time such a chief would allow 
his warriors to crawl between his legs before going to battle in order that 
they might be endowed with his virility and power he was playing his part 
purely as an instrument of rapport, transmitting to the fighters as a con- 
ductor the spiritual power which was resident in him or was supposed to 
pass through him. In the first ceremony he received offerings as the per- 
sonal agent of individual gods; in the second, he was the impersonal instru- 
ment of natural force. 

In reading what follows may students seek to enter into the philosophy 
of the Polynesian worship; and in doing so may they carry with them 
the realization that they are observing not a mere array of cold facts, but 
salvaged fragments of a religion that was a vitalizing force in the life of 
a magnificently virile and buoyant branch of the human family that flour- 
ished in these islands only a short century past! 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 9 

PHILOSOPHY OF THE RELIGION 

COSMOGONY 

The ancient esoteric teaching in cosmology postulated the preexistence 
of a self-created World Soul which evolved the world and the universe 
out of itself, and called manifest existence out of nothingness by the power 
of the Word. Many of the creational accounts make no mention of this 
Being—the evolutionary process by which the universe evolved from noth- 
ingness is stated merely as a succession of stages, the first of which is 
characterized as Void or Night. But other records that describe the course 
of evolution in terms similar to these definitely attribute to a Supreme 
Being as the Cause the emergence of tangible and visible reality out of or 
in the empty and lightless Void in which this Being existed alone. Authentic 
accounts from the only two sections of Polynesia which have left to the 
world a legacy of teachings direct from the mouths of initiated priests, 
New Zealand and the Society Islands, commence with description of such 
a World Soul. Hence I conclude that this concept was fundamental in 
the ancient mythical teaching of the priests. Such accounts as omit refer- 
ence to the preexistent Cause probably do so for one of two reasons: 
either the raconteur was ignorant of the teaching relative to the World Soul 
or Supreme Being; or, obeying the most potent of all tapu, he intentionally 
concealed his knowledge. It is well known that in New Zealand the knowl- 
edge even of the existence of a Supreme Being was confined strictly to 
initiates in the priestly lore; and, furthermore, that it was believed that 
profane utterance of the name of “lIo-the-nameless” by one possessed of 
the sacred knowledge meant death to the blasphemer. 

Some of the epithets and remarks used in describing the nature of the 
Supreme Being in New Zealand clearly refer to the preexistent Cause. This 
Being was Io-the-self-created, Io-the-foundation-of-all-things, Io-the-parent- 
of-all-things, and Io-the-parentless. A Maori teacher said, “There is noth- 
ing without him; within him are all things’ (27, pp. 7-9; 119, p. 93). A 
genealogical account of the cosmogenesis recorded by White from the Nga- 
i-tahu tribe commences with the name of Io (156, Vol. I, p. 32). Another 
record published by the same writer (op. cit., p. 18) from the South Island 
of New Zealand, where lived a Polynesian stock older than the fourteenth 
century immigrants of the North Island from whom come most of the 
records of Maori teaching, commences the account of creation not with 

10 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

the name Io, but with anonymous reference to the “god”: “The Atua (god) 
began his chant of creation at Te Po (darkness) and sang: Po begat Te-ao 
(light), who begat Ao-marama (daylight).” One of the earliest records 
of Io, published by White (156, Vol. II, p. 2) before the esoteric cult of 
the Supreme Being had been revealed to foreigners, states simply that Io 
‘“made the heaven and the earth.” 

The following chant, transcribed and translated by Hare Hongi (84, pp. 
113-4) is one of the most illuminating records to be found in Polynesian 
literature. 

Io dwelt within the breathing-space of immensity. 
The Universe was in darkness, with water everywhere. 
There was no glimmer of dawn, no clearness, no light. 
And he began by saying these words,— 
That He might cease remaining inactive: 

“Darkness, become a light-possessing darkness.” v 
And at once light appeared. 
(He) then repeated those self-same words in this manner, 
That He might cease remaining inactive: 

“Light, become a darkness-possessing light.” . 
And again an intense darkness supervened. 
Then a third time He spake saying: 

“Let there be one darkness above, 

Let there be one darkness below. 

Let there be one light above, 
Let there be one light below. 

A dominion of light, 
A bright light.” 
And now a great light prevailed. 

(Io) then looked to the waters which compassed him about, and spake a 
fourth time, saying: 
“Ye waters of Tai-kama, be ye separate. 
Heaven, be formed.” Then the sky became suspended. 
“Bring forth thou Tupua-horo-nuku.” 
And at once the moving earth lay stretched abroad. 

Those words (of Io) (the supreme god) became impressed on the minds of our 
ancestors, and by them were they transmitted down through generations, our priest 
joyously referred to them as being: 

The ancient and original sayings. 

The ancient and original words. 

The ancient and original cosmological wisdom (wananga). 
Which caused growth from the void, 

The limitless space-filling void, 

As witness the tidal-waters, 

The evolved heaven, 

The birth-given evolved earth. 

And now, my friends, there are three very important applications of those original 

Handy—Polynesian Religion II 

sayings, as used in our sacred rituals. The first occurs in the ritual for planting a 
child in the barren womb? 

The next occurs in the ritual for enlightening both the mind and body. The third 
and last occurs in the ritual on the solemn subject of death, and of war, of baptism, 
of genealogical recitals and such like important subjects, as the priests most par- 
ticularly concerned themselves in. 

The words by which Io fashioned the Universe—that is to say, by which it was 
implanted and caused to produce a world of light—the same words are used in the 
ritual for implanting a child in a barren womb. The words by which Io caused 
light to shine in the darkness are used in the rituals for cheering a gloomy and 
despondent heart, the feeble aged, the decrepit; for shedding light into secret places 
and matters, for inspiration in song-composing, and in many other affairs, affecting 
man to despair in times of adverse war. For all such the ritual to enlighten and 
cheer includes the words (used by Io) to overcome and dispell darkness. Thirdly, 
there is the preparatory ritual which treats of successive formations within the 
universe, and the genealogical history of man himself. 

The preexistent Cause is revealed also in the Tahitian myths, as in the 
Maori account just given. Here Taaroa is substituted for Io as the name 
of the Supreme Being (see Gods and Spirits), although the theory is the 
same. The following is a translation from the Tahitian (105, Vol. I, pp. 
419-23; 55, Vol. I, pp. 221-23). 

He existed. Taaroa was his name. 
In the immensity (space) 

There was no earth, there was no sky, 
There was no sea, there was no man. 
Above, Taaroa calls. 

Existing alone, he became the universe. 
Taaroa is the origin, the rocks 

Taaroa is the sands. 

It is thus that he is named. 

Taaroa is the light; 

Taaroa is within; 

Taaroa is the germ. 

Taaroa is beneath; 

Taaroa is firm; 

Taaroa is wise. 

He created the land of Hawaii, 
Hawaii the great and sacred, 

As a body or shell for Taaroa. 

Another Society Islands account is more explicit (82). 

Ta’aroa was the ancestor of all the gods; he made 
everything. From time immemorial was the great Ta’aroa, 
Tahi-tumu (The-origin). Ta’aroa developed himself in 

2The remarks of Hare Hongi, the translator, with regard to the word here used are 
illuminating: 

Kopu pakoko, or barren womb.—The interest in this term centers in the idea which gives it 
materialization. We are clearly to understand that as lo, by using certain words, caused the solid 
substance of matter to issue from the void of space, so man, by using these words, can cause 
the barren womb to conceive and bring forth. 

12 Bernice P, Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

solitude; he was his own parent, having no father or 
mother. 

Ta’aroa sat in his shell in darkness, from eternity. 
The shell was like an egg revolving in endless space, 
with no sky, no land, no sea, no moon, no sun, no stars. 
All was darkness, it was continuous thick darkness. 

The record then proceeds to describe Taaroa’s breaking his shell, which 
became the sky; his swimming in empty space and retirement into a new 
shell which, after he had again emerged, 

... he took ... for the great foundation of the world, for stratum rock and 
for soil for the world. 

And the shell Rumia that he opened first, became his house, the dome of the 
gods’ sky, which was a confined sky, enclosing the world them forming. 

Maori teachings generally describe the primal condition of the universe 
as one of darkness and void (84, p. 113): 

The universe was in darkness 
There was no glimmer of dawn, no clearness, no light. 

The same idea is present in the Hawaiian creation chant which describes 
darkness as reigning supreme in the beginning of things (96, pp. 7-8). In 
like manner it is recorded in Tahitian accounts of creation that “for a long 
period Taaroa dwelt in his shell . . . and revolved in space in con- 
tinuous darkness.” And again it is said that when Taaroa called the world 
into existence, “there was no sound, all was darkness” (82). 

In the early stages of Maori cosmogonic records Kore, “Void,” is 
frequently given as the primal condition. According to some accounts 
darkness was born of the Void, while in others the order is reversed (See 
145, p. 168.) One of the accounts gives at the beginning a succession of 
“Voids” characterized by descriptive adjectives such as “The Vast,” “The 
Unpossessing.”’ Out of these come forth a series of “Nights,” then “Day,” 
and then “Space,” in which were formed “two existences without shape”: 
“Moisture,” a male, and “The Great-expanse-of-heaven,”’ a female, who 
were the parents of “Sky,” the ancestor of gods and men (1, p. 127). 

As tangible reality emerged from the Void, so light is described as being 
derived from darkness (84, p. 113): 

There was no glimmer of dawn, no clearness, no light. 
And he [the Supreme Being] began by saying these words,— 

“Darkness, become a light possessing darkness.” 
And at once light appeared. 

Another account says more simply that “Darkness begat Light.” (156, Vol. 
I, pp. 18-19.) 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 13 

One of the most striking features of the Polynesian cosmologies is the 
abstract and metaphysical nature of the concepts. Students are asked to 
bear this in mind, if, in following my interpretations of the meaning of the 
religion, there is inclination to question whether the Polynesians themselves 
calculated so subtly in handling the ideas that underlay their system of wor- 
ship. Though they were living in a simple state of material civilization, 
the natives of these islands possessed a high order of intellect and imagina- 
tion which is reflected not alone in the mythology, but throughout the re- | 
ligious and social systems. 3 

A purely metaphysical picture of cosmogenesis is drawn in the following 
account from New Zealand (140, pp. I09-II1). 

The first period 
From the conception the increase, 
From the increase the swelling, 
From the swelling the thought, 
From the thought the remembrance, 
From the remembrance the consciousness, the desire. 
The second period 
The word became fagcal 
It dwelt with the feeble glimmering; 
It brought forth night: 
The great night, the long night, 

The night ending in death. 
The third period 
From the nothing the begetting, 
From the nothing the increase, 
From the nothing the abundance, 
The power of increasing, the living breath; 
It dwelt with the empty space, 
It produced the atmosphere which is above us. 

In the fourth period, the moon and the sun, “the chief eyes of Heaven,” 
were born. “Then the Heavens became light.’’ In the fifth period, 
The sky which floats above the earth, 
Dwelt with Hawaiki (the earth), 
and various lands or islands of this world were born. The sixth period 
was that in which the gods and men first appeared. 

In the Society Islands the metaphysical element is likewise prominent 

(82). 
Ta’aroa dwelt in the confined sky in total darkness, and did not know the light 
outside. . . But these were the persons (ta’ata) within himself, memory (maharo), 

thought (manao), steadfast-gaze (tutonu), and observation (/i’ohv’o). 

The primal stages of cosmic evolution are also described in part in meta- 
physical terms (82). 

14 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Confinement, the earth was confined, firmness held it. Atmosphere, the earth 
was atmosphere. Searching there was searching for land. Nothing, there was no 
land. Inland was not yet formed, seaward was not yet formed, above was not yet 
formed, below was not yet formed. ‘The time for night ebbed. There was rapid 
progress. There was thinness, there was thickness. 

The first generation of growth was born, it was rocks (papa) that have affinity. 

After the growth of the papa came the land, then roots, and finally the 
things that grow on the earth’s surface. 

The version of creation from the Society Islands is suggestive in parts 
of the following translation by White from the Maori, said to be descriptive 
of Tane’s “discovery of man” (156, Vol. I, pp. 152-3), but obviously 
having reference to the primal stage of evolution under discussion, which 
preceded the appearance of human beings. This Maori composition may 
serve to illustrate both the metaphysical tendency in the native thought 
and the poetic quality that is so prominent a feature of the Polynesian 
creational and other chants. 

Seeking, earnestly seeking in the gloom. 
Searching—yes, on the coast-line— 
On the bounds of light of day. 
Looking into night. 

Night had conceived 

The seed of night 

The heart, the foundation of night, 
Had stood forth self-existing 
Even in the gloom. 

It grows in gloom— 

The sap and succulent parts, 

The life pulsating, 

And the cup of life. 

The shadows screen 

The faintest gleam of light. 

The procreating power, 

The ecstacy of life first known, 
And joy of issuing forth 

From silence into sound. 

Thus the progeny 

Of the Great-extending 

Filled the heaven’s expanse ; 

The chorus of life 

Rose and swelled 

Into ecstacy, 

Then rested in 

Bliss of calm and quiet. 

A primal expanse of waters is in some accounts described at the begin- 
ning. Thus it is said in one of the Maori chants (84, p. 113), that 

Io dwelt within the breathing space of immensity 
The universe was in darkness with water everywhere. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 15 

A fragmentary account of creation from the Society Islands, which differs 
from the usual records but bears every evidence of authenticity (29, p. 45; 
44, p. 20), records that 

In the beginning there was only the god Ihoiho. Afterward there was an expanse 
of waters that covered the abyss; and the god Tino-ta’ata floated on the surface. 

In Samoa likewise it is said that in the beginning Tangaloa, the creator, 
existed alone in the sky, while below him was nothing but a vast expanse 
of waters (151, pp. 244-5). After its genesis, the materialization of the 
cosmos proceeded by a process of evolution which, continuing through 
aeons of time, gradually led by successive stages of ever more concrete 
and limited manifestation to the visible and tangible world in which men 
live. The succession of eras of creation or evolution is strongly marked | 
in both the Maori and Hawaiian mythologies. White (156, Vol. I, app.) 
gives from New Zealand a series of eighteen eras, the duration of each 
of which is described as “from 1000 to unlimited years,” beginning with 
“Nothing” and ending with “Space,” from which was descended the Sky 
Father. 

1. Nothing (Te Kore). 10. Desire. 

2. Darkness (Te Po). 11. ... Medium or abode of Deity... 
3. Asking, or Seeking. 12, ... Beauty of form in spirit. 

4. Following on. 43, Coming inte form=. 2. 

5. Conception of thought. 14. Possessing. 

6. Enlarging. 15. Delightful. 

7. Breathing power.... 16. Becoming erect. Possessing power. 
8. Thought. 17. Breath of life. 

9. Spirit life. 18. Space (Atea). 

The Hawaiian chant called the Kumulipo pictures sixteen successive 
eras in which the world has evolved. Dixon remarks that a striking feature 
of the Kumulipo is the fact that ‘“‘although we have the source of all things 
from chaos, it is a chaos which is simply a wreck and ruin of an earlier 
world” (44, p. 15). This idea of a cataclysm preceding the present creation, 
though it does not appear in so definite a form in other Polynesian cosmolo- 
gies, is of peculiar interest because it is typical of other ancient mythologies 
to which the Polynesian may be related, notably the Aryan. The only 
definite correspondence to this feature of the Kumulipo within Polynesia 
itself is found in Samoa. Here, in a preliminary era of creation the 
octopus arises, and has as children Fire and Water. Between the descend- 
ants of these there arose a mighty conflict, which ended in the destruction of 
the world by flood and its re-creation by Tangaloa (44, p. 17). The Maori 
also preserved a relic of this story of the contest for supremacy between 
Fire and Water (149, p. 433). 

Flood myths in which, for some reason or other, the world is submerged 

16 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

by the sea are preserved from all parts of Polynesia (44, pp. 38-40). The 
ideas that led to the creation of such myths belong in the same category with 
the theory of cataclysms preceding the creation of the world. The deluge 
stories are also closely related to the belief in the existence of a primal 
expanse of waters, though in this case it must be remarked that the typical 
deluge story describes the submersion of the earth as occurring after the 
world was formed and peopled with men. 

According to the account from the Society Islands (p. 14), following 
the “searching for land” where “there was no land,” and after “the time 
for night had ebbed,” “rapid progress” led suddenly to the first concrete 
world manifestation : 

The first generation of growth was born, 
It was rocks that have affinity. 

These rocks, strata, or levels (papa) that have affinity were apparently the 
shells of Taaroa, one of which became the sky, while the other formed the 
earth. According to the Tahitian account the gods were born in the “con- 
fined sky” between the upper and lower shells which were at this time 
lying close together. Taaroa made “Great-foundation” (Tumu-nui)— 
apparently associated with or derived from the upper shell—to be the 
husband; and “Earth-stratum” (Papa-fenua), who was identified with the 
lower shell, he made to be the wife (82). This concept of superior and 
inferior male and female strata at this stage of creation is found in other 
groups also. The Marquesan chants speak of the birth of the gods between 
the male Stratum-above (Papa-una) and the female Stratum-below 
(Papa-a’o) (77, p. 327); and it is the same concept, though couched in 
different terms, that is seen in the Maori account of the birth of the gods 
between Sky (Rangi) and Earth (Papa) (70, p. 1). A clear corre- 
spondence is evident in Samoan genealogy in which “The-high-rocks,” 
which are male, and “The-earth-rocks,” which are female, are the progeni- 
tors of various natural phenomena and of the gods and chiefs (152, p. 4). 
In Hawaiian mythology the name of Papa, who, as wife of Wakea was 
mother of lands and the ancestress of the human race, identifies her with the 
ancestral earth strata or rocks in the other groups (99, p. 21; 54, Vol. IV, 
p. 12). Further evidence of the continuance of the old ideas is found in 
the custom of referring to the heavens as ka paa iluna, “the solid above,” or 
more literally, the “firmament,” for paa means “fixed” or “firm;” and the 
earth as ka paa ilalo, “the solid below” (99, p. 29). 

The superior gods, such as Tane, Rongo, Tu, were born of the upper 
and lower strata of the now concrete world; the gods were conceived and 
brought forth in the darkness and confinement of the space between the 

Handy—Polynesian Religion srg 

superior and inferior world strata which were at this time clinging to each 
other in close embrace. Growing restive, the gods took it upon themselves 
to separate Heaven and Earth so that light and space might come between 
them and make the earth’s surface habitable. In New Zealand was told 
the stirring tale (149, pp. 460-1; 70, p. 1) of the efforts of the gods to 
elevate the sky, in which 

All failed till Tane, the god and father of forests, . . . . tore the eternal 
loversvapatt ii ene ae oe 

Then the gods prepared the props of Heaven (Toko-rangi) to sustain forever the 
weight of the over-arching sky. ‘The ancient love of Heaven and Earth remains, and 

still Heaven nightly mourns with sighs and dewy tears over the loving breast from 
whose embrace he was torn away. 

Mythology of the Society Islands also credits Tane with this great 
achievement of elevating the sky and here there is reference to posts (pow), 
on which the sky was supported (82). In the Marquesas, though Tane was 
among the gods who were born between the supper and lower papa, it is 
another god, Tonofiti, who is credited with rending them apart. The 
genealogies and creation chants of this group of islands mention too, or 
toko, which correspond to the Toko-rangi of the Maori myth (77, p. 342). 
The episode of the elevation of the sky also occurs in the Cook Islands, 
where it is said Ru pushed up the sky and propped it in place with strong 
stakes (145, p. 529). Here is evident relationship to the Society Islands 
account which says that the sky (Atea) was first elevated a little ways and 
propped on large flat-topped leaves by the god Ru, after which it was cut 
loose from the earth and caused to ascend to its present height by 
Tane (82). Samoan mythology likewise describes the elevation of the sky 
(44, p. 35). But in Hawaiian lore this element seems to have been 
obscured, although the recollection of it is evident in a verse from a 
creation chant quoted on page 39. 

The episode of the elevation of the heavens is in itself an interesting 
element to find in the ancient mythologies throughout Polynesia; but even 
more interesting from the point of view of interpretive study is the sub- 
sidiary feature of the propping of the heavens on toko. In New Zealand 
it was toko, translated generally “props,” which Tane used to hold up 
Rangi; in the Marquesas there were the too (to’o), in Tahiti the pou; 
and in the Tuamotu Islands chants are still sung about the turuturu, or 
“posts” on which the sky rests. The concept seems to have been lost in 
Hawaiian mythology; though there may be a reminiscence of it in the 
dialect, in which the word kukulu means “a pillar” or “a post,’ and also 
“the place where the sky apparently meets the horizon” (2; cf. 99, pp. 30-1). 
Now when the word turu, or a derivitive or the word pow is used, there 

18 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

can be no question but that the meaning is a “post;”’ and the word toko 
in the popular accounts of mythology is undoubtedly properly translated 
“prop.” But originally, I believe, the usé of the word toko in connection 
with the separation of Heaven and Earth had an entirely different significa- 
tion. Toko in the Maori dialect means not only “prop” or “pole,” but 
also signifies “rays of light” (145, p. 528), doubtless in the sense in which 
English metaphor speaks of a “shaft of light.” The significance of the 
use of this term in the cosmogonic account immediately becomes apparent 
in view of the fact that Tane, the separator of Heaven and Earth, was in 
the ancient worship the embodiment of sunlight. And so the popular 
accounts of the elevation of the sky upon toko probably grew out of the 
more poetic vision of the separation by shafts of light of Heaven and Earth 
at the dawn of creation. 

After the separation of Sky and Earth, creation was thought of as 
proceeding in various ways. Land and living nature are described as 
originating by growth as of a tree growing upward and outward through a 
process of natural evolution, by propagation, by metamorphosis. 

One of the typical conceptions or principles exhibited in numerous 
myths of Polynesia is that of growth of land and nature. The following 
quotation from a Hawaiian myth vividly depicts the earth as growing like 
a tree. The first line refers to the birth of the island of Hawaii as the 
child of Papa, sired by Wakea (54, Vol. VI, p. 363). 

Born was the island— 

It budded, it leafed, it grew, it was green, 
The island blossomed on the tip, ’twas Hawaii 

Unstable was the land, tremulous was Hawaii, 
Waving freely in the air; 

From Akea ’twas fastened together 
Quiet by the roots was the island and the land,.... 

Tahitian mythology has such lines as these descriptive of the growth of | 
the world in its early stages (82). 

The growth (tupu) of the nights, 
The growth of the mountains, 
The growth of the streams, 

The growth of the sea, 

The growth of the coral, 

The growth of the heavens, etc. 

In the Samoan sacred lore there is also exhibited the same thought as is 
shown in these lines (57, pp. 20-1). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 19 

Where is the land which first upsprang (tupu) ? 
Great Manu’a first rose up. 

Savai’i with its high mountain then sprang up 
And up sprang Fiti and all the Tongan group. 

Growth was thought of as upward and outward, as of a tree, rather than 
downward; of spreading and ascent, rather than descent. In the Mar- 
quesas distant ancestral entities and beings are spoken of as being 1 ao oa 
(far below); and in Tahiti genealogies are sometimes referred to as papa 
tupuna na raro (ancestry having grown from below). In other words, it is 
correct to say in Polynesian parlance that men are ascended, not descended, 
from their ancestors. 

Two lines from a creation chant from the Marquesas Islands, descriptive 
of the origin of the land, illustrate the conception of growth outward (78). 
Country spreading this way, 

Land spreading that way. 
(Country and land spreading, growing, hither and yon) 

These lines in the Marquesan chant follow references to the roots (aka) 
at the beginning, or base, of the growing world. The spreading growth of 
the “roots of earth” is typical of the mythology of the Society Islands, 
which tells (82) of 

Roots that spread upwards, roots that spread downwards, 

Roots that spread inland, roots that spread seawards, 
As roots spread they held the sand, the land became firm. 

The spreading growth was described in such terms as these in the Hawaiian 
Kumulipo creation chant (96, p. 18): 

The sea spread, the land spread, 
The waters spread, the mountain spread. 

The simile employed in speaking of a genealogical and cosmogonic tree 
is essentially applicable to the Polynesian records of the origin of human and 
other stocks. The word tumu, which signifies the base of a tree, or the 
trunk, is employed widely in the mythologies in the sense of the base or 
foundation or source of the world. The word tupu (to grow) is used in 
connection with the growth of land and of men. Furthermore, the ref- 
erences to roots at the foundation of the world, indicate the same concept. 
Description of the growth of roots in the foundation of the world is also 
typical of the lore. One of the most trustworthy of the Marquesan 
genealogies goes back to Aka-nui, “Great-root”; and the creation chants 
mention the roots of the world. Rarotongan lore describes Teakaiaroe 
which is characterized as “The-root-of-all-existence’ (63, p. 1). One 

20 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

illustration of the mention of roots in the Tahitian creation has already been 
given. Another part of the Tahitian chant (82) records that 

There were tens of roots 

There were hundreds of roots 

There were thousands of roots 
There were myriads of roots. 

The last line of one of the Hawaiian chants (54, Vol. VI, p. 363) reads: 

Quiet by the roots was the island and land... . 

Best has remarked the same idea in New Zealand, that is to say, that of 
comparing “the growth of the universe to the growth of a tree.” In some 
Maori creation genealogies, there follows after Kore, the Void, “a series 
of names such as Te Pu, Te More, Te Take, Te Weu, etc., which appear 
to denote parts of a tree, thus reminding us of the cosmogonic tree of 
Old-World mythological systems” (14, p. 10). The genealogy to which 
Best refers names the successive generations preceding the birth of Heaven 
and Earth as follows (20, p. 186): 

The Root or Origin 

The Taproot 

The Rootlets 

The Creeper or Vine 

The Growth 

The Great Wood 

The Conception, Form. 

The Sound 

The Chaos, Void 

The Darkness 

The Sky 
The Earth 

Cosmogonies differ as to the periods to which they allot the growth of 
roots. In the Marquesan and Maori genealogies, the roots precede the 
appearance of Sky and Earth, or upper and lower levels (papa); while in 
one Tahitian account at least the appearance of the roots occurs after the 
creation of the primal earthly pair. 

The Kumulipo chant of Hawaii represents a wholly different category 
of thought. This account of creation appears to be a description not of the 
origin of the cosmos but of the growth of nature after it had become con- 
crete, and probably explains the absence of “long series of antecedant, 
vaguely personified entities” remarked by Dixon (44, p. 15). It embodies 
a simple and definite statement of the idea of organic evolution, in which 
the concepts are undoubtedly very ancient. This cosmic story may well 
serve as the first illustration of the principle of evolution in Polynesian 
thought. An excellent brief description is given by Dixon (44, pp. 15-6). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 21 

The drama of creation, according to the Hawaiian account, is divided into a 
series of stages, and in the very first of these life springs from the shadowy abyss 
and dark night. There is here, however, no long series of antecedent, vaguely per- 
sonified entities ranged in genealogical sequence, but the immediate appearance of 
living things. At first the lowly zoophytes and corals come into being, and these are 
followed by worms and shellfish, each type being declared to conquer and destroy its 
predecessor, a struggle for existence in which the strongest survive. Parallel with 
this evolution of animal forms, plant life begins on land and in the sea—at first with 
the algae, followed by seaweeds and rushes. As type follows type, the accumulating 
slime of their decay raises the land above the waters, in which, as spectator of all, 
swims the octopus, the lone survivor from an earlier world. In the next period 
Black Night and Wide-Spread Night give birth to leafy plants and to insects and 
birds, while in the darkness the first faint glimmering of day appears. The sea brings 
forth its higher forms, such as the medusae, fishes, and whales; and in the dim twi- 
light monstrous forms creep in the mud. Food plants come into existence while 
all nature is thrown into an uproar under the stress of its birth-pains. The fifth 
period sees the emergence of swine (the highest mammal known to the Hawaiian), 
and night becomes separated from day. In the sixth, mice appear on land, and 
porpoises in the sea; the seventh period witnesses the development of various abstract 
psychic qualities, later to be embodied in man; while in the eighth, the turmoil and 
uproar having subsided, from peace and quiet, fructified by the light, which is now 
brilliant, woman is born, and also man, together with some of the higher gods. 

The appearance of man does not mark the end of the evolutionary 
process; after the eighth are still seven eras of creation. In the eleventh 
era commences the pedigree of the kings of the land, and about 740 genera- 
tions (approximately 18,500 years) are given in this era alone. The gene- 
alogy continues in the twelfth era for another hundred generations to 
Wakea and Papa, the mythical progenitors of Hawaii, who correspond to 
Rangi and Papa, the “Sky” and “Earth,” in New Zealand, and to Atea and 
Atanua in the Marquesas. In the fourteenth era the stars are born. In the 
fifteenth appear mythical heroes, among them Maui, the culture hero of 
Polynesia. The sixteenth era brings the genealogy down to the present 
day (8, p. 69; 147, pp. 38-46; 96, p. 28). 

A faint suggestion of this Hawaiian evolutionary teaching in one bit 
of the ancient Society Islands cosmology is preserved (82), according to 
which there first grew night, mountains, water, ocean, coral, and the 
heavens. Next came rain, slime, forests, food plants, the paper mulberry, 
creeping vines and weeds. And finally appeared the living creatures that 
inhabit the sea and the land. In Samoan mythology also the same idea is 
expressed in a description of the appearance of successive forms of 
vegetable life which follow each other as offspring and parent (44, p. 18). 
There is further suggestion of this theme in one of the accounts of the 
origin of man in Samoa, according to which Tangaloa first cast down 
from the sky a rock, then sent down “some earth and a creeping plant, as 
all was barren rock.” The vine grew speedily; then it withered, died, and 

22 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

decomposed, and from or in the decomposed vegetable matter appeared 
swarming worms, which in due course became men and women. (Cf. 44, 
pp. 28-29. ) \ 

The most common mode of transmitting or recounting the evolutionary 
cosmogonic records was by genealogical series. Creational genealogies are 
typical of and peculiar to Polynesia. These picture the world as evolving 
by a process of generation or propagation. Evolution is pictured as being 
procreational, accomplished by successive impregnations of female by male 
entities resulting in the birth of new cosmic manifestations, elements, 
entities, and beings. It is scarcely accurate to speak of the results of these 
mythical unions as reproductions, for the offspring always differs entirely 
from both parents. It is more correct, and perhaps more suggestive, to 
speak of the process as one of continuous impregriation producing suc- 
cessive mutations. 

It must not be concluded from this that the native imagination pictured 
the processes of cosmogenesis wholly as a succession of physical unions. 
Though the words employed in describing the marriage of Heaven and 
Earth, for example, are those that signify the association of the human 
sexes in physical union, it is not probable that the priests and others who 
understood the more abstract features of the mythology in ancient times 
thought of procreation in its early stages as being physical at all; and it is 
certain that they did not consider it to have transpired after the human 
manner, for none of the earlier entities in the genealogies are anthropo- 
morphic. As the cosmogenesis was metaphysical, so the precreational mode 
of evolution must, to be understood, be thought of as metaphysical. Hongi 
(84, pp. 113-4) revealed the Maori’s idea of the manner in which a priest 
could implant life in the womb of a woman or light in the minds of men 
through the medium of the original words by which the Supreme Being 
dispelled darkness and sang the universe into existence. These lines 
(156, Vol. I, pp. 152-3) present also the thought of procreative energy as 
a metaphysical reality. 

The procreating power, 

The ecstacy of life first known, 
The joy of issuing forth 

From silence into sound, 

Thus the progeny 

Of the great extending 

Filled the heaven’s expanse. 

The thought of impregnation appears in less abstract terms, but still 
metaphysical, in another Maori chant which has reference to the origin of 
woman. ‘This is supposed to be part of the prayer chanted by the god Tane, 
the lord of light and male vivifier of nature, when in the act of impregnating 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 23 

with life the figure modeled in earth that became the first woman 
(156, Vol. I, pp. 155-8). 

Here stands the originating power, the power dreaded, 

Inspired and stretched out. Dawn, thou day on high; 

Dawn, thou day beneath; dawn on the mountain-peak; 
Dawn, thou uplifted; dawn within, younger brother of glowing heaven. 

To what shall I place my procreating power— 
To what—to your power of producing? 
It is good—to your producing power. 

That is where the procreating power has its storehouse, 
Fully abundant, fully engendered, 

Procreation complete, unlimited, and final. 

Following the Maori theory back to the very earliest eras of manifested 
existence, it is found that impregnation and consequent birth were the mode 
even then. A simple form of genealogical description of the beginning of 
things commences thus: 

Po [darkness] begat Te-ao (light), who begat Ao-marama (daylight), who 

begat Ao-tu-roa (long-standing-light) . . . and proceeds till it arrives at the birth 
of the gods from the union of Heaven with Earth (156, Vol. I, pp. 18-19). 

Such genealogical recitation iikewise constituted one mode of recounting 
the story of the growth of the world in its beginnings in the Marquesas. 
(See 77, pp. 342-3.) One of the sacred chants which recounts the cosmic 
evolution describes the union of great root stocks and roots at the founda- 
tion of the world, from which subsequent generations of gods, men, and 
things are descended. (See 77, pp. 322-325.) Another of the sacred 
chants (78) of the same island group describes a later stage in growth, 
when the first gods, the progenitors of inorganic and organic nature includ- 
ing man, were born from the union of the Level Above (the male) with 
the Level Below (the female). This finds its counterpart in the sacred 
lore of New Zealand in the birth of the chief gods of the Maori from the 
union of Rangi and Papa (156, Vol. I, p. 18). 

The Hawaiian Kumulipo chant, though not in genealogical form, de- 
scribes evolution as proceeding in its later phases in the procreational 
manner. 

From peace and quiet fructified by the light . . . woman is born, and also man, 
together with some of the higher gods (44, p. 16). 

Maori accounts describe continuous propagational evolution from what 
Best calls “allegorized eras or forces” (26, pp. 206-7), through the birth 
of Sky and Earth, respectively the male and female, to whom were born 
the original gods, and on to the birth of animate earthly forms, such as 

24 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

trees and men, the children of the gods. Two lines from one of the Maori 
chants (140, p. 110): 

The sky which floats above the earth, 
Dwelt with Hawaiki [the earth]. 

This is the union of Rangi and Papa of which Best speaks, from which 
sprang the gods and visible nature, their domain. This union marks the 
epoch in cosmic genesis, the events of which were of immediate concern 
to men, for this was the era in which lands, gods, animate objects, and 
human beings took form. This period may be illustrated from the 
mythologies of islands in all parts of Polynesia, showing the idea of the 
marriage of Heaven and Earth to have been typical of this region as 
a whole. 

In one Tahitian account Taaroa cast down a piece of his shell, which, 
falling upon the surface of the sea, became the land called Havaii. 
Thereafter 
Taaroa lay with Havaii, the land he had created; 

And there was born the first tree; 
Then were born the grey sands of many shades, then the golden sands, then the light 

and the dark; x 
Then were born the demigods of Havaii, male and female, and they became sacred. 
Taaroa lay again with Havaii the earth, and all that grows and lives was born of her. 

Taaroa lay with the night, and the stars were born. 
Taaroa lay with light, and rainbows that flashed on Havaii were born. 

After successive generations of this kind, there was born the first human 
ruler (101). 

In the Marquesas I know of no record of the birth of land, but the 
genesis of the natural objects of the world is described as coming about as 
a result of impregnation of various female elements by the personification 
of light. 

Genealogies depict man, animals, trees, stones, and moons as_ the 
offspring, by different mothers, of Atea, the embodiment of the light of the 
heavens, who was the progenitor of all natural objects. Reference to such 
unions in the dynamic chants intoned in connection with child-bearing, with 
the consecration of the sacred child, with the completion of products of 
handicraft, appear to me to indicate a belief that this operation of impreg- 
nation by Atea was ever continuous—in other words, not merely one act of 
original creation, or generation, but a constant activity. Hence, it may be 
concluded that reproduction or creation was not believed to be one series 
of events accomplished in a distant past, but to proceed continuously in all 
time through fertilization. The original basis of the belief regarding Tane 
was apparently the idea of the vivification, or impregnation of matter with 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 25 

life by the light of the heavens, of which Tane and Atea were embodi- > 

ments. ‘These deific progenitors, enliveners of nature, were not sun gods, 
but personifications of two divine principles that were metaphysically one, 
male procreating power and light. The sun for the Polynesian was but an 
object in the heavens, occasionally personalized and worshipped as a tutelary 
deity. (See Tane.) 

Quite a different concept from any of those that have just been dis- 
cussed is represented in certain parts of the Society Islands chants, which 
undoubtedly represent the amalgamation of more recent intrusive teachings 
upon the ancient story. In several places the chants describe the Supreme 
Being as having made the world by metamorphosis of parts of himself (82). 

He took his spine for a mountain ridge, his ribs for mountain slopes, his vitals 
for broad floating clouds, his flare and his flesh for fatness of the earth, his arms 
and legs for strength of the earth; his finger nails and toe nails for scales and shells 
for the fishes, his feathers for trees, shrubs, and creepers, to clothe the earth; and his 

intestines for lobsters, shrimps, and eels for rivers and seas; and the blood of 
Ta’aroa got heated, and drifted away for redness for the sky and for rainbows. 

But Ta’aroa’s head remained sacred to himself, and he still lived, the same head 
on an indestructible body. 

Another part of the same chant says: 

Ta’aroa was a gods’ house; his’ backbone was the ridge pole, his ribs were the 
supporters. 

The Marquesans figuratively described their islands as being the “House of 
Atea,” calling each of the islands of the group a particular part of the 
house; but this is quite different from referring to the god himself as the 
house. ‘The elements in the Society Islands account just quoted exhibit a 
category of thought that is quite distinct from the typical Polynesian 
evolutionary ideas, and one that may represent the teaching of a late group 
of immigrants. (See Ethnographic Considerations. ) 

NATURE A PSYCHIC DYNAMISM 

The discussion of the concepts of the origin of the universe presents 
evidence that objective, physical manifestation was believed to have resulted 
from metaphysical beginnings by an unbroken evolutionary process. Such 
being the conceptions of the origin and growth of all things, it would be 
logical to conclude that these people, who described the universe and nature 
as evolving through propagation or growth, should regard all elements 
therein as conscious and animate. Such was actually the belief. Animate 
and inanimate were not clearly distinguished by the Polynesian. Rock and 
land were believed to be born and to grow exactly as were man and trees. 

26 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Stones, islands, trees, streams, the sea, the heavenly bodies, and the heavens, 

like man, had their psychic being as well as their physical manifestations. 
. ° \ 

Best (26, p. 209) writes that in New Zealand, 

The quaint old myth of how the mountains grouped around Lake Taupo 
quarrelled, separated and went away to other places, is an example of animism, the 
vivification of nature. Those mountains are endowed with sex, the powers of speech, 
and locomotion. They married and produced young in the form of hail, snow, 
and sleet. 

The Polynesian cosmogony depicts a universe which is a psychic dyna- 
mism manifesting itself physically: behind and within all natural manifes- 
tation is life and psychic force. All objective phenomena of nature had 
their origin in the psychic dynamism; and all existed within its field or 
atmosphere. Concrete nature in all its parts was also in a sense regarded 
as a reservoir of dynamic power. Its different parts were the mediums of 
transmission of this force. The system of Polynesian mythology and wor- 
ship cannot be explained except on the assumption of the existence in the 
native mind of this concept of nature as a psychic dynamism. 

This concept is clearly the basis of the principle of influence through 
psychic rapport, which plays so prominent a part in the religion, being 
exhibited in the dynamic recitation, intonation, chanting, drumming, danc- 
ing. By all these means, which aroused in the native himself a state of 
intense exhilaration, such as only those who have seen Polynesians or 
similar people under stress of such motor and emotional excitement can 
fully appreciate, the old Polynesians believed that they generated or stimu- 
lated dynamic psychic impulsions, which, impinging upon their goal would 
produce the desired effects. 

MANA 

The most conclusive evidence of the existence in the native mind of 
the idea of the psychic dynamism of nature lies in the mana concept itself. 
The word mana referred to the manifestation of this aspect of nature, when 
its dynamism was centered in or focussed through specific gods, spirits, 
‘individuals, rites, or objects. Mana was exhibited in persons, in power, 
strength, prestige, reputation, skill, dynamic personality, intelligence; in 
things, in efficacy, in “luck”; that is in accomplishment. These qualities 
were not mana; they were the evidences of mana, which was itself but the 
focussing and transmission of the potency of nature. It is my belief that 
mana was thought to come into individuals or objects only through the 
medium of gods or spirits. But no definite statement to this effect should be 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 27 

made without more extensive examination and analysis of instances than I 
am now prepared to make.® 

Turning back for a moment to the discussion of procreation as a mode 
of origination of the varied aspects of nature, it is seen that the primal 
mana was not merely power or energy, but procreative power, derived from 
an ultimate source and diffused, transmitted, and manifested throughout 
the universe. This was the original mana which was believed to be con- 
tinuously passed down through the gods, the mana atua of which the Maori 
teacher in the New Zealand college of lore spoke as follows, deprecating 
its loss as a result of the influence of Christianity (119, p. 105): 

This [loss of the ancient knowledge] is in consequence of the decadence in 
power, authority and prestige of the conduct of the various rituals, of the (abroga- 
tion of) the tapu, of the (unbelief in) the gods, until at the present time, there is 
none of the ancient mana, or power, left ... . . 3 ee Dencesalso 
it is that I impress on you the (former) aspect of fees ‘Hines, that you may be 
clear as to the descent of the mana-atua (the god-like powers) even from Io (the 
Supreme God), and from the Whatu-kuras, Mariekuras, and the Apas of each 
separate heaven... . 

Another priest taught that the mana-ariki or chiefly power, the mana- 
tapu or sacred power (signifying apparently that which pertained to ritual), 
the mana-ora or life-giving power, and lastly the mana-atuatanga signifying 
the power pertaining to the gods, were “all held within the hands of Io,” the 
Supreme Being (27, pp. 8-9). 

The fact that the gods did not possess it of themselves but were the 
mediums or agents of this all-pervasive, divine force is indicated by these 
remarks of a learned Maori (9, p. 16): 

Mana is all round the world, and Tawhirimatea [god of tempests], Ruaimoku 
[god of earthquakes], Maui [culture hero], and others are in the centre of the 
circle and get hold of this mana and direct the elements and make the weather. 

This teacher also says, “No one can rub out mana’’; he then contrasts with 

8 Codrington apparently conceived this to be the case in Melanesia. Thus he writes (37, 
pp. 119-20): 

“Tf a stone is found to have a supernatural power, it is because a spirit has associated itself 
with it; a dead man’s bone has with it mana, because the ghost is with the bone; a man may 
have so close a connection with a spirit or ghost that he has mana in himself also, and can so 
direct it as to effect what he desires; a charm is powerful because the name of a spirit or ghost 
expressed in the form of words brings into it the power which the ghost or spirit exercises 
through it.’ Though this may be true of Melanesia, it does not follow that it is necessarily also 
the universal rule in Polynesian worship; for the religion of Polynesia was more abstract in its 
principles, appealing more to higher powers and occupying itself less with the controlling influence 
of ghosts and spirits. 

I am convinced that the pure mana concept is Polynesian, and that in the islands of 
heterogeneous racial and cultural mixture included in Melanesia, where it has been most studied 
and best described aid analyzed, thanks to Dr. Codrington, it was adulterated by amalgamation 
with Melanesian ghost-cult elements and crude spiritistic beliefs. (See 37, p. 119.) The Poly- 
nesian mana concept is an expression of religious consciousness of a high order. It was the 
very pith and core of the Polynesian system of worship through. rapport. This pure Polynesian 
mana was abstract quality and power, its use in the different dialects denoting power; might; 
influence; authority; strength, energy, skill, cleverness, intelligence; prestige, glory, majesty; 
effectual, effective. (See 145, p. 203.) 

28 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

it the borrowed mana of human beings, saying, “Personal mana can be 
overcome and annihilated, but the mana of the gods cannot.” 

Transmitted through the superior psychic mediums, the divine procrea- 
tive energy was expressed in man in all qualities and attributes which 
rendered visible proof of this divine energy in MANIFEST ACCOMPLISHMENT ; 
in objects, rites, and processes it was exhibited in PROVEN EFFICACY. No 
person or thing possessed intrinsic mana: but beings and objects of all 
kinds were capable, to a greater or less degree, of being mediums and 
reservoirs for the divine psychic potency. 

The Polynesian ideas concerning the behavior of and laws governing 
mana are analogous in so many ways to the known nature of electricity that 
the simplest and clearest method of illustrating the native concept of the all 
pervasive psychic force is by describing it in terms of this all pervasive 
physical energy. The superior, divine aspect of nature, the “realm of 
light,” was the reservoir of positive potential; while the inferior, common, 
earthly aspect, which sprang from and harbored darkness, was the impotent, 
the uncharged, the negative pole. In creation myths evolution is described 
as proceeding by the charging (impregnation) of the negative by the 
positive. In the world, all the children of the primal generations of the 
Cosmos, gods and spirits, men, animate, and inanimate objects were trans- 
mittors and storage reservoirs. The energy was transmitted from one 
medium to another, or from a medium positively charged to one that was 
negative, through contact. When flow from superior positive to inferior 
negative occurred under improper circumstances, as when a common person 
came in contact with a high-born chief, there were two resultant effects: 
the superior was to some extent drained of potential energy; and the in- 
ferior, unsuited as a transmitter or container, was subject to various 
injurious effects as a result of the overload or surcharge. Hence the 
necessity for insulation of the transmitter and reservoir (the sacred chief 
or priest, for example) for his own protection and that of the higher 
mediums with which he was in contact (the gods), and for the protection 
of others, by means of tapu designed to prevent direct contact, or indirect 
contact through the medium of food, clothing or other conductors; and 
hence also were various rites designed to relieve the commoner of a sur- 
charge of mana, and to restore it to its rightful owner. Every person as 
a transmitter was the center of a field of psychic magnetic influence. The 
magnetic power and the extension of the field were proportionate to sacred- 
ness of the individual. Anything that came within that field became 
magnetized, and was thenceforth, unless de-magnetized by one of the rites 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 29 

employed for this purpose, in intimate psychic rapport with the individual 
whose mana had affected it. 

Mana may be compared not only to kinetic but also to static electricity. 
It could be generated by means of ritual prepared for the purpose by those 
having occult knowledge, just as electricity is generated through mechanical 
processes; and the conceptions of what actually took place are probably 
identical. Mana generated by means of dynamic ritual was evidently not 
believed to be created, but rather, like electricity, to be generated by induc- 
tion, the all pervasive and latent energy of nature being accumulated, to be 
stored or directly transmitted. 

The divine chief was a transmitter: linked by an unbroken chain of 
first-borns to the primal gods, his was mana directly transmitted and made 
subject to conduction wherever the potential was needed—in agriculture, 
industry, war. On the other hand the mana of the priest or man of 
learning, which might be almost though not quite as great as that of the 
chief, was largely diffused mana, acquired as a result of consecrational 
ceremonies, and his continual association with sacred beings, objects, and 
rites. It may be said that while the chief transmitted mana, the priest was 
charged and magnetized with it. Like the chief, the gods or spirits whom 
the priest served were transmitters, as were also all objects animate or 
inanimate which had intimate generic relationship with superior power. 
And like the priest, all persons and objects that were charged with mana 
by means of dynamic rites and at the same time put in rapport or con- 
nected with the source of potential, or that were magnetized as a result 
of being placed in a magnetic field, may be said to have been charged, or 
magnetized. Any person or thing might, of course, become a transmitter 
by being connected with a terminal that was in contact with the ultimate 
source of potential, such as a chief, a spirit, or a god. Actually no being 
or object associated with Polynesian worship was believed to be purely a 
transmitter, or purely a reservoir or magnetic pole: the sacred chief’s mana 
was in the main transmitted, but it was augmented by means of many 
consecrational rites, and by instruction; and no priest could through any 
amount of ritual consecration and teaching become a great priest unless he 
personally had inherited a capacity to transmit mana. Powerful priests 
were, in fact, almost always men of high birth in Polynesia. 

Lest the description of the theory of mana in terms of electricity, which 
has been pursued only for the sake of illustration, and not because I 
believe mana to have anything to do with electricity, or vice versa, become 
tedious, this method may now be abandoned in favor of specific illustration. 
The power—psychic and physical, religious and civil, productive and de- 

20 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

structive—that the sacred chief in Polynesia was believed to embody was 
his firstly by reason of his direct descent from the higher beings and con- 
sequent close rapport with them through his illustrious ancestors; secondly, 
because of many rites that were performed to empower him and bring him 
into closer rapport with the higher beings; and lastly, as a result of knowl- 
edge acquired through education of the nature of the greater powers, of 
means of approaching, coming into rapport with, and influencing them—in 
a word, of superior psychic knowledge in general comparable to the superior 
worldly knowledge that was inevitably his through fortune of crcum- 
stances. Tregear writes (149, pp. 321-2) that the mana of the Maori 
chiefs was a “part of their god-inheritance,” which under unfortunate cir- 
cumstances could be lost, but which was capable also of being greatly 
strengthened : 

; . it was not exactly success in battle, or acquisition of power and lands, or 
repute for wisdom, but the possession of these was a sign of the indwelling of mana, 
Its outward form might be what we vaguely call good luck, genius, reputation, etc., 

but it might also be recognizable in high courage, lofty social position, personal 
influence, etc. 

Interpreting mana from a rationalistic basis, Gudgeon (72, p. 49) con- 
sidered it to be 
.... the result of hereditary characteristics transmitted through famous ancestors, 

and strengthened in every instance by the belief—shared by all true Maoris—that a 
man of this type must be under the special care of the gods. 

The mana of the individual was believed to be concentrated in the 
head which, according to Polynesian philosophy was associated with the 
superior, divine aspect of nature. This is evidenced by the figurative use 
in New Zealand of the phrase kauwae runga (upper jaw, or superior 
maxilla) to denote the heavens, the abiding place of the iva atua (superior 
godlike life). The same figure of speech was used in the Society Islands. 
This belief had to do with the widespread practice of secreting the skulls 
of deceased relatives. 

A prophet or diviner who was the oracular medium of a spirit or god had 
little or no accretion of personal mana because of his inspirational talent - 
—his mana was but that of the spirit or god he served. (See The Prophet.) 
On the other hand a ritualistic priest (tohunga) was a personal embodiment 
of acquired mana, who exhibited his power in the efficacy of his ritual, and 
in his knowledge of occult influences and power to interpret omens. (See 
The Priest.) 

In the case of a man of learning such a teacher of sacred lore, accuracy 
of memory, extensive knowledge, and keenness of mind were the evidences 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 31 

of his mana. In the Marquesas Islands any person who was an adept at any 
occupation was a tu/iuna, a master. Every tu/iuna possessed mana for the 
particular activity in which he was skilled. But there were rare individuals 
whose learning and ability extended to all the departments of man’s activity ; 
knowledge, ritual, arts, and crafts. Such an adept, whose mana was so 
great that he was second to none in the tribe in sacredness, was honored 
with the title of tuuna nui, great master or adept. The ability, talent, or 
capacity possessed by tu/iuna appears to have been regarded as in part due 
to natural endowment, but more particularly to education, consecration, and 
experience. A Marquesan youth who could not memorize the ancient lore 
was spoken of as being “without mana’’; but anyone who had great ability, 
showed sufficient persistence in learning from his teacher, and submitted to 
the required consecratory rites could become a master bard and ceremonial 
priest (tuhuna oono). Such a scholar grew in power and prestige as he 
demonstrated the superiority of his knowledge and wit in contests that 
were from time to time held between the wise men of different tribes; 
but if in such a contest with other tuna he proved incapable of meeting 
his opponents’ sallies, or to be ignorant or in error, he was considered in 
some way to have lost the mana he once possessed. With his defeat his 
prestige and power were dissipated, he was no longer recognized as a 
master, and it was sometimes even believed that his defeat would cause 
his death. (See 77, p. 229.) The mental darkness or blindness that would 
lead to such a downfall might, according to native ideas, result from the 
man’s having come under a spell of witchcraft of an opponent or enemy, 
or from psychic defilement or broken tapu. 

Another type of mana was that evidenced in physical prowess. Tregear 
writes that in New Zealand “the child of a slave could by great daring, 
influence and good fortune rise to be a dreaded chief or noted councillor” 
(149, p. 323). In the Marquesas it was through personal prowess that a 
tribesman became a war chief (toa). The warrior was thought to embody 
the mana of all those whom he had killed, his own mana increasing in 
proportion to his prowess. In the mind of the native, the prowess was the 
result, however, not the cause, of his mana. The mana of the warrior’s 
spear was likewise increased with each death it inflicted. As a sign of his 
assumption of his defeated enemy’s power, the victor in a hand-to-hand 
combat assumed his slain foe’s name; with a view to absorbing directly his 
mana, he ate some of his flesh; and to bind the presence of the empowering 
influence in battle, to insure his intimate rapport with the captured mana, 
he wore as a part of his war dress some physical relic of his vanquished 
foe—a bone, a dried hand, sometimes a whole skull. 

G2 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Mana of the same type was exhibited by men in the more peaceful pur- 
suits of industrial life. That of a canoe builder and his implements evi- 
denced itself in his work and in the godd fortune that accompanied the 
use of the products of his craftsmanship; that of the husbandman and his 
tools, in his crops; and that of the fisherman and his nets and hooks, in 
his catch. In this sense the mana of a man was regarded as power only 
partially inherent in or pertaining to the man himself. Much, perhaps 
| most, of the mana of the warrior, craftsman, husbandman, and fisherman, 
- came to him through his gods, through his rites and spells, and through the 
_instruments he used. Again, mana manifested through instruments or rites 
was only partially inherent in these themselves, their efficacy when utilized 
being dependent upon the mana of the person using them. A great spear 
needed the hand of a great warrior, though it would give a common fighter 
more than his accustomed power. An adz, although it might embody mana 
in itself, could manifest its full efficacy only in the hands of an adept of 
great mana. A rite would demonstrate its highest mana only when per- 
formed by a priest endowed with that same mysterious quality. In the 
performance of rites not only the sacred instruments but the localities in 
which they were performed influenced the results; and in spells, the names 
or esoteric words that were recited, and the mode of utterance also had 
much to do with their efficacy. The mana directly applied or manifested 
in any circumstance may be said to have represented the sum total of 
psychic power brought to bear through the various mediums of rapport 
associated at the time—gods, men, rites, instruments, and localities. 

The attribution of mana to spears and other implements and instruments 
has already been mentioned. Gudgeon (72, p. 55) describes “two weapons 
that were almost dangerous to man by reason of the peculiar mana attached 
to them.” One of these, a double-bladed club, served to give the tribe by 
which it was owned omens in war time: if, as it lay on a mat it was 
observed by all to turn over, it was taken as a happy sign that the enter- 
prise in hand would have a favorable outcome. “It was, however, in single | 
combats that this weapon shone with its greatest lustre, for then it never 
failed.” The other object, characterized as being “almost dangerous to 
man” was an adz, said to be the very implement that was used by the gods 
in cutting the props that were made to hold up the Sky Father after he 
and the Earth Mother had been thrust apart. 

In all the sections of Polynesia the bones of enemies were used for 
making fishhooks which were thought to have mana by reason of their 
rapport with the spirit of the deceased foe. Slightly different was the 
conception with regard to the stones commonly referred to as “fish gods” 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 33 

in the Marquesas Islands, Hawaii, and Tahiti. These possessed mana 
capable of aiding in fishing, not merely because they were in rapport with, 
but because they were supposed to be the actual shrines of gods or spirits 
which controlled particular kinds of fish. 

According to Gudgeon (72, pp. 57-8), in New Zealand 

. rivers, mountains, lakes, and trees may possess mana in a high degree. .... 
There are instances in which trees have been objects of veneration to the Maoris, not 
because they were trees, but chiefly for the reason that they were deemed to be 
capable of absorbing mana from either man or weapons. 

This writer goes on to describe a desperate battle that was fought by a 
Maori tribe to protect the mana of their sacred river. Tregear has written 
that 

Lands and localities were supposed to possess mana of their own, as well as men, 
weapons, etc. This influence when it pertained to land was on account of the spirits 
of famous men remaining on guard over them. If a man descended from, or related 
to one of these ancestors was in danger, he would feel much more security if he 
could reach such enchanted or sacred ground, feeling that in some miraculous way 
he would obtain succor. Efforts would be made when a fight was impending to 
force the battle over into such a locality so as to obtain the “tribal luck” (mana) of 
the place. (149, p. 323-4.) 

The generation of mana by dynamic ritual may be illustrated by the 
custom of creating or empowering necromancer’s familiars in Hawaii. The 
spirit selected was itself but the soul of a deceased infant. Such a spirit 
may have been chosen because of its supposed feeling of resentment against 
the world that had not welcomed it, and perhaps also because, being a 
child’s soul, it was thought to be more easily subject to influence. Accord- 
ing to J. S. Emerson, the spirit so chosen was supposedly raised to the 
power of a malicious demon by a process called hoomanamana, meaning 
literally to cause to have mana, a process which entailed continuous nourish- 
ing with offerings and the recitation of prayers or charms by the necro- 
mancer. Concerning the word descriptive of the process, Mr. Emerson (49, 
p. 4) has written: 

The simple word mana may . . . be explained as “supernatural power” 

In the frequentitive form hoomanamana (the causing one to have mana), the impart- 

ing of supernatural power seems to be the prominent idea, rather than the ascription 
of a power already possessed by the object worshipped. 

Let me here distinctly remark that the worship (hoomanamana), rendered to 
the spirit is not an ascription of power already possessed by the object worshipped, 
but an imparting to it of mana (power) which but for the worship it would never 
have. 

Now this word hoomanamana was applied not only to these rites of the 
necromancer, but also in a general sense to worship. In view of this, and 

34 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

of the remarks of the Maori teacher explaining the decadence of mana 
in modern times as being due to negligence of ritual, and lastly, in the 
light of the general intent of the worship of the higher powers through 
rapport, it may fairly be assumed that one main purpose of the prayer, 
sacrifice, and other elements of the Polynesian rites was to increase the 
mana of the gods worshipped, that, while they sought on the one hand to 
approach and draw on the strength embodied in their gods, these people 
were confident at the same time that their efforts in worship were capable of, 
indeed requisite for, empowering the very gods on whom they believed 
themselves to be dependent. 

The empowering of a familiar demon with mana indicates that the 
divine psychic force might be diverted to, or coerced for, destructive ends; 
that the native mind accepted the possibility of worship of the evil beings, 
and of their being empowered by induction of the all pervasive energy of 
nature in exactly the same manner as were the helpful, patron gods. Mana, 
indicating psychic power, may therefore signify destructive power as well 
as salutary. It was so applied when it was said of a sorcerer, “His is great 
mana for causing sickness and death.” It was of this evil mana, diverted 
and at work against man’s life and well-being, that a Maori sage spoke 
these words: “That which destroys man is the mana of the female organ” 
(25, p. 215). This leads to the discussion of this evil aspect, which may 
be called negative, and to the consideration of the dualistic principle in the 
native religious philosophy. 

NATURE DUALISTIC 

Mana has been spoken of as procreative power. As such it belonged 
to the superior, divine aspect or realm of nature, to the realm of light and 
life. The following bit of cosmogonic genealogy illustrates the association 
of male procreative power with the idea of light (121, p. 10), 

From eternity [Po, Darkness] came the universe [4o, Light], 

From the universe [Ao] the bright clear light, 

From the bright clear light the enduring light, 

From the enduring light the void unattainable, 

From the void unattainable the void intangible, 

From the void intangible the void unstable, 

From the void unstable the void (endowed with) paternity, 

From which came moisture, which combining with limitless thought, 
Produced the visible Heavens [Rangi, the Sky Father] 

In the earliest stages of Maori creation, the dualistic principle is found 
illustrated in the distinction of light and darkness, with which are respec- 

tively associated the male and female principles. Thus in one creation 
genealogy which commences with Io, the Supreme Being, on the one side 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 3 

is a series of male Ao (Day or Light) headed by the Sun, while on the 
other, balancing the Ao as the female elements impregnated by them, is a 
succession of Po descending from the moon (Marama), the whole genea- 
logical series ending with Rangi, the Sky, on the male side, embodying the 
Light, and with Papa, the Earth, on the female, born of the Darkness (26, 
p. 210). This clearly illustrates the association of the male procreative 
mana at work in creation with the idea of light and with the sky, the 
visible embodiment of light and at the same time the symbol of nature’s 
superior aspect, and the contrasting of this positive aspect with the opposed 
but complementary darkness which is female, and which takes form in the 
Earth. 

Mana, to the native mind, was primarily associated with nature’s 
superior, divine aspect, with male procreative energy, with light. The 
picture of the positive aspect in nature is not complete, however, until it 
is pointed out that to it belonged the life (ora) of man. Best has written 
that “ ‘light’ and ‘life’ are, to the Maori, equal terms, as also are ‘darkness’ 
and ‘death’”’ (19, p. 156). A few quotations from prayers may be given 
to illustrate the association of the ideas of life and light and the superior 
realm. Spells and prayers used for healing, strengthening the souls of new- 
born children and the souls of the dead, frequently end with the phrases 
(cf. 25, pp. 231-2). 

To the world of being, 
To the world of light. 

The following lines are from a Maori spell which would be recited for the 
purpose of implanting life in, or reviving as we should say, the body of 
one apparently dead (23, p. 10): 

Thy breath, my breath, 

Open out, close up, thy breath, 
Return inside then; 

It enters; it is sacred; 

Come forth to the world of being, 
To the world of light, 
The restored life. 

Another similar spell, recited over invalids, which White has translated 
poetically and perhaps somewhat too freely, ends (in the translation) thus 
(756; Vola ly-p. 46): 

The soul now climbs, and high ascends— 

The soul of the Supreme and his disciples. 

O Heaven! the soul is far above— 

Above, in all creation’s space, 
In light supreme, in blaze of day. 

36 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

As a final example I shall quote a spell which the Moriori of Chatham 
Islands employed for the purpose of reviving a fainting person: 
Y 
Tis the life (mauri) 
’*Tis the sensation (anint) 
*Tis the light breath (or quivering) 
Of Tama, the Great-child-of-the-sun, 

Of Tama, the only child, 
Of Tama, the offspring of heaven. 

Of Tama, who was a god, it is said that it was he “who is supposed to 
give the recovering vivifying influence” (114, p. 166). 

This illustration which indicates the flowing of life through the “Great- 
child-of-the-sun” leads by a natural transition to another proof of the 
association of the ideas of light and life. It is evidenced most clearly in 
the concept of the wai ora a Tane, “the water of life of Tane” which is 
presented in the mythologies of Hawaii, Tahiti, Samoa, New Zealand, and 
other groups. “The water of life of Tane’’ has been shown to be a 
figurative expression for sunlight, or the light of the heavens, as a vivifying 
agent, of which the god Tane, whose name literally means “male,” was the 
embodiment. (See Tane.) 

The Polynesian thinkers furthermore distinguished locally and geo- 
graphically the east from the west, and the left from the right side of 
man, and associated the two in their dualistic philosophy. ‘Tane the “male,” 
who fathered man and trees, who brought the knowledge of occult matters 
down from the Supreme God for the benefit of man, was the embodiment 
at once of divine light, life, and procreative power. Now Tane was cer- 
tainly not embodied in the sun, but the sun as the most radiant heavenly 
body in some way symbolized him to the instructed native mind. It is 
therefore not surprising to find that in New Zealand the temples of learn- 
ing, in which was taught the sacred lore that Tane brought down from 
high heaven, faced east; that the college was open only during the summer 
months, and that instruction was then given only from dawn to noon of 
each day. It is quite in line with what might be expected to find temples 
in the Society Islands orientated so that the altars are at the eastern end, 
and that a famous stone figure representing a tutelary god in the Cook 
Islands faced the rising sun. The association of Tane embodying the male 
principle with the east where the sun rises, and of the female principle 
with the west where the sun descends into darkness (po) is indicated by 
and explains the custom of a Maori tribe who, being fortunate in posses- 
ing a tree that could make women conceive and bear children, believed 
that a woman by embracing the tree on the east side would bear a male 
child; a female, if on the west side. The right side of man, furthermore, 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 37 

belonged to the east. It was the right side, possessing mana, that was 
consecrated in war; while the left, the weak side, was known as the “taha- 
ruahine [place of the old woman] or tama-wahine [child of woman]. In 
many rites and acts connected with witchcraft, sickness, marriage, etc., the 
left hand is invariably used. The left hand is noa, void of tapw’ (24, Pp. 
25). These beliefs in New Zealand explain an incident in Hawaiian 
mythology which relates that when man was first made, clay from the 
cardinal points were brought by Lono, that from the north and east serving 
to form the right side, and that from the south and west the left (54, Vol. 
VI, 267). The Marquesans used the same word, fiti, to signify motion 
upward towards the mountains, and eastward, toward the rising sun; and 
another, hee, for motion down toward the sea, or westward toward the 
setting sun. 

The principle of dualism is manifest again in the theory of the balance 
of synchronous evolution on land and in the sea which is described in the 
Hawaiian Kumulipo chant. In the second era land is tossed up from the 
depths, and trees, shrubs and vines appear; while the sea becomes calm 
and fish develop. In the third era the land spreads and land birds appear, 
and at the same time the sea is described as spreading and marine birds 
as developing. Lastly, in the fourth to sixth eras occurs the first appearance 
on the one hand of mammals upon the land, and on the other of sea 
monsters, whales and porpoises in the ocean. (See 146, pp. 38-46.) The 
balance of land and sea is not merely stated in a general way, but each 
form of marine life is definitely correlated with a particular form on land; 
and there was apparently believed to exist between such classes a close 
rapport. There is striking evidence of an identical system of ideas in the 
Marquesas Islands (77, p. 167), and in Tahiti. I believe careful study 
will reveal it as an underlying theory throughout Polynesia. 

To conclude: the Polynesian dualism placed on the positive side nature 
superior, the sacred and divine, the psychic, superior power (mana), the 
male principle, light, life, occult knowledge, the east and day (ao), and the 
strong, right side of man; while on the negative side were included nature 
inferior, the common and unsacred, the physical, the passive, receptive 
female principle, darkness, destructive influences and death, ignorance, the 
west and night (po), and the left or weak side. 

Turning to study the inferior aspect of nature, it is found to be the 
manifestation of the negative, female principle, to be the realm of darkness 
and death. ‘The cosmogonic genealogy on page 10 shows that the dualism 
in which light and darkness are opposed as the complementary elements 
in procreative genesis runs back as far as Io, the originator of all. I have 

38 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

never heard that Io himself was believed to have embodied the dualistic 
principle, but would rather suppose that he represented positive, unmani- 
fested Being and that he called manifest being into existence out of noth- 
ingness (Po). Po would be, therefore, the source of the negative, inferior 
aspect of nature. In the accounts of the origin of the world, the dualistic 
principle is persistently followed in the cosmogonies, and it continues in 
the physical world in which the positive procreative power is manifesting 
itself in all realms of nature through reproduction, the female impregnated 
by the male conceiving and giving birth to physical embodiments of psychic 
power in the never ending process of natural procreation. In pointing out 
the part played by the female principle in nature, a Maori teacher said 

(27, p. 8), 

had not Rangi [the Sky] married Papa-tua-nuku [the Earth] nothing would 
have possessed ahua [form]. And from this (it may be gathered) that it is through 
the male and female that each thing has its (separate) form. 

Again the same teacher said that everything has a female of its kind 
which acts as a “house” (receptacle), in which and through which things 
have life, growth and reproduction. 

At this point it is necessary to return for a moment to a phase of 
cosmogenesis that has already been described. The genesis of the visible 
world through the impregnation of the inferior female by the superior 
divine male is a fundamental element in the cosmogonic mythologies. In 
New Zealand it was Rangi the Sky who lay upon Papa, and who was thrust 
up so that his children, the gods, the progenitors of all forms of life on 
earth, might have light and space for their work. In the Marquesas Islands 
it is first Level Above (Papa Una), referred to sometimes as Ani Motua 
(Sky Father), and Level Below (Papa Ao, the female); and afterwards 
Atea (Widespread Light, or White Space) and Atanua, the female, who 
played the same parts in the drama of creation. The enforced separation 
of the Level Above from the Level Below in the Marquesan record is 
reminiscent of the Maori account of the separation of Sky from Earth. 
(See 78.) In the Society Islands and Samoa it was Taaroa or Tangaloa 
who was the heavenly impregnator, and there are similar accounts of the 
separation of heaven and earth. In Hawaii Wakea and Papa, progenitors 
of lands and men, correspond to the heavenly and earthly progenitors, 
elsewhere. The idea of the birth of the gods and of the separation of 
heaven and earth appears to have been obscured in Hawaii, although these 
lines from a prayer are certainly reminiscent of this mythical event (54, 
Vol. VI, p. 505): 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 39 

O Lono of the heavenly region (oili), 

From out of the rest of heaven’s origin (ka maha ulu lant) 
Issued forth Kane and Kanaloa. 

[From] within the heavenly birth-place (eweewe-lani) 
Came forth Kumu-honua, of Kane. 

And Lalo-honua [cf. Papa A’o], the female. 

Spread forth Wakea and great Papa that gave birth to lands. 
From out of Huli-honua 

The chiefs were born; 

From within the heavenly birth-place 

Lono stood forth. 

The name Huli-honua (Overturn-earth) is probably another epithet for 
Lalo-honua (Below-earth) for in both New Zealand and Marquesan ac- 
counts Mother Earth was overturned when forcibly separated from. her 
mate the Sky, by their children, the gods. 

In Maori myth of all the offspring of the Sky Father and Earth Mother 
not one was female. All the seventy children of this mighty union were 
gods, divine and male. Now, when it was desired to create man that he 
might inhabit the earth, it was proposed by the gods that the female element 
be sought in the heavens where dwelt various types of female beings. But 
one of the gods said, 

Not so; for those are supernatural beings, and their offspring would also be 

supernatural. The female element must be obtained from the Earth Mother, in order 
to produce a race to dwell in the world as our descendants, but yet different from us. 

To produce man it was therefore necessary for the god ‘ane, the 
Fertilizer, to fashion in human form a figure of earth upon the Earth 
Mother’s body, and to vivify it. This event transpired in the following 
way. (The account, according to Best, is “rendered as given by an old 
native’) (27, pp. II0-I11). 

Tane proceeded to the puke (Mons veneris) of Papa [the Earth] and there 
fashioned in human form a figure in the earth. His next task was to endow that 
figure with life, with human life, life as known to human beings, and it is worthy of 
note that, in the account of this act, he is spoken of as Tane te waiora. It was the sun 
light fertilizing the Earth Mother. Implanted in the lifeless image were the wairua 
(spirit) and manawa ora (breath of life), obtained from Io, the Supreme Being. The 
breath of Tane was directed upon the image, and his warmth affected it. That figure 
absorbed life, a faint life sigh was heard, the life spirit manifested itself, and Hine- 
ahu-one, the Farth Formed Maid, sneezed, opened her eyes, and rose—a woman. 

Such was the Origin of Woman, formed from the substance of the Earth Mother, 
but animated by the divine Spirit that emanated from the Supreme Being, Io the 
great, Io of the Hidden Face, Io the Parent, and Io the Parentless. 

What I believe to represent the genuine ancient Polynesian form of account 
of the creation of man follows this type except that the god impregnates the 
Earth Maid whom he has modeled, thus engendering the first human being. 

40 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

This was the mode of Tane’s creation of man according to a number of 
accounts from New Zealand which find parallels in the Society and Marque- 
san islands. (See 44, p. 24.) In the myths of this type the name given 
_ to the divine impregnator is in all cases either Tane, or Tiki, which, as Best 
has shown, was in all probability originally the name given to Tane’s procre- 
ative energy or instrument as a distinct embodiment. Further on in the 
account quoted above Best writes: 

The seed of life is with Tane, and with man, with woman is the receptacle that 

shelters and nourishes it. ‘The seed of the spiritual god is with the male, for he is 
a descendant of gods. Woman emanates from Papa, the Earth. 

The ora tangata (human life, life as known to man) pertains to the kauwae raro 
{lower jaw], (a term denoting the earth and all things connected with it), but the 
Rauwae-runga (upper jaw, the heavens, celestial spheres) knows only the ora atua 
(supernatural life as enjoyed by the gods). In Hine-ahua-one and her descendants 
(men) we see the blending of the two. 

Best points out, “It is from the earthly origin of Hine-ahu-one that came 
about the belief in the inferiority of the female sex.” That the same 
conception was characteristic of Tahiti is evidenced by the fact that when 
two families were united by formal marriage, that of the man was called 
papa nia (level above) and that of the woman the papa raro (level below), 
recalling the Marquesan creational Levels Above and Below, the male and 
female. 

If the picture of the dualistic nature is to be complete, it must be shown 
that with the inferior material aspect of nature derived from darkness were 
associated womankind and the evils that afflict men. The evidence of this 
is again furnished by Best, who in another article (26, Vol. XIV, p. 207, 
pt. 1) has written as follows: 

When Tane desired and sought woman, he hied him to Rangi, the sky parent, 
and asked: “O Rangi! Where is the uha?” (female or female principle). And Rangi 
said: “The whare o aitua is below; above is the whare o te ora.’ The first of these 
terms may be translated as “the abode or origin of trouble, death, misfortune.” It is 
here applied to the female organ or principle, and apparently so for two reasons: in the 
first place, man is born of woman to encounter many troubles in this world, and 
finally death; again, the female organ (or principle) was the origin of death. In 
this wise, when Maui of old sought to gain eternal life for man, he proceeded to 
enter the organ of Hine-nui-te-Po, Goddess of Death and Queen of Hades, that he 
might obtain the life principle, or breath of life, from her sacred body, and so con- 
quer death. For the seed of man is implanted in that organ and is endowed therein 
with the breath of life, or life principle. But it was not to be, and Maui perished 
in the organ of the Goddess of Hades—that is to say, in the whare o aitua. Hence 
death ever assails man in this world. The term whare o aitwa might also be applied 
to Papa, the earth mother, for she is the personification of the female principle. 
Her descendants who dwell on her broad bosom, 7. e., man, birds, trees, etc., all perish 
and are received back into the earth mother. 

Due to the fact that there exist from no other region of Polynesia 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 41 

detailed and searching studies in the genuine native philosophy equivalent 
to those of Best and a few others in New Zealand, it is impossible to 
present direct evidence from mythological or priestly teachings of the exist- 
ence throughout Polynesia of equally clear cut concepts underlying the tapu 
system. But if the records from the rest of Polynesia were in any way com- 
parable to those transmitted by the small body of faithful and intelligent 
students in New Zealand, they would, I believe, show that there were 
equally clear cut teachings in all the islands. There is no good ground 
for assuming mental superiority of the Maori, whose civilization in most, 
though not all, aspects was decidedly inferior to that of the people of 
other large groups, such as Hawaii, Samoa, Tonga, and the Society 
Islands. Furthermore, in view of the uniformity of practice of the tapu 
system throughout Polynesia, the assumption of uniformity of underlying 
theory or principle seems justified. Finally, it is unquestionable that the 
dual aspect of nature, which is clearly the underlying principle of the 
system in New Zealand is manifest in the creation mythologies and in 
the religious practices and beliefs of all the islands. 

Specific illustration of the association of woman with the inferior 
aspect of nature, and of evil with that aspect and with the female principle 
can be drawn from various customs and beliefs prevalent in all the islands. 
In the Marquesas there was a class of evil spirits called fanaua that were 
said to be demons which would enter the womb of a woman and kill her ; 
and if she were pregnant at the time, as was usually the case for this was 
the time the demon would choose for its evil work, it would kill the child 
as well as the mother before delivery. These fanaua were employed by 
necromancers as their familiars, being sustained by worship, and being 
dispatched against this or that person with murderous intent. The same 
ideas are found in New Zealand illustrated in the meanings given by 
Tregear for the word kahukahu: a ghost, a spirit of a deceased person; the 
germ of a human being, grown into a malignant spirit; and, a cloth used 
by women at the time of menstruation. Tregear remarks that the last 
two meanings are connected, and says further, 

It is probable that the “ghost” is connected with the idea of “growing” because 

the ghost springs from what the Natives think to be “wasted germs of human 
beings” (145, p. I13). 

Further light is thrown on the Maori beliefs by these remarks of 
Best’s (26, Vol. XV, p. 13): 

There is a considerable amount of danger to man attached to abortion, so say 
the Maori people, inasmuch as the foetus is liable to develop into a most malignant 
demon (atua), which afflicts man grievously in diverse ways, and is much dreaded. 
Such a caco-daemon is termed an atua kahu or kahukahu. It is the spirit (wairua) 

42 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

of the foetus which thus developes into a mischievous and dangerous demon. ‘The 
term kahu is applied to the membrane which covers the foetus, as also is whakakahu. 

It is unnecessary to go further into the consideration of beliefs regarding 
demons to illustrate the believed connection of such spirits with woman and 
with the reproductive activities of her body. 

The consideration of evil spirits of this type leads to further highly 
interesting evidence of dualism; for, while the good gods who aided the 
living belonged to the superior realm of nature, it is found that the evil 
spirits which caused disease and death lived in or under the earth, that is, 
in‘nature-inferior. In the Marquesas the body of a woman who was killed 
by a fanaua spirit was buried in the ground, in the hope that the demon 
which had fed on her might thereby be compelled to remain below ground 
where it belonged, and prevented from further molesting those living in the 
“world of light” (ao maama). All other bodies were deposited in some 
elevated place of safety. It was the belief that the fanaua spirit would seek 
to enter the body of any woman who walked over the place where such 
victims had been buried, coming up out of the ground and entering the 
womb. In Tahiti, when a corpse was placed on the bier, a hole was dug 
in the ground at the foot of the structure, and over this the officiating 
priest prayed to the god supposed to have caused the death, asking that the 
evil might be drawn off into the hole (105, Vol. I, p. 552). Thus the 
influence which had caused the death was conducted into the ground. Here, 
as in all the islands, the influences which caused sickness and death were 
believed to be manifested as spirits. It seems, therefore, that this rite 
indicates again the association of evil spirits with the earth. Such associa- 
tion is certainly evident in a widespread belief in the Society Islands in a 
certain much feared form of evil spirit (varua ino) that is said to be seen 
as a ball of light which is frequently described as emerging from the 
ground and shooting off into the air (79). 

In one New Zealand healing rite, the evil spirit causing the trouble was 
conducted back into the earth or the nether regions along the blade of grass 
which was believed to have been its route of entry into the world (116, 
pp. 114-127). 

It was the universal belief that all spirits except a select few went 
downward at death to an underworld. Moreover, the demons that caused 
sickness were for the most part spirits of deceased human beings who had 
been unfortunate in human life, or whose remains were neglected or 
desecrated, or spirits that had not been properly assisted with the prescribed 
post mortem rites, or which had fallen prey to the demons that sought to 
catch the souls of the dying, or to the murderous machinations of a 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 43 

sorcerer or necromancer. This makes it evident again that evil spirits and 
the evil influences of which they were the medium and embodiments were 
associated in the native mind with the earth and the underworld. In New 
Zealand, Whiro, the lord of all evils that afflicted man, dwelt in the under- 
world the sovereign of which was Hine-nui-te-po, “Great-woman-of-the- 
night,” the goddess of death. In Hawaii, Pele, the devastator of lands and 
great patron of the black arts, may certainly, as the fiery mistress of vol- 
canoes, be spoken of as a goddess of the underworld. 

TAP 

Grounded upon and derived from this principle of dualism in nature 
was the system of tapu or religious law, which had a controlling influence 
over all phases of the life of the individual and the community. Its specific 
regulations were doubtless the product of a long period of growth in folk 
custom. In its fundamental meaning tapu as a word was used primarily 
as an adjective and as such signified that which was psychically dangerous, 
hence restricted, forbidden, set apart, to be avoided, because: (a) divine, 
therefore requiring isolation for its own sake from both the common and 
the corrupt; (b) corrupt, hence dangerous to the common and the divine, 
therefore requiring isolation from both for their sakes. What is spoken of 
as the “common” needing protection from both divine and corrupt represents 

the middle ground between the superior and inferior aspects of nature, the © 

common ground of human beings and natural objects, where superior and 
inferior united in a balanced equilibrium. It should be noted that the 
dualism which was the basis of tapu was a theory not of opposition, but of 
balance and complement which made up a unity. Any disturbance of this 
equilibrium in an individual, either by a surcharge of mana or by a loss of 
his natural endowment of mana, affected him disastrously. 

TAPU OF THE DIVINE 

The tapu of sanctity governed two classes of individuals: those of 
inborn or inherited sacredness and those of induced sacredness which was 
acquired simultaneously with mana through the direct or indirect association 
with the gods. It was characteristic in particular of the divinely born and 
consecrated chief. He was tapu beyond all others because he was the 
embodiment of the divinity, the instrument of the mana of the gods, his 
ancestors. On this account he was fenced about with many tapu designed 
to protect him and, through him, his ancestors from indignity and from 
loss of mana through contact with the common. While the head of every 
person was tapu, in proportion to the mana of the individual, especially 

eae Vota 
4 

44 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

sacred was the head of the divine chief. For in the head the mana was 
believed to be concentrated. No greater desecration was possible than to 
touch a chief’s head or to pass something common or corrupt over it, or 
to insult it by comparing it to some profane thing. The bloodiest of wars 
have arisen from such serious breaches of the laws of tapu. 

The rules governing the sanctity of the divine chief were by no means 
a system of arbitrary regulations invented by overlords with an eye toward 
maintaining their power and the pretence of their theocratic system of gov- 
ernment, as has been sometimes maintained. Chiefs striving for power 
often, of course, must have taken advantage of the system to protect and 
aggrandize themselves; but the tapu surrounding the sacred chief was in 
essence part and parcel of the religious system and no arbitrary invention. 
Neither were the tapu entirely for the protection of the sacred individual. 
Their enforcement was equally important to the community as a whole, 
for through the chief, the divine mana was thus protected, for the chief 
was the community’s main instrument of rapport with the life-giving 
powers of the heavens. (See The Divine Chief.) It is therefore obvious 
that the chiefly tapu would have been scrupulously observed by the people, 
as a voluntary duty. 

The protective rules, of which innumerable examples are to be found 
in every description of Polynesian life, applied not only to the immediate 
person of the sacred individual, but on account of the principles of psychic 
rapport, were extended to include all things with which he came in contact; 
clothing, houses, personal possessions, canoes, land, etc.; and particularly 
food and all things associated with its preparation and consumption, 
because food, being taken into the body was believed to be a ready trans- 
mittor or purveyor of influence. 

In a lesser degree, all who were related to the divine first-born of the 
first family of the community were tapu, their degree of natural sacredness 
being exactly proportional to the closeness of blood relationship. In the 
purest form, the system followed the genealogy. The divine chief was the 
first-born in the family that was most directly descended from the gods and 
that combined the greatest number of lines of more or less direct descent. 
Others were sacred in degree, according to their descent. In some of the 
islands which had developed elaborate political systems, notably Hawaii 
and Tahiti, the tapu became the basis of social stratification of the strictest 
sort. It is mainly on the basis of very limited knowledge concerning these 
groups that those who have regarded the personal tapu surrounding 
royalty and nobility in these islands as products of a theocratic govern- 
mental system have based their theory. As a matter of fact, both the tapu 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 45 

and the theocratic systems were founded upon the fundamental principles 
of a religious philosophy undoubtedly more ancient than any of the culture 
traits peculiar to Polynesia. 

What may be termed the consecrational tapu was that which applied 
to all persons, places, and things set apart for worship or sacred labor. 
There were consecrational rites that cut off the contagious influences 
emanating from the common world, and induced divine control. All sub- 
jected to such consecration became tapu, and would remain so until in 
turn other rites had been performed to remove or neutralize the condition 
of rapport with the divine that had been established. (See Consecrated 
Industry. ) 

A second type of consecrational tapu was enforced upon the whole 
community upon important occasions such as the birth, marriage, sickness 
or death of a chief, religious festivals, war, fishing expeditions, and the 
like, when the people were subjected to a complete prohibition of all com- 
mon, everyday activities. All not actively engaged in worship or conse- 
crated enterprise had to be passively part of it by engaging in no other 
activity. No noise of any kind was allowed, no one could move about, no 
fires were lighted, and no food prepared or eaten. 

Another type of the tapu of sacredness related to first fruits and new 
objects. A crop that was about to be harvested, food collected and about 
to be consumed, a catch of fish, was tapu until a small portion of it had 
been presented as an offering to the gods whose mana had been utilized. 
The presentation to the gods of their share constituted the “offering of 
first fruits,’ and “raised the tapu’”’ on the crop, food, or catch, making it 
free (noa) for general consumption. (See Offerings and Sacrifices.) 

In the case of newly made products of handicraft, such as canoes, 
houses, or nets, the offering was not made in kind; but some gift was 
always presented to the gods who had lent their help, such presentations 
having a prominent place in the consecrational rites which were necessary 
for raising the tapu on every newly made object before it could be moa. 
This constituted the reverse of the process by which food, objects, or 
persons to be devoted to sacred purposes were consecrated by being 
released from the contagion of the common or defiling. 

There was a large class of restrictions which are sometimes termed tapu 
but which should properly be called rahui. These were arbitrary prohibi- 
tions instituted by chiefs or proprietors of trees, lands, or fishing grounds 
for the purpose of keeping away trespassers or reserving the food supply 
for some particular occasion. These prohibitions depended for their 
enforcement in part upon custom, but in the main upon ritual of some 

40 Bernice P. Bishop Muscum—Bulletin 34 

kind that would bring a curse upon anyone who disobeyed the regulation. 
If it were a chief who was laying a rahwi ypon a crop or a kind of fish in 
a certain season in preparation for some feast, he would call upon his 
priest to invoke the support of his gods, doubtless promising the gods their 
share of the food when it was harvested. If, following this, any subject 
disregarded the restriction it was believed that the gods would dispose of 
him. Sometimes there were special guardians of the raw. In New 
Zealand a chief who desired to place a vahui upon a piece of land or a 
stream had only to erect a post and hang a piece of clothing upon it, doubt- 
less at the same time uttering a curse against trespassers. The same effect 
could be attained by a Marquesan chief by merely giving the land his 
name, or calling it his head. But the’ more common method here was to 
employ a sorcerer who performed a special form of rite, in which certain 
objects were buried at the base of the tree with an incantation and a sign 
put on its trunk as a warning to trespassers (77, pp. 57-61). 

The rahui were temporary prohibitions of foods. But there were 
numerous permanent prohibitions. If the patron of a community was 
believed to be incarnate in a certain species of animal, as was the case 
frequently in Samoa, no member of the community was allowed to kill or 
eat that form. There was another type of tapu in the Marquesas which 
bears a superficial resemblance to this. A dying priest or prophet would 
sometimes tapu some food or some color to himself, so that after his death 
no member of his tribe could eat of that food or wear that color (77, p. 262). 
Certain foods appear to have been very generally restricted throughout 
Polynesia to the gods and their representatives, the priests and chiefs: 
such were the fish called ulua in Hawaii, the turtle, and the octopus. Arbi- 
trary tapu restricted certain foods to certain classes, or individuals, and 
denying them to others. In Tahiti several varieties of fish were always 
to be brought to the chief when caught; and the forequarters of hogs 
were his share. In the Marquesas the head of a hog killed was always 
offered to the gods, and the flesh on it (which the natives relish) was 
eaten by the priest. In this group pork was tapu to women except upon 
certain rare specified occasions. Everywhere it was used kava was strictly 
forbidden to women, and in certain of the groups it was reserved for chiefs 
alone. Obviously these rules were for the most part arbitrary regulations 
of a privileged class created for the purpose of restricting to themselves 
certain of the rare or best foods. But there was often a religious reason 
in addition, as in the case of the octopus and turtles which were sacred 
creatures and were for this reason reserved for the chiefs and priests, the 
children and servants of the gods. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 47 

The genuine tapu of sacredness were always connected directly or in- 
directly with the higher gods who embodied the positive mana in the 
universe and protected all that was in intimate rapport with them. 

The tapu of unsacredness, on the other hand, in the last analysis were 
always associated with the malicious and destructive evil agencies of the 
earth. These tapu were associated for the most part with women, to whom 
dangerous spirits were likely to attach themselves, and who were at times 
in a contaminated state psychically; and with sickness and death which 
were the signs of the presence of fearful demons. 

There were everywhere many tapu relating to the reproductive activ- 
ities of women’s bodies. Everything connected with menstruation was 
dangerous on account of the menstrual blood, which was regarded as 
utterly contaminating to all that was sacred. In the Marquesas the cause 
of leprosy was thought to be contact with menstrual fluid. Hence the 
avoidance of women’s mats and clothing by men, and the dire results that 
were believed to follow if a woman or anything on which she had sat 
should pass over the head of a male child. Such a reversal of the funda- 
mental principle and order of nature as the latter occurrence would effect, 
could not, it was thought, but induce corruption through contamination or 
destruction of the very principle of the child’s being. I know Marquesan 
mothers who even today refuse to sit in a chair for fear that a child 
might subsequently walk or crawl under it. One of the reasons given 
for the building of the old sleeping houses on solid stone platforms, and 
never on posts, is the protection of children from this danger. One type 
of Marquesan house was elevated upon posts, but this was a tapu struc- 
ture, sacred to men, into which women were never allowed to enter. 

The Maori were just as fearful of woman in her “sickness” as were 
the Marquesans. Best writes (26, Vol. XIV, p. 212); 

On account of the. . . feeling in regard to the paheke, or menses, the sleeping 
places, etc., of women were looked upon as being unclean and hence dangerous to 
man, who is tapu. Such places are to be avoided by all men of standing, although 
they might not be harmful to a common, tapu-less person, such as a slave. Should 
a man sit down, or recline on a place where women sleep, or rest, or should he 
utilize an article of female wearing apparel, as a pillow, he will be polluted thereby, 
his tapu, the sacred spiritual and intellectual ichor which pervades, vivifies, and pre- 
serves him, will be contaminated by contact with “uncleanness” and hence his spiritual, 
physical, and intellectual well-being will be seriously affected and endangered. 

The term atua was sometimes applied to the menses, which was “viewed 
as a sort of human embryo, an immature or undeveloped human being, 
hence the tapu” (op. cit. pp. 210-211). The existence of the same point 
of view in Hawaii is indicated by the fact that women retired into a 
“house of separation” at times of their infirmity (54, Vol. IV, p. 158). 

48 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

In most of the islands of Polynesia, a woman expecting to be delivered 
of a child had to retire to a house built especially for the purpose; or into 
the bush, so that the sleeping house might not be contaminated. In the 
Marquesas Islands, in the event of an accidental delivery in the family 
dwelling, the house was afterwards destroyed with fire exactly as it was 
when a death occurred in it. Evil spirits of the most dangerous sort were 
thought to be lingering about at such times, and the woman and child were 
as dangerous to the family and the community until purificatory rites had 
been performed as was the dead body of a person who had been done 
away with by demons of sickness. Here, as in the case of menstruation, 
it was the blood that was discharged after the delivery that was regarded 
with great fear. 

Characteristic of the native customs were tapu designed to protect the 
mother and the child in her womb from evil, psychic influences. Pregnant 
women were regarded as particularly subject to attack by evil spirits. 
(See pp. 138-140.) Another important class of tapu affecting pregnancy 
had to do with food. If a Marquesan baby were affected with certain 
maladies it was thought that the evil had come to it through something 
that the mother had eaten. A diviner would be summoned who would 
tell the mother what had caused the trouble, advising her that to heal 
the child she must perform certain rites with a bit of the same food. If 
she had none, she must seek it. To insure having a morsel for this purpose 
should it be necessary, pregnant Marquesan women put by in a safe place 
a little bit of every kind of food that was eaten during pregnancy. (See 
77, Pp. 267-8.) 

This belief in psychic influence affecting the embryo through food con- 
sumed by the mother manifests itself in an interesting manner in Tahiti. 
Here even today when a pregnant woman becomes obsessed with the 
desire for a particular food it is said that if she is allowed to have it her 
child will be marked in some way. To give only one illustration: I am 
told that there is now living a boy who since birth has had deformed, 
claw-like hands as a result of the fact that his mother, while he was still 
in her womb, was allowed to eat crabs when an intense desire for them 
came upon her. Club feet, mottled skin, and other deformities were 
accounted for similarly. In Tonga the craving of a pregnant woman was 
spoken of as, “the food by which she was pregnant, or had conceived” 
(38, p. 160). In Hawaii when a chiefly woman became pregnant “she was 
restrained from eating food from any and every one if offered her.” She 
must not eat any fish salted by others; and certain varieties of fish were 
forbidden, as was also the flesh of brown colored dog. She must not gird 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 49 

herself with a “glittering skirt,” or wear old garments, or dwell in an old 
house. “The child was thus carefully safeguarded. . . A man of evil 
designs, if seen around such places, would be taken before the king who 
commanded him to be killed. Such a place was strictly tabooed. No 

woman nor man of evil intentions was to traverse there sees ey 
MOle VL pe 2 )s 

What is known as the “eating tapu,” a custom peculiar to Polynesia, 
furnishes one of the clearest and simplest illustrations of the working of 
the system based upon the theory of dualism in nature. This tapu required 
that men and women and persons of different degrees of sacredness eat 
apart. Since food was capable of acting as a medium to carry psychic 
influences into the body, it was considered safer for men not to eat in 
company with women, not to have their food prepared by them, or to 
employ the same fire or same utensils. In the Marquesas, for example, 
persons of the same sex, but of differing degrees of sacredness even in 
the same family were required to eat apart. This appears to be based 
upon the belief that a loss of mana would be incurred by the more sacred 
person as a result of the shared food’s acting as a conductor. 

Since sickness and death were thought always to be caused directly or 
indirectly by demons, or else by the subtle darts and machinations of 
sorcery, the living protected themselves from contamination by strict 
avoidance of contact with the body of the victim and everything that had 
touched it. The house in which a death occurred was destroyed or else 
measures were taken to free it of lingering evil. Possessions and clothing 
belonging to the deceased were destroyed or put away with the body. And 
the attendants of the corpse, until they had been purified, protected them- 
selves from contamination through their hands by being fed by others 
or eating without touching the food with their hands. They protected 
others by keeping strictly apart. 

The tapu pertaining to warriors returning from battle, which required 
seclusion and purifying ceremonies, are to be ascribed in part to the fear 
of the influences associated with death, in part to fear of the vengeful 
spirits of slain enemies which might be expected to seek to avenge them- 
selves on any member of the community, and in part to the weighty tapu 
of consecration that was laid on a war party when it went into the fray. 
But the chief reason for the isolation of the warriors and their purifica- 
tion was undoubtedly the fact that they had been in contact with spilt 
blood, both their own and that of the enemy. There are various evidences 
that blood was regarded as a most potent medium of psychic influence. 
Until the returning fighters had been released from the psychic influences 

50 Bernice P. Bishop Muscum—Bulletin 34 

lingering about them by the rites prescribed for the purpose, it was unsafe 
for them to be among men, women and children of the community who 
were not so well protected psychically by innate and induced mana as 
were the warriors themselves. | 

The native who disregarded tapu, whether of sacredness or unsacred- 
ness, was breaking psychic law, and the resultant physical effects were 
sickness, accident, and death. The effect of infringement of a psychic 
law was to his mind direct and inevitable. His psychic being or life 
principle was impaired, with consequent physical and mental effects, for it 
was the belief that the physical and mental effects were consequent upon 
the psychic condition. Punishment evidently was believed to come both 
directly and automatically, as when, in the Marquesas, a child contracted 
leprosy through defilement by menses; or indirectly, through the agency 
of evil spirits lingering about to attack the weakened life or sent by 
avenging gods. Usually a person suffering from the effects of broken tapu 
could be relieved and restored to health by the prompt performance of 
healing rites which strengthened his life principle by exércising the spirit 
causing the trouble, or by propitiating the offended deity. 

It is beyond question that in consequence of breaking tapu death 
actually occurred and still does occur in Polynesia. In all the islands 
many of the old tapu are still operative. During our stay in Hivaoa, 
Marquesas Islands, in 1921, a man, stricken with fear, lay down on his 
mat and died after seeing an angry demon upon one of the old temple 
sites. Society Islanders today will not venture on certain of the ancient 
chiefly temple sites, because of the firmly established belief that the oovi 
ari, chief’s leprosy, will result. Many instances of this curse are cited 
throughout the islands which, of course, it would be impossible to verify. 
Tregear writes of the tapu in New Zealand (149, p. 200) : 

The infringement of the tapu was not only a spiritual offence, but sometimes pro- 

duced actual physical consequences. . . The physical consequences of broken tapu 
have been noted in numberless individual instances. 

Manning relates in detail the circumstances of the death of a Maori slave 
who discovered he had eaten the food of a very tapu chief (100, pp. 132-4). 

RELEASE FROM Psycuic INFLUENCE 

There were various methods of releasing persons, things, and places 
from psychic influences, both good and bad. At birth and at death, at- 
times of consecrated labor or worship, there were releasing rites that 
loosed the bonds of tapu. In the consideration of one class of these 
rites which may be spoken of as purificatory ceremonies, there is apt to 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 51 

arise in the student’s mind a conception of an ethical sense underlying 
the whole system of practices. But this suggestion is to be rejected, for 
there was no ethical element associated in the native mind with the 
ritualistic practices in question. The psychic influence removed might be 
good, or it might be evil, in the sense of being helpful and salutary or 
malicious; but there was no sense of ethical and moral good and evil. 
The common life occupied an intermediate plane between the divine world 
above and the lower realm which harbored all evil. Man, embodying 
elements, influences and qualities derived from both, was capable of being 
or becoming surcharged either with sacredness or corruption; and when 
in such a condition, he required restoration to the normal psychic balance 
of the common world before his mingling with others was safe for him 
or for them. When a man had been engaged in sacred activity and 
returned to common life, the removal of tapu was perhaps more for the 
protection of the sacred with which he was in intimate sympathetic con- 
tact until the rapport was broken by the rite, than for the man’s pro- 
tection; but when the contact had been with something psychically defiling, 
such as a corpse, then the release of the man was for his own and the 
community’s well being. In the removal of psychic influences there were 
two physical mediums that were employed in the ritualistic practices 
throughout the islands: fire, to drive away or consume the influence; and 
water, to wash it away. In view of this ritualistic use of fire and water, 
this remark of a Maori teacher, obscure in itself and isolated as a tenet 
in the native philosophy, is interesting: 

“Tt is by water and fire that all things grow and live” (27, p. 8). 

There were many ways in which fire was employed as an agent to 
drive away or destroy evil. Evil spirits were believed to fear heat and 
fire. In the Society Islands when a demon causing sickness or insanity 
was discovered by a seer to be localized in a stone that some enemy had 
buried, the stone was dug up and thrown into a fire, to destroy the evil 
spirit (varua ino). Again, when a demon was believed to have entered 
into a sufferer’s body, a cure might be effected by applying a heated stone 
to the afflicted part and gradually drawing it towards the arm or leg 
of the person, down to its extremity, and then out of the body entirely. 
The custom of baking or steaming a woman after delivery in these islands 
probably likewise arose out of the idea that evil spirits feared heat and 
fled before it; and this is true also of the practice of some Maori fighters 
of leaping through the flames of a fire before going into battle (24, p. 
47). Apparently the Maori believed that good as well as bad psychic 
influence fled before heat, for they thought that if hot water touched a 

52 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

man’s head it destroyed his tapu. The well known fire-walking rite of 
. Raiatea, in the Society Islands, in which a body of people led by a priest 
who subdued the flames and the heat by means of a spell walked across 
a large pit in the ground filled with white hot blocks of lava, is said to 
have been performed for prophylactic purposes (90, p. 145). Firewalk- 
ing was also practiced in ancient times by Maori priests, as in Raiatea, but 
not by those of any of the other Polynesian groups. The fundamental 
purpose in this as in most of the rites in which fire was used was the 
destruction of evil influence. Examples of the attempt to destroy or 
dispel evil by burning or roasting the bodies of sacrifices in the Cook 
and Marquesas islands are given elsewhere. (See Offerings and Sacrifices. ) 
The use of fire as an agent to remove psychic influences may be illus- 
trated also by the custom typical of the Marquesas and elsewhere of burn- 
nig structures that had become tapu either through defilement or contact 
with sacredness. In witchcraft and in war fire was likewise employed 
to destroy through rapport victims’ psychic attributes. In connection with 
this discussion of the use of fire, it may be pointed out that there is little 
to suggest association of fire with the sun in the mind of the native. 
Mythology in volcanic Polynesia is consistent in deriving fire from the 
underworld, though according to Maori teaching, it was originally derived 
from the heavens (16, p. 199). 

Water, both salt and fresh, was the agent employed in the formalized 
ritual for removing from persons tapu of both sacredness and contamina- 
tion. The ritualistic use of water in this way was undoubtedly associated 
in ancient times with the “Living waters of Tane” or the “Water of life 
of Tane,” which, it is likely, referred both to sunlight and rain as vivifying 
agents from the sky. In ritual the removal of tapu by means of water 
was accomplished through immersion, washing, and sprinkling. Maori vil- 
lages had each their “Sacred Water,’ which was just as important a 
place in the worship as was the shrine; and every Marquesan chief built 
for his first-born a tapu bathing basin. Bathing both in the sea and fresh 
water was one of the most common accompaniments of the rites preceding 
and following war, consecrated labor, and worship in the Marquesas, 
Society Islands, and Hawaii. The removal of evil by washing is illustrated 
in the fact that this was customary in connection with birth, healing and 
death rites in all parts of the area. The so called “baptismal” rite in New 
Zealand, in which a child was sprinkled with sacred water when it was 
consecrated—the same rite was employed to consecrate adults for various 

* For descriptions and discussions of firewalking in Polynesia see 90, p. 145 ff.; pp. 53-4: 
5, Pp. 61; 71, pp. 58-60. For descriptions of fire-walking in Fiji and elsewhere see 60, pp. 187- 
201; 83, pp. 667-72; 3, pp. 188-196. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 53 

purposes—finds its counterpart in Hawaii in the consecrational sprinkling 
with seawater of fishermen before their work. Sprinkling was extensively 
used in the removal of tapu in Samoa: for freeing chiefs from inferior 
influences, purifying dead bodies and those who had been in contact with 
them, releasing those who had just been tattooed, and so on (134, pp. 
127-8). 

There were always two aspects to ritual purification with water: the 
recitation of a spell or prayer, and the application of the water. The 
following words ® taken from a prayer used in Hawaii when the influence 
of worldly life was to be removed from chiefs, priests, and commoners in 
preparation for a temple rite, illustrate the type of verbal accompaniment 
that always went with the ritualistic use of water (99, p. 234). 

Priest. : ; ; ; 

Turn to us, o Lono. 

Release, oh Lono, 

Unloose (kala) the hala (broken tapu) of the men chiefs, 
Unloose the hala of the women chiefs, 

Unloose the hala of the priests, 
Unloose the hala of the commoners. 

Response. ‘ : 
The bodies are purified, 

Your temple is tapu, oh thou god, 
Release for the multitude. 

Free (noa), free, it has flown, 

It has flown to Lono, the mana god. 

The following Maori custom which is described by Best (16, p. 199) 
is indicative of the fact that water was sometimes believed literally to “wash 
away” evil influences. To dispel the evil pervading a place and causing an 
epidemic of sickness, this rite was sometimes resorted to. Some person 
in the community was selected and a stalk of bracken was loosely at- 
tached to his body. The priest then recited a spell, the object of which 
appears to have been to cause the evil to enter the stalk. The man then 
entered the stream, immersed himself in it, and while covered with the 
water released the stalk. “The stalk as it drifted away was supposed to 
bear with it the evil influences that had been affecting the people.” 

The actual washing away of tapu by water is likewise illustrated by these 
remarks of a Maori in explanation of the removal of tapu from certain 
ancient sacred weapons by spell and washing. After describing the dashing 
of handfuls of water over the weapons, and the repetition of the spell, he 
said (128, p. 158), 

>In this and a number of other prayers quoted from Malo I have substituted in the tr 

lation more literal meanings for the native words than those given in Emerson’s free 
tions. 

of the 
= PACIFIC 

54 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

The effect of this was to destroy, or modify, the tapu which otherwise would 
have prevented the people from handling these treasures of their ancestors. ‘The 
death-causing attributes of the weapons were by the water-laving and sprinkling 
transferred to the running water, which carried the baneful tapu into the ocean where 
it was dispersed and lost. This is why such ceremonies are performed in running 
water, 

The practices that have just been described were both preventative and 
destructive of dangerous influences already present. There was another 
class of customs that were purely preventative, which were closely related 
in purpose but not in principle to these rites in which water and fire were 
used. Since food and womankind were thought to be the two chief 
mediums through which evil influences could enter and take possession of 
man, when it was especially desirable to guard against psychic risk, it 
was necessary to take unusual precautions in the matter of eating. There 
were everywhere a variety of tapu which fenced about the prospective 
mother during pregnancy, but the greater part of these related to food. 
Similarly, prior to and during worship and consecrated labor, fasting or 
abstinence from certain kinds of food was required of all those taking 
part; and at these times men were required to keep themselves “separate 
from the world,” and particularly from women, who, because they were 
common (without mana) and harbored dangerous influences of the lower 
aspect of Nature, were always open to acting as mediums of evil. These 
food tapu, and tapu requiring seclusion were preventative or prophylactic. 
But there were occasions when food served as a medium for- removing tapu, 
as when a fern root was used in one Maori rite to absorb tapu from an 
infant and was then eaten by the child’s father. 

MAN’S PSYCHIC NATURE 

From the foregoing it must be clearly evident that man’s nature was 
considered like that of all other wordly forms, dual. Born of the union 
of the Superior and Inferior, he was compounded of the elements and 
characteristics of both. In the words of a Maori sage (27, p. 6), 

Everythnig has a space of its own—of the earth (Papa) and of the heaven 

(Rangi). There is no thing of which it can be said it belongs to the earth alone, 
or to the heavens above. 

The two complementary aspects of man’s nature may be clearly dis- 
cerned through the terms that were employed in the native tongue to 
signify their respective component parts. According to Maori teaching, 
every man’s superior nature was made up of an individual vital principle 
(mauri), manifesting divine life (ora) and power (mana) in personal 
qualities and attributes, the most important of which are celestial knowl- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 55 

edge (wananga), breath-consciousness (manawa), the vitality (mauri), 
and dynamic vital personality (haw). ‘These sacred elements of the indi- 
vidual were mutually interdependent, and belonged as a whole to the realm 
of light (Ao). The inferior elements, derived from the realm of darkness 
(Po), were dependent for their well-being, indeed for their very existence, 
upon the superior. The inferior included the individual soul or psychic 
self (wairua), the ghost form (kehua, etc.), and the physical embodiment 
(tino). A man (tangata) was distinguished from lower forms of life, such 
as fish (tka), birds (manu), trees (rakau), and stones (whatu), by having 
the wananga that was brought down from the highest heaven by his 
progenitor, Tane, for his especial benefit. All the other superior and in- 
ferior attributes of the individual, with the exception possibly of the ghost 
form which appears to be essentially human, belonged to the lower forms 
as to man. Gods (atua) were, on the other hand, distinguished from men 
in not being constantly embodied physically. Gods existed in a non-physical 
state comparable to that of the wairua of man after it had departed from 
the body. Souls were of the same nature as gods, differing only in degree 
of power; but souls were embodied in and limited to one individual form 
while gods were capable of entering into every variety of embodiment and 
representation and were not limited and inescapably attached to one body. 

Many of the powerful gods of the Polynesian religion were but souls of men 5 

elevated to superior power after death as a result of their own prowess in 
life, and of the worship of their survivors. I have always supposed, 
although no definite statements relative to this question are known to me, 
that except for the body, the nature of a god was accepted as being the 
same as that of a man. Life, power, and knowledge they were certainly 
supposed to have in excess of men; and their believed relationship to men 
indicates also that their consciousness was of the same order, and that 
they were believed to have the same type of dynamic vital personality. 
These attributes, embodied in, or manifested as, individual spirits free 
from physical limitations, were what the Polynesians named atua, gods, and 
distinguished from wairua, souls, that were confined to single physical or 
ghostly forms. 

The more important spiritual and psychic attributes of man require 
more detailed study and illustration. The significance of ora and mana 
has already been discussed at some length (pp. 26-37). Wananga, its 
source and meaning is treated on pages 154-58. The concept expressed by 
the native word manawa, which I translate breath-consciousness, is a com- 
plex one. This is one of many words of the Polynesian language having 
a variety of specific meanings associated with a general idea that is to us 

56 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

inevitably somewhat vague, though to the educated native the meaning was 
doubtless definite enough. Manawa appears to have expressed a combined 
sense of breath, the vital organs, and sentiments, emotions, feelings, and 
states of mind which, according to native ideas, had their seat in these 

‘organs. (See 145; and 15, pp. 35-6.) In New Zealand, the manawa ora, 

called in the Marquesas simply manava, to be translated in both cases as 
“breath of life,” was a vital element essential to the existence of the phys- 
ical man, a definite entity which left the body after physical death. In the 
Marquesas this was supposed to leave the corpse some time after the soul. 
Before it went, it was strengthened by means of a special chant, which was 
also employed with a view to strengthening the life of a new-born child in 
the rites that followed birth (77, pp. 106, 330). The Maori believed that a 

‘person apparently dying could be endowed with the “breath of life’ by a 

powerful tohunga’s performing a rite that was called whakanoho manawa 
(whaka, to cause; noho, to remain or rest); and it is said that a spell 
similar. to that used in this rite was recited over young infants also. Best 

writes (15, pp. 35-6), 

The manawa ora of the Maori I render as “the breath of life”; the expression carries 
a sense of something more than mere breath—a_ spiritual sense. The manawa ora 
obtained from the Supreme Being, and implanted in the image that was to be Hine- 
ahu-one, the Earth-formed Maid, the first woman, was something more than mere 

power of breathing. It was the . . . spiritual breath of life, that, together with 
the wairua, obtained from the same source, endowed Hine with her twofold life 
essence, the ira atua and ira tangata . . . The manawa ora is one of the vivifying 

agents or potentiae that impart life to man. 

An old Maori sage told Best that all things, even trees and stones, pos- 
sessed manawa ora. 

Mauri, which, following Best, is defined above as individual vital prin- 
ciple, seems to signify primarily what is spoken of in English as vitality. 
Best writes that it could not leave the body, and that death extinguished 
it. The phrase mauri ora had an extended spiritual signification implying 
“sacred life principle” which was supposed to be intimately connected with 
the spiritual welfare of the individual. “Should the AZauri ora of man 
become noa, or defiled, then his physical, intellectual, and spiritual welfare 
is seriously endangered. ” When a man had committed some hara, 
disregarded some tapu, his mauri ora lost virtue thereby and could be 
restored only by ritual purification. 

For the Maori all things had their mauri, the heavenly bodies, the ele- 
ments, seasons, and all animate and inanimate things. While the mauri was 
not separable from the material embodiment, it was capable of being pro- 
tected by means of some external object which had been brought into 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 57 

rapport with it by means of ritual. When this was done, the object itself 
thus placed in sympathetic relationship with the vital principle was also 
referred to as the mauri of the thing protected. A tree, for example, was 
sometimes planted as the material mauri of a child when it was born; or 
a stone was placed at the base of the main post of a new house as the 
material mauri of the dwelling; and some talisman would be carefully 
secreted somewhere as the mauri of a fortified village to protect it from 
downfall through the arts of the tohunga (15, pp. 22-31; 128, pp. 149-155). 

There are many instances of practices evidently based on the same idea 
in other groups. Due to the fact, however, that we have from no other 
islands studies in the native philosophy comparable to those of Best, we 
know little concerning the ideas regarding the mauri in other groups. In 
the Tahitian dictionary mauri is translated soul or spirit (91, p. 119), 
doubtless rough and inaccurate translations, equivalent to those given for 
the word by early students in New Zealand. The same is to be said of 
the translation of the same word in Mangaia as “ghost” (63, p. 269). A 
missionary in Samoa has written that in those islands a person would 
exclaim when startled, “My mazuli, or spirit, has been startled” (132, p. 
220). In New Zealand when a child sneezed someone would say, “Sneeze, 
living soul [mauri]; sneeze, bind the seed to the sky.” Hare Hongi 
remarks the implication in this of the derivation of the mauri, referred to 
as the seed, from the sky (88, p. 28). Mauli ola is spoken of in Hawaii 
as meaning “breath of life’ (52, note, p. 94). It is not to be expected , 
that this term would have had identical meanings in all parts of Polynesia, 
for the use of terms is proved by evidence from all branches of ethnological ) 
study in this region to have been subject to rapid change. But I believe 
that adequate information regarding the use of this word in the islands 
from which we now have so little information will reveal its fundamental 
meaning to be the idea of vitality which Best has brought out as its general 
signification in New Zealand. 

The concept expressed by the Maori word hau, as applied to an entity 
in man’s makeup is somewhat difficult to understand. Personality plus 
vital power appears to approximate the idea. According to Best, the hau 
was essential to physical existence. One way of killing a man by witch- 
craft consisted in destroying his haw. This attribute of man differed from 
the wairua in being inseparable from the physical man; and from the 
mauri, which was intangible, in being externally tangible, though ap- 
parently never visible. Its external tangibility is indicated by the fact that 
a man was supposed to leave a portion of his haw in his footprint or upon 
any spot upon which he had sat. The hau was sometimes protected in the 

58 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

same manner as the mauri, by secreting some object naturally or cere- 
monially brought into rapport with it. Tike man, all other objects and 
elements in nature had their haw. Nothing is known of corresponding 
ideas in other Polynesian groups. The word haw in the Maori dialect 
meant also, among other things, “wind”; but no evidence has been found 
in Polynesia of association of the idea of the soul with wind, as is the 
case in many parts of the world. Haw is certainly not to be translated 
“soul” or “breath,” and neither wairua nor manawa were associated with 
wind. 

It is to be noted in the quotation on p. 39, relative to the manawa ora 
that Best speaks of this and the wairua as being derived from the same 
source. But it will be observed also that he speaks of the manawa ora and 
wairua together endowing the first woman with her twofold “life essence, 
the ira atua and ira tangata’ from which I understand that the manawa 
ora and ira atua belong together on the one hand as divine derivatives, 
while the wairua and ira tangata may, in contradistinction, be classed 
together as worldly attributes. In grouping the different attributes of man 
under the classifications of Superior and Inferior, signifying divine and 
common, I was led after much deliberation to class the separable soul 
(wairua) with the body as an element derived from Nature Inferior ‘on 
account of the fact that universally in all the island groups the departing 
souls of the dead were believed to betake themselves to an underworld 
which, in a number of the islands is referred to as the Po. In New Zea- 
land it even appears that the wairua was destined ultimately to die, like 
the body. It seems impossible, therefore, to regard separable souls as 
more than embodiments of the life belonging to the superior aspect of 
nature. Sustained by divine force, however, it appears that they might 
be empowered with mana and rise to dwell as gods in upper realms 
of light. The soul in one sense may be said to have had a dual nature, 
being a substantial embodiment in the psychic realm of. the spiritual 
attributes derived from a still higher source, namely, the Supreme Being. 
, Soul, as it is used in this study as a synonym for the native wairua, may 
be defined as an evanescent, yet concrete, manifestation of the individual 
' psychic nature on which the physique was dependent for its form and 
existence. As the embodiment of man’s superphysical attributes, it may be 
characterized as his godlike form, for existence in a superphysical condition 
was the characteristic of gods as distinguished from men. The soul was 
separable from the body during life, its absence during sleep being normal, 
but during waking consciousness disastrous. Souls were seen in dreams, 
in reflections, and in shadows. Their causal relationship with the living 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 59 

body was direct, and their rapport with the physical remains was perpet- 
uated indefinitely after death.® 

Although the soul was seen in the shadow and reflection, it must not 
be concluded that it was believed to be a mere shadow or reflection of the 
body. On the contrary, the body was thought of as a less permanent 
entity than the soul. A Maori sage once said, speaking of the native 
attribution of soul to all things in nature, “Were a thing not possessed of 
the wairua of the atua, then that thing could not possess form” (15, p. 9); 
which seems clearly to indicate that it was the soul that determined and 
caused form. Another remark of a Maori indicates that the wairua was 
also the vehicle of mana, and likewise of the other higher attributes. A 
native who was working with Best on ethnographic data once said to him, 
“My wairua is very intent on this work, that it may be well done” (15, p. 8). 

Best has described the ideas regarding the soul held by the Maori in 
some detail (15). He characterizes the wairua as a sentient spirit in man 
which could leave the body during sleep, and which survived after death. 
It was capable of wandering afar when the body was asleep, at which 
times it could detect impending dangers, see and converse with the wairua 
of other sleepers and those of the dead. The Maori were very careful 
not to wake a sleeping person suddenly lest the wairua might have trouble 
in returning comfortably to its physical body before consciousness returned 
to the sleeper. This separable and surviving soul, according to Best, was 
not thought of as being located in any particular organ or part of the 

body. It was immaterial in the sense of being non-physical, but was a » 

substantial entity which could be seen and injured by one with occult 
knowledge and power. The wairua of living persons were volatile and 
active but were not inherently aggressive unless they had become malevo- 
lent demons through some process or other, as in the case of souls of 
still-born children that were capable of becoming powerful and terrible. 
In other words, souls of the living or departed were not as such dangerous 
or fearful. 

€ The usual term for soul, which is a universal and a basic concept in the worship in all 
the islands of Polynesia, is wairwa and its dialectical equivalents occur in Hawaii as wailua, in 
Tahiti as varua and vairua, in~Mangaia as vaerua, and so on. (See 145, pp. 591-2; and 2.) 
There were” of course variant terms. ‘The most interesting of these is uhane or kuhane which 
was used exclusively for soul in the Marquesas where the word corresponding to wairva appears 
to have been dropped entirely from the vocabulary. Kuhane or uhane was synonymous with 
wailua or vairua, in Easter Island and Mangareva, and in Hawaii (2; and 35, p. 219). The 
fact that kuhane as a term for soul was thus spread over the northern and eastern extreme of 
Polynesia leads to the supposition that it must have been an ancient form. On the other hand, 
it is possible that it is an intrusive term brought to this region late in Polynesian history. If it 
is an ancient term, its complete absence from the central and southern region is difficult to 
explain. In Samoa the term anganga, which in New Zealand meant “head’’ or perhaps “skull,” 
seems to have been substituted for the original vailua (15, p. 13; 132, p. 220); while in Tahiti 
in recent times, the word tupapau which originally meant ‘‘dead body,” then “ghost,’’ has come 
to mean “soul.”” In New Zealand the word meaning ‘skeleton’ was, as a figurative expression, 
sometimes substituted for wairua. 

60 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

It is quite a wrong supposition based upon modern European notions 
of these things, which leads most students to believe that peoples such as 
the Polynesians are necessarily afraid of apparitions when they see them— 
by no means an uncommon experience with those among them who are 
psychic in their nature. I am personally acquainted with a number of 
Society Islanders to whom forms of dead relatives and friends appear 
quite frequently, usually with some definite purpose such as giving warning 
of an impending occurrence or revealing something that should be known. 
Those who are accustomed to such visitations show love rather than fear 
for these specters; and those who do not see them, who are in the 
majority, are, according to temperament, either unaffected by the idea of 
their being about, or seized with a fear of the unseen which associates 
itself in their minds with the evil demons, of which there are many forms 
believed to be about in these islands. 

The Polynesian’s psychic life was and is as vivid a reality to him as 
his physical existence; in actuality it was far more important to him 
because more enduring. Since the dangers most to be feared by a person 
were those to which his soul might be victim, it was the thought of these 
that stirred in his emotional nature the most intense dread. But to sup- 
_pose that the native lived under a perpetual spell of superstitious fear is 
wholly a misconception. It must be remembered that for the Polynesian 
his psychic sensitiveness was a means of protection as well as a source of 
dread. At such times as he was frightened, believing himself in the 
presence of a demon, his fear was intense; he was panic stricken. But 
the place in his mental life that was filled with conscious dread of these 
dangers was probably not greater than the proportion of thought devoted 
by the average person of our race at the present time to dangers from 
the ubiquitous germ. The Polynesian nature was essentially spontaneous, 
open, and care-free. While most of the reported examples of contact 
of the living with apparitions are of an unhappy or fearful nature, by 
reason of the fact that it is these that have most impressed the minds 
both of strangers and natives, and hence are most often recounted and 
longest remembered, nevertheless there are many stories in which departed 
souls are said to have come to those with whom there was a bond of 
love to help them in some way. There are many accounts of warnings 
of danger, others of aid given in emergency. During the influenza epidemic 
of 1918 which carried off one-third of the native population in Tahiti all 
the members of a large family were so helplessly sick that they could do 
nothing for themselves or each other. For several days a number of them 
were conscious of the visible and tangible presence of an old and much 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 61 

loved nurse of the family, long since deceased, who, they say, ministered 
to the needs of the sick. It is worthy of note that, although every member 
of this household was ill at this time, not one died, a rare record for a 
large family during this epidemic. Best writes of an instance in New 
Zealand when a native woman who lay in prison received word from her 
friends, “Be of good cheer. Although you are afar off, yet our wairua 
are ever with you” (23, p. 179). 

Since the soul was believed to be capable of wandering off by itself 
when the physical body was asleep, it fulfilled a very valuable function, 
for it made every man in his sleeping hours at least a clairvoyant and seer. 
By his dreams, which were the experiences of his forth-faring soul, a man 
could sometimes foresee and forestall unhappy events. This habit or 
characteristic of the soul was also taken advantage of by priests. In 
Hawaii, for example, the priest called upon to determine whether a tree 
that had been chosen for making a new canoe was sound or not had the 
required knowledge revealed to him in a dream; and the same thing 1s 
true of the inspirational priests in the Marquesas who sometimes received 
their revelations from their tribal gods in the same way. In the examples 
just cited it appears that the belief was not so much in the soul’s wander- 
ing, as in its having knowledge imparted to it by an inhabitant of the 
psychic realm. It is a common experience of natives to receive messages 
from departed relatives or from persons whom they do not recognize, but 
who appear repeatedly, in dreams. Such, for example, was the experience 
of a native friend in Hawaii, who was cured of an illness after taking a 
native remedy advised by an unknown man arrayed in the ancient native 
dress, who appeared to her in a dream. 

The soul was seen also in reflections. The widespread custom of gazing 
into a reflecting liquid as a means to clairvoyance is based upon the belief 
that, just as the individual could see his soul reflected thus, so one with 
occult vision was capable of seeing any part or all of the realm of psychic 
being. The Marquesan inspirational priest is said to have been able to 
detect tapu breakers by seeing them in his cup of kava. There are a num- 
ber of incidents in legends from these islands that are illustrative of the 
same idea, episodes which describe a person as being able to see all that 
was transpiring in the world of departed souls by gazing into water held 
in a certain kind of leaf or into a spot of oil poured upon the sea 
(77, p. 278). The association of the soul with the reflection is revealed 
again in the occasional use of the word ata for soul, meaning literally a 

7 Descriptions of psychic phenomena and beliefs are to be found in 154, p. 245 ff.; 23; 
ee Hird db CEST, seal y fie Zip Boy 

62 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

reflection in a liquid (15, p. 6).8 According to Best, the Maori word 
wairua meant shadow as well as reflection. The fact that the soul was 
believed to be seen in the shadow reveals the reason for the strict tapu 
relating to the shadows of priests and chiefs in many of the islands. 

According to the teaching of the Maori college of occult knowledge 
(the Whare Wananga), all things, the heavens, the earth, water, fire, trees, 
rocks, plants, the air, sun, moon and stars, as well as men, had their own 
forms of life and wairua similar to their outward forms (119, p. 107). 
In Tahiti, also, spirits were accorded not only to men but to animals, 
plants, stones, and so on. Souls were believed to be perfect in proportion 
to the degree of action, movement, and intelligence evidenced by objects 
vivified by them. Here, it is said, the soul that was separated from the 
body could feel and see, and was animated by good will toward those loved 
in bodily life (105, Vol. I, pp. 430-431). 

There was a highly interesting belief in New Zealand regarding the 

ultimate dematerialization of the soul (15, p. 12). Best writes of it as 
follows: 

Perhaps the most interesting spiritual concept of the Maori folk is that of the awe 
of the wairua, or refined essence or spirit of the human soul. . . After the lapse of 
a certain time after the death of the body the released soul gradually sloughs off 
its gross elements, and this process leaves a refined, immaterial, and immortal essen- 
tial spirit termed the awe. ‘This word was apparently selected as a name for it 
because it denotes extreme lightness. The light down found under the feather of 
birds, clouds, and the light soot deposited by the smoke of a wood fire are all 
termed awe. This etherialized spirit seems to have been called the hamano in some 
districts, a word that is a variant form of mano, and means the precise center or 
heart, as of a tree. 

There is reason to believe that in Tahiti was a similar idea, for it is 
reported (48, Vol. I, pp. 396-7) that souls, after they went to the Po after 

8 J. S. Emerson considers the word wailua, in the Hawaiian dialect to be derived from war 
meaning water, and /ua meaning two or double, signifying the double or reflection as seen in 
water. This derivation of the word is supported by Best’s remarks to the effect that it seems 
probable that “shadow” was the original meaning of the word wairua, for there is another 
Polynesian word, ata, which means “shadow” and “reflection” and ‘‘soul’” (15, p. 6). 
While I hesitate to question the opinion of so competent a linguist as Mr. Emerson, I feel some 
doubt as to whether his derivation is correct. In the Society Islands, the term corresponding to 
watlua is varua, pronounced with the a flat (approaching vaerua). The word has been recorded 
on Mangaia as vaerua. (See foot-note 5.) Now the word varua is in regular usage in Tahiti 
today and always has been, so far as anyone knows, in spite of the fact that at different 
times, as a result of the chiefly tapu relating to names both the words vai (water) and 
rua (two) were dropped from the vernacular, pape (water) and piti (two) being thereafter sub- 
situated in all words, even names, in which these stems occurred. Thus the island Maurua 
became Maupiti, and the spring formerly named Vaiete became Papeete. The conclusion 
is that the native authorities did not themselves consider varua to be compounded of vai plus 
rua, else the word would be today papepiti. But it remains varwa. I realize that some students 
will question the analytical power of the native mind. But in Tahiti language was an art and 
a science in which there were none as thoroughly versed as the old priests who attended to the 
deletion of tapu words from the vocabulary. 

Again, the compounding of vai and lua would mean “double stream” or ‘‘twin streams,” not 
the image of a person or thing reflected in water for which there is a definite word, ata, which 
distinctly means reflection in this sense. Lastly, it appears questionable whether this universal 
and fundamental concept of ‘soul’? would have had as its usual signification a word thus 
clumsily compounded. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 63 

death, were believed to be “eaten” “by degrees” by the gods and at the 
same time to undergo a process of being scraped with shells by their 
ancestors resident in the nether world. When a soul had passed through 
this experience three times, “it became a deified or imperishable spirit, 
might visit the world, and inspire others.” The “eating” of souls and 
“scraping” of the bones with shells probably had a figurative ® meaning to 
the educated Tahitian that was not comprehended by the missionary who 
preserved for us the record of this interesting native concept of spiritual 
immortality. 

Little is known of the Polynesian theories regarding the origin of the 
soul and other psychic and spiritual attributes. The union of man and 
woman was viewed in the old cult as a continuation of the procreative 
process of the dualistic nature in which the male and female were 
respectively the embodiment of Nature Superior and Nature Inferior. The 
children of a couple who were mated, like all human beings, represented a 
compounding of the divine and the common, or life and earth. In a very 
sacred Marquesan chant which was intoned in connection with the conse- 
cration of children (77, p. 327), the course of human generation and the 
birth of human offspring is definitely coupled with the birth of the original 
gods from the Level Above and the Level Beneath. This chant com- 
mences thus: 

Above is the base of the Level Above (the Heavens), 

Below, the turning movement of the Level Beneath (the Earth). 
After recapitulating the stages of human cohabitation, impregnation, con- 
ception, gestation, and delivery of offspring, the chant returns to the above 
refrain; then proceeds 

O child-bearing depths! 

Atea comes—my child, 

Tane, the younger, comes forth, 

And Tonofiti, Moepo, etc., 
and continues thus, giving the names of a number of gods. Apparently the 
recapitulation of the stages of human generation has reference to the 
supposed process by which the earth brought forth the gods; but the pur- 
pose for which the chant was recited—the consecration of a child—and 
the statements of informants both indicate that there was in the minds of 
those who were reciting the chant a double sense of describing the birth of 
the gods from the Earth Mother and the birth of the child from its 
human parents. 

The male embodied procreative power. Best writes (23, Vol. IX, 

® As an example of the figurative use of the words ‘“‘to eat,’’ it was formerly said of chiefs 
in Tahiti that theirs was the right to “eat the land,” signifying absolute authority. 

64 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

p. 185), “The Maori had the same belief in, or grasp of, the active and 
passive agents as had all peoples who have practiced the phallic cult.” The 
male organ was considered the active, while the female was the passive or 
receptive, referred to as the whare moenga (sleep-house) (26, Vol. XV, 
extra leaflet, p. 5). It is beyond question that all the Polynesians realized 
the connection between cohabitation and the processes of human reproduc- 
tion, for in genealogical recital the conventional mode of saying, for 
example, “Atea (Clear Space) begot Te Po (the Darkness)” is to say 
Ua moe Atea i Atanua, fanau Te Po, (“Atea slept with Atanua, Te Po 
was born”); and so the birth of human generations is likewise recited. 
The father was, therefore, clearly accepted as the agent of fertilization and 
implantation of mana. 

There was in New Zealand a definite belief in the ultimate derivation 
of individualized life from the Supreme Being, Io. This is implied in 
the use in the “ritual for planting a child in a barren womb” of the words 
that Io employed in calling the world into being. (See pp. 10-11.) 

We are clearly to understand that as Io, by using certain words, caused the 
solid substance of matter to issue from the void of space, so man, by using these 
words, can cause the barren womb to conceive and bring forth. 

According to Best (26, Vol. XV, extra leaflet, Whare Kohanga, part II, 
p. 3) the wairua was implanted in a woman’s womb during coition. Else- 
where Best writes (15, p. 9) that the wairua, along with the liver (ate), 
breath (manawa), and blood (toto), which vivified the earthly form of the 
first woman, were derived from Io. To me it appears that in this statement 
it must be meant that the spiritual elements, of which these physical 
attributes were the seats, were derived from the Supreme Being. Certain 
it is that the material liver and blood were not thought to return to Io. 
Nor is it apparent that the wairua as a substantial psychic form and 
embodiment of the individualized life was thought to return to Io, except 
in the dematerialized state called awe, the immortal essence of the soul. 
It was the universal belief of Polynesians that the psychic forms or souls 
of individuals resided in the nether regions, or if they were empowered 
to become gods, in the sky world. The separable soul, like the body, was 
but a vehicle of the life that was derived from the Supreme Being. It 
was the life (ora) that came from Io. Like the body, the soul belonged to 
-Nature Inferior. Best (23, Vol. [X, p. 184) quotes White as designating 
the fourth heaven, Hau-ora, as the source of “the spirit” [probably signify- 
ing the ora] of a child. 

There is some evidence that the belief was occasionally held that souls 
were reincarnated, in other words that while individual life may originally 

Handy--Polynesian Religion 65 

and perhaps continuously have been derived from the Supreme Being, some 
souls that were born in bodies had lived before upon the earth. Best 
writes (26, Vol. XV, extra leaflet, p. 3) that while there was no fixed 
theory as to this, some natives believed that an ancestor’s spirit appeared 
in a child. This idea, it seems, may have been at the bottom of the Maori 
custom of naming a new born child for the ancestor whose name seemed 
to bring response from the infant when the genealogy was recited in one 
of the birth rites. The suggestion of a native theory of reincarnation, 
underlying their ideas, though not held as a clearly formulated concept, is 
strengthened by the fact that a Maori would say, “I was still in Hawaiki,” 
meaning he was not yet born (26, p. 4). Hawaiki was at once the home 
of the ancestors of the race and the land of departed souls. 

It has been mentioned already that men’s skulls seem to have been 
considered, if not the seat of the individual mana, at least in the most 
intimate rapport with the source of all mana, that is, with Nature Superior. 
The peak of the head (anini in Tahiti, manawa in Hawaii) was an impor- 
tant point. The eye of the living or recently dead person was believed to 
embody the mana, life, or soul of the individual, as is evidenced by its 
sacramental use in sacrifice and cannibalism. Exactly which of the higher 
attributes was seen in the eye is unknown. There are two interesting lines 
from a Samoan creation chant which say (57, pp. 22-3): 

Opaque shall be your bodies, 
Your eyes [or faces] shall shine. 

The heart seems to have been regarded to some extent as the seat of the 
sentiments, emotions, and qualities of character, such as courage (15, p. 35). 
These were likewise associated with the intestines which were very generally 
considered to be the seat of the emotions and of thought. Physical breath 
(manawa) associated with the spiritual attribute called “breath of life” 
(manawa ora) was intimately bound up with the ideas of the vital organs 
as the seat of consciousness. Because of the extreme tapu relating to it, 
it is evident that some one of the higher attributes of man was supposed 
to be in the blood, though which one it is not known. Lastly, the liver 
was believed to play an important part, though in just what way is uncer- 
tain. The beliefs concerning the generative organs are later to be 
described. 
DESTINY OF SOULS 

The beliefs relative to the destiny of souls, exhibited in the practices 
and lore of these people, are in the main built upon conceptions that are 
practically universal throughout the world among peoples of a similar 
grade of culture. 

66 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Like souls of healthy living persons, spirits that had successfully gained 
admittance to the other world were invisible to the physical eye, could be 
seen only by those gifted with clairvoyant ‘vision. But the souls that had 
just left the body assumed an attenuated, ghostly form of denser stuff than 
that of which the soul itself was made, and in this form was visible to 
anyone. The appearance of an apparition was supposed to indicate that 
death had occurred or was imminent. A soul that had been neglected and 
was constrained to wander on earth, retaining this form, might be seen by 
anyone, especially at night, but sometimes also by day. 

In New Zealand, the words wairwa, meaning soul, and kehua, ghost, are 
quite distinct in their signification. Best writes (15, p. 6): 

The word wairua of the Maori is a sentient spirit, the soul of precise anthro- 
pological nomenclature. It leaves the body at death, but it can do the same during 
the life of its physical basis. . . [Kehua, on the other hand] denotes the soul of 

a dead person, apparently carrying an apparitional sense. . . Its usage is equal 
to that of our word “ghost.” *° 

There was a similar distinction in Hawaii where uhane meant soul, 
wailua, visible apparition, and lapu, fearful ghost (2); in Tahiti where 
varua was soul (or spirit) and tupapau ghost; and apparently also in the 
Marquesas where uhane (applied also to ghosts nowadays.) meant soul, and 
vehine hae a malignant ghost. In view of the distinction between the soul 
and ghost, it seems justifiable to define the ghost as a substantial appearance 
assumed by the soul after the decease of the physical body. 

Since the ghost and the physical form were embodiments of the same 
soul, they naturally were supposed to have the same appearance. It is 
said that in Samoa “the disembodied spirit [ghost] was supposed to retain 
the exact image of its former self” (135, p. 39). In both the Marquesas 
and Society Islands, ghosts are customarily described as appearing dressed 
as in life, which makes it evident that popular fancy saw in the ghost the 
exact image of the person as remembered. In this exact reflection of the 
individual’s physique, it is interesting to note that physical defects and 
injuries were believed to be reflected in the ghost. A Hawaiian legend 
relates that as a result of the fact that his jaws were crushed when he was 
killed, a certain man’s ghost spoke with difficulty (54, Vol. IV, p. 472). 
This principle of identity of the soul’s ghostly form and of the physical 
body made the natives believe also that injury sustained by the soul or 
ghost would be manifested upon the physical remains. The Marquesans 

10 Best remarks that Williams’ Maori Dictionary notes kehua as a modern expression, but 
subsequent discussion of the word in Best’s paper indicating its use in the time of such early 
writers as White and Colenso does not bear out this suggestion. Furthermore, it appears unlikely 
that natives have borrowed the ghost concept, for it is prominent throughout Polynesia. If the 
concept is ancient, the word that described it is probably also old, though, of course new words 
are frequently adopted and applied to old ideas. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 67 

believed that a man could be killed by having his soul shot with a gun, and 
that the victim of such an assault would be found to have in his body 
a bullet hole in the exact place where the bullet pierced the ghost body. 
The principle of the interdependence of the soul, ghost, and the physical 
body of the individual is one of the basic and fundamental concepts on 
which the religion is built, for it is the basis of the beliefs concerning the 
causes of death, and of innumerable forms of healing and killing rites. 

Ghosts of the recently deceased were not usually objects of dread, 
except those of personal enemies or fellow-tribesmen of malicious proclivi- 
ties. The ghosts that lingered were the ones feared. ‘The very fact of 
their remaining on earth was an indication of discontent arising out of a 
grudge that had not been settled, or of inability of the soul to reach the 
other world, because it had not been assisted with the proper rites, or of 
its having fallen prey to malicious demons which had diverted it from its 
normal course and probably caused it to suffer. Whatever the reason for \ 
its lingering it was logically assumed that it was in a mood for troubling ) 
the living. Many of the terms employed to signify ghosts as distinguished 
from souls of the dead (kehua, tupapau, lapu, vehine hae) connote pri- 
marily malevolent beings that sought to strangle wanderers by night, lead 
them astray, afflict with disease and insanity, steal children and even adults, 
and trouble the struggling souls of the dying and recently dead most griev- 
ously. Grown more powerful such ghosts became the malevolent demons 
that were always lingering about places of birth, sickness, and death, 
awaiting their chance to pounce upon a feeble soul and devour it. 

The native folklore is capable of furnishing an unlimited number of 
examples of the spirit lore of Polynesia. Only a few incidents that are 
typical and particularly illuminating need be quoted. In the Hawaiian 
legend of the adventures and mishaps of Pumaia it is related that a char- 
acter of this name was foully killed by the chief Ku-alii. Pumaia’s ghost 
went home and directed his wife to seek his remains, telling her where 
they had been thrown and concealed. The body having been found, the 
woman and her daughter carried it up to a cave in the mountains, and 
there dwelt with it, being fed and clothed by the ghost of the dead 
Pumaia, who nightly raided the dwellings in the domain of Ku-alii. This 
went on for a long time, until finally Ku-alii, whose priest had revealed 
to him that the depredations were due wholly to the angered ghost of the 
man he had slain, took the measures which the priest recommended to 
restore peace and order. He built three houses, one for Pumaia’s wife 
and daughter to dwell in, a second for their possessions and servants, and 
a third for the bones of the murdered man whose ghost, still caring for 

68 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

his wife and daughter, had been making so much trouble for the country 
side. All things having been so satisfactorily arranged, with his bones 
reposing in safety and his wife and daughter being well established, the 
active and efficient ghost ceased further to trouble Ku-alii (54, Vol. IV, 
pp. 470-476). 

Another Hawaiian tale describes the resuscitation of a man who had 
been drowned at sea by the goddess Hiiaka. The ghost was seen near the 
seashore, “wandering aimlessly from place to place with its calabash thrown 
over its shoulder.” When it had been forced to come to its former resi- 
dence by the goddess, the dead man’s daughters “saw the ghost as if it 
were the natural body.” The goddess was then led by the ghost to the 
place on the sea coast where the drowned body cast up by the waves was 
lying at the base of a cliff. After washing the body, Hiiaka slowly and 
with much difficulty forced the ghost, which attempted strenuously to break 
away and flee to the forest, to reenter the corpse. Then, while she poured 
fresh water over the eyes and face, she addressed a prayer-spell to Kane, 
ending with the lines 

Here is the water of life. 
Awake! Arise! 

Let life return. 

The taboo [of death] is over. 

It is lifted, 
It has flown away. 

Slowly the body, into which the soul had reentered, thanks to the heroic 
endeavors of the goddess, was reanimated, and the fisherman again walked 
in the flesh (155, pp. 112-115). 

The Polynesian custom of preliminary treatment of the body (exposure, 
embalming, or primary burial) and final safe disposal of the skeletal 
remains after the flesh had entirely disappeared may have been based 
upon the belief that the soul was not finally settled in the other world until 
the flesh had disappeared. (Compare 59, Vol. I, pp. 165-168.) Of the 
fact that there was believed to exist an intimate rapport between the soul 
and the skeleton there can be no question. It is possible that in like manner 
the ghost was believed to be identified with the flesh, to be a sort of 
etheric counterpart of it, so to speak, and that the soul was believed to be 
capable of continuing to frequent its earthly haunts in its ghostly vehicle 
as long as the flesh remained on the bones of the corpse. After the flesh 
was gone, the soul was regarded as finally settled in the next world, and 
the bones were secreted. 

It was the belief throughout Polynesia that the soul just released from 
its body in death required the assistance of its surviving relatives in its 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 69 

journey to, and establishment in, the next world. A primary religious duty 
in the old worship was the caring for the remains of the dead and perform- 
ing the prescribed rites, which were among the most important of the cult. 
There were two aspects of the funerary rites; the physical treatment of 
the body and skeleton; and the ritualistic features which more directly 
affected the soul. Immediately after death, the body was commonly washed 
and covered with cloth, and in a number of the islands it was temporarily 
in a way to insure safety from the tampering of evil doers, for a man’s 
soul could be brought into a sort of slavery or injured through his bones, 
which, it appears, were believed to continue to retain forever an intimate 
rapport with the soul. This is the reason for the universal custom of 
carefully secreting in caves, trees, and sacred tombs the skeletal remains 
of the deceased, and particularly the skull, which was in more intimate 
rapport with the soul than any other part of the skeleton. The soul of 
one whose physical remains were neglected became a wandering, homeless, 
and usually malicious ghost. The customs in the different islands that 
had as their purpose the aiding of the recently departed soul were similar 
to those of other peoples on a corresponding plane of development through- 
out the world. The supposed needs of the soul on its journey were supplied 
by placing food, clothing, and possessions with the body or offering these 
at the tomb. Prayers and chants were recited to strengthen and protect 
the soul, and to bring to it the assistance of friendly inhabitants of the 
psychic realm. And lastly there were many rites that were intended to 
protect the living from the ghost if it were inclined to be malicious, and 
from the fatal psychic influences and destructive spirits that were believed 
to be the immediate cause of all death. 

In the main, the ideas concerning the journey of the soul and its future 
destiny were the same throughout the islands and even the details of the 
beliefs show that uniformity which evidences derivation from a common 
source. In passing, from the theories relating to the constitution of man 
to the accounts of the next world the ground of esoteric teaching is left 
for the field of popular folklore. Common souls were very generally 
thought to go westward and downward to a nether world which may, as 
a generalization, be referred to as the realm of darkness, since the most 
common designation for it was Po (Darkness) (105, Vol. I, p. 431; 125, 
Vol. XI, p. 197; 145, pp. 342-3; 119, p. 161). Although Po is frequently 
used as though indicating a locality or place where departed souls were 
believed to dwell, it should be regarded more properly as signifying a 
state of existence. In the metaphysical sense in which it is employed in 

70 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

the cosmogonic myths, it signifies the primal nothingness and darkness out 
of which was born the negative and inferior aspect of nature. 

The underworld was in some of the islands called Hawaiki, which 
definitely signified a locality; in some cases merely an under-world; in 
others a country of ancestors to the westward. In some instances, the name 
signified for the natives, in a way that is difficult for us to understand, both 
an underworld of souls and a western land believed to have been the home 
of the ancestors of the race, the two being regarded as identical. (Compare 
18, p. 30; 77, pp. 251-2.) The Polynesian word raro which designated 
the direction of the region means both westward and below, and in addition 
carries with it not only this double special sense, but also a temporal 
connotation. A Marquesan, when he says “7 ao (raro) oa’ means “far 
westward,” “far below,” and “long ago,” and these are not alternative 
meanings, but convey a single idea including the double sense of locality 
and of time. In the lore of New Zealand, the Cook Islands and the 
Marquesas, the name Hawaiki (’Avaiki, Havai’i) signified an ancestral 
land to the westward and an underworld where dwelt souls and gods 
(145, pp. 56-8; 63, p. 155; 62, Vol. II, p. 18; 77, pp. 251-2). In Samoa 
and Tonga, the ancestral land to the west was called by another name and 
was regarded as quite distinct from the underworld; while in the Society 
Islands and Hawaii, where the belief in the underworld of souls is present 
as elsewhere, the idea of its being an origin land seems to have become 
somewhat obscured. In the dialects of the leeward islands of the Society 
Islands, in Tonga, Samoa, and Hawaii, the word which in the local dialects 
corresponds to the Maori name Hawaiki signified not an underworld or a 
western land but one of the largest islands of the group (Havai‘i, which is 
now called Raiatea, in the Society Islands; Savai‘i, still retained as the 
native name of the largest and most westerly of the islands of Samoa; and 
Hawai‘i applied in the northern dialect to the largest and most easterly of 
the Hawaiian islands). 

The notion that Hawai‘i was the name of an origin land is present in . 
Hawaiian tradition (55, Vol. I, pp. 22-3); and in the mythology of the 
Society Islands Havai’i is spoken of in creation lore as the first land 
created and as such appears always, in recent times at least, to have been 
identified with the island now called Raiatea, which is a name of recent 
origin. 

Hawaiki was sometimes identified with Po, as has already been indi- 
cated. In New Zealand it is said of Hawaiki that it “is the place meant 
when it is said man goes to the Po (119, p. 154). Again, the two were 
sometimes regarded as being quite distinct; thus in Rarotonga, it is reported 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 71 

that the land Avaiki, lying toward the setting sun, was a place where the 
fortunate reveled in pleasures of all kinds, while the unfortunate, excluded 
from this land, were doomed to exist in Po, a place of darkness and 
distress (62, p. 18). 

It was generally believed that there was a definite route or path taken 
by souls of the departed on their way to the next world; and at different 
points on the path there were supposed to be stopping or gathering places 
where souls paused on their journey, and where the wraiths of the dead 
congregated (99, pp. 150-4; 77, pp. 250-1; 29, pp. 39-40; 116, p. 45; 119, 
p. 114). Souls of Maoris were believed to make their way along a spirit 
road toward the northern point of land on the North Island until they 
came to a tree that had a long pendant root. The journeying souls are 
said to have been clothed in leaves. Bemoaning their fate in having to 
leave behind their friends in the world of light, souls would pause by the 
tree at the land’s end, lamenting and gashing themselves with obsidian 
flakes. But finally they must slide down by the long root to the beach 
below. Here the soul, casting aside its leaf garments, leapt into the sea 
and went on or down until it came to the portal of Hades where “beat 
forever from below the sound of wailing and lamentation.” Into the lower 
world the soul passed unclad. All was at first dark but as it pressed on 
the soul “reached a great light and found that the world below was not in 
darkness but in twilight.” Farther on, the soul came upon a wall; if it 
passed above this it might yet return to the upper world, but if it passed 
beneath it, it had to abandon all hope of doing so (149, pp. 408-11). 

The last point in the upper world where the spirit paused before plung- 
ing into the unknown was most commonly the extreme point of land at the 
western end of the island or group, this being logically regarded as the 
natural leaping place whence souls would depart for the ancestral region. 
This place in the Hawaiian islands, the Cook Islands, and New Zealand 
was called the Leina or Reinga (154, pp. 246-7; 63, p. 159; 145, pp. 407-8). 
Reinga in New Zealand meant not only the leaping place but was used 
synonymously with Po and Hawaiki as a name for the underworld or 
part of it. The lore of a number of islands describes at this point a tree 
which had much to do with the final passage of the soul into the next 
world. The tree with the long pendant root in New Zealand has already 
been mentioned (see also 43, Vol. II, p. 66). Near the leaping place in 
Hawaii was “the-quietly-calling-breadfruit-tree” which had two branches, 
one on its eastern side, the other on its western. If the journeying soul 
perched on one branch, helpful spirits would come to its assistance and it 
was saved; but if it landed upon the other, it was precipitated into eternal 

LD er“ Ne 

7a Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

darkness (154, p. 246). On Mangaia, Cook Islands, it was believed that 
there was below the leaping place a great tree which grew up from the 
underworld, having on it one branch reserved for each tribe in the island. 
The soul, after leaping, landed in this tree before being precipitated into 
the sea (63, p. 160). It is said that in Samoa there was near the place 
believed to be the entrance to the underworld a coconut tree that had the 
power of enabling the soul which came in contact with it to return to its 
body restored (151, pp. 235-237). In the same category as these trees at 
the verge of the next world probably belongs the “speaking tree” of Tongan 
myth which, with the water of life in which souls were purified, was 
believed to stand near the house of the Lord of Paradise (145, p. 58). 
This interesting Tongan fragment is strikingly similar to a Hawaiian 
teaching which describes a mythical origin land and paradise in “the hidden 
land of. Tane,’ where were the “divine waters of Tane,” described as the 
“beautiful living waters,” and the “tabued breadfruit tree” (55, Vol. I, 
pp. 25, 78-9).14\ In the Society Islands, while a tree is not described 
similar ideas are expressed in several ways. In the southeastern islands of 
the group it was believed that there were two rocks in the sea at the leap- 
ing place, one the rock of life, the other of death. The fate of a soul was 
determined by the rock upon which it perched (105, Vol. I, p. 432; 
90, pp. 179-80). In the Leeward Islands it was believed that souls passed 
by way of one or the other of two small peaks which stand by the side of 
the sacred mount Temehani on Raiatea, one peak being spoken of “The 
Darkness (Po),” the other as “The Light (Ao).” 

The souls of Marquesans passed along the high mountain ridge that 
forms the backbone of the main island of their group to the high promon- 
tory at the west called Kiukiu. As they marched along the path of souls, 
the ghosts could be seen dressed in their white garments (mortuary wrap- 
pings), avoiding the valleys lest they be caught in the bush. They are 
said to have been like shadows and to have disappeared when gazed upon. 
On their way the souls (or ghosts) strengthened themselves for their 
coming ordeals by bathing in a cool pool of water. Below the promontory 
was a_rock. When the souls clapped their hands this opened, the sea 
rolled back, and the soul entered the nether world (136, Vol. XXV, 
pp. 494-5). 

According to one account from New Zealand there were believed to be 
two hills which were stopping places for souls en route for the underworld. 

11S0 far this Hawaiian myth appears to be truly Polynesian, for its elements find corre- 
spondences in other parts of Polynesia. But other elements such as the Hawaiian Adam and 
Eve, and the tempting reptile, which Tregear, following Fornander, accepts as Polynesian, are 
certainly intrusive ideas, probably brought by the Portuguese castaways, for nothing in any 
way resembling these Biblical teachings based on Hebrew mythology interpreted in terms of an 
ethical philosophy are to be found elsewhere in Polynesia. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 73 

On the first the soul paused to divest itself of its leaf garments; and from 
the second it took its leap into the lower regions. Here there were two 
long, straight roots which hung downwards toward the sea. The soul 
stood at the upper end watching for an opening in the seaweed below. 
When its chance came, it made its final plunge and flew down to the nether 
world. On the way it must cross a_river with a sandy beach, on the 
farther side of which its name was shouted. Here food was set before 
it. If the soul partook of this, it could never return to the world of 

mei CLIO," p. 45). 

In these examples, as is also the case in most of the other islands, the 
belief in the soul’s going downward is clearly evident in the native accounts 
of its journey. On the other hand, the use of canoes, and canoe shaped 
coffins, and a number of the other mortuary customs (p. 258), show that 
at least the natives of importance who were accorded special honors antic- 
ipated a long canoe voyage to the westward land of the dead. 

There were a great variety of dangers with which a soul was beset 
on its journey to the other world. No sooner was it out of its body than 
it became the prey of all sorts of malevolent demons that were desirous of 
capturing and devouring it. At this time its salvation depended in part 
upon the strengthening and protecting power of the prayers and rites 
performed by and at the behest of surviving relatives and friends, but to a 
large extent also upon the guidance and support of friendly ancestral 
spirits. Even when the soul was safely liberated from the physical world, 
however, there were still many difficulties that had to be overcome, the 
chief of which were those connected with gaining admission to the lower 
regions. Hazards of various kinds are described in the Marquesan folklore. 
One of the most spectacular that the hero Kena had to pass was a narrow 
place between two great rocks which were continually clashing together. 
Von den Steinen describes a number of pairs of demons whom the soul 
was constrained to placate with gifts: a pair throwing two stones back 
and forth, between whom the soul must pass; a second pair armed with 
fishnets; a third that attempted to noose the soul; and a fourth pair, who, 
with flaming torches, threatened its destruction by fire (136, pp. 494-5). 
Souls in New Zealand had to pass through a narrow space between two 
demons who sought to catch them. “If a light spirit it escaped... , but 
if gross and clogged it would be caught and destroyed by the guardians 
of the pass” (149, pp. 408-11). Hawaiians believed that the leaping place 
was guarded by a great caterpillar on one side and a great lizard on the 
other, who sought to interfere with the leap of the poor soul into the depths 
of Po (154, p. 247). Some of the offerings that were placed beside the 

74 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

dead were believed to be used by the soul as gifts for such guardians of the 
entrance of the lower world. Marquesans were careful that the soul should 
be provided with kava and at least one pig, for it was believed not only that 
these demons had to be placated, but that, having successfully eluded these 
dangers on the way, the soul would have to present a gift to the ruler of 
the underworld. The soul was nourished on its journey also by the food 
- offerings put beside the corpse and was strengthened by means of prayers 
and dynamic chants; and long after the decease of its body, its prestige 
in the world of the dead was enhanced by means of elaborate festivals 
marked by the presentation of offerings, chanting honorific compositions, 
feasting, and dancing in honor of the soul and the lord of the nether 
realm (77, pp. 250-1). 

While there are many names in different islands that refer to 
the rulers of the lower regions, the name Miru, shared by several of the 
island groups, appears in all probability to have been the original. The 
Hawaiians believed that Milu, who was said to have been a king of Hawaii 
far back in the dim ages of myth, was the king of the underworld (48, 
Vol. IV, p. 366). The same position was accorded to this character in 
Mangaia, Cook Islands, where he was spoken of as “Ruddy Miru” (63, 
p. 161). In New Zealand Miru was a chiefess or goddess in the under- 
world (145, p. 483), while in the Society Islands the name is recorded 
by an early writer as that of “a kind of heaven” (48, Vol. I, p. 397). 

That the lower world was regarded as being much like that in which 
’ men lived will be seen in the accounts quoted below describing visits of the 
living to the nether regions. For some reason, perhaps because life on 
earth was pleasant and free from constant climatic and other environ- 
mental hardships, the Polynesians do not seem to have devoted their 
imaginative minds to any considerable extent to picturing the details of 
life in the underworld. Consequently there are few descriptions. Such as 
there are illustrate varying points of view. In Hawaii, a desolate, ghostly 
sort of place is described, an insubstantial realm of twilight and shades, a 
barren waterless waste, devoid of grass, flowers, and trees. Here famished 
shades of men, fleeing each other in fear, strove in vain to appease their 
hunger by eating butterflies, moths, and lizards (99, pp. 153-4). On the 
other hand, one of the New Zealand stories of the visit of a living man 
to the land below the earth describes the region as much like that above 
except that it was inhabited by a people with fair complexions and “flaxen 
hair,’ who enjoyed a higher form of civilization than that of the Maori 
(119, p. 175). Elsewhere it is said that a soul newly arrived in the land 
of the dead came to a lake surrounded by hills where dwelt all the inhab- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 75 

itants of the lower world. Here the newcomer had to wait upon one of 
the hills until some relative or ancestor came to meet him with a gift of 
food. If the soul partook of the meal offered, it must abandon hope of 
returning to the world of light (149, pp. 408-11). 

Naturally, accounts of this kind which come from the popular folk- 
lore compass a considerable range of variation. But some of the diver- 
gences in accounts are probably due to the fact that in some of the groups 
certainly, and very likely in all of them formerly, there was believed to 
be a series of underworlds some of which were much more desirable places 
to live than others. The Marquesans believed there were below the earth 
three regions. In the lowest, that to which those who had many pigs 
offered for them attained, life was good with an abundance of excellent 
foods and lovely women. Above this was a world of mediocre sort where 
there was an amplitude of good things, but not luxury. Still above this, 
next the earth, was a realm haunted by demons, where there were only 
disgusting foods that were brought down from earth by evil spirits. 
Souls that had had only one pig’s head offered for them could not penetrate 
beyond this unpleasant region. But there was also, in addition to these 
three nether worlds, another region that is not definitely located, to which 
were consigned souls that had had nothing offered for them at all, a dis- 
gusting hell in which these abandoned souls lay sunk in mire until someone 
came to their rescue and offered a pig for them (77, p. 251). The Maori 
believed the earth (Papa) to be made up of ten strata or divisions through 
which the soul gradually descended in its course toward ultimate demater- 
ialization or extinction. The upper. four were ruled by the “Great- 
lady-of-the-night,” who is commonly spoken of in the Maori folklore as the 
chiefess of the realm of shades, the goddess of death, who ruled the souls 
of men in the underworld. The fifth, sixth and seventh divisions below the 
earth’s surface were ruled by a deity named Rohe, the goddess Miru holding 

sway over the last three (145, p. 315). It is said that ordinary souls were , 

believed to die after a period of life in each of the underworlds until, after 
passing through each of the “circles” or planes of the underworld, it finally 
reached Po (Darkness, Oblivion) (149, pp. 408-11). To say that a soul 
ultimately reaches a state of being called darkness or oblivion is the same 
as saying its ultimate destiny is extinction. Since, therefore, it was the 
general belief throughout Polynesia that common souls went to Po, it may 
be affirmed that the Polynesians believed the ultimate destiny of common 
individuals was extinction. Elsewhere it is pointed out that the souls of 
those possessed of superior mana ascended into the heavens or dwelt in 
bliss in an earthly paradise (pp. 77-9). 

7 Ant nek 

76 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Just as there was in all the islands the belief in an underworld of shades, 
so there was the conception of an overworld; or a series of overworlds, one 
above another. Overworld paradises were sometimes conceived with vivid 
imagery, but more commonly simply as other realms or worlds inhabited 
by higher orders of beings and imagined as being more or less ethereal, 
or resembling the earth world. ‘There was little of an ethical element 
determinative in the destiny of souls, although ‘a rudimentary idea of the 
opposition of good and evil conceived as positive and negative, constructive 
and destructive, potent and impotent, underlay the whole dualistic system 
of thought in Polynesia which is reflected in the theories regarding the 
destiny of souls as in all other aspects of the religion. As a generalization, 

‘it may be said that the souls of those without superior mana, exhibited 

}in worldly distinction of some kind were destined to dwell after life on 

A 

earth in the lower regions, while souls with mana, those who were dis- 

) tinguished by divine.descent, or by sacred or notable attainment of some 
) kind in this life, such as priesthood, wealth, prowess in war, or distinction 

in craft, were destined ultimately to attain to some sort of heavenly or 

\ earthly paradise. Thus the order of nature was faithfully adhered to in 

the theories of the destiny of souls: those illustrious individuals whose 

affinity was with the Nature Superior those in whose personal makeup 

the earthly element was outweighed by the endowment of divine power, 

/ ascended in spirit into the heavenly realm of light and life to which they 

belonged; while the common souls descending into Nature Inferior found 
their ultimate destiny in darkness and oblivion whence was derived in its 
beginnings all of the inferior and common in nature. 

Throughout Polynesia was the belief in sky worlds, the number and 
nature of which differed considerably in different regions and sometimes 
a great divergence of opinion is found in a single group of islands or even 
a single island. The number of worlds existing above the earth in the sky 
is reported to have been ten or twelve, according to Maori teaching (145, 
pp. 391-2; 119, p. 116). In the highest heaven dwelt the Supreme Being, 

To, the source of all existence. The sky worlds between this and the earth, 

each of which had its ruler, were inhabited by a class of deific male beings 
who were intermediaries between the Supreme Being and the gods, the 
sons of heaven and earth, who presided over the earth and men’s affairs. 
These god-like male inhabitants of the heavens had their female companions, 
who were regarded as a second class inhabiting the heavenly realm. 

Two other classes were believed to inhabit the sky worlds: the mes- 
sengers or servitors of the god-like male beings and their female com- 
panions, and a class of guardian spirits who were inferior to the gods 
and appointed by the Supreme Io to be guardians over the various depart- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion Ti 

ments of life in the sky and the earth. Concerning similar ideas in other 
parts of Polynesia, the records are by no means as satisfactory by reason 
of the fact that little or. nothing is known of the esoteric teaching of 
Polynesians other than the Maori. In Tahiti it is recorded that the heavens 
were counted as seven. In the highest, which is said to have been called 
“the mouth of Tane,” signifying the opening by which the light enters, 
dwelt the Supreme Being (Ihoiho or Taaroa) who had delegated authority 
to gods inhabiting the sky worlds whose greatness and powers were de- 
termined by the magnificence of their abodes (105, Vol. I, p. 443). Although 
there are no descriptions such as that quoted from New Zealand, evidence 
of various sorts makes it plain that the ancient Tahitians believed the 

universe to be governed by an hierarchy of gods and spirits comparable to ~~ 

that just described. In the Marquesas the sky worlds are variously num- 
bered as ten, seven, four, and three. Little is known of them, except that 
the ancestral tutelary gods of tribes were believed to reside somewhere in 
the sky, indulging in cannibalistic feasts like those they had enjoyed when 
they were men on earth. One sky world was thought to be inhabited by 
a race of men who were peculiar in having only one arm and one leg (77, 
p. 253). It is said also that the goddess Hina (commonly the moon god- 
dess in Polynesia) dwells in the sky world and that the cyrrus clouds that 
were seen in the sky were believed to be the terraces of her houses. Out 
of the ocean of that world came the rains, and from its valleys the winds 
that descend upon the earth (136, p. 506). The Rarotongans believed in 
the existence of ten heavens (113, p. 18). The sky worlds where their 
gods dwelt were called by the Mangaians “The Bright Land of Vatea 
[Light]” (63, p. 4). The Samoans, according to different authorities, 
described the sky as being divided into eight, nine, or ten layers or regions 
which were inhabited by the gods and the souls of chiefs (92, Vol. I, p. 
22; 56, p. 177; 145, pp. 391-2). The creation of these heavens by the 
Supreme Being (Tangaloa) makes up an important chapter in the Samoan 
cosmogonic myths. In the highest heaven, called the Fale Ula, “House of 
Brightness,” dwelt the Supreme Being (56, p. 166). 

The paradise to which the souls of the illustrious went was sometimes 
identified definitely with the sky worlds inhabited by gods. More often it 
is not stated whether they were the same sky worlds, and in several cases 
it might be inferred that the Elysium of the elect was reserved for them 
alone. Again, the abode of the blest was sometimes described as being on 
the earth, and occasionally under the earth. Most commonly, however, 
paradise was located in the heavens. It has already been mentioned that 
the souls of chiefs in Samoa and priests and chiefs in the Marquesas went 

78 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

to dwell in the heavens. A like theory in New Zealand is indicated in the 
belief that heroes’ souls became stars (140,,p. 147). In Hawaii, Tahiti, 
and the Marquesas were certain gods whose especial duty it was to con- 
duct the souls of the fortunate to the heavens (48, Vol. IV, p. 145; Vol. 
I, p. 245; 77, p. 246). The souls of the brave on Mangaia, Cook Islands, 
were believed to ascend to the upper regions of the sky world, where they 
' continued to dwell in everlasting happiness, clothed in fragrant flowers, 
dancing, and enjoying the full gratification of all their desires (63, p. 163). 
It was the people of the Society Islands, however, whose imagination pic- 
tured in most vivid imagery the delights of a true Elysium which was 
reserved for the souls of those of chiefly stock and others who had dedi- 
cated their lives to the society of ceremonial dancers called the arioi. In 
these islands Rohutu noanoa, “Sweet-scented Rohutu’’ was a paradise in 
the sky above the sacred mountain on the island of Raiatea where the souls 
of the chosen few were said to enjoy a life of everlasting bliss (105, Vol. 
I, p. 434). This realm of delight is described as 

an abode of light and joy, which, of its kind surpassed the Elysium of the Greeks, 
even the heaven of Mahomet, being second to none of the abodes of delight or 
recompense invented by the founders of the different religions of the earth. ‘There 
the sun shone with the most vivid radiance, the atmosphere was perfumed and 
always pure; there was neither age, nor malady, nor pain, nor sadness; there were 
flowers always fresh, fruits always ripe, and delicious and abundant foods; there 

were chants, dances and festivals without end, and the most ravishing pleasures in 
the midst of women eternally young and eternally beautiful. 

What was seemingly an opposing and quite different form of belief, 
located paradise in the west. The opposition in belief, may, however, be 
more apparent than real, for in Polynesia some souls traveling westward 
were believed ultimately to reach the sky. In New Zealand belief, the 
souls of the dead returning to the ancestral home of the race traveled along 
the trail of light cast upon the water by the setting sun—“The Broad Path 
of Tane,” (27, pp. 115-116). This path leading to the sun also led to 
the sky, for the sky met the sea at the horizon. The Tongans and Samoans 
named the white. foreigners who came to their shores the Papa Langi, 
“People of the Heavens,” who “broke through the sky,” that is, came over 
the horizon, in their ships. In the Marquesas Islands a man’s coffin 
was spoken of as his canoe. Now, chiefs in particular, expecting to reach 
paradise, were honored with such coffins. And it was chiefs who were 
believed to dwell after death in the skies. Gill wrote (63, p. 193) that it 
was customary in Rarotonga to say of the dying, “So-and-so is passing 
over the sea.’. And the Mangaian myth of Veetini described the soul of 
the hero as it left its relatives on the shore, as “gliding swiftly over the 
western ocean in the ruddy track of the sun” (63, p. 184). The theories 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 79 

of a western Elysium and of a paradise in the sky are not necessarily 
conflicting, but were in origin identical. 

According to one record, the Marquesans had a belief in a paradise for 
chiefs in Po. Even this is not necessarily in opposition to the statement 
that chiefs and other illustrious persons went to a world of light in the 
heavens. Here the apparent diametrical opposition which places the para- 
dise below the earth instead of above it, may arise out of a confusion of 
words and ideas. It has been shown that po is the word most generally 
used for the underworld; also that the word ao (raro), which describes 
the location of the underworld in relationship to the earth’s surface, may 
signify also westward; and lastly that the nether regions and the homeland 
to the west were frequently given the same name and apparently were con- 
fused in many native minds. It is evident then that the journey of souls 
westward (i raro) might lead to a paradise which was thought to be in the 
heavens where the sun travelled, or on earth towards the setting sun, or 
even “below” the surface where the sun went in the night (Po). 

The Samoans believed both in a western and an overworld paradise. 
In Samoa two circular basins at the west end of the island of Savaii, 
served as the exits from earthly life, by which the souls of both commoners 
and chiefs took their departure, the commoners to go to the underworld, 
the chiefs to a western. paradise. This Elysium, called Pulotu, was 
believed to be an “island” in the west, a happy and beautiful land where 
dwelt the gods, ruled by a chief, whose body above was that of a man 
while the lower part had the form of an eel or serpent, stretching into the 
sea (I5I, pp. 235-7; 132, pp. 217-29). According to other accounts 
already quoted the souls of Samoan chiefs dwelt in the sky. The Tongan 
paradise, which was also believed to be the homeland of the ancestors and 
the residence of the gods, was called Pulotu, and was believed to be a 
large island lying northwest of Tonga. Here the souls of the distinguished 
resided, enjoying life in the midst of plentiful fruits, lovely flowers grow- 
ing in a fragrant atmosphere in which dwelt beautiful birds (102, pp. 
329-330). The ruler of this region, as in Samoa, was peculiar in having 
a long tail (158, Vol. III, pp. 23-24). Near his house was the ‘“‘water of 
life’ and the “speaking tree” (145, p. 58). The concept of the “water of 
life’ has been discussed elsewhere, but what is the significance of the 
“speaking tree’ is unknown. The belief in an island paradise appears also 
to have been present in Hawaii. Westervelt describes there an island 
believed to be one of the homes of the ancestral gods, and said to be 
floating somewhere upon the surface of the sea. Here, it is said, the 
ancestral spirits lived upon the shadows of earthly things (154, p. 103). 

80 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

The ideas concerning the destiny of souls taught in the Maori priestly 
college are interesting and illuminating; for they reveal the idea of a 
separation of souls according to their destiny after they reached the west- 
ern, ancestral land. They represent one of the few consecutive accounts— 
perhaps the only one—of Polynesian eschatological theory recorded directly 
from the mouth of an initiated priest. In the account of the teachings of the 
Whare Wananga college of sacred knowledge, so ably translated by 
S. Percy Smith, it appears that Hawaiki, used in a strict sense, was the 
name of a temple located at the “gathering place of souls” in the father- 
land. This “gathering place” of returning souls is elsewhere spoken of 
as a mountain in the distant land of Tawhiti. The great temple Hawaiki 
is said to have been built foursquare with a door in each side opening 
respectively north, east, south and west. In the center of the temple were 
four fire places, one opposite each door. Into this temple came the souls 
of the dead, some to be despatched downward to Whiro, the Lord of the 
Underworld; others to go upward to the Supreme Io in the highest 
heaven (119, pp. 112-113). 

Now, commencing from the period of Rangi and Papa, the (spirits) of the 
people of this world, have always followed the four winds named (in their journey 
to the spirit land), and each dead one follows its own wind, [thus being led] to his 
own particular door. . . Arrived at Hawaiki they separated; some went to the 
heavens appointed for them; the door by which they left Hawaiki was (named) Te 
Rawhiti (the east); whence they ascended by the Ara-toi-huarewa. . . Another 
division passed out by the south door, and by the way Tahekeroa descended to Raro- 
henga, at the Muriwai-hou (Hades) . . . Those spirits which by their evil con- 
duct on this earth, such as murderers and those guilty of treachery, left the temple 
by the Taheke-roa (long rapid descent) to Rarohenga, or Hades, presided over by 
the evil spirits, Whiro-te-tipua, Hine-nui-te-po (Great-Mother-of-Hades), and Wha- 
karu-ai-moko (god of volcanic phenomena); whilst others ascended the mountain 
Tawhiti-nui . . . sometimes called Maunga-nui, great mountain, where they were 
purified and then further ascended to the heavens by the way called T’e-Ara-tiatia 
(the way of steps), or by the other named Te Toi-huarewa (the dangling or floating 

way—the idea is of a suspended rope), where they entered the realm of Io the 
Supreme God. 

Elsewhere it is explained that from Hawaiki mankind was supposed to | 
have spread to the four corners of the earth and that their souls, carried 
by the winds, came back from the four corners to this, their place of 
origin (119, p. 185). 

That the Polynesian peoples regarded the “other worlds” not as 
vaguely conceived regions totally removed from the earth, but rather as 
definite localities of one piece with it, is evidenced by stories from the 
various island groups recounting visits of living men to the other world 
of spirits and their return here. Besides serving to illustrate the thought 
in question, several of the best versions of such stories furnish a picture 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 81 

of the imagined nature of the other world. One of the Maori stories of 
this type recounts the prowess of the hero Hutu in such games as top 
spinning and lance throwing, which were being played before the house 
of the Chiefess Pare (156, Vol. II, pp. 164-7). 

Once, when the lance which he had thrown, led Hutu to Pare’s door, the young 
noble-woman, whose heart had been won by the youth’s skill and presence, revealed 
to him her admiration and love and invited him to enter her house. But he refused 
her and departed. Overwhelmed with shame, she “ordered her attendants to arrange 
everything in the house and put it in order. When this was done she sat alone 
and wept, and rose and hung herself.” Hutu, remorseful, fearful of the people’s 
anger, determined to save her soul in the world below. First he sat down and 
chanted the priestly incantations having to do with death and the abode of the dead; 
then he rose and proceeded on his journey. He met Hine-nui-te-po (Great-lady-of- 
the-night), who presides over the Land of Shades. Ill-humored as usual, when 
Hutu asked the way, she pointed out the path taken by the spirits of dogs to the 
lower regions; but her favor was eventually won by the presentation of the seeker’s 
precious greenstone hand club. Mbollified by the gift, the goddess pointed out the 
true route, cooked some fern root for him and put it into a basket, at the same 
time admonishing him to eat sparingly of it, for it must suffice him throughout the 
journey. Should he eat the food of the lower world, it would mean that, instead of 
his being able to bring back the spirit of Pare to the world of light, his own soul 
would be condemned to remain forever in the lower regions. The goddess advised 
him further, “When you fly from this world, bow your head as you descend to the 
dark world; but when you are near the world below a wind from beneath will blow 
on you, and will raise your head up again, and you will be in a right position to 
alight on your feet .’ Hutu arrived safely in the world below, and on inquir- 
ing the whereabouts of Pare, was told that she was “in the village.’ Although the 
girl knew that Hutu had come and was seeking her, her shame led her to conceal 
herself. In the hope of luring her from her house, he organized contests in top 
spinning and javelin throwing, games which he knew she loved to watch. But 
never did she appear. At last Hutu, sore at heart, said to the others, “Bring a 
very long tree, and let us cut the branches off it.’ This done, ropes were plaited 
and tied to the top, and the crown of the tree was bent down to the earth by the 
people’s tugging at the ropes. Hutu climbed into the top, and another man sat on 
his back. Then Hutu shouted, “Let go.” And the tree flung the young adventurer 
and his companion high into the air. Delighted at this exhibition, all the people 
shouted with glee. This was too much for Pare and she came to watch the new 
game. Finally she said, “Let me also swing, but let me sit on your shoulders.” 

Exuberant, Hutu answered, “Keep hold of my neck, O Pare!” The top of the 
tree being again drawn down, it was released on the signal and flew skyward with 
such a rush as to fling the ropes against the under side of the upper world where they 
became entangled in the grass at the entrance to the realm of shades. Climbing up 
the ropes with Pare on his back, Hutu emerged into the world of light. He went 
straightway to the settlement where the dead body of Pare was lying, and the spirit 
of the young chiefess reentered her body and it became alive. 

An identical idea, and sometimes almost the same story, is found in 
other of the island groups. In the Marquesas was told the legend of 
Kena, whose loved one had killed herself because he had spurned her. 
Kena after many adventures reached the land of spirits, captured her 
spirit in a basket with the aid of the chiefess of the underworld, and 

82 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

brought it back to the world of the living. Again, there is the story of 
Ipokino, whose sisters-in-law brought back her soul from the realm of 
shades and restored it to a body in order that the grief of her husband, to 
whom she had been unfaithful, might be healed. The Mangaians told the 
story of Kura who fell through into the underworld by accident and who 
was sought and saved by her husband (63, p. 221). 

In Hawaii the story of Hiku and Kawelu presents close analogies to 
that of Hutu and Pare in New Zealand. 

Hiku was led to the house of Kawelu by a charmed arrow. After living with 
the maid for some time, the youth deserted her, leaving her so stricken that she 
shortly died of grief. Filled with remorse, Hiku set out to seek her soul in the 
nether world, gaining access to that region by having himself let down through 
the entrance on a long vine or swing. When Kawelu had been induced to climb 
onto the swing with her mate of the upper world, he quickly gave the signal and 
his friends above pulled away. To prevent the frightened spirit from escaping, Hiku 
put it in a coconut shell. Coming to her dead body, he forced the spirit into the 
great toe of the left foot, and then up and up into the body by massaging. “Grad- 
ually, as the heart was reached, the blood began once more to flow through the 
body, the chest began gently to heave with the breath of life, and soon the spirit 
gazed out through the eyes” (144, pp. 43-8). 

One feature in the Hawaiian story is particularly interesting, revealing 
as it does the old conception of the nature of newly arrived spirits of the 
dead. In order to conceal the fact that he belonged to the world above, 
Hiku smeared his body with rancid coconut oil, so that he would smell 
like a dead man. So well did his ruse succeed that spirits in the under- 
world exclaimed when he came among them, “What an odor this corpse 
emits!’’ and “He must have been dead a long time.” In the Marquesas 
it is said that Kena, who adopted no such ruse, was upon his arrival in the 
lower world instantly detected by the chiefess on account of his upper- 
world odor (78). 

There are also stories of visits to the upper regions. In the Marquesas 
it is said that a man named Tikituao was conducted to the sky world 
where he witnessed all the tribal gods (who were deified priests) regaling 
themselves on kava and the body of a sacrificed human victim. When the 
assembly of gods detected his presence, he was forcibly ejected, literally 
“kicked out,” landing safe and sound on the earth to tell of his marvelous 
adventure (78). According to Maori lore, the god Tawhaki, when he 
went up to heaven, “found settlements, houses, slaves, canoes, axes, etc., 
and the inhabitants following the occupations of men’ (149, p. 422). 

There is a striking and beautiful story from the Society Islands of an 
earth maiden who sought her lover in the heavens. Heipua (Wreath of 
flowers), the lovely, dwells in seclusion on the island of Porapora, guarded 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 83 

by a monster of the sea. To her, drawn by her famed beauty, comes the 
son of the god Tane, Tinihauarii (The exalted chief of peace) the golden, 
god “of the dark night, that flies through the heavens, that shines in the 
heavens ... , the golden rays of Tane that give light to the rainbows.” 
The god falls in love with Heipua and dwells with her, leaving her to 
return to the heavens from time to time. Finally he can continue his 
earthly association with her no longer and is drawn away into the heavens, 
to return no more. Heartbroken, Heipua dies, and her body is laid upon 
a bed of flowers. Her released spirit flies to the upper world. At its 
entrance she is warned of the dangers that lie ahead of her, but told that 
if she goes on and on, turned aside neither by temptations nor dangers, 
she will find her lover. After passing by many alluring houses of pleasure 
and terrifying dangers that beset her, she comes at last to the house of the 
“keeper of the way that leads to the habitations of the gods.” Here she is 
told how she may lead her lover back to earth and outwit Hina, queen 
of the heavens, who also desires him. Heipua hides in a nest of flowers, 
awaiting Tehauarii. When he comes she leaps upon his shoulders. With 
all her might she holds his head down and facing earthward, so that his face 
cannot be turned back by the wind and they are swept on by the wind 
till they pass out of the heavenly world. “The two spirits descended hand 
in hand to earth, one to take the form of man, the other to return into the 
lovely body that lay upon the bed of flowers. Heipua awoke to see by her 
side Tinihauarii, chief of the dark and the light.” 

These stories are instructive in many ways, but the main point of 
interest at the moment is the picture they present of the other worlds, both 
above and below, as being more or less exact replicas of this. In the 
story of Pare in New Zealand, the departed spirits were said to live in a 
village and to play games identical with those played on earth. In another 
story (149, p. 422), when Maui wished to visit the Spirit Land he pulled 
the center post of the house to one side, and felt the wind from Hades 
blowing up through the aperture. 

Looking down he saw fire, men, trees and the ocean; he also saw men busily 
employed in the pursuit of their several occupations in this world. 

In the Marquesas the dwellers in the land of shades are described as 
going on trips or tours of the country, having festivals, bathing, bedecking 
themselves, and feasting exactly as in this world. In Hawaii the under- 
world of departed spirits, the kingdom of Milu, was a realm governed by 
a former chief of Hawaii, in which all the institutions of the world of the 
living were exactly reproduced (154, pp. 94-99). 

Though universal metempsychosis was by no means regarded as a 

84 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

law of life in Polynesia, there was everywhere the belief in occasional or 
temporary transmigration or reincarnation, of human souls. Disembodied 
souls were of the nature of gods, and they were capable apparently of 
assuming any form of temporary incarnation or physical manifestation that 
they desired. The gods seem to have availed themselves of two methods 
of appearing physically in the world. They entered living bodies, borrowing 
them, so to speak, and using them as vehicles, as for instance in the case of 
shark and bird incarnations, and of human mediums “possessed” by a god; 
and they appeared by direct materialization in some recognizable natural 
form such as a cloud, rainbow. Souls appear to have had the same powers. 
They took temporary possession of living persons, sometimes for vengeance, 
but sometimes to help the living. They likewise entered into temporary 
possession of an animal body, or were even permanently incarnated in 
certain limited classes of forms, as in the case of the numerous shark gods. 
Moerenhout writes that in Tahiti the natives were said to have believed that 
the spirit of a man would come back in the body of some animal he had 
revered in life. When a man was sick, the approach of this animal presaged 
his death, for it was believed that the man’s god was coming to receive his 
soul (105, Vol. I, pp. 456-457). It is probable that in this statement Moer- 
enhout is, as he has done in numerous instances, generalizing from facts 
which, though true in particular instances, are by no means universally the 
rule. I have never heard in Tahiti that it was general for patron deities to 
appear in animal bodies, and feel quite certain that there was no general 
belief in souls transferring themselves from the human to an animal body as 
is here suggested. Some chiefs in these islands held that certain of their 
sacred ancestors habitually appeard as sharks; and the presence of these 
near the shore was in some cases, as at Opoa, Raiatea, believed to presage a 
death in the chief’s family. 

Gill writes that on the island of Mangaia, Cook Islands, men’s souls 
were supposed sometimes to enter into one or another form of bird, fish, 
reptile, insect, and also into immobile objects and materials such as trees, 
Triton shells, sennit, sandstone, and basalt (63, p. 32; 67, p. 347). The belief 
in incarnation of ancestral spirits in animate and inanimate bodies, which 
is closely related to the question of the transmigration of souls, is discussed 
in the section on Objects Venerated. 

In the Society and Marquesas islands it is believed that a tiny shrill note 
heard at night about houses, apparently made by some small insect which 
the natives say has never been seen, is the voice of a deceased relative who 
desires to convey some message. Many persons, native and European, are 
unable to hear the note, doubtless because it is too high in pitch, the vibra- 
tion too rapid to be heard by their ears. I have frequently, but without 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 85 

success tried to locate the source of the sound in the thatch of native houses. 
The note is utterly illusive, seeming to come now from one, now from 
another part of the house. . Only those gifted psychically can understand the 
message supposed to be conveyed. Apparently there was the same belief in 
the Cook Islands. (See 63, pp. 162-164.) 

It was thought in a number of the islands that souls assumed temporarily 
the form or appearance of some insect, bird, or other object. This is hardly 
to be called transmigration. In a Marquesan legend, the soul of a woman, 
recently killed, whose body lay in her house, is described as perching in the 
form of a bird on the ridgepole of the dwelling. In New Zealand (23, Vol. 
IX, p. 181) souls are described as assuming the form of butterflies, while in 
the Marquesas it is said that priests’ souls had the form of night moths 
which increased in size as they ascended until they flew through the sky as 
great birds (136, p. 496). Heroes’ souls in New Zealand were believed to 
become stars of greater or less radiance according to the number of enemies 
they had slain (140, p. 147). In Samoa, when a person died away from 
home and the body was not recovered, a sheet of cloth was taken to the 
supposed place of death and spread upon the ground with a prayer. The 
first living thing that came upon the sheet was believed to be the soul of 
the departed, and was wrapped up in the cloth and buried with due ceremony 
(151, p. 234). In Niue was a similar custom arising out of an identical 
conception of the appearance of the soul after death as some small living 
form. When a person died, a mat was spread besides the body, and the 
insect or lizard that lighted or crawled upon it was thought to be the person’s 
soulnaznenV oly Xs pi 207 32142, Pp. 52). 

From Tahiti (101) comes a most interesting account illustrative of a be- 
lief in human reincarnation. It is related that a certain chiefess, well known 
in recent local history, died. Her body had lain many days undergoing the 
usual process of rubbing. Decomposition had already set in, when the 
attendants were terrified one day to observe first one part of the body, 
then others, begin to move, and finally to witness the eyes open. The body 
was gradually restored to its living condition, and then the chiefess told of 
her strange adventure: of the departure of her soul through the air to Para- 
dise and of its subsequent unwilling return to its putrefying body in obedi- 
ence to the command of a chief who appeared to reign in the world of happy 
souls that she had gone to. The chiefess was told that she must return to 
and reenter her body because the chief required her to assist him in reap- 
pearing on earth in a human body. As the chief of the other world urged 
her to enter her lifeless body, he said: 

“TI will continue to be your lover. Live always apart from the others and I will 
come to you every night. If you love me, perhaps, later on, when I have annointed 

86 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

my spirit with the odour of the living through you, I may come again to life in the 
body of a dead arii, whose body will be kept alive by my spirit. But I must always 
meet you alone. Now I order you to return to your body, for I hope also to return 
through you to the land of the living.’ And as he spoke, he pushed me into my body. 

The restored chiefess lived apart from the world in a small house she 
had had built, and the chief of the other world came to her every night. She 
was told that she must not accept Christian baptism, for this would make it 
impossible for the chief to realize his desire. But some time later in obedi- 
ence to the command of one who had authority over her, the chiefess was 
baptized. 

That night, he came for the last time, my arii of the night. He wore a sad 
countenance. Standing far away from me, he said, “So you betrayed me! You did 
not love me. Could you not have waited a little longer? My body was almost fully 

impregnated with earthly odours. Now you have cut away my last chance to come 
again and live as you, to live with you as your husband, in your world.” 

In this highly interesting story, the conception seems to be that an in- 
habitant of the spirit world could become again a dweller on earth by 
gradually acquiring the earthly “odour” through constant association with 
the human chiefess. In the story the spirit chief speaks of being “reborn” 
through the chiefess, but I believe this is meant figuratively, and not with 
the idea of rebirth as an infant through the woman. ‘There is an episode 
in a Hawaiian tale that is based upon a similar idea, though the method of 
bringing about materialization is quite different. In this story the 
parents of a man who had been killed “proceeded to worship the spirit . . . 
until it became so strong that it could go about in the form of a live person.” 
In this condition the ghost-man returned to live with his wife who thence- 
forth believed her husband, who was actually dead physically, to be still with 
her in his physical body (54, Vol. IV, p. 490). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 87 

DEITIES 

GODS AND SPIRITS 

The descriptions of the other worlds existing above, below, or beyond 
the earth have already revealed the fact that the gods were supposed to 
dwell in all of these regions. Whereas most deities appear to have had 
their permanent residences in the heaven world, some few, as rulers in 
those domains, belonged to the underworld. It is said that the gods of 
Mangaia were divided into two orders and spoken of as the “dwellers in 
the day [Ao]” and the “dwellers in the shades or night [Po].”’ The former 
dwelt in the firmament, “The Bright Land of Vatea,”’ while the others with 
their attendants lived in the lower regions called Avaiki or Po, where 
dwelt also the souls of the dead (63, pp. 4, 32, 154). 

The native’s sense of the presence of his gods was by no means a vague 
feeling. In the elements and in nature about him he saw and felt the beings 
whom he venerated. To the Maori, the rainbow was not a mere symbol of 
a godlike power: it was the god Kahukura. The Marquesan Atea who is 
described as being the progenitor of all natural objects including man was, 
as his name shows, the bright expanse of the firmament which spread 
above the earth, whose light fertilized the land. In Hawaii the rain clouds 
are referred to in prayer as the “bodies of Lono,” the rain god. The more 
immediate features and objects of nature were all the children of the gods, 
each a separate living individual with a soul of its own, yet always one 
with the ancestral cosmic elements in a most intimate generic relationship. 
The trees in New Zealand were the children of Tane, the vivifying sunlight, 
but single trees were sometimes spoken of as though they themselves were 
the god; and man, the male human descendant of the great nature father, 
in his capacity of human procreator, was universally called by the generic 
term, tane. The god Tane himself was not an ultimate ancestor, for he 
was the son of Heaven and Earth, who were in their turn descended from | 
a series of vaguely conceived mythical ancestors coming down in gene- 
alogical succession from the Supreme Being. 

Continuously manifesting itself by birth out of a single source by growth 
and the universal procreative process, all nature was, to the perception of 
the Polynesian, wholly unified. The same dominating sense of psychic 
unity apparent to him in nature as a whole was also the mainspring of the 
native’s social consciousness. A sense of separateness from family, tribe, 
or community was unknown to the native. His consciousness of social 

88 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

unity extended even beyond this world, for his immediate earthly com- 
panions as a group formed only a portion of a larger group which may be 
said to have extended psychically into the past and the future and beyond 
the limits of his immediate locality into the “other worlds” above and below 
and away to the west. The individual and the social groups of different 
kinds were intensely conscious of oneness with their ancestors. The family 
group was regarded as existing not only as a present reality, but as a con- 
crete entity extending into the past and the future, including the dead and 
the yet unborn. As for the larger social groups such as tribes, communities, 
districts, islands and nations, professional and industrial groups and the 
like, their psychic patrons were for the most part but men who, having been 
notable during their lifetime, were called upon after passing into the next 
world to continue to participate and assist in human affairs, being attracted 
and empowered to lend their superhuman aid by the worship of their de- 
votees. When a new canoe was made in the Marquesas, Motuhaiki and 
Hope ‘outo’1, famous canoe builders of ancient times whose names occupy 
the most prominent places in the craft chants used by canoe builders, were 
thought by the workers to be actually present at the consecrated place of 
labor. When there were funerary festivals, first fruits rites, and on all 
such ceremonial occasions of the first order of importance, the gods con- 
cerned were not regarded as far off somewhere in the sky looking on, but 
were believed to be present with their worshippers, enjoying with them the 
exhilarating effects of the feasting, dancing, singing, and social emulation. 
To descend to the lowest order of psychic beings, the familiar spirits of 
mediums, which were sometimes employed for good purposes but usually 
for evil, these were in a most literal sense present with their worshippers 
who sustained and strengthened them with their offerings and prayers. A 
Marquesan explained the relationship between a woman and the demon that 
was her familiar by saying that the demon was to her like a husband to a 
wife, meaning to indicate by this simile only the intimacy of the rapport, not 
any theory of sexual relationship between the spirit and the medium. To 
comprehend the Polynesian’s sense of his relationship to his gods it must 
be remembered always that these were for him when he worshipped them, 
and at other times also, intimately present; and it must be realized that 
intimate presence for the Polynesian, with his subtle and instinctive social 
responsiveness and exuberant emotional nature implies not a vague intel- 
lectual idea of presence, but a vivid feeling of it. 

The gods of the Polynesians were personified concepts that, on the one 
hand, embodied the desires and needs, the hopes and dreads of their 
worshippers; and, on the other hand, individualized the elements and forces 
that they observed in nature. The epithets by which they were described 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 89 

and the parts they played in the folklore and myths and in the worship 
reveal their nature. Tu “of-the-angry-eyes,” also known as Ku “the-land- 
snatcher,’ who in Maori myth as one of the sons of Heaven fought and 
withstood the fury of the elements themselves in the great war of the gods, 
was the original patron of war, the hungry devourer of captives, the main- 
stay of chiefs bent on victory and conquest. In Tangaroa, the lord of the 
winds and ocean, is seen the destructive power of the elements he ruled re- 
flected in various episodes of his epic, according to the Marquesan version 
of which some of those who had offended him were engulfed in the depths 
in their canoes, while others were drowned by having the whole island on 
which they lived overturned. In Hawaiian myth the terrors of volcanic 
disturbances were embodied in Pele, the ugly hag who dwelt in the black 
pit of Kilauea, vengeful and brooding of spirit and furious and devastating 
in her outbursts. In the same group of islands which is so full of natural 
contrasts on land and sea, the more usual character of the land and the love 
of nature in its happier moods and the joyous spirit of the people were 
embodied in the character of the lovely goddess Laka, queen of the wild- 
wood, who, represented by a block of forest wood wrapped in saffron- 
stained cloth, was worshipped with flowers, poetry, and the dance. The 
practical industrial needs and aspirations were similarly embodied in the 
gods who presided over labor. ‘Thus the patrons of carpentry in the 
Marquesas were themselves great traditional adepts who embodied in full 
the skill and perfection in workmanship for which the native craftsmen 
strove. 

The descriptions of the other worlds illustrate that just as most of those 
regions were conceived of as being more or less exact replicas of the earthly 
scene of human activities, so the ancestral relatives dwelling there were re- 
garded as having human form, sentiments, and occupations. And yet, no 
doubt on account of the sense of mystery associated with the unknown, and 
because of their supposed superior psychic knowledge and power, which was 
naturally believed to result from the more intimate acquaintance with the 
psychic, the spirits that had passed on were always regarded with a greater 
or less degree of awe. ‘The souls of the departed who had been of some 
consequence in life, after they had reached their ultimate abode usually 
became what may be called ancestral spirit-gods. This: Polynesian concept 
is well illustrated in the Marquesan stories of the spirit world in which the 
native terms kuhane (soul) and etua (god) are often employed interchange- 
ably in speaking of the dwellers in the other world. The relationship be- 
tween the living in this world and their relatives in the next may be likened 
to that existing between the older and the younger members of one family. 
Just as the younger members of the family group cared for the older mem- 

go Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

bers physically, feeding and keeping them in house and home, receiving in 
return the benefit of their superior worldly and psychic wisdom, so the 
dwellers on the surface of the earth made food offerings to the souls of 
the dead, and protected the physical remains, and in return expected to 
receive the superhuman psychic guidance and assistance that inhabitants of 
the other world were in a position to give. 

The memorial festivals, with their lavish offerings presented by many 
families, celebrated some time after death had occurred, were in 
essence deification rites, as were also the prolonged religious ceremonies ex- 
tending over months, which followed immediately upon the death of a great 
man. ‘Those whose names became fixed in the pantheon of the popular 
cult were men whose eminence would in some way entitle them to be 
characterized as tribal or national heroes. In its broader aspect which in- 
cluded the cult of the larger social units, the ancestor worship of the region 
may be characterized as hero worship. The tutelary gods of tribes in the 
Marquesas were apparently always the deified souls of famous priests or 
chiefs, elevated and empowered by means of the elaborate rites such as 
have just been mentioned. And in the same islands, the tutelary gods of 
other kinds were also spirits of the dead, as in the case of the patrons of 
carpentry and, to take an example of an entirely different kind, that of 
the demon goddess of leprosy who was traditionally the first woman on 
earth who succumbed to this disease (77 p. 247). 

By no means, however, were all the gods enrolled in the Polynesians’ 
pantheon the spirits of persons who had once lived on the earth. The major 
deities that will shortly be described were not thought ever to have lived as 
men on earth. This is true also, for example, of the seventy gods who 
were the sons of Heaven and Earth according to Maori myth. It is some- 
times stated categorically that all the deities of this religion were ancestral. 
This is true, in the sense that all the beings venerated had their place in 
the ancestral genealogies of the people, that they were, in other words, 
regarded by the natives as being ancestors in direct or collateral lines. Many 
gods, though ancestral, were believed never to have been human beings. 
While most of the patrons of the popular worship were deified heroes, 
many others, such as Rangi (Heaven) in New Zealand, and Taaroa, the 
creator, in the Society Islands, clearly were not. 

Most of the gods who received actual worship and those who figured 
in the myths and legends were thought of usually as having human form. 
It must be remembered, however, that gods were accredited with the 
power of assuming various forms at their pleasure. All through Polynesia 
there are legends which recount the exploits of the mythical hero gods who 
were regarded as embodying and expressing all the attributes of human 

Handy—Polynesian Religion gl 

beings, but at the same time possessing godlike powers and qualities. Such 
figures are those described below as the chief deities of the major pantheon 
of the region: Tane, Tu, Hina, and so on. Back and beyond these char- 
acters to whom are ascribed human adventures and attributes, there were 
the more distant figures of creation, whose names frequently occur in 
prayers and chants, but who were never thought of as having human form. 
In this class were Atea in the Marquesas, Taaroa in Tahiti, Rangi in New 
Zealand, and other figures of the same type who enact the parts in 
primary phases of the world’s birth. Still beyond these in the dim aeons of 
cosmic evolution recorded in genealogies and chants are the “Roots,” “Day,” 
“Night,” and the “Void,” the primal elements and epochs in the cosmo- 
genesis. 

It is to be noted that the highest of the gods—the Supreme Being is not 
classified as a god (atua)—of the cult were none of them preexistent be- 
ings in creation, but were born and became active agents only in the final 
stage of evolution after the world was formed. To the priest thinking in 
terms of the cosmic eras, even the most ancient of his gods were recent 
compared with the beginnings of evolution. 

The deities that figure in both the mythology and the worship may be 
said to have been born gods. They were, however, frequently superceded in 
the actual cult by lower spirits or souls that became gods through worship. 
Thus in New Zealand, although Tu still maintained his position as the war 
lord who was recognized by all tribes, the deities who were actually looked 
to for assistance in fighting were commonly beings more recently elevated 
to godlike power. An interesting account of the history of one war god 
has been written by Best (21, p. 41). A Maori woman had been delivered 
prematurely and the much feared spirit of the foetus (kahukahu) was not 
destroyed as was usual by means of the prescribed ritual. The foetus was 
wrapped in leaves in which a certain kind of fish had been cooked. The 
soul of the foetus is said to have taken up its abode in this species of fish, 
which was thereafter never eaten by the tribe. At some later time the spirit 
took the form of a certain kind of lizard that was much feared by the Maori, 
and this was thereafter known as its aria or incarnation. By turning into a 
lizard—a form of incarnation that was much feared because lizard gods 
were believed to cause illness by eating men’s vitals—this spirit became a 
“man eating god.” Now a certain man in the tribe went to the place where 
the premature delivery had occurred and offered a parakeet as sacred food 
(amonga) for the spirit. Thereafter, it is said, this man suffered a tempor- 
ary mental derangement during which he performed several miraculous 
feats that were attributed to the spirit. Subsequently he erected a shrine to 
the spirit, to which he had given a name. This spirit, raised to the dignity 

nw rr Sc rr 

oe 

92 Bernice P. Bishop Musewm—Bulletin 34 

of a war god through worship and reputation, later became famous through- 
out the region on account of the successfyl prophesies and directions given 
in war time through his priest. 

The method used by a Hawaiian necromancer to empower the spirit of 
a deceased child whom he desired to make his familiar (pp. 235-36), was 
closely similar in many features to the interesting bit of religious history 
just quoted. There is in a Hawaiian legend an episode that illustrated the 
same principle of empowering a soul by worship, which is the point of 
particular interest in connection with the making of gods. According to 
this story the soul of a boy who had been drowned was accustomed to 
enter a certain temple every night. The father of the boy following the 
advice of the priests, caught the spirit by means of nets. “When the spirit 
was finally caught it had the form of a rat. It was then worked over until 
it almost assumed its human form again” (54, Vol. IV, p. 550). This 
episode from folklore is interesting not only in showing the effect that 
worship was believed to be capable of producing, but in showing how souls 
and spirits were supposed to be capable of appearing in different forms of 
body. The examples just given illustrate one way in which gods were 
made; but those created in this way were of an inferior sort. A much 
more dignified method of elevating spirits to what was doubtless regarded 
as a more truly exalted position was by means of the deification rites or 
memorial festivals which are described in connection with the ceremonial 
having to do with death. 

The general term for deity was atua. This was applied to all classes 
of psychic beings, from the great figures of creation such as Rangi, the 
“Heaven or Sky, the great father of men” in New Zealand to the tim o te 
Hakaturi, “ ‘the multitude of little Wood-elves’ . . . the children of the god 
Tane, (who) have charge of the god’s especial domain, the forest and its 
denizens” (145, pp. 391, 513) and the corresponding kinit o ke akua, “the 
multitude of the little gods” of the woodland in Hawaii who were propitiated 
in the Hula dance ritual of those islands (51, p. 21). 

Malicious demons were atua; the spirits of the dead were atua in the 
Marquesas. The word was even applied to some human beings who, as 
prophets of gods, were referred to as though they themselves were living 
gods. Atua is specifically a noun, but it was occasionally used as an ad- 
jective, as in the phrase mana atua, meaning godlike power. 

There were also various terms for different orders of inferior psychic 
beings. To signify ancestral patrons, and also malicious beings of ancestral 
derivation or relationship, the Hawaiians had the term aumakua, the So- 
ciety Islanders oromatua, and the Samoans, Niueans, and Cook Islanders 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 93 

aitu. Still another term, tt, was employed in the Society Islands to signify 
this class of beings. This term in its strict sense must in ancient times have 
been employed here with the same meaning as in other parts of Polynesia, 
to signify the representation of a deity and not a type or class. Carved 
representations or symbols of deceased chiefs, were set up in Tahiti to 
protect sacred localities and these emblems were called ti. In the Mar- 
quesas, figures carved in human form were set up in the tribal temples to 
represent the deified priests and chiefs who were the tutelary gods of the 
people. Such figures are referred to as tiki, but this designates the repre- 
sentation and not the apotheosized man who had become an atua. Moerenhout 
(105, Vol. I, pp. 459-460) speaks of tii in Tahiti as an intermediate class 
of deities, believed to be the children of Taaroa and Hina, who functioned 
as nature deities, guardians of animals, plants, fish, and so on. The 
Poutiriao of Maori theology seem to correspond to this class. 

In some islands tupua, tipua, or kupua, a term evidently derived from 
the word tupu, to grow, was given meanings that varied considerably in 
different localities. It might signify human and nature spirits embodied in 
any unusual or uncanny form; designate an object regarded as the embodi- 
ment of such a spirit; or it might be used more or less with the meaning 
that we understand in the words “wizard” and ‘“‘monster,’’ when these carry 
a strong sense of supernatural character. Best (15, p. 37) speaks of 
tipua in New Zealand as apparitional, non-indwelling spirits pertaining to 
inanimate objects. Such objects are described as tipua, and this term is also 
applied to such animals as were believed to be possessed of supernormal 
indwelling spirits. It is occasionally applied to persons, as to such as possess 
strange, abnormal characteristics, and to any strange sickness. 

Niue Islanders signified by the word tupua beings possessed of super- 
natural powers that were sometimes protective and sometimes mischievous, 
propably originally nature spirits; and also human beings possessed of super- 
natural power, and strange embodiments of human souls such as the column 
of water ejected from a certain blowhole that was supposed to be the 
incarnation of a man’s soul (125, Vol. XI, pp. 196-7). In Samoa tupua was 
applied to deified spirits of chiefs that were seen embodied in stars and 
other natural phenomena (132, pp. 211, 215). In the Hawaiian islands 
kupua were nature spirits that assumed as their embodiments various types 
of natural objects and phenomena. A list of the types of incarnations 
assumed by kupua includes leaves, flowers, birds, trees, ferns, vines, shells, 
clouds, winds, fish, sharks, sea mosses, stones of peculiar form, and danger- 
ous localities (154, p. 46). Here also the same word was applied to human 
beings with extraordinary powers. It is obvious that this word is one, the 
meanings of which may easily be confused with a number of others signify- 

04 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

ing various types of spirits and embodiments, and that it must frequently 
have been used interchangeably with various of these terms. Tupua stands 
out, however, as a word belonging to a distinct concept of spirits of unusual 
power embodied in strange natural forms, or of human beings or other 
phenomena exhibiting unusual features that would indicate such an indwell- 
ing spirit. 

Only from New Zealand is there a clear account of the hierarchy of gods 
in the esoteric teachings of the priesthood. According to the Wananga of 
the Maori, the universe was presided over by the following classes and 
types of beings: 

Io, the Supreme Being who dwelt in the highest heaven. 

From him were descended Heaven and Earth, who gave birth to seventy 
male gods called as a class the Whanau-a-rangi, or “Born of Heaven.” These 
seventy may be spoken of as original gods who made up the major pantheon 
of deities directly connected with the world and men. 

A class of male spirits called Whatukura (Red Lords) or Apa 
Whatukura who dwelt in the eleven heavens below the highest and served, 
according to one account, as links or messengers between Io and the 
Whanau-a-rangi. 

A complementary class of female spirits called Mareikura or Apa 
Mareikura were the female companions of the Whatukura. One account 
speaks of the Whatukura and their companions not as messengers but as 
the guardians of the twelve heavens, to all of which, as also to the eleven 
earthly planes, they had access. It is said that “Without the Whatukura 
nothing would have possessed the mana atua.” 

A class of beings called Apa acted as messengers and servitors for the 
Whatukura and their companions. There was one Apa of each of the 
eleven heavens below the highest. 

Lastly, there was a very important class of celestial executives called 
Poutiriao who, having been appointed by Io through Tane, were the guardi- 
ans of all departments of nature. It was their duty to see that the sun and 
moon ran in their proper courses, in fact that all nature’s machinery func- 
tioned in orderly fashion. There was one Poutiriao in each of the heavens 
and everything on the earth and in the sea had its guardian of this type. 
These guardian spirits were under the command of the Whatukura, who 
are spoken of as the “binders,” a term referring apparently to the fact 
that they were the links that bound Io to the gods presiding over human 
affairs. 

It is evident that some at least of the Wanau-a-rangi were Poutiriao for 
Tane, who as one of the seventy original gods is spoken of as the Poutiriao 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 95 

of plants (119, Vols. xiv, xv, pp. 109-110, 138; 27, pp. 5-8). In Tahiti it is 
said that each of the superior gods of myth represented an attribute of the 
Supreme Being (Ihoiho or Taaroa), that they resided in the seven heavens, 
wielding authority that was delegated to them by the Supreme Being (105, 
Vol. I, p. 443). 

THE SUPREME BEING 

The core of the esoteric theology of the Maori was the concept of the 
Supreme Io which remained wholly unrevealed to foreign enquirers for 
many decades after the first contact of Europeans and Maori. I cannot 
help feeling that our lack of knowledge of such a supreme god in other 
island groups is due largely to the fact that the knowledge was limited to 
the ancient priesthood, whose rules would have compelled them to conceal 
from outsiders the most sacred of their lore; while personal instinct would 
at the same time have led them to shelter their hallowed beliefs from 
strangers with the attitude typical of practically all the early inquirers. 
With the ancient priesthoods, the knowledge of the great body of the most 
sacred Polynesian lore died. The following pictures well the attitude of 
Maori priests toward the indiscreetly inquisitive and disrespectful. Tregear 

writes (149, pp. 450-2), 

Cc. O. Davis mentions that when attempting to question an old priest on the 
subject of the ancient Maori worship of the Supreme Being he was refused informa- 
tion, and politely referred to another priest 100 miles away. Probably that priest 
would have referred him again to someone else and so on. Each initiate into the 
sacred mysteries considered his knowledge as a trust to be guarded against the outer 
world, and it is only under most exceptional circumstances that information could 
be acquired. Some gods could only be named in the Whare Kura and Whare- 
wananga (temples) of the tribe. To utter “the ineffable name” (Io) under a 
roof of any kind was to blaspheme most frightfully, and would be a sacrilege that 
only an ignorant person (religiously ignorant) like a European would have the 
depravity to attempt. Even the names of ancestors, as god-descended, would not be 
regarded as treated with due respect if mentioned at certain times or in unsuitable 
localities. A European student of Maori lore once ventured to speak to an old 
priest whom he met in a country store (shop) and asked him some question about 
ancient history. The Maori turned round with a disgusted look and remarked, “This 
is no place in which to speak of solemn things.” . . . Only one who loved the | 
enquirer and dared unknown terrors for the sake of that love would answer such 
questions (about sacred things) or repeat the consecrated hymns for him. It is not 
unusual for a priest after going a certain length to say, “If I tell you any more 
death will overtake me,” or “I must not repeat what follows, because there is now 
no priest alive sacred enough to perform the ceremonies necessary to purify me from 
such sacrilege.’ Another has been known to say, “The presence of the Christian 
God has silenced the Maori gods, but the gods of the Maori still hold us in their 
power, and if I break their laws they will punish me with death.” 

The mere fact of the existence of Io was unknown to most Maoris 
(149, p. 456). Best writes (14, p. 20) that 

96 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

The number of men initiated into the cult of Io was but small; only members of 
the higher grade of priestly experts and men of high-class families were allowed to 
learn the ritual pertaining to it. The common folk apparently had no part in it, 
and it is doubtful if they were even allowed to know the name of the Supreme 
Being. This cult of Io was an esoteric one; that of the lower tribal gods may be 
termed exoteric. All ritual and ceremonial pertaining to Io was retained in the 
hands of the superior priesthood, by no means a numerous body. It may be 
' described as an aristocratic cultus, known only to such experts and the more im- 
portant chiefs. It is quite probable, indeed, that this superior creed may have been 
too exalted for ordinary minds, that such would prefer to depend on more accessible 
and less moral deities. 

It is interesting to note that no form of offering or sacrifice was made to Io, 
that no image of him was ever made, and that he had no aria, or form of incarna- 
tion, such as inferior gods had. 

Of Io a Maori teacher said, “You will now be quite clear; there is one 
Lord, one God, one Spirit, in whom is vested peace and life. . . .Death 
was cast out from the conjoint heavens to this world” (27, p. 9). This 
exalted Being was referred to in the sacred lore by numerous epithets that 
illustrate the ideas that were associated with the concept in the priests’ 
minds. He was Io-of-the-hidden-face, Io-seen-in-a-flash-[of-lightning], Io- 
the-great-god, Io-exalted-of-heaven (128, p. 141). Dwelling in the highest 
heaven, called Te Toi-o-nga-rangi, it is said of him that “All god-like 
functions centered in Io alone.” Hence his names: lo-sacred-knowledge-of- 
the-heaven, Jo-the-water-of-life-of-all-things, lo-the-foundation-of-all-things, 
Io-the-parent-of-all-things. “By these names are ‘bound’ everything in the 
conjoint heavens,’ even to the lower world. “And now another name be- 
comes his, Io-matua-te-kore [Io the parentless], he is self created. Hence 
there is nothing without him; within him are all things” (27, pp. 7-9). 

The following (119, p. 93) is a prayer that was addressed to the 
Supreme Being when the teachings concerning him were entrusted to dis- 
ciples in the priestly college called Whare Wananga. The “offspring” re- 
ferred to, Io’s “sons,” were the students about to be given instruction, 
youths who must be of high birth, who, during their period of study were 
called tauira, a term which is best translated as “disciple.” 

Enter deeply, enter to the very origins, 

Into the very foundations of all knowledge, 

O Io-the-hidden-face—e ! 

Gather as in a great and lengthy net, in the inner recesses of the ears, 

As also in the desire, the perseverence, of these thy offspring, thy sons. 

Descend on them thy memory, thy knowledge, 

Rest within the heart, within the roots of origin; 

O Io-the-learned! O Io-the-determined ! 

O. Jo-the-self-created. 

The most ancient Maori prayers were addressed to Io (149, p. 456). 
This furnishes the best possible proof of the fact that this cult of the 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 97 

Supreme Being was truly an ancient feature in the Polynesian religion, 
that it was not a result of late speculation on the part of some priest or 
priests. This is supported. also by the fact that the Tahitians had a cor- 
responding concept. It is reported that they taught that “In the beginning 
there was nothing but the god Ihoiho; afterwards there was an expanse 
of waters which covered the abyss, and the god Tino Taata floated on the sur- 
face (29, p. 45).” Tregear notes that Sir George Grey spells the name 
Tho-o-te-rangi and takes the position that this is probably the proper pro- 
nunciation in view of the spelling in the corresponding Tahitian name (149, 
p. 456). Iho in Tahiti means the core of anything. Ihoiho would signify 
the “core of cores” or the ‘‘very core.” The giving of this name to the 
preexistent Supreme Being suggests that the ancient originators of the 
concept had in mind the idea of the Supreme Being’s existing within, at 
the heart of creation, rather than outside as is indicated by his being said 
to exist in the most distant heaven above the earth. The concept of Taaroa, 
the creator, according to other Tahitian versions, preexisting within an egg- 
like form is vaguely suggestive of the thought of a World Soul existing at 
the heart of creation. 

The words iho and io in several other dialects have suggestive meanings. 
Iho in Hawaii has the same fundamental and simple translation as has this 
word in the Tahitian dialect, that is to say “pith,” or it might signify 
the center of a thing, being applied in post-European times to the axis of 
the earth and the axle of a wheel (2). On the island of Mangaia, io (which 
should probably be written 7’0 for the Cook Island’s dialect elides the h), 
meaning literally “pith” or “core” of a thing, was commonly employed with 
the meaning “god.” “What the core is to the tree, the god was believed to 
be to the man. In other words the gods were the life of mankind” (63, p. 
28). Inthe Marquesas zo signified power, faculty (45, p. 142). 

The Samoan and Tongan mythologies postulate the preexistence of 
Tangaloa, the Supreme Being and creator, as does the lore of the Society 
Islands that of Taaroa; but in Samoa and Tonga there is no suggestion of 
the name of Io or Iho. In Hawaii, on the other hand, are several instances 
of the occurrence of the name Io; but proof that this refers to the Supreme 
Being is lacking. In the Kumulipo chant is an intriguing line, the meaning 
of which is entirely obscure, which reads, “Eggs and Io are life to birds” 
(146, p. 41). 

And in a prayer the name appears again, “Decorated at its ends is the malo 
of the bird-god Io-uli” (99, p. 248). 

If, as is possible, though to my mind not probable, Io here refers to a 
Supreme Being, the associating of his name with eggs and birds is 

98 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

reminiscent of Tahitian lore in which, according to one version of creation, 
Taaroa is pictured as a bird which first emerged from an egg and then 
grew feathers that afterwards became the trees of the earth (82). The 
combination of Io and Uli is highly interesting. Uli as a word signified 
“darkness” and “dark color’; and as a proper name it was applied to the 
patron god of the priesthood of Hawaii. This suggests relationship to Io, 
who might well be regarded as the patron of the priests, who alone appealed 
to him and held the knowledge concerning him. The manner of occurrence 
of the name Uli alone in numerous Hawaiian prayers indicates that as a 
deity he was of the first rank and importance. (See 99, p. 133, 139-40, 205, 
216.) Although it is impossible to prove the presence of Io or Iho in 
Hawaii, there was unquestionably here the idea of a Supreme Being 
worshipped under the name of Hika po loa, or Oji-e, which, according to 
Fornander (55, Vol. I, p. 61), signified “most excellent, supreme.” 

Tue Mayor PANTHEON 

TANE, GOD OF LIGHT AND MALE VIVIFIER 

Apparently there existed originally in Polynesia a clear-cut pantheon of 
major deities having sharply defined functions and attributes. With the dis- 
persal and isolation of the people among the many island groups there 
gradually came the confusion and contradictions that are apparent to the 
student of the religion in the late phase of its history. By remarking the 
similarities and eliminating the contradictions in the position of the differ- 
ent major deities in the various parts of the region, it is possible to recon- 
struct an outline at least of the constitution of this pantheon as it originally 
existed. It is in those characteristics of particular deities that are identical 
in several or many geographically unconnected localities that the clues to 
the uniform original are to be discovered; whereas it is in the divergences 
that are witnessed the evidences of differentiation. A thorough study of 
the divergences would require a very lengthy discussion, one that would be 
out of place in this paper; therefore only the most striking and significant 
differences will be mentioned in passing, while attention will be concentrated 
on the similarities. 

In all the Polynesian dialects the word tane and its corresponding di- 
alectical forms signifies male, man, husband. The very word chosen for 
his name has reference even in common usage to that one of his functions 
which was more important than any other in both myth and worship, 
whereby he was the chief generator of beings and things in the world. Tane 
represented the male principle in the period of cosmic history following 
upon the birth of the Earth Mother, when the natural objects and beings 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 909 

in the world were born. But it must always be remembered that Tane was 
by no means the only figure representing the male principle. All male 
entities and beings, both before and after his time represented this principle, 
and were therefore dignified by the adjective tane. It is certain, however, 
that when the Polynesian pantheon was intact in earlier times, Tane stood as 
the symbol and embodiment of the male principle in earthly generation in 
just the way that is depicted in the recorded mythology of the Maori who, 
due to their isolation and competent recorders, have passed on to us so 
much of the genuine, original Polynesian thought. Best (14, pp. 13-14) 
writes of Tane: 

He is the Fertilizer, the power that fertilized the Earth Mother and caused her to 
produce vegetation of all kinds. He represents light, and brought light into the world. 
He is the parent of the Dawn Maid, and the renewer of the life and light of Hina, the 
moon. He has many names to accord with his many functions. For instance, as Tane- 
mahuta he represents trees; as Tane-i-tewananga he represents occult knowledge; as 
Tane te Waiora he represents sunlight; and this is the Waiora a Tane of Maori myth, 
in which Hina-uri, the darkened moon, bathes, to return to this world once more young 

and beautiful. "Tane it is who warms the body of the Earth Mother, and is the cause 
and conserver of all life. [Tne is the personified form of the sun.] 

As the universal fertilizer, Tane is naturally credited with having produced trees 
and all plants... 

The generation of the race of men was accomplished in New Zealand after 
the following manner : 

It was now resolved to create woman, and ane the Fertilizer, as representing the 
male element, was appointed to carry out the task. On the body of the Earth Mother he 
fashioned an image in human form—fashioned it of earth, a portion of the body of 
Papa. Into this body, this lifeless form of earth, it was necessary to instil life. The 
spirit (the breath of life) and the mind (the power of thought) were obtained from Io 
the Supreme God. When Tane introduced these, when the breath of life entered the 
nostrils of the earthen image, the life-principle of man took possession of it: breathing 
commenced, the eyes opened, a sneeze broke from the nostrils; the forbear of the ira 
tangata was endowed with life; a person, a female, lived. Woman had entered the world. 

The woman thus fashioned was then impregnated by the god and thus 
was the race of men originated. 

Almost the same story describing the impregnation of the ancestress of 
the human race, who was formed out of a pile of sand, was related of the 
god Tiki in the Marquesas. It will be shown in subsequent pages that the 
character Tiki represents but the personification of the procreative instru- 
ment of Tane. In Hawaiian myth it was Kane, as it was Tane in New Zea- 
land, who played the leading role in creating the first man out of earth or 
Clay 90.2 Vol: 1, p.-62 )- 

Lines from prayers identify the Hawaiian Kane as a general fertilizer 
and vivifier of the earth. In one prayer he is addressed as “Kane, god of 

100 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

” 

the shooting herbs, 
241, 245, 246). , 

Scatter blessings from the heavens, the upper heavens ! 

and in others in the following terms (99, pp. 209-10, 

The prayer is uttered; Kane reigns over all. 
Kane, who arched the heavens, mottled with clouds the whole heavens. 

Oh Kane, transform the earth, 

Oh Kane and Lono! Gods of the husbandmen, 
Give life to the land! 

Pour out abundance! life! life to the land 
Through you Kane, the god of Life! 

The thought in these prayers is echoed in New Zealand when Tane is 
called “Great provider of food” (156, Vol. I, p. 147). The most prominent 
work of Tane as a vivifier in New Zealand, after his creation of man, was 
the origination of the trees which grow on the breast of Mother Earth. 
In the capacity of lord of the forests he was called Tane-mahuta. As forest 
god he was the protector of all things dwelling in the forests and of all 
things fashioned of wood. All the minor woodland deities were under his 
rule (145, pp. 461-2). His position as tree god was intimately associated 
with the part he is said to have played in the drama of the gods when they 
separated Heaven and Earth, for it was Tane, who was to be seen embodied 
in all the tall forest trees whose tops almost touch the sky, who forced the 
Sky Father up and away from the Earth Mother’s breast (20, Vol. XL, p. 
189). In New Zealand single trees, though actually the children of the god, 
were often spoken of as though they were themselves Tane. In speaking of 
one of the prized timber trees, such as the totara, a native would often say, 
“That is your ancestor, Tane” or when a tree had been felled, ““Tane has 
fallen” (op. cit. p. 186). In an identical capacity this god was spoken of in 
Mangaia, Cook Islands, as ‘Tane-of-the-Barringtonia-tree, ‘Tane-piler- 
up-of-wood. Moreover, it was as patron of woodwork that he answered to 
the name, T'ane-shearer-of-thatch, and was embodied and venerated in the 
sacred stone adzes that were used in canoe building and other important 
woodwork (65, pp. 27-33, 229-30). It was Tane-of-royal-face who was 
enshrined in the ceremonial double adz (66, p. 224). The sacred adzes with 
which craftsmen shaped out the coffins for chiefs’ bodies in the Marquesas 
were similarly consecrated to Tane (77, pp. 111-112, 245). In the Society 
Islands, Tane elevated above the earth his father Atea; and he is otherwise 
prominent in the creation mythology. In the cult he was Tane-i-te-haa, the 
patron of carpenters, canoe makers, and house builders (105, Vol. I, p. 453). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 101 

In mythology he early assumes his role as god of adz craftsmen, having as 
his assistants the great ftahwa “Sharpness,” ‘“Feeler,” “Swiftness,” and 
“Canoe-setter” (82). Prior to the historically recent ascension to power of 
Oro as a popular war god, Tane was also the superior patron of many 
temples throughout these islands. It is surprising to discover that in the 
Hawaiian islands Kane seems to have lost his position as forest god in favor 
of Ku who has nothing to do with forests anywhere else. Throughout the 
process of canoe building as it is described by Malo, it was Ku that was 
appealed to, and the word used for the adz was Ku-palalake (99, pp. 160, 
176). The following lines from a chant used in the ritual for carving a 
representation of the god indicate, however, that the sacred ceremonial adz 
had not passed entirely out of Kane’s control, that in the ritualistic lore 
which here, as elsewhere in the religions of many peoples, preserves the 
more ancient ideas in the midst of the new, it had not been forgotten that 
Tane was the lord of the forest and woodworking, and that the sacred adz 
was his (99, pp. 237-8). 

These are the offerings for you oh Kane, 
For the benefit of the carpenter’s adze, 

The woodman’s adze 

The little adze, 

The reversible adze, 

An adze to finish off the image, 

The image of you, oh Kane, the god of life. 

In Samoa the guild of carpenters regard Marama (Light), who is 
possibly to be identified with Tane, as their godly ancestor (80, p. 15); but 
the Tongans are said to have regarded Tangaloa as the patron of carpentry 
GO25p.,593,); 

In New Zealand, the Society Islands, and Hawaii, there is frequent re- 
ference in myth and prayers to “the water of life’? which is practically al- 
ways associated with the name of Tane, the life giving. According to the 
Henry manuscript the ‘“Water-of-life-of-Tane,” spoken of also sometimes as 
the ‘“Water-of-life-of-Taaroa,” signified in the mythology of the Society 
Islands the Milky Way (82). This may have been one of the ancient 
significations of this figurative phrase, but I believe that Best (14, p. 13) 
has revealed in New Zealand myth the original meaning which is “sunlight.” 
In Maori myth it was in the “living water of Tane” that the moon goddess 
bathed and renewed her youth when her strength waned in the dark nights 
of the month. 

. this is the Waiora [wai, water; ora, life] a Tane of Maori myth in which 

Hina-uri, the darkened moon, bathes, to return to this world once more young and 
beautiful. 

102 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 
Tane-te-Waiora was the epithet of the god that referred to his nature 
as sunlight. ‘ 

The presence of the same ideas in Hawaiian worship and myth may be 
shown by various examples. The following are lines from a prayer for 
abundance (99, pp. 205, 208). 

Green are the leaves of God’s harvest fields. 
The net fills the heavens—Shake it! 

Shake down the god’s food! 
Scatter it oh heaven! 

Life to the land! 
Life from Kane, 
Kane the god of life. 

Life to the people! 
Hail Kane of the water of life! Hail! 

Again, in another prayer, are the lines: 

O Kane of the water of life! 
Preserve us thy offspring. 

The following song from Kauai is of peculiar interest. The first two 
verses agree perfectly with the hypothesis that sunlight was meant by the 
“water of Kane,” or at least that this life giving element of nature was 
closely associated with the sun in some way; and the last four verses 
clearly refer to freshwater above, upon, and within the earth. In other 
words this composition is built upon both the figurative and literal meaning 
of the “water of life.’’ The island of Kauai is referred to by Emerson (51, 
pp. 257-9) as “the island which more than any other of the Hawaiian group 
retains a tight hold on the mystical and imaginative features that mark the 
mythology of Polynesia.” 

Toe WATER OF KANE 

A query, a question, 

I put you: 

Where is the water of Kane? 

At the Eastern Gate 

Where the Sun comes in at Haehae; 
There is the water of Kane. 

A question I ask of you: 

Where is the water of Kane? 

Out there with the floating Sun, 

Where cloud-forms rest on 
breast, 

Uplifting their forms at Nihoa, 

This side the base of Lehua; 

‘There is the water of Kane. 

Ocean’s 

One question I put to you: 
Where is the water of Kane? 
Yonder on the mountain peak, 
On the ridges steep, 

In the valleys deep, 

Where the rivers sweep; 
There is the water of Kane. 

This question I ask of you: 
Where, pray, is the water of Kane? 
Yonder, at sea, on the ocean, 

In the driving rain, 

In the heavenly bow, 

In the piled-up mist-wraith, 

In the blood-red rainfall, 

In the ghost-pale cloud-form ; 

There is the water of Kane. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 103 

One question I put to you: One question I ask of you: 
Where, where is the water of Kane? Where flows the water of Kane? 
Up on high is the water of Kane, Deep in the ground, in the gushing 
In the heavenly blue, spring, 
In the black piled cloud, In the ducts of Kane and Loa, 
In the black-black cloud, A well-spring of water, to quaff, 
In the black-mottled sacred cloud of the A water of magic power— 

gods; The water of life! 
There is the water of Kane. Life! O give us this life! 

That the “water of life of Kane” in Hawaiian mythology, as in Maori 
lore, was a figurative expression signifying sunlight, seems to be clearly 
indicated in certain episodes in the story of Aukele-nui-aiku, recorded by 
Fornander (54, Vol. IV, p. 82). According to this legend the hero, 
desiring to secure the means of restoring life to one who was dead flew “in 
a straight line to the rising sun” and, after flying in this course for six 
moons arrived at the “edge of a hole, in the bottom of which was kept the 
water of everlasting life of Kane.” The association in this story of the 
“water of life’ with the sun and its light is so obvious that it seems un- 
necessary to dwell upon it further. 

This beautiful mythological conception which truly combines poetry and 
science presents one of the highest and most perfect products of the fertile 
and gifted Polynesian mind. But let us preserve it in its purity and not fall 
into the error of naming these people “sun worshippers” and stripping Tane 
of all his beauty and dignity by calling him a “sun god” or the “god of the 
sun.” It seems necessary to give this warning emphatically on account of 
the irresistable lure of the “sun cult’? for many students. The conceptions 
that the Polynesian mind crystallized in the figure of Tane were, like all 
the fundamental ideas underlying the Polynesian religious philosophy, 
figurative and abstract, and must be accepted and left as such. Tane may 
have been “the personified form of the sun” as Best puts it (14, p. 13), 
or it may be said that the sun was a symbol of the god, as Hongi has it 
(88, p. 26) but Polynesian religion was not a “sun cult.” If it is so 
called, it must also be named a sea cult, a rock cult, a fish cult, a bird cult, a 
cloud cult, and so on, for other major deities, who were equally as im- 
portant in the worship as Tane, were embodied in these and innumerable 
other forms. 

The most ancient and earliest instance in which I know of Kane’s being 
referred to in mythology is in a Hawaiian myth in which, under the name 
KKane-i-ka-po-loa (Kane-in-the-long-night), he is described as existing as a 
spirit (uwhane) without body, dwelling alone in the immeasurable darkness in 
the dim ages of cosmic evolution even before the world was formed (54, 

Vol Vip. 335). 

104 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Atea takes the place of Tane as progenitor of man in the genealogies of 
the Tuamotu Islands, the Marquesas, and Hawaii. Now it is observable 
that in these places the name Atea does not figure as that of a person in 
the myths of these islands as does that of Tane. I believe that this is an 
example of an epithet which originally belonged to the god Tane coming to 
be regarded as a separate figure. The word atea signifies in general a 
combined idea of “light” and “space.” In the Marquesas it was Atea, the 
bright firmament, who was the male vivifier in nature, playing a part 
corresponding in some ways to that of Tane, in others to that of Rangi in 
New Zealand myth (77, p. 245). ‘Tane’s name appears in Marquesan 
myths but not in the genealogies, which are headed by Atea. In the 
Society Islands Atea is described as the father of Tane. He was the “clear 
sky for the gods to fly through. These were his possessions beneath the 
dome of the sky, the wind, the clouds, the rainbow, the atmosphere and all 
it contains.” That Atea was not the sun itself is clearly indicated by a line 
from one of the chants from this group which describes the sun as “flying 
in the burning expanse of Atea’’ (82). 

It is interesting to note that, while Atea as a proper name does not 
appear to have been known in New Zealand, the Sky Father was sometimes 
called Rangi-atea (88, p. 25). In the Tuamotus, Atea’s name commonly 
heads the lists of the ancestors of man. ‘These two, according to one 
Marquesan account were respectively younger and elder brothers. In both 
the Society Islands and the Tuamotu archipelago Tane and Atea are 
described as waging relentless war upon each other (82). On the island 
of Mangaia it appears that Vatea was distinctly the god of light (145, p. 
461); while on Mauke, Atea is spoken of as the “Spreader” or creator, 
indicating that he held a position corresponding to that in the Marquesas 
(68, p. 135). In Hawaii the names of Wakea and Kane are sometimes 
found closely associated (54, Vol. IV, p. 12), but one genealogy records the 
name of Kane twenty-seven generations before that of Wakea, undeniable 
evidence that in this instance the two figures were regarded as being en- 
tirely separate (op. cit. p. 404). In these islands, however, Wakea played a 
part closely paralleling that of Atea in the Marquesas and Rangi in New Zea- 
land. With Papa he was progenitor of men, and “begetter of islands” in 

which they lived (54, Vol. IV, p. 12). 

In begetting the islands Wakea’s part corresponds to that of Taaroa and 
Tangaloa (who played the part of Sky Father in Tahiti and Samoa). 
According to Dr. Emerson, ““Wa-kea . . . means noon, undoubtedly figur- 
ative of the sky, the light of day, the vivifying influence of the sun... . 
Wakea, it seems needless to remark, is represented to be the vivifying male 
(99, p. 317). It is not possible to state that Atea corre- 

29 

element ... 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 105 

sponded specifically to Tane. In dealing with a religion grounded upon 
such indefinite concepts, it cannot be expected that specific correspondences 
will always be found. But it is certainly evident that Atea, Vatea, and 
Wakea played roles corresponding in part to that of Tane, in part to that 
of Rangi, in New Zealand. Marama, which occurs as the name of a branch 
of the chiefly families in both the Samoan and Society islands may 
originally have been a variant or epithet of Tane, for marama means “light” ; 
and in Samoa it was Marama who is said to have been the traditional 
founder and patron of the woodworkers. 

Tregear has written that Tane was regarded as a celestial deity of good- 
ness and light (145, p. 461), but Best points out that although in the war of 
the gods Whiro, who came to stand for evil as well as darkness, was over- 
come by Tane, the god of light, it must not be inferred that Tane therefore 
stood for or embodied goodness as an ethical concept (14, p. 12). As 
lord of light and life, Tfane was the antithesis of Whiro, the lord of dark- 
ness and death; but it must be remembered always that ethical concepts 
were in only a nascent state in the ancient Polynesian mind. 

There was a widespread belief in the blondness of one of the superior 
gods, but strangely enough it is by no means always the same character who 
is so described. In Hawaii, Kane was believed to be red headed or blond, 
and was therefore sometimes referred to as “red Kane” (154, p. 114); and 
in a prayer he is addressed as “Kane the blond one” (99, p. 237). In the 
Marquesas, the same deity is said to have been “white” and blond haired, 
and to have been the progenitor of the “white” foreigners (/ao’e), in con- 
trast to Atea, the forefather of the native peoples who was brown and 
dark-haired like them (77, p. 245). On Mangaia, it was Tangaroa to whom 
was attributed blondness, his hair being said to be of a red, sandy color. 
Hence it was that the natives of this island concluded that Captain Cook’s 
party were the fair-haired sons of Tangaroa (63, p. 13). In a song from 
Niue, which is just south of Samoa, occurs the line, “red and white art 
thou, O Tangaroa, precious one from the unseen country” (147, p. 235). 
It is said also that on the same island the god Tu was believed to be an 
albino (125, Vol. XI, pp. 195-6). In Tonga, Tangaloa was god of for- 
eigners, but whether he was believed to be blond is unknown to me. The 
fact that Captain Cook was received as Lono (Rongo) in Hawaii may 
indicate that this god as well as Kane was here supposed to be light of 
complexion. Wakea in Hawaii was sometimes spoken of as “the ehu, the 
blond, the bright, the shining one” (99, p. 317). There is much historical 
significance in this attribution of blondness to certain of the superior gods. 
It is entirely unnecessary to resort to the theory of sun gods with golden 

106 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

hair to explain it, for the clue to the real significance of these beliefs is to 
be found in certain racial and cultural facts,now well established. Blondness 
and reddish hair have been known in the case of individuals among the 
people from traditional times, manifesting itself from time to time appar- 
ently in fairly pure blond and light skinned individuals. Concomitant with 
this physical evidence of the presence of elements of a blond type in the 
racial makeup of the Polynesians, there is the fact that lightness of skin was 
everywhere in pre-European times regarded as one of the distinguishing 
marks of chiefly birth. Bleaching of the skin and sometimes the hair by 
various artificial means, and avoidance of exposure to the sun were 
customary with people of rank in all parts of Polynesia. In view of these 
circumstances, physical and social, it is by no means surprising to discover 
the concept of blond ancestral gods among this people in whose veins 
undoubtedly runs the blood of some very ancient Caucasoid progenitors.!? 

It is therefore not necessary to resort to the idea of “sun gods’ to 
explain the concept in question. As a matter of fact, the only deities in 
Polynesian worship that may be specifically called sun gods, La in Samoa, 
Ra in New Zealand, Raa in Tahiti, are in no case, so far as I know, de- 
scribed as light gods in the sense of being light skinned or golden haired. 
The mention of these names will doubtless instantly call from the mind of 
many readers the question, “Is there not here evidence of relationship to 
the Egyptian sun god, Ra’? I believe not, for even the etymological re- 
semblance is superficial, the accepted pronunciation of the Egyptian Ra 
being ray, that of the Polynesian Ra being rah. The suggestion presents 
itself that this word may be identified with the first syllable in the name 
Atea (Vatea, or Wakea), but it is not likely that the stems ra and va are 
of common origin. It is said that the sun was venerated in New Zealand 
as a god named Ra (145, pp. 383-4), but evidently this deity was accorded 
little if any actual worship. In Mangaia, Ra was the sun god in mythology 
as in New Zealand (63, p. 155), and the same is true of La, called usually 
Tangaloa La, in Samoa (92, Vol. I, pp. 392-4). Only in the Society Is- 
lands does Ra or Raa, seem to have had an actual cult. There he was 
appealed to in prayer and temples were built in his honor (29, pp. 43-4), 
and he had a considerable amount of prestige as a war god (48, Vol. I, p. 

285). 

A figure prominent in the lore that has been wholly misunderstood, being 
regarded as an independent mythological character or god instead of a 
symbol, is Tiki. The word “tiki” is used throughout the Polynesian islands 

12’The studies in anthropometry carried on by the Bishop Museum in the past few years have 
revealed the presence in the Polynesian stock of a substratum of Caucasoid blood with blonde tenden- 
cies. (See Sullivan, L. R., Race Types of Polynesia, Am. Anthropologist, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 22-26.) 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 107 

as the term for the carved representation of ancestral deities. In the mytho- 
logy, Tiki figures in the myths of the origin of man as the generator. Now 
one of the prominent characteristics of all representations of ancestral gods 
in human form is the full display of the generative organs. Hongi (87, pp. 
162-3, 199-201) in New Zealand has recently brought out the fact that 
in the Maori lore, Tiki is not a separate character in creation but the name 
or symbol of the procreative power and organ of the godly ancestor of men, 
Tane. ‘Tiki, according to this writer, is the name given to the fertilizing 
power of Tane. I have no desire to state that all figures representing an- 
cestral deities were derived from the same source, but I have long been of 
the opinion with regard to the human figures representing tutelary gods 
in the Marquesas, that their peculiar conventional form, which is never 
varied, results from the fact that each is actually a phallic symbol trans- 
formed into a human figure; or perhaps it should be stated the other way— 
that each is a human figure carved in a form suggestive of a phallus. 
Anyone who examines a number of Marquesan tiki (carved figures) with 
this idea in mind—and it was always the foremost idea in the mind of the 
Marquesan with his procreational philosophy—will be convinced of the 
plausibility of the theory here put forward. 

The mythological character called Tiki, figures in many myths as the 
god who created man; or who impregnated a pile of earth or sand with life, 
thus causing the first woman, Hine-ahu-one (Woman-pile-of-sand) to have 
life; or sometimes Tiki is said to have been the first man himself. (See 44, 
p. 25.) Tiki’s position in the creational lore may be said, therefore, to be 
entirely compatible with the position and meaning given him by Hongi, 
that is to say, with his being the embodiment of Tane’s procreative power. 
That, in the Society Islands, this character was such as Hongi claims him to 
have been in New Zealand, is perhaps indicated in several lines from the 
creation chants (82) which describes him as: 

Ti’i the propagator inland, 

TV’ the propagator seaward. 

That is, Tii the propagator everywhere. The full signification of these 
lines is immediately apparent if Tiki was, as Hongi says, the embodiment 
of the fertilizing power, or perhaps better, the fertilizing instrument, of 
Tane the procreator. 

RONGO, THE HARVEST GOD 

The meanings of the word rongo and its dialectical variants in the 
Polynesian language all have to do with ideas of sound; the word means 
noise, report, rumor, to listen. But few of the most prominent specific 
functions of the god Rongo seem to justify a belief that the meaning of 

108 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 3 4 

the name and the attributes of the god are related as is true in the case 
of Tane, Tu, and possibly Tangaroa. Nevertheless in some cases there is 
unquestionably such relationship, as in the Marquesas where he was patron of 
singing, and in Mangaia where he was usually represented by a great triton 
shell belonging to the king, and was called the Resounder (78; 65, p. 
229). The same deity’s association in the Society Islands with the Arioi 
dancers who were also singers, and his indirect relationship with the hula 
singers and dancers in Hawaii may also be adduced as evidence of the same 
thing. Originally this deity was apparently a rain god. In view of this 
fact, the hypothesis suggests itself, that perhaps he was called Rongo, the 
Sounder, or in the Society Islands Roo-the-resounder (Ro’o-te-roro’o), 
because he was heard in the thunder. There is no direct evidence, however, 
that identifies this deity with thunder; and furthermore it must be said that 
thunder as an accompaniment of rain is a comparatively rare phenomenon 
in Polynesia. Nevertheless, Rongo may have originated in some region 
where thunder was a frequent accompaniment of rain. 

The outstanding function of Rongo is that of patron of cultivated foods, 
a natural role for a rain god. In Maori mythology it is related that in the 
war of the gods following the separation of Heaven and Earth, Rongo, who 
was the lord of the kumara (sweet potato) and the other cultivated foods, 
took refuge in the bosom of the Earth Mother along with Haumia the god 
of the wild fern root and other uncultivated foods (145, p. 424). The 
first temple of Rongo-marae-roa, god of agriculture in New Zealand, is 
said to have been in the form of a building for housing agricultural imple- 
ments (119, p. 127). On Mangaia it is evident that this god discharged the 
same function; for in a chant he is spoken of as the “giver of food” (65, 
p. 219). In Tahiti it was to Oro impersonated by the king that first fruits 
were offered in the seasonal rites, Oro was supposed to have been the 
patron and founder of the mysteries, the purpose of which was to forward 
the fertility of nature (105, Vol. I, pp. 487-9, 502). 

That Oro in the Society Islands corresponds to Rongo, as is here 
assumed, is open to question. In the creation mythology, the character Roo 
unquestionably corresponds to Rongo, both in name and in function. He 
is called the “prayer-chanter” (82) which identifies him definitely with 
Ono (Rongo) in the Marquesas, the patron of chanting and of the ritual 
chanters (tuhuna ’o’ono) (78). Furthermore, Roo’s position as rain god 
seems to be indicated by a reference to him in a Tahitian prayer in which 
the gods of the temple “are- directed to. 2.2 Roo, ... the parent of 
clouds—to the formation and increase of clouds—to the blue cloud, the 
red cloud, and the low hungry cloud, and the horned or pointed cloud”’ 
(48, Vol. I, pp. 342-4). It is therefore to Roo as patron of agriculture, or 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 109 

rain god, that first fruits should have been offered, and it is he that should 
have been the patron of the ceremonial dancers who assisted in forwarding 
the fertility of the land. Roo the “prayer chanter,” should be also the patron 
of the dance, for the ceremonial singing and dancing accompanying each 
other were performed by the same devotees and had both the same patrons 
in Hawaii and the Marquesas. But it was Oro, not Roo, who received 
these offerings in Tahiti in historic times, and it was Oro who was the 
patron of the arioi dancers and the mythical founder of their order. The 
supposition presents itself that the name Oro is merely a variant form of 
Roo. This is not probable. What seems to have happened in Tahiti is 
that the originally distinct god Oro, after gaining a position of political 
ascendancy as a war god, absorbed the functions of Roo whose name so 
closely resembled his. The chief argument against the suggestion that Oro 
was a variant form of Roo is the fact that these two names, or their di- 
alectical variants have existed side by side as independent mythical figures 
in historic times in Tahiti, the Cook Islands, and New Zealand. 

Society Islands traditional history shows that Oro, as a war god was 
first worshipped at Opoa, Raiatea. Here, at the very commencement of 
his cult there was a particular tuft of red feathers spoken of as the Ura to 
which was attributed such power that it was supposed that the chief who 
owned it was invincible in war. Now the tufts of red feathers that were 
used in these islands as sacred talismans were called orooro; the simple 
singular form of the word is oro. The potent feather talisman of Opoa 
known specifically as the Ura (Red) was identified with Oro, the ferocious 
war lord of the Marae Taputapuatea. It is possible that the god’s name 
originated with reference to the Ura as Oro. Many fierce battles were 
fought in the leeward islands over the Ura. In later times the god Oro on 
account of his prowess as a war lord, was introduced into Tahiti and came 
into such favor as to supercede the original patrons of the chiefly families, 
Taaroa and ane, and in the late pre-European history of this island Oro 
is found to be simultaneously the ferocious war lord, the recipient of the 
peacetime harvest offerings, and the patron of the dancers and singers 
whose activities were intended to forward fertility in nature. Therefore 
there can be no question but that Oro in historic times in Tahiti was ful- 
filling the same functions as harvest and fertilizing god as did Rongo in 
New Zealand and Lono in Hawaii. It appears, therefore, that while Oro 
and Roo were distinct in origin, Oro through usurping the main functions 
of Roo in Tahiti may be said to have become identified with him in the later 
Tahitian worship. 

Gill considered Oro and Roo both to be variant forms of Rongo. He 
wrote (63, p. 14) that: 

110 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Ro(ng)o or O Ro was the chief object of worship at Tahiti and the Leeward 
Islands. .. . 

At Atiu Te-rongo, the Rongo, the Rongo of; Mangaia, was represented as a son 
of Tangaroa. At Raiatea Oro was in like manner regarded as a son of the great 
Tangaroa. At Samoa Longo is represented as the son of Tangaroa by Sina. 

Tregear (145, pp. 170, 424) points out the probable correspondence of 
Oro to quite another god, Koro, in Mangaian and Maori myth. On 
Mangaia Koro was the legendary teacher of certain dances (63, p. 100 ff). 
Koro was quite distinct from Rongo as was Oro from Roo in Tahiti. That 
Koro was the same as Oro, at least in the minds of some well informed 
natives, is proved by the fact that when the missionary Williams visited 
Rurutu, Austral Islands, a local chief hearing there was a native missionary 
on board the ship, asked him where was “Koro of Raiatea’’ (159, p. 68). 
Hare Hongi of New Zealand considers the Maori Koro, the god of desire, 
to correspond to the Tahitian Oro (88, p. 26). Etymologically Oro corre- 
sponds to Koro in both the Maori and Cook Islands dialects; and Koro as 
teacher of dancing or god of desire may be classed functionally with Oro 
as the patron of the arioi. There seems to be little doubt, therefore, that 
the Mangaian and Maori Koro was the Tahitian Oro transplanted. The 
evidence from the Cook Islands and New Zealand indirectly sheds light on 
the ultimate origin of Oro and Roo in the Society Islands, for it shows the 
existence of Koro and Rongo as quite distinct figures in the southern groups 
which is weighty evidence in favor of the theory of independent origin of 
Oro and Roo. To sum up the discussion as regards these two names in 
the Society Islands, it appears that while they originally stood for two 
distinct figures Oro came in late times to embody the characteristics and 
functions of both, in view of which it is permissible to speak of Oro when 
he functioned in the capacity of harvest god as correesponding to Rongo. 

The Hawaiian Lono was unquestionably the same as the Maori Rongo, 
being the god of fertility and the harvest. Here in the great Makahiki rite, 
he received first fruit and harvest offerings. (See p. 297.) Prayers used 
in connection with these rites clearly reveal Lono as the god of cultivated 

foods (99, pp. 233, 235). 

Oh Lono of the blue firmament! 

Here are vegetables, here is meat, 

An offering of prayer, a sacrifice, 

An offering of fat things to you, O Lono! 

Let the crops flourish in this ahu-puaa [district]! 

The following quotations reveal the fact that Lono, the god of crops 
was a rain god: 

Send gracious showers of rain, oh Lono. 
Life-giving rain, a grateful gift, 
Symbols of Lono’s blessing .. . 

Handy—Polynesian Religion igs 

Oh Lono of the broad leaf, 

Let the low-hanging cloud pour out its rain, 
To make the crops flourish, 

Rain to make the tapa-plants flourish, 
Wring out the dark rain-clouds 

Of Lono in the heavens. 

These lines from a song express the same idea (54, Vol. IV, p. 94): 

Where the waters are drawn up from the ocean, 
And are again sprinkled by Lonowaimakua [Lono-father-of-waters]. 
O ye rains! O ye rains! 

Other lines from prayers address Lono as embodied in rain clouds: 

O Lono in heaven; you of many shapes. 

The long cloud, the short cloud, the cloud just peeping (over the 
horizon), the widespreading cloud, the contracted cloud.... 

The body of Lono has changed into glory. 

The Kanawao grows in the moist earth; 

The body of that tree stands in high heaven, 

Established is the holy assembly of Lono in the distant sacred place. 

This prayer, which is very long, goes on to describe the “sacred signs 
of the assembly” of Lono, which were thunder, earthquake, wind, clouds, 
rain, and the rushing stream (54, Vol. VI, pp. 508-10). 

It is quite in keeping to find that the patron of agriculture was also 
regarded as the god of peace. It seems to have been a universal rule in 
ancient Polynesia that war was tapu during the first fruits and harvest 
festivals. In Hawaii, for example, the months that were filled with rites 
and festivities in honor of the harvest god were set apart by law and no 
chief was allowed to make war during them. Practically the same rules 
applied in the islands throughout central Polynesia. In both New Zealand 
and Hawaii where Rongo retained most truly his original character and 
functions, blood sacrifice was never offered to him. In the first named 
country Rongo shared with Kahukura the gracious duties of guarding in- 
valids and travellers (145, pp. 424-5; 156, Vol. 1, p. 40; 119, p. 92). To 
me it appears likely that Kahukura and Rongo were originally identical. 
Kahukura appeared as the rainbow; while in Hawai Lono (Rongo) was 
rain god. Furthermore, the name Kahukura when translated means “Red 
Robe,” suggesting both the Hawaiian sacred chiefly garments decorated with 
feathers and the Tahitian feather-covered girdles of royalty that were 
sacred to Oro. Rongo’s role as guardian of invalids in New Zealand was 
paralleled in Hawaii where Lono was regarded as ancestor and teacher of 
all good healing priests (154, p. 99). As Lono-puha his aid was sought in 
the treatment of chronic diseases (99, p. 147-8). A reminiscence of this 
original function of Rongo is echoed in a healing charm from the Cook 

112 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Islands, a line of which reads, “Be healed in the name of Rongo and 
Tavake” (64 p. 69). 

| Both the mythical teachings and rites\ of the religion reveal the fact 
that Rongo was anciently the central figure of a seasonal fertility cult of 
agriculturalists. 

In Hawaii a myth explaining the origin of the annual first fruit rite, 
- called the Makahiki, in which sports and dancing held a prominent place in 
the festivities, related that in ancient times Lono, jealous of another’s at- 
tentions to his spouse, killed his wife and afterwards in a frenzy of grief 
travelled about the island boxing all whom he met (33, p. I1). 

The people astonished, said, “Is Rono entirely mad?” He replied, “I am frantic 
on her account, I am frantic with my great love.’ Having instituted games (The 
Makahiki) to commemorate her death, he embarked in a triangular boat (piama lau) 
and sailed to a foreign land. Ere he departed he prophesied, “I will return in after 
times, on an island [moku may mean ship as well as island] bearing cocoanut-trees, 
and swine, and dogs,” 

When Captain Cook first discovered Hawaii, he was received and 
worshipped as Lono. In prayers the god is frequently referred to as Lono 
from Kahiki (Tahiti or any distant land). ‘The last important feature in 
the Makihiki rite which was in honor of Lono was as follows. The Ha- 
waiian king, impersonating Lono, landed on the shore from a canoe, where- 
upon spearsmen rushed toward him and threw their spears at him. After 
this a canoe laden with food, which was called Lono’s canoe, was towed 
out to sea and set adrift, supposedly to take the food, and perhaps the god 
also, to Kahiki. (See Seasonal Fertility Rites.) 

In this story and in the drama at the close of the Makahiki is pictured 
the seasonal myth of which Lono is the hero, and the pantomimic killing of 
the god. 

With the name of the fertility god were connected the ceremonial singers 
and dancers who played a prominent part in the seasonal rites. The dancing 
order known as the Arioi in the Society Islands were active during the sea- 
son of fertility, exhibiting at the fertilization festivals their dances that 
dramatized the procreational activities of nature. The society or order 
traced its origin to the marriage of the god Oro with an earth maiden, and 
therefore regarded Oro as its patron. In the Marquesas the Kaioi, who 
corresponded to the Arioi in Tahiti, though not organized into a society 
played the same part in the fertility rites. Since they were the singers and 
dancers it may be assumed that Oro was in a sense their patron. 

In these islands it is interesting that the story of Ono, though crude and 
for the most part little suggesting the ideas of a seasonal myth, recounts 
first the fact that the god circulated about the country with a singing and 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 1s 

dancing troupe, demonstrating his prowess in sports; and later describes the 
death of the god and his rebirth. In Hawaii hula dancers corresponded to 
the Arioi society. Like them, they devoted themselves to singing and dancing, 
dramatizing generative concepts. Their founder was the goddess of the 
wildwood, Laka, who was the sister and wife of Lono. (Seasonal Fertility 
Rites. ) 

In consideration of these evidences of various kinds, the conclusion ap- 
pears justified that if the confusing mists enshrouding the Polynesian re- 
ligion could be penetrated and Rongo discovered in his pristine simplicity, 
he would stand revealed as the hero of a seasonal fertility cult who de- 
serves a place beside Osiris, Adonis, and others of the gods of life in 
cultivated nature in the more ancient classical religions. 

TU, GOD OF WAR 

Tu was the war god of the ancient Polynesian cult. The word tu in the 
language means “to stand” and “to strike.” In New Zealand, all war parties 
were sacred to him and he was known by such epithets as Tu-with-the- 
dreadful-countenance, ‘Tu-the-angry, and ‘Tu-the-man-consumer (140, 
p. 123). He was the god of the right or powerful side of man, while 
Rongo, the patron of peace and agriculture, was god of the left side (156, 
Vol. I, Appendix). In the Maori mythology of creation, it was Tu who 
advised his brothers forcibly to separate their parents, the Heaven and 
Earth, so that there might be light and space in which the gods might live 
and move; and after the separation it was Tu alone who was capable of 
standing against the fury of Tawhiri-matea, the Tempest, when this son of 
Rangi and Papa sought to revenge the injury done their parents (145, p. 
540). ‘Tu was likewise the famous war lord of tradition in the Tuamotu 
Islands. In Samoa it is recorded that a coconut wood spear used to be 
borne in the war canoe of a certain village, “as a sign that Tu was with 
them” (152, p. 61). The consecration of war parties to this deity in New 
Zealand finds its counterpart in the Marquesas where it was the custom 
for all those taking part in the rites preceding and following war, including 
priests, their assistants, and warriors, to be known as the Ati Tu, or 
Family of Tu, while they were consecrated to the sacred art of warfare 
(77, p. 131). Strangely enough, this deity’s major function appears to have 
been usurped in the Society and Cook islands by other war lords of more 
recent origin. Nevertheless there is evidence in Tahiti of a memory, at 
least, of the ancient god of war in the naming of the first captive in battle, 
who was always sacrificed as a votive offering, “the-slain-warrior-of-the- 
water-of-Tu” (48, Vol. I, p. 289). In Hawaii this god, known in the local 
dialect as Ku, attained his greatest glory. Regarded from all points of view 

114 Bernice P, Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

he was the dominating figure of the pantheon in these islands. He was, 
first of all, the national war god of the ruling chiefly and priestly dynasty ; 
in consequence of which it was in his honor that the elaborate rite known 
as the “Ritual of the King” was celebrated accompanying the erection of 
the votive war temple called the Luakini (99, p. 210). It was to Ku that 
human sacrifices were offered in war time, as it was to Tu in the Marquesas 
and New Zealand. The full name of Kamehameha’s war god, which he had 
inherited from his ancestors, was Ku-kaili-moku (99, p. 114). 

But this god, under other epithets, served also as patron of several peace- 
ful arts. When canoe builders went to the mountains to find a suitable 
tree for making a new canoe, they appealed to Ku with such epithets as 
“Ku-who-clothes-the-island.” Husbandmen appealed to Ku-ka-ao; bird 
catchers to Ku-huluhulu-manu (Ku-of-bird-feathers), fishermen to Ku-ula 
(Ku-the-red), and sorcerers to Ku-ka-oe. Ku-ula is said to have been a 
deified man, and it is possible that this was true also of some of the other 
patrons named Ku. Chiefs often assumed the name of their patron god 
in Polynesia, having a right to it in the native system of law by reason of 
the fact that they always regarded their patrons as ancestors. 

According to Fornander (55, Vol. I, pp. 61 ff.), the Hawaiians believed in a 
triune godhead called “the one established,’ and “Most excellent, supreme,” 
which, having itself existed from eternity, was made up of Ku, Kane, and 
Lono. Although I believe that the chiefs and priests of Hawaii who had 
Ku for their patron had elevated him to the position of supreme being, I find 
myself unable to give credence to the idea that this trinitarian concept was 
a product of native Polynesian thought, for there is nothing like it or 
vaguely suggesting it that has been truthfully reported from other parts of 
Polynesia. The record of a divine trinity in the Marquesas that came to 
Fornander from a man named Lawson was without question a fraudulent 
invention. (See 77, p. 328-9.) I have no grounds upon which to question 
the existence of the idea of a trinity or triune godhead in Hawaii as re- 
ported by Fornander; but I do question its Polynesian origin and feel 
justified, in view of its dissimilarity with all Polynesian ideas with which 
I am acquainted, in attributing it to some extraneous influence. There is un- 
questionably justification for believing that Tu in his original mythological 
aspect may have represented the idea of stability as Fornander believed. His 
name suggests this; and his part when he is first called forth by Taaroa to 
assist in creation according to the Society Islands account indicates that he may 
have stood for this concept there. His role here may furnish a clue also as 
to the reason for Ku’s place as patron of wood workers in Hawaii, for in 
the Society Islands lore Tu is described as the great artizan (tahua) who 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 115 

served the creator by shaping the earth, which is figuratively referred to as 
a canoe (82). Tangaloa himself was referred to as the artificer (tufunga) 
of the earth in Tonga and Samoa. It is strange that Tu, as the original 
tahua in the mythology of the Society Islands should not have been the 
patron of canoe makers in that group instead of Tane. 

Before leaving the discussion of these figures in the pantheon it may 
be pointed out that it is possible that the names of these three Sons of 
Heaven may originally have been mere epithets descriptive of the Sky itself 
as a personalized mythical figure. Tu may have been descriptive of its 
elevated and stable position—which is specifically referred to in the 
mythology—after its separation from Earth; Tane to its male function as 
the Sky Father; Atea to the illuminated sky of daytime; and Rongo to the 
reverberation of the heavens when it thundered and rained. ‘That is, the 
Sky may originally have been Rangi-tu, Upstanding-sky; Rangi-tane, Male- | 
sky; Rangi-atea, Illuminated-sky; and Rangi-rongo, Resounding-sky. The, 
Sky was sometimes referred to in New Zealand as Rangi-atea, Widespread- 
sky, and Atea is known elsewhere to have become an independent figure or 
a substitute for Rangi. This, then, is an example of an epithet’s coming 
to be regarded as another character. What happened in the case of Atea 
may well have happened to those who are sometimes described as his brothers 
or descendants, Tu, Tane, and Rongo. 

TANGALOA 

The god Tangaloa is the one Polynesian god who appears in all the 
main island groups as a deity of prime importance in both worship and 
myth. In those groups in central and west Polynesia which were probably 
the nuclear centers of recent cultural diffusion, this name has in historic 
times been given as that of the Creator and Supreme Being. In both 
Samoa and the Society Islands he is said to have dwelt alone in the im- 
mensity of space before anything else existed, and to have brought into 
being the world and the universe and all in them. The Samoan and Ta- 
hitian creation chants have strikingly similar beginnings. The Samoan 
commences: “The god Tangaloa dwelt [alone] in the Expanse,’ and the 
Tahitian, “He existed, Taaroa was his name. In the immensity... 
Existing alone, he became the universe” (56, p. 166; 44, p. 11). In the 
Samoan chant, the god is spoken of as the tufunga, which is translated 
“carpenter” and “builder.’’ The latter translation, understood figuratively, 
is undoubtedly the correct one, for as creator the god was the master 
builder (tufunga) of the universe. The former translation of tufunga as 
“carpenter” gives a wholly wrong sense, and doubtless explains the modern 
habit of speaking of Tangaloa as the “‘god of carpenters” (57, p. 31). In 

116 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

the lore of the Society Islands the god Tu is described as the great tahua, 
which Miss Henry translates as “artizan,’ who aided Taaroa in creating the 
world. The main features of the creation stories of the Society and 
Samoan islands have been described in the section on Cosmogony. In Raro- 
tonga Taaroa was believed to have been the creator, as in Tahiti, Samoa, and 
Tonga (62, Vol. II, p. 14). 

In the groups of islands lying in the outer regions of the area, this deity 
although still a prominent figure among the gods, is never spoken of as 
Supreme Being or creator. In both New Zealand and the Marquesas the 
part assigned to him is that of lord of the ocean. In the former region he 
was incorporated into the cosmogonic myths as one of the sons of Rangi 
and Papa who took part in the drama of creation when the Sky Father 
was separated from and elevated above the Earth Mother. Incapable of en- 
during the fury of his brother Tawhiri, the Tempest, after the separation 
of their parents, Tangaroa sought refuge in the ocean, which has been his 
domain ever since. The living creatures of the sea are the children of 
Tangaroa (70, pp. 5-6). It is striking, and significant, that in the groups 
discussed above in which this deity was given a more exalted position, the 
other element beside the god spoken of as existing before all other things is 
the vast expanse of waters, or the ocean. One eminent New Zealand 
authority, Hare Hongi, writes that Tangaroa was the “Lord of the Milky 
Way,” and not of the ocean as is generally supposed. In the same article 
he says that another of the Maori gods, Rehua, “the brightest of the Sons 
of the Sky-Father,’’ who was seen in the star Sirius, made his appearance 
through the dark hole seen in the sky near the Southern Cross (88, pp. 25- 
26). In Tahiti the old belief was that this dark spot near the Southern 
Cross was a hole made in the vault of the sky by the foot of Taaroa, and 
that the piece of the sky that fell down upon the sea stretched below, is 
the island Raiatea (79). This would seem to prove that the sky is the 
shell of the egg from which the creator emerged, the primal yolk of which 
might have been the sea, which preceded the land as the embodiment of 
Nature Inferior. The striking similarity of this concept of the egg to the 
cosmic egg of other ancient mythologies should not lead students to put 
too much stress on it. The concept does not hold an important place in 
the cosmogonies of any other islands in Polynesia; and it is an obvious 
simile which inventive priests might very well come upon for themselves, 
and which because of its attractiveness as an explanation of the origin of 
things might pass easily through the transition from simile into dogma. The 
incident in Tahitian creation of the emergence of ‘Taaroa from the 
primeval egg may even be nothing more than an echo of the theory of 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 117 

emergence of the gods from between Heaven and Earth when they were 
thrust apart. 

To return to the discussion of Tangaroa as god of the ocean, known 
in the Marquesas as Tanaoa, he figured largely in both myth and religion as 
god of the sea. He was called Te Fatu Moana (The Lord of the Ocean) 
which finds an interesting correspondence in the Society Islands genealogies 
at the beginning of which the name Te-fatu frequently occurs. In New 
Zealand it is said that when Tangaroa fled to the sea, some of his children 
deserted him and took refuge with his brother Tane, lord of the forests, 
becoming the reptiles of the land (the lizards). It is interesting to find that 
in Samoa the lizard, although sometimes regarded as a separate deity named 
Pili, is said probably to have been an incarnation of Tangaloa; and further, 
to find that the lizard was venerated as a protector of fishing, and that 
offerings of fish were called the “fish of Tangaroa” (32, p. 257). In the 
Marquesas Tanaoa was the great patron of the fishing industry, having 
shrines erected near the fishing grounds where fish were offered to him. 
Many minor deities were associated with the industry but his name is 
prominent in examples of the chants or spells used by fishing expeditions 
(77, pp. 165, 246). ‘Taaroa was likewise a patron of fishermen in Tahiti, 
as is evidenced by the fact that in the district of Taiarapu there was a 
stone that was believed to be “possessed with the spirit of Ta’a-roa” to 
which fishermen prayed. This stone was “the fishermen’s god of that 
region, and fish were presented to it” (82). In Hawaiian myth and 
worship there is little to show that originally this deity, there known as 
Kanaloa, was associated particularly with the sea. As patron of fishing, 
he was superseded by a deified legendary character named Ku-ula. Almost 
the only evidence of his being connected with the sea is his association 
with the octopus in the Kumulipo chant in which he is spoken of as “the 
octopus” (146, p. 42). Although the octopus was sacred in Samoa, the 
Society and the Marquesan islands, I never have heard that it was identified 
with Tangaroa. In Hawaii, instead of being regarded as the originator of 
the universe, Kanaloa is said, according to Fornander’s account, to have 
been a miscreator who made an abortive attempt at creating man, following 
which he led a revolt against the other original gods which ended in his 
being cast into the lower regions (55, Vol. I, pp. 83-4). According to 
Fornander Kanaloa in the older legends is referred to as god of the infernal 
regions, sometimes distinct from, sometimes the same as, Milu (55, Vol. 
III, p. 10). Kanaloa, as an outcast from the heaven world, dwelling in 
the lower regions, according to this account seems to correspond to Whiro 
in New Zealand. This may represent some priestly teaching in Hawaii, 
but it does not reveal the general attitude toward Kanaloa, for neither 

118 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

myths in general nor the worship reveal the theory of this deity’s being 
a “fallen angel,’ as Fornander puts it. In prayers Kanaloa is repeatedly 
appealed to as a beneficent deity, along with Ku, Kane, and Lono; and his 
name with these three is mentioned by Malo as one of the four major de- 
ities venerated by chiefs and people, it being said that he had two days in 
each moon set aside to be especially devoted to his worship (99, pp. I12, 

114, 58). 
OTHER SUPERIOR DEITIES 

In the Polynesian pantheon, there was only one female deity who may 
justly be said to have had a place among the superior deities. Hina, the 
moon goddess, figures largely in both myth and worship. Tregear con- 
sidered that “Hina was by far the best known of all Polynesian legendary 
personages” (145, p. 69). She filled the important position of being the 
first woman in creation, the ancestress of men and had innumerable mythical 
adventures. Hina sometimes appears in the actual worship as a patron of 
womankind and women’s activities. It is related that in Rarotonga the 
goddess came down from the sky to teach women games, mat_ plaiting, 
net making, and tapa beating (112, p. 155). I have been told in Hawaii 
that there it was customary formerly for women to say a morning prayer to 
Hina. 

Another very prominent figure in mythology, who certainly was as well 
known as was Hina, is Maui, the culture hero of the mythology in all the 
islands. His exploits and adventures belong rather to the realm of folk- 
lore than religion, although his name occasionally appears in a prayer. In 
the Tahitian lore, Maui is said to have been first high priest of the gods 
(82). But on the whole, Maui is to be characterized as culture hero rather 
than as a god. He is accredited with such exploits as stealing fire from the 
fire god below the earth, catching on his great fishook and pulling up from 
the bottom of the sea some of the islands on which the people lived, noos- 
mg the sun with a rope of hair in order that the day might be longer to 
enable him to finish his work. His last and noblest exploit in Maori 
mythology, one in which he lost his life, was his attempt to destroy death by 
entering the womb of the ‘“‘Great-lady-of-night,” the goddess of death who 
dwelt in the underworld. 

The lord of fire in the underworld was Mahuike, who appears in the 
myths of some islands as an old man, in those of others as an old woman. 
It was from this keeper of the fire that Maui, who is commonly spoken of as 
related to him, stole the fire. Mahuike was without doubt the god of 
vulcanism in the ancient pantheon. In Hawai, where volcanic activity and 
the lurid evidences of the fires below the earth were most vividly in evidence 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 119 

before the eyes of the people, Pele and not Mahuike was the goddess of 
fire. The Halemaumau, the lava pit in the volcano Kilauea, was the 
house of Pele. The great prestige of Pele as an object of worship was 
limited to the Hawaiian people, but she was known elsewhere also. In 
Rarotonga she was, according to the mythology, the daughter of Mahuike, 
and fire was referred to either as the “fire of Mau-ike” or the “fire of Pere” 
(124, p. 74). The name occurs in Tahitian mythology (82). According to 
Smith, in Maori mythology: 

Pare-whenua-mea is emblematical of the traditional deluge, and for the destruc- 
tion of the face of nature caused thereby. She is also identical with the Hawaiian 

goddess Pele (which, through known letter changes, is the same as Para), goddess 
of volcanic fires (119, p. 159). 

As remarked in the descriptions of the underworld, Miru appears to 
have been the ancient name of the lord of the realm of shades. In New 
Zealand and the Cook Islands, Miru is spoken of as goddess of Reinga or 
Hades (73, p. 112; 123, p. 59). The land of shades of the ancient Ha- 
waiians was known as “Milu” or the “pit of Milu,”’ because the region was 
ruled by the god of this name (99, p. 154). In Tahiti the underworld was 
sometimes called Miru (48, Vol. I, p. 397). 

According to one eminent authority, Miru in New Zealand lore was but 
a door keeper at the entrance to one of the underworlds (88, p. 27). 
Whiro was actually the lord of the whole lower realm of nature, the 
realm of darkness. This god is described as the lord of darkness in no 
other mythologies except that of the Maori, but I believe the position 
that Whiro holds in that to be the original one belonging to him, by reason 
of the fact that his name appears as that of the darkest night of the moon 
in four of the calenders of the more important island groups, exactly as 
the names of the four chief major gods (Tangaroa, Tane, Rongo, and 
Tu) appear in these calenders as names of other nights or days which 
were evidently anciently consecrated to them. This occurrence of Whiro’s \ 
name, and the fact that in the New Zealand myths he is one of the sons of 
Heaven and Earth, justifies the classification of this deity with the great 
ones of the major pantheon. According to Maori teachings, Whiro came 
to be the lord of darkness death, and the underworld in this wise. After 
Heaven and Earth had been separated by Tane, he and Whiro disagreed as 
to which had the right to ascend to the highest heaven to bring down the 
knowledge of celestial things to the earth. Both deities ascended seeking 
the “baskets of knowledge,” the sacred talismans (whatu), and the sacred 
fire, from the Supreme Being. ‘Tane, whose right it was, secured these 
necessities for life on earth; whereat his disappointed and enraged brother, 
waged a terrific war upon him, which ended by Whiro’s being cast from the 

120 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

heavens into the lower world by “the compelling currents of death” (128, p. 
143). Ever after his downfall, this outcast from heaven was the enemy 
of men, the children of Tane, as the lord of darkness, of death, of sickness 
and witchcraft, in fact as the arch demon who dispensed all evils which 
afflict mankind. On the island of Mangaia, Iro (Whiro) was the patron 
of thieves, a natural secondary function of the lord of darkness (64, p. 49; 
63, p. 126). Early visitors to the Society Islands describe Hiro as being 
worshipped there by robbers as the patron (105, Vol. I, p. 440), especially 
at the time of the change of the moon (153, Vol. I, pp. 186-7). In both 
the Society and Cook islands, a character of this name appears as hero of 
many legends which recount his exploits as an adventurer and voyager. I 
am inclined to believe that this Hiro or Iro was a chief named after the 
god, for there is little doubt that he was a historic character of fairly late 
time. 

There are a number of other characters that were famous in the 
mythology or legendary lore of the islands, but who being seldom if ever 
invoked in worship, are of little interest or significance here. Among these 
was Rata, famous as a voyager and occasionally appealed to in connection 
with canoe building and fishing. Another famous hero of legend, some- 
times associated with fishing, was Tinirau; and others were Turi the ex- 
plorer, Tupa the builder of rocks, and Kae, the adventurer with his great 
whale. Besides these, are many names that appear in the worship and lore 
of various islands which find occasional correspondences in other parts of 
the region; and there are many local adventurers whose exploits resemble 
those recounted in episodes of legends in other islands in such a way as to 
indicate generic relationship. Many of these characters were undoubtedly 
figures of minor importance in the worship and lore of the ancient Polynesians, 
others were but local characters. To determine which of these are truly 
ancient characters of the original cult would require an exhaustive analysis 
of the folklore, mythology, and prayers. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 121 

MODE OF WORSHIP 

OBJECTS VENERATED 

In the old Polynesian vocabulary were two words, tiki, (figure, design, 
symbol) and toko (staff) that were applied to the objects commonly 
termed “images,” or “idols.’2% 

Tiki was applied more particularly to the figures carved in human and 
animal form representing gods of lesser _magnitude—group, family, and 
individual patrons. The word tiki never means image, an idea that was 
expressed in the old dialect by quite another word, ata. In modern usage 
tiki signifies figure, design. Falling back again on the old mythology as a 
guide to original meanings, apparently in the beginning the word meant 
symbol—probably specifically phallic symbol—or figure or design repre- 
senting a procreating human progenitor, referring back always to the 
ultimate origin of man from Tane through Tiki and Hina. 

The word toko was applied in New Zealand to the miniature “god 
sticks” representing the major deities. In Tahiti the corresponding term 
too designated post-like figures or smaller sennit covered stakes that repre- 
sented or were emblematical of the greater gods. The same term is found 
in the mythology of New Zealand and the Marquesas denoting the supports 
believed to hold the heavens above the earth, and “rootstocks” at the founda- 
tion of the world (145, pp. 528-9; 78). The reduplicated forms also 
signified the sacred staves, the insignia of chiefs in the Society Islands and 
the Marquesas. But while toko also means stick or staff and mere chance 
may have led to its use in these various connections, | believe that a deeper 
significance lies in the naming of the representations of the superior gods 
and the insignia of chiefs “sacred staves,’ for in Polynesian religious 
philosophy both the heaven-born gods and divine chiefs were in a sense 
regarded as supporters of the heavenly realm in its relationship to the 
earth. 

Distinguished ancestors and heroes who received worship were frequently 
represented by conventionalized statues, or in New Zealand, by bas-reliefs. 
The Marquesans, being naturally adept at carving, made large figures of 
wood or stone representing their deified chiefs and priests. Such figures 
were prominent features of the tribal temples. One of the most imposing 

13’To speak of the sacred carved figures as idols would be improper, for as Tregear has pointed 

out, it is doubtful that any representation of deity in the islands was an “‘idol’’ in the sense of being 

“a worshipped image that could of itself work miracles or confer benefits. There was always the 
spiritual creature behind it’ (149, pp. 480-1). 

122 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

was the stone figure of the chief Takaii of the Naiki tribe, which still 
stands in the somber gloom of his sacred, grove on the platform of the 
main temple in the valley of Puamau, Hivaoa. This figure is about eight 
feet high, carved in the square and massive Marquesan convention with 
cylindrical head, mouth, nose, and eyes in low relief; short, broad body with 
hands clasped across the stomach, and heavy short legs carved in a semi- 
squatting position. The most imposing relics of the stone carving of the 
Polynesians are the immense monumental busts, the largest one, seventy 
feet high, erected by the Easter Islanders (143, p. 495). Conventional 
wooden figures were likewise made to represent ancestors in the Society 
Islands and New Zealand. In western Polynesia however, carved repre- 
sentations of ancestors appear to have been less in use in historic times 
than elsewhere in Polynesia; but Wilkes reports that in Samoa carved 
blocks of wood and stone were set up in memory of chiefs and worshipped 
(158, Vol. II, p. 139). Such representations of deity were for the most 
part, merely temporary shrines into which gods could be induced to enter 
when their services were required for purposes of divination or for dis- 
pensing mana. At such times these objects or instruments were made new 
or refurbished, and consecrated, as were the places of worship. They were 
revered with all the awe that the visible presence of the god himself would 
have inspired but at other times the only sanctity accorded to the object was 
that which pertained to any paraphernalia devoted to the service of the gods. 

Ellis wrote as follows of too in Tahiti and the adjacent islands (48, Vol. I, 
PP. 337-8). 

Into these they supposed the god entered at certain seasons, or in answer to 
the prayers of the priests. During this in-dwelling of the gods, they imagined even 
the images were very powerful: but when the spirit had departed, though they were 
among the most sacred things, their extraordinary powers were gone. 

I had repeated conversations with a tahua-tarai-too, a maker of gods, whom I 
met with on a visit to Raiatea..... It was not, he said from the alteration his 
tools had effected in the appearance of the wood, or the carving with which they 

were ornamented, but because they had been taken to the temple, and were filled 
with the atua, that they became so powerful... 

When invoked, the patron spirit was evidently supposed to descend into 
the figure representing him in much the same way as a spirit was believed 
to enter into the body of a prophet and possess him. In the Marquesas 
the native phrase used to describe the entry of a god into his human vessel 
was haatopa te etua (to cause the god to fall) (77, p. 265). In Tahiti, 
an identical conception, faaiho (to cause to descend), signified a rite for 
inducing the descent of a deity into his representation. 

The following extract from a journal of Dr. G. P. Judd, written in 
1834, recording a conversation with the former high priest of the native 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 123 

cult is an apt illustration and direct evidence of the same idea in the Ha- 
waiian islands. 
In conversation with Hewahewa today he said... that they made the idol and 

presented offerings hoping the spirit would descend and take possession of the idol 
and give answer to their auguries as to the pono (right) and the hewa (wrong). 

In New Zealand and Tonga the custom of referring figuratively to the 
medium as a “canoe” illustrates the same conception of the entry of the 
god. The Maori sometimes’ spoke of their inspirational prophets as waka, 
canoes (21, p. 41), while in Tonga, according to Colocott (38, p. 155): 

The Tongan words used to express the presence of the god in the object sacred 
to him signifies his “coming in” it, or “using it as a boat”... 

The elemental gods who embodied the phenomena of nature, though 
regarded as personalities, were not conceived to have human forms. Rangi, 
the sky-father, in New Zealand, though apparently animated by human 
sentiments and passions, was never referred to in any way that would 
indicate that he was thought to have human form. Rangi was the Heaven 
extending over the Earth, a conscious, living being having his own peculiar 
form. Actually, Polynesian ideas represent a reversal of the belief usually : 
attributed to peoples in a corresponding phase of religious development. 
Here, instead of conceiving the elemental gods to be anthropomorphic, the 
old teaching attributed divinity to certain human beings, the hereditary 
chiefs. Where, however, the creational, in contrast to the evolutionary, 
theory of the origin of the world is stressed, simple anthropomorphic con- 
ceptions appear. This was true of Tahiti that Taaroa, the creator, was here 
thought of as anthropomorphic is evidenced by myths describing his break- 
ing through the sky and standing upon Raiatea, and by the fact that carv- 
ings in human form were made of him. ‘This type of belief probably re- 
sults from late, extraneous influence in Tahiti, which obscured and con- 
fused the old mythical teaching and substituted the name of Taaroa for 
that of the original Supreme God, Iho. But even the figures said to be 
“images” of Taaroa were intended to symbolize rather than to depict the 
supposed form of the god. Moerenhout wrote (105, Vol. I, p. 471): 

The images of Atuas [the greater cosmogonic deities] were made with much 
less care than those of the Tii [the lesser guardians, probably ancestral], their in- 
feriors.... The reason is that the images were not the true emblems of divinity. 
In several islands they did not have them; and when they had, as in Tahiti, they 
were but the tabernacles where were deposited what represented the gods, that is to 

say, red feathers, the maro ura, and other objects of the same kind, the only true 
symbols of divinity, that which alone represented it, in all the islands. 

Symbolic rather than literal form and decoration were given to the repre- 
sentations of such of the elemental gods as were worshipped. A striking 

124 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

example of symbolism in carving is exhibited in a figure from Rurutu 
representing the creator, Taaroa, a copy of which is in the Bishop Museum. 
On this anthorpomorphic figure all the features of the face and other protu- 
berant parts of the body are represented by small human figures carved in 
high relief, symbolizing the relationship of the creator to the other gods 
who emanated from him and to whom he delegated various functions. Of 
this Ellis wrote (48, Vol. I, pp. 354-5): 

In addition to the number of images or demigods forming the features of his 
face, and studding the outside of his body, and which were designed to show the 
multitudes of gods that had proceeded from him; his body is hollow, and when 
taken from the temple at Rurutu, in which for many generations he had been 
worshipped, a number of small idols were found in the cavity. They had perhaps 
been deposited there, to imbibe his supernatural powers, prior to their being removed 

to a distance, to receive, as his representatives, divine honors. The opening to the 
cavity was at the back; the whole of which, might be removed. 

Some of the diminutive Maori “god sticks,” called toko, show an inter- 

esting symbolism. A set described by White (156, Vol. I, p. 2) consisted 
of small sticks only a few inches high, each with a knob on top, and each 
having a characteristic shape of shaft. The stick representing Tu, the war 
god, was straight, standing erect ‘as Tu did at the deluge.” The symbol 
representing Tawhiri, the god of the tempest was “not unlike a corkscrew, 
to represent the whirling of the winds and clouds when Rangi attacked Tu 
at the time of the deluge.” The lord of the sea, Tangaroa, was symbolized 
by “a zigzag form, not unlike the teeth of a saw, to represent the waves of 
the sea.” ‘The stick representing Tane, the forest lord, “had a semicircular 
bend at half its length, on either side of which it was straight. This bend 
represented the swelling and growth of bulbs, shrubs, and trees.” The 
stick of Rongo, the god of the sweet potato, “was in rounded wave-lines 
along its whole length, to represent the growth of the tuberous kumara as 
it raised the earth in little mounds.” Lastly, the toko (stick) of Haumia, 
the god of the fern root “had three half-circles bending in one direction” 
which represented “the irregular and twisted form of the fern-root when 
newly dug up.” 

It is interesting to note that the convention followed in carving the heads 
which adorned the tops of some of the Maori “god sticks” is that of the 
“figure eight” mouth which is typical of the Hawaiian convention (89, p. 
99). The Hawaiian figures exhibiting this convention were probably both 
symbolic and literal in their meaning. A well known type represents the 
god with squat legs and body, open mouth carved in the form of a figure 
eight lying flat, and with an overhanging crest on top of the head and over 
the brow, demoniacal in appearance and well calculated to fill the followers 
of the king and his enemies alike with fear and respect. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 125 

The portable figure of the war god Kukailimoku, made of wicker-work 
covered with feathers, was similarly awe-inspiring, having a rapacious 
looking mouth lined with sharp teeth, an appropriate symbolism for the 
eater of sacrifices. 

Some Polynesian figures were given the form of the animal in which 
the spirits they stood for were supposed to manifest themselves. They 
depicted not the form of the spirit itself, but that of its incarnation. 
Naturally it would be supposed that a god could be most easily induced to 
come into a figure in the form which he had chosen himself. A temple in 
Tahiti was consecrated to a deity who appeared as a lizard; and here the 
god was represented by a stone figure carved in the form of a lizard. 

Other animal-like figures were purely symbolical. The Hawaiian god, 
Lolupe, “the deity who took charge of those who spoke ill of the king, 
consigning them to death, while the souls of those who were not guilty of 
such defamation he conducted to a place of safety,” was a kite, made sup- 
posedly of cloth stretched on a frame “in the shape of a fish, with wings, 
tail, etc.” (99, pp. 114-5, 141, 143). In the Marquesas, the god who was 
likewise thought to conduct the souls of dead chiefs and priests heaven- 
ward was represented by some sort of artificial figure of a bird placed in or 
on the temples. The stone fish gods in the same islands were commonly 
carved in the form of fishes. 

Certain of the symbols or representations were sacred or powerful in 
themselves as charmed mediums. To this class belongs a peculiar form of 
the emblem typical of Tahiti—a small stick of wood pointed at the lower 
end, bound with cloth and feathers, over which is plaited a tight mesh of 
coconut fiber covering all but the pointed end. 

Two features characteristic of these Tahitian objects, which are called 
by the same term as are the Maori god sticks, are typical also of some of 
the representations of the superior gods in other islands: red feathers 
adorned some of the large figures of major deities in Hawaii, Tahiti (48, 
Vol. I, pp. 338-9), the Cook Islands (62, p. 13; 65, p. 173), Niue (725, 
Vol. XI, p. 176), and New Zealand (140, pp. 211-12), and doubtless else- 
where also; and these figures were. sometimes bound with sennit cord (46, 
ser, 3, pl. 158). Feathers were sacred emblems; and the sennit, presumably 
plaited and applied ceremonially, probably had the same purpose as when it 
was used in witchcraft to spell-bind the victim. 

In Central Polynesia there was a considerable use of emblems such as 
elaborately carved clubs, paddles, or adzes. “Tane-of-the-royal-face” in 
Mangaia, in his capacity of patron of woodwork, was “enshrined in a 
sacred triple axe, which symbolized the three priestly families on the island, 

126 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

without whose aid the gods could not be acceptably worshipped” (66, pp. 
223-4; 48, Vol. I, pp. 354-5). Most of these ceremonial adzes have very 
large handles which are square in cross-section, broadening toward the lower 
end or base, the whole handle consisting of a most elaborate system of 
openwork carving of designs representing highly conventionalized. human 
figures and sharks’ teeth (66, p. 223). On the same island, Tane, with 
another epithet and in a capacity which also evidently had to do with 
woodwork, was represented by sennit lashings. Tane was represented also 
by figures carved in human form, and was seen in birds, in sprats, and in 
the planets Venus and Jupiter (65, pp. 229-230). 

In Tahiti developed the custom of substituting single red feathers or 
bunches of red plumes for carved representations of deity. In a sense 
these are symbols of the gods, but it is probably more accurate to speak of 
them as talismanic mediums of divine power. Moerenhout writes (105, Vol. 
1, p. 474) concerning the use of these red feather emblems by the Tahitians 
that : 
threatened by danger of some kind, they hasten to seek them, believing that their 
presence would suffice as a guarantee of the aid; and at sea, when a storm is ap- 
proaching, they hold them toward the horizon from which the storm is coming, 
and order it to retire, either in the name of these emblems, or in the name of the 
divinities which they represent. 

The feathers or tufts of feathers here referred to were impregnated 
with divine power by contact with a figure of a god. 

The ancestral gods of the second order—that is, deified human beings who 
were tutelary deities of groups, families, or individuals—in addition to 
being represented by carved figures were believed to have incarnations in 
animate forms. It is significant that in the islands in which the animate 
incarnations were most prominent, notably Tonga and Samoa, carved 
representations were least used. ‘This unquestionably evidences the effect 
of intrustive cultural influences; but though the contrast is very marked 
there is no clear-cut cleavage, for carved figures were to some extent used 
in Tonga and Samoa, and belief in animate and inanimate incarnations is 
found throughout Polynesia, though nowhere else playing so dominant a 
part. Group, family, and individual tutelary gods were thought in Tonga, 
Samoa, Cook Islands, and New Zealand to be incarnate in various animate 
forms such as the dog, heron, rail, owl, cuttle-fish, and the eel. Omens 
were taken from the movements of the animals, and the killing and eating 
oi them) was tapu: (152, p. 233.38, p. 227703, p. 32). 

In the Maori dialect the word aria denoted the form of incarnation or 
embodiment of a god. Best (15, pp. 16-17) defines the word as being ap- 
plied to: 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 127 

the conception of a material representation of an immaterial being or condition; thus 
the aria of an atua is its form of incarnation, the form in which it is visible to 
mortal eyes. . ; : 

We do not hear of the superior gods possessing any aria, but only inferior ones. 
In many cases such a visible form of an atua was a lizard, in some cases a bird. 
Among the Tuhoe folk, lizards, birds, the whe (mantis), dogs, stars, meteors, and 
the rainbow were viewed as aria of inferior gods. In one case a lock of hair repre- 
sented an atua. 

In Tahiti individuals had their patrons incarnate in single animate and 
inanimate objects. Henry writes (82) that: 
each individual had a secret patron spirit represented by something within or close by 
the marae, such as a tree, snail, lizard, or stone, to which invocations were made at 
any time. 

In Tahiti a most interesting conception existed regarding the relation- 
ship of certain animal species to gods. According to the Henry man- 
uscript (82), certain animal types or species were spoken of as the ata. Thus 
the boar was the afa of Oro the war god, and the dog of Toahiti. The sea 
gull was the ata of Tane. Different kinds of lizards were the ata of various 
gods. ‘The turtle is described as the ata of the gods of the ocean. But 
Taaroa, the creator, had the greatest variety of afa. The whale, tropic 
bird, parrot fish, and the albatross are all described as his ata and the ray 
fish is spoken of as the “swimming temple of Taaroa.” It is said that men 
swamped in a canoe at sea, seeing an albatross would cry out (82), 

Oh my god Taaroa! 
Cause the sea to be calm and navigable, 
Permit us to reach the land, the women and children. 

It is difficult to understand just what was meant in the use of the word 
ata, which literally signified “reflection,” in this connection. The word sug- 
gests that the animal form was a sort of materialization of the god’s form. 

And yet if this were the conception, how could Taaroa materialize in 
such a variety of forms? Apparently, the conception was close to that 
expressed by the word aria, which in New Zealand certainly signified in- 
carnation. The statements that “the rat... was a shadow (ata) of 
ghosts,” that owls were the ata of voracious ghosts, and green pigeons ata 
of ghosts which haunted the woods, indicate that the ata was not a materi- 
alization of the form of the psychic being, for ghosts had human form. 
The term ata was also used in Samoa in a sense similar to that of the 
Society Islands. I have no record of such usage elsewhere. 

It is almost unnecessary to point out that these types of belief in in- 
carnation were obviously symptoms of totemism. The veneration of 
animal forms as embodiments of individual patron spirits or gods is ob- 
viously not genuine totemism. But when social groups are found venerat- 

At 

; i ADIN LA Arq hk a — ONcak bos 
~ es Eke \n A Be Rice 4 SON og a ss 
N ry ee Ae ON Aaa eRe, | Admin tansog a ps Wee Ad Te, 
As : yin, mane COW Aten Amten Te } ES ak A vail] 4 : f sy ) 
i ood eae = eS ONE, penn 4 Pigeent }- Se 
128 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

ing types of animals as species, rather than single animals as individual in- 
carnations, with tapu on killing and eating the species, then it is evident that 
totemistic influence is strongly at work. (See Ethnographic Considerations. ) 

An interesting variant manifestation, which on the surface appears to be 
more like the Samoan and Tahitian near-totemism than it actually is, is 
found in the Marquesas. There, certain animals were tapu to members of 
particular tribes, each tribe having a few such species. But this tapu was 

“~founded not on the belief that the animals were incarnations of their gods, 

but on the fact that they were types of food consecrated to the tribes’ 
tutelar deities. (See 77, pp. 262-3.) Thompson writes (142, p. 93) that 
in Niue also various animals were held sacred or tapu yet were not believed 
to be incarnations of gods, which suggests a similar concept. 

Certain animal forms were everywhere venerated, but each form in its 
peculiar way. Sharks were frequently regarded as individual incarnations. 
In the Society Islands various of the chiefs of ancient times, were, in fact 
still are, believed to be seen at times as individual sharks frequenting par- 
ticular localities. But in Hawaii the shark gods were most common and 
played the most important role in actual worship, for here they were 
believed to be incarnate ancestral spirits, which served as familiars of sor- 
cerers and aided those at sea in fishing and at the time of disaster. In 
many cases these gods were believed to have the power of assuming at will 
either human or shark forms (10, pp. 504-12). Equally prominent were the 
lizard incarnations (moko). Mythological lizards and living ones were 
sometimes venerated, generally feared. Some families believed certain of 
their ancestors to have been lizards. 

The lizard Pili in Samoa, being regarded as an incarnation of Tangaloa 
was venerated rather than feared. On the island of Maui, Hawaii, Kihawa- 
hine, the queen of the lizards, “lived in a large deep pool on the edge of the 
village Lahaina, and was worshipped by the royal family of Maui as their 
special guardian” (154, p. 258). Similarly on Raiatea, Society Islands, it 
is said that a lizard goddess dwelt in a small gulch back of the settlement 
of Tevaitoa, who was regarded as the protector of the chief of that place. 
On the other hand, the great lizard Moovi, who inhabited a cave on Maupiti © 
was dreaded as an eater of men; and in Tahiti the sudden appearance of a 
certain type of lizard was regarded by the royal family as a presage of 
sickness or death. Lizards of great size figure largely in the Hawaiian 
folklore as the enemies of man. (See 154, pp. 255-8.) In the Cook Islands 
the king of the lizards was a god in his own right named Moko. His part 
in relationship to man is not known, but it may be fairly assumed that it 
was evil (63, p. 225). It has been suggested with a considerable degree of 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 129 

plausibility that the fear the Polynesians held for lizards may be due to a 
former acquaintanceship with crocodiles in regions farther to the west 
(53, PP. 712-19). 

The turtle was tapu in many islands, though apparently not as an incar- 
nation. In the Society Islands, only the chief could eat turtles; and in the 
Marquesas, only chiefs and priests. There turtles were sometimes sub- 
stituted for human victims for temple sacrifice (77, p. 240). 

In the same way the octopus was sacred, and took a prominent place 
in a more or less symbolic way in ritual and mythology in various places. 
It is identified with Kanaloa in the Hawaiian creation chant (96, p. 29). 

In the Society Islands the octopus was more important as a mythical 
figure than anywhere else in Polynesia. In the creation it is said (82) that 
When land became land and it was firm, the great octopus, Tumu-ra’i-fenua, 

held on; one arm was south, one arm was north, one arm was east, and another arm 
was west; they held the sky down against the earth. 

The number eight and the octopus which it symbolized were prominent 
features in the symbology of the Society Islands, being made the basis of 
the political division of all the islands. For example the eight districts of 
Raiatea were spoken of figuratively as the tentacles of the octopus, while 
the residence of the chief at Opoa was the head. In Samoan creation 
mythology the octopus also plays a prominent role (48, p. 17); and the god 
Le Fee (The Octopus) was a prominent figure in the cult (95, p. 373 132, 
p. 28). Inthe Marquesas an octopus, or if one could not be obtained, a taro 
root with eight rootlets was used ceremonially in certain rites (77, p. 320). 

In mythology the eel appears frequently in an erotic role (27, p. 56; 
19, pp. 130-4; 78; 101), but as a form it does not seem to have been vene- 
rated, unless perhaps as an ancestor. In Tahiti there is a family that 
regards itself as descended from an eel. 

As was quite natural, deities supposed to inhabit the celestial regions 
were believed to appear as birds. It is probable that birds of different kinds 
were believed to be gods more often than is realized, for it is only in 
definite, fixed incarnations that this belief is evident to the casual student. 
It is interesting to note that the god houses typical of Maori villages are tiny 
boxes with gabled roofs which stand on top of high poles; an uninformed 
observer, not knowing what they were, would instantly take these little 
shrines to be bird houses such as are ordinarily set up on posts. I was told 
by a native seer of the old order now living in the Society Islands that his 
gods, through whom he has his occult knowledge, are birds that live on a 
small mountain not far from his dwelling. In the ancient times in these 
islands the priests received their messages from their gods from the cries 

130 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Butlletin 34 

of birds in the trees about the temples. Birds were often believed to be 
messengers of the gods but not incarnations. It is difficult to tell in some 
cases what was the conception. Thus in Samoa the plover (turi) is spoken 
of in the mythology of creation as the ata (reflection), of Tangaloa-savali 
(Tangaloa-the-messenger), and the word is said by the translator to signify 
that the plover was the “shadow” or second self of Tangaloa (57, pp. 
20-27). It must be remembered that gods were believed to be able to 
assume different forms at will. In Polynesian folklore mythical or legend- 
ary characters sometimes assume temporarily the form of birds when they 
are called upon to act as messengers (54, Vol. V, p. 414). What more 
natural than that gods called upon to traverse great distances quickly in 
the discharge of some work on the earthly plane should be believed to 
assume the form of birds? From New Zealand come accounts of gods of 
Maori necromancers “flying through the air’ (22, p. 2). 

A mythological figure that is interesting in connection with the religion 
because of the widespread use of red feathers in ceremonial was the manu 
kura red or sacred bird. There are contradictory accounts of what the 
manu kura was. In the Marquesas some modern natives say that it was a 
bird with red plumage formerly to be found in the uplands of Nukuhiva, 
while others say that the feathers of the manu kura were brought from 
islands south of the Marquesas. In Tahiti I have been told by one of the 
best informed living natives that the manu ura signified a variety of red 
parrokeet that was found in Rarotonga and one of the Tuamotu islands, and 
another informant said the manu ura used to be found on Mapihaa Island. 
According to Henry (8&2) the manu ura were a variety of duck that 
lived in Lake Vaihiria in the central upland of Tahiti. It is probable that 
the red feathers that were so much prized as sacred objects in the local cult 
were derived from more than one species of bird, that there were in other 
words several types of manu ura from which the ura were obtained. As to 
the mythical bird called manu kura, the Henry manuscript gives the following : 

There were great handsome red birds (manu ura) that lived in the living water 
of Tane, named Tane-manu, which he sometimes sent to represent him in the ter- 
restial ocean. 

Although Tane-manu is frequently spoken of in the lore of this group, 
this is the only instance I know of here or elsewhere of Tane-manu’s being 
characterized as the Manu Ura, or as a manu ura, though both Tane-manu 
and the Manu Ura are of widespread occurrance in the ancient myths. 
Maori myth makes mention of “Great bird of Tane. The bird that goes 
round the heaven” (156, vol. I, p. 130), and in recent times the kien 
(Apterix) has been referred to as “The hidden bird of Tane” (145, p. 208). 
Hawaiian lore has “The large white bird of Tane” (op. cit.), which is 

Handy—Polynesian Religion ERI 

certainly not identifiable with the red manu kura. On the whole I am 
inclined to believe that it is a mistake to associate the Manu Kura with 
Tane or the bird of Tane or Tane-the-bird (Tane-manu). In both the 
Marquesas Islands and New Zealand the manu kura or manu kua appears 
as a ceremonial and artistic figure. In the former islands representations of 
this mythical figure were made out of bamboo covered with cloth dyed red, 
and these were placed like perching birds along the ridge pole of the 
inspirational priest’s house in the tribal temple (77, pp. 232-233). The 
manu kura, with long beak and three claws is one of the figures most fre- 

quently seen in Maori carving. Red (kura) as a color was very generally / 

associated with the idea of chiefhood and mana. The word itself in many 
islands had meanings connoting excellency and sacredness. (See 145, 
p- 185.) Again, it was sometimes employed freely to designate sacred 
feathers of colors other than red. In the Society Islands the ura, signify- 
ing the sacred red feathers that were so intimately a part of the local cult 
belonged distinctly to Oro and red was sacred to him; and in New Zealand 
red was Rongo’s color. If red was sacred to this god in the original worship 
—as these facts suggest though they do not prove—then the inference 
would be that the manu kura stood for Rongo. 

In New Zealand migratory birds of a certain species called godwit 
(Limosa novae-zcalandiae, in Maori kuaka) are in the habit of congregat- 
ing in the Fall (April) before their departure north, and in the Spring 
upon their return, at the leaping place of departed souls called Te Reinga 
at the northern extreme of the North Island. Taylor White asks 
(P57, p.. 180); 

.. can this remarkable habit of the kuwaka, and possibly of other migratory 
birds also, in leaving New Zealand from its northernmost point have caused the 
Maori to select the same route as leading to spirit land? 

The point raised, and the inferences that might follow from it, while most 
interesting and worthy of consideration, cannot be authenticated without 
extensive investigation of the habits of migratory birds in other places where 
there existed similar beliefs concerning the departure of souls. An intri- 
guing vista of speculation is opened up by the suggestion. It is known 
that in Polynesia the departed souls of men and the gods were believed to 
reappear as birds. Is it possible that the observed departure and return, 
or passage, of migrating birds at certain seasons had something to do with 
the idea of the departure and return of ancestral deities and gods of fertil- 
ity in the Fall and Spring, and the belief in the presence or absence of the 
gods at certain seasons? The fact that the believed route of souls is almost 
universally westward, while migratory birds move for the most part north 
and south, is the strongest argument against this interesting speculation. 

132 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

In Polynesia, New Zealand is the only group from which souls were 

believed to depart northwards. ‘ 

The gods in Polynesia were believed to be able to assume any form at 
will. A Maori sage said regarding the assumption of different forms by 

gods (130, p. 45), 

There are gods dwelling in all the twelve heavens. They are all “god germs” . 
They have the ability to take on the semblance of all things whatever its nature 
[such as] water, trees, stones, earth, wind, air, reptiles, rats, lightning, clouds, dogs, 
man, and many other things. . . They are all “god germs” (ira). 

The power here described attributed not only to the gods but to a lesser 
extent to disembodied souls, explains the phenomenon of metamorphosis 
which is a prominent element in the lore of the region, particularly that of 
Hawaii. In all the islands mountains, rocks, and other features of the land- 
scape are pointed out as the embodiments of gods or individual souls 
that at a former time lived in human form. Episodes in legends from all 
parts of Polynesia describe the metamorphosis of characters into some ani- 
mate or inanimate form. Thus in a Tahitian legend, the ancestor of the 
Teva clan, fleeing from Tahiti plunges into the sea, turns into a shark, and 
disappears. In the Marquesan epic of Tanaoa, this god’s brothers and 
sister, overwhelmed in her canoe by the chant of the god who was pursuing 
them, turned into porpoises as they sank. Hawaiian folklore is full of 
examples of the same belief. In one story the demi-goddess Namokaokahai 
changes herself at different times into a cliff, the ocean, and fire, having 
the power to assume also another form of embodiment “which enabled her 
to fly through the air” (54, Vol. IV, pp. 70-71). It appears to have been a 
common belief in Hawaii that deities could assume four types of embodiment 
which enabled them to adapt themselves to dwelling in water, earth, air, and 
fire. Hawaiian folklore also relates that human beings also often went 
through various metamorphoses. In one legend a youth is changed into a 
paper mulberry plant, while his sister turns into a fish pond; a man drifts 
ashore as a log of wood and then assumes human form; another tale 
describes a child as being born as a piece of rope or cord (54, Vol. V, pp. 
270-2, 364). In another legend an individual is described as having first 
the form of a rat; in this body he climbed a banana tree and turned into 
fruit; and finally he turned into “a human being having a shark’s mouth and 
teeth in the back below the neck” (54, Vol. V, p. 140). 

REMAINS OF THE DEAD 

When the familiar spirit of a Hawaiian necromancer acquired sea, earth, 
and fire bodies, it appears to have been through the metamorphosis of the 
various parts of the body of the child, whose spirit was being empowered, 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 133 

that were respectively disposed in the sea, on land, and in the volcano. The 
spirit or god possessed all the bodies into which the bones of its former 
human body changed. But a different belief is apparent in connection with 
a similar type of demoniacal spirit in New Zealand. An abortive foetus 
was carefully buried, for the spirit was much feared, and unless the body 
were buried would be likely to enter some thing animate such as a moth 
flying over it. If the foetus were thrown into water and a fish ate it the 
fish would become the embodiment of the demoniacal spirit (26, pp. 14-16). 
These spirits, called kahukahu, were believed in New Zealand to serve necro- 
mancers as did the familiars of these workers in Hawaii. In these two 
examples is exhibited an interesting contrast of ideas, for in the Hawaiian 
theory the spirit obtains its physical vehicles through metamorphosis of its 
former body, while in New Zealand it was believed that the spirit trans- 
migrated from the old body into a new and borrowed one. There is no 
certainty however, that the belief in Hawaii was not identical with that 
in New Zealand, for the parts of the body thrown into the sea by the 
Hawaiian necromancer may have been thought to become a shark or some 
other kind of fish through being eaten by such a creature. 

It is quite natural to find in a religion in which the veneration of the 
recently dead had a prominent place, that the physical remains of those who 
had passed on were regarded as holy. By reason of their believed rapport 
with the spirit of the deceased, the Polynesians not only treated both bodies 
and bones with the greatest respect, but regarded them as embodiments of 
the spirits. ‘The intimate rapport believed to exist between the departed soul 
and the physical remains has been discussed in connection with the native 
beliefs concerning the soul. The careful treatment and disposal of the re- 
mains of the dead is described in the section on Funerary Rites. 

Although the mode of disposing of the remains of the dead in the 
several regions of Polynesia differed in details, the general principals were 
throughout the same, being determined by the purpose which underlay all 
the practices, namely the desire to protect relics regarded as sacred from 
desecration, and to preserve them as mediums and objects of worship. 

Of all the physical remains, the skull was the most important. Just as 
in life the head of a man, woman, or child was the most sacred part of the 
body, being regarded as the repository of the individual’s mana, so the skull 
after death continued to represent the sacredness and power that the person 
had embodied, and served as a valuable medium of rapport with the soul, 
as an instrument through which mana might flow to the earth and men. 
That some skulls were at least regarded as actual shrines of the venerated 
ancestral spirits is indicated by the fact that in the Society Islands such 

134 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

spirits are spoken of as entering the skulls that were preserved. According 
to Henry (82), the oromatua (ancestral spirits ) that “entered the skulls 
(upo’o) of men, were good oromatua.” 

The preservation of skulls as objects of worship was the custom through- 
out Polynesia, though it was more in evidence in some parts than in others. 
The preservation of the king’s skull, along with the rest of his bones, as an 
object of worship in Hawaii has just been described. In the Society and 
Marquesas islands the skulls of deceased ancestors had a prominent place in 
the family cult (48, Vol. I, p. 406; 77, p. 114). In Samoa, it is said, skulls 
were in ancient times kept in boxes in houses (158, Vol. II, p. 146), as 
they were also in Tahiti and the Marquesas. Even in far-off Easter Island 
the preservation of skulls is reported (143, pp. 534-7). In New Zealand 
the preserved heads of relatives were kept, to be used in mourning rites, 
while those of enemies were retained to be jeered at (24, pp. 195-7). The 
skulls of the powerful and sacred were guarded in all the islands with the 
greatest care. A fighter who wore into battle the skull of a great warrior 
felt himself carried on by all the mana of his slain foe in addition to his 
own. Skulls frequently served as mediums of rapport in the place of arti- 
ficial representations in peace-time ceremonial. In the Marquesas upon the 
occasion of certain fishing rites, the temple attendant brought down the 
skull of a deceased headman of the tribe to the chief fisherman who per- 
formed the ceremonies believed to be necessary to bring great numbers of 
the children of the sea into the tribe’s deep sea nets. After playing its part 
in the rites, and lending its mana to aid the chief’s “children,” as the tribes- 
men were called, the skull was returned to the tribal temple for safe keep- 
ing (77, p. 166). Whether or not the skull was borne to sea on one of the 
canoes of the expedition is not known, but it seems likely that it was, as was 
the custom at the small islands of Rakaanga and Manihiki, six hundred miles 
north of Rarotonga. Here formerly the head of a chief, priest, or distin- 
guished fisherman was carried in a basket in the fore part of the fishing canoe 
(65, p. 104). 

When overtaken by unfavorable winds on a voyage, or drenched with heavy 
tropical rains, the head would be taken out of the basket and held aloft by the hair 
whilst prayers were offered to it for favorable weather. The hands and feet of 

defunct chiefs, priests, and fishermen were used for the same purpose by people of 
inferior rank. 

In New Zealand, skulls served to bring fertility to the potato crop. 
Commonly a chief would use for this purpose the skull of his father or 
that of some more distant ancestor; but frequently it was the skulls of van- 
quished enemies that were set up around the sides of plantations to promote 
growth of the tubers (48, p. 148). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 135 

The use of detached and preserved hands and feet by fishermen in 
Rakaanga and Manihiki, and of hands, fingers and the like by warriors in 
the Marquesas, finds a parallel in the following Hawaiian practice described 
by Malo (99, p. 134): 

Sometimes a person would secretly exhume the body of a beloved husband or 
wife, and remove the four leg-bones and the skull, washing them in water until they 
were clean. They were then wrapped up and enclosed within the pillow, and the 
friend took them to bed with him and slept with them every night. The number of 
corpses treated in this way was considerable among those who were fond of each 
other. Instead of the bones just mentioned, perhaps the palm of the hand would 
be cut off, dried in the sun and taken to bed with one. Or, if not the hand, the 
hair of the head, the teeth, or the finger nails. These parts of the corpse were 
preserved by the fond lover until such time as the love came to an end, when they 
were neglected. 

The Marquesans carved out of the leg and arm bones of deceased rela- 
tives’ ornaments for the ears and hair. A practice, prevalent throughout 
Polynesia was the making of fishhooks from the long bones of enemies. 
Doubtless this was founded in part on convenience, for these bones are 
eminently suited to the purpose; but the motive was also desecration of the 
enemy’s soul. In this manner the native accomplished two ends at once; the 
soul of the deceased was insulted, and his mana was coerced into lending 
aid in the fishing. In New Zealand, the leg bone of an enemy was some- 
times shaped into a nose flute (149, p. 66). 

HUMAN INTERMEDIARIES 

Three roles are distinguishable in the Polynesian worship: the chiefly, 
prophetic, and ritualistic. Several, or even all three, of these might be filled 
by one individual; but more commonly the different functions were divided 
between distinct classes of religious leaders. In every group was some in- 
dividual who was the living embodiment of the mana of the ancestors: in the 
family this was the first-born in each generation, while in the tribe or larger 
group it was normally the chief who was the first-born of the tribe. In the 
second place, there was always someone who by talent rather than by reason 
of rank, was subject to possession by gods and spirits for the sake of 
oracular revelations, or who was capable of discerning the trend of events 
in the psychic realm by some other means. Lastly, there were the adepts in 
sacred lore and ritualistic practice. To describe individuals discharging each 
of these three functions the language has a distinct term. For these English 
equivalents, which will hereafter be employed strictly with the meanings here 
given, have been selected as follows: artki, the divine chief; fala, the 
prophet; tohunga, the priest. 

In the simple rudimental form of the worship the three functions were 

136 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

combined in one individual. In Samoa, for example, the head of the family 
was its chief, its prophet, and its priest, acting as intermediary between the 
members of the family living in the other\ world and those dwelling upon 
the earth. Turner writes that the father of the Samoan family offered at 
the evening meal a short prayer for the well-being of the family, determined 
the occasions of feasts in honor of the household gods, and when the family 
was assembled in the dwelling poured a libation of kava out upon the ground 
for the tutelary gods who were supposed to be present. A family patron 
often “spoke through the father or some other member of the family, telling 
them what to do in order to remove a present evil, or avert a threatened one” 
(151, p. 239). In Tahiti likewise, in the time of the old order of social and 
religious life, it is written (48, Vol. I, p. 342): 

In the family, according to the patriarchal usage, the father was the priest; 

[while] in the village or district, the family of the priest was sacred, and his office 
was held by one who was also a chief. 

In the social system of Polynesia is plainly to be discerned the develop- 
ment of the complicated polity of the larger social and political groups out of 
the simple patriarchal family. In the worship, the next step beyond the 
rudimental form just described was that in which the chief of the tribe or 
village, which were but expanded families, served also as its diviner and 
priest. In Samoa this condition was sometimes to be found in its pure 
form. Thus Turner writes (151, p. 241): 

The priests, in some cases, were the chiefs of the place; but in general, some one 

in a particular family claimed the privilege, and professed to declare the will of the 
god. 

The part played by the chief of a Maori tribe is described as follows by 
Tregear (149, pp. 146-152): The ariki, or priest-chief, as this scholar calls 
him, was by reason of his descent the ranking individual of the tribe, and 
hence set apart at birth to fill the high office. Instructed in all the mysteries, 
in addition to being distinguished by birth, such a man was regarded as a 
peculiar being with rights and attributes that differed from those belonging 
to all other men. The ariki acted as judge in all tribal matters, supervised 
the operation of tapu, agriculture, fishing, and burial ceremonies. 

He was the medium between the gods and his people, to him were brought the 
first fruits of the soil, of fishing expeditions, etc.... His was the task of prepar- 
ing the war-parties before battle and freeing them from the tapw of blood thereafter, 
of blessing the crops, of serving at the altar, and his were the offerings at the altar. 
... Through his children the line of the “god born” was carried on. 

In the actual worship of the Maori tribe the priestly and prophetic functions 
were largely taken over by the member of the tribe called the tohunga, or 
sometimes tohunga taua, who combined ritualistic with prophetic duties. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 137 

In the more complicated tribal and national cults the political leadership ~ 

and priestly activities of several kinds tended to become differentiated in 
various ways. It is noteworthy, however, that in the two groups where 
differentiation had proceeded farthest, namely Hawaii and the Society Is- 
lands, the political ruler still continued to be the pontifical head of the cult. 
It is said (99, p. 79) of the king in Hawaii that: 

. it was his duty to consecrate the temples, to oversee the performance of 
religious rites in the temples of human sacrifice... in the Juakini [war temple], to 
preside over the celebration of the Makahiki-festival, and such other ceremonies as he 
might be pleased to appoint. 

Subject to the king were various types of priests and prophets. The 
sacredotal functions of the divine chief in Tahiti and his relationship to 
the priests and the prophets were to all intents and purposes identical with 
these. 

Tonga and the Marquesas, on the other hand, exhibit a complete di- 
vorce of religious from civil power. In Tonga were two extremely sacred 
individuals who were venerated as divine beings and as intermediaries 
between the gods and men, but who had neither political power nor pro- 
phetic or ceremonial functions: they were sacred chiefs shorn of every- 
thing except their divinity, which was theirs by reason of descent, and of 
which, according to the old Polynesian system, no earthly circumstance 
could deprive them. By reason of their divinity, they played an important 
passive role in the worship, receiving first fruits offerings and being re- 
garded as mediums of rapport with the superior gods from whom they 
traced direct descent. Temporal authority was in the hands of local leaders 
who were dominant in civil and military affairs, but whose personal sacred- 
ness was inferior to that of these divine chiefs; while the active religious 
duties of prophecy and ceremonialism were discharged by two other dis- 
tinct classes, the taula and matapule, who were attached to the civil leaders 
in different localities. 

In the Marquesas was found still another condition. Here sanctity of 
chiefs such as was typical of Tonga, the Society, and Hawaiian islands did 
not exist. This was doubtless due to the fact that of the settlers who came 
at various times to those islands no one by reason of direct descent from 
the superior gods through an unbroken line of first-borns, had a right to 
speak of himself as an ariki. (See 77, pp. 44-5.) The tribal headman 
(hakaiki) in the Marquesas, as the “father” of his tribe, played a passive 
part in connection with the worship both through appeal and rapport com- 
parable in many points to that of the divinely born chief in New Zealand, 
but the hakatki had little of that peculiar sacredness and power that char- 
acterized the divine chief. Furthermore, he had no prophetic or priestly 

138 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Butlletin 34 

functions whatever, these being divided between two distinct and inde- 
pendent classes of diviners and priests, the tawa and tuhuna. 

Thus is illustrated in these groups the whole range of possible variations 
in the position of the divine chief. In Samoa he was at times political 
_ chief, prophet, and priest; and the same condition was approximated some- 

) times in New Zealand, and likewise, in certain historic instances, in the 

Society Islands. In Hawaii and normally in the Society Islands he retained 
his political power, his divinity, and a control of the cult, but no prophetic 
or priestly functions. His divinity alone was left to him in Tonga. And 
in the democratic Marquesas, he was absent entirely, though the institution 
was preserved in the position of the first-born of every family. 

Tue Divine CHIEF 

The divine chief (ariki) was the most important and the most unique 
of the intermediaries between the gods and man. As the male of the 
highest rank in the tribe, a direct descendant of the gods, he was the cen- 
tral figure in the tribal worship, the point of contact, so to speak, between 
the psychic and the physical aspects of nature. As the first-born male of 
the tribe, he stood for land and people as the prime embodiment of gener- 
ative power in nature; as the first-born of the divine stock, the frontal 
bone (paarae), as the Tahitians describe him (cf. Maori tumu whakarae), 
he was the human instrument most intimately in rapport with psychic power 
in general; and as the first-born child of the gods, he represented them 
personally when they were worshipped by the people. The power man- 
ifested in the person of the divine chief was proportionate to the degree of 
his sacredness, and this was dependent upon the purity of his descent. He 
must be the first-born of a line of first-borns—as Tregear writes, “eldest son 
of eldest son, down from the gods of Heaven and Earth” (149, p. 146). 
Hare Hongi concisely defines ariki as follows: “An Ariki is one in whom 
many ancestral lines converge, and from whom many ancestral lines diverge.” 
(86, p. 84). In addition to being distinguished by birth, the divine chief, 
to play his part, must have been duly consecrated in all the required rites, 
and have received education and training in knowledge and practice per- 
taining to the hidden mysteries. 

In most of the islands of Polynesia, elaborate precautions were taken to 
insure the purity of blood of the chiefly first-borns, to make certain that 
it was only the blood of the divine stock that flowed in the veins of the 
chiefly heir. The link which bound land and people with the ancestral 
powers must be pure and unalloyed by admixture with inferior metal. 
Otherwise, how could the chain be perfect? How could his people be sure 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 139 

of their moorings in the ocean of psychic being? One of the instructions 
imbedded in the minds of young Tahitian chiefs by their tutors was this 

(101): 

Let not the blood of your parents be tainted by you—better were it for you to 
hide your shame in hell (Toareva). 

In Samoa, old duennas were set apart to guard the virtue of the un- 
married daughter of a chief. When a chiefly marriage was to take place 
the tribes of both man and woman assembled on the village gathering place, 
and there, before all, the chastity of the young chiefess was put to the 
test; and when found perfect, she was greeted with prolonged cheers, violent 
manifestations of joy by the people, and eulogistic songs praising her (109, 
pi 138). 

In Hawaii elaborate precautionary measures were taken by royal families. 
In order that the royal strain might be carried on in its greatest possible 
purity, the young prince took to wife his own sister for the offspring of 
such a union, if fruitful, was the highest attainable rank of royal sanctity, 
being referred to as akua. Such a personage could not go abroad by day 
at all lest his divine presence interfere too much with the activities of men; 
for, at the sight of him, “every one had to fall to the ground in an attitude 
of worship.” Before marriage, the young man and woman were placed in 
separate establishments in charge of guardians. “Worship was paid to the 
gods, because it was firmly believed that the genius, power and inspiration 
(mana) of a king was like that of a god.” When the time for marriage 
came, the princess was led to a pavilion which had been set up in view of 
the assembled people, and here the young prince came to her. Outside the 
pavilion or tent, the family god was set up and the priests were assembled 
to utter prayers to the gods that the union might be fruitful (99, pp. 80-1, 
179-80. After an Hawaiian princess had conceived, and it was known that 
a child was to be born, chants were composed in honor of the yet unborn 
prince or princess, and dances prepared to accompany them. ‘The father 
commanded the people to “dance in honor of my child, all ye men and all 
ye chiefs.” ‘“‘Name songs (i. e., chants in honor of the new chief’s name) 
were composed and given to bards who went from place to place singing 
them, so that the people throughout the land might know them.” These 
were sung and danced continuously during the remaining time of the 
princess’ pregnancy, and after the child was born (54, Vol. VI, pp. 3-43 99, pp. 
179-81). These chants were eulogies which exalted the ancestry of the 
expected royal child, and the child’s own person. In the performance of 
these songs and dances during the whole period of gestation is clearly to 
be seen the intent of empowering and elevating the child through rapport. 

140 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

In the Society Islands, the young chief and chiefess were treated literally 
like gods both before and after marriage. For many months before their 
union was consummated, the boy and the ‘girl were kept each in a small 
separate house erected for the purpose, and tended by some relative (48, 
Vol. I, p. 270). Only certain foods were given them, but of those, the 
best; their bodies were rubbed and anointed with fragrant oil; they were 
always dressed in fresh, newly made cloth of the finest quality; and they 
were never allowed to leave the house, nor was any person other than the 
consecrated attendant permitted to see either of them. After months of 
such treatment, the two were brought together in one house, and there they 
were fed, anointed, and clothed in the same fashion until a child was born 
to the girl. Then all the people assembled about the house. As it was 
opened, the young father and mother emerged “into the world” again, to 
be greeted with applause and joy by their people, who crowded about 
them and embraced their lower limbs—the native sign of reverential adula- 
tion. Feasting and merry-making in honor of the young couple and the 
child, the new divine chief, followed. 

That the divine chief in Tahiti was as a god to his people is indicated 
by the conventions regulating his relationship to them. All things in any 
way connected with high chiefs—possessions, persons, even the sounds that 
composed their names—became sacred and were guarded against profane 

_use or service. Any ground on which they trod or house into which they 

entered automatically became their own, because it had taken on the royal 
sanctity. No one not consecrated or closely related must touch the royal 
person, and death was the penalty for passing anything over the head of a 
high chief. In order not to surcharge with their sacredness the land over 
which they passed when they went abroad, ranking chiefs were always borne 
on the shoulders of special carriers (48, Vol. III, pp. 101-2). The homage 
paid to their sacred chiefs by the Polynesians is not to be wondered at, for 
the ranking chief was actually believed to be an embodiment of divinity. 
The reverence, too, was by no means merely a matter of respect springing 
from fear, but it was to a great extent the adoration of a highly emotional 
and affectionate people, who believed the very life of themselves and the 
land to be dependent upon the royal person, as upon the gods themselves. 
A Hawaiian prayer reads (99, p. 243): 

Life through the multitude of the gods! 

Sacred! sacred! Life! life! 

Life through the King! life through the gods! 

The Hawaiian people had to prostrate themselves upon the ground when 

the king passed. The Tahitians must strip themselves to the waist, as they 
did in the vicinity of the temples of the gods. The dwelling of the Tahitian 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 141 

chief was sacred in exactly the same way as was the temple of his god. 
The boundaries of the land upon which it stood were marked with carved 
pieces of wood as were those of the temple, and all who passed by, whether 
the chief were at home or not, must pay the same mark of respect as in 
passing a temple (48, Vol. III, pp. 105-6). 

The relationship of the divine chief to the land also may be illustrated 
from Tahiti. There the arii was spoken of as the iho of his country, of the 
land on which his people lived (iho o te fenua or iho tupu). The signifi- 
cance of these phrases as indicative of intimate rapport, becomes apparent 
when the meanings and connotations of the word iho are examined. Of 
the many meanings given this term, the following are the most suggestive : 
“essence, or nature” of a thing (QI, p. 114), pith, core, bud, first fruit (79), 
anything that had been in close contact with a person’s body such as nail 
parings, clothing, bedding (82). The meanings of this word in the Maori 
dialect are illuminating: “Speaking generally [it] means the heart or 
kernel of anything” (26, Vol. XV, p. 24); but the most common specific 
application appears to be the umbilical cord. Tregear (145, p. IOI) gives 
as other meanings: the heart of a tree; that wherein the strength of a thing 
consists, as of an army; and the tohunga or principal person in a canoe. 
(The Tahitian chief always referred to his country figuratively as his 
canoe.) In Mangaia, the corresponding term, 70, meaning literally the pith 
or core of a tree, was applied figuratively to a god (145, p. 101). The di- 
vine chief, then, the first-born of the gods, was the first fruit, the pith, the 
core of his land. The meaning for iio in the Maori, “umbilical cord,” is 
particularly suggestive, conveying as it does the sense that was definitely 
in the native belief that the chief was the channel or medium through 
which the land was nourished. 

The same intimate rapport was believed to exist between the heaven- 
born chief and the elements. The very heavens themselves were agitated 
by such an event as the birth or death of a chief. When a certain ari, 
famous in Tahitian history was born, legend recounts that he “gave a loud 
cry which seemed a signal for such a storm as had never been seen on the 
island. The heaven clashed with its fury; the winds blew a hurricane, 
tearing off the roof of the royal birth place.” The following are several 
lines from a chant composed to commemorate the occurrence (IOI) : 

The heavens clashed in their might. 

The thundering voice, heard o’er the land, 
Brought terror to the hearts of the simple. 
The torches of the gods, alight, 

Were carried through the heavenly vault, 
Flashing to the four corners of the earth. 

142 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

In all parts of Polynesia, such phenomena as thunder and lightning, 
_wind and rain, rainbows, falling stars are recorded in the lore as presaging 
or accompanying events affecting chiefs or chiefly families. The terms ap- 
plied to the Tahitian chief and his possessions illustrate the belief in his 
intimate rapport with the elements. These terms were in part figurative and 
poetic, but at the same time had their literal significance for the native mind. 
The chief resided in the “clouds of heaven’”—his house was called the ao rai 
(ao, cloud; revi, heavens); his voice was the thunder; the glare of the 
torches in his dwelling was the flashing of lightning; and the progress of the 
divine personage from place to place was spoken of as “flying” (48, Vol. III, 
Pp. 113-4). 

Hawaiian folklore is replete with incidents illustrating the believed 
influence upon surrounding nature of the presence or actions of divine 
chiefs. One legend describes the demonstrations of nature accompanying 
a royal mating (54, Vol. IV, p. 538): 

At their union the thunder was heard; the lightning flashed; eight rainbows 
arched the heavens; the pools of Kahoolana on Kahtia were flooded; red rain 

passed in procession on the ocean; the hills were covered with fog; and a thick 
mist covered the land for ten days. ‘These were the signs. 

Another quaint description presents to us vividly the native sense of the 
conscious, animate nature rejoicing in the presence of its lord (op. cit., p. 
168) : 

At the sight of Kila [their chief], the crowd began to shout, admiring his beauty. 
Even the ants were heard to sing his praise; the birds sang, the pebbles rumbled, the 
shells cried out, the grass withered, the smoke hung low, the rainbow appeared, the 

thunder was heard, the dead came to life, the hairless dogs were seen, and countless 
spirits of all kinds were seen. 

All the ants and birds, pebbles and shells, and other things mentioned are 
described as the “people” of Kila’s father. 

According to Westervelt (155, p. 116) the Hawaiians of old believed 
in an aura or halo, an emanation of light, from a divine or sacred person- 
age: 

Among the ancient Hawaiians it was believed that the eyes of prophets could 
tell the very family to which a high chief belonged by the color or peculiar appearance 
of the light around the individual even when a long distance away. 

In the light of the belief in the close rapport of the divine chief with 
nature, it is easy to understand the theory upon which was based the 
practice prevalent throughout Polynesia of taking from natural phenomena 
omens and auguries relative to oncoming events affecting chiefs and their 
people. In Hawaii it was believed that an eclipse of the sun, moon, or a 
star, or a halo seen around the sun, or thunder out of a clear sky, signified 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 143 

the death of a chief; while a pillar of cloud seen on the ocean, or “blood 

rain” (?) portended the appearance of a great chief (54, Vol. VI, pp. 
106-8). 

THE SACRED LOINS 

Before leaving this brief consideration of the part played by the 
divine chief in the native worship, it will be necessary to turn for a 
moment to the native view of the psychic aspect of the male generative or- 
gans. Generation, as the Polynesian conception of the mode and process 
of cosmogenesis and subsequent reproduction in nature, has been described 
in the first part of this study. For a people who made generation, opera- 
tive through sexual union, a universal principle of their natural philosophy, 
it was inevitable that especial significance should be attributed to the human 
organs of generation. ‘The belief in the sacred and psychically potent 
nature of the loins and genitals may be illustrated from all parts of Poly- 
nesia. 

The loins of the male, recognized as the seat of human generation, were 
quite reasonably regarded by the native as the focus of such generative 
power as was embodied in him, and many beliefs and practices arose out of 
this idea. These aspects of the native worship are not to be regarded as 
indications of degeneracy, but rather as evidence of a highly dignified philo- 
sophic sense of the true meaning of one of the fundamental and essential 
bodily activities of man. Best writes that the ancient sacerdotal term for 
the organs of generation in New Zealand was tawsito, a word used only in 
invocations and the like. An old native said to him: “Friend! the salva- 
tion of my ancestors was the ure, the tawhito. By its aid were the shafts 
of magic warded off and life retained.”” Ure was the ordinary term for the 
virile member. Tawhito commonly meant in the Maori dialect, “ancient” 
or “the ancient one,” but Best believes the meaning preserved in another 
dialect to be nearer the original. Tagito in Futuna signifies “cause, source, 
principle, or origin” (26, Vol. XIV,p. 208). Elsewhere, the same scholar fur- 
nishes an illustration of the manner in which the virile member was believed 
to be “the salvation” of a Maori. When repeating a charm to protect 
himself from psychic injury, a man would place his hand “in the hollow of 
his thigh,” this act being believed to give the necessary power to his charm. 
Another illustration of the same principle in the religion is furnished in the 
Maori belief that a sick man could be cured, or a person starting on a 
journey be protected from evil, if he went to the village latrine and, while 
the priest recited a charm, bit the horizontal bar that was a part of all such 
places (13, pp. 463-4). 

Similar beliefs and practices prevailed in the Marquesas. In one of the 

144 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

legends of these islands, an incident furnishes a striking bit of evidence re- 
garding the native belief in the connection between the life force of a man 
and his virile member. In this story, a jealous woman caused an eel to bite 
off the genitals of her husband, who immediately died. After the body had 
lain many months on its bier, the woman replaced on it the part that had 
been bitten off by the eel, which she had preserved all the while, and imme- 
diately her husband came to life again. In translating with an old man a 
Marquesan spell which had been recited by turtle fishers and had also been 
used upon the occasion of the incision of the foreskin of boys, and probably 
at other times, we came upon a number of words which he at first insisted 
had no meaning. Later, when he had come to feel that I was not altogether 
incapable of understanding in such matters as are most white foreigners, he 
explained that these terms were regarded as very esoteric, as sacred words 
which gave power to the spell, and that they all had reference to the virile 
organ of the chief. An earlier investigator in these islands was told that 
genital organs of certain members of the community were definitely named 
(138, pp. 545-6). 

Phallic symbolism and the use of phallic emblems appear to have been 
common, though not as prominent as in some other early religions. Were it 
not that most of our early accounts of the islands are by explorers who saw 
little and understood less, or by missionaries whose hearts were bent upon 
eradicating and consigning to oblivion, rather than recording such matter 
as was shocking to their uncomprehending minds, it would be realized, I 
believe, that phallic symbolism was more common than is evident on the 
surface. In all representations of deity carved in human form in Poly- 
nesia, the sexual features were made prominent. Actual phalli, or 
carved symbols representing the male organ, were comparatively 
rare. Such an emblem, carved of red stone in the form of a phallus, is 
described by Gudgeon as being the treasured heirloom of one Maori tribe. 
This symbol was exhibited only on great occasions, such as the death of a 
man of rank, when it was suspended from the overhanging gable of the 
tribal council house (74, p. 34). Gill speaks of erotic dances in the Cook 
Islands, in which married and unmarried chiefs wore phallic ear ornaments 
in order to allure the opposite sex (65, p. 181). Gudgeon describes a 
phallic emblem worn by warriors in the same island group, which conferred 
upon the wearer certain rights over any woman he might meet, so long as 
he wore the symbol round his waist. This writer goes on to point out that 
the word toa meaning both “brave” and “virile male’ furnishes an interest- 
ing bit of evidence of the association of the procreative power with cour- 
age, and remarks that “the peculiar state of the virile organ of a warrior 
when engaged in mortal combat is a matter well recognized in Maori super- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 145 

stitions” (74, Vol. XIII, p. 210). The food pounders in use in the Marque- 
sas and several other sections of Polynesia offer an illustration of another 
use of phallic symbolism. Almost without exception, the upright handles of 
these pounders were carved to symbolize the male organ. The extent to 
which phallic symbolism probably influenced the form of carved representa- 
tions of gods and ancestors has already been discussed in connection with 
the description of these. 

The generative organs of all males being regarded as embodying power, 
it is natural that those of the divine chief were thought to be particularly 
potent in this way. Certain Maori rites prove that that warlike people 
believed the generative organs of the chief of the tribe to be the medium 
of transmission of the psychic force which was the source of power and 
courage in battles. Sometimes it would happen that a great warrior would 
be afflicted with fear just before battle, as a result of his own mana having 
been dissipated by contact with that of the divine chief who embodied a 
higher psychic potential. The cure for the evil consisted in the warrior’s 
crawling between the legs of the chief, which restored his courage. Similar 
to this was the custom observed before a war party started on an expedi- 
tion, when the great fighting men of the party were required to squat down 
in a line while the chief passed them in succession between his legs “in 
order to ward off all misfortune from these valuable men” (72, p. 64). 
Best explains this by saying that the warriors passed “beneath the tawhito, 
in order that the mana of that organ might prevent them from being 
afflicted by atua (malignant demons, gods), and so be assailed by indeci- 
sion, faint heartedness, etc., in battle” (26, Vol. XIV, p. 208). 

In the quotations already given, it is indicated that organs of genera- 
tion, and especially those of the chief, were regarded as embodying the god- 
like power that was thought to focus itself through men. The sacredness 
and ceremonial significance of the garment which girt the sacred loins illus- 
trates another ramification of this point of view. The chief was the first- 
born earthly representative of the gods, whose procreative powers or genera- 
tive activities were evidenced in all nature. That which girt the seat of 
generation and procreation of the priest-chief was therefore sacred and sym- 
bolic of his power. That the loin cloth was regarded as a symbol of 
power in New Zealand seems to be indicated by the words of this Maori 
incantation recited by a warrior when, in Biblical language, he was “girding 
up his loins” for battle (156, Vol. HI, p. 108). 

Let the fountain gush forth 
From the spring, and from within. 

146 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

And you, put your war-belt on. 
Double the fringe of your maro (war-belt) up. 
Let your maro provoke your enemy. 

In another war charm, the name of which was maro (girdle), occur 
these lines (24, Vol. XI, pp. 69-70) : 
Give me my girdle, to pass between the legs, 

Give me my girdle, to pass round the waist, 
Fasten to the left, fasten to the right. 

These spells indicate, at least, that the putting on of the loin cloth was 
regarded as a very important part of the warrior’s preparations. On the 
small island of Niue, a male child was called at the time of his birth, “fruit 
of the war-girdle”; while the Morioris of Chatham Island called such a 
child tamariki-maro, girdle-child (125, Vol. XI, p. 203). There was a 
special girdle used by the Moriori, worn only by men of rank. With this 
they girt themselves when going to war. A chant reads (117, pp. 110-111): 

Whose is the maro [loin cloth] which is outspread? 

Fight to the east, fight to the west, fight to the distant east! 
Rise! Stand up! 

Gird it that it may encircle! 

Whose is the maro [loin cloth] which is outspread? 

In a legend from the Tuamotu Islands, it is said of the hero that, in a 
moment of danger, “he seized his magic girdle called Manava-apeape, and 
begirt himself with it” (6, p. 51). 

In the Marquesas, every first-born child was regarded as the chief of his 
family, as the living representative of the ancestral line, and a 
special strip of cloth, which was sacred to him, was beaten for him from 
the reddish bark of the sacred banyan trees which grew usually on the 
sites of temples. This was called his hami hiapo (loin-cloth of banyan 
bark) or hami tapu (sacred loin-cloth), and was the chief ceremonial symbol 
and emblem of his divine right in the numerous ceremonies which were 
celebrated in his honor, such as the birth rites, adoption, betrothal, presen- 
tation at the first public feast, and marriage (77, p. 76). Nowhere else 
in Polynesia, however, did the loin cloth or girdle come to be regarded with 
such veneration as in Tahiti, Raiatea, and Porapora (in the Society Islands). 
There the maro ura (red, or sacred girdle) and maro tea (yellow girdle) 
were the emblems of the divine descent and peerless position and power 
of the ranking chiefs in civil and religious life of the country. Ellis wrote 
that the inauguration of a “king” consisted in his being girded with this 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 147 

sacred maro ornamented with red feathers. The rite elevated the wearer to 
the rank of the gods. The sacred girdle, like that in the Marquesas, was 
made of bark of the banyan tree, to which, in Tahiti, were added feathers 
taken from the “image” of the god, these being supposed to retain all the 
attributes of power and vengeance belonging to the god. One of these 
girdles, which was shown to Captain Cook, was five yards long and fifteen 
inches wide and ornamented with red and yellow feathers. The consecra- 
tion of this royal girdle when it was made or added to was accompanied 
by the sacrifice of human victims; and the central feature of the rites sur- 
rounding the accession of a new ranking chief to a position of supreme 
power was his investiture or girding with this sacred emblem. The cere- 
mony commenced in the national temple; thence a formal procession of 
religious and civil dignitaries marched to the sea, the divine chief following 
immediately after the representation of Oro. At the seashore, among other 
canoes, was an especially prepared sacred barge, gaily embellished with 
plaited coconut leaves, on which the god was placed. After various cere- 
monies, chief of which was purification in the sea, the chief entered the 
sacred canoe where stood the image of Oro, and was there invested with 
the maro ura, the priest meanwhile pronouncing a prayer commencing: 

Extend or spread the influence of the king over the sea to the sacred island. 

It then describes the nature of his girdle and addresses the king at the close 
thus: “Parent this, of you, O king”; indicating that from the gods all his 
power was derived (48, Vol. III, pp. 108-111). 

The use of the red loin cloth as a badge of the Arioi dancing society in 
Tahiti and the adjacent islands is described on pages 308-9. 

It appears that in New Zealand the tohunga when performing their rites 
wore sacred girdles. One type of maro worn by a priest was called maro- 
huka; while the tu-maro was another type of sacred loin cloth (122, p. 202). 
In Rarotonga the priest or other who was dispatched to secure a human 
victim for the god Rongo, had to be girt with “the sacred girdle,” by the 
divine chief, who was high priest of Rongo’s worship to show that he was 
commissioned by the gods (64, pp. 39-40). On Mangaia, Gill mentions “the 
girdle sacred to Rongo” (65, p. 54), which doubtless corresponded to the 
maro-ura in Tahiti, where it was the symbol of the ruling dynasty and was 
sacred to Oro, who took the place of Rongo. That sacred girdles were used in 
some way in the Marquesas is indicated by a remark of Stewart’s (137, 
Vol I, p. 275) to the effect that: 

At times ...a hami or girdle... is held up, and the name of a god invoked 
in a loud and bold manner. 

148 ernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Just what part the sacred girdle played in rites is unknown, but it is prob- 
able that the girdle described by Stewart was to be put upon the representa- 
tion of the god, for it is known that the making of such loin cloths for the 
effigies of ancestors was the special labor of a priest (77, p. 238). The 
girding of the sacred first-born with a ceremonial loin cloth was in the 
Marquesas the sign of his coming of age. 

In Hawaii the girding of figures in the temples used in the national 
worship constituted one of the most important incidents in the public rites, 
such as those before war or at the annual harvest festival. In the Luakini 
war rite, a new figure of the god of war was made and set up in the temple 
in the midst of other less important gods. The figure was at this time 
ungirt, standing, as the native expression puts it, “with its nakedness pen- 
dent.”” Some days later, after a number of preparatory rites, came the 
ceremony of girding the god. The king and his priests being assembled for 
the rite, the whole body of the priests recited in unison the “prayer of the 
girdle”: 

Gird on, gird on the malo oh Lono! 
Declare war, declare it definitely, proclaim it by messengers! 

At the conclusion of the prayer, they arrayed the idol in a malo, and a new 
name was given to it, Moi, lord of all the idols. After that all the idols were clothed 
with malos, and each one was given the name according to the place in which he 
stood. This ceremonial girding of the war god was followed by a feast and by 
offerings (99, pp. 223-8). 

In the Makahiki festival, the representation of Lono was girt with a 
malo by the chiefesses of every district through which it passed (99, 
p. 194). The loin cloth likewise played a ceremonial part in Hawaii in the 
rites of canoe-building, this time, however, being girt upon the priest. When 
preliminary offerings had been made, the tree that had been chosen for the 
canoe was felled and the canoe-priest performed his propitiatory rite (99, 

PaaEOO.)e 

When the tree had fallen, the head kahuna mounted upon the trunk, ax in hand, 
facing the stump, his back being turned toward the top of the tree. 

Then in a loud tone he called out, “Smite with the ax and hollow the canoe! 
Give me the malo!” Thereupon the kahuna’s wife handed him his ceremonial malo, 
which was white; and, having girded himself, he turned about and faced the head of 
themtnee: 

It is interesting that in the Hawaiian legend of Umi, when the hero’s father, 
Liloa, desiring to leave something that should stand for his child as proof of 
his chiefly descent, he left with the mother-to-be his loin cloth (54, Vol. IV, 
p. 180). 

In an annual Tongan rite, in which a child impersonated the wife of 
the god of crops in whose honor the rite was performed, the child was 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 149 

wrapped in a great roll of cloth (102, pp. 385-7). This custom of wrap- 
ping or rolling a sacred person in an enormous strip of bark cloth on cer- 
‘tain ceremonial occasions was typical also of Hawaii and the Marquesas. In 
like manner, sticks, posts, and figures were wrapped in great lengths of 
cloth in central Polynesia (the Society and Cook Islands). Undoubtedly all 

these practices go back to the principle of the sacredness of loin cloths, and | 

arise out of ceremonial practices corresponding to the girding with cere- 
monial cloths of sacred persons and deific figures carved in human form. 

Tue Prrest 

The trained organizers and leaders in ceremonial were the tohunga. 
Literally meaning adept, the term was applied throughout the islands to 
experts or masters in any kind of activity. The tohunga in any craft was 
one who had mastered all phases of his work, both technical and ritualistic, 
and had in addition sufficient experience and leadership to enable him to 
organize and direct the labor of other workers in communal enterprise. Thus 
the ritualistic priest was both the master of the technique of worship and 
the leader in all communal rites. The meaning of tohunga in connection 
with the Polynesian industrialism is discussed in the section on Consecrated 
Industry. 

In Hawaii, Tahiti, and the Marquesas, were priests attached to the more 
important temples, whose duties were exclusively ceremonial, known as 
kahuna pule, tahua pure, or tuhuna pue. These priests performed the rites 
in the temples and the ceremonies of a purely religious nature which 
affected the whole community, industrial groups, war parties, families, and 

individuals. This class corresponded definitely to the temple priesthoods of | 
other ancient religions. Theirs was the duty of presenting to the gods . 

the offerings and sacrifices of all kinds and at the same time of invoking, 
supplicating, and coercing the psychic powers. ‘They rendered noa persons 
and things made tapu by contact with the sacred or the profane; they con- 
secrated laws such as rahui or restrictions on foods, land, and the sea, the 
newly born and the dead, new houses, new canoes, temples, warriors, work- 
ers, priests, and kings; they indicated the proper occasion for public and 
private rites, organized and directed these ceremonies. These adepts at 
prayer and ritual were the repositories and teachers of the sacred myths and 
genealogies relating to the gods and creation. They were the savants who, 
bound by the strictest rules, guarded the esoteric secrets of their cult and 
passed them on by oral instruction to the initiated priests and chiefs of each 
succeeding generation. With these priests, who went down with their 
gods and their temples before Christianity, died all but a few bits of that 

—— 

150 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

esoteric teaching and sacred lore that was engraved in their minds through 
the ancient instruction and rites, and sealed there by tapu, a record of 
which would make study of them today so much more easy, interesting, and 
illuminating. 

In Hawaii, where the worship was most highly systematized, Fornander 
speaks of “colleges of priests” devoted to different professions of a sacer- 
dotal nature. There were, according to this writer, ten “colleges”: three 
dealt with sorcery, two with necromancy, one was devoted to medicine and sur- 
gery, another supervised the building of temples and dwelling, and three 
others devoted to divining by various methods. A specific name was given 
to each college, which is said to have been subdivided into classes devoted 
to particular details of rites. The priesthood in general was governed by 
rules and regulations, and severe penalties imposed for violations. An oath 
was exacted before admission of candidates. The different classes and sub- 
divisions of the priesthood had their own patron deities whom they invoked ; 
but the god Uli was the patron of the whole body of priests (55, Vol. I, 
pp. 112-4, note 2; 54 Vol. VI, pp. 68-70). 

What this writer refers to as “colleges’’ were doubtless to some extent 
merely classes of experts in particular fields of the religious art, some types 
of whom may have formed societies as did the industrialists in Samoa and 
other islands; while others, such as the diviners, were probably not organ- 
ized. There were, however, two genuine priestly orders that served the two 
chief gods of the land, Ku and Lono. According to Malo, the priests of 
Ku formed a distinct order called the Kanalu. The members of this sacred 
order outranked those of another, called Paliku, which included the priests 
of Lono, for Ku was the chief god of the land and his ritual, known as 
the “ritual of the king,’ demanding human sacrifice was more arduous than 
that of the milder Lono (99, p. 210). The extent to which the organiza- 
tion of the religious system in these islands had advanced is evidenced by 
the existence of these long established religious orders which were in them- 
selves distinct hierarchies subject to the king but in a sense independent of 
him, having their own genealogies, and being endowed even with their own 
lands. Since the king had to turn to his priests in both war and peace to 
obtain the psychic aid which was deemed necessary at all times, it is evi- 
_ dent that these orders and the priests in them must have had a considerable 
amount of political power. It is interesting to note, however, that in spite 
of the complication of the system in Hawaii, the three types of religious 
functionaries defined are still clearly to be distinguished. The Hawaiian 
system of worship was built about the divine chief or alii (=ariki), the 
priest or kahuna (=—tohunga), and the prophet or kaula (=taula). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion I5I 

Concerning organizations or orders of ceremonial priests or prophets in 
other island groups, little is known. Moerenhout (105, Vol. II, p. 48) 
describes the diviners in Tahiti as forming a sort of college or corporation ; 
and Ellis (48, Vol. III, p. 109), in describing the consecration of a new 
chief, writes that in the procession of functionaries marched the miro-tahua, 
or “orders of priests”; but beyond this there is to my knowledge no 
definite record of priestly orders in the Society Islands, though Henry (82) 
speaks of the priesthood as a “fraternity.” In view of the thoroughly ) 
organized social and religious system and of its close similarity to that of | 
Hawaii, it is reasonable to assume the existence of definite organizations of 
priests. Farther south on the island of Mangaia, Cook Islands, were three . 
hereditary orders of priests said to date from the time of settlement of the 
island (65, pp. 227-8), each of which was consecrated to one of the three 
chief gods of the island. 

In other parts of Polynesia, industrial tohunga were organized into socie- 
ties, but apparently not the ritualistic tohunga. In Hawaii, the Marquesas, 
Society, and Cook islands, and doubtless elsewhere the fishermen were def- 
initely organized groups. Although the Marquesan tattooers (tuhuna patu 
tiki) are said by early visitors to have formed a society of professionals, it 
was probably scarcely to be spoken of as an organization but rather as a social 
institution; for the groups of people in these islands were too isolated on 
account of local enmities for intertribal organizations to have survived. The 
society of tattooers probably constituted a group of professionals with mutual 
interests, trained in the identical principles of artistic design and technical 
skill, and conforming to one system of rules governing apprenticeship and 
labor, who, recognizing each other as fellow artists, regarded themselves as a 
distinct class among all the tribes, but not as an organization. While not a 
guild, this is the nearest possible approach under conditions of intertribal strife 
such as existed in the Marquesas. In Samoa, on the other hand, the tattooing 
artists (tufunga tatau) were definitely organized into a guild, as were also 
other types of professionals, among them the carpenters. The housebuilders 
(tufunga fai fale), who were the most prominent and powerful of the groups 
of industrialists, formed a closed corporation with an elaborate system of ap- 
prenticeship, thorough internal organization and carefully regulated conven- 
tions governing the erection of houses, employment, payment by house-owners, 
and interrelation of various societies of carpenters within the guild. These 
societies, like the Hawaiian and Mangaian priestly orders, had their own 
genealogies, all of them starting with the original founder of the guild 
(80, p. 15). The carpenter priests (tawnga) in the Cook Islands, who were 
charged with the ceremonial direction of canoe making, and whose symbol 
was the sacred adz (67, p. 342; 63, p. 141) constituted a priestly order that 

152 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

offers a close parallel to, and perhaps was an offshoot of, the Samoan car- 
penters’ guilds. In Samoa, tufunga was applied only to industrial experts ; 
apparently no religious adepts were honored with that title. The “talking 
men” or orators (tulafale), who were also organized in a guild, in func- 
tion correspond to some extent to the Hawaiian ceremonial priests, for 
although primarily bards or orators, they had very definite ceremonial func- 
tions, which ally them with the ritualistic priests elsewhere, such as direct- 
ing the kava-drinking rite—often strictly a religious ceremony. This is true 
also of the matapule in Tonga whose social role parallels that of the Samoan 
tulafale, but whose religious duties appear to have had a broader scope, 
including anything from possession by his chief’s god to supervision of 
funerals and direction of public religious ceremonies (102, pp. 319-21). ‘The 
true ceremonial priest, a professional who devoted himself exclusively to 
sacred learning and ritual, such as was typical of Hawaii, the Marquesas, 
and the Society Islands, and probably of the Cook Islands, appears to be 
lacking in Samoa and Tonga. This is not at all surprising, for in Samoa, 
and in Tonga probably as a result of Samoa’s influence, the social order and 
institutions rather than the religious held the most prominent place in the 
native life; and therefore it is to be expected that the masters of ceremony 
would be social rather than religious. Some of the duties assigned to the 
ritualists in the other islands were in Samoa and Tonga assumed by the 
tulafale or the matapule who were attached and subject to the local chiefs, 
as were the priests in the other groups; other duties were performed by the 
chief himself; and still others by the prophet of the chief’s god.’ Tahiti 
combined the Samoan and the Hawaiian conditions. The chiefs had their 
orators (orero) who were definitely the counterpart of the Samoan tulafale, 
though lacking his ceremonial functions. The orero are described as living 
repositories of religious and traditional lore, “mouthpieces” of the chiefs, 
who delivered orations in the temples at ceremonies attended by the people. 
But quite distinct from this class were the priests of the temple (tahua) 
who presided on all ceremonial occasions, as did the Hawaiian temple priests. 
It is quite natural not to find temple priests in Samoa and Tonga where 

' temple worship was comparatively unimportant, and to find them in Hawaii, 

Tahiti and the Marquesas, where it was highly developed.” In the Mar- 
quesas there were, as in Hawaii, no orators; but the ceremonial priests 
(tuhuna pue or oono), whose ritualistic functions correspond definitely with 
those of the temple priest (kahuna pule) in Hawaii, was, in addition to 
being its master of ceremonies, the tribe’s bard, which indicates his relation- 
ship in one phase of his activity with the orators of Tahiti and Samoa. The 
Hawaiian temple priests also correspond to the orators in this way, for they 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 153 

were the repositories of sacred lore, and the intoners of chants, as were the 
Marquesan tuhuna. 

One feature that was typical of the Marquesan mode of worship was the 
way in which the master craftsmen (tuhuna) of all professions functioned 
as a body of singers in all the important rites. These professionals had, 
therefore, a definite sacerdotal as well as an industrial and social function 
(77, p. 223). This was true also in Tahiti, for there Miss Henry describes 
the craftsmen as joining the priests in the temple processions and in the 
performance of the most solemn ritual (82). I am inclined to believe also 
then when Malo (99, p. 211) speaks of “the body of priests engaged in the 
work” of building the new war temple in Hawaii, and describes them as 
assembling “to perform a service of prayer,’ (99, p. 225), which signifies 
“to chant,” that he is referring not only to the ritualistic priests but to the 
industrial kahuna also who aided by constructing the stone and woodwork 
of the temple. 

In New Zealand, where the people were disseminated in isolated tribes, 
no orders or guilds of priests or workers are be to found. While every 
man was his own orator and to some extent his own ceremonialist, the 
tohunga of the tribe was not only its ritualistic priest but likewise its 
prophet. 

In different islands there were various forms of dress and insignia that 
distinguished religious functionaries. Priests and prophets are sometimes 
described as having shaven heads (77, p. 227), in other instances as having 
long hair (55, Vol. II, p. 115). In the Marquesas the temple functionaries, 
the priests, prophets, and temple assistants, wore bark-cloth robes of special 
kinds, and at certain times headdresses that distinguished them from others 
in the tribe. The Marquesan prophet carried a special form of staff, and 
possessed a symbol of his office, three sticks of hau wood wrapped in cloth, 
which was used in the ceremonial and upon his death was buried with him. 
An interesting type of body covering that distinguished persons engaged in 
sacred duties—such as messengers in war time—consisted of a shredded 
coconut leaf, worn upon the back; this was a recognized form of ceremonial 
dress which indicated that the person wearing it was tapu (77, p. 125). In 
Tahiti, there must have been a practically identical convention, for it is 
recorded that when he would go about the country announcing a ceremony, 
the temple priest would be covered only with coconut leaves (105, Vol. I, 
p. 478). In Tahiti the ceremonial dress, said to have been worn by the 
temple priest when performing his duties, consisted of a fine mat worn about 
the loins, the upper part of the body being left bare (105, Vol. I, p. 507). 

154 Bernice P. Bishop Musewm—Bulletin 34 

The use of fine mats to cover the loins on ceremonial occasions was typical 
also of Samoa and Tonga. 

Like that of the chief, the malo of the’ priest was often a prominent 
ceremonial adjunct. In several parts of Polynesia widely separated from 
each other, the ceremonial loin cloths of ritualistic priests are specifically 
described as being white. Malo describes a Hawaiian priest, a “head kahuna,” 
officiating in the making of a canoe, as girding himself with his “ceremonial 
malo, which was white” (99, p. 169). The temple priest in charge of the 
Luakini war rite is also described as wearing a white malo (99, p. 220). In 
the Society Islands, according to several writers (29, pp. 16-7; 90, p. 168), 
the white maro was the badge of the priesthood. Lastly, Gill (67, pp. 
339-40) speaks of the white loin cloth as being worn by Cook Islands priests. 

It is only from New Zealand that much detailed knowledge of the edu- 
cation and training of chiefs and priests has been preserved. It said that 
in Hawaii young chiefs were educated by the priests, but little is known 
of the training of the young priests, or of the existence of organized schools 
comparable to the whare wananga (99, p. 182). Henry (82) describes 
priests’ schools in the Society Islands. These places, built on sacred ground, 
were called fare-atraa-upu, which means literally “prayer-eating-house.” 
Men only received instruction in these schools, though at other schools 
women might also attend to obtain the lower knowledge. In these schools 
the method of teaching is said to have been chanting, as was true also in the 
Marquesas and doubtless to some extent in New Zealand. All classes of 
prayers, invocations, spells, and knowledge of ritualistic custom, the obser- 
vance and interpretation of omens and signs of all kinds, and other things 
that a priest must know were taught to the novices. The following is the 
translation of an invocation used by students in training: 

O host of the gods! The prayer must close. Send obscurity out, and let light 
come in as the flow of the freshet. \ Let it move and run, let it shake out (to fill) 
tightly; let it be means of accomplishing much. Give [me the gift of] prayer; let 

me become a herald, an orator, in one night, O gods! Fly to the rising sun, with 
the sun that is rising is life, O God! 

When the schooling was completed, the candidates for the priestly orders 
were examined as to their proficiency by a body of priests; and finally the 
admission of new members into the “fraternity,” as Henry terms the priest- 
hood, was celebrated with a feast in the temple (82). In the Marquesas 
was a rather elaborate system of informal instruction of youths centering 
about the learning of certain sacred chants and legends which embodied the 
tapu lore of these islanders. Youths so educated were taught in a house 
especially erected for the purpose by the ceremonial priest of the tribe. This 
structure was not a permanent erection, as was apparently the whare 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 155 

wananga in New Zealand. There were no difinite sessions or periods of 
study; and, although the ritual connected with consecration of the build- 
ings, instruction, and consecration.of the youths was equally as formal as in 
New Zealand, it would scarcely be proper to call these institutions in the 
Marquesas “colleges” of sacred lore. It is interesting, however, that one of 
the special houses had as its purpose the teaching and singing of one of the 
creation chants called vanana (wananga). I was told that this house was 
called the fae papa; but it is quite likely—although I was not told that this 
was an alternative name by natives—that it was also spoken of in a de- 
scriptive way as the fae vanana (77, p. 327). It is interesting to find an 
are-vananga, “house of teaching,’ mentioned in a Rarotongan legend 

(Tiss pao): 

Concerning the whare-wananga (house of occult knowledge) or whare 
kura of the east coast of New Zealand, there is excellent information (119). 

In the whare wananga lads who had shown a disposition for learning and ° 

a talent for recitation were taught the myths, legends, and prayers, which it 
was necessary for the priest and chief to know. The teaching was divided 
into two branches, called te kauwae-runga (the upper jaw), and te kauwae- 
raro (the lower jaw)—sometimes called also te kauhanga-runga, and te kau- 
hanga-raro, kauhanga (according to Smith), being the name given to the 
imaginary plane separating the various heavens from each other. The first 
branch included knowledge of everything pertaining to the gods, the heavens, 
the origin of things, the creation of man, astronomy, the record of time, and 
so on. The second branch dealt with traditional history, genealogies, migra- 
tions, the tapu, and other terrestrial subjects. Smith, therefore characterizes 
the first as representing “celestial things,’ the second “terrestrial things.” 

The whare-wananga was a very sacred institution and some tribes pre- 
served the names of their whare back to the traditional period preceding 
their departure from the mythical fatherland, Hawaiki. The original whare- 
wananga, after which all others were patterned, the one to which the god 
Tane brought down the knowledge from the uppermost heaven, was said to 
have been situated in the sun’s path in the heavens, its name matangi-reia, 
having that signification. 

Each tribe had its own college whose methods differed somewhat. Not 
less than three tohunga took part in this whare. 

The ceremonial of construction and consecration of the whare was an 
important feature. At the opening session, after the students, tawira, had 
assembled in the consecrated building, the house was purified by the recita- 
tion of a prayer, begun as the first rays of the sun appeared in the sky. 

156 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

The tenor of the prayer, which was quite long, is brought out in the last 
verse: ‘ 
Enter deeply, enter to the very origins, 

Into the very foundations of all knowledge, 
O. Io-the-hidden-face-e! 
Gather as in a great and lengthy net, in the 
inner recesses of the ears, 
As also in the desire, the perseverance, of 
these thy offspring, thy sons. 
Descend on them thy memory, thy knowledge, 
Rest within the heart, within the roots of origin; 
O To-the-learned! O Jo-the-determined ! 
O Jo-the-self-created. 

This prayer made the house very tapu. 

The session of the whare-wananga opened in April and continued until 
October. There were seven “enterings,” or courses of lectures, each year. 
Each day during the session, lessons began at daylight and ended at high 
noon. The teachers and pupils “followed the sun to the light each day, but 
would not descend with him into the darkness.” Each day’s work was 
ushered in by a prayer; and during instruction the pupils were seated on 
stones around the altar or the fireplace. The priests also recited their 
prayers from these stones or from the passage-way of the house. Clothes 
worn while in the building were left there every night. 

Three divisions or departments of knowledge constituted the teaching 
of the whare-wananga; the uruuru matua, uruuru tipua, and uruuru tawluto, 
the meaning of which is gathered from the following myth relating to the 
whare. 

The god Tane obtained from the uppermost heaven three kete, or 

baskets of knowledge, which he brought down with him and placed in the 
original, mythical whare. These baskets of knowledge were: (1) kete- 

| uruuru-matua, knowledge of peace, of all goodness of love; (2) kete-uru- 
_ uru-rangi (or tipua), knowledge of all prayers, incantations, ritual, used by 

| mankind; (3) kete-uruuru-tau (or tawhito), knowledge of the wars of man- 

et 

kind, of agriculture, of woodwork, stonework, earthwork—of all things per- 
taining to earthly life. 

In addition, Tane brought with him two stones which were placed in the 
rear of the original whare-wananga. ‘The stones were called Te Whatu-kura 
Huka-a-tai (which Smith translates Foam-of-the-Ocean) and Te Whatu- 
kura Rehu-ta (White-sea-mist). Replicas were similarly placed in each of 
the whare-wananga. At the final ceremony of graduation, the pupils stood 
on these stones, this being believed to give them mana. 

The uruuru-tawhito only was taught in the main whare, the other sub- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 157 

jects being taught in adjacent buildings. The students were allowed to 
choose the precedence in which they wished to take the subjects. When a 
pupil had passed in one department of study, he went on to the other 
branches. Those students who, in the examinations which were held before 
the end of the session, proved most proficient were placed on the stones on 
the right hand side of the rearmost pillar; the less proficient, who would 
have to go through a second course, were placed on the left hand side; and 
the dunces were given the stones by the fireplace. Hence it was common 
to ask in the old days, “Where were you purified?” (or passed in the 
whare?’). If one questioned had passed well, he replied, “By the side of the 
rearmost pillar on such and such a stone,” indicating that he had passed a 
good examination. 

At the end of the last series of courses, actual baskets containing pebbles 
of different materials symbolizing the baskets of occult knowledge brought 
down by Tane were taken from the rear post of the whare and given to 
each young man. A prayer was said. At a certain point, in the prayer, 
each pupil swallowed his stone. He was careful to recover it afterwards, 
for the pebble was thereafter always placed in the mouth whenever incan- 
tations were recited. Just before the “breaking up,” the pupils stood on the 
mat before the altar under which were the whatu-kura described above, the 
priests gathered around them, placing their hands on their heads and repeat- 
ing invocations to insure the permanence of the knowledge they had acquired. 
The pupils were then taken to the bar of the latrine, to remove from them 
the tapu which had been induced by their sojourn in the college. To do this 
they bit the bar of the latrine. All then went to the marae, or court, naked, 
their regular clothes having been left outside the enclosure. A lock of hair, 
the dirt of the feet, some spittle, the perspiration from under the arms and 
between the thighs were carried to the rearmost pillar of the whare by the 
priests and there buried; and thus a psychic bond between the graduates and 
the school was established for all time. After this the pupils were taken to 
the sacred water and ducked: this washed away the tapu. Before the final 
departure of classes all stood in line within the porch of the house, facing 
out. The priests standing in the court addressed them, first on good beha- 
vior; second with an admonition to guard the esoteric knowledge they had 
been taught; and lastly, they were told the month when they should return 
to complete their course. Then all marched, the priests leading the way, to 
the bounds of the sacred court where they stood facing the direction of the 
door of the house. A priest then made fire with sacred fire-sticks. If the 
fire burned, according to the Maori, either rumbling thunder or sharp claps 
of thunder were heard. This closed the session and the students went home 

(119, p. 79-97). 

158 Bernice P. Bisho p Museum—Bulletin 34 

Strictly speaking there were no priestesses in Polynesia, though certain 
ceremonial functions in various islands were performed by women. In both 
Hawaii and New Zealand these duties had to do with the removal of tapu, 
for which purpose, under certain circumstances, women were eminently 
suited being by nature without tapu. In the great war rite of the Hawaiian 
islands, the Juakini, one feature of the ceremony as described by Malo 
(99, p. 214) was the assembling of a group of high-born women, for the 
purpose of performing a rite of purification, in a building called the hale 
papa, which stood just outside the sacred precincts of the war temple. 

The women also took part in the ceremony of freeing warriors from 
psychic dangers. The part played by the Hawaiian women in purifying the 
warriors undoubtedly corresponds directly with that of the ruahine in 
numerous rites of the Maori for the removal of tapu. The ruahine in New 
Zealand was a woman of high birth, apparently commonly what might be 
called a “female elder” of the tribe, who for some reason was supposed to 
be peculiarly fitted to remove tapu (26, Vol. XV, p. 148). 

In addition to the ritualistic priests and the prophets there were in the 
islands having temples and elaborate ceremonial, various types and classes 
of assistants in ceremonial, attendants of sacred places and persons, guardi- 
ans and bearers of sacred objects such as the representations and emblems 
of the gods. Occasionally these constituted distinct professional classes. 
This was true of the class known in Hawaii as the kahu, attendants and 
assistants of the temple priests, and also the bearers of the representations 
of the gods in processions and in war. The same word was applied in the 
sense of “servant”? to necromancers and minor prophets, who were sup- 
posed to be “possessed” by particular spirits and gods. There seems to 
have been in Samoa a class that closely resembled the Hawaiian kahu, called 
by the corresponding term tau, which is described as including those men 
in the community who were the attendants and guardians of the sacred 
places and embodiments of the gods (132, p. 221). The same type of re- 
ligious workers existed also in the Society and Marquesas islands. In the 
Society Islands early writers described in connection with the temples and 
representations of deity, and in the sacred processions that were a part of 
many rites, special bearers and guardians of the representations of the gods 
(105, Vol. I, p. 478; 82); while in the Marquesas an inferior class of 
helpers in the tribal temples and rites, generally called the moa, everywhere 
made up a part of the personnel of those who carried on the worship of 
the tribes’ gods (77, p. 230). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 159 

Tue PROPHET 

Throughout the islands, but particularly in Samoa and Tonga, the 
inspired diviners formed a definite class that played a prominent part in the 
cult. For this type of individual there was a distinct term in the Polynesian 
language: it appears as kaula in Hawaii, taula in Samoa and Tonga, taura 
in the Society Islands, tawa in the Marquesas. This term was not used to 
designate prophets in New Zealand. The kaula in Hawaii are described by 
Malo (99, pp. 153-4) as an eccentric class whose “thoughts were much taken 
up with deity.” The word, which is generally translated prophet, was also 
applied to those subject to spirit obsession. In Samoa the word taula was 
applied to a class of inspirational diviners who functioned in communal, 
family, and private worship (132, p. 70); and in Tonga the same term was 
employed with similar meaning (103, p. 258). Taura is translated in 
Jaussen’s Tahitian Dictionary as “prophet”; and diviners in the temples are 
called by this term by early writers (48, Vol. I, p. 371). In the Marquesas 
the inspired diviners who were known as taua were, as in Samoa, both 
public and private practitioners. Here, however, the tribal prophets who 
were called by this term were in addition priests, for they had definite 
sacrificial functions at the tribal temple (77, p. 223). 

Taula, then, signified one who was subject to possession by a god or a 
spirit, and was thus applied to the “inspired oracles’? into whom gods or 
spirits were supposed to enter in order to speak to men. ‘The word was 
employed both for the inspirational diviners who were the servants of the 
tutelar gods of communities and who played an important role in the com- 
munal worship—these may be termed the prophets of the cult; and likewise 
to an inferior order of private practitioners or mediums who were subject to 
“possession” by spirits. 

At the times when they were in a state of possession, these prophets and 
mediums were regarded by the people as living embodiments of the gods or 
spirits believed to be in possession of their bodies and faculties. They 
perhaps might better be described as vessels or containers that held the 
indwelling spirit. The Marquesans believed that the control entered into 
the stomach (kopw) of the individual possessed, and from this convenient 
vantage point spoke through the mouth of the man or woman.’# Both the 
Cook Islanders and the Maori used figurative expressions for individuals 
serving their gods in this capacity. The Mangaian word for these living 

14 Marquesans, whom I have asked to explain to me what was the condition of. or where was, 
the individual’s soul during the time when the god was supposed to be in possession of his body, have 
professed ignorance on the subject. The question appeared to be irrelevant to them: apparently the 
thought that the medium’s soul must go somewhere else to give place to the entering spirit has never 

occurred to them. It is my belief that a thinking Polynsian would consider the individual soul, 
like the rest of the body and faculties, to be in a state of passive control by the spirit of superior mana. 

160 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

embodiments or containers Gill translates as “god box” (63, p. 35). The 
Maori employed an equally suggestive term, speaking of such mediums as 
waka, evidently implying that the priest contained and carried his god as 
did the canoe its owner (21, p. 41). 

The visible manifestations accompanying “possession” were similar to 
those characteristic of the same type of mediums the world over. The 
medium, after a preliminary period of quiescence during which his own 

\ personality receded, coming into the condition of temporary abeyance that 
/ accompanied possession by another spirit, would pass by degrees into a 

state of more or less violent mental, emotional, and physical frenzy in 
which he appeared to be entirely “out of his senses.” When he spoke 
during such a spasm, every utterance was taken to be a direct verbal revela- 
tion from the controlling spirit who was in his body, and the oracular words 
were accepted as infallible prophecy. The gods’ desires, for sacrifices for 
example, were made known to their people in this way; and no important 
enterprise, such as war, was initiated until the god had been consulted 
through, or in the person of the prophet. It was by this method also that 
the cause of sickness and prospect of recovery were discovered, that thieves 
were detected, and coming or distant events described for the benefit of clients 

‘by mediums of inferior spirits. 

The private seances of mediums, who were often ventriloquists, were 
identical with such performances among other peoples, being held at night 
in a dark house or room in which the controlling spirit, summoned for the 
benefit of the medium’s employer, made its presence known by various 
sounds about the house—outside, on the roof, or in the walls—and then 
spoke to its awestruck interlocutors in a squeaky or whistling voice. (For 
descriptions of such seances see 100, pp. 169 ff; 77, pp. 265-6.) These 
demonstrations of mediums with their personal controls in a dark room ap- 
pear not to have been accompanied by the violent manifestations char- 
acteristic of the possession of his priest by a community god, which 
frequently took place in the public view in broad daylight. Of this type of 
phenomenon there are a number of descriptions by eye witnesses in various 
parts of Polynesia. The following picture of the possession of a prophet 
in Tahiti by his god will suffice for illustration (48, Vol. I, pp. 373-4). In 
this island, in the time of genuine native worship: 

. aS soon as the god was supposed to have entered the priest, the latter became 

violently agitated, and worked himself up to the highest pitch of apparent frenzy, the 
muscles of the limbs seemed convulsed, the body swelled, the countenance became 

| terrific, the features distorted, and the eyes wild and strained. In this state he often 

rolled on the earth, foaming at the mouth, as if laboring under the influence of the 
divinity by whom he was possessed, and, in shrill cries, and violent and often in- 
distinct sounds, revealed the will of the gods. The priests, who were attending, and 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 161 

versed in the mysteries, received, and reported to the people, the declarations which 
had thus been received. 

An early witness of this phenomenon in the Marquesas (137, Vol. I, p. 
70) writes of the prophets of those islands that: 

In their fits of inspiration they become convulsed, glare fiercely with their eyes, ) 

and putting their hands into a violent quiver, run about prophesying death to their 

enemies, in a squeaking voice; and at times demanding human victims for the god, 

by whom they are possessed. 

In Tonga, when it was desired to learn the will of the god of the com- 
munity, food was prepared and carried to the prophet’s house where the 
dignitaries of the community assembled, dressed ceremonially in mats, and 
seated themselves in a semicircle before the prophet. Kava, made by 
mixing chewed fibers of pepper root with water and straining out the 
refuse, was brewed in the customary ceremonious manner and drunk by all 
present, and food was served. The prophet then became inspired, remaining 
for some time with his eyes cast down. When questions were asked by 
those before him, the prophet would sometimes reply, at other times remain 
silent; sometimes remaining silent until the repast was finished. Then he 
would commence in a low, strange voice which would gradually rise to a 
natural pitch or higher, speaking always in the first person, for the god 
was supposed to be talking. At such times the inspired prophet usually 
spoke without emotion, but sometimes his countenance would take on a fierce 
expression and he would go into a convulsion, trembling all over, his lips 
turning back, and perspiration bursting out on his forehead, until at length 
tears would start from his eyes, his breast would heave, he would choke and 
then the agitation would gradually subside. It is said that before and 
after such periods of inspiration, a prophet would often eat as much food as 
four men could normally consume. After he had become calm he would 
pick up a club lying near him, regard it attentively for a moment, then 
look up, now to the right, now to the left, then again back at the club; 
after repeating this several times he would then suddenly raise the club, 
strike the ground or the house with it, and the god would leave him (102, 
pp. 86-7). 

These diviners or oracles are sometimes called priests, as in the descrip- 
tion by Ellis; but as human beings capable of surrendering their powers 
of speech to the controlling god, they were rather temporary embodiments. 
It is natural that such individuals were greatly prized by groups possessing 
them, and that they were very tapu: they were in a sense exactly like any 
other embodiment or artificial representation of the gods, a temporary abode 
of the deity among his worshippers; but they had the advantage over all 
other types of natural and artificial, animate and inanimate mediums, in 

162 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

that they were articulate and could lend the power of speech to the psychic 
patron. It is striking that in Tonga and, Samoa, where artificial repre- 
sentations of the ancestral gods were little used, the place of carved figures 
and the like was filled to a large extent by the human mediums or embodi- 
ments of the gods. In a kava drinking rite in honor of a local god, the 
prophet of the deity sat at the head of the circle, being treated as though 
he were the god who was actually believed by the people to be present and 
presiding at the feast. When guidance from the patron of the community 
was sought on some public matter, the god was entertained at a feast as 
though he were a human dignitary, with exactly the same ceremony, and his 
opinion or will was consulted just as though he were a human being. If 
the local god had a prophet whom he controlled, this man sat in the place of 
honor and was consulted verbally; but if, as was frequently the case, there 
was no individual in the community subject to possession, the place of the 
president at the head of the circle was left vacant, and the god, who was 
believed to be invisibly present in this place, was consulted by one or 
another method of artificial divination, in which was used his emblem—a 
bowl, a club, or something of the kind (102, pp. 368-85). Martin points out 
that in Tongan worship, “It must here be remarked that those gods who 
have priests are invoked in the person of the inspired priest wherever he 
may happen to be” (102, p. 223). In the Marquesan temple rites, the 
tribal prophet, when the god had come into him, was fed with food offer- 
ings, or, to put it more correctly, the god in his stomach was fed through 
the prophet’s mouth. It is interesting that descriptions from both these 
islands and those of western Polynesia picture the individuals when in this 
state of possession as consuming enormous quantities of food, which would 
be proof positive to the native mind that the god in the man was satisfying 
a voracious appetite such as war gods might be expected to have. 
Apparently the state spoken of as possession was sometimes induced 
artificially by certain conventional means; while at other times it appears to 
have come spontaneously and unexpectedly upon the psychically and 
nervously sensitive or unstable mediums who served as prophets. In 
western Polynesia the use of the narcotic kava (Piper methisticum), un- 
doubtedly aided in bringing about the condition. Here also it was cus- 
tomary, in some cases at least, for the medium about to come under the 
control of his god to gaze fixedly at some symbol of the deity such as a 
whale’s tooth or a club; this concentration of the gaze would for these 
practiced psychics bring about the cessation of normal personal conscious- 
ness desired, and the other symptoms would doubtless follow in due course. 
In an account of the religion of the island of Uea, which is geographically 
and culturally close to Samoa, it is definitely stated that kava was imbibed 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 163 

by the priest when he desired to induce inspiration (56, p. 115). Kava was 
used also for this purpose in Niue (142, p. 45). In Hawaii, a psychic 
diagnostician, desiring possession by his spirits, would drink ava; where- 
upon it is said the bystanders would remark, “Drink the awa to strengthen 
the spirits’ (54, Vol. VI, p. 112). In the Marquesas, as in western Poly- 
nesia, the prophets drank much kava and it is probable that the narcotic 
effect, which is sedative, aided in the practice of their prophetic art. Al- 
though there is no definite description of such use in the Marquesas, it is 
likely that the whale’s tooth was used as an object upon which to con- 
centrate, for it is known that such a tooth, worn as a neck pendent, was 
an ornament commonly used by inspirational priests, and that the whale’s 
tooth of such a prophet was in some tribes regarded as a very precious 
object. While speaking of the probability that concentration of the gaze upon 
some sacred object served to bring about the state of consciousness in which 
Polynesian prophets became possessed, the likelihood may be pointed out 
that the widespread practice of gazing into a reflecting liquid that was the 
custom in Polynesia may also have been employed with the object of induc- 
ing possession. It appears that in New Zealand the miniature god-sticks 
which represented the gods, and at which the tohunga gazed fixedly when 
he sought revelations from the god represented, probably served the same 
purpose as the whale’s tooth or other object elsewhere; and this may be 
true also of the larger carved figures of gods in other parts of Polynesia. 
I know of no definite description of a prophet fixing his gaze upon a 
carved figure of his deity in a temple when he desired possession, but it 
is certain that diviners of an inferior type very generally made use of 
small carvings or other artificial representations of their patron spirits. 
These oracles, like those of better known religions, by no means de- 
livered themselves of their wisdom intended for the guidance of the people 
in a manner that was always intelligible to the uninitiated; their utterances, 
like most prophetic words, were sometimes obscure in themselves, and were 
undoubtedly always subject to various interpretations. Ellis describes the 
Tahitian prophet in a state of inspiration, as uttering “shrill cries,” and 
violent and often indistinct sounds,” which had to be interpreted by priests 
“versed in the mysteries.” In New Zealand, prophecies, which were called 
matakite came through the tribal priest in a state of possession by his god; 
or they might come to him while he was asleep. It is said of matakite in 
general that though they were often obscure, they were sometimes clear and 
to the point, warning a war party, for instance, of dangers to be avoided, 
sometimes giving definite instructions as to the most favorable place and 
manner of fighting. The spoken prophecies, which were delivered in 
rhythmic utterance by the priest as coming from the tribe’s god, are said 

164 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

usually to have stipulated some sign or object or action which must be seen 
or accomplished before victory would be assumed. For example, a matakite 
once stipulated that the war party must kill a certain bird which it was 
believed embodied the soul of the opposing chief; at another time, it said 
that the fighters must rally about a certain point on the battle field (24, 
Vol. XI, pp. 53-4). It is evident that these war time prophecies in New 
Zealand were based in part upon prevalent native beliefs, and in part upon 
“\ the knowledge of strategy in fighting of the priests who pronounced them. 
This would probably hold true of similar utterances in all the islands; that 
the utterances themselves, or the priests’ interpretations of them when they 
were obscure, were based on the one hand upon the complex, and yet well 
defined system of native beliefs concerning the psychic aspect of objects and 
events, and in part upon intelligent reasoning on the part of the priest or 
prophet, who, removed to some extent from the fuss and fury of war and 
politics, was probably able to discern the trend of circumstance—causes, 
~ issues, and consequences—more clearly than those in the midst of the fray. 

It is natural that miraculous powers should have been attributed to men 
believed to be inspired by gods, and that wonder tales should have grown 
up concerning their mana. Not to mention the powers of second sight or 
prescience and of summoning spirits and gods, which were attributed 
everywhere to prophets, there are many tales of miracles that were regarded 
as proof of the mana of particular men. In the Marquesas there are 
several such stories: of one tribal prophet who was able to cause his 
sacred robe to travel by itself from island to island; and of another who 
floated upon the sea for a month at a time without food and unmolested by 
sharks (77, pp. 223-4). Early visitors to Tahiti describe feats performed 
by native holy men as proofs of their divine power (153, Vol. II, p. 123). 
From New Zealand are various stories illustrating the prowess of tohunga. 
It was quite generally believed that these wizards were able by means of 
their spells to dissipate frost, to cause downpours, and similar meteorological 
occurrences. One famous story from New Zealand is of a certain tohunga 
who, to confound a missionary who was seeking to convert him, caused a 
sprig of dried brown leaves to turn green before the astonished eyes of 
the European. As Percy Smith points out, there can be little doubt that 
the Maori tohunga—and the same holds true of other Polynesian initiates 
into the religious mysteries—had some knowledge of hypnotic control. 
However consciously they used hypnotism, and regardless of whether its 
principles were to any degree formulated by them, it is beyond question 
that Polynesian priests, prophets, and workers of magic were skilled in 
using it in connection with their respective psychic activities. Trained 
mediums and workers in the magic arts in this part of the world were 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 165 

skilled also in both ventriloquism and sleight-of-hand, and employed both 
to bolster up the faith of their clients in their own and their gods’ powers. 
(See 131, pp. 253-270; 75, p. 63.) 

While direct revelation through mediums was the chief means of divina- 
tion in Polynesia, there were many other ways of discovering what the 
future held. An interesting method was that of haruspication, which was 
employed in Hawaii and Tahiti in the war rites, when the bodies and 
entrails of sacrificed pigs lying in the temple were observed by the priests 
and auguries were taken from their positions and movements. (See War.) 
Another favorite mode of prognostication was one that would be expected 
to have reached a high degree of development among a people who were 
at once sea farers and agriculturists—that is, the casting of auguries by the 
observation of astronomical and meteorological signs. (See Consecrated 
Industry.) While this method was to be found everywhere; it was most 
in vogue in Hawaii where there was a distinct class of diviners called kilo 
or kilokilo, whose business it was on the occasion of important events to 
take auguries from the heavens, clouds, rainbows, the winds, and other 
natural phenomena. It is easy to understand how a people who believed in 
an intimate rapport existing between the heavens, the earth, and human 
beings should have given especial attention to this particular mode of fore- 
telling events. Since it was believed that the heavens and the earth were 

directly affected by the well being of the divine chief, it was thought quite | 

logically that the condition and fortunes of the chief in the immediate future 
could be discerned, by one wise in such matters, on the face of Nature, 

whose psychic life was one with that of the chief. Signs were also taken, 

particularly in those islands in which animate incarnations were the chief 
type of visible embodiment of tutelar gods, from the appearance or move- 
ments of sacred animals. Mechanical means such as spinning a coconut, or 

breaking a gourd, and observing in what direction the end of the nut or | 

fragments of gourd pointed, were used to some extent. Finally there were 
various ways in which knowledge of future or distant events came to those 
psychically gifted: in dreams, through second sight in a trance state, through 
gazing into a reflecting liquid or into a sacred fire, and so on. All of the 
methods of divination here mentioned were practiced particularly by the 
priests and prophets and other inferior types of religious workers in the 
islands; but divining was by no means limited to these.’ In every form of 
activity, work, war, play, and travel, there were innumerable special omens, 
so that every man, and particularly every leader in any form of organized 
activity, had to be to a large extent his own diviner; and in private life, 
except in very important events when a professional diviner was called in, 
every man was his own prophet. Weather conditions and accidental occur- 

COaret. / 

166 Bernice P. Bisho p Museum—Bulletin 34 

rences that were out of the ordinary were the chief sources of omens in 
connection with activities; while personal omens were taken from such 
things as sneezing, unusual bodily movements and feelings, petty incidents 
of an unusual nature. 

SACRED PLACES 

Of consecrated places devoted to the worship of the ancestral gods there 
were in Polynesia all varieties from the simplest shrines to elaborate stone 
temples! The nature of the sacred places was determined chiefly by the 
purpose of the worship offered in them, but also, in public places, by the 
numbers of worshippers and political and environmental influences. The 
simplest of all public shrines were those in New Zealand where the tribal 
groups of the Maori formed less numerous and less static communities than 
the inhabitants of the Marquesas, Tahiti, and Hawaii which possessed 
, genuine temples; while, on the other hand, the most complicated temple 

A Rant? ) form to be found in Polynesia was that of the island of Hawaii, with a 

\ 

\large static population united under dominant overlords. 

The sacred place devoted to general worship of the community was only 
one of many types of temples. Every occupation in Polynesia had its 
patron deities, and all these gods had their own shrines for the more im- 
portant activities at least. Thus in Hawaii every house that was erected 
for the purpose of teaching hula dancing, which in ancient times was a 
sacred occupation, had at one end an altar consecrated to the goddess Laka, 
the patron of the dance. In fact, the whole structure may be considered a 
temple consecrated to this goddess, for rules similar to those of larger 
temples governed its erection and use. This is true to some extent of all 

_. Polynesian sacred structures built for some sacred labor, such as the tattoo- 

ing houses in Samoa and the Marquesas, the canoe shelters in Samoa and 
Hawaii, and the special houses of learning in the Marquesas and New 
‘Zealand. These were in a sense temples consecrated to the sacred labor and 
the patron deities who presided over it. The site upon which the hula halau 
was to stand had first to be purified by aspersion. The whole process of 
erection of the halau was ceremonial, requiring fasting, prayers and sacri- 
fices, and the enforcement of strict tapu upon those engaged in the work. 
In every halau was a_shrine (kuahu), which is described as a rustic frame 
embowered in greenery. Chants to Laka accompanied the assembling of 
the materials used in making “and bedecking the shrine; and prayers were 
recited continuously during the whole of the process of its construction, one 
of these invocations being addressed to the “multitude of little gods’ of 
the woodland. ‘The goddess herself was represented upon the altar by an 
uncarved block of wood wrapped in yellow bark cloth scented with turmeric 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 167 

(51, pp. 14-22). These temples devoted to the goddess of wild nature, the 
patroness of the song and the dance, were wholly appropriate to their 
purpose, for they were conceived and erected by a people as free and 
spontaneous as Nature herself, a people with abundant imagination, but 
whose fancy flowed with nature rather than aspired to go beyond her with 
invention. 

Fishermen in Hawaii had their shrines along the coast where they plied 
their trade. Most of these appear to have been merely small piles of stones, 
on which offerings were placed for Kuula the chief patron of fishermen (99, 
pp. 278-9). Many such primitive shrines are still to be seen along the 
shores; and a few, at least, still receive offerings of the first of the catch. 
Sacred precincts in which the fishermen performed their rites are also 
described as existing in ancient times, but little is known concerning these. 
In the Marquesas, the fishermen’s shrines were temporary erections within 
consecrated precincts near the fishing grounds (77, p. 165), while in Ta- 
hiti the fishermen had their own temples (82). In some islands, it 
was evidently considered necessary to have a shrine of the god mounted on 
the canoe itself. In historic times in New Zealand large canoes sometimes 
carried on board a “tiny temple of the sea-god ...a miniature copy of 
the larger shrine that in former days was built on the deck of the great 
double or outrigged canoes” (149, p. 121; 41, Vol. II, p. 39). On the 
eve of the departure of a war expedition by sea in Tahiti, Cook observed on 
the shore four double canoes, each with a small platform on the bow 
covered with coconut leaves tied in “mysterious knots.” On the platforms, 
which are referred to as marae, was an assortment of food offerings dedi- 

cated to the god. The Englishmen were told that the canoes belonged to 
the chief’s god and were destined to accompany the fleet in its attack on 
another island. 

Henry describes the type of special canoe that was designed as a 
floating temple for Tahitian gods (82): 

The god’s canoe ... was large and deep and in its bows was a chamber about 
six feet long for the god in his house, covered with planks, which formed a deck 
where men could walk without desecrating the sacred presence. Upon the canoe 
were elaborately carved hideous figures of tii and decorations of sacred feathers, the prow 
and stern gracefully rising twelve or fifteen feet high and ending in the carved figure 
of a tii or head of a sacred sea_bird. 

Elsewhere in the same work are described sacred canoes such as used 
to come by sea from great distances to the temple of the chiefly dynasty at 
Opoa on the island of Raiatea for certain festivals. These crafts were 
double canoes with a floor: 

. covering the chambers containing idols, drums, trumpet shells and other 
treasures for the gods and people of Raiatea; and upon the floor were placed a row 

\ 

\ 
( Lore om 
{ ys HAA Woda 
x 
~ 
OR Bee 
\< ‘ei Ow 

re / 
wd Cat 

Ks dr tree HAA 

We oem Ok 

168 Bernice P. Bisho p Museum—Bulletin 34 

of sacrifices from abroad which consisted of human_ victims brought for that purpose 
and just slain. 

Domestic shrines where families venerated their dead, and where private 
rites such as those of birth and death were performed, commonly had a 
place in the dwelling or near it. In Hawaii the small house called mua which 
was a part of the establishment of every householder of any pretensions, 
was both a tapu eating house for men and the family chapel, for it con- 
tained the domestic shrine where the representations and relics of the 
ancestral guardians were kept and rites performed in their honor (99, p 
143). In other parts of Polynesia domestic shrines were commonly tombs 

' or consecrated localities where the remains of the dead were temporarily or 
\ permanently deposited. 

One of the main uses of the family shrine was in connection with the 

care of the remains of the recently dead. In Tahiti, corpses were exposed _ : 
and treated on a bier erected on the platform of the family marae, “dnd 

after the preliminary treatment, deposited i in the platform of the marae (105, 
Vol. I, pp. 470, 547 ff.). The private shrines served in this way in the 
Marquesas (77, pp. 116-7), and in Easter Island (111, p. 166). 

The stones that were built into the family marae in the Society Islands 
had to be purified by sprinkling accompanied by the recitation of a prayer; 
and the opening of the new domestic shrine was celebrated by a feast. In 
such marae (82): 

The sacred family fetishes, in the shape of images, ancestral skulls, jawbones, 

\ and feather amulets, were secreted in flagstone cavities in the front part of the marae. 

A characteristic adjunct of such places was a refuse pit, corresponding 

‘to the sacrifice pit of the larger temples. Those near the dwellings were 

surrounded by sweet smelling ferns to counteract disagreeable odors. ‘These 
were attached to the marae because it was believed that the objects thrown 
in them—anything that had been in intimate contact with the body—were 
thereby protected against witchcraft. 

A transitional stage between the simple family shrine and the larger com- 
munity temples of the northern islands is seen in the wahi tapu (sacred 
place), or tuahu (shrine), of New Zealand, where the Maori tribe was but 

-an expanded family. The wahi tapu were enclosures located usually close 

by the villages, which served both as community cemeteries and tribal 
shrines. Such a sacred place might contain the hallowed remains of a 
chief awaiting final burial or exhumation, or it might be only a place where 
tapu objects, such as remnants of chiefs’ clothing or food, were thrown to 
protect them from desecration, and to shield those with inferior mana (149, 
p. 283). One writer, referring to the wahi tapu as a “sacred grove,” 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 169 

speaks of it as containing the tombs of chiefs, offerings to the gods, 

sacrifices, and tapu_objects, placed there for protection. Only priests might Oa, nen 
enter these restricted precincts. “In the grove the priest performed his \ aaane 
mystic rites; there he professed to hold converse with his gods, and thence | 

brought back their responses” (140, pp. 98-9, 174). 

Many wahi tapu were marked “by a heap of rough unworked stones, 
and sometimes by one or more blocks of stone set upright, partially em- 
bedded in the earth” (16, p. 171). Both these features indicate generic re- 
lationship with sacred places in central Polynesia. Another interesting 
feature of these Maori shrines was a small model of a house on top of a 
pole, in which a receptacle containing the emblem of the tutelar god of the 
community was kept (16, pp. 172-3). 

The tribal temple of the Marquesans was generally called meae (tomb or Y=e~ ase 
temple), but was referred to sometimes also as the vahi tapu. It was es- “~~2a2! 
sentially the tomb of the chiefs and priests of the tribe, although there was” aeaol eau 
one form built as an adjunct to the feast place, which was purely for cere- 
monial purposes. The sepulchral mcae of the tribes were in secluded upland 
spots, where the sacred relics of the illustrious dead were protected from 
desecration. Still another type called by the same name, was intended , 
exclusively for the protection of other objects of a tapu nature such as 
anything which by accident had come in contact with the head of a sacred “% °© 
first-born boy. 

The Marquesan ceremonial temple was not to be seen in its completeness 
except when some tribal rite was being performed—this was true more or + Acai Rnghciackal 
less of places of worship throughout Polynesia—for it was then only that 
houses and altars were put in order, decorated with coconut leaves, white 
and brown sacred cloth, and various symbols. At other times the sacred , 
places were deserted and in a state of disorder, only the stone platforms and / 
the figures of the gods being permanent. Some of the ancient platforms/ 
were built of immense stone blocks carefully fitted, but not dressed or cut. 
|The most sacred of the platforms was that at_the rear, where stood the \ 
, ancestral figures of wood or stone, and where the human sacrifices were | aos oe 
_ offered. Others were foundations for houses of priests and their attendants. (~~ a am 
The most striking of these houses was that of the prophet, a thatched (eee 
structure, small and rectangular at the base but with a roof so high that 
from a distance it had the appearance of an obelisk. Inside and about this 
were small temporary shrines and altars or stagings, the whole surrounded 
by peeled stakes of hau standing upright in the ground, signs of tapu. The 
house of the prophet, and the platform from which the carved figures repre- 
senting the ancestors surveyed the rest of the sacred place were the two werd, y ban 

& Lo ~ DAL 

é 

170 Bermce.P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

main features of the temple, being at the rear. The Marquesan temples 
had no court enclosed by a wall or fence, as did the places of worship in 

~ the Society and Hawaiian islands, but one of the types of Marquesan meae 

approximated this condition in having before it the paved tribal gathering 
place (taha koina) which was surrounded by stone platforms and on which 
feasting, dancing, and sports were staged on the occasion of the rites. 
The Marquesan meae is transitional between the simple vali tapu, or sacred 
place of the Maori, and the more complicated temples in which were cele- 
brated the district and national rites in Tahiti and Hawaii. The cult belonged 

a (to dynasties of exclusive ‘chiefs rather than to the people as in the Mar- 

Bnd nslrene quesas, the populace assembling outside the stone walls of the sacred area 

of the temple to observe what they could of the ritual conducted within by 

‘chiefs and priests. But in the democratic Marquesas the whole tribe was 

assembled at the feast place during the popular festivals, men, women, and 
children being seated about the area, taking part silently in the worship 
led by the priest, prophet, their assistants, and the old men of the tribe. 

In the Society Islands there were, according to Henry six classes 
of temples: first the family ancestral temples at which the father of the 
family presided as priest; the district temples known as the people’s marae; 
quite distinct from these was the royal marae, the most important of all, 
belonging to the family of the reigning chiefly dynasty; and three types con- 
secrated to particular activities, the fishermen’s temple, the canoe builders’ 
temple, and temples or shrines belonging to doctors (82). : 

The characteristic feature of all marae was an area of earth or rubble 
slightly elevated and surrounded or encased with stone or coral blocks, 
which in the more elaborate temples took the form of a platform or terrace 
made by encasing earth or rubble in walls. In one type of marae the form 
of this terrace is closely similar to the Marquesan type. 

The generic relationship of the higher platforms and terraces to the 
small elevated sacred places is clearly evident to a careful observer; and 
further, the derivation of a still more complicated and elaborate form from 
the platform, that is the pyramidal type which consists simply of superposed 
platforms, is equally evident. Upon or before’ _thig’ holy of holies the 
figures of the gods stood and sacrifices were offered and in or near it the 
skulls of victims were kept. In the sacred precincts of the temple, the 
skeletal remains of deceased chiefs were often put, either temporarily or 
permanently: there was sometimes at least a stone lined vault for this 
purpose, as in the burial meae in the Marquesas. In front of the holy of 
holies was a paved area which was either elevated above the surface of the 
ground forming an extensive low terrace; or else this paved area was on 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 171 

the ground level and surrounded by a stone wall or fence. Upon the paved 
area were erect stone slabs marking the seats of the heads of the various | “~~~ * 

branches of the family having a right to a place in the temple. Concern- / ~ 
ing the temporary features of Tahitian temples little is known beyond what ~ 
d : ue ein 

has been recorded by casual observers during the early years of European 
contact. One of these describes a marae enclosed by a wooden fence about 

thirty or forty yards equate: 7 Na ee, 

t fare eee | 

About one half of the platrorm next the interior side of the square was paved, “~*~ phihns \udofln 

and near the middle of the pavement stood a_staging to receive sacrifices, a long 

structure forty feet long and seven feet wide supported on sixteen posts eight feet aa 
high. The surface of the staging was covered with mats on which offerings of hogs, 
turtles, fish, plaintains and coconuts were laid. The fence seemed to be broken down 
in one nics and here was observed a heap of rough stones upon which, in line with 
the fence were placed boards from six to seven feet high, cut into various shapes. 
[These represented ancestral guardians of the marae.] 

Near this were a house and two sheds where men were constantly in Mowe = 
attendance. Inside the house, at one end, was a “little house, or ark” of = wee 
the god, a model of a Tahitian house, four feet long and three in height and 
breadth. The emblem of the god of the temple which was placed in this 
little house for the visitors to see is described as being an object of plaited 
coconut fiber to which were attached bunches of feathers (161, pp. 
211-212). The house described in this account was the Fare-ia-manaha 
which, according to Henry was “a good sized house” in front of the 
marae, where the keepers dwelt and the effigies and emblems of the gods peers is 
were stored, the most sacred of these was the Fare-atua, a “little ark upon) - ‘*"" aon 
a stand,” a miniature house containing the emblem of the god resting upon a 
stand about four feet high on four curved legs that formed two supporting 
arches, which were carved and polished (Henry, 82). Prominent in the Stele Vann 
large marae were the altars, which were of several kinds. The first type, Loew 3 
called fataa rau (leaf-stage), consisted of a large staging supported on 
carved posts. In addition to these large structures intended to receive the , | 
bodies of sacrifices, were several small forms referred to as fataatat (food i ine 
altar) which are more strictly altars, being intended, according to Henry, to »,, rer 
receive “dainty morsels” for the gods. Some of these were square, and 
supported on four posts, some were ohlong on two posts, and others were 

DAA + 

round and rested on one post. 
Some of the sacred structures in the Society Islands represent the most hme 

ambitious efforts of the Polynesians in building with hewn stone. The 

largest structure of this kind, at Mahaiatea, in the district of Papara, Tahiti, few acy. 

was a pyramid 44 feet high,/267 feet long, and 71 feet broad (at the base, aR 

built with eleven. stages, each of which was res with alternating courses of =. 

square white coral | blocks and roundish volcanic stones shaped by hand. | 

tt ao 
Shit 
172 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Before this pyramid was a spacious area 118 paces long by 110 paces wide, 

entirely paved with flat stones and enclosed with stone walls. One of the 
_ early visitors who observed this monument wrote that “Its size and work- 
, manship almost exceed belief” (7, pp. 102-3). However, this monument 
\ must not be taken as it often has been, as typical of the temple form of the 
\ Society Islands. 

The marae in the leeward Society Islands is commonly made by encasing 
a core of rubble between two parallel rows of cut coral blocks and natural 
slabs of volcanic rock set on_edge in the ground. Some of these blocks 
are of great size, as those in the marae Tainuu, Raiatea, in which one of 
the largest of the enclosing blocks of coral rears itself twelve feet above mule 
ground. : Vie 

Rak cee The erection of the royal temples of the Society Islands was accom- 
plished with the aid of all the chief’s people, and the labor in every opera- 
tion was consecrated by prescribed ritual. The whole community was 
placed under a consecrational tapu, as at the time of the most sacred rites, 
and those who were to work on the temple were segregated so that they 
might be free from all evil influences. ‘The ground of the site upon which 
the place of worship was to stand was purified by sprinkling, as were also 
the stones that went into its walls; when the whole structure was com- 
plete it was again purified in the same way. The corner stone was the 
link that bound the new monument consecrated to the chiefly ancestors to 

their older places of worship. This stone was always brought from another 

~ & beth ' temple “of. the family, and under it was placed the body of a human 

Wordinnmaert ( \ Sacrifice. The completion of the new marae was marked by a great inaugu- 
ration feast (82). 

LArat 

Mterine, 

Se In Hawaii the temples, like the other features of the organized cult, are 
patentee found to be more elaborately planned than those of any other part of 
ppmned Yan Polynesia. "Tombs of the illustrious were still places of worship, and as 
w dem nenebent such may be spoken of as shrines; but the true temples, or heiau, having 
Ne a: 6a arrangements for the exclusive worship carried on by the chiefs assisted by 

their priests, and serving only occasionally for sepulture, differ so widely 
from the simple vali tapu of New Zealand as to be scarcely recognizable 
as a more elaborate counter-type were it not for the intermediate forms in 
other islands and in Hawaii itself which bridge the gap between the two 
extremes. The identity of the chief features of the Hawaiian heiau with 
the characteristic elements typical of all Polynesian sacred places becomes 
clearly manifest only when the basic features characteristic of places of 
worship throughout Polynesia are studied. 

At the time of the discovery of the Hawaiian islands, the best known 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 173 

royal mausoleum, which with strict propriety may be called a_place_of 

worship as well as a tomb, was the sepulchral house of King Keawe, which 
stood near the seashore in the vicinity of the large temple of refuge at 
Honaunau, on the island of Hawaii. This was a rectangular house with 
gabled roof, apparently in the form of the typical native dwelling, 24 feet 
long by 16 feet wide, built of durable timber and thatched with ti_leaves. 
A fence made of large rough stakes, which must have resembled closely the 
enclosure of the Maori wahi tapu, protected the house from intrusion. ‘This 
fence was so constructed as to leave an open area about 24 feet wide 
in_ front and at either end of the house, which was paved with smooth lava 
blocks. There were several rudely carved male and female figures outside 
the enclosure, some on low pedestals, others on high posts, ae a number 
of similar representations embellished the fence at irregular distances all 
around—a feature typical also of Maori sacred enclosures. These figures, 
as aos of the spirits supposed to guard the place, had the same function 
as the “carved boards” called tii, representing ancestral spirits which 
guarded the boundaries of the temples in Tahiti. At the south-« east end of 
the enclosed area of the tomb, upon a crescent shaped heap of stones, there 
stood on pedestals and pillars ranging from three to ten ace high < a_semi- 
if perpetual guardians of the ene gen reposing in the miotee adjoin- 
ing.” 

It is significant that the arrangement of figures of the gods for their 
sacrificial feasts in this tomb- -temple, and also in the tece temples used 
primarily for ceremonial, duplicates the formal seating order in a_kava 
drinking rite in Samoa and Tonga, in which the ranking and presiding chief 
or priest ‘occupied the central position at the head ‘of a semicircle of digni- 
taries. Before each of the { figures in the tomb of Keawe was a little mound 
of accumulated refuse of offerings that had been presented, such as the 
remains of flower wreaths, broken calabashes, bits of cloth. Within the 
house, which was so tapu that the missionary visitors were not allowed to 
enter, could be seen through the walls many.tlarge figures, some of them 
carved of wood, some of the feather covered variety, typical Hawatian 
representations of their gods, with distended mouths shaped like a figure- 
eight lying flat, adorned with rows of dogs’ or sharks’ teeth, and with 
pearl-shell eyes. There were also in different parts of the house several 
bundles of bones of deceased royalty, tied with coconut fiber cord; rich 
shawls and other articles that probably had belonged to the deceased, for 

such articles were hidden away with the remains of the dead to prevent 

sacrilege (48, Vol. IV, pp. 165-6). 

The great Hawaiian heiaus, or temples, while not exhibiting the same 

* Pre Rancrenody 

ya. 

lor otanthe 

(ha wine ADe ’ 

9s ee 
NW ether Cem au 
enisiene. 

et On te AA 
j 

| 

Vere. hikes A, 

brentus 

174 Bernice P. Bishop Musewm—Bulletin 34 

Tneant a skill in stone work that had been developed in the Society and Marquesas 
OOS hod-enele islands, were the largest and most elaborate, stone constructions in Polynesia. 
Se Pol. Mae There were, however, intermediate forms, simpler. types, which ally the 
larger structures with the local tomb forms and with temple forms in 
pecncta) Polynesia. Fornander believed that in Hawaii a temple in truncated 
Qe rmnrdackl | pyramidal form comparable to the Society Islands type preceded the later 
m “oe Oa Calnthon” walled _enclosures, and points to the heiau of Kumakaula at Kaimu, in the 
district of ‘Puna, Hawaii, as an example (55, Vol. II, p. 6). This was built 
© / \in the form of an irregular parallelogram surrounded by rough stone walls 
from which hideously carved representations of protective spirits stared out 
upon the surrounding country. These enclosing walls measured 224 feet 
on the long side and 100 feet on the short. On three sides of the parallelo- 
gram, the walls were 20 feet high and 12 feet thick at the base, narrowing 
i sercga., gradually toward the top where a 6 foot wide course of smooth stones was 
laid as a walk; while on the seaward side the enclosing wall was only_7 or 
8 feet high. The temple was entered through a narrow passage between 
two high walls. / / Within the enclosure there were several terraces; the 
highest of these was more carefully finished than the others, being a spacious 
Vom er.) area paved with flat, smooth stones. At the south end,was “a kind of 
7 ais inner court, which might be called the sanctum sanctorum of the temple.” 
wAKorafln ) Here stood the figure representing Kukailimoku, the king’s war god, to 
| whom the temple was dedicated, flanked by a number of figures of inferior 
. ‘ deities. The representation of Ku is described as “ a large wooden image, 
crowned with a helmet, and covered with red feathers.” In the center of 

Nauttd Cane, 

8 woth / this inner court stood the “oracle tower,” a high frame of wicker-work 4 to 
“Centon ) 5 feet square at the base, and sloping slightly inward toward the top. Into 
Wes hk \ this the king’s prophet entered when he desired oracular revelation of the 
god’s will. Near the entrance to the inner court was a staging on which 

Ls & ae aoe © 

{ \ sacrifices were deposited. Approximately in the center of one of*the ter- 

races (apparently the upper one is still referred to) was a sacred house be- 
OY) Caen longing to the king, in which he resided at certain seasons of strict tapu; 
Vans iy while at the north end of the same terrace were other houses occupied by 

Vee 

Neri | dosnt the priests, the only persons other than the. king who were permitted to 
dwell within the sacred enclosure (48, Vol. IV, pp. 96-8). 
Ptioh. a ~ One of the best known and largest heiaus of the late Hawaiian form was 

wr Warrant, the luakini at Kawaihae on the island of Hawai. 

Malo, in his description of the Hawaiian war rites, gives further details 
concerning the luakini form of temple. The account as given by this native 
writer is somewhat confusing; but, when simplified, gives the following 
picture (99, pp. 213-4): A stone wall enclosed the precincts of the temple 
proper. The oracle tower (/ananuu), a tall frame covered with white cloth 

| 
‘(Peqion wath 
al ale 
Handy—Polynesian Religion 175 

i. we. (90, pp. 229-31) with a small entrance on one side, stood at the back of the hae Arn 
Sem — enclosed court, apparently surrounded by a fence; and beneath it was the 

’ 4 ‘ 
Ae laukini or sacrifice pit (lua, pit; kini, innumerable [sacrifices] ) into which the + Ln oAc 
k remains of victims were thrown. In front of this, ranged in a semicircle, 
| en ngen ore rr“ 

stood the figures of the presiding gods, with Kukailimoku in the « central te 
Pak. position. Before the gods was a pavement of pebbles and the altar, a frame bers «cP 
sxaq’., On which animal and human offerings were laid after being sacrificed. Next 
a the altar toward the front of the temple was the hale pahw where drums 
peal were beaten, no doubt accompanying the chanting of groups of priests, which 
vers tunis) WAS a conspicuous feature in the war rite. Beyond this stood a large 
) Wrremom house called mana which was apparently a sort of holy of holies, in which 
ey { torkcre were kept the “portable. figures of the war_gods (54, Vol. VI, Do 150) ache 
s eon 4 doors of both these houses opened toward the altar. Beyond them was 
) « another house, the use of which is not stated, which stood close by the 
Be tant, entrance to the enclosure. At one _end of the mana was a small structure 

called watea, in which was kept a very sacred symbol consisting of a cord or 
Bese Pgs nti Qe of plaited coconut fiber intertwined with seaweed of a particular kind. j 
oe (The seaweed was of such importance ceremonially that the temple and the 
Rm wen rite could not be completed until it had been obtained.) In the waiea the 

king and his priest performed the sacred aha rite (54, Vol. VI, p. 156) in 
the war ceremony, and into this house the high priest retired for a certain 
number of days during the Makahiki_ festival. (See Seasonal Fertility 
b Onn Rites.) At the other end of the mana ‘stood an oven house where were 
prepared the feasts in which the priests indulged during the war rite./ Out- 
side the enclosure on the north side was a level pavement, the outer borders 
ee of which were marked by tapu signs in the form of crosses, which indicated 
to the laity the limits of the holy ground; while on the south side of the 
on Caan temple proper, outside the enclosure, stood a building called the house of 
“ss. . Papa (Hale Papa), the mythical ancestress of the Hawaiians. Here 
os wee women of chiefly rank assembled at a certain time during the war cere- 
monies to perform a purificatory rite (99, pp. 214, 234). 

Ota. ad facryren Arp ~ 

BAS etncn 

In ‘Tonga and Samoa, where there were no elaborate temples, in con- Few yen 4 

’ formity “with a less formalized system of worship, there were tombs of OnmrrA 
sacred chiefs which correspond fundamentally in form and use to tombs in) %§ 44 
Hawaii, the Society, Marquesas, and Cook islands. In Tonga the tombs of 
the divine chiefs are described by an early visitor (161, pp. 283-4) as being 
of three kinds: an earth mound with a grave on top; an enclosure of stone 
slabs set up on edge, having at each corner two_slabs larger than the rest 
at right angles to each other (remains of this type of sacred enclosure have 
been found also in the Austral Islands) ; the third form combined the other yj (y-em-eod 
two, being a low elongated pyramid with three or four stages formed by 

% KAantliee “ 
y | 

Yy 4 f. adie 

176 Bernice P. Bishop Musewmn—Bulletin 34 

encasing successive levels of earth filling with large, carefully cut blocks 
of coral, so to make broad stepped sides. This last form finds a definite 
correspondence in the Tahitian pyramidal and platform type of_marae, which 

Tom in its turn in certain other features is identical with the sacred places of the 
ae , other Polynesian groups. These tombs in Tonga, by reason of their serving 

t, i \ as places of worship at the time of funerary rites, memorial festivals, and 

ae -.g _) Seasonal offerings of first fruits, which were among the principle occasions 

er aaa ) when the temples in other islands were used—definitely fall into the category 
of tomb-temples. 

¢. This is true also of the less pretentious tombs of chiefs in Samoan 
villages, which consisted of a small mound that was sometimes encased with 
a curbing of dressed coral blocks. These tombs were also upon certain occa- 

sions places of worship. 
In Tonga and Samoa, the tombs of the chiefs were places of worship 
ns for the community, but they were not strictly speaking, temples. In both 
ve, was a class of houses consecrated to local tutelar deities, and these were, at 
Ron Di Kaan : times at least, quite distinct from the sepulchral sites. In Tonga, besides 
ba wn the tombs that served at times as places of worship, were in different locali- 
phar Ganck ties special houses built in the usual style of dwellings, standing in carefully 

tended enclosures, which were dedicated to particular gods of their cult, and 
to their priests (102, p. 331; 41, Vol. I, pp. 312-14). Some of these: 
at least, stood on ‘mounds as did the tomb houses. Likewise, some 
Samoan villages had a special | house of the usual form that was dedicated 
to the tutelar god of the community; while in other places the council house 
of the village, which belonged to the chief, was also its temple (109, pp. 109, 
110; 151 p. 240). It is probable that both in Tonga and Samoa the com- 

, munities that had houses especially dedicated to a god were those favored 
with the possession of an inspired prophet. 

SS thd 

A careful analysis of the features typical of sacred places reveals the 
Venn existence of a fundamental uniformity comparable to that found in the basic 

is theory and practice of the religion. The uniform elements probably repre- 

sent features typical of sacred places of the early Polynesian cult. That 

Crit es the primitive prototype of the holy of holies was a_mound seems to be 
indicated both by the use of the word ahw (pile) to designate this part and 
by the form of the tapu part of tombs and temples which was generally a 
mound, terrace, platform, or pyramid. ‘The old sacred places may have 
orXcerntokecd been orientated, for in late times in many, though by no means all, instances, 
the holy of holies was at the east end of the sacred place. Around or before 

| this tapu place was a sacred area where the exoteric phases of rites were for 

ae the most part enacted. Stone slabs set in the ground or in the surface of a 
tee pavement to serve as seats or back-rests, may also have been a feature of the 

\ DR Mragquma& 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 177 

nesia which is reported from all the large island groups except Hawaii and 
Tonga. Another feature of general distribution was the pit or other 
place for tapu refuse. Perhaps also a staging or frame on which sacrifices 

were placed or hung was typical of the ancient place of worship. Certainly’ 

a_shrine to be occupied by the visible representation of the patron god, or by 
his prophet, or by both, was an indispensable part of the place of worship. 
(See 77a.) Finally, a feature which the Polynesian religion had in common 
with many other nature cults is the association of places of worship with 
sacred trees or groves. 

In New Zealand Best (16, pp. 173-4) describes the wai tapu of a hamlet 

as aie 

. a stream or pond at or in which tapw rites were performed. Such a stream, 
or a portion of it, was set aside for such purposes, as it were, and viewed as a place 
not to be trespassed on. . . A considerable number of religious ceremonies were 
performed at such streams, lustration and immersion forming an important feature 
in Maori ritual. 

Corresponding to these in New Zealand were what were known as the 
vai_keetu (ke'etu, hewn slabs of stone) in the Marquesas, tapu bathing 
basins enclosed in cut slabs of tufa or coral, which chiefs built in the 
stream close by their houses (77, p. 79). In the Society Islands also the 
arti had such artificial bathing basins (101). From neither of these groups 
of islands, however, is there information relative to ceremonial use of these 
basins equivalent to that of the vai tapu in New Zealand; but the fact that 
washing as a means of ceremonial purification was equally as prominent in 
ritual in the Marquesas and Society islands as in New Zealand justifies the 
assumption that they were used ceremonially. According to Henry, those 
in the Society Islands who had no other place of worship went to the sea- 
shore to perform their rites, the ocean being regarded as the great common 
marae (82). 

THE PLACE OF THE TEMPLE IN THE CULT 

The function of the temple as a place of worship is of course obvious; 
but there were certain points of view with regard to sacred places in Poly- 
nesia that are characteristic of the area. In several of the island groups 
the native point of view toward the temples varied considerably. The 
Hawaiian heiaus, which appear to have been erected usually for a definite 
purpose—for success in war, or to bring rain, for example—were really 
votive offerings. The temple itself was the main element in the gift, the 
accompanying rites, which were performed to attain the desired end, center- 
ing about the erection and consecration of the sacred structure and its ac- 
coutrements. In other words, the chief motive in the erection of Hawaiian 

idan Rruoyyh moar 
yp 

ais cs 
pce 

vd 

bron ~ Sree 

¢ 
Veta Oy Cane reall 

"eed Kenda 

: , % ‘ 
Ret, Yada 

178 Bernice P. Bisho p Museum—Bulletin 34 

temples was ritualistic. In the Society Islands, on the other hand, the marae 
may be said to have had more of a social and political than a religious func- 
tion, due, no doubt, to the intense rivalry that existed between chiefs and 
families. Here the temples were places of worship and in a sense votive 
offerings, but they were regarded primarily as monuments to the family to 
which they belonged, as emblems of the hereditary rank, signs of prestige, and 
tokens of land ownership. In the Marquesas, there existed both the 
Hawaiian and the Society islands’ points of view toward the tomb-temples. 
The stone meae was a mark of prestige and land ownership. Temporary struc- 
tures built as a part of the rites, and the stonework of new temples 
were regarded as votive offerings. Here, as was true also in both the 
Society Islands and Hawaii, a prominent element in the performance of any 
rite was the decoration of the place of worship with sacred growing things, 
building new structures to serve for various purposes in the ritual, or re- 
furbishing old structures. The aesthetic sense of the natives led them to 
believe that their gods would be pleased with the decorations and arrange- 
ments that were enjoyed by human beings at times of festivity. They 
therefore sought to attract their presence and to entertain them by adorn- 
ing the places of worship after the same fashion that they followed in 
decorating a house for an honored human guest: using sweet smelling and 
ornate foliage and flowers, neat thatching, ground coverings, and carving. 
In the utilization of certain growing things, such as the ieie (Freycinetia) and 
the maile (Alyxia) vines in Hawaii, the sacred miro (Thespesia) in Tahiti, and 
various types of foliage in the Marquesas, it is probable that there was present 
also in the native mind the thought of inducing the presence of the deity through 
rapport, or perhaps of inducing a flow of his mana through materials known to 
be in rapport with him. In Hawaii, for example, the ieze, which was used in 
decorating the war temple, was apparently sacred to Ku to whom the temple 
was consecrated; for the name of one of the woodland deities was Kuka- 
ieie. 

Descriptions from the Society Islands (82) that deal with the customs 
connected with the refurbishing of old temples and the opening of new ones 
make clear how strong was the motive of making the marae attractive places 
into which the gods should like to come. The weeding and sweeping of 
the court of the temple was an important preliminary of religious festivals 
when the gods were supposed to be present. Some lines of a prayer or 
chant that was used at this time read, 

. Swept will be the ground 
To render the marae attractive 

To Ro’o-te-roro’o 
And to all the host of gods. . . 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 179 

The prayer that follows was that recited when the refurbishing of the 
temple was finished. 

May the land live! The marae is restored, it is weeded and become handsome. 
The carved ornaments are renewed. The altars are renewed. The house of the gods 
is renewed. The gods will all come, and gather in the darkness. 

Henry describes as follows the consecratory rite when a new royal marae 
was opened and dedicated as the place of residence of the gods. 

The first-born young virgins of the royal family . .. arrayed in flowing white 
tapa and decked with wreaths and garlands of tiare . ... carrying round green 
cocoanut leaf baskets of these flowers in their hands . . . led a procession formed by 
the clergy in sacerdotal array, each of whom carried a branch of miro in his 
hand . .. . . the young virgins walked around the marae casting their flowers 
upon it as high as they could reach and upon the paving close by. The high priest 
followed calling upon the gods to fill the place with their presence. 

The native point of view toward their tomb-temples will be apparent if 
certain of the basic principles in the religion are called to mind. These holy 
places were in origin, and often in practice, the tombs of venerated ances- 
tors and as such partook of all the sacredness and required all the respect 
due to the family, community, tribal or national, ancestral gods. In addi- 
tion they were the places especially consecrated by ritual and by use to the 
presiding gods of the cult and were by reason of this fact the most tapu 
spots in the land. Hence it was that woman in her commonness and sub- 
jection to defiling influences was never allowed upon or within these holy 
places, except she be a high chiefess or a female prophet; also that some 
temples came to be places of refuge for fugitives, while others were for- 
bidden ground whereon the common intruder would meet an instant death as 
desecrator of that which was holy. As instruments of the approach through 
appeal, the temples served as hallowed spots, to which the gods could be in- 
duced to come when their help was needed by means of offerings, prayer 
and other ritualistic worship. In the approach through rapport, the con- 
secrated spot of land marked by the temple and the holy structure itself 
stood in a peculiarly significant relationship to land, people, and gods. This 
phase of the native beliefs regarding their places of worship has been clearly 
revealed to me in the Society Islands and may be illustrated also from other 
groups. There are two concepts, the first relating to stones, and the second 
to the use of the word iho, that reveal the essence of the native theory on 
this subject. 

By reason of its materially lasting qualities no doubt, stone was regarded 
throughout Polynesia as the most permanent agency that could be utilized 
as a medium and container of mana. This is evidenced in many of the 
religious customs. The most obvious examples of this usage are the carved 

180 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

and natural blocks of stone that served as embodiments for, or mediums of, 
rapport with patron deities, but other customs illustrate more definitely the 
native view of the value of stones as mediums of rapport, one is the cere- 
monial use of stone seats or back rests. This usage is based upon the prin- 
ciple of transference of sacredness through contact: the stone, upon which 
a man imbued with mana rested, and especially one so employed upon cere- 
monial occasions, became charged with the man’s divine power and would 
remain so until the tapu was released and the rapport broken between the 
object and the individual by one of the rites prescribed for the purpose. When 
a stone slab had served as a seat or back rest for chiefs or priests for generation 
after generation, it is evident that as it aged it would become more and 
more sacred and an ever more potent medium of rapport with the spirits 
of those who had passed on; its sacredness and its mana would be cumu- 
lative. 

Another instance of the use of stones as mediums of mana is exhibited 
in the custom typical of the Society Islands and New Zealand, and doubtless 
of other islands also, of employing them as signs of ownership of land. 
In the Society Islands the limits of land belonging to families were marked 
by corner stones, small upright columns of rock some of which were dressed 
and some rough, set up at the corners of the property. These markers, 
which have been in the ground from ancestral times, are regarded as very 
sacred even today. Various instances are cited by the natives in which 
persons have suffered sudden death, families have been attacked by insanity, 
and so on, as a result of molesting these stones in the interests of their own 
unrighteous claims. Nothing is known of the ritualistic method used in 
ancient times in sealing the tapu on these markers. In New Zealand the 
same practice is exhibited in the “boundary stones” (pou-paenga) which 
were set up to mark the limits of plantations. Under these a ngarara lizard 
was placed—incantations are not mentioned in the account quoted, but they 
were undoubtedly used at the same time—to cause sickness to afflict anyone 
who molested the marker (129, p. 174). This method of sealing a tapu 
on property by a curse is paralleled in Samoa and the Marquesas 
(77, p. 60). Now, it is evident that this ceremonial use of stones to seal a 
land claim is closely related to the building of stone marae for the purpose, 
among others, of establishing land rights. 

In the marae, corner stones marked the limits of the sacred precincts, 
and these undoubtedly bore much the same occult relationship to the land 
as did the stone markers. In view of the close connection between land 
rights and the marae in these islands, the hypothesis is reasonable that in 
origin these stone temples are to be traced back to the use of land stones 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 181 

rather than to a primitive tomb form. Doubtless the use of stone markers 
and the veneration of localities sanctified by the presence of sacred remains 
have both contributed as independent factors to the development of the 
marae institution as it existed in historic times; but the two features are by 
no means as independent as they appear to be. A land stone in New Zealand 
supported a claim by reason of being made tapu by a curse that would 
cause sickness. A Tahiti marae sealed a claim also through tapu, but one of 
sanctity derived from the power of its ancestral patrons. In the Marque- 
sas the stone tomb-temples stood for land rights on account of their use as 
repositories for sacred relics. A legend from these islands recounts that 
the presence of an ancestor’s skull in a chief’s meae was accepted by a 
counter claimant as proof of ownership of the island on which the tomb 
stood; in fact, in these islands, a man had but to name a piece of property 
after his own head to establish a tapu of ownership upon it. By establish- 
ing rapport between his head and the land in this manner (through the 
name), he buttressed his claim with the mana of his whole ancestral line, 
for an insult to a man’s head, which was the symbol of his mana, was an 
insult to his forefathers as well as to the man himself. It is obvious that 
whether ownership was sealed by the giving of such a name, by the presence 
of a skull or of other ancestral relics, or by means of a curse, the method 
was based upon the same principle, that of supporting a claim by means of 
occult power. 

One custom typical of the Society Islands and the Marquesas throws 
much light upon the natives’ beliefs concerning stones as mediums and their 
attitude in ancient times toward their stone tomb-temples. In the Society 
Islands, it was customary for every member of a family upon the occasion 
of certain family gatherings to bring a stone. From these stones the marae 
was built. A similar custom prevailed in the Marquesas when a family or 
tribe was building a new feast place with a temple attached. The stones 
contributed, being incorporated into the consecrated structure, established a 
permanent psychic connection. The same principle led chiefs in the Society 
Islands in establishing a new temple to incorporate in it a stone taken from 
one of the ancient shrines of his family; similarly for families of the raatira 
(freeholder) class, when they desired to establish a family marae, to carry a 
stone to the priest of the chief’s temple to be consecrated (79). 

The second of the concepts that thows light on the place of the temple 
in the Polynesian cult is the significance of the term iho as applied to a 
sacred place. It has been found that in the Society Islands the marae of a 
chief was sometimes referred to by this term. This appears to signify that 
the sacred place of the community as a medium of rapport bore much the 
same relationship to the land and people as did the divine chief, who was 

182 Bernice P. Bishop Musewm—Bulletin 34 

also referred to as the iho—a word which literally means umbilical cord, 
and also pith and core of a thing. It is quite natural that the locality con- 
secrated to the holy ancestors, which was the most sacred spot of land for 
the community, and the divine chief, who was the most sacred living medium 
of rapport, should have been referred to figuratively by the same term. 
There was, however, in these islands a quite definite reason for applying 
this term to marae, for it was the custom to bury in the temple the excised 
umbilicus of the infant chief. Thus at Taputapuatea, in Opoa Valle 
Raiatea, the most famous and one of the most sacred temples in this gt 
of islands, there is a large upright stone block at the base of which t 
umbilici of the chiefs of Opoa were buried (79). In like manner, the 
Maori deposited umbilical cords at the tribal sacred places (149, p. 43) Y 
though sometimes the iho of children of chiefly rank were placed under aly 
stone or tree at the tribal boundary to maintain and strengthen the people’s — 
influence on the bounary (12, p. 773). This practice reverts to the subject ) 
of the relationship of sacred places to land rights, for it reveals the fact that | 
the marae, which was the symbol of these rights, maintained its claim not — 
only because it was ceremonially consecrated and contained the holy relics of 
the chief’s ancestors, but also because its ground was sanctified and placed in 
most intimate rapport with the living chief through the planting of his 
umbilicus in its soil. The marae was, then, the iho of the land and the — 
community in a literal as well as figurative sense, for it harbored the sho — 
of the chief on whom both the land and the people were dependent. 

Holy ground sometimes offered sanctuary to fugitives. In the Hawaiian 
islands were enclosures that may be spoken of as temples of refuge, which 
were especially built for and consecrated to this purpose. One of these was j 
near the tomb of King Keawae, and was consecrated to his spirit. Fugitives — 

of all kinds—women and children in war time, manslayers, thieves, and — 

in, were safe. This sacred area of Keawe was a walled enclosure in the — 
form of an irregular parallelogram walled on one side and at both ends, the 
unwalled side being bordered by the seashore. The walls measured 715 feet 
long by 404 feet wide, were 12 feet high and 15 feet thick. In the top of 
the walls, as in the temple at Kawaihae, were holes, in which figures of — 
protective deities were placed to frown upon the surrounding country. — 
' Within these extensive walls were included three complete temples for 
worship and houses for priests and refugees. It is said that in war time, 
spears with white flags attached were set up at each end of this city of 
refuge, and that warriors pursuing fugitives, who attempted to pass these 
/ limits were killed by the priests. Refugees were required to go before the 
. figure representing Keawe and render thanks. After a certain length of 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 183 

time they were allowed either to enter the service of the priests or to 
sally forth into the world again unmolested (48, Vol. IV, pp. 166-9, 363; 28, 
p. 100)..“In the Sqciety Islands, the tapu ground of some marae served 
as a place of sanctuary. One writer who visited Tahiti soon after its 
discovery speaks of particular marae which were regarded as safe retreats 
for refugees (150, p. 151). In Tonga were sacred places of refuge, which 
were surrounded by fences enclosing a god house (95, p. 86). On the island 
‘arotonga a man could not be killed on consecrated ground (64, p. 42) ; 

in Samoa there were certain tapu villages, which abstained from war 
served as places of refuge for the defeated (108, p. 311). 

OFFERINGS AND SACRIFICES 

Upon different occasions almost every type of substance and object was 
presented to the gods: fruits of the land, fish from the sea, animals, 
human beings, and every kind of manufactured article. It has been re- 
ma rked in the description of sacred places that the temples themselves were 
in some of the islands regarded as votive offerings. This subject of sacrifice 
is one that presents considerable difficulty from the point of view of an 

_ invariably complex. Rarely will a simple explanation reveal all the feelings 
and ideas of the worshippers in making an offering. 

Unquestionably the dominant belief with regard to most gifts of food. 
was that the gods were sustained or strengthened by the offerings of their ) 
_. worshippers. On Mangaia, “It was believed that the ghosts ate the ‘essence’ 
(ata)” of the food offerings presented to the dead (63, p. 206). Best 
_ writes that in New Zealand, “The act of making an offering to a god is 
described by the verb whangai, meaning ‘to feed,’ or ‘to offer to be eaten’ ” 
(16, p. 140). Such a point of view is easily understood when it is realized» 
that in a sense the ancestral gods were the shadows of their former physical — 
selves and that all things had their ghostly counterparts. It was logical to 
suppose that these ghostly beings could gain their sustenance by consuming 
the immaterial counterparts of material offerings. It is said in Hawaiian 
folklore that the souls of the dead lived on the shadows of things that 
belonged to the earthly life (154, p. 103). The thought of nourishing and) 
providing for the newly released soul of the dead relative contributed largely \ 
to the usual practice of placing food and water, clothing, and other pos- | 
sessions near the body of the deceased both before and after burial; and 
the same point of view was also dominant in the offerings made by 
necromancers to their familiar demons. Everywhere it was customary for \ 

the surviving family to make offerings to the spirits of the dead. In the } 

184 Bernice P, Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Marquesas, for example, little shrines made in conical form from coconut 
leaves served as the repositories for food and water intended to nourish the 
disembodied spirit (137, Vol. I, p. 290). In the Marquesas also, offerings 
of food had continually to be made to the familiar spirits called fanaua 
which “possessed” individuals; unless their appetites were satisfied in this 
way, these vicious demons would vent their anger upon their keepers by 
inflicting sickness and death. The keeper of a Hawaiian umiipili god, a 
“familiar” of the same type as the fanaua, had to give the spirit poi in a 
small calabash every time he made fresh poi for himself (49, p. 3). The 
same motive, but for a worthier end—that of sustaining the ancestral spirits 
of the family—moved the Marquesan to throw aside a bit of his breadfruit 
paste at every eating, the native of the Cook Islands to offer at meal times 
the end of his taro root, and the Samoan to pour on the ground a bit of 
each cup of kava before drinking, the offering in each of these cases being 
accompanied by a short invocation. 

The belief in the consumption by gods of the immaterial counterpart of 
a sacrifice is illustrated in a most interesting legend from the Marquesas. 
According to this story, one of the tribal deities who inhabits the sky is said 
to have come down to the earth and conducted a living man up to the sky 
world. There the earthly visitant saw the gods having a cannibal feast and 
discovered that the victim was his own brother-in-law, who at that time he 
knew was chanting a sacred chant with his fellow tribesmen in the valley 
below. On being discovered by the gods, he was tumbled out of heaven, and 
upon alighting on earth he hastened to tell his brother-in-law that he had 
seen the gods in the sky regaling themselves on his body. Of course he was 
laughed at by the group of singers; but soon the mockery was replaced by 
credence, for an enemy tribe descended upon them suddenly and took the 
brother-in-law for a Heana (human sacrifice) for their god. Some most il- 
luminating revelations of the native thought lie in this story, but the feature 
illustrative of the matter under discussion is the gods’ feasting on the ghost 
body of the victim, which, it would seem, they had already selected and 
slaughtered, while the physical body continued to be animated on the earth.1® 
For according to native philosophy, instant physical decease by no means 
necessarily followed upon annihilation of the soul. 

The custom of waving an offering heavenward, which was typical of the 
Maori (16, p. 142), obviously had as its purpose the attraction of the god 

16 One of the most interesting indications that comes out of these considerations is relative 
to the native belief in prescience, or ability to foresee death attributed to certain individuals with 
psychic vision. As was indicated earlier in the paper, the Polynesians conceived the physical to 
be consequent upon the psychic. It was obviously logical, therefore, to believe that a ‘‘medium” 
who witnessed an injury suffered by a man’s soul in the psychic realm should be able to predict 
with assurance the consequent injury, sickness or death that would manifest itself in the man’s 
physical body. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 185 

to the vicinity of his worshipper. This motive, combined with a number 
of others, is also apparent in the human sacrifices offered by Marquesan 
tribes when war was pending. A member of an enemy tribe—man, woman, 
or child—having been captured by stealth, the victim was taken to the 
temple and then killed and offered to the presiding god by the chief priest 
of the tribe, The heart and eyes of the victim were torn from the body and 
eaten by the prophet, whereupon the tribal deity entered into him. ‘The 
prophet spoke with the voice of the god and consumed food that was put 
into his mouth by his assistants who supposed that it was the god “in the 
stomach of the prophet,’ to use the native phrase, who was being fed 
through the mouth of his inspired servant. It is clearly evident that one 
main purpose of this sacrifice was to attract the tribal deity to his temple 
and his prophet; and that the eating of the victim’s heart and eyes was not 
symbolic of the god’s consumption of the sacrifice but was regarded as the 
very act itself. Here it is apparent that the gustatory tastes of the god 
were not satisfied with the mere immaterial essence of the sacrifice, but 
demanded flesh and blood, a trait that might well be expected of tutelar 
gods who were but men elevated in rank and power in the next world 
through worship, men who in life had doubtless been avid eaters of their 
enemies. 

A most interesting example of the attraction of gods by means of 
offerings is furnished by certain war time customs in Tahiti. When a de- 
feated party had taken refuge in a fort, their besiegers would approach as 
near to it as possible and deposit offerings for the gods of the enemy, hop- 
ing that these fickle beings would thereby be led to desert their worshippers 
in the fort and thus to leave them without protection (48, Vol. I, p. 316). 

There were formerly in the Marquesas rites that had as their purpose 
the baiting of spirits. One of these was performed for a sick person whose 
soul had supposedly departed. An attractive mess of food having been 
placed in a shed erected for the purpose, a priest waited outside until he 
knew the soul, drawn by the meal, was inside the shed; then he rushed in 
and caught the spirit, which he exhibited as a caterpillar, proving to on- 
lookers that it had been eating the viands set out for it by exhibiting 
scratches on the food. The rite was closed by the priest’s pretending to 
force the soul to re-enter the patient’s body by way of the ear (77, pp. 
271-2). The other of the Marquesan rites for baiting spirits was per- 
formed over a victim who was being offered at the temple. His face was 
smeared with red paint, flowers were put in his ears, and young fruits of 
Morinda citrofolia were put in his mouth, as “bait” (akoko) to attract the 
relatives of the victim, whose spirit—under the control of a powerful 
spell undoubtedly, though this is not mentioned in the record—was believed 

186 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

to go to the dwelling of his relatives and bring it about that they also could 
be seized as victims (77, p. 241). Baiting the soul of the murderer was 
a prominent feature in the Hawaiian kumi rite, which was performed to 
avenge the death of a person supposedly killed by witchcraft (99, pp. 
135-9). In the Marquesas, it was also believed that offerings, such as dogs’ 
and pigs’ heads placed near the bier of a recently dead person, served to at- 
tract the evil spirits lurking about the place, thus giving the soul a chance to 
get away unharmed. This point of view is identical with that suggested 
above, that one of the purposes of human and other sacrifices at times of 
sickness was to attract or draw away the evil spirits causing the trouble. 

Sometimes the victim, or his spirit, was regarded as a messenger to the 
other world. This conception was present in the Marquesas where the 
human sacrifice was called haihai heana (hai, to send; heana, captive or 
victim), and where it has been definitely stated to me by natives that the 
victim was believed to go as a messenger to the gods. Captain Cook, who 
witnessed the immolation of a human victim on the occasion of a war rite in 
Tahiti, describes the officiating priest as addressing a forcible discourse to 
the corpse of the victim as it lay in the temple (41, Vol. II, p. 34). This 
was a pre-war rite and probably was the role of the victim to explain to 
the gods the reasons why it was necessary to break the then reigning peace 
pact which, as were all great political events, had doubtless been submitted 
to them for sanction. 

Best speaks of human sacrifices being offered in New Zealand sometimes 
for purposes of divination (16, p. 151), but does not explain how the 
victim served this end. Among the most interesting of all the sacrifices in 
the Tahitian and Hawaiian worship were those before war or some other 
equally important event when hogs were killed in the temple and either 
their entrails or the body as a whole were observed by the priests for omens. 
(See War Rites.) In quite another sense, sacrifices that were intended to 
induce the war god to enter his priest, may be said to have been for purposes 
of divination, for the god’s presence was desired usually for the sake of the 
predictions and guidance which he was supposed to give through his oracular 
mouthpiece, the prophet. 

A great many offerings and sacrifices were conciliatory in intent. When 
sickness came upon a certain Hawaiian family that served a lizard god, it 
was believed to be the result of anger or pure spite on the part of this 
aumakua. ‘Therefore, in order to bring their patron into a more charitable 
frame of mind they presented before its hole a spotted dog, awa root, 
red fish, red sugar-cane, and some grass of the kind that grows in taro 
patches, wrapped in yellow bark cloth. If a shark god were to blame, the 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 187 

head of the family, carrying a black pig, a dark red chicken, and some awa 
root wrapped in a piece of white bark cloth newly made by a virgin, went 
by the sea and recited this prayer: 

O aumakuas from sunrise to sunset, 

From North to South, from above and below, 

O spirits of the precipice and spirits of the sea, 

All who dwell in flowing waters, 

Here is a sacrifice—our gifts are to you. 

Bring life to us, to all the family, 

To the old people with wrinkled skin, 

To the young also. 

This is our life, 

From the gods. 

The bundle was then thrown into the sea, the chicken was buried alive, 
and the pig presented as an offering at the temple (154, pp. 252-3). 

In such an offering as this was the sense both of placating angry spirits 
and pleasing them in the hope of benefits to come. For the sacrifices offered 
to appease anger of the gods arising out of broken tapu, the motive is most 
clearly seen to be that of placating or mollifying the irascible spirits and of 
removing or neutralizing the intangible evil influence or atmosphere. The 
breaking of the tabu on noises, private activities, the lighting of fires, 
sexual intercourse, and so on, at the times of consecrated tribal enterprise 
or worship, was a type of sin or fault (hara) that was thought to bring 
calamity on the people as a whole because of the anger of the gods, or be- 
cause it brought evil into the neighborhood or interfered with the rite. In 
Tahiti, some sacrifices were termed “Taraehara, a compound term, signify- 
ing disentangling from guilt; from tara, to untie or loosen, and hara, guilt” 
(48, Vol. I, 344). On Rarotonga, a public calamity of any kind was taken 
as an indication that the gods were incensed for some reason. Two or 
three tapu breakers, their arms and legs bound with green thongs, were 
dragged to the altar of sacrifice and presented alive to the gods, the priest at 
the same time confessing their faults and begging the gods to remove the 
calamity. The victims were then placed upon an oven of red hot stones 
called the “seeking salvation (health) oven” or the “oven of atonement” 

(62, Vol. II, pp. 16-17). 

The conciliatory motive was unquestionably dominant in such practices as 
making offering to local genii when travelling (16, p. 143), and was one of 
the most important, though by no means the only, element of belief leading 
to the sacrificing of human beings when chiefs died or other local calamities 
such as drought or epidemic indicated anger of the gods and the presence 
of powerful evil influences: all sacrifices and offerings at the time of death 
were in some measure based upon the desire to appease both the evil spirits 

188 Bernice P. Bishop Museuwm—Bulletin 34 

causing the trouble and the soul of the sick or dead person. Again, in the 
offering to the war god of the first fallen enemy, a custom found throughout 
the area, the object was in part the placation of the lord of battle (16, pp. 
151-2). Finally, in the offerings of first fruits there was a strong element 
of conciliatory intent. All earthly things and creatures were regarded as 
the children of the gods. Therefore a fisherman, for example, felt it 
necessary to placate by means of a gift Tangaroa or whoever the local or 
particular patron of fishing and the sea might be. 

Should he fail to do this he would have himself alone to blame should 
“luck” turn against him or some mishap occur in his work. In New Zealand, 
first fruits of every type of product—potatoes, birds, fish, taro, and the 
like—were given to the sacred chief of the tribe as the living representative 
of the gods (149, p. 218) or to the priest who performed the prescribed 
ritual over it (16, p. 142). In Tahiti, the offering of the first catch of fish 
at the opening of the bonito season in November and December, and of the 
first of all kinds of fruits of the land and products of industry in De- 
cember or January, presents an example of very much more elaborate rites 
than those just cited as illustrations. On these occasions different districts 
of the islands vied with one another, each attempting to excel in magnificence 
and quantity of offerings and thereby to gain the special favor of the gods. 

Moerenhout writes that “Beautiful new canoes, mats, quantities of cloth, 
breadfruit, bananas, cocoanuts, hogs, dogs, fowl, and so on” were brought 
by each district, all the inhabitants of the district accompanying it, most of 
them coming by sea bedecked in festive regalia, “with chiefs clothed in their 
rich and imposing costumes.”’ Four new canoes designed to be offered to the 
gods, laden with the other gifts, preceded each flotilla, which was cere- 
moniously received by the priest on the seashore, after which the four 
canoes and their contents were formally presented to the ari raj, the 
“ereat” or ranking chief of the island (105, Vol. I, pp. 516-19). The canoes 
and their cargoes were finally carried into the court of the temple where 
they were presented to the gods. The corresponding festival in the 
Hawauan islands, which originated in the offering of first fruits of the 
land to the god of fertility, became to a large extent in late Hawaiian 
history the occasion of collecting tribute by the royal and noble overlords of 
the land. (See Seasonal Fertility Rites.) 

One fundamental reason for offerings of first fruits is to be found in a trait 
of the Polynesian mind that finds expression throughout his religion, and 
throughout his social system and private life—that trait, closely associated 
with intense personal pride and vanity, which manifests itself in an acute 
sense of obligation in the matter of favors or material benefits received 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 189 

and the returns due. This expresses itself not so much in greed for profit 
(although in many instances it has manifested itself in an acute instinct for 
trade), as in a rigid sense of justice in exchange. Exacting in the extreme 
with himself as well as with others, he naturally supposed his gods to be 
governed by the same feeling. Now, according to Polynesian social prin- 
ciples, everyone who took part in an enterprise was entitled to share in the 
results, his portion being dependent upon his dignity and importance in con- 
nection with the affair. The gods deserved the first portion in all things; 
after them their earthly representative and descendant, the divine chief; 
after him the servants of the gods, the priests, then those who had actively 
participated in the enterprise; and lastly the rest of the community. What 
is commonly spoken of in descriptions of Polynesian customs as “raising 
the tapu” on crops, newly gathered foods, a catch of fish, or the like con- 
sisted actually in the offering of first fruits to the gods, the presentation to 
them of their share. If this were not done, the gods could scarcely be ex- 
pected to lend themselves to forwarding subsequent enterprises; in fact it 
might be expected that their sense of neglect and of having suffered injustice at 
the hands of individuals or the community would lead them, true to the 
pattern of their human, native prototypes, to retaliatory measures. A sense 
of the debt owed to patron gods, then, constituted one of the causes that 
led to offering first fruits. 

To return to the effect through psychic rapport on the creative forces 
of nature: it has been shown that the food or other objects offered would 
constitute a medium of rapport between the superior powers that dispensed 
procreative mana and the reproductive agencies of earth. Now, in war cere- 
monial, it was commonly the custom to present as an offering the body of 
the first enemy slain, the “first fruit” of the war god, the belief based on 
an easily understandable train of thought being that, as a result of the work- 
ing of the subtle laws of rapport, this would lead to the capture and death 
of many of the victim’s comrades. It is probable that the same feeling was 
associated with the offering of first fruits of peaceful industry. Thus it 
seems likely that the Hawaiian fisherman had a definite conviction that his 
first fish “devoted” to his god would have a direct power to bring to his line 
or net other fish; and it is possible that a similar process of reasoning was 
applied even to fruits of the land. 

Many of the first fruits that had been assembled as gifts for the gods 
were redistributed and feasted upon by the people; but I do not believe 
that there existed in connection with these offerings or feasts any thought 
of their constituting a ‘“communional” sacrament, that is, that there was 
present the idea of the worshippers’ identifying themselves with the body of 

190 Bernice P. Bisho p Museum—Bulletin 34 

the god when they partook of the first fruits offering. In the first place, the 
fruits or fish did not represent for the Polynesians the body of the god, but 
his children or descendants; and in the second place, the redistribution and 
feasting upon the offering was in no way ceremonial: on the contrary it 
was done in a way that proves it to have been symbolic of the raising of the 
tapu and releasing the food for common consumption. Finally, it may be 
said with assurance that there is no evidence in this area of the god wor- 
shipped being thought to be temporarily embodied in the sacrifice or offer- 
ing; and I know of no instance in which the animal or other object believed 
to be the form of incarnation of a god was selected for sacrifice or cere- 
monial eating. 

The approach to the psychic powers through rapport, as well as that 
through appeal, also had a large place in the theory as to the effect of 
presenting first fruits. To find the basis of the believed influence through 
sympathy or rapport it is necessary again for a moment to turn to analysis 
of the native’s mental and emotional makeup. As has already been said, 
a gift for the native was a medium of rapport. The contribution of first 
fruits, therefore, established a definite rapport between the patron god (and 
through him with generalized psychic power), and his worshippers on the 
one hand and on the other the crops or fish or whatever product of nature 
or handicraft was included in the offering. The establishing of this bond 
could only react to the benefit of the people in greater productivity of the 
earth. Or, to put it another way, on the basis of appeal to conscious agents: 
just as any native instantly reflects with an expansive mood cordiality and 
generosity, so the gods and conscious, dynamic nature as a whole were 
thought to reflect with bounty the munificence of devoted contributions. The 
fact must be borne in mind also that the occasions of great first fruit offer- 
ings were not mere ritualistic events but were feasts or festivals in honor 
of the gods, at which the deities themselves were supposed to be present. It 
is reasonable to suppose that the natives, believing their gods to have natures 
like their own, would have been assured that the powers of their fertilizing 
gods would be aroused, strengthened and stimulated by the gifts of food, 
as well as by the other features of the festivals designed more directly to 
accomplish this end. 

It was the Polynesian custom for relatives and friends to present gifts 
to the dead. In a large measure this practice was due to the desire to please 
the spirit, the feeling on the part of survivors that it was well to establish 
a relationship of good will with it; but there was also a subtler side to this 
custom. Exchange of gifts in Polynesia was regarded as definitely estab- 
lishing a psychic bond, or rapport, the object exchanged becoming a medium 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 191 

between the giver and receiver. Even today in Samoa, when a gift is 
formally presented, the recipient places the object on his head for a moment, 
indicating his personal acceptance of the psychic bond: that which comes 
from the hands of the donor is, as a result of contact, imbued with his 
being ; and when the same object has touched the head of the recipient it 
comes instantly into sympathy with his mana. Comparative equality of status 
must exist to make such an exchange proper; in other words, the touching 
of the head with the gift does not entail contamination or loss of mana. 
This principle was at the bottom of the ceremonial exchanges of presents 
which marked numerous rites in Polynesia such as those of adoption and 
marriage, when the exchange aided in sealing the union of the families; 
and also in peace making rites after war, when tribes or peoples were 
brought together ceremonially. A peculiar form of offering in the Society 
Islands illustrates this principle. There relatives of the deceased used to 
throw beneath the bier on which the corpse lay bits of cloth stained with 
blood from wounds on the head inflicted in the course of their violent 
mourning (7, p. 170). The custom evidently had as its object the sealing 
of the bond between the dead and the living: it was a case of strengthening 
an already existent blood relationship by means of a blood offering. It is 
also reported that blood from the gashed heads of women mourners was 
sometimes put on a piece of cloth and presented to the nearest relative of 
the deceased as a token (48, Vol. I, p. 410). Students of early religions 
customarily interpret such offerings presented to the dead and demonstra- 
tions of grief as being motivated primarily by fear. Fear was assuredly 
present; fear of demons rather than of the soul; but anyone acquainted with 
the Polynesian nature, and with the many means that were used, such as 
preserving bodies or parts of them, with a view to keeping close touch with 
the departed spirit, will fully realize that in all of these practices there was 
also expressed a strong desire to strengthen the psychic bond with the 
deceased relative’s soul. 

A large class of sacrifices, particularly those in which human victims 
were immolated, were consecratory. Human victims, sometimes buried 
alive, were placed in the foundations of sacred buildings in Hawaii, the 
Marquesas, Tahiti, and New Zealand, commonly under a supporting post or 
posts of a consecrated house. In like maumner, it was customary to sacrifice 
a human victim when other types of sacred objects were made or consec- 
rated, as the new figure of the war god in Hawaii, a new war canoe, or 
in the adding of new sections to the sacred maro in Tahiti upon the occa- 
sion of the ascendance of a young arti rahi. The main purpose in these 
offerings was consecration, which in Polynesian worship signifies two 
things: releasing from tapu and endowing with mana. The human sacri- 

192 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

fices were instrumental in accomplishing these ends first by automatically 
transferring to the consecrated object the mana of the victims and the 
powers brought into rapport with the victims by ritual; and secondly, by 
counteracting any evil influences that might adhere to the new object. In 
the light of the native belief that the soul of a slain victim became, so to 
speak, a psychic slave of the slayer, and a medium of rapport, it appears 
likely that when a captive or a slave was sacrificed to consecrate a new 
object it was supposed that the soul of the victim would become a sort of 
protective spirit for the object, bound by the ritual and by the presence of 
the material remains of the body, which, in the case of the foundation 
sacrifice were permanently held fast beneath the consecrated structure. 

A characteristic feature in connection with human sacrifice in these 
islands was a ritualistic act consisting of the actual or symbolic eating of 
the eye of the victim. In New Zealand, the Marquesas, and Hawaii, the 
victims eyes were actually eaten by priests or chiefs, while in Tahiti one eye 
of the victim was presented on a plantain leaf to the sacred chief presiding 
at the rite, who raised it to his mouth as though to eat it and then passed 
it back to the priest, who disposed of it in some way but apparently did 
not actually eat it (48, Vol. I, p. 347). This custom in Tahiti is usually 
interpreted as being merely a survival of cannibalism; but I believe the true 
explanation of the rite to be this. The eye was believed to be intimately 
associated with the soul, hence the eating of the eyeball was probably thought 
to aid in the absorption of the soul and mana. ‘This absorption would both 
strengthen the mana of the worshippers, and deprive enemies, who were in 
rapport with the victim, of their mana, be these enemies human beings or 
evil spirits. 

The exact significance of the eating of the heart and eyes is uncertain; 
it is probable that the heart stood for courage; and it is known that the 
eyes were intimately connected in the native mind with the separable soul 
of man, and probably with the mana. I am, therefore, inclined to believe 
the purpose of the consumption of the heart and eyes of the enemy by the 
tribal god through his priest in the Marquesan sacrificial rite to have been 
the destruction, through the rapport existing between the captive victim and 
his tribesmen, of the courage and psychic life of the enemy; and at the 
same time the absorption on the part of the consuming tribal god, and 
through him, of his worshippers, of the mana of their enemies. (See War 
Rites, and compare Best, 16, p. 152.) 

The object offered or sacrificed in some instances played the part of a 
medium into or through which evil was transferred. In the Marquesas an 
unusual form of human sacrifice was resorted to for the purpose of break- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 193 

ing a long drought. In this, a living human victim was burned upon the sea- 
shore, and the ashes thrown into the sea. The victim, evidently embodying 
the evil affecting nature—probably the evil was identified with the body by 
means of a spell—carried away with him the evil, or perhaps it should be 
said that the evil was destroyed with him by the fire. The casting of the 
burnt remains into the sea would seem to have been an extra precaution 
designed to insure the transference of the last vestige of desiccating evil 
from the land into the sea. In the Rarotongan rite in which tapu breakers 
were burned upon an “oven of atonement” (62, Vol. II, pp. 16-17) it is 
apparent that the victims were likewise regarded as mediums through whom 
evil was destroyed by fire. The transference of evil, and its destruction in 
the person of the victim, was also one of the motives behind the immolation 
of animals or human victims at times of sickness. The sacrifice, as a sub- 
stitute or scapegoat, received and took away the demon or spell of black 
magic causing the trouble. 

Offerings presented to the gods were taken to their shrines or temples, 
and should they have any, were placed before their representations. In a 
number of the islands, such gifts were placed upon elevated stagings 
(whata), possibly to keep them away from roving dogs and pigs; but more 
likely, to elevate them for the convenience of the gods who dwelt above the 
earth and travelled in the air. Sometimes the remains of offerings were left 
to be eaten by birds or animals. Even the priests rarely partook of sacri- 
fices unless ceremonially, as in the ritual consumption of the heart of the 
slain enemy. It was customary to set aside for the priests a separate por- 
tion, distinct from that of the gods. The description of sacred precincts 
brings out the fact that there were special places set apart for the recep- 
tion and protection of such remains as food, hair, clothing, that had been in 
contact with sacred persons. Now the remains of sacrifices of all kinds 
were left in the temples where they had been offered, or buried in the 
temple precincts, or thrown in consecrated pits or enclosures. The reason 
for this—the same as in the case of objects that had been in contact with 
sacred persons—is obvious: that which had been sanctified and had thus 
come into rapport with sacred beings must be protected against desecration. 

A Polynesian convention that presents an interesting subject for conjec- 
ture was the habit of regarding human victims as “fish.” It was custom- 
ary to speak of human offerings as “fish” in most, if not all the islands 
where this type of sacrifice was common—in New Zealand, Society 
Islands, Marquesas, and Hawaii. The Maori referred to the first enemy 
captured, who was sacrificed to Tu, as the “first fish.” (See War Rites.) 
An important ceremonial object in the Marquesas was a great pearl-shell 

194 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

hook which was inserted in the mouth of the human victim, who, thus 
realistically caught like a fish, was suspended in one of the trees of the 
sacred precincts. In the rite in Hawaii centering about the erection of the 
war temple, the last human victim offered was dragged to the temple with 
a great hook in his mouth as though he were really a fish. 

It is said (82) that on the occasions of the gathering of peoples at the 
great temple at Opoa, on Raiatea, Society Islands, both fish and human 
victims were hung in the trees, and that Oro, the patron of the temple was 

addressed 
Now eat of thy long legged fish (men) 

Fat Of ne Ten of the sea. 

The custom of suspending bodies in the trees about the temples was typical 
of Tahiti and the Cook Islands, as of the Marquesas. Possibly this was 
merely symbolic of the “catching” of human food for the gods, just as 
fish were caught for man. There is a highly interesting episode in a Mar- 
quesan legend which describes the cannibalistic, tribal war gods as letting 
down a hook from the heavens and catching a human victim on it. At 
basis, the custom of actually using the hook in suspending the victim may 
have been intended to bring about the catching of more victims; in other 
words, it may be a ritualistic catching or “baiting,” or this custom may be 
taken as an indication that the human sacrifice in Polynesia evolved from an 
earlier, simpler offering of fish that were hung up in trees at sacred places. 
All these may have been contributory factors; but all must remain hypo- 
thetical for there is no direct evidence to prove any one of them. 

Sacrifices were sometimes offered in effigy, while at other times there 
was substitution of one thing for another. In Tonga, early observers saw 
in a rite men carrying to the sacred place bundles of sticks representing the 
yams that supposedly were being offered; and in the Marquesas it is said 
that a straw figure sometimes took the place of a human being, as did the 
young plantain tree in Tahiti (48, Vol. I, p. 317). The latter example is 
really an illustration of the substitution of one thing for another, which was 
quite common. Thus in the Marquesas, a turtle was sometimes substituted 
for a human being as an offering to the tribal gods (77, p. 240), while in 
New Zealand “The sacrifice of a dog would be made in ceremonies when it 
was not convenient to supply a human victim, as in those preceding a fight” 
(iG,.p.. 141). 

Offerings and sacrifices to a deity were always proferred with some sort 
of invocation or address or spell. Food for the Polynesians was one of 
the most apt mediums through which effects were produced through rap- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 195 

port; in killing by witchcraft, a morsel of food of which a man had eaten 
was equally as good a medium through which to annihilate his soul as was 
a piece of his clothing or a bit of hair. In the matter of these sacrifices 
accompanied by invocations, it seems reasonable to suppose that the gift, 
which was intended and believed to be eaten, or if it was not food taken and 
used by the god, was regarded as a concrete medium of rapport through 
which the deity could be affected directly by the prayer-spell that accom- 
panied the proffering. If a Polynesian were offered food, and as it was 
being passed to him heard the giver mutter a charm, he certainly would not 
eat the food for he would judge the gift to be charged with the spell which 
would probably kill him once he had the food in his stomach; in fact no 
native would eat food from or with a man who might want to hurt him 
with a spell. Undoubtedly the food or other objects offered to gods were \ 
believed to be mediums through which the accompanying spell or prayer | 
would directly influence the recipient. 

FEASTING 

Feasting was a prominent element in all rites: it constituted, in fact, the 
central feature of many, particularly those for the dead, although a share 
was usually set aside for spirits and gods, the feasts were designed primarily 
for the enjoyment of men, but the dead in the other world benefitted in the 
reflected glory of the lavish entertainment, for their prestige (mana) was 
enhanced by it just as was that of the members of the family still living. 
An incident in a Marquesan legend clearly illustrates this point: special 
favors are granted by the chiefess of the underworld to the soul of a 
woman because she was well content with the lavish feast that had been 
given in the woman’s honor by her living relatives at the time of her 
memorial festival. At the memorial festivals in the Marquesas, enormous 
quantities of food that had long been diligently accumulated were collected 
at the tribal gathering place and there displayed and shared out to be con- 
sumed in honor of recently dead ancestors. These legends exemplify one 
of the two chief motives lying behind all feasting—the sense of increasing 
the prestige of the family or tribe, in this world and the next. The other 
motive was more distinctly religious. 

The chief religious element in feasting as a part of rites was probably the 
sense of the commensal nature of the feasts. It must be borne in mind that 
food shared and consumed with another constituted for the Polynesian a 
concrete bond or medium of rapport, perhaps the most intimate of all 
mediums, by reason of the fact that it was taken into the body. The study 
of the seasonal and memorial festivals and certain other rites reveals the 

196 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

fact that the natives believed that their gods were actually present at these 
entertainments as honored guests. ‘This belief in the presence of the gods is 
true also in the industrial activities in which patron gods played an important 
part. The accomplishment of industrial enterprises, like the celebration of 
religious festivals as signalized by feasts in which all those who had taken 
part in the work or the rite, and sometimes the rest of the community also, 
were entertained. It is only reasonable to assume that the patron gods, whe 
had been supposedly present invisibly with the craftsmen or priests while 
they were performing their labors, were also believed to be present at the 
' feasts. It is almost certain that the soul of the deceased was believed to 
participate in the death feasts celebrated immediately after death. In a 
sense all religious feasts were sacramental, in that food was believed to be 
shared between gods and men. On such occasions, all the members of the 
group, family, industrial, or tribal, the living, the dead, and the patron gods, 
were welded together through the concrete bond of food shared, and in 
_ addition by a bond of sympathy believed to result from or bring about the 
feelings of mutual satisfaction and enjoyment that sensibly distinguished 
such occasions for the human participants. 

The burning of offerings or sacrifices was very rare in Polynesia and 
may be said to have been exceptional rather than typical in the religion. In 
the Society Islands, according to Henry (82), in certain rites the intestines 
of sacrificed pigs and dogs were removed from the bodies of the animals and 
burned in a newly generated fire called the ahi-haapena. ‘The Marquesans 
and Rarotongans occasionally burned human victims, as has already been 
mentioned; and there is indirect evidence of the burning of sacrifices in 
Easter Island. (See 143, pp. 470-1.) 

The preparation and consumption of sacred feasts cooked in the ground 
oven was, on the other hand, distinctively Polynesian. Ovens were an essen- 
tial feature of the temples in Tahiti and Hawaii and of the feast places in 
the Marquesas. It was the ancient custom to have separate ovens or shares 
of food for the different classes of people who took part in the rites. Thus 
in the sacred feasts in Tahiti three separate shares were spread out in the 
marae: one was placed on the altar for the gods, a second was for the high 
priest and his assistants, and a third for the other priests and guardians of 
the temple (82). A similar division of the temple feast in two portions 
assigned to two groups of priests is mentioned by Malo (99, pp. 225-6) in 
his description of the /uakini ceremonial. In New Zealand the preparation 
of a number of ovens in connection with ceremonies accompanied by feast- 
ing appears to have been a more prominent feature than in any other part 
of Polynesia. For example, in the tua rite for an infant (see Birth Rites), 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 197 

the food was cooked in four ovens, one for the officiating priest, one for the 
fighting men, one for the women who played a ceremonial part in the removal 
of tapu, and finally one for the people in general (16, p. 205). 

PRAYER AND SPELL 

The presentation of an offering to the gods was always accompanied by a 
prayer or chant. This might consist in anything from a simple summoning 
of the god, presentation of the gift and statement of desires, to an elabor- 
ate and lengthy formal prayer or chant which when the sense of appeal was 
dominant, was a more or less direct supplication; or if the method were 
approach through psychic rapport, a dynamic compelling spell. The more 
elaborate prayers and spells were a part of the esoteric lore of the priests 
to whom the knowledge was restricted; but every man had his own prayer- 
spells which he employed for private purposes. There were special recita- 
tions for every sort of occasion and activity and of these every native knew 
a considerable number. A strong sense of personal ownership was enter- 
tained in the matter of powerful spells, which were carefully kept secret, 
and only passed on from priests to their successors, or from father to son. 
Many prayers and spells were mere verbal appeals or charms. But there 
was an esoteric side to this phase of the religion. This is revealed in the 
priestly teachings concerning the Maori Supreme Being, Io, transcribed by 
Hare-Hongi. After the account of Io’s bringing the universe into being 
through the power of His Word, it is said that these “ancient and original 
words” uttered by the Supreme One impressed upon the minds of generation 
after generation of priests—for they alone knew of Io “of the hidden face,” 
the transcendent god of the esoteric cult—were employed in the ritual con- 
nected with birth, baptism, war, death, “and such like important subjects, as 
the priests most particularly concerned themselves in.” 

The words by which Io fashioned the Universe—that is to say, by which it was 
implanted and caused to produce a world of light—the same words are used in the 
ritual for implanting a child in a barren womb. The words by which Io caused light 
to shine in the darkness are used in the rituals for cheering a gloomy and despond- 
ent heart, the feeble aged, the decrepit; in song-composing, and in many other affairs, 
affecting man to despair in times of adverse war. For all such the ritual to enlighten 
and cheer includes the words .(used by Io) to overcome and dispell darkness. 

Thirdly there is the preparatory ritual which treats of successive formations within the 
universe, and the genealogical history of man himself. 

In all events of human life in which the priest sought to dispell darkness 
of the mind, or to implant or foster the germ of life, he repeated the words 
employed by Io “before time was” to dispell darkness and bring manifested 
being into existence. The esoteric meaning of prayer then, for the Poly- 
nesian initiate, was that the “word with power” properly expressed or pro- 

198 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

nounced was made manifest externally and objectively in the mind and 
body of man, and in the rest of the physical world. It is probable that 
many of these potent words in all the islarids had reference to the genesis 
of phenomena as it was recounted in the different groups, or to beings con- 
cerned in it; but another important class referred to the more immediate 
human manifestation of creative or procreative energy believed by these 
people to be centered in or focussed through the generative organs of man. 
Thus the potent words utilized in a Marquesan spell employed in connection 
with fishing, circumcision of boys, and the like were esoteric terms applied 
to the generative organs of the chief of the tribe. The first reaction of our 
European minds to this is that it belongs to a lower order of belief than 
that of the Maori just described, in which the words supposed to have been 
uttered by their Supreme Being were employed. Considered philosophically, 
however, the view held by the intelligent Polynesian of the male organs as 
being the manifestation or embodiment of universal creative or procreative 
power, the Marquesan expression is the same in principle as that of the 
Maori and in consequence equally high as an expression of religious thought. 
Worship is not brought to a low grade by such forms of recital; but rather 
natural functions are elevated to a high level by the religious philosophy 
which evolves these ideas. 

Of course, the reason for the power of the word was its supposed rap- 
port with superior mana, the influence being transmitted through the psychic 
atmosphere and the beings who peopled it. The spell had its immediate 
effect upon the psychic aspect of persons or things, which was in turn trans- 
mitted and manifested externally, for physical effects were consequent upon 
psychic precedents. Such effect through the instrumentality of verbal spells is 
illustrated by the following from Best (15, p. 9). 

In Maori narratives we often hear of the wairua being affected by magic spells. 
When about to attack an enemy it was a common custom to recite certain charms in 
order to affect the wairua of such enemies. ‘These spells were endowed with power, and 
rendered effective by the mana of the particular atua of whom the wizard was the 
kauwaka or medium. 

Unbroken, rhythmic, accurate utterance were the essentials of effective 
recital of ritual in these islands. The Polynesians recognized that the breath 
(manawa) was the medium upon which words were carried. Probably their 
feeling that prayers and spells must be uttered without a break for inhala- 
tion was due to the belief that the breath actually carried words to their 
objective: a break in the breath meant a broken spell. 

Both prayers and spells were everywhere recited in a sing-song, chanting 
fashion, for accurate and rhythmic utterance were believed to be imperative 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 199 

if the dynamic impulsion necessary were to be transmitted or to produce the 
required effect in the psychic world. 

Thus it is said that in New Zealand such a recitation of a war spell 
meant success; whereas the omission of a part of the spell or perhaps the 
reversal of the order of words were signs that disaster was likely to befall 

the warriors (72, p. 123). Two tohunga were required to intone lengthy ' 

recitations, for they must be said without a break for taking breath. One 
would, “with full lungs, commence the chant, and carry it smoothly on 
until his failing breath compelled him to desist, when his companion at once 
took up the recital and carried it on.” Any break in the continuous flow, 
or error in recital, was an omen of failure and disaster (16, p. 197). 

The Maori are said to have considered a tohunga’s power of killing to 
lie in the tip of his tongue (29, pp. 173-4). This is probably figurative. 
The effect of any religious recital depended on a number of factors, the 
most important of which were: the mana of the composition itself, which 
was largely determined by the potency of the names and words employed; 
the mana of the reciter; the mana of the rite and locality in which it was 
recited; and lastly, the mode of utterance. The last factor includes more 
than the rhythmical, unbroken recitation. Spells were positive verbal impul- 
sions, and as such were uttered with energy and force, particularly the 
last lines. Typical Maori spells conclude with such positive ejaculations as 
these (24, Vol. XI, pp. 20-27) : 

oy fee acquire the power of Tu 
Possess it! Hold it! 

Arise! Be brave! 

Catch it! Hold it [the power of the spell] 
So be it; possessed! So be it; held! 

Be possessed, be held, 

Now it is firm. 

In Tahiti also it is reported that an error in the recitation of a single 
word or verse of a prayer or chant was enough to lead to the total abandon- 
ment of a religious festival (105, Vol. I, p. 501), a single mistake being 
believed to be sufficient to nullify the power of the whole, and in conse- 
quence to render the continuation of the rite useless. Or was it rather that 
such a mistake was taken as a revelatory omen? The petitioner in the temple 
knelt on one knee, or sat crosslegged or in a crouching position on a flat 
stone, leaning his back against an upright basaltic column six or ten yards 
from the figure of the god. Small pieces of coconut leaf were suspended in 
different parts of the temple to remind the priests of the order to be 
observed in recitation of prayers (upu or pure). The gods were addressed 
either in a shrill, chanting tone, or boisterously (48, Vol. I, pp. 342-3). 

200 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

In long prayers, priests aided their memory by means of a bundle of 
little sticks of different sizes and dimensions which were taken from the 
packet one by one and placed to one side as the prayer proceeded. If an 
error in recitation occurred, the prayer was immediately stopped. It is said 
also that a mistake in a single words in a religious chant would suspend all 
the activities of fete (105, Vol. I, p. 501, 504-5). 

There appear to have been various modes of uttering their spells 
(karakia) employed by the Maori priests. A priest sometimes waved the 
offering in the air while he prayed, or he might hold up his god-stick, vibrat- 
ing it in the air as he recited. Sometimes the god-stick would be planted 
in the ground, the priest sitting at a little distance from it, and by means of 
a string tied to the god-stick jerking it to arrest the attention of the god. 
Short pieces of fern stalk were stuck in the ground to mark off prayers as 
they were recited (140, pp. 182-183). 

The chanting intonation of ritual was typical of Hawaii, as of the south- 
ern islands; but there was one distinctive convention here. Both private 
and public prayers were always ended with the word amama, which meant 
“to offer in sacrifice.” Fornander believed this “to be foreign and imported 
into the language in far remote times and from a people of superior culture” 
through contact or other connection. Certainly it is significant that neither 
this word nor a corresponding term occurred in any of the other Polynesian 
dialects, so far as is known. Its meaning at the end of a prayer is obvious 
in view of the fact that a prayer was always accompanied by an offering or 
sacrifice of some kind, and that the prayer frequently amounted to a state- 
ment of the purpose for which the offering was presented and an invitation 
to the deity or deities to come and partake of it. 

The simplest form of direct supplication to accompany an offering is 
well illustrated by the “asking of grace,” as Gill called it, before the family 
meal in the Cook group. When the Mangaians were at their principal meal 
at a little before sunset, the head of the family would take a cooked taro, 
pinch off the smaller end and, throwing it outside and calling his god’s name, 
would say, “Motoro, here is your taro; O eat.” For Tiaio, another patron, 
the same words were repeated. Then the patriarch would add: “Grant 
presence of mind and safety,” after which the family would eat (64, pp. 
44-5). Equally simple and direct was this family prayer offered at night in 
Hawaii (154, p. 251). 

O long god[s]! O god[s] watching, peeping at one! 

O short god[s]! O god[s] hiding, slipping out of sight 

O god[s] breathing in short, sibilant O All ye Gods, who travel on the dark 
breaths night paths! 

O god[s] blowing like whistling winds! Come and eat. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 201 

Give life to me, To us who are living in this place. 
And my parents, Amama [Amen]. 
And my children, 

The following is a translation of a family prayer such as used to be said 
at night by the head of a Tahitian household (105, Vol. II, p. 83): 

Save me! Save me! it is the night of the gods. Watch close to me, my God 
[atua]! Close to me, oh my Lord [fatw]! Protect me from enchantments, sudden 
death, evil conduct, from slandering or being slandered, from intrigue, and from 
quarrels concerning the limits of land. Let peace reign about us, oh my god! 

Protect me from the furious warrior, who spreads terror, whose hair bristles! May 
I and my spirit live and rest in peace this night, oh my god. 

The more elaborate prayers which belonged to the community worship 
were formalized as such invocations have come to be in the other organized 
systems of religion, whose priests have used their inspirational and intellect- 
ual talents in making what seemed to them fitting and potent forms of 
address to deity. Such religious compositions in Polynesia were always re- 
plete with mythological reference and poetic simile. Unfortunately, com- 
paratively few examples of such prayers have been published. Though a 
great number are preserved in manuscript, most of these compositions, many 
of which were truly inspired and have great beauty, have been irretrievably 
lost in the abyss of the unknown past with the priesthoods that composed 
and treasured them in their memories. 

The poetic sense with which the Polynesians are so highly endowed 
naturally expressed itself in many of their invocations, as in these lines from 
one of the prayers accompanying sacrifice at the time of the building of the 
king’s temple (Juakini) in Hawaii. 

Resplendent the heavens, crystalline the earth, mirror-like earth’s plane, 
The milky way inclines to the West, refulgent are the heavens. 

The heavens are guarded by the milky way. 

Oh Ku! Oh Kane, Oh Lono! 

Oh Lono of the clear night, 
Keep the brightness of the heavens undimmed! 

This prayer concludes with reference to the pig that is offered to the gods, 
the celebration of a dance in honor of the king and the temple, and to the 
coming of Kane ‘‘with the water of life” to bring “Life through the multi- 
tude of the gods!” ending with the ejaculation “We are saved!” (99, p. 243). 

Ellis (48, Vol. I, pp. 343-4) gives the following as an example of the type 
of invocation that was recited in a Tahitian temple at dawn: 

Awake Roo—awake ‘Tane—awake remembered progeny of ‘Tane—awake Tuu— 
awake Tuaratai. ‘Thus the gods, to the number of twenty, are called upon by name, 
and are directed to the birds and to Roo, the god of the morning, and the parent 
of clouds—to the formation and increase of clouds—to the blue cloud, the red cloud, 
and the low hungry cloud, and the horned or pointed cloud. They are then directed 

202 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

to mark the progress of Roo, the property or offerings of Roo, the plaited cocoa-nut 
leaf of Roo, the medium through which his influence or power was conveyed to his 
image, or through which he received the spirit , of the offerings. All the gods are 
then invoked to enter their tapau or cocoa- -nut leaves, and to open wide their 
mouths. Each one is addressed by name, and it is declared, “Here is the food and 
offering, in or from the land or the sea.’ ‘The gods are then invoked to take off 
the sacredness or restriction, and to hold it fast, probably that men may securely 
attend to their avocations. The gods are then supposed to be awakened, and the 
priest retires. 

The following is the translation of a Hawaiian invocation and is an 
example of direct supplication to Lono, the god of cultivated foods, such as 
was used in his annual first fruits rite (99, p. 233): 

Oh Lono, gift from Tahiti, h Lono shake out a net-full of food, 
A prayer direct to you oh Lono, a net-full of rain. 
Oh Lono of the broad leaf, Rain to make the tapa-plant flourish, 
Let the low-hanging cloud pour out its Gather them together for us. 

rain, Accumulate food oh Lono! 
To make the crops flourish, Collect fish oh Lono! 
Wring out the dark rain-clouds Wauke shoots and the coloring matters 
Of Lono in the heavens. for tapa. 

Amen. It is free. 

The prayer which follows (99, p. 239) addressed to Kane, Lono, and 
Ku, the three chief deities of the Hawaiian cult, was one recited at the 
time of the consecration and purification of a new war temple of the king. 
A new image of the war god Ku was made of ohia (Eugenia malaccensis)— 
this is the “ohia of Kuamu,” “The ohia, god-image of ohia” referred to in 
the prayer. The chief priest of the temple, who recited the prayer, his 
loins girt with the sacred white tapa, with a bunch of sacred fern leaves in 
his hand, was accompanied by a man bearing a human skull containing sea- 
water which was used in the ritual for releasing worshippers from tapu. 
The frequent mention of the sea in the lines of this prayer has reference 
to this water carried in the skull. 

Oh Kane, oh Lono of the blue sea, 
The white sea, the rough sea, 

The sea with swamping breakers, 
The sea, oh Ku, that reaches to Tahiti, 
Oh Ku of the ocean at Tahiti, 

The sacred ocean, 

Sea of the bleached skull. 

Take of the sea-foam 

The ohia, god-image of ohia, 

God-image that shall fly to the conquest 
of the whole land. 

That shall overthrow all enemies. 

Oh Kane, here is your life-giving brine, 

To be mixed with food to be drunk, 
to be sopped up. 

Long life to the king! Long life to the 

That is the brine wherewithal to con- 
secrate, 

Consecrate the ohia, ohia of Kuamu, 

Of the woodland deities, Kua-wao, Kua- 
wa, and Kua-lana, 

That the kaei god may make his circuit 

Above the pavement guarded by the 
aha ula obedient only to royalty. 

kahunas. 

Long life to all true worshippers in the 
temple! 

It is lifted, there is freedom! 

The load is removed! Freedom! 

Freedom through Kane, the life-giving 
one ! 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 203 

Another example (99, pp. 244-5) of these temple prayers was called 
pule kuili (pule, meaning prayer; kuili indicating that it was recited by 
“everyone” at once). Whether “everyone,” as seems likely, signified merely 
all the priests, or the priests and congregation, is unknown. 

Unite now in the prayers of the king 
to Ku! 

Oh Kane, oh Lono of the portent-show- 
ing heavens, 

Heavens that have been lifted up O 
Kane, 

Lift up your prayers that they may be 
approved! 

Approved in the heavens! 

Have power in the heavens! 

Flourish in the heavens! 

Scatter blessings from the heavens, the 

upper heavens! 
The prayer unrolls itself. 
The prayer is uttered; 
over all. 
A heaven that is a walled stronghold. 
It 1s free. Let all pray! 

Kane the god of power, 

Power to step in the assembly of the 
dancers. 

Restrain now the voice and suppress it, 

The voice of hunger, the sound of the 
bamboo, the sound of the ohia trees, 

Ohia-god of the mountain forests. 

Kane _ reigns 

Prayers in which the people, who may be termed the congregation, took 
part by responding to the priests were used in services of both a public 
and private nature. In view of the fact that all Polynesian prayers appear 
to have been either intoned or uttered as recitative, this class of supplications 
may be called antiphonal. This same type of prayer is known to have been 
typical of the public rites in the Society Islands, the Cook Islands and Tonga, 
as well as Hawaii. The first example (99, pp. 132-4) here given is a 
prayer that was used in Hawaii in the rite by means of which those who 
had been contaminated by contact with a dead body were purified: 

The kahuna brought with him a dish filled with sea-water, which also contained 
a sea-moss called limu-kala and turmeric; and standing before the people who sat in 
a row, he prayed as follows: 

Hasten, O Uli; hasten, O water. 

Here is Uli, Uli; here is water, water. 

I fly to thy shrine, O Kane, the approachable one. 
A rustling in heaven—it rustles with the sprinkling. 
Light appears. The deity is silent. 

Then the people respond: The deity is silent. 

The kahuna resumes: 

Silent and attentive are the rude and unceremonious, 
Silent are the wicked and unbelievers, 

Silent are the hula-dancers, 

Silent are those given to sports and games, 

Silent are the hot-blooded ones. 

Give us now the blood of swine! 

Give us now the blood of dogs! 

The blood of the human sacrifice! 

The deity is silent. 

The people respond: The deity is silent. 

The kahuna says: Profoundly. 

The people respond: Tabu. 

204 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

The kahuna says: Entirely, profoundly. 

The people: Free. 

The kahuna: O Ia! \ 

The people: Freedom instant and complete. 

The kahuna then sprinkled the water mixed with turmeric on all the people, 
and the purification was accomplished, the defilement removed. 

A second example of an antiphonal prayer or chant comes from the 
Cook Islands (63, p. 299) : 
The single voice of the “praying king.” 
A bleeding victim has been chosen for our altar. 

By it are weeded out the evils of the land 
Which spring up from nether-world. 

All the drums and all the voices. 

Let peace begin. May the sky be cloudless! 
Weed out all evils. Weed them out! 

Weed, weed them out; utterly and forever! 

Aye, let each threatening cloud entirely disappear ! 

The Hawaiian invocations quoted above are genuinely supplicatory in 
nature, and hence truly may be called prayers. But frequently appeal is 
mingled with impulsion or induction, when the address to the gods com- 
bines prayer and spell. This is illustrated in the following example from 
the Hawaiian, a prayer-spell used by a doctor both at the time of catching 
the squid mentioned in the prayer, and later recited again over the sick 
man for whom the rite was performed, when the squid was eaten by the 
patient. The whole rite combines the approach through appeal and a simple 
form of sympathetic magic’ in a most interesting way. Hee means “squid” ; 
and it means also, “to dissolve, disperse, put to flight.” Hence, according 
to Emerson, the use of the squid in this healing rite, with the idea that it 
assisted in dissolving, or putting to flight, the disease. (See 99, p. 146; 
and p. 148, note 9.) The first two lines represent a supplicatory prayer to 
the god Kanaloa, the last two a mere magical incantation (99, pp. 149-50): 

O Kanaloa, god of the squid! . 
Here is your patient, Kalua. 

O squid of the deep blue sea, 

Squid that burrows in the sand, 

Squid that inhabits the coral reef, 

Squid that squirts water from its sack, 

Here is a sick man for you to heal, Kalua by name, 
A patient put to bed for treatment by the squid that lies flat. 

Here is the cowry, 

A red cowry to attract the squid to his death. 
Here is the spear, a mere stick, 

A spear of lama wood for the squid that lies flat. 
O Kanaloa of the tabu nights, 

Stand upright on the solid floor! 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 205 

Stand upon the floor where lies the squid! 

Stand up to take the squid of the deep sea! 

Rise up, O Kanaloa! 

Stir up! agitate! let the squid awake! 

Let the squid that lies flat awake, the squid that lies spread out. 

From the Cook Islands comes another example (64, pp. 68-9) of a 
prayer-spell in which there is an element of appeal, though the note of direct 
psychic influence is dominant. 

This is the infallible cure; 

In the presence of Great Vatea. 
Staunch, O wound, lest the sufferer faint, 
Staunch quickly, lest he faint and die! 

Here is water from the swamp to cure thee. 
Wound, heal speedily ! 

[This is repeated five times, mentioning “water from the 
valleys,” “water bubbling out of the earth,” 

“from the running stream,” “from the taro plantation,” 
“from the mountain-side.’’] 

Be healed in the name of Rongo and Tutavake. 
Poison of the iron-wood, arise, depart ! 

Compare with these representing a blending of prayer with spell the 
following, the first (99, p. 152) a genuine prayer used for healing, the 
second (140, p. 182) a simple spell or incantation for the same purpose. 
The first is Hawaiian; the second, a Maori spell to heal a burn. 

Oh Ku, the forgiving, 

Oh Lono who grants pardon, 

Giving full pardon, : 

Undo the knot-of our sins at Ahuena. 

Tabu is the ceremony presided over by you Kane. 
Pardon is wide and free. 

It was burnt with what? 

It was burnt with fire, 

Fire from whom, 

Fire from Mauika, 

Fetch me some fire, spread it out 
As a food dresser for us two, 
Little burn, great burn, 

Burn be coated with skin, 

I will make it grow, 

I will make it effective. 

Another Maozi spell (140, p. 182) of the simplest type, the purpose of 
which is obvious, went like this: 

Loud wind, 
Lasting wind, 

206 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Violent whistling wind, 
Dig up the calm reposing sky, 
Come, come. 

There was a class of recitations called aha, that played a prominent part 
in the Hawaiian temple rites, which combined features of prayer and spell 
in a most interesting manner. ‘These may be characterized as “binding 
prayers,” for the purpose of their recitation was to bind the temple and the 
earthly fortunes of the kingdom to the heavenly powers. Of this class of 
recitations Emerson says that for ceremonial perfection absolute silence and 
freedom from all disturbance was required during the recital. All listeners 
and observers had to preserve profound silence and attention; even the 
crowing of a cock, the barking of a dog, the squeaking of a rat, or the hoot- 
ing of an owl would defeat the efficacy of the spell. The intrusion of a 
woman would be punished by death. The cord referred to in the prayer 
was an actual cord or rope made ceremonially and hung up in the temple, a 
cord evidently symbolizing, or perhaps embodying, the “binding of the super- 
natural influence” of heaven to the earthly kingdom. The term aha used 
for this form of prayer-spell signifies “cord” and probably has reference to 
the believed effect of the rite. 

The following is an example of one of the verbal aha (99, p. 244). 

O Ku in the heavens! 
Behold the cord done into the all-including knot! 
Oh Ku of the mystic, wonderful ridge-pole of Hanalei! 
Bind, tie with the knotted oloa! 
It is the oloa that shall overturn the power. 
Power is wrapped up in the oloa cord. 
Let power go forth to the god-image! 
Cut now the navel-cord of the house Mana! 
Virtue, virtue resides in the knotted oloa cord 
That decorates the house of god Kane. 
Cut now the navel-string! 

Done! It is done! 

The fact that true prayers were most used in the worship of the 
Hawaiian people and least by the Maori, may have ethnographical signifi- 
cance or may be the result wholly of divergent evolution from the ancient 
type of Polynesian worship which undoubtedly included both. Most Maori 
verbal expressions of worship were spells or incantations, but, according to 
Best, true invocations were also sometimes employed. These appeals, accord- 
ing to this writer, “mostly belong to the higher type of ritual pertaining 
to matters of the highest importance’’—such as that of the whare wananga 
—“and not to such as deal with everyday affairs” (16, p. 193). An ex- 
ample of a pure invocation to the Supreme Being is given in a description 
of the teaching in the sacred college (p. 96). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 207 

In some of the islands, particularly in the central and southern region of 
Polynesia, the genealogies relating the descent or ascent of man were chanted 
as religious formulae. As such they constituted at once prayers, invoking 
those spirits whose names were recited, and spells, binding the living to 
their sacred ancestral stock. The efficacy of reciting or chanting the names 
of ancestors was due, according to native belief, to the rapport existing 
between the soul and the name. It was on the same principle that names 
were supposed to lend power to prayer-spells. In New Zealand, genealogical 
recitals were a part of family rites such as naming and_ purification 
(“baptism”) of a child, and were employed also to aid in alleviating difficult 
parturition (149, p. 383). According to White, Maori genealogies were 
divided into three parts. The first, the genealogy of the gods, was chanted 
on occasions when a tribe mourned a person of rank at the time of burial, to 
purify all who had been contaminated by the death. The second division, the 
genealogy of ancestors who followed immediately after the gods, was 
chanted over those who handled the skeletal remains when these were 
removed from the ground, cleaned, and secreted in a cave. Finally the third 
division, the genealogy of man, did service on less sacred occasions, being 
chanted by midwives, hunters, fishermen, planters and harvesters, to aid 
them in their operations (156, Vol. VI, pp. iii, iv). 

In the Marquesas the preservation, recitation, and teaching of the geneal- 
ogies of the families included in the tribe was a part of the duty of a 
tuhuna oono, or tribal bard and ceremonial priest. Here there were also 
various division of the genealogies, but whether they were employed in the 
same way as in New Zealand I do not know. The learning and recitation 
of these catalogues of sacred names was aided by a mnemonic device con- 
sisting of a small, closely knit object made of plaited sennit from which 
hung knotted strings. These were an aid to accuracy upon ceremonial 
occasions, for exact recital was as necessary for genealogies as for spells. 
These devices were called too (or too mata) which means “rootstock.” It 
is probable that the body of the device represented the main ancestral line or 
stock (too) and that the pendant knotted strings stood for the various 
branches (vahina) through which descent was traced back by the living 
family. The Maori employed for the same purpose carved pieces of wood 
on which notches stood for generations. Some of these “genealogical staves” 
as Tregear calls them—the Marquesan word too may be translated “staff” 
—were elaborately carved and ornamented (149, pp. 384-5). The recitation 
of the genealogies formed a central feature in feasts or festivals which 
were celebrated at times in honor of the ancestral spirits, when all the 
different branches of a family would come together to chant the names of 
their immediate ancestors who came from the common stock. Another use 

208 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

of the sacred genealogies was in the ceremonies attending adoption, betrothal, 
marriage, and the funerary memorial festivals. In the marriage rite, for 
example, the genealogies of both the families that were being bonded to- 
gether were chanted. In these rites the chanting of the names was carried 
on continuously by two women, who sang out slowly in a high pitched 
voice the alternate names of male and female in each generation. This 
practice parallels interestingly the Maori method of two priests chanting long 
prayer-spells. The conception in the use of genealogies in the Marquesan 
rites mentioned seems to have been that this recitation of the pedigrees of 
the two branches served to seal in the psychic realm the bond between the 
two families, which the physical and social union of their two members in 
marriage would accomplish in the physical world. 

When their religious use has been mentioned, the subject of genealogies 
and their meaning and uses in Polynesia has scarcely been touched; but it 
is primarily their religious aspects and meaning that are significant in this 
study. The record of the genealogical descent from the gods was every- 
where preserved ; in some places their religious use was of chief importance, 
as in New Zealand and the Marquesas; elsewhere—in Hawaii, the Society 
Islands, and Samoa—they were employed more in the interests of social 
prestige; but everywhere they represented the great verbal encyclopedia of 
mythological, traditional, and historical record. As such, their value remains 
even today. Concerning their historical and educational value in Maori life, 
White has written: “As all the names in these genealogies were indices of 
important events, the chanting of them... provoked inquiry from the 
younger and explanation by the elder members of the tribe, and thus became 
an important means of transmitting its history” (156, Vol. VI, p. iv). 

CHANTING 

In describing the mode of recital of prayers, spells and genealogies, it is 
more accurate to say that they were chanted than that they were recited. 
All these invocations and formulae may in a sense be called chants, for if 
they were not actually intoned, they were uttered as recitative; but there 
were besides the simple type, what may be called in a strict sense ritualistic 
chants—ceremonial recitations intoned after a prescribed musical plan. 
Singing or chanting by groups of natives engaged in ceremonial worship 
has been described by early visitors in the Tongan, Society, and Cook 
islands. It is also reported by Malo that in one of the great Hawaiian 
religious rites each of two alternating groups of priests “prayed” in unison. 
“Praying” signifies in Polynesian worship one of two things: recitative or 
intonation. (See 81, p. 7.) 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 209 

Nowhere, however, did chanting hold so prominent a place in the 
worship as in the Marquesas Islands, where intonation seems to have re- 
placed practically all simple recitation in the ceremonial. In that group were 
innumerable varieties of sacred chants intended for different ceremonial 
occasions, which were intoned by a priest alone or by a chorus as a central 
feature in the various rites. The pue chant, for example, which recounts the 
origin and growth of the world, was intoned sometimes alone by the 
ceremonial priest, as when consecrating a new house or canoe; at other times 
by a large choir of old men at the great ceremonies such as the memorial 
rites for the dead. Both the content of this chant and the mode of intoning 
it mark it as a dynamic spell rather than an invocation. While in parts 
certain gods and goddesses are appealed to directly, it is mostly made up of 
the recapitulation of events of creation combined with phrases most of 
which are not, so far as can be discerned today, subject to translation, but 
the repetition of which in the powerful rhythm of the chant was believed to 
give mana to the spell. Some of these phrases were “words with power,” 
others merely served to sustain the rhythm of utterance, being, according | 
to native phrase, “for the mouth to take hold of.” The conception in the’ 
native mind of the use of the pue appears to have been that by dynamically 
recapitulating creation, by verbally bringing the process down to the activity 
in hand at the moment, they bound the new product or rite to all things 
past and present and thus made it potent and consecrated. The new object 
consecrated was generated and evolved psychically by means of the chant. 
If the generation and evolution were recited perfectly, then the psychic 
aspect of the work was perfect and the inevitable consequence must be 
physical perfection. In the Marquesas were other and similar chants for 
every purpose—for honoring the dead or the living and thus increasing their 
sanctity and spiritual power (mana), for accompanying the offering of 
human sacrifice, for fishing, tattooing and all other activities. (See 77, pp. 
BAe tOle ph LO: ) 

In the forceful, rhythmic recitation, or intonation of their religious 
compositions by this people is to be seen both cause and effect. For anyone 
who in modern times has sensed the dynamic, emotional power of non- 
religious recitations by individuals in these islands and the even more in- 
tense effect of the chanting of ancient songs by choruses, there can be no 
question but that similar recitals in worship in ancient times, when the 
virility of the race was unimpaired and emotion was intensified by the oc- 
casion, created in performers and hearers alike a strong sense of immanent 
power. Furthermore, this very sense of the immanence of the power sup- 
posed to be omnipresent in its turn intensified the dynamic nature of the 
recitation. Mana, power, was the heart and soul of the worship; and the 

210 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

sense or feeling of power both stimulated the mode of recital and was 
augmented by it. But for the native, the emotional effect on human beings 
was subsidiary to the main purpose of such ritualistic recitals. All nature 
was personalized by the Polynesians, who felt all about them beings, most 
of whose forms differed from their own, but whose motives and feelings 

were like theirs. ‘Therefore conscious, animate nature as a whole, and gods 
and spirits, were supposed to be moved by the same desires and subject to 
the same impulsions and. influences as men. So it was natural that the 
natives would have supposed nature and the gods to have been influenced in 
just the same way as they themselves were affected by the rousing, stimulat- 
ing, and empowering recitals of prayers and.spells. Many recitals, like 
certain offerings, were also intended to strengthen and empower patron 
gods; others, like some offerings, were designed to nullify evil influences or 
drive away evil spirits. 

DANCING 

Dynamic action, as well as utterance, was believed to affect nature. The 
religious dancing, which was a prominent feature of worship in ancient 
times in Polynesia, was based on exactly the same conception as recitation 
—namely, the power of rapport in nature. In prayer-spells, words were the 
instruments of rapport; in dancing, acts and movement were the means. 
The pantomimic recapitulation of scenes from the story of creation by the 
consecrated dancers in the seasonal fertility rites in Tahiti clearly parallels 
the verbal recapitulation of creation in the consecrational chants in the 
Marquesas Islands. 

The dancing at the religious festivals was closely related to the offerings 
and feasts in honor of the gods: they were believed to entertain the gods, 
and at the same time to rouse and stimulate them. Mana in one fundamental 
sense, meant procreative power. ‘The erotic dancing of the tropical islands 
of Polynesia, which was in its origin a form of worship, was designed to 
stimulate and bring into action the mana of the gods who were believed to 
be animated by the same emotions as men and on whose procreative activities 
the fecundity of human beings, the earth, and sea depended. ‘These rites 
have been characterized as “mysteries” but I see no reason to call them such. 
The gods, man-like in their nature, were present at the feasts. The dancing 
roused their passions, and they sought the satisfaction of their desire with 
their female mates. The nature father—Tane in New Zealand, Taaroa in 
Tahiti, Atea in the Marquesas—would enjoy with the mothers of fruits, 
as men enjoyed with the mothers of men, the orgy of sexual indulgence in 
which such feasts always culminated. There would be many children of 
the nature father—many breadfruit, taro, bananas, potatoes, many fish— 

Handy—Polynesian Religion PAY 

and there would be many human children, both because the procreative power 
seated in the human fathers was released and freely spent, and because the 
nature father, from whom or through whom this power came to men, was 
aroused to impregnate the mothers in nature. 

The Polynesian islands north of New Zealand are noted for their erotic 
dances which are built upon the principle of suggestive posturing and move- 
ment of the abdominal parts of the body, shivering, and the like. In the 
dancing that is to be seen today (and this apparently held true also in 
ancient times)—is every grade from extreme refinement, such as is typical 
of the best Samoan and some Hawaiian performances, to animal-like out- 
bursts of passion that are almost terrifying to the uninitiated onlooker, 
such as are still to be seen in the Tuamotu Islands, where much of this 
savage side of the native nature smoulders today visibly or just beneath the 
surface. 

The Maori, doubtless by reason of the fact that the climate of New 
Zealand was, literally, chilling to eroticism, particularly during the early 
days when the Polynesian colonists were struggling to adapt themselves to 
a cooler climate than they had been accustomed to, have lost all except a 
hint of the dancing typical of the rest of Polynesia; but they have de- 
veloped a type of exhibition dance used on occasions of war, and social 
and religious festivities, called the haka, the dynamic power of which can 
never be forgotten by anyone who has seen it. It consists in rapid steps, 
posturings, grimaces, and pantomimic display in which every part of the 
body is brought into play by the dancers, the whole group going through 
the performance with the utmost precision and putting every ounce of 
energy into it. The physical motivation is accompanied by a rapid rhythmic 
recitation interspersed with powerful ejaculations. It is usually assumed, as 
in the case of similar war dances among other peoples, that the primary 
object of these performances by war parties was to rouse and reinforce 
the spirits of the fighting party. This probably is only a part of the story, 
and the least important part. I believe that in ancient times the whole per- 
formance, including rhythmic recitation and accompanying synchronous, 
dynamic action was just as definitely a spell as that recited by the tohunga, 
having the double purpose of destroying the mana of the enemy and endow- 
ing the war party with power. (For description of the haka see Best 17, 

PP. 39-40.) 

212 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

RITES 

BIRTH RITES 

The rites and customs pertaining to pregnancy and birth were designed 
in the main to shield and help the mother, and to protect and endow with 
life and strength the infant both before and after birth. Others, also, had 
to be protected at this time, for delivery was surrounded by the same 
dangers of contamination as was menstruation, sickness, and death. 

It was the custom in many places to build a special shed for the seclusion 
of the prospective mother. In the Marquesas the birth house was built 
near the dwelling, and had to be burned after it had served its purpose. 
(77, pp. 71-2.) The Tahitians used to build a small shed behind the family 
marae when a woman was to be delivered, thatching it with maire fern, 
which was believed to ease delivery (82). In New Zealand delivery for 
those of low degree took place in the open air, while those well born were 
ushered into the world in a secluded “birth house” (149, p. 41). The shed 
in which a mother was delivered was called the “foetus house” (whare 
kahu). After delivery the mother and child were taken to what was called 
the “nest house” (whare kohanga) and there they dwelt in seclusion until 
certain rites had been performed (26, Vol. XV, p. 16). In Samoa women 
went to a secluded spot to be delivered (47, p. 621) ; and in Hawaii it is said 
that at the time of childbirth women went “into the woods” for ten days 
(34, p- 190). 

In New Zealand, if travail was hard, it was aided in various ways: by 
reciting incantations to the goddess Hine-te-iwaiwa who presided over child- 
birth, while the father went and plunged into the river; by invoking Tiki, 
the first man; and by the recitation of the genealogy first of the father, and 
then of the mother, and bidding the child to “Come forth” (149, p. 42). 
When labor of a Samoan mother was difficult, her father or husband prayed 
to the ancestral household gods, first to the patron of the prospective father’s 
family, then to that of the mother’s. The god who was being addressed 
when delivery occurred, became the patron of the child, and was presented 
with gifts (151, p. 174). In the Marquesas Islands, when it was seen that 
an infant was in the wrong position to come out of the womb normally, it 
was customary for the household to set about making a great din by beating 
on everything they could put their hands on. I have been told that the 
belief was that this would cause the child to turn into the right position for 
easy delivery; but it seems likely also that there was some idea of frighten- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 213 

ing away a malicious demon causing the trouble (77, p. 72). When a royal 
mother’s labor set in in Hawaii all the people in the country set them- 
selves to worship the ancestral gods of the land. A pig was offered to 
the king’s god with a prayer. “Then rain fell” (indicating a favorable at- 
titude of the god). When the travail was over, a girdle was offered to “the 
female deity,’ Hulu, who aided in delivery (54, Vol. VI, p. 4; 99, pp. 
180-1). 

The process of delivery was throughout Polynesia regarded as unclean 
and psychically dangerous. Just as when a person died and departed from 
this world, all associated with the occurrence was regarded as unclean and 
fearful, so likewise was this the case when a child was ushered into the 
world at birth. The gravest psychic contamination was believed to result 
from contact with the issue of blood at the time of delivery. This ap- 
parently was the basis of the fear that led to the taking of elaborate pre- 
cautions. Everywhere washing in fresh water served to cleanse both mother 
and child physically, and probably was believed also to have a similar psychic 
effect. In Tahiti the mother went through a steaming over hot stones in a 
little tent; while in the Marquesas she seated herself upon a sun-heated stone 
in the stream-bed. The object of these practices may have been largely 
the physical effect; but it is likely, too, that there was also a psychic side 
to these, as to almost all customs at this time, for it must be remembered 
that as water was an agent that washed away evil, so heat was one that 
drove it away or destroyed it. 

The cutting of the umbilicus, and disposal of the cord and of the after- 
birth were regarded as operations of great import. It is evident that the 
ancient Polynesians believed that the nature of the child was capable of 
being affected at this time through rapport and contact. In Samoa a male 
child’s umbilicus was cut on a war club, in order that he might grow into a 
great warrior; while that of a girl child was severed upon one of the boards 
used by women in their cloth making labors (151, p. 175). On Rarotonga 
when a boy was born, spears, clubs, and slaying stones were assembled. 
The child being placed in a large leaf filled with water, this was held over 
the pile of weapons and the cord was cut (63, pp. 36-7). In Tahiti this 
operation was performed by the temple priest. The sacred implements of 
war, the symbols of the family’s prowess, were laid on the pavement; and up 
on these, a large leaf of Arum costatum filled with water. After a prayer 
called “the prayer of life,” the child’s umbilicus was cut with a sacred knife 
of sting-ray bone. The operation accomplished, the child was placed in a 
little shelter inside the temple covered with sacred cloth, “to indicate that 
the child was admitted to the society of the gods, and exalted above ordinary 

men” (48, Vol. I. pp. 258-9). 

214 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

In Hawaii a royal girl child’s umbilicus was cut in the dwelling; but that 
of a male heir was cut in the temple before the king’s gods, as in Tahiti. 
The priest, as he prepared to sever the cord, took a piece of bamboo, saying: 

This is the bamboo [knife] for the navel-string of the heaven-born chief. 

Splitting off a sharp strip he continued: 

This is the splitting of the bamboo for the navel-string of the heaven-born chief. 
This is the cutting of the navel-string of the heaven-born one. 
He then cut the cord, and said: 

Cleanse the red blood from the stump; 
Cleanse it from the cord; 

Bind up the cord; 

It is for God to safeguard this child, 

To make him flourish like a well-watered plant. 

The child’s father then prayed as follows: 

O Ku, Lono, Kane and Kanaloa, here is the pig, the cocoanuts, the malo. Deal 
kindly with this new chief; give him long life; protect him until the last sleep 
of unconsciousness. Long may he reign and his kingdom extend from the rising 
to the setting of the sun. Amen [Amama]; it is free: the tabu is lifted. 

As he finished his prayer, he dashed a pig to the ground and killed it, 
thus ending the rite (99, pp. 181-2). I interpret the sacrifice as being 
intended to take off any evil influences which might be lurking about to 
afflict the child at this critical time. 

The proper disposal of the placenta and the umbilicus was highly im- 
portant, for they were in the most intimate rapport with both the child and 
the mother. In the Marquesas the part of the cord that was cut off was in 
some instances kept for the rest of the individual’s life in the dwelling, or 
it might be attached to a tree (77, p. 73). In New Zealand the navel string 
was buried in a sacred place, and sometimes a young tree was planted over 
it, in which case the life of the tree and that of the person were thought 
to be closely allied. There the placenta was offered before the tribal shrine 
(149, p. 43); while in the Marquesas it was buried in mud (77, p. 73). 
Safe disposal of the after-birth was thought to be a matter of great con- 
sequence on account of the intimate rapport with the child that made it a 
medium through which an evil doer might inflict any sort of injury on 
mother or child. ‘The Marquesans never buried the placenta in dry soil 
lest, as it gradually dried up, the child should also dry up and die. It was 
the custom in the Society Islands for the placenta and umbilicus of infant 
chiefs to be buried in the ground of the family temple. This protected 
the sacred relics, placed the temple and the young chief in an intimate 
rapport, and at the same time added to the endowment of mana that 
distinguished the temple. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 215 

After the cleansing and stoppage of the flow of the woman’s blood, the 
child had to be carefully secluded with its mother in order that no psychic 
harm might come to it. It is evident that the child, prior to the consecra- 
tional rite, was regarded as peculiarly subject to attack by evil influences or 
spirits, and hence as needing every sort of special precaution to protect it 
until the consecrational rite insulated it in a positive psychic atmosphere, 
and placed it under the protection of the family god. During this time in 
the Marquesas, no one, not even the child’s father, was allowed without 
certain ceremonies to enter the house in which the mother and child were 
secluded ; and anything that touched the child’s head during this time had to 
be put in a sacred, restricted place in the tribal temple (77, pp. 257-8). 
Similar rules were observed in Tahiti. A Hawaiian royal child was secluded 
in a sacred place after his umbilicus was cut and any “person who ate pig 
or cocoanut, or any unclean or filthy food, or those whose garments were 
greasy with the oil of the cocoanut were not allowed there” (54, Vol. VI, p. 6). 

Implanting the breath of life, strengthening, and purification were the 
first needs of the new born infant to be supplied by the proper ceremonial. 
Ellis describes the prayer recited for a new born child in Tahiti as “the 
prayer of life,’ but gives no details (48, Vol. I, p. 259). From a line of 
an Hawaiian prayer quoted by Malo (99, p. 31), “give him long life,” it is 
evident that this was likewise a prayer of life. The Marquesans erected a 
small shrine in honor of the newborn child and the tribal priest was sum- 
moned to recite a chant called aumeha, the object of which was the strength- 
ening of the breath (menava) of the child (77, pp. 74-5). 

The Maori child was taken immediately after birth to the sacred water 
(vai tapu) of the village, and there a rite called tu-ora (tu, stand; ora, 
health) was performed for the purpose of endowing the infant with vitality 
(hau ora). ‘The rite itself explains its name. ‘The main feature was the 
making of two mounds of earth upon each of which a stick was set upright, 
one representing life and the other death. The stick representing, or em- 
bodying death, was cast down by the priest (24, Vol. XI, p. 20; 26, Vol. 
XV., p. 162). Five or six days after this, the Maori child was purified by 
means of the fua rite. The infant was again taken to the sacred water and 
sprinkled by means of a branch from a sacred tree, while spells designed to 
empower the child were recited. There was a feast on consecrated food 
which was shared by all attending, and sometimes a human victim was 
killed and eaten to add distinction to the occasion and to endow the rite with 
power (26, Vol. XV, pp. 148-53). The following are typical of the kind 
of spells that were recited in the twa rite. The first example quoted is 
obviously for the purpose of bringing about growth and strength; the lines 
of the second, which are taken from a long recitation, were evidently de- 

216 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

signed to implant bravery; while the other two sought to arouse his spirit 
and endow it directly with those qualities that would make the man-to-be 
arereat hehter (24, VoloXI “pp. 21, 22,27). 

By exalted powers (art thou) treated 
That thou mayest in statute grow; 
Like unto the solid matai stump inland 
Mayest thou be bulky in growth, 

Like the hapuku fish in the sea 
Mayest thou be of prodigious growth, 
As the whale of the ocean depths 
Mayest thou grow in all greatness. 

The sense of another spell is expressed in these lines: 

Rely on the powers below, the powers above, 
(For) thy strife shall be all above, all below, 

Call on the first Heaven, 

Call on the second Heaven, 
When thou dost exercise thy warlike spirit 
Be brave indeed. 

To uplift thy weapons, 

To carry thy arms, 

To parry fierce blows, 

To catch the bravest 

Be thou strong and able, 

To grimace in the war dance, 
To be lithe and quick 

And acquire the power of Tu 
Possess it! Hold it! 

Come forth to the world of being 
To the world of light. 

Invoke (the powers) inland (the powers) at sea, 

Invoke the ancestors, 

Invoke the female priests, 

Invoke the (spirit of the) ancestral homes, 

Invoke the wind (or spirit) that is present, 

Be strenuous, be brave, be courageous, 

Stare fiercely, stride with high action, showing the white of the eyes, 
Stare wildly, that those of old may sce thee. 

So be it; possessed! So be it; holden! 

Soon after the twa, another similar rite called the tohi was performed. 
This was coincidental with the removal of the navel string and released the 
infant from tapu. There was the sprinkling ceremony as before, with 
recitations designed to endow the child with needed qualities (26, Vol. XV, 
pp. 157-61). Best has written (24, Vol. XI, pp. 22-4). 

This ceremony is for the purpose of endowing the child with health, strength, 
cleverness and courage, and to enable it to retain such qualities. For the child came 
into the world by way of the whare o aitua (translated, “The house of misfortune,” 
signifying the female reproductive organ). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 2r7 

In the tohi rite the child swallowed a small stone, this being believed to 
“harden” the child. The invocation contained these words: “Tangaroa hard 
skin, Tangaroa stony skin.” » 

This is the explanation of the toi rite given by one tribe. When man 
was first created in Hawaiki, the creator (here said to be Tu-mata-uenga) 
made an altar in the form of a mound of earth. In this he stuck two 
branches—the one on the right representing life; that on the left, death. 
Making a figure in his own form out of clay, he placed it with its head on 
the right hand branch and its body on the left. Then he breathed into its 
nostrils and it came to life (73, pp. 125-6). Thus the tohi rite endowed a 
child with life by symbolically reenacting the work of the creator. 

In the to/i rite of the Moriori of Chatham Islands the frequent re- 
ference to sand in one of the incantations employed would seem to indicate that 
sand was used in some way, probably for the mounds (alu) when the 
shrine (tuahu) was made ready for the consecration of the child. (See 114, 
Vol. VI, pp. 12-13.) This is peculiarly interesting in view of the fact that 
sand played an important ceremonial part in certain consecrational rites in 
the Marquesas, when a shrine (ahw) was also a feature of these ceremonials. 
The sand so used in the Marquesas, which had to do in some way with the 
life of the child, was called, “the Sand of Tiki,” its use having reference 
to the impregnation by Tiki of a pile of sand which gave birth to the first 
woman. (See 77, p. 321.) According to Tregear the Maori rite in which 
the stick representing life was left erect on its mound while that represent- 
ing death was cast down, was performed as a symbolic representation of the 
“act of Tiki . . when the first woman was made” (149, p. 41). In the 
Marquesas there was an interesting ceremony that was performed after 
the mother had recovered, designed apparently to purify and endow with 
power the firstborn child, for whom alone it was celebrated. The child’s 
maternal uncles went at night to a spring in the mountains and procured 
fresh water, chanting a spell as they filled their vessels. When they re- 
turned, the sacred child was placed on the heads of its maternal uncles and 
paternal aunts, who leaned over with their heads close together; and while 
thus seated on the mana-filled heads of its spiritual sponsors, it was bathed 
with the sacred water, the ceremonial priest of the tribe at the same time 
intoning a chant (77, p. 78). 

RUMMES Ole Clsisl DISKO) ZANIDY OUNCE! 

INFANCY 

The naming of a child was very important religiously, for the names 
that a person possessed were intimately a part of his being. Through re- 

— 

, 

OA 

218 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

ceiving names taken from the family genealogy, the child was placed in 
rapport with his gods, ancestors, and living \kith and kin. Marquesan and 
Tahitian children were given names from the genealogies of the various 
branches of their families, so that they were bonded to all the descending 
branches of the family tree on fathers’ and mothers’ sides and through 
them to the ancestors and gods of the original stock or stocks. I have 
never heard that there were any particular ceremonies in the Marquesas 
upon the occasion of giving the names, though the event probably transpired 
on the occasion of the feast given soon after the birth. Besides these 
sacred names given at birth, the individual was destined to acquire numerous 
others, some of which were sacred. If the child was formally adopted, it 
received names from the genealogies of its foster parents; as a youth he 
might acquire a nickname at tattooing; or by a formal exchange of names 
with another he might lose one of his own and acquire the name of an intimate ; 

‘and if successful in battle he would take and be called by the names of his 

slain enemies. (See 77, p. 87.) In New Zealand most Maori firstborn 
children were given a tapu name at birth. After the tapu had been removed 
from the child by the tua rite, this was usually discarded (ceased to be 

pused publicly?) and a common (moa) name was given; and this was 

changed frequently, for new names were assumed when anything unusual 
occurred, such as the death of a relative, the building of a sacred house, 
or the like. The changing of names after the death of a relative was 
typical also of the Cook and Society islands, the purpose of the custom 
being, apparently, the concealing of the identity of the survivors to protect 
them from the demon that had caused the death of the relative, and also 
from the soul of the deceased in case this should turn into a malevolent 
creature. Best writes that a child often received a new name at about the 
age of puberty. He mentions no rites performed at this time (26, Vol. 
XV, pp. 154-6). The manner of a Maori father’s giving a name from his 
genealogy to his child is described as follows by Tregear (149, p. 44). The 
father took the child in his arms, and to remove all evil from him, touched 
various parts of his body with a cooked fern root, then ate the root, thus 
absorbing the evil himself and relieving the child of it. After this he 
recited his genealogy, and “if the child gave any marked movement while 
a particular name was being uttered, it received that name.’’* 

For highborn children, the purificatory rite was more elaborate (of the 

This perhaps suggests a belief in human reincarnation. Although I feel sure that the 
uninstructed native had no such belief or philosophy, it appears to me likely that the priests 
had. A seer now living in Raiatea who has a great reputation for fire-walking, exorcism, doctor- 
ing and second sight, has told me that there has always been the belief in the rebirth, in human 
bodies, of human souls that had previously lived and died as men on earth. His statement came, 
however, in reply to a leading question, hence it is of doubtful value. The outline of a story 
evidencing such a belief in Tahiti is given in the section on Spirits and Souls. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 219 

type described above) but the manner of naming from the genealogy was 
the same. 

In Hawaii (199, pp. 119-123) when a child was weaned, it was taken 
from its mother to live in the men’s eating house, which was tapu to 
women. The father baked a pig and placed the head on the altar of his 
shrine. An ear of the pig was cut off and put in a gourd—called “Lono’s 
gourd,’—which hung from the neck of the figure of the god, and a 
prayer was recited. 

When all was ready for the recital of the prayer, bananas, cocoanuts, awa-root, 
and awa prepared for drinking were set before the image. The father then took the 
awa-bowl and offered it to the idol with these words, “Here is the pig, the cocoanuts, 

the awa, O ye gods, Ku, Lono, Kane and Kanaloa, and ye Au-makuas.” At the close 
of this address he offered the prayer called Pule Ipu [Prayer of the Gourd]. 

A few lines of this prayer indicate its tenor: 

Arise, O Lono, eat of the sacrificial feast of awa set for you, an abundant feast 
for you, O Lono! 

Provide, O Kea, swine and dogs in abundance! and of land a large territory— 
for you, O Lono! 

Make propitious the cloud-omens! Make proclamation for the building of a 
prayer-shrine! Peaceful, transparent is the night, night sacred to the gods. 

The gourd is this great world; its cover the heavens of Kuakini. 

Thrust it into the netting! Attach to it the rainbow for a handle! 

Imprison within it the jealousies, the sins, the monsters of iniquity! 

Within this gourd from the cavern of Mu-a-Iku, calabash of explosive wind- 
squalls,—till the serene star shines down. : 

Following the prayer, the child’s father sucked the awa root which “was 
said to be the idol’s drinking of it,’ after which he mixed awa and drank 
it, ate of the food provided until he was satisfied, and then he declared 
the ceremony noa, free, saying: 

Installed is the child, the awa smitten against the brain. Free is the awa; there 
is freedom to come and go; the tabu is entirely lifted. One is free to travel to the 
ends of the earth. 

Then those who had taken part in the service ate the pork and the vegetables 
until they had satisfied their hunger, and thus the ceremony was accomplished. In 
this it was shown that the child had come under the eating-tabu, and would no 
longer be allowed to eat with the women. Such was the meaning of this service. 

In the consumption of the food by the father first in this Hawaiian rite, 
there is evident correspondence to the eating of the fern root by the Maori 
father to absorb any evil that might affect his child. 

The most elaborate of the Polynesian rites performed for a child were 
those for the newly born scion of the reigning house in Hawaii, which 
resembled the great ceremonials at the time of war and harvest. Tribute 

220 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

was paid by the people when the new king was born, exactly as it was in 
the Makahiki harvest festival. A new temple was built, there was a general 
period of tapu during which the usual worldly activities of the people were 
forbidden and temple worship was carried on; there were processions, 
congregational temple services, prayers, sacrifices, and the taking of 
auguries; and the making of a new figure of the king’s god for his temple 
(54, Vol. VI, pp. 8-30). I shall not describe these rites in detail, for in 
their essential characteristics they in all ways resemble the war and seasonal 
festivals. 

There was a succession of ceremonial occasions that were celebrated after 
the birth of a child in Tahiti. The infant was taken to the family temple 
immediately after birth and an offering was made. The mother and child 
then retired into a secluded hut for two or three weeks, after which time 
they were removed to another temporary hut near the family dwelling. 
While there, the father and uncles (probably the mother’s brothers) made a 
second offering for the child. This rite had to do with the “food tapu,” 
for it was only after it had been performed that the parents might approach 
the infant, wearing the clothing in which they had eaten. A third offering 
was made by the mother and aunts (father’s sisters?) ; and later a fourth 
which evidently corresponded to that described above in Hawaii, for after 
it the child was brought to the eating house of the men of the family. There 
was, however, still another offering that had to be made when the child was 
adopted by a “god-father.” The offerings consisted of hogs and cloth in 
behalf of males, and fish for females. Much festivity attended each of these 
numerous times of ritual in honor or for the benefit of the child (£67, /p. 
354). Moerenhout describes a feast held about six weeks after a birth 
which evidently corresponded to one of the above occasions. The chiefs and 
ceremonial singers and dancers (arioi) of the district were invited to the 
feast and gifts were presented to them. The child was carried to the 
temple, and there, standing before the priest, the father and mother gashed 
their heads and offered blood to the gods in leaves of the sacred miro tree, 
while the ariot performed dramatic dances and chanted (105, Vol. I, pp. 
535-7). The offering of blood I interpret to signify a sealing of the bond 
with the ancestral gods; while the dramatic dancing and chanting of what 
were doubtless eulogistic songs composed for the occasion had as its purpose 
the exalting and empowering of the child, just as did the dancing and 
chanting in connection with royal offspring in Hawaii. 

Soon after a child’s birth, the Samoans celebrated a great feast with 
games and dances. There was another such celebration when the child 
could sit up, and still others when the child could crawl, stand upright and 
walk. These feasts were marked by exchanges of gifts between the rela- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion Bet 

tives of the father and the mother (132, pp. 176-7). Although in Samoa 
these functions may have been mainly social, for here the social aspect 
rather than the religious always assumes the place of larger importance in 
festivities, there was undoubtedly present the thought that the feasting, 
sham-fighting and night dancing (151, pp. 178-9), had the effect of em- 
powering the child through rapport, of stimulating its growth, and endow- 
ing its spirit with those qualities that were being exhibited about it, which 
would enable it to take its place when grown as a distinguished leader in 
festivities, in social and political life, and among the community’s fighters. 

ADOPTION 

In some parts of Polynesia, lineal descendants were not only born; they 
were also acquired. It was both the ambition and duty of a man to leave 
descendants worthy of the stock to which he belonged. During his lifetime, 
it was a matter of pride with him personally, a source of distinction; it 
was essential for the prestige of the whole ancestral line. Furthermore, 
a man knew that by leaving worthy descendants he insured his own future 
well-being in the world to come: unfortunate indeed was the ancestor wor- 
shipper who died without descendant, for there would probably be no one 
to perform the rites that were necessary to protect, strengthen, and elevate 
his spirit after death. The Polynesian therefore had recourse to the expedi- 
ent of adoption, a means, like marriage, by which he bound himself to 
other worthy families, and in addition secured foster children. There was 
also in adoption as in marriage a strong motive arising out of social am- 
bition, for through family alliances prestige, wealth and power were in- 
creased. In both Tahiti and the Marquesas, adoption and marriage were the 
two chief means by which families elevated themselves to special and po- 
litical eminence. But in spite of the fact that the chief motive that led to 
adoption was in most cases social ambition, the rites that accomplished the 
union of families through exchange of children were fundamentally 
religious. 

Nowhere was adoption more frequent or more important in the life of 
the people than in the Marquesas. Illustrative of such rites were those 
enacted on Hivaoa. In the elaborate formalities on that island, were four 
stages, each of which was accompanied by the presentation of gifts: a 
formal request from the prospective foster-parents before the birth of the 
child; a visit by the foster-parents to the house of the true parents im- 
mediately after the child was born, for the purpose of giving the child 
names from their genealogies; the transfer of the child to the foster-parents 
at the time of weaning; and a final feast when the true parents made a pay- 
ment in gifts intended to defray the expense of raising the child. The first 

PG: Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

stage consisted simply in sending a hog and other food when the request 
was made, the messengers being the prospective foster-father’s sisters and 
foster-mother’s brothers, who according to Marquesan custom, would, 
during its childhood, have supervision of the ceremonial life of the child. 
Such a request was always accepted; When the child was born, a messenger 
was immediately dispatched to the foster-parents, who, with the brothers and 
sisters mentioned above and other relatives then prepared a sweet native pud- 
ding made of breadfruit, taro, and coconut oil, and bearing some of this, set out 
for the house where the child was. As they approached, the women of the 
visiting family chanted sections of their genealogy, thus formally announcing 
their arrival in the native manner. Being summoned to come to the house, 
they presented the child’s parents with the gift of food, after which all 
seated themselves inside the dwelling, while the recipients of the gift placed 
some of the food on their heads and held it there while an old man, a 
member of their family, intoned the creation chant which recounts the growth 
of the world from its original source. After this the women of both 
families chanted their genealogies, and the true father and mother, and 
their respective sisters and brothers partook of the food. The placing of 
the food on the head, and its subsequent consumption, and the recital of 
the creation chant and genealogies securely sealed the union of the families. 
The creation chant recounted the earliest stages of the growth of the 
world; and the genealogies, the later descent of both the families. Anything 
that was placed upon the head became sacred, being imbued with the mana 
of the person whose head it had touched. When, therefore, the parents who 
were giving up their child ate the food that had been upon the heads of the 
foster-parents, a bond of rapport of the deepest and most sacred nature was 
consummated. By this rite the two families were united, not only in the 
present but also back to the very beginnings of things. After these 
formalities, the visitors were entertained with a feast, and then the child 
was given a name from its foster-father’s genealogy, the naming being 
done by the man’s eldest sister. 

When the time came for weaning the child, each of the foster-father’s 
sisters prepared a strip of sacred cloth for its loin cloth made from bark 
of the banyan tree; while each of his brothers sought a pig. When all was 
ready, the family set out for the home of the child, bearing their gifts. As 
they drew near the house, their genealogies were chanted as before, while 
the sisters at the same time placed their strips of cloth for the child on 
their heads. Arrived at the house, they were received by the eldest sister 
of the child’s father who brought forward the infant and presented it to 
the eldest sister of the foster-father. All foster-father’s sisters next placed 
their pieces of cloth upon the infant. The pigs were then presented by the 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 223 

brothers and the ceremony was over. There was no feast on this occasion, 
the child being immediately taken to their home by the foster-parents. 

The completion of the formalities was accomplished by the presentation 
on the part of the child’s true parents to its foster-parents of a large gift 
of ornaments, cloth, and the like. The gift being ready, a day for the feast 
was set and the true parents with their relatives and friends betook them- 
selves to the house of the foster-parents. Then they presented their gift, 
which was scrambled for or plundered by all the relatives of the foster- 
parents; after which they were entertained with a good feast. 

The religious elements connected with this final rite were only inci- 
dental; it was in essence a business transaction and a social occasion. 
The distinctly religious rites were those enacted at the time of the birth, 
the naming, and the weaning of the child. This last feast was in the 
main economic and social, although all feasts had a strong religious 
element in them as commensal rites. The completion of these elaborate 
formalities having at last been accomplished, the child continued for the 
rest of its childhood, and usually for the rest of its life, to live as a 
member of the family and the tribe into which it had been adopted. As 
such it had all the rights and obligations of a hereditary member, at the 
same time retaining all these toward the family and tribe into which it 

had been born (77, p. 81). 

SUBINCISION 

Among a people whose religion occupied itself to so large an extent 
with generation, it would be expected that puberty rites would have a 
prominent place among the ceremonies for the individual. But, surpris- 
ing as the fact may seem, such rites coincident with boys’ and girls’ 
adolescence and having to do with the coming of maturity appear to have 
been of little importance, if not absent entirely in most of the islands. 
In general it is true to say that there was no especial notice taken re- 
ligiously of the adolescence of either male or female children. The 
absence of anything that might be called initiation rites that ushered 
boys into manhood is due to the fact that in Polynesia a boy left the 
company of women and was accepted into association with men at wean- 
ing, when the food tapu that required men to eat apart from women was 
laid upon him. The Polynesian boy became a man when he began to 
eat the food of men, not at adolescence. In all the main Polynesian 
groups with the exception of New Zealand, subincision of the foreskin of 
boys was the custom; but this operation was performed at any time from 
infancy to full manhood. 

224 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

The inhabitants of Niue Island did not actually cut the foreskin, but 
went through a symbolic performance of the operation just after a boy 
was born (125, Vol. XI, p. 203). On Mangaia, on the other hand, the 
foreskin was cut at about the age of seventeen or eighteen (67, pp. 327- 
9). Tattooing, which was accompanied by religious rites, was usually 
done several years after adolescence, sometimes not until a man was 
about twenty. In the Marquesas Islands, where the generation cult was 
clearcut and strong, especial inquiries were made to ascertain what con- 
nection there might be between adolescence and the incision of the fore- 
skin and tattooing. The result of these inquiries was wholly negative: 
there appeared to be no thought of connection in the minds of native 
informants, and the age at which boys were subject to these operations 
also indicated that there was no connection. 

The point of view of the Marquesans and probably of the other Poly- 
nesians also with regard to the cutting of the foreskin appears to have 
been practical rather than ceremonial: it was considered a useful, if not 
necessary, physical operation. In these islands also there was a distinct 
social stigma which attached itself to any man who had not had the 
operation performed, but this fact does not indicate ceremonial signifi- 
cance, for anything that departed from accepted custom was stigmatized. 
The following episode in a Hawaiian legend suggests that at one time 
at least the operation of cutting the foreskin may have had more cere- 
monial significance than it appears to have had in historic times. 

A chief named Palila, the hero of the story, is being discussed, and one man says, 

“He is not quite human as he is partly spirit. . . He has been brought up 

by the spirits and is therefore not quite human.” 

At this Ahuapau asks: “What are we to do then”? 

The solution was this. Palila was carried to the temple and a strict tapu was an- 
nounced by the temple drums and the “cocoanut rattlers” (puniw). The next day the 
chief was “properly circumcised.” “He was then transformed into a perfect human 

being,” after which he was “allowed to live with his wives” . . . (54, Vol. V, 
p. 144). 

This is suggestive of the type of belief that is behind some of the 
puberty rites in New Guinea, in which boys, after being circumcised, 
were supposed to be reborn into the life of manhood. 

There is little in any of the ceremonial practices connected with the 
operation of subincision of which we know that seems to indicate that it 
was an occasion of especial significance. In Hawaii, the rite resembled 
that performed at the time of the laying of the food tapu. There was a 
gathering of people, a pig was baked, and then the operation was _per- 
formed with the following prayer: 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 22 

Sat 

Bring the bamboo! 

Give me the bamboo! 

Here is the small-leafed bamboo of Kane. 
Cut now the foreskin! 

It is cut. 

The wound was wrapped in a medicinal leaf, after which the child was 
arrayed in a white loin cloth. Then the father ate a bit of the pig, after 
which all present feasted (99, pp. 127-9). The operation in the Mar- 
quesas, which was often performed on a number of other boys at the 
same time as the son of the chief of the tribe (as was also his tattooing), 
seems to have been performed without formality. Here, after the recovery 
of the chief’s boy, a feast was held in his honor, as on all other occasions 
when the first-born passed any of the conventional crises of life (77, pp. 
94-7). Little is known of the practices at this time in Tahiti except that 
the operation was performed on sons of chiefs by a priest as in Hawaii 
(7, p. 174), when they were fourteen or fifteen years old (161, p. 342). 
Nothing is known beyond the fact that the operation was performed on 
boys in Samoa, Tonga, and the Tuamotus. 

There were several interesting rites that the natives of the Marquesas 
performed when a girl matured. In one of these the girl was seated on 
a platform before which her (female?) relatives passed. Another rela- 
tive who was seated beside the girl plucked a hair from the head of each 
relative and placed it on the white loin cloth which the girl was wearing. 
These hairs, it is said, were worn by the young woman in the pieces of 
cloth that she utilized at the times of her menstruation (138, pp. 546-7). 
Another rite, which was performed for first-born girls only, was as fol- 
lows: Her relatives having assembled at the girl’s house, she was seated 
upon the heads of her maternal uncles and her paternal aunts (her cere- 
monial sponsors, called pahupahu). ‘The girl being removed, a pig was 
then placed on the heads of the pahupahu, who leaned over so that their 
heads were touching. The pig was then cut up and eaten by the pahupahu, 
after which other food was brought and all present feasted except the 
girl’s father, mother, and brothers, who could not partake of the feast, 
though the girl herself and her sisters could do so. Apparently the ex- 
planation of this rite is this. The tapu of the mentrual fluid was trans- 
ferred to the pig’s flesh, through the sacred’ medium of the heads of the 
pahupahu. These relatives then ate the flesh sacramentally, thus absorb- 
ing the influence and identifying themselves with it in order to insulate 
their god-child against the fearful evils that would hereafter threaten the 
young woman in her reproductive functions. In the Marquesas also were 
certain sacred spots where the daughters of chiefs were taken at the time 

226 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

of their first menstruation. In these places the first menstrual blood must 
be left, a special sacred, white cloth being made and kept there for the 
girl’s use (77, p. 94). This is quite similar to a Hawaiian custom, which 
required that certain chiefesses be delivered of their noble offspring at 
a certain spot on the island of Oahu. The adolescence of girls was the 
occasion of a rite in Samoa also. Her relatives collected a quantity of fine 
mats and cloths, prepared a feast and invited all the unmarried women 
of the district. After the feast was over, the property that had been 
collected was distributed as gifts (151, p. 184). 

TATTOOING 

Another important occasion in the life of a youth or maid was his or 
her tattooing. In some of the islands the physical operation was accom- 
panied with many formalities when designs were put on a prominent 
youth’s body. A well-to-do Marquesan father had built for his son a 
special house for the tattooing. Into this retired the boy, the artists who 
had been employed, and other boys of about the same age (called kavoz) 
who were to share in the tattooing gratis in return for manual service 
rendered in erecting the house and collecting and preparing food for the 
participants. All were strictly tapu from all contact with the outer 
world; for the operation, in which blood was continually spilt, was a 
dangerous one psychically. When the boy’s body was properly adorned 
and he was well recovered, the sacred house was burned to prevent the 
possibility of desecration and injury of the boy through it. Then a great 
feast was held that was primarily social rather than religious, at which 
the youths displayed their new suits of design. Aside from consecrational 
rites and tapu typical of all times of sacred activity, and minor features 
of a religious nature such as were associated with all social feasts, the 
religious elements in the tattooing formalities were only incidental (77, 
pp. 97-8). 

The Samoan customs closely resembled the Marquesan. When a young 
chief was tattooed, numerous other youths were tattooed with him, “to 
share the sufferings,” the operation being performed in a large shed that 
was erected for the occasion. There was a sham fight (probably to drive 
away evil), and the artists were given a first payment. After the tattooing 
was finished, an augury was taken in the following way. The tattooing 
artists and their attendants went at night to the village plaza carrying 
torches, and there went through a pantomime until, upon a signal, all 
the torches were extinguished and a water gourd was dashed to pieces in 
front of the newly tattooed young chief. The torches were then relighted 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 227 

and a diligent search was made for the stopper of the vessel. If it could 
not be found its loss presaged the death of the youth as a result of the 
operation. Another purification by sprinkling the following day com- 
pleted the rite (132, pp. 157-64). 

Another writer speaks of revelling and sexual abandon at this time 
(151, p. 183), and this was true also of the feast following tattooing in 
the Marquesas. This would have been natural, for the purpose of the 
tattooing was the attraction of the opposite sex. Indirectly, tattooing | 
may have had to do with the cult of fertilizing powers; but I was unable 
in the Marquesas to discover any definite relationship. The possibility, 
if not probability, of direct connection is apparent in the Society Islands, 
however, where the various grades of the sacred dancers called arioit who 
functioned prominently in the fertilization rites, were marked by par- 
ticular tattoo designs. Even here, however, this use of tattooing by these 
dancers scarcely proves ceremonial significance of the tattooing itself, 
for the art was universal throughout the area while the Arioi Society of 
sacred dancers was quite a unique institution limited to the Society 
Islands, though practically nothing is known of the actual practice and 
associated ceremonies there. 

In New Zealand all the members of the community were tapu while 
the operation of tattooing, or rather carving the skin, was being per- 
formed. This was to protect the person from evil (140, p. 321). Women 
sang during the operation to strengthen the sufferer, and spells were 
recited to lessen the pain. After the operation was finished, a rite was 
performed to remove from the place the tapu caused by the spilling of 
blood (1, pp. 107-8). In both New Zealand and the Marquesas, the 
preparation of the pigment was a sacred process that had to be per- 
formed ceremonially, doubtless for the psychic protection of the person 
to be tattooed. 

MARRIAGE 

The Polynesians apprehended in the union of man with woman a 
repetition or continuation of the primal union of the superior with the 
inferior aspect of nature. Man was the embodiment and instrument of 
the divine procreative mana that was always associated with nature 
superior; while woman, sprung from earth or sand into which life was 
breathed or impregnated, forever belonged by reason of her origin and 
the dualism of nature, with the earth, or nature inferior. ‘This idea was 
reflected in Tahiti in the conventional mode of expressing the relation- 
ship of the families of a man and a woman who had been united by the 

228 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

formal marriage ceremony. All the relatives on the husband’s side were 
referred to as “above” (inia), while those on the wife’s side were below 
(i raro). The clearest proof that human ‘marriage was consciously asso- 
ciated with the marriage of Sky with Earth is presented in the fact that 
the Maori employed “as a basis of all divorce ritual among the human 
descendants of Rangi and Papa (Sky and Earth) the same incantation as 
was used by the gods when they thrust apart their parents, the Sky and 
the Earth, that they might have light and space in which to live and 
move” (27, p. 66). Those who desired to be separated would be taken 
to the sacred water and the priest would recite his spell and “wash away” 
the love of one person for another. “In his invocation he calls upon the 
sky to stand apart, on high, and be separated from earth; and also upon 
earth to lay separate from the sky...” “The term for divorce (toko) 
is taken from the act of Tane of old, he who performed the first divorce 
on record when he separated earth and sky” (18, pp. 60-1). 

The proper mating of the first-born of a family was a matter of great 
moment, being the preliminary step toward securing worthy representa- 
tives of the family stock in the next generation. The betrothal and 
marriage of children, like adoption, also offered a means of enhancing 
social and political prestige. 

The religious aspects of the marriage rites appear to have had as 
their main purpose, first, the sealing of the union, not only between the 
man and woman, but between the two families, which was accomplished 
by feasting together, exchanging gifts, chanting genealogies, and various 
symbolic rites; and second, the securing of proper offspring and forward- 
ing of fertility through consecrational means, including presentation of 
offerings, recital of prayer-spells, and dancing (pp. 197-208). The elements 
in the marriage rites that were primarily social rather than religious 
consisted of exchanges of gifts between the families and festive cele- 
brations in which lavishness and abandon were often the keynote. Both 
the abundance of foods and the sexual abandon and erotic dancing at the 
time of marriage of chiefs undoubtedly had a religious as well as a 
social meaning, being believed to forward fertility through rapport. One 
feature that is of peculiar sociological interest was the conventional 
plundering by their tribesmen of the dowry prepared by the families of 
the bride and groom, which appears to have been an institution designed 
to perpetuate the memory of the communistic rights of the community 
to a share in the gifts and feasts. 

Formal betrothal was the custom in New Zealand, Tahiti, and the 
Marquesas. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 229 

Among the Maori betrothal apparently did not require elaborate rites. 
And afterwards when the Maori man and woman came together the occa- 
sion was marked only by a simple feast. The priest repeated several 
spells, one for the welfare of the people and to ward off evil influences; a 
second to impart mana to the ceremony; a third to bring about a condi- 
tion of fruitfulness in the young wife; and lastly one to unite the pair. 
After the couple had been living together for some time came a cere- 
mony described as a “formal handing-over of the woman to her husband,” 
when she was publicly presented to the man by her relatives, after which 
it was the custom for the man’s family to give a feast in honor of the 
woman’s family, which was followed by a return of the compliment (18, 
pp. 43-6; 16, p. 230). 

Elaborate betrothal rites were typical of the Marquesas. Children were 
sometimes betrothed even before they were born. The formalities con- 
sisted of a series of feasts, exchanges of gifts by the families concerned, 
and recitations of the family genealogies. First those making the over- 
tures came to the valley of the other family bearing gifts—among people 
of wealth this would mean a great number of hogs, borne on a large litter 
by a group of men. The most interesting feature here is the fact that 
this gift never reached the family for whom it was supposedly dispatched, 
but was seized by force in a free-for-all tussle by the tribesmen of the 
valley into which the gift was borne, this plundering of the gift being 
the accepted convention. The custom was evidently a formal demonstra- 
tion of the community of property rights in the tribe. The boy or girl 
betrothed belonged to the tribe (all fellow-tribesmen were huaa, rela- 
tives), and so did the gift of hogs sent in exchange. (This conventional 
plundering or scrambling for the gifts was typical of such festivities also 
in Tahiti, Samoa, Tonga, New Zealand, and doubtless of other groups 
as well.) In the Marquesan rite, the bearers of the gift and the rest of 
the visiting family were after this entertained with a feast at the house 
of the resident family. The chief religious feature of the occasion was 
the chanting of the boy’s and girl’s genealogies, which bound the families 
together. Subsequently, the house to whom the first gift had been sent, 
prepared a similar one and sent it to the other family, when exactly the 
same performance of plundering was repeated, the looting being done 
this time by the other tribe. A feast followed as before. This exchange 
of compliments might be repeated several times, but after the first ex- 
change was accomplished the children concerned were regarded as being 
betrothed (tuia, joined). 

A union thus incepted was finally consummated when the boy and girl 

230 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

had come of age to marry. If the families concerned were wealthy, there 
was at this time succession of festivals,,the magnificence of which was 
excelled only by that of the great memorial feasts in honor of the spirits 
of the dead. Preceding the marriage festival a considerable period of 
preliminary activity was required for gathering foods, preparing great 

| sheds, ovens, ending in the final preparation of the feast. All being 

ready, the food was wrapped in small parcels and concealed everywhere 
about the premises of the establishment of the family giving the feast. 
During all the time of the cooking of the food, and other preparations, 
the genealogies of the family were chanted. To the food prepared by 
the resident family were added contributions sent by the other family. 
On the day of the feast the local tribesmen and the visitors raided the 
premises taking everything they could find—food, weapons, ornaments, 
and the like, even canoes; and demolished houses and everything else 
that they did not take away. The immediate private possessions of the 
family had previously been hidden away somewhere so that they would 
not lose everything. After this free-for-all came the religious part of the 
rite. The girl’s family arrived, the young bride being borne on the 
shoulders of a maternal uncle, behind whom marched the rest of the 
child’s maternal uncles and paternal aunts, carrying on their heads a very 
long piece of sacred cloth which had been specially made to serve as a 
loin cloth for the child. They were met by the betrothed boy who was 
borne in the same manner, and followed by a similar train. The children 
were exchanged by the two parties, and then each group of uncles and 
aunts walked in procession under the strip of sacred cloth held on the 
heads of the other party, the genealogies being chanted at the same time. 
This completed the marriage. Exactly the same rite was later performed 
at the home of the other family. These exchanges might be repeated 
many times; and on each occasion the quantity of cloth, ornaments, and 
the like brought had to be double that which had been presented by the 
other family on the preceding occasion (77, p. 208). The object of the 
chief religious features in this rite appears to have been the uniting of the 
two families, and sealing of the union between the boy and the girl. This 
was, according to native ideas, very thoroughly accomplished in five ways: 
by the recital of the genealogies of the two stocks; by the exchange of 
gifts; by the exchange of the children; by the commensal feasting; and 
by the sponsors of each child passing beneath the sacred loin cloth of the 
other. 

Little is known concerning betrothal rites in the Society Islands. The 
formal marriage of a couple of high rank in Tahiti, which was performed 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 231 

in the temple, was a genuine religious service. The consecrated society called ~~~ +s, — 
Arioi commenced performing their dramatic dances the day before the mar- 9 “~~. - 
riage. On the morning of the ceremony a temporary altar was erected in 
the house of the bride, and on this the ancestral relics such as skulls and 
bones of her family were placed. The whole was covered with a fine white’ 
cloth. Gifts of white cloth were brought by the parents and relatives of the 
girl. The bride and groom changed their clothing upon entering the sacred 
enclosure, putting on special garments which were afterwards considered 
sacred. ‘They took their places on either side of the temple court, about six 
yards apart, and standing thus were admonished and questioned by the 
priest. Relatives now brought a large piece of white cloth (cf. the sacred 
loin cloths in the Marquesan rite) and laid it out upon the pavement of 
the marae. Standing on this the man and woman clasped hands, and the 
ancestral relics were brought out and placed before them. The relatives of 
the bride then took a stalk of sugar cane, wrapped it in sacred miro 
(Thespesia populnea), placed it on the head of the groom, and then laid it 
down between the pair. The groom’s relatives performed the same act, 
touching the head of the bride and placing the stalk upon the ground. 
Sometimes at this point the mothers of the bride and groom would gash 
their heads, causing a flow of blood which was caught on a single bit of tid 
cloth and placed at the feet of the bride. (Samoan women also sometimes 
beat their heads at the marriage rite, as in mourning.) It is said that this 
removed any difference in rank between the two families which were there- 
after regarded as one. Another large piece of cloth was now brought and 
thrown over the bride and groom. It is not recorded whether or not they had 
their first physical union at this time, as did the chiefly mates in other | 
islands, but it is possible that they did. The piece of cloth thrown over 
the couple, and the clothing in which they were married, were dedicated to 
the dancers and presented to the chief. The purpose appears obvious, 
since the dancing of the Arioi Society was believed to forward fertility. The 
religious ceremony was followed by a feast, the duration of which depended 
upon the wealth of the family (48, Vol. I, pp. 270-3). 

There is another description of a Tahitian marriage rite witnessed by 
early visitors which was quite different. In this the girl, accompanied by a 
man holding fern leaves in either hand, pressed against his head, was led 
to the ceremony with a cord around her neck. Arrived at the marae, the 
man threw the fern leaves down before the altar. The presiding priest 
picked up one of them and used it in counting off the girl’s ancestors and 
living relatives. When he came to the name of the nearest kinsman, he 
stepped forward and, releasing the noose, delivered the bride to her spouse. 
Gifts were then presented by the friends of both (153, Vol. I, pp. 243-4). 

232 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

According to one account, when a Tahitian girl was married, there were two 
offerings that had to be made on her behalf at the temple, the object of 
the first being to enable her husband to at with her father and uncles, 
while the second was to make it right for her mother and aunts to touch 
her husband’s food (161, p. 354). ‘Tahitian girls of distinguished families 
always presented to the husband a large dowry, all of which was taken away 
by her relatives and friends. 

A very striking convention was customary at the time of a formal 
marriage of nobility in Rarotonga. The entire tribe to which the bride 
belonged lay on the ground forming with their bodies a pathway from the 
door of the groom’s house to that of the bride. Over the prone bodies the 
groom walked, while his relatives walked alongside on the ground clapping 
their hands and chanting his praise. After the birth of the first child, the 
performance was repeated, the woman at this time, however, walked to 
her husband over the bodies of his tribesmen (64, pp. 59-60). It is par- 
ticularly interesting and significant ethnographically that practically the same 
rite was performed in Uapou, Marquesas Islands. 

The Samoan marriage rite appears to have had little of a religious 
nature connected with it. The bride, properly bedecked, simply presented 
herself to the groom on the public plaza, placing before him her dowry, and 
then seated herself by him. There was the usual feast when gifts were 
exchanged which, it is said, used to turn into an orgy lasting several days 
(47, p. 626; 151, pp. 186-8). A feature of the marriage rite of chiefs in 
Samoa was a public testing of the chasity of the bride, which was done 
apparently in the interests of the purity of blood of the offspring. Although 
this testing is nowhere described, it probably consisted in the public con- 
summation of the physical union. (See p. 139.) This public union of the 
newly married chiefly pair appears to have been a widespread custom which 
apparently arose out of the theory of the part played in the whole economy 
of tribe and nature by the divine chief which made the union of a young 
chief and chiefess an incident of interest and concern for the whole com- 
munity. (See p. 141.) Such a public union as has been mentioned in Samoa 
was celebrated as a part of some marriages in the Marquesas; while in 
Hawaii what amounted to the same thing in principle transpired when the 
royal pair had their union in a tent set up before all the people. In Tonga, 
after the feast celebrating the formal marriage of a divine chief with his 
bride, the two retired into the house. ‘Then, it is recorded, “the moment 
they retired together the lights were extinguished, and a man, appointed 
at the door for the purpose, announced it to the people by three hideous 
yells, which ke followed up immediately by the loud and repeated sound of 
the conch” (102, p. 102). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 233 

SICKNESS 

Physical maiady and death were believed to be the result of psychic 
causes or conditions, rather than physical; and hence the chief means chosen 
to combat illness were psychic. Broadly speaking, the evils that were 
thought to destroy a man may be classified as of two kinds: demons that 

acted of their own accord or at a god’s or necromancer’s behest, causing © 

illness, sometimes by entering the body; and curses of black magic that 
acted directly on the psychic nature. When a man fell sick, first it was 
necessary to discern the nature of the trouble. The causes of illness being 
psychic, diagnosis was necessarily by psychic means, these being mainly of 
two kinds, through revelation by familiar spirits speaking through a human 
medium, and by clairvoyance. If the trouble was caused by an angered 
god or spirit, then expiation or placation was required, and gifts or sacri- 
fices were presented and other measures taken to mollify the angry psychic 
being. When it was a case of a demon in the sick body, various modes of 
exorcism were resorted to, including the recitation of potent spells, the 
application of heat, the use of evil smelling herbs. Spells of black magic 
were capable of being counteracted by a powerful magician, who attempted 
usually to cause the trouble to revert upon its sender; or a curse might be 
removed if the witch who had laid it could be bought off or otherwise per- 
suaded to relieve the victim. Finally, there were various types of spells and 
rites designed to restore health and life to the sick body, and practices re- 
sorted to for the purpose of bringing back into its body the soul that was 
believed to have left it. 

There was a condition into which men might fall, signified in Maori by the 
word hara, which described a kind of psychic impotence or defilement believed 
to result from contact with that which was corrupt. Best (15, p. 10) has 
written that the Maori believed that 
When your tapw becomes polluted you become pahunu and kahupotia (spiritually 

blind) ; the powers of evil find you defenceless, the gods stand aside; the kouka, 
or abyss of death, yawns before you. 

The word hara and its dialectical equivalents have been commonly and 
erroneously rendered in the dictionaries compiled by the early missionaries 
as “sin’’; but this word in Christian theology and common usage connotes 
an ethical sense which had little place in the genuine native thought. In a 
general sense the word appears to have signified a state that was evil 
because conductive of impotence; and secondly, a kind of defection of the 
psychic principle believed inevitably to result from such a condition of 
impotence. Hara was a negative condition, which came about through loss 
of mana (or tapu), breaking tapu, contact with contaminating and destruc- 

234 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

tive influences surrounding sickness and death, and the like. In a sense 
hara (condition of impotence or corruption) may be said to be the antonym 
of tapu (condition of sacredness, implying potency) ; but hara bears quite a 
different signification from another antonym of tapu, the word noa, which 
was everywhere employed with the meaning “free” or “common” in the 
sense of being either naturally free or released from powerful psychic 
influence, either good or bad. Tregear (145, p. 49) gives as his first defini- 
tion of the Maori word hara, “ to violate tapu, intentionally or unintention- 
ally.’ The corresponding word haa in the Marquesan dialect signifies 
“vengeful and jealous anger, rancour.” It is my belief that these defini- 
tions point to one of the two fundamental significations of this word which 
I conceive originally to have had reference to the anger of the gods at 
infringement of tapu. The second fundamental concept in the word, which 
is evident in the following meanings, carries with it the signification of fault 
or error: Samoan sala, incorrect; Tongan hala, to err; Mangarevan ara, to 

|miss a mark; Hawaiian hala, to miss the object aimed at. The natives felt 

that the gods punished disregard and disrespect for the specific laws of tapu; 
and they believed also that deviation from the established order of nature 
through infringement of psychic law was evil, in that it would automatically 
bring in its train evil consequences. 

When a person through his own fault brought about a condition of hara, 
he was subject to all the evil influences in nature, and these conditions in 
one way or another would bring about his death through sickness, war, acci- 
dent, or in some other way. Sometimes, however, sickness came through no 
fault of the sufferer’s but through malicious evil spirits motivated by their 
own propensity for doing harm or acting as the agents of evil human 
practitioners. Sometimes, again, the condition and effects were induced 
directly by means of incantations of black magic. 

The Marquesan demons called fanaua illustrate the belief in evil spirits 
which on their own part sought to harm mortals (p. 41). In these islands 
every sickness of a specific type was supposed to be caused by a particular 
demon, while that of an indefinable nature was believed to come either 
through spirits or magic. (See 77, p. 263.) A class of demons that were 
much feared throughout the region were those supposed to incarnate them- 
selves as lizards. These occupy a prominent place in Hawaiian folklore as 
the much feared moo, or lizard gods (154, pp. 255-8); and in New Zealand 
belief as the mokomoko, demons of sickness, which entering men’s bodies 
caused pain and death by gnawing their vitals. (See 145, pp. 249-50.) 
Lizards, according to Best, were the agents of Whiro, the god of the lower 
world (27, p. 110). Evil spirits appear also to have served the gods in 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 235 

punishing those who offended them. Thus in New Zealand, when a man 
had neglected tapu and the worship of the gods, an infant spirit (a demon 
which had originated in an infant spirit is doubtless meant) was sent to enter 
his body and feed upon his vital parts (115, pp. 114-127). The attack of a 
demon of sickness is graphically depicted in this Maori lament (69, p. 79). 

Ah, this animal Mokoroa (long lizard) has 

Thrust his teeth into my flesh, and 

Grasped my body with his numerous 

Teeth, and thus I am being eaten up. 

The pain that wracks my body is like 

An army passing on, each wounding 

As he passes. 

Aye, there’s little 
Hope for my recovery; J’m hastening to the dust 
To appease the gods, who haunt my spirit hence. 

The fanaua spirits in the Marquesas were sometimes familiars of female 
necromancers, who are said to have supported them with offerings and to 
have been able to send them on errands of destruction against other women. 
Similar beliefs in men or women being at once masters and subjects of 
familiar demons are common throughout the islands. 

A most interesting and illuminating account of this unprepossessing 
aspect of the ancient religion is that of J. S. Emerson, in which is described 
the manner of creating and supporting the wnthipili gods in Hawaii. The 
body of a deceased friend, relative, or a child, whose spirit was to become 
the necromancer’s assistant, was secreted in his house; the flesh was re- 
moved, and the bones and hair were made into a bundle. ‘The necromancer 
(kahu, guardian or keeper) then offered to the spirit a red and a white loin 
cloth, a shirt of bark cloth, a salted and dried red fish, a kava root, and a 
small calabash of poi, which was refilled every time the man made poi for 
himself. At each meal the spirit was invoked in prayer. If the kahw went 
away, he must take with him a lock of hair or a bone of the deceased, and 
the complete outfit including the loin cloths, sheet, gourd, and so on, to 
enable him to continue the work of imparting power (hoomanamana). By 
degrees the spirit became stronger and stronger, until at length the necro- 
mancer began to feel new psychic power resting upon him. The spirit 
having now become a powerful wnihipili, it remained to give it vehicles in 
which it could move in the air, the sea, and on land in discharging the com- 
missions of its keeper whenever required. To do this the kahuna divided 
the physical remains into four parts. A portion of hair was thrown into the 
“Pit of Pele,’ in the crater of Kilauea where dwelt Pele, the goddess of 
volcanism. This portion became a “wind body” (kino makant), in which 
the unilipili could travel through the atmosphere. Most of the bones and 

236 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

some more hair, being cast into the sea, became a shark which could serve 
the spirit of the ocean. A finger or finger-nail, thrown into a fresh-water 
stream or pond, turned into a lizard, which went upon the land. And 
lastly, a bone or two was wrapped in cloth and placed in a secret recess 
in the house of the kaw to serve as an embodiment in which the um/ipili 
was invoked at every meal. Once created in this manner, the powerful 
familiar had to be continuously supported, not only by the man who had 
created it but by his descendants after his death, for, if its sustenance were 
cut off the demoniacal power of the unihipili would turn upon its keepers 
and destroy them. It was believed that uwnihipili of more limited power and 
usefulness could be created with less arduous machinations. For instance, a 
child’s body thrown into the sea would become a shark familiar; or thrown 
into fresh water, a lizard (49, pp. 2-5). 

These unihipili were distinctly the private—and doubtless also, secret— 
patrons of individual necromancers; but there were also in Hawaii a 
number of gods that were generally known and employed by psychic mur- 
derers for similar destructive purposes. One of these gods or demons, it is 
said (49, p. 21), could be sent into a victim by a necromancer with a prayer 
such as this: 

O, Kuamu, go thou to Puhi, 

Enter him head and tail, 

Let him become your bread and meat. 

Return not back again until he is devoured of worms. 

Some Hawaiian necromancers were skillful spirit catchers, who were able 
personally to destroy victim’s souls. Familiar spirits subject to one of these, 
either unihipili or souls of men and women who had excelled in these arts 
when alive, were drawn to the kahuna’s house by means of an offering of 
awa and a prayer. Early in the evening, before the souls of sleepers had 
wandered far afield, these familiars were dispatched with instructions to 
bring back to their house a number of souls, among them that of the 
victim: it was important that the victim be among friends lest it be on its 
guard. Then cups of awa were placed side by side in the doorway, and 
behind them the necromancer seated himself, with his client hidden in a corner. 
As the familiars returned with their spirit guests the kahuna described these 
as he saw them enter and the man in the corner picked out from his 
description the one he desired to kill. Silence reigned while the spectral 
guests drank of the psychic essence of the awa. As the victim’s soul stooped 
to drink, the kahuna caught it dexterously with his right hand and crushed 
it between both palms: there was a faint squeak, a drop of blood was ex- 
hibited on the murderer’s hand,—the victim’s soul had ceased to be! Some- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 237 

times instead of crushing the spirit, the necromancer imprisoned it in a gourd 
and then held it for ransom (50, pp. II-13). 

There was similar “spirit catching” in the Marquesas when a man’s soul 
was destroyed by being caught and imprisoned between two coconut shells, 
which were then crushed with a stone (77, p. 274). 

The most common, and the most feared, way in which psychic and 
resultant physical injury and death could be induced was through the mach- 
inations of black magic or sorcery. The principle of this type of psychic 
assassination was the same here as in other parts of the world: through a 
medium of rapport, which might be anything that had been in intimate con- 
tact with the victim, sorcerers undertook to kill or injure him by means of 
verbal, symbolic, and dramatic rites. The close psychic rapport that was 
believed to continue to exist with objects that had been in physical contact 
with the body is well illustrated in the following admonition with regard 
to the proper disposal of such objects which is a translation from the old 
Tahitian teaching (82). 

Let not the cuttings of the human hair be burned with fire, lest the owner of the 
hair become bald. Let not the nail parings of a person, or the worn out clothes, or 
shredded mats’ or tapa from the bedding be burned with fire; these are the essence 
(iho) of the person, and there would follow moles upon the skin and blindness to 

the owner if they burned them; but bury those things in the rubbish pit of the 
temple, or drop them into the deep sea. 

The medium that was employed in witchcraft was in some of the islands 
very aptly spoken of as “bait.” Thus the Marquesans called the saliva, 
urine, excrement, clothing, or whatever the object in intimate rapport with 
the victim might be, the mounu, a word which literally signified the bait used 
in fishing with a hook (77, p. 272). The same thought is evident in this 
imprecation of a fallen Hawaiian warrior, who believed his ill fortune to be 
due to the magical machinations of a personal enemy (54, Vol. VI, pp. 
417-8). 

Let the miscreant perish. 
I will throw back upon him curses 

Kahai was jealous, 
Whosoever has taken the bait (maunu) of me 
It is for thee to kill him; let him die! 

A study of the terms and methods used in sorcery reveals the native 
conception of what occurred when a spell was cast upon a man. It goes 
without saying that it was through his psychic nature that a man was 
believed to be affected. Best writes of the Maori that “the hau [vital 
power or personality] of a person, of land, of forests, etc., could be de- 

238 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

stroyed by the arts of black magic. . .” (15, p. 32); when the hau of a 
man had been destroyed it became easy to fall the wairua [separable soul] 
(23, Vol. IX, p. 189). The same writer says furthermore that if the maui 
ora, or “sacred life principle’ of a man, which was inseparable from his 
body, became noa, “then his physical, intellectual and spiritual welfare is 
seriously endangered” (15, p. 23). Finally, an account by the same writer 
of a very unusual form of killing by black magic describes the manner in 
which death was induced more directly by destruction of the wairua, or 
soul. Hair, spittle, or some other medium (haw) of the victim, was put in 
a hole in a figure in human form which had been modeled out of earth, 
after which the man’s qwairua was compelled (evidently through the haw) 
to enter the hole, and was there destroyed by means of a spell (11, pp. 41-2). 

The Maori had a method of protecting the psychic man against black 
magic. This consisted in taking an ‘object, which in some way had been 
ceremonially made to represent the mauri (sacred life principle of a person, 
land, settlement, or forest), and hiding it. It was believed that so long as 
this object remained undefiled, witchcraft could not harm the person or thing 
protected (13, p. 459). 

The Polynesians appear to have been clear in their minds as to the 
manner in which death was inflicted through sorcery. Terms and rites 
indicate seven distinct conceptions as to the mode of psychic killing: burn- 
ing, piercing, catching, enmeshing, binding, extinguishing, and burying. As 
has been shown (pp. 51-52), fire was believed to be destructive of evil in- 
fluence and evil spirits. This conception of the psychic power of fire was the 
basis of some of the most characteristic modes of sorcery in Polynesia, in 
which fire or heat, acting on the personal medium, were the agents of 
destruction, as in the Hawaiian kuni rite and the Marquesan nati kaha. The 
word kunt means “to kindle.” In the rite called by that name, the pur- 
pose of which, as Malo describes it, was to kill in revenge a man who had 
cast a fatal spell, the liver of the dead man was taken out, cut up, and 
small pieces were stuffed into the bodies of dogs and chickens which had 
been brought for sacrifice. These bits of liver served as “bait” for the 
soul of the murderer. As each body was thrown into the fire that had been 
kindled, those performing the rite cried: “Here comes 1 Tee 
(giving the murdered man’s name) seeking the one who caused fe death Me 
anaana [sorcery]. After this the sorcerer in charge of the rite continued 
reciting a spell until the sacrifice was consumed to ashes (99, pp. 135-39). 
The belief was, evidently, that the spirit of the murderer, lured to the offer- 
ings by the “bait” and by incantations was destroyed by fire and spell. In 
the Marquesan nati kaha as performed on Hivaoa, the medium (here re- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 239 

ferred to as “bait’’) consisting of clothing or the like, was buried in a hole 
beneath the ashes of a fire that had been kindled with appropriate incanta- 
tions (77, pp. 272-3). The same conception of burning is indicated in the 
Tahitian and Tuamotuan term for sorcery, tahutahu (tahu, to kindle), in the 
Maori tahu, meaning an incantation; and in the use of fire in several rites 
intended to destroy men by witchcraft (16, pp. 202-3). The conception of 
piercing a foe by means of black magic is indicated by the use in Tahiti 
and New Zealand of the term tara, meaning literally “spear point,” or 
“spine,” to signify incantations and sorcery. ‘The Maori describe the spell 
of sorcery (makutu) as being “like a spear-thrust.” In modern times such 
a spell is referred to as an “unseen bullet” (129, pp. 176-7). I have no 
example of a rite specifically illustrative of this method. The Tahitians 
use the word pifao meaning “fishhook” for sorcery, suggesting the idea of 
catching a man’s soul (cf. the characterization of the medium as “bait,” and 
the custom of spirit catching). The idea of enmeshing or entangling is 
illustrated in Tahiti in the use of the word fai “mesh” or “string-figure” for 
a spell of black magic; and in figurative reference to a spell of black magic 
as a “net” (101). In New Zealand the corresponding term whai, and 
another word maui, both of which meant “string-figure,’ were applied also 
to witchcraft (145, pp. 233; 604). This idea is again illustrated in the 
use of bags of plaited sennit in the black arts in both Tahiti (105, Vol. I, 
540-1) and the Marquesas. The rite in the Marquesas was performed some- 
times as follows: 

Saliva, excrement, or urine of the victim, which had been obtained as 
a medium, was mixed with a specially prepared powder. This was put in 
a small bag woven of sennit, and the bag was then buried. The power of 
this charm, it is said, lay in the weaving of the bag and the preparation of 
the powder (93, Vol. I, p. 174). Another account of the same rite says 
that three such bags were made, each containing the skin of a freshly killed 
lizard, various plants, a small stone of particular shape, a small piece of 
bamboo, and other articles (94, Vol. I, 155-6). Undoubtedly different 
practitioners would have employed various and sundry destructive material 
charms in their bags. 

The significant feature is the enmeshing or binding of the medium in a 
charmed bag of sennit. These bags and the rite itself were called aha or 
kaha which literally means sennit. The Tahitians referred to black magic 
as natinati aha (nctinati, to bind; aha, sennit), to which the full Marquesan 
name for the practice, nati kaha, corresponds. The use of the word aha 
for a form of powerful spell, which had a prominent place in Hawatian 
war rites (p. 206), is doubtless based on the same idea. Just as in the 

240 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Marquesan rite the bags were buried, so also was this the case in the Ta- 
hitian rite in which bags were similarly used, Burying of the medium appears 
to be associated with the idea of extinguishing the soul of the victim, an idea 
that is expressed in the use by the Maori of the word whaka pio (from pio, 
to quench) for “incantation,” and the corresponding Hawaiian hoopiopio, 
meaning “to practice sorcery,” derived from /oopio, “to extinguish” (145, 

Ps 3S 32, fe nlOs). 

In the record of the teaching in the Maori priestly college preserved by 
Percy Smith (119), is a full account of the mode of teaching withcraft. 
Several points brought out in this description are illuminating in connec- 
tion with the practice of the black arts in Polynesia and the native beliefs 
concerning death. In the section on tapu (pp. 43-50), Best was quoted to 
show that evil, destruction, and death were associated with the lower, in- 
. ferior aspect of nature, with the earth and what is below it. It is interesting, 
therefore, to read that, the same teachers who instructed the young Maori 
chiefs in the higher religious lore, and the knowledge of “celestial things,” 
taught them also witchcraft. This branch of learning was taught away 
from the sacred building of higher lore, the instruction being carried on at 
night, indicating the presence in the Maori mind of the same idea that has 
led us to name sorcery “black magic.’’ Furthermore, it was considered that 
the proper time for instruction in witchcraft was during the months of July 
and August (midwinter in New Zealand), because these were the months 
during which was waged the great war of the gods, which ended in Whiro’s 
being cast out from the heavens to become the god of death and evil dwelling 
in the underworld called Po, meaning hterally “darkness” (127, pp. 146-7; 
IIQ, pp. 97-102). According to Best, Whiro, often styled Whiro te tupua, 
or “Whiro the demon,” “represented Darkness, and, in one way, Death, and 
his contest with Tane seems to have been a struggle between Light and 
Darkness.” The enmity between Whiro and Tane (who led the gods in 
the war in the heavens) has continued through all time. Men, the children 
of Tane, are forever afflicted by the gods called the Maiki, the personnified 
forms of disease whom Whiro originated. “The work of Whiro is the 
breeding of all types of disease that carry off man to the Po” (27, pp. 
108-9). 

When a person was sick, or died, there were various ways in which the 
natives sought to discover the exact cause of the trouble. In the Marquesas 
the most common mode of diagnosis was to employ a necromancer, who 
would come to the sick person’s house, have his familiar spirit “enter his 
stomach” and reveal to the family the cause of death, speaking through the 
mouth of the practitioner. Another method recorded in these islands 

Handy—Polynesian Religion - 241 

consisted in a “seer’s” gazing into the flames of a specially built fire, in 
which he saw the person who was causing trouble. A common method of 
clairvoyance used there also, and undoubtedly employed at such times as 
this, a method found throughout Polynesia, was that of gazing into a liquid 
and there seeing depicted events or persons distant in time or space (77, p. 
278). Clairvoyance appears to have been a favorite mode of diagnosis in 
the Society Islands. When a seer was summoned in Tahiti to discover the 
cause of a death, he came and paddled out to sea in a canoe in front of the 
victim’s house. While doing so, it is said, he would see (in the water?) 
the spirit of the dead man wearing an emblem which indicated to him the 
cause of his death: if it were a flame, it had been caused by a sorcerer by 
means of fire; if 1t were a red feather, the symbol of the gods, it was a 
sign that the death was a punishment sent by the gods (48, Vol. I. p. 398). 
The Society Islanders also used spirits as agents. Diagnosis of disease is 
still made with the aid of familiars. In 1923 when I asked a well known 
seer and doctor in Raiatea how he knew the cause of illness in his patients, 
he replied, “My gods tell me.” This man’s gods make their revelations to 
him in sleep. Another famous healer of this island, now dead, is said by 
the same means to have been able to locate certain stones in which were 
embodied evil spirits supposed to cause sickness or insanity. Such stones 
would be planted by one’s personal enemies. Just this type of divining is 
described also in New Zealand (128, pp. 151-3). 

When it was thought that sickness was sent by the gods on account of 
negligence in worship or of tapu, expiation was sought with offerings and 
prayer. The gods punished the breaking of tapu sometimes by sickness, 
sometimes by other means. The Maori believed that those who ate food of 
the gods died of a wasting sickness (25, Vol. XIII, pp. 216-7), and the 
Tahitians attribute leprosy to such disregard of the chiefly tapu on the part 
of inferiors as walking upon their consecrated places, wearing their apparel, 
or the like (79). In the Marquesas and other islands it was believed that 
tapu breakers were in danger of being eaten by sharks. Death in battle or 
by accident might result also from the same cause. A Maori sufferer 
mourns in these words (69, p. 79): 

Alas, thou canst not find a remedy, 
The gods have otherwise decreed; Whiro by his 
Axe has all my bones disjointed, and I am 
Torn asunder as a branch snapt from its 
Parent stem by some rude blast, and falling 
With a crash is rent in pieces. 

I did it; I brought this death 
Upon myself in meddling with the sacred things 

Which e’er displease the gods: and now 
As in a desert I’m bereft of every succor. 

242 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Emaciated and forlorn, wracked with 
Pain of body and distress of mind, I turn me 
Round to die. \ 

The following is part of a lament of a fallen Hawaiian chief whose 
mana has failed him (54, Vol. VI, pp. 416-7) : 
What is my great offence, O god! 
I have eaten standing perhaps, or 
Without giving thanks, 
Or these my people have: eaten 
Wrongfully. 
Yes, that is the offence, O Kane-of-the-water-of-life. 
O spare; O let me live, thy devotee, 
Look not with indifference upon me.: 
I call upon thee, O answer thou me, 
O thou god of my body who art in heaven. 
O Kane, let the lightning flash, let the thunder roar, 
Let the earth shake. 
I am saved; my god has looked upon me, 
I am being washed, I have escaped the danger. 

This Hawaiian lament is particularly interesting, for it practically 
amounts to a confession and appeal to Kane, the god of life, for forgiveness 
and succour. According to Best, on the east coast of North Island, New 
Zealand, the first act of a tohunga in seeking to help a sick person was to 
call upon his patient to confess all hara and raruraru that is, “acts of- 
fensive to religious or moral laws.” The act of confession was followed 
by an absolutory rite which “acted as a . . . loosening or setting free from 
all pernicious hindrances.” The purification was aided by sprinkling (16, 
pp. 198-9; cf. 25, pp. 225 ff.). It will be noted that the Hawaiian lament 
just quoted, the first part of which is in a sense a confession, ends 

eat saviediesueaae 
lam being washed, I have escaped the danger. 

In Tahiti and the Marquesas the illness of a chief was the occasion for 
elaborate temple rites including human sacrifice. Apparently the sacrifice 
was intended to serve a double purpose: it was expected to appease the 
anger of the gods, and also serve as a medium to attract and carry off the 
evil spirits causing the trouble. There were many shifts to which less 
prominent victims of sorcery and necromancy were put to save themselves. 
Best describes a simple and amusing expedient of the Maori. When a man 
had a stomach ache which he believed to be caused by the anger of some 
spirit he had offended, he would say over and over again, “Tell [naming 
the spirit] that I have a stomach ache,” repeating the names of all the 
chiefs and priests he could think of. The natives’ theory was, according to 
Best, that the persons named all had relatives in the spirit world—their 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 243 

ancestral gods—any one of whom might be the cause of the stomach ache. 
The spirit’s anger being appeased by hearing the name of the living relatives 
mentioned, it was thought that it might relent and cease troubling the 
afflicted man (16, pp. 192-3). 

The souls of the dead, if discontented, were much feared, for it was 
believed that they affected the living with sickness. When a death has recently 
occurred nowadays in the Marquesas, the natives are particularly careful to 
close up their houses tightly at night so that the ghost of the dead man 
cannot enter. Colocott writes that in Tonga neglect of the remains of the 
dead was supposed to be a cause of sickness which would be inflicted by 
the offended ghost. When a person was sick in Tonga, it was first neces- 
sary to discover the identity of the ghost causing the trouble, and then to 
beg mercy at the grave containing the physical remains. It is said that the 
bones of a skeleton were sometimes mixed up to prevent the ghost’s walk- 
ing (39, pp. 137-8). Similar beliefs concerning the causes of illness were 
prevalent in Samoa (47, p. 639). 

Evil spirits might be diverted from their purpose by means of a bribe; 
they might even be turned back upon the person who had sent them, if a 
more powerful practitioner were employed; or the difficulty might be solved 
simply and quickly if the identity of the man employed to send the trouble 
could be discovered and he could be bought off. The law of retaliation 
ruled in these matters: if a man believed himself to be bewitched, he would 
employ an expert to divine the cause of his trouble, to discover who had 
sent it, to relieve him of it, and to return the compliment. There were 
many types of rites designed to send back the evil upon the witch whose, 
work it was. This was the object of the kuni rite in Hawaii. (See p. 238.) 
It is said that in New Zealand the healer would bring the spirit of the 
sorcerer to a vai tapu (sacred water) and then he would kill it with a spell, 
thus releasing his patient (129, p. 179). The following is an example of 
a Maori spell used to counteract sorcery (makutu) (69, p. 42): 

Tu, baptise the night; 

Tu, baptise the day. 

Go thou beneath, I go above. 

Send thy power below 

To the night below, to the worms below, 
To the evil one below. Go to death. 

And thy spirit forever to darkness. 

This is the translation of a spell by which a Maori tohunga, called upon 
to help a man attacked by makutu, sought to destroy the spirit of the wizard 
who had cast the spell (24, Vol. XIII, p. 229): 

244 Bernice P. Bishop Muscum—Bulletin 34 

Depart by the deep night 

Depart by the uttermost depths of Hades (Po), 
Depart by Hades, and return not, 

Depart by Hades and begone forever. 

(May) flies gather. (on thy body), 

And worms creep: 

Begone forever, 

Begone to Hades. 

When physical pain was believed to be the result of an evil spirit’s 
having taken up its residence in the afflicted region of the body, one or 
another method of exorcism was used. The Maori are said to have regarded 
sickness due to an evil spirit as much easier to deal with than sickness re- 

\ sulting from sorcery (129, pp. 176-7). There were many methods of 

exorcism. A Marquesan doctor would stroke the afflicted part of the body, 
gradually drawing or forcing out the demon, which was finally caught 
and destroyed as it emerged, whistling (77, p. 269). (It needs scarcely 
be remarked that the native mediums understood the art of ventriloquism.) 
Massage was one of the modes of exorcism in Tonga also (39, p. 138). 

Sometimes a Maori diviner, being summoned to cure a sick man, would 
first set about discovering the path by which the evil spirit came up from 
the lower world. This would probably be a flax or grass stem, for such 
were usually chosen as their means of entrance into the world of light. The 
seer, by submerging his head under water, could see the exact stem that had 
been used. This he would secure and bring to the sick man’s house. It 
was suspended above his patient, and then the tohunga repeated an incanta- 
tion which compelled the spirit to reenter the stem and thus return to the 
lower world (115, pp. 114-127). According to another description of this 
rite (25, Vol. XIII, p. 229), the priest, going to a flax plantation, grasped 
a young leaf firmly and said: 

’Tis a searching, Search the young roots, 
’*Tis a seeking, Search the night (chaos), 
Where shall (I) search? Search the god; 

Search in land, May thou be powerful. 

Search the stump (pw, origin), 

He then pulled the leaf out from its sheath—if it screeched in coming 
forth, it was a good omen. He then lay the leaf, so that one end was on 
the patient’s body, to serve as a path for the demon to leave by, and re- 
cited this exorcising spell. 

Thy way: Ko rou ora. 

Begone behind, outside, Begone by the great ocean, 
Begone in the light, Begone by the long ocean, 
Begone to the clouds of heaven, Begone by the ocean not omened 
Begone by aid of hihi-ora To the world of light 

To the world of being, Ko row ora. 

To the world of light, 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 245 

If after this recital and the purificatory sprinkling that accompanied it, 
the god left the patient at once, then it was known that it was the patient’s 
god; but if it exhibited stubborness then it was surely a malicious demon 
sent by an enemy or as a punishment for broken tapu. 

In an earlier section of this paper the fact that fire and heat were 
supposed to be destructive of evil influence and evil spirits was mentioned 
(p. 51). In the Society Islands one method of exorcising evil spirits that 
still persists consists in driving the demon out of its victim’s body by means 
of a heated stone wrapped in cloth. (See p. 52.) The same principle is 
exemplified in various Marquesan healing rites, the central feature of which 
consisted in building a fire over or under a sick person. (See 77, pp. 270-1.) 

The intention of frightening or driving away evil spirits causing disease 
is at the bottom of the use in native medico-magical remedies of certain 
ingredients distinguished for their disgusting smell and taste. In the 
Marquesas, for example, the ripe noni (Morinda citrifolia) fruit was much 
used in remedies—of this fruit it may be said, that if it affected the olfactory 
senses of demons in a manner in anyway comparable to its effect on 
those of a white man, it is small wonder it was efficacious in driving out 
devils. The Tongans employed strong smelling leaves that were believed to 
“smell like a ghost or spirit” with the idea that they would frighten the 
demon away from the afflicted part (39, p. 138). Just why a spirit should 
be frightened by a leaf that smelled like his own kind is not obvious; but 
the interpretation of the practice does not affect the principle which is the 
same as in the Marquesas. It is also typical of Tahitian medical practice in 
which heat, washing and emetics were also much used. All of these 
methods, interpreted in terms of the ancient religious philosophy, would 
have been regarded as means of relieving the patient of contamination and 
evil spirits. 

Still another method of driving away disease demons was employed in 
the Marquesas. Here it was thought that the vagina of women was abhor- 
rent to such demons. One way that a woman could cure her husband if 
he was affected with sickness was by sitting naked upon the afflicted part. 
Similarly, a sick man’s female relatives would sometimes attempt to frighten 
or draw away his troublesome guests by leaping over him naked. (See 77, 
pp. 270-1.) The hypothesis presents itself that these performances may 
have originated not, as has been supposed, in the theory that the spirit would 
be frightened away, but rather in the belief that the demon would be at- 
tracted and thus drawn out of and away from the man. 

Even when death had occurred and the spirit had taken its flight from 
the body, it was still possible for a man of psychic skill to catch and bring 

246 Bernice P. Bishop M useum—Bulletin 34 

back the escaped soul and reintroduce it into the body. One class of kahuna 
in Hawaii was supposed to be able to catch an escaped soul and to force it 
into the body by raising the big toe nail‘and introducing it there, then 
urging it (by massage) first up to the ankle, then up the leg, and so on 
until it was lodged in its right place in the man’s chest. It is said that it was 
not wise to attempt to introduce the recalcitrant soul through the mouth, for 
then it would be likely to jump out again and escape (50, p. 13). 

The spells used by the Maori in their healing rites are revelatory of the 
religious beliefs and attitude toward sickness of the Polynesians as a whole. 
It is significant that such spells frequently end with the lives, 

To the world of light, 
To the world of being, 

which is indicative of the fact that health and life were regarded as derived 
from the upper realm of light (cf. pp. 35-37). Some of the Maori and 
Moriori healing incantations are pure spells; but others preserve a very 
strong element of supplication. The first of the specimens given below 
exemplifies the spells, while the second and third exhibit supplications (60, 

Pp. 57, 65, 43): 

(1) A spell to heal cuts, wounds, and broken bones: 

Come from the crown of the head; 
Be thou closed 
Be thou at ease, etc. 
Let the bones close, 
Let the clotted blood close. 
Close earth, 
Close heaven, 
Close it with the closing of Maru (healer of wounds) 
Close it with the closing of earth. 

(2) Another spell to heal a fracture: 

O thou Tiki, give me thy girdle 

As a bandage for this limb. 

Come thou, bind it up, 

Tie around it thy cords and make it right. 
O thou flesh, be thou straight, 

And ye sinews, be ye right, 

And ye bones, join ye, join ye. 

(3) A healing spell: , 

Breathe thou, breathe thou, breathe, O Rangi! 

And thou Tu, give thy living spirit 

To create life, that the body and soul may live in the world 
Beat with life thou heart, 

The tree falleth, the tree of Atutahi, 

Here the blow was given, the wind blew there, 

There is the tree of enchantment. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 247 

In the Cook islands departed souls were recalled. A doctor would repair 
with assistants to the burial place of the bereaved family. Then the men 
played nose flutes and the women whistled to allure the soul back. When it 
put in an appearance, the doctor captured it and compelled it to reenter the 
body of the “dead” man (63, p. 172). The Maori believed that their 
tohunga could, by using the proper incantations, call back a man’s spirit 
after death (72, p. 129) 88 

A description given by Malo of the treatment of a sick man in Hawaii 
gives an excellent picture of the fusing of various modes of doctoring. 
A messenger, bearing gifts for his patron, the god of medicine, was sent for 
a kahuna. On reaching his patient’s house, the kahuna forbade him to eat 
certain articles of food—and administered a potion, a kind of sea moss 
and shells of some marine animal. When improvement was evident, the 
kahuna came prepared to perform his healing rite and spent a night in the 
men’s eating-house, bringing with him the articles he had previously told 
the man not to eat.19 

The kahuna had to wait until the signs were favorable—if rain fell 
during the night, this was not a good omen, and he must wait until a 
night passed without rain. When the signs were right, the Pu limu rite 
was performed: a fire was lighted and the forbidden articles of food (which 
were in some way the cause of trouble) were burned. While the doctor at- 
tended to this, two men with bunches of twigs fanned away the smoke and 
flames, and when all was consumed, the ashes themselves, until the hearth 
was swept clean and bare. A fowl was then baked and offered to his god, 
and the doctor ate of it. Two dogs were also baked, one for the tapu eating- 
house (the men’s domain), and one for the common sleeping-house (the 
women’s domain). Men assembled in the eating-house and feasted in the 
presence of the sick man, at the same time worshipping the god of 
medicine; and the women did likewise in the sleeping-house, worshipping a 
female patron of healing. This ended the Pu limu ceremony. The juice 
of the convovulus vine was then administered as a cathartic; and sometimes 
an enema was employed. Next a little hut was made in which the patient 
was given a steam bath, after which he was bathed in salt water; after 
which he was given food. After this, the rite of sacrificing and feasting 
described above was repeated. 

187t must not be concluded from this description of the religious aspects of the treatment of 
sickness, that this presents a general picture of native doctoring. Because they are irrelevant to 
this study, I have made no mention of the many modes of physical treatment employed alone and 
in combination with the psychic methods described. Purely physical aspects of treatment include 

crude surgery, trepanning, massage, sweating or baking, bathing, purgation and the administration 
externally and internally of drugs made from herbs. 

19In New Zealand when illness was caused by food contamination, the priest is said to have 
employed certain “water weeds’ as ara atua, or “pathways,” by which the demon in the sick 
man was compelled to depart from his body (25, Vol. XIII, 232-3). 

248 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Now, if the sick man seemed better, the Hee Mahola rite was performed. 
A squid (hee), which had been found in the ocean lying flattened out, 
was offered to the god in the same position with an accompanying prayer. 
(See p. 204 for prayer used.) Now, hee means not only squid, but also 
“to dissolve, disperse, put to flight’’; hence its significance and function in 
this rite. If rain fell during the night that followed, the omen was bad and 
the patient was informed that he would die. If, however, it did not rain, 
the squid was cooked on a special fire, and offered to the god with the 
prayer referred to above. Then it was given to the patient to eat. After 
this, recovery was sure to follow (99, pp. 145-8). 

This rite exhibits strikingly the combination of many diverse elements: 
the use of fire and sympathetic magic to dispell evil, of prayer and spell 
combined, of sacrifice and feasting, and all of these are combined with 
internal and external physical treatment. 

FUNERARY RITES 

A complexity of motives was exhibited in the customs of the ancients 
at the time of the death of a relative or member of the community. Many 
manifestations of genuine grief were made, measures designed to assist the 
departing soul, and various means were resorted to in the effort to 
strengthen the bond of psychic rapport with the departing soul. But many 
of the conventional practices exhibit fear both of the soul and of the 
malicious influences associated with death, and the desire to be rid of the 
ghost and everything connected with it. It seems that the apparent confu- 
sion is to be explained by the fact that while lingering ghosts and the 
demons that caused death were feared, the soul itself continued to be re- 
garded with the same affection as had been felt for the person in life. 
As mortals subject to the same psychic dangers as had just carried off the 
dead person, the survivors took protective measures against the psychic 
evils; while as ancestor worshippers they attempted to seal the bond of 
psychic rapport. 

For those who have witnessed the mourning of bereft natives, there can 
be no question of the sincerity of grief of the close relatives in most cases. 
Such laments as the following were certainly inspired by genuine affection 
(23, Volo XI, pp: 121-2) 

Alas! the pain that gnaws my vitals, 
For the broken canoe—for my departed friend, 
Stranded on the beach is my heron plume 
Gleaming like the lightning of the heavens. 
Vainly I seek thy all-powerful presence in this world, 
(Thou art gone) by the slippery way, 

The sliding way of death, 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 249 

Ornament of Heaven! Supporter of the Heavens! 
Pillar of (thy ancestress) Whaitiri! 

(Descendant of) great Tawhaki-of-Hema! 

Thou power of the gods! 

Beautiful is my friend on the bier in his dogskin mat; 
| Extend thy gaze to the cloud of heaven, 

- It is well with thee; an unforgetable death. 

(Thy death) is like the coming forth of a tanitwha (monster) ! 
Sleep then in thy house of death. 

Furthermore, in the rites which were intended to aid the spirit on its 
journey and after its arrival in the next world, and in the care bestowed 
upon the physical remains there was also shown solicitude for the welfare 
of the spirit, perhaps mingled somewhat with fear of the consequences of 
neglect of these attentions, and also with purely selfish motives, for a spirit 
well treated would of course be in a position and mood to give aid to living 
relatives. Fear, on the other hand, was exhibited in many of the practices: 
in the excessive and exaggerated mourning, the purpose of which was in 
part to convince the released soul of the sincerity and depth of the grief; 
in various ways of disguising the person, so that the spirit or loitering 
demons, if angry, might not be able to recognize those who had been close 
to the deceased in life; in the fear of all that had been in contact with 
the body immediately before and after death; and in the rites that had as 
their purpose the speeding of the departed spirit on its way. ‘These exhibi- 
tions and practices evidence, however, fear of the influences supposed to 
cause death even more than they do fear of the departed spirit itself. When 
it is considered that all death was believed to be directly or indirectly the 
result of fearful unseen conditions or agencies—spells of black magic, 
psychic contamination, demons, or gods who were angry for some reason or 
other,—it is easy to comprehend the state of mind in which the people 
related to a deceased person must have lived immediately after his death. 
In addition to the fear of the evil influences felt to be present about the 
scene of death, it is evident that there was also fear of the ghost’s lingering 
there and being mischievous, if it felt injured or neglected. Hence, those 
remaining felt that they must impress it with the fact that it was mourned, so 
that it would immediately depart on its journey to the next world. 

To impress the departed soul, or else to terrify evil spirits, a peculiar 
trembling dance was performed by bereaved women, naked or bedaubed 
with red paint, in the Marquesas (77, p. 104) and New Zealand (43, 
Vol. II, p. 62). Sustained wailing, partly expressive of genuine grief, but 

250 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

frequently nothing more than an histrionic dissimulation, was customary 

throughout Polynesia; but this was only a part of the violent and excessive 

demonstrations of grief that commenced when death was approaching and 

‘ continued until the purificatory and consecrational rites were complete. 
_ These demonstrations took the form of public self-mutilation, in which it 
| was usually the women whose part it was to wound and abuse themselves— 
though sometimes both men and women, and sometimes men only took part. 

The most common forms of self-mutilation consisted in gashing the head 
and body with some sharp instrument, usually sharks’ teeth, pounding the 
head, face and body with the fists, clubs or stones, burning spots on the 
skin, knocking out teeth, and cutting off fingers at the joints. When a 
chief was mourned, the concerted and stimulated grief of all his people led 
them into unimaginable excesses of frantic exhibition. 

After depicting various practices such as cutting the hair in special 
patterns, knocking out teeth and the like on such an occasion in Hawaii, 
Ellis describes a state of social anarchy as reigning, in which “the whole 
neighborhood exhibited a scene of confusion.” “The people ran to and fro 
without their clothes, appearing and acting more like demons than human 
beings. . . . Houses were burnt, property plundered, even murder some- 
times committed . . .” (48, Vol. IV, p. 177). 

The following description pictures the state of mind of the people, and 
may serve to convey an impression of the appearance of such orgies. The 
first missionaries who arrived in Tonga wrote a fairly detailed account of 
the practices that they witnessed when a divine chief of that island died 
soon after their arrival. 

Three days after the chief’s death, all the people assembled and seated 
themselves around the tombs amidst shouting and blowing of shell trumpets. 
Suddenly a band of men armed with clubs and spears rushed into the area 
and began mutilating themselves. A Fijian servant of the chief rendered 
unusual honors to the dead by setting on fire his hair which had been oiled. 
A second group of mourners repeated the performance; then others 
entered, some men in the front rank carrying stones with which they 
knocked out their teeth. Such exhibitions continued till the afternoon, when 
a body of about 140 women entered walking in single file, wailing, each 
bearing a basket of sand, followed by eighty men carrying baskets of coral 
sand, singing “This is a blessing to the dead.” Another body of women 
then brought a quantity of cloth, singing responses to the sand bearers. 
The space between the tomb and the place where the corpse lay was covered 
with fine mats and cloth, after which seven men blew upon shell trumpets 
while others intoned a dirge. Then the body was borne to the tomb on a 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 251 

bale of black bark cloth, while a company of men and women mutilated 
themselves, after which valuable offerings were brought. Sixteen mourners, 
who had recently cut off their little fingers, entered the area followed by a 
body of men who continued the self mutilation; while women and children 
sang, “My father, my father, the best of chiefs,” until the cover slab was 
lowered slowly over the vault in which the body now lay. When the cover 
slab was at least in place, there was a great shout and the people tore off 
the leaves worn around their necks (161, pp. 239 ff.). 

The excessive violence exhibited in the mourning accompanying the 
chief’s funeral in Hawaii and in Tonga is in part to be explained on 
grounds of fear of the ghost itself. But it was probably due even more to 
dread of the presence of the evil influences in the form of malignant 
magic or spirits that had done away with the chief. When the man whose 
person embodied the strongest mana in the community was fatally stricken 
by some psychic instrumentality, it indicated the presence of an evil power 
which all might well fear. Directly, through the destruction of its chief 
instrument of rapport, the divine chief, the evil threatened the welfare of | 
the community; and, indirectly, the presence of such evil might result in 
all sorts of harm—epidemics, infertility of the land, drought, and so on. 
Consternation reigned, also, lest the soul of the chief, priest, or prophet, 
powerful after death as in life, and angered on account of some tapu 
breaking on the part of subjects, or burning with a desire for revenge if 
the death of the body had been caused by sorcery, should devastate the | 
community as an angered and insulted chief might do with his warriors 
if alive. When a chief’s death occurred, priests and doctors realized that 
their rites had failed to alleviate the anger of the gods or obtain their desired 
aid. All the people accepted the fact that if the gods had killed their chief 
they might well fear the further expressions of their anger; and that if the 
gods had not killed him but had been powerless to save him, it was indeed 
an unseen influence that ought to be dissipated at any cost. Small wonder, 
then, that frantic emotional scenes ensued upon the deaths of ruling chiefs! 

There were various practices customary in mourning in Polynesia, 
which had as their original purpose either the concealment of identity of the 
living, or the repelling of evil spirits. Ellis describes a group of Hawaiians 
coming to mourn a chief wearing fragments of old clothing, dirty and worn 
out mats, and discarded fishing nets held on the body with pieces of old 
canoe ropes. To the missionary, “they appeared the most abject and 
wretched companies of human beings’ he had ever seen (48, Vol. IV, 
p- 179). In Tonga the custom still prevails today for the people to wear 
old mats and cloth for an extended period after the death of a chief. 

252 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

These modes of dress had probably come in Hawaii and Tonga to be 

b) 

regarded as “signs of mourning,” visible evidences of grief for the sake of 
the spirit. But in the customs of the Cook Islanders there is certainly the 
intention of concealment or disguise. Here, and in Tahiti also, the rela- 
tives of the dead person changed their names (67, p. 344). 

Mourners (63, pp. 181-2) blackened their faces, cut off their hair, slashed their 
bodies with shark’s teeth, and wore only “pakoko,”’ or native cloth, dyed red in the 
sap of the candle-nut tree, and then dipped in the black mud of a taro-patch. The 
very offensive smell of this mourning garment is symbolical of the putrescent state 
of the dead. Their heads were encircled with common fern, singed with fire to give 
it a red appearance. 

Frequently aggressive measures were taken to free the environs of a 
house or community of lingering evil. In the Cook Islands, on the day 
following a death, a mimic battle or sham fight, called the “slaying of 
ghosts,” was staged, with the object, according to Gill, of preventing 
malignant spirits from further harming the living. The young men of the 
district in which the death had occurred would rush to the border of the 
district and clash arms with the warriors of the next district. Then they 
all joined company and passed on to the next district, following a leader 
who carried a sacred coconut leaf at the pit of his stomach just as one 
was placed on the corpse—clear evidence that the leader represented the 
ghost of the deceased. All the men composing the company were called 
“ghosts” (mauri). After enacting a sham battle at the border of each dis- 
trict, all returned to the place where the corpse lay and enjoyed a feast 
(63, pp. 268-9)., The same rite was enacted in Tahiti, but in a somewhat 
different way. When the chief had died, his body was placed in his temple, 
which was surrounded by his warriors, armed. The men of the next dis- 
trict, spoken of as “weepers,’’ came, likewise armed, and demanded to be 
allowed to enter. Upon their request being refused, as was customary, 
a fight always ensued which resulted in a number of injuries and deaths. 
The “weepers” always finally won out, according to Moerenhout (105, 
Vol. J, pp. 551-52). 

Another highly interesting Tahitian performance witnessed by several 
early visitors is described as follows: A masked and elaborately costumed 
man called the heiva, impersonating the ghost of the deceased, led a proces- 
sion made up of a band of boys and men clad only in loin clothes with 
their bodies painted black, red, and white in various spectacular fashions. 
All were armed with clubs. The “ghost’? wore a mask made of pearl shell 
surmounted by a great feather head piece, a brest plate, and a full length 
costume made of shell plaques and cloth. He carried in his hand clappers 
made of pearl shell. The heiva with his company paraded through the set- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 253 

tlement, setting upon anyone who came in their way, beating upon the 
dwellings passed, until they arrived finally at the bier of the deceased, when 
the leader, who was evidently impersonating the ghost, disrobed, washed, 
and partook of a feast that was provided (48, Vol. I, pp. 412-4; 105, 
Moll npesay ii.s 7 Pp. 08,. 17.1 ).2° 

To be sure that nothing of the influence that had caused a death re- 
mained, the Marquesans burned everything associated with it: house, fur- 
nishings, clothing, and utensils, all that might have lingering about them the 
contagion of death. Contamination extended to persons who came in contact 
with a corpse. Throughout the islands the relatives or others who attended 
the dead were strictly tapu until they had been released from the fearful 
psychic contamination that resulted from contact with the corpse. ‘Thus in 
Tahiti those who embalmed a body were shunned by everyone; they did 
not feed themselves but were fed by others lest the defilement of their 
hands be transferred into their stomachs and kill them. When their work 
was finished, they went into the sea to free themselves from pollution, cast- 
ing away in the water the clothes they had worn while attending the corpse. 
Then, collecting a few pieces of coral, they returned and addressed the 
corpse, saying, “With you may the pollution be’; and they cast the coral 
into a hole beneath the corpse, into which all the pollution of death had 
been deposited by a priest (48, Vol. I, p. 403). 

Elsewhere it has been pointed out that the soul and ghostly appearance 
were quite distinct, and that apparently, according to native belief, the 
former assumed this body when physical death occurred and the material 
body was forsaken. (See Man’s Psychic Nature.) Many of the practices 
and rites that followed a death in Polynesia were the expressions of fear 
and love of the ghost, which, as the embodiment of the soul ere it reached 
the other world, was believed to linger for a time about the scene of its 
physical life. It was apparently thought that if it lacked the assistance of 
rites, offerings, prayers, the soul would linger about indefinitely in its 
ghostly form. ‘Those that lacked proper assistance through ritual, such as 
spirits of seamen or warriors whose bodies were lost and uncared for, 
would linger for all time, becoming wandering spirits, lost souls, or perhaps 
malicious demons. Those whose relatives had failed to help them, as was 
their duty, and who therefore had been unable to pass on to the next world, 
would be certain to be troublesome to living survivors, and, as a result of 
anger arising out of a sense of neglect were likely also to become demons 

20 Under the word timo, in his D aster Island vocabulary (35, pp. 259-60), Churchill gives the 
meaning of the word as “‘mourning” or ‘“‘sorrow,’’ adding in a note that when a kinsman had 
been killed a man would don a feather headdress and go about behind the houses making a 

“great yelling and rattling the bones.” ‘This sounds very much like a distant echo of the 
Tahitian heiva with his feather headpiece and shell clappers. 

254 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

of a disagreeable, though not violent, character. The most pitiable of all 
souls were those which, while in the ghostly state and unassisted by 
strengthening rites of their survivors, were attacked by the savage and 
sometimes cannibalistic demons and devoured or destroyed. 

Fear of the ghost was manifestly the cause of a number of rites, 
which sought to hasten the departure of the soul for the next world and 
to propitiate it. It is said that in Raiatea the departing spirit was hastened 
on its way by the clapping of pearl shells (90, pp. 180-1). 

According to Henry, spikes of breadfruit flowers and tips of stems of 
banana leaves were put beneath the arms of a corpse, one to represent 
every member of the family, and then the dead man was addressed with 
these words (82): 

Here is thy father; here is thy mother; here is thy wife (or husband); here 

is thy son; here is thy daughter; here are thy relatives. Turn thy face to Po; 
look not back to the world. Let sickness end with thee. 

When a body was laid in its grave in Samoa, a female relative seated 
herself at the head of the grave and addressed to the spirit these words, 
which seem to evidence some lack of good will on the part of the living 
(12256f.9183) : 

Compassion to you. Go with good will, and without bearing malice towards us. 
Take with you all our diseases, and leave us life. 

These words probably did not mean to the Samoan just what they appear 
upon the surface to signify. The last sentence was doubtless a request to 
the spirit to take back with it to the lower world, whence they originated, 
the evils which had caused its death, and thus to spare the survivors the 
same suffering. In Tahiti, as a body lay upon a bier, a rite was performed 
in which the “sins” of the departed were deposited in a hole in the ground 
at the foot of the bier, in order that the survivors might be free from 
danger of attack by them (105, Vol. I, p. 552). In other words, the evil 
influences, perhaps brought on by tapu breaking, were conducted out of » 
the body into the lower world whence they came. ‘The survivors were 
thus protected; but it is probable, too, that the soul was also believed to 
be relieved and thus aided; for it was this that was attacked by evil spirits 
and spells, and it was only through the soul that the fatal effect was 
produced upon the physical body. 

As has already been indicated, the violent mourning was in one way 
a mode of propitiation of the spirit, being intended to convince the ghost 
of the devotion and grief of survivors. Spirits of the departed were also 
propitiated by offerings and sacrifice. The custom of making offerings 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 255 

still survives in the Marquesas in the bringing of gifts of all kinds to the 
deceased immediately after death. The practice in Tahiti of women mourn- 
ers catching on a piece of cloth the blood from their gashed heads and pre- 
senting it as a token of grief (48, Vol. I, pp. 407-11; 7, p. 170) may have 
originated as a propitiatory sacrifice. "The dominant motive in historic 
times, however, was the desire to strengthen the bond with the departing 
soul. This is indicated by the fact that a similar practice was customary 
when the family of a new-born chief came together to demonstrate and 
seal their allegiance in the following ceremonious manner, as described by 
Henry (82), 

As a sign of affection the hui metua (elder relatives) . . . punctured their 
foreheads, and each mingled the .. . drops that fell with a mixture of the juice of 
sugar-cane and milk expressed from grated cocoanut upon a miro leaf, which they 

held over their heads, and with a parent leading, they approached in turn the babe... 
and touched its cheek with the leaf, but not with the mixture, signifying the union 
of blood. 

The cutting off of fingers and knocking out of teeth, which were typical 
of Tonga (102, pp. 388-9), Samoa (132, p. 117) and Tahiti (105, 
Vol. I, p. 552) were certainly forms of propitiatory sacrifice). It is said 
that in former times in New Zealand dead chiefs’ wives used to strangle 
themselves, doubtless to accompany their husbands. Such must have been 
in part the motive in sacrificing slaves when a chief died. Apparently, 
however, such sacrifices were also intended here, as elsewhere, to add 
prestige to the occasion and exalt the spirit of the chief (cf. 16, pp. 149-50; 
19, p. 166). 

Many of the rites celebrated just after death had as their object the 
assistance of the soul in its transition from one world to the other. The 
rite in Tahiti that relieved it of the influences that had caused physical 
death has already been described. It was everywhere customary to 
strengthen and sustain the departing soul by means of food offerings, 
prayers, and chants. In Tahiti a special attendant was appointed to stand 
by the body of a deceased chief and offer food to the lips of the corpse 
(48, Vol. I, p. 404). The central feature of one of the rites in the Mar- 
quesas was the intoning of a chant that was believed to strengthen the 
breath (menava). (The same chant was employed also for strengthening 
a new-born child.) This was one of a series of chants that were intoned 
soon after death, accompanying the laying out and washing of the body 
and the preparation of the coffin. The last two of these, recited a little 
before dawn when the breath was thought to take its final departure from 
the dead body, were for the purpose of strengthening the soul and assist- 
ing it on its way (77, p. 106). The custom of feasting and singing dirges 

256 Bernice P. Bishop Musewm—Bulletin 34 

after a death had also as its purpose the strengthening and encouraging of 
the soul that was still lingering about. The soul must have been regarded 
as present at its own death feast; and it ‘s reasonable to suppose that the 
feasting and praise were believed to produce the same invigorating effect 
as in life. The feast that was given immediately after a death had 
occurred in the Marquesas was distinctly held in honor of the soul; but 
there was also the motive of paying back all obligations of the dead in the 
way of entertainment owed, so that the soul would depart for the other 
world content. ‘To this feast relatives and friends brought gifts for the 
dead, and thus all debts on both sides were discharged (77, p. 104). 

Dirges in honor of the dead, impromptu or composed in advance, were 
commonly recited upon the occasion of death, or at feasts long after. 
Thus in the Cook Islands a special concourse gathered at night soon after 
a death in a large house built for the purpose of singing dirges. Here as 
many as thirty tangi, or “weeping songs,’ would be sung, as well as an 
equal number of chants of other kinds. Each adult male relative 
was expected to sing a song in honor of the deceased (63, p. 270). 
The Marquesans also composed and sang dirges, which may well be called 
“weeping songs,” for in one type of these each line of the chant was 
followed by the sustained trill-like weeping sound continued by the voices 
of all the men and women present until their breath was exhausted, when 
the next line would be sung and ended in the same way. These dirges were 
sung at feasts immediately after a death and at the memorial festival 
celebrated months later (77, pp. 103-4). Singing, dancing, and wailing at 
a funeral are described in Hawaii by early visitors (41, Vol. III, 
pp. 161, 166-7), while in Tahiti Ellis writes that the violent mourning and 
weeping customary after a death were followed by the performances of 
eulogistic ballads composed for the occasion (48, Vol. I, p. 411). In New 
Zealand mourning songs called tangi were performed in honor of the dead 
by organized groups of wailers, and in addition there were spoken eulogies 
(19, pp. 168-70). An example of a Maori dirge has already been given 
(pp. 248-49). There was a special type of mourning song that was composed 
to be sung to the accompaniment of humming tops, which apparently were 
substituted for the human wailing, such as punctuated similar performances 
in the Marquesas. The group of mourners, assembled on the village 
marae to perform such a tangi, would pause at the end of each couplet, a 
great number of humming tops would be set a-spinning, making a mournful 
droning sound, and when this had died down another couplet would be sung 
(24, Vol. XI, p. 153). The singing of dirges was continued by the Maori 
for a month or even a year after the death of a notable person, mourning 

Handy——Polynesian Religion 257 

parties going to related sub-tribes and formally carrying the news of the 
death (19, pp. 172-3). 

These rites show that the worship of an ancestral spirit in Polynesia 
began almost as soon as the soul was released from the body, a fact evident 
also in the practice—typical of some islands though not all—of carving 
wooden or stone figures of the dead after their decease. A rudely carved 
effigy without head or arms was observed near the bier of a chief in 
Tahiti (42, Vol. I, p. 338), and here the symbols of the guardian spirits 
of sacred places, called ti, representing deceased chiefs and warriors, were 
doubtless carved soon after their death. In the Marquesas images of the 
deceased figured in the funerary rites (139, p. 677). In New Zealand a 
hewn wooden post or slab called tuapa was erected with proper ceremonial 
at the place where an individual had died, to represent the soul (19, p. 187). 

The spirit of one who had passed on was given help on its journey to 
the next world, which was fraught with dangers and difficulties; and after 
it had reached its destination, if it had been distinguished in life, its 
memory was honored with a magnificent festival that elevated it to the 
power and dignity of a god dwelling in the upper realms. ‘The nature of 
the journey of the soul has been described in the section on Destiny of 
Souls. The Marquesans believed that a soul coming to the lower realm 
of shades must have with it as gifts for the ruler of the underworld a 
pig and kava root. Such an offering was therefore an essential part of the 
funerary rites (77, p. 110). The placing of clothing, ornaments, weapons - 
and food with a dead body was designed to aid and supply the soul on } 
its journey and in the next world (77, p. 110). The o matenga in New 
Zealand was a gift of food presented to the dead for the soul on its death 
journey. Human flesh is said to have been preferred (19, p. 162). 

Because of the rapport believed to exist between the soul and the 
physical remains, the greatest care was taken to protect these from desecra- 
tion. There were various modes of treatment of the body after death, and 
a variety of ways of finally disposing of the bones. However, everywhere 
except in Tonga and Samoa, where immediate and final disposal in a 
grave or tomb was the rule in historic times, a basic uniformity existed 
consisting of preliminary treatment or disposal of the body and secondary 
secreting of the bones. It is my belief that classification of modes of 
disposal of skeletons based on superficial details is likely to be misleading 
and can contribute little at present to the ethnographic problem.?! 

21 Tf difference in burial customs be taken as a criterion, it would appear that the immediate 
internment of sacred persons in vaults in Tonga, differing so markedly from the preliminary 
embalming in the Marquesas, must be indicative of difference in origin of the people. While 
the difference in mortuary practice in this instance probably is significant ethnographically, it is 
not necessarily so, for actually the contrast in custom is not so great as appears on the 

258 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

and disposal of physical remains—this is a subject for a study in distribu- 
tion of ethnic elements rather than for a ‘description of the worship—the 
most usual modes of treatment may be mentioned. The preliminary stage 
in Tahiti and the Marquesas consisted in embalming. In the Marquesas, 
the corpse was laid on a bier soon after death to be oiled, rubbed, and 
sunned until it had been reduced to a mummy that would last for some 
time. An early visitor to the Marquesas describes seeing such a mummy 
“enveloped in immense folds of tappa, with only the face exposed, and hung 
erect against the side of the dwelling.’ Other mummies were seen 
“stretched out upon biers of bamboo, in open, elevated temples, which 
seemed consecrated to their memory” (104, p. 225). Captain Cook 
(41, Vol. II, p. 52) describes seeing in Tahiti the body of a chief who 
had been four months dead. 

The only remarkable alteration that had happened was a shrinking of the muscu- 
lar parts and eyes; but the hair and nails were in their original state, and still 

adhered firmly; and the several joints were quite pliable, or in that kind of relaxed 
state which happens to persons who faint suddenly. 

In Samoa, embalming was less frequently attempted; but when bodies 
were treated and preserved they were called by a phrase meaning “made 
into a sun-dried god” (132, p. 184). In New Zealand bodies were tem- 

porarily buried in the ground; or bound and set up in a seated position, 

sometimes upon a grating in an old canoe, which allowed decayed matter 
to fall away (140, pp. 218-19); or put in small carved canoes especially 
made as coffins (116, p. 43). (Canoe coffins were also used in Samoa, 
Tonga, the Marquesas, and Hawaii.) Bones were more quickly relieved of 
the impermanent elements of the body in Hawaii by being buried about a 
foot below the surface of the ground, after which a fire was kept constantly 

burning on the surface for about ten days. Later, the bones were carefully 

collected, arranged with the skull on top, and then wrapped in cloth, after 
which they were set up so as to 

surface; after decay of the perishable body, the remains of the distinguished Marquesans were 
placed sometimes in a vault in a secluded sacred place, or in a cave where they would be 
similarly protected. In principle, the use of vaults in mounds protected by tapu in Tonga is 
the same as disposal in caves in the Marquesas and elsewhere. The real and significant difference 
is not in the mode of disposal at all, but in the fact that the body and skeletal relics apparently 
were not regarded in Tonga as they were in the Marquesas, as objects to be actively worshipped. 
Cremation may be taken as another example of the danger of superficial judgments based on 
mortuary customs. This is distinctly not a typical Polynesian custom. Although reported in 
New Zealand, when practiced there, it was clearly a result of circumstance rather than sacred 
custom; for the bodies that were cremated were those of warriors who fell when their party 
was so far from home that their comrades had to choose between leaving them to cannibalistic 
enemies or burning them (24, Vol. XII, p. 195). To take a final example the occasional 
interment in the Marquesas of the bodies of the insane, lepers and women who died in 
childbirth, which had as its purpose the burying of evil, is interesting and significant religiously 
but possibly not ethnographically. In fine, circumstance and purpose had so much to do with 
differences in modes of disposal of dead bodies that I question the value of attempting classifica- 
tion on superficial grounds. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 259 

resemble the shape of a man, being seated in the house until the day of prayer, when 
their deification would take place and they would be addressed in prayer by the 
kahunas of the mua [shrine]. 

The deceased king is said to have then been regarded a “real god.” In 
recognition of his apotheosis, his successor erected a new temple in which 
the canonized spirit was worshipped (99, p. 142). In another reference to 
these customs of the Hawaiians, the bones of a deceased chief are 
described as being “plaited with feathers and fastened together by netting” 
CAV OLY pa al): 

The preservation of the skeletal remains of those of distinction in 
tombs, temples, or other sacred places guarded against desecration was 
typical of old Polynesia from Hawaii to New Zealand, and from Tonga to 
Easter Island. The use of caves in this way as safe places for the secreting 
of skeletal relics of the dead, is the most general mode of final disposal, 
and was likewise universal throughout the islands. The important part 
played in the worship of ancestral spirits by skeletal relics as embodiments 
or mediums in intimate rapport with spirits has been discussed in the 
section on Objects Venerated. 

DEIFICATION AND MEMORIAL FESTIVALS 

Little is known of the Hawaiian deification rite. It was celebrated 
after the body had been treated as described above, after the skeleton had 
been cleaned and the decaying flesh thrown into the sea. The bones were 
arranged in a bundle with the skull on top “to resemble the shape of a 
man” and were left “in the house until the day of prayer, when the 
deification would take place.” After awhile they were removed to a 
specially built tomb-temple, where they were enshrined as a god. “After 
this these bones continued to be a god demanding worship.” ‘Common 
people,” according to Malo, “were sometimes deified, but not in the same 
manner as were kings” (99, pp. 142-4). These rites for commoners may 
have resembled the memorial festivals for departed spirits in the Mar- 
quesas and elsewhere, which were celebrated long after death. 

There were rites in the Marquesas, which correspond to the royal 
deifications in Hawaii. These were performed immediately after the death 
of a high priest and lasting as long as a month, and included mummifica- 
tion of the body as it lay in the tribal temple, sacrifices and continuous 
chanting. The service in Tonga described below, which lasted twenty-six 
days following the death of the sacred chief Tuitonga also undoubtedly 
corresponds to this. In the Marquesas, this rite was merely a preliminary 
stage in deification of the priest. There were three great festivals which 

at nA err 

260 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

had to be celebrated at different times subsequent to the disposal of the 
body. Prior to the first, a month’s continence was required of all the 
tribe, no cloth was made, there was no playing, bathing, anointing of the 
body or decoration with flowers. At the end of the month, the restric- 
tions were lifted and there was feasting, the beating of drums, dancing and 
chanting, and the playing of games. The second was the most elaborate of 
all festivals celebrated in the islands; but unfortunately little is known 
of it, except that there was chanting to the accompaniment of drums, 
while dancers performed nude, old men and women being smeared with 
white earth so as to exaggerate their decrepitude, perhaps to make them 
appear like ghosts. Men, women, and children, their bodies entirely nude, 
were carried to the feast place slung on poles like pigs, as though to be 
sacrificed. They were not killed as offerings, however, but imitated in 
pantomime dying and death and the type of demon called fanaua which 
were thought to kill women in labor. The festival ended in a wild 
bacchanalia. Of the last of the three festivals for priests nothing is 
known except that a central feature of it was stilt walking, in which cham- 
pions of different tribes contested with each other. ‘These contests were so 
tapu that women were not allowed to witness them (77, p. 218). 

On Mangaia, Cook Islands, memorial games called eva?? were celebrated 
some months after death in honor of the departed. There was here a most 
interesting myth accounting for the origin of the custom of singing dirges 
and holding funeral feasts (63, p. 181). Anciently, it is said Veetini (All- 
separating) was the first human being who ever died a natural death; and 
it was his parents who instituted the mourning customs and funeral games 
that were ever after celebrated for the honored dead. The chief mourners 
were Tueva (Mourner), Manga (Food), and his “attached sister,’ the 
lovely Tiki (Fetched--in Mangaia a departing spirit was said to be 
“fetched”). The last resting place of Veetini was a green spot on a hill, 
upon which the last rays of the setting sun rested as it descended into the 
sea. The evening after the body was buried, the mourners performed their’ 
dirges and dances in his honor and then looked towards the north vainly 
hoping to see their loved one return to them. The day following they 
returned to the western shore, again performed their “weeping songs” and 
dances, and gazed passionately out into the western sea hoping still to see 
Veetini return. The mourning procession made its way the next day to the 
rugged southern shore of the island, but “still there was no response to 
the loud cries and entreaties of the disconsolate parents and the lovely 

2 Cf, Tahitian heiva, applied to the masked figure representing the ghost of a dead man; 

and Marquesan heva, which signified the dancing of women nude at funeral feasts; Samoan siva, 
a song-dance; Tongan hiva, a song or festival. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 261 

Tiki.” At last, on the third day after the burial, they arrived at the 
eastern end of the island; and here, having performed their lamentations 
and funeral dances, they spent the night in the Ruddy Cave (Ana-kura), 
which is close by the sea. At dawn, as Tueva was watching the rising of 
the sun “in all its wonted glory,” a tiny speck was noticed beneath the 
sun on the ocean. As the sun advanced in its course, this drew nearer 
“passing over the ocean in the bright trail of the sun.” “On arriving 
nearer still, this wonderful object, lightly skimming the crest of the waves, 
proved to be no other than their own lost Veetini!” 

The now rejoicing parents rushed forward to kiss their son, who was indeed 
Veetini, yet not altogether like his former self. He said to the joyful throng that 
he had been permitted to revisit this upper world in consequence of the passionate 
lamentations of his parents, and to comfort their sorrowing hearts. He also came 
to show mortals how to make offerings of food to please the dead. For himself, he 
had come and must depart in the bright track of the sun, being now a denizen of 
spirit-land. However, to gratify his parents and friends, Veetini asked great 
Tangaroa to detain the sun for a short time in its course in order that he might rest 
and converse awhile with his relatives. ... 

At length Veetini rose, and led the half-glad and half-sorrowful procession along 
the beach towards the west, the sun now moving on as usual in the heavens. At 
last they reached Vaiorongo, or Rongo’s sacred stream, directly facing the setting 
sun. ... As the sun disappeared beneath the horizon, and the ocean was covered 
with the golden light, Veetini said that he must go. The weeping parents begged 
him to stay with them. The son replied, “I cannot; I do not belong to this world 

now; and then shouted impatiently: 

Thrust down the sun, 
That I may descend to nether-land! 

The parents now endeavored to detain him by force; but lo! they grasped at 
a shadow. ‘They watched him gliding swiftly over the western ocean in the ruddy 
track of the sun, and, with its last rays, Veetini, now a tiny distant speck in the 
train of the king of day, forever disappeared. 

The following dirge, founded on this highly interesting myth, may serve 
as an example of the mourning songs used in the Cook Islands: 

Call for the The news has sped to Avaiki 
Music and Of Veetini about to die. 
Dance to Begin. Sad day of death! 
Solo. Go on! 
Chorus. A house is built for him at Karangaiti 
To face the rising sun. 
Solo. *Tis done! 
Chorus, Veetini has gained the sky (ie. the place where the sun drops 
down) ; 
Has fled! 

Oh, all-dividing Spirit-world! 

Solo. Whence came he? 

262 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Chorus. He came up out of Spirit-world, 
Stepping lightly on his path. 
O’er the treacherous waves. : 
Veetini is again trembling on the wing. 
He skims, he skims the sea! 

Solo. Alas, he follows thy track, (O Sun!) 

Chorus. Yes, he follows thy dazzling light, 
As thou gently settest in the ocean. 

Thrust down the sun, 
That he may descend to nether-land. 

The purpose of Veetini’s return to the world of men is alluded to in 
another ancient song: 

Tueva, who seven times lamented for his boy, 
Asked, “Why didst thou return to this world?” 
“T came,” (said Veetini) “to instruct you 

In making food-offerings to the dead, 
Offerings to those in spirit-world; 
Gifts from their relatives, 
Who yet linger in this upper world.” 

The return of Veetini to earth, then, was for the purpose of instructing 
mankind in the art of mourning and instituting the solemn eva in remem- 
brance of the dead. 

There were, according to Gill (63, p. 271) four varieties of eva. The 
first was the funeral dirge, expressing the grief of the mourners, in which 
they appeared with blackened faces down which blood from self inflicted 
wounds was streaming, with shaven heads, and stinking garments. The 
second was the war dirge, in which long spears made of a white, brittle 
wood were used in a pantomimic war dance, in which the heroic deeds of 
the clan of the deceased were recited or sung under the leadership of the 
dead man’s relatives. The third variety of dirge was called the adz dirge. 
In this mimic adzes were used to cleave the earth “which had swallowed up 
the dead,” in the pretended hope that an opening might be made in the 
earth which would enable the departed spirit to return from the underworld. 
According to Gill, this performance was appropriate only to artizans whose 
sacred symbol was the adz. Finally, was the crashing dirge in which two 
bodies of men, every one armed with a flat spear or a wooden sword, per- 
formed some sort of dramatic dance in which reasons were “assigned for 
the anger of the gods as shown in the death of their friends.” This per- 
formance was usually ended with “a sort of comedy.” 

A Tongan rite witnessed by the first missionary visitors corresponds in 
general features to these performances soon after death. The preliminary 
phase of this ceremony—the violent demonstrations of grief, burial of the 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 263 

body, decoration of the tomb, and presentation of offerings—has already 
been described on pages 250-51. Ten days after the burial, there was 
celebrated at the tomb a great dance in which women dressed in their 
finest tapas and mats, wearing ornaments and with hair oiled, performed 
to the accompaniment of drums and a chorus of men’s voices. The 
dancing was followed by a feast. After the elapse of another ten days, 
the men are said to have begun “their diversions,” by which is apparently 
meant games, which were practiced morning and evening under the leader- 
ship of different chiefs. On the twenty-ninth day after the death had 
occurred, a great dance was celebrated at the tomb, men performing this 
time, dressed in their finest robes, in mats ornamented with red feathers, 
beads, and shells. The dance was accompanied by a chorus of singers as on 
the preceding occasion when the women danced (161, pp. 239 ff). This 
rite clearly corresponds to that celebrated in the deification formalities in 
the Marquesas one month after death had occurred. (The Polynesian 
lunar month had twenty-nine days. ) 

Another kind of memorial was celebrated in the Marquesas, in which 
a number of families of the tribe united to make a great feast in honor of 
their recently deceased ancestors. ‘These were held a year or more after 
the death of someone of distinction. A long period of restriction on con- 
sumption of food products (kahui) was necessary in order that provisions 
might be accumulated to make the lavish feasts and offerings required. 
When the appointed day arrived, hogs were collected in honor of the 
youthful first-born children of several families represented. On the day 
of the feast, which commenced early in the morning, the hogs and other 
food were laid out on the dance area, each family participating having its 
own pile of offerings. These were divided and distributed among all those 
present. Thus, through the bounty displayed, was the prestige of the 
family raised in this world and that of the spirits in the next. The native 
idea of the effect of these celebrations is illustrated by an interesting epi- 
sode in a legend which describes the chiefess who ruled the underworld 
as being highly pleased with, and hence favorably inclined toward, a 
recently arrived soul because of the splendid feast that had been given in 
her honor. ‘There is no doubt that these feasts were regarded as com- 
mensal, that is, as being shared by the spirits themselves, who were 
allotted their share and whose effigies presided over the feast place. At 
this festival, in addition to the feasting, there was chanting of eulogistic 
songs and of dirges accompanied by drumming and dancing (77, p. 212). 

A ceremony described as being for the purpose of “annulling the eight 
months taboo” after the death of a divine chief in Tonga was undoubtedly 

264 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

a rite corresponding to these memorial festivities in the Marquesas. At this 
Tongan rite, there were lavish food offerings, the distribution of food, 
feasting, games, and dances (102, pp. 97-100). It is interesting to read 
that in Easter Island, tapu were sometimes laid on the potato fields in 
honor of the ancestral spirits. These periods of food restriction usually 
lasted a year, but sometimes extended to as much as four years. The end 
of the period of mourning marked the end of the food tapu (61, pp. 28-30). 
Although such a feast is not described, it is reasonable to assume that the 
raising of the tapu was marked by a great feast enjoyed by the living and 
supposedly the dead also. 

Apparently the rite called hahunga in New Zealand corresponded 
roughly to these memorial festivals in other islands. This feast marked the 
exhumation of bones prior to hiding them. Frequently a number of skele- 
tons were disinterred at the same time. The bones were wrapped in 
bundles and placed on a staging. ‘The ceremonial aspects of the occasion 
consisted in the recitation of spells and an elaborate feast with a number 
of ovens in which food was prepared for different purposes: for the 
priests assisting, as offerings for the dead, and for the different classes of 
mourners. The bundles of bones were finally carried to the cave or tree 
where they were to be secreted, and there, ‘after the recitation of spells, they 
were left. The rite was ended by the removal of tapu from those who 
had carried the bones (19, pp. 211-18). 

It is obvious that lavish memorial festivals celebrated after a long 
period of preparation must always have taken place in the season of plenty. 
It may be that some of the seasonal fertility rites were in their original 
form memorial festivals of just this type. This would appear almost 
surely to have been true of certain periodic feasts in the Society Islands at 
which the images of the ancestral gods were brought out to be sunned, 
rewrapped, and oiled, which, according to early visitors, marked the occa- 
sion on which the ancestral gods returned from or departed to another 
world. These rites were always accompanied by feasting, games and the » 
like. It must be borne in mind always that, since the ancestral gods were 
the instruments of fertilization in nature, or the transmittors of procreative 
power from its higher source into the lower aspect of nature, the earth, 
all rites that aroused and empowered spirits of the departed or ancestral 
gods would affect the abundance of land and sea as well as the personal 
well-being of man. 

The elaborate funerary and memorial rites that existed in Polynesia are 
therefore to be explained on two grounds, and their meaning is to be 
interpreted in two ways. ‘They were designed to elevate and empower 

Handy—Polynesion Religion 205 

the ancestral souls in the other world; this is their simple meaning, obvious 
on the surface. But the natives in ancient times were by no means so 
altruistic as to have denied themselves the best of their foods for months 
and sometimes years, wholly for the sake of the well-being of their 
ancestors. The second and most important meaning of these rites, is that 
they were part of the elaborate system of religious performances that were 
designed to forward the fertility of nature for the benefit of the living. 
This is apparent even in New Zealand, where the seasonal fertility rites 
had fallen practically into disuse. Here the prayer recited when food was 
offered to the recently departed spirit of a relative at a feast held in its 
honor was the same as that recited when the first fruits rite was celebrated 
with the object of causing fertility (19, p. 200). The connection of memo- 
rial feasts and fertility is even more obvious in the Marquesas, where these 
feasts were always enacted in the season of abundance, thus corresponding 
roughly in time with the seasonal first fruits and harvest rites in Tahiti 
and Hawaii. 

WAR 

Though a few wars in historic times have been definitely for conquest 
of territory, and while on the more civilized islands many have been waged 
for political ends, the fundamental motive behind most fighting in Polynesia 
was the desire for revenge. To appease the spirit of a slain relative or 
tribesman, or to appease the tribal gods, it was incumbent on tribe or 
family to exact payment in blood from his slayer’s group. Similarly an 
indignity suffered by a group or a chief at the hands of another had to be 
avenged in the same way, for it was an insult to the patron gods, as well 
as to prestige. Blood revenge, as a sacred duty, was a fundamental principle ' 
of tribal law and intertribal relationship. 

Tu, whose position has already been outlined in the section on the 
major pantheon, was the war god in the ancient Polynesian cult. In Hawaii 
alone did this deity maintain this position unchallenged. In the Marquesas 
Islands, Tu was the patron or lord of war in general, and all those who 
participated in the war rites were called the “Family of Tu.” But for 
actual support of war parties, appeal was made to the deified chief, or 
priest, or phophet, who was tutelar god of the tribe, and to him the human 
sacrifices were offered (77, p. 131). Practically the same condition existed 
in New Zealand, where, though Tu was still recognized as the lord of war, 
particular tribal patrons were more sought for definite and immediate assist- 
ance. Elsewhere it was generally some local patron who was relied on in 
war as in peace. 

Through sacrifice and prayer the favor and active support of the patrons 

266 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

of war were sought by direct appeal. In both the Marquesas and Tahiti, 
for example, the presentation of human victims was a necessary antecedent 
of ally wars’ (77, p: 1315\145, Vol. 1,°p.5270), and ‘the lardswotanate 
received their toll in victims of the fighting. During the fighting the first 
slain was commonly offered as a sacrifice. (See pp. 191-92.) And in Tahiti, 
on the day following the battle, the bodies of the slain were collected and 
\ offered to Oro, the war lord (48, Vol. I, p. 308). 

Every sort of divining was resorted to in order to discover the will of 
the gods and the chances of success in war. In the Marquesas and through- 
out Polynesia, a favorite mode of divination in war time was to call upon 
the temple prophet to discover the will of his master, the tribal god, through 
inspirational “possession.” (See The Prophet.) 

In Tahiti and Hawaii a highly interesting method of detecting the humor 
of the gods was practiced, the observation of the entrails of sacrificed vic- 
tims. When animal sacrifices were immolated in the Hawaiian war rite, the 
manner in which they expired was carefully watched and the appearance of 
the entrails, which were extracted, were observed by experts. The spleen 
of the animal is said sometimes to have been removed and held up in his 
hands by the priest while a prayer was said (48, Vol. IV, p. 150). In 
Tahiti a sacrificial hog was strangled, its hair was burned off and it was 
placed before the house in which the representation of the god was kept. 
The entrails were taken out and observed: if their movements were rapid 
and continued this was taken to be an omen of success. After this the 
body of the animal was bathed in its own blood. The priest then prayed 
over it, and laid around it a coconut leaf to serve, so it is said, as a means 
by which the god might enter the sacrifice to make his will known. The 
heart and other parts of the beast were placed on a small altar, while the 
carcass was placed upright on a larger altar. The body was then carefully 
observed for signs: its remaining motionless, meant success; sinking of the 
hinder parts indicated that the gods were restraining the enemy and that 
peace might be concluded; enlargement of the hinder parts spelled defeat; 
the closing of one eye showed either that the enemy chiefs would be defeated, 
or that one of them would be taken prisoner (48, Vol. I, pp. 371-2). 

The chief auguries in Samoa were drawn from the observed appearances 
or movements of the living creatures in which the tutelar gods of tribes 
were believed to be incarnate (151, pp. 242-3). 

A universal method of forecasting was by observation of meteorological 
and astronomical signs. Thus in New Zealand the phase of the moon and 
the positions of the stars were believed to be significant when a war party 
was starting out, and omens were taken also from the direction in which 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 267 

lightning was seen to flash at such a time (22, p. 123). The Tahitians 
believed that Venus or any of the other conspicuous planets appearing 
above the horizon just at sunset for several consecutive nights, betokened 
that two chiefs were planning each other’s downfall and the horns of the 
new moon pointing upwards, an “angry” or “savage” moon, signified that 
two hostile parties were gathering. Three or more spiral clouds in the west 
about the setting sun indicated a division of councils; and one conspicuous 
cloud’s appearance presaged the death of a powerful chief (48, Vol. I, p. 
378). This type of augury was followed more closely in the Hawaiian 
islands, where a special class of diviners called kilokilo attached to the chiefs 
were believed to be expert in this reading of the signs of the heavens and 
earth. These men being consulted immediately before an engagement, 
would observe the passage of clouds across the sun and the appearance of 
rainbows (48, Vol. IV, pp. 157-8). At other times innumerable other 
appearances and signs gave them their indications; the sun, moon, and stars, 
rain, thunder, heavy surf, fire, and sounds, as well as unusual phenomena 
such as tidal waves and eclipses. 

By various means the destruction of the mana of the enemy was 
attempted. During the fighting it was practically a universal custom to 
offer as sacrifices the first of the enemy slain or the first captured alive. 
In Tahiti, the head of the first man slain was cut off, wrapped in coconut 
fiber cord, and sent to the temple, being sometimes presented as an offering 
before the carved figure of the deity (48, Vol. I, p. 289). The rite, as 
described in the Henry manuscript (82) shows clearly that the aim was to 
attack directly the power of the enemy by means of a spell exactly as was 
done in bewitching a private individual. A pin of Casuarina wood was 
driven through the crown of the head, and another through the ears. To 
the upper was attached sennit which was then wound tightly around the 
head and secured with the aid of the stick passing through the ears until the 
whole face was covered. Each member of the body was likewise bound and 
drawn together, the knees being brought up against the chest with the arms 
embracing them. The priest meanwhile uttered this prayer: 

Tu-ma-Ta’aroa, O great Ta’aroa, your curse is death, here is your fish, the fish 
caught from the Vai-o-Tu (Water-of-Tu). Well it is, O gods, that you have given 
this fish into our hands. Then O gods take it as a fish for yourselves, that all his 
family may be extirpated and not one be spared. 

It is said to have been the belief that all the man’s family would become 
extinct after such a curse. The body so bound was taken to the temple, and 
was later buried in this fare-ia-manaha. According to Ellis’ account 
(48, Vol. I, p. 289) the first man, seized before he was quite dead, was 
carried along the ranks of the war party and afterwards sacrificed. As he 

268 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

was borne along, his head bound with sacred sennit from the temple, the 
priest walked beside the litter of spears on which he lay, and watched his 
movements for omens, praying in the meantime to the war god. This 
sacrifice was called, “The first rending of the root,” or “The falling away 
of the water of Tu” (48, Vol. I, p. 289). 

The following lines from one of the incantations recited over a child to 
endow it with the proper qualities call upon the child to be brave in these 
words 24, Vol. XI p: 20)% 

May thou be quick to catch the first fish (in battle) 
And boast that thou hast the first one slain. 

The heart of the first man slain in battle in New Zealand was taken out 
of the body, roasted on a tapu fire which the priest kindled with proper 
incantations, after which it was eaten by the priest. The words of the spell 
recited show clearly that it was the tribal gods who were supposed to be par- 
taking of the heart of the enemy in or through the priest or priests: 

The high priest eats, the high priest eats, 
The first born eats, the other priests eat, 

The gods eat, 
I, this disciple, eats. 

The purpose of the rite, it is said, was “to fix or make firm the victory 
and the courage of the victor” (24, Vol. XII, p. 147; 149, p. 354). The 
intention of weakening the enemy is seen also in the Maori custom of 
warriors’ bringing back with them locks of hair from the heads of slain 
foes and “feeding” (offering) these to their god. These trophies that were 
“fed” to the god they called haw (122, p. 203). The same word indicated 
the medium used in witchcraft. 

In the Marquesan war rite the inspirational prophet of the tribal god 
likewise ate the heart of a victim sacrificed before battle. Here too it is 
evident that the god himself was supposed to partake of the morsel with or 
through his prophet (77, p. 241). The custom in Hawaii was to sacrifice a 
pig on the field of battle before the fray commenced, doubtless with the 
intention of attracting friendly gods to the scene of the conflict; and then, 
after the armies had met, to offer to the gods the first three enemy warriors 
killed (48, Vol. IV, p. 159). 

Trophies of defeated enemies were preserved in some of the islands to 
serve as mediums of psychic control. The sending of the skull of the first 
enemy slain bound with sennit to the temple in Tahiti has already been 
mentioned. The binding with coconut fiber undoubtedly symbolized the 
binding or enslavement of the soul of the enemy, for sennit binding was 
employed in this way in witchcraft. After a battle in Tahiti, “the victors 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 269 

took away the lower jaw-bones of the most distinguished among the slain, » 
as trophies; while leg and arm bones were taken to be made into tools and 
fishooks, and skulls to be used as drinking vessels” (48, Vol. I, p. 309). 
The practice of making fishooks out of long bones, and converting the 
skull into a drinking vessel were ways of insulting and desecrating the soul 
of the vanquished foe; while the preservation of the lower jaw would seem 
to have had the same meaning as did the preservation of skulls and other 
bones, hands, fingers, and the like by Marquesan fighters as mediums 
through which the mana of the slain could be controlled. It is evident from 
the accounts of early visitors to the Society Islands that quantities of lower 
jaw bones frequently adorned the places of worship in these islands. The 
trophies of war, such as heads brought back from the field of battle by the 
Marquesan warrior, were first taken to the temple, where they were con- 
secrated by the priest, and then they were kept in his house as symbols of 
his prowess and as talismans to be worn in subsequent battles. It is said 
that the young Maori warrior starting his career likewise presented his first 
trophy to the priest (24, Vol. XI, p. 28). The Maori preserved the heads 
of their enemies by a process of smoking and steaming, apparently mainly 
with the object of taunting them (149, p. 370). Marquesan warriors not 
only kept skeletal relics of their victims as visible tokens of their prowess, 
but also took unto themselves the names of the vanquished, thereby identify- 
ing with themselves the persons—and, it is supposed through the names, 
also their mana. 

One of the motives that led to the eating of the bodies of enemies was 
closely related to that which brought about the preservation of relics and 
trophies. It was the belief throughout the area that when a man took food 
into his body, he aborbed with it whatever psychic influence with which it 
was embued. Hence it was that the Marquesans, in eating the flesh of their 
enemies, believed that they absorbed their mana, while at the same time 
they were inflicting on the soul of the departed the maximum insult, if not 
annihilating it completely by absorption. Though cannibalism in the more 
barbaric of the Polynesian groups where it was indulged—in the Marquesas, 
Tuamotus, Easter Island, the Cook Islands, and New Zealand—had de- 
veloped a love of human flesh for its own sake, still the actual seeking or 
hunting for human beings for the sake of feasting on them was very 
uncommon. ‘The original motives at the basis of the practice were first 
revenge ; and second, the belief in the absorption of the enemies’ mana which 
brought about two results—it enhanced the power of the eater and his 
tribe, and detracted from or destroyed that of the slain victim’s people. 
This double motive of strengthening the slayers and injuring the war party 

270 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

of the slain is clearly evident in the ceremonial eating of the heart of the 
first victim, in the eating of the eye, and in various other sacrificial practices 
that have been described. It is not imprbbable that the practice of eating 
the bodies of enemies, and the consequent love of human flesh, may have 
\ originated in these ceremonial practices. Best (24, Vol. XI, p. 71) takes the 
position that the Maori ate their enemies because it degraded them, and 
for the love of human flesh, not because they believed that their qualities 
were absorbed. And yet the Maori had the same theories as did the other 
Polynesians regarding the absorption of psychic influence through food taken 
into the stomach; and the “degradation’’ was a psychic abasement which 
was surely believed to destroy mana and to affect not only the individual’s 
soul but the souls of those in intimate rapport with him, his ancestors and 
his tribesmen. The absorption and destruction of enemy souls appears to 
have been the object of the following rite practiced sometimes in New 
Zealand. A tohunga would, by means of a spell, cause the spirits of the 
enemy to enter sacrificial food in a basket. The food was then warmed over 
a sacred fire, after which the spirits supposed to be in the food were de- 
stroyed by the priest by means of another spell. The priest then ate a bit 
of the food, and gave a morsel of it to each warrior, who carried it into 
battle in his girdle, believing, according to Best, who describes the rite, 
that it enhanced his bravery (21, p. 54). Reason would lead to the sup- 
position that the theory behind the carrying of the food in the girdle was 
the belief that it would have the effect of destroying bravery of the enemy, 
rather than increasing that of the bearer. However, this is perhaps splitting 
hairs, for the net result would be the same. 

Whether or not the idea of absorbing the qualities of the defeated 
enemy had anything to do with the origin of cannibalism, it is certain that 
the motive of revenge was at the bottom of the practice. This is well 
exemplified in the Marquesas where when a single victim was taken to pay 
the debt of blood for the death of a relative, a form of ceremonial cannibal- 
ism required that every relative of the slain kinsman eat a bit of the victim 
(77, p. 124). On other islands where cannibalism was regarded with dis- 
gust, the lust for revenge was satisfied by mutilation of the remains of slain 
foes. (See 48, Vol. I, p. 308.) 

The destruction of the enemies’ mana constituted what may be termed 
the negative aspect of the war ritual. The positive phase had as its object 
endowing leaders, fighters, and equipment with mana. In one of the 
Tahitian ceremonies, whose name when translated meant “the binding of 
the sacredness or supernatural influence,’ the priests are said to have 
been “unremitting in their prayers that the ra atua, etc., the influence of the 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 271 

gods, etc., might be turned against their enemies” . . . If the rite were suc- 
cessful, Ellis goes on to say, the “supernatural influence” was believed to 
desert the enemy and to come to the side of the priests performing the 
rite, entering the canoes and weapons of their people and insuring victory 
(48, Vol. I, pp. 279-90). 

A figure of the war god, and sometimes the divine chief himself im- 
personating the deity served as instruments or mediums through which mana 
came to the community and the fighters. In the discussion of the divine 
chief is illustrated the manner in which the chief in New Zealand served 
as the medium or conductor of psychic force in empowering his warriors by 
allowing them to pass between his legs; and furthermore how the loins of 
the divinely descended were believed to embody and symbolize the procre- 
ative power signified by the native word mana. In the light of this Maori 
practice, and of the association of the idea of mana with the loins of divine 
personages, it is evident that when the Tahitian priest performed the rite of 
ceremonially girding the chief’s loins in the temple with the sacred loin cloth 
of feathers (maro ura)—which symbolized the god of war and was in 
intimate rapport with him—the purpose of the rite was to endow the chief, 
and through him his people and country, with the mana of the god. The 
same effect was accomplished in the Hawaiian war rite, described at the 
end of this section, in which a new carving of the war lord was set up in 
the temple and ceremonially girded with a new and specially prepared 
loin cloth, except that in Hawaii the carved figure, which was called “king,” 
instead of the living chief, served as the medium of rapport. 

Figures representing the gods, or their emblems, sometimes accompanied 
the fighters to the field of battle to inspire the warriors and to assure them 
of the presence of their god. In Hawaii a ferocious looking head, made 
of coconut fiber covered with feathers, and having a bloodthirsty gaping 
mouth lined with dog’s teeth, was elevated and carried near the person of 
the king in battle. This was Ku-kaili-moku, the war lord of the royal family. 
Every lesser chief was likewise accompanied by a similar figure borne on a 
pole, the emblem of his patron and protector (48, Vol. IV, p. 158). In 
Tahiti, where engagements were usually naval, or if on land were near the 
sea, the principal figures of the gods were usually placed on canoes which 
accompanied the fleet; and in addition, flags or emblems of the gods were 
carried to battle. It is said that no sacrifices were offered at the temple dur- 
ing an engagement, for it was feared that they might attract the gods back 
to the home altars, thus leading them to desert their people in the field (48, 
Vol. I, pp. 282-5). 

The priest or priests of the chiefs and tribes sometimes accompanied the 

“a 

272 Bernice P. Bishop Muscum—Bulletin 34 

war party also. In New Zealand and the Marquesas, where the recitation of 
incantations to aid and protect the Bouts fs was a prominent feature of the 
religious aspect of war-making, the priest$ appear to have been very import- 
ant members, or at least assistants, of the fighting force. The Marquesan 
priests or prophets sometimes accompanied their fighters onto the field of 
battle, in order to aid them by means of their incantations. This spell is 
obviously one that was employed after the importation of firearms: 

Into the ground the shot! 

Into the ground the shot! 

In vain! In vain! 

To the land! To the land! 

It is the shot of the god! 
It is the gun of the god! 

The power of the priest himself was relied on to a greater extent by 
the Maori and Marquesans than by the natives of the Society and 
Hawaiian islands, where the priests were merely sacrificers, diviners, and 
supplicators, who sought the aid of the gods rather than relying on them- 
selves or on their spells. 

Weapons, war canoes, and so on, which were endowed with mana were 
also relied upon for success in battle. The Maori had incantations that were 
recited over their weapons before they entered the fight, spells which were 
supposed to give them irresistible power in themselves. 

I chant my incantation now to heaven, 

To earth, and pit below. Chant now 
thy song, 

Mine enemy: as here I meet thee, 

’Tis gloom on thee, but sunshine rests 
on me. 

The mist now closes o’er thee: still 
the sun on me does shine. 

*Tis night with thee, but blaze of day 
with me. 

Display thy rage with weapons, bravery, 
and power, 

And use thy feet to show thy noble 
deeds ; 

Because with me are now the gentle, 
breathing winds, 

And passing air that speaks so gently 
low. 

They bind me round, and add their 
power to mine. 

But now with thee is night, and coming 
day on me, 

And denser darkness wraps thee round. 

But now on me the lifting clouds 

Disclose a bright and daylight sky. 

This, according to White (156, Vol. III, p. 232), is the translation of 

“a warrior’s sacred chant repeated over his weapon as he enters battle.” 

Weapons in New Zealand had, as Tregear points out, a sort of personality 
and power of their own. Cooked food, being contaminating to that which 
was sacred, must never be brought near them, for contact with it would 
destroy the mana inherent in the weapon. This mana was acquired through 
the number of lives the weapon had taken, by long usage in the hands of 
successive generations of celebrated men, as well as through the incanta- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 278 

tions recited over it before a fight (149, p. 317). The Marquesans believed 
likewise that a weapon’s mana, like a man’s, increased with its prowess; 
weapons, like men, were given the names of those whom they had killed. 
Here, too, the mana of the tribal war canoes was very important. When a 
new war vessel was being cut out, a noted brave of the tribe would sleep 
at night in the hull in order that it might be endowed with his mana; and 
when the craft was launched, consecrational rites further endowed the canoe 
with mana, placing it in rapport with the powers above and insulating it 
from the evil below. The first duty of a newly made war canoe was to 
seek a human victim from an enemy tribe; the success of the first expedition 
in obtaining a victim for sacrifice demonstrated and established its mana 
(77, P. 155). 

The war parties were themselves consecrated or purified, so that they 
were on the one hand under the influence of their gods, and on the other, 
relieved of any evil influences which might induce defeat or death. The 
Maori had a very clear idea of the manner in which such influences affected 
warriors. There was a very unfortunate, negative, psychic condition 
(called pahunu) which is said to have afflicted warriors, inducing weakness, 
indecision, nervousness, and cowardice. This condition, it was believed, 
might result from errors in ritual performance, or the breaking of tapu. 
Another unfortunate condition called hinapo, implying a state of psychic and 
mental darkness, resulted likewise from these causes, but might come also 
from the effects of powerful machinations of an enemy. These conditions 
could be dispelled by warriors passing between the legs of a priest who dis- 
carded his clothes and held himself suspended from the branch of a tree, or 
between the legs of a first-born female of chiefly rank, or by having such a 
woman step over the person afflicted. A warrior might be relieved also if 
he went and bit the bar of the village latrine (24, Vol. XI, pp. 48-51). It 
was a Maori warrior who was suffering from such an unfortunate condi- 
tion of psychic distemper who sang (op. cit. p. 50): 

Alas! the shame that unnerves (me), 
Like unto a burning heat, 
Such as caused by thee, O Pero! 

That fiercely burns on Tukurangi hill— 
Like the deep thirst at Taurito. 

The purificatory and empowering ritual used by the Maori on behalf 
of war parties were practically the same as those by means of which an 
infant was purified and endowed with life and the qualities of manhood. 
The tohi ritual was used for warriors as it was for children. The men 
stood with one foot in the water and the other on land, chanting in unison 
(73, pp. 123-4). The priest then dipped a branch of the karamu shrub into 

Lo 

274 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

the water and struck each warrior on the right shoulder—the right side was 
the seat of mana—with the dripping wand (24, Vol. XI, pp. 24-5). 

This is the sacred charm of Tu, the Diminished is the flying cloud. 

charm of Rongo, ; The searching of old, O son! 
Open wide thine eyes, be alert, on the To Tu-ka-nihi, to Tu-ka-hara, 

lookout, Swashing are the tides (of war) 
For the sacred offering of Tangaroa, Heaping up on Mokoia island. 
As the seas of Kupe break. Arise thou! Be thee brave! 
Be charmed the earth, be charmed the 

Heavens. 

Practically identical with this was another performance called the hirthirt, 
a rite that was performed alike for the sick, and to relieve warriors of evil. 
The hirihiri tawa, as it was called when it was recited for warriors, was 
intended “to avert or prevent them being afflicted by nervousness, listlessness, 
lack of energy, etc.” The incantation employed by the priests of the Tuhoe 
tribe began, 

Thou art one to the makaka at Whakatane, 

Thou art one to the pouahu at Whakatane, 

Thou art one to the manuka at Whakatane. 
In this recitation the italicized words are said to represent “sacred places 
and objects,” which were representations or maurt (cf. pp. 50-57) of the 
health, life and vigor of the people. The performance was spoken of as a 
ruruku, a “binding together,” of man. “He is thus protected from external 
evil influences” (24, Vol. XIII, pp. 226-7). 

An interesting symbolic rite, employed by the Maori for aiding its fight- 
ers, was called tiva-ora (wand-of-life). Beside the sacred water, the priest, 
clad in a ceremonial girdle, fashioned two small mounds of earth, sticking 
upright upon each a wand (tira) of karamu (Coprosma) shrub, one repre- 
senting life, the other death. The mound on which the life-giving wand 
stood was called Tuahu-a-te-rangi (Altar-of-the-Heavens), while that 
beneath the wand of death was the Puke-nui-a-Papa (Great-mons-veneris-of- 
Earth). The priest then cast down “the wand of death,” and left standing 
that representing life upon the Altar-of-the-heavens. After appealing to his’ 
god to reveal to him which warriors were to fall in battle, the priest, it is 
said, ‘“‘would see the wairua (or spirit) of such men hover over the ‘wand 
of death.’”’ These men were then warned not to enter the battle. This rite 
was followed by incantations designed to weaken the enemy (21, p. 48). 

A war cremony used by the Matatua tribes of the Bay of Plenty, similar 
in its method to the above, though differing in purpose, is described as 
follows: The priest fashioned a mound of earth for each subdivision 
(hapwu) of the tribe to be attacked, naming one of the piles of earth for 
each of the enemy hapu. A wand of the karamu shrub with its leaves re- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 275 

maining on it, was stuck in each mound. ‘These branchlets were termed hau, 
and represented the prestige, courage, power, and endurance of the hapu. 
An equal number of other wands of the same shrub were then laid on the 
ground a short distance from the mounds, one pointing towards each of the 
hau, the distance between each stick and each hau being measured off. The 
priest then made similar mounds to represent his own people, and a branch, 
also called the hau, was stuck up in each. “Now the sticks laid on the 
ground represent the attacking party, and the priest then proceeds to recite 
an invocation in order to cause the sticks to advance, each on its adjacent 
mound, and attack the haw thereof.” 

Behold thy enemy! Be brave indeed, 
Be brave, be strong, be strenuous, Be thou stout-hearted, 
Be stout-hearted, Thou shalt catch the “first fish.” 
Behold thy enemy standing there, Pull away! Haul away! 
Stand forth (aided by) the higher and Stand striding over the land, 

lower powers, Stand striding the Heavens, the Earth— 
If thou be brave, To the ancients of old. 

Having thus endowed his men represented by the sticks on the ground, 
with power, the priest then recited another incantation to weaken the 
enemy (24, Vol. XI, pp. 39-40): 

By this rite shall be exhaustion, The victim is disemboweled, 

By this rite shall be weariness, Gathered are the flies, crawling are the 
Completely gone, descended maggots, 

Is the victim to Hades, And when thou diest 

The victim is ripped up, Die forever. 

The victim is torn in shreds, 

Then the assembled people are bidden to look, and behold! the sticks are seen 
to move towards the hau, and the leaves of the haw are seen to fall to the ground, 
in response to the karakia of the priest. The number of leaves which fall from the 
different haw represent the men of that particular hapw who will fall in the coming 
fight. 

Great precautions were taken by the Marquesans before a fight in order 
to protect themselves against evil influences. In fact, similar insulatory 
measures were taken as when preparing for sacred work or worship. 
Immediately before and during all the time of active warfare, the fighters 
dwelt apart from the rest of the population, sleeping and eating in the men’s 
house which was tapu. Before retiring to the house, they purified them- 
selves by bathing in the sea. Especially forbidden was any sort of contact 
with womankind; the warriors’ food even was brought to them by male 
non-combatants. While the fighters were under this tapu, their women at 
home were also subject to strict tapu, requiring fasting and forbidding them 
to let down their hair or sleep in the common dwelling (77, p. 135-6). In 
New Zealand were similar regulations, for it is recorded that in wartime 

276 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

| “the people who were left behind in the tribal villages were supposed to be 
tapu and to eat no food while the war-party,was away. . .” (149, p. 342). 
Before setting out, Marquesan fighters assembled at the tribal temple where 
a prayer asking for the defeat of the enemy was uttered by the ceremonial 
priest. At the end of the prayer, the warriors thrust out their arms before 
them and cried “Our enemies will be for us like cockroaches” (77, p. 132). 

The Maori war parties used the dance called haka to rouse their own 
spirits and intimidate the enemy and probably also to rouse the gods and 
generate mana. ‘Tregear describes the haka as follows (149, p. 62): 

The war dance (Ngarahu taua or tutu ngarahu) was, when well executed, a very 
exciting and even terrible exhibition. Hundreds of warriors in serried ranks would 
leap as one man to the right and to the left, letting their weapons rise and fall like 
the waves of the sea, while a deep chest-note would alternate with a savage blood- 
curdling scream in the powerful chorus of the impassioned singers. Sometimes a 
mere ceremony, at other times the war-dance was a prelude of battle, and a means 
of rousing the fighting men to fury. Few who have seen the war-dance in New 
Zealand executed in earnest will ever forget the resounding fear, the trembling earth, 
the muscular frenzy, and the moral effect of that tossing sea of human creatures, 
transformed by their own action into the semblance of demons. Yet, withal, the 
exquisite time kept in the dance, the force and power that tamed apparently ungovern- 
able excitement into cadence and rhythmic motion had a charm and entrancement 
all their own. 

War dances were typical also of Rarotonga (65, pp. 23-4); and the 
words of a chant that used to be sung before battle by warriors in the 
Marquesas suggest that there was formerly something of the same kind 
there, though perhaps not so highly developed as in New Zealand. 

Battle songs served also to strengthen the warriors. Into Marquesan 
legends are frequently introduced a species of chant which is in part a song 
of exultation and in part a spell to strengthen the adventurer who sings it. 
These chanted spells, if they may be so called, were doubtless closely related 
to the war songs described in some of the other islands. When the signal 
was given for the commencement of the combat in Tahiti, the fighters used 
to unite in singing “the wmera ia Ra, song of battle to the god of war, or in 
deafening shouts and imprecations” as they rushed to the fray (48, Vol. I, 
p- 285). The Maori war song was an “accompaniment of the war dance 

. Inspiriting compositions, the words sometimes hardly to be understood, 
but the vigor and volume of sound enormous, hands, legs, and heads all 
agreeing in consentaneous motion” (149, p. 73). 

In New Zealand and the Marquesas Islands, the purification of the war- 
riors was necessary upon their return from battle, for, having been in con- 
tact with blood and death, they were dangerous to others. The absolutory 
rite in New Zealand appears to have been practically the same as was used 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 277 

before the warriors entered battle, consisting of sprinkling with water and 
an appropriate incantation (149, p. 362; 73, p. 124). The Maori fighters 
appear to have been allowed to resume intercourse with their people immedi- 
ately ; but Marquesan warriors were compelled to submit to a ten day’s tapu, 
during which they lived apart from others, allowing the dangerous influences 
to wear off gradually. It is evident from the fact that during this period a 
fighter had to be fed by another, just as did the attendants of dead bodies, 
that here manslayers were dangerous to themselves as well as to others 

775 p135). 

Peace making in ‘Tahiti, the Marquesas and Hawaii was the occasion of 
a formal rite intended to consecrate the pact. ‘There was the usual sacrifice 
and praying or chanting that were typical of all temple services in these 
islands; and in Tahiti and Hawaii an interesting feature consisted in the 
weaving of a wreath symbolic of the unity of the two parties. In Tahiti, 
when terms of peace had been agreed upon by the leaders of the contending 
parties, a wreath was made from two or three green boughs of the miro 
tree, which was emblematic of peace, the boughs being furnished by the 
leaders of either side. After this symbol of reconciliation and union had 
been made, two young dogs were exchanged by the leaders. Then two long 
strips of cloth, one white and the other reddish, representing the two sides 
in the quarrel, were joined together, forming another token of union. The 
wreath and the cloths were then presented to the gods, who were called upon 
to punish him who should “rend . . . [the] band of peace” or break the 
wreath. There followed the usual feasting, games and so on, which ac- 
companied all rites, besides other ceremonial performances to reestablish the 
peacetime prosperity of the country (48, Vol. I, pp. 318-319). The Hawaiian 
rite, as described by the same writer, shows close similarity to this. First a 
pig was sacrificed in the temple, and the blood, being caught in a gourd, 
was afterwards poured out on the ground to signify the punishment that 
would come upon those who broke the sacred pact. The opposing chiefs 
then wove a wreath of maile (Alyxvia olivaeformis vine), which, as a 
symbol of the union of the parties, was left in the temple (48, Vol. IV, p. 
162)., Not much is known of the Marquesan peace-making rite; but in 
several details it corresponded with the Tahitian. Instead of exchanging 
dogs, the opposing chiefs exchanged human sacrifices, or turtles in substitu- 
tion for human bodies. Furthermore, the Marquesan rite was called Hamuz 
Oa, which may be translated “Tong Cloth,” a name decidedly suggestive of 
the Tahitian practice of tying together two long strips of cloth to make a 
symbol of union. (77, p. 141). The Maori had a rite that sometimes served 
to seal a solemn pact, one main feature of which is suggestive of parts of 

278 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

the Hawaiian and Tahitian rites. The Maori priests of the opposing parties 
representing their respective war gods “approached one another, each one 
invoking the aid and concurrence of his god and each twisting a piece of 
the native flax into a cord, on the end of which was a loop, to be placed 
on the great toe of the opposing tohunga,”’ thereby symbolizing the binding 
in union of the two gods (26, Vol. XVI, p. 85). 

When in Tahiti a temple and its district had been desecrated by invaders 
and bloodshed, it was necessary that a rite be performed to purify the land. 
The people who had fled from their district having returned, the temples 
were rebuilt, new representations of the gods and new boards representing 
chiefs were made, and then services were held in the temples which ended 
in the peoples’ going to the seashore and securing bits of coral which were 
placed on the altar with a prayer that the land might be made as pure as 
the altar. The altars were then refurnished and decorated with coconut 
leaves and the sacred miro, and sacrificed pigs were placed on them. Such 
a rite was performed, it is said, with the object of bringing rain and fertility 
to land gained by conquest or recovered after invasion (48, Vol. I. pp. 
348-9). A part of this rite, according to Henry (82) consisted in 
offering before the god a large branch taken from a sacred breadfruit tree, 
with an address to the god commencing, “Here is a part of a breadfruit 
for thee, O god, make fruitful the land ge 

Following the consecration of the land was an interesting symbolic 
rite in which a canoe having in it figures representing men, and laden with 
foods, was set adrift, being believed to carry away with it the “sins of the 
land” (82). In New Zealand, localities, like the warriors, required purifica- 
tion and consecration after bloodshed. It is said that after a battle had 
been fought, defiling it by bloodshed, the Maori would desert a fortified 
village (pa) unless they had a tohunga who was competent to perform the 
proper purificatory rite (19, p. 38). 

In the foregoing analysis and description of the various aspects of the 
religion as practiced as an adjunct to war craft, the illustrations have given 
a more thorough picture of the simpler tribal rites such as were typical of 
the Maori, than of the complicated temple ritual characteristic of the islands 
where the worship was more formalized. In order to give a balanced picture 
I shall, therefore, conclude the section on war with a short description of the 
Hawaiian rite, with brief comparative reference to the Tahitian ceremony 
which was fundamentally the same. 

The Hawaiian ceremony that was celebrated when war was impending 
was spoken of as the “king’s ritual.” The rite centered about the erection 
of a new temple, called the /uakini, or the renovation of an old one. The 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 279 

first thing that was done was to enclose with a stone wall the place that 
had been selected. The site and all the workers were then purified or con- 
secrated by means of a somewhat lengthy rite, which was followed by a 
symbolic collection of offerings of pigs throughout the country, in which no 
living animals were actually taken but wooden effigies to represent them were 
set out. All the people, including chiefs, priests, and commoners (probably 
men only) then attended the temple site to be purified by prayer and asper- 
sion. ‘This rite completed what may be termed the preliminary stage of 
consecration, in which the people, the temple, and the land, were purified 

and prepared for the important services to follow. These preliminaries | 

appear to have occupied about a month’s time. 

Now came the time for the making of the wooden figure representing 
the war lord. The temple was made strictly tapu, and the men who were to 
do the work that followed slept in the sacred precincts. In the night was 
celebrated a service that had as its object the consecration of the adzes 
that were to be used in cutting and shaping the representation of Ku, and 
the timbers for the sacred structure that was to be erected in the temple at 
the same time as this was made. The day following, the consecrated group 
of woodworkers went with the priest to the mountains where the figure of 
Ku was to be cut out. There is no account of the cutting of the tree and 
shaping of the figure but it is reasonable to assume that the work was ac- 
companied by formalities similar to those used when a new canoe was 
sought and cut out in the forest. At this time a sacrifice was made to 
propitiate the protectors of the forest (which in Hawaii was the domain of 
Ku), the work being directed and consecrated by kahuna. After the new 
figure of Ku had been brought down to the temple it was laid on the pave- 
ment and covered with leaves awaiting its setting up. While the figure lay 
thus in the temple, a house called mana, which appears to have been a sort 
of sanctuary, was built, apparently by the same group of tapu craftsmen. 
The end posts of this house were cut with a specially consecrated adz. 
A human sacrifice was made both in the forest where the materials were 
gathered and in the temple when they were assembled (54, Vol. VI, p. 52). 
At this stage in the erection of the temple a rite was enacted in which the 
carriers of the portable effigies of the chiefs’ war gods ran a circuit 
around the stationary figure or figures in the temple; after which there was 
a parade of the portable gods before the people assembled outside the en- 
closure, led by a naked man impersonating a mythical denizen of the under- 
world named Kahoalii (The-friend-of-chiefs.) The performance was ended 
with a prayer, and the words, “Hail, hail, O Ku.” 

After the new house had been completed, the figure of Ku was set up, 

280 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

not in the house, but at the head of a semicircle of ,figures of deities at 
one end of the temple enclosure. That night the king and the high priest 
went through a service of the kind called aha?* in which absolute silence 
was required while the priest recited a spell, at the conclusion of which the 
king dashed upon the ground a young pig he had been holding in his 
hands during the recitation. The next day the sanctuary called mana was 
completed with certain rites. Four bundles of white cloth were tied to the 
ridgepole, the thatch over the door was trimmed and a carved figure repre- 
senting some deity, perhaps Luanuu, but apparently not Ku, was set up 
inside. The body of priests now assembled in this house and being divided 
in two groups which sang alternately, chanted for ,two nights and two 
days continuously, being supplied during this time with great quantities of 
pigs on which they regaled themselves. At the end of this service the 
King and the high priest again went through the rite called aha. At this 
time a long cord of sennit, having strips of bark cloth suspended from it, 
was run around the inside of the mana. The first line of the prayer then 
recited runs, “From heaven fell the aha to the spot favored by Kane,” 
the spot referred to being of course the kingdom. Thus this rite 
symbolized the binding of the heavenly to the earthly realm. The next 
important event was the catching of ulua fish. 

If an ulua could not be caught, some man was set upon as a victim, the 
hook was thrust in his mouth, and he was dragged to the temple to be 
sacrificed. Here, then, is the Hawaiian variation of the catching of the 
human “fish” for the war god. The following morning a girdle of coconut 
leaves, which was spoken of as the “navel string,” was put about the belly 
of the figure of Ku; and the king and the priest then proceeded with due 
solemnity to “cut the navel string” of the newly made effigy, employing the 
same formalities and prayers as were used when the umbilicus of a chief’s 
child was cut (p. 214). After this the god was girt with a loin cloth. Fast- 
ing, sacrifice, and prognostications or oracular utterances by a priest of the 
temple, who entered the oracle tower for the purpose, followed the girding 
of Ku. Following this the oracle tower was dressed with white cloth, the 
day on which this was done being known as “the day of great decorations.’’ 
Toward evening of the same day, the priests and the people, accompanied 
by the portable figures representing the war gods of the different chiefs, 
and the man impersonating Kahoalii, went to the mountains, later to return 
in a body, shouting and singing, bearing branches of the koa (Acacia koa) 
tree (koa meant also “warrior,” or “brave’’). A booth was made with these 

*3The word aha is defined in Andrews’ Dictionary as the ‘“Name of a certain prayer used in 
the aha kapu.” “The name originated,” it is said, in the fact that cocoanut fiber [aha, a cord of 
braided cocoanut fiber] is very strong” . . . The significance of the service so named is self 
evident—the ula was a binding prayer. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 281 

branches and was consecrated that night by means of the sacrifice of a pig. 
This was the last sacrifice offered in the whole ceremony. Every man 
had to eat some of this offering upon pain of death, and all of the pig 
must be consumed. The day following the workers and warriors all went 
to the sea and bathed, the portable war gods being set up along the beach; 
and when the bathing was finished, all brought back to the temple handfuls 
of coral which was piled outside the temple. (A similar performance in the 
Society Islands, after a war was over, symbolized the purification of lands 
and people.) A prayer and feast followed. 

On the following morning the female chiefs presented Ku with a great 
loin cloth, which was ceremoniously carried into the temple but apparently 
not girt on the figure. This gift by the women completed the war rite, 
except for minor ceremonies to relieve the men, chiefs, and priests from 
their consecratory tapu, so that they might rest (99, p. 210). It is small 
wonder that Malo says of the war ritual 

It was a great undertaking for a king to build a heiaw of the sort called a 
luakini, to be accomplished only with fatigue and redness of the eyes from long and 
wearisome prayers and ceremonies on his part. 

Numerous close correspondence can be discerned in the war rites in 
Tahiti, in spite of meager knowledge of these, which indicate close relation- 
ship to the Hawaiian luwakini ceremony. ‘The Tahitian rite was called 
the “king’s prayer,’ while the Hawaiian luakini was the “king’s ritual.” 
In Hawaii the “binding prayers’ (aha) were prominent, and _ there 
~were the long recitations and feasting on the part of the priestly body; in 
Tahiti was a rite spoken of as the “binding of the supernatural influence,” 
accompanied by large payments made to the priests by the chief. The build- 
ing of the sanctuary called mana was a central feature of the Hawaiian 
rite; in Tahiti, there was the building in the temple of a small shrine called 
manaha, spoken of as the “host of the gods.’ The man impersonating the 
god Kahoalii ate the eyes of a human victim in the northern group; while 
in Tahiti the chief pretended to do the same. The girding of the chief 
with a sacred loin cloth in the southern islands finds its counterpart in the 
girding of the effigy of the war god in Hawaii. Lastly, there was the 
bringing of coral from the seashore to the temple in both groups. In addi- 
tion to these there were numerous minor features, in which the war rites of 
these two groups resembled each other: but these correspondences are 
sufficient to illustrate the close relationship of the Hawaiian and Tahitian 
ceremonies. (See 105, Vol. 1, pp. 509 fi.; Vol. IL, p. 32-38; 48, Vol. I, 
p- 275; 41, Vol. II, p. 32.) There is definite relationship to Hawaii evident 
in the Marquesas in the calling of those participating in the war rites in 

282 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

those islands the “family of Tu”; in suspending of the cloth from the 
ridgepole of the prophet’s house in the temple (corresponding to the bundles 
on the ridge of the house called mana in Hawaii); in the eating of the 
eyes of captives by chiefs; in the suspending of human victims on hooks 
and calling them “fish”; and finally in the purificatory rites. The eating of 
the eye, the reference to captives as “fish,’ and the offering of them to 
Tu are also details that connect the practices in war time in New Zealand 
with those of Hawaii. 

CONSECRATED INDUSTRY 

The chief of the industrial rites of Polynesia were those that accom- 
panied the labor of planting, fishing, canoe-making, and house-building. 
These were the four industries in this part of the world in which groups of 

“~~|men working together regularly participated. All serious enterprise, whether . 

—-—-cit were worship, war, or peaceful industry, was regarded as consecrated 

activity by the Polynesians; for all required equally protection from evil 
psychic influences, and assistance from the positive powers of the superior ( 
realm. Consecration! worship before, during, and after, all labor was re- 
garded as the prerequisite of successful accomplishment. Manifest perfec- 
tion was only to be attained if perfect psychic conditions had been estab- 
lished and were maintained in regard to the undertaking in hand. What 
Malo wrote with regard to the making of canoes in Hawaii was true in 
ancient times of all industry throughout all Polynesia: “The building of a 
canoe was.an affair of religion” (99, p. 168). 

The main features of all kinds of consecrated enterprise were every- 
where fundamentally the same. These were: organization and direction 
under master craftsmen or adepts, and priests; worship of patron deities, 
who were commonly deified men, by means of prayer and the presentation 
of offerings; tapu and purificatory rites designed to insulate the work, the 
workers, and the product, from evil; the taking of omens relative to the 
outcome of the enterprise ; empowering workers, places, instruments, and the 
product by using conductors of mana, and endowing them directly with 
mana through spells; consecrating the finished product by means of ritual; 
and finally, feasting and general merrymaking to mark the end of the con- 
secrated period, to enjoy the product, and to render thanks to the gods. 

The system of professional craftsmanship was such that the adepts or 
master craftsmen (kahuna, tohunga) may properly be called craft priests. 
A man who became an adept at some profession through heredity, apti- 
tude and apprenticeship, was not only master of the technique of his pro- 
fession, but was also master of the ceremonial requirements of his trade, 
understood the auguries and omens that were significant. Thus, in the 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 283 

Marquesas Islands the chief fisherman (tuhuna nui avaika) both directed 
the making of nets, preparation of the canoes, and casting and drawing of 
the nets, and also played the part of priest in the ceremonies at the fisher- 
men’s shrine before and after the expeditions for deep-sea fishing (77, 
p. 164). Likewise in Hawaii the master canoe-maker presented offerings to » 
the gods of the forest; he uttered the appropriate prayers; and then he 
himself did the preliminary manual work in trimming the log for the canoe 
body before it was shaped out (99, p. 168). Under the direction of the 
adept in charge there always worked a body of consecrated workers, some 
of them also adepts, others assistants or apprentices. 

In addition to the religious functions that fell to the adept craftsman 
in charge, were more important rites of a consecratory nature, many of 
which required the services of the temple priest, or master of ritual. For 
example, in the Marquesas the master canoe builder supervised all the actual 
work on a new canoe, including the minor ritual connected with it, but the 
temple priest consecrated the completed vessel (77, pp. 155-6). In 
different islands and under different circumstances some variation appeared: 
the master worker sometimes consecrated the final product; while at other 
times it was the temple priest who did this. According to Malo, it was the 
canoe builder (kahuna kalai waa) who consecrated the new Hawaiian canoe 
(99, pp. 171-3), whereas it was the temple priest (kahuna pule) who con- 
secrated the newly completed house (99, p. 160). 

Before, during, and after the work, the gods who were believed to have ~ 
to do with it were summoned and appealed to by means of offerings and 
prayers. Doubtless the gifts of food were intended in part at least to 
attract the gods to the scene of activity. Thus in New Zealand when a 
new canoe was to be made, “incantations were chanted and rites practiced 
to propitiate the Lord of Forests and his attendant woodelves” (149, 
p- 116). In Hawaii upon a similar occasion Ku, as Lord of. the Forest, 
under various epithets, was invoked in prayer, and offerings of pig, coconuts, 
red fish and awa were presented (99, pp. 168-9). In fishing in Hawaii it 
was Kuula (who, according to legend, was anciently a famous fisherman, a 
human being) who was appealed to and presented with gifts of fish (54, 
Vol. IV, pp. 554-8). The following prayer was used before fishing for 
the opelu (54, Vol. VI, p. 32): 

O, ancestral gods of the night (Po); 

The night is gone and I am come with the day. 
Give me great power this day. 

Cover the belly of our net this day. 

After the opelu fishing, first-fruits of the catch were sent to the temple 
priest and the chief. Ku with various other epithets was also appealed to 

284 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

by some agriculturalists: Kukaoo (Ku-of-the-digging-stick), was the god 
of husbandry; Kukulia was patron of dry farming; and Kukeolowalu, of 
wet (54, Vol. VI, p. 120). Apparently, Kane was also for some farmers 
a patron. The following is a prayer that was used to stimulate the potato 
crop (54, Vol. V, p. 666): 

O Kane-pua’a (Kane-the-pig), root towards the mountain, root towards the sea; 
root towards the wind, root towards the calm, root in the middle of this our potato 
field! O Kane-pua’a! Do thou root from that corner to this corner, from that 

border to this border, from that side to this side, so fruit would appear at the end 
of the stalk, along the stalk, and the roots which creep between hills. 

The idea of the patron of agriculture rooting in the ground as a pig does, 
turning over the soil from side to side of the field, in order to forward 
fertility, is certainly well conceived, and demonstrates an understanding of 
the first principle of agriculture. Little is known of Tahitian agricultural 
rites; but today stones crudely carved with a human face and some with 
arms and legs roughly formed are found in fields formerly planted with 
taro, indicating that in ancient times such stone figures, called ti, served to 
forward fertility of the land, as they served likewise to assist fishermen in 
filling their nets (79). The use of representations of the patrons of agri- 
culture was a prominent feature in the planting rites of the Maori (148, p. 
158). The appeal to exalted patrons of the craft is seen in Samoa in prayers 
to the guardian spirit of the carpenter’s guild during the consecration of a 
house (80, p. 14). 

Numerous tapu protected consecrated enterprise from evil influences. 
Those engaged in the work had to be purified before they began their 
labors in order that they might be freed from evil that had attached itself 
to them and be made psychically pure to work as instruments of mana. 
In both the Marquesas and Hawaii the fishermen went through a rite of 
purification, and had to sleep in the consecrated place sacred to their labor 
before going out on their expeditions. Malo writes that in Hawaii fisher- 
men spent the night preceding an expedition at the fishing temple, bringing 
with them the nets, clothing, and food that they would use. All the fisher-' 
men gathered at the temple seated themselves in a circle. The kahuna 
then came, bearing a bowl filled with seawater in which floated some coarse 
sea moss and tumeric, to be used in sprinkling those to be purified. Stand- 
ing in the midst of the circle, he recited a prayer for purification, which 
closed with the following responses : 

Priest. Defend us from them. 

Fishermen. Defend us. 

Priest. Save us from night-mare, from bad-luck dreams, from omens of. ill 

From such deliver us. 
Fishermen. Defend us. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 285 

Priest. Speedily and entirely. 
Fishermen. It is free! 

Priest. Oh, Ia! 

Fishermen. Freedom complete, absolute. 

After this apparently, though Malo fails to mention the fact, the priest 
sprinkled the fishermen, thereby completing the absolutory rite. Following 
this all the fishers slept in the sacred precincts, none being allowed to leave 
on any pretext. It was especially forbidden for a man to steal away to 
spend the night with his wife. In the Marquesas, the more important tribes 
had places by their fishing grounds set apart as sacred precincts in which the 
professional fishers of the tribe kept their canoes and nets, and slept and 
performed the necessary consecrational chanting and sacrificial rites before, 
during, and after expeditions. These precincts were tapu to all members of 
the tribe when fishing was going on, and particularly to women. Here was 
found the same rule against men sleeping with their wives before fishing 
that was enforced also upon warriors before battle (77, p. 164). Maori 
agriculturalists, in planting the sweet potato that was their staple food, 
worked entirely naked (149, p. 90), apparently with the purpose of insur- 
ing freedom from such contaminating influences as might linger about cloth- 
ing. To protect workers and their work another class of tapu was im- 
posed upon those in close rapport with the workers but not on the workers 
themselves. These, again, are identical with one class of the war time tapu. 
Apparently it was believed that those in intimate rapport with fishermen 
were likely to interfere psychically in some way with the men at sea if 
they participated in their usual occupations while the fishermen were out. 
The Marquesan tribe as a whole was placed under a consecrational tapu 
requiring silence and cessation of all activity, when their fleet of fishing 
canoes was out, similar to that in war time and during the great communal 
rites. Especial tapu were imposed upon the wives of the fishers while their 
men were at sea. They had to fast, to remain within the sleeping house, 
and to refrain from any casual sexual intercourse (such as was permissible 
at other times, as with a secondary husband, pekio (77, pp. 166-7). Similar 
restrictions or rules for the protection of Hawaiian fishermen have been 
recorded as follows: those remaining at home were cautioned against sexual 
intercourse, quarreling, inquiring the whereabouts of the men at sea, eating 
of the food being used as bait (54, Vol. VI, p. 118). 

The localities used in connection with sacred labor had to be consecrated, 
as did the workers. It has already been pointed out that the precincts of 
the professional fishermen in both Hawaii and the Marquesas were tapu, 
that is protected against the intrusion of outsiders. For other types of work 
in the Marquesas there was a special kind of shed that was built and con- 

286 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

secrated for the purpose of protecting workers and their product both 
physically and psychically from inclemency of the weather and from distem- 
per or ill temper of psychic powers or beings. When work was finished, 
these sheds, and all that had had anything to do with the labor therein, were 
burnt or taken to pieces and their durable materials stored in a sacred place. 
The purpose of this was to protect the new object, with which the work 
house was in intimate rapport, from the possibility of evil psychic effects 
that might later accrue to it in case the building were defiled by having 
a woman sleep in it, or in some other way (77, p. 146). In New Zealand 
were analagous practices to protect canoes in the making. Tregear writes 
(149, p. 118) that “The chips from a new canoe were burnt in a sacred 
fire with much ceremony, lest. they should be used in connection with the 
evil spells or other witchcraft.” 

Whether the work in hand was to result in success or failure was 
indicated to the trained understanding of the master craftsman by many 
signs. In canoe making in the Hawaiian islands it is said that the kahuna 
in charge would observe the movements of an elepaio bird on the felled 
tree trunk for indications. Where the bird, who was Kupulupulu, one of 
the guardians of the forest, stood still, it indicated some defect, such as 
rottenness, a hollow place, or a knot in the wood, which made it unfit for 
use. This appears to be both a practical sign and a practical way of taking 
it. A large class of omens with regard to industrial undertakings had to do 
with the weather. In both Hawaii and the Marquesas rain after the work 
was commenced was taken as an ill omen for the work and for those 
engaged in it. But by far the most important of the signs in connection 
with sacred work were those that were taken from errors, ritualistic or 
technical, committed in the course of labor. Any such sign of the presence 
of influences that might lead to imperfection or ill luck would be likely to 
lead to abandonment of the whole project. Should the silence and the 
inactivity required during an important rite be broken, the ceremony was of 
no value, and the work it was intended to assist would be without the 
necessary psychic aid. In the consecratory rite for a canoe in Hawaii’ 
Malo writes (99, p. 173), 

When the kahuna had finished his prayer he asked of the owner of the canoe, 
“How is this service, this service of ours?” Because if anyone had made a disturb- 
ance or noise, or intruded upon the place, the ceremony had been marred and the 
owner of the canoe accordingly would then have to report the ceremony to be 
imperfect. And the priest would then warn the owner of the canoe, saying, “Don’t 
you go in this canoe lest you meet with a fatal accident.” 

In Tahiti, according to Henry (82), before a new canoe was launched 

. a piece of sennit about a foot long was passed beneath the front end of 
the outrigger, and then taken to the temple and left all night under a slab of stone. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 287 

If in the morning when the stone was removed, the piece of sennit remained per- 
fectly straight, it was a good omen; if it was tortuous the vessel would be beset 
with dangers, but would escape safely; but if the sennit had become twisted or 
turned over, this foreboded loss at sea. 

In New Zealand, according to Tregear (149, p. 90), in the planting rites, 

Great trouble was sometimes taken to ensure the presence of a celebrated 
priest . . . , for, if a mistake was made in the prayers or any ceremonies 
omitted, the presiding priest would be smitten with death by the gods, and the crop 
ruined. The principal chief would probably see to the death punishment. 

Errors in craftsmanship were likewise indicative of the presence of 
maleficent influences, or foreboded evil. In Tahiti in ancient times a small 
technical error might lead to the abandonment of the work in hand; while 
in Hawaii a diviner might point out some defect in the construction of a 
house, predicting misfortune for its inmates if the error were not corrected 
(54, Vol. VI, p. 82). In the Marquesas the ancient craftsmen discarded 
defective products as worthless. Obviously there is a point of view arising ° 
out of religious concepts, which must have had very far reaching practical 
effects in producing painstaking and accurate craftsmanship, such as was 
typical of ancient Polynesia. 

It was customary to empower the instruments that were to be used in 
labor, as in war. In Hawaii a sacrificial consecration was made of the nets 
and lines that were used in fishing (54, Vol. VI, p. 120). In the Marquesas 
likewise, nets, canoes and whatever were used in the deep-sea fishing were 
consecrated and empowered by means of dynamic chants. Before going out 
to fish, it is said that Maori fishermen in New Zealand placed their hooks 
around some excrement, repeating a spell at the same time. When they had 
arrived at their fishing grounds and all the hooks were arranged properly, a 
very long incantation was chanted, which ended with these words (140, pp. 
197-200) : 

“You are strengthened by the spell, 
With the strength of Tane Tangaroa, 
The biting of the fish has begun.” 

In woodworking, adzes were used which, on account of some traditional 
sacredness, through consecration to a god, or through ritual of some kind, 
were supposed to be endowed with peculiar power (mana). Special adzes, 
called toki mana (adz-with-power) were used in cutting out the coffins of 
chiefs in the Marauesas (77, pp. 111-2), and in Hawaii the adzes with 
which the figure representing the war lord of the /uakini was cut, were 
especially consecrated by being laid overnight within the lintel of the door 
of the sanctuary called Mana (99, p. 237). In both Tahiti and the Cook 

288 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Islands the adzes that served in making canoes were especially consecrated. 
The blessing of the adzes was one of the most important stages in the 
elaborate ritual of the canoe makers in Tahiti (82). Before work on a 
new canoe was begun, in the evening of the last night of the moon, each 
artizan took his adz and “put it to sleep” (haamoeraa toi) in a recess in 
the canoe builders’ temple, at the same time invoking Tane, Taere (Keel), 
Tefatu, and Taaroa, calling upon them to 

Go and take hold of the adze The adze will become sacred 

Hold, that it be taken out enchanted, In the brilliant sennit of the artizan 
Made light; that it may producesparks Which touches and holds 

In doing varied work. As a girdle for the adze, 

It is set in a firm handle of sacred ‘T'o consecrate the adze, 

miro, To impel the adze, 
United with many-stranded sennit of To complete the adze, 
Tane. To give power (mana) to the adze. 

After thus putting their adzes “to sleep” the carpenters feasted and pre- 
sented offerings at the temple. Next morning, before sunrise when work 
was to begin, each man took his adz down by the sea and “awakened” it, 
praying as follows: 

The awakening of the adze! Inaugurating its flying girdle, 
Let it travel a little seaward, Awake for Tane, great god of artizans; 
Present it (there), let it fight and Awake for Ta‘ere of all skill, 

attack. Awake for Te-fatu, The-lord of hosts, 
Let the adze go against the spray Awake for Taaroa, father of all gods. 

On Managia, Cook Islands, a stone adz head hafted upon a ‘highly 
ornamental handle became the symbol of ‘“Tane-of-the-royal-face,’’ who was 
the patron of carpenters. (See pp. 125-26.) In several of the islands tales 
were told of mythical adzes of marvellous qualities that were once known. 
According to a Mangaian tale, Rangi once brought up from the lower world a 
“magic-axe” “the handle and all being of stone in one piece, and withal very 
sharp.” This became the envy of all, but it disappeared when Rangi died 
(63, pp. 273-4). The story was told in the Marquesas of a tremendous | 
tree that defied all the powers of man to fell it, until finally they were 
told to procure a magic adz kept by a god under the sea. So great was the 
mana of this adz that the tree was felled in short order without effort on 
the part of the men (78). One of the New Zealand Maori tribes possessed 
a very famous adz, the mana of which must have been very great, for it 
was the very tool with which Tane cut the props which held the sky above 
the earth, when, in the beginning of things, he thrust Rangi up and away 
from his wife, the Earth, so that gods and men might have room in which 
to breathe and move (72, p. 55). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 289 

There were other types of mediums of psychic power or conductors of 
mana that served to aid certain kinds of undertakings by inducing the 
presence of higher power. Skulls of sacred and psychically powerful chiefs 
were used in this way sometimes in plantations, or in fishing. Stones, 
either carved, or suggestive in an uncarved state of some animal or 
human form, were also used to aid fishing and agriculture in some of the 
islands. These stones, when used by the fishermen in Hawaii, the Society 
Islands, and the Marquesas, were definitely regarded as embodiments of 
spirits ; they were not mere lucky stones that somehow attracted the fish, but 
spirits that controlled them. They were furthermore embodiments of spirits 
believed to control only certain kinds of fish, but from the manner of their 
use it is evident that the native thought with regard to them was not so 
much that they were mediums of mana which served to increase the number 
of fish, as magnets which attracted them to the nets of the fishers. On the 
other hand, the stone ti that the Tahitians planted in their fields must cer- 
tainly have been regarded as serving a purpose similar to that of the 
skulls employed in the same way in New Zealand: they must have been 
mediums intended to induct mana into the plantation to increase the 
fertility and the crop. The distinction here drawn was almost certainly not 
thought out in this way in the native mind. ‘The practice of planting a 
stone or bone medium of rapport in the earth and in the sea, and the assur- 
ance that it meant more fish and more taro is all that concerned the fisher- 
man and the farmer. They probably did not stop to analyze what they were 
doing, to wonder whether the sacred object were acting as a fertilizer or a 
magnet. 

Kuula, the famous patron of the fishing industry in Hawai, was a 
stone. ‘The legend relating to him states that he was a fisherman of Maui, 
who was killed when falsely accused of insult by King Kahoali. After his 
death Kuula assumed a “fish body,” and later apparently he turned into a 
stone. Kuula’s wife, Hina, and his son, Aiai, also turned into stone “fish 
gods.” Of Hina it is said that she is “a real stone, which exists to this 
day,” controlling certain kinds of fish. Thrum writes concerning these fish 
gods that “in no case were they carved images” (54, Vol. IV, pp. 172-4). 

The Maori had a theory that the life principle (mauri) of species of 
birds, fish, and of land could be protected by being in rapport with a con- 
secrated stone. Such a stone was called mauri or whatu (stone). The prin- 
ciple was the same when some of the maur: of a human being was put 
into some object, or placed in rapport with it, so that the hiding of the 
object out of harm’s way assured the individual’s safety. (See 128, p. 149.) 
This seems to be a variation of the same thought that led to the use of 

290 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

stones in the northern islands as embodiments of the spirits or gods that 
controlled particular kinds of fish. \ 

Dynamic spells were employed both to empower the implements and 
instruments used and to forward the work. This use of incantations was 
carried to a higher point in New Zealand than in any of the other islands. 
The spells uttered by Maori fishermen over their hooks have already been 
illustrated (p. 287). Marquesan fishermen chanted incantations in the 
same way to attract fish and turtles into their nets (77, p. 174). Much of 
the chanting, which accompanied all sorts of activities in these islands, un- 
doubtedly had a religious side, as being thought to aid or empower psychic- 
ally. This is true also of voyaging songs, which were typical particularly of 
western Polynesia, canoe hauling songs, and the like. These correspond 
| directly to the sailors’ chanteys that were typical of the sea-faring class in 
| the days of sailing vessels, except that sailors had no sense of a psychic 
effect being produced by the singing, as the Polynesians probably did. This 
is the translation of a very ancient Polynesian chantey, said to have been 
sung when one of the famous canoes that sailed from mythical Hawaiki to 
New Zealand was hauled to the sea (85, pp. 99-I0I). 

Glide slowly and gently, Gently of fortune, 

My beauteous canoe prow! Hui-te-rangiora ! 

Ah, me. Thou art mysterious! 
Slowly, slowly, From ‘neath the shades, 
Gently, gently (with care). Give calms and peace. 

Gently of whom? 

Below is a spell that was chanted upon the same occasion to lighten and 
speed the vessel to the place where it was to be launched: 

Yonder the rainbow brightly gleams, In the seafoam, spread about, spread 
Yonder the rainbow vaporous gleams, afar, 
The rainbow ashore, the rainbow at sea, Thou shalt swim when out yonder, 
It circles, it expands abroad, Yea, yea, 
That, thy overlord; that, thy potential Hi, yea, yea, 
force (mana), Uplift thyself, 
Yea, yea, 
Hi, yea, yea. 

Since the power of a spell was believed to be due in part to rhythmic and 
forceful utterance, the effect was naturally believed to be augmented by 
synchronous performance by a number of men at the same time. In view 
of the believed influence of rhythmic and united movement in dancing, it is 
interesting to read that in New Zealand groups of men engaged in prepar- 
ing fields for kumara planting moved their bodies rhythmically in unison and 
sang as they swung their digging sticks (148, pp. 157-8). Andersen 
(1, p. I) writes that as the planters stood in lines they moved rhythmically 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 291 

to the singing of waiata (songs) and the intonation of karakia (spells). 
“Songs were sung to Rongo-ma-tane, the god of all cultivated foods, that 
he might bless their labor.” . Another custom of the planters was to paint 
their bodies red (1, p. 1). This was apparently founded on the belief that 
this, the color of the kumara, and the color sacred to Rongo, the god of the 
kumara, would serve as a medium of induction to bring the mana of Rongo 
into the soil. 

The completion of fishing and planting was marked by the offering of 
first fruits to the gods through their representatives, the priests and divine 
chiefs. This constituted a consecration of the crop or catch, and “raised the 
tapu,” making the food free for general consumption. (See Offerings and 
Sacrifices.) Quite distinct from the elaborate seasonal first fruits festivals, 
which are described in the next section, were the small offerings of first 
fruits made by individual farmers and fishermen. Hawaiian taro planters 
celebrated with a feast when the first taro was brought from the patch. The 
roots having been cooked, an offering was made to the patron of husbandry 
with these words: 

O Ku-kulia, the food is cooked; a fresh taro, the pig is cooked; here is the 

food; here is the fish; return and partake of my food, the great farmer, saved by 
me and my family. Amama, it is done. 

After the prayer was finished all joined in a feast (54, Vol. V. p. 682). 
In like manner the first fruits of the potato crop were presented in New 
Zealand to the divine chief with chants appropriate for the occasion (149, 
frei): 

Anderson (1, p. 3) writes that a large kumara of curious shape from 
among those first gathered 
would be taken by the tohunga as the medium between him as_ representative 
of the people, and Pani [from whom the kumara was originally obtained] as their 
benefactress, and cooked in a sacred oven as an offering to the goddess for the first 

fruits. Should this root be eaten by the people, and its tapu be thus broken, Pani 
would turn, and in anger cause the decay of the whole crop. 

When the products of manufacture, such as houses and canoes, were 
consecrated it was not possible to make offerings in kind; but similar rites 
were performed. ‘The food was offered which constituted a thanksgiving 
sacrifice just as did the gift of first fruits; and until the presentation to the 
gods who had helped in the work had been made, the object was not free for 
human use. The completion of any work was usually the occasion of a 
feast, which generally followed immediately after the formal removal of 
tapu. Both in Tahiti and the Marquesas, the consecration of a newly 
finished war canoe required human sacrifice. In the Marquesas the new 

292 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

craft was bedecked with sacred cloth, human hair (to give it mana), and 
greenery; and the shed by the sea in which it was to be housed, and its 
crew, were similarly bedecked in festive attire. After a formal consecration 
by the tribal priest, the canoe was launched with all its gaily caparisoned 
crew on board. Then followed feasting and general merry-making in honor 
of the occasion (77, pp. 155-6). 

The ceremonial opening of a new house in the Marquesas was marked 
by a similar rite the chief feature of which was the removal of the tapu and 
opening of the new house by the priest who was accompanied by an old 
female relative of the family. As they mounted upon the platform and 
entered the house, the priest and the woman each bore a leaf of a certain 
fern, which was probably used in some such way as the branch of sacred 
shrub in the following Maori rite. Consecratory chants sung by the family 
were typical of the ceremony for a new house in both the Marquesas and 
New Zealand. In the removal of tapu from a new house in New Zealand 
the priest struck various parts of the dwelling with a branch of sacred 
shrub, at the same time reciting incantations. He then ascended to the roof 
and chanted a spell to lift the tapu from the building and make it noa for 
people to dwell in. Those who were gathered to witness the rite joined in 
the chorus of this chant. In New Zealand, the house was not actually free 
for general use until, at the time of the rising of the morning star on the 
morning following the rite by the priest, three women of rank walked 
through the hitherto unentered door, “to trample the threshold” (149, p. 
279). The part played by women in both the Marquesan and Maori rites 
for removing the tapu from a new dwelling indicates the fact that it was 
thought necessary to remove evil influences from the house as well as the 
tapu of sacredness, for women were absorbers of evil. 

The consecratory chant that was recited, or intoned, by the Marquesan 
priest for a new house (or a new canoe) is particularly interesting to the 
student of the philosophy of the native religion. The spell employed was 
the pue creation chant, which commences by recounting the growth of the 
world and ends by summoning the personifications of all the materials— 
rocks, earth, different kinds of wood, etc.,—used in building the house to 
come to the house building of Atanua, wife of Atea, the Sky Father. The 
chant, in other words, associates the construction and materials used in it 
with the primeval origin of all living things—the children of Atea—and 
with the building of the first house, that of the father of nature and men. 
The different islands of the Marquesas are said to be parts of the house 
of Atea; in other words the land upon which men dwelt was spoken of, 
doubtless more in a figurative than a literal sense, as the “house of Atea.” 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 293 

The chant describes the sending of messengers to summon the personifica- 
tions of the materials to the housebuilding, in exactly the same way as the 
Marquesan man planning to build a house would send word to different 
relatives or tribesmen asking them to bring certain materials for the new 
house when they came to the feast that was always given when the build- 
ing was commenced. Another Marquesan chant associated with canoe mak- 
ing similarly refers to the first canoe building, and also recapitulates the 
process of this labor in such a way as to give a fair picture of the making 
of a canoe as it proceeded stage by stage. The two features here brought 
out seem to be typical of many Polynesian consecrational spells and 
prayers: they refer to ancient events surrounding the first inception of the 
process or the work in the dimly remembered era of the gods; and they 
recapitulate in rhythmic and dynamic word series and stages of actual labor 
that produce the finished, tangible object. Thus they identified the work and 
its product with its primeval foundation, thereby binding the new thing to 
the rock of tradition; and with a chain of words they created a verbal 
picture of the labor as it should be done, forming a dynamic mental image of 
the work planned or completed. 

A Marquesan chant that had to do with canoe building reads in part as 
follows (79): 

Dig the stone from its hole, Dampen it with water blown from the 
mouth. 
How is the rub of it on the thigh? 
Put it on its handle, 
: ‘ i ; ; ; "Fix it well upon the crooked mi’o (Thes- 
if i ? : S 
Who is the man who makes the adze? pesia populnea) stick, 

Motuha’iki-me-Hope’outo’i (first canoe Bind it with the colored sennit, with the 

Bring it into the House of Papa. 

builders). fine spun coconut fiber, 
: ° : : Bind it with the Lashing-of-Tana’oa. 
Rub the adze upon the rough stone, Tipotipo-te-mata is the binding, 
Polish it with the fine sand, You are the Lashing-of-Tana’oa. 

The adz having thus been made, the chant goes on to summarize the stages 
of the making of the canoe: 

Seek his canoe (tree), Build a shed (oho au) to house it, 

: : : : : ; . Place the canoe inside the shed, 

Strip the bark off his canoe, Set the canoe upon the log supports, 
Pare the branches off his canoe, Thin out the hull, 

Bell) hismcanoes. «1.0: Seek coral (for polishing) 

Measure .., cut to length .. , ; : : 

Cut out .., hollow as a trench .., Polish the canoe. 

dig out inside .. , 
In the next verse the chant proceeds 

Who is my god who is dwelling here? 
It is Motuha’iki-me-Hope’outo’i, 

204 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

after which the different parts of the canoe are named, apparently in 

the order in which they were made. \ 
The following lines from the chant that was used by a Hawatian kahuna 

to consecrate a new canoe illustrates again the habit of referring in such 

chants to mythical events having to do with the origin of the art of canoe 
building (99, pp. 172-3). 

This is the adz of our venerable an- 
cestress. 

Dame [luahine] Papa,* the wife of 
Wakea. 

She set apart and consecrated, she 
turned the tree about, 

She impelled it, she guided it, 

She lifted the tabu from it. 

The canoe this of our ancestress. 

Dame Lea, wife of Moku-halii;” 

She initiated, she pointed the canoe; 

She started it, she guided it; 

She lifted the tabu from it, 

Lifted was the tabu from the canoe of 
Wakea. 

Gone is the tabu from the canoe of 
Wakea. 

The main feature of the consecration of a new house in Hawaii was the 
_cutting of the thatch over the doorway, which was done with due form- 
‘ality by the priest employed for the purpose. This act was spoken of as 
“cutting the navel string of the house,” a figure of speech which conveys a 
clear idea of the native sense of the meaning of these consecratory rites, 
when the priest by his ritual cut the bond of rapport that bound the newly 
born house to the psychic beings or powers from whom the materials and 
the mana that had entered into the work had come. Every new thing was 
a child of the gods; and when it entered upon its worldy life it must be 
detached from them, as the human child was physically detached from its 
mother when it entered upon its independent life. To return to the 
Hawaiian rite: the priest, chopping block in one hand and stone adz in the 
other, inquired of the house owner if all was ready for him to proceed 
with the ceremony. On receiving an affirmative reply he commenced his 
prayer, at the same time beginning to trim the thatch over the door, timing 
the strokes of his adz by the cadence of his recitation 
Orderly and harmonious is the prayer,of the multitude to the god. 
Kuwa cuts now the navel-string of the house of Mea. 

He stands! He cuts! ‘The thatch is cut! 
leiscutle orig asnciut! 

The following is the translation of a prayer recited upon this occasion 
on the island of Molokai. 

2% Compare the Marquesan chant in which the adz is said to be brought ‘into the House of 
Papa.” Papa in Marquesan lore may be another name for Atanua, who occupies the same position 
in creation as wife of Atea (== Wakea) as did Papa in Hawaiian lore. The House of Papa was 
the name given to a ceremonial structure in which women performed their part in connection 
with some of the religious rites in both Hawaii and the Marquesas. 

25 Moku-halii is the same as Motuha’iki in the Marquesan dialect. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 205 

_ Severed is the navel-string of the house, 

the thatch that sheds the rain, that wards off the evil influences of the heavens, 
The water-spout of Haakula-manu (Deluge personified). 
Cut now! 

Cut the navel-string of your house, 0 Mauli-ola (Demi-god of health). 

That the house-dweller may prosper, 

That the guest who enters it may have health, 

That the lord of the land may have health, 

That the chiefs may have long life. 

Grant these blessings to your house, 0 Mauli-oli. 

To live till one crawls hunched up, till one becomes blear-eyed, 

Till one lies on the mat, till one has to be carried about in a net. Amama. It is free. 

A new material object that had been made was comparable in the Poly- 
nesian mind to a new born child. Like the child, the canoe, house, or other 
object had a soul and a vital principle that required strengthening, for all 
objects were conscious and animate. Thus the ancient “Takitimu” canoe 
was addressed with these words (87, pp. IOI, 103): 

In the sea foam, ... 
Thou shalt swim when out yonder. 
and again, 
Float lightly so, float lightly so, 
As a flapping shore-bird with thy wings (sails), 
To anchor anon on distant lands, 
Thy spouse being Ariki-tapu (the sea), 
That thou mayest drink the waters 

Such an address was not a figurative personification of the object, but 
words spoken to a conscious soul. Even the roots of the sacred kumara, 
sprouting in the ground in a Maori plantation were encouraged to grow in 
such words as these (1, p. 2): 

Thinly encumbered with earth, O son of noble birth! Incline thyself towards 
the warm sea breezes; thy face shall be favorably marked with the waters causing 
vegetable growth: be thou soon seizing, grasping the soil with thy rootlets, even as 
a bird with its claws, grasps the branch: for thou art naked, possessing only thy 
skin; be thou therefore seizing, laying fast hold on the earth; for naked art thou, 
possessing only thy skin! ; 

It is evident that the new object, as a living being, needed the same 
kind of rites to free and protect it against evil, and to endow it with mana 
and other necessary psychic qualities, as did the human infant. I feel 
sure that if sufficient detailed information concerning the various consecra- 
tory practices connected with crafts were available, it would be possible to 
draw a picture of the ritual for consecrating new objects which would be 
found to parallel fairly closely the succession of ceremonials that released 
the child from tapu, protected, strengthened and endowed it with mana. 

nN 

x 

296 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bullei 

The formal consecration, which marked the com] 
the releasing of the object and those who had m 
usually followed by a feast that was primarily social, 
had some religious element in its purpose. The su 
navel-string”’ of the new house in Hawaii “was the 
the whole company” gathered to celebrate the occa 
Samoa, when the construction of a new house was 
was celebrated a feast that was distinctly religious i 
called the Umu sanga (“Sacred-oven”). Upon tl 
ance of food was distributed among the builders an 
presented to the builders, and the ceremony of kava « 
with speeches appropriate to the occasion. The most 
a consecratory prayer that was addressed to the wt 
building tufunga, living and dead, supplicating the 
home, and addressed to the ancestors of the family 
support the unity and prestige of the family. Lat 
was enjoyed, the “House-entering” (Faa-ulu-faleng« 
times the Samoans combined “Sacred-oven” and “ 
celebrating them at the same time. In this is evident 
to the Marquesan house opening rite called “F 
(Koin a uu tina fae), which commericed with the 
scribed on pages 292-93 and ended with a purely sc 

In both Tahiti and the Marquesas the launchin 
the occasion for a gala feast, when the new canoe it 
as to cut a fine figure at what may be called its bi 
One feature in this Tahitian feast is suggestive of 
local craftsmen invited others of their profession and 
in honor of the occasion. As for the fishing and ag 
reapings of their harvests were always celebrated by 
the presentation of offerings in the manner describ 

SEASONAL FERTILITY RITES 

Unfortunately there have been preserved in Polynesia only fragmentary 
records of the allegorical myths which once served to explain the death 
and rebirth of fertility in nature as the seasons of dearth and plenty 
followed one upon the other. In Hawaii it was recounted that in ancient 
times Lono, the god of cultivated food, animated by jealously, killed his 
wife; then, overcome by grief, he rushed about the island boxing all those 
whom he met, and afterwards departed for some foreign land, promising 
that he would return (p. 112). The Hawaiian first fruits and harvest 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 297 

festival called the Makahiki annually commemorated this event. Lono, 
represented both by carvings and by the king himself, received the offer- 
ings of fruits of the land. Sports were a prominent feature of this festival, 
particularly boxing. At the close of the period of festivity a canoe, called 
Lono’s canoe, with a basket containing all kinds of food attached to its out- 
rigger, was taken to sea and set adrift, symbolizing the departure of the 
god at the end of the season of abundant growth. 

In Tahiti, although the rites in which the first fruits were offered and 
the tapu removed on land and sea are closely similar in many features to 
the Makahiki, there is no record of a corresponding story related concerning 
Oro, to whom the fruits of the land were offered; but here it was believed 
that at the end of the season of abundance the ancestral gods departed for 
the other world (indicating that they were supposed to be present in this 
world during the rainy season), not to return until the next growing season. 

In various islands appear distinct suggestions of the seasonal 
myths of other ancient religions, such as that of Orpheus and Eurydice. It 
is particularly interesting that in two of the Maori stories of this type, in 
which the heroine kills herself because of unsatisfied love, the hero, who 
has followed her soul to the underworld institutes games to entice her from 
her place of seclusion. This is a reminiscence, I believe, of the fact that 
the games celebrated during the festivities in the season of abundance were 
intended to attract and excite the fertilizing god or gods. In another New 
Zealand story on the same theme, the hero is instructed not to attempt to 
bring his loved one back to the upper earth while the world is full of evil 
(during the winter season), but to wait until the beginning of summer 
(119, p. 190). And in still another story, a man’s wife killed in jealousy 
is said to have come here to life “in the spring, when all the trees were blossom- 
ing” (44, p. 82). It is noteworthy that in all these Polynesian myths it is 

ee 

the loved woman (the symbol of embodiment of the earth’s fertility) who is | 
killed, sought by her mate, (in Hawaii, the sky-god of fertility), and brought | 

back to life. Nowhere, so far as I know, are there any tales of the death | 

and resurrection of male gods of fertility, though this theme is suggested in 
one episode of the Hawaiian fertility rite, about to be described, when the 
king, personifying the god of fertility, was attacked by spearsmen. The 
divine chief, as representative of the gods and as the instrument of mana 
for the community or country naturally played a prominent part in the fertil- 
ity rites. In New Zealand, Tonga, Tahiti, and Hawaii he received the 
offerings of first fruits. Nowhere, however, so far as is known, was the 
role that he played as significant and interesting as in Hawaii. Here, toward 
the end of the Makahiki festival, in which the king personified the god of 

298 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

fertility, was enacted a dramatic ceremony symbolic evidently of the testing 
of the mana of the divine chief.?¢ ia 
, After the offerings in the form of tribute had been collected the king | 
| purified himself and went to sea to meet the effigy of the harvest god as it 
| returned from a circuit of the islands for the purpose of receiving homage 
and tribute from all the districts and chiefs. As the king, coming to meet 
the procession, disembarked from his canoe, a body of spearmen stood 
before him. An expert at warding off spears preceded most kings, it is 
said, though Kamehameha depended upon his own mana at this time. As 
the king leaped ashore, a man rushed forward bearing two spears, the points 
of which were wrapped with white cloth. One of these was hurled at the 
_ king, while with the other the man touched the body of his divine chief. A 
sham fight with spears followed, after which the king proceeded to pay his 
respects to the effigy of the lord of the harvest (99, pp. 196-7). ‘ According 
to another account the body of men with spears are said to have been 
grouped around the effigy of Lono, “As the king landed a man threw 
several spears at the guardian of the king, who warded them off. “The 
man then touched the king with a second spear thus freeing him from re- 
strictions” (54, Vol. VI, p. 44). The last remark suggests that the sham 
attack and fight were perhaps intended rather to frighten evil away from the 
divine chief than to symbolize the testing of his mana.27 

The purpose behind the presentation of first fruits and harvest offerings 
was to give the fertilizing gods their share and by so doing to gain their 
blessing on the rest of the crop and to release it from the tapu under which 
it had lain as long as it was the exclusive property, so to speak, of the 
gods. The gift presented, usually to the divine chief as representative of 
the god, was in part a thank offering, in part a payment. But it was also 
a medium of rapport which it was hoped would assure the flow of the 
fertilizing mana of the god into the earth or the crop. There was apparently 
also the thought of gaining control over the food through psychic rapport, 
be it land fruit or fish. When the divine chief or priest, as representative 

>In the Marquesas there was a symbolical testing of the mana of the tribal prophet when 
the structure that was sacred to him and the god was built in thé temple. In this case also the 
testing consisted in an attack by warriors armed with spears; but in the Marquesas it was the 
sacred structure that was attacked, or the symbols on its ridge pole which embodied in some 
way the mana of the prophet who, during the performance, stood in front of the structure, while 
the men discharged their spears in the attempt to knock down the building or the symbols on its 
ridge (77, p. 234). Beyond this and the Hawaiian performance, I know of no other dramatic 
rites of this type that have been described; but I feel certain that others must have existed. 

“TT cannot help believing that this rite and the belief it dramatized furnishes a clue as to 
the circumstances which led to the killing of Captain Cook on the shores of Hawaii. Cook had 
been received and accepted as Lono, and there had grown some doubt as to his real divinity, 
encouraged no doubt by the chiefs and priests who had been disillusioned. When Cook was 
compelled to put back to Hawaii and landed for the last time, he was killed by a spear thrust, 
in what seemed to the Britishers to be a confused melee. It is possible that the stroke that 
killed the great navigator was not an accident in a flurry of excitement, as supposed, but a 
prearranged test of his divinity. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 299 

or embodiment of the god, ate of the first fruits, a relationship of rapport , 
and a condition of control was established which may be compared to that | | 

believed to be brought about by the eating of sacrificial food in war rites. 
This seems to have been the purpose of the king’s eating the right eye of 
an opelu when the first fruits of this kind of fish were sent him at the 
opening of the season in Hawaii (54, Vol. VI, pp. 32-4). In New Zealand 
was found the simplest form of presentation of first fruits both in the 
people’s offering a share of every kind of food to the ariki with accompany- 
ing chants (149, p. 218) and in the priests’ presenting them directly to the 
god. Among the Maori of Tuhoe the ceremonious offering of the first bird, 
when a quantity of forest food of this kind has been gathered, was an 
interesting performance. If there were no priest with the party to per- 
form the proper rite, the bird was put in the hollow of a tree or impaled 
on a branch in order that ‘“Tane (the god of forests) may consume it.” ‘The 
proper sacrifice consisted in roasting the bird before a sacred fire (the ali 
taitai) which was spoken of as the hau or mauri of the feast (kainga). The 
first bird thus roasted was then eaten by the priest without touching it with his 
hands. The prayer that accompanied this rite referred to the binding of the 
sun by Maui, when he desired that it should move more slowly to give more 
day. “The first fruits of land and water [were] then cooked for the 
people”; after which a thanksgiving prayer was repeated, the purpose of 
which seems to be summed up in these lines (21, pp. 49-51): 

The tapu is taken from Tupa, cleansed is Rakai-hika, 

Yield to ie thanksgiving, 

Be extinguished by the thanksgiving. 
That is, the tapu was to be extinguished by the offering. Another account 
states that when Maori first fruits were offered there was a long 
invocation in which a number of stars were addressed, one after another, and 
asked in turn to cause the food products to be plentiful. At the same time 
the priest laid an offering of the fresh young growth of the potato plants 
at the tuahw shrine (13, p. 463). The first fruits rites in New Zealand 
are said to have been called amoamohanga (amo, to carry on the shoulder) 
because of the fact that each little village or family group of the tribe came 
bearing its gifts to the place where the rite was performed (20, Vol. XLII, 
p. 448). Here is evident similarity to the very elaborate first fruits rites in 
the Society Islands, in which the various districts of the islands assembled 
with their offerings at the chief place of worship. 

In Tahiti in November and December there was a time known as the 
“season of the outside or sea,” when the fishing season was opened by 
offering a sacrifice of first fish to the gods. On a certain day a canoe went 

300 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

out to fish; while it was out a ceremonial tapu reigned over land and sea, 
requiring complete inactivity and complete silence. Upon the return of the 
canoe in the evening, the whole of the catch was offered in the temple. Next 
day the procedure was the same, except that this day’s catch was for the 
chief. Again in the third day the canoe went out, and now the fish were 
for the people—the tapu on the sea was lifted, the fishing season was open 
(105, Vol. I. pp. 516-7). / In Hawaii the fishing season was opened in 
December with the offering of first fruits. Canoes went out for ten suc- 
cessive nights, during which time all the catch went to the chiefs. During 
these nights great fires were kept burning on the shores, doubtless as beacons 
for the fishermen. After the tenth night the female chiefs were allowed to 
partake of the catch, and this was the sign of the end of the tapu and the 
opening of the season, when the sea and fish were free for all. General 
fishing was not allowed, however, until five days later (99, pp. 196, 204). 

The Tahitian year was regulated by the appearance of the Pleiades 
(82).28 

When the Pleiades first sparkle in the horizon towards the constellation of 
Orion’s Belt in the twilight of the evening, in the month of Tema, on November 
20, they are the forerunners of the season for plenty. Mata-ri’i-i-ni’a (Pleiades- 
above) is then the season, until these little stars descend below the horizon in the 
twilight of evening, in the month of Au-unuunu (Suspension), on the 20th of May. 
That is the ending of the season of plenty. Mata-ri’i-i-raro (Pleiades-below) is the 
season. . . . when those little stars disappear below the horizon in the twilight of 
the evening. 

It is my belief that in ancient times in Tahiti the appearance of the 
Pleiades was taken only as a general indication of the approach of the season of 
plenty and of the religious festivals marking this time of the year, that there 
was no fixed ceremonial calendar. This would necessarily be the case by rea- 
son of the variableness of the rainy season and the dependence of the crops on 
the coming of the rains. The time of the festivals at which first fruits and 
harvest offerings were presented to the gods must therefore have been 
determined by the rainy season rather than by any astronomical observa- 

*8 The round of the seasons is given as follows by Henry (82). It is pointed out that 
there was variation in different islands and districts on account of difference in rainfall. 

The seasons by moons (months): 

een, DHlarvest ) Soe eith eee t ut seeress BFR eee cy Re ea ahaerceviorey raccoon eetanne co AeeC December-January 
2. Faahunui (Great-repose). Characterized as “‘the sound sleep of plenty”........January-February 
PAPE pIGing OCALCIty, DE SINS uy cer eecesccesie areesssatee cee tecee ee ee ee ee es ee eae nee February-March 
Gemeladod. Bread iruit was. Scares arse nectar cos ees xed can perenne ere a ee eee March-April 

5. Auunuunu. It was stormy, there was no fishing .. April-May 

QUAD AAD ARE CUtS WAG city < 2se ces eensee teeta eee eee re eae -... May-June 
(amebaroroniua, It was dty)...0.:<cse Sree avenge ae an ---June-July 

8. Paroromuri. ‘The last of the fruit season” ... ..- July-August 

OPM VI tts A ee ess ceca. sanvastye sagen ce, eens ae a --- August-September 
10. Hiaia (Craving). The greatest scarcity ... September-October 
11. Tema. New crops were developing ........... ee ee .... October-November 
12. Teeri (Scarcity). The inflorescence of breadfruit _.. ... November 

LS ect Leamonuiteatiaothen hrtirtaeseu tec amen mea amr Sine eines wean ene _... December 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 301 

tion.2® It is worthy of note that the old accounts speak of an approximate 
time, giving a leeway of a month. Thus Moerenhout (105, Vol. I, p. 518) 
describes the first fruits rite as being in December or January. 

First fruits of the land were offered in Tahiti in December or January 
with elaborate festivities. Later, another offering was made in March 
or April, which marked the end of a season of abundance and may 
therefore be spoken of as the harvest festival. War was tapu at this 
season. Districts vied with each other in amassing the most bounteous 
gift, the offerings including not only fruits of the land but all kinds of 
products of man’s handicraft. Each district came to the main marae of 
the island by sea, their flotilla preceded by four new canoes laden with 
gifts. Each flotilla was met on the shore by priests and a rite was 
performed before the people could disembark, after which the visiting 
chiefs paid their respects to the king and the canoes laden with offerings 
were presented to him. After that the gifts were borne to the temple in 
grand procession led by the high priest accompanied by the priests of 
the visiting districts clad only in fine mats, their robes of office. At the 
temple, after a service in which thanks were offered, a small portion of 
each offering was presented on the altar. The rest was formally assigned 
by the priest to the ranking chief. He in his turn gave it to the people, 
who thereupon rushed in and enacted a mock battle for the spoil. After 
this there was an actual peaceful division, in which the chief had the 
first share. The return of the offerings to the people, the mock fight, and 
the subsequent division in prescribed shares were evidently symbolic of 
the release of the country from tapu after the gods and chiefs had 
received their portion (105, Vol. I, pp. 520-21). 

Malo’s account of the Makahiki festival in Hawaii conveys the impres- 
sion that the commencement of this rite was fixed by the calendar; and 
the account in the Fornander papers (54, Vol. VI, p. 34) states definitely 
that the beginning of the new year, which was ushered in by the Maka- 
hiki, was on the first night (hilo) of the month of Ikuwa (here translated 
as September). Mr. Thomas G. Thrum kindly furnishes me with a note 
taken from untranslated writings of Kamakau to the effect that 
the Hawaiian new year commenced in the Kane tapu period in the 
month of Ikuwa (November). According to Emerson’s notes to Malo’s 
“Hawaiian Antiquities” (99, p. 58), the Kane tapu covered the twenty- 
seventh and twenty-eighth days of the moon’s age. Since the chief 

* There is no true “rainy season” in Tahiti, comparable to that in India, for example; but 
what I refer to as the “rainy season’? is the period between November and May, the sub- 

equatorial summer, when the trade winds rarely blow, the air is hot and humid, and rains are 
more frequent and heavier than during the winter months. 

302 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

literary authorities disagree as to the month in which the Makahiki com- 
menced, it is obviously impossible to prove from these sources that the 
Makahiki commenced on a stated day, rather than being regulated by the 
season. On the whole, the fact that the three available accounts are so 
lacking in agreement would seem to indicate that the time of commence- 
ment was variable. On the other hand, the monthly schedule of worship 
was definitely regulated, with certain days sacred to certain gods; and 
both the Malo and Fornander accounts agree in assigning the different 
ceremonies of the Makahiki to definite days in the month. The definite 
fixing of a date for the commencement of the rite was feasible in Hawaii, 
where the staple food was the irrigated taro, while it would have been 
impossible in Tahiti where the staple was breadfruit, the abundance of 
which was wholly dependent upon the rainy season. In connection with 
these considerations there comes to light some very interesting evidence 
that suggests that the first fruits festival out of which the elaborate 
Makahiki must have grown was brought to Hawaii from the Society 
Islands. The offering of first fruits in Tahiti was definitely correlated 
with the early period of the rainy season when breadfruit first matured, 
being in December or January. Now the time of collection of tribute 
in the Makahiki, November and December according to Malo’s account, 
corresponds approximately to the time of the first fruits offering in 
Tahiti. In other words, the time of presentation of first fruits in Hawaii 
may be said to have been correlated with the Tahitian season and the use 
of breadfruit as a staple while it had no particular connection with the 
harvesting of taro which, being irrigated, was not controlled by the 
season. This justifies the hypothesis that the seasonal rites, like many 
other cultural elements known to have been so transferred, were brought 
from the Society Islands to Hawaii during the period of active intercourse 
between these groups.®° 

In the Hawaiian Makahiki festival, during which there were both first 
fruits and harvest offerings, the presentation of gifts to the gods had | 
developed under the monarchic system into a formal annual collection of 
tribute in the name of Lono, by chiefs from the people, and by the king 
from the chiefs. About the middle of November, according to Malo, there 
was a small tax levy that was displayed before the gods by the king 
before being divided among the keepers of the gods, the priests, and the 
king’s household and warriors. This small preliminary collection prob- 

“It is certainly significant as regards Polynesian history as a whole that the appearance of 
the Pleiades, which was the sign for the commencement of the new year in the Cook Islands 
(64, p. 99) and New Zealand (145, p. 226), and probably in Hawaii (99, p. 60), as well as the 

Society Islands, was so definitely correlated with the actual commencement of the season of 
abundance in the Society Islands. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 303 

ably corresponds to the offering of first fruits in Tahiti. Toward the end 
of November came the great annual collection of tribute. An altar was 
built at the border of each district of the land, and here the taxes due the 
king were amassed. An effigy of Lono, borne by sacred carriers and 
accompanied by its priest and the king’s tax collectors, made its way 
around the island. As it entered each district, the royal and sacred 
company stopped at the altar which stood by the road at this point. 
Here the offering or tribute was formally presented to “Father Lono”— 
pigs, taro, feathers, cloth. The offering having been accepted, the land 
was released from tapu by means of a prayer beginning 

Your bodies, O Lono, are in the heavens, 

A long cloud, a short cloud, 

A watchful cloud, 

An overlooking cloud in the heavens. 

and ending 

Stand up! Gird yourselves for play. 

The last line of the prayer calls on the people to commence the cele- 
bration of the sports said to have been founded by Lono. There was a 
subsidiary rite that was performed at each district, which consisted in 
the entertainment of Lono at the house of the chief of the district. The | 
chief himself proffered the food to the effigy of the god and, as an act of 
homage, actually fed with his own hands the bearer of the effigy. Fol- : 
lowing this act of hospitality on the part of their lord, the female chiefs 
then girt Lono with a new loin cloth. When, after completing the circuit 
of the island, Lono arrived at the king’s residence, he was received with 
all the formalities accorded to a royal guest, as he had been in the dis- 
tricts. He was then entertained by boxing matches, in which both men 
and women participated (54, Vol. VI, p. 42). 

An interesting feature of the Hawaiian harvest rite was the custom of 
divining the prospect of future bounty. This was done by means of a 
great net that was filled with food and then shaken to make the contents 
fall through the meshes. The prospect of abundance or scarcity in the 
coming season was indicated by the quantity of food which fell upon the 
ground. The rite was called the “net of Maoloha.” According to tradi- 
tion, this net made its first appearance in ancient times during a great 
famine, when it was let down from heaven and shaken, so that the food 
that was in it was scattered over the earth. This is the prayer that was 
said when the net was shaken: 

304 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Kahuna Life to the land! 

Oh deep-blue sea, oh god Uli! Life from Kane, 

Oh blue of the wild, tossing sea! Kane the god of life. 

Net of heaven, oh Uli! Life from Kanaloa! 

Green are the leaves of God’s harvest The wonder-working God. 

fields. Life to the people! 
The net fills the heavens—shake it. Hail Kane of the water of life! Hail! 
Life to the king of the Makahiki! 

People Amama. It is free. 

Shake down the god’s food! 
Scatter it oh heaven! 

A season of plenty this. 
Earth yield thy plenty! People 

This is a season of food. Free through Kane. 

Kahuna 
Free through whom? 

The priests then stood up, holding aloft their hands, and the people, 
raising their left hands, cried; “It is free! It 1s ftee! Afus treeh 94s 
they uttered each exclamation they clapped their right hands upon their 
left armpits. When the priest came to the words, “Shake it,” the net was 
raised and shaken, allowing the food to fall through (99, pp. 205-6). 

The following is an interesting variant of Malo’s story of the food 
net: Once a kind man named Makalii (Pleiades) collected and stored 
all the food on earth in storehouses and forts up in the heavens. The 
result was that famine came upon all the earth, for Makalii had all the 
fruits gathered up in nets that were out of reach of men. But finally rats 
climbed up upon cloud and rainbow, and nibbled at the nets until the 
food fell through. Thus was the earth restocked. In memory of this 
“some stars have been called Makalii, and the Pleiades have been called 
na huihui (the assembling, in memory of Makalii’s nets of food. mM 
(54; Vol. Vinip: 272:) 

Little is known of the actual offering of first fruits in Samoa beyond 
the fact that there were festivals at different times in various districts of 
the islands in honor of local deities to whom particular kinds of foods 
were offered. According to Turner (152, p. 203) there were prayers for 
rain in October, November was a month of feasting, and December was 
characterized as “the finish of feasting.” 

The Tongans celebrated a fairly elaborate annual rite which com- 
menced in October and resembled the Makahiki in Hawaii, in the collec- 
tion of tribute which was paid by lower to higher through all grades of 
the civil polity. The Tongan formal presentation of first fruits was 
made to the Tui-Tonga, the divine chief of Tongatabu, and the religious 
rites were followed, as in Hawaii and the Society Islands, by a period of 
festivity in which feasting and the enjoyment of sports were the most 
prominent features (102, pp. 157-8). 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 305 

A review of the discussion of the seasonal customs associated with 
harvesting shows that in all the larger groups of central Polynesia and 
in Hawaii the period from October to January witnessed the celebration 
of religious rites associated with fertility in nature and the enjoyment of | 
the bounty of the earth, and of general recreation. There is certainly a 
correlation significant of more than the coincidence of seasons in these 
Spring and Summer festivities. There was in Hawaii the Makahiki, in 
Tonga a festival that resembled the Makahiki in many details, in the 
Society Islands the celebrations in honor of the season of abundance, in 
Samoa prayers for rain followed by much feasting which meant general 
festivity, in the Cook Islands rejoicing following the appearance of the 
Pleiades and the commencement of the new year (64, p. 99), and in the 
Marquesas various types of feasts, including harvest and memorial rites. 
(See 77, p. 212.) If the records of these seasonal ceremonials in all the 
groups were detailed, or even reasonably adequate, instead of being 
fragmentary and superficial, it is certain that close relationship between the 
activities in the various groups at this time would be demonstrable. 

The seasonal festivities were everywhere times of recreation for all the 
people. Men rejoiced in the good things of earth and in the spirit of the times. 
Furthermore, it was a time of freedom from tapu, both on account of the 
release from the seasonal food restrictions after the offering of first fruits, 
and by reason of the fact that during this season, which was consecrated 
to the food giving gods, war was tapu and labor was forgotten. There 
were probably two reasons for the cessation of belligerent activities during 
this period: the belief in the necessity for uninterrupted performance of 
these highly important consecrational rites, on which the food supply was 
believed to depend; and the belief that the bloodshed that was the inevitable 
accompaniment of war defiled the land and made it infertile. There was 
also the purely practical consideration that the fighters were employed during 
the fishing, cultivating, and harvesting seasons in activities more essential to 
the life of the community than fighting. In Hawaii the whole of the period 
of the Makahiki was a time devoted to worship and to recreation, during 
which the regular work of the land and the making of war were suspended, 
and the people, after paying their taxes, gave themselves over to enjoying 
the sports instituted by Lono, the harvest god. Heaven and earth at this 
time were Lono’s (54, Vol. VI, pp. 40-1). 

[For] the deity had decreed his law that killing was tapu; war was tapu, there 
must be no fighting; the ocean was tapu, no canoe was to sail; the kapa block was 
tapu and no cloth was to be beaten; tapu was the drum, not to be beaten; tapu 

was the trumpet, not to be blown; tapu was the land, not to be loosed (hemo). 
The heaven was sacted to Lono, the thunder was wiered to Lono, the earth. 

306 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

life. 05). 5) the hills.” 2. the’ mountains... “7 9) the’ tocean. 4/0) "the raging 

surf. . . , the family. . . , the sailing canoe, all were sacred to Lono. 
\ 

As Lono made his circuit of the island in Hawaii, the symbols of the 
patrons of the various national sports accompanied him; and in his train, 
as he left district after district after being entertained by the chief and 
receiving the tribute, the population of the land abandoned themselves to the 
enjoyment of sports and other holiday amusements (99, p. 189; 54, Vol. VI. 
p. 202). In Tahiti following the formal offering of first fruits in the temple, 
there followed feasting and merrymaking which lasted some days. The 
ariot were much in evidence at this time singing chants composed on mythical 
subjects and performing the dances that interpreted them. There were 
sports of all kinds—racing, sham-fights, boxing—and feasting as long as the 
provisions lasted (105, Vol. I, pp. 520-21). One of the early voyagers in 
the Pacific, arriving in Tahiti at a time when such a festival was being cele- 
brated (in April), wrote (150, p. 285), “It was now a Bartholomew-fair- 
time at Otaheite; nothing but singing and drumming from morning till 
night.” 

Another of the explorers characterizes the festivals celebrated during the 
season of abundance in the Marquesas, when tribes came together to enjoy 
the breadfruit harvest and war was tapu, as “the Olympic games of these 
savages” (93, Vol. I, p. 169). The feasting and enjoyment of sports that 
followed the presentation of first fruits in Tonga has already been men- 
tioned. As has been said, annual festivals in honor of district. gods were 
held in Samoa. One of these, in honor of the god Fee (Octopus), in the 
district of Upolu called Aana was attended by people from all parts of the 
group. Vast quantities of food were provided by the district for the enter- 
tainment of the thousands of visitors who had come together to see the 
“various club and sham fights, boxing and wrestling matches, dances, and 
obscenities which followed each other in rapid succession during the five 
days the feast lasted.” Following this festival in Aana was a similar one in 
the district of Atua; and others of the same nature were held in other parts » 
of the group, in honor of the local tutelar gods (135, pp. 54-5). 

While superficially the main object in the festivities seems to have been 
enjoyment, there was certainly an underlying religious meaning. In the first 
place, just as the offerings at this and other times were intended to attract 
the gods to places where their presence was desired, so on these occasions 
of food gathering the feasting, sports and dances were undoubtedly thought, 
and intended, to attract the gods, in whose honor the rites were celebrated, 
to the localities where their influence (mana) was needed. The very bounty 
of the feasts at these times was probably also believed both to strengthen 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 307 

and to exhilarate the gods present as it did men, and to affect directly the 
fecundity of the earth. The sports that were enjoyed would, furthermore, 
stimulate the gods as they did men; and possibly some of them were 
believed to have a direct effect through psychic rapport. Sham fighting, for 
example, which was practiced at this time in both Samoa and Tahiti, served 
to drive away evil spirits when their influence was believed to be lingering 
about a place following a death. Some other sports that were engaged in at 
these times, for instance archery in Tahiti and stilt-walking in the Mar- 
quesas, were sacred activities, and hence may properly be spoken of as 
religious elements in the festivals. In these and other sports it was prob- 
ably thought that constantaneous response in nature was affected directly by 
the activity, movements, and expenditure of human energy. 

In the dancing and singing, which were everywhere prominent features 
in these festivals, is very clearly to be seen a religious motive. The purpose 
of these was certainly, in part, the attraction of the gods and the stimulation | 
of their procreative powers after the same manner as those of the human 
participants and witnesses who were roused by witnessing erotic postures 
and hearing hymns of generative creation and erotic lyrics sung. But their 
purpose was largely also the stimulation through psychic rapport of the 
generative processes in Nature as a whole. In the Marquesan festivals held 
in honor of the spirits of the departed, who were believed to be fertilizing 
agents, and celebrated in the season of abundance, there were pantomimic 
performances in which nude dancers imitated the birth process; and these 
festivals culminated in lupercalian orgies in which the sexual instincts of all 
those taking part, strengthened by a long period of enforced continence pre- 
ceding these rites, were released and given unrestrained and promiscuous 
freedom. At these rites were chanted also the songs called uta, a type of 
sacred chant in honor of the dead. The words of all uta were erotic 
(77, pp. 331-2). There can be no question but that these practices were 
believed to attract and stimulate the gods. (See Dancing.) In some of the 
Marquesan chants that were intoned as part of the great festivals celebrated 
during the season of fertility (78), Atea, the personification of the illumined 
sky as generator of life, is called upon to impregnate his wife. The erotic 
dances performed upon the same occasions were certainly calculated to rouse, 
and perhaps even to empower, the sky god. 

In the Marquesan festivals the kaioi, who were made up of the young, 
unmarried youths and maids of the tribe, were the dancers and singers. 
The distinguishing feature of the kaioi was the use of sweet scented oil on 
their bodies (typical also of Samoan dancers) and the staining of their 
skin and their clothing with yellow dye made from the root of the wild 

308 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

ginger. This use of yellow dye was typical of the dancing societies in Tahiti 
and Hawaii, and has been described also from other parts of the Pacific. 

The Arioi Society in Tahiti (48, Vol. I, p. 230; 105, Vol. I, p. 485; 
29, p. 34) represent an elaboration of the kaioi institution of the simpler 
Marquesan culture. In Tahiti the Arioi were much more than a mere unor- 
ganized body of young people who sang and danced at feasts. It was 
an organized order which, while retaining its original function and purpose, 
had developed or acquired many new characteristics. Yellow was the color 
of the arioi as it was of the kaioi; but red was made use of also, for this 
was sacred to Oro, who was their patron, the red girdle, also sacred to this 
god, was the symbol of the order. The Arioi Society had a system of lodges 
in the various districts and islands of the Society Islands, with different 
degrees or ranks within the lodges. There were elaborate initiation rites, 
the payment of fees upon admission and advancement in rank. Each degree 
was distinguished by a particular tattoo design. Those who presented them- 
selves as candidates were supposed to be inspired by Oro: they announced 
their candidacy by leaping into a circle of arioit, when they were assembled, 
and performing a dance. The life of the members of the lodges consisted 
in travelling from place to place, dancing, singing, and feasting upon the 
bounty of the land, for the groups of arioi were everywhere lavishly enter- 
tained and honored. They were, furthermore, regarded as very sacred; for 
there was a special form of religious service performed at the district temple 
for deceased arioi; and it was believed that their souls went to dwell in ever- 
lasting bliss in a paradise reserved for them, situated above the sacred 
Mount Mehani on Raiaatea. The sacredness of the arioi is one of the in- 
dications of the religious significance of the order; a second indication lies 
in the rule, which was enforced without exception, that they should kill all 
their offspring; a third is found in their activities at the times of religious 
feasts; and finally, the myth that explained their origin clearly shows this 
institution to have been fundamentally religious, and confutes the popular 
conception that its only object was unrestrained indulgence of the sexual 
appetite and enjoyment of the hospitality of chiefs and people. 

According to myth, the original founders of the Arioi were two sons of 
an earth maiden whom Oro, descending from the heavens on the island of 
Borabora, married. The order founded by the sons of Oro, sang and per- 
formed erotic dances at festivals. Probably the regulation requiring that 
they kill all their offspring was established to make them free, as agents or 
devotees of Oro as procreator, to forward fertility in nature directly and by 
stimulating gods and men. 

The religious nature of the performances of the Arioi was remarked 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 309 

many years ago by Moerenhout, who wrote in 1835 (105, Vol. II, pp. 
131-2), 

I believe that they [the voluptuous and erotic scenes] were part of the spirit 
of the institution of the areois, for example in mythological and other more serious 
representations, and exhibited through living pictures in place of inanimate figures, 
the two principles of generation in nature. If this be the case, it implies ideas 

similar to those the ancient Egyptians attached to the phallus, and the inhabitants 
of India to the lingam. 

This writer goes on to say of their performances (p. 134), 

their exercises commence always with religious subjects. The description of 
the two principles, Taaroa and matter with which he joined himself, the creation 
of the universe, gods, the elements, spirits, plants and the other productions of the 
earth. 

In the Tahitian festivals the singing and dancing, led by the ariot, ac- 
companied by the compelling throb of drums, worked up gradually to a 
higher and higher pitch until the rite was consummated in a general orgy 
of sexual abandon in which doubtless it seemed to the swimming senses of 
the human participants that all Nature, aflame with passion, joined. 

The dance organization in Hawaii known as the Hula (see 51, pp. 7-128), 
though generically related to it, was a simpler institution than the Tahitian 
Arioi. It lacked some of the characteristics which mark the Tahitian order 
as a religious institution to forward fertility, but there is much to justify 
the conclusion that in their origin and primary function in the community 
the two institutions were related. Laka, who was the patroness of the hula, 
was the wife of Lono, and hence probably the counterpart of the earth 
maiden whom Oro married. In the rites of the hula she was represented 
by a block of wood covered with a piece of perfumed cloth dyed yellow. 
The altar, which was at one end of the tapu house in which the hula troupes 
practiced their songs and dances, was further decorated with greenery from 
the mountains, for Laka was the goddess of wild nature. Laka’s body, it is 
said, was the fragrant foliage of the mountains, the wild ginger, the fern, 
the maile, the ilima, ti (54, Vol. VI, p. 208). The hula troupes in their 
religious function served in the great festivals in the same way as did the 
Arioi in the southern islands, singing chants composed on mythical, historical, 
and eulogistic subjects during the seasonal rites and upon the occasion of 
the birth or marriage of a king or chief. Emerson writes in the foreword 
to his excellent study of the hula (51, pp. I1-12) that it was “a religious 
service, in which »oetry, music, pantomime, and the dance lent themselves 

to the refreshment of men’s minds.” It is my belief that there 
was an even more deeply religious motive than this writer perceived, that 
the hula was a form of ritual designed to produce effects in nature through 

310 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

suggestion and rapport. The following altar song, which practically amounts 
to a prayer to the wife of the fertility god, seems to indicate a purpose more 
serious than the “refreshment of men’s minds” (51, p. 34). 

O goddess Laka! O Laka, giver of gifts! 
O wildwood bouquet, O Laka! O Laka, giver of bounty! 
O Laka, queen of the voice! O Laka, giver of all things! 

From what is known concerning the believed psychic effect produced by 
sacred chanting and dancing, it is obvious that the ancient Hula deserves 
to be considered a religious institution and an integral part of the worship. 

Nothing is known concerning dancing organizations in other parts of 
Polynesia. In Samoa the part played by dancers at festivals appears to have 
been similar to that of the Arioi in the Society Islands; and furthermore, it 
is known that parties of people used to wander from village to village and 
that at every stopping place there were feasting, sports, and dancing, which 
the missionaries characterize as “obscene.” It has already been mentioned 
that erotic dancing was a prominent feature in the annual festivals in 
honor of the district gods in Samoa. 

From Tonga, is a most interesting bit of evidence suggestive of the 
Hawaiian and Tahitian myths relating to the god of fertility and the danc- 
ing societies. In a ceremony for rain and good crops performed after the 
first fruits had been offered, a little child played the leading role, personi- 
fying the wife of the god Aloalo (Lono?), the sender of rain. This very 
youthful, vestal virgin, the daughter of a female chief usually, dwelt in a 
house consecrated to Aloalo during the eighty days that the rite lasted and 
was brought to watch the offering of foods and sham fights (free-for-all 
boxing), which were the main features of the rite. The day before the 
first ceremony for rain was performed, there was held at the sacred house a 
formal kava drinking at which the child presided, occupying the seat at the 
middle of the semicircle (102, pp. 385-7). It seems probable that in 
this small wife of the weather god in Tonga is manifest the local variant of 
Laka, the wife of the rain god in Hawaii, and of the earth maiden whom 
Oro married in the Society Islands. 

It is apparent that the motives that led to the industrial, social, and cere- 
monial activities of these seasonal fertility festivals were many. But three 
dominant religious motives are clearly discernible: the effort to stimulate 
nature directly through psychic rapport, the desire to render thanks to the 
patrons of fishing and agriculture, and finally the honoring of the spirits of 
relatives or ancestors in the other world. The first two motives have been 
sufficiently illustrated in this section. The third—the relationship of the 
seasonal fertility cult to the veneration of ancestral spirits—is a very import- 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 311 

ant topic deserving further consideration. The festivals, in which the offer- 
ing of first fruits is a prominent feature, may have been in origin memorial 
festivals in honor of the spirits of the dead. The lavish memorial festivals 
in the Marquesas, Cook, and Easter islands were necessarily celebrated dur- 
ing the season of abundance; thus they corresponded in time of celebration 
to the first fruits and harvest rites in Hawaii and Tahiti. In Huahine, 
Society Islands, there existed a clear combination of the memorial element 
with the first fruits rite. 

Henry writes (82) that in the first fruits rite in December or January 

Roma-tane, god of Paradise (was invoked) to come with the spirits of (the 
people’s) deceased friends to share their pleasures. Some families, especially in 
Huahine, spread out upon lines in their houses tapa which they placed at the disposal 
of these spiritual guests. 

This is definite proof, then, of the association in the native mind of the 
fertility rites with the thought of the return and presence of the spirits of 
the dead. 

312 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS 

The analysis of the Polynesian mythology and worship, and the study of 
variations in, and distribution of, the elements that enter into these, clearly 
reveal the composite nature of the religions of the various island groups of 
Polynesia at the time of their discovery. 

There are first those elements that belong to what may be termed the 
ancient foundational system. These are distinguished by their fundamental 
nature in relationship to the culture as a whole, universal occurrence through- 
out Polynesia, uniformity, and existence in more pronounced or clear-cut 
form in the large island groups on the periphery of Polynesia; namely, 
Hawaii, the Marquesas, and New Zealarid. These elements I term Indo- 
Polynesian because comparative study has led me to conclude that their 
sources are to be found in the regions long dominated by Indic religious 
influence. 

Second in importance is a group of elements that are predominant in 
the region in which Tangaloa was regarded as Supreme Being and divine 
ancestor. The region that was the center of recent cultural evolution and 
diffusion—Samoa, Tonga and the Society Islands—represented a cultural 
intrusion of more recent date. These elements had also a more or less con- 
tinuous distribution throughout the area; but, in contrast to the Indo- 
Polynesian, they were highly variable, as would be -expected of intrusive 
traits assimilated into a firmly established ancient system; and they are least 
pronounced in the islands on the periphery. 

There were other, probably later, intrusions and borrowings of secondary 
importance, from the neighboring cultural areas, Melanesia, and America. 
These are distinguished by limited distribution or sporadic occurrence. 

THE INDO-POLYNESIAN CULT 
DEFINITION 

The Indo-Polynesians were inveterate ritualists. They were speculative, 
philosophic, and highly imaginative, and they evidently brought with them 
into Polynesia a rich heritage of sacred lore of a very high order. ‘Typical 
of these older Polynesians also was a sense of intimate, friendly rapport 
with nature and with the psychic power and myriad psychic beings great 
and small felt to be lurking within and behind its physical manifestations. 

The Indo-Polynesian theory of creation postulated a pre-existent Cause 
or World Soul who brought the universe into existence out of the Void and 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 313 

Darkness. Growth of the universe by a process of mutational evolution, a 
succession of eras, sex throughout nature and the propagation of natural 
objects which led to the habit of thinking of and describing creation in terms 
of genealogical sequence, were fundamental principles in the old mythological 
system. The symbol of the cosmogonic tree belonged also to this people. 
The late stage of creation, that which immediately preceded the appearance 
of man, embodied the theme of the Sky Father and the Earth Mother, from 
whom the gods were born. By the primal gods the heavens were elevated 

and propped up. Finally, the Indo-Polynesians conceived man to have - 

originated in the impregnation of a female figure formed of earth by one of 
the gods. 

The concept of mana as the manifestation of dynamic, psychic energy, 
derived ultimately from the Supreme Being and permeating all other beings 
and nature, is Indo-Polynesian. This concept was really part and parcel with 
a systematic theory of dualism in nature which attributed divinity, power, 
the male principle, light, and life to the superior, heavenly realm; and com- 
monness, impotence, the female principle, darkness, and death to lower 
nature, or the earth. The tapu system, which, with the mana concept, is the 
most widely known feature of the religion of historic Polynesia, is grounded 
upon this dualistic system of thought. 

The ancients seem to have had a fairly complicated theory as to the non- 
physical constitution and attributes of man—believing in the wairua, or sep- 
arable “soul,” the mauri or “vital principle,” the ora or “life,” the manawa 
or “breath of life”; and attributing to men in varying degrees mana or 
“psychic power,” and wananga or “celestial knowledge.” Continuance for all 
souls after death of the physical body, and immortality for those endowed 
with mana were believed in. 

At death, souls assumed a temporary ghostly form and set out upon their 

journey westward to the spirit land.. The migrating souls paused at some 
point, at which there was a last resting place on earth—a tree or rocks, a 
cliff or mountain—and thence plunged downward into the sea to continue 
their course, which was fraught with various difficulties, westward and 
downward. Once in the underworld of shades (Po), souls were subject to 
the lord of that realm, who seems to have been generally called by the 
ancients, Miru. The fortunate souls—those with mana—were elevated, 
commonly with the aid of ritual, to the upper realm of light (Ao). One 
of the most interesting beliefs characteristic of the older cult is that which 
postulates the existence of superposed over- and under- worlds, in which 
various classes of beings were believed to dwell. 

The names of the chief gods (atwa) of the ancient pantheon are easily 

VV aA, 

314 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

distinguishable. That of the transcendent Supreme Being, who was superior 
to all gods, yet still subject to approach by the initiated priests, was Ilo or 
Iho (Core). The Sky was personified as'Rangi, and the Earth as Papa, 
respectively the male and female progenitors of both gods and men. Atea 
(Widespread-white) personified the illumined space between the heavens and 
the earth. Tane (Male) was the embodiment of the light and procreative 
mana in the heavens. He was the agent both of the light that vivified nature 
and of the light of celestial knowledge, which he brought down from the 
Supreme Being in the highest heaven; and with him was associated the 
“water of life,’ symbolizing both sunlight and fresh-water as life giving 
agents in nature. And finally, Tane, as lord of forests, was the patron of 
woodworkers. Tiki was the personification of Tane’s procreative power. 
Rongo (Sound), perhaps anciently the “Resounder” in the sense of 
“Thunderer,” was the rain god and patron of agriculture, of peace and the 
healing arts, and of the festive singing, dancing, and sports which were as- 
sociated with his cult of fertility. This deity, as the recipient of the annual 
first fruits offerings, came to be the central figure of what may be termed 
the seasonal fertility cult. Tu (Stand) signifies stability in creation; and 
in the cult he was the patron of war, the supporter of chiefs and warriors. 
Miru was chief of the underworld; and Whiro, whose name was given to the 
first dark night of the new moon in each month, was the lord of darkness, 
of the black arts, of sickness and death. Whiro was the antithesis of Tane 
and his bitter enemy, according to Maori mythology. Mahuike, sometimes 
described as a god, sometimes as a goddess, was deity of fire and vulcan- 
ism. To Mahuike was closely related Pere, who caused convulsions in 
nature. Maui, the culture hero, who procured fire for mankind, drew up 
islands from the depths of the ocean, noosed the sun, and performed many 
useful and wondrous exploits, belonged likewise of the family of Mahuike. 
The only goddess associated with the heavens was Hina (Gray), the Moon. 
Besides these, were many other deities of minor importance, and legendary 
characters supposed to have lived in the dim beginnings of human history: 
of these Rata, the canoe builder and voyager, Tinirau the fish man, Rupe 
the pigeon, and Ruanuku, whose name is associated with the flood, are 
among the most prominent.*! 

31 Apparently in ancient times clans or tribes worshipped one or another of the mythological 
gods as patrons, doubtless regarding them as ancestors, calling themselves “Clan of (Ngati) so- 
and-so.” Thus in early times in Tahiti groups of people in different parts of the islands had 
various gods as their patrons, and called themselves Ati Tane (Clan of Tane), Ati Raa, Ati Oro, 
Ati Hau, Ati Tu (82). The distinction of sects devoted to single mythological gods persisted in 
the Society, Hawaiian, Cook, and Tuamotuan “islands until historic times; and there is evidence 
of the former existence of this condition in the Marquesas. It is possible that the division — 
under different gods was originally occupational. This would explain the fact that those taking 
part in war rites in the Marquesas, of whatever local tribe they might be, continued to refer 
to themselves as the Ati Tu. If the original division were occupational, then in the ancient 
Polynesian social order the Ngati Tu were the warriors, the Ngati Tane, the woodworkers, and 
the Ngati Rongo the agriculturalists. In late historic times in the Marquesas, Cook Islands, and 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 315 

The worship of ancestors and the various practices that grew out of it “i 

was Indo-Polynesian. This cult manifested itself in the social and liturgical 
use of genealogies, in the veneration of the physical remains of those who 
had passed on, in elaborate funerary rites and memorial festivals intended 
both to assist the souls of the dead and through them to bring blessings on 
the living. The disposal of the remains of the dead appears to have followed 
the scheme of preliminary treatment of the corpse in one way or another— 
exposure, attempted mummification, burial—until the perishable elements had 
disappeared, and then hiding away the skeletal remains in places protected 
by tapu, in caves, or in trees. 

The Indo-Polynesians made use in their ancestral cult of crude and 
conventionally carved representations of ancestors, which they set up in 
sacred places as shrines into which the psychic beings should enter tempor- 
arily when worshipped. There is much that suggests that the use of carved 
representations may have been a recent innovation. 

Phallic symbolism was characteristic of the Indo-Polynesian system of 
thought. It is seen in mythology in the character of Tiki, in ritual in the 
function of the loins and loin cloth, and in art, in naturalistic and conven- 
tional representations having phallic origin, form, and meaning. 

With the ancient settlers, the scion of every family, its first born was © 
very sacred for he was the representative of the sacred line of ancestors; 
and the first-born of the tribe, its aviki or sacred chief was extremely sacred. 
The spiritual and temporal chiefs called by this term probably had ritualistic 
functions in the ancient days comparable to those retained by the ariki in 
New Zealand. Certain females of rank, the ruahine, had to do with the 
ceremonial removal of tapu. In this early cult, it seems, was no distinct 
priestly class, except the ariki; the sacred chiefs were the repositories of 
sacred lore and the religious leaders. The ariki, or a member of his family, 
was the ceremonialist who served the tribe, as the father was the priest of 
the family, but he was more than ceremonialist, he was the medium or 
instrument of rapport with the gods and mana. The priestly tohunga seems 
to have been the product of the fusion of Indo-Polynesian ritualism and 
Tangaloa ceremonialism. 

The sacred places (vahi tapuw) of the Indo-Polynesians are inferred to 
have been very simple, marked by an ahu, or heap of earth and stone, 
around or before which was a tapu area. A shrine, or structure of some 
kind to house the representations of gods, and in post-Tangaloa times, the 

New Zealand, local tribal patrons, deified spirits of more recent origin, had to a large extent 
superceded the ancient mythological characters in the worship. In Samoa and ‘Tonga the old 
Polynesian gods were entirely submerged by the system of totem-like patrons of the Tangaloa 
people. 

316 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

_ prophets, was probably a part of every Indo-Polynesian temple. This and 

the place of offering and prayer were probably at the eastern end, for ori- 
entation of sacred sites was common; the east, where the sun is in as- 
cendance, was associated with the superior realm of light and divine power ; 
and this place in the sacred area was referred to as the mua, signifying the 
“forward part.’ Another Indo-Polynesian term for a place of offerings 
was tuahu. In the sacred areas were either frames (fata) or stagings 
(fataa), or trees, where offerings were put; and a pit or some other place 
intended to receive refuse associated with sacred persons or worship of the 
gods. Typical also of this religion which made such frequent use ceremoni- 
ally of water was the “Sacred Water” (Vai Tapu), a stream, pool, or 
basin used in connection with purificatory rites. 

Since the presentation of offerings to the gods held a prominent place 
in all the peripheral islands, I conclude that this was a practice typical of 
the Indo-Polynesians. In the earliest times the offerings probably consisted 
wholly in fruits of land and sea; but in later times, as a result, I believe, 
of extraneous influence, human victims came to be substituted on important 

, occasions for the simpler forms of offering. In the seasonal and industrial 

rites first fruits or the equivalent compensatory gifts were presented to the 
patrons of activities. Commensal feasting also had a place in all rites. 

As ritualists the Indo-Polynesians used extensively prayer-spells, both in 
organized ceremonials and in private life, in fact every activity required, 
or at least was aided by, the recitation of prayer-spells. 

The destructive perversion of the ritualistic instincts of these people is 
seen in their highly developed systems of black magic and necromancy for 
personal revenge. 

The consecrational rites, personal, occupational, and communal, with 
purification, establishing condition of tapu on places, objects, and men, main- 
taining severe rules as to cooking, eating, and contact with women and the 
world, endowing with mana, and finally repaying the assisting gods for 
their help and releasing places, objects, and men from the imposed condi- 
tion of sacredness, were Indo-Polynesian. To this ethnic group also are 
to be attributed the elaborate war ritual, which in a way was a form both 
of occupational and communal ceremonial, combined with many elements of 
black magic. 

To the Indo-Polynesians, I attribute the seasonal fertility cult with its 
complex of associated traits, including allegorical myths, accounting for the 
death and rebirth of fertility in the seasons of dearth and plenty, ritual for 
the removal of tapu on land and sea by the offering of first fruits through 
the divine chief with accompanying feasting, celebration of recreational 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 317 

sports and games, singing, and dancing often of a highly erotic nature, all 
of which was designed to energize and stimulate nature as a whole, veget- 
able, animal, human, and celestial. 

RELATIONSHIP 

In searching for external relationships of a system of worship of con- 
siderable antiquity such as the ancient Indo-Polynesian it is best to compare 
fundamental aspects of the system as a whole rather than the specific isolated 
phenomena of belief and practice which may easily be originated, changed, 
borrowed, or lost in a new environment. 

There are many general correspondences and innumerable isolated paral- 
lels in Indic and Polynesian myth and worship that might be dwelt upon at 
length, resemblances in ritualistic usages, sacrificial practices, feasting, con- 
secration, purification, tapu, ancestor worship, psychic and eschatalogical 
beliefs, and so on, but most of these are of the type that are too widespread 
in the world to be significant except in a more thorough and detailed com- 
paritive study than is feasible at the present writing. 

The Indo-Polynesian cult was composite, combining ancient Indic, South- 
east-Asiatic, and historic Hindu traits. These were probably brought into 
Polynesia by successive groups of migrants, spread throughout the islands, 
and amalgamated to form the ancient Indo-Polynesian system before the 
Tangaloa people came upon the scene. This hypothesis seems best capable of 
explaining the uniform character and distribution of the old Polynesian com- 
posite cult made up, as it will be shown to be, of ancient Indic, Southeast 
Asiatic, and historic Hindu traits. 

VEDIC RESEMBLANCES 

It is fully realized that some of the features about to be presented as 
illustrative of Indo-Polynesian Vedic relationship are characteristic also of 
other classic religions, particularly of those derived from the same source as 
the Vedic. The assumption of Vedic relationship rests on the fact that 
there are more definite and more numerous parallels with the Vedic than 
with any of the other classic religions. Furthermore, the hypothesis of 
Indic derivation is in harmony with evidence of other cultural and racial 
studies, and with historic probabilities. 

In their inveterate ritualism, the old Polynesians closely resembled the 
Vedic worshippers and their Hindu descendants, as also in their philosophic 
and mythopoetic faculty and in their peculiarly intimate and generally 
friendly rapport with nature sensed as the manifestation of all pervasive 
psychic forces and entities. 

318 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

There are clear and definite parallels in the cosmogonic and creational 
ideas: in the primal void and darkness enveloping the undifferentiated ex- 
panse of waters in the preexistent Causé out of whom evolves, through 
metaphysical beginnings, manifest existence in successive eras of unfold- 
ment, in the procreational theme culminating in the parenthood of Sky and 
Earth, the separation of these and the propping up of the heavens. The 
symbol of the cosmogonic tree and the deluge are also common to both. 

Mana, with its peculiar social and religious complications and implica- 
tions, represents a distinctly Polynesian expression of religious thought. 
But as a concept it is very closely related to the original Vedic brahma as 
prayer, force, power; and also to the later pantheistic brahma of the 
Upanishads and later literature, as all pervasive energy. (See 88a.) More- 
over, the Polynesian mana concept is distinctly the outcome of a system 
built about a priestly aristocracy. Of such a system the Brahman caste in 
India stands as one exemplification, while the Polynesian mana endowed 
arikt stands as another. ‘The two are, I believe, products of divergent 
evolution out of a common parental social and religious system. 

Similarly, I believe the tapu system as a body of rules to prevent im- 
proper contact of the superior divine with the inferior common or corrupt, 
to be an example of divergent evolution from the same system out of 
which came also the Indian caste, with its untouchableness, eating rules, 
purifications.®? 

Directly related to the mana convention were the sanctity and priestly 
function of the divinely born ariki. In the Polynesian system the arikz, 
who were the direct descendants of the gods, constituted priestly aristocracy. 
As such they would correspond to the Brahman caste in India. Further- 
more the loin cloth with which the ariki was ceremonially girt finds its 
counterpart in the sacred cord or thread in India, which probably represents 
a survival of an ancient Aryan custom since it was characteristic of the 
Persians as well as the Hindus, though it may be Dravidian (see 43a). 
While the discussion of social classes in general is not relavent to a study of 
the religion, it may be pointed out in passing, in connection with the correla- 
tion of the Polynesian ariki with the Hindu priestly aristocracy, that there 
existed in Polynesia a social order with fourfold division that roughly cor- 

®2The word mana may be generically related to Sanscrit man, to think, and its derivatives 
manas, mind, power of mind, heart, manaya, to estimate highly, and manyva, to be honored, The 
association of mana and its derivative manava, breath or breath of life, recalls the close association 
in Indian philosophy of brahma and atma, breath. 

The word tapu is probably of late origin. The following is possibly its derivation: the 
blowing of his conch shell, pu, was the Polynesian chief’s method of announcing his arrival, 
inaugurating rites, etc.; and in the Polynesian language ta means to strike, or a mark or sign, 
and is used also as a causative prefix. In the old order, when the chief announced a ceremonial 
restriction by blowing his conch shell, it may have been described by the compound word ta-pu. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 319 

responded to the four original castes of ancient India: divine aristocrats, 
nobles, landowners, and serfs. 

\ 

Careful study of the major pantheon of the Polynesians has convinced bes 

N #.ALWW 

me that its characters as we know them are in the main products of local (04 e+ 

or independent evolution. There are several exceptions, however, the most 
striking of which is that of Tane. This deity is the most important of all 
the superior gods in the old mythology, and he personifies philosophic con- 
cepts whose antiquity can not be questioned. In Polynesia Tane raises the 
heavens and brings light, he brings celestial knowledge to man from the 
highest heaven, he embodies sunlight and the life giving power of the 
heavens, is intimately related to the waters of sky and earth and is the 
psychic purifier. In all these characteristics he parallels closely, not just 
in a general way but specifically in detail, Varuna, the greatest of the Hindu 
gods of Vedic and Brahmanic literature, who “struck earth apart [from the 
sky]... ” (88a, p. 65), who was god of light, dweller in the highest 
heaven, guardian of the holy order, husband of the waters of the earth 
and purifier from sin (QIa, pp. 21-4, 85, and 88a). 

SOUTHEAST ASIATIC AND INDONESIAN RESEMBLANCES 

Certain of the old Polynesian religious customs find their parallels more 
definitely in the cultures of peoples of more or less mixed Caucasoid_ blood 
in Southeast Asia and Indonesia. These cultures, however, generally lack 
the distinctively Indic traits characteristic of the old Polynesian. The most 
prominent religious customs belonging to this class are the preserving of Crs 
skulls of enemies as trophies and of relatives as objects of worship and the 
preliminary treatment of corpses—by exposure, rubbing with oil, wrapping, 
putting in a coffin—until the perishable elements had disappeared, followed 
by final disposal of the sacred relics in such a way as to protect them 
against malicious molestation. There are many non religious cultural 
resemblances indicating relationship of the old Polynesian with various of 
the Southeast Asiatic and Indonesian cultures of people who, like the 
Polynesians, were predominantly Caucasoid in blood. 

HISTORIC INDIC RESEMBILANCES 

One figure in the major pantheon finds his parallel in historic Hinduism. 
Rongo, as patron of the seasonal fertility cult and originator of sports, 
dancing, and music, celebrated as accompaniments of the fertility rites, 
resembles the Visknuite Krishna of historic Hinduism. Again, in the story 
of Vishnu’s other avatar, Rama, are seen some interesting suggestions of 
correspondence: in the Hawaiian Lono myth (p. 112); and particularly in 
the birth from Rama’s wife of “Kusa and Lava, in whose names can be 

320 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

seen a popular etymology of the word kusilava, the name of the wandering 
minstrels who sang the epic songs to princely courts and even to the 
people” in India (91a, p. 128) is seen similarity to the birth from Oro’s wife 
in the Society Islands of Orotetefa and Urutetefa who became the an- 
cestors and patrons of the Arioi Society of sacred minstrels (p. 308). 
Here the subjects of comparison are perhaps of too general a nature and 
universal a type to be given much weight. Probably the historic seasonal 
cults in both India and Polynesia represent two products of divergent evolu- 
tion from a widespread South Asiatic fertility cult which had many ram- 
‘ mifications, as did that of Asia Minor and the Mediterranean. 

The same observation probably holds true of the elements in the Poly- 
nesian worship that find parallels in the other great historic development of 
Hinduism, the Sivaite cult. The phallism exhibited in the Tiki theme in 
mythology and in the tiki carvings of ancestors I believe to represent a far 
extension of the same south Asiatic phallic cult that found expression in 
Dravidian India in the worship of the linga. Natural accompaniments of 
such a cult wherever it occurs are accentuation of the erotic phase and 
debauchery such as were typical of the fertility, marriage, and memorial rites 
in Polynesia. 

Distinctly Indian, on the other hand, were the variety and elaboration 
of theory relating to numbers of celestial and infra-terrestrial worlds. The 
germ of these ideas lies in the Vedic teachings but their elaboration came 
with the historic development of Hinduism and Hinduized Buddhism. It is 
to these, therefore, that the Polynesian accounts would seem to be related. 

Three outstanding features of the old places of worship in Polynesia are 
distinctly Indian: the sacred Banyan, the vai tapu or sacred bath, and the 
form of the shrine which housed the gods or their prophets. The sanctity 
of the banyan in India, while made notable through association with 
Buddha, is not necessarily attributable to his religion for it is far more 
ancient in India than is Buddhism. The vai tapu, or sacred bath, in Poly- 
nesia served the same purpose as the tank attached to the Dravidian temple, 
the ultimate origin of which is unknown to me. As to the probable rela- 
tionship of the Polynesian shrine to the Dravidian, I have recently discussed 
this elsewhere (77a), pointing out possible relationship between the Ha- 
waiian “oracle tower” and the related Polynesian forms to the Dravidian 
influence in Southeast Asia. One more point in this connection may be 
mentioned in passing. The crowding of conventionalized figures as a mode 
of exterior decoration in Dravidian architecture may perhaps furnish a clue 
to the wood carving conventions in Central Polynesia. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 22% 

THE TANGALOA CULT 

DEFINITION 

The genius of the Tangaloa people was social and political, rather than 
religious and philosophic. ‘They were social ceremonialists ; but not ritualists, 
as were their predecessors in the area. So far as both the outer and the 
inner aspects of their worship go, they show themselves to have been 
inferior to the Indo-Polynesians in religious instincts and genius. Their 
religious philosophy and myth-making faculty were markedly inferior, and 
their cult is surprisingly primitive religiously for a people socially so 
advanced. 

Their cosmogonic ideas center about Tangaloa as creator of the world. 
Tangaloa as a concrete individual represents a simple anthropomorphic 
conception. In Tahitian mythology he is even described as kicking a hole 
in the sky, and standing upon Raiatea. Many of the more imaginative 
elements belonging to the older mythology were retained in the composite 
creation myths from the Society Islands and Samoa which attribute crea- 
tion to Tangaloa, but the Tangaloa story itself, when shorn of these sur- 
vivals, is devoid of the metaphysical and imaginative quality that makes the 
Indo-Polynesian lore so interesting and attractive. The lack of the 
philosophic tendency is again exhibited in the contrast of theories with 
regard to the constitution of man and psychic beliefs, for apparently these 
people were content with a simple conception of a separable soul, and did 
not trouble themselves with conjectures concerning the other immaterial 
attributes of man, or the nature of the hierarchies of psychic beings de- 
fined by the Indo-Polynesians. As to the destiny of souls, they believed 
that they went to a western island paradise called Pulotu which was ruled 
by Hikuleo, a monster with a long tail like that of an eel. Ideas of tempor- 
ary metempsychosis and occasional reincarnation seem to have been common 
among these people, whose religion had a strong leaning towards totemism. 

Instead of worshipping directly mythological and ancestral deities, the 
Tangaloa-Polynesians venerated local, family, and personal patrons—doubt- 
less ancestral—who were visible to them in various species of animate, and 
sometimes inanimate, objects. They were not given to carving representa- 
tions of their gods. The Tangaloa worshippers may be described as near- 
totemists, for they exhibited undeniable “symptoms” of totemism, in the 
veneration by social groups and individuals of sacred classes of objects; but 
they are scarcely to be characterized as thorough-going totemists. The habit 
of taking omens from the observed movements of the animate forms repre- 
senting protective spirits (aitw) was typical of this cult. It was probably 
the Tangaloa worshippers who introduced the habit of regarding certain 

= 

322 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

animal species in particular—lizards, sharks, octopi, and turtles—as forms 
embodying or representing in some way particular classes of psychic beings. 
The terms aitu and tupua were employed to designate respectively free and 
locally embodied psychic creatures. Demonology rather than ancestor wor- 
ship was characteristic of their attitude towards the inhabitants of the 
psychic realm. Angry ghosts and malicious demons were placated with 
gifts of kava root, which was the only type of offering. 

The ceremonial of the Tangaloa-Polynesians was social rather than 
ritualistic, the chief’s master of ceremonies or social ceremonialist and 
orator (tulafale, matapule, or orero) directing it. The kava drinking func- 
tion was the chief, and the typical, ceremonial of the groups most thoroughly 
dominated by the Tangaloa customs, namely Samoa and Tonga, being em- 
ployed for both religious and social purposes. Gods and men were enter- 
tained by having the beverage brewed and drunk in their honor. 

A gathering of dignitaries ranged themselves according to rank in two 
curved lines radiating from the person presiding, who was the chief or 
house owner entertaining, or in the religious celebrations in ancient times, 
the prophet of the community god; should the god have no prophet, the 
place at the head of the circle was left vacant. The drink was brewed 
from the kava root by the village maiden sitting at the middle of the 
semicircle radiating from the host’s right hand, and then, under the direction 
of the masters of ceremony, the cup was passed successively to the guests 
in order determined by courtesy and rank. Throughout the brewing and 
serving of the kava, prescribed order, movements, and forms of speech were 
adhered to with the utmost care. In Samoa the first cup was always raised 
and waved heavenwards with a circular motion, after which its contents 
was poured on the ground as an offering to the patron god. Following the 
offering and drinking of the libation by those present, food was shared out. 

The divine chief among this people was a very sacred and exalted per- 
sonage, more so than the Indo-Polynesian ariki, though he lacked ritualistic 
functions of the ariki. Apparently the term Tui—as used in Tui Tonga and | 
Tui Manua, the most elevated titles of Tonga and Samoa respectively—was 
the word for chief used by the Tangaloa people when they first settled in 
Polynesia. Establishing themselves as chiefs over the earlier population, 
they evidently took to themselves or had given them the title used by their 
subjects to signify “chief,” namely, ariki. 

In industrial life the tufunga who were organized in professional guilds, 
were the leaders; but their leadership must originally have expressed itself 
rather in the organization of labor and supervision of craftsmanship than 
in ritualistic performances such as were later acquired by the tufunga in 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 323 

most parts of Polynesia as a result of the persistence of the Indo-Polynesian 
ritualism. I conclude that the word tufunga, in spite of the universality 
and uniformity of its use and its variants throughout Polynesia, is to be 
attributed to the Tongaloa groups. It is incorporated in sections of Samoan, 
Tongan, and the Society Islands’ creation myths which are undoubtedly of 
Tangaloa-Polynesian origin (in Samoa and Tonga, Tangaloa is spoken of 
as tufunga, builder of the world, while in the Society Islands Tu is spoken 
of as Taaroa’s tahua) and it belongs essentially to the guild system which 
was most highly developed in Samoa. 

The chief religious figure in the Tangaloa cult was the taula, shaman, 
or prophet, through whom the patron god was consulted on all occasions. 
Besides being the mouthpiece of the community god, the taula had charge 
of the “god house” that was consecrated to the deity; but apparently he 
had no ritualistic functions. 

The tombs of divine chiefs were important to these people as to the 
Indo-Polynesians. ‘The custom of enclosing these in a curbing of stone 
probably had much to do with the later evolution of temple forms. They 
celebrated public festivals on the greensward (malae) in front of the chief’s 
house. 

Their method of disposing of the remains of the dead contrasts markedly 
with that of the Indo-Polynesians: they buried their dead in the ground, 
with the body extended at full length, either in graves covered with a low 
mound or in slab-lined vaults protected by plain or slab-encased mounds. 

For occasions of birth and death, of industrial activity and war, the 
Samoa-Polynesians had little ritual—these were social rather than religious 
events for these people, and were marked particularly by kava drinkings, 
social feasting, and the exchange of gifts. Even the occasions of celebration 
in honor of the harvesting of first fruits were made social rather than re- 
ligious festivals though the festivals were in honor of local gods; and the 
family celebrations were distinctly social affairs. 

CHINESE TANKALO RESEMBLANCES 

The distribution and variation of culture elements indicates that those 
which have been distinguished as belonging to the Tangaloa people were 
of later introduction than the Indo-Polynesian, for they are dominant, uni- 
form, and least affected by fusion with the Indo-Polynesian in the western 
and central region which traditions show was the focus of recent cultural 
distribution—Samoa, Tonga, and the Society Islands while they are 
secondary and highly variable in the outlying marginal groups. ‘This is il- 
lustrated most clearly in the two outstanding religious elements belonging to 

324 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

the ethnic group, the Tangaloa concept and the ceremonial use of kava, as 
well as in many other traits. 

: 

The hypothesis that Tangaloa was introduced later than Tu, Tane, and 
Rongo is alone capable of explaining his position in different sections of 
Polynesia. In the three main groups of islands on the outer margin of this 
area (Hawaii, the Marquesas, New Zealand) he appears in the genealogies 
as a descendant from the marriage of Heaven and Earth (54, Vol. IV, pp. 
12, 18; 77, P. 344; 145, p. 667). He was also a deity of prime importance 
in both mythology and worship, but was never elevated to the position of 
creator. On the other hand, in the three main groups in the central and 

) western region of Polynesia (Samoa, Tonga, and the Society Islands) he 
\ was regarded as the preexistent Supreme Being who originated all things. 

Now, supposing Tangaloa to have been a name belonging to a later group 
of seafaring Polynesian immigrants, how can the fact be explained that it 
appears as the name of one of the sons of Heaven and Earth in the lore of 
the Maori which supposedly represents the original Indo-Polynesian mytho- 
logy? ~A reasonable hypothesis is that as a deity he had become widely 
known and been adopted into their pantheon by the Maori before their 
fourteenth century migration to New Zealand. Again, if Tangaloa was a 
late comer, how is it that his name is of more widespread occurrence than 
that of any other of the greater gods of the area? A satisfactory answer 

would seem to be that this was inevitable since he was the patron and 

ancestor of a group of skilled mariners who, as traditional history shows, 

\voyaged from Samoa and the Society Islands to every part of the Pacific. 

The variability of Tangaloa’s position in different parts of Polynesia is 

) most easily to be explained on the assumption that he was not a figure of 
\the original pantheon but was adopted into it. While Tu, Tane, Atea, 

Rongo, Maui, and others, represent fundamentally the same ideas every- 
where except in Tonga and Samoa, where they have been obscured by the 
Tangaloa cult, Tangaloa is given all sorts of functions from that of Supreme 
Being to patron of fishing, and holds all sorts of positions in the genealogies, _ 
heading the genealogies in Samoa and the Society Islands, and appearing as 
a merely legendary character whose name occurs long after those of the 
primeval sons of Sky and Earth in the Marquesas. As Tangaloa’s name is 

‘most widespread in occurrence, so his functions and position are the most 
‘widely diverse of any of the major deities. 

The following remarks of Fornander (55, Vol. I, pp. 84-5) add weighty 
evidence in support of the theory that Tangaloa did not belong to the 
original Indo-Polynesian pantheon, but was introduced into the area by later 
comers. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 325 

The introduction and worship of “Kanaloa” as one of the great gods in the 
Hawaiian group, can only be traced back to the time of immigration from the 
southern groups some eight hundred years ago. . . . in the more ancient chants 
he is never mentioned in conjunction with “Kane,” “Ku,” and “Lono”. 

If Tangaloa was originally the patron of some conquering chief or 
chiefs, this may explain why some of the Hawaiian lore of an early period, 
composed by those whose enemy his proteges were, relegated him to the 
lower region and ridiculed him as a miscreator and an outcast from heaven, 
supplying Fornander with a theme which enabled him to develop his 
theory, based on Biblical prepossessions, that Kanaloa was a “fallen angel.” 

Early in my search for extra Polynesian Tangaloa resemblances I found 
that they are conspicuous for their absence in Oceania, outside Polynesia. 
The name occurs in Melanesian lore, but among people distinctly Melanesian 
in race and culture. 

Tangaro is a character in the folklore and worship of the Banks Islands 
and the New Hebrides. Here the name was sometimes that of a character 
who combines traits of creator and culture hero, and who was also appealed 
to in some places as a beneficent deity. In the Banks Islands lore there 
were a number of brothers named Tangaro. This finds correspondence in 
the presence in both Tongan (110, p. 444) and Samoa (36) myth of various 
Tangaloa. That our Polynesian Tangaroa, to whom Tangaro undoubtedly 
corresponds, as Codrington has pointed out, appears in these islands where 
the other figures of the Polynesian pantheon are absent, furnishes additional 
evidence of his independent origin. It indicates also that the Tangalo in- 
fluences centering in western Polynesia, spread westward into Melanesia as 
well as in the other direction into the farthest reaches of Polynesia (37, pp. 
156, 168). 

Both Indonesian and Micronesian areas fail to disclose cultures whose 
dominant traits or fundamental character resemble the well ordered and 
socially highly perfected Tangaloa-Polynesian civilization. 

Gradually, as the search proceeded, it became evident that in many 
general and specific cultural and physical traits the Tangaloa-Polynesians ex- 
hibited Chinese characteristics. Investigation of the name Tangalo revealed 
the fact that this word is applied to the river population of southern China, 
spelt in redaction Tan-kah-lo, meaning people (Jo) of the egg (tan) 
family (kah). ‘The discovery of this correspondence in names and in cul- 
ture traits has led to the conclusion that a group of these seafaring Chinese, 
whose religion combined the strictly Chinese worship and philosophy with 
Buddhism, came into Polynesia, intermarried with Caucasoid Polynesian 
women, and through organizing ability and genius for trade, succeeded 

—_ <r 

326 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

ultimately in dominating Samoa, Tonga, and the Society Islands and later 
Hawaii and other groups. A more thorough discussion of this theory is to 
be presented elsewhere (79a). Here I shali point out the outstanding religi- 
ous correspondences which evidence the preservation in the Tangaloa Poly- 
nsian culture of religious traits of Mongolian and Chinese origin, combined 
with and effected by Buddhism. The theory assumes that under the 
influence of the Polynesian custom of recording history in genealogies, the 
name ‘Tan-kah-lo came to be regarded as that of the divine ancestor 
Tangaloa—Tangalo in Melanesia—who ultimately, with the ascendance of 
his descendants in Tonga, Samoa, and the Society Islands, assumed the 
role of Supreme Being and Creator. The creation story in the Society 
Islands, according to which Taaroa (Tangaloa) was born of an egg, is seen 
perhaps to have relationship to the meaning of the Chinese Tan-kah-lo 
(Egg-family-people). I have been unable as yet to ascertain the origin, or 
possible mythological signification, of this name in China. 

The close association of the beneficent lizard (Pili) in Samoa with 
Tangaloa (32, pp. 256-8) and with Taaroa’s descendants in the Society 
Islands is perhaps a reminiscence of the heavenly dragon in China. (But 
the maleficent moko (lizard) throughout Polynesia I attribute to the Indo- 
Polynesians. It finds its ancient parallel in the Vedic serpent Vrtra, the 
embodiment of evil.) 

The use of the word langi, sky, and its equivalents in the parts of 
Polynesia dominated by Tangaloa influence to designate the divine chiefs or 
descendants of Tangaloa the sky god finds its parallel in the Chinese con- 
vention of identifying the Emperor with Heaven. 

In Samoa and Tonga, Pulotu (pleasant or beautiful) the paradise of 
chiefs, was believed to be an “island” to the northwest, ruled by a being 

. named Hikuleo, or Si’uleo, who is described as having the head of a man 

and a lower body in the form of the tail of a great eel or serpent (151, p. 
237). China, whence the Tangalo are assumed to have come, lies north- 
west of Tonga and Samoa; and the form of the ruler of Pulotu is certainly 
suggestive of Fu-hi, the traditional first Emperor of China who is “depicted 
as a human figure with a fish tail something like a mermaid” (82a, p. 191). 

The central religious figure in the Tangaloa-Polynesian community was 
the taula who would be called, in the terminology of ethnology a shaman, 
signifying a medium subject to possession by spirits, who served the com- 

~)munity in the double capacity of oracle and healer. The importance of the 

shaman in Samoa and Tonga constitutes an especially valuable link, for 
this particular manifestation or religious phenomenon is peculiarly char- 
acteristic of the Asiatic Mongoloids, including the Chinese. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 327 

The Tangaloa-Polynesian method of disposing of the dead at full 
length in stone lined vaults or cists, or in common graves, which contrasts 
strongly with the older Indo-Polynesian customs, finds its parallel in China. 

In addition to the above, which represent the most striking specific paral- 
lels with the native Chinese culture discovered in a very limited preliminary 
comparitive study, there are many points of general similarity such as the 
worship of ancestors, the importance of omens, the fear of demons, the 
religious aspects of the guild system, which add weight to the more precise | 
evidence. And outside the field of religion, in the social and material 
culture there are numerous general and detailed correspondences which will 
be dealt with elsewhere (79a). 

As to the evidence of the preservation in the Tangaloa-Polynesian 
culture of vestiges of Chinese Buddhism, there are, to begin with, certain 
broad suggestions, which, though general in character are nevertheless 
significant. Worship was simplified to such an extent that there remained 
only vestiges of ritualism. ‘Then there was a strong foundation of social 
ethics upon which the Tangaloa-Polynesian system was grounded—this 
may, perhaps, in ultimate origin be as much Chinese as Buddhist. Finally, 
there is the social ceremonialism, formality, etiquette, and grace in living 
and particularly in that phase of living that was all important in the 
Tangaloa-Polynesian community, the social. This was essentially Buddhistic 
Chinese. 

The kava drinking ceremony is peculiarly and distinctively Tangaloa- 
Polynesian. Although kava was drunk throughout central Polynesia and 
Hawaii, the ceremonialism which is often mistakenly supposed to be as- 
sociated with it wherever it was used was limited to Samoa and Tonga and 
the islands dominated by them. ‘This interesting socio-religious ceremonial 
has generally been assumed to be the product of local evolution. On the 
contrary, I believe it to represent the adaptation to Polynesian conditions \ 
of the Buddhist ceremonial tea drinking which is still preserved in Japan, ) 
to which country it was imported from China in the Sung dynasty (107a). 
I have been unable to learn much of the ceremonial in China itself, but 
the Japanese Tea Ceremony, which shows inost interesting parallels in 
details with the Tangaloa-Polynesian Kava Ceremony, is undoubtedly 
largely patterned after the Chinese original. 

In connection with the social ceremonialism and its epitome in the 
kava ceremony, it may be pointed out that the formal posture of the 
Samoan chief, seated crosslegged, resting the right foot, with sole up, on the 
left thigh, reproduces about as well as can be done in common life the 

328 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

conventional posture in which the Buddha is depicted sitting in meditation, 
which was the conventional posture of the tea drinking Zen Buddhists in Japan. 

What I have termed the near totemism of the T’angaloa-Polynesians 
may represent the Buddhist doctrine of metempsychosis influenced and 
modified by the Melanesian totemism with which the people of western 
Polynesia were in contact during many centuries. 

INTRUSIVE AND BORROWED TRAITS 

MELANESIAN 

The religion shows a number of instances of regional and local accre- 
tion from neighboring areas by intrusion or borrowing, or both. 

Certain Melanesian traits were probably spread through central and 
south Polynesia t by the group of invaders who were repelled by the Samoans 
some centuries ago, the invaders called by the Samoans the Tonga-fiti. To 
these people, who were probably Indo-Polynesians who had adopted many 
Melanesian practices, I attribute the war dances and other dramatic group 
dancing by men, cannibalism, dirge singing, and the great memorial festivals 
characteristic especially of Tonga (cannibalism excepted), the Cook Islands, 
the Marquesas, and New Zealand. 

There are several features that centered in the Society Islands, which 
seem to be Melanesian. The masked and armed hiva representing a ghost, 
who, followed by a motley of men and boys, paraded through the com- 
munity terrorizing its inhabitants is typically Melanesian, finding its counter- 
part nowhere else in Polynesia. I am inclined to believe that the mumifica- 
tion of corpses, typical of the Society Islands and the Marquesas, was 
probably borrowed from Melanesia. Finally, the Tahitian Arioi Society 
seems to be patterned upon the Melanesian secret societies. There is 
certainly little Melanesian blood in the Society Islands; and such a feature 
as this, the organization of so important an institution in the religion and 
in society as the Arioi, could hardly be brought about by a few stray Melan- 
esian immigrants. The most reasonable supposition is that some chief from 
the Society Islands, in the course of a voyage, visited some part of Melanesia 
where secret societies were flourishing, brought the idea home with him, 
and organized the Arioi on a similar basis. 

AMERICAN 

In America is found the most likely source of three associated traits and 
also a number of other distinctive traits in social and material culture which 
were typical of Hawaii, the Marquesas and the Society Islands. The 
general and extensive use of stone in building temples, the cult of human 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 329 

sacrifice, and the importance of processions in ceremonials, find their paral- 
lels in Mexico and Peru. 

The absence of stonework and temple building in New Zealand makes it 
apparent that this is not a trait attributable to the Indo-Polynesians; the 
Tangaloa worshippers were not temple builders at all; and stone temples 
were certainly not introduced from Melanesia or Micronesia where they 
were unused. The art of stone building may, of course, have been 
independently developed in Polynesia. It is possible to make out a case 
for gradual development from the simple stone encased graves of chiefs 

in Samoa and Tonga to the platform and pyramidal types of the Society, | 

Marquesas, and Hawaiian islands. (See 76, pp. 226-236.) 

But what probably happened is that during the hundreds of years of 
very active voyaging some Polynesians visited America and returned to 
Polynesia, having seen the Mexican or Peruvian stonework, and possibly 
bringing a few stone craftsmen with them.** ‘The fact that both in quantity 
and skill there is a diminution in the art of building with stone, beginning 
with the Marquesas, running through the Society Islands and ending at 
Tonga, is strong evidence in favor of the hypothesis that some eastern 
Polynesians, probably Marquesans, borrowed the art of stone construction 
from the west coast of South America; and that within Polynesia the art 
spread from east to west. 

As regards human sacrifice, the fact that human victims in Polynesia ~ 

were referred to as “fish,” and were hung in trees like offerings of fish, has 
led me to believe that the ancient form of flesh offering was fish, and that 
the presentation of human victims was a late innovation. As such, it may 
have developed within the area as a result of expansion and elaboration of 
the cult. On the other hand, it may have been introduced. If so, it probably 
did not come from or through Indonesia, for this practice in connection 
with war ceremonial is not typical of Malaysia or Southeast Asia. Nor is 
it typical of Melanesia or Micronesia. Turning eastward, however, it is dis- 
tinctly characteristic of the Mexican and Peruvian religions; even the 
manner of killing the victim in the Marquesas where the heart was torn 
out and eaten by the priest resembles the Maya practice. It is possible 
that the custom was carried from Polynesia to America; but it more likely 

was borrowed by Polynesia, where on important political occasions and , 

in time’of war human victims came to be substituted for the simpler offer- 
ings of fish. The fact that the Maori sacrificed war captives to Tu, as did 
the Society Islanders, Marquesans, and Hawaiians, indicates that the prac- 

33] have a Marquesan story taken from the lips of an old man on Hivaoa which describes 

the construction by a chief of Puamau valley of a great canoe, and his sailing toward the rising 
sun till he reached a land, whence he returned again to his Marquesan home. 

330 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

tice must have been fairly ancient in Polynesia, antedating the fourteenth 
century when most of the Maori went to New Zealand.*# 

The part played by the elaborate processions of chiefs, priests, and 
representations and emblems of the gods, particularly in the Society Islands 
and Hawaii, finds its counterpart in Mexico and Peru rather than in the 
west. 

GENERAL CONCLUSION 

There can be no question but that the religion of Polynesia was very 
complex in its makeup. Evidence has been adduced to prove the presence of 
ancient Indic, Southeast Asiatic, historic Hindu, Chinese, Melanesian, and 
American traits. This state of things may be explained in the following 
way. First there came into Polynesia a system of mythology and worship 
related to the ancient Vedic and Brahmanic of India. This was followed by 
a barbaric Southeast-Asiatic culture similar to that still preserved among the 
head-hunting peoples of South-east Asia and Indonesia. On the heels of 
these next came, from Southeast Asia or Indonesia, a religion closely re- 
lated to, or strongly influenced by the historic missionary Indic religions, 
Hinduism, and Buddhism. The religious ideas and practices of these three 
cultures were spread throughout Polynesia to make the uniform ancient 
system here termed Indo-Polynesian. It may be that the fusion of the first 
and the second, or of the second and the third, of these cultures, took place 
in Southeast Asia or Indonesia before they were carried to Polynesia. Sub- 
sequently, a mixture of old Chinese folk religion and Chinese Buddhism 
came into central and west Polynesia, borne by a group of stray Chinese 
Tan-kah-lo. Melanesian traits were brought in by invaders entering by way 
of Fiji and Tonga; and others were borrowed by Polynesian voyagers. 
Other customs were borrowed in the same way from Mexico and Peru by 
Polynesian adventurers and explorers who found their way to America and 

back. 

*$ According to Joyce (91x) human sacrifice appeared in middle America first approximately 
tooo A. D. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 331 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

ANDERSEN, JOHANNES C.,. Maori Life in Ao-tea, Wellington, 1907. 

ANDREWS, Lorrin, revised by Henry H. Parker, A dictionary of the Hawaiian 
language, Honolulu, 1922. 

Anonymous, Fire-walking in Fiji, Japan, India, and Mauritius: Polynesian 
Soc., Jour., vol. VIII, pp. 188-196, 1899. 

Anonymous, More about fire-walking: Polynesian Soc., Jour., vol. X, pp. 53-4, 
1901. 

Anonymous, Polynesian fire-walkers: Folk-lore Soc., Jour., vol. XIV, pp. 60-1, 
IQOI. 

AuDRAN, Hervré, Un glorieux episode de la vie de Moeava: Soc. d’Etudes 
Oceaniennes, Bull. no. 5, pp. 46-53, I919. 

Banks, JosEPH, Journal of the Right Hon. Sir Joseph Banks, during Captain 
Cook’s first voyage... London, 1806. 

Bast1an, Apo.PH, Die Heilige Sage der Polynesier, Leipzig, 1881. 

Beatriz, H., Mana: Polynesian Soc., Jour., vol. XXX, pp. 16-18, 1921. 

Brecxwitu, M. W., Hawaiian shark aumakua: Am. Anthr., vol. XIX, pp. 503- 
5175) 1017. 

Best, Exspon, Makutu or Maori witchcraft: Am. Antiquarian, vol. XXI, 
pp. 41-3. 
Brest, Exspon, Notes on some customs and superstitions of the Maori: Austral- 
asian Assoc. for the Advancement of Sci., vol. VII, pp. 768-77, 1808. 
Best, Exspon, Maori religion,—notes on the religious ideas, rites, and invoca- 
tions of the Maori people of New Zealand: Australasian Assoc. for the 
Advancement of Sci., vol. XII, pp. 457-464, 1900. 

Brest, Exspon, Some aspects of Maori myth and religion: Dominion Mus. 
Mon. no. 1, Wellington, 1922. 

Best, Exspon, Spiritual and mental concepts of the Maori: Dominion Mus. 
Mon. no. 2, Wellington, 1922. 

Brest, Exspon, Maori religion and mythology: Dominion Mus. Bull. no. 10, 
sec. I, Wellington, 1924. 

Brest, Exspon, The diversions of the whare tapere...: New Zealand Inst., 
Trans. vol. XXXIV, pp. 34-69, 1901. 
Best, Exspon, Maori marriage customs... : New Zealand Inst. Trans., vol. 

XXXVI, pp. 14-67, 1903. 

Best, Exspon, Maori eschatology: New Zealand Inst. Trans., vol. XXXVIII, 
pp. 148-239, 1905. 

Best, Exspon, Maori forest lore: New Zealand Inst. Trans., vol. XL, pp. 185- 
254; vol. XLII, pp. 433-481; 1907, 1909. 

Brest, Exspon, Te Rehu-o-Tainui: the evolution of a Maori atua: Polynesian 
Soc. Journ., vol. VI, pp. 41-66, 1897. 

Brest, Exspon, Omens and superstitious beliefs of the Maori, pt. 1, Polynesian 
Soc. Journ. vol. VII, pp. 119-136, 1808. 

Best, Exspom, Spiritual concepts of the Maori, pts. 1 and 2, Polynesian Soc. 
Journ., vol. IX, pp. 173-199; vol. X, pp. I-20; I900-1901. 

Best, Exspon, Notes on the art of war, pts. I to 9: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
XI, pp. 11-41, 47-75, 127-162, 219-246; vol. XII, pp. 32-50, 65-84, 145-165, 
193-217; vol. XIII, pp. 1-19, 73-82; 1902-4. 

$34 

Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Best, Exspon, Maori medical lore, Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XIII, pp. 213- 
237; vol. XIV, pp. I-23; 1904-1905. 

Best, Exspon, The lore of the whare-kohanga: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XIV, 
PP. 205-215; vol. XV, pp. 1-26, 146-162, 183-192; vol. XVI, pp. 1-12; 1905- 
1907. 

Best, Exspon, Maori personifications: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XXXII, pp. 
53-69, 103-126, 1923. 

Biro, I. L., Six months in the Sandwich Islands, London, 1876. 

Bovis, M. vg, Etat de la societe Tahitienne a l’arrivee des Europeans, Papeete, 
1909. 

Bricnam, W. 7T., Director’s report: Bernice P. Bishop Mus., Occ. Pap., vol. 
I, no. 1, 1898. 

Bricuam, W. T., Report of a journey round the world..... : Bernice P. 
Bishop Mus., Occ. Pap., vol. V, no. 5, 1913. 

Burtow, W. von, Die eidische Volksglauben der Samoaner: Globus, vol. 
LXXIV, pp. 256-9. 

Byron, Lorn, Voyage of H. M. S. “Blonde” to the Sandwich Islands, in the 
years 1824-1825, London, 1826. 

CAMPBELL, ARCHIBALD, A voyage round the world from 1806 to 1812, Edinburgh, 
1816. 

CuurcHILL, WinitaM, Easter Island: The Carnegie Inst. of Washington Pub. 
no. 174, IQI2. 

CHURCHILL, W1LLIAM, Unpublished manuscript deposited in the Bishop Museum. 

Coprincton, R. H., The Melanesians, Oxford, 1891. 

Cottocort, E. E. V., Notes on Tongan religion: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
XXX, pp. 152-163, 227-240, 1921. 

Cotnocort, E. E. V., Sickness, ghosts, and medicine in Tonga: Polynesian Soc. 
Jour., vol. XXXII, pp. 136-142, 1923. 

Cook, JAMES, A voyage towards the South Pole and round the world. . . in 
the years 1772, 1773, 1774, and 1775 [second voyage], 2 vols., London, 1777. 

Cook, JAMES, A voyage to the Pacific Ocean... in the years 1776, 1777, 
1778, 1779, and 1780 [third voyage], 3 vols., London, 1784. 

Corngey, B. G., The quest and occupation of Tahiti by emissaries of Spain 
during the years 1772-1776, London, 1913. 

DIEFFENBACH, Ernest, Travels in New Zealand, London, 1843. 

Dituinc, W. J., Girdles: Hasting’s encyclopedia of religion and ethics, vol. 
VI, pp. 227-30. 

Drxon, R. B., The mythology of all races, vol. IX, Oceanic, Boston, 1916. 

Dorpition, J. R., Grammaire et dictionnaire de la langue des Iles Marquises, 
Paris, 1904. 

Epcr-Partincton, JAMES and Heaprt, Cuarirs, Ethnographic album of the 
Pacific islands, Manchester, 1890-1808. 

ELLA, S., Samoa, ... : Australasian Assoc. Advancement of Sci., vol. IV, pp. 
620-645, 1892. 

Exuis, WiritAM, Polynesian researches, London, 1831. 

Emerson, J. S., The lesser Hawaiian gods: Hawaiian Historical Soc. Pap. no. 
2, Honolulu, 1892. 

Emerson, J. S., Some Hawaiian beliefs regarding spirits: Hawaiian Hist. Soc., 
gth ann. rept., pp. 10-17, Honolulu, 1902. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 333 

Emerson, N. B., Unwritten literature of Hawaii: Smithsonian Inst. Bur. of 
Am. Ethn., Bull. 38, Washington, 1909. 

Emerson, N. B., Pele and Hiiaka, Honolulu, 1915. 

Estry, M.p’, Etude ethnographique sur le lezard chez les peuples Malais et 
Polynesiens: l’Anthropologie, vol. III, pp. 711-719, 1892. 

ForaANANDER, ABRAHAM, Fornander collection of Hawaiian antiquities and folk- 

lore, translated and edited by Thomas G. Thrum: B. P. Bishop Mus. Mem., 
vols. IV-VI, Honolulu, 1916-20. 

ForRNANDER, ABRAHAM, An account of the Polynesian race, London, 1878. 

Fraser, JoHN, The Samoan story of creation: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. I, 
pp. 164-189, 1892. 

FRASER, JOHN, Folk-songs and myths from Samoa, Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
VI, pp. 19-36, 1897. 

FRAZER, J. G., The golden bough [abridged edition], London, 1922. 

Frazer, J. G., The belief in immortality, London, 1913-1924. 

Furton, Rosert, An account of the Fiji fire-walking ceremony ... New 
Zealand Inst., Trans. vol. XXXV, pp. 187-201, 1902. 

GEISELER, Die Osterinseln, Berlin, 1883. 

Gini, W. W., Gems from the coral islands, London, 1856. 

Git, W. W., Myths and songs from the South Pacific, London, 1876. 

Giz, W. W., Life in the southern isles, London, 1876. 

Gitt, W. W., Historical sketches of savage life in Polynesia, Wellington, 1880. 

Git, W. W., Jottings from the Pacific, London, 188s. 

Git, W. W., Mangaia (Hervey Islands): Australasian Assoc. Advancement of 
Sci., vol. II, pp. 323-353, 1890. 

Git, W. W., A word about the growth (history) of Mauke Island, Polynesian 
Soc. Jour., vol. XX, pp. 135-6, IQII. 

Gorpiz, W. H., Maori medical lore, New Zealand Inst., Trans. vol. XXXVII, 
pp. 1-120, 1904. 

Grry, Grorck, Polynesian mythology ... , London, 1855. 

Gunpcron, W. T., Te umu-ti, or fire-walking ceremony: Polynesian Soc. Jour., 
vol. VIII, pp. 58-60, 1899. 

Guncron, T. W., Mana tangata: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XIV, pp. 49-66, 
1905. 

Gupcron, T. W., Maori religion: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XIV, pp. 106-130, 
1905. 

Gupcron, T. W., The tipua-kura, and other manifestations of the spirit world: 
Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XV, pp. 27-57, 1906. 

Gupcron, TI. W., The tohunga Maori: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XVI, pp. 
63-91, 1907. 

Hanpy, E. S. C., Some conclusions and suggestions regarding the Polynesian , 
problem: Am. Anth., vol. XXII, pp. 226-236, 1920. 

Hanpy, E. S. C., The native culture in the Marquesas: B. P. Bishop Mus. 
Bul. 9, 1923. 

Hanpy, E. S. C., The oracle house in Polynesia: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
XXXV, pp. 48-57. 

Hanpy, E. S. C., manuscript on Marquesan lore, in preparation for publication. 

Hanpy, E. S. C., manuscript on the culture of the Society Islands, in prepara- 
tion for publication. 

334 

- 79a. 
80. 

8. 

82. 

82a. 

Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Hanpy, E. S. C., Sources of Polynesian culture, manuscript in preparation. 

Hanpy, FE. S. C. and W. C., Samoan housebuilding, cooking. and tattooing: 
B. P. Bishop Mus. Bull. 15, 1924. ' 

Hanpy, E. S. C. and Winne, J. L., Music in the Marquesas Islands: B. P. 
Bishop Mus. Bull. 17, 1925. 

Henry, TEurra, History and traditions of Tahiti, compiled from notes of J. 
M. Orsmond, manuscript in preparation for publication by Bernice P. 
Bishop Museum. 

HirtH, FrepertcK, China: History (in part), Encylopedia Britannica, 11th ed., 
vol. VI, pp. 191-4. 

Hocxen, T. M., An account of the Fiji fire ceremony: New Zealand Inst. 
Trans., vol. XXXI, pp. 667-672, 1888. 

Honc1, Hare, A Maori cosmogony: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XVI, pp. 109- 
119, 1907. 

Hone1, Hare, The story of the “Takitimu” canoe: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
XVII, pp. 93-107, 1908. 

Hower, Hare, On ariki, and incidentally, tohunga: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
XVIII, pp. 84-80, 1909. 

Honer, Hare, On the greenstone “tiki.” . . . Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
XXVII, pp. 162-3, 199-201, 1918. 

Hanc1, Hare, The gods of the Maori, sons of light: Polynesian Soc. Jour., 
vol. XXIX, pp. 24-8, 1920. 

Hopkins, FE. W., The Religions of India, New York, 1805. 

Huce,, ANATOLE von, Maori sacred images: Internationales Archiy fur 
ethnographie, vol. XV, p. 99, 1902. 

HucuEntIn, Paut, Raiatea la sacree, Neuchatel, 1902. 

JaussEN, TEPANO, Grammaire et dictionnaire de la langue Maorie, dialecte 
Tahitien, Paris, 1808. 

Joyce, T. A., Mexican archaeology, New York, 1914. 

KraEMER, Aucus‘riN, Die Samoa Inseln, Stuttgart, 1902. 

KRUSENSTERN, A. J., VON (translated by R. B. Hoppner), Voyage round the 
world in the years 1803, 1804, 1805 and 1806, London, 1813. 

Lancsporrr, G. H. von, Voyages and travels in various parts of the world 
during the years 1803, 1804, 1805, 1806, and 1807, London, 1813. 

Lawry, W., A second missionary visit to the Friendly and Feejee islands, 
London, 1851. 

LILIUOKALANI, An account of the creation of the world according to Hawaiian 
tradition, Boston, 1897. ; 

Linton, Ratpy, Archaeology of the Marquesas Islands: B. P. Bishop Mus., 
Bull. 23, 1925. 

Lyons, Curtis J., The song of Kualii of Hawaii: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
II, pp. 160-178, 1894. 

Mato, Davin, Hawaiian antiquities translated by N. B. Emerson, B. P. Bishop 
Mus. Spec. Pub. no. 2, 1903. 

Manninc, F. E. (A Pakeha Maori), Old New Zealand, Wellington, 1922. 

Maravu Taaroa, Memoirs of, unpublished manuscript. 

Mariner, WILLIAM, edited by John Martin. An account of the natives of the 
Tonga Islands, Boston, 1820. 

Marist Mission, Dictionnaire Toga-Francais et Francais-Toga-Anglais, Paris, 

1890. 

104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 

1074. 
108. 

109. 
110. 

DPT. 
Ii2. 

113. 

14. 

115. 

116. 
117. 

118. 

119. 

120. 

121. 

122. 

123) 

124. 

128. 

120. 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 335 

MELVILLE, HERMAN, Typee, a peep at Polynesian life, New York, 1876. 

Morrennovt, J. A., Voyages aux iles du Grand Ocean, Paris, 1837. 

Morretu, W. T., A lament: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XI, pp. 121-2, 1902. 

Newman, A. K., On a sstone-carved ancient wooden image of a Maori eel- 
god: New Zealand Inst. Trans., vol. XXXVIII, pp. 130-134, 1905. 

Oxakura, K., The book of tea, New York, 1906. 

Pratt, GEORGE, Grammar and dictionary of the Samoan language, revised by 
J. E. Newell, Samoa, r1o11. 

PritcHarp, W. T., Polynesian reminiscences, London, 1866. 

Reirer, P. F., Traditions tonguiennes, II, De l’origine du monde: Anthropos, 
vol. II, pp. 438-448, 1907. 

Routiepce, Mrs. Scorespy, The mystery of Easter Island, London, 1919. 

SAVAGE, STEPHEN, in “Extracts from Dr. Wyatt Gill’s Papers,’ no. 30: 
Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XXIV, pp. 153-5, 1914. 

SAVAGE, STEPHEN, The period of Iro-nui-ma-aota and Tangiia-nui-ariki, pts. 2 
and 3: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XXVI, pp. 10-18. 

SHAND, ALEXANDER, The Moriori people of Chatham Islands, their traditions 
and history, Chaps. XI and XIII: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. VI, pp. 11-18, 
161-168, 1897. 

SHORTLAND, Epwarp, Traditions and superstitions of the New Zealanders, 
London, 1856. 

SHORTLAND, Epwarp, Maori religion and mythology, London, 1882. 

Skinner, H. D., The Morioris of Chatham Islands: B. P. Bishop Mus., Mem., vol. 
TXeunomet, 1923: 

Smiru, S. Percy, Hawaiki, the original home of the Maori, Christchurch, 
IQIO. 

Smiru, S. Percy, The lore of the Whare Wananga: Polynesian Soc. Mem., 
vol. III, New Plymouth, 1913. 

SmiruH, S. Percy, Uea; or, Wallis Island and its people: Polynesian Soc. Jour., 
vol. I, pp. 107-117, 1802. 

Smitu, S. Percy, Genealogy of Te Mamaru family ... : Polynesian Soc. 
Jour., vol. III, pp. 9-15, 1894. 

Smiru, S. Percy, Explanation of some matters referred to in the paper, “The 
coming of the Arawa and Tainui Canoes from Hawaiki to New Zealand,” 
by T. Tarakawa: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. III, pp. 198-207, 1894. 

Smiru, S. Percy, Te tatau-o-te-Po (The door of Hades or death), by Te 
Kahui Karereho: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. VII, pp. 59-63, 1808. 

Smira, S. Percy, History and traditions of Rarotonga, by Te Arikitara-are: 
Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. VIII, pp. 61-88, 1899. 

Smitu, S. Percy, Niue Island, and its people, pts. I-IV, and appendix: Poly- 
nesian Soc. Jour., vol. XI, pp. 80-106, 163-178, 195-218; vol. XII, pp. 1-31, 
85-119, 1902-3. 

Smitru, S. Percy, Arai-te-Tonga, the ancient marae at Rarotonga: Polynesian 
Soc. Jour., vol. XII, pp. 218-220, 1903. 

Smrrx, S. Percy, The lore of the whare wananga, pt. 2, Te Kauwae-Raro, or 
“things terrestrial,’ chap. III: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XXIII, pp. 138- 
149, 1914. 

Smita S. Percy, Clairvoyance among the Maoris: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
XXIX, pp. 149-161, 1920. 

Smiru, S. Percy, The evils of Makutu, or witchraft: Polynesian Soc. Jour., 
vol. XXX, pp. 172-184, 1921. 

336 
130. 
Tie 

132. 
133. 

134. 

135. 
136. 

SW 
138. 

139. 
140. 
I4I. 

142. 
143. 

144. 
145. 

146. 
147. 
148. 

149. 
150. 

I5I. 
152. 
153. 

154. 
155. 
156. 
157. 
158. 

159. 

160. 
161. 

Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Smiru, S. Percy, The Maori philosophy of life and matter, pt. II: Polynesian 
Soc. Jour., vol. XXXI, pp. 45-7, 1922. 

Situ, S. Percy, The tohunga-Maori, a sketch: New Zealand Inst., Trans. 
vol. XXXII, pp. 253-270, 1808. 

Stair, J. B., Old Samoa, London, 1897. 

Stair, J. B. O le fale o le Fe’e: or Ruins of an old Samoan temple: 
Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. III, pp. 239-244, 1893. 

Sram, J. B., Flotsam and jetsam from the great ocean: or, summary of early 
Samoan voyages and settlement: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. IV, pp. 99-131, 
1905. 

Sratr, J. B., Jottings on the mythology and spirit-lore of old Samoa: Poly- 

nesian Soc. Jour., vol. V, pp. 33-57, 1906. 

SteinEN, Kart von DEN, Reise nach den Marquesas-Inseln: Verhandlungen der 
Gesellschaft fur Erdkunde zu Berlin, vol. XXV, pp. 489-513, 18098. 

Stewart, C. S., A visit to the South Seas, New York, 1831. 

Tautain, Notes sur l’ethnographie des iles Marquises: l’Anthropologie, vol. 
VI, pp. 543-552, 1896. 

Tavutain, Notes sur les constructions et les monuments des Marquises: 1’Anthro- 
pologie, vol. VIII, pp. 538-558, 667-678, 1897. 

Taytor, Ricard, Te ika a Maui, or, New Zealand and its inhabitants, London, 
1870. 

Ts Haupapa-o-Tane, Io, the Supreme God, and other gods of the Maori: 
Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. XXIX,, pp. 137-143, 1920. 

THOMSON, Basin, Savage Island, London, 1902. 

Tuompson, W. T., Te Pito Henua, or Easter Island, in the report of the U. S. 
National Museum for the year ending June 30, 1889. 

Turum, T. G., Hawaiian folk tales, Chicago, 1907. 

TREGEAR, Epwarp, The Maori-Polynesian comparative dictionary, Wellington, 
1891. 

TREGEAR, Epwarp, “The creation song” of Hawaii: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
IX, pp. 38-46, 1900. 

TRECEAR, Epwarp, A song of Savage Island (Niue): Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. 
IX, pp. 234-235, 1900. 

TREGEAR, Epwarp, The spirit of vegetation: Anthr. Inst. Jour., new ser., vol. 
IV, pp. 157-159, I90I. 

TREGEAR, Epwarp, The Maori race, Wanganui, 1904. 

TURNBULL, JoHN, A voyage round the world in the years 1800, 1801, 1802, 1803 
and 1804, London, 1813. 

TuRNER, Grorcr, Nineteen years in Polynesia, London, 1861. 

Turner, Grorck, Samoa, a hundred years ago and long before, London, 1884. 

TyERMAN, DANIEL, and BENNET, GrorGE, compiled by James Montgomery, Jour- 
nal of voyages and travels, Boston, 1832. 

WESTERVELT, W. D., Legends of gods and ghosts, Boston and London, 1915. 

WESTERVELT, W. D., Hawaiian legends of volcanoes, Boston and London, 1916. 

Wuitt, JouHn, The ancient history of the Maori, Wellington, 1887-90. 

Waitt, Taytor, Te Reinga: Polynesian Soc. Jour., vol. VII, pp. 178-181, 1808. 

WILKES, CHARLES, Narrative of the U. S. Exploring Exped. during the years 
1838, 1839, 1840, 1841, 1842, Philadelphia, 1844. 

WiuiaMs, JoHuNn, A narrative of missionary enterprises in the South Sea Islands, 
New York, 1837. 

WiiiiaMs, THomas, and Carvert, JAMES, Fiji and the Fijians, London, 1858. 

Witson, JAMEs, A missionary voyage to the southern Pacific Ocean performed 
in the years 1796, 1797, 1798, in the ship “Duff,” London, 1799. 

INDEX 

INGE GS NR: Cree eee ee 50 

Adolescence (See subincision) 

UN GG DELO Meeeerecte erase cece 191, 208, 221-3 

UNI ze SACTeC eens 32, 100-1, 
...-.125-6, 279, 287-8, 203-4 

Agriculture (See Rongo)............ IIO-I, 
114, I17, 134, 136, 282- 
296, 310, 314. 

DNC), ces Rong eh, Ae oem ee ea ata 38 
JENGRTUL. i Se A a a 93, 131-2 
Altar (See temples) 

PNINIC ICOM ee 312, 328-30 

Ancestors, ancestor worship 
(See tupuna) 

Animatism 

UNO ISTNISIING pe eeee see 

PANIVi{) leet tent ee ae 
Anthropomorphism 22, 90-I, 124, 321 
ING) 1c Pare n 34-7, 55, 58, 72, 87, 91, 

IOI, 105, 244, 246, 313 
Appeal, approach through. ........ Whey Sle ¥ fe 
179, 190, 204-5 
ANOLE Dae meee 8, 27, 20, 43-6, 50, 77-9, 
90, 93, 121, 129, 135-50, 
TO2selOL 203.) 220" §220, 
251, 255, 259, 263-4, 297- 
; 9, 304, 315, 318, 322-3 
eee 78, eS, 147, 220, 227, 
231, 306-9, 320, 328 
Aryan (See Indic) 
EN Calne bien erent 61, 127, 130, 183 
dN Coo Rene eee 38-9, 63-4, 77, 87, 90, 
100, 104-6, II5, 205, 210, 
292, 204,307, 314, 324 
(See also cosmogenesis) 
ENGI ee ae 27, 40-1, 47, 55-8, 76-7, 
G2). 127, 132, 140, 145, 
186, 198, 313-4 
(See also deities, names 

of ) 
Augury (See divination) 

DNV SEE RE ee Tee Oe ee ee 142 
B 

Baking, treatment by............--..:----- Pre 

Banyanmeneeme 7-2. ee 146-7, 222, 230 

Baptism (See birth) 

Baskets of knowledge.............. 119, 156 

it tite tere ee 48, 50, 52-3, 596, 

63-5, 67, 197, 212-17 
Black magic (See witchcraft) 
le flor! 2t0tg KS, cee eso epee eee 105-6 

IgG melOlecn 3.2204 225-77, 
231, 255, 265 
Breath (See manawa) 

PacE 
Boddhismgs2. == ene 320, 326-8 
Burial (See funerary practices and 

rites ) 
G 

Calendar? 2¢ 30 eee ee IIQ, 300 
Cannibalism 65, 215, 268-70, 282, 328 
Canoe building ........ IOI, 114, 120, 148, 

170, I9I, 282-296 

Carvings (See tiki) 

Cause (See Io) 

Chants and Chanting 7, 10-26, 37, 
56, 63, 65, 74, 88, 90, 
102-3, 107, IIO-II, I17, 
154, 166, 198, 200, 208-10, 
PHU Ohigp Pee) PPP Pye 
8, 233, 241-2, 248-9, 255- 
6, 261, 263, 273; 276-7, 
280, 283, 287-8, 290-3, 
306-8, 310, 314, 317, 328 

Charms (See prayer-spells, witch- 

craft) 
Chastitya 2. ee 139, 233 
Chief (See ariki) 
Childhood's: a5 ane ares 196, 217 
hitiain be oa ee eee a 323-8 
Christianity 27, 95, 149, 233 

Circumcision (See subincision) 
Clairvoyance 61, 66, 165, 184, 233, 241 

Coftins =a. os soe 100, 258, 287 
Cohabitation’. eee ees 64 
Confession s-22 cot eee 242 
Congregational worship ................ 220 

Consecration I9I-2, 278, 287, 291-2, 
293-4, 206, 316 

Contasion wes Ciicn= === 44-5 
Continence 22.6. =e ae 54 
Cook, Captain, death of... e 298 
Coral, ceremonial use of........ 253, 281 

Cosmic cataclysm (See cosmogenesis ) 
Cosmic egg (See cosmogenesis) 

Cosmic eras..........-.:0-.-- 37.91 Ne els 
Cosmice roots 19-21, QI 
Cosmic treens se eee 18-20, 313, 318 

Cosmogenesis......9-25, 34, 37-8, 115-6, 
129, 143, 312-3, 318, 321 

Creation (See cosmogenesis) 

Creation chants (See chants) 

Cremation !2.3.453.. eee 258 
Culture hero (See Maui) 

D 

Dances and dancing 7, 26, 74, 88, 
112-3, 139, 170, 210-11, 
22088228) 1281 8 250;) 200, 
262-3, 276, 290, 306-8, 
310, 314, 317, 319, 328 

338 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Pace 

Death....35, 37, 42, 47, 49-53, 56, 67, 
OS dS zOnmet84.8 107, 
ALOyp, PUA, FAs, PIG PE! 

Defilement....31, 47, 56, 179, 213, 233, 
249, 253 

Dethcation=e. 2 QI-2, 255, 259-65 

Deities, names of....17, 21, 38-40, 43, 
56, 63-4, 74-5, 77, 80, 87- 
We, Wey Tee Tele, ates 
150, 166-7, 235, 304, 309- 
10, 313-4 

Demons....33, 34, 41-2, 43, 48, 49-50, 
51, 66, 88, 90, 91, 92, 133, 
183-4, I9I, 193, 213, 218, 
233, 235-6, 244-5, 247-9, 
25E25O 200m G22 4320 

Divination....32, 48, 61, 73, 122, 129- 
30, 142, 159-166, 186, 212, 
220, 226, 233, 244, 247-8, 
206-7, 280, 286-7, 303, 

321, 327 
IDivOrcomme tn sree ten nec Ces 228 
DOW vant tree hs Se 228, 232 
ID CATS WIN cee Cees Net 50, 61, 165 
IDYROUERa SYS So eee ios Manin ones 

193 
Dualism......34-50, 54-5, 58, 227-8, 313 
Dynamism (See psychic dynamism) 

E 
1 ES RS a oe SRR ella oe a OS 129 
Eight, ceremonial significance of 129 
IEmabalnaitigws. 69, 258, 315, 328 

Epithets of deities....80, 96, 104, 113, 

115 

Eroticism (See phallicism) 

Eschatology (See wairua, ghosts, fu- 
nerary rites and _ prac- 

tices ) 
Esoteric lore and teachings (See wa- 
nanga) 
TES tint @G me eeceee e ene ne os 51, 105, 233 
einosiiaphiysy eee ee 312-30 

Evil (See also hara, demons, dual- 
ism) 41, 51-2 

Evolution (See cosmogenesis ) 

TES@BRH ONG) 001k oes ee ee 233, 243-5 

Bi yie mes 65, 185, 192, 270, 281-2, 299 

F 

Familiars (See necromancy) 

Family (See tupuna) 

Herre meat as ea eer aie eee Se 171 

AS Citi eeen ees 54, 88, 166, 280, 285 

Feasts and feasting....74, 148, 170, 175, 
189, 195-7, 215, 220-3, 
225-6, 228-32, 247, 255-6, 
260, 263-4, 277, 201, 206, 
304, 306, 08, 316 

TCE SESS ee eee 109, 125-6, 259 

Weel comrades nln tie stain ae 5, 88, 209-10 

Female......34-41, 54, 64, 245, 202, 313 

Pace 

Festivals (See memorial festivals, 
seasonal rites, ee 

Fstichism |... 2. ee eee 

Fire....15, 51, 118, 157, 193, 233, Le 
9, 241, 245, 247-8, 270, 
300 

Mirewalkino wes see eee 52 

First born....8, 44, 135, 138, 146, 148, 
169, 179, 217, 225, 228, 
231, 203, 315 

First fruits....45, 88, II1-2, 137, 141, 
188-90, 264-5, 283, 291, 
207, 299, 311, 314 

Fishing....32-3, 114, I17, 120, 134-6, 
I5I, 167, 170, 209, 282- 
96, 299-300, 310 

Floods ee ee ees 15-16, 318 

Food = a2. 49, 54, 195, 247, 270, 318 

Funerary rites....42, 68-9, 88, 132-6, 
183, I9I, 196, 207, 248- 
65, 315, 319, 323, 327 

G 
Games (See sports) 
Giits eee eee 220-3, 228-32, 255-6 

Girdle (See maro) 

Genealogy (See also cosmogony) 
37, 44, 64, 104, 155, 207, 
212, 218-9, 222, 228-30, 
313, 315, 324, 326 

Generation (See cosmogenesis ) 

Ghost parade (See Hiva) 

Ghosts....41, 55, 50, 66-8, 72, 86, 184, 
242, 245, 248, 252-4, 313, 
322 

Gods (See atua) 

Groves sacred (See trees) 

Grow the peer nee ee oe 87, 313 
Ciildsten. eee eee LSI, LS Sseoe7 
Er 
CU Taormina 225, 268 

Hara....53, 56, eae 193, 233, 242, 254, 

anus DicatiOnl = = rr 165 

Harvest (See also seasonal festivals) 
Bee ae tlAN III, 148, 264-5 

Latte were eae 55-8, 268, 275, 2090 

Hawaiki........ 24s OS-670-0, 80, 261, 290 

Head (See also skulls) 25, 43, "46- -7, 
TST) 2075 222 eon ose 
267 

Flead@hintiness ssa 268-9, 319 

Heiau (See temples) 

Healing....42, 47, 50, 52, III, 170, 204- 

5. 314 
Cat eee 65, 185, 192-3, 268, 270 
Heat (See fire) 
ihteranrchysmcelestiqle ss aaeene 94-5 

Hina....77, 99, IOI, I10, 118 

, 221,304 
Hiro (See Whiro) 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 339 

Pace 

EL yale o teres eee rece 5. Be 252, 328 
housebuilding” 28728002 f 282-96 
Clase eee 92, 108, 113, 166-7, an 

sed cope ira eaters Iremn 97, 141, 181-2, 237 
Htc (See wairua) 
Impregnation (See cosmogenesis ) 

IMGATItAtIOMe eee tee nek 145, 165 
Incarnations....46, 84, 91, 93, 125-7, 
129-30, 132 
nidierprme uae cbt Pe 15, 317-20, 326 
inidonesianwer.. 20.0 319, 325, 3290 
Indo-Polynesian........000002..... 312-20, 329 
industutalusitesse tn es 282 

Initiation rites (See subincision ) 

LISTEN OTUNG eae ise es 5 ay ete a 67 
RESTO: “ot te cee AOU 153 
intellectionere eww a ee 5 
TLCS UIMCS aut ee ee ee ye 

lo (See also cosmogenesis).. 
36-9, 56, 58, a) Mes 
80, 87, OI, 94-9, 115, 123, 
156, 197, 206, 312-4, 318 

Iro (See Whiro) 
K 
Kane (See Tane) 
Kaula (See taula) 
ISERIES Ce boa RON 46, 136, 184, 219 

Kava ceremony 162-3, 173, 322, 327-8 
King (See ariki) 

UN OICERS Bie ek Su Se ee QI, 312, 318 
Kuahu (See tuahu) 

Scishiatie eeeee Wee ete oes A 50, 66, 89 
Kura...100, 123, 126, 130-1, 147, 201 
lb, 

Mer ence cia iieee see re 165, 236 
WW epiOS yee etc 47, 50, 90, 241, 258 

Life (See ora) 

Light (See Ao) 

ive iment orto Pes x ise 64-5, 238 
Lizard (See moko) 

Loin cloth (See maro) 

Loins (See maro) 

Lono (See Rongo) 

Looting, ceremonial......................229-30 
Wuakinielieie7 ano Sn t746 278 
81, 287 
M 

Magic (See also rapport, witchcraft, 
prayer-spells) 3, 4, 7, 
164, 248, 251, 316 

Viti tke pees ete eee 118-9, 205, 314 

Makahiki........ 112, 148, 175, 207, 301-6 

Pace 

Male....34-40, 63-4, 87, 98-9, 313 (See 
cosmogenesis ) 

Man, origin of....14, 21, 23, 24, 36- 

40, 107, 313 

Mana (See also head) 5, 8, 26-37, 
43-4, 47, 50, 53-8, 64-5, 
76, 92, 94, 122, 131, 133, 
136, 139, 145, 164, 178- 
81, 189, I9I-2, 195, 198- 
OF 200-MIn ZT den 27.227, 
233, 267, 269-73, 276, 
287-91, 295, 297-8, 306, 

Manawa....35, 39, 55-8, 64-5, 146, 198, 
215, 255, 313 

Manu kutasen 20 ee ee 130-1 

Marae (See temple) 

Maro....123, 143-9, 154, I9I, 202, 213, 
222.9225) 230-1, 27 lecoly 
303, 315, 318 

Marriage....37, 139, 140, 208, 221, 227- 
232 

Massage jet aae eos 244, 246 

Matetializatione-s. see ee 84, 86 

Maui....21, 27, 40, 83, 118, 290, 314, 

324 
Mauri....36, 54-8, 238, 252, 274, 280, 
209, 313 
Meae (See temple) 
Mediums (See taula) 
Melanesiagee es ZT STO 82583 26-0 
Memorial festivals........ 90, 195, 208-9, 

259-65, 311, 315, 328 

Menstruation.................. 41, 47, 212.6226 
Metamorphosis............--.------- 18, 25, 289 
Metaphysical tendency ..................-- 9 
Metempsychosis.............- 84-5, 321, 328 
Mexico (See America) 

Micrones tains: <tr eee ee 325, 329 
Milky Ways... eee IOI, 116 
Miracles 43 28 See pee 1604 
Mnemonic devices ...........-.-...--- 200, 207 
Moko....117, 125, 127-9, 186, 236, 239, 

322, 326 

Monotheisnits 224-3 ee ee 
Moons ee 35, 99, 118, ae 

Mother’s brothers and father’s 
sisters..217, 220, 222, 225, 
230 

Mourning (See funerary rites) 

Mutation (See cosmogenesis ) 

Myths and legends quoted....9-25, 36, 
67-8, 78, 81-3, 103, I12- 
3) TAS melO4N 224)» 260-2; 
289 

N 

Names and naming....65, 207, 217-9, 

221, 252, 260 

Nature (See cosmogenesis, dualism) 
Navel string (See umbilicus) 

340 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Pace 

Necromancy....4, 33, 34, 41, 88, 91-3, 
133, 158, 183-4, 233, 235- 
6, 241-2, 316 

New year (See makahiki) 

Night (See Po) 

Noa....37, 45, 53, 56, 149, 218-9, 238, 

202 
O 
Occult lore, knowledge, teaching (See 
wananga ) 
Octopus.......... WR, A, AG, 1g We), Ser 
Odorssuers ee eee 82, 86, 233, 245 

Offerings....7, 69, 73-4; 88, 90, 148, 
178, 183-95, 200-1, 228, 
233, 235-6, 242, 254, 257; 
262, 268, 283, 288, 290, 
6 

31 
Omens (See divination) 
Ono (See Rongo) 
Ora....27, 35-6, 39-40, 54-8, 64-5, 215, 
217, 238, 244, 274, 313 
Oracle (See taula) 

WratOns ee cee te ees es Ms2eg22 
Onicntatione. <1 ye ae 36-7, 316 
Oro....10I1, 109-10, 126, 131, 147, 266, 
297, 308-I0 
Orerissreiaceeeenens we 2 ony 196, 264, 206 
P 

Papa....34-5, 38-9, 40, 54, 63-4, 70, 
75-6, 80, 94, 99-100, 113, 
11G;) 175, 227-8, ~ 274-5, 
289, 293-4, 313-4, 318, 324 

avadise. sae 72, 76-9, 321, 320 
Parturition (See also birth)............ 207 
RGrsOnihica tiOlbesccce ats eee 88-9 

Peru (See America) 
Phallicism....64, 107, 121, 198, 210-11, 

227-8, 307, 309. 313, 315, 

317, 320 
Philosophy, logical system of...... 5 
TEI GY ODE, cierecseae pepe incensed cetera 214-5 
Rd gtades str cece oe eee 300-I, 304-5 

Po....34-8, 55, 58, 62, 64, 69-75, 79, 87, 
QI, 240, 243, 283, 313, 318 

Roly demotisnige:. 6 ee eee: : 

Roly theism este ee ee ee 

Prayer-spells......7, 26, 34, 35, 53; a 
68, 88, 90, 96, 100-2, 112, 
117, 136, 140, 143-8, 154, 
166, 178-9, 187, 197-208, 
211, 216, 220, 227-9, 233, 
235, 241, 243-4, 246, 264, 
208, 272, 274-5, 277-8, 
280-1, 283-4, 290-2, 295- 
6, 304, 316, 318 

Re ciiamc yer nr 41, 48-9, 54, 139 

RGR GION COU eee acces ee 184 

Priestess (See ruahine) 

Priests (See tohunga) 

IBHOCESSOMS Meee ess ce eee eee 220 

Pace 
rocreationmerctes eee 87, 107 
Propagation (See cosmogenesis ) 
Prophet (See taula) 
Pye bic sccocn castes ep a receueees Bos, Y/ 
Psychic’ atmospheneicr.c-<--seeoee 6 
Psyehici beings icccere estore eee 7 
Psychic consciousness...........------+--- 
Psychic contamination (See de- 
filement ) 
Psychic dynamism....25-34, 199, 209-11 
Psy.chichentitiess: = nese eee 7 
Psychic imitencecen. ee ee 49-54 
PSV.C ici la Ween era eee 50 
Psy chicwlifec. coe ae ee 6 

Psychic power (See mana) 

Psychic rapport (See rapport) 

Psy chichoneallinmesttccc:: sean etree 7 

Plotter ee ee 79, 321, 326 

Purification........ 50-6, 157-8, 177, 202, 
2OANE207. 0 210 a 20S melo. 
227, 242, 273, 276, 278-9, 
281, 284-5, 298, 316 

Pyramid (See temples) 

Raa (OrmRag)) ea ee ere 106, 276 
Rahuteu= see eee 45-6, 149, 263 
Rain (See Rongo) 

Rainbow: Seen OS Bo aiaeh ee 

Rangi sec 34-40, 54, 63, 65, 76- 80, so. 
92, 94, 96, 100, 104, 106, 
T13, 115-6, 123-4, 227-8, 
246, 275, 289, 313-4, 318, 
324, 326 

Rapport....4-5, 7, 26-34, 44-5, 47, 49, 
57-8, 65, 68-9, 88, 133-4, 
137, 139, 141-2, 165, 178- 
80, 182, 210, 213-4, 221-2, 
228, 237, 248, 251, 257, 
259, 268-71, 285-6, 280, 
208, 307, 310, 312 

Red (See kura) 

Retugesplacesm Oia 179, 182-3 

Reincarnation........ 64-5, 84-6, 218, 327 

IR@suscitationmes se ee 86 

Revenge eaeen et 135, 238, 265, 270 

RightVhands... <2... See eee 30-7 

Rocks (See papa, sacred stones) 

Rongo....16-17, 37; 39, 53; 87, 100, 105, 
107-113.) TSS 11S, euro: 
125, 131, 147-8, 150, 201- 
3, 205, 214, 219, 261, 274, 
291, 296-8, 301, 303, 305- 
6, 300, 314, 319-20, 325 

Roo (See Rongo) 

Riahines cc = oe aren es 158, 315 

SaCramentihe ocean eee 189-90 

Sachitices es 73 4c A011, ilo OO, 
183-95, 220, 233, 247, 
254-5, 259-60, 2606, 268, 
277, 279-81, 287, 299 

Handy—Polynesian Religion 341 

Pace 

Sacrifice, human....52, 58, 65, 114, 147, 
150, 175, 177, 184-6, IgI- 
3, 204, 209, 215, 242, 266- 
7, 277, 282, 291, 316, 329 
Sactiticewine eng jee. e ete ct 194 
Sand, ceremonial use of...............- 217 
Seasonal festivals (See also first 
fruits, harvest) 296-311, 

314, 316 
Seasonalmemyilise eer eee 290-7 
SC CIUISIOM Meets en eee erecta 54 
Sennit....125-6, 239, 259, 267-8, 280, 

293 

Sex (See male, female, phallicism) 

Sex theme (See cosmogenesis ) 

Shaman (See taula) 

Slat espera ec! 84, 128, 236, 322 

Shrine....122, 129, 133, 166-182, 184, 
215, 259, 283, 299, 309, 
315, 320 

Sickness....37, 42, 47-50, 53, 60-1, 67, 
84, III, 160, 184-6, 212, 
233-248 

Sin (See hara) 

Skeletal remains....32, 68-9, 132-5, 160- 
70, 242, 257-8, 259, 264, 
269, 315, 319, 327 

Skulls....7, 30, 51, 65, 69, 133-4, 181, 
202, 231, 267, 268-9, 319 

Sky (See Rangi) 

Sky elevated (See toko) 

ky wOrld Src cer esse 76-9, 94, 313, 320 
Songs and singing (See chants and 
chanting ) 

Sorcery (See witchcraft) 
Soul (See wairua) 

Souls OUI Ysa cee 69-86 
SoutheasteANstatiG ees. 310, 32! 
Spell (See prayer-spells, witchcraft) 
SPIE MCATCh Tose ene mee tee ae. 236-7 

Spirit possession (See taula) 
Spirits....33, 41, 49, 76-7, 87-120, 160, 
186 
Spiitialconcepisweeesee. eee ae 6 
Sports and games........ Ti2-3l7O, 220; 
252, 260, 264, 277, 207, 
303, 304, 306-7, 310, 314, 
317, 319 
Steaming, purification by................ 213 
Stones, sacred......172, 176, 179-81, 199 
Stone seats and back rests (See 

stones ) 
TID ITIGISTON meter a esce ae ese rata 223-6 
SUM cg eee cers 25, 34, 52, 103, 105 
Sunlight (See wai ora) 
Srl oii’ perce cece sear e eee 25 
STIPE LIA tinal meme een eee secs ae: 6. 7 

Supreme Being (See Io) 
Sympathy (See rapport) 

PacE 

ab 

Taaroa (See Tangaloa) 

Tahua (See tohunga) 

Tanaoa (See Tangaloa) 

Tane....14, 16-18, 22, 24-5, 36, 39-40, 
52, 55, 63, 68, 72, 77, 78, 
83, 87, 90, 92, 94, 98-109, 
II5, 117-21, 124-7, 156-7, 
202-3, 205, 210, 214, 210, 
225, 228, 240, 242, 280, 
284, 287-8, 209, 301, 314, 
319, 324-5 

Tangaroa (See Tangaloa) 

Tangaloa....I, I1-13, 15, 16, 21, 24-5, 
38, 39, 77, 89, 90-1, 93, 
95, 97, IOI, 104, 105, 108- 
10, 114-9, 123-4, 127, 120, 
132, 188, 204, 210, 214, 
217, 219, 267, 274, 287-8, 
293, 300, 312, 315, 321, 
324, 320 

Tangaloa—Polynesian .............-.-.- 321-8 

Tan ka lo (See China) 

Tapu....7, 9, 27, 37, 41, 43-50, 56, 61- 
2, 65, 68, III, 128-9, 136, 
140-I, 149, 155-7, 158, 
161, 166, 168-9, 172-3, 
176-7, 179-83, 189-90, 193, 
202, 206, 214, 215, 218-9, 
223-6, 233, 241-2, 251, 
253-4, 260, 263-4, 273, 
275-6, 279, 281, 284-5, 
ae 294-6, 2-3 
305-6, 309, 313, 316, 318. 

Taua (See taula) "es 

Taula....30, 46, 61, 84, 123, 135-8, 150, 
I aa 240, 266, 268, 
272, 208, 323, 326 

Taura (See taula) oa 

attooinp eae 53, 200, 224-7, 308 

Temples....114, 122, 131, 166-182, I91, 
193, 220, 278-81, 316, 
328-9 

Tii (See tiki) 

Tiki (god)....40, 99, 106-7, 121, 217, 

~ 246, 257, 314-5, 320 

Tiki....32-3, 36, 93, 121, 148, 167, 173, 
IQI, 264, 271, 279-80, 284, 
289, 208, 303, 309, 315, 
320 

Tohunga....9, 29-31, 46, 77-8, 90, 93, 
96, 98, 115, 120, 135-8, 
147-58, 163-4, 197, 199, 
207, 211, 235-6, 243, 245, 
247, 250, 264, 270-2, 279, 
282-3, 286, 206, 315, 322 

Toko....17-18, 108, 116, 121-2, 124, 163, 
200, 207, 228, 313, 318 

‘Tombs LOSI 2330617550170 323 

Trance 

342 Bernice P. Bishop Museum—Bulletin 34 

Pace 
Transmigration of souls..............-- 84-5 
Treessa0 36-7, 117, 168, 177, 214, 316 
oD rig ieeteet et See sent een aura Hiatiedes 114 

Tu....16-17, 67, 89, 90, 101, 105, 108, 
IK Tine TO) MAI Tuo), 
174-5, 202, 205-6, 214, 
217, 243, 246, 265, 267-8, 
271, 274, 279-84, 286, 280, 
291, 323-5 

stra peer ee nthe ot 167-8, 217, 299, 316 

Tufunga (See tahunga) 

Tuhuna (See tahunga) 

(2515): ape a ae Teli, HUGE AY, aXe}, 4 

ECR EE, 55 a ay 03-4, 322 

Tupuna....19, 30, 43, 65, 70, 77, 84, 
88-90, 92-3, 107, 121-2, 
132-6, 148, 179, 183, 190- 
TS Aroye PARA Brfeis Wax Nts 
248, 257, 262, 264, 207, 
307, 310-11, 315 

Pbirtleese 0). 46, 127, 120, 277, 322 

Tutelary deities....25, 34, 88-00, 92-3, 
UALS) PMO TGAoy Vass 

196, 283-4 
i 
Uhane (See kuhane) 
(Wimbilicticne tea eee 182, 214-5 

Uncleanliness (See defilement) 

Underworld....40, 42, 43, 52, 70-85, 87, 
94, II7, I19, 139, 240, 
263, 313, 320 

Vatea (See Atea) 

Vedic (See Indic) 
Ventriloquism..................:. 160, 165, 244 
Void (See kore) 

PAcE 

Wahi tapnle.. 2 ee 168-9, 173, 315 

Wai ora....18, 36, 39, 52, 68, 72, 96, 
99, I0I-3, 201, 205, 242, 
304, 320 

Wairua....30, 41, 42, 49, 54, 59, 62, 
86-7, 131-2, 196, 108, 238, 
243, 245, 247-0, 254, 256, 
263, 265, 270, 274, 295, 
313 

Wakea (See Atea) 

Wananga....10, 29, 41, 55; 59, 80, 94- 
8, 119, 154, 157, 197, 313 

War....31, 37, 44, 49-50, 52, 91, 106, 
109, III, 134-5, 145-6, 
148, 158, 163, 185-6, 188- 
Q, 191-2, 197-8, 211, 213, 
216, 265-82, 291, 301, 305, 
BAN sto 

War of the gods........ 108, II7, 119-20 

Water, sacred (See also wai tapu, 
Wall Ota) eee 15, 51-4 

Waters, primal expanse of............ 16 

'Weanitigs ieee son eee: 219, 221-2 

Whale’s tooth............ Suet Nae ONAL, 163 

Whare wananga (See wananga) 

Wihiroe se sheets 43, 80, 105, 119, 314 

Witchcraft....4, 31, 37, 46, 49, 52, 66, 
120), 125) 9143, s4S nese: 
193, 195, 199, 233, 237- 

_ 40, 242, 249 
Woman, origin of....23, 39-40, 64, 99, 
313 

Word, the (See cosmogenesis ) 
World Soul (See Io) 

Ke) 
>, a 
[e)) 
Oo 
oOo) 
N 
© 
(2) 
io) 
(2) 
(2) 
2 If 
N 
©
