Experimental Investigation of the Spirit Manifestations
Robert Hare, 1855
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Hare's 1855 laboratory investigation of mediumship — the chemist's 'spiritscope'; the psi canon's first scientific-apparatus classic. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/experimentalinv00haregoog). This 1855 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 


, Google 


, Google 


EXPERIMENTAL INyESTIGATION 


SPIRIT MANIFESTATIONS, 


THE EXISTENCE Of SPIKITS AND THHIH COMMDNION 
WITH MOBTAIS. 


DOCTEIHE OF THE SPISIT WOElt KESPECTBG HEATER, HELL, 
MOEAIIW, AM GOD. 


Intomt of gttiplatt on % Slotals »f S6ri'li"s- 


EGBERT HAEE, M.D. 


Verba animi proftrrvj Tilam Iiopandere veto. 


NEW YORK: 
PAETKIDGE & BKITTAN, 842 BKOADWAY. 

1855. ^ , 

iio.i.db,L.oogle 


rflingtoQctofCoi 


lEreBsJntlwj 


MAKGAEET B, 


OOTJBLAY, 


the Dlatolsl Court 


ot the UDit«d 1 


nsjlyania. 


, Google 


PLATE I. 

Engraving and deKcription of tlie apparatas, wliich, being contrived for Ihe purpose 0/ 
delermi«i«g mhelher Ike maaifeilalioni alirihUed (o spirits caald be made mithovt mortal 
aid, Jy deciding the qveilioa ajirmativclg, led lo lie author'i eoliwMtion. 

(o) PLATE I. Pro. 1, Is as engraving ftoin a. jibotogmpb of Iba nppinitua above nHndei to. The 
disk A is r^iWEnlel n eappoi-tol npon s rod of Iron Ibrmlne the sida on nhirh It turns. To tlio 


Ilia cord C endiOira the pnlley 


ionb of the lattvrS' TIteEo ue placed around the mnrfila of tJie dlE 
- ■ ■ -ut tlio centra of l£e dlsli, like a hnl> to a carrlajo nhe. 


.._ . . ^ B(l to irelghta, whlcb, vbm the ta 

other i^roni^h tlio pnlley; one beiu^ so large as to he InunoTahler the other so Email as lobe lifted. 
Of conrse a hook in the Uoor may he snbsUtated fOr Ibe larger n^^t- 

PEASE'S APPABATU8. 

trived by niya^f. The nhole« thus modlAedr has beeu named the Sph^loscope- 

|c) The appnratns thns de^gnated conelsts of a hox F, wiiich Is a, uiniatnTe represenlatlon of s 
low, square, ftuc ^ded honse, with a elr^le doping roo^ bat without any floor elosiUK it at the 
bottom. 

(d) On Uie outside of the part scrvinit as the root; the alphahetlo dial Is de^ed. On the Inner 
snriace of the roof hoard, the roring, pulley, and stihigB are attached, by which Um index is made to 

(e) G represents the vibrating lever upon which the medinm^s hands are placed. When test condt 
tioDB are not requi^te, her hands should be situated so as thnt merely one-bfllf may be on ench side 

be altogether on tie porUon of the board wlilBh is between tbe osterlor end of The board and the 
fulcrum. When thus placed,it la ntterTy]tnpo?elblolo more tbe lever so ae to cause it to select letters, 
. or lo control tbe seleoilou, by eoj sph-lt who may be employing them to make a crunmunlcatloB.* 

diHk or dial-bee; there are lUievlse words, the dibits, and notes of mu^ 

(g) The words are aa ftlJows: Tn—Diniitfiil—Ifa — Doi'l laiovi—I Ihliii: sn—Amislalix—Fatptait 
over — A mmigi— Doric — rU come again — Goadij/e^I must leaM. These words are pdoted on eqid. 
distant radial lines, nearly dfyldlng tbe arm between them. The dlsila are printed on radial hues 
Intermediate between those on which the words appear. 

serfo for the IndiMngof musical notes; respecting which the direotlons are given, hy Pease npon a 
printed slip of paper paste* inside. 

(*) Tbe indeit in this Instrnment Is secured upon the outer end of a mvot supporting a pnlley of 

_t — ..o^_, — ..._i_ ,_ 3i — ^*._ '"^- flnrlng consisls of a coll of brass wire, of which one end la fiis. 

■^' -' whiEh the DuMde thrms (be surfiice Ibr the letters, dto., 

, ...__ ^_ ^ „jd. heyonil theordl to abont ^hicbes, and, by means of 

a loon, has a string of catgut tied to It securelT' This string !■ Distened to a perSiratlon in the firot. 
Another piece of the rume kind of string is nstenad to tiie drcumfSience w Uie puiloy. The [drot 
being turned so as lo wind upon it Iha stiing prooeedhig from the spring, and thus (onatralning it so 
as to make It capable of eSaitnal rendl ftom tha pulley, tbe iattei may, with a little care, he mode, 
aa the spring raeoHs, to wind abont It anothet shrlng duly attached to its ^ronmihi^nee. "Tb^ strings 
b^ng tbuB wound, ^one to the right, ttie other to the left,) when tbe Rtrlng cttscbed to the pulley IS 
pnlledlhnutbeontsldeDf flmboi,itisimiroand thenflinn, and mcmwhUe winds that attached to 
the aiding ppnn tbe pivot. The' reaction of the spring when left to itself; reversea this process, pro. 
ftudng the opposite vevolulipu in the pulley. The Inflei attached to the plTot of conree turns in ona 
directkin or the other, as the pivot le actuated by tbe drawing out or re&actiDn of the string which 
proceeds from it. This, at the outer end, la tied to a ring, wmch prerents It fcom receding into the 

the lever, Bctuale the index, caning it to point to the lettei-s, words, or flgnres distributed on the £ice 
of the disk, as above mentioned. 

(J) The apparatus of Pease above described, agreeab^ lo the de^gn of Uie maker, operates 1? 
means of a string estending fmm the bnn ring, In which the pullay strlnff terminates externally, 

tilHngifthe table, by ralMng the 'end at which the box Is dtoalsd, causes tbe waixht to pull the 
Btrlng, and of coarse to induce the revolution of "Uie pullqy, Its pivot, and correBpondlng ludu The 
roet«vilon of the table to Ita nsnal podflDn reverses the motion. Hence bj these means tJie index 
may be moved either v^, aa reftnldte Ibr the stieetloa <tf tbe letteis reanlred 9tc econmunleating. 

er ^gnre In the same plate ToprEsentfl Pease^ dish apparatus, BO arranged, OS to be atBxed 

' — -*-—■ 1- -■' -,-^- i™.^ *i_, ^ ^, ?_T. ii__ ■— Yihratea la so made as to be 

^- a vertical p^e, is Bupportetl 

Le disk It is fiistened by being Intro- 
resembilng that by which a square 


ut % of an Inch In diameter. The spring cm 
Ed into the Inrfae of the rootbnard (0) of wh' 
lie the other eud of the wire Js prDdn^ed h> 


'esliga^on on Uedia; also PI 


, Google 


, Google 


, Google 


, Google 


PLATE n. 
Deacryitioti of the iasiTuiiiertt hy vihieh »pirili were enabled to move a table Jinder iht 

infiuenee of mediumship, yel m no mise under the control of the medmm employed, eve/t 

elairvoJ/iatce ieBig nullified. 

(i) The table is about eii feet in length, and eiiteen inotes in width, no contrived 
as to separate into three parts for conyenienoy of carriage. 

(j) The pair of legs under the right Mde are upon castors. Those on the left side 
upon an axle, passing through parftorations suitably made for ita reception. The 
aile consiata of a rod of about j of an inch in thickness. The aila aocves for two 
wheels of about six inches diameter, of which one is grooved. A disk, already de- 
scribed as apperliuning to apparatus in a preceding page, is aeoured upon a pivot 
affixed to a strip of wood, ■which is made to slide between two other Eiiips attaclieil 
to the frame of the table just under the top board. By tbeao means, the band em- 
braces both the bub of &e disk and the wheel ; when this turns in conaeqnenoe of 
iie shoving of the table horijontally along the floor, Uie disk turna with the wheel, 
and as much faster as the circumference of the groove in the hab, is lesa than tjiat 
of the groove in the wheel. 

(k) Tho index is in this apparatus situated precisely as in that described in Plate 

I. ; and any mortal having due hold, of tho table, may, by shoving it one way or the 
other, bring any letter nnder the index, so aa to spell out any desired word. But no 
person, sitting as tie medinm is in the engraving represented to ait, with the plate 
on two balls, can actuate the disk bo as to spell out words aa above mentioned. Ut- 
terly incapacitated from moving the table, it were manifestly impossible to actuate 
the disk, or to interfere with the moveaients otherwise imparted. 

(I) In the employment of the apparatus (Plate I.) it has been suggeated that 
througli cl^rvoyance the medinm might see the letters, despite of the screen, o: 
might learn them from the mind of the observer ; but in this case the medium sees 
the letters without the aid of elairvoyancy; bnt this power does not aooonnt for the 
regulation of the manifestations ; since, even seeing the letters, they cannot control 
the movements so as to give to the intuitive power thus exerciaed any efficacy. 

(«) On the surface of the table, on the right, may be seen a board upon castors. 
Thia was contrived as a snbstitnte for the plate on balls. The castors, of course, 
perform the some office as the balls in allowiDg a solid material commnnioation be- 
tween the hands of the medium and the table, without giving the power to induce 
or control the movement. Evidently, though by imy horizontal impulse the medinm 
might caaae the castors to turn and the board to move in consequence, the force 
necessary to effect thia must fall short of that requisite to move the table. 

{ji) In point of fact, the board, when under tho plate, balls, and hands of tho me- 
slinm, was often moved rapidly to and f. o, without moving tiie table. To move thia 
under such conditions without moving tho board or tray, required a distinct spiritual 
process, of much greater difficulty, and which some spirits were wther mmiiUiiig or 
unable to employ successftilly. 

See "Mediumghip" in this work. See also 164, 166. 


;;■ Google 


, Google 


, Google 


PLATE ni. 

(o) On Iho opposite page is a representation of an ospcrimGnt, in wliieli tlie men 
dium was prevented from having any other eommunication witli tlie apparatus, 
aotuatad under Ms mediomship, eicepting tlirougli water. Yet under these oircum- 
stauces tlie spring balance indioatad the exertion of ft force equal hi 18 pounds. 

(p) A board is supported on a rod so as to make it serve as a fulcmni, as in a 
see-saw, escepling Ihitt the fnJcrum is at the dJEtanee of only a foot from one end, 
while it is three feet from the other. This end is supported by a spting-halmca 
which indicates pounds and ounces by a rotary inde;;. 

(q) Upon the board, »t about sis inches from the fulcrom, there is a liole into 
which the knob of an inverted glass vase, nine inches in diameter, is inserted. 

(r) Upon two iron rods proceeding vertically from a board resting on the floor, 
so as to have one on eadi side of the vnse, a cage of wire, such m is used to defend 
food from flies, of about five inches diameter, ia uphold [inverted] by the rod within 
the vaae concentrically, so as to leave between it and the sides of the Taee an in- 
terstice of an inch nearly, and an interval of an incli and a half between it and the 
bottom of the vase. 

(s) The vase bdng filled with water until within an inch of the brim, the me- 
dium's hands were introduced into the cage and thus secured from touohing the vase. 

{() These arrangements heing made, the spirits were invoked to show their 
power, when repeatedly the spring-balanoe indicated an augmentation of weight 
equal to three pounds. The relative distances of the vase and balance fi 
fulemm being as " ' "" " " 
yet the medium di 
esperienced none. 

that! 

bassador, who alleged w 

te be walked upon. 

(v) The belief in spiritual agency was treated as a mental disease, with which I, 
of course, had been infected ; those who made this chaj^e being perfectly uncon- 
seioua that thoir education has associated morbid inoredulils' wi& bigoted and fa- 
natieal credence. 


, Google 


, Google 


, Google 


, Google 


PLATE IV. 


tnteJ, "roEmibUng those oris 

ilwipH 1o It loo^for, wit 
.llowUieimdeKtIii'ougliiiUi 
momy of cnBting iiie di^s < 


>reseutalion ara Bpliitoscopes, under modi- 
joiiiwMcLPeaaB'adialiaemplDTed. Tor 
ineWy aaiplovsd by mo, 118 rrprBMmied in 
ae Id revolve under itie iadei: Mblte la 
.t rest. The advantage of Mvlng tbe diali 


ets uum a plug Hreirsd into tbe baB&.lxnTd ; upon this plug tt nuy be &ateDed by iJtB eat aarvw <>). 
ByBlfaing thBiod (fjinwiirf, thediik nuff batiinifiilbalf nrand upon the plug, ■» as to ^kcb the 
lettered SDi&ee oat la tlie dght of tlie me^om, wluM powel to inflnenns tbe oommaulontloni \a thui 
nulMed. Tlilals one mode olsttalnlng test condltlans; In otlur words, tbusa omdltloDB wbLoh nuilca 
It Impoodble tlist the communliiaUoni nfieivad Sbould be due to any mortid, (IM (o IMJ unlen, as 
giatmtJInBly nnd ertonoouely, as I lalloye, BUnged, the maliadi by olaitvoyancy sees the lettais, 
(eej By nuother method test conditions are obtidned nbleh are not eipDBed to this eviL 
{dd) The method to nbicb I aUude has been expMuea la llie deserlpUou of Plate X la leferencs to 
the Hpiiitoacepe formed nith tlie aid of a FeaBS's disl^ Hjngrbpb (_e\ Tlie process \b the same la the 

Uluatratlon of Uie lever board L Is more coniplcaaus. In the nnJinsty mode of onentli^ Mltliout test 
Dondltlona, the band of the medium Is so sttiiatsd as to Lave nearly bait of It Dt^na the fidcram, 
mark«lb7thallua^.&. TTlieu teat cDndltions are Ifflpcsed, ttie t^ of tbe llngen only reach to thit 
line, wlthoat going beyond It. Bltnatad la last mentioned, the medinra to irhom they appmtaln can- 
not more tJmioiJt, beoanB It la alreat^ ogobiBt ths loner edge of the disk, whleh prerente it fiom 

llilons thus made evldentsre often appalled to as one proof, amoDg 

d credentials are from the humortal northles of tbe spirit norU. 

(es) Jis. 2 la analogous In Its mode of operating, to tbe apparotns repnsenteii In Plata II. II h {n 

the EnbsUtutkin of a small board for a table that the principal dl9erence conElat3.t Tbe board reqobes 

only to be large enough to allow the bands In rest upon it in ironl of the disk. The index Is actuated 

bj a hei^ontal motion to and fro, which, as In the apparatus Plate H., chubbb the i-otA^n of a sup. 

^k on the [iTf4 to wMi^ the indes Is Kcared la fl*ont. The sliding pulley P being Ihsteued at a 
due dlBtanoB.lkom the disk (o), la used to keep (he hmd tight. 

(ff) This instrunient la nrefenwHytbe s^tB, and la aaider Sir a foeblc medium to employ effet- 
biaJly. I cannot u yet ar^ myself of Tig. 1; ihrongli Elg. 2 1 have had sonie interesting testa. 

(Be) Tbla Cum, then. Is beet for Incipient mediumBhlp. 

(AH Sio. a Ba^ ha amplrred under test conditions, hy so situating It as that the dial sball be on 
the doe oppii^te to that wliere the modinm rdta; under these clrcumstanceE she eauuot see tJie Index 

(iv of clalrvDyant power, 'enabling themnllnni to see tbroi^h the cast-lien. orKad tbe letters in Uje 
minds of tbe bystanders. Tbbpowerl have never witnessed; yet it la ahanrdly attributed to media 
who, as well as all their tHenda, are Ignorant of the esiatenee of any such power. 

(ii) Anoth^ mode of teatlng Is that UlnetratBd io Plate II-, irhere a plate upon two Imlla eupports 
the bands of the mfdlum, and fitnne the only means of condnoting CDmmnnieatTon between the me- 
dium and apparatna. It may be easily conceived that Instead of the bauds being placed npon the 
hoard, the plate and balls bf4ng Interposed, the hands of the medium may be support^ over the board 

See im, las, H^TrTioe. ""^ ' "^ * ' 

(j^) EiCK3,F]atel'V.>iBaFHpreBentationDf an aSHjdatian of serrated strlpsof Iron In a wooden frame, 

the medium, Is Wnd to increase the ellleai^ of the medium ship- It Is only of importance to use It 

suggested, will be stated under the head of medlumship. It will be percHVed that the bIm of tbe 
frvne is not In dne proportion to the lever board, being upon a larger scale. But this renders It more 


bundty about STJ cants a ploco. One may be used as a pattern by whic 

hands of the maliuni, 1^ whioh suffldent pressure is secured to make il 
1 portion thus jjren does not Sill into tho plane of the pulley at Iho bar 

osition where It is coincident with the phine aforesrdd. The wheel Is vis 


, Google 


, Google 


, Google 


CONTENTS. 


F —Letter ftom J P Lanmng Esj — Xp ntual commim at n through tlie 
unah p of Mr Lanning to the author — Authors Eeply — Cu iimnn oatjon 
an ussemblj of eminent sjiinti saaotioning under test conditions ilie ore 
1 through Mr Lanning— PoBtsot pt hy Uie author — Supple 


mental Pretboe 
Imeoddotioi — The eiidenoe of the esietenee of a Deity by the author — Tlieilo 

giojtl Asioms ] 

I-iTDiTivB EviEEHCB CF THE ExisTBMj: OP Sfihits — HaiTatiTB of t] auihor B 
esper mental jnToeligation of Spirit alisni — letter in reply la an inquiry respeol- 
g th I fl of Elaotiicitj in Tfthla Tnrmng— Of Manifaetationa fonndLd on 

i m V "h tact, or sneh i]oatiii,t aa oanno( be snffiolent to oauBa the 

ro — H mn h ted and reply ; 

n TTVH E B H Off THE EiJSTENOE OB bPHtiTS — EvidencB ttEordod by 

th K All P tn m of Eosbnir, Mnaa. — BiidBHCB of Dr. Bell, of Somomlio, 
B a— H ra arieingfromignorunoeof faols, (110, 283, 864) ! 

P Q C HH EVIDBSCB OF THE EXISTBNCB OP SpIBITB — Monifcstft 

n wh h urr n Pranco in 1851— Letter from T. R. P. Ventm'a— Letter of 

C — L te M F. De Sauloy — Spiritualism in Paria— Spiritual Manifesto. 

ti £ an and G) rmany — Spiiituslism in Great Briti^ — Letter of Robert 

Ov B q ( 

M a H HE Spikit Wobld. — Remaria introdnctory to ray spirit 

th mrtum ti — My father's oommunioation — Communioation from a epi- 

a th ' — Additional commnnications from spirits nho died ivhile in- 

aEta — C mm rom a Tory young spirit child to its parents ! 

Op SpiEiTuAt. Bin™.— NarralJTOa giyen by spirits of thoir tranalalion to the spirit 
world — NarradTB of his spiritual birth, by W. W, a moat benevolent spirit — The 
spirit Maria's narratire — My sister's acoount of ber tranalatioa to the spirit norld 

— My brotber'a aecount of his spiritual birth, &e II 

CoMYOOATios OP SpiBiTS. — Six^-ftiiir queries addressed to a convocation of worlhiea 
&om the spirit world; also their replies to the aatne, (through the mediumship of 

Hrs. Ooarlay,) confirmed under oonditiona which no mortal could pervert 1'. 

EiroaiTios op thb Ihpohmation beceivbd from thh Spieit World V 

Apolooy pob hy Costeksios.- Eoaaona for my change of opinion, and belief in 
the esiatenoB and agency of spirita — On the whereabout of heaven — Correspond- 
ence with Mr. Holooml 


niTFAusji ' 


OF Spii^....s. oo.Tn.aTsi 


, „. ,„ H.„., ™ 


S TO Heavbh bbino otbkbb^ 


iD.— Diaoordanoe as to the 


— Ihe Eov. H. HacbaHgh's oplni 


on reapccting heaven 


, Google 


b CONTENTS. 

Op CotsTBR-MEDinusHiF. — Oh tha inflnenco of the Hl-treatmBot of media on spi- 
ritual manifeBtiidons— The auttot'a liiaooTery of tis powers as amodium IBS 

On PsicBologicATj BxrtiNiTioNS of BPiaiinii. MiHiFESiiTiosB 16S 

Ar.PHiBETio CoHYEBSK WITH SpiiUTS. — Modcm prooflss for aiptabetie oonTerae witli 
apirita ss neir as tlint of eloctric telograph,.. ^...........,4....... .»...» 173 

Inplttenob op Mundjne Wejitb in the Wokld to comii. — AiMording fo tha api- 
ritual code, rieliee eievnte or degriuSe aooordbg to Uia morality diaplayad in their 
acquisition and employment 1TB 

Mrs. QoTrltLil'B JTAHRiTITE OF HEB OoSTERSIOH 10 SPlETTTtiUaiS. ITfl 

PBioncAr, Behepii op SpjBmtiLiSJt.— Illnatration of the ptaeUcal beneSt of Spi- 
titualiam, ia the Lnppioeaa imparted by the conversion of on nnbeliever lo a beiief 
in immortality— La tter from a spirit (laughter^Corrcapondonoo irith a epirit bcothsr. 162 

MinEiiGB OS EiBTBAHD IS EEiYEH. — The h jmBneal tio in the apitit world grows 
ont of the ncocssilff of the connnbial nnion in the mandane sphere—" Free love" 
impntaUon xeftited 20i 

Inflpeboe of Sobiptube on the Mobals of Cheistiams.— The morality of Cbria- 
tendom being iMOOOOoilable with the Hew Teatament, oannot ho ita legitiniate off- 
spring — InsphTitJon can have uo higher authority than tie Jinman teatimony on 
wMoU its eiistenoe is nrrogated — Injurions influeaoe of unrensonahla reatriction — 
No one would believe that a, capable farmer would malio auoh a mistoiie as to saw 
gailio instead of wheat; yet God, whilo reproacnted as having intended to sow 
ProteatanMsm, is considered aa having caused tlironghout CliristODdoro a crop of 
Catholicism, in the Romim or Qreoian form, for more than a thousand jeara : those 
weeds slill ocoupying more than half of the whole aoil— Letter of William Pitt, af- 
tevwaidBarl of Chatham— Offer of guidanca by amundane spirit— Improper ubb of 
the epithet Infidel- On Atonement— On the massaore at Sinopo— Opinions o( God 
held by Sir Isaao Newton — On God and hia attribulos, by Soneoa— On the better 
employment of the firat day of the ireek — Additional romarlis respecting the ob- 
servanca of the Sabbath, so called — If creaturca be not bo ccoated as to love their 
n^ghbonrs aa themselves, precepts can no more alter them in this respect tiian 
change the colour of their hair or the number of cubiia in their Btatui'e— Attacks 
upon the authenticity of Scripture cannot endanger the prevalent moriJity, which, 
while superior to tiiat of the Old Teatament, indicates a recklessness of the pre- 
cepts of Christ, esceptiDg so for es failh ia upheld aa a counterpoiao for sin— The 
doctrine of a peculiar belief being noeoasary to solvation, and a counterpoise for 
sin, a source of discord originally oonfined to Judea, exploded with ChrisKonlty 
and Islamism: verifying Christ's allegation, that he came "aa a sword, not as a 
mesaengec of peace"— Superior morality and far less qnestionoble oerlalnty of tha 
commnnications from the spirit world — Quotation from Mosheim — Quotation from 
Gibbon— For more than a thousand years, tho Grecian or Eomon Oatholio clergy 
were the sole depositories of the word of Ood, so called, and regulators of religioas 
morale; yet, according to Bishop Uoplcins, during that time, the clergy were for 
tho most part pre-eminent in vice, as compared with the rest of tho commuBifyi 
■whence it ia inferred that, like Popo Boniface, tho wielied clergy in general were 
nnbeliovera in tho truth of tho gospel— If the morals of the modem clergy ore 
better, it ia neither from tha barbarons esample furnished them in the Old Testa- 
ment, nor tha ulUu precepts of the gospel; being too much enlightened to bo go- 
verned by either — Summary made by Bishop Hopkins — Any religion, like that of 
Moaea, which does not make immortality a primary considerodoii, must be chiefly 
confined te worldly objecla, and, of conrae, unworthy of oonsidEration. People 
profeas Christianity more from a desire to do right, than they do right in conse- 
quence of their profesaiona- A cnlnmny against human nature to represent men as 
wi(fulls Ignorant of the true religion — To appreciate the Jewish representaUon of 
tho Deity, a reader should first form an idea of this planet and ilB inhabitants. 


;;■ Google 


CONTENTS. I 

comparatively with the hundred millions of solar BjsteiQa, and the inoonceiTable ''''' 
eitent of the spa^e which encompasaes tliem, and nhich falls nithia the domain of 
one oommon Deil^— Onr actiona dependent, under Qod, on otganiiatJon, ednoa- 
tion, aQd the estent io whioh we are tempted eitraneonaly — On probation — 'World 
loaat moral wten the Chriatian chuvoh had most away — Honoui' and maroantile 
credit more trusted than reli^on. Virtuo duo morn to the hoart than to ssctarian- 
isra. Bigotry acta lika an evil spirit — Progreaa of literatuiB and scienoe in Arabia, 
under tlie Mohammedan panliffa, called calipha 20< 

AdDITIOSAIj COBROBOBiTIVE EviEENCE OP THE EsiSTBKCB OP SpIBITS. — The Opi- 

moD9of MM. do Murille and Gasporin on Table Taming and Mediums, (con£idered 
in relation to theology and pb.yaLCS,} csnmiaed by the Abbot Almignana, doctor of 
the oommon law, theologian, &o. — Meehanisal moTements without coEtoot, by Mr. 
laaao Behn, President of tte Harmonial Society, PhilHdelphia — Communication 
from J. M. Kennedy, Eaq.— Communication IVom Wm, "Wea^ Esq.— Koona's Esta- 
bliahmcnt — Communications from Joseph Hazard, Esq. — A riait lo the SprritualiatB 
of Ohio— Letter from John Gage— The liome of tlio medinma, and the hannta of the 
apirita — What Ihey did, said, and wrota — ^Tho houae of the Spiritunlists — Presence 
of eleotriiuty — The room where the spirits manifest thdr power — Tha furniture 
Mid occupnnta — The manifestatioaB commence — The spirits play on drums, tarps, 
Prencli torns, acoordeons, and tamborines— The manifestations contiana, and the 
liead spirit writea a oommunloadon— Tte Spirit's lettei^MJonoiuding rematkE— An 
evening at Eoons's spirit room, by Cfliariea Partridge, Esq., New York — Biperience 
(£ the Hon. H. P. TaUmadgo— Letter from Mr. D. H. Hume— Spiritnaliam in Lon- 
don—Lord Brougham with the spicita — Evidence afforded by tho Rov. J. B. Fer- 
guson — An espoaition of viewa lespactiog the priDoipal ftuls, causes, ajid pecu- 
liarifiea involved in spiritnalinanifeataligns, together with interasting phenomenal 
Btatemeuts and oommunicationa, by Adm Ballon— TestmiODy of tho Hon. J. W. 
BdmoB da— Testimony of Eonrj Lloyd Gatnaon — Testunony of Mr. and Mis. 
Newton— Testimony of members of the New York cnole— Taatimony of the Eev. 
D. P. Goddard, Boston — ^Mnnifoatations at Stratfoid, Connectteut, in tho Iiouse of 
the Rev. Eliakim Phelps, D.D. — Eemnrkable Oihibition" of power — Singular oo- 
eurrences — Imoge-moting — Deslinotion of flmniture — Ineendmry spirita — The 
spirits identified — Unhappy spirits, from the remambrance of wrong done in this 
world — Wrong doing revealed — Directions given for restoring ill-gotten g^na— 
Discontinuance of tho manifostntiona — Idea of the existence of a spiritual sun, 
and a vital apiritaal oxygen, found to exist, independently, in tlie mind of a much- 
esteemed autiioc 2'! 

Ob Matter, Mihd, ano Spieit. — Of matter — Strietares on a apeoHlaUon by Earra- 
day rospaotjng tho Datura of matter — On 'Whowell'a demonstration that all matter 
is heavy — Additional remaris on the apeonlatlon of J'nrraday and Biley, above 
noticad— Of mnndano, ethereal, and ponderable matter, in their chemical relationa 
— Suggestions of Mnssotti, respecting the nature of matter — On electro-polarity as 
fie canse of eleolrioal phenomena — Of mind, aa esisting independenSy, and as dia- 
tingniahcd from matter — Of spirit independently, or aa disfinguiahed from mind 
and matter — Of fte sou!, as disiinguialied from mind and matter — On the odic, or 
odylic force 3t 

IlELiBiona EnEona o? Mb. Maban. — Propoaition of Mr, Mahan — Of the orlgiQ of 
the Boots of Moaas no higher CTidenoo eiiata, according to the featimony of tlie 
Bible itself, than tliat of an obaeure priest and a fanatical king — Scriptural no- 
count of tha Ending of the Books of Moses by Hilklah, tho high-prioat — Account 
of the finding of the Books of Moses, by Joaephns— If the Pentateuch tad been 
previously known to the Jews, it is incredible that it could have become obsolete 
and forgotten prior to the alleged discovoiy of it in tha temple in the reign of 
Joaioh — Great importance attached to abelief in immortality by Cyrus the Great, 


, Google 


8 CONTENTS. 

King of Persia, aa contrastad with tJio mokloasnojs of Moses respecting tlie same "■"" 
baliaf— Tho worship of s. bools, idolatry — Bridenoe of Joaephus and Gibbon ks.' 
Mr. Mahau — The worshippers of die golden oalf more righteons than then: aasnaains 
— Jnst donunoiation of the religions inipostnre and lunrpatlon of Moses, by noblo- 
minded lEraeliies — Remarkablo obsorvance of the golden rule by Moses, in his last 
advice to tho iBraclitoa — Straining at spiritual gnats while BWidlowing scriptural 
raimela — Tie eridenoe wtioh is inenfficiont to establish tho iniqnity of a sinner 
cannot bfl Bnfficicnt to establish tho divine aulhorily of a book— Word of God, bo 
called, or tha golden mle inverted by God's alleged eommnnda — Pagan fearlesS' 
nass of death — Obserralions of Mr. Hue, a Chriaticn prioat, that it is thoir religion 
which makes ChrisUanS moro fearful of death tJion tho Chinese — Mr. Hue's obser- 
vations—Conclusion of Etriotnrea on Mr. Maban'a religious errors. 396 

CoNOLKSiON. — The Pontaletioh inoonsistenlly represented as the baas of a belief in 
human immortality — Injustice of representing disbclievors lathe BlMo as not hav- 
ing as good ground for belief in immortality as those who rest thoir belief on a 
work which, by its Bilcnco, tends to discountenance the hope of a future life — 
Those iiho uphold tbe Bible against Spiritualism, the real antagonists of the only 
saljafaclory evidence erer given to nan ef a future habitation in the spirit world... 423 


, Google 


CONTENTS. 


APPENDIX. 

Lbtteb to tub Episoopili CLEEnr.— Lettar from Dr. Hate to t!ia clergy of Uie 
Proteatnnt Episcopal Chntoli, offering to Joy before them tiie new evidence qf im- 
mortality. (Submitted to the lile conTenfion, Pluladolphia, May 16, 1855.) 43? 

A Lettbr rnoit Dn. Earb. — Addressed to tie Association for the Advanoeraent of 
Soieaoo, at their meeting, August IB, 1355 — PiBlimlnary lenmrka 430 

FABBADAT'a SPBciTiiA'non — Speculation loncliing electric oondaotios and the nature 
of mctter By Purradaj 432 

MoTIVEa Fia REPTTBLISHlSa MT Meuoie OH Electbicai. Theoby. 437 

EleotbicAl Theory — Objections to the theories seyerally of Erniiklin, Dufaj, and 
Ampere, Witb an effort to esplum eleotrioal phenomena by staljaal or nndulatory 
polariintion — <iuppoaed grounds for a theory — Proofs of the esislenoe of on enor- 
mous quantity of imponderable matter in metola — Eieotricol phenomena attributed 
to tat oa y or undulatoi? polarization — On the perfect aimilitudo between the 
p la ty mmunicatcd to irs n Clings by a magnatiied steel bar and a galvaniiad 
w — P as by which the eihtreo-pondcrable atoms itithin a galvanic oivenit ace 
p laru d by the chemical reaction — Difference between electro-ethereal and ethsreo- 
p nd abl polarization— Compotonoy of a hItb to convey a galvanio dischflige is 
a t B t nal area, while statical diaohargas of friotional electricity, proforring 
tho ufa are promoted by its estenaion. Yet in proportion as suoh diaohargeB 
are heavy, the ability of a wire to canrey them and its magnetic energy beuome 
more dependent on Its sectional area, and less upon estent oE snrfliee— Difference 
betneen ttictional electricity and gulTonio does net depend on the one b^ng SQp&. 
nor as to quantity, tbe other as to intensity ; but on tho different degrees in which 
Qie ethereo-ponderabie atoms of the bodiea affected are deranged from theii; ua- 
tnral state of nentralized polarity — Of etharec-ponderablo deflagration — Summary. 439 


, Google 


, Google 


, Google 


1 


!n 


■ 


'li 


E 


7 


i 


~M 


r 


*■}- 


■'i 


JK 


d 


r 


".. ■■ 


t . 


^ 


1 


IS 


M 


i 


Li 


■ 


yU/'^zfe^ /u^^. 


„ Google 


PEEFACE. 


Ab prefatory to this volame, it may be expedient here to introduce 
the credentials which I have lately received from the spirit world. 
With the medium of their communication, Mr. Lanning, of this 
city, No. 124 Arch St., I have had but little intercourse, knowing 
him, however, by report, aa a good man and a zealous spiritualist. 
The communication which I owe to his mediumship, was utterly un- 
expected by me, never having, in any way, hinted to him, directly 
or indirectly, that it would be desirable to receive such an indica- 
tion of confidence and approbation. 

The first and only knowledge which I had of this, to me, stir- 
ring appeal, is comprised in the following letter from Lanning. 
The difi'ercnce between the style of his own language, though very 
good for its purpose, and that which he ascribes to the spirits, mast 
corroborate his allegation that this address did not originate in 
his brain. 

On submitting the address to my spirit father, he sanctioned the 
idea of its proceeding from spirits. 


Sear Sir: I send you tie following comnraniealioii, and think it to be an emaaa- 
tion from the spirit life. I feel not a, little reluetaDoe in so doing, for it is aeldom 1 
can get any thing for oiliei-s. Hon it may auit year mind, I do m>t know, nor do I 
wieli to impose it npon you for any thing worthy your oona-iieratlon. I would hesi- 
tate much te instruct one so mueh my senior, [ind whose name I esteem, were it not 
that I love a cause eo near jour heart; and I feel that my mind is only the channel 
tiirongh which I hOTe every eyidcnoe, the nnseen in the spirit life, at limes give 
thwr thoughts to mortals. I have no idea from what spirit it came, but foiow U did 
noi ortgrnate in my own bi-am. 

Very truly, years, J. F. LlKsiKa. 

Pi-of. Robert Hare — Venerable and mnoh-esteomed friend, it is sn unwonted plea- 
sure with us to number jou as a leading mind in the ranks cf this new and better 
gospel which is being glten to the dwellers of earth. We see tlie many and per- 
plexing difficultjea which, to you, apparently hiader your progrcaa in this path to 
light and lore, and we sympathize with you in all your efforts to unfold your mind 
and to render it useful aod happy. 

II 


,v Google 


12 

Could jou aae the great gloj'y wMch is to be tto issue of your labours in the new 
unfoldingg of spiritual science, you would not despiur of your mission, nor weary in 
yonr deyotion to it. Let us ask you. If there is any earthly Crnie or conaideraUon 
that oould induoe you to turn book agiun to tie familiar paliis in ■which a, life of pa- 
tient labour has been spent? If Hiere is any earthly joy or brilliant attainment 
which you Lave evei' enjoyed, woriiy tobe compared with the little you have realized 
rfnoe you commenced your iuTeatigationa in this iie most important pursuit of your 
Mfe ? Ask yourself how much happiness you haye found in the contemplation of that 
fiiot which has been demonstrated, not only io your wishes, but to your senses, 
that tie Uunking mind fieva- dies; that the gcaro, which is but the wardrobe of the 
oast^off garment of the spirit, has no power over the soul ; that it liTcs on, lives cuer, 
and must throughout tLe oeaselesa ages of etemii^ continue to unfold its powers. 
Ask yourself, what is earth, what is fame, what is the endearment to your present 
life, whan oonti-aated or compared with the nssuranoe which you now hove, that th^e 
is no death, no loss of your individuality, no severmg of the lies of friendship and love 
which shall not be renewed again in that fairer land, the home of tJie angda, whither 
yon and aU you lore on earth are tending ? Ponder then, our Tenerable ftiend, and 
ask your thirsting soul, if this Scowledge is not worth more than the cost of dia- 
monds to you? We, who have Ifud aside tie orumhling casket which contained the 
priceless jewel that is noTcr tarnished, knowfullwell the value of this gem of know- 
ledge which now sparkles on your vision just opened. 

Thei'O are many things which we would like to say to you, but the condi^ons and 
(urcumatanees which control our operations render it impossible for ns to present 
to your miud tbe light which it so much seeks. To answec the demands of your 
spirit is dow impossible to ua. Time and the ucfoldings of your mind can only solve 
tjie questions you would propound. You are well aware tJiat tie growth of your 
present knowledge is but tie effect of earnest inquiry, of patient (oil, and deep study, 
and esperiment after experiment in your aearohings for truth. Such was the only 
way you reached the position which you now occupy in the science so dear to you. 
It came in no other way, it could come in no other. The child is subjected to lie 
necessitr of firat learning the alphabet before it is prepared to spell, and must under- 
stand the meaning of words before it can comprehend the aentance it reads. So in 
this investigation. That which is apparently of HtHo meaning must first be learned, 
lie alphabet must he mastered, 'ixaxi words pronounced, and all must be understood 
before there is a fittodneas for progresMon. The wisest on earth, aye, the wisest in 
spirit life, are learners, students : none but God is perfectly wise ; and it is no bmni- 
liatiou to any mind that it contains not all of wisdom. Let ua say io you i^t if 
patient in your iuTestigationa, you shall in due time obtain that vhich you so ear- 
nestly seek. Could we work mh'aeles, (a thing impossible, ) (hey would astound 
rather than enlighten your mind. Could we withdraw the vail which separates the 
■virion from the tiinga you dedre to aee in our spheres of life, yon have no data by 
which yoa could make plain to jouraelf or to the eyes of your fellow-mau the sights 
you would behoM. 

Go ou in your searchinga, our good friend ; the end is not yet with you. Brilliant 
minda with brilliant thoughts are burning to ^ve utterance to earth through you. 
Ton are a selected instrument of our own choosing, and we are watching and guiding 
in the path and to (he goal you seek. You may not only " speai trumpet-tongued 
to the scientific world," but in thunder-lones to those savaus who think they are the 
masters of the keys of Imowledge. 


,v Google 


Author's Reply to the preceding Address. 

To my spirU friends, to ivhom X oyte ike preceding address: 

It IB qiute imneoeasary for mj angel friends to urge upon mj heart, or upon my 
reason the notb.in.gii,o63 of thia norld, in comparison with that of which a description 
haa lately heen giyen to mo. 

So higUy do I estimate the prospect Ocas awakened, Ihat it seems almost too good, 
(00 desirahlo to 1)0 realiied. There are eo man j painful ideas awoicaed in my mind 
rSEpeofcig tho lot of humanity, by the events of past and present times, that it is 
difficult to ooMoiyo that, at the short distance of little more than the eightieth part 
of tho diamclfir of our globe, there should he such a contrast. But to hejghtm my 
apprccialion of the ineslimahle yalne of sach an heirship is utterly uncalled for. If 
there be any drawback, it is the misery which pervades this mundane sphere. The 
sympathy wliich, on the one hand, ties you io tlus world, must, on tlio other, cause 
a participation in tho sufferings which pervade all ammated nature. While I am 
aware that sympathy, as above suggested, wonld pcevcnt me from flying from a per- 
oeptJon or contemplation of Hie wretchedness in question, it seems as if the heaven 
of Spiritualism were, in this phase, in some degree open to the objeotioa to ttie hea- 
ven of Scripture, foimcled on its too great proximity to hell. la not tho spiritual 
heaven too near liiis sphere, and too much associated with it by its sympathy, not to 
suffer indirectly a portion of its miseries ? 

If there were any thing I should deem to be requisite to render esiatonco in the 
spirit world happier, it would be the power of removing the miseries of (his lower 
world, and eepecialli/ those arising from. Error — the most prolific source of evil. Aooord- 
ing to Addison's aUogory, Death admitted tho pretensionscf Intemperance to be supe- 
rior io destmctiveness, to those of any of the numerous diseases which competed for the 
honour of tJie preniiecship in his cabinet ; bnt might not Hrror have suceessfully com- 
peted with Intemperance! — Error, the main cause of intemperance, of intolerant 
bigotry, and of war, which destroys hoth by tJie sword and by siokness which it 
induces ? 

It is difficult for us to conceive that good, affectionate spirits are not unhappy at 
witnessing the distress which they cannot relieve. The prisoners at Sing Sing are 
said to undergo mental torture by the silence imposed upon them. Yet this is imposed 
upon spirits, when ofton a word would prevent fatal events. 

Nevertheless, Spiritualism, so far as it prevails, will make all better : in the first 
place, by removing error and sectarian discord, and, in the next place, by making 
nature the object of our study, and, iudirectly, of onr worship, as the work of the 
Being who created all. 

You need not any more strive to stimulate my ostimatioo of the high office which 
you bestow on me as promulgator of the knowledge given me of the spheres, than in 
eioite my appreciation of that knowledge. I would cot relinquish my position for 
any temporal Eovereignty. My love of truth, my desire for human happiness, would 
be sufficient for my pay in causing truth to triumph, as that, of course, would be 
a Leaven to me in contemplating the nusery obviated and the happiness induced. 

Doubtless, not to be f^rJy appreciated would be painful ; while meritod applause 
would be a high gvatiScation; but, were that my primary motive, I should not de- 
serve applause. All tJiat I would desire would be, to have that share of honour to 
which I might be entitled in common with other oolahonrors in the cause of truth : 
to exist in the spheres on the same plane with the illastrious Washington and his 
coadjutors, and associated with my beloved relatives and friends, iiaving access to 


,v Google 


14 raEFACE, 

the wisfl and good men of all ages and nations ! Tlatwere a liaa,Ten incieed I To be 
iTorlliy of and enjoy Buch a heaven, is tlie oclj selfish ambition mth whicli I am 
actnated, bo far as I know mjaolf. 

Your truly deyoted serraut and friend, Eobeet Hare. 

Having suggeatcii to my spirit father that it would ho expedient 
that some names should bo attached to the credentials with which 
the preceding address from the Bpirits seemed to endow me by ap- 
pointment, he induced several spirits of eminence to accompany 
him to Mrs. Gourlay's this morning, (August 4, 1855.) This gave 
mo art opportunity to read Lanning's letter, the address which I 
received through him as above represented, and my reply. In re- 
turn I received the subjoined communication. 

Qommunieation from an assembly of eminent spirits, sanctioning 
the credentials transmitted through the mediumship of Mr- 
Lanning. 

Auausr4, leSB. 
Me^ected FrieTtd: We cheerfully aooompany youv father to Hanction tho commvmi- 
Ctttion gheu through our medium, Mr. Laniiing, to yourself. My friend, wO have 
Bought media in various looalities through whom to accredit yon as our minister to 
earth's inhalntanta, but owing to ucfavourable conditions, we have, in most in- 
Btanoes, failed. Wo perceive mth pleasure that your heart is fnlly imbttod with tlio 
importance of your holy mission. It noeiJs no fulsome flattery from us to incite you 
to aoUou. A priad-ple of right and truth pervades all your movemonts in this spl' 
ritual campaign. We truly style it a campaign, since you are battling fearlessly 
against Error, that hydra-headed monster who has slain his milUons and tens of mil- 
lions. We have looked forward to tho publication of facts involTOd throngb your ei- 


mr great republic ; 


but, for personal reasons, lie wishes to withhold his mime. 


Be it known to all who may read these oredinti ih tint we 


sanctitn them, and 


nuthoriic oui- names to be afiised thereunto, Cli Wisiiin 


n\ 


J Q Aom- 


Dk Chalmeb 


OBBailN 


IV I Ceabki 


•iu an 1 others. 


Postscript hy the author. 
It is a, well-known saying that there is "but one step between the 
sublime and the ridiculous," This idea waa never verified more 
fully than in the position I find myself now occupying, accordingly 
as those by whom that position ia viewed may consider the mani- 
festations which have given rise to it in the light wherein they are 
now viewed by mc, or as they were two years ago viewed by myself, 
and are now seen by the great majority of my estimable contempo- 


,v Google 


PSEPACE. 15 

I sincerely belieye that I have comnmnicated with the spirits of 
my parents, sister, brother, and dearest friends, and likeirise with 
the spirits of the illustrious Washiugtoa and other worthies of the 
spirit world ; that I am by them commissioned, under their 
auspices, to teach truth and to expose error. This admitted, I 
may be reasonably inspired with the sentiment authorized in the 
preceding credentials, that I hold my office to be greatly prefer- 
able to that of any mundane appointment, and for the reasons 
above given in those credentials. But how vast is the difference 
between this estimate and that which must ascribe thoso impressions 
to hallucination! myposition being that of a dupe or fanatic. Yet 
there can be no man of real integrity and good sense, unimpaired 
by educational bigotry, who will not respect sincere devotion to 
the cause of piety, truth, and human welfare, hero and hereafter, 
however displayed. Hence, although the foregoing prefatory 
pages should have no other influence, they may operate to show 
my own deep conviction of the righteousness of my course, founded, 
aa I believe it to have been, on the most precise, laborious, ex- 
perimental inquiry, and built up under the guidance of my sainted 
father, as well as under the auspices of Washington and other 
worthy immortals. 

Those who shall give a careful perusal to tho following work 
will find that there has been some "method in my madness;" and 
that, if I am a victim to an intellectual epidemic, my mental con- 
stitution did not yield at once to the miasma. But let not the 
reader too readily " lay the flattering unction to his soul" that 'tis 
my hallucination that is to be impugned, not his ignorance of facts 
and his educational errors. 

The sanction of the spirits, as above given, was obtained under 
test conditions; so that it was utterly out of the power of any mor- 
tal to pervert the result from being a pure emanation from the 
spirits whose names are above given. 

It ought to be understood that the sanction given by the spirits 
whose names arc attached to the preceding certificate, was obtained 
under test conditions, as explained in paragraph bb., dd., in the 
description of Plate iv. Moreover, I placed my hand on the in- 
strument illustrated by Fig. 2 in same plate, so as to question the 
spirits directly as to the reliability of the affirmation, previously 
given to mo, and the fidelity of the medium generally. In both 
cases the index moved so as to give an affirmative reply. 


,v Google 


EUPPLEilENTAL PREFACE. 


SUPPLEMENTAL PREFACE. 

The most precise and laboiious eiperimenta wMeh I have made la my investiga- 
tion of Spiritualism, have boon, assfdled by tte moat dlspara^g auggestions, aa re- 
speota my capacity to aToid being tlie dupe of any medium employed. Had my con- 
clusions been of the opxwsite liind, how muoli fulsome exaggeration had. there heen, 
founded on my experience as an investigator of science for more than lialf a century! 
And noWj in e, case when my oirn liiroet ovidenoo is adduced, the most ridioulona 
surmises aa to my probable oversight or indiscretion are suggested, as the means of 
escape from liie only fair ooncluslon. 

Having despatched a spirit friend from Cape Island, at one o'elooli on the tliird of 
July, to request Mrs. Gourlay, in Philadelphia, to fiend her haBband to tho bank to 
make an. inqairy, aad ta report the result to me ot half-past 3 o'clock, the report 
was made to m© as doBlred. The subject was not mentioned until after my return 
to PMladelpMa, when, heing at the tesiaenco of Mrs. Gonrlay, I inquired of her, 
whether she hai received any message from me during my absence T In reply, it was 
stated that while a communication from her spirit mother was b^g made to her 
brother, who iras present^ my spirit messenger interrupted it to request her to 
send her hushanii to the bank to make the desired Inquiry; that, in conscqoenco, 
the application was made at the bank. The note-elerk recollocteil the application to 
him, hut appeared to have considered It as too irregular to merit much attention. 
Hence the impresaion received by the applicants, and communicated lo me, was not 
correct. But aa it did not accord with that existing in my memory, it could not have 
been learned from my toind. 

■Wishing to make thia tranaacfion a test, I was particularly careful to manage so 
that I uugM honourably insist upon It as a t«at ; and, until I learned the fact from 
Mrs. Gonrlay and from the note-clork that the inquiry waa made, it did not amount 
to a test manifestation. But, if I had been ever so indiscreet, wonll it not be absurd 
to imagine a conspiracy between any person at Cape Island with Dr. and Mrs. Gonr- 
lay, her brother, and the aote-clcrk at the hank, to deceive me on my return by 
concurrent falsehoods ! 

I submit these facta to the public, as proving that there must have been an invisi- 
ble, intelligent being with whom I communicated at Cape Island, who, bearing my 
message to this city, commnnicated It to Mrs. Gonrlay, so as to induce the apphea- 
tion at the bank. Otherwise, what imaginable canse could have produced the result, 
espeeiaJly -within the time occupied — of two and a half hours ? 

The existence of spirit agency being ihns demonstrated, I am justified in solemnly 
calling on my contemporaries to ^ve credence to the important Information which I 
have received from spirits, respecting the destiny of the human soul after death. 
They may be assured that every other objectof consideration, sinks into insignificance 
in comparison with this information and the bearing it must have upon morals, re- 
ligion andpoliticsjwhenover it can bokaowE and bo believed by society in general, as 
it is by me. 


;;■ Google 


INTRODUCTION. 


As introducforj to tliis work, I shall make a few brief remarks on tke 
following topics : — 

Objects of religion, — Diversity of opinion as to the means by wbicb 
tbey have been attainable. — Every sect, excepting one, would vote t^Mnst 
any one. — Consequent sentiments of the Author aa embodied in verse, — 
Keasons for his beliGving in the existence of a Deity. — -Amerioan priest- 
hood eminently honest acd pions. — If people who have obtained a belief 
in immortality by one route are better and happier therefor, why object 
that others, by another route, should attain the same ends. — The table, no 
less than our firesides, an object of interest. — Inconsistency of those who 
make their Deity pass through all the stages of human existence, from 
th ml y to IB tunty bj t gt th t t rapl ym t f t hi — 

U f th t hi Id d th m f tat t wh h fh A th 

h t d— I iste J f gSp tu.1 t8 f d d 1 y 

toscpt Imral dfth pptelft ptpti 

m f tt —Of ta wh tra t i t 1 g t yt 

w U w pt 1 m 1 — "Mu- 1 i S pt f t! y 1 

ca 1 ptdbtthmftt fSptlmwlIb 

petdwth mi ddmltf ffi y — E h d 

pt dt ceh Itlgud tdt d 

th m b mitt 1 pp t di t by "^p t I 

ss t d t t 1 t th th m d t -— Th tl t 

mt^w Idd I th bt th I y 1 — 4. d g 
t C t^ wh t b g th d m f tli 1 y t m t 

b g ly t f th m ti —A d to Spir t ohsm 

t th d m f g th t I d wh 1 tl 1 gy y ! d 

1 IJg w th t wth d t th w th t t th — 
A ff 1 1 f [ th d f C mte th t th ph m f th d I 

t be pi d by gra t t wh h 1 ft t t If w M 

hd te 11 th m tt th t 1 mj ~S 

t 1 t th 1 I — \ g m t f Id 

10 11 d I p th t t w 11 b dm tt I tl t tl g t b- 

j t f 1 f 11 w — 

T f h th b t 1 f tl t i '^ I T tv 

d f h tt b t 


,v Google 


18 INTEODUCTION, 

3. To convey a correct idea of our duty toward that Deity and our 
fellow creatares, 

4. To impart that knowledge of a state of existence heyond the grave 
which will he happier as we are more virtuous in this life, and moro 
miserahle as we are more vicious; this knowledge affording tlie beat con- 
solation amid temporal sufferings of the rigliteous, and the strongest re- 
straint upon the vicious indulgence of passion in the unrighteous. 

5. Finally, by these means, to promote morality and the happiness of 
man in thia world, and prepare him for a blissful position in the world to 
come, 

6. It must result, from these premises, that whichever is most com- 
petent for the attainment of these all-important ends, wiU be the best 
religion. 

7. The above -mentioned postulates being generally admitted, various re- 
corded traditions, pretended to have been derived from one or more detlieH, 
have been advanced as best calculated to meet the requisitions in question. 
Each of the religious doctrines thus advanced ia tenaciously defended by 
ita appropriate priesthood. If the opinions of the majority of these ad- 
vocates of their respective revelaliona be taken as respects auy creed ex- 
cepting their own, it will be denounced as ori^nadng in error or fraud. 
The opinion being taken successively upon any one, by all but those to 
whom it appertains, each would be condemned. 

8. It was under theae impressions that the following verses were 
written, more than forty years ago. They have recently been published 
in a pamphlet on the better employment of the first day of the week. 

They serve to show that my skepticism arose from my love of truth, 
instead of that aversion from it, ascribed to skeptics by many well-meaning 
bigots. 

9. Oh.TmOi! if maji thj way could find. 
Not doomed to ettay with error blind. 

How maoli moro kind his fate 1 
Bnt wojmird Elill, he seeks his bane, 
Hor oan of fonl delusion gain 

A knonlodgn till too late. 


The bigot to ensnare. 

a there a theme more highly fraught 
fflth matter for onr eerioas tbought 

Thnn this reflection sad, 
Chat millions orr in different ways, 
fet all their own improBSions praise, 

Deeming alt others bad? 


,v Google 


IHTROBUCTION. 
it seems no st^nclard'a gi 


No ECiilo of Trnth hi 

Opinion to nssa; 

Yet e&Iled upon to a 


10. How far I was a believer in God may be estimated from the fol- 
lowing opinions, whieli have appeared in the pamphlet wherein the fore- 
going verses were published : 

(©It t^e <35tiiiJCBa si t\t €mitm of s ifilg. 

BY THE AUTHOR. 

11. The existence of the universe is not wove evidL-nt than that of the 
reasoning power by wliicli it is eontroUed. The evidence of profound and 
ingenious contrivance ism mnftlthn we inquire, Yet tlie 
nniverse, and the reason by wh h t h b n nt ived and is regulated, 
are not one. Keither is th th un nor is the universe the 
reason. This governing r s th f wh r, or however it may 
exist, is the main attribute f th D ty wh m w can only know and esti- - 
mate by his works. And u ly th j ufii tly sublime, beautiful, 
magnificent, and extensive tg th dafab ing who may be con- 
sidered as infinite in comp n w th m n \ t the existence of evil 
displays either a deficiency fjw adfi yof goodness, I adopt 
the idea of a deficiency of power in preference. 

13. " If," as Newton rationally infers, " God baa no organs," the per- 
son of man cannot be made after God's Image, since the human image is 
mostly made tip by the human organs. Man has feet to walk, arms to 
work with, eyes for seeing, ears for hearing, a nose for smelling. It were 
absurd to attributo such organs to God. 

1" It f Hows that while wo hive as much evidence of a Deity as we 
h f wiw uyp f forming any idea of his form, 

m J n h w d w We are as sure of the im- 

m ydbqyfhpw f the existence of the i 

w w b he m IS b n ve and inaeparately ai 

Th h p w m at h a w y x we arc also certain ; since if 

nh hd padh n ould have been any thing; out 

fnhgnhnean m 

li Th n h h D y, must be eternal, since if at 

ny m h w n h D y s ted without a universe, there 

mu bun nfin en d n p riod during whioh the divine 

pw n ha bnnufidfwn f objects for its exercise. A 
Beity 30 situated wotdd be as a king without a kingdom to govern. 


;;■ Google 


M INTRODUCTION. 

15. I am under the impression that mind is at least as essential to the 
creation as matter. It seems to me inconceivable that tho yarious olcmon- 
tary atoms of the cJiemiat could come into existence, with their adaptation 
to produce the multiplicity of efBcient combinations which they are capable 
of forming, without having been modified by one mind. The existence of 
adaptation, I think, prOTes the existence of mind. But even were these atoms 
to possess inherently the adaptation which they manifest, of what possible 
utility coiild be the variegated consequences thereof, were there no minds 
to perceive, appreciate, or enjoy them. The beauty of colour, the music 
of sound, the elegance of curves or angles, oould have i 
there no perception of them ; since those attributes are ii 
attached to objects by mind. Independently of mind, music is mere aerial 
vibration, colour mere superficial texture, or intestinal arrangement pro- 
ducing undulatory waves variously polarized, which are the proximate 
causes, which would be sterile, were there no mind to be actuated by 
them through appropriate organs. 

16. Could the universe exist without mind, would not its esistence be 
nugatory? 

17. The following allegations scorn to me no Jess true than the axioms 
of Euclid : 

18. No evil can endure which any being has both the power and desire 
to remove. 

19. Any result must ensue which any being has both power and desire 
to accomplish. 

20. No rational being will strive by trial to ascertain that which he 
knows as well before as after trial, 

21. If God be both omnipotent and omniscient, he can, of course, make 
his creatures exactly to suit his will and fancy, and foresee Low they will 
fulfil the end for which they are created Wherefore then subject them 
to probat A wh h m mus h h 
foreknow 

22. Is w h d g w 
are placed h li p mm 

evil which b d d h h m h 

limited, p 

23. Su h w h mm 
ceived, frmhpn dpd dwhh h 
publioatio mnlg 

24. Un h m p m fl d b p 
and preju H q P P P fl h 
men difi'e fe h & wh ted w h 
the hope of enjoying by its tenure a heller, if not exclusive, pretension t*] 
eteraal happiness and tho favour of G-ocI, the sectarian by whom it may be 
held becomes honestly tenacious of its despotic supremacy over all others. 


;;■ Google 


INTEODUCTION. 21 

25, I have no doubt that a largo portim of om \merieiin priesttood 
are sincere in tlio advnfacy of tiie tenets re'.petfively held by them. 
Among them I have known some ot tho best of men, and I have generally 
found them more tolerant of ekeptioism than the majority of their fol- 
lowers. It has not however, been unfrequently nrj^i-d by clergymen as a 
ground of adherence to Christn.nity, that uttJioul it, there is no authentic 
evidence of a future state of existence I have 3i,en an argument from an 
able and respectable Obnsfian writei, urging that there is no refuge for 
the mass of mankind to be found m puie dei^m uaicoompanied by any 
specific evidence of a futuie state 

26. Under these cuoumsf mcea 'should Spiritualism afford such a refuge 
to those who are utteily dissatisfied with the evidence of the truth of 
scriptural revelation, it will certainly be a blessing to tJiem ; and those who 
ha h etofore found this essential comfort in one way, ought not to 

bj t hould their neighbours find it ia another way. 

An effort haa been made to throw ridicule on spiritual manifesta- 
t n account of phenomena being effected by means of tables and 

th vablo furniture ; but it should be recollected that, when move- 

n -e to be ejected, resort to movable bodies was inevitable; and as 
g n ally the proximity of media, if not the contaot, was necessary to 
f il t te the movements, there was no body so aeeessible as tables. But 
th VI lent mechanical manifestations were always merely to draw atlen- 
laon J just as a persoa will knock, or even kick, violently at a front door, 
until someone looks out of a window to communicate with him. The more 
violent manifestations ceased both at Hydesville, at Rochester, and at 
Stratford in Connecticut, as soon as the alphabetic mode of communicating 
was employed. I never have had any to take place during my intercourse 
with my spirit-friends, unless as tests for unbelievers, when intellectual 
communications could not be made. It is more than fifteen months since 
I have resorted to instruments which have notiiing ia common with 
tables. Of these instruments, engravings and descriptions will be found 
in this work. 

23. But is it not a great error to consider out tables as less saered than 
our firesides ? Could any appeal more thoroughly vibrate to tho heart of 
civilized man than that of any invasion of bis rights which should render 
his fireside liable to intrusion ? Hence, in the Latin motto, "Pro aris et 
focis," the inviolability of the fireside is placed side by aide with freedom 
of conscience. But, with the passing away of winter, tho interest in the 
fireside declines ; 'tis changeable as the temperature of air. It loses all 
its force in the tropics; but, throughout Christendom, the table still 
draws about it the inmates of every human dwelling, at all seasons, and iu 
every kind of weather. Even when not escited by hunger, we value the 
social meeting which takes place around it. 

29. At tables, moreover, conferences are held, contracts and deeds 


;;■ Google 


22 INTUODUCXION. 

signed, and decrees, statute-bwa, and ordluances are written. Treaties, 
also, arc made at tables, on wbich not the fate of individuals merely, but 
of nations, depends. 

30. Is the renown of the "knights of the round table" tarnished by 
their being only known in connection with the word ia qnestion ? la any 
director or trustee ashamed of being, with bis colleagues, designated as a 
"boai-d?" — a humble synonym for table. 

31. It was at a table the DocJaratioa of Independence was signed; 
and in Trumbull's picture of its presentation to Congress a table is made 
to occupy a conspiouous position. Our tables should be at least as much 

bj t f d th ty f fi [1 

3 Th f d d th f th t hi p t 1 m fes- 

tat p d t tlj f th p wh w lib g their 

d ty th h 11 tl t g f h It 

3 111 h m b ly f Ch t t 1 g th h U th tages 
f tl ml y t m t ty It w w b pp a m g d 1 ved 

th ty y b ty d t Why 11 th 1 1 y wh the 

1 m d w th h 1 w f r d bt 1 ddi d H d tlie 

R J d y th p t t t th ^1 > ir? 

Tb Almghty ft g th h -t h b 1 1 th t f Pb oh, 

th f m k 1 h 1 b tl t bl 1 

4 All d g t h 1 d t 01 t d th w d — Ihey 

shall see the Son ot man coming m the clouds with great power and 
glory." Mark siii. 26. Wherefore did not his first coining take place ia 
this conspicuous, glorious, and unquestionable manner ? 

35. It is often impaired. Wherefore were not these efforts to communi- 
cate with mankind at an earlier period of the world's duration f but it 
may be demanded in return, Wherefore did not Cbrlst come until tie 
earth bad been peopled, even according to Scripture, about four thousand 

36. Why was not the use of the compass, of gunpowder, printing, the 
steam-engine, steamboat, railway, telegraph, daguerreotyping, eleotrotyp- 
ing, contrived earlier in this teiTestrial sphere ? Let ortbodoxy take the 
beam out of its own eye first. 

37. Had Christ taught these arts, tbey would not only have had a more 
general influence during the era of their accomplishment, but Lave left a 
durable and irrefragable proof of a towering mental superiority. As they 
would have gone into use, there could have been no question as to their 
accomplishment J so that every intelligent being might have become intui- 
tively cognizant of their wonderful results. 

38. The invention of gunpowder, the telegraph, and the mariner's 
compass might have been the means of preventing the inroads of the 
Goths and Vandals, and, subsequently, tbo success of the Moham- 
medans; since the Arabians would hardly have availed themselves of 


;;■ Google 


INTGODUCTION. 23 

these inventions at the time the Mohammedan coaquesta were com- 
mencei?. 

39. ITow importact woulil havu hcen Iho art of printing to the promul- 
gation of a correct knowledge of the revelation which was the alleged 
object of Christ's mission ! 

40. Of those who believe in revelation, it may he inquired, Why the 
Hebrews were preferred, as the reteivers of divine inspiration, to the 
more civilized Greelta, Romans, Hindoos, or Cbinescf If revelation was 
requisite to one nation, was it not equally necessary to all ? 

41. 'Wherefore, after Christ had undergone cmcifision la order to 
make people Christians, should Mohammed have been allowed to massacre 
or enslave them for being Christians ? 

42. There is even now great difficulty in effecting these interoommuni- 
cations with spirits in this country of universal legal tolerance. I say 
legal, since there is, as Owen alleged, "too mwh Chrutinn despotU'm of 
another land." 

43. Almost every editor ii, more or less, a censor to the press, and a 
peon of popularity. The tendency is not to lepress, but to gratify, and, 
of course, promote existing bigotry. This bigotry and its Siamese bro- 
ther, intolerance, have, in all countries and ages, been exercising a mh- 
ckievous, though ofien a weU-inte^idedj vigilance, over any innovation of a 
nature to emancipate the human mind A'om educational error; and, when- 
ever supported by temporal power, has resorted to persecution — even to 
the use of the sword, of the rack, or the fagot ; and, in this country of 
boasted freedom and much-vaunted liberty of the press, shows its baleful 
power by de&mation, or alleging disquaMcation for employment, wher- 
ever its influence can be exerted. 

44. A conspicuous piinter in this city refused to print an edition of 
my recent pamphlet, as to would allow nothing to go through his press 
which was against the Bible. This shows how far fanaticism will go, 
even at this advanced eia of science and in this country of vaunted intel- 
lectual freedom, 

45. Tw hund d y rs ago, Spiritualism would have been as much per- 
secuted w t 1 raft 

46. I p b t n f unbelief in the scriptural proofs of immortality, it 
has be u u 1 f If-complacent believers to urge that the " wish 
was fath t th th ght;" that a sincere desire to perceive the truth 
could n t sist w th ut conviction ; but the opposite must have been the 
prevailing weakness among unbelievers iu Scripture who have become 
spiritualists, if they are now ovor-credulous in admitting the evidence on 
which Spiritualism is founded. 

47. I declare solemnly, that I always was intensely anxious to know the ■ 
truth; that although, theoretically, I doubted the possibility of changing: 
the course of things by prayer, yet I did often 3ift my thoughts up to^ 


,v Google 


INTEODUCTION. 


Crod, imploriug that m 


b ht U h t. 


t 


m Of 


rs 


as 


as the ficta idmitted f 


tl 1 


th 


tl t y 
1 ff t 


f th 

t 


U 


biofhor, and otter sp nt f 1 h d b 


k 


me of their existenc 


d f th t f th 


p t 


IJ th 


m t 


t 


desire arose to leiify th 


f t t d t 


tti 


th 11 mp t 


t 1 


fion, whether man la m 


t 1 


4S If the eyido 


f th t th f 


It 


w 


d] 


[ te 


repre^antel by its t 


my 


t 


111 ty to 1 1 


would indi t 1 


tt t 1 


Upt 


m wl 


I 


1 


moie pi oof th n th f, 


t m f Ch t 


d 


t 


credence Y t n w h 


g t d tl 


d 


f mm 


rt 1 ty 


t 


ca=e of '^p t 1 m t 


f t J t 


1 1 


d th t 


my h 


t.t 


reipti.tiDg th d 


f 1 t 


f 


y 


11 


heheve in a future st 


11 


t 


th ! 


1 


to justify behef M f 


tly t w Id b 


t t to 


diabdiovmg in the 


i d 


h di 


td 


d 1 


ty 


yet, in the other, yieldi 


f m th pp 1 


h ra 


t t 


40 IVnd'iniGntally 


y f 


t hi 


1 t 


h 


heen, IhU it Molati. 


t m b 


tat d 


(1'* ) wh 


h 1 


b 


as cle^r to my mmd as those collated hy Buehd. 

50. It may be shown that the existing system fails to give any evidence 
which can he subjected to the intuition of each generation mccessiveli/. It 
rests on the alleged intuition of human beings who existed ages ago, and 
of whom we know nothing hut what they say of themselves through history 
or recorded tradition. It reposes entirely oh the testimony of propagand- 
ists, who were interested to give it importance, or on partial human nar- 
rators or compilers. It has been erected on a species of hearsay evidence, 
inadmissible id courts of justice. This species of testimony in the ease 
of Spiritualism is contemptuously set aside. No one will believe in mani- 
festations unless intuitively observed. Wherefore this faith in ancient 
witnesses, this s7ceptioism of those of our own times, even when they are 
known to be truthful ? 

51. On my stating to a distinguished savan a fact which has been 
essentially verified since in more than a hundred instances, his reply was — 
I would believe you as soon as any man in the world, yet I cannot believe 
what you mention. He suggested the idea of its being an epidemic, with 
.which I was of course infected; nevertheless, that savan, as a professing 
■Christian, admitted facts vastly more incredible, depending on the alleged 
■intuition of witnesses who lived two thousand years ago, nearly. 'Jhis, 
■ doubtless, was the consequence of educational bigotry, which would have 
caused a belief in the miracles of any other reUgion in which he should 
^have been brought up. 

52. Such persons strain at the gnats of Spiritualism, yet swallow t]io 
■camels of Scripture. 


,v Google 


INTEODUCTION. 25 

53. In like manner an Eastern soyereign treated a Dutot ambassador aa 
deringed, because ho lUegei! tLat bodies of wati,r, mis oouitij, were 
capable of sol d teat on, bi as to support people oa the suiface 

54 But if this skeptiLiom is shown with n,'*ptet to ob^erTf-ia ot our 
day, how cin it be expecttd that it 'hould not be diiplayi-d tiwaid ob 
seners of antniuity i* 

55 Spuitualism will in this respect have a great advantage ■iS it will 
alwija be ^-uppirted by the mtuit on of its actual \otaries It will not 
rest on bjgonc niiiiclei, never to bo ri,pi,atcd, if they e^ei occuired, but 
will rest upon an inteioourse with the "jpirit world which will giow nnd 
impiove with time 

5b One of the pre eminent blLSSin;:^ resulting fi^m this new philo- 
•iopby will be its biiu^in^ lel gion within the scope of positive science 
This worl pcsitne is employe! bj the learned itheiat Comt^ to desi^ate 
sciem-e founded on observation and espcnment It will give the quietus 
to the told, cheerless view of otii bemg s end and aim presented m his 
work 

57 Professor Niehol endeavoured, in the foJlowin„ way, to comfcrt his 
Christian auditors against the apparent incompatibility of the phenomena 
of the sidereal creation with the language of Scripture : Ilaving drawn 
two lines from the same point, maiing a right angle, the learned lecturer 
said, Suppose A sets out and pursues one of these routes, B pursues ffie 
other, and hoth arrive at certain truths; although these results should not 
seem to have amy ^ing to do viith each other; yet, said he, if they he truths, 
^ley must come together eventually; they cannot always travel away from, 
each other. But if any person find that, agreeably to all bis experience, 
the results thus attained, tend to greater and greater Mmoteness and in- 
ooaaistency, there would be little comfort found in tho idea of a possible 
ultimate approximation. 

58. It is upon this actual fundamental discordancy between scriptural 
impressions, and the truths ascertained by experimental and intuitive in- 
vestigation, that Comt^ builds his inference that theology is to be en- 
tirely abandoned. But very different is the position of Spiritualism rela- 
tive to positive science. It starts from the same basis of intuition and 
induction from facts. It does not controvert any of the results of positive 
science within the ponderable material creation, to which the results con- 
templated by Coinf^ belong. It superadds new facts respecting the spirit 
world, which had so entirely escaped the researches of materialists, that 
they entertain the highest incredulity merely upon negative grounds, — 
merely because the facts in question have not taken plaoo within the ex- 
perience of those who have investigated the laws of ponderable matter 
and ono or two imponderable principles associated therewith. 

59. Such was the ground of my incredulity; which, however, vanished 
before intuitive demonstration. 


;;■ Google 


26 INTRODUCTION . 

60. It is admitted bj Comte that we know nothing of the sources or 
causes of nature's laws ; that their originatioa is so perfeotly insorutablej 
aa to make it idle to take up time io any scrutiny for that purpose. He 
treats the resort to the Deity as the cause, as a mere ahstraction tending 
to comfort the human mind before it has become acquainted with true 
science, and doomed to be laid aside with the advance of positive science. 

61. Of course his doctrine makes him avowedly a thorough ignoramus 
as to the causes of laws, or the means by which they were established, 
and can have no other basis but the negafjve argument above stated, in 
objecting to the facts ascertained in relation to the spiritual creation. 
Henee when the spirits allege that by their volition they can neutralize 
gravity, or vis inertia,* there is nothing in positive science to confute this. 
The inability of material beings to neutralize gravitation by their powers 
is no proof that spiritual beings cannot effect this change. 

62. Thus while allowing the atheist liis material dominion, Spiritualism 
will erect within and above the same space a dominion of an importance 
as much greater as eternity is to the avarage duration of human life, and 
as the boundless regions of the fixed stars are to tlie habitable area of this 

63. But although Comte be a man of great learning, his fundamental 
opinions appear to be faulty, and his distribution of the operations of the 
mind imaginary. 

64. In treating of gravitation as the priinaiy law, does he not commit 
a blunder? Is not vis inertiso indispccsable to gravitation, since it maybe 
conceived to exist without gravitation, while gravitation cannot exist with- 
out vis inertise ? 

65. The power of a body A to draw B toward it can never exceed that 
which is necessary to put it into motion, which must bo directly as its vis 
jnertife ; and where the one is null, the other must be null. 

66. I cannot imagine how any philosopher so learned as Comto should 
not perceive the reduction of the phenomena of tbe universe to " different 
aspects" of the one faculty of gravitation to be utterly impossible. In 


» Vii inertia, or force of bertneas, is tho force by which a body, nhen afc rest, rofiiati 
being put into motion, or, when in DKition, resists arrestatioc. Tbe force, in tliis Inltei 
cnaa, ia called momcntam, being directly as tte weight mnltiplied by the velocity. Thus, 
two pOQDils, moving at the Tate of one foot per Eecond, exercise exacl]; the same mo- 
mentum as one pcand moving at the rate of two feat per second. 

The force of a spring, or of exploaivc componnds, cannot be called momentBm; neithei 
velocity nor weight enter into its eonslitution ; though, when Itunaferred to a projeolUe, 
it producea momentum proportional to the force with which it ficta, the weight moved, nnii 
Telocity imparted. 

Muacular force does not come within the definition of momentum, althongh it prodneet 
thig property in a hammer, pioportionahly to its weight and Iho resulting velocity. 
Hor is the force of gravity momentum, though momentum bo generated by it in falling 


, Google 


27 

the first place, it has been sliown that gravitation could not be the basis 
of YiB inertife, without which it cannot exist ; and in the next place, gra- 
Titation has always, at any given point of time, its possible influence limited 
to the power of making a body move towai-d an appropriate centre of 
graTity, and afterward remain forever at rest, unless afibcted by some 
extraneous cause. 

67. It is alleged also that tbe phenomena of the universe are explained 
by gravitation.. I here quote his own words : 

68. "Ourhudneis is — seeinff how vain is ant/ research into what are 
called causes, whether first or final — to pursue an accurate discovery of 
these laws, with a view to reducing them, to the smallest possilsle number." 

69. How is it possible, I demand, to reduce the orbitual motion of a 
planet to fewer causes than vis inertife, motion, and gravitation ? Vis iner- 
tias and motion are necessary to momentum ; and momentum thus arising, 
acting in a tangential direction to that of gravitation, is indispensable to 
form, with the force of gravity, the resultant which constitutes the orbitual 

70. Yet from subsequent language in tte same paragraph, the idea is 
suggested of reducing planetary motions to one cause, gravitation ! This 
will be perceived from his language, subjoined as follows : 

71. " The hesi illustration o/this is in the case of the doctrine of gravi- 
tation. We say that (Ae g&ieral phenomena of the universe are explained 
by it, because it connects, under one Itead, the wliole immense variety of 
astronomical facts, eschibifing the constant tendency of atoms toward each 
other in direct proportion to their masses, and in inverse proporiioii to the 
squares of their distance." 

72. How can the revolution of a single planet about the sun be ex- 
plained without the centrifugal or tangential force due to momentum ? 
Were not gravitation resisted by the projectile velocity constituted by 
motion and vis inertiie, would not all the planets fall into their suns, 


73. Are there not three essential elements in such orbitual movements, 
— via inertife, motion, and gravitation ? Are not these as neeessary to an 
orbit as three sides axe to a triangle ? and is it not as great an error to 
suppose that such moveTOcnts can continue by the agency of one of them, 
as to make one rio-ht line serve to enclose a superfluies ? 

4 B tw n tw pi I jh b th q lly learned with Comte, one 
m y b 1 k h m n ath t th ti 1 k N wton, a believer in Godj 
nijt jtthwhl ng fp t science, would there be 

any 1 h g Th y w Id tt b t y thing to the same laws, 

wh th tl h Id b a b d t a d y not. The origin of the 

1 w n d by b th w uU by n b cribed to an inscrutable 

G d b3 lb fl t tl Hy w th ut a G d. 

7 B ause th m m ts f th h nly bodies are ascribed to the 


;;■ Google 


28 INTKOETTCTION. 

three elements above mentioaed, — an unknown s u f p j t ! f 
vis inertiffl, by which that force is perpetaated, and t t n ly wh h 

it is modified into elliptical, orbitual revolution, op t 1 w a 

ing planetary movement, — it does not make th at n n wh 1 pt 
thia conception less of a theologian; it only makes Lim a more enlight- 
ened theologian. "We ascribe less to the special interference of tbe Creator 
in proportion aa our knowledge enables us to perceivo results attained by 
general laws, Thia, Comt^ conoeivea, causes theista to be less theologi- 
cal, and to lessen what he seems to view as tbe domain which theology is 
allowed to have. But is it not more correct to assume that it is only the 
domain of ignorance which grows less, while that of theology becomes 
simpler and more correct, but not less osteusive f It is not that less is 
ascribed to God, but that the aggregate is more intelligently ascribed as 
the laws through which his agency is recognised are fewer. 

76. Newton a^umed inertia, gravitation, and motion, as the foundation 
of his philosophy; but attributed these fundamental properties, or states of 
matter, to tbe will of that governing mind of which he held the existence 
to be as evident as that of the matter governed. Comte does not consider 
that there is any positive proof of the existence of such a ruling mind, and 
does not, therefore, find it necessary to admit the existence of a Deity. 
Thus, the states or properties above mentioned are, with Newton, proxi- 
mate, with Oomte, ultimate, causes. Hence, when wc arrive at the foun- 
dation of the Newtonian doctrine, we cannot go deeper without admitting 
the existence of a God, Without thia admission, we involve ourselves in 
the irremediable darkness of atheism, 

77. In this respect, I have always been a follower of Newton. Evi- 
dently, both, the governing reason and the creation which it rules must 
have existed from eternity; since, if nothing ever existed exclusively, it 
must have forever endured, and tbere never could have been any thing. 
So, if there ever had been no mind, there never could have been any 

78. The human mind, says Comte, by its nature employs, in its pro- 
gress, three methods of philosophizing,— the theological, the metaphysical, 
and the positive, differing essentially from each other, and even radically 
opposed. Hence, he assumes the successive existence of three modes of 
contemplating the aggregate phenomena of the universe, any one of which 
excludes the others. The first, "is the point of departure of the huTnan 
understanding; the third, its ultimate, fixed, definite state; the second, 
merely a state of transition from ^e first to the third." 

79. It seems to be assumed lliat the intellectual progress of the human 
mind must necessarily be through these three stages. Moreover, it is 
suggested that each individual, in reviewing the progression of his mind 
from childhood to mature age, will perceive that he was a theologian in 
his cbildhood, a metaphysician in his youth, and a natural philosopher in 


;;■ Google 


INTEOEUCriON. 29 

his manliood. If this did not come from a distinguished philosopher, I 
should pronounce it ridiculous. If allowed to be so egotistical, I must say 
that I am not aware that I went through these stages in the different pe- 
riods of my life. 

80. Studying metaphysical works as a part of my education, I took 
great interest in the theory of moral senlaments, and published essays on 
topics of that nature in the "Portfolio;" hut previously, I wrote my 
"Memoir on the Blowpipe." In 1810, my "Brief Tiew of the Policy 
and Resources of the United States" was published, in which it was first 
truly advanced that credit is money. 

81. Subsequently, more than a hundred publications were made by me, 
for the moat part on chemistry and electricity, yet always intermingled 
with political, moral, and financial essays. 

82. I am now, more than ever, a theologian; and my first publications 
touching that subject date after the attainment of threescore and ten. 

83. But theology and religion were subjects always near to my heart; 
and were accompanied by (he pain arising from the discordancy of my 
opinions with those entertained by much-Iovcd relatives and friends. 

84. I do not understand how any man of common sense can conceive 
that theological, metaphysical, or csperimental science ean be the separate 
object of contemplation; or that the share that either may occupy at any 
age, to the esclusion of the others, will not depend on exterior contingencies. 

85. I became a believer in God solely from my intuitive perception of 
the existence of a governing reason. Of course, all things were to be 
ascribed to that reason ultimately, but proximately to the very laws which 
this author considers as the object or basis of positive science. 

86. Ho holds that our inquiries should be bounded by the inscruta- 
bility of the well-ascertained physical properties and laws of matter. 
Coinciding, pr.aetically, with Oomte until lately, I held that inquiry 
should be bounded by the inscrutability of the Divine Lawgiver, to 
whom these laws owed existence. But Spiritualism has opened an 
avenue to inquiry beyond the boundary thus practically admitted no 
less by myself than by Comte. Other inscrutable laws and phenomena 
have to be recognised within a region for the existence of which Comie, 
in denying spiritual agency, allows no room. 

87. Though, practically, this field of inquiry was shut out from me as 
well as from Comte, theoretically, it was not excluded by my philosophy. 
Although in ascribing the universe to mind, the unity of its design and 
harmony of its phenomena led to the inference that it must be due to one 
supreme mind, there was still room for the coexistence of any number of 
degrees of subordinate mental agency, between that supreme mind and 

88. Beside those antagonists to Spiritualism, who would set aside the 
evidence of persons living at the present time and who are known to be 


,v Google 


30 INTRODUCTION. 

truthful, by the evidence of others who lived &ome thousaud years since, 
spiritualists are assailed by such as admit their facts, but explain tlieiu 
differently. Thus the Roman Catholie Church has admitted the manifesta- 
tions to iudicat* an invisible physical and rational power which cannot be 
attributed to human agency. But instead of ascribing them to spirits, 
good or bad, of mortals who have passed the portal of death, they con- 
sider them the work of Old Nick. 

89. If this personage ever did influence the acts nf any FCct, manifestly 
it must have been in those instances in which alleged religious error has 
been made tho ground for persecution, from the time of the estirpation 
and spoliation of the Midianites, Ganaanites, and others, down to that 
of the extirpation of the Albigenses, the auto da f^, inc[nisition, massacre 
of St. Barlhulomew, fires of Smithfield, roasting of Servetus, and the per- 
seontion of the Quakers and witches. 

90. So far as the devil is only an imaginary embodiment of the evil 
passions of men, as conceived by many enlightened Christia.ns, no doubt 
those and many other analagoua acts were due to tho devil ; but when 
the benevolent language of the spirils resjieeting sinners is contrasted 
with the cruel doctrine of the uhurch in ij^nestion, as well as by others, it 
can hardly be conceived that this language comes from Satan, and that of 
the churches from the " benevolent" Jesus Christ. 

91. Tho following veises, which have already appeared in my letter to 
the Episcopal clergy, express the sentiments of tho spirit? — every soul 
having the privilege of reforming, and rising proportionally to the im- 
provement thus obtained : 

92. Ilowevar lato, as holy angola teach. 

Souls now in Hades, hli's in HeaYen may reach. 

All wlioBa conduct has been mainly right, 

With lightning spaed may gain that bliasful height; 

■While those who sclfisli, Mueual ends pursue. 

For ages may their vieious conduct rue, 

Doom'd in some lam and loatliaome piano to dwell, 

Mndo through remorse and shamo the sinner's hell ; 

Yet through contrition and a change of mind, 

Tha means of rising may each sinner find. 

Tho higher spirits their assistance give, 

Teiiohing the contrite Iiow tor heaven to live. 

93. Let these lines be contrasted with those which are given In the work 
on Heaven of tho Kcv. Dr. Harbaugh — a most excellent orthodox cler- 
gyman of the German Eeformed Church — which are as follows : 

94. " But the wicked ? alas ! for him at that awful moment ! Oh ! my 
Bonl, come not thou into the secret of his sorrows. 

"How shocking mast thy summons be, death! 


;;■ Google 


INTRODUCTION. ol 

Kuns to each avenue, and shrieka for help ; 
But shrioka in vaiu ! How wiehfiilly she loois 
On nU she's leaTirg, now no longer hers I 
A little longer; jot a litdo longer,- 
Oh ! might she sis; U> wash avay her stains ; 
And St her for her passive 1 HournM aightl 
Her Tery eyee weep hlood, and evorj gcoiiii 
She heaves is big with horror. £nt the foe. 
Like a, stanch murderer, etead; to his purpose, 
Puranea her close, through every lane o£ life, 
Nor misses onoe the track; but proaaea on. 
Till forced at last to the ti-emendona verge. 
At once ahe ainks to evcrlasUag ruin." 

95. But I conceive that t!ie existence of a devil is irrecon oil able with 
all goodness and omnipot«noy ; and ttat, were a devil created by God, the 
Creator would be answerable for all the acta r f the being so created Evi- 
dently, the d(,\il could bo notting else but what omnipotence should make 
him, and could do nothing but what prtscience would foresee Tho acta 
of the devil would thereforL be indirectly iho'^f of his makii 

96. I would, inquire of tlioai, who lelj on the Bible as the source of 
their opinions, hew it hij^pena that Moaes makes no allusicn to Satan aa 
an agent in tho events of whioh he is the mintor '^ 

97. Though Milton represents that m ile\ olent being aa taking the form 
of the serpent, Mose"", fii fiuni fcancfioning that idea, makes not only the 
individual smke, but the whole genns forever ■imenable foi tlie part 


98. In his Jescription of hell, Josephua lepie'^enta m aichangel as the 
janitor, which is quite inconsistent with Sitan'a being the lailor la it 
conceivable that an aichingel should be dooikeeper to the deiil i* 

99. Moreovei, in stating the reasona why the doom oi the ii&h man 
(broiling to e(einitj) wis irremediable, no illuaicn is made to the Sa- 
tanic dtapot whjse inexorable malevoleni-e would have had to be coun- 
teracted 

100. It would seem to be an axiom, that whenever any event does not 
take place, it must be because there is no being who has at once the power 
and the wish to cause it to happen j and when any event does ensue, there 
can exist no being having at once the power and wish to prevent it from 
happening. Moreover, consistently, no agent can exist whose destruction 
is desired by another being, who, having the right, is competent by mere 
volition to destroy that agent. 

101. It follows, that if there actually does exiat any being, sueh as is 
designated by the words Devil, Satan, Beelzehvh, to treat him as the crea- 
ture of God, would be inconsistent either with the attribute of all goodnosa 
or of omnipotence. 

103, Can any act be more devilish than that of creating a devil ? Would 
it not be blasphemous to ascribe to a beneficent Deity a measure ao truly 


,v Google 


82 IKTRODirCTION. 

diabolical ? It has been said tliat the devil is a iiecesBary agent ia G-od's 
proTidonce. How necessary, Jf Grod be omnipotent ? 

103. Does not the necessity of employing a bad agent involye inability 
to create a good agent ? 

lOi. The evils which eiist in the creation may, to a great extent, be 
explained by an inevitable limitation of power. Thus, probably, there could 
be no virtue were there no vice ; no pleasure, wcra there no pain. Ecstasy 
might become painful by Tinlimited endurance. 

105. Without appetites and paasioEs, an animal would be reduced to 
the state of a vegetable, which lives without perception. 

106J The language held by certaiu sectariaiia on. such subjects, seems to 
me often contradictoiy of the idea they strive to enforce. Thus they 
represent that our sorrows and our pangs are intended for our amendment, 
or designed to prevent some greater evil here or hereafter; but what can 
justify a painful remedy, if there be power to adopt one which, while 
equally efficaoious, would be painless ? 

107. G-od is, on one side, represented as the cause of all the cireum- 
stanoes under which we exist; yet, on the other, is under the necessity of 
afflicting us in order to- remove or to remedy them ! If possessing both 
ability and disposition to reform us without causing us to suffer, could 
suffering be inflicted consistently with all goodness ? 

108. Of a most excellent Roman Catholic I inquired whether it was 
not held by their churcli that a belief in their tenets was necessary to sal- 
vation ? The reply was in the affirmative. And yet, said I, of all who 
do believe, only those can be saved who do their Master's will, — who add 
good worhs to an orthodox creed? The reply was again affirmative. Of 
all manltifld, then, there is but a very small number, comparatively, who 
are not, according to the creed iu question, to go to hell? Again I re- 
ceived an affirmative reply. I would then (I rejoined) when I die, rather 
go into an eternal sleep, than awake in heaven to find so many of my fel- 
low-creatures in endless misery, the mcro knowledge of which would make 
heaven itself a boll to a good-hearted angel. 

109. Another species of objection to the existence of spirits is, that 
although movements of bodies are admitted to take place without any per- 
ceptible or conceivable mortal agency, the existence of spirits as the cause 
is to be disbelieved, because the observers have not been successful in get- 
ting replies such as they thinkwould have been given were spirits the source. 

110. Thus a very distinguished physician. Dr. Bell, has alleged that 
nothing has in his Investigations been communicated which was not pre- 
viously in the mind of one or more mortals present. This is one of the 
instances in which the assailant of Spiritualism founds his argument in his 
error. It is an argument which has no other basis than inaccurate informa- 
tion, because I am enabled to disprove the truth of the conclusion on which 
the inference is founded. 


,v Google 


Ill N 


thl 


I 


m 


t 


1 


d tht 


f 


m d 


h 1 1 


Id 


^ 


d 


p 


t t p t 


t th 


If r 


k 


f 


d 


b 


t fh t th 


d 


^y J 


1 1 


r es 


t 


y^ 


f d til t 


Ith 


g I p t th tw wt h p t dlj d b d h 

p d 1 t t Tsly by tt g p k tb j f I te 

t mp m fwh t 

11 S d I, D B 1! I 1 t tf" i m 

from a paci, and laid down beiiind tbe medium and myself, tbe i 
tion unaeen by any moi'tai, have been ninned correctly by one of tbe apiriis 
alluded to, altbougb, about the same time, another eminent spirit could 
not name cards when similarly employed. 

113. Agreeably to my ezpeiienee iu a multitude of cases, spirits have 
reported themselves who were wholly uncspooted, and when others were 
expected. When I was expecting my sister in Boston, my brother reported 
himself. Lately, when expecting her, OaSwalader was spelt out, being 
the name of an old friend, who forthwith gave me a test, proving his 
identity. As this spirit had never visited my disk before, I had not tbe 
smallest expecta.tion of his coming. 

114. My spirit brother referred to a confidential conversation had with 
my brother Powel, in which the former was alluded to, when nothing was 
farther from my mind than that he had been present as an invisible listener. 

115. I vrill now mention a fact of recent occurrence, which completely 
refutes Br. Bell's inference ; Being at Cape May, one of my guardian 
spirits was with me frequently. 

116. On tbe 3d instant, at one o'clock A. M., I requested the faithful 
being in question to go to my friend Mrs. Gourlay, Mo, 178 North Tenth 
street, Philadelphia, and request her to induce Dr. Gourlay to go to the 
Philadelphia Bank to ascertain at what time a note would be due, and 
that I would sit at the instrument at half-past three o'clock to receive tbe 
answer. Accordingly, at that time, my spirit friend manifested herself, 
and gave me the result of tbe inquiry. 

117. On my return to the city, I learned from Mrs. Gourlay that my 
angelic messenger Lad interrupted a communication, which was taking 
place thtough tbe spiritoscope, in order to communicate my message, and, 
in consequence, her husband and brother went to the bank, and made the 
inquiiy, of which the result was that communicated to mc at half-past three 
o'clock by my spirit friend. 

118. This diflered from the impi-ession which I had from memory, and 
was not, of course, obtained from my mind. And it is evident that the- 
medium could not have known of my message until she was made to ra- 


;;■ Google 


34 INTRODUCTION. 

119. But independently of the inability to communicate ideas, not pre- 
esistiag in the minda of mortals present, which has been so erroneously 
inferred to esist hy Br. Bell, let this eminent physician suggest any eon. 
ceivable explanation of the phenomena attested by him, excepting that 
founded on the agency of spirits. 

120. And, independently of any other proof, the fact that one of my 
guardian spirits bore a message from me at Cape May to Mrs. Gourlay at 
Philadelphia, so as to induco her to do what was requested, is evidently, 
of itself, inexplicable under any other ■view than that of a spirit having 
ofE.oiated. 

121. To conclude, I hope that while Spiritualism will give a quietus to 
atheism, it will he found, agreeably to the facts and reasoning presented iu 
this book, better suatainod by oyidence, and to aiiswer the great objects 
of religion, as above stated, vastly better than any other religious doctrine. 


THEOLOGICAT, AXIOMS, 
la not the affirmative of any of these queries, as evidently trne as any 
of the asioma of Euolid ? 

Did DOt that thought from heaven proeesil, 

AeeordiDg Uod's meroy to every creed, 

Whioi however pagnn, hono'or unttoe, 

la meant to give our Cteatoc his due f 

Mny not devotion to God he ahown. 

Whether thfougb Christ or Mohammed known? 

Whether men die in holy war. 

Or kneel to bo ornshod by Juggernaut's oar ? 

Mankind would God in error leave, 

Tet penally for that error aggrieve. 

Sid God a epedol oroed require. 

Each Boul mould he not with that creed inapire f 

Can a glaring evil endure 

Despite Dfthspower and will to cure? 

Must not any event arrive 

For which both will and power alrlve ? 

Will not any reault oh tain 

Whieli power unitea with will to gain f 

If God can creatures moke to suit hia will, 
foresee, if they can, tia design fulfil; 
Wherefore to (rial, those craaturea espose, 
Traits to discover, which he thua foreknows ? 


, Google 


, Google 


^y. 


^. /^^ y,i^z.^-/L. 


„ Google 


INTUITIVE EYIDENCE 


EXISTENCE OF SPIEITS. 


122. TiiE first fruit of luy atteotion to the pienonicna of table turning, 
was the following letter. I ti'ust I shall not be considered as aelf-oompla- 
cent, when I allege it to be an eKemplification of Tuise ignorance, which is 
about equivalent to folly. The wisest man who speaks in ignorance, 
speaks foolishly to the eurs of those who perceive his ignorance. The 
great mass of men of science appear in this light to spiritualists when 
they argue against Spiritualism. Men who are only nominally Know 
Nothings have proved a formidable party in politics; unfortnnately, Spi- 
ritualism has, in its most active opponents, real Know Nothings, who will 
not admit any fact of a spiritual origin, unless such as they have been 
educated to believe. In that case, many have powers of intellectual deglu- 
tition rivalling those of the anaconda in the physical way. 

Letter in repli/ to an Inquiry repeating the infiuence of Electricity in 
Table Turning. 

PBiUBELPmA, July 27, 1853. 

123. "Dear Sir: I am of opinion that it is utterly impossible for sis 
or eight, or any number of persons, seated around a table, to produce an 
electric current. Moreover, I am confident that if by any adequate means 
an electrical current were created, however forcible, it could not be pro- 
ductive of table turning. A dry wooden table is almost a non-conductor, 
but if forming a link necessary to complete a circuit between the sky and 
earth, it might possibly ba shattered by a stroke of lightning ; but if the 
power of all the galvanic apparatus ever made was to be collected in one 
current, there would be no power to move or otherwise affect such a table. 

124. " Frictional electricity, such as produced by electric machines, 
must first be accumulated and then discharged, in order to produce any 
striking effect. It is iu transitu that its power is seen and felt. 

^ IE ie anggested ttia,t the^ nords maj be misapprelieaded. I aso them la the SGOSV 
given by Johneon : "Sight of any Mtig, commiinlg mental mem." 

Itar^Aeestaod-titnl eyideuea to be intuitive ivbiakis obEoined by the slmultaiieous autien 
of tha mind and the eight, nnd, of couysb, of any other of the senses. Intuitive ie da- 
rived froin tlie Latin woid iiilua, to lool! npon. "Iiilnei-e ealuiH," according to Cicero, 
means to louk ttt the slty. 35- 


oogic 


36 INTUITIVE EVIDENCE OP 

125. "Insulatecl conductors, wliether inanimate, or in tlie form of animals, 
maj be electrified by the most powerful means, without being injured or 
seriously incommoded. Before a spark ot lightning passes, every object 
on the teiTestrial surface, for a great distance' around, Js subjected to a 
portion of the requisite previous accumulation. Tet it is only those ob- 
jects which are made the medium of discharge that are sensibly affected. 

126. "Powerful galvanic aooumulation can only be produced by those 
appropriate n m t which concentrate upon a comparatively small 
filament of p t 1 fb p ouliar polarizing power ; but nothing seems 
to me iiiorc t nt w th experience than to suppose a table moved 
by any possibl f n n d of galvanic reaction. It was ascertained by 
Gaaiot that u f th m t powerful galvanic batteries ever made could 
not give a pvk h f ntaot to a conductor presented to it, at the 
smallest distance which could be made by a delicate micrometer. If there 
is any law which is pre-eminent for its invariability, it is, that inaiiimale 
matt-er cannot, ^er se, change its state as respects motion or rest. Were 
this law liable to any variation, we should be proper tiouably liable to 
perish; since in that case the revolutions and rotations of our planet and 
its satellite might undergo perturbations by which the ocean might inun- 
date the land, or the too great proximity or remoteness of the sun cause 
us to be scorched or frozen. If the globe did not carry the Pacific more 
steadily than the most competent person could carry a basin of water, we 
should be drowned by the overflow of the land. I recommend fo your 
attention, and that of others interested in this hallucination, Faraday's 
observations and experiments, recently published in some of our respect- 
able newspapers. I entirely concur in the conclusions of that distin- 
guished experimental expounder of Nature's riddles. 

KoBERT Hare." 

127 Th p bl t d w f rth th f 11 m t th b 

J d 1 tt wl h d t d t f th t f th h 

b t 1 g ty It t b t ! t th w h p 1 

tat fmBCmtktottd It d th tt 

I wh h I t 1 mm I t ly ft d 

M ^ 1 1 5 

lb Bea S I b d tb pie. f 1 ght | ta w 1 j 

m th t, I SB th tw ty y wh I h b t d f 1 p 

PhdUph 1 wllltu.t th lbetjlt.k wt to 

y w I h y 1 tte t th 1 1 I d Iph I 1 1 til 

m I bldtw uidbyltty 1 mbt 

t 1 k ly t b t! 1 f ? T w th P 

f F n.d y h t tb t bl m 1 by tb h d tb t t N 

I k w tai !y I k y th g th t th 1 1 g 

ral, f t y ta Th m b 1 th t t bl m 


;;■ Google 


or SPIRITS. 07 

times move without any person near them, as that they sometimes move 
with hands on them. I cannot in this case doubt the evidence of my 
senses. I have seen tables move, and heard tunes beat on them, when no 
person was within several feet of tbem. This fact is proof positive that 
the force or power'is not muscular. 

129. "If any further evidence was necessary to set aside Professor 
Faraday's explanation, it is found in abundance in the great variety of 
other facta taking place through the country, such as musical instruments 
being played iipoti without any hands touching them, and a great variety 
of other heavy articles being moved without any visible cause. If tables 
never moved except when bands were on them, the ease would be differ- 
ent; but as they do move, both with and without Lands, it is plain that 
the true cause remains yet to be discovered. 

10 I w 1 th t y had 1 1 pp t ty t wit ss m 

th ph f this t wh h m fc y t to h i II d j 

dith Ly w lib sati fi dtb t th I h 11 t 


1 Ifd pt b 


t t Ih y 


h m 


d Th t 11 


t d w th I m 


t has 


b 


t df 


151 If th th 


gs b cc 


td f 


tfi p p 


w 


Id t 1 1 g t 


qui t t 


t 


d wl tth p 


pi 


If t 


t d 


tl th 1 bl 


1 


jly te tel k 


g t! f t 


I 


t ly i g t p 


th t th ti 


th gs th t 


t I g pi ywh 1 


b 


pi d It 


ff t g th 


1 h 


Ij h th 


d f d 


ta tl 


th t 


(h L w \ 


h 


J t b g 


I th t d es 


t mply 


g t b d ty t 


h 1 m 
! 1 fl 
1 Ih m 


yd t! t t 


d 


by pint th g 


d th m tt 


f th 


1 t th y tl 


m 


1 f 1 p 


!1 1 


t t 


fid If th f 


in 


1 as t 


th t t t 


Iw h 


t ty ^ 


"lours 


respectfully. 


\m4S1 HoiifOMBE 


Ijl It will be jeicened thit the ktter illudcd ti by Mi Holcombo 
wiitten m reply to some mqunies lespecting my opinion of the can^-e of 
table turning, wis pubhshed in the Philadelphia Inquiier, in July, lb53 
This letter will fhovr that I wts it that time utterly incredukus of any 
cause of the phenomena esce[tin„ unconscious muscular action on the 
pirt of the peiTOns with whom the phenomena wcio aasociated The 
mf rpnces of Faradaj, tLndmc; to the same conclusion, I thorcughlj sane 
timel 

134 Ai nD allusion to spints as the cause had been mode by this Her 
culcan investigator m the letter which drew forth mme they were not 


;;■ Google 


38 INTUITIVE EVIDEKCE Or 

cuntemplated in my view uf tte suliject. Hail I oyer heard spiritual 
agenuy assigned as a cause, po great was my disbelief of any sucli agency, 
that it would have made no impression on my memory. 

135. Though present on several occasions when tahlo turning was the 
subject of discussioD, it was not, within my hearing, attrihuted to spirit- 
ual agency. In common with almost all educated persons of the nine- 
teenth century, I had been brought np deaf to any testimony which 
ikimed assistance from supernatural causes, such as ghosts, magic, or 
witchcraft. 

136. Subsequently to my publication corroborating the inferences of 
Faraday, having, in obedience to solicitations already cited, consented tu 
visit circles in which spiritual manifestations were alleged to he made, 
I waa conducted to a private house at which meetings for spiritual inquiry 
were occasionally held. 

137. Seated at a tihle with half a dozen persons, a hymn was sung 
with religious zeal and solemnity. Soon afterward tappings were dis- 
tinctly heard as if made beneath and against the table, which, from the 
perfect stillness of every one of the party, could not be attributed to any 
one among them. Apparently, the sounds were such aa could only he made 
with some hard instrument, or with the ends of fingers aided hy the nails. 

138 I learned that simple qnurics were answered hy means of these 
manifestations ; one tap being considered as equivalent to a negative ; two, 
to doubtful; and three, to an affirmative. With the greatest apparent 
mncerili/, questions were put and answers taken and recorded, as if ail 
concerned considered them as coming from a rational though invisible 
agent. 

139. Subsequently tw m d a t d t a mail fable, (drawer re- 
moved,) which, upon a ful s n t n I f un I to j sent to my inspec- 
tion nothing but the sf of laejal n the under side as well as 
upon the upper. Yet ht.psw h dabf seemingly against the 
table. Even assumi g tb \ j 1 by wh m I was surrounded, to be 
capable of deception, and the feat to be due tj jn^^leij, it was still inex- 
plicable. But manifestly I was in a company of worthy people, who were 
themselves under a deception if these sounds did not proceed from spi- 
ritual agency. 

140. On a subsequent occasion, at the same house, I heard similar tap- 
ping on a partition between two parlours. T opened the door between the 
parlours, and passed to that adjoining the one in which I had been sitting. 
Nothing could be seen which, could account for the sounds. 

141. The medium to whose presence these manifestations were due, 
then held a flute against the panel of the door, and invited me to listen. 
On putting my ear near to the flute, tapping was quite audible. On the 
ensuing evening, I carried with me a sealed glass tube, a hollow tube of 
the same material, and a brass rod. These being successively held agiiinst 


,v Google 


THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. ^9 

tlie door panel, similarly to the holding of the flute, the rapping was again 
heard.* 

142. I have muoh. reason to confide in the disinterestedness of the 
medium through whose assistance these facta were observed. She would 
not allow me even to make a present to her child; and her sitting for mo 
was deemed prejudicial to her comfort and health, so that hy the advice 
of her physician it was finally discontinued. Her parents believed the 
manifestations obtained through her iufluence to be caused by spirits. 

143, Sitting at another mansion, in company with an able lawyer, (an 
unbeliever in Spiritualism,) ap well as an accomplished female medium 
and two other persons, sounds were heard like those above mentioned. 
The lawyer alluded to, though from his profession accustomed to distrust 
and to scrutinize evidence, admitted that he found it utterly impossible 
to account fiir these sound? by any visible agency 

144 In ordei to mike my narrative of the evidence upon the subject 
oi rappin^' contmuou'), I would stdfe thjt duiing the evening of ray first 
visit to the circle of spiiitualist^, as above mcntionel, while giaspmg with 
my utmost energy a table at whn,h I was seated, two female media, by 
meiely plicm^ thi-u hauls upon the surface of tlie fable on the opposite 
side, eau'sed it to move to and fio, in despite of my utmost exerti ins 

145 Visiting anothei circle undei the influence of another medium, I 
tound that tilling a table was substituted fur the sounJs aa a means of 
manifestation As one rap signifies no, two, doubtful, and thiee, iffirmi 
tive, so 18 it with the motions, or tipping*, as they aie usually called 

146 Passing the fingers over the lettei-s upon in ilphabetic pasteboard, 
like those to assist children in learning then letters, when it coraes ovei 
the required letter, its selection is indicated either by a tapping or tilting. 
By this procosa, when the medium's eyes were directed to the ceiling, as 
independently observed by the legal friend above mentioned, as well as 
myself, the following communication was given : 

147. "Light is dawning on Hie mind of your friend; soon he will 
speak truinpet-tongued to the sctentijtc world, and add a new link to that 
chain of evidence on which our hope of man's salvation is founded." 

148. The lawyer declared that be was utterly unable to conceive how, 
by the human means apparently employed, such sentences could be elabo- 
rated. Legerdemain on the part of the person who took down the mani- 
festation was the only way to get rid of this evidence without resorting 
to the agency of some invisible intelligent being, who, by operating upon 
the tables, at once exercised physical force and mental power. 

* I have sinoo been assured by my epirit frienila, tliot tbero n-as no deception on the 
pert of the medium here alluded to. It has sinoo been alleged by them that it iraa my 
own father nhn made the raps on the small table aboie mentioned, ivhon I fat at it hc- 
tween the two media. It nas my spirit ftlend, lYilliam Elodget, who xapped when the 
date, tubes, and rod were held against the door, oi' ithen the rapping appealed to be 
made Bgainet the partition between the parlours. 


, Google 


40 INTUITIVE EVIDENCE OE 

140 But a'isigmng the lesuU to legeideimin was oltogetliei 
to aij knowledge of !ii3 chdraiter This gcntkman, aod the ciicle to 
which he belonged spent abcut three hours, twice or thrii^ a ■week, in 
getting communications through the alphahet, hy the pcooesa to whiih the 
lines ahovH mentioned were due This WDuld not have taken plate, had 
tfixy Eot had implicit confidence, that the information thus obtained pro 
ceeded from spmts 

150 Subsequently, I contrived an app'jMtus which, if spmts were 
actually concerned in the phenomeni would enable them to manifest their 
phjsicil and intelleitual power indi,penilently of control by anj medium 
(See Engiavin,^ and description, Phte 1 ) 

151 Upon a pasteboird disk, more than a foot in diameter, flie ktlcrs 
cut out from au alphabet card were nailed around the circumference, aa 
much as possible deranged from the usual alphabetic order. About the 
centre a small pulley was secured of two and a half inches diameter, fitting 
on an axletree, which passed through the legs of the table, about six inches 
from the top. Two weights were provided — one of about eight pounds, the 
other about two pounds. These were attached one to each end of a cord 
wound about the pulley, and placed upon the ^oor immediately under it. 
Upon the table a screen of sheet zinc was fastened, behind which the me- 
dium was to be seated, so that she could not see the letters on the disk. A 
stationary vertical wire, attached to the axle, served for an index. 

152. On tilting the table, the cord would be unwound from the pulley 
on the side of the larger weight, being wound up simultaneously to an 
equivalent extent on the side of the small weight, cansing the pulley and 
disk to rotate about the axle. Bestoring the table to its normal position, 
the smaller weight being allowed to act unresisted upon the cord and pulley, 
the rotation would be reversed. Of course, any person actuating the 
table and seeing the letters, could cause the disk so to rotate as to bring 
any letter under the index j but should tlie letters he concealed from tJie 
operator, no letter required could be brought under the index at will. 

153. Hence it was so contrived that neither the medium seated at the 
table behind the screen, nor any other person so seated, couid, by tilting 
the bible, bring any letter of the alphabet under the index, nor spell out 
any word requested. 

154. These arrangements being made, an accomplished lady, capable 
of serving in the required capacity, was so kind as to assist me by taking 
her seat behind the screen, while I took my seat in front of the disk, 

155. I then said, "If there be any spirit present, please to indicate the 
affirmative by causing the letter T to come under the index." Eovthwith 
this letter was brought under the index. 

156. " Will the spirit do us the favour to give the initials of his name 7" 
The letters R H were successively brought under the index. " My ho- 
noured father ?" said I. The letter Y was again brought under the index. 


,v Google 


OF SPIRITS. 41 

157. " Will my father do me the favour to bring the letters under the 
index successively m alphabetical order ?" Immediately the disk began 
to revolve so as to produce the desired result. Afier it had proceeded aa 
far as the middle of the alphabet, I requested that " the name of Washing- 
ton should be spelt out by the same process," This feat was accordingly 
performed, as well as others of a like nature. 

158. The company consisted of but few persons be.sides the medium, 
who now urged that I could no longer refuse to come over to their belief. 
Under these circumstances the following communication was made by the 
revolving of the disk : " Oh, my son, Itsfen to reascn !" 

159. I urged that the esperiraent was of immense importance, if con- 
sidered as proving a spirit to he present, and to have actuated the appa- 
ratus; aifording thus precise esperimental proof of the immortality of the 
soul : that a matter of such moment should not be considered aa conclu- 
sively decided until every possible additional means of verification should 


te d 


160. This led my companions to accuse me of estrema incredulity. The 
medium said she " should not deem it worth while to sit fur me again," 
and one of the gentlemen sat himself down by the fiieside, declaring me 
" to be insusceptible of conviction, and that he would now give me up." 

161. Nevertheless, the medium, relenting, gave me another sitting at 
her own dwelling a few days afterward ; when I had improved the appa- 

b pi y fj y hts by h h h d g h 

p 11 1 1 11 ! p 1 p 11 

1 f h n IP ted 

IThlfidhj ly d lip 

ghmlf H 11 my I d hm 

b J b 1 I q 1 h y h ppy Tl d L 

1 b hlYJll fyglfa 

1 h f 11 g k I ook my pp tu ! h f 

lib 1 m Tl pp b g i ly ar 

d 1 dy h m I b d bef 1 d by h luy pp 

rawas hfi dw myllbidh 

Thp f 11 had I hbf kdbh dm 

Hin b ihpplbm fUh 

names were spelt out at request, 

164. Although the requisite letters were ultimately found, there was 
evidently some difficulty, as if there was some groping for them with an 
imperfect light. This has been explained since by my father's spirit. He 
alleges that preferably the eyes of the medium would be employed, but 
that, although with difficulty, he used mine as a substitute. 

165. But although, with a view to convince the skeptical, spirits will 


,;■ Google 


42 INTUITIVE 

oeeasionally give manifestations when the vision or mnsculai' control of 
the medium is nullifiecl, it is more difficult for them to operate in this 
way ; moreover, it is more difficult for some spirits than for others. 

166. Those spirits by whom I obtained my test manifestations were 
interested in my success. Others have refused to aid me in like manner. 
One who hM assisted me with much aeal, has communicated that lie would 
work my apparatus when arranged for a test; hut, that as it caused much 
more exertion, and, of course, retardation, he advised that the test arrange- 
ment should not be interposed when it could be avoided. 

167. *Tlio table, at this stage of my inquiry, was not more than thirty 
inches in length. I had improved the construction in the following way ; 

168. Two of the legs were furnished with castors, through holes duly 
bored. Through perforations in the other two legs a rod was introduced, 
serving as an axle to two wheels of about five inches diameter. One of 
these wheels was grooved, so as to carry a band which extended around 
the pulley of the disk. Hence, pushing the table nine inches boriaontally 
by the necessary rotation of the supporting wheels, caused the disk to 
make a complete revolution. It was while the table was of the size above 
mentioned, that I first saw the violent action to which they might be sub- 
jected without any corresponding or commensurate visible cause. The 
hand of the medium being laid on the table at about half-way between the 
centre and the nearest edge, it moved aa if it were animated, jumping like 
a restive horse. 

169. Having my apparatus thus prepared, a medium sat at nij table, 
the screen interceptiug her view of the disk. No manifestation took place 
through the disk, though other indications of the presence of spirits were 
given. Hence, inducing the medium to sit at on ordinary table, I inquired 
if any change could be made which would enable them to comraunioato 
through my apparatus ? The reply through the alphabetic card was, " Let 
the medium see the letters." At first it struck me that this woitld make 
the experiment abortive, as it would remove the condition by which alone 
independency o£ interference by the medium was secured. However, it 
soon ocoi d th t by m f m til jl t m d i t t I 
some bra b 11 1 k b 11 d b 11 w th wJ h I i 111 11 
neutralize th p w f th m d m to th t bl tl t h 1 1 
not influe th It f th 1 tte th h p nutt d t th 

170. A d g!y al t th m d m pi d 1 h d 
the plate t th b U 1 w tl t y th mm t w th 
tiro table, thdkb t 1 bwytl thitt 
under th d d Ipl b t 1 Aft word m 


M of tie taHe represented in lengtt, tlia npparatns hero do- 
m ttat lepresented in Plate 2, wtich is aooompiinioa iy a 


;;■ Google 


THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 43 

spelled, and communications were made. At subsequent Bitticgs, tHe 
grandfather and brother of the medium uiacifosted their presence suc- 
cessively by spelling their names on the disk. My father, by means of 
this apparatus, gave me the name of an uncle who was killed by the Arabs 
nearly seventy years ago. In order that, without any possibility of contact 
with the legs, the medium might sit nt the table, the length was sabse- 
quently extended to sis. feet, being so made its to separate into three 
parts, for convenience in carrying from one place to another. It is under 
this modification that it js represented in Plate 2 accompanied by a de- 
scription, with the medium sitting as when employed in obtaining some 
of the manifestations herein mentioned. On the left may be seen the 
wheels and asle. The front wheel may be distinguished, with its groove 
securing the band which embraces it, together with the pulley on the disk. 

171. The disk represented in this figure differs from the one represented 
above, (employed in my first investigations,) in having the alphabet in 
the usual order. But they are so made as that one can be made to replace 
the other, when requisite. 

172. Oa one side of the long table, Plate 2, a board or tray on castors is 
represented. This was used sometimes as a support for the hands of the 
medium, by its being interposed between them and the table. On one 
occasion, where the hands of the medium were supported by tho plate and 
ball upon this tray, it was moved briskly to and fro upon the table, tho 
hands of the medium and the ball and plate accompanying the motion. 

173. On various subsequent occasions I have had this experiment of 
putting the hands of the medium oa a plate and balls repeated, and with 
the same result. The interposition of the plate and balls makes it much 
more difficult for spirits to move a table than when the hands are directly 
applied. In the latter case, the spirits actuate the hands primarily, and 
the table or apparatus secondarily; but when the hands are incapacitated 
from influencing the motion, the spirit has to assail the inanimate matter 
directly, assisted only by an emanation from the medium. In this attack 
upon ponderable matter, the spirits of tho second sphere are the most 
capable ; but even with their assistance, the condition of the medium must 
be very favourable to render succesa possible. 

174. I nest resorted to an apparatus lik 
excepting that the fulcrum, inst 
was situated at one-fourth of the whole length from one end. There was 
one foot on one side of the fulcrum, and three feet on the other. The 
disk and its axle was transferred from the table, Pkte 1, near to the longer 
end of this seesaw-like apparatus. The cord attached to two weights was 
employed as above described, so that as the disk was made to rise or fall 
wiUi the vibi'ation of the board by the action of the cord, a revolution 
took place, bringing the letters successively under tho index, as already 
explained to have resulted from the movements of the table. 


ike the plaything called a seesaw, 
,cg under the middle of the board. 


;;■ Google 


44 INTUITIVE E 

175. The disk being situated edg w t th n dium, the letters could 
could not be seen. Under these c m t th hands of the medium 
were placed upon the surface of th m 11 p t n of the board outside 
of the fulcrum. The disk revolved t If s to bring the letters 
under the index in due alphabetic d M er, while this process 
was under way, to render the result in nq st onable, I interposed a 
screen between the disk, and the ey f th m d m, without causing any 
arresfation of the process.* 

176. Afterward upon the tahle supported on wheels or castors, and 
moving the disk by a band, I ised a tray on castors to support the hand 
of the medium. 

177. When the hands of the medium, or those of any other operator, 
were placed upon this tray, it was impossible to move the table by means 
of it, because much less force would make it move on its castors than would 
move the table. Sometimes the tray would be moved baokwai'd and 
forward with rapidity, the table remaining quite still. Yet, on urging 
that the table should be moved, this desideratum would be conceded, and 
the tray would become stationary, relatively, to the table. On one occa- 
sion, when an intelligent spirit was manifesting, I interposed a brass ball 
(Plate I.) and plate between the tray and the hands of the medium, and 
then requested that the tray might bo moved. My request was obeyed; 
the tray moved repeatedly about a foot to and fro, accompanied by the 
hand of the medium, the ball remaning at rest, relatively, to the tray. 

178. Having my apparatus at the residence of the lady by whom it had 
been actuated in the third trial above mentioned, (172) this lady sitting 
at the table as a medium, my sister reported herself. As a test question, 
I inquired "What was the name of a partner in business, ofmy father, who, 
when he had left the city with the Americans during the Kevolutionary 
war, came out with the British, and took care of the joint property?" The 
disk revolved successively to letters correctly indicating the name to be 
Warren. I then inquired the name of the partner of my Knglish grand- 
father, who died in London more than seventy years ago. The true name 
was ^ven by the same process. 

* It may bs eipedient to state that tiia diak was counterpoised bj a weight ot tia 
smaller end of Ihe board. This weight was euspended from a hook at ons end of a rod, 
which was so faalenea by atopies, as to have the distanoe of tlie hook from the fulernm 
adjusted so as to make the weight oouclorpoise the diak exaitly. 

This exporimant may be undecstood by looking at Plate 3, The board employed ia 
thera repreaenled, afisoeiated nith a wire-game cage and spring balaHce. Lot all these 
be removed in the mind's eye. Suppoae the large disk repcesenled in the Plate I to be 
affixed with its axle to the board, neat whers the hook is raprescntad aa attached to the 
balance. Snppoae a counter-weight at the other and of the board to balance the dislt, so 
oa ia keep tha board level when loft to itself. Now, the oord and weights being applied, 
as in the experiment with table, (154,) on the medium plaolng her hands on the small 
end, the results above desoribed ensued. 


, Google 


8P1RITB. 45 

179. The medium and all present were strangers to my family, and I 
had never heard either name mentioned, except hy my father. Even my 
jounger brother did not remember that of my father's partner. 

180. Sahsequently, in the presence of a medium utterly unacquainted 
with my fajuily, to whom I was first introduced in Deoemher, 1853, and 
who had only within two years previously removed to our city from Maine, 
I inquired of my father the name of an English cousin who had married an 
admiral. The name was spelled out. In like manner the maiden name 
of an English brother's wife was given — an unusual name, Clargess. 

181. The principle of my apparatus for spiritual manifestations has 
been employed on a smaller scale by Mr. Isaac T. Pease, of Tbompson- 
ville, Coonecticut, substituting the reaction of a spring for that of a weight, 
and making the index revolve instead of the disk. (Plate 1.) 

182. By the modification which I made for the employment of this 
smaller instrument communication was greatly facilitated. I had subse- 
quently a copious interehange of ideas with my father, brother, and sister, 
and other friendly spirits. (See engraving and description, Plate 1, Fig. 2.} 

183. At the house of a spiritualist who had been holding cirelos for 
more than a year, I had confirmatory evidence of the intelligence by which 
spirit rapping is regulated. I was allowed to subject the table em- 
ployed to a strict scrutiny, removing the drawer to obtain a more thorough 
inspection. This table was nevertheless repeatedly agitated with an en- 
ergy which could not be ascribed to the hands placed quietly upon its 
surface by a circle of persons perfectly quiescent. Often at this circle, and 
at others during the chanting of hymns, have I seen a table thus situated 
keeping time by its vibratory movements with a sympathetic tremour. 

184. The spirit friend of a medium present, who called herself Amanda 
Ford, used on request to make a sound like that of the hammering by 
blacksmiths, designated as " ten-pounds-ten." This sound would be shifted 
to that of sawing or sweeping. Doubtless, these manifestations might be 
imitated by certain ventriloquists; but I had not the smallest reason to 
suspect ventriloquism, and Amanda gave me the following unquestionable 
proofs of her spiritual esistenee : 

185. Taking up the alphabetic card, and holding it up near my face, 
in a feeble light, with the back toward the medium, so as not to be in- 
spected by any one else, I asked Amanda, as I should pass my fingers over 
the letters, to indicate those necessary for spelling out her name, by the 
usual manifestation. The name was in this way con-ectly spelt out. 

186. In the nest place, at the same time and under the same circum- 
stances, I asked her then to spell the name of "Washington. Passing my 
fingers over the letters of the alphabet, not regularly but zigzag, and stop- 
ping a short time at the letters adjoining the right ones, that mueh-revered 
name was coiTectly spelt out, with one single error, the omission of the Or. 

187. Suspicion that the rapping or tapping could arise from any me- 


;;■ Google 


chaniam. coiic«aIed in the table, was precluded wlien thej were made 
under my own tables, fitted up witli my otth hands. 

Of tnanife^tation^ founAed on fable niovements wiihoul ccatact, or suck 
contact, (M cannot he sufficient to cause the result, 

188. It was at the eame mansion, where the above-mentioned manifes- 
tations wero observed, that I first saw a table continue in motion when 
every person Iiad withdrawn to about the distance of a foot; so that no 
one touched it; and while thus agitated on our host saying, "Move the 
table toward Dr. Hare," it moved toward me and back again. At the same 
premises, when between the hands of each of two media and a small table 
a plate upon a brass ball was interposed, without any other communication 
with it, the table was violently overset, so as to have its legs uppermost. 
Yet while thus upside down, it continued to vibrate, a single finger of a 
medium ^il, about twelve years of age, being the sole means of human 
contact therewith. This I ascertained, with the greatest care, by kneeling 
on the floor and causing tlie finger of the medium, by the tip of which 
alone her touoli was effected, to be situated between me and the light of 
a lamp. 

189. In the observations above stated, respecting the movements of the 
fable when untouched, I was aided by the presence of my friend Joseph 
Hazard, Esq., of Narragansett, Ehode Island, who occupied a seat oppo- 
site to mine on the other side of the table; so that while he saw all clear 
on one side, I saw all clear on the other. In iny narrative I have adverted 
to two recent instances in which severally, in the presence only of the 
medium and myself, the table moved, as I could judge, about eight 
inches, being at the same time untouched by either of us, 

190. Next in importance to the movements of tables which take place 
without any contact, are those in which the table rises under the hands 
of the medium laid gently upou it. On one occasion I saw a large circu- 
lar table, supported by three massive claws on castors, overset several 
times by the influenee of three ladies who were media In order to have 
this experiment performed with asmhp ats mt wld 
permit, I seated myself on one side fthtbl tob jdtt 
from two of the three claws by which t w [ f ted Th t m d te 
medium, waa directly opposite the th d 1 w 1 1 th th t 1 

on each side of her. My relative p t n was h th t th j w 
standing upright before me, I could 1 k t tl p p t llj b I w 

as welt as above the table. These ri g t 1 g b d t! 

three media laid their hands on the til llbydihm 
that thej could not apply their thu b b 1 w th d^ d th t 

the table to raise. Under these cir I I bl d t w f h th 

media above as well as below the t bl 1 y t my J pw d d 
downward alternately, they being all th f t nd ta d p ght 


;;■ Google 


THE EXISTENCE OS SPIEITE. 47 

It was Tinder these conditioas, tliat tte table, in three successive trials, came 
over toward me and went back to its normal position. 

191. It did not slam dowa qaioklj, when on arriving at auoli a position, 
as to make it impossible for the ladies to resist its farther descentj but 
descended gently, rising slowly in recovering its usual upright position. 

192. I called one morning at the dwelling of a medium to whom allusion 
has been made more than once in my narrative. I sat down at a table 
with the medium, her father, and a gentleman who accompanied me. I 
inquired if any of my spirit friends were present; the fable tilted nega- 
tively. " Will the spirit give its initials through the alphabetic card ?" 
In reply the letters M C were indicated. My companion, whose attention 
had been withdrawn, on hearing the result, said : " They are the initials of 
my daughter's name ;" exclaiming, "Maria, are you here ? " 

193. The table tilted ia the affirmative, vivaciously, as if the daughter's 
heart were in the movement. 

194. Maria proving to be a sprightly spirit, a lively conversation ensued. 
I inquired if she could not work my apparatus; she answered through the 
card, "/( is impossibl-e for a ipirit to xBwh yow apparattts ; lam very 
mrry." I replied that evidently it was not impossible, since it had been 
actuated by spirits suecesBfulIy several times. " You mean to say," I 
added, "that it is difficult." To this she replied affirmatively by three 
tilts of the table. 

19 A th ugh tl fluence of the medium, who sat at the table with 

u irm tnshdbn received through my apparatus several times, 

tl Ijh b t rang d f i a state of disarrangement, and names spelt 

t by th It f the disk, it cannot be imagined that the medium 

U h fl 1th Iphabetical communications in this instance, since 

th ff J n f p to deception, would have perceived it ridicu- 

1 t 11 t mp bL to work an apparatus which had on several 

n d h fl ee, proved the opposite to be true, in the pre- 

f h f th w n 18 myself 

1 IC It h b ! dy mentioned in the narrative (164.) that my 

p t f th nd p t f nd W. "W., had alleged that they worked my 

pp t w th gr t d ffi Ity when under test conditions, from their great 

1 t m k m a ert to Spiritualism. It was, therefore, quite 

te t th t p t ^^ho had no such powerful motive, should have 

J t dtofilajl yfor not actuating my apparatus, rather than to 

have studied, or sought for the means of surmounting the obstacles. 

197. As all the manifestations, observed on this occasion, were by the 
tilting or partial lifting of the table, I urged the spirit to aid me in obtain- 
ing a teat that these manifestations came not from the medium, but from 
herself, a spirit. I immediately procured from a basket which I Lad pre- 
viously brought to the premises, a brass ball, turned truly spherical, like a 
bUliard ball, and a plate of zinc which had been ground quite true. I 


,v Google 


48 iNTiriTiVB 

placed tie ball on tie table, tte plato on the ball, aod the licinds of the 
medium on the plate. She had no other communicatioQ with, the table 
than that wliioliwaa thus established. Pressing ou the ball when situated 
between perpendicular lines falling inside of all the legs of the table, 
woald of course only presa it downward more firmly on its feet. 

198. Things being thus arranged, I solicited Maria to repeat the upward 
jerks which she had employed in the communication which she had been 
making. Her father joined his solicitation to mine, pointing out that my 
object was to obtain evidence, which would satisfy the scientific world that 
such manifestations were due to the agency of spirits. 

199 After a little delay the table rose undei the ball, the plati,, and 
the hinds of the medium, with gi eater foicp than had been di'plijed in 
any of the foregoing moveinents 

200 Sul. sequin tly, being in company with Maiia s father, at the dwell- 
ing of a spiritualist, and sittmg with a medium it the table supporting 
an appaiitus for ilphabet!(,al communications, the spint of Maria, who 
seems to follow her woithy tathei with much fllnl iffection, repoitcd her- 
self I inquired whcthti she lemembeied our previous meeting, and 
what means I lesorted to as i test fehe lepliel, "You u'ied a pKte and 
ball to support the hands of the medium, which I knocked away." 

201. While receiving communications from my spirit sister, the table 
tilting toward the medium, so as to cause the cord actuating the iodes, by 
being through a string tied to a weight on the floor, iltern'vtelj to be w th 
drawn and returned, consequently, winding off and on the pullej wl ch 
turned the indcs, I suggested that the relative po t n of the me 
dium should be reversed, so that she should be on tl e same de w h the 
apparatus. By this change the table would have to r se under the hands 
of the medium. The proposed modification was su cessfuUy carr d out 

202. I i^kcd iiiy sister how a spirit could work an appa atus w th the 
medium's bauds on the upper surface of the table ; the eply was f hit the 
presence of the hands of the medium enabled the spi t to let n ojp s t on 
to them. 

203. Under this head dimes the esperiment n vh h a hot I wis 
supported so as to turn on a fulcrum, one foot of the hoi d be n^ on 
one ads of the fulcrum, and three feet on the otliei, the longei end 
suspended on a spring balance. When a medium, eleven years old, placed 
his bands on the short end, that end rose while the other, of course, went 
down; iu some instances, showing an increase of downward pressure on 
the balance, equivalent to seven pounds. 

204. This experiment was subsequently repeated at my laboratory, in 
the presence of John M. Kennedy, Esq. Having a basin of water oa the 
board, the boy's hands being merely immersed in the water, and not 
touching the parietes of the containing vessel ; the balance was affected 
as in the experiment, above described, although not to so great an extent. 


;;■ Google 


THE EXISTENCE 0¥ BPIKITS. 49 

205. In one case, Mr. Kennedy satisfied himself, that the jnediuin did 
not touct the veaae}, by placing his ovm hands helow those of the medium, 

206. Mj much-esteemed friend. Prof, Henry, ha,ving treated this 
result as incredible, I was induced to repeat it with the greatest precision 
and precantion, as represented in Plate ii. The board, as already 
described, being about four feet in length, is supported by a rod as a ful- 
crum at about one foot from one end, and, of course, three feet from the 
other; a glass vase, about nine inches in diameter and five inches in 
height, having a knob to bold it by when iuTerted, had this knub inserted 
in a hole made in tbe board, sis inches nearly from the fulcrum. Thus, 
the vase rested on the board, the mouth upward. A wire-gauze cage, 
such as is used to keep fiies from sugar, was so arranged by well-known 
means, as fo slide up or down on two iron rods, ono on each side of the 
trestle supporting the fulorum. By these arrangements it was so adjusted 
as to descend into the vase until within an inch and a half of the bottom, 
while the inferiority of its dimensions prevented it from coming elsewhere 
within an inch of tho parictes of the vase W'lter was poured into the 
vase so as to rise into the ca^o till within nbout in inch and a half of 
the brim 

207. Awell known medium (GJord n) wis inluoed to plunge hia handi, 
clasped together, to the bottom f (be cage, holding them perfectly still 
As soon IS these conbtiona were attamel the apparatus bomg untouched 
by any one excepting thi, medium is deaciibed, I invoked the aid ot mj 
spirit friends A downward force was lepeatedly eseited upon the end 
of the boird appended to the balam-a equal to thiee pmnds' weight 
nearly. 

208. It will be percBiyed thit m this manifestation, the medium hai 
no means of communication with the board, beside the ■niter It wis njt 
until he became quite still, that the invocation was made. Nevertheless, 
he did not appear to be subjected to any reacting force. Yet, the distance 
of the book of the balance from the fulcrum on which the board turned, 
was six tim^ as great as the cage in which the hands were situated. 
Oonsequently, a force of 3x6= 18 pounds must have been exerted. The 
boatd would probably have been depressed much more, but that the water 
had been epUled by any fai'ther inclination of the vase. 

209. This experiment has since been repeated agaia and again, but on 
a smaller soaie, when, not only the downward force was exercised, but the 
spelling oficords was accomplished. 

210. On one occasion, when no result ensued, it appeared to arise from 
the water being so cold as to ehill the medium, because, on warming it 
up to a comfortable temperature, the desired manifestations were obtained. 

211. At the same IJme and place, after the manifestation by means of 
the spring balances above described (207) bad been accomplished, I 
requested my spirit friends to repeat that which has been above mentioned. 


;;■ Google 


EVIDENCE OF 

aa performed by putting the hands of a medium upon a plate and ball sup- 
ported by a tea-table. (199.) 

212. Accordingly, the attending medium being placed under exactly 
the same circmnatances and conditions, a similar violenb tilting ensued. 

213. Dr. Childj together with the same medium and myself, placed our 
finger ends all reciprocally in contact, and about a quarter of an inch above 
a tea-lable. After an interval of about two minutes, the table rose, and 
was t(»sed from the legs on one side to those on the other forciily. 

214. During a visit to New York, I entered the apartment where one 
of the Misses Fos was sitting. There were more than half a dozen persona 
present. On my entrance, I inqaired, "Does any one here recognise me, 
so as to know my name f" No person answered that I was known. As soon, 
however, as I inquired, my spirit sister announced herself, and indicated 

215. During a visit made tft Boston last autumn, on sitting with a 
medium, my sister , addressed me in the following way, by spelling the 
words out upon the disk apparatus just di 


ScriTing to rench a heavenly goal ; 
Wouldst then aMain tbe hliaaful height 
Where irisdom paiiSes the sight; 
Where God reveals to buinl)lest gaaa. 
The bliss and beaatj of his -ways 
luoline thine ear to augels bright. 
Who radiant from tlio realms of light, 
For ever hover near. 
To cfFcr ihee, sweet words of cheer. 

216. Only the firet couplet in these verses differs at all from those 
which were given, iu the impromptu, the words having been too flattering 
for me, to have mentioned. Soon after being at the residence of a highly- 
esteemed friend, who is a medium, my spirit sister, who manifests much 
love for this Jady, reporting herself, I told her of the change which I thus 
desired to have made. The reply was, " I give you full liberty to alter my 
verses; you know I never wrote two lines of poetry while in the flesh." 
Miss Ellis is no poetess, still less is Mrs. P., the medium. 

217. After my lecture at the Melodeon, being at the residence of Mrs. 
Hajden, au accomplished medium, I requested a repetition of the expe- 
riment, of which I had given an account on that occasion, in which the view 
of the disk was cut off from the medium, by the interposition of a screen; 
and Mrs. Hayden consenting, an arrangcmoat was made so as to satisfy 
the "bystanders, as well as myself, that the letters on the disk could not be 
seen by her. Under these conditions the name of Washington was spelt out. 

218. I have had this test repeated under Gordon's mediumship, as well 
as that of others, several times. Afterward, Mrs. Hayden sitting aloof, on 
making the indes move successively to each letter, those required for the 


;;■ Google 


SPIEITS. 51 

liamc of Jefferson were selected in dae order, liy rapping at the one in de- 
mand, aa it camo under the index. 

219. Through the influenee of Mrs. Hajden, an uncommon test was 
afforded by my iaithful spirit sister. 

220. My charming, intelligent friend, Mrs. Eustis, daughter of the late 
Rev. Dr. W. E. Channing, though not a believer in Spiritualism, became 
desirous of seeing the manifestations so much relied upon by me. Hav- 
ing accompanied me to the residence of Mrs. Hayden, Mrs, Eustis was 
sitting beside her, while through her influence my sister was making a 
communication by means of the apparatus descrihed. (Plate 1, Fig, 2.) 
When the process commenced, the hand of Mrs. Hayden was resting on the 
lever in the usual position, but was subsequently lifted, so as to allow Mrs. 
Eustis, S3 well as myself, to see between it and the wooden surface, with- 
out creating any apparent abatement of the power of indicating the requi- 
site letters. (Description of Plate 1, par. e.) 

221. While the process still proceeded under these conditions, Mrs, 
Eustis, having placed her hand upon the surface of tho board lever, alleged 
that she felt it imparting motion to her hand, 

222. Dr. W. P. Channing has since informed me that Mrs, Eustis's ac- 
count of these manifestations, as given to him, coincide with those given 
to him by me. 

223. Sometime after this feat was performed through Mrs, Hayden, I 
inquired of my sister if she could not perform it througli an excellent me- 
dium under whose influence communioafiona were making at the time of 
this inquiry. It was replied that Mrs Eustis being unconsciously to a 
certain extent a medium herself, the powe M H 1 w m ted 
by her presence. 

224. But as respects the selection of teia w h tan f 
the eyes of the medium, I have had ma hi d 
although the facility of its performance u. w h d ff 
media and with different spirits, but like h d m m 
are the same : it varies with tho state of m I m h n n 
hour with an accomplished medium, du ng n y h g 
without receiving any eommnnication; in n q« n aa up d 
effect of the heat upon her organism. 

225. The interposition of water con n h 
broad part of the lever aotnaling the in h h d ra 
dium can touch nothing but the water, 1 ff 

ing of the hand as above described, sin y d ff nee 

ditions is, that in the one ease there is ai n h h w te nte p d 

226. It has been stated that, by the inteiposition of water, the power of 
actuating the indes was paralyzed ; yet merely warming the water enabled 
the manifestation to proceed, so as to empower the spirit to spell Bnch 
names as were called for. (210.) 


;;■ Google 


227. In. one instaacej I took a book from mj pocket wiiich the medium 
had never seen, and opened it at a page where the heading "Publisher's 
Preface" was conspicuous, without allowing the medium, to see any thing 
more tlian the back of the book. Holding the pago exposed to the disk, 
the spirit spelt out "Ihihlish — ," and then seemed unable to proceed. 
Meanwhile, the medium called to her little son to he quiet; forthwith the 
deficient letters, ers, were supplied, bo as to finish the word "PubliikeT's." 

228. The medium alleged that her mind was imbued with, the idea that 
the word " publishicg" was coming forth, and with a view to aid the spirit, 
lent some muscular aid to the letters necessary to complete that word; but 
attention to her child causing her mind to be withdrawn, the spirit imme- 
diately selected the letters above indited. On the same occasion I opened 
the same book, keeping the back toward the medium, opposite to an engrav- 
ing of Jefferson ; immediately, Jefibrson was spelt out. 

229. On my way to Boston, I visited Mrs. Ann Leah Brown, formerly 
Miss Pox. At about eight in the morning, I found her under very unfa- 
vourable circumstances : Mrs. Brown had been watching the previous night 
with a sick cbild. Nevertheless, considering me as an advocate of the 
cause of truth, a short sitting was given to me, during which my faithful 
spirit sister manifested herself by comparatively loud knockinga. 

230. Through this I learned that Mrs. Brown was not ia condition to 
make it expedient to resort to her mediumship then, had not the necessity 
of attending to her sick child formed a sufficient impediment. 

231. On my return from Boston, I called again on this interesting me- 
dium, and then saw a table, situated at the distance of more than a foot from 
her person, which was quiescent, make a movement to and fro of at least 
eight inches. Moreover, as I sat on the opposite side of an intervening table, 
I felt unexpectedly a slight touch against my leg as if by a human finger. 

232. During this visit, Mrs. Brown created much interest by giving a 
brief account of the trials which herself and her sister had undergone, 
being on the one hand urged to give their services to the community, as 
the means of promoting truth, while on the other they were treated as impos- 
tors or ju gl rs Th mpression left on my mind was extremely favour- 
able as p ta M B own's sincerity in her. Spiritualism and in her 
goodnes of hca t 

233. In n e |u n e of her invitation, I attended a circle at her house 
3, few d ys sub qu nt!y when I saw, in addition to all the usual manifesta- 
tions, th foUowi ^ f the first time: Under a table around which the 
party was seated, a sheet of paper was depos t d n th a p ted floor. A 
pencil was placed upon the paper; soon afte n xam nat on, I found my 
name scrawled thereon. 

234. Two small bells situated upon the fl b n th tl e table were 
rung, and subsequently it was found that on f tl n h 1 b en lifted and 
seated on the other. 


,v Google 


TOE EXISTENCE OF SPmiTS. 53 

236. My spirit sister has siace informecl me that my name was wiitten 
upon the paper by my spirit friend William Bloclget. 

236. "While at Bostoa, having read to a friend a communieation from my 
father through a writing medium, I placed it in onD of my pockets, and 
ptoeeeded to the Foantain Inn. 'Wheii there, I felt for it without success. 
Unexpectedly, I went to Salem by the cai**, and returned the same evening. 
On undressing myself the scroll wis missmg, and I inferred that it had 
been lost between the place where it hid beea read and tlia inn above 
named, where I felt for it uiisui,cessfnlly On going nest morning to Mrs. 
Hayden's, and my spirit father itportmg himself, I inquired whether he 
knew what had become of the seioll It was aiiswered, that it had been 
left upon the seat in the car on my quitting it at Salem. 

i237. Inquiring of the conductor, who was on duty in the car where it had 
been left, he said that it had been found on the seat, was safe at Port- 
land, and should be returned to me nest day. This promise was realized. 

238. On one occasion, sitting at the disk with Mrs. Hayden, a spirit 
gave his initials as 0. H. Hare. Not recollecting any one of our relations 
of that name precisely, I inquired if he were ono of them. The reply was 
affirmative. "Are you a son of my cousin Charles Hare, of St. Johns, 
New Brunswick ?" "Yes," was spelled out. This spirit then gave me 
the profession of his grandfather, also that of his father, and the fact of 
the former having been blown into the water at Toulon, and of the latter 
having made a mii-aculous escape fi-om Verdun, where he had been con- 
fined until his knowledge of French enabled him to escape by personating 
in disguise aa officer of the customs. Only one mistake was mado in 
refen-ing to my English i-elatives, respecting an uncle's name. Other in- 
quiries were correctly answered. 

239. Subsequently, the brother of this spirit made us a visit in Phila- 
delphia, and informed us that the mundane career of bis brother Charles 
Henry, had been terminated by shipwreck some few years anterior to the 
visit made, as mentioned, to me. 

240. No one being present beside myself, and the medium ignorant of 
Latin, my father spelt out upon the disk the words he had pointed out to 
me ia Virgil more than fifty-five yeai-s ago, as expressive of the beating 
Entellus gave Dares, as described by Virgil — "pvlsatgue versatque;" also 
the word which so much resembles the Bound of horses' hoofe trampling 
on the ground, " Quadrwpedante." 

241. A spirit of the name of Powel tendered his services, and un- 
dertook to spoil Cato, but instead of that name, Blodget, my friend, 
occupied the disk, and spelt his own name, and afterward Cato. On the 
same occasion Blodget spelt out and designated words withont the medium 
seeing the alphabet. 

242. The employment of letters to express ideas neither existing in 
the mind of the medium nor in mine, cannot evidently be explained by 


,v Google 


INTUinVE EVIDENCE OF 


any psjch 1 1 bt f Tb Bl 1^ t b 

reference t tt Ijb 


tbe idea tb t t was lea d f th m d f y m t 1 p t 


243. It m t b f t tk t th g te t d fli Uy wh h I li d to 


g 


history, a fmth tyfkg yb t 


1 h 


cireumsta asthwthtlw tl dbytb d 


244. Bth glttly quilthpw f md 


ffi 


cient deg t t hg daswth yptf dim 


J fe 


under th sstyfdfd mdifmth h fflh 


1 d 


deception It la w y w h t ly fh t 1 i t 


245. Tjp th th f th f t t t wh 1 I 


b t 


to allude t. (E f f th h I 1 tt I t 


A t 


to this w k ll'S) 

246. Th f t th t y p t te d to k t Ik th 1 
of July, 1855 t y f th Atl t H t 1 L p M y 1 1 1 
message to M & 1 j N 17a ^ th T tl t t PB 1 d Ifh 
questing th t h w Id d DC 1 j t t ll 1 h I d Ipli 
Bank to t, h ttm wh tewullbd d pt m t 
half-past th 1 k tl t 1 d 1 I t t th pp t d t 1 th t 
on my return to Philadelphia, Mrs. Gourlay alleged herself to have re- 
ceived the message, and that her husband and brother went to the bank in 
consequence. With the idea received by the latter, my sister's report coin- 
cided agreeably to his statement to me. All this proves that a spirit must 
have offioiated, as nothing else can explain the transaction. 

247. The note clerk recollects the application, but does not appear to 
have felt himself called upon to take the trouble to get the register, which 
was not in his hands at tbe time. Hence the Impression received by tho 
applicants was not correct, but corresponded with the report made to me 
by my sister, which differed from, tbe impression on nij memory, and of 
course, was not obtained from my mind. 

HYMN CHAMTED TO MY SISTER, AND HER KEPLY, 

248. My sister having mentioned her name in tho ephores, to be Queen 
of Flowers. I substituted this name translated into Latin in the Sicilian 
Mariners' Hymn, replacing virgo by aoror, tho Latin for sister ; seraph for 
mater; boniasima for piissima; carissima for purissima ; and oura for ora. 
It then read as follows : — 

248. Oh ! bonisaima, oi ! oarieaima 
Dulois aoror, amatu 
Florum cegian 
In uffllo oognita 

Cura, oara, pro nobis 
Serapli amnta iutemsrata 
Cura, oum, pro nobia. 


, Google 


THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 55 

249. As soon as this was chanted, the following reply was given through 
the spiritoscope, at which I was sitting with Mrs. Gourlay as medium : 

250. " Deak BaoTHEE : — I answer your prayer by saying I do watch 
over you, and pray for your welfare. I am grateful for your remembrance, 
iind shall strive to deserve it. 0! brother, our cause is acommon one, 
and we feel the same interest in its promulgation. I am daily striving to 
disseminate its truths, but can make little progress, haying so much igno- 
rance to contend againat. I know that the truths of progression, with the 
help of a good and wise God, will ultimately prevail over all the land ; but 
when that happy time comes to earth, your freed spirit will rove the end- 
less fields of immortality with those loved friends who have gone a little 
while before. Then will we revel in delights which, ia comparison with 
earth's joys, are far more beautiful and sublime. I wish you could look 
with the eye of prescience, and see that glorious time, wlien all nations 
shall become as a band of brothers," 


CORROBORATIVE EVIDENCE OF THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 

251. The evidence of the manifestations adduced in the foregoing narra- 
tive does not rest upon myself only, since there have been persona present 
when they were obsei-ved, and they have in my presence been repeated 
essentially under various modifications, in many instances, not specially 
alluded to. 

252. The evidence may be contemplated under various phases : First, 
those in which i-appings or other noises have been made, which could 
not be traced ta any mortal agency; secondly, those in which soundB were 
60 made as to indicate letters forming grammatical, wcE-spelt sentences, 
affording proof that they were under the guidance of some rational being; 
thirdly, those in which the nature of the communication has becu such as to 
prove that the being causing them must, agreeably to accompanying alle- 
gations, be some known acquaintance, friend, or relative of the inquirer. 

253. Again, cases in which movements have been made of ponderable 
bodies, either without any human contact, or with such contact as could 
not be productive of the resulting motion. 

254. Cases in which such movements of bodies have been of a nature 
to produce intellectual communications, resembling those obtained as above 
mentioned by sounds. 

255. Although the apparatus by which these various proofs were 
attained, luiV/i. the greateU possible precaution aiK^ju-ecisjon, modified themi 
as to the manner; essentially all the evidence which I have obtained, tend-- 
ing to the conclusions above mentioned, has likewise been substantially 


,v Google 


56 CORaOEORATIVE EVIDENCE OP 

obtained by a great number of observers. Many who never soagbt any 
spiritual Cflmnmnieation, and have not been induced to enroll themselves 
as spiritualists, will nevertheless not only af&rm the esistenco of the sonnda 
and movements, but also admit their insenitabilitj. 

25S. Bat we have now, in a matter-of-fact, busineas-like publication, 
by E. W. Capron, a record of the original manifestations at Hydesville 
and Rochester, in New York ; where, as it is well known, thej produced 
intense interest, escitement, and eontroverey; which gave rise to succes- 
sive town-meetings, and the appointment of committees by these meetings 
for the pui'pose of ascertaining whether any other cause could be disco- 
vered for the manifestations, except the spiritual beings who assumed 
them to be their doings. Some of the persons appointed fo make the 
investigation, were prepossessed with the belief that the phenomena were 
due to some joggling contrivance. One alleged that he would tkrow 
himself over the Genesee Falls, or prove the knockings due to humbug- 
gery. Another alleged that the media, aware of his prepossession, would 
not for one hundred dollars have him on the committee ; yet both these 
persons being put on the committee, the latter oama out in favour of the 
inscrutability of the noise ; while the former neither accounted for it, 
"nor threw Itimself over fhefalh," as Mr. Capron pointedly alleges. 

257. Subsequently, in tke city of New York, the mystery was subjected 
to the ordeal of a public investigation by a number of distinguished citi- 
aens, whose reports confirmed those of tho Eoohester committees. Fenni- 
moro Cooper was among those appointed on tbe New York committee, and 
was the means himself of obtaining an unequivocal test. His sister's 
death, which had resulted from beipg thrown from a horse, was correctly 
stated by her spirit in every particular, in reply to mental inquiries by him 
made. 

258. Again at Stratford, Connecticut, at a house of a minister of the 
gospel, manifestations were made fully as striking as those which had 
occurred at Hydesville and Eochester, so as to establish in the mind of 
this estimable clergyman, and in those of many others acquainted with 
the facts, a belief in spiritual agency. (1667) 

Corroborative evidence by the Rev. AUcn Putnam, of Soxhurt/, Mass. 

259. As affording support to the testimony which I Iiave given, I deem 
it expedient to cite that of the Rev. Allen Putnam, formerly a Unitarian 
■ clergyman and preacher in Augusta, Maine, having been in the legisla- 
■ture of that State, and for some time editor of the New England Farmer. 
Mr. Putnam had the advantage of a theological and collegiate education 

;at Harvard. I heard an able and erudite lecture from this worthy spirit- 
lualist, at Boston last October. 

260. Mr. Putnam entered upon the investigation of the manifestations 
iin July, 1852, nearly eighteen months before my investigation com- 


;;■ Google 


THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 57 

meneed. Like me, lie tegan as an uabeliever, and. was converted by coni- 
muniealjona reoeiTed from the spirits of his wife and relatives, who had 
left this life. In a company ignorant of the fact that he had married 
twice, his first wife had made herself known to him, so as to create a con- 
viction of her identity. 

261. lu the nest place, hia ancestors communicated with Mr. Putnam, 
so as to satisfy his mind that they were the beings they professed to be. 
I do not enter into the detail of the facta which created conviction in the 
mind of this respectable observer; my object is to show that other minds 
have gone through the process which has influenced mine, in order that 
sceptics may not "lay the flattering imction to their souia'' that 'tLs mj 
niadness speaks in favour, not their prejudices that speak against, the 
conclusions in which investigators of sound understanding have concurred. 

262. Mr. Putnam alleges : "Some uncommon movements have occurred 
in my presence. I have seen a table moved without any visible power 
applied to it." 

263. The following narrative is taken fi-om the pamphlet published 
by the author in question. It is quite characteristic of the variety of 
character found in the spheres. This juvenile spirit owed his education 
entirely to his schooling in the spirit world. It will be perceived that he 
died while yet an infant. (Page 34, Paragraph 3.) 

264. "Entering a medium's room one morning, I saw a gentlemanly, 
intelligent man, apparently about thirty, sitting at the table and putting 
questions. Soon a tiny rap was heard, and the name Natty was spelled 
out. ' Who are you ?' said the man. ' I am your brother ;' was the an- 
swer. 'No, said the man, 'I had no such brother.' 'You had,' said the 
rapper. 'No,' said the man. 'Yes,' said the other. 'Well, let us see,' 
added the man. ' How old were you. Natty, wlien you died ?' ' Five days,' 
was the answer. ' How long since you died ?' ' Thirty-five years,' The 
gentlemau here bit his lip in thought, and said — ' I believe there was an 
infant brother who died before I was born, but I thought they called him 
Oliver.' 'No,' was the response, 'they called him Natty, and I am he.' 
' Natty,' said the man, ' how do you know that I am your brother ? ' By 
love,' he answered. ' By love ?' said the questioner; ' but don't you !ove 
others as well as relatives ?' Ans, ' We like others, and love relatives '.' 
' What,' it was then asked — ' what is the difierence between love and like ?' 
The word LOVE was immediately written in large letters, two or three 
inches long, and like was traced under it in very small letters. 'Natty,' 
continued the man, ' you are not my brother, hut are some one else, attempt- 
ing to impose upon me.' 'I am your brother,' was the earnest rejoinder. 
'Then, will you tell me what sphere you are in?' 'The fourth,' he said. 
' The fourth, ah ? Now I've caught you — for as you died in infancy, you 
was fitted for the seventh sphere when you left the earth.' ' I have been 
there;' was the response. 'Have been there, and yet arc now in the 


;;■ Google 


58 OOREOBORATIVE EVIDENCE 0¥ 

fourtli! how is that? are you moving backwart! ? coming down F' 'No/ 
I am an adviser la the foui'th.' 'Adviser! what is that? a sort of super- 
intendent?' 'Yea.' ' Oh I you are in office, then ?' 'Yes,' 'Do you get 
any pay? We pay well for such things here.' 'Yes, I get pay.' 'What 
pay?' 'The pleasure of seeing those under me progress.' 

265. " I then said to the gentleman stranger, ' Sir, you have found your 
match, if not your brother. I thiuk I would own the relationship ;' and in 
continuance I remarked, that this seemed to be a veiy biight chicifu.1 
spirit ; when there was written — ' I am always Liu^hiag ' 

266. " My next remark was — 'Natty, I should like to make your ac- 
quaintance.' ' Hand out your card ;' was the instant re=ponie Finding 
no card in my pocket, I wrote, secretly, on a slip of papei — 'Mr Allen 
Putnam, Bustis St., Roxbuiy — turned the paper over, phraug the writing 
down upon the table, kept my hand over the paper, and asked Natty to 
make a copy. Instantly the medium's hand wrote — Mr. A. P., TT. St. Eos. 
The writing on my paper had been seen by me alone, and I was looking 
for a copy ia full, but received only abbreviations, and those of every 
word, Eustis being reduced to the letter TJ. This closed my first interview 
with him. 

267. "Some weeks afterward, when he was forgotten, the medium's 
hand wrote, 'Mr. A. P.,tJ. St. Kox. — I have used your card.' 'Natty,' 
said I, 'as you left the earth when very young, I would like to know how 
you learned the English language.' He answered, ' My mother knew it, 
I think ; and asked, ' Will jou let my mamma come ?' ' Certainly, with 
pleasure.' And the following was written : 

268. " 'My friend, you must not be angry with my darling boy. It 
ofttimes grieves me to have him, so pure, use such wild phrases. I am 
your friend, as a soldier in the cause. Elizabeth Y .' 

269. " Yery often this littlo bright spark comes out with something un- 
expected, amusing, or witty; but at all times he manifests a very marked 
disposition to be obliging and kind. Onoe, when his communication seemed 
to be closed, I ssdd, ' You are not going, Natty?' 'Yes — gone — don't you 
see the dust fly?' 'Where,' I asked, 'do you pick up such phrases?' 

270. " On another occasion he said, ' My friend, you must not put on 
a long face when you come to talk with supposed ghosts. You must not 
believe all they tell you to. You must not go to the end of the world and 
jump off, because they tell you to.' 

271. " When once I swd to him, ' How do you go to work, Natty, to use 
a medium's hand ?' He said, ' Why, you see, we just passes a chain of 
light around the wrist, and that sets it to shaking. The next operation is 
to make it write, of course. Somedmes the words are allowed to pass 
through the brains. We now have such a power over this medium, that 
wc can make her shake awfully.' 'Try my wrist, Natty,' said a lady who 


,v Google 


THE EXISTENCE OP SPIRITS. 59 

was present. 'Dear, beloved anDtj, I've got a peck of love for you, but I 
can't make you trace my purified thoughta on the clean paper,' " 

For those who endeavour to get rid of the evidence of respectable wit- 
nesses, such as Mr. Putnam, by representing them as dupes, and the me- 
dia as impostors, it may he well to quote the following passage from the 
same publication : (Page 44.) 

272. " Within the last fourteen months I have seen twenty-two or three 
different mediums — all but four of them private ones — taking no pecuniary 
compensation; and more than half of them are our own citizens, several 
of whom are now present in this assembly. I have spent very many hours 
in their presence. Have seen them at their homes — at my own home — 
and in the parlours of neighbours and friends. I have met and watched 
them in the broadest sunlight and at evening. Every desirable opportu- 
nity has been furnished me for detecting machinery, jugglery, or impos- 
ture, and I have faithfully, but in vain, strove to find something mundane 
a sufficient cause for ail these wonders. That trick or humbug is some- 
times attempted by pretenders to uncommon susceptibilities, no one will 
have a wish to deny. But very many of the mediums, private ones, are 
as much above these things as aro the very best persons among the wit- 
nesses. 

273. " One medium, an active, energetic business man, of more than 
sixty years, has submitted himself to be used by me at any time, however 
suddenly called upon, whether in his counting-room or in mine, — whether 
caJled in his h t 1 f m th w dp 1 lb r dressed up and 
ready for comp y dih Ihm dwtchd him daily almost, 
and that thr gh se 1 m th M y diuras have been 
watched forlgjnl d dqt d umstances; and, 
though the I w t d th gh y f th m y fai from being 
uniform, and th h th d f f t t o two alike, yet I 
have seen no f t b ywh ppl i I y m hinery; or of its 
being varied by y p p rat t f th m d m themselves. 

274. "Thy 1 y d 11 j g d II I ated and ignorant 
alike — they II d y d th t t th m t p t and friendly cir- 
cles, where alithth Hflw t — hylldytht they exercise their 
wiUa at all i th p d t f ih w d ^ d I cannot rate that 
fiiimess very high which, in the face of such a fact, will persist in saying 
that all of it is trick, imposture, humbug. More than one hundred thou- 
sand witnesses have looked on, and yet are unable to prove to any extent 
the cheats alleged. More than five thousand mediums la this country 
unitedly and persistedjy declare that they use no machinery and practice 
no trick." 

275. This charge is utterly futile when we see persons in affluence 
converted by their own mediumship, as in the case of two of my most 


;;■ Google 


60 COBBOBOaATIVE 

276. My conve on w ^ ft t d b fore I atf ul 1 any public medium. 
To the lad ea by wl om t w s effects I j re ju t ons could only have 
been OBer s h d not the de e fo truth to obi ge me bean a strong 
motive fo the pa ns which they were made t take 

277. It does not &eem ufii ently understood by those who object to 
Spirituali m apon the gr rati of the nconsiatency of the opinions given 
by spirits that o next state of es tence s one of progression, and that 
wc go there with all our imperfections, which are removed more or less 
slowly. 

278. " Many men, many minds," is an old adage : it is equally true as 
respects the inhabitants of the spirit world, excepting that as their eleva- 
tion ia that world is higher, accordance in opinion.is more prevalent. In 
the spirits of the fifth sphere, and those above that sphere, I find little 
diversity in important facta or doctrines. 

279. AJlnsion is made to this diversity in some communications from 
Franklin, la Mr. Putnam, which are as follows : 

280. "The mortak of earth espect truth from the spirit land; they 
think that it is perfect, and that the angels are omnipotent. Oh, how 
far do they wander in the darkness of their own minds 1 The spirit home 
is progressive, like unto this ; the canting hypocrite passes into the heavens 
with the same thoughts ; the simple babe too passes into this new-born 
life with all its childlike innocence. Each one has to mount the ladder 
of progression." 

281. " There are millions in the spirit world that know not of the esisl^ 
enoe of this planet, even as the children of this earth know not of the 
starry world above. But on beholding angels descend to this hidden pla- 
net, they follow, and in wonderment behold a new world, and that world 
inhabited. Then do they find whence thay originated. 

282. " Allusion has been made to the one-sided support given to Spi- 
ritualism on the part of those who admit many of the most important facts, 
yet do not ascribe them to the spirits of the departed. These opponents 
were alleged to be of different features; one ascribing them to Satan, the 
other disputing their spiritual origination, because agreeably to their im- 
perfect information, certain traits were found to be deficient which should 
esist, were the intollechial communications due to the spirits of our de- 
parted fellow-creatures. The idea of these spiritual manifestations owing 
their existence to Satan has already been noticed, (88,) but from the com- 
munications which will be given in this work must appear still more un- 
tenable than they have, as I trust, been proved to be. As one of the most 
respectable of these, who deny the esistenoe of spirits, the distinguished 
Dr. Bell, of Somerville, Massachusetts, has been noticed. (110.) 

283. " It is conceived that Dr. Bell's positive evidence in favour of 
phenomena which he has seen, gives so much more weight in favour of the 
existence of spirits than his arguments on negative grounds, as to what ho 


,v Google 


THE EXISTENCE OE SPIRITS. 61 

happens not to ha¥e aeen or learned, that I will quote here his account of 
the manifeatationa which he haa deacribed, after having ohseryed them 
with great oircumapection : 

284. " Dr. Bell commeneed (at a meeting of hospital directors) by ex- 
pressing his surprise that at tlie meeting, laist year, of so large a number 
of persons whoso lives were spent in investigating the reciprocal influences 
of mind and body, scarcely a single member had given a moment's atten- 
tion to a topic directly in their path, which, whether regarded as merely 
an epidemic mental delusion, or as a new psychological science, was pro- 
ducing such momentous effects upon the world. It was now said to num- 
ber over two millions of believers, had an estended literature, a talented 
periodical press in many forms, and had certainly taken fast hold on many 
minds of soberneaa and power. He was well aware how eaaily it was 
turned to ridicule, and that there were many who would be ready to ask, 
when they saw hospital directors seriously diacusang the spiritual phe- 
nomena, Quis cusfodief ipsos custodes? 

285. " But if there was any class of reen who had duties in this direc- 
tion, it was those of our specialty. Our reports contain the record of 
many cases of insanity said to be produced by it. It was important, 
whether true or false, or mised, that its precise depth, length, and nature 
should be studied out. As is well known, mystery always loses its terrific 
character when boldly met and opened to the light of noonday. 

286. " Dr. Bell remarked, that on his return home from our meeting at 
"Washington, he had a peculiar wish to verify his previous observations on 
what are technically known as the physical manifestations of this new 
aoienee. He oould not pretend that he could doubt his repeated personal 
obaervations, addresaed to his sight, hearing, and touch, and separated, as 
he believed, from any possibility of error or collusive fraud. Yet the 
offer, by Professor Henry, of a large sum to any person who would make 
one of his tables move in the Smithsonian Institution, and the obvious 
incredulity of many of the 'brethren,' had induced the desire again to see 
some full and unequivocal experiment in tahle-moving. 

287. "An opportunity was not long wanting. On the occasion of the 
visit of a well-known gentleman, long connected with the insane, and who 
never had seen any of these phenomena at the asylum. Dr. Bell invited 
him to go to a family where a medium of conaiderable power was visiting. 
The family was one of the most respectable of the vicinage, the head of it 
being a gentleman intrusted with millions of dollars of other people's 
money, as the financial manager of a large banking institution. He and 
his wife had for some years been perfectly convinced of the spiritual cha- 
racter of these manifestations. The medium was a young lady of eighteen 
or twenty, of very slight figure, weighing eighty or ninety pounds, and had 
discovered herself to be a mfdium while on a visit to these distant relatives. 
A family, from character and position, more entirely beyond the suspicion 


;;■ Google 


62 CORROBORATIVE EVIDENCE OF 

of even winking at any thing like fraud or irregolarity, does not exist in 
the world. They were so fortunate as to find llie medium at home, and 
the circle was made of the ivo persona mentioned. The ordinary mani- 
festations of raps, beating of musical tunes, and responses to mental and 
spoken questions, wero very completely presented, as well as the move- 
ments of the table under the mere contact of fingers' ends. Finding that 
things appeared very favourable to a full exhibition of what he wished f« 
see, as evinced by the very facile movements of the table under contact. 
Dr. Bell proposed trying the grand experimerUtim oiitcis of the physical 
manifestations — the movement of the table without any human contact, 
direct or indirect. He was permitted to awange things to suit himself, 
and began by opening the table more widely, and inserting two movable 
table-leaves, which increased the length from about sis to perhaps nine or 
ten feet. This, he felt, also gave him an opportnnity to see and upset [JI 
wires and mechanism concealed, or, at least, to answer positively as to their 
non-existence. The table was a solid structure of black walnut, with sis 
carved legs, the whole of such a weight that when the castors were all in 
the right line of motion, he could just start it by the full grasp of the 
thumb and fingers of both hands. 

288. "The persons stood on the sides of the table, three and two, and 
back from its edge about eighteen inches. As Dr. Bell is some sia feet 
two iuohes in height, he averred that he had no difficulty in seeing between 
the table and the persona of all present. The bands were raised over it at 
about the same height, of a foot and a half. 

389. " At a request, the table commenced its motion, with moderate 
speed, occasionally halting, and then gliding on a foot or two at once. It 
seemed as if its motion would have been continuous, if the hands above it 
bad followed along pari passu. On reaching the folding-doors dividing 
off the two parlours, and which were open, it rose over an iron rod on 
which the door-trucks traversed, and which projected half or three-quarters 
of an inch above the level of the carpet. It then entered the other parlour, 
and went its whole length until it came near the pier glass at its end — a 
centre-table having been pushed aside by one of the party to allow its free 

290. " At request, for they during this time spoke aa if to actual beings, 
the motion was reversed, and it returned until it again reached the iron 
rod. Here it stuck The ('»ble hove, cieaked, and struggled, but all in 
vain; it could not surmount the obstacle The medium was then 'im- 
pressed by the spirits' to iinte, and seizing a pencil, hastily wrote that if 
the fore legs were lifted over the bu, they (t. e. the spirits) thought they 
could push the others over This wis done, and the motion kept on. 
Once or twice Dr. Bell requested aU to withdraw a little farther from the 
table, 'to see how far the influence would extend.' It was found that 
whenever a much greater distance, say two feet, was reached, the move- 


;;■ Google 


THE EXISTENCE 01* SPIRITS. 63 

mt dddlyftli f t uidbf t m 

m dfevithltltfbL ff Um It f 

f w df 1 ( p t t Til t bl ] 1 tt pp 

Iflpl f wlbthdttlbtwlf f tt 

f m th d M f h D B U p d th t Iv f tt 

pyf th -y mil hb wbwbhthyblb 

f d b t k I tl t th bl "at w Id b h d f th 

p t w Id h t bl b t f f t t ght 1 th t th 

h w Id 111 glit f h 1 t p t Ih mm 1 tely 

d Itlpt wdmd pftlyflldtfty 

th t til m was k d t th 

91 D B 11 w i rst d t y th t tli m 1 m fi 

tm whhhhd thtfclm wthtbin tt d 

11 d ml pp tly f f m p th j t 

1 J H 1 t t 1 th t h B, M P 1 ym ft 1 y 

g p pt drah ilklltkth mmdmtoh 

h use th t p th ht wh h I f 1 1 b 

d w!i 1 w f bl th I f h w f m ly 1 w t 

th gh tl f 11 t 1 w t! h m t h D B 11 m t d 

th t 1 1 t p t th t just ted th ti p m d 

th h was fifty f t 

9 DClltl pasdtothtp f psMtmtal d 
bljt ig 1 t fig tnswth 

whtpptdthth pnt tprt. ddf twtyfi ttty 
y hh yq h Id I Itgttl dniti 

history, and to events in it known only to them and him, had been tmly 
answered Some of the subjects put mentally — i. e., without speaking or 
writing — hid half i dozen coiTect replies, forbidding, of course, com- 
pletelj, on any doi,tiino of chances, the contingency of accident or coin- 
cidence, DS such mental questions, ^er se, negative the explanation of pre- 
yioua knowledge on the part of the medium. 

203. "A brief ahstraet of one of these will give a general idea of their 
character: Dr, Bel! had frequently remarked to his 'spiritual' friends, 
that if any medium could reproduce the essential particulars of a final 
interview which had occurred between himself and a deceased brother in 
1826, he should be almost compelled to admit that it came from his spirit; 
because he was sure that he (Dr. Bell) never had communicated it to any 
living being. Hence, as it never had been known to but two persons, and 
was of so peculiar, well-marked a character, as not to he capable of being 
confounded by generalities, he should hardly be able otherwise to explain 
it. A few weeks afterward wbat purported to be the spirit of that bro- 
ther narrated the essential particulars of that interview, the place where, 
down to the well-recolleeted fact thai he was adjusting the stiri-ups of Jiis 
saddle, pi-eparatory to a distant journey, when it was held ! Pi-etty early, 


;;■ Google 


"64 CORaOEOBATIVE ETIDENCE OF 

however, in his iavestigationa, Dr. Bell begati to find that, however cor- 
rect his spiritual conferees were, in most of theit responses, the moment a 
question was put invoking a response the truth of which was unknown 
to hiro, uniform fiiilure ooorirred. Sometimes, where he believed at the 
time that his questions were truly answered, subsequent informalioa had 
shown him that he had been mistaken. He had answers which he be- 
lieved to he true, when the facts were decidedly otherwise. 

294. "Pursuing this ti'aia of inquiry, he found the 'spirits,' while 
averring that they could see him distinctly, ' fece to fiiee,' never could 
read the signature to letters taken from au old file, and unfolded wilkmit 
his having seen, the writing. Yet as soon as he had oast his eye upon the 
signature, without allowing any one else to see it, it was promptly and 
correctly reproduced by the alphabetical rappings. And again, when he 
had made a previous arrangement with his family that they should do 
certain things every quarter of an hour at iiomc — ho, of course, not 
knowing what — while he was to ask the ' spirit^ what was done at the in- 
stant, uniform failure occurred. He proved, too, that the theory of the 
'spiritualists' to meet such difficulties — viz., that evil or trifling spirits 
interfered at their end of the telegraph — was not tecablo. For the 
responses just before and after these gross failures had been eminently 
and wonderfully accurate, and the 'spirits' not only declared that they saw 
with perfect clearness what was going on at his house, but denied that 
there had been any interruption or interference. 

295. " Dr. Bell also gave esamples where test questions, involving replies 
unknown to the interrogator, had been designedly ictermLsed with those 
which were known. The result uniformly was, that the known responses, 
however curious and fwc remote, were correctly reproduced; the unknown 
wore a set of perfectly wild and blundering errors, the responses often 
being obviously formed out of the phraseology of tho question, as a stuck 
schoolboy guesses out a reply ! 

296. " The result of the inquiries of Dr. Bell and his friends— for 
several gentlemen of eminently fitting talents pursued the investigation 
with him—was briefly this : — That what the questioner knows the spirits 
hnoio; what the questioner does not hnovi, the spirits are entirely igTiorant 
of. In other words, that there are really no superhuman agencies in the 
matter at all — no oonnottion with another state of existence; but that it 
bears certain stiong amiogie'i to some of the osperiences of clairvoT/ance, 
in that mysteiiou^ SLience of anima! magnetism, as it has been protruding 
and receding for the last hunlied years. Dr. Bell thought there was 
some retsoQ to believe that the matter reproduced may come not only from 
the questioner, but if in the mmd of any one at the circle, that it might 
be evolved. He made some observations upon the evidences of spirit ex- 
istence, drawn from the character of the matter communicated by the me- 
diums in a state of impresnion, when, as it is believed, spirits express 


;;■ Google 


) througli tto hninaii i^ent Of oourae tlie [uality of such 
composition is more or less a ({utat on of taste Much t jt h elevated,' 
indicating Mgh intellectual and moral cipaoitie'' m the mind to which it 
owes its origin. Much more k alisuid puet le and d ""ustmg infinitely 
below tlie grade of tht human producti n? of thp same persons fiomwliDm 
it professedly comes Yet the spii tual revelation his gi^ n us nothing 
of such extriordmarj value or novelty as to stamp it in the jud^^ent oi 
unprejudiced mmda, is of tuper mundane production Dr Bell alluded 
to a treatise which haJ been put mfo his hinds by an earnest spiritualist, 
purporting, to he the w ik of Thomas Paine, the authoi of (he Age ot 
Eeason, &,q , which wii thought wiuld carry c nviction to anybody, as it 
purported to bo a full explanation of the formation and changes of this 
eaithj by cne who, from hia t, tw, mu^t know all about it The truth was, 
that the work was the produoticn of some mind, celestial or mundane, 
ignorant uf the veiy first rudiments of chemicil philosophy, la which the 
most ndiculius blunders were made on eveiy pige in matters which are 
as demonstrible as mathematics, ml where, of cjuisc, the answei cannot 
be made thit the revelation was too high fji common readers Koi docs 
Dr Bell believe, from his obser\ationo, that the waters from thia fountain 
ever reach a highei level than then souice The most ele\ated speci 
men of the spiiitual literature would no doubt be frund la the eommuni 
cations fiom Swedenborg and Lord Baton m Jud^^e Eimond a and Dr 
Dexter i fir'it and second volumes "iet, whoever reads the very elegant 
ind powerful jreliminary ticatise of these g ntlcmcn, which Dr Bell 
thought would compare favourably with any 'wiitings of the kind ever 
publiahcd, would not bo able to feel that Swedenborg and Lord Bacon_ 
after their nearly one and more than two centuries' residence, respectively, 
amid the culture and reSaed senses of the superior spheres, had more 
than equalled their unpretending amanuenses still in the ' vale of tears.' 
297. "Dr. Bell concluded by the esp n h h 

while the faith in spirits must he given p h n w h h 

facts, it was a topic, whether regarded as a by n y 

delusion, cutting deeply into the very gun p p 

which was worth our fullest examinati TI g 

resting facts Tiere. They had not been d f y and p fly 

they should have been. The efiect was, that the communityj knowing that 
here were /acfc, if human senses could he trusted at all, went away from 
those who should have thrown light upon the mysteries, but who would 
or could not, to those who gave some explanation, even if it was one 
which uprooted all previous forms of religious faith. He hoped that the 
members of this association, who were as much required to examine this 
topic as any order of men, except, perhaps, the clergy, would not be afraid 
of looking it in the face from any apprehensions of ridicule or of degrading 
their dignity." 


,v Google 


66 FOF^IGN COEUOBOEATIVE EVIDENCE OF 

298. After giyiDg much evidence, sliowing thiit physical i 
take place without contact, and that coimminieatJons were made to him 
which could not have ensued without controJling reason, Dr. Bell finds 
that in certain instances Tchich have come to his knowledge spirits could 
not communicate information nor ideas which did not esist in his mind 
or that of some mortals present. Yet it appears that during a manifesta- 
tion which mj learned friend witnessed, a request to lift the legs of the 
table was given which did not occur to any mortal present. 

299. I have already given a brief reply to these objections of Dr. Bell, 
Under this head I will only add my reg:ret that my letter to the Episcopal 
clergy, with a sketch of the information derived from my spirit friends, 
had not fallen under Dr, B U n t b f re his conclusions were pub- 
lished. It will be seen that th nf m t n thus alluded to is irreconcilable 
with Br. Bell's infereoces I sh 11 h ver, postpone this discussion 
until facts have been more fully p nt 1 1 the reader. (866) 


FOaEIGN CORROBORATrVE EVIDENCE. 
Some quotations from a worJe on Spiritual Philosophy, addressed to the 

Academy of Sciences at Paris, ly James 0. De Mj-Bz'Ke.— -Third 

Edition. 

Mamfestoiions tBhich occurred in France, in 1851, 

300. There ia a great resemblance between the manifestations which 
have been deseribed by Capron and others as having taken place at the 
mansion of the Eev. Br. Phelps, at Stratford, Connecticut, and those which 
occurred in the Presbytery of Oidevilie in France, so as to be verified before 
a court. The facts in this last-mentioned case were verified by the testi- 
mony taken during a trial which grew out of the circumstances. Some of 
the witn^ses were persons distinguished by their high character and posi- 
IJon in society. None had any interested motives for stating them ; but, 
on the contrary, had to meet the odium which falls upon all who tell truths 
conflicting with the prejudices of the community within which, they reside. 
Eochefouoault correctly urged that it is more politic, to toll a probable 
lie than an improbable truth. 

SOI. This iinpvession I have seen to operate in making people back- 
ward to admit their belief in spiritual communication. 

302. It is remarkable that in the case at Cideville, signals as the means 
of intellectual communication were employed, independently of their em- 
ployment made between two and three years before in New York. Of 
course, those who resorted to this expedient, might have heard previously 
of the effort in the same way which had been successful in this country 


;;■ Google 


•; or SPIRITS. 67 


The signs employed, however, differed. At Eocliester one rap was taken 
for no, two for doiilf/ul, three for yes. At Cideville one rap was received 
for yp.s, and (wo for no. At the former place, the alphabet was directly 
referred to; at the latter, refereEoe was made hy figures inclieatiug the 
place of the selected letter in the alphabetic card. 

.303. Of this character is the admisaion of the Roman Chwrch of the 
spiritual origin of the manifestations; aacribed, however, to diabolic 
agency. To this alhsioa has been already made; but I subjoin some 
letters and expositions, translated from a Ei-cnch work lately published on 
Mesmerism, Clairvoyanoe, and Spiritual Manifestations. 

304. The following letters, taken from the wnrk in question, will require 
no farther introduction. 

305. If the Roman clergy thna advance the inference that the mani- 
festations and intellectual communications corao from spiritual agency, it 
will he easy for Spiritualism to show that it is vastly more clevoid of dia- 
bolic malevolence and inhumanity than the insfitutions sanctioned by that 
priesthood. 

L'-tler from T. li F. Ventura. 

306. "My Dear Sir: When you came two years ago to consult me as 
to the merit and propriety of your labours, I hesitated so much the less to 
encourage their publication, that having myself entertained the same ideas 
for along time, I had been several times on the point of proclaiming them 
fcom the eaored chair. I do not fear then to af&rm 'that the publication 
of this important and serious work would he of incontestable usefulness, 
and tend strongly to enlighten opinion on a mass of curious facts, and thus 
prepare for the solution of high and important questions; for, I add, it is 
necessary that all the phases of the subject should be first presented by the 
laity, in order that the church may thus be enabled to form their judg- 
ment with full knowledge of the case.' 

307. "I do not say enough, my dear sir, in pronouncing your work 
useful; I might have called it indispensable, had I foreseen the approach- 
ing invasion of that scourge which you so happily designate as a spiritual 
epidemic : a scourge whose sudden and universal propagation, in my opinion, 
notwithstanding its appearance of puerility, wilt constitute one of the 
GREATEST EVENTS OF OUR, AOE. But how has it been both received and 
entertained ? 

308. " Commencing with your savans, it is impossible not to be alarmed 
by the obstinate incredulity which does not allow them to see what at the 
present time can be confirmed by anybody. Oaihs Jiahenf el won vident* 

309. "Those individulals alarm me still more, who having given their 
attention, and of course seen, shake their heads as a sign of indifference 

^ Though giftod with viaioii, they are, nQvurthaless, blind. 


;;■ Google 


68 FOBEIGN CORROBORATIVE EVIDENCE Or 

and pity, as if the phenomenon exhibited was of a low character and 
beneath th n t Wh n th y h e d n 1 d t the f ndation, they 
treat it w th nt mpt 

310. ' Ih n fin llj and y d ffe ntly nd d I f 1 myself frozen 
with terr by -t n d p n f t uth wh n th 11 ndnesa, trifle 
without s up] w th tl m t 1 ntl n m f have they for- 
gotten th nts Utah 

311. "I do not profess to be a prophet, airj and do not Imow what the 
mercy or justice of God is prepai'ing for us; but, like you, I Iremblo for 
the present, and hopo for the future ; for marvellous lessons are already 
presented to «s in these passing phenomena. 

312. "In fact, the justification of the church and of the faith are 
emanating from them : the definite condemnation of a fallen rationalism; 
and consequently, the approaching glorification of all the past in the true 
church, and even of that Middle Age, so calumniated, so ridiculed, and 
gratuitously endowed with so much darkness. The political events of 
these latter times have to justify that Middle Ago, as respects good sense 
in the affairs of government; and behold these facts of a nature entirely 
foreign, coming to avenge its accusation of superstitious credulity. This 
reparation was necessary, and afl«r all our own age has nothing (o fear 
from it, for certainly it will not render injustice of any kind to the objec- 
tive and useful progress of modem civilization. 

313. " As for yourself, sir, you will enjoy the honour of having brought, 
by your luminous discussions, a large stone for the construction of this 
majestic edifice, and I rejoice in the encouragement I have given you. I 
need not enlarge on this subject, for success HAS spokbn, and think I 
am sufficiently aoquainted with you to know that you did not anticipate 
one so brilliant. . You have known how to engage the attention of the 
learned, and people generally, by making your work attractive while it is 
instructive — a quality sufficiently rare to claim my congratulations. I 
will only add another word : had this work been confined to the notice of 
those phenomena whose advent we deplore, it would probably stare their 
fate; but what will secure its perpetuity is your discussion of medical 
science which you put in apposition with your subject, and which will not 
long be able to resist the feveie stiiotnre of your logic. Therefore, be 
assured, it will be the learned, ind especully physicians, that you will first 
convert to your doctrine. Philosophers will only surrender after them; 
but so far there is no doubt that you will have given rise to most serious 
reflections in all of them. 

314. "I will not speak to yoa at present of two or three observations 
which I have made in reading your book, which we will discuss inpHvate, 
and which only relate to some inaccuracy of doctrine, foreign, besides, to 
the principal subject of your work. 

315. " Finally, my dear sir, I do not doubt that the God of truth will 


,v Google 


or SPIRITS. 69 

blesa your labours. Continue them, for the subject is vaat, and especially 
do not suffer yourself to be discouraged by tlio reasoning of light minds, 
' that in divulging all these things you favour their promulgation, when 
tbey had better be suppressed, &o. &a.' A gross error I They might 
as well accuse fho doctors of e tt h ] a. And, beside, it is wor- 

thy of remark that all the cas f ty 1 tciy developed in the midst 

of these exhibitions are duo to tl ghtl nthusiasm succeeding to an 
absolute state of doubt aod disb 1 f It Id not well be otherwise ; the 
prodigy which was doubted y t d y nl t>day is firmly established, 
will to-morrow be transformed nt G- (f T tb alone is ablo to prevent 
and remedy sueh disastrous mishaps. 

Receive, my dear sir, the assurance, &o., 

Le p. Ventura De Eaulica, 

Former O-eneral of the Jfonis, Exammsr of Ihe Bkhopa and of the Roman dn'gy." 

Letter of Dr. Coze. 

316. " Sir : — You do me the honour to ask my opinion of the book on 
ihe Spirits which you have just published. Tiiat opinion I have already 
expressed to our mutual friend, the good worthy doctor Paulin ; and true 
it is, this book has made a strong impreBsion on my mind, for I had 
arrived at similar conclusions from the examination of some magnetic phe- 
nomena and the moving of tables. I find in your book a chain of very 
renmrkable fects — presented, too, with talent and clearness very unusual 
in this sort of writing. I see, beside, that science is brought bacli to the 
path which cannot mislead us to that of the sacred writings ; there, as I 
think, are to be found the true philosophy and the true light. 

317. " I do not fancy that my opinion can have any weight with the 
learned world. If, however, you think proper to make this public, I con- 
sent with all my heart in behalf of a truth which you so well defend, and 

TIIR SUCCESS or WHICH APPEARS TO ME INFALLIBIB. 

I have the honour to bo, &o., 

R. Ooze, 
Dian of ths Faculty of Medicine at Slrasiourff." 

Letter of M. F. Be iSauky. 

318. " Si'T : — You desire me to report to you my opinion in writing 
which I have formed as to the stj-ange phenomena, to say the least of 
them, which have been conventionally called table turning and table talk- 
ing. I am not the man to recoil from what I regard as a truth, whatever 
sarcasm may be reserved for such profession of faith, and therefore pro- 
ceed to satisfy your inquiry. 

319. " It is about eight or ten months since when the public of Paris was 
agitated by the late arrival of the fact from America and Germany ; a fact 
which pure physics was not able to explain apriori. I did as many always 


,v Google 


70 roHETON coaaoBORATivE evidence or 

do, and have no doubt done for a long time — received this account with tte 
moat determined incredulity, and, I confess, with ridicule. I considored its 
adepts as ehailataca or as simpletons, aad refused fov a long time to be- 
stow on it the least attention. I became tired of the war, however, and 
after hearing many affirm, to whom I could not apply these epithets, the 
reality of these facts, I determined to try for myself, 

320. " My son and a friend were my two companions : we had the pa- 
tience for forty-five minutes, seated at the table, to form what is called 
the ehdn, and were not a little sui'prised, I assure yon, to sco at the end 
of that time the table on which we were operating, and which was merely 
the parlour dinner-table, begin to move, and after some hesitation to con- 
tract a rotary movement, which, accelerating, soon became very rapid. We 
endeavoured hy pressing to make it strike against the bar and arrest its 
motion, but could not succeed. 

321. "After repealing the experiment two or three times, I sought to 
find some cause in physics for the movement, and battled the whole theory 
of Electro-Dynamics with the aid of aa electroscope, compass, iron-filings, 
iron, &c. As I could not detect the least trace of electricity, I thought 
then of impulses due to the volition of the operators, and of which a sort 
of integration might eause the motion of the table. On that I stopped, 
and for several weehs did not give the smallest attention to a phenomenon 
which did not seem to merit any further notice. 

322. " Finally was commenced the faculty of talhmg, and I assure you 
my incredulity was considerably greater than when its moving power was 
announced. I was sparing, however, in my epithets, for I soon found 
myself an investigator. I watched the rogues, as I suspected, for two 
hours, but left the room a full believer of its reality, without any further 
examination, confirmed too by all subsequent experiments. (1.) 

323. " What could be said indeed of the fact witnessed together, that 
a crayon, which was fastened to the leg of a table, wrote legible words, 
while we were pressing it down with our hands? 

324. "It was then, sir, that your book fell into mj hajids. I have 
read it with the most lively interest; have admired your eradition, and 
the courage necessary at our epoch to treat such a subject. 

325. "I believe in the existence of facts which often volition is unable 
to produce, and over which I declare that volition sometimes appears to 
have a manifest influence. I believe in the intervention of intelligence 
DIFEERENT FROM OUR OWN, and which puts in action means almost 
ridiculous. 

326. " I believe that the Christian religion should not encourage the 
pi-aotice of these experiments. I believe there is danger in allowing them 
to become a habit, and at least we may lose the little reason which has 
been granted man by the Uiver of all things. I believe, finally, that it is 
the duty of an honest man to dissuade others from occupying themselves 


,v Google 


sriRiTR. 71 

with it, in preaching, by example, and not allowing it in the least to occupy 
himself. 

327. "This is the end I have reached after some months' esperienoe; 
and, aak permission to close this letter, already too long, by repeating a 
very wise saying of a man of high intelligence: 'Either these phenomena 
are, or are not real; if not, it is disgraceful to lose time with them; if 
they are, it is dangerous to invoke them and to make them a pastime.' 
Please accept, &c., F. De Saulcy, 

Member of the Imtiliite." 

S^irituaiisni, in Paris. 

V,e flnl the fell wing oitick m tl London Illustrated Hews of 
July 23 it 18 an estitct tiom the News Piris correspondence :— 

328 An immen'fe seasatijn was caused here, a few days since, by a 
revelat on gnen on the authority of some of the most respected and influ- 
ential membeis of the cleigy hejdel I3 th Archbishop of Paris, on the 
sub]ect of table m lements The aroh^iahop, being questioned as to bis 
opinion of the legit maey m a lehgiou^ pomt of view, of attempting to 
eommunieite with ■'piiits through the m dium of the tables, alleged that 
he hal not sufEciently studiel the question to reply definitively; that he 
imagined thit the efteots produce i were wholly of the nature of physical 
science lad in thit cas hoimlessj but thit in order to form a judgment, 
he would attend a meeting composed of certain members of the clei^y, at 
a plioe appointed to make the usuil experiments. 

329 Ihe table being put m motion one of the party demaaded it ia 
reply by a certnin number of raps if there were a spirit' present. The 
response was in the affirmative , and in answer to a second question, the 
spirit represented heiself by raps indicating ecrfaln letters of the alphabet, 
to be that of iSoiui Franconi' deceased a week previously at the convent 

of , Pans The Abbo B stated that he had confessed the 

Soiui- Ft mcoii'' who had, in fiet died at the time and place named. 

General consternation as may be 'nil posed ensued when the Abbe L , 

rising comminled the '[uit in the name of the Saviour to appear. 

330 'Theieportdcel ires that the spirit hereupon actually became visi- 
ble, and replied to a variety of questions put to it, but of what import 
we are not informed. On the above details we do not pretend to give 
either explanation or opinion. 

331. " ' Such is the story as related by the members of the Seance, two 
of whom were so affected by the events related as to be some days aori- 
ously indisposed, one of them even confined to bed. 

332. " ' Various narratives mention that, through the medium of the 
tables, communications are held with spirits of all nations. The spirits,, 
happily, being escellent linguists, find no difEculty in expressing themp- 


;;■ Google 


72 FOREIGN CORUOBIiRATIVE EVIDENCE OP 

selves in any language chosen by ite questioner, and reveal the secrets of 
the prison-house with a frankness, not to siij indiscretion, that would 
shoelc the more reaervcd giiost in Hamlet, in no way confirming his state- 
ment of the hon-ors of their temporary abode. Many of them describe 
in glowing ternia the beauties aad delightB of their celestial abodes.' " 


SPIRITUAL MANIFESTATIONS IN PRANCE AND GERMANY. 

The following contribution, under the preceding head, is translated bj 

my much esteemed friend, Dr. Gteib, from the work of De Mirville, whence 

the articles under the designation of FoEfiiON Corobokative Evidence 

have been obtained through the same able translator : 

333. " Toward the end of the year 1852 (he epidemic had been imported 
into the North of Scotland by some American mediums ; thence it got to 
London, where, according to tho latest accounts, it must have reached, by 
the present time, a pretty extensive development. Seeing its progress in 
this way, we were led to say, If it ever reacies Germany, that whole 
country will bo on fire. 

334. "The religious gazette of Augsburg of June 18, 1853, contained 
an article from which wo make some estraots : 

335. " ' Again the world is presented with various marvellous appear- 
ances, which, coming from elevated sources, force themselves on public 
notice, and which, ia every case, throw a very marked shadow on our own 
epoch of civilization. It may be appropriate to communicatD some of those 
found in the Gazette Ginirali; and leaving reflection to the reader, we 
will give some of the moat striking. 

336. " ' 'Pile Morgan Matt (Morning Sheet) announces among its novel- 
ties from Palatinat Kh^nan, the phenomenon of a young girl not yet 
pubescent, who, they say, is able at will to command a rapping ^ectrc, 
(Klopferle.) The spectre raps as often as the little girl orders him, being 
obedient in the extreme. What is remarkable is, that the spectres of the 
Old World, as well as the New, have a str<mg famili/ iikeness, being as 
much alilce as two drops of water. And the Tribune of New York, 
■printed in the German language, has lately contiuned various oommnnica- 
'tions on this subject. But whence come these rapping spectres, and why 
.make their appearance all at oncef 

337- "The GazetteofAugsbourg then refers to several other facts of the 
isarae nature, which, at all times, have caused much embarrassment to the 
■ German authorities, either in giving rise to lengthy inquests, or in causing 
ithe condemnation of persons proved afterward to be entirely innocent; but 
lits for those of the present time, it fully understands, proclaims, and 
(■demonstrates them to be of the Am: 


;;■ Google 


73 

338. "The Journal du Magnetisme of the lOtii of Marcli, 1853, had 
already furnished us with the reported account given in the course of last 
January to the tribunal of London, by the rapping spirit of the Louse of 
Sanger; the same phenomena, the same stupefeotion, the same impos- 
sibility to discoyer the jugglers. However, the subject appeared to rest at 
this point in Germany, ■when, in the month of April, the first phenomenon 
of table moving reached Bremen, and then the AugihouTg Gazette insisted 
on its true ori^n. 

339. "'For eight days preTions,' it said, 'our good town has been 
in an agitation difficult to describe; it is completely absorbed by a miracle 
which was not thought of before the arrival of the steamer from New 
York — the Washington. The new phenomenon la impohted from 
America.' 

340. "Now a certain Doctor AndrS was the first to describe this first 
Gxhibitioa of table turning; therefore they called it his discove-i-!/. What 
a discovery I 

341. "' Ha-ving formed a chain,' he says, 'of seven or eight personS; 
the right little finger of each touching the left one of his neighbour, the 
table they surround will commence turning, and continue as long as the 
chain remains unbroken, and stop when an individual leaves it.' 

342. "A general burst of pleasantry and incredulity first accompanied 
the revelation of the doctor. But soon esperiment begins, and hugbter 
gives place to a sort of dejection. Certain saTans, professors of the Uni- 
versity of Heidelberg, MM. Mittei-mouer and Zoepfl, M. Molh, brother of the 
member of the Institute, Eschenmajer, Ennemoser, and Keraer, attest the 
same facts; and Doctor Lcewe of Vieona undertakes to give the theory of it; 
'This theoiy consists, according to him, in the opposite polarity of the 
right and left sides of the human body ; hence, having formed a chain of 
human beings, the contrary poles of which, viz. the right and left, touch each 
other, aud this chain, eserting upon any body whatever a prolonged notion, 
conveys to it an electric current, and converts it into a magnet, and thus 
polarization is established in that body; and in virtue of its tendency to 
magnetic orientation, the south pole of the table impressing it with a 
movement to the north, the latter commences a continued rotation, and 
turns on its asis as long as the indispensable conditions are continued.' 

343. " Unfortunately, the spirits are very soon seen to dispense with these 
indispensable conditions. Thus, then, at Bremen, Vienna, and Berlin, 
there was not a table at rest on its legs, and still the French press observed 
a uniform iaexplieable silence ! 

344. "We ask, however, what would have been said, had we foretold 
what began to appear unavoidable, that in less than a month, table and 
hat turning would reach Paris. The announcement was scarcely known 
when it appears that such a thing has always esisted; that it is a law of 
nature; and that tables never had any other destiny ! 


;;■ Google 


74 FOREIGN COllUOBOUATIVE EVIDENCE OP 

345. " Again weinquireof.ill serious minds, What is tliefaeulty by wliich 
we predict, among other coming events, the turning of tables, wtich, 
nevertheless, Ho not turn till after tlie arrival of a vessel and a medinm ? 
Howeve!-, stleace becoming impossible, the Freacb preaa has thought pro- 
per to speak. On the 4tli of May, the Journal of the Empire, Le Paya, 
happened to inform, us that ' from the Bailie to the banks of the Danube, 
all Germany was in a fever.' It became then plainer and plainer that 
wo were going to be infected, and from that time we hastened to prepare 


346. "It was high time, for about the end of April, the gr 
army had this time decidedly crossed the Rhine, and in all the large cities 
of France — Strasbourgi Marseilles, Bordeaux, Toulouse, &c.— the turniiig 
epidemic broke out like a discharge of musketry; and better to impress 
the mind, it only at first attacked stands, tables, hats, seats, &c., for all these 
participated in the demonstration. 

347. "At Paris especially, in repeatingtLeesperiments, they were made 
a pastime for a soiree. Children were introduced into the circles, without 
considering whether correlative evil might not be coupled with these , 
mysterious amusements. 

348. "It is true tbey would not allow the smallest Leydeu jar to come 
near them; but what troubles might bave resulted from the action of an 
electricity that could raise tables of eighteen dishes like a feather ? 

349. "It is true, too, that M. Kouilly, m.attre de pension at OTleava, un- 
dertook to give an answer. In the Moniteur due Loiret, he informs us 
that ' at his house, even in the middle of the process, a lai^e young man 
of twenty-sis: was seized with a violent trembling in all his limbs, and that 
his left forearm began sudd(,nly to o cillate in a frightful manner, making 
as many as a thousand movement? in a minute ; being able, he said, to 
utter only broken syllabli"! staggered like an intoxicated man; it was 
necessary to carry him to bed, an I the next day he still felt some nervous 
trembling.' M, Eouilly ended in siymg 'that he felt it Lis duty to 
report this fact for the benefit of those who may enter into these experi- 
ments without knowing their possible serious inconveniences.' Little 
attention was paid tti this, so much had fashion asserted empire, so much 
was this pleasure worth its cost. 

350. " However, knowing long since all the particulars, we are disposed 
to ask ourselves. What is going to result from all this ? what will the savans 
say ? Will they allow themselves to be carried away by electrio appear- 
ances? will their philosophy allow them io seek independently of the fluids, 
which may be imagined to operate, the real agent of such a variety of 
effects 7 No ; they well know, however, that in the sciences — medicine, for 
example — every investigation that stops ehort of phenomena, is of very 
secondary value; we may be satisfied, for want of better, but still we do 
not feel ourselves in possession of the truth; we still seek it. Why in 


,v Google 


THE EXISTENCE OF SPIEITS. 75 

this case should we do otheiwi^e? These suppositions were just, but we 
say without hesitation oui fantistic espeumenters comtaitted from the 
first an unpardonable fault, philosophii.illy Bpeahmg , that is, not to have 
taheu the least notice of those facts from Araenoa which were beginning 
to sound in their ears from all «des When we are yiaifed by the plague, 
yellow fever, or cholera, the fiist care of the faculty is to have it studied 
in Bgyptj Spain, and Poland These ecouiges are investigated cyen at 
the place of their birth, we notice then origin, de%elopment, aud termi- 
nation. Well ! in doing the same in thjs case, these gentlemen would 
have seen as dear tts day that the Avgabourg Gazette was right in telling 
them that this animal magnettxtng was received direct from America. 
But what shall we do ? we take no pleasure m hoi iwj at what we do not 
want to see. 

351. " However, this aihliation once wdl LStabli'slieil well uuderstood, 
by thoroughly studying the ^eiican fiodi^jei, we should very soon have 
reached the assurance thit there it le '■t, the sju ta hid exhibited thcm- 
eelves ia open day; and there ia thej were fir&t concealed in tables or 
behind partitions, we could hive seun immediately what wight be reserved 
for ns for the future. 

852. "But rest assured onr Frenth &&ienco will not yield; the enare is 
too gross; French science has no n%*il m physics and clectiioitj ; it only 
sees in this a inaggiah electiicity, and will nevei consent to be persuaded 
that it baa slept a hundred years at the side of such truths, or rather at 
the side of such enormities in physics, 

353. " And then iniquity is exhibited to herself at all times. Sir, then 
what becomes of the indispertsoMe conditions of Dr. Andr^ ? that is to 
say : ' All the effects ceasing on the least interruption of the chain.' 

354. "This morning, in a journal of Lorraiue, there is a notice of a 
circle formed in a first story, round a mas i e tible ■ as long as the circle 
continued nothing was done; but g tt t d th y U lea e for the street, 
and a few moments afterward the bel! u tabl b g n to waltz, as if to 
bid defiance to the party. WI t a iaw f phy what electricity I 
Behold, on the other hand, citi and unt d nh ited 1 Behold 
the city of Valence, who lahoni d all n h pow wl followed with 
angelic patience all the presciijt n f th n w n nothing could 
produce the phenomena. Is it th t at V 1 n p h nee, the human 
species has no electricity ? Hon D u 1 1 It ty but it is not of 
that accidental and local kind, tl I L nd f th sion, and which 
may be therefore denominated ei aa tl an nt lied those gods 
that moved about from place to jl 

355. " No, Science is not to be so deee \ed, ,-he i not satisfied with the 
explanation of the little fingers, but soon perceiyes that these little fingers 
supply here precisely the part of the famous mesmeric trough, and the 
chain that was formed entirely round it. Then, also, the chain was said 


,v Google 


76 FOEEION COItHOBOEATIVE EVIDENCE OP 

to be very important ; and tlie trougt, magnet, steel, glass pile all neces- 
sary agenis. Very well, what has now hecome of all these necessities? 
The magnetic effeefa exceed all those of that time, and notwithstanding 
they are not made any use of. Much morel since the^ssss have ceased 
to he the fasliion the phenomeni have doubled In &eimin>, where peo- 
ple go to the bottom of things, they hive desired to look into the heart 
of it Lach mastei of the magnet — and they are pretly plenty there — 
has constructed his own trough That of Walford con&ihts of an iron 
bos, fttini'.lied witli bottle's, iron wiie, ground ^Itss &c That of Keiser 
was madi- of 6ce A without bottles and filled with water, which did not 
present the efieots from bein^ preci'sely the &ame in the two cases Thus 
it was s-iid It is Hiagni.ti=ni alone which gnes them thia power and they 
magnetized tbeir best But one lucLy dty it was thought proper not to 
magnetiae, and the trough lost none of its power ! 'Ah ! ah !' they aay, 
'the trough is magnetized by the magnetized patients themselves, and they 
put a stout man into it, free from all magnetic influence, and besides in 
excellent health. Well, thia time ! tlie magnetic effects esccoded in in- 
tensity all the previous esperiments, and never had the phenomena exhi- 
bited themselves so brilliantly.' 

356. "This is the precise account of the famous report of Bailly, of 
which M. Ai-ago spote so highly in his last memoir; and in one respect he 
was right; forthese great experimenters did not allow themselves to becanght 
by any of these electric seductions, and proclaimed physios to be entirely in- 
nocent of all the effects they witnessed. But at the same time they thought 
proper to refer to the imagination these same prodigious effects, which 
no one could understand even after having seen them; and there was their 
great mistake; they were right as savans, as philosophers inexcusable. 

357. " Moreover, this absnrd explanation by imagination he renewed 
under these ciroumstanoes; and that of jugglery is not more fortunate. 
What prejudice ! These two words rendered much service, and covei-ed 
many retreats ! That is, however, passed; it will be necessary hereafter, 
cot only to admit them, biit to redeem all analogous precedents, for these 
are about to be, at last, explained. Again, what is to be done ? It will 
be necessary to proclaim that these electrie phenomena which are real as 
an effect, are not in fact real in their cause; that they Ho when they wish 
the contrary to be believed, that they jolte when they^act by turns with 
and without a chain in a particular town, and not in some other, &e. 

358. "But on the other hand to perceive a capricious and lying cause, 
is almost to perceive ... a mind. A mind, grands dieus ! You repre- 
sent yourself before the whole Academy Arago as recognising spirits, 
hobgoblins I grand experiment ! But that itself is horrid to contemplate ! 
Not a face at the Institute can remain uncovered, and that day will forever 
be regarded as unlucky for science, as it robs it of a victory which was 
thought to have been gained centuries before. 


;;■ Google 


THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 77 

359. "Beware, however, of the first supernal intelligence! for we 
filiall fall back on oar ancient and primitive criterion, oar infeUible touch- 

360. "All depends on what it ia going to ^ve ua; think well of it this 
time; an imprudent question might lose all. 

361. "And already, what signifies that last phrase of a aeriona ajtiole 
which we find in the Courier du Nord? ' In another house the tahle, 
they say, obeyed the commands of one of the esperim enters ; took the 
direction indicated, danced in measure to the Eound of a piano, counted 
the hours, and told the age of the assistants,* &c. 

362. ""WhatmeanathatotherletterfromBordeauXjinthe Gv,yeme?'h. 
hat submitted to animal magnetUm appeared more intelligent even than 
the table; it indicsted, they say, by little gambols, the age of persons, the 
number of pieces of money they bad iu their pockets, it told the amount 
of ladies and gentlemoa together in the room,' &o. 

363. "What follows is better still : see in the Journal le Pai/s, a letter 
of M., the Abb^ of Moigno, according to which it follows that MM. 
Seguin and de Montgolfier, very distinguished engineers, ordered the 
tables to rest on this log and then on the other, and made them beat 
time, &o. 

304. " We read in La Patrie — ' Explanation given hy the savans.' 
Ah I let us see ! this subject is becoming important. According to this 
journal the following is the hypothesis at which the savans have arrived : 
' The table and hat turners act •mostly in good faiik, (quite a coacesdon,) 
but then/ deceive themselves; they think they cause the motion of an inan- 
imate object by an act of volition, or an effusion of magnetic fluid from 
their fingers ; while it is by muscular action, imperc^tible to themselves, 
or others.' Ah! take notice! It ia by a vibratory movement coming 
from thousands of small nervous branches. Add to this, lasMtude, humid- 
ity of the hands, and you will have an esplanation, if not entirely satis- 
factory, at least su^ienUy plausible, of the phenomena which engage our 
attention. M. Ghevreul (of the Institute) has analt/zed this physiological 
predisposition, and has illustrated it by the fact fomiliar to the billiard 
player, who having struck the ball, follows it with his eyes, with his 
shoulders, and with the whole body, and makes fantastic motions, as if to 
impel it, though no longer subject to his direct action, &c. 

365. "It is well M. Ghevreul has used the phrase 'as if to impel it,' 
for had he been so unfortunate as to say, and in fact he did impel it, 
vre should have been lost. In truth we should have been sin d But 
that lucky 'as if aaves ua from a very bad predicament; it b nga b k 
to our memory what we were about to forget ; that ia to say tl t n th 
relations of man and matter, never, up to the present tim i 11 th 
muscular effort of the world been able to influence, in the sm 11 t d g 
the direction of an object, not under its direct action. T th p nt 


;;■ Google 


time all the laws of physics have been baaed on the grand primordial law, 
and the plajer of ten-pina ia not more successful from suofi efforts, than 
he of the billiard ball juat named. 

366. " How clia,nged are the times ! Tiro joars ago, the whole Academy 
of Sciences revolted agaiost the Baron de Humboldt for supposing that at 
a distance he caused a deviation of the magnetic needle — an experiment, 
too, which could KCTer be renewed at Paris; and, behold! in place of needles, 
all at once heavy tahlea are seen malt'zing about the room, and ohedierU to the 
will; a,ndall this is easily explained ! It is ^ite plausible! Yes, but this 
time, gentlemen Savans, we will not allow you to distort the facts. Since 
the commencement of this volume, we have done nothing hut establish, 
on good evidence, all those which your colleagues arrange agreeably to their 
fancy, after having absolutely denied them. But now the half of France 
rises with us to convict them, and to say to you ; No, your nervous branches 
will never explain it; neither the physical phenomena which yoa would 
refer to them, nor the inteJligence of our tables which respond to onr own 
questions, nor the m,',per-iiitelUgence of those which probably to-morrow 
will reveal to us what we are ignorant of ourselves. 

36T- " Attending on the morrow, then I It is truly sorrowful to see a 
man of the highest merit, like M. Chevreul, expose himself in this way 
to the weakest scholar who, ewe m hand, might fairly undertake to an- 
swer him. Those may hereafter believe in physics who wish. It is most 
horribly compromised. A science, capable of thus forswearing all its prin- 
ciples, loses, in our estimation, much of its authority, 

468. " La Revue Medicals, cited by La Patrie of May 20th, declares in 
its turn ' the explanation either by imagination or muscular vibrations, aa 
represented by MM. Coivisart and De Castelnan, entirely nvUlfied by the 
fact of the simple change in the relations of the little fingers' 

369. " As for the Medical, they see in it animal magnetism, and exclaim : 
'No one is able to foresee the appl a n of wh h this discovery is sus- 
ceptible. It is an entire world fo esplana n Who knows if there ia 
not at the end of this hint the means of llus a ng a whole generation !' 

370. "Lucky Magnetism — whata epa a n you have a right to demand! 
what incense will be bestowed on y u t m w by those who yesterday 
so cruelly tore you to pieces ! But La J^cs.e and L' Union Medicale may 
do what they please, no one will hereafter believe them on their word. 

371. "A just reward, gentlemen, for things here below. Ton Votild- 
not believe and you are not believed now ! "We read afresh in La Patrie 
of May 21st, the recital of ' tables promenading and upsetting without 
contact hy pure efforts of volition, or even by a simple magnetic pass — a 
very superjluous precaution of the experimenter.' Very superfluous, in- 
deed ! It could not have been better expressed. 

372. " In the presence of such a fact, will the magaetizers still maintain 
that the magnetic rapport results from the mixture of the two nervous at- 


;;■ Google 


TIIE EXISTENCE OP SPIRITS. (9 

mospheres? The nervous system of tables, (disgueridons,) to use the 
language of Reiehenhach, must be very sensitive; and in this new dance 
wiihowt contact — what becomes of the explanation by muscular vibration, 
and especially by the humidity of the 7iands? 

373. "We have some very important communications, on the 23d of 
May, from M. Bonjean, member of the Royal Academy of Savoy, at Cham- 
b6ry, respecting several esperiments made at the academy itself, and esta- 
blishing the perfect intelligence of the agent in question. M. Bonjean, 
however, always refers this iutelligence to one uniform process. ' These 
responses,' he says, ' are not, and cannot he hut ike reflection of the thoughts 
of the person who causes the phenomena, and the movables are only able to 
satisfy tbose questions whose answers are known, without ever being able 
to supply an answer that is not known.' 

37i. " The idea that tie furniture is unable to give satisfaction Is charm- 
ing ! but up to this point it was not understood to be super-intelligence. 
Patience, however, for it is bound to happen ! 

375. " Besides, M. Bonjean does full justice to the musailar movements 
of M. Chevreul, by means of that single exception of the table of Stras- 
bourg turning with all i(s operators, or certain tables at Lyons moved with- 
out immediate contact. Next, he passes from the physical to the moral 
question, which, if to be believed, is certainly not very encouraging, 
'Fathers and mothers,' he exclaims, 'if you do not desire to develope 
premature feelings in your daughters, husbands who regard the peace of 
your wives, he mistrustful of the m,agnetic chain in general, o-ad of the 
dancing of tables in partieular.' 

376. "It will he recollected that in the famous secret report of Bailly on 
mesmerism, iu 1784, exactly the same thing was said. There is tinder 
all this, then, we have good reason to apprehend, a uniform unrepeuted 

377. "In a. letter of May 24th from M. Seguin, one of our most distin- 
guished engineers, to the Abb^ ilHoigno, who had very ably opposed these 
experiments in Le Pays, M. Seguin says, ' When I reason d'spi-cionately 
on the real and very pontine results which I ha\e obtained, an 1 seen ob- 
tained by others before my eyes, I think myself under ths eontiol of an 
hallucination which causes me to see tbinf,s differently to wlit they are, 
so much does my reason refuse to admit thtm , but when I repeit my ex- 
periments, I find it impossible any longer to resist the force of evidence, 
when indeed it confounds and upsets all my opinions 

378. "' SoiB can yw, expect me to accept your explanation, when a 
table touched very lightly by the ends of the lingers premises ag nntt my 
hand and against my legs to such a degiee as to lepel me ind almost 
break iteelf f How believe that the person whose hands touch it could 
impart to it a force equal to such efforts, ani esppiAolly when tJal person 
is myself? Accept, then, freely and with couiage, the facts as they aee , 


;;■ Google 


80 POEEIGN CORSOEORATIVE EVIDENCE OE 

tte facts well seen and satisfactorilj produced by myself, ia wliotn you. 
have, I think, as much confidence as in yourself. The explanation, will 
come tereafter, rest assured. Believe firmly that in these phenomena of 
turning tables there is something more than yon see — a pkyncal reaiity 
outside of the imagination and of the faith of thoas who appear to make 

879. " It is impossible, as we see, to be more positive, or better to defend 
ilie ^hi/sical evidence on the ground of facts, M. Seguin has a thousand 
times the advantage over his Jeai'ned antagonist; but let us see if M., the 
Abh^ Moigno, defeated on this ground, will not take his revenge on an- 
other. 

380. " Referring to a communication made to the academy by one M. 
Vouquelin, about one of these enchanted tables, which in his hands was 
able to reply to the most mysterious questions, divine the most secret 
thoughts, &c., M. Meigno exclaims in Le Cosmos Sevue Enc^dopidique 
des Sciences : ' This time it is too strong ; we find onrsolyea definitively at 
the mercy of magic, and the moment has come to proclaim it at Rome. 
Then there is neither magnetism nor electricity; not even the infiuenco 
of human volition on matter ; but supposing the fact to he certEun — wincH: 
IS HARD TO SWAtLOW — there must be in it the intervention of spirits, or 
•magic. Intelligeuce that can refuse these deductions of eommon sense, 
would be DisoRDEKED intelligence, as useless to dispute with as with fools. 
If you have not been mistaken, if tbo extraordinary facts which you 
affirm are true, wo ourselves are believers. The intervention of spirits 
and of magic became the sorrowful but great realities.' 

3S1. " M. Agenor De Gasparin, one of our most aed 
writes what follows in ice Gazette de France : — ' I will not indst on this 
point. The phenomenon of rotation, if alone, would not appear to me 
entirely satisfactory. I am mistrustful, though not an academician, and, 
I admit, that it may be possible (at a pinch} that a mechanical impulsion 
might be communicated. But the rotation only serves to present other 
phenomena, the explanation of which it is impossible to refer to any kind 
of muscular action. 

S82. "'Ea^ih of ns, in his turn, gave orders to the table, which it 
promptly obeyed ; and I should succeed with difficulty in explaining to 
you the strange character of these movements, of blows struck with an 
exactness, with a solemnity that f^hlj friffhlened us. " Strike three blows ; 
BtrJke ten blows. Strike with your left foot; with your right foot; with 
your middle foot. Rise on two of your feet; on only one foot; remain up; 
prevent those on the side raised from returning the table to the floor." 
After each command the table obeyed. It produced movements that no 
complicity, involuntary or voluntary, could have induced ; for we shovM 
have afterward tried in vain ta place it on one foot, and Iceep it there by 
the pressure of the liands, resisting incontestably the efforts to press it down. 


;;■ Google 


THE EXISTlfnCE OF sriMTS. 81 

383. " ' Eaoh one of us gave oi-ders with ecjual success. Children were 
obeyed as well as grown persons. 

384. " ' Still more : it was agreed that the requests should not he audi- 
ble, but merely mentalj and whispered to a neighbour. Still the tabic 
obeyed ! There was in no Mjsfawce Oie least error. 

385. " ' Eaoh person desired the table to rap the number of years of 
his ago, and it gave our ages as indicated only in our mind, endeavouring 
in the most curious manlier to hurry when the nnmher was large. I mast" 
own, U> my stame, that I was rebuted by it, for having unintentionally 
diminished my, age; the table gavo forty-three instead of forty-two, he- 
cause lay wife, with a bettor memory, had thought of the correct number. 

S86. '" Finally, having continued these esperimenta more than an 
hour, at whicb the neighbours and the servants of the farm were present, 
I feit that it was tune to stop. I requested the tablo to raise; to raise 
a,gain, and turn over on my side, which it did. 

" 'Accept, gentlemen, the assurance of my best consideration, 

A. De G-ASPABIN.' 

387. " We stop our citations here; for those who are not content with, 
the testimony we have furnished, emanating as it does from philosophers, 
or mea of serious minds, the same revelations appearing, too, in all parts 
of the world, will not be better satisfied by any thing we could add. A 
day is coming, however, that will open every mouth. 'Xhen from all those 
parlours so reserved before — from all those cabinets ia which eiperiments 
had been conducted with closed doors, the truth will burst forth in its full 
power. Then it will be known that some of the most esteemed men of 
Paris, of the bench, puJpit, and men of letters, have both desired to see 
and have seen it; have desired to know and have known it. It will be 
known, that the evil super-intelligence has been revealed to them, and that 
if they have been, silent on the subject, or desired ia suppress their name, 
it was only an act of prudence to restrain public opinion. 

388. "But on that day what will Science be doing? We can boldly 
predict : the facts of to-day tehidt it does admit, proving to amount to no- 
thing, and the inadmissible facta being admitted, its faith will change, 
and its language become more modest. Like the ancient Augurs, two 
savans will not be able to look at each other any more without smiling, 
and often enough to exclaim; 'It has been well said, my dear colleague; 
it has always been foretold^ that "He, who obtside OB pure mathe- 
matics, PEONOUN0E8 THE WOBD IMPOSSIBLE, WAMTS PBODENOE.' " 

Arago." 


;;■ Google 


COKROBORATIVi; EVIDENCE OP 

SPIRITUALISM IB GREAT BRITAIN. 
Account of Mr. Robert Owen's Conversion. 

389. " While in doubt upon this subject, I heard of the media in this 
eountiy, and was casually introdiiced to Mrs. Hayden, an American me- 
dium, without having any intention to ask a question respecting the spi- 
rits ; my object being to purchase a book which Mrs. Hayden had for sale, 
written by a valued and most truthful friend of mine in America, Adia 
Ballou, who has written a plain, praotieal, common-sense history of this 
new revelation to the human race. 

390. " While conversing with Mrs. Hayden, and while wo were both stand- 
ing before the fire, and talking of our mutual friends, suddenly raps were 
heard on a table at some distance from us, no one being near to it. T was 
surprised, and as the raps continued and appeared to indicate a strong desire 
to attract attention, I asked what was the meaning of the sounds? Mrs. 
Hayden sdd they were spirits amsioua to communicate with some one, 
and she would inquire who they were. They replied to her, by the alphas 
bet tliat they weie friends of mini, who were deairou« to oommunicite with 
n e Ml' Hayden then give me the ilphabet and pencil, ind I found, 
icorling to tkbiroun statements, thit the spiiits were those cf mv mother 
and father IteiteHheii truth ly \anou« ([uestions, ind the r answers, 
all correct, snrjri^ed me exceedingly I have s nee had twcJvc seances, 
•< me of bng continuani,!", and during whith with one exception 1 have 
hai prompt and true answers so far as the past and present, and very ra- 
tioni] replies as to the future, but these last ba\etr le teatud by time. 
The exception wis my own afterwaid discovered error ' 

391. From the following quotation, it seems that Mr. Owen has not 
had any reason to diminish hb faith in spiritualism. , The manifestations, 
of which his account is subjoined, are eminently wonderful; yet they are 
not more so than those which are recorded as having been realized under 
the influence of the same medium, in this country, or at Koons's Establish- 
ment in Ohio : — 

Zetter of Robert Owen to the Yorkshire Spiritual Telegraph. 

Seven Oaks, April 23, 1865. 
393. "Dear Sir: — Just now, on my return from London, where, last 
night, I had been giving a lecture to Mr. Rouge's party of foreigners and 
others on Education, I had the pleasure to receive jour 2d Number of ' The 
Yorkshire Spiritual Telegraph.' I have hastily glanced over it, and I 
feel much interest in your proceedings, and wish you all success in the 
good cause. I say good cause, for it is sure to lead to great ultimate good, 
and especially will it destroy the many evils arising from sectarianism, and 
other causes of hatred and ruin between man and nations. I must tell 


;;■ Google 


THE EXISTENCE OS SPIRITS. 8ii 

you of what occurred to me iast nigUt, after my return from the lecture, 
about nine o'clock. 

393. " A Mr. Hume, a young Scotchman, who went to America to pur- 
sue his studies as a medical student, ftar or five years ago, tecame a me- 
dium, (he is now abont twenty years of age,) and soon became a very 
superior one. He had engaged to accompany the Ha,ydeQa and Miss Jay. 
He took his passage and came, but the others, for some canse, postponed 
their voyage, but may now be daily expected. They an'ived on the 22d. 
I had heard on my arrival in London, irom friends on whom I could de- 
pend, of the extraordinary results by his mediumship. I made ari-angements 
to visit those friends and Mr. Hume when I finished my lecture, which I 
did, and found my two friends and Mr. Hnnis waiting my arrival. On 
being seated around a regular full-sized card table, there were raps imme- 
diately, and because I do not hear very well, the raps increased until they 
became very loud, but I heard the first raps distinctly. Many spirits were 
present ; some, relatives of my friends, and others, my own relations. My 
wife and daughters, my son and brother, and also my father and mother, 
with all of whom I have had frequent delightful intercourse through va- 
rious mediums. My two friends present are husband and wife; and the 
first new occurrence to me was, seeing the lady's silk apron untied by in- 
visible means — a somewhat complicated operation — and taken from, her 
and given to Mr. Hume, opposite to her. It was then conveyed backward 
and forward, from one to another, and it soon came to me. I held it with 
much force, but it was drawn from me with greater force, for I was afraid 
damage would be done to it. Next a flower was taken from the table, 
conveyed away by invisible means, and brought to me. The flower I kept 
for being so presented to me. Next I had my handkerchief out; it was 
taken from my hands, and in an instant thrown from the opposite side of 
the table, not as it was taken, but made into a large hat, which I also have 
as a curiosity. Then the spirits came and touched each of ns. I was 
occasionally touched on one knee, then on the other, and afterward on both 
at once; and then one of them shook hands with me, and I' most distinctly 
felt the fingers of them separately. An accordeon was then placed under 
the table, and soon the spirit of the daughter of the family played most beau- 
tifully several tunes and pieces of music. I asked for one of my fiivourite 
Scotch tunes, and it was immediately played. The instrument was then 
.raised by invisible power, and given first to one, then to another; it was 
thus brought to me. The tabic was then lifted from the floor; at first, 
about a foot, and immediately afterward, about three feet. 

394. " After this the medium was put into a trance, during which he 
saw beautiful visions of spirits, and one of them spake through him while 
in that state sentiments that went (o the heart of each of us, giving us 
advice, invaluable in its import, and in language beautifully and eloquently 
I, and calculated to make the deepest impression on our memo- 


ir Google 


84 CORUOBOKATIVE EVIDENCE, ETC. 

ries. While reason remains I stall never forget it ; and it was given witli 
many encouraging words, to pursue mj course in tlie menaures in wbict I 
indeavour to iatroduoe the millenniuraj but also stating 
i I should meet, and the groat difficulties which were to be 
overcome. 

395. " Much more occurred, very interesting; hut the post time expires, 
arid I wish you to have this communication by this mail. 

" Yours sincerely, Roubbt Owen." 

206. I subjoin the following narrative of Mr. Kufus Elmer, of Spring- 
field, Massaoliiisetts, concerning manifestations through Mr. Hume, as 
corroborating those described by Mr. Owen. Thus, on bott sides of the 
Atlantio, we have evidence of analogous striking results by the same 

Mr. Hume at Springfield. 
397. "llufus Elmer, Esq., of Springield, informs ns that Mr. Hume 
spent the nights of March 17th and 18th at his house. On the evening 
of the 17th, thirteen persons were present, when a scries of most extra- 
ordinary demonstrations took place. First, two largo tables standing toge- 
ther, around which the company werfe sitting, were lifted from the floor, 
while all hands were resting upon thoir tops. Then, an accordeon, held 
under the table in one of Mr. Hume's hands, (the other being on the 
table,) with the keys downward, was played in strong tones, three parts 
being maintained, and any tune performed that was called for — even foreign 
music. The instrument was also played upon, while held in the same 
manner by each, person p t — 11 I i pt II ! Id tl 

accordeon being npou the t bl bt (Th m fostai w 11 

made in a room well ligl t d by ) A b 11 w gh g p d 

was passed about under thtbl \ t thhd f hjrs Ik 
away again, passed rapidly f m 1 f th t bl t tl h 1 

tance of eight feet, knock 1 dly th d 1 t w d 

finally, the tables having b ptdfw b I Ithpd 

over tho aperture, the bell w blip d th I th wb 1 f h m 
pany were allowed to feel tb h d wb li h Id t ^ t tb 1 11 w 
slid out on to one of the t bl f m 1 tl tl d tl h d 

■whick grasped it was expo d t th w f II tb mp y — th h Is 
of each being at the sam t fUviwT tfy 1 tt 

so great a distance as not to have a clear view, it was communicated that if 
all others would for a moment avert thoir eyes, so as not to concentrate their 
magnetism so powerfully upon the object, it could be more plainly mani- 
fested to this one alone. Acting upon this hint, each person was allowed 
to look singly at the hand— -io the full satisfiiction of all. One of those 
present, mentally requested, unknown to all others, that the hand of her 


,v Google 


COMMTJOTCATIONS FROM THE SFIRIT WORLD. 85 

Bpirit^ohiliJ miglit be exhibited to ter; and, behold ! a cbild's hand was 
presented, while no child in the body was in the room. One of the com- 
pany was a coloured domestio in the family of Mr. E , and she men- 

taLly requested that her mother, who had before purported to communi- 
cate to her, if present, would show her hand ; when, lo I a hlacJs: hand 
appeared ! These are hut specimens of what occurred during the evening." 


COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE SPIBIT WORLD. 
Remarhi Introductori/ to my Spirit father's Communication. 

398. Agreeably to my spirit father's communication, the m 
which of late Lave given birth to Spiritualism, have been the resnit of a 
deliberate effort, on the part of the inhabitants of the higher spheres, to 
break through the partition which has interfered ■with the attainment, by 
mortals, of a correct idea of their destiny after death. To carry out this 
intention, a delegation of advanced spirits has been appointed. Eeforring 
to this statement, I inquired how it happened that low spirits wore allowed 
to interfere in the undertaking ? The answer was, that the spirits of 
the lower spheres being more competent to make mechanical moYements 
and loud rappings, their assistance was requisite. 

399. Likewise, I inquired why it was deemed expedient to make these 
manifestations, in the first instance, at Hydeaville, near Eochester, through 
the spirit of a murdered man ? The answer to this was, that the spirit 
of a murdered man would escite more interest, and that a neigliboorhood 
was ehoson where spiritual agency would ho more readily credited than 
in more learned or fashionable and conspicuous circles, where the prejudice 
against supernatural agencies is extremely strong; but that the manifes- 
tations had likewise been made at Stratford, in Connecticut, under other 
circumstances. Nor were these the only places. They had been made 
elsewhere, without much success in awakening public attention. 

400. Thus, it appears that at the outset, the object was to draw atten- 
tion, and ia the next place to induce communications. It will appear from 
the account of the manifestations at HydesviOe and Stratford, that as soon 
as through an ingenious agreement upon signals rational intercommuni- 
cation was established, the manifestations became changed in character. 
The misehievousnesa displayed, in the primitive derangement of furniture, 
ceased. This was attributed to the repla^iement of spirits of inferior grade, 
by their superiors. 

401. Thus this new and glorious light has come up aniid dark clouds, 
as we often see tho thunder-gust the harbinger of a bright sky. 

i02. But still there has boon another source of temporary degradation, 


;;■ Google 


not arising solely 


f m tl p 


t h tf 


rath 


q 


ho. The great 


motive in tie fi t 


L f 


wt 


P 


t In 


f tationa was the 


loYQ of tLo mar 


11 tl 


d t 


P 


wh t 


aa d cmed ju^lery. 


The mere movem 


t { Uhl 


(1 t 


y 


f 


t jiritual agency, 


was tiio great 1 


1 t f tt 


t Th 


sia 


I w 


p t where table 


turning was dis 


1 t I 


h dfh 


d 


f P 
^dyt 


( b ing the cause, 
t ted. (134.) 


it left no jmpre 


mj m 


m y h 


1 


403. But aft 


llh b t 1 


m ct 


mm 


d t wa,3 performed 


so slowly, that tt 


Pl 


fte b 


f 


d m 


d ith a view to 


estahJish identity 


ft! p t3 w th til 


I 


1 1 wh m t professes to 


personate ; or t i 


t th t 


f 


p t 


by t! 


jles given to lo- 


quirers respect 


f t wh h 


Id t b ] 


L w 1 


th medium. At 


tie first recogn t 


th 1 t 


w Id 


TO uly with state- 


ments very natural and amiable, but not instructive beyond the dcgre 
confirmation thus afl'orded of tho great fact of such intercourse being pos- 
sible on the part of fneuds who have quitted this stage of esistence. 

404. Communications through spelling and writing media very much 
fell short of the expectations which the name assumed by the spirit would 
awaken 

405 ^s ioon as convinced that the phenomena weri, due to the thides 
of the dead, I lorlced with eagerncf^ for somo coniisfent mformition of 
their abode , modes of csistenco, of the theclogiLil doctrines enteit lined by 
them, and the tetual diversities of their situation consequent to lar ous 
degrees of racial and intellectual meiit 

406 It WIS with regret that I iound m the published -tcoounts, nothing 
satisfai,tory, nothing pieoiie, nothin^ connected In no publication lid I 
find anj satisfictoiy statements of iho Iccation of the spirit wuiH, or of 
its subdivision into spheres 

407 Urging this dcfieieni-y of informition upon, tho'ie =ipint fiu,nd3 
who s m d to have selected rae as an inslrument m promulgating the in 

aluabl truths of Spiritualism, I obtained information, as eaily ds May, 
1854 p t ng the situation of the spuitual sjheres, or cointiy of 

p t Lit elj to the e*irth , but about the latterpiitof Octoler my 
f tb mm ced writing on the subject thiongh i medium of the other 
K but tb dc^a fuiniahed were toD much blended w th het own pie 
p w th which her mini was leplett Henn,, ilthough miny 

p g h d be n wiitten, they were reje(,ted, i id resort was bad to another 
m J um — M (jouiliy The result thus obtime 1 wts afterwards reid to 
the author, at the disk, so as to have every paragraph scrutinized. 

408. Under the following head will be found my father's communi- 
cation. 


;;■ Google 


COMMUNICATIONS lEOM THE SPIEIT WORLD, S7 

¥/ Sj>irit Fatlie} s Commiii i afic i * 

409. My s n 111 commutiicating with you reap fii g tl q Je^t nv I 
man, I shall endeiTOur according to the estPot of mj eipio t^ nd 
highest perceptioD of truth to give you a view a conei,t an 1 dtfi i tc as 
possible, of the all important sul leot in que^t on 

410. The spint world lies letween sixty and one hundied and twen j 
miles from the ferrestrn! eurfnce the whoL intermudiato =pace mdudins; 
that immediately over the earth, the hihitation of morteh, is divided intj 
seven concentnc regions called spheies The region nest the eiith th 
primary scene of mans esistcnoe is known is the flifif r r Imentil 
Bpter.. 

411. The remiicing six maj be distingiishcl is the tj: iitiial apheies, 

412. The SIX spiritual spheres ire eonoontiio zones, or (.ucles of es 
ceedingly rehued matter, encompassing the earth lifco belts or girdles 
The distance of each from the other is legulatcd 1 y flxod laws 

413 You will un'ltrstand then tl ey re not shjpele&s chimeris o 
m J J t f the mind lut ibsolute cntit os as much so indeed as 
th pi t f th olar s\sten or the globe on which you now le lie 
Tl yh Ittd 1 n^itudes anl itmosphcros f jeculirMtl u 
wh f t d b Imy undulating curients produce a most pleasuiable and 

n t ff t Their suriacea aie diversified with an immense ^anetj 

f th t p t que hndseapes, with lofty mountain ranges vail js 

Ik f t anl the internal con espondence of ill the higher 
p! m f th The trees and shrubbery, crowned with exquisitely 
be t f 1 f 1 d flowers of eveiy colour and \a1iPt3, send foith their 

g iti 

414 Th phy 1 economy and arrangements of each sphere differs 
f th tl , w and striking scenes of grandeur being presented to 
us in each, increasing in beauty and sublimity as they ascend. 

415, Although the spheres revolve with the earth on a common axis, 
forming the same angle with the plane of the ecliptic, and move with it 
about the ponderable sun, they are not dependent on that body for either 
light or heat, receiving not a perceptible ray from that ponderable source; 
but receive those dispensations wholly from his internal or spiritual cor- 
respondence, (a spiritual sun concentric with the sun of your world,) 
— from that great central luminary whose native brightness and uninter- 
rupted splendour baffle description. 

« My father waa a membec of do convention hy which the original constitution of tho 
Stnt« of Pennsylvania wna mudo. Snbaequently, ho served In the lagislatare, nnd held 
the office of Bpealter of the Senate. His name must be ssaeciated vlth many of the lan-a 
of hie time. Durmg leiaurc he nsed to amuse himself with the Latia poeta nnd bistoiione, 
aa well as with those of Great Britain and of Franco, The Historical Society of Penn-- 
sylvania have lately pabliated a jonrniil which ha wrote of a tour, made in 1T75, throughi 
New York to Canada and Niagara FaUs. 


;;■ Google 


88 COMMUniCATIONS FEOM THE SPIRIT WOB,LD. 

416. We have no divisions of time, therefore, into days, weeks, months, 
or years J nor alternations of season, aiused by the earth's annual revolu- 
tion; those periods being observed with reference only to the affairs of 

417. Although we, like you, are constantly progressing toward perfec- 
tion, our ideas of time and the seasons differ widely from, yours; with 
you it ia time — with us, eternity. In the terrestrial sphere, a man's thoughts, 
being honnded hj time and space, are limited; but with us they ire es- 
tended in proportion as we ^ot rid cf those ri-stuctions and oui percep- 
tions of truth become more aoounij- 

418. As order ia a priaiaiy object in the Bpheies, then, aie of cjurse 
laws for its preservation. E unda men t illy, these proceed through his mi- 
nistering angels, frora theDmne Lawgi^ei, who commanls the an gdic hosts 
of heaven and rules the inhabitants of earth; who employs myriads of 
ministering angels as the means of intevcomnmnication between their 
Supreme Master and his creatures throughout the universe. 

419. So far as legislation, subordinate or supplementary to that of the 
Sapreme Legislator, is required, the government of the spheres is repub- 
lican, exercising legislative, judicial, and execntive powers. But these 
functions are not embarrassed by the necessity of codes indited or 
printed, nor by that of physical coercion. The results of these functions 
are realized in simultaneous and hoDiogeneons opiuious awakened in the 
minds of the ruling spirits, as truth takes hold of the minds of mathema- 
ticians, ^artpassw, as they read the same series of demonstrations. The 
conclnsions in which the chief spirits thus unanimously concur, are by 
them impressed upon their constituents, who, thus impressed, are consti- 
tutionally Tinable to resist the sentiment which, like a magic spell, ope- 
rates upon their sense of right, and overrules any rebellious passion. 

420. As, in the rudimental sphere, weighing, measurement, or mathe- 
matical calculation or demonstration, when performed by competent per- 
sons, are rarely disputed, so in the spheres, the decisions of those whose 
aufhoritj is intuitively evident in moral or legal questions, meet with 
acquiescence. It follows, therefore, that neither imprisooraont nor fetters 
are requisite for the enforcement of moral or legal restrictions. 

421. Moreover, it must be evident that in the spheres, wisdom, know- 
ledge, rectitude, and conscientiousness are the 1 g ta f G d the 
higher spirits acting as his media.' 

422. We acknowledge no aristocracy but th t f m d d m it. 
In our diplomatic intercourse with our broth f th wh ff of 
the greatest importance are to be transacted, (th p t d p nsat n for 
example,) we intrust them to a delegation of tl t 1 n 1 p (a — 

ithose who are best acquainted with the affairs f th 1 f 1 t y nd 

lof that to which they are accredited. 

423. Our laws are meted out in the scale t t j t f m wh se 


;;■ Google 


COMMUNICATIONS rEOM THE SPIRIT WORLD. S9 

awards tliere is no appeal. Punishments are but the natural consequences 
of violated Jaws; being invariably commensurate wltH offences, and have 
reference as well to the reformation of the offender, as to the prevention 
of future crime. 

424. The political economy of the spheres has f ly t w 1th 
which being unbounded and free as air and light n f rs b pp 
pmted by each and every member of society, ae d t ! h 
capacity of reception, the supply being always eq 1 1 t! d 1 

425. Wealth consisls, upon earth, of those oljt fhm 1 -y 
or taste, which can only be acquired by mean fib I p tal 
Other things being equal, the value Js generally p p t t h t 
incurred in the production. But in the spheres, h b] t ^ 
profusion, the supply is of course always equal to th d d t! gl 
less necessary than the air which you breathe 1 L t th y h n 
marketable value ; there is no one who has oc t h y 11 h 
abundantly supplied from a common ineshaustibl t k 

426. Hence it will appear that we have no occasion for gold or silver, 
which perisheth with the using, but the currency of moral and intellectual 
worth, coined in the mint of divine love, and assayed by the standards of 
purity and truth. Our bank, whose charter is eternal, and whose notes 
are never subject to fluctuations, and always payable on demand, is none 
other than the great bank of heaven, whose capital stock consists of an 
infinitude of love, mercy, and benevolence, of which our Heavenly Fa- 
ther is president and director, and ia which his beloved children, the 
whole human family, are shareholders. 

427. With regard to the social constitutions of the "spheres," each is 
divided into six circles, or societies, in which kindred and congenial spirits 
are united and subsist together, agreeably with the law of affinity. 

428. Although the members of each society unite as near as may be on 
the same plan, agreeing in the most prominent moral and intellectual 
features ; yet it will be found, on caxeful analysis, that the varieties of 
character, in each society, are almost infinite ; being as numerous' as the 
persona who compose the circle. 

429. Each society has teachers from those above, and not unfrequently 
from the higher spheres, whose province it is to impart to us the know- 
ledge acquired from their instructions and experience, in the different 
departments of science, and which we in turn transmit to those below. 
Thus, by receiving and giving knowledge our moral and intellectual facul- 
ties are expanded to higher conceptions and more esalted views of the 
great Creator, whose almighty power is no less displayed in the constitu- 
tion of spirit worlds, than in that of the countless resplendent orbs of 
space. 

430. We do not, as many persons in the rudimental state ima^ne, 
abandon the studies which we commenced on earth, which would prcsup- 


,v Google 


p se tl loa f J J equent inferiority to 

J sel b t th t y w p g ng in knowledge and 

w dm d lillj ^ea th gh th b .31 gea of eternity. Tou 
b g h d d w t -u h by tb 1 w f e t t on, are coiupai-atively 
Imtd J f fmt btw baying arrived at a 

b gb J b f th bt d f d 1 more extensive field 

f hli dttl totlw nderful workings of 

th t my t B g b g 1 tb fi ty t bis pei-feetions, must 

b f d f 1 fi t tui d to whom, of course, 

w an b I t p p t 

481 t fi h d t g I are extended to all 

th t p t t th ph m f 1 t ; to all the wonders 

f th 1 d tb tb d t wh t th mind of man. is eapa- 

bl f g all f b h f Ities, and form a con- 

1 bl p t f 1 ym t Th 11 d sublime sciences of 

t yhmtjdtl t a, usiderable portion of 

our attention, and aiford us an ineibaustible subject foi study and reflection. 

432. Nevertbeless, tbere are millions of spints who are not yet suffi- 
ciently advanced to take any interest in tbose pui-suits, foi jou will bear 
in mind thit the spheres are but ■50 many departments of a great normal 
school, fo tb m tdl d pi n and development of the iiee, each of 
which is h d nly by tb p -al* stages of progiession, — the earth 
being the fli t tb nd the seventh sphere tbe last, being pre- 
paratory t t nto tb pei ail heaven You will peiceive, then, 
that we b n 1 m ted p for tbe pro'.ecution of our studies, and 
that what k wl Ig y f 1 to icquire in the rudimental state, legi- 
timate tb t y w 11 b t obtain, m some of the degrees of the 
spiritual pb 

433. y\ d t t dy tb se J ctical arts, which are so essential to tbe 
earth life h as m I *£ for we do not stand in need of their 
applicatio u tud b ng wl oily of a mental character, we attend 
to the f u 1 m ntal j pi ly All the more intellectual branches 
of the ait 1 1 vated in a much more perfect manner 
than that wh 1 w h b a accustomed upon earth. The mind 
being unt m 11 1 by tb material body, and having its intellectual 
energies and p pt n mp d w 
clearly and p d!j p 1 uod 
which th a b d W 
subject, so as to understand its co 
which mortals arrive only by a long ud 

434. We are not, for good and w 
fully esplrdned, permitted to reveal 11 


d b p 


Pl 


nd truths on 


b 


I nns of each 


mpo 


knowledge at 


d u p ce 


ds wh h 


d 


ime will be 


B Is understood in 


, Google 


COMMUNICATIONS FEOM THE SPIKIT WORLD. 91 

aa the consequences of such a procedure would be perilous to the happiness 
of all, and Bubversive of order. 

435. In addition to our studies we have many oilier sources of intellec- 
tual, moral, and heartfelt enjoyment, from whieh we derive the most in- 
effable pleasure : one of which is social reunions and conviyial meetings 
a coming together of dear friends, brothers, sisters, children and parents 
where tho liveliest emotion and tondercst affections of our nature are es 
cited, and the fondest and most endearing reminiseenoes are awakened 
where spirit meets in unison with spirit, and heart beats responsive to 

436. Yet individuals united by the ties of consanguiaity ai-e not always 
linked together, eyen here, by the golden chain of love and benevolent 
affection, since it not unfrequently happens that there is muuh more har- 
mony existing among those who are not members of the same family. 
Notwithstanding that persons who were intimately acquainted with each 
other in the natural world, and those who are akin, may be and often are 
separated, sometimes for long periods, still they do occasionally meet to- 
gether ; those in the higher degrees and spheres passing to the lower, while 
those in the latter never ascend to the former tOl fully prepared for such 
a transition, agreeably to the fixed and unalterable laws of prflgression. 
The periods of such separations vary aceordiog to the relative gradations 
of iotellectnal and moral qualities in each. 

437. The peculiar connections and relations of parents and ohildi'en, 
brothers and sisters, and all the minor ties of consanguinity, must be for- 
ever maintained, although there may be an indefinite interruption to the 
harmonious play of their afEnities, 

438. As regards tho institution of marriage, I would observe that on 
earth it Is a civil contract, entered into by two persons, male and female, 
mutually or otherwise, as the eaijc may be, for and during the term of their 
natural lives, but which is legally annulled on the demise of either party j 
BO that whether or not it be renewed in tha spiritual world, is determined 
by choice, not obligation. 

439. Celestial marriage, however, is quite a different affair : it is the 
blending of two minds in one, resulting from an innate reciprocal love in 
each; a eonjunetaon of negative and positive principles, forming a true and 
indissoluble bond of spiritual union, which human legislation cannot reach ; 
a marriage which is born of God, and is therefore eternal. It is often 
asked, " Will all bo married in heaven ?" I answer, Yes, most assuredly ; 
it never was designed for man to be alone, either on earth or in heaven : 
each will seek and find their counterpart. 

440. Each society has a municipal administration or moral code, subject 
to the divine government; submission to the will of G-od, and obedience 
to bis laws, whether recognised in nature or revelation, forming the basis 
of its constitution. With us philosophy and religion go hand in hand. 


;;■ Google 


92 COMMUNICATIONS SVMil THE 6PIEIT W0IIIJ3. 

441. Evil or misdirected spirits find their affinities in the second sphere, 
where the lowest and most undeveloped are associated together, and remain 
for indefinite periods, but with all the moral depravity and darkness with 
which they are enveloped, through the benign influence exerted over their 
perceptive and rational faculties, by higher intelligences, eaoh begins to 
feel, sooner or Inter, the low and degraded position he occupies ; moreover, 
finding new means of progress, and new source;, of contemplation 'as well 
aa delight, and his capacity of making perpetual advancement in knowledge, 
his intellectual faculties become gradually expanded, and his moral powers 
increased. Hence the grovelling propensities of his nature yielding to the 
dictates of reason, his grosser passions snbside, causing him to aspire to 
higher associationa and circumstances, which in turn beget new wants, 
thoughts, and feelings. 

442. We have no sectarian or ecclesiastical feuds; no metaphysical 
dogmas; nor are we troubled with those insatiable cravings and iaordioale 
ambitions, so often manifested by mortals; nor have we any taxation for 
religion, the voluntary contribations of intellectual and moral minds being 
its meet support. 

443. Our religions teachers belong to that class of persons who were 
noted, during their probation on earth, for their philanthropy and deeds 
of moral bravery; those who, regardless of the scoffs and sneers of the 
time-serving multitude, dared to promulgate and defend the doctrines 
of " civil and religious liberty." These practical reformers and saviours 
of the race, instead of worrying their hearers, aa ia the cuatom with many 
on earth, with horrible denunciations and awful threats of eternal vengeance 
for their misdoing, admonish and exhort them to higher and nobler aims 
and aspirations ; to the study of Deity as manifested in his stupendous 
works. 

444. They nrge upon them, too, the necessity of their co-operation in 
the reformation and advancement of their more degraded brethren, by in- 
structing them in the divine principles of love, wisdom, and benevolence. 
They instruct them in the soul-inapiring and elevating doctrine of univer- 
sal and eternal progression, and in the sublime truth that evU is not an 
indestrvictihle and positive principle, hut a negative condition, a mere 
te.mporary cii-cumetance of their existence; and, farthermore, ihat sneer- 
ing for sin is not a revmigefid arid malevolent injiktion of God, hid a 
necessart/ and invariahle sequence of violated loan. 

445. Tbey teach them also that, according to the divine moral economy, 
there is no auch thing as paidon for sina committed — no immediate mercy 
— no possible escape from the natural results of crime, no matter where 
or by whom committed ; no healing of a diseased moral constitution by 
any outward appliances, or cciemonnl dbsurdities; and finally, that the 
only way whereby to escape sin tnd its tonsequences, is by progressing 
above and beyond it. 


;;■ Google 


FROM THE SPIRIT WOELB. 93 

446. We dcrivG much pleEisure from the exercise of our talents in vocal 
and instrumental music, whitb. fai excels the noblest efforts of musical 
genius ou earth. When we convene to worship God in our temples, whose 
halls and coluians heam with inherent celestial light, our voices are blended 
together in songs of praise and adoration to the Almighty Author of oar 
existence, from whom all hleasinga or? derived. 

447. From what has been stated, it may be perceived that we are inoral, 
intellectual, and sensitive creatures. Instead of being, as many of you 
imagine, mere shadowy and unsubstantial entities, we are posseaacd of 
definite, tangible, and esquiaitely symmetrical forms, with Well-rounded and 
graceful lirabs, and yet so light and elastic that we can glide through the 
atmosphere with almost electric speed. The forlted lightnings may flash, 
and the thunders roll in awful reverberation along the vault of heaven, and 
the rain descend in gushing torrents; nevertheless, by the mere act of 
volition, wa may stand unharmed at your side. 

448. We are, moreover, endowed with all the beauty, loveliness, and 
vivacity of youth, and aie clothed in flowing vestments of effulgent nature 
suited to the jm-rticular degree of refinement of our bodies. Our raiment 
being composed of phosphorescent piinciplea, we have the power of attract- 
ing and absorbing or reflecting the rays evolved, according as oiir con- 
dition is more or less developed. This accounts for our being seen, by 
clairvoyants, in different degrees of brightness, fiom a dusky hue to the 
moat intensely brilliant light. 

449. The spiritual body is a perfect human form, originating in, and 
analogous to, the corporeal organization in its several parts, functions, and 
relations. The heart beats in rythmic pulsations, the lungs fulfil their 
office of respiration, and the braiu generates its vitalized magnetic fluid, 
wlioae life-giving currents permeate every portion of the spiritual organism; 
Man in the rudimental state is tripartite, consisting of soul, of spirit, and 
flesh ; hut in tho spheres a duality, composed of soul and spirit. Having 
approached the portals of death, he disrobes himself of the exterior form as 
he would put away a worn-out garment. The gross and cumhrous physical 
machine, which was given for the purpose of developing his more beautiful 
and excellent spiritual body, and of bringing him into more immediate 
relationship with the outward world, can serve his purposes no longer. 

450. For your clearer understanding of the modus operandi of our in- 
tercourse with man, you will remember that by our transition to the world 
of spirits we part with the body only. Wo lose none of our intelligence 
by the transfer, hut, ou the contrary, become daily more and move deve- 
loped in our knowledge of and power over the forces in nature ; so that we 
are enabled to perform many feats to you, seemingly wonderful, and which 
really appear miraculous to the majority of those who witness them. 

451. Having disposed of the external mechanism of flesh, wo cannot 
come into direct contact with physical matter, but wo arc able, through 


;;■ Google 


94 COMMUKICATIONS FROM THE SPIRIT WORLD. 

the sphere of the medium, when natural conditions are complied witb, 
not only to communieate our thoughts and wisliea to our friends, but to 
move solid, ponderable bodies. By spheres, I mean the particular mental 
or physical state, or eraanatioa by which all bodies, organic or inorganio, 
are immediately surrounded, and the particular electrical relations which 
they sustain to each other, causing repulsions and attractions in man and 
animals as well as in chemical reagents, 

452. 'When wc wish to impress the mind of the medium, by the effort 
of our magic will, (provided always that he or she is in sympathy with 
or sustains a negative relation to the operator,} we can dispose and arrange 
the magnetic currents of the brain so as to form or fashion them into ideas 
of our own. We can also learn to read the thoughts of another — condi- 
tions being favourable — as readily as you can gain a knowledge of the 
charactei-s or symbols of a language foreign to your own. 

453. Thoughts being motions of the mind, assume specific and definite 
forms, and when distinct in the mind can be clearly perceived and under- 
stood by any spirit who is in sympathy with the mind in which they are 
generated. 

454. To influence, mechanically, the hand of a medium to write, we 
direct currents of vitalized spiritual electricity on the particular muscles 
which we desire to control. In order to produce the physical manifestations, 
it is not by any means requisite that the medium should be possessed of a 
good moral character or well-balanced mind, as an individual of small 
mental calibre would answer our purpose equally well ; but an advanced 
spirit could not directly imprcM or control the organs of a mind with which 
he is not in a£5.nity, and vice vcrsd. 

455. We can instantly determine the sphere of a spirit, in or out of the 
body, by the particular brilliancy and character of the light in which he 
is enveloped, as well aa by the peculiar sensation which his presence creates. 

456. The raps are produced by vol-aataT^ discharges of the vitalized 
spiritual eleotricity, above mentioned, from the spirit, coming in contact 
with the animal electricity emanating from the medium. These discharges 
we can direct at will to any particular locality, thereby producing sounds 


' 457- The question being often asked, " How do you move solid sub- 
stances ?" I would partly answer it by asking, How does a magnet attract 
and raise from their resting-places certain bodies within whose sphere it is 
brought? How does a man move his body and direct it whithersoever it 
goeth ? How does God, the almighty cause of all causes, move and keep 
in perpetual motion the immense systems which revolve in space, and main- 
tain each in ita due relative position ? I answer, By the magnetism of a 
positive will. 

458. We, in common with you and all animals, possess an inflnites^i- 
mal portion of this power, varying in degree in different classes and in 


;;■ Google 


IM THE SPIRIT WORLD. y5 

different indiTiduala. When jou raise your arm, as in tlie act of lifting 
or moving a body, you direct by the force of your will-power galvanic 
currents on the muscles required to perform the function. The muscles 
acting as levers, through the stimulus of the subtle element, act and react 
on the more solid parts, the bones, and thus is the object laid hold of and 
moved, and still you do not come into direct contact with the object. Now, 
this is called a very aimple operation, and so it would appear, bat who under- 
stands it ? Although advanced spirits are much more conversant with the 
forces operating in nature than the most intelleotually developed mau in 
the form, still thej do not, nor can they ever, as long as eternity rolls on, 
understand the hidden sphere of cause. The operation of the will it is 
impossible to understand. Now, as I have said, we are not possessed of 
physical bodies ; still we can mate the imponderable elements subserve our 
purposes by acting as bones, nerves and muscles 

459. Touching our peregrinations and voyages t discovery, about which 
so much has been said by spirits as well as mortals I will say that it is a 
fallacy to suppose that every spint can visit nt will the phnets of the solar 
system, much less those of the more remote sj stems since I am certain 
that none but the residents of the "seienth ^pheie, r the angels of the 
"Supernal Heavens," have the power to db bo because tach planet, being 
an inhabited globe, hath its concentric or spiritual ^ipheres, through all 
of which in order to reach it a spirit must pass It is obvious, therefore, 
according to the immutable law of progiLSSion that the transit of a spirit 
to a distant planet would requiie its ad ptitiou to the highest sphere of 
that body. 

460. Having spoken of the angels ot tho Supernal Heavens," I will 
explain what is meant by this desjgnafion They are those pure and 
comparatively esaltcd beings who, htving advani^l beyond the highest 
sphere of the planet to which they belonged and nttained a very high 
state of moral and intellectual development, htive been admitted into that 
great and illimitable sphere of progression which lies outside of all other 
spheres, and in which the greatest conoenable degree of harmony leigns. 
It is composed of one grand hajmonnl society whose members are privi- 
leged to go wheresoever they will through the boun Hess empire of space. 
They are principally from the planets Tupiter and Saturn, and hold a much 
more distinguished rank in the intellectual m ral and social system than 
the inhabitants of earth. I have not leirned thit iny spirit from our 
planet has yet reached the Supernal Heaven 

461. It has been said that spirits hunger thirst and stand in need of 
repose. It is true that those states do pertain to spint life agreeably 
to the law of spiritual correspondences The grosser and more unde- 
veloped the spirit, the closer is th an 1 f.j between it and the physical 
states. 

462. Physical laws and substances are gro^s or esfernalizcd spiritual 

[looted by Google 


96 COMMLNICVTK^a WO-Vt HIE sriEIT WOKLD 

laws and things The moie refined ™iJ developed the spiut, the lesa it 
reqaires of gio^-s ihment Epiinel mtellectuil, and moril bem^s are 
nourished ind su&tained hy refiapd, intelkUual and moral Buiiiment. 
Their foid i'5 dernel frsm the " Trno of Knowledge, ' ind thejblake their 
thirat at the crystal streams which continually flow from the ineshaustible 
foiintain of God's wisdom, and love. The lowest undeveloped sph'it lives 
on oon]para.tively reflued aliment to that on which mortals subsist. It con- 
sists of the move refined elements of spiritual fruits and vegetables. The 
spirit's need of rest depends on its particular degree of development, 
diminishing in proportion to its advancement from the material plane. 

463. Thougt the principles embodied in our teachings and philosophy 
may be i-egarded, by the majority of mankind, as strange and incompre- 
hensible, they are, nevertheless, no more so than the principles of natural 
science would be to the unlettered mind. As the ability to compre- 
hend the principles on which the natural sciences arc baaed increases with 
the expansion of the intellectual faculties, in like manner is the power of 
perceiving spiritual things and relations increased by the development of 
the interior or spiritual faculties. 

464. As there are no words in the human language in which spiritual 
ideas may be embodied so as to convey their literal and exact signification, 
we ore obliged ofttimes to have recourse to the use of analogisms and me- 
taphorical modes of expression. In our communion with you we have to 
comply with the peculiar structure and rules of your language; but the 
genius of our language is such that we can impart more ideas to each other 

'in a single word than you can possibly convey in a hundred. 

465. I have thus given you a general outline of the leading facts con- 
nected with the destiny ofthra Ih d dthwy that 
man is a progressive being th t h p fi d t 1 (449) or- 
ganiaation, which, going wthhmtdth Im thr ngh 
which he may communicat w th tl bl w Id I 11 h Id that, 
under certain circurastanc th p t 1 ga t h th p w r of 
reflecting the rays of iigh tb dliablttl tl eye, 
as arc ccvlain gaseous bod 

466. I have attempted t h w y t tl t th p t te the 
spheres, being governed by t f5 ty t k t p t n n tb t I for 
which it lly 1 ntell t lly d pted h the first sphere is the 
abode of U th m t d gr d 1 p t d th t th ir advancement, how- 
ever slow tmb n thlssu u iward and upward" is 
the mott mbl d n I p t 1 h nn 

467. II d dthwy I th t the spirit is a Jinile 
being lik n th f m 1 th f f llhl -dA that as ho advances 
in knowledge, he grasps more of truth and drops more of error. I have 
attempted to show you that the spirit world is a counterpart of the natural 
world, and that we, no less than you, arc subject to surrounding conditions 


,v Google 


C03IMUNICATIONS TPOM TUE SPIHIT WOULD. 97 

and cii'cumstanoea. Spirits of congeniLl miada and opiDions are drawn 
toward eac^ other and to you, oa the principle that "like attracts like." 
In order to receive liigh mora] and intellectual comraimieations, it is essen- 
tially necessary that the medium and circle should he in affinity wJth each 
other, and with the spirits who are capable of gi\ mg such communications. 

468. BeaideB the topics adverted to, I will briefly call your attention to 
a few of the most prominent among the beneficial results which will flow 
from spiritual intercommunion. It will settle the important question, "If 
a man. die, shaU Tie live again f" It will reduce the foot of the immov- 
tality of the human spirit to a certainty, so that the world'a knowledge of 
the fact will not be the result of a hlind faith, but a positive philosophy. 
It will show the relation existing between mind and matter It will make 
men thinking and rational bemi^'! It will establish a holy and most de 
lightfu! intercourse between the jnhibifants of the terrestrial world and 
their depirted spirit friends It will espand and liberalize the mind lar 
beyond jour present conceptions It will fiiteinize and unite all the 
members of the human fimily m an cvcthsting bond of spiutual union 
and hirmonnl brothcihood It will e'tahhsh the pnnciplea of love to 
0-od and youi fellows It will do iwiy with sectamn bigotry It will 
show that mxny of thi, so calkd religious teiching? are but impositions 
on the eiedulitj of mankind, bein^ founded on the grossest absuiditics 
and palpable ij,noiance of the niture of thing'* 

469 It will gi^e min higher ^nd infinitely more exalted views ot Ttfl 
and brmg him into closer communion with the Author of his being. It 
will do away completely with the sting of death, and rob the grave of it.? 
terrors. It will teach the eternal progression of the soul, and show that 
the time is fast approaching when the moral condition of the race is to be 
vastly improved ; when error is to bo abolished, and truth is to take its 
place; when the glory of the Lord is to be revealed, and all flesh shall see 
it together 1 In fine, it will be a help tii the soul in the hour of its adver- 
sity, and enable it to bear up under affliction with noble and heroie for- 
titude; and when about to launch its harqne on the river of eternal life for 
the fair and beautiful land of promise, it will be its stay and sheet-anchor. 
Your father, Robest Haee. 

Communication from a Spirit Son of the Author. 

1 have in the spirit world two sons, one of whom died, thirteen months 
old, in 1813 ; the other, five months old, in 1825. Both have been to 
communicate with me. I subjoin a letter received from the younger ; 

470. "3f>/ Dear Fatlier : — I made a very brief communication to you 
through the medium of Mr. Gordon, which was my flrat successful effort to 
control the human organism. It has been long known to me that spirits could 
manifest themselves to mortals; and that they have always held com- 
munion with their brethren in the flesh, is not new to me. The law is as 


;;■ Google 


tig t t dlk t Ip HI 


11 d f ever. But so 


t L b d tU th p tt 


f th m , and to suoh 


t t h m m tal b I 


d by h ailed spiritual 


b. til t pt mpaij t ly f 


t p ts have failed 


th ttempfa t ( th m ] to th 


1 dp n of mankind 


h It 1 f tl TO t p rt b 


w t g to the ibove 


d wh h h g t f m 


f 1 t respecting his 


t al 1 till 1 t th th w 


Id Th Its mlized of our 


th hild t, d t th mm 


w th pir ta, have bten 


h 1 ghly f d th Ih th 


m f t nife brethren, 


t his t b in 


ta f th m to commune 


th til d piit a f 1 


4 1 BI y J mj 1 p t h 


1 [ d I oDtcitd the 


ht b 1 f th 11 t— jlttl hild yt yhppyone My 


t d d 1 th p dly ed d 


h th 1- t little did I 


w f m I 1 p f my 1 


t 1 d t , that I have 


eah dth h Ih mm 


J f y tl 1 fe, yet I know 


f m b t d i t th 1 1 f m t t the loser by my 

pmt btt tth ptltt I! t tne, measurably 

obtained amce then that knowledge ot extenoi nature whiok I should have 
acquired in the flesh, on the globe which gave me birth, as an independ- 
ent, individualized esistenoe. 

473 " My life here has been a charmed one; enrapturing scenes of 
beauty be ng constantly p esented to v ew 1 ke the ver vary ng landscapes 
leli eated on the ea vas by a sk Iful nrt st Now s seen a beautiful 
f, 1 ry lake on whose tr n lu ent bosom floats the gracef 1 swan, bending 
1 a fl lit e k as f pr uHv con e ous of h s su-pas n^ beauty; and 

n n amoii;, the 1 1 s ot tl ^ lake wh h a^ pear 1 ke gems placed on a 
nlrov shoot tnylaipe freighted w th ngel k Idren. Then 

s piesented a bolder \ ew of t wer ng mounta ns ind wide-estended 
jl ns w th the aooompanj ng cl anetpr sties f h U and d 11. 

4''3 In answer to a [uest on wh ct would atuially s ggest itself to 
your mind, respecting the means by which I have become acquainted with 
that kaowledgo of the external world which I should have gained in it, I 
would say it has been acquired by frequent visits to the earth, I have 
been accustomed to accompany you, father, in your daily walks, and to 
study, through you and mother, those elementary lessons which ate so 
essential to the full development of the spirit. Your son Theodore, though 
nearly forgotten by you, has not been far distant. The time is fast ap- 
proaching, and is near at hand, when man's spiritual nature and destiny 
will be much more fully comprehended by the world. Then spirit mani- 
festations and spiiit intercourse will be considered as natural as for the 
sun to rise in the eastern heavens. Spirits highly elevated in love and 
wisdom would not descend from their exalted position except to (each, for 


;;■ Google 


COMMUNICATIO.IS FROM THE SPiaiT WORLD. 99 

their attractions are upwarJ, but tbcir mission is f t t tl LI 

them, from whith they derive much, happiness. T k f th h w 

much pleasure it gives yoit to impart knowledge t th rs H w m h 
greater then is our enjoyment, whose ininds are int ^ely d u pt bl 

of real joys I Your spiritual mission on earth has ju, t begi d w 

endeavouring to impress your mind with the saorel mp t n f t f 1 
filment. Give unto others that we give unto yo d y h 11 
abundantly. I occupy a place which has not yet b [ ' * y 

perception. Prepare yourself, my dear father, f t i h 1 

glorious imfoldjngs, by fiist gaining that knowledg wh h p t t th 
lower degrees, and you. will therehy become elevated to the higher spiritual 
planes, and increaf,e your knowledge of things celestial, and gi'eatly develop 
and enlarge your sphere of usefulness. THEODoaE." 


Additional Communications fi-om Spirits wlw died while Infants. 

474. The brother of a medium reported himself by spelling out his 
name in full — Dewitt Matthias. He had departed this life at the age of 
thirteen months. I inquired if he had taught himself to spell, I was 
instructed, was his answer. 

475. Whilo I was in a state of extreme unbelief, Dewitt's mother told 
me that her son, who died when aged only thirteen months, had commu- 
nicated with her; and said that Lis stature had grown with his age, 
now sixteen years. This statement I mentioned as an exemplification of 
credulity, little thinking that this wonder would be realized by the exist- 
ence of my spirit children being made evident to me by such communica- 
tions as that from Theodore, above given. 

476. The eldest child of my parents died an infant, yet my elder bro- 
ther, Charles, in his account of hia spiritual birth, mentions that this bro- 
ther eame as a full-grown spirit to greet his translation to the spirit world. 

Gmnmunication from, a very young Spirit child to its Parents. 

477. The following communications have been received from a spirit 
child, as I understand, of about six years old. It will be perceived that 
it was assisted by its grandmother. They have been handed to me by 
the child's father, Mr, George Helmiek, in whose sincerity I have great 
confidence. 

478. The following message, says Mr. Helmick, came through the 
medium of Miss Irish, some eight months since, on an occasion when 
there were some twelve or fifteen persons present, nearly all of whom 
were entire strangers to me and my wife, who was also present. We had 
never seen Miss Irish before, and wo know that she had no knowledge of 
us in any respect. 


,v Google 


100 

479. Tic ffMl tHat we Lad a child in the spirit world was no! known to 
any present but nijself and wife. 

480. " Father, do joii not, kind father, feel my soft and gentle touch 
upon your brow?* Can you not feel my presence, as grandmamma and I, 
with care, enfold you in our embrace ? 

" Mother, genfJe, loving mother, do you not feel my angel kiss, as I im- 
print it upon your cheek ? 

" Father, mother, I left yon before earth's errors had a chance to take 
root within my young and tender mind. 

481. " Then, loTing parents, think of me as you do of a gentle moon- 
beam, which struggles to bless earth with its presence but for a moment, 
and then softly acd sweetly returns to heaven again. 

" Spirit Child." 


The following message was received through Mrs. Gourlay on the 27th 
of October last, by the aid of a disk and alphabet as arranged by Dr. 
Hare: 

482. " Dear and loving mother, grandma will help mo to write to you. 

483. " A calm and holy atmosphere pervades this little company, and 
lovely forma are surrounding each earth friend. thou great God of 
goodness ! to thee our hearts are r^sed in thanks^ving for this privilege 
of communion with our friends on earth. Gratitude should fill the hearts 
of all present. Little children are sporting in this atmosphere of love 
like gentle moonbeams, kissing with a gentle touch the brows of their lov- 
ing parents. 

484. " Oh ! why should you weep for those who have gone before ? 
Eather raourn those who are debarred the joya of our celestial homes, 
where the weary spirit finds rest from the toils of earth, where all is joy 
evermore. 

485. " Gentle mother, your little seraph-boy is not (Jcarf, but livetk. 
In his uncontaminated love, find comfort for the ills of life. 

486. " Dear father, it was my spirit hand which was placed on thy 
brow, which you just felt. 

487. "I left earth pure. In this purity I come to my dear parents. 
Accept my love, and give me jours in return. 

"Little Walteh." 

Mn. ffelmict. 

''■ I Jinil roHiBrkea to the oorapunj during tte evening (.hat I fait a spirit touoliing my 
forehend. I had often before that time felt a geoiilo toiieli upon my foteliead or brow, 
as If touched bj a fcatlier, hut I illd not know its cause, and thia waa the first intimntion. 


;;■ Google 


COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE i 


Of Spii-itual J}irth. 
488 Having obtimed from seveial of my most valued Bpiiit fnenda or 
relatives, niiiittiTes of their tranilitua trim this spHere to the world of 
spinta, it appeirs fnm their concurrpnt ttsfimcny, that oa the deith of 
tie body, the soul finds itfell soon aiterward awaking from a piofnund 
sleep, — but so much moie like dreaming thju being iwake, is for a shiit 
time to create a doubt whether it bo not dioaming Meanwhile, biight 
fchadowy form^ become raoio -md mnre distinguishable, and the body 
which it has loft bung percenei apart on its bed, oi m ^^hate^er pi-sition 
its dejth ooouired, the onviction. is induce! that another state of csi^t- 
ence has been attainel Aa the foira", at hiot shadowy, become distinct, 
they art usually found to be those of tho ncareat or dcaiest previously de 
parted fi lends These meet the nascent spuit with eveiy josiiblo mam 
featation of affection, while the moat ecstatic emotions are awakened. 

489. Forthwith the spirit is conducted to his celestial ahode : of which 
the elevation is greater as the morality of the individual concerned is 
higher. 

Narrative given Jiy Spirits of tJteir translation fo i/ie Spirit World, (lie 
abode of human souls in a future state 

490. The following narrative is from an excellent spirit philanthropist, 
who, thoiigh a stranger to me in this world, introduced himself to me at 
the session of a small circle, by the communication alleged to be intended 
for me, which has already been quoted. (147.) 

491. He has since reported himself as the author of those sentiments, 
and has held many oonvorsatlons with me.f 

'^ Apailieasia from apo, among, and theot, god, liaving been uscti to signiiy ti-an!!a^ 
ticin to D pliico among gods, migLt not apo-migeloeis bo nsed to signify translation to a 
place among angala, from apo, among, and angelcs, an angel? 

t " Praise vndeierved is latire in disgaiae." 

This being mauifeatly true, it follows tbat whatever applause maybe boskpired npon an 
author by his apiritnal advisors, aa be may consider tham, will l>o so inverted in tho mind's 
eye of aa nnbeliever as to bare all tbe efficacy of satire. Undor tbese circumsUinccs I 
abonld be terribly satirized were I bare to give the wbola of a comranDioatJou mode by 
this benevolent pbilanthropic spirit, of whicli the following is a part. Were I to give liis 
senlimenta in full, it wonld be rather from tbe motive ot sliowitig how vivacious is the inte- 
rest taken in the progress of Spiritualism by eertaia worthies of the spirit world, and to 
give another exemplification of the ardour of the spirit miail after emerging from its 
mundane tenement. Bnt tho miun motive for pnblisbing so much of tho oommunlcation 
in quesHon as subjoined, is the oonfitmation thus afforded of the account previously given 

This account ivaa also conBrroed by independent oommuniootions from two other sources, 


, Google 


102 COMMUNICATIONS FKOM THE SHRIT WORLD. 

492. Subsequently to an address inado by me a,t Ei-aaklin Hall, ho ex- 
pressed himself as follows : " Do not keep your light under a busLel. I 
was present and heard you speak last night. I wisli you to say more about 
youv personal experience. That would weigh with the community at large." 
I excused my course hy answering, that I wished ray experience to he riper 
before Bubmitting it to tho community. 

JVarrative of his Spiritual Birth, hy W. TP , a most benevohnt Spirit 

of the Fifth Sphere. 

493. "Did you ever have a most delightful dream in wliich you saw 
your near and dear friends about you, all seeming happy and contented 
with their condition ? If you have, then you can form an imperfect idea 
of my state when I awolie to the reality of the change which opened upon 
my entranced sight on being ushered into tlie spheres. I had been long 
sick, and was subject to periods of uneonsciousnesa. Therefore I did not 
soon perceive tte change to be real. I felt almost too much happiness for 
my spirit to bear. 

" On looking around, I perceived my mother, with outstretched arms, 
ready to receive her welcome son to the mansion prepared for him. 

494. "Did I still dream? I asked: no! it was a blessed reality; all 
pain had fied, and my spirit rejoiced iu new tealtb. I could hardly con- 
tain myself from expressing my gratitude to God in verbal ejaculations. 
But I soon found that I had a much more delightful mode of expression. 
Each countenance beamed with love and intelligence, and the spirits could 
interpret my thoughts as readily as mortals can read a well-printed book. 

495. "One spirit, on whose countenance I could read volumes, ap- 

Opocanoftnongh, the Indian eliio 
Snowing tie names, deaoribed BC 

Part Ufa ZellsrfroM Mrs. Gourlay to ike Author. 

PHiLiDELPHii, Notembcr 14, 1854. 

" My Bear Sir : Having finished reading jonr letter, I fell a. rarj powerful influanoa 
indicating tlie prosanee of spirits. Aooordinglj, seating myself at lie losliunieQt, [Plato 1. 
Pig. 2,] the following communication was rapidly given : 

"'My dear sister, say to our beloTad friend and brother that I was present at his lec- 
tures iu Boston, and was mucli pleased tc bear him speal: bo nobly osd feaFlessly in the 
holy cause of Spintualisa. aa«fie»»a«* 

'"There was a great asBemblaga of elevated spirits convened at our friend's lectures in 
Boston. Among those whom I particularly recognised were B. Franilin, W. B. Chan- 
ning, J. Q. Adams, H. Kirlt White, Byron, Bums, Moore, Dr. Physiok, Dr. Euah, Dr. 
Chalmers, and s. host of otiiers. His chief supporters vera his father and mother, his 
loving sisiCE Martha and lirotiior Charles, and his friend Blodgett, Walter Gom^lay, and 
myself. W. W.' 

"My door friend: The abore is the commnniealion which I received, verlalim, and 
which you wUl ploaso accept for what it is worth. I believe it came from the soiirco 
whence it purports to have emanated. I quesdoned W. W. regarding tho unturo of the 
marks of approbaUon. His reply was, 'We rapped several times.'" 


, Google 


COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE SPIRIT WORLD. 103 

proached, and taking me by the hand said, 'Welcome, dear brother, to 
this sinless world, where your progression is sure; no obstacles shall im- 
pede your footsteps ; the conditions of time are removed ; jour feet shall 
fail not in the race of progress. Otiitard and Upward is our motto.' 

495. " With willing heart I followed my guide. ETery step taken led 
me up toward the great Source of light and truth, I never wearied in. 
my journey. Bright and sparkling wafers flowed at my feet, and living 
flowers sprang np before me. Eacli new object gave me courage to pro- 
ceed. Old familiar faces met my gaze at every footstep, and cherub forms 
flitted past me. Golden cloads rested over the scene, and all nature was 
refulgent with light and animation. Huge oaks tossed their giant branches 
to the pure breezes of heaven, and lofty pines bowed their heads in love 
and adoration. The little birds sent forth their notes of praise, while the 
air was laden with the perfume of flowers. Being fond of the beauties of 
nature while on earth, I enjoyed this scene much. 

497- "1 was rejoioed to see so many of my friends present. Each vied 
with the other to give me the most cordial welcome. 

498. "I soon perceived that I was near my journey's end, for I had 
reached the fifth sphere of spiritual progression. My guide pointed out to 
my view the mansion which I was to occupy. 

496. " I was told that I could return to earth, when I was so inclined. 
Inclination often draws me thither. So long as a spirit has friends on 
earth, lie will visit them ; but when they join him, he loses his attach- 
ment for the rudimental sphere, and seldom thereafter leaves his celestial 
abode. 

500. " My habitation consists of suites of rooms, mMt beautifully orna- 
mented with paintings and statues and the most elegant productions of 
spirit art. Each individual can have his dweUing to suit huovm par- 
ticular taste or fancy. The viore refined and elevated the spint, ilie more 
refined and heautiftd is i!te Jiouse or Iwme that he inhabits. 

501. "The occupations of the higher spirits are of a more intellectual 
character than the highest on eatth. 

502. " Our spheres are types of yours ; but we do not have to provide 
for the casket which contains the spiritual jewel." 


SPIEITUAL BIRTH OF MAMA. 

503, Ir the reader will turn to my narrative, 192 to 200, he will learn 
under what circumstances I became acquainted with Maria, the being 
of whose spiritual birth it will, in the nest place, be my object to give her, 
own account. 

504. 5Iy aequaintanee with this truly angelic creature has awaliencdi 


;;■ Google 


104 COJMMDSICATrONS FROM THB SPIEIX WORLD. 

in me lively friendship and esteem. These sentiments have been induced 
by her devotioa to her parents, her affeetioiiato recollection of her chil- 
dren, and graoions demeanour to others. 

Tlte Bpirit Maria's Narrative, as given ilirough the Mediumship of Mrs. 
M. B. Gourlay. 

505. Dear Father: I promised to give you an account of my entrance 
into, and life in the spheres. As I said to you on a former oeeasion, I 
felt like one just awaJiiug from a deep sleep induced hy the deadening 
influence of an opiate. It was some timo before I could collect my scattered 
senses. On partially regaining lay consciousness, I recollected having been 
sick, and h x t f my f nd for my restoration to health; and I 
wondered at tl d 1 n h g n my feelings. Those racking pains I 
esperienc d hid Ufld nllflta newness of life which was truly 
delightful Ind t n t and shad wy forms flitted before me. On closely 
inspecting th m I p d tl at they were my departed friends. It was 
then that I fully liz d th hang n my condition. My first and greatest 
concern was for those who seemed so inconsolable at my loss, and for whom 
I still entertained the most devoted love and affection. My vision becom- 
ing gradually clearer, I perceived, among the group, my brother WiUiam 
ready to receive me. He was clothed in a garment of living light, and 
closely resembles you, dear father, in form and features. He addressed 
me in the following language; — "Welcome, thrice welcome, my beloved 
sister, to the re^ons of immortality ! I liave been your guardian angel 
through life, and have looked forward with pleasure to this happy re- 
union." I was now informed hy him that I must leave my treasures on 
earth. This gave me some uneasiness, but being assured that I should 
visit them again, I cheerfully accompanied him in his upward flight. 

506. Surprise and delight pervaded my existence whon I beheld 
those friends bound to rac by the ties of consanguinity ready to receive 
me and fold me to their hearts. 

507. Gliding swiftly upward, on gaining an elevation of some sixty 
miles from the earth's surface, we passed into the second sphere;* on 
entering which a tremor seized me, A moral darkness pervades the 
atmosphere, which renders it gloomy and uncomfortable in the extreme. 
The inhabitants are dark and dismal in their appearance, and are con- 
tinually tortured with the pangs of a guilty conscience. Here disorder 
and confusion reign supreme, each spirit vieing with the other in render- 
ing discord more discordant. We passed on rapidly, leaving the second 
; sphere and its undeveloped inhabitants behind. 

508. On approaching the third sphere, wo were met by a company of 
.angels from the seventh sphere, among whom I recognised my brothers 

* First spiritual fphcre. 


, Google 


COMMDXICATIONS FROM THE SPiail \^ F i 3'T' 

who died in infency. They had attained the stature of m a I n w ttit 
that law of afSnity which hinds ua so closely together, diawmg nn. toward 
them, and I was enabled at once to single them out frim the multitude 
which accompanied them. With smiles they gceetel me, saymj, \\ ti 
come, dear sbter; another link is added to the hjiu of love nhi ii 
hinda us together. One by one they shall he removel tro n cii h till the 
chain is completed here." 

509. We next entered the thii-d sphere, where comparative Drder 
reigns. There I perceived many spirits intently listening to * te. cher, 
whose tlieme was the subject of progression. 

510. Anxiously desiriag to reach my destiny we quickly passe 1 to 
the fourth sphere. How different the scene! every thing lookel 1 right 
and beautiful to my enraptured sight. It seemed like aa enohanted liud 
Thousands of flowers scented the air with their odorif r us perfume lad 
rapturous strains of music thrill dm th 1 1 ht 1 "R now approichL 1 
a beautiful temple devoted to th ce f th h m y f sounds In it 
music in all its departments is ta ht f th 11 you hear the 
master spirits of song, who lived g -th tt ng then lastru 
menta to harmony, your senses w Id b m 1 Music bting 
conceived iu heaven, is sent forth t th t 1 te m and attract him 
to our great and beneficent Fatl I p d th t the fourth sphere 
was to be my abiding-place for th j t 

511. Oa niy return to the se d pi t look d mewhat different 
to me, for, haviag lost my fear, I could more closely inspect the place aad 
its iEhabltants. The country, as far as my vision could penetrate, seemed 
like a vast desert, without a green spot to relieve the eye. Its denizens 
are seen straggling here and there, with no fixed object in view. All are 
seeking to minister to their perverted tastes. Some are holding forth in 
loud tones, and painting in fiilse and gaudy colours the joy of their home; 
others, who occupied high stations on earth, hang their heads in confusion, 
and would fain hide themselves from view; but they are taunted with 
rude jests, and told that their "pride of position will avail them nothing 
here." One heai-t-sickeniag feature of this place is the absence of ohil- ', 
dren. No purity can exist where such evils abound. " The loud laugh, 
which bespeaks the vacant mind," is heard pealing forth in derision, as the 
teachers from the higher spheres approach the motley group. Some, in 
whom the work of regeneration has commenced, are seea ascending the 
spiral stairway of progress which leads to the third sphere. 

512. The beauty of the third sphere far transcends that of earth. The 
scenery is endlessly diversified with spiritual objects, corresponding to 
things of your planet. Mountaias aad valleys, hills and dales, rivers and 
lakes, and trees and plants, lend their enchantment to the scene. The 
inhabitants of this sphere are anxious for instruction- The teachers from 
the higher degrees are listened to with profound respect and atteation. 


;;■ Google 


100 COMJIURICATION'S FK05I TOE SPIRIT WORLD. 

513. I saw many persons wiiom I knew in the riidimental stato. I mot 
a spirit jeaterdaj whom I have seen in your company befoi'e he left the 
form.* I felt attracted ta him. On approaching him, he smilingly said, 
" Why do you take such an interest in me, fair being f I know you not." 
" True," I replied, " but I saw yoa in ray fetlier'a company before you left 
tkeearth, and was present once when my brother gave yoaacommnnieation, 
which, by the way, you received with much incredulity; therefore, I feel 
constrained to speak to you." He thanked me, saying, " I never believed 
in the immortality of the soul; consequently, it was not strange that I 
should doubt the spirits." "Your skepticism," I replied, "was honest; 
tkerefore you will rise much sooner in the scale of progression. A sincere 
'uubelief is better than false professions." Here I left him, and followed 
a multitude who were just entering a magnificent temple, where a teacher 
was fo address them. This structure is immensely large and exquisitely 
symmeti-ieal in its proportions. Many stately columns support its roof, 
each surmounted by a cap of chaste design. The materia! of this temple 
is similar in appearance to alabaster, but transparent. The seats are semi- 
circular, forming an amphitheatre, in the centre of which stood the speaker, 
Channing. With uplifted hands he invoked God's blessing on all man- 
kind. With what breathless attention all listened to the glowing words 
of eloijuecce which fell from his lips ! This is the true worship of tho 
soul. His test was : " The light that is within you." He dwelt at some 
length oil the importance of- self-elevation, as a means of progressing 
othei-s. He spoke of the moral bond of union which binds the race toge- 
ther. "When one individual," said he, "is degraded, all must suffer." 
His discourse abounded with clear and energetic thought. 

514. As we passed from this temple, I met my friend of yesterday. 
He remarked that he had learned much from the speaker who had just 
addressed us. He said that his mind, before entering the spheres, had 
been much troubled about the future, although light had begun to dawn 
on his mental honzon. "Hope," said be, "with her cheering counte- 
nance, had almost deserted me, and the world appeared like a dreary wil- 
derness. Sick and disheartened, I laid me down to recruit my exhausted 
energies. An unconscious period intervened, and then burst on my en- 
raptured vision the glorious morning of the resurrection in all its loveli- 
ness ; and with it came a bright messenger of light to bear me onwai-d 
and upward to the boundless regions of progressive wisdom, where my 


• Ttia spirit, I hava aseertnioetl, waa the late Mr. McDhsnnj, treasurer to tlie Atho- 
Damm, who died in August, 185*. I took tho more interest in this aa ho was mj olaiEmate, 
and iras pi'oaent at aome of the investigadons which led to my conversion. X tflok leave 
of him one eveniDg in July, lS5i, after a waUt in Walnut atreeL He then appeared fo 
he Eflarly a convert lo Spiritnaliam, though ho did not doem it pradont to acknowledga 
hl3 opinions publloly. His remarks coincided with those nseribed to him hj the tnilj 
angelio Maria. Within the last month Maria brought him 


, Google 


THE SPIRIT "WORLD. 107 

m study the wondrous works of Al- 

mg 

ery is characterized by still more 

of a greener green, and the flowera 

m g he birds sing still more sweetly. 

S Here you perceive the lily with its 

m tam elicately tiDted with the fainteat 

g sc. Hero you observe the myrtle, 

m SB flower, which speaks of a deathless 

A which spirits alone can fully com-- 

T ai hat different from those oa earth. 

T nk is very straight, and mni up tn 

mm its top ii surmounted by tufta of 

be by its side stands one of very dif- 

ranches, lite the graceful willow, 

urting one to repose beneath tbcir 

g te H ng streams, murmuring eascades, 

d g h tm ding beneath their load of golden 

d the arts and sciences. 

6 N ool on earth ri&e up before your 

m 3 of instmction differ widely from 

m eh as thoy are far more beautiful. 

W he spirit or substance of each sub- 

se mind at onco perceives its internal 

m g most difficult problems. 

L m ed to the teachers from the seventh 

sphere. See the multitude throngmg its portals. Before we enter, let us 
glanoe at its exterior. It is circular in form, and beautiful in its architec- 
tural design. Its spiral columns are entwined with the richest flowers, 
which yield a delioious fragrance. As you enter this temple, its fretted 
vaults resound with the soft harmonious symphonies of spirit voices. In 
the midst of the group stands the teacher, Melancthon, who suffered in the 
cause of religious freedom. His countenance is mild and angelic, but he 
still retains that fearless spirit which characterized him on earth. 

518. Here comes a band of beautiful children carrying wreaths of 
flowers in their hands. They are singing, and they lead by the hand a 
lovely child just escaped from earth. How happy it seems I It is quite 
unconscious of the change in its condition. 

519, Let us now wend our way to the fifth sphere. This state is in a 
still greater degree heavenly. As far as the eye can reach are seen lovely 
villas, magnificent temples, forest-crowned hills, and gently undulating 
plains. Let us go up this avenue, shaded with lofty sycamores : this is the 
residence of H. K. "White. How enchanting the spot! It is a low cot- 

n the midst of trees and flowers, which, by interlacing. 


;;■ Google 


108 COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE SPIRIT WORLD. 

form beautiful iirboura with arched entrances. The grounds about this 
dwelling are skilfully and tastefully laid out. The clematis and honey- 
suckle entwine their tendrils around the trellis-work of the door. Let us 
enter. Statues of the most exquisite finish fill the niohes ; couches and 
divans of various forms and singular devices grace the rooms, and car- 
pets of the softest testure and most brilliant dyes cover the floors. It is, 
indeed, the beau ideal of a poet's home. In this sphere dwell Cbanniiig, 
Ballou, Murray, the Wesleys, Byron, Burns, Moore, Shelley, Scott, and 
Hahnemann, the founder of your school, who is still engaged in the in- 
vestigation of scientific truths. I speak of those persons in particular, 
because I am personally acquainted with them, being attracted to them 
by a congeniality of feeling. 

520. The siKth state or sphere far transcends the most gorgeous picture 
of oriental splendour. So lovely are the scenes presented to the view there, 
that I cannot impress your mind with any thing like a just conception of 
them. / receive fay ideas of Hie fifth, sixth, and seventh spheres from 
&ie spirits who dwell therein, having never visited them, in person. What 
a magnificent panorama is there presented to the fpitit s gize ' There are 
colossal temples, and "houses not made with hands eternal in tho hea- 
vens." As far as the vision can extend may be seen cities and pakceg, 
whose lofty domes sparkle like diamonls in the sunbeams of he-nen; 
oceans and seas with which yours are mere lak s in Lomjari on phcid 
lakes and noble rivers winding the r interminable wiy thiough \illeys 
clothed with perpetual verdure. 

521. There are gardens there of inconceivable beauty, filled with the 
choicest and most aromatic herbs and flowers, and birds with every con- 
ceivable variety of plumage. The parks are of great magnitude, and 
abound with the most beautiful animals. The swift antelope, the wild 
gazelle, and the gi-aceful deer are seen ranging over the flowery plains. 
There the lion and the lamb lie down together in peaceful innocence. 
There are congregated millions of spirits, who are associated together 
like a harmonious and happy family. The vales are vocal with celestial 
melody, and the air is redolent with the perfume of flowers. 

522. How Biall I describe to you the transcendent glory of the se- 
venth sphere ? Let us contemplate it. In it all the beauties and joys 
of the lower degrees are combined, but in a much more refined and sub- 
limated form. There dwell the spirits of the just made more perfect. 
Innumerable companies of children, which constitute the infant army of 
heaven, are sieging in gladsome strains the love of Him who called them 
into being, causing the atmosphere to resound with harmonious shouts 
of joy. There dwells Jesus of Naaareth, the great moral reformer, and 
" Joha the beloved." There reside the apostles, prophets, and martyrs 
of oldea time. There live Confucius, Seneca, Plato, Socrates, and Solon, 
with all the pbilosephera of ancient Greece and Eome. 


,v Google 


COMMUNICATIONS FKOM THE SPIRIT WORLD. 109 

523. That spliere is illumined ty tlie refulgent beams of lieaven'a 
great central sud, io whose genial warmth and golden flood of living light 
spirifa find life eternal. 

My Siiler's account of Tier Spiritual Birth, or Translation to the Spirit 
World. 

524. J}ear broths: The langof^ of mortals is ina,deqttate to convey 
to jour mind a tenth part of the joy that I esperieneed when liberated 
from the physical hodj. You remember well the hour when the summons 
came. You did not espoct me to depart so soon. The mutual relation- 
ship which had existed between my body and spirit being dissolved, I 
found myself still a living, thinking, and intelligent being, and in a world 
of tangible and eternal realities. 

525. When the last act in the drama of life was finished, and as soon 
as I had emerged from the pleasing reverie which succeeded the moment 
of dissolution, I found my room filled with bright visitants from the world 
of spirits, and my ears were delighted with the sweetest melodies. I now 
felt that the great secret was about to be disclosed, and I began to realize 
that I had iudeed passed from, death unto life. 

526. Dazzled by the esoeeding bnlliancy of the light which emanated 
from the pure beings who surrounded me, I began to distrust my senses, 
and looked about to assure myself that I was not in a dream or trance, I 
was soon startled from my musing by a gentle puU at my garment, and 
on turning round to discover the cause, I instantly recognised my beloved 
father. Oh I imagine my feelings at that joyful moment ; no words can 
describe them. I now felt a strong desire to leave earth. Father per- 
ceiving this, placed his hand in mine, and said, " My daughter, the battle 
is fought, the victory is won; follow me." He now led me forth into open 
space. We were immediately encircled by a magnificent halo of light, 
and strains of heavenly music floated on the circumambient air. Ilere a 
scene of glory was revealed to me whicli human imagination is unable to 
conceive. As we penetrated the clear blue depths of ether, myriads of 
angelic beings crossed our path, and many greeted mo with words of 
welcome. 

527. Having passed beyond earth's sphere, uew and more glorious 
scenes burst upon my enraptured vision, and they increased in beauty at 
each successive stage of our journey. I felt that a great change had taken 
place in my condition, for the most inten'io sensations of pleasure pervaded 
my soul. Father watched my emotions with deep interest, and was de- 
lighted with the startling and happy effect produced on my mind. We 
passed quickly through the different stages of our progress, till we arrived 
at the fifth spiritual sphere, which is my present home. I am often with 
my friends on earth, and would gladly influence them, and prove my 
identity to them, if they would render themselves receptive to my power. 


;;■ Google 


110 COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE SPIRIT WORLD. 


528. My present Lome, in point of beauty, far excels any scene ever 
■(ritnessed by mortal eye. The interior of nature is kid open to tlie spirit's 
perception, and the hidden treasures of earth are exposed to its yiew. 
When we desire to bo with, our friends on eartb, we have only to will it, 
and our desire is instantly gratified. Wo can visit the spheres below, but 
not those above ns until we are prepared for admission into them by a 
gradnal process of development. 

529. Tlio first spiritual sphere is the abode of those spirits whose desires 
are low and sonsuous ; they pursue those pleasures which are most con- 
genial to ttcir unrefined ant! grovelling natures ; but as their moral facul- 
ties become strengthened, tiiey lose their taste for debasing pursuits, and 
rise in the scale of being. The brightness of the halo which envelopes 
t!ie spirit is iacreased in proportion to its increase of moral and intellectual 
greatness. 

530. Dear Itobert, I have looked forward with great pleasure to tie 
time when I might be enabled to commune with jou. 

531. All knowledge gained by mortals wil! be of advantage to them in 
the spheres. 

532. Each individual in the spirit world is judged and suffers accord- 
ing to the deeds done in the body. There is no possible escape from the 
legitimate consequences of evil actions. 'The book of God's judgment is 
the record made on the tablets of the mind, and it may be read by all. 
The hypocrite can remain hypocrite no longer, as bo will inevitably 
appear in bis true colom-s; and in this fact, in part, shall his punishment 
consist. 

533. I would say a few words to you concerning (he condition of infants. 
The infant Spirit ascends directly to the seventh sphere, and is given in 
charge of a guardian spirit, by whom it is cared for and instructed in those 
things which most serve to develope its intellectual powers. It is per- 
mitted occasionally to visit its parents who may be in lower spheres, and 
to descend even to earth with its guardian angel, who often communicates 

534. Every individual, at death, is waited on by a congenial spirit, 
who escorts him to bis home ia that sphere to which his merit entitles 

535. The object of our present mission to the inbabifaats of the earth 
is to convince millions of douhting mortals of the fact of tbeii' immortality, 
and of the glorious destiny which awaits them beyond the limits of the 

536. It ia thought by many of our brothers in the flesh that we will 
impart to them all the knowledge that we possess re.^pecting the mysteries 
of the spheres; but on this point let them be undeceived, for it is utterly 
impossible for them to comprehend all in their present mdiraental state. 
Our chief object is to assure them, by unmistakable signs, of the soul's 


,v Google 


COMMUNICATIONS UEOM THE sriRIT WOULD. Ill 

iminortality, and tlie conditions necessary to be observed bj tbeui in order 
to obtain a happy future esiatenco. 

537. Notwithstanding the truth of spirit manifestations and spirit 
teachings, tliere are many persons who will not readily perceive it; their 
minds are so much cramped and distorted by false teadiings, that many 
years shall have elapsed before there can he much improvement in them; 
of such it hath been said, " They would not believe though one should 
arise from the dead." 

538. My brother, I would say a word to you touching your duty in 
regard to the present dispensation. You occupy a prominent and import- 
ant place ID the dissemination of this most glorious gospel ; your mind 
lias ever been desirous of the truth ; a uniform consistency of conduct has 
marked your course thi-ough life : pursue, then, the even tenor of your way, 
and let love be the controlling principle of your motives and actions, and 
if reviled, revile not again, but bear all things nobly for the truth's sake, 
and great will be yoor reward. I would say, moreover, let your reason 
determine the value of our teachings. You are engrossed to some extent 
by the cares and perplesiliea of earth life ; therefore you cannot so fully 
realize the wondrous joys which await you in yonder peaceful heaven ! 

539. My brother, when the lamp of your earthly existence shall begin 
to burn dimly, and the objects of earth recede from your view, your spirit 
father and sister will be at hand to conduct you into the presence of those 
loved friends who are bound to you by the ties of consanguinity and 
sympathy. Maiitiia. 

Ml/ BrotJier's account of his Spiritual Birth. 

5i0. Daar irotker Robert: How long I remn.ined ia a state of un- 
consciousness, previous to my spiritual birth, is unknown to me; suffice 
it to say, when the vital cord which bound me to the physical body was 
parted, I esperienoed a full consciousness of my personality. I enjoyed 
p f tlr d mf mp Ik 1 w t d 1 f t gth 

d b y n y f p t t f th m t It d h t tool 

p f m d h ly Im p d d tl I y f my 1 

I w t h w 1 1 I w y b ly ly i th b d th t th 

t-u f fmytt flhd ymdlhll fj,t 

th t m m t f t t bl <!. I f It dd d 1 b bl 

f 1 m t 1 I phy 1 p w d my b dy wis m t b 

t f Uy d ymm t lly f -m d f'lct I b 1 Id myself ( f t d 
_ . . . ^ ^ 

1 td 


mm 


tl m I I p 


d t th t y tep w 1 I tc 


m 


! t th 1 


d my h 1 y t m w 1 !y 


Ik 


w th 1 1 WIS t 


ty y 1 1 w th 1 1 w po th 


y 


m d b m 1 


d my 1 I t t 1 ra 


wl 


11 1 tb f 


t d 11 1 th w 1 


ht Ij y p 1 1 1 t th 11 t h I 

[looted by Google 


tation f 


Ih LU 


f 
th 
y 
th 

11 

1 


h 
dth 
f t 
My 

t,l 


t tL 1 
k dm 
ph f 
fm tal 
m t 11 
d 81 t b 
tl th 
h g h 

gl 
mbl 
whil t 
I 1 

gl 1 
tf 1 1) 
f 1 


d f 
T?y 
t!i w 
t 
1 wh 
d th 
1 t 


p 8& 

d -r 
il bl 


1 

t 
d 

I 

tg 

t 
P 
I d 


progression." 

d the tegioDB 
where the bril- 
b iitiful spirits, 
kimg fountains ; 
Idea harps, and 


The epint 
541. H 
of perp t 
liant flow 
angelio I 
where h 


h 

P 


pok 

db 
wh 

t m 

1 
f 

1 
wh 
1 wth 

<« tl 
th h 


^her fl t 

respecti 
togothe 
anthem J 
of apac t 
Those c 1 


t tl 

\ 
h 

til 


t 
h w 
1 i 

h b 

L d 


way thither we 

d fro on their 

t Iked earnestly 

tl eir voices in 


P 
P 

il 1 

t Ih 

t f 


if I 
1 

d th 
Th 


th 
bl 


gh the realms 

pheres above. 

ption of finite 

to th t 1 


h 1 


whose m t is t th Iw 11 ^s f m d t m te a t th 

bereaved d fli tel f th t t 1 th b 1 f th dy d t 

whisper ttthw y Ihptthdp 1 

542. Mybth Imh piLtoj thptltlpf to 
open th d f th b gKt 1 gl t t & 1 J th t n n 
should 11 h m If h ppy b f d th w Ith bid t n t 
this adv fthdt hd g It wthttl mparat ly 
speaking h pp th d m t y t t pi ecjn t t 
that which iwaits the resurrected spirit in th b ut f I m n wh 

it shall fiiever bathe m the eternal sunlight f t E tb, 1 I 

not find w^rds to describe to you the m^nifl t t f H m f m 

whom all order, beauty, and harmony proee d 

543. I am surrounded by every thing th t n d light tl y pi 
the ear, and gratify the taste. I h.ive evi. y f 1 ty f t dj 11 th 
principles in the vast universe of matter, 

544. In the higher spiritual states pftp dt i^lty 
reign : no strife mars the harmony of the c 1 t 1 t 1 

545. My mission is to instruct spirits m the lower circles, and to 
raise them from thoir degraded condition. 

546. Every spirit follows those pursuits that are most congenial 

547. Every spirit has a sphere of utility, and finds his true position 
on entering the spheres. 

Brother, the years of yonr external life are drawing to a close. When 
j'our initial term is finished, you will enter upon an unending series of 
moral and jntelleetual developments; theo you will be fully compensated 
for ail that you have endured in the cause of truth on earth. Your pre- 
sent life, remember, is but the prelude to inofl'able joys in the world beyond 
tte grave. Thani God, your barque is not drifting rudderless and piIol> 


;;■ Google 


SPIEITS. 113 

less on tlie great ocean of time. No ! she is well-manned and equipped, 
and pursues her direct course, fearing neither Scjlla nor Charjbdis. 

Robert, jou have acted nobly and fearlessly in defending the great 
eauso of tumanitj. We are watching jour movements with great interest. 
Continue to devote your mental energies to the development of epicitnal 
feots, and we will aid you when conditions tavout. Farewell. 

C. W. H. 


COHVOCAWON OF SPIRITS. 


Sixty-fow Queries addressed to a Oonvorjition of WortMes from tlie 
Spirit World; also, the Sepli'es given, hi/ Htcm, and confirmed under 
conditions which no mortal could pervert. 

548. Having received many pages of communication, from my father, 
sister, brother, and certain other spirit friends, on the subject of the spirit 
world, and having been urged by him ind other inhabitants of that world 
to publish the information thus communicated, I represented, at a time 
when this honoured heing reported hts presence, that I felt a reluctance 
at publishing solely on the ■luthonty of my relations; and requested that 
certidn distinguished spirits, who, as I had been told, bad attended one of 
my lectures at Boston, should sanction a syoopsia of tho facts which I had 
learned respecting the spirit world. (409 to 5i7.) 

549. The propriety of my request being admitted, it was appointed that 
on Monday, the 18tb of Ecbmaiy, 1855, at nine o'clock, thei'e should he a 
convocation of some of the worthies in question at the dwelling of the 
excellent medium empJoyed. Accordingly, soon after my arrival there, at 
the appointed time, my father reported himself, and the following names 
were spelt out as being present ; 

George Washington, W. E. Channing, 

J. Q. Adams, H. K. White, 

Wm. H, Harrison, Isaac Newton, 

A. Jackson, Byron, 

Henry Clay, Martha Washington, 

Benjamin Franklin, Besides relatives and friends. 

550. The queries subjoined were then read succesBivcly, pausing, of 
course, for an answer to each in turn. 

551. The answers were given through an instrument analogous to that 
represented by Fig. 1, Plate 4, and described on the page opposite to the 
plate. 

552. Finally, after all the queries bad been answered agreeably to the 


,v Google 


114 CONVOCATION OP SPIRITS. 

TiBnal conditions, a oonflrmalion of the ■whole was given vnSn tfU condi- 
tions, as eaplained in the page opposite Plate 4. 

553. E«ljing on these conditions as competent to secure the issue 
against the control of the medium or that of any other mortal, the ques- 
tion was put, "Have all the answers been correctly oommumcated ?" In 
reply, the index moved so aa to point to the word "Yea," ^nd the follow- 
ing address was made at the same time : 

554. Friend, we have heard your questions, and se\cnlh ^(hlra that 
■wo have answered thorn as recorded by you. 

555. It is to he understood that all the subjoined mquiups were 
answered simply in the affirmative, escepting wheie a qnahfacd answer 
tBado more words necessary than tho word " Yea," by itstlf The queries 
having been previously reduced to writing, the answers weiewutten down 
fcy mo at once. 

556. (1.) Is it true that within a space lying bet-ween the earth and 
the lunar orbit there are seven coneenti'ic regions, denominated spheres, 
which maybe called the country of spirits; that this country has all 
the features of terrestrial scenery, but with a much greater beauty,, even in 
the third sphere, while tho beauty of the other foiir spheres is greater in 
pi-oportioa aa they are higher ? 

Am. Yas. 

557. .(2,) la it true that in those regions there are mountains, plains, 
rivers, lakes, fcrooka, rills, trees, flowers, birds, boasts, and every attribute 
of the most admired portions of this lower sphere ? 

Am. Yes. 

558. (3.) la it teue that, by the higher spirits, music, poetry, and all 
the sciences and fine arts, are highly and zealously cultivated, and that the 
pleasures of eoeiaJ intei-aourse are more highly enjoyed than upon earth? 

Am. Yea. 

659. i(4.) Aie the Bafratives of their translation to the spirit world, 
which I have received from my lister, brother, William Wiggins, and 
the spirit Maria, to be relied on as eoraing from them, and as coiTeot 
ia their reprosentatiuns of the u&ual process of tran'.frrence to the spi- 
ritual world a&er death? 

An.^. Yes. 

560. (5.) How many .sjiheres «re there, this world being the first in 
the series? ' 

Am. Seven. 

561. (6.) How many inhabited by spirits ? 
Ans. Sis. 

562. (7.) Are there subdivisions? if so, how many in each sphere? 
Ans. Six. 

663. (8.) Are the subdivisions equidistant ? 
Am. Yes. 


,v Google 


CONVOCATION OF SPIUITS. 115 


564. (9.) How are they designated ? 
Atis. Either as circles or planes. 

565. (10.) Are they concentric with eact otter and with this globe ? 
Ans. Yea. 

566. (II.) At what distance from tie terrestrial surface does the lower 
hoTindarj of the second sphere, or first spiritual abode, commence ? 

.. Ans. Sixty miles. 

567. (12.) Are the atmosphei-es of the spheres more rare in proportion 
&B they are more elevated ? 

Ans. Tes, 

568. (13.) Do theyincrease in beautyas they are higher ia the series? 

569. (14.) How are they illuminated ? 

— Ans. By a peculiar sun within the spiritual spheres. 

570. (15.) Is our sun visible ia the spirit world ? 
.-- . Ans. No. 

571. (16.) If lighted by a peculiar spiritual sun invisible in our mun- 
dane region, do the rays of that sun consist of unduJations of an all-pervad- 
ing ethereal fluid, analogous to that assumed to esist by the undulationists ? 

Ans. Tes. 

572. (17.) Or do they depend upon the last-mentioned fluid for es- 
iatence ? 

Alls. No. 

573. (18.) Are there not peculiar elementary principles appropriate, 
severally, to the spiritual world, and liiewiso to the material world ? 

Ans. Tes. 

574. (19.) Is it not an error to suppose that any of the ponderable ele- 
ments recognised by chemistry can contribute to the organization of the 
person of an imponderable spirit ? 

Ana. Of course, not without a loss of ponderosity, Trhich involves a loss 
of identity or a transformation. 

575. (20.) Is it not luminiferous matter which causes the efiulgenco 
of spirits, analogous in its effects to that of luminiferous insects, though 
consisting of a spiritual material entirely different from those which enter 
into the luminiferous matter of insects ? 

Ans. Tes. ' 

576. (21.) Are spirits in the lowest level of the second sphere destitute 
of effulgence ? 

Ans. Tes. 

577. (22.) Are they absolutely enveloped in a dark halo? 
Ans. Tes. 

578. (23.) Is reformation indicated first by diminished darkness, and 
subsequently by augmented effulgence ? 

Ans. Tes. 


;;■ Google 


116 COKVOCATION OF SPIRITS. 

579, (24.) Is the sphere of a spirit known by the relative brightness 
or darkness of his halo ? 

Ans. Yes, 

580. (25.) Is the lower circle of the second sphere disagreeable as to 
its scenery f 

Ans. Tes. 

681. (26.) Is Bpirlt iMaria's deseriptioa of the spheres correct? (505 
to 523.) 
Ans. Tes. 

582. (27-) Does this feature lessen as the circles are higher? 
Am. Tea. 

583. (28.) Do the last-mentioned circles present an aspect leas agree- 
able than that of our sphere ? 

Ana. Tes. 

584. (29,) At what point docs tiic scenery beoomc superior to any in 
our world ? 

Ans. In the third sphere. 

585. (30.) "What "designates tlia boundaries of the spheres, so as to 
make spirits pereeive when they ai'e passiog throngh the partition between 
one and another 7 

Am. Diversity of impression made npon the spirit. 

586. (31-) What confines a spirit to his proper level, so that none can 
mount above it into a sphere to which he does not belong ? 

Ans. A moral specific gravity, in which the weight is inversely as the 
merit, prevents the spirit from rising above his proper level. 

587. (32.) Are spirits of different densities rarer or more refined in 
constitution as they are higher in raclc ? 

Ans. Yes. 

688. (33.) Has the most dense or most undeveloped spirit any weight? 
if not, how are they denser than those who have progressed farther ? 

Am. They are in tiie spheres heavy as compared with other spirits, but 
their weight would not influence a scale-beam in this mundane sphere. 

589. (34.) If the lowest have no weight, wherefore are they more com- 
petent to give physical manifestations by moving ponderable bodies ? 

Ans. They do not act by weight, but all spirits, under feivourahle con- 
ditions and with certain means, possess, in a minute degree, a portion of 
that power possessed to an infinite extent by the Deity, of annulling gra- 
vitation and vis inertice ; and though they cannot exercise such powers with- 
out the aid of a medium, the medium is to them as an implement in the 
hands of a human being. 

590. (35.) How are such movements produced consistently with the 
law that action and reaction are equal and contrary ? 

Am. Gravity and vis inertise being neutralized, the physical law of action 
and reaction does not prevail against the spirit volition. 


;;■ Google 


CONVOCATION OP SPIRITS, 117 

691. (36.) Do spirits employ their litnba in efFectiog maaifc stations ? 
Am. Not necessarily. 

692. (37.) Have spirits a power of creating that which, they desire ? 
Ans. Yes. 

593. (38.) Like the genius of Aladdin's lamp, can spirits within their 
sphere create habitations at their bidding? 

Ans. Tes. 

594. (39.) Does this creative power exist in the spirits of each sphere, 
or is it denied, as I Lave been informed, to those of the second sphere ? 

Ans. It is denied. 

595. (40.) Is this creative power more extensive as tbe sphere to wliieh 
the spirit belongs is more elevated ? 

Am. Yes. 

696. (41.) Are the epirifs of the third sphere happy ? 

Ans. Yos. 

597. (42.) Does happiness become greater as the rank of the spirit be- 
comes higher ? 

Ans. Yes. 

598. (43.) Do spirits of infants go to the seventb. sphere ? 
Ans. Yes. 

599. (44.) Does an infant dying hefore noticing any thing go to that 

Ans. Yes. 

000. (45.) Does it require care analogous to that given to infants in this 
world ? 

Ans. It is carefully instracted. 

601. (46.) Do infant spirits come down and reside among kindred more 
or less, visiting, as it grows older, those mundane scenes which may com- 
pensate it for its loss of opportunities by premature death? 

Ans Yes. 

602. (47.) Does not the inability to communicate with its kindred cause 
it to be unhappy under these circumstances ? 

.4ns. It is not rendered unhappy, in consequence of the peeuliar manner 
in which such circumstanccB act upon the spirit mind. 

603. (48.) DoBUchapirits, as for instance, those going to the other world 
while children, but having attained mature ago, say forty, become com- 
panions for their parents and friends in the spheres who may have died 
after their maturity, or is there a too great simplicity or childishness? 

Ans. In purity and simplicity they are contented to live. 

604. (49.) Is the love of children, who have died very young, as great 
to their parents and relations who remain iu this world as if they con- 
tinued to live in their sooiety? 

Ans. Greater. 

605. (50.) Is there a deference shown to spirits on the same plane 


;;■ Google 


118 CONVOCATION OF SriEITS. 

i3om mens urate with their superiority in learning, science, and wia- 

Ans. Yes. 

606. (51.) The bj t f m th w 1 1 b m f t]y th 

perpetuation of th j t tlj w th th p t f h 

ment and the welf fffp dthb hmt th 

spiritual world, How thb jtf j Ldlblt? 

Ans. Between t,\ tj dbjmtmy th jh tl 
greater blending of m t 1 If 1 t mm t t th n 

any otker friendsh [ 
, 607. (52.) Hav pt yfll Itgth h tdd 

venous system, whhialjtit ityp !{, to 

that which our bio d 1 g 

Ans. Yea. 

008. (53.) As spirits are weightless; is not this fluid devoid of weight? 

Ans. Yes. 

609. (54.) Has it any colour ? 
Ans. No. 

610. (55.) Does the gaseous or ethereal matter respired by spirits per- 
vade the mundane sphere ? 

Ans. Yes, 

611. (56.) Do mortals breathe it as a means of sustenance to their 
spiritual organization while encased by this " mortal coil ?" 

Ans. Yes. 

612. (57.) Does it supply the nervous system ? 
Am. Yes, 

613. (58.) Is it communicated to inferior animals? 
..4ns. Yea. 

614. (59.) Do fishes require atmospheric oxygen while swimming, 
(water consisting of S puts m *) of pure oxygen,) in order to get at the 
spiritual gas isBOci-tled with the former ? 

Ans. Tho spiiitual gis impeioeptibly accompanying atmospheric air is 
especially necefiaiy to fishes 

615. (60 ) Creed is illeged tD be productive of no obslruetjon to as- 
cendency in the spiritual world 

Ans. Belief, bting an ih' olvnttii/ act of the mind, has no merit or cul- 
pability attached to it, esceptmg ta far as it is the consequence or is pro- 
ductive of prejudices, the advance of a spirit is retarded by these defecta. 

616. (61 ) As in the spiiituil world there is no necessity, desire, or 
passion whii,h •spirits can giatify by violence or fraud, on what is virtue 
founded ? W here there l'^ no motive or power to do wrong, where is tho 
merit of doing right? 

Ans. In the spheres, vice is displayed by the endurance of bad passions; 
virtue is manifested by love, purity, and the aspiration for improvement. 


,v Google 


EXrOSITION OF IKFOKMATION HECEIVED. 119 

617. (62.) Aa the diveraitiea of human character are cl lyth alt 
of organisation, and education, neither of which can he c nt U d hy tl 
human heings wliose merit or demerit ia the incTitabl ju n 
how can there be any culpability ? It ia true that a man nth 
wills ; hut is not his will the creature of bis passions and n j ntlj 
If his passions be increased, will not reason he leas capabl f nt 11 n 
tlicm ? and, vice versd, if his passioaa be enfeebled or his n. !■ n fh 
ened, will not bis passions have less sway ? Does it not f 11 w th t hi 
we must in self-defence resist or restrain those who cann t g n th m 
selves, should wo not commiserate all who have the mii,f t t b 
badly constituted ? 

Ans. We are no more able to answer that than you. 

618. (63.) When a being virtuously constituted is murdered by one of 
the opposite character, who ia most an object of commisoratiou ? which is 
most favoured as a creature of God ? Is not the difference between these 
beings analogous to that between the dog and the wolf ? Both creatures 
of God — one is to be extirpated, the other cherished, as an inevitable con- 
sequence of tho laws of creation ? 

Ans. Tho victim is most favoured. 

619. (64.) Has not the analogy between a wicked or a savage man, and 
one who baa the advantage of a good organization and education, a bettor 
exemplification in the case of a wild dog, and one brought up by a kind 
master, since the wild dog is reclaimablo, may be reformed, and so may the 
bad or savage man. Hence, in the spheres, is not punishment or restraint 
made with a view to reformation rather than as a retribution for inevitable 
defects ? 

Ans. Correct. 


620. From the information conveyed by communications s 
tbe preceding pages, as well as others, it appears that there are seven spheres 
recognised in the spirit world. The tciTcstrial abode forms the first or 
rudimental sphere. 

621. At the distance of about sixty miles from the terrestrial surface, 
the spirit world commences. It consists of six bands or zones, designated 
as spheres, aurrounding the earth, so as to have one common centre with, 
it and with each other. An idea of these rings may be formed from that 
of tbe planet Saturn, excepting that they are comparatively much nearer 
to their planet, and that they bavo their broad surfaces parallel to the 
planet, and at right angles to the ecliptic, instead of being like Saturn's, 
rings, ao arranged that their surfaces are parallel to the plane in which his^ 
ecliptic exists. 


;;■ Google 


120 EXl'OSITION OF INFORMATION KECEIVED 

622. Supposing tlie eartt to be represented by a globe of tliiiteen and 
a half inches iu diameter, tbe lower surface of tbe lowest of tbe spiritual 
spheres, if represented in due proportion to tlie aotua.1 distance from the 
earth, would bo only one-tenth of an inch from the terrestrial surface. 
The bands observed over the regions in the planet Jupiter which cor- 
respond with our tropical regions, agree very well in relative position with 
those which are assigned to our spiritual spheres. They are probably the 
spiritual spheres of that planet. 

It having struck me as possible that these bands might be due to spi- 
ritual spheres appertaining to Jupiter, I inquired of the spirits; their 
reply was confirmatory. 

623. The objection naturally occurs that ours arc invisible to us; yet 
we know that light may be polarized in passing through transparent masses 
so as to produce effects in one case which it does not ja others when not 
so polarized. It would have to pass through the spheres of Jupiter, and 
return through them again. This light, twice subjected to the ordeal of 
passing through the spirit world, whea oouti-aated with that which goes and 
returns without any such ordeal, may undergo a change of a nature to 
produce an eiFect upon the eye, when, in the absence of this contrast, no 
visual change should be perceptible. 

624. I am aware that it has been alleged that the bands do not appear 
always to occupy the same boundaries, and at times appear separated or 
more unequally distributed than at others. This may be due in part to 
actual changes which the spiritual essence may undergo as to its relative 
position, or optical delusions, If not deviations, resulting from the suscepti- 
bility of polarizing causes. 

625. Possibly some peculiarity in the reflecting surface of the planet 
may he productive of such polarizing variations in the state of the light as 
to cause a difference suf&oient for detection. 

626. Alum, transparent to the rays of light, iateroepts nearly the whole 
of the rays of heat. Opaque black glass intercepte the rays of light 
entirely, those of heat but partially. 

627. Eock salt, a substance analogous to alum, intercepts radiant heat 
only to a very small extent. 

628. When tbe rays of the setting sun fell upon the glass of windows, 
we see one portion reflected with great effulgence, yet another goes 
through the glass. The last-mentioned portion, of the rays received on a 
second pane are reflected, while those which were reiected will pass through 
another pane without reflection. 

629. This may demonstrate that the conditions requisite to the pev- 
.meability of media by rays is affected by diversities of intestinal arrango- 
.nients which are inscrutable to us. 

630. The interval between the lower boundaries of the first spiritual sphere 
;and the second is estimated at thirty miles as a masimnm, but this interval 


;;■ Google 


FROM THE SPIRIT -WOELD. 121 

be less, as the splieTes between whioli it may exist are 
more elevated or remote from the terrestrial centre. 

631. Eaoh spbero is divided into six "circles" or plains. More pro- 
perly tbese may be described as concentric zones, occupying cact about 
ooe-sixtb of the space comprised within the boundaries of tlie spliere. There 
being six subdivisions to each of the six spheres, in all there must be 
thiity-sis gradations. 

632. These boundaries are not marked by any Tisible partition, but 
spirits have in this respect a peculiar sense, which makes them feci when 
they arc passing the boundaries of one sphere in order to get to the 

633. This allegation of the existence of an invisible spirit world within 
the clear aaure space intervening between the surface of this ^lobe aud 
the luaar orbit may startle the reader; and yet this idea may have been 
presented by Scripture to the same mind, without awakening sktpticism 
It was urged by a spirit fnend — Is it more wonderful that you should find 
our habitations invisible, than that we are invisible ? 

634. It is plain that between the lowest degrees of vice, ignorance, and 
folly, aad the highest degrees of virtne, learning, and wisdom, there arc 
many gradations. When we are translated to the spheres, we fake a rant 
proportional to our merit, which seems to be there intuitively susceptible 
of estimation by the law above alluded to, of the grossness being greater 
as the character is more imperfect. Both the spirits and spheres are 
represented as having a gradation in constitutional refinement, so that the 
sphere to which a spirit belongs is intuitively manifest. Hank is deter- 
mined by a sort of moi-al specific gravity, in which merit is inversely as 
weight. Another means of distinction is a circumambient halo by which 
every spirit is accompanied, which passes from a darkness to efiulgency 
as the spirit belongs to a higher plane. Even mortals are alleged to be 
surrounded with a halo visible to spirits, although not to themselves. 
Intuitively, from the extent and nature of this halo, spirits perceive the 
sphere to which any mundane being belongs. The effulgence of the higher 
spirits is represented as splendid. As soon as emancipated from their cor- 
poreal tenement, spirits enter the spheres, and are entitled to a station 
bigher in direct proportion to their morality, wisdom, knowledge, and 
intelleotaal refinement. 

I 635. The first spiritual sphere, or the second in the whole series, is as 
i large as all the other five above it. This is the hell or Hades of the spi- 
rit world, where all sensual, malevolent, selfish beings reside. The next 
sphere above this, or the third in the whole series, is the habitation of all 
well-meaning persona, however bigoted, fanatical, or ignorant. Here they 
are tolerably happy. 

636. In proportion as spirits improve in purity, benevolence, and wisdom, 
they ascend. They may ascend as love-spirits, in consequence of the two 


;;■ Google 


122 EXrOaiTION op ISPORMATION niiCEIVED 

first-mentioned attributes; but cannot go up on account of wisdom alone. 
A Icnave, however wise, cannot advance m the splieres. Tiiere arej in 
fact, two modes of ascent— love, so called, and Jove and wisdom united. 
Ttoso who go up in love are called foye-spirits; those who unite both 
qualifications are called wisdom- spirits. A feminine spirit, who had been 
remarkable for her disinterested devotion to her relatives and friends, 
ascended almost forthwith to the fifth sphere. My friend W. W. had an 
ascent equally rapid to the same sphere. Yet another spirit, who was 
fully as free from vice aa either of those above alluded to, took many years 
to aacend in wisdom, to the fifth sphere, not being satisfied to rise unless 
accompanied by the attribntes of wisdom, as well as love. Spirit B. 
alleged that because he was a free-thinker he went up more quickly than 
another spirit, A. A., being questioned, admitted that B. had got on 
more speedily, in consequence of superior liberality. 

637. Washington is in the seventh sphere. 

638. In the spheres, diversity of creed has no influence, escepting so 
far as its adoption indicates badness of heart and nari'owness of mind, and 
has been of a nature to injare the mora! and intellectual character. 

C39. Degradation ensues aa an inevitable consequence of vice, and as 
the means of reformj not as vindictive punisliment. God is represented 
as all love, and is never named without the most zealous devotion. Spirits 
iu any sphere can descend into any sphere below that to which they be- 
long, but cannot ascend above this sphere. They are suri-ounded by a 
halo, which is brighter in proportion aa their sphere is higher. They have 
an intuitive power of judging of each other and of mortals. Attachments 
originating in this life are strengthened, while hatred passes away. The 
spirits in the upper spheres have "ineffable" happiness. The sufferings 
of those below are negative, rather than positive. They are made to 
feel shame at a degradation which is rendered intuitively evident to 
themselves and all other spirits. But all are capable of improvement, 
so as to have elevation and happiness within their reach sooner or 
later. The higher spirits are always ready to assist sinners by kind 
admonition. (92.) 

640. My brother alleges himself to hold the office of a teacher. By 
teachers, spirits fresh from this world, called the "mdimental sphere," are 
examined to determine their rank. 

641. Spirits are carried along with our globe by their moral affections 
and affinity, which upon them acts as gravitation upon material bodies. 
They ate just where they wish themselves to be, as they move in obedience 
to their moral impulses or aspiratdona, not having a gross, material body 
to carry along with them. 

642. Spirits of the higher spheres control more or less thoso below 
them in station, who are seat by them to impress mortals virtuously. 
Spirits are not allowed to interpose directly, so as to alter the course of 


;;■ Google 


lEOM THE SPIEIT W0EIJ3. 123 

events upon earth. Tiiej ai'e not aUowed to aid ia anj measure to obtain 
wealth. 

643. Blessed spirits are endowed with a power competent to the grati 
ficatioii of every rational want They enjoy, as I am authrrizei to say by 
the convocation of apints to whom illusion hjs been made i power hke 
that ascribed to the f,pniua of A.lildin i lamp (598 ) 

644:. There is nothing of the nature of maikotable propeity in the spirit 
world, BiDoe every inhabitant abovi. the second sphere, or Hade's, has as 
much as he wants, loA needs no m re to puichase the requisite fii his 
enjoyment oi subsistence than we need to buy an to breathe 

645. It ought also to be explained thdt after spirits reach the highest 
plain or circle of the seveith spbeie, thej are represented as being entitled 
to enter the supernal heaven, takmg place among the ministering angels 
of the Deity. 

646- Whether the o nnubial tio endmes or not lo opt oml Hence 
those who have nut found their inatiimoiii.il connection a source of happi 
ness in this world, aie at liberty to bcek a new hjmcneal union in the 
spirit world. Where there have been a plurdity ot husbinds tr wives, 
those unite who find themselves haj jy m doing so But, as if to indi_mnify 
mortals for the crosses m marriage or in love, oi for the dreariness of mun- 
dane celibacy, all are destined- in the spheres to find a counterpart with 
whom they may bo happy, there being peculiarly ardent pleasurable emo- 
tions attached to the connubial union in the spheres which mortals can- 
not understand. 

647. Infants grow as they would have done upon eai'th, nearly. They 
are nursed and educated, and on account of their higher pui'ity have, in 
this point of view, as much elevation as their relatives who attain great 
worldly pre-eminence. 

648. The alleged motives for our oxistcnco in this rudimental sphere, 
is the necessity of contrast to enable us to appreciate the immunity from 
suffering of the higher spheres. Infants in this respect are at a disadvan- 
tage ; but being unable to appreciate their deficiency, do not grieve there- 
for. " Where ignorance is bliss, 'twere folly to be wise." 

649. Allusion has already been made to the condition of those who 
have departed from this world during infancy, or prior to maturity. A let- 
ter from one of my sons who died when five months old his been, intro- 
duced into this work, (47(1 ) The change which ensues on spiritual birth 
has been described. (488 ) 

650. Among the most wondeiful facta narrated by my spirit father, 
and sanctioned by the convocition of spuiis, is the existence of a spiritual 
sun concentric with ours, and yet emitting independent nys for the spirit 
world, not for our world , while the rijs oi our sun do not reach the 
worid above mentioned. 

651. Further, the fact that spirits respite a vif i! fluid msTutablc to our 


;;■ Google 


t la t Ith ^I t t y li w tl jg (If h 

pfwhl d {hflhwth pppnteptl uili 

m t 

65 Th th til w IJ t t lly d 

d -T oc t d w th -wl li f a t ly s t mp t t 

d t til th t wh w w 1 i 

b58 Afte I h 1 w tt tli r d g y t f th L wl d 
mp rt d t m f th p t w Id I 1 ted t comra w th 

W h t t bm t tl mm y f h t A d gly h 

w h i to my p hy 1 bl p t d my po t d 

the pagea cotitrastin^, the heavea of Spintujhsm with that of Sonpture, 
were read, and receiyed his sanction under test conditions. (See Plate 4.) 
65i. In this, my first interview, I premised that I wished to let him 
know that I had always been one of his most devoted political advocates, 
h n Iw ys styled myself a Washington FederaJist, and that I had aa 
arly as 181 embodied my sentimenta in some vei-ses. He said he was 
w h such vei^cs were written by mo, but would wish me to repeat 
th m lb yed his request. They are aa follows : 

Hnil gloriona day, wiiieli gave 'Washington birth. 

To Columbia and liberty dear, 
IVhen a gaardiim angel descended on earth 

To shed blesBinga o'er many a jaar. 

Thougli heroes and stutoatoen, by glory enshrinGd, 

May be eeon in the temple of fame. 
No hero or statesman unblemisliod we find, 

Unless nnder Washington's name. 


fealth, tLUea, 


and power, were by him eror spurn'i 


Of horoes tc 


10 often the aim ; 


■torn a king o 


ir hia foyoorB indignant lie turn'd. 


Only feeliDf 


; his country's high claim. 


To this crer true, in her tronble'a dark nigh^ 

Intent on her welfare alone. 
Against her proud tyrants, ho urged tlie dread fight, 

Till he forced thern her freedom to own. 

Nest in France a sti'ange demon uplifted its head. 
All the natJouB of earth to bewray, ' 

And into Ita sniiroa would Colnmbia have ted, 
Had not Washington mam'd hor to stay. 

Best and wisest of men I when counsell'd by tLee, 
Could thy people Iheir treasure withhold? 

When mled by another, then could they agree 
To layisli their railliona untold? 

By Genet insulted, ty slander aggrioTed, 
If thy wrongs nnrerenged could remain, 

For denouneing the men whom falao ho believed. 
By a mob oould thy Lingan bo slain ? 


, Google 


Al'OLOGY FOE MX CONVEESION. 


656. As soon as tte last words in tlic preceding verses were recited, I 
was thrilled by the following effusion : 

657. My Friend : How my heart swells witli grateful emotion, at hearing 
that heautiful effusion from your lips ! YeSj my friend, I strove while on 
earth, to carry out the impressions which were mado on my mind hy supe- 
rior intelligences, and if I failed, my countrymen will hear testimony. 

658. Tour nohle fiither is a friend of mine, and I feel a love for you 
commensurate with his worth. He is foremost in the ranks of spiritual 
intelligences, and ready to act when duty calls. 

659. My friend, I sympathize with you in your arduous undertaking; 
but let mc assure you that your reward will be greater than the suffering 
you have endured. Yes, most nobly you have fought against error; and 
you will yet place the banner of freedom high upon the battlement of 
truth. Farewell, noble scion of a noble man ! 

GrEO. WASHINaTON. 


APOLOGY FOR MT CONVERSION. 

Apology for my change of opinion and belief in the existence and agency 
of Spirits. 

660. I DO not conceive that in my change of opinion I have been in- 
volved in any inconsistency of principle. It always appeared to mo that 
in explaining the plajietary movements, after arriving at the Newtonian 
boundary mado by momentum and gravitation, there could be no alterna- 
tive between appealing to the spiritual power of God, or resorting to athe- 
ism. An appeal to the power of God has always been my choice; never- 
theless holding tliat wondrous power to be of a nature wholly unintelligible 
to finite man. (57 to 87.) 

661. Confining the range of my philosophy to the laws of motioo, mag- 
nificently illustrated by the innumerable solar systems, but no less opera- 
tive in every minute mechanical movement, I hold that I could only come 
to the same conclusion as Faraday, that if tables when associated with hu- 

i g ta Itmt mwybe duo to those beings, since, 

gr bly to II p ce f th 1 w f matter in the material world, 

nmtbl ca t f,tmt. But as when the plaaetaij 

t n Id y 1 yp th f lils which does not account for 

h t lyfth It Ifhfe involves the agency not only 

tpwtll"t f 1 tl manifestations of Spiritualism, 


;;■ Google 


126 APOLOGY FOR a 

jnvolring both reason and power, might consistently justify me in looking 
for agents endowed 'witii the reason and power manifested by the pheno- 
mena. This power being invisible and iTiipondei'ahle, and at the same 
time rational, there was no aiternativo but to consider it aa spiritual, no 
less than tliat to which planetary motion ia duo. In its potentiality the 
power thus manifested migtt be extremely minute as compared Tvith the 
potentiality of the Creator ; still it had to be of the same spiritual nature. 

662. It baa not appeared unreasonable to infer tliat the soul in assum- 
ing tte spirit form should , acquire a power of which material beings are 
destitute, and of which they can only conceive an idea fram its necessity 
to the operations of God. Parting with its material attributes, were the 
soul not to acquire others, even if it eould esist, it would be perfectly 
helpless. Hence, in becoming an immaterial spirit, it must acquire powers 
indispensable and appropriate to that state of eaistenoe. 

663. Since we know that the animal frame for the moat part after death, 
on the exposure to the air, warmth, and moisture, returns to the atmo- 
sphere whence it ia mainly derived, it follows that on undergoing that awful 
change the soul must take the spirit form, unless it perish with its mate- 
rial tenement. Bo far, then, all who believe in the immortality of the 
60ul, must concur with spiritualists that on dying we become spirits. 

664. It will then be admitted by all who believe ia the immortality of 
the soul that, as for every mortal that dies a spirit ia born, innumerable 
spirits must exist. Is it not then reasonable to consider them as agents in 
producing phenomena which can only be ascribed to invisible, imponder- 
able, rational, and affectionate beings, especially when they themselves 
sanction this inference by word and deed ? 

665. Were a tyrant fti enclose a human being while alive within a cast- 
iron vessel, the aperture through which the introduction should be made 
being closed by a stopple soldered in air-tight, all the ponderable elements 
of the coporeal body would be retained j but can any one who believes the 
soul to survive (he body, think that it would remain included in that ves- 
sel BO long as it should endure ? Cast-iron coats itself with a carbonated 
poroxido, vulgarly called ruat, and then undergoes no farther change; so 
that the corporeal elements might be retMned to an infinite time. But 
could the soul be thus imprisoned, perhaps to eternity? Could the tyranny 
of a man thus imprison an immortal soul ? Does it not follow that the 
soul would not be confined by the air-tight and apparently impenetrable 
metallic vessel ? 

Invi&ihility of the Soul. 

666. The invisibility of the soul in leaving the body, must be ad- 
mitted, since, however the dying may be eurroundcd by their friends and 
nurses, and vigilantly guarded after death by watches, as customary with 
many, the soul is not seen to leave the body. It must, therefore, be ia- 


;;■ Google 


APOLOGY FOK MY CONVEItSTO.'. 127 

visible, and capable of permeating cast-iron or atiJ lAhj-j .■ixn^dul within 
which, wHle alive, an immortal being might be endosRd alr-tiglit. 

Oil the Whereabout of Heaven. 

667. The qualities of invisibility and penetrative power being necessa- 
rily conceded to the sou!, is it unreasonable to extcid this attribute to its 
habitation ia the skies : to the country of spirits ? 

668. In coniinunicaling with a friendly spirit, I adverted to the diffi- 
culty of inducing people to conceive that iu the clear anure space existing 
between the earth and moon, there should be scenery lite ours, with plains, 
tills, mountains, valleys, rivers, lakes, seas, and every variety of edifice in 
greater perfection than upon earth. " You do not see us," said my friend ; 
" then why should you wonder at not seeing our world ?" 

669. It is quite evident that no such obstacle stood in the way of belief 
in the esistenee of heaven among the Jews, as it is constantly referred to 
as being above ; Noah's deluge oame through the windows of heaven ; and 
this id h b nst d th 1 g f fh t w II of tho 
Hebrew p ph ts 

670 El J h p ie t 1 1 g I ly 1 d to h That 
the vt ty d b 1 ty f h t t w w th =! pt ire, is 
alleged t w k by th E M Hiib h f th G m s Ec- 
formed ChhfL teP yl H^t ip ngly a 
passag w k t tl d Phy ITh i fA tl Lf by Taylor, 
which I bj 

671 T 1 fe t -- Th t w th th 1 p d by th visible 
and p 1 bl d 11 d f n, tl t g and 
movin h 1 m t f ht w tl th p f 1 f CO porea] 
indeed dnu. td Ittptth la f those 
who a 11 1 1 th d t t m 1 g t t t be seen 
nor h rd t I f It ly m j t j t marks 
the a th in th j! h t tl f t f pp g that 
within thespace encircled by the sidereal revolutions, there exists and moves 
a second universe, not less real than the one we are at present conversant 
with : a universe elaborate jn structure, and replete with life; life a 
with momentous interests, and perhaps by frivolous interests 
conscious perhaps of the material spheres, or unconscious of them, and 
firmly believing (as we do) itielf to be the only reality. Our planets in 
their sweep do not perforate the structure of this invisible creation; our 
suns do not scorch its plains : for the two collateral systems are not con- 
nected by any active affinities." 

672. This would bring "the things which arc not seen," indeed, near 
to and around us. To enter the other world would not be so much a 
removal in space, as just to be made loose from, or to become insensible to. 


,v Google 


128 APOLOGY FOR MY CONVERSIOX. 

tlie conditions of ftis life. Death will bo only the destruction or disap- 
pearance of human and earthly affinities, and directly we shall be surrounded 
by affinities adapted to our new state of existence, and shall find for oar- 
selves a congenial home in and around our present habitation. 

673. Much is argued in fayour of this theory. It is said in no plaje 
to interfere with Scriptii'e, but rather to be countenanced by incidental 
hints and allusions. J. is said to be made highly probable by the known 
truths of physical science. An unseen world, in all respects material, 
inhabited by corporeal beings, it is said, is possible. Thero are material 
elements which are not cognizable to any of our senses except by a rounci 
of research and espcriment, and then only in their remote effects, as, for 
instance, electricity. The atmosphere also, and light, are material, and 
yet so subtle as almost entirely to evade our unassisted observation; and 
may there not be still others as yet to us unknown ? "VVe are related to, 
and become acquainted with, the external world by the medium r f the five 
senses ; but who will say that there are not other senses hidden in possi 
bility in our nature which may by means of other affinities communicate 
witli a world far more refined in ifs constitution, with which we cmnot 
now come in contact? Science has discovered living animakulas m the 
solidest substances; the air we breathe and the water we dimk are the 
homes of myriads of beings, and though unseen by the nated eye, these 
elements ai'e swarming with miniature life ! It seems to be tiod b motto, 
"MuUum in parvo" — life in life, world in world, universe m universe' 
With these known faets in science before us, may we not, it is asked, eon- 
eider the above theory probable ? 

674. It is further suppcsed that this invisible world around ns is the 
after stage of the present life; and as it is a stage of being in all respects 
superior to this, it may be that its inhabitants have a knowledge of us, 
though we have not of them, just as we are acquainted with grades of 
animalcule life beneath u«, when it cm hardly be supposed thit they know 
any thing of our esis-tenLO H n^e, too, in soma exi,optne cises it may 
be possible foi them to Tjreik through the veil of sepirition and ippeii 
in various wiys unto men on the platfoim of human iife Thon we ire 
indeed " surrounded bj a cloud oi witnesses, who stind aroun 1, or bend 
over us, and kok with deep int" rest upon the struggle of hfi,, and when 
they see it unequal in the cise of the saint', they Ireak thiough in their 
ardour, and become ministeimg spirits to thjso who aie heir^ of ttnrnal 
Efe. 

075 It is ilso supposed that tliese beings in the wcild unseen may 
have capacities to communicate with the remotest inhabitants of God's 
universe The facilities of communication may be so gieit m these ethereal 
climes, that space is annihilated, and the different hosts of mtolligonoes m 
the wide universe may commune with each other and God as one family 
in their " Father's house." 


;;■ Google 


APOLOGY FOR MY CONVEKSION. 129 

676. There is a surprising degree of coincidence between tlie specula- 
tions compnsed id tlii-i quotation, and the accounts which I have received 
leapeeting the spnit world fiom some of those ocLupyiag in elevated 
grade theroin It has been ob^ened ibo^e fhat if the loul be immortal, ' 
it caiiHot be imi^ined to lemain in the grave, since the gieat«r part of 
the human oisanizifion in hot wcdthei ccapcs thiough putiefiction, as 
vapoui or ^s Ilenr* the endmaniG ot the soul ittei deith involves 
spintuil existence We mwt, theielDii,, on djini;, tal-e an invisible api- 
ntudl torm 

677 Believers in revelation staio incredulously when mentim is made 
of a sptnt, as if its existence were an impossibility ; yet it has beea shown, 
that according to orthodoxy, death extricating the soul from the body, it 
must forthwith commence its spiritual life. The esiatenco of spirits being 
thus established, that they should communicate with us would be more 
probable than that they should not, excepting that it baa not been hereto- 
fore generally known to take place. But spirits allege that tho mmifcsta- 
tdons which have been taking place for some years have beea the result 
of efforts especially made by a delegation of philanthropic spirits, to break 
through the partition which has so long prevented the communication to 
mortals of a correct knowledge of tte existence of the human soul after 
death, and the requisites to the attainment of celestial liappiness. 

678. The accomplishment of this object is a step in the progressive ad- 
vancement and the means of improvement possessed by the celestial world, 
analogous to tlie invention of printing or of the telpgraph in tho mundane 

679. The management is intrusted to advanced spirits acquainted with 
the affairs of both worlds. Agreeably to Scripture, heaven is above, 
over our heads ; to prevent the Tower of Babel from reaching it, a contu- 
sion of tongues was ordained. The second commandment speaks of hea- 
ven above and earth beneath. Christ " descended into hell," according to 
the apostles' creed ; of course, hell is below- " Whosoever calls his brother 
a fool, is in danger of hell-fire " That hell and fire should be thus associated 
is therefore consistent with the observations of geologists, who infer that 
the interior of the earth consists of ignited matter of which volcanoes arc 
the safety-tubes, however inoonsisteiit with reason to suppose immortal 
souls to be broiling therein. 

680. But enlightened Christians do not, I believe, locate hell within 
this earth, nor call in fire to aid in their conceptions of it. Kvideutly, the 
more rational idea of the future abode of souls is that of its being above 
every point on the earth's surface, and equidistant therefrom. This would 
involve that of a space concentric with the eai-th, and which falls in with 
the idea of that comprising the spheres of Spiritualism. 

681. If we leave this earth, in order to imagine any location beyond 
the range of astronomical bodies, it would place the locality at a distance, 


;;■ Google 


ISO ArOLOGY roa my COKVERSIOI^f. 

according to Herscliel, requiring nineteen huDdred tliousand years 
souls to travel, moving with the Telocity of light, two hundred t 
miles in a seeoDd, In one of my lectures, in 1842, I suggested that hea- 
ven might he situated at that central space about which all the constella- 
tions of the universe have been suppoaed to revolve, 

682. But if we infer a general place of reception for souls, then in that 
celestial emporium every soul from all the jnyiiads of planets, of all the 
solar systems in the universe, must congregate. Far more rational does it 
not seem that our heaven should be associated with our own planet, in the 
welfere, the past history, and future prospects of which the sonls who were 
born upon it, mast talte pre-eminent interest? 

683. The separation of any heaven into spheres seems ine\'itable, since 
the association of spirits according to their virtue and intelleotual acquire- 
ments and capacity seems indispensable to harmony and happiness. Thus 
the more virtuous, wise, and cultivated spirits are, the higher their spheres 
of existence. 

684. Let any person contemplate the information respecting the spirit 
world given in the preceding pages, in tie communications from my spirit 
relations and others, and then say whether, in receiving thein as true, any 
believer in immortality, as vaguely portrayed in the gospel, will not make 
a beneficial escLange. 

685. How can any person become a spiritualist without forthwith find- 
ing an irresistible impulse to conduct himself in this world, so as to acquire 
eminence ia the next ? For what are we all workiag ? is it not for hap- 
piness, "our being's end and aim," the difi'ereoee being only in the mode 
by which it is sought? By some it is through the good of others as well 
as of themselves; yet too many seek it without regard to that portion of 
their fellow- creatures whom they may deem it their interest to oppress, de- 
ceive, cheat, or rob. 

686. But even these will perceive how much better it will be to pursue 
the opposite couTse, since every wrong done by them here, will have to bo 
expiated by a proportionate penance in the spirit world. 

687. By every good action resulting from the wish to do as we would 
be done by, wo advance a step higher in that heavenly stairway by which 
we may ultimately reach the supernal heaven, and become ministering an- 
gels of God. 

688. But even during oar ascending progression, we shall pass through 
a succession of stages whereiu every intellectual, social, and amiable pro- 
pensity of our nature will be grat'fi d 

689. In justice to myself, and to g e weight to tho inferences 
drawn from my laborious investig t n I w 11 ubjoin the correspondence 
between Mr. Holcomb and myself wh h u d I the receipt of the let- 
ter which has been introduced in th m n n m nt of my narrative, {128.) 
So far as my judgment goes, there n w s a 1 tter written of which the 


;;■ Google 


APOLOGY FOK MY CONVERSION, 131 

facts 01 inferences are more correct; yet it appears that so late as the 8th 
of February I was Btill a donhter. The tenor of the correspondence wilt 
show that if I was conquered, I did not yield tho ground undisputed, and 
was vanqmahed only by facts and reasons ■which, when understood or ad- 
mitted, must produce m others the conviction which they created in me. 
If I was the Tiotim of an inlellcetnal epidemic, my mental constitution 
did not yield at once fo tha musma. It took some three months to in- 
clude me among its victim g. 

PHiLABELPmA, Janusj-y 14, 1854. 

690. Dear Sir .-—Your letter of the 17th of November met my eye as 
I was this morning looking over a file of letters. I am led to write, there- 
fore, that in consequence of your suggestion, and those of others, I have 
been giving my attention to the phenomena to which you alluded. Wheu 
I come (o any conclusion, I will write again. 

691. I sljtl concur with Earaday, and have seen nothing to make me 
believe in the spiritual manifestations. Tet I am not surprised that the 
latter should be believed in by those who have that belief, as there are phe- 
Eomeaa which I cannot explain yet, any more than many which I have 
seen resulting from jugglery. The converts are, however, such wor- 
thy persons, that I cannot bring myself to suspect them of deception. I 
think you must be mistaken as respects a table moving when left to itself 
entirely. The circumstances for producing this phenomena have been 
repeatedly made favourable by the mediums in my presence, but excepting 
in one instance, when it was within reach of the feet, no motion ensued. 

692. It would, indeed, be a glorious mercy if God would give tia some 
evidence, which should settle the religious opinions of mankind. 

Robert Hare. 

Southwioe:, Mass., Feb. 8d, 1854. 

693. Dear Sir: I wish, however, to say something iu regard to tho 
subject-matter of your letter. You say you are not surprised at the belief 
of many in Spiritualism, as there are phenomena which you cannot ex- 
plain. Yon also say that you think I must be mistaken "as respectB a 
tabic moving laken left to itself entirely." I do not think a table would 
move if left to itself entirely, since matter cannot put itself into motion. 
The great question is. What is the power that makes the table move ? You 
think it is muscular, and I am certain that it is something else. When 
I am looking at the sun in a clear sky, I know that it shines. No argu- 
ment would have any influence to make me doubt the evidence of my 
senses. There has, no doubt, been a great deal of jugglery in the world, 
but shall I doubt the evidence of my senses on that account ? How shall 
wo prove any thing in a court of justice, if the evidenae of our senses is 
not to bo relied upon ''. While I am looking at a table, it moves, and I 


,v Google 


132 APOLOGY FOR MY CONVERSION. 

have the samo evidence tliat no tody touches it, that I have that it moves. 
I see the table tilt np, and poise itself on two of its four legs, and then on 
the other two, and finally it wholly rises from the floor, and seems to float 
in the air without any visible support whatever ; all this timo tliere are no 
persons within sis feet of it. In a letter of N. P. Tairaadge, publislied in 
the Tribune of May 27th last, he gives an account of his seeing tables 
luovo when nothing visible touched them. I mention Jiini, because I sup- 
pose his character and standing would be likely to have weight with you. 
It would, however, be very easy to mention a very great many cases, proved 
by teslimoDy that would be couoluaive in any court of justice. I supposed 
that it was too late in the day to doubt facts of this character, as they are 
taJiing place in numerous places in this country and also in Europe. I 
suppose this is the reason why Faraday's esplanation has availed so little 
to check Spiritualism in England or France. 

694. I believe Henry Gordon resides now in Philadelphia. I have no 
doubt you can see such things for yourself in his presence by attending a 
few times. Our judge of probate, who lives a few miles from me, told 
me a few days ago that a young lady of his acquaintance put her Lands 
upon a table and it moved. He then took hold of tbe table to prevent 
the motion, but he had not strength to do it. The table would slide on 
the floor, notwithstanding his utmost efibrts to prevent it. Now it is per- 
fectly idle to eay that the young lady •anconscioud>/ exerted such a power. 
The judge ridicules the idea of its being caused by spirits. He says that it 
is eleotiicity You are too wcU acquainted with the laws of electricity to 
believe that undei such circumstances jt can produce any such feats. I 
know of a case, m topiingfield City, in which four respectable merchants, 
with whom I am ^o t d t t'fy that a large table, with two of them on 
it, moved aiound th oo n In that instance the medium's hands were on 
the table But wh n 1 1 e that such a force could be exerted without 
the movers hem n ft. There are oases enough of the same 
desoription to fill a lum 

695. There is n th pha f this matter that is worthy of attention, 
and that is the intelt g n nn cted with it. You mention cases where 
the answers we n t t Thousands of such cases might bo fur- 
nished. In the p D f s n of the mediums, almost all the answers 
will be false ; wh le n the p nee of others, it will be very rare that a 
wrong answer is {, n fe ne f the answers being wrong does not prove 
that there is no mt 11 j, n nn cted with it. In the presence of a good 
medium, a question asked mentally is answered as readily and as correctly 
as when asked vocally. I do not depend on the testimony of others for 
this. I have found it to be true in my own esperienoe. In the presence 
of some mediums, mental questions arc not answered. The foregoing are 
facts that are well settled if evidence can settle any thing. To say that 
we are dupes and fools, decides nothing. I suppose that I c 


;;■ Google 


133 

matter as carefallj and intricately as most men, and I know I am not de- 
ceived about the facts. But the cause is quite another matter. 

696. I suppose you are acquainted with the various and conflicting 
esplanations that have been ^ven. They all appear to my mind perfectly 
absurd and incredible, and no two of them agree. Eev. Dr. Beeoher was 
appointed by his association to esamine and report. He did so, and de- 
cides that the communications are trom the spirits of the dead, but from 
the evil or unhlest portion of them. K it is from spirits, there is &a much 
evidence that some of them are good, aa that others are evil. 

697. I must close. I did not expect an answer, but was glad to hear 
from you, and i£ yon mate any important discovery, I should be glad te 
hear from you again ; I am not settled in my mind respecting the cause 
of these strange phenomena. I agree with you heai'tily in your last remark 
in your letter, that " it would indeed be a glorious mercy if God would give 
us some evidence which should settle the leligious opinions of mankind." 

Toni's, very respectfully, 

Amasa Holcomb, 

In repl>/ to the preceding, no mucji of a letter from ffie Author as relates 
to Spirilualism. 

PiiiLiDELPHiA, Feliruary 8, I8Si. 

698. You believe fully that tables move without contact, because you 
have seen them move; I am skeptical, because I have never seen them move 
without human contact, although I have been at several circles. 

699. You have been much more lucky than I have been as to the ma- 
nifestations, whether mechanical or mental. 

700. I shall lose no opportunity of making further observations. I 
have no clue to find Gordon. You ought to give me his address, and 
communicate all you know respecting him. 

EoBT. Hare. 

SouIHWlOir, February 20, 1854. 

701. Dear Sir: Your letter of February 8th is before me. Youdidnot 
say whether you believed in the soul's immortality or not I This is the 
most important of all questions te me, and how is it te he settled? If 
the Bible is not to be depended upon, and we have no communications 
from the spirit world, what evidence have we of oui immortality? I have 
been greatly afflicted with doubts upon this subject It has exceeded all 
other afflictions that I have met with. You will of course see at once 
how dearoua I am that these apparent communications should piove to be 
in reality ftova the spirit world, as that would settle the question. I seize 
upon every thing that seems to have a bearing upon the question of im- 
mortality, and I confess that I have strong hopes that Spiritualism, as it is 
termed, will settle this question. If it be trae that there is physical force 


;;■ Google 


134 APOLoiiY roE my cowveiiiiIon. 

and infelligenco, aeitber of wliicli proceed from, the medium, how is it to 
be explained ? You doubt these two, but I am as well at-iured of them 
as I can be of any thing, 

702. If spirits communicate, it is certain that sumo of them deceive. 
It would appear that there are al] sorts of ebaracters, the same as there 
are in this world. If you should become satisSed of the two facts that I 
mentioned, I should like to have you and other men of science try your 
skill at explanation. 

703. 1 will relate what took place at the first sitling that I ever 
attended. It was in Boston, and 1 went as a perfect stranger. Before 
the sittiiig commenced, and but few had collected, a strolling musician 
came along and commenced playing at the door, and every tune played at 
the door was beaten or rapped on the table. The medium was in the 
room ; I saw her walk up to the table and lay her hand on it, and then 
walk away, but it made no difiercnoe with the raps on the table ; they con- 
tinned, without any person near it, as long as the tunes were played at 
the door. When it came my turn to question, I asked, Are any of my 
relatives present? Am. Yes. Will yon rap at each letter of yonr name, 
if the alphabet is called over. Ans. Yea ! The alphabet was called, and 
there was a rap at A, one at L, one at F, one at R, one at E, and one at 
D,— Alfred : a son that died at the age of twenty-two years. Among a 
great many questions, I asked. How many years since you died. Is it 
twelve? Is it eleven? Is it ten? Is it nine? Is it eight? Is it 
seven ? There was a rap at seTen, but I asked. Is it six ? and instantly 

there were rapped ; the seventh was fainter. I said. He pro- 

b[ibly means that it is sis and a piece, when instantly they were repeated 

; the last the faintest. The raps were equidistant, like the 

ticking of a clock, and about as loud. I supposed at the time that it was 
les& than seven. After the sitting was over, and we were preparing to 
leave, I said. It is possible that we may have mistaken the time since my 
son's death ? There was instantly a loud rap on the table. I then asked, 
Did you mean seven ? and there was instantly an affirmative. I inquired 
for the odd months, and the answer was four. When I got home, I found 
tho tme time was seven years, four months, and two days. These last raps 
were when no person was within SM;/eei of the table. I confess myself 
unable to explain the foregoing without admitting that it was my soa who 
responded. If you could have such an opportunity, and inquire for some 
dear friend whom you loved in life, I think you would witness what would 
interest you. 

T04. I mention the foregoing as a specimen. I have received a great 
many communications purporting to be both from my son and a daughter, 
who died at the age of eighteen, quite as remarkable as the above. Now, 
admitting the two facts of physical force and intelligence, I don't know 
even then that spirits are the agents ; but it seems probable, because I 


,v Google 


APOLOGY FOR MT CONVERSION. 135 

doubt whether any other explanation can be given, that will appear at all 
reasonable. It is very evident that there is an intelligence that governs 
the world; but if that intelligence has given us no revelation excepting 
what is in nature, then it appears to rao that every thing that can give 
lis any knowledge of what wo are to he hereafter, is valuable beyond all 
price. Uncertainty upon this matter is pfiinful, but then we know so 
little about the Deity, that I thinlt there is great uncertainty in our views 
of what he does, either to prevent or bring to pass the good and evil that 
we see around us. Yours, very respeobfully, 

Am AS A HOLCOMB. 

Some parti of a tetter to Mr. Solcomi, in reply to the parts of his letter 
relating to Spiritualism. 

PniLADBLFHiA, Pebmary 24, 1854. 

705. Sear Sir : There is a great resemblance in your sentimentSj as de- 
scribed in your letter of the 20tli, ( jnst received,) and those which I en- 
tcrt^un, excepting that while I am very desirous — I may say extremely 
desirous — to learn something which may prove another state of existence, 
I am not unhappy at my not being able to find out the truth. If I have 
less hopes, I have also less fears, than those who have heaven and hell 
both to encounter. I do not envy those who are placed in the situation 
of depending iipon the estimate which may be formed of them hereafter, 
whether they are to be placed among the " sheep" or "tJie goats." 

706. It is true that the gospel holds out the idea on one hand that in- 
tense belief, called faith, will wash away sin ; but on the other, it is said, 
that " he who hnoweth his Master's will, yet doeth it not," shall be beaten 
with many stripes, while he who is ignorant of that will, and doeth it not, 
shcJl be beaten with few. Under these circumstances, who can escape 
flagellation ? Who is it that does the will of God, as enumerated by 
Christ? Who loves his neighbour as himself? Who presents a second 
cheek on receiving a blow on one f Who gives his coat, when hia cloak 
has been taken ? Who returns good for evil ? Who acts as if it were as 
hard for a rich man to go to heaven as for a camel to get through the eye 
of a needle ? 

707- Unless our missionaiies can make better Christians abroad than 
they leave at home, it were inhuman to add to the number, who are to be 
pre-eminently punished for their neglect of their Master's will, while fuEy 
apprized of it. In many eases a pagan will be better off than his nomi- 
nally Christian instructor, although he should not prove a convert to 
Christianity. 

708. My sentiments are much like those which Socrates esprc^sod 
Iliope for a future iBorld, and, tlierein to have a Tiappier existurice All 
those reasons which have been advanced by wise and good mtn in fivoui 
of such futurity, operate upon' my mind as upon theirs ; but if theie be 


,v Google 


136 MOKAL IM'LUENCB OF SPIRITUALISM. 

no Buch a state of future existence, I ishall nevei- waJce ttp to fed my du- 
appovatment. It will onl^ he a prolongation of a state of oblivion analo- 
gous to that lahich, we enter upon fn-ansiently, every ntgJit. 

709. The incentives which have acted upon you, act also upon me, and 
I have seen some of the manifestations on which jou rely ; hut not so 
satisfactorily. The answers which I have received have not been worthy 
of the other world. 


710. Amaagf ywftl 


lounted to this; "Oh, my son, 


listen to d th 1 d '^ 


eral similar nugatory senteneea 


have be m f t 1 th b (h lit b 


t. 


711. I h h w t ted 


nstrument to put the question 


of indcp d y f tell g t th t 


t. It works independently of 


any cent I f th m d m th 1 tt 


which must be seen to bring 


them CO tly d th d 


led by a screen. (Plate 1.) 


712. Th t b 1 t d was 


imuuicated in tiiis way. 


713. I m b t hyth t t 


teat the manifestations farther. 


RoBEiiT Uare. 


MORAL INFLUENCE OF SPIRITUALISM. 

714. Among the best precepts afforded by the gospel is that of laying 
up treasure in heaven, in preference to seeking to become rich in this 
world. To pursue the laet-mentioned course haa been alleged to disqiialify 
us more or less for entering heaven. Certainly, however, honest esertion 
for the acquisition of wealth is the corner-stone of human prosperity, and 
money seems in most instances necessary to the effectual eserciso of that 
fellow-feeling in the cultivation of which human virtue pre-eminently 
consists. (See Influence of Mundane wealth on Celestial Happiness,) 

715. How can a man display charity, hospitality, or contribute his 
means and time to objects of philanthropy, unless he beforehand lay up 
wealth ? How could the Samaritan have assisted the traveller who had 
been maltreated by thieves, had he not taken care to have something be- 
forehand, not only for himself, but for the needy? But still the precept. 
Lay up treasure for thyself in heaven, is precisely the course which Spt- 
ritualism indicates. Precepts may lead, hut examples will draw. Those 
who have gone before us to eternal life, furnish iis not only precepts, but 
examples also. They furnish exemplifications of the consequences of their 

■ conduct, if followed. With few esceptions, my intercourse has been with 
those only, who did lay up treasure in heaven, by doing on earth as they 
would have others to do unto them. Of the spirits with whom I have 
• communicated^ only two alleged or indicated that they were unhappy. Of 
~ I bore an ill character upon eai'th. 


;;■ Google 


sriaiTUALiSM. 137 

716. Another, after having suggested to liia inquiring brother some 
meiisures relating to his surviving wife's temporal concerns, spontaneously 
added the following words: "1 am not liapey." The inquiry teing made 
for the cause of his misery, the resulting reply was, " I did not do rite 
when I was in this world." 

717. Another admitted that h w d wn d n n qu nee f etting 
dead drimk. On being asked iflw hj^yh w 1 Damned 
happy." In reply to an inquiry wh th h w y t h quitted 
this life, he replied in the affirmat 

718. Having evidently been a am n wh 1 d Id und n officer 
who was present, he had preser dth uulfal ss f sad for to- 
haceo and grog. This propensity h Id t d d pi j n twith- 
standing his having passed death d d p tal and th b nutility 
of expressing to mortals his cravnig for those pernicious stimulants. 

719. Thus it appears that in the spirit world one means of retribution 
for the indulgence of bad propensities in this life, is subjugation to their 
ungratified cravings. 

720. Of course, the more of these a spirit carries with him, the greater 
is his misery ; while the more he founds his happiness on the indnlgenoe of 
good propensities, the greater his power and opportunities of enjoyment. 

721. As an illustration of the manner in which liappiness may arise 
from the indulgence of good propensities, one of the enjoyments of a spirit 
of the fifth sphere is, as I am informed, in looking after children of 
relatives and friends, who have not as yet followed them to the spirit world. 

722. Believing in the existence of a spirit world, where there are thirty- 
six grades of esistenee, corresponding to degrees of purity and intellectual 
acquirement, — purity alone giving exaltation merely, while cultivation of 


mind secures breadth of consideration,— we have, 
here strictly to truth, honesty, justice, benevolence 
be done by, to reach a sphere higher in proportior 
ful. Yet, among those on the same plane, superic 
gives precedence. 

7 N thi 1 tt k wn th wh 1 p 
dr w and th t bj ti t b d plea 
p pt. g liy es tbl byth y 
p pts t h k b t th t y ill 


in the first place, to ad- 
!, and doing aa we would 

irity in mental attributes 

pt m J 1 d mples 
wh h k d bj d 
B wh th 
I w 11 as b 1 m 


plfwhm b oshw wll ttted 
thted yf hd t 1 1 Letbdh 
peradd d d wh t b t I f v? 
h w 11 Ih i pe d t f y ! 
Ahhd frt y ttlybf 


ga Uj Id ist 

It yp p b 

k d 3S W f tly 
tl p t f th t m 
d t It f 11 th 


dt b tddgdpit d 
mp 1 f th I p t k d wh 


pi p t 

! w t f p g 


t h t d 1 h ( 11 t 


,v Google 


138 MORAL INl'LUENCE OF SPIRITUALISM. 

724. Much stress is laid upon ftee-will, but is will ever free from tho 
joint control of reason and passion ? What is will, if it be not the result- 
ant of the conflict or co-operation of these ? It may he a question whe- 
ther, without pasaonSj a man would act at all ; hut certainly he would act 
like an idiot or baby, so far aa his will should be entirely independent of 
his reason. 

725. It must he conceded, then, that the prodigious diversity between 
virtue and vieo is the consequence of contingencies, which are no more 
under the control of the individual affected than the colour of hia hail- or 
the number of cubits in hia stature. 

726. The great features of the spiritual religion are, as I understand 
them, as follows : — Its foundation is laid in the belief of an aO-good Deity, 
whose power is manifested to us by the immensity, profundity, sublimity, 
ingenuity, and adaptation of the means to the ends in the creation ascribed 
to the co-operation, if not origination, of his miud. . The Bible of the 
spiritualist is the book of nature — -the only one which by inward and out- 
ward evidence can be ascribed to divine authorship, 

727. In this book we read, as matters of fact, that there is an infinite 
series of gradation in the rank of animals, as well as variety in their dis- 

s and propensities. This may be seen, from the half-animal, half- 
) known as the polypus, up to man, there being gradations not 
only of genera, but of speciea and varieties. Thus amid men there are 
various races, rising one above the other in development, from the Bush- 
man, Hottentot, or lowest Negro, up to the most highly -developed race of 
white men. But when we have passed through the gradation of the races, 
we have to enter upon that of individuals, who in the same race are by 
diversity of organization or education, or of both, made extremely differ- 
ent as to intellectual, moral, and scientific pre-eminence. 

728. It is difficult for human reason to reconcile with impartiality this 
immense divei-sity in the lot of the creatures of Godj but that such is the 
law of nature is self-evident : it is an intuitive truth. To reconcile it with 
the all-goodness of God, we must suppose a limilation of power, and that 
it has been beyond his power to put created beings more nearly upon 
a level. But, as Seneca observes, all have received more than they had a 
claim for. Some may think that the parable of the hiring of labourers 
for a vineyard, conveys an idea like that of the Ecman sage. 

729. These considerations being premised, it would seem that punish- 
ment in the spirit world is only the carrying out of the same system, ex- 
cepting that while the deficiencies or vices which have arisen in this world 
become a punishment in the nest, they also operate as the means of im- 
provement, or, to use the language of that world, of "progression." It 
may be inferred that as in this world the power of the Deity, although 
commensurate with the all but infinite universe in which we esist, was so 
restricted by conditions as to induce that enormous diversity of position in 


,v Google 


MORAL IKFLCENOE OF SPUUTUAlrSJI. 1S9 

the scale of animation which has hecn presented to view. Yet in tlie 
world to come these defects and vices are liable to be remedied; and, 
though they react upon their Tiotim, it is with a view to his own ultimate 
benefit. There is not a malevolent devil to seize the poor miscreant, and, 
like the savage Indian, torture him with a fiend-like pleasure. Ho is re- 
garded with compassion, and as soon as contrition is induced, treated with 
sympathy by the higher spirits, and assisted by counsel and enlightened 
by instruction. Unable any longer to indulge his bad propensities, the 
f rbing to a higher level becomes a passion. lotelleotual and 
easures begin to be enjoyed. So long as he remains under the iu- 
flnence of his mundane appetites, ho has to consort with spirits who are 
similarly actuated ; they read each other's mind, and thus are made 
acquainted with the deformity of their own. They eventually thus be- 
come instrumental in reciprocal coiTection, So soon as an aspiration for 
a better state is awakened, they rise to the nest plane or circle above that 
in which they may have been existing ; the only difficulty is in taking the 
first step. Progression grows with its growth, and strengthens with it« 
strength, so that all beings may sooner or later attain to the highest sphere 
in the spirit world. It should be understood that there is no pardon for 
esiating sin. Pardon can only exist as a consequence of reform, and in 
proportion thereto. (92.) 

730. An assailant of Spiritualism, who not long since lectured at San- 
som Street Hall, founded one of his charges on the commiseration felt 
by good angels for sinners, agreeably to Spiritualism. But from the ex- 
amination above given respecting the origin of the difference between the 
virtuous and vicious, does it not appear that the fate of the latter is quite 
as hard as can he reconciled with justice, even under the more benign in- 
stitution of Spiritualism ? According to this, there exist in the spirit 
world six spheres, each subdivided into six circles or planes, forming to- 
gether a succession of grades in which the soul finds its place according 
to moral and intellectual merit. The first of the spheres is tliroughout 
comparatively hideous in its aspect and disgusting in its inhabitants, who 
are designated by a dark halo in lieu of the effulgence which distinguishes 
spirits of the rest of the spheres. Moreover, this distinguishing efful- 
gence, as well as the beauty of the spirit world, augments with the grade 
of the being whom it envelops, thus making a series of ranks in society 
founded on real nobility of head and heart. When it is considered that 
this immense diversity ensues mainly from contingency in denization, 
education, and greater or less exposure to trial, it mast be cleai that the 
difference made between the good and the bad by Spiritualism does not 
fall short of the degree which human reason can reconcile with justice. 

731. The assailant of Spiritualism to whom allusion was made, while 
admitting the truth of the evidence given of communication with spirits, 
explained it by reference to Satan. It is remarkably inconsistent with 


;;■ Google 


140 MORAL ISPLUENOE OP Sl'IEITUALISM. 

this idea tliat this evidence ia of a nature to abrogate tlie esistence, and 
of course the sovereignty, of that imaginary arch-fiend. Again, it can 
hardly he conceived that the greater conimiseration for sinners should 
come from a malevolent devil, and the urging for everlasting and cruel 
torture from a sincere disciple of the benevolent Jesus Christ. But how 
much, then, must it shock one who embraces these views, that in addition 
to the misfortune of being badly organiaed, badly educated, and badly 
tempted, the being subjected to these disadvantages is to be exposed eter- 
nally to misery, typified, if not realized, by broiling on bwrning brimstone ! 
I am aware that doing away with the more horrible attributes of hell will 
be alleged to be subversive of one of the restraints upon criminality; but, 
in the first place, it is evident that a man who is restrained from crime 
solely by the fear of punishment is only a more prudent villain than one 
who is not restrained by that selfish apprehension. When a man is de- 
terred from crime only by prudence, hope of reward, or fear of punish- 
ment, he ought not to have a higher grade in heaven than the perpetrator 

732. But, agreeably to experience, of all restraints upon crime, none are 
more efficacious than the fear of degradation. The lawyer who will do the 
bidding of a caucus (or of a powerful demagogue in the executive office) 
in order to get a judicial appointment, when securely seated therein, will 
not give a oblige which will degrade Iiim in the eyes of the legal pro- 
fession, and consequently in that of society, as well as in his own estima- 
tion. The di'ihonest gambler, who neglects to pay his tradesman's bill, 
will not fill to piy his gambling debts. The debtor who will take every 
advantage in getting a high price for his goods, and who will put off any 
other payment as long as possible, fails not to pay his note at a bank. 
Sovereign states, who pay no other claims, take every means to meet the 
interest oa their funded obligations. " Failure" in the one case, in the 
meroantile adaptation, involves the loss of reputation for good financial 
faith, abroad as well as at home ; but the just complaints of domestic 
claimants, not heard upon the exchange, are unheeded. The great object, 
in many eases, is not to leave the crime "undone, but to keep it unknown." 
The corrupt, selfish politician, who would promoto war in order to give 
himself an opportunity of emolumeut or ofEcial pre-eminence, when facing 
the enemy in the field of battle will nominally die for that country whose 
interests he has sacrificed. But not from the alleged motive will he die, 
but either to avoid being degi-aded as a coward, or for the hope of popu- 
larity which may help him to office. 

733, In the spirit world, all ai-e seen through and justly estimated, so 
that degradation and vice, or elevation and virtue, are inevitably associated 
by spiritual intuition. Yet there is, in my opinion, far more satisfactory 
proof of the truth of Spiritualism than of any other creed involving im- 
mortality; while, so far as adopted, it must tend to do away with priest- 


;;■ Google 


THE HEAVEN AND HELL OF SPIRITUALISM COHrHASTED- J41 

craft, eeotarian malevolence, and religions intolerance. Man will go to the 
spirits of hia ancestors for his religion, aot to a fanatical, bigoted, or inte- 
rested priest, Stould spirits actually exist, as supposed, and conyey the 
same reli^ous knowledge all over the world, all men will agree that virtue 
13 to ho the means of salvation, not bigotry, under the name of faith. 

734. It is conceived that Spiritualism has all the desirable attributes of 
religion, as stated in the second page of the introduction of this work. It 
sanctions the idea of the existence of one Supreme Being, who is repre- 
sented as all love to his creatures ; while his powers are made known to us 
by the sublimity, profundity, magnificence, and inconceivable extent of 
the creation which he rules. It does not represent him as selfishly creat- 
ing us for the purpose of worshipping him, as capable of jealousy or im- 
plaoable wrath for the result of errors which his alleged omnipotence could 
by a fiai correct. On the contrary, we have been created to be happy 
sooner or later; evil existing not through design, but in consequence of 
conditions which he cannot control or cure unless through the operation 
of general principles. 

735. With a view to mutual happiness, reciprocal beneficence is enjoined. 
We are required to obey the precepts of acting toward others as we would 
have them act toward us. 

736. This innate law is appealed to instinctively by any child who is 
oppressed by another larger than itself, and was consecrated by Confucius 
six hundred years before its judicious sanction by Christ. 

737. Spiritualism has the merit pre-eminently not only of furnishing a 
knowledge of immortality beyond the grave, but a precise knowledge of 
the spirit world in Jieu of the silence of the Pentateuch and the vagueness 
and inconsistency of the gospel. An effort to establish the truth of those 
allegations will be made under the next head. 


THE HEAVEN AKD HELL OF SPIEITUALISM COKTRASTED WITH 
TOE HFi\EN A^D IILLL t S RI TUR 
738. On the fii-st bj t 
the mass of observers w 
intellectual communi t ' 
tedious process, it wa d 

could be made out, o It w t bj t w th 

inquirers to ascert^a byth t h^ ^^feg ^^ ^ ^ P 
of a relation or friend w lly p t 11 ^ 1 by th I P d I t 

Hence, the communications weie i ery deficit nt as respects any informatun 
of the spirit world. It is not sui-prising, therefore, that prejudicial unbe- 
lievers should have taken up the idea that there is nothing inviting in the 


t t t M 


t tl t 


Ij t 


th ph, 1 f 


t Inth 


t,l 


kt 1> t th 


b n bt 


dbj 


fE ntly t t 


g f fw 


at 


, Google 


142 WITH THE heaven asu hell of scuirTURE. 

heaven of Spiritualism. I hope that, iigreeahly to the eommunieations 
from the spirit world recorded iu the preceding pages, there is euough to 
create an ardent desire to hecome a dweller therein. 

739. But ia it not nnreasocable for a person to disdain a state of exist- 
ence which is hy the spirits themselvea described as "ineffably" happy? 
Alluding to the progression, which is to carry spirits eventually among the 
ministering angels of Grod, I observed to my spirit friend, Dr. W. E. Chan- 
ning, that I did not consider him in heaven yet. " Were you situated as I 
am," said he, " you would not say that I" But let us see how far the ideaa 
of heaven, as waiTanted in Soripture, are comparable with those which have 
been communicated by spirits. 

740. In a work by the Rat. Mr. Harbaugh, of the G-erman Keformed 
Church of Lancaster, Pa., a great effort is made to collect all the hints 
respecting heaven which have been given in the Old and New Testaments. 
This learned divine quotes the following paragi'aph from Dr. Chalmers : 
" The common imagination," says Dr. Chalmers, " that we have a paradise 
on the other side of death, is that of a lofty aerial region, where the inmates 
fioat in ether, or are mysteriously suspended upon nothing — where all the 
warm and sensible accompaniments which give such an expression of 
strength, and life, and colouring to our present habitation, are attenuated 
into a sort of spiritual element; that is, meagre and imperceptible, and 
utterly uninviting to the eye of mortals here below; where every vestige 
of materialism is done away, and nothing left but unearthly scenes, that 
have no power of allurement, and certain unearthly ecstacies, with which 
it is felt impossible to sympathize." 

741. After reading and believing the representations of heaven given 
by the immortal inhabitants of the spirit world, who can avoid turning in 
disgust from the portrait thus cited by Dr. Chalmers? 

742. The most favourable idea of heaven given in Scripture seems to 
be that which identifies it with Paradise; in other words, a most beautiful 
garden. But who would conceive an eternal residence in one garden, 
however superlative its attractions, as desirable? The idea of the spheres 
assumes a succession of gardens, with every pleasure, every joy of which 
the human heart and intellect are capable; and beyond those gardens 
the whole universe is open to us, and an ultimate ministration as angels 
under our Heavenly Eather. 

743. The portraiture cited by Chalmers is not approved of by the E«v. 
Mr. Harbaugh, but in order to confute it he does not resort to any belter 
picture given in the Bible, but to reasoning. This shows that, learned as 
he is, and idolatrous as he appears in worshipping the Bible as an ade- 
(juate fountain of light, he cannot get from the object of this idolatry any 
passage tending to prove the inconsistency of the idea quoted from Chal- 
mers with Scripture. Were there not the greatest poverty of instruction 
on this all-important subject, the ideas aUeged to exist as above mentioned, 


,v Google 


THE HE N 14 

upon the liigt tli y f D Ch lin 11 h 1 d fli t 

.currency toiaet t ItmybosinltltiiCht 

oeive themsel? t b b It nt tl d t th j y f li Ih fh 

twelve apostles fCltl dthwlwi nyjUt f 

a bliss higher th ll t ff d d by Sp t 1 m ul 1 h 1 n ot 
tained hj those d pi t tly w th S [ t I d m t n j nt t 

refer the langu g hUt fhmh-jth D M t I !j fw 

lines from I>r. Harbaugh, wherein he quotes the query put to that Master, 
by the twelve, and tbe consequent reply. Nothing can be further from 
my idea of a happy state than the benefaction promised to tliem. The 
query and reply are subjoined, in oi-der to enable the reader to judge of 
both T — Behold, vie Jiave left all and followed ikee : what shall we have 
therefor? The Saviour answered the above query when made by Peter, 
as follows : — When the Son of Man shall sit upon the throne of his glory, 
ye shall also sit upon twelve thro^ies, judging the twelve tribes of Xsrael. 
Here is a direct answer hy Christ to an inquiry respecting the nature of 
the i-eward which his disciples were to have for their merits as his faithful 
devotees. Tliey are to ba made se\eril]y woilJly dignitaries; each is to 
sit on a throne, jud^ng a tribe of Israel That is, they are to have 
worldly pre-eminence, accompanied, of courie, hy all the vexations attend- 
ant on auch stations^ as well as the uncertainty and limitation arising from 
liability to death and disease. How weak ind worldly-minded must his 
disciples have been, could such a piospeot bi- alluring to them ! I ask for 
any sectarian to say in candour, whether a governorship over one of the 
wealthiest States, the presidency, or any sovereignty in Christendom, 
would be deemed a heaven in comparison with that eternity of ineffable 
happiness enjoyed by the immortal spirits of tbe higher spheres? Yet 
Mr. Harbaugh, with the simplicity of blind faith, quotes this without per- 
ceiving how meagre is the gospel evidence thus afforded of the joys 
awiuting the faithful as a reward for their good conduct in this life. 

744. The following remarks, made hy Mr. Harbaugh, demonstrate how 
partial sectarians are ia reading Scripture: " What shall we have tlierefoT ? 
This is a question that freguffttUy arises in the Christian's mind, as he 
ejideavotira to cheer his ofitimes drooping ^irtts with a look tomard the 
recompense of reward. What shall we have? We have left all for thee, 
and by foMoimng fliee we have confessed that we aire pilgrims and strangers 
■upon earth. Tn diis world we shall have tribulation; but thov didst over- 
come the world; what shall those have who overcame wi& thee?" Har- 
baugh remarks : "Sere f/ien is curiosity whicA the Saviour Himself ap- 
proves, because he satisfies it. The same pious ouriostly still manifests 
itself in ike minds of God^s people in their holiest hours, and shall there 
"be nothing revealed to satisfy them f Yes, Gfod wUl approve of such -m- 
guiries, and loill grant the ivfiuence of that Spirit, who leads -unto all 
truth to all those who search the Scripture for an answer." Drawing an 


,v Google 


144 WITH THE HEAVEN AND HELL OF 

eloquent picture of the nspirationa of the soul for some realizntion of the 
vaguo ideas of the rewards of the faithful in a future state of existence, 
he esulta that this curiosity, as he calls it, stould he sanctioned by Christ, 
"who approves this curiosity hecause he satisfies it." How does he 
satisfy it ? la it by holding up the hope of a judgeship for each ? It 
seems it was not then foreseen that instead of performing the part of the 
Jewish Messiah, with which he thus identified himself, that of gathering 
together the chosen, people of God, he was to put forth opinions which 
were to scatter them through the world. " Wo unto you, Choraain," 
&c., for the heinous offence of not admitting him to be both the Messiah 
and the Son of God, The promise of the judgeships was quite consist- 
ent with, the former character, and strengthens the idea that he never pre- 
tended to any higher mission. With this the promise in question is con- 
sistent, but is wholly irreconcilable with his divinity, which would maie 
these judgeships worse than ^ving a stoue for bread or a serpent for a 
fish. In order to have bestowed these judgeships, the Roman empire 
must have been subverted. It seems that if (as stated by the worthy Mr. 
Harbaugh) the curiosity of Ute disciples was truly and c<yrrec&y satisfied, 
that this satisfaction was the sum total of the Leaven with which they 
were remunerated ; since not the slightest hint is given that they were, 
like the penitent thief, to be with their object of devotion in paradise. 
It would seem, on the whole, that the rewards of the thief and the beggar 
Lazarus were of a more heavenly nature than those promised to the apos- 
tles, even had the latter been susceptible of realization, instead of being 
irreconcilable with the doom which awaited the Hebrews, and conse- 
quently a mere vox eiprwterea nihil. But while, in lieu of an eternal pro- 
gressive happiness, Ohiist holds up the transient, precarious, and limited 
supremacy from which a truly pious and wise man would turn in disgust, 
when hell is to be represented, we have eternal torments typified by fire, 
and weeping and gnashing of teeth in utter darhness, in despite of this 
fire. The situation which Christ, the Son of God, was to have, was to 
bear manifestly a relation to that of his disciples. His situation would 
be somewhat analogous to that of Washington, when he was in the presi- 
dential chair, and the thirteen States were governed by as many of his 
faithful followers in the Kevolutionary War. Yet Washiugtoa did not 
find his chair worth retaining longer than the good of the country made 
it important to remain. I am confident that neither would that great man 
leave his position ia the seventh sphei-e for the presidency, nor any spirit 
among those who held the gubernatorial dignity, as suggested, find a 
governorship now a motive for leaving their bright abodes in the celestial 

745. Dr. Harbaugh sanctions the idea that the revolutions of all the 
constellations with which telescopic esamination has made us acquainted, 
may take place about a central sun, bearing the relation to other suns 


;;■ Google 


AND HELL OF SPIRITUALISM CONTKASTED 145 


analogous to that wBicb. God has been represented to have to the other 
potentates ; whctiee the title of " King of kings." The esistence, then, of 
a sun of suns is suggested, about which the cons(«llafiona formed by in- 
ferior bodies of the same kind revolve. It would seem, then, that a more 
fitted all tm nt had b a made if, enthroned by his Father's side on that 
sun of un h h d Hotted to each of his disciples a constellation, than 
have ass n d to th ra miserable transitory judgeships in Judea ; a speck 
of territ y in tl IS p k of a globe, which in a field of vision embrac- 
ing the un w uld be imperceptible 

746. Th b ng n Scripture so much more stress laid upon the tor- 
mMits of h U th n th joys of heaien, 13 probibly the reason why the 
hoi-ror f d th g at among Chiistians in general. Their practice 
in this 2 t to p k of death as a great calamity. Here and there 
may be found a behever who is thoroughly convinced that the efficacy of 
his peculiar tenets, combined with the absence of criminality, nnd the 
redeeming influence of repentance, will insure him a passage to heaven; 
but the predominant language is to p nt th d th f y large number 
of human beings as a great ealam ty Th wh posed to danger 
pray most earnestly to be saved, d tl d th alw ys treated as 
a cause for deep regret by survi f nd H th weeping, the 
grief, and the mourning called for by ust m — th ! t d connections 
weai-ing black for months. Hen th 1 k h rs th black pall, and 
bitter lamentation oyer the grave ;w]lhwthtt nt realised that 
death is only a glorious spiritual b th I m fid nt tb t apintualists 
will soon abandon a custom which mu&t tl p t I inconsistent; 
since they must look on death as n b t than a residence 
in a foreign country, the means of mm t b w thin reach, and 
a happy reunion foreseen. 

747. When on board of a steamer under way at night, tho possibibty 
of her going down occurring to my mind, I felt cheered by the idea that 
I should not go down with her, but soar to the spirit world with my im- 
mortal friends, who would flock to meet my apotheosis. (Page 101,) 

748. It has been urged that a most substantial idea of heaven, given in 
the old Bible, is that of a restoration to Paradise, of which the descrip- 
tion gives the idea of an exquisite, beautiful garden; but Spiritualism 
gives tho idea of garden above garden, improving in beauty with their 
elevation. Then there are thirty-six gradations in all, and in the five 
happy spheres thirty ; so that there is excitement arising from well-re- 
warded emulation as a sonrce of interest. Into the idea of heaven, as 
suggested in Scripture, intellectual ability and improvement form no part 
and give no superiority; whence the tendency of the more strict construc- 
tionists to turn a cold shoulder to every acquirement which is not coupled 
with scriptural knowledge. Neither the Athenteum, nor any library, is tj> 
be accessible on Sunday. If the time deroted at meetings and at church 


;;■ Google 


146 "WITH THE HEAVEN AND HELL 01^ SCRlI'TtiRE. 

were giveu to tlie study of tlie real book of God, how iutio!i more learned 
would be those who thus employ their Sundays ! It is held that the low- 
est and most ignorant person who is educated to believe implicitly the 
tenets of a sect, when he would by the same process as easily be made to 
believe any other tenets, is in heavea to be is hi^h as the most enlight 
eued as well as virtuous man, who has the only merit which can be 
attached to belief in a high degree — that cf ardent desire for truth and 
taking the pains to form an opinion for himself Nay the ignoi'snt bigot 
is to be higher in heaven, if the freethinker alluded to, should n t agree 
with the ghostly adviser, of the devoted secfariin with whom he ij com 
pared. 

749. The idea of living in the finest garlen which imagination an eon 
ceive, without the enjoyments and progression which my fathers com 
munication attributes to the spheres, would beget tedium iithei than the 
ineffable happiness which my spirit friends jiofess to eajoy But while 
one of the Jewish ideas of heaven in its best form, is thus deficient thf, 
(lescriptiou given by the learned Josephus of hell is homble in the ei 
treme, that of heaven being disgusting. 1 gne it tj I find itqiotel ij 
the Rev. Mr. Harbaugh : 

750. " Now as to Hades, wherein the souls of the iighfeoua and un 
righteous are detained, it is necessary to sjeit of it Hides i? a place m 
the world not regularly finished, a subterr.ine us region, wherein the light 
of this world does not shine; from which circumstance lu this region 
there must be perpetual darkness. This region is allotted as a place of 
custody for souls, in which angels are appointed js guardians to them who 
distribute to them temp "a y p ' hn nt g e bly to eve j o '« b h 

751. "Itt this region th a ta n pi t ap t a^ ! k f 
unquenchable fire, wher nt w ip n nhthhthtob a>t 
but it is prepared for a 1 y af J t n d by C d n wh h n ^1 1- 
eous sentence shall dese dly 1 p d pon m n wl n th u lust 
and those that have been disobedient to (rod, and have given honour to 
such idols as have been the vain operations of the hands of men as to God 
himself, shall be adjudged !« this everlasting punishment, as having been 
the causes of defilement j while the just shall obtain an incorruptible and 
never-fading kingdom. These are now indeed confined in Hades, but not 
in the same place wherein the just are confined. For there is one descent 
in this region, at whose gate, we believe, there stands an arehangel, with 
a host; which gate, when those pass through that arc conducted down by 
the angels appointed over souls, they do not go the same way, but the just 
are guided to the right hand, and are led with hymns, sung by the angels 
appointed over that place, unto a region of light, in which the just have 
dwelt from the beginning of the world, not constrained by necessity, but 
ever enjoying the prospect of the good things they see, and rejoicing in 


;;■ Google 


TDE HE EN 


B M CONTEASTED 147 


the expectation f tl 
one of them, an 1 tp 


w J J t wh h w 11 be peculiar to eveiy 
th th bj 1 hat we have here; with 


whom there is n pi 
briers tiiero; hut th 


f t 1 b fc h t piercing cold, nor any 
te f th t th nd the just, which they 


see always, smil p 


th m wh 1 th y w t f the rest, and eternal new 


life in heaven, wh h 


t d th This place we call the 


hosom of Ahrah m 


B t to th J t tl y re dragged by force to 


the left hand, hy th 


g 1 11 ttcd f p hm t, no longer going with 


a good will, but p 
angels appointed 
their terrible lo 1 


d by 1 to whom are sent the 
th m t I I th d threaten them with 
d t thru t th m 1 11 d w ird. Now these angels 


that ai-e set ove th i d ^ ^ ™ * '^i neighbourhood of hell 
itaeff; who, wh tl y h Uy t t lly hear the noise of it, and 
do not stand cl f th t t p t It b t when they Lave a near 


view of this spe I 
they are struck with 


f t bl d 1 g great prospect of fire, 
a feacftil expectation of a future judgment, and in 


effect punished thereby; not only so, but when they see the place (or choir) 
of the fathers and of the just, even thereby are they punished, for a chaos 
deep and large is fixed between them, insomuch that a just man that hath 
compassion upon them cannot be admitted, nor can any one that is unjust, 
if he were bold enough to attempt it, pass over it." 

752. So much for Josephus. Mr, Harbaugh subjoins as follows : "This 
estract is exceedingly interesting. It shows to what extent of distinctness 
the Jewish ideas of the future state had attained. The dreamlike under- 
world is here considerably illuminated. The righteous and the wicked are 
separated, aud already share the first fraits of their eternal reward. The 
righteous are surrounded with intimations and shadowy promises of better 
things to come, in the expectation of which they are already happy j the 
wicked are surrounded with tokens and forebodings of more fearful ill, 
much of which they already Buffer ja awful expectation. 

753. "Through this picture," aaya our good paison, "we see in faint 
but terrible glimmerings, in the distance, the region of eternal fire, which 
awaits the wicked when the judgment-day shall remove them from Hades; 
on the other hand, we see also the dawning of an eternal day for the just, 
the rest and eternal new life which is fo succeed this region. This king- 
dom of the dead, beyond which the thoughts of men in the early ages did 
not wander, is considered only as a place of detention for judgment, while 
the idea of a final state, both for the righteous and the wicked, is believed 
lo exist beyond it." 

754. How can any person sincerely pretend that those who rely on a 
happy idea of our immortal life are indebted for it to the source from 
which this Hebrew Pharisee derived the impressions given in the preceding 
quotation ? Yet the Pharisees were the only conspicuous Hebrew sect 
who believed in heayen. The Sadduoees did not believe in immortality. 


,;■ Google 


148 WITH THE HEAVEN AND HELL OP BClllPTUILE. 


755. The history of Luzams and the rich man, (saya Harhaugh, page 
168,) "plainly teaches that hoth the righteous and the wicked on death 
pass into a fised and eternal abode, where no change is possible;" a.Bd he 
further states (pp. 169-70) that " the misery of the wicked commences 
iramedjately after death, and before the resnrreotion, and their condition 
is unchangeably fixed." According to St. Luko, (chapter sri.) in the page 
alluded to above by Harbangli, wc are informed that the wicked, while in 
the torture of hell-fire, are within the view of the righteous, (verse 23.) 
The righteous are near enough to converse with those in torment, and yet 
there is an impassable barrier between them. The rich man is not tor- 
tured for his sins, but simply because be had "enjoyed good tilings." Yet 
Abraham, who turned his son and son's mother out in the wilderness to 
starve, and twice exposed hia wife to prostitution, is represented as enjoy- 
ing the reward due to the righteous. 

756. How little sincere, heartfelt belief there can be in the words of 
Christ, may be estimated from the fact that scarcely any Ohristiau hut 
seeks for the good things of this life, instead of qualifying themselves for 
heaven by undergoing the rewarded privations of a Lazarus. 

757. It ia utterly unintelligible to my mind why repentance and re- 
formation should not avMl after, as well aa before death, as it ia represented 
to be in the spirit world. 

758. There is a coincidence between these representations of Joaephus 
and those of the gospel, so far as that both represent the righfeoua as wit- 
nessing the torments of the wicked. Would not such a situation make 
heaven a heli to good-hearted angels ? 

759. According to Matthew, (chapter siv. 24,) the blessed, after the 
day of judgment, are to inherit Hie hingdom, prepared from tlie founda- 
tion of ilie ioorld. Of the joys that kingdom would afford there is no 
description. But, as usual, hell is made sufficiently horrible, (chapter xxy. 
41,) — "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels." 

760. In this respect, if in ao other, there ia an immense superiority in 
the conoepfions of faturity given by my immortal adTiaers, in comparison 
with those attributed as above to Christ. 

761. It has been ur^ed that human conduct is so much dependent on 
organization, education, temptation, and example, neither of which are 
within the option of any soul, that the orthodox doctrine respecting sin is 
manifestly wrong. But admitting the culpability which that doctrine im- 
putes, it has been shown that the gradations of sinfulness between the 
extremes of vice and virtue are innumerable. Suppose for each gi'adatiou 
a strand in a ladder, like that of which Jacob dreamed, and human souls 
supported severally at elevations commensurate with their respective pre- 
tensions. Thia adjustment being made, suppose a plane at any level to 
divide the vertical row into two portions, all below the plane being con- 


;;■ Google 


IKSTIKCTIVE IMPRESSION 149 

sidered as goats, all above tte plane as sheep. Evidently, between the 
soul just above, and that just below the plane, there would be only a ahade 
of difference; yet the one would have to go to hell, the other to heaven, 
eternally. 

762. According to Spiritualism, on entering the spirit world each soul 
finds its just level by a sort of moral specific gravity, in whioh merit is 
inversely as weight. Every soul, moreover, has the pi-ivilege of reform- 
ing, and rising proportionally to the improvement thus obtained. 

763. One of the most agreeable conceptions attending our future es- 
istenoe in the spheres, is thatof being restored to the appearance of youth; 
the decrepitude and wrinkles of age, of disease, mutilation, deformity, 
ugliness, are all avoided in the spiritual body. The insane are restored to 
reason, the idiot gradually improved in mini3. 


DISCORDANCE AS TO THE WHEEEABODT OF THE SCRIPTURAL HEAVEN. 
— raSTINCTIVE IMPRESSION AS TO HEAVEN BEING OVERHEAD. 

764. Theee is no small degree of contradiction in Scripture respecting 
the locality of heaven. In addressing the thief, paradise is identified with 
heaven by Ohrist. "iSL Paul is alleged to have been, taJeen up into para- 
dise," says Harbaugh; yet, according to the map accompaoying the work 
of Josephus, Paradise is represented as being upon the river Tigris, near the 
Persian G-ulf. The idea given of the abode of Adam and Eve, in Genesis, 
conveys the impression that it was a terrestrial locality. 

765. In the Decalogue the abbreviation of life is threatened as the pu- 
nishment for not honouring parents, and God is alleged to have held out 
the promised land to Moses, instead of comforting him by a clairvoyant 
view of a place of blissful enjoyment in some celestial region, 

766. Elijah was carried up to heaven in the sight of Elisha. The com- 
mandment makes heaven above, the earth beneath. Christ was seen as- 
cending by his disciples, and according to the apostles' creed, after descend- 
ing into hell, be arose on the third day and ascended into heaven. Yet 
Josephus consigns both heaven and hell to a subterranean region, like the 
Elysian Fields and Erebus of the heathen, but places them on each side 
of a lake of everlasting fire. This representation is sanctioned in the 
allusion by Christ to Dives, Lazarus, and Abraham ; the former, broiling 
to eternity, requests that Lazanis should get a little water to cool the tip 
of his tongue. This Abraham declares to be impossiile. Hence it ap- 
pears the parties were so near as to converse with each other, and for those 
who were blest to witness the sufferings of the damned. Thus, according 
to Christ as well as Josephus, heaven and hell are in immediate prosiraity, 
and both must be in the infernal regjons. 


,v Google 


150 AS TO HEAVEN BEING OVERHEAD. 

767. The actual effects of the old Bible were to produce either unhe- 
lievers in immortality, like the Badduoees, or iinmoral helievcri, lilte the 
Pharisees, whom Christ especially denounces as vipen, and internally cor- 
rvpt, nice wJtiled sepulchres holding dead men's hones. 

768. Christ never singles out the Sadduoees for denunciation, but speaks 
of the Pharisees partioula ly as hyp t cal d iTupt. But in what 
did their hypocrisy consist f t w t th t incerity of their pro- 
fessions as respects helief ft ty wh h. w bown by their world- 
liness. 

769. Thus the evidence f th t f f ture state was such as 
to produce avowed unhelie p fes 1 bel s whose morality was 
so deficient as to create an i n th t th y w corrupt hypocrites, as 
odious as vipsre. 

770. It is not thefeeblen fth mp ess pecting the existence 
of another world, where h^pn Pp' I*o good conduct, that 
renders the existing system n p rat p ting those vices which 
it especially interdicts; as f ta mb t ness, cupidity, and re- 
vengefulaess ; so that the ur? u ually p n d by professed Christians, 
does not merely amount to n gl f Ch p cepta, but renders an 
adherence to them disrepul b! N th ^ m degrading throughout 
Christendom than poverty or tame submission to blows. The last excuse 
Christians in general will make for any omission or deficiency is their 
poverty. 

771. If they really believed that they would broil to eternity, like the 
rich man, merely for seeking the good things of this life, would the attain- 
ment of those good things be made the great object of their existence ? 

772. Notwithstanding the representations of Josepbua, sanctioned, as 
above shown, by Christ, of the subterranean localization of Elysium, there 
seems, nevertheless, aa inslinctive propensity to assume that heaven is 
overhead. Clergymen all look upward when they address God, and the 
Thespian artists universally follow their example. Whenever heaven is 
referred to, it is customary, I believe, for all devout persona to tura their 
eyes in the same direction. 

773. Bat if heaven be above, what does this term alove mean ? It 
practically designates a vertical dii-ectlon relatively to this globe at any 
point over which a speaker who uses the word may stand. Consequently, 
it indicates a space overhead, having everywhere the same relative position 
to the terrestrial surface; in other words, a region concentric with that 
surface, like that within which the clouds float. This floating takes place 
rarely at a less distance than two, or more than sis, miles. 

774. The spiritual spheres are estimated, as already mentioned, as being 
between sixty and one hundred and twenty miles from the earth's surface. 
They are, therefore, analogous in position to the region of the clouds, though 
at a much greater distance and vastly more capacious. 


;;■ Google 


THE laOE DOCTRINE, 151 

775. According to Ohviatianity, ttere is no immortality for animals 
below the grade of humanity; but according to Spiritnalisni, aniiQals 
that are favourites of man in this world are his compaiiions in the nest. 
Much stress is laid on the singing of birds in the account given of the 
spheres. There is a line of demarcation below which the privilege of an 
existence after death is not enjoyed. Eespecting that bcmndary my in- 
formation is at present incomplete. 

776. In order to do justice to the excellent and learned clergyman to 
whom I have so often referred, I will annex the whole of those pages in 
which he conceives himself to give the "true doctrind' respeofiog heaven. 
However unsatisfactory it may be to me, I hope it will be found interesting 
to those who, like the author, loot only to the Bible for informatioE respecf- 
ing their existence beyond the grave. 


"THE TRUE DOCTRINE" 

Respecting Seavm,, according to the Rev. S. HarhaugTi, Pastor of the 

First Gevmaii Reformed Church, Lancaster, Penna. 

"Ono gentlo aigh thoir fetter bretiks; 

SeforQ tbfl Hilling spirit t&kes 
Her mansion near the tlirone." 

777. "The different theories by which the souls of sainta are supposed 
to be detained from entering heaven immediately at death, have now been 
exhibited. They have led us a long and dreary chase. The groundless- 
ness of these theories has been, in part, shown in connection with a state- 
ment of them. They will, however, be more completely overthrown by a 
statement of the true doctrine, and by the arguments that may be adduced 
in its support. Various arguments that, in passing along, were offered 
against these false views, will also substantiate the true doctrine; thus the 
same implements that have been used to tear down the old building may 
b rapl V 1 to erect the new. If, therefore, any thing should be pre- 

tel th 3 section, among other things, which may seem to have been 
P at d i) fore, it mast be rememhei'ed that though they are the same 
t 1 th y re now used to do a different kind of execution. 

8 ^\ e consider the true doctrine of God's word on this subject to 
b th The saints do immediately, at death, enter that place which is 
called heaven, where the body of the Saviour now is, where the divine 
manifestations are most clearly and gloriously made, where angels have 
their proper homo, and where all the heirs of Christ shall finally and for 
evermore bo assembled. 

770. "That the sainta pass immediately at death into heaven, is taught, 
in the symbol iu some of the most pioua and learned denominations in. 


;;■ Google 


152 THE TEUE DOCTRINE. 

tb.e ciiii ct We grant that ttis does not prove it absolutely tme; but it 
1 a? m b w ght, as showing how the Scripture on this subject was nu- 
d r?t od by many pious aad learned men who had the same interest in 
and mot ves for the truth as we have, and were, we may therefore suppose, 
just as sincerely anxious to be led into the truth as we can possibly be. 
The conclusions, therefore, to which they have come, and which have been 
adopted by their numerous successors for centuries, are valuable. Beside 
furnishing us with the testimony of so much learning and piety, it serves 
to show that this is no new idea, and that it is not the faith of a few, but 
is the testimony of the church. 

780. "The first symbolical testimony we produce is the Heidelberg Ca- 
techism, published first in 1563, This symbol has been the embodiment 
of the reformed faith for more than three centuries. Its influence has 
been very extensively respected and felt. It has, since its publication, 
been translated and read in at least fourteen different languages; and it 
is said that half a million editions of it have been published in Germany 
alone. In this country it is received aa a symbolic book, both in the Dutch 
Reformed and in the German E«formed churches. In the fifty-seventh 
question it is asked. What comfort is afforded to «a by the doctrine of the 
resurrection of the body; and the answer is: 'That not only my soul 
after this life shall he immediatdj/ taken up to Christ its head; but also, 
that my body, being raised by the power of Christ, shaU be reunited with 
my soul, and be made like unto the glorious body of Christ.' Here the 
doctrine is plinnly taught, and has been responded to with a joyful amen 
by millions during three hundred years. 

781. "The next is from the Shorter Catechism, received as a symbolic 
book in the different branches of the Presbyterian communion. It is in 
answer to the thirty-seventh question : ' What benefits do believers receive 
from Christ at death ? The souls of believers are at their death made 
perfect in holiness, and do immediately pass into glory ; and tieir bodies, 
being sljll united to Christ, do rest in their graves till the resurrection.' 
In the eighty-sisth question of the Larger Catechism this same doctrine 
is taught in more words. The following quotation is from the Westmin- 
,ster OonfeaaioE of Faith : ' The bodies of men, after death, return to dust 
.and see corruption; but their souls, (which neither die nor sleep,) having 
an immortal substance, immediately return to God who gave tbem. The 
.souls of the righteous, being tJien made perfect in holiness, are received 
.into the highest heavens, where they behold the face of God in light and 
.glory, waiting for the full redemption of their bodies.' The declaration 
ithat they are 'then made perfect in holiness,' is no doubt directly aimed 
.against the idea of a process of purgatorial or medicinal preparation, men- 
tioned in a previous section. Tlie declaration that they are then ' received 
.into the highest heavens,' is intended to stand in opposition to the idea of 
.a middle abode in all its forms. 


;;■ Google 


TOE TEUE DOCTRINE. 153 

782. " The book of ' Doctrines and Discipline of the Methodist Episco- 
pal CUuvch' is silent on ttia subject j but, so far aa I have been able to 
learn, the proper Protestant doctrine on this subject is held in that large 
eommunion. Their views of the nature of justification and sanctification 
would admit of no other to be consistently believed among them. It is 
believed that this is also the prevailing sentiment among Baptists, and 
other Congregationalists. 

783. " What is here presented from symbols as the united faith of so 
many learned and pious men living in different ages, and in. different parts 
of the world, is also foiinded on holy Scripture. By no wresting and vio- 
lence has the church, in the general stream of its theological views, been 
turned aside from this faith. It is vain that men hope to annul, by means 
of violent and unnatural interpretations, the plain declarations of Scrip- 


Ttio eternal years of God tiro liors.' 

784. " The Saviour said to the penitent thief on the cross — ' To-day shalt 
thou be with me in paradise.' Now the question arises. Where and what 
is that paradise in which the Saviour promised the dying penitent that he 
should be with him that day ? This can be seen by referring to other pas- 
sages in tlie Scriptures where the word paradise is used, and where its 
sense cannot be mistalien. Tliis can be seen by reference to 2 Oor. sii. 
There it is said that Paul was caught np into paradise; and in the same 
passage the place into which he was taken is called the third Tieaven — the 
highest and holiest place in the universe. In Rev. ii. 7 we are told 
that the tree of life stands ia the midst of the paradise of God; and in 
Rev. sxii. 2, we are told that that same tree of life stands by the side of 
the river which flows from the throne of God and the Lamb. From this 
it ia evident that paradise is the heaven where God dwells and the Lamb. 
Is then the middle abode. Hades, the kingdom of shades, the peculiar 
abode of God and the Lamb? 

785. " The objection that the Saviour himself did not go to heaven 
that day, but was for forty days afterward on the earth, and that therefore 
he could not be with the penitent thief in paradise, has no force. Daring 
the three days that intervened between his death and resurrection, he 
eould as well be in heaven aa in Hades. Indeed, it is evident that he was 
in heaven during those three days, from what he says to his disciples 
shortly before his death ; ' A little while, and ye shall not see me ; and 
again, » little while, and ye shall see me, hecause I go to the Father.' 
Moreover, his tarrying on the earth and appearing among his discipiea does 
not conflict with the idea that he was also in paradise. When he was yet 
in the flesh on earth, he could say : ' And no man hath ascended up to 
heaven, but that he came down from heaven, even the Son of man which 


,v Google 


154 THE TRUE DOCTEINB. 

is in Tieavmi.' In the same way tlmt Iio was in teaven at that time, he 
may have been in heaven with the penitsDt thief during the forty days 
between his death and ascension. 

786. " The history of the rich man and Lazarus (Luie xvi.) plainly 
teaches that both the righteous and the wicked, at death, pass into & fixed 
and eternal abode, where no change is possible. No comment on the pas- 
sage is necessary. This portion of Scripture has a thousand times been 
tortured out of its meaning by errorists of various kinds, and as often has 
its testimony failen back into the church's healthful stream of sound views. 
As a sheep, carried away fi'om the fold, returns when set IVee, so this pas- 
sage always comes back again ; for the voice of a stranger it heareth not, 


787. " In tlie Kevelation, John, in his vision, saw the souls of departed 
martyrs and saints ' in heaven,' ' under the altar,' ' before the throne of 
God,' &G., and in the company of each other, of God, of Christ, and of 
angels, in the central and highest heavens, and in that place where the 
saints go no more out forever. Let it be remembered, also, that all this 
is he/ore the resurrection ; and if the following passages are carefully con- 
sidered, they will leave no doubt on any candid mind that the saints are, 
immediately after death, admitted into heaven. To quote them all would 
be too tedious ; a reference to them is sufficient : Eev. v. 6-14 ; vi. 9-12 ; 
vii. 9-17; xiv. 1-6; xiv. 12,13. 

788. "For further proof still the reader is referred to Acts vii. 59; 
2 Cor. V. 1-9 ; Phil. i. 21-24 ; 2 Tim. iv. 6-9 ; Eph. iii. 15. In this 
last passage, the whole family of Ohrist is represented to be at two places, 
in heaven and on earth; but according to the other theory, there ought 
also to b m H d th tl d pi 

789. It y 1 b m k 1 tl t th m y of the wicked com- 
mences d t tl S pt mm d t ly fter death, and before 
the resi t d th t th It h geably fixed. This is 
evident f Lk dlfmhtpogin Jude where he says 
that tho h h d d d m[ t t th dest tion of Sodom and Go- 
morrah w ttltmhwt ff th vengeance of eternal 
fire.' , I 1 k m t sa d f th hte t death, that they are 
blessed f m h f th d f th wh w clothed in white robes, 
having m pth ghg ttblt t il'th f thy 
before th tl f C d 

790. Th pis il d tw ill na J b y n 
have been ttptdtml-hmm jthgdifi fmh 
plain s w ttf dfliltwhh hnh 
stood in th w y f th d t th t th I f the s nts pass mm 
diately at death into heaven. Let us look at these, and see whether they 
are not fancied difficulties, whicli one glance at the truth ought to remove : 

791. (1.) " It is said that the soul, in a state of separation from the 


,v Google 


TOE TRUE DOCTaiNE. 155 

body, cannot be in tJie same state, nor properly in the same place, as it 
will he after the resurrection j and as heaven is to be the eternal abode of 
the saints after the resurrection, it eanaot he a proper abode for them 
before. This objection has, however, no force. There is, for instance, in 
this world, a great difference between a person in ehUdhood and old age, 
jea, before he is born and after, or between his sleeping and waling state; 
and jet he is in all these in the Bame world, in the same place, and is the 
same person. Tlie state and condition of the Savionr differs widely from 
that of any saint or angel, and yet both are in heaven. So angels and 
human spirits differ, and yet both are in one company and in one place. 
So in heaven the condition of the saints before and after the resurrection 
may differ much, and yet they may be, in both oases, in the same place. 

793. "(2.) The saints cannot enter teaven, it is smcI, before they are 
judged J and as the day of judgment is represented to be after the resur- 
rection, the saints cannot enter heaven until after that, and consequently 
not immediately at death. We may, however, consider, as is generally 
done, that the day of judgment is only a public and final consummation of 
the decision of man's destiny. Although God can, and no doubt, does, 
for himself, judge and decide for each one when he dies, yet it seems ne- 
eessarf for the glorious praise of his justice and righteousness that all 
other intelligences should see the propriety of his decision. This is ne- 
cessary, that every mouth may be stopped; and in order to do this he has 
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by 
that man whom he has ordained. 

793. " (3.) It is also said that the condition of many is represented in 
that day to be undecided. Thus many are said to be disappointed; 
coming to be judged, they find that their expectations of heaven are vain, 
and they say, ' Have we not prophesied, cast out devils, and done many 
wonderful works in Thy name ?' Now it is said that if these persons had 
been in a fixed state before, they could not have been in doubt on this 
matter. The force of this objection is only apparent. The representa- 
tions of the judgment are after the manner of men, and consequently our 
conceptions of it must be more or less according to what we are accus- 
tomed to see on earth. The Saviour is warning his hearers not to delay 
preparation for death; and, in order to impress his solemn eshortatioo, 
tells them that many will find themselves disappointed in their expecta- 
tions in reference to the final decision of their judge, and that their hopes 
of heaven, being built on the sand, will fail at last. It does no more ex- 
clusively refer to that day than the many warnings to prepare to meet the 
Son of Man refer to the time of his second coming. He is always coming, 
and to prepare for death is to prepare to meet him. So to find ourselves 
deceived at the day of death is the same as to find ourselves deceived at 
the day of judgment. 

794. •' (4.) Again, it is said that in some cases the full effects and 


;;■ Google 


156 THE TRUE DOCTRINE. 

consequences of persona' iiutiona are not fully worked out when persons 
die. Thus, for instance, it is known that the labours and writings of 
many infidels, who are long since dead, are still working for evil ; and on 
the other hand, the labours and writings of many good men are still work- 
ing out good. These consequences must, in a certain sense, come into the 
consideration of their punishment or reward Hente it js thought their 
destiny cannot immediately be decided. But to this it miy he repbed 
that God, who judges, knows how these eonsequencpi will work tlicm 
selves out, and is able, therefore, to give a just judgment la well at the 
day of death as at the end of the world. At the last day, when, ill cjn 
sequences have run out their history, it will be ptoper that (hpy shiuld 
he exhibited in a solemn public judgment, that all may see for themselves 
that ali his ways are just and right. Besides, there is nothiag unreason- 
able or uascriptuval in the belief that the happiness of the righteous in 
heaven, and the misery of the lost in hell, w 11 n as n sact proportion 
as the consequences of their actions on h had veloping them- 

selves, until the day of judgment, when th p w 11 b fill, and (hen the 
full draught of happiness or misery will h k n fin lly and forever ! 
Oh, what a moment will that be 1 

795. " Some additional conaideratious w U m ompletely still 
to answer these and other objections, and reeoncilo the seriou^i and thought- 
ful mind to the idea that the souls of the saints are in heaven before the 
resurrection of the body. 

796. " We shall only gain proper ideas in reference to this interesting 
subject when we have corrected our ideas of heaven, for many of them are 
evidently wrong. We are inclined to think of heaven as affording to the 
saints a fixed or stereotyped condition, without attaching to it the idea of 
degrees and progression. When we maintain that the saints pass immedi- 
ately at death into heaven, we do not mean that they enter then upon their 
final condition, or into their highest state of perfection, but only that they 
enter into that place which is their final abode. When, for instance, a 
child is born info the world, it is in the world; but it is limited in its 
observations, actions, ideas, capacities, and enjoyments, and yet all these 
are in their state perfect ; all its fiieulties occupy their place symmetii- 
cally, and we have in the ehiid a uniform but not a perfect being. Analo- 
gous to this may bo the primary stage of our future celestial history. The 
child is in the world before it is bora and during its infantile years, but 
how different is it, and how different is the world to it, from what it will 
be when ail its faculties are ripe ! So in heaven. The child before self- 
consciousness appears to enjoy an indistinct and floating life, but happy 
too; so may it be with our future condition before the resurrection of the 
body. The condition of the disembodied spirit will, no doubt, be some- 
what isolated and lonely, (in a pleasant sense,) its happiness being derived 
much, though not entirely, from the flow of its own harmonious existence, 


;;■ Google 


THE THUE DOCTRINE, 157 

and not from ifa connection witli things external. Its future conneotion 
with, its body will arrest its floating condition, and connect it again more 
consciously with locality and materiality. Thus it will become more 
capable of social relalions and joyaj just as the child emerging from its 
floating state in infancy has ita social powers developed by being furnished 
with self-consciousness and speech, by which it learna intelligently to 
separate and distinguish itself from the general mass of being, which makes 
its enjoyments higher Jn their nature and more acute and sensible in their 
quality. 

797. " Perhaps the state of the saints previous to the re&urrection of 
the body, and in the first stage of their future being, may be analogous to 
(but of course higher than) a state of ordinary sleep, with active, pleasant 
dreaming. la dreams, the spirit acta and enjoys, nnconsoious of the body; 
and may we not suppose that the spirit after death may, to a certain ex- 
tent, act and enjoy without the body ? Perhaps it may in this state pass 
profitably and pleasantly throngh the first stages of ita future history. It 
may, so to say, become habituated to eternal things, and develop ita spi- 
ritual capacities to such a degree as to be prepared, at the time of the 
resurrection, to enter upon a more tangible and positive state of existence. 
It may thus, also, become acquainted with purely spiritual beings, and with 
the modes of purely spiritual existence. This will be useful, because the 
saints after iJie resurrection will be required to hold communion with 
things material and immaterial. While the saint is in this world, in the 
body, he becomes conversant with material things, and habituated to them; 
now, in the other world, in a disembodied state, previous to the resurrec- 
tion, he will become conversant with and habituated to purely spiritual 
existence, so that after the resurrection, when soul aud body are again 
united, he will be able to hold oonverae and communion with cither mate- 
rial or immaterial existences at pleasure. 

798. " To this it may be objected that while those who lived in the 
early ages of the world would have a long time to remain in this state of 
celestial pupilage, those who live in later ages would have less, and those 
in the list days scarcely any 

799 "This objection, sv fu fiom militating agiinst this idea, moat 
beautifully lUu^tratea ind conbim? it Thus the souls ot men ari, more 
developed la spintual things now, and will be still moie in iutuie, thiin 
they were in the eaiher iges of the world Those who lived m the morn 
ing of the woild had very limited and indistinct ideis of divme and 
eternal things Their views ot a future world, especially, were exceed 
ingly misty and obsoure As the church advanced, life ind immortality 
were moie ind more biought to light Revelation jassed fiom typoi, 
shadows, and ceii,nionies into brighter ml cloirer realities, and spirifuil 
conceptions gainel a firmir and moic d ^tinot held ujon the conseiousne-* 
of men Thi, new d spen^ition w a in advince uf on the old, as undei tbt 


;;■ Google 


168 THE TRUE DOCTRINE. 

old tlie age of proptecy tad been upon the law, and the law upon the 
simple twiligtt of the pati-iarohal age. In what a different light those who 
lived after the new dispensation dawned, stood from those undei" the Old 
Testaraent, is clear from what the Sayiour sajs — 'Among those that are 
bom of women, there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist ; but 
he that is least in the kingdom of God' (in the new dispensation) <is 
greater than he.' 

800. "At the present day, clearer views are enjoyed than were enjojed 
in the early history of the Chiistian ohuroh. Let any one read the history 
of the patristic controvereies, and he will sec how the most learned stumbled 
among propoMtious in seai h f t Tith. wh h w 1 !y mj. 1 d 1 
by intelligent Sahbath-sch 1 hll Al t w 11 ^ t th 
future. Spiritual ideas wh h astntt 1th t d 
relations of which wo do n t w 11 b pp 1 d d by es t 
once. Thus, under the t t f th Si t It will h w t If 
progressive, and new things as w 11 Id f t th p t 1 
world, will be constantly a ! ss ly b ht t t Ih t f 
God's word, of which the d Sj t th m ta H w y 
ask, does all this apply to th bj t h df Tl 1 1 6 
lived in this world, the longer time for this heavenly pupilage he will have 
in the nest before the resurrection, and te needs morej the later he lived 
in this world, the less will he have in the other befoi-e the resurrection, 
and he needs less. Tlius those who enjoy in this world superior advan- 
tages on account of living under the clearer dispensation of divine truth iu 
the last ages of the church, shall not have any advantage over those who 
had less on account of living in the first ages, since those who had less 
will have longer time in the future world before the resurrection. 

801. " With this idea in view, the passage in 1 Theas. iv. 15 becomes 
beautifully intelligible : 'For this we say unto you by the word of the 
Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord, 
shall not prevent' (that is, shall not go before, anticipate, or have any 
advantage over) ' those which are asleep ; the dead in Christ shall rise 
first : then' (when they have risen) 'we which are alive and remain shall 
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord iu the 
air; and so shall we be ever with the Lord.' Those who shall live in the 
last moment, having had their spirits fully enlightened and prepared for a 
future esistence in the brightness of the latter-day glory before death, 
shall not ' sleep' at all, for there will be no necessity for it ; but ' shall all 
be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump,' 
' The dead shall be raised incorruptible,' having been prepared for their 
incorruptible body, but ' we shall be changed.' 1 Cor. xv. 61, 62. 

802. "This theory may be seen in the same way to illustrate itself 
consistently when applied to those who are lost. Those who live last in 
the world, when superior light is around them, sin against greater light 


,v Google 


OP MEDIUMSUIP. 159 

than those who lived eaiUu, md ire therefoii, sooaei jiej iied to have 
their dolefiil station fixed finally in hell, in the union of soul and hody 

803. "The doctrine we piesent m reference to the condition of the 
spiritfl of the saints in heaien, differs fiom the idea of a middle state, in a 
third place, in several impoitant paiticulaia It escludea the idea of a 
middle place entirely, and of oiuise all idea ot piobatjon, which is gene 
rally attached to it in some firm or othei The state of the spiiit m 
heaven, though imperfet^t, being the celestial childhood of the ap rit la 
nevertheless final, and n t piohatiooaiy Our enjojmcnts tlieie will bi, in 
exact proportion to our capacity , and t< fist as our sjints aie unfolded, 
will our joys increase. 

' The more our spirits oro enlarged on earth, 
The deeper draughts they shall ceeeivs of heaven.' 

804. " What an interesting moment to the spirit, will be the moment 
after death I What scenes will open up before it ! The friends will stand 
weeping over the now tenantless body, but the spirit is— oh ! 

'Mj thoaglits pursue it where it flies, 

805. "The Christian need have no unpleasant anxiety about what 
scenes will open to him, for he knows that the glory which will then 
brealt upon his astonished spirit will exceed his keenest anticipations." 


QV MEDIUBISHIP. 


806. The facts which I have noticed in ri:latii->n to niKrliumship, arc 
certainly among the most inesplieahle in naturi?. 

807. There are two modes in which spiritual manifestations are made 
through the influence or suh-agency of media. In the one mode, they em- 
ploy the tongue to speak, the fingers to write, or hands to actuate tables 
or instruments for communication ; in the other, they act upon ponderable 
matter directly, through a halo or aura appertaining to media ; so that 
although the muscular power may be incapacitated for aiding them, they 
will cause a hody to move, or produce raps intelligibly so as to select letters 
conveying their ideas, uninfluenced by those of the medium. 

808. Even where they act through the muscular frame of the media, 
their vision may be intercepted by a screen so that they cannot influence 
the selection of the letters requisite to a oommaaieation (Plato 1.) 

809. Eappiuga or tappings are made at the 1 stance f many feet from 
the medium, and ponderable hodies, such as I ell are moved or made to 
undergo the motion requisite to being taa^ 


,v Google 


IW OF MED I (J MS II IP. 

810. It will be pei'oeived that mj spirit Mher, in reply to the queries 
put in relation to this mjsterj, asks, "Soto do gov, move your limbs — ca-ny 
the iod^/ wheresoever iigoeth? how does God cause tlie movements of astro- 
nomical orbs ?" (457.) 

811. Evidently some instrument must intervene between the divine will 
and the bodies actuated thereby, and in humble imitation between the 
hnman will and the limbs. Upon the viscera our will has no influence. 
The heart moves without the exercise of volition. 

812. As there is an ethereal medium by means of which light moves 
through space from the remotest visible fixed star to tho eye, at the 
rate of two hundred thousand miles per second; as through aa a,ffecfioQ 
of the same ether frictional electricity moves, accoEding to Wheatstone's 
estimate, with a velocity eseeding that of light, — so may we not infer that 
the instrument of Divine will acts with atil! greater velocity, and that in 
making man in this respect after his own image, so far as necessary to an 
available existence, gives him one degree of power over the same element 
while in the mortal state, and another higher degree of power in the spi- 
ritual state. But if there be an element through which a spirit within bis 
mortal frame is capable of actuating that frame, may not this element of 
actuation be susceptible of becoming an instrument to the will of another 
spirit in the iTnmortal state f 

813. The aura of a medium which thus enables an immortal spirit to do 
within its scope things which it cannot do otherwise, appears to vary with 
the human being resorted to; so that only a few are so endowed with this 
aora as to he competent as media. Moreover, in those who are so consti- 
tuted as to be competent instruments of spiritual actuation, this competency 
is various. There is a gradation of competency, by which the nature of the 
instrumentality varies fi'om that which empowers violent loud knocking 
and the moving of ponderable bodies without actual contact, to the grade 
which confers power to make intellectual communications of the higher 
order without that of audible knocking. Further, the power to employ 
these grades of mediumship varies as the sphere of the spirit varies. 

814. It has been stated that mortals have each a halo perceptible to 
spirits, by which they are enabled to determine the sphere to which any 
individual will go on passing death's portal. Spirits cannot approach effec- 
tively a medium of a sphere much above, or below that to which they belong. 

815. As media, in proportion as they are more capable of serving for 
the higher intellectual communication, axe less capable of serving for me- 
chanical demonstration, and as they are more capable of the latter are less 
competent for the former, spirits likewise have a higher or lower capacity 
to employ media. It has been mentioned that having made a test appa- 
ratus, my spirit sister alleged that it could not be actuated by her without 
aaaista,nce of spirits from a lower sphere. I inquired whether she could 
not meet me again, accompanied by the requisite aid. The reply was in 


,v Google 


O]? MBDIUMSHIP. 161 

the affinnatiTe, and accordingly slie met me at an appointed hour, and my 
apparatus was actuated effectually under test conditions. (Plate 4, dd, ii, hh.') 

816. After I had read oyer au exposition of my information respecting 
the spirit world to the spirit of the illustrioiia Washington, I requested 
him to give me a confirmation while the medium, should be under test 
conditions, (Plate 4, M.) I placed tie hand of the medium upon the 
board lever of the instrument, of which a representation has been given, 
(Plate 1, Plate 4,) so aa to be on the outer side of the fulcrum, and re- 
quested him to attest the reliability of the medium during the prcvioita 
interoomm union. In reply it was alleged Eot to be within his power to 
giye me that test; I urged that this test had been given in his presence. 
" We luid an emyloi/ee, then" was his rejoinder. Fortunately I had con- 
trived a test instrument requiring less of the mechanical power, so that 
by means of it he was enabled to perfect the evidence by bringing the in- 
dex to the affirmative, under conditions which put it out of the power of 
the medium to produce that result, (See Plate 4 and description.) 

817- These facts make the subject of mediumship a most complicated 
mystery; but the creation teems with mystery, so that inscrutability can- 
not bo a ground for disbelief of any thing. The only cases wherein there 
is absolute incredibility, are those in which the definition of the premises 
contradicts those of the inferences or oonolnsions. 

818, It is evident from the creative power which the spirits aver them- 
selves to possess, that they esercise faculties which they do not under- 
stand. Their explanation of the mysteries of mediumship only substitutes 
one mystery for another. 

819, If we undertake to generalize, it must come pretty near what I 
have said above, that spirits are endowed, as my spirit father alleges, with 
a " magie will," capable of producing, as they allege, wonderful results 
within their own world, (452 ;) nevertheless that this will does not art hj 
itself directly on mundane bodies. An into mdm f d thhl 
or aura within or without certain human o t Th h 1 thu. 
existing are not all similarly endowed ; som h m m th 
capability. Some are better for one obj t m f th hj t 
Again, the will-power vai'ies as the sphere of th p t h gh 1 w 
so that the medium suited for one is not suited for another. 

820. Thus the means by which they are capable of communicating is 
various, and moreover precarious, according to the health and equanimity 
of the mortal being under whose halo they may strive to act. 

821. Evidently, the ponderable elements recognised by mundane che- 
mists cannot contribute to any of the bodies of the spirit world, since their 
gravity must disqualify them for use in a world where every thing is, in 
comparison with them, weightless. Accordingly, one of the queries put by 
me to the convocation of spirits (574) was, whether any of our elements, 
being ponderable, could act as such in the imponderable spiritual oreation- 


,v Google 


162 OF MEDItlMSHIP. 

The reply was, Not witliout andergoing a. transformation. Ttis would be 
ecinivalejit to annihilating them first, and recreating them afterward, when 
the process of creating alone would he sufficient. But manifestly it is of 
no imporla.noe, whether their adaptation to the spirit world he the result 
of creation or of transformation. 

822. Concerned in the proeesaes of mediumship, it is manifest that 
there ia none of that kind of electricity or magnetism of which the laws 
and phenomena haye been the subject of Faraday's I'esearchos, and which 
are treated of in books, under the heads of frictional or mechanical elec- 
tricity, galvanism, or electro-magnetism. 

823. Frictional electricity, such as produced usually by the friction of 
glass in an electrical machine, or of aqueous globules generated by steam 
escaping from a boiler, is always to be detected by electrometers, or tho 
spark given to a conducting body when in communication with the earth; 
the human knuckle, for instance. When not sufficiently accumulated to 
produce these evidences of its presence, it mast be in a very feeble state 
of excitement. But even in the highest accumulation by human means, 
as in the discharge of a powerfully charged Leyden battery, it only acts for 
a time inconceivably brief, and does not move ponderable masses as they 
are moved in the instance of spiritual manifestation. It is only in transitu, 
that frictional electricity displays much power, and then its path is ex- 
tremely narrow, and the duration of its influence inconceivably minute. 
According fo Wheatstone's experiments and calculations, it would go round 
the earth in the tenth part of a second. 

824. How infinitely small, then, the period required to go from one side 
of a room to another ! Besides, there are neither means of generating such 
electricity, nor of securing that insulation which must be an indispensable 
precursor of accumulation. 

825. Galvanic or yoltaio electricity does not act at a distance so as to 
produce any recognised effects, except in the case of magnetic metals, or 
in the state of transition produced by an electric discharge. In these phe- 
noma the potent effects are att^nable only by means of perfect insulated 
conductors, as we see in the telegraphic apparatus. No reaction with im- 
perfect conducting bodies competent to toss them to and fro, or up and 
down, can be accomplished. The decomposing influence, called electro- 
lytic, is only exhibited at insensible distances, within a filament of the mat- 
ter affected. 

826. It has appeared to me a great error on the pai't of spirits, as well 
»s mortals, that they should make efforts to explain the phenomena of the 
spirit world by the ponderable or imponderable agents of the temporal 
world. The fact that the rays of our sun do not affect the spirit world, 
and that there is for that region an appropriate luminary whose rays we 
do not perceive, (415) must demonstrate that the imponderable element to 
which they owe tieir peculiar light differs from tke ethereal fluid which. 


;;■ Google 


OP MEDIU.MSIIIP. 163 

according to tlie undulatorj theory, is the means of prodaeiag light Id the 
terrestrial creation. 

827. In one of tho replies made by the convocation, (571,) the idea 
was sanctioned of the effulgence of the spirit being due to an appropriate 
ethereal fluid, analogous to that above alluded to. But it has, I think, 
been shown by me, that as light is due to the undulations of mir ether, so 
electricity is due to wajies of polarization. But if undulations produce 
light in the ether of the spiritual universe as well as in ours, why may 
not polnriaation produce in the ether of the spirit world an electricity anala- 
gotis to ours? Thus, although in Bptiitual manifestations our electricity 
taies no part, their eleotrieity may be the means by which their will is 
transmitted efFeotuaJIy in the phenomena which it controls. 

828. The words magnetism and Tnagnetic are used in this world in two 
senses. In one, it signifies the magnetism of magnets or electro- 
; in the other, the animal magnetism of which the existence was 
d by Mesmer, and which is commonly called Mesmerism. 

829. This mesmerical magnetism seems to be dependent rather on pro- 
perties which we have as immortals, encased in a corporeal clothing, than 
as mortals owing oar mental faculties to that frame. K it be the spiritual 
portion of our organization which is operative in clairvoyanoy, spiritual 
electricity may be the intermedium both of that faculty and of mesmeric 
influence. 

830. All spirits are clairvoyant more or less, and where this faculty is 
esercised, it seems to be due to an unusual ascendancy of the spiritual 
powers over the corporeal, so that clairvoyants possess some of the facul- 
ties which every spirit, after shufiinjf off the mortal coU, must possess to 
a greater or less extent. 

831. In striving to make a test apparatus by which the communication 
should be uninflnenoed by the muscular power of the medium, through 
which alone her will could modify the ideas communicated, an interesting 
fact was ascertained. The nullifying of the power of museuiar control, 
which it is the object of this contrivance to accomplish, is obuined unes- 
ceptionalJy by means of two balls and a plate, as already illustrated, 
(Plate 2,) or by placing the hands of the medium exterior to the fulcrum 
of the Jever-board, as described in the instance of testing the eommuoica- 
t dfntl noct But th nethods requiring that the 

nd t n 1 uld b f ur bl b th [ t the spirit communicating 

ndtbmdma IbltofU Itt km that the distance between 

tl 1 d d h f f th t bl t y to be moved, by lessening 

th fl f th med m n tl tabl t ay, lessened the power of 

t n My ff t w th f d ted to contrive to have the 

h d f fh 1 th f t I d, without the possibility 
f t 

83 "1^ t! 1 witl 1 b It eeiyitiff the hands of the 


,v Google 


164 or MEDIUMSHIP. 

medium upon delicate rollers, so that no horizontal movement would affect 
tte base board supporting the rollers and actuating tte index. To giro 
gi-eoter efficacy to the aura, a plate of glass was supported in a wooden 
frame or sash by means of fotir screw rods fixed upright on the base board, 
each furnished with two screw nuts. The screw rods passed through four 
suitable holes, so as to have one nut beneath, the other aboye, the sash. 
Thus situated, by adjusting the nuts, the sash could be regulated to any 
horizontal level, so as to be near the upper surfaces of the hands without 
any contact therewith. 

833. On trying this arrangement, it was found as difficult for a spirit to 
actuate it as if the glazed sash had not been employed. 

834. Under these eiroumstanees, I had the gkss plate or pane slit length- 
wise into two equal strips. These being restored to the position previously 
occupied in the sash, I interposed between their edges a piece of sheet-tin, 
with teeth cut in one of its edges, (Plate 4, k/c,) so as to maie it look lihe a 
long narrow saw, such as are used by sawyers in frames. With the aid of a 
leaden joint, (such aa is used by glaaiers to join glass panes,) to which the 
saw was soldered, the teeth of this projected about the eighth of au inch 
below the glass, so as to be near the upper surface of any hand, resting on 
the sliding board. 

835. It was with no small degree of satisfaction that I found the appa- 
ratus now sufficiently susceptible of actuation by my spirit friends. 

836. From this result it would seem that the saw-shaped metallic con- 
ductor, operated precisely as it would have acted had it been necessary to 
impart to the pane those means of electric discharge of which, aa at flrat 
used, it was deficieut. 

837. Aa soon as I had introdaced the serrated conductor, my spirit 
father corroborated the impression that it promoted the influence of the 
medium. 

838. This was the first instance in which I have discovered any analogy 
between the laws governing the communication of the medium of the 
spirit will-power, and those obeyed by electrical phenomena. 

839. An account is given in my narrative of an experiment in which a 
board, suspended at one end from a spring-balance, was made to descend 
with a force of three pounds, through the instromentality of a medium who 
had no connection with the board, excepting water which was nf pos d 
Hence, as the hook screwed into the board, by which it wa J t 
the hook of the balance, was six times aa far from the ful um as th 
hands of tlie medium, the force eserted by the officiating spi t w qrnl 
to 3 X 6 ^ 18 pounds. (See Hate 3, and description.) ]S" tl I 

no upward reaction was perceptible to me, nor was any exper n d by the 
medium, Henry Gordon, as he declared. 

840. In the case of the boy (Plate 3,) a downward action of seven pounds 
was observed, which, multiplied by the difference of distance, amounted to 


;;■ Google 


OP MEDIUM SHIP. 165 

7 X 6 ^ 42 pounds, and yet the boy was not perceptibly impelled io the 
opposite direction. Nor, when throt^h the same juvenile mediumship, 
the whole of the apparatus was thrown upon the floor, did the boy appear 
to be impelled in the opposite direction. Nor was there any reaction when 
the apparatus wa&' thrown down. Now, agreeably to the laws of nature, 
aa established by huEoan experience, in all cases of motion or momentum, 
there must be aa equal force exercised in the opposite direction by the vis 
inertise oi some other matter endowed with that attribute. Hence Archimedes 
said, " G-ive me but where to stand, and I will move the world." A point 
of support, a place of resistance, however, was belt! to be indispensable. 

841. The only explanation of which I can conceive is, that spirits, by 
volition, can deprive bodies of vis ineriiee, and movo bodies, as they do 
themselves, by their will. But the necessity of the presence of a medium 
to the display of this power, granting its existence, is a mystery. 

842. That the spirit should, by its " magic" will-power, talie possession 
of the frame of a human being, so as to make use of its brain and nervous 
system, depriving its appropriate owner of control, is a wonderful fact 
sufficiently difficult to believe, yet, nevertheless, intelligible. The aura 
which surrounds a medium must be imponderable. No volition of the 
medium can, through its instrumentality, move ponderable bodies, nor cause 
raps or consequent vibrations in the wooden boards. Hence, the presence 
of a medium imparts power to spirits which the medium does not poi^esa. 

843. The aura on the one side, and the spirit on the other, are inert 
unless associated. Thus the volition of the spirit gives activity to an 
effluvium, by itself, bo devoid of efficacy that it wholly escapes the perception 
of the possessor or the observation of his mundane companions. It has 
been already alleged, that the usual reference to mundane electricity must 
be wholly unsatisfactory to all acquainted with the phenomena and laws 
associated under that name; since no such movements have ever been 
produced by such electrical means, nor is it consistent with those mundane 
electrical laws, nor the facts which electricians have noticed, that such 
movements should be produced. Those movements which have been pro- 
duced by electricity have never been effected without surfaces oppositely 
charged, nor, of coarse, without the means of charging them. Neither are 
there associated with the spiritual manifestations means at hand of creat- 
ing nor of holding charges either much more minute than those which 
display perceptible force or cause audible sound. 

844. Eleotro-magnetio phenomena require the use of powerful galvanic 
batteries or magnetic metals. Galvanic series, of the most powerful kind, 
do not act at the minutest distance without contact. 

845. Even lightning could not move a table backward and forward, 
though it might shatter it into pieces, if duly interposed in a circuit. 

846. Electrical sparks produce snapping sounds in the air, not knoch- 
inffs or rappings upon si 


;;■ Google 


OF COUNTEE- MEDIUM SHIP. 


ON THE INFLUENCE OF THE ILL-TREATMENT OF MEDIA, ON SPI- 
EITUAl MAHIFESTATIONS.— OF COUNTER-MEDIUMS HIP. 
847- Allusion has beea above mada to the unf' VoUrable influenco 
upon manifestations of tlie demeanour and incredulity of tte investigator, 
displayed in suspicious, cold, scrutinizing looks, such as would be merited 
only by a cheat or pickpocket. All this has a deterioi-ating influence upon 
mediumship, and likewise repels the spirits. While oommunieating through 
a medinm, a near blood relative, much beloved by the communicating 
spirit while in this world, coming into tlie circle, an immediate departure 
of the spirit was the consequence. It was subsequently alleged in osplana- 
tdon that there existed a repulsiveness between him and the spirit, founded 
on the idea that tis opinions were under the influence of worldly consi- 
derations, whence a predeterminatioa to disbelieve, as far as possible, by 
an unfavourable view of the evidence. 

848. An incredulity liable to be overcome by the reason by which it has 
beea created does not form a bar; but where an impregnable bigotry has 
been introduced merely by education, so that the person under its influence 
would have been a Catholic, Calvinist, Unitarian, Jew, or Mohammedan 
by a change of parentage, cannot usually be changed by any evidenue or 
argument. Spirits will not spend their time subjeeting their manifesta- 
tions to sueh impregnable bigotry, or to predetermined malevolence 

849. On this account such persona find it hard to obtain the minifcsta- 
tioQS which they seek with ill-will to Spiritualism, aud a predisposition to 
ridicule and pervert it. 

850. Besides this difficulty, there is no doubt a constitutiunal stxte, 
the inverse of that which creates a medium. The atmospheie of persons 
so constituted, neutralizes that of those who arc endowed with that of 


851. It were impossible for any one to be more inciedulous than I was 
when I commcuced my investigations; but in the firit place, my recorded 
religious impressions, founded on more than a half century of mtenae 
reflection, in no respect conflicted with the belief which Spiritualism 
required. As I said to a clergyman, I wish I knew as well what I ought 
to believe, as I can perceive what I ought not to believe I was aidently 
desirous that the existence of a future state should be established m a way 
to conform to positive science, so that they might start togethei This 
was perceived by my spirit friends, and that they had only to give me 
sufficient evidence of the existence of spirits and their world, to make me 
lay down in the cause my comparatively worthless mortal life, could I be 
more useful to truth in dying than in living. 

852. My Either and sister, brother and friend Blodget, were therefore 
not deterred by my sneers or denivnoiations. Moreover, I was never pre- 


;;■ Google 


or COUNTEE-MEDIUMSHIP. 167 

disposed to suspect anj medium of treacliery, and therefore never disgusted 
them by the display of any such impressions. To the aid of these truly 
angelic spirits who were nearly allied with me, came another angel, (whom 
I will designate by his initials W. W.,) who, from philanthropic motives, 
seems to have selected mo to serve in this invaluable dispensation. Hence, 
his first annunciation of my destined course, in language which so far, how- 
ever it may imply an overestimate of my capacity to serve, shows the more 
the partiality with which it seems to have been estimated by him. (47.) 

The Auikor^S Discovery of 7iis powers as a Medium. 

853. It occurred to me to try how far the interposition of my Land 
would interfere with the powers of the medium to whom I resorted. To 
my surprise, it seemed very little to impair the actuation of the indes by 
the officiating spirit. It next occurred to me to ascertain how far a dimi- 
nution of contact, between the hand of the medium and mine, would im- 
pair the power exercised under these conditions. In pursuance of my 
rcciuest, the contact was diminished by successively lifting the fingers of 
the medium and the rest of the hand from mine, until only one finger 
was left. Finally, this finger was removed, and yet the power of actua- 
tion still continued to exist, though enfeebled. The officiating spirit, my 
friend W. W., now was made a party to this investigation, being requested 
to estimate the effects as well as myself. 

854. I requested the medium to pick up a pair rf scissors which lay on 
the table, and, while holding the blades bttween the finj^er and thumb, to 
lay the rings upon the back of my hand An increase of power wis 
manifested to my observation and that of W TV 

855. At a subsequent sitting, having made due prepiiratjon, a strip of 
sheet tin about two inches wide, and about fifteen inches in length, being 
applied to tbe back of my hand while resting on the base boaid of the 
spiritoscope, (Plate 4, Fig. 2,) the medium held it successively at various 
distances. Under these circumstances, the facilitation was greater as the 
distance between her hand and mine was diminished. 

856. A plate of glass of about four inches square, interposed between 
the palm of the hand of the medium and the back of mine, interrupted 
the power entirely ; but neither cork nor a metallic plate of a similar size 
much reduced the power. 

857. The frame (Fig. 3, Plate 4) being in sift<, as described, paragraph 
S/c of the description, under these ciroumatancea the removal of the 
serrated strips diminished tbe power more and more as removed. 

858. Thus it appears that there is a mesmeric electricity, or spiritual 
electricity, which may be considered as appropriate to the spirit world as. 
their vital air is ; but which like that air, may influence our spiritual bodies, 
while in their mundane tenement. It may, as well as the vital air of the: 
spirit world, belong in common to the inhabitants of that world and to us. 


;;■ Google 


168 ON rsYRHOLOGICAL EXl'LANATIONS 

as sjirits, being a pobiiz iij, ifiection of tlie spiiituol cthcieal laodmm, 
of whicL the undulations constitute thp peculiai rays of their apnitual sun 

859 That thi^ Bpiritnal or Diesmeiic electncitj shotild be auxiliary to 
the efSeacj of the magic will powei, ot '.pints, 11 f course one of those 
mysteries which, like that of giavitation, may be isceitained to pie^ail, 
and yet be to "spirits aa well as mortals inexplicable 

860 We Ine in a wonder woiliing unneise, which bi,u)mes more and 
moie wonderful as we learn moie of it, insttid of being brought more 
within our compiehenaiDn Whea we compare what we know with the 
knowledge of savages it may api car a mountain ot !e xmin^,' ind srien&i, , 
but tlua ¥ery leirning and SLience cnly makts us si,e still m le how ^u it 


ON PSYCHOLOGIC 41 EXPLAHATIOHS OF SPIPIXUAL MANIFESTATIONS. 

8(il. This, fohhdmbngsii d nh ptof 

Dr. Bell, of Som r\ B n n a n n 

862. It ia not n n h d a; ish d ph n n h ndi- 
vidual capacity th nmhmh nbn u h hypo- 
thesis which his gi mus b ^ h m , an wt h he 
may be considered a most respectable advocate. Dr. BeJl not on)y admits, 
hut confirms by his own testimony, the important fact of the movement 
of heavy bodies without contact. His esperieuce, in this respect, is more 
striking than mine, since he has not only seen this phenomena take place 
repeatedly, but on one occasion, as before stated, saw tables laoY^ fifty feet, 
intelligently obedient to his directions. He also admits the reception of 
such communications from pretended spirits, as spiritualists would con- 
sider as coming from real spirits. Yet on the negative ground, that 
agreeabh/ to his ea^erience, nothing was found to he communicable but 
what pre-esiated in the mind of some mortal present, he infers that the 
ideas received are not derived from spirits, but from the minds of those 
mortals who are parties to the process. 

863. Of course our distinguished friend thus involves himself in the 
task of explaining not only the intellectual, but also the mechanical move- 
ments, by tho mental agency of the media who participate in the condi- 
tions under which the manifestations occur. 

864. I have already adduced manifestations irreconcilable with the 
^assumption on which the whole of Dr. Bell's inference is built, (111 to 288.) 

But were his observations verified, in order to make them justify the ab- 
. negation of spirits, it should be shown that any spirit could tell him any 
Ihing which mtist he known to him, whether known to the spirits or not. 


;;■ Google 


1G9 

Kemombermg all tlie fiwta communioated to him by his spirit brother, it 
should he shown that any other spirit could narrate them as well as bis 
spirit brother. Any inquiry made of ant/ spirit, of whccli the answer is 
lenoionto ike inquirer, ^aoXd. be told on request as well as any other; 
but it will be found that answers are given only to those of which the 
spirit knows the answers independently, through his own memory. Un- 
der favourable circumstances mental questions are answered; but often, 
when mental questions cannot be answered, those put verbally aro replied 
to. I have detected spirit imposfoi-s, hy their inability to tell the name of 
my sister in the spheres. 

865. I postponed the discussion on this question until I should have 
submitted to the reader the communications which I had received. I 
trust that these are of a nature to show that they could not have originated 
in my mind, nor in those of the media through whom they were obtained. 

866. "Whatever want of ability may bo shown, hy Dr. Bell, to exist in 
the communications alleged to come from Paine, Swedenhorg, and Bacon, 
or from spiiits personating those distinguished men, it cannot do away 
the valuable information which I have obtained from my spirit father and 
ofhers, sanctioned hy a convooation of spirits. It haa been shown that in 
a few pages of that communioation, there is vastly more knowledge of 
our happy prospects in the future world, than all that can be found in the 
Scriptures. 

867. Dr. Bell will not, I am sure, suspect me of any want of truthful- 
ness, and will hardly flatter the media and myself with an unconscious 
origination of ideas, which had never before occurred to either. 

S68. If he finds that in the case of Swedenhorg and Bacon the spirits 
are below their medial instruments in capacity, he will find that in the 
instance of my spirit friends this estimate must he inverted. 

860. My experience does not tend to establish that there is less folly or 
more wisdom in the inhabitants of the spirit world than in this. I con- 
cur with Dr. Bell in the opinion that the worlc to which he alludes, attri- 
buted to the spirit of Paine, merits all the denuueiation which he bestows 
on it. I concur that it must he the work of a mind, whether celestial or 
mundane, ignorant of the rudiments of chemical philosophy. But if such 
a work coming from a mortal would not dispi-ove the author's claim to be 
a mortal human being, wherefore then should a foolish book coming from 
a foolish, ignorant spirit, personating Paine, disprove the author to be a 
spirit? It only shows that low, ignorant, foolish spirits personate the 
spirits of eminent authors ; hut does that disprove the existence of spirits ? 
Does madness or idiocy annihilate the victim of these afflictions ? But in 
all cases where communications are obtained through speaking or writing 
media, the minds of the media are liable, unconsciously, to pervert or 
repress the sentiments of the spirits, and therefore are not trusted by me, 
unless corroborated hy communications through the alphabet. 


,v Google 


170 ON PSYCHOLOGICAL 

870. By their existence in the spiieres, it seems to lae that spirits im- 
prove as to tbeir talents, not as to their reasoning powers. They have a 
superior knowledge to that ^Yhieh we possess of their own world, but not 
of our sciences, as far as I have had means of judging. Having no great 
objects to effect, thej have no great incentive to thought or contrivance. 
It is by learning, more than by invention, that they rise in the spheres. 

871. These inferences are not, however, admitted by the spirits. They 
allege that as their medial instrumeniB improve, they will give me reason 
to change my opinion. They assume to go deeper and fai-ther into the 
nature of things than mortals. 

872. To me it seems that their happiness is due in pait to self ftlieifc^ 
tion and seeing every thing under a rosy hue They often id^ert to the 
superior height iipon which they stand, without showing that they see more 
in consequence. 

873. So for as I can judge, in some branches of knowledge the spirits 
will improve by discussion with mortals. They will be cured of some of 
their "sky scraping !" 

874. They seem to be mainly improved by then reciprocal inteicourae 
Thus honest bigots of all sects, find when tl ey ^et together thit in point 
of feet none of their records are true ! 

875. It is by getting rid of error, more than lequnm}, knf nledge thit 
they rise in reciprocal estimation. 

876. Veiy soon after my father began to commimicale w th mc nenrly 
fourteen months ago, be said — " We know little moiein religion than you 

877. They all agree that good works are lely of imjoitan e eieeds 
only being good or bad aa they induce good or bad deeds 

878. A good man cannot accept a creed which sanctions wickedness 
that, for instance, which authoriaes, under ceifain sophistical pietencLS 
spoliation, massacre, rape, fraud, &c. Whenever any miu bungs him 
self to believe that his God over authorized such cnmes oi patronized 
those who weregoiityof them, he becomes more or le^s immoral Ih Beig 
truly alleged that "a devotee is assimilated to the God uTiimheuo ships 

S79. To assist me, as it were, in exposing the enors of those who with 
I)r. Bell admit, for the most part, the facta of Spiritualism yet ascribe the 
whole to the minds of mortals acting as me lia or inquirers an advocate 
of that side of the question gives this explanation of the fact of my hav- 
ing sent a message to Mrs. Gourlay by my spirit sister : 

880. He alleged it as a fact, that if two snails be placed in proximity, 
and afterward apart to a considerable distance, that the contact of one, will 
affect the other perceptibly. 

881. That Mrs. Goarlay and myself being frequently in each other's 
society, it followed that if at the distance of about a hundred miles I wished 
her to induce Dr. Gourlay to apply at the bank, Mrs. Gourlay, although 
at the time engaged in receiving a m<st interesting communication from 


;;■ Google 


OF SPIEITTTAI. BIANirESTATIONS. 171 

her mother for lier brother, had so much more snail-like sympathy, with, 
me at Cape Island, than with the ideas she helieved to proceed from her 
mother, that she would interrupt the one forthwith, to attend to the other 
at that particularly inoonvenient time I Meanwhile, the phenomenon of 
the index of my disk being moved independently of any effort of mine, so 
that I can ina^e oath that no mortal moved it, is not taien into view. 
Surely if hy such means a message respecting a pecuniary affair oould 
awaken sympathy, there are many messages which it would be of im- 
mensely more importance to convey, than that which I aent in the instance 
in question. 

882. But how comes it that neither I nor any other of her friends can 
send messages to Mrs. Gourlay while in the same ty w th he i* Must 
her friends go to Cape Island for the purpose? ^\ 11 f h 3 r 1 to and in- 
genious psychologist inform me hy what means I may b ng b at this 
object, which, on business account, would be more conTen ent than send- 
ing notes by penny post? 

883. Am I to go through the same process of sitt ng dew at my spirito- 
scope 1 Will this learned assailant of Spiritualism inform me why I must 
do this, and must wait till the indei moves? Wherefore should it move 
after a quarter of an hour's invocation, when it will not move at first 1 

884. Again, I wish the circumstance I am about to mention to he ex- 
plained by psychology : I was sitting in my solitary third-story room at 
Cape Island, invoking my sister as usual, when to my surprise I saw Oad- 
wallader spelt out on my disk. "My old friend. General Cadwallader ?" 
said I. "Yes." A communication ensued of much interest. But be- 
fore concluding, I requested him, as a test, to give me the name of a per- 
son whom X met in an affair of honour more than fifty years ago, when he 
(General Cadwallader) was my second. The name was forthwith given, 
by the pointing out on the disk the letters requisite to spell it. 

885. Now as the spirit of General Cadwallader, during more than fifteen 
months that other friends had sought to communicate with me, had never 
made me a visit, why should bis name have been spelt out when I had not 
the remotest hope of his coming, and was expecting another spirit, the 
only one who had been with me at the Cape? 

886. Further, the breakfast bell Laving rung, I said, " General, will you 
come again after breakfast?" I understood him to consent to this invita- 
tion. Accordingly, when afterward I reseated myself in statu quo, I 
looked for the Genei-al, but, lo ! Martha, ray sister's name, was spelt out ! 

887. I challenge this psychologist to put his hypothesis on paper, in 
order that I may psychologize him info a more consistent assumplaon of pre- 
mises and conclusions. 

888. Let him show his hand by reducing his sophistry, as I conscien- 
tiously consider it, \a black and white. He may learn the difference between 
talent and judgment, I am aware that he shows a vast deal more of the 


,v Google 


172 ON I'SYCnOLOGICAL EXPLANATIONS, ETC. 

ojyijygjriaie ability of his profassioa in dofendiag tlie view lie tas es 

than I could hope to esert. It is only iu the strength of truth tliat I feel 

stroDg, "Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just." 

889. It is of no small impovtance that, thig learned and subtle psycho- 
logist, should explain how my spiritoscope, or any other instrumental means 
of alphabetic indication, becomes necessary to effect the psych ologization of 
a medium at a great distance, so as to convey to her mind the ideas which it 
is an otject to impart. Why is it necessary that the indes over a disk at 
Cape May, should revolve to the letters requisite to spell a message, in 
order that the indes of another disk in Philadelphia, should revolve at a 
suhsequent time ? How does the TOechanisra in one place, acquire a power 
from the remote actuation of another f Will it I)e pretended that they 
are affected analogously to the sympathetic snajls ; whence, having kept 
each other's company, this miracle ensued ? But even this is not true, since 
they were not kept together, if ever they were in each other's company. 

890. Could any process be divined by which an instrument for supposed 
alphabetic communication with spirits, could be applied to transmit such 
messages as that for which I employed mine, according to this psycholo- 
gical hypothesis, it would he superior to the existing telegraphic pro- 
cess, since the ocean could be no barrier to messages which, although de- 
pendent on snail-like sympathy, would have nothing in it of the pi-over- 
bial creeping attribute of the animal in question. 

891. The following manifestations are of a nature, as it secras to me, to 
invalidate Dr. Bell's notion that the communications received from the 
spirit are acquired from the minds of the bystanders : 

892. Calling on Miss Ellis, it was found that her time was so pre- 
engaged, that she could not, as she said, sit for me till the day but one 
succeeding. My spirit sister manifested her desire to communicate, and 
conveyed the idea that Miss Ellis could give an hour named nest day, if 
she would examine her list. This sam nat a b ng made, the sugges- 
tion was verified. 

893. Here was an idea not obtain d f m the n nd of any person pre- 
sent. It could not exist in the m nd t tl e who, like my friend and 
myself, had not seen the list, nor co 1 1 t h el n in Miss Ellis's mind, 
as in that case she would not have hal to n ult the list, in order to de- 
termine the truth of the suggestion. 

894. In this visit, I>r. W. F. Channing, who was my companion, said 
that possibly he had better not accompany me. It was left to my spirit 
sister to decide. No instrument being ready, as the quickest mode of 
communication, the medium was made to take up her pen, and began forth- 
with to make figures upon a sheet of paper. When the operation termi- 
nated, nothing but figures were seen to have been written. The medium 
said she did not know what to make of it. But under the letters it was 
written, " Select, from the alphabet, the letters corresponding, and you have 


,v Google 


ALPUAUETIO CONVEKSE W!TH BPIRITS, ETC. 173 

my answer." This being done, the following sentence was obtained : "My 
dear brofJier, come alone." 

895. It cannot be reasonably imagined that either Misa Ellis, ray friend, 
or myself suggested this reply, as my fiiend and myself regretted the 
result, and it was not the interest of Miss Ellis to lessen the circle. But 
none of vis had the ability to have pereeived the numbers indicating the 
relative position of letters in the alphabetic row, so as to have selected 
them correctly. It would take some time to associate the letters with the 
numbers duly, and an unusual strength of memory to recollect them. 


896. In his instructive work on Spiritualism, the idea is advanced by 
Capron, that the species of modern spirit commnuieation, of wiieh his 
book ^nainly treats, dates back to a period of history so early that no age 
or country is exempt from accounts of them. 

897- To me it seems that I have never read any thing in history in 
which intellectaal commuEioation was established by sounds or meohanical 
movements with invisible beings. Sight has almost always been the 
sense most appealed to in evidence of the appearance of ghosts. In the 
instance of the Witch of Endor, Samuel is made to come from his grave, 
not like one of oar happy spirits from his beautiful abode in the spirit 
world ; — 

" Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee ? And he 
said, Bring me up Samuel. And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried 
with a loud voice : and the woman spake to Saul, saying. Why hast then 
deceived me ? for thou art Saul. And the king said unto her, Be not 
afraid ; for what sawest thou ? And the woman said unto Sanl, I saw 
gods ascending out of the earth. And he said unto her, What form is he 
of? And she said. An old man cometh up ; and he is covered with a 
mantle. And Saii! perceived that it was Samuel, and he stooped with his 
face to the ground, and bowed himself. And Samuel said to Saul, Why 
hast thou discinieted me, to bring me up f And Saul answered, I am sore 
distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed 
from me, and auswereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams : 
therefore I have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what 
I shall do. Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, see- 
ing the Lord is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy ? And the 
Lord bath done to him as be spake by me ; for the Lord hath rent the 
kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to David : 
Becanse thoa obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, nor exeeutedst his fierce 


,v Google 


174 ALPIIABETIC CONVERSE WITH SPIRITS, 

Tvratli upon Amalek, therefore hatli the Lord done this thing utito thee 
this day. Moreover, the Lord will also deliver Israel with thee into the 
hiind of the Philistines : and to-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with 
me : the Lord also shall deliver the host of Israel into tho hand of the 
Philistines." 1 Sam. xsviii. 11-19. 

898. It is represented in this quotation, that tlie ghost of Samuel came 
and ooDTersed with Saul; that he " aseendefh out of the earth; an old 
man cometh ■up, and he is covered imth a mantle." Where is there any 
thing in common hetween this representation and the process hy which I 
communicate with my familiar spirits, — not coming up from the grave, or 
the disgusting heaven of Josephus, hut from their magical abodes in the 
skies ! I challenge any one to adduce the idea, as having ever been es- 
pressed, that any one had found any mode of conversing with spirits 
resembling in its operation that which we now have discovered. This 
seems to be as new to the spirits as to us, being as much a novelty as the 
electric telegraph. The very limited degree in which it has been recently 
accomplished has been attained with very great difficulty. It appears that 
efforts were made to establish this intercourse ia Eugland at the mansion 
of the celebrated Wesley, without any beneficial result. If over this art 
had been discovered, certainly it would not have been lost. Even the idea 
of rapping or knocking ind^endentJ^ of mortal agency, had the fact ever 
been established, could not have been held so incredible as it was, almost 
univerfially when it took place at HydesviUe, or in Groat Britain, as above 
m nt 1 

8*^0 Th 1 m d r P tl y utt ly n dul u tl t th pp ngs 
tWly lib bdto y pmuln gnjattbt 

t m t k th p t f aut ass ted by n gl b n, It p 
p -s th t n n 1 th mist utfi nlwll odp d a the 
m t b kw d n b h ph n n na to m bl p t If 

th f d p t u h n t bl n and m m nts f 

b d h d X J n hi ng thos nlynt d tlln suhu 

hdbnmd fthm wnwbhld ^ulmmftatnbn 
n f dmnttdast du ipl f udmndlout 

nf th tothn tlptfdptdfnd aftf 

u h wf 1 th 11 t t th t fc n Id 1 b m 1 1 te 

p lly ti tat 1 h wh h 1 m tt d t n b 

u safdly w tn 1 w uld h 1 d to t t t n N th th 
pntsn n t.1 h 1 1 d t d ym th n th t 1 ph. th 
railways will be disused, afler esperieneing the aiivaatages of those iuveu- 

900. Is there not as much reason for the lateness of this discovery, as 
for that of any of those inventions by which modern times are distinguished 
from ancient? Even now, with what difficulty has it been accomplished 
to the degree to which it has arrived. After eighteen months of laborious 


,v Google 


AS NEW AS THE TELEGEAPH. 175 

investigation, I find myself surrounded by inveterate skeptics among my 
wnfmlyfi 1 1 tfrnymd oe 

901 Th ly t y l d this wh L I h Id % p 

1 gal p U fyra 1 t t p g th p wh h I 

m t d tly t ta d m nip II d 1 1 ly to p d 

Ith h h try f f m 1 K 1 I It th ly 

thd fmlt^bl £;t mtthbtfth ( 11 

h I t m bl ) -nh h w U t d t t& If lly th 

f bg t T d t 1 ra 

00 B t b d th m ta th f d 1 th th t 

th f fc th t h d th I Y tell t I ram t with th 

p tw Id th H th 1 h M f th hm 

d t wh h th p I Th th t w Id 1 rs ty 

ptth t dtyfCrd Tstoth pt f 

tl se J wh h h 1 th w Id ra h m h f by th 

qtratyi t df Tip f&yf 

g d w l I by th / /?«. p blj tip 

c|{3 Th biyt th m h ty th d f m pote t 

m tdj Udb dth =styfbjg 

th g t t J id 1 t d t th p ra 

b 1 11 It tl tl 1 Th t 1 t d p t 

th tw 11 t w th ffi m t y q y p p d th rs 

tdCt 4) 

904 Th b t t ra t p ta tb q t b tw r 

bt dpg dthtisf fthlt Id 

upward js the motto on our spiritual bauner. &ui,h is the lanj,ua^L. held, 
and repeated over and over again. It would not take a quarter of an hour 
for a spirit to pom information into the ear of a mortal which, if credited, 
would put an end to all honest discord respecting religion, and induce that 
mortal thenceforth to look to the spirit world as his ultimate destination. 
The language of the paragraph in the address through Lanuing, would go 
home to every human mortal having reason to comprehend it, so that 
whatever they might pursue in this world would be with an ultimate view 
to ascendancy in the other. (See Preface.) 

905. Bigotry, fanaticism, selfish sectarianism, the want of media and 
boid, enlightened inv^tigators, seem to have formed impenetrable obstacles 
to the promulgation of a knowledge of the greatest importance to human 
prosperity, morals, and future happiness. No doubt that so much evil 
should arise merely from want of a knowledge so near at hand, is one of 
the facts which human reason finds it most difficult to reconcile with the 
power and goodness of the Almighty Ruler of the universe; but that is a 
difficulty which exists in case any one creed be assumed as true ; since none 
has Ijeen heretofore so communicated as to be within the reach of mankind 
in general. Meanwhile the error has originated in various sects, that they 


;;■ Google 


176 INFLUENCE or MUNDANE 

have beeo espeoiallj favonrec! by God, so that they alone of all hia cren.turea 
have had true light let id opera them. 

906. Hitppily, from tie mode in whieh. the light of Spiritualism liaa 
been received by its present votaries, it may be gradually extended to all 
their fellow-creatures: and meanwhile those who enjoy this light do not 
assume that their fellow- creatures who are in this respect less fortunate, 
are on that aecotmt to be censured, denounced, and persecuted as far as the 
power to persecute goes. Spiritualists believe the wonderful manifestations 
on whioli their creed rests, to have far more testimony in its favour than 
any other before accredited; and that the manifestations relied on being 
more recent, and observed by multitudes of eye-witnesses, known by their 
neighbours tti bo truthful, have, as mere hearsai/ proof, an immense supe- 
riority over the recorded tradition of an obscure, illiterate, superstitions 
age and country. But then the same privilege which has been enjoyed by 
one set of observers belongs to any aucceediog number, and no less to suc- 
ceeding ages than to this. It is not assumed that any special inspiration 
appertains to any existing being, as an instrument of promoting truth, that 
will not inure to others. No particular escluBive capacity for miracles is 
claimed for this age ; on the contrary, the belief is that in this, as in other 
things, there will be improvement and progression, and that posterity will 
learn directly from the same high angelic source whence we learn. 

907. The more the moral code of Spiritualism is contrasted with that 
which has heretofore pi-evailed, the better we shall he pleased. We chal- 
lenge the strongest, the most learned of those who adhere to that dispensa- 
tion, to meet us ore rotunda sei), eurrente calamo. Confident in the strength 
of truth and the feebleness of error, the writer of these lines feara not 
any competitor who makes error his client. 


ISPLDENCE OF MUNDANE WEALTH IN THE WORLD TO COMB. 

According to tJie Spiritual Code, riches elevate or degrade according to 
the virtue di&played in their ac^isition and ewuploi/nient. 

908. The great object of the more prudent and calculating portion of 
mankind, is to provide for that old age which they all hope to attain, or, if 
it be not reached, to provide the means for themselves or families which 
may insure a comfortable if not luxurious support, in case sickness or 
mutilation should deprive them of the power of making money, or compe- 
tency to earn wages. 

909. But how precarious and fleeting are any such worldly advantages, 
when compared with those of an eternal home, where every thing desirable 
may be had without causing a drop of sweat to foil from the brow ! Let 


,v Google 


IN THE WORLD TO COME. 177 

tlie description of the higher spheres be compared with auj earthly para- 
dise, which, besides inferiority in every attribute which can render it attract- 
ive, is open to all the ills of mental and bodily saffering to which flesh is 
heir. If there bo any objection to the consec(uences of a due appreciation 
of the bliss ■which we may expect in the spirit world, it would seem to be 
founded on its tendency so to enfeeble our interest in this world, as to 
deter the human efforts on which this sphere is, under God's laws, mainly 
dependent for improvement. Bat then, as a matter of principle, in order 
to merit elevation in the spirit world, ezertion may be induced in this ; and 
esertion (/mm originating, can never he perverted ts the perpetuation of 
those wrongs now so often forming the steps to human aggrandizement. 
The subjugation, the pillage, and estirpation of manlcind, will never be 
induced by considerations founded on the desire to accumulate treasure in 
heaven. 

910. There is hardly in respect to any subjeot, more error than in the 
estimate made of persons who strive to acquire wealth. The question lies 
not in the zeal with which it may be sought, but in the object for which 
it is desired. Although the maxim that the end justifies the means, be 
immoral when extended so far as to palliate any dereliction of the cardinal 
virtues, does it not hold good so long as the means employed ar.o consistent 
with these virtues ? Is it not charitable honestly to seek the pecuniary 
means of being charitable ? Is it not liberal to seek the means wherewith 
to be liberal ? Uospitable, to seek the means to support hospitality ? Is it 
not the duty of each man to promote tho welfare of his wife and children, 
by seeking the means wherewith to houae, clothe, and feed them, and, 
moreover, to educate them intellectually as well as morally ? Since, when 
destitute of education, a man is little above a bmte, surely it must be me- 
ritorious to seek the means of educational improvement, both for ourselves 
and for those by whom we are surrounded j but more especially for those 
who are so dependent on us, that it can only thi-ongh us be attained. 

911. That part of the Lord's prayer which deprecates tempfation, is 
perhaps of pre-eminent importance ; since where there is one man who goes 
through the world honestly by resisting temptaticai, there are hundreds 
who preserve their honesty by avoiding temptation : by so providing pecu- 
niary means in due time, as not to be placed between the alternative of 
starving, begging, cheating, or stealing. 

912. In our republic it will be found that while the acquisition of wealth 
enables one individual to raise his family by educational superiority, the 
ofepring of another, by the loss of fortune, sink into the mass of illiterate 
labourers ; so that there is a perpetual anduiation by the educational in- 
fluence of money. Though public schools may extend the advantages of 
education to the poor, yet -want drives the educated youth to loathsome 
drudgery, made more painful by the enlargement of hia views resulting 
from education. 


;;■ Google 


178 INrLUENCK OP MXJ^'DANE "WEAI.TE, ETC. 


913. To the consoqueEce of hereditary nohicmeD heredilary wealth ia 
essential, haviDg vastly more influence than titles. In those countries 
where titles esist ■without assooiatej wealth, they have scarcely any weight. 
However incompetent money may be to give iteportanoe to an uneducated 
commoner, a cotton- spinner, by educating his son and ^ving him his for- 
tune, may prepare him to sway an empire ; when, had his father heen a 
pauper, the premier might have lived among those so eloquently described 
by Shakspeai'e's Heni-y the Fourth, as upon "uneasy pallets stretching 
them." How different from those perfumed chambers and canopies of 
coatly state, to which this spinner's boy was actually enabled to climb 
through .the education and position resulting from paternal affluence ! 

914. Civilization elevates those who have the advantages of education, 
and who are either professionally employed in intellectual pursuite, or have 
leisure to caltivate science and literature from taste. But the same divi- 
sion of human labour and enterprise which gives intellectual pursuits to a 
few as a profession, gives to the mass occupations inconsistent with the 
cultivation of their intellectual powers. Those who are engaged in the 
humblest species of industry, living from hand to mouth, have little or no 
time to spare from that which their necessities imperatively require; and 
the bodily fatigue incurred during working hours, makes repose from all 
exertion the primary object. 

915. But the situation of the poor, ignorant, and uneducated labourer 
in civilized society, is rendered worse than that of an equally ignorant and 
uneducated barbarian, by contrast with his educated neighbours. The low- 
est savage has as much scholastic education as his chief, while the civilized 
labourer may be in the rear of an educated child of five years of age. 
Thus the absolute evil is made relatively still greater. When any man 
refiects on these facts, can he be otherwise than anxious for those means 
which are necessary to put his offspring upon a par in learning with those 
of othei-s in the m m ty ? 

916. Early i 1 1 t m f 1 1 ery one who does not enjoy pecu- 
niary affluence, th t y p t 1 Igence which he may desire re- 
quires money f t tt m t E the command of leisure for any 
enjoyment requ my f 1 1 ged to work to earn his bread, a 
man may not h 1 f y th bject. 

917. Among the most rational motives for the pursuit of wealth is the 
love of independence. "Thy spirit. Independence, let me share — lord of 
the lion heart and eagle eye !" In this sentiment every noble seal must 
participate. How many have had, like the apotheeary in Shakspeare's 
tragedy, to allow their poverty to rule, instead of honest will ! How many 
have been induced to "earn tlieir daily hread hy their daily shame!" 

918. Prudent, thoughtful, honest men, who do not choose to live house- 
less, without clothes, nor upon the sweat of other men's brows, tarn from 
the paths of amusement, of sensual enjoyment; from the love of literature 


,v Google 


MRS. GOUIlI.AY's NAHRATIVE. 17& 

or acience, or from the observation and investigation of nature's beauties 
and miracles, in order to get, through wealth, the power, and honest right 
to indulge. But while parsuing this great ohjeet, in the firat instance 
only as the means of attaining other ohjecta, good or bad, they grow old 
in the chaae; their passions bum out, while avarice originates as it were 
from their ashes, not, phosnis-like, to replace one parental being, but a hor- 
rid monster, having nothing in common with a plurality of progenitors, 
but the selfish, ardent love of money, unmitigated by any redeeming aspi- 
ration. A being so actuated — or, in other words, a miser — would certainly 
find it as difficult to reach a higher sphere in the spirit world, as it were 
for a camel to get through the needle's eye. 

919. As swine accumulate fat to bequeath to those to whom they leave 
their carcasses, so the avaricious accumulate wealth, to hoard until it can 
no longer be retained. They die with an immense amount of negative sin ; 
since all their omissions to do good, which is within their power, is carried 
to tlieir debit in the spirit world. Their poverty in the spirit world will 
be proportioned to their ill-used wealth in this temporal abode. 

920. When this is well brought home to mankind, there will be less 
avarice, and fewer of those crimes which arise from selfish cupidity, or am- 
bition. 


MRS. GOURLATS NARRATIVE, 
92T. The following is a narrative of the circumstances which led to the 
conversion to a belief in Spiritualism, of mj esteemed friend, Mrs. M. IJ. 
Gourlay, through whose high attributes as an intellectual medium, I am in 
a great measure indebted for my conversion. I do most devoutly believe 
that the information received from my spirit father, through her medium- 
ship, would, if duly credited, be of more value to true religion and morality, 
than the forty millions of dollars annually expended upou the Church of 


PHiLADEI.PHr,v, May 20, 185-5. 
To Frofesior Robert liars : 

922. Ml/ Dear Sir: Pursuant to your request, I have the pleasure to 
present you the following particulai's of my experience and observation in 
relation to the phenomena of spiritual intercourse, — phenomena which 
engage, at the present time, the serious and profound attention of thou- 
sands of intelligent minds; manifestations that are rapidly and steadily 
spreading their influence over the entire continent, and carrying with them 
the evidence of their spiritual origin, while impressing receptive minds 
with the truth of their sacred importance to an estent unexampled in the 
history of any other movement. 


;;■ Google 


180 MRS. GOUHLAY a 

923. My attention was attracted to the phenomena in question, about 
five years since, by reading sundry reports ia the New York Tribune, of 
certain mysterious sounds which bad occurred in the city of Rochester, 
and purported to have been made by the spirits of the departed, 

924. I regarded the subject at first -with great distrust, supposing it & 
mere imposition on the credulity of the public, and considered it entirely 
uQworlhy of serious thought. 

925. Finding, however, that it was eliciting considerable notice, and 
knowing that facts are sometimes stranger than fiction, I deemed it con- 
sonant with reason to suspend my judgment till more eonveraaut with the 

926. Having been admonished by a much-loved, intelligent, and, I 
would add, practical Christian mother to worship at the altar of truth, 
while exercising my reason on all subjects presented to my mind, I was, as 
might be presumed, nearly, if not entirely, free from the shackles of bigotry, 
superstition, and dc^matism, and was thus prepared, so far at least as these 
barriers to mental and moral progression are concerned, to investigate any 
subject within the range of my capacity. 

927. Hearing of the spread of the manifestations, and their actual 
occurrence ia the city of Bangor, Maine, where I then resided, I resolved, 
with the first favourable opportunity, to investigate the matter for 
myself. 

928. Not many days had elapsed after forming this resolution, before I 
met an intimate friend, an exemplary and respected member of the Me- 
thodist Episcopal denomination, who informed me that she was interested 
in spiritual manifesta,tions, and desired to investigate them. But alas ! 
she was bound by the galling fetters of sectarian and priestly bondage, and 
dai-ed not move in such an investigation. Her pastor had said that 
the "arctt deceiver," the veritable Satan, was the prime instigator in 
this scheme, and, moreover, that to participate in a movement so diabolical 
in its character would render her liable not only to loss of membership in 
the church, but expose her to divine wrath ia this world, as well as end- 
less torment in the world to come. 

929. I believed such an intolerant and persecuting spirit, to be diame- 
trically opposed to every principle of true Christianity, and repugnant to 
the claims of reason; and deprecating any doctrine, orthodox though 
called, that would thus stifle free thought and inquiiy, and consign to eter- 
nal misery the children of our teavenly Father, even however depraved, I 
advised my friend to exercise her reason, with which she was by nature 
endowed, and regardless of the sneers of a time-serving multitude, or 
the anathemas of the church, to obey the injunction of the apostle — 
" Prove all things — lioldfaM that tchich is good." 

930. She consented; and a few days subsequent to this interview, she 
extended to me an invitation to attend a spiritual c 


,v Google 


Mas. gouklay's naurattve. 181 

at tie touse of a bighly respectable family, membera of the Unitai-ian 
Ciiuvch, and much esteemed by a large circle of friends for their many 
virtues. 

931. The inYJtation was gladly accepted, and the ensuing evening found 
us seated at a tahle in the domicile of our worthy friends, Mr. and Mrs. 
T , with Bomo six or eight intelligent persons of both seses. 

932. Having, agreeably to request, placed our hands on the table, wc 
silently raised our thoughts in solemn and sincere aspirations to the great 
Father of spirits, and desired to be brought into more harmonious rela- 
tion with the spirits of our dear departed friends, and hoping that these 
might thereby be better able to manifest themselves to their friends still in 
the earthly hahilimente of humanity. 

933. We had not remained long in this position, before we heard dis- 
tinct nd I'k th f O'ng f d pa f w t n the table. Imagine our 
surpr nd n p hi d bght wh n first used to a vital conscious- 
ness of th I n f 1 t 1 tiut n u midst I I shall never 
forget tl gl u sp n f pi ur wh h illumined the counte- 
nance f that I ttl b nd f k f tn th nor the electric thrill of 
joy wh hip 1 this h ppj is n 

934. The sounds continued to respond to our inquiries; three esprcss- 
iog the affirmative, and one the negative. It was su^ested by a member 
of the circle to use the alphabet as a means of communication ; and that 
on passing a pencil slowly over the card, the spirits would indicate, by the 
sounds, the letters required to convey their thoughts. la this manner we 
received many convincing evidences of spirit intercourse; such as getting 
the names of our spirit friends, the particular localities of their birth and 
death, and the precise time of their departure from this world, with many 
other proofe of their presence and identity. 

935. We were soon informed by the communicating intelligence that a 
much more rapid mode of communication would now be established be- 
tween us. On inquiring its nature, it was spelt out — Let Welthea (refer- 
ring to my friend) take the pen, and we will write through her hand.* 
To all of us this was a new and unexpected revelation. My friend, being 
very timid and retiring in her nature, was evidently confused by this an- 
nouncement. At onr very earnest solicitation, however, she lifted the pen 
from the table. Her hand was now seized by an invisible and intelligent 
power, and being in a normal state, several beautiful stanzas,f touching 

* To meet the cnrio^ty of tie reader, it may ba well to aay that eommunioationa by 
tlie pen are elOier impresaioiial — tliat ia, raBiilting from the rolition of ths writer, aided 
Iq the matter by the manonee of a spivil^or fley are aaiomatis; that is, produced by the 
juaoliflnieal afilion of the Bpirila on the hand of the modinm, anUrely independent of tho 

t I would state, on the nnthority of this lady and her reiativea, many of whom wore 
oppoaed to Spiritualiam, that this was the firat time that sha had avor produced a iiootieal 
efiUsion; though it has not heon an uncommon circamstacoe for her, since then, when 


;;■ Google 


182 MRS. GOURLAY S NARRATIVE. 

her missioa iu tliis glorious cause, resulted from ttis first and, to all of 
U3, astounding performance. 

936. Tliis, to us, was a new phase of the manifestations, and to mjself 
and friend was very wonderful, since, I am certain, she had never thought 
of beeoraing a medium for spiritual intercommunion. 

937. Soon after writing the stanzas alluded to, her hand was again in- 
fluenced to write a communication to a gentleman present. He was a 
stranger to my friend, now regarded as a medium, and the communication 
was from the spirit of a sister who had passed from earth about thirty 
years before, the name, in full, of the spirit being appended. 

938. After receiving instruetions from the spirits, in regard to the 
manner of conducting our circle, we adjourned to the time appointed for 
our next meeting. 

939 Oil the succpeding day I visited my friend at her residence, and 
received many additional evidences of the pieseace and identity of spirits. 
My fathei, mothei and sistei, and many other loved spirit fiiends with 
whom the medium had no acquimtance, ind whoie names even weie not 
Liown to her commumcaied, and n,miaJed me of many ineidenfa of their 
hfe on eaith ot which my fi end was wholly ignjrant, and Bomi, of them 
I bad myself almost fornotten 

940 At subsequent and frequent interviews with this hdy, I rec-eived 
many indubitable pioofs of the preaente and guaidiau'fhip of angels, of 
which the following is an example 

041 feome weeis after oui first inteiview, and while djatasaing the 
orlinarj topics of the day, hei hind was influenced to wiite these 


942 "My dear M Tou will te anipnsed and pleased io learn that an 
old achoolmite is present, one that jou ne\ei, while m eaitb, anticipated 
hearmg from again Many years have fled since our laat meeting I 
ha\e come fiom Ihe realms of the unseen, to renew the acquaintance 
with y)ii begun in childhood, and to advise jou in relation to your 
sputual development You iie destined to become a good vmpiesiional 
medium for spiiitual truth Follow the directions which we from time to 
time shall give you, and you will progiess rapidly, and be greatly piofited 
theieby Elevate your mind to the source of light and truth, ind seek to 
be saved from every thing that might hinder your spiritual advancement. 
Devote a portion of each day to the development of your spirit, and inves- 
tigate the principles which govern the physical and spiritual departments 
of the universe. You are living in the light of an advanced age, and are 
surrounded by many advantages. Improve the privileges that you enjoy, 
for the benefit of yourself and others. Lydia Manly." 

under spiriEuol iBfluenep, to write page aflor pago 
ooropoaition, bott in proao and Tcreo, fnr BBrpussin, 
powers (rf thought and fancy. 


, Google 


Mils. GOURLAY'S NARaATIVE. 183 


943. Tbe communication being finished, my friend handed it to me, 
saying, "I am not acquainted with this name." I said, on glancing at 
the sif^ature, ttat I never knew any one of the name of Hanly. It was 
immediately written, " Let Margaret look again, and she will find that 
she is mistaken in the name; it is Mardy, not Hard^." Imagine my 
astonishment on recognising the name of a schoolmate whom I had not 
seen, heard, nor thought of, for many years. This was to me, and might ho 
to any one, a full and satisfactory confirmation of spiritual communion. 

944. On a subsequent occasion, it was written, through my friend, hy my 
spirit sister, " Do you want instruction ? I will talk to yon of friendship 
this tJme. Let the basis of your friendship be esteem, and hy all means 
seek to have this sure foundalion. Friendship is a source of the greatest 
pleasure, and when begun in a right manner, ends not on earth, but con- 
tinues to increase with unabated interest thronghout eternity. Yours has 
thus far been characterized by firmness and sincerity. Oh ! if yon knew 
with what interest I look upon you, my dear sisters, watching the pro- 
gress of your affections, and seeking a close intimacy with yout spirits, it 
wonld awaken in both of your minds a lively interest for heavenly objects, 
and incite you to the pursuit of solid happiness. Friendship should be- 
gin in time to continue In eternity. Oh ! conld I convey to you the worth 
of time when viewed in this light I 

945. "I am watching your silent communings. The lofty aspirations 
of your souls are not of an earthly nature. Your minds are being en- 
lightened and seeking communion with Grod. Be encouraged, my dear 
sisters; we shall all be united in love. Be well grounded in the spiritual 
faith, and let your motto be — Onward in ilte divine life. MabY." 

946. Again, it was written, "Sing with the spirit! Sister, let thy 
heart make tuneful melody with an angel choir who now surround you ! 
Sing a song to immortality ; how the dear departed, clothed in robes of 
viotflry, now stand on heavenly hills, enwrapt in glorious visions of the 
Groat Eternal, bowing before the throne! Sing, 'Death, where is thy 
sting? oh I grave, where is thy victory?' 

947. "While here you meet, guardian angels are in attendance. Here 
is ft gray-haired sire, a mother, and a aweet-lipped babe. All have come, 
with noiseless wing, to listen to thee. Precious moments ! Improve them 
in converse sweet of heaven, and blessings, richer far than earthly trea- 
sures, we will pour upon you." 

948. The reminiscences of the hours devoted with my friend to the inves- 
tigation of this sublime subject are among the happiest of my life. They 
serve to awaken the purest, holiest, and most affectionate sentiments and 
sympathies of my nature, and thereby lead me into closer communion with 
the loved ones who have gone before me. 

949. But in refevenca to my family, I was for a season destined to be^ 
alone in my happy belief. It is true, my husband did not reject the sub- 


,v Google 


184 MRS. gouelay's karrative. 

jeot, but thougUt the phenomena in question might be accouated for by a 
reference to the principles of mental science. I requested him to boIto 
the mystery. He attempted it, but failed. His explanation, lite ali 
othMS adverse to the Bpiritual theory, was an espknation in which iioHdng 

950. About three months after these occurrences, a lady informed my 
husband that one of her daughters, about fifteen years of age, was a me- 
dium for the rappings. The young lady being present, declined the appel- 
lation aa a term of reproach. Perceiving her discomfort, he requested to 
know what she thought of these manifestations. Her reply was, that they 
claimed a spiritmd origin, but, in her opinion, they were due to "dec- 
iricilff, or something o/t/iat sort." 

951. Hearing the raps on the young lady's chair, and on various other 
articles of furniture in the room, he requested her to put her hands on the 
table. This being done, the sounds were made on the table so loud and 
distinct, that they might have been heard iu an adjoining apartment. In- 
quiring of the spirits if they would communicate with him by the alpha- 
bet, he was answered in the affirmative by three raps. 

952. Having tatcn a seat at some distance from the table, and placed 
himseif in such a position that no one could see the letters but himself, 
he proceeded to take down those indicated by the sounds aa he passed a 
pencil slowly over the alphabet. 

953. The sounds having at length ceased to respond, he fried to read 
the communication, but found it impossible to do so until he had first 
arranged what was written into words and sentences. This having been 
accomplished, he read, to his utter amazement, as follows : " My dear son, 
your parent rejoices in this opportunity to communicate with you. Let 
me advise you to investigate this most important subject; it will benefit 
you in time and eternity. Tour spirit father, W. G-." 

954. On reading this communication, my husband said he felt "riveted 
to the spot;" that he had realized the presence of a long-lost parent, and 
that language Billed to convey his feelings. It is perhaps needless to say 
that he was from that moment a believer in the truth of Spiritualism. 

955. Months rolled on, and we continued to receive and enjoy the do- 
3ightftd intercourse of our spirit friends. One day, while engaged in sew- 
ing, the needle dropped suddenly from my fingers. At the same instant 
I esperienced a sensation in my right hand and arm analogous to a slight 
'electric shock. My husband, seeing me start, inquired the cause. Per- 
■ceiving the temperature of my hand diminished, he became somewhat 
:alarmed, and commenced rubbing it. In a few moments we heard sounds 
■on the workstand at which I was seated. I inquired if the spirits wished 
ito communicate, which was responded to by three raps. Taking the card 
axnd passing a pencil over it, the following words were given : 

956. " My child, be not afraid ! we are trying to devolope you as a 


;;■ Google 


MRS, oodrlay's nakrative. 185 

■writing medium." I experienced the next day a similar feeling in the 
same arm, and was influenced to write the following impressive words : 

957- " My dear Child: Your mother would impart to you a few thoughts 
relative to an event which is generally regarded with unspeakahle horror. 
I mean the d ssolut oa of the m t ! h dy D th h uld p ent no 
terror to tl e m nd nee t s but ta tnfti \ ttan ore ex- 
alted n 1 pe fectp 1 state of hein a d un f th mpe h hie and 
eternal pr n pies of the soul and j t f n th temp a y h n e in the 
physical fo m It sbuttheloj t wh tl hh Id th p 1 1 ys aside 
its wo n it g rment to ajpea Ithdntnuhm eh ttul habili- 
ments in the spiritual realm — the entran at abu ntnle with 
hands, eternal in the heavens." 


958. "To the 


mind that views th s h ng th n 1 ( n f tl 


spirit 


in its true light, 


it will appear an ay 


p 1 m n ry t p n th 1 


velop- 


ment of the im 


mortal germ to a h h 


d mu h m gl u 


esist- 


ence. With the 


gross earthly b dy the | 


t uld n t nh b t th 


celes- 


f 1 ph 


th Ij ia fi Id f 


t Ip gr 1 


L have 


b d y 


k p g wh h list 


p d t mm t 1 fl 


fer in 


h E th 


h g t b tl b t 


ts Ulty f hi I 


needs 


t pi t g 


t m g 1 1 tl 


g d f rth 


id our 


G d wl tw 


II It m t ly f Id t f 


dl tf Ip p f 


(. In 


th w 1 y 


httl f t Em ly w 


11 ^ J f II 


ireeive 


th t 1 d 


p t 1 1 Jt 


- d e. th t m 


lycan 


h B p p 


J th my de' h Id 


f th b wh 1 


oon to 


t k pi P 


1 f th m D 


til B Im b fi ra I 


Y 


th L 


A." 


9 9 Th w 


m f t t t 


f p t m tl 1 


e and 


w t hf 1 


Sb f w th t th 


tabl t w t h d 


She 


perceived that ( 


rar darling chiU w a 


u bly diseased. Although I 


trembled at the thought of part a w tl 


my t asure, still I was 


■ much 


calmer and more 


resigned in con ^u 


f ll parental warning 


, when 


the dread summi 


ins came 


960. Three weeks papsed, and still there was no apparent change 


little one from, her usual seemingly healthy condition. My husband hod 
business which called him to Philadelphia. At his urgent request I accom- 
panied him. We left our little ones in charge of a female friend and a faith- 
ful nurse, intending to be absent about two weeks. Ten days subsequent 
to the time of our departure from home, I received a strong impression to 
return, and tbat my presence would soon be required there. My husband 
objected, on the ground that his business was unfinished. I proposed re- 
turning alone, but he was unwilling, and we started for home the next 
morning. We found our children all woll. I was joked about my spi- 
ritual impression, and was told it was the result of imagination. On the 
day succeeding our return, however, our dear child was taken sick, and 


,v Google 


186 ME8. GOURLAY'S NAltRATIVE, 

after an illness of ttree days lier eDfiancMsoil spirit passed from earth to 
heavea. 

961. Notwithstanding the ridicule heaped, at that time, by its opposers 
upon tie believers in Spiritualism, and the affected contempt ia which tlie 
votaries of this mnch-abused doctrine were then held, we pursued the in- 
vestigaiion of the subject, and became daily more imbued with a sense of 
fie truth and harmony of its divine teachings. We had the pleasure of 
seeing many persona, who had once denounced it as an idle dream, as a 
humbug, and a delusion, now converted to a full faith ia its glorious reali- 
ties. A change came over the spirit of their dream, and they are now 
blessed in the enjoyment of the richest feast for mind and soul ever be- 
stowed by a munificent God npon his grateful children. And many do 
not hesitate to proclaim the fact to the world ; for, thant heaveu, the days 
of the Inquisition are numbered, and a brighter and more glorious day ia 
dawning on benighted humanity. 

963. The following extracts from a letter of ray brother. Dr. North, of 
Waterville, Maine, in reply to my husband, may serve to show the mind 
of one of the skeptics referred to, in regard to the snbject of Spiritualism, 
both before and after inyestigation. As they may not be uninteresting to 
your readers, I give them to you, as follows : 

963. "Dear Doctor: — Tour letter of the 17th instant is before me, 
and its remarkable contents noticed. Had a great man or men, for in- 
stance, Daniel "Webster, Henry Clay, or Millard Fillmore, advised a friend 
to a certain course, if I thought that course improper, I should have felt at 
liberty to dissent from him or them , but when the adviser is the ^pvnt of 
my departed mother, or flic ■,oul rf i/our dq ariad li jthi^, I cannot dis 
sent, or give an opinicn thit would Lonfliet with them It seems to me 
dear doctor, that you cannot have better id\isers unless you coll the "ipirit 
of G-abriel to your assi'itance, and you can do no less than consult the dic- 
tates of the rappers 

964. "To be son ub lam Buipnaed at your easy conveision to Spi 
ritualism. I had -supposed you spiiit proof, the greatest sk^ptu, in the 
land; but I iiud you aie completely (a? eii inanl dew for' Id not 
place the least reliance on your superhuman communications, and would 
advise you to look upon them as phenomena of Mesmerism or mind read 
ing. The medium is in a mesmeric slate, and consequently is capable of 
reading the thoughts of the inquirei, and inswering questions correctly 
The sounds are easily accr unted for The subject la alaniied and mper 
stitious, and therefore easily imposed upon The cieaking of a boot is 
often taken by such persons in this state of mind is a spiritual rap Bo 
not be imposed upon by suoh superstition, but choose rather to be guided 
by good sound sense 

965. " You m ght conanlt the spiiit of Lorenzo Dr w He wa^ a y.oA 
old soul, and one that always safely advised his fnend 


;;■ Google 


MRS. gouhlay's narrative. 187 


966. " Give my love to Martia Luther, and William Penn, and the 

Wandering Jew. If you should hear any thing of M. B , you may let 

me know. " He died three or four years since in my debt." 

967. The subjoined was received some time after the foregoing from the 
same hand, hut was dictated, it seems, by a more elevated spirit: 

968. "In relation to Spiritualism, I am deeply conviuced of its truth- 
fulness. God grant that the grand and glorious realities which it reveals 
may so influence me that my progress in goodness and holiness will never 
end! Do I believe in it? Yes I yes! It is my daily hope and happi- 
ness ; the bread of life ; and it will be my conso!a.tion in death. I have 
read much, but have seen little of the manifestations. I should be very 
happy to spend a fortnight with you and meet your circle, 

969. "My wife is reading and approximating toward belief. We have 
read the following works ; — Davis's Harmonia; Davis's Present Age and 
Inner Life; Edmonds's and Dester's work on Spiritualism; Beecher'a 
Export, aud Brittan's Kepjy to the same; Stilling's Pneumatology ; 
Riechenbach's Dynamics; Oahagnet's Celestial Telegraph, and the Spi- 
ritual Telegraph, weekly. I am so deeply interested in spiritual literature 
that other reading is insipid to me. I am rejoiced that people in the 
higher walks of life are engaged in the subject. It will give popularity fo 
it, aud the weak and fearful souls will be encouraged and strengthened in 
well-doing." The following was addressed to me last February : 

970. "My Dear Sister: Tou say it is too late to wish us a happy New 
Tear, It is never too late to wish our friends happiness, and strive to 
make them happy. This is a new jear indeed ; a new era to bo made 
memorable through time and eternity; one in which the spirits of our 
friends are striving for our happiness. Then let us not only make each 
other happy, but by purifying our thoughts and conversation, strive to 
progress in this rudimental world, so that when we find ourselves disrobed 
of these bodies, and in the sphere of eternal progression, we may be with 
and make the spirits of our friends happy. This is a glorious happy new 
year. The old ark of theology and superstition is passing away. The 
life-blood of the popular theology is drying up. The lens of the spiritual 
philosophy is concentrating upon it the powerful and burning rays of truth. 
Already a dense and fetid smoke is issuing from its decaying portals. Its 
priests and votaries already are crying, Fire ! fire ! God grant, that from 
its ashes no phtenis may arise to propagate anew its senseless dogmas. 
Then will this be a happy year for all mankind." On a subsequent occa- 
sion he writes — 

971. "The spiritual doctrine is gaining ground here. Many of our 
influential citizens are believers. Some that were iiifideh have become 
hopeful Christians. Public opinion is softening, and it is not now esteemed 
a disgrace, as it was some time since, to believe. The acquisition of such 
men as Professor Hare, Edmonds, TaSmadge, Chase, Simmons, Dester, and 


,v Google 


188 MES. GOtlELAY B NARRATIVE. 

Btittan to our ranks, has given respectability to it, and wrought a revolu- 
tion in opinion." 

972. Thus much I have said respecting my spiritnal esperience anterior 
to leaving Maine. Concerning my experience since then, much more 
might bf- saiJ, but as you are alieady ftmiliai with the most of it, it 
leniains for me to prea nt lou with a few (f the best and most unequi- 
vocal di,monstratioDS of spintniJ uimmunion that I have witnessed, but 
which Lave not come under yom peisonnl obsenation Among which 
the following touching incidents cannot fail to interest those whose 
heiits ind minds aie not cloicd by the iron bai"! of preiudice and super- 
stition 

973 While spen hug the evening of January the 21st, 1854, at the 
hoiiie of a fiicnd, it was yroposi-J bj the lady and h r husband that we 
should form a circle. Wo had not been long seated at the table when 
three ladies, two of whom I had never seen, fiivonved us with their com- 
pany, and took their seats at some distance from the circle. Tbey had 
been in the room but two or three minutes, when the following waa given 
through the table : 

974. " My dear mother ! In love I meet you this evening. Oh, mo- 
ther, why do you mourn my death ? I have just begun to live. G-rieve 
not for me ! 

975. " I wish my husband to investigate Spiritualism. I will com- 
municate to him. 

976. " Why should you erect a monumental slab to my memory ? Let 
me live in the hearts of friends. Sarah North," 

977. When the gentleman who took down the communication read it, 
I was surprised at hearing the name of North, that being my maiden 
name. As there was no Sarah in our family, I asked the spirits, Who 
is Sarah North ? Before thoy had time to reply, one of the ladies referred 
to (Mrs. Wightman) approached the table in teai-s. She said, " That is 
from my daughter Sarah. I have been engaged to-day in the solemn duty 
of selecting a tombstone to her memory." 

978. On Nov. 25th, 1854, I sat by appointment with Mrs. Wightman 
for spirit intercourse, Mrs. W. put the question, "Is Elizabeth Adams 
present V " Yes." " Will she communicate ?" " Yes." " My dear 
aunt," was immediately spelt out. Interrupting the communication at 
tliat point, I asked Mrs. W. if Elizabeth Adams was her niece. No, she 
replied ; it must be a mistake. Thinking it probable that there was some- 
thing wrong in the conditions, I removed my hand for a few moments. 
On replacing it, to our surprise, the words, " My dear aunt," were repeated. 
"Well!" we exclaimed, simultaneously, "that is strange. Let us see 
what may come ;" and we received the following : 

979. "Ml/ dear Aunt: This is the first time that I have conimanieated. 
When I left the rudiniental sphere, I was so young I did not know what 


;;■ Google 


MRS. gotjrlay's nabrative, 189 

ib meant to die; I now know. It was the licgianing of life ! I will came 
again soon and talk witli jou. Youi' niece, 

Almira Barnes." 

980. It was some moments before Mrs. W. could recall to mind the 
fact that her sister had lost a child, of the above name, about twenty-three 
yeara since, aged three months. Hero is intGlligonce so clearly independ- 
ent of our minds, that it is, in my opinion, entirely fetal to the theory of 
" menial rejleotion" so diten adduced by the uubelievers in Spiritualism. 
At the close of this communication the following was received : 

981. " Dear Mot/ier : I am happy to have this opportunity fo Bend you 
a iind message. Although I am often with you, I cannot speak to you 
through your own mediumship. Ob mother ! what delight it would give me 
could I make myself visible to you. What would yon say if you should 
see me sitting in the obair I so long occupied when an invalid ? I oftea sit 
in that cbair, but you cannot yet see me. Have you not heard me rap to 
you t I have tried in various ways to make myself manifest, I think you 
had better go South this winter. I think father's health woald be better 
there, I will visit you, if you go. The climate where you now live ia too 
bracing for father's lungs. When the warm weather returns, you can bid 
farewell to the sunny South and seek your Northern home. I wish I could 
speak to you through your own dear hand, but that I cannot yet do. 

982. "Dear mother, you will become a medium; then we shall have 
good times. Gocd-by, blessed mother! I look forward to a happy reunion 
with all your loved ones here, Elizabeth Adams," 

983. The above, as may he seen, was from the spirit that Mrs. W, 
called for, and the communication was designed for the spirit's mother, 
who lived in the State of New York, The message was subsequently for- 
warded to her address. E. A., Mrs. Wightman, informed me, died after 
a lingering illness of consumption. She occupied the arm-chair alluded 
to during the greater part of her sickness, and she promised her mother 
she would come back and sit in it after her death, if she could. Her step- 
father, whose indisposition she refers to, is affected with a chronic disease 
of the lungs. The loved ones are Elizabeth's brothers and sisters, all of 
whom, five or sis, are in the spirit world. These facts were unknown to 
me at the time. 

984. Last January, my friend Mrs, Wightman brought two ladies to 
witness, for the first time, some of the phenomena of our beautiful philo- 
sophy. Their names were suppressed, to be disclosed by the communica- 
tions that might come from their spirit friends, ia order to strengthen the 
evidences of spiritual intercourse. My hand being applied to the disk, the 
index spelled out the following : 

985. "Bear Mother: I am not dead, but living in the love sphere of 
my Father in heaven When you laid my little body in the ground, it 
caused you many tears. Kind friends wept. I see one here who was a 


;;■ Google 


190 MRS. GOUELAy'S NAItRATIVE. 

faithful friend to you in that hour of atiguisli. Ciieiish her, for she was a 
friend in need. Oh ! mother, I wish jou to believe that jour little child 
is indeed with you. I can come to earth whea I wish to see you and la- 
tter. It only causes me to feel a little sad that you and father cannot see 
me. F. H. W." 

986. One of the ladies rose fiom her seat and accepted the communica- 
tion aa from her darling boy, who had been put in his' grave two years be- 
fore.. The name was all right: "Franklin Heni-y Wilcox." The friend 
referred to was Mrs. Wightman, who had been a true friend in the trying 
hour of a mother's sorrow, and had performed the solemn duty of prepar- 
ing her dear child for the depository of hia earthly remains, and to pour 
halm on the heart of a bereaved aud stricken mother. 

987. About two months since, two of the professors of the Female Me- 
dical College of Penasylvauia, one of whom. Dr. Haryey, is iavouribly 
known to you, called to see me in relation to the subject of Spiritualism. 
I had never seen either of these gentlemen. After a few minutes' eouversa- 
tion on the topic in question, Br. H, observed — "We should like, madam, 
if JOU will be kind enough to favour us with a, sitting, to communicate 
with onr spirit friends." Complying with the doctor's request, I placed 
my hand on the disk, and the subjoined was rapidly communicated : 

988. "My brothers in the glorious profession of medicine ! I greet you 
this flileraoon with unabated affection and respect. It seems like a dream 
that I have passed from your midst; but passing away is written on all 
things of a perishable nature. Not so with the spirit, which ia an emana- 
tion from God. 

989. " Mj earthly career is closed, and a brighter one ia now in view. 
Oh, the inexpressible delight which fills my soul when I behold the wondrous 
works of Omnipotence ! Here I can pursue, untrammelled, those subjects 
which were so delightful to me when an inhabitant of the mundane sphere. 
Oh ! that I had prepared my mind in some measure, by proper investiga- 
tion, for this transcendent world of living beauties ! but the love of my 
profession filled my mind, to the exclusion of the more important one of 
spiritual progression. I would that I could converse with my beloved wife, 
that I might console her for her early loss! Tell her that .t am happy; 
this will speak voluraea. Johnson." 

990. The foregoing was accepted by the docttirs, as coming from their 
colleague, the late Dr. Johnson ; and they said that he was the spirit they 
had wished to hear from. 

991. The same spirit has since communicatei with Dr H, and has given 
him abundant evidence of his identity. 

992. Many more incidents in uiy esperiente, giving proof of the truth 
of spirit intercourse, might be adduced ; but is time and ^pace admonish 
me to bring my narrative to a close, I reseive them for a future period. 

993. I have thus, my dear friend, given you i leiy hnsty and imperfect 


;;■ Google 


MEM. GOURLAY'S KAilRATIVK- 191 

Bkctct of my experience in Spiritualism, and my development as a me- 
dium. Little need here be said to prove, to reflecting minds, the value of 
tliis heavoB-desccnded philosophy. It is a theme that idl may study 
with pleasure aad profit, when so disposed. 

994. Whatever may be thought of modern Spiritualism, and however 
opposed it may be to many of the preconceived notions and opinions of 
mankind, it is certain that there is nothing in its fundamental doctrines 
and teachings, which may not be reconciled with the laws of God, so far 
as these are known to man. 

995. It matters not, I shoiild think, whether this movement is sanctioned 
or not by a former revelation, as that would neither add to nor detract 
from its intrinsie merit. Spiritualism, is endeared to the heart of thou- 
sands by its fond associations, and mementoes of love and affection from 
those dear friends who have passed from their sight, though still united to 
them by kindred ties. It has gone on in triumph, overspreading every 
State in our glorions republic, and, passing over the broad sea, has reached 
the shores of other lands, binding together the brotherhood of man in the 
sacred bonds of love, and dispelling the discordant elements of strife and 
sectiam which have hung over the world, and like a dark pall, imparted 
their sombre hue to the minds of men. Progress is its name, and love its 
mission. It has no affinity with vice. It makes no war with right, bnt 
inculcates the highest standard of morality. It is noiselessly accom- 
plishing its divine mission. Many a widow's heart is made to leip with 
joy by its benign influence, and many an orphan feels its silent mmistiation. 
Many a prodigal son has been reclaimed at the brink of ruin by the voice 
of a spirit mother! It is not only a few indi\iduals who ire to receive 
the blessings which flow from this new dispensition — the mi ses aie to be 
benefited. It inculcates principles which will &tiengtben the ioundations 
of society, promote liarmony in the socnl system, and ultimately unite all 
mankind under its broad standard of peace That Spiritualism la npidly 
estendingits bounds, and gaining hundieds ol thousands of eon%erts, admits 
not of a doubt; and that it iias the elements withia it to elevate, reform, 
and redeem the raee, it were folly, nay, madness, to deny. 

996. Eighteen months have scarcely elapsed, my dear friend, sinoe our 
first acquaintance, and you are aware of the circumstances which afforded 
me this highly-esteemed pleasure. The event, I am happy to say, has 
proved an era in my own life that I shall always revert to with pleasurable 
and heartfelt emotion; for its results have not only proved a blessing and 
solace to you, but a source of much joy and happiness to myself. Though 
you have encountered much opposition, and even abuse, from the ignorant 
and illiterate as well as from the professed votaries of science, in defend- 
ing the cause of spiritual philosophy, you have fearlessly and faithfully 
battled against error, and planted your standai-d on the Iiigh pinnacle of 
truth. And as David of old, with the smooth atones of Kcdroo, slew the 


;;■ Google 


192 PKACriCAL BENEFIT 01 

Gathean giant, nnd was met with songs of triumpli and dances of joy by 
the daughters of Israel ; so yon,annod with the panoply of trutt, have gone 
forth with the weapons of philosophy and reason to prostrate the hydra- 
headed monster; and will, I trust, receive in your turn the acknowledg- 
ments and love of yonr grateful friends. 

69?. " Thsrs is a nobler attifo thtin olnsbing epaars, 

A noUer peril tlmn tlie battlB-fiold ; 
■Tls wijen, with trust in God, worn as a siield, 
'Midst nnivei'snl hissas, scoffs, and sneers, 
Tbe man of tnitli irltli l>row serene appears 
And stands forth singlf, for the right appealed 
To the Eternal Umpirsi nor will yield 
Odb backvrnrd alep, fVom polie; or ferns. 
The savage, bandit, nay, the brute, is steeled 
'Gainst fatisding danger — e'en the worm uprears 
Beneath the foot bis tisy sting, to crave 
A venomed Tengeanea ; but immortal years 
Are full of glory for the Christ-li£e bravo, 

Very truly yours, 

MaRGAEET B. G-OTJKIAY. 


ILLUSTRATION OF THE PRACTICAL BENEFIT OF SPIRITUALISM, IN THE 
HAPPINESS IMPARTED BY THE CONVERSION OF AN UNBELIEVER TO 
A BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY. 

998. Cebtainly, in one conclusion all zealous religious sectarians will 
coincide. I allude to tliat which makes belief In a future state of exist- 
ence of the highest importance to the happiness of reasoning mortals. 

999. Those who, for faith in immoi-tality, have been satisfied to rely on the 
creed whioli they may have chanced to derive from their ancestors through 
education, and have consequently felt the comfort of a belief in immor- 
tality thence arising, may readily conceive of the benefit which must ensue 
to those of their fellow-creatures upon whom such a creed has not been 
impressed, but who are quite sensible of the immense value of any facts 
tending to create such a belief in life to come. It is to be lamented, how- 
ever, that persons who have this impression contingently from a peculiar 
education, are irritated at having analogous impressions created in a differ- 
ent way. 

1000. But in obedience to any dissatisfaction thus arising, to assail 
those who may acquire a knowledge of futurity by a new route, is mani- 
festly inconsistent with the golden rule. As an esemplifieatioa of the 
benefit which the new evidences of another and a better world may pro- 


;;■ Google 


PUACTICAL BENEIIT OF SPIRITUALISM. 103 

duoo in tlie minds of ttoae who are not satisfied with that of revelation, I 
will subjoin the account of his conversion indited by one of my 
esteemed friends, Doctor W. Greib, ■who preceded me in Ppiritual investi- 
gation, and has longer enjoyed the influence which Spiritualism esorcises 
over its votaries. 

1001. The author was a member of the circle under whose auspices my 
experimental tests weve for the most part applied, and was present on the 
very occasion when my ovnt apparatus, vihieh had been conlrived to dis- 
prove spiritual agency, demonstrated its existence. 

1002. "The verdure and warblings of fifty springs had elevated the souls 
of the writer of the present sietcli in wonder, admiration, and gratitude, to 
the great Omnipotent Father of the Universe, without opening to his 
longing view a world beyond the grave. 

1003. " There w£^ pdn in the thought, that scenes so enchanting, feel- 
ings so susceptible to their charms, a mind constituted to appreciate their 
miraculous wonders and pei-vading fascinations, and to do homage to the 
great Intelligence which gave them existence, should in a few short years 
be destined, like the foliage of the forest, to death and decay 

1004. "Still, to hia mind their was arrogance in the thought that man 
could ever be the recipient of joys beyond those provided for him in com- 
mon with all animal creation ; and he chased from his mind the sombfc 
thought of death, as a dreaded incubus upon life and the enemy of his few 
remaining joys. 

1005. " But how changed the scene ! Death, once so disturbing to his 
peace, so discordant with the moral attributes of his nature, which ' puzzles 
the will,' and leads the mind to seek in wonder and discouragement the mo- 
tive for human life, is now but a ' consummation devoutly to bo wished,' 
when this race of earthly life shall have been duly run ; when we maj- 
have filled the measure of our destined usefulness, and secured by our 
moral affinities a joyful reception in the spheres above. 

lOOC. " And why this change in thought and feeling ? How ai'e the 
horrors of the grave, the dread of dissolution into the primordial elements 
of creation, exchanged for the blissful assurance of immortal life for the 
soul of man, in all its associate identity, after it sh3,ll have departed from 
its earthly tenement of flesh ? 

1007. " The answer to this all-absorbing question, which sheds light 
into the gloomy recesses of the sheptie's mind, and gives joy to his des- 
pairing heai't — which supplied evidence where none had been sought, con- 
viction wliere it had been sought in vain, and imparts to the accepted hope 
and faith of the professional believer, the confirmation of a demonstrated 
feet — Is to be found in the Irrefutable evidence of Spiritual Philosophy. 

1008. " How invaluable is this dispensation of an Almighty Providence, 
which has made his despairing creature, a believer in the immortality of 
the soul of man ; has cleared from bis mental vision the clouds of doubt 


,v Google 


104 TIIACTICAL BENEFIT 0^ SPIRITUALISM. 

and disbelief, and Bas opened to his rejoicing miud the iriefragahlo c 
denee of a future life hejond the grave ! 

1009. ' Hall now on earlli the glorioue day, 

When infidels hitro lenmt lo pray; 
ITTiBu liQftYan'a laws liy reason biassed. 
Are nil irlth fondest love confeseed t 


Throw baek tie gates, ye heavenly hand. 
To loved ones ehon the spirit lond; 
Hang out tlie bencoa lights to see 
A homo /or all, the bond and free. 

And now the dreams of former days 

Behold in those celesdal ways; 

Whete sotiow's eye is never soon. 

Where loyo and hope aro ever grcsn.'— W. G. 

1010. "Tte exhibition of so-called spiritual agency in New York City 
by the Misses Fox and their mother, Tvas tho first inuident that claimed 
my notice, and excited my laughter and ridicule, in this apparent new 
phase in the science of legerdeniain. 

1011. " BlitK and Lis wonders crossed my mental yiiion, and seemed 
outdone by the results of thia feminine exhibition, in which the spirits 
of another worW were invoked, aad aided m the pei-formance. 

1012. " This happened when psychology had been developed to a won- 
dering world, as the climax of magnetic phenomena in the wonderful attri- 
butes of man, aod was regarded by myself among many as the culmination 
of human research in the science of animal life. 

1013. "Meeting an intelligent friend who had bestowed much pains in 
the investigation of this department of science, and inquiring of him as to 
the progress of magnetism, I was answered, that something much more won- 
derful than magnetism engaged his attention and occupied his mind at 
that time. 

1014. "Asking what the subject might bo, and being asked in return, 
if I had not heard of the wonders of Spiritualism, a painful impression was 
.made on my 'mind and feelings that, where all tad been regarded as sound 
and straight, there must be some latent obliquity of thought; that my 
■friend, as the Spaniards say, was a little touio, or that he was likely soon 
■to become so, was quite apparent. 

1015. " HoweTCr, my strictest sorutiay could detect no decline of his 
intelligent and ingenuous mind, and his well-digested remarks addressed to 
my incredulous ears, gave proof enough that this might be another demand 
for the investigation of science, and a step forward in the progressive 
development of nature's laws. 


;;■ Google 


PRACTICAL JSEKEFIT OF SPIRITUAT.ISM. 195 

1016. " Being the leading member of a circle that held its meetings at 
his house, and kindly aequieseing in my request to bo present and witness 
the phenomena, I found myself shortly afterward seated at a, table, on a 
Sabbath evening, with about twenty ladies and gentlemen, whose every 
appearance was fatal to my preconceived prejudices against the understand- 
ing of those with whom I expected to be associated. 

1017. " It was evidently a meeting for religious devotion. Sacred songs 
took the lead, and my own voice, as if impelled by a foreign influence, was 
raised for the first time by the impulse of feeling to participation in this 
vocal prayer of gratitude and pr^se, sung to the great, almigity Founder 
of the universe, 

1018. " Indeed it would be well for the cause of spiritual philosophy 
if all exhibitions of its wonderful and sacred phenomena were made under 
circumstances calculated to impress the mind with the greatness and dig- 
nity of its source. To feel protected from the nefarious cupidity of the 
world is an important first step for the successful investigation of a subject 
so sacred in its character, and so absotbingi ia coutempl t th p p ctive 
existence of mm. 

1019. " Seeing my associates place their hands fit th t bl I fol- 
lowed their example, and was soon made sensible of th ea by f eliag 
what was recognised as electric concussion, made by fir f to d t their 
presence, 

1020. "And ever will my mind recur with deliglt dg ttd to the 
influence on my moral nature of this mission of lov d 1 ti to an 
invulnerable heart ! It flashed like electricity across th m d tl louds 
of siteplicism were ruptured, and shed a grateful and refreshing shower of 
hopeful Joy on the feverish doubts of an unbelieving soul. This beginning 
led to progiessive investigation, and that, as is uniformly the case, to a 
confirmed conviction of the communion of ^irits Kith their friends on 
earth 

1021. " Hearing much of physical demonstrations, but having witnessed 
only the concussions, vulgarly called the raps, the question was put to my 
friend, the gentleman already referred to, if a demonstration could be had 
to gratify my curiosity, and strengthen my assurance, when the following 
dialogue occurred ■ 

1023 Will tl e spir ts be so o}\ g ng as to make a physical demon- 
stration 1* An w ed by th ee aps on t! e table, which were responded to 
by an af&rmat ve expre s on f m the whole circle. My seat was at the 
side of the med n a ma r e 1 lad> of considerably more than ordinary 
weight Qu t on Will the 8[ r ts mo e lira. B. in her chair ? Ans. Yes. 

1023 \s th s demonstrat on wa' ntended for my special benefit, and 
our invisible friends were fully committed for its performance, my atten- 
tion was riveted on the lady who was to be the subject of it. ' Madam, 
will you please put your feet on the spar of the chair?' This being fully 


,v Google 


L96 PKACTICAL BENEFIT OP 

accompiisJied — 'and your hands ia your lap/ was added. As lier hands 
dropped, the lady left my side, passed about two feet backward, and im- 
mediately returned to her former positioa at the table. 

1024. "My astonishment was naturally raised to tho highest pitcb, 
demanding of Dr. P., who sat on her opposite side, if I could believe my 
own eyes, and that Mrs. D. bad really been moved from my side. ' Oh, 
certainly,' be replied ; ' that ia nothing. I have seen far more wonderful 
manifestations than that ' 

1025. "The idea of coUusion wis too ndieulous to be entertained for a 
moment; every consideration condemned it Tlie carpet on which the 
chair stood on its slenTex loj,s, with at lei't oae hundred and fifty pounds 
added to its gravity, mu'ft hive been extensively injured had the chair 
remained in contact with it But nut even a sound was audible, and my 
mind was left to contemplate an %nvtST,hle power that lw.d effected the 
movement of a ponderojis hodi/ in mid air. 

1026. " Showing the interest of my own dear invisible guardian friends, 
it was spelt out by the card, the primitive mode of communication at that 
time, that I should change my seat to the side of the medium ; and it was 
only after this change had been made that my mind was impressed to ask 
for a demonstration. 

1027. " By this demonstration of supernal agency I was delighted, 
humbled, and convinced. As the octogenarian Robert Owen, of London, 
proclaimed to the world in a published letter, in relating hia own case, 1 
became a convert to spiTiltial life and intercourse by the force of this 
evidence, because I sbonld have considered any man a fool, who, with a 
mind ii-ee from tbe curse of a bigoted education, and whose thoughts and 
feelings were not mortgaged to the world, could reject such palpable and 
convincing proof, and entertain a difierent conclusion. 

1028. "Being subsequently in the city of New Tort, I visited the 
public circles of Mi-s. C, a medium for automatic writing and the sounds. 
Being requested, as the rest had been, but without response, to ask if any 
of my spirit friends were present, my interrogation was answered by three 
disfinet raps on the table. ' Now ask who it is ; a father, mother, and so 
on;' and I was informed it was a son. 'Is your sister with you?' 'Yes.' 
' Will you spell her name ?' ' Yes ;' and it was correctly given. ' Is her 
little son with her ?' 'Yes.' 'Will you spell bisnamef 'Yes;' and a 
name of seventeen letters was correctly spelt out by the card, the letters 
being indicated, when pointed to, by three raps, 

1029. "My spirit son also informed me when ho had died and of what 
disease. I asked if they were happy. It wiil be observed that my 
son's name had not been mentioned, reserving it for a test. Three raps 
had replied in the affirmative to my question, when the medium spa-imo- 
dically seized a pencil, extended a sheet of psiper toward me, and wrote 
upside down, so that I might read it as written : ' We are looking forward 


;;■ Google 


JEPIT OP MiriTl iLIsM 117 

for you to join us, when we bWI be more &(. , and to my jeifco del gUt 
and astonishment, signed my son'a name to tlie tommunicition, islcing 
whether the name was correct. 

1030. " On a subsequent ocoaaon, when a lar^e and respeetihle com 
pany was present, I remarked to Mrs. C. thxt s>ho had repjitcd the fjct 
that foreign langaages had been written by hei hand ' All kinds of hn 
guage ; but I don't know ajiy thing about them, was the leply ' If jou 
have no objection, I sliould like to get a commuuication from my son, m a 
foreign language.' 'Oh, not the least; if he knew it m this world, he 
win know it in the next,' ' My bob, will jou gne me a communication in 
a foreign language V Answer, three raps. The company were all intent on 
this striking and convincing test of spiritual intercourse. In French? no; 
one rap. In Spanish ? three raps. The medium's hand, as before, seized 
the pencil, and wrote upside down a communication to me in correct Spa- 
nish, though we all accepted her declaration, that she was not aoquiunted 
with one word of the Spanish language. 

1031 " As it is said of our beneficent almighty Father, that when two 
or thiee are gatheii,d togethei in his name lie is with them, so it is with 
the spnits of oni deir departed telatiyes anl fiiends. When a few 00a- 
gemil harmonious apuits it eaith aio an^ocialed ia virtuous love, and 
tliLU dffia ty far their supeimnndtne spuit friends is strong enough to 
draw them hete, thay comi- on missions cf fiiendship, and pour happiness 
into our hearts, pioiiied the pieienceof amedmm, possessing the required 
conditions, affords them jn opportunity 

1032 " It his hecn my good fortune to be a member of such an asso- 
ciation, called a spirit circle, and the communications which have come to 
me from my dear departed children, and others who are dear to me, filled 
with love and interest for my welfare in the world, have given a value to 
life which it never had before, supplying a stimulus to the heart and mind 
which has guarded them from the influence of surrounding excitements, 
and strewed that path with many sweets which was loo apt, with less 
humility and resignation, to be regarded with doubt and pursued with 


1033. " Let it not be said that spiritual philosophy imparts no benefit to 
man. It need not be aslced if opening heaven to the mind of the skeptic 
is not a boon : it is too manifest an axiom to be made a question. Is it uo 
advantage to mankind to know that this life is a prelude to one in the 
skies ? no incentive to virtue to be taught that the be^uning of our spirit 
life will correspond with the termination of our mundane existence, and 
that our position there will be governed by our affinities here? Operating 
on spiritual, as gravity does on physical, matter, and ^ving to crime a weight 
which holds the criminal back in the career of immortal happiness; and 
that this must be first disposed of by the redeeming laws of natui-e before 
the soul can begin its progressive flight to spheres of celestial bliss- 


;;■ Google 


198 PKACnCAIi BENEFIT OF BPIUITUALISM. 

1034. " At one of those family liavmonious associations at which spi- 
rits are wont to come, I received a first coininiinicatioQ from a much-loved 
daughter, whose devoted affection in this world caused her untimely death 
to leave a large hlant in mj happiaesa, till spiritual philosophy gave to 
my mind the assurance of her exalted bliss and unaltered love. 

1035. " To hear, as it were, the voice of one who had been resolved, 
agreeably to my belief, into the primitive elements of her physical nature, 
proclaiming her existence and transcendent happiness in scenes of surpass- 
ing beauty and fescination, was well calculated to soften the heart, how- 
ever hard before, and make it for the future a more ready recipient of hap- 
py impressions; to open the floodgates of feeling, waken up the, latent 
sympathies of our nature, and make us participants of those fountains of 
joy, wlieh flow from the blessings of pure religion. 

"Letter fi-om a Spirit Daughter. 

1036. "'Father Bear: I will ^ve you some idea of mj beautiful 
home. Think of all the flowers ever seen on earth blended ia one, all 
the heavenly strains of musio blended in one strain, all beauty combined, 
and you will have a slight conception of the heavenly kingdom. 

1037. " ' Poets have sung of heavenly joys, but fancy cannot paint, nor 
artist sketch, the wondrous heaatiea of the spirit home. Darling father, 
how glad I am to see you have begun to Jive for heaven I I shall be one 
to welcome you when life's journey is over. Oh, mother dear, will you, 
for the love you hear to us, listen to the voice of your children ? We will 
give you all the proof you ask. Maria.' 

1038. " This was all got hy pointing to the letters on a card, and taken 
down by a third person. All in such a manner as to preclude the possi- 
bility of the least participation of any one in its production. 

1039. "A beautiful and much-loved son, who left this world at three 
years of age, came to me, at the end of twenty-seven years, from the seventh 
supernal sphere, with words of love, consolation, ajid advice. Such events, 
to a believer iu the spiritual doctrine, are well calculated to arouse the 
strongest energies of the soul and inspire the best feelings of the heart ! 

1040. " The regular progress of maturity of the spirit, uninterrupted by 
the grave, ia made evident to our astonished minds by an event like this. 
We are also admonished by the same source that decline is not an attri- 
bute of spirit life ; that old age recedes, and infancy advances, to the same 
point of maturity, with entire immunity from all physical infirmity. . 

1041. " On last Christmas-day, being convalescent from a rather doubt- 
ful illness, and musing alone on the wonders and blessings of spiritual 
intercourse, I was induced to write the following letter to my much-loved 
spirit daughter, from whom had come the preceding and many othev com- 
munications : 

1042. " ' Bear angel Child : The untiring af&nity of your cherished 


;;■ Google 


:, BENEFIT OP SPIRITUALISM. 199 

loTe, which, unobstructed by time and space, mates you so often the com- 
panion of my mind and heart, and the dear partner of my thoughts and 
feelings, would seem to render the present object of addressing a. letter to 
you and your dear hrothera in heaven a suporlluous task. 

1043. " But, my dear Maria, my ever dear and cherished child, with 
my growing faith in the blessed reality of spiritual existenoe, I am becom- 
ing daily more anxious to preserve the history of my happy experience, 
and also my correspondence with my beloved relations of this world, who 
have preceded me in the progressive destiny of the human race. Beside 
which, my beloved daughter, it will assimilate, revive, and perpetuate 
that mundane correspondence, the dear mementoes of which had their be- 
ginning seventeen summers since in your sick chamber on the tanks of 
the Hudson,- while an ambitious and youthful votary of Minerva, and 
ended on. the Alabama, ever sacred to my memory, with the termination 
of your worldly career, a wife and a mother. 

1044. " The considerations which engage my mind and elicit my solici- 
tude, in this contemplated correspondence with my spirit relatives and 
friends, are the mode of conducting it, that may make them acquainted 
with its contents, the fear of transcending the limits of propriety in the 
subject-matter of my letters, and my solicitude to make all my thoughte, 
feelings, and acts as conformable to the high behests of spirit life as may 
be within the reach of my weak and earthly nature. 

1045. " The communications I have received from you and yonr dear 
brothers, and from your TJnde John and Aunt Bebecca, are a pei-petual 
source of happiness to my mind, and nothing, while I am ia this world, 
can reflect so much joy on my heart as the contimied correspondence of 
all the loved ones who have gone before roe, 

1046. " Your angel visits, and those of my dcaa- William, during my 
recent bodily affliction, have exercised that joyful influence on my heart 
and mind so essential in diseases of a dangerous nature and of doubtful 
termination. 

1047. "The assurance which you and your dear brother have given 
me, that my sickness has had the happy effect to spiritualize my mental 
and physical nature, has been already made manifest to my grateful mind 
by strengthened resolution for the future, and a more exalted sense of the 
demands of that true spiritual philosophy which felicitates our life in this, 
and secures for us a desirable position in the spheres above. 

1048. " Flowing from my warm aspirations for the increased happiness 
of my fellow-creatures in this mundane sphere, by the dissemination and 
growth of tho spiritual doctrine, I clierish a wish that this letter may be 
made to subsei-ve that divine object, by cshibiting to the world an irrefuta- 
ble test of spiritual intercourse. 

1049. " l<'or this purpose, my dear angel child, in your next interview 
through our much-respected medium, allow me to request the favour off 


;;■ Google 


200 PRACTICAL BENEFIT OF SPIRITUAEIHJI. 

you to make my letter so far the subject of your commuuieation, as may 
exhibit the reality of your spiritual exietence, intelligence, and okirvoy- 
ance, and your continued oorrespoudciico of heart and mind with your 
happy father. 

" Chrktmai, 1851. 

1050. "Shortly after writing this letter, at the circle of whieli I am si 
raemhcr, the following communication was spelled out on the spiritosoope 

1051. " 'Barliiif/ Father : I wish to say something to you about Wil- 
liam's communication. He has impressed you since yoa were sick more 
than myself. You are rapidly developing as an irapressional medium. 

1052. " ' We have been constantly with. you. Having wislied to give a 
communication the evening our friend (a lady who is a very superior me- 
dium) was with you and mother, but the mode was too tedious. It was 
an era in mother's life. Her opposition tends in some measure to repulse 
us ; not that we love her less, but our loving natures must meet reciprocal 
tenderness. 

1053. " ' Love begeta love in the heavenly spheres, aa well as on earth. 
I cannot say more at present, but I think William will speak more at 
length about the letter. Maria,' 

1054. "'What letter?' 'Father knows,' was the reply. The nest 
communication for me on the same evening was the following : 

1055. " ' Father, I wish you to read the letter which you have in your 
pocket-book before you go home; it will dispel all doubts in your mind 
relative to its spiritual origin. W. G-.' 

1856. " On the nest evening, finding myself incidentally one of a hap- 
py meeting of spiritual friends, the following came for me through the spi- 
ritoBcope from my brother, referring to my letter ; 

1057. " ^Broilier WUKam. : We are still with and around you. Dur- 
ing your sickness it was the province of Maria to watch you daily. Other 
friends were near j among these were father and mother, with your sons 
Jacob, William, and Henry, Rebecca, and many others bound to you by 
the ties of consanguinity. On Christmas-day we held a levee in your 
room. If yon eotdd have seen us, I think it might have disturbed your 
placidity, but you sat aa composed aa if you were entirely alone. I think 
if you will recall the circumstances, you will confess that a power foreign 
to your own was exerting an influence to give forth spiritual monitions. 

1058. " ' I am anxious that Maria should make a communication in re- 
gard to the letter, and she will do so when an opportunity offers,' 

1059. "On the next meeting of our circle, the following beautiful let- 
ter was put in my hand by our intelligent and highly-developed medium, 
:Mrs. Gourlay, written by her under spiritual impression : 

1060. " ' Dear Father : I mentioned to you briefly at the circle that 
ibrother William impressed you to write the letter which you a 


;;■ Google 


PRACTICAL BENEFIT OF SPIRITUALISM. 201 

me on Ciiristmas-day. I perceive with pleasure that my frieud Mrs. G-. 
is HOW suffiuiently wnder my control to answer your affectionate epistle. 
The proposed correapondence between us affords me much pleasure, and 
causes me to feel as if I were really to live over again the days of my 
earthly esistenee, when. I was blessed with the oft-repeated manifestations 
of your parental love and affection. I flatter myself, my dear father, that 
this revival of loving association will tend much to your happiness as wcU 
as mine. I will he a friendly star to guide yoa in your course over the 
troubled sea of life, that you may not become submerged in its surging 
billows, but arrive safely at the haven of eternal joy and felicity. I wilt 
lift your soul by degrees to the source of love and wisdom, and cause you 
to feel sensations of pleasure such as you Lave never before experienced. 
You have a mind which delights in the beauties of nature and art. Let 
mo tell you, then, that no scene of earthly grandeur which you have ever 
witnessed, nci the suhhmest flight of fancy of the wildest enthusiast in 
the cause of Spiritualism, can compaie with the beauties and joys of the 
f "th m 

1061 I legiet that the members of my loved family are so much 
bl n 1 1 by prejudice, as to debai themselves the holy privilege of spiiitual 

te — a communion which would serve to connect them indissolubly 

w h us d ttach them of a woild beyond death and the grave. Oh ! 

h h w my heart icjoices that I can come to you with cheering words, 

dp to your willing ear the tidings of the gospel of peace, which 

w 11 1 balm of consolation to your drooping spirit ! The ordinary 

1 f 1 f are but as dew on the eagle's wing, when the proud bird soars 
aloft to couit the rays of the rising sun. Father, I have already presented 
you with a view of the beautiful realities of my spirit home. The picture 
I have drawn is no ideal one, but a real and substantial scene of enduring 
pleasures. Now let me ask. How will your joys compare with oui*? Oh! 
that the minds of tny darling children might become imbued with an un- 
derstanding of this most holy religion, for I am consoioua that it would 
add largely to their present and future bliss I 

1062. " Dear fiitber, I perceive the emotions of your inmost heart, and 
if the love of a devoted child can in any wise conduce to your happiness, 
it is moat freely thine. Oh ! that dear mother could feel as you do, how 
happy her declining years on earth might become I When she is disposed 
to listen to the voices of her spirit children, it will be our pleasure to come 
to her "with glad tidings of great joy." Wishing you both, my dear 
parents, al! the happiness which earth can afford, I subscribe myself your 
ever loving daughter, Maria.' " 

1063. The following letter was placed in a sealed envelope, addressed 
and handed to Mrs. Uourlay for an imprcssional reply. A few days after- 
ward the answer to it, here annexed, was handed to me by my esteemed 
friend, the lady named, with the original letter still in the sealed envelope 


;;■ Google 


202 PKACTICAL BENEFIT OF SPIRITUALISM. 

as it hoA beea Landed to her. This kas to be regarded as a beautiful spe- 
cimen of psychometrio mediumship. 

PaiLABELniiA, March 2S, 1855. 

1064. Ml/ dear BrotJter John : Tour communicatioii last eveaiog at our 
circle of " progress" afforded me much gratification, as you are doubtless 
aware from your pei-vading perception. , I regi-et that circumstances do not 
allow of a more frequent intercourse with my beloved friends of tlie spirit 
land. It is also my ardent desire to hold coiumuuion with all my spiiit 
relatives, and would wish with you, my dear brother, to bring about this 
delightful consummation. 

1065 Your injunction of cheorfulaess, as an efficient means of securing 
a heaithful ectuilibiium of the vital organism, I can fully appreciate, and 
shall endeavour to proit by your welcome brotherly and excellent advice, 
as fiir as circumstances will permit. , It is true, my dear John, that a 
longei sojourn here harmonizes with my desire to effect some objects, the 
accomplishment of which would. probably add to my happiness here, and 
my tiaim for congenial association The object to which I allude is the 
amelioittion of the'condition of the poor and wretched of my fellow-orLa 
tures, making them through my agency the recipients of some at.tive bt 


106(j I have imbibed. the opinion that the only acctptable otfenng at 
the throne of the great God, is the actual perfoimince of those duties 
which ate incumbent on us as individuals and sociil beings , beginning 
with the eBtablishment of our own peisonal physical and moral character, 
and.those of our own household and immed ate social circle of rehtives and 
friends ; and then, to the aLOomplishment of this, to cultivate the sentiment 
of benevolence in aiding to promote the individual welfare of mankind in 
the use of .what talent and other means may hays'fallen to our lot. I am 
prone, in my relations with the great Omnipotent Euler of the universe, to 
apply the time-honoured maxim, "Actions speak louder than words." 

1067. Your invitation, my dear, brother, to increase my intercoui-se with 
my spirit friends, finds in my heart and mind a very ready compliance. 
You .propose a daily appropriation of time . to this object. If you will do 
me the favour to appoint the time most agreeable to them and most de- 
sirable for myself, it shall be, to the fuUeat extent of my power, sacredly 
devoted to a duty and pleasure that are nearest to my 1 t 

1068. . I feel the assurance that the good earth-chara t 1 t II 
of my spirit family, and the extent of our mutual lov nd ffi y ff d 
me a more than ordinary opportunity for receiving f t f th t 

bright world which has become a delightful prospectiv h t t m 

and to thousands of doubting, fearful, and despairing m d& 

1069. Your inspiring cheerfulness, my dear John 1 1 e. ly fi 1 
your sensible prognostic of the great influence on d f h f 1 

mind. I have learnt to entertain a high opinion of th b ^1 1 t 11 n 


,v Google 


PRACTICAL BENEFIT 01 SPIRITUALISM. 203 

and clairvojance of tte more elevated denizens of the spirit world ; and 
shall always, therefore, regard any advice that may he offered me for the 
better government of my body and soul aa a welcome and precious offer- 
ing from those Ilove. I will close for the present with the nssarauce of 
my unaltered affection. William. 

1070. My dear Brother: With heartfelt love and affection I i-espond 
to your letter in reply to a message which I delivered through the instru- 
mentality of our devoted friend, Mrs. Gourlay. During our Bappy inter- 
change of thought, it will be my endeavour to suggest such ideas to your 
mind as may serve to elevate it and develope ite capabilities. To the mind 
that is ignorant and prejudiced, this mode of communion with the invisible 
world may seem to be a direct violation and infringement of nature's laws; 
but it is, on the contrary, not only natural, but perfectly legitimate to the 
^e in which you now live. It is not a new revelation, but simply the 
disctfvery of hidden truths peculiarly adapted to the present advanced 
state of the race. It is old material in a new form. The materia! and 
spiritual elements ai-e eontributn s -n Je/ore, to the elevation and 
happiness of mankind, and aire dy is I bl 1 d a spiritual telegrapli on 
which I am at this moment su fully p ating — sending a message 
of love to you, my brother. 

1071. You saymywords of h h w u ht a change for the better 
in your system. Tliis is a result wl h n tu l!y follows a strict adherence 
to my prescription— cheerfulness. 

1072. You desire to know what time would be most advisable for you 
to sit for spiritual oommunion. I would say, early in the morning, before 
tte mind becomes taxed with the cares of the day, make a record of your 


1073. You observe that it gives you great pleasure to receive messages 
from those in the spirit world who are bound to you by the ties of relation- 
ship. Iietme assure you, my dear brother, that the feeling is mutual; and 
while time lasts with you, it will be our endeavour to gladden your heart 
witK tokens of our increasing and untiring love. Your cup of happiness 
shall bo filled to the brim, if it depends on us. 

1074. Brother, may you meet with friends trae and kind; may the la- 
bours of the cheerful mom render each day a happier one to you; and when 
night steals upon a slumbering world, may you close your outward eyes in 
peace with all mankind ! Keep the mind's sunshine bright ! You have 
a soul to feel for others' woes, and this is the true stamp of divinity. 

JOHS. 


,v Google 


MARRIAGE ON EARTH AND IN HEAVEN. 


MAEEIAGE OS EAKTII AHD IN HEAVEN. 

The Hymeneal Tie m the Spirit World grows out of the itecessity of the 
Connubial Union in the Mundane Sphere. "Free love" imputation 

1075. Some peculiar views respecting marriage, which, are not consist- 
ent with the ideas of female delicacy and chastity heretofore entertained, 
have been designated by the name of "Free Love" and have been com- 
mented on as proceeding from the spirit worid. I am happy to say that, 
agreeably to the impressions which I have derived from inj spirit friends, 
any doctrine, Laving a tendency of the kind thus described, would be at 
least as nrnch censured in the spirit worid as in this. As the best mode 
of removing this groundless imputation on Spiritualism, I will state the 
impressions which I entertain on the subject of marriage. 

1076 Amonc the sources of happiness in the spirit world much in- 

t d th t It f m mb d xmion of those really created 

f ach tb Til na tra t d this world, loses its binding 

p w th p t w Id y t m y d ire if mutually desired. If a 

hbdhhd Iw wf several husbands, the tie en- 

1 nly b tw th t 1 P t 

1)77 b 1 t th tb ougbont nature by which the 

pjtt fi isfftd Ltd at this association may esist 

m hm b wthtdgilt tia manifestly necessary that 

thll the 1 m te Nt ly delicacy, modesty, and the cul- 
tnf Ifft btikw the interests of offspring, re- 

q thtth p t d hdl n h Id f rm one family. The welfare 
f h Id , tb 1 1 1 ty to b tl p ts, and natural affections be- 

tween the parents and their children, must make a separation painful to all 
parties, however affection may have declined between the husband and 
wife, on the part of either or both. 

1078. Hence, in the mundane sphere, the perpetuation of the human 
race consistently with decorum, and the welfare of offspring, and the hap- 
piness of the parties, especially the mother and wife, seems to be the 
great object of matrimony. In the spheres it is difficult to perceire how 
any motives of ecjually high importance can esist. It must be that con- 
nubial union in the spirit world rather grows out of marriage in this 
world, in order to fill up the void in the heart which might otherwise 


« This arlicla should hivi 


J heen inaertod earlier, hut was mislaid. 


t The fact that my father 


, my hi-other, my uephen, and my friend Gercrnl Cat 


Lwolader, 


ore each residing mth their 


■ mundane wives, proves that in tills world a Lymeu 


e»l torcii 


may be lighted, which may : 


not be exUnguisbed liy deatl. 


, Google 


MARRIAGE ON EAUTII AND IN HEAVEN. 205 

arise from our mundane habits. It would seem as if it wcro a benevolent 
indemnification for celibacy, or for the miseries so often resulting from tte 
conmibial state in this world, consequent, like the sufferings of child-bear- 
ing, to the perpetuation of mankind. 

1079. It seems to me an error to suppose that the terrestrial maiTiage 
can be a secondary object with G-od, when the important part which it 
performs is taken into view. 

1080. Incapacity to maintain a fiimily often renders it impossible for 
those who woold marry to come together, and worldly motives induce mar- 
riages, even when disgnst or indifference may esiat on the part of one, 
if not on that of both the parties. 

1081. It seems, moreover, even where marriage actually results from 
the passion of love, that it is more or less the consequence of a species 
of hallucination, through which lovers deck an object with all that they 
would wish to exist in the way of merit, and feel toward them an affection 
proportionate to their own capacity to love, rather than of the degree of 
power in the object, reasonably to escite such intense partiality. It is 
thus that the love of the mother to the child she believes to be her own, 
will be powerful in proportion to her own capacity for maternal love, 
rather than of the child to excite love; since though it be a monster, and 
not rtaUy Iter own child, but fraudulently substiiuted therefor, it will 
cause BO diminution of her maternal devotion. 

1082. It is the impression on the mind that determines tlie object to 
wh 1 tl p d t 1 th h t f th b t t I by the 
1 wh h d f rm L t Hi 

108 B t wh t ill th q il fi t wh h w 1 1 t friend- 
hpbtw p fth m thpl mt which take 

pi b tw th t 1 ff t 1 dd d th who come 

t th th w Id d th 1 J 1 t m y fi 1 t m h ng more 

th m 1 tn t d t term te 1 by 1 th M over, in- 

d p d tly f th g 1 P fk es ff t which is 

J ly d t g h d as j gal d wh h 1 ft f tl th in this 
h hly mp titp"tl thtt fdd th gh eciproca! 

k wl d^ t d f th t wJ h to f t comp a attach- 

tpd dlyth wfthbld d Cpd metimes 

1 t d w tl fig t t y 

Di-t H Iw y sipp d th t 1 p 1 lly ± th emotnn? 

p 1 t th es th Id ly b f n p b tw nan and 

woman like that which would es st bi,tween a brother ind ustor, I am at 
a loss to understand what it can be whi^'h, in the spiritual afate of exist- 
ence, can induce indissoluble maniige 

1085. On submitting the suggpitions comprised in the prei'din^ itifc 
nieiit to the spirit to whom I owt much ii f imition hprLin quote 1 and 


;;■ Google 


INILUENCG or i-ORIETUKE 


to the spirit of a most intimate male frieniS, \ij both it was alleged that 
peculiar emotions were attendant on &esual affection in the spheres, as 
well as on earth, so far as consbfent with the absence of that ^hioh exists 
n with brutes. 


THE MORALITY OP CHRISTENDOM BEING IRRECONCILABLE , WITH 
THE NEW TESTAMENT, CANNOT BE ITS LEGITIMATE OFFSPRIKG. 

Inspiration can have no higher au&writy, than ilm hixvnan te%timimy on 
tohick its existence is iirrogatcd 

1086. Is it not a mistake to suppose that any doctrine gT.ins any vali lity 
by claiming inspiration as its source, when theie is nothing but humin 
testimony to advance in support of that claim? Fir if in the instxni'e of 
Spiritualism, human testimony b deemed to be univaihble, hjw comes it 
to avail when adduced in support of this arrogint chim of inspiration ^ 
As well might a man espect to cure the defe t of a marshy foundation by 
substituting columns of iron for wooden posts or that while rest Uj, on 
wood, the support could be made firmer by iatroducmg iron into tl e si pe 
atmcture. 

1087- As the introduction of the iron would diminish tl e competency 
of the foundation iu proportion to the augment^tl n of weiglit s th 
claim to inspiration lessens the competency of the testimony upon wh ch 
it is advanced, proportionally as the incredibihty is increased 

1088. But as respects the ancient witnesses, then own Ktitements, make 
them out unworthy of confidence. Facts or circumstances oie stated 
which are manifestly bksphemous, inconsistent and absuid, if not impos- 
sible. Thus a want of veracity or of discretion being demonstrated in some 
points, is sufficient to destroy validity in all. 

1089. Eevelation assumes God to be omnipotent jinnisciect pr acient 
and all good, yet represents him as under the neee=aity tf suJriecting his 
creatures to probation, to find out what, by the premises, he must foiesce 
It represents him while wishing his creatures to know him and his attr 
butes, as not teaching them that which he wishes them to learn, yet punish 
ing them and their posterity for ignorance aiioing from his own omission 

1090. It does not suffice to allege that the Old Testament taught God s 
will to the Jews; since it is to me incredille that oui Heavenly Tither 
would ^ve instruction of vital importance to a few of, his children, leav- 
ing all the rest uninstructed, and yet afflict them for this result. But, 
admitting this possible, it appears that the instruction given tlie Jews in 


,v Google 


MORALS OF CHEISTIANS. 207 


the book of Moses failed in those particulars, which, are of paramouat im- 
portance. 

1091. Iivlhe Bible, God is represented as susceptible ai jealomy, of 
wrath, of authorizing the butchery of three thousand Israelites for worship- 
ping a golden calf; sanctioning the massacre of the whole nation of the 
Midianitea, with the reseryation of tte vir^ns for violation by the bloody 
murderers of their kindred ; the outrageous deception and fraud on the 
part of Jacoh^ swindling the Egyptians by borrowing their ornaments with 
intention of purloining them; hardening the heart of Pharaoh, yot af- 
flicting his subjects for the obduracy thus produced; instructing Saul to 
surprise and massacre the Amalekites, even to each ^'sucMing hahe, for a 
wrong done by their ancestors some hundred yeai-s before, as authoriz- 
ing the hewing down with a sword the regal prisoner Agag in cold 
blood,* and sanctioning the destruction of whole pf^an communities by 
Dayid-t 

" I quote here the language of Samuel, the nicked pope of JoiDeR, to Snul, reapeeUag 
the desiiDetioQ of the tribe of Amolek : " Thus eaith the Lord of hosts, I remember Itial 
which Amalek dill to Israel, how ho laid wiut for him in ttfl way, when lie came np from 
Egypt. Now go and smite Amolet, and utterly deakoy all Ihttttliey httfO, oiid spare ihem 
not ; but slay both man and wonmn, infant and suokling, os and sheep, camel and ojb. 
And ho took Agag the king of the Amalekites aliTe, and utterly destroyed oil the people 
nitb the edgo of flie snord. Bat Saul and tbo people spared Aga£, and tko best of the 
steep, and of the osen, and of the fallings, and the iaiobs, and a.11 that was good, and 
woidd not utterly destroy them : but evoLy thing that was rile and refuse, that they de- 
One ■would tiiink here was butcbery enoagh to satisfy a devil, but it does not satisfy the 
God of the Bible. Saul is deposed for giving qnartec to Agag, and not OBiryine Siis re- 
yonge so 1!it as to deslroy t^e fiocks and herds as well as the captire king, of whom the 
bloodthirsty, blasphcmoo! ponUff booomea himself the cold-blooded asecntionar, hewing 
Agag to death he/are ths Lord. Dr. Berg alleges that men ore aa^milated to tbe god whom 
tiey worship. What ought then to be the affact of worshipping the God thus dascrilwd in 
theBibla? 

How does this comport with the esiiayagant precepts of Christ, agi-ceably to which we 
are to return good for sTil? 
There eanni 


If axamples draw us, while precepts do no more than lead, aococdlng to the provei-b, 
what influonoe ore such eiomples of the morality of the Bible likely to produce in those 
who are taught to view it as the word of God ? 

FroPb ihv permniotis infiaence of sucJi religiotta errors mojf the nohle optrils of our proffs- 
nitora relieve iiv and ovr a^apriag I 

■f Shakspeare's king, in the tragedy of Hamlet, is made to espraas this oorroot aentiment 
in the midst of tls villainy : "Pray I cannot, be my iaelinatiou sharp aa 'twill." Why ? 
because ie still retained the objects fer which he sinned. But thosgh David had esposcd 
Urioli to be killed (a obtain bis wife, be retidned her in despite of his professed penitence. 

Yet o! this man Jehovah is repraaanlad as saying, "I took thea from the shaopeote, 
from following sheep, that then shouldst be ruler over ray people Israel, and I have been 
with thea wheresoevar thoa hast walked, and have cut oiF all thine enemies from before 
thee, and bnve mada thee a nama of the great men that are in earth." 

Thus God is represented as 1^ oonstant companion, and, of course, acoomplice of bis 


, Google 


208 INrLUESCE OF SCKIMITRK 

1092. The following is tlie account given of this favotuite of Jebovah : 
" And David said in tis heart, I sliall now perish one day hy tlio hand of 
Saul : there is nothing better for roe than that I should speedily escape 
into the land of the Philistines ; and Saul shall despair of me, to seek me 
aay moie in any coast of Israel; so shall I escape out of his hand. And 
David arose, and he passed over with the six tundred men that were with 
him unto Achish, the son of Hdaoch, king of GSatli. And David dwelt with 
Achish at Gatii, he and hia men, every man with his household, even David 
with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jeareelitesa, and Abigail the Carmelitess, 
Nabal'a wife. And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath : and hw 
sought no more again for him. And David said unto Achish, If I have 
now found grace in thine eyes, let them give me a place in some town in 
the country, that I may dwell there : for why should thy seiTant dwell in 
the royal city with thee ? Tken Achish gave him Ziglag that day : where- 
fore Ziglag pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day. And tlio 
time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year 
and four months. And David and his men went up, and invaded the 
Geshurites, and the Gearites, and the AmaJekitcs : for those nations were 
of old the inhabitants of the fand, aa thou goest to Shut, even unto the 
land of Egypt. And David emote the land, and left neither man nor 
woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the osen, and the asses, and 
the camels, and the apparel, and returned, and came to Acliish. And 
Achish said, Whither have je made a road to-daj? And David said, 
Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelites, 
and against the south of the Kenitea. And David saved neither man nor 
woman alive, to bring tidings to Gtath, saying. Lest they should toll on us, 
saying. So did David, and so will he Lis manner all the while he dwelleth 
in the country of the Philistines. And Achish believed David, saying. He 
hath made his people Israel utterly to ahhor him; therefore he shall be 
nij servant forever." 

1093. Here ia massacre, spoliation, base lying to Aohiah, his truly 
Eohle-hearted friend, whom he deceives into a belief that he had made the 
people of Israel abhor him, when it was his intention to become king of 
Jttdea, and of course the enemy of hia too-confiding protector, whenever 
an opportunity offered. 

1094. Praise be to God that he has sent ns a new way to religious light, 
not associated with this detestable immorality ! 

1095. Jehovah ia made to arrest the son, in order that Joshua may- 
slaughter his flying foes. He is described aa authoriaing the Jewa to cs- 
tirpate their neighbours and seize their territory. I do most conscientiously 
declare that the portrait of Jehovah by the Bible appears to me more 

butchering, robbery, and troooliery ; juat tho pnrtwbich would belong to Stitan, were sucli 
an ovil being to osiat. He ia oalled to ncconnt for tbo mnnier of Uriah, bnt the pagana 
whoin he robbed nnd mnssaered ware on2j vermin in thoeatimatioQ of the Jon-iah Johotoh. 


, Google 


ON TOE MORALS OF CHKISTIANS. 209 

sTiitable for Satan tlian foi" our Leavenlj Father, wLo is represented by tbe 
spirits as perfectly innpartial and equally loving to all his creatures. 

1096. The example set in the Bihie of slandering and persecuting those 
who did not believe in its doctrines, has ever been followed out by scrip- 
tural devotees, who would presumptuously represent that it is only from 
the Scriptures, which ihey recognise as the word of God, that a correct 
knowledge of the divine attributes can be obtained. But this ia the con- 
verse of the truth. As described by Seneca, tho Eooian Sage, the God 
of tlie ancient theist was to the Jehovah of the Bible aa Hyperion to 
Satyr. (See Seneca's opinions of God, 1224) 

1097. It appe!\ra to me a striking proof how far men can be demented 
by educational bigotry, that it should be supposed that their omnipotent 
God can require human missionaries' aid to promulgate or carry out his will. 

Did God u apeeiol creed requbre, 

Eaoh Bonl ivoulil be^ot with ttat creed iDspire? 

1098. The Old Testament does not im/part a knowledge of hnmortaUiy, 
wiikout which religion were worthless. The notions derived from, the gos- 
pel are vague, disgtistinff, inaeeurale, and diffteult to helteve. The Pen- 
tateuch did not ^ve the Jewa an idea of immortality, nor were those Jews 
distinguished for morality, who from other sources than the Pentateuch 
embraced a belief in immortality. It has already been pointed out that 
the moat enlightened sect among the oiiildren of Israel, the Saddueees, 
did cot believe in a future state, while tlie Pharisees, who professed to be- 
lieve therein, appear to have been so immoral as to be pre-eminently the 
objects of Christ's denunciation. 

1099. As respects the preoepts of Christ, those on which he laid most 
stress are not only neglected, but grossly violated, by the opposite course 
being sanctioned by the overruling sentiment of society. Nothing would 
subject a man to more contenipt in Christendom than a tame submission 
to blows, or being so poor as to wear patched or ragged clothes. There 
are few, if any, in, Christendom, who would not rather have any deficiency 
in attire attributed to accident or taste, than to poverty, 

1100. I have shown that the idea which the Pharisees entertained of 
heaven, as portrayed by Josephus, representing the wicked like the rich 
man within sight of tho good, would be a hell to a good-hearted angel. 
This representation is sanctioned by Christ in his story of the rich man 
and Lazarus. The only reward promised to his apostles was worldly pre- 
eminence in the form of judgeships. Ilence it wore hardly reasonable for 
those who are aubordinate in merit to the disciples to expect any better 
remuneration. Hell is as ab&urdly as horridly typified by eternal exposure 
to interminable fire. 

1101. Thus neither among the Jews, nor among Christians, has the 
Bible furnished any adequate account of a future state, nor has it been 
productive of higher morality j since the only morality which does csist, 


;;■ Google 


210 USFLUENCE 

is coupled not oiH;/ with tlic neglect, but with the violation of those precepts 
which the gospel tnettlcates. 

1102. Diogenes toot a, lantern to see if he could find an honest man In 
Greece. Were any one to employ a lime-light, he wouM not in Christen- 
dom fiad a Christian who carries out in practice the precepts of his divine 
Master. If those who know their Master's will, yet do it not, are to be 
beaten with many stripes, while the ignorant pagan is to bear but few, 
were it not better to be a pagan than such a Christian as those are, for the 
most part, who esist in Christendom? Unless oiir missionaries can make 
better Christiana, is it not inhumane to add to the number? 

1103. On calling on a bigoted, self-styled disciple of Christ to show me 
any one who put the precepts of Christ into practice, the reply was, " We rely 
o!i Ids merits." " That is all you do," said I. " In common with others 
of your tenets, you make the blood of Christ a fund on which every sin- 
ner may draw in proportion aa he has confidence in its detersive influenoe." 

1104. I am sapported in some of the views above presented, by a com- 
munication from a believer in revelation, ander the signature of Bosanqiiet, 
to the Baltimore Church Times, for June 15, 1848. I will quote a por- 
tion of this communication, which is as. follows : 

1106. "Buttha wiintof fftitJiisinore op«n and diroot than this, and it is the more oh- 
Tions nnd pointed Qpon religions enhjeots. The Biblo is boldlj and pnictioally denied in 
BTBty particular. Ho oliiss or body of men bBlieve and obey it, nnd stfange aa it may 
aeem, lb is b; no nation, or people, or diniohes, or sacla of men, lees impUoitly believed 
nnd followed llinn by those vary people and BSotionB of the church irho talli so muoh 
nbout it. There ore no persons less obedient to the plain sense and mandates of the 
writWn word of God, than those nho most Bpenli of nnd nphold it as the sole authority 
nnd standard, nnd reject all aasistance from tie history of the ohhroh and what is spolten 
ngwnel as tradition. BTory class of persona reject some porKonor othsr of the sncred 
Scriptnree. If yon tall! tu some of temporal honour and rewards, and the observance of 
a flay of rest, and the pntriaroha, they will say, Oh ! that is the Old Testament, nnd is ah- 
■rognted. If jnu spent to, others of good worts, they will any. Oh! thnt is only in the Gos- 
pels, and the Epistles oarrj ns mneh beyond thnt, and ore superior to ii Unitarians, 
i^iCln, receive n Bible of Iheir onn^ that is, just so mnny passages are oxoluded as will suit 
tli«ic own belief and pnrpose. Others, of nnmeroDS sects, dwell each upon some half 
dosen ehapters, or passages, or phroses, or words of Scripture, of the Epistles especially, 
and dwell apon them idolatrously and devotedly, to the exclusion of nil the rest, so far oi 
the authority of Scripture is concerned, from belief nnd prnolice, 

ll08. "This Is even in the religious world— the thiiiking nnd rensoning world. Lotas 
now tmii our observation to the world itself ; to' the working and practical. 

1107. "The Bible is denied in ererj partlcuinr. Men do not belieTo tiiat we are really to 
be Ohrisdans ; that we nre to Imitnte onr Lord. ' They do not believe that the world oonld 
possibly go on if all men were tc net upon pnre Christian, motives, and up to a perfect 
Christian rule : if they were to forgive and forget injuries; if they were not to resent an 
affront; if they wore to give to people because tfiey asked (liem; if tJiey were to lend 
money without looking for interest; If we were all to give up luxuries, and style, and 
costly furniture nnd etiuipoge; if wo, our cattle and sertanta, wei'e strictly to obsefve the 
dny of rest How many are there among us who believe that 'tie tree of knowledge' is 

.not an absolute good? or that we ought to receive the gospel witii the simplicity of little 

reign? Who is there that aots up to the precept that we ought not to Judge others In 
their character? How many are there wlio appear to believe thnt It is not right to be 
nnxtouB abont the futnre ; that riches are not a good thing; thnt the entrance into beayen 
is easier to the poor man; that we onght to return a tenth to Godj that we would bring a 
blessing to give fredy and largely to the poor; that children are a blessing and a gift 
from the Lord, and tJiat the man is happy who hns bis quiver full of them ? It is evi- 
dent (hat in nil these points the Bible is disbelieved nnd is practically denied, and does 
not control or guide us in onr bnbits and prinolples of life and society. 
1103. " Still leas do we believe thnt the pnbllo measures, the laws, and government of 


,v Google 


ON TEE MORALS C 

the Btnle, and tbe intaroonrse with ottier nuttons, ought to be, or can be, oacried on and 
conducted upon ChrisUan prineiplea. What number or ohisses of persona bBliCTe that 
righteousness esslteth a nation? that we bm punished aocordiug to Uie nalioniil aina of 
the people, and for the sins of the rulers ? and that if wioiad and irreligioua men preside 
over OUT couneile, ne shall as a nation suffer the penalties of it i or that the conscteuoe 
of the goTecnment is ths oonscience of the people, and that onr mlers aie bound to take 
the -first care far the pure religion and morsTs of the G0Dnti7; and tha^ iftJie; do so, their 
righteousness irill bring doim a blessing upon the nation ? 

1109. "To oome again to more direct praotico, and to oui- own habits of life. Who is 
tbero who thinks ^m what is right, and according to the pattern of Christ, and after the' 
will of God, in what lie ia about fa do, and not what is wise and expedient? Who seeks 

good consaquenees will follow upon it? Who is there who thinks and abides oitly by the 

and auggeations of the Spirit in Ms deaigns and uadeitakings, and belieres, and acts, and 
writes, and thinka, as beliering that the moat Qsetul and Impprtant and inflnential aug- 
gestious of Dui: thoaghts and inrenUon come to our mind by the inspiration of tiie Holy 
Spirit, more tiian by oar own olavemeaa, and exertion, and memory, and prays for divine 
help upon oommenoiDg every tost, or writing, oi nndertaking ooBordingly ? Who forbears 
strictly and endeavonra to eipel at once all tiought and every snggesHon of Che mind in 
worldly mattei-s on a Sunday, with eonfidenoe and fiiith ' that the same and more Hseful 
thought wilt be supplied on tJie suoceoding week-days, and that the ucqualided dedica- 
tion and aonctifioation of the Lord'a day will make the labour of the six days mare efioc- 
tual and fruitful than would be that of tbe aoren? Who would believe now that a sab- 
batical year woald not neceaaarily be improcdcable and tuinaua, or that a populous oonn- 
try eonld esist under such a rule, or that it would not produce a debasing and demoralis- 
ing idleness?" 

1110. Let not the reader infer that these admissions come from a free- 
thinker. The following remarks will prove the writer one of the/aitk/ul, in 
the sense in which this epithet arguea a mind chained down by abject enthral- 
ment, to put any Gonstructions on facts but that which ia subversive of 
educational prejudice : "All the emh of wJiieh the eadstence is admitted 
are due to our narrowing down, our reception of truths and faets to the 
limits of reason — of our own more or less shallow individual reason." 

1111. Now to me it seems that the nominal profession of a faith iu 
facts which arc absurd and contradictory, and professed reverence for 
precepts which are as utterly impracticable as unwise in the abstract, in- 
duces this monstrous incompatibility of the aotuo! morality of Christen- 
dom with the professions of Christians and doctriaea of Christianity. 

1112. Our submission to scriptural authority is not to be governed by 
oar own reason, but by that of pei-sons who lived many ages ago, originally 
assumed to be inspired by God, upon human testimony; which in the 
case of Spiritualism, or any other thau the one in point, is treated as mere 
chaff. 

1113. It strikes me, from the considerations presented under the head 
of Mundane Wealth, that tbe precepts of Christ were fundamentally 
erroneous, so (ar as they discredit and discourage efforts for the honest 
acquisition of wealth. (908.) 

1114. God has given the fowls of the fdr feathers as a natural clothing, 
and thus any effort to procure clothing on their part is rendered unneces- 
sary; be has not given them hands nor intellectual ingenuity to spin and 
weave. On the other side, with little exception, man is naturally devoid 
of clothing, and requires clothes to protect him from tbe scorching solar 


,v Google 


rays or freezing blasts of winter, but has been furnished witb tte hands 
and the ingenuity to t^in and weave. Under these ciroumstanees, was it 
leaaonable to allege tbit man sbould be governed by tbe example of tbo 
fo'itbered (,reation ^ Was it reasonable to infer that there should be no 
spinning oi weaving by men, because there neither was nor could bo any 
performed by fowh ' 

1115 Again, the lily, lilto all other vegetables, not only comes into 
csi^tonoe naied, but remains so, since it neitter can nor will clothe itself, 
and would perish, if bj any artificial clothing it were shut out from the 
influence of the solai rays, and from the absorption of carbonic acid, which 
furnishes the legetable creation with the carboa requisite for the fibres 
essenti J to stability Henee the allegation, that Solomon in all his glory 
wa^ not ciotJicd like the lily, is iiTeconcilable with the nature and actual 
state of this beautiful flower, which is destitute of clothing by nature, and 
which would perish if it were clothed. The stin of vegetable leaves, to a 
certain extent, performs for them what moutha do for animals. How un- 
reasonable, then, to argue from one to the other, that man shonld imitate 
the vegetable ; or to compare a plant, naturally and of necessity naked, with 
a king gorgeously clothed? 

1116. The degrading a rich man, whether honest or not, to the level 
of a felon or murderer, as respects accessibility to heaven, and of course 
favour in the dght of God, is so erroneous, that there never was a precept 
which was less respected in practice, by the votaries of its author. As I 
have heietofore remarked, the con luct of Ohiistians is not merely negativi, 
in respect to this precept — they do not merely neglect it, their cour&e is 
the con'i'ise of inj obedience to its diotites Yet professed Ghri'itnna 
while violating their 4i^ine Mister s behests in a, wiy which makes their 
performance the inverse of the results which their prcfesaions involve, for 
the moat part treat any peison who does not profess devotion for Christ s 
doctrines, as actually more oidpable than themselves, and more lixble to 
retnbution after death Thia la about as just as for a man, who after 
mairying 1 woman and lulling her Lis wifp, should let the inverse of the 
obligations imjosed by the connubial contiact, and then consider an mdi 
vidual who bad never entoied into ^.ny oblgitirn mth her of any kind, ts 
guilty of sinful negLcl in not acl nowLdf^ing as i wife, one whom ho never 
married. The question is, who treats the woman most ill, he who ac- 
knowledges but neglects, or ho who does not display a hymeneal devotion 
which he never led her to expect ? 

1117. Again, the precept to return good for evil, would, if acted up to, 
encourage evil. Were a man to submit quietly to be robbed, whipped, 
and cheated, he would encourage robbing, flagellation, and fraud. Far 
wiser is the precept of Confucius, " Ectum good for good ; for evil, justice." 
The impracticable precept of Christ is so far from being carried out by 
professing Christians, that in their conduct to the aborigines of Africa, 


;;■ Google 


ON TUE MOUAtS OF CHRISTIANS. Zl6 

India, and America, tLey liave always Ijeen aggressive, always rewarding 
die hospitality of the natives with fraud and violence, and their conduet 
toward each other is the inverse of the ultra preeept of Christ — " Eeturn 
good for evil." They not unfrequently return evil for good. 

1118. There is, as I think, nothing more injurious than the habitual 
violation of acknowledged professions. If the violator be aware of his 
inconsistency, it involves the incessant perpetration of manifest wicked- 
ness; and if his mind he so cramped by education that he commits such 
violations unconsciously, it must degrade the all-important power of dis- 
tinguishing good from evil. Thus, in the garb of truth, 


1111 It la ths nummil devoti n to the dootimes of Christ, mth % 
lomeanour diaiaetiically m teeth of them, whieh causes that anti Chustiin 
morality whn,h Boainquet portrays 

1120 But I am eonsoientiously of opinion that the respect paid to 
Abrihim, Jacob, MD-ies, Samud, David, &c , by which one five hundred 
millionth of the blool of 'ibiahim i^ made an honour to Jesus Chiist 
la among tho lei'foiis of the low state of nion,hty among those who 
(.onoider the Lille as the Wcrd of God, tnd are thus led to view with 
indulgence, prostitution, murder, massaue, npe, cht if ing, and tnud 
Agieeably to the opinion of j. ohampion of Chustnnity, alieady quoted, 
"The worshipper is aasimil'ited to the imaginary deity whom he wor 
ships." 

1121. "With the exchange of two words for two other words, the verses 
which Pope ascribes to Eloiaa, might woU be uttered by many aelfcalled 
Christians, who in defending the gospel from any conscientious attack, hesi- 
tate not at any intemperance of language, and yet think that the marriage 
ceremonT/ ia all that is called for. 

1123. "All ! wretch, believad tha spouse of ftod ju vain, 

Confessed within the elare of lovo and man." 

1123. Although the substitution of the words weaM aai power ior love 
and man would spoil the rythm, it would not lessen the applicability to 
the great mass of those who eal! themselves Christians, while not only 
neglecting, but positively violating the precepts of Him by whose blood 
they still hope, by a due degree oi faith, tc wash away then- transgressions, 

1124. The universe, aa it is presented to my mind, induces a belief that 
it must have a presiding deity of commensitrate power. As there are 
millions of suns, each having its planets; as the space which it occupies 
appears to us little short of iuflnity; as it must have endured from eter- 
nity, and must endure eternally, — the power and glory of this presiding 


;;■ Google 


214 INFLUENCE OP SCEIPTUKE 

deity must be commensurate with liis realm, aa to extent and inagnifi- 
ceace. Yet evil esists ; mtioK can only exist fram choice oa his part, or 
because it cannot he avoided. There must he a want of will or power to 
provcnt or remove eyil. Such is the God which my reason obliges me to 
acknowleiJge. Wliere impressions are the offspring of reason, they cannot 
destroy their parent. But those who owe their opinions of their deity to 
tradition, have a deity which, not having originated fcora reason, may 
always be made the means of setting its dictates aside. 

1125. The bigot's god ia a dangerous idol, although he be not rcpre- 
Bsnted by an image ; and no less dangerous is any book which owes author- 
ity to hereditary, intoleraat dictation and servile devotion. 

1126. The fear of public opinion, or a desire to do what is deemed right 
among men, seems to be the principal motive for religious professions and 
churoh-going in the great mass of society. The prevailing morality bsing, 
as already noticedj not only neglectful of Christ's precepts, but absolutely 
the inverse of them — not fya\y perntiuing, but call-ing for a course diame- 
trically opposite, as respects the acquisition of wealth and submission to 
wrongs — stows that it is not generally founded on a desire to cultivate the 
good will of Christ, but to square with sectarian opinion. I hold that one 
cause of this is, that the conviction of a future state, in which happiness 
is in proportion to our deportment here, is not so deep as that which I now 
have. Under the conviction wbioh I have, nothing could tempt me to act 
in such way as to produce a retrograde influence on my pretensions as a 

1127. It seems to me, as urged by me before, that no one believing the 
language of Abraham, as narrated and sanctioned by Christ, to have come 
authenticated direct from the Sou of God, and consequently expecting it to 
be verified, would render himself liable to the punishment of Dives for the 
sake of enjoying the good things of this world. 

1128. The idea that souls are to remain in the grave till the "lastda^," 
the procrastination of that day and geological knowledge being inconsistent 
with the belief that any such day will arrive, makes the sinner less fearful, 
the good less hopeful, and diminishes tie number of those who are actu- 
ally, in their worldly condaot, influenced by their hopes or fear of future 


1129. The espectation of washing away sin through the merit of a 
bigoted belief in Christ, oo-operating with the vague, contradictory, and 
irrational idea of heaven and hell recorded ia Scripture, seems to be the 
reason why Christians act so inconsistently with the precepts of Him whom 
they professedly adore. 

1130. Nothing can be more inconsistent with the religion inculcated by 
my spirit friends, than the idea of atonement for sin by faith in any re- 
ligion, true or false. 

1131. Had there ever been any available light let in from the spirit 


,v Google 


world, this error had been denounced, and haying heen thus stamped na 
erroneous from on high, could not have acquired or retained iis mischiev- 
ous hold of so many milUons of human heing=, by substituting blind faith 
for genuine virtue. 

Injurious Influence of unreasonrible liestriction. 

1132. Another reason why, throughout Christendom, the vices most 
deprecated hy Christ are those pre-eminently prevalent, is fh^t his precepts 
were absolutely impracticable, unless explained away in the elyle of Lord 
Peter in the "TaU of a Tub." 

1133. Some of the escellent Society of Friends may, as respects war, 
have beeQ obedient to the precepts of Christ, and probably iu other re- 
spects deviate from them less than most other sects ; but as to wealth their 
course is the inverse of ^viag away their money. They are rationally 
among the most active and successful in the honest acquisition of money. 
In this they would act morally, excepting the violation of their recognised 
obligation to obey the precepts of Christ. 

1134. Does not esperience show that nothing is more injurious to mo- 
rals than unreasonable restrMnt? This has been seen in the profligacy of 
the children of puritanical sectarians. To disobey an unreasoDiible re- 
striction always appears comparatively a, trivia! offence. Going to a play, 
in the opinion of the mass of the world, is not sinful; but for a minor to 
go to a play in disobedience of parental authority, by stealth, deception, 
or lying, becomes dnful delinquency, and introduces a habit which may 
lead to crime as wicked as that of the couduct of Jacob to Esau. Lying 
and deceiving for venial purposes will soon induce the habit. The restric- 
tion from eating port or drinking wine has no doubt induced much decep- 
tion and falsehood among the followers of Mohammed, and thus made a 
crime where none would have esisted. In like manner, the putting a rich 
man on a footing with a felon, as respects access to heaven, forbidding the 
resistance to blows or spoliation, makes almost every professed Christian 
praclJoally unfaithful to his professions, and of course an inSdel of the 
worst kind. More or less of this infidelity is involved in various ways, as 
above admitted by "Bosanquet." 

1135. If the history of Christianity, so called, be reviewed, it will be 
found that the deviations from the precepts of Christ during the present 
ago are quite venial, compared with those which took place during the 
thousand years or more in which Romanism had the ascendency. 

1136. A painful picture of the morals of the clei^ during that period 
may be found in a recent wort by Bishop Hopkins of Vermont. It would, 
seem as if the crimes and indecency displayed during the Middle Ages,, 
exceed even those of Abraham, Moses, Jacob, and David, and Samuel, the: 
cruel, despotic pope of Judea. The deposition of Saul for not killing 
Agag, and his hewing his royal prisoner down with a swoi-d in cold; 


;;■ Google 


216 INFLUENCE or 

bloocl, may have been looked to as a justification of pontifical cmelty 
and despotism. 

JVb one laovld helieve ihal a eapabh farmer vxiuM make swc/t » mistake 
as to sow garlic instead of wheat Yet God, while represented as 
having intended to sow Protestantism, is considered its having caused, 
throughout Christendom, a crop of Catholicism, in the Roman or Gre- 
cian for^n, for more than a thousand j/ears ; those weeds still oecwp^ing 
more than half of the whole soil. 

1137. The immense importanee attaobed by mankind to correct religious 
impressions is demonstrated, in the first place, by the enormous expendi- 
ture throughout this world iu sustaining those who are concciTcd by their 
constituents to he the true expounders of religion ;* and, in the second 
pkce, by the blood and treasure which have been espended either in mis- 
siona or in wars, for the extension or defence of the impressions believed 
by Tarjons sectai'ians to bo the most accordant with truth. 

1133. Yet it must be plain that in no case has there been any higher 
evidence than that of an alleged human communiosition, direct or iadirect, 
with some recognised deity, if not the true God. If the wUl of God has 
ever been revealed, the number who have actually pretended to an interview 
with him, or with any immorfal' subordinate spirit are very few. The 
Old Testament depends upon the testimony of Moses and a few Hebrew 
prophets, whose inspiration rests upon theb own allegatious, respecting 
tbomselves or each other. 

1139. As regards the basis of Christianity, there are two irreconcilable 
opinions : one held by the Protestants, the other by the Komau Catholics; 
since although there is a great diversity of opinion betweeit Protestants, 
there is between all Protestants and Papists this difference r The latter 
relying on their own church as the sole depository of all the evidence of 
Christiauity, do not allow any direct recourse to Scripture for a rale of 
faith. The former reject the claims cf the church of Eome, and resort to 
the gospel for their rule of faith.f 

1140. But wherefore should such implicit confidence be placed in lan- 
gnage alleged to have been held by Moses or any other ancient author 1 or 
should they be credited, even when they allege God to have used such 
words as these, "Let me max hot in my mrath tJial Im,ay consume them." 
The motive for this imputation against God, was that Moses might take 
credit for moderation in slaughtering only three thousand of God's chosen 
people in one day, for worshipping a golden calf, made by his own brother, 
afterward made high-priest. Thus the ringleader, being the brother of 
Moses, was loaded with honours, while those whom he led astray were to 


;;■ Google 


ON THE MORALS 01' CHRISTIANS. 217 

1 cold blood. Yet it is on such witnesses aa this blood- 
thirsty, blasphemous bigot, that oi-thodosy relies for assuming the Penta- 
teuch to bo the word of &od, censuring, if not persecuting, all who do not 
concur with it. 

1141. The intercourse with the angel Uafcriel reals upon the evidence 
of Mary alone, who was interested immensely to make her cliild a god, 
instead of being her illegitimate oSspring. Of the dream of Joseph there 
can bo no witness besides himself But would a dream be now admitted 
as testimony in any court of justice. 

1142. The diversity of opinion existing between Romanists and Pro- 
testants, are briefly exhibited in the subjoined quotations from the contro- 
versy between Archbishop Hughes and the Kev. Mr. Breckinridge. They 
have already been cited by me in a pamphlet on the better employment of 
the first day of the week. Here are the opinions of two men highly quali- 
fied to judge. In one, we have an eminent champion of Itomanism; in 
the other, a no less able champion of Calvinism. To the latter belongs 
the distinction of having persecuted the Quakers and witches, and of hav- 
ing roasted Servetus; to the former, putting some hundreds of thousands 
to death or torture by the sword, the rack, or the fagot. 

1143. Agreeing with each of the parlies that the other is in the wrong, 
I, of course, assume that they ai-e both in error. Taken together, they 
may be considered as proving that there is no evidence in favour of Chris- 
tianity, which I have not tho authority of eminent Christians for reject- 
ing. In the 29th page of the controversy between himself and Breckin- 
ridge, Bishop Hughes speaks as follows : 

1144. " My fourth argument was, that the Protestant rule of faith ac- 
tually nndermines the authority of the Scriptures, by estiBgaishing the 
proofs of their rmthenUdti/ and inspiration, and consequently terminates 
in moral suicide. Just imagine to yourself an ordinary will o 
written but twenty years ago, purporting to be the last will ar 
of a wealthy deceased, relative, and designating you as hiir, but without 
either signature or probate, and ask yourself what it would be worth? 
Could such a document establish its own authenticity? And yet this is 
precisely the sitaation to which the Protestant rule of faith reduced the 
Scriptures, by which, and hy which alone, their authenticity could have 
been established. St. Augustine, of whom Presbyterians are sometimes 
wont to Bpeak with respect, declared that it was the testimony of the church 
which moved him to believe in the Scriptures. But iioio the order of 
belief is 'reformed.' Men pick up (pardon tho phrase) the sacred vo- 
lume, as they find it floating on the sea of two thousand years, and by one 
great but gratuitous act of belief, which flings all intermediate church au- 
thority and tradition to the winds, they say ' the Bible is the Bible, and 
we are its interpreters, every man for himself.' " 

1145. It seems not to have occuiTod to the right reverend champion 


,v Google 


218 INFLUENCE OF BCUlFriJEE 

of the Catholic creed, that it is not more true that a testament without wit- 
nesses is of no validity, than it ia true that the testimony of witnesses 
claiming under the will, cannot be admitted. A document written after 
the death of the testator would not be considered in a court of justice as 
entitled to the name of a testament. But were persona to write a will 
after a mau's death, and bring it forward, claiming under it supremacy, 
would their claim produce any result beside derision ? 

1146. The distinguished prelate justly treats the gospel as resting on 
the traditionary evidence of the church ; since, as he truly urges, the 
church existed before the gospel, having been inalituted at the time when 
his instraationa were given lo the apostles by Ohrist. 

1147. But how much value is to be attached to the testimony of the 
church, may be learned from the following opinion of the learned clergy- 
man to whom I have alluded as the other party in the controversy, (pages 
35, 36 

1148. " The wnwarraniahle liberties of ^our church tori/i the word of 
God show her fallible to a deplorable decree. 

1149. "Pbwr rule, if observed, requires implicit faith in the decretals 
and interpretations offcdlihle men, which is subversive of the ver^ nature 
and end of religion in. Oie soul. Faith supposes knowledge, conviction on 
evidence, and trust in God, founded on a belief of divine truth ; but your 
rule requires unconditional submission to the dicta of the church in the 
lump. The ' Oarhonaria fdes,' or faith of the collier, is the very faith 
required. It is as follows: When asked, 'What do you believe?' he 
answered, ' I believe what the clmrch believes.' ' What does the church 
believe?'- Ans. 'What I believe.' 'Then what do jou. and the church 
together believe ?' Ans. 'We both believe the same thing.' This is the 
grand catholicon for believing every thing, without knowing any thing. 
In this soil grew the maxim that ' ignorance is the mother of devotion.' 
It ia believing by prosy, or rather not believing at all, in the true sense. 
Here is the secret of the nnity of your church." 

1150. To conclude, I agree with the right reverend able and learned 
archbishop, that Christianity has no witnesses but those disciples of Ohrist 
whom he calls the church ; but I also concur with his able, learned, and 
reverend opponent, that the said church ia neither competent as a witness, 
nor reli bl as f d t f th ty 

1151 B k dg d t I fh t th g p 1 wh h h 
lies, and (1 d d t d t wh h b th t w k t p rat 
have no b tte f d t tl th te t m y t / ;? W ra 

1152 M f tl3 I w th tJ ty f tl hur h f Rom 
not be t wth t tt th th t ty f th Ch 
religion 

1153 CIdj bl ht p dfmwll=ow 
field with g 1 wh t d t h i f wh t T\ Id t th 


;;■ Google 


f CHRISTIANS. 219 

oonelusion be that if a field upon Lis farm were occupied by tliat objec- 
tionable weed, it Bust bave been the spontaneous production of the soil, 
not of a niistalce so gross on his. part? Yet our prescient God ia repre- 
sented aa so much inferior in foresight to an ordinary farmer, that while 
the religious soil of Christendom was for ages occupied with crops of Ca- 
tbolieism, in the Grecian or Eoman niodifieatdon, the seed of Protestant- 
ism waa sown by God through his son and vicegereut, Christ, intending to 
have the soil occupied by Protestantism. Manifestly, either it waa in- 
tended that Catholicism should prevail, as above described, or an omnipo- 
tent, omniscient, and prescient God did not preside over tlie seeding. 

1154. Yet notwithstanding this diversity as to the true import of Chris- 
tianity between the most distinguished Christian sectarians, each sect con- 
ceives itself justified in propagating its own peculiar opinions among 
jgaorant pagans. The principle being thus sanctioned, that those who 
believe themselves to have become acquainted with religious truth, are 
justified in propagating a knowledge of it, wherefore should not that pri- 
vilege be exercised by a spiritualist as well as a Christian ? 

1155. Humility is one of the virtues inculcated by Christ; but if his dis- 
ciples assume to themselves a peculiar capacity to know what is true, and 
an esclusive right to teach what they thus assume to be truth, there will 
be no humility in their practice, however it may be blazoned among their 

1156. The view which I have presented in the preceding pages is cor- 
roborated by a personage of no less authority than William. Pitt, afterward 
the Earl of Chatham, and prime minister of England. His opinions, 
albged to have been originally published in the London Journal for 1733, 
are as follows : 

Letter of WiUiam Pitt. 

"Fwre Seligioa B^il jmdefiled before God <.«<i tlie Fal!.er, ia tU>: to miil tlis Falha-leas 
and Widows ia thsir affliolions, and to isejj one's self umpotled from tl« World." 

1157. "Gentlemen: Whoever takes a view of the world, will find, that 
what the greatest part of mankind have agreed to call religion, has been only 
some outward exercise esteemed sufSoient to work a rcconcili'ition with God 
It has moved them to build temples, flay victims ofler np sacnfice? to fast 
and feast, to petition and thank, to laugh and cry to iing and sigh by 
turns; but it has not yet been found sufEcient to induce them to breik 
off an amour, to mate a restitution of ill-gotten weilth or to bring the 
passions and appetites to a reasonable subjection Diffei as much as they 
may m opinion concerning what they ought to believe, or after what man- 
ner they are to serve God, as they call it, yet they all agree in gratifying 
their appetites. The same passions raga eternally in all countries and in 
all ages, Jew and Mohammedan, the Christian and the Pagan, the Tartar 
and the Indian, all kinds of men who differ in almost every thing else, 
universally agree with r^ard to their passions. If there bo any difference 


;;■ Google 


among tliem, it is this; that tte more supci'Stitious, the more ■vicious they 
always aro, and the more tliey helieve, the less they practise. This is a 
melancholy consideration to a good mind; it is a truth, and certainly 
above all things, worth our while to inquire into. We will, therefore, 
probe the wound, and search to the hottom; we will lay the axe to the 
root of the tree, and show jou the true reason why men go on in sinning 
and repenting, and sinning again through the whole course of their lives; 
and the reason is, because they have been taught, most wickedly taught, 
that religion and virtue are two things absolutely distinct; that the defi- 
ciency of the one might be supplied by the sufficiency of the other; and 
that what you want in virtue, you must make up in religion. But this 
religion, so dishonourable to Uod, and so pernicious to men, is worse than 
Atheism, for Atheism, though it takes away one great motive to support 
virtue in distress, yet it furnishes no man with arguments to be vicious; 
but superstition, or what the world means by religion, is the greatest pos- 
sible eneouragement to vice, by setting up something as religion which 
shall atone and commute for tlie want of virtue. This is estabSishing ini- 
quity by a law, the highest law; by authority, the highest authority; that 
of Grod himself. Wo compliun of the vices of the world, and of the 
without searching into the true cause. It is not 
! they are wicked by nature, for that is both false and impious, 
but because to serve the purposes of their pretended soul-savers, they have 
been carefully taught that they are wicked by nature, and cannot help 
continuing so. It would have been impossible for men to have been both 
religious and vicious, had religion been made to consist wherein alone it 
does consist; and had they been always taught that true religion is the 
practice of virtue in obedience to the will of God, who presides over all 
things, and will finally make every man happy who does his duty. 

1158. "This single opinion in religion, that all things are so well made 
by the Deity, that virtue is its owa reward, and that happiness will ever 
arise from actiug according to the reason of things, or that Uod, ever wise 
and good, will provide some extraordinary happiness for those who suffer 
for virtue's sake, is enough to support a man under all difficulties, to keep 
him steady to his duty, and to enable him to stand as firm as a rock, amid 
all the charms of applause, profit, and honour But this religion of rea- 
son, which all.men are capable of, has betn ne^jIcLted and condemned, and 
another set up, the natural consequences of which have puzaled men's ■ 
understandings, and debauched their morali, mori, than all the lewd poets 
and atheistical philosophers that evei infested the world; for instead of 
being taught that religion consists in action, oi obedience to the eternal 
moral law of God, we have been most gravely and venerably told that it 
consists in the belief of certain opinions which we could form no idea of, 
or which were contrary to the clear perceptions of our minds, or which 
had no tendency to make us cither wiser or better, or, which is much 


;;■ Google 


ON THE MOEALS OF CHEISTIANS. 221 

worse, had a manifest teadeiicy to make us wicked aod immoral. And 
this belief; this impious belief, arisiDg fiom imposition on one side, and 
from want of esainination on the other, has heen called by the aacred 
name of religion, whereaa real and genuine religion consists in knowledge 
and obedience. We know there is a Uod, and know his will, which is, 
that we should do all the good we can ; and we are assured from his per- 
fections, that we shall find our own good in so doing 

1159. "And what would we have more? are we, after such inquiij, 

and in an age full of liberty, children stiU ? and cannot we be quiet unless 

we have holy romances, sacred fables, and traditionary tales to amuse us 

■ U h d to g' t t J wh f lli d ■ ea 

11 t fl t t 

1100 1 h b faht IJtht htblf thdj 

wlllk 1 ty mJtd fnsbtbe td dbhf 

f m t to th trutl f p po t i 1 t 

t b 1 f f fh t 

p thwll rym mtbel 
t d g th 1 [ pea f 

dgfid dtguhd m d tbl th feltyf 

th h h t f lly a b d Cy b t 

th y mm d t b 1 d w 

If t blfth thy mtwk 
w J d I ifthm t to wh t 
th w d bl punish b! It IP 

b! i J t to mm d tbl 
w IS 1 t wh m mm d 

h td ytpmte t btwhh llwdt mmt 

t f th w t f t th tl y d t th tm t p t h f 

mp ty, th th q ty f !I, th h th y fi h d th s^-y, 

and completed the destruction of poor mortal man; by betraying the in- 
terest of virtue, they have undermined and sapped the foundation of all 
human h'^ppmess, and how treacherously and dreadfully have they be- 
trajed it' A gift, well applied, the chattering of some unintelligible 
sounds cilled creeds , an unfeigned assent and consent to whatever the 
cburib enjoins, religious worship and consecrated feasts ; repenting on a 
death bed, pirdons rightly saed out; and absolution authoritatively given, 
have done moie towwd making and eontinuing men vicious, than all the 
natural pasiions and infidelity put together. For infidelity can only take 
awiy the supematuiil rewards of virtue ; but these superstitious opinions 
and practices have not only turned the scene, and made men lose sight 
of the natural rewards of it, but have induced them to think, that were 
there no hercifter, vice would be preferable to virtue, and that they in- 
crease in hijpiness as they increase in wickedness ; and this they have 
been taught in several religious discourses and sermons, delivered by men 


lunt y t i 


t (1 


J b 1 wh tl 


1 


m If th f 


Qt 


tbl th 


1, 


t t p 
d t bb f d 


1 


d d mm al b 


1 t. y J 


th 


tt jrpl 

yd t 6 

t bl p 


d 


, Google 


222 INFLUENCE or SlEinURE 

wli e u b. y was never doubted, particulaily by a late Rcy. prelate, I 
an an B up Atterbury, in his &erm.on on these woids : 'If in this life 
y b h hen we are of all men the most miserable,' where vice and 

fa h r de m t ovingly and triaraphantly together. But these doctrines 
. of the natural escellenoj of tioo, the ef&cacy of a right belief, (he dignity 
of atonements and piopitntions have, beside depriving us of the native 
beauty and charms of honestj, and thus cruelly stabbing virtue to the 
heart, riused and diffused among men a certain unnatural passion, which 
we shall call a religious hatred — a hatred constant, deep-rooted, and im- 
mortal. All other passions rise and fall, die and revive again ; hut this of 
religious and pious hatred rises and grows every day stronger upon the mind 
as we grow more religious, because we hate for G-od's sake, and for the 
sake of those poor souls, too, who have the misfortune not to believe as we 
do ; and can we in so good a cause hato too much ? the more thoroughly 
we hate the better we are ; and the more mischief we do to the bodies and 
states of these infidels and heretics, the more do we show our love to God. 
This is religious zeal, and this has been called dirinity; but remember, 
the only true divinity is humanity. W. Pitt." 

Offer of Guidance hy a Mundane Spirit. 

1161. The Rev. Allen Pntnam, whose narrative of his conversion to 
Spiritualism, has been submitted, gave a very sensible and interesting lec- 
ture on this new doctrine, at the Melodeon, in Boston, last October. One 
of his remarks struck me as being very well warranted by my own observa- 
tion and experience. He said that we are wont to express indignation at the 
absurd, cruel, and unnatural Chinese custom of cramping the female foot; 
but to him it appeared that in Christendom a much worse practice existed, 
that of cramping the minds of females by bringing them up zealous secta- 
rians, their opinions, in general, being determined by their parentage. 
Thus Miss A. is a Eomauist; Miss B. an Episcopalian; Miss C. a Calviri- 
ist; Miss D. a Methodist ; Miss E. a Jewess; all most excellent oreatures 
in any other respect excepting the effects of educational sectarianism, 
which had been interchanged, bad their parentage been commuted. (259.) 

1162. One of the blessings of Spiritualism, according to my view, is, 
that this cramped state of the mind, which attaches importance to vari- 
ous phases of analogous educational error, will be removed by receiving 
their opinions from the same source. But it seems that one of the most 
amiable and interesting among those angelic devotees, has been actuated by 
the same anxiety for my salvation from hell, that I have felt for her eman- 
cipation from the educational ligatures imposed upon her otherwise excellent 
understanding. The following letter is the fruit of her aeal in my favour : 

Augnstl, 1855. 

1163. My dear Sir : yonhavetoomuchkindnessyourself, not to receive 
in kindness what is so intended; and you have too much politeness not to 


;;■ Google 


or CHRISTIANS. 223 

grant as much as jou aak of a friond. I, therefore, with all confidenoe, 
send JOU tlie enclosed letter, written by one of the first intellects iQ the 
country. Now, if when you send your pamphlets and the papers you wish 
ni9 to read, you will state that you have read this letter, (vnth the care you 
■mish me to read yours,) not to refute but to comprehend the mind of the 
writer, I will do the same. But, as what I send to you requires higher 
power than any power in created man, I will continue to pray to this higher 
power, this Creator of all things, that you may so read under bis blessing 
and guidance, (before whom you and the very world upon which you tread, 
are but a molecule or mite,) that yow, I say, may find that salvation for 
your immortal soul, which you seem so much fo desire, If you believe 
that your father and sister exist, and consequently, that you have a soul 
-that cannot die, you must feel a deep ansiety with us all for the future 
welfare of this soul, and will not treat with indifference the attempt to 
offer you that which is a complete satisfaction to your friend I 

1164. I would avoid argument, as two persons at opposite points can 
never see the objects in the same light; but I send simply the Christian's 
plan of salvation, to which I only ask you to attend as carefully as I at- 
tended to the statement of your theory. Whan I return to New York 
permanently, I will inform you. As I ara anxious to retain these papers, 
and life is uncertain, please so arrange them that they may easily be found, 
should any thing happen." 

1165. The following lines, which are subjoined in the title page of my 
pamphlet, addressed to the Episcopal clergy, would have forewarned a 
but an enthusiast, that there was an outwork to b 
impression could be made : 

ill, 


If Ooa can oreatn 


res make to suit Uaw 


Eoroaoc, if ttey < 


ian, liis design fulfill. 


■Wierafoce those ■ 


creatures to tilnl espo 


Iraita to find out 


, ivhiQli te thus foroki 


1167. Persons who should differ about axioms could never agree in 
mathematical demonstrations, nor ia it possible for A and B to agree in 
theology, when A assumes what to B appears to comprise a contradiction 
within its premises and conclusions. Haying for years held the opinion 
conveyed in the above lines, to be self-evident truth, it is of course useless 
to debate with those who take an opposite view, especially just at this time, 
when I believe that opinion to be sanctioned by my spirit friends. This 
opinion was urged in my letter to the Episcopal clergy; yet this kind 
adviser has not seen, or has not taken pains to understand, its all-important 
bearing. 

1168. The letter of this charming woman commences with begging the 
question. It is assumed that the arguments of her clerical friend require 
for compreJtension a higher potvey than any pmoer created in man. But 


;;■ Google 


224 INFUFNOF CF SCRIPTURE 

this to me appears fanatical presumption just as much as it would be in 
any other sectarian The exciliont authiress of the epistle puts herself iu 
a olass of females whom it has been my object to emancipate- from the 
restraint imposed upon their minds no kss cramping than tbat to which 
the feet of Chinese ladies are subjected. 

1169. It must be evident, that unless there was a successful precursory 
effort by facta and reasoning, to make me believe that what appears to me 
belotD good sense, is actually above it, her inference that discussion would 
be useless is quite evident. But this amounts to an admission that the 
opinions which it is her object to impart, are not founded in reason. 

1170. Her clerical friend falls into the same error, as wiU appear from 
the following quotation. The last postulate in the world which he could 
induce me to admit, would be that any thing which owes its existence en- 
tirely to barbarous, wiclted, ignorant, covetous, and blood-thirsty men, can 
be God's word, and, therefore, paramount to human reason. 

1171. How would he enable an idiot to believe in the Bible, or in any 
thing? Is not our capacity to believe correctly, greater as our reason is 
better by nature ? It is only through his own intellectual faculties that 
he has received his opinions and can defend them. It is through my rea- 
son that my head and heart repel the Old Testament as, for the most part, 
the woik ot a set of unprincipled bigots, comprising allegations which the 
present state ot astionomy and geology demonstrate to be fallacious, and 
which, independently of that cramping of the intellect by education, which 
it is my ardent desue to remove, would be denounced replete with inde- 
cency, immonlity, and misrepresentation of G-od. 

1172 It IS stiiking that this kind lady, in referring to my sister and 
other spirit friends, should suppose that I would slight the direct heartfelt 
evidence received from tkem, in obedience to impressions felt 6y her in 
common with every other devotee to any religion whaiever. They.eonld, 
with just as much consistency, appeal to their tenets, and assume their 
" Koran," their " Shasters," or " Zendavesta" to bo above my reason. 

1173. Bat. the whole tenor of this application shows that the authoress 
cspects to set aside the results of nearly twenty months' investigation, creat- 
ing in me a firm devout conviction that I have a correct knowledge of the 
spirit world, received tlirough my relatives, friends, and high spirits, in 
deference to those of a set of people of whom I know nothing but ill. 
May God do that for her which she has so benevolently implored for me, 
and remove from her brain the influence of educational narrowness. I 
would utter the same asjMi-ation for the divine whom she has brought in as 
her advocate, who I hope as smcerelj/ believes what he alleges, as I believe 
in the communications of my guardian spirits. 

1174. But tliis superior intellect, it will be shown, fiills into one of 
the most inexcusable eiTors, into which a tyro in reasoning can fall, that 
of founding his arguments on premises which are emphatically denied by 


;;■ Google 


ON TnE MORALS OE CHRISTIANS. 225 

tlie other party— a gross begging of the question, that the Eible ia the 
word of God, and paramount to human reason. 

1175. la a subsequent part of this letter, Hume's excellent rule is set 
aside : that we must weigh the probability of the evidence against the 
improb b I ty f th m racle. Kochefoucault alleges, 'Tis better to tell a 
probabl 1 th n n xtremely improbable truth. By what evidence can 
any re d b p d t ue, when it is vastly more probable it should be 
lalse, th th f ts orded by it should be trae. 

1176 M f tly there are but these two ways in which any record can 
comm d 1 ther there must be external evidence suf&oient to 

weigh t th prohahility of the facts which it has recorded ; or 

those f t m 1 1 f nature to create belief from their probability, from 
what 11 d t 1 eTideace. As to external evidence, clearly any 

amount f th t m y b adduced without creating a belief in spiritual ma- 
nifestat n H m evidence is wholly inadequate to prove any thing 
which t m d not wish to admit. Considering the external evi- 

dence f '^ pt vastly inferior to that on which Spiritualbm is 

founded d fh m lea recorded, and the doctrines taught, as carrying 
no evid f tb t uth, but the contrary, I do not understand upon 

what reasonable ground they are to be identified with the word of God. 

1177. This fascinating lady supposes that she gave ear to my exposition 
of my views; bat I am under the impression that she is quite deaf to any 
thing that does not concur with hor fanatical impressions, otherwise ehe 
would never have looked upon me as one to be converted from the opinions 
which I entertain by the reasoning of hor clerical friend, beginning with a 
begging of the question : assuming that revelation is God's word, in order 
to prove it to be God's word. 

1178. So the Bible is true because of the miracles which it records; 
and these are true because the Bible leeord'i them I 

1179. If she can so confine her mmd as to become mjster of the pyra- 
mid of facts which I have itised m favour of fepirituahsm she will per- 
ceive that all other evidence of iramortihty "lats into inaigniflcance as 
compared with it. Now jll this m ly be nominally ahro^attd by denying 
the truth of it. But if I do not rely on mv JWn senses is it likely I shall 
rely on those of other persons, in whom I have no more confidence than 
her clerical adviser and herself have in Mohammed and his disciples. 

1180. I subjoin a portion of the letter of the clerical champion, whose 
reasoning this interesting devotee deems so conclusive. I have gone over 
the whole of it, and have ascertained that by substituting Allah for God, 
Mohammed for Christ, Prophet for Kedeemer, Mediator for Saviour, it has 
a qualification which would be deemed a merit elsewhere, if not in Christen- 
dom : it would serve just as well to uphold the religion of Mohammed, 
as that of Christ. 

1181. The letter is so long that it would occupy too many pages to give 


;;■ Google 


226 INFLUENCE Of SCRirTURE 

the whole ; but I will givo a portion, suffieient to show how the ri 

on which many sectarians rely, may he just as good for any otlier creed, 

founded on an arrogation of premises, aa that for which, they contend. 

11S2. "Allah forbid that I should depreciate the value of reason in 
any of its offices. Eeason is Allah's gift to man, and must be used as 
Allah designs. But bo is the Koran Allah's gift to man, and must be 
used as Allah designs. Two gifts fram the same perfect being cannot 
conflict with each other. The Koran in its teachings aud reYCalings may 
go beyond or riso above the comprehension of our reason, because reason 
in man is a finite and imperfect gift, while the Koran from Allah opens 
the miod of an infinite and perfect being. But the Koran does not and 
cannot iii any thing contradict reason, because Allah does not and can- 
not contradict himself Unless, therefore, you are prepared to say that 
the Koran is nol Allah's gift to man — if you are a believer in its true 
divine inspiration — you must see and admit that when the Koran, as Allah's 
mouth, reveals any thing which our reason cannot as yet comprehend, be- 
, cause beyond or above, though not against, that reason, then Fuitk must 
submissively receive the revelation addressed to it, and Reason stop her 
speculation and shut her mouth at the limit which Allah has set. Eea- 
soa has to do with the evidences which show the Koran to he Allah's gift; 
with tho grammatical and intended sense of what Allah taught and revealed 
in the Koran, and with the use of what in the Koran is clear to the com- 
prehension of man. But here Reason's province ends. When the Koran 
goes beyond or rises above this point. Reason must pause and adore, and 
Faith must go forward and receive. I do not hold, as you intimate, that 
tlie right exercise of reason ' is impious,' or that Eeason is to be discarded 
aud Faith s-ubsHcuted, if by this be implied any thing incompatible be- 
tween the proper offices of Reason and Faith ; but I mean that oih- finite 
reason is to stop at the limit assigned her by her aiillior, and let Faith as 
a higTier power go forward and receive what Allah teaches or reveals to 
her acceptanca. Faith can now receive more than Reason can as yet com- 
prehend. She does so in the province of nature; she must do so in tho 
province of revelation. This cannot be denied without takiiig at once the 
ground of the infidel^a ground from which, I doubt not, you would shrink 
back as fiiom the border of an open pit of destmcldon. 

1183. "I am thus brought to your remark, that 'The Mohammedan 
system, as generally received, is not difficult to understand.' If this be 
strictly true, it must be beeaiKe that system, ' as generally i-eceived,* is not 
the true system ; for, in this sense, or as truly and rigMy received, the 
Mohammedan system contains various things which it is difficult to under- 
stand, if by understanding be meant comprehending. We may, indeed, 
understand that a fact or a truth exists or is revealed, while that fact or that 
fmth iUelf is, for the present, utterly beyond or above our comprehension. 
And this is precisely the case with the Mohammedan system rightly viewed. 


,v Google 


ON THE MORALS OF CHRISTIASa. "'227 

It contains various facts and truths which oa?' reason cannot yet fathom. 
Natural reason loves to separate and set aside these great and Ligli things 
from the Koran aa nonessentials, and then to hisy itself with those parts 
of tie Koran whict are level with its own height ;, pleased with the dream 
that it has grasped enough, has grasped all that can be of any real value. 
Believe me when reason does thia, for one who has the Koi-an in his 
hands, she plays at a perilous game. 

1184. "The main position which I have thus far taken is, however, vir- 
tually conceded in another part of jour letter. Alluding to what I had 
urged as to the importance of acknowledging Mohammed as your media- 
tor, and relying on his mediation only for justification as all-sufficient, 
reconciling all difficulties, and removing all embarrassment from the con- 
sideration of the union of justice and mercy in the deity, yon s»yi 'But 
doss it remove all embarrassment 1 Is not Allah himself the author of 
the plan of salvation ? Was not Mohammed himself Allah, and also his 
vicegerent?' The impossibility of answering these questions satisfactorily 
to th^ plamest reasouj t«iphes me to lecoil turn the impiety of i iquirini^ 
Sou. my Maker will save mp or rPConciL hi"! own attributes ' I know full 
Tiell that the great m iss of human minds irp totally incapable of considei 
ing snob a subject with any approximation to a solution of it, lad there 
fore Jo I feel that the eternal salvation oi condemnation of mini ind dees 
not depend on such thiological questions Here you duectly admit the 
inability of reason in most minis 'sitisfj.ctoiily to comprehend some of the 
gieit and high pcmts of the Stohimmedan system and the con ^ucnt 
impiPty of her nttemplmq such a comprehension You imght as well es 
pin, tly admit her imbihty for this comprehension lu all mmds, for no 
mmd m it^> piesent state can by icason aloiw grasp all that Allah hia 
revedLd in the Koran These greit and high things are not pinposed to 
leison alone, but to reason so £ir as their evidence is ooneerned, and to 
faith so fiu as their substance is to be received. Reason may satisfy her- 
self th-vt they are revealed. Faith alone can take in the substance which 
they contain When they are proposed to it, faith must receive them, 
or salvation cannot come, whether the reason of the individual addressed 
be the 'plainest' or otherwise. 

1185, " Tour argument in the above extract does not satisfy me so well 
as your admission. From the inability of the great mass of minds satisr 
factorily to comprehend the high mysteries of the Koran, yon infer that 
the ' eternal salvation or condemnation of mankind does not depend on 
such theological questions.' Certainly, the salvation of mankind in the 
mass does not depend on these or any other theological questions ; if by 
this be meant depending on the ability to comprehend such questions, be- 
cause the points involved in these questions, so far as they are mysteries, are 
proposed not to reason as comprehending, but to faiSi as receiving. But 
do you mean to be understood as saying, that when the Koran is put into 


,v Google 


228 ISFLUEKCE or SCairTITRE 

any man's hand, and when Allah through the Koran opens to that man 
his revealed way of salvation, the individual thus approached may accept 
what is level with his reason, hut reject what is proposed to his/aitk and 
above his reason, and that yet notwithstanding sunh rejection he may rea- 
sonahly hope to he saved ? If so, I ask you hy what right you argue thus ? 
Who is Allah, and what is man ? When he tells you the way in which 
ho will save you, not the mass of mankind or the heathen to whom the 
Koran has never come, but t/ou yourself, what right have you to say that 
your salvation docs not depend on your faith's reception of those very 
things which are above your reason's comprehenKon ? How do yon know 
but that the whole efE.eacy of the plan pressed to you, depends on yonr 
receiving the great facts and truths propounded to yoni/aith? 'Faith 
itself, I admit/ you may contend, ' does not save any man ; it is the Media- 
tor that saves.' But you have no right to say, or think, or hope that he will 
or can savo you with the Koran in your hand, in any other way than that 
which in the Koran he proposes to your/oji/i. And if when he demands 
your f'dtli in what surpasses your reason, you withhold that faith, and 
plead the sufEciency of what he has incidentally made level with your 
reason, do you not thereby show that you have not the spirit which he 
requires, and that you are yet none of his ? In the Koran he has not only 
revealed to you his mission and sanctiSoation, but also proposed to you his 
mediation as a propitiation for your sin; and he has told you that 'you 
must be horn again,' not only of water, but also 'of the spirit;' that ex- 
cept yon be converted and become as a 'litUe child, you shall not enter 
into the kingdom of heaven ;' and that 'he that Se&iJetfi. and is baptized 
shall be saved, but he that believeUt not shall be damned :' ' helieveih' not 
3, part only, but the 'whole of the Koran then intrusted to its Ulemas. 
Here he explicitly demands your faith in the whole Koran. But suppose 
it had been otherwise, suppose he had simply opened to you a way hy 
which he could certainly save yott, without saying any thing about faith, 
as the one great and necessary receiver of the facts and truths involved in 
that way; I ask, would not a rejection of a pari of those involved facts 
and truths he equivalent to a rejection of the whole ? Would it not display 
the same spirit as a rejection of the whole ? Would it not show that you 
were not walking in his way, hut in some other which you supposed rrvight 
possibly be found? Nay, would it not show that in your heart you had 
no confidence in him as a mediator; that yon even rebelled against his 
right to prescribe to you the terms on which he would save you ?" 

1186. To conclude, with respect to this guardian angel of my soul, to 
whom this digression owes its existence; it may comfort her to know that 
I conceive myself so securely protected and guided already, and so sure 
of the result of that guidance and protection, that I would advise her, in 
my turn, to consider well whether she ought not to pray to God to give 
her a little more light respecting her own destiny, than is afforded by the 


;;■ Google 


OSr THE MORALS 01' CHRISTIANS. 229 

book which is vaunted as being above reason, and as being tlie woi-d of 
Q-od. Does she conceive the subterranean cave with the " lake of un- 
qvienchable fi're," in which Dives is roasting in sight of the blessed, to be so 
satisfactory as to be unwilling to hear of a, preferabie abode in the azure 
slty ? Does she aspire to some official position eommensurate with that of 
tlie judgsbips which Christ promised hia disciples ? If it is to procure me 
a place in the heaven described in Scripture, I beg leave to decline, 
being pre-engaged j and therefore give her an invitatioa to meet mo hero- 
after in the glorious abode to which I confidently aspire, and where I shall 
feel myself especially called upon to render her my assistance to rise from 
the inferior though happy sphere to which, with her present opinions, she 
Is destined. 

1187. I would recommend to her, and to others in the same predica- 
ment, the perusal of the influence of the conversion to Spiritualism on 
my friends, as presented in this volume. I would also recommend her to 
study the comparison made between the heaven and hell of Scripture and 
that of Spiritualism, as herein presented. 

1188. I hope my would-be mundane guide to salvation will find in the 
verse and prose addressed to me by one more nearly allied (215, 250, 538) 
a sufficient apology for declining her kindly-tendered guidance, especially 
as the path through which she would lead me ts known to this excellent 
relative, who has frequently passed and repassed it during her residence of 
more than two years in the spirit world, while to my mundane friend it is 
as yet unknown, and, as I believe, misapprehended. But although my 
mind has not been converted to her view of the service tendered, lay heart 
will never cease to be gratefully inclined toward one who, while actually 
in want of guidance herself, thought so much of the supposed deficiency 
from which it is imagined I suifer. 

Improper use of the epithet Infidel, as used in the parodied quotation fro7rt 
the Olerfft/man's Letter. 

1189. If a man cannot be guilty of infidelity to another man's wife, 
how can he be guilty of infidelity to another man's religion? The JIo- 
hammedan wrongfully calls the Christian " infidel," because he does not 
believe in Mohammed; and as wrongfully is the epithet retorted, because 
the Mohammedan does not believe in Christ. The epithet can only be 
truly applicable to those who, while professing a religion, do not act up to 
their professions. In this sense, Christendom, so called, teems with infi- 
dels to Chrbtianity. 

On Atonement. 

1190. Since my spirit sister's translation to the spheres, she has risen 
from the fifth to the sixth sphere. It has been alleged by her that her 
ascent was retarded by her belief in the atonement. I subjoin some rea- 
soning on that subject : 


;;■ Google 


2S0 INFLUENCE OP 

1191. As respects free-will, Dr. Johnson shrewdly said that all prac- 
tice is in its fevour, all theory against it ; but whatever Tiew may be taken 
on this subject, no one can deny that so far as it is possible for sin to he 
avoided, it must be within the power of &od to make men irirtuoua. The 
fact that they are not sinless, must arise either from his not wishing to 
make them more TJrtuous, oi- from his inability to make them so. That 
he does not make them free from sin implies either a want of will or a 
want of power. 

1192. ;^ut whatever may in this respect be true, his omniscience must 
have enabled him to perceive the result beforehand, and of course it is 
inconceivable that he would, consistently with his goodness, have created 
them, foreknowing that they would be so wicked as to deserve eternal 
punishment. 

1193. All this it was in his power to obviate by not creating men, or 
by making their temptations less, or their power of resistance greater. 
Bnt foreseeing their wickedness, and imposing fetters on his omnipotent 
power, so as to render a cei'tain amount of mffeving inevitable, he is said 
to Lave determined that a portion of the godhead should expiate in the 
flesh, by the pains of omctfixion, the punishment due to the sinful crea- 
tures which he has been supposed to have wilfully created, foreseeing this 

1194. But in order to make men better, instead of using that almighty 
power with which ho is said to have hardened the heart of Pharaoh, to 
soften the human heirt ind enlighten the human mind universally, be is 
made to resort to a method which, however cruel and manifestly unjust in 
making an innocent bein^ suffer for the guilty, has proved utterly ineffi- 
cient, since only a smiU minonfy of mankind profess Christianity, and 
of that minority only an impciccptible portion, if any, comply with its 
requisitions, as befoie obseivcd, hence the greater part are liable" to 6e 
beaten isiih many strij>es," while those to whom the mission of Christ has 
been unknown are to "he beaten with hut few stripes." 

1195. Human lawgivers may enact constitutions which result in practi- 
cal failure, because they do not foresee the issue. Such failures are 
ascribed to their deficiency in practical wisdom. But the failure of mea- 
sures for the production of any result proving it unwise, must demonstrate 
that it did not originate with an all-wise author; in other words, with the 
Almighty. 

1196. It is manifestly absurd to asci-ibe to that Being any measures 
which have failed to effect the ends for which they have been specially 
devised. Knowing that Mohammed would have more followers than 
Christ, that the largest portion of mankind would remain pagans, that 
even in Christendom the Christian religion would be a source of bloody 
contention and theological hatred, making scarcely any real Christiaus, — 
how could it originate with a wise and prescient Deity F 


;;■ Google 


ON THE MOHALS 01* CHRISTIANS 231 

1197. " By their fruita jc shall know theia ?" It being premised that 
God is omniscient, all-wise, and omnipotent, can any fruit proceed from 
that high source which has not proved to answer well the purpose for 
which it was intended? 

1198. The actual morality of Christendom heing the inverse of that 
excessive and impracticable restraint, which Christ enjoined as the object 
of his mission, must prove that his doctrine could not hare originated 
with a being by whom its failure must have been foreseen. 

1199. Arguments such as I have nsed are met often by referring to the 
evils, to which all animated nature is subjected, in the way of misery, mn- 
tilation, disease, or death. But when the government of the universe ia 
attributed to general laws, it may be inferred that evil results from a want 
of power f« render those laws free from bad consequences. Nothing but 
such limitation ff power, or an indisposition to prevent those evils, can 
account for their occurience Bat thjs is nideSy different from assuming, 
in the fiist phce with selfcdled orthodoxy, that God is omnipotent, 
omniscient, all wise and ail good, and then representing him as resorting 
to measures for the accomplishment of his ends which are utterly ineffi- 
cacioos This 13 accusing the Almighty of icting like an idiot. Can 
any thing be more preposterous, than that an all-wise, all-good, all-power- 
ful, and all-foreseeing Deity should require the services of human mission- 
aries to carry out his vrill ? Would he not at least require that such mes- 
sengers of his word should flrat agree as to what that word ought to be ? A 
pagan might remain during his whole life a pagan, should he, before adopt- 
ing any creed, require that professed Christians, in general, should agree 
as to the tenets which he should espoase. 

1200. Agreeably to the attributes assigned to the Deity by orthodosy, 
the state of things which exists in the universe cannot be otherwise than 
aa God wishes it to be, to the falling of a sparrow; so that any change 
sought by man, beyond the immediate sphere of his necessities, must be 
an of&cious intei-ferenoe with God's providence. 

1201. Yet if a man be considered as an instrument in attaining certain 
beneficent ends, without which those ends could not be accomplished, then 
human exertjon ia reasonable, in whatever way it can ho productive of good. 

1203. How can any being who confemplales the wonderful power dis- 
played in the creation, hesitate to perceive that if the divine Architect 
desired that all men should coincide in their modes of worship, he would 
have furnished them sufficient evidence of bia will, and disposed (heir 
minds to receive the desired impression? 

1203. Nevertheless, his measures are represented as the inverse of these. 
It is represented that a creed which he wished aU men to embrace was. 
promulgated in an obscure part of an obscure country, under the yoke of 
heathen despotism, in a language unknown to any other people. It was.' 
so promulgated that the great majority of mankind were entirely out of 


;;■ Google 


232 INFLUENCE OF SCRIPTUKE 

the reaeli of its inflaenee, and have remained so for nearly two thousand 
years. Moreover, those who have been made acquainted with Christianity 
are nnahle to agree in what it consiata. 

1204. As I have already urged, if we were to judge of the estention of 
Christianity by the mimher of Christiana who do not in practice violate the 
precepts of Christ, it might be a question whether the name of Christen- 
dom is applicable to any part of the world. 

On the massacre at Sinope, as a probable conseq^ience of Religioiis Fana- 
ticism and Intolerance. 

1205. As in conBideration of the idolatry of the Amalekites the Israel- 
ites were, according to the Bible, authorized to extirpate that nation, for 
a wrong done to larael some hundred years before, may not the Ruasians 
imagine themseWes justified for the massacre of Sinopa ? (1 Sam. xv.) 

1206. Tho Turks have done vastly more harm to the Greek Christians, 
when, with fire and sword, they subdued the Greek empire, and obliged 
each man to pay annually for wearing his head, than the tribe of Amalek 
did to the Hebrews. In the one ease there does not appear to have been 
for centuries any repetition of the wrong; but in the other the wrongs 
were reiterated, and of an enduring natare. It is trae that the Moham- 
luedan sovereigcs were in Turkey more tolerant of their Christian subjects 
than Christian sovereigns were of Mohammedans; or even of the Albi- 
genses, Lollards, Wicliffites, Lutherans, or Oalviniats. The Turks never 
introduced an inquisitorial tribunal to burn or torture uubehevei^ 
On this account they may think themselves less open to the chjrge of 
cruel intolerance than some of the self-called disciples of Chriit , an 1 no 
doubt the discordancy between the conduct of those disciples and the 
precepts of their teacher, may have contribnted to their contemptuous 
opinions of those whom they impioperly call infidels to Mohamraedj not 
perceiving that people who have not professed a religion, can no more be 
infidels thereto than one man can be gailty of infidelity to another man's 
wife. This argument, however, would be answered by the fact that Chris- 
tians call Mohammedans infidels, not in consequence of any violation of 
their faith in Mohammed, but because they have never had any faith in 
Christ. 

1207. Such skeptical Mohammedans as Lady Mary Wortley Montague 
■made mention of ia her letters from Coestantinople, will no doubt con- 
isider the term infidel applicable only to snoh as break their professed faith, 
\whatever it may be, 

1208. Agreeably to this definition, every fighting or wealth -seeking 
'Christian ia an infidel to the religion which he professes; every Moham- 
imedan who indulges in wine is an infidel. 

1209. The religion taught by Mohammed, like that of Moses, outhor- 
iJBcd the most cruel wars, the extermination of nations for erroneous belief. 


;;■ Google 


ON THE MOHATjS of CHRISTIANS. 233 

wMe the religion of Christ directs as to Iot© our neighbours as ourselvesj 
to retura good for evil; to giYe onr coat when our cloak is taken; to sub- 
mit passively to blows, and that the possession of wealth interferes with 
access to heaven. Christianity is, moreover, unfavourable to polygamy or 
concubinage. 

1210. It follows that the precepts of Jesus call for restraint upon the 
predominant pa^ions of human uature, while those of Mohammed, in jus- 
tifying warfare, esoessive indulgence in women, and in the spoliation and 
massacre of unbelievers, coincide with the most predominating propensi- 
ties of human nature, It in, therefore, for easier to be faithful to the 
precepts of Mohammed than those of Christ. 

1211. Nevertheless, as both Christ and Mohammed treated the Old 
Testament as authentic, it is to be feared that the Turks and Russians 
may look to it for justification of their intolerant cruelty. 

1212. None of the ancient Pagans were as hostile to the Hebrews, as 
the disciples of Bloharamed have been to the Greek Christians. But not 
even the Mohammedans have been so intolerant to those whom they call 
infidels, as Christian sectarians have been, to such persons as they have 
dogmatically adjudged to be heretics. 

1213. It should be well considered whether any authority dependent 
on human records can justify the inference that God, anywhere, or in any 
age, ever authorized such emelty as that exhibited at Sinope. 

1214. Whenever men adopt the idea entertained by tha Jews and Mo- 
hammedans, and certain sects of Christians, that a peculiar creed is neces- 
sary to salvation, it is deemed humane to inflict any temporal evil in order 
to eradicate any other belief which will subject souls to eternal punishment. 
When to the Catholics in the reign of Queen Mary it was urged that burn- 
ing heretics alive would not change their creed, the reply was, that although 
the victims should not be converted, the souls of their progeny would be 
saved from damnation by the extirpation of the heresy with the heretics. 
Admitting the premises, the conclusion was correct, and the auto-da-ffi and 
the tortures of the inquisition were even more excusable than a painful 
chirurgioal operation, when it preserves the temporal life of the patient. 

1215. If the Czar is of opinion, that for every Christian who may replace 
a Turk, a soul will be saved from damnation, he may conceive himself as 
well authorized to extirpate the Turks, as were Moses and Joshua to ex- 
tirpate any heathen nation. 

1216. Moreover, by some Christians, Jesus is considered as having sanc- 
tioned the retention of th t h te t f th H b w portraiture of 
Jehovah, wbicli makes t ht t t m t b ! in the orthodox 
creed. This must be f d co d wh t recognised, as it 
induces persecution from t 1 1 tl 1 ition of the vic- 
tims upon, whom it act w! 1 tl t t lly tes bitter resent- 
ment instead of gratit 1 


;;■ Google 


234 INI'LUENCB 0¥ SCRIPTURE 

1217. Having submitted the representations of Jehovali, gnen m tte 
Old Testament, I will subjoin those of the great modern philoaophep 
Newton, and ttose of Seneca, one of the most distinguished sages of anti- 
quity. The reader may, from these data, judge how far piety or mcialitv 
■woald suffer, were that ancient record to give way to the direct evidence 
of Spiritualism. 

Opinions of God held hy Sir Isaac Newton. — Enfield's Philosoplii/, 
Page 638. 

1218. " God has no need of organs ; he being everywhere present to 
the things themselves. 

1219. " It appears from phenomena, that there is a being incorporeal, 
living, intelligent, omnipresent, who, in infinite space, as it were in his 
sensory, sees the things themselves, intimately and thoroughly perceives 
them, and comprehends them wholly by their immediate presence to him- 
self. 

1220. "This most beautiful system of the sun, planets, and comets 
could only arise from the counsel and dominion of an intelligent and 
powerful being; and if the fixed stars be centres of similar systems, these, 
being all formed by lite wisdom, must be subject to the dominion of one; 
especially since the light of the fixed stars ia of the same nature with the 
light of the sun; and ail systems mutually give and receive light. 

1221. " God governs all things, not as the sou! of the world, but as the 
Lord of the universe. The Supreme Deity is an eternal, infinite, and 
absolutely perfect being, omnipotent and omniscient; that is, his duration 
extends from eternity to eternity, and his presence from infinity to infinity; 
he governs all things, and knows all things which exist, or can be known. 
He is not eternity or infinity; but eternal and infinite; he is not duration 
or space ; but he endures and is present ; he endures forever and is present 
everywhere. Since every portion of Bpiee is always, ind every indnisible 
moment of duration is everywhere, certainly the Mikei and Lord of all 
things cannot he never or itotehere Ood is omniprestnt, not viitually 
only, but substantially ; for power o mnot subsist without substance la 
him all things are contained and move, but without recjpiocal aifection 
God is not affected by the motion of bodies, nii do bodies suffei lesi&tance 
from the omnipresence of God. 

1222. " It is universally allowed that God exists neceswirily , and by 
the same necessity he exists always and every when, Whenoe he is 
throughout similar, all eye, all ear, all brain, all arm, all power of perceiv- 
ing, understanding, and acting; but jn a manner not at all human, not at 
all corporeal ; in a manner to us altogether unknown. As a blind man has 
no idea of colours, so we have no idea of the manner in which the most 
wise God perceives and understands all things. Ho is entirely without 
body, and bodily form, and therefore can neither be seen, nor heard, nor 


;;■ Google 


ON THE MORALS or CHRISTIANS. 235 

touched; nor ought he to he worshipped under any corporeal representa- 
tion. We have ideas of his attrihutes, but what the suhitance of any thing 
is, we are wholly ignorant. "We see only the figures and colours of bodies; 
we hear only sounds; we touch only external superficies; we smell on]y 
odours; wo tasto only savours; of their internal substance we have no 
knowledge by any sense, or by any reflex act of the mind; much ]ess 
have wo any idea of the substance of God. We know him only by his 
properties and attributes, by the most wise and ezcelleni structure of things, 
and by final causes; and we reverence and worship him on account of his 
dominion. A God without dominion, providence, and design, is nothing 
else but fate and nature." 

1223. The language above quoted does not involve the idea that Newton 
owed his idea of God to the Bible, or that he considered him as having 
any person, much less that he consisted of three persons. He makes no 
allusion to Christ or to the Scriptiixes. His opinions are quite rcooneihihle 
with Theism, but incompatible with the existence of tho Trinity. 

On God and /ii's AtlribtUes, ly Seneca. 

1224. "Great respect is due to universal opinion, "We consider com- 
mon, asscut an evidence of truth. That there arc Gods, we are convinced, 
among other proofs, from the fact that the belief in their existence is 
natural to man. No nation has been found so brutal as to be entirely 
without religion. 

1225. " "We begin to know God from his works. What is God ? All 
that you see, and all that you do not see. In what does the nature of God 
and man differ 1 The best part of man is bis mind ; ia God there is nothing 
but mind. lie is pure spirit. Many names are applicable to him. Do 
you call him Fate ? You do not err. He it ia upon whom every thing 
depends. The cause of causes. Uo you oall him Providence f You are 
right. It is by his appointment that this world is so arranged that it 
performs without confusion the part assigned to it. Bo you call him 
Nature ? You do not sia. It is he from whom all things are produced. 

1226. " You may properly apply to God any name expressive of celes- 
tial power. All his benefits may give rise to distinctive appellations. 
Thus he is called Father, Hercules, Mercury, &o. Father, because he is 
truly the Father of all; Hercules, becaiise he is omnipotent; Mercury, 
because he is pure Eeason, the principle of science, of order, and of 
harmony. 

1227- " Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, are all names of one 
God, expressive of his various attributes, and are qualities of the one mind; 
uihichever of tlicm yov, love, you love God. Known unto God are al! his 
works. 

1228. ''Whatever is to happen is present with him. What to us is 
sudden and unexpected, has by him been foreseen and provided for. 


,v Google 


286 INILUENCE OF SCEISTURE 

1229. "A wise man does not change liis opinion, how miicli leas Godl 
As a river does not flow back, or stop iu its course, so the order of nature 
is governed iy fixed laws, which are nofhintj less than divine deei-ees. 

1230. " Who is so ■wretched, so neglected, who horn to so cruel a des- 
tiny, as not to have received any heneflts from the gods ? Look at those 
who complain of their lot, jou will find that they are not deprived of al! 
comforts. Is the gift of life nothing? Are there no objects pleasant to 
the eye, to the ear, or to the mind? God's kindness does not only supply 
us with what is necessary to existence, he provides also for our pleasure. 
Witness the variety of fruits, differing in fiavonrj the many healthful 
vegetables, so great a Tariety of food for different seasons of the year, some 
produced from the earth without culture, even/or tlte idle; animals of all 
kinds abounding ia the earth, the sea, and the sdr, as if all things in 
nature were tributary to our enjoyment. Consider the rivers Sowing grace- 
fully through the fields which they fertilize; others, whose deep beds in 
their vast and navigable courses, afford the means of a profitable c 
or by overflowing their hanks during the drought and heat of s 
water the parctod earth and cause it to bring forth abundantly. You deny 
that you have received any favours, and yet are unwilling to part with what 
you possess. There are some philosophers who do not appreciate the divine 
gifts. They complain that we are not endowed with perfect health, incor- 
ruptible virtue, and foreknowledge. They scarcely refrain from impudently 
despising nature, that she has made us less then gods. How much better 
would it be to return thanks to the gods for the many baaefits we have 
received, and for placing us in this beautiful world, and subjecting it to 
our role, as their vicegerents. 

1231. "The Deity has thought of us from the beginning; and this 
world has been so arranged as to make his care of us manifest. We admit 
our obligation to love our parents, as those from whom we derive our ex- 
istence. They were, however, certainly not the authors of our existence, 
but were utterly ignorant of the mysteries of nature. 

1232. " That we are indebted for our existence to an. intelligent cause, 
is evident from the provisions made for our support long before our birth, 

1233. "The strong instinct of a mother, making her willing to endure 
any privation for the helpless stranger; the sacred fountain which, at the 
moment it Js wanted, flows from the mother's breast; the air adapted to 
the lungs, the light to the eye; what more shall I say? — a present God is 
revealed! 

1234. " Our kind Father begins to bestow benefits on us before we are 
capable of perceiving our obligations to him, and continues them even 
when we are ungrateful. Some accuse him of forgetting them ; some of 
injuring them; others believe him to be regardless of his works; never- 
theless, like a good parent, who smiles at the follies of his children, God 
does not cease to confer his benefits on those vko deny his existence, hut 


;;■ Google 


ON TOE MORALS OF CHaiSTIANS. 2S7 

with an. equal eye regards all nations, and kscs Ids -power oiily to bless. 
He sprinkles tlie earth ■with, soft showers ; he moves the sea by his breath; 
tempers the severity of winter and the heat of summer, and is placable to 
the errors of invperfeet mortals." 

On the Better Employment of the First Bay of the WeeJc. 

1235. The subjoinecl essay, as above designated, was written nearly 
ten years ago, before the author had any hope that any knowledge of a 
future state would be mercifully afforded through himself, as well as many 
others, which would supply the only defleiency ia the elements requisite to 
the proposed innovation. Eortnuately the doctrines, since taught by the 
spirits, entirely corroborate the snggestions of this essay; so that Spi- 
ritualism, natural religion, and literature, may hereafter go hand in hand 
on Sunday. 

1236. This now gloomy day, may, tlirongh the happy united instru- 
mentality suggested, become a day of real intellectual improvement, as well 
as of every species of variety of innocent recreation. Yet every species 
of selfish sensual pleasure will be avoided and condemned by every con- 
scientious believer in spiritual manifestations. 

1237. It is suggested that persons opposed to Sabbatarianism, iuoon- 
sistent with the early and long-contiaued practice of Christianity, and 
with the freedom of conscience guaranteed by the Constitution of the United 
States, should unite to render Sunday (en-oneousiy called the Sabbath) a 
day of moral, literary, and scientific iusti-uction, for those who, dissatisfied 
with the sectarianism of the existing places of worship, pass the day with- 
out edifying occupation. 

1238. The object of this association would be to contemplate the Deity, 
agreeably to the opinions entertained by the first and one of the best of 
philosophers. Sir Isaac Newton; the sentiments of morality comprised in 
the precepts aaeribed to doafuoius, as well as to Christ, " Do unto others 
as yoa would have them do unto you." 

1239. As respects the object of devotion, the idea of the Deity enter- 
tained by Newton, and this sentiment of Pope's universal prayer, might 
be adopted : 

12^0, " Ffltber of all, Id every age, 

Bj saint, bj savOEO, nnd by sago, 
JehoTah, Jore, or Lord." 

1241. As regards ceremonial, that sanctioned by Christ, agreeably 
to which the brief appeal of the humble, contrite publican, was deemed 
preferable to that of the self-complaeent, multiloqueat, pomporis Pharisee. 

1242. The opinions of the Deity given by Newton, are quoted to show 
that there is nothing therein to justify intolerant sectarianism, nor to indi- 
oate the distinguished author to have been indebted for them to Eevelatioo. 

1243. As favouring toleration, the sentiments expressed by Seneca, the 


;;■ Google 


238 INFLUENCE OF 

Roman sage, should be dierislied. The sentiments of this sage prove tbat 
among the heathens a more pious idea of God existed than that given by 
the Bible, which represents him as jealous, and as punishing not only the 
individual, but his posterity, for an involuntary ignorance, which by a mere 
fiat, omnipoteney could correct. 

1244. G-od ia quite tolerant, according to Seneea, as respects any mis- 
apprehension of his pretensions, while, according to Moses, he is extremely 
intolerant. 

1245. Instead of teaching people to disHte and disesteem those who 
may differ from them, as to the designation, form, or name under which 
tho I>eity ia to be worshipped, it should be held that no person of sound 
mind would waste his time and his energies in worshipping that which he 
does not conscientiously believe to be entitled to adoration, any more than 
a man will hnowingly pay a debt to or court the favour of one to whom 
he owes nothing, and from whom he cannot expect any thing in retum. 
It might he argued as reasonably, that a person in paying by mistahc a 
forged draft, is less honest than in paying one which is genuine, as that a 
virtuous pagan is to have less favour with God than any other man, how- 
ever orthodox his creed. (See Theological Axioms, page 34.) 

1246. Were a lessee to pay a forged order for rent due to his landlord, 
would the latter strive to punish him for the mistake, especially if so 
wealthy as not fo feel the want of the money? But what would bo said 
of the landlord who, knowing that his lessee had received an erroneous 
impression as to the owner of his tenement, should allow him to pay year 
after year without any effort to prevent him from being cheated? Would 
not this deprive him of moral if not of legal claim to tlie rent f God is 
represented as omniscient, and consequently as cognizant of the misappre- 
hension which leads the pagan to kneel before his idol, and yet without 
either influencing his mind, or placing before him any evidence of his error, 
punishing him for his mistake. 

1247. It should, moreover, be an object to prove the greatness and good- 
ness of God, by making men acquainted with the wondrous mijucles of 
that universe of which a nook has been assigned to the inhabitants of this 
planet, which, in comparison with the totality, is as minute as any grain of 
sand which contributes to form our terrestrial globe is to the whole mass 
of which it constitutes a part — so insignificant. It should be an object to 
show how that "honesty is Hie hesi policy " — the had never being happy. 

1248. Those well-educated sectarians of different creeds should be held 
wanting in hnmility, who severally considered themselves free from that 
error in belief to which they deem all other men liable. It is conceived, 
also, that individuals are answerable for their opinions to God only, and 
that for one man to condemn another for not thinking as he himself thinks, 
is to violate the precept, "judge not, lest ye be judged," and the golden 
rule of acting toward other men as you would have them act toward you. 


,v Google 


ON THE MOIIALS OF CHRISTIANS. 239 

1249. Since ouv missions ara all intended to induce pagaas and otiUera 
to think freely as respects tlie tenets in which they have been educated, 
how can it he otherwise than proper for every person to think without fear 
of denunciation upon the tenets of his ancestry. Are we to deny our- 
selves the liberty of thought, which we claim for all wlio differ from us as 
to their creeds? 

1250. A sectarian who ia a Christian only as to observances, and is 
therefore really apracfical infidel, aeonses a, man of infidelity who ispj'nc- 
tically a Christian, so far as Christianity and virtne are associated, hecanse 
that man does not arrive at his morality hy the route which his denuncia- 
tor points out, but never follows to any good purpose. 

1251. While missionaries, who otight to know all that can be learned, do 
not agree among themselves, wherefore do they attempt to instmct the 
ignorant? How is the nnlettered pagan to judge between tlia Catholic, 
Calvinist, Unitarian, or Deist ? 

Additimial Eemarlcs respectiiig the Observance of the Sabbath, so called. 

1252. It is believed that a great majority of the people of the United 
States, while Eivourable to the observance of Sunday as a day of worship, 
of innocent recreation, and of moral and intellectual improvement, are ad- 
verse to the legal enforcement of restrictions introduced into Christianity 
by pnritanism. They do not consider the Jirst day of the week as liable 
to the command meat given to tho Jews for the observance of the seventh 
day; still less that the innocent recreation allowed to the Jews mtder that 
commandment is to he denied to Christians on that day of rest. The 
commandment forhids viork, hut does not prohibit recreation. That it 
was thus viewed by the Hebrews, is asserted upon the authority of a 
learned Jew. 

1253. It is conceived that the enforcement of any observance on secta- 
rian ground, is inconsistent with the freedom of conscience guaranteed by 
the Constitution of the United States. 

1254. If God intended the Sabbath to be kept so strictly, wherefore is 
it not kept holy by him ? why do not the rivers stop flowing, vegetables 
growing, and the wind stop blowing oa the day selected for the Sabbath, 
especially if a sparrow does not fail without his cognizance. 

1255. Precepts may lead, but example loill draw. Aware of this, is 
it conceivable that God would enjoin man to keep any day holy, and yet 
fail to keep it holy himself? Regulating tho blowing of the winds, as 
well as the falling of sparrows, when creating a storm, would he not he 
responsible for forcing the breach of the Sabbath upon the mariner ? 

1256. Ought the farmer to lose his crops in order to avoid working on 
Sunday f The Romans took advantage of the Hebrew Sabbath, to make 
their advances upon Jerusalem, the tenets of the Jews restricting them 
from resistance; yet there was no divine interference to sliield this chosen 


,v Google 


240 INFtUESCE OF BCEIPTUEE 

people against tlie heatlien conqueror, or to assist ttem ia the observance 
of the command ntent. 

1257. The plea oa which the commandment was founded is manifestly 
groundless — that an omnipotent God could he so weary a$ to rehire rest. 
But it has been suggested by enlightened Christiana, that the six days were 
periods of immense duration, and of course the seventh day being lite the 
rest could not be a day of twenty-four hours, like the Jewish Sabbath so 
called, but, on the contrary, an era comprising many ages. 

1/ Oreaiures he not so created as to love their Neigliiours as tliemselves, 
precepts can no more alter (/tern in this respect, f/ian change the Colour 
of their Hair, or Hie Number of Oubits in their Stature. 

1258. In the spheres, agreeably to the communication received from 
spirits, great importance is attached to the friendship, the affection, and 
the ardent love, which may subsist between congenial minds or souls; 
they seem to recognise love as something which cannot be felt by all to all ; 
so that while benevolence, charity, and sympathy may be sentiments enter- 
tained to mankincl generally, there are other sentiments which require con- 
centration, in order to have any efficacy. Of this nature ate parental, 
filial, and conjugal affection, as well as other intimate friendships. 

1259. Sympathy between the parent and child, between husband and 
wife, and likewise occasionally between brothers and sisters, or such friends 
as Pylades and Orestes, may be so strong as to induce the risk, if hot the 
loss of life, but this sympathy cannot be self-induced. Where, from prin- 
ciple, a person may determine to male the sacrifice, not from impulse, he 
cannot endow himself with the sensitiveness which would make him fee! 
for the sufferer as for himself. A being may admire such a sentiment, and 
have an ambition to be so actuated, bxit that would not create the sensibi- 
lity to which its esistence is due. It has been alleged that Napoleon's 
mother said of him, as I remember to have read somewhere ; " He wbhed to 
have a good heart." The most that can be done is to act as if we did love, 
and consequently sympathize, so as to feel the pains and privations of an- 
other as if they were our own. But it were inconsistent to entertain a love 
so powerful and peculiar, and not give our time, thought, services, or atten- 
tion to the object of our affection. It were inconsistent so to love and keep 
at a distance, and behave toward the object as if we were indifferent. But 
were the sentiment to be felt universally, or even generally, there would 
be such a cutting up of our time, service, or. attention, that, as respects 
any individual in particular, it would be nugatory, and might as well not 
esist. There would likewise be such a multiplicity and perplexity of 
yearnings that it would distract the heart, perhaps place it in a less happy 
condition than if it were devoid of any affection whatever. 

1260. Although temporal life may at times be sacrificed by one being 
to save that of another, it is manifestly because the being who makes the 


;;■ Google 


OM THE MOKALS OP CHEISTIAKS, 241 

sacrifice is constituted so nobly as to endure less pain under tlie circum- 
staaces in question in making than avoiding self-immolation. But can 
any one who has not been so organized and educated as to malie such a 
sacrifice, he sufficiently changed by preaching, or monition, to undergo Belf- 
tmmolation to save a fellow-creature ? 

1261. Is it reasonable to order, direct, or advise people to love, espe- 
cially on the part of any one who by his aeknowleged omnipotency could 
30 constitute them as to sympathize to any required extent ? I admit, 
that it may be consistent to urge them to act toward others, as far as pos- 
sible, as if they ■were loved.* 

1262. Should not the great object of cultivation be sympathy and bene- 
Tolenee, which are general in their nature ? Wo may deeply sympathize 
with a sufferer, even with a brute, whom we do not love. Benevolence 
should we Eot also cultivate, by endeavouring habitually to take the moat 
favourable view of those around ua which oui observation and reason can 
permit? Does it not argue a want of diserimination to treat love as a 
senliment, to be entertained toward all other mortals by mere volition? 
Is it reasonable that Christ, op any other teacher, assuming to be missiona- 
ries of the Creator, should enjoin us to love, when the capacity for that 
sentiment manifestly varies through organization and education, derived 
from that Creator by various human beings, as much nearly, as the opposite 
propensities of the wolf and dog? Behold the difference between the 
elephant and rhinoceros: the former capable of a canine fidelity and affec- 
tion, the latter irretrievably hostile; and again between a wild elephant 
and one tamed by education. 

1263. Were his organization and edxication dependent on himself, it 
might be reasonable to say to a. human being, Love your neighbour as your- 
self, love your enemies ; but how can that Doity who determines man's race 
and bis parentage, and of course whether he be a savage or a civilized 
man, whether a Thug or a real Christian, if such a thing can be, — how can 
that Deity require a being to do that which is irreconcilable with his pas- 
sions, opinions, and habits, derived from nature and education, as well as 
the examples set by those around him f 

1264. The inutility of precepts in controlling human passions, may be 
seen in the history of Christendom, in which, as already urged, the morals 
and conduct of mankind, with very few exceptions, have been diametrically 
opposite to that of their divine Master, so called. Who have been more 


^ Qod ia mnde out to ba a strange bungler. Though omnipotent, he docs not maka his 
creatures as he wishes tbem to V>s; and although omniscient, haa t<i Enbject them to ttial to 
diflcoTer what they are. Ho dooa not inform them of that which he wielea them to believe, 
but punishes them and their children to Ihe thu'd and fourth geneialion forhia own omission. 
For no other roaKin than his hnving afforded to a pai'lJoular uaUon more knowledge of his 
will than ho had afforded to otlars, he gives them a right (o estirpato thoir neighbours 
and lake possession of their lands. 


16 


;;■ Google 


242 INFLUENCE OS 

aggressive tban the great majority of professed Ohristiaos? Who have 
been more actuated hy cupidity ? Yet these votaries have been, for the 
most part, vooiferoas in their professions of devotedness to Christ, mat- 
ing him the Son of Gocl as well as their teacher, and too often cruelly 
maltreating those who have denied his divinity. 

1265. Both on the pact of the ancient Jews, or on that of modern Chris- 
tians, religion has heen made an esonse or a plea for despoiling unbelievers 
of their patrimony. In the contention respecting the right to Oregon, 
the great question, on which judgment was to turn, was, which of alt of the 
Christian potentates claiming it, was the first to lay his longing eyes upon 
the object of contention ? It has been shown that the massacre of whole 
nations involved no criminality, provided they were pagans. David put to 
the sword the pagan communities, man, woman, and child, during which 
time Jehovah was with him. The pagans being mere vermin in the esti- 
mation of the Jewish deity, the wrongs done to them were not cited as 
among David's misdoings. No Nathan came to call him to account for 
his flagitious conduct to them, or to Achish, (1 Sam, sxvii. 8 to 12.) 

1266. In his correspondence with the British minister, respecting ter- 
ritorial rights granted to the English by the Mosquito king, Mr. Clayton 
urged that the aborigines never had been admitted to have any rights to 
their own lands, which could interfere with Christian claimants. 

Altaslcs upon the atitlientidty of Scripture cannot endanger the prevalent 
m,orality, viMch, wMle it is superior to that of the Old Testament, iitdv- 
cales a reckhssnest of the precepts of Christ, excepting so far as tltey 
ma/ce faith a counterpoise for sin. 

1267. In the preceding pages, I have endeavoured to show that the ex- 
isting morality of Christendom' does not owe its existence to Christianity. 
My object has been to do away the apprehension that this morality would 
be deprived of its foundation were Spiritualism or any other innovation to 
be accredited which would be inconsistent with revelation. But I hope 
I have shown that whatever merit may be possessed by the existing state 
of morals, it cannot be ascribed to any influence exercised by those pre- 
cepts of Christ which are not only neglected, but acted in diametric oppo- 
sition to. 

1268. Another cause of alarm has been that it would weaken that belief 
in a future state of rewards and punishments which is so essential to encou- 
rage virtue and repress vice. But it has been pointed out that the authority 
of Moses is against the existence of a future state, not merely negatively, 
but positively, so far as any anthority is given to him as inspired by God. 
For what stronger argument need there be that there is no state of exist, 
enco beyond the grave, than the faot that the being who of all mankind 
solely had immediate converse with the Deity, should not have learned 
from him the all-important fact ? If, as now held generally among Chris- 


;;■ Google 


243 

tianSj an unbeliever ia a future state is culpable in the sight of GocI, as 
wellas theirs, and disqualified from testifying in courts of justice, can it 
be conceived that God would have failed to oommunieate a knowledge of 
immortal existence to his favourite lawgiver; or how could that lawgiver 
have been so devoid of that deaire for immortality as to have been satis- 
fied to remain ignorant ? 

1269. Materialists who have become converts to Spiritualism, all repre- 
sent themselves as having entertained a great ausiety to believe in immor- 
tality prior to the blessed, cherished truth having been niiide evident to 
their thirsting souls. 

1270. Converts from Materialism to Spiritualism, wbo have shown much 
zeal in the investigation of the subject, and eagerness in believing in im- 
mortality aa soon as evidence was obtained, were, by certain sectarians, 
doomed to hell for their heresy. Yet this Hebrew materialist, who made 
no use of his transcendent opportunities of aequiring eotreot knowledge 
of futurity from the Deity, is made an object of veneration, and the book 
which he wrote, while devoid of this pre-eminently important information, 
is worshipped as an idol. 

1271. His allegations that God authoriaed the Israelites to hon-oto in 
order to purloin, or that he authorized the murder of the people misled by 
Aaron to worship the golden eajf, are manifestly as false as blasphemous. 
Then why imagine that mankind can suffer by the substitution of a belief 
in a future state associated with the purest principles of morality, for the 
books of Moses, which sanction crimes and discredit immortality? 

1272. As respects any subsequent alleged inspirations to which Phari- 
sees, thepapisfsofJudea, owed their jij-q/essecZ belief in a futurd state, in the 
first place, we have the authority of Christ for viewing them as hypocrites : 
esternally, like whited sepulchres, internally, as no less corrupt than dead 
men's bones. Of course there is reason, on this account, to doubt whether 
they acquired a sincere belief in a future state from any part of Scripture. 
But evidently it did not make them moral. Their immorality, on the eon- 
fj-ary, was made more hideous by the cloak of false religion. Nothing is 
more detestable than to see religion in men's mouths, with cupidity and 
unprincipled ambition at their hearts. Yet this much may be said for the 
Pharisees, that they had not professed themselves C'hnstians, and thus 
subject to those precepts of Jesus which place the acquisition of wealth 
on a level with felony as respects the accessibility to heaven. The Pha- 
risees of Christendom, even those who assumed to be exclusively the depo- 
sitories of revelation and sole espounders of God's word, have been 
aisolulely as wicked as the Pharisees, and relatively more wicked by the 
monstrous discordancy of their course with their professed devotion to the 
ultra precepts of the alleged Son of their God. 

1273. It has been shown, moreover, that although Christ occasionally 
referred to hell, yet be gave inconsistent views of it, (738, 764.) At one 


,;■ Google 


244 INFLUENCE OE SCRIPTURE 

time it is five, into wljint any one is to be doomed for allegiag his trothei' 
a fool, whether this allegation he true or not; at another, it ia utter darle- 
ness, with weeping aud gnashing of teeth ; and of course there could ho no 
&e. Then tlie disgusting description ^ven hy Josephua is sanctioned, 
agi-eeablj to which, like the Elysium and Erebus of the heathen, both hell 
and heaven are subterranean localities, but separated by a lake of unquench- 
able fire, across which Abraham and Dives converse. At another time, 
heaven is aboye ; he ascends to heaven in sight of his apostles, yet the 
penitent thief is to be with him in paradise, which, agreeably to Gfenesis 
and Josephua, is upon the earth on the river Tigris, near the Persian Gulf. 
But wherever the Elysium and Erebus of the gospel may be, all souls, ac- 
cording to it, are to romiua in their graves till the " last day," and then, 
like Samuel, being called up from their tombs, are to be sorted into two 
squadrons, of which one is f« go to an undescvibed heaven, the other fo the 
" heli fire prepared for the devil and his angels from the beginning of the 
world," The injustice which would follow from a judgment of this kind, 
by which two souls differing from each other only by a shade would meet 
a fate so different that one would have to go to heaven, the other to hell to 
remfun eternally, is so manifest, that, like the ulti-aism of the same record, it 
loses its effect altogether upon people in general. 

1274. It must be cJear that the great mass of professed Christiana are 
very little restrained by their fears of such an eternity of punishment. Had 
Christ any specific knowledge of the kingdom of heaven to which he occasion- 
ally alluded, wherefoi-e did he not convey that knowledge to his disciples ? 
But they seem to have learned no more from Jesus than Moses did from 
Jehovah, and hence their querulous inquiry as to what would be their 
reward. But the promise of judgeships, (743 to 745,) of worldly pre- 
eminence, was a satire upon thfera. It argues that he considered them as 
worldly-minded. Had he known the world to be looked upon by the apos- 
tles as beneath consideration in comparison with immortal life, he would 
hardly have insulted them by the offer. But their tone has a great deal 
too much of the Swiss in it. Had they been so very dull, or Christ so re- 
served, that the idea wasnot conveyed to them that in acting the part of pious, 
virtuous men, they would have the reward promised to the righteous in 
the other world. 

12T5. Thank God, no spiritualist who reads with attention the commu- 
nications given in this work, will ever inquire as to the extent of selfish 
reward which he is ta enjoy ! He would be impressed by his general 
knowledge with the idea that the less any being is actuated by selfish aspi- 
ration, the greater his capacity for happiness and his pretensions to the 
means of felicity. 


;;■ Google 


ON TUE MOUALS OF ClIRISTIANS. 245 

TYifi Doctrine of a peculiar Belief being necessary to Salvation, and a 
cmmterpoise for Sin, a source of discord originallt/ confined to Judaa, 
earpanded witli Ohviiiianily and Islamdem; verifying Christ's allega- 
tion, that he came "as a Sword, not as a ^kssenger of Peace." — Su- 
perior Morality/, and far more unquestionable Gertainfy of the Cojiimu- 
nications from the Spirit World. 

1276. It were in vwn, I tliiak, to find in tte apple of diacord, iu the 
mieohiefa let loose from Pandora's bos, or any other figurative exemplifica- 
tion, any idea adequate to convej my conception of tte mischief done to 
tlie world by inti-odueing the dogma, that belief could be the means of 
salvatioa ; so that if God had so constituted or so sitnated a people, that 
they could not believe what was cotijmunicated to them by certain itinerant 
preachers, it should be vrorse for them in the day of judgment than for 
Sodom and Gomorrah ; two cities which God had destroyed becaiise he had 
not so organized them, and circumstanced them, aa to make them as vir- 
tuous as he, subsequently to their ci-eation, deaired. 

1277. Christ fully JTiatified this opinion, when he alleged himself to 
have come as a sword, not as a messenger of peace, and to set father and 
son, mother and daughter, &c., at variance with each other, making the 
people of a man's own household his foes. It may be said that he iden- 
tified himself with piety and rectifude; so that it was for the virtue of which 
he, as the Son or missionary of God, was the representative, that ho plead ; 
but this pious devotion has much more of self in it than people imagine. 
They identify God or Christ with the welfare of their souls and bodies. It 
it through the hope of benefit to these that they take such i deep iuterest 
in God. 

127S. But is it not strange that the Oh an 1 n 1 tl 1 be treated 
as a harbinger of peace and harmony, whnwh sa ne nto the 
world, came the intolerance, before confined o Judeo and wl by ils 
founder it is repveseofed as a sword, to se e h d e 1 1 es by ntvoduo- 
ing the poisoning idea that belief could be a vntue or a sm ? It seems to 
have been the cause of a peculiar animosity which baa always accompanied 
its progress, if not its endurance, and which set the esample to Moham- 
med of attaching the same fanatical idea to another basis, comporting with 
his individual aggrandizement, at the espense of much human misery. 

1279. The language of Christ held to his apostles, showing that he con- 
sidered them as thirsting for temporal honours, and his aspiration for the 
thivne of his glori/, situated, of course, in the same mundane region, may 
warrant the surmise that his views did not differ from those of Mohammed 
as to the ultimate object, however much he may have found it necessary, 
under the Roman despotism, to fight with the tongue instead of the sword. 

1280. But how cau this sentiment be justified in which he makes devo- 
tion to himself irreconcilable with the holy ties betweeu the child and his 


;;■ Google 


246 XSPLUENCE OP SCRIl'TORE 


parents, or tlic parents and tlieir children ? Tte God of Spiritualism 
woxJd view parental and filial loye as the truest piety. He aslis only that 
love. He lias not constituted us to have that sort of love for tim. Had 
he wished it, he would have made us so, as to be thus actuated. 

1281. " He that believeth in me shall have eternal life." "Thy faith 
hath made thee whole." These allegations produced a change in the world 
at large. That bigotry and animosity which led the Jews to consider that 
all who did not agree with them in creed, were objects of spoliation, mas- 
sacre, rape, enslavement, were now extended to other parts of the world. 

1282. No doubt the success of this exclusive notion, on the part of 
Christ, led to its adoption by Mohammed, and thus some hundred millions 
have been actuated by this mischievous impression, which is now at work 
on the Russian territory. It has been already suggested that this idea 
always begets persecution to the extent of the power to exercise it. While 
seeing the horrid consequences of this error in the persecution of the 
Fi-ench Calvinists, Calvin could not avoid the diabolic impulse in the in- 
stance of Servetus. It cannot be necessary to recall to our readers the 
maiiy bloody persecutions and religious wars whicb have disgraced Chria- 
tecdom far more than any other part of the globe, nor to allude to the 
tyranny reciprocally employed by any sect having complete ascendancy. 
Yet with these consequences before the mind — the facts which I have ad- 
duced to prove that the morality of Christendom is not due to Scripture — 
the tocsin is sounded wherever any effort is made to get rid of the crimes 
and indecencies of the Old Testament, or the error of making bigoted 
belief, under the name of faith, a primary oonsideralion on the part of the 
New Testament. People are taught that every tling good is duo to Scrip- 
ture; that thenco alone can we get any correct notions of morality, any 
knowledge of a future state. The idea is entertained that Christianity 
made a great change for the better as soon as it prevailed, and that with- 
out it we should sink into a state of demoralization. 

1283. Consistently with my experience of the effect of a confident be- 
lief in a future slate of existence on my own mind, as already suggested, 
I was always under the impression, prior to my conversion, that those who 
believed in a future state must be happier; and if that belief were not asso- 
ciated with mischievous error, that it should not be assailed. The idea 
that what I considered aa bigotry, should be a counterpoise for sin, I did 
consider a mischievous error, tending to substitute devotion for good works, 
and as I saw, too, made nations selfish. The love of hoarding was very 
commonly coupled with this selfishness, which operated at once to produce 
efforlfl to lay up treasure on earth by close dealing, and in heaven by strict 
sectarianism, bigotry, and intolerance. Hut, nevertheless, I was restrained 
from any effort to cure these errors, from the conviction that religion, un- 
accompanied by the expectation of a future state, can never take hold of 
the human heart. 


;;■ Google 


OM TUL MORALS 01 CIUIISTIANS. 247 

1284. In a dialogue between tlie spirit of Wm. Penn and that of Thos. 
Paine, the former points out this error : "You strove to take from your 
readers one of their greatest comforts under the afflictions of mortal life." 
Foreieeing this would have prevent«d me from writing tto Age of Reason. 
Any set of skeptics who should only coincide in disbelieving, could never 
adhere together nor make many converts. The prospect of future life 
must be promised confidently, or there would be few proselytes. 

1285. But the spiritual manifestations, and the intellectual, the heart- 
felt intercommunion with my relatives, friends, and the immortal, great, and 
good Washington, now enable me to assert that there is not, nor can bo 
upon any record of the past, any evidence so complete, as that presented 
to my senses, conourrently with a multitude of observers. I now, there- 
fore, feel myself warranted to speafe out what my reason justifies and my 
conscience dictates ; and Iiave not hesitated to express the opinions which 
are spread out upon tho pages immediately preceding that which contains 
this esposition. 

12S6. With a view to show how much more happy was the state of 
reciprocal sectarian feeling in the world before this idea of making belief 
an object of vital importance, I will quote here, first a passage from Mo- 
sheim's Ecclesiastical History, vol. i,, and will subjoin some pages from 
"Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire;" following these up 
with quotations from Bishop Hopkins, of Vermont : 

Quotation from MosJieim. 

1287. " Eacb nation suffered its neighbours to follow their own method 
of worship, to adore their own gods, to enjoy their own rites and ccrc- 
m Id ed ! pi t th d ty f t ts 

1 gi m tt Th y 1! ! k d p th w Id g t mp 

dldt p y fwhh tal 

fl pesdd dthtthf Idbhldwtl 

tptthgdfth t f trag tpytm t 

th 

1288 Th K m d th t 1 t th ampl t m 

A tl f m wh h 11 m d d 1 tl 

m ly f th th b th 1 t to th 1 b t 

Ih by tl th w 1 f 1 th 1 P 1 f 

i th d f h m b -ai d all t th w Jd 

Thfft ff <nfp hppl gttd&c 

common to man as his natuve as a man, and could not fail to produce a 
corresponding similarity in the objects of his superstitious veneration. To 
have nothing in common with the aiready established notions of mankind,, 
to bear no features of resemblance to their halluoinafiona and follies, to. 
be nothing like them, to be to nothing so unlike, should be the essential! 
predications and necessary credentials of the ' wisdom which is from above.'' 


;;■ Google 


248 INFLUENCE OF SCRIPTURE 

1289. "It lias, however, been alleged by learaed men, with conYinciog 
arguments of probability, 'tkat the principal deities of all the Gentile 
nations resembled each other extremely, in their essential cliaraeters; 
and if so, their receiving the same names could not introduoa much eon- 
fnsion into mythology, since they were probably derived from one common 
source. If the Thor of the ancient Celts was the same in dignity, cha- 
racter, and attributes with the J-ujtiter of the Greeks and Eonians, where 
was the impropriety of giving Lim the same name ? Dies Jbvis is still 
the Latin form for our Thor'a day. When the Greeks found in-other 
countries deities that resembled their own, they persuaded the worshippers 
of those foreign gods that their deities were the same that were honoured 
in Greece, and were, indeed, themselves convinced that this was the case. 
In consequence of this, the Greeks gave the names of their gods to those 
of other nations, and the Romans in this followed their example. Hence 
we find the names of Jupiter, Mai-s, Mercury, Venus, &c. frequently 
mentioned in the more recent monuments and inscriptions which have 
been found among the Oauls and Germans, though the ancient inhabitants 
of those countries had worshipped iio gods under such deaomi nations." 

Quotation froTn Gibbmi. 

1290. " The policy of the emperors and the senate, as far as it con- 
cerned reli^on, was happily seconded by the reflections of the enlightened, 
and by the habits of the superstitious, part of their subjects. The various 
modes of worship which prevailed in the Roman world were all considered 
by the people aa equally true; by the philosopher, aa equally false; and 
by the magistrate, as equally useful. And thus toleration produced, not 
only mutual indulgence, but even religious concord. 

1291. "The superstition of the people was not imbittered by any mix- 
ture of theological rancour; nor was it confined by the chains of any spe- 
culative system. I'he devout polytheist, though fondly attached to his 
national rites, admitted with implicit faith the different religions of the 
earth. Fear, gratitude, and curiosity, a dream or an omen, a singular 
disorder, or a distant journey, pei-petually disposed him to multiply the 
articles of his belief, and to enlai^e the list of his protectors. The thin 
texture of the pagan mythology was interwoven with various, but not dis- 
■ eordant, materials. As soon as it was allowed that sages and h wh 
■had lived, or who had died, for the benefit of their count y ^ 
ialt«d to a state of power and immortality, it was universally c nf ss d th t 
vtiiey desLrved, if not the adoration, at least the reverence, of U mank nd 

The deities of a thousand groves and a thousand streams p ss d n 
peace, their local and respected influence; nor could the Rom n wh d 
pieaited the wrath of the Tiber, deride the Egyptian who presented his 
ofttimg to the beneficent genius of the Nile. The visible powers of na- 
ture, the planets, and the elemente, were the same throughout the a 


,v Google 


jN mi. M R4LV or ruaisTiws 219 

The mvisxble govetnois of the moial world weie laevitablj cast m a simi 
lai mould (f fiction ind allej,ory E\eiy vntue and even Tue, acquired 
its diTiiio leprtseiitative, CTerj irt ind profesaiin its pation, wh se attii 
bute«, m the mobt distant ages and cuuntnes were umtoriii!^ dei \ed from 
the character of their peeulnr a otaries A lepuhlic oi gods of surh p 
posite temppis and interests lequired, in c\eij ajstem, the moderating 
hand of i s-upremc magistrate, who, by the progiess of knowledge and 
fltttery, wis gradually inve'sti'd with the sublime perfections of an Eternal 
Pan,nt ind in omnipotent hloniioh bucli was the mild spiutuf inti- 
quity, that the nations weie less attentive to the difference than ii the 
resemblance of then religious worship The Greek, the Bomin, ml the 
Barbiiiio, ts they met befoie their re'spectue altars, eisily pt-rsuidad 
themselves that under vaiious nimes tnd with \aiions cerem nies they 
idored the same deities The elegant mythology of Homei gate a be in 
tiful and almost legular form to the p jly the sm of the anoient worl 1 

1292 " The philosDphers of Greece deduced (hen mor ih fi jin the ni 
titre of man rithei than from that of God They melitated howc(ei, 
on (he Divme Natuie is i very cunuua and impoit'snt speculation, and 
in the piofound inqmiy they displayed the strength and weal ness it the 
human undeistanding Of the toui most cekbiated schools, the Stoics 
and the Platonists endeavoured to reconcile the jarring intercits of reison 
ind piety They have left us the moat sublime proofs of the esistHuco 
and perfections of the fiist cause but is it was impossible for them to 
conoeiTe the creation of matter, the \torkmen in the fetoio philosophy was 
not sufficiently distinguisbed from the work, while, on the contrary, the 
spiritual God of Plato and his disciples resembled nn idea rather thin a 
substance. The opinions of the Academics and Epicureans were of a less 
religious cast ; but while the modest science of the former induced them to 
doubt, the positive ignorance of the latter urged them to deny the providence 
of a Supreme Kuler. Tlie spirit of inquiry, prompted by emulation and 
supported by freedom, has divided the public t-eacliers of philosophy into a 
variety of contending sects; but the ingenuous youth who, from every 
part, resorted to Athens and the other seats of learning in the llomnn 
empire, were alike instructed in every school to reject and to despise the 
religion of the multitude. Hoiv, indeed, was it possible that a philosopher 
should accept, as divine truths, the idle tales of the poets, and the inco- 
herent traditions of antiquity, or that he should adore as gods those im- 
perfect beings whom he must have despised as men ! Against such un- 
worthy adversaries Cicero condescended to employ the arms of reason and 
(, but the satire of Lucian was a much more adequate as well as 
8 weapon. Wo may be well assured that a writer conver- 
sant with the world would never have ventured to expose the gods of his 
country to public ridicule, had they not already been the objects of secret 
contempt among the polished and enlightened orders of society. 


;;■ Google 


250 INFLUENCE OF SCRIPTURE 

12)3 N fci\itl itandn, tlie faliomole lelig ou wIulIi pi \ 1 lin 
the nge of the \.Titonmes Ijoth the lateiest of the priests and the ciedn- 
hty of tte people were suf6 leatly respected In then ivntinga and con- 
versation the philosophers of ontiqnity iSiberted the iDdependent dignity 
of reason huf they resigned their tctions to the commtnia of law and of 
custom Viewing with a smile f pity and indul^i-nce, the ^ar oua eirora 
of the vulgar they diligently prai,tised the ceremonies of then fathers, 
devoutly trec[uented the temples of the gods and soiuetimes conleacend- 
in^ to act a pait on the theatre of superstition they eoni,ealed the senti- 
ments of atiithei>:tiindei the aaceidotal 1 be'* Keascneraof such a temper 
weie scarcely inclined to wi ingle ah ut their respective modes of fiith or 
of worship. It was indifferent to them what shape the folly of the mul- 
titude might choice to assume; and they approached with the same in-, 
ward contempt, and the same external reverence, the altars of the Lybian, 
the Olympian, or the Capitoline Jupiter. 

1294. " It is not easy to conceive from what motives a spirit of persecu- 
tion could induce itself into the Roman oounoils. The magistrates could 
Hot he actuated by a blind though honest bigoh-y, since the magistrates 
were themselves philosophers, and the schools of Athens had given laws 
to the senate. They could not be impelled by ambition or avarice, as the 
temporal and ecclesiastical powers were united in the same hands. The 
pontiffs were chosen among the most illustrious of the senators, and the 
office of Supreme Pontiff was constantly exercised by the empei-ors them- 
selves They knew and valued the advintaces of religion as it is con- 
n ted w tl 1 nra nt Th y n n Uh pnbl ft 1 wh h 

hum n thmnrstthppl Tlynn dtl t,fli 
tn tntmntfplyndthy ptdasthfim 

t b d f BO ty th useiul j u n U t th n th f t e 

If th m fpejy mtas dlypnhdhythan g 
god ? But wh I th y kn wl d 1 th g n 1 d nf g f 1 n 


thjw 


n n d that tl 


a u 


mod 


f w 1 


p nt 


b ted lA 


to th 


1 tayju p 


nd tht 


n e y 


u ty 


th f ra f 


p rsit 


n wb h h 1 


d th 


n i 


n f tm 


and 


p n was 


th b 


t 


i pt i t th 1 m 


te nd t 


t 


nh b t nt 


A 


nl tat 


yf 


F 


n ly d p 1 d tl 


qu 


h d 


n t f tl 1 


nt tat 


f th 


k 


d and th h n m nt 


f th tempi 


b t n 


th s 


f th 


1 


n h h th y d 


d f 


in 


tl n 


t th 


y u f mly 


^p 


rh 


d th ndul n 
p vin f G ul 


nd n 


I 
d 


t t f i 
nd d nly 


h P n 


n^u 


n K pt n 


t th 


u 


! t 1 t n 


TJ I 


th 


I P 


t St 


f 1 1 hn 


Inm 


fl tl Emp 


rsTb 


dCl liL 


PP 


dth d n 


g u 


p 


w f I D uils 


h t th 


P 


ts th m 


1 es th 


d nnd 


th 


It 


ltd 1 


f 1 h 


y til tl 


t 1 1 


t t f 


, Google 


ON THE MORALS OP CHRISTIANS. 251 

1295. "Rome, the capital of a great monaroLy, wag incessantly filled 
with subjects and atraiigers from everj part of the worlcl, who all intro- 
duced and enjojed the favourite superstitiona of their native country. 
Every city in the empire was justified in maintaining the purity of its an- 
cient ceremonies; and the Eoman senate, using the common priyilege, 
sometimes interposed to check this inundation of foreign riles. The Egyp- 
tian superstition, of all the moat contemptible and abject, was frequently 
prohibited; the temples of Serapis and Isis demolished, and their wor- 
shippers banished from Borne and Italy. But the zeal of fanaticism pre- 
Ttuled over the cold and feeble efforts of policy. The esilea returned, the 
proselytes multiplied, the temples were restored with increasing splendour, 
and lais and Serapis at length assumed their place among the Koman dei- 
ties. Nor was this indulgence a departure fi-om the old maxims of go- 
vernment. In the ■porest ages of the commonwealth, Cybele and .^scula- 
pius had been invited by solemn embassies, and it was customaiy to tempt 
the protectors of besieged cities by the promise of more distinguished 
honours than they possessed in their native country. Rome gradually be- 
came the common temple of her subjects, and the freedom of the city was 
bestowed oa all the gods of mankind." 

For more than a thousand years tJie Grecian or Roman Catlwlia Glorgy 
loere (Ae sole depositaries of the loord of God, so called, and Segida- 
tort of Religions morals } yet'during that time the Glergy were for the 
inost part pre-entinent in vice, as compared with the rest of the com- 
WMnityj whence it is inferred that, li/ce Pope Boitiface, the wicked 
Glergy in general were really unbelievers in the truth of the Go»pel. 
If the morals of the /nodem Clergy are better, it is neither from, the 
harbaroiis example fwmished them, m the Old Testament, nor ^leultra 
precepts of the Gospel ; being too much enlightened to he governed in 
practice by either. 

1296. " OriOEN eomplning of Uie neglect aad Inattention of bis day, tbrongh the in- 
oreaee of noridlineas. Cjprian nbaai thE satae time moui-ns over the progress of doge- 
neraoy, and Ensabius, tonnrd the close of (be third eeutiu'y, lameuta the coicnption of the 
primitive mDrulit; in strDng terms of censnre. 

1297. "Bnt jet snperslition waa mpidly advanoJng, and the oompliunts of priestly cor- 
ruption and general licenliousness ivere on the luarease. The eleclJau of Pope Damnsus 
was the oocasian of a public riot, in Khich bis "partisaas besieged the obardi where the 
friends of tlie other candidate veie assembled, broke doirn the doors, and uncovered Ihe 
roof; and in the slamofal battle that ensued, one hundred and thirty-seven persons were 
slain, of both seies. The splendour of the Roman bishops had grown so rapidly, that the 
heathen hiatoiion Ammionns MaioalhnuB prononneod the episcopal style of living t(i be 
superior to that of a king. Toward tha close of the fourth century, Chrysostom deferdad 
t^e new system of monkery, on (he ground that Christians baij become so corrupt, especi- 
ally in tha large cities. Jerome before him bad bitterly eomph^ned of the prevailing 
degeneraay, and beeame 'a monk in order to escape from it. St. Angustine lamented that 
many Christians in his day (about A. D. 389) were snperslitious, that they adored the 
sepulchres and piatnres of the siuntB, and ate and drank to escess at funerals, under the 
excuse tbat it was an aot of religion. 

1293. "The fifth century was not likely to improve the state of ihe church, but on tha 
contrary it witnessed a rapid deterioration. The tesUmony of Salvion is set forth by 
Flenry, proving that among the Koman Ciiristians there was much heathen idolatry re- 


, Google 


p scgiptdub 

toainiog; that the greatac part nera onlj Cbriadims in namo, and worse tliftii the boriio- 
Tiona in life nnd oonvarBatlon. 

laSfl. In the aisth cBDtury, toward the close, wa soe Pope Qregorj the Oi-onl ottriliut- 
iDg oJI the public calamities to the ambition of (he bishops, nbo coDoeakd the teeth of 
ivolvos under tha face of sheep. 

1300. " The aavantk eeutnrj. We begin to see the frnitg of clerical calibaoy in tlio rale 
catabliahed by the council of Toledo, thntthe illeeitimate children of the clergy, from tlio 
bishop down to the Bub-deacon, ahonld be slarea in tha ohurob where theh' tolbers served. 
It is to ba pi'esumed that this canon wns intended to diaeonrage and amend the ineonti- 
nencB of tho clergy, but tha adoption of such an extraordinary law proves pliunly the 
prevalence of the evil. So general hod the worldliuess of tha clergy heoome, that in Ibe 
latter part of this century the most eminent bishops of France took great part in politioal 
matters, and in time of war marched at ttia head of their tioops, like the lay barons. 

1301. " One of tha most important events of the eighth century was the forgery of the 
Decretals, by whieli all the primitive bisbopa of Rome, from Clement to Sylvesler, irore 
mode to utter tha most estrovagant dootrinea conceming ibe poiver of the pope, the sn, 
preniacy of Rome, and the authorily to jndge tha otber biBhops, ivhile the pope himBoif 
could be Judged by none. Xat Buoh was the ignorance of the times, that this forgery was 
saccessful thronghonl tlie whole Latin Oburch, and remidned nnquesUoned for eight 
hundred years together. Another strong proof of this prevailing ignorance is found in 
tlie course of the bishops at the second council of Hice, where pretended miracles per. 
formed by images wei'e cited from false documents without any suapioion of Mistake. 

ISOZ. " Tha parliament of Worms presented to tlie emperor a request from all the poo- 
plo that the bishops should no longer go out at the head of their troops, but should stay in 
their dioceses and assist the army by their prayera ; and Charlemagne willingly granted tha 
patilion. Bat it is remaikabls t^atthis application came not from the eleigyj babfiom the 
laity i and it nus so little regarded oflenrard, that we shall find some warlike biahopa even 
nmong the popes themaelvea. This same emperor endeavoai'ed with great zeal to purify 
the morals of the clergy ; and hia reproofs of their worldliness, their avarice, and their 
prostitntion of sacred things for the sake of gain, are remarkable monuments of his own 
good sense and of tha poiTuption which infested the church in the ninth century. After 
his death, which oconrrod in A. D. B14, some churches inToked him as a sunt, notwithstand- 
ing ho had four wives and five conoubineB. 

1303. "The year E44 was signalized by tha introdnction of false relics at Dijon in 
Pronoe, by which, neyertbeleaa, several renmrkable onres were snppcsed to have been 
effected, until tha fraud waa discovered; but the proceeiliugs show ^at such impoatm-es 
were oomnon. In A. d. S50 a poor presbyter named Gothesehalk, who bod adopted high 
views on predestination, was not only deposed from the priesthood, but afterword pub- 
licly -whipped, as an incorrigible herelao, and caatinto prison, whore he died after ^gbteen 
years' confinement. Yet bis docti-ine was defended by other bishops of high reputation, 
and hia pnuisbmcut was denounced as cruel and unjust. 

1304. "In A. D. SGI, a violent cubage took place at Eome, in which Gonthier, the 
Arebbishop of Cologne, protesting ogainat the judgment of Pope Nlcholaa, told his 
brother Hildwin, who waa a priest, to place his protoslation on the tomb of Saint Peter : 
that is, ui»n tha altar of the church. Accordingly, Hildwin entered into the churob 
with several followers, all armed, and aa tha keepers opposed him, he repulsed them witli 
blows, and killed one of them upon the spot. Be then oocomplished his purpose, and re- 
treated sword in hand. The anecdote is only of importanee as a proof of the spirit of the 
ago. The first instunce of a parUol interdiot ooourB in A. n. BJl. The ordeals of boiling 
water, cold water, and red-hot iron wera employed in this age, to determine questions of 
Justioo under the anapiees of the priasta; and even kinga employed them, with all faith 
and confidanoa. O^he Sake of Naptea hod formed an alliance with the Saracens, which 
tha pope disproved ; and aa ha refused to break it on the order of the ponti^ he was es- 
oommnnioated. The Bishop Athanasins, who was the dnke's own broUier, took him and 
put out his eyea, aant him as priacner to Rome, and enuBed himself to be proclaimed Duke 
of Naplaa in hia place. The pope approved this conduct highly, and praised the bishop for 
loving God more than his brother, and putting out the right aye which had offended, 
according to Scripture. This pontjff was John VIIL, and the time was A. D. STf. 

Seasons/or iwi proceeding farther with Quotation of Details. 
1305. It would occupy too muet space, and make too wide a digression, 
were I to proceed in quoting tlie details of the evidence showing tiie state 
of morals in Christendom, dining the Middle Ages to liave been much he- 
low that which the heathen displayed during the period immediately suc- 
ceeding the adveat of Christ, according to Mosheim and Gibbon. But 


;;■ Google 


OF CimiSTIANS. 253 

slthough the reader should not be enabled to form an opinion directly, by 
a perusal of tl d t 1 f t tdy I n enabled to submit that of the 
right revei-end p It by Tfh m th j L ve been compiled. 

1306. The f t des tt t that for more than a thousand years, 
of all the upp 1 f so ty th Christian clergy were pre-eminently 
wicked, frequ t mplai t h b n made against them by the laity, 
notwithatandi th 1 p t to which complainants were liable. 
The popes we g rally as p m t in wickedness as high in official 
distJnctJOD. Th mm p f B h p Hopkins, which I subjoin, fully 
conSrias the imp a> wh 111 deavoured to convey : 

1307. " I h IT g th history of your ohutch, with the 
single aim of p * J ^ ecords, the rise, progress, and ter- 
rible extent of t pt p t the close of the sixteenth century. 
Here we see that for a period ot seven centuries together there had been 
a conBtant outcry for reformation; that the popes and priesthood were the 
objecfa of continual complaint on the part of the laity ; that by their own 
aoknonledgmeat, although the church was never destitute of true Chris- 
tians, yet holiness was the exception, and iniquity the raie, since the 
great body of the clergy were steeped in licentiousness, avarice, simony, 
cruelty violence falsehood, and blood; that the University of Paris, one 
of yon most f n ous nurseries of theological education, was infested with 

n nfilelphl opl y and with habits of libertine sacrilege; that the hoists 
f atsolufe the sm were heard from the lips of pontiffs and cardinals 
that the rel an e of your church was in the terrors of the inquisition, h 
the k the d n^^e , and the stake; that war, and treachery, and assas 
s nat on Wb e p t on zed in the service of religoa; that bishops, and car- 
d nals an i popes we e ready to lead their troops to battle ; that there were 
eonsta t evolts nd rebellions against the tyranny of the priestly power 
that there were m ny schisma in the papal kingdom, in which two or three 
pretenlers to nfall b lity cursed each other at the same time, in the name 
of Gf-od and h s apostles; and that every effort to banish these horrible 
n quit es p ov d utte -ly abortive, until the success of the Protestant refor- 
at on J elled them to respect public opinion, by fear for their very 
be Hg f the} ont nued to bravo it any longer." 

13C8 It s be! e ed that there was no such wickedness among the pa- 
gan priesthood as to have become o cause of complaint, although far less 
power existed to silence accusation. Throughout Christendom even nio- 
narchs were made to suffer severely for their remonstrances against papal 
tyranny, and had to make concessions after having been ill-treated. By 
way of exemplifying his disrespect for those precepts of Christ which en- 
join humility, meekness, and poorness of spirit as the means of reaching 
heaven. Pope Celestin kicked the crown from the head of the emperor, 
Henry VIT., as this potentate knelt before him. Could any sane man 
have done this while believing that Christ's allegations were to be verified, 


;;■ Google 


254 INFLTJENCB OF SOaiPTOEK 


agreeably to which the "poor in spirit" are to taye heaven, the meelt to 
inherit the earth ? (See Hopkins,) 

1309. According to Taylor's Diegesis, Oonstantine inqaired of Soptiter, 
the pagan priest, if he could absolye him from his sina, among which wa3 
that of scalding one of h's w' ea to leath and executing unjustly one of 
his sons. Sopater informed h m that it went beyond his power to obtain 
pardon for such sins. The 01 st a [r esCs having agreed to procure the 
desired absolution, is supposed to 1 ave been one of the principal motives 
which induced Oonstantine to eml ace Christianity. Yet it was under 
this wicked despot that the Counc 1 of N oe was held, whjeh decided in 
fiivour of the divinity of Chr st 


m gy pc^ y 

themselves into a belief, and espeet to induce others to concur with them, 
the parodied quotation from the clerical Goliah of my would-le guide to 
heaven is an exemplification. It is only hy frowning down ohjeetiom, or 
hegging the question, that they can g t u (IIS ) 

1312. Said one among the most am 1 1 f my clerical friends to me, 
when I adverted to the improbabil ty th t tl D tj of this almost infinite 
universe would select a few human an 1 1 n Judea as liis especial 
favourites: "Dr. Hare, you must n t spe t ne to sit by patiently, 
and see the pillars of my professi n ssa 1 ? I am sorry, said I, if I 
have said any thing to gjve you pain. " How would you like the pillars 
of your science to be attacked?" I would defend them, not endeavour 
to silence the assailant! But all criticisms which lead to the cure of 
errors only benefit a science founded on truth. 

1313. The skepticism produced by reading the Bible is alleged, by Arch- 
bishop Hughes, as the motive of his church for forbidding the reading of 
it to the faithful. It was the reading of the Bible, when a minor, which 
led to my unbelief in its authenticity. Bible societies may, without in- 
tending it, do much to prepare the reasoning portion of mankind for the 
adoption of a more moral, consistent, and rational gospel. 

1314. That one pope at least was a materialist, the following quotation 
from Bishop Hopkins's work will prove 


,v Google 


ON THE MORALS OF CHRISTIANS. 255 

1315. "Tho yetirlSOS was mortediir the resolution of Pope Clement V, to lake up liis 
residence at Avignon. Two jeora aftevwanJ, he appointed tbraa cardinals to examine the 
witueases against tho former pope, Boniface VIII., and Cardinal Gtyetan; and the iesti- 
niony taken on ^e occasion proved them both to haro been downright athelata. It nos 
in anhstanoe as follona : 

1316. "Nicholas, a priest and canon of the ealhedral, &e., on oath, snid, tliot being at 
Naples, andei' tbe pontifioute of Celestia V., viz. A. D. 12T4, in the house of Marin Sieti- 
nulfe, where Cardini^ Benedict Ci^etan dwelt, he entered the chamber of the cardinal in 
ihe suite of the Bishop of Frioenti, and found there a clerk disputing nlth him, in pre- 
sence of several persona, upon the qneetians, which nas the best lav or teligion, tliat of 
the Christians, of the Jews, or of the Saraoens? and i7ho those ircre that best observed 
their own? Then the cardinal said, What are all these religions? They are the inven- 

is no other life but the present. Ho said also, on the same oocasion, that this world has 
had no beginning, and would not have an end. Nicholas, Abbot of St. Benedict, Ac, de- 
posed to the same fact, adding that the Cardinal Cagetan had said that the bread was not 
changed in the sacrament of the nltar, and that it was false that it was the bod; of Jesns 
Christ,- that there is no resurrection ; that the soul dies tilth the body,- (iat this woa his 
opinion and that of all men of letters, hat that the simpie and ignorant tJiought others 
wise. Tho witness lieing asked If the cardinal did not thus speak Jestingly, replied that 
he s(Jd these things aerionslj and in good fiuth. 

1317. "Manfred, a la; citizen of Lucca, said, that in the year 1300, before Christmas, 
being in the chamber of Pope Boniface, in presence of the ambassadors of Florence, of 
Boulogne, and of Lucca, and many other persons, a man, ivho appeared to be the Pope's 
chapl^n, told his holiness of the deatli of a certain knight who had been a wicked 
man, and therefore it was necesaory to pray for him, that Jesus Christ might have pity 
on his Bonl. Upon which Boniface treated him as if he were a fool; and after having 
SpokBH injurioBsly ot Jeans Christ, he added: This knight has already i-Bceived all tho 
good and evil ha can have, and there is no other life than this, nor any other paradise or 
hell than what is in this world. The witness testified to another discourse of Boniface, 
which modesty does not allow of our reporting; and another witness recited a story about 
bim still more impious than the foregoing. 

1318. "'"What remains of this information,' saya Floury, 'comprehends the depositions 
of thirteen wltDesses, all to a similar effect. Another in forms^tioii which appeared the fol- 
lowing year oontained fho evidenca of twenty-three witnesses to the flame facts, with 
others equally scondolous. Bnt as the affair was never brought to judgment, it is anper- 
flaous to enter into any ftirther details.' 

1319. "Now here IB a very eitraordinary and powerful evidence to prove that at least 
one pope, aud he a very distinguished oue, Boniface VIIL, and one cardinal, of high ra- 
putotion, were not only infidels themselves, but claimed to be of the same class with 'ail 
men o/teUert.' That the testimony was satisfactory seems iacantrovertiblo; because the 
witnoasea were thu'ty-six in number, nnimpeached in oharaoter, and thoaght snfflcicnt hy 
Philip the Ftur, King of France, and all his leading nobility. He proposed that Boni- 
face should be arraigned, though dead, for heresy, and that his bones should be disinterred 
and burned, according to the modem fashion established by tiie Roman Church. It may 
seem strange, however, that even if Boniface and Csjetan had held such sentiments, they 
should have been so ibolish as to utter them in the presence of so many. To this two an- 
swers may be given. First, tliat the inflnence of the philosophy which we have already 
noted in the Cniversity of Paris waa so prevalent, that the clergy and tlia upper ranks of 
the laity were generally infaoted with it, and religion was looked upon, by nearly all, aa 
a thing of policy, necessary to keep the vnlgai' in order, but only professed by the higher 
classes, aa it was in heathen Home, ' for the sake of appearances.' Unhappily, there are 
many proofs too strong to be doubted that this infidel philosophy was rife among the 
priesthood ; and perhaps them is no other way of accounting for the manifest tact that 
the church, like Uie state, was governed for so many ages by the maehioery of force and 
fear, as If there was no inward oonaoience to appeal to, escept among a few piotis souls, 
here and there— enough la perpetuate tho ehmch, according to the promise of Christ, but 
not enough to atfect the general sentiment." 

Anff religion, like that of Moses, which does not raaJce Immortality a pri- 
mary consideration, must le chiefly confined to worldly/ oijecis, and of 
course unworSiy of constderafion or respect. 

1320. While the silence of the Pentateuch respecting immortahty throws 
the authority of the " word of &od," so called, against tlie endowment of 
the human soul with that all-important attribute) the language of the de- 


;;■ Google 


256 INFLUENCE OF SCKIPTURE 

calogue is inconsistent with the unity of the divine power. The words, 
" Thou ehalt have no other gods he/ore me," implies that there wero other 
gods who might be acknowledged; since if there were none other, the 
proper words would he — Thou canst have no other God hut me, or — There 
u no other God but me. 

1321. Again, when Jehovah alleges himself to be jealous, of whom 
could he be jealous, if there was no other Gfod to escite the sentiment of 
jealousy ? Can any one conceive God to be jealoua of an ido), when he 
must perceive that whatever worship may he bestowed on idols, is actually 
intended for the true God ? (1245, 1246.) Could Adam have been jealous 
when there was no other man in existence to be jealous of? 

1322. In the Introduotion the ends to he answered by religion were 
stated, (page 18.) Several of the foregoing pages have been designed to 
show that Scripture does not fulfil these objects, being almost silent as 
respects immortality, using doubtful language respecting the unity of the 
divine power. Moreover, Jehovah is described as wrathful, jealous, and 
vindictive; as sanctioning the massacre, spoliation, and estirpation of neigh- 
bouring nations.* The fruits of the religion of Moses were two sects, of 
whom one did not believe in a future state of rewards and punishments ; 
the other, although professing such a belief, (according ia the barbarous 
ideaofJosephus,)werenotas moral as the unbelievers, (750,1098.) More- 
over, as respects the New Testament, the precepts on which it laid the 
most stress, those against pecuniary cupidity and resistance of wrong, have 
been not only neglected, but acted upon inversely; so that rapacity and 
aggression have been the predominant features of the conduct of Christiaas, 
unworthily so called, toward each other, but especially toward those who 
Lave been of a different religious belief. In one trait, however, the words 
of Christ, already cited, have been fully carried out ; " I come as a sword."-}- 

1323. It may be seen from the passages quoted, that prior to the pro- 


* "I will send my faar before ttee, and will destroy all t!ie people to ffhom tLou slialt 
come, anil 1 will make all tliino eneujies tnrn theu' baaka mito tkee. And I will send 
Iioraols bofoi-e fiea, nhioi. stall driro out the Hirite, the Canaanite, and the Hitaio from 
beforothoo. I nill not drive them ontlVom before thea in one jenr; lest tie laud become 
desolate, and the beasts of the field multiply agiunst thee. By little and little I nill drira 
them out from befoie thee, until thou he increased, and inherit the land. And I nill Est 
thy bounds from tlio Bed Sea even unto the Eoa of the Philistines, and from the desert 
anto the river i for I will deliver the iuhabilants of the land into your hand; and thou 
shnlt drire them out before thea." 

■|- "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth; I oame not to eand peace, but a 
eiTord. 3'or I am come to set a man at variance against hia father, and tlie daughter 
against her mother, and tiio dangbter-in-law against her mothar-in-law," " Suppose ja 
that I am come to glvo peace on eartb ? I tell you. Hay ; bnt rather division ; For ft-om 
henceforth thei'o shall ba five in one honse dmded, tliree agwnst two, and two .against 
tliree. The father shall be divided agfunst the son, and the eon against the father; the 
mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law 
against her daaghter-in-law, and the daHghtor-in-lair ogaioat bar mothet-in-laie." 


, Google 


257 

niiJgation of Christianity, people of Tarioua religious sects were willing to 
liTe in harmony; hut that after its promulgation there was much discord, 
and that those who shonid have been especially iiiflticnced by Christianity 
(the priesthood) were the foremost in vice ! 

1324. It is conceived that either on the one side the evidence of Chris- 
tianity could not have gone home to the soul of those who so grossly vio- 
lated its monitions, or that the rewards held out by it had not been pre- 
sented under an aspect sufficiently inviting to counteract the fleeting aliure- 
menfs of this temporal world. It is conceived that Scripture is from 
beginning to end, from the Pentateuch to the Gospel of John, too worldly, 
as first exhibited in the promise of lands to the Jews, and lastly oijwige- 
sAijps to the apostles. The Old Testament, of necessity, can treat of nothing 
but worldliness, since there is throughout scarcely any reference to heaven ; 
and some of the Psalcis would aooord better with the curses of a dovil, 
than with the prayers of a sincere Christian. Tho cis. Psalm contains 
this language : 

1325. "IVIienhe shtill be judged, lot him ba oondemned; and let hia prayer booome sin. 
Lot his days be few ; imd let another take his office, Let his children be fatherloas, and hia 
wife a widow. Lot hia oMldren be eontinuollj Vflgabonda, and bog : let them seeit thaii- 
bread also out of their desoiate plaoea. Let tiio estoitionflr entoh all that he bath, and 
lot the Btaangers spoil hia labour. Let there be cone to estond mercy ueW him : neilber 
let there be any to favour hia fatherless children. Let hia poateritj be cut off; and in the 
generation following let their name be blotted out. Lot tie iniquity of his fathers be 
remembered \rith tha Lord; and let not the sin of hia mother be blotted out. Let them 
be before the Lord oonlanunlly, that ha may ont off Ihe memory of them from tha eartli. 
Bocause that he rememborod net to show mercy, but persaoutad tha poor and needy mon, 
that he might even slay tlie broken in heart. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto 
him : aa he deligbted not in hlessing, so let it be far from him. As he clothed himself 
with cursing like aa with hia garment, ao let it oome into hia bowola lika water, and like 
oil unto his bones. I-et it be unto him as the garment whioh covereth him, and for a gir- 
dle wherewith he ia gifdod contjunally. Let this be the reward of mine adveraarioa from 
tha Lord, and of them that apeak evil against my sonL" 

1326. Under these circumstances, wherefore should there be any alarm 
for the conseqnenoes of replacing belief in Scripture by belief In Spirit- 
ualism, if the evidence of this be, as we think, vastly more reliable, and the 
morality far more consistent with that followed in practice by great and 
good men of ancient and modem times. 

1327. Moreover, the basis of probation, upon which the morality of 
Scripture is buUt, is manifestly a cauh in the air, since it involves this 
contradiction, that an omnipotent, omniscient, and prescient Deity, who 
can make his creatures what he wishes them to be, and must know what 
they are, has to resort to trial to leam that which he knows before the 
process is undertaken, as well as he can possibly after its accomplishment. 
This demonstration alone overturns the whole probationary superstructure 
existing in the minds of sectarians. 

1328. Meanwhile, the eommnnieations which I have submitted involve 
the idea of progression, and convey infinitely more knowledge of futurity 
than the Old and New Testaments taken together. 


;;■ Google 


258 INFLUENCE OF SCRIPTURE 

Feoj}le profess Ohrist'tanity more from, a desire to do right, than tim/ da 
right in consequence of ffieir professions. 

1329, I am aware how mucb. it is a part of the existing system of edu- 
cation to imbue a confident faith in whatever tenets may he taught, and 
how little it is possible, in consequence, to have any arguments fairly con- 
sidered which beat against the educational impressions. It may be seen 
in the instance of the interesting lady to whom I owe the kind letter, (1163,) 
how much more anxious such persons are to teach than to listen. She 
had, as she supposed, listened to an exposition of my views, of which ths 
foundation had already been described in a published letter, with an effort 
to compare the heaven and hell of Scripture with those of Spiritualism ; 
yet in all confidence of victory, this excellent creature brings me a letter 
■writfen by one whom she considers to have a first-rate intellect, and wio 
begins by assuming what I most emphatically deny, and of which the 
argument is just as good for Mobararaedaaism as for Christianity, provided 
the Koran be assumed as the word of God in lieu of the Bible, aad Mo- 
hammed as the vicegerent of God instead of Christ. This may be consi- 
dered as the alignment of an eminent Episcopalian in favour of the truth 
of Chiistiaaity, while in those cited from Hu"iies and Breckinridge we 
haro the arguments of an emineat F m ist d d an eminent 
Oalvinist on the other. The one bj t t tl has f fallible" men 
as the rule of faith ; the other, toyf 1 dlna gospel by 
"fallihl^' men. Breckinridge do t 11 t th t th re is nothing 
more fallible than the traditions, c mpil t d t It jus of fallible 
men, nor how skeptical all those wb t th t tl f Scripture on 
this evidence, are of any other evi 1 f tl k d hicli oonflicte 
with Scripture. 

1330. If the reader will look at th 1 tt f \ as. H luomb and my 
replies (bOO ) he will see an ts mjl h t f th d fB ulty ]n which 
nnny were placed, who htd no otl d t f t a state beside 
that afforded by feoiiptuie Let h pply t th h m evidence of 
antiquity no lea] skeptiu^m than n [pl 1 t th h man evidence 
of bpuitualists nnd then estimate th w ght f te t m y fivour of the 
fecnpturea Let him fjiily eonsid th t 1 len gainst Scrip- 
ture, as biiefly sketched in this woik oi elsewhere, and then say whether 
he can consciLntiou'fly condemn Mi Holcomb or myself for conscien- 
tionsiy lisbebcvmg Sciiptuic 

13^1 Let it be ccnsidered whether belief in Chnstiimty is not at the 
pje^ient time a consequence of morahty rathei than its ctuse, whether it is 
nut, with ninety nme in an bundled, the consequence of early impressions, 
which have associated the Christian religion and morals inseparably on the 
conscience; without, however, iaducing in any one of the individuals thus 
influenced any idea that the precepts of Christ are to be carried out in 


,v Google 


ON THE MOKALS OP CHEISTIANS. 259 

praotico. It would he manifestly preposterous to look for this wliere tbe 
clergy, who ivere the teacliei-s, did aot practically obey the precepts, but 
went ahead in the race of iniquity, whichever way the current might lead, 
aad almost everywhere as desirous of wealth, and power, and worldly dis- 
tinction as other men. The imperfection of the evidence of scriptural 
tmth, on which the belief in it rests, or that false moral sense derived from 
education, which makes the person afFected just as tenacious of one creed 
as of another, whether it he Judaic, Christian, or Mohammedan, caiwea 
the faith thus arising to yield whenever the moral sense is impaired on 
which it rests. Not being supported by reason, as soon as the educational 
conscientiousness on which it vras founded is hlunted, any faith huilt upon 
it forms no hairier. The individual perceives that hia opinions were not 
formed by himself, but imparted, and would have been different, had he 
been born of different parents. Thus faith rests upon morality, not mo- 
rality upon faith; and when morality goes, faith ceases to be a barrier. 
But meanwhile those who abandon morality, find in their educational im- 
pressions one which is a salvo to them, however sinful. They find that 
Christ died for those who believe in his divinity or in his divine mission, 
and of course, that by closing their eai-s and eyes to all evidence or argu- 
ment impeaohing Christianity, and continuing to cherish the early impres- 
sions made by their teachers, they may be redeemed from future punish- 
ment; whereas, as Dr. Berg alleged in his debate with Barker, "A sinnsr 
cannot he saved out of Christ." 

13B2, But one consequence of this interested, bigoted belief is, that 
animosity which, it was foretold by Christ, would cause such horrible dis- 
cord, and would make his advent equivalent to a severing of all the 
dearest ties between relatives and friends, the superior and his subordi- 
nates. As at this time any idea of a religion would he scouted with indig- 
nation which should not make a future state of rewards and punishments 
the primaiy object, it is inconceivable to me wherefore the Old Testament 
should be an object of veneration to those whose thoughts are hmvenwaitl. 
How could there be any thing but worldliness where nothing hut the things 
of the world were objects of desire — no heaven beyond, 

1333. From what has been urged, is it not manifest th t n th fit 
place, it is of great importanoe that the evidence of a futn ft h Id 
be placed on a firmer footing than on recorded and trans! t d t It 

or on the decretals of a most profligate priesthood ? Woul 1 t n t b 
of the greatest imaginable blessings that those who have n t th 1 

tion of believing in immortality, should have that consolation, and those 
who already believe in a future state of esistence, should have a better 
knowledge of that state, than that given by Josephus, sanctioned by Christ, 
even as collated by the pious and learned clergyman, Dr. Harbaugh? (750.) 

1334. If Cbrist had nothing but the vicinity of the fire prepared for the 
devil and his angels, agreeably to Josephus, and his story of Dives and 


,v Google 


260 ISFLUENCE OF 

liiaarus, or imaginary worldly appomtmente, or lying in the grave till the 
last day, — if these iu'e all the grounds that Christians have tad to build 
upon as respeote future happiness, ia it to he wondered at that the priesthood 
of the Middle Ages, who best knew the defect of gospel eyidence, how lit- 
tle they themselves were to bo trusted, and how illusory wag the promise 
mado to the apostles of judgeships, (743,) should, of all others in society, 
he the least resti'ained by fear of future punishment ? 

Jt is a calwirmi/ againU human nature to represent men as wilfully/ igno- 
rant of the Irtte religion. 

1335. A prevalent calumny against human nature has been, that men 
remain wilfully reckless as respecfs religious truth ; or that they remain in 
error designedly, and not because they mistalte it for truth. But it is no- 
torious, that as respects the laws of man, those who make it their business 
to violate them take gi'eat care to mate themselves acquainted with the 
Jaws which it is their object to break. None but an idiot would expect 
the law to be less severe in proportion as he should keep himself ignorant 
of its provisions. No banditti in tho Russian empire wouH expect the 
less to go to Siberia because Ihey should deny the reigning czar to be the 
sovereign. They would not expect to escape his power by enthroning a 
j)retmtded czar, and paying Lim honour. Such conduct would be too ab- 
surd, even for fools to pursue ; yet it is upon such erroneous views that 
three thousand Israelites were surprised and assassinated for worshipping 
the golden calf; and that eminent clergymen do not consider it as blas- 
phemy against the paternal Grod, described by Seneca (^1224) to represent 
him as sanctioning this horrible butchery,* 

1336. The truth is, the selfishness of the worst men makes it quite as 
much an object with them, as with good men, to know to what punish- 
ments they may become liable, or what advantages they will be entitled to 
hereafter. Self-interest makes every man anxious to know that which 
deeply affects his future existence. Is ttoro any ono who would not wish 
to learn whether his soul is to rot in the coffin with its fleshy integuments, 
or to have another and eternal existence, happy or wretched according to 
his deportment in this world ?-|- 

5* The fact thatsomanyof tli8l5raaliteB,nB5isted«naoE course cuunteuanced hj Aaroa, 
tka brothsr of Moses, aflenriird mode bigh-ptieat, ware thua induced to worship an idol, 
shoira that Ihey wara pions bnt ignorant. It has elsenhei'e bean urged tliat any one tliat 
iTorahips, means to ict>rsA{p HgJtt as much, as a person who paif9 a debt means to pat/ tbe 
i-iglit credilor. It argues against the snffleieney of tta laeta and roaaODing by which 
Moses EUppoTted bis pretensioBS to inspiration, thaA he bad to resort to bis siiord in oaiss 
to pieveBt bis people from worshipping idols. That tbay were sinoera, mnat ba eiddant 
from their relinquisliiHB their golden trinkets for the purpose of furnlsbing matei-ials for 
the calf. 

titm 


;;■ Google 


ON IHE MORALS OF CHRISTIANS. 261 

1337. Those wlio really wish to serve the cause of true religion, and 
human welfare here and hereafter, should not expect that harsh words or 
measures will promote these objects. If, from want of due consideration, 
they uphold that which is repulsive to the human heart and understanding, 
and turn a deaf ear to facts and reasoning, which would produce a more 
beneficial issue, they will reiUy he amenable to the blame which they so 
unjustly lavish upon those whom they calumniate as " InficUls," while 
they themselves are really infidels to their professed principles. The Bible 
itself made me an unbeiiver in its autiientieity, and makes unbelievers of 
many who read it attentiTely and fearlessly, after their reason ia matured. 

1338. Nothing could serve the cause of true religion and true morality 
more than a belief in a future state of i-eward and punishment, without 
having that hook made an appendage to the instruction. 

To appreciate ike Jerwiih repreteiitation of the Deity, a reader should first 
form, an idea of this planet and its iiihahilantSj comparatively mith the 
hundTsd nhiUions of solar s>/slems, and the inconceivable extent of the 
space which encompasses ikein, which fall within the domain of one 
common Deity. 

1339. In order to foim an idea of the Deity, w mu t a d th x 
tent of the universe over which he rules, and the m gn fi n an 1 n 1 
plieity of the bodies which it comprises. Alpha C nt u a ta f tl e 
Centaur, a constellation in the southem hemisphe e s the nea e t of tl 
flsed stars ; it nevertheless is nearly twenty thousai J mill o f 1 t m 
the earth. Light, flying at the rat« of two hundred thousand miles in a 
second, to come from that star, would take three years and three months 
to reach the earth. 

1340. A star in the constellation of the Swan, known as " 61 Cygni," is 
another among the few whose distance is suffiaiently small to allow it to 
be measured. This is nearly three times as far as Alpha Gentauri; so that 
it would take light nine years to come from " 61 Cygni" to the earth. 
This sfar appears single to the nnked eye, but, seen through a telescope, 
appears like two stars, which according to Mitchell, are sis thousand 
millions of miles apart. 

1341. But the stars which enter into the nebula of Orion are so remote, 
that light, to come from one of them, would require ninety-two thousand 
years. Suppose an imaginary right line to be extended from a star io 
Orion so as to pass through the centre of this planet, and to reach a stw 
on the other side as remote as that first mentioned; of course, the distance 

God's siinotion, and the aliilM use of the enord. He seems to have valued the farour of 
Jahoyah only foe worldly objects. Had it been otherwise, in lieu of so much stresa boins 
laid upon the "prmiUed load," it tad been moro wisely leated on the hope of heaven. 
Had MosQs obtained a knowledge of the spirit woria, the Raflilueaes iiad not boon mate- 

rittlists, nor tho Pbarisees norldly-mmded, corrupt hypocrites, as allegad "by Christ. 


,v Google 


262 INFLUENCE Or SCRIPTURE 

be d 1)1 d t w Id quire ligiit twice the time to perceive it, or one 
h d d d hty f tJiousaod years. Suppose a spLerioal space of 
wli Ii th t 1 f m diameter, or we may suppose a larger sphere, in- 
11 11 th 1 1 ble by the Eosse telescope. It is estimated that 
th U 1 1 tha h nd d m 11 f stare visible with the 

dfthtmgi t timt hfwlh Bun with its planets ; 
tl t w h t . pfoa th t tl hundred millions of 

1 y tern & m f th II S estimated to give sisty- 

th t m m h 1 j^ht rat planet is to Jupiter as 

ttlhlltht as t thousand; to tha sun, 

t 11 f I 1 1 d th 6a 1 It s hardly to be seen by 

th k d y f J pit i w Id b Ue to any human eye 

t t d p y pi t m t tl J p t To the whole of the 

sidereal creation, it is as a globule of water m the ocean, and the inhabit- 
ants are as animalcules in that globule. 

1342. Having thus prepared his mind with a proper conception of the 
vastness of the attributes of the Deity, and the degi-ee of the comparative 
importance of the human race in the divine mind, as it surveys the whole 
creation, let the reader take up the book of Genesis, and compare the im- 
pressions which that alleged word of God would convey with those which 
the preceding facts and considerations would induce. It may be expedient 
that the reader, while under the sublime impression of the majesty and 
niagoifleence of the Deity, as displayed in his worts, should consider what 
evidence there is of any entity having the relation to him of a female; and 
if it be irrational to suppose a commensurate being of the other ses, let 
the reader consider how this Supi-eme Deity could have a son ? The ex- 
istence of a, son requiring both a father and mother, it may be well to think 
how a male without a female god could have a son. He may take into 
view the opinions of Newton, that God cannot be presumed to have organs. 
Doubtless it will be perceived that this all-pervading, magnificent being 
cannot require eyes to see, ears to hear, a nose to smell, a tongue to speak, 
or a month to eat, legs with which to walk, or anns with which to strike. 
Of course he will not consider him as having a person made of those organs, 
as in the instance of his creature, man. He will agree with Newtoo, that 
it were absard to ascribe even one person to Grod, and would be still more 
so to ascribe three persons. Again, if three persons be essential to God, 
he being eternal, the three pei-sons must be eternal, and of course neither 
can bear the relation of a son to the other; nor can th% coevai Holy Ghost 
proceed from two of the trio, forming the third person, who, by the pre- 
mises, existed he/ore he came into his siifisegiiemt existence, as alleged by 
the contradictory conclusion. If the individuals composing the Godhead 
have any distinct will or reason, the admission of the trinity amounts to 
polytheism ; and if they have not severally independent natures and rea- 
son, then the association of the idea of three pei'sons is useless. la it not 


;;■ Google 


ON THE MORAIS OF CHRISTIANS. 263 

idolatroua ttas to associate with tlie Doitj e£Fete masses of spiritual matter, 
under the name oi persons, and worship the imaginary monster thus created 
as the tme G-od? Still more, is it not monstrous to represent that those 
who cannot adore this imi^nary idol, are wiJfullj/ incredulous? 

1343. I have said that the aocount of the creation, given in the Penta- 
teuch, is inconsistent with geological facts. Much sophistry has been em- 
ployed to escape from this truth. Thus eminent geologists have striven to 
reconcile the alleged creation of the world in sis days, to mean actually 
sis eras, each of immense duration ; yet Scripture representing that the 
day succeeding those so employed, should be kept holy as a Sabbath, and 
thia being viewed in the Decalogue as a period of twenty-four hours, pre- 
cludes the assignment of any longer duration to each of the sis days, ac- 
tually occupied by the Creator ia performing his great work. 

1344. To enable the reader to judge how far the facts ascertained by 
geological investigation, can be reconciled with the scriptural account, I 
shall here quote them, as stated by Professor Hitchcock, in his work entitled 
"Eeligion of Geology," page 19, It should be known to the reader that 
this author is among those who assume the Bible to be the word of God 
upon the same grounds aa the clergyman, (1182.) 

1345. "Under these circumstances, all that I can do, is to state defi- 
nitely what I apprehend to be the established principles of the science 
that have a bearing upon religious truth, and refer my hearers to standard 
works ou the subject for the proof that they are true. If any will not 
take the ti-ouble to examine the proofs, I trast they will have candour and 
impartiality enough not to deny my positions. 

1346. " The first important conclusion to which every careful observer 
will come is, that the rocks of all sorts which compose the present crust 
of the globe, so far as it has been esplored, at least to the depth of several 
miles, appear to have been the result of second causes; that is, they are 
now in a different stat« from that in which they were originally created. 

1347. " It is, indeed, a favourite idea witli some, that all the rocks and 
their contents were created, jast as we now meet them, in a moment of 
time ; that the supposed remains of animals and piants, which many of 
them contain, and which occur in all states, from an animal or plant little 
changed, to a complete conversion into stone, were never real animals and 
plants, but only resemblances; and that the marks of fusion and of the 
wearing of water, exhibited by the rooks, are not to be taken as evidences 
that they have undergone such processes, but only that it has pleased God 
to give them that appearance ; and that, in fact, it was as easy for God to 
create them just as they now are as in any other form. 

1348. "It is a presumption against such a supposition, that no men,, 
who have carefully examined rocks and organic remains, are its advocates.. 
Not that they doubt the power of G-od to produce such effects, but they 
deny the probability that he has eserted it in this manner; for through- 


,v Google 


tn t 


tl yh 


IP t 


tjt 


wt h 


) 


t 


th y £ 1 tt t wli 


b ta 


PI t 


!i 


d 


h 


ly 


m f 


d y 


thj h 


i 


d 


th IB 


d 


th f 


th wl 1 


igy 


f t g 


p th 


t th 


k 


L p 


d g 


t h g 
f t 


th 


dp 


t If 


k. 


pt 


t th t 


— th t f 


tj 


th fi 


t f 


IT 


1 g 


y— th 


P 


f f t d 


d 


t tw th 


tp 


f to 


d t y 11 mid 


f I 


1 


1 p t 


th 


W 1 t 


t 


th 


t h f 


phj 


al 


E y e. 


n m 


tl f 


h 1 


d k 


1 adm t th t 


thyh 


d 


mp L 


t h fe 


th 


s If 


m t 


ISV^ 


I th 


d pi 


th m 


Uw pp 


h 


Iwy p 


1 1 


h gib 


d to h 


t 


11 1 th h 


fe 


h h 


h tk 


pi p 


dw 


th t "W 


m 


t pt 


th 


h ( y 


f th 


k wh 


h J tern d ff t f m 


th t wh h 


w 


P 1 


pp t 


h 


d & 


t p 1 t 


th t t 


f 


1 


d pi 


d md 


1 ir 


■w 11 h 


g 


! 


f m 


t d 


1 w 


ti t 

d 
I th th 


b t th 


ly 

m t f th 


h 


d [tat t 

11 

h 1 t 


1 


dil 


th g 1 g 


h h 


1 


d 


w I 


g II t 


1 


h th 


It 


f ih 


m — h t d t 

1351. "Fourthly. It )S demonstrated that the present eontinents of 
the globe, with perhaps the exception of some of their highest mountains, 
have for a long period oonstituted^te bottom of the ocean, and have been 
subsequently either elevated into their present position, or the waters have 
been drained off from their surfece. This is probably the most important 
principle in geology; and though regarded with much skepticism by many, 
it is as satisfaeforily proved as any principle of physical science not resting 
on mathematical demonstration. 

1352. " Fifthly. The internal parts of the earth are found to possess a 
very high temperature; nor can it be doubted that at least oceans of melted 
mattei exist beneath the crust, and perhaps even all the deep-seated inte- 
rior is in a state of fusion. 

1353. " Sixthly. The fossiliferous rocks, or such as contain animals and 
plants, are not less than six or seven miles in perpendicular thickness, and 
are composed of hundreds of alternating layers of different kinds, all of 
which appear to have been deposited, just as rocks are now forming, at the 
ibottom of lakes and seas; and hence their deposition must have occupied 
.an immense period of time. Even if we admit that this deposition went 
lon in particular places mnch faster than at present, a variety of facts for- 
!bid the supposition that this was the general mode of their formation. 

1354. " Seventhly. The remains of animals and plants found in the 
•sarth are not mingled confusedly together, but are found arranged, for the 


;;■ Google 


ON THE MORALS or christiakb. 265 

most part, in as ni\icli order as the drawers of a, well-regulated cabinet. 
In general, they appear to have lived and died on or near the spots where 
they are now found; and as countless millions of these remains are often 
found piled together, so as to form almcet entire mountains, the periods 
requisite for their formation must have been immensely long, as was 
taught in the preceding proposition. 

1355. "Eighthly. Still further confirmation of the same important 
principle is found in the well-established fact, that there have been upon 
the globe, previous to the existing races, not less than five distinct periods 
of organized esistence ; that is, five great groups of animals and plants, so 
completely independent that no species whatever is found in more than 
one of them, have lived and successively passed away before the creation 
of the races that now occupy the surface. Other standard writers make 
the number of these periods of existence as many as twelve. Comparative 
anatomy testifies that so unlike in structure were these different groups, 
that they could not have coexisted in the same climate and other esterual 
circumstances. 

1356. "Ninthly. In the earliest times in which animals and plants 
lived, the climate over the whole globe appears to have been as warm as, 
or even warmer than, it is now between the tropies. And the slow change 
from warmer to colder appears to have been the chief cause of the succes- 
sive destruction of the difierent races; and new ones were created, better 
adapted to the altered condition of the globe; and yet each group seems 
to have occupied the globe through a period of great length ; so that we 
havo here another evidence of the vast cycles of duration that must have 
rolled away even since the earth became a habitable globe. 

1357. " Tenthly. There is no small reason to suppose that the globe 
underwent numerous changes previous to the time when animals were 
placed upon it; that, in faot, the time was when the whole matter of the 
earth was in a melted state, and not improbably also even in a gaseous 
state. These points, indeed, are not as well established as the others that 
have been mentioned; but, if admitted, they give to the globe an incal- 
culable antiquity, 

1358. "Eleventhly. It appears that the present condition of the earth's 
crust and surface was of comparatively recent commencement; otherwife 
the steep flanks of mountains would have ceased to crumble down, and 
wide oceans would have been filled with alluvial deposits. 

1359. "Twelfthly. Among the thirty thousand species of animals and 
plants found in the rocks,* very few living species have been detected; 
and even these few occur in the most recent rocks, while in the secondary 

'"* Two or tliree years eince Professor Bronn described tnenty-six thousand 8i\ hunared 
and seventy-eight Epecies; and, Hpoa an average, one thouBand species are diaoovered 
orerj year. M. Alcido D'Orbignj, in 1850, stated the number of molluBke and radiateii 
animals alone at seventeen thousand nine hundred nnd forty-sevon spsoies ' 


Google 


group, not less than sis mltlik t ^P "^ ^^ ^ ^ 

lias been discovered. Hen tt p t d J t t 11 f th 

in ihs secondary roclts had ddNhm m h b fd 

below those alluvial deposit whh wfmby It d 

the ocean. Hence geology f th t m w f fh 1 te t ml 

that was placed on the glob 

1360. " Thirteenthly. Th f f h th h 1 

mous auiotint of erosion by th t t th tl d th 

atmosphere. The ocean Iw wyth lid k mptsf 

the world, not less than teth dftnifth d rsh t 

channels through the hard ttthded fJtlpnl 1 

miles long; both of which ff t d ni d p d blj 1 g 

1361. " Fourteenthly. At mp t ly t d t rth d 
southern regions have bee w pt d w d w by th j nt t n 
of ice and water, the for 1 h vi g h di ted t w d th 
equator. This is called th. d fi-p d 

1362. "Eifteenthly. S tl d ft p 1 th oe h t d m 
thousands of feet above itp til my t 

1363. " Siiteenthly. Tl d "Trd m p ts f th 
world, that the continents wp Iwtl mt 
— some places sinking, and th ra A 1 h pre mpt 
derived that, in early times hh myh bnftn jtd 
and on a great scale. 

1364. "Seventeenthly Eycc h fmpta th 
earth's surface appears to h b mp m t f t nd t 
adapting it to beings oflh g t dtm tlfth 
most perfect of all. 

1365. "Finally. The p t f a] d pi t tl 1 be 
are for the moat part disp d [OcepygpluJ Itts 
beyond whose limits the sp p 1 t th p Uy d p 
and die. The same is tru I tt toth ml dplts 
found in the rocks; thoUj^h thmhg t fmtyflmttht 
prevailed in early times p ttd db ttnkmhwl 
range than at present; so th t th 1 g I d b t eal d t t w re 
then probably much wid Efeth^ 1 lisin petto 
living and extinct animal thtth mth b I t 
of creation, from which th y m ted asf th nt wllllw 
them to range. 

1366. " It would be ea y t t. te m i pi f g 1 gy f 
derable importance; but Ih uradthp pal thtb 
upon the subject of religi Ab fttm tfthldif,t th f 
theology, whether natural or revealed, which these principles affect, and on 
which they cast light, will give an ideii of the subjects which I propose to 
discuss in these lectures. 


;;■ Google 


136" Th fi t p t 1 t t tl f tt 


w Id F 


has be til al t p t t f fh M 


t th t tb 


v&s bi gilt t te ly t tl &am 1 


wth m 


Dtlier et m'Jglythwlikts 


t t p d 


nitely b t mm bly m f Tl q t 


t h th 


existed th gl b 1 th th m t 


p t t f 


requu'e f h fe 1 gy d tl B bl p 1 th 


m 1 


whethc th lb t If d 1 t t 1 g b f 


h t 


long If th 1 y w k 1 fi t ly d 


bed th 


account I th w 1 t th wl 


h th d 


science enable 113 10. le ooiratelyto d st 1th 


S pt / 


1368. " The introductiou of death into the world, and the specific cha- 
racter of that death described ia Scripture as the consequence of sin, are 
the next points where geology touches the subject of religion. Here, too, 
the general interpretation of Scripture is at variance with the facts of 
geology, which distinctly testify to the occurrence of death among animals 
long before the existence of man. Shall geology here, also, be permitted 
to modify our exposition of the Bible? 

1369. " The subject of deluges, and especially that of Noah, will next 
claim our attention. For though it is now generally agreed that geology 
cannot detect traces of such a deluge as the Scriptures describe, yet upon 
some other bearings of that subject it does oast light ; and so remarkable 
is the history of opinions concerning the Noaehian deluge, that it could 
not on that account alone be properly passed in silence," 

Ow actions dependent, wilder God, on organization, education, and the 
extent to which we-are tempted extraneoudy. 

1370. "Are not the hairs of your head all numbered f — Which of you by 
taking thought can add one cubit to hia stature ?" Luke xii. 7, 25. 

1371. May it not be consistently inquired, who, without God's assist- 
ance, can make his passions less ardent ? his counteracting reason or con- 
scientiousness more competent to restrain them f Who, prior to his sub- 
lunary existence, had the option, whether ho should he bora a Jew, a 
Gentile, or a Christian; whether in the Eoraan, Grecian, Episcopalian, or 
dissenting churches; whether his progenitors should he Chinese, Hindoos, 
Europeans, negroes, or savages ? Who has, through his own previous 
choice, been brought up, on the one hand, by ignorant and vicious, or on 
the other, by virtuous and well-educated, parents 1 Can any soul be alleged 
to be responsible for entering the body of an infant begotten by idolaters, 
and thus subjected to the curse of the commandment? Or can a soul be 
deemed to have any merit because it came into the world as the progeny 
of parents orthodox in tbeir own estimation, and happy in the belief that 
while myriads are to suffer to eternity in another world, for errors or crimes 
arising from causes beyond tbeir control, a few are to be made eternally 


,v Google 


268 INPI-vUEUCE OF SCEIPTUKES. 

happy, not with standing tbcir admitted sinfulness, hy virtue of a bigoted 
confidence in the pre-eminent ability of their parents, their priests, or 
of themselves to learn tenets of which the great majority of mankind are 
ignorant? Humility in profession is associated with a towering and over- 
hearing presumption in practice toward all who differ with them in creed : 
hence an effort to instruct others at the expense of millions spent in mis- 
sions, while they have no better evidence of the a^jouracy of their own 
knowledge than a fallible human conviction. 

1372. If two persona, A. and B., were organized exactly alike, educated 
precisely in the same way, and subjected to the same temptations or incen- 
tives, would they not act alike ? Would not their acting differently prove 
that they were not alike in all respects ? 

1373. It may be said that they are free agents, being endowed with free- 
will ; bat if they be perfectly alike and similarly situated, (agreeably to the 
premises,) their free-wiU must be perfectly similar; and if not, let it be 
allowed to be, through God's will, perfectly similar. Is it in their power 
to alter the nature of their will, any more than " t]ie colour of their hair." 

1374. If any other being act differently from these, does it not follow 
that he is differently organized, educated, or situated from them ; and that 
the diversity in one or all of these respects must be proportionable to the 
degree in which his actions and morals differ from those of A. and B. 

1375. But it may be inquired, where is the merit of virtue, or the de- 
merit of vice, if they be the consequences of caiKea over which we have 
no control ? Th ply that irtue is an endowment due to the will of 
Deity, just as th d fl between the different races of mankind and 
the various gene a f n m 1 between individuals of the same species, 
must be due to th t lit n An analogous idea of the necessity of God's 
help to virtue is n tod up n J y some of our most respectable and nume. 
rous Christian s f It pi irtue in man, so far as it may exist, upon 
the same basis as in God. It has always been held by al! Christians that 
God can do no wrong; that vice is inconsistent with his nature. The 
more, then, a man is by nature and education incapable of being vicious, 
the greater his natural aptitude for virtue, the more ho approaches its most 
perfect esemplification. 

1376. But how can the punishment of the wicked bo justified under 
this view of their case ? I answer, that it can only be justified in self- 
defence, for the reformation of the offender, or to prevent the repetition 
of injury where no other means can be employed, just as kUIing wild 
beasts, noxious insects, or our enemies in warfare is justified. 

1377. Punishment, unless with a view ia prevention or reformation, 
seems to me diabolic. It seems irreconcilable with the injunction to return 
good for evil, that the Deity from whom it proceeds should return evil for 
evil, in. excess^ thut he should, for finite and transient sins, award eternal 
punishment. 


,v Google 


ON THE MOEALS OF CHRISTIANS. 2l59 

1378. Tlie iDference that omni.TCienee and omnipotence could create 
nijriads of beings, foreseeing that tiej must be subjected to estreme misery 
for an unlimited time, is irreeonoikble witb all goodness and oraniscienee. 
But it may be demanded, doo3 not the fear of future punishment make 
mankind more virtuous ? The man who avoids a felony solely through fear 
of future punishment is not the less wicked ; he is only a more prudent, or 
a more cowardly villain. That piety to God and philanthropy ate virtues, 
is most evident ; hut then these incentives must he disioterested. If Ahi-a- 
ham could believe that shedding his son's blood upon the altar would gra- 
tify the Deity, in order to make it a pious or virtuous net, it should have 
been unaccompanied by any espectation of benefit to himself. He must 
have had a conception of the Deity fully as bad as that of auy heathen, 
to suppose that the sacrifice would be agreeable to him. 

1379. There is, moreoTer, much reason to infer that a man who could 
pass his wife as his sister, and send her to a palace in order to gain influ- 
ence with a king, did not lose sight of himself when he contemplated kill- 
ing his son to propitiate the King of kings. But no human teatimooy 
should induce na to credit such imputations against Jehovah. Nothing is 
more probable than that priests should invent this absurd fable, and nothing 
more improbable than that an omniscient God, who could read Abraham's 
inmost thought, should have found jt necessary to ask suoh a barbarous 
■taciilice, m older to determine the extent and sincerity of that devotion 
of which lie must have already known the precise limits. 

On- Probation. 

1380. I have already made objections to the idea that we can be placed 
in this world for the purpose of probation. I will here make use of addi- 
tional arguments in support of those objections. Spiritualism assumes 
that we are placed here for progression. It has, in this aspect, a self-evi- 
dent ascendency over the scriptural doctrine. 

13S1. A finite being has need to subject his works to trial, in order to 
learn whether they have the requisite perfection; but how ctn an omnipo 
tent and omniscient Deity be under any necesi&ity of trying his works '' In 
the first place, they must be precisely what he has designed, in the next 
place, foreseeing tbe result of any esperimi,nt he m ly mike, he has no 
motive for the trial. Thus, before placing Adam and Eve m Paradise, God 
must have known that Adam would be incompetent to resist his wife, his 
wife the serpent, and that the apple would be eaten Hiw uselets then 
was the experiment! How can it be reconciled with ommscienee and 
omnipotence ? The criuie would not have t jken phce had God mide 
woman less inquisitive; her husband stiong enough mDraily to resist 
temptation and his wife's seductive influence, or had not the seijent oi 
Satan, under the form of this reptile, been allowel to fimpt Eve And 
yet in consequence of that act, not only the soul ot the firat mm, but thit 


Google 


270 iNrLUENCE or scripture 

of al! Ilia posterity, ai'o considered by orthodoxy as liaviog fallen, aa being 
doomed to eternal punishment, unless by being morally regenerated, prin- 
cipally by a blind belief in the allegation of certain priests, who do not 
agree among themselves as to what we are to believe. 

t882. But what had souls unborn to do with the aets of Adam and 
Eve ? Is it conceivable that the soul of the child ia begotten by the 
Bonis of its parents, or to be infei-red that it is a spiritual being, created by 
God for the body, which the progenitors beget in their corporeal capacity? 
(See Seneca's opinion, 1230.) How could a dumb snake, belonging to the 
class of reptiles^ very low comparatively ia intellectual capacity, acquire 
power of speech and reason without a special miracle on the part of God, 
either dirixtly or indirectly through Satan, acting with the cognizance of his 
divine master. This reptile, previously created without feet, because the 
devil merely assumed his form, is doomed as a punishment to crawl on 
his belly, in the only way in which he could move consistently with his 
organization, independently of the sentence ! ! ! Would it be any greater 
punishment to cause snakes to creep on their bellies than quadrupeds to 
go on their feet ? Since none of the genera of seipents are endowed with 
reason or speech, how could they be responsible for the acts of an animal 
which, being endowed with those attributes, would not belong to their 
order ? It must have been a peculiar reptile, in the form of a snake, 
created for the special purpose of tempting Eve. If, with Milton, it be 
assumed that it was Satan, in the form of a serpent, who tempted her ? 
how could serpents be responsible for the crime ? 

World least moral when the Christian church had most sway. — Honour 
and mercantile credit more t -usled than religion — I'trtue due more to 
the heart than to sectarianism — Bijot y acts like an eml spirit. 

1383. It will be perceived that when the church had the world most 
completely under ita sway there w^ the leiat molality but as the arts 
and sciences grew up, in despite of lehgious intolerance morality improved. 
Thus a system has been e tahli hpd wl ich while vioktin^ more especially 
the most emphatic monitions of Christ tends to enforce those rules of con- 
duct which are necessary to the welfaie of "otiety But an auxiliary 
principle — honour— has come into openton which often resti dins those 
who are not influenced by rel gion nor by pure morality Honour, like 
the fear of hell, may make a mm act nioie nobly oi more honestly, with- 
out improving his religious principles or his hoart Hence the saying, 
" Honour among thieves," and likewise among unprincipled gamblers. 

1384. Mercantile honour, under the name of mercantile credit, is an- 
other important substitute for real heartfelt integi-ity. The ill conse- 
quences of a loss of worldly consideration, or of those advantages which 
result from the ability to hoiTow, or to postpone payment with consent of 
the creditor, is a motive for punctual payment, when a debt equally due, 


,v Google 


ON THE MOHALS OP CHRISTIANS. 271 

in honesty, would be neglected. Tliis goes much farther as an ele- 
ment of the prevailing morality in securing punctual payment, than 
religion. 

1385. That religion has actually very little to do with mercantile morals, 
must be evident, mice it is never, on cJiange, an object of ingiiiri/. When 
men ate about to trust large siims, they do not incjuirB how oftea the otter 
party goes to church, nor to what church he goes. It has never been my 
lot to know any one whom I thought better for his religion. I have known 
many whom I thought better through native goodness of heart than they 
would have been if left to the influence of their bigoted opinions alone. 
I heard a clergyman, distinguished for his amiability and liberality in 
social intercourse, speak from the pnlpit of infidelity as " the work of the 
devil." 

1386. There are allegitioni of this kind made from the pulpit which to 
me appear to he absolutely cnlumniou«, though those who make them do 
not conceive themsehes i) be ealumnntois It is, in trutb, their false reli- 
gion which speaks , they are possessed ib if by an evil spirit, yet the good- 
ness of their heaits prevents them from realizing any such, calumnies in 
their persona! intercouiie with society Dr. Berg said it was not lie (Dr. 
Berg) that spoke when he used lU hnguage to Barker, but the Bible. 
There is a want of Chiistian moderation in the language of Christ, and 
John the Baptist, and in some of thi. Psjlms, which seems inconsistent with 
Christ's precepts. John, addressing the Pharisees as " vipers fleeing from 
the wrath to come," representing them as poisonous reptiles, and God as 
enraged against them. The language of Christ respecting some of the 
same sect, to which allusion has been made, is even more abusive. 

1387. But among the calumnies to which I have alluded, are those 
which represent the human heart as innately wicked, and only to be cor- 
rected by religious regeneration. All the souls ci-eated since Adam ate 
the apple, must be born anew, thus drawing a marked distinction between 
those who have gone through this second birth, and such as myself, who 
have not undergone this recuperative process. But what man of common 
sense draws a line between those who are thought to have been born over 
again, and those who have not? The great majority of those who call 
themselves Christians, do not put any more trust in one who has gone 
through this second birth, than in one who is not deemed to have been 
thus regenerated. 

Progress of Literature and Scievie in Arahia tinder the Mohammedan 
Pontiffs, called Caliphs. 

1388. While the science and literature of the Eoman Empire sank 
under the influence of the Christian pontiff (pope) into ignorance, super- 
stition, and vice, the Arabians, under the influence of their Jlohammedan 
pontiffs, (caliphs,) arose from barbarism to a comparatively superior state 


,v Google 


272 IN^LUE^fCE op 

of intellectual acquirement, as the followiag quotation, from " Gibbon's 
Decline and Eall of the Roman Empire," will show : 

1389. "After fheir ciiil and floinestio wars, tlie flubjoets of tho AbbassiJaa, awakening 
-om tliia mental lotbatgy, toand leisure and felt curioaity for tha noqwiaition of profane 
BiBHOB. This spirit was first CQConraged hy the Caliph Almansor, who, hasidea his linow- 
tdge of tha Mohammedan law, had applied himself with suaoass to the sUiHj of astronomy, 
lut when tiie seeptrB darolyed to Almamon, the seventh of tiia AhbnBBidea, he completed 
lie designs of his Entndfathar, and invited the musea ftom their aneiant seata. Hia am- 
assadora at Constantinoplo, Iiia agents in Anneaia, Syria, and Egypt, oolleoted the TO- 
inies of Gh-eoian science : at his command tiey ware tranfilatad by the most skilful intar- 
pretera into the Arabic language; his euhjocts were oxhorlod assiduonaly to peruse these 
instructive wridnga; ond the auccessor of Mohammed oasiated with pleaanra and modesty 
at the assemblies and disputations of tlia learned. 'He waa not ignorant," aays Abolpha- 
ragius, ' that Iheg are the elect of Qod, his best and most usefnl soryanta, whose lives ore 
devotad tn the improvement of their rational faculties. The mean ambition of the Chi- 
nese or the Turk may glory in the industry of their hands, or the indulgence of their 
hrutal appetites. Yet these dastoroua ai'tista must view, with hopalesa omnlatioa, tha 
hexi^ns and pyramids of tlie eella of a bee-hive ; these fortltudinoua herooa are awed by 
tie superior fierceness of the lions and tigers; and in their amorous enjoyments, they are 
mnoli inferior to the vigour of the grossest and moat sordid qnadrnpeds. The teachers 
of wisdom ore the true luminaries and legislators of a world, which, without their aid, 
would again siuli in Ignorance aod barbarism.' The zeal and oariosil^ of Almamon were 
imitated by anceeading prinees of the line of Abbas ; their rivals, the Patimites of Africa 
and the Ommiadeg of Spain, were the palions of the learned, as well as the commandera 
of the fiuthfuJ; the same royal prerogalaye was claimed by tdcir in depfindent emirs of the 
provineosj and thair emulation diffused the taste and the rewards of science from Samar- 
eand and Bochara to Fez and Cordova. The visir of a sultan consecrated a sum of two 
hundred thousand pieces of gold to the foundation of a college at Bagdad, whiah he en- 
dowed with an annua! revenue of fifteen thousand dinars. The ftaits of instruction were 
eommunicatod, perhaps at different times, to six thousand disoiplea of every degree, from 
the son of the noble to that of the meohanlo : a snffieient allowance waa provided for the 
indigent Boholraa ; and the merit or Indastry of the professors was repaid with adequate 
stipends. In eveij city the prodnetions of Arabia literature wore copied and oolleoted by 
the curiosity of the studious and the vanity of the rich. A private doctor refused the in- 
vitation of the Bnltan of Bochara, because the carriage of hie boots would have required 
fonr hundred camels. The royal library of the Patimitea consisted of one hundred thousand 
manuaoripts, eloganfly transoribed and splendidly bound, which were lent, without jea- 
louay or ayarioe, to the students of Cairo. Yet this oolleotion mnst appear moderate, if 
we can bolieve that the Ommiadea of Spahi had formed a library of aii hundred thousand 
volumes, forty-fonr of which were employed in the mere catalogua. Their capital, Cor- 
dova, with the adjacent towns of Malaga, Almeria, and Murcla, had given birth to more 
thon three hundred writers, and above seventy public libraries were opened in tiie cities 
of the Andaluslan kingdom. The age of Arabian learning coutinned about five hundred 
years, till the great eruption of the Moguls, and waa coeval with the darkest and most 
slothful period of European annala; liufc ainee the snn of science has arisen in the West, it 
should seem that the Oriental studies have languished and declined." 

1390. I here close my remarks upon the lafluence of Scripture oa the 
Morals of Christians. They have proceeded from a desire to promnlgate 
what I deem to be truth, and to expose the errors by which I conceive it 
to be environed. It is inconastent with my nature to state less than the 
truth when treating on any subject. I shall be sorry for any pala which 
I may give to those whose hearts are so associated with their opinions, that 
whatever conflicts with the one is p^'nful to the other; yet I wish any 
parsons so woanded to reflect how little denunciation has been spared, not 
onJy as respects opinions, but as respects motives, where " infidels," un- 
justly so called, have been held up to view. I have not assaDed the mo- 
tives of any one; even as respects (pinions, I have withheld or modified 
sarcasms which, as I think, might have been justly e 
without modification. 


;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE 01 SPIRITS. 


1391 SuBSEQUEiSTiY to tLe printing of the articles under the liead of 
Coiroboiative Evidence, t pamjhlet wis received fioiu wliit-h tte aabjoined 
pages aie tran'.lateil, by my trieccl, Di Geib It series to show th'' im 
presaion mide bj bpnit miuifi.&tati n? in nBOtln,r piit ot Ctri'fti.nljin, 
upon one who belongs to tlie churoli 

The Ojpmwns of MM rfe MirviUe and Gai,jpnnn, on Tabh Tuimnj 
and Mediums, (considered tn relation to Hieohgy and physics) er 
amtned, by the Ahb^t Almignana, Doctor of the Canon Law, Tlieo- 
hjian, ki. 

TntJoduction 
13**2 "Mesmerism, fable tuvniDg, and medinmship 1 mg plie; 
which, m my estimation, demand serious ini esfigation befoic piet 
judgment on them, as soon as this became known to mo, as an ocular wit- 
ness, far from judging of them, ex ahrvpto, aa so many have done under 
the same circumstances, I confined myself to mate numerong experiments, 
with the hope that they might in time fui-nish me with some very useful 
facts, in searching for the caiise of these wonderful phenomena. 

1393. "Beinginpossessionof some of these facts, I thought the present 
an opportune time for their publication, when two savans of the elite, 
such aa the Marquis de Mirville and the Count de Gasparin, are engaged 
in a scientifle contest on this subject. 

1394. " I consider the present moment the more opportune, that the 
facts furnished by mj investigation, being at variance with certain leading 
points in the doctrines contained Jn the Pneumatologj/ of M. de Mirville, 
and the Supernatural in General of M. de Uaspatin, may induce those 
writers to give a new complesion to their doctrines, by talcing counsel from 
my facta. These, shedding a new light on the triple phenomena, would 
powerfully aid in the solution of a problem wblch, up to the present time, 
docs not appear to have been solved in a manner as clear and positive, as 
the interests of truth, science, and religion demand. Such has been and 
is now my belief, as well ss that of many others whom I thought proper 
to consult before undertaking the task in which I have engaged. 

1395. " Simple as my language is, it will be seen to have issued from 
the pen of a man who boldly seeks the truth, and is not to be arrested in 
his course by any worldly interests. Persuaded that in view of my 
position, my readers will grant me the indulgence which in a similar case 
I could not refuse them, I will proceed to the main question without further 
preliminaries. I divide my monograph into two parts ; faots opposed to 
the Pneumatology of M. de Mirville, and the Supernatural in General of 
M. de Gasparin. 


;;■ Google 


274 ADDITIONAL CORaOBOE.ATIVE EVIDENCE 

First rart. 
1S96. " TaWo turning and mediuinahip are nothing morCj in the opinion 
of M. de Mirville, than the work of the devil ! I give an ahstract of his 
doctrine as found in his Pneumatology. ' In the lettei-,' he says, ' which 
I had the honour to addraaa to the Societe Mesmerisme of Paris on the 
non-intervention of the devil in therapeutic mesmerism, dated Sept. 20, 
1847, and published in numbers 54, 56, and 57 of the Journal of Magne- 
tism, I established the existence of the devU, with the attributes given him 
in the Scriptures, as well as the power he possesses, with divine permission, 
to aet moraHy and physically on mankind, as set forth in the same holy 
books.' 

1397. "In view of what I have just said, I oannot be mistaken by M. de 
Mirville with respect to demonology. But while admitting the existence 
of a devil^ and his power over man, I cannot agree with the opinion of M. 
de Mirville io his Phamnatology, which admits the direct intervention of 
the devil in table turning and table talking, as well as in the powers of 
mediums ; a view of the subject which I hold to be at variance with the 
teachings of the Catholic Church on the possessed, and the manner of de- 
liverance therefrom, the evil spirit, which I proceed to explain. 

1398. " It is an axiom as old as the world — in proportion as the cause 
is removed the effect ceases; mblaCa cuusa ioUilur efecttis. The truth 
of this masim, in reference also to diabolical possessions, is found to be 
esplioitly proved in the Holy Soripturea. A mute is presented to Christ 
to be cured: ohlatus est ei mutus. The Divine Master, knowing that 
dumbness is caused by the devil, hastens to remove the cause, by chasing 
the evil spirit from the body of the possessed, which being doce, the mute 
spoke in the midst of the people ravished with admii-ation. 'And he was 
casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to pass when the devil 
was gone out, the dumb spake, and the people wondered.' St. Luke xi. 14. 

1399. " There was at Philippi, in Maeedonia, a girl who, being possessed 
of the evil spirit, had the gift of divination to such an extent, that people 
came from all parts to consult her, much to the benefit of her masters. St. 
Paul having chased the demon from the body of the possessed, she lost 
the ^ft of divination ; which exasperating her masters, they dragged St. 
Paul before a magistrate like a malefactor. (Acts xv.) Admitting these 
principles, it follows that if the devii intervenes directly in tables and me- 
diums, as Christ drove him from the mute, and St. Paul from the girl of 
Philippi, then, a fortiori, should clairvoyants lose Jhcir lucidity, tables bo 
made to stand still, aud mediums be depiived the power of tracing a line 
however short j mllala causa tolUtur effecius. The cause being removed, 
the effect must cease. 

1400. " Oar next object is to refer to the means for removing the evil 
spirit wherever found j and consulting the Catholic ritual affords us this 


;;■ Google 


knowledge. In fact, agi'ceablj to these teactinga, demons are driven off 
bj the sacred names of God and Jesus, by prayer, the sign of the cross, 
by holy water, and exorcisms ; and these means being known, I am going 
to report the effect of these means on clairvoyant subjects, tables, and 
mediums. 

1403. " Haying witnessed some estraordinary phenomena, and desiring 
to assure myself as to the presence of a diabolical agency in these iiiani- 
festationa, as I had been persuaded to believe — profiting by the opportunity 
offered by some mediums magnetized by others, and not by myself — I was 
induced to pray to invote the sacred names of God and Jesus, to make 
the sign of the cross oa the subjects, and went so far as to sprinkle them 
with holy water, with the design of driving out the devil, should he have 
taken possession of them. However, as not one of these mediums lost, in 
my presence, the smallest part of their powers, I was led to infer that the 
devil had nothing to do with the phenomena. 

1404. " The following fact should attract the attention of all observers 
holding the orthodox faith : A youth of thirteen, put to sleep by his 
mother, at my house, gave proof of the greatest qlairvoyance, even so far 
as to be ia communion with supermundane beings. Alarmed, as I ac- 
knowledge I was, at what passed linger my eyes, and suspecting, as I did, 
that the devil might be the agent of those phenomena, I took my crucifix, 
and preaentiag it to the clairvoyant, conjured him in the holy name of 
Jesus. Hut in place of repelling it, as I expected, he seized the cross in 
the most affectionate manner, and, smiling, pressed it to his lips ; as much 
to the edification of his mother as of myself. Should M. de Mirville 
de'<ivc the iddresa of the parties, he can have it 

1405 "The means thu^ emplojed by me to diacoier if the evil spirit 
actuited mesmeric subjects, have been employed also by other persons 
with the same view, and with similar results Should M. de Mirville 
desire to know some of these persons, I will be happy to facilitate the 
acquiintance As ti exorcism, it is known by the biography of the cele- 
brated clairvoyant Piudeni^e, that although esoicited oa several occasions, 
the osoicisms failed to depnve bim, in the smtlle'st degiee, of his great 
clairvoyiace To the taft"" which. I have just reported in support of the 
non-1 atervention of the devil, some new tacts of another kind will be 
adjoined, which in some measure confirm the first. 

1406, " One of the models of sacred elociueace, the E. P. Lacordaire, 
speaking of mesmerism in 1S46, fer from qualifying it as nafanical, as M. 
de Mirville has done, proclaimed from the pulpit of truth, in the church 
of Notre Dame of Paris, that this phenomenon belonged to the order of 
prophecy, and that it was a provision of the divinity to humble the pride 
of materialism. This language, dracended from the summit of the sacred 
tribune, is known to have received the public approbation of Mgr. Afire, 
the centre of Catholicism of the diocese of Paris, who. 


,v Google 


276 ADDITIONAL CORROBOEATIVI 

faithful, said to them : 'Mj hrothcrs, it is God who speaks with the mouth 
of the illustrious I)ominican.' 

1407. "A very pious female, abandoned by her medical advisor, being 
in a state of despair, was magnetized by one of her parents, and fell into 
the most complete ti-ance. In oce of her first sleeps, she said she saw a 
person who, according to the description she gave of him, appeared to be 
the clairYojant'a great-grandfether, deceased several years before the birth 
of his grand-daughter. The latter was cured by the adyiee received during 
her trajQCe condition from the stud groat-grandfather. This fact appeared 
to me so grave in its nature, and so interesting to science and religion, 
that I thought proper to publish it Jn number nineteen of the Maffnetisme 
SpiritualisCe, with an appeal to all those who, by their knowledge, might 
be able to expMn this pheaomenon. 

1408. "Among those to whom our appeal was made, figured the theo- 
logians, to whom, in speaking of the person who appeared to the elaii'- 
voyant, I said : ' Should this not be considered the devil, who, assuming a 
fantastic personation, took that of the great-grandfather of M. K., and 
appearing thus to him, cured him of a disease which he himself had 
originated J" 

1409. " Some copies of the number of the journal in question were 
sent to the sovereign pontiff, through his apostolic nuncio at Paris, to Mgr. 
the archbishop of Paris, to the faculty of theology at Sorbonne, to IIB. 
PP. Jesuits of the Sue des Posies, to E. P. Laeordaire, and to the Oal- 
vinistio Consistory of Paris, begging them to enlighten mo on a fact of 
such grave impoi-tance. But to the present time, a period of three years, 
not one of these great personages has informed me that the phenomenon 
to which I invited their attention is the work of the devil, which proves 
that, in their opinion, the evil one is a stranger to this phenomenon ; for 
otherwise they would not have failed to answer my inquiry, if only from 
interest for religion, or through charity to myself Should M. de MirviUe 
desire to know the clairvoyant I refer to, he can be conducted to hia 
domicile. 

1410. " Mgr. Sibour, on mesmerism, and La Grandeur, if interrogated, 
will tell you that the thoughts expressed by clairvoyants aie only reflec- 
tions from their magnetizers, without saying a single word to you about 
the devil. But we have said enough on clairvoyants, and will pass to the 
tables. 

1411. " I have made a great many esperiments in table-turning and 
table-talking with pious laymen and with ecclesiastics, men of prayer and 
serious habits, and even with a venerable bishop, and always in a very 
serious manner; desbing to know, for the sake of religion and our souls, 
if the devil is in reality the agent who conveys movement and language 
to the tables. Besides exorcism, we have employed all the means taught 
and prescribed in the Catholic Church to drive out the devil, and we have 


,v Google 


OP SPIRITS. 277 

never obtained any rcsuUs; for neither prayer, nor tlie &i,red nam''; (if 
God and Jesua, nor the sign of the erosa made on the tables, nor tte ciu 
cifis, nor the chapelet, (tte beads,) nor the Gospels, noi the image of 
Christ placed on the tables, nor holy water, could atop their tuvninc;s 
knookidgs, and replying to our quesfaons. But far fiom it, and much to 
our astonishment, we have seen the table turn over befoio tie imige of 
Christ crucified. I will say no more. In the espenments miJe with the 
bishop jnst named, and the person with whom I was boarding, it wis the 
Tciicrablo bishop himself that made the sign of the ores on a stand, with 
out in the le'!st lelarding the motion of that small piece of furniture 
MonaeiE^neur then aaked the stand if it loved the noss and it replying in 
the affiimative, it was with surprise thit MonsPigneur saw the stand turn 
over before his toix jiastoralf, and speak to him m orthodox hnguage of 
a fatuie life 

1412. "If, accoi-ding to all the ficts which I have just ri-portod, it be 
necessary to reason agreeably to BI de Muvillc, bahild what that rtasonm^ 
must be. The teachings of the Oatholio ntual giie to prayer, to the 
sacred names of Grod and Jesus, to the sign of the cross, to the holy water, 
and the exorcisms, the virtue of driving the devil (le dimon) out of the 
possessed. Now, as neither prayer, the sacred names, the sign of the cross, 
&c. are able to drive the spirit out of mediums, nor out of tables, which, 
acoording to M. de MirviUe, are also victims, then the Catholic Instructor, 
which assigns these means for removing evil spirits, must be in error. 
Then the Scripture, the SS. PP., and the Church, authorities on which the 
Catholic teachings are based on the subject of possessions, and the manner 
of delivering the posisesaed of the evil spirit, (Jes diraons,) are in error.* 
And what true Catholio dare entertain this language ? It is then to avoid 
getting into so unfortunate a position, that I have thought proper to reject 
the opinion of M. de MirviUe on the manifestations of spirits. I shall be 
told that if the prescribed means sometimes fail, it is from want of faith 
on the part of those who employ them. This is my reply to that objec- 
tion. The peasants do not possess a large quantity of feith, and, notwith- 
standing, Origen says the name of God, pronounced even by a peasant, 
chases the demons. — Origine^ contra cehum. 

1413. "There are a great many people, and among them figure some 
pious ecclesiastics and laymen, who quite frequently partake of the sacra- 
ment, who have experimented with me, who have prayed with me, have 

[s The use of tlie word " demons" ia the tait would seem to mnko it verj uncertain that 

the pluml, 119 it often is, it eouuot menu the dsvil, yet both singular and plui'ol, ths word 

to eignifyaepiritjirhethergoodorbttd. But out nnthor does notBeem to have jet bceo»s 
Tery UiDrouglily gmundod in the doeti'ine of tho communion of ungela with miin ; whioli 
will certaialy be found to bo the only tangible docfriue. — TniKBLiioii.] 


, Google 


278 ADDITIONAL OOREOBORATIVB EVIBENCE 

invoked with me the sacred names of God and Jesua, &c. ; is it then cre- 
dible that among these persons, not one should be found possessing a por- 
tion of faith equal to that of a peasant, which is able, accordiag to Origen, 
to drive out the devi! in tlie naviie of God? I am unable to believe it. 
What ! the yenerable bishop, who esperiuiented with me during four years, 
had sacrificed himself in propagating the faith in distant lands, should he 
not have as mucli faith as a peasant, in order to be able to remove an evil 
spirit in the name of God? This would be to insult the sacred labour of 
propagating the faith, in the person of one of its most distinguished apostles. 

1414. "But this is not enough; notice how St. John teaches us to know 
if a spii'it is of God or not. ' My well beloved, this is how to tnow that 
a spirit is of God ■. all spirits who confess that Jesus Christ haa come in 
the flesh, are of God, and those who do not confess that he is come ia the 
flesh, are not of God.' (1 John ix.) Instructed by St. John in the man- 
ner of kuowing the spirits of God, to assure myself further on the nature 
of spirits or occult forces, exhibited in the movement and language of tables, 
I have used the method indicated by St. John. It was with this view that, 
my little fable being in motion, I addressed to it the following questions : 
Do you confess that Jesus Christ is come iu the flesh F Tea, it replied. 
The samequestion,repBatedsevoral times, produced uniformly the same an- 
swer. Having this experiment alone at my house, I was desirous of seeing 
whether the same results would be obtained iu company. With this de- 
sign. I went to the bouses of persons acquainted with these phenomena, 
and begged a gentleman, a medium, to place his hands with mine on a 
stand. The movement of the stand being felt, the same question was an- 
swered in the same manner. And after this experience can I conscienti- 
ously believe in the intervention of the devil in the turning and speaking 
of the tables, without regarding the testimony of St. John a; 
and should I regard it as such ? It is for M. de Mirville to a 

1415. "But I do not stop here. It is said in the ritual of Paris and 
others, in the chapter of the possessed, as follows : Signa energvmenorvmh 
sunt. Ignota Ungtia Hogni idgue, masdma ierie verborum, guas previderi 
won. jjofiKJ'Ulii velita, JoqueiUemt inlelligere disfanfia, et ootilla paie/acere 
et vires supra etatis sum naliiram ostendere. Yery well, if demons, as 
the ritual says, speak all languages, even those unknown, after the great 
number of esperimeuls which I have made, I am prepared to declare that 
tables do not speak all languages, even the known ones, nor do they under- 
stand them. Let some one who does not understand Greek, addressing a 
question to the toble in French, i-equest it to reply in Greek, and we will 
see if the table does it. Let a stranger give to an inquirer at the table a 
question in a language unknown to liim, limiting himself to merely read- 
ing it, and we will see if the fable respond; I defy all the tables iu the 
world to do it. If M. de Mirville desires to make these experiments with 
me, I am entirely at his service. 


,v Google 


OT' TOE EXISTENCE 0¥ SPIRITS. 279 

1416. " I have endeavoured to discover if tables have tlie faculty which, 
accordiug to the ritual, is poaaessed hj the devil (les demons) to penetrate 
the hidden and the future, and I have found in this direction more 
error than truth. As to the superior physical force which, according to 
the ritual, is possessed by the devil, (les /demons,') there is not a single tnrn- 
iiig table in the world, whose movement cannot be arrested or retarded by 
enveloping the hands of the experimenters in silk ; which proves that the 
tables have not a power supra nahtram, and that of course it could not be 
the devil who furnishes the momentum. But what gives more force to the 
reasons on which I rest, for not referring the motive-power to an evil 
spirit, is this : that having made them sep -at ly kn w t f u p 1 tes of 
the church of France, three of whom are n p on n th 1 ous in- 
vestigation of these phenomena, begging due esam nat n an I port if 
my opinion is in error, that I may retra t and w te &"^ n t the tables, 
not one of these prelates has pronounced m w ng n n the I t blamed 
my exposition of facts. And in case it n y I m n ssa y to tabliah 
this lact, I retain the letters of these prelates. Let us now pass to the 
consideration of the mediums.* 

1417. " Hearing that there were persons whose hands, without their 
will, were made to write some very extraordinary things, and that these 
persons were called ' mediums,' one day, in order to assure myself of the 
fact, I took a crayon in my hand, and placing it on paper, concentrated 
myself as much as possible. But a few minutes had passed, when I felt 
mj hand controlled without my will, and saw it trace some lines, letters, 

[® HaYing reiiclied this stage of our aalhov'a remnrks, Ms translator bogs leave to snbmit 
tliam to a traDsioiit review. It is evi<]ont tbat his investigations in ths pb^eical demoQ- 
Btrations, relating to Bpiiitnal pbiloaophy, foil very short of the intelligeHoe of the present 
timo. Ho seems to be a total stranger to llmt flood of truth and love that haa for years 
been ponring its blesaings on the hearts and minds of tens of thousands of delighted and 
grateful recipients in the Western hemisphere, and by the Tery means that appear to hare 
been fully in his poivei of reaehing that heavenly boon, hut nhich Tieie (Jl esliausted to 
convince the world tJiat the devil haa nothing to do with it. 

This is ceitiunly a point gained on Catholio ground, and had oar friend supplied some 
argument equally conolnsive for Iheologiana of the opposing school, he ivould probably 
save thetn the sin of making ont of the devil, by imputation, a veritable naint. 

The quBsHon will naturally arise with his readers, If the power and intelligenoe do not 
emanate from the denl, from ^hom or what do they emanate? £ut on this subjeet, i^om 
some teaaoQ that can only be guessed at, onr author, the abbot, is so far silent. Tho 
confirmed theory of spirit intercourse, wlien the vehicle is meehonioal or anlomaUo, makes 
the eharooter and intelligenoe of the oonunonioation depend on the oommunicaOng spirit, 
subject to apparent irregularities. Bnt our nnthor. In his hurry perhaps to prove his &- 
voiu'ite postulate of esclading the devil, ma^es them depend on the one, as he says, who 
" consults the table." If ho speaks Greek, tton the table talks Qreeli, and ditto for all . 
other languages, &c. Cat certainly the marquis would comer him here. Eo says, also,, 
that tho motive power is interoepled by a non-conductor, as silk ronnd the hands.. 
Although this maybe ti-ua to some extent with feeble mediums, still the fact that tables: 
often movo without contact with any one, must nullify the abbot's theory, whatever it; 
may be.] 


;;■ Google 


280 ADDITIOfJAL CORROBORATIVE EVIDENCE 

and words. This esperiment being repeated often with the same BuccesB, 
I have therefore become a medium^ though of a secondary degree. 

1418. " Desiring to know wiiether, in this phenomenon, there might not 
be some diabolical agency, in order to satisfy my mind on that subject, I 
asked of the occult power, or the spirit that controlled my hand, if it was 
the devil; being answered in tho negative, I requested to have proof o* it. 
Scarcely were those words uttered, wbeii my hand, moving with energy, 
drew a large croga. Seeing this, I put the same questions about J. C. 
that were put at my table, and the answers, being written, were the same ; 
fi'om which I concluded ttat the agency in the writing of mediums is the 
same as in moving the tables, which, in my opinion, is not that of the 
devil, as already said. However, in order to confirm my assurance of the 
non-intervention of the devil in the phenomena of mediums, I desired to 
add another esperiment, which follows : 

1419. "As the devil speaks al! languages, according to the ritual, even 
those unknown, to see whether the occult power or spirit which caused me 
to write possessed this Satanic attribute, which, being so, would prove the 
intervention of the devil in the performance of mediums, I asked tho 
invisible agent if it would cause the Lord's prayer to be written in several 
languages, and was answered in the affirmative. Yielding my hand with 
a pen to the motive power, the Pater was written in two ways, which the 
same power, also by writing, SMd was in Valaque and in Russian. Then 
requesting the same to be written in French, Spanish, Italian, and Latin, 
it was immediately done; when requesting it to be written in English and 
German, was answered it could not be done. Why not? I inquired. 
Because you neither speak nor write those two languages, which is 
necessary. 

1420. "In what languages then, I asked, are jou able to make me 
write ? In the languages which I spoke on earth, as the Valaque and 
Kussian, and those which you speak. The Pater, thus written, I had tho 
honour to present it personally to Monseigneur the Archbishop of Paris, 
by his request. Having mentioned this, I was advised to request my spirit 
friend to write something in Valaque, and have it submitted to some one 
acquainted with that language, in order to determine the fact of ifs being 
■so; which proposal I willingly accepted. 

1421. " But, returned to my house, the idea occurred to me to make an 
■.esperiment to control my familiar spirit myself. I wrote on a piece of 
jpaper a phrase in French, and took a separate copy of it on another piece 
-of paper. I read this phrase to my spirit, and requested him to render it 
iin Valaque. The spirit, having made some lines, told me by writing that 
ithe translation was alrcady made. I requested him to do the same with 
;it in Spanish, Italian, and Latin, and it was done. Eequesting him fur- 
ther to write tho same in English, he replied it could not be done, as I 
•did not speak that language. Allowing a few minutes to pass, I took the 


,v Google 


OP THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 281 

copy of the phrase, and requested the spirit to do the same with it that he 
had done with the original. The spirit having caused me to write, as he 
professed, the same phrase in the same languages as he had caused me to 
write it in previously, I hastened to compare the two translations; but 
what was my surprise when finding the Spanish, Italian, and Latin trans- 
lations of the copy like those of the original; I found the Valaque transla^ 
tion of the original and that of the copy not at all alite ! 

1422. "Conyinced, then, that my spirit did not understand the Valaqtte, 
■which proved to me, according to the ritual, that it was not a devil, («n 
dimon,) hut that notwithstanding he had deceived lue, I gave him a 
severe reprimand, treating him as an infamous cheat, and driving him 
from my presence. At this juncture, my hand was caused to tremhie ex- 
cessively, which terminated by writing in large characters : ' I am the 
devil, and you are a bad preacher that seeks to find out the secrets of God I' 
Very well, I said; your proclamation in large letters that you are the 
devil, is no reason why I should believe it. The devil, according to the 
ritual, speaks all languages, and you do not speak the Valaque nor English, 
and therefore you are not the devil. If I am a bad preacher, that does 
not concern you. It is God who will judge me, and I submit to his holy 
will. Could I see jou as I feel you, I would fix you well ; but as it is, I 
decline any further correspondence with you. 

1423. " Scarcely had I expressed these words, when my hand, being 
infl.uenced, wrote as follows : ' Pardon I pardon I I am not the devil. If 
I said so, it was to frighten yoit, because you continued to plague me with 
your questions; hut I see you are a manthat feai-s nothing. You are not 
a bad preacher, but a great thinker. Continue then to esperitnent with 
me, and I will always tell you the truth I 

1424. " Very well, I pardon you, and request you to say, without deceiv- 
ing me, what languages you do speak ? ' I speak no other bngnages than 
those which you speak, and if I did otherwise, it was for amusement,' 
Then what are the languages which the spirits speak? 'Those of the 
communing person, and no others.'* And this ended the meeting. 

1425. "Wishing still to test what had been said to me by my spirit, I 
went to the house of a writing medium, like myself, and begged him to 
tiy some experiments in writing. In the midst of our experiments, I 
wrote the following words ou a small piece of paper in Spanish ; Como U 
Itainos? and witkout making their signification known to the medium in 
French, requested him to read them to the spirit friend. This wa'< done, 
but the spirit was silent. The medium, however, insisting on an answer, 
was impressed by the spirit to write the word maUifur, (misfortune ) The 


[* This is probably com 
raTeree is true w&en the w 
Thamslatoh.] 


,v Google 


282 ADDITIONAL CORROBORATIVE 

reply not agreeing with the question, I told the medium fo Kty to hia spirit 
that he had badly replied. Then the spirit made the medium write as 
follows: 'If I have not oomplied with youv request, it is because I do not 
nuderstand that language.' 

1426. "As the medium did not uuderatand what had been read to the 
spirit, which in French would mean, Comment vous oppdez-vous? (What 
is your name ?) I perceived that if the spirit did not reply to the Spanish, 
it was because the medium neither spoke nor understood that tongue; 
which agreed with what my spirit had told me. Then I requested the 
medium to aslc his spirit to make me write. On the affirmative teapouse 
of the spirit, I took the pen, and addressing the same question to him : 
Comote llamas? he replied in Spanish — Seniio. Answer me in French — 
Benoit. In Latin — Benedictus. 

1427. "This experiment confirming what my spirit had told me, that 
the spirifa could produce only the language of those with whom they com- 
muned, was a new proof for me of (he non-intervention of the devil; see- 
ing, according to the ritual, that he is master of all languages, and that 
mediums only write those they understand, and have previously learnt.* 
If M, de Mirville desires to make some such experiments with me, it will 
afford me great pleasure to do so. 

1428. "Notahcne: What merits particular regard in the information 
received from my spirit friend as to the language used by spirits in com- 
muning with men is, that the same was said one hundred and five years 
since by the ecstatic Swedenhorg. See No. 236 of his Treatise on Heaven 
and Hell, by Le Boys des Guays. 

1429. "This win sufEoe for the present for M, de Mirville. It remains 
for him to esplaia the facts we have reported, and to reconcile them with 
his Pnetimatoloffi/ : in expectation I proceed to notice the Supemahiral 
in General of M. de Gaspariu. 

Second Part. 

1430. "All the prodigies of the mesmeric subjects of clairvoyants, the 
sorcery, haunting spirits, apparitions, visions, &c., owe their origin, ac- 
cording to M. de Gasparin, to nervous exoifement, fluidic action, and some- 

[» Oui' author eaems to ooaiavoibts dramatU petam's : he first aaja it ia the iaugu^ige 
of the coraiBimioaDt, und oftentord the language of the medium whiuh the spirit under- 
Elands. But tha simplo thaoiy iE, aooording to the experionos of the Weatem hemispliere, 
that nhat li namnuDioated depeuda on the istelligBfice of the communicntang n^nt, 
which is tha spirit. That apirita, it ia trao, poaaeaa the clairvoyant faenlty, and can read 
our thoughta, butthoae thonghts miiatba olothed in alanguagothey tmderstand.— Teans- 

[I am under the impreaalon that tte potver of the spirit to oonstrae onr thonghts, varies 
with the Bpirit and medium, and with the same medium nnaer different conditions as to 
health and tranqnillitj of mind. No invHriablo rule can, in my opinion, tie said to exist 
Bs to the ponera of spirits to learn oac thoughts, whether wa apeali one langaage or an- 
other.— Dk. H*BE.] 


,v Google 


OP THE EXISTENCE OP SPIUITg. 2S3 

times are Tialluoinalions. As I do not design here to raako a critical ana- 
IjBis of M. de Gaspariu'a work, not considering myself capable, and leav- 
ing tliis honour to those who are in some scientific line, I design merely 
occupying myself with some fects which refer personally to me, and which 
appear to me to oppose some points in the doctrine of M. de Gasparin in 
his table-turning, or Supernatural in General, as already noticed in the 
introduction to the monograph, and I commence with the subject of 
ecstasy. 

1431, " Speaking of eestatics, M. de Gaspai-in esplaics himself as fol- 
lows : *Aa to their intellectual faculties, they are capable in those cm 
prodigious development. The eestatics declare themselves that they have 
two souls; that a voice foreign to their own causes them to speak; thai 
they suddenly receive ideas entirely nnknown to them, and terms of es 
pressioQ entirely strange to them. It happens even that the peaaan 
accustomed to patou, speaks French, and that illiterate men express them 
selves in Latin. Now, have we something here that is suiKmatural 
Certainly not; it is a physiological state, or often the treasures of reminis- 
cence, which the subject possessed, though iu feet not aware of it. The 
peasant may have known how to speak French; she may not have known 
it, and still it may all have been engraved on the deep recesses of the 
memory, where nothing is ever really effaced. Exalted or sick, she finds 
herself in possession of the French language. A merchant, who has 
scarcely passed the first classes, and who never knew Latin, finds himself 
the possessor of the Latin language, and embaiTasses his doctor, whom he 
addresses in that tongue.' 

1432. "According to this ecstatic theory of M. de Gasparin, it follows 
that the ideas expressed hy the subjects, and which were unknown to 
them in their normal state, are nothing more than reminiscences. I admit, 
with M. de Gasparin, that reminiscence is only the return of the soul to 
the recollection of a thing or an idea, which, though engraven on the me- 
mory, was forgotten. This return, however, does not happen without some 
reniarlts, which, from the recollection of some ideas or incidents, conduct 
the mind to the recollection of what was forgotten. 

14S3. "I am a medium; according to the received opinion, a medium is 
a waking magnetic subject. Now, every magnetic subject is in a degree 
ecstatic, therefoiel being a medium, am ei,=tatn. Well I being etstatie 
take a pencd nnd concentrating myself lO thit state le^ne^t the occult 
power that moves my hand with ut my volition t cause it to wufe if it 
IS possible something on the creation The laat w rd is fcarcely j ro- 
nouneed when my hand proi,eeds to write without interruption something 
tine or filse on the creation, whn,h surprises me 

1434 This inteiYiew terminates and desiring to know if these ideas 
on the eicition come fiom lemmisceni.e'' I S(,eL to discover if they could 
ha\e been engiaven on my memorj eitl er fiom rendmj, ir hearing them 


Google 


284 ADDITIONAL CORltOBOEATIVE EVIDENCE 

related. With this view I ooramencei by reading religious and pliilosopliic 
boots that would be likely to discuss the qti bt Id fid li 
like what I had written. I consulted the p bli 1 b d th y 

tEiined nothing on the creation similar to wh t my h 1 h d ted 

Not a professor, philosopher, naturalist, phy I g t theol g 1 

torian, with whom I had ever had any intero Id 11 t yth 

of the kind. 

1435. "After this, I reason as follows: h m 1 11 th m 
by which what was written by my hand on th t 11 h b 
impressed on my memory, nothing appears twrr tthtblf th 
fore, these notions on the creation cannot b ira d d 

1436. "But it is not enough, we have d th t n mm 
necessary, which, by the recoIlectioiT of an bj t d t w 

led to the further recollection of something f tte Th t ti h Id 

H w la 


take place, some 
the case related, 


tim 
n t 
n d 


I 


d 
t w 
P n 


h w 

qu 
it th 


Ittl 
d 
th 


tmyh 
d th b 
y f M 1 


al 


quired process, 


to 


t. 


1437. "Now 


f the. 


d as a 


th 


t u 


t 


TO 


they do not ema 


tef 


m th 


d 


il wh 


bly to 


entire stranger 


t th 


l^ 


n 


-f 


t 


t th 


1 


person that cent 11 d 


my h 


d 


M 


1 & 


p nb 


g 


d ea d 
? t t t 
does not believe a tunu p t n ram th th d d 

who then caused to b wr tten by my hud u h t nge thmgs, without my 
knowledge or as ist n And I b g M de Ga p riu to be so good as to 
explain this phe n n n wh 1 ip a t b n pposition with his theory 
on the prodigies of ecstatic subjects. Shonld JI. de Gaaparin desire to see 
what I have written, he can be gratified. But what will he say, when 
having requested my spiHt to reply in writing on some subject familiar to 
my mind, ho is unable to do it, or replies contrary to my thoughts and 
convictions ? Can this be called reminiscence ? I pass now to consider 


1438. " In speaking on this subject, the Stlpemat^^ral of M. de Gasparin 
says, 'The clairvoyance of mesmerism appears in genei'al to have only the 
character of an echo. Its wonders are those of reminiscence or perception 
of im^es and thoughts, which occupy the intelligence of the person with 
whom the clairvoyant is in rapport. This appears to he the balance-sheet 
of animal magnetism, and it has changed but little since its origin.' (Tome 
ii. p»g« 311.) 

1439. "According to what M. de Gasparin has just told us, it follows, 
that when a clairvoyant fells us in bis sleep that he sees the spirit of a 
deceased person, and gives ns an exact description of his person, we are 
not to regard it as the deceased person that the clairvoyant sees, but his 
image impressed on the memory of that clairvoyant from acquaintance with 
the defunct when living, or in the memory of the consulting visitor in 


;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OP SPIRITS. 285 

rapport; bo that the clairvoyant, in tltese apparitions of the dead, is go- 
verned only by reminiscence or the reflection of images or of thouglita. 
Now, having allowed M. de Gasparin to speai, I desire in my turn to 
speak also. 

1440. " In January, 1848, a wori was published, entitled Les Arcanes de 
la Vie Future Rivdie : The Arcana of a Future Life Bevealed. My atten- 
tion being attracted by the title of this work, it was procured, and proved 
to be nothing but a eolleotion of the apparitions of deceased persons to 
clairvoyants. 

1441. " On so delicate a question, I thought it heat to consult the 
Scriptures, to see whether the appearance of the dead to the living was 
admitted by the saorcd volumes. I opened, then, the Bible, and the first 
passage that met my eye was the chap, xxvii. of the first book of Kin^, 
where it stud that Samuel had appeared to the witch of Endor, and that, 
by the intermediation of the latter, the prophet spoke to Samuel; au 
apparition on which were sketched those reported by M. Oahagnet in his 
Arcana. I saw afterward in the second book of Maccabees, the high- 
priest Onias and the prophet Jeremiah appearing to Judas Maccabeus. 
I see in St. Matthew, chap, svii., the apparition of Moses and Blias to 
Peter, John, and James on the Tabor. Finally, I read, in chap, xsviii. 
of the said St. Matthew, that at the death of our Saviour Jesus Christ, 
many of the dead appeared to a great number of the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem. 

1442. " Convinced by the holy volume of the possibility, or rather of 
the reality, of the apparition of the dead to the living, I put to myself this 
question : Can these apparitions of the dead to the living which, according 
to the Bible, took place in former times, be permitted to occur at the pre- 
sent time ? In order to resolve that question, I desired again to consult 
the Bible, and found the Holy Spirit, in Ecelemstes, holding the following 
language : ' What has been, -is -uihai shall he ; and what has teen done, is 
•what shall he done again.' 

1443. " Then, I said to myself, the appearance of the dead to the living 
has taken place, according to the Bible; therefore, agreeably to the same 
sacred volume, what has esisted at one time may exist at anotlicr. There- 
fore, there is no reason for rejecting; the doctrine of communion of spirits, 
God willing, at the present time 

1444. " But it is to be found out whether the a| pantions reported m 
the Arcana were realitita, or were or3y illusions so cilkd The solution 
of this problem belongs to me And with this view I found myself at the 
house of the author of the \icam, whi-rt, a very senous disou'Jsion ttok 
place between him and myself on h s woil which ended with the apii 
rition of my brother Jo&tph the thud oie thit fiaUies m thv ^et, i 1 
volume of the Arcana. In fact, I callel foi the apjaiition of m-\ 1 te 
brother, and scarcely hid a few mmitei paaiLd when tho elauvoiant 


Googk 


r, CO Elton Oa ATI VE EVIDENCE 

Adile, told me she saw a gentleman, and by the description she gave of 
the stature, costume, character, the cause and place of the death of the 
person appearing, I could not avoid recognising in the said person that of 
my hrother Joseph, 

1446. " This apparition had such an effe t n n t L ep me awake 

the whole night, seeking to explain the pi m But becoming 

fatigued ■with researches, I thought, as a m "n t t he Ue to explain 
these apparitions hy the same means as M. d G p m p t nds to explain 
them at the present time. I said to my If th t ) yants saw the 
image of things impressed on the memory of tl p w th whom they 

were ia rapport; the image of my late hrother being engi-aved on my 
memory, it was enough for M. Cahagnet to put me, by an act of his will, 
in rapport with his claJi'Voyant, for the latter to have seen the image of my 
brother on the tablets of my luemory. 

1446. "With this impression, I wrote to M. Gahagnet, saying to him, 
that in spit© of my atfeurance yesterday of the reality of the apparition of 
my brother, my knowledge of magnetism had caused rae to-day to think 
otherwise, and that further evidence would be necessary to couyince me of 
its reality. M. Cahagnet having complied, two spirits were evoked ; one 
of iny aforesaid brother Joseph, and the other of Antoinette Carr^, the 
sister of my domestic; apparitions reported m the second volume of the 
Arcana, and the description given by the clairvoyant could not have been 
more correct. But as I still entertained the idea that these images could 
not be traced by the clairvoyant in my mind, this meetang produced no 
results. Curious, however, to know whether other clairvoyants possessed 
the same faculty as the clairvoyant of M. Cahagnet in regard to these ap- 
paritions, in the sense I understand them, I begged M. Lecocq, clock- 
maker of the navy, living at Argenteuil, to try some experiments with hjs 
sister, a very lucid cliwrvoyant, 

1447. "Five apparitions appeared, of whom three were unknown to 
him or his clairvoyant, knowiug only their names; and their identity was 
determiued by the assistance of other persons present who had known 
them, as reported from two sources, the letter written me hy 31. Lecocq, 
which M. de Gasparin can see, and the report made by the former to M. 
Cabagnet, which was published in the second volume of the Arcana, page 
244. In view of this fact, and others of the same nature come to my 
knowledge, my opinion as to the derivation of appearances and thoughts 
from the miad of communicants through the clairvoyant begins to be mo- 
dified. However, to he entirely convinced of the reality of these appari- 
tions, I should require similar facte to he presented to my own eyes. 

1448. " Animated by these sentiments, I requested a person in whom 
I reposed entire confidence, to give me the name of a defunct, entirely 
unknown to me, and that of Joseph Moral was given. The young clair- 
voyant of thirteen years, whom I named at the beginning of this mono- 


;;■ Google 


or spiKiTS. 287 

graph, being oae day put to eleep by Lb mother at my housa, I used the 
opportunity to request the Bubject to invoke the spirit of Joseph Morah 
Scarcely had two minutes elapsed, when the young clairvoyant announced 
the presence of a person, whom she described. Having never seen the 
said Joseph Moral, and therefore not able to say any thing about him, I 
was limited to ■writing down a faithful account of him as given by the 
clairvoyant. 

1449. " The meeting ended, I sought the person who had furaished the 
name, and reading the description, and mueh surprised to find it correct, 
she said to me, 'How, sir, were you able to give such an exact description 
of M Joseph Moral whom you never knew ind have never seen ?' 

1450 This fii-t WIS for me a positne tonviction that clauyoyants in 
then com m m ion with the dead do not s mply see the image of the 
deceased in the memory of the consult ng pirtj but fhit tl ej see the 
veritible so Is of the departs 1 as the witch of Lnlor saw the soul of 
Samuel aci,oiding to our creed called the Holy Sj iiit of the Ecclesiist o 
And ahould M. de &aspaim desire to know the peison who gaie me the 
name of M. Joseph Moral, it will give me pleasure to wait on him to her 
house. 

1451. " Here is another fact like the preceding, but still more interest- 
ing. M. de Sarrio, of Alicant, in Spain, a cavalier of Malta, gave to loj 
brother Joseph, of whom I have already spoken, fifteen thousand francs, to 
be distributed among the poor; for which sum my brother aforesaid gave 
[ 1 1 th 1 1 d At th death of M. de Sai-rio, his bro- 

th th M ^ f Al If 1 g 1 s heir, found this receipt among 

th I pers f tl d ce d At th d th of my brother, the Marquis 
d ^tkwtlltl thd been disbursed, addressed my 

t wh b m h h n th li t. But my sister, being unao- 
q tdwthh ff th led with him, submitted to the 

ni q th Ecl 1 1 f th d as d which, showing only the distribu- 
t f b If th t th th 1 If WIS claimed by the marquis, and 

fin lly n d tl bj t f 1 w t 

145 My te m h g d m de me a party to her troubles, in 

1 tf f mAl nt D mf t d by what had happened fo my sister, I 
ted my y 1 rv y t 1dm led the presence of my brother, 

who, as she had said, had several times been with her. He was reported 
present, and I questioned him in relation to the money received from M. de 
Sarrio, reproaching him in regard to the i-eversion of the said balance, and 
the pain he had caused my sister. 

1453. " My brother, astounded at my language, said, that he owed noth- 
ing to anybody; and as to the amount referred to, he had given it to Father 
Mario before dying, to be distributed to the poor; to prove which it would be 
necessary to call Father Mario. Scai-cely had my brother said this, when 
the clairvoyant said she saw a man with my brother, and from the descrip- 


;;■ Google 


tion she gave of him, I thought I recognised a Capuchin friar, who, inter- 
rogated by my brother, confirmed what he had said, 

1454. " Having never heard the name of Father Mario, as I had left 
Alicant thirty years hefore, I requested some particulars of his country 
and family, and was told he belonged to St. Vincent du Eespect, one league 
from Alicant, &c., and I put the following questions to my sister, by letter : 
Was your brother Joseph visited in his siclinesa hy a priest named Father 
Mario, having & sister at St. Vincent du Respect ? and do you know if 
this Father Mario is dead ? Following is the answer : 

1455. '"As to Father Mario, he left this country several years sinoe, 
and it is not known if he is in Franoe or Amerioa. He did not visit our 
b th D h 1 t iness, because he had left some years before. He 
ha tw t rs n was, in Algeria, and tho other went with him.' The 
1 tte w tten hy m to my sister on this subject, and her replies, with 

th d t 1 w p bl shed In the third volume of the Arcana. The 
1 t tl d posal of M. de G-asparin, and I would desire to ask 

that gentleman one question : Whether the apparition of Father Mario, as 
established by the letters of my sister, eoafirming the existence of Father 
Marfo, is not a positive fact, and not an hallucination ? Whether, as this 
monk had never been seen nor known hy me. Lis image could possibly 
have been perceived hy the clairvoyant through any impression made 
upon my mind ? Of course, it could not have been the devil who per- 
sonated Father Mario, if M. de Gasparin correctly repudiates the inter- 
vention of Satan in spiritual manifestations, 

1456. " Can M. de Gasparin explain to me the appearance of Father 
Mario consbtently with his Piyclwhgieal liypoikcns in General. These 
are the facts which I have at present to oppose to the Psyclwlogical Ra- 
tionale of M. de Gasparin. At a future time I shall be prepared to say 
more to him as well as to M. de Mirville, both on mesmerism and table- 
turning, as well as in regard to mediums. 

1457. "If tho marquis and count do not respond to my call, their 
silence wiU do great injury to the cause of truth, science, and religion. It 
is, then, in order not to act against interests so sacred, that I take pleasure 
in hoping that these gentlemen will comply with my wishes." 

Mechanical Movements without Contact. By Mr. Isaac Blien, President 
of the Sarmonial Societt/ o/ Philadelphia.* 

1458. Among the most distinguished and eloquent advocates of Spi- 
ritualism in Philadelphia, is Mr. Isaac Kehn, President of the Harmo- 
nial Society. It is said that a good countenance is a constant letter of 

* TbiB DOBHBnnication, as ncll as those immediately pieeedisg and foUo'wiiig it, iroultl 
have been Inserted under the head of Corrotorative Evidence, page 65, Ac, Imd thBjheen 


, Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 289 

reoommenclation. The truth of this adage is conspicuously realized in the 
instance of this sensible and agrocaTjle spiritualist. There is an air of good 
feeling and sincerity in Mr. Eehn's tones and expression, which would 
cause him to be ■viewed as a reliable witness before any honest and intelli- 
gent jury. 

1459. The fact of mechanical movements being induced without mus- 
cular contact, direct or indirect, is one of the phenomena which scarcely 
any one will believe without intmtive proof. It will be seen that on the 
third of February, 1854, after I had been engaged in the investigation of 
spiritual manifestations for more than two months, I was still so incredu- 
lous as to employ this language to Mr. Holcomb: " Tou believe fully that 
tables move ■without contact, because yoa have seen them thns moved; I 
am skeptical, because I have not seen them move without human contact, 
although I have been at several circles." 

1460. Bnt one of the forms of this phenomenon, which has excited the 
most wonder and incredulity, is that of the carrying of Mr, Henry Gordon, 
a medium, through the air without the contact of any mundane body. Mr. 
Eehn having been among the witnesses of this fact, I requested him to give 
me a statement of it, as well as of others of a similar kind. SubjuinoA is 
a letter, written in consequence of my request: 

PHIiAEElFHIA, August 1, 13orl. 

Pkofessob Robebt Hake: 

1461. Dear Sir: In obedience to yonr invitation, I will proceed to 
make a brief statement of the more prominent facta supporting the hypo- 
thesis, that the spirits of those who once dwelt with us do still hold inter- 
course with mortals. 

1462. During the early part of the year 1850, some friends of mine, in 
whom I had fall confidence, stated to me the result of several intarcommu- 
nions had with these mysterious agents, by which I was led to a determina- 
tion to test the matter for myself; and, accordingly, on the fifth day of July, 
in company with a friend, I visited N"ew York, that being the only acces- 
sible point known to ns at which to gain the object of our visit. The Fox 
family, consisting of Mrs. Eox, Mrs. Fish, (afterward Mrs. Brown,) Catha- 
rine and Margaret Fox were then at Barnum'a Hotel, giving to the public 
opportunities to test the reality or imposture of the so-called spiritual 
phenomena. We called at the rooms of the family, and obtained a sitting 
during the afternoon of the same day. A dozen or more persons were 
present at the sitting, the result of ■which was the conviction that the 
sounds were not a deception on the part of the mediums, but the result of 
some occult force and intelligence, independent of the ladies themselves. 

1463. Without entering into any detail of the incidents of the visit 
above referred to, or speculations upon the general subject under con- 
sideration, I propose to cite incidents in my own experience, which go to 
establish the truth of spiritual intercourse. 


;;■ Google 


290 ADLinONAL 

1464. Shortly after the eorameneement of the sounds in the first circle 
instituted in this city, and of which I was, from the first, a member, cle- 
monstrationa in the form of mO¥emeuls of tables, chairs, and other artiplea 
commenced. Many times they were very violent, but in moat instances it woa 
necessary that the hands of the company, and especially those of the meclium, 
should be upon the table. During the session of a circle, however, held in 
the afternoon — -and of course in daylight — these moyements became uausally 
violent. Two card-tables, aroitud whioli the company sat, having been 
drawn to the centre of the floor, were thrown backward and forward with 
great force. After moving thus for some minutes, one of the tables storted 
toward some two or three of the company, and pressed heavily againat 
them, causing them to recede until they had reached the wall; the table 
would then retreat to the centre of the floor, and, as it were, charge some 
two or three more, whom in like raaaner it would press back. Thu? it 
continued retreating and attacking, until the entire company were seated 
around at the sides of the room. 

1465. Having thus cleared the floor in the central part of the room, the 
table raae deliberately at the side next to myself, and so continued until it 
had turned some distance beyond the point of equilibrium, with the evi- 
dent design of performing a revolution, 

1466. These and other manifestations were at the time so wonderful 
and strange to that part of the company present which had never before 
met in a circle, as to cause great terror. One lady became so much alarmed 
duiing the performance of the spirits with the table as above described, 
that slie screamed aloud, which interfering with the requisite conditions 
for success, the table fell heavily upon the floor, breaking off the top. 

1467. During the rising of the table on the side toward myself, I 
reached my hand and pressed upon it, with the view of seeing what force 
was employed in raising it. "Upon removing my band, it would spring up 
as if it were suspended from the ceiling by an elastic cord. 

1468. At the time this phenomenon was occurring, a friend of mine, 
Mr. J. A. Cutting, of Boston, Massachusetts, being seated by my side, 
found himself moved, as though some one had drawn the chair on which 
be was sitting. He then placed his feet upon, the front round of the chair, 
so as to entirely insulate himself from the floor, and while in this position 
he waa raised from the floor, chair and all. This gentleman was quite 
large and stout, weighing, I should think, not loss than one hundred and 
seventy pounds. 

1469. I would here state particularly and emphatically, that at the time 
of these most violent movements of the table, no hands were wpon them, 
nor mas there any physical contact -witli tlie objects moved. 

1470. At the same session, a tumbler and pitcher being upon a wash- 
stand in 0, comer of the room, some five feet distant from any person pre- 
sent, suddenly a crash waa heard in the direction in which those articles 


,v Google 


OF srmiTs. 291 

were situated. Upon csamination, the tumliler was found to be broken 
into several hundred pieces, aad what is still more strange, tho pieces were 
not scattered around, but occupied a spot which did not exceed eight or 
ten inches in diameter ! It seemed ns if the tumbler had collapsed) even 
the bottom, thick as it was, was broken ^nto many pieces. These facta oc- 
curred at the house of Mr. George D. Henck, dentist, in Arch street, who, 
with the other persona present on that occasion, will at any time con-o- 
boKite these statemeuta. 

1671. On another occasion, at the house of Mr. J, Thompson, of this 
city, during a sitting, I requested, among other things, that the spirits 
would move the table without physical contict. Mre. Thompson, Mrs. 

K , and myself, the only persnns in the room, drew hack from the 

table, and it was then moved some sis or eight inches. In addition to 
this, it moved from various points, and objects were retained on the table, 
when under ordinary circumstances, from the inulinatinn of the table, 
they must have fallen off. 

1472. At a sitting at my own residence, some two years since, some 
very strange phenomena ooourrud. At the close of the session, a yiung 
man, of slender frame and constitution, (Mr. H. 0- Gordon,) had his hand 
thrown violently upon the centre of a large dining-tablc, weighing not less 
than eighty or ninety pounds. Some of the company were requested to 
raise Mr. Gordon's hand from the table. This, after much effort, was ac- 
complished, and, strange to relate, the table accompanied the hand until it 
was entirely isolated from the floor. This waa a result which I would have 
doubted, had it not come under ray own personal observation. 

1473. About the samo time, a company of persons whose nameo as far 
as I can recollect, I shall mention, were seated ari nd tw tabl joined 
together, in order to furnish room sufficient to seat tl p t'^ Th house 
in which I then lived had two parlours, with fold n doo The two 
tables referred to occupied the entire length of the f nt p I leaving 
barely room enough for the chairs at the front end f th m fh other 
end of the table extended quite to the folding doors, ieavin^, of course, no 
passage on either end. It so happened that I was seated at that end of 
the table projecting into the doorway. The medium, Mr. Gordon, was 
seated about midway of the tables, on the left, the other seats being occu- 
pied by the rest of the company. 

1474. After a variety of manifestations had oocntred, the medium was 
raised from his seat by an invisible power, and, after some apparent resist- 
ance on his part, was carried through the doorway between the parlours, 
directly over my head, and his head being bumped along the ceiling, he 
passed to the farther end of the back room, in whicli there waa no one 
beside himself 

1475. Although all the individuals present had not equally good oppor- 
tunity of ascertiuning the facts in this case, the room haying been some- 


;;■ Google 


292 ABl TI N4L C n L liTI"\LLMIlN L 

wliat darkened still 1 13 t ins t over the eul of tbe talile at i^Licli I was 
seated, and the uttei imj oss Lilitj of the medium j ass ug out in other 
way than o\er oui heads Lib continued conYersati n while thus sua 
pended, and his position is ind oa,ted by the sound, with other lacts iq 
the ease, lei've no rei'Jou^ll doubt of the perfoimance f the fuvf 

1476. There were present on the occas on alluded to the following per 
sons, viz Aaion Comfoit Geoige D Hentk Rebecca Thomas Naomi 
Thomas, Marianne Thomai Esther Henok Mrs Eolin J S llmtBer 
M, D., and many others Respectfully, I Eehn 

1477. Ihe truth of the ele\atiDn and carnage of this medium iloft by 
invisible agency, from one part of a room to another, does not depend on 
the testimony of one set of observers; several other respectable eye- 
witnesses have alleged the occurrence of a similar manifestation in (heir 

C'ommiimcafion from J. M. Kermedy, Esq. 

1478. One of our most zealous and eloquent spiritnalist-s, is my friend, 
J. M. Kennedy. He has done me the favour, out of many striking mani- 
festations observed by him, to communicate two, which are among the 
most demonstrative of a physical power and mental intelligence, and which 
cannot be ascribed to mortal agency. That in which the magnetic needle 
was moved by bis request, without physical confact, is, as I conceive, pre- 
eminently interesting. 

PniLADELl'IIIA, August, 1855. 

"PBOrEBSOE. Hake; 

1479. '-Sir : Ton ask me to state some facts I h.ive witnessed, which 
tended to convince my mind that the varied phenomena, occurring among 
us, are truly aspribable to the direct action of disembodied spirits. I will 
state two matters, remarking, however, that I have had other and different 
forms of evidence equally satisfactory to me. 

1480. "About two years since, I was invited to meet a private cu-cle 
to witness physical manifestations. I met them at the house of a near 
neighbour, whose ladyis'a" medium. There were about ten persons pre- 
sent. The circle being seated, the movement of the table and tipping in 
answer to questions ' occuiTed. I now asked for a communication with 
myself, which was assented to. I then inquired if the spirits would move 
the table, despite of my power to hold it still, the company to withdraw 
from the table, excepting tko medium aad myself The answer was, ' We 
will!' The company all arose, and removed their chaii-s; I stood up and 
took hold of the table, exercising my best judgment as to the use of my 
strength in the pending contest. The medium having placed her hand on 
the table, I promptly annouQcedj 'lam ready.' At once, the movement 
of the table commenced, despite of my efforts to prevent it, and having 
slightly pushed me backward, it began to draw me in the opposite direc- 


,v Google 


OP THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. Z\}6 

tion. It moveii entirely aoroas the room, dragging mo along with it, my 
feet sliding on the carpet. I resisted the motion of the tahle with all the 
power I could command, and no visible being but myself had any contact 
with it, escepting the medi\im, whose hand (not hands) was on the top of 
the table. 

1481. "I then, said, 'If I sit on the table, will jon throw me off?' 
Answer. Yea. I at once sat on it, and the medium placing her hand as 
before, I said, 'I am raady,' and almost instantaneously the table was 
turned over on its side, of course, throwing me off. All this occurred at 
a private house ; the room was light enough to read smaU print, and there 
was entire freedom to search for trick, maehinery, &e. There was to me 
evidence of an intelligent, invisible power, giving us the tests we sug- 
gested and asked for, to prove ifa presence and power. 

1482. "Ott another occasion, there were present, at the dwelling of 
another friend of mine, my friend and his lady, also a lad learning busi- 
ness with him, and myself, the apprentice lad being the medium. We 
sat in the parlour in the afternoon, windows open, room well lighted. 

1483. "Among other manifestations which oeourred. was this : T placed 
on the centre of the large dining-table a glass tumtler, on which I placed 
a compass, the needle being one foot in length. On the periphery of the 
compass, the alphabet, as well as the various points, was piinted, anl it 
eaoh letter there was a small metallic pin perminenfly fixed Aftei 
changing the compass freely, to see if the needle worked free ind tiue, I 
left it so placed that the needle pointed due north, accjrding to the points 
marked therefor. We then removed our chairs from the table some lis 
tanoe, no one being in contact with it. My friend w^s on the Last, hia 
lady on the south, the medium on the west, and mj^clf on the north bid 
of the tabic. I then requested that the spirits would movo tie compass 
needle to suoh points as we might designate; and naming noith, south, 
east, west, north-east, south-west, &c., perhaps, in all, neatly twenty dif 
ferent points, I saw the needle promptly and quickly moved to each point, 
as and when designated by me, and there heldateadily for a brief time; and 
on each occasion, after haying been thus held, I saw it fly back to the 
north point. I also requested that they (the spirits) would spell Jb/m hy 
moving the needle to the letters, and I saw the needle promptly moved to 
the several letters required to spell the name, stopping at each, tipping 
and touching the small pin opposite the letter, and then immediately re- 
turning to its position due north. 

1484. "This manifestation I was compelled to regard as clearly proving 
the action of an invisible, intelligent power, present with us, and purport- 
ing to be a disembodied spirit once known among us as a man. There 
was here also perfect freedom to search for trick, maehinery, &c.; and all 
these suggested esplanations occurred as clearly to my mind as to men 

', and were duly cared for by me ; for I was then an investigator 


,v Google 


294 ADDITIOKAL COrAoBORATIVE EVIDENCE 

of the truth of spirit manifestations, and did not wisli to be hwmbugged. 
These oases, however, are but a sainplo of the chain of testimony that Iiaa 
satisfied my mind fiilly on this question. John M. Kbnjsiedy." 

Comm/unication from Wm. Wesl, Ea^. 

1485. As respects the communication ■which follows I have only to say 
that I consider the author q hbhtoh py b 
serve accurately, and his d p to hi 
believe him to have one o h m d h w 
every thing j)i-o or con to h ts d W h 

"PK03rB93OR B. HaIIE ." 

1486. "Dear Sir .-At w m 
my esperienee. 

1487. "About three y I h h 
spiritual agency of ' the m m if n, d d d 

aura, obedient to the will A m I h h w to top 

physical movements, Sub h g t& h ph m n 

fused to obey me. I hav m d y h by 

permitted me to control t m w m 

me by depriving me of said power. 

1488. " Having read your statement of the message transmitted hy you, 
through, your spirit sister, from Cape May, in July last, to this city, I 
have thought that aa account of a similar despatch from myself, through 
my spirit wife, to a circle in this city, might be acceptable. 

1489. " Ou the evening of June 22, 1853, while sitting at the table at 
Mrs. Long's, (a writing medium, living at No. 9 Thompson St., New York), 
my deceased wife purported to be communicating with me. At that time 
I had been appointed, by the spirits, dictator to a circle, which convened 
every Wednesday evening at the residence of H, C. Gordon, 103 North 
Fifth St., Philadelphia. I inquired of my wife if she could convey a mes- 
sage to the circle then assembled in Philadelphia. She answered, ' Iwill 
try.' I then requested her to take my respects to the circle, and inform 
them that I was succeeding admirably in my investigation, and becoming 
stronger in the glorious truth of spirit intercommunion. In the course 
of seventeen minutes, the spirit again announced her presence, and in- 
formed us sie had delivered the message. On the next Wednesday even- 
ing, I was present at the circle in Philadelphia, and was informed by all 
the members present that my communication had been duly received. 
Another spirit, I was informed, had been communicating, when an inter- 
ruption occurred, and my wife gave her name, and, in substance, the eom- 
munieation, through the hand of Mr. Gordon. 

1490. " There were present about twelve persons of high respectability, 


,v Google 


snaiTS. 205 

among wliom were Mr. and Mrs. IIowcJl, Mr. and Mrs. Laird, Mr. Aai-on 
Coin fort, Mr. William Knapp, &o. 

1491. "At Mrs. Long's there were three or four persons present, among 
tliem, I think, Mr. Ira Davis. 

1492, "I am not a medium, therefore tho objection of m,edmm syin- 
_pa^% is out of place. Tours, &c. W. West. 

"George St., 4th house west of Broad." 


1493. Among the wonders of Spiritualism, none have excited so much 
astonishment as the manifestations which have occurred at the establish- 
ment of Mr. Eooas, in Atheus countj, Ohio. The phenomena are so 
extraordinary, as to be difficult to be believed, even bj Spiritualists; and 
yet there is far more evidence of their truth than of any of the miracles 
recorded in Scripture. la no instance has any of these been attested in 
due form by known spectators, and admitting that, in this respect, there 
is no deficiency, they were not of a nature to be repeated before a suc- 
cession of observers. Those at Koons's have been repeated, and are still 
being repeated. I first heard that there was such an establishment from 
my spirit brother, at least fifteen months ago. My spirit friends confirm 
the truth of the account receivecl, and sanction the idea that there ia some- 
thing in the locality which favours mediamship. I subjoin the narratives 
of several visitors to the establishment in question : 

Communicntion from Joseph Sazard, £Jsq. 

1494. Joseph Hazard, Esq., of Narragansett, R. I., is very well known 
,ia Philadelphia, as well aa in the vicinity of his residence. Mr. Hazard 

accompanied me, in some of my investigating visits, to spiritual circles, 
and was present, as I have mentioned, (139,) on the occasion when I first 
saw a table move without contact. There is no doubt but that be is a 
truthful witness. If he has overrated what he heard or saw, it must be 
from the enthusiasm with which he was inspired. 

Athens Co., Ohio, May 4, 1855. 

1495. M^ Bear Sir: I have been here these three days, witnessing the 
wonderful spirit manifestation a of which we have heard so much. Allow 
me to assure you that the pwbUshed account of them is no more to the 
reality than shadow is to substance. No pen can describe, and if it could, 
Ibl md ullbl ththl twt essed them. The spirits, 
talk d bly t! gh trump t a t w th ^ od rticulation, but as if the- 
p w 1 1 tt 1 however, the Linguage is. 

qtlytltlb mbtfl or catch, according to the 

Tj fwl tl hmyb gift and every note forming a. 

P t wh 1 w d n y f [ tly erhead, next the ceiling,, 


;;■ Google 


266 ADDITIONAL 

■mth a rapidity of mottnn inconceivably astounding, blowing a trumpet 
with cieafenmg blasts at times, or. heating a taraboritte or some otlier in- 
strument 

1496. One of the esbibitiona represents a spirit hand during this cir- 
cuit, beating a tamborine, there being a piece of sand-paper with phos- 
phorus on it, which they use for illuminating the hand. I saw them begin 
the work and ooraplete it The hand was small and delicate, aud flew all 
over the mom witK something like the rapidity of light on a broken sur- 
face of water, fiequently snapping the fingers, and stopping often near to 
myself and othcis, that we might see it to full advantage. 

1497. Another hand, which I could not see, touched me, but I took hold 
of it. It seemed is if covered with buciskia. 

149S. Tho spiiits ace now contriving a plan to exhibit in the light. They 
say that light destroys the conditions necessary by their present system, 
even that evolved by tho phosphorus rendering the operation very difi- 

1499. It appears evident that spiiita to be seen with material eyes are 
obliged to materialize themselves, or else spiritualize our vision; and thc;se 
things have been done repeatedly. 

1500. I have not yet seen them write. I have heard thcra talk and 
play on many instruments by the hour. There is a ba^e and tenor drum 
on which they perform with such violence, that it is almost deafening at 
times, and the whole house resounds till it shake? throughout. Some of 
the music is serapliic, especially when they speak with the harmonioon, 
when it is more unearthly in its character than I should have been able to 
imagine. 

1501. The spirit houses are distinct buildings of one room, dark as 
Erebus, and rather lonesome places, in this wilderness. I have, neverthe- 
less, obtained permission to sleep on the floor each night in one : and dur- 
ing two of those nights I have been favoured with faint music on the 
drums. Xiast night, from the moment I extinguished the ilght, drumming 
was continued throughout the night, aeoompanied by a few notes on the 

1502. The spirit SMd last night, " I can't play a bit," but, nevertheless, 
.he played some things delightfully. This was a new performer, who had 

sent word he would perform this night, and that he was a German. 

1503. One spirit attempted to sing through the trumpet, but could not 
imake music; after each failure he would stop a minute, and (hen, very 
; good-naturedly, say, "Iwill try again." This he did several times, when 
;he added "What shall I do for you, if I can't singf" He at length 
■.took up an accordeon, and succeeded better on that; but I presume did 
mot suit himself, as he would exclaim every once ia a while, " Oh, dear !" 
wery despondingly. 

1504. The effort the spirits make to manifest themselves ia very great. 


;;■ Google 


Of SPIRITS, 207 

evidently, and tlie amialiility of their demeanour here is striding. How- 
ever, I caunot tell you hut a small portion of what I have seen, but heliev- 
ing you would be interested in this sketch, I have hastily made it, and 
hope you will excuse the rudeness of it If I could not witness again 
what I have seen during the last seventy-two hours, I would not part with 
the consciousness of it for the whole State of Ohio. 

I am very sincerely your friend, 

Jos. P. IIazakd. 
To Paop. EoBT. IIaeb, Piiilada, 


A VISIT TO THE SPiaiTUALISTS OF OHIO. 

Letter from, John Gage. — The Some of tJie Mediums and the Haunts of 
the iSpirits. — What they did, said, and wrote. 

LOCALITY or JONATHAN KOONS.— A HILIY LAND. 

1505. The house of Mr. Koons is in Milford, Athens county, Ohio, 
twenty-five miles south-west of McCounelsville, forty-two miles from Lan- 
caster, and sisty-seven miles from Columhus. 

1506. Persona going from the West can go to Lancaster, which is the 
nearest point by railroad, thence down the Hocking Kiver by stage, which 
runs daily to Cliauncey, thence on foot two miles to Koons. From the 
North persons would take the stage at Oolumhua, thence to Lancaster hy 
the lines above described. From the East there are steamboats to McOon- 
nelsville, on the Muskingum, both from Zanesville and Marietta, but from 
these private carriages must be got; distance as above, tweaty-five miles, 
but the miles bear no eorrespondence to the hours, for on every route they 
think tliey do well if they accomplish two and a half .miles an hour. No 
man ever travelled over so hilly a country anywhere else, and when you 
finally get into JKoons's vicinity, you find the essence of hills personified; 
there is no such thing as a level spot large enough to put a house on. 

THE HOUSE OS THE SPIaiTTTALlil — PRESENCE OP ELECTMCITT. 

1507- Koons's iouse js heated en the scuth c ist angle of a sharp ridge, 
some few rods below the edge of the ledge, in 1 where, when the native 
trees occupied the ground, the lightning was wont to make frolic among 
tbem; and where it stiUliUes to 'poit The stove-pipe above the spirit 
room was burst off, and a numbei uf timei during the sitting of the 
mediums, the electric •-piii.'! weie seen to jhy over the wires of the 
spirit table. 


;;■ Google 


COliaOKORATl 
THR KOOM IVHERE THE BimiTS M iMTE^T TIIFm TOWER 

1508. The spirit room is built uf lo^s, as well as tlie honse in whuJh 
Mr. Koons resides; it is situated at the end of hia dwel hug house, and 
six feet frora it. It is twelve bj sisteea feet squaie, and seven feet hiqh 
inside; there is atight floor, and the ceiling above is rf lough boards, 
laid close edge to eclge; in the ganet abu\e, there is less than three feet 
clear room to the peak of the roof, and up here aie stowed old shoes md 
other old trumpery. There is a door in the tiont, near the centre cf the 
building, and a small window on eaeh side of it, ind one window m the 
bactside; thewindows have each cljae shuttei^ outside to esclude the 
light. Across the bach end of the room are three rough board sbehes 
Two feet in front of these, stands the spirit table, three feet wide and six 
feet long. In front of this, and setting against it, is a couiiaOH fall-leaf 
table, about three and a half feet square, which extends to within one foot 
of the stove ; and across the back end of the room are two rough benches 
for spectators to sit upon, and the front one comes within one foot of ihe 
stove. Then, on each end of the table is room for three or four chairs, all 
of which fills the room so full that there ia no room to get around. Mr. 
Koons's seat is at the left of the table, where he sits and plajs the fiddle. 
Nahum, his son, sits on the left of the table ; he is a lad eighteen years . 
old, and the principal medium; and his mother sits nest to him. 


1509. The spirit table has a frame or rack standing on it, and extended 
from one end to the other; this rack sustains a tenor drum at one end and 
a brass drum at the other, 'attached to it by means of wires; there ai-e 
wires also passing in yarious directions about the rack, and sustaining some 
small hells, some images of birds cut out of copper plate, &c. ; there are 
two fiddles, a guitar, banjo, accordeon, French harp, tin bora, tea bell, 
triangle, and tamborine, either hanging up or on the tables. The room 
will bold eighteen or twenty persons besides the mediums, and when filled, 
as it usually is, there is no room to pass around or between the people and 
the table or stove. 

1510. Some phosphorus is always placed on the table between wet 
sheets of paper, for the exhibition of the hand. 

THE MANIFESTATIONS COMMENOB. THE SPiaiTS PLAY ON DRUMS, HAKPS, 

FRENCH HORNS, ACCORDEONS, AND TAMBORIXES. 

KooKs's Room, June 19, 1855. 

1511. Between eight and nine o'clock, Mr. Koons and hia son Nahum 
went into the room and closed the doors and shutters, for the purpose, they 
said, of inquiring of King, the presiding spirit, whether he would attend 
that evening, and what time' be would commence; this they always do, 


;;■ Google 


OP THE EXISTENCE OF SPIEITS. 299 

and they were told to get ready ia twenty minutes. We went into the 
room. Mr. Keons took his seat witli hia fiddle and tuned it; I toot my 
seat by bis side, and my wife next to me, our chairs setting close to each 
other, and the chairs and benches in the room were all filled. The window- 
shutters and doors were now closed, and Mr. Koona put out the light, and 
immediately there came a startling hlow upon the fable that made the 
room jar, and almost brought me to my feet. "Well, King," said Mr. 
Koons, " jou are here," and commenced A oo 

as Koona began to play the fiddle, the has te m ga 

with such power and energy as to frighten m 
jar and vibrating in perfect time with th 
hands bad hold of the drumsticks, and fo 
sistible and constant that spirits controlle A 

on the drums, the tamborine was taken u h 

that I espected eyeiy mouieut it would b m 

time it was making rapid circles in the ro m m 

to another, aod oecasionaliy thrust almost m iS 

it would hit me. Then the French harp 
drums, harp, and accordeon altogether; t g k 

noise would sing in concert with the m Infe ra b 

tunes upon the harp was talking througl 
passing through the room, oyer and aroun m m 

THE HIANIFESTATJONS CONTINITE, AND 


1512. At one time there was talking a 
those that were ausious to hear every thi 
shriek that was truly terrific; auch a 

would be made by an imp of the infernal g T h h 

" Keep silent." 

1513. Koons talked some time with t 

then asked him to write a commuuicatdo W 

rattling of paper, and the phosphorus beg to w w tai p 

in a hand, showed the hand. It then go to k m p d 

laid it on a table close before me, and wi-ote on it, making the same sound 
that a pencil alwaya makes in rapid writing; then made some fiourishes on 
the paper below the writing, threw down the pencil, handed the paper into 
my hand, and threw the phosphorus on the fioor in front of Mr. Koons, 
who took it np and handed it to the hand again ; it then threw it in the 
comer of the room, and said, " Good-night," when Mr. Koons lighted a 
candle. I esamined the paper that the hand had given me, and found it 
was my paper, which I had placed on the table, with a private mark on it. 
There were four lines written on it in a good legible hand, and following 
the ruled lines on the paper as follows : 


;;■ Google 


300 ahmtioxal corroborative evidence 

1514. "Weli, friend, we return our regards to you for the interest you 
have manifested in our presence and performance; we now take our 
leave. Farewell. - Kma." 

At Koohs's, Thursday, June 21. 

1515. We liave raucli more of a performance than usual, and one highly 
satisfactory. Among other things, after thoy had finished playing a tune, 
Mr. Schenick, who sat next to me, and who plays the violin very well, 
said, "King, won't you hand me the other fiddle?" It was taken up and 
handed to him over my head, thumbing the strings as it passed. ■ " Tea," 
it said, " I will ^ve you the fiddle ; you do not want the bow, I suppose." 
" Oh, yes," said Schenick, " I want the bow, too." The horn said, " Can't 
you get along without it ?" Schenick answei-ed, " I can't play very well 
with my fingers." Then the how was handed to him, the horn named a 
tune, and both fiddles began to play, accompanied by the drums and the 
accordeon, and a number of voices saog, something like human voices. 

1516. Then the tamborine was played with much spirit, and passed 
rapidly around the room. At the same time it made stops in front of it 
person, touched them gently on the shoulder, head, or somewhere else, 
playing all the while ; then passed to another, and so on. It passed me, 
and dropped into my wife's lap. It then fiew over Van Sickle's head, 
made a great flourish, lit on it, and began to press down ; and Van says, 
" Bear down ; I can hold jou up." He then said there was tlie weight of 
a large man put on his head; it also passed to a number of others, and 
pressed down on. their heads. Mr. Koons then asked him to lay the tam- 
borine on my head, which it did immediately, bearing down, I should think, 
with a weight of twenty pounds : I raised up my hand and took hold of 
it, when it staxted up, and I held on as fast as 1 dared for fear of breaking 
the tamborine; it then passed around and came to my wife, and pressed 
gently against her head. This, she said, she mentally requested it to do, 
as she did not want it to bear down hard on her. 

1517. Mr. Koons then said, "King, it is very warm here; won't you 
take Mrs. Gage's fan and fan us?" But before he had finished speaking, 
the tamborine began to fly around the room like lightning, breathing a strong 
current of wind, and fanning all in the house. Then the phosphorus was 
taken up and darted around the room like flakes of lightning, and a hand 
began to develop. We talked with the voice while this process was going 
on, and tried to urge our spirit friends to write a communication for us. 
When the hand was formed, it passed around the room and shook hands or 
touched the hands of many of us. It took hold of my hand, and then of 
my wife's. We both felt the shape of a hand distinctly. It then got some 
paper and a pencil, and laying the paper on the table, right in front of us, 
began to write with great rapidity ; covei-ed one side of the sheet ; turned 
it over again, wrote five lines, signed it, filled the rest of the page with 


;;■ Google 


OP THE EXISTENCE OF SMEITS. 301 

t, folded it, and placed it ia my wife's hand. It then flew aroTiud 
the room, darting from, the table up to the ceiling, there mating three or four 
distinct knocks, and darting down and up, repeating the knocks a number 
of times in succession ; it then passed all ai-ound the room, stopping and 
showing the hand to all that wanted to see it. It then commeuoed dart- 
ing around the room again, and snapping its fingers as loud as a man could 
do. It then threw the phosphorus in the hack corner of the room, said 
"Good night," and was gone. Mr. Koons then lighted the candle, and my 
wife read the paper which was giyen her by the spirit hand, as follows : 

THE spirit's iBTTEE. 

1518. To t/ie Friends of this CHrde: After various inquiries made at 
this circle, we deem it highly necessary to reply by stated reasons, why our 
presiding spirit declines to ^ve the names of the spirits present during 
our performances at this room: 

1519. 1st. Let the inquirer conceive himself entering a congregated 
promiscuous assembly of persons, who are all anxiously awaiting his ap- 
proach under the discharge of some important and general mission, in be- 
half of those iu attendance. On entering the assembly, he looks around 
upon his anxious inquirers, and sees them attended with their respective 
safeguards, such as he never saw before. In the discharge of his official 
duty, however, he is necessitated to exclude himself from tho direct view 
and intercourse of the safeguards, so as to be brought into a nearer rela- 
tion to the corresponding parties. The interlocution accordingly takes 
place, when each one in turn begins to interrogate the speaker in his ex- 
cluded position, on subjects relating, to their excluded guard, of which the 
speaker knows but little or nothing, except th t f th ir p ence 
on his arrival ; and in order to acquaint h m If with th m t nces 
and matters inquired after, so as to answe tly th p k 1 as fo 
disencumber himself at every inquiiy, and t ly b t w Id 1 fail 
to perform his devolved duty by submittin h m If t tl t y and 
criticism of the corresponding parties. Wh h th f th tw (juire- 
ments would be of the most consequence — t d mm d ih g 1 nte- 
rest of the assembly and that of his own offi al d ty t m t th latter 
and attend to the discharge of a more import t d h h 1 ty by hioh 
the peace and consoling riches would be augmented to the fulness of their 
cup? 

1520. Now, this is the position oxir presiding spirit occupies. When 
himself and band enter the room, be recognises many bright guardian 
spirits interspersed among the promiscuous assembly, of whom he has no 
knowledge. And in the discharge of their manifesting performances, they 
necessarily must assume physical incumbrances, which shuts them from a 
direct view of the attending spirits; and as many questions that are led 
in relation to them so often, the corresponding spirit has to disrobe him- 


;;■ Google 


C0n,E0BOB,ATIVE EVtDENCE 

self so as to give a correct relation, to say nothing of the possibility of re- 
ceiving and conveying ■wrong impressiona from spbitfl who do not regard 
the truth, 

1521. GriYea hy Second King, at the eonnoil of the presiding hand. 

THE ABOVE IS CERTIFIED TO. 

1523. After thia communication had heen read, a certificate, setting foith 
the above facts was drawn up and signed by all those present, as follows : 

1523. Audience present. — Portia Gage, Gage's Late, El. ; John Gage, 
Ghige's Late, Lake county, 111 ; Solomon Bordon, Millfleld, Athens county, 

, Ohio ; Thomas Morris and wife, Hyram Scheniclr, Sekh Yan Sickle, Dela- 
ware, Ohio. 

1524. Mediwms present. — Jonathan Koons, Abigail T. Koona, Nahnm 
W. Koons. 

COKCLUDINQ HEMAKKS. 

1525. When a person comes here and sees the rooms, and iinds them 
open all day for the children to run in and out of, and for visitors to ex- 
amine, and sees there are no jiiggler's tools about, and no place to keep 
them ; the mediums and all engaged are of that artless stamp, and in their 
whole appearance, bearing, and conduct, so marked with honesty and sin- 
cerity of purpose, that the idea of theiv being impostors, or of their psycho- 
lo^zing their auditors, is simply ridiculous. That the music is not ima- 
ginary, is proved in another way, if further proof is necessary; It can be 
heard as well outside as inaido of the houses, and is freqiiently heard by 
the neighbours for miles around. There is no question about the manifesta- 
tions, and about their havingall that superhuman or unaceountabla character 
that the most sanguine writers have given them. They rather seem to bo 
over-cautious about exaggerating any thing, and consequently fall far short 
of conveying an adequate idea of the phenomena. Therefore, all we have 
to do is to account for these existing facts, for the facts cannot he contro- 
verted. The intelligence displayed is sometimes of a high order, and they 
always claim to be spirits of men or women who have left the earthly form, 
and passed to that undiscovered country from whose bourne it has been 
said no travellers return. But of this every one can judge for themselves, 
though it is difB.cnlt to ima^ne what they can be, if they are not spirits. 

John Gage. 

An Evening at Komi's Spirit Room. By Charles Partridge, Egg., 
New York. 

1526. Sunday evening, 27th May last, I walked some three miles 
through a wood over a very poor road, in the direction of what is called 
the spirit rooms of Jonathan Koocs. I noticed at the foot of a hill seve- 
ral carriages by the roadside, and horses tied to the fence and trees; and 
on reaching the place, I observed from thirty to fifty men sitting on stones, 


,v Google 


or SPIRITS. S03 

logs, and fences aro in 1 a dilapitaded log-cabin. The men looked respect- 
able, and their dej oitment and convorsation bore the impress of a religious 
meeting I nqu ed who lived there, and was informed that Jonathan 
Koons liyed n that house, (pointing to the cabin,) and that (pointing to a 
small one n&ir by) is the Bpirita' room. I inquired what spirits lived 
there, and was told that it was the room whore people go in to talk with 
their spirit friends who have gone out of their earthly tabernacle. On 
inquiry as to what this gathering was for, I was informed that these people 
had come to talk with their spirit friends and to witness spirit manifesta- 
tions. I was informed that I might go in — that everybody was free to 
enter and examine the room, and to attend the circle. I selected a good 
" soft" stone, and sat me down, a perfect stranger, with the other disciples. 
I scrutinized the people closely, and listened to their conversation withoiit 
joining in it. I overheard one say that Mr. Koons was in his hoxise. In 
the course of half an hour a man came out, whom several persons addressed 
as Mr. Koons; he glanced his eyes over the congregation; presently, two 
men drove up, who, as I subsequently leai-ned, came from Amesville, some 
ten miles distant; they were entire strangers to me and I to them ; they 
looked around, spoke with some persons, and then with Mr. Koons, asking 
whom he had there, &c., and finally asked him who I was, pointing me out 
to Mr. Koons. Mr. Koons observed that he had not learned my name, 
that I had just come; but ho was impressed by spirits to say, "His name 
is Charles Partridge, of New York." Soon after, one of these men ap- 
proached me, and isked it I was BIr Partridge, from New York. I answered 
in the affiimative " Chiiles Pjitndge i"' " Yes." " "Well," said he, 
" the spuits told !BIi Koons who you were." I had not overheard their 
conversation, but such wts the lesult of one of my tests as to the spirit 
ongin of these mamtestations 

1627 Mr Koons and one cf hi^ children (a medium) went into the 
spiiit room alono, as is their ou=tom b fire forming the public circle, to 
receive such instiuotion from the piesidmg spirit (King) as he might wish 
to communieate Theio are often moie persons present desiring to obtain 
admittance than the room will hold. In such cases the spirit directs Mr. 
Koons to especially invite those in who have come the longest distance, 
and snch. as cannot remain there for another opportunity, usually calling 
the names of the parties, and leaving out the neighbours and those who 
can make it convenient to be present on subsequent occasions. At one of 
these preliminary interviews, I was invited in by Mr. Koons. Immediately 
on closing the doors, the spirit took up the trumpet, (deaciibed in my last 
communication,) and spoke through it audibly and distinctly, saying, " Good 
evening, friends !" to which we responded in like manner. The spirit 
then addressed me by name, and obsorved, in substance, that although 
they were strangers to me, I was not a stranger to them : they had been 
cognizant of my thoughts, desires, and efforts in behalf of Spiritualism from 


,v Google 


304 ADDiTior 

the lime my attention ivas first called to the snhject. They spoke in very 
flatteriDg terms of myself and others, who hiid heen bold to testify to the 
Bpiritual nianifeatations witnessed in the early times, and during the severer 
trials and opposition. Tkey had watched the TELEOitAPH with anxious soli- 
citude, and with eminent satisfaction. They closed in a fervent henediction 
and consecration to further and greater good and uses.. After which this 
spirit (King) said to Mr. Koons, that they could not hold a puhlic circle 
that eyening, as he was elsewhere engaged. Mr. Koons expressed much 
regret at this aanouncementj and said ho felt much cmharrasscd and mor- 
tified, beeaiise several persons were there who had come a long way ; some 
from New York, Pennsylvania, Vir^nia, Canada, and other distant places. 
The spirit said he was sorry, but he had engaged to attend a circle else- 
where, (naming the place a long distance away,) and ho must ho there in 
fifteen minutes. Mr Koons would not he satisfied with any excuses, hut 
insisted that ho (King) had agreed to preside over his circle, and meet the 
company who came there; and rather than bo made the instrument of 
apology to others for the disappointment in the performances, he would 
ahandon it altogether, etc. King said, " Wait a few moments, and I will 
go and see if arrangements can he made." He thereupon laid down the 
trumpet, and to all appearancs left us, and we could get no further replies 
for four or five minutes, when the trumpet was again taken up, and King 
spoke through it, saying he had arranged the matter by deputiaiug a por- 
tion of his hand to fill his engagement, and they would therefore hold a 
circle in that place, commencing the performance in fifteen minutes, hnt 
perhaps they would not he able to mate so good music, or have the full 
complement of the manifestations. Thus ended this preliminary interview, 
which sufBciently indicates the character of all similar ones. 

1528. I attended three public circles in the spirit house of Mr. Koons, 
and three in the spirit house of Mr. John Tippie; they are situated about 
three miles apart ; the rooms and manif^tations are very similar, although 
the electrical tables, so called, differ somewhat in their construction ; the 
presiding spirits are of the same name, King; they claim to be father and 
son. These rooms will seat about twenty-five or thirty persons each, and 
are usually full. Many times, while I was there, more persons desired to 
go in than the house would hold, and some of them had to remain outside. 
They could hear the music and the spirits' conversation just as well, and 
they only had to forego being touched by spirits and seeing them. The 
music is heard, under favourable circumstances, at the distance of one mile, 
or as far as any band of martial music can he heard. ■ ' After the circle is 
formed, the door and windows are shut, the light is usually extinguished, 
and almost instantaneously, a tremendous blow by the large drnmstiok is 
struck on the table, when immediately the bass and tenor drums are beaten 
rapidly, like calling the roll on the muster-field, waking a thousand echoes. 
The rapid and tremulous blows on these drums are really frightful to many 


;;■ Google 


)p spmiTS. ^505 

persona. This beating of the drums is continued five minutes or more, 
and when ended, King usually taliea up the trumpet and Balutes us with 
" Good evening, friends," or something like it, aud often asks what particular 
manifestations are desired. If none are specially asked for, King ofton asks 
Mr. Koons to play on the violin, the spirit hand plajing at the same time 
on the drums, triaugle, tamhorine, harp, accordcon, harmonica, etc. etc.; 
upon these the spirits perform scientiScally, in very quick and perfect time. 
They commence upon each instrument at one instant, and in full biast, and 
Btop suddenly after sounding the foil note, showing that they have some 
more perfect method than we have of notifying each performer of the in- 
ataut to start and stop. After the introductory piece on the instruments, 
the spirits often sing. I heard them sing. The spirits spoke to us, ro- 
questing us to remaia perfeetlj silent. Presently, we heard human voices- 
singing, apparently in the distance, so as to be scarcely distinguishable; 
the sounds gradually increased, each part relatively, until it appeared as if 
a full choir of human voices were in our small room, sin^ng most exqui- 
sitely. I think I never heard such perfect harmony; each part was per- 
formed with strict attention to its relative degree of sound or force. There 
was none of that flopping, floundering, ranting, and shrieking which con- 
stitutes the staple of what is latterly called masic; harmony, rather than 
noise, seemed to constitute the spirits' song. So captivating was it, that 
the heartstrings seemed to relax or to increase their tension, to accord with 
the heavenly harmony. It seems to me that no person could sil in that 
sanctuary without feeling the song of "Glory to God in the highest, peace 
on earth, and good-will to man," spontaneously rising in the bosom, and 
finding expression on the lip. I don't know that the spirits attempted to 
utter words with their song; if they did, they succeeded in this particular 
no better than, modern singers. But it was hardly necessary for the spirits 
to articulate, for every strain and modulation seemed pregnant with holy 
sentiments, and language could scarcely signiiy more. After this vocal 
performance, several pieces of quick music were performed by the spirits 
on the several instruments. They play faster than mortals usually do, and 
in most perfect time throughout. If any instrument gets out of chord, 
they tune it; they tuned the violin ia my presence, and did it rapidly and 
skilfully. 

1529. Spirits reconstruct their physical bodies, or portions of them, from 
similar elements, apparently, as those which constitute our mortal bodies. 
Spirits' hands and arras were reorganized ia our presence, on several of 
these occasions; and that we might sec the more distinctly, they sometimes 
wet their hands with a weak solution of phosphorus, (which Mr. Koons 
prepared some time previous by their request,) which emits a light, so that 
their hands can be almost as distinctly seen in a dark room as they could 
be if the room were light. At one of these circles which I attended, there 
were three hands which had been covered with this solation of phosphorus. 


,v Google 


306 ADDITIONAL CORKOBORATIVE EVIDENCE. 

and we all saw tlieni passing swiftly around the roam, over our heads, car- 
vying the instruments, and playing upon the violin, aoeordeon, triangle, 
harmonica, and tamborine, and all keeping perfect time. These instru- 
ments ivere moved so swiftly and near the faces of the audience,— -onr own 
among them,— that we felt the cool atmospheiio current as distinctly as we 
do that produced by a fan. Several of the company in different parts of 
the room remarked that they not only felt this disturbance of the air, but 
heard it, and distinctly saw the hand and instrument pass close te their 
faces. Several of us requested the spirits lo place these instruments in our 
hands, or touch us on our heads or other parts of our bodies ; and in most 
cases it was instantly done. I held up my hands, and requested the spirits 
to beat time with the tamborine on my hands. They did so, and gave 
me more than I asked for, by striking my knees, hands, and head in a simi- 
lar manner. I have seen the tamborine players in the minstrel bands of 
New York ; I have seen the best performers in the country j but they can- 
not perform equal to these spirits. The perfect time and the rapidity with 
which they beat are truly surprising. 

1530. Spirit hands with phosphorus upon them passed around the 
room, opening and shutting, and exhibiting them in various ways and posi- 
tions which no mortal hand could assume or occupy — demonstrating them 
to bo veritable spirit hands, physically organised. The phosphorescent 
illumination from these hands was so distinct, that it occurred to me I could 
see to read by it; and I took a pamphlet from my pocket, and asked the 
spirit to place the hand over it, that I might see if I could read by the 
light. The spirit did so, when I at once perceived that I held tho pam- 
phlet wrong end up. I turned it, and could read. The members of the 
circle remarked that they could see very plainly my hands, face, and the 
pamphlet I held, and as distinctly could see the spirit's hand and a portion 
of the arm. I then put out my hands, and asked the spirits to shake 
hands with mej they did so almost instantly. I then asked tlicm to let 
me examine their hands, and they plaoed them in mine, and I looked at 
them and felt them until I was entirely satisfied. Others asked the same 
favour, and it was readily granted them. These spirit hands appeared to 
be reorganized from the same elements that our hands are; and, except 
that they had a kind of tremulous motion, and some of them being cold and 
death-like, we could not by onr senses distinguish them from hands of 
persons living in the form. 

1531. This spirit hand took a pen, and we all distinctly saw it write on 
paper which was lying on the table; the writing was executed much more 
rapidly than I ever saw mortal hand perform ; the paper was then handed 
to me by" the spirit, and I still retain it in my possession. At the close of 
the session the spirit of King, as is his custom, took up the trumpet and 
gave us a short lecture through it — speaking audibly and distinctly, present- 
ing the benefits to be derived, both in time and eternity, from intercourse 


;;■ Google 


QY THE EXISTENCE OF SPiaiTS. 307 

with spiriis, and exhorting us to he discreet and hold in speech, diligent in 
our investigations, faithful to the responsibilities which these privileges 
impose, charitable toward those who are in ignoraaoe and error, temper- 
ing our zeal witli wisdom j and finally closing with a benediction. 

1532. I am aware that these facts so much transcend the ordinary ex- 
perience of mortals, that few persons can accept them as true on any 
amount of linman testimony. I obtained the addresses of the following 
named persons, and hope they will excuse me for the liberty I take in re- 
ferring to Ihem in thiH connection, for the confirmation of my statements. 
They were present at some or all the circles which I attended, when 
these manifestations occurred ; E. I. Batterfield, Cleveland, Oliio ; Wil- 
liam D. Young, Covington, Ind,; George and David Brier, Kainaville, Ind.j 
David Edger and daughter, Mercer co., Pa. ; S. Van Sickle, Delaware, 
0.; S. T. Dean, Andrew Ogg, and Geo. Walker and son, Amesville, 0. ; 
Azel Johnson, MillSeld, 0. ; W. S. Watkins, New York ; Thomas Monis 
and wife, Dover, 0.; Dr. Geo. Carpenter, Athens, 0,; Thomas White, 
Mount Pleasant, 0. Many other persons were present, whose names I did 
not learn. Charles Paiubidge. 

Experience of the Son. N. P. Tallmadge. 

1533. The following com municatio a from Governor Tallmadge to Mrs. 
Sarah H. Whitman, of Providence, E,. I., has been in print for some time, 
and came out early, when Spiritualism had made too little impression to he 
duly appreciated. I for one, at the period of its first publication, could 
not lealiBe it. But the public are now better prepared, and it may be re- 
peated with advantage. Besides, this work is made for the uninformed 
and incredulous, rather than for those who have been heretofore converted, 
and who are familiar with the earliest manifestations. 

EiLTiMOKE, Tuesday, April 12, 1853. 

1534. Dear Madam : I seize a few leisure moments, while detained 
here a shoi-t time on business, to give you a more estended account of the 
"Physical Manifestations" to which I alluded in a former letter. In this 
account, I shall confine myself to those which purport to come from the 
spirit of John C. Calhoun. 

1535. I have received numerous coramunicationB from him, from the 
commencement of my investigation of this subject down to tte present 
time. Those communications have been received through rapping me- 
diums, writing mediums, and speaking niedii\ms. They are of the most 
extraordinary character. In style an 1 (.ent ment they would do honour to 
him in his best days oa earth. 

1536. After the ai-rival of the Mis s F x in Washington City, in Feb- 
ruary last, I caUed on thom by aj[ ntme t ^nd, at once, received a com- 
munication from Calhoun. I then w ote d w icd piopounded mentaUy 
the following cjuestion ; 


,v Google 


308 ADIITI *r C EROBOaATIVE EVIDENCE. 

1537. "Can jou do any tl ng (meaning pbjaical i 
confirai mo in tbe t ith of these reTelafJons, and to remove from my mind 
the least shadow oi ual el ef T wliicli I received the following answer : 

1538. " I will a 'o J a CO u aunicatlon oa Mon^laj, at taK-past seven 
o'clock. Do aot fail to be here. I will then give you an explanation. 

"John C. Calhoun." 

1539. It is propeir here to remark, that all the commuaications referred 
to in this letter, were made by Calhoun after a call for the alphahet, and 
were rapped out, letter by letter, and taken, down by mo in the usual 
way. They were made in the presence of the Misses Fox and their 
mother- I called on Monday at (he hour appointed, and received the fol- 
lowing communication : 

1540. "My friend, the question is often put to you, 'What good can 
result from these manifestations ?' I will answer it. It is to draw man- 
kind together in harmony, and convince skeptics of the immortality of the 
soul. John C. Calhoun." 

1541. This reiniads me that, in 1850, at Bridgeport, in the presence of 
other mediums, among many questions put and answers received, were the 
following, the answer purporting to come from W. E, Channing : 

1542. Q. AVhat dq spirits propose to accomplish by these new mani- 
festations ? A. To unite mankind, and to convince skeptical minds of the 
immortality of the soul. 

1543. The coincidence in sentiment of the answer of J. 0. Calhoun 
and W. E. Channing, in regard to the object of these manifestations, is 
remarkable, and worthy of particular notice. The oonourrenee of two 
such great minds, whether in or out of the body, on a subject so engross- 
ing, cannot fail to command the attention of every admirer of exalted 
intellect and moral purity. 

1544. During the above communication of Calhoun, the table moved 
occasionally, perhaps a foot, first one way and then the other. After the 
communication closed, we all moved back from the table, from two to four 
feet, so that no one touched tlie table. Suddenly the table moved from the 
position it occupied some three or four feet, rested a few moments, and 
then moved back to its original position. Then it again moved as far the 
other way, and returned to the place it started from. One side of the 
tabic was then raised, and stood for a few moments at an angle of about 
thirty-five degrees, and then again rested on the floor as uauftl, 

1545. The table was a large, heavy, round table, at which ten or a 
dozen pei'sons might be seated at dinner. During all these movements no 
person touched Hie table, nor was tmi/ one near it. After seeing it raised 
in the manner above mentioned, I had the curiosity to test its weight 'by 
raising it mySelf, I accordingly took my seat by it, placed my hands 
under the leaf, and exerted as much force as I was capable of in that 
sitting posture, and could not raise it a particle from the floor. I then 


;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OE SriEITS. S09 

stood up in the best possible position to esert the greatest force, took hold 
of tlio leaf, and still could not raise it irith ail the strengtli I could apply. 
I then requested the three ladies to take hold around the table, and trj 
altogether to lift it. We lifted upon it until the leaf and top begaa to 
craek, and did not rMse it a particle. We then desisted, fearing we should 
break the table. I then said, "Will the spirits permit me to raise the 
table ?" I took hold alone and raised it without difficulty. After this, the 
following conversation ensued ; 

1546. Q. Can you raise the taBe entirely from the floor ? A. Yes. 

1547. Q. Will you raise me with it ? A. Yea. Get me the square 
table. 

1548. The square table was of cherry, with four legs — a large-sized 
tea-table. It was brought out and substituted for the round one, the 
leaves being raised. I took my seat on the centre; the three ladies sat at 
the sides and end, their hands and arms i-estiag upon it. This, of course, 
added to the weight to be raised — namely, my own weight and the weight 
of the table. Two legs of the table were then raised about six inches, 
from the floor, and then the other two were raised to a level of the firet, 
so that ilte lehole tahle was suspended in the air about eix incites above the 
Jioor. While thus seated on it, I could feel a gentle vibratory motion, as 
if floating in the atmosphere. After being thus suspended in the air for a 
few moments, the table ^ras gently let down again to the floor ! 

1549. Some pretend to say, that these physical manifestations are made 
by electricity 1 I should like to know by what laws of electricity known 
to us, a table is at one time riveted, as it were, to the floor, against all the 
force that conld be exerted to raise it ; and at another time v^sed entirely 
from the floor, with more than two hundred pounds weight upon it? 

1550. At a subsequent meeting, Calhoun directed me to bring three 
bells and a guitar. I brought them accordingly. The bells were of dif. 
feient sizes — the largest like a small-sized dinner-bell. He directed a drawer 
to be put under the square table. I put under a bureau-drawer, bottom 
side up. He directed the bells to be placed on the drawer. The three 
ladies and myself were seated at the table with our hands and arms resting 
on it. The bells commenced ringing in a sort of chime. Numerous raps 
were made, as if beating time to a march. The bells continued to ring 
and to chime in with the beating of time. The time of the march was 
slow and solemn. It was beautiful and perfect. The moat fastidious ear 
eould not detect any discrepancy in it. 

1551. The vaps then ceased, and tho bells rang violently for several 
minutes. A bell was then pressed on my foot, my ankle, and my knee. 
This was at different times repeated. Knocks were made inost veTiew^ntly 
against the underside of the table, so that a large tin candlestick was, by 
every blow, raised completely from the table by the concussion. 

1552. I afterward examined the undovside of tho tabic, [^whiih, it will 


,v Google 


310 ADDITIONAL COEIIOBORATIVE EVIDENCE 

be recollected, was of ctevry,) and found indentations m the woocl, made 
by the end of the handle of the beil, which was tipped with bi'ass. Could 
electricity mate those violent knocks with the handle of the bell, causiDg 
indentations and raising the candlestick from the table at everj blow ? Or 
was it done by the same invisible power that riveted the table to the floor 
and again raised it, with all the weight upon it, entirely above the floor? 

1553. Here the ringing of the bells ceased, and then 1 felt sensibly and 
distinctly the impression of a hand on my foot, ankle, and kneo. These 
manifestations were several times repeated. 

1564. I was then directed to put the guitar on the drawer, We were 
all seated as before, with our hands and arms resting on the tabic. The 
guitar was touched softly and gently, and gave forth sweet and delicious 
sounds, like the accompaniment to a beautiful and exquisite piece of music. 
It then played a sort of symphony, in much louder and bolder tones. And, 
as it played, these harmonious sounds becoming soft, and sweet, and low, 
began to recede, and grew fainter and fainter, till they died away on the 
ear in the distance. Then they returned and grew louder and nearer, till 
they were heard again in full and gushing volume, as when they com- 
menced, I am utterly incapable of giving any adequate idea of the beauty 
and harmony of this music. I have heard the guitar touched by the 
most delicate and scientific hands, and heard from it, under such guidance, 
the most splendid performances. But never did I heai- any thing that 
fastened upon the very soul like these prophetic strains drawn out by an 
invisible hand from the spirit- world. While listening to it, I was ready to 
escMm, in the language of the Bard of Avon— 

1555. " 1ba.t strain Bgiuu ; it Iiad a ijlag fall ; 
That breallics upon a bauU of violets, 

1556. After the music had ceased, the following communication was 

1557. "This is mj hand that touches you and the guitar. 

JoDN 0. Oalhodn," 

1558. At another time, the following physical manifestation was made 
in the presence of General Hamilton, General Waddy Thompson, of South 
Carolina, and myself : 

1559. We were directed to place the Bible on a drawer under the table. 
I placed it there, completely closed. It was a small pocket Bible, with 
very fine print. Numerous raps were then heard, beating time to " Hail 
Columbia," which had been called for. Soon the sounds began to recede, 
and grew fainter and fainter, till, like the music of the guitar, they died 
away in the distance. The alphabet was then called for, and it was spelled 
out, " Look," I looked on the drawer and found the Bible open. I took 
it up and carefully kept it open at the place as I found it. On bringing 


;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OP SPIRITS. 311 

it to the light, I found it open at St. Joliu's Gospel, chapter ii. being on 
the loft side, and chapter iii. being on the right side. I said, " Do you 
wish us to look at chapter ii. ?" A. "No." "Do you wish us to look 
at chapter iii. ?" A. " Yes." And it was then said, " Read." I cora- 
menced reading the chapter, and sigaificant and emphatic raps were given 
at many verses; and at verses 8, 11, 19, 34, most veJiement raps were 
given. By looking at these verses, you will appreciate the significancy 
and intelligence of this emphatic demonstration. This manifestation pur- 
ported to come from Calhoun, who had previously invited us three gentle- 
men to ho present at a particular hour. 

1560. In reflecting on the preceding manifestations, one cannot but 
marvel at the power by which they are made, and the inieUir/ence by which 
that power is directed. And it would seem impossible for one to doubt 
the source of that intelligence. If, however, doubt should still remain on 
the mind of any one acquainted with similar manifestations, that doubt 
inust be entirely dispelled by the account of the manifestation which 
follows : 

1561. 1 wiia present, by CaUioun'a appointment, with the Misses Fox 
and their mother. We were seated at the table as heretofore, our hands 
and arms resting upon it. I was directed to put paper and pencil on the 
drawer. I placed several sheets of unruled letter-paper, together with a 
wood pencil, on it. I soon heard the sound of the pencil on the paper. 
It was then rapped out, " Get the pencil and sharpen it." I looked under 
the table, but did not see the pencil. At length I found it lying diago- 
nally from me, three or four feet from the table. The lead was broken 
off within the wood. I sharpened it, and again put it on the drawer. 
Again I heard the sound of the pencil on the paper. On being directed 
to look at the paper, I discovered pencil marks on each side of the outer 
sheet, but no writing. Then was received the following communication ; 

1562. " The power is not enough to write a sentence. This will show 
you that I can write. If you meet on Friday, precisely at seven, I will 
write a short sentence. John C. Calhoun." 

1563. We met, pursuant to appointment, took our seats at the table, 
our hands and arms resting on it as usual. I placed the paper with my 
silver-cased pencil on the drawer, and said : 

1564. "My friend, I wish the sentence to be in your own handwriting, 
so that your friends will recognise it." He replied, "You will know the 
writing." He then said, " Have your minds oa the spirit of John C. 
Calhoun." 

1565. I soon heard a rapid movement of the pencil on the paper, and 
a rustling of tho paper, together with a movement of the drawer. I was 
then directed to look under the drawer. I looked, and, found my pencil 
outside of the drawer, near my feet, but found no paper on tho drawer 
where I placed it. On raising up the drawer, I discovered the paper all 


;;■ Google 


312 ADDITIONAL COEE.OBORATIVE EVIDENCE 


under it. The sheets were a little deranged, and on examining, I founil 
on tlio outside sheet these words : " I'm with you still." 

1566. I afterward showed the " sentence" to General James Hamilton, 
former Governor of South Carolina, General Waddy Thompson, former 
Minister to Mexico, General Robert B. Campbell, late Consul at Havana, 
together with other intimate friends of Calhoun, and also to one of his sons, 
all of whom are as well acquainted with his handwriting aa their own ; and 
they all pronounced it to be a perfect fac simik of the handwriting of 
John C. Calhoun. 

1567. General Hamilton stated a fai-t, in connection with this writing, 
of great significance. He'says that Calhoun was in the habit of writing 
" I'm^" for " I am," and that he has numerous lettei-a from him where the 
abhreviation is thus used. 

1568. Mrs. General Maeomb has stated the same fact to mo. She says 
that her husband, the late General Macomb, has shown to her Calhoun's 
letters to him, where this abbreviation "I'm" was used for "I am," and 
spoke of it as a peculiarity of Callioun. 

1669. How significant, then, does this fact become ! We have not only 
the most unequivocal testimony to the handwriting itself, but, lest any 
skeptic should suggest the possibility of an imitation or a counterfeit, this 
abbreviation, peculiar to himself, and known only to his most intimate 
friends, and which no imitator or counterfeiter could know, is introduced 
by way of putting such a suggestion to flight forever. 

1570. This "Bentence"i3 perfectly characteristic of Calhoun. It con- 
tains his terseness of style, and his condensation of thought. It is a. test 
from which volumes might be written. It proves — 1. The immortality of 
the soul; 2. The power of spirits to revisit tlie earth; 3. Their ability to 
communicate with relatives and friends; and, 4. The identity of the spirit 
to all eternity. 

1571. How one's soul espanda with these sublime connections! How 
resistless is this testimony of their truth ! How surprising that men can 
doubt, when this flood of living light is poured upon them by spirits who, in 
the language of Webster, "revel in the glory of the eternal light of God." 

Very truly yours, N". P. Tallmadgb." 

Mbs. SAitAH Hbleh WuKMAif, Providence, R. I. 

Letter from Mr. D. M. Skme. — Spiritualism in London. 

1572. The author of the letter which comes under this head has already 
been introduced to the readers of this work, in ^ving an aecount of the 
manifestations observed through his mediumship, (393.) 

Ealijjo Villa, keak London, July 26, J855. 

1573. W * * In London I found but a limited number, compara- 
tively speaking, who possess any intelligent or rational idea of the spiritual 


,v Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OF SPIKITS. 313 

pliilosophy. The subject has not made any great advauoe here ; but tlioEo 
who are iavestigating include in their number some of the best minds of 
England. The first call I reeeired was from Sir Charles E. lacham, who 
baa proved a most excellent friend to me. A day or two after this I re- 
ceived an invitation from Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton to visit him at his 
country-seat at Knehworth. I accepted his invitation, and had an interest- 
ing and delightful visit. 

1574. I was deeply interested in Sir Edward, who' is, by birtb, educa- 
tion, and mind, a most superior person. His love of the beautiful, in 
nature and art, but especially in nature, is manifested at every part of his 
wide domim Knehworth was originally built by a follower of the Con- 
queror, and WIS in the year of the Armada, occupied by Queen Eliaabeth. 
The state loom contims the bed upon which her majesty slept. It has 
rich velvet hangings — the same which shaded the slumbers of Queen Bess. 
The room of the extensive library contains the oak table at which Crom- 
well, Pyro i. Co sat while planning the rebellion. * * * We had some 

manifcstationg at onr semices almost as good as those we had at 'a 

in your place. The spirits showed their presence in the same palpable 
way, by presenting tangible bands, shaking hands, &c., and Sir Edward 
" acknowledges the corn," to nse a Yankee vulgarism. He is much in- 
terested in the subject, and has be.stowed no small share of (bought upon 
the matter. 

1575. I have also had the pleasure of being presented to the Mai-- 
chioness of H s, Baroness G— — y R — n. She is a highly intel- 
lectual and altogether charming lady, who possesses much native refinement 
and a fearless desire to learn and follow the truth. I met, too, the Eavl 
of B e and the JTarquia of C e, at one of our circles a few even- 
ings since. A most kind friend I also found in the Tioomte de St. Amirro, 
CbargS d'Affaires from Brazil, who has given me valuable letters to France. 
I am to meet him and his lady (both investigators) the coming autumn at 
the Neapolitan court. 

15'"6 I 1 p J, ph f om one of the London journal- giving a 

kthf t wlhdwthLdB ghni dbD dB water. 

Tb 1 tt > w 11 w w t tl t ( I t\ JEl nhargh 

B m tb n wh h 1 d ga t tb t e of 

p nt g y tb p d t n f th m nif t t J wh li he 

d d th wh 1 m tt n th b tte t t n a d lus d an 

mp t H t 1 b b ly d w d ly 1 t d bj th oppo- 

a nts f fep tu 1 1 th d f th All t d ( t t m ts are 

1 uhtl ss 1 1 d by th wh [ bl f pp f mpre- 

hLudmg the truths which they a.,sail. 

1577. Sir David, however, has for once met with a "stumper," for be 
has seen and felt such manifestations of bis spirit friends as to completely 
upset his philosophy. He frankly confessed that he is "soi-ely puraled" 


;;■ Google 


314 \DDiTiON'\T topaoBfpiTnE Ji,\mENrE 


at what he has witoeased, and Loid Bioughani acknowledges himself to 
be thoroughly nonpluised Both of theae noted men brought the whole 
force of their keen disceininent to beir upon the tolulion of the jheno- 
mena; but the prLsence ot Buhstanfia! actual hanJs, ind the demonstra- 
tive strength of the spmts who thiis clothed theiu'jeheB foi thp time and 
moved materjil objects about the loom, pro\ed to he too mm,h of i ques- 
tion for them to master. 

1578. Time will not albw me to mention the various interesting 'Sittings 
I have had, nor the many distinguished pcraonagea who have been m our 
circles dui-ing my short sfaj in London I am at pre-sent enjoying the 
quiet of an English countiy home The gentleman with whom I am stop- 
ping (Mr. Eymer) is one of the most distinguished sohcitas m London. 
He has been a materiaUst, n disbeliever ju a futuie state, ill his life pre- 
vious to witnessing these demonstration? of spint existence He is now a 
believer (or rather a knmcer) of the future life The manifest it lona, so 
often scoffed at by professing Chnstians, have done for hmi, as they have 
for upward of twenty-five thousand infidels and atheists in America, what 
no power of the pulpit or doctrine of evangelical religion could ever have 
effected. 

1579. Is not this one fact alone a sufficient reply to the oft-repeafcd 
question of " What good does it all do ?" There is many a broad-loving 
sonl that, failing in the effort to narrow itself down to the limits of a dog- 
matical creed, has ended in infidelity or blank atheism; but the number 
of these is becoming steadily less by the influence of tho spirit manifesta^ 
tions, which are to them what the placing of the hand in the spear-wound 
was to Thomas. Mr. K., since his conversion, has given a lectuie on the 
subject, and will give another. 

1580. One thing I will not omit. Mrs. Trollope, whom Americans 
will he apt to remember, came, with her son, from I'lorence to London for 
the express purpose of seeing the manifestations. They were accordingly 
invited f« spend a few days with me at my village home ; and, I must say, 
I was agreeably disappointed in her. Bly previous ideas of her had not 
been such as to prepossess me in her favour, but I have become an admirer 
of her private character. She has none of the stifihess of the author 
about her, nor any of the "blue-stocking." She enjoys the realities of 
existence move fully than any one I have ever met in a circle. 

1581. The seance with her was one of strange interest. Her son was 
an unbeliever, and his mother was very desirous that ho should be 
" brought to a knowledge of the truth." When at length the light did 
beam upon his soul, and the chords of his spirit vibrated in unison with 
the celestial harmonies that ushered in the birth of faith through the 
shadows of his old unbelief, the result was too much for his stoicism, and 
the tfiars of holy joy coursed down his manly cheeks. Her joy was too 
great for utterance, and her rapturous emotions seemingly too great to be 


;;■ Google 


OS THE EXISTENCE OF SPIEITS. 315 

endured. It was aa impressive scene, and an oeoasion of deep interest. 
There are many such in tho life of a spirit mediuin. 

1582. In a few ■weeks I leave England foi the Continent, in company 
mih jay friend, Mr. Ejcicr. "We intend to reach Rome in Noveinber, 
where we purpose to spend a few mouths, if hia holiness will let ua. You 
sliall hear from me again. 

Yours truly, D. H. Home. 

The following is the article referred to as having appeared in the London 
Journal : 

Jjord Siotiffkam vdth the Spirits. 

158S. "A circumstance which has excited the most extraordinary sensa- 
tion among the piinleged few who have heen admitted within the sphere 
of its operations, has taken pkee at Ealing, a Tillage ou the Usbridge 
road. A young gentleman, named Hume, a native of Scotland, but who 
has resided for many years in America, is now on a visit at the house of 
Mr. Eymer, a highly respectable solicitor. Mr. Hume is what the Ame- 
ricans term a 'medium,' and through his instrumentality some extraordi- 
nary and, if true, miraculous, occurrences have taken place. 

1584. " The spirits of deceased persons have heen heard and felt in 
Sir. Eymer's house, and a variety of circumstances have talsen place, 
wliich the persons who were present affirm could not have been produced 
except by supernatural agency. One of the spirits is supposed to he that 
of a son of Mr. Rymer, a little b j b t 1 tw 1 years of age, 
who has been induced to write to h p t 1 th r of the fable, 
afld the writing is, to all appearan i ly mil t that of the child 
whea alivo. Mr. Rymer, who is th hly d f the bond Jtdes 
of the affair, has iavitod several p t w ( th manifestations, 
and among them the Rev. Mr. LamI t th mhent who has become 
a devOTit believer in. the existence f th m t pints. 

1585. " Some rumours of the sptm fttnsh g reached Lord 
Brougham, the medium had aa interview with the noble and learned lord 
in the piescnco of Sii David Eiewstei, when seveial unaccountable revela- 
tions were made, and evtn Loi 1 Broughim hts confe'''^ed himself amazed 
and BorLly bothered to compiehend the defcnption of agency by which an 
accoideon is forced into his hands and mide to pliy, or hib watch taken 
out rf hn pocket and found in the hands of some other persons in the 
room , foi such aii, imon^ the vagaries perfurnicd by the E Jmg spirits 
The house of Mr Eymer I's, tf (.jurse, besieged by jirsuns anxious to 
witni-ssthe manifest iticns, and scarcely a ni£,ht passes thit some acoffor 
IS not conicitcd into a true believer m the mystery of spirituil mam 
fc station 5 ' 


;;■ Google 


AL C OUR OBO RATI VE EVIDENCE 

Eiiidence afforded hy the Rev. J. B. Ferguwn. 

1586. Tlie following is the summary of tlie result of the investigation 
of epiritual manifestations by the Kev. Mi". Fergnson, of the Baptist 
Church, Nashville, Tennessee. 

1587. His sentiments are of a nature to need no recommendation, as 
they appeal to-tho head and the heart. He is one of the advocates of 
Spiritualism of whom we have reason to he proud. It is from his wori, 
entitled "A Kecord of Communications from the Spirit Spheres," that 
this summary is quoted : 

1588. "You -will now allow me to sum up briefly the ^h nomeiia I 
have witnessed since my investigations hegan 

1589. "First. I have seen tables and othei fu niture moied, with and 
without hands; heard distinct and sometimes loud rapa on thp ceihng 
floor, and furniture of various rooms, which were changed from one loi^lity 
to another, as doubts arose as to any unobserved cau^e'i, to which we would 
have attributed them but for the tnnsitionj have heird thom upon my 
person, clothing, pillow ] nlpit and still hive them in ilmost eveiy serious 
hour of thought and meditation and have thtm neii mc as I write nnd 
I find this espenence to be that of hundreds who, with me •ind others 
believers and skeptics hive witnessed oi reilized all I here state to 
be true. 

1590. "Second I have hear! m the piesence of sec res whose names 
are at any min's commini wh may desuc them for an honest leference, 
native Americans who never ?pol e a word of German discourse foi hours 
in that tongue, in prose nnd f OLtr\ m the preience of native (Tomians 
who pronounced their addjcses pure specimens of the power of their Ian 
guage. I see, daily, lengthy essays and b oka written undi-r what cLims 
to be spirit intelhgpnce aho^c far ibove fie ctpauty and culture of the 
instrnments through whom thi,y iio wiitten There is scarcely a day m 
which I do not lecei^e suoh ccmmun cati s in ! if i dij passes wilhout 
it, it is my neglect not that of the mtcllifcnce that seems evei icaly ti 
speak when a pio; et medium cin be secure 1 At home an I alioad in 
the houses of stiangers anl acj iintance'i such med ma hive 1 '* lib d 
tho age, appearance, t me of death, snl the pi.Luliarities of chnricter of 
the deceased relatives of persons pr sent ind where thcj could have had 
no acCLuaintan.ee with them in 1 in many instance'! c aid not havp 1 nown 
of their existence oi deith I have hal meeti gs of radiums who knew 
nothing of each othei oecui at my hou'^e anl elsewhere without their 
knowledge, and to which they were bt ucht fiom a distance of mil and 
which seemed as inesplicahle to them as to me until after some efleot for 
their benefit was secured by their meeting and expluned by their spmt 
monitors. To jrove the identity of sprit intelligences common icatinj^ to 
me through others they have detailed private ccnver ations held with me 


,v Google 


OE THE EXTSTEiSCE Or SITRITS. 317 

during their earth life ; refciTed to incidents aud eyents of which the me- 
diums could have known nothing ; described, accurately, oecurrenoes taking 
place at a distance of hundreds of miles ; answered questiona that had 
been written in my private records for future investigation, months after 
they had passed from my active memory; stated the state of wiy investi- 
gations of various subjects, with the folly or wisdom, as they legarded it, 
of my difficulties ; leaving me, on the whole, no choice aa to whether I 
would regard them as what they claimed to ho, save that of honest convic- 
tion or the most shameless hypocrisy. Allow me to say, therefore, that 
there is no event of hbtory, no fact in mental philosophy, no conclnsions 
in logical dialectics, more fully and forcibly established, in my convictions, 
than the following : 

1591. "I BELIEVE, I KNOW, THAT I HAVE HELD, AND NOW ERE- 
QUENTLY HOLD, COMMDNIOW, I\TELtIflIBLE AND IlIlllO^INO, IVITH 
KINDRED AND ELEVATED &PIEITh, WHO HA'S E P1.--SFD EBUM ELE^HLT 
SIOHT. 

1592. " Xou will not be lurpused, therofoie, it my wilhngness to risL 
reputation, the dearest ties of ftitrdship, nnd prospects of earthh pim 
and honour, if need be, in the avowal and jropa^'itioa of this faith, ind 
the results to which it must inevitably lead God know*, and cveij inti 
mate friend on earth know", Ihit I would hesitate, long and seinusly, to 
avow 3 faith that was doubtful in my own mind, oi of doubtful influence 
for good in my dim foresight, where so much i'' ipparently at stake I 
think X may safely appeal to my past life aa proof that the dearest per- 
sonal and earthly considentions hate often been sacrifloed, where it was 
thought my action would afiLCt the mteiests or happiness of others 
Know, then, that it is from the matniest conaideration of duty, and the 
obligation, that every man owes to truth and right, and espeoialiy when 
truth and right are ridiculed and denounced, that I detail to jou these 
results of a long esperience ind the most serious jnd solemn invcstigitiona 
of ray life. Willingly, I cannot find it m my heart to disappoint a fnend 
or injui-e an enemy. And with such fnends as in the providence of Grod 
have surrounded me, who have proved themselves true and enduiing 
when every form of bigotry and anunosity were aroused against my posi- 
tion, reputation, and influence, — with all this pressure of enmity and 
friendship upon me, you must know, and all will hereafter know, that 
nothing but loyalty to conviction and a desire to preserve privileges I have 
learned to esteem above what men call life or death, could induce me to 
lay these facta befcie the world 

1593 "If it be asked whit good we cspict to cifcct by the statement 
of these fai.t's, we answei, the epreid rf tiuth upon the dearest, purest, 
and holiest relations of mm, aud the bieilting away of the clouds that 
gather aroand thp mind of man m view of de ilh and fiiturity, the darkness 
of which can nowhere be moie di'*tinetly felt than in the asking of such 


;;■ Google 


SIS ADDITIONAL CORPUBOEWnr M IDENLE 

fi question. The purity, angelic Jjveliness aad divrne toline'.s Ibit such 
a faith, if firmly based, t ecu pires the Ic jil =oul s with hea 

Ycnly beatitudes in the ( mpl t Its power to icttram and refoim, 

to soften the hard hea t f 1 d I enoe, to expo'.e the atill haidti 
heart of bigotry and rel ^ is d f n ; to moisten the eye of oriininal 

efi^rontery, which the byj f th world have made stem and fixed; 

to bring the strong mau f It h p t! y as a child once more ia company 
with his brother-obi Idre t th ft f maternal or sisterly tenderness, 
whose earthly bodies ha 1 si ben entombed; to keep down the 
unnatuval separations of 1 m 1 b e th the manly wisdom and fatherly 
affection of one who claims all as big, and still needing bis care; to turn, 
the scoff of godless ribaldry into loving faith, and the shame of pulpit 
cursca pronounced upon human brethren and by human beings, of eternal 
doom, into blessings of eternal help; to make all, yes all, realize an inner 
reli^on, which worships at the altar of eternal truth and unchangeable 
love. With such aims and prospects before us, to ask what is the good of 
general, tangible spirit intercourse, is to ask the good of iminortality, of 
heaven, and of God." 

An Exposition of views respecting f Tie principal /acls, causes, and peculi- 
arities involved in Spiritual Manifestations; together toitk interesting 
phenomenal slatemenls and communications. S^ Adin Ballou. 

1594. The preceding is the title of a work by the Kav. Adin Ballon, of 
Hopedale, Massachusetts. It is among those which give what appears to 
me available, well-considered facts and opinions respecting Spiritualism. 
Mr. Ballon judiciously, as I think, disposes the spirit manifestations under 
the following heads ; 

1595. "I. Those in which all the important demonstrations were most 
evidently caused by departed spirits. II. Those in which some of the im- 
portant demonstrations were probably caused or greatly affected by unde- 
parted spirits. III. Those in which the demonstrations were of a hetero- 
geneous, incongruous, or derogatory character. 

1596. " The following is a statement of Mr. Ballou'a experience taken 
from the work in question : 

1597. " In this chapter I shall conclude what I have to say under my 
first general head, by referring to a few particulars connected with cases 
within my personal knowledge, and then stating the principal points of 
doctrine taught by the spirits. 

1598. " I will not go into minute narration or description, but simply 
mention the more important pheuoniena I have witnessed. I have heard 
multiform sounds in the presence of spirit media, purporting to be made 
by departed spirits; some like the ticiings of a small watch, others like the 
clicking of a common clocfc, others like the loud knocking of a labouring 
man on the door of his neighbour with his knuckles, others like the 


,v Google 


OP THE EXISTENCE OF SPISITS. 319 

scratching of a Lard finger-nail on a board, others like the creaking of a 
door or window, &c, &c. I have heard the tinio and metre of tunas beaten 
out witli the utmost accuracy, and by several rappers in unison — not only 
while the tune was being played or sung, but afterward, without accom- 
paniment. And I am as certain tbat these sounds were not made by any 
conscious mortal agency, as I am of the best-authenticated facts in the 
commou transactiona of life. 

1599. " I have seen tables and light stands of various size moved about in 
the most astonishing manner, by what purported to be the same invisible 
agency, with only tte gentle and passive resljing of the hands or finger-ends 
of the medium on one of their edges; also, many distinct movings of 
such objects, by request, witlwut the touch of the medium at all. I have 
sat and conversed by the hour together with tie authors of these sounds 
and motions, by means of signals first agreed on ; asking questions and ob- 
taining answers — receiving communications spelled out by the alphabet — 
discussing propositions sometimes made by them to me, and vke versd^ 
all by a slow process, indeed, but with every possible demonstration of in- 
telligence, though not without incidental misapprehensions and mistakes. 
I have witnessed the asking of mental questions by inquirers, who received 
as prompt and correct answers as when the questions were asked audibly to 
the cognition of the medium. 

1600. "I have known these invisibles, by request, to write their names 
witi a common plumbago pencil on a clean sheet of paper — half a dozen 
of thorn, each in a different hand. To make sure of this, as an absolute 
fact, the medium was required to lay her left hand, back downward, in 
the hollow of a veracious person's hand, both open ; when a piece of paste- 
board paper was laid on her hand, a well-examined blank sheet of writing- 
paper placed thereon, and a lead pencil on top of tJiat; in which position 
(the medium's right hand being held up to view,) both the hands, ■with 
these fistures reafing on them, were placed under the leaf of the table, as 
insisted on by the writers. After a minute or two, at a given signal by the 
spirits that they had done, the paper was exhibited with various names 
written thereon, as above affirmed This was repeatedly tested with the 
same results, under circumstances patting all suspicion of fraud and jug- 
glery entirely at rest. 

1601. "I have requested what purported to be the spirit of a friend, 
many years deceased, to go to a particular place, several miles distant from 
that of the sUtinij, and to bring me back intelligence respecting the then 
health and doings of a certain relative well known to the parties. In 
three minutes of time the intelligence was obtained, numerous particulars 
given, some of them rather improbable, but every one exactly confirmed the 
nest day by personal inquiries made for that purpose. 

1602. "I have been requested by the invisibles to speak on a particular 
subject, at a given time and place, with the assurance that responses should 


,v Google 


r, CORHOBOHATIVE ETIDEKGE 

be made on the occasion, by knockinga, approving tUe truths uttered; all 
wbicli wa3 stHkioglj verified. Once, at a most unexpected interview, when 
nothing of the kind had been previously thought of by any person present, 
a spirit, so purporting, who had several times evinced much interest in my 
public Jaboura, spelled out ; — ' Have you' seleefed jour Bubjects of dis- 
course for the next Sunday?' Only vae of them, I answered. Would 
my spirit friend like to suggest a text for the other part of the daj 1 
'Yes.' What is it? I inquired. He spelled out the word 'The,' and 
ceased. Wondering at bis silence, the signal of another spirit was given. 
The new-comer communicated by moving^ of the table, not by raps, like 
the other. . lie said that our friend, the rapper, had been suddenly sum- 
moned away for a few moments, but would certainly return soon. He did 
return within fifteen minutes, resumed his communication just where lie 
left it, and spelled out — ' The second chapter of first Corinthians, Hie 
twelfth and thirteenth verses' No man in the room had the least. recol- 
lection of the words referred to. So the Bible was called for, when the 
text proved to be the following : — ' Now we have received, not the spirit 
of the tcorld, but the spirit which is of God, that we might lenow the 
things that are given to us of God. Which things we also epeafCfnotin 
the words which man's wisdom teaeheth, hut which the Soli/ Ghost teacJi- 
elh; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.' Struck with the sub- 
limity, purity, richness, and force of the passage, I answered that I accepted 
it thankfully, as a very appropriate text for the occasion referred to, and 
would endeavour to illustrate its great truths as well as I might be able. 
My spiViV friend expressed great pleasure by sounds rapidly made on. the 
table, and announced that he and several other sympathizing spirits should 
be prosent to hear the discourse, and, if the mediiMti should also bo there, 
would manifest their approbation of the good things uttered. All this 
was verified in a remarkable manner. 

1603. "I have seen a medium gently magnetized and thrown into a 
trance in one minute, by the imperceptible influence of the spirits, in ac- 
cordance with their own original proposition, reluctantly acceded to by the 
medium and her friends; during which sometimes she had visions of the 
spirit world, and at others became entirely non-eoguizant of every thing 
transpiring in either world. In the latter case, the spirits, as previously 
promised, made use of her organs of speech, unconsciously to herself, and 
thas answer d numerous questions, instead of responding by the rappings. 
That these trances were not superinduced by mortal ^ney, and were not 
feigned, but real, I am as certain as I can be of any thing not absolutely 
beyond the possibility of mistake. 

1604. " I might proceed much farther in the particularization of mani- 
festations coming under my personal observation, but will not make myself 
tfidious. Suffice it to say, that I have witnessed enough with my own eyes 
and ears to prepare mo for the belief of the still more incredible manifes- 


;;■ Google 


or THE EXISTENCE OE SIIRITS. B21 

tations reported fi-om a, thousand places in o.ur country and the world. I 
will Eierely add, that I have received many exoellont commuDications from 
these invisible friends, and scarcely a single one of a light, frivolous, or 
low character; though I know, that in this respect my esperience has been 
unlike that of some othera. I Can laj m tiuth, speaking for myself alone, 
that my whole moral nature has been purified and elevated by the influ- 
ences which have flowed in upon mo duung the investigation of this sub- 
ject. Otheii, I am sure, can say the same There are thoaOj no douht, 
who have abused the whole thin^ — btfiolmg themselves and others in a 
lamentable manner. What is there m the wide world that has wholly 
escaped abu&e and perversion? Kcnson, inapired and clowned with the 
wisdom from above, is indispensable to the avoidance of these evils. Un- 
til a much larger portion of mankind than it present attain to the de- 
velopment of their higher faculties, we must expect the abuse and perver- 
sion, to a gi eater or less extent, of every thing iu nature. 'But wisdom 
is justified of all her children.' " 

1605. The following statement of A. H. Jarvis, a Methodist clergyman, 
of Eochester, New York, is copied from Mr. Balloa's work. It is one of 
those manifestations in which the information conveyed cannot be con- 
ceived to have pre-existed in the mind of the person by whom it was 


1606. " There are many facts which have como under my observation, 
equally convincing of the intelligence and utility of the comnjunieationa 
from these unseen agents, who, I now believe, are continually about ns, 
and more perfectly acquainted with all our ways, and even oui thous;hls, 
than we are with each other. But the fact in reference to my fiiend 
Piekard is what you desire. Ho was at ray house on Friday afternoon, 
April 6, 1S49. None of the Fox family wore present. While at the tea- 
table, we had free communications on different subjects, Piekard was re- 
quested to ask questions. Ho desired to know who it was that would an- 
swer questions. The answer was — 'I am your mother, Maky PiciCAim,' 
Her name, or the fact of her death, was not known to any of us. The 

nest Monday evening he (Piekard) was at Mr, 6 's, and tarried there 

over night. He there received a communication, purporting to be from 
his mother, aajlng, 'Your child is dead.' He camo immediately to my 
place, and said he should take the stage for home, (Lockport, sisty miles 
distant.) He left in the stage at 8 or 9, A. M. At 12, m., I returned 
to my house, my wife meeting mc with a telegraph envelope. I broke the 
seal and read mentally, first : 

" ' EOOKESTEB, April 10, ISIS. 

1607. " ' By telegraph from Ijock port— the Itev, A, H. Jarvis, No. 4 
West St. 

160S. '"Tell Mr. Piekard, if you can find him, his child died this 
morning. — Answer. K. Malloilt.' 


;;■ Google 


322 ADDITIONAL CORROBORATIVE EVIDENCE 

1609. " I then read it to my wife, and said, ' This ia oiio of the best and 
most convincing eTidcnoes of the intelligence of those invisible agents ;' and 
then I added, ' God'a telegi'aph has outdone Morse's, altogether.' 

" Yours, truly. A, H. Jarvis.' 

'■To E. If. CArnoN, Auhum." 

1610. Tho subjoined opinions of the spirits, taken from the volnme 
above mentioned, differ but immaterially from those which I have received; 
proving that information respeoting scriptural morals, when properly 
sought, will be consistently obtained ; 

1611. " 1. There is one and but one God, an infinite Spirit and the Fa- 
ther of spirits. He loves all, and eternally seeks their good by all wise and 
fitting means. 

1612. " 2. All human beinga are spirits as to their absolute internal con- 
stitution, and soon after death emerge into disUnot conscioua spiritual iden- 
tities, having bodies, forms, and peculiarities as obviously cognizable to 
each other, and as distinguishable from each other, as here in the flesh. 

1613. "3. All human beings possess certain mental and moral qualities, 
partly constitutional, partly circumstantial, and partly self-wrought, which 
determine for the time being each individual'a real spiritual character and 
relative nearness to, or distance from, the divine standard of perfection. So 
that each one is in a certain sphere, and io some oirele or degree of that 
sphere, as to his spirit, alioays, whether existing in the fleshly body or 
after his dissolution. And if a person is spiritually in a certain sphere at 
death, in that sphere he finds himself tho moment ho resumes his con- 
sciousness in the spirit world, associated with kindred spirits, 

1614. " 4. There are seven spirit spberes, or circles,* inferior to the 
heavenly or celestial spheres, and each sphere or circle has several degrees, 
Man is a being by nature capable of progress, subject to certain funda- 
mental spiritual and moral laws. In conformity to these laws, he may now 
progress from lower to higber spheres ; i. e. he may draw nearer and nearer 
to God; or, what ia the same thing, nearer as a spirit to the divine stand- 
ard of perfection. But without conformity to these laws, he cannot pro- 
gress, but obscures and debases himself, Death does not change man's 
real character, nor his proper spirit sphere, nor his capability to make pro- 
gi'ess, nor the laws of progress. No man is in a morally worse state, all 
things considered, by reason of pa^ng into the spirit world, The -worst 
even are, if any way affected, in a better state there than in the iesh. 
They whose spirit sphere was purer, find themselves proper! ionally blessed. 
Many remain very long in the lower spheres, where, though enabled to 
enjoy existence in the degree possible at such a distance from the divine 
focus of blessedness, they are • spirits in prison/ and wretched in com- 


,v Google 


EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 323 


p.wiscn with those ia tlie paradjpaical spheres. Their esistenoe is a bleas- 
i.Dg to them even while thua low, and there is no such place ov state as a 
HELIj of unmitigated, hopeless misery. Meantime, God, angels, and all 
the higher spirita, are for ever seeking the elevation of the inferior spirits, 
by all just, wise, and appropriate means. And no one, however low and 
sluggish of progress, will finally fjil to be attracted iipward, obediently to 
the divine laws, from one degree to another, and froai one sphere to an- 
other, till he reach the heavenly mansion — even though it take an age of 
eternities to complete his de'Jtiny. 

1615. "5. Spirits in the highir of the seven spheres are employed in 
three general exercises. 1. In religious a^pimtions, meditations, worship 
— ill striving after a more perfuct knowledge of and commanieation with 
God — whom they cannot see there any more than here, as a personal be- 
ing, but only in spirit by faith and intuition. 2. In study, self-esamina- 
tion, contemplations of truth, and acquaintina; themselves with all useful 
knowledge attainable by them. 8 In ministering to struggling spirita on 
earth and in the lower spheres — cndcavuuiing to elevate and Mess them; 
thus cultivating love to God, wisdom within themselves, and ever-active 
benevolence to their inferiors in condition. Spirits in any circle can descend 
into aU the circles below their own, but cannot, except by special per- 
mission, ascend into a higher sphere, untU qualified by spiritual progress. 

1616. " 6. Mankind are by nafure one family of brothers and sisters, 
the ofispring of a common Father in heaven, whom they ought to love with 
all their heart, and each other as themselves. The good of each is really 
the good of all, and that of all the good of each. Therefore, no one can 
injure another without injuring himself in the end. All kinds of tyranny 
and oppression are utterly sinful. So all war, violence, revenge, and vin- 
dictive punishment. So all intemperance, debauchery, and sesnal pollu- 
tion. So all falsehood, covetousness, fraud, extortion, and pecuniary faking 
of advantage. 8o all pride and domineering of superiors over inferiors. 
So all religious bigotry, thrusting down, persecution, and sectarian bitter- 
ness. So every thing contrary to personal holiness, to the piety which 
loves God supremely, and man as a brother, whether friend or foe. These 
reliable spirits are everywhere reformers, regenerators of the world, indivi- 
dually and socially. They are for the reconciliation of all things — for 
universal harmony — on the great principles of trath, purity, justice, love, 
and wisdom. And they all predict a better future for the hnman race here 
on earth, as well as in the fature state. 

1617. " 7. It is the imperative duty of every human being to exercise 
his own powers, faculties, reason, and judgment, with modesty, humility, 
and Ci-mness, and not to be overawed, borne down, or led away captive, by 
any assuming spirit ia or out of the flesh. Every one is acconntable for 
himself, and ought both to judge and act for himself, with supremo reve- 
rence for God and his moral perfections, according to his own highest eon- 


,v Google 


324 APDITJONAT, COREOBOaATIVE EVIDENCE 


victioH of tiuth anl dut^ Thu li;. ilioill esaminL tU Bible and all 
hcokh Iliui ill hum in governments autto itio" poiM,rs const tutions 
law* (.ustoms, and usag s in clnjii,h anlstafi, Th \3 tiy all spinta and 
tlien commnnicationb — all pretended prO| iieta jhilosophers., and teacbeta—- 
all piofcasiona and aa&amptions whatsoever No one should impenuuilj 
dictate, or cower down before j.nother But truth, rectitnle, reason ind 
the Ruision of wislom, sh uH alone sway the minds of moral ngents 

1C18 ' Such 13 1 fur digest and s immaay of the principal doctiines 
put foith m ninety nine onu hundiclti s of the ocmmunications of reliable 
spiiits thioughout the country I hiye stated them m my own language 
as I have understood them. It will be seen that they differ in some re- 
spects from etery sectarian view of theology, religion, and morality now 
popular in the world." 

Me ITon. J. W. Edmond^s TeUimony. 

1619. To those who have not seen the original statement of the benevo- 
lent and distinguished Judge Edmonds, respecting his conversion, the sub- 
joined account, taken from the introduction to his work on "Spiritualism," 
may prove interesting. 

1620. "It was in January, 1851, that my attention was first called to 
the subject of 'spiritual intercourse.' I had, in the course of my life, 
read and heard from the pulpit so many contradictory and conflicting doc- 
trines on the subject (of man's future esistence) that I hardly knew what 
to believe. 

1621. " For about four months I devoted at least two evenings in a 
week, and sometimes more, to witnessing the phenomenon in all its phases. 
I kept careful records of all I witnessed, and, from time to time, compared 
them with each other, to detect inconsistencies and contradictious. I read 
all I could lay my hands upon, on the subject, and especially ail the 
professed 'exposures of the humbug.' In fine, X availed myself of every 
opportunity that was afforded thoroughly to sift the matter to the bottom. 
I was all this time an unbeliever. At length the evidence came, and witli 
such force that no sane man could withhold his faith. 

1632. " To detail what I witnessed for those four months, an 1 co d d 
would fill, at least, one hundred and thirty closely- written p ^ s I will 
however, taention a few things, which will give a general da f that 
which charaetemed interviews now numbering several hundr d fli t f 
them have occurred in the presence of others. I have pr s v d th 
names in my records. ***** These considerations grow out of 
this fact : 

1623. "First, That I have thus very many witness^ whom I can 
invoke to establish the truth of my statements. 

1624. " Second. That if I have teen deluded, and have not seen and 
heard what I think I have, my delusion has been shared by many as 


,v Google 


or THE EXISTENCE JE =iinill'i 52'i 

alirewd, aa mtelhgcat, aa lionest, \oA as enliglitened people is ire to be 
fonnd anywhere among us 

1625. "My attention was fli^t drawn to the tnteioourse by the rjppings, 
then the most common, but now tte moat inLongiJprjble, mcde of com 
muning. Of coui'^e I wis on the look out fni JeLeption, anil at first rtliel 
upoa my sensefi and the conelusions which my reason mi^ht diaw frmi 
their ovidonea. * ■* * 

1626. "After depending upon my stnae^ as to these various phases of 
the phenomenon, I invoLed the tii of soience, and, with the assistance of 
an accomplished eleetiiei.in and his michinery, and of eight or ten int 1 
ligent, educated, and shiewd peisoni, examined the matter We pursued 
our inquiries many days, ind estabhshel, to out s'^tisfaotion, two things 
first, that the sounds were not piodiiced by the igenoy of any person pie- 
sent or near us ; and, secondly, that they were not forthcoming at our will 
and pleasure. In the mean time, another feature attracted my attention, 
and that was ' physical manifestations,' as they are termed. Thus, I have 
known a pine table, with four legs lifted up bodily from the floor, in the 
centre of a circle of six or eight persona I rne 1 up de lown, and laid 
upon its top at our feet, then lifted p o er our heads nd put leaning 
against the back of the sofa on w! ch wc t -t- * * * j have seen a ms.- 
hogany centre-table, having only a centre Ic and w tli a lamp burning 
npon it, lifted from the floor, at lea t a fo t n aj te of the efforts of those 
present, and shaken backward and fuiward, as one would shofce a goblet in 
hJa hand. * * * * 

1627. " I have known a dinner-bell, taken from a shelf in a closet, rung 
over the heads of four or five persons in that closet, then rung around the 
room over the heads of twelve or fifteen persons in the back parlour, and 
then borne through the folding-doors to the farther end of the front par- 
loui-, and then dropped on the floor. 

1628. " I have known persons pulled about, with a force which it was 
impossible for them to resist; and once, vphen all my strength was added, 
in vain, to that of one thus affected. 

1629. "I have known a mahogany chair thrown on its side, and moved 
swiftly back and forth on the floor, no one touching it, through a room 
where there were, at least, a dozen people sitting. Yet no ono was touched, 
and it was repeatedly stopped within a few inches of mc, when it was 
coming with a violence which, if not arrested, must have broken my legs. 

1630. " This is not a tithe, nay, not an hundredth part, of what I have 
seen, of the same character. At the same time, I have heard from others, 
whose testimony would be credited in any human transaction, and which 
I could not permit myself to disregard, accounts of still more extraordi- 
nary transactions; for I have been by no means so much favoured in this 
respect as some. 

1631. "Intelligence was a remarkable feature of the phci 


;;■ Google 


326 ABDITIOXAL 

Thus, I have frequently known mental queationa answered — tl t qu s 
tiona merely framed in the mind of the interrogator, and not al d by 
him or known to others. Preparatory to meeting a circle, I h & t d wn 
alone in mj room, and carefully prepared a series of question t h p o 
pounded; and I have heen surprised to find my questions answered, and 
in the precise order in whicL I wrote them, without my even taking my 
memorandum out of my pocket, and when I knew that no person present 
knew that I had prepared questions, much less what they were, 

1632. "My most secret thoughts — those which I never uttered to 
mortal man or woman — have heen fteely spoken, as if I had uttered them. 

1633. "I have known Latin, French, and Spanish words spelled out 
through the rappings; and I have heard mediums, who knew no language 
but their own, speak in those languages, and in Italian, German, and 
Greek, and in other languages unknown to mo, hut which were repre- 
sented to be Arabic, Chinese, and Indian, and all done with the ease and 
rapidity of a native. 

1634. "I have seen a person who knew nothing of mudc, except a 
little that he had learned at a country singing-sahool, go to the piano and 
play in perfect keeping, as to time and concord, the several parts of an 
overture to an opera. 

1635. " When I was absent last winter, in Central America, my friends 
in town heard of my whereabouts, and of the state of my health, seven 
times ; and, on my return, by comparing their information with the entries 
in mj journal, it was found to be invariably correct. 

1636. " 1 went into the investigation, originally thinking it a deception, 
and intending to make public my esposure of it. Haying, from my re- 
searches, come to a different conclusion, I feel that the obligation to make 
known the result is just as strong. Therefore it is, mainly, that I give 
the result to the world. "J. W. Edmonbs." 

Testimony of Hairy Lloyd Garrison. 

1637. IMr. Garrison is spoken of as a man of unimpeachable veracity 
and independent mind. His testimony will have weight with one class of 
inquirers, if not with another. The following is from the "Liberator" of 
March 3, 1854. 

1638. ""We are often privately asked, what we think of the 'Spiritual 
Manifestations,' so called, and whether we have had any opportunities to 
investigate them. 

1639. "When we first heard of the 'Rochester knockings,' wesuppcraed 
(not personally knowing the persons implicated) that there might be some 
collusion Id that particular case, or, if not, that the phenomena would ere 
long elicit a satisfactory solution, independent of all spiritual agency. As 
the manifestations have spread from house to house, from city to city, from 
one part of the country to the other, across the Atlantic into Europe, till 


;;■ Google 


OF TIIL IvI lENCE T 11111 327 

now tie civilized worlJ is compelled to acknowlc Ige the r leil tj however 
diverse in accoucting for them — as the«e minifest'itjoaa coi tiuue to ia- 
crease in variety and piwer &o that all suspieion of trick or impnature be- 
coaies simplj ahsurd and preposteions— and as every attempt to find a so- 
lution for them ia some physical theory lelating to electnnty the odic 
force, clairvoyance, and the hi e ha? thus fir proved abortive — it becomes 
every intelligent mind to enftr into an investigation ot them with candour 
and lairness, as opportunity may offer, and to bear such testimony in regard 
to them as the facts may warrant, no matter what ridicule it may excite 
on the part of the uninformed or skeptical. 

1640. "As for ourselves, most assuredly we have iwen in no haste to 
jump to a conclusion in, regard to phenomena so universally diffused, and 
of so extraoi-dinaiy a character. For the last tkree years, we have kept 
pace with nearly all that has been published on the subject; and we have 
witnessed, at various times, many surprising 'manifestations;' and our 
oonvietion is, that they cannot be accounted for oa any other theory than 
that of spiritual agency. This theory, however, is not unattended with 
discrepancies, difficultiesi and trials. It ia certain that, if it be true, tiiere 
are many deceptive epirits, and that the apostolic injunction to ' believe 
not every spirit,' but to try them in every possible way, is specially to be 
regarded, or the consequences may prove very disastrous. 

1641. "We might write a pretty long essay on what we have seen and 
heard, touching thisjnatter; but this wa reserve for some other oi 
We shall now merely describe some of the phenomena which ^ 
in New York during our recent visit to that city. 

1642. "The medium in this instance was Mrs. Brown, formerly Mrs. 
Fish, of Rochester. The circle was composed of six gentlemen and four 
ladies. The table was of ample dimensions, so as to aeeommodato the 
party without inconvenience. We sat around it in the usual manner, (the 
hands of each individual resting upon the table,) and engaged in social 
chit-chat. While waiting for some demonstrations from the invisible 
world, we had our right foot patted as by a human hand, and the right leg 
of our pantaloons strongly pulled, by some unseen agency. This was done 
repeatedly, though we said nothing at the time; but, thinking it might be 
possible that the foot of some one of the company might undesignedly be 
ia contact with our own, we cautiously felt around to ascertain if this were 
the case, but there was nothing tangible; and the moment we put our foot 
down, the same familiar tappings and jerks followed. Still, wo made no 
disclosure, Kaps were then distinctly heard, and the alphabet was called 
for. Letter by letter, it was rapped out that the medium must put her feet 
in the custody of one of the party, and then we were told to wait for de- 
monstrations. This was evidently done to oonvince every one present that 
tho medium had nothing to do with the phenomena, by way of fraud or 
collusion ; and, during the entire sitting, (a protracted one,) before any re- 


;;■ Google 


328 AEDITIONAI, COEKOEOKATIVE KVIDENCE 

matkalile feat was performed, the medium was iavariably ordered to take 
suoh. a position as to render it clearly impossible for her to bo privy to it. 
The presence of several spirits was indicated during the evening, and satis- 
factory tests were made ; but the most commanicative aud efSeient one pur- 
ported to be that of 'Jesse nutcbinson.' It was b.e who had been play- 
ing bo-peep witli us under the table; and, now that the medium was se- 
cured, to the satisfaction of all present, he renewed his salutations, not 
only to us personally, but to nearly every one of the circle. The ladies 
had their dresses, and the gentlemen their pantaloons, pulled, and their 
feet patted, in the most emphatic manner. Heavy raps were now made 
on the floor ; and, on being requested to that effect, ' Jesse' beat a march — 
it seemed to us Washington's march — in admirable time, and in the most 
spirited manner ; no drummer could have done it more skilfully. He was 
then asked to beat time, while the company joined in singing several 
tunes — ' The Old Granite State,' among othersr— which he did to perfec- 
tion. He then spelt out" the following communications by the alphabet : 
' I am most happy, dear friends, to be able to give you such tangible evi- 
dence of my presenee. The good time haa truij oome. The gates of the 
New Jerusalem are open, and the good spirits, made more pure by the 
ohange of spheres, are knocking at the door of your souls-' 

1643. "Isaac T. Hopper now indicated his presence to his daughter, 
who was at the table, and made some physical demonstrations. His mes- 
sage, as rapped out, was as follows : ' I am ti-uly happy to echo back joy 
and gladness fiom my happy home. Truth is bearing its way on gloriously, 
and the subject of Spiritualism will work miracles in the cause of reform. 
My friends, the rock of prejudice begins to yield to the hammer of truth ; 
and, now, with the aid of good spirits, you can blast it without the use of 
powder.' And ho subsequently added, 'I want you to see that spirits have 
power to move matter.' 

1644. "It was nest rapped out, 'Put the bell under the table.' We, 
accordingly, took the bell, (aa ordinary table-bell,) and put it down at our 
feet. Ill a few moments, it was smartly rung by aa uuseen power, and 
then fell to the floor. This was done again and again — the bell making 
the circuit of the table, and ringing so loudly that the servant-giil, in an ad- 
jacent room, supposing she was needed, eame in to inquire what was wanted. 

1645. "Nest, a cane with a hooked handle was laid on the carpet, 
under the table. Immediately, it struck the table violently, and rubbed 
along the under surface its entire length. It then fell to the floor, and 
traversed over and under the feet of several of the party, like a living 
snake — in one or two instances the foot being involuntai'ily lifted to enable 
it to pass under. Its movements were exceedingly eurions. At one time, 
wo caught hold of the handle as it protruded itself by our side, and en- 
deavoured to pull it from under tho table ; but the resistance was as strong 
as though another hand was grasping it at the o 


;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OS Sl'IHITS. 329 

1646. " We were bow directed to put seyeral tiinga under tlie table, 
observe how they were placed, aad wait for results. Whea told to loot, 
we found that a penknife was missing, nor eoald it be discovered by the 
most careful search. On again resuming oar seats, we were told to tal^e 
another look; and, behold! there was the penknife, precisely where it 
had been originally placed 1 

1647. " Nest, we were directed to lay some writiog-papev, with a pen- 
cil upon it, Tinder the table. This was done; and, in a few moments, on 
being told to look, we found the word 'Jesse' written upon it ia a scrawl- 
ing hand, as though made with great difficulty. The same experiment 
was again made, and 'Isaac T. H.' (Hopper) was written very legibly, and 
in a different hand. A third time this was done, and ' Mary Jane' was 
recorded, — the name of a young lady who had been communicating with 
a gentleman present. The first two autographs we have in our possession. 

1648. "We now made two req^uesta of 'Jesse,' to convince us yet 
more strongly of his presence. The first was, to press our right foot 
iirmly to the floor, and to make loud raps directly under it. This was 
quickly done, the foot being grasped as by a mortal hand, and vibrating 
to the raps thus strangely made. The second was, if possible, to take ua 
by the right hand with his own, so as to make the touch palpable beyond 
a doubt. Keeping the hand careftilly in custody between our knees as we 
sat— the hands of all the company, including those of the medium, being 
on the table — we, in a few moments, had it patted, first on one side, then 
on the other, briskly and repeatedly, as if fey another hand, having a ne- 
gative feeling, as though there was no warmth in it, but natural in every 
other respect. For the general gratification, the same thing was done to 
others of the party. 

1649. " How shall demonstrations like these be accounted for, except 
on the hypothesis of spirit-agency? If we cannot positively afB.rm that 
Isaac T. Hopper and Jesse Hutchinson were present on that occasion, we 
are, at least, prepared to declare, as our own conviction, as well as that of 
the entire company, we believe, that invisible spirits, not of this mundane 
sphere, performed the pheaomena we have thus briefly nairated to our 
readers." 

Testimony of Mr. and Mrs. NeMon. 

1650. The following is esti-acted from a highly interesting letter, enti- 
tled, "The Ministry of Angels Eealized," addressed by Mr. and Mrs. 
Newton to the Edward's Congregational Church, Boston, of which they 
were members. Mr. Newton is editor of the " New England Spiritualist," 
and sustains a reputation for high moral and intellectual attainment. 

1651. " The results, however, of this first investigation, at the time, were 
(for reasons not then apparent, but which have since been made plain to us) 
tar from satisfactory. Though we witnessed some striking evidences of 
invisible intelligent agency, there was nothing by which tliis agency could. . 


,v Google 


ADDITIONAL C0HEOB0KATIVE EVIDENCE 

y identified; and tliG conclusion seemed most in a:,corlaiice with 
our previous opinions, that, if any agency beyond thit of human htings 
was concerned, it was that of evil and seducing spiriti Some mcnths 
subaequently to tliis, we were led to attempt the investigation under eir 
oumgtances more favourable to ariiving at a satisfactoiy oonclnsion 'i' * * 
The results of this interview were of the most surprising, yea, astounding 
character. An intelligence, claiming to be tliat of a Tencrited parent, who 
had long since passed ■within the vai!, manifested its presence, and iddreesed 
to one of us a communication glowing with parental affection, and breath 
ing the very spirit of the upper realm. This was -vccompaaied by the 
statement of a number of facts, pertaining to his earthlj life, none of which, 
we were fully satisfied, could have been known to any person, bodily 
present, except the inquirer, and some of them unLnown e\en to him 
Although the investigation had been approached with minds on the alert 
and perceptions sharpened to detect collusion, imposture, deception, or dia- 
bolism, in any of lis forms, no trace of them could be perceived; all was 
conducted with evident frankness and candour, on the part of those con- 
cerned; and no solution of the mystery was then arrived at, and no ade- 
quate one has since been offered, which does not recognise the agency of ia- 
teUigent beings. A ti-umpet-blast from the clouds could scarcely have been 
more startling to our prejudices and unbelief than was that message from 
the hidden world. * * * As may be well supposed, tlie interest awakened 
by this occurrence was sufficient to lead to a further investigation But a 
futh Idttlguldntt b dhw de- 

m trit d g th ] wh h t t 1 N w t 


u tl 


d h d 


m I ted 


P 


1 d p 


t b 


pi d 


r n p 
h lb 


f— t tl 


m f tat 


g 


f th m t m 
t fy f 


11 h 
m t 


t 


I t llywt 


d 1 


d 


twth ta 1 th rpl t f 


nid 


t 


t h wl d 


ai 1 


bl f th 


y 


f p 


t lb 


-s Th b 1 f h 


n 


pt f p J dee 


d k pt m 


pte 


tth fe 1 


y f h 


1 g 


1 mp t 


pt 


fall 


tt nipi 


f tfi m 


t p! 


th 


1 th b 


f m 


t lal 


ism (wl 


h (1 t 


w f 1 


y a. t be wh Uy in 3 


1 t 


t unt f wh t 


wt d 
tbl d 


J th t b 1 f b 


t 1 gth 


f d 


pn 


m d bj 


105 


B tth q 


tl tllp 


d 


p wh w 


th 


11 


b 


d wh t tl 


h t 


d 1 


Th y 1 


m d t 


b th 


p te 


f d p t lb 


b gs 


Sm 


f th m t d th t th 


y w 


1 


t d ] 


1 dth y 


f 


h d m t ta tl 


d 


pha- 


bl p 


f fth 1 


t ty Th y p 1 


diab th m 


f t 


thm 


I t 
160 


tw d 
Th m tf 


f th 
rabl f 


P 


t dh 1 t fj 


I 
d f 


Aing 


PI 


d th y TV f lly 1 p y t lly mp d 

;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OF SPIEITS. 661 

1654. " For several montts did we continue to apply to what waa tran- 
spiring under our notice, through the medinmship of others, tlie keenest 
powere of observation, and the highest exercise of moral perception, which 
have been granted us ; ever seeking light and aid from Him who has said, 
'Ask, and ye shall receive.' 

1655. " At length, these intelligences from another sphere began to 
manifest themselves to iis in a manner most unlooked-for and diverse from 
any thing we had elsewhere witnessed, in the quietness and seclusion of 
our own home, and without the intervention of any other person. From 
small and gentle beginnings, they have gone forward, as we were able to 
bear the increasing light, to give greater, and higher, and clearer proofs 
of the reality of their presence, their identity, and their heavenly mission ; 
until, through a period of sis or seven months, we have been permitted, 
as we believe, the almost daily enjoyment of the sweetest and most inti- 
mate communion with the spirits of 'just ones made perfect above.' 

"A. E. Newton, 
S. J. Newton." 

Testiinonj/ of Memhei's of ills New York Circle. 

1656. The following is a statement of facts by Mrs. Charles Partridge, 
taken from the minutes o the New York circle, attested by several highly 
respectable and credible persons, among whom is my personal friend, Doc- 
tor Gray. 

1657- " Persons at the circle have been unesp tedly t n 1 d n 

the chairs in which they were sitting, and moved to nl f m lb til 
Chairs and sofas have suddenly started from the p t n t th 

wall, and moved forward to the centre of the ro m wh th y w 
quired in the formation of the circle. The per n n th lb 

each successively lifted his own side of the table, nd th bl p w 

has raised the opposite side correspondingly. is lly th p ts 
have raised the table entirely, and sustained it n tad tan f 

from one to three feet from the floor, so that all nld t fy th m 
selves that no person in the flesh was touching it. Lights of various 
colours have been produced in dark rooms. A man has been suspended 
in, and conveyed through, the air, a distance of fifty feet, or more. The 
communications have been given iu various ways, but chiefly in writing, 
and by the rappings throngb the ordinary alphabetical mode. 

1658. "At the close of the session held on the 17th of November, 1851, 
the spirits, through the alphabet, and in their usual manner, said, ' We 
wish to give you a sentence for you to find out and remember;' when the 
following was communicated : ' Dehemos amar d todo el nvwndo auti d nu- 
estros encmigos.' No person present on that occasion understood a word 
of this language, but we were subsequently informed that it was Spanish. 

1659, " During the session on the 19th of January, 1852, the spirits sig- 


;;■ Google 


332 ADDITIONAL COIIIIOEORATIVE EVIBENCB 

nified their deaive to make a commuaioatioa ia Ilebrew- Mr. Partridge 
asked who should call the alphabet, aad received for answer, ' The only 
person present who understands it — Greorgo Bnah.' Professor Bush there- 
upon proceeded to repeat the Hebrew alphabet, and a commuaioatioa in 
that langtt w i 

1660. ' M y dd t ■d facts might be given to sbow that spirits com- 
municate 1 ges through B. P. Fowler; but the above will 
suffice for th p p f this statement. 

1661. ' W t all w the present occasion to pass, without an es- 
pressioa of th t fidence and uaqualified esteem with which Mr. 
Fowler is regarded by the merabers of the New York circle, and by those 
who know hiia generally. We have had an intimate persoaal acquaintance 
with him for two years past — some of ua for a much longer period — and 
we have only knowa him as a high-niinded and honourable jouag man. 
Erom the beginning, he has steadily refused to accept the slightest com- 
pensation for his time and services whilo employed in the capacity of a 
medium; and we deem it but an act of simple justice to Mr. F. to record 
the fact tliat, oa all occasions, we have found him entirely unassuming in 
his deportment, and eminently truthful in hia life. 

"R. T. Hallock, M.D., W. J. Banek, 

J. T. "Wakner, M. J)., John F. Gray, M. D., 

Almiba L. Fowleu, Samuel T. Fowusk, 

A. G-. Hull, M, D., Ma. & Mna. Charles Paeteidge." 

Testimony/ of the Rev. D. F. Goddard, Boston. 

1662. " This is to certify that, during a long investigation of tho mo- 
dern phenomena which are now attracting attention in our own country 
and in the old, I have repeatedly seen my own table, in my own room, to 
which I know there is no nice machinery affixed for purposes of deception, 
without any contact whatever of earthly kind, raised, tipped, moved about 
the room, as if a strong man was there at work. Also, a piano-forte played 
upon in the same way, without mortal contact, producing most beautiful 
music — an ocean piece, in which a storm was represented succeeded hy a 
calm. These phenomena occurred in the presence of several other indivi- 
duals of both sexes, all of whom saw, and all of whom are ready to testify. 
I have also received from a medium, who never saw me before, and knew 
nothing of my family, the fact of my father's death, his name, and a 
perfeot /ac-s/mifc of his handwriting; and this when I was not expecting 
such handwriting, and could not have possibly imitated it, without a copy, 
in the labour of three months. D. F. Goddaed." 

1663. As this work may be read by many who have not perused any 
other book on the subject of which it treats, I hope that those who take it 
up, having a knowledge of the most important spirit manifestations here- 
tofore published, will esonse my quoting them here. My object is to fur- 


,v Google 


OF spmiTS. 333 

niah the readers of this volume a reasonably, comprehensive view of Spi- 
ritualism, without the necessitj of their referring to works which may not 
he easUy accessible. 

1664. To the cool Yankee sagacity of Mrs. Fox and her daughters, the 
world is indebted for the happy result that these manifestations did not, 
like those which preceded them in other parts of the world, end in a mere 
inesplicable mystery, and erroneous inferences as to their origin. I allude 
here to the well-known fact, that similar manifestations were made in the 
early part of the last century, in Epworth, England, at the mansion of the 
celebrated clergyman, Wesley, and that one of his daughters was endowed 
with the attributes of a medium for many years, without the art of alpha- 
betic communication having been suggested. 

1665. I might here republish the history of the famous " rappings and 
Jenockings" at Hydesville and Eochcater, in the State of New Yorkj but 
as regards evidence, they amount to about the same thing, only not so con- 
centrated, as those demonstrations which occurred at the regidenee of the 
Rev. Dr. Phelps, in Stratford, Connecticut. The doctor, who is a Congre- 
gationalist, and one of the most worthy men in the world, became a con- 
vert to Spiritualism in consequence of these manifestations, an account of 
which ifl subjoined. I quote it from the escellent work of E. W- Capron, 
Esq., entitled, "Modern Spiritualism, its Facts and Fanaticisms." 

1666. I omit quoting the history of the abortive effort made by the 
spirits to communicate with the Wesleys, but refer the reader to the ac- 
count published in a work entitled, " Memoirs of the Wesley Family," 
by Adam Clark, LL.D., second edition, 1846; or to the work of Mr. 
Capron, already specified. 

Minifeitations at Stratford, OovM., in Ute Some ofSev. EUakim Phelps, 
D.D. — Reinarhabte Exhibitions of Povi.er. — Singular Occurrences. — 
Image-making. — Destruction of Famiture. — Incendiary Spirits. — 
The ^irits identified. — Unhappy Spirits, from the remembrance of 
lOTOiig done in this World. — Wrong-doing revealed. — Directions given 
for restoring Ulrgotten Gains. — Discontinuance of the Manifestations. 
1C67. "While these strange occuiTences were taking placo at Koohester 
and Auburn, and the press and people were busy in trying to account for 
them on strictly mundane principles, making all manner of insinuations 
against the character and motives of those who even dared to investigate 
for themselves, some manifestations took place at Stratford, Conn., which 
attracted attention to that quarter, as well on account of the character and 
standing of the gentleman at whose house they occurred, as the very strange, 
lis, and violent character of the manifestations. I have been allowed 
e all the records kept of the occurrences by Dr. Phelps, and shall 
be able, therefore, to present the history with more minuteness and accu- 
racy than has ever before appeared. 


;;■ Google 


COEKOBOEATIVE EVIDENCE 

1668, "The first distuibanoea took place on the tenth daj of March, 
1850, at the house of Eey. Elkkim Phelps, D.D. The house had be^n 
oeeupiei by him from the 22d of February, 1848. It i^ a laige and gen- 
teel coaiitry mansion, separated from the street by a fence foity-five feet 
in front of the house; which ia thirty-two feet in front, and, including the 
piazza, seventy feet deep, witt a hall thirteen feet wide, running through 
the whole depth of the building, Adjoiniog, and opening from this hall, 
are two parlours and a dining-room. On the second floor are five sleeping- 
rooms, and on the third floor two. The kitchen is in the basement. The house 
was built about the year 1829 or '30 by a Captain Dondall, who for seToral 
years commanded a vessel in the China trade, and who died in the Bay of 
Canton within two or three years after his family had taken up their resi- 
dence in the house. The property then passed into the hands of another 
sea-captain, by the name of Purcell, who, with his family, occupied it for 
several years. Captain Purcell dying suddenly in New York, the faraiiy 
removed, and the bouse waa occupied by an Episcopal clei^yman for a 
school a year or more, and afterward by a Mr , also as a school for 

1669. "None of the families who had thus far occupied the house had 
ever been disturbed, or witnessed any thing aside from ordinary events. 
At the death of Captain Purcell it became the property of the two daugh- 
ters, of whom Dr. Phelps purchased it during the month of November, 

1847. For two years previous to this it bad been, unoccupied. Dr. Phelps 
and family commenced their residence therein on the 22d of February, 

1848. Nothing occurred to excite the attention of the family out of the 
ordinary course of events until the 10th of March, 1850; and, as before 
stated, nothing can be learned of any strange or unusual events occurring 
there previous to that time. It will be observed by the dates given that 
Dr. Phelps had occupied the house more than two years, had found it an 
agreeable and quiet place of residence — having never himself or any mem- 
ber of the family beoa disturbed or alarmed by unusual occurrenoea. On 
the lOth of March, as above stated, it being the Sabbath, Dr. Phelps and 
family, consisting of Mrs. Phelps, two daughters, and two sons, the eldest 
a daughter aged sixteen, a son of twelve years, and a second daughter of 
sis years, chUdren of Mrs. Phelps by a former marriage, and another son of 
Dr. Phelps by the present maniage, not then three years old, all attended 
church; and an Irish servant girl, who had been employed in the family 
some six months, and had shown herself to be honest and trustworthy, had 
gone on that day to Bridgeport, to attend the Catholic church. On leav- 
ing the house in the morning, it appears that the doctor had secured the 
chamber doors, and put the keys in Ms pocket; those which could be were 
locked inside and the keys left in them. The only door by which the cham- 
bers could be entered was locked, and the key taken by Dr. Phelps. He 
also locked the front door inside, left the key in the look, and, passing out at 


;;■ Google 


OP THE EXISTENCE OF SPIUITS. 33b 

tte back door, locked that, and pkoed the key id his pocket. On return- 
ing fi'om church at noon, t!ie front door was found standing open ; the 
chamber doors, whicli were left fastened, were now open ; and in the nursery 
tke furniture was thrown about in disorder ; chairs on the bed, and thrown 
downupoa the floor; theshovel, tongs, and poker, witli other things, were in 
unusual positions and places, every thing showing unmistakable signs of the 
work of some mde hand making mischief in their absence. Upon discover- 
ing the disorder here, Dr. Phelps passed into other rooms on the same floor, 
but could Ece no further evidence of intrusion. The first suppositi 
very naturally, that some persoa or persons had entered and robbed thi 
Search was immediately made in the closefa where silver plate, spoons, 
forks, etc., were kept. AH were found safe and undisturbed. A gold 
watch, left in an exposed place, remained there as left. The impression 
still remained that burglars had been in ; and, on examination of the win- 
dows, one was f d th t Id b d f m th t 1 d th gh th 
was no evidenc f t 
this was the pla f 
noou, Dr. Phelp m 
going again to h h 
selecting a sec! lip 
was no disturb I 
raaiaed quiet. th 

g at three lock 

. a way to m L i 

les of kit h f 
had been used t d 
cellar. The b 1 j 
the kitchen, w f 

evidently been pi 1 w y wi h th f m ly !d t t f 

Upon entering the middle chamber, occupied as a sleeping-room, a sheet 
was found spread over the bed outside the counterpano, and beneath which 
was a nightgown and chemise laid out with the arms folded across the 
breast, with stockings placed in a position to represent, as it seemed, a 
corpse disposed aa is usual before placing it in the coffin. Oa the wall 
were written characters resembling those said by certain clairvoyants to 
belong to a spiritual language, but which none of the family were able to 
decipher. Whether they had any significance, or how they came there, 
was alike an unanswerable question by the family; they had not observed 
them before. Occurrences ceased for that day and night, yet, no one 
thinking of any mystery in the matter, they imputed it to roguish boys, 
or others, who had effected entrance with false keys, for mischief rather 
than for robbery, and that the culprits would soon be detected. The next 
morning, March lltb, when the famiiy went up stairs, after breakfast, the 
middle chamber had again been visited, exhibiting much the same scene 


cell 71 b m 


a lb 


d bt 


t d bat 


Tb Ii th 


jmgbt 


t 1 


b ftp 


d t 1 m th 


th 


bn f a 


f Ij 


B 1 ft 1 


tb d to 
I f 


m Ibm 


If d 


w teltl 


b b In 


Tb 


tb ft 


1 ft If 11 


11 


t -n t tb f 


mly h 


tb 


us nlly 


1 tl I 


I w t 


1 t tl 


1 b t 


t tb t tb y w t m 


1 tb 


m 


t w b 


a b t 


A t« h ttl 


wb b 


m waatualbdU bbml m b 


tb 


b wl d 


m 


tb tb 


Ipt 


b th J d d 


til g 


dwl 


b,i a 


, Google 


836 AnDlTIONAT, COltEOBORATIVE EVIDENCE 

of disorder presented t!ie previous day. A sheet was spread out upon the 
floor, the ■washstand laid upon its back upon the sheet, a candleafjck set 
upon the stand, the washbowl placed upon one side, and the pitcher on the 
other. The nightgown and clienjise, used on the previous occasion to re- 
present a dead body, were found one in the bowl, the otter in the pitcher. 
It appears that these articles of clothing were not then in use ; they had 
been placed in a trunk which stood in a closet adjoining that room. They 
were replaced in the trunk when removed from the bed the day before. 
As they were conversing in relation to the disposition of the things as 
above stated, Mrs. Phelps looked under the bed, and discovered articlea 
there, partially concealed by the bed, resembling those ia question. They 
were taken out and pronounced to be the same. Dr. Phelps had not before 
examined them, but then took them, noted the name and number on each, 
as they were mai'ked, folded and placed them again in tte trunk, remark- 
ing that he wonld put them where they would stay ; did not lock tie trunk, 
not haying a key, but looked the closet and placed the key about his own 
person; then requesting the fimily to all leave the room first, which they 
did, the doctor, following, locked tte door of the room, and kept the key. 
Having observed thi^t Mis Phelps seemed a litfle troubled as to the 
mystery, he thought to convmce her fhj.t theie was no mystery in the 
matter, and, having lecurcd the closet ind room, he descended to 
the rooms below following thLm all Aft^i the lapse of some fifteen 
minutes, some person spoko to the doctor, upon which he went np to the 
chambers. At the head of the stairs, out in the hall, ho found the same 
articles which he had left as before stated He examined ttem, and was 
positive theff were the same. He went to the door, found it locked, en- 
tered by applying the key from bis pocket, went to the closet, found it 
locked, took the key from his pocket, opened tte door, looked in the trunk, 
and the articles were gone ! Dr. Phelps staffs that he was confident 
there was no deceplaon in the case, and that he then, for the first, felt that 
there was a mysteiy about the affair. He had never believed in the ap- 
pearing of ghosts or departed spu'ita, warnings, or any thing of that nature, 
and, at the age of three-score, had never seen or heard any thing ctjnnected 
with that class of phenomena. The evidence upon which such supersti- 
tions, as he termed them, rest, he had never examined, and, whUe he had 
no proof positive that they were impossible, and never did occur, he tad 
no evidence to found a belief upon that they ever had. His idea of spi- 
ritual manifestations seems to have been that most, if not all, foJlowed by 
a strict scrutiny, might be accounted for on natural or known principles, 
or some physical means, which wonld disrobe them of the mysterious alto- 
gether. But it was not to rest here. On the same day (March 11th) the 
moving and throwing of furniture commenced. An umbrella, standing at 
the end of the hall, leaped, without visible assistance, a distance of at 
least twenty-five feet. Dr, Phelps saw tte movement, and knows there 


,v Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OP SPIRITS. 337 

was no perceptible agency by whioli the motion was produced. A bucket, 
standing at the head of the stairs, was thrown into the entry below 
Smaller articles, such aa nails, forks, knives, spoons, bits of tin, iron, anc! 
keys, were thrown from different directions about the house. He says, 
'There were times when they came from such direetions that they vniglii 
have been thrown by some person in tio house' — at least, that may be ad- 
mitted ; bnt in very many eases the motion and point of starting were such 
as to preclude all possibility of deception on the part of persona in the 
rooms. During the afternoon. Dr. and Mrs. Phelps had occasion to go to 
Bridgeport, !^ distance of some three miles. During their absence the 
shovel and tongs, standing in the dining-room, were tkrown violently down 
the basement stairs j a piece of mourning-crape fastened to the knocker of 
the back door, and the mirrors in the front chambers covered with sheets 
and tablecloths, as is the custom in some parts of the country while a per- 
son lies dead in the house. The crape on the door Dr. Phelps did not 
see, but the covering on the mirrors ho removed with his own hands. The 
position of the mirrors in one room was such that the coverings could not, 
without great difficulty, have been placed there by any person about the 
honse. Various articles were said to have been thrown about the room — 
the phenomena continuing in his absence about the same as when he was 
present in the fore part of the day. Soon after sundown all was again 
quiet, and so continued through the night. 

1670, " The next morning, (March 12tli,) soon aft«r the family were 
up, the same phenomena began again ; knives, forks, spoons, blocks of 
wood, nails, eto. etc. were thrown from different directions, and with in- 
creased freqaency, attended by still stranger eiroumstances, and those of a 
still more mysterions character. Mrs. Phelps expressed some alarm, and 
a wish that some of the neighbonrs might be called in. Dr Phelps 
called on a retired clergyman of Stratford, a man of extensive informatjon 
much experience, and sound judgment, who was universally admitted to 
be capable of rendering correct judgment and good advice in sucli a ca^e 
He requested him to call and spend an hour at the house, to which ht 
sheerfuUy consented. Dr. P. told him that his family had been a littlp 
excited by some occurrences in the house, but did not state any cf the 
details of the matter, but desired that he would sit with them fn i shoit 
time and witness for himself He remained all day, but was at fir«t, 
firmly of the Opinion that the oecuirenees were produced, m somp way, 
through the agency of the girl, or some other person about the house, and 
his main attention was directed to the girl in the kitchen, or the children, 
in the expectation that he should detect them in doing it. 

1671. " The door leading from the parloui-s to the kitchen was, by his 
request, locked, and aJl communication between it and the other parts of 
the house cut off; still, the throwing of articles went on as before. The 
children were sent out of the wom, and the doors locked; but this made 


,v Google 


Sao ADDITIONAL COHKOBORATIVE EVIDENCE 

no difference. He stayed through, moat of the day on Thuisday, and re- 
turned soon after breaifast next Biorniog, and remained most of tlie time 
for nearly three weeks. ,He became satisfied, before the close of the second 
day, that neither the girl in the kitobeu nor the obildrea had any agency 
in producing the t m m t D g tl d y (^H h 1 thj m 

of the neighbourb w thhus dmUbltf wood w 

to fall in different j,! tl p b t ly p n t 1 

them in a way to t ly dtbtp asqtdtt 

mention what sh h i 

1672. " On A^ d d y Mar b 1 tb th f t t ram d 
early in the mo ^ n th m ddl b mb th h b tw 
childi-en slept, an 1 b g wl 1 f b y w both 1 [ A b L ta d g 
in the library, te tw 1 f 1 1 m tb b 1 1 p 1 f m tb b If t 
the middle of th m Tli bl wh b th g t 1 p d t 
on the floor, adt ftltixfttb fwbhfit 
awakened the ob H At tl b kf t f bl 1 t 1 w 
thrown; among tbem a large potato, which had been seat from Pennsyl- 
vania, and laid up in a closet in tbe east chamber, fell on the table direotly 
by the side of Dr. P.'s plate, in a maimer that no person could have done 
it without instant detection. The doctor's ouiiosity was much excited, 
and bo watched, witli all the scrutiny be was capable, every person in the 
room. Ho took up the potato and let it fall from different beigbfs, in 
order to determine how far it must have fallea to have made the concus- 
sion that it did j ond it was adjudged by all that the distance coiild not 
have been more than twelve or fifteen inches, 

1673. "Rev. Mr. came in soon after breakfast, and remained 

during the day. Several Bibles were opened at different passages, which 
seemed to be selected with a great deal of care, and indicated either by 
placing small pieces of paper on tbem or tiirning down a loaf. These 
things first occurred in the middle chamber, where the library stood. 
While the family were at dinner similar things were done in the parlour 
adjoining the dining-room. Two Bibles and an Episcopal prayer-book 
were opened at different passages, chairs turned forward on the floor, two 
solar lamps placed on the floor, a hat and man's cap put one on each; 
nearly every thing in the room bad been moved, and in so short a time, 
that it seems wholly inadmissible that any person about the bouse could 
have done it J beside, the whole household were in the dining-room, all seated 
at the table, except the servant, and she was employed waiting on the table. 

167-1. " In the afternoon the demonstrations were confined to tbo middle 

parlour; Dr. and Mrs. Phelps, and Mr. , and, a part of the time, 

the eldest daughter, being present; in the absence of the daughter the 
doors were locked, and the three first named only were present. 

1675. "The throwing of various things occupied the afternoon. The 
articles thrown were picked up and placed upon the mantel, and between 


,v Google 


or TUE EXISTENCE OP SriRTTS. 339 

the hours of one and four o'clock, the nuraber amounted to forty-sis; 
among which were nails, bits of tin, iron, keys, and small blocks, all of 
which were gathered from different parts of the howse ; most of them from 
closets on the second floor and the chambers. At one time, while Mr. 
M— — ■ was standing near the centre of the room, a. padlock, which was 
known to have beea in the closet of the niidclle chamber, felt at his feet. 
He took it in his hand, letting it fall from different heights, to discover 
the probable distance it nmst have fallen to produce the concussion. After 
vations trials it was jndgec! to have fallen not more than two or two and a 
half feet. As Dr. P. was sitting, perhaps ten feet from the piano-forte, 
he saw a small toy-mouse, which was on the piano, arise as if tossed, and, 
describing a parabola as it came, fall at bis side, so near that he took it 
from the floor without leaving his chair. This he speaks of seeing as dis- 
tinetly as he ever saw any thing, the whole being perfectly in his view. 
He aJso saw, in the same way, among other things, a nail, cotton-spool, 
and key, arise fi-om behind the sofa, which stood diagonally across the 
corner of the room. He arose, went fo the sofa, looking behind and under 
it, but c6uld discover nothing which might give impulse to the articles. 
While examining the carpet about the sofa to find if any other things were 
there, without success, as his eyes were directed to one spot, there arose 
from that very point a piece of cheese-rind, perhaps eight inches from the 
floor; when he saw it first it arose four or five feet, passed over the sofa, 
and fell on the floor. He Is positive it was not there when he was looking 
at the carpet, and knows there were no visible means of its moving. 

1676. " Mr. M suggested, as he was about to leave on Wednesday 

night, that if the strange phenomeiia shouid return, he would like to havo 
some other persons called in. Early the nest morning, Thursday, the 14th, 
the manifestations commenced about as they had on the previous day. 
Soon after breakfast a sheet was found spread upon the floor, sevei-al 
Bibles were opened at different places, the candlesticks, in a row, the 
highest in the middle, and covered with a sheet ; other articles changed 
about the room, without any seeming design, more than to attract atten- 
tion. Mr. M proposed that notes be despatched to Rev. Mr. W , 

Congregational minister, and Mr. Plant, a lawyer of high standing and 
respectability, which was accordingly done. It was at this time that they 
first began to hear rappings and heavy poundings. A loud sound, like 
some person striking the floor with some heavy substance, was heard, 
generally in the middle chamber. This was usually done when no one 
was in the chamber, and on any one entering all was still. In one instance 
a chair was seen to rise from the floor and beat down again, five or sis 
times, with a violence which caused the house to tremble so as to be felt 
in all the adjoining apartments. A largo plated candlestick, standing on 
the mantel, was moved by some unseen power to the floor, and then rose 
up and down, beating the floor, until the candlestick was broken. This 


;;■ Google 


340 ADDITIONAL CORRnBOBATIVE EVIDENCE 

was the first article tliat was damaged about the house. Several times 
during tlie day loud noisis, like some one pounding with an axe or some 
heavy subatanoe on the floor, weie heard in different parts of the house, 
and several times the loud ponndings terminated with a fiightful scream ; 
it was not a cry of distress, or any thing that could be easily imitated, 
seeming like something between the cry of a cat and the bleating of a calf, 
but louder than either. These sounds occurred in all probably twenty 
times while the manifestations were going on. Sometimes the f 
seemed to be in the third story, sometimes iu the front-hall < 
several times out in the yard, and occasionally in other places. There was 
at no time any audible expression of words. The sounds consisted of 
poundings, knocking, and sereamings. On this day the first images were 
found, which will be spoken of more fully hereafter. 

1677. "la the evening of this day, just after some young ladies had 
called. Dr. P. 'a daughter returned to the parlour, it being between nine 
and ten o'clock. After seeing the young ladies to the door, an iron stand, 
in which stood the fire-shovel, tongs, and poker, leaped from the hearth, 
where it stood, into the middle of the floor, and rose np and beat the floor 
with a force that made a jar tbat could be felt, and the sound heard, in 
any part of the house. This was seen only hy the daughter, but Dr. P. 
and wife heard the noise. The daughter ran through the dining-room to 
get «p stairs, and, as she passed, a large fable was standing, with the other 
furniture, arranged for breakfast the nest morning. The table was three 
feet nine inches wide, and five feet three inctes long, made of solid ma- 
hogany; and when she entered the room it rose up and beat five or six 
times against the floor with a force which made the house jar. The noise 
was heard hy many persons in the house. Mrs. P, was alarmed, and 
screamed oat, ' Oh, take mo from this place !' This happened between 
nine and ten o'clock, p. m. Previous to this time all manifestations had 
ceased by snndown, or a little after. 

1678. " Soon after daylight on Friday, March 15th, movements similar 
to those on previous days commenced. Heniy, a lad then eleven and a 
half years of age, attended the academy, and nothmg hid thu^ Ijr, ever 
occurred to connect these strange phenomena with his piesence Dr. P. 
had never heard or thought of particular persons leing 'mediums' But 
on this day the remai-kahle occurrences seemed to he connected moie or 
less with this hoy. His cap was torn on his head, so as to be entirely 
destroyed. Another one which he put on wai tiLen in the sime way. 
First a small hole opened in the crown; this gradually extended, and in a 
short time it was torn into many pieces. On another cap choiicters were 
made, apparently with chalk. They resembled those sometimes made by 
persons in the higher mesmeric slate, deserihmg them as charactcis of a 
spiritual language. Five or sis of these chai meters were, it one time, 
made on the boy's cap. Others, supposed to constitute a ■sentence, were 


Google 


OF THK EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 341 

written on a red pocket-handkercliiof ; others on liia pantaloons and coat, 
and on the inside of tis sack-coat. Copies of these chincters weie 
taken with great oare, and were preserved till September following, wten 
they were mysteriously destroyed. From this time it became evideot that 
Bome of the phenomena had some kind of connection witli this boy 

1679. " An umbrella which he was carrying was, in a. mystenoua man 
ner, torn in several pieces. His pantaloons were torn from the bottom 
upward, aa high as the knee, and sometimes higher, and were literally torn 
to ribbons, an inch or more wide. This occurred several time"* undL-r the 
immediate inspection of Kev. Mr. M., ■which seems to fix the iict that, 
in those instances at least, no power visible did it. Thus it contmued for 
sevei-al weeks, clothing to the amonnt of twenty dollars being deatioyed 
At one time, while he was tiding in a carriage with Dr. P , his cip on his 
head was torn in a myeterious manner, and his pants torn from the waist- 
band to the bottom, in a way that no human power could have done l>r 
P. heard them torn, but cotdd see nothing doing it, and knows the boy 
could not have done it himself. It was on this day, March 15th, that 
images, dressed in articles of clothing, were again seen ; only two or three 
appeared on that day. The most extraordinary oocurreBces of this kind 
took place on Saturday, the 16th. Soon after breakfast two or three 
images appeared in the middle chamber; soon again another, followed by 
others stUI, numbering in all eleven or twelve. They were formed of 
articles of clothing, found about the house, stuffed to resemble the human 
figure. A lady's dress would be stuffed in some cases with a muff; again 
with a pillow, and sometimes with other dresses; a bonnet and shoes were 
aptly placed to complete the figure. These, on this occasion, all but one, 
represented females in the attitude of devotion, some having Bibles or 
prayer-books placed before them. One, formed of Sirs. P.'s dress, so 
much resembled the real, that the little boy, scarce three years old, coming 
into the room with his sister, older, whispered, 'Be still, ma is saying 
prayers.' 

1680. "A portable writing-desk, usually standing on the secretary in 
the room, was taken and placed upon the floor, a towel spread over it, and 
the image of a child kneeling beside it. A Yankee clock was taken from 
the mantel in the nursery and placed upon the floor in the middle room, 
a distance of twenty feet, and so carefully done that the clock was still 
going when discovered in its new place, though it stopped some time after. 
It does not appear that any of these images were seen in the process of 
construction, or that the clothing, which was gathered from different locali- 
ties, was seen in the act of moving. When persons entered the room every 
thing was still, the clothing about the floor, which, upon going in again 
within a few minutes, were found wrought into forms. Tbe marked va- 
pidity of their construction, and the lifelike appearance of them, seems to 
have been truly wonderful.' During this day several others than members 


,v Google 


342 ADDITIONAL CORROBOaAT 


of the family were present. In several instaaces, when the rooms were 
closed and the doors guarded, so that no person could enter, the images 
were constructed. To one reading or listening to the relation of these 
facts, the mischief and cunning evinced wiil seem amusing as well as most 
wonderful, but to the finiily, who bore the annoyance and witnessed the 
teiiifymg demon 'ttitions, it was a serious and trying affair, 

1681 " The reader will keep la mind that this was on Saturday of the 
fiist week of these strange proceedings, and many persons were still he- 
Iieving that they must be pi-odueed by some one in the house; every 
member of the family therefoie wis subjected to the most rigid scrutiny, 
which mites it monlly ceitiin that no member of the household could 
have hid any agency in the matter ■without being at onco detected. Beside 
the neatness and iespatch with which they were formed, the natural ap- 
pearxnce of most of them mu«t have required taste and shill beyond the 
conception of oidmary peiaons m the flesh. Mr. M. remained there 
throughout the day, 3Ii W , Governor Plant, and Captain 8., a part of 
the day. Dunng the day and evening various things were thrown in dif- 
ferent parts of the house. A brick-bat, which lay on the stairs leading to 
the third story, was thrown vioJently down stairs, passing very near the 
head of the eldest daughter as she was descending the stairs. A fire- 
shovel was also thrown near her, which she first saw high above her in a 
position to fall upon her head. She was several times constrained to cry 
out from fear, so mudi as to cause apprehension on her account. 

1682. " [I omit, in this place, at the request of Dr. Phelps, a minute 
account of occurrences in which the medium seemed to be one who has 
now grown to be a young woman, and would feel a repugnance at Jiaving 
her name mentioned in connection with the subject. At one time a ribbon 
was tied around her neck, while she was sleeping, so tight as to cause a 
serious affection of the brain. Dr. Phelps was sitting in the room when 
it was done. Sevei-al other remarkable ocourrenees are omitted, on account 
of her connection with them. In the main they do not differ materially 
in their nature from the ocouiTenoes herein related.] 

1683. "The hiding of hats, caps, clothing, &c., seems at this time to 
have become of eommon occurrence. On several occasions a hat was seen 
to go up stdrs — not thi-own, but seemed to be carried rapidly by unseen 
hands. For several days Dr. P. was forced to keep his hat under lock and 
key to prevent its disappearance, if left out as usual. Coats, hats, and 
canes of gentlemen, who were strangers in the house, were spirited away; 
the only object seeming to be the gratification of mischievous desires, with 
the exception of a few instances. They were found sometimes in the chim- 
ney, under the bed, and in the bottom of tmnks. The design seemed to 
be to detain the owners to witness further demonstrations. Two gentle- 
men from an adjoining town called, one of whom had expressed an earnest 
desire to witness the phenomena; but having passed several hours, and 


;;■ Google 


OE THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 343 

Beeing nothing, they were ahout to kaye, when the person who expressed 
the wish found himself minus a hat. A thorough searching followed, but 
no hat could be found; conseqnenfjy, the gentleman decided to remain until 
the nest day. During the evening and night, phenomena transpired 
sufficient to gratify his most abundant desire. Similar eases, with like 
results, afterward occurred. 

1684. " On the nineteenth and twentieth, little occurred to cause alarm. 
Some of the family heard loud and frightful screams in an adjacent out- 
house, which must have been torturing to the feelings, much more so than 
the silent images. Small articles were also thrown about the house. Ex- 
ports had now got abroad, and some excitement was being produced, as is 
always the case in country towns, where each person knows their neigh- 
bour's privat* business quite as well, and sometimes better, than those most 
interested. And in a matter of this kind all efforts to prevent publicity 
would prove unavailing. Curiosity and staring wonder would overstep all 
bounds of propriety and respect for the private rights and feelings of the 
family, forgetting that it is no slight thing for the harmony and quiet of a 
household to be invaded, each tnember being subjected to suspicion, ill- 
natured scrutiny, or careless reproach. On this subject I can speak from 
experience. Laving myself passed the ordeal. To persons of refined sensi- 
bility it is a trial indeed. In this case. Dr. P. adopted the rule of giving 
all who called an opportunity to investigate for themselves, and to this 
rule he adhered, notwithstanding the annoyance such a constant visitation 
must have occadoned. In one instance, while a rabble was gathered out- 
side, a stranger, who came unintroduced by letter or otherwise, asked lo 
spend the night, and was refused for obvious reasons, 

1685. " On Friday and Saturday, March 23d and 24th, the distui'bances 
increased, and became still more annoying. Loud poundings and screams 
were heard in different places, and on Saturday evening, between sunset 
and dark, Harry was passing through the dining-room, and thought him- 
self suddenly caught up by some unseen power from the floor, and supposed 
that he was about to be carried off through the ceiling. He was very much 
frightened, and screamed bo as to alarm the family, and remained in a state 
of great nervous excitement for two or three hours, aJid the effects did not 
wholly wear off for more than a week. At times he was in such a state 
as to require two men to hold him. For several days after tliis, he spent 
a portion of his time with one of the neighbours during the day; hut the 
disturbances conrinued the same at the house, although he appeared to be 
more or less the medium as long as the phenomena continued. At one 
time he was thrown into a cistern of water ; at another he was ried up and 
suspended from a tree, and several times was thrown into a state of appa- 
rent insensibility, in which he would remain from ten to fifteen minutes, 
and for which no human cause could be assigned. 

1686. " Somewhere about the 20th or 22d of March, Dr. P.'s attention 


;;■ Google 


344 AUDITIONAL COEROBOB-ATIVE EVIDENCE 

was called to a pamptlet, (Capron and BaiTOn's,) giving a history of the 
'mysterious noises' at Eoctestcr aod Aubnm. Several persona who had 
read the same proposed to question the agents of these disturbances in the 
manner there i-eoorded, and see if they could get answers to questions. To 
this the doctor objected, for reasons known to himself, but wbicli may 
readily bo imagined by those knowing his position in life, and his general 
opinions of such phenomena. 

1687. "On the 26th of March Anna left Stratford, and on the 3d of 
April Harry also left. No manifestations took place while both were 
away. Harry was absent a week, and Anna three weeks ; but the very day 
that Harry returned, the manifestations commenced with greater power 
than ever. Bveii before lie arrived at the house, a paper with some mys- 
terious characters was dropped near the front door. These characters were 
interpreted by a clairvoyant* to read as follows : 

16S3. "'Foar not when te lefcams; (dl danger is o'er. 

'We came, wa disturbed tliy luraao > but sliall no more. 

Believe us not eril or good, till we prOTO 

Our speech to humanity, onv language of love.' 

1689. " This was supposed to indicate that no further disturbance would 
be made j but in the course of two or three hours another paper was found 
in the boy's bat, in these words : 

1690. "'The gooa ones 
Bnt tlio moke I 

1C91. "The 'wit-ked ones,' in this cise, seemed to come nearei the 
truth than the 'good ouea,' for, on the aftcicoon of the eighth of 4.pril, 
the breaking of glafs i/Ommencel for the Inst time, by the ble^klng of a 
pane in a mysterious manner In the evenmg of the same day another 
was broken during fimily piiyers, ^ome of the pieces fallm^ inside and 
some outside. There were no inlieations of any thing being thicwn 
against it. 

1692. "From this time forwaid for scvciil weeks gla^s wis bioken 
almost diuly, until the whole numbei ot panes broken amounted tj vinity 
one in the house and out-buildtngs Most of them weie bioken by 
something being thrown against them, among the articles wore a biush, 
a slioe, a poker, a fire.«hoTel, a eandksticL, t pan of snuffeis, books, and 
numerous other things , oocasion'Jly a stone or piece of brick, thrown from 
the outside. 

1693. "Dr. P. thinks it would have been possible, but not probable, that 
in some of these cases, they might have been broken by human agency, 
but he was an eye witness in some twenty or thirty case, ind knows that 
they could not have been so done He saw a biu>h, ivhioh he knew 
to have been onaiut m shell but a moment Icfin, iniuojcih nneii 


^ Aadrew Jael:aon Davia. 


, Google 


OE THE EXISTENCE OP SPIUITS. 345 

the slielf, fly to the window, break out a glasB, aad fall down between tho 
shutter and sash, where he knew from the position that no one could 
have thrown it. He saw a tumbler, whioh waa standing on a bureau, rise 
from i(a place, fly to the window, and dash out the only pane remaining 
whole in the window, when no person was withiu twenty feet of it, and 
the only persona in the room ■were himself and Harry, the latter standing 
by the doctor's side in the doorway of the room — a position in which it 
was utterly impossible for him to have done it without detection. 

1694. " The mysterious Tisitora, whoever they were, seemed at times 
to be actuated by a spirit of sheer mischief in the destruction of property, 
particularly glass and crockery. Even the glass in the carriage-top was 
broken out. Pitchers of water were, on two or three occasions, poured 
into the beds, and the pitchers and other vessels thrown about the room 
and broken. The damage to farniture during the whole time was nearly 
two hundred dollars. Sometimes there was a cessation of 'hostilities' for 
two or three days; but they would then return with additional violence; 
in fact, they increased gradually in violence from the beginning to the 
middle of April. On the eveniag of that day, and during the night, they 
were more violent and destructive than ever before. On the night of the 
13th of April, loud pounding and beating, as with some hard substance, 
were frequent in tho room adjoining that in which Dr. P. slept; so loud 
and continued were they, that at one o'clock no person in the house had 
been able to sleep. Soon after, a small drawer was taken from a dress- 
ing-lable, and beaten so violently against the bedstead as to break it into 
fragmenfs, some of which were thrown against the windows, breaking 
two panes of glass. The knockings were now transferred to Mrs. P.'s 
room. She was pinched, pricked with pins, and otherwise annoyed in a 
manner beyond explanation 'on any known laws of matter or mind.' Mr. 
W. C was staying in the house that night. He went to the room by re- 
quest, and proposed to interrogate them, as they were then doing at Eo- 
chester and other places in Western New York. Being left to act his plea- 
sure, he queried, and was replied to as follows : ' Who are you ? If a spirit, 
knock.' Immediately there were heard on the head of the bed distinct 
knocks. Q. — ' Are you a good or bad spirit ? If good, knock.' To this 
there was no answering sound. 'Ifa bad spirit, knock.' At once the same 
sounds as befiieweie heard. Q. — ' Will you spell your uame if the alphabet 
is called i* 4 — Knock. It was done; and a name was spelled out, and 
a communication mide of a most extraordinary character, detailing the 
particul-us of a transaction in which a portion of the family were said to 
have been defrauded out of a large property. As this whole communica- 
tion relates tj a matter which may yet come before the tribunals of our 
country foi adjudication, I am expressly prohibited from making' any ex- 
tracts from this part of the journal. I regret this more, as the facts in 
this case form one of the most wonderful and unaccountable cases on record. 


;;■ Google 


346 ADDITIONAL COIIROBORATI\ L M IDLNLE 

1695. "Tbe family concluded that, aftei ihese impoitant diaclosores 
were made, tte disturbances would cease; Lut they weie doomed to be 
disappointed. The following sight no communications weie made, T)ut 
the throwing of articles and breaking of windows, crockery, elo , were 
renewed with greater violence thao beforo. Foui or five paue^ of glass 
were broken in one room in the space of half in houi While the family 
were together in the east chamber, a small sauee-dish, with an iion handle, 
rose from the floor, under the washstand, and belt a^ain^t tiie bedstead 
witli suet violence as to break the handle off, and wis then thiown bacl. 
from whence it started. It beat seven or eight times against the bedstead, 
producing a noise that could easily be heard twenty rods. A round of a 
chair was beaten against the bedstead in the same manner, when there was 
no person within seven or eight feet of it. A lamp that was on the 
mantel leaped into the middle of the floor, and was extinguished. Being 
left thus suddenly in the dark produced no little agitation, and Mrs. 
Phelps proposed that they should take the children and go into the sfreet, 
rather than stay in the house that night. In a few minutes two gentle- 
men, who had appointed to spend the night with them, anived, and the 
more violent of tbo manifestations ceased. 

1696. "About this time. Dr. P.'b attention was called to the fact that 
the demonstrations were much more violent iu the presence of some per- 
sons than of others. While some were present they woidd cease entirely, 
and commence as soon as they left, with great vehemence. 

1697. " On the 17th the communications were renewed, and from that 
time they had frequent communications, mainly respecting the property 
afiiur. At one time they asked how they should know that this was 
really from the spirit it purported to be, and requested his signature; 
whea in less thaa four minutes a small piece of paper, having on it an 
exact fae-simile of his handwriting, was seen sticking t* the wall — the 
writing apparently done with a pencil. Dr. Phelps still preserves the 
ordinal paper, with the name inked over. It was stuck to the wall by 
being made damp. 

1698. "It was now discovered that, in order to get the rapping, tha 
presence of Henry was necessary. At one time a request was made by 
the rapping to send him to New York, and a threat that all the windows 
in the house would be broken, if they did not, was made; but in a few 
minutes after, a small piece of paper was seen to ftll, apparently from the 
ceiling, and on it written, ' Send him not to New York — evil will befall 
him.' It was evident that there were two or more contending agencies 
engaged in the manifestations. It was not easy to define or imagine 
what their objects were. At times, when one was making a commu- 
nication, the other would rap, seemingly to make confusion. At other 
times, when a communication was being made by alphabet, a paper 
would be dropped down, and on it written, 'It is all a lie; don't believe 


;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OE SPIRITS. 347 

what he sajs." Sometimes language tJie most profene, and oeeasioually, 
but rarelj, obscene, would be written out in this way. Inquiry was made 
as to how these contradiot^iry communications were to be accounted for, 
and the answer was that an opposing spirit was attempting to defeat the 
object of the first; that this spirit was now one of his tormentors ; that 
both were in a state of misery, and his suffering would be mitigated if the 
object of the first could be accomplished, although he would never go to a 
state of happiness. 

1699. "Among the spirits who communicated were two who professed 
to be in a state of happiness, and three in a state of misery. One of the 
good spirits claimed to be a sister of him who made the first communica- 
tion ; she communicated frequently, and constantly manifested herself in 
the morning and evening devotions of the family, and always gave two 
distinct Isnoeks at the utterance of 'Amen.' Upon inquiry as to the 
meaning of these two knocks, the answer was given that it was a response, 
after the manner of the Episcopal service, signifying that she joined in 
the devotions, 

1700. " Much that was commnaieated after the first few days was of a 
trifling and childish character ; some, more like what would be received 
from street rowdies than any thing else. To the question why they de- 
stroyed property, they replied, ' For fun.' It was asked of the opposing 
spirit what could be done to afford him relief; he answered that 'The 
best thing they could do would be to giva him a piece of pie.' Some- 
times letters would come, purporting to he from ministers of Philadelphia, 
giving accounts of eonversiona in their congregations and additions to 
their churches. These were addressed to the doctor, and indicated a 
knowledge of things in Philadelphia to an astonishing degree. Some of 
the letters were addressed to Mrs. Phelps, signed, or rather purporting to 
be signed, by departed spirits of persons who had lived in Philadelphia, 
and all, or nearly all, who had lived in a single square, and were the ac- 
quaintances of Mrs. Phelps, during a residence in that city, in the time of 
her former marriage. Sentimental notes were also addressed to the 
daugjiter. These letters and billets were frequent, amounting in all to 
nearly one hundred, and were all written in one hand, though purporting 
ffl come from different persons. The fact was at one time referred to, 
and an explanation desired, to which the following was given : ' We do 
not write with the hand^do not touch the pencil; we write with the 
will.' At one time a paper was thrown down to Mrs. Phelps, while in 
the parlour with a number of ladies, having written on it, with a pencil, 
as follows : 

1701. " ' Sm : Sir Sambo's oomplimenta, and begs the laddyes to ac- 
cept as a token of esteem.' 

1702. "A lady in the family of Dr. Phelps had, in a humorous way, 
requested the spirits to write her a letter that she might send to a friend 


;;■ Google 


The spirit complied witli the request l)j sencling dowD 
the following : 

1708. '"Dear Maey: I have just time t<p wi'ite and tell you I am 
well. G-ive my loye to Miss E. and her uncle. A!so to Mrs. and Mr. D. 
Also to Sarah. Good-bye. H. P. Devh.' 

1704. "The initials of tho lady's name who asked for the letter 
were H. P. 

1705. "Papers were also thrown down, signed 'Beelzebub' and 'Sam 
Sliek.' Sometimes names of persons whom the family had known in 
Philadelphia, but who had been dead several years, were signed to these 
papers. 

1706. " The foUowiug was in pencil, and seems to be written in the 
same hand as the other. It was superscribed ' E. Phelps :' 

1707. " ' If you promise not to write what I told you, I will not throw 
any thing all this week.' 

1708. " On the 28th of July, 1850, two singular letters were thrown 
down, addressed to Dr. Phelps. They were both in one handwriting, but 
were signed by two different orthodox elergymea of Philadelphia. Their 
interest in religious movements, and their acquaintance with the phrase- 
ology of 'revival' correspondence, are seen at a glance. 'St. Peter's,' in 
the second letter, is a Pusejite ehnrch. 

1709. "'Deab. Brother: The Lord is dealing bountifully with his 
chosen people. Brother Barnes admitted to the ohureh forty-nine last 
Sunday, and Brother Parker thirty-four tfl-day. Brother Converse has 
had the cholera, and Brother Fail-child has grown so fleshy as scarcely to 
be recognised. Our Mend Mr. Tarr has buried his wife. She died of 
consnmption. E. Tarr is married. Brother Mahu, being suddenly 
spired last Sunday, spoke so eloquently and so loud, and used such i 
Jestic action, as to be quite done iip for awhile. He broke a blood-vessel. 
Old Tiers has gone crazy, and is shut up in a mad-house, or, rather, a hos. 

pital. The H s have gone into the country to spend some time. 

That's all the news. 

'"Tour faithful brother in Christ, 

"'R. A,' 

1710. " ' Peak Brother : The milleanium truly is coining. The day 
of the Tjord is at hand. We ore adding countless numbers to the altar of 

the Lord. Brother A became inspired last Sunday to such a degree, 

that his soul took its flight to the regions above, and has not yet returned. 
The Catholic churches, St. Joseph's and St. Mary's, were burned down ; 
St. Peter's, also — I believe that is a Catholic church. Brother Mahu was 
preaching from the text, 'Resist the devil,' &«., when he was suddenly 
overturned by an invisible power, which frightened him so that his hair 
turned white in five minutes. 


;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 349 

1711. "'Brother Barnes, to render his church more attractive, is going 
to have opera-sioging and dancing every Sunday afternoon. Mrs. Alex- 
ander Tower, old Mr. Tiers, Brother Fairchild, and Mrs. Somerville are 
going to dance. I think they will find it a very lucrative employment. 
Jane and Martha still progress in Hebrew, 

"'Your affectionate brother, M. R.' 

1712. "On Sunday, April 27th, 1851, on retarniag from church, the 
family found strange characters written on the last leaf of a writing-book, 
lying on the hall floor, although it was known to ha in the nursery pre- 
vious to their going away. None of the family had any knowledge of how 
the hook got into the hall.* 

1713. " H, C. Gordon, a clairvoyant, interpreted the characters as fol- 
lows : The first line, 95th Psalm, 2d verse ; second line, 3d and 6th verse ; 
and the third line, the 10th verse, 

1714. " Certain charactei-s were found on the wall in the east chamber, 
on Sunday morning, May 4th, 1851, They were made with a candle on 
the wall near the south window. 

1715. " These Mere translated to be, ' Spirits of a higher order desire to 
communicate with you soon.' 

1716. " Spirit-writing, without visible human agency, has never been a 
common mode of communicating, although it was among the early occur- 
rences at Hydesville, Rochester, and Auhurn.f 

1717. " Sometimes these missives were enclosed in a book, and thrown 
down staii-s or into the room ; Bometimea wrapped about a key or nail, or 
any thing that would give a momentum, and thrown into the room. Often 
they were seen to fall from above; this oeeurring frequently when the 
doors were closed, and it was not possible for any visible agent to have been 
the cause. Writing would appear on the wall at times, made, as it ap- 
peared, witli a pencil. On one occasion, Dr. Phelps was wnting at his 
desk, and, turning his back for a few moments, without leaving his chair, 
turned again to his paper, where he found written in large letters, 'Very 
nice paper and very nice ink for the devil,' The ink was not yet di-y, the 
desk was not two feet from him as he sat, and he was entirely aloue in the 

1718. " About the first of May, Dr. Phelps, of Boston, brother of the Rev. 
Doctor, and Prof. Phelps, of Andover, a son of the Rev. Doctor, went to 
Stratford to ' espose the humbug,' and with a full belief that it was a trick 
of evil-minded persons, and that they should be able to detect and espose 
it without trouble; and they were disappointed, as hundreds have been 

3 Wood-cnta of the chaiacters sUnded to in this nod the suoceedmg pnrsgrnphs, mny 
be anea !a Mr. Caproa's book. 

■[ "Mr, Snudarlima, in his 'Book of Human Watiirs,' p. 280, Baja thla ttos tba first of 
tha spirit writing, lint Mr. Capron alleges that ha was nocinaintod with oases of this liind 
long bcfom the disCurbaaoes at Stratford." 


, Google 


isohievonsly ; but, on look- 
n the shades of evening, 
who might have 


350 ADDITIONAL COKROBORATIVE EVIDENCE 

under like circumstances. On Tuesday evening a loud rap was heard on 
the hack door, seeming to he aiade hj the knocker, loud enough to he heard 
twenty rods distant. The servant went to the door, hot no person was 
there. After the lapM of.five or eight minutes, t" 
was then supposed that some one had done it a ' 
ing about, no person was discovered. It was 
but not dark enough to prevent any person h 
done it, aa easily as at mid-day. The knocking came the third time, when 
Dr. Phelps — the visitor — placed himself in the halt, perhaps four feet 
from the door, and the Professor, of Andoyer, took a position on the steps 
without, each having full view of the door. The same loud raps were 
repeated on the door between them. The knocker did not move, nor could 
the eye detect any cause for what met the ear. The noise was heard through- 
out the house, and both the gentlemen were pc«itive that no visible agent 
was employed to produce it. About bed-time, a loud pounding was heard 
on the chamber-door. The gentlemen, each with a candle in hand, stood 
on either side of the doov, as the pounding, as though done with a heavy 
boot, was continued. The noise appeared to each to be on the side of the 
door opposite to him. Ou the following morning, as Dr, PhelpB, of Strat- 
ford, was standing at the foot of the stairs leading to the third story, a 
noise as loud and much resembling the report of a pistol occurred appa- 
rently close to his ear. These boisterous sounds occurred at intervals dur- 
ing a great part of the time that the disturbance waa eontinued. Some- 
times for weeks they would not be heard; and again for days they were 
heard every day. 

1719. "It would seem, from various occurrences, that the agents of 
these sounds, whoever they were, must have been human beings, or, at 
least, possessed of all the leading charaeteristios of humanity. They were 
evidently influenced by kindness or ankindness, by respect and confidence, 
as persons generally are in this life. Some instances illustrating this are 
given. One morning, during the breakfast hour, they would push the table 
suddenly, raise up one side and shake it in such a manner as to spill the 
coffee, and otherwise occasion serious inconvenience. A person at the 
table spoke to them in a tone of authority, commanding them to desist ; 
but the act was at once repeated. Again they were commanded f* cease, 
but increased violence followed this command. This was five or six times 
3d, and the shading was each time renewed. At length another per- 

1 at the table said, ' I request you kindly to cease this annoyance, and 
allow us to take our breakfast quietly,' and they ceased at once, without a 
repetition. It was found, fi:om this time, that kindness had about the same 
effect upon them that it produces upon mankind at large. A lady, the 
wife of a clergyman, spent a few weeks in the family during the summer, 
who received many communications from them, would often, when the scis- 
sors, thimble, or things of that kind, were mislaid, say, ' I will thank the 


;;■ Google 


OP THE HXISTSNQE OF SPIRITS. 351 

spirits to return mj thimlDle, acissoi-s,' or whatever was missing, aud tha 
article named would drop at her side, or in her lap, within a minute. Things 
of this hind occurred very many times in the course of the time that these 
phenomena were continued. If a key or knife, or any thiiig of the kind, 
was mislaid, and any person was looking for it, frequently it would he 
thrown to them as though their wants were anticipated. Dr. Phelps was 
once with Harry in the stable, when the cnrryoomb could not he found, 
and he asked Harry where it was, to which Harry replied that he did not 
know. At that moment, the doctor saw it rise, as if thrown, from a point 
ten feet distant from them, and, descrihing a parahola, fall within a short 
distance of the spot where they both wei'e standing. 

1720. "About the middle cf May, Dr. Phelps and HaiTj were riding 
to Huntington, a distance of seven miles. When they had proceeded 
about one mile on the way, a stone, about the size of a hen's egg, was 
thrown into the carriage, and lodged on Dr. Phelps's hat. Soon- another 
and another were thrown in, The carriage was a covered one, and the 
back curtain was down, and there was no way a stone could have heen 
thrown in by ordinary means. At one house where they stopped, the mo- 
ment the front door was opened, two stones were thrown, one of which 
entered the door as it stood partly open, and the other hit one of the lights 
of glass, and broke it. Harry was standing on the door-steps at the time, 
and there was no one in the street who could have thrown them. Two 
stones were also thrown against another house where they stopped of an 
errand. Sixteen stones were thrown into the carriage on the doctor's 
return, and, including thise thrown against the two houses, twenty, in 
driving three or four hours. 

1721. " As it was now apparent that these strange things were in some 
way connected with Harry as a medium, it was thought best to separate 
him from the family. Accordingly board was obtained for him in a family 
some two miles distant. One day, when he came home, he told his mo- 
ther, in great secrecy, that on the night previous he had been awakened 
from his sleep by some person dressed in white, whom he saw standing by 
his bedside. He was frightened, and was about to scream, when the person 
spoke and said, ' Be not afraid, my son ; I am your father ;' and then placed 
in the boy's hand a silver watch, and told him to wear it for hia sake. The 
boy affirms that he had the watch in his hand ; that it was not a dream ; 
and that he was entirely awake ; and that his father told him to tell no 
one of it but his mother and Dr. P, His mother told him it was nothing 
but a dream, and turned it off as a light affiur. 

1722. " It seems that a valuable silver watch had been left the boy by 
his father, which was not in use, hut had been kept locked up in a drawer 
of a dressing-table, to which he (Harry) had no access. A member of the 
family, having occasion to look into the drawer, saw the watch, and knows 
it was there, and that the drawer was locked, and the key given to Mrs. P. 


;;■ Google 


352 ADDITIONAL CORROBORATIVE EVIDENCE 

A few minutes after the conyorsatioa with liis mother about the appari- 
tion and the watch, the night previous, he came in from the yard with the 
waloh in his hand I He said Lis father had again appeared to him, and 
pnt the watch into his hand again, and said, ' Wear this for my sake.' He 
brought the watch into the house, and showed it to his mother, and said 
that his father said, 'Tell jour mother to look at the second-hand,' The 
hand was off, and lay on the face of the watch under the crystal. A cre- 
dible person will make oath, if called upon, that she saw the watch in the 
drawer, where it was usually kept, not more than sis or eight minutes be- 
fore, and that she locked the drawer and gave the key to Mrs. Phelps. 
The key had been in posaessioii of no other person, and Harry had not 
been in the room during the time. The watch was taken to Dr. P., and 
he tried to replace the second-hand, hut could not succeed. He closed it, 
leaving the hand loose on the fece, and passed it hack to Harry, saying 
that he must take it to the watch-maker. When he toot it in his hand, he 
exclaimed, ' Why, it'a on I' They looked, and it was on and going. In a 
few minutes it was off again, and was put on a second time, all within a 
minute or two. The doctor affirms that it was not out of his sight a mo- 
ment; that he knows the watch was not opened, and that no ■visible power 
was employed in doing it. 

1723. " On one occasion tho piano-forte was played while it is known 
that no person was in the room ; and, at another time, it was turned around, 
the front toward the wall, and so far removed from the side of the room as 
to allow the player room to sit next to the wall; the stool was also appro- 
priately placed. 

1724. " On several occasions, about this time, certain members of the 
family saw, or tliought they did, visible appearances. Dr. P. did not give 
entire credit to these statements; not but what bo bad full confidence in 
the honesty of the family, but the excited state in which some of them had 
been for a long time led him to think that they might imagine they saw 
what had no existence in fact. Toward the last of May, it was signified 
that one of tho spirits who had communicali,d would appear visibly— first 
to the daughter, then to Mrs. P., and then to the doctor himself. They 
asked in what manner he would appear, and the answer was, 'In a sheet.' 
Between ten. and eleven o'clock the same night, soon after the family had 
retired, Anna, who occupied the east bedroom, the door between her room 
and that where the doctor and his wife slept being open, and a lamp burn- 
ing on a stand so placed as to light both rooms, called to her mother, and 
said, ' There it is, in a sheet.' Dr. P. asked where; when she said it was 
in tjie door between the two rooms, coming from the room the doctor occu- 
pied, but the doctor saw nothing. The daughter was frightened, and 
covered up her head, and in a few minutes looked up and saw nothing. 
He was represented as moving slowly from one room to the other. 

1725. " In about two minutes Mrs. Phelps exclaimed, ' There it is !' 


;;■ Google 


OF THE EXISTENCE OF SHMTB. 353 

and drew the clothes over her head. Both tlie daughter aad mother saw 
it at this time, but still the doctor saw nothing, although in as favourable 
a position as either of the others. 

1726. "After two or three minutes had elapsei^, the doctor also saw it. 
It appeared to him to move slowly from the hall chamber into his, and 
turn and move slowly back. It had the appearancQ of a very tall person 
with a sheet thrown around it; lio saw only the sheet. In about one 
miaute, something was thrown on to the bed, which proved to be a sheet 
which had been taken from the wardrobe ia the hall. Dr. Phelps de- 
clares that he was not frightened ia the least, and could not haTe been 
mistaken in the appearance. Some two or three weeks subsequent to this 
a similar appearance was seen, and Dr. P. sprang out of bed, determined 
to seize hold of it if possible. It came part way into his room, and then 
moved slowly back. The daughter affirmed that the doctor was within 
two or three feet of it when it disappeared, and a sheet dropped into a 
chair. These were the only instances in which the doctor saw any thing 
himself. Others of the family saw persona in a mysterious way several 
times. 

1727. " At one time, while Anna was in the dining-room, and a cousin 
of hers and some of the children in the front yard, her attention was 
arrested by some one entering the front parlour. She went in, and saw 
three gentlemen — two of them sitting on the sofa, and one on a chair by 
the table — all having their hata on, and drawn down oyer their eyes more 
than usual; the one hy the table had his feet upon the table, and was 
reading a paper. She was surprisedAhat neither of them rose up, or looked 
at her, as she entered the room ; and when she was within five or six feet 
of the one nearest her, he leaned over on one side and fell, chair and all, on 
the floor, and instantly all disappeared I She was frightened, and ran to 
her cousin, who was near the front door. She came in, but no persons 
were there, neither could they have entered without her seeing them. The 
chair was thrown down, but no person near who could have done it. 

1728. "A few other instances occurred in which appearances were sup- 
posed to have been seen ; but the circumstances were not of a character to 
put the matter beyond a doubt, therefore no record was kept of them. 
About the middle of May, Dr. Phelps spent some time with the Pox 
family in New York. He soon decided that the manifestations were es- 
sentially the same as those at his house, with a few points of difference. 
With them property was not destroyed, and they were not painfully an- 
noyed. Tho sounds were different, it being with them a double or roll- 
ing sound, and at his house a single knock. They could call upon and 
receive answers from different spirits, or what claimed to be different ones. 
This could be done at bis house. During the months of June and July 
the same general occurrences continued at Stratford. Sometimes for two 
or three days thei-e would seem to be an entii-e cessation of 'hostilities." 

33 


,;■ Google 


354 ADDITXONAI. COEBOEORATIVE EVIDENCE 

Then tliej would commonce agiia with redoubled foroe. People from all 
parta of the country were visiting the hou.?e, to whom every facility was 
afforded to search into tie cause. Newspaper discussions were going on, 
casting the most unjust and painful reflections, subjecting the family to 
suffering little short of .martyrdom, while auniberlesa other persons had as 
good an opportunity of explaining the matter as the persecuted family. In 
this affliclion I can sympathize somewhat with Dr. Phelps and family. In 
the first days of these phenomena in Western New York, all persons who 
were involved with or interested in them wore looted upon and treated at 
once as void of all common feeling or sensibility, both privately and pub- 
licly j their names passed about, coupled with opprobrious epithets; their 
houses were entered without ceremony, and even in the face of direct 
request to the contrary; their right to quiet aad repose invaded, their 
houses often being crowded with visitors, prompted by idle curiosity and 
a malicious desire to torture, beyond the midnight hour ; still insisting to 
remain, and adding insult to injury by declaring in your ears that it was 
an arrant cheat — a grand humbug — being carried on ; and all for — what ? 
And at the same time those whose ill-fortune it then seemed to be to have 
an identity with it were weeping and prayitig for the scourge to be removed 
from them; for scourge it seemed, indeed, under such m Ln 

1729. "Dr. aud Mrs. Phelps concluded, in Augi t a th 1 m n t a^ 
tions were then less frequent, on taking a short jou y f tl w ks 
The disturbances were still more annoying in their b th n b f 
and it was decided as best to close the house for th w nt nd m<un 
away. Accordingly, on the 11th of September, Harry I ft f P nn yl n 
and it was arranged that the otter members of the f n ly h uld f 11 w 
within three weeks. It seems that, although the ma f Lt w n 
nected more intimately with Harry, his presenc8\wa. n t 11 p tant is 
they did not cease altogether when he left; but comn n t w f 11 
made, though with less force and violence. The in I w n t s 
loud, and the communications less free or frequent. At n t te 
was thrown into the room, while Dr. P. was writin t th 1 k wh h 
contained the following : ' How soon do the family xp t t t P nn 
sylvania? I wish to make some arrangements bef tb y g PI ase 
answer in writing.' The doctor replied as desiied, ai ftilows 'About the 
first of October,' and placed the paper in a position wheie he hi I hefote 
put writiogs of the kind, and heard nothing fuithei 

1730. " Two or three days after this, a communication wa^ given by 
use of the alphabet, saying that Boot, a gentlemau who hid been m the 
house, had destroyed the doctor's book. He inquired ' What book ' and 
was answered ' The big book.' Yet lie did not know what book was de 
signaf«d, and repeated the question, and received the answer, ' The big 
book in the secretary.' Stiil it was not undoistood Again was speUeil, 
' Look and see '.' Dr. Phelps had in the seeretiiy two blank books , m the 


Google 


OP THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITS. 355 

larger one he had writteE a full aooouat of the mysterious manifestatioDS, 
in the form of a diary, and, Laving noted tLem as they occurred from day 
to day, they were recorded with more minuteness than could afterward be 
done. Upon looking, it was discovered that every page that had been 
written upon was torn from the book and gone. After a long search, the 
fragments of the leaves wcro found in the vault. Copies of the characters 
which the doctor had carefully taken, and felt anxious to preserve, were 
eveiy scrap gone. There were, in a dressing- table drawer in the chamber, 
a great number of the notes sent. These were set ou fire with a match, 
and burned in the drawer. The fire was discovered by the smoke, but not 
until the papers were so fa h rred a- to injure them beyond pre-ervtion 
A few of these writing nly t< 1 wh h w tl pi 

The last of the annoya w n th 5th f S pt mbe d w th t 
of throwing ink upon fh d ght d '^1 w ta 1 n th 

piazza, near the front d thwlwftiftlib wis p 

from which was thrown m 11 b ttl f k Ti k w t h 

dress in a way to entirely untt it for further use. Thete was no person m 
the chamber who would have done such a thing for mischief; and, indeed, 
no person in tho house "who would have been guilty of it. 

1731. " The young lady was just setting out for a visit at New Haven, 
from which she was anticipating much pleasure, and I cannot conceive of 
any feeling, short of sheer malevolencej that would prompt such an act. 

1732. " On the second day of October, the family, with the esception 
of Dr. Phelps and the cook, left Stratford to go to Pennsylvania. During 
their absence all demonstrations ceased, with what may be termed one ex- 
ception. A letter, addressed by Dr. Phelps to Mrs. Phelps, contained, 
when it reached her, some of the spirit-writing in pencil, saying that 'her 
husband was sick and wished her to return if she espeoted to see him 
alive.' He was then in good health; but the next week was sick and 
confined to his bed two or three days. There may or may not have been 
some connection between the two occurrences. It was the design of Dr. 
Phelps to separate the family for a time, in order, if possible, to get rid of 
tho annoyance; and for the five weeks he remained at Stratford, after the 
family had left, no disturbances took place. Harry stayed in Bucks 
county (Pa.) all winter, and the other raembers of the family lived in 
Philadelphia. 

1733. "In the month of March tho family returned to Stratford. The 
house had been closed and under the charge of a neighbour, and no sign 
of any disturbance was visible, as every article of furniture was found just 
as they loft it. About the fourth or fifth day aiter their return slight rap- 
ping was heard as they sat at the tea-table. They affected not to notice 
it, and the nest day it was repeated moro distinctly, but no response was 
made. Soon after, certain characters were found about the house, which 
were known, from the circumstances, to be of recent origin. Two or three 


;;■ Google 


353 ADDITIONAL COEROE DILATIVE 

days after, distinct communications were made by a spirit purporting to be 
Dr. Phelps's daugliter, wlio died at the age of twelve years. On being 
questioned, this spirit could not give any evidence of identity. 

1734. "About the first of May several communications of a trifling 
ebaraoter were given. On one occasion the doctor asked if they would be 
troubled any more as tliey had been, when they answered by rapping the 
following : 


17o6. "At another time certain characters were given, which were in- 
terpreted by the rapping as follows : ' Evil one has gone, and better one 
has come.' No communications were made after the early part of May, 
but some things occurred indicating their presence and desire for mischief. 

1737. "At one time, on cutting a loaf of bread, there were found in it 
nails, pen-holders, small sticis, and tin, under circumstances whieti showed 
that they must have been placed there after it was pnt on the table and 
before the family were ready for tea. At one time Harry's hat was hid 
away, and then tis cap, and then another hat. He took his brother's cap 
to use, and that was also taten away. On the evening of the 18th of 
July they set fire to some papers in the doctor's secretary, and some twenty 
papers and letters were burned before they were discovered. Fire was set 
at the same time to the papers in both the closets, under the stairs in the 
hall. They were discovered by the smoke. Two or three days after this, 
when some friends who had visited them were about to leave, their bon- 
nets and some other articles could not be found, although search was made 
in every part of the house, until the train by which they were to go to 
New York had passed. They were at last found, looked into an enclosed 
washstand, in a way that made it morally certain that they couid not have 
been placed there by human hands. 

1738. " On the 29th of July Harry left to spend some time at New Leba- 
non, N. Y., and during his absence no manifestations were noticed, although 
they were constantly on the look-out for something of the kind. Anna and 
her mother left for Philadelphia on tho 25th of September, and they had 
been so long exempt from annoyances that they hoped they had ceased 
alt-ogether. But Harry bad the manifestations at New Lebanon, and there 
was first operated on, by invisible agency, to produce a magnetic sleep, 
into which he passed with a sudden shock. He had never been magnetized 
before, although frequent attempts had been made to do so. In this state 
he evinced all the phenomena common to good clairvoyance. On his re- 
turn to Stratford, on the 9th of October, the sounds accompanied him almost 
constantly ; but they seemed less inclined to mischief than formerly, be- 
cause, as they said, ' Harry had passed to » higher state, where the low 
and ignorant spirits could not commumcate with him ' 

1739. "On several occasions chataeteis of a unique destuption were 


Google 


OF THF. EXISTENCE OE SPIRITS. 357 

mftde. Some were written early in April, 1851, wliich Harry interpreted 
to read : ' We are to take our leave of you soon.' 

1740. " Some were traced out with chalk on the piazaa o£ the house, on 
the 31st of March, 1850. 

1741. " These Harry interpreted to mean : ' Tov, mai/ eaypect good spi- 
rits to come hy-and-hy.' The same characters had been said, by A. J. 
Davis, to read : ' Our societi/ desires through vo/rioui m,edvtt,ins to impart 
thoughts.' The spirit that seemed to be most prominent in all these cora- 
muaioatioas claimed to be Harry's father, and sometimes a siateir of Dr. 
Phelps, who died about three years previous to this; also a child of Dr. 
Phelps, who died more than twenty-two years before. The communica- 
tious seemed generally to come from the boy's father. On the 12th of Oc- 
tober be passed into a mesmeric state, and wrote some characters, which 
he translated as follows : 

1742. " ' Ml/ dear children : I love you, and try to do every thing that 
will do you good. Obey dear Mr. Phelps in every thing, for he knows 
what is right and what is wrong. This is the advice of your spirit father.' 

1743. " On the same paper were writteu others, which, being translated, 
read ; ' You were troubled once wilh evil spirits, but now they are no more. 
They have bid adieu, and good spirits have come and are with you all the 

1744. " Again occur others, which read: ' You must not fear, brother, 
that you will be troubled with evil spirits any more. No, brother, no 
more. Tour spirit sister, Bliss.' 

1745. "The person here supposed to communicate is a sister of Dr. 
Phelps, a widow, who left the earth-ephere in 1848, and by whom several 
of the previous communications ai'c said to have been made. Other cha- 
racters, of the same general formation, were made at the same time, but 
were not then translated. 

1746. "On the evening of the 12th, Dr. Phelps, Harry, and two 
younger children, were seated at a fable ; responses were frequently given 
by raps under the table. Dr. Phelps inquired if it would accommodate 
them at all to have some substance to rap with; to which they replied 
affirmatively. He threw down a table-knife; the rapsseemed immediately 
to be made by striking tho knife against the tab!e*leaf, and soon it was 
tossed up on to the table A small tea-bell was then placed under the 
table; it was rung several times, and tossed on to the table as the kuife 
had been. It was again put down, and returned as before ; the same being 
repeated several times iu succession. The light was then estinguished, 
and the candle put under the table with a match-box containing matchps, 
and the spirits requested to light it. They distinctly heard the match 
drawn upon the bottom of the bos, which was prepared with sand-paper 
fur that use. All saw the light, but the first match went out. Again the 
scratching of the match was heard ; it ignited, the candle lighted, and was 


,v Google 


358 ADDITIONAL 

placed upon the table 1 The esperlmeiit was repeated seTeral time'', with 
the same result; every precaution being taken to prevent collusion in the 
matter. 

1747. " On a suhsecjuent occasion a chair was placed upon the tahle by 
invisible power, and the two children, Harry and Hannah, rai&ed up and 
placed upon it; they could neither of them tell how it wa^ dune. The 
sensation was that of some person placing a hand under them and lai&ing 
them up. Many of these things occurred when the rojm was darkened, 
as has been the case in numerous other places, and for which explanations 
have been recorded, as given by the spirits. On the eveninj^ of the 20th 
of October, the light being put out of the room, the beO was placed under 
the table, with a request that it should be rung, and placed iu the dootor's 
hand. He was sitting by the table with both his hands lying on his 
lap open, w'th th p Im ipward. Tho bell rung several times with some 
violence, nd th u w s pi eed in his left hand. This was repeated four or 
five time n u s n Dr. P, sat beyond the reach of any one, and the 
room was sufli ntly 1 jjht for him to have detected any movement on the 
part of p n p e nt He requested them to let him feel the hand that 
placed th I 11 n 1 Very soon a hand came in contact with his, took 
hold of his fingers, shakmg his hand, passed slowly over the back of his 
hand, then over the palm again, took hold of his fingers, and he felt what 
he is sure to have been a human hand. He describes It as being cold and 
moist, which ^coords with my own experience repeatedly, and that of my 
frionds; Tl ey tl en to 1 hold of 1 3 fo t si ook it with much force, 
loosened the st ng t ok ofi the 1 o an 1 place 1 it ipon the table before 
him. At his r p at tl e shoe was leplace 1 the heel adjusted, and the 
strings d awn p but i ot t ed 

1748. On s bse [ ent oc o a 1 r^, s zed tea-bell was rung under 
the table, then loa. up, passed :ound the room, lining violently all the 
way, and fell «pon the table. The candle was in the closet, but the room 
was sufficiently light to make it certain that no person left the table to 
convey it. It was manifest that from the time Harry returned from New 
Lebanon the manifestations began gradually to subside. They were less 
frequent and less marked. It was arranged that he should accompany 
the family to Philadelphia, and go to a boarding-school at a town about 
twenty miles distant from the city. At different times he had been told 
that if he went there he would again be annoyed by bad spirits. The 
question was many times put, ' Will you annoy him again if he goes to 
the school V A.—' We will not, but others will.' — ' What others ?' A. — 
'Those who were with him last summer.' — 'Will they disturb him if he 
stays here and goes to the academy in Stratford ?' — ' No. They will not 
disturb him while he is with yon.' — ' What will they do if he goes to 
Pennsylvania ?' A. — ' They will tear his clothes, destroy his books, and 
break his windows.'—' Can you not control those bad spirits, and prevent 


;;■ Google 


OF TUB EXISTENCE OP SPIRITS. 859 

their doing him any injury f — 'No.' — ' Will you do all yoa can ?' — ' Yes.' 
At anotliei- time Dr. Pheips inquirod if they would not leave him, as his 
mother was so much opposed to the whole thing. ' Will you not, to oblige 
her, leave him, that he may be a medium no longer ?' said the doctor. 
The reply was, ' If we leave him, evil sp ts w'll g t possession of him 
again.' These communications were male by what p ported to be the 
boy's father. For two weeks previous t g b t Philadelphia the 
manifeafations had almost wholly subsid 1 p hap nly occurred when 
requested ; and notwithstanding the repeated d I t ns that when he 
should leave for the school in Pennaylvan a the bad S| ta would come in 
and make him trouble, it was determined to try tho espeiiraent, and on 
the 11th of November the family set out for Philadelphia, where they 
were to spend the winter, while Harry was to go to school. He remained 
with the family ia Philadelphia about a week, where a few communications 
were given to Dr. Phelps in private. The spirits said they would begin 
to annoy the boy on the cars, on bis way to the school, would pinch him 
and teai his clothes, so that, when he got there, they would be found torn, 
and that the troubles would follow him in the school aa long as he stayed 
there. Dr. Phelps, uuder all the oircum stances, thought it best not to 
send him ; but on consultation it was decided to have him go, and oa the 
19th of November he started for tho school. Dr. P. went a mile or two 
with him, put him tinder the eare of the conductor, and told him to report 
on his return if any thing worthy of notice occurred on the way. In two 
days the doctor was sent for to come and take him away. He said that 
soon after his father left him on the cars, he was pinched, pricked with 
ping, and annoyed in various other ways, until he reached his destina- 
tion ; that, on his arrival there, he found that his pantaloons were torn in 
front, between the waistband and the knees, in two places, several inches 
in length. He changed them for another pair which were new and made 
of very substantial material, and these were torn down in front at least 
half a yard in length, before the doctor arrived there. The knockings had 
attended him in school and other places ; his books were torn and damaged 
to the imouut f two d>lhii, which the docfor paid The fnmdy where 
he wna hid bi-cjme ahrmcd, and would not keep him, jnd he was taken 
away Thi, boy stated tliit on one of the evenings, while lie was there, 
he was walk n^ m the atieet, when his cap wa^ mjstenously taken from 
his head and thiowa upon the siiewalk A? he stooped to pick it up he 
saw the flash it a gun at iome dist^nte <ind a bullet passed over his back 
and htruck a bo^id feute near him Ho wai ofteiward informed by the 
rapping that, had he not stooped down, he would haie been killed, and 
that hia friendly spirit took this a eans to preserve him 

1749. "Dr. P. now concluded to return with Harry to Stratford, and 
was told that the bad spirits would have no control over him there. The 
family in which they resided ia Pliiladelphu had become alarmed at the 


;;■ Google 


360 ADDITTOKAL CORltOBOKATIVE EVIDENCE 

straDge occurrences, and finally tley agaia retarned to Stnttford. From 
that time the disturbances began to subside, and by the 15th of December, 
1851, they had eeased altogedier. The family remained at Stratford till 
the spring of 1852, when they returned to their former residence in the 
city. The Louse at Stratford is occupied by another family, but no dis- 
turbances have ever occurred with the family which now occupy the house, 
and none with Dr. P.'a family since the above date. 

1750. "Thus ends one of the most remarkable histories ia the whole 
course of modern spiritual manifestations. The authority on which it comes 
to the world is indisputable, and the characters of all concerned are beyond 
suspicion. It will be observed that generally the demonstrations, as in 
case of Mr. Calvin K. Brown, ia the Fos family, were less boisterous after the 
family eonsonted to hold communication with them. It seemed to be the 
desire of a spirit to communicate and set right a matter which was making 
him unhappy. This accomplished, the demonstrations ceased. 

1751. "From the foregoing narrative it will be seen that these pheno- 
mena do not attach to places, as some have supposed. It makes the fact 
equally clear that they do attach to persons, and that without certain 
media they cannot, to any extent, take place. If there is such a thing as 
' haunted houses,' they must belong to another class of phenomena, or a 
very different phase of the same, than those always depending on the 
presence of particular persons. 

1752. "Another iUct seems also to be proved by the above nan-ation, 
namely, that persons may be powerful mediums at one time and afterward 
lose the power, for neither of the media of Dr. Phelps's family in Stratford 
have had any proof of mediumship for years." 


Idea of the existence of a spiritual um, and a mtal spintual oxygen, 
found to exist ind^endenlly in the mind of a much esteemed author. 
1753. The most wonderfol and important of all the facts communicated 
to me by my spirit father, and subsequently sanctioned by a convocation 
of spirits, were the following : 1. That there is a special spirit sun, oon- 
centrie with our sun, which illuminates the spirit world, without percep- 
tibly affecting our visual organs. 2. That there is a peculiar vital gas 
which spirits breathe, although inscrutable to our senses or chemical tests, 
which we respire in our spiritual capacity. These facta I have considered 
as aroong those, which it was impossible could have been learned from the 
minds of Mrs. Gourlay or myself, as they were certainly new to both of us, 
and di£&cult to realize when communicated. My attention has been re- 
cently directed by a friend to an essay in a work entitled " Eambles and 
Reveries of a Student," wherein I find (page 11) tte ideas in question to 
have been awakened in the author without the smallest interchange of ideas 
with Mrs. Gonrlay or myself. I have been under the impression that his 


;;■ Google 


OP TOE EXISTENCE OF SPIEITS. 361 

leauiug would have been UDfavourable to Spiritualism. The language 
eniplojed is as follows ; 

1754. " I hold it as a truth, that a divine atmosphere snrrounda ouv 
earth — an aioma emitted from the world of spirifa, in which dwell the 
great truths and secrets of the universe — a great world that pours down 
riches upon ua, aa the sun pours down heat ; and as witliout the sun this 
world would be but a formless wilderness, so, without this spirit sun, would 
it be barren of thought or beauty. 

1755. "Above us and around us exists a spiritua] atmosphere, more 
subtle than the natural one. As the latter is the supporter of physioal 
life, so tiio former is of psjchal. We absorb the delicate magnetio aromata 
from all substances, through the m d um f th lir, as well as the compa- 
ratively coarse osygen ; so all of ul 1 f es from this spirit atmo- 
sphere — all thought, all feeling, all pp t f truth and beauty. 

1756. " Man is the apes of ea th eat d the basis of all heavenly 
life — the foundation of all spirit 1 t Standing thus in a middle 
plane as the highest thing of ea th nd th 1 west of heaven, he holds 
magnetic relationship to both; th tl n t ly supplying the physical 
requirements of his being, such food d nk d air, but he absorbs im- 
palpable nourishment from all h u 1 the aroma from flowers, 
and trees, and fi-uit, as well as th g t m nations from people; in- 
tuitively appreciating harmoniou nfl n i — f ling an instinctive repul- 
sion when under those that are i h m n us This antagonism, or horror, 
we call antipathy; and biography b d with trange stories of its indi- 
vidual action. Whenever antipatl y sp 1, it is a proof that some- 
thing exbts in the peculiar mag t ph wh h has no affinity with the 
other sphere. 

1757. "An animal is but a highly organized combination of the me- 
chanical and chemical forces of the earth, i-eturning to the earth when 
death ensues : the only good resulting from its life is, that grofs matter 
has been changed into a little higher condition by the combination. 

1758. "Man, regarded as the animal, possesses nothing after his death 
but the spiritual attributes he has received, corresponding to the physical 
things he sought in his earthly life; if that was low and sensual, his spi- 
ritual condition will he the same ; for the spirit land is as much a spiritual 
condition as it is a place. 

1759. "As man's external form grows from appropriating substance 
from the earth, so are thoughts and sentiments, and all things relating to 
the soul, appropriated from the spirit world. Take the earth from man, 
and he ceases to exist as a physical being ; take the spirit world from him, 
and he ceases to exist as an immortal soul. 

1760. " All physical things have corresponding truths in the spiritual 
world, and a man is truly harmonious when ho receives the corresponding 
essence or quality with the material thing — not as a mere sjmbolization, 


;;■ Google 


^b2 ADDITIONAL CORROBORATIVE EVIDEKCB, ETC. 

but as an actuality, as teal to the soul as its coi'respomiing earthly tiuth is 
to the body. As a petty iHustration, we will say that wliere an applp is 
eateo, a harmonious man receiYes not only the nutriment eontamed m the 
fruit, but he also receives its spiritual correspondence, so aa to be donhly 
nourished by it. 

1761. " Mea having a stronger magnetic relationship to the apint 
world, are easily exhausted, for they do not receive strength enough from 
the earth sphere to teep soni and body in harmony. 

1762. " Persons en rapport with the earth are the Jabourers and tillers 
of the grouftd, living only in the lowest piano of mental life. 

1763. "The truly hai'monious men receive equally the spiiitual and 
physical elements ; they are electrical conductors, whose attracting pomta 
bend downward as well as upward, dispensing, equally, thought and 
strength to their less harmonious fellows, with but little exhaustion 

1764. " Men originate nothing : they have merely different degrees of 
receptivity ; are merely more or less in magnetic relationship with the 
higher world. A principle, or truth, is not your truth, or my truth, but 
God's tmth ; as much as a drop of wafer in the ocean, or a sand gram in 
the great desert; as little a personal possession as the cloud abo^e youi 
head. If we look at it abstractly, we perceive the absurdity of all qusi- 
rels in relation to originality of ideas— water refreshes the thirsty tra^eUer, 
whether drunk from his own cup or the cup of another; and it we can 
incorporate a new truth into our Jives, it is unimportant whether we receive 
it directly or indirectly from the great fountain. 

1765. "The intellectual struggle of the student is but an education of 
the soal, training it to become susceptible to higher influences — an attempt 
to enter into unalloyed magnetic relationship with the spirit world. 

1766. "Prayer is a simple and natural method of becoming ere rapport 
with higher beings and a higher world ; yet no thinker ever believed that 
prayer would move the Kvine Being to alter His eternal plans. As He is 
the fountain of all Love and all Wisdom, His, designs must be without 
flaw — must be for eternal good: yet prayer is one of the most holy, beau- 
tifiil, and useful of things, it is the earnest asking of the soul foi com- 
fort — whatever the words m'ly be — '»nd by the esaltition ot fedin^, we 
rise up from the earth-life into the higher spiritual planes, and become 
harmonized by the indwelling htimonies of these spheies Piayer is aspi- 
ration. Prayer is the desire to embrace the Infinite The form of prayer 
is unimportant; its power lies in the inlwelling desire ft gocd Men 
should not have forms and times of piayer, but their whole lues should 
be long, unending acts of piayer ' 

1767. It seems that the light of Bpiiituxhsm hid begun to d»wn m the 
mind of the author of the preceding piosage His languaj;e lespeeting 
prayer is in strict conformitj with the doctime of Spiiituahsm 

1768. As the author, to whom lefcience is thus mide, was on teims of 


;;■ Google 


ir MiTTFIt BIIhD, AN1> SPlltlT. 6bd 

great mutual fiiendatip with mj late sifter, as well as with, myself, I have 
consulted lier spirit as to the Olivia of the impressions which had hcon 
thus indited by oui common fr end It appears from her reply to my 
inquiry, that thes-p idew were communicated to him hy my spirit father, 
and that his conveision toSpinfualiamhad commenced prior to his decease, 
which took pbee ahout two yoarf ag 


OF MATTER, MIKD, AND SPIRIT. 


0/ Matter. 

1769. It is a fact, that as we study more deeply the nature of matter, 
we find that we know the less about it. The crude impressions hy which 
it makes ua sensible of ita presence are, of course, intuitively received, and 
ai-e reiterated incessantly. Henc«, the mass of mankind do not ima^ne 
that there can be any mystery respeoting that ponderable matter which 
influences the soale-bcam. The existence of any other matter, people ge 
uerally are slow to admit. The electric fluid and caloric, the sujposcl 
causes of electricity and heat, were rarely believed in, out of the scientific 
world, hnt ponderahle matter is the last thing of which aay person would 
imagine himself ignorant. Yet we fiud that some of the moat espeiienced 
investigators of nature, have not made up their minds as to what pondei 
able matter is. 

1770. According to Newton, matter consists of hard, impenetrable pai 
tides, endowed with vis inertiee, gravitation, and chemical attiaction for 
other particles; vis tJiei-Hse being tliat force by whioh a body, if in motion, 
requires a certain degree of force to arrest or retard it, or to put it into 
motion if at rest. Gravitation causes all iflasses to attract each other reci- 
procally, with a force exactly proportioned to their vis inerfise; so that 
these forces are reciprocally measures of each other. It is usual to make 
gravitation its own measure, by estimating it to be as the weight of the 
mass; while weight is only the reciprocal attraction of gravitation between 
the body tried, and the earth. (64.) 

1771. These properties being conceded as belonging to matter, and the 
measure of its quantity, the next question is, of what does massive matter 
consist? As to the ratio of weight to bulk, which is designated as " spe- 
cijic graviti/," we see aa immense disparity between solids. Potassium, 
for instance, weighs three-fourths of its bulk of water, while platinum 
weighs twenty-one times its bulk in that fliiid. The density of gaseous 
hydrogen is to that of platina not more than 1 to 2r),000, and yet it may 
be rarifled to the one-hundreth part of ifs normal spissitude, while appa- 
rently filling the same space. Thus the same space may bs filled succes- 
sively by different portions of matter, yet the quantity of matter in the 


■,. Google 


364 01" MATTER, MIND, AND SFIttlT. 

Space, in the fii-st ease, may be io the quantity eontMned in the second, as 
2,500,000 to 1. Newton's definition of material particles was as follows : 

1772. " It seems prohahle to me that God, in the beginning, formed 
matter in solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, movable particles, of such 
sizes and figures, and with sucli other properties, and in such proportion 
to space, as most conduced to the end for which he formed them; and that 
those primitive pai-ticlea, being solids, are incomparably harder than any 
porous bodies compounded of them; even so very hai'd as never to wear 
or break in pieces ; no mundane power being able to divide what God him- 
self intended to be indivisible." 

1773. Boscovitch, observing that all that was essential to material atoms 
was attraction and repulsion, the latter being the substitute of Newton's 
impenetrability, suggested an hypothesis which dispensed with the atom, 
and assumed only the forces of attraction and repulsion; alternating, as ifc 
appears to me, in a way more original than warrantable. This idea of 
atoms has been modified by an accomplished mathematician, Exley, of 
Bristol, England, I quote here Esley's view : 

1774- "The reader has only to allow that each atom of matter coosists 
of an indefinitely extensive sphere of attraction, resting on a very small 
concentric sphere of repulsion, the force being everywhere, from the cen- 
tre, inversely as the square of the distance, repulsive near the centre, and 
then attractive. Now that part which regards the attraction has already 
obtained the consent of all the followers of Nhoton; and much more than 
the other part, which respects repulsion, has been already received in the 
principles of our present philosophy. 

1775. "It may be here asked — Are we absolutely to exclude solid 
atoms ? I confess I can find no nse for them. It is true. Sir Isaac New- 
ton thought that the atoms of matter consisted of minute solids. 

1776. " But this hypothesis, however convenient and consonant with 
our prejudices, is not absolutely necessary to the explanation of natural 
phenomena; for, it may be conceived, according to the theory of Bosco- 
vitch, that matt-er consists not ot solid particles, but of mere mathematical 
centres, of forces attractive and repulsive, whose relations to space were or- 
dained, and whose actions are regulated and maintained by the Creator of the 
universe. Both hypotheses, however, agree in one great principle, viz. : that 
the properties of bodies depend upon forces emanating from immovable 
points (whetlier substantial or not is of little importance) of their masses. 

1777. " The atoms of matter constituted as in the theory now proposed 
possess al! the individuality, indivisibility, and indestruetibility, which the 
learned and illustrious Newton ascribes to his small solids, and they answer 
all the ends he has mentioned ; the central points, indeed, will be utterly 
impenetrable by each other, since the repulsion there is infinite; and if at 
those centres we suppose small solids to be placed, they can answer no far- 
ther end than is accomplished by this immensely great repulsive force ; 
for from what we know of matter, we must suppose them to be indefinitely 
small, if we introduce such solids; and hence they will occupy the place 
where the repulsion is infinitely great; such solids would be found only an 
obstacle, and an incumbrance to the free actions of matter; since, how- 
ever small we imagine them to be, their magnitude will bo infinite if com- 
pared with a mathematical point, the centre of an atom, which is devoid 


,v Google 


or MATTEE, MIND, AND SPIEIT, 365 

altogether of magnitude. It may be added, that if any reader wish to 
retaia these eolids at the centres of the atoms, it will not materially affect 
the oonoluBions', provided he allow us to have them as i^mall as we please; 
and £0 much, if he intend to philosophize, he must grant, whateYcr course 
he may determine lo pursue." 

1778. These efforts to define matter derire interest from the foDowing 
attempt of Farraday to sustain a view inconsistent with tliat of Newton, hy 
practical illustration : 

Strieturcs on a iSpectdation % Wai-raday, respecting the Nature of Matter. 

1779. This sagacious investigator adverts to the fact, ttat after each 
atom in a mass of metallic potassium has eomhined with an atom of oxy- 
gen and an atom of water, forming thus a hydrafed oxide — caustic potash — 
the resulting aggregate occupies much less space than its metallic ingre- 
dient previously occupied ; so that, taking equal bulks of the hydrate and 
of potassium, there will ha in the metal only 430 metallic atoms, while in 
the hydrate there will be 700 such atoms. Yet in the latter, besides the 
700 metallic atoms, there wUI be an equal number of aqueous and oxy- 
genous atoms, in all 2800 ponderable atoms. It follows, that if the atoms 
of potassium are to be considered as minute impenetrable particles, kept 
at certain distances by an equilibrium of forces, there must be, in a mass 
of potassium, vastly more space than matter. Moreover, it is the space 
alone that can be continuous. The n on- contiguous material atoms cannot 
form a continuous mass. Consequently, the well-known power of potas- 
sium to conduct electricity must be a quality of the continuous empty 
space which it comprises, not of the discontinuous particles of matter with 
which that space is regularly interspersed. It is in the nest place urged, 
that while, agreeably to these considerations, space is shown to be a con- 
ductor, there are considerations equally tending to prove it to be a uon- 
conduotor, since in certain non-conducting bodies, such as resins, there 
must be nearly as much vacant space as in potassium. Hence the suppo- 
sition that atoms are minute impenetrable particles, involves the necessity 
of considering empty space as a conductor in metals, and as a non-conduc- 
tor in resins, and of course in sulphur and other electrics. This is con- 
sidered as a reductio ad absurdum. To avoid this con tradic lion, Farra- 
day supposes that atoms are not minute impenetrable bodies, but, existing 
throughout the whole space in which their properties axe observed, may 
penetrate each other. Consistently, although the atoms of potassium per- 
vade the whole space which they apparently occupy, the entrance into that 
space of an equivalent number of atoms of osygen and water, Jn conse- 
quence of some reciprocal reaction, causes a contraction in the boundaries 
by wbiob the combination thus formed is enclosed. This is an original 
and interesting view of this subject, well worthy of the contemplation of 
chemical philosophers. 

1780. But, upon these premises, Farraday has ventured on some in- 


,v Google 


866 OF MATTEE, HIND, AND SPIRIT. 

ferenees wliich, upon ■n mous accountaj ippeai to me uuwarrantable. I 
agree that "a," repieseating a particle of matter, and "m" representing 
its properties, it ib only with "m" Ihat ■we have any acquaintance, the ex- 
istence of "a" renting merely on an inference Heretofore I have often 
appealed to this fact, in order to show that the eMdence of imponderable, 
no less than of ponderable matter, is precisely the existence of properties 
which can only be accounted for by mfeiring the esistence of an appro- 
priate matter to which those properties appertain. Yet I cannot concur 
in the idea that, because it is only with "mi" that we are acquainted, the 
existence of "a" must not be inevitably inferred, so that bodies are to be 
considered as constituted of tbeir materialized powers. I use the word 
"materialized," because it is fully admitted by Farraday, that by dispensing 
with an impenetrable atom "a" vie do not get rid of the idea of matter, 
but have to imagine each atom as existiag throughout the whole sphere of 
its force, instead of being condensed about the centre. This seems to fol- 
low from the following language : 

1781. "The view now stated of the constitution of matter would seetn 
to involve necesmrHy the conclusion &iat matter Jills all space, or at, least 
the space to which gravitation extends, including the eun and its ST/stem; 
for gravitation is a property/ of matter dependent on a certain force, and 
it is thisfwce which constitutes mxitter." 

1782. Literally, this pai'agraph seems to convey the impression, that, 
agreeably to this new idea of matter, the sun and his planets are not distinct 
bodies, but consist of certain material powers reciprocally penetrating each 
other, and pervading a space larger than that comprised within the orbit 
of Neptune. We do not live upon, but within, the matter of which the 
earth is constituted, or rather within a mixture of all the solar and planetary 
matter belonging to our solar system. I cannot conceive that the sagacious 
author seriously intended to sanction any notion involving these conso- 
quencea. I shall assume, therefore, that, excepting the case of gravitation, 
his new idea of matter was intended to be restricted to those powers which 
display themselves within masses at insensible distances, and shall proceed 
to state the objections which seem to exist against the new idea as asso- 
ciated with those powers. 

1783. Evidently the arguments of Farraday against the existence, in 
potassium and other masses of matter, of impenetrable atoms endowed with 
cohesion, chemical affinity, momentum, and gravitation, rest upon the in- 
ference that in metals there is nothing to perform the part of an electrical 
conductor besides continuous empty space. This illustrious philosopher 
has heretofore appeared to be disinclined to admit the existence of any 
matter devoid of ponderability I The main object of certain letters which 
I addressed to him was to prove that the phenomena of induction could 
not, as he had represented, be an " action" of ponderable atoms, but, on 
the contrary, must be considered as an affection of them consequent to 


,v Google 


I, MINP, AND SPIRIT. 367 

the intervention of an imponderable matter, without whioli the phenomena 
of electricity would he inexplicahic. This repugnance to the admission 
of an imponderable electrical cause, has been the more remarkable, as his 
researches have not only proved the existence of prodigious electrical 
power in metals, but likewise that it is evolved during cliemioo-electric 
reaction, in equivalent proportion to the quantity of ponderable matter de- 
composed or combined. 

1784. According to his researches, a grain of water, by electrolytic re- 
action with four grains of zinc, evolves as much electricity as would 
charge fifteen laiUions of square feet of coated glass when supplied by a plate 
machine of fifty inches in diameter. But in addition to the proofs of the 
existence of electrical powers in metals thus fawiiahed, it is demonstrated 
that this power must be inseparably associated with metals, by the well- 
known fact that in the electro-magnetic machine — an apparatus which we 
owe to his genius, and the mechanical ingenuity of Pisii and Saston — a 
coil of wire, being subjected to the inductive influence of a magnet, is 
capable of fni-nishing, within the circuit which it forms, all the phenomena 
of an electrical current, whether of ignition, shock, or electrolysis. 

17S5. The existence in metals of an enormous calorific power must he 
evident from the heat evolved by mere hammering. It is well known that 
by a skilful application of the hammer, a piece of iron, between it and a 
cold anvil, may be ignited. To what other cause than their inherent 
calorific power can the ignition of metals by the discharge of a Leyden 
battery he ascribed ? 

1786. It follows, that the existence of au immense ealoriSc and electrical 
power is undeniable. The materiality of these powers, or of their cause, 
is all that has been questionable. But, according to the speculations of 
Farraday, all the powers of matter are material; not only the calorific and 
electrical powers are thus to be considered, but likewise the powers of 
cohesion, chemical affinity, inertia, and gravitation, while of all tJiese ma- 
tei'iai powers only the latter can he ponderable ! 

1787- Thus, a disinclination on the part of this distinguished investiga- 
tor to admit the existence of one or two imponderable principles, has led him 
into speculations involving the existence of a much greater number. But 
if, while the rest of the properties of the metal are represented by Newto- 
nian atoms, the caloiific and electrical powers be both materia] and impou- 
derahie, and of these such enormous quantities exist in potassium, as well 
as in zinc and all other metals, so much of the reasoning in question as is 
founded on the vacuity of the space between the metallic atoms is groundless. 

1788. Although the space occupied by the hydrated oxide of potas- 
sium comprises 2800 ponderable atoms, while that occupied by an equal 
mass of the metal comprises only 430, there may be in the latter propor- 
tionally as much more of the material, though imponderable, powers of heat 
and electricity, as thero is less of matter endowed with pouderability. 


;;■ Google 


368 OP MATTER, MIKD, AND SPIH 

1789. Thus, while assuming the existence of fewer it 
than the celebrated author of the speculation has himself p 
explain the conducting power of metals, without being under the necessity 
of attributing to void space the property of electrical conduction. More- 
over, I consider it quite consistent to suppose that the presence of the 
ethereal basis of electricity js Indispensable to electrical conduction, and 
that diversities in this faculty are due to the proportion of that material 
power present, and tlie mode of its association with other matter. The 
immense superiority of metals will be explained, by referring it to their 
being peculiarly replete with the ethereal basis of boat and electriotty. 

1790. Hence Farraday's suggestions respecting the materiality of what 
has heretofore been designated as the properties of bodies, furnish the 
means of refuting his arguments against the existence of ponderable im- 
penetrable atoms as the basis of cohesion, chemical affinity, momentum, 
and gravitation. 

1791. But I will, in the next place, prove that his su^estiona not only 
furnish an answer to his objections to the views in this respect heretofore 
entertained, but are likewise pregnant with consequences directly incon- 
sistent with the view of the subject which lie has recently presented. 

1792. I h sail th t f 11 the powers which are, according to Earra- 
day's sp It t b 1 m d material, gravitation can alone be pon- 
derable ; a \ t h peculations, gravitation, in common with 
every po h tof t b t d to impenetrable partioles, must be a 
matter i 1 p 1 tly p 1 g the space throughout which it is per- 
ceived. Th b g th 1 nee, by what tie is gravitation, or, in 
other wo d w ht — liss 1 biy ttached to the rest? It cannot be pre- 
tended th t th f th pow the property of any other. Each of 
them is a d ca t p! y th part of an a, not only because an ni, 
an effect n 1 1 n its cause, but because, according to the premises, 
no a can ex t N n it be advanced that tliey are the same power, 
since ch m al affia ty anl cohesion act only at insensible distances, while 
gravitati n a ts t any and every distance, with forces inversely as their 
squares; and m the power of chemical affinity is not commensu- 
rate witl th t f g a tation. One part, by weight, of hydrogen has a 
greater aflinity, universally, for any other element than two hundi'ed parts 
of gold. By what means then are cohesion, chemical affinity, and gravi- 
tation inseparably associated in ail the ponderable elements of matter f Is 
it not fetal to the validity of the highly ingenious and interesting deduc- 
tions of Farraday, that they are thus shown to be utterly incompetent to 
explain the inseparable association of cohesion, chemical affinity, and 
inertia with gravitation, while the existence of a vacuity between New- 
tonian atoms, mainly relied upon as the basis of an ai^ument against their 
existenee, is shown to be inconsistent both with the ingenious speculation 
which has called forth these remarks, and those Herculean " researches'* 


;;■ Google 


ND, AND SPmiT. 300 

which must perpetuate his fame f (See Appendix for Eai'raday's Specu- 
latione on Electric Coaduotion aad the Nature of Matter,) 

On Whewdl's demonstration, that all matter is heavy. 

1793. "While the speculations of Barraday, isolate gravitation, as the 
only matter endowed with weight, and treat all other matters as weight- 
less, those of another eminent philosopher, Whewell, would tend to prove 
that all matter is heavy. 

1794. This subject may be interesting now, when we are anxious to un- 
derstand well the nature of matter, which Oomte would represent as the 
hasis of mind, and when it becomes a point of departure in forming ideas 
of spirit and mind, as they must be contemplated by Spiritualism, I 
therefore subjoin a critique upon the allegation that all matter can be 
heavy, and on the relation between vis inertim and gravitation. 

1795. One consideration seems to be usually overloofeed in contem- 
plating these forces. It is forgotten that inertia Sa the property of one 
body, while gravitation requires two for its existence. If there were only 
one body in nature, it might move on, in obedience to its vis inertia:, for 
any length of time ; but, during an isolated existence, could neither attract 
aor be attracted. Whewcll's theorem, in his own language, is as follows : 

1796. " We see," alleges Whewell, " that the propositions that all bodies 
are heavy, and that inertia is proportional to weight, necessarily follow 
from those fundamental ideas which we unavoidably employ in all attempts 
to reason concerning the mechanical relations of bodies." (See Demonstra- 
tion that all Matter is heavy, by the Kev. William Whewell, B.D. Silli- 
man's Journal, vol. 42, page 265.) 

To PnOFBBSOlt "WUEWELL : 

1797. Dear 8ik : I thank you for your kind attention in sending mo 
a copy of your pamphlet, entitled a '^Demonstration that all Matter is 
heavy" comprising a communication made to the Cambridge Philosophical 
Society. 

1798. I conceive that to demonstrate that all matter is heavy, is, in 
other words, to prove that all matter is endowed with attraction of gravi- 
tation, or that general property which, when it causes bodies to tend toward 
the centre of the earth, is called weight. Hence to assert that all matter 
is heavy, is no more than to say, that attraction of gravitation exists be- 
tween all or any masses of matter. 

1799. Tou say, "it maybe urged that we have no difficulty in conceiv- 
ing of matter which is not heavy." I have no hesitation in asserting 
that there should he no difficulty in entertaining such a conception ; since 
I cannot understand why any two masses may not be as readily conceived 
to repd, as to attrax,t each other, or neitlmr to attract nor to r^el. Is it 
not easier to imagine two remote massesmdiBefent fo~each other, than that 


;;■ Google 


370 OF MATTER, MIND, AND SPIRIT. 

thej act upon each other ? Is any thing more difficult to undei-gtand thau 
that a body can act where it is not ? 

1800. It ia also meDtioned by jou, that it may be urged " that inertia 
and weiffhC are tvio separate properties of matter." Now I 'Bill not only 
urge, hut also, with all due deference, will undertake to show, that the ex- 
istence of inertia may aa well be proven, and its quantity estimated, by 
means of repulsion aa by means of attraction. 

1801. StippOsa two bodies, A and B, to he endowed with leoiprocal 
attraction, or, in other words, to gravitate toward each other. Being 
placed at a distance, and then allowed to approach, if, after any given 
time, it were found that they had moved severally any ascertained dis- 
tances, evidently their relative inertias would he considered as inversely as 
those distances. 

1802. In the nest place, let us suppose two bodies, X and Y, endowed 
with the opposite force of reciprocal repulsion, to be placed in proiimity, 
and thea allowed to fly apart. The distances run through by them seve- 
rally, being, at any given time, determioed, might not their respective 
inertias bo taken to he inversely as those distances; so that the question 
would be aa well aseei-tained in this case aa in that above stated, in which 
gravitation should be resorted to as the test? 

1803. It seems to me that this question is suf&ciently answered in the 
affirmative, in your second paragraph, page 7, (p. 269,) in which you 
allege, that " one hody has tmiee as much inertia as anoHier, if, when tlie 
same fm-ce acta upon it for the same time, it acquires hut half the velociti/. 
This is the fundamental conception of inertia." 

1804. In the third paragraph, fourth page, (p. 261,) you say, "that 
the guanf!^ of matter H measured hy those sensible properties of matter 
which undergo quantitative addition, subtraction, and division, as the 
matter is added, s^ibtracted, or divided, the quantity of matter cannot he 
Icnown in any other way; but tltis mode of measuring the quantity of 
matter, in order to lie true at all, must he true universal^." 

1805. Also your fourth paragraph, fifth page, (p. 268,) concludes with 
this allegation : "And thus we have proved, that if there he any hind of 
matter which is not heavy, the weight can no longer avail ns, in a/ny case, 
to any extent, as the measure of the quantity of matter." 

1806. In reply to these allegations, let me inquire. Cannot a matter exist 
of whioh the sensible properties do not admit of being measured by human 
means? Because some kinds of matter can be measured by "those 
sensible qualities whioh undergo quantitative addition, subtraction, and 
diviaon," does it follow that there may not be matter which is incapable 
of being thua measured ? And wherefore would the method of obtaining 
philosophical truth be " fufjle" in the one case, because inapplicable in the 
other? Because the inertias of A and B have been discovered, by means 
of their gravitation, does it follow that the inertias of X and Y cannot 


;;■ Google 


MIND, AND SPIRIT. 371 

be discovei-ed by their self-repellent power ? Why should the inappli- 
cability of grayitatioTi la the one ease render its employment futile in the 
other ? 

1807- It is self-evident, that matter without weight cannot be esti- 
mated by weighing, but I deny that on that account such weightless 
matter may not be otherwise estimated. The inertias of A and B cannot 
be better measured by gravitation than those of X and T by repulsion, as 
already shown. 

1808. You seem to infer, in par^raph second, page sixth, (p. 268,) 
that we should be equally destitute of the means of measuring matter ac- 
curately, " were any kind of matter heavy indeed, hut not so heavy, in 
proportion to its quantity of matter, as other hinds." 

1809. If, in the case of all matter, weight be admitted to be the only 
measure of quantity, it were inconsistent to suppose any given quantity 
of matter, of any one kind, to have less weight than an equal quantity of 
another kind; but upon what other than a conventional basis is it to be 
assumed that there is more matter in a cubic inch of platinum than in a 
cubic inch of tin f in a cubic iuch of mercury than in a cubic inch of iron ? 
Judging by the chemical efficacy of the masses, although the weight of 
mercury is to that of iron as 13.6 is to 8, there are more equivalents of the 
latter than the former in any given bulk, since by weight twenty-eight 
parts of iron are equivalent to two hundred and two parts of mercury. 

1810. Weight is one of the properties of certain kinds of matter, and 
has been advantageously resorted to, in preference to any other property, 
in estimating the quantity of the matter to which it appertains. Never- 
theless, measurement by bulk is found ospcdicnt or necessary in many 
cases. But may vre not appeal to any general property which admits of 
being measured or estimated ? FaiTaday has inferred that the quantity of 
electricity is as the quantity of gas which it evolves. Light has been 
considered as proportional in quantity to the surface which it illuminates 
with a given intensity at a certain distance. The quantity of caloric has 
been held to be directly as the weight of water which it will render aeri- 
form ; and has also been estimated by the degree of its expansive or ther- 
mometric influence. What scale-beam ia more delicate than the thermo- 
Bcope of Melloni ? 

1811. In the last paragraph but one, seventh page, (p. 270,) yoa 
suggest, that "perhaps some persons might conceive thai the tde^itily of 
weight and inertia is obvious at once, for hoUi are merely resistance to 
motion ; inertia, resistance to all motion, or change of motion ; weight, 
resistance to motion upward." 

1812. I am surprised that you should think the opinion of any pkaon 
worthy of attention, who should entertain so narrow a view of weight, as 
antagonist of momentum, as that above quoted, " that it is a resistance to 
motion -upward." Agreeably to the definition given at the eommenee- 


;;■ Google 


372 OF MATTEE, MIND, AND SPiaiT. 

ment of the letter, weight, in its usual practical sense, is only one case of 
the general force which causes all ponderable masses of laatter to gravitate 
toward each other, and which is of course liable to resist any conflicting 
motion, whatever may he the diredaon. When, in the form of solar attrac- 
tion, it oyercomes that inertia of the planets which would otherwise cause 
them to leave their orbits, does gravitation "resist motion upward?" 

1813. In the next paragraph jou allege, that "there is a difference in 
these two kinds of resistance to motion. Inertia is instanianeom, weight 
is contitiu<ms, resistance." 

1814. It is to this allegation I object, that as you have defined inertia 
to be " resistance to motion, or to change of ■motion," it follows that it 
can be instantaneous only where the impulse which it resists is in- 
stantaneous. It cannot be less continuous than the force by which it is 
overoome. 

1815. Gravity has been considered as acting upon falling bodies bj an 
infinity of jmjitdses, each producing an adequate acceleration; but to every 
such acceleratiag impulse, producing of course a " change of motion," 
will there not be a commensurate resistance from inertia ? and the im- 
pulses and resistances being both infinite, will not one be as continuous as 
the other ? 

1816. I have already adverted to inertia h us antagonist 
of solar attraction in the case of revolving p u 

1817. Agreeably to Mossotti, the oreat n f wo kinds of 
matter, of which the homogeneous partic] 
heterogeneous mutually attractive. Oonsisl 
se, any matter must be imponderable; bein 
very opposite of attraction of gravitation.. This last-mentioned property 
exists between masses consisting of both kinds of particles, so far as the 
attraction between the heterogeneous atoms predominates over the repul- 
sion between those which are homogeneous. It would follow from these 
premises, that all matter is ponderable or otherwise, accordingly as it may 
be situated. 

1818. Can the ether by which, according to the undulatory theory, Hgbt 
is transmitted, consist of ponderable matter? Were it so, would it not be 
attracted about the planets with forces proportioned to their weight, re- 
spectively ? and becoming of unequal density, would not the diversity in 
its density, thus arising, affect its undulations, as the transmission of sound 
is influenced by any variations in the density of the aeriform fluid by 
which it is propagated ? 

AVith esteem, I ara yours truly, 

EoiiEET Haur 
(See appendix for Whewell's EsBaj,) 


hypothesis, per 
ig endowed with a property the 


;;■ Google 


Additional Itemarhs on the Speculations of Fan-aduy and Rxley, above 
noticed. 

1819. Is it possible for a mere centre to be endowed with a force? or 
reasonable that languago should not make adiatiaetion between Bomething 
and nothing, between cause and effect, between matter and the properties 
of matter? m being the properties, and a the Newtonian atom, of which 
they have been considered as the attributes, I cannot concur in the reason- 
ing which infers that where we can only perceive phenomena, we are to 
dispense with the idea of causation, because that causation is not directly 
perceptible. It seems to me, from the meaning of the words, that no 
cause can exist without some effect, nor can any effect exist without a 
cause. Language founded on the existence of ideas cannot be disused. 
Can there be any reason for considering any thing as endowed with ex- 
istence which gives no evidence of existence? We distinguish between 
the thing which causes and the effect which it produces. The cause evidently 
has a centrality; the effect, though it indicates by the direction in which it 
arrives, the centre whence it proceeds, is remote from that centre. The 
esistenoe of this centrality seems to be recognised in the suggestion that 
atoms are centres of forces. This implies that the source or cause is at 
the centre in each atom, and, of course, the phenomenon, bebg more or 
less remote from the centre, cannot be tlie source or cauae, and hence baa 
been treated as an effect or property. 

1820. The suggestion that the office of atoms may be performed by 
centres of forces, in fact, assigns to a mere centre the part now performed 
by a Newtonian atom. But it must be evident that the centre is that 
point within any rotating mass, which does not turn therewith ; and which, 
where neither of the opposite motions resulting from rotation take place, 
can neither have length nor breadth. This reduces the idea of a centre 
to a common definition with a mathematical point; which is nihility in 
the extreme. An absolutely void space may be identified with nihility, 
and a mathematical point is a portion of that space, without length, 
breadth, or thickness. To endow centres with forces is to disregard the 
axiom, " Out of nothing nothing can come." Moreover, wherefore should 
there ho a force at certain mathematical points, and yet others he destitute 
of the same attribute ? Manifestly, if some mathemalical points are de- 
ficient of powers with which others are endowed, there must be something 

■ aasociatcd with one, which is not associated with the other. This justifies 
the Newtonian idea, that the force, though proceeding from the centre, is, 
like the terrestrial attraction of gravitation, the resultant of the complicated 
attraction of the whole of a body surrounding the centre. But the cen- 
trality of the force does not seem to accord with the idea of the inferred 
diffusion of properties. In the instance of gravitation it does not account 
fur those attributes by which this globe acts as a solid mass within its 


;;■ Google 


r MATTER, MIND, AND SriKIT. 

iTidiin defiiiitinn reaches 


material 


. c,:,. .„A . 


jet ■> 


[■eordii 


)<r to the FllTldi^ 


by Aih m 


1 1 


B t th d 


t I 


M 1 


ty f h ] r 


m li to 


t bl h fli 


t 


11 m tt 


t 


1 th t t 


tf t 


t ms th m 


'y 


b t j)p ( 


f 


^ h wh t 


I t 


p m p 


Iv 


w t 


t 1 


th gh 
1 1 


wh h Ita d 
fth m 


pos 
t f 


tdby 
1 


th 1 t 
th 1 ft 


wli h p 


p ty th I h 


m 


f 1 


t ty dm 


d i>o d 


t H w th 


t 


b 


Id th tl 


t 


Iff b3 p 


t 


11 t t th gli t t 


p p 1 


p I S 


th 


PP 


t p ! t 


P 


1 p 1 tt t 


wl 


1 t k 


] thmt-gth 


y tp tsth m 
f m t t p d tit 

182 'Vr 1 I J d as, f Im ft d, 1 It t b t tl to 

placa a Newtonian atom within each of his oonoentrie spheres, or to assume 
that nothing can liave properties, oi that effects can exist without causes. 
What is to cause a force at any mathematical point more than at any other? 
How, in case of a moving body, are the forces to appear successively to 
proceed from various centres, if there be nothing in which it is inherent, 
which moves and carries its forces or properties wheresoever it goes ? Does 
not this suggestion that atoms are centres of their forces, by making the 
cart draw itself, force the effect to be its own cause ? It is quite consist- 
ent with the Newtonian definition, that the resultant of tie action of every 
part of a mass should comport as if it proceeded from a common centre, 
as does terrestrial gravitation; and of course, whether wo have the New- 
tonian idea or that of Boscovitch, Farraday, or Esley, we have forces pro- 
ceeding from centres. The great difference is that agreeably to the one 
these forces emanate from nothing; agreeably to the other, from some- 
thing. I used to define matter to my pupils as that which has properties. 
In the mind, is not force distinguished from some moving power which 
gives it rise ? Is not this distinction inevitable ? and were the word force 
employed to designate the moving power which esercises force, would it 
not confound ideas, without altering the actual state of the case ? Would 
it not impoverish language, without improving science ? 


0/ Mundane, Ethereal, and Ponderable Matter, m tlieir Chemical 
relations. 

1823. The bodies which occupy the attention of a chemist are found in 
one of three states — those of solidity, fluidity, and elasticity. Ice, liquid 
water, and steam exemplify these different states. The fact is thus illus- 
trated, that the same chemical compound, consisting of oxygen and hy- 


;;■ Google 


OP MATTER, MINUj AND SPIRIT. S75 

drogen, may exist in either state, aceordiDg to the temperature to whioli it 
may lie subjected. 

1824, Esporieace justifies tlie surmise, tLat scarcely any body in nature 
is utterly insusceptible of tbeso three states, prorided it were heated ov re- 
frigerat dwtli 1 telpw 

1825 B 1 th p p ty f g vit t f wh li th yr 

Tersely tt j t th d ta h w gr t (i^ wh hi 

the tw pp tly f m g h t — tl d bl t bl Oy 

(1840)— t th d t f th ta d m 11 f m 1 t ttra t h 

other t 1 b t th * f g J ) ' 

endow 1 th f call d tt t t fe-T g t wl h p t ly 
at ins 1 1 d t th t wh b ght t d p t-v th y te 

and f htm Ag th y d w 1 1 dy m 

tioned w th h m 1 ffi ty wh h w th th k d f j t 1 

which t t p p ty h th h te t by wlu h th j 

distin^ h d f m th th 

181.6 A d tothdt hhlmfl htf 

geated fh tefm thl g tth 

aerial g tmw Itb Ipel tph f 

fluid U d 1 mbl th th th It I 1! t p w ft 

constit t p t 1 Th tm ph h b m d t mp t t 

atoms i?hht 1] t h tpw f p Ipl 

like th t w! h th f tl th h B t D It h w I tl t th 

was n J 1 b t g t wh / / y « Tw 

more h hyd d t g f t. b mp I 

the sa tj th w Id b p Is b tw tl t f hyd 

gen a d th t t ^ h t ly b tw th t th m gas Th 
has h h Id t be q lly t h w my m ht b m 1 1 

or wh t p m ght b sui dd 1 

182 Th d th fut d wh h b th p 1 p t 

thesam 1 t fl 1 th t & th 1 rs ty f th t 

could not so affect the repulsne influence as to nullify it between heti,ro- 
geneous atoms, while sustaining this repulsion, where the atoms should 
be alike. 

1828. Moreover, as the i-aya of light haye been found to be mere undu- 
lations in the ether; the lays of heat, being perfectly analogous in their 
attributes, must also be due to ethereal uadulations. But vaporization may 
be affected by radiant heat, and gases owe their aeriform state to the same 
cause as vapor or steam ; yet transient undulations evidently cannot form 
a permanent combination, so as to confer the durable elasticity of a per- 
manent gas. 

1829. It appears, then, that neither the dostvine of caloric, nor the un- 
dulatoiy doctrine, as it is received, will explain the creation of permanent 
gas. Under these circumstances a modification of the existing opinions is 


;;■ Google 


376 OF MATTER, MIND, AND SPIRIT. 

called for. It has, for some yeavs, occurred to me, that the Newtonian 
doctrine of radiation might be associated with that of undulation. 

1830, The fact that i-adiant heat could he collected hy a mirror so as to 
raise the tempei-ature of hodies placed in the focus, and that this process 
could take place in vacuo, as ascertained by Sir Humphrey Davy, had been 
adduced as unquestionable evidence of the materiality of caloric, the sup- 
posed fluid cause of heat. But as the cold proceeding from a snowball or 
any cold body could be collected by the same process, it was urged by 
some chemists that the evidence of the materiality of the cause of cold 
must also ho admitted. Prevost met this argument by suggesting that no 
body in nature ia absolutely cold. Every body, however refrigerated, is 
not so cold as to be incapable of greater refrigeration. Hence all bodies 
being absolutely above the zero of nature, are throwing off rays to each 
other, and where there is equality of temperature, they do not cause any 
change in their relative temperatures. The rays thrown off by A are com- 
pensated by those which it receives from B, and vice versa. But if A 
throws off to B more than B reciprocates, the temperature of A must fall 
until an equilibrium is attained. Thus, A being the mirror and B the 
snowball, the mirror is refrigerated, and causes a greater radiation from 
any body situated about its focus. This explanation was generally re- 
ceived, but to me, the following rationale, which I advanced, appeared 


1831, I assumed caloric to exist throughout the sublunary creation, as 
the luminiferoua ether is assumed to be diffused throughout all space by 
the undulationists ; the diffusion arising from the reciprocal repulsion of 
jls particles being similar to that which had been supposed to cause the 
diffusion of caloric. There is the greatest analogy between this diffusion 
and that which is known to exist in the case of gases. The process is the 
same, whether the gas be dense like chlorine, or tbirty-sis times as rare, 
as in the insfance of hydrogen, and in the luminiferous ether resembles 
the process by which hydrogen is rarified, or might be rendered more rare, 
were the pressure of the atmosphere removed. 

1832, It is known that in any gas or gaseous mixture like that which we 
'breathe, if a deficit of pressure be caused in any spot, the gaseous parti- 
cles will quickly move toward it, in order to restore the equilibrium of 
pressure, and that if, on the other hand, any augmentation of pressure be 
produced at any spot, the gas will move outward to restore the equilibrium, 

1833, The particles being aymmeti'ically arranged in lines, a row of 
particles may be conceived to lie between every two remote points. If we 
suppose any number of points in the focal body, and a corresponding 
number in the surface of the mirror, it may be conceived that the inter- 
vening ethereal or calorific particles will move in rows one way or the other, 
as the pressure in the focal space may become greater or less. Thns an 
effect is brought about, equivalent to that which the Newtonian idea of 


;;■ Google 


oil' MATTER, MIND, AND SPIEIT. iiJl 

radiatioE involves ; lines of particles proceed from the hotter points to the 
colder ones. 

1834. The nrrangement of tlie particles of ealorio, which was originally, 
in my view, confined to the sublunary creation, appears of necessity to 
belong to the luminiferous ether, required by the theory ascribing light to 
undulations, ttough the last-mentioned medium must be endowed with 
ubiquity as above stated, so as to abound in every part of space through 
■which light reaches the eye. 

1835. The uiiduiatory hypothesis supposes that a wave-like motion being 
imparted to a row of particles, by a luminous point in the surface of the 
luminous body, is transmitted, like the sound producing waves in the air, 
to the other end of the row. ■ 

1836. This undulatory progression has been roughly illustrated by the 
transitory serpentine movements which may be made in a cord, stretched 
like a clothes-line between the tops of posts. 

1837- In order to make this illuatratiou elucidate the conception which I 
advance, we have only to suppose that the cord, instead of being attached 
to the post, should be diawn rapidly over pulleys, and, while thus actuated, 
be subjected to a canse of undulatory vibration. It may be conceived 
that, by tbis process, the ethereal particles, whUe performing all ■which the 
undulatory theory requires, might at the same time perform all required 
by that of emisaon and material calorific radiation. Directed upon a va- 
poriaable liquid, the undulations might perform tie part of sensible 
heat; the ethereal particles, successively combining, might furnish the 
latent heat requisite to the constitution of vapour. 

1838. Agreeably to Newton, the seven colours of the spectrum are due 
to aa many different kinds of radiant particles of various refrangibility, or 
susceptibility of being bent from the rectilinear path when passed through 
the same refracting medium.* 

1839. According to the undulatory theory, tlie colours are caused by 
diversitieB in the undulations producing them. Eetaining this feature, the 
last-mentioned hypothesis, as modified by myself, appears to be competent 
to explain the phenomena of light as well as those of vaporization, pro- 
duced by calorific radiation, since not only is any vaporizing liquid sub- 
jected to the transient effect of the undulations, but ilso may combine with 
the ethereal pai-ticles as they come into contact w th t 

1840. Thus modified, the rationale of the rainbow o p ma sp 
trum, would not be that the colours indicate as many a ti f o g n 
radiant particles, but that they are to be explained gi b y h d 
latorj hypothesis, which ascribes them to as many es n h ndu 
tions, just as the notes in music are ascribed to di ers f b 

"> Latterly, Siv David Bramstar iaa ooneaised that ddIj h m 

light are roquisita, aoiwrdiDg to the theory of omisfiion, to p a a1 ffi vh h 

Hewtoa naerihed to sercE. 


, Google 


378 

1841. Tlie ether, under this view, performs the part heretofore assigned 
to lateat heat, by combining with solids so as to render them susceptible 
of espansioB, and of clecttieal conduction by being liable to the polariza- 
tion which constitutes electricity. 

1842. Sensible heat, according to this aspect, is due to the Tibrotions 
of the ethereal fluid, which is sustained by the sud, by ignltioa in the 
interior of the earth, and by chemical reaction, including combustion and 
respiration. 

1843. The correctness of the inference, that conductors owe their con- 
ductive power to ethereal matter entering into their composition, has been 
insisted upon in my strictures on Farraday's speculation in some of the 
preceding pages. The facts admitted by this distinguished iuTestigator of 
nature's laws, gave to me a basis on which to rest an argument in favour 
of the esiatence of an imponderable cause of heat and electricity in metals, 
which seems to me unanswerable. 

1844. Agreeably to the hypothesis respecting which the preceding 
preparatory suggestions have been made, gasification is not due to a 
repulsive atmosphere of ethereal matter, severally appropriated to each 
ponderable constituent atom, but to an attraction for every such atom ex- 
ercised by the ethereal fluid, such as water ciercises toward sugar, quick- 
lime, salt, or any soluble substance. The ether attracts the particles of 
certain solids, and is of coiirse reacted upon bj them. The particles thus 
attracted naturally distribute themselves throughout it, at symmetrical 
distauees. Hence the law of Pettit and Dulong is verified, which, at least, 
holds good with all gasifiable atoms, that their capacity is inversely as 
their atomic weight. 

1845. The atomic weights of hydrogen, nitrogen, and chlorine being 
severally 1, 14, 36, when associated with equal volumes of the impondera- 
ble ether, they will have still the same weight. Eijual volumes will weigh 
the same as the atoms with which they are associated ; and the capacity for 
heat, being directly as the volumes, wOl be inversely as the weights, the 
calculation being the same, whether ether or caloric be the impondorablo 
principle to which they owe their gasification. By concurring with those 
chemists, who estimate the atoms of oxygen at 16, instead of 8, this gas 
will come into the same calculation. 

1846. When heterogeneous gase^ are confined within the same cavity, 
that they should not react with each other is no more wonderful, than that 
the same mass of water may at the same time hold different substances in 
solution, which may add to its hydrostatic pressure though they have no 
reciprocal reaction. 

1847. Sensible heat appears to be due to vibrations in the ether, kept 
up by the solar rays or central ignition within this globe. By the heat 
thus acquired the self-repellent power of the ether is augmented. When 
by refrigeration this source of repulsion is diminished beyond a certain 


;;■ Google 


OF BIATTER, MIND, AND SPIRIT. 379 

1 m t tte t ms o£ certain vapotizfilile particles, such as tliose of steam and 
th al nsitle yaponra, are approximated sufficiently to attract each 
othe nd nsequently coalesce and are condensed. 

1848 It f Uowa that light is due to imdidcUion,sc-asihh heat to vibration, 
and electricity to the polarization caused in the ethereal medium, wLQe 
either in a free, or in a eomhined state. Thus this luminiferoua ether per- 
forms the part heretofore attrihuted to latent heat or caloric in one state; 
in another state, that of sensible heat. 

SuggeUiom of MassoUi, respecfi^iff the. Nature of Matter. 

1849. Massotti has suggested that all bodies consist of two kinds of 
ultimate particles; that any two or more pirticles of one kind are repul- 
sive of each other, while any two or moie of different kinds are recipro- 
cally attractive. Hence atoms are formed, consisting of one atom of one 
kind and one of the other kind. Of course, were the opposite forces 
escrcised hy the heterogeneous and homogeneous equal, the resulting atoms 
would be neither attractive nor repulsive; but assuming the attractive 
power to have the ascendency, the hypothesis would account for the pro- 
perty of gravitation. 

1850. Let the suggestions of Misaotii be modified so far ■is that the 
extremities of each pait 1 wh th f n th th 1 nd e to be 
considered as endowed th ppo t p 1 t 1 1 th f th magnetic 
needle, as already sugg tlnthc. fmtt n n 1 Then in 
one relative position of th st m t th y m y b p ally pulsive, 
in the other reciprocally tti t 1 k w n f th i nd f matter, 
like the light-producing th f th und dtnt.myi d the uni- 
verse, and be condensed nap ul trlj g t qu nt ty w th n j ■f ct con- 
ductors : all this being pm dtmyb n dhwth waves of 
opposite polarization, wh h p oeeed fiom ppos telyeleet fl d, n other 
words, oppositely polarized bodies, cause the matter through which they 
pass to be decomposed or explosively rent. 

1851. As elsewhere stated, in large bodies of water, waves are the effect 
of transference of motion successively from one part of the mass to the 
other; the rolling of the wave causing nothing to pass but the motion, 
and of course, the momentum is invariably consequent to motion. ■ The 
waves by which sound is transmitted, are analogous; nothing being trans- 
ferred excepting a vibration of the air, capable of afiecting the tympanum 
of the ear with the impression requisite to create in the sensorium the idea 
of sound. 

1852. Any affection of matter, capable of existing in succesive parts of 
a materia! body, so that while the body is stationary, the affection passes 
from one part of the mass to others, may be considered as a wave of that 
affection, as reasonably as the affection called momentum is considered as 
producing a wave in water, when passing through it, as above described. 


,v Google 


380 OF MATTEK, MINT), AND EPIEIT. 

It is in this way that I consider that the term, wave of j 1 n M y 

be applied to an affection of matter consisting of an abn u 1 p n f 
tho poles of tho constituent particles, successively in J la w f 
atoms, so as to ptoeeed from one part of the series to th 1 

1853. And as two seta of waves, of ■which the hollows of one should 
correspond with the elevations of the others, wonld, hy being associated, 
produce an even surfece and equalization of the momentum in the aqueous 
liquid, so, in opposite polarities, there might be reciprocal neutralization 
by the coming together of the polarities, 

Oit Electro-polarity as the Caase of Electrical PJienomena. 

1854. Agreeably to the view which I take of the present state of our 
electrical knowledge, the phenomena designated under the name of elec- 
tricity are due entirely to a process which I designate as polarization, and 
the consequences thereof. Those attractions and repulsions which have 
been found to exist between pai-tieles of matter, instead of being an en- 
dowment of the whole mass of each particle, seem confined, as already 
suggested, to parficular terminations or spots, as we see this property on a 
larger scale in tJie loadstone or natural magnet. In the body long known 
under this appellation, the attractive power which it exercises is displayed 
usually at two distinct portions of ita superficies, which are called poles. 
"When a piece of steel wire is duly rubbed by either of these poles, it ac- 
quires a simUar attraotave polarity, which always appears at the estremities. 
When formed into an appropiiate shape and fieely suspended, such a wive 
magnet coastitutes the compass needle, liaving the wonderful and all-im- 
portant faculty of arranging itself withia a meridian plane, so as to be 
always nearly north and south; the same pole invariably pointing in the 
same direction. The poles are named from the quarter to which they 
point, one being called the north pule of the needle, the other the south 
pole. This involves that the nortli pole of the earth ifi-elf has nominally 
south polarity; the south pole, jioi-th polarity. 

1855. Whea two suspended compass needles aie sufficiently approsi- 
mated, it will be seen that between the poles which point in the same 
direction, there is repulsion; between those which point in different 
directions, attraction. When the dissimilar poles are brought into contact, 
they adhere; and if left cohering, will continue attached for any length of 
time; and while in that state of coherence, the magnetic power of the 
poles thus touching, being neutialized, disappearf,.* 

1856. If two needles be laid parallel, an interval between them, the ex- 
tremities being made to communicate by applying two wires of suitable 

" It ebonld ba nndcratood, that when two mognetio needlas are assooiatod by tlio eon- 
tfiot of dissimilar poles, (be estreme polas do not lose tbeir rangDeliEm, aithongli it nill bo 
more fbeble tivtin wten tlio needles ate indapendontlj sitnated. 


, Google 


OF MATTER, M]ND, AND SPIRIT. 381 

dimenaions, also parallel to eaoli other, ttc mognotio power will be neu- 
ti-alized, 

1857. It is inferred that analogous phenomena take place in the par- 
tioles of masses or surfaces Triioh are endowed with chemical afSnity or 
eyea cohesive attraction. 

1858. It is to the existence of the power by which these effects are 
caused, at opposite terminations, that bodies, in congealing or freezing from 
the state of liquidity, shoot into prismatic, oblong, regular forms, called 
crystals. This is illustrated in the formation of ice, which ia seen to shoot 
into such prismatic crystals. 

1859. When a pane of glass is so situated as to hare the focus of a solar 
microscope thrown upon any spot, so that the glass thus affected may be 
between the eye of an observer, and the microscope, any small crystals 
formed are greatly magnified. Hence if the focal space be moistened with 
a solution of certain salts, the solvent evaporating, crystaUiaation ensues, 
and is seen to form appropriate figures for each salt employed. It is owing 
to this property that when certain solutions of various substances are eva- 
porated, the soluble solid, as it is deposited from the solvent, arranges 
itself longitudinally; one atom attaching itself to the pole of another, until 
it creeps over the sides of the vessel in great quantity. The appearance 
of arboreseence in certain minerals is thus accounted for. When an amal- 
gam of mercury with silver is hung by a platina wire within a bottle of a 
solution of silver in nitric acid, there is formed a beautifiil branching of 
silver filaments. These are longer, though more slowly formed, as the 
solution is more dilute. In very dilute solutions I have seen prisma of 
silver of more than an inch in length, so delicate, that but for the bril- 
iiaccy of the surface they could not have been detected by the eye. 

1860. Farraday distinguished two tinds of polarity — ferro-magnetic and 
dia-maguetic. That above described as taking place between steel magnets 
is designated as ferro-magnetic. Dia-magnetic particles under magnetic 
influence, take position at right angles to that which would ensue from 
ferro-m agne tism. 

1861. This explanation being premised to enable the student to com- 
prehend what is meant by polarity, I will proceed to explain electric phe- 
nomena, according to the theory which I hold. 

1862. It is espeoted that the preceding discussions have prepared the 
reader to conceive that the atoms of all ponderable matter are endowed 
with two analogous hut opposite polar powers, which we terra polarity. 
That itt any two atoms the dissimilar polar powers tend to make them unite, 
the similar powers having the opposite teudeacy. That in any inert mass 
the opposite powers or polarities are in contact, and thus reciprocally neu- 
tralized, 

1863. It will be also underetood that the ethereal fluid which pervades 
i the means of illumination is assumed to consist in like 


;;■ Google 


382 OF MATTEH, mi^;d, and spirit. 

manner of atoms or particles wliinh are endowed with polarity, so- that 
when the opposite poles are in proximity, there is neutralization : repulsion, 
and disturbance, when similar poles are approximated. This heing pre- 
mised, the allegation may he intelligible, that when hodiea are electrified, 
tie poles of the oomponentmtoms or particles are conceived fo be deranged 
from their natural position of reciprocal neutralization, so that they react 
with exterior bodies, disturbing the poles of their constituent particles, 
and thus electrifying them by induction. 

1864-. This abnormal afate of disturbance, is conceived to be produced 
on glass or resin, or any electric, when duly subjected to friction. 

1865. Thus when in an electric machine a vitreous surface is rubbed 
by a leather cushion, the particles both of the leather and glass surfaces arc 
deranged from their natural state of reciprocal neutralization, and present 
their poles in an active state, and the glass surface, moving through the 
ethereal medium, (812) polarizes it as it passes, the ether resuming its 
normal state till the ethereal atmosphere over the conductor is reached. To 
that it imparts durable polarity; the mctaJIic superficies of the conductor 
taliing the opposite state, so that the charge is retained until the glass goes 
to and returns from the cushion, with a farther supply of polarity. 

1866. The charges of polarisation received by the plates at each suc- 
ceeding revolution of the plate or cylinder, is divided with the ethereal 
atmosphere over the conductor, and this process is reiterated till the fric- 
tioual power has accomplished its maximum eifect. Then the conductor 
is said to be charged positively, according to the theory of one fluid, and 
vitreously, according to that of Dufay, or the theory of two fluids. Mean- 
while, if the cushion communicates duly with an insulated conductor, a 
process perfectly u 1 is to th t just described has been charging that 
conductor, pari j)a. w th th ne first mentioned. By these means we 
have two excited h d nductors. 

1867. If, befo h g ng th conquerors, two scalps of hair he seve- 
rally situated ou fh m t w 11 b perceived that, as the charging proceeds, 
the hairs on each f th ][ e, and endeavour to keep away from each 
other. But, meanwhile, the whole of the hair on either is attracted by 
that on the other conductor. Moreover, on touching both conductors with 
any metallic rod, simultaneously, the whole of the excitement disappears, 
and the hwrs assume their normal position. 

1868. la producing this discharge, iron is not more efieetive than any 
other metal. It is, in fact, inown to be less competent for this species of 
conduction, than copper, silver, or gold. 

1869. When the conductors are excited they have a powerful effect 
upon gold leaves, suspended as in the electrometer 

1870. The state of the conductors, when excited, as described here, is 
said fo be static. Such a slate of excitement n di-^trngui^ihed as a slatical 
charge of electricity. 


;;■ Google 


OF MATTER, MIND, AN]) SPIEIT. S83 

1871- In tie next place, if w(, proouie a hor e shoe magriBt h\ it on a, 
table, cover it with a shtet of piper, and then sift over it iron filings, we 
shall see the shape of the magnet debneated upon the piper, fcy the filings 
an-anging themselves above its comers in preference But as the sifliag 
proceeds, the fllinga will be seen to extend themselves in filimenli, so as 
very much to resemble tbe electrified hair above described A tnft of tbe 
ferrnginoua filaments will be formed upon eit-h pole of the m't^net, each 
filament avoiding its neigbbonrs, as f*r as possible But while each fila 
ment, in either toft, avoids every other in its ippiopriite tiitt, the whole 
of the filaments in one, are attiaotel by those in the otht,r Thus, the 
chaj^es of polarity which cause ea.ch simibily polarized filampnt to avoid 
those in tbe same slate, induce those polarized ly one of the polps of 
the magnetj to attract such as ire polarized by the other pole of the 
magnet. 

1872. Here is, so fai, 1 greit inalogy between the phenomena of the 
polarization of filings and tbe polarization of the hair, above described 
But then there is this difi'erence excepting iron, cobilt, and nickel, theie 
is no metal which can by contact ■«ith the poles of a mi5jnet, neutralize 
the polarity by which the iron tlm^s aie iffectcd, ind even thpse mefah 
produce this result by a piocess, tho inverse of thit by whicb charges of 
statical electricity are neutralized In fact, the miguetic meta! far fiom 
acting as a discharger, acts as a keeper, and i jieee of uon, of a suitable 
shape, applied to the terminations of i hor^o shoo mignet, prevents the 
gradual diminution of the magneti'^m, which otheiwisc euiues Hiiice 
the name keeper is applied to it, as well as armature, deiived from the 
French. 

1873. It will be perceived that, in a stoe! luafjUct, the chiigcs a e sus 
tained at the terminations of a conductor Tvbich, as estimated bj Cavcn 
dish, conducts electricity with a velocity two hundred thousand times as 
great as water. 

1874. The charge of the coniuctor of the machine is Buperflcial, a gilt 
globe of glass holding ts good a chirge as a solid globe of metal, and, 
moreover, in this superficial charge, the ether ind the air paiticipate, un 
dergoing a polar affection, analogous to thit of the filings exposed to the 
influence of the magnet 

1875. On the other hand, in the use of the stctl magnet, the charge 
is internal, and, other things bein^ pijuiI, incrtases with the quantity of 
iron charged; neither the air nor the ethei piiticipite in f h s mignetic 
charge. There is no mode in which tbe charges of tho poles of i magnet 
can bo made to pass from one to the other, thiough any interposed con 
ducting mass. 

1876. The retention of the charge "^eems to be dependent upon a stite 
of the particles in which they are cipible f being deranged fnm their 
normal position ivith a ccrtiin degree of estnneous influence and can o ily 


;;■ Google 


384 OF MATTER J I\P iND SPIRIT. 

resume their natural relative p & tion \y i contrary application of a similar 
agent. Although steel differs from ion only in containing, as an ingre- 
dient, one-fiftieth of carbon, this gives it the higilj valuable property of 
hajTjeningi when suddenly refrigerated a icsult which may be aceounfed 
for by supposing that, in consequence of the sudden esposme to a pow- 
erful conducting medium, there is a sort of a jerk by which the particles 
loose from their midst an undue portion of their ethei'eal constituents, and 
cannot lecoyer their normal arrangement after the refrigeration. When 
this effect is reached to a maximum, the steel is so brittle as sometimes to 
fly into two or more pieces when left to itself. "When soft iron is sub- 
jected to the magnetizing process, it exchanges one polarity for the other 
with such speed, that, in some electro-magnetic instruments, this reversal 
is effected more than one hundred times in a second ; but precisely in pro- 
portion as the magnetism ia readily received, it is more readily lost. On 
the other side, when hardened to a maximum, steel can scarcely be mag- 
netized at all. Thus, to have a permanent magnet, we mnit employ the 
metal in a state of induration between the extremes. These facts tend to 
corroborate the inference that magnetism is dependent on the relative posi- 
tion of the ferruginous particles. It is presumed that the ferruginous par- 
ticles of which the filings consist indicate, by their direction, as seen ex- 
ternally, the direction in which the constituent particles of the magnet 
are situated beneath the metallic surface.* 

» Explanatioa of the Qahaiih Pile, BaUery, or Se:!cs.—yih n p f ttod 

silver aro so plaoect in &.e mouth as to hare theh' Bnrfacea sepaiat d by th t n"u iheir 

extiemides extending beyond it externally, on nlbwing &.a Intttr t t u h h til r, a 

melallio taete is perceived by the peraon whose tongue ia snbject 1 t th p Ihns 

oiydiied at the expense of the irater whiohesiata in the saliva. 

SupposB a pile of plates of sine and Bilver, or copper, ultetnati to b p t d oto 
couples by tbe interposiliou of moistened oloth; each plato will n d ton Ii its 

partner, oq the other side the moistened cloth. Every oouple of ilno and copper fleparnted 
by the cloth are sitnated as ths pair above deaoribad, wlien separated by the tongue, and 
are equally capable of giving a discharge whioii would bo sensibla to the taste, under those 
circamstanccs. The plates which ore in metnlUo contact have no anah dispoution to dis- 
charge, hecanae there is no moisture to act upon them, and no diversity of eleotrioal etute 
can be eieited on Bcoouat of their great conducting power, wUioh would Heutralize any 
auch exeitement as aoon as it conld bo oreated. The Burfaees separated by the cloth con- 
not discharge to each other, because there is no conductor extending from one to the other. 
But as the whole pile is a conduotoi: of eleotiioity, to discharge every pair enlcrlag into 
its oonatitueticy it is only neoe^aary to touch each end eimnltaneousl; with a good god- 
ductor— a wire, for instance. The whole series will then be discharged at once, and the 
energy of the discharge ia proportional to the number to be thus dischorgeil. There is an 
uncertainty and obseuritj as to the precise ratianaU of the effect thus obtiuned. There is 
as muoli difference about this as there ia about the nature of matter. It will not be espe- 
dient, therefore, in preaenOng a popnlar view, to enter upon that intricate question, and 
will be enough to state the laws aud facta which are admitted generally by men of aoienoo. 
It is nnivei-snlly admitted that, if each of the terminal plates, in Buoh • pile or series, have 
a plotina wire soldered or otherwise well connected with it, the olher ends of the wires 
extending into soma water, this liquid will be decomposed, and a similar decomposition 


, Google 


OF MATl'EE, MIND, AND SPIRIT. 385 

1877. If to a wire, connecting the poles of a galvanic battery, iron 
filings are applied, each ferruginous particle tocomes a little magnet, and 
displays exactly tbe same disposition to unite in filaments as lias been re- 
presented to take place when they aro exposed upon a sheet of paper, to 
the influence of a magnet supporting it. But while this affection is thus 
identical with that induced by the steel magnet, it differs therefrom, in its 
being as transient as the galvanic discharges to which it owes its esistenoe. 
These,' at the lowest estimate, are sufBciently rapid to go round the globe 
in two seconds; whence it may be conceived that the time taken to per- 
cur a few inches of wiro must be almost infinitely brief. Hence, although 
the filings continae in a state of magnetization so long aa the action of the 
battery is siistained, and the wire kept in due contact with the poles of 
the battery, it is only by a rapid reiteration of discharges, that this result 
is effected. 

1878. As the relative position of the particles composing the steel 
magnet has been inferred to be indicated by that of the movable filings 
which they influence, we may suppose the position of the particles compos- 
ing the wire, to be indicated by that which the filings fake by which it is 
encircled. These are situated always as if forniing tangents to the cir- 
cumference of the wire, and hence it may he perceived that the metallic 
particles, forming the wire, have been shifted from their norma! position, 
parallel to the asis, so as to take that tangential direction which the mag- 


1879. On one end of the wire being in communication with one pole 
of a voltaic series, on touching the other pole of the series with the other 
end of the wire, filaments of the particles previously situated parallel to 

may, fliroolly or indirectly, be effected of variona snbstancea held io solution by water, na 
well 03 Buhatanoes liquified, by heal. Moreover, when the same wire is made to form Iho 
meaue of discharge by extending from one terminal plate to the ot^er, it ncquirea the 
property of attracting iron fiiioga, and, eo long ns the disebnTge througli it is enatalaod, 
will causa the compass needle to arrange jtaelf always at right angles to tho wire. Cnder 
theae ciroumstaaees, according to the Franklinian theory, a currant of electricity pasees 
fron] ttie positive to the negative pole; itecai'ding to the theory of Dnfny, a fluid proceeding 
from each pole, they oombino in the wire. According to the view above given, two oppo- 
site waves of polorixallon pct.33, by which the melalhe atoms or parUcles aro ehtftod trora 
their natural poaicion, so as to act externally, aa already Elated. 

It is not, I believe, known to whom the world is indebted for the fundamental obserTa- 
tion in galvaniam, made, as has been mentioned, by the assiatanoe of the tongue and 
plates of silver and zinc. Subsequently, Galvani, probably without any reference to this 
phenomenon, ascertained some other oonseqnenoes of the reaction of the elementary pair; 
■ but to Voltawe owe the pile or aeries above desci'ibed. In wbaterer form Toltaio' series 
may have been subsequently oonslrticted, the main principles are the same, the reaction 
of chemical agents so arranged in suoeassion as to be productive of that intensity of dia- 
eharge, and powera of decomposition, to which allusion has been made. 

These hare latterly been called elootrolytio ; and decomposition, by the voltaic series, has 
bean called electrolysis, by Parraday— a beauSful, well-conceived, and esprcssire word. 
'See Essay on Electrical Theory, in the Appendi.i.) 


;;■ Google 


386 OF MATTER, MIND, AND SPiaiT. 

the axis, are jerked out oftho normal position with an Inconceivable quick- 
neaa, the discharge, however, not affecting successive parts of the length 
absolutelj at once, but successively; so that there is a time required foi' 
the process, however inconceivably minuto it may appear to us. The 
effect upon the filaments of filings, at the different ends of the wire, are 
perfectly simultaneous, and the effect analogous, but different in this re- 
spect, that the positive poles are presented externally at one end, the nega- 
tive at the other, so that, when the polarizing affections meet at an inter- 
mediate point within the wire, neutrality ensues. 

1880. Thus it will he perceived that no current passes through the 
wire, any more than the water which is seen to form a wove, on one side 
of a hie, passes with the wave which is seen apparently to proceed to the 
other side. Notoriously, in this case, nothing passes but the momentum, 
which is snccessively imparted to successive portions of the intervening 
water; so, in'the galvanic discharge, successive portions of the intervening 
wire are affected by the original disturbing jerks, of which the power 
passes from each porHon to that nest beyond it, just as the momentum in 
the case of the aqueous wave. 

1881. Upon these considerations I hold myself as warranted in calling 
the affections of the wire, as described, -maves of polariaation, not that the 
affection of the wire has the smallest similitude to that with which water 
produces waves, but that, in both cases, there is a successive communication 
of a property. It is well known that there is this analogy in the two oases; 
in either, opposite waves, on due meeting, produce reciprocal neutrality. 

1882. The neutralization of the electro-polarity induced upon the 
charged conductors (1867) by touching both at the same time by a conduct- 
ing rod, is effected in some degree analogously to the process in the voltaic 
discharge ; since waves of opposite polarization are produced at each ex- 
tremity, and, rushing toward an intermediate point, are neutralized by 
meeting. But th pol t a th ase of the conductors, as has been 
slated, (1874,) p ■fi 1 d tod not only to the surfaces of the 
conductors, but 1 k w t th d ng ether and air, and does not 
affect the pond bl t m f th unless the charge be too great to 
pass in this sup £ 1 m I th t case, being condensed upon the 
wire to a state f t t ty t ses a polarization of the atoms 
composing it, simil t th t f th Ita discbarge, though less durable. 

1883. From th p d pos t t follows that the conduction and 
insulation of th t p f J t ty which is excited by an electrical 
machine or othe f t 1 p xi ta upon the superficies of insu- 
lated masses, oi th t f th m mb nt particles of the air or ether. 
This frictional It ty 1 1 w i preferably over the surfaces of 
conductors, so th t th m t d f of glass, or other non-conductors, 
conveys it with rm f 1 ty It is notorious, that when the air is 
moist, electrical ml re par ly d But this cannot be in conse- 


;;■ Google 


HIND, AND SPIRIT. |J87 

quence of the moist air acting sa a conductor. Agreeably to some experi- 
ments which I made, a fog from liot water does not act as a conductor. 
Evidently, were & fog or a cloud a conductor, the air and moisture forming 
a ttunder cloud could not be electrified, so as to give the discharges wiick 
constitute lightning, 

1884. It ii3 well known that a tube will carry more lightning than a 
rod, of which the sectional area should compriso the same quantity of 
metal. Yet, when the wire is too small to carry a charge outside, it is 
acted upon intestinally and may be esplosiTely deflagrated. But while the 
existence of a film of moisture upon the glass legs of an electrical machine, 
may paralyze its power, to a powerful galvanic battery moisture ia well 
known to be essential. 

1885. If the poles of a powerful voltaic series, while highly charged, 
were severally to have a conducting oommunicatioa with the conductors 
of an electrical machine, it wonld discharge them so rapidly, that the 
most active working would not enable them to give a spark ; jet at the 
poles of the same series there might be charges accumulated which would, 
in effecting chemical deoompoMtion, heating, deflagrating wire, or inducing 
magnetism, be immensely superior to that created by a machine. 

1886. Farraday's reasoning and observations, founded on the idea that 
the only difference between galvanic and friotional electricity was that 
between quantity and intensity, led him to take up the idea that a grain 
of water with an equivalent of zinc would evolve as much electricity as 
sixteen millions of square feet of coated glass, charged by a powerful ma- 
chine of fifty inches in diameter, I am surprised that Farraday did not con- 
sider his premises erroneous, when he found them involving such startling 
conclusion s. 

1887. The source of this startling inference was, I think, as follows: 
Farraday entertained the opinion, that the only difference between voltaic 
and frietional electricity was that of quantity and intensity. He went so 
far as to intimate that this opinion would be entertained the more confi- 
dently as the electrician forming his decision should be better acquainted 
with the subject. I advanced what appeared to me unanswerable objeo- 
tJons to this conclusion, but such as were not deemed by him worthy of 
reply. Unduly confident in his postulate, Parraday first ascertained the 
greatest effect which could be produced by a certain number of turns of a 
powerful machine, with a fifty inch plate, in causing a deviation of the 
galvanometric needle, and then, comparing the quantity of zinc and water 
required to produce the same effect through galvanic action, by a rule-of- 
three statement the result above mentioned was obtained. In my view 
the error arose from overlooking tho fact that in the one case the whole 
discharge was exercised in polarizing the ponderable matter, while in the 
other only a portion of the discharge was thus employed, being only a 

y effect of tho polarization of the circumambient medium. Only 


;;■ Google 


dBB OF MATTER, MIND, AND SWEIT. 

that portion of the charge which waa forucd into an association with the 
ponderahle matter, had any eiFect on the galvanometric needle. 

1888. According to Gaziot's espei'imenfs, a Grove's battery of 320 
pairs would Dot give a sparli bofurc contact at any distance, although 
frtctional machines, proportionally powerful, have given sparks fit twenty 
inches. 

1889. Thus the laws of conduction and insulation, as respects the two 
kinds of electricity in question, are different; the waves of polarization are 
in the case of the galvanic circuit confined to absolute contact with con- 
ducting ponderable matter. It cannot pass through the electrical medium 
or the air by the diruptive process. When once a passage has been made 
for it, it may pass eonyeotively, carrying with it the polarinable matter, as 
may be seen in the arch formed between the poles of a powerful voltaic 
series after contact. 

1890. This arch cannot be formed between two metallic points, because 
none but those of a most fixed and infusible nature can support the heat 
produced. It is only between charcoal points that it can be created, because 
no other competent conductor is infusible at the temperature of its volati- 
lization. It is in fact only by the process in. question, that charcoal can bo 
volatilized }>£?■ se. It may be inferred that as those waves of electro-polarity 
which require the presence of ponderable as well as ethereal matter can- 
not pass over an interval without the assistance of ponderable matter such 
as is supplied by the coal. On. contai,t with each other, the points com- 
pleting the circuit are subjected to an intensity of the polarizing power 
which causes the carbon of the points, in the state of vapour, to become 
associated with the ethereal waves, and thus produces the flaming arch, 
which distinguishes the scene of reciprocal neutralization. 

Of Mind, as existing independently, and as distinguished from Matter. 

1891. TI d mt tn yt Ibg hltymnl 
and matte "Wnfrsn fjflydp nd 
likewise of mthntcalp twlbi f,t p t tua 
tity. Yet p t t b d t m d w th t d g nt t 
between whhthj t twthth lunt yprtnf 
those ent t wh th th b ly n t 1 m t 1 f wh 
several a d t th Ot h i t w h 1 dj t t 1 
forming at th mm bl tfttm tht t 

of course t t f th t f b p t 

1892. Af th d t 1 dy 1 t 1 t w 11 b th t 
there is g t d f& ulty vi g f tl t f t f m It 
endowed w tl p I ty 1 f ur w th tw t f tw 1 j, 
but oppo t J 1 bl f A 1 w m t 1 th t th 
are more th tf y h h t n 1 t y t m 11 I w d w th 
various d I fii t tb t tw m y t n t llj t th s 


,v Google 


OP MATTER, Mixn, IND spiaiT SB** 

elusion of a third. Tliia is designated us a caie ot decomposition, and 
may be exemplified liy the process in wliich. water is exploaivtly ler ni 
posed by potassium, with which the oxygen of the watei unites to the 
exclusion of hydrogen. When we sco that frim soyen piits, bj wcioht 
fh Idbt'ptfwt tltth t 

ss w h wh h tl g d w d th It f d fF 5 tw 

this 1 t d L h th p p t f tb w t y 1 t t h 

t f 1 w t th ga w th th m t f h 1 

wh w 1 th t tw 1 p ts by w ht f h lit i 1 f 
g 1 f hyd tit t th d aiy I d d 

wh f t w 1 th t th to f m tt wh b po 

fib pblftgt myt hm&almbt 

thbdfhll p be{,dt f figur th t w II b 

m f t tb t th [h m h t wt t w 11 m tte w 11 

th p w f tb t m tt b t I tt P tj t 

phdtl pwrs dppt t telt dthtw 

mttbjtt ywdthtt yp^ b t 

b y d I h 

lh9 Th b 1 f th p w d pi y d by m tt d t th 

It f tl be pi 1 1 b t t m tb b mg 1 t j t 

th lb t f th h I f m th g d t t th f t th t th 

J Ik d th wh t h 1 tit Ik with t b ^ 

Hit phdthp bjwbh hb fftd&l 

be th mp -f t f k wl dg sp t tb t t t f 
m tt d t re t t m to m t t th t tb b Id 

hb Ibkwd tbl tbdptt t f 

m d f wh 1 th pb m d j j- t q t aa it 

tl f m tt th d f t i I t th i 

rut hi 

1894. The great distinction between mind and matter is the presence 
of will on the one side, aad the absence of it upon the other. Ft's ineriise 
is the antipodes of will ; and if gravitation have any association with will, 
it will be that of the Creator; but in the inert mass actuated, it serves 
only to add to the evidence of incapability of self actuation. 

1895. Passion and reason, the parents of will, are properties as manifest 
as those which, surrounding a centre, give to it that idea of a central force 
which indicates the presence of material atoms, though it does BOt consti- 
tute them, as I have urged. 

1896. The existence of vii inertiis, gravitation, and chemical affinity, 

S It wars absurd to draw any conolnaion from this, U 
for beliovirg the miiaoles aEoiiboa to Moiiimmed or an 

poeitioB to the evldeneo of our seuBes; but, at ths some time, it forma no reat 
liesing, of ilaclf, hut is ratbor a clog npoa belief, when intoittTely aw^ened. 


;;■ Google 


390 OF MATTER, MIND, AND SPIRIT. 

is not more evident as properties of ponderiilile matter ttan reason and 
passioa and oonaec[uent will are of mind ; nor is will less evidently the 
offeprjng of reason and paasion, than momentum is of vis inertim and gra- 
vitation. The existence of these attributes of mind is as evident as is the 
existence of those of ponderable matter, and the incomprehensibility of 
their orig n or mode of per t on aho Id no more b an obstacle to belief 
in the former oa o than n the lattc 

1897. Kothng s n ore tloroaglly f lane tal and essential in the. 
doctrine ino loated by re elat on tha the omn p tenoy of the will of God. 
Accoiding to Sc I ture tl e wl ole heaven and ea th, and all that is in 
them, sprung nto cs tence onse |uon o of the fiat of the Deity, whose 
will, under the de^ ^nat n of overtuhng p ov dencc," is alleged to 
rc^ulatu e ery th ng von to the fal] of a pir ow o the advent of a pes- 
tilence It follows th t tl e STig^o t on wh h I have made respecting the 
powers ot mmd arc perfectly orthodos, so far as the mind of the Creator 
IS cmcemLd, and as, according to orthodoxy, man is made after God's own 
image, howevci humble and minute may be the being so made, his mind, 
so far as it exists, must be, within the sphere allotted to it, existing upon 

'an analogous footing to that of ibs author. The idea of all things coming 
from the creative power of God as the first cause, involves the existence of 
the divine-will power, of the first cause ; and conscfj^uently, beings endowed 
with on analogous will, must, so far as they have any available existence, 
he endowed with will-power, of which the potentiality may be more ex- 
tensive in spirits than in mortals. 

1898. It is because there is no other imaginable power which can be 
productive of the rationality of the universal creation, that forms the great 
argument for assuming the will of a reasoning Pcify to be the cause of 
causes. Vain were it to appeal to any irrational force under the name of 
odylic, or any other, to explain the divine attributes on which this argu- 
ment reposes. In like manner, the assailants of Spiritualism cannot find 
any nominal force, whether new or old, which can explain the rationality 
of the results which I have submitted to the public in this book, as coming 
from the minds of my spirit friends. 

Of Spirit mdependmitly, or as dintinguisked from, Mind and Mailer. 

189d. It has been alleged above, that three ideas must exist in the con- 
ception of every rational being; nihility, mind, matter. 

1900. Mind is distinct from mattef in its usual acceptation; but it also 
differs from nihility. There arc some attributes common to mind and 
matter; since they cannot be considered as nothing, they must both be 
something. Therefore, the word thing applies to either, and thing is 
sometimes received as synonymous with matter. But between these two 
kinds of things, mind and matter, we have an intermediate thing called 


;;■ Google 


OP MATTEE, MIND, AND SPIRIT. 391 

spirit, which is sometimes confounded witli miud. In ils ojigiBJl sense, 
this word merely denoted a tJiin or refined matter, such as air, wind, 
breath. In ohemifitry, it has been applied to every thing obtained hy dis- 
tillation, as, for instance, spirit of wine, spirit of salt, spirit of nitre, of 
vitriol, spirit of turpentine.* 

1901. Hence, by analogy, when the mind of a mortal, after death, was 
■ seen, or supposed to be seen, in a shadowy form called a ghost or shade, it 

was conceived to be the spirit or essence of the mortal body wbich it had 
inhabited. It was the body which the mind took or kept for its integu- 
ments after abandoning its perishable mundane casket, as the spirits are 
wont to call the carnal body. 

1902. It is difficult for tts mortals to conceive of mind without such a 
spiritual body. Yet, agreeably to information from my spirit friends, the 
substances of which the bodies, the country, and habitations of spirits are 
constituted, seem fo have the attributes of materiality no less than the 
substances of which the bodies, th,e territory, and the habitations of mortals 
are constituted. Their spiritual substances perform for them the same 
offices as our material substances do for ours, jet it is expedient to distin- 
guish them. by different appellations, and those cited here have been sane- 
tioned by custom at least as far as the time of St. Paul, or when these 
words in Genesis were first used : " The spirit of God moved on the sur- 
face of the water." 

1903. Hence, the words materialism and materialist have been made 
synonymous with unbelief or unbeliever in a future state of frpiritual 


1904. Spirit has also been confounded with mind or soul, or so asso- 
ciated that we speak of the spirit of a friend, when Jnlcuding to convey 
the idea of soul or mind. 

1905. The soul seems to be understood as the basis both of the passions 


^ In this l^t souse it is used us syrnfaymaas irith essence. By cbemists, latterly, spirit 
of turpentine is culled oil of tuipentiue. All the volatile oils obtoiued by delieata distil- 
lation, usually witl! water, like oil of twrpentiiie, oi-e oitlled eaaentiol oils or essences. 

As respects the employment of langnoge to express ideas when a, new view is origi- 
nated, there is a ohoioe of evils ; we are plaeed between Scylla and Chnryhdis. There is 

In either case there is a manifest disadTantage ; and the ([nestlon arises, shall we teaoh a 
new meaning for an old word, or present to those to whom we wonld conrey our idens a 
new idea with a new word to designate it ? The word matter, il will be found, has, in 
Webater'a diodonary, ten meaHings assigned to it ? Though in some of its acceptations it 
may be oensidcred as applicable to every thing that exists, so as to qualify space so far 
as to distinguish it from nihility. Nevertheless, it bos been used as distinguishing those 
aubstanees which are neither spiritual nor mental. The antagonism of spirit and matter 
in the words, " There la a spiritual body and a material body," is not warranted in ohe - 
mistiy, ainee the distillate or spirit evolved by distillation la a material body, however it 
may be more volatile or of less density than the capiil Hiortuiini left in the alombia 
or retort. 


,v Google 


392 OF MATTER, MIND, AND SPIRIT. 

and the reason,* uniting bott the power of tliinkiag and reasoning witt 
those of loving and hating, of henevolence and malevolence, so tiiat even 
the soul of Jehovah has been represented in Scripture as being actuated 
by jealousy, wrath, and vindictiveness. 

1906. According to infonnation from the spirit world, spirit is viewed 
as the clothing of the soul, and is not constant in its charaeteristioa ; but, 
on the contrary, varies with the plane which it occupies, so that its density 
is inversely as the rank attained. It is on this aceonut that the inferior 
spirits cannot rise above the level to which they rightfully belong. 

1907. The impression is conveyed that there is a state to be attained in 
the spiritual heaven, wherein the tenaity of the integnmente of tho soul 
are still more refined. 

1908. According to the speculation in which I indulged in a pevious 
page, a centve cannot differ from the nihility involved by the conception 
of a mathematical point, without a circumambient something, to which the 
difference is due, and, however dlf&cult to conceive in what way the attri- 
butes of a human soul are associated about the centre whence their in- 
fluence proceeds, this difficulty, having been shown to esist no less in the 
case of ponderable atoms, would be an objection to the existence of matter 
as much as of mind. 

Of the Soul, as duiiwjvislied from Mind and Matter. 

1009. The word mind is much used as synonymous with intellect or 
understanding, though it seems to me we consider it as more or less asso- 
ciated with the passions which actuate it. 'The word soul, on the other 
band, involves Ihe association of every thing which distinguishes a being 
capable of passion, and competent to reason, from a corpse. It is remark- 
able that, as spirits become more pure and intellectual, they should be 
alleged to become more refined in their spiritual integument*, thus remov- 
ing further from the mundane state, and becoming less capable of giving 
11 which violent luoveraents are witnessed. 


On ihe Odic, or Odylic, Fotcj: 
1910. There never was perhaps a more eloquent exhibition of that which 
has been designated as ratiocinatio verhosa, than in the appeals made to 
the odio force as the means of explaining spiritual manifestations. It 
may be inferred, from the speculation into which I entered, when treating 
of mediumship, (806,) that there is a spiritual light and spiritual electri- 
city, which performs for spirits in the spiritual world what our electricity 
and light does fov us in this world. It was pointed out that the term mag- 
netism had been applied to mesmeric phenomena rather in consequence 
of an analogy between them and those of electro-magnetism, than from 
any identity. To this spiritual electricity, mortals, in their spiritual organ- 


ic Google 


OP MATTER, MIND, AND SPIRIT. SOS 

ism, which coeaists willi the mortal body, during mundane life, are liable; 
beiDg unconficiously under its influence. 

1911. The phenomena of mundane light being aseribed to the undula- 
tions of an ethereal fluid pervading the visible universe, (1831,) and elec- 
tricity being ascribed to the polarization of the same fluid, so the spirit-s 
ascribe their elecincity and ilieir light to the undulation and polariaation 
of an analogous ethereal fluid. It is to this ethereal fluid of the spiritual 
world, that the phenomena called odic belong, as I conceive. We may 
speak of that ether aa the odic fluid, and we may designate the light and 
electricity which it produces aa odic light, and oiio electricity. 

1912, But the use of the term force, as applied either to the ether 
appropriate to this mundanB sphere, or to that which belongs more especially 
to the spirit world, seems to me erroaeous. Imponderable fluids may be 
instrumental to forces, but, per se, cannot have force. No imponderable 
material fluid can jaer se have any force, unless that of the reciprocal re- 
pulsion of particles, which causes their equable difi'usion and resistance to 
condensation. Electricity has less force in proportion as it is more isolated. 
In vacuo it passes more diffusely and with less noise in proportion as the 
vacuum is more perfect. The violence of electrical phenomena is always 
dependent upon the reaction of the ponderable masses upon or between 
which it acta. In proportion aa tho matter on which it operates is more 
favourable to ita condensation therein, or thereupon, the more violent is 
the deflagration or explosion which results. But in all the phenomena 
which have hitherto been recognised as the objects of strict physical esa- 
minatioB, vis inerttie has been indispensable to the exhibition of force, 
"Give me but where to stand, and I will move the world," was the ex- 
clamation of Archimedes ; but the conviction thus expressed, of the neces- 
sity of a resisting baas, is universally recognised. In other words, there 
can be no action without reaction, whether chemical, mechanical, or mus- 

It h pph dot t p p t oua to ap ak of an isolated 

mp nd bl phy I fl d p in f p When left to 

f If t w Id m t 1 k y oth n m te matter. Clearly, 

Itdt thptf h fluil ann t be shown in any case 

wh f 

I'llS E. hbhU^dth ht.nceorpnn pie to which the name 
odic has been given to be visible, but he did not adduce any instance of 
its aciing as a moving power so as to justify its heing designated as the 
odic force. 

1914. It is, however, unnecessary that those who admit the existence 
of an invisible ethereal medium through which, withonC mttsaular contact, 
or agency, efleota are produced by will, should concur in their opinions 
respecting the nature of tliat imponderable principle. The question be- 
tween those agreeing in the preceding principles, is whether it i.s to the 
will of mortals or to the will of disembodied spirits that such manifesfa- 


;;■ Google 


894 OP MATTER, MIND, AND SPIRIT. 

tions are to be attributed. I should think that no person wbo shall have 
read the cow muni cations whieb I liayc introduced into this work, as coming 
from my spirit friends, can ascribe those communications to the medium and 
myself, 'jhey must either suppose that there is a wilfa! manufacture of 
the wonderful and interesting information therein contained, Betting aside 
the test conditions, tbrougb which they are sanctioned, as unreliable ; or 
tbey must asciibe a wonderful fertility to the minds of the media and my- 
self, through whom they bave been obtained. 

1915. So far fi-om the ideas being obtained ftom my mmd, wbich pro- 
ceed from my spirit father, that he and I cannot come to one opinion on 
some points after mueb discussion. My father and sifter bave, bj leite- 
rated communication, as well established a conviction on my mmd of tbeir 
being that wbicb tbey allege tbemselves to be, as if a coriespondenoe bad 
been carried on witb. them for the same space of time, say eighteen months, 
wbile they should be residing in another part of the country. 

1916. But the whole superstructure built up by the most confident 
among the recent assailants of Spiritualism, Mahan, rests on the error 
already exposed in the case of its eommission by Dr. Bell. 

1917- It is assumed that spirits can never tell any ideas wbich do not 
exist in tbe minds of some persons present. Who was present when my 
spirit messenger conveyed to Mrs. Gourlaj tlie request to send her bnsbaud 
to bank to inquire when a note would be due? Again, when cards were 
selected without the denomination having been seen by any mortal present, 
how could tbe denomination of tbe cards be spelt out upon tbe alphabetic 
disk? 

1918. In bis work, Mr. Mahan assumes that tbe odic force is identical 
with that wbich is the immediate cause of the spirit manifestations. 
Agreeably to the considerations above presented, no imponderable material 
principle, such as the etber of the undulation theory is supposed to be, can 
be a force. Tbe only part which it can. perform is that of being a medium of 
force. The fluid of electricity was never assumed to be a moving power, 
neither according to the Franklinian hypothesis of one fluid, nor that of 
two fluids, according to Dufay. Without chemical or mechanical dis- 
turbance, they would be as still as the water in a pond during a perfect 

1919. There is evidently, however, in nature, an imponderable cause of 
motion, and of other changes, more complicate than simple motion, and, I 
believe, only one such cause, and that is mind. No one wbo attributes tbe 
creation to the mind of tbe Creator, hut must admit that the mind of the 
Creator and Ruler of the universe is tho moving power of tbe universe. 
It must also bo admitted that the mind of man, as a moving power, is very 
minute in comparison with that of its Author, or Source, but still resembling 
it so far as it reasons, and obeys the dictates of that reason, and causes 
matter to move in consequence of Its designs, desires, wishes, or emotions. 


;;■ Google 


OP MATTER, MIND, AND BPIRIT. 395 

1920. But if this will of the Creator esists, it must have some medium 
through wliich it reaches the objects which it influences, just as the ether 
of the undulationist ia neccssaiy to the tranamiasion of light. It is 
ttrough this medium, that gravitation exists aa one of tiie effects of divine 
will, Muce, although it appears to he a property of matter, it is inferred to 
be no less the effect of an habitual exercise of Tolition, than the erect 
posture presei-ved in man, by analogous means, unconsciously; whence, in 
Iiim, it ceases with sleep. The human will, within its eomparatively 
minute, humble sphere of action, must require also a medium analogous 
to that through which G-od acts; otherwise, how does a, thought so quickly 
move the toe ? While encompassed by its perishable tenement, there is 
a certaiu extent of this will-power enjoyed through the. laws of God ; 
but on casting off this envelope, the spirit, to be qualified for its new state 
of existeace, becomes endowed with more extensive power of the nature in 

1921. This power of the will exists and ia displayed in th mm 
phenomena, where the will of one individual dominates over th 1 n b f 
another. The power of the will of an individual over his own n 1 
not only in the usual movement, but in producing a rigidity t th mus 
clea of the arm or thigh, is of course notorious. But it ppeiis th t 
there are some persona morbidly susceptible of this rigidity at 1 ist 
preternaturaliy liable to it. Again, others have a will which u s m 
de^ce, preternatural ; hence, when such persons are in proximity, the oni, 
can aftuate the muscles of the other, and even modify the impe^sions on 
the hi am 

1122 Spirits, aa above stated, appeal to be cndowel with this will 
power to in extent proportioned to their necessities Heni-e it wia subatin 
tiatod by my spiiit fixther in the first instance, and by the connotation of 
spirits in the second, thit they, like the genius of Abddm s lamp, can 
create, lu then own world, the objects of rational desiio or fincy by •'.Jiat, 
but their will power oinnot directly move mundane bodies In oidei to 
efieot this, they must ivail fhemsehes of the coarser medium of the human 
will power, 1 1 which ease they act, as one m rtal may act upon the will 
power of anotl ti m jiosimity The willpower aura of humm beings 
and of bpirits seems to emanate fiom their organism lespectively, and, 
no doubf, connects duly with thit of fiod Hence, there is thus, thit 
association of the di\ine will, with all animated beings, which is su,; 
gested by the pipular theology Ihe will, and the aura through which 
it acts, varying with the oigamam with which it is associated, it requires 
a certain coincidence in the attributes of a spiut and a mortal, ki enable 
the foimer to use the aura of the latter to produce any manifestation of 
its will or ideas. But so far as this coincidence exists, the power ia 
That such coincidences have arisen, I conceive must be evident from 
careful consideration of the facts which I have recorded in this work. 


;;■ Google 


396 RELIGIOUS ERE0R5 OF MR. MAHAN. 

1923. The question is put by tlie Eev. Mr. Mslian, wliy the odio force, 
existing m nature, may not be productive of tte results ascribed to disem- 
bodied spirits? He overlooks the fact that no inanimate imponderable 
principle can be, per se, a moving power; that inanimate matter does 
not moTo itself. Then, as I understand, agreeably (o another phase, he 
inquires why may it not become an instrument to the minds of the mor- 
tals concerned? 

1924. In the first place, there are faofs within my experience which 
cannot be explained by any possible exertion of any mundane mind, were 
those concerned to concur in striving to accomplish the result. Thns, how 
would it be possible for Mrs. Gourlay and myself to have brougtt about 
the result of which an account has been given in the supplemental preface 
of this wort, and upon which remarks have been made in other pages ? 
It is utterly impossible that, by any imaginable process, Mrs. G-outlay, 
having no previous hint, could have become the instrument of my volition 
at the distance of nearly a hundred miles from Philadelphia, and when, at 
the time, she was intently engaged in receiving, as she alleges, a com- 
munication from her spirit mother to her brother, who was her visitor from 
his abode in Mme. 

1925. Again, it cannot be imagiued that things would be communi- 
cated .by my spirit father and others, of whicii I was ignorant when they 
were made. The same may be said of Mrs. Gourlay, as she knew nothing of 
the facts communicated to her, for me. Then, when the nan-ative of those 
facts was read over to the spirit, there were often things to be explained and 
views to be justified, in opposition to my previous impressions. Convers- 
ing frequently with Mrs. Gourlay, I know that she had none of the im- 
portant impressions respecting the spheres, which wore conveyed through 
her for ray edification. 


RELIGIOUS ERRORS OF MR. MAHAN. 
Proposition of Mr. Mohan. 

1926. "Evidence that the Scriptures are given by inspiration of the 
Spirit of God, as contrasted with the evidence, that the spirit manifesta- 
tions are from the spirits of raeu." 

1927. The Eev. Mr. Mahan, not satisfied with endeavouring to refute 
Spiritualism directly, devotes some pages of his work to the object of bear- 
ing it down by the weight of Scriptural superiority, both as to the evidence, 
and its moral tendencies. This renders the expediency of the strictures 
which I have made, or may make, on the other side of the question, unques- 
tionable. 


,v Google 


tOES OP MR. MAUAN. 39" 

1928. There are several truths, which I deem to be asiomatic, which 
are irreeoQoikhSe with the truth of Eevelation, (18 to 20.) Merely to state 
them is to refate Mr. Mahan'a allegatioa above cited. With readers who 
will not admit the axioms to which allusion is made, I must agree to differ. 
(See page 34.) 

1929. In the first place, I have represented it as a contradiction to allege 
that an omnipotent, omniscient, and prescient God can subject any thing 
to probation, (1380.) 

1930. In the nest place, I hold that an omnipotent Crod caniiot wish 
men to have any religion, without that object being effected. 

Will Di>t Miy event arrive 

For wliirfi both will and power atiiTe? 

Must not any reault otfiLin 

Which powor unites wilh will lo gnin? 

1931. I answer these Cjueries ia tho affirmative, and of course consider 
the theology of Eevelation as involved in a contradiction, so far as it 
represenla an omnipotent and ^prescient God as wishiTig amy creed to he 
adopted which has not been adopted. 

1933. As a corollary to these axioms, it results that God never has per- 
formed any miracle for the purpose of conveying a knowledge of tlie true 
religion ; simply because all that have been alleged to have come from 
God have only produced religious discord. Of course God, foreseeing 
the failure of those miracles, would*not have resorted to thom. 


1933. This I answer affirmatively. The truth of the affirmative is as 
olear to my mind as any of Euclid's axioms, 

1934. Another conclusion I consider as inevitable ; that no document 
can be substantiated by the facts of which it furnishes the sole evidence, 

1935. In this predicament I place the Bible, the Koran, the Shaster, 
or Veda, and the Zendavesta, or any religious record of antiquity. 

1936. Manifestly, a record made by man can have no higher authority 
than that of the men whose testimony it records, and those by whom it 
was recorded. 

Of the origin, of the Books of Moses no higher evidence exists, accord- 
ing to the testimony of tlie Bible itself, than that of art obscure priest 
and a fanatical kint/. 

1937. If we are to judge of the Jewish priesthood by the example 
afforded by Samuel, we have no more reason to trust a Hebrew pontiff 
than a Romish pope, (1091,) Bishop Hopkins has sufficiently shown 
how far priests are to he trusted, (1296.) What would be said of any 
book, alleged to be due to Divine inspiration, if it had, agreeably to its 
own authority, an origin no more reiiable tian the allegation of a priest 


;;■ Google 


398 KELioiooa erroks of mr. mahan. 

that it had been found in a temple or church, there hcing no other evi- 
dence of it3 not having been forged by the priest, or his accouiphces, 
than his own allegation? What better evidence would there be of the 
sacred origin of such a document, than there is of the Book of Mormon — 
the Bible brought forward by Joe Smith? Yet the following quotation 
will show that there was no Bible in use in Judea in the reiga of Josiah, 
350 years after the reign of David, and just before the Babylonian cap- 
tivity; and that, in oonse [u n e d I t y had to a great extent superseded 
the true ■worship - 

1938. Under these eir m t n th 1 igh priest alleged a copy of the 
Bible to be found, and ae t 1 1 y a b to the king. This monarch had 
lived in such ignorance f th xi ten of this holy code, that he was 
thrown into a state of such d p p n t n for the sinful omissions arising 
from his ignorance, as t nd h 1 thes by way of expressing his sor- 
row. Moreover, orders w e f thw th vea to have the abuses abated, 
which had been introduc d I ly th agl ignorance. 

1939. I view this evidence of the highest importance at this time, when 
suoh men as Mahan, and the anonymous author of the parodied letter, 
(1182,) are appealing to the Bible as the inspired word of Giod, and thus 
making God sanction a catalogue of atrocious crimes and indecencies, and 
when this imposture is to sit as an incubus on those truly mocal impres- 
sions which the blessed spirits of the immortal Washington and other 
worthies, as well as my honoured father, would communicate for the ame- 
lioration of the religion and morals of mankind. I repeat, that I consider 
it of immense importance that attention should be called to the question- 
able foundation on which these pretensions to inspiration are erected. I 
shall, therefore, not only quote a portion of these pretended words of God, 
but also that part of a chapter in the Book df Jcaephua which narrates 
the same all-important occurrence more fully and satisfactorily, though 
giving the same evidence essentially. 

Scrij/tural Account of the Finding of the BooJcs of Moses hy MilMah, 
the Sigh FHest. — 2 Chron. xxxiv.; 2 Kings xxii. 

1940. " And when they brought out the money that was brought into 
the house of the Lord, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the 
Lord given by Moses, And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the 
scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the Lord. And 
Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan. And Shaphan carried the book to 
the king, and brought tho king word back again, saying. All that was 
committed to thy servants, they do it. And they have gathered together 
the money that was found in the house of the Lord, and have delivered it 
into the hand of the overseers, and to the hand of the workmen. Then 
Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath given 
me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king. And it came to pass 
when the king had heard the words of the law, that he rent his clothes. 
And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikaw the son of Shaphan, and 


;;■ Google 


RET.IOIOUS ERILORS OP MR. MAHAN. 399 

Abdon the son of Micah, and Shapban the sorihe, and Asaiah a servant 
of the king's, saying, Go, inquire of the Lord for me, and for them that 
are left in Israel, and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is 
found; for great is the wrath of the Lord that is poured out upon us, he- 
cause our fathers have not kept the word of the Lord, to do after all that 
is written in this hook. And Hilkiah, and tbey that the king had ap- 
pointed, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the sou of 
Tikvath, the son of Easrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in 
Jerusalem in the college :) and they spake to her to that effect. And she 
answered them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell ye the man that 
sent you to me, Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this 
place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the curses that are written 
in the book which they have read before the king of Judah ; because they 
have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they 
might provoke me to anger with al! the works of their hands; therefore 
my wrath shall be poured out upon this place, and shall not be quenched. 
And as for the king of Jndah, who sent you to inquire of the Lord, so 
shall ye say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel concerning the 
words which thou hast heard ; because thy heart was tender, and thou 
didst humble thyself before God when thou heardest his words against 
this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself be- 
fore me, and didst rend thy clothes, and weep before me ; I have even heard 
thee also, saith the Lord. Behold, I will gather thee io thy fathers, and 
thou shalt be gathered to thy gi'ave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see 
all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabiteints of 
the same. So they brought the king word again. Then the king sent 
and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem, And the 
king went up into the house of the Lord, and al! the men of Judah, and 
the inhabitants of Jei-uaalem, and the priests, and the Levites, and all the 
people, great and small: and he read in their ears all the words of the 
book of the covenant that was found in the house of the Lord. And the 
king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the Lord, to walk after 
the Lord, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his 
statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul, to perform, the words of 
the covenant which are written in this book. And he caused all that were 
present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fa- 
thers. And Josiah took away all the abominations out of aU, the coun- 
tries that pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that were present 
in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. And all hia days 
tliey departed not from following the Lord, the God of their fathers." 

Account of the Finding of the Books of Moses, by Josephus. 
1941. " The repairs of the temple being completed, and all expenses 
defrayed, Hilkiah, in conformity to the king's orders, took out tlio money 
for the purpose of converting it into vessels for the use of the temple; and, 
upon removing the gold, happened to discover the sacred books of Moses. 
This he took out and gave to Shaphan, the king's secretary, to peruse, 
who, upon reading them over, went to the king, accompanied by Hilkiah, 
who told him that he had eseouted all his eommauds relative to the repa- 
ration of the temple, and at the same time presented the book to him in 
great form, assuring him what it was, and where they had found it. 


;;■ Google 


400 REIIGTOU^ FEPORS Or HR. MAHAN. 

1942. " The king oidKred Rbaphan to read a part of tlie contents, which 
being done, he rent his rohi^f, in dieid of the heavy curses rlenoiineed 
against a wicked geneiation In the heieht of his affliction, he desired 
the secretary, with Hilkiah, and se\eial priests who were present, to go to 
the prophetess Huldah, the wife of Shallum, a man of emiaenoe, and unite 
their endeavours to prevail upon her to Biaie intercession with God for 
pardon toward himself and his subjects. He told them there was great 
reason to apprehend that the vengeance of Heaven would fall npon the 
present generation as a punishment for the iniquity of their prc^nitors, 
and particularly their neglect and contempt of the laws of Moses; and 
that, without obtaining a reconcilialion, they should be dispersed over the 
face of the earth, and terminate their lives in misery. 

1943. "Hilkiah, with those who were appointed to accompany him, 
immediately repaired to the prophetess, and having related the cause of 
the king's affliction, and his earnest desire of her intercession with Heaven 
in behahf of him and his subjects, she bade them return him this answer : 
That the sentence already pi-onounced was not to be recalled on any suppli- 
cation or intercession whatever. That the people were to be banished from 
their own conntry, and punished for their disobedience with the loss of all 
human comforts. That the judgment was irrevocable, for their obstinately 
persisting in their superstitious and idolatrous practices, notwithstanding so 
many warnings to a timely repentance, and the menacing predictions of the 
prophets, if they persevered in their abominations. 

1944. " This unchangeable decree was to show, by the event, that there 
is a just and overruling Disposer of all things, and the predictions which 
he delivered by the means of the prophets will be infallibly verified, as 
the certain indications of bis whole will respecting mankind. The pro- 
phetess added, ' Tell the king, however, that, in consideration of his own 
pious and virtuous example, the judgment shall be averted from the people 
during his days; but that the day of his death shall be the eve of their 
final destruction.' 

1945. "As soon as Josiah received this message from the prophetess, he 
immedbtely despatched messengers to the several cities within his domi- 
nions, commanding all the priests and Levites, and men of all ages and 
conditions, to repair with the utmost speed to Jerusalem. These orders 
being obeyed, and the people assembled, the king went to the temple, 
where, in the bearing of the whole multitude, he caused the laws of God, 
as confained in the books of Moses, to be distinctly read; after which he 
bound himself and the people, with their universal consent, by a most 
solemn oath, strictly to observe every article contained in the sacred books, 
respecting the laws and religion established by Moses. This solemn oath 
was followed by prayers and oblations for the divine blessing and protection. 

1946. " The king strictiy enjoined the high priest to take a particular 
account of the plate and vessel in the temple, and to cast out so many of 
them as they should find to have been dedicated by any of his ancestors to 
idolatrous services. Those that were found were reduced to dust, and in 
that state thrown into the air. All the priests were likewise put to death, 
that were not of the flock of Aaron. 

1947. "Having effected this reformation in Jerusalem, Josiah made a 
progress throughout his whole dominions, where he destroyed all the relics 
of Jeroboam's superstition and idolatry, and burnt the bones of false pro- 
phets, npon the very altar which that impious king had set up. Of this 


;;■ Google 


RELIGIOUS EEEORS OP MIt. MAHAN. 401 

we have taken notice before, as well as the intervention, of the propket, 
witt a prediction in the hearing of the multitude, at the time when Jero- 
boam was offering sacrifice, ' That one of the race of David, Josiah bj 
name, was to do this.' The prediction was verified, by tlie event, three 
hundred and fifty-one years after it was foretold. 

1948. " So ardent was the zeal of Josiah for extending tlie great work 
of reformation, that he went in person to several of the Israelites who tad 
escaped the Assyrian bondage, ia order to disauads them from continuing 
in superstition, and prevail with them to embrace the pure religion of their 
forefather's, according to the long established custom of their country. Nor 
did he rest here, but caused the towns and villages to be searched for the 
discovery of any remains of idolatrous practices that might lie concealed. 
The very figures of the horses over the porch of the temple, which their 
forefathers had dedicated to the sun, and all the monuments to which the 
people had ascribed divine honour, were, by his special order, taken away 
and destroyed. 

1949. " Having thus purged the whole nation from idolatry, and fully 
restored the true worship of the one only and true God, he called an as- 
sembly of the people at Jerusalem, for the purpose of celebrating the 
pasaover, the time for that festival being near at hand. On this occasion 
the king gave out of his own store, for paschal sacrifices, thirty goats, a 
thousand lambs, and three thousand oxen. The heads of the priests pre- 
sented to the others of the saeerdotai order two thousand sis hundred 
lambs, and the chief of the Levites gave to their tribes five thousand 
lambs, and five hundred oseu. A solemn sacrifice was made of these 
victims, according to the precepts of Moses, and the ceremony was per- 
formed under the direction of the priests. From the time of the prophet 
Samuel to that day, there had never been a festival celebrated with equal 
solemnity ; for this had the allowed preference, because the whole was 
conducted in strict conformity to the very letter of the laws, and the pre- 
cise mode of their forefathers. Josiah, after the accomplishment of a work 
of such moment and importance to the nation in general, enjoyed his go- 
vernment in honour, peace, and plenty, till he closed his life." — Book 10, 
page 153. 

If t7i.e Pentateuch had heen j>reviously &novm to the Jexos, it is incredible 
that it covM have become obsolete and forgotten prio7- to the alleged 
discovery of it in the Temple, in the reign of Josiah. 

1950. After the Pentateuch bad been viewed as tho word of God, made 
known to a people as their peculiar inheritance, lifting them, in their own 
estimation, above the rest of mankind, as God's chosen people, this code 
being the solo authority for their bloody and rapacious course toward their 
neighbours, is it credible that such a document, had it ever existed, could 
have become both obsolete and forgotten?* Yet we have no alternative 

* It is a remiiriablo faot that, althongh in later times tbe Jews have Tieen so froqnenllj 
named after Abratam, laaac, and Jacob, it dons uot appaar to haro boon oustomarj dnriug 
the time which intorvoned between the anpposed era of Moaas and that of the finding of 
tho Pcntatenoh in tbe temple. 

This serves to show that tho Pentateuch ia a fahrioation of the priesthood and King 
Josiah. 


, Google 


402 RELIGIOUS EUROKS OP MR. JIAIIAN, 

but to admit this absurdity, or to conclude that the Bible has no better 
authority than tha Book of Mormon ; the one being no more than the 
other the work of a designing priesthood and would-be rulers. 

1951. What credit would be given to any work having no better autho- 
rity for divine origin than that of the allegation that some pope had found 
it ia a cathedral or in the Vatican, and had sent it to some monarchical 
bigot as the mislaid testament of the Almighty, given by inspiration 
through some ancient predecessor of his holiness ? 

1952. It may be difficult to conceive that Hilkiah and his associates, in 
writing a book, as proceeding by inspiration from Jehovah, could have 
fabricated any facta so derogatory to an immaculate Deity as those men- 
tioned under the authority of Moses. How impious must have been their 
conceptions, to represent him aa authorizing them to borrow trinkets of the 
Egyptians, in order to purloin them; the sanctioning the cold-blooded 
murder of three thousand people for religious error ; the slaughtering of 
whole nations, even to their suckling babes, as in (he case of the Midian- 
ites, Canaanites, and Amalekites, with the setting aside virgins for the fatfi 
from which the Roman Virginius relieved his daughter by bis dagger ! 
It ia dif&cult to conceive that an idea, so derogatory of God, could have 
been entertained by his chosen people. Yet, on the other hand, inasmuch 
as they were written, there must havo been some mind so impious as to 
have originated them ; and it may be a less wonder that such fabricators 
should have existed in a crael and barbarous age of the world, than that, 
in the present age of superior morality and civilization, they should find 
endorsers in the professed ministers of the Being whom they have thus 


1953. Mr. Mahan alleges: "Every reader will agree with us in the 
assumption that the incorruptible Grod has never jperformed and never wOI 
perform a miracle in attestation of that which is unreal or untrue. A 
religion really and truly attested by divine miracles must therefore be 
admitted to be true." 

1954. To this very admissible truism, I add that an omnipotent and 
prescient God could not have any occasion to perform miracles in attesta- 
tion of any thing, since, by the premises, his will must be carried out 
without miracles. That any thing should, even for an instant, be contrary 
to his will, is inconsistent with his foresight and omnipotency. It would 
be a miracle tliat any thing counter to his will should exist. 

1955. The next postulate of Mr. Maban is : "Mj religion attested as 
true hy divine miracles caw he fahe." 

1956. Was this proposition over impugned ? No one would resist the 
unqueslaonable dictates of God, however conveyed, whether by miracles 
or any other means. The question is not whether a religion attested hy 
divine miracles should he accredited, hut whetJier there were ever any mi- 
rae?es, attesting any religion, performed j and if so, what religion Aas 


;;■ Google 


BEUGIOUS EHKOKS OP MK. MAHAN. 403 

the peculiar 'nierit of having ieen thus altestcdf Millions, who believe 
ia other religions, deride those miracles of revelation which Mr. Mahan 
would adduce; and Protestants do not admit many which the Etjmiah 
Church sanctions. For one, I deny that any mirjfle has ever heen per- 
formed with the view of attesting any religion whatever. No mirack- 
could be aecessarj to attest the will of Omnipotence uny more than to 
enable a man to wave his hand. But, admitting that it ever has been ne- 
cessary, no miracle has ever heen resorted to for the purpose in question, 
since none has answered the desired end. This would not have been the 
ease had miracles been resorted to hj prescient omnipotence. 

1957. A miracle, as defined by this author, oa page 345 of his work, is 
an event "vjliose existence and characteristics c»n he accounted for hut hy 
a reference to the direct and immediate iiiterposition of creative pmoer, as 
their exclusive cause." 

1958. I reassert that, where omnipotence and prescience are concerned, 
such interposition could, in no case, be requisite. The miracle would he, 
that there could be any thing so contrary to omnipotent will aa to require 
any miraculous interference to set it right ! 

1959. Instead of assuming, with orthodoxy, that our heavenly Father is 
gi(i(e omnipotent, spirits hold that his powers are only such as this magni- 
ficent and almost infinite wnivGrse involves j consequently, there ia no 
necessity on their part to admit that every thing must be exactly as God 
wishes it to be. Thejarenot ohl ged to consider h m as allowingra seh e ous 
ignorance, sin, and misery (o es st wh le by J. fiat he eoul \ eorre t the n 
and still less are they involved n the necessity of supposio" thit wh 1 
able to make every th ng pc Ject he from cl oi e maL.es them in perfect 
and yet has had to resort to drown nj, hs creatures by a greit flool 
and subjecting whole nat ona to degradi g captiv (y luthor z n^ on 
nation to massacre another even to eich s ckl ng 1 al e f r wrongs done 
centuries before. 

1960. By Spiritual sn the De ty s ep eseuted as> op at ng I y gen lai 
laws, from which, consistently with his attributes, he cannot deviate, having 
to. perform no miracle to attain his ends; and that through these laws ho 
is incessantly acting for the good of mankind; and the whole universe ia 
progressing under his benign controOing influenee. 

1961. Thus we have the two systems, that of progression last men- 
tioned, and that of probation above objected to ; which last, being in diame- 
tric opposition to aa asiomatic truth, is, on tbia account alone, manifestly 
absurd. 

1963. But, admitting that mincles could, without inconsistency, be 
supposed to ho resoited to by piescieat omnipotence, m order to produce 
or prevent some consequence ot a general law, in the making or carrying 
out of which an all wiso and all poweiful being inconsistently displays a 
want of wisdom and foresight, it must be perfectly clear that a prescient 


Google 


404 RELIGIOUS ERaORB 01' MR. MAHAN. 

beiog would resort to such miracles as would produce the desired effect; 
not such as would be onlj psu-tiaJIy seen or believed, and would become a 
new source of discord. Omnipotence could certainly devise miracles 
■which could be seen and be believed in by all men; and which would so 
impress tlieir minds, as to malie them believe in what they should hear 
and see. By a single fiat, God, if as omnipotent as represented in Scrip- 
ture, could make all his people of one mind. He would not send them a 
" &word to separate father from cliild, mother from daughter, mother- 
in-law from, daitgliter-in-law," and to make the subordinates of each ho^me- 
Itold rise in rehellion against their master. A prescient God would not 
perform miracles of such doubtful character as, for want of evidence, to 
oblige one of the miracle-makers to enforce a belief in them by treacher- 
ous and cruel a^assination, as did Moses. God would require no evidence of 
his mira^iles but such as could be recorded in the minds of believers. He 
would not have the records of his will so situated, as to be liable to be con- 
founded with the fabrications of priestcraft. If devils were to be cast out, 
he would not have drowned a herd of swine, merely to give those immor- 
tal miscreants a ducking. 

1963. So far are the miracles narrated in the gospel from commanding 
my credence, that the account of them proves to me, that the Evangelists 
were men without discretion, in recording any thing so absurd and incre- 
dible, and so tiseless to the main, object, of giving a Jcnowledge of God, 
and of the means of reaching a future happy state. 

1964. How absurd to represent God as performing miracles remotely 
and indirectly bearing upon his object, instead of exercising his omnipo- 
tent power universally, effectually, and at once ! 

1965. If God were to adopt any miraculous means to mate his will 
known, they would not be such as would fail in attaining their end. 
Wone but an idiot would resort to measures foreknown to be incompetent 
to the object for which they should bo devised. As no miracles that have 
been alleged to have been performed have been productive of general con- 
viction of the truth of the creed which they have been alleged to sup- 
port, it follows that they could not have had a divine origin. A prescient 
God would not have resorted to incompetent miracles. 

1966. This reverend author is likewise of opinion that nothing but 
miracles can bo appealed to as evidence of the divine origin of Christianity 
or of any other religion. 

1967. When miracles are appealed to by different sects, in support of 
their conflicting pretensions, it must result that, if religion ia to be founded 
only on miraclesj that religion only can be recognised as true whose mira- 
cles are so pre-eminently evident as to abrogate all others that conflict 
■mtli it. But it is notorious that the miracles brought forward by each 
sect are denied, if not ridiculed, by others. Appealing to miracles is, in 
fact, appealing to the human evidence on which they depend. In like 


,v Google 


RELIGIOUS EILROaS OF MR. MAHAN. 405 

manner, any religion wtich rests on aasumod inspiration, rests, in fact, on 
the evidence proving that the inspiration claimed ever took place, 

1968. But are we to helieve in all miracles which have been alleged 
by men to have happened ? Are we to believe any hook to ho inspired, 
because men, who contradict each other, alleged it to be inspired ? and if 
several books are alleged to be inspired, how are we to choose between 
them? Is a man's choice of these books to be governed by his educa- 
tion ? If br gU p " T k j ' h t b I' th t th K is th 
word of God f Oh te d ra th g p 1 li all wh urr d 
him were tottt p tlbtht h J thwdf 
God, is he to hm 1 1 th d t t h t hi w j 1 
ment, and es wh th th B bl f tl Oh t d th 1 
on which it r ts t m ! ii ly t b t th th K d th 
miracles on wh h t t ? B t f f h ^ m d b th f th 
works, he find th t th m 1 h h th y t b th 
ontirelj depc d t h m t f y I th t th t t ra y I 
puted on one d by th M h mm 1 d th tl by th (.h 
tians, and th t h p fy ly dm t h m ra 1 t 1 tr as h 
monize with h w 1 htmnltUbypf tr« 
rather tend t dL d t th t b t th w th wh 1 
they are asso ted — w U t th t t Uy tl t tb b 1 f 
in miracles th ult f 1 t 1 th It f bel f 
in miracles? 

1969. Aa Ig Umybp d It t yt 
dioary manifest t &j t 1 S 'j y w li b li th t 
the spirit hand (1513) h b d f It t K t bl hm t 
Ohio, unless previously a convert to Spiritualism. Thus he does not 
become a spiritualist by reading the account of that manifestation, but 
believes the manifestation because he has been converted to Spiritualism. 
Did the truth of that manifestation rest upon the evidence of only one 
set of eye- witnesses, even spiritualists Lad not believed ia it. As iijira- 
clcs have ever been alleged to have been seen only by very few persona, 
and have never been of a nature to be seen by a succession of observers, 
I cannot conceive why any man, in any ago or time, could be reasonably 
expected to display a credulity, the inverse of that now exhibited, as 
respects this spiritual manifestation. Scarcely any person, without being 
an eye-witness of the fiict, has been brought to believe that tables move 
without human contact. By recurrence, the reader may perceive that in 
my lett-er of February 3, 1854, I use this language in my letter to Mr. 
Holcomh; Youielieve that tahla moiie withovi contact, hecame you have 
seen, them so moved ; I am sleepiical, hecavse Ihave never seen thevn, moved 
without contact, though I have been at several circles, (698.) 

1970. When I stated to my friend. Professor Henry, the experiment 
illusfraffid by plate 3, with the utmost precisioa, made twice on two dif* 


;;■ Google 


405 RELIGIOUS ERROaS OF JIR. MAIIAN. 

feront evenings, he said : " I would believe you as soon as any man in the 
world, but I cannot helievo ttat." Yet tlio result of that experiment was 
nothing more than the fact of bodies moving when uninflueneed by any 
apparent mortal agency, accompanied by a demonstration of a governing 
reason J a result which has been established again and again by myself 
with the greatest precision, and by many other investigators. Evidently, 
if this had never been repeated, it would have been treated as a mental 
haJlacination on my part by my comrades in science and all the rest of the 
community. 

1971. Such is the difficulty of inducing credence, in enlightened minds, 
of a,ny thing which is inconsistent with those laws of nature with which 
they have become familiar. Clearly, in the present advanced state of the 
human mind, no miracles would be believed on hearsay testimony. 

1972. It seems as if facts, inei-edible at first view, are always believed 
when Ihey ore confirmed by being seen by independent and disinterested 
and intelligent observers sufficiently often, and under such modifications, as 
to make all such observers believe in them We are willimr to believe in 
a mysteri usftas ^9 bttwh 1 ted If I ra y 
judge by th d 1 ty w th wh h mj b t ''p t ilism h 
been met by th 1 h d p ly dim h bl I h 11 
deem it utt ly p bl m g t 11 g t w 11-el t 1 pe pi f (h 
present dyt 1 Mf Itlml d pf 
ignorant,] td t th 1 fii Ity t bt 1 11 b t 
least as gruit 

■ 1973. W h lyPfb wf mltbp 

furmed as w d f 1 d ltd tl m t d S [tm 

no one wo UL. y th g f th d tf ( d pt th 

by whom th y m \^i be Wit d t w uld ly th t f 

them to b did th pir t list w h 1 1 wh fir t rt d 

their belief jtlmft-t I d thf thtmral 

should be bel d by 1 ht dm ty 1 1 f w 1 1 h t 

be instillelly d t pported by t t d b t 

enlightened m t m 1 w Id b b 1 d b t th wh 1 

should cot w th th d t 

1974. rh t ^1 m 1 m t d th ^ p ^ 1^ ^ t 

to throw light upon the alleged object of Christ's mission. Tho object of 
their performance was mainly to prove his supernatural power to those 
who should believe in them, and thus to cause him to be accredited as a 
missionary from G-od. So far from their ever having had an effect of this 
kind on my mind, gospel miracles tended only to destroy my coafidence in 
the veracity or discretion of their narrators, upon the same principle that 
spiritualisis have lost weight with their inteUigent friends by mentioning 
manifestations which were considered by these as incredible. 

1975. I can foresee a great triumph for spiritualists, sooner or later, in 


,v Google 


RELIGIOUS ERRORS OF UH. BIAIIAN. 407 

tlie world to come, if not ia ttis; but this result wili not flow from the 
oouversion of tlieir steptical friends to a belief in the manifestations which 
may have been viewed by the narrators, as described. The conversion of 
skeptics wiU arise from their own observation, with the conouiTent testi- 
mony of many reliable witnesses, all tending to the verificatioa of anaJo- 

1976. The miraoles of Scripture never have had nor never ean have 
this species of corroboration, and of course will make but little progress 
among people educated under conflicting impressions. In this age of 
bigotry in favour of all educational mysteries and extreme skopticism as to 
innovations, the last thing which could obtain credence would be miraoles 
of tbe nature of those which Mr. Mahan assumes to be the onl^ founda- 
tion for religious belief. 

1977. It has already been urged that Moses was, hff his own, account, 
a worldly man, who, as I conceive, was guilty of a misrepresentaUon in 
alleging that the Creator of the hundred millions of solar systems com- 
prised in this universe (1342) made him and his people especially the ob- 
ject of a partiality, authorizing them to plunder and extirpate all the 
neighbouring people; moreover, that Moses was worldly-minded in the 
extreme, and so intent upon aequiring lands in this world, as to neglect 
his opportunities, if he had any, of learning from Jehovah, iu frequent 
alleged Intercourse with him, any information respecting the immortality 
of the soul, (1091, 1098, 1271.) My attention has been recently turned 
to the 24tli chapter of Exodus. It is there mentioned that Moses, with 
more than seventy elders of Israel, went up the mount, and there had an 
interview with the God of Israel, when 'Hhe}/ mw Gdd." It is then 
stated that "The Iiord spahe unto Moses, saying, Speah vnto (he ehildrmt 
of Israel, that tJiei/ iring me an, offering. And fJiis is the offering which 
you shaU take of ihem, gold, diver, and brass, and hhie amd purple, fine 
linen, and goats' hair," &c.* 

1978. There are then two or three chapters occupied with the specifica- 
tion of the various valuable articles of gold, and precious wood, and stones, 
required by an omni^lent God io furnish a tabernacle. Such is the misuse 
made by this pretended missionary of God, of the opportunity of learning 
that which is above all price. How many thousands of human beings 

S Ths following trash is tlina miwla to bo spocified ly the Ood of the univorsB ;— gold, 
eilver, hrnss, blue, purple, goats' hi^r, red rams'-skins, badger ekins, shittim-iiood, oil for 

six brauchos, almond-shaped bonis nilh a knop and a loner, knop and branches of beaten 
gold, seven lumps, large dishes, curtains of fine linen, apoons, oherubiuis of gold- Eight 

hy Jehovah liimsolf. 

Now, let the use Moses made of his opportunities be ooropaied with tliat wliieli I hai-c 
made of those afforded me b; the spirits, and then jndge between Spiritualism and Eolf- 
oaJIed orthodosy. 


, Google 


408 RELIGIOUS EEUORS OF MK. MAHAN. 

havQ been willing to lay down tteir lives for religious trutt I — and yet thia 
pretended, favourite of Jehovah, hy his own account, spent hia time in 
getting baublps, making the Almighty his agent. It may he that the 
whole is a fahle, and that the account originated in tlie time of Hilkiah, 
when the Pentateuch was acknowledged to have heen found accidentally. 
But if Moses and the elders really ascended the mount, and represented 
themselves as seeing God, and receiving those directions, evidently they 
were all a set of impoatoi^, who resorted to this mode of obtaining furni- 
ture for the tabernacle. 

Gi-eat Imparlance attached to a Belief in, Immortalify hif Oyrui the 
Greatf King of Persia, as contrasted with the rechUssness of Moses 
respecting the same Belief. 

1979- Among the errors propagated industriously by fenatical sectarians, 
is that of representing the Old and New Testament as of inestimable im- 
portance, as the only source of our knowledge of a future state of exist- 
ence, of which heathen writers are mentioned as deficient. In refutation 
of the calumny thus promulgated, I deem it espedient to quote the follow- 
ing sentiments ascribed by Xenophon to Cyrus, King of Persia, in address- 
ing his children : 

1980. "Think not, my dearest children, that when I depart from you, 
I shall be no more : remember that my soul, even while I lived among 
you, was invisible; yet by my actions you were sensible it existed in this 
body. Believe it, therefore, existing still, though it atil! be unseen. How 
quickly would the honours of illustrious men perish after death, if their 
souls performed nothing to preserve their fame ! For my part, I could 
never think that the soul, which, while in a mortal body, lives, when de- 
parted from it, di^ ; or that its consciousness is lost when it is discharged 
out of an unconscious habitation; on the contrary, it most truly exists 
when it is freed from all corporeal alliance." 

1981. Let this be compared with the inexcusable inattention of Moses, 
taking his own narrative to be tme, in communicating with God about 
every thing else, almost, excepting that which concema immortal life. If 
the despicable criminality of Abraham in putting his wife at the pleasure 
of two heathen kings successively, and (AeiV repugnance to have violated 

, his connubial rights, be taken as a fit test of comparative morality, if 
these sentiments of King Cyrus be compared with those of the Jewish 
law^ver as respects immortality, the chosen people of Gfod were much 
below some neighbouring heathens both in morality and religion. 

1982. This inference will be fortified by comparing the portraiture of 
the Deity aa given by Moses (1140) and Samuel, (1091,) with that given 
by Seneca, (1224.) 


,v Google 


EEUOIOUS ERROHS OF MR, MAHAN. 409 

The Worship of a Book, Idolatry. 

1983. Mucli has been said in Scripture and by ita votaries against ijola- 
ta'y, bat I do most seriously consider the Old Tesfament 9S, a more pemi- 
cioua idol than any image or statue can be in the nature of things. 

1984. An image or statue does not speak; it suggests nothing cruel, 
unjnst, or indecent to the worshipper ; neither do any of the objects usually 
treated as idols. It must evidently be an error to accuse idolaters of con- 
templating the inert image to which they kneel, as their God. Thej must 
see that it neither does nor cau do any thing. They must perceive that, 
fixed in one pkce, the image caQnot have that ubiquity or efficiicj, essential 
to divine power. It follows that the object of adoration roust be an 
invisible power associated with the idol, which may occupy tho image 
only when invoked. In every temple devoted to Jupiter there might bo 
a statue of Jupiter, and yet it was never held that there was more than 
one Jupiter. From the verses subjoined, from Pope's translation of the 
Iliad, it appeai-s that Homer gave to Jnpiter a supremacy which made the 
other deities bear to him no higher relation than that which the archangels 
do to God, according to Christianity : 

1986. "Letdown our goldeu everlnsHng choio. 

Whose stroDg embraoe holds hsavan, and oarth, and muiii ; 

Strive ftll, of mortal or immortal birth. 

To drag by this tlio Tbrnadorer down to earth. 

Ya strive in yalD. If I but lift thia hand, 

I heave the heavens, the ocean, and the land; 

Eor auch I reign, nnboundad and above, 

And Buch are men and gods compared to Jove." 

1986. But when a book is made the word of God, which patronizes men 
as bcloDging to a choien seed who are guilty of cruelty, robbery, fraud, 
massacre in cold blood, it becomes a more active and mischievous idol than 
any dumb beast, image, or statue can be An dolater worships a silent 
idol as the repr^entative of God The lol cannot say, "I aw, a jealnos 
God: I wax Tuot in ray wvatl 

1987- Mr. Mahan urges, thit the suffe ings undergone by martyrs to 
Christianity is evidence of its t ath whe ea t se ms to me that it only 
proves the conviction of the p rt es wh b f d splayed by a dervise or a 
fakir, would be called bigotry But f s ffer ng a -x cause is evidence 
in its favour, there have been suff rers on the other de, as well as on that 
which this author has undert 1 n t uphold It s but fair, if those who 
suffer for one side should have th r fle ng hel 1 up as proof of their 
conscicntjousness, the same cons ent o ness sho Id be conceded to those 
who have suffered for tho oth r Tl e th r of the pages I am about to 
quote, the Eev. Robert Tayl r wa fo want fab tter answer to his 
publication, condemned to 0.1 n J 1 n Engl nd f r one year. It was 
there he wrote bis Diagesis, cop es of wh ch. may bo had of Mr. Curtis, 


,v Google 


410 RELIGIOUS EKaOKS OF ME. MAIIAN. 

No. 34 Arch street, as well aa other books which may assist readers to 
form an opinion for themselves. I shall quote some pages from this work, 
which, being studied after reading Mahan's arrogant allegations, will make 
good the old saying, that " One story is good until another is told." 

1988. " The ortliimry notion, that the four gospels were written by the 
persons wbose names they bear, and that they have descended to us from 
original autographs of Matthew and John, immediate disciples, and of 
Mark and Luke, contemporaries and companions, of Christ, in like manner 
as the ■writings of still more early poets and historians have descended to 
us from the pens of the authors to whom they are attributed, is altogether 
untenable. It baa been entirely surrendered by the most able and ingenu- 
ous Christian writei-s, and will no longer be maintained by any hut those 
whose zeal outruns their knowledge, and whose recklessness and temerity 
of assertion can serve only to dishonour and betray the cause they so inju- 
diciously seek to defend. 

1989. "The surrender of a position which the world has for ages been 
led to consider impregnable, by the admission of all that the early objec- 
tion of the learned Christian Bishop, Faustus the Manicheau, implied, 
when he pressed Augustine with that bold challenge which Augustine was 
not able to answer, that,* 'It was certain that the New Testament was 
not written by Christ himself, nor by his apostles, but a long while after 
them, by some unknown persons, who, lest they should not be ci-edited 
when they wrote of afiairs they were little acquainted with, affixed to their 
works the names of apostles, or of such as wero supposed to have been 
their companions, asserting that what they had written themselves was 
written AOCORDiMG TO those persons to wtom they ascribed it.' 

1990. " This admission has not been held to be fatal to the olwms of 
divine revelation, nor was it held to be so even by the learned Father 
himself who so strenuously insisted ou it, since he declares his own un- 
shaken fiiith in Christ's mistical crucifixion, notwithstanding. 

1991. "Adroitly handled as the passage has been by the ingenuity of 
theologians, it has been made rather to subserve the cause of the evidences 
of the Christian religion than to injure it. Since, though it be admit- 
ted that the Christian world has 'all along heen under a, delusion' in this 
respect, and has held these writings to be of higher authority than they 
really are; yet the writings themselves and tlieir authors are innocent of 
having contributed to that delusion, and never bore on them, nor in them, 
any challenge to so high authority as the misfaken piety of Christians has 
ascribed to them, but did all along profess no more than to have heen 
written, as Fauatus testifies, not BY, but ACCOEDlNa to, Matthew, Mark, 
Luke, and John ; and by persons of whom indeed it ia not known who 
or what they were, nor was it of any oonseqence that it should be, after 
the general acquiescence of the church had established the sufficient cor- 
rectness of the compilations they had made. 

1992. "And here the lo-n^o post tempore (tlie great loMle after) is a 
favourable presumption of the sufficient opportunity that all persons"]" had, 

B " Keo ab ipso aorlptum conatal, neo tih ejaa apoatolia aecl longo poat tempore a quibus- 
ilam incerti nomiDis viris, qui ne albi non haberetnr fitleB aoribentibus c[B£0 noacirenl, par- 
tim apoatoiorum, pncam eoram quo apostolos Beoutl viderentnr nomlnft soriptomm Buorum 
frontibus iiididerunt> asBBremnteB secukbdu eos, bb scripsiaso quffi scripaerunt.— QhoWiI 
by icH-dnsr, vol. 2, p. 221. 

t "By all ■penmis, uQacrstanctlng strictly all yni-aons, for the eommon people were 


,v Google 


RELIGIOUS EltROaS OF ME. MAHAN. 411 

of knowing and being satisfied that the gospels which the cliuroh received 
were indeed al! that they purported to be ; that is, faithful narrations of 
the life and doctrines of Christ according to what oould be collected from 
the verbal accounts which his apostles had ^ven, or by tradition been sup- 
posed to have given, and, as such, ' woriliy of aU aeceptation.' 

1993. "The objection of Faustus becomes from its own nature the most 
indubitable and inexceptionable evidence, carrying us up to the very early 
age, the fourth century, in which he wrote, with a demonstration that the 
gospels were then universally known and received under the precise desig- 
nation, and none other, than that with which they have come down to us, 
even ns the gospels, respectively, according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and 
John. 

1994. " Of course there can be no occasion to pursue the inquiry into 
the authenticity of the Christian Scriptures lower down than the fourth 
century, 

1995. "1. Though, in that age, there was no established canon or 
authoritative declaration that such and none other than those which have 
come down to us were the books which contained the Christian rale of faith. 

1996. "2. And though 'no manosoript of these writings now in 
existence is prior to the sixth century, and various readings which, as 
appears from the quotations of the Fathers, were in the test of the Greek 
Testament are to be found in none of the manuscripts which are at pre- 
sent remaining.' — MidmelU, vol. ii. p. 160. 

1997. " 3. And though many passages which i 
Scriptures were not contained in any ancient copies w 

1998. " 4. And though ' in our common editions of the G-reek Testa- 
ment are many readings which exist not in a single manuscript, but are 
founded on mere oohjeoturb.' — Marsh's Mlohaelis, vol. ii. p. 496. 

1999. " 5. And though ' it is notorious, that the orthodox charge the 
heretics with corrupting the test, and that the heretics recriminate upon 
the orthodox.' — Unita/rian New Yernon, p. 121. 

2000. "6. And though 'it is an undoubted fact that the heretics were 
in the right in many points of criticism where the Fathers accused them 
of wilful corruption.'— Bp. Mar&h, vol. i). p. 362. 

2001. "7. And though 'it is notorious that forged writmgs undir 
the names of the apostles were in circulation almost from the apostolic 
age.' — See 2 Thess. ii. 2, quoted in Unitarian Neie Vm-sion * 

2002. "8. And though, 'not longafter OhriBt'sascensionmto hoa\cB, 
several histories of his life and doctrines, full of pious frauds and fabulous 
wonders, were composed by persona whose intentions, perhaps, were not 
bad, but whose writings discovered the greatest superstitioa and ignorance.' 
— Mosheim, vol, i. p. 109. 

2003. "9. And though, says the great Soahger, 'They put into their 
Scriptures whatever they thought would serve their purpose. 'f • 

nobodn, and nerer at any time hud nnj Toice, juilgment, or option in Ihe business of 
religion, bnt nlwajs believed that which their godfathera and godmothers did promise and 
yow that they shouid believe. God or deril, and any Scriptures their masters pleased, 
tvere alnajs all one to tbem. 

« •• 'Almost from the aposMicagsr Why, the text itself, 
ttat BBoii foiled "nridngs were in esisteace abeolutely is the 
apostles themselves. 

t " Omnia qniB Chciatianiamo condueere pntabaat bihliia s 


, Google 


412 RELIGIoyS ERRORS OS BtR. MAHAN. 

2004. " 10. And though, ' notwithstanding those twelve known infalli- 
ble and iiiithful judges of controversy, (the twelve apostles,) there were 
as many and as damnable heresies crept in, even in the apostolio age, as 
ia any other age, perhaps, dm-ing the same space of time.' — Meeve'g Fi-e- 
liminary Discourse to the Commomloiy of Yincentius Iiirmmsts, p. 190. 

2005. "11. And though there were in the manuscripts of the New 
Testament, at the time of editing the last printed copies of the Gireek 
text, upward of one hundred and thirtt thousand various readings.' 
— Vkitarian Ifew Vernon, f. 22. - 

2006. " 12. And though ' the confusion nnavoidable in these versions 
(the ancient Latin, from which all our European versions are derived) 
had arisen to such a height, that St. Jerome, in bis Preface to the Gos- 
pels, complains that no one copy resembled another.' — Mickaelis, vol. ii. 
p. 119. 

2007. "13. And though the Gospels fatally contradict each other; 
that is, in several important particulars, they do so to such an extent as no 
ingenuity of supposition has yet been able to reconcile; after Marsh, 
Michaelis, and the most learned critics, have stuck, and owned the 
conquest. 

2008. " 14. And tbough the difference of character between the three 
first Gospels and that ascribed to St. John ia so flagrantly egregious, that 
the most learned Cbristian divines and profoundest scholars have frankly 
avowed that the Jesus Christ of St. John is a wholly different character 
from the Jesns Christ of Matthew, Mark, and Luke ; and that their 
account and his should both bo true is flatly impossible.* 

2009. " 15. And though such was the idolatrous adulation paid to the 
authority of Origen, that emendations of the test which were but sug- 
gested by him were taken in as part of the New Testament; though he 
himself acknowledged that they were supported by the authority of no 
manuscript whatever. — Marsh, in loco. 

2010. " 16. And though, even so late as the period of the Reformation, 
we have whoie passages which have been thrust into the test, and thrust 
out, just as it served the turn which the Protestant tricksters had to serve. 

2011. " 17. And though we have on record the most indubitable his- 
torical evidence of a general censure and correction of the Gospels having 
been made at Constantinople, in the year 506, by order of the Emperor 
Anastasins.f 

2012. " 18. And though we have like unquestionable historical evi- 
dence of measureless and inappreciable alterations of the same having 
been made by our- own.Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury, for the 
avowed purpose of accommodating them to the faith of the orthodox."X 

^ " B\ forte iLCGidisaeti ut Joliajxuia Ev&Dgelmm per ockidooim eeculn priora prosus igoo- 
tum jaouiasat, at noslris demum temporibue, in modinm prodnotmneseetomneahaud dnbia 
UDO ore confltereutur Jesuni a. Johaune deBciiptum longs ulinm ease ao lllium MatthEei, 
Marci> et Lno^, neo nfrfLmqne deaoTlptionem slmui veram esse pesse. — Carol. Theoph. 
^r/stachn eider Probab, Lipei<B, 1320. 

j" "Here it is. 'MeaasJa V. 0. oonaule, ConstoatiaQpolI, jaliente Anaseaaia Imperatore, 
WDOta evangBlia, tanqoam Bib idiotia ersHgelisti^ oomposita, reprebendantnr et etuendim- 
iax.'—Vietnr Tantuientii, Oav^t Siitoria Liteyaria, vol. i. p. 415— i. e., ' The iUmlHoi^s . 
JHeixila being Coniul, iy the eommand qf the Emptror Anaslasius, the holg QospeU, at hav- 
ing 6een mrillai iy idi^ evanseiiilt, are eesiiiied and coiva^ed.'—Yietor, Bishop of Tunis 
la Africa. 

J " Sea BeirasobrB, quoted in the Manifesto of tha ChriBtian Society; and this and 
the preceding extract vindicated, in the niithot's Syntagma, against tlio vitnporaliona of 
the evangelical Dr. John Pye Smith, ia lock." 


„ Google 


RELIGIODS ERKORS OF Mil. SIAHAN. 413 

Evidence of Joseiihus and Gihhon vs, Mr. Mahan. 

2013, The silence of Josephus reapeotiDg Christ iadured some Chria- 
tians to concoct the pious fraud of interpolating ju his history a notice of 
the career and crucifixion of Christ, but subsequent Christian writers have 
detected and exposed the interpolation ; so that the history alluded to, 
written soon after Christ's death by the distinguished Hebrew, contains do 
notice of those events; and, from, the following passage in Gibbon, it appears 
that it did not awaken much attention among the Romans. Yet Ilahan, 
assuming the opposite to bo true, urges it as evidence of the evangelical 
aoconnt, that the phenomena drew universa] attention. 

2014. " How shall we excuse," says Gibbon, " the snpine inattention of 
the pagan and philosophie world to those evidences which were presented 
by the hand of Omnipotence, not to their reasou, but to their senses ? 
This miraculous event, which ought to have excited the wonder, the curi- 
osity, and the devotion of mankind, passed without notice in an age of 
science and history. It happened during the lifetime of Seneca and the 
elder Pliny, who rauat have experienced the immediate effects or received 
the earliest intelligence of the prodigy. Each of these philosophers, in a 
laborious work, has recorded all the great phenomena of nature — earth- 
quakes, meteors, comets, and eclipses — which his indefetigable curiosity 
could collect; both one and the other have omitted to mention the greatest 
phenomenon to which the mortal eye has been witness since the creation 
of the globe," (Gibbon, vol. ii. chap. xv. p. 379.) 

The Worshippers of ffie Golden Calf nwre righteous than their Assassins. 

2015, The example is set in tbo Old Testament of attributing the worst 
motives to every one who does not concur with the accusers in religious 
opinions, I conscientiously believe that the Israelites who made the 
golden calf were at least as righteous in their worship as those who trea- 
cherously and cruelly massacred them in obedience to an order strangely 
represented as sanctioned by Jehovah : "Put evert/ man 7iis sword hy his 
side, and go in and out of the camjp, and day every man his brother, 
every man his companion, and every man his neighbour ; and the chil- 
dren of Levi did according to the words of Moses, and there feU of thl 
people on that day about three tliousand men." 

2016. Obviously, the only way in which those who, witli Mr. Mahan, 
can find any pretence for ascribing this horrible sanguinary order to the 
inspiration of God, is by treating idolatry as so wicked as to be punished, 
not only in the immediate transgressor, but in his offspring to the thhd 
and fourth generation. Is it not a fairer way of viewing this affair to 
infer that Moses and his partisans were covetous, unprincipled men, who 
did not hesitate at swindling, lying, massacre, or any measures requisite 
to give him and them ascendency? Was there ever a greater analogy 
between the measures of any two evil-doers than those of Mohammed and 


;;■ Google 


414 EELIQIOTJh ZKEOKb OF MH. HAHAN, 

Moses, both professing communion ■with God, which we now know could 
not have talten place, and hoth pleadmg his commands to esercise the most 
horrible intolerance at home, as well is ti-uel rapacity abroad f 

2017. Mohammed appears to havo been more successful than Moses in 
conTinoing his followers of his mission. There seems to have been a great 
distrust of Moses, which ho artfully always ascribes to the impiety of the 
unbelievers; lite all other religious inipostora, identifying his word with 
that of God. Nothing but his inability to convince the sfeeptics of the 
divine origin of his mission could have induced them to worship idols in 
opposition to liis remonstranco ; aud the fact that Aaron assisted them in 
casting tte goHeu calf, can only be explained by his participation ic the 
heresy. Does not this alleged conduct on the part of Aaron render the 
whole affair so absurd as to throw doubt OTer the whole histoiy? Moses, 
while tilling the msdeontents, could hardly avoid punishing their ring 
leader. Moreover, how could one who would assist in idolatrous worship, 
be fit to hold tbo office of high-priest, into which he was soon afterward 
installed with great pomp ? 

2018. It is perfectly clear, to my mind, that a pagan who sincerely wor- 
ships any thing as his GoA, really worships'God He stands in the same 
relation to his God that a debtor stands to his real creditor when paying a 
forged draft. 

2019. Wicted priests have raised a cjy -tgninst idolatei-s, as the real 
thief strives, by calling after some innocent person withm view, to divert 
the hue and cry from himself. As an exemplification of this species of 
wictedness, I quote here a speech made to the Emperoi Constantins by 
Julius Pirmicius Matemus, (Taylor's Diagesis, page 144 ) 

2020. (Addressing the Emperor Constantins ") " Take away, tate away, 
in perfect security," exclaims this self called Christian priest, "0 most 
holy emperor, talce away all the ornataents of their temples. Let the fii'c 
of the mint or the flames of the, mines melt down their gods. Seize upon 
all their wealthy endowments, and turn them to your own use and pro- 
perty. And, most sacred emperor, it is absolutely necessary for you to 
revenge and punish this evil. You are commanded by the law of the Most 
High God tt> persecute all sorts of idolatry with tho utmost severity; hear 
and commend to your own sacred understanding what God himself com- 
niands. He commands you not to spare your son or your brother ; he bids 
you plunge the avenging tnife even into the heart of your wife that sleeps 
in jour bosom ; to persecute your dearest friend with a sublime severity ; 
and to ai'm your whole people against these sacrilegous pagans, and tear 
them limb from limb. Yea, even whole cities, if you should find this 
guilt in them, must be cut off. most hoJy emperor, God pri 
joa the rewards of his mercy, upon condition of your thus acljng. 
therefore, what he commands, complete what he prescribes." 

2021. It should be recollected that this diabolical address was made to 
the Christian son and successor of Constantino. Can there be a more 

; picture of the mischievous consequences of the example and 


)!,, Cookie 


It f M p t d ! t C t ly C t t t 

y b tt 1 h Ob t f J wh h Id 1 t w th t nl {, ' 
to h w k d g t 

It 11 d th t th ty f Th 1 th E t Th 

d p t t d tt II th p tl t 1 th 1 ^ d I Ch 

t 1 M t ! wl I m d n t w 1th 

m fStBthlmwdy Ithlqt Sh th 

ff t f th p r "-It f Ch t n ty th tl pp 1 g f h P 
tate h t tl w dl k tt b te w th wh h Ch lat I w 1 1 m If 
Th k otthtl m t dpea n th, I m tt nd 

peace, hut a sword !" Matt. x. 34. 

2023. Shakapeare truly makes one of his oharaeters say that whosoever 
takes away the good name of another commits a move wicked theft than 
one who takes a purse. But in this portrait of the effect of calumny 
there is one important feature omitted, which is sometimes the most in- 
jurious: I allude to the pain of mind created by a false accusation. If, as 
I have before urged, it be wrong to hurt the flesh by a blow, is it not 
wrong to hurt the soul by calumny ? The sting of the fangs of tlie viper, 
no less than the paw of the lion, may give a mortal infliction; but no less 
painful may be tlie effect of a false human tongue. Is it not as great a 
wrong to wound a man's soul as his flesh ? Yet there never has been any 
hesitation oa the part of sectarians to express any painful opinion as to 
heretics or idolaters, TKo word infidel, so jnuch more deserved by them- 
selves for their violation of the precepts they profess, is used as a matter 
of course, and, coupling with an error in worship a heinous sinfulness, the 
idolater is always in the wrong. But reasonably, upon the grounds which 
have been advanced in the preceding portion of this work, (1245,) idola- 
try may be an imputation against the intellectual pretension, but not 
against the integrity, of the worshipper; and for one I consider the propen- 
sity to the worship of idols displayed throughout the whole of the Jewish 
history, and even by Solomon the "Wise," as a strong proof that there 
never was sufficient evidence presented to the Jews of the divine origin of 
the books of Moses, or any others represented as conveying God's holy 

2034. It ia not doing as we would be done by to accuse any worshipper 
of bad motives, for the reasons which I have above given; and when it is 
considered how unwilling people areto part with theirproperty, the fact that 
the Israelites gave their gold ornaments to enable Aarou to cast a golden 
calf, shows that they sincerely believed that their worship would be ac- 
ceptable to some deity who had the best claim to their acknowledgment. 
If they mistook the object, it must have been an error of the understand- 
ing, which It would have been evidently more reasonable to have corrected 
by reasoning and evidence, than by punishment. 

2025, While such eminent men as Mahan, and the learned Goliah of mj 


,v Goc~)glc 


416 EBLIGIOUS EGROItS OF MR. MAIIAN. 

mundane guardian spirit, will hold up tliia, to mj mind, barbarous and 
preposterous Pentateuct as the woi^d of God, I am obiiged. to meet them 
upon the ground tbua statecl ; but tbere are other highly respectable cler- 
gymen, who concur in questioning that the Pentateuch existed until after 
the return of the Jews from their captivity; and there is evidence, agreeably 
to the quotations I have made, that this alleged work of divine inspiration, 
or ivord of God, as stated in the Second Book of Chronicles, and 22cl 
chapter of the Second Eook of Kings, has no better foundation than the 
word of the priest Hilkiah and his aceomplioes. 

2026. The Rev. Mr. Norton, in a laborious investigation, shows that, 
according to internal evidence, almost all the important facts stated in 
Genesis and Exodus are inconsistent with each other or the oircuni stances 
under which they are alleged to have happened. 

2027. Mr. Mahan conceives that the willingness of the believers in the 
gospel to sacrifice their lives In testimony of the sincerity of their con- 
viction proves the truth of revelation. Wherefore, then, does not their 
exposure to tho slaughtering sword of the partisans of Moses prove the 
sincerity of the IsraeUtea in their worship of their idol ? No wise knave 
would do any thing SO absurd. History shows that many of those who 
have been most wilting to make sacrifices for their belief have been great 
fanatics. Their willingness to suffer only proves the intensity of their be- 
lief, not the truth of the miracles which they believe. 

2028. Having first assumed, contrary to the fact, that the mission of 
Christ was generally accredited in the contemporaneous pagan communities, 
Mr. Mahan claims this to be evidence of tho facts stated by the evan- 
gelists. 

2029. But if the belief in a mission by contemporaries is evidence in its 
iavour, is not the disbelief of contemporw^es evidence on the other side? 
Is not the fiiet that Moses could only expel idolatry from the Hebrews by 
the sword, a proof that he was unable to convince them by any adequate 
evidence of his claims to inspiration? 

2030. This surmise, respecting the inadequacy of the facta and reason- 
ing which Moses had to advance in favour of his pretensions as a mis- 

' sionary of Jehovah, appears to be fully justified in the history given by 
Josepbus. From the following language, which this distinguished. Jewish 
historian alleges to have been held by one of the Israelites, it is evident 
that Moses was then viewed as no better than Mohammed or any of the 
usurping popes of Christendom. While Protestants sanction such religious 
despots as Moses and Samuel, they ought not to complain of the papal 
despots of Christendom, (note to 1091.) 


;;■ Google 


EELIGIOUS EIlllURS OE ? 


Just denunciaiion of ilte religious imposture cmid umrpation of Mofcs, by 
noble-minded Israelites.'' 

20S1. " Corah, an Hebrew of great wealtli and influence, and famous 
for hie eloqaence, becoming jealous of the dignity to which Mo^ea had 
attained, raised a clamour against him among the Levites who were of the 
same tribe, by suggesting to thetn, in an occasional harangue, 'That it re- 
dounded to their dishonour thus tamely to suffer Moses, nnder pretence of 
the divine command, to retain unlimited authority, vest the priesthood in 
his brother Aaron without their, suffr^es, and bestow places of honour and 
profit at pleasure,' He added, ' that these measures were the more op- 
pressive and grievous as founded on the arts of sophistry and insinuation; 
that those who are conscious of deserving posts of dignity endeavour to 
obtain them not by force, but mild persuasion ; that it was the interest of 
a state to eheclc the ambition of such aspiring individuals, before they ac- 
quired an influence tliat might prove destructive.' He demanded by what 
authority Moses had conferred the priesthood on Aaron and his sons, en- 
forcing his own title as superior to theirs, both by descent and property." 

2032. In consequence of this, Moses addresses the following prayer, 
which certainly is as remote from the sentiments which the precepts of 
Christ would call for, as any which can be imagined : 

2033 " Testify thy wonted kindness to the Hebrews by inflicting con- 
dign punishment on I)athan and Abiram, for suggesting that thy purposes 
are opposed by my aits Ti^it these detractors from thy glory with ex- 
emplary vengeance Let the earth on which they tread swallow them up, 
v.Uh iki.li faimhes and substance, to the manifestation of thy power, and 
as an example to posteiity not to think unworthily of the Majesty of 
he'iven " 

203-1 Mr Mahin uiges that those who sacrificed their lives for a cause 
must have had good reason for their course. . What are we, then, to think 
of Zimn the Hebrew, who used the following language to Moses, and was, 
IS well as those whj concurred with him in opinion, murdered in conse- 
queni,e, nDt iftpr tiial, but by Lynch law, as will appear from the sequel ?f 

20it5 '" MoBis, ^ou aie at liberty to contend for the use and observanco 
of your own laws, which have obtained a sanction and authority by long 
custom alone, or you would have been brought to merited disgrace and 

Sunishraent, and found, to your cost, that the Hebrews were not to be 
eluded by your arts. I will never subject myself to your tyrannical de- 
crees, assured that, under a pretest of regard to reli^on and law, you seek 
to enslave us, and establish a supreme authority over ua, by denying us 
those liberties to which all free-bom men have an undoubted right. Was 
there a more grievous oppression during the whole course of an Egyptian 
bondage than the power you usurped of punishing every man by laws of 
your own formation ? You particularly deserve punishment for abrogating 
and annulling those customs, laws, and privileges which are authorized and 
established by the common consent of nations, and preferring the sugges- 

s Joaephus, book ir. ohttp, ii. paga 49. f Ibid, book iv. chap. Ti. pngo 63. 


;;■ Google 


418 

tions of jour feney to rule g Hy f H d d Hy f Id 

Conscious that I have done h g g I f kly d 1 h 

assemlily, that I have mar d Mgwm ThI f h 

honest holduess, and would dh hi^fh Id II 

worship the gods whom th h f b dd b h pp d Id 

hold myself bound to subm j bywyl tef 

law or religion, hut must a hlbeyf '^ hruhf 

myBelf, and directing mj o p ra ! co 

2036. "Zimri, in this p I dl d h I m f h 
whole faction, while the mid l!y diss fhp 
sumptuous conduct, for they p[ t d d m h f Id 

2037. But one of Mose i d d 11 w h 1 1 f 
the rights of human natur h b id d 1 w 11 pp 
from the rest of the narrat wh h h p d 

2038. " His contumacy and flagrantly insolent behaviour to Moses 
raised the resentment of one Phineas to the highest degree. He was a 
youth eminent for the dignity of his family, lus singular prowess, and his 
personal virtues. Eleaaar the high-priest being his father, he was nearly 
allied to the great lawgiver. Sensible that to suffer such indignity to pass 
with impunity would bring both the religion and the laws of the Hebrews 
into contempt, he determined to make an example of the ringleader of the 
faction, as his esalted rank would cause that esample t-o have a greater 
influence on the minds of the people. His resolution being equal to his 
zeal, he repaired, without delay, to the tent of Zimri, and at one strokt 
slew both him and Cofci his wife. This resolute act excited an emulation 
among those of his contemporaries who still maintained a regard for the 
honour of their country, to avenge themselves on those who had done it 
violation ; inasmuch that they fell most furiously upon the faction, and put 
great numbers of them to the sword." 

2039. Where is the true-hearted son of Columbia who would not have 
been among those who fell with Zimri, for the right of choosing his wife 
and his religion according to his own judgment ? 

REmarJsable observance of the Golden Ride hi/ Moses, in Ms last advice 
to the Israelites.* 

2040. " ' Wherefore, to avoid this danger of apostasy from the worship 
of the God of your fathers, suffer not any of your enemies to live after 
you have conquered them ; but esteem it highly conducive to your interest 
to destroy them all, lest, if you permit them to live, you become infected 
by their manners, and thereby corrupt your own institutions. I do further 
eshort you to overthrow their altars, temples, groves, and indeed to exter- 
minate their nations with fire and sword. By these means alone the per- 
manency of your happy constitution can be secured to you.' " 

2041. Let these sentiments of Moses be compared with those of the 
great Cyrus, in which he justly adverts to the immortality of the soul. 
Moses was always worldly, and, as respects the lives of neighbouring paganSj 
30 called, displayed no better morality than Thuggtsm on a great scale. 


* Josephus, book iv. chap. viii. paga 66. 

iio.i.db, Google 


RELIGIOUS ERGOES OE MR. MAHAN. 4.Ly 

Strainiiiff at Spiritual Gnats, while swalloiBing Scriptural Camels. 

2042, Tlie question is put, Wlierefore can spirits cause tappings on or 
tilting of tables, onJy wSien a medium is present ? To those who believe in 
tlie Old Testament as the word of God, it may ba in point to inquire, Where- 
fore the mere eleyation of the hands of Moses, on a hill remote from the 
field of batfle, enabled the Israelites to overcome their enemies, when the 
opposite result ensued when the hands of the veracious prophet were 
lowered, as agreeably to verses 11 and 12, chapter xvii. of Exodus? 

2043. "And it came to pass, when Moses held ap his hand, that Israel 
prevailed J and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. But 
Moses's hands were heavy, and they took a stone and put it under him, 
and he sat thereon, and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on 
the one side and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady 
until the going down of the sun." 

2044, It follows from the verses in question that the skill, strength, or 
courage of every Jewish combatant varied with the elevation cr depression 
of the arms of Moses above or below a mean horizontal plane, 

2045, Surely, the peculiar influences thus exercised by the author of 
the Pentateuch is at least as incredible as that by which the presence of 
a medium enables spirits to move ponderable bodies, when otherwise they 
could not move them. The influence ascribed to Moses is alleged to have 
been witnessed only on one occasion, whereas that attributed to media has 
been seen in a multiplicity of instances by living witnesses of good charac- 
ter, who will attest to the foots, as well as the media themselves. 

2046. But, independently of the incredibility of this Mosaic mii-acle as 
an isolated fact discordant with the laws of nature and human experience, 
is it not incredible on aoeount of its inconsistency with the just and hu- 
mane idea of God which the truly pious entertain, that he should give this 
assistance to the Jews in their unchristian warfare ? This reasoning is at 
least as applicable to the alleged arrestation of the sua, (involving that of 
the rotary motioa of the earth,} in order that Joshaa might make a further 
slaughter of the vanquished Cauaanites, For this slaughter the prominent 
excuse seems to have been that Moses, wishing to possess the territory of 
the Canaanites, professed to have the authority of God for extirpating them 
as idolaters, agreeably to the followiog language, which is represented 
by Mr. Mahan and others as the word of God, (Deut. viU. 16, 20, 22 :) 

2047. "And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God 
shall deliver thee ; thine eye shall have no pity upon them : neither shalt 
thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee. Moreover, the 
Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left, 
and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed. And the Lord thy God 
will put out those nations before thee by little and little ; thou mayest not 
consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee." 


;;■ Google 


420 KELIGIOUa EREORS OP MK. MAHAN. 

The E'ddence which is insufficient to mtaldish the Tniguiii/ of a, Sinner 
cannot he sufficient to establish the Divine Authority of a Boole. 

2048. " One witneaa shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity or 
any sin : at the mouth of two witnesses, or three witn^ses, shall the matter 
be established," (Dent. xix. 15.) 

2049. Agreeably to the preceding quotation from Scripture, one 'witness 
is not sufficient to convict a man of any Iniquity. Two witnesses, at least, 
are necessary to establish guilt. But If a single witness be insufE-cient to 
establish the iniquity of a man, how is it to be established, on the evidenee 
of tbe priest HiVkiah alone, that the manuscript, which, as he represented, 
he had found in the temple, was the inspired code of Moses, or, as Mahan 
and others would have it, the word of Godf 

2050. Should the righteotianeas of a religious code be established by 
evidence insulBcient to establish the iniquity of an individual ? A fortiori, 
when, by proving the righteousness of a code, a whole generation was to be 
convicted of iniquity, was the evideace of one individual sufficient, espe- 
cially when the iniquity thas to be adjudged was to draw down the un- 
quenchable wrath of God, agreeably to Huldah the prophetess? 

Word of God, impiously so called, or the Golden Rule invei-ted Sy God's 
alleged Commaiuls. 

2051. "When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight agwnst it, then 
proclaim peaee unto it. • And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, 
and open uato thee, then it shall be that all the people that is found there- 
in shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shalJ serve thee. And if it will 
make no peaee with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt 
besiege it. And when the Lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, 
tbou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword : but the 
women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even 
all the spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself: and thou shalt eat the 
spoil of thine enemies, which the Lord thy Grod hatb given thee. Thus 
shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from thee, which 
are not of the cities of these nations. But of the cities of these people 
which the Lord thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt savo 
alive nothing that breatheth : but thou shalt utterly destroy them, namely, 
the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Oanaanitea, and the Perizzites, the 
Hivites, and the Jehusites, as the Lord thy God hath t 
(Dent. XX. 10-17.) 


;;■ Google 


'EABLESSNESS OP DEATH. 


PAGAN FEAELr-iSNE^^ OF CE iTH 

Opmion- of Mr. Sac, a OhnUian Frtest, that tt is ilietr idigvni which 
inahea Ch/netians more feaifal of death than the Chtne^Cj (746.) 

2052. Pakbon Beeg anci Bialiop SIcIlvame unjustly repieseiit tie doc- 
trines of futurity, held bj Christians, ai causing thoise whi believe in 
eternal punishment — in tlie horrible bell desonbed by Josephos, and sanc- 
tioned by the gospel, with the precarious notion'^ of beiven derived from 
the same authority — (o have leas fear of death than deists, by them called 
infidels. But I have known many deists die, ani certainly I haie never 
seen any believer in Christianity meet de-kth with more firmness than those 
who did not believe. Some of the last-mentioned class have died of pMnfiil 
complaints with the most admirable equanimity. But to illustrate the 
injustice of these reverend gentlemen in their undue assumption of the 
superior fearlessness of death of those persons who believe in the gospel 
over those who do not so believe, I will here quote a passage from tlio 
travels of a Christian missionary, which describes the equanimity with 
which the Chinese meet death. From the work of the French missionary, 
Mr. Hue, it will be seen that death is contemplated with far less fearful 
apprehension in China than in Christendom. 

Observations of the Mis>.ionaiy, Mr. Sue, tu whom referenee has juit 
ieen made. 

2053. " lu uo other country than China, perhaps, could men be heard 
exchanging compliments on the subject of a eoffio. People (in Christen- 
dom) are most shy of mentioning the lugubrious objects destined to con- 
tiun the mortal remains of a relation or friend ; and when death does enter 
the house, the coffin is got in. in ydil dtpth 
feelings of the mourning family B t t q t th w Ch 
there a coffin is simply an artiel f th first ty t th d 1 if 
luxury and fancy to the living. It!g ttwty thmdplyd 
in the shops with ail sorts of ta tef 1 d nt j ted 1 h d 
and polished, and trimmed up t tt t th j f piss g d g 
them the fancy to buy tiiemselv 

2054. "People in easy circ mta whh myfp t 
their pleasures, scarcely ever fa 1 1 p 1 th 1 b f h d w th 
coffin to suit their own taste, Iwbhtly dbm d 
until the moment arrives for ly g d w t, t is k pt th h , t 
as an article of immediate necessity, but as one that cannot fail to be con- 
soling and pleasant to the eye in a nicely-ftivnished apartment. 

2056., "For well-brought up children, it is a favourite method of ex- 
pressing the fervour of their filial piety toward the authors of their being, 
a sweet and tender consolation for the heart of a son, to be able to purcliasa 
a beautiful coffin for an aged father or mother, and come in state to pre- 
sent the gift at the moment when they least expect such an agreeable sur- 


;;■ Google 


^'S'i PAGAN FEARLESSNESS OP SEATH. 

pvjae If one is not sufficiently favoured by fortune to be able to afford 
the purchase of a coflia in adYancc, care is alwaja taken tefore 'saluting 
(he world,' as tho Cbinese say, a sieli person shall at least have the satia- 
fection of casting a glance at his last abode ; and if he is Burrounded by at 
all affectionate relations, they never fail to buy liim a coffin and place it 
by the aide of his bed. 

2056. "In the country, this Js not always so easy, for coffins are not 
kept quite ready, and, besides, peasants have not such luxurious habits as 
townspeople. The only way, then, is to send for the carpenter of the 
place, who takes the measure of the siek person, not forgetting to observe 
to him that it must be made a little longer than would seem necessary, 
because one always stretches out a little when dead. A bargain is then 
made concerning the length and breadth, and especially the cost; wood is 
brought, and the workmen set about their task in the yard, close to the 
chamber of the dying person, who is enterfained with the music of the 
saw and the other tools, while death is at work with him, preparing bim 
to occupy the snug abode when it is ready. 

2057. "All this is done with the most perfect coolness, and without the 
slightest emotion, real or affected. We have ourselves witnessed such 
scenes more than onee, and it has always been one of the things that most 
surprised us in the manners of this extraordinary country. A short time 
after our arrival in the mission of the north, we were waking one day in 
the country with a Chinese seminarist, who had the patience to reply to all 
our long and tedious questions about tjie men and things of the Celestial 
Empire. While we were keeping up the dialogue as well as we could, in a 
mixture of Latin and Cbinese, using a word of one or the other as we 
found occasion, we saw coming toward ns a i-ather numerous crowd, who 
advanced in an orderly manner along a narrow path. It might have been 
called a procession. 

2058. " Our fii-st impulse was to turn aside, and get into some safe 
comer behind a large hill ; for, not having as yet much experience in the 
manners and customs of the Chinese, we bad some hesitation in pro- 
ducing ourselves, for fear of being recognised and thrown into prison ; pos- 
sibly even condemned and strangled. The crowd had now oome up with 
us, and we stood aside to let it pass. It was composed of a great number 
of villagers, who looked at us with smiling faces, and had the appearance 
of being uncommonly pleased. Aft«r them came a litter, on which was 
borne an empty coffin, and then another litter, upon which lay extended a 
dying man, wrapped in blankets. His face was haggard and livid, and his 
expiring eyes were fixed upon the cofEa that preceded him. When every 
one bad passed, we hastened to ask the meaning of this strange procession. 
' It is some siok man,' said the seminarist, ' who has been taken ill in a 
neighbouring village, and whom they are bringing home to his family. The 
Chinese do not like to die away from their own house.' ' That is very na- 
tural ; but what Ls the coffin for ?' ' For the sick man, who probably has 
not many days to live. They seem to have made every thing ready for 
his funeral.' I remarked by the side of the coffin a piece of white linen. 
' That, thoy mean to use for the mourning.' 

2059. " These words threw us in the most profound astonishment, and 
we saw then that we had come into a new world — into the midst of a 
people whose ideas and feelings differed widely from those of Europeans. 
These men quietly setting about to prepare for the foaeral of a still living 


;;■ Google 


CONCLUSION. 423 

friend and relalion — this coffin placed purposely under the eyes of the dying 
man, doubtless with the purpose of doing what was agreeable to him ; all 
this plunged us into a strange reverie, and the walk waa continued in 
silence. The astonishing calmness with wliieh the Chinese sec the ap- 
proach of death does not fail when the lost moment arriTes. They expire 
with the most incomparable tranquillity, without any of the emotions, the 
agitations, the agonies that usually render the moment of death so terrific." 

2060. It is remarkable that Mr, Hue cites an "entire want of religious 
feelmf/, as among the catwes of this iiidifference to death."'*' But it may 
be inquired whether that can be a proper kind of religious feeling which 
interferes with equanimity at the prospect of our spiritual birth. I can 
easily believe Mr. Hue to be correct, if his entire want of religious feeling 
means the absence of all fear of an eternal broiling, like that of Dives. 

2061. It is the absence of that sort of religion which this sectarian . 
would teach; that whioh consigns the great majority of mankind to per- 
petual misery on account of their disbelief in Eomanism. 

2062. Widely different is the effect of the religion I have espoused. It 
has made a prodigious change iu my feelings. I look forward to death 
with hope, rather than fear. (See page S2 (108) of this work for the dif- 
ferent effect of Komanism on my mind.) 

Gonchmon of Strictures on Mr. Mohan's Religioug Errors. 

2063. It will be observed that under the general head of Mr. Mahan's 
errors, I have treated of not only those which he has advocated, but such 
as he sanctions by his general endorsement of Scripture. However, I 
here take my leave of Mr, Mahan and his errors. 


CONCLUSION. 


2064. In a work by the English bishop Warburton, is to be found the 
following allegation : 

"The doctrine of a futm-e state of rewards and punishments is not to 
he found in, nor did it make part of, the Mosaic dispensation." 

The Feittaleuch inconsisfenfly represented as ffte basis of belief in human 
immortality, as will appear hy the prefixed quotation, as well as the 
inahUity of any of its devotees to point out any part which conflicts 
■with the right reverend author's opinion, above mentioned.— Injustice 
of representing disbelievers in the Bible as not having as good gnnends 
for helief in itnmortality as those who rest their belief on a worlt which, 

* See vol. ii. pnge 42, Hnc'e TravelE. 

iio.i.db, Google 


424 CONCLUSION. 

iy its silence, lends to diicoantena>nce the hope of a fufm-e life. — Those 
who uphold the Bible affainst ^piritualimi, the real dnfagoniits of the 
only satisfactory evidence ever given to man of a future habitation in 
the spirit •world. 

2065. Eeligious people all very justly iDsist oa tho immense importance 
of a belief in a future state of existence, in wtich we are to enjoy a de- 
gree of Iiappmess in propovtion to our good conduct in this life, or of 
misery in proportion as we do evil. 

2066. Ttronghout CIiriaf«ndom I believe such a belief is necessary to 
render a person competent as a witness, or to bold any office. As it is 
assumed generally by Christians that there is no other proof of immor- 
tality than that alleged to be afforded by Scripture, unbelievers in Scrip- 
ture are assumed to be nnbeHevers in a future state, and the most nnfa- 
vourabie insinnationa are made respecting such persons, (1310.) Bishop 
Mcllviune, in his " Evideiioes," has charitably represented that, as a 
class, such men are peculiarly vicious, and ia their domestic relations im- 
moral; not recoUeeting hm far Christian prelates have been found want- 
ing in the present, as ineU as in past times. But notwithstanding that the 
disbelief in a future state is held to be so univei-sally pernicious in its 
influence, selfoalled orthodox Christiana deem it impious not to bow before 
the Bible as the holy word of God, or to be wanting in respect for his 
inspired missionary, Moses, But admitting that the books found by Hil- 
kiah (1940) were written, under divine inspiration, by Moses, how does it 
happen that those hooks and their author stand in such high estimation, 
when they actually give no evidence of immortality^ but rather tend to 
prove that God, in communicating hit will to Moses, thought it more i^n- 
portant to give to the Jews direetiona for the decoration of a laliernacle, 
than to impart to them the invaluable 'knowledge of ihetr eternal existence f 
Moreover, God is represented as holding m e^edal favour, those iulu) did 
not think it of as much importance to inguire into the truth of immor- 
tally, as to obtain decorations for pharisaical worship. Why is Moses, 
a materialist, to he venerated, who so grossly trifled with his opportunities? 
There is either a flagitious misrepresentation, or he, of all men, had the 
best opportunity of learning this all-important truth ; and therefore, dying 
ignorant of It, is proportionally moi-e culpable. "Wberefoi-o is the iinoandid 
and unfounded pretence resorted to, that attacking the Old Testament is 
attacking the basis of the hope of heaven, when, on the contrary, that 
record his really the opposite tendency — that of enfeebling the evidence 
of immortality? 

2067. We see the heaikm Cyrus, on his death-bed, (1980,) striving to 
impresa upon his children a belief ia immortality, while Moses, dying a 
worldly-minded, blood-thirsty materialist, employs his last moments in 
giving inhuman directions for the merciless massacre of every conquered 


;;■ Google 


coNcmsiON. 425 

pagan. Yet, while Bishop Mcllvaine, as respects hia contemporaries, re- 
presenta materialism as irreconcilable with virtue, Moses is to be venera- 
ted and the books attributed to his authorship idolatrously worshipped as 
the word of God! But if the advocacy of any thing which tends to 
lessen the hope of immortality be culpable, is it not culpable, against the 
trttths of Spiritualism to hold up a boob which authorizes disbelief in 
immoi'tality, and that, too, upon such questionable authority as an obscure 
priest and fanatical and barbarous autocrat? (1937.) As respects the gos- 
pel, it has, I hope, been shown tliat, with all the exertions of the good 
parson Harbaugh to exhibit the heaven of Scripture in its most favorable 
aspect, (777 to 805,) Spiritualism has immensely the advantage in the 
description given of the spirit world, (409 to 469,) sanctioned by the re- 
plies given to my queries nader test conditions, (552). 

2068. Another ground of pre-eminence is the perfect immunity from 
any association witli such a priesthood as ihat described by the Eight 
Eev. Bishop Hopkins. Media, repladi^ the priests, will owe their office 
to nature, not to any aristocracy, monarch, or theocrat, (1307), 

20C9. Private disinterested Media will always outnumber and control 
any of the same class who may attempt to acquire unfair ascendancy, 
even if, in the nature of the case, it were possible that such a wmng 
could be contemplated, 

2070. I trust I have shown that the actual morals of Ghrfetendom are 
iiTecondlahle mth the precepts of the gospel, which denounce wealth 
and enjoin submission to wrong, these morals being also incoflsistent with 
the materialism of the books of Moses. Under these circumstances, let 
the reader turn to the evidence which has converted me from a prepossess- 
ed skeptic to a devout believer in spiritual communication. Let that 
glorious porti'aiture of the spirit-world be coneiderd which has been open- 
ed to the view of mortals through the high spirits who have accredited 
me as one of their servants. I will not go over tlie evidence, nor recapitu- 
late the arguments which I have abeady so fully urged upon the atten- 
tion of my readers. I implore them to read with candour, and think 
earnestly of the facts and reasoning submitted in this volume, 

P, S. — Explanation respecting Jesus Christ. 
My spirit sister alleges that Christ never uttered the language record- 
ed as his, and npon which I have commented. This being admitted, I wish 
that nothing which I have said may be considered as bearing personally on 
aBeingwho is so much the object of devotion with many of my dearest 
connections, relations, and friends. I wish that it should be considered 
that it is only upon the doctrines imputed to Christ, that I have intend- 
ed to animadvert, not on Jesus himself. Surely I am justified as treating 
that language as coming from Jesns Christ, which is ascribed to him in 
the only history of his teachings which has come down to us, and which, 
under the name of the holy canonical gospel, is considered by more than 
three-fourths of all the Christians in existence as inspiijedbv (]{oc1^qq|p 


, Google 


APPEHBIX. 


UsDEE, this Lead I place some articles wliicb. could not b 
this work; but which it may nevertheless be expedient to place within 
the reach of certain readers. Among the articles referred to is the theory 
of electricity, which I first published in 1848, and which has been ap- 
proved by the spirit of Franklin, and, in obedience to his advice, inserted 
in this volume. Unfortunately, there are but few persons sufficiently ac- 
quainted with the phenomena which form its basis, and the technical lan- 
guage employed by professed electricians, to find it agreeable to study the 
subject in question; but they may qualify themselves to do so by shidying 
the elementary works on this branch of science. 


lETTEll TO THE EPISCOPAL CLERGi', 

Although the subjoined letter has been published in various channels, 
as well as in a separate pamphlet, I deem it proper to record it in this 
work, as, otherwise, many who may sea the one might not see the other. 
It will be perceived that the substance of my second letter has been already 
incorporated in the preceding pages, (714 to 776.) Of course it ia to the 
first letter that I now allude, and which I intend to record here. 

Letter from, Dr. Mare to (Ae Clergy of the Protestant Episcopal OhurcJi, 
offering to lay before them the New Evidence of Tmmortaliti/. ()?«&- 
mitted to tlie late Convention, Philadelphia, May 15, 1855.) 
Eeverend and Bear Sirs ; Haying, from my youth, been on friendly 
terms with the clergy of the Episcopal Church, wiUiin the pale of which 
I was born and christened ; having, in fact, had among the clergy of that 
church some excellent friends and relatives,— it has been a source of regret 
that I have not been able to see doctrines deeply aSecting the happiness 
of mankind in the same light. I am, however, fully sensible of the kind- 
ness and courtesy with which I have been treated by clergymen in general, 
and especially by those of the church above designated. I have always 
been under the belief that in no part of the globe, nor at any period of 
human history, has a priesthood existed as moral, as dneere, and truly 


,v Google 


428 APPENDIX . 

pious as tliose of mj country; and among that priesthood, I believe, none 
bave stood higlier in these qualifications than sach as are of the Episcopal 
Church. 

It is happy for me that of ]a(« I have, in one respect, found myself more 
in accordance with the Christian clergy: I allude here to the awakening 
of perfect confidence in the immortality of the sonl. There was on this 
subject, heretofore, this difference between my sentiments and those of my 
clerical friends, that while I toped for a future state, I was no less skep- 
tical respecting the evidence of witnesses who lived some thousand years 
ago than of those who have, in modern times, alleged themselves to have 
witnessed supernataral manifestations. I required in the former case, no 
less than in the latter, intuitive proof; or the consistent testimony of inde- 
pendent observers having sufficient sense, knowledge, and integrity to 
make reliable witnesses. 

Happily, in the case of Spiritualism, both of these testa have been af- 
forded to me, so that I now believe in a future state no less firmly than the 
orthodox Christian. 

Like St. Paul, in the case of OhrisldanJty, I entered upon the investiga- 
tion of Spiritualism with a view to refutaljon ; hut the very instraments 
which I contrived to accomplish that object produced the opposif« effect. 

If human testimony is not to he taken when advanced by contempo- 
rariea known to be conscientious, truthful, and well informed, how is it to 
be relied on with respect to those of whom wS know nothing available 
beside what their own writings mention ? 

I am prepared to submit a communication respecting the spirit world 
from my father, sanctioned by a convocation of spirits, whose approbation 
was manifested by means which no mortal could pervert. 

The practical influence on my mind has been to make me far more 
happy, to remove all fear of death, and to render me more watchful as 
to my deportment in life. 1 know that my sainted parents, and other 
relatives and friends, my children who died in infancy, are around me, 
witnessing every act and exercising a limited power over my safety and 
my health. 

Mourning for the dead now seems to be groundless, and at all events 
can bo indulged only upon selfish considerations. But who would grieve 
deeply at a transient separation, even for years, from friends made happier 
by the cliange, when sure of a happy reunion ultimately? 

Wo evidence of any important truth in science can be shown to be more 
unexceptionable than that which I have received of this glorious fact, that 
heaven is really " at hand," and that our relatives, friends, and acquaint- 
ances who are worthy of happiness, while describing themselves as inef- 
fably happy, are still progressing to higher felicity; and while hovering 
aloft in our midst, are taking interest in our welfare with an augmented 
zeal or affection, so that, by these means, they may be a solace to us, in 
despite of death. 

As the reverend clergy of the Episcopal Church are about to meet in 
Philadelphia, I deem it my duty to afford them an opportunity of hearing 
the evidence on which I rely; and which, with due '-ffort, they can have 
subjected to their own intuition. 

Should the clergy deem it expedient to listen to my exposition, I shall 
be ready to answer any queries which may be made. 

I am aware that there may be considerationB which may justify the 


,v Google 


APPENDIX. 420 

clergy in declining to hear me, I have never, in my own ease, deemed it 
wise to seek abstract right at the expense of practical evil- I would not 
urge persona in certain official stations to hecome converts to Spiritualism, 
lest it«houlclj by consequent unpopularity, interfere with their usefulness, 
as in the case of Judge Edmonds; and a like ohjeotion must arise as to 
the conversiou of clergymen, so far as to bring their convictions in compe- 
tition with their professional vocation. Orthodox Christians are generally 
educated to believe not only that the revelation on which they rely is true, 
but that no other can he justifiable. Hence they are evidently displeased 
that spiritualists should allege themselvea to have come by oth mean t 
that belief in immortality which is admitted on all sides to be th te t 

comfort tinder the aflictiona to which temporal life is liable. 

There is, moreover, this discordancy in doctrine : Agreeably t S p 
ture, man is plai.ed heie for probation, and is liable to be -nally pu 
niahed if he prove delinquent According to Hpiritnalism, jl d 

here for progression, and when ho goes to the nest worid, 1 11 w II h 
the opportunity to progress, however wicked he may be wh ii 1 d j, t 
this life. 

It is conceived by spiiitualist'* that if, as the orthodox all d T b 
omnipotent, he can make his creatures to suit his will ; if he 1 ran nt 
he must know what they are when made; and if he be pre nt h a 
foresee what they will be, and consequently cannot have the m U t n 
ceivable motive for exposing them to probation. 

I foresee that it may not be deemed expedient to take any notice of this 
letter; but whatever maybe the result in this way, does not interfere 
with the propriety of my putiing it in your power to avail yourselves of 
my offer ; since I have a sanction from a higher source, the spirit of the 
immortal Washington, the proofs of whose communion with me I am pre- 
pared to submit to any respectable inquirers. 

I am aware that this language would, a few years ago, have made me 
attach the idea of insanity to the author; but this cannot, nevertheless, 
in the slightest degree, be dedueible from it now, from the notorious fitct 
that the same monomania is never entertiwned by any two persons, and 
in wy hallucination, if it he such, there are a multitude of participators. 
That is to say, there are a multitude of persons of every grade who be- 
lieve that they have communicated with their spirit friends, as I have 
with mine; and who, like me, have believed themselves to have held 
communion with the spirits of some of the most distinguished men who 
have departed this life. A faith in the miracles of the New Testament 
may as well be adduced as insanity as belief in spiritual manifestations 
nndcr these circumstances. 

The fact that manifestations have fceen made and irutbfuily described 
has been admitted by the Calholic Church, but are ascribed to Satanic 

Let the doctrines of Spiritualism, and those of the church in question, 
be compared, in order to determine which owes most to Satan. 

The existence of a devil being admitted, was there ever a more fertile 
source of diabolical intolerance than the idea that a peculiar belief being 
necessary to save men's souls from hell fire, any temporal evi! to which 
mortals might be subjected to coerce belief, would be as justifiable as the 
forcible extirpation of an incipient cancer from the body of a child un- 
willing to submit to the operation? If ever there was a devil's agency, 


;;■ Google 


AI-PENDIX. 


it may be seen in the auto-da~f^, tho Inquisition, and tbe maasaere of 8t, 
Bartholemew's day. 

Of tbe same devilish character wag the execution of Servetus by Calvin, 
or the persooution of the Quakers and witciics by the Puritans. 

Kespcotfully, your well-wisher, Robert Hake, 


V LETTER FROM DR. HAKE. 


Addrcised to the President of the Amociation, for the Advancement of 
Science, at their meeting, August 18, 1855. 

PRELIMINAEY EeMABKS. 

Having addressed the subjoined letter to the American Association for 
the Advaucemeiit of Sciencej the standing committee resolved that the 
subject did not fall sufficiently within the objects of the Association to 
allow even of ita being reed to the meeting. In the instance of my letter 
to the Episcopal clergy, it was stated that its acknowledgment by them 
was not expected; and after this impression was "veiified, I admitted that, 
in their not replying, the interest of the church was best consulted. In 
the present case I admit that the harmony of the Association was perhaps 
best consulted in not recognising that the objects of the Association in- 
volved the duty of allowing certain facts to he stated before it, which are 
at wai with the received doctrines of science, no less than with those ot 
revehition. 

During the I>ai'k Ages, the so-called word of God (but really the words 
of ignoi-ant propagandists) had taken such hold of the proper domain 
of science, that it was heresy to assert tho rotundity of tliis planet, or 
that the sun did not tevol ahout t di ally. But at this time science 
has established itself upon th d ma n 1 mied for religious truth, so that 
between the positive scien f th th t Comte and the dogmatic opi- 
nions of the orthodox savan th is n com for the germ of Spiritual- 
ism to shoot up. , 

It seems to me that, In du u t sy and liberality, the standing com- 
mittee might have had my letter read to the meeting, and have let the 
members judge whether it should he acknowledged. But I place it on 
record in this volume, and leave the propriety of their having neglected 
to acknowledge it to be estimated hereafter in this world, as it has already 
been in the world of spirits, as respects its influence on the estimation of 
the parties. 

I am aware, however, that every man in society is more or less a. peon, 
and that there is no .small analogy between the situation of many holding 
worldly pre-eminence and that of the poor apothecary of i 


;;■ Google 


APPENDIX. 431 

e and reason are ever under tte control of expedioncy. Those 
who live in society must he governed by the hearts and heads of others as 
well as their own: unless they aro quite sure that the cause of truth will 
suffer hy thoir silence, they should not speak to give others umbrage. I 
always considered it my duty not to do any thing which would injure the 
institution of which I was a member for nearly thirty years. Douhtless, 
the sachems of the Association did what they thought best, as probably I 
h uld h done, had I been situated as they were, and holding their 

11 

In th 1 tter aa actually sent to the Association, I introduced the argu- 
n nts f oded on Dr. Bell's observations, (111, 287, 864,) also the facts 
nd ng submitted in the Supplemental Preface. I shall, of course, 

lea th ader to recur to those passages, and introdnce here only the 
other porfJons of my letter : 
To THE President of the Assdciatios fok tbe Aqvahcejieni of Soiewoe ; 

Dear iStV ; Being engaged in putting a work to press, I am sorry to be 
unable to be present at the meeting of the Association on the 15th inst. 

When I was at the last meeting, I stated an experiment made with the 
greatest care and precision, which proved the existence of a power inde- 
pendent of any possible or conceivable mortal agency; and 1 had on that 
occasion an opportunity of experiencing the fate of the Dntch ambassador 
who first made the king of Ava acquainted with the fact that bodies of 
water can be frozen so as to enable people to walk on a solidified aqueous 
surface. It was a disease of the mind in either case. 

But let no one apply to his soul the self-complacent unction that it was my 
hallucination, not bigoted ignorance, that origmated that diagnosis. Since 
that time, the fact of movements being made intelligibly, without any per- 
ceptible or assignable mortal aid, has been verified hundreds of times by 
others; while under my own intuition it has been reiterated many times, 
the experiment which I adduced having been repeated with every imagi- 
nable precaution and inatruotive variation. ***** 

About two years have elapsed, since I erroneously sanctioned Farraday's 
explanation of the manifestations, in ascribing them to involuntary muscular 
action. This arose from my being, no less than that philosopher, so utterly 
incredulous and intolerant of any idea of spiritual agency in any of the phe- 
nomena of nature, excepting those which I ascribed to God, that I did not take 
the possible agency of spirits into view; but having been obliged to admit 
the facfB conceded by Dr. Bell, (287,) and having received interesting and 
intellectual communications of which he has not been informed, I cannot, 
with him, stop half-way : nor conld he, were be to have the interesting 
communications with his spirit friends wbieb I have had with mine. 

There has been a time when religion repressed science; and it would 
seem that at the present era science is to revenge itself by repressing 
religious truth, by sanctioning indirectly the aUeged manifestations of anti- 
quity, while deriding those of the present time; believing on miracles told 
by no one knows who, yet denying the allegations of eye-witnessea known 
to be truthful; while straining at spiritual gnats, swalJowiiig scriptural 
camels. With high esteem, your well-wisher, 

KOBEBT HiUtE. 


;;■ Google 


APPENDIX. 


ARRiUJAY'S SPECULATION. 


Speculation toucldng Electric Conduction- and the nature of Matter. . Bi/ 
Fm-rady. 

Having expressed my objections to Farraday's inferences respecting 
matter, &o., I feel that justice requires tiat I shoiJd submit the article 
whieb drew forth my strictures. At tbia time, when electricity and matter 
are scrutinized with a view to understand the analogous, but different, 
entities of the spirit world, the ideas of an experimental investigator so 
eminently successful, must be of interest to readers; 

Light and electricity are two great and searching investigators of the 
molecular structure of bodies, and it was, while considering the probable 
nature of conduction and insulation in bodies not decomposable by the 
electricity to which they were subject, and the relation of electricity to 
apace contemplated as void of that which, by the anatomist, is called 
matter, that considerations, something like those which follow, were pre- 
sented to my mind. 

If the view of the constitution of matter, already referred to, ho as- 
sumed to be correct, and I may be allowed to speak of the particles of 
matter and of the space between them (in wafer, or in the vapour of water, 
for instance) as two different things, then space must be taken as the only 
continuous part, for the particles are considered as separated by space from 
each other. Space will permeate all masses of matter in every direction 
lite a net, except that, in place of meshes, it will form cells, isolating each 
atom from its neighbours, and itself only being continuous. 

Then take the case of a piece of shellac, a non-conductor, and it wooJd 
appear at oiice, from such a view of its constitution, that space is aa insu- 
lator, for if it were a conductor, the sheila* could not insulate, whatever 
might be the relation as to eondueting power of its material atoms; the 
space would be like a fine metallic web penetrating it in every direction, just 
as we may imagine of a heap of siliceous sand having all its pores filled 
with water, or as we may consider of a stick of black was, which, though 
it contains an infinity of particles of conducting charcoal diffosed through 
every part of it, cannot conduct, because a non-conducting body (a resin) 
intervenes and separates them one from another like the supposed space in 
the lac. 

Next take the case of a metal, platinum or potassium, constituted, ac- 
cording to the atomic theory, in the same manner. The metal is a con- 
ductor ; but how can this be, except space be a conductor, for it is the only 
continuous part of the metal, and the atoms not only do not touch, (by 
the theory,) but, as we shall see presently, must be assumed to be a con- 
siderable way apaa-t. Space, therefore, must be a conductor, or else the 
metals could not conduct, hut would be in the situation of the hiaok seal- 
ing-wax referred to a little while ago. 

But if space be a conductor, how then can sbellac, sulphur, &c, insulate ? 
for space permeates them in every direction. Or, if space be an insulator, 
how can a metal or other similar body conduct 'I 

It would seem, therefore, that in accepting the ordinary atomic theory, 


,v Google 


APPENDIX. 

space may be proved to be a non-conductor in nou-eo 
a oondaefor in conducting bodies; but tbe reasoning enaa la inis, a auD- 
version of that theory altogether, for if space be aa insulator, it cannot 
exist in conducting bodies, and if it be a conductor, it cannot exist in insu- 
lating bodies. Any ground of reasoaing whicb tends to such conclusions 
must in itself be false. 

In connection with aueb conoluaions, we may consider shortly what are 
the probabilities that present themselves to the mind, if the extension of 
the atomic theory which chemists have imagined be applied in conjunction 
with the conducting powers of metals. If the specific gravity of the 
metals be divided by the atomic numbers, it gives us the number of atoms, 
upon the hypothesis, in equal bnlks of the metals. In the following table 
the first column of figures expresses nearly the numbers of atoms iu, and 
the second column of figures the conducting power of, equal volumes of 
the metals named : 

At C du H g poivor. 

1 W gold 6 UO 


So heie iron, whiLh CLCtams the gieatest number of atoms in a given 
bulk, IS the wti t conductor esLoptrng one Gold, whi(,h contains the 
fewest IS neaily the belt conductor, not that these conditions are in in- 
verse proportions, for copper, whieh contains nearly as many atoms as 
iron, conducts better still than gold, and with above six times the power 
of iron. Lead, which contains more atoms than gold, has only about one- 
twelfth of its conducting power ; lead, which ia much heavier than tin 
and much lighter than platina, has only half the conducting power of either 
of these metals. And all this happens among substances which we are 
bound to consider at present as elementary or simple. Whichever way we 
consider the particles of matter and the space between them, and esamine 
the assumed constitution of matter by this table, the results are full of 
perplexity. 

Now let us take the case of potassium, a compact metallic substance 
with excellent conducting powers — its oxide or hydrate a non-conductor; it 
will supply us with some facts having very important bearings on the as- 
sumed atomic construction of matter. 

When potassium is oxidized, an atom of it combines with an atom of 
oxygeu to form an atom of potassa, and an atom of potasaa combines with 
an atom of water, consisting of two atoms of oxygen and hydrogen, to 
form an atom of hydrate of potassa, so that an atom of hydrate of potassa 
contains four elementary atoms. The specific gravity of potassiam is 
0-865, and its atomic weight 40-; the specific gravity of cast hydrate of 
potassa, iu such a state of purity as I could obtain it, I found to be nearly 
2 ; its atomic weight, 57. From these, which may be taken as fccts, the 
following strange conclusions flow ; A piece of potassium contains less po- 
tassium than an equal piece of the potash formed by it and oxygen. We 
may cast into potassium oxygen, atom for atom, and then again both 
oxygen and hydrogen in a twofold number of atoms, and with all these 


;;■ Google 


434 APPENDIX. 

additions the matter shall become less and less, until it is no w h d 
of its original Tolume. If a giyen bulk of potassium coDta.in 45 toms 
the same bulk of hydrate of potassa contnias 70 atoms nearly f m I 
polassitiw., and, besides that, 210 atoms more of oxygen and hyd n 1 
dealing with assumptions, I must assume a little more for h sak f 
making any kind of statement; !et me therefore assume that h 1 y 
drate of potassa the atoms are all of one size and nearly to h h 

other, and that in a euhio inch of that substance there are 2800 1 m n y 
atoms of potassium, oxygen, and hydrogen ; take 2100 atom f y 
and hydrogen, and the 700 atoms of potassium remaining will w 11 
more than a cubic inch and a half; and if we diminish the n mh n 1 
only those containable in a cubic inch remain, we shall have 430, or there 
about. So a space which can contain 2SO0 atoms, and among them 700 
of potassium itself, is found to be entirely filled by 430 atoms of potas 
sium, as they exist in the ordmiry state of that mefa! Surely, then, 
under the suppositions of the atomic thiory, the atoms of potasuum must 
be Tery fitr apart in the metal, i e there must be much moie of space 
than of matter in that body ; yet it is an excellent conductor and so space 
must be a conductor, but then what becomes of shellac, sulphur, and all 
the insulators ? for space miist also, by the theory, exist in them. 

Again, the volume which will contain 430 atoms of poiassjum, and 
nothing else while in the state of metal, will, when that potassium is con- 
verted into nitre, contwn very nearly the same number of atoms of potas- 
sium, i. e. 416, and also then seven times as many, or 2912 atoms, of nitro- 
gen and oxygen beside. In carbonate of potassa, the space which will 
eontrdn only the 430 atoms of potassium as metal, being entirely filled 
by it, will, after the conversion, contain 256 atoms more of potassium, 
making 686 atoms of that met^, and in addition 2744 atoms of oxygen 
and carbon. 

These and similar considerations might be extended through, compounds 
of sodium and other bodies, with results equally striking, and indeed more 
so, when the relations of one substance, as oxygen and suiphur, with dif- 
ferent bodies are brought into comparisoo. 

I am not ignorant that the mind is most powerfully drawn by the phe- 
nomena of crystallization, chemistry, and physios generalJy to the acknow- 
ledgment of centres of force. I feel myselt constrained, for the present, 
hypo the tically to admit them, and cannot do without them ; but I feel 
gi'cat difficulty in the conception of atoms of matter which in solids, fluids, 
and vapours are supposed to be more or less apart from each othev, with 
intervening space not occupied by atoms, and perceive great contradictions 
in the conclusions which flow from such a view. 

If we must assume at all, as indeed in a branch of knowledge like the 
present we can hardly help it, then the safest course appears to be to as- 
sume as little aa possible ; and in that respect the atoms of Boscovich ap- 
pear to me to have a great advantage over the more usual notion. His 
atoms, if I understand aright, are inere ceutivss of forces or powers, not 
particles of matter in which the powers themselves reside. If in the 
ordinary view of atoms, we call the particle of matter away from the 
powers a, and the system of powers or forces in and around it m, then in 
Boscovich's theory a disappears, and is a mere mathematical point, while 
in the usual notion it is a little, unchangeable, impenetrable piece of matter, 
and TO is aa atmosphere of force grouped around it. 


;;■ Google 


APPENDIX, 405 

■In iiiaDy of the hypothetical uses made of atoms, as in crysta!logriph> , 
chemistrjj magnetism, &c., this difference in the assamption. makes little 
or no alteration in the results ; but in other cases, as of electric conductors, 
the nature of light, the manner in which hodies combine to produce com 
pounds, the effect of forces, as heat or electricity, upon matter, the differ- 
ence will be very great. 

Thus, referring back to pota^ium, in which as a mefcd the atoms must, 
as we ha've seen, be, according to the usual view, very far apart from each 
other, how can we for a moment imagine that its conducting property be- 
longs to it any otherwise than as a consequence of tbe properties of the 
space, or, as I have called it above, the m! So also its other properties in 
regard to light, or magnetism, or solidity, or hardness, or speeifto gravity, 
must belong to it, in consequence of the properties or forces of the vt, not 
those of the a, which, without the forces, is conceived of as having no 
powers. But then, surely, the m is the matter of the potassium, for where 
is there the least ground (eieept in a gratuitous assumption') for imagine 
ing a difference in kind between the nature of that space midway between 
the centres of two contiguous atoms, and any other spot between these 
centres ? A difference in degree or even in the nature of the power consist- 
eat with the laws of continuity I can admit, but the difference between a 
supposed little hard particle and the powers around it, I cannot imagine. 

To my mind, therefore, the a or nucleus vanishes, and the substance con- 
sist of tlie powers or m; and indeed what notion can we form of the nuolens 
independent of its powers ? All our perception and knowledge of the atom, 
and even our fancy, is limited to ideas of its powers; what thought remains 
on which to bang the imagination of an « independent of the acknowledged 
forces ? As mind just entering on the subject may consider it difficult to 
think of the powers of matter independent of a sepai-ate something to be 
called ike matter, but it is certainly far more difficult, and indeed impossi- 
ble to think of or imagine that matter independent of the powers. Now, 
the powers we know and recognise in every phenomena of the creation, the 
abstract matter in one ; why, then, assume the existence of that of which 
we are ignorant, which we cannot conceive, and for which there is no phi- 
losopbioal necessity? 

Before concluding these speculations, I will refer to a few of the import- 
ant differences between the assumption of atoms consisting merely of 
centres of force like those of Boscovieh, and that other assumption of 
molecules of something specially materia], having powers attached in and 
around' them. 

With the latter atoms a mass of matter consists of atoms and intervening 
space ; with the former atoms matter is everywhere present, and there is no 
intervening space unoccupied by it. In gases the atoms touch each other 
just as truly as in solids. In this respect the atoms of water touch each 
other, whether that substance be in the form of ice, water, or steam ; no 
mere intervening space is present. Doubtless, the centres of force vary 
in their distance one from another, but that which is truly the matter of 
one atom touches the matter of its neighbours. 

Hence matter will be confinu<ms throughout, and in considering we have 
not to suppose a distinction between its atoms and any intervening space. 
'The powers around the centres give these centres the properties of atoms 
of matter; and these powers again, when many centres by their conjoint 
forces are grouped into a mass, give to every part of that mass the proper- 


ly Google 


idb APPENDIX. 

ties of matter. In sucli a Tiew all the contradiction resulting fiom tlie 
consideration of electric insulation and condu&tion disappears 

The atoms may be conceived of as highly dastii, instead of being sup- 
posed excessively hard and unalterable in form, the mere compiession of 
a bladder of air between the hands can altei their siae a little, and the 
experiments of Cagniard la Tour carry on this change in size until the 
difference in bnllr at one time and another may be made several hundred times. 
Such is also the case when a solid or a fiaid body is converted into vapour. 

With regard also to the sliape of the atoms 1 d' g t th d' 

nary assumption, its definite and unalterable ch racte th m t 

now be taken of it. An atom by itself might b ed f ph I 

or spheroidal, or where many were touching 11 d t th f 

might be thought of as a dodecahedron, for a y w Id b d d 

by and bear against twelve others, on different d B t if t m be 
conceived to be a centre of power, that which, i d ly f d to d 
the term shape, would now be referred to the d p d 1 t 

tonsity of the forces. The power arranged in i 1 t m ht 

be uniform in arrangement and intensity in e y d t tw d f 

that centre, and then a section of equal inte ty t f th gh th 
radii would be a sphere ; or the law of decrea f f ce f m th t 
outward might vary in different directions, an 1 th th t f ■[ 1 
intensity might be an oblate or oblong sph d h h f m 

or the forces might be disposed so aa to m k tl t pol tb \ 

might circulate around it equatorially or oth -w ft th m t 

imagined magnetic atoms. In fact, nothing b sipp d f th d 

position of forces in or about a solid nucleus f m tte wh h t 1 

equally conceived with respect to a centre. 

In the view of matter now susttnned as th I mpt m tt 

and the atoms of matter would fee mutually i t bl A& on d th 
mutual penetrability of matter, one would thi k th t th f t p t 
potassium and its compounds, already described w Id b gh to p 

that point to a mind which accepts a fact for ft d tbt td 

in its judgment by preconceived notions. W f h p t t th m t 1 
penetrability of the atoms, it seems tometp myptf 

view a more beautiful, yet equally probable d pbil ph d f th 
constitution of bodies than the other hypothe p lly th m f 

chemical combination. If we suppose an atom f yg d t m t 

potassium about to combine and pi-oduce potash, the hypothesis of solid, 
' ' 3, impenetrable atoms places these two particles side by side in 
leily, because mechanically, ima^ned, and not unfrequently 
id; but if these two atoms be centres of power, they will mutu- 
ally penetrate to the very centres, thus forming one atom or molecule, with 
powers either uniformly around it or arranged as the resultant of the 
powers of the two constituent atoms ; and tne manner in which two or 
many centres of force may in this way combine, and afterward, under the 
dominion of stronger forces, separate, may in some degree be illustrated by 
the beautiful case of the conjunction of two sea waves of different velocities 
into one, their perfect union for a time, and final separation into the consti- 
tuent waves, considered, I think, at the meeting of the British Association 
at Liverpool. It does not, of course, follow fi'ora this view that the centres 
shall always coincide; that will depend upon the rektive disposition of the 
powers of each atom. 


;;■ Google 


APPENDIX. 437 

The view now stated of the constitution of matter would seem to involve 
neoeasariJy the coucluaion that matter fills all spaoe, or, at least, all 
space to which gravitation extends, (including the sun and its system,) for 
gravitation is a property of matter dependent on a certain force, and it ja 
this force whicb constitutes the matter. In that view matter is not merely 
mutually penetrable, but each atom extends, so to aay, thi-oughout the 
whole of the solar system, yet alwajrs retainiug its own centre of force. 
This, at first sight, seems to fill in very harmoniously with Massotti'a ma- 
thematical investigations and reference of the phenomena of eiecdicity, 
cohesion, gravitation, &c. to one force in matter, and also again with the 
old adage "matter cannot act where it is not." But it is no part of my 
intention to enter into such considerations as these, or wliat the bearings 
of this hypothesis would be on the theory of light and the supposed ether. 
My desire has been rather to bring certain facts from electrical conduction 
and cheniioBl combination to bear strongly upon our views regarding the 
nature of atoms and matter, and so to assist in distinguishing in natural 
philosophy our real knowledge — i. e. the knowledge of facts aad laws— from 
that, which, though it has the form of knowledge, may, from its including 
so much that is mere assumption, be the very reverse. 

It is to be regretted that the memoir of the Kev. Mr. Whewell could 
not be quoted, being long and obscure. His opinions, it is conceived,- have 
been stated fairly, (1796.) 

Motives for repiihlishmg w.y Memoirs on Electrical TJieori/.' ■ 
The principal motive, without which the other motives would not have 
prevailed, is, that having had an interview with the spirit of Franklin ex- 
pressly to have his advice, it was given decidedly in favour of publication. 
There is no door in the temple of science which is so easy of access as 
that whicb Jeads to the departm nt f 1 t ty Th jllustrations usually 
^ven at a popular lecture may t th m t n mu> an infant, instruct 
a student, and yet perplex ajf llll ph As associated with 
the phenomena of thunder and 1 htn ug at ne t m attributed to the 
bolt of omnipotent Jove, no n [u nee f s nt fie research are so 
awful and sublime : coupled w tl th m gn t It telegraph, no other 
result so miraculous. "While vis inertim would keep all nature in statu 
quo, whether at rest, or like our planet in motion with a velocity fifty 
tiines as great as that of a cannon ball : while gravitation tends like the 
clock weight to produce a definite action and, jjer se, never to act again : 
electricity, with a protean diversity of power, appears to be the great in- 
strument of all those changes by which the quiescent influence of the 
properties above mentioned, is modified in the mund me opheie of diemut v 
and of life. 

Every tyro ia aware of the wonderful property impaitod to ekctiics by 
friction — to the toiirmaline by heat; and that the same proct^s, on *i hi^e 
scale, will produce sparks, ignition, combustion, deflagration, ind destroy 
animal life by an instantaneous shock. It is notoriou=i that these won 


Googk 


438 ArPENDix. 

derful powers may all be imparted to a n'xked pane of glass, while* tie 
charge thus imparted is reallj only twj opjosite and equal affections, ca 
pable of neutralizing each other by due communication Known alifo la 
it, that properties, to a certain extent eimilai, may be found in a pile of 
pairs of heterogeneous metals, with the aiditional piwci ot elCLtiolysjs, 
or, in other words, of resolving ohemic il compounds info then ingredient', 
(1376.) It is well known that, by these moans, watci, long and almost 
religiously considered as one of the four elements of the univerae, can be 
decomposed into two kinds of air; that the eaiths and alkalies hive been 
resolved into metals and oxygen ; and that there i") scarcely any chemical 
compound consisting of two elements, which may not, when in aqueous 
solution or in fusion by heat, be directly or indirectly decomposed by elec- 
trolysis, as explained in the not* to page 384. 

These multifarious feats of electricity have caused it to he contemplated 
as the source of every thing mysterious in nature. It is not surprising, 
therefore, that those who, through the accessibility of electricity, had be- 
come partially acquainted with electrical phenomena, should view it as the 
source of spiritual manifestations; while tliose who have a more exten- 
sive knowledge of the nature and extent of electrical jurisdiction should 
perceive at onee that the phenomena in question do not fall within its 
sphere. 

After the discovery, by Oersted, of the previously unsuspeeted reac- 
tion between galvanized wire and a magnetic needle, those who had 
resorted to either one or two fluids to explain eiectriea! phenomena, found 
themselves completely at fault. Yet the language originated by Franklin 
has been still employed conventionally. This, though not misleading 
adepts, introduces confusion ia the minds of those who have merely 
reached the ante-chamber of the electrical department. 

Under these circumstances, I deem it expedient to republish the exposi- 
tion of electrical theory which I first laid before the scientific world 
ill 1848. 

I hope that those who endeavour to refer spiritual manifestations or 
animal magnetism to electricity, in any of its modifications, will study this 
exposition of mj views. 

Though, as already stated, there appears to be, for the spirit world, ap- 
propriate elements, distinct from those of this mundane world, there is, 
nevertheless, a correspondence. We mortals can best prepare ourselves to 
understand the elements of that world by understanding our own. From 
an idea of ok r light and our vital air, we, may by analogy conceive of 
theirs as a preliminary to any further kuowledgo. 

The following theory has been submitted to the spirit of Franklin, who 
fuUy approved of it, and fully admitted the validity of the reasons assigned 
by me for substituting this new exposition of electricity for that which 
goes under h 


,v Google 


APPESDIX. 


Objections to the Theories severally of IVariklm, JDu/ay, and Ampm-e, 
loith art effort to explam Electrical Phenomena, hy Statical or Undu- 
latori/ Polaj-ization.* By Robert Sare, M.D., Emeritus Professor of 
Cliemiatry in the Universily of Pennsylvania. 

1. It appears, from tlie esperimenta of Wlieatstone, that the discharge 
of a Leyden jar, by means of a copper wire, tak^ place withia a time so 
small, that were the transfer of a fluid from the positiTe to the negatiye 
surface requisite for its accomplishment, a cun-ent having a velocity ex- 
ceeding two hundred thousand miles in a second would bo necessary. 

2. The only causes for the velocity of an electric current, according to 
Franklin, are the repulsion hetween the particles of tte electric fluid of 
which it has been assumed to consist, and the attraction between those par- 
ticles and other matter. These forces are alleged to concur in distributing 
the supposed fluid throughout space, whether otherwise void, or partially 
occupied by conducting solids or fluids. Hence, when between two or 
more spaces, surfaces, or conducting masses, there is an unequal distribu- 
tion of the electric fluid, the equilibrium is restored whenever a 
cation is opened by means of a sufficiently conducting mediu 
to this view of the subject, there seems to be a resemblanc 
supposed effort of the electrical fluid to attain a state of equable difi'usion, 
and that which would exist in the case of a gas confined in adjoining re- 
ceivers, so as to be more dense within one than within the other; for, 
however the subtilty nf the supposed electric fluid may esceed that of acy 
gas, there seems to be an analogy as lespacis the processes of diffusion 
which must prevail. But on opening a communication between cavities 
in which any aeriform fluid exists, in different degrees of condensation, 
the density must lessen in one cavity and augment in the other, with a 
rapidity which must diminish gradually, and become evanescent with the 
difference of pressure by which it is induced. Far from taking place in 
an analogous manner, electrical discharges are effected with an extreme 
suddenness, the whole of the redundancy being discharged at once, in 
a mode more like the flight of a bullet, projected with infinite velocity, 
than that of a jet gradually varying in celerity from a maximum to a 
minimum. 

3. So far, in feet, is an electrical discharge from displaying the features 
which belong to the reaction of a condensed elastic fluid, that agreeably to 
the observations of our distinguished countryman Henry, the result is more 
like the vibrations of a spring, which, in striving to regain its normal po- 
sition, goes beyond it. The first discharge between the surfaces of a 
Leyden jar is not productive of a perfect equilibrium. The transfer of 

* According to Pairaday's resemches and ganeral esperienee, wa hnre renaon to ■believe 
that all portioleB of matter are endowed wit!i one or the otLec of two species of polarity. 
This word paloiit; conveys the idea that two ierminiitions in each putide are respoctively 
eudoired with forces which ore analogousj hut contrary in iheii' nature; so that of any two 
homogeneoue particles, the eimilsr poles repel each other, i>hile the dissimilar attract; 
Ukeirise, when freely guspended, they tjike a certiun poEitiou relatively to each other, and 
on Had proximity, the opposite polar forces, counteracting each other, appear to be extent. 
When deranged from thia natural atate of recipi'ocal nentraliaation, their liberated polos 
react nith the parUclee of odjocent hodiee, or those in tie surronnding modium. Under 
thoae oircu instances, any hody which may bo oonstitutcd of the pai-tiolea thna reacting is 
enid to be polarized, or In a state of polarization. 

Statical implies atationary; undnlatuiy, ware-lilie. 


, Google 


440 Al'PENDIX. 

different polarities goes beyond tlie point of reciprocal neEtra.lizalJou, pro- 
ducing a staffi, to a small extent, the opposite of that at first existing; and 
hence a refluent discharge ensues, opposite in direction to the primary one. 
But even this does not produce an eqiiilibrium, so that a third effort is 
made. These alternate discharges were detected by means of the mag- 
netism imparted to needles exposed in coils of copper wire.* 

4. Supposing one or more rows of electrical particles, forming such a 
filament of electricity as must occupy the space within a wire of gi-eat 
length, to he made the medium of discharge to a Leydeu jar; agreeably 
to the hypothesis of one fluid, the electrical filament mnst he attracted at 
one end of the wire and repelled at the other, as soon as its terminations 
are brought into due communication with the coatings of the jar. Yet 
the iofl.«ence of the oppositely-charged surfaces of the jar cannot be con- 
ceived to estend to those portions of the electricity which are remote from 
the points of contact, until they be reaobed by a succession of vibrations. 
Hence, it is inconceivable that every particle in the filament of electric 
matter can be made at the same time to move, so as to constitute a current 
having the necessary velocity and volume to transfer, instantaneously, the 
eleetrieity requisite to constitute a charge. Even the transmission of the 
impulses, in snoh an infinitesimal of time, seems to bo inconceivable- 

5. In reply to these objections, it has been urged by the Franklinians 
that a conductor being replete with electricity, as soon as this fluid should 
be removed at one end, it ought to move at the other. This might be true 
of a fluid if incompressible, but could not hold good were it elastic. A 
bell wire moves at both ends when pulled only at onej but this would not 
ensue were a cord of gum-elastic substituted for the wire. 

6. But if the flow of one fluid, with the enormous velocity inferred, he 
difficult to conceive, still more must it be incomprehensible that two fluids 
can rush with similar celerity, from each surface of the jar, in opposite 
directions, through the narrow channel afforded by a wire; especially as 
they are alleged fo esereise an intense affinity; so that it is only by a 
series of decompositions and reoompositions that they can pass each other. 

7. That agreeably to the theory nf Dufay, equivalent portions of the 
resinous and vitreous fluids must exchange pkces during an electrical dis- 
charge, will appear evident from the following considerations : One surface 
being redundant with vitreous and deficient comraensurately of resinous 
electricity, and the other redundant with the resinous and deficient of the 
vitreous fluid, it is inevitable that, to restore the equilibrium, there mnst 
be a simultaneous transfer of each redundancy to the surfaces wherein there 
is a deficiency of it to be supplied. If, after decomposing a large portion 
of the neutral compound previously esistiag on the surface of the jai-, and 
transferring the ingredients severally in opposite directions, so as to cause 
each to exist in excess upon the surface assigned to it, should the redun- 
dasoies, thus originated, be neutralized by meeting in the discharging rod, 
neither surfece could recover its quota of the electrical ingredient of which 
it must have been deprived i^reeably to the premises. 

8. This calls to mind the fact that no evidence has been adduced of the 
existence of any tertium quid, arising from the union of the supposed 
eleetricities, founded oa any property displayed by their resulting combina- 
tion in the neutral state. It must, if it exist, constitute an anomalous 


$ CommnDicatad to the Ameiioiui PbiloBopbical Society. 


, Google 


AprnNEix. 441 

mattei, ile&titute of ill pinppitieij inl of the csi^tcnLL oi wliiJi wi Imc 
no evidence, besides that founded on tlic appetrance ind disappeaiazn,e 
of ife alleged ingredienta 

9 But howcvei plausibly the disehirges consLq^nent to making «b con 
ducting oommunieation fiom one electiified mass oi surface to another 
mass 01 surface in an oppoijite ^tate, may be ascribed to accumulation a 
either of one or of two fluids, neither, lecoiding to one theory nor the 
othei, 13 it pos'.ible to looount satisfactorily for the stitioniry magnetism 
with which steel may he endowed, nor the tran^tory magnetibm, or power 
of dynamie indui,tion, acquired hy wiics traa emitting galvaDic dischaiges 

10 Eor the most plausiblp effort which hai been made foi the puipose 
of leconcihn^ the phenomen^ of eleotro-magnetism with the theory of 
two fluids, or with th'it of one fluid so fii i^ tho«c theoiies are eoBTertible, 
we are indebted to Ampere. 

11. According to the hypothesis advanced by this eminent philosopher, 
the difference between a magnetized and an electrified body is not attri- 
butable to any diversify in the imponderable matter to which their pro- 
perties are respectively due, but to a difference iu the actual state or dis- 
tribution of that matter. Statical polarity is the consequence of the unequal 
distribution of the two electric fiuids whose existence he assumes; while 
magnetical polarity is the consequence merely of the motion of those fluids, 
which, in magnela, are supposed to gyrate in opposite directions about each 
particle of the mass. These gyrations are conceived to take place only in 
planes at right angles to the asis of the magnet ; so that, in a straight 
magnet, the planes of the orbits must be parallel to each other.* 

12. The aggregate effect of all the minute vortices of the electrical 
fluids, in any one plane, bounded by the lateral surfaces of the magnet, ia 
equivalent estemally to one vortex, since, in either case, every electric 
particle on that surface will so move as to describe tangents to a circle 
drawn about the asis of the magnet. When the electrical vortices of the 
pole of one magnet conflict in their direction with those of another, as 
when similar magnetic poles are approximated, repulsion ensues; but if 
the vortices are coincident in direction, as when dissimilar poles are near, 
attraction takes place. ■ When a current through a galvanized wiref con- 
curs in direction with the magnetic vortices, as above described, attraction 
ensues; repulsion resulting when it does not so concur. Hence, the 
magnet, if movable, will strive to assume a position in which its electrical 
cuirenla will not conflict with those of the wire on one side more than on 
the other; also the wire, if movable, will strive so to arrange itself so as 
to produce the same result, which can arrive only when the needle ia at 
right angles to the wire, and its sides consequently equidistant therefrom. 

13. Electric currents will produce magnetic "vortices, and, reciprocally, 
magnetic vortice* will produce electric currents. Hence tbe magnetism 
imparted to iron }y galvanic spirals, and the Farvadian currents produced 
by magnetizei iron withm spirals not galvanized. 

14. Ampete a theory has in a high degree, the usual fault of substitut- 
ing one mystery for another, but, on the other hand, it has, in an equally 


na sjnonjinoiia 
nedlum of tlio c 


;;■ Google 


442 APPENDIX. 

high extent, tte only merit to wliiot any theory can make on indisputable 
claim : I mean that of associating facts bo as to make them more easy to 
comprehend and to remember, enabling us, by analogy, to foresee results, 
and thus affording a clue in our investigationa. Evidently, the author of 
this theory was guided by it in hie highly interesting and instructive con- 
trivances; and Professor Henry asoribea his sncceaa in improving the 
electro-magnet to the theoretic clue which he had received from Ampere. 

15. NevertheleBs, the postulates on which this Amperean hypothesis is 
founded appear to me unreasonable. They require us to concede that 

bo t J t of a permanent magnet a process is goiag on analogous 

t th t l!y admitted to exist in a galvanic circuit, where two fluids 

p h th in a common channel by a series of decompositions ind 

mp t i7.) In the galvanic circuit this process is sustained by 

b 1 ; but without any eoenduring oause, how is it to be sus- 

tai d pe m tly in a magnet f Is it reasonable to assume thit the 
heteri^eaeous constituents of an imaginaiy tertivmi quid are perpetually 
separating only to reianite? (^.)* 

16. Incases of complex affinity, where four particles, AB C Daie united 
into two compounds A B, I>, It is easy to conceive that, in obedience 
to a stronger affinity, A shall combine with C, and B wJth D : but, with- 
out any extraneous agency, wherefore, ia anyone compound, should a par- 
ticle A quit a particle E, ia order to unite with another particle of the 
same kind ; or wherefore should any one B quit one A, in order to combine 
with another A ? 

17. That such a process should take place in eonsequenoe of the induc- 
tive agency of a similar process already established in a magnet or gal- 
vaniaed wire were difficult f<i believe ; but it would seem utterly incredible 
that the most trimnenl influence of such induction should be productive 
of SHoh permanent electrolytic gyration as has been above specified. More- 
over, it is inconceivable that the particles of any matter should, as required 
by this hypothesis, merely hy being pu( into ^notion, acquire a power of 
reciprocal repulsion or attraction of whioh it were otherwise destitute. 

IS. The vortices being assumed to take place about each atom, cannot 
severally occupy an area of greater diameter than can exist between the 
centres of any two atoms. Of course, the gyratory force exercised about 
the surface of a magnet by the aggregate movements of the vortices can- 
not extend beyond the surfaj^e more than half the diameter of one of the 
. minute areas of gyration alluded to. Wherefore, then, do these gyrations, 
when similar ia direction, from their concurrence approach each other; 
when dissimilar in direction, from contrariety move away, even when 
situated comparativeiy at a great distance ? 

19. I should consider Ampere's theory as more reasonable were it 
founded upon the existence of one fluid; since, in that ease, vortices 
might be imagined without the necessity of supposing an endless and un- 
accountable separation and reunion of two sets of particles; not only 
devoid of any property capable of siKtaining their alleged opposite gyra- 
tions, but actually endowed with an intense reciprocal attraotion which 
must render such gyrations impossible. But even if grounded on the idea 
of one fluid, this celebrated hypothesis does not seem to me to account for 

^ In some eloetro-magnoticappar!itua,t!ni polarity of on eleetro-mognot is reveisod moro 


, Google 


APPENDIX. 4i3 

the plienomena wMoh it ■was intended to explain. If distinct portioos of 
any fluid do not attraijt or repel each other when at rest, wherefore 
should they either attract or repel each other when in motion? Eyidently 
mere motion can generate neither attraofion nor repulsion. Bodies pro- 
jeeted horizontally gravitate with the same intensity, and consequently, 
in any given time, fall to the earth through the same perpendicular dis- 
tance, whether moving with the celerity of a cannon hall, or undergoing 
no impulse excepting those arising from their own unresisted weights, 

20. The ohjections which are tirus shown to be applicable in the case of 
liquids, of which the neighbouring particles are destitute of the reaction 
requisite to produce the phenomena requiring explanation, must operate 
with still greater force where ethereal fluids are in question, of which the 
properties are positively irreconcilable with the phenomena. According 
both to Fraaklin and Dufay, bodies, when similarly electrified, should repel 
each otherj yet in point of fact, collateral wires, when subjected to similar 
voltaic discharges, and of course similarly electrified, become reciprocally 
attractive, while such wires, when dissimilarly electrified by ourrenis which 
are not analogous, become reciprocally repulsive. 

21. Agreeably to Ampere, an iron bar, situated within a coil of wire 
snhjected to a galvanic current, is magnetized, because the current in the 
wire is productive of an electrical whirlpool about every particle of the 
metaJ. When the iron is soft, the magnetism, and of course the gyrations 
of which its magnetism consists by the premises, cease for the most part 
as soon as the circuit through the coil is broken ; but when the iron is in 
the more rigid state of hardened steel, the gyrations continue for any 
length of time after the exciting cause has ceased. 

22. This theory does not es^ain wherefore the hardening of the steel 
should cause the gyration to be more diificult to induce, yet more lasting 
when its induction is efi'ected. Evidently the metallic particles must take 
some part in the process ; since it is dependent for its existence and en- 
durance upon their nature and their state. Yet no function is assigned to 
these particles. In feot, it is inconceivable either that thay can participate 
in, or contribute to, the supposed gyration. 

23. The electrical fluid in an iron bar cannot form a vortex about each 
particle, all the vortices turning in one direction, without a conflict between 
those which are contiguous. In order not to conflict with each other, the 
alternate vortices wonld have to turn in different directions, like interlock- 
ing e(^-wheels in machinery. But in that ease, if magnetism be due to 
currents, the magneto-inductive influence of one set would neutralize that 
of the other. Again, how can a current, escited'by a battery in one cir- 
cuitous conductor, cause, by dynamic induction, a current in the opposite 
direction, through another conductor parallel to the flrst, but. insulated 
therefrom? How can a current of quantity in a ribbon coil* give rise to 
one of intensity in a coil of fine wire, rushing of course with a velocity 
commensurate with the intensity thus imparted ? 

24. From the preceding considerations, and others which will be stated, 
it follows that it has been erroneously inferred that the only difference 
between galvanic and frictional electricity is dependent on quantity and in- 
tensity. It must be evident that there is a diversity in the nature of these 
aifcctions of matter, sufficient to create a line of demarcation between them. 


^ Soe 8illimaii'3 Journal, vol. sisviii. p. 215, 1S40. 


;;■ Google 


444 APPENDIX. 

25. Having stated my otjectious to the electrical theories heretofore 
advanced, it may bo proper that I slioiild suggest any hypothetical views 
which may appear fo me of a. character to amend or to supersede those to 
which I ha,ve ohjected. But however I may have been emboldened to 
point out defects which have appeared to me to be inherent in the theories 
heretofore accredited, I am far from presuming to devise any substitute 
which will be unobjectionable. I am fully aware that there is an obscurity 
as respects the nature and mutual influence of chemical affinity, heat, light, 
electricity, magnetism, and vitality, which science can only to a minute 
extent dispel. 

26. The hypothesis which I now deem preferable is so much iodehted 
to the researches and suggestions of Farraday and others, that, were it 
true, I conld claim for mjsdf but a small share of the merit of its origina- 
tion. That sagacious electrician employs the following language; "In 
the long-continued course of experimental ingniry, m which I Jiave been 
engaged-^ this general resuU haf preeeed upon me constantly — namely, the 
neceseity of adrndtting two forces or directions of force, combined teith 
the imposiibility of separating these two forces or electricities from- each 
other." (^Experimental JResearches, 1163.)* 

27. Subsequently, (1244,) after citing another proof of the insepara- 
bility of the two electric forces, he alleges il to he " another argument in 
favour of the iiiew that induction and its concomitant phenomena depend 
upon a polarity of the particles of matter !" 

S^ipposed grounds for a Theory. 

28. The grounds upon which I venture to advance a theory are as 
follows : 

The existence of two heterogeneous polar forces acting in opposite direc- 
tions, and necessarily connate and coexistent; yet capable of reciprocal 
neutralization, agreeably to the authority of Farraday and others ; the 
polarity^ of matter in general, aa displayed during the erystalliaatton and 
vegetation of salts : also as made evident by Farraday's late researches, 
and the experiments and observaljons of Hunt : the very small proportion 
of the space iu solids, as in the instance of potassium and other metals, 
which are apparently occupied by the ponderable atoms; while, agreeably 
to the researches and speculations of Farraday, (rightly interpreted,) the 
residual space must be replete with imponderable matter i the esperiments 
and inferences of Davy and othei-s, tending to sanction the idea that an 
impouderabie ethereal fluid must pervade the creation : the perfect identity 
of the polarizing effects, transiently created in a wire by eubjeclion to a 
galvanic discharge, with those produced by the permanent polarizing power 
of a steel magnet : the utter heterogeneousness of the powers of galvanic 
and frictional electricity, as respects ability to produce sparks before con- 
tact, and likewise of the polarities which they respectively produce ; and 
superfciality of electricity proper daring discharge as well as when esistdng 
upon insulated surfaces, as demonstrated by atmospheric electricity when 
conveyed by telegraphic wires, i^reeably to Hemy; the sounds observed 

^ This BBBDis to hnve been entirely overlooked in bis snggestiona rsEpeoting the nature 
of luBlieiiiil atoma. It appenrs to ma that CJio cbonieterisliics thus insisted upon ore iaeom- 
patible nith the idea tbst ench pi'operEy is of iCseir n dlihisibk matter, and tLnt in euch 
atoms tRo polarities can exist inseparable from each other. 


, Google 


AIIENDIS 440 

severally by Page, Henry, and M-unan, js being consequent to making 
and breaking a galYanio ciri^uit tbvough a, oonduotoi oi magnetizing oi 
demagnetising by means of sunounding gnlTanizei coil" 

Proofs of tlie existence of a 

29. It has been most sagaciously pointed out by Farraday that four 
hundred and thirty atoms, ivhich foim a cabe of potassium in the metallic 
statfl, must occupy nearly six times as mueh space as the same number of 
similar atoms fill, when existing in a cube of bjdrated oxide of potassium 
of the same size; which, beside seven hundred metallic atoms, must hold 
seven hundred atoms of hydrogen and fourteen hundred of oxygen — in 
all two thousand eight hundred atoms; whence it follows that, in the 
metallic cube, there must be room, for six times as many atoms as it ac- 
tually holds. 

80. "With all due deference, I am of opinion that this distinguished 
philosopher has not been eonsistent in assuming that, agreeably to the 
Newtonian idea of ponderable atoms, the space in potassium not replete 
with metal must he vacant; since, according to facts establiahed by his re- 
searches, or resulting therefrom, an enormous quantity both of tke causes 
of heat and of electricity exists in metals. Moreover, agreeably to hia 
recent speculations, those causes must consist of material, independent, 
imponderable matter, occupying the whole of the space in which their ef&- 
cacy is perceptible. To tke evolution of the imponderable matter thus 
associated, the incandescence of a globule of potassium on contact with 
water, may he ascribed, since it is the consequence of the displacement of 
such matter by the elements of water, which, in r pi t t th 

metal into the hydrated oxide called caustic potash 

31. The existence both of the causes of eleetri ty 1 h t t 1 
likewise confirmed by the fact that the inductive fl f g t 
sufficient to cause all the phenomena of heat, el t 1 1 m t- 
m, as exemplified by the magneto- electric mach Th te f 

the cause of heat in metals is also evident from th f, t n f d 

when hammered, or the deflagration of wire by the discharge of a Leyden 
battery. 

32. The superiority of metals as electrical conductors may be the con- 
sequence of the pre-eminent abundance of imponderable matter entering 
into their composition, as above alluded to in the case of potassium, 

33. Graham, in his Elements, treating of electricity, alleges that the 
"great discovei'iea of Farraday have completely altered the aspect of this 
department of science, and suggests that all electrical phenomena what- 
ever involve the presence of matter." Unless the distinguished author 
from whom this quotation is made intended to restrict the meaning of the 
word matter to ponderable matter, there was no novelty in the idea that 
electrical phenomena involve the presence of matter, since the hypotheses 
of Franklin and Dufay assume the existence of one or more imponderable 
material fluids. But, on the other hand, if the meaning of the word 
matter is only to comprise that which is ponderable, the allegation is in- 
consistent with the authority cited. According to the researches of Farra- 
day, there is an enormous electrical power in metals, and, according to his 
speculations, such powers must be considered as imponderable material 


,v Google 


APPENDIX. 


principles, pervading the space within whicli tliey prevail, independently 
of any ponderable atom acting as a basis for material properties; the ex- 
istence of such atoms being repi-esented as questionable. 

Electrical Phenomena attributed to Stationary, or X/nditlaiori/, 


34. It Slaying been shown that Jn electrieai discharges there cannot 
reasonably he any transfer of matter, so as to justify the idea of their be- 
ing effected either by one current or by two currents, the only alternative 
seems to be that the phenomena are dne to a progressive affection of the 
conducting medium, analogous in its mode of propagation to waves, as in 
the case of liquids, or the aerial or ethereal undulations to which sound 
and light are ascribed. (1, 2, 3, &b.) 

35. The idea intended to be conveyed by the word wave, as applied in 
common to the undolatory affections above mentioned, and that which is 
conceived to be the cause of the phenomena usually ascribed to one or 
more electrical cucrents, requires only that there should be a state of mat- 
ter, which, while it may be utterly different from either of those which 
constitute the waves of water, light, or sound, may, nevertheless, like 
either, pass successively &om one portion of a mass to another. 

36. The affection thus designated may be reasonably diatingnished from 
other waves, as a leave of polarization, since the wire acts, so long as snb- 
jected to the reiterated discharges of i voltaic aerie'' as if it were converted 
into innumeiible email ma n ttdlLtngntto dp d 
from its axis 

37. But it a polaiiaibl m d um b quis t to 1 t 1 dis har 
since they piss through i p wh d d f p ?i» 6? n tt th 
must be oome imponderuU m d um fh ugl wh h tl y n b ff ted 
Hence we have reison t f th t th an np od hi sist ng 
throughout all space, a-i well as within conductors, which is moie or less 
the medium ot the oppo'dte waves osseatial t<i electric discharges. Quot- 
ing his own hnguige, Davy's experiments led him to consider " that space, 
(meaning ^oid "ipace,) where there is not an appreciable quantity of this 
matter, (meaning ponderable matter,) is capable of exhibiting electrieai 
phenomena :" also that such phenomena " are produced by a highly sub- 
tile fluid or fluids." Moreover, that "it maybe assumed, as in the hypo- 
thesis of Hooke, Enler, and Huyghens, that an ethereal matter susceptible 
of electrical affections fills all space." 

38. Agreeably to the suggestions above made, all ponderable matter 
which is liable to be electrified internally by electrical discharges, may be 
considered aa consisting of atoms composed of imponderable ethereo-elec- 
tric particles in a state of combination with ponderable particles, analogous 
to that which has been supposed to exist between such particles and caloric 
when causing expansion, liquidity, or the aeriform state. Atoms, so eon- 
atituted of ethereal and ponderable particles, may be designated as ethereo- 
ponderable atoms.* 

* Pouillat suggests thnt when tlie passage of a raj of light throngh glass, ia influenced 
by a powerfnl mBgnet, agi'eeftbly to the expei^imonta of raitady, " consiatantly with the 
uniluiatory theory of light, it is tie ether of the body submitted to the experimeat, whieli 
I70uid be modified by Uie JOftgneOsm, and tiiat i6 would be very difficult to recogniae 
whether it is modified without ituy p^^cipation of tlie ponderable matter nitli nhioh It 


, Google 


447 

39. A quiesceul, cliarge of t'rictional eleciiieity, only aifecting the 
saperficies of any ponderable mass with wlsich it may be assooiated, and 
having no influence upon the component ethereo-ponderablo atoms eeve- 
rally, is not to be ascribed to rednndanoie? or deficiencies of tlie ethereal 
matter, but to different states of polarization prfldueed in different sets of 
the particles of such matter existing about the eleetrifiablo bodies.* During 
the action of an electrical machine, these particles are polarized by the 
opposite polarities transiently induced in the surfaces subjected to friction; 
one set of particles going with the electric, the other remaining with the 
rubber 

40. The particles thus oppositely polarized, severally divide their appro 
priate polarities with other ethereal matter surrounding the conduotors, and 
this, when insulated, is retained until a fui'ther polarization lesults from 
the same process. Thus are the ethereo-eleotric atmospheres respectively 
surrounding the poMtive and negative conductors oppositely polarized, and 
consequently charged to the degree which the machine is competent to in- 
duce. Under these circumstances, if a conducting rod be made to foim 
between them a communication, by touching each conductor with one of its 
ends, the polarities of the ethereo-eleotric atmospheres by which they are 
severally surrounded propagate themselves, by a wave-like process, over 
and more or less through the rod, according to ita nature and dimensions, 
so as to meet intermediately, and thus produce reciprocal neutralization. 

41. When the oppositely polarizing waves, generated by friction, as 
above described, are by means of a conducting communication transmitted 
to the surface of a coated pane, the two different portions of the electro- 
ether there existing are severally polarized in opposite ways, one being 
endowed with the properties usually called vitreous, or positive, the other 
with those usually called resinous, or negative. In fact, the two polarized 
atmospheres thus created, may be conveniently designated as the " two 
electrudties" and alluded to iu the language heretofore employed in treat- 
ing of phenomena, agreeably to the hypothesis which assumes the exist- 
ence of heterogeneous fluids instead of heterogeneous polarities. 

42. Of course it will follow, that the oppositely polarized ethereal at- 
mospheres thus produced, one on each surface of the electric which keeps 
them apart, must exercise toward each other an attraction perfectly analo- 
gous to that which has been supposed to be exercised by the imaginary 
heterogeneous electric fluids of Dufay. The electro-ctherl" being elastic, 

IS so iatimalel; connecteiJ." Thus tbe oxiatenoe of matter, composed of etberD!tl BS irell 
aa ponderable pnrtioles, is anstaiiiefl bjall (be evidence which has been brought to upiiold 
the ondBla,tory theory of light.— Z. & E. Phil. Mag. Ac, for IBifl, vol. sxviii., page 835. 

^ The nord etntico! has been used ki designate phenomena nhich are the effeclfl of 
elaetrioitj wten at rest, as wlien accumulated upon condnotors or the surfaces of panes or 
jars. Phenomena which are supposed to arise tcrna eleetrioity in moUon (forming a inr- 
rent) are designated as dyaamio. Thus, ivhen chargiog one side of a pans produces the 
opposite state in the other, the eSeot upon the latter is ascribed to itatical Induction,' but 
ivben a discharge of eleotrioily tbrougi ODO wire, causes a current in another, forming an 
adjacent circnit, the result is asoribetl to di/iuanie induction. This method of designation 
is employed whether the alleged current be owing to eleetrioity generated by friction, as 
in the case of a machine, or generated by chemical reaotion, as in the case of a galvanic 
battery. A good word is wanting to diaHnguieh electricity, when produced by friction, 
frosL electricity produced by galvano-chemieal reaction : fov want of a better, I will resort 
to tiat employed byNoad, (/Wcii'osai,) which has Uie advantage of being aelf-oiphi- 
natory. 

t As the word ether is used in various aonsea, tbe syllables " electm" facing preBscd, 
serve to designate that which is intended. 


, Google 


448 ArPEKRix. 

a d n t n er each of the eliargeJ surfiices, proportiona'ble to the 
tt t f tst ensue ; while over the surface of an electrified con- 

d to th m ! riy polarized atoms, not being attracted by those in an 
pp t !y p 1 d atmosphere beneath the surfaoe, tend, by their recipro- 
ily p 1 agency, to exist further apart than in a neutral state. 

H hit -ether, as it exists over the surface of an insulated con- 

du to !S d d rarer, ■while, as existing over the surfaces of charged 
p L yd n jars, it must be in a state of condensation.* And, con- 

j tly wh I the space perceptibly electrified by the charge of a con- 
d t f qa 1 ai-eas and charging power, is much more extensive than 
th pao wl h the ohai^e of a coated pane is perceptible, the striking 
It ^ a 1 kewise much greater; yet upon any body, sncceasiyely 

subjected to a discharge front each, the effect will be more potent when 
produced by means of the pane. 

Ignition, Electrolyns, and Magnetism, Secondai-y SffecU of Fnetional 
DiscJiarges; or, in other words, of Polari^ng Electro-ethereal Waves. 

43. In proportion as a wire is small in comparison with the charge which 
it may be made the means of neutralizing, the conducting power seems to 
be more dependent on the sectional area,f and less upon the extent of 
surface. The reciprocal repulsion of the similarly polarized ethei-eal 
particles must tend always to make them seek the surface, but at the same 
time their attraction for the ethereo-ponderable particles composing ■ the 
wire has the opposite effect, and tends to derange these from their nor- 
mal polar state of quiescence. Commensurate with the extent in which 
this state is subverted, is the resulting heat, electrolytic power, and electro- 
magnetic influence. The phenomena last mentioned are, however, se- 
condary effects conseC[uent to the participation of the ethereo-ponderable 
matter in the nndulattons resulting from flie statical discharge. 

44. Such effects, making allowance for the extreme minuteness of the 
time occupied by the proces p b b es p p onal to the 
degi-ee in which the ponder b m is ff up h p nt at which 
it is dissipated by deflagi-a n bn h ta 
being almost infinitely minute f y g h f w 
niently be subjected thereto h m g h 
statietu disohai'ge are not comnraw h te y 

45 Xh fhd fhdy between the 

1 mag pwf d gas pdwth that of 

hi n ywiwhh fffi aghd tenuity to 

1 pl y h m mum p w i \ flagration by the formei, cannot serve 

f h m p p h f the latter. Moreover, the form of a 

hi 1 ly w d h h oatiags may touch, which is that most 

furblfh fe fh magnetic influence of the circuit upon 

d 1 ! p d the case of statical discharges of high 

! p M y f he circumvolutions would enable the 

hlw wh Jgti interposition of cotton or silk, to cross 

E eiricilv," in Saiimnn'a Amerioan Jomnal of 
N BB Maj, 18ir. 

f area of the suparScies irlilch ironld be espoaed 


, Google 


superficially from one to the other, parallel to the asis of the included 
JroB, instead of pursuing the circuitous channel afforded hy the helix with 
the intensity recjuiKite to tho polarization of the ponderable atoma. 

ITie extreme Diversity, as respects Urikiiv/ Distance, between the direct 
Effecti of Frictional Electricity and those diie^ily arumg from. Gal 
■vanie RraUwa 

46 The intensity of the excitement pioduced by different electrical 
machines la estimated to be as the lelative lengths of the sparL.3 which 
proceed fiom their prime conductors le^pei-tiTely Admitting th^t the 
relative intensity were merely is the length of the spark, not -is the squaie 
of that length, still there would be an infinite difference between the in- 
ffinsity of a voltaic seriea and that of electrical machines, if measured by 
this test. Largo electrical machines, like that at the Polytechnic Institu- 
tion, Londoa, give sparks at twenty inches and more; while, agreeably to 
Gassiott'a experiments, a Gfroves'a battery of 320 pairs, in full power, would 
not, before contact, give a spark at oaiy distance, however minute. It 
follows, that, as respects tho species of intensity which is indicated by 
length of sparks, or striking distance, the difference between the electricity 
of the most powerful voltMC series and electrical machines is not to be 
represented by any degree of disparity; it proves that galvaaisui proper 
and electricity proper are hetfirogeneoua. 

47. It should be recollected that the intensity of galvanic action in a 
series of S20 pairs, excepting the loss from conduction, would be to that 
of one psur aa 320 to 1.* Of course, the striking distance of a battery 
of one pair would be 320 times less tlan uothing : 320 below zero. 

48. We may infer that the undulatory polarization of ethereo-ponder- 
able matter is the primary, direct, and characteristic effect of galvanic ex- 
citement, in its more energetic modifications. Yet, that by peculiar care 
in securing insulation, as in the water batteries of Gross and Uassiott, 
ethereal undulations may be produced, with the conseqneot accumulation 
of ethereal polarity requisite to give sparks before contact, agreeably to tho 
experiments of those ingenious philosophers. 

49. Henee it may be presumed that, during intense ethereo-ponderable 
polarization, superficial ethereal waves may always be a secondary effect, 
although the conducting power of the reagents, requisite to the constitu- 
tion of powerful galvanic batteries, is ineonsiatent with that accumulation 
of ethereal polarity which constitutes a statical spark-giving charge. 

50. Aa all the members forming a voltaic scries have to be discharged 

" Aooordlng to Colomb's espetiments, eleotrical attraetion and repulBion aro interscly 
OB tha sqnarOB of tlie distanoea; (nigit not the indviotiTo power of atatioal otargcs whicli 
is produced bj those forces, and irhich precedes and detoiainas lie length of tte roaalting 
spark, to obey the sniDe Ian ? 

If tliia colculnlion be correct, tlie intensity must be os the sqnai-as of tbe striking dis- 
tancoa, as indicated b; epacks. 

It may be urged that the striiing distances, ss njeasursd by the length of ibn spari^ 
is ia tke compound ratio of the quantity and intensity. As to Uie (quantity, bowerer, 
gidvanic aooroea bare alnsys been treated as pre-eminent in eScaoy, so that on tbat side 
Biere oonld be no dlapnrity. Moreover, I IiaTe found, ttat in galvanic apparatns of only 
one, or erea of tivo pairs, as in the calorlmotors, the intensity leasened as the surfaces 
were enlarged. By a poic of fifty square feet of aznc Eurface, a white heat could not be 
produced in a wire of any aiw, however small. Tho calonflo power of such apparatus 
can only be made evident by the production of a oompaiatiioly very low tcaiperatuce> in 
a compacaUvely very large moss. 


, Google 


450 APPENDIX. 

in one circuit, the energy of the effort to discharge, and the velocity of 
the consequent umiulations must be, ceeterin paribus, as the number of mem- 
bers which co-operate to produce the discharge. Of course the more active 
the ethereo -ponderable waves, the greater must be their efficacy in produc- 
ing ethereal waves of polariaation, as a secondary effect, agreeably to the 
suggeations above made, (49, 36.) 

51. Hence, in a battery consoling of one galvanic pair escitcd by re- 
agents of great chemical energy and conducting power, the electro-magnetic 
effects are pre-eminent; while De Luo's electric coluftins, consisting of 
several thousands of minute pairs, feeble as to their chemical and conduct- 
ing efficacy, are pre-eminent for statical spark-giving power, (48.) This 
seems to be quite consistent; since, on the one hand, the waves of polarisa- 
tion must he larger and slower as the pairs are bigger and fewer ; and, on 
the other hand, siuallei- and more active as the pairs arc more minute and 


On the perfect simiiiUtde between the Polarity communicated to Iron 
Sailings by a Magnetized Steel Bar and a Galvanised Wire. 

52. If by a sieve, or any other means, iron filings be duly strewed over 
a paper, resting on a bar magnet, they will all become magnets, so as to 
arrange themadvcs in rows lite the links of a chaiu. Each cf the little 
magnets thus oveated will, at its outermost end, have a polarity similar to 
that of the pole (of the magnet) with which it may be affiliated. Of course 
the resulting ferruginous rows formed severally by the two different poles 
of the bar will have polarities as opposite as those of the said poles. 

53. In an analogous mode, if two wires be made the media of a gal- 
vanic discharge, iron filings, under their influence, will receive a niagaetio 
polarity, arranging themselves about each wire like so many tangents to as 
many radii proceeding from its asis : those magnetiz^ by one wire 
reacting with such as are monetized by the other. 

54. The affections of the ferruginous particles during the continuance 
of the current so called are precisely like those of the same particles when 
under the influence of the tar magnet. The great discordancy is in the 
fact that the influence of the magnet is permanent, while that of the wire 
is indebted for existence to a series of oppositely polarizing but transient 
impulses which proceed toward the middle of the circuit from each side, 
so as to produce reoiprooal neutralization by meeting midway. 

55. The cflect upon the filings, as ori^nally pointed out by Oersted, is 
precisely such as would aiise were the ponderable matter of the wire, re- 
solved by each impnlao into innumerable Uttle magnets, situated so as to 
form tangenta to as many radii proceeding from the asls of the wire. 

56. Independently of the filings, the wires react with each other as if 
their constitution, during subjection to the discharge, were such as above 
supposed. When the discharges through them concur in direction, thej 
attract, because the left side of one is next the right side of the other, 
bringing the opposite poles of their littie magnets into proximity; bat 
when the discharge is made in opposite directions, the two right or 
the two left sides will be in proximity, and will, by the consequent ap- 
proximation of the similar poles of the little magnets, bo productive of 
repulsion. 

57. From these last-mentioned facts and considerations, it must be evi' 


,v Google 


451 

dent tbat issuming that tbere is in a galvaniited wire a derangement of 
the poles of the constituent etheteo-ponderable particles analogous to that 
peimanently csist n^ m magnetized steel, involves no contradictionj no 
absui lity noi any thing hut what is consistent with tho researches and 
inferences of Da^j, Faiidday, and otiaer emicent investigators of the phe- 
nomena of Eature. 

Process by which the Ethereo-^onderable Atoms leithin a Galvanic Cir- 
cuit arepola/ri^ hy the Chemical Reaction. 

68. In order that an ethewo-ponderahle particle of oxygen in any 
aqueous solution shall unite with an ethereo-ponderable particle of ziuo iu 
a galvanic pair, there must ho a mrtiai revolution of the whole row of ethereo- 
ponderable zinc atoms, with which the atom assailed ia catenated by tbe 
attractions between dissimilar poles; and likewise there must be a series 
of decompositions and recompositions between every atom of water existing 
in the circuit, an atom of hydrogen being eliminated at one end, an atom 
of oxygen at the other. The impulse must extend through the negative 
plate to the conductor, by which it communicates with the aino or electro- 
positive plate. When the circuit is open, the power of combination exer- 
cised by the zino and oxygen is inadequate to produce thia movement in the 
whole ch^n of atoms, liquid and metallic ; but as it is indifferent whether 
any two atoms are united with each other, or with any other atoms of tho 
same kind, the chemical force easily causes them to exchange partners, as it 
were, when the whole are made to form a circuitous row in due contiguity.* 

59. As we know that, during their union with oxygen, metals give out 
an enormous quantity of heat and electricity, it is reasonable to suppose 
that whenever aa atom of oxygen and an atom of zinc jump into union 
with each other, a wave is induced in the ethereo-ponderable matter, and 
that this wave is sustained by the deoompositioas and recompositions, by 
means of which an atom of hydrogen is evoJved at the negative plate, and 
probably enabled to assume the aeriform state. There must, at the same 
time, he a communication of wave polarity by contact of the negative plate 
with the connecting wire, by which the positive wave in the wire ia in- 
duced. Although the inherent polarities of the atoms are not, agreeably 
to this view, the moving power in galvanism, yet they facilitate, and in 
some cases induce, the exercise of that power, by enabling it to act at a 
distance, when otherwise it might bo in<^cient. 

60. Thia, I conceive, is shown in the effect of platina sponge, upon a. 
miature of the gaseous elements of water; also in G-roves's gas batteir, 
by means of which hydrogen and oxygen gas severally react with water m 
syphons, SO as to cause each other to condense, without any communication 
beside that through the platina, and an electrolytic decomposition and re- 

^ Suppose a. num'ber of boja slid girls, nesoclBted as partners for a dance, to stand up 
In a row, EBTerol]; united, and dlstingniBhed info cooples by those joining heeds; (lia 
sexes being ragnlnjlj alternating, so Ibat no two of the seme sex sbould be band in baud. 
Under tbeae conditions no sffart to talce n bo; from one end of the rov, or a. girl from tbe 
other end, conld be effeoted with tbe consent of the oouplea ooneerned, both partners in 
wiiioh Bonld thus be deprived of tbe power of joining in the dance. But should it be 
nnderatood that only on esobange of partners was all that ahould bo intanded, and, con- 
sialflnllj, a boj from one end iind a girl from the other end of the row, taken aimulta- 
neoualy and allowed to form e, oouple, forthwith, the rest merely abifting their hands 
from one neigbbouf to another, there ivould no longer ba the same inoliTO for resistance 
nnd Ibo roquired exobange might be cheerfully aeoomplisbed. 


, Google 


composition extending from one of the aC[iieou3 surfaces ia contact with 
one of the gases, to the other surface in contact with the other gas. 

Difference hetween Electro-eSiereal and EOiereo-^onder able PolarKatioii. 

61. There are two species of electro-polarity which come under the head 
of statical electricity. One of these Farraday iljustrates by supposing 
three bodies, A, B, and C, in proximity, but not in contact, when A, being 
electrified, electrifies B, and B electrifies C by induction. This, Farraday 
calls an aclion of the particles of the bodies concerned, whereas, by his 
own premises, it appears to me t* be merely a superficial affection of the 
masses or of a circumambieat ethereal matter. This species of polariza- 
tion, to which the insulating power of air is necessary, afiecta the super- 
ficies of a body only, being displayed as well by a gilt globe of glass as a 
solid globe of metal. No sensible change appears to be produced in the 
ponderable conducting superficies by this inductive superficial electrification 
of masses ; and of course no magnetism. 

63. When a small image, of which the scalp has been abundantly 
furnished with long hair, is electrified, the hairy filaments estend them- 
selves and move apart, as if actuated by a repulsive power r also, wlien iron 
filings are bo managed as to obey the influence of the poles of a powerful 
magnet, (51,) they arrange themEelves in a manner resembling that of the 
electrified hair. There is, moreover, this additional analogy, that there is 
an attraction between two portions of hwr differently electrified, lite that 
which arises between filings differently magnetized. Yet the properties of 
the electrified hidr and magnetized filings are, in some respects, utterly 
dissimilar, A conducting communication between differently electrified 
portions of balr would entirely neutralize the respective electrical states; 
BO that all the electrical phenomena displayed by them would cease. Yet 
such a oommunicat' n mad b tw E th pol s 't'n tl fil'ng by any 
non-magnetic condu t d ntntt Ighttlg lasnth pi 
affections and consequ nt p w f p oo 1 fl Up n th 1 

trifled hair, the pros mty th nttfatelmnth m 

effect than would re ult d 1 k u t n fi u y th m t 11 

mass similarly empl ydbtl th jp mt and 1 11 m th 
contact of such a n agn f th aff t f tl fil g m y b ban d 
lessened, or nullified d n t th m d ft pi ym nt I th 

case of the hwr th fl t n uj fi I d tl ]u te ha 

power must be in p p rt n t th ( nt f u f In th e f th 

magnetiaed forrugin us parti 1 t th m ts wh h a ff ted and 
cseterii paribus, thmemtlthgiteth ptyt mgnt 
power. In the instan fthltfldl n yth tf 

tional excitement, thltalpw d nnpdblth 

electric atmospheres whi h adh up ■£ lly t th mass 1 n 1 bl 
to be unequally dist but d up n th m n pp te stat f p 1 ty n 
sequent to a superfi 1 p lai ti f th x ting x ted p nd bl 

masses ; but in the in tan f bod p man ntly n gn t th n 

dered transiently magnetic by galvanic lafluenoe, tie ethereo- electric mattei 
and the ponderable atoms are inferred to be in a state of combination, 
forming ethereo-ponderable atoms, so that both may become parties to the 
movements and affections of whiob the positive and negative waves consist. 

63. Thus an explanation is afforded of the hitherto mysterions diversity 


,v Google 


ATPEND X 45 

of th powe £ a g d f p nd a cop ^ git 

both a e to m aoul u, d g e — t t f b 

gT,lnodshi^hf Ii li cais y 

ne the isnhm mntedoT. S dbyhp n wt L. 

tiSecta the oth 

64. The ch Tih h m X p ff d h m 
plification of ta h In hi aa d 
to Farraday, hp flas hwna f o-pir 
and are, in fact, partially affected as if they belonged to a conductor; so 
that inauiafors and conductors differ only in the posaesaion in a high degree 
hy the one of a susceptibility of which the other ia poaseased fo an extent 
barely perceptible. The facts seem to me only to snow that either an in- 
sulator or conductor may be both aifeoted by the same polarizing force, the 
transmission of which the one facilitates, the other prevents. , 1 am under 
the impression that it is only by the disruptive process that electricity 
passes through glass; of course involving a fracture. It gets through a 
pane or jar, not by aid of the vitreous particles, but in despite of their 
opposing coherence. The glass in such cases is not liable to be fused, de- 
flagrated, or dissipated, as conductors are. It is forced out of the way of 
the electrical waves, being incapable of becoming a party to them. Dis- 
charges will take place through a vacuity, rather than through the thinnest 
leaf of mioa. But if, as Farraday has alleged, irom within a glass flask 
hermetically sealed, an electrical charge has been found to escape, after a 
long time, it proves only that glass is not a perfect insulator, not that per- 
fect insulation and perfect conduction are different extremes of the same 
prc^erl^. On the contrary, the one ia founded upon a constitution com- 
petent to the propagation within it of the electro-polarizing waves, with 
miraculous farality, while the other is founded either on ao absolute inca- 
pacity, or comparatively an infinitely small ability to be the medium of 
their conveyance. The one extremely retards, the other excessively expe- 
dites, its passage through a space otherwise void.* 

Compelenq/ of a Wire to convey a Galvanic Discharge is as its sectional 
area, while statical discharges of fncticmal electricity, preferring the 
surface, are promoted ^ itt extension. Yet in proportion as swJi. diS' 
charges are heav^, the ability of a wire to convey them and its m,ag- 
netie energy hecorne more dependent oM its sectional area, and less upon 
extent of surface. 

65. Reference has been made to two modes of electrical conduction, in 
one of which the ef&cacy is as the surface ; in the other, as the area of a 
section of the conductor. Although glass he substantially a non-conductor, 
the power of the surface of glass when moistened or gilt to discharge 
statical electricity is enormous. It has been generally considered that, as 
a protection against lightning, the same weight of metal employed as a 
pipe would be more efficacious than in the usual solid form of a lightning 
rod : yet this law does not hold good with respect to galvanic dischai^es, 
which are not expedited by a mere extension of conducting surface. In- 
dependently of the augmentation of conducting power, consequent to 


;;■ Google 


454 APPENDIX. 

radiation and contact with the air, the cooling i S n f wh h ee d 
ing to Davy, promotes galvauo-eleotrio conduct! m tU bb d 

not convey a galvanio dischai'ge better than a wir f mi! w ght d 
length.* 

66. Agreeably to the considerations above etal d th ti ] ir f 
a conductor remaining the same, in proportion y I ml 
tion which it may discharge is greater, the effect 1 p fl a] 1 
the ethereo-ponderable atoms are affected more a I ly t th P d 
to galvanic discharges. It is in this way that th d h £ f L yd n 
jai- imparts magnetic polarization. Thns, on th n h nd th If 
ethereal matter being polarized and greatly cond n=ed mb n w tl d 
communicates polarization, and consequently m g t m t th o-p 
derable bodies ; while, on the other hand, these, wh u p 1 1 by i 
reaction, and thus rendered magnetic, commun i p I tj to th It 
ether. Hence, statical electricity, when produced by gal m d 
netism, when produced by statical electricity a ec nd y ff t 

67. Where a wire is of su h d m p p t n t th h g 
as to be heated, ignited, or d p d by t t 1 1 t ty th m t 
be a transitory concentration t th It p w wh h t n t m th 
nature of the reaction, and an t Iw f i t p d bl ] 1 
tion, similar to those of gaJva -el t ty th q 

68. As above observed, (dl ) th t j. I d by tl m g t 
electric machine has all the att b t f th gT.1 -el tn n i y t' 
this is altogether a secondary ft t f th h f polarity in a keeper, 
acting upon a wire solely by dj am ind t B t f, by mere external 
influence, the machine abov m t d pi within a circuit a 
current such as above describ d t un bl t suppose that the 
common machine, when it acts p t y p t into activity the 
matter existing therein, soastpd w fp lariaation, having the 
power of those usually aacrib d t il ! tj o.l current? 

69. It has been shown that both reason and the researches and sugges- 
tions of Farraday warrant the inference that ponderable atoms, in solids 
and liquids, may be considered as swimming in an enormous quantity of 
condensed imponderable matter, in which all the particles, whether pon- 
derable or imponderable, are, in their natural state, held in a certain rela- 
tive position due to the reciprocal attraction of their dissimilar poles. A 
gal vano-elec trifled body differs from one in its ordinary state, in having the 
relative position of the poles of its ethereo-ponderable atoms so changed, 
that their inherent opposite polarities not being productive of reciprocal 
neutralization, a reactiou with external bodies ensues. 

70. In statical excitement the affection is superficial as respects the 
ponderable bodies concerned, while in 1m m hpl s 
of the whole mass are deranged oppo telj pp te 1 f 1 lec- 
triSed mass ; so that the oppositely di& tgmp! poi,d irm 

» It 13 well known tliat Wollaalon effaoled ai a 

powerful electricnl mockiiie. Httying enolt la as hi ese 
vtttQ fuQfid so us to cover tlio eiidg. Xao gliLG ufte m 

as to expose minute meUillio [loiDts to Cka li TI umstan tb o- 

trieity oonvayod by the wires, being prevented from, proceeding over tbsm sup fl ally 

was obliged lo moke its way tlitongh Ibe ethereo-ponderable matter of ithicb m tnl n 
eist Instead of proving the identity of galvanism with friotional electricity, tb espe 

ment ekows tiint in one oharaoierislie, at leost^ there is a discordancy. At tbo sam tim 
it may indioate that ethereal may give rise to ethereo-ponderable undnlaUona. 


, Google 


the poles of the disturbing apparatus, neutraliae each other in tei-med lately. 
Supposing the ponderable aa well as the imponderable matter in a perfect 
oonduotor to be susceptible of the polar aiTangement, of which an elec- 
trified state is thus represented to consist, non-conductors to be insuscep- 
tible of snoh polar derangement ; imperfect conductors may have a consti- 
tution intermediate between metals and electrics. 

71. When an electrical discharge is made through any space devoid of 
air or other matter, it must then find its way solely by the polarization of 
the rare imponderable matter existing therein ; and consequently its cor- 
rnsoations should be proportionably more diffuse, which is actually found 
to be true ; bat when gaseous ethereo-ponderable atoms intervene, as in 
wire, they enable competent waves to exist within a narrower channel and 
to attain a greater intensity. 

72. I consider all bodies aa insulators which cause discharges through 
them to be moi-e difficult than through a vacuum, and which, by their 
interposition within a circuit, can prevent that propagation of the oppo- 
sitely poiaiiEing undulations which would otherwise ensue. This furnishes 
a good mean of discrimination between insulators and conductors, the 
criterion being that a discharge ensues more readily as there is more of 
the one and less of the other in the way : that the one leads the waves 
where they would not go, the other impedes their going where they would 
proceed. Both in the case of disruptive discharge through air, producing 
a spark, or of a deflagrating discharge througL wire, causing its explosion, 
there is a dispersion of intervening ponderable paiticles ; and yet there is 
this manifest discordancy, that in one case the undulatory process of transfer 
is ifflsisted, in the other resisted. The waves follow the metallic filament 
with intense attraction, while tliey strive to get out of the way of those 
formed by the aeriform matter, as if repelled. Hence the term disruptive, 
from di-rumpOf to break through, was happily employed by Barraday to 
designate spark discharges. 

73. The aigzag form of the disruptive spark shows that there is a ten- 
dency in the aeriform particles to turn the waves out of that straight 
course, which, if unresisted or facilitated, they would naturally pursue. 
On the one hand, the aerial filaments being unsuitable for the conveyance 
of the electric waves, these are forced by them out of the normal path — 
first in one direction, then in another; while, on the other hand, the finest 
metallic fikment furnishes a channel for the electric waves, so iavourable 
that this channel is pursued, although the consequent polarization of the 
conducting particles be so intense as to make them fly asunder with explo- 
sive violence. Even when a bell-wire has been dissipated by lightning, it 
has been found to facilitate and determine the path of the discharge. 

74. The various forms of the electric spark, resulting from varying the 
gas through which it may be made to pass, agreeably to tho researches of 
Earraday, is explwned by the supposition that the peculiarities of the spark 
is partially the consequence of the polarizability of the gaseous atoms 
through which the discharge is made, and varies, accordingly, in its ap- 
pearance. 


,v Google 


Difference hetween. Frictioiial Electricity and Galvanic does not d^end 
on the one being superior as to Quantiii/, the other as to Intensity/; but 

. on the diffei'ent Degrees in wMch the Ethereo^onderaVle Atoms of the 
Bodies affected are deranged from their natuTol state of 2ieatralieed 
Polarity. 

75. I infer that all magneto-polar cLargea are attended by an affeetion 
of ponderable particles; and that the reason wbj the most intense statioal 
charge does not affect a galyanometer is, that it is only when appositely 
excited hodiea are neutraliEcd by the interposition of a conductor bs during 
a discbarge, that ethereo-ponderable particles are sufficiently polarized to 
enable them to act upon others in their Ticinity, so as to produce a polar 
affection the opposite of their own. (54.58.) In this way dynamic induction 
is conMstently explained, by supposing that the waves of polamation, in 
passing along one conductor, produce, pari^assu, the opposite polariaation 
in the proximate part of any neighbouring conductor suitably constituted, 
situated and arranged to allow it to form a part of a circuit, 

76. It is only during the state of the incessant generation and destruction 
of what has been called the two electricities, that the circuit, whicb. is the 
channel for the passage of the polarizing waves, is endowed with electro- 
magnetic powers. It was, no doubt, in obedience to a perception of this 
fe,c^ that Oersted ascribed the magnetism of a galvanized wire to a con- 
flict of the electricities. Undoubtedly, that state of a conductor in which, 
by being a part of an electrical circuit, it becomes enabled to display elec- 
tro-magnetic powers, is so far a conflict of the two electricities, as the 
affections of matter, which are denominated electrical, consist of two oppo- 
Hte polar forces, proceeding, agreeably to the language of Farraday, in 
opposite directions Irom each side of the source, and conflicting with each 
other, Bo as to be productive of reciprocal annihilation. 

77. That a corpuscular change in conduotors is concomitant with their 
subjection to, or emancipation from, a galvanic current, is proved by an es- 
periment of Henry's, which he afi'orded me an opportunity on one occasion 
of witnessing. I allude to the fact that sound is produced whenever the 
dicnit is suddenly made or suddenly ruptured. By I. P. Marrian it has 
been observed that a similar result takes place during the magnetization 
or demagnetization of iron rods, by the alternate establishment or arresta- 
tion of galvanic discharges through wires coiled about them so as to con- 
vert each into an electro-magnet. Mr. Marrian represents the sound as 
resembling that produced by striking a rod upon one of its ends.*f Sounds 
from this source were observed by Dr. Page in 1838. See Silliman's 
Journal for that year, vol sxsiii. 

78. Thus it appeals that there is an analogy between the state of matter 
which involves permanent magnetism, and that which constitntes a galva- 
nic current, so far as this, that either by one or the other, daring either 
its access or cessation, an affection of the ponderable particles concerned 
ensues, sufficient to produce sound. 

79. Simultineously with the production of sounds, as above stated, by 
the opening or closing of the galvanic circuit through a metallic rod oi 

^ Agreeably to eiperimenta of FavTuday, the partielea of a glaaa prism may be as ia 
fiuanced liy ao elootro- magna t as to affoot tia pasaaga of polariied light, 
f L. ojid E. Phil. Mag. and Jout., vcL xIt. p. 333, lEi*. 


,v Google 


APPENDIX. 457 

the coils of aa eleotro-magnet, secondary waves are induned, called aeoond- 
ary cuiTenta. It seems reasonable to ascribe these waves to the same 
shifting of the poles, which produces the soaorific undulatioas.* 

80. Within the bodies of animals and vegetables, the electro-ether may 
he supposed to esist as an atmosphere surrounding the ethereo-ponderable 
atoms of which their organs are constituted, so as to occupy all the space 
which is not replete with such atoms. Hence a discharge of frictional 
electricity may indirectly polarize the whole animal frame, by producing 
ethereo-ponderahle polarization ia the constituent atoms of the fibres of 

<* These pSieEomena esoltBiuorB inierestjn consequence of the employment, for medicol 
putpoaes, of ao apparatus originally contrived by Callan, but since ingeniously modified 
by out conntrjman. Dr. Pnge, into u form wbiob baa been designated as tta eleotfotome. 
A ooil of ooaise copper wire, oovored with cotton, lilio bonnet wii^a, ia wound about a 
wooden cylinder. Around iiie ooil thua formed, a eoil of fine copper nira dmilarly covered 
ia wound, leaving the extremities aecosslble. One end of the oonrae ceil communicating 
coQEtontlyn'tth one pole of a galvanic battery, Ihc otber end !a left free,- eo tliatby ecntp- 
ing with it the teeth of a rasp attached t« the othci pcle, n lapid dc^ng and opening pf 
Hm oireuiC may be effected. Undei' these ciroumstHDoes, an obserrer, bolding the ends of 
the fine coil, receivea abocks more or less severe, aooovdina to the oonatmotion of tie bat- 
tery, the energy of tiiB ogenls employed to eioife if, or the total weight and relative di- 
mensionB of the coila as to length and sectional area. Agreeably to the rcociTed doctrine, 
the shooks ihua prodaoed are owing to Becondary onrrenta caused by dynamic induction. 
Agreeably to {ha hypothesis which I liave adtanced, the atoms of tie coarse wire, polar- 
iaed by waves procooding from the poles of the battery, induce a oorreaponding polariza- 
tion of tbo atoma of the flne wire ; the aggregate polarity imparted beiag as the number 
of atoms in the former to llie number of atoms in tie latter : or (to nae an equivalent 
ratio) as the weight of the oomsb, t« the weight of the fine wire. But aa on breaking the 
circuit through the coatao wire, the ethereo-ponderable atoms in both wirea roaume tieic 
neutral portions, while this requires each idrouit to be mn thraugh within the same minnte 
interval, the velocities of thsir respocUve waves will be inveraalj aa their aeotional areas 
and directly aa their lengths : In otber words, the velooily in the fine wire will bo as much 
greater aa the channel which it affords is narrower and longer. The cylinder indnded 
witMn the coils aa above staled being roraoyed, a cylindrical apoca is vacated. If into 
the cavity thus made iron rods, like knitting needlea, be introdnced, one aftar the other, 
while the apparatus is in operation, the sdooka inoreaso in aeverity aa tha number ai^- 
menfa; ao that from hcing supportable thajr may bo rendered inlolerabla. Tha shock 
fakea place without the preaeaoa of iron, but is mnob increased by its assistance.* 

These laats appear to me to justify a aurmiae that the ethereo-ponderable atoms of iron, 
in beccn^ng magnetized and demsgnetizad, ca-operalc with the ethereo-ponderable atoms 
o£ the copper coils in the induction of secondary undulations. It ia eonoeivod that these 
may be owing to the intastinai change attended by sound, aa above stated, (IS ;) this 
being eaused by a sudden approsimaUon of the poloa of the atoma, praYioBaly moved 
apart by the influence of the galvanized coil. £nt if thla sadden coming together of the 
previously separated poles of atoms within a magnetised cylinder of iron, can coutriI)ul« 
to the energy of secondary waves, it is consistent to infer that thoae waves owe their origin 
to on onalogoua approximation of the separated poles of tha oupreons atoma, forming tha 
finer ooil, in which Iha secondary undulations may be created without tha presenea of 
iron. Of oonrae, this reaaoning will apply to all oases in which tha phenomena hitherto 
attributed to Farradian cutrcots are the result of dynamic induction. 

Thus it appears that the polarization of magnels, and Ihat created and sustained when 
a g^vaniaed ooil or helix acta npoQ anotter in proximity, have tha same relation to gal- 
vanio discharges that tho charges upon insulated sorfeoea have to thek appropriate dis- 
charges. The permanent magnetism of steel seems to have aoma analogy with tha obarga 
upon a ooatod pane, while wa may consider as analogous with tho charges upon inaulated 
conductors, already adverted to, (61, 63,) that etata of the etherec-ponderable particles, 
(38,) of a wire holis, which ataie, MSulUng from tha influence of an included magnet, or 
neighbouring galvanized ooil, and being diacbarged on a change of relative poaition, or 
breach of tha galvaniaing circuit, is productive of spark, shook, ignition, or electrolysis, 
aa exemplified by Oallan's eoil. Page's eleetrotome, or the magneto-eleetrio maehlue. 

« Agreeably to the usual construction, the cylinder about which the inner coarao wire 
ooii ia wound ia originally of iron, so that there is as much of this metal contained as it 
can hold. Various contiivaneea are reaorted to for the closing and opening of the circuit, 
which are mora ingenious and convenient than scraping a rasp, aa above dasorlbed. 


, Google 


458 APPENDIX. 

the nerves and muscles. Probably thia polarization if _ 
mediately in the poaJetable solids by a disoliarge from & voltaic series or 
a ■wire subjected to electro or ma gne to-dynamic induction. In the latter 
instanoes the shook is reiterated so rapidly as to appear more enduring, 
while in tlie former it is more startling and producible at an infinitely 
greater distance. 

81. Agreeably to Farraday's researolias, (14.85 to 1543,) there is reason 
to suppose that m frictional spark discharges, the consequent shook, light, 
and other peculiarities are in part owing to waves of ethereo-ponderable 
polarization, indirectly produced in the intervening gaseous matter. 

0/ E^ereo-ponderoMe Deflagratwn. 

82. It is well known that between two pieces of charcoal 
attached, one to the negative, the otlier to the positive, pole of a 
and well-excited voltaic series, an aroh of flame may he produced by mov- 
ing them apart after contact. This phenomenon evidently depends upon 
the volatilization of the ponderable matter concerned; since it cannot be 
produced before the carbon has been volatilized by contact, nor by any 
body besides charcoal, this being the only conductor which is sufficiently 
infusible, and yet duly volatilizable. Metals, similarly treated, fuse at the 
point of contact and cohere. On separation, after touching, a single spark 
ensues, which, without repetition of contact, cannot be reproduced. Hence, 
it may be inferred that the carbonaceous vapour is indispensable to this 
process, as a medium for the ethereo-ponderable polarizing waves, being 
soon consumed by the surrounding atmospheric oxygen. The excrescence 
upon the negative charcoal, observed by Silliman, together with the oppo- 
site appearance on the positive charcoal, may be owing to the lesser affinity 
for oxygen on the negative side.* 

83. There may be some resemblance imagined between this luminous 
discharge between the poles, and that which Las already been designated 
as disruptive; but this flaming arch discharge does not break through 
the air; it only usurps its place gradually, and then sustains this usurpa- 
tion. It difiers from the other as to its cause, go fiir as galvanic reaction 
diflers from friction ; moreover, it requires a volatilizable, as well as a 
polarizable ponderable conducting substance to enable its appropriate un- 
dulations to meet at a meaa distance from the solid polar terminations 
whence they i-espectively pi-oceed. 

84. The most appropriate designation of the phenomenon under con- 
sideration is that of ethereo-ponderable undulatory deflagration. Under 
this head we may not only place the flaming arch, but likewise the active 
ignition and dissipation of fine wire or leaf metal, or when attached to one 
pole, and made barely to touch the other. 

85. In one of Farraday's experiments, a circuit was completed by sub- 
jecting platina points, severally proceeding from the poles of a voltaic 
series, whDe very near to each other, to the flame of a spirit lamp. This 
was ascribed by him to the rarefaction of the air, but ought, as I think, to 
be attributed to the polarizable ethereo-ponderable matter of the flame, 
performing the same office as the volatilized carbon in the flaming arch, 
between charcoal points, to which reference has been made. 


,v Google 


APPENDIX. 


Swinviiary. 

From the facta and reasoning wHch have been above etated, it is pre- 
sumed that the following deductions may be considered as h^hly probable, 
if not altogether snsceptible of demonstration ; 

The theories of Eranklin, Dufay, and Ampere are irreconcilable with 
the premises on whioli they are founded, and with fiiets on all sides 


A charge of frictional electricity, or that spoeiea of electric excitement 
which is produced by friction, ia not due to any accumulation, nor to any 
deficiency either of one or of two fluids, but to the opposite polarities in- 
duced in imponderable ethereal matter existing throughout space however 
otherwise void, and likewise condensed more or less within ponderable 
bodies, so as to enter into combination with their particles, forming atoms 
which may be designated as ethereo-ponderable. 

EVictional charges of electricity seek the surfaces of bodies fo which 
they may be imparted, without sensibly affecting the ethereo-ponderabie 
matter of which they consist. 

When surfaces thus oppositely charged, or, in other words, having about 
them oppositely polai-ized ethereal atmospheres, are made to communicate, 
no current takes place, nor any transfer of the polarized matter : yet any 
conductor, touching both atmospheres, furnishes a channel through which 
the opposite polarities are reciprocally neutralized by being communicated 
wave-like to an intermediate point. 

Galvano-electric discharges are likewise effected by waves of opposite 
polarization, without any flow of matter meriting to be called a current. 

But such waves are not propagated superficially through the purely 
ethereal medium; they occur in masses formed both of the ethereal and 
ponderable matter. If the generation of frictional electricity, sufficient to 
influence the gold-leaf electrometer, indicate that there are some purely 
ethereal waves caused by the gaJvano-electric reaction, such waves arise 
&om the inductive influence of those created in the ethereo-ponderable 
matter. 

When the intensity of a friclional discharge is increased beyond s. cer- 
tain point, the wire remaining the same, its powers become enfeebled or 
destroyed by ignition, and ultimately deflagration : if the diameter of the 
wire be increased, the surface, proportionally augmented, enables more of 
the ethereal waves to pass superficially, producing proportionally less ethe- 
reo-ponderable undulation. 

Magnetism, when stationary, as in magnetic needles and other perma- 
nent magnets, appears to be owing to an enduring polarization of the 

' ' " ' as, like that transiently produced by a galvanic dis- 


The magnetism transiently exhibited by a galvanized wire, is due to 
oppositely polarizing impulses, severally proeeemng wave-like to an inter- 
mediate part of the circuit where reoiprocal neutrdization ensues. 

When magnetism is produced by a frictional discharge operating upon a 
conducting wire, it must be deemed a secondary effect, arising from the 
polarizing influence of the ethereal waves upon the ethereo-ponderable 
atoms of the wire. 

Such waves pass superficially in preference ; but when the wire is com- 


,v Google 


460 ATPENDIX. 

paratively small, the reaction between the waves and the ethereo-ponderahle 
atoms becomes sufficiently powerful to polarize them, and thus render 
them ooaipetont, for an extremely Buiaute period of time, to produce all 
the affections of a galvano-electrio ourrent, whether of ignitioB, of elec- 
trolysis, or magQetiaation. Thus, as the ethereo -ponderable ■waves produce 
such as are purely ethereal, so purely ethereal waves may produce such aa 
are ethereo-ponderable. 

The polarization of hair opon electrified scalps is supposed to he due to 
a superficial sssociation with the surrounding polarized ethereal atoms, 
while that of iron filings, by a magnet or galvanized wire, is conceived to 
arise fi;om the influence of polarized ethereo-ponderable atoms, consisting 
of ethereal and poaderable matter in a state of combination. 

Farradian discharges are aa tnily the effects of ethereo-ponderable 
polarization as those from an electrified conductor, or coated surfaces of 
glass are due to static ethereal polarization, (39, 40, 41.) 


It is vrell known that if a rod of iron be included in a coil of coated copper wire, on 
making tbe coil the mediam ofnToll^c disclinrgc, Uie iriro Is uiEignetiaed. Agreealily 
lo a ooniinunieatJon tVom Jonle, in the L. & B. Phil. Mog. & Jonr. for Feb., 1S4J, the bar 
is at the same time lengthened, without nnj augmentation of bnlt, so that ila other di- 
menBioaa moat be lessened in proportion to the elongaUon. 

All these foBlfl tend to prore that a ohanga in the relative position of the constituent 
ethereo-ponderable atoms of iron accompanies ita magnetJzation, eltliei' aa an immediate 
lause or as a collateral efiect. 


, Google 


INVOCATION OF SPIRITS.* 
Spiriis on high, or far or near, 
Who happen our hamhle ehaating to hear, 
Onr circle with jour presence bless; 
Our souls with pious emotions irapre&s. 

Come, spirits, come ! our sand runs fost ; 

Death waits for his due, and life may be past. 

In mercy teach us truth to know. 

And, passing death's portal, whither we go; 

Of your abodes the wonders teach, 

And how to deserve that haven to reach. 

Come, spirits, come ! out sand runs fast; 

Death's portal may yawn, and Hie may he past. 

Say how far in the azure sky 
The magical homes of immortals lie if 
Tell us how angels draw their breath — 
That breathing beyond the power of death.J 

Say, spirits, say 1 our sand runs fast ; 

Death's warrant may come, and life may he past. 

The bliss portray which the good enjoy. 
The paia and remorse which the bad annoy, 
The sun ■which sheds on earth no rays, 
Yet glorious light in heaven displays !§ 

Haste and portray I our sand runs fitst ; 

Death's mandate may come, and life may be past. 

Qiieri/ to the High Sjdriu. 
Throughout the aaute realms of space 

Do blessed spirite cheerly fly 
To orbs too far for thoughts to reach, 

Or Eoss' reflector to descry ? 
Or bide ttey near their natal orb, 

To mingle with their mundane friends, 
Striving theiv minds to impress with truth 

Which to their future welfare tends? 

'^- To the tnne of Moore's " Canadian Boat Song." 
■f See paragraph 410, 

\ See " 416. 


,v Google 


4 PAKTKlDaB & BETITAh's SPIEITITAL IIBBABT. 

Sorcery and Magio- 

Uy Wright. rnce,«I OOi poatsgf, IBcentB. 
The Clairroyaat Pamily Phyaioiaii. 

By Mrs. I'uttle. Paper, price 7o cents ; muslin, 61 00 ; postage, 10 cents, 

Bnswerg to Seventeen Oligectltms 

Agomsl Spiritual Intoi-courae. By Jolin S. Adflins. FnMsLed by Partridgo A 
Brittan. Paper, price H5 cents ; mnalln, E3 eenla ; postage, T centB. 

The Approaching Crisia : 

Beins a aoYiew rf Dr. Baslinell'a recent Leotures on SupctBoturallam. By A. ]. 

BaviH. Pnbliahod lij PnrtrLilge &. Brittan, Ptlco, 50 cents ; postSEe, 13 oents. 
Practical Inatniotion ia Animal Magnetism, 

By J. P. F. Deleuae, Price, 81 OD ; postage, IS cents, 
Spirit-Mlnatrel. 

A ctillection of Ninety familiar Tnncs end Hjmns, appropriate to Meetings fol 

Spiritual Intercourse. Paper, 25 cents i muslin, 38 cents ; poalage, B cents. 

Spirit-Voices. 

DictBted fay Spirits, for the use ef Circles. By E. C. Ilenck, Medium. Prlca. 

Bnctianfin'B Journal of Man, 

A Monthly Magailne, dsvolefl to Anthropological Science, by which tlie Constitu- 
tion of Man is dotei-mined throueh Phrenological and Psychologicfll Derctop- 
mania. Price, per annum, E3 00: siugle copies, 25 cents; postage, 3 cents. 

Baeeher's Baport on the Spiritual Hani&statio:^, 

To Iha Congregational AsBOidniioa of New Totk and Brooklyn. Price, papM; 95 

The Kinistrf of Angels Bealized. 

By A. E. Hewlon, Boalon. Price 12 cents poslago 1 cant. 
Amaranth Blooms, 

A Colloolion of cmhodiel Poetical Thouglils, hy Mrs. a. S, SmlUi. Price 63 eeni* 

postage S cents. 
E«pl7 to a Siscoorea 

Of Bev. S. W. tind, D.D., Present Wesleni Baptist Theoloelcnl lusUtnte, CoTIn|^ 

ton, Eenlncliy, Sy P, B. Bland, A.M., Bt Louis. Price 15 cento, poatogo 2 cents. 
Cho Harmonial Manl 

Or, Thouglilfl for llie Ago. By Andrew Jaclison Davis, Frlia BO tents, poslsga 


No. 300 Broadway, Kcw Tork. 


;;■ Google
