What is Christianity? (Adolf von Harnack (Thomas Bailey Saunders, trans.), 1901)
==========================================================
Liberal Protestantism's manifesto: the essence of Christianity as the fatherhood of God. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (whatischristiani00harn_2).

tie 


ae 
See 


Sates 
rut 


Ro) 


Library of The Theological Seminary 


PRINCETON : NEW JERSEY 


C= p> 


‘hep 


eee Es 


Ht AeVOle MLW a0 ee 
WHAT iS CHRISTIANITY? 


WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Szrteen Lectures delivered in the University 
of Berlin during the Wrnter-Term 
I599:--I900 


_ BY 


ADOLF HARNACK 


RECTOR OF, AND PROFESSOR OF CHURCH HISTORY IN, THE UNIVERSITY, AND 
MEMBER OF THE ROYAL PRUSSIAN ACADEMY, BERLIN 


Translated into English 


BY 


THOMAS BAILEY. SAUNDERS 


WILLIAMS AND NORGATE 


14 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON 
20 SOUTH FREDERICK STREET, EDINBURGH 
AND 7 BROAD STREET, OXFORD 
New York: G, P. PUTNAM’S SONS 


I9Ol 


Copyright 1901 in U.S.A. 


G. P. Putnam’s Sons. 


Breen hs S Pier ACH POLE AE 
HN GES VE DT Ta ON 


To meet the wishes of my English friends I have assented to the 
publication of these Lectures in English as well as in German, 
and, as my esteemed friend Mr. Barley Saunders was so self- 
denying and obliging as to undertake the translation of them, I 
— was sure of their being in the best hands. Whether there is as 
great a need in England as there 1s in Germany for a short and 
plain statement of the Gospel and its history, I do not know. 
But this I know: the theologians of every country only half 
discharge ther duties if they think tt enough to treat of the 
Gospel in the recondite language of learning and bury ut m_ 
scholarly folros. 


A. HARNACK. 


BERLIN, October 1900. 


TRANSLATORS PREFACE 


The following Lectures were delivered extempore to a class of 
some six hundred students drawn from all the Faculties in the 
University of Berlin. An enthusiastic listener took them down 
in shorthand, and at the close surprised Professor Harnack 
unth a complete report of what he had said. A few alterations 
sufficed to transform the Lectures into a book, and German 
readers everywhere were thus happily enabled to share in some 
of the privileges of the original audrence. 

TI deem it an honour to have any hand in offering to my fellow- 
countrymen a similar advantage. Coethe, writing in his last 
years to Carlyle, described translators, in grandiloquent language, 
as the agents of intellectual commerce among the nations. The 
duties of such agency in regard to the contents of this volume I 
have done my humble best to discharge, convinced as I am that 
am the traffic in ideas between Germany and the English- 
speaking peoples all over the world both the matter of Professor 
Harnack’s discourse and the spwrit in which he treats rt are 
alike worthy of attention. 


T, BAILEY SAUNDERS. 


Lonpon, November 1900. 


CONTENTS 


GENERAL SCOPE OF THE LECTURES, 


I. THE GOSPEL: Preliminary. . 


(..) THE LEADING FEATURES OF JESUS’ MESSAGE. 
The kingdom of God and its coming, 
God the Father and the infinite value of the human soul, 


The higher righteousness and the commandment of love. 


(ii.) THE GosPEL IN RELATION TO CERTAIN PROBLEMS. 
The Gospel and the world, or the question of asceticism, 
The Gospel and the poor, or the social question, . 
The Gospel and law, or the question of public order, 
The Gospel and work, or the question of civilisation, 


The Gospel and the Son of God, or the Christological 
question, 


The Gospel and doctrine, or the question of creed. 


II. THE GOSPEL IN HISTORY. 
THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION (i.) IN THE APOSTOLIC AGE, 


iy “ es (ii.) IN I'S DEVELOPMENT INTO 
CATHOLICISM, . 


s . »  (iii.) IN GREEK CATHOLICISM, 
a. se »  (iv.) In Roman CATHOLICISM, 


,9 9 »»  (v.) IN PROTESTANTISM. ; 


102 
117 


124 
146 


152 


190 
217 
246 
268 


WHAT IS CHRISTIANIEY re 


ph OASUR = i 


THE great English philosopher, John Stuart Mill, 
has somewhere observed that mankind cannot be too 
often reminded that there was once a man of the 
name of Socrates. That is true; but still more im- . 
portant is it to remind mankind again and again that 
aman of the name of Jesus Christ once stood in their 
midst. The fact, of course, has been brought home 
to us from our youth up; but unhappily it cannot be 
said that public instruction in our time is calculated 
to keep the image of Jesus Christ before us in any im- 
pressive way, and make it an inalienable possession 
after our school-days are over and for our whole life. 
_ And although no one who has once absorbed a ray of 
Christ’s light can ever again become as though he had 
never heard of him; although at the bottom of every 
soul that has been once touched an impression remains, 
a confused recollection of this kind, which is often only 
a “superstitio,’ is not enough to give strength and 


life. But where the demand for further and more 
A 


2 WHATS CHRISTIANITY ? 


trustworthy knowledge about him arises, and a man 
wants positive information as to who J esus Christ 
was, and as to the real purport of his message, he 
no sooner asks for it than he finds himself, if he 
consults the literature of the day, surrounded by 
a clatter of contradictory voices. He hears some 
people maintaining that primitive Christianity was 
closely akin to Buddhism, and he is accordingly told 
that it is in fleeing the world and in pessimism 
that the sublime character of this religion and its 
profound meaning are revealed. Others, on the 
contrary, assure him that Christianity is an optim- 
istic religion, and that it must be thought of simply 
and solely as a higher phase of Judaism; and 
these people also suppose that in saying this they 
have said something very profound. Others, again, 
maintain the opposite; they assert that the Gospel 
did away with Judaism, but itself originated under 
Greek influences of mysterious operation; and that 
it is to be understood as a blossom on the tree of 
Hellenism. Religious philosophers come forward 
and declare that the metaphysical system which, as 
they say, was developed out of the Gospel is its 
real kernel and the revelation of its secret; but 
others reply that the Gospel has nothing to do with 
philosophy, that it was meant for feeling and suffering. 
humanity, and that philosophy has only been forced 
upon it. Finally, the latest critics that have come 
into the field assure us that the whole history of 
religion, morality, and philosophy, is nothing but 


PRELIMINARY 3 


wrapping and ornament; that what at all times 
underlies them, as the only real motive power, is 
the history of economies ; that, accordingly, Christian- 
ity, too, was in its origin nothing more than a social 
movement and Christ a social deliverer, the deliverer 
of the oppressed lower classes. 

There is something touching in the anxiety which 
everyone shows to rediscover himself, together with 
his own point of view and his own circle of interest, 
in this Jesus Christ, or at least to get a share in 
him. It is the perennial repetition of the spectacle 
which was seen in the “Gnostic” movement even 
as early. as the second century, and which takes 
the form of a struggle, on the part of every con- 
ceivable tendency of thought, for the possession of 
Jesus Christ. Why, quite recently, not only, I 
think, Tolstoi’s ideas, but even Nietzsche’s, have 
been exhibited in their special affinity with the 
Gospel; and there is perhaps more to be said even 
upon this subject that is worth attention than upon 
the connexion between a good deal of “ theological” 
and ‘‘ philosophical ” speculation and Christ's teaching. 

But nevertheless, when taken together, the im- 
pression which these contradictory opinions convey 
is disheartening: the confusion seems hopeless. How 
can we take it amiss of anyone, if, after trying to find 
out how the question stands, he gives it up? Perhaps 
he goes further, and declares that after all the question 
does not matter. How are we concerned with events 
that happened, or with a person who lived, nineteen 


4 WHAT MIs CHRISTIANITY? 


hundred years ago? We must look for our ideals 
and our strength to the present; to evolve them 
laboriously out of old manuscripts is a fantastic pro- 
ceeding that can lead nowhere. The man who so 
speaks is not wrong; but neither is he right. What 
we are and what we possess, in any high sense, we 
possess from the past and by the past—only so much 
of it, of course, as has had results and makes its 
influence felt up. to the present day. ‘To acquire a 
sound knowledge of the past is the business and the 


duty not only of the historian but also of every one 


who wishes to make the wealth and the strength so 
gained his own. But that the Gospel is a part of 
this past which nothing else can replace has been 
affirmed again and again by the greatest minds. 
‘Let intellectual and spiritual culture progress, and 
the human mind expand, as much as it will; beyond 
the grandeur and the moral elevation of Christianity, 
as it sparkles and shines in the Gospels, the human 
mind will not advance.” In these words Goethe, 
after making many experiments and labouring inde- 
fatigably at himself, summed up the result to which 
his moral and historical insight had led him. Lven 
though we were to feel no desire on our own part, it 


would still be worth while, because of this man’s testi- 


mony, to devote our serious attention to what he came 
to regard as so precious; and if, contrary to his de- 
claration, louder and more confident voices are heard 
to-day, proclaiming that the Christian religion has 
outlived itself, let us accept that as an invitation to 


PRELIMINARY 5 


make a closer acquaintance with this religion whose 
certificate of death people suppose that they can 
already exhibit. 

But in truth this rehgion and the efforts which 
it evokes are more active to-day than they used 
to be. We may say to the credit of our age that 
it takes an eager interest in the problem of the 
nature and value of Christianity, and that there 
is more search and inquiry in regard to this subject 
now than was the case thirty years ago. Even 
in the experiments that are made in and about 
it, the strange and abstruse replies that are given 
to questions, the way in which it is caricatured, 
the chaotic confusion which it exhibits, nay even 
in the hatred that it excites, a real life and an 
earnest endeavour may be traced. Only do not 
let us suppose that there is anything exemplary 
in this endeavour, and that we are the first who, 
after shaking off an authoritative religion, are strug- 
eling after one that shall really make us free and 
be of independent growth—a struggle which must 
of necessity give rise to much confusion and half- 
truth. Sixty-two years ago Carlyle wrote :— 
“In these distracted times, when the Religious 
Principle, driven out of most Churches, either lies 
“unseen in the hearts of good men, looking and 
longing and silently working there towards some 
new Revelation; or else wanders homeless over the 
world, like a disembodied soul seeking its terrestrial 
organisation, — into how many strange shapes, of 


6 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


Superstition and Fanaticism, does it not tentatively 
and errantly cast itself! The higher Enthusiasm of 
man’s nature is for the while without Exponent; yet 
does it continue indestructible, unweariedly active, 
and work blindly in the great chaotic deep: thus Sect — 
after Sect, and Church after Church, bodies itself 
forth, and melts again into new metamorphosis.” 
No one who understands the times in which we 
live can deny that these words sound as if they 
had been written to-day. But it is not with “the 
religious principle” and the ways in which it has 
developed that we are going to concern ourselves 
in these lectures. We shall try to answer the 
more modest but not less pressing question, What 
is Christianity? What wasit?> What has it become ? 
The answer to this question may, we hope, also 
throw light by the way on the more comprehensive 
one, What is Religion, and what ought it to be to us? 
In dealing with religion, is it not after all with the 
Christian religion alone that we have to do? Other 


religions no longer stir the depths of our hearts. 


What is Christianity? It is solely in its historical 
sense that we shall try to answer this question 
here; that is to say, we shall employ the methods 
of historical science, and the experience of life 
gained by studying the actual course of history. 
This excludes the view of the question taken by 
the apologist and the religious philosopher. On 
this point permit me to say a few words. 


PRELIMINARY 7 


Apologetics holds a necessary place in religious 
knowledge, and to demonstrate the validity of the 
Christian religion and exhibit its importance for the 
moral and intellectual life is a great and a worthy 
undertaking. But this undertaking must be kept 
quite separate from the purely historical question as 
to the nature of that religion, or else historical 
research will be brought into complete discredit. 
Moreover, in the kind of apologetics that is now 
required no really high standard has yet been 
attained. Apart from a few steps that have been 
taken in the direction of improvement, apologetics 
as a subject of study is in a deplorable state: it is 
not clear as to the positions to be defended, and it 
is uncertain as to the means to be employed. It is 
also not infrequently pursued in an undignified and 
obtrusive fashion. Apologists imagine that they are 
doing a great work by crying up religion as though 
it were a job-lot at a sale, or a universal remedy 
for all social ills. They are perpetually snatching, 
too, at all sorts of baubles, so as to deck out religion 
in fine clothes. In their endeavour to present it as 
a glorious necessity, they deprive it of its earnest 
character, and at the best only prove that it is some- 
thing which may be safely accepted because it can do 
no harm. Finally, they cannot refrain from slipping 
in some church programme of yesterday and “ de- 
monstrating ” its claims as well. The structure of 
their ideas is so loose that an idea or two more makes 
no difference. ‘The mischief that has been thereby 


8 WHATS CHRISTIANITY? 


done already and is still being done is indescribable. 
No! the Christian religion is something simple and 
sublime; it means one thing and one thing only: 
Kternal life in the midst of time, by the strength and 
under the eyes of God. It is no ethical or social ar- 
canum for the preservation or improvement of things 
generally. To make what it has done for civilisation 
and human progress the main question, and to de- 
termine its value by the answer, is to do it violence 
at the start. Goethe once said, Mankind is always 
advancing, and man always remains the same.” It is 
to man that religion pertains, to man, as one who in 
the midst of all change and progress himself never 
changes. Christian apologetics must recognise, then, 
that it is with religion in its simple nature and its 
simple strength that it has to do. Religion, truly, 
does not exist for itself alone, but lives in an inner 
fellowship with all the activities of the mind and 
with moral and economical conditions as well. But 
it is emphatically not a mere function or an exponent 
of them; it is a mighty power that sets to work of 
itself, hindering or furthering, destroying or making 
fruitful. The main thing is to learn what religion 
is and in what its essential character consists; no’ 
matter what position the individual who examines it 
may take up in regard to it, or whether in his own 
life he values it or not. 

But the point of view of the philosophical theorist, 
in the strict sense of the word, will also find no place 
in these lectures. Had they been delivered sixty 


PRELIMINARY 9 


years ago, it would have been our endeavour to try to 
arrive by speculative reasoning at some general con- 
ception of religion, and then to define the Christian 
religion accordingly. But we have rightly become 
sceptical about the value of this procedure. Latet 
dolus in generalibus. We know to-day that life 
cannot be spanned by general conceptions, and that 
there is no general conception of religion to which 
actual religions are related simply and solely as 
species to genus. Nay, the question may even be 
asked whether there is any such generic conception 
as “religion” at all. Is the common element in it 
anything more than a vague disposition? Is 
it only an empty place in our innermost being 
that the word denotes, which every one fills up in a 
different fashion and many do not perceive at all? I 
am not of this opinion; I am convinced, rather, that 


= 


at bottom we have to do here with something which | 


is common to us all, and which in the course of 
history has struggled up out of torpor and discord 
into unity and light. I am convinced that Augus- 
tine is right when he says, “Thou, Lord, hast made 
us for Thyself, and our heart is restless until it finds 
rest in Thee.” But to prove that this is so; to 
exhibit the nature and the claims of religion by 
psychological analysis, including the psychology of 
peoples, is not the task that we shall undertake in 
what follows. We shall keep to the purely historical 
theme: What is the Christian religion ? 


b 


fe) WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Where are we to look for our materials? The 
answer seems to be simple and at the same time 
. exhaustive: Jesus Christ and his Gospel. But 
however little doubt there may be that this must 
form not only our point of departure but also the 
matter with which our investigations will mainly 
deal, it is equally certain that we must not be content 
to exhibit the mere image of Jesus Christ and the 
main features of his Gospel. We must not be con- 
tent to stop there, because every great and powerful 
personality reveals a part of what it is only when 
seen in those whom it influences. Nay, it may be 
said that the more powerful the personality which a 
man possesses, and the more he takes hold of the 
inner life of others, the less can the sum-total of 
what he is be known only by what he himself says 
and does. We must look at the reflection and 
the effects which he produced in those whose leader 
and master he became. ‘That is why a complete 
answer to the question, What is Christianity, is 
impossible so long as we are restricted to Jesus 
Christ’s teaching alone. We must include the first 
generation of his disciples as well—those who ate and 
drank with him—and we must listen to what they tell 
us of the effect which he had upon their lives. 

But even this does not exhaust our materials. If 
Christianity is an example of a great power valid not 
for one particular epoch alone; if in and through it, 
not once only, but again and again, great forces have 
been disengaged, we must include all the later pro- 


bELE: GOSPEL II 


ducts of its spirit. It is not a question of a “ doc- 
trine” being handed down by uniform repetition or 
arbitrarily distorted ; it is a question of a life, again 
and again kindled afresh, and now burning with a 
flame of its own. We may also add that Christ 
himself and the apostles were convinced that the 
religion which they were planting would in the ages 
to come have a greater destiny and a deeper meaning 
than it possessed at the time of its institution; they 
trusted to its spirit leading from one point of light 
to another and developing higher forces. Just as we 
cannot obtain a complete knowledge of a tree without 
regarding not only its root and its stem but also its 
bark, its branches, and the way in which it blooms, 
so we cannot form any right estimate of the Christian 
religion unless we take our stand upon a compre- 
hensive induction that shall cover all the facts of its 
history. It is true that Christianity has had its 
classical epoch; nay more, it had a founder who 
himself was what he taught—to steep ourselves in 
him is still the chief matter; but to restrict ourselves 
to him means to take a point of view too low for his 
significance. Individual religious life was what he | 
wanted to kindle and what he did kindle; it is, as — 
we shall see, his peculiar greatness to have led men 
to God, so that they may thenceforth live their own 
life with Him. How, then, can we be silent about the 
history of the Gospel if we wish to know what he was ? 

It may be objected: that put in this way the 
problem is too difficult, and that its solution threatens 


12 WHAD WS (‘CHRISTIANITY :? 


to be accompanied by many errors and defects. That 
is not to be denied; but to state a problem in easier 
terms, that is to say in this case inaccurately, 
because of the difficulties surrounding it, would bea 
very perverse expedient. Moreover, even though the 
difficulties increase, the work is, on the other hand, 
facilitated by the problem being stated in a larger 
manner ; for it helps us to grasp what is essential in 
the phenomena, and to distinguish kernel and husk. 
Jesus Christ and his disciples were situated in 
their day just as we are situated in ours; that is to 
say, their feelings, their thoughts, their judgments 
_ and their efforts were bounded by the horizon and 
‘the framework in which their own nation was set 
‘and by its condition at the time. Had it been 
otherwise, they would not have been men of flesh 
and blood, but spectral beings. For seventeen 
hundred years, indeed, people thought, and many 
among us still think, that the “humanity” of 
Jesus Christ, which is a part of their creed, is suffi- 
ciently provided for by the assumption that he had 
a human body and a human soul. As if it were 
possible to have that without having any definite 
character as an individual! To be a man means, 
in the first place, to possess a certain mental and 
spiritual disposition, determined in such and such a 
way, and thereby limited and circumscribed ; and, in 
the second place, it means to be situated, with this 
disposition, in an historical environment which in its 
turn is also limited and circumscribed. Outside this 


THE GOSPEL 13 


there are no such things as “men.” It at once 
follows, however, that a man can think, speak, and 
do absolutely nothing at all in which his peculiar 
disposition and his own age are not coefficients. A 
single word may seem to be really classical and valid 
for all time, and yet the very language in which it is 
spoken gives it very palpable limitations. Much less 
is a spiritual personality, as a whole, susceptible of 
being represented in a way that will banish the 
feeling of its limitations, and with those limitations, 
the sense of something strange or conventional; and 
this feeling must necessarily be enhanced the farther 
in point of time the spectator is removed. 

From thése circumstances it follows that the 
historian, whose business and highest duty it is to 
determine what is of permanent value, is of neces- 
sity required not to cleave to words but to find out , 
what is essential. The ‘‘ whole” Christ, the ‘‘ whole ” 
Gospel, if we mean by this motto the external image 
taken in all its details and set up for imitation, is 
just as bad and deceptive a shibboleth as the “whole” 
Luther, and the like. Itis bad because it enslaves 
us, and it is deceptive because the people who pro- 
claim it do not think of taking it seriously, and 
could not do so if they tried. They cannot do so 
because they cannot cease to feel, understand and 
judge as children of their age. 

There are only two possibilities here: either the 
Gospel is in all respects identical with its earliest 
form, in which case it came with its time and has 


14 WHAT 3S GHRISTIANITY? 


departed with it; or else it contains something 
which, under differing historical forms, is of per- 
manent validity. The Jatter is the true view. The 
history of the Church shows us in its very commence- 
ment that ‘‘ primitive Christianity” had to disappear 
in order that “Christianity” might remain; and in 
the same way in later ages one metamorphosis 
followed upon another. From the beginning it was 
a question of getting rid of formulas, correcting 
expectations, altering ways of feeling, and this is a 
process to which there is no end. But by the very 
fact that our survey embraces the whole course as 
well as the inception we enhance our standard of 
what is essential and of real value. : 

We enhance our standard, but we need not 
wait to take it from the history of those later ages. 
The thing itself reveals it. We shall see that the 
Gospel in the Gospel is something so simple, 
something that speaks to us with so much power, 
that 1t cannot easily be mistaken. No far-reaching 
directions as to method, no general introduc- 
tions, are necessary to enable us to find the way 
to it. No one who possesses a fresh eye for 
what is alive, and a true feeling for what is really 
great, can fail to see it and distinguish it from its 
contemporary integument. And even though there 
may be many individual aspects of it where the 
task of distinguishing what is permanent from what 
is fleeting, what is rudimentary from what is 
merely historical, 1s not quite easy, we must not 


THE GOSPEL | 15 


be like the child who, wanting to get at the kernel 
of a bulb, went on picking off the leaves until 
there was nothing left, and then could not help see- 
ing that it was just the leaves that made the bulb. 
Endeavours of this kind are not unknown in the 
history of the Christian religion, but they fade 
before those other endeavours which seek to con- 
vince us that there is no such thing as either 
kernel or husk, growth or decay, but that every- , 
thing is of equal value and alike permanent. 

In these lectures, then, we shall deal first of all 
with the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and this theme will 
occupy the greater part of our attention. We shall 
then show what impression he himself and his Gospel 
made upon the first generation of his disciples. 
Finally, we shall follow the leading changes which 
the Christian idea has undergone in the course of 
history, and try to recognise its chief types. What 
is common to all the forms which it has taken, 
corrected by reference to the Gospel, and, conversely, 
the chief features of the Gospel, corrected by reference 
to history, will, we may be allowed to hope, bring us 
to the kernel of the matter. Within the limits of 
a short series of lectures it is, of course, only to what 
is important that attention can be called; but per- 
haps there will be no disadvantage in fixing our 
attention, for once, only on the strong lines and 
prominent points of the relief, and, by putting what is 
secondary into the background, in looking at the vast 
material in a concentrated form. We shall even 


16 _ WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY P 


refrain, and permissibly refrain, from enlarging, by 
way of introduction, on Judaism and its external and 
internal relations, and on the Grseco-Roman world. 
We must never, of course, wholly shut our eyes to 
them—nay, we must always keep them in mind; but 
diffuse explanations in regard to these matters are 
unnecessary. Jesus Christ’s teaching will at once 
bring us by steps which, if few, will be great, to 
a height where its connexion with Judaism is seen 
to be only a loose one, and most of the threads 
leading from it into “ contemporary history’’ become 
of no importance at all. This may seem a para- 
doxical thing to say; for just now we are being 
earnestly assured, with an air as though it were some 
new discovery that was being imparted to us, that 
Jesus Christ’s teaching cannot be understood, nay, 
cannot be accurately represented, except by having 
regard to its connexion with the Jewish doctrines 
prevalent at the time, and by first of all setting them 
out in full, There is much that is true in this 
statement, and yet, as we shall see, it is incorrect. 
It becomes absolutely false, however, when worked 
up into the dazzling thesis that the Gospel is in- 
telligible only as the religion of a despairing section 
of the Jewish nation; that it was the last effort of 
a decadent age, driven by distress into a renunciation 
of this earth, and then trying to storm heaven 
and demanding civic rights there—a religion of 
miserabilism! It is rather remarkable that the 
really desperate were just those who did not weleome 


THE GOSPEL 17 


it, but fought against it; remarkable that its leaders, 
so far as we know them, do not, in fact, bear any of 
the marks of sickly despair; most remarkable of all, 
that while indeed renouncing the world and its goods, 
they establish, in love and _ holiness, a brotherly 
union which declares war on the world’s misery. 
The oftener I re-read and consider the Gospels, the 
more do I find that the contemporary discords, in 
the midst of which the Gospel stood, and out of 
which it arose, sink into the background. I enter- 
tain no doubt that the founder had his eye upon 
man in whatever external situation he might be 


found—upon man who, fundamentally, always re-— 


mains the same, whether he be moving upwards or 
downwards, whether he be in riches or poverty, 
whether he be of strong mind or of weak. It is the 
consciousness of all these oppositions being ultimately 
beneath it, and of its own place above them, that gives 
the Gospel its sovereignty ; for in every man it looks 
to the point that is unaffected by all these differences. 
This is very clear in Paul’s case; he dominates all 
earthly things and circumstances like a king, and 
desires to see them so dominated. The thesis of the 
decadent age and the religion of the wretched may 
serve to lead us into the outer court; it may even 
correctly point to that which originally gave the 
Gospel its form; but if it is offered us as a key for 
the understanding of this religion in itself, we must 
reject it. Moreover, this thesis and the pretensions 
which it makes are only illustrations of a fashion 


which has become general in the writing of history, 
B 


18 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


and which in that province will naturally have a 
longer reign than other fashions, because by its 
means much that was obscure has, as a matter of 
fact, been cleared up. But to the heart of the 
matter its devotees do not penetrate, as they silently 
assume that no such heart exists. 

| Let me conclude this lecture by touching briefly 
on one other important point. In history absolute 
judgments are impossible. This is a truth which in 
these days—I say adviscdly, in these days—is clear 
and incontestable. History can only show how things 
have been; and even where we can throw heht upon 
the past, and understand and criticize it, we must not 
presume to think that by any process of abstraction 
absolute judgments as to the value to be assigned 
to past events can be obtaimed from the results of 
a purely historical survey. Such judgments are the 
(creation only of feeling and of will; they are a 
subjective act. The false notion that the under- 
standing can produce them is a heritage of that 
protracted epoch in which knowing and knowledge 
were expected to accomplish everything; in which iv 
was believed that they could be stretched so as to 
be capable of covering and satisfying ail the needs 
of the mind and the heart. That they cannot do. 
This is a truth which, in many an hour of ardent work, 
falls heavily upon our soul, and yet—what a hope- 
less thing it would be for mankind if the higher peace 
to which it aspires, and the clearness, the certainty 
and the strength for which it strives, were dependent 
on the measure of its learning and its knowledge. _ 


LECTURE II. 


Ovr first section deals with the main features of 
the message delivered by Jesus Christ. They in- 
clude the form in which he delivered what he had 
to say. We shall see how essential a part of his 
character is here exhibited, for “he spoke as one 
having authority and not as the Scribes.” But 
before describing these features I feel it my duty 
to tell you briefly how matters stand in regard to 
the sources of our knowledge. 

Our authorities for the message which J esus Christ 
delivered are—apart from certain important statc- 
ments made by Paul — the first three Gospels. 
Everything that we know, independently of these ~ 
Gospels, about Jesus’ history and his teaching, may. 
be easily put on a small sheet of paper, so little 
does it come to. In particular, the fourth Gospel, 
which does not emanate or profess to emanate from 
the apostle John, cannot be taken as an_ historical 
authority in the ordinary meaning of the word. The 
author of it acted with sovereign freedom, trans- 
posed events and put them in astrange light, drew up 


the discourses himself, and illustrated great thoughts 
19 


20 WHAT IS CHRISTIANE? 


by imaginary situations. Although, therefore, his 
work is not altogether devoid of a real, if scarcely re- 
cognisable, traditional element, it can hardly make 
any claim to be considered an authority for Jesus’ 
history ; only little of what he says can be accepted, 
and that little with caution. On the other hand, it is 
an authority of the first rank for answering the ques- 
tion, What vivid views of Jesus’ person, what kind 
of hght and warmth, did the Gospel disengage ? 
Sixty years ago David Friedrich Strauss thought 
that he had almost entirely destroyed the historical 
credibility not only of the fourth but also of the © 
first three Gospels as well. The historical criticism 
of two generations has succeeded in restoring that 
credibility in its main outlines. These Gospels are 
not, it is true, historical works any more than the 
fourth ; they were not written with the simple object 
of giving the facts as they were; they are books 
composed for the work of evangelisation. Their 
purpose is to awaken a belief in Jesus Christ’s 
person and mission; and the purpose is served by 
the description of his deeds and discourses, as well 
as by the references to the Old Testament. Never- 
theless they are not altogether useless as sources of 
history, more especially as the object with which 
they were written is not supplied from without, but 
coincides in part with what Jesus intended. But 
such other great leading purposes as have been 
ascribed to the evangelists have been one and all 
shown to lack any foundation, although with each 


THE GOSPEL 21 


individual evangelist many secondary purposes may 
have come into play. The Gospels are not “ party 
tracts”; neither are they writings which as yet 
bear the radical impress of the Greek spirit. In their 
essential substance they belong to the first, the Jew- 
ish, epoch of Christianity, that brief epoch which 
may be denoted as the paleontological. That we 
possess any reports dating from that time, even 
though, as is obvious in the first and third Gospel, 
the setting and the composition are by another hand, 
is one ef those historical arrangements for which we 
cannot be too thankful. Criticism to-day univers- 
ally recognises the unique character of the Gospels. 
What especially marks them off from all subsequent 
literature is the way in which they state their facts. 
This species of literary art, which took shape 
partly by analogy with the didactic narratives of the 
Jews, and partly from catechetical necessities —this 
simple and impressive form of exposition was, even a 
few decades later, no longer capable of exact repro- 
duction. From the time that the Gospel was trans- 
ferred to the broad ground of the Graeco-Roman world 
it appropriated the literary forms of the Greeks, and 
the style of the evangelists was then felt to be 
something strange but sublime. When all is said, 
the Greek laneuage lies upon these writings only like 
a diaphanous veil, and it requires hardly any effort to 
retranslate their contents into Hebrew or Aramaic. 
That the tradition here presented to us is, in the 
main, at first hand is obvious. 


22 WHAT Ts°CHRISTIANITY ? 


How fixed this tradition was in regard to its form 
is proved by the third Gospel. . It was composed by 
a Greek, probably in the time of Domitian ; and in 
the second part of his work, the Acts of the Apostles— 
besides the preface to the first—he shows us that 
he was familiar with the literary language of his 
nation and that he was an excellent master of style. 
But in the Gospel narrative he did not dare to abandon 
the traditional type: he tells his story in the same 
style as Mark and Matthew, with the same con- 
nexion of sentences, the same colour, nay, with 
many of precisely the same. details; -it is “only the 
ruder words and expressions, which would offend 
literary taste, that are sparingly corrected. There 
is another respect, too, in which his Gospel strikes 
us as remarkable: he assures us at the beginning of 
it that he has ‘‘had perfect understanding of all 
things from the very first,” and has examined many 
accounts. But if we test him by his authorities, we 
find that he has kept in the main to Mark’s Gospel, 
and to a source which we also find appearing again 
in Matthew. These accounts both seemed to him, as 
a respectable chronicler, to be preferable to the crowd 
of others. That offers a good guarantee for them. 
No historian has found that it is possible or necessary 
to substitute any other tradition for the one which 
we have here. ; ? 
_. Another point: this tradition is, apart from the 
story of the Passion, almost exclusively Galilean in 
its character. Had not. the history of Jesus’ public 


THE GOSPEL 23 


activity been really bounded by this geographical 
horizon, tradition could not have so described it; for 
every historical narrative with an eye to effect would 
have represented him as working chiefly in Jerusalem. 
That is the account given by the fourth Gospel. 
That our first three evangelists almost entirely 
refrain from saying anything about Jerusalem arouses 
a good prejudice in their favour. 

It is true that, measured by the standard of “ agree- 
ment, inspiration and completeness,” these writings 
leave a very great deal to be desired, and even when 
judged by a more human standard they suffer from 
not a few imperfections. Rude additions from a 
later age they do not, indeed, exhibit—it will always 
remain a noteworthy fact that, conversely, it is only 
the fourth Gospel which makes Greeks ask after Jesus 
—but still they, too, reflect, here and there, the circum‘ 
stances in which the primitive Christian community 
was placed and the experiences which it afterwards 
underwent. People nowadays, however, put such 
constructions on the text more readily than is necessary. 
Further, the conviction that Old Testament prophecy 
was fulfilled in Jesus’ history had a disturbing effeet 
on tradition. Lastly, in some of the narratives the 
miraculous element is obviously intensified. On the 
other hand, Strauss’ contention that the Gospels con- 
tain a very great deal that is mythical has not been 
borne out, even if the very indefinite and defective 
conception of what “mythical” means in Strauss’ 
application of the word, be allowed to pass. It is 


24 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


almost exclusively in the account of Jesus’ childhood, 
and there only sparingly, that a mythical touch can 
be traced. None of these disturbing elements affect 
the heart of the narrative; not a few of them easily 
lend themselves to correction, partly by a comparison 
of the Gospels one with another, partly through the 
sound judgement that is matured by historical study. 

But the miraculous element, all these reports of 
miracles! Not Strauss only, but many others too, 
have allowed themselves to be frightened by them 
into roundly denying the credibility of the Gospels. 
But, on the other hand, historical science in this last 
generation has taken a great step in advance by 
learning to pass a more intelligent and benevolent 
judgment on those narratives, and accordingly even 
reports of the marvellous can now be counted 
amongst the materials of history and turned to good 
account. I owe it to you and to the subject briefly 
to specify the position which historical science to-day 
takes up in regard to these reports. 

In the first place, we know that the Gospels come 
from a time in which the marvellous may be said 
« to have been something of almost daily occurrence. 
People felt and saw that they were surrounded by 
wonders, and not by any means only in the religious 
sphere. Certain spiritualists among us excepted, 
we are now accustomed to associate the question of 
miracles exclusively with the question of religion. 
In those days it was otherwise. The fountains of the 
marvellous were many. Some sort of divinity was, 


THE MIRACULOUS ELEMENT 25 


of course, supposed to be at work in every case; it 
was a god who accomplished the miracle; but it was 
not to every god that people stood in a religious 
relation. Further, in those days, the strict concep- 
tion which we now attach to the word ‘“ miracle” was 
as yet unknown; it came in only with a knowledge of 
the laws of nature and their general validity. Before 
that, no sound insight existed into what was possible 
and what was impossible, what was rule and what was 
exception. But where this distinction is not clear, or 
where, as the case may be, the question has not yet 
been raised at all in any rigorous form, there are no 
such things as miracles in the strict sense of the 
word. No one can feel anything to be an interrup- 
tion of the order of Nature who does not yet know, 
what the order of Nature is. Miracles, then, could 
not possess the significance for that age which, if they 
existed, they would possess for ours. For that age 
all wonders were only extraordinary events, and, even 
if they formed a world by themselves, it was certain 
that there were countless points in which that other 
world mysteriously encroached upon our own. Nor 
was it only God’s messengers, but magicians and char- 
latans as well, who were thought to be possessed of 
some of these miraculous powers. The significance 
attaching to “ miracles” was, therefore, in those days 
a subject of never-ending controversy; at one moment 
a high value was set upon them and they were con- 
sidered to belong to the very essence of religion; at’ 
another, they were spoken of with contempt. 


26 WHAT IS °GHRISTIANITY ? 


all 


In the second place, we now know that it is 
not after they have been long dead, nor even 
after the lapse of many years, that miracles have 
- been reported of eminent persons, but at once, often 
the very next day. The habit of condemning a 
narrative, or of ascribing it to a later age, only 
because it includes stories of miracles, is a piece 
of prejudice. 3 

In the third place, we are firmly convinced that 
what happens in space and time is subject to the 
general laws of motion, and that in this sense, as 
an interruption of the order of Nature, there can 
- be no such things as “miracles.” But we also 
recognise that the religious man—if religion really 
permeates him and is something more than a belief 
in the religion of others—is certain that he is not 
shut up within a blind and brutal course of Nature, 
but that this course of Nature serves higher ends, 
or, as it may be, that some inner and divine power 
can help us so to encounter it as that ‘“‘ everything 
must necessarily be for the best.” This experience, 
which I might express in one word as the ability 
to escape from the power and the service of transitory 
things, is always felt afresh to be a miracle each 
time that it occurs; it is inseparable from every 
. higher religion, and were it to be surrendered, 
religion would be at an end. But it is an experience 
which is equally true of the life of the individual 
and. of the great course of human history. How 
clearly and logically, then, must a religious man 


THE MIRACULOUS ELEMENT 27 


think, if, in spite of this experience, he holds firmly 
to the inviolable character of what happens in 
space and time. Who can wonder that even great 
minds fail to keep the two spheres quite separate ? 
And as we all live, first and foremost, in the domain 
not of ideas but of perceptions, and in a language 
of metaphor, how can we avoid conceiving that 
which is divine and makes us free as a mighty 
power working upon the order of Nature, and 
breaking through or arresting it? ‘This notion, 
though it belong only to the realm of fantasy and 
metaphor, will, it seems, last as long as religion 
itself. | 

In the fourth place, and lastly, although the order 
of Nature be inviolable, we are not yet by any 
means acquainted with all the forces working in 
it and acting reciprocally with other forces. Our ) 
acquaintance even with the forces inherent in matter, 
-and with the field of their action, is incomplete ; 
while of psychic forces we know very much less. 
We see that- a strong will and a firm faith exert 
an influence upon the life of the body, and produce 
phenomena which strike us as marvellous. Who 
is there up to now that has set any sure bounds 
to the province of the possible and the actual? 
No one. Who can say how far the influence of 
soul upon soul and of sou] upon body reaches? 
No one. Who can still maintain that any extra- 
ordinary phenomenon that may appear in this 
domain is entirely based on error and delusion ? 


28 WHAT AS*GHRISTLANIT VY? 


Miracles, it is true, do not happen; but of the 
marvellous and the inexplicable there is plenty. 
In our present state of knowledge we have become 
more careful, more hesitating in our judgment, 
in regard to the stories of the miraculous which 
we have received from antiquity. That the earth 
in its course stood still; that a she-ass spoke; 
that a storm was quieted by a word, we do not 
believe, and we shall never again believe; but 
that the lame walked, the blind saw, and the deaf 
heard, will not be so summarily dismissed as an 
illusion. 

From these suggestions you can arrive for your- 
selves at the right position to take up in regard to 
the miraculous stories related in the Gospels, and 
at their net results. In particular cases, that 
is to say, in the application of general principles 
to concrete statements, some uncertainty will always. 
remain. So far as I can judge, the stories may be 
grouped as follows :—(1) Stories which had their 
origin In an exaggerated view of natural events of 
an impressive character; (2) stories which had their 
origin in sayings or parables, or in the projec- 
tion of inner experiences on to the external world ; 
(8) stories such as. arose in the interests of the ful- 
filment of Old Testament sayings; (4) stories of 
surprising cures effected by Jesus’ spiritual force ; 
(5) stories of which we cannot fathom the secret. 
It is very remarkable, however, that Jesus himself 
did not assign that critical importance to his 


THE MIRACULOUS ELEMENT 29 


miraculous deeds which even the evangelist Mark 
and the others all attributed to them. Did he not 
exclaim, in tones of complaint and accusation, “‘ Unless 
ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe”? He 
who uttered these words cannot have held that 
belief in the wonders which he wrought was the 
right or the only avenue to the recognition of his 
person and his mission; nay, in all essential points 
he must have thought of them quite otherwise than 
his evangelists. And the remarkable fact that these 
very evangelists, without appreciating its range, 
hand down the statement that Jesus “did not many 
mighty works there because of their unbelief,” shows 
us, from another and a different side, with what 
caution we must receive these miraculous stories, 
and into what category we must put them. 

It follows from all this that we must not try to 
evade the Gospel by entrenching ourselves behind 
the miraculous stories related by the evangelists. 
In spite of those stories, nay, in part even in 
them, we are presented with a reality which has 
claims upon our participation. Study it, and do not 
let yourselves be deterred because this or that 
miraculous story strikes you as strange or leaves. 
you cold. If there is anything here that you find 
unintelligible, put it quietly aside. Perhaps you 
will have to leave it there for ever; perhaps the 
meaning will dawn upon you later and the story 
assume a significance of which you never dreamt. 
Once more, let me say: do not be deterred. The 


30 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


question of miracles is of relative indifference in 
comparison with everything else which is to be 
found in the Gospels. It is not miracles that 
matter; the question on which everything turns is 
whether we are helplessly yoked to an inexorable 
necessity, or whether a God exists who rules and 
governs, and whose power to compel Nature we can 
move by prayer and make a part of our experience. 


Our evangelists, as we know, do not tell us any- 
thing about the history of Jesus’ early development ; 
they tell us only of his puble activity. Two of the 
Gospels do, it is true, contain an introductory history 
(the history of Jesus’ birth); but we may disregard 
it; for even if it contained something more trust- 
worthy than it does actually contain, it would be as 
good as useless for our purpose. ‘That is to say, the 
evangelists themselves never refer to it, nor make 
_Jesus himself refer to his antecedents. On the 
contrary, they tell us that Jesus’ mother and his 
brethren were completely surprised at his coming 
forward, and did not know what to make of it. Paul, 
too, is silent; so that we can be sure that the oldest 
tradition knew nothing of any stories of Jesus’ birth. 

We know nothing of Jesus’ history for the first 
thirty years of his life. Is there not a terrible 
uncertainty here? What is there left us if we have 
to begin our task by confessing that we are unable 
to write any life of Jesus? How can we write the 
history. of a man of whose development we know 


JESUS’ HISTORY 31 


nothing, and with only a year or two of whose life 
we are acquainted? Now, however certain it may be 
that our materials are insufficient for a ‘‘ biography,” 
they are very weighty in other respects, and even 
their silence on the first thirty years is instructive. 
They are weighty because they give us information 
upon three important points: In the first place, they 
offer us a plain picture of Jesus’ teaching, m 
regard both to its main features and to its in- 
dundual application ; um the second place, they tell 
us how his life issued in the service of his vocation ; 
and in the third place, they describe to us the 
impression which he made upon has disciples, and — 
which they transmitted. 

These are, in fact, three important points; nay, 
they are the points on which everything turns. It 
is because we can get a clear view of them that a 
characteristic picture of Jesus is possible; or, to 
speak more modestly, that there is some hope for 
an attempt to understand what his aims were, what 
he was, and what he signifies for us. 

As regards the thirty years of silence, we gather 
from our evangelists that Jesus did not think it 
necessary to give his disciples any information about 
them. But much may be said about them nega- 
tively. First of all, it 1s very improbable that he 
went through any Rabbinical school; he nowhere 
speaks like a man who had assimilated any theo- 
logical culture of a technical kind, or learned the art 
of scholarly exegesis. Compare him in this respect 


32 WHATS CHRISTIANITY? 


with the apostle Paul; how clearly it can be seen 
from the latter’s epistles that he had sat at the feet 
of theological teachers. With Jesus we find nothing 
of the kind; and hence he caused a stir by appear- 
ing in the schools and teaching at all. He lived and 
had his being in the sacred writings, but not after 
the manner of a professional teacher. 

Neither can he have had any relations with the 
Essenes, a remarkable order of Jewish monks. Were 
that so, he would have belonged to the pupils who 
show their dependence on their teachers by proclaim- 
ing and doing the opposite of what they have been 
taught. The Hssenes made a point of the most. 
extreme purity in the eye of the law, and held 
severely aloof not only from the impure but even 
from those who were a little lax in their purity. It 
is only thus that we can understand their living 
strictly apart, their dwelling in particular places, and. 
their practice of frequent ablutions every day. Jesus. 
exhibits a complete contrast with this mode of life: 
he goes in search of sinners and eats with them. So 
fundamental a difference alone makes it certain that. 
he had nothing to do with the Essenes. His aims. 
and the means which he employed divide him off 
from them. If he appears to coincide with them in 
many of his individual injunctions to his disciples, 
these are accidental points of contact, as his motives. 
were quite other than theirs. 

Further, unless all-appearances are deceptive, no: 
stormy crisis, no breach with his past, lies behind. 


JESUS’ HISTORY 33 


the period of Jesus’ life that we know. In none of 
his sayings or discourses, whether he is threatening 
and punishing or drawing and calling people to him 
with kindness, whether he is speaking of his relation 
to the Father or to the world, can we discover the 
signs of inner revolutions overcome, or the scars of 
any terrible conflict. Hverythimg seems to pour from 
him naturally, as though it could not do otherwise, 
like a spring from the depths of the earth, clear and 
unchecked in its flow. Where shall we find the man 
who at the age of thirty can so speak, if he has gone 


through bitter struggles—struggles of the soul, in 


g 
which he has ended by burning what he once 
adored, and by adoring what he burned? Where 
shall we find the man who has broken with his past, 
in order to summon others to repentance as well as 
himself, but who through it all never speaks of 
his own repentance? This consideration makes it 
impossible that his life could have been spent in inner 
conflict, however little it may have been lacking in 
deep emotion,-in temptation and in doubt. 

One final point: the picture of Jesus’ life and his 
discourses stand in no relation with the Greek spirit. 
That is almost a matter for surprise ; for Galilee was 
full of Greeks, and Greek was then spoken in many 
of its cities, much as Swedish is nowadays in Finland. 
There were Greek teachers and philosophers there, 
and it is searcely conceivable that Jesus should have 
-been entirely unacquainted with their language. But 
that he was in any way influenced by them, that he 

C 


34 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


was ever in touch with the thoughts of Plato or 
the Porch, even though it may have been only in 
some popular redaction, it is absolutely impossible to 
maintain. Of course if religious individualism—God 
and the soul, the soul and its God; if subjectivism ; 
if the full self-responsibility of the individual ; if the 
separation of the religious from the political—if all 
this is only Greek, then Jesus, too, stands within the 
sphere of Greek development ; then he, too, breathed 
the pure air of Greece and drank from the Greek 
spring. But it cannot be proved that it is only on 
this one line, only in the Hellenic people, that this 
development took place; nay, it is rather the con- 
trary that can be shown ; other nations also advanced 
to similar states of knowledge and feeling ; although 
they did so, it is true, as a rule, only after Alexander 
the Great had pulled down the barriers and fences 
which separated the peoples. For these nations, too, 
no doubt it was in the majority of cases the Greek 
element that was the liberating and progressive factor. 
But I do not believe that the Psalmist who uttered 
the words, ‘“ Whom have I in heaven but thee? and 
there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee,” 
had ever heard anything of Socrates or of Plato. 

Enough: from their silence on the first thirty 
years of Jesus’ life, and from what the evangelists do 
not tell us of the period of his activity, there are 
important things to be learnt. 


He lived in religion, and it was breath to him in 


JESUS’ TEACHING 35 


the fear of God; his whole life, all his thoughts and 
feelings, were absorbed in the relation to God, and 
yet he did not talk like an enthusiast and a fanatic, 
who sees only one red-hot spot, and so is blind to 
the world and all that it contains. He spoke his 
message and looked at the world with a fresh and 
clear eye for the life, great and small, that sur- 
rounded him. He proclaimed that to gain the 
whole world was nothing if the soul were injured, 
and yet he remained kind and sympathetic to every 
living thing. That is the most astonishing and the 
oreatest fact about him! His discourses, generally 
in the form of parables and sayings, exhibit every 
degree of human speech and the whole range of the 
emotions. The sternest tones of passionate accusa- 
tion and indignant reproof, nay, even irony, he 
does not despise; but they must have formed the 
exception with him. He is possessed of a quiet, 
uniform, collected demeanour, with everything 
directed to one goal. He never uses any ecstatic 
language, and the tone of stirring prophecy is rare. 
Entrusted with the greatest of all missions, his eye 
and ear are open to every impression of the life 
around him—a proof of intense calm and absolute 
certainty. ‘‘ Mourning and weeping, laughing and 
dancing, wealth and poverty, hunger and _ thirst, 
health and sickness, children’s play and _ politics, 
gathering and scattering, the leaving of home, life 
in the inn and the return, marriage and funeral, the 
splendid house of the living and the grave of the 


36 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


dead, the sower and the reaper in the field, the lord 
of the vintage among his vines, the idle workman 
in the marketplace, the shepherd searching for the 
sheep, the dealer in pearls on the sea, and, then 
again, the woman at home anxious over the barrel 
of meal and the leaven, or the lost piece of money, 
the widow's complaint to the surly official, the 
earthly food that perishes, the mental relation of 
teacher and pupil, on the one side regal glory and 
the tyrant’s lust of power, on the other childish 
innocence and the industry of the servant—all these 
pictures enliven his discourse and make it clear 
even to those who are children in mind.” They do 
more than tell us that he spoke in picture and 
parable. They exhibit an inner freedom and a 
cheerfulness of soul in the midst of the greatest 
strain, such as no prophet ever possessed before 
him. His eye rests kindly upon the flowers and’ 
the children, on the lily of the field—-‘‘ Solomon in all 
his glory is not clothed like one of them”—on the 
birds in -the air and the sparrows on the house-top. 
The sphere in which he lived,.above the earth and 
its concerns, did not destroy his interest in it; no! 
he brought everything in it into relation with 
_ the God whom he knew, and he saw it as protected 
in him: ‘ Your Father in heaven feeds them.” ‘The 
- parable is his most familiar form of speech. In- 
sensibly, however, parable and sympathy pass into 
each other. Yet he who had not where to lay his 
head does not speak like one who has broken with 


JESUS’ TEACHING 37 


everything, or like an heroic penitent, or like an 
ecstatic prophet, but like a man who has rest and 
peace for his soul, and is able to give life and 
strength to others. He strikes the mightiest notes ; 
he offers men an inexorable alternative; he leaves 
them no escape; and yet the strongest emotion 
seems to come naturally to him, and he expresses 
it as something natural; he clothes it in the 
language in which a mother speaks to her child, 


” 


LECTURE IIL 


In the previous lecture we spoke of our evangelists 
and of their silence on the subject of Jesus’ early 
development. We described in brief the mode and 
character of his teaching. We saw that he spoke 
like a prophet and yet not like a prophet. His 
words breathe peace, joy, and certainty. He urges 
the necessity of struggle and decision—‘‘ where your 
treasure is, there will your heart be also”—and yet the 
quiet symmetry of a parable is over all that he says: 
under God’s sun and the dew of heaven everything 
is to grow and increase until the harvest. He lived 
in the continual consciousness of God’s presence. 
- His food and drink was to do God's will. But—and 
this seemed to us the greatest thing about him and 
the seal of his inner freedom—he did not speak like 
an heroic penitent, or like an ascetic who has turned 
his back upon the world. His eye rested kindly 
upon the whole world, and he saw it as it was, in all 
its varied and changing colours. He ennobled it in 
his parables; his gaze penetrated the veil of the 
earthly, and he recognised everywhere the hand of 


the living God. 
38 


JOHN THE BAPTIST 39 


When he came forward, another was already at 
work among the Jewish people: John the Baptist. 
Within a few months a great movement had arisen 
on the banks of the Jordan. It differed altogether 
from those messianic movements which for several 
generations had by fits and starts kept the nation 
alive. The Baptist, it is true, also proclaimed that 
the kingdom of God was at hand; and that meant 
nothing less than that the day of the Lord, the 
judgment, the end, was then coming. But 
the day of judgment which John the Baptist 
announced was not the day when God was going to 
take vengeance upon the heathen and raise up his 
own people; it was the day of judgment for this | 
very people that he prophesied. ‘‘ Who hath warned 
you to flee from the wrath to come? Think not to 
say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our 
father: for I say unto you that God is able of these 
stones to raise up children unto Abraham. And now 
also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees.” In 
that day of judgment it is not being children of 
Abraham, but doing works of righteousness, which is 
to turn the scale. And he, the preacher, himself 
began with repentance and devoted his life to it; he 
stands before them in raiment of camel’s hair, and 
his meat is locusts and wild honey. But it is not in 
the levying of a band of ascetics that he sees his 
work, or at any rate his main work. He appeals to 
the whole nation, busy with its various trades and 
callings, and summons it to repentance. ‘They seem 


40 _ WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


very simple truths that he utters: to the publicans 
he says: ‘Exact no more than that which is 
appointed you”; to the soldiers: ‘‘Do violence 
to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be 
content with your wages”; to the well-to-do: 
“He that hath two coats, let him impart to him 
that hath none, and he that hath meat, let him 
do likewise”; and to all: “Forget not the poor.” 
This is the practical proof of the repentance to which 
he calls, and it embraces the conversion which he 
has in view. It is not a question of a single act, 
the baptism of repentance, but of a righteous life in 
the face of the avenging justice of God. Of cere- 
monies, sacrifices, and the works of the law, John 
did not speak; apparently he thought them un- 
important. It was on a right disposition and good 
deeds that everything turned. In the day of 
judgment it was by this standard that the God of 
Abraham would judge. 

Let us pause here for a moment. Questions force 
themselves upon us at this point which have often 
been answered and still are again and again put. 
It is clear that John the Baptist proclaimed the 
sovereignty of God and his holy moral law. — It is 
also clear that he proclaimed to his fellow-country- 
men that it was by the moral law that they were to 
measure, and that on this alone everything was to 
turn. He told them that what they were to care 
about most was to be in a right state within and 
to do good deeds. It is clear, lastly, that there is 


JOHN THE BAPTIST 41 


nothing over-refined or artificial in his notion of what 
was good; he means ordinary morality. It is here 
that the questions arise. 538 

Firstly : if it was only so simple a matter as the 
eternal claims of what is right and holy, why all this 
apparatus about the coming of the day of judgment, 
about the-axe being laid to the root of the trees, 
about the unquenchable fire, and so on? 

Secondly: is not this baptism in the wilderness 
and this proclamation that the day of judgment was 
at hand simply the reflection or the product of the 
political and social state of the nation at the time ? 

Thirdly: what is there that is really new in this 
proclamation and had not been already expressed in 
Judaism ? | y 

These three questions are very intimately con- 
nected with one another. 

Firstly, then, as to the whole dramatic eschatological 
apparatus about the coming of the kingdom of God, 
the end being at hand, and so on. Well, every time 
that a man earnestly, and out of the depths of his 
own personal experience, points others to God and to 
what is good and holy, whether it be deliverance or 
judgment that he preaches, it has always, so far as 
history tells us, taken the form of announcing that 
the end is at hand. How is that to be explained ? 
The answer is not difficult. Not only is religion a 
life in and with God; but, just because it is that, it 
is also the revelation of the meaning and responsi- 
bility of life. Every one who has awakened to a 


42 _ \WHAT CIS GHRISTIANITY ? 


sense of religion perceives that, without it, the search 
for such meaning is in vain, and that the individual, 
as well as the multitude, wanders aimlessly and falls: 
‘they go astray; every one turns to his own way.” 
But the prophet who has become conscious of God is 
filled with terror and agony as he recognises that all 
mankind is sunk in error and indifference. He feels 
like a traveller who sees his companions blindly 
rushing to the edge of a precipice. He wants to call 
them back at all costs. The time is running out; he 
can still warn them; he can still adjure them to turn 
back ; in a single hour, perhaps, all will be lost. The 
time is running out, it is the last moment—this is 
the cry in which, then, in all nations and at all 
times, any energetic call to conversion has been 
voiced whenever a fresh prophet has been granted 
them. The prophet’s gaze penetrates the course of 
history ; he sees the irrevocable end; and he is filled 
with boundless astonishment that the godlessness and 
blindness, the frivolity and indolence, have not long 
since brought everything to utter ruin and destruc- 
tion. That there is still a brief moment left in which 
conversion is possible seems to him the greatest 
marvel of all, and to be ascribed only to God’s 
forbearance. But certain it is that the end cannot 
be very far off. This is the way in which with every 
great cry for repentance the idea of the approaching 
end always arises. The individual forms in which it 
shapes itself depend upon contemporary circumstances 
and are of subordinate importance. It is only the 


JOHN THE BAPTIST 43 


religion which has been built up into an intellectual 
system that does not make this emphasising of the 
end all-important; without such emphasis no actual 
religion is conceivable, whether it springs up anew like 
a sudden flame or glows in the soul like a secret fire. 
I pass now to the second question: whether the 
social and political conditions of the time were not 
causes of the religious movement. Let us see briefly 
where we are. You are aware that at the time of 
which we speak the peaceful days of the Jewish 
theocracy were long past. For two centuries blow 
had followed upon blow; from the terrible days of 
Antiochus Epiphanes onwards the nation had never 
had any rest. The kingdom of the Maccabees had 
been set up, and through inner strife and external 
foe had soon disappeared again. The Romans had 
invaded the country and had laid their iron hand 
upon everything. The tyranny of that Edomite par- 
venu, King Herod, had robbed the nation of every 
pleasure in life and maimed it in all its members. 
So far as human foresight went, it looked as if no 
improvement in its position could ever again be 
effected; the lie seemed to be given to all the 
plorious old prophecies; the end appeared to have 
come. How easy it was at such an epoch to despair 
of all earthly things, and in this despair to renounce 
in utter distress what had once passed as the in- 
separable accompaniment of the theocracy. How 
easy it was now to declare the earthly crown, 
political possessions, prestige sand wealth, strenuous 


y/ 


/ 


44 WHAT TS CHRISTIANITY? 


effort and struggle, to be one and all worthless, 
and in place of them to look to heaven for a 
completely new kingdom, a kingdom for the poor, 
the oppressed, the weak, and to hope that their 
virtues of gentleness and patience would receive 
acrown. And if for hundreds of years the national 
God of Israel had been undergoing a transformation ; 
if he had broken in pieces the weapons of the mighty, 
and derided the showy worship of his priests; if he 
had demanded righteous judgment and mercy— 
what a temptation there was to proclaim him as 
the God who wills to see his people in misery that 
he may then bring them deliverance! We can, in 
fact, with a few touches construct the religion and its 
hopes which seemed of necessity to result from the 
circumstances of the time—a miserabilism which 
clings to the expectation of a miraculous interference 
on God’s part, and in the meantime, as it were, 
wallows in wretchedness. | 

But although the terrible circumstances of the 
time certainly disengaged and developed many 
ideas of this kind, and easily account for the wild 
enterprises of the false Messiahs andthe political 
efforts of fanatical Pharisees, they are very far 


from being sufficient to explain John the Baptist’s 


message. They do, indeed, explain how it was 
that deliverance from earthly things was an idea 
which seized hold of wide circles, and that people 
were looking to God. Trouble makes men pray. 
But trouble in itself does not give any moral force, 


s 


JOHN THE BAPTIST 45 


and moral force was the chief element in John 
the Baptist’s message. lh appealing to it, in pro- 
claiming that everything must be based on morality 
and personal responsibility, he took a higher point 
of view than the feeble piety of the “poor,” and drew 
not from time but from eternity. 

It is scarcely a century since [ichte delivered 
his memorable orations here in Berlin, after. the 
terrible defeat which Germany had suffered. What 
did he do in these lectures? In the first place, he 
held up a mirror to the nation, and showed it its 
sins and their consequences,—frivolity, godlessness, 
self-complacency, infatuation, weakness. What did 
he do next? Did he simply call them to arms? 
Arms were just what they were no longer capable 
of bearing ; they had been struck from their power- 
less hands. It was to repentance and to inward 
conversion that he called them ; to God, and there- 
fore to the exertion of all their moral force; to truth 
and to the Spirit, so that by the Spirit everything 
might be made new. By his powerful personality, 
and in union with friends of a like mind, he pro- 
duced an immense impression. He succeeded in 
opening up once more the choked fountains of our 
energy, because he knew the strength fromm which 
help comes and had drunk of the living water 
himself. No doubt the necessities of the time 
taught him and steeled him; but it would be foolish 
and ridiculous to maintain that Fichte’s orations 
were the product of the general woe. They are the 


46 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


antithesis of it. Not otherwise must we think of 
John the Baptist’s message, and—let me say it at 
once—of the message which Jesus himself delivered. 
That they appealed to those who expected nothing 
of the world or of politics—of John the Baptist, 
however, this is not directly reported; that they 
would have nothing to do with those popular 
leaders who had led the people to ruin; that they 
turned their gaze altogether from earthly things, may 
also be accounted for by the circumstances of the 
time. But the remedy which they proclaimed was 
no product of those circumstances. Nay, was not 
calling people to ordinary morality and expecting 
everything of it bound to seem a hopeless enter- 
prise? And whence came the power, the inflexible 
power, which compelled others? This leads us to 
the last of the questions which we have raised. 
Thirdly, what was there that was new in the 
whole movement? Was it anything new to set up 
the sovereignty of God, the sovereignty of the good 
and the holy, in opposition to all the other elements 
which had forced their way into religion? Did 
John the Baptist, did Christ himself, bring in any- 
thing that had not been proclaimed long before ? 
Gentlemen, the question as to what is new in 
religion is not a question which is raised by those 
who live in it. What is there that can have been 
“new,” seeing that mankind existed so long before 
Jesus Christ and had seen so much in the way of 
intelligence and knowledge? Monotheism had long 


JOHN THE BAPTIST 47 


been introduced, and the few possible types of 
monotheistic religious fervour had long made’ their 
appearance here and there, and had taken possession 
of whole schools, nay, of a whole nation. Can the 
religious individualism of that Psalmist ever be sur- 
passed in depth and vigour who confessed: ‘ Lord, 
when I have thee, I ask not after heaven and earth” ? 
Can we go beyond what Micah said: “He hath 
showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth 
the Lord require of thee but to do justly and to 
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God” ? 
Centuries had passed since these words were spoken. 
“What do you want with your Christ,’ we are 
asked, principally by Jewish scholars; “he intro- 
duced nothing new.” I answer with Wellhausen : 
{t is quite true that what Jesus proclaimed, what 
John the Baptist expressed before him in his exhorta- 
tions to repentance, was also to be found in the 
prophets, and even in the Jewish tradition of their 
time. The Pharisees themselves were in possession 
of it; but unfortunately they were in possession 
of much else besides. With them it was weighted, 
darkened, distorted, rendered ineffective and deprived 
of its force, by a thousand things which they also 
held to be religious and every whit as important as 
mercy and judgment. ‘They reduced everything to 
one dead level, wove everything into one fabric ; the 
good and holy was only one woof in a broad earthly 
warp. You ask again, then: ‘“ What was there 
that was new?” The question is out of place in 


48 WHAT HS; CHRISTIANETY? 


monotheistic religion. Ask rather: ‘“ Had what 
was here proclaimed any strength and any vigour?” 
I answer: Take the people of Israel and search 
the whole history of their religion; take history 
generally, and where will you find any message about. 
God and.the good that was ever so pure and so full - 
of strength—for purity and strength go together— 
as we hear and read of in the Gospels? As regards 
purity, the spring of holiness had, indeed, long been 
opened; but it was choked with sand and dirt, and 
its water was polluted. For rabbis and theologians 
to come afterwards and distil this water, even if 
they were successful, makes no difference. But 
now the spring burst forth afresh, and _ broke 
a new way for itself through the rubbish — 
through the rubbish which priests and theologians: 
had heaped up so as to smother the true element 
in religion ; for how often does it happen in history 
. that theoloey is only the instrument by which 
religion is discarded! The other element was that. 
of strength. Pharisaical teachers had proclaimed 
that everything was contained in the injunction to. 
love God and one’s neighbour. They spoke ex- 
cellently ; the words might have come out of Jesus’ 
mouth. But what was the result of their language ? 
That the nation, that in particular their own pupils, 
condemned the man who took the words seriously. 
All that they did was weak and, because weak, 
harmful. Words effect nothing; it is the power 
of the personality that stands behind them. But he 


JESUS’ MESSAGE 49 


“taught as one having authority and not as the 
Scribes.” Such was the impression of him which 
his disciples received. His words became to them 
“the words of life,” seeds which sprang up and bore 
fruit. That was what was new. 3 

Some such message John the Baptist had already 
begun to deliver. He, too, had undoubtedly placed 
himself in opposition to the leaders of the people ; 
for any man who tells people to “reform,” and at the 
same time enjoins nothing more than repentance and 
good works, always comes into opposition with the 
official leaders of religion and church. But beyond 
the lines of the message of repentance John did 
not go. 

Jesus Christ then appeared. He first of all | 
accepted and afirmed the Baptist’s message to its | 
full extent, and he acknowledged the Baptist himself ; 
nay, there was no one of whom he spoke in language 
of such warm recognition. Did not he say that 
among them that were born of women there had not 
arisen a greater than John the Baptist? Again and 
again he acknowledged that his cause began with the 
Baptist and that he was his forerunner. Nay, he had 
himself been baptised by him, and thereby put him- 
self into the movement which the Baptist began. 

But he did not rest there. When he appeared, he, 
too, it is true, like John proclaimed: ‘‘ Repent, for the 
kingdom of God is at hand” ; but his message became _ 
one of joy as he delivered it. The traditions about him 


contain nothing more certain than that his message 
D 


50 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


‘was an “evangel,” and that it was felt to bring blessing 
and joy. With good reason, therefore, the evangelist 
Luke began his narrative of Jesus’ public appearance 
with the words of the prophet Isaiah :—‘ The 
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath 
anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he 
hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach 
deliverance to the captives and recovering of sight to 
the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to 
preach the acceptable year of the Lord.” Or in 
Jesus’ own words :— Come unto me all ye that 
labour and are heavy laden and I will give you rest. 
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am 
meek and lowly of heart; and ye shall find rest unto 
your souls. For my yoke is easy and my burden vs 
[ight.” ‘These words dominated Jesus’ whole work and 

ge; they contain the theme of all that he 
taught and did. ‘They make it at once obvicus 
that in this teaching of his he left John the Baptist’s 
message far behind. . The latter, although already in 
silent conflict with the priests and the scribes, did 
not become a definite signal for contradiction. ‘‘ The 


/ messa 


falling and the rising again,” a new humanity opposed 
to the old, the God-man—Jesus Christ—was the first 
to create. He came into immediate opposition with — 
the official leaders of the people, and in them with 
ordinary human nature in general. They thought 
of God as of a despot guarding the ceremonial 
observances in His household; he breathed in the 
presence of God. They saw Him only in His law, 


JESUS’ MESSAGE st 


which they had converted into a labyrinth of dark 
defiles, blind alleys and secret passages; he saw and 
felt Him everywhere. They were in possession of a 
thousand of His commandments, and thought, there- 
fore, that they knew Him; he had one only, and 
knew Him by it. They had made this religion into 
an earthly trade, and there was nothing more 
detestable; he proclaimed the living God and the - 
soul’s nobility. 

If, however, we take a general view of Jesus’ teach- | 
ing, we shall see that it may be grouped under 
three heads. ‘They are each of such a nature as to \ 
contain the whole, and hence it can be exhibited in 
its entirety under any one of them. 

Firstly, the kingdom of God and tts coming. 

Secondly, God the Father and the infinite value ~ 
of the human soul. 

Thirdly, the higher righteousness and the com- 
mandment of love. 

‘That Jesus’ message is so great and so powerful lies 
in the fact that it is so simple and on the other hand 
so rich; so simple as to be exhausted in each of the 
leading thoughts which he uttered ; so rich that every 
one of these thoughts seems to be inexhaustible and 
the full meaning of the sayings and parables beyond 
our reach. But more than that—he himself stands , 
behind everything that he said. His words-speak to 
us across the centuries with the freshness of the 
present. It is here that that profound saying is truly 
verified : “ Speak, that I may see thee.” 


52 WHAT Is CHRISTIANITY)? 


Our course in what follows will be to try to learn 
what those three heads are, and to classify the 
thoughts which come under them. They contain the 
main features of Jesus’message. We shall then try 
to understand the Gospel in its relations to certain 
great questions of life. 


I. The kingdom of God and its coming. 


Jesus’ message of the kingdom of God runs through 
all the forms and statements of the prophecy which, 
taking its colour from the Old Testament, announces 
the day of judgment and the visible government of 
God in the future, up to the idea of an inward coming 
of the kingdom, starting with Jesus’ message and then 
beginning. His message embraces these two poles, 
with many stages between them that shade off one 
into another. At the one pole the coming of the 
kingdom seems to be a purely future event, and the 
kingdom itself to be the external rule of God; at the 
other, it appears as something inward, something 
which is already present and making its entrance at 
the moment. You see, therefore, that neither the con- 


ception of the kingdom of God, nor the way in which 


a 


its coming is represented, is free from ambiguity. 
Jesus took it from the religious traditions of his 
nation, where it already occupied a foremost place ; 
he accepted various aspects of it in which the concep- 
tion was still a living force, and he added new ones, 


THE KINGDOM OF GOD 53 


Eudemonistic expectations of a mundane and political 
character were all that he discarded. 

Jesus, like all those of his own nation who were really 
in earnest, was profoundly conscious of the great anti- 
thesis between the kingdom of God and that kingdom 
of the world in which he saw the reign of evil and the 
evil one. This was no mere image or empty idea; it 
was a truth which he saw and felt most vividly. He 
was certain, then, that the kingdom of the world must 
perish and be destroyed. But nothing short of a 
battle can effect it. With dramatic intensity battle 
and victory stand lke a picture before his soul, drawn 
in those large firm lines in which the prophets had 
seen them. At the close of the drama he sees himself 
seated at the right hand of his Father, and his twelve 
disciples on thrones judging the twelve tribes of 
Israel; so objective was this picture to him, so 
completely in harmony with the ideas of his time. 
Now we may take the view—and not a few of us 
take it—that in these dramatic pictures, with their 
hard colours and contrasts, we have the actual pur- 
port of Jesus’ message and the fundamental form 
which it took; and that all his other statements of it 
must be simply regarded as secondary. We may say 
that they are all variations of it more or less edifying, 
variations which were added, perhaps, only by later 
reporters; but that the only positive factor is the 
dramatic hope for the future. In this view I cannot 
concur. It is considered a perverse procedure in, 
similar cases to judge eminent, epoch-making per- 


54 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


sonalities first and foremost by what they share with 
their contemporaries, and on the other hand to put 
what is great and characteristic in. them into the 
background. The tendency as far as possible to 
reduce everything to one level, and to efface what 
is special and individual, may spring in some minds 
from a praiseworthy sense of truth, but it has proved 
misleading. More frequently, however, we get the 
endeavour, conscious or unconscious, to refuse great- 
ness any recognition at all, and to throw down any- 
thing that is exalted. There can be no doubt about 
the fact that the idea of the two kingdoms, of God 
and of the devil, and their conflicts, and of that last 
conflict at some future time when the devil, long 
since cast out of heaven, will be also defeated on 
earth, was an idea which Jesus simply shared with 
his contemporaries. He did not start it, but he grew 
up in it and he retained it. The other view, how- 
‘ ever, that the kingdom of God ‘“‘cometh not with 
observation,” that it is already here, was his own. 

For us, gentlemen, to-day, it is difficult to reconcile, 
nay, it is scarcely possible to bridge over, such an 
opposition as is involved, on the one side in a 
dramatic picture of God’s kingdom existing in the 
future, and on the other in the announcement that 
“it is in the midst of you,” a still and mighty power 
in the hearts of men. But to understand why it was 
that with other historical traditions and other forms 
of culture no opposition was felt to exist between 
these views, nay, that both were able to exist side 


THE KINGDOM OF GOD 55 


by side, we must reflect, we must steep ourselves in 
the history of the past. I imagine that a few hun- 
dred years hence there will be found to exist in the 
intellectual ideas which we shall have left behind us 
much that is contradictory ; people will wonder how 
we put up with it. They will find much hard. and 
dry husk in what we took for the kernel; they will 
be unable to understand how we could be so short- 
sighted, and fail to get a sound grasp of what was 
essential and separate it from the rest. Some day the 
knife will be apphed and pieces will be cut away 
where as yet we do not feel the slightest inclination 
to distinguish. Let us hope that then we may find 
fair judges, who will measure our ideas not by what 
we have unwittingly taken over from tradition and are 
neither able nor called upon to correct, but by what 
was born of our very own, by the changes and im- 
provements which we have effected in what was 
handed down to us or was'commonly prevalent in 
our day. : ad 

Truly the historian’s task of distinguishing between 
what is traditional and what is peculiar, between 
kernel and husk, in Jesus’ message of the kingdom of 
God is a difficult and responsible one. How far may 
we go? We do not want to rob this message of 
its innate character and colour; we do not want to 
change it into a pale scheme of ethics. On the other 
hand, we do not want to lose sight of its peculiar 
character and strength, as we should do were we to 
side with those who resolve it into the general ideas 


‘ 


56 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


prevailing at the time. The very way in which 
Jesus distinguished between the traditional elements 
—he left out none in which there was a spark of 
moral force, and he accepted none which encouraged 
the selfish expectations of his nation—this very 
discrimination teaches us that it was from a deeper 
knowledge that he spoke and taught. But we possess 
testimonies of a much more striking kind. If anyone 
wants to know what the kingdom of God and the 
\coming of it meant in Jesus’ message, he must read 
and study his parables. He will then see what it 
is that is meant. The kingdom of God comes by 
coming to the individual, by entering into his soul 
and laying hold of it. True, the kingdom of God is 
the rule of God; but it is the rule of the holy God in 
the hearts of individuals; «zt 1s God himself in his 
power. From this point of view everything that 
is dramatic in the external and historical sense has 
vanished ; and gone, too, are all the external hopes 
for the future. Take whatever parable you will, the 
parable of the sower, of the pearl of great price, of 
the treasure buried in the field—the word of God, 
God himself, is the kingdom. It is not a question of 
angels and devils, thrones and principalities, but of 
God and the soul, the soul and its God. 


LECTURE IV. 


WE last spoke of Jesus’ message in so far as it pro- 
claimed the kingdom of God and its coming. We 
saw that it runs through all the forms in which the 
prophecy of the day of judgment is expressed in the 
Old Testament, up to the idea of an inward coming 
of the kingdom then beginning. Finally we tried to 
show why the latter idea is to be regarded as the 
dominant one. Before examining it more closely, 
however, [ should hke to draw your attention to 
two particularly important expressions of it, lying 
between the extremes of the “day of judgment” 
and the “‘inner coming.” © 

In the first- of them, the coming of the kingdom 
of God signifies that the kingdom of the devil is 
destroyed and the demons vanquished. Hitherto it 
is they who have been ruling; they have taken 
possession of men and even of whole nations, and 
forced them to their will. Jesus not only declares 
that he is come to destroy the works of the devil, but 
he actually drives out the demons and releases men 
from their power. 


Let me here digress a little from our subject. 
57 


58 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Nothing in the Gospels strikes us as stranger than 
the frequently recurring stories of demons, and the 
great importance which the evangelists attach to | 
them. For many among us the very fact that these 
writings report such absurdities is sufficient reason 
for declining to accept them. Now in this connexion 
it is well to know that absolutely similar stories are 
to be found in numerous writings of that age, Greek, 
~ Roman, and Jewish. The notion of people being 
“possessed ” was current everywhere; nay, even the 
science of the time looked upon a whole section of 
morbid phenomena in this light. But the con- 
sequence of these phenomena being explained as 
meaning that some evil and invisible power had taken 
possession of a man was that mental affections took 
forms which looked as if an alien being had really 
entered into the soul. There is nothing paradoxical 
in this. If modern science were to declare nervous 
disease to consist, in great part, of “‘ possession,’ and 
the newspapers were to spread this announcement 
amongst the public, the same thing would recur. We 
should soon have numerous cases in which nervous 
patients looked as if they were in the grip of an evil 
spirit and themselves believed: that they were so. 
Theory and belief would work by suggestion and 
again create a class of “demoniacs” amongst the 
insane, just as they created them hundreds, nay 
thousands, of years ago. It is unhistorical and 
foolish to attribute any peculiar notion or “ theory” 
| about demons and the demoniac to the Gospels and 


-THE KINGDOM OF GOD 59 


the evangelists. They only shared the general 
notions of their time. The forms of mental disease 
in question are of rare occurrence nowadays, but 
nevertheless they are not yet quite extinct. Where 
they occur the best means of encountering them is 
to-day, as it was formerly, the influence of a strong 
personality. It manages to threaten and subdue the 
“devil” and so heal the patient. In Palestine 
“ demoniacs” mu$t have been particularly numerous. 
Jesus saw in them the forces of evil and mischief, 
and by his marvellous power over the souls of those 
who trusted him he banished the disease. ‘This 
brings us to the second point. 

When John the Baptist in prison was disturbed 
by doubts as to whether Jesus was “he who was 
to come,” he sent two of his own disciples to him 
to ask him himself. There is nothing more touching 
than this question of the Baptist’s, nothing more 
edifying than the Lord’s answer. But we will not 
dwell upon the scene. What was the answer? 
*“Go and shéw John again those things which you 
do hear and see: the blind receive their sight, and 
he lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf 
hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor. have the 
Gospel preached to them.” ‘That is what the ‘‘ coming 
of the kingdom” means, or, rather, it is there already 
in this saving activity. By vanquishing and banishing 
misery, need and disease, by the actual influence which 
Jesus was exerting, John was to see that a new day 
had dawned. The healing of the possessed was only 


60 WHAD IS: CHRISTIANITY: 


a part of this saving activity; the activity itself, 
however, was what Jesus denoted as the meaning 
and the seal of his mission. It was, then, to the 
wretched, to the sick, and to the poor, that he 
addressed himself; but not as a moralist and with- 
out any trace of weak-minded sentimentality. He 
makes no division of evils into departments and 
groups; he spends no time in asking whether the 
sick one “deserves” to be healed; he is far, too, 
from having any sympathy for pain and death. He 
nowhere says that disease is salutary and that evil 
is a blessing. No! disease he calls disease, and 
health he calls health. To him all evil, all misery, 
is something terrible; it is part of the great realm 
of Satan. But he feels the power of the Saviour 
within him. He knows that progress is possible 
only by overcoming weakness and healing disease. 
But he goes further. It is by his healing, above 
all by his forgiving sin, that the kingdom of God 
comes. This is the first complete transition to 
the conception of the kingdom of God as the power 
that works inwardly. As he calls the sick and the 
poor to him, so he calls sinners also, and it is this 
call which is all-important. ‘The Son of Man 
is come to seek and to save that which was lost.” 
Here for the first time everything that is external 
and merely future is abandoned : it is the individual, 
not the nation or the state, which is redeemed; it 
is new men who are to arise, and the kingdom of 
God is to be at once their strength and the goal 


THE KINGDOM OF GOD 61 


at which they aim, They search for the treasure 
hidden in the field and find it; they sellall that 
they have and buy the pearl of great price; they 
are converted and become as children; but thereby 
they are redeemed and made God’s children and 
God’s champions. | 

It was in this connexion that Jesus spoke of the 
kingdom, of God which the violent take by force, 
and, again, of the kingdom of God which grows 
steadily and silently like a seed and bears fruit. It 
is in the nature of spiritual force, a power which 
sinks into a man within, and can be understood only 
from within. Thus, although the kingdom is also 
in heaven; although it will come with the day of 
judgment, he can still say of it: (“It is not here or 
there, it is within you.” | 

At a Jater period the view of the kingdom, accord- 
ing to which it was already come and still comes in 
Jesus’ saving activity, was not kept up by his 
disciples: nay, they continued to speak of it as of 
something that was solely in the future. But the 
thing itself retained its force; it was only given 
another title. It underwent the same experience as 
the conception of the “ Messiah.” As we shall see 
hereafter, there was scarcely anyone in the Church of 
the Gentiles who sought to explain Jesus’ significance 
by regarding him as the ‘“ Messiah.” But the thing 
itself did not perish. 

The essential elements in the message of the kingdom 
were preserved. The kingdom has a triple meaning. : 


62 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


\ Firstly, it is something supernatural, a gift from 
above, not a product of ordinary life. Secondly, it 
is a purely religious blessing, the inner link with 
the living God; thirdly, it is the most important 
experience that a man can have, that on which 
everything else depends; it permeates and dominates 
his whole existence, because sin is forgiven and 
misery banished. 

This kingdom, which comes to the humble and 
makes them new men and joyful, is the key that 
first unlocks the meaning and the aim of life. 
This was what Jesus himself found, and what his © 
disciples found. It is a supernatural element alone 
that ever enables us to get at the meaning of life ; 
for natural existence ends in death. But a life that 
is bound up with death can have no meaning; it is 
only sophisms that can blind us to this fact. But 
here the kingdom of God, the Hternal, entered into 
time. “Eternal light came in and made the world 
look new.” This is Jesus’ message of the kingdom. 
Everything else that he proclaimed can be brought 
into connexion with this; his whole ‘“ doctrine” can 
be conceived as a message of the kingdom, But we 
shall recognise this, and the blessing which he means, 
‘still more clearly, if we turn to the second of the 
sections indicated in the previous lecture, and there- 
by progressively acquaint ourselves with the funda- 
mental features of Jesus’ message. 


GOD THE FATHER 63 


I. God the Father and the enfinite value of the 


human soul. 


-To our modern way of thinking and feeling, 
Christ's message appears in the clearest and most 
direct light when grasped in connexion with the idea 
of God the Father and the infinite value of the human - 
soul. Here the elements which I would describe as the 
restful and restgiving in Jesus’ message, and which are 
comprehended in the idea of our being children of God, 
find expression. I call them restful in contrast with 
the impulsive and stirring elements; although it is 
just they that are informed with a special strength. 
But the fact that the whole of Jesus’ message may be ' 
reduced to these two heads—-God as the Father, and 
the human soul so ennobled that it can and does | 
unite with him—shows us that the Gospel is in no- 
wise a positive religion like the rest; that it contains 
no statutory or particularistic elements; that it 1s, 
therefore, religion itself. It is superior to all anti- 
thesis and tension between this world and a world 
to come, between reason and ecstasy, between work 
and isolation from the world, between Judaism and 
Hellenism. It can dominate them all, and there is 
no factor of earthly life to which it is confined 
or necessarily tied down. Let us, however, get a 
clearer idea of what being children of God, in Jesus’ 
sense, means, by briefly considering four groups con- 
taining sayings of his, or, as the case may be, a single | 


64 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


saying, viz.:—(1) The Lord’s Prayer ; (2) that utter- 
ance, ‘‘ Rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto 
you; but rather rejoice because your names are 
written in heaven”; (8) the saying, “Are not two 
sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall 
not fall on the ground without your Father. But 
the very hairs of your head are all numbered” ; 
(4) the utterance, ‘“‘ What shall it profit a man if he 
shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul?” 

Let us take the Lord’s Prayer first. It was com- 
municated by Jesus to his disciples at a particularly 
solemn moment. ‘They had asked him to teach them 
how to pray, as John the Baptist had taught his 
disciples. Thereupon he uttered the Lord’s Prayer. 
~It is by their prayers that the character of the 
higher religions is determined. But this prayer was 
spoken—as every one must feel who has ever given 
it a thought in his soul—by one who has overcome 
all inner unrest, or overcomes it the moment that 
he goes before God. The very apostrophe of the 
prayer, “Our Father,” exhibits the steady faith of 
the man who knows that he is safe in God, and 
it. tells us. that he is certain of being heard. 
Not to hurl violent desires at heaven or to obtain 
this or that earthly blessing does he pray, but 
to preserve the power which he already possesses 
and strengthen the union with God in which 
he lives. No one, then, can utter this prayer 
unless his heart is in profound peace and_ his 
mind wholly concentrated on the inner relation 


GOD THE FATHER 6s 


of the soul with God. All other prayers are of a 
lower order, for they contain particularistic elements, 
or are so framed that in some way or other they stir 
the imagination in regard to the things of sense 
as well; whilst this prayer leads us away from every- 
thing to the height where the soul is alone with its 
God. And yet the earthly element is not absent. 
The whole of the second half of the prayer deals 
with earthly relations, but they are placed in the 
heht of the Eternal. In vain will you look for any 
request for particular gifts of grace, or special bless- 
ings, even of a spiritual kind. “ All else shall be 
added unto you.” ‘The name of God, His will, and His 
kingdom—these elements of rest and permanence are 
poured out over the earthly relations as well. Lvery- 
thing that is small and selfish melts away, and only 
four things are left with regard to which it is worth 
while to pray—the daily bread, the daily trespass, 
the daily temptations, and the evil in life. There is » 
nothing in the Gospels that tells us more certainly 
what the Gospel is, and what sort of disposition 
and temper it produces, than the Lord’s Prayer. 
With this prayer we ought also to confront all those 
who disparage the Gospel by representing it as an 
ascetic or ecstatic or sociological prenouncement. It 
shows the Gospel to be the Fatherhood of God. 
apphed to the whole of life; to be an inner union 
with God’s will and God’s kingdom, and a joyous 
certainty of the possession of eternal blessings and 


protection from evil. 
: EF 


66 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


As to the second utterance: when Jesus says 
“Rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto you, 
but rejoice rather that your names are written in 
heaven,” it is another way of laying special emphasis 
on the idea that the all-important element in this 
religion is the consciousness. of being safe in God. 
The greatest achievements, nay the very works 
which are done in the strength of this religion, fall 
below the assurance, at once humble and proud, of 
resting for time and eternity under the fatherly care . 
of God. Moreover, the genuineness, nay the actual 
- existence, of religious experience is to be measured, 
not by any transcendency of feeling nor by great 
deeds that all men can see, but by the joy and the 
peace which are diffused through the soul that can 
say “My Father.” 

How far did Christ carry this idea of the fatherly 
providence of God? Here we come to the third 
saying: “ Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ? 
and one of them shall not fall to the ground without 
your Father. But the very hairs of your head are 
all numbered.” The assurance that God rules is to 
go as far as our fears go, nay, as far as hfe itself— 
life down even to its smallest manifestations in the 
order of nature. It was to disabuse his disciples of 
the fear of evil and the terrors of death that he gave 
them the sayings about the sparrows and the flowers 
of the field; they are to learn how to see the hand 
of the living God everywhere in life, and in death 
too. 


GOD THE FATHER 67 


Finally, in asking—and after what has gone before 
the question will not sound surprising—‘“‘ What shall 
it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world and 
lose his own soul?” he put a man’s value as high 
as it can be put. The man who can say “My 
Father” to the Being who rules heaven and earth, is 
thereby raised above heaven and earth, and himself 
has a value which is higher than all the fabric of this 
world. But this great saying took the stern tone of 
a warning. He offered them a gift and with it set 
them a task. How different was the Greek doctrine! 
Plato, it is true, had already sung the great hymn 
of the mind; he had distinguished it from the whole 
world of appearance and maintained its eternal 
origin. But the mind which he meant was the 
knowing mind; he contrasted it with blind, in-. 
sensible matter; his message made its appeal to 
the wise. Jesus Christ calls to every poor soul; he 
calls to every one who bears a human face: You 
are children of the living God, and not only better 
than many -sparrows but of more value than the 
whole world. The value of a truly great man, as 
I saw it put lately, consists in his increasing the. 
value of all mankind. It is here, truly, that the 
highest significance of great men lies: to have 
enhanced, that is, to have progressively given effect 
to human value, to the value of that race of men 
which has risen up out of the dull ground of Nature. 
But Jesus Christ was the first to bring the value of 
every human soul to light, and what he did no one 


68 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


can any more undo. We may take up what rela- 
tion to him we will: in the history of the past no 
one can refuse to recognise that it was he who 
raised humanity to this level. 

This highest estimate of a man’s value is based 
‘on a transvaluation of all values. To the man who 
boasts of his possessions he says: ‘Thou fool.” He 


confronts everyone with the thought: ‘ Whosoever 


will lose his life shall save it.” He can even say : 
“He that hateth his life in this world shall keep it 
unto life eternal.” This is the transvaluation of 
values of which many before him had a dim idea; 
of which they:perceived the truth as through a veil ; 
the redeeming power of which—that blessed mystery 
—they felt in advance. He was the first to give 
if calm, simple, and fearless expression, as though it 
were a truth which grew on every tree. It was 
just this that stamped his peculiar genius, that he 
gave perfectly simple expression to profound and all- 
important truths, as though they could not be other- 
wise; as though he were uttering something that 
was self-evident; as though he were only reminding 
men of what they all know already, because it lives 
in the innermost part of their souls. 

In the combination of these ideas—God the Father, 
_ Providence, the position of men as God's children, 
the infinite value of the human soul—the whole 
Gospel is expressed. But we must recognise what 
a paradox it allis; nay, that the paradox of religion 
here for the first time finds its full expression. 


/ 


GOD THE FATHER 69 


Measured by the experience of the senses and by 
exact knowledge, not only are the different religions 
a paradox, but so are all religious phenomena. 
They introduce an element, and pronounce it to be 
the most important of all, which is not cognisable 
by the senses and flies in the face of things as 
they are actually constituted. But all religions 
other than Christianity are in some way or other 
so bound up with the things of the world that 
they involve an element of earthly advantage, or, 
as the case may be, are akin in their substance 
to the intellectual and spiritual condition of a 
definite epoch. But what can be Jess obvious than 
the statement: the hairs of your head are all 
numbered; you have a supernatural value; you 
can put yourselves into the hands of a power 
which no one has seen? Either that is nonsense, 
or else it is the utmost development of which 
religion is capable; no longer a mere phenomenon 
accompanying the lfe of the senses, a coefficient, 
a transfiguration of certain parts of that life, but 
something which sets up.a paramount title to be 
the first and the only fact that reveals the funda- 
mental basis and meaning of life. Religion sub- 
ordinates to itself the whole motley world of pheno- 
mena, and defies that world if it claims to be the 
only real one. Religion gives us only a single ex- 
perience, but one which presents the world in a new 
light: the Eternal appears; time becomes means to 
an end; man is seen to be on the side of the Eternal. 


70 WHAT IS: CHRISTIANITY? 


This was certainly Jesus’ meaning, and to take 
anything from it is to destroy it. In applying 
the idea of Providence to the whole of humanity 
and the world without any exception; in showing 
that humanity is rooted in the Eternal; in proclaim- 
ing the fact that we are God’s children as at once 
- a gift and a task, he took a firm grip of all fumbling 
and stammering attempts at religion and brought 
them to their issue. Once more let it be said: we 
may assume what position we will in regard to him 
and his message, certain it is that thence onward 
the value of our race is enhanced; human lives, 
nay, we ourselves, have become dearer to one another. 
A man may know it or not, but a real reverence for - 
humanity follows from the practical recognition of 


God as the Father of us all. 


Ill. The higher righteousness and the command- 
ment of love. 


This is the third head, and the whole of the 
Gospel is embraced under it. To represent the 
Gospel as an ethical message is no depreciation of its 
value. The ethical system which Jesus found pre- 
-vailing in his nation was both ample and profound. 
To judge the moral ideas of the Pharisees solely by 
their childish and casuistical aspects is not fair. By 
being bound up with religious worship and petrified 
in ritual observance, the morality of holiness had, 
indeed, been transformed into something that was 


THE HIGHER RIGHTEOUSNESS 71 


the clean opposite of it. But all was not yet hard 
and dead; there was some life still left in the deeper 
parts of the system. To those who questioned him 
Jesus could still answer: “You have the law, keep 
it ; you know best yourselves what you have to do; 
the sum of the law is, as you yourselves say, to love 
God and your neighbour.” Nevertheless, there is a 
sphere of ethical thought which is peculiarly expres- 
sive of Jesus’ Gospel. Let us make this clear by 
citing four points. 

Virstly: Jesus severed the connexion existing in 
his day between ethics and the external forms of 
religious worship and technical observance. He 
would have absolutely nothing to do with the 
purposeful and self-seeking pursuit of “ good works” 
in combination with the ritual of worship. He 
exhibited an indignant contempt for those who allow 
their neighbours, nay, even their parents, to starve, and 
on the other hand send gifts to the temple. He will 
have no compromise in the matter. Love and mercy 
are ends in themselves; they lose all value and are 
put to shame by having to be anything else than 
the service of one’s neighbour. 

Secondly: in all questions of morality he goes 
straight to the root, that is, to the disposition and 
the intention. It is only thus that what he calls the 
can be understood. The 


9? 


“higher righteousness 
“higher righteousness” is the righteousness that will 
stand when the depths of the heart are probed. Here, 
again, we have something that is seemingly very 


72 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


simple and self-evident. Yet the truth, as he uttered 
it, took the severe form: ‘It was said of old... . 
but I say unto you.” After all, then, the truth was 
something new; he was aware that it had never yet 
been expressed in such a consistent form and with 
such claims to supremacy. A large portion of the 
so-called Sermon on the Mount is occupied with what 
he says when he goes in detail through the several 
departments of human relationships and human fail- 
ings so as to bring the disposition and intention 
to light in each case, to judge a man’s works by 
them, and on them to hang heaven and hell. 

Thirdly: what he freed from its connexion with 
self-seeking and ritual elements, and recognised as 
the moral principle, he reduces to one root and to one 
motive—love. He knows of no other, and love itself, 
whether it takes the form of love of one’s neighbour 
or of one’s enemy, or the love of the Samaritan, is of 
one kind only. It must completely fill the soul ; it 
is what remains when the soul dies to itself. In this 
sense love is the new life already begun. But it is 
always the love which serves, and only in this function 
does it exist and live. 

Fourthly: we saw that Jesus freed the moral 
element from all alien connexions, even from its 
alliance with the public religion. Therefore to say 
that the Gospel is a matter of ordinary morality is 
not to misunderstand him. And yet there is one 
all-important point where he combines religion and 
morality. It is a point which must be felt; it is 


THE HIGHER RIGHTEOUSNESS 73 


not easy to define. In view of the Beatitudes it 
may, perhaps, best be described as humility. Jesus 
made love and humility one. Humility is not a, 
virtue by itself; but it is pure receptivity, the ex- 
pression of inner need, the prayer for God’s grace 
and forgiveness, in a word, the opening up of the 
heart to God. In Jesus’ view, this humility, which 
is the love of God of which we are capable—take, 
for instance, the parable of the Pharisee and the 
publican —is an abiding disposition towards the 
good, and that out of which everything that is good 
springs and grows. ‘‘ Forgive us our trespasses even 
as we forgive them that trespass against us” 1s 
the prayer at once of humility and of love. This, 
then, 1s the source and origin of the love of one’s 
neighbour ; the poor in spirit and those who hunger 
and thirst after righteousness are also the peace- 
makers and the merciful. 

It was in this sense that Jesus combined religion , 
and morality, and in this sense religion may be 
called the soul of morality, and morality the body, 
of religion. We can thus understand how it was 
that Jesus could place the love of God and the love 
of one’s neighbour side by side; the love of one’s 
neighbour is the only practical proof on earth of 
that love of God which is strong in humility. 

In thus expressing his message of the higher right- 
eousness and the new commandment of love in these 
four leading thoughts, Jesus defined the sphere of 
the ethical ina way in which no one before him had 


74 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


ever defined it. But should we be threatened with 
~ doubts as to what he meant, we must steep ourselves 
again and again in the Beatitudes of the Sermon on 
the Mount. They contain his ethics and his religion, 
united at the root, and freed from all external and 


particularistic elements. 


LECTURE V. 


At the close of the last lecture | referred to the 
Beatitudes, and mentioned that they exhibit Jesus’ 
religion in a particularly impressive way. I desire to 
remind you of another passage which shows that 
Jesus recognised the practical proof of religion to 
consist in the exercise of neighbourly love and mercy. 
In one of his last discourses he spoke of the Judg- 
ment, bringing it before his hearers’ eyes in the 
parable of the shepherd separating the sheep from 
the goats. The sole principle of ‘separation is the 
question of mercy. The question is raised by asking 
whether men gave food and drink to Jesus himself, 
and visited him; that is to say, it is put as a 
religious question. The paradox is then resolved 
in the sentence: “Inasmuch as ye have done it 
unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye 
have done it unto me.” We can have no clearer 
illustration of the fact that in Jesus’ view mercy 

was the quality on which everything turned, and — 
that the temper in which it is exercised is the - 
guarantee that a man’s religious position is the 


right one. How so? Because in exercising this 
75 


76 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY’? 


virtue men are imitating God: “Be merciful, even 
as your Father in heaven is merciful.” He who 
exercises mercy exercises God’s prerogative; for 
God’s justice is not accomplished by keeping to 
the rule, ‘‘an eye for an eye and a tooth for a 
tooth,’ but is subject to the power of His mercy. 

Let us pause here for a moment. The history of 
religion marked an enormous advance, religion itself 
was established afresh, when through poets and 
thinkers in Greece on the one hand, and through 
the prophets in Palestine on the other, the idea of 
righteousness and a righteous God became a living 
force and transformed tradition. The gods were 
raised to a higher level and civilised; the war- 
like and capricious Jehovah became a holy Being | 
in whose court of judgment a man might trust, 
albeit in fear and trembling. The two great provinces 
of religion and morality, hitherto separated, were now 
brought into close relation ; for “‘ the Godhead is holy 
and just.” It is our history that was then developed ; 
for without that all-important transformation there 
would be no such thing as “‘ mankind,’ no such thing 
as a “history of the world” in the higher sense. The 
most immediate result of this development may be 
summed up in the maxim: ‘ What ye would not 
that men should do unto you, do ye also not unto 
them.” Insufficient and prosaic as the rule may 
seem, yet, if extended so as to cover all human rela- 
tionships and really observed, it contains a civilising 
force of enormous strength. 


THE HIGHER RIGHTEOUSNESS 77 


But it does not contain the ultimate step. Not 
until justice was compelled to give way to mercy, and 
the idea of brotherhood and self-sacrifice in the service 


of one’s neighbour became paramount—another re- 
establishment of religion—was the last advance accom- 
plished that it was possible and necessary to make. 
Its maxim, ‘What ye would that men should do 
unto you, do ye also unto them,” also seems prosaic ; 
and yet rightly understood it leads to the summit and 
comprises a new method of apprehension, and a new 
way of judging one’s own life. The thought that “he 
who loses his life shall save it,” runs side by side with 
this maxim and effects a transvaluation of values, in 
the certainty that a man’s true life is not tied to this 
span of time and is not rooted in material existence. 

I hope that I have thus shown, although briefly, 
that in the sphere of thought which is indicated by 
‘“‘the higher righteousness” and “the new command- 
ment of love” Jesus’ teaching 1s also contained in its 
entirety. As a matter of fact, the three spheres 
which we have distinguished—the kingdom of God, 
God as the Father and the infinite value of the human 
soul, and the higher righteousness showing itself in 
love—coalesce ; for ultimately the kingdom is nothing 
but the treasure which the soul possesses in the 
eternal and merciful God. It needs only a few 
touches to develop this thought into everything 
that, taking Jesus’ sayings as its groundwork, Chris- 
tendom has known and strives to maintain as hope, 
faith, and love. 


78 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


To proceed: Now that we have established the | 
fundamental characteristics of Jesus’ message, let us 
try, in the second place, to treat of the main bearings 
of the Gospel as applied to individual problems. 
There are six points or questions which call for 
special attention, as being the most important in 
themselves, and consequently felt and regarded as 
such in all ages. And although, in the course of 
the Church’s history, one or other of these questions 
may have passed into the background for a decade 
or two, it has always reappeared afresh, and with 
redoubled force :-— 

(1) The Gospel and the world, or the teed of 
asceticism ; 

(2) The Gospel and the poor, or the social 
question ; | | 

(3) The Gospel and law, or the question of public 
order ; 

(4) The Gospel and work, or the question of 
civilisation ; 

(5) The Gospel and the Son of God, or the Christo- 
logical question ; 

(6) The Gospel and coe aate: or the question of 
creed, 

By these six questions—the first four hang 
together, and the last two stand by themselves—I 
hope to be able to exhibit, of course only in outline, 
the most important bearings of Jesus’ message. 


ASCETICISM 79 


-f 

5 e 

(1) The Gospel and the world, or the question 
of asceticism. 


There is a widespread opinion—it is dominant in 
the Catholic churches and many Protestants share it 
nowadays—that, in the last resort and in the most 
important things which it enjoins, the Gospel is a 
strictly world-shunning and ascetic creed. Some 
people proclaim this piece of intelligence with 
sympathy and admiration; nay, they magnify it 
into the contention that the whole value and mean- 
ing of genuine Christianity, as of Buddhism, lies in 
its world-denying character. Others emphasise the 
world-shunning doctrines of the Gospel in order 
thereby to expose its incompatibility with modern 
ethical principles, and to prove its uselessness as a 
religion. The Catholic churches have found a curious 
way out of the difficulty and one which is, in reality, 
a product of despair. They recognise, as I have said, 
the world-denying character of the Gospel, and they 
teach, accordingly, that it is only in the form of 
monasticism—that is, in the “ vita religiosa ”—that 
true Christian life finds its expression. But they 
admit a “lower” kind of Christianity without asceti- 
cism, as “sufficient.” We will say nothing about this 
strange concession now; the Catholic doctrine is that 
it is only monks who can follow Christ fully. With 
this doctrine a great philosopher, and a still greater 
writer, of the nineteenth century, has made common 


=< 


80 WHAT. IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


cause. Schopenhauer extols Christianity because, 
and in so far as, it has produced great ascetics like 
St. Anthony or St. Francis; but, beyond that, every- 
thing in the Christian message seems to him to be 
useless and a stumbling-block. With a much deeper 
insight than Schopenhauer, and with a strength of 
feeling and power of language that carry us away, 
Tolstoi has emphasised the ascetic and world-shunning 
features of the Gospel, and erected them into a rule 
of observance. That the ascetic ideal which he de- 
rives from the Gospel is endowed with warmth and 
strength, and includes the service of one’s neighbour, 
is a fact which we cannot deny; but to him, too, 
the shunning of the world is the leading character- 
istic of Christianity. There are thousands of our 
“educated” readers who find his stories suggestive 
and exciting, but who at the bottom of their hearts 
are pleased and relieved to know that Christianity 
means the denial of the world; for then they know 
very well that it does not concern them. They are 
certain, and rightly certain, that this world is given 
them to be made the best of, within the bounds 
of its own blessings and its own regulations; and 
that if Christianity makes any other claim, it thereby 
shows that it is unnatural. If Christianity has no 
goal to set before this life; ifit transfers everything to 
a Beyond ; if it declares all earthly blessings to be 
valueless, and points exclusively to a world-shunning 
and contemplative life, it is an offence to all energetic, 
nay, ultimately, to all true natures ; for such natures 


¢ 


ASCETICISM 81 


are certain that our faculties are given us to be 
employed, and that the earth is assigned to us to be 
cultivated and subdued. 

But is not the Gospel really a world-denying 
creed? Certain very well-known passages are ap- 


- pealed to which do not seem to admit of any other 
' interpretation: “Tf thy right eye offend thee, pluck 


= ™~. 
— 


_ Itvat and cast it from thee”; “If thy right hand 


offend thee, ost it off”; or the answer to the rich 
young man: “ Go and or tnedy thou. hast., and. give 
to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure . in 


9 


heaven’; or the saying about those who have made 
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake ; 
or the utterance : ‘‘ If any man come to me, and hate 
not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, 
and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, 
he cannot be my disciple.” These and other passages 
seem to settle the matter, and to prove that the 
Gospel is altogether world-shunning and ascetic in its 
character. But to this thesis I oppose three con- 
siderations which point in another direction. The 
first is derived from the way in which Jesus came 
forward, and from his manner and course of life; 
the second is based upon the impression which he 
made upon his disciples and was reflected in their 
own lives; the third springs from what we said about 
the fundamental features of Jesus’ message. 

1. We find in our Gospels a remarkable utterance 
by Jesus, as follows: “John came neither eating 
nor drinking, and they say, He hath a devil. The 


¥F 


cece 


> 


82 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, 
Behold a man gluttonous and a wine-bibber.” A 
olutton, then, and a wine-bibber was he called in 
addition to the other abusive names which were given 
him. From this it clearly follows that in his whole 
demeanour and manner of life he made an impression 
quite different from that of the preacher of repent- 
ance on the banks of the Jordan. Toward. the 
various fields ir which asceticisn. se? been tradi- 
_ tienally nractised ke imust have taken up an atti- 
tude of indifference. We see him in the houses of 
the rich and of the poor, at meals, with women and 
amongst children; according to tradition, even at a 
wedding. He allows his feet to be washed and his 
head to be anointed. further, he is glad to lodge 
with Mary and Martha; he does not ask them to 
leave their home. When he finds, to his joy, people 
with a firm faith, he leaves them im the calling and 
the position in which they were. We do not hear 
of his telling them to sell all and follow him. Appa- 
rently he thinks it possible, nay, fitting, that they 
should live unto their belief in the position in which 
God has placed them. His circle of disciples is not 
exhausted by the few whom he summoned directly 
to follow him. He finds God’s children everywhere ; 
to discover them in their obscurity and to be allowed 
to speak to them some word of strength is his highest 
pleasure. But he did not organise his disciples into 
a band of monks, and he gave them no directions as 
to what they were to do and leave undone in the life 


ASCETICISM 83 


of the day. No one who reads the Gospels with an 
unprejudiced mind, and does not pick his words, can 
fail to acknowledge that this free and active spirit 
does not appear to be bent under the yoke of asceti- 
cism, and that such words, therefore, a3 point in this 
direction must not be taken in a rigid sense and 
generalised, but must be regarded in a wider con- 
nexion and from a higher point of view. 

2. It is certain that the disciples did not understand 
their master to be a world-shunning ascetic. We 
shall see later what sacrifices they made for the 
Gospel and in what sense they renounced the world. 
But it is evident they did not give ascetic practices 
the chief place; they maintained the rule that the 
labourer is worthy of his hire; they did not send 
away their wives. We are incidentally told of Peter 
that his wife accompanied him on his missionary 
journeys. Apart from what we are told of an 
attempt to institute a kind of communism in the 


congregation at Jerusalem—and we may put it aside, 
as it is not trustworthy and, moreover, bore no 
ascetic character—-we find nothing in the apostolic 
age which suggests a community of men who were 
ascetics on principle; on the contrary, we find the 
conviction prevailing everywhere that it is within 
the given circumstances, in the calling and position 
in which he finds himself, that a man is to be 
a Christian. How differently things developed in 
Buddhism from the very start! 


3. The all-important consideration is the third. 


mS 


84 WHAT IS-CHRISTIANITY ? 


Let me remind you of what we said in regard to 
Jesus’ leading thoughts. In the sphere indicated 
by trust in God, humanity, the forgiveness of sins 
and the love of one’s neighbour, there is no room 
for the introduction of any other maxim, least of 
all for one of a legal character. At the same time 
Jesus makes it clear in what sense the kingdom of 
God is the antithesis of the world. The man who 
associates any ascetic practice with the words “Take 
no thought,” “Be merciful even as your Father in 
heaven is merciful,’ and so on, and puts it upon the 
same level as those words, does not understand the 
sublime character of these sayings, and has either 
lost or has never attained the feeling that there 
is a union with God in which all such questions 
as shunning the world and asceticism are left far 
behind. 

For these reasons we must decline to regard the 
Gospel as a message of world-denial. 

On the other hand, Jesus speaks of three enemies, 
and the watchword which he gives in dealing with 
them is not that we are to flee them; rather, he com- 
mands us to annihilate them. These three enemies 
are mammon, care, and selfishness. Observe that here 
there is no question of flight or denial, but of a battle 
which is to be fought until the enemy is annihilated ; 
the forces of darkness are to be overthrown. By 
mammon he understands money and worldly goods 
in the widest sense of the word, worldly goods which 
try to gain the mastery over us, and make us tyrants 


ASCETICISM 85 


over others; for money is ‘‘compressed force.” 
Jesus speaks of this enemy as if it were a person, 
as if it were a knight in armour, or a king; nay, 
as if it were the devil himself. It is at this enemy 
that the saying, ‘‘Ye cannot serve two masters,” 
is aimed. Wherever anything belonging to the 
domain of mammon is of such value to a man that 
he sets his heart upon it, that he trembles at the 
thought of losing it, that he is no longer willing 
to give it up, such a man is already in bondage. 
Hence, when the Christian feels that this danger 
confronts him, he is not to treat with the enemy, 
but to fight, and not fight only but also destroy 
the mammon. Were Christ to preach among us 
to-day, he would certainly not talk in general terms, 


66 


and say to everyone, “give away everything you 
have”; but there are thousands among us to whom 
he would so speak, and that there is scarcely anyone 
who feels compelled to apply these sayings of the 
Gospel to himself is a fact that ought to make us 
suspicious. 

The second enemy is care. At first sight it may 
surprise us that Jesus should describe care as so 
terrible a foe. He ranks it with ‘ heathenism.” 
It is true that in the Lord’s Prayer he also taught 
men to pray, ‘Give us this day our daily bread” ; 
but a confident request of this kind he does not 
call care. The care which he means is that which 
makes us timorous slaves of the day and of material 
things; the care through which bit by bit we fall 


86 WHAT IS CHEISPIANITY? 


a prey to the world. Care is to him an outrage 
on God, who preserves the very sparrows on the 
housetop ; it destroys the fundamental relation with 
the Father in heaven, the childlike trust, and thus 
_ruins our inmost soul.| This is also a point in 
regard to which, as in respect to mammon, we 
must coutess that we do not feel deeply and strongly 
enough to recognise the full truth of Jesus’ message. 
But the question is, Who is neht—he with the 
inexorable “Take no thought,’ or we with our 
debilitating fears? We, too, in a measure feel that 
a man is not really free, strong, and invincible, 
until he has put aside all his cares and cast them 
upon God. How much we could accomplish and 
how strong we should be, if we did not fret. 

And then, thirdly : selfishness. It is self-denial, 
not asceticism, which Jesus requires; self-denial to 
the point of self-renunciation. “If thy rght eye 
offend thee, pluck it out; if thy mght hand offend 
thee, cut it off.’ Wherever some desire of the 
senses gains the upper hand of you, so that you 
become coarse and vulgar, or in your selfishness a 
new master arises in you, you must destroy it; not 
because God has any pleasure in mutilation, but 
because you cannot otherwise preserve your better 
part. It is a hard demand. But it is not met by 
any act of general renunciation, such as monks 
perform—the act may leave things just as they 
were before—but only by a struggle and a resolute 
renunciation at the critical point. 


ASCETICISM 87 


With all these enemies, mammon, care, and selfish- 
ness, what we have to exercise is self-denial, and 
therewith the relation of Christianity to asceticism 1s 
determined.  Asceticism maintains the theory that 
all worldly blessings are in themselves of no value. 
This is not the theory to which we should be led 
if we were to go by the Gospel; ‘for the earth 
is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.’ But ac- 
cording to the Gospel a man is to ask: Can and 
ought I to regard property and honour, friends 
and relations as blessings, or must I put them 
away? If certain of Jesus’ savings to this effect 
have been handed down to us in a general form 
and were, no doubt, so uttered, still they must be 
limited by the whole tenour of his discourses. What 
the Gospel asks of us is solemnly to examine our- 
selves, to maintain an earnest watch, and to destroy 
the enemy. There can be no doubt, however, that 
Jesus demanded self-denial and self-renunciation to 
a much greater extent than we like to think. 

To sum up: Ascetic in the primary meaning of 
the word the Gospel is not; for it is a message of 
trust in God, of humility, of forgiveness of sin, and 
of mercy. This is a height which nothing else can 
approach, and into this sphere nothing else can force 
its way. Further, worldly blessings are not of the 
devil but of God—‘“ Your heavenly Father knoweth 
that ye have need of all these things; he arrays the 
lilies of the field and feeds the fowls of the air.” 
Asceticism has no place in the Gospel at all; what it 


88 WHAT IS*CHRISTIANITY 2 


asks is that we should struggle against mammon, 
against care, against selfishness; what it demands 
and disengages is love; the love that serves and is 
self-sacrificing. This struggle and this love are the 
kind of asceticism which the Gospel means, and 
whoever encumbers Jesus message with any other 
kind fails to understand it. He fails to understand 
its grandeur and its importance; for there is some- 
thing still more important than “giving one’s body 
to be burned and bestowing all one’s goods to feed the 
poor,” namely, self-denial and love. 


~(2) The Gospel and the poor, or the social 
question. 


The bearings of the Gospel in regard to the social 
question form the second point which we proposed to 
consider. It is closely akin to the first. Here also 
we encounter different views prevalent at the present 
moment, or, to be more exact, two views, which are 
mutually opposed. We are told, on the one hand, 
that the Gospel was in the main a great social 
message to the poor, and that everything else in 
it is of secondary importance—mere contemporary 
wrapping, ancient tradition, or new forms supplied 
by the first generations of Christians. Jesus, they 
say, was a great social reformer, who aimed at re- 
lieving the lower classes from the wretched condition 
in which they were languishing ; he set up a social 
programme which embraced the equality of all men, 


THE SOCIAL QUESTION 89 


relief from economical distress, and deliverance from 
misery and oppression. It is only so, they add, that 
he can be understood, and therefore so he was; or 
perhaps—so he was, because it is only so that we can 
understand him. For years books and pamphlets 
have been written dealing with the Gospel in this 
sense; well-meant performances which aim at thus 
providing Jesus with a defence and a recommendation. 
But amongst those who take the Gospel to be an 
essentially social message there are also some who 
draw the opposite conclusion. By trying to prove 
that Jesus’ message was wholly directed to bringing 
about an economical reform, they declare the Gospel 
to be an entirely Utopian and useless programme ; 
the view, they say, which Jesus took of the world 
was gentle, but also weak; coming bimself from the 
lower and oppressed classes, he shared the suspicion 
entertained by small people of the great and the 
rich ; he abhorred all profitable trade and business ; 
he failed to understand the necessity of acquiring 
wealth ; and accordingly he shaped his programme so 
as to disseminate pauperism in the “ world ’”—to him 


the world was Palestine—and then, by way of contrast 
with the misery on earth, to build up a kingdom 
in heaven; a programme unrealisable in itself, and 
offensive to men of energy. ‘This, or something like 
this, is the view held by another section of those 
who identify the Gospel with a social message. 
Opposed to this group of persons, united in the 


way in which they look at the Gospel but divided 


go WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ¢ 


in their opinions in regard to it, there is another 
group upon whom it makes quite a different im- 
pression. They assert that as for any direct interest 
on Jesus part in the economical and social conditions 
of his age; nay, further, as for any rudimentary 
interest in economical questions in general, it is only. 
read into the Gospel, and that with economical 
questions the Gospel has absolutely nothing to do. 
Jesus, they say, certainly borrowed illustrations and 
examples from the domain of economics, and took 
a personal interest in the poor, the sick, and the 
miserable, but his purely religious teaching and his 
saving activity were in no way directed to any 
improvement in their earthly position: to say 
that his objects and intentions were of a social 
character is to secularize them. Nay, there are not 
a few among us who think him, like themselves, a 
“Conservative,” who respected all these existing social 
‘differences and ordinances as “ divinely ordained.” 

The voices which make themselves heard here are, 
as you will observe, very different, and the different 
points of view are defended with zeal and pertinacity. 
Now, if we are to try to find the position which 
corresponds to the facts, there is, first of all, a brief 
remark to be made on the age in which Jesus lived. 
Our knowledge of the social conditions in Palestine 
in his age and for some considerable time previously 
does not go very far; but there are certain leading 
features of it which we can establish, and two things 
more particularly which we can assert. 


THE SOCIAL QUESTION gi 


The governing classes, to which, above all, the 
Pharisees, and also the priests, belonged—the latter 
had little 


feeling for the needs of the people. The condition of 


partly in alliance with the temporal rulers 


those classes may not have been much worse than 
it generally is at all times and in all nations, but it 
was bad. Moreover, there was here the additional 
circumstance that mercy and sympathy with the 
poor had been put into the background by devotion 
to public worship and to the cult of ‘ righteousness.” 
Oppression and tyranny on the part of the rich had 
long become a standing and inexhaustible theme with 
the Psalmists and with all men of any warm feelings. 
Jesus, too, could not have spoken of the rich as he 
did speak, unless they had grossly neglected their 
duties. 

In the poor and oppressed classes, in the huge 
mass of want and evil, amongst the multitude of 
people for whom the word “misery” is often only 
another expression for the word “life,” nay, is life 
itself—in this multitude there were groups of people 
at that time, as we can surely see, who, with fervent 
and steadfast hope, were hanging upon the promises 
and consoling words of their God, waiting in humility 
and patience for the day when their deliverance 
was to come. Often too poor to pay even for the 
barest advantages and privileges of public worship, 
oppressed, thrust aside, and unjustly treated, they 
could not raise their eyes to the temple; but they 
looked to the God of Israel, and fervent prayers went 


Q2 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


up to him: “ Watchman, what of the night?” Thus 
their hearts were opened to God and ready to receive 
him, and in many of the Psalms, and in the later 
Jewish literature which was akin to them, the word 
“poor” directly denotes those who have their hearts 
open and are waiting for the consolation of Israel. 
Jesus found this usage of speech in existence and 
adopted it. Therefore when we come across the 
expression ‘‘the poor’ in the Gospels we must not 
think, without further ceremony, of the poor in the 
economic sense. As a matter of fact, poverty in the 
ecohomic sense coincided to a large extent in those 
days with religious humility and an openness of the 
heart towards God, in contrast with the elevated 
‘practice of virtue” of the Pharisees and its routine 
observance in “righteousness.” But if this were the 
prevailing condition of affairs, then it is clear that 
our modern categories of “poor” and “rich” cannot 
be unreservedly transferred to that age. Yet we 
must not forget that in those days the economical 
sense was also, as a rule, included in the word ‘“ poor.” 
We shall, therefore, have to examine in our next 
lecture the direction in which a distinction can be 
made, or perhaps to ask, whether it is possible to fix 
the inner sense of Jesus’ words in spite of the peculiar 
difficulty attaching to the conception of “ poverty.” 
We can have some confidence, however, that we shall 
not have to remain in obscurity on this point ; for in 
its fundamental features the Gospel also throws a 
bright light upon the field covered by this question. 


* 


LECTURE VI. 


Ar the close of the last lecture I referred to the 


y] 


problem presented by “the poor” in the Gospel. 
As a rule, the poor of whom Jesus was thinking 
were also those whose hearts are open towards 
God, and hence what is said of them cannot be 
applied without further ceremony to the poor 
generally. In considering the social question we 
must, therefore, put aside all those sayings of 
Jesus which obviously refer to the poor in the 
spiritual sense. . These include, for instance, the 
first Beatitude, whether we accept it in the form 
in which it appears in Luke or in Matthew. 
The Beatitudes associated with it make it clear that 
Jesus was thinking of the poor whose hearts were 
inwardly open towards God. But, as we have 
no time to go through all the sayings separately, 
we must content ourselves with some leading con- 
siderations in order to establish the most important 
points. 

Jesus regarded >the possession of worldly goods 
as a grave danger for the soul, as hardening the 


heart, entangling us in earthly cares, and seducing 
98 


94 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


us into a vulgar life of pleasure. “A rich man 
shall hardly enter the kingdom of heaven.” 

The contention that Jesus desired, so to speak, 
to bring about a general condition of poverty and 
distress, in order that he might afterwards make it 
the basis of his kingdom of heaven—a contention 
which we encounter in different forms—is erroneous. 
The very opposite is‘ the case. Want he called 
want, and evil he called evil. Far from showing 
them any favour, he made the greatest and strongest 
efforts to combat and destroy them. In this sense, 
too, his whole activity was a ‘saving activity, 
that is to say, a struggle against evil and against 
want. Nay, we might almost think that he over- 
estimated the depressing load of poverty and 
affliction ; that he occupied himself too much with 
it; and that, taking the moral bearings of life as 
a whole, he attributed too great an importance to 
those forces of sympathy and mercy which are 
expected to counteract this state of things. But 
neither, of course, would this view be correct. He 
knows of a power which he thinks still worse than 
want and misery, namely, sin; and he knows of a 
force still more emancipating than mercy, namely, for- 
giveness. His discourses and actions leave no doubt 
upon this point. It is certain, therefore, that Jesus 
never and nowhere wished to keep up poverty and 
misery, but, on the contrary, he combated them 
himself and bid others combat them. ‘The Christians 
who in the course of the Church’s history were 


THE SOCIAL QUESTION 95 


for countenancing mendicancy and recommending 
universal pauperisation, or sentimentally coquetted 
with misery and distress, cannot with any show 
of reason appeal to him.~ Upon those, however, who 
were anxious to devote their whole lives to the 
preaching of the Gospel and the ministry of the 
Word 
garded it as a special calling from God and a special 
eift—upon them he enjoined the renunciation of all 
that they had, that is to say, all worldly goods. 
Yet that does not mean that he relegated them 
to a life of begeary. On the contrary, they were 
to be certain that they would find their bread 
and their means of livelihood. What he meant 
by. that we learn from a saying of his which was 
accidentally omitted from the Gospels, but has been 
handed down to us by the apostle Paul. In the 
ninth chapter of his first epistle to the Corinthians 
he writes: ‘“‘The Lord hath ordained that they 
which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.” 
An absence of worldly possessions he required of 
the ministers of the Word, that is, of the mission- 
aries, in order that they might live entirely for 
their calling. But he did not mean that they were 
to beg. This is a Franciscan misconception which 
is perhaps suggested by Jesus’ words but carries 
us away from ie meaning. 


he -did not ask this of everyone, but re- 


Im this connexion allow me to digress ae a moment 
from our subject. Those members of the Christian 
churches who have become professional evangelists 


96 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


or ministers of the Word in their parishes have not, 
as a rule, found it necessary to follow the Lord’s 
injunction to dispossess themselves of their worldly 
goods. So far as priests or. pastors, as the case may 
be, and not missionaries, are concerned, it may be 
said with some justice that the injunction does not 
refer to them; for it presupposes that a man- has 
undertaken the office of propagating the Gospel. 
It may be said, further, that the Lord’s injunctions, 
over and above those relating to the commandment 
of love, must not be made into inviolable laws, as 
otherwise Christian liberty will be impaired, and 
the high privilege of the Christian religion to adapt 
its shape to the course of history, free from all 
constraint, will be prejudiced. But still it may 
be asked whether it would not have been an extra- 
ordinary gain to Christianity if those who are called 
to be its ministers,—the missionaries and pastors, had 
followed the Lord’s rules. At the very least, it 
ought to be a strict-principle with them to concern 
themselves with property and worldly goods only so 
far as will prevent them being a burden to others, 
and beyond that to renounce them. I entertain no 
doubt that the time will come when the world will 
tolerate a life of luxury among those who are charged 
with the cure of souls as little as it tolerates priestly 
government. Our feelings in this respect are be- 
coming finer, and that isan advantage. It will no 
longer be thought fitting, in the higher sense of the 
word, for anyone to preach resignation and content- 


THE SOCIAL QUESTION 97 


ment to the poor, who is well off himself, and 
zealously concerned for the increase of his property. 
A healthy man may well offer consolation to the 
sick; but how shall a man of property convince 
those who have none that worldly goods are of no 
value? The Lord’s injunction that the minister of 
the Word is to divest himself of worldly posses- 
sions will still come to be honoured in the history of 
his communion. 

Jesus laid down no social programme for the sup- 
pression of poverty and distress, if by programme 
we mean a set of definitely prescribed regulations. 
With economical conditions and contemporary cir- 
cumstances he did not interfere. Had he become 
entangled in them; had he given laws which were 
ever so salutary for Palestine, what would have 
been gained by it? They would have served the 
needs of a day, and to-morrow would have been 
antiquated ; to the Gospel they would have been a 
burden and a source of confusion. We must be care- 
ful not to exceed the limits set to such injunctions 
as ‘Give to him that asketh thee” and others of a 
similar kind. ‘They must be understood in connexion 
with the time and the situation. They refer to 
the immediate wants of the applicant, which were 
satisfied with a piece of bread, a drink of water, an 
article of clothing to cover his nakedness. We must 
remember that in the Gospel we are in the Kast, and 
in circumstances which from an economical point of 


view are somewhat undeveloped. Jesus was no social 
G 


98 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


reformer. He could say on occasion, “‘The poor ye 
have always with you,” and thereby, 1t seems, 
indicate that the conditions would undergo no 
essential change. He refused to be a judge between 
contending heirs, and a thousand problems of eco- 
nomics and social life he would have just as reso- 
lutely put aside as the unreasonable demand that he 
would settle a question of inheritance. Yet again and 
again people have ventured to deduce some concrete 
social programme from the Gospel. Even evangelical 
theologians have made the attempt, and are still 
making it—an endeavour hopeless in itself and full 
of danger, but absolutely bewildering and intoler- 
able when people try to “fill up the gaps’”—and 
they are many—to be found in the Gospel with 
regulations and programmes drawn from the Old 
Testament. . 

No religion, not even Buddhism, ever went to 
work with such an energetic social message, and so 
strongly identified itself with that message as we 
see to be the case in the Gospel. How so? Because 
the words “Love thy neighbour as thyself” were 
spoken in deep earnest; because with these words 
Jesus turned a light upon all the concrete relations 
of life, upon the world of hunger, poverty and misery ; | 
because, lastly, he uttered them as a religious, nay, 

as the religious maxim. Let me remind you once 
more of the parable of the Last Judgment, where the 
whole question of a man’s worth and destiny is made 
dependent on whether he has practised the love of 


THE SOCIAL QUESTION 99 


his neighbour; let me remind you of the other 
parable of the rich man and poor Lazarus. I should 
like to cite another story, too, which is little known, 
because it occurs in this wording not in our four 
Gospels but in the Gospel of the Hebrews. The 
story of the rich young man is there handed down as 
follows :—“A rich man said to the Lord: Master, 
what good must I do that I may have life? He 
answered him: Man, keep the law and the prophets. 
The other answered: That have I done. He said to 
him: Go, sell all thy possessions and distribute 
them to the poor, and come and follow me. Then 
the rich man began to scratch his head, and the 
speech did not please him. And the Lord said to 
him : How canst thou say: I have kept the law and 
the prophets, as it is written in the law, Love thy 
neighbour as thyself? Behold, many of thy brethren, 
sons of Abraham, lie in dirty rags‘and die of hunger, 
and thy house is full of many goods, and nothing 
comes out of it to them.” You observe how Jesus 
felt the material wants of the poor, and how he 
deduced a remedy for such distress from the com- 
mandment : “ Love thy neighbour as thyself.” People 


ought not to speak of loving their neighbours if they | 


can allow men beside them to starve and die in misery. 
It is not only that the Gospel preaches solidarity 
and the helping of others; it is in this message that 


its real import consists. In this sense it is profoundly | 
socialistic, just as it is also profoundly individualistic, — 


because it establishes the infinite and independent 


100 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


value of every human soul. Its tendency to union 
and brotherliness is not so much an accidental pheno- 
menon in its history as the essential feature of its 
character. The Gospel aims at founding a com- 
munity among men as wide as human life itself and 
as deep as human need. As has been truly said, its 
object 1s to transform the socialism which rests on 
the basis of conflicting interests into the socialism 
which rests on the consciousness of a spiritual unity. 
In this sense its social message can never be outbid. 
In the course of the ages people’s opinions as to 
what constitutes “an existence worthy of a man” 
have, thank God, become much changed and im- 
proved. But Jesus, too, knew of this way of 
measuring things. Did he not once refer, almost 
bitterly, to his own position: ‘The foxes have holes, 
and the birds of the air have nests: but the Son of. 
Man hath not where to lay his head” ? A dwelling, 
sufficient daily bread, cleanliness—all these needs 
he touched upon, and their satisfaction he held to be 
necessary, and a condition of earthly life. If a man 
cannot procure them for himself, others are to step 
in and do it for him. There can be no doubt, there- 
fore, that if Jesus were with us to-day he would side 
with those who are making great efforts to relieve 
the hard lot of the poor and procure them better 
conditions of life. The fallacious principle of the free 
play of forces, of the “live and let live” principle— 
a better name for it would be the “live and let die’”— 
is entirely opposed to the Gospel. And it is not as our 


THE SOCIAL QUESTION TL EOS 


servants, but as our brothers, that we are to help the 
poor. 

Lastly, our riches do not belong to us alone. The 
Gospel has prescribed no regulations as to how we 
are to use them, but it leaves us in no doubt that we 
are to regard ourselves not as owners but as admin-_ 
istrators in the service of our neighbour. Nay, it 
almost looks as if Jesus contemplated the possibility 
of a union among men in which wealth, as private 
property in the strict sense of the word, was non- 
existent. Here, however, we touch upon a question 
which is not easy to decide, and which, perhaps, 
ought not to be raised at all, because Jesus’ eschato- 
logical ideas and his particular horizon enter into it. 
Nor is it a question that we need raise. It is the 
disposition which Jesus kindled in his disciples to- 
wards poverty and want that is all-important. 
The Gospel is a social message, solemn and over- 
powering in its force; it is the proclamation of 
solidarity and brotherliness, in favour of the poor. 
But the message is bound up with the recognition of 
the infinite value of the human soul, and is contained 
in what Jesus said about the kingdom of God. We. 
may also assert that it is an essential part of what he 
there said. But laws or ordinances or injunctions 
bidding us forcibly alter the conditions of the age in 
which we may happen to be living are not to be 
found in the Gospel. 


102 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


(3) The Gospel and the law, or the question 
of public order. 


The problem dealing with the relation of the 
Gospel to law embraces two leading questions: (1) 
the relation of the Gospel to constituted authority ; 
(2) the relation of the Gospel to legal ordinances 
generally, in so far as they possess a wider range 
than is covered by the conception “constituted 
authority.” It is not easy to mistake the answer 
to the first question, but the second is more com- 
plicated and beset with greater difficulties; and 
very diverse opinions are entertained in regard 
to it. | 

As to Jesus’ relation to the constituted authori- 
ties of his day, I need scarcely remind you again 
{in express terms that he was no political revolu- 
tionary, and that: he laid down no political pro- 
gramme. Although he is sure that his. Father 
would send him twelve legions of angels were he 
to ask Him, he did not ask Him. When they 
wanted to make him a king, he disappeared. Ulti- 
mately, indeed, when he thought weil to reveal 
himself. to the whole nation as the Messiah—how 
he came to the decision and carried it out are 
points in which we are left in the dark—he made 
his entry into Jerusalem 'as a king; but of the modes 
of presenting himself which prophecy suggested, 
he chose that which was most remote from 


THE GOSPEL AND LAW 103 


a political manifestation. The way in which he 
understood his Messianic duty is shown by his 
driving the buyers and sellers from the temple. 
In this cleansing of the temple it was not the 
constituted authorities whom he attacked, but 
those who had assumed to themselves rights of 
authority over the soul. In every nation, side by 
side with the constituted authorities, an unconsti- 
tuted authority is established, or rather two 
unconstituted authorities. They are the  politi- | 
eal church and the political parties. What the 
political church wants, in the widest sense of the 
word and under very various guises, is to rule; to’ 
get hold of men’s souls and _ bodies, consciences 
and worldly goods. What political parties want 
ig the same; and when the heads of these parties 
set themselves up as popular leaders, a terrorism 
is developed which is often worse than the fear of 
royal despots. It was not otherwise in Palestine 
in Jesus’ day. The priests and the Pharisees held 
the nation. in bondage and murdered its soul. 
For this unconstituted “ 


? 


Jesus showed | 
a really emancipating and refreshing disrespect. 


authority ’ 


He was never tired of attacking it—nay, in his 
strugele with it he roused himself to a state of 
holy indignation—of exposing its wolfish nature and 
hypocrisy, and of declaring that its day of judg- 
ment was at hand. In whatever domain it had 
any warrant to act, he accepted it: “Go and show 
yourselves unto the priests.” So far as they really 


104 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


proclaimed God’s law he recognised them: ‘ What- 
ever they tell you to do, that do.” But these 
were the people to whom he read the terrible 
lecture given in Matthew xxiii: “Woe unto you, 
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like 
unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beauti- 
ful outward, but are within full of dead men’s 
bones and of all uncleanness.” Towards these 
spiritual ‘authorities,’ then, he filled his disciples 
with a holy want of respect, and even of “ King” 
Herod he spoke with bitter irony: “Go ye and 
_tell that fox.” On the other hand, so far as we 
‘can judge from the scanty evidence before us, his 
attitude towards the real authorities, those who 
wielded the sword, was different. He recognised 
that they had an actual right to be obeyed, and 
‘he never withdrew his own person from their juris- 
diction. Nor are we to understand the command- 
ment against swearing as including an oath taken 
before a magistrate. No one with a grain of salt, 
as Wellhausen has rightly said, can miss the inner 
meaning of this commandment. On the other 
hand, we must be careful not to rate Jesus’ posi- 
tion in regard to constituted authority too high. 
)People usually appeal to the often quoted saying: 
“Render unto Cesar the things which are Cesar’s 
and unto God the things that are God’s.” But 
this saying is often misunderstood. Wherever it 
is. explained as meaning that Jesus recognised God 
and Czesar as the two powers which in some way 


THE GOSPEL AND LAW 105 


or other exist side by side, or are even in secret 
alliance, it is taken in a wrong sense. Jesus had no 
such thought; on the contrary, he spoke of the 
two powers as separate and divorced from each 
other. God and Cesar are the lords of two quite 
different provinces. Jesus settled the question that 
was in dispute by pointing out this difference, 
which is so great that no conflict between the 
powers can arise. The penny is an earthly com 
and bears Czesar’s image; let it be given, then, 
to Cesar, but—this we may take as the comple- 
ment—the soul and all its powers have’ nothing 
to do with Cesar; they belong to God.’ In a> 
word, the all-important matter, in Jesus’ view, is 
not to mix up the two provinces. When we are 
once quite clear about this, then we may go 
on to remark on the significance of the fact that 
Jesus enjoined compliance with the demand for 
payment of the imperial taxes. .No doubt it is 
important to note that he himself respected the 
constituted authorities, and wished to see them 
respected ; but in regard to the estimate which 
he formed of them, what he said is, at the least, 
of a neutral character. 

On the other hand, we possess another saying of 
Jesus in regard to constituted authority which is much 
less often quoted, and nevertheless affords us a deeper 
insight into the Lord’s thoughts than the one which we 
have just discussed. Let us consider it for-a moment. 
The fact that it forms a point of transition to the 


106 WHAT Is “CHRISTIANITY? 


consideration of the attitude which Jesus took up in 
regard to legal regulations in general also makes it 
worth our attention. In Mark x. 42, we read: 
“Jesus called them (.e. his disciples) to him and 
saith unto them, Ye know that they which are 
accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship 
over them: and their great ones exercise authority 
upon them. But so shall it not be among you: 
but whosoever shall be great among you shall be your 
minister: and whosoever of you will be the chiefest 
shall be servant of all.” Observe here, first of all, the 
“ transvaluation of values.” Jesus simply reverses the 
usual process: to be great and to occupy the foremost _ 
position means, in his view, to serve ; his disciples are 
to aim, not at ruling, but at each being all other men’s 
servant. Next observe the opinion which he has 
of authority as it was then constituted. Their 
functions are based on force, and this is the very 
reason which, in Jesus’ view, puts them outside 
the moral sphere; nay, there is a fundamental 
opposition between it and them: “Thus do the 
earthly rulers.” Jesus tells his disciples to act 
. differently. Law and legal ordinance, as resting 
on force only, on actual power and its exercise, 
have no moral value. Nevertheless Jesus did not 
command men not to subject themselves to these 
authorities; they were to rate them according to 
their value, that is, according to their non-value, 
and they were to arrange their own lives on other 
principles, namely, on the opposite; they were not 


THE GOSPEL AND LAW 107 


to use force, but to serve. Here we have already 
passed to the general eround of legal ordinance, for 
it seems to be an essential feature of all law to secure 
observance by force when called in question. 

When we approach the second point, the relation 
of the Gospel to legal ordinance generally, we again 


encounter two different views. One of them— ~* 


in modern times more particularly maintained, in 
his treatise on Canon Law, by Prof. Sohm of Leipzig, 
who presents points of contact with Tolstoi—lays 
down that in their respective natures law and the 
world of spiritual things are diametrically opposed ; 
and that it is in contradiction with the character 
of the Gospel and the community founded thereon 
that the Church has developed any legal ordinances 
at all. In his survey of the earliest development 
of the Church Prof. Sohm has gone so far as to 
see in the moment when Christendom gave a 
place in its midst to legal ordinances a second Fall. 
Nevertheless’ he is unwilling to impugn the law 
in its own province. But Tolstoi refuses, in the’ 
name of the Gospel, to allow the law any rights 
at all. He maintains that the leading principle 
of the Gospel is that a man is never to insist upon 
his rights, and that not even constituted authority 
is to offer any external resistance to evil. Authority 
and law are simply to cease. Opposed to Tolstoi 
there are others who more or less positively contend 
that the Gospel takes law and legal relations under 
its protection; that it sanctifies them and thereby 


108 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


raises them into a divine sphere. These are, briefly, 
the two leading points of view which are here in 
conflict. 

As regards the latter, there is little that need be 
said. It is a mockery of the Gospel to say that 
it protects and sanctifies everything that presents 
itself as law and legal relation at a given moment. 
Leaving a thing alone and bearing with it are not 
the same as sanctioning and preserving it. Nay, 
it 18 a serious question whether even bearing with 
it is not too much to say, and whether Tolstoi is 
not right. ‘The difficulty of the matter makes it 
necessary that I should take you back a little way 
in Jewish history. 

For hundreds of years the poor and oppressed in 
the people of Israel had been crying out for justice. 
It was a cry which still affects us to-day as we hear 
it in the words of the prophets and out of the 
prayers of the Psalmists; but time after time it 
passed unheeded. None of the legal regulations 
in force was free from the power of tyrannical 
authorities, to be distorted and exploited by 
them just as they saw fit. In speaking of legal 
regulations and their exercise, and in examining 
Jesus’ attitude towards them, we must not straight- 
way think of our own legal relations, which 
have grown up partly on the basis of Christianity. 
Jesus was of a nation the greater part of which had 
for generations been in vain asking for their nights, 
and which was familiar with law only in the form 


THE GOSPEL AND LAW 109) 


of force. The necessary consequence was that in 
such a nation a feeling of despair arose in regard 
to the law; despair, as much of the possibility of 
ever getting justice on earth as, conversely, of the 
‘moral claim of law to have any validity at all. 
We can see something of this temper even in the 
Gospel. But there is a second consideration which 
is a standing corrective to this temper. Jesus, like 
all truly religious minds, was firmly convinced that 
in the end God will do justice. If He does not do 
it here, He will do it in the Beyond, and that is 
the main point. In this connexion there was, 
in Jesus’ view, nothing objectionable in the idea 
of law in the sense of a just recompense; it was a 
lofty, nay, a dominating idea. Just recompense is 
the function of God’s majesty; to what extent it 
is modified by His mercy is a question which we 
need not here consider. The contention that Jesus 
took a depreciatory view of law as such, and of the 
exercise of law, cannot be sustained for a moment. 
On the contrary, everyone is to get his rights; 
nay more, his disciples are one day to share in 
administering God’s justice and themselves judge. 
It was only the justice which was exercised with 
violence and therefore unjustly, the justice which 
lay upon the nation like a tyrannical and bloody 
decree, that he set aside. He believed in true 
justice, and he was certain, too, that it would 
prevail; so certain, that he did not think it neces- 
sary for justice to use force in order to remain justice. 


110 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


This brings us to the last point. We possess 
a number of Jesus’ sayings in which he directs 
his disciples to renounce all their lawful demands, 
and so forego their just rights. You all know 
those sayings. Let me remind you of one only: 
‘But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil, but 
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, 
turn to him the other also. And if any man will 
sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let 
him have thy cloak also.” The demand here made 
seems to proscribe law and disorganise all the 
legal relations of life. Again and again these 
words have been appealed to with the object of 
showing either that Christianity is incompatible 
with life as it actually is, or that Christendom has 
fallen away from the principles of its Master. By 
way of reply to this argument the following 


observations may be made :—(i.) Jesus was, as \ 


we have seen, steeped in the conviction that God 
does justice; in the end, therefore, the oppressor 
will not prevail, but the oppressed will get his 
rights. (u.) Earthly rights are in themselves of 
little account, and it does not much matter if we 
lose them. (iu.) The world is in such an unhappy 
state, injustice has got so much the upper hand in 
it, that the victim of oppression is incapable of 
making good his rights even if he tries. (iv.) As 
God 
justice with mercy, and lets His sun shine on the 
just and on the unjust, so Jesus’ disciple is to show 


and this is the main point—mingles His — 


x 


THE GOSPEL AND LAW I1I 


love to his enemies and disarm them by gentleness. 
Such are the thoughts which underlie those lofty 
sayings and at the same time set them their due 
limits) And is the demand which they contain 
really so supramundane, so impossible? Do we 
not in the circle of our family and friends advise 
those who belong to us to act in the same way, 
and not to return evil for evil and abuse for abuse ? 
What family, what society, could continue to exist, 
if every member of it were anxious only to pursue 
his own rights, and did not learn to renounce them 
even when attacked? Jesus regards his disciples 
as a circle of friends, and he looks out beyond this 
circle to a league of brothers which will take shape 
in the future and extend. But, we are asked, are 
we in all cases to renounce the pursuit of our rights 
in the face of our enemies ? are we to use no weapons 
but those of gentleness? To speak with Tolstoi, are 
the magistrates not to inflict punishment, and there- 
by to be effaced? are nations not to fight for house 
and home when they are wantonly attacked? I 
venture to maintain that, when Jesus spoke the 
words which I have quoted, he was not thinking 
of such cases, and that to interpret them in this 
direction involves a clumsy and dangerous miscon- 
ception of their meaning. Jesus never had anyone 
but the individual in mind, and the abiding dis- 
position of the heart in love. To say that this 
disposition cannot coexist with the pursuit of 
ones own rights, with the conscientious administra- 


‘ite WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


‘tion of justice, and with the stern punishment of 
‘crime, is a piece of prejudice, in support of which 
we may appeal in vain to the letter of those 
sayings, which did not aim at being laws or, 
therefore, at prescribing regulations. This much, 
however, must be added, in order that the lofti- 
~ness of the demand which the Gospel makes may 
be in no way abated: Jesus’ disciple ought to be 
able to renounce the pursuit of his rights, and - 
ought to co-operate in forming a nation of brothers, 
in which justice is done, no longer by the aid of 
force, but by free obedience to the good, and which 
‘is united not by legal regulations but by the 
ministry of love. 


LECTURE VII. 


WE were occupied in the last lecture with the relation 
of the Gospel to law and legal ordinance. We saw 
that Jesus was convinced that God does, and will do, 
justice. We saw, further, that he demanded of his 
disciples that they should be able to renounce their 
rights. In giving expression to this demand, far 
from having all the circumstances of his own time 
in mind, still less the more complex conditions of a 
later age, he has one and one only present to his soul; 
namely, the relation of every man to the kingdom of 
God. Because a man is to sell all that he has in 
order to buy the pearl of great price, so he must also 
be able to abandon his earthly rights and subordinate 
everything to that highest relation. But in con- 
nexion with this message of his, Jesus opens up 
» to us the prospect of a union among men, which is 
held together not by any legal ordinance, but by the 
rule of love, and where a man conquers his enemy by 
gentleness. It is a high and glorious ideal, and we 
have received it from the very foundation of our 
religion. It ought to float before our eyes as the 


goal and guiding star of our historical development. 
| 113 H 


114 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Whether mankind will ever attain to it, who can say 4 
but we can and ought to approximate to it, and in 
these days—otherwise than two or three hundred 
years ago—we feel a moral obligation in this 
direction. ‘Those of us who possess more delicate 
and therefore more prophetic perceptions no longer 
regard the kingdom of love and peace as a mere 
Utopia. ? ; 

But for this very reason there are many among 
us to-day upon whom a very serious and dithcult 
question presses with redoubled force. We see a 
whole class struggling for its rights; or, rather, we 
see it struggling to extend and increase its rights. 
Is that compatible with the Christian temper? Does 
not the Gospel forbid such a struggle? Have we not 
been told that we are to renounce the rights we have, 
to say nothing of trying to get more? Must we, 
then, as Christians, recall the labouring classes from 
the struggle for their rights, and exhort them only 
to patience and submission ? 

The problem with which we have here to do is also 
stated more or less in the form of an accusation against 
Christianity. Earnest men in political circles of a 
socialistic tendency, who would gladly be guided by - 
Jesus Christ, complain that in this matter the Gospel 
leaves them in the lurch. They say that it imposes 
restraint upon aspirations which with a clear con- 
science they feel to be justified; that in requiring 
absolute meekness and submission it disarms every- 
one who wants to fight ; that 1t narcotises, as it were, 


THE GOSPEL AND LAW II5 


all real energy. Some say this with pain and regret, 
others with satisfaction. The latter assert that they 
always knew that the Gospel was not for the healthy 
and the strong, but for the broken-down; that it 
knows, and wants to know, nothing of the fact that 
life, and especially modern life, is a struggle, a 
struggle for one’s own rights. What answer are we 
to give them ? 

My own opinion is that these statements and 
complaints are made by people who have never yet 
clearly realised with what it is that the Gospel has to 
do, and who rashly and improperly connect it. with 
earthly things. The Gospel makes its appeal to the 
inner man, who, whether he is well or wounded, in 
a happy position or a miserable, obliged to spend 
his earthly life fighting or quietly maintaining what 
he has won, always remains the same. ‘‘ My kingdom 
is not of this world”; it is no earthly kingdom that 
the Gospel establishes. These words not only exclude 
such a political theocracy as the Pope aims at setting 
up and all worldly dominion; they have a much 
wider range. Negatively they forbid all direct and 
formal interference of religion in worldly affairs. 
Positively what the Gospel says is this: Whoever 
you may be, and whatever your position, whether 
bondman or free, whether fighting or at rest—your 
real task in life is always the same. ‘There is only 
one relation and one idea which you must not violate, 
and in the face of which all others are only transient 
wrappings and vain show: to be a child of God and 


116 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


a citizen of His kingdom, and to exercise love. How 
you are to maintain yourself in this life on earth, and 
in what way you are to serve your neighbour, is left 
to you and your own liberty of action. This is what 
the apostle Paul understood by the Gospel, and I do 
not believe that he misunderstood it. Then let us 
fight, let us struggle, let us get justice for the op- 
pressed, let us order the circumstances of the world as 
we with a clear conscience can, and as we may think 
best for our neighbour ; but do not let us expect the 
Gospel to afford us any direct help; Jet us make no 
selfish demands for ourselves; and let us not forget 
that the world passes away, not only with the lusts 
thereof, but also with its regulations and its goods! 
Once more be it said: the Gospel knows only one 
goal, one idea; and it demands of a man that he 
shall never put them aside. If the exhortation to 
renounce takes, in a harsh and onesided way, a fore- 
most place in Jesus’ words, we must be careful to 
keep before our eyes the paramount and exclusive 
claims of the relation to God and the idea of love. 
The Gospel is above all questions of mundane 
development; it is concerned not with material 
things but with the souls of men. 

With this we have already passed to the next 
question which was to occupy our attention, and we 
have half answered it. 


CIVILISATION Ely 


*(4) The Gospel and work, or the question of 


civilisation. 


The points which we shall have to consider here 
are essentially the same as those which we emphasized 
in regard to the question just discussed; and we 
shall therefore be able to proceed more concisely. 

Jesus’ teaching has been felt again and again, but 
above all in our own day, to exhibit no interest in 
any systematic work or calling, and no appreciation 
of those ideal possessions which go by the name of 
Art and Science. Nowhere, people say, does Jesus | 
summon men to labour and to put their hands to the 
work of progress; in vain shall we look in his words 
for any expression of pleasure in vigorous activity ; 
these ideal possessions lay far beyond his field of 
vision. In that last, unhappy book of his, The Old 
Faith and the New, David Friedrich Strauss gave 
particularly harsh expression to this feeling. He 
speaks of a fundamental defect in the Gospel, which 
he considers antiquated and useless because out 
of sympathy with the progress of civilisation. But 
long before Strauss the Pietistic movement exhibited 
the same sort of feeling. The Pietists tried to evade 
the difficulty in a way of their own. They started 
from the position that Jesus must be able to serve as 
a direct example for all men, whatever their calling ; 
that he must have proved himself in all the situations 
in which a man can be placed. They admitted that 


118 WHAT HS CHRISTIANITY? 


a cursory examination of Jesus’ life disclosed the fact 
that this requirement was not fulfilled; but they 
were of opinion that on a closer inspection it would 
be found that he was really the best bricklayer, the 
best tailor, the best judge, the best scholar, and so 
on, and that he had the best knowledge and under- 
standing for everything... They turned and twisted 
what Jesus said and did until it was made to express 
and corroborate what they wanted. Although it was 
a childish attempt which they made, the problem of 
which they were sensible was nevertheless of some 
moment. ‘They felt that their consciences and their 
callings bound them to a definite activity and a 
definite business; they were clear that they ought 
not to become monks; and yet they were anxious to 
practise the imitation of Christ in the full sense. 
They felt, then, that he must have stood in the same 
situation as they themselves, and that his horizon 
must have been the same as theirs. 

Here we have the same case as we dealt with in 
the last section, only covering a wider field. It is 
the ancient and constantly recurring error, that the 
Gospel has to do with the affairs of the world, and 
that it is its business to prescribe how they are to 
be carried on. Here, too, the old and almost in- 
eradicable tendency of mankind to rid itself of its 
freedom and responsibility in higher things and 
eae itself to a law, comes into play. It is much 
easier, in fact, to resign oneself to any, even the 
sternest, kind of authority, than to live in the liberty 


CIVILISATION 11g 


of the good. But apart from this, the question 
remains: Is it not a real defect in the Gospel that 
it betrays so little sympathy with the business of 
life, and is out of touch with the hwmaniora in the 
sense of science, art, and civilisation generally ? 

I answer, in the first place: What would have. © 
been gained if it had not possessed this “defect” ? 
Suppose that it had taken an active interest in all 
those efforts, would it not have become entangled 
in them, or, at any rate, have incurred the risk 
of appearing to be so entangled? Labour, art, 
science, the progress of civilisation—these are not 
things which exist in the abstract; they exist in 
the particular phase of an age. The Gospel, then, 
would have had to ally itself with them. But phases 
change. In the Roman Church of to-day we sce 
how heavily religion is burdened by being con- 
nected with a particular epoch of civilisation. 
In the Middle Ages this Church, anxious to parti- 
cipate to the full in all questions of progress and 
civilisation, gave them form and shape, and laid 
down their laws. Insensibly, however, the Church 
identified its sacred inheritance and its peculiar 
mission with the knowledge, the maxims, and the 
interests which it then acquired; so that it is now, 
as it were, firmly pinned down to the philosophy, 
the political economy, in short, to the whole 
civilisation, of the Middle Ages. On the other 
hand, what a service the Gospel has rendered to 
mankind by having sounded the notes of re- 


120 WAT ais; CHRIS PANTY 


gion in mighty chords and banished every other 
melody ! 

In the second place, labour and the progress of 
civilisation are, no doubt, very precious, and summon 
us to strenuous exertion. but they do not comprise 
the highest ideal. They are incapable of filling 
the soul with real satisfaction. Although work 
may give pleasure, that is only one aspect of the 
matter. I have always found that the people who 
talk loudest about the pleasure which work affords 
make no very great efforts themselves; whilst those 
who are uninterruptedly engaged in heavy labour 
are hesitating In its praises. As a matter of fact, 
there is a great deal of hypocritical twaddle talked 
about work. Three-fourths of it and more is nothing 
but stupefying toil, and the man who really works 
hard shares the poet’s aspirations as he looks for- 
ward to evening: 


Head, hands and feet rejoice: the work is done, 


And, then, think of the results of all this labour! 
When a man has done a piece of work, he would 
like to do it over again, and the knowledge of its 
defects falls heavily on soul and conscience. No! 
it is not in so far as we work that we live, but in 
so far as we rejoice in the love of others, and our- 
selves exercise love. Faust is right: Labour which 
is labour and nothing else becomes an aversion. 
We long for the streams of living water, and for the 
spring itself from which those waters flow: 


” 


CIVILISATION Tat 


Man sehnt sich nach des Lebens Bdchen, 
Ach! nach des Lebens Quelle hin. 

Labour is a valuable safety-valve and useful in 
keeping off greater ills, but it is not in itself an 
absolute good, and we cannot include it amongst our 
ideals. The same may be said of the progress of 
civilisation. It is of course to be welcomed; but 
the piece of progress in which we delight to-day 
becomes something mechanical by to-morrow, and 
leaves us cold. The man of any deep feeling will 
thankfully receive anything that the development of 
progress may bring him; but he knows very well 
that his situation mwardly—the problems that 
agitate him and the fundamental position in which 
he stands—is not essentially, nay 1s scarcely even 
unessentially, altered by it all. It is only for a 
moment that it seems as if something new were 
coming, and a man were being really relieved of his 
burden. Gentlemen, when a man grows older and 
sees more deeply into life, he does not find, if he 
_ possesses any inner world at all, that he is advanced 
by the external march of things, by “the progress 
of civilisation.” Nay, he feels himself, rather, where 
he was before, and forced to seek the sources of 
strength which his forefathers also sought. He is 
forced to make himself a native of the kingdom of 
God, the kingdom of the Eternal, the kingdom of 
Love ; and he comes to understand that it was only 
of this kingdom that Jesus Christ desired to speak 
and to testify, and he is grateful to him for it. 


£22 WHATEES (HRISIZANITY ? 


But, in the third place, Jesus had a strong and 
positive conviction of the aggressive and forward 
character of his message. “JI am come to send fire 
‘on the earth, and”—he added—‘“ what will I if it 
be. already kindled?” The fire of the judgment and 
the forces of love were what he wanted to summon 
up, so as to create a new humanity. If he spoke 
of these forces of love in the simple manner cor- 
responding to the conditions nearest at hand—the 
feeding of the hungry, the clothing of the naked, the 
visiting of the sick and those in prison—it is never- 
theless clear that a great inward transformation of 
the humanity which he saw in the mirror of the 
little nation in Palestine hovered before his eyes: 
‘One is your master, and all ye are brethren.” The 
last hour is come; but in the last hour from a small 
seed a tree is to grow up which shall spread its 
branches far and wide. Further, he was revealing the 
knowledge of God, and he was certain that it would 
ripen the young, strengthen the weak, and make 
them God’s champions. Knowledge of God is the 
spring that is to fructify the barren field, and pour 
forth streams of living water. In this sense he spoke 

of it as the highest and the only necessary good, 
as the condition of all edification, and, we may also 
say, of all true growth and progress. Lastly, he saw ° 
on his horizon not only the judgment, but also 
a kingdom of justice, of love, and of peace, which, 
though it came from heaven, was nevertheless for 
this earth. When it is to come, he himself knows 


CIVILISATION 123 


not—the hour is known to the Father only; but he 
knows how and by what means it will spread ; and 
side by side with the highly-coloured, dramatic 
pictures which pass through his soul there are quiet 
perceptions which are fixed and steady. He sees the 
vineyard of God on this earth and God calling His 
happy the man who receives a 


labourers into it 
call!. They labour in the vineyard, stand no longer 
idle in the market-place, and at last receive their 
reward. Or take the parable of the talents dis- 
tributed in order to be employed, and _ therefore 
not to be buried ina napkin. A day’s work, labour, 
increase, progress—he sees it all, but placed at the 
service of God and neighbour, encircled by the light 
of the Eternal, and removed from the service of 
transient things. 

To sum up what we have here tried to indicate: Is 
the complaint from which we started at the begin- 
ning of this section justified? Ought we really to 
desire that the Gospel had adapted itself to “the 
progress of civilisation”? Here too, I think, we 
have to learn from the Gospel and not to find fault 
with it. It tells us of the real work which humanity | 
has to accomplish, and we ought not to meet its 
message by entrenching ourselves behind our miser- 
able ‘“‘ work of civilisation.” ‘The image of Christ,” 
as a modern historian justly says, “ remains the sole 
basis of all moral culture, and in the measure in which 
it succeeds in making its light penetrate is the moral 
culture of the nations increased or diminished.” 


124 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


a 


*(5) The Gospel and the Son of God, or the 
Christological question. 


We now pass from the sphere of questions of 
which we have been treating hitherto. The four 
previous questions are all intimately connected with © 
one another. Failure to answer them rightly always 
proceeds from not rating the Gospel high enough ; 
from somehow or other dragging it down to the 
level of mundane questions and entangling it in 
them. Or, to put the matter differently: The 
forces of the Gospel appeal to the deepest founda- 
tions of human existence and to them only; it is 
there alone that their leverage is applied. If a man 
, 1s unable, then, to go down to the root of humanity, 
and has no feeling for it and no knowledge of it, he 
will fail to understand the Gospel, and will then try 
to profane it or else complain that it is of no use. 

We now, however, approach quite a different 
problem : What position did Jesus himself take up 
towards the Gospel while he was proclaiming it, 
and how did he wish himself to"be accepted? We 
are not yet dealing with the way im which his 
disciples accepted him, or the place which they gave 
him in their hearts, and the opinion which they 
formed of him; we are now speaking only of his 
own testimony of himself. But the question is one 
which lands us in the great sphere of controverted 
questions which cover the history of the Church 


CHRISTOLOGY 125 


from the first century up to our own time. In 
the course of this controversy men put an end to 
brotherly fellowship for the sake of a nuance; and 
thousands were cast out, condemned, loaded with 
chains and done to death. It is a gruesome story. 
On the question of ‘Christology’ men beat their 
religious doctrines into terrible weapons, and spread 
fear and intimidation everywhere. ‘This attitude 
still continues : Christology is treated as though the 
Gospel had no other problem to offer, and the ac- 
companying fanaticism is still rampant in our own 
day. Who can wonder at the difficulty of the 
problem, weighed down as it is with such a burden 
of history and made the sport of parties? Yet any- 
one who will look at our Gospels with unprejudiced 
eyes will not find that the question of Jesus’ own 
testimony is insoluble. So much of it, however, as 
remains obscure and mysterious to our minds ought 
to remain so; as Jesus meant it to be, and as in 
the very nature of the problem it is. It is only in 
pictures that we can give it expression. ‘There 
are phenomena which cannot, without the aid of 
symbols, be brought within the range of the under- 
standing.” 

Before we examine Jesus’ own testimony about 
himself, two leading points must be established. 
In the first place, he desired no other belief in his 
person and no other attachment to it than is con- 
tained in the keeping of his commandments. Even 
in the fourth Gospel, in which Jesus’ person often 


126 WHAT IS: CHRISTIANITY ? 


seems to be raised above the contents of the Gospel, 
the idea is still clearly formulated : “If ye love me, 
keep my commandments.” He must himself have 
found, during his labours, that some people honoured, 
nay, even trusted him, without troubling themselves 
about the contents of his message. It was to them 
that he addressed the reprimand: “ Not everyone 
that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
kingdom of Heaven; but he that doeth the will of 
my Father.” To lay down any “doctrine” about 
his person and his dignity independently of the 
Gospel was, then, quite outside his sphere of ideas. 
In the second place, he described the Lord of heaven 
and earth as his God and his Father; as the Greater, 
and as Him who is alone good. He is certain that — 
everything which he has and everything which he is 
to accomplish comes from this Father. He prays to, 
Him ; he subjects himself to His will; he struggles 
hard to find out what it is and to fulfil it. Aim, 
streneth, understanding, the issue, and the hard 
must, all come from the Father. ‘This is what the 
Gospels say, and it cannot be turned and twisted. 
This feeling, praying, working, struggling and suffer- 
ing individual is a man who in the face of his 
God also associates himself with other men. 

These two facts mark out, as it were, the bound- 
aries of the ground covered by Jesus’ testimony 
of himself. They do not, it is true, give us any 
positive information as to what he said; but we 
shall understand what he really meant by his 


CHRISTOLOGY &:: 127 


testimony if we look closely at the two descriptions 
which he gave of himself: the Son of God and the 
Messiah (the Son of David, the Son of Man). 

The description of himself as the Son of God, 
Messianic though it may have been in its original 
conception, lies very much nearer to our modern 
way of thinking than the other, for Jesus himself 
gave a meaning to this conception which almost 
takes it out of the class of messianic ideas, or at all 
events does not make its inclusion in that class 
necessary to a proper understanding of it. On the 
other hand, if we do not desire to be put off with 
a lifeless word, the description of himself as the 
Messiah is at first blush one that is quite foreign 
to our ideas. Without some explanation we can- 
not understand, nay, unless we are Jews, we cannot 
understand at all, what this post of honour means 
and what rank and character it possesses. It is 
only when we have ascertained its meaning by 
historical research that we can ask whether the 
word has a significance which in any way survives 
the destruction of the husk in which it took shape 
in Jewish political life. 

Let us first of all consider the designation, ‘‘Son 
of God.” Jesus in one of his discourses made it 
specially clear why and in what sense he gave 
himself this name. The saying is to be found in 
Matthew, and not, as might perhaps have been 
expected, in John: “No man knoweth the Son 
but the Father; neither knoweth any man _ the 


128 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the 
Son will reveal him.” It is “knowledge of God” 
‘that makes the sphere of the Divine Sonship. It 
is in this knowledge that he came to know the 
sacred Being who rules heaven and earth as Father, 
as his Father. The consciousness which he pos- 
sessed of being the Son of God is, therefore, no- 
thing but the practical consequence of knowing God 
as the Father and as his Father. Rightly under- 
stood, the name of Son means nothing but the 
knowledge of God. Here, however, two observations 
are to be made: Jesus is convinced that he knows 
God in a way in which no one ever knew Him 
before, and he knows that it is his vocation to 
communicate this knowledge of God to others by 
word and by deed—and with it the knowledge 
that men are God’s children. In this conscious- 
ness he knows himself to be the Son called and 
instituted of God, to be the Son of God, and hence 
he can say: My God and my Father, and into 
~ this invocation he puts something which belongs 
to no one but himself. How he came to this con- 
sciousness of the unique character of his relation to 
God as a Son; how he came to the consciousness 
of his power, and to the consciousness of the 
obligation and the mission which this power carries 
with it, is his secret, and no psychology will 
ever fathom it. The confidence with which John 
makes him address the Father: ‘Thou lovedst 
me before the foundation of the world” is un- 


CHRISTOLOGY 129 


doubtedly the direct reflection of the certainty 
with which Jesus himself spoke. Here all research 
must stop. We are not even able to say when 
it was that he first knew himself as the Son, and 
whether he at once completely identified himself 
with this idea and let his individuality be absorbed 
in it, or whether it formed an inner problem which 
kept him in constant suspense. No one could 
fathom this mystery who had not had a parallel 
experience. A prophet may, if he chooses, try 
to raise the veil, but, for our part, we must be 
content with the fact that this Jesus who preached 
humility and knowledge of self, nevertheless named 
himself and himself alone as the Son of God. He 
is certain that he knows the Father, that he is 
to bring this knowledge to all men, and that 
thereby he is doing the work of God. Among 
all the works of God this is the sreatest ; 1b 18 
the aim and end of all creation. The work is given 
to him to do, and in God’s strength he will ac- 
complish it. It was out of this feeling of power 
and in the prospect of victory that he uttered the 
words: “The Father hath committed all things 
unto me.” Again and again in the history of 
mankind men of God have come forward in the 
sure consciousness of possessing a divine message, 
and of being compelled, whether they will or not, 
to deliver it. But the message has always hap- 
pened to be imperfect ; in this spot or that, defective : 


bound up with political or pafticularistic elements : | 
I 


Toy, WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? > 


designed to meet the circumstances of the moment ; 
and very often the prophet did not stand the test 
of being himself an example of his message. But 
in this case the message brought was of the pro- 
foundest and most comprehensive character ; it went 
to the very root of mankind and, although set in 
the framework of the Jewish nation, it addressed 
itself to the whole of humanity—the message 
from God the Father. Defective it is not, and its 
real kernel may be readily freed from the inevi- 
table husk of contemporary form. Antiquated it 
is not, and in life and strength it still triumphs 
to-day over all the past. He who delivered it has 
as-yet yielded his place to no man, and to human 
life he still to-day gives a meaning and an aim— 
he the Son of God. 25 

This already brings us to the other designation 
which Jesus gave of himself: the Messiah. Before 
I attempt briefly to explain it, I ought to mention 
that some scholars of note — and among them, 
Wellhausen—have expressed a doubt whether Jesus 
described himself as the Messiah. In that doubt 
I cannot concur; nay, I think that it is only by 
wrenching what the evangelists tell us off its 
hinges that the opinion can be maintained. The 
very expression ‘‘Son of Man”—that Jesus used it 
is beyond question—seems to me to be intelligible 
only ina Messianic sense. To say nothing of any- 
thing else, such a story as that of Christ’s entry 
into Jerusalem would have to be simply expunged, 


THE MESSIAH 131 


if the theory is to be maintained that he did not 
consider himself the promised Messiah and _ also 
desire to be accepted as such. Moreover, the forms 
in which Jesus expressed what he felt about his 
own consciousness and his vocation become quite 
incomprehensible unless they are taken as the out- 
come of the Messianic idea. Finally, the positive 
arguments which are advanced in support of the 
theory are either so very weak, or else so highly 
questionable, that we may remain quite sure that 
Jesus called himself the Messiah. 

The idea of a Messiah and the Messianic notions 
generally, as they existed in Jesus’ day, had been 
developed on two combined lines, on the line of - 
the kings and on that of the prophets. Alien — 
influences had also been at work, and the whole 
idea was transfigured by the ancient expectation 
that God Himself in visible form would take up the 
government of His people. The leading features of 
the Messianic idea were taken from the Israelitish 
kingdom in the ideal splendour in which it was 
invested after the kingdom itself had disappeared. 
Memories of Moses and of the great prophets also 
played a part in it. In the following lecture we 
shall briefly show what shapes the Messianic hopes 
had assumed up to Jesus’ time, and in what way he 
took them up and transformed them. 


LECTURE VIII. 


AttTHouGH the Messianic doctrines prevalent in the 
Jewish nation in Jesus’ day were not a positive 
“dogma,” and had no connexion with the legal 
precepts which were so rigidly cultivated, they 
formed an essential element of the hopes, religious 
and political, which the nation entertained for the 
future. They were of no very definite character, 
except in certain fundamental features; beyond 
these the greatest differences prevailed. The old 
prophets had looked forth to a glorious future in 
which God would Himself come down, destroy the 
enemies of Israel, and work justice, peace, and joy. 
At the same time, however, they had also promised 
that a wise and mighty king of the house of David 
would appear and bring this glorious state of things 
to pass. They had ended by indicating the people 
of Israel itself as the Son of God, chosen from 
amongst the nations of the world. These three 
views exercised a determining influence in the 
subsequent elaboration of the Messianic ideas. The 
hope of a glorious future for the people of Israel 


remained the frame into which all expectations 
132 : 


THE MESSIAH 133 


were fitted, but in the two centuries before Christ 
the following factors were added: (1.) The extension 
of their historical horizon strengthened the interest 
of the Jews in the nations of the world, introduced 
the notion of “mankind” as a whole and brought 
it within the sphere of the expected end, including, 
therefore, the operations of the Messiah. The day 
of judgment is regarded as extending to the whole 
world, and the Messiah not only as judging the 
world but as ruling it as well. (ii.) In early times, 
although the moral purification of the people had 
been thought of in connexion with the glorious 
future, the destruction of Israel’s enemies seemed to 
be the main consideration ; but now the feeling of 
moral responsibility and the knowledge of God as 
the Holy one became more active; the view pre- 
vails that the Messianic age demands a holy people, 
and that the judgment to come must of necessity 
also be a judgment upon a part of Israel itself. 
(iii.) As individualism became a_ stronger force, 
so the relation of God to the individual was 
prominently emphasized. The individual Israelite 
comes to feel that he is in the midst of his people, 
and he begins to look upon it as a sum of individuals ; 
the individual belief in Providence appears side by 
side with the political belief, and combines with 
the feeling of personal worth and_ responsibility ; 
and in connexion with the expectation of the end, 
we get the first dawn of the hope of an eternal 
life and the fear of eternal punishment. The pro- 


134 WHAT -IS:- CHRISTIANITY? 


ducts of this inner development are an_ interest 
in personal salvation, and a belief in the resurrec- 
tion, and the roused conscience is no longer able 
to hope for a glorious future for all in view of 
the open profanity of the people and the power 
of sin; only a remnant will be saved. (iv.) The 
expectations for the future become more and more 
transcendent; they are increasingly shifted to the 
realm of the supernatural and the supramundane ; 
something quite new comes down from heaven to 
earth, and the new course on which the world enters 
severs it from the old; nay, this earth, transfigured 
as it will be, is no longer the final goal; the idea 
of an absolute bliss arises, whose abode can only 
be heaven itself. (v.) The personality of the long- 
expected Messiah is sharply distinguished, as well 
from the idea of an earthly king, as from the idea 
of the people as a whole, and from the idea of 
God. Although he appears as a man amongst men, 
the Messiah retains scarcely any Messianic traits. 
He is represented as with God from the first 
beginnings of time; he comes down from heaven, 
and accomplishes his work by superhuman means ; 
the moral traits in the picture formed of him come 
into prominence ; he is the perfectly just man who 
fulfils all the commandments. Nay, the idea that 
others benefit by his merits forces its way in. 
The notion, however, of a suffermg Messiah, which 
might seem to be suggested by Isaiah lii., is not 
reached. | 


THE MESSIAH 135 


But none of these. speculations succeeded in dis- 
placing the older and simpler conceptions, or in 
banishing that original, patriotic, and political inter- 
pretation of them with which the great majority 
of the people were familiar. _God Himself assuming 
the sceptre, destroying His enemies, founding the 
Israelitish kingdom of the world, and availing Him- 
self of a kingly champion for the purpose; every 
man sitting under his own fig-tree, in his own vine- 
yard, enjoying the fruits of peace, with his foot 
upon the neck of his enemies—that was, after all, 
still the most popular conception of the coming of the 
Messiah, and it was fixed in the minds even of those 
who were at the same time attracted to higher views. 
But a portion of the people had undoubtedly awakened 
to the feeling that the kingdom of God presupposes 
a moral condition of a corresponding character, and 
that it could come only to a righteous people. Some 
looked to acquiring this righteousness by means of a 
punctilious observance of the law, and no zeal that 
they could show for it was enough; others, under 
the influences of a deeper self-knowledge, began to 
have a dim idea that the righteousness which they 
so ardently desired could itself come only from the — 
hand of God, and that in order to shake off the 
burden of sin—-for they had begun to be tortured by 
an inner sense of it—<divine assistance, and divine 
grace and mercy, were needful. 

Thus in Christ's time there was a surging chaos of 
disparate feeling, as well as of contradictory theory, | 


- 


136 WHAT IS: GHRISTIANDTTVY ? 


in regard to this one matter. At no other time, 
perhaps, in the history of religion, and in no other 
people, were the most extreme antitheses so closely 
associated under the binding influence of religion. 
At one moment the horizon seems as narrow as the 
circle of the hills which surround Jerusalem; at 
another it embraces all mankind. Here everything 
is put upon a high plane and regarded from the 
spiritual and moral point of view ; and there, at but 
a stones throw, the whole drama seems as though 
it must close with a political victory for the nation. 
In one group all the forces of divine trust and confi- 
dence are disengaged, and the upright man struggles” 
through to a solemn ‘‘ Nevertheless”; in another, 
every religious impulse is stifled by a morally obtuse, 
patriotic fanaticism. 3 
The idea which was formed of the Messiah must 
have been as contradictory as the hopes to which 
it was meant to respond. Not only were people's 
formal notions about him continually changing— 
questions were being raised, for instance, as to the 
sort of bodily nature which he would have; above 
all, his inmost character and the work to which he 
was to be called appeared in diverse lights. But 
wherever the moral and really religious elements had 
begun to get the upper hand, people were forced to — 
abandon the image of the political and warlike ruler, 
and let that of the prophet, which had always 
to some extent helped to form the general notions 
about the Messiah, take its place. That he would 


THE MESSIAH 137 


bring God near; that somehow or other he would do 
justice ; that he would deliver from the burden of 
torment within-—this was what was hoped of him. 
The story of John the Baptist as related in our 
Gospels makes it clear that there were devout men 
in the Jewish nation at that time who were expecting 
a Messiah in this form, or at least did not absolutely 
reject the idea. We learn from that story that some 
were disposed to take John for the Messiah. What 
elasticity the Messianic ideas must have possessed, 
and how far, in certain circles, they must have. tra- 
velled from the form which they originally assumed, 
when this very unkinglike preacher of repentance, 
clad in a garment of camel’s hair, and with no 
message but that the nation had degenerated and 
its day of judgment was at hand, could be taken for 
the Messiah himself. And when the Gospels go on to 
tell us that not a few among the people took Jesus 
for the Messiah only because he taught as one 
with authority, and worked miraculous cures, how 
fundamentally the idea of the Messiah seems to be 
changed! They regarded this saving activity, it is 
true, only as the beginning of his mission ; they 
expected that the wonder-worker would presently 
throw off his disguise and ‘‘set up the kingdom ” ; 
but all that we are concerned with here is that they 
were capable of welcoming as the promised one a 
man whose origin and previous hfe they knew, and 
who had as yet done nothing but preach repentance 
and proclaim that the kingdom of heaven was at 


138 WHAT IS:-CHRISTIANITY ? 


‘hand. We shall never fathom the inward develop- 
ment by which Jesus passed from the assurance that 
he was the Son of God to the other assurance that 
he was the promised Messiah. But when we see 
that the idea which others as well had formed of 
the Messiah at that time had, by a slow process of 
change, developed entirely new features, and had 
passed from a political and religious idea into a 
spiritual and religious one—when we see this, the 
problem no longer wears a character of complete 
isolation. That John the Baptist and the twelve 
disciples acknowledged Jesus to be the Messiah ; 
that the positive estimate which they formed of his 
person did not lead them to reject the shape in which 
he appeared, but, on the contrary, was fixed in this 
very shape, is a proof of the flexible character of the 
Messianic idea at the time, and also explains how it 
was that Jesus could himself adopt it. ‘Strength is 
made perfect in weakness.” That there is a divine 
streneth and glory which stands in no need of 
earthly power and earthly splendour, nay, excludes 
them; that there is a majesty of holiness and love 
which saves and blesses those upon whom it lays 
hold, was what he knew who im spite of his lowliness 
~ ealled himself the Messiah, and the same must have 
been felt by those who recognised him as the king of 
Israel anointed of God. 

How Jesus arrived at the consciousness of being 
the Messiah we cannot explain, but still there are 
some points connected with the question which can 


THE MESSIAH 139 


be established. An inner event which Jesus experi- 
enced at his baptism was in the view of the oldest 
tradition the foundation of his Messianic conscious- 
ness. It is not an experience which is subject to any 
criticism ; still less are we in a position to contradict 
it. On the contrary, there is a strong probability 
that when he made his public appearance he had 
already settled accounts with himself. The evange- 
lists preface their account of his public activity 
with a curious story of a temptation. This story 
assumes that he was already conscious of being 
the Son of God and the one who was intrusted 
with the all-important work for God’s people, and 
that he had overcome the temptations which this 
consciousness brought with it. When John sent 
to him from prison to ask :—‘‘Art thou he that 
should come, or do we look for another?” the answer 
which he sent necessarily led his questioner to 
understand that he was the Messiah, but at the same 
time showed him how Jesus conceived the Messianic 
office. Then came the day at Ceesarea Philippi, 
when Peter acknowledged him as the expected 
Messiah, and Jesus joyfully confirmed what he said. 
This was followed by the question to the Phari- 
sees ‘‘ What think ye of Christ, whose son is he ?”— 
the scene which ended with the fresh question: “If 
David then call him Lord, how is he his son?” 
Lastly, there was the entry into Jerusalem before 
the whole people, together with the cleansing of 
the temple; actions which were equivalent to a 


140 WHAT IS.CHRISTIANITY? 


public declaration that he was the Messiah. But his 
first unequivocal Messianic action was also his last. 
It was followed by the crown of thorns and the 
CLOSS. 
I have said that it is probable that when Jesus 
made his public appearance he had already settled 
accounts with himself, and was therefore clear about 
his mission as well. By this, however, [ do not 
mean that, so far as he himself was concerned, 
he had nothing more to learn in the course of 
it... Not only had he to learn to suffer, and 
to look forward to the cross with confidence in 
God, but the consciousness of his Sonship was now 
for the first time to be brought to the test. The 
knowledge of the ‘‘ work” which the Father had 
intrusted to him could not be developed except by 
labour and by victory over all opposition. What 
a moment it must have been for him when he 
recognised that he was the one of whom the pro- 
phets had spoken; when he saw the whole history 
of his nation from Abraham and Moses downwards 
in the light of his own mission ; when he could no 
longer avoid the conviction that he was the promised 
Messiah! No longer avoid it; for how can we 
refuse to believe that at first he must have felt 
this knowledge to be a terrible burden? Yet in 
saying this we have gone too far; and there is 
nothing. more that we can say. But in this con- 
nexion we can understand that the evangelist John 
was right in making Jesus testify over and over 


THE MESSIAH 141] 


again: ‘Il have not spoken of myself; but the 
Father which sent me; he gave me a command- 
ment, what I should say, and what I should speak.” 
And again: “ For I am not alone, but I and the 


Father that sent me.” 


But however we may conceive the ‘“ Messiah,” 
it was an assumption that was simply necessary if 
the man who felt the inward call was to gain an 
absolute recognition within the lines of Jewish 
religious history—the profoundest and maturest | 
history that any nation ever possessed, nay, as the 
future was to show, the true religious history for 
all mankind. The idea of the Messiah became the 
means—in the first mstance for the devout of his 
own nation—of effectively setting the man who 
knew that he was the Son of God, and was doing 
the work of God, on the throne of history. But 
when it had accomplished this, its mission was ex- 
-hausted. Jesus was the “Messiah,” and was not 
the Messiah; and he was not the Messiah, because 
he left the idea far behind him; because he put a 
-meaning into it which was too much for it to bear. 
Although the idea may strike us as strange we 
can still feel some of its meaning; an idea which 
captivated a whole nation for centuries, and in 
which it deposited all its ideals, cannot be quite 
unintelligible. In the prospect of a Messianic period 
we see once more the old hope of a golden age; 
the hope which, when moralised, must’ necessarily 


142 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


be the goal of every vigorous movement in human 
life and forms an inalienable element in the re- 
ligious view of history; in the expectation of a 
personal Messiah we see an expression of the fact 
that it 1s persons who form the saving element in 
. history, and that if a union of mankind is ever to 
come about by their deepest forces and highest aims 
being brought into accord, this same mankind 
must agree to acknowledge one lord and master. 
But beyond this there is no other meaning and 
no other value to be attached to the Messianic 
idea; Jesus himself deprived it of them. 


With the recognition of Jesus as the Messiah the 
closest possible connexion was established, for every 
devout Jew, between Jesus’ message and his person ; 
for it is in the Messiah’s activity that God Himself 
comes to His people, and the Messiah who does 
God’s work and sits at the right hand of God in the 
clouds of heaven has a right to be worshipped. But 
what attitude did Jesus himself take up towards his 
Gospel? Does he assume a position in it? To this 
question there are two answers; one negative and — 
one positive. 

In those leading features of it which we described 
in the earlier lectures the whole of the Gospel is con- 
tained, and we must keep it free from the intrusion 
of any alien element: God and the soul, the soul and 
its God. There was no doubt in Jesus’ mind that 
God could be found, and had been found, in the law 


GHRISTOLOGY' 143 


and the prophets. ‘‘He hath showed thee, O Man, 
what is good; and what doth the Lord require of 
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to 
walk humbly with thy God.” He takes the publican 
in the temple, the widow and her mite, the lost son, 
as his examples; none of them know anything about 


y] 


“Christology,” and yet by his humility the publican 
was justified. These are facts which cannot be 
turned and twisted without doing violence to the 
grandeur and simplicity of Jesus’ message in one of 
its most important aspects. ‘lo contend that Jesus 
meant his whole message to be taken provisionally, 
and everything in it to receive a different interpreta- 
tion after his death and resurrection, nay, parts of 
it to be put aside as of no account, is a desperate 
supposition. No! his message is simpler than the 
- churches would like to think it; simpler, but for that 
very reason sterner and endowed with a oreater 
claim to universality. A man cannot evade it by 
the subterfuge of saying that as he can make nothing 
of tlis “Christology” the message is not for him. 
Jesus directed men’s attention to great questions ; he 
promised them God’s grace and mercy; he required 
them to decide whether they would have God or 
Mammon, an eternal or an earthly life, the soul or 
the body, humility or self-righteousness, love or 
selfishness, the truth or a lie. The sphere which 
these questions occupy is all-embracing; the indi- 
vidual is called upon to listen to the glad message 
of mercy and the Fatherhood of God, and to make 


144 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


up his mind whether he will be on God’s side and 
the Eternal’s, or on the side of the world and of 
jtime. The Gospel, as Jesus proclaimed it, has to 
ldo with the Father only and not with the Son. 
This is no paradox, nor, on the other hand, is it 
‘rationalism,’ but the simple expression of the 
actual fact as the evangelists give it. 

But no one had ever yet known the Father in the 
way in which Jesus knew Him, and to this knowledge 
of Him he draws other men’s attention, and thereby 
does ‘‘the many” an incomparable service. He leads 
them to God, not only by what he says, but still 
more by what he is and does, and ultimately by 
what he suffers. It was in this sense that he spoke 
the words, ‘‘Come unto me all ye that labour and 
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest”; as also, 
“The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, - 
but to minister and to give his life a ransom for 

many.” He knows that through him a new epoch 
i is beginning, in which, by their knowledge of God, 
the “least” shall be greater than the greatest of the 
ages before; he knows that in him thousands—the 
very individuals who are weary and heavy laden— 
will find the Father and gain life; he knows that 
he is the sower who is scattermg good seed; his 1s 
the field, his the seed, his the fruit. These things 
involve no dogmatic doctrines; still less any trans- 
formation of the Gospel itself, or any oppressive 
demands upon our faith. They are the expression 
of an actual fact which he perceives to be already 


CHRISTOLOGY 145 


happening, and which, with prophetic assurance, he 
.beholds in advance. When, under the terrible bur- 
den of his calling and in the midst of the struggle, he 
comes to see that it is through him that the blind 
see, the lame walk, the deaf hear, the poor have the 
Gospel preached to them, he begins to comprehend 
the glory which the Father has given him. And 
he sees that what he now suffers in his person will, 
through his life crowned in death, remain a fact 
efficacious and of critical importance for all time: 
He ws the way to the Father, and as he is the 
appointed of the Father, so he is the judge as well. 
Was he mistaken? Neither his immediate pos- 
terity, nor the course of subsequent history, has 
decided against him. It is not as a mere factor 
that he is connected with the Gospel; he was its 
personal realization and its strength, and this he 
is felt to be stl. Fire is kindled only by fire; 
personal life only by personal forces. Let us rid 
ourselves of all dogmatic sophistry, and leave others 
to pass ‘verdicts of exclusion. The Gospel nowhere 
says that God’s mercy is limited to Jesus’ mission. 
But history shows us that he is the one who brings 
the weary and heavy laden to God; and, again, that 
he it was who raised mankind to the new level; 
and his teaching is still the touchstone, in that it 
brings men to bliss and brings them to judgment. 
The sentence “I am the Son of God” was not 
inserted in the Gospel by Jesus himself, and to put — 


that sentence there side by side with the others is 
K 


146 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


to make an addition to the Gospel. But no one 
who accepts the Gospel, and tries to understand him * 
who gave it to us, can fail to affirm that here the 
divine appeared in as pure a form as it can appear 
on earth, and to feel that for those who followed 
him Jesus was himself the strength of the Gospel. 
What they experienced, however, and came to know 
in and through him, they have told the world ; and 
their message is still a living force. 


(6) The Gospel and doctrine, or the question 
of creed. 


We need not dwell long on-this question, as on 
the essential points—everything that it is neces- 
sary to say has already been said in the course of 
our previous observations. 

The Gospel is no theoretical system of doctrine 
or philosophy of the universe; it is doctrine only 
in so far as it proclaims the reality of God the 
Father. It is a glad message assuring us of life 
eternal, and telling us what the things and 
the forces with which we have to do are worth. 
By treating of life eternal it teaches us how 
to lead our lives aright. It tells us of the 
value of the human soul, of humility, of mercy, 
of purity, of the cross, and the worthlessness of 
worldly goods and anxiety for the things of which 
earthly life consists. And it gives the assurance 
that in spite of every struggle, peace, certainty, 


THE CREED 147 


and something within that can never be destroyed, 
will be the crown of a life rightly led. What 
else can “the confession of a creed” mean under 
these conditions but to do the will of God, in the 
certainty that He is the Father and the one who 
will recompense? Jesus never spoke of any other 
kind of “creed.” Even when he says :—‘ Whoso- 
ever shall confess me before men, him will I con- 
fess also before my Father which is in Heaven,’ 
he is thinking of people doing as he did; he means 
the confession which shows itself in feeling and 
action. How great a departure from what he thought 
and enjoined is involved in putting a “ Christo- 
logical” creed in the forefront of the Gospel, and 
in teaching that before a man can approach it he ~ 
must learn to think rightly about Christ. That is 
putting the cart before the horse. A man can 
think and teach rightly about Christ only if, and 
in so far as, he has already begun to live accord- 
ing to Christ’s Gospel. There is no forecourt to 
his message through which a man must pass; no- 
yoke which he must first of all take upon himself. 
The thoughts and assurances which the Gospel 
provides are the first thing and the last thing, 
and every soul is directly arraigned before them. 
Still less, however, does the Gospel presuppose 
any definite knowledge of nature, or stand in any 
connexion with such knowledge; not even in a 
negative sense can this contention be maintained. 
It is religion and the moral element that are con- 


148 WiitA Tos Cinas CPANTTY ? 


cerned. The Gospel puts the living God before 
us. Here, too, the confession of Him in belief 
in Him and in the fulfilment of His will. is the 
sole thing to be confessed; this is what Jesus 
Christ meant. So far as the knowledge is con- 
cerned—and it is vast—which may be based upon 
this belief, it always varies with the measure of 
a man’s inner development and subjective intelli- 
gence. But to possess the Lord of heaven and 
earth as a Father is an experience to which no- 
thing else approaches ; and it is an experience which 
the poorest soul can have, and to the reality of 
which he can bear testimony. 

An experience—it is only the religion which a man 
has himself experienced that is to be confessed ; 
every other creed or confession is in Jesus’ view 
hypocritical and fatal. If there is no broad “theory 
of religion” to be found in the Gospel, still less 
is there any direction that a man is to begin by 
accepting and confessing any ready-made theory. 
Faith and creed are to proceed and grow up out of 
the all-important act of turning from the world 
and to God, and creed is to be nothing but faith 
reduced to practice. ‘ All men have not faith,” says 
the apostle Paul, but all men ought to be veracious 
and be on their guard in religion against lip-ser- 
vice and light-hearted assent to creeds. ‘‘ A certain 
man had two sons; and he came to the first and 
said, Son, go work to-day in my vineyard. He 
answered and said, I will not; but afterward he 


THE GOSPEL 149 


repented and went. And he came to the second, 
and said likewise. And he answered and said, I 
go, Sir; and went not.” 


I might stop here, but [ am impelled to answer 
one more objection. The Gospel, it is said, is a 
great and sublime thing, and it has certainly been 
a saving power in history, but it is indissolubly 
connected with an antiquated view of the world 
and history ; and, therefore, although it be pain- 
ful to say so, and we have nothing better to put 
in its place, it has lost its validity and can have no 
further significance for us. In view of this objection 
there are two things which I should like to say :— 

Firstly, no doubt it is true that the view of the 
world and history with which the Gospel is con- 
nected is quite different from ours, and that view 
we cannot recall to life, and would not if we could; 
but ‘‘indissoluble” the connexion is not. I have © 
tried to show what the essential elements in the 
Gospel are, and these elements are “timeless.” Not 
only are they so; but the man to whom the Gospel 
addresses itself is also “timeless,” that is to say, 
it is the man who, in spite of all progress and 
development, never changes in his inmost consti- 
tution and in his fundamental relations with the 
external world. Since that is so, this Gospel re- 
mains in force, then, for us too. 

Secondly, the Gospel is based—and this is the 
all-important element in the view which it takes of 


150 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


the world and history—upon the antithesis between 
Spirit and flesh, God and the world, good and evil. 
Now, in spite of ardent efforts, thinkers have not 
yet succeeded in elaborating on a monistic basis any 
theory of ethics that is satisfactory and answers 
to the deepest needs of man. Nor will they suc- 
ceed. In the end, then, it is essentially a matter 
of indifference what name we give to the opposi- 
tion with which every man of ethical feeling 
is concerned: God and the world, the Here and 
the Beyond, the visible and the invisible, matter 
and spirit, the life of impulse and the life of 
freedom, physics and ethics. That there is a unity 
underlying this opposition is a conviction which 
can be gained by experience; the one realm can 
be subordinated to the other; but it is only “by a 
struggle that this unity can be attained, and when 
it is attained it takes the form of a problem that is 
infinite and only approximately soluble. It cannot 
be attained by any refinement of a mechanical pro- 
cess. It is by self-conquest that a man is freed 
from the tyranny of matter— 


Von der Gewalt die alle Wesen bindet 
Befrett der Mensch sich der sich uberwindet. 


This saying of Goethe's excellently expresses the 
truth that is here in question. It is a truth which 
holds good for all time, and it forms the essential 
element in the dramatic pictures of contemporary 
life in which the Gospel exhibits the antithesis that 


THE GOSPEL 151 


is to be overcome. I do not know how our increased 
knowledge of nature is to hinder us from bearing 
witness to the truth of the creed that “The world 
passeth away, and the lust thereof, but he that doeth 
the will of God abideth for ever.” We have to do 
with a dualism which arose we know not how; but 
as moral beings we are convinced that, as it has been 
given us in order that we may overcome it in our- 
selves and bring it to a unity, so also it goes back 
to an original unity, and will at last find its 
reconciliation in the great far-off event, the realised 
dominion of the Good. 

Dreams, it may be said; for what we see before | 
our eyes is something very different. No! not 
dreams—after all it is here that our true life has its 
root—but patchwork certainly, for we are unable 
to bring our knowledge in space and time, together 
with the contents of our inner life, into the unity of 
a philosophic theory of the world. It is only in the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding that 
this unity dawns upon us. 

But we have already passed beyond the limits 
of our immediate task. We proposed to acquaint 
ourselves with the Gospel in its fundamental features 
and in its most important bearings. I have tried 
to respond to this task; but the last point which 
we touched takes us beyond it. We now return 
to it, in order to follow, in the second part of these 
lectures, the course of the Christian religion through 
history. 


LECTURE IX. 


Tue task before us in the second half of these 
lectures is to exhibit the history of the Christian 
religion in its leading phases, aud to examine its 
development in the apostolic age, in Catholicism, and 
in Protestantism. 


Tur. CHRISTIAN RELIGION IN THE APOSTOLIC AGE. 


The inner circle of the disciples, the band of 
twelve whom Jesus had gathered around him, formed 
itself into a community. He himself founded no 
‘ community in the sense of an organised union for 
divine worship—he was only the teacher and the 
disciples were the pupils; but the fact that the band 
of pupils at once underwent this transformation 
became the ground upon which all subsequent 
developments rested. What were the characteristic 
features of this society? Unless I am mistaken 
_there were three factors at work in it: (i) The 
recognition of Jesus as the living Lord; (ii.) the fact 
that in every individual member of the new com- 


munity—including the very slaves—religion was an 
152 


THE APOSTOLIC AGE 153 


actual experience, and involved the consciousness 
of a living union with God; {iii.) the leading of a 
holy life in purity and brotherly fellowship, and the 
expectation of the Christ's return in the near future. 

By keeping these three factors in view we can 
grasp the distinctive character of the new com- 
munity. Let us look at them more closely. 

1. Jesus Christ the Lord: in thus confessing 
their belief in him his disciples took the first step in 
continuing their recognition of him as the authorita- 
tive teacher, of his word as their permanent standard 
of life, of their desire to keep “‘ everything that he 
commanded them.” But this does not express the 
full meaning attaching to the words ‘‘the Lord” ; 
nay, it is far from touching their peculiar significance. 
The primitive community called Jesus its Lord 
because he had sacrificed his life for it, and because 
its members were convinced that he had been raised 
from the dead and was then sitting on the right 
hand of God. There is no_ historical fact more 
certain than that the apostle Paul was not, as we 
might perhaps expect, the first to emphasize so 
prominently the significance of Christ’s death and 
resurrection, but that in recognising their meaning 
he stood exactly on the same ground as the primitive 
community. “I delivered unto you first of all,” 
he wrote to the Corinthians, ‘that which I also 
received, how that Christ died for our sins according 
to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that 
he rose again the third day.” Paul did, it is true, 


154 WHAT IS: CHRISTIANITY? 


make Christ's death and resurrection the subject of 
a particular speculative idea, and, so to speak, re- 
duced the whole of the Gospel to these events ; 
but they were already accepted as fundamental 
facts by the circle of Jesus’ personal disciples and 
by the primitive community. In these two facts 
it may be said that the permanent recognition of 
Jesus Christ, and the reverence and adoration which 
he received, obtained their first hold. They formed 
the ground on which the whole Christological theory 
rested. But within two generations from his death 
Jesus Christ was already put upon the highest plane 
upon which men can put him. As men were con- 
scious of him as the living Lord, he was glorified as 
the one who had been raised to the right hand of God 
and had vanquished death, as the Prince of Life, 
as the strength of a new existence, as the way, 
the truth, and the lfe. The Messianic ideas per- 
mitted of his being placed upon God’s_ throne, 
without endangering monotheism. But, above all, 
he was felt to be the active principle of individual 
life: ‘It is not I that live, but Christ that liveth 
in me”; he is “‘my” life, and to press onwards to 
him through death is great gain. Where can we 
find in the history of mankind any similar instance 
of men eating and drinking with their master, seeing 
him in the characteristic aspects of his humanity, 
and then proclaiming him not only as the great 
prophet and revealer of God, but as the divine 
disposer of history, as the “beginning” of God's 


THE EXPIATORY SACRIFICE 155 


creation, and as the inner strength of a new life! 
It was not thus that Mahommed’s disciples spoke 
of their prophet. Neither is it sufficient to assert 
that the Messianic predicates were simply transferred 
to Jesus, and that everything may be explained 
by- Jesus’ expected return in glory throwing its 
radiance backwards. True, in the certain hope of 
Jesus return, his ‘ coming in lowliness” was over- 
looked; but that it was possible to conceive this 
certain hope and hold it fast; that in spite of 
suffering and death it was possible to see in him 
the promised Messiah; and that in and side by side 
with the vulgar Messianic image of him, men felt 
and opened their hearts to him as the present Lord 
and Saviour, that. is what is so astonishing | LG 
was just the death ‘for our sins,” and the resur- 
rection, which confirmed the impression given by 
his person, and provided faith with a sure hold: 
he died as a sacrifice for us and he now lives. 

There are many to-day who have come to regard 
both these positions as very strange; and their at- 
titude towards them is one of indifference—towards 
the death, on the ground that no such significance 
can be attributed to a single event of this kind; to- 
wards the resurrection, because what is here affirmed 
to have happened is incredible. 

It is not our business to defend either the view 
which was taken of the death, or the idea that he 
had risen again; but it is certainly the historian’s 
duty to make himself so fully acquainted with both 


156 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


positions as to be sensible of the significance which 
they possessed and still possess. That these positions 
were of capital importance for the primitive com- 
munity has never been doubted; even Strauss did 
not dispute it; and the great critic, Ferdinand 
Christian Baur, acknowledged that it was on the 
belief in them that the earliest Christian communion 
was built up. It must be possible, then, for us in 
our turn to get a feeling and an understanding for 
what they were; nay, perhaps we may do more; if 
we probe the history of religion to the bottom, we 
shall find the truth and justice of ideas which on the 
surface seem so paradoxical and incredible lying at 
the very roots of the faith. 


Let us first consider the idea that Jesus’ death 
on the cross was one of expiation. Now, if we were 
to consider the conception attaching to the words 
‘“expiatory death” in the alien realm of formal 
speculation, we should, it is true, soon find our- 
selves in a blind alley, and every chance of our 
understanding the idea would vanish. We should be 
absolutely at the end of our tether if we were to 
indulge in speculations as to the necessity which can 
have compelled God to require such a sacrificial 
death. Let us, in the first place, bear in mind a fact 
in the history of religion which is quite universal. 
Those who looked upon this death as a sacrifice soon 
ceased to offer God any blood-sacrifice at all. The 
value attaching to such sacrifices had, it is true, 


THE EXPIATORY SACRIFICE 157 


been in doubt for generations, and had been steadily 
diminishing ; but it was only now that the sacrifices 
disappeared altogether. They did not disappear im- 
mediately or at one stroke—this is a point with 
which we need not concern ourselves here—but their 
disappearance took place within a very brief period 
and was not delayed until after the destruction of 
the temple. Further, wherever the Christian message 
subsequently penetrated, the sacrificial altars were 
deserted and dealers in sacrificial beasts found no 
more purchasers. If there is one thing that is 
certain in the history of religion, it is that the ) 
death of Christ put an end to all blood-sacrifices. | 
But that they are based on a deep religious idea is 
proved by the extent to which they existed among 
so many nations, and they are not to be judged from 
the point of view of cold and blind rationalism, but 
from that of vivid emotion. If it is obvious that 
they respond to a religious need; if, further, it is 
certain that the instinct which led to them found 
its satisfaction and therefore its goal in Christ’s 
death ; if, lastly, there was the express declaration, 
as we read in the Hpistle to the Hebrews, that “ by 
one offering he hath perfected for ever them that 
are sanctified,” we can no longer feel this idea of 
Christ’s sacrifice to be so very strange; for history 
has decided in its favour, and we are beginning to 
get in touch with it. His death had the value of an 
expiatory sacrifice, for otherwise it would not have 
had strength to penetrate into that inner world in 


158 WHAT Ss CHRISPIANETY ¢ 


which the blood-sacrifices originated ; but it was not 
a sacrifice in the same sense as the others, or else it 
could not have put an end to them; it suppressed 
them by settling accounts with them. Nay, we may 
go further ; the validity of all material sacrifices was 
destroyed by Christ’s death. Wherever individual 
Christians or whole Churches have returned to them, 
. it has been a relapse: the earliest Christians knew 
that the whole sacrificial system was thenceforth 
abolished, and if they asked for a reason, they 
pointed to Christ’s death. 

In the second place: any one who will look into 
history will find that the sufferings of the pure and 
the just are its saving element; that is to say, that 
it is not words, but deeds, and not deeds only but 
self-sacrificing deeds, and not only self-sacrificing 
deeds, but the surrender of life itself, that forms the 
turning point in every great advance in history. In 
this sense I believe that, however far we may stand 
from any theories about vicarious sacrifice, there are 
few of us after all who will mistake the truth and 
inner justice of such a description as we read in 
Isaiah liii.: “Surely he hath borne our griefs and 
carried our sorrows.” ‘‘Greater love hath no man 
than this, that a man lay down his life for his 
friends”—it is in this light that Jesus’ death was 
regarded from the beginning. Wherever any great 
deed has been accomplished in history, the finer a 
man’s moral feelings are, the more sensible will he be 
of vicarious suffering; the more he will bring that 


THE EXPIATORY SACRIFICE 159 


suffering into relation to himself. Did Luther in the 
monastery strive only for himself ?—was it not for 
us all that he inwardly bled when he fought with 
the religion that was handed down to him? But it 
was by the cross of Jesus Christ that mankind gained 
such an experience of the power of purity and love 
true to death that they can never forget it, and 
that it signifies a new epoch in their history. 
Finally, in the third place: no reflection of the 
“reason, no deliberation of the “intelligence,” will 
ever be able to expunge from the moral ideas of 
mankind the conviction that injustice and sin 
deserve to be punished, and that everywhere that - 
the just man suffers, an atonement is made which 
puts us to shame and purifies us. It is a con- 
vittion which is inpenetrable, for it comes out of 
those depths in which we feel ourselves to be a unity, 
and out of the world which hes behind the’ world of 
phenomena. Mocked and denied as though it had 
long perished, this truth is indestructibly preserved 
in the moral experience of mankind. These are the 
ideas which from the beginning onwards have been 
roused by Christ’s death, and have, as it were, played 
around it. Other ideas have been disengaged—ideas 
of less importance but, nevertheless, very efficacious 
at times——but these are the most powerful. They 
have taken shape in the firm conviction that by his 
death in suffermg he did a definitive work; that he 
did it “for us.” Were we to attempt to measure 
and register what he did, as was soon attempted, we 


160 WHAT IS:CHRISTIANITY ? 


should fall into dreadful paradoxes; but we can in 
our turn feel it for ourselves with the same freedom 
with which it was originally felt. If we also consider 
that Jesus himself described his death as a service 
which he was rendering to many, and that by a 
solemn act he instituted a lasting remembrance 
of it—I see no reason to doubt the fact—we can 
understand how this death and the shame of the 
cross were bound to take the central place. 


Jesus, however, was proclaimed as ‘the Lord” 
not only because he had died for sinners but 
because he was the risen and the living one. If 
the resurrection meant nothing but that a deceased 
body of flesh and blood came to life again, we 
should make short work of this tradition. But ‘it 
is not so. The New Testament itself distinguishes 
between the Easter message of the empty grave 
and the appearances of Jesus on the one side, and 
the Easter faith on the other. Although the 
greatest value is attached to that message, we 
are to hold the Easter faith even in its absence. 
The story of Thomas is told for the exclusive 
purpose of impressing upon us that we must hold 
the Easter faith even without the Haster message : 
‘Blessed are they that have not seen and yet 
have believed.” The disciples on the road _ to 
Emmaus were blamed for not believing in the 
resurrection even though the Easter message had 
not yet reached them. The Lord is a Spint, 


THE RESURRECTION 161 


says Paul; and this carries with it the certainty 
of his resurrection. The LHaster message tells us 
of that wonderful event in Joseph of Arimatheea’s 
garden, which, however, no eye saw; it tells us 
of the empty grave into which a few women and 
disciples looked; of the appearance of the Lord 
in a transfigured form—so glorified that his own 
could not immediately recognise him; it soon begins 
to tell us, too, of what the risen one said and 
did. The reports became more and more complete, 
and more and more confident. But the Laster 
faith is the conviction that the crucified one 
gained a victory over death; that God is just 
and powerful; that he who is the firstborn among 
many brethren still lives. Paul based his Haster 
faith upon the certainty that “‘the second Adam” 
was from heaven, and upon his experience, on the 
way to Damascus, of God revealing His Son to 
him as still alive. God, he said, revealed him 
“in me”; but this inner revelation was coupled 
with “a vision” overwhelming as vision never 
was afterwards. Did the apostle know of the 
message about the empty grave? While there 
are theologians of note who doubt it, I think it 
probable; but we cannot be quite certain about 
it. Certain it is that what he and the disciples 
regarded as all-important was not the state in 
which the grave was found but Christ’s appearances. 
But who of us can maintain that a clear account 


of these appearances can be constructed out of 
° L 


162 WHAT IS CHRISTTANETY ? 


the stories told by Paul and the evangelists ; and 
if that be impossible, and there is no tradition of 
single events which is quite trustworthy, how is 
the Easter faith to be based on them? Hither we 
must decide to rest our belief on a foundation un- 
stable and always exposed to fresh doubts, or else we 
must abandon this foundation altogether, and with it 
the miraculous appeal to our senses. But here, too, 
the images of the faith have their roots in truth 
and reality. Whatever may have happened at the 
grave and in the matter of the appearances, one 
thing is certain: This grave was the birthplace of 
the indestructible belief that death is vanquished, 
that there is a life eternal. It is useless to cite 
Plato; it is useless to point to the Persian religion, 
and the ideas and the literature of later Judaism. 
All that would have perished and has perished ; 
but the certainty of the resurrection and of a life 
eternal which is bound up with the grave in 
Joseph’s garden has not perished, and on _ the 
conviction that Jesus lwes we still base those 
hopes of citizenship in an Hternal City which make 
our earthly life worth living and tolerable. ‘“‘ He 
delivered them who through fear of death were 
all their lifetime subject to bondage,” as the writer 
of the epistle to the Hebrews confesses. That is 
the point. And although there be exceptions to 
its sway, wherever, despite all the weight of 
nature, there is a strong faith in the infinite value 
of the soul; wherever death has lost its terrors; 


THE RESURRECTION 163 


wherever the sufferings of the present are measured 
against a future of glory, this feeling of life is 
bound up with the conviction that Jesus Christ 
has passed through death, that God has awakened 
him and raised him to life and glory. What else 
can we believe but that the earliest disciples also 
found the ultimate foundation of their faith in the 
living Lord to be the strength which had gone out 
from him? It was a lfe never to be destroyed 
which they felt to be going out from him; only 
for a brief span of time could his death stagger 
them; the strength of the Lord prevailed over 
everything ; (rod did not give him over to death ; 
he lives as the first-fruits of those who have fallen 
asleep. It is not by any speculative ideas of 
philosophy but by the vision of Jesus’ life and 
death and by the feeling of his imperishable union 
with God that mankind, so far as it believes in 
_these things, has attained to that certainty of 
eternal life for which it was meant, and which 
it dimly discerns—eternal life in time and beyond 
time. This feeling first established faith in the 
value of personal life. But of every attempt to 
demonstrate the certainty of “immortality” by 
logical process, we may say in the words of the 
poet: 


Believe and venture: as for pledges, 
The Gods give none. 


Belief in the living Lord and in a life eternal is 
the act of the freedom which is born of God. 


164 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


As the crucified and risen one Jesus was the 
Lord. While this confession of belief in him ex- 
pressed a man’s whole relation to him, it also 
afforded endless matter for thought and_ specula- 
tion. This conception of the “Lord” came to 
embrace the many-sided image of the Messiah and 
all the Old Testament prophecies of a similar kind. 
But as yet no ecclesiastical ‘ doctrines” about him 
had been elaborated; everyone who acknowledged 
him as the Lord belonged to the community. 


2. Religion as an actual experience. —'The 
second characteristic feature of the primitive com- 
munity is that every individual in it, even the 
very slaves, possess a living experience of God. 
This is sufficiently remarkable; for at first sight 
we might think that all this devotion to Christ, 
and this unconditional reverence for him, must 
necessarily have resulted in all religion becom- 
ing a punctilious subjection to his words, and 
so a kind of voluntary servitude. But the Pauline 
epistles and the Acts of the Apostles give us quite 
a different picture. While they do, indeed, attest 
the fact that Jesus’ words were held in unqualified 
reverence, this fact is not the most prominent feature 
in the picture of earliest Christendom. What is 
much more characteristic is that individual Chris- 
tians, moved by the Spirit of God, are placed in 
a living and entirely personal relation to God 
Himself. Dr. Weinel has lately presented us 


THE HOLY GHOST 165 


with a fine work on the ‘ Workings of the Spirit 
and the Spirits in the post-apostolic age.” It con- 
tains many passages which take us back to the 
apostolic age and treat in greater detail of the 
matters which Professor Gunkel has so _ impres- 
sively placed before us in his treatise on ‘“‘The 
Holy Ghost.” The neglected problems of the 
extent to which, and the forms in which, the 
Spirit exercised an influence on the life of the 
early Christians, and of the view to be taken of 
the phenomena connected with this influence, 
are admirably discussed by Dr. Weinel. In 
substance, his conclusion is that the expressions 
‘“recelving” and ‘acting by” the Holy Ghost 
signify such an independence and immediacy of 
religious life and feeling, and such an inner union 
with God, perceived to be the mightiest reality, as 
could not have been expected from strict subjection 
to Jesus’ authority. To be the child of God and 
to be gifted with the Spirit are simply the same 
as being a disciple of Christ. That a man is not 
truly a disciple unless he is pervaded by God’s 
Spirit is a pomt which the “ Acts of the Apostles” 
fully recognises. The pourmg out of the Holy 
Spirit is placed in the forefront of the narrative. 
The author is conscious that the Christian religion 
would not be the highest and the ultimate religion, 
unless it brought every individual into an im- 
mediate and living connexion with God. This 
mutual union of a full obedient subjection to the 


166 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Lord with freedom in the Spirit is the most im- 
portant feature in the distinctive character of this 
religion and the seal of its greatness. The work- 
ings of the Spirit were shown everywhere, in the 
entire domain of the five senses, in the sphere of 
will and action, in profound philosophical specula- 
tion, and in the most delicate appreciation of the 
facts of the moral life. The elementary forces of 
the religious temperament, long held in check by 
systems of doctrine and the ceremonies of public 
worship, were again set free. They showed them- 
selves in ecstatic phenomena, in signs and wonders, 
in an enhancement of all the functions of life, down 
to conditions of a pathological and suspicious char- 
acter. ‘The fact, however, was not forgotten—and 
where it threatened to be obscured it was strongly 
impressed on people’s attention—that those strange 
and violent phenomena were individual, but that side 
by side with them there are workings of the Spirit 
which are bestowed upon every one and with which 
no one can dispense. But ‘‘The fruit of the Spirit,” 
as the apostle Paul writes, “is love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, 
temperance.” The other feature in the distinctive 
character and greatness of this religion is that it 
does not overestimate the elementary strength which 
gave it birth; that it makes its spiritual purport 
and its discipline triumph over all states of 
ecstacy; and that it holds immoveable to its con- 
viction that the Spirit of God, however it may 


THE COMMUNITY OF BROTHERS 167 


reveal itself, is a Spirit of holiness and of love. 
But here we have already passed to the third 
feature which characterises early Christendom. 


3. The third feature is the leading of a holy life 
in purity and brotherly fellowship and in_ the 
expectation of Christ’s speedy return. ‘The course 
which the history of the Church followed resulted 
in the dogmatic details in the New Testament being 
selected for investigation, rather than those parts 
of it which depicted the life of the. first Christians 
and exhorted men to morality. And yet not only 
are the New Testament epistles largely taken up with 
these moral exhortations, but not a few of the so- 
called dogmatic portions were also written solely for 
moral admonition. Jesus directed his disciples to 
give these exhortations the first place, and the 
earliest Christians were well aware that the first 
business of life was to do the will of God and present 
themselves as a holy community. Upon this their 
whole existence and their mission in the world were 
based. There were two points which, in accordance 
with Jesus teaching, they put first and foremost, 
and they were points which at bottom embraced the 
whole range of moral action: purity and brotherly 
fellowship. They took purity in the deepest and 
most comprehensive sense of the word, as the horror 
of everything that is unholy, and as the inner plea- 
sure in everything that is upright and true, lovely and 
of good report. They also meant purity in regard 


168 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


to the body: “Know ye not that your body is the 
temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you? therefore 
glorify God in your body.” In this sublime con- 
sciousness the earliest Christians took up the struggle 
against the sins of impurity, which in the heathen 
world were not accounted sins at all. As sons 
of God, ‘‘ blameless and harmless in the midst of a 
crooked and perverse nation,’ they were to “shine as 
lights in the world.” It was thus that they were 
to show of what they were made, and it was thus 
that they showed it: to be holy as God was holy, 
to be pure as disciples of Christ. Here too, we get 
the measure of the renunciation of the world which 
this community imposed upon itself. ‘To keep one- 
self unspotted from the world” was the asceticism 
which it practised itself and required of its adher- 
ents. The other point is brotherly fellowship. In 
joining the love of God with the love of neighbour 
in his sayings, Jesus himself had a new union 
of men with one another in view. ‘The earliest 
Christians understood him. From the very first 
they constituted themselves into a brotherly union, 
not in word only but in deed—a living realisation 
of what he meant. In calling themselves “ brothers,” 
they felt all the obligations which the name imposes 
and tried to come up to them, not by legal regula- 
tions but by voluntary service, each according to the 
measure of his own powers and gifts. The Acts of 
the Apostles tell us that in Jerusalem they went so 
far as to have a voluntary community of goods. Paul 


THE COMMUNITY OF BROTHERS 169 


says nothing about it; and if we are to accept this 
obscure report as really trustworthy, then neither 
Paul nor the Christian communities among the 
Gentiles took pattern by the enterprise. They seem 
not to have been required, nor to have thought it 
desirable, to order their lives afresh in externals. 
The brotherly fellowship which “the holy” were to 
cultivate, and did cultivate, was distinguished by 
two principles: “ Whether one member suffer, all 
the members suffer with it,” and ‘ Bear ye one an- 
other's burdens and so fulfil the law of Christ.” 


LECTURE X. 


Ir was as their Lord that the primitive community 
of Christians believed in Jesus. They thus ex- 
pressed their absolute devotion to, and confidence 
in, him as the Prince of Life. As every individual 
Christian stood in an immediate relation to God 
through the Spirit, priests and mediations were 
no longer wanted. Finally, these “holy” people 
were drawn together into societies, which bound 
themselves to a strictly moral life in purity and 
brotherly fellowship. On the last point let me 
add a few words. 

It is a proof of the inwardness and moral power 
of the new message that, in spite of the enthusiasm 
arising from personal experience of religion, there 
were relatively seldom any extravagant outbursts 
and violent movements to be combated. Such 
movements may have been more frequent than 
the direct declarations of our authorities allow us 
to suppose, but they did not form the rule; and 
when they arose Paul was certainly not the only 
one who was concerned to put them down, He 


had certainly no wish to quench the “Spirit,” but 
170 | 


THE COMMUNITY OF BROTHERS I7I 


when enthusiasm threatened to lead to a repug- 
nance to work, as in Thessalonica, or when, as in 
Corinth, there was a superabundance of ecstatic talk, 
he uttered some sober warnings: “If any would ~ 
not work, neither should he eat,” and ‘I had 
rather speak five words with my understanding, 
that by my voice I might teach others also, than 
ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.” Still 
more plainly are the concentrated repose and power 
of the leaders shown in the moral admonitions, 
such as we get not only in the Pauline Epistles 
but also, for example, in the first epistle of Peter 
and in the general epistle of James. Christian 
character is to show itself in the essential circum- 
stances of human life, and that life is to be 
invigorated, supported and illumined by the Spirit. 
In the relation of husband to wife and of wife 
to husband, of parents to children, of masters 
to servants; further, in the individual’s relation 
to constituted authority, to the surrounding heathen 
world, and, again, to the widow and the orphan, 
is ‘the service of God” to be proved and tested. 
Where have we another example in history of a 
religion intervening with such a robust super- 
natural consciousness, and at the same time laying 
the moral foundations of the earthly life of the 
community so firmly as this message? If a man 
fails to be inwardly affected by the faith proclaimed 
by the New Testament writers, he must certainly 
be stirred to the depths by the purity, the wealth, 


172 WHAT, IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


the power, and the delicacy of the moral knowledge 
which invests their exhortations with such incom- 
parable value. 

There is another feature of the life of the earliest 
Christians which also deserves notice in this con- 
nexion. They lived in the expectation of Christ’s 
near return. This hope supplied them with an 
extraordinarily strong motive for disregarding 
earthly things, and the joys and sufferings of this 
world. That they were mistaken in their ex- 
pectations we must freely grant; but neverthe- 
less it was a Inghly efficacious lever for raising 
them above the world, and teaching them to make 
little of small things and much of great things, and 
to distinguish between what is of time and what is 
of eternity. For a new and powerful religious 
impulse, which effects its own influence, to be 
associated with a co-efficient which enhances and 
strengthens that influence, is what we see constantly 
happening in the history of religion. With every 
renewal of the religious experience of sin and grace 
since Augustine's day, what a lever has been supplied 
by the zdea of predestination, and yet it is an idea 
which is in no way derived from that experience 
itself. How much enthusiasm was inspired in Crom- 
well’s troops, and how greatly were the Puritans 
on both sides of the ocean strengthened by the 
consciousness of adoption, although this conscious- 
ness, too, was only a co-efficient. When the religious 
experiences of St. Francis developed in the Middle 


CHRIST’S RETURN 173 


Ages into a new form of devotion, how much assist- 
ance it received from the doctrine of poverty, and 
yet this doctrine was an independent force. The 
conviction which obtained in the apostolic age that 
the Lord had really appeared after his death on the 
cross may also be regarded as a co-efficient. These 
co-efficients teach us that the most inward of all 
possessions, namely, religion, does not struggle up 
into life free and isolated, but grows, so to speak, in 
coverings of bark and cannot grow without them. 
In studying the apostolic age, however, it 1s impor- 
tant to observe that, not only in spite of the religious 
enthusiasm but even in spite of the intense eschato- 
logical hopes which prevailed, the task of making 
earthly lfe holy was not neglected. 


The three principles which we have emphasised 
as contributing most to the characteristic features 
of primitive Christianity could also, if necessary, have 
been brought to bear within the framework of 
Judaism and in connexion with the synagogue. 
There, too, Jesus could have been acknowledged as 
the Lord, the new experience united with the 
ancestral religion, and the society of brothers de- 
veloped in the form of a Jewish conventicle. In 
Palestine, as a matter of fact, this was the form 
which the earliest communities took. But the new 
principles displayed great vigour and pointed far 
beyond Judaism: Jesus Christ the Lord is not only 
Israel’s Lord, but the Lord of history, the Lord of 


174 WHAT Ss CHRISTIANITY? 


all men. ‘The new experience of a direct union with 
God makes the old worship with its priests and 
mediations unnecessary. The society of brothers 
towers over all other associations and deprives them 
of any value. The inner development which the 
new tendency virtually comprised began at once. 
Paul was not the first to start it; before and side 
by side with him there were obscure and nameless 
Christians in the dispersion who took up Gentiles 
into the new society. They did away with the 
particularistic and statutory.regulations of the law 
by declaring that they were to be understood in a 
purely spiritual sense and to be interpreted as 
symbols. There was a branch of the Jewish world 
outside Palestine where this declaration had long 
taken actual effect—it is true, on other grounds— 
and where the Jewish religion was being freed from 
its limitations by a process of philosophical inter- 
pretation which was bringing it to the level of a 
spiritual religion for the whole world. This de- 
velopment may be regarded in the light of a pre- 
liminary stage in the history of Christianity and 
was in many respects really so. It was the stage 
on which those nameless Christians entered. It was 
the path upon which a deliverance from historical 
Judaism and its outworn religious ordinances was 
capable of gradual attainment. But one thing is 
certain; it was not the goal of the movement. So 
long as the words “the former religion is done away 
with” remained unspoken, there was always a fear 


THE DISPERSION 175 


that in the next generation the old precepts would 
be brought forward again in their literal meaning. 
How often and often in the history of religion has 
there been a tendency to do away with some 
traditional form of doctrine or ritual which has 
ceased to satisfy inwardly, but to do away with it 
by giving it a new interpretation. The endeavour 
seems to be succeeding; the temper and the know- 
ledge prevailing at the moment are favourable to it 
—when, lo and behold! the old meaning suddenly 
comes back again. The actual words of the ritual, 
of the liturgy, of the official doctrine, prove stronger 
than anything else. If a new religious idea cannot 
manage to make a radical breach with the past at the 
critical point—the rest may remain as it is—and 
procure itself a new “body,” it cannot last; it 
disappears again. ‘There is no tougher or more 
conservative fabric than a _ properly constituted 
religion; it can only yield to a higher phase by 
being abolished. No permanent effect, then, could 
be expected in the apostolic age from the twisting 
and turning of the law so as to make room for the 
new faith side by side with it, or so as to approxi- 
mate the old religion to that faith. Someone had to 
stand up and say “The old is done away with”; he 
had to brand any further pursuit of it as a sin; he 
had to show that all things were become new. The 
man who did that was the apostle Paul, and it is in 
having done it that his greatness in the history of 
the world consists. 


176 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Paul is the most luminous personality in the 
history of primitive Christianity, and yet opinions 
differ widely as to his true significance. Only a few 
years ago we had a leading Protestant theologian 
asserting that Paul’s rabbinical theology led him to 
corrupt the Christian religion. Others, conversely, 
have called him the real founder of that religion. 
But in the opinion of the great majority of those 
who have studied him the true view is that he was 
the one who understood the master and continued 
his work. This opinion is borne out by the facts. 
Those who blame him for corrupting the Christian 
religion have never felt a single breath of his spirit, 
and judge him only by mere externals, such as clothes 
and book-learning ; those who extol or criticise him 
as a founder of religion are forced to make him bear 
witness against himself on the’main point, and ac- 
knowledge that the consciousness which bore him up 
and steeled him for his work was illusory and self- 
deceptive. As we cannot want to be wiser than history, 
which knows him only as Christ’s missionary, and as 
his own words clearly attest what his aims were and 
what he was, we regard him as Christ’s disciple, as 
the apostle who not only worked harder but also 
accomplished more than all the rest put together. 

It was Paul who delivered the Christian religion 
from Judaism. We shall see how he did that if we 
consider the following points :— 

It was Paul who definitely conceived the Gospel 
as the message of the redemption already effected 


PAUL 177 


and of salvation now present. He preached the 
crucified and risen Christ, who gave us access to 
God and therewith righteousness and peace. 

It was he who confidently regarded the Gospel as 
a new force abolishing the religion of the law. 

It was he who perceived that religion in its new 
phase pertains to the individual and therefore to all 
individuals ; and in this conviction, and with a full 
consciousness of what he was doing, he carried the 
Gospel to the nations of the world and transferred 
it from Judaism to the ground occupied by Greece 
and Rome. Not only are Greeks and Jews to unite 
on the basis of the Gospel, but the Jewish dispensation 
itself is now at anend. That the Gospel was trans- 
planted from the Hast, where in subsequent ages it 
was never able to thrive properly, to the oe is a 
fact which we owe to Paul. 

It was he who placed the Gospel in the great 
scheme of spirit and flesh, inner and outer exist- 
ence, death and life; he, born a Jew and educated 
a Pharisee, gave it a language, so that it became 
intelligible, not only to the Greeks but to all men 
generally, and united with the whole of the intel- 
lectual capital which had been amassed in previous 
ages. 

These are the factors that go to make the Apostle’s 
greatness in the history of religion. On their inner 
connexion I cannot here enter in any detail. But, 
in regard to the first of them, I may remind 


you of the words of the most important historian 
M 


178 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


of religion in our day. Wellhausen declares that 
“Paul's especial work was to transform the Gospel 
of the kingdom into the Gospel of Jesus Christ, so 
that the Gospel is no longer the prophecy of the 
coming of the kingdom, but its actual fulfilment 
by Jesus Christ. In his view, accordingly, redemp- 
tion from something in the future has become 
something which has already happened and is now 
present. He lays far more emphasis on faith than 
on hope; he anticipates the sense of future bliss 
in_ the present._feeling of being..God’s son; he 
vanquishes death and already leads the new life on 
earth. He extols the strength which is made perfect 
in weakness ; the grace of God is sufficient for him, 
and he knows that no power, present or future, can 
take him from His love, and that all things work 
together for good to them that love God.” What 
knowledge, what confidence, what strength, was 
necessary to tear the new religion from its mother 
earth and plant it in an entirely new one! Islam, 
originating in Arabia, has remained the Arabian 
religion, no matter where it may have penetrated. 
Buddhism has at all times been at its purest in India.. 
But this religion, born in Palestine, and confined by 
its founder to Jewish ground, in only a few years 
after his death was severed from that connexion. 
Paul put it in competition with the Israelitish 
religion: ‘Christ is the end of the law.” Not 
only did it bear being thus rooted up and _trans- 
planted, but it showed that it was meant to be thus 


PAUL 179 


transplanted. It gave stay and support to the Roman 
empire and the whole world of western civilisa- 
tion. If, as Renan justly observes, anyone had told 
the Roman Emperor in the first century that the little 
Jew who had come from Antioch as a missionary was 
his best collaborator, and would put the empire upon 
a stable basis, he would have been regarded as a 
madman, and yet he would have spoken nothing but 
the truth. Paul brought new forces to the Roman 
empire, and laid the foundations of western and 
Christian civilisation. Alexander the Great’s work 
has perished ; Paul’s has remained. But if we praise 
the man who, without being able to appeal to a 
single word of his master’s, ventured upon the boldest 
enterprise, by the help of the spirit and with the 
letter against him, we must none the less pay the 
meed of honour to those personal disciples of Jesus 
who after a bitter internal struggle ultimately 
associated themselves with Paul’s principles. That 
Peter did so we know for certain ; of others we hear 
that they at least acknowledged their validity. It was, 
indeed, no insignificant circumstance that men in 
whose ears every word of their master’s was still 
ringing, and in whose recollection the concrete 
features of his personality were still a_ vivid 
memory—that these faithful. disciples should re- 
cognise a pronouncement to be true which in im- 
portant points seemed to depart from the original 
message and portended the downfall of the religion of 
Israel. What was kernel here, and what was husk, 


180 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


history has itself showed with unmistakeable plainness, 
and by the shortest process. Husk were the whole of 
the Jewish limitations attaching to Jesus’ message ; 
husk were also such definite statements as “I am not 
sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” 
In the strength of Christ’s spirit the disciples broke 
through these barriers. It was his personal disciples 
—not, as we might expect, the second or third genera- 
tion, when the immediate memory of the Lord had 
already paled—who stood the great test. That is 
the most remarkable fact of the apostolic age. 

Without doing violence to the inner and essential 
features of the Gospel—unconditional trust in God as 
the Father of Jesus Christ, confidence in the Lord, 
forgiveness of sins, certainty of eternal life, purity and 
brotherly fellowship—Paul transformed it into the 
universal religion, and laid the ground for the great 
Church. But whilst the original limitations fell 
away, new ones of necessity made their appearance ; 
and they modified the simplicity and the power of a 
movement which was from within. Before conclud- 
ing our survey of the apostolic age, we must direct 
attention to these modifications. | 

In the first place: the breach with the Synagogue 
and the founding of entirely independent religious 
communities had well‘marked results. Whilst the 
idea was firmly maintained that the community of 
Christ, the ‘“‘Church,” was something suprasensible 
and heavenly, because it came from within, there 
was also a conviction that, the Church took visible 


PAUL I By 


shape in every separate community. As a complete 
breach had taken place, or no connexion been 
established, with the ancient communion, the forma- 
tion of entirely new societies was logically invested 
with a special significance, and excited the liveliest 
interest. In his sayings and parables Jesus, careless 
of all externals, could devote himself solely to the all- 
important point ; but how and in what forms the seed 
would grow was not a question which occupied his 
mind ; he had the people of Israel with their historical 
ordinances before him and was not thinking of 
external changes. But the connexion with this people 
was now severed, and no religious movement can 
remain in a bodiless condition. It must elaborate 
forms for common life and common public worship. 
Such forms, however, cannot be improvised ; some of 
them take shape slowly out of concrete necessities ; 
others are derived from the environment and from 
existing circumstances. It was in this way that 
the Gentile” communities procured themselves an 
organism, a body. ‘The forms which they developed 
were in part independent and gradual, and in part 
based upon the facts with which they had to deal. 
But a special measure of value always attaches 
to forms. By being the means by which the 
community is kept together, the value of that to 
which they mimster is winsensibly transferred to 
them; or, at least, there is always a danger of this 
happening. One reason for this is that the ob- 
servance of the forms can always be controlled or 


182 WHAT JS ‘CHRISTIANITY? 


enforced, as the case may be; whilst for the inner 
life there is no control that cannot be evaded. 

When the breach with the Jewish national com- 
munion had once taken place, there could be no 
doubt about the necessity for setting up a new 
community in opposition to it. The self-conscious- 
ness and strength of the Christian movement was 
displayed in the creation of a Church which knew 
itself to be the true Israel. But the founding of 
churches and “the Church” on earth brought an 
entirely new interest into the field; what came 
from within was joined by something that came 
from without; law, discipline, regulations for ritual 
and doctrine, were developed, and began to assert 
a position by a logic of their own ‘The measure 
of value applicable to religion itself no longer 
remained the only measure, and with a hundred 
invisible threads religion was insensibly worked 
into the net of history. 

In the second place: we have already referred 
to the fact that it was above all in his Christology 
that Paul’s significance as a teacher consisted. In 
his view—we see this as wel] by the way in which 
he illuminated the death on the cross and_ the 
resurrection, as by his equation, “the Lord is a 
Spirit”—the Redemption is already accomplished 
and salvation a present power. ‘God hath re- 
conciled us to himself through Jesus Christ”; “If 
any man be in Christ, he is a new creature”; 
“Who shall separate us from the love of God?” 


PAUL 183 


The absolute character of the Christian religion is 
thus made clear. But it may also be observed 
in this connexion that every attempt to formulate 
a theory has a logic of its own and dangers of its 
own. ‘There was one danger which the apostle 
himself had to combat, that of men claiming to 
be redeemed without giving practical proof of the 
new life. In the case of Jesus’ sayings no such 
danger could arise, but Paul’s formulas were not 
similarly protected. That men are not to rely 
upon “redemption,” forgiveness of sin, and Jjusti- 
fication, if the hatred of sin and the imitation of 
Christ be lacking, inevitably became in subsequent 
ages a standing theme with all earnest teachers. 
Who can fail to. recognise that the doctrines of 
“objective redemption” have been the occasion of 
grievous temptations in the history of the Church, 
and for whole generations concealed the true 
meaning of religion? The conception of “ redemp- 
tion,” which cannot be inserted in Jesus’ teaching 
in this free and easy way at all, became a snare. 
No doubt it is true that Christianity is the religion 
of redemption; but the conception is a delicate 
one, and must never be taken out of the sphere of 
personal experience and inner reformation. 

But here we are met by a second danger closely 
connected with the first. If redemption is to be 
traced to Christ’s person and work, everything 
would seem to depend upon a right understanding 
of this person together with what he accomplished. 


184 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


The formation of a correct theory of and about 
Christ threatens to assume the position of chief 
importance, and to pervert the majesty and sim- 
plicity of the Gospel. Here, again, the danger is 
of a kind such as cannot arise with Jesus’ sayings. 
Hiven in John we read :—“‘If ye love me, keep 
my commandments.” But with the way in which 
Paul defined the theory of religion, the danger 
can certainly arise and did arise. No long period 
elapsed before it was taught in the Church that 
the all-important thing is to know how the person 
of Jesus was constituted, what sort of physical 
“nature he had, and so on. Paul. himself is far 
removed from this position—‘ Whoso calleth Christ 
Lord speaketh by the Holy Ghost”—but the way 
in which he ordered his religious conceptions, as 
the outcome of his speculative ideas, unmistakeably 
exercised an influence in a wrong direction. That, 
however great the attraction which his way of 
ordering them may possess for the understanding, 
it is a perverse proceeding to make Christology the 
fundamental substance of the Gospel, is shown 
by Christ’s teaching, which is everywhere directed 
to the all-important point, and summarily confronts 
every man with his God. This does not affect 
Paul’s right to epitomise the Gospel in the message 
of Christ crucified, thus exhibiting God’s power 
and God’s wisdom, and in the love of Christ 
kindling the love of God. There are thousands to- 
day in whom the Christian faith is still propagated 


PAUL 185 


in the same manner, namely, through Christ. But 
to demand assent to a series of propositions about 
Christ’s person is a different thing altogether. 
There is, however, another point to be considered 
here. Under the influence of the Messianic dogmas, 
and led by the impression which Christ made, Paul 
became the author of the speculative idea that not 
only was God in Christ, but that Christ himself 
was possessed of a peculiar nature of a heavenly 
kind. With the Jews, this was not a notion that 
necessarily shattered the framework of the Messianic 
idea; but with the Greeks it inevitably set an 
entirely new theory in motion. Christ’s appear- 
ance in itself, the entrance of a divine being into 
the world, came of necessity to rank as the chief 
fact, as itself the real redemption. Paul did not, 
indeed, himself look upon it in this light; for 
him the crucial facts are the death on the cross 
and the resurrection, and he regards Christ’s en- 
trance into the world from an ethical point of 
view and as an example for us to follow: “For 
our sakes he became poor”; he humbled himself 
and renounced the world. But this state of things 
could not last. The fact of redemption could 
not permanently occupy the second place; it was 
too large. But when moved into the first place 
it threatened the very existence of the Gospel, 
by drawing away men’s thoughts and interests in 
another direction. | When we look at the history of 
dogma, who can deny that that was what hap- 


186 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


pened? To what extent it happened we shall 
see in the following lectures. 

In the third place: the new church possessed a 
sacred book, the Old Testament. Paul, although he | 
taught that the law had become of no avail, found 
a means of preserving the whole of the Old Testa- 
ment. What a blessing to the church this book has 
proved! Asa book of edification, of consolation, of 
wisdom, of counsel, as a book of history, what an 
incomparable importance it has had for Christian 
life and apologetics! Which of the religions that 
Christianity encountered on Greek or Roman ground 
could boast of a similar book? Yet the posses- 
sion of this book has not been an unqualified ad- 
vantage to the church. To begin with, there are 
many of its pages which exhibit a religion and a 
morality other than Christian. No matter how re- 
solutely people tried to spiritualize it and give it an 
inner meaning by construing it in some special way, 
their efforts did not avail to get rid of the original 
sense in its entirety. There was always a danger 
of an inferior and obsolete principle forcing its way 
into Christianity through the Old Testament. This, 
indeed, was what actually occurred. Nor was it 
~ only in individual aspects that it occurred; the whole 
aim was changed. Moreover, on the new ground 
religion was intimately connected with a political 
power, namely, with nationality. How if people 
were seduced into again seeking such a connexion, 
not, indeed, with Judaism, but with a new nation, 


PAUL 187 


and not with ancient national laws, but with some- 
thing of an analogous character? And when even a 
Paul here and there declared Old Testament laws to 
be still authoritative in spite of their having under- 
gone an allegorical transformation, how could anyone 
restrain his successors from also proclaiming other 
laws, remodelled to suit the circumstances of the 
time, as valid ordinances of God? ‘This brings us to 
the second point. Although whatever was drawn 
from the Old Testament by way of authoritative 
precept may have been inoffensive in substance, it 
‘was a menace to Christian freedom of both kinds. 
It threatened the freedom which comes from within, 
and also the freedom to form church communities 
and to arrange for public worship and discipline. 


I have tried to show that the limitations which 
surrounded the Gospel did not cease with the 
severance of the tie binding it to Judaism, but that, 
on the contrary, new limits made their appearance. 
They arose, however, just at the very points upon 
which the necessary progress of things depended, or, 
as the case might be, where an inalienable posses- 
sion like the Old Testament was in question. Here, 
again, then, we are reminded of the fact that, so 
far as history is concerned, as soon as we leave the 
sphere of pure inwardness, there is no progress, no 
achievement, no advantage of any sort, that has not 
its dark side, and does not bring its disadvantages 
with it. The apostle Paul complained that ‘ we 


188 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


know in part.” To a much greater degree is the 
same thing true of our actions and of everything 
connected with them. We have always to ‘pay the 
penalty” of acting, and not only take the evil con- 
sequences but also knowingly and with open eyes re- 
solutely neglect one thing in order to gain another. 
Our purest and most sacred possessions, when they 
leave the inward realm and pass into the world 
of form and circumstance, are no exception to the 
rule that the very shape which they take in action 
also proves to be their limitation. 


When the great apostle ended his life under Nero’s 
axe in the year 64, he could say of himself what 
a short time before he had written to a faithful 
comrade : ‘‘I have finished my course; I have kept 
the faith.” What missionary is there, what preacher, 
what man entrusted with the cure of souls, who can 
be compared with him, whether in the greatness of 
the task which he accomplished, or in the holy 
energy with which he carried it out? He worked 
with the most living of all messages, and kindled a 
fire ; he cared for his people like a father and strove 
for the souls of others with all the forces of his own; 
at the same time he discharged the duties of the 
teacher, the schoolmaster, the organiser. When he 
sealed his work by his death, the Roman empire 
from Antioch as far as Rome, nay, as far as Spain, 
was planted with Christian communities. There 
were to be found in them few that were “ mighty 


PAUL 189 


after the flesh” or of noble degree, and yet they 
were as “lights in the world,” and on them the 
progress of the world’s history rested. They had 
little “illumination,” but they had acquired the 
faith in the living God and in a life eternal; they 
knew that the value of the human soul is infinite, 
and that its value is determined by relation to the 
invisible; they led a life of purity and brotherly 
fellowship, or at least strove after such a life. Bound 
together into a new people in Jesus Christ, their 
head, they were filled with the high consciousness 
that Jews and Greeks, Greeks and barbarians, would 
through them become one, and that the last and 
highest stage in the history of humanity had then 
been reached. 


LECTURE XI. 


THE apostolic age now lies behind us. We have seen 
that in the course of it the Gospel was detached from 
the mother-soil of Judaism and placed upon the 
broad field of the Greco-Roman empire. The 
apostle Paul was the chief agent in accomplishing 
this work, and in thereby giving Christianity its 
place in the history of the world. The new connexion 
which it thus received did not in itself denote any 
restricted activity; on the contrary, the Christian 
religion was intended to be realised in mankind, and 
mankind at that time meant the orbis Romanus. 
But the new connexion involved the development of 
new forms, and new forms also meant limitation and 
encumbrance. We shall see more closely how this 
was effected if we consider 


Tuk CHRISTIAN RELIGION IN ITS DEVELOPMENT 
INTO CATHOLICISM. 


The Gospel did not come into the world as a 
statutory religion, and therefore none of the forms 


in which it assumed intellectual and social expression 
190 


CATHOLICISM IQ 


—not even the earliest—can be regarded as pos- 
sessing a classical and permanent character. The 
historian must always keep this guiding idea before 
him when he undertakes to trace the course of the 
Christian religion through the centuries from the 
apostolic age downwards. As Christianity rises above 
all antitheses of the Here and the Beyond, life 
and death, work and the shunning of the world, 
reason and ecstasy, Hebraism and Hellenism, it 
can also exist under the most diverse conditions; 
just as it was originally amid the wreck of the 
Jewish religion that it developed its power. Not 
only can it so exist—it must do so, if it is to be 
the religion of the living and is itself to live. As 
a Gospel it has only one aim—the finding of the 
living God, the finding of Him by every individual 
as his God,-and as the source of strength and joy 
and peace. How this aim is progressively realised 
through the centuries—whether with the co-efficients 
of Hebraism or Hellenism, of the shunning of the 
world or of civilisation, of Gnosticism or of Agnos- 
ticism, of ecclesiastical institution or of perfectly 
free union, or by whatever other kinds of bark the 
core may be protected, the sap allowed to rise— 
is a matter that is of secondary moment, that is 
exposed to change, that belongs to the centuries, 
that comes with them and with them perishes. 
Now the greatest transformation which the new 
religion ever experienced—almost greater even than 
that which gave rise to the Gentile Church and 


192 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


thrust the Palestinian communities into the back- 
ground—falls in the second century of our era, and 
therefore in the period which we shall consider in 
the present lecture. 

If we place ourselves at about the year 200, about 
a hundred or a hundred and twenty years after the 
apostolic age—not more than three or four generations 
had gone by since that age came to an end—what 
kind of spectacle does the Christian religion offer ? 

We see a great ecclesiastical and political com- 
munity, and side by side with it numerous “ sects” 
calling themselves Christian, but denied the name 
and bitterly opposed. That great ecclesiastical and 
political community presents itself as a league of 
individual communities spanning the Empire from 
end to end. Although independent they are all 
constituted essentially alike, and interconnected by 
one and the same law of doctrine, and by fixed rules 
for the purposes of intercommunion. The law of 
doctrine seems at first sight to be of small scope, 
but all its tenets are of the widest significance ; and 
together they embrace a profusion of metaphysical, 
cosmological, and historical problems, give them 
definite answers, and supply particulars of mankind’s 
development from the creation up to its future form 
of existence. Jesus’ injunctions for the conduct of 
life are not included in this law of doctrine; as the 
“rule of discipline” they were sharply distinguished 
from the ‘rule of faith.” Each church, however, also 
presents itself as an institution for public worship, 


CATHOLICISM 193 


where God is honoured in conformity with a solemn 
ritual. The distinction between priests and laymen - 
is already a well-marked characteristic of this institu- 
tion ; certain acts of divine worship can be performed 
only by the priest; his mediation is an absolute 
necessity. It is only by mediation that a man can 
approach God at all, by the mediation of right 
doctrine, right ordinance, and a sacred book. The 
living faith seems to be transformed into a creed to 
be believed ; devotion to Christ, into Christology ; 
the ardent hope for the coming of “the kingdom,” 
into a doctrine of immortality and deification ; 
prophecy, into technical exegesis and_ theological 
learning; the ministers of the Spirit, into clerics ; 
the brothers, into laymen in a state of tutelage ; 
miracles and miraculous cures disappear altogether, 
or else are priestly devices; fervent prayers become 
solemn hymns and litanies; the ‘ Spirit” becomes 
law and compulsion. At the same time individual 
Christians are in full touch with the life of the world, 
and the burning question is, “In how much of this 
life may I take part without losing my position as 
a Christian?” This enormous transformation took — 
place within a hundred and twenty years. The first 
thing which we have to determine is, How did that 
happen? next, Did the Gospel succeed in holding 
its own amid this change, and how did it do so? 


Before, however, we try to answer these two 


questions, we must call to mind a piece of advice 
: 3 : a: 


194 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY 2 


which no historian ought ever to neglect. Anyone 
who wants to determine the real value and signi- 
ficance of any great phenomenon or mighty product 
of history must first and foremost inquire into the 
work which it accomplished, or, as the case may 
be, into the problem which it solved. As every in- 
dividual has a right to be judged, not by this or 
that virtue or defect, not by his talents or by his 
frailties, but by what he has done, so the great 
edifices of history, the States and the Churches, must 
be estimated first and foremost, we may perhaps say, 
exclusively, by what they have achieved. It is the 
work done that forms the decisive test. With any 
other test we are involved in judgments of the 
vaguest kind, now optimistic, now pessimistic, and 
mere historical twaddle. So here, too, in considering 
the church as developed into Catholicism, we must 
first of all ask, In what did its work consist? 
What problem did it solve? What did it achieve? 
I will answer the last question first. It achieved 
two things: it waged war with nature-worship, 
polytheism, and political religion, and beat them 
‘back with great energy; and it exploded the dual- 
istic philosophy of religion. Had the Church at the 
beginning of the third century been asked in tones 
of reproach, ‘How could you recede so far from 
where you began? to what have you come?” it 
might have answered: “Yes, it is to this that I 
have come; I have been obliged to discard much 
and admit much; I have had to fight—my body 


CATHOLICISM 195 


is full of sears, and my clothes are covered with dust ; 
but I have won my battles and built my house; 
I have beaten back polytheism; I have disabled 
and almost annihilated that monstrous abortion, 
political religion; I have resisted the enticements 
of a subtle religious philosophy, and victoriously 
encountered it with God the almighty Creator of 
all things; lastly, I have reared a great building, a 
fortress with towers and bulwarks, where I guard 
my treasure and protect the weak.” This is the 
answer which the Church might have given, and 
truthfully given. But, some one may object, 
it was no great achievement to wage war with 
nature-worship and polytheism, and to beat them 
back; they had already rotted and decayed, and 
had little strength left. The objection does not 
hold. Many of the forms in which that species 
of religion had taken shape were, no doubt, anti- 
quated and approaching extinction, but the religion 
itself, the religion of nature, was a mighty foe. It 
even still avails to beguile our souls and touch our 
heart-strings with effect, when an inspired prophet 
voices its message; how much more so then! The 
hymn to the Sun, giving life to all that lives, pro- 
duced a profound and lifelong religious impression 
even upon a Goethe, and made him into a Sun- 
worshipper. But how overpowering it was in the 
days before science had banished the gods from 
nature. Christianity exploded the religion of nature 
—exploded it not for this or that individual; 


196 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


that was already done—but exploded it in the sense 
that there was now a large and compact community 
refuting nature-worship and polytheism by its im- 
pressive doctrines, and affording the deeper religious 
temper stay and support. And then political religion ! 
‘Behind the imperial cult there was the whole 
power of the state, and to come to terms with it 
looked so safe and easy—yet the Church did not 
yield a single inch; it abolished the imperial system 
of state-idols. It was to place an irremovable land- 
mark between religion and politics, between God 
and Cesar, that the martyrs shed their - blood. 
Lastly, in an age that was deeply moved by ques- 
tions of religious philosophy, the Church maintained 
a firm front against all the speculative ideas of 
dualism; and, although these ideas often seemed to 
approximate closely to its own position, it passionately 
met them with the monotheistic view. The struggle 
here, however, was rendered all the harder by the 
fact that many Christians—and just the very 
prominent and gifted ones too—made common cause 
with the enemy, and themselves embraced the 
dualistic theory. The Church stood firm. If we 
‘recollect that, in spite of these counter-movements 
against the Greco-Roman spirit, it also managed 
to attach this very spirit to itselfi—otherwise than 
Judaism, of whose dealings with the Greek world 
the saying holds, ‘You had power to draw but 
not to keep me”; if we recollect, further, that it 
was in the second century that the foundations of 


s 


CATHOLICISM | £97 


the whole of the ecclesiastical system prevailing up 
to the present day were laid, we can only be 
astonished at the greatness of the work which was 
then achieved. : | 


We now return to the two questions which we 
raised: How was this great transformation accom- 
plished? and did the Gospel hold its own amid 
this change, or, if so, how? ) 

There were, if I am not mistaken, three leading 
forces engaged in bringing about this great revolu- 
tion, and effecting the organisation of new forms. 
The first of these forces tallies with a universal law 
in the history of religion, for in every religious 
development we find it at work. When the second 
and third generations after the founding of a new 
religion have passed away; when hundreds, nay 
thousands, have become its adherents no longer 
through conversion but by the influences of tradi- 
tion and of birth—despite Tertullian’s saying : fiwnt, 
non nascuntur Christiant; when those who have laid 
hold upon the faith as great spoil are joined by crowds 
of others who wrap it round them like an outer gar- 
ment, a revolution always occurs. The religion of 
strong feeling and of the heart passes into the religion 
of custom and therefore of form and of law. <A new 
religion may be instituted with the greatest vigour, 
the utmost enthusiasm, and a tremendous amount of 
inner emotion ; it may at the same time lay ever so 
much stress on spiritual freedom—where was all this 


4 


198 WHAT: tS CHRISTIANITY ? 


ever more powerfully expressed than in Paul’s teach- 
ing ?’—and yet, even though believers be forced to 
be celibates and only adults be received, the process 
of solidifying and codifying the religion is bound to 
follow. Its forms then at once stiffen; in the very 
process of stiffening they receive for the first time a 
real significance, and new forms are added. Not only 
do they acquire the value of laws and regulations, but 
they come to be insensibly regarded as though they 
contained within them the very substance of religion ; 
nay, as though they were themselves that substance. 
This is the way in which people who do not feel 
religion to be a reality are compelled to regard it, for 
otherwise they would have nothing at all; and this 
is the way in which those who continue really to live 
in it are compelled to handle it, or else they would 
be unable to exercise any influence upon others. 
The former are not by any means necessarily 
hypocrites. Real religion, of course, is a closed 
book to them; its most important element has 
evaporated. But there are various points of view 
from which a man may still be able to appreciate 
religion without living in it. He may appreciate it 
as discharging the functions of morality, or of 
police; above all he may appreciate it on esthetic 
grounds. When the Romanticists re - introduced 
Catholicism into Germany and France at the begin- 
ning of the nineteenth century, Chateaubriand, more 
especially, was never tired of singing its praises and 
fancied that he had all the feelings of a Catholic. 


CATHOLICISM 199 


But an acute critic remarked that Monsieur Chateau- 
briand was mistaken in his feelings; he thought that 
he was a true Catholic, while as a matter of fact 
he was only standing before the ancient ruin of the 
Church and exclaiming: ‘“ How beautiful!” That is 
one of the ways in which a man can appreciate a 
religion without being an inward adherent of it; but 
there are many others, and, amongst them, some in 
which a nearer approach is made to its true sub- 
stance. All of them, however, have this much in 
common, that any actual experience of religion is no 
longer felt, or felt only in an uncertain and inter- 
mittent way. Conversely, a high regard is paid to 
the outward shows and influences connected with it, 
and they are carefully maintained. Whatever finds 
expression in doctrines, regulations, ordinances and 
forms of public worship comes to be treated as the 
thing itself. This, then, is the first force at work in 
the transformation: the original enthusiasm, in the 
large sense of the word, evaporates, and the religion 
of law and form at once arises. 

But not only did an original element evaporate in 
the course of the second century ; another was intro- 
duced. Even had this youthful religion not severed 
the tie which bound it to Judaism, it would have 
been inevitably affected by the spirit and the 
civilisation of that Greco-Roman world on whose 
soil it was permanently settled. But to what a 
much greater extent was it exposed to the influence 
of this spirit after being sharply severed from the 


200 WHATS Ch RISTIANITY? 


Jewish religion and the Jewish nation. It hovered 
bodiless over the earth like a being of the air; 
bodiless and seeking a body. The spirit, no doubt, 
makes to itself its own body, but it does so by 
vassimilating what is around it. The influx of 
Hellenism, of the Greek spirit, and the union of 
the Gospel with it, form the greatest fact in the 
history of the Church in the second century, and 
when the fact was once established as a foundation 
it continued through the following centuries. In the 
influence of Hellenism on the Christian religion three 
stages may be distinguished, and a preliminary stage 
as well. We have already mentioned the preliminary 
stage in a previous lecture. It is to be found in the 
circumstances in which the Gospel arose, and it 
formed a very condition of its appearance. Not 
until Alexander the Great had created an entirely 
new position of affairs, and the barriers. separating 
the nations of the Hast from one another and from 
Hellenism had been destroyed, could Judaism free 
itself from its limitations and start upon its develop- 
ment into a religion for the world. The time was 
ripe when a man in the East could also breathe the 
air of Greece and see his spiritual horizon stretch 
beyond the limits of his own nation. Yet we cannot 
say that the earliest Christian writings, let alone the 
Gospel, show, to any considerable extent, the presence 
of a Greek element. If we are to look for it any- 
where—apart from certain well-marked traces of it 
in Paul, Luke, and John—it must be in the posso- 


GREEK PHILOSOPHY 201 


bility of the new religion appearing at all. We 
cannot enter further upon this question here. ‘The 
first stage of any real influx of definitely Greek 
thought and Greek life is to be fixed at about the 
year 130. It was then that the religious philosophy © 
of Greece began to effect an entrance, and it went 
straight to the centre of the new religion. It sought 
to get into inner touch with Christianity, and, con- 
versely, Christianity itself held out a hand to this 
ally. We are speaking of Greek philosophy ; as yet, \ 
there is no trace of mythology, Greek worship, and 
so on; all that was taken up into the Church, 
cautiously and under proper guarantees, was the great 
capital which philosophy had amassed since the 
days of Socrates. A century or so later, about the 
year 220 or 230, the second stage begins: Greek(’ 
mysteries, and Greek civilisation in the whole range 
of its development, exercise their influence on the 
Church, but not mythology and polytheism; these 
were still to come. Another century, however, had 
in its turn to elapse before Hellenism as a whole. 
and in every phase of its development was established 
in the Church. Guarantees, of course, are not lacking 
here either, but for the most part they consist only in 
a change of label ; the thing itself is taken over with- 
out alteration, and in the worship of the saints we see 
a regular Christian religion of a lower order arising. 
We are here concerned, however, not with the second 
and third stage, but only with that influx of the 
Greek spirit which was marked by the absorption 


202 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


of Greek philosophy and, particularly, of Platonism. 
Who can deny that elements here came together 
which stood in elective affinity? So much depth 
and delicacy of feeling, so much earnestness and 
dignity, and—above all—so strong a monotheistic 
piety were displayed in the religious ethics of the 
Greeks, acquired as it had been by hard toil on a 
basis of inner experience and metaphysical specula- 
tion, that the Christian religion could not pass this 
treasure by with indifference. There was much in 
it, indeed, which was defective and repellent; there 
was no personality visibly embodying its ethics as 
a living power; it still kept up a strange connexion 
with ‘“demon-worship” and polytheism; but both 
as a whole and in its individual parts it was felt 
to contain a kindred element, and it was absorbed. 

But besides the Greek ethics there was also a 
cosmological conception which the Church took 
over at this time, and which was destined in a 
few decades to attain a commanding position in its 
doctrinal system—the Logos. Starting from an ex- 
amination of the world and the life within, Greek 
thought had arrived at the conception of an active 
central wdea—by what stages we need not here 
mention. This central idea represented the unity 
of the supreme principle of the world, of thought, 
and of ethics; but it also represented, at the same 
time, the divinity itself as a creative and active as 
distinguished from a quiescent power. The most 
important step that was ever taken in the domain 


THE LOGOS 203 


of Christian doctrine was when the Christian apolo- 
gists at the beginning of the second century drew’ 
the equation: the Logos=Jesus Christ. Ancient 
teachers before them had also called Christ ‘the 
Logos” among the many predicates which they as- 
cribed to him ; nay, one of them, John, had already 
formulated the proposition: “The Logos is Jesus 
Christ.” But with John this proposition had not 
become the basis of every speculative idea about 
Christ ; with him, too, “the Logos” was only a predi- 
cate. But now teachers came forward who previous 
to their conversion had been adherents of the platon- 
ico-stoical philosophy, and with whom the conception 
“Logos” formed an inalienable part of a general 
philosophy of the world. They proclaimed that 
Jesus Christ was the Logos incarnate, which had 
hitherto been revealed only in the great effects which 
itexercised. In the place of the entirely unintelligible 
conception “ Messiah,” an intelligible one was acquired 
at a stroke; Christology, tottering under the ex- 
uberance of its own affirmations, received a stable 
basis; Christ's significance for the world was 
established; his mysterious relation to God was 
explained; the cosmos, reason, and ethics, were 
comprehended as one. It was, indeed, a marvellous 
formula; and was not the way prepared for it, 
nay hastened, by the speculative ideas about the 
Messiah propounded by Paul and other ancient 
teachers? The knowledge that the divine in Christ 
must be conceived as the Logos opened up a number 


204 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


of problems, and at the same time set them definite 
limits and gave them definite directives. Christ’s 
unique character as opposed to all rivals appeared 
to be established in the simplest fashion, and yet 
the conception provided thought with so much 
liberty and free play that Christ could be regarded, 
as the need might arise, on the one side as operative 
deity itself, and on the other as still the first 
born among many brethren and as the first created 
of God. | | 

What a proof it is of the impression which Christ’s 
teaching created that Greek philosophers managed 
to identify him with the Logos! For the assertion 
that the incarnation of the Logos had taken place 
in an historical personage there had been no pre- 
paration. No philosophising Jew had ever thought 
of identifying the Messiah with the Logos; no 
Philo, for instance, ever entertained the idea of 
such an equation! It gave a metaphysical signifi- 
cance to an historical fact ; at drew into the domam 
of cosmology and religious philosophy a person 
who had appeared in tume and space; but by so 
distinguishing one person it raised all history to 
the plane of the cosmical movement. 

The identification of the Logos with Christ was the 
determining factor in the fusion of Greek philosophy 
with the apostolic inheritance and led the more 
thoughtful Greeks to adopt the latter. Most of us 
regard this identification as inadmissible, because the 
way in which we conceive the world and ethics does 


THE LOGOS 205 


not point to the existence of any logos at all. But 
a man must be blind not to see that for that age 
the appropriate formula for uniting the Christian 
religion with Greek thought was the Logos. Nor is 
it difficult even to-day to attach a valid meaning to 
the conception. An unmixed blessing it has not been. 
To a much larger extent than the earlier speculative 
ideas about Christ it absorbed men’s interest; 
it withdrew their minds from the simplicity of 
the Gospel, and increasingly transformed it into 
a philosophy of religion. The proposition that the 
Logos had appeared among men had an intoxicating 
effect, but the enthusiasm and transport which it 
produced in the soul did not lead with any certainty 
to the God whom Jesus Christ proclaimed. 

The loss of an original element and the gain of 
a fresh one, namely, the Greek, are insufficient to 
explain the great change which the Christian religion 
experienced in the second century. We must bear in 
mind, thirdly, the great struggle which that religion 
was then carrying on within its own domain. 
Parallel with the slow influx of the element of 
Greek philosophy experiments were being made all 
along the line in the direction of what may be briefly 
called “‘acute Hellenisation.” While they offer us a 
most magnificent historical spectacle, in the period 
itself they were a terrible danger. More than any 
before it, the second century is the century of re- 
ligious fusion, of theocracy. The problem was to 
bring Christianity into the realm of theocracy, as 


206 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


one element among others, although the chief. The 
_“ Hellenism” which made this endeavour had already 
attracted to itself all the mysteries, all the philosophy 
_of Eastern worship, elements the most sublime and 
the most absurd, and by the never failing aid of 
philosophical, that is to say, of allegorical interpreta- 
tion, had spun them all into a glittering web. It 
now fell upon—I cannot help so expressing it—the 
Christian religion. It was impressed by the sublime 
character of this religion; it did reverence to Jesus 
Christ as the Saviour of the world; it offered to 
clive up everything that it possessed—all the treasures 
of its civilisation and its wisdom—to this message, if 
only the message would suffer them to stand. As 
though endowed with the right to rule, the message 
was to make its entry into a ready-made theory of 
the world and religion, and into mysteries already 
prepared for it. What a proof of the impression 
which this message made, and what a temptation ! 


2} 


This ‘‘ Gnosticism ”—such is the name which the 
movement has recetved—strong and active in the 
plenitude of its religious experiments, established 
itself under Christ’s name, developed a vigorous and 
abiding feeling for many Christian ideas, sought to 
give shape to what was still shapeless, to settle 
accounts with what was externally incomplete, and 
to bring the whole stream of the Christian movement 
into its own channel. The majority of the faithful, 
led by their bishops, so far from yielding to these 
enticements, took up the struggle with them in the 


CATHOLICISM 207 


conviction that they masked a demonic temptation. 
But struggle in this case meant definition, that is 
to say, drawing a sharp line of demarcation around 
what was Christian and declaring everything heathen 
that would not keep within it. The struggle with 
Gnosticism compelled the Church to put its teaching, 
its worship, and its discipline, into fixed forms and 
ordinances, and to exclude everyone who would not 
yield them obedience. In the conviction that it was 
everywhere only conserving and honouring what had 
been handed down, it never for a moment doubted 
that the obedience which it demanded was anything 
more than subjection to the divine will itself, and 
that in the doctrines-‘with which it encountered the 
enemy it was exhibiting the impress of religion 
atself. | 

If by “Catholic” we mean the church of doctrine 
and of law, then the Catholic church had its origin 
in the struggle with Gnosticism. It had to pay a 
heavy price for the victory which kept that tendency 
at bay; we may almost say that the vanquished im- 
posed their terms upon the victor: Vacte victoribus 
legem dederunt. It kept Dualism and the acute 
phase of Hellenism at bay; but by becoming a 
community with a fully worked out scheme of 
doctrine, and a definite form of public worship, it 
was of necessity compelled to take on forms 
analogous to those which it combated in the 
Gnostics. ‘To encounter our enemy’s theses by 
setting up others one by one, is to change over 


208 WHA bts CHRIS ETANDLY ? 


to his ground. How much of its original freedom 
the Church sacrificed! It was now forced to say: 
You are no Christian, you cannot come into any 
relation with God at all, unless you have first of all 
acknowledged these. doctrines, yielded obedience to 
these ordinances, and followed out definite forms of 
mediation. Nor was anyone to think a religious 
experience legitimate that had not been sanctioned 
by sound doctrine and approved by the priests. 
The Church found no other way and no other 
means of maintaining itself against Gnosticism, 
and what was set up as a protection against 
enemies from without became the palladium, nay, the 
very foundation, within. This entire development, 
it is true, would probably have taken place apart 
from the struggle in question—the two elements 
which we first discussed would. have produced it— 
but that it took place so rapidly and assumed so 
positive, nay, so Draconian, a shape, was due to the 
fact that the struggle was one in which the very 
existence of the traditional religion was at stake. The 
superficial view that the personal ambition of certain 
individuals was at the bottom of the whole system 
of established ordinance and priesthood is absolutely 
untenable. The loss of the original, living element 
is by itself sufficient to explain the phenomena. La 
médiocrité fonde Vautorité. It is the man who 
knows religion only as usage and obedience that 
creates the priest, for the purpose of ridding him- 
self of an essential part of the obligations which 


CATHOLICISM 2a9 


he feels by loading him with them. He also makes 
ordinances, for the semi-religious prefer an ordinance 
to a Gospel. 

We have endeavoured to indicate the tendencies by 
which the great change was effected. It remains to 
answer the second question: Did the Gospel hold its 
own amid the change, and, if so, how? That it 
entered upon an entirely new set of circumstances 
is already obvious ; but we shall have to study them 
more closely. 


LECTURE XII. 


No one can compare the internal state of Christendom 
at the beginning of the third century with the state 
in which it found itself a hundred and twenty years 
earlier without being moved by conflicting views and 
sentiments. Admiration for the vigorous achieve- 
ment presented in the creation of the Catholic 
Church, and for the energy with which it extended 
its activity in all directions, is balanced by concern 
at the absence of those many elements of freedom 
and directness, united, however, by an inward bond, 
which the primitive age possessed. Although we are 
compelled gratefully to acknowledge that this Church 
repelled all attempts to let the Christian religion 
simply dissolve into contemporary thought, and pro- 
tected itself against the acute phase of Hellenisa- 
tion, still we cannot shut our eyes to the fact that it 
had to pay a high price for maintaining its position. 
Let us determine a little more precisely what the 
alteration was which was effected in it, and on which 
we have already touched. | 

The first and most prominent change is the way 


in which freedom and independence in matters of 
210 


CATHOLICISM 211 


religion is endangered. No one is to feel and count 
himself a Christian, that is to say, a child of God, 
who has not previously subjected his religious know- 
ledge and experience to the controlling influence 
of the Church’s creed. The ‘ Spirit” is confined 
within the narrowest limits, and forbidden to work 
where and as it will. Nay, more; not only is the 
individual, except in special cases, to begin by being 
a minor and by obeying the Church ; he is never to 
become of full age, that is to say, he is never to lose 
his dependence on doctrine, on the priest, on public 
worship, and on the ‘‘ book.” It was then that what 
we still specifically call the Catholic form of god- 
liness, in contrast with Evangelicalism, originated. 
A blow was dealt to the direct and immediate element 
in religion; and for any individual to restore it 
afresh for himself became a matter of extraordinary 
ditheulty. 

Secondly, although the acute phase of Hellenisation 
was avoided, Christendom became more and more 
penetrated by the Greek and philosophical idea that 
true religion is first and foremost ‘doctrine,’ and 
doctrine, too, that is coextensive with the whole 
range of knowledge. ‘That this faith of “slaves and 
old women” attracted to itself the entire philosophy 
of God and the world which the Greeks had formed, 
and undertook to recast that philosophy as though 
teaching it were part of its own substance, and 
unite it with the teaching of Jesus Christ, was 
certainly a proof of the inner power of the Christian 


4 


212 WHAT IS ‘CHRISTIANITY ? 


religion ; but the process involved, as a necessary 
consequence, a displacement of the fundamental 
religious interest, and the addition of an enormous 
burden. The question ‘What must I do to be 
saved?” which in Jesus Christ’s and the Apostles’ 
day could still receive a very brief answer, now 
evoked a most diffuse one; and even though in view 
of the laymen shorter replies might still be provided, 
the laymen were in so far regarded as imperfect, and 
expected to observe a submissive attitude towards the 
learned. The Christian religion had already received 
that tendency to Intellectualism which has clung 
to it ever since. But when thus presented as a 
huge and complex fabric, as a vast and difhcult 
system of doctrine, not only is it encumbered, but 
its earnest character threatens to disappear. ‘This 
character depends upon the emotional and gladdening 
element in it being kept directly accessible. The 
Christian religion is assuredly informed with the desire 
to come to terms with all knowledge and with intel- 
lectual life as a whole; but when achievements in 
this field—even presuming that they always accord 
with truth and reality—are held to be equally binding 
with the evangelical message, or even to be a neces- 
sary preliminary to it, mischief is done to the cause 
of religion. This mischief is already unmistakeably 
present at the beginning of the third century. 
Thirdly, the church obtained a special, indepen- 
dent value as an znstitution; it became a religeous 
power. Originally only a developed form of that 


CATHOLICISM 213 


community of brothers which furnished place and 
manner for God’s common worship and a mys- 
terious shadow of the heavenly Church, it now 
became, as an institution, an indispensable factor 
in religion. . People were taught that in this insti- 
tution Christ’s Spirit had deposited everything that 
the individual man can need; that he is wholly 
bound to it, therefore, not only in love but also in 
faith; that it is there only that the Spirit works, 
and therefore there only that all its gifts of grace 
are to be found. That the individual Christian 
who did not subordinate himself to the ecclesiasti- 
eal institution relapsed, as a rule, into heathenism, 
and fell into false and evil doctrines or an immoral 
life, was, indeed, an actual fact. The effect of this, 
combined with the struggle against the Gnostics, was 
that the institution, together with all its forms and 
arrangements, became more and more identified with 
the ‘‘ bride of Christ,” ‘“‘the true Jerusalem,’ and so 
on, and accordingly was even itself proclaimed as 
the inviolable creation of God, and the fixed and 
unalterable abode of the Holy Ghost. Consistently 
with this, it began to announce that all its ordinances 
were equally sacred. How greatly religious lberty 
was thus encumbered I need not show. 

Fourthly and lastly, the Gospel was not pro- 
claimed as the glad message with the same vigour 
in the second century as it had been in the first. 
The reasons for this are manfold: on the one hand 
personal experience of religion was not felt so 


214 WHAT IS "CHRISTIANITY 7 


strongly as Paul, or as the author of the fourth 
gospel, felt it; on the other, the prevalent eschato- 
logical expectations, which those teachers had re- 
strained by their more profound teaching, remained 
in full sway. ear and hope are more prominent in 
the Christianity of the second century than they are 
with Paul, and it is only in appearance that the 
former stands nearer to Jesus’ sayings; for, as we 
saw, God’s Fatherhood is the main article in Jesus’ 
message. But, as Romans viii. proves, the know- 
ledge of this truth is just what Paul embodied in 
his preaching of the faith. While the element of 
fear thus obtained a larger scope in the Christi- 
anity of the second century—this scope increased 
in proportion as the original buoyancy died down 
and conformity to the world extended—the ethical 
element became less free and more a matter of law 
and rigorism. In religion, rigorism always forms 
the obverse side of secularity. But as it appeared 
impossible to expect a rigoristic ethics of every- 
one, the distinction between a perfect and a suffi- 
cient morality already set in as an element in the 
erowth of Catholicism. That the roots of this 
distinction go further back is a fact of which we 
need not here take account; it was only towards 
the end of the second century that the distinc- 
‘ tion became a fatal one. Born of necessity and 
erected into a virtue, it soon grew so important 
that the existence of Christianity as a Catholic 
Church came to depend upon it. The uniformity of 


CATHOLICISM 215 


the Christian ideal was thereby disturbed and a 
quantitative view of moral achievement suggested 
which is unknown to the Gospel. The Gospel does, 
no doubt, make a distinction between a strong and 
a weak faith, and greater and smaller moral achieve- 
ments; but he that is least in the kingdom of God 
may be perfect in his kind. 

These various tendencies together denote the es- 
sential changes which the Christian religion experi- 
enced up to the beginning of the third century, 
and by which it was modified. Did the Gospel 
hold its own in spite of them, and how may that 
be shown? Well, we can cite a whole series of 
documents, which, so far as written words can 
attest mmner and genuinely Christian life, bear very 
clear and impressive testimony that such life ex- 
isted. Martyrdoms lke those of Perpetua and 
Felicitas, or letters passing between communities, 
like those from Lyons to Asia Minor, exhibit the 
Christian faith and the strength and delicacy of 
moral sentiment with a splendour only paralleled 
in the days when the faith was founded; while of 
all that had been done in the external development 
of the Church they make no mention whatever. 
The way to God is found with certainty, and the 
simplicity of the life within does not appear to be 
disturbed or encumbered. Again, let us take a 
writer like the Christian religious philosopher, 
Clement of Alexandria, who flourished about the 
year 200. We can still feel from his writings 


216 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


that this scholar, although he was absolutely 
steeped in speculative ideas, and as a thinker re- 
duced the Christian religion to a boundless sea of 
“doctrines ”—a Greek in every fibre of his being 
—won peace and joy from the Gospel, and he can 
also express what he won and testify of the power 
of the living God. It is as a new man that he 
appears, one who has pressed on through the whole 
range of philosophy, through authority and _ specu- 
lation, through all the externals of religion, to the 
glorious liberty of the children of God. His faith 
in Providence, his faith in Christ, his doctrine of 
freedom, his ethics — everything is expressed in 
language that betrays the Greek, and yet every- 
thing is new and genuinely Christian. [urther, 
if we compare him with a Christian of quite an- 
other stamp, namely, his contemporary Tertullian, 
it is easy to show that what they have in common 
in religion is what they have learned from the 
Gospel, nay, is the Gospel itself. And in reading 
Tertullian’s exposition of the Lord’s Prayer and 
turning it over in our minds, we see that this hot- 
blooded African, this stern foe of heretics, this 
resolute champion of auctoritas and ratio, this 
dogmatic advocate, this man, at once Church- 
man and enthusiast, nevertheless possessed a deep 
feeling for the main substance of the Gospel and 
a good knowledge of it as well. In this Old- 
Catholic Church the Gospel, truly, was not as yet 
stifled ! 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 217 


Further, this Church still kept up the all-im- 
portant idea that the Christian community must 
present itself as a society of brothers active in 
work, and it gave expression to this idea in a way 
that puts subsequent generations to shame. 

Lastly, there can be no doubt—and while so 
truth-loving a man as Origen confirms the fact 
for us, heathen writers like Lucian also attest it— 
that the hope of an eternal life, the full confidence 
in Christ, a readiness to make sacrifices, and a pur- 
ity of morals, were still, in spite of all frailties— 
here, too, not lacking—the real characteristics of 
this society. Origen can challenge his heathen 
opponents to compare any community ‘whatever 
with the Christian community, and to say where 
the greater moral excellence lies. This religion had, 
no doubt, already developed a husk and integument, 
to penetrate through to it and grasp the kernel 
had become more dificult ; it had also lost much of 
its original life. But the gifts and the tasks which 
the Gospel offered still remained in force, and the 
fabric which the Church had erected around them 
also served many a man as the means by which he 
attained to the thing itself. 

We now pass to the consideration of 


THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION IN GREEK CATHOLICISM. 


I must invite you to descend several centuries 
with me and to look at the Greek Church as it 


218 WHAT TS "CHRISTIANITY? 


is to-day, and as it has been preserved, essentially - 
unaltered, for more than a thousand years. Between 
the third and the nineteenth century the history . 
of the Church of the East nowhere presents any 
deep gulf. Hence we may take up our position 
in the present. Here, in turn, we ask the three 
following questions :— 

What did this Greek Catholicism achieve ? 

What are its characteristics ? 

What modifications did the Gospel here undergo 
and how did it hold its own ? 

What did this Greek Catholicism achieve? 
Two facts may be cited. on this point: , firstly, in 
the great domain which it embraces, the countries 
of the eastern part of the Mediterranean and north- 
wards to the Arctic Ocean, it made an end of 
heathenism and polytheism. The decisive victory 
was accomplished from the third to the sixth 
century, and so effectually accomplished that the 
gods of Greece really perished—perished unwept 
and unmourned. Not in any great battle did they 
die, but from sheer exhaustion, and without offering 
any resistance worth mention. I may just point 
out that before dying they transferred a considerable 
portion of their power to the Church’s saints. But 
_what is more important, with the death of the gods, 
Neoplatonism, the last great product of Greek 
philosophy, was also vanquished. The religious 
philosophy of the Church proved the stronger. The 
victory over Hellenism is an achievement of the 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 219 


Eastern Church on which it still subsists. -Seeondly, 
this Church managed to effect such a fusion with 
the individual nations which it drew into its bosom 
that religion and church became to them national 
palladia, nay, palladia pure and simple. Go amongst 
Greeks, Russians, Armenians, ete., and you will 
everywhere find that religion and nationality are 
inseparable, and the one element exists only in and 
alongside of the other. Men of these nationalities 
will, if need be, suffer themselves be cut in pieces 
for their religion. This is no mere consequence of 
the pressure exercised by the hostile power of 
Mohammedanism; the Russians are not subject to 
this pressure. Nor is it only—shall I say ?— 
in the Moscow press that we can see what a firm 
and intimate connexion exists between Church and 
nation in these peoples, in spite of “‘sects’’ which 
are not wanting here either; to convince our- 
selves of it we must read—to take an instance at 
random—Tolstoi’s Village Tales. They bring before 
the reader a really touching picture of the deep 
influence of the Church, with its message of the 
Eternal, of self-sacrifice, of sympathy and fraternity, 
on the national mind. That the clergy stand low 
in the social scale, and frequently encounter con- 
tempt, must not delude us into supposing that 
as the representatives of the Church they do not 
occupy an incomparably high station. In Eastern 
Europe the monastic ideal is deeply rooted in the 
national soul. 


—— 


220 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


But the mention of these two points includes - 
everything that can be said about the achievements 
of this Church. To add that it’ has disseminated 
a certain amount of culture would involve pitching 


our standard of culture very low. In comparison 


with Islam, too, it is no longer so successful in doing 
what it has done in the past and still does in regard 
to polytheism. ‘The missions of the Russian Church 
are still overthrowing polytheism even to-day; but 
large territories have been lost to Islam, and the 
Church has not recovered them. Islam has extended 
its victories as far as the Adriatic and in the direction 
of Bosnia. It has won over numerous Albanian and 
Slav tribes which were once Christian. It shows itself 
to be at least a match for the Church, although we 
must not forget that in the heart of its dominions 
there are Christian nations who have maintained their 
creed. 

Our second question was, What are the character- 
istics of this Church? The answer is not easy ; 


for as it presents itself to the spectator this Church 


is a highly complex structure. The feelings, the 
superstitions, the learning, and the devotional 
philosophy of hundreds, nay, of thousands of years, 
are built into it. But, further; no one can iook 
at this Church from outside, with its forms of 


_ worship, its solemn ritual, the number of its cere- 


monies, its relies, pictures, priests, monks, and the 
philosophy of its mysteries, and then compare it 
on the one hand with the Church of the first 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 22% 


century, and on the other with the Hellenic cults in 
the age of Neoplatonism, without arriving at the 
conclusion that it belongs not to the former but to 
the latter. Jt takes the form, not of a Christian 
product in Greek dress, but of a Greek product 
m Christian dress. It would have done battle 
with the Christians of the first century just as it 
did battle with the worship of Magna Mater and 
Zeus Soter. There are innumerable features of this 
Church which are counted as sacred as the Gospel, 
and towards which not even a tendency existed 
in primitive Christianity. Of the whole perform- 
ance of the chief religious service, nay, even of 
many of the dogmas, the same thing may, in the 
last resort, be said: if certain words, like Christ, 
etc., are omitted, there is nothing left to recall 
the original element. In its external form as a_ 
whole this Church is nothing more than a continua- 
tion of the history of Greek religion under the 
alien influence of Christianity, parallel to the many 
other alien. influences which have affected it. We 
might also describe it as the natural product of 
the union between Hellenism, itself already in a 
state of oriental decay, and Christian teaching ; 
it is the transformation which history effects in 
a religion by “natural” means, and, as was here 
the case, was bound to effect between the third and 
the sixth century. In this sense it is a@ natural 
religion. The conception admits of a double mean- 
ing. It is generally understood as an abstract 


222 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


term covering all the elementary feelings and pro- 
cesses traceable in every religion. Whether there are 
any such elements, or, on the other hand, whether 
they are sufficiently stable and articulate to be 
followed as a whole, admits, however, of a doubt. 
The conception “natural reigion” may be better 
applied to the growth which a religion produces when 
the “natural” forces of history have ceased playing on 
it. At bottom these forces are everywhere the same, 
although differing im the way in which they are 
mouuted. They mould religion until it answers 
their purpose; not by expelling what is sacred, 
venerable, and so on, but by assigning it the 
place and allowing it the scope which they consider 
right. They immerse everything in a uniform 
medium,—that medium which, like the air, is the 
first condition of their ‘‘natural” existence. In 
this sense, then, the Greek Church is a natural 
religion; no prophet, no reformer, no genius, has 
arisen in its history since the third century to 
disturb the ordinary process by which a religion 
becomes naturalised into common history. The 
process attained its completion in the sixth century 
and asserted itself victoriously against severe assaults 
in the eighth and ninth. The Church has since been 
at rest, and no further essential, nay, not even any 
unessential, change has taken place in the condition 
which it then reached. Since then, apparently, the 
nations belonging to this Church have undergone 
nothing to make it seem intolerable to them and 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 223 


to call for any reform init. They still continue, then, 
in this “natural” religion of the sixth century. 

I have, however, advisedly spoken of the Church 
in its external form. Its complex character is partly 
due to the fact that we cannot arrive at its inner 
condition by simple deduction from its outer. It is 
not sufficient to observe, although the observation 
is correct, that this Church is part of the history 
of Greek religion. It exercises influences which 
from this point of view are not easily intelligible. 
We cannot form a correct estimate of it unless 
we dwell more closely on the factors which lend 
it its character. ; 

The first factor which we encounter is TLIO 
and the observance of it. The sacred and the divine 
do not exist in free action—we shall see later to what 
reservations this statement is subject—but are put, 
as it were, into a storehouse, in the form of an im- 
mense capital. The capital is to provide for ali 
demands, and to be coined in the precise way in 
which the Fathers coined it. Here, it is true, we 
have an idea which can be traced to something already 
existing in the primitive age. We read in the Acts 
of the Apostles that “They continued steadfastly 
in the apostles’ doctrine.” But what became of this 
practice and this obligation? Firstly, everything 


p) 


was designated ‘‘apostolic’” which was deposited 
in this Church in the course of the succeeding 
centuries; or, rather, what the Church considered 


necessary to possess in order to suit the historical 


224 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


position in which it was placed, it called apostolic, 
because it fancied that otherwise it could not exist, 
and what is necessary for the Church’s existence 
must be simply apostolic.__Secondly, it has been 
established as an irrefragable fact that the “con- 
tinuing steadfastly in the apostles’ doctrine” applies, 
first and foremost, to the punctilious observance 
of every direction as to ritual: the sacred element 
is bound up with text and form. Both are con- 
ceived in a thoroughly antique way. That the 
divine is, so to speak, stored up as though it were 
an actual commodity, and that the supreme demand 
which the Deity makes is the punctilious observance 
of a ritual, were ideas that in antiquity were per- 
fectly familar and admitted of no doubt. Tradi- 
tion and ceremony are the conditions under which 
the Holy alone existed and was accessible. Obedi- 
ence, respect, reverence, were the most important 
religious feelings. Whilst they are doubtless in- 
alienable features of religion, it is only as ac- 
companiments of an active feeling quite different 
in its character that they possess any value, and 
that further presumes that the object to which 
they are directed is a worthy one. ‘Traditionalism 
and the ritualism so closely connected with it are 
prominent characteristics of the Greek Church, but 
this is just what shows how far it has departed 
from the Gospel. , 

The second point that fixes the character of this 
Church is-the value which it attaches to orthodoxy, 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 225 


to sound doctrine. It has stated and re-stated its 
doctrines with the greatest precision and often 
enough made them a terror to men of different 
creed. No one, it claims, can be saved who does 
not possess the correct doctrine; the man who does 
not possess it is to be expelled and must forfeit 
all his rights; if he be a fellow-countryman, he 
must be treated as a leper and lose all connexion 
with his nation. ‘This fanaticism, which still flares 
up here and there in the Greek Church even to-day 
and in principle has not been abandoned, is not 
Greek, although a certain inclination towards it 
was not lacking in the ancient Greeks; still less 
did it originate in Roman law; it is the result, 
rather, of an unfortunate combination of several 
factors. When the Roman empire became Chris- 
tian, the hard fight for existence which the Church 
had waged with the Gnostics was not yet for- 
gotten; still less had the Church forgotten the 
last bloody persecutions which the State had in- 
flicted upon it in a kind of despair. These two 
circumstances would in themselves be sufficient 
to explain how the Church came to feel that it 
had a right of reprisal, and was at the same time 
bound to suppress heretics. But, in addition, there 
had now appeared in the highest place, since the 
days of Diocletian and Constantine, the absolutist 
conception, derived from the Hast, of the unlimited 
right and the unlimited duty of the ruler in regard 
to his “subjects.” The unfortunate factor in the 
P 


“ 


226 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


oreat change was that the Roman Emperor was 
at once, and almost in the same moment, a Chris- 
tian Emperor and an oriental despot. The more 
conscientious he was, the more intolerant he was 
bound to be ; for the deity had committed to his 
care not only men’s bodies but their souls as well. 
Thus arose the aggressive and all-devouring ortho- 
doxy of State and Church, or, rather, of the State- 
Church. Examples which were to hand from the 
Old Testament completed and sanctified the pro- 
CeSS. 

Intolerance is a new growth in the land of the 
Greeks and cannot be roundly laid to their charge ; 
but the way in which doctrine developed, namely, 
as a philosophy of God and the world, was due 
to their influence; and the fact that religion and 
doctrine were directly identified is also a product 
of the Greek spirit. No mere reference to the 
significance which doctrine already possessed in 
the apostolic age, and to the tendencies operating 
in the direction of bringing it into a speculative 
form, is sufficient to explain the change. ‘These are 
matters, as | hope that I have shown in the previous 
lectures, which are rather to be understood in a 
different sense. It is in the second century, and 
with the apologists, that Intellectualism commences ; 
and, supported by the struggle with the Gnostics 
and by the Alexandrian school of religious philo- 
sophers in the Church, it manages to prevail. 

_ But it is not enough to assess the teaching of 


’ 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 227 


the Greek Church by its formal side alone, and 
ascertain in what way and to what extent it is ex- 
hibited, and what is the value to be placed upon 
it. We must also examine its substance; for it 
possesses two elements which are quite peculiar 
to it and separate it from the Greek philosophy 
of religion—the idea of the®creation, and the doc- 
trine of the God-Man nature of the Saviour. We 
shall treat of these two elements in our next lec- 
ture, and, further, of the two other clements which, 
side by side with tradition and doctrine, characterise 
the Greek Church; namely, the form of worship 
and the order of monkhood. 


LECTURE XIII. 


So far we have established the fact that Greek 
Catholicism is characterised as a religion by two 
elements: by traditionalism and by intellectualism. 
According to traditionalism, the reverent preservation 
of the received inheritance, and the defence of it 
against all innovation, is not only an important duty, 
but is itself the practical proof of religion. That is 
an idea quite in harmony with antiquity and foreign 
to the Gospel; for the Gospel knows absolutely 
nothing of intercourse with God being bound up with 
reverence for tradition itself. But the second ele- 
ment, intellectualism, is also of Greek origin. The 
elaboration of the Gospel into a vast philosophy of 
God and the world, in which every conceivable kind 
of material is handled; the conviction that because 
Christianity is the absolute religion it must give in- 
formation on all questions of metaphysics, cosmology, 
and history; the view of revelation as a countless 
multitude of doctrines and explanations, all equally 
holy and important—this is Greek intellectualism. 
According to it, Knowledge is the highest good, and 
spirit is spirit only in so far as it knows; everything 


GREEK CATHOLICISM | 229 


that is of an eesthetical, ethical, and religious character 
must be converted into some form of knowledge, 
which human will and life will then with certainty 
obey. The development of the Christian faith into 
an all-embracing theosophy, and the identification 
of faith with theological knowledge, are proofs that 
the Christian religion on Greek soil entered the pro- 
scribed circle of. the native religious philosophy and 
has remained there. 

But in this vast philosophy of God and the world, 
which possesses an absolute value as the “substance 
of what has been revealed” and as “orthodox 
doctrine,” there are two elements which radically 
distinguish it from Greek religious philosophy and 
invest it with an entirely original character. I 
do not mean the appeal which it makes to revela- 
tion—for to that the Neoplatonists also appealed— 
but the idea of creation and the doctrine of the God- 
Man nature of the Saviour, They traverse the 
scheme of Greek religious philosophy at two critical 
points, and have therefore always been felt to be alien 
and intolerable by its genuine representatives. 

The idea of creation we can deal with in a few 
words. It is undoubtedly an element which is as im- 
portant as it is in thorough keeping with the Gospel. 
It abolishes all intertwining of God and world, and 
gives expression to the power and actuality of the 
living God. Attempts were not wanting, it is true, 
among Christian thinkers on Greek scil—just because 
they were Greeks—to conceive the Deity only as the 


230 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


uniform power operating in the fabric of the world, 
as the unity in diversity, and as its goal. Traces of 
this speculative idea are even still to be found in 
the Church doctrine ; the idea of creation, however, 
triumphed, and therewith Christianity won a real 
victory. ; 
_ The subject of the God-Man nature of the Saviour 
is one on which it is much more difficult to arrive at 
a correct opinion. It is indubitably the central 
point in the whole dogmatic system of the Greek 
Church. It supplied the doctrine of the Trinity. 
In the Greek view these two doctrines together make 
up Christian teaching i nuce. When a Father of 
the Greek Church once said, as he did say: ‘The 
idea of the God-Man nature, the idea of God becoming 
a man, is what is new in the new, nay, is the only 
new thing under the sun,” not only did he correctly 
represent the opinion of all his fellow-believers, but 
he also at the same time strikingly expressed their 
view that, while sound intelligence and earnest re- 
flection yield all the other points of doctrine of 
themselves, this one lies beyond them. The 
theologians of the Greek Church are convinced that 
the only real distinction between the Christian creed 
and natural philosophy is that the former embraces 
the doctrine of the God-Man nature, including the 
Trinity. Side by side with this, the only other 
doctrine that can at most come in question is that 
of the idea of creation. 

If that be so, it is of radical importance to obtain a 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 207 


correct view of the origin, meaning, and value of this 
doctrine. Jn its completed form it must look strange 
to anyone who comes to it straight from the 
evangelists. While no historical reflection can rid 
us of the impression that the whole fabric of 
ecclesiastical Christology is a thing absolutely out- 
side the concrete personality of Jesus Christ, his- 
torical considerations nevertheless enable us not 
only to explain its origin but also even to justify, in 
a certain degree, the way in which it is formulated. 
Let us try to get a clear idea of the leading points. 
We saw in a previous lecture how it came about 
that the Church teachers selected the conception 
of the Logos in order to define Christ’s nature 
and majesty. They found the conception of the 
“Messiah” quite unintelligible; it conveyed no 
meaning to them. As conceptions cannot be im- 
provised, they had to choose between representing 
Christ as a deified man, that is to say, as a hero, or 
conceiving his nature after the pattern of one of the 
Greek gods, or identifying it with the Logos. The 
first two possibilities had to be put aside, as they were 
‘**heathenish,” or seemed to be so. There remained, 
therefore, the Logos. How well this formula served 
different purposes we have already pointed out. Did 
it not readily admit of being combined with the 
conception of the Sonship, without leading to any 
objectionable theogonies? It involved, too, no menace 
to monotheism. But the formula had a logic of its 
own, and this logic led to results which were not 


«> 


232 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


absolutely free from suspicion. The conception of the 
Logos was susceptible of very varied expression; in 
spite of its sublime meaning, it could be also so 
conceived as to permit of the bearer of the title not 
being by any means of a truly divine nature but 
possessing one that was only half divine. 

The question as to the more exact definition of the 
nature of the Logos-Christ could not have attained 
the enormous significance which it received in the 
Church, and might have been stilled by various 
speculative answers, if it had not been accompanied 
by the triumph of a very precise idea of the nature of 
redemption, which acted as a peremptory challenge. 
Among all the possible ideas on the subject of 
redemption—forgiveness of sins, release from the 
power of the demons, and so on—that idea came 
victoriously to the front in the Church in the third 
century which conceived of it as redemption from 
death and therewith as elevation to the divine life, 
that is to say, as deification. It is true that this 
conception found a safe starting-point in the Gospel, 
and support in the Pauline theology; but in the 


form in which it was now developed it was foreign 


to both of them and conceived on Greek lines; 


mortality is in itself reckoned as the greatest evil, 


and as the cause of all evil, while the greatest of 


blessings is to lwe for ever. What a severely Greek 


idea this is we can see, in the first place, from the 
fact that redemption from death is presented, in a 
wholly realistic fashion, as a pharmacological process 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 253 


—the divine nature has to flow in and transform 
the mortal nature—and, in the second, from the way 
in which eternal life and deification were identified. 
But if actual interference in the constitution of 
human nature and its deification are involved, then 
the redeemer must himself be God and must become 
man. It is only on this condition that so marvellous 
a process can be imagined as actually taking place. 
Word, doctrine, individual deeds, are here of no avail — 
—how can life be given to a stone, or a mortal made 
immortal, by preaching at them? Only when the 
divine itself bodily enters into mortality can mortality 
be transformed. it is not, however, the hero, but 
God Himself alone, who possesses the divine, that is 
to say, eternal life, and so possesses it as to permit 
of His giving it to others. The Logos, then, must 
be God Himself, and He must have actually become 
man. With the satisfying of these two conditions, 
real, natural redemption, that is to say, the deifica- 
tion of humanity, is actually effected. These con- 
siderations enable us to understand the prodigious 
disputes over the nature of the Logos-Christ which 
filled several centuries. They explain why Athana- 
sius strove for the formula that the Logos-Christ was 
of the same nature as the Father, as though the 
existence or non-existence of the Christian religion 
were at stake. They show clearly how it was that 
other teachers in the Greek Church regarded any 
menace to the complete wnity of the divine and the 
human in the Redeemer, any notion of a merely moral 


234 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


connexion, as a death-blow to Christianity. These 
teachers secured their formulas, which for them were 
anything but scholastic conceptions; rather, they 
were the statement and establishment of a matter of 
fact, in the absence of which the Christian religion 
was as unsatisfactory as any other. The doctrines of 
the identical nature of the three persons of the 
‘Trinity—how the doctrine of the Holy Ghost came 
about, I need not mention—and of the God-Man 
nature of the Redeemer are in strict accordance with 
the distinguishing notion of the redemption as a 
deification of man’s nature by making him immortal. 
Without the help of the notion those formulas would 
never have been attained; but they also stand and 
fall with it. They prevailed, however, not because 
they were akin to the ideas of Greek philosophy, 
but because they were contrasted with them. Greek 
philosophy never ventured, and never aspired, to 
meet, in any similar way by “history” and specu- 
lative ideas, that wish for immortality which it so 
vividly entertained. To attribute any such interfer- 
ence with the Cosmos to an historical personality 
and the manner in which it appeared, and to ascribe 
to that personality a transformation in what, given 
once for all, was in a state of eternal flux, must 
necessarily have seemed, to Greek philosophy, pure 
mythology and superstition. The ‘‘only new thing 
under the sun” must necessarily have appeared 
to it, and did appear, to be the worst kind of 
fable. 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 235 


The Greek Church still entertains the conviction 
to-day that in these doctrines it possesses the essence 
of Christianity, regarded at once as a mystery and 
as a mystery that has been revealed. Criticism of 
this contention is not difficult. We must acknow- 
ledge that those doctrines powerfully contributed 
to keeping the Christian religion from dissolving 
into Greek religious philosophy; further, that they 
profoundly impress us with the absolute character 
of this religion; again, that they are in actual 
accordance with the Greek notion of redemption ; 
lastly, that this very notion has one of its roots 
in the Gospel. But beyond this we can acknowledge 


nothing; nay, it is to be observed (i.) that the 
notion of the redemption as a deification of mortal — 


nature is subchristian, because the moral element 


involved can at best be only tacked on to it; (ii) | 


that the whole doctrine is inadmissible, because it 
has scarcely any connexion with the Jesus Christ 
of the Gospel, and its formulas do not fit him; it 


is, therefore, not founded in truth; and (ii) that | 


as it 1s connected with the real Christ only by un- 
certain threads, it leads us away from him; it does 
not keep his image alive, but, on the contrary, 
demands that this image should be apprehended 
solely in the hght of alleged hypotheses about him 
expressed in theoretical propositions. That this 
substitution produces no very serious or destructive 
effects is principally owing to the fact that in spite of 
them the Church has not suppressed the Gospels, and 


236 WHAT I5 CHRISTIANITY? 


that their own innate power makes itself felt. It 
may also be conceded that the notion of God having 
become man does not everywhere produce the effect 
only of a bewildering mystery, but, on the contrary, 
is capable of leading to the pure and definite 
conviction that God was in Christ. We may admit, 
lastly, that the egoistic desire for immortal existence 
will, within the Christian sphere, experience a moral 
purification through the longing to live with and m 
God, and to remain inseparably bound to His love. 
But all these admissions cannot do away with the 
palpable fact that in Greek dogma we have a fatal 
connexion established between the desire of the 
ancients for immortal life and the Christian message. 
Nor can anyone deny that this connexion, implanted 
in Greek religious philosophy and the intellectualism 
which characterised it, has led to formulas which 
are incorrect, introduce a supposititious Christ in the 
place of the real one, and, besides, encourage the 
delusion that, if only a man possesses the right 
formula, he has the thing itself. Even though the 
Christological formula were the theologically right 
one—what a departure from the Gospel is involved. 
in maintaining that a man can have no relation 
with Jesus Christ, nay, that he is sinning against 
him and will be cast out, unless he first of all 
acknowledges that Christ was one person with two 
natures and two powers of will, one of them divine 
and one human. Such is the demand into which 
intellectualism has developed. Can such a system 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 237 


still find a place for the Gospel story of the Syro- 


pheenician woman or the centurion at Capernaum ? 


But with traditionalism and intellectualism a 
further element is associated, namely, ritualism. 
If religion is presented as a complex system of 
traditional doctrine, to which the few alone have 
any real access, the majority of believers cannot 
practise it at all except as ritual. Doctrine 
comes to be administered in stereotyped formulas 
accompanied by symbolic acts. Although no inner 
understanding of it is thus possible, it produces 
the feeling of something mysterious. The very 
deification which the future is expected to bring, 
and which in itself is something that can neither 
be described nor conceived, is now administered as 
though it were an earnest of what is to come, by 
means of ritual acts. An imaginative mood is excited, 
and disposes to its reception; and this excitement, 
when enhanced, is its seal. 

Such are the feelings which move the members 
of the Greek Catholic Church. Intercourse with 
God is achieved through the cult of a mystery, and 
by means of hundreds of efficacious formulas small 
and great, signs, pictures, and consecrated acts, 
which, if punctiliously and submissively observed, 
communicate divine grace and prepare the Christian 
for eternal life. Doctrine as such is for the most 
part something unknown; if it appears at all, it_ 
is only in the form of liturgical aphorisms. For 


238 WHAT IS‘ CHRISTIANITY? 


ninety-nine per cent. of these Christians, religion. 
exists only as a ceremonious ritual, in which it is 
externalised. But even for Christians of advanced 
intelligence all these ritual acts are absolutely neces- 
sary, for it 1s only in them that doctrine receives 
its correct application and obtains its due result. 

There is no sadder spectacle than this trans- 
' formation of the Christian religion from a worship 
of God in spirit and in truth imto a worship of 
God in signs, formulas, and idols. To feel the whole 
pity of this development, we need not descend to 
such adherents of this: form of Christendom as are 
religiously and intellectually in a state of complete 
abandonment, like the Copts and Abyssinians; the 
Syrians, Greeks, and Russians are, taken as a whole, 
only a little better. Where, however, can we find 
in Jesus’ message even a trace of any injunction 
that a man is to submit to solemn ceremonies as 
though they were mysterious ministrations, to be 
punctilious in observing a ritual, to put up pictures, 
and to mumble maxims and formulas in a prescribed 
fashion? Jt was to destroy this sort of religion 
that Jesus Christ suffered himself to be nailed to 
the cross, and now we find it re-established under 
his name and authority! Not only has “ mysta- 
gogy” stepped into a position side by side with 
the “mathesis,” that is to say, the doctrine, which 
called it forth; but the truth is that “ doctrine’”’— 
be its constitution what it may, it is still a spiritual 
principle—has disappeared, and ceremony dominates 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 239 


everything. This is what marks the relapse into 
the ancient form of the lowest class of religion. 
Over the vast area of Greek and Oriental Christen- 
dom religion has been almost stifled by ritualism. 
It is not that religion has sacrificed one of its essential 
elements. No! it has entered an entirely different 
plane; it has descended to the level where religion 
may be described as a cult and nothing but a cult. 


Nevertheless, Greek and Oriental Christianity con- 
tains within itself an element which for centuries 
has been capable of offering, and still offers here 
and there to-day, a certain resistance to the com- 
bined forces of traditionalism, intellectualism, and 
ritualism—I mean monasticism. To the question, 
Who is in the highest sense of the word a Christian ? 
the Greek Christian replies: the monk. The man 
who practises silence and purity, who shuns not 
only the world but also the Church of the world, 
who avoids not only false doctrine but any state- 
ment about the true, who fasts, gives himself up to 
contemplation, and steadily waits for God’s glorious 
light to dawn upon his gaze, who attaches no value 
to anything but tranquillity and meditation on the 
Eternal, who asks nothing of life but death, and 
who from such utter unselfishness and purity makes 
mercy arise—this is the Christian. To him not even 
the Church and the consecration which it bestows 
is an absolute necessity. For such a man the whole 
system of sanctified secularity has vanished. Over 


240 WHAT IS*CHRISTIANITY 2 © 


‘and over again in ascetics of this kind the Church 
has seen in its ranks figures of such strength and 
delicacy of religious feeling, so filled with the divine, 
so inwardly active in forming themselves after certain 
features of Christ's image, that we may, indeed, 
say: here there is a living religion, not unworthy 
' of Christ’s name. We Protestants must not take 
direct offence at the form of monasticism. The 
conditions under which our Churches arose have 
made a harsh and one-sided opinion of it a kind 
of duty. And although for the present, and in 
view of the problems which press on us, we may 
be justified in retaining this opinion, we must not 
summarily apply it to other circumstances. Nothing 
but monasticism could provide a leaven and a coun- 
terpoise in that traditionalistic and ritualistic secular 
Church, such as the Greek Church was and still is. 
Here there was freedom, independence, and vivid 
experience; here the truth that it is only what is 
experienced and comes from within that has any 
value in religion carried the day. 

And yet, the invaluable tension which in this part of 
Christendom existed between the secular Church and 
monasticism has unhappily almost disappeared, and 
of the blessing which it established there is scarcely 
a trace left. Not only has monasticism become 
subject to the Church and is everywhere bent 
under its yoke, but the secular spirit has in a 
special degree invaded the monasteries. Greek 
and oriental monks are now, as a rule, the 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 241 


instruments of the lowest and worst functions of 
the Church, of the worship of pictures and _ relics, 
of the crassest superstition and the most imbecile 
sorcery. Exceptions are not wanting, and it is 
still to the monks that we must pin our hopes of 
a better future; but it is not easy to see how a 
Church is to be reformed which, teach what it will, 
is content with its adherents finding the Christian 
faith in the observance of certain ceremonies, and 
Christian morality in keeping fast-days correctly. 


As to our last question: What modifications did 
the Gospel undergo in this Church and how did 
it hold its own? Well, in the first place, I do not 
expect to be contradicted if [ answer that this 
official ecclesiasticism with its priests and its cult, 
with all its wessels, saints, vestments, pictures and 
-amulets, with its ordinances of fasting and its festi- 
vals, has absolutely nothing to do with the religion 
of Christ. It is the religion of the ancient world, 
tacked on to certain conceptions in the Gospel; 
or, rather, it is the ancient religion with the 
Gospel absorbed into it. The religious moods which 
are here produced, or which turn towards this 
kind of religion are, in so far as they can still be 
ealled religious at all, of a class lower than Chris- 
tian. But neither have its traditionalism and its 
“orthodoxy” much in common with the Gospel ; 
they, too, were not derived from it and cannot be 


traced back to it. Correct doctrine, reverence, 
- Q 


242 WHAT SACO RISTIANI TY? 


obedience, the shudderings of awe, may be valuable 
and edifying things; they may avail to bind and 
restrain the individual, especially when they draw 
him into the community of a stable society; but 
they have nothing to do with the Gospel, as long 
as they fail to touch the individual at the point 
where freedom les, and inner decision for or against 
God. In contrast with this, monasticism, in its 
resolve to serve God by an ascetic and contemplative 
life, contains an incomparably more valuable element, 
because sayings of Christ, even though applied in 
a one-sided and limited way, are nevertheless taken 
as a standard, and the possibility of an independent 
inner life being kindled is not so far removed. 

Not so far removed—entirely lacking, thank God, 
it is not, even in the waste shrines of this 
ecclesiasticism, and Christ’s sayings sound in the 
ear of any who visit its churches. On the Church 
as a Church, apparatus and all, there is nothing 
more favourable to be said than has been said 
already; the best thing about it is that it keeps 
up, although to a modest extent, the knowledge 
of the Gospel. Jesus’ words, even though only 
mumbled by the priests, take the first place in 
this Church, too, and the quiet mission which 
they pursue is not suppressed. Side by side with 
the magical apparatus and the transports of feeling, 
of which the ceremony is only the caput mortuwm, 
stand Jesus’ sayings; they are read in private and 
in public, and no superstition avails to destroy 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 243 


their power. Nor can its fruits be mistaken by 
anyone who will look below the surface. Among 
these Christians, too, priests and laity, there are 
men who have come to know God as the Father 
of mercy and the leader of their lives, and who 
love Jesus Christ, not because they know him as. 
the person with two natures, but because a ray 
of his being has shone from the Gospel into their 
hearts, and this ray has become light and warmth 
to their own lives. And although the idea of the 
fatherly providence of God more readily assumes 
an almost fatalistic form in the Hast, and produces 
too much quietism, it is certain that here, too, it, 
endows men with strength and energy, unselfishness 
and love. JI need only refer again to Tolstoi’s 
Village Tales, which I have already quoted. The 
picture which they present is not artificial. But 
from much also that I have myself seen and ex- 
perienced I can testify how even with the Russian 
peasant or the humbler priests, in spite of all the 
Saint- and picture-worship, a power of simple trust 
in God is to be found, a delicacy of moral feeling, 
and an active brotherly love, which does not dis- 
claim its origin in the Gospel. Where they exist, 
however, the entire ceremonial service of religion 
is capable of undergoing a spiritualisation, not by 
any ‘symbolical re-interpretation”—that is much 
too artificial a process—but because, if only the soul 
is touched by the living God at all, thought can 
rise to him even by the help of an idol. 


244 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


But it is truly no accidental circumstance that, 
in so far as any independent religious life is to be 
found among the members of this Church, it at 
once takes shape in trust in God, in humility, in 
unselfishness and mercy, and that Jesus Christ is 
at the same time laid hold of with reverence; for 
these are just the indications which show us that 
the Gospel is not as yet stifled, and that it is in these 
religious virtues that it has its real substance. 


As a whole and in its structure the system of the 
oriental Churches is foreign to the Gospel; it means 
at once a veritable transformation of the Christian 
faith and the depression of religion to a much 
lower level, namely, that of the ancient world. 
But in its monasticism, in so far as this is not 
entirely subject to the secular Church and itself 
secularised, there is an element which reduces the 
whole ecclesiastical apparatus to a secondary posi- 
tion, and which opens up the possibility of attain- 
ing a state of Christian independence. Above all, 
however, by not having suppressed the Gospel, but 
by having kept it accessible, even though in a meagre 
fashion, the Church still possesses the corrective 
in its midst. Side by side with the Church the 
Gospel exercises its own influence on individuals. 
This influence, however, takes shape in.a type of 
religion exhibiting the very characteristics which 
we have shown to be most distinctive of Jesus’ 
message. ‘Thus on the ground occupied by this 


GREEK CATHOLICISM 245 


Church the Gospel has not completely perished. 
Here, too, human souls find a dependence on God 
and a freedom in Him, and when they have found 
these, they speak the language which every Christian 
understands, and which goes to every Christian’s 
heart. 


LECTURE XIV. 
THE CHRISTIAN ReLicion IN RoMAN CATHOLICISM. 


THe Roman Church is the most comprehensive and 
the vastest, the most complicated and yet at the 
same time the most uniform structure which, as far 
as we know, history has produced. All the powers 
of the human mind and soul, and all the elemental 
forces at mankind’s disposal, have had a hand in 
creating it. In its many-sided character and severe 
cohesion Roman Catholicism is far in advance of 
Greek. We ask, in turn :— 

What did the Roman Catholic Church achieve ? 

What are its characteristics ? 

What modifications has the Gospel suffered in this 
Church, and how much of it has remained ? 

What did the Roman Catholic Church achieve ? 
Well, in the first place, it educated the Romano- 
Germanic nations, and educated them in a sense 
other than that in which the Eastern Church edu- 
cated the Greeks, Slavs, and Orientals. However 
much their original nature, or primitive and 


historical circumstances, may have favoured those 
246 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 247 


nations and helped to promote their rise, the value 
ef the services which the Church rendered is not 
thereby diminished. It brought Christian civilisa- 
tion to young nations, and brought it, not once 
only, so as to keep them at its first stage—no! it 
gave them something which was capable of exercising 
a progressive educational influence, and for a period 
of almost a thousand years it itself led the advance. 
Up to the fourteenth century it was a leader and a 
mother; it supplied the ideas, set the aims, and dis- 
engaged the forces. Up to the fourteenth century— 
thenceforward, as we may see, those whom it educated 
became independent, and struck out paths which it 
_did not indicate, and on which it is neither willing 
nor able to follow them. But even so, however, 
during the period covered by the last six hundred 
years, it has not fallen so far behind as the Greek 
Church. With comparatively brief interruptions it 
has proved itself fully a match for the whole move- 
ment of politics—we in Germany know that well 
enough !_and even in the movement of thought it 
still has an important share. The time, of course, is 
long past since it was a leader; on the contrary, it 
is now a drag; but, in view of the mistaken and 
precipitate elements in modern progress, the drag 
which it supplies is not always the reverse of a 
blessing. | 

In the second place, however, this Church upheld 
the idea of religious and ecclesiastical independence 
in Western Europe in the face of the tendencies, 


- 


248 WHAT IS ‘CHRISTIANITY ? 


not lacking here either, towards State-omnipotence 
in the spiritual domain. In the Greek Church, as 
we saw, religion has become so intimately allied with 
nationality and the State that, public worship and 
monasticism apart, it has no room left for imde- 
pendent action. On Western ground it is otherwise ; 
the religious element and the moral element bound 
up with .it occupy an independent sphere and 
jealously guard it. This we owe in the main to 
the Roman Church. | 

These two facts embrace the most important piece 
of work which this Church achieved and in part still 
achieves. We have already indicated the bounds 
which must be set to the first. To the second also 
a sensible limitation attaches, and we shall see what 
it is as we proceed. | . 


What are the characteristics of the Roman 
Church? This was our second question. Unless | 
am mistaken, the Church, complicated as it is, may 
be resolved into three chief elements. ‘The first, 
Catholicism, it shares with the Greek Church. The 
second is the Late spit and the Roman World- 
Empire continuing in the Roman Church. The third 
is the spirit and religious fervour of St. Augustine. 
So far as the inner life of this Church is religious life 
and religious thought, it follows the standard which 
St. Augustine authoritatively fixed. Not only has 
he arisen again and again in his many successors, 
but he has awakened and kindled numbers of men 


. ROMAN CATHOLICISM 249 


who, coming forward with independent religious 
and theological fervour, are nevertheless spirit of 
aa. Spirit. 

These three elements, the Catholic, the Latin in 
the sense of the Roman World-Empire, and the 
Augustinian, constitute the peculiar character of the 
Roman Church. 

_§So far as the first is concerned, you may recognise 
its importance by the fact that the Roman Church 
to-day receives every Greek Christian, nay, at once 
effects a “union” with every Greek ecclesiastical 
community, without more ado, as soon as the Pope 
is acknowledged and submission is made to his 
apostolic supremacy. Any other condition that 
may be exacted from the Greek Christians is of - 
absolutely no moment; they are even allowed to 
retain divine worship in their mother tongue, and 
married priests. If we consider what a ‘‘ purifica- 
tion” Protestants have to undergo before ‘they can 
be received into the bosom of the Roman Church, 
the difference is obvious. Now a Church cannot 
make so great a mistake about itself as to omit 
any essential condition in taking up new members, 
especially if they come from another confession. 
The element which the Roman Church shares with 
the Greek must, then, be of significant and critical 
importance, when it is sufficient to make union 
possible on the condition that the papal supremacy 
is recognised. As a matter of fact, the main points 
characteristic of Greek Catholicism are all to be 


250 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


found in Roman as well, and are, on occasion, just 
as energetically maintained here as they are there. 
Traditionalism, orthodoxy, and ritualism play just 
the same part here as they do there, so far as 
‘higher considerations” do not step in; and the 
same 1s true of monasticism also. | 

So far as “higher considerations” do not step in— 
here we have already passed to the examination of the 
second element, namely, the Latin Spirit in the sense 
of the Roman World-dominion. In the Western half 
of Christendom the Latin spirit, the spirit of Rome, 
very soon effected certain distinct modifications in the 
general Catholic idea. As early as the beginning of 
the third century we see the thought emerging in the 
Latin Fathers that salvation, however effected and 
whatever its nature, is bestowed in the form of a 
contract under definite conditions, and only to the 
extent to which they are observed; it is salus 
legituma; in fixing these conditions the Deity 
manifested its mercy and indulgence, but it guards 
their observance all the more jealously. Further, 
the whole contents of revelation are /ex, the Bible 
as well as tradition. Again, this tradition is attached 
to a class of: officials and to their correct succession. 
The “mysteries,” however, are “sacraments”; that 
is to say, on the one hand, they are binding acts; 
on the other, they contain definite gifts of grace 
in a carefully limited form and with a specific 
application. Again, the discipline of penance is a 
procedure laid down by law and akin to the process 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 251 


adopted in a civil action or a suit in defence of 
honour. Lastly, the Church is a legal institution ; 
and it is so, not side by side with its function of 
preserving and distributing salvation, but it is a 
legal institution for the sake of this very function. 

But it is in its constitution as a Church that it is 
a legal establishment. We must briefly see how 
things stand in regard to this constitution, as its 
foundations are common to the Eastern and the 
Western Church. When the monarchical episcopate 
had developed, the Church began to approximate its 
constitution to State government. The system of 
uniting sees under a metropolitan who was, as a 
tule, the bishop of the provincial capital, corre- 
sponded with the distribution of the Empire into 
provinces. Above and beyond this, the ecclesiastical 
constitution in the Hast was developed a step further 
when it adapted itself to the division of the Empire 
introduced by Diocletian, by which large groups of 
provinces were united. Thus arose the constitution 
of the patriarchate, which was not, however, strictly 
enforced, and was in part counteracted by other 
considerations. 

In the West no division into patriarchates came 
about; but on the other hand something else 
happened: in the fifth century the Western Roman 
Empire perished of internal weakness and through 
the inroads of the barbarians. What was left of 
what was Roman took refuge in the Roman Church 
—civilisation, law, and orthodox faith as opposed to 


252 WHAT I5 CHRISTIANITY? 


the Arian. The barbarian chiefs, however, did not 
venture to set themselves up as Roman Emperors, 
and enter the vacant shrine of the wnpervum; they 
founded empires of their own in the provinces. In 
these circumstances the Bishop of Rome appeared as 
the guardian of the past and the shield of the future. 
All over the provinces occupied by the barbarians, 
even in those which had previously maintained a 
defiant independence in the face of Rome, bishops and 
laity looked to him. Whatever Roman elements the 
barbarians and Arians left standing in the provinces 
—and they were not few—were ecclesiasticised and at 
the same time put under the protection of the Bishop 
of Rome, who was the chief person there after the 
Emperor’s disappearance. But in Rome the episcopal 
throne was occupied in the fifth century by men who 
understood the signs of the times and utilised them 
to the full. The Roman Church in this way privily 
pushed itself into the place of the Roman World- 
Empire, of which it 1s the actual continuation ; the 
empire has not perished, but has only undergone a 
transformation. If we assert, and mean the asser- 
tion to hold good even of the present time, that 
the Roman Church is the old Roman Empire 
consecrated by the Gospel, that is no mere “clever 
remark,” but the recognition of the true state of 
the matter historically, and the most appropriate 
and fruitful way of describing the character of this 
Church. It still governs the nations; its Popes 
rule like Trajan and Marcus Aurelius; Peter and 


-ROMAN CATHOLICISM 253 


Paul have taken the place of Romulus and Remus ; 
the bishops and archbishops, of the proconsuls ; 
the troops of priests and monks correspond to the 
legions; the Jesuits, to the imperial body-guard. 
The continued influence of the old Empire and its 
institutions may be traced in detail, down to 
individual legal ordinances, nay, even in the very 
clothes. That is no Church lke the evangelical 
communities, or the national Churches of the East ; 
it is a political creation, and as imposing as a 
World-Empire, because the continuation of the 
Roman Empire. The Pope, who calls himself 
“King” and ‘“ Pontifex Maximus,” is Cesar’s 
successor. The Church, which as early as the 
third and fourth century was entirely filled with 
the Roman spirit, has re-established. in itself the 
Roman Empire. Nor have patriotic Catholics in 
Rome and Italy in every century from the seventh 
and eighth onwards understood the matter otherwise. 
When Gregory VII. entered upon the struggle with 
the imperial power, this is the way in which an 
Italian prelate fired his ardour: 


Seize the first Apostle’s sword, 

Peter’s glowing sword, and smite ! 
Scatter far the savage horde ; 

Break their wild, impetuous might ! 
Let them feel the yoke of yore, 
Let them bear it evermore / 


What with blood in Marius’ day, 
Marius and his soldiers brave, 


254 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Or by Julius’ mighty sway, 
Romans did their land to save ; 
Thou canst do by simple word. 
Great the Church’s holy sword / 


Rome made great again by thee 
Offers all thy meed of praise ; 
Not for Scipio's victory 
Did tt louder peans raise, 
Nor entwine the laurel crown 
Lor a deed of more renown. 


Who is it that is thus addressed, a bishop or a 
Cesar? A Ceesar, I imagine; it was felt to be so 
then, and it is still felt to be so to-day, It is an 
Empire that this priestly Ceesar rules, and to attack 
it with the armament of dogmatic polemics alone is 
to beat the air. 3 

I cannot here show what immense results follow 
from the fact that the Catholic Church is the Roman 
Empire. Let me mention only a few conclusions 
which the Church itself draws. It is just as essential 
to this Church to exercise governmental power as 
to proclaim the Gospel. The phrase “ Christus 
viacit, Christus regnat, Christus triumphat,” must 
be understood in a political sense. He rules on 
earth by the fact that his Rome-directed Church 
rules, and rules, too, by law and by force; that is to 
say, it employs all the means of which States avail 
themselves. Accordingly it recognises no form of re- 
ligious fervour which does not first of all submit to 
this papal Church, is approved by it, and remains in 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 255 


constant dependence upon it. This Church, then, 
teaches its ‘‘subjects” to say: “Though I under- 
stand all mysteries, and though I have all faith, and 
though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and 
though I give my body to be burned, and have not 
unity in love which alone floweth from unconditional 
obedience to the Church, it profiteth me nothing.” 
Outside the pale of the Church, all faith, all love, all 
the virtues, even martyrdoms, are of no value what- 
ever. Naturally ; for even an earthly State appre- 
ciates only those services which a man has rendered 
for its sake. But here the State identifies itself with 
the kingdom of Heaven, in other respects proceed- 
ing just like other States. From this fact you can 
yourselves deduce all the Church’s claims; they 
follow without difficulty. “ Even the most exorbitant 
demand appears quite natural as soon as you only 
admit the truth of the two leading propositions: 
“The Roman Church is the kingdom of God,” and 
“The Church must govern like an earthly State.” 
It is not to be denied that Christian motives have 
also had a hand in this development—the desire 
to bring the Christian religion into a real connexion 
with life, and to make its influence felt in every 
situation that may arise, as well as anxiety for 
the salvation of individuals and of nations. How 
many earnest Catholic Christians there have been 
who had no other real desire than to establish 
Christ's rule on earth and build up his kingdom! 
But while there can be no doubt that their in- 


256 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


tention, and the energy with which they put their 
hands to the work, made them superior to the 
Greeks, there can be as little that it is a serious 
misunderstanding of Christ’s and the apostles’ in- 
junctions to aim at establishing and building up 
the kingdom of God by political means. The only 
forces which this kingdom knows are religious and 
moral forces, and it rests on a basis of freedom. 
But when a Church comes forward with the claims 
of an earthly State, it is bound to make use of all 
the means at the disposal of that State, includ-— 
ing, therefore, crafty diplomacy and force; for the 
earthly State, even a State governed by law, must 
on occasion become a State that acts contrary to 
law. The course of development which this Church 
has followed as an earthly State was, then, bound 
to lead logically to. the absolute monarchy of 
the Pope and his infallibility ; for in an. earthly 
theocracy infallibility means, at bottom, nothing 
more than full sovereignty means in a secular 
State. That the Church has not shrunk from 
drawing this last conclusion is a proof of the extent 
to which the sacred element in it has become 
secularised. 

That this second element was bound to produce a 
radical change in the characteristic features of Cathol- 
icism in Western Europe, in its traditionalism, its. 
orthodoxy, its ritualism, and its monasticism, is 
obvious.  ‘Traditionalism holds the same _ position 
after the change as it did before; but when any 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 257 


element in it has become inconvenient, it is dropped 
and its place taken by the papal will. ‘“‘ La tradition, 
cest moi,’ as Pius IX. is reported to have said. 
Further, ‘‘ sound doctrine” is still a leading principle, 
but, as a matter of fact, it can be altered by the 
ecclesiastical policy of the Pope; subtle distinctions 
have given many a dogma a new meaning. New 


) 


dogmas, too, are promulgated. In many respects 
doctrine has become more arbitrary, and a rigid 
formula in a matter of dogma may be set aside by 
a contrary injunction in a matter of ethics and in 
the confessional. The hard and fast lines of the past 
can be everywhere relaxed in favour of the needs of 
the present. ‘The same holds good of ritualism, as 
also of monasticism. The extent to which the old 
monasticism has been altered, by no means always to 
its disadvantage alone, and has even in some impor- 
tant aspects been transformed into its flat opposite, 
I cannot here show. In its organisation this Church 
possesses a faculty of adapting itself to the course 
of history such as no other Church possesses; it 
always remains the same old Church, or seems to do 
so, and is always becoming a new one. 


The third element determining the character of 
the spirit prevalent in the Church is opposed to 
that which we have just discussed, and yet has held 
its own side by side with the second: it goes by the 
names of Augustine and Augustinianism. In the 


fifth century, at the very time when the Church 
R 


258 WHATS CHORISTIANITY? 


was setting itself to acquire the inheritance of the 
Roman Empire, it came into possession of a religious 
genius of extraordinary depth and power, accepted his 
ideas and feelings, and up to the present day has been 
unable to get rid of them. That the Church became 
at one and the same time Ceesarian and Augustinian is 
the most important and marvellous fact in its history. 
What kind of a spirit, however, and what kind of a 
tendency, did it receive from Augustine ? 

Well, in the first place, Augustine's theology and 
his religious fervour denote a special resuscitation 
of the Pauline experience and doctrine of sin and 
grace, of guilt and justification, of divine predestina- 
tion and human servitude. In the centuries that 
had elapsed since the apostle’s day this experience 
and the doctrine embodying it had been lost, but 
Augustine went through the same inner experiences 
as Paul, gave them the same sort of expression, and 
clothed them in definite conceptions. There was no 
question here of mere imitation ; the individual differ- 
ences between the two cases are of the utmost import- 
ance, especially in the way in which the doctrine of 
justification is conceived. With Augustine, it was 
represented as a constant process, continuing until 
love and all the virtues completely filled the heart ; 
but, as with Paul, it is all a matter of individual 
experience and inner life. If you read Augustine's 
Confessions you will acknowledge that in spite of 
all the rhetoric—and rhetoric there is—it is the work 
of a genius who has felt God, the God of the Spirit, 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 259 


to be the be-all and the end-all’of his life - who thirsts 
after Him and desires nothing beside Him. Further, 
all the sad and terrible experiences which he had had 
in his own person, all the rupture with himself, all 
the service of transient things, the ‘‘ crumbling away 
into the world bit by bit,” and the egoism for which 
he had to pay in loss of strength and freedom, he 
reduces to the one root, sin; that is to say, lack of 
communion with God, godlessness. Again, what re- 
leased him from the entanglements of the world, 
from selfishness and inner decay, and gave him 
strength, freedom, and a consciousness of the Kternal, 
he calls, with Paul, grace. With him he feels, too, 
that grace is wholly the work of God, but that it 
is obtained through and by Christ, and possessed as 
forgiveness of sins and as the spirit of love. He is 
much less free and more beset with scruples in his 
view of sin than the great apostle; and it is this 
which gives his religious language and everything 
that proceeded from him quite a peculiar colour. 
“Forgetting those things which are behind, and 
reaching forth unto those things which are before ”— 
the apostolic maxim is not Augustine’s. Consolation 
for the misery of sin—this is the complexion of his 
entire Christianity. Only rarely was he capable of 
soaring to the sense of the glorious liberty of the 
children of God; and, where he was so capable, he 
could not testify to it in the same way as Paul. But 
he could express the sense of consolation for the 
misery of sin with a strength of feeling and in words 


260 WHAT IS-CHRISTIANITY ? 


of an overwhelming force such as no one before him 
ever displayed; nay, more: he has managed by what 
he has written to go so straight to the souls of 
millions, to describe so precisely their inner condition, 
and so impressively and overpoweringly to put the 
consolation before them, that what he felt has been 
felt again and again for fifteen hundred years. Up 
to the day in which we live, so far as Catholic 
Christians are concerned, inward and vivid religious 
fervour, and the expression which it takes, are in their 
whole character Augustinian. It is by what he felt 
that they are kindled, and it is his thoughts that they 
think. Nor is it otherwise with many Protestants, and 
those not of the worst kind. This juxtaposition of sin 
and grace, this interconnexion of feeling and doctrine, 
seems to possess an indestructible power which no lapse 
of time is able to touch; this feeling of mixed pain 
and bliss is an unforgettable possession with those who 
have once experienced it; and even though they may 
have subsequently emancipated themselves from re- 
ligion it remains for them a sacred memory. 

The Western Church opened, and was compelled to 
open, its doors to this Augustine at the very moment 
when it was preparing to enter upon its dominion. 
It was defenceless in face of him; it had so little 
of any real value to offer from its immediate 
past that it weakly capitulated. Thus arose the 
astonishing ‘‘complexio oppositorum” which we see 
in Western Catholicism : the Church of rites, of law, of 
politics, of world-dominion, and the Church in which 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 261 


a highly individual, delicate, sublimated sense and 
doctrine of sin and grace is brought into play. The 
external and the internal elements are supposed to 
unite! To speak frankly, this has been impossible 
from the beginning; internal tension and conflict 
were bound to arise at once; the history of Western 
Catholicism is full of it. Up to a certain point, 
however, these antitheses admit of being reconciled ; 
they admit of it at least so far as the same men are 
concerned. That is proved by no less a person 
than Augustine himself, who, in addition to his other 
characteristics, was also a staunch Churchman; nay, 
who in such matters as power and prestige pro- 
moted the external interests of the Church, and its 
equipment as a whole, with the greatest energy. 
I cannot here explain how he managed to accomplish 
this work, but that there could be no lack of internal 
contradictions in it is obvious. Only let us be clear 
about -two facts: firstly, that the outward Church is 
more and more forcing the inward Augustinianism 
into the background, and transforming and modify- 
ing it, without, however, being able wholly to de- 
stroy 1t; secondly, that all the great personalities 
who have continued to kindle religious fervour afresh 
in the Western Church, and to purify and deepen it, 
have directly or indirectly proceeded from Augustine 
and formed themselves on him. The long chain of 
Catholic reformers, from Agobard and Claudius of 
Turin in the ninth century down to the Jansenists 
in the seventeenth and eighteenth, and beyond them, 


262 WHA TsissCHORISTLTANFIY:? 


is Augustinian. And if the Council of Trent may be 
in many respects rightly called a Council of Reform ; 
if the doctrine of penance and grace was formulated 
then with much more depth and inwardness than 
could be expected from the state of Catholic theology 
in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, that is only 
owing to the continued influence of Augustine. With 
the doctrine of grace taken from Augustine, the 
Church has, indeed, associated a practice of the 
confessional which threatens to make that doctrine 
absolutely ineffective. But, however far it may 
stretch its bounds so as to keep all those within its 
pale who do not revolt against its authority, it after 
all not only tolerates such as take the same view of 
sin and grace as Augustine, but it also desires that, 
wherever possible, everyone may feel as strongly as 
he the gravity of sin and the blessedness of belong- 
ing to God. 

Such are the essential elements of Roman Catholi- 
cism. There is much else that might be mentioned, 
but what has been said denotes the leading points. 


We pass to the last question: What modifications 
has the Gospel here undergone, and how much of it 
is left 2? Well—this is not a matter that needs many 
words—the whole outward and visible institution of 
a Church claiming divine dignity has no foundation 
whatever in the Gospel. It is a case, not of distor- 
tion, but of total perversion. Religion has here 
strayed away in a direction that is not its own. 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 263 


As Eastern Catholicism may in many respects be 
more appropriately regarded as part of the history 
of Greek religion than of the history of the Gospel, 
so Roman Catholicism must be regarded as part of 
the history of the Roman World-Empire. To con- 
tend, as it does, that Christ founded a kingdom ; 
that this kingdom is the Roman Church; that he 
equipped it with a sword, nay, with two swords, 
a spiritual and «2 temporal, is to secularise the 
Gospel; nor can this contention be sustained by 
appealing to the idea that Christ's spirit ought 
certainly to bear rule amongst mankind. The Gospel 
says, “‘Christ’s kingdom is not of this world,” but 
the Church has set up an earthly kingdom ; Christ 
demands that his ministers shall not rule but serve, 
but here the priests govern the world; Christ leads 
his disciples away from political and ceremonious 
religion and places every man face to face with God 
—God and the soul, the soul and its God, but here, 
on the contrary, man is bound to an earthly insti- 
tution with chains that cannot be broken, and he 
must obey; it is only when he obeys that he ap- 
proaches God. There was a time when Roman 
Christians shed their blood because they refused to 
do worship to Cesar, and rejected religion of the 
political kind ; to-day they do not, indeed, actually 
pray to an earthly ruler, but they have subjected 
their souls to the despotic orders of the Roman 
papal King. 


LECTURE XV. 


THE point to which we referred at the close of the 
last lecture was that, as an outward and _ visible 
Church and a State founded on law and on force, 
Roman Catholicism has nothing to do with the 
Gospel, nay, is in fundamental contradiction with 
it. That this State has borrowed a divine lustre 
from the Gospel, and finds this lustre extraordinarily 
advantageous, cannot avail to upset the verdict. 
To mix the divine with the secular, and what is 
innermost in a man with a political element, is to 
work the greatest of mischiefs, because the con- 
science is thereby enslaved and religion robbed of 
its solemn character. It is inevitable that this 
character should. be lost when every possible measure 
which serves to maintain the earthly empire of 
the Church—for example, the sovereignty of the 
Pope—is proclaimed as the divine will. We are 
reminded, however, that it is just this independent 
action on the part of the Church which saves religion 
in Western Europe from entirely degenerating into 
nationality, or the State, or police. The Church, 


it is urged, has maintained intact the high idea 
264 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 265 


of the complete self-subsistence of religion and 
its independence of the State. We may admit 
the claim, but the price which Western Iurope 
has had to pay for this service, and still pays, is 
much too great; by having to pay so heavy a 
tribute, the nations are threatened with bankruptcy 
within; and, as for the Church, the capital which 
it has amassed is truly a capital that consumes. 
With all the apparent increase in its power, a 
pauperising process is slowly being accomplished 
in the Church; slowly but surely. Let me here 
digress from our subject for a moment. 

No one who looks at the present political situation 
can have any ground for asserting that the power 
of the Roman Church is on the wane. What a 
growth it has experienced in the nineteenth century ! 
And yet—any one with a keen eye sees that the 
Church is far from possessing now such a plenitude 
of power as it enjoyed in the twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries, when all the material and spiritual forces 
available were at its disposal. Since that epoch its 
power has, in point of intensity, suffered an enor- 
mous decline, arrested by a few brief outbursts of 
enthusiasm between 1540 and 1620, and in the nine- 
teenth century. Harnest Catholics, concerned at this 
fact, make no secret of it; they know and admit 
that an important portion of the spiritual possessions 
necessary to the dominion of the Church has been 
lost to it. And again; what is the position of the 
Latin nations which, when all is said, form the 


266 WHAT HSSCHRISEFANITY? 


proper province of the Roman Church’s rule? There 
is only one of them which can really be called a 
great Power, and what sort of spectacle will it 
present in another generation? As a State this 
Church lives to-day, to a not inconsiderable extent, 
on its history, its old Roman and medizeval history ; 
and it lives as the Roman Empire of the Romans. 
But empires do not live for ever. Will the Church 
be capable of maintaining itself in the great changes 
to come? Will it bear the increasing tension be- 
tween it and the intellectual hfe of the people? 
Will it survive the decline of the Latin nations? | 

But let us leave this question to answer itself. 
Let us recollect, rather, that this Church, thanks 
above all to its Augustinianism, possesses in its 
orders of monkhood and its religious societies a 
deep element of life in its midst. Im all ages it 
has produced saints, so far as men can be so called, 
and it still produces them to-day. Trust in God, 
unaffected humility, the assurance of redemption, 
the devotion of one’s life to the service of one’s 
brethren, are to be found in it; many brethren 
take up the cross of Christ and exercise at one 
‘and the same time that self-judgment and_ that 
joy in God which Paul and Augustine achieved. 
The Imitateo Christi kindles independent religious 
life, and a fire which burns with a flame of its 
own.  Kcclesiasticism has not availed to suppress 
the power of the Gospel, which, in spite of the 
frightful weight that it has to carry, makes its 


ROMAN CATHOLICISM 267 


way again and again. It still works like leaven, 
nor can we fail to see that this Church, side by 
side with a lax morality for which it has often 
enough been to blame, has, by the mouth of its 
great medieval theologians, fruitfully applied the 
Gospel to many circumstances of life and created 
a Christian ethics. Here and elsewhere it has 
proved that it not only carries, as it were, the 
thoughts of the Gospel with it, as a river carries 
grains of gold, but that they are bound up. with 
it and have been. further developed in it. The 
infallible Pope, the ‘‘ Apostolico-Roman polytheism,” 
the veneration of the Saints, blind obedience, and 
apathetic devotion — these things seem to have 
stifled all inwardness, and yet there are Christians 
still to be found in this Church, too, of the kind 
which the Gospel has awakened, earnest and loving, 
filled with joy and peace in God. Lastly, the mis- 
chief is not that the Gospel has been bound up with 
political forms at all—Melanchthon was no traitor 
when he expressed his willingness to acknowledge the 
Pope if he would permit the Gospel to be preached 
in its purity—but it hes in the sanctification of 
the political element, and in the inability of this 
Church to get rid of what was once of service in 
particular historical circumstances, but has now be- 
come an obstruction and a clog. 

We now pass to the last section in the exposition ~ 
of our subject. 


268 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION IN PROTESTANTISM. 


Anyone who looks at the external condition of 
Protestantism, especially in Germany, may, at first 
sight, well exclaim: ‘‘ What a miserable spectacle !” 
But no one can survey the history of Europe from 
the second century to the present time without 
being forced to the conclusion that in the whole 
course of this history the greatest movement and 
the one most pregnant with good was the Reforma- 
tion in the sixteenth century ; even the great change 
which took place at the transition to the nineteenth 
is inferior to it in importance. What do all our 
discoveries and inventions and our advances in 
outward civilisation signify mi comparison with the 
fact that to-day there are thirty millions of Ger- 
mans, and many more millions of Christians outside 
Germany, who possess a religion without priests, with- 
out sacrifices, without ‘fragments’ of grace, without 
ceremonies—a spiritual religion ! 

Protestantism must be understood, first and fore- 
most, by the contrast which it offers to Catholicism, 
and here there is a double direction which any 
estimate of it must take, first as Reformation and 
secondly as Revolution. It was a reformation in 
regard to the doctrine of salvation ; a revolution 
in regard to the Church, its authority, and its 
apparatus. Hence Protestantism is no spontaneous 
phenomenon, created as it were by a “generatio 


PROTESTANTISM 269 


] 


equivoca”; but, as its very name implies, it was 
called into being by the misdeeds of the Roman 
Church having become intolerable. It was the 
close of a long series of cognate but ineffectual 
attempts at reform in the Middle Ages. If the 
position which it thus holds in history proves its: 
continuity with the past, the fact is still more 
strongly in evidence in its own and not inappro- 
priate contention that it was not an innovation in 
regard to religion, but a restoration and renewal 
of it. But from the point of view of the Church 
and its authority Protestantism was undoubtedly 
a revolutionary phenomenon. We must, then, take 
account of it in both these relations. 

Protestantism was a Leformation, that is to say, 
a renewal, as regards the core of the matter, as 
regards religion, and consequently as regards the 
doctrine of salvation. That may be shown in the 
main in three points. 

In the first place, religion was here brought back 
again to itself, in so far as the Gospel and the 
corresponding religious experience were put «into 
the foreground and freed of all alien accretions. 
Religion was taken out of the vast and monstrous 
fabric which had been previously called by its 
name—a fabric embracing the Gospel and holy 
water, the priesthood of all believers and _ the 
Pope on his throne, Christ the Redeemer and St. 
Anne—and was reduced to its essential factors, to 


the Word of God and to faith. This truth was 


270 WHAT TS (CHaRts LIANTTLY? 


imposed as a criterion on everything that also 
claimed to be “religion” and to unite on terms 
of equality with those great factors. In the history 
of religions every really important reformation is 
always, first and foremost, a critical reduction 
to principles; for in the course of its historical 
development, religion, by adapting itself to circum- 
stances, attracts to itself much alien matter, and 
produces, in conjunction with this, a number of 
hybrid and apocryphal elements, which it is 
necessarily compelled to place under the protec- 
tion of what is sacred. If it is not to run wild 
from exuberance, or be choked by its own dry 
leaves, the reformer must come who purifies it and 
brings it back to itself. This critical reduction to 
principles Luther accomplished in the sixteenth 
century, by victoriously declaring that the Christian 
religion was given only in the Word of God and in 
the inward experience which accords with this Word. 

In the second place, there was the definite way 
in which the ‘‘ Word of God” and the “ experience” 
of it were grasped. For Luther the “ Word” did 
not mean Church doctrine; it did not even mean 
the Bible; it meant the message of the free orace 
of God in Christ which makes guilty and despair- 


6é 


ing men happy and blessed; and the “ experience ” 
was just the certainty of this grace. In the sense 
in which Luther took them, both can be embraced 
in one phrase: the confident belief in a God of 


grace. They put an end—such was his own ex- 


PROTESTANTISM 271 


perience, and such was what he taught—to all 
inner discord in a man; they overcome the burden 
of every ill; they destroy the sense of guilt; and, 
despite the imperfection of a man’s own acts, they 
give him the certainty of being inseparably united 


with the holy God: 


Now I know and believe 
And give praise without end 
That God the Almighty 
Is Father and Friend, 
And that in all troubles, 
Whatever betide, 
He hushes the tempest 
And stands at my side. 


Nothing, he taught, is to be preached but the 
God of Grace, with whom we are reconciled through 
Christ. Conversely, it is not a question of ecstasies 
and visions; no transports of feeling are necessary ; 
it is facth that is to be aroused. Faith is to be 
the beginnmg, middle, and end of all religious 
fervour. In the correspondence of Word and faith 
“justification ” 1s experienced, and hence justification 
holds the chief place in the Reformers’ message ; it 
means nothing less than the attainment of peace 
and freedom in God through Christ, dominion over 
the world, and an eternity within. 

Lastly, the third feature of this renewal was the 
great transformation which God’s worship now in- 
evitably underwent, God's worship by the indi- 
vidual and by the community. Such worship— 


272° WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


this was obvious—can and ought to be nothing 
but putting faith to practical proof. As Luther 
declared over and over again, “all that God asks 
of us is faith, and it is through faith alone that 
He is willing to treat with us.” To let God be 
God, and to pay Him honour by acknowledging 
and invoking Him as Father—zit is thus alone 
that a man can serve Him. Every other path on 
which a man tries to approach Him and honour 
Him leads astray, and vain is the attempt to 
establish any other relation with Him. What an 
enormous mass of anxious, hopeful, and hopeless 
effort was now done away with, and what a re- 
volution in worship was effected! But all that is 
true of God’s worship by the individual is true in 
exactly the same way of public worship. Here, too, 
it is only the Word of God and prayer which have 
any place. All else is to be banished; the com- 
munity assembled for God’s worship is to proclaim 
the message of God with praise and thanksgiving, 
and call upon His name. Anything that goes be- 
yond this is not worship at all. 

These three points embrace the chief elements in the 
Reformation. What they involved was a renewal of 
religion; for not only do they denote, albeit in a 
fashion of their own, a return to Christianity as it 
originally was, but they also existed themselves in 
Western Catholicism, although buried in a heap of 


rubbish. 
But, before we go further, permit me two brief 


PROTESTANTISM 273 


digressions. We were just saying that the com- 
munity assembled for God’s worship must not 
solemnise its worship in any other way than by 
proclaiming the Word and by prayer. To this, 
however, we must add, according to the Reformers’ 
injunctions, that all that is to stamp this com- 
munity as a Church is its existence as a com- 
munity of the faith in which God’s Word is 
preached aright. Here we may leave the  sacra- 
ments out of account, as, according to Luther, 
they, too, derive their entire importance from the 
Word. But if Word and faith are the only char- 
acteristics of worship, it looks as if those who 
contend that the Reformation did away with the 
visible Church and put an invisible one in its 
place were right. But the contention does not 
tally with the facts. The distinction between a 
visible and an invisible Church dates back as far 
as the Middle Ages, or even, from one point of 
view, aS far as Augustine. Those who defined the 
true Church as “the number of the predestined ” 
were obliged to maintain that it was wholly in- 
~ visible. But the German Reformers did not so 
define it. In declaring the Church to be a com- 
munity of the faith in which God’s Word is 
preached aright, they rejected all the coarser char- 
acteristics of a Church, and certainly excluded 
the visibility that appeals to the senses; but—to 
take an illustration—who would say that an in- 
tellectual community, for example, a band of young 
. 


274 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


men all alike eagerly devoted to knowledge or the 
interests of their country, was ‘‘invisible,” because 
it possesses no external characteristics, and cannot 
be counted on one’s fingers? Just as little is the 


(74 


evangelical Church an “invisible” community. It 
is a community of the spirit, and therefore its 
“visibility ’ takes different phases and different 
degrees of strength, ‘There are phases of it where 
it is absolutely unrecognisable, and others, again, 
where it stands forth with the energy of a power 
that appeals to the senses. It can never, indeed, 
take the sharp contours of a State like the Vene- 
tian republic or the kingdom of France—such was 
the comparison which a great exponent of Catholic 
dogmatics declared to be applicable to his Church 
—but as Protestants we ought to know that we 
belong, not to an “invisible” Church, but to a 
spiritual community which disposes of the forces 
pertaining to spiritual communities; a_ spiritual 
community resting on earth, but reaching to the 
Kternal. 

And now as to the other point: Protestantism 
maintains that, objectively, the Christian community | 
is based upon the Gospel alone, but that the Gospel 
is contained in Holy Scripture. From the very be- 
ginning it has encountered the objection that, if 
that be so, and at the same time there be no. re- 
cognised authority to decide what the purport and 
meaning of the Gospel is and how it is to be ascer- 
tained from the Scriptures, general confusion will 


PROTESTANTISM 275 


be the result; that of this confusion the history of 
Protestantism affords ample testimony ; that if every 
man has a warrant to decide what the ‘true under- 
standing” of the Gospel is, and in this respect is 
bound to no tradition, no council, and no pope, but 
exercises the free right of research, any unity, com- 
munity, or Church is absolutely impossible; that the 
State, therefore, must interfere, or some arbitrary 
limit be fixed. That no Church possessing the Sacred 
Office of the Inquisition can arise in this way is 
certainly true; further, that to impose any external 
limits on a community from the mside is a simple 
impossibility. What has been done by the State or 
under pressure of historical necessities does not affect 
the question at all; the structures which have arisen 
~ in the way are, in the evangelical sense, only figura- 
tively called ‘‘ Churches.” Protestantism reckons— 
this is the solution—wupon the Gospel being something 
so simple, so dune, and therefore so truly human, 
as to be most certain of being understood when it is 
left entirely free, and also as to produce essentially 
the same experiences and convictions im mdividual 
souls. In this it may often enough make mistakes ; 
differences of individuality and education may issue 
in very heterogeneous results; but still, in this its 
attitude, it has not up to now been put to shame. A 
real, spiritual community of evangelical Christians; a 
common conviction as to what is most important 
and as to its application to life in all its forms, has 
arisen and is in full force and vigour. This com- 


276 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


munity embraces Protestants in and outside Germany, 
Lutherans, Calvinists, and adherents of other de- 
nominations. In all of them, so far as they are 
earnest Christians, there lives a common element, 
and this element is of infinitely greater importance 
and value than all their differences. It keeps us 
to the Gospel and it protects us from modern 
heathenism and from relapse into Catholicism. More 
than this we do not need; nay, any other fetter we - 
reject. This, however, is no fetter, but the condition 
of our freedom. And when we are reproached with 
our divisions and told that Protestantism has as many 
doctrines as heads, we reply, ‘So it has, but we do 
not wish it otherwise; on the contrary, we want 
still more freedom, still greater individuality in utter- 
ance and in doctrine; the historical circumstances 
necessitating the formation of national and_ free 
churches have imposed only too many rules and 
limitations upon us, even though they be not pro- 
claimed as divine ordinances; we want still more 
confidence in the inner strength and unifying power 
of the Gospel, which is more certain to prevail in free 
conflict than under guardianship; we want to be a 
spiritual realm and we have no desire to return to 
the fleshpots of Egypt ; we are well aware that in the 
interests of order and instruction outward and vis- 
ible communities must arise; we are ready to foster 
their growth, so far as they fulfil these aims and 
deserve to be fostered ; but we do not hang our hearts 
upon them, for they may exist to-day and to-morrow 


PROTESTANTISM 277 


give place, under other political or social conditions, 
to new organisations; let anyone who has such a 
Church have it as though he had it not; our Church 
is not the particular Church in which we are placed, 
but the ‘societas fidei’ which has its members every- 
where, even among Greeks and Romans.” ‘That is 
the evangelical answer to the reproach that we are 
“ divided,” and that is the language which the liberty 
that has been given to us employs. Let us now 
return from these digressions to the exposition of the 
essential features of Protestantism. ; 
Protestantism was not only a Reformation but also 
a Revolution. From the legal point of view the 
whole Church system against which Luther revolted 
could lay claim to full obedience. It had just as much > 
legal validity in Western Europe as the laws of the 
State themselves. When Luther burnt the papal bull 
he undoubtedly performed a revolutionary act—re- 
volutionary, not in the bad sense of a revolt against 
legal ordinance which is also moral ordinance as well, 
but certainly in the sense of a violent breach with a 
given legal condition. It was against this state of 
things that the new movement was directed, and it 
was to the following chief points that its protest 
in word and deed extended. Firstly: It protested 
against the entire hierarchical and priestly system in 
the Church, demanded that it should be abolished, 
and abolished it in favour of a common priesthood 
and an established order formed on the basis of the 
congregation. What a range this demand had, and 


278 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


to what an extent it interfered with the previously 
existing state of things, cannot be told in a few 
sentences. To explain it ail would take hours. 
Nor can we here show how the various arrangements 
actually took shape in the evangelical churches. 
That is not a matter of fundamental importance, but 
what is of fundamental importance is that the 
“divine” rights of the Church were abolished. 

Secondly : It protested against all formal, external 
authority in religion ; against the authority, therefore, 
of councils, priests, and the whole tradition of the 
Church. That alone is to be authority which shows 
itself to be such within and effects a deliverance ; the 
thing itself, therefore, the Gospel. Thus Luther 
also protested against the authority of the letter 
of the Bible ; but we shall see that this was a point 
on which neither he nor the rest of the Reformers 
were quite clear, and where they failed to draw the 
conclusions which their insight into fundamentals 
demanded. 

Thirdly : It protested against all the traditional 
arrangements for public worship, all ritualism, and 
every sort of “holy work.” As it neither knows nor 
tolerates, as we have seen, any specific form of worship, 
any material sacrifice and service to God, any mass and 
any works done for God and with a view to salvation, 
the whole traditional system of public worship, with 
its pomp, its holy and semi-holy articles, its gestures 
and processions, came to the ground. How much could 
be retained in the way of form for esthetic or educa- 


“PROTESTANTISM 279 


tional reasons was, in comparison with this, a question 
of entirely secondary importance. 

Fourthly: It protested against Sacramentalism. 
Baptism and the Lord’s Supper it left standing, as 
institutions of the primitive Church, or, as it might 
be, of the Lord himself; but it desired that they 
should be regarded either as symbols and marks by 
which the Christian is known, or as acts deriving 
their value exclusively from that message of the 
forgiveness of sins which is bound up with them. 
All other sacraments it abolished, and with them the 
whole notion of God’s grace and help being accessible 
in bits, and fused in some mysterious way with definite 
corporeal things. To sacramentalism it opposed the 
Word, and to the notion that grace was given by 
bits, the conviction that there is only one vrace, 
namely, to possess God himself as the source of grace. 
It was not because Luther was so very enlightened 
that in his tract “On the Babylonian Captivity ” 
he rejected the whole system of Sacramentalism— 
he had enough superstition left in him to enable 
him to advance some very shocking contentious— 
but because he had had inner experience of the fact 
that where “grace” does not endow the soul with 
the living God Himself it is an illusion. Hence for 
him the whole doctrine of sacramentalism was an 
infringement of God’s majesty and an enslavement of 
the soul. 

Fifthly: It protested against the double form of 
morality, and accordingly against the higher form ; 


2 


280 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


against the contention that it is particularly well- 
pleasing to God to make no use of the powers and 
oifts which are part of creation. The Reformers had 
a strong sense of the fact that the world passes away 
with the lusts thereof; we must certainly not repre- 
sent Luther as the modern man cheerfully standing 
with his feet firmly planted on the earth; on the 
contrary, like the men of the Middle Ages he had a 
strong yearning to be rid of this world and to depart 
from the “vale of tears.” But because he was con- 
vinced that we neither can nor ought to offer God 
anything but trust in Him, he arrived, in regard to 
the Christian’s position in the world, at quite different 
theses from those which were advanced by the grave 
monks of previous centuries. As fastings and ascetic 
practices had no value before God, and were of no 
advantage to one’s fellowmen, and as God is the 
Creator of all things, the most useful thing that a 
man can do is to remain in the position in which 
God has placed him. This conviction gave Luther 
a cheerful and confident view of earthly ordinances, 
which contrasts with and actually got the upperhand 
of his inclination to turn his back upon the world. 

He advanced the definite thesis that all positions 
in life—constituted authority, the married state, 
and so on, down to domestic service—existed by the 
will of God, and were therefore genuinely spiritual 
positions in which we are to serve God; a faithful 
maidservant stands higher, with him, than a con- 
templative monk. Christians are not to be always 


PROTESTANTISM | 281 


devising how they may find some new paths of their 
own, but to show patience and love of neighbour 
within the sphere of their given vocation. Out of 
this there grew up in his mind the notion that all 
worldly laws and spheres of activity have an inde- 
pendent title. It is not that they are to be merely 
tolerated, and have no right to exist until they 
receive it from the Church. No! they have rights 
of their own, and they form the vast domain in 
which the Christian is to give proof of his faith 
and love; nay, they are even to be respected in 
places which are as yet ignorant of God’s revelation 
in the Gospel. . 

It was thus that the same man who asked nothing 
of the world, so far as his own personal feelings were 
concerned, and whose soul was troubled only by 
thought for the Eternal, delivered mankind from the 
ban of asceticism. He was thereby really and truly 
the life and origin of a new epoch, and he gave it 
back a simple and unconstrained attitude towards the 
world, and a good conscience in all earthly labour. 
This fruitful work fell to his share, not because he 
secularised religion, but because he took it so seri- 
ously and so profoundly that, while in his view it 
was to pervade all things, it was itself to be freed 
from everything external to it. 


LECTURE XVI. 


THE question ie often been raised whether, and 
to what extent, the Reformation was a work of the 
German spirit. J cannot here go into this compli- 
cated problem. But this much seems to me to 
be certain, that while we cannot, indeed, connect 
_ Luther’s momentous religious experiences with his 
nationality, the results positive as well as negative — 
with which he invested them display the German ; 
the German man and German history. From the 
time that the Germans endeavoured to make them- 
selves really at home in the religion handed down 
to them—this did not take place until the thirteenth 
century onwards—they were preparing the way for 
the Reformation, And just as Eastern Christianity 
is rightly called Greek, and the Christianity of the 
Middle Ages and of Western Europe is rightly called 
Roman, so the Christianity of the Reformation may 
be described as German, in spite of Calvin. For 
Calvin was Luther’s pupil, and he made his influence 
most lastingly felt, not among the Latin nations 
but among the English, the Scotch, and the Dutch. 


Through the Reformation the Germans mark a stage 
982 


PROTESTANTISM 283 


in the history of the Universal Church. No similar 
statement can be made of the Slavs. 

The recoil from asceticism, which as an ideal never 
penetrated the Germans to the same extent as other 
nations, and the protest against religion as external 
authority, are to be set down as well to the Pauline 
Gospel as to the German spirit. Luther's warmth 
and heartiness in preaching, and his frankness in 
polemical utterance, were felt by the German nation 
to be an opening out of its own soul. 


In the previous lecture we touched upon the chief 
provinces in which Luther raised an emphatic and 
still effective protest. There is much upon which I 
could also dwell: for example, upon the opposition 
which, especially at the commencement of his reform- 
ing activity, he offered to the whole terminology of 
dogmatics, its formulee and doctrinal utterances. ‘To 
sum up: he protested, because his aim was to restore 
the Christian religion in its purity, without priests 
and sacrifices, without external authorities and ordi- 
nances, without solemn ceremonies, without all the 
chains with which the Beyond was to be bound to 
the Here. In its revising ardour the Reformation 
went back not only earlier than the eleventh 
century, not only earlier than the fourth or the 
second, but to the very beginnings of religion. 
Nay, without being aware of it, the Reformation 
even modified or entirely put aside forms which 
existed even in the apostolic age: thus in matters 


284 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


of discipline it abolished fasting; in matters of 
constitution it abolished bishops and deacons; in 


matters of doctrine it abolished, among other things, 
Chiliasm. 


But with the change effected by Reformation and 
Revolution, how does the new creation stand as a 
whole in regard to the Gospel? We may say that 
in the four leading points which we emphasised in 
the previous lecture—inwardness and_ spirituality, 
the fundamental thought of the God of grace, His 
worship in spirit and in truth, and the idea of the 
Church as a community of faith—the Gospel was in 
reality re-won. Need I prove this in detail, or are 
we to be shaken in our conviction because, as 1s 
surely the case, a Christian in the sixteenth and in 
the nineteenth century presents an appearance dif- 
ferent from that which a Christian presented in 
the first? That the inwardness and individualism 
which the Reformation disengaged accord with the 
character of the Gospel is certain. Further, Luther's 
pronouncement on justification not only reflects in the 
main, and in spite of certain irreducible differences, 
Paul’s train of thought, but is also in point of 
aim in exact correspondence with Jesus’ teaching. 
To know God as one’s Father, to possess a God of 
grace, to find comfort in His grace and providence, 
to believe in the forgiveness of sins—in both cases 
that is the point on which everything turns. And 
in the troubled times of Lutheran orthodoxy a Paul 


PROTESTANTISM 285 


Gerhardt succeeded in giving such grand expression 
to this fundamental conviction of the Gospel in his 
hymns, ‘‘ [s God for me, then let all,” and “ Commit 
thy ways,” as to convince us how truly Protestant- 
ism was penetrated with it. Again, that the right 
worship of God ought to be nothing but the acknow- 
ledgment of God in praise and prayer, but that the 
love of neighbour is also worship, is taken direct 
from the Gospel and Paul's corresponding injunctions. 
Lastly, that the true Church is held together by the 
Holy Ghost and by faith; that it is a spiritual com- 
munity of brothers and sisters, is a conviction which 
is in line with the Gospel, and was most clearly 
expressed by Paul. In so far as the Reformation re- 
stored all this, and also recognised Christ as the only 
Redeemer, it may in the strictest sense of the word 
be called evangelical; and in so far as these con- 
-victions, crippled and burdened though they may be, 
retain their ascendency in the Protestant Churches, 
they have every warrant for being so described. 


But what was here achieved had its dark side as 
well. If we ask what the Reformation cost us, and 
to what extent 1t made its principles prevail, we 
shall see this dark side very clearly. 

We get nothing from history without paying for , 
it, and for a violent movement we have to pay 
double. What did the Reformation cost us? [ 
will not speak of the fact that the unity of Western 
civilisation was destroyed, since it was after all only 


286 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


over a part of Western Europe that the Reformation 
prevailed, for the freedom and many-sided character 
of the resulting development brought us a greater 
gain. But the necessity of establishing the new 
Churches as State-Churches was attended by serious 
disadvantages. The system of an ecclesiastical State 
is, of course, worse, and its adherents have truly no 
cause to praise it in contrast with the State-Churches. 
But still the latter—which are not solely the outcome 
of the breach with ecclesiastical authority, but were 
already prepared for in the fifteenth century—have 
been the cause of much stunted growth. They have 
weakened the feeling of responsibility, and diminished 
the activity, of the evangelical communities ; and, 
in addition, they have aroused the not unfounded 
suspicion that the Church is an institution set up 
by the State, and accordingly to be adjusted to the 
State. Much has happened, indeed, in the last 
few decades to check that suspicion by the greater 
independence which the Churches have obtained ; 
but further progress in this direction is necessary, 
especially in regard to the freedom of individual 
communities. ‘lhe connexion with the State must 
not be violently severed, for the Churches have 
derived much advantage from it; but steps must 
be taken to further the development upon which 
we have entered. If this results in multifarious 
organisations in the Church, it will do no harm; on 
the contrary, it will remind us, in a forcible way, 
‘that these forms are all arbitrary. 


PROTESTANTISM 287 


Further, Protestantism was forced by its opposi- 
tion to Catholicism to lay exclusive emphasis on the 
inward character of religion, and upon “ faith alone” ; 
but to formulate one doctrine in sharp opposition to 
another is always a dangerous process. ‘lhe man in 
the street is not sorry to hear that ‘good works” are 
unnecessary, nay, that they constitute a danger to 
the soul. Although Luther is not responsible for the 
convenient misunderstanding that ensued, the in- 
evitable result was that in the reformed Churches in 
Germany from the very start there were accusations 
of moral laxity and a want of serious purpose in the 
sanctification of life. The saying “If ye love me, 


Pr] 


keep my commandments ” was unwarrantably thrust 
into the background. Not until the Pietistic move- 
ment arose was its central importance once more 
recognised. Up till then the pendulum of the 
conduct of hfe took a suspicious swing in the 
contrary direction, out of opposition to the Catholic 
“justification by works.” But religion is not only a 
state of the heart; it is a deed as well; it is faith 
active in love and in the sanctification of life. This 
is a truth with which evangelical Christians must 
become much better acquainted, if they are not to 
be put to shame. 

There is another point closely connected with what 
I have just mentioned. The Reformation abolished 
monasticism, and was bound to abolish it. It rightly 
affirmed that to take a vow of lifelong asceticism was 
a piece of presumption; and it rightly considered 


288 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


that any worldly vocation, conscientiously followed 
in the sight of God, was equal to, nay, was better 
than, being a monk. But something now happened 
which Luther neither foresaw nor desired: ‘“ mon- 
asticism,’ of the kind that is conceivable and neces- 
sary in the evangelical sense of the word, disappeared 
altogether. But every community stands in need of 
personalities living exclusively for its ends. The 
Church, for instance, needs volunteers who will 
abandon. every other pursuit, renounce ‘the world,” 
and devote themselves entirely to the service of their 
neighbour ; not because such a vocation is “a higher 
one,” but because it is a necessary one, and because 
no Church can live without also giving rise to this 
desire. But in the evangelical Churches the desire 
has been checked by the decided attitude which they 
‘have been compelled to adopt towards Catholicism. 
It is a high price that we have paid; nor can the 
price be reduced by considering, on the other hand, 
how much simple and unattected religious fervour 
has been kindled in home and family life. We may 
rejoice, however, that in the past century a beginning 
has been made in the direction of recouping this loss. 
In the institution of deaconesses and many cognate 
phenomena the evangelical Churches are getting back 
what they once ejected through their inability to 
recognise it in the form which it then took. But 
it must undergo a much ampler and more varied 
development. 

Not only had the Reformation to pay a high price ; 


PROTESTANTISM . 289 


it was also incapable of perceiving all the conclusions 
to which its new ideas led, and of giving them pure 
effect. It is not that the work which it did was not 
absolutely valid and permanent in every particular— 
how could that be, and who could desire it to have 
been so? No! it remained stationary in its develop- 
ment even at the point at which, to judge by the 
earnest foundation that was laid at the start, higher 
things might have been expected. Various causes 
combined to produce this result. From the year 
1526 onwards national Churches had to be founded 
at headlong speed on evangelical lines; they were 
forced to be ‘rounded and complete” at a time 
when much was still in a state of flux. Then again, 
a mistrust of the left wing, of the “ enthusiasts,” 
induced the Churches to offer an energetic resistance 
to tendencies which they could have accompanied for 
a good bit of their way. Luther’s unwillingness to 
have anything to do with them, nay, the manner in 
which he bécame suspicious of his own ideas when 
they coincided with those of the ‘“ enthusiasts,” was 
bitterly avenged and came home to the evangelical 
Churches in the Age of Enlightenment. Even at the 
risk of being reckoned among Luther's detractors, we 
must go further. This genius had a faith as robust 
as Paul’s, and thereby an immense power over the 
minds and hearts of men; but he was not abreast 
of the knowledge accessible even in his own time. 
The naive age had gone by; it was an age of deep 


feeling, of progress, an age in which religion could 
3 T 


290 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


not avoid contact with all the powers of mind. In 
this age it was his destiny to be forced to be not 
only a reformer but also an intellectual and spiritual 
leader and teacher. The way of looking at the world 
and at history he had te plan afresh for generations ; 
for there was no one there to help him, and to no 
one else would people listen. But he had not all 
the resources of clear knowledge at his command. 
Lastly, he was always anxious to go back to the 
original, to the Gospel itself, and, so far as it was 
possible to do 1t by intuition and inward experience, 
he did it; moreover, he made some admirable studies 
in history, and in many places broke victoriously 
through the serried lines of the traditional dogmas. 
But any trustworthy knowledge of the history of 
those dogmas was as yet an impossibility, and still 
less was any historical acquaintance with the New 
Testament and primitive Christianity attainable. It 
is marvellous how in spite of all this Luther possessed 
so much power of penetration and sound judgment. 
We have only to look at his introductions to the books 
of the New Testament, or at his treatise on ‘‘ Churches 
and Councils.” But there were countless problems of 
which he did not even know, to say nothing of being 
able to solve them; and so it was that he had no 
means of distinguishing between kernel and husk, 
between what was original and what was of alien 
growth. How can we be surprised, then, if in its 
doctrine, and in the view which it took of history, the 
Reformation was far from being a finished product ; 


PROTESTANTISM 291 


and that, where it perceived no problems, confusion 
in its own ideas was inevitable? It could not, like 
Pallas Athene, spring complete from Jupiter's head ; 
as doctrine it could do no more than mark a begin- 
ning, and it had to reckon on future development. 
But by being rapidly formed into national Churches 
it came near to itself cutting short its further de- 
velopment for all time. 

As regards the confusion and the checks which it 
brought upon itself, we must content ourselves with 
referring to a few leading points. Firstly, Luther 
would admit nothing but the Gospel, nothing but 
what frees and binds the consciences of men, what 
everyone, down to the man-servant and the maid- 
servant, can understand. But then he not only took 
the old dogmas of the Trinity and the two natures 
as part of the Gospel—he was not in a position to 
examine them historically—and even framed new 
ones, but he was absolutely incapable of making any 
sound distinction between “doctrine” and Gospel ; 
in this respect falling far behind Paul. The neces- 
sary result was that intellectualism was still in the 
ascendant ; that a scholastic doctrine was again set 
up as necessary to salvation; and that two classes of ° 
Christians once more arose: those who understand 
the doctrine, and the minors who are dependent on 
the others’ understanding of it. 

Secondly, Luther was convinced that that alone is 
the “Word of God” whereby a man is inwardly 
born anew—the message of the free grace of God in 


292 _ WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


Christ. At the highest levels to which he attained 
in his life he was free from every sort of bondage 
to the letter. What a capacity he had for distin- 
euishing between law and Gospel, between Old and 
New Testament, nay, for distinguishing in the New 
Testament itself! All that he would recognise was 
the kernel of the matter, clearly revealed as it is in 
these books, and proving its power by its effect on 
the soul. But he did not make a clean sweep. In 
cases where he had found the letter important, he 
demanded submission to the “it is written”; and he 
demanded it peremptorily, without recollecting that, 
where other sayings of the Scriptures were concerned, 
he himself had declared the “it is written” to be 
of no binding force. 

Thirdly, grace is the forgiveness of sins, and there- 
fore the assurance of possessing a God of grace, and 
life, and salvation. How often Luther repeated this, 
always with the addition that what was efficacious 
here was the Word—that union of the soul with 
God in the trust and childlike reverence which God’s 
Word inspires ; it was a personal relation which was 
here involved. But the same man allowed himself 
to be inveigled into the most painful controversies 
about the means of grace, about communion, and 
infant baptism. These were struggles in which he 
ran the risk of again exchanging his high conception 
of grace for the Catholic conception, as well as of 
sacrificing the fundamental idea that it is a purely- 
spiritual possession that is in question, and _ that, 


PROTESTANTISM 293 


compared with Word and faith, all else is of no 
importance. What he here bequeathed to his Church 
has become a legacy of woe. 

Fourthly, the counter-Church which, as was in- 
evitable, rapidly arose in opposition to the Roman 
Church, and under the pressure which that Church 
exercised, perceived, not without reason, that its 
truth and its title lay in the re-establishment of 
the Gospel. But whilst the counter-Church privily 
identified the sum and substance of its doctrine 
with the Gospel, the thought also stole in surrepti- 
tiously : We, that is to say, the particular Churches 
which had now sprung up, are the true Church. 
Luther, of course, was never able to forget that the 
true Church was the sacred community of the faith- 
ful; but still he had no clear ideas as to the relation 
between it and the visible new Church which had 
now arisen, and subsequent generations settled down 
more and more into the sad misunderstanding : 
We are the true Church because we have the right 
“doctrine.” This misunderstanding, besides giving 
rise to evil results in self-infatuation and intolerance, 
still further strengthened that mischievous distinc- 
tion between theologians and clergy on the one side, 
and the laity on the other, on which we have already 
dwelt. Not, perhaps, in theory, but certainly in 
practice, a double form of Christianity arose, just 
as in Catholicism; and in spite of the efforts of the 
Pietistic movement, it still remains with us to-day. 
The theologian and the clergyman must defend the 


294 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


whole doctrine, and be orthodox; for the layman 
it suffices if he adheres to certain leading points and 
refrains from attacking the orthodox creed. A very 
well-known man, as I have been lately told, expressed 
the wish that a certain inconvenient theologian 
would go over to the philosophical faculty; ‘“‘ for 
then,’ he said, ‘‘instead of an unbelieving theo- 
logian we should have a_ believing philosopher.” 
Here we have the logical outcome of the contention 
that in the evangelical Churches, too, doctrine is 
something laid down for all time, and that in spite 
of being generally binding it is a matter of so much 
dithculty that the laity need not be expected to 
defend it. But if we persist on this path, and other 
confusions become worse confounded and take firmer 
root, there is a risk of Protestantism becoming a 
sorry double of Catholicism. I say a sorry double, 
because there are two things which Protestantism 
will never obtain, namely, a pope and monastic 
priests. Neither the letter of the Bible nor any 
belief embodied in creeds can ever produce the 
unconditional authority which Catholics possess in 
the pope; and Protestantism cannot now return to 
the monastic priest. It retains its national Churches 
and its married clergy, neither of which looks very 
stately by the side of Catholicism, if competition 
with Catholicism is what the evangelical Churches 
desire. 

Gentlemen, Protestantism is not yet, thank God, 
in such a bad way that the imperfections and con- 


PROTESTANTISM 295 


fusions in which it began have got the upperhand 
and entirely stunted or stifled its true character. 
Hiven those among us who are convinced that the 
Reformation in the sixteenth century is something 
that is over and done with are by no means ready 
to abandon the momentous ideas on which it was 
based, and there is a large field in which all earnest 
evangelical Christians are in complete unanimity. 
But if those who think that the Reformation is 
done with cannot see that its continuance in the 
sense of a pure understanding of God’s Word is a 
question of hfe and death for Protestantism—its 
continuance has already borne abundant fruit im 
associations like the Hvangelical Union—let them 
at least promote the liberty for which Luther fought 
in his best days: ‘Let the minds of men rush 
one against another and strike; if some are mean- 
while led astray—well! that 1s what we must expect 
in war; where there is battle and slaughter, some 
must fall and be wounded, but whoso fights honestly 
will receive the crown.” 

The reason why the catholicising of the Protestant 
Churches—I do not mean that they are becoming 
papal; I mean that they are becoming Churches of 
ordinance, doctrine, and ceremony—is so burning 
a question is that three powerful forces are work- 
ing together to further this development. First 
there is the indifference of the masses. The 
tendency of all indifference is to put religion on 
the same plane with authority and tradition, but 


296 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY? 


also with priests, hierarchies, and the cult of cere- 
monies. It puts religion there, and then goes on 
to complain of the external character and stationary 
condition of religion, and of the “ pretensions” of the . 
clergy ; nay, it is capable, apparently, at one and the 
same moment, of mingling those complaints with 
abuse, of contemptuously jeering at every active ex- 
pression of religious feeling, and doing homage to 
every kind of ceremony. This kind of indifference 
has no understanding whatever for evangelical Christi- 
anity, instinctively tries to suppress it, and praises 
Catholicism at its expense. The second of the 
forces to be taken into consideration is what I 
may call “natural religion.’ Those who live by 
fear and hope; whose chief endeavour is to find 
some authority in matters of religion; who are 
eager to be rid of their own responsibility and 
want to be reassured; who are looking for some 
“adjunct” to life, whether in its solemn hours or 
in its worst distress, some esthetic transfiguration, 
or some violent form of assistance till time itself 
assists—all these people are also, without being 
aware of it, putting religion on the Catholic plane ; 
they want ‘‘something that they can lean upon,” 
and a good deal else, too—all kinds of things to 
stir them up and help them; but they do not 
want the Christianity of the Gospel. But the 
Christianity of the Gospel in yielding to such 
demands becomes Catholic Christianity. The third 
force I mention unwillingly, and yet I cannot pass 


PROTESTANTISM 297 


it over in silence; it is the State. We must not 
blame the State for setting chief store by the con- 
servative influence which religion and the Churches 
exercise, and the subsidiary effects which they pro- 
duce in respect of reverence, obedience, and public 
order. But this is just the reason why the State 
exercises pressure in this direction, protects all the 
elements of stability in the Churches, and seeks to 
keep them from every inner movement that would call 
their unity and their “ public utility” in question ; 
nay, it has tried often enough to approximate the 
Church to the police, and employ it as a means 
of maintaining order in the State. We can pardon 
this—let the State take the means of power where- 
ever it can find them; but the Church must not 
allow itself to be made into a pliant instrument ; 
for, side by side with all the desolating consequences 
to its vocation and prestige, it would thereby become 
an outward institution im which public order is of 
greater consequence than the spirit, form more 
important than matter, and obedience of higher 
value than truth. 

In the face of these three so different forces, what 
we have to do is to maintain Christian earnestness 
and liberty as presented in the Gospel. Theology 
alone 1s unavailing ; what is wanted is firmness of 
Christian character. The evangelical Churches will 
be pushed into the background if they do not make 
a stand, It was out of such free creations as the 
Pauline communities were that the Catholic Church 


298 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY 


once arose. Who can guarantee that those Churches, 
too, will not become ‘‘ Catholic” which had _ their 
origin in “the liberty of a Christian man” ? 

That, however, would not involve the destruction 
of the Gospel: so much, at least, history proves. It 
would be still traceable lke a red thread in the 
centre of the web, and somewhere or other it 
would emerge afresh, and free itself from its en- 
tangling connexions. Even in the outwardly decor- 
ated but inwardly decayed temples of the Greek 
and Roman Church it has not been effaced. 
“Venture onwards! deep down in a vault you will 
still find the altar and its sacred, ever-burning 
lamp!” This Gospel, associated as it was with 
the speculative ideas and the mystery-worship of 
the Greeks, yet did not perish in them; united 
with the Roman Empire, it held its own even in 
this fusion, nay, out of it gave birth to the Re- 
formation. Its dogmatic doctrines, its ordinances 
of public worship, have changed; nay, what is 
much more, it has been embraced by the simplest 
and purest minds and by the greatest thinkers; it 
endeared itself to a St. Francis and to a Newton. 
It has outlived all the changing philosophies of the 
world; it has cast off like a garment forms and 
ideas which were once sacred; it has participated 
in the entire progress of civilisation ; it has become 
spiritualised, and in the course of history it has 
learnt how to make a surer application of its ethical 
principles. In its original earnestness and in the 


THE GOSPEL 299 


consolation which it offers, it has come home to 
thousands in all ages; and in all ages, too, it has 
thrown off all its encumbrances, and broken down 
all barriers. If we were right in saying that the 
Gospel is the knowledge and recognition of God 
as the Father, the certainty of redemption, humility 
and joy in God, energy and brotherly love; if it 
is essential to this religion that the founder must 
not be forgotten over his message, nor the message 
over the founder, history shows us that the Gospel 
has, in point of fact, remamed in force, struggling 
again and again to the surface. 


You will perhaps have felt that I have not entered 
into present questions, the relation, namely, of the 
Gospel to our present intellectual condition, our 
whole knowledge of the world, and our task therein. 
But to do this with any success in regard to the 
actual situation of affairs would require longer 
than a few fleeting hours. As regards the kernel 
of the matter, however, | have said all that is 
needful, for no new phase in the history of the > 
Christian Religion has occurred since the Reforma- / 
tion. Our knowledge of the world has undergone 
enormous changes—every century since the Refor- 
mation marks an advance, the most important being 
those in the last two; but, looked at from a religious 
and ethical point of view, the forces and principles 
of the Reformation have not been outrun or rendered 
obsolete. We need only grasp them in their purity 


300 WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


and courageously apply them, and modern ideas will 
not put any new difficulties in their way. The real 
difficulties in the way of the religion of the Gospel 
remain the old ones. In face of them we can “prove” 
nothing, for our proofs are only variations of our 
convictions. But the course which history has taken 
has surely opened up a wide province, in which the 
Christian sense of brotherhood must give practical 
proof of itself quite otherwise than it knew how, or 
was able, to do in the early centuries—I mean the 
social province. Here a tremendous task confronts 
us, and in the measure in which we accomplish it 
shall we be able to answer with a better heart 
the deepest of all questions—the question of the 
mening of life. 


Gentlemen, it is religion, the love of God and 
neighbour, which gives life a meaning; knowledge 
cannot do it. Let me, if you please, speak of my 
own experience, as one who for thirty years has 
taken an earnest interest in these things. Pure 
knowledge is a glorious thing, and woe to the man 
who holds it light or blunts his sense for it. But 
to the question, Whence, whither, and to what pur- 
pose, it gives an answer to-day as little as it did two 
or three thousand years ago. It does, indeed, in- 
struct us in facts; it detects inconsistencies ; it links 
phenomena; it corrects the deceptions of sense and 
idea. But where and how the curve of the world 
and the curve of our own life begin—that curve of 


RELIGION 301 


which it shows us only a section—and whither this 
curve leads, knowledge does not tell us. But if with 
a steady will we affirm the forces and the standards 
which on the summits of our inner life shine out as 
our highest good, nay, as our real self; if we are 
earnest and courageous enough to accept them as 
the great Reality and direct our lives by them; and 
if we then look at the course of mankind’s history, 
follow its upward development, and search, in strenu- 
ous and patient service, for the communion of minds 
in it, we shall not faint in weariness and despair, but 
become certain of God, of the God whom Jesus Christ 
ealled his Father, and who is also our Father. 


THE END. 


PRINTED BY 
NEILL AND COMPANY LIMITED 


‘ 


EDINBURGH ts 


THE 


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION 
LIBRARY. 


Hew Series. 


A Series of Translations by which the best results of recent Theological 
investigations on the Continent, conducted without reference to doctrinal 
considerations, and with the sole purpose of arriving at truth, will 
be placed within reach of English Readers. 


SUBSCRIPTION IN ADVANCE— 


For a Year’s issue of Three Volumes, 21s. net; 22s. 6d. Post Free. 
Single Volumes, Cloth, 10s. 6d.; Half-leather, 12s. 6d. 


Just published. FIFTH YEAR. VOL. I. 


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE TEXTUAL 
CRITICISM OF THE GREEK 
NEW TESTAMENT. 


By Prof. EBERHARD NESTLE of Maulbronn. Translated by WM. EpIE, B.D., 
and Edited by Prof. ALLAN MENzIxEs, D.D., of St. Andrews. 


With Eleven Reproductions of Texts. 


Prof. Eberhard Nestle, now of Maulbronn, has done much to facilitate the study of the text 
of the New Testament. His ‘‘ Novum Testamentum Graece”’ is highly valued by all who 
know it as giving in the smallest bulk, and at a very low price, the text now approved by critics 
and his contributions to theological magazines in this country, mostly on textual questions, have 
made his name familiar. His ‘‘ Hinfiihrung in das Griechische Neue Testament ” has had a great 
success in Germany, and has specially recommended itself to students. It is believed that the 
translation of this book will be welcomed by theological teachers and students in this country 
also. Written by one whose life has been spent in teaching, it gives in a clear and lively way 
what the student requires to know of the complex subject of Textual Criticism. A much smaller 
book than Scrivener’s ‘‘ Introduction,” which few can afford to buy, it is fuller than the small 
handbooks of Haumard, Schaff, and Kenyon, and shows criticism in actual operation at the hands 
of a competent scholar. 


In Half-leather, 12s. 6d. 
BPLIPLH ViEAR, -“ VOLAIE 


WHAT IS CHRISTIANITY ? 


BY 


ADOLPH HARNACK, 


Rector and Ordinary Professor of Church History in the University, and Fellow 
of the Royal Academy of Science, Berlin. 


Translated by T. BAILEY SAUNDERS, with a Special Preface to the 
English Edition by the Author. 


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION LIBRARY—NEW SERIES—covdd. 


All uniform in style and binding, 


Demy 8vo, Cloth, tos. 6a. per 


volume. 


THE-APOSTOLIC ‘AGE. 


EY Prof. CARL VON WEIZSACKER. 


‘* Weizsiicker is an authority of the very first 
rank, the present work marks an epoch in New 
Testament criticism. The English reader is 
fortunate in having a masterpiece of this kind 
rendered accessible to him.” — EA xfository 
Times. 

re No student of theology or of the 
early history of Christianity can afford to leave 
Weizsicker’s great book unread.” —Manchester 
Guardian. 


“In every direction in this work we find the 
mark of the independent thinker and investi- 


gator . .. . this remarkable volume.... 
this able and learned work... .. "—Christian 
Wortd. 


Translated by James Millar, D.D. 


2 vols. 


“The book itself . ... is of great interest, 
and the work of the translation has been done 
in a most satisfactory way.’—Cvitical Review. 


“One thing that must strike every reader is 
that the volume is very readable and very in- 
teresting.” —Scotsman. 


“We part from the book with warm admira- 
tion for the qualities displayed by the author, 
tempered with regret that his undue scepticism 
as to the Acts has imparted a defective quality 
to a work which, apart from this, would have 
been as nearly perfect as we could have ex- 
pected. We must add a tribute to the general 
excellence of the translation, which reads like 
an English book asa rule.” —Primitzve Metho- 
dist Quarterly. 


A HISTORY OF THE HEBREWS. 
By R. Kirre., Ordinary Professor of Theology in the University of Breslau. In 


2 vols. 
death of Joshua. 


Vol. I. Sources of Information and History of the Period up to the 
Translated by John Taylor, 


D.Lit., M.A. Vol. II. 


Sources of Information and History of the Period down ‘to the Babylonian 


Exile. 


‘“Tt is a sober and earnest reconstruction, 
for which every earnest student of the Old 
Testament should be grateful.”— Chrvistzan 
World. 


“Tt is a work which cannot fail to attract 
the attention of thoughtful people in this 
country.’—Pall Mall Gazette. 


| parsonage.”—Literary 


Translated by Hope W. Hogg, B.D., and E. B. Speirs, D.D. 


‘* Dr. Taylor’s translation is very readable.” 
—Manchester Guardian. 

“There are few works on this subject so 
luminous and so instructive.” —Glase. Herald. 

“Tt will be a happy day for pulpit and pew: 
when a well-thumbed copy of the History of 
the Hebrews is to be found in every manse and 
World. 


THE COMMUNION OF THE CHRISTIAN 
WITH GOD. 


A Discussion in agreement with the view of Luther. 
Professor of Dogmatic Theology in the University of Marburg. 


Dr. Theol., 


By W. HERMANN, 


Translated from the Second thoroughly Revised Edition, with Special 
Annotations by the Author, by J. Sandys Stanyon, M.A. One Vol. 


“Tt will be seen from what has been said 
that this book is a very important one... . . 
The translation is also exceedingly well done.” 
—Critical Review. 


“Though the reader may not always find 
himself in agreement with Dr. Hermann’s 
views, he cannot fail to receive moral and 


spiritual benefit from the atmosphere by which 
the teaching is surrounded.”—Scotsman. 

‘We trust the book will be widely read, and 
should advise those who read it to do so twice.” 


 —Primitive Methodist Quarterly. 


“Instinct with genuine religious feeling 
. exceedingly interesting and suggestive.” 


—Glasgow Herald. 


A HISTORY OF DOGMA. 


By Dr. ADOLPH HARNACK, Rector and Ordinary Professor of Church History in 


the University, and Fellow of the Royal Academy of Science, Berlin. 
lated from the Third German Edition. 


Bruce, D.D. Seven Volumes, 
Suttable for Presentation. 


““ No work on Church History in recent times 
has had the influence of Professor Harnack’s 
History of Dogma.”—The Times. 


Trans- 
Edited by Rev. Professor A. B. 


Half-leather, 12s. 6d. per volume. 


‘“ A book which is admitted to be one of the 
most important theological works of the time.” 
—Daily News. 


N.B., 


—Harnack’s Hestory ee ee, is issued in the United States of America 


by Messrs. Little, Brown, & Co., Boston, Mass. 


A CATALOGUE 


OF SOME OF 


WILLIAMS & NORGATE’S 


THEOLOGICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS. 


ALVIELLA (Count Goblet d’) The 
Contemporary Evolution of Religious 
Thought in England, America, and 


India. Translated from the French, | 
by the Rev. J. Moden. 8vo, cloth. 
10s. 6d. | 


Evolution of the Idea of God, 
according to Anthropology and His- 
tory. ‘Translated by the Rev. P. H. 
Wicksteed. (Hibbert Lectures, 1891.) 
Cloth. 10s. 6d. (Cheap Ed., 3s. 6d.) 


BARNABAS’ Epistle, in Greek, from | 


the Sinaitic Manuscript of the Bible, 


with a Translation by 8S. Sharpe, | 


Crown 8vo, cloth:: 2s. 6d. 


BARROW (E. P., M.A.) 
Evangelium. A Survey of the Teach- 
ing of Jesus Christ. Crown 8vo, 
cloth. 6s. 


BAUR (F. C.) Church History of. 


the First Three Centuries. Trans- 
lated from the Third German Edition. 
Edited by Rev. Allan Menzies. 2 vols. 


8vo, cloth. (Vide Theological Trans- 
lation Fund.) 12s. 
Paul, the Apostle of Jesus 


Christ, his Life and Work, his 
Epistles and Doctrine. A Contri- 
bution to a Critical History of Primi- 
tive Christianity. By Rev. Allan 
Menzies. 2nd Edition, 2 vols. 8vo, 


Regni — 


cloth. (Vide Theological Translation 
Fund.) 12s. 


BAYNES (H.) The Idea of God 
and the Moral Sense in the light of 
Language; being a philological En- 
quiry into the rise and growth of 
Spiritual and Moral Concepts, 8vo, 
cloth. 10s. 6d. 


' BEARD (Rev. Dr. C.) The Uni- 


versal Christ, and other Sermons. 
Crown 8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d. 


Lectures on the Reformation of 
the Sixteenth Century in its relation 
to Modern Thought and Knowledge. 
(Hibbert Lectures, 1883.) 8vo, cloth. 
10s. 6d. (Cheap Edition, 3rd Edi- 
tion, 3s. 6d.) 


BEARD (Rev. Dr. John R.) The 


Autobiography of Satan. Crown 8vo, 


cloth. 7s. 6d. 


_ Bible, translated by Samuel Sharpe, 


being a Revision of the Authorized 
English Version. 6th KEdition of 
the Old, 10th Edition of the New 
Testament. 8vo, roan. 5s, 


vide also Testament, 


Biblia Hebraica ad optimos editiones, 
imprimis, E. van der Hooght recensa 
et expressa. Chr. C. G. G. Theile, 
Lips., 1889. 7s. 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


g Williams and Norgate’s 


BLEEK (F.) Lectures on the Apo- | CURTIN 


calypse. Translated. Edited by the Rev. 
Dr. S. Davidson. 8vo, cloth. (Vide 
Theological Translation Fund.) 6s. 


CAMPBELL (Rev. Colin, D.D.) The 
First Three Gospels in Greek. Avr- 
ranged in Parallel Columns. Demy 
8vo. Second Edition, Revised and 
Improved. Cloth. 5s. nett. 


CHANNING’S Complete Works, 
including “The Perfect Life,” and 
containing a copious general Index 
and a Table of Scripture References. 
Tenth Thousand. 658 pp. Demy 
Ato, cloth. 7s. 6d. | 


CLARK (Archd. Jas.) De Succes- 
sione Apostolica nec non Missione et 
Jurisdictione Hierarchiae Anglicanae 
et, Catholicae. 8vo. (Georgetown, 
Guiana.) Cloth. 21s. 


Seven Ages of the Church; 
or Exposition of the Apocalypse. 
Sewed. ls. 


COLLINS (F. H.) An Epitome of 
the Synthetic Philosophy. By F. 
Howard Collins. With a Preface by 
Herbert Spencer. 
Synthetic Philosophy Completed. 
8vo, cloth. 21s. 

Common Prayer for Christian 
Worship : in Ten Services for Morn- 
ing and Evening. 32mo, ¢loth. 
1s. 6d. Also in 8vo, cloth, 3s. 

CONWAY (Moncure D.) Centenary 
History of the South Place Ethical 
Society. With numerous Portraits, 
a facsimile of the original MS. of the 
hymn, “ Nearer, my God, to Thee,” 
and Appendices. 
vellum, paper sides. 5s. 

Critical Review (The) of Theological 
and Philosophical Literature. Edited 
by Principal S. D. F. Salmond, D.D., 
F.E.1.8. Bi-monthly parts, 1s. 6d. nett; 
yearly subscriptions 8s. 6d. post free. 

CURETON (Dr. W.) History of the 
Martyrs in Palestine, by Eusebius, 
in Syriac. Edited and translated. 
Royal 8vo, cloth. 10s. 6d. 


4th Edition. The | 


Crown 8vo, half- 


(Jeremiah) Creation 
Myths of Primitive America in rela- 
tion to the Religious History and 
Mental Development of Mankind. 
Author of “ Myths and Folk-Tales of 
Ireland,” etc. It contains Twenty 
Long Myths taken down word for 
word by Mr. Curtin from Indians who 
knew no religion or language but 
their own, and many of whom had 
not seen a white man until they had 
attained years of maturity. With 
an elaborate Introduction and Notes. 
Demy 8vo, cloth. 10s. 6d. nett. 
‘There can be no doubt that Mr. Curtin has 

collected a number of traditions that will be of 

great interest to students of the beliefs of savage 
and undeveloped races.” —WVature. 
‘Mr. Curtin is to be congratulated on having 


produced a book on an abstruse subject, which 
can be read by the student with profit, and by 
the amateur not without pleasure.”—Critie. 
_ “Mr, Curtin’s book is most welcome... .. 
delightful collection of primitive creation myths, 
which will help the student to understand the 
problem of man’s early conceptions of the 
universe.’ —Atheneum. 

‘‘This is a specially valuable contribution to 
folk-lore. The American myths have a place of 
their own in the science, and the analogies and 
differences which we can discern between them 
and those of the Old World are instructive in no 
common degree.’’—Spectator. 

‘Of great scientific value.” — Hxpository 
Times. 

‘Deserves the attention of every student of 
folk-lore.”—Manchester Guardian. 


DAVIDS (T. W. Rhys) Lectures on 
some Points in the History of Indian 
Buddhism. (Hibbert Lectures, 1881.) 

- 9nd Edition. 8vo, cloth. 10s. 6d. 
(Cheap Edition, 3s. 62.) 


DELITZSCH (Prof. F.) Assyrian 
Grammar, with Paradigms, Exercises, 
Glossary,and Bibliography, Translated 
by the Rev. Prof. A. R. 8. Kennedy. 
Crown 8vo, cloth. 15s. 


The Hebrew Language 
viewed in the light of Assyrian Re- 
search. Demy 8vo, cloth. 4s. 


Die Massorah der Ostlichen und 
Westlichen Syrer in Ihren Angaben 
zum Propheten Jesaia, Nach fiinf 
Handschriften des British Museum 


in Verbindung mit zwei Tractaten- 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


: 
| 
| 


Theological Catalogue. 3 


iiber Accente herausgegeben und 
bearbeitet von Gustav Diettrich, 
Pfarrer der Deutschen Evangelischen 
Gemeinde zu Sydenham. Cr. 8vo, 
sewed, 8s. 6d. nett. 


DRUMMOND (Dr.) Philo Judeus; 


or, the Jewish Alexandrian Philo- | 


sophy in its Development and Com- 
pletion, By James Drummond, 
LL.D., Principal of Manchester New 
College, Oxford. 2vols. 8vo, cloth. 
21s. 


“This treatise of Dr. Drummond’s fills a 
place of its own in the English language, and 
may be put beside, or even above, the best 
German books on the subject.” —Athencewm. 


Via, Veritas, Vita. Lectures 
on Christianity in its most Simple 
and Intelligible Form. (The Hibbert 
Lectures, 1894.) 10s. 6d. (Cheap 
Edition, 3s. 6d.) 


Echoes of Holy Thoughts: Ar- 
ranged as Private Meditations before 
a First Communion. 2nd Edition, 
with a Preface by Rev. J. Hamilton 
Thom. Printed with red lines. Feap. 
8vo, cloth. ls. 


EWALD’S (Dr. H.) Commentary 
on the Prophets of the Old Testa- 
ment. Translated by the Rev. J. F, 
Smith, [Vol. I. General Introduc- 
tion, Yoel, Amos, Hosea, and Zak- 
harya 9—11. Vol. II. Yesaya, 
Obadya, and Mikah. Vol. III. 

'Nahfim, Ssephanya, Habaqqtiq, 
Zacharya, Yéremya. Vol. IV. Heze- 
Kiel, Yesaya.. xl.—Ixvi.. - Vol. V. 
Haggai, Zakharya, Malaki, Jona, 
Baruc, Daniel, Appendix and Index. | 
5 vols, 8vo. (Vide Theological 
Translation Fund.) Cloth. Each 6s. 

Commentary on the Psalms. 

Translated by the Rev. E. Johnson, 


M.A. 2 vols. (Vide Theological 
Translation Fund.) § 8vo, cloth. 
Each 6s, 


Commentary on the Book of 
Job, with Translation. Translated 


from the German by the Rev. J.. 


Frederick Smith. (Vide Theological 
Translation Fund.) 8vo, cloth. 6s. 


FIGG (E. G.) Analysis of Theology, 


Natural and Revealed. Crown 8vo, 
cloth. 6s. 


Four Gospels (The) as Historical 
Records. (Anonymous.) Demy 8vo, 
15s. 


‘The conclusions here reached are justified 
and upheld, directly or by legitimate inference, 
by- the series of judgments which have been 
delivered by the Sovereign in Council as the 
final interpreter of the standards and formularies 
of the Church of England,” — Extract from 
Preface. 

‘The facts to which he addresses himself are 
those relating to the Four Gospels. He comes 
to very different conclusions from those that are 
generally accepted in the Church to which he 
belongs—the Church of England. But he claims 
that though this is the case his position is entirely 
tenable according to the terms of the constitution 
of that Church... .. The great ability and 
abundant learning which it everywhere dis- 
plays.’ —Scotsman. 

‘“The anonymous author of this volume is a 
keen and uncompromising critic of the Gospel 
narratives. Undeterred by the fact that the 

uestions raised by him concerning the origin of 
the Gospels and their historical credibility have 
been raised over and over again, and, to say the 
least, have not been decided in the negative sense, 
he discusses them afresh with an undisguised 
negative bias. The controversy thus raised 
afresh is of a vast and momentous character, 
His Christian belief—for he writes as a Christian 
and even as a Churchman—appears to be founded 
on a mystical or spiritual interpretation of the 
Nicene creed.” —Times. 

‘This anonymous treatise is admirably printed 
and got up, and written in a fine, jaunty style. 
The object of this is to demolish and lay flat the 
Acts and the Four Gospels by one cannonade.”— 
Sat. Review. 


Free Inquiry (A) into the Origin 
of the Fourth Gospel. (Written 
anonymously.) 456 pp. Demy 8vo, 
cloth. 7s. 6d. 


FUERST (Dr. Jul.) Hebrew and 
Chaldee Lexicon to the Old Testa- 
ment. 5th Edition, improved and 
enlarged. Translated by Rey. Dr. 
SamuelDavidson. Royal8vo,cl. 21s. 


GILL (C.) The Evolution of Chris 
tianity. By Charles Gill. 2nd Edition. 
With Dissertations in Answer to Cri- 
ticism. 8vo, cloth. 12s. 


The Book of Enoch the 
Prophet. Translated from an Ethi- 
opic M.S. in the Bodleian Library, by 
the late Richard Laurence, LL.D., 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


4 Williams and Norgate’s 


Archbishop of Cashel. The Text 
corrected from his latest Notes by 
Charles Gill. Re-issue, 8vo, cloth. 5s. 


Gospel Catechism. An Unsectarian 
Christian Primer. For use in Families 
and Schools. By the author of “King 
and Kingdom,” Discipleship, ete. 
Medium Svo, in stiff paper wrapper. 
ls. 


GOULD (Rev. S. Baring’) Lost and 


Hostile Gospels. An Account of 
the Toledoth Jesher, two Hebrew 
Gospels circulating in the Middle 
Ages, and Extant Fragments of the 
Gospels of the first Three Centuries 
of Petrine and Pauline Origin. Crown 
8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d. 


GWYNN (The Very Rev. John, 


D.D.) On a Syriac MS. of the New 
Testament belonging to the Earl of 
Crawford and Balcarres, and on an 
inedited version of the Apocalypse 


therein contained, Trans. R.I.A. 
XXX. 10. Plate 21. 4to, sewed. 
os. 6d. 


HARDY (R. Spence) Manual of 
Buddhism in its Modern Develop- 
ment. ‘Translated from Singhalese 
MSS. 2nd Edition, with a complete 
Index and Glossary. 8vo, cloth. 
21s, 


HARNACK (Dr. Adolph, Ordinary 

Professor of Church History in the 

University, and Fellow of the Royal 

Academy of Science, Berlin) History 

of Dogma. Translated from the Third 

Xerman Edition. Edited by Rev. 

Prof, A. B. Bruce, D.D. Vols. I.—VI. 

(VideTheological Translation Library, 

New Series.) Demy 8vo. 

*¢This valuable work, the translation of which 
may be justly regarded as one of the most im- 
portant events that has happened of recent 
times to our theological literature. We earn- 
estly hope that many of our readers will find 
it possible to procure this and the other works 
of the Theological Translation Library.”—Primi- 
tive Methodist Quarterly. 

‘““The translation is good . . creditably 
free from the barbarisms so common in transla- 


tions, and can be read with pleasure.” —Principal 
RAINY in The Critical Review, 


**No work on Church History in recent times 
has had the influence of Professor Harnack’s 
History of Dogma.”——The Times. - 

“The third volume of Harnack’s History of 
Dogma needs but the announcement of its issue. 
The work is known ; the translator now is known 
also. One wondered if ever we were to see The 
History of Dogma in English; no one hoped to 
see it in better English than this.’’--Haxpository 
Times. 

ph . A book which is admitted to be one 
of the most important theological works of the 
time.”—Datly News. 

“*Tt is needless to expatiate on the value of 
Harnack’s works. ... for thorough study no 
history of Dogma is so full and suggestive as 
this. Greater praise cannot be given to the 
translation than to say that it is worthy of the 
original, and that must in justice be said.”-= 
Interature. 


HATCH (Rev. Dr.) Lectures on 
the Influence of Greek Ideas and 
Usages upon the Christian: Church, 
Edited by Dr. Fairbairn, (Hibbert 
Lectures, 1888.) 3rd Edition. 8vo, 
cloth. 10s.6d. (Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.) 


HAUSRATH (Prof. A.) History of 
the New Testament Times. The 
Time of Jesus. Translated by the 
Revds. C. T. Poynting and P. Quenzer. 
2 vols. 8vo, cloth. (Vide Theologi- 
cal Translation Fund.) 12s. 


History of the New Testa- 
ment Times. The Time of the Apos- 
tles. Translated by Leonard Huxley. 
With a Preface by Mrs. Humphry 
Ward. 4 vols, 8vo, cloth. 42s. 


From the two latest Reviews: 


“He is something of a German Renan. He 
has won his spurs in the field of Historical 
Research. He has a brilliant and fascinating 
style, and works for the public as well as for the 
scholar. Christian students of every school 
may profit by his fine historical sense and 
descriptive power.’’—Christian World. 

“‘For insight and graphic portraiture the 
work is sure to take high place among translated 
theology of the most attractive sort. As Mrs. 
Ward says, Hausrath’s is a brilliant picture of 
the first Christian times, and Mr. Huxley has 
not blurred it.”—-Literary World. 


Hebrew Texts, in large type for 
Classes : 


Genesis. 2nd Ed. 16mo, cloth, Le 6d. 


Psalms. 16mo, cloth. ls. 
Isaiah. 16mo, cloth. ls. 
Job. 16mo, cloth. ls, 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, ’Onford. 


‘Theological 


HEMANS (Chas. I.) Historic and 
Monumental Rome. A Handbook 
for the Students of Classical and 
Christian Antiquities in the Italian 
Capital. Crown 8&vo, ‘cloth. 
10s, 6d. 


HERRMANN (W.) The Communion 
of the Christian with God: 
cussion in agreement with the View 
of Luther. By W. Herrmann, Dr. 


Theol., Professor of Dogmatic Theo- | 


exceedingly interesting and suggestive.”-—Glas- 


- logy in the University of Marburg. 


a Dis- | 


Catalogue. 5 


Translated from the Second thoroughly 

revised Edition, with special Annota- 

tions by the Author, by J. Sandys 

Stanyon, M.A. 1 vol. Demy 

8vo. 

“Tt will be seen from what has been said that 
this: book is a very important one..... 1@ 
translation is also exceedingly well done.”— 


Critical Remew. 
*¢ We trust the book will be widely read, and 


_ should advise those who read it to do so twice.” 
| —Primitive Methodist Quarterly. 


** Instinct with genuine religious feeling. . 


gow Herald. 


HIBBERT LECTURES (THE). 


Systematically arranged. 


CoMPARATIVE RELIGIONS, 
MONTEFIORE (C. G.) On the Origin 
and Growth of Religion as illus- 
trated by the Religion of the 
Ancient Hebrews. 2nd Edition. 


RENOUF (P. Le Page) On the Religion 
of Ancient Egypt. 2nd Edition. 


REVILLE (Prof. A.) On the Ancient 
Religions of Mexico and Peru. 
ord Edition. 


RHYS (Prof. J.) Gn the Origin and 
Growth of Religion as illustrated 
by Celtic Heathendom. 3rd 
Edition. 


RHYS DAVIDS (Prof. T. W.) On 
the Origin and Growth of Re- 
ligion as illustrated by some 
Points in the History of Indian 
Buddhism. 2nd Edition. 


SAYCE (Prof. A. H.) On the Religion 
of Ancient Assyria and Baby- 
lonia. 5th Edition. 


PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGIONS. 


D’ALVIELLA (Count G.) On the 
Evolution of the Idea of God. 
Translated by Rev. P. H. Wick- 
steed. 2nd Edition. 


Library Edition, demy 8vo, 10s. 
Cheap Popular Edition, 3s. 6d. per volume. 


| 


6d. per volume. 


KUENEN (Prof. A.) On National Re- 
ligions and Universal Religions. 


History oF REticions. 
BEARD (Rev.C.) On the Reformation 
of the Sixteenth Century in its 
Relation to Modern Thought and 
Knowledge. 3rd Edition. 
HATCH (Rev. Dr.) On the Influence 
of Greek Ideas and Usages upon 
the Christian Church. Edited 
by Dr. Fairbairn. 7th Edition. 
PFLEIDERER (Prof.) On the Influ- 
ence of the Apostle Paul on the 
Development of Christianity. 
Translated by the Rev. J. 
Frederick Smith. 2nd Edition. 
RENAN (M. E.) On the Influence of 
the Institutions, Thought, and 
Culture of Rome on Christianity, 
and the Development of the 
Catholic Church. Translated 
by the Rev. Charles Beard.» 4th- 
Edition. 


CHRISTIANITY® PRESENT-DAy PROBLEMS, 
DRUMMOND (Rev. Principal) Via, 
Veritas, Vita. Lectures on 
Christianity in its most Simple 

and intelligible form. 


UPTON (Rev. C.B., B.A.) On the Bases 
of Religious Belief. 2nd Edition. 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


6 : Williams and Norgate’s 


HOERNING (Dr. R.) The Karaite 
MSS., British Museum. The Karaite 
Exodus (i, to vii. 5) in 42 Autotype 
Facsimiles, with a Transcription in 
ordinary Arabic type. Together with 
Descriptions and Collation of that and 
five other MSS. of Portions of the 
Hebrew Bible in Arabic Characters 
in the same Collection. Royal 4to, 
cloth, gilt top. £2, 12s. 6d. 


HOPPS (Rev. J. Page) Pilgrim 
Songs. With 2 Portraits, 3s. 


Sermons of Sympathy. Cr. 
8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d. 


Twenty Sermons for our 
Day. $8vo, cloth. 2s. 


The Bible for Beginners. 
Vol. I. The Old Testament. Crown 
Svo, cloth. 2s. 


Bible Readings for Public 
Worship and the Home (106). Is. 6d. 


Pessimism, Science, and God. 
Crown 8vo, cloth. ls. nett. 


Death a Delusion: 


with an 


Account of some Personal Experiences | 


on the Border-land between Sense and 
soul. Crown 8vo, cloth. ls. nett. 


Verses by the Way. ls. 


Twelve Sunday Morning 
Prayers: for the Twelve Months of 
the Year. Ils. 


Personal Prayers. (20 in 
number, bound in grey and gold.) 1s. 


The Life of Jesus. Re-written 
for Young Disciples. 5th Edition. 
Richly bound as a gift-book. Is. 
Spirit-Life in God the Spirit: 
a Meditation on God and Immortality. 
Is. 


—— First Principles of Religion 
and Morality. 20 Lectures, mainly 
for the Young. Is. 


The Little Wicket Gate to 


Life. Guiding Thoughts for the 
Young. Is. 


HOPPS (Rev. J. Page) Who was 
Jehovah? Is. 

Scientific Basis of Belief in 

a Future Life. 6d. 

Common Prayer. 1s. 

— Coming Day. Pub. monthly, 
3d 


JONES (Rev. R. Crompton) Hymns 
of Duty and Faith, selected and ar- 
ranged. 247 pp. Foolscap 8vo, cloth. 
2nd Edition. 3s, 6d. | 

Chants, Psalms, and Can- 

ticles, selected and pointed for Chant- 

ing. 18mo, cloth. ls. 6d. 

Anthems, with Indexes and 

References to the Music. 18mo, cloth. 

ls, 3d. 

The Chants and Anthems, 
together in 1 vol. Cloth. 2s, 

—— A Book of Prayer, in Thirty 
Orders of Worship, with Additional 
Prayers and Thanksgivings. 18mo, 
cloth. 2s. 6d. 

The same, with Chants, in 1 vol. 
18mo, cloth. 3s. 

KAUTZSCH (E., Professor of Theo- 
logy at the University of Halle) An 
Outline of the History of the Litera- 
ture of the Old Testament. With 
Chronological Tables for the History 
of the Israelites, and other Aids to 
the Explanation of the Old Testament. | 
Reprinted from the ‘Supplement to 
the Translation of the Old Testa- 


ment.” Edited by the Author. 
Translated by John Taylor, D.Lit., 
M.A., ete. Demy 8vo, cloth. 
6s. 6d. 


‘‘There is no one who with open mind will 
read the book and not be better for it.’——Scots- 
man. 

‘ Nothing could be more admirable than the 
arrangement of the Outline.” — Leamington 
Chronicle. 

“As to matter, it is the work of a scholar 
who is not afraid of results suggested by fair 
research, but who never grasps at novelties 
merely for the sake of originality. In style 
and language, the book reads more like an 
original than a translation; an original, too, 
which in its terseness of expression has escaped 
the prolix obscurity so commonly complained of in 
the writings of the author’s country.”—Church 
Gazette. 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


Theological 


©, . . . It is obviously a boon to have at 
convenient service the latest German analysis, 
and this Literature of the Old Testament supplies 
it.”—Literary World. 

‘Of course, this work is only an outline, and 
therefore cannot find room for such fulness of 
detail as Dr. Driver gives us. Yet there are 
some points on which the student will find more 
information in the book before us. The author 
writes from the critical standpoint. .... We 
have read the book with great interest, and have 
pleasure in recommending it to our readers.”’-— 
Primitwe Methodist Quarterly Review. 

“The work is exceedingly helpful, especially 
the Chronological Tables.’--Christian World. 


KEIM’S History of Jesus of Naz- 
ara. Considered in its connection 
with the National Life of Israel, and 
related in detail. Translated from 
the German by Arthur Ransom and 
the Rev. E, M. Geldart. [Vol. I. 
Second Edition. Introduction, Sur- 
vey of Sources, Sacred and Political 
Groundwork, Religious Groundwork. 
Vol. Il. The Sacred Youth. Self- 
recognition, Decision. Vol. III. The 
First Preaching, the Works of Jesus, 
the Disciples, and Apostolic Mission. 
Vol. IV. Conflicts and Disillusions, 
Strengthened Self-confidence, Last 
Efforts in Galilee, Signs of the 
Approaching Fall, Recognition of the 
Messiah. Vol. V. The Messianic 
Progress to Jerusalem, the Entry into 
Jerusalem, the Decisive Struggle, the 
Farewell, the Last Supper. Vol. VI. 
The Messianic Death at Jerusalem. 
Arrest and Pseudo-Trial, the Death 
on the Cross, Burial and Resurrection, 
the Messiah’s Place in History, 
Indices.] Complete in 6 vols. 8vo. 
(Vide Theological Translation Fund.) 
Each 6s. (Vol. I. only to be had 
when a complete set of the Work is 
ordered.) 


KENNEDY (Rev. Jas.) Introduc- 
tion to Biblical Hebrew, presenting 
Graduated Instruction in the Lan- 
guage of the Old Testament. By 
James Kennedy, B.D., Acting Lib- 
rarilan in the New College, and one 
of the additional Examiners in 
Divinity at the University, Edin- 
burgh. 8vo, cloth. 12s. 


Catalogue. vf 


KENNEDY (Rev. Jas.) Studies in 
Hebrew Synonyms. Demy §8vo, 
cloth. 5s. 

King and the Kingdom (The): A 
Study of the Four Gospels. Three 
Series, each complete in itself; with 
copious Indexes, Medium 8vo, cloth. 
3s. 6d. each. 


KITTEL (R.) A History of the 
Hebrews. By R. Kittel, Ordinary 
Professor of Theology in the Univer- 
sity of Breslau. In 2 vols. Vol. I. 
Sources of Information and History of 
the Period up to the death of Joshua. 
Translated by John Taylor, D.Lit., 
M.A. Vol. IL. Sources of Information 
and History of the Period down to 
the Babylonian Exile. Translated by 
Hope W. Hogg, B.D., and E. B.. 
Speirs, D.D. (vide Theological Trans- 
lation Library, New Series), Demy 
8vo, cloth. 21s. 


**Tt is a sober and earnest reconstruction, for 
which every earnest student of the Old Testament 
should be grateful.” —Christian World. 

‘It is a work which cannot fail to attract 
the attention of thoughtful people in this 
country.”—Pall Mall Gazette. 

“Dr. Taylor’s translation is very readable.”— 
Manchester Guardian. 

‘“‘There are few works on this subject so 
luminous and so instructive.” —Glasgow Herald. 

**Tt will be a happy day for pulpit and pew 
when a well-thumbed copy of the History of the 
Hebrews is to be found in every manse and 
parsonage.” —Literary World. 


KUENEN (Dr. A.) The Religion of 
Israel to the Fall of the Jewish State. 
By Dr. A. Kuenen, Professor of 
Theology at the University, Leyden. 
Translated from the Dutch by A. H.’ 
May. 3 vols. 8vo, cloth. (Vide Theo- 
logical Translation Fund.) 18s. 

Lectures on National Religions 

and Universal Religions. (The Hib- 

bert Lectures, 1882.) 8vo, cloth. 
10s. 6d. (Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.) 


LAURIE (Professor Simon) Ethiea: 


or the Ethics of Reason. By Scotus 
Novanticus. 2nd Kdition.  8vo, 
cloth, 6s. 


Metaphysica Nova et Ve- 
tusta: a Return to Dualism. 2nd 
Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s. 


(14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20 South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


8: Williams 

LLOYD (Walter) The Galilean: 
A Portrait of Jesus of Nazareth. Cr. 
8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d. 


MALAN (Rev. Dr. S. C.) The Book 
of Adam and Eve, also called the 
Conflict of Adam and Eve with 
Satan. A Book of the early Eastern 
Church. Translated fromthe Ethiopic, 
with Notes from the Kufale, Talmud, 
Midrashim, and other Eastern Works. 
8vo, cloth. 7s. 6d. 


of Proverbs. According to the Autho- 
rized Version. Vol. I. Chap. i. to x. 
8vo, cloth. 12s. 


Vol. II. Chap. xi. to xx. 
cloth. 12s. 


8vo, 


Vol. III. Chap. xxi. to xxxi. 8vo, 
cloth, 12s. 


MARCHANT (James) Theories of 
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. 

- By James Marchant, sometime 
Evidential Lecturer to the Barking 
Rural Deaneries and the Christian 
Evidence Society. Contents :—The 
Theory of the Evangelists. The 
Swoon Theory. The Theory of Con- 
spiracy. The Vision Theory. The 
Apparition Theory. Answers to Ob- 
jections. With facsimile of Un- 
published Letter from the late 
Cardinal Manning, and from Prof. 
Sir G. G. Stokes, Bart. Crown 8vo, 
cloth, 3s.; paper boards, 2s. nett. 


** A well-arranged little book treating of the 
critical and always urgent question on which the 
validity of Christian belief in the last resort 
depends.': .%. A bright, readable, and effective 
demolition of current errors. "Saturday. Review. 

‘¢Mr. Marchant here critically examines the 
main theories advanced by sceptics to account 
for the belief in a risen Christ. He does a real 


service to the Christian faith in issuing thus | 


cheaply a popularly written work, that so effec- 
tively exposes the hollowness of plausible 
speculations which bar many a man’s progress 
along the road leading to life eternal. Mr. 
Marchant’s reading is w ell abreast of the times.” 
—Christian Age. 


Original Notes on the Book | 
| MARTINEAU (Prof. Russell) The 


and Norgate’s 


| MARGOLIOUTH (Rev. G., M.A.) 


The Original Hebrew of Ecclesiasticus ° 
xxxi. 12-31, and xxxvi. 22—xxxvii. 
26. Now for the first time edited, 
translated, and annotated, with a 
vocabulary at end. 


MARTINEAU (Rev. Dr. James) 
The Relation between Ethics and 
Religion. An Address, 8vo, sewed. 
As, eo 


Modern Materialism : its Atti- 
tude towards Theology. A Critique 
and Defence. 8vo, sewed. 2s. 6d. 


Roots of Christianity in Mosaism. 
8vo, sewed. Ils. 


MARTYN (Rev. H. J.) For Christ 
and the Truth. 5s. A New and 
Cheap Edition now ready, 234 pp., 
2s. 6d. 


“Full of thoughts of considerable apologetic 
value, on various topics of Theology, Christology, 
and Ecclesiastical matters in the Apostolic 
Times.”—The Guardian. 

‘*A series of excellent papers, treating of a 
number of well-worn subjects in an original way. 
: The section treating of belief in a future 
life i is most comprehensive and convincing. 

A book that is full of power.”—-The Church 
Gazette. 

** As a rule concise and reasonable, and his 
choice of subjects indicates a thoughtful and 
active mind, ¢.g., ‘Is Christ a Historic Person ?’ 
‘Was Christ Sinless?’ ‘The Formation of the 
Gospels.’ ”—The Christian World. 

‘Certainly somewhat out of the ordinary 
course, and if it were within the capacity of the 
congregation for whom the discourses were 
originally intended, it ought to have been help- 
ful in removing difficulties.”--The Church Tomes. - 


Mind, A Quarterly Review of Psycho- 


logy and Philosophy. Nos. 1—64. 
1876-90. 8vo,each 3s. Vols. I1.— 
XVI. in cloth, each 13s. Annual 


Subscription, post free, 12s. 


- New Series, Nos. 1—21, each 3s. 
Vols: 7. TL TE TVs Ve At and wee 
each 13s, 


MONTEFIORE (C. G.) Origin and 
Growth of Religion as illustrated by — 
the Religion of the Ancient Hebrews. 
(The Hibbert Lectures, 1892.) 2nd 
Edition. 8vo, cloth. 10s. 6d. Cheap 
Edition, 3s. 6d. 


‘14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, "Broad Street, Oxford. 


————————ert———~S eas 


Theological Catalogue. 9 


Mosheh Ben Shesheth’s Com- 


mentary on Jeremiah and Ezekiel. 


Edited from a Bodleian M.S., witha | 


Translation and Notes, byS. R. "Driver. 
8vo, sewed. 3s. 


OLDENBERG (Prof. H.) Buddha; — 


his Life, his Doctrine, his Order. By 
Dr. Hermann Oldenberg, Professor at 
the University of Berlin. Translated 
by W. Hoey, M.A. 8vo, cloth gilt. 
18s, 


PERRIN (R. S.) Religion of Philo- 
sophy (The), or the Unification of 
Knowledge: a Comparison of the chief 
Philosophical and Religious Systems 
of the World. 8vo, cloth. 16s. 


PFLEIDERER (0.) Paulinism: a 


Contribution to the History of Primi- © 
tive Christian Theology. Translated | 


2nd Edition, 
12s, 


by E. Peters, 2 vols. 


8vo, cloth. 


—— Philosophy of Religion on > 


the Basis of its History. (Vols, I. I. 
History of the Philosophy of Religion 


from Spinoza to the Present Day ; 
Vols. 


by Professor Alan Menzies and the 
Rey, Alex. Stewart. Complete in 4 
vols. 8vo, cloth. Each 6s. 


—— Lectures on the Influence of 
the Apostle Paul on the Develop- 
ment of Christianity. Translated by 
the Rey. J. Frederick Smith. (Hibbert 
Lectures, 1885.) 2nd Edition. 8vo, 
cloth. 10s. 6d. (Cheap Edition, 
3s. 6d.) 


—— vide also Protestant Commentary. 


PIKLER (Jul.) The Psychology of 
the Belief in Objective Existence. 
Part I. 8vo, cloth. 4s. 6d. 


POOLE (Reg. Lane) Illustrations | 


Ecclesiastical Politics. 
10s. 6d. 


8vo,- cloth. 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 


Ill, IV. Genetic-Speculative | 
Philosophy of Religion.). Translated | 


PRINCE (J. D., Ph.D., Professor 
of Semitic Languages in the New 

- York University) A Critical Com- 
mentary on the Book of Daniel. 
Designed especially for Students of 
the Iinglish Bible, Demy 8vo, cloth. 
9s. nett. 


Protestant Commentary on the 
New Testament; with general and 
special Introductions. Edited by Pro- 
fessors P. W. Schmidt and F, von 
Holzendorff. Translated from the 
third German Edition by the Rev. 
F. H. Jones, B.A. 3 vols. 8vo, cloth. 
(Vide Theological Translation Fund.) 
Each 6s. 


Psalterium Tetraglottum, Grece, 
Syriace, Chaldaice, Latine ex Cod. 
Vat. et Siniat. Grecis, Ambrosiano, 
Syriaco, Amiat, Latino, et Lagard. 
Targum curavit Dr. E. Nestle. 360 
pages, 4to, cloth. 18s, 


QUARRY (Rev. J.) Genesis and 
its Authorship. Two Dissertations. 
2nd Edition, with notice of Animad- 
versions of the Bishop of Natal. 8vo, 
cloth. 12s. 


RENAN (E.) On the Influence of 
the Institutions, Thought, and Culture 
of Rome on Christianity and the 
Development of the Catholic Church. 
Translated by the Rev. Charles Beard. 
(Hibbert Lectures, 1880.) 8vo, cloth. 
10s. 6d. (Cheap Edition, 3rd Edition, 
3s. 6d.) 


vide also Spinoza, Essays. 


RENOUF (P. le Page) On the 
Religion of Ancient Egypt. (Hibbert 
Lectures, 1879.) 3rd Edition. 8vo, 
cloth. 10s. 6d. (Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.) 


_REVILLE (Dr. A.) Prolegomena 
- of the History of Medieval Thought | 


in the Departments of Theology and | 


of the History of Religions. With 
an Introduction by Professor F. Max 
Miiller. 8vo, cloth. (Vide Theo- 
logical Translation Fund.) - 6s. 


20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 


and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


10 Williams and Norgate’s 


REVILLE (Dr. A.) On the Native 
Religions of Mexicoand Peru. Trans- 
lated by the Rev. P. H. Wicksteed. 
(Hibbert Lectures, 1884.) 8vo, cloth. 
10s. 6d. (Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.) 


The Devil: his Origin, Great- 
ness,and Decadence. Translatedfrom 
the French. 2nd Edition. Crown 
8vo, cloth. 2s. 


The Song of Song's, commonly 
called the Song of Solomon, or the 
Canticle. Translated from the 
French. Crown 8vo, cloth. ls. 6d. 


RHYS (Prof. J.) On the Origin 
and Growth of Religion as illustrated 
by Celtic Heathendom. (Hibbert 
Lectures, 1886.) 8vo, cloth. 10s. 6d. 
(Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.) 


ROBINSON (Alex., B.D., formerly 
Minister of the Parish of Kilmun, 
Argyleshire) A Study of the Saviour 
in the Newer Light, or, A Present- 
day Study of Jesus Christ. 2nd 
Edition. Revised form. Demy 8vo, 
cloth. 7s. 6d. 


*‘It is a life of the Founder of Christianity, 
with the miraculous part omitted, or rational- 
istically explained away very much in the manner 
of Renan. Mr. Robinson seems to have been 
led to his present views largely by an examination 
of the discrepancies between the Fourth Gospel 
and the Synoptics, and he presents them in a 
clear, temperate, and reverend tone.’’-—Academy. 

‘As to the book itself, it is eminently read- 
able, displaying command of language without 
floweriness, and insight into character that avoids 
metaphysical hair-splitting.”--Church Gazette. 

“The point of view throughout is very much 
that of Prof. Pfleiderer and Dr. Martineau..... 
It is an honest attempt founded on independent 
thought and study to see the human life of Jesus 
as it was.”—IJnquirer. 

“Here is a book written in the most reverend 
spirit, which, to a Southron, seems to do a good 
deal to restore the human interest in Jesus 
Christ that has, to a large extent, been evaporated 
from the story by pressure of dogma and theo- 
logical refining; and what we learn from the 
Preface, is that Mr Robinson, called to account 
by the Genera: Assembly, declined to disavow 
his ideas or his method, and was cast out of the 
Church of Scotland.’""—Zondon Review. 

‘*The book is a genuinely honest production, 
the work of a man supremely desirous of getting 
at the truth, and fully resolved at all costs to 
cleave loyally to it..... There is throughout it 
a fine devotional spirit and it lifts into prominence 
the high moral ideas of Christianity.” — Bradford 
Observer. 


SADLER (Rev. Dr.) Prayers for 
Christian Worship. Crown 8vo, cloth. 
3s. 6d. 


Closet Prayers, Original and 
Compiled. 18mo, cloth. ls. 6d. 


SCHRADER (Prof. E.) The Cunei- 
form Inscriptions and the Old Testa- 
ment. Translated from the 2nd 
Enlarged Edition, with Additions by | 
the Author, and an Introduction by 
the Rev. Owen C. Whitehouse, M.A. 
2 vols. (Vol. I. only sold with com- 
plete Sets of the Theological Trans- 
lation Fund.) With a Map. 8vo, 
cloth. Each 6s. (Vzde Theological 
Translation Fund.) ; 


SCHURMAN (J. Gould) Kantian 
Ethics and the Ethics of Evolution. 
1882. 8vo, cloth. 5s. 


The Ethical Import of Dar- 


winism. Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s. 


SHARPE (Samuel) History of the 
Hebrew Nation and its Literature. 
With an Appendix on the Hebrew 
Chronology. 5th Edition. Crown 
8vo, cloth. 4s. 6d. 


-—- Critical Notes on the Autho- 
rized English Version of the New 
Testament. 2nd Edition. 12mo, 
cloth. ls. 6d. 


—— Short Notes to accompany a 
Revised Translation of the Hebrew | 
Scriptures. 12mo,cloth. Is. 6d. 


.—_.— vide Barnabas, Bible, Testament. 


SMITH (H. W.) Selected and com- 
piled by: | lis 
Modern Thoughts on Life and Con- 

duct. A Collection of above 
400 Extracts, designed to bring 
into prominence the permanent 
elements which go to make and 
improve our’social life. Crown 
8vo, cloth gilt. 6s. 


—— An Edition, extra gilt, printed 
on antique paper. 7s. 6d. 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20 South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


Theological 


SMITH (H. W.)—continued. 

Modern Thoughts on Religion and 
Culture. A Collection of the 
Recorded Beliefs and Aspirations 
of Leaders of Thought in the 
Nineteenth Century, especially 
Illustrating the Transforming 
Influence of Science on Religion 
and Morals. 340 pages. Crown 
8vo, cloth gilt. 6s. 

SPEIRS (Rev. E. B.), wide Kittel, 

History of the Hebrews, Vol. IT. 


SPENCER (Herbert) First Prin- 
ciples, 10th Thousand, with an Ap- 
pendix. 8vo, cloth. 16s, 


The Principles of Biology. 
2 vols. 6th Thousand. §8vo, cloth. 
Vol. I. Revised and greatly enlarged. 
TSariVol, Ti Les 


The Principles of Psycho- 
logy. 5th Thousand. 2 vols, 8vo, 
cloth, 36s. 


The Prineiples of Sociology. 
Vol. I.° Part 1, The Data of Socio- 
logy, Part 2, The Inductions of Socio- 
logy ; Part 3, Domestic Institutions. 
4th Thousand, revised and enlarged. 
8vo, cloth. 21s. 


- Thesame. Vol. IJ. Part 4, Cere- 
monial Institutions ; Part 5, Political 
Institutions. 3rd Thousand. 8vo, 
cloth. 18s. 


_The Principles of Sociology. 
Vol. III. Part 6, Ecclesiastical Insti- 
tutions; Part 7, Professional Insti- 
tutions; Part 8, Domestic Institu- 
tions. 2nd Thousand. 8vo, cloth. 
16s. 


— The Principles of Ethics. 
Vol. I. Part 1, The Data of Ethics ; 
Part 2, The Inductions of Ethics ; 
Part 3, The Ethics of Individual Life. 
2nd Thousand. 8vo, cloth. 15s. 


The Principles of Ethics. 
Vol.) [> -Part)-4, Justice. Part. 5, 
Negative Beneficence; Part 6, Positive 
Beneficence ; ; Appendices, Demy 8vo, 
cloth. 12s. 6d. . 


Catalogue. 11 


Also to be had separately : 


SPENCER Herbert) Ecclesiastical 
Institutions. Being Part 6 of the 
Principles of Sociology. 2nd Thou- 


sand. 8vo, cloth. 5s, 

Ethics. Parts 2 and 3. 8vo, 
cloth. 7s. 

Justice. Being Part 4 of the 


Principles of Ethics. 2nd Thousand. 


8vo, cloth. 8s. 

Various Fragments. Uniform 
in library binding. - Demy 8vo, cloth. 
4s, 


— The Study of Sociology. 
Library Edition (21st Thousand), with 
a Postscript. 8vo, cloth. 10s. 6d. 
Edueation. Intellectual, Moral, 
and Physical. 7th Thousand. 8vo, 
cloth. 6s. 


The same, cheaper Edition. 39th 
Thousand. 12mo, cloth. 2s. 6d. 
—— Essays: Scientific, Political, and 

Speculative. A new Edition, re- 


arranged with additional Essays. 3 
vols. 8vo, cloth. (Each 10s.) 30s. 


Social Statics. Abridged and 
revised, together with The Man ». 
The State. S8vo, cloth. 10s. 

Also separately : 


— The Man versus The State. 


13th Thousand. Sewed. Ils. 
— A Rejoinder to Professor 
Weismann. Sewed. ls, 


Reasons for Dissenting from 
the Philosophy of M. Comte. Sewed. 
6d. 


The Inadequacy of Natural 


Selection. Sewed. Ils. | 


Descriptive Sociology, or 
Groups of Sociological Facts. Com- 
piled and abstracted by Professor 
D. Duncan, of Madras, Dr. Richard 
Scheppig, and James Collier. Folio, 
boards. No. 1. English. 18s. 


14, Henrvetta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad. Street, Oxford, 


12 3 Williams and Norgate’s 


SPENCER (Herbert) Descriptive 


Sociology. No. 2. Ancient Ameri- 


can Races. 16s. 

——- -—— No. 3. Lowest Races, Ne- 
gritto Races, Polynesians. 
18s, 

——— ———._ No, 4,. African dtaces:i916s. 

—— —— No. 5. Asiatic Races. 18s. 

— —— No.6. American Races, 18s. 

iatia — Now sHebrews and? Phe: 
nicians, 21s, 

fee Noe (Une. Dann, (Gawlrs 
zation. 30s. 


Collins (F. H.) An Epitome 
of the Synthetic Philosophy. By F. 
Howard Collins. Being a Digest of 
Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Works. 4th 
Edition, the Synthetic Philosophy 
completed. With a Preface by Her- 
bert Spencer. 8vo, cloth. 2ls. 


—— Drey (S.) Herbert. Spencer’s 
Theory of Religion and Morality. 
By Sylvan Drey. 8vo, sewed. Ils. 


A Theory of Life de- 
duced from the Evolution Philosophy. 
Demy 8vo, sewed. ls. 


—— Thompson (D. G.) Herbert 
Spencer: his Life, Writings, and 
Philosophy. By Daniel Greenleaf 
Thompson, Author of ‘A System of 
Psychology,” ‘“‘The Problem of Evil,” 
“The Religious Sentiments of the 
Human Mind,” ete. Ils. 


SPINOZA. Four Essays by Profes- 
sors Land, Van Vloten, and Kuno 
Fischer, and by E. Renan. Edited 
by Professor Knight, of St. Andrews, 
Crown 8vo, cloth. 5s. 


STEPHENS (George) Professor 
Bugge’s Studies on Northern Mytho- 
logy examined, Illustrations, 8vo, 
cloth, 8s. 


they? 4to, sewed. 6s. 


The Runes, Whence came | 


STOKES (G. J.) The Objectivity 
of Truth, 8vo, cloth. 5s. 


STOKES (Whitley) Old Irish Glos- 
saries, Cormac’s Glossary. O’Da- 
voran’s Glossary. A Glossary to the 
Calendar of Oingus the Culdee. 
Edited, with an Introduction and 
Index. 8vo, cloth. 10s. 6d. 


Middle-Breton Hours. Edited, 
with a Translation and Glossary, 8vo, 
boards, 6s. 


—— The Creation of the World. 
A Mystery in Ancient Cornish, 
Edited, with Translations and Notes. 
8vo, cloth. 6s. 


STRACK (H. L.) Hebrew Gram- 
mar. Paradigms, Literature, Chresto- 
mathy, and Glossary. Crown 8vo, 
cloth, 4s. 6d. 


STRAUSS (Dr. D. F.) Life of Jesus; 
for the People. The Authorized 
English Edition. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 
Reduced to 10s. 6d. per set. 


STUART (Jas.) Principles of Chris- 
tianity: being an Essay towards a 
more correct Apprehension of Chris- 
tian Doctrine, mainly Soteriological. 
636 pp. 8vo, cloth. (Published at 
12s. 6d.) . 7s. 6d, 


SUFFIELD, Life of the Rev. Robert. 
Rudolph, Author of ‘*The Crown of 
Jesus.” Photogravure Portrait. Or: 
8vo, cloth. 4s. 6d. 


Talmud of Jerusalem. Translated 

_ for the first. time into English by Dr. 
Moses Schwab, of the Bibliothéque 
Nationale, Paris, Vol. I. The Trea- 
tise of Berakhoth (Blessings). Fools- 
cap 4to,sewed, 9s, 


TAUCHNITZ’S English New Testa- 
ment. | Authorized Version; with 
Introduction, and various Readings — 
from the Three most celebrated Manu- 
scripts of the Original Greek Text. 
By C. Tischendorf. -12mo, sewed. _ 
ls, 6d. ; cloth, 2s, 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh 
and. 7, "Broad Street, ‘Oxford. 


Theological Catalogue. 13 


TAYLER (Rev. John James) An 
Attempt to ascertain the Character of 
the Fourth Gospel, especially in its 
relation to the first Three. 2nd Edi- 
tion. 8vo, cloth. 5s. 


TAYLOR (Rev. C.) The Dirge of 
Coheleth in Eccles. xii. discussed and 
literally interpreted. 8vo, cloth. 3s, 


TAYLOR (Rev. Dr. J.) The Mas- 
soretic Text and the Ancient Versions 
of the Book of Micah. Crown 8vo, 
cloth. 5s. 


Ten Services of Public Prayer, 
taken in Substance from the Common 
Prayer for Christian Worship, with a 


few additional Prayers for particular 
Days. 8vo, cloth, 2s, 6d. ; or 32mo, 
cloth, ls, | 

Ten Services of Public Prayer, 
with Special Collects. 8vo, cloth, 
3s.; or 32mo, cloth, ls. 6d. 


Psalms and Canticles. 8vo, 
cloth. Ils. 6d. 
the same, with Anthems. 8vo, 
cloth, 2s. 
| Testament (The New). Translated 


from Griesbach’s Text by S. Sharpe, 
Author of ‘The History of Egypt.” 
14th Thousand. Fcap. 8vo, cloth. 
Ls, 6d. 


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION FUND 
LIBRARY. 


A Series of Translations by whieh the best results of reeent Theological 
investigations on the Continent, conducted without reference to 
doctrinal considerations, and with the sole purpose of arriving at 
truth, are placed within reach of English Readers. 


These Volumes are now reduced to 6s. per Volwme. 


BAUR (F. C.) Chureh History of the 
First Three Centuries. ‘T'rans- 
lated from the Third German 


Edition. Edited by the Rev. 
Allan Menzies. 2 vols. 8vo. 
12s. 

—— Paul, the Apostie of Jesus 


Christ, his Life and Work, 
his Epistles and Doctrine. A 
Contribution to a Critical History 
of Primitive Christianity. 2nd 
Edition. By the Rev. Allan 
Menzies. 2 vols. 12s. 

BLEEK’S Lectures on the Apoca- 
lypse. Edited by the Rev. Dr. 
S. Davidson. 6s. 

EWALD (H.) Commentary on the 
Prophets of the Old Testament. 
Translated by the Rev. J. Frede- 
rick Smith. .5 vols. 8vo. Each 6s. 

—— Commentary on the Psalms. 
Translated by the Rev. E. John- 

. son, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo. Each 
6s, 


EWALD (H.) Commentary on the 
Book of Job, with Translation by 
Professor H. Ewald. Translated 
from the German by the Rev. 
J. Frederick Smith. 8vo. 6s. 


HAUSRATH (Professor A.) History 
of the New Testament Times. 
The Time of Jesus. By Dr. A. 
Hausrath, Professor of Theology, 
Heidelberg. Translated, with 
the. Author’s sanction, from the 
Second German Edition, by the 
Revs. C. T. Poynting and P. 
Quenzer. 2 vols. 8vo. 12s. 


vide end of List of this Series, 


KEIM (Th.) History of Jesus of 
Nazara, Considered in its con- 
nection with the National 
Life of Israel, and related in 
detail. Translated by Arthur 
Ransom and the Rev. E. M. 
Geldart. 6 vols. 8vo. -Each 
6s. (Vol. I. is not sold sepa- 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


14 


New Series. 


Williams and Norgate’s 


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION FUND LIBRARY—continued. 


rately, and can only be had when 
a complete Set of the Work 
is ordered.) 

KUENEN (A.) The Religion of Israel 
to the fall of the Jewish State. 
Translated by A. H. May. 2nd 
Edition. 3 vols. 8vo. 18s, 

PFLEIDERER (Professor 0.) The 
Philosophy of Religion on the 
Basis of its History. Translated 
by the Rev. Allan Menzies, and 
the Rev. Alex. Stewart, of Dun- 
dee. 4vols. 8vo,cloth. Each 6s. 

—— Paulinism ; a contribution to the 
History of Primitive Christian 
Theology. Translated by E. 
Peters. 2nd Edition. 2 vols. 
8vo. 12s, 

Protestant Commentary on the New 
Testament; with General and 
Special Introductions to the 
Books, by Lipsius, Holsten, 
Lang, Pfleiderer, Holtzman, Hil- 
genfeld, and others. Translated 
by the Rev. F. H. Jones, 3 vols. 
8vo. Lach 6s. . 


REVILLE (Rev. Dr.) Prolegomena of 
the History of Religion. With 
Introduction by Professor Max 
Miller. 8vo, 6s. 


SCHRADER (Professor E.) The Cunei- 
form Inscriptions and the Old 
Testament. Translated by the 
Rev. Owen C. Whitehouse, M.A. 
2 vols. 8vo,Map. Each 6s. (Vol. 
I. is not supplied separately. ) 


ZELLER (E.) The Acts of the Apostles 
Critically Examined. To which 
is prefixed Overbeck’s Intro- 
duction from de Wette’s Hand- 
book. ‘Translated by Joseph 
Dare. 2 vols. 8vo. 12s. 


Uniform with the above Series : 


HAUSRATH (A.) History of the New 
Testament Times. The Time of 
the Apostles, Translated by 
Leonard Huxley ; with an Intro- 
duction by Mrs. Humphry Ward. 
4vols 42s. 


THEOLOGICAL TRANSLATION LIBRARY. 


Edited by the Rev. T. K. Cheyne, M.A., D.D., Oriel Professor of 


Interpretation in the University of Oxford, and Canon of Rochester ; and 
the late Rev. Prof. A, B. Bruce, D.D., Professor of Apologetics, Free 


Church College, Glasgow. 


Uniform price, 10s. 6d. per vol. 


** We once more call the attention of our readers to this admirable series." —Quarterly Review. 


Vol. First Year's Issue. 
1. WEIZSACKER. Apostolic Age, I. 
2. HARNACK. History of Dogma, I. 
3. KITTEL. History of the 
Hebrews, I. 
Second Year’s Issue. 


4. HERRMANN. The Communion | 
of the Christian with God. | 
| 


5. ab ASI Ate Apostolic Age, 


6. KITTEL. History of the 


Hebrews, II. 


Vol. Third Year’s Issue. First Vol. 
{is sre hd History of Dogma, 


8. —— —— III. 

open Se Np 

Fourth Year's Issue. First Vol. 
10. —— Vi 

dh: oe — VI, 

12, —— —— VII. 

coe Vide under separate 
titles, 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


Theological 
TISCHENDORF (C.) Novum Testa- 


mentum Greece. 3vols. 8vo. 70s. nett. 


TURPIE (Dr. D. McC.) The Old 
Testament in the New. The Quota- 
tions from the Old Testament in the 
New classified according to their 
Agreement with or Variation from 
the Original: the various Readings 
and Versions of the Passages, Critical 
Notes. Royal 8vo, cloth. 12s. 


Manual of the Chaldee Lan- 
guage: containing Grammar of the 
Biblical Chaldee and of the Targums, 
and a Chrestomathy, with a Vocabu- 


lary. Square 8vo, cloth. 7s. 
UPTON (Rev. C. B.) On_ the 
Bases of Religious Belief. (Hibbert 


Lectures, 1893.) Demy 8vo, cloth. 
10s. 6d. (Cheap Edition, 3s. 6d.) 


VICKERS (J.) History of Herod ; 
or Another Look at a Man emerging 
from Twenty Centuries of Calumny. 
Crown 8vo, cloth. 6s. 


The Real Jesus: a Review of 
his Life, Character, and Death, from 
a Jewish Standpoint. Crown 8vo. 
6s. 


The Crucifixion Mystery. 
Crown 8vo, cloth. 3s. 6d. 


The Book of Bander. A 
Scripture-form Story of Past and 
Present Times. Crown 8vo, cloth. 
os. 6d. 

‘‘There are good things in it.” — Literary 
World. 

*¢¢The Book of Bander’ is a marvellously vivid 
narrative in Scriptural form of the historical 
progress of the human race . . It deserves 
much praise... . it has a distinct ethical 
value.” — Westminster Review. 


Vinaya Pitakam: one of the princi- 
pal Buddhist Holy Scriptures. 
Edited in Pali by Dr. H. Oldenberg, 
5 vols. 8vo, cloth. Each 21s. 


VIZARD (P. E.) Prayers, New and 
Old. New Edition. Printed at the 
Chiswick Press, Crown 8vo, buck- 
ram. ls. nett. 


Catalogue. 15 


VOYSEY (Rev. C.) The Testimony 


of the Four Gospels concerning 
Jesus Christ. Crown 8vo, cloth. 
3s. 6d. 


The Sling and the Stone. 
Vol. VII. On Prophecy. 8vo, cloth. 5s. 


Vol. VIII. On the Lord’s Prayer. 
8vo, cloth. 3s. 6d. 


Vol. IX. The Fatherhood of God, 
Sermon on the Mount, etc. 8vo, 


cloth. 7s. 6d. 


Vol. X. Revelation tested on 
Moral Grounds, etc. 8vo, cloth. 
10s. 6d. 


Theism; or, The Religion of 
Common Sense. 8vo, cloth. 2s. 6d. 


Theism as a Science of 
Natural Theology and Natural Re- 
ligion. 8vo, cloth. 2s, 6d. 


Family Prayers. 8vo, cloth. ls. 


—— Theistic Prayer Book. 3rd 
Edition. 12mo, cloth. 3s. 6d. 


Lectures on the Theistic 
Faith and its Foundations, and on 
the Bible. 8vo, sewed. Ils. 


Prayers and Meditations, 
for Family and Private Use. 3rd 
Edition. Fecap. 8vo, cloth. 6d. 


The Bible and Modern Criti- 


cism. Three Sermons. 8vo, sewed. 
Ad, 


WEIR (T. H., B.D.) A Short His- 
tory of the Hebrew Text of the Old 
Testament. By Thomas H. Weir, 
B.D., Assistant to the Professor of 
Oriental Languages in the University 
of Glasgow. Illustrated with Fac- 
similes. Crown 8vo, sewed, 5s.; 
cloth, 6s. 


‘This excellent book should be welcomed by 
all Hebrew tutors in theological colleges, and read. 
with their senior classes.” —-Manchester Guardian. 

‘*The remarkably well-informed outline that 
is here presented appeals at once to the culti- 
vated Hebraist, to the general reader, and 
perhaps, above all, to the divinity student,”—— 
Glasgow Herald. , 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 
and 7, Broad Street, Oxford. 


sb tea - Williams and Norgate’s Theological Catalogue, 


‘*Tn the great range of the ancillary literature 
of the Bible, there is no one book that sticks so 
closely to the same subject ; and its substantial 
learning and good exposition will, no doubt, 
recommend it to many readers.”-—Scotsman. 

‘“We cannot close our review of the book 
without recognising the author's accurate scholar- 


ship and the clear and concise style in which he 


puts the results of his studies before his readers. 
It is a book which every student of divinity and 
every minister should possess. We know of no 
other book which contains so much’ valuable 
information on the Hebrew text in such a brief 
ccompass,”’-—St. Andrew. 


WEIZSACKER (Prof. Carl von) 
The Apostolic Age. Translated by 
James Millar, B.D. 2 vols. Demy 
8vo, cloth. 21s. 


‘* Weizsicker is an authority of the very first 
rank, the present work marks an epoch in New 
Testament criticism. The English reader is 
fortunate in having a masterpiece of this kind 
rendered accessible to him.” —Hapository Times. 

No student of theology or of the 
oar history of Christianity can afford to leave 
Weizsicker’s great book unread.’’~—Manchester 
Guardian. 

‘*In every direction in this work we find the 
mark of the independent thinker and investigator 
A this remarkable volume. . this able 
‘and learned work."—Christian World. 

*‘This book itself . . is of great interest, 
and the work of the translation has been done in 
a most satisfactory way.’—Critical Review. 

‘‘One thing that must strike every reader is 
that the volume is very readable and very inter- 
esting."’-—Scotsman. 

‘We part from the book with warm admira- 
tion for the qualities displayed by the author, 
tempered with regret that his undue scepticism 
as to the Acts has imparted a defective quality 
to a work which, apart from this, would have 
been as nearly perfect as we could have expected. 
We must add a tribute to the general excellence 
of the translation, which reads like an English 
book as a rule.”—Primitive Methodist Quarterly. 


WICKSTEED (Rev. P. H.) The 
Ecclesiastical Institutions of Holland, 
treated with Special Reference to the 
Position and Prospects of the Modern 
‘School of Theology. A Report pre- 
‘sented to the Hibbert Trustees, and 
published by their direction. 8vo, 
‘sewed. Is. 


‘WRIGHT (Rev. C. H. H.) Book of 
Genesis in Hebrew Text. With a 
critically revised Text, various Read- 
ings, and Grammatical and Critical 
Notes. Demy 8vo. Reduced to 3s, 6d. 


14, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London ; 


WRIGHT (Rev. C. H. H.) Book of 
With a 


Ruth in Hebrew Text. 
critically revised Text, various Read- 
ings, 


Grammatical and Critical Commen- 
tary ; to which is appended, The 
Chaldee Targum. Demy 8vo. 7s, 6d. 


WRIGHT (G. H. Bateson) 


Translation, with Essays on Scansion, 
Date, etc. 8vyo, cloth. 6s. 


Was Israel ever in Egypt? 
or, a Lost Tradition. By G. H. 
Bateson Wright, D.D., Queen’s Col- 
lege, Oxford; Head-master Queen’s 
College, Hong-Kong; Author of 
‘“‘A Critical Revised Translation of 
the Book of Job.” 8vo, art-linen. 


7s. 6d. 


“The book displays not only sound learning 
and critical insight, but a freedom from theo- 
logical bias which is almost unique amongst 
doctors of divinity. We give it a most cordial 
welcome." — Westminster Review. 

* It is a carefully reasoned and acute book, 
which will add to the author's already high repu- 
tation as a critic of the Scriptures.’’—Scotsman. 

“The book is written in a fresh, vigorous 
style, and is reverent in spirit, while thorough- 
going in its critical method.’—Boston Christian 
Register. 


WRIGHT (Rev. J.) Grounds and 


Principles of Religion. Crown orq 
cloth. 3s. 


ZELLER (Dr. E.) The Contents 
and origin of the Acts of the Apostles — 
critically investigated. Preceded by © 
Dr. Fr. Overbeck’s Introduction tothe — 


Acts of the Apostles from De Wette’s 
Handbook. ‘Translated by Joseph 
Dare. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth. 
Theological Translation Fund.) 12s. 


ZIEGLER (Th.) Social Ethies. 
lines of a Doctrine of Morals. 
lated from the German. 
cloth. 3s. 


ZOMPOLIDES (Dr. D 
Modern Greek, or the Greek Language 


Trans- 


of the Present Day. I. The Elemen- 
tary Method. Crown 8vo, cloth. 58. 3 


20, South Frederick Street, Edinburgh ; 


and 7, Broad Street, ‘Oxford. 


including a new Collation of 
Twenty-eight Hebrew MSS., and a 


The 
Book of Job. A new critically revised — 


(Vide - 


Out- : 


Crown 8vo, — 


ene 


.) A Course of | 


i ee 


Me 


= 


ve 


te 


Date Due 


ee ae tae aie 
” ; a 


we 


