Harper's Dictionary of Classical Literature and Antiquities
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/harpersdictiona00peckgoog>. Public domain.

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web


at  http  :  /  /books  ■  google  .  com/


iffi'-IFO'RD  -VI'^ffyERSirif-  KBRMY


*r


HARPERS DICTIONARY

OF

CLASSICAL LITERATURE

:  '  AND

ANTIQUITIES


EDITED  BY

HARRY  THURSTON  .PECK,  M.A.,  Ph.D.

PROFESSOR  OF  THE  LATlV  t'KTSilVAGE  AND  LETKRATURB
IN  COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY


ILLUSTRATED


NEW YORK
HARPER  &  BROTHERS PUBLISHERS

1897


APR  13  ms


Copyright,  1696,  by  Harper  &  Brothibs.
J II  rtghU  rturvtd.


VIRO
DOCT1M8IMO • AT<2VE ■ nVMAKIHSIMO

HENRICO  .  DRISLER  •  LL  •  D  ■

COLLEtlll • COLVMBIAE ■ QVUNDAM ■ DKCANO
LINGVAE  .  LITTEHAHVMqVE  •  liRAECAltVM  -  FHOKE880UI  -  EMERITO

CiVI

MIHI  •  AVXILIVM  •  CONMLIVMQVK  •  PETKNTI

NVHqVAM • DEKVIT

HOC  .  OPVS

PIETATIS  • AM0RI8 - VENERATIONIfl  • TE8TIM0NIVH

D D D-


PREFACE


The  purpose  of  the  present  volume  is  to  give  the  student,  in  a  concise  and  in-
telligible form,  the  essential  facts  concerning  those  questions  that  oftenest  arise  in
the  study  of  the  life,  the  literature,  the  religion,  and  the  art  of  classical  antiquity.
Its  further  purpose  is  to  indicate  the  sources  whence  a  fuller  and  more  critical
knowledge  of  these  subjects  can  be  most  readily  and  most  accurately  gained.

TTntil  very  recently,  the  study  of  classical  literature  was,  in  all  our  univer-
sities, inseparably  linked  with  the  conception  of  u  liberal  education.  Holding
Hrmly  to  tlie  dignified  traditions  of  the  past,  it  was  accepted  as  an  undisputed  fact
that  the  highest  type  of  scholarship,  the  type  best  Htteti  to  sustain  the  supreme
test  of  aesthetic  perfection  and  to  be  stamped  with  tlie  linal  cachet  that  confers
ilistinction,  was  unattainable  if  severed  from  the  direct  influence  and  inspiration
of  the  great  Hellenic  masters  whose  intellectual  activity  was  imbued  with  a  noble
passion  for  ideal  beauty  and  ideal  truth.  Of  late,  the  tremendous  pressure  of
material  interests  from  without,  and  the  national  eagerness  for  immediate  and
tangible  results,  have  bred  a  new  and  more  utilitarian  theory  of  the  academic
function ;  so  that  the  study  of  ancient  life  and  thought  has  been  deposed  from  its
old  supremacy  and  has  been  made  to  take  its  place  beside  those  subjects  of  inves-
tigation that  derive  their  interest  mainly  from  the  appeal  which  they  can  make
to  tastes  and  motives  that  are  essentially  commercial  and  mechanical.

This  revolution  in  paedagogic  theory,  with  the  resulting  revolution  in  the
ordering  of  our  university  curricula,  while  it  sprang  from  a  false  impression  of
what  liberal  study  really  means,  and  while  it  is  fraught  with  especial  evil  to  a
community  sucli  as  ours,  already  far  too  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  all  material  ends,
has  nevertheless,  by  way  of  compensation,  not  been  without  a  stimulating  effect
u[>on  the  methods  and  the  aims  of  classical  study.  It  has,  to  be  sure,  impaired
the  value  of  the  university  degree  that  once  was  everywhere  accepted  as  being
the  hall-mark  of  the  cultivated  gentleman.  It  has  broken  down  forever  the
intellectual  sympathy  that  once  existed  as  a  powerful  bond  between  all  univer-
sity men — a  sympathy  based  upon  absolute  identity  of  training,  and  one  which
made  them  a  potent  influence  in  the  diffusion  of  sanity  and  serenity  of  thought.
It  has  lowered  the  whole  tone  of  university  life  and  imported  into  the  academic
shades  the  standards  of  value,  the  aims,  and  the  ambitions  of  the  workshop
and  the  counting-room.  Yet,  nevertheless,  the  very  changes  that  have  nar-
rowed the  sphere  of  classical  study  and  restricted  its  (wwer  for  good  by  Pleas-
ing from  its  refining  influence  the  very  persons  who  are  mcwt  in  need  of  it,  have
still,  within  its  sphere,  compelled  it  to  develop  a  new  and  vigorous  life,  by  en-
abling it  to  gain  in  perfection  and  completeness  what  it  has  lost  in  universality.


ri  PREFACE

The  teachers  of  the  classics,  under  this  new  system,  which  takes  nothing  for
granted  and  ascribes  no  preeminent  value  to  the  study  and  investigation  of  the
past,  have  been  forced  to  rouse  themselves  to  a  demonstration  of  that  value  even
from  the  standpoint  of  the  modem  iconocl^t.  In  so  doing  they  have  very  wisely
laid  more  stress  than  heretofore  upon  the  intimate  relation  of  the  present  to  the
past;  they  have  laboured  to  bring  out  the  essential  modernity  of  the  life  of
Greece  and  Rome;  and  they  have  dwelt  as  never  before  upon  the  points  of
resemblance  rather  than  upon  the  points  of  difference  that  exist.  Classical  teach-
ing has,  therefore,  gained  immensely  in  vividness  and  vitality,  and  its  topics  of
investigation  have  been  at  once  enlarged  and  correlated.  It  is  no  longer  sufficient
to  dwell  upon  the  linguistic  and  literary  obligations  of  the  modern  world  to
Greece  and  Rome.  It  is  as  necessary  as  it  is  entirely  possible  to  show  that  the
religious  and  the  ethical  problems  of  the  past  are  those  that  still  occupy  the
thought  of  educated  men ;  that  the  political  and  social  dangers  that  confronted
the  Republics  of  Hellas  and  Rome  are  precisely  those  that  are  brooding  over  the
nations  of  to-day ;  and  that  in  sociology  and  economics  the  student  is  but  a  tyro,
who  has  not  profoundly  studied  the  CtiUurgeschiGhte  of  the  two  great  nations.

Hence  it  comes  about  that  the  study  of  the  classics  and  of  ancient  life  is  to-
day far  more  comprehensive  in  its  scope,  far  broader  in  its  purpose,  far  more  con-
sciously important  in  its  relation  to  the  whole  field  of  human  knowledge,  and  far
more  elaborate  in  its  critical  apparatus  than  it  ever  was  before.  The  classical
teacher  feels  that  he  must,  in  studying  any  side  of  his  subject,  avail  himself  of
every  possible  aid  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  investigations  of  his  fellow-special-
ists in  order  to  give  interest  and  life  and  richness  to  his  own  instruction.  If  he
turn  to  language,  he  must  draw  upon  the  labours  of  the  epigraphist,  the  numis-
matist, the  palaeographer;  if  he  deal  with  art,  he  must  explain  its  inspiration  by
the  testimony  of  literature  and  the  history  of  contemporary  life ;  if  he  inves-
tigate history,  he  must  know  the  whole  intellectual  and  social  environment  of
the  people.

Nor  is  the  appreciation  of  these  things  confined  to  the  teacher  and  the  investi-
gator. The  younger  student  of  the  classics  is  also  becoming  more  and  more  alive
to  the  true  significance  of  his  work,  as  with  every  year  more  is  required  of  him  in
the  way  of  special  equipment  and  general  information.  Even  the  undergraduate
classical  courses  in  our  universities  and  colleges  now  touch  upon  many  sides  of
study,  and  are  no  longer  restricted  to  the  mere  reading  of  ancient  authors  and
the  formal  study  of  their  language.  An  early  familiarity  with  the  conditions  of
ancient  life  is  expected  and  required ;  some  knowledge  of  art  and  archaeology  is  a
further  requisite :  and  at  least  a  moderate  acquaintance  with  the  best  and  most
obvious  sources  of  information  is  asked  of  all.  It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  to
aid  the  student  in  his  work,  as  that  work  must  be  pursued  under  these  compara-
tively new  conditions,  some  manual  is  needed  that  shall  give  him  in  a  simple  and
intelligible  form  the  most  important  facts,  condensed  and  summarized  and  set  forth
not  as  isolated  bits  of  information,  but  in  their  necessary  connection  with  one
another. The  present  volume  is  intended  as  a  contribution  towards  this  end.

The  information  which  is  given  in  its  articles,  arranged  under  a  single  alpha-
bet, may  be  classified  under  the  following  general  heads  :

(1)  Biography. — The  Dictionary  includes  articles  on  all  the  important  person-
ages of  classical  antiquity  in  every  sphere  of  effort,  wliether  military,  literary,


P  R  K  F  A  C  E  vii

political,  or  artistic.  The  greatest  of  the  Christian  Fathers  have  been  added  to  the
list,  both  because  of  the  general  interest  of  their  relation  to  the  history  of  the
Later  Empire,  and  because  to  the  student  of  language  their  writings  are  of  marked
importance  in  the  study  of  plebeian  Latin  and  the  development  of  the  later
dialects  of  Greek.  Among  the  biographies  which  the  Dictionary  contains  will
be  found  also  those  of  the  great  classical  scholars  and  philologists  of  later  times,
and  extending  into  our  own  century,  since  these  represent  distinct  stages  in  the
development  of  classical  study,  and  their  lives,  when  taken  collectively,  give  a  sug-
gestive outline  of  the  history  of  Classical  Philology.  The  names  of  living  scholars,
for  obvious  reasons,  have  been  excluded  from  the  list.

(-2)  Mythology. — All  the  mythological  personages  whose  names  appear  and
reappear  in  the  pages  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  writers  are  the  subjects  of  sep-
arate articles  which  carefully  distinguish  the  Hellenic  myths  fn)m  those  that  are
essentially  Italic,  while  the  relation  between  them  is  indicated  and  the  subsequent
blending  of  the  two  described.  In  the  case  of  the  most  famous  of  the  myths  the
explanatory  s[)eculations  of  the  latest  schools  of  comparative  mythologists  are
^iven,  though  with  caution ;  and  the  use  of  the  myths  themselves  in  literature  is
touched  u]K)n,  with  especial  reference  to  their  appearance  in  the  prose  and  verse
of  the  English  classics.  A  separate  general  article  on  Mytliology  describes  briefly
the  development  of  the  different  schools  that  have  endeavoured  to  explain  the
folk-lore  an<I  religious  tradition  of  the  ancients.

(3)  Geography. — The  names  of  all  countries,  produces,  states,  cities,  and  other
localities  that  are  mentioned  by  the  most  read  of  the  classical  writers  will  be
found  as  separate  titles,  with  a  treatment  proportionate  to  the  historical  impor-
tance of  the  subject  and  its  interest  to  the  student.  Xumerous  maps  and  dia-
grams illustrate  the  geographical  information  given  in  the  text.  The  very  inter-
esting ethnic  questions  that  arise  in  this  department  of  the  work — as,  for  example,
in  the  articles  Aegyptus,  Etruria,  Scythia — are  briefly  noted,  with  a  statement
of  the  views  of  recent  ethnologists  and  anthropologists,  and  with  bibliographical
references  to  the  original  sources  of  information  and  discussion.

(4)  History. — The  principal  political  events  of  Greek  and  Itoman  history  form
the  subjects  of  special  articles  when  these  topics  do  not  fall  under  geographical
and  biographical  titles ;  and  even  when  they  do,  they  are  also  given  as  separate
captions  with  cross-references  to  direct  the  student  to  the  proper  place  of  treat-
ment.

(5)  LrTERATCRK. —  Tiie  articles  on  the  great  writers  of  Greek  and  Roman  lit-
erature will,  it  is  hoped,  be  found  to  be  especially  complete;  and  their  best-known
and  most  widely  read  works  are  noted  likewise  under  distinct  titles  with  cross-
references  to  the  leading  articles.  A  very  large  number  of  general  articles  deal
also  with  special  phases  of  literary  production,  detailing,  for  example,  the  history  of
the  Epic,  of  Lyric  Poetry,  of  Dramatic  Literature,  of  Parody,  of  the  Epigram,  of
♦Tokes,  of  Rhyme,  of  Satire,  of  the  Anthologies,  of  the  Cento,  of  the  ancient  Novel
and  Romance,  of  the  Alexandrian  Canon,  of  celebrated  editions  of  the  classics,  of
important  Codices,  of  the  Renaissance,  of  lexicography,  of  Grammar,  and  of
Rhetoric  and  Oratory.  Everywhere  the  effect  of  ancient  literature  upon  the  lit-
erature of  modem  times  has  been  noted  with  particular  reference  to  such  of  the
great  modern  masterpieces  as  have  derived  their  suggestion  and  inspiration  di-
rectlv  from  the  works  of  Greek  and  Roman  writers. It  is  believed  that  this  de-


vui


P  It  K  F  A  C£


partment  of  the  Dictionary  will  prove  especially  «itlractive  to  those  students  who
are  interested  in  the  study  of  Comparative  Literature  ;  and  that  it  will  give  to
uli  a  fuller  sense  of  the  essential  unity  of  man's  recorde<l  thought.

(6)  AirriQtjmEs. — A  large  portion  of  the  work  is  devoted  to  the  discussion  of
subjects  relating  to  the  Amusements,  Art,  rostume,  Doniestie  Life.  Law,  Music,
Numismatics,  Philosophy,  Religion,  and  Science  of  the  ancients — a  department,
in  fact,  upon  which  the  greatest  labour  has  been  expended,  as  it  is  the  sphere  in
wliich  the  greatest  additions  to  our  knowledge  of  antiquity  have  been  made  within
the  past  half-century.  It  is,  indeiMJ,  the  pmgress  in  the  (ield  of  archteology  that
has  most  completely  made  the  ulder  works  of  reference  seem  antiquateil  for  the
purposes  of  the  modern  student.  A  wealth  of  new  material  has  of  late  lieen  pre-
sented for  scientiho  investij^ti»m.  The  work  of  discovery,  pursued  with  increas-
ing intelligence  and  enthusiusui,  has  brought  to  light  fresh  treasures  uf  ancient  art
and  ornament,  and  has  made  plain  and  in  every  way  intelligible  much  that  before
was  doubtful  and  obscure.  The  investigations  of  SchJiemann,  lltiniann,  U^jrpfeld,
Flinders  Petric,  Jjinciani,  Iloiuolle.  and  others  would  alone  have  made  the  jmsL
three  decades  a  new  and  brilliant  era  in  the  history  of  classical  arch:eology,  even
had  their  discoveries  not  been  supplemented  and  illustrated  by  the  laboure  of
scholai*s  less  known,  perhaps,  but  not  less  able.  Epigraphy,  too,  in  the  last  fifty
years  has  experienced  a  marked  developinont.  It  would  be  easy  to  name  certain
inscriptions  whose  discovery  h:is  given  an  entirely  new  meaning  to  the  investiga-
tion of  ancient  life  and  manners,  and  especially  to  the  study  of  Greek  an<l  Koman
law.  Moreover,  the  literary  ]>roductivoness  of  the  period  in  its  relation  to  the
study  of  antiquity  has  been  wonderfully  rich  in  giving  a  lucid  and  scientific  expo-
sition of  these  discoveries,  and  in  deducing  from  them  the  knowleilge  which  they
embody  or  suggest.  It  is  with  these  facts  in  mind  that  the  portion  of  the  work
which  rebites  to  Archaeology  pro|>er  lias  been  prepuied.  and  it  has  been  the  pur-
pose of  the  Editor  to  leave  no  important  topic  unrecorded,  or  ]>a.ssed  over  without
at  Icju^t  the  most  essential  information.  A  number  of  short  general  articles  take
up  the  subjects  that  arc  necessjiry  to  an  understanding  of  the  collateral  sources  t>f
information,  sueii  as  those  relating  to  Epigraphy,  Palieography,  and  Text  Criti-
cism;  while  important  bits  of  special  information  regan-iing  matters  to  which
reference  is  frei|uently  made  in  classical  teaching,  Ijut  f<tr  whose  explanation  tlie
student  is  too  often  ignorant  where  to  go,  will  be  found  under  such  titles  as  ('ista
Kicoroniana,  Chtiragic  Monument.  Uarpy  Monument,  Duenos  Inscription,  Graffiti,
Monumentum  Adulitanum.  Miinumentum  Ancyranum,  Palimpsest,  Portland  Vase,
Tabuhi  liantira.  and  very  many  more.

(7)  LiNiJirAUB. — It  lias  been  thought  desirable  to  provide  the  student,  for  pur-
poses of  ready  reference,  with  some  sjiecial  information  concerning  the  most
iraportiint  linguistic  questions  that  arise  in  the  study  of  the  classics.  Considera-
tions of  space  have  prevented  the  Editor  from  elaborating  this  department  of  the
work  and  from  adding  many  subjects  to  an  ab'eady  formidable  list.  What  has
been  given  will,  he  is  assured,  be  a  source  of  satisfaction  l-o  those  who  use  the
b(M>k.  The  character  of  the  topics  coming  under  this  he4id  can  be  fairly  well  indi-
cate<l  by  mentioning  ii  few  of  them,  such  as  Alliteration,  the  African  Latinity,
Dialects.  Gniinmar,  Grimm's  Law.  the  IndoEuroptwin  Ijinguages,  Onomatopoeia,
Philology,  the  Pj*onunciation  of  Greek,  the  Pronunciaticm  of  ],atin,  Uhotacism,
the  Sermo  Plebeius,  and  Vomer's  Law. No  work  of  reference  in  English  that


PREFACE  ix

has  to  do  with  classical  study  has  ever  included  information  of  this  character,
and  it  will  be  therefore,  to  American  students,  a  feature  that  is  quite  unique.

(8)  BiBUOGRAPHT. — At  the  end  of  all  of  the  most  important  articles  a  selected
bibliography  has  been  appended,  including  those  works  that  are  most  famous,  most
valuable,  and  most  readily  accessible  to  the  student  who  desires  to  acc]uire  a  more
special  knowledge  of  the  subjects  treated.  Where  such  works  exist  in  the  English
language,  these  have  received  the  preference  over  those  in  foreign  tongues.  Un-
fortunately, it  is  only  within  the  last  few  years  that  English  and  American
scholars  have  begun  to  put  forth  monographs  in  any  way  comparable  with  the
treatises  in  which  the  French  and  German  classicists  have  long  been  accustomed
to  embody  the  results  of  their  special  investigations,  llence,  a  large  proportion  of
the  references  are  to  books  and  pamphlets  in  the  Continental  languages,  including
many  important  ''  programmes  '^  and  university  dissertations.  In  no  case  has  an
exhaustive  bibliography  been  attempted,  but  such  a  selection  has  been  given  as
will  be  of  the  greatest  practical  assistance.

(9)  Illustrations. — A  word  should  be  said  of  the  illustrations,  of  which  the
Dictionary  contains  some  fifteen  hundred.  Their  insertion  has  necessarily  drawn
heavily  upon  the  space  at  the  Editor^s  disposal ;  yet  he  feels  that  the  gain  in  in-
terest and  in  intelligibility  which  they  secure  far  more  than  compensates  for  the
enhanced  brevity  which  they  entail  upon  the  printed  text.  In  the  case  of  mate-
rial objects,  a  picture  is  usually  far  more  intelligible  than  whole  paragraphs  of  ver-
bal d^cription  whose  place,  in  truth,  they  very  eificiently  supply.  Their  source
are  in  most  cases  indicated;  and  the  fact  that  the  greater  number  of  them  repro-
duce exactly  objects  that  have  come  down  to  us  from  antiquity  gives  them  an
especial  interest  and  value.  In  some  cases,  for  the  clearer  comprehension  of  tbe
original  form,  restorations  by  archaeologists  of  distinction,  such  as  Durpfeld,  Biilil-
mann,  Brune,  Hoffmann,  Wagner,  I^nvenuti,  and  Lanciani,  have  been  Inserted,
and  now  and  then  the  ideal  creations  of  modern  sculptors  and  painters,  such  as
Canova,  Thorwaldsen,  Alma-Tadema,  and  Jalabert,  have  received  a  place,  as  giving
a  more  vivid  perception  of  the  essential  meaning  of  a  theme.

From  what  has  now  been  said,  it  will  be  evident  that  the  work  is,  in  fact,  a
Classical  Encyclopaedia.  Were  the  title  not  too  ambitious,  it  might  perhaps  be
more  correctly  described  as  a  Dictionary  of  Classical  Philology,  using  that  term  in
the  sense  which  it  conveys  in  Germany.  It  does,  indeed,  aim  to  give  in  a  single
volume  the  substance  of  all  the  information  that  it  has  hitherto  been  necessary  to
seek  among  many  books  and  in  many  places.  The  massing  of  all  this  material  in
a  single  volume  and  under  a  single  alphabetical  arrangement  would  in  itself  be  an
immense  gain  in  convenience  to  the  student  who  has  heretofore  been  obliged  to
refer  to  half  a  dozen  dictionaries  for  the  elucidation  of  the  questions  that  arise  in
his  daily  work ;  but  the  advantages  of  such  a  consolidation  extend  far  beyond  any
mere  question  of  convenience.  It  enables  all  the  topics  to  be  treated  in  a  way
that  shall  show  their  natural  relation  to  one  another  and  that  makes  impossible  a
sense  of  detachment  and  isolation.  Thus,  History  illustrates  Literature,  and  Liter-
ature explains  History ;  while  Art,  and  language,  and  Science  are  shown  in  their
proper  relations  to  the  whole  study  of  ancient  life  and  thought.  It  has  every-
where been  the  purpose  of  the  Editor  to  make  this  intimate  connection  fully  ap-
parent, and  every  important  article  in  each  department  refers  directly  and  contin-
ually to  all  the  others  that  in  any  way  have  any  bearing  upon  the  same  subject.


X  PREFACE

The  general  articles,  such  as  those  on  Epigraphy,  History,  Libraries,  Museums,
Music,  Palaeography,  Philology,  Philosophy,  Painting,  Sculpture,  Numismatics,
Religion,  and  Text  Criticism,  are  meant  to  give  the  reader  in  each  case  a  conspec-
tus of  the  whole  field  in  an  outline  which  the  special  articles  will  enable  him  to
fill  in  with  a  more  elaborate  detail.  It  is  this  method  of  treatment  that  has
made  possible  the  inclusion  of  so  many  classes  of  topics  in  a  volume  of  moderate
size;  for  each  article  serves  to  explain  many  others,  and  thus  avoids  a  tedious  and
unnecessary  repetition.

As  may  be  readily  understood,  the  most  difficult  question  confronting  the  Ed-
itor was  the  question  of  proportion.  It  is  unlikely  that  any  two  scholars  could  be
found  to  agree  upon  the  relative  importance  of  the  topics  presented ;  and  it  is,
therefore,  here  that  the  Editor  must  expect  to  receive  the  greatest  amount  of  criti-
cism. Hence,  it  is  proper  to  set  forth  the  general  principles  that  have  guided  him
in  his  work,  so  that,  whether  or  not  they  meet  with  general  approval,  they  may,
at  any  rate,  be  recognized  as  definite  and  consistent.  Having  in  mind  the  daily
needs  of  the  student,  it  has  been  the  purpose  of  the  Editor  to  give  the  fullest
treatment  to  those  questions  that  most  frequently  arise  in  one's  ordinary  reading
of  the  classics,  and  that  are  of  tlie  greatest  practical  importance.  Thus,  tlie
largest  assignment  of  space  has  been  given  to  articles  that  deal  with  ancient
literature  in  all  its  phases,  inasmuch  as  it  is  from  and  through  literature  that  our
clearest  knowledge  of  Greek  and  Roman  thought  and  life  has  been  derived,  and
because  literature  has  itself  been  to  all  succeeding  ages  the  magnet  that  drew
men's  minds  to  the  investigation  of  the  ])ast.  Historical  questions  are  also  cjuite
fully  dealt  with  ;  while  in  the  department  of  antiquities  those  topics  that  are  most
closely  related  to  the  every-day  life  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  are  the  ones  that
liftve  received  the  preference.  Thus,  much  space  is  given  to  describing  the  dress,
the  food,  the  houses,  the  amusements,  tlie  conveniences,  the  arts,  and  the  religious
faith  and  rites  of  tlie  two  great  peoples ;  far  less  is  assigned  to  their  governmental
regulations;  while  with  regard  to  the  minuter  points  of  law,  the  dififerent  ypatftai
and  BUai  and  letfes  that  one  seldom  meets  outside  of  the  pages  of  the  legal
oratory  of  the  ancients,  these  have  usually  been  allowed  to  jiass  with  a  concise
and  simple  definition.  So  in  Geography,  those  places  that  are  linked  with  some
great  historical  event,  or  that  are  to  us  moderns  especially  interesting  because  of
their  importance  in  the  study  of  archjeology,  are  described  with  considerable
minuteness;  but  cities  and  towns  and  countries  that  have  no  such  s|>ecial  associa-
tions now,  and  that  are  known  to  us  only  from  some  casual  mention  in  the  pages
of  Polybius  or  Strabo  or  Pomponius  Mela,  have  been  merely  touched  upon  with
a  note  or  two  upon  their  situation  and  their  relative  importance  in  antiquity.
Hence,  while  the  great  city  of  Rhagae  has  only  some  twent}'  lines  assigned  to
it,  the  description  of  the  little  Campanian  town  of  Pompeii  occupies  a  space  of
nearly  seven  pages.

Thus  the  practical  neetls  and  the  greater  convenience  of  the  learner  have  been
everywhere  reuieniberetl,  and  to  tiiese  ends  the  Editor  has  occasionally  sucrificetl
considerations  of  strict  consistency  when  such  consistency  would  render  the  use  of
the  work  less  simple,  and  would  secure  nothing  more  valuable  than  a  ]>edantic
uniformity.  For  instance,  in  the  matter  of  arrangement,  the  names  of  Romans
have  been  placed  under  the  gentile  name  or  the  cognomen,  according  to  the
respective  familiarity  of  each  in  English  usage :  Marcus  TuUius  Cicero  and  Gains


PREFACE  xl

lulius  Caesar  are  treated  under  Cicero  and  Caesar^  but  Publius  Terentius  Afar  and
Publius  Vergilius  Maro  under  Terenthcs  and  Vergilius.  The  same  considerations
have  guided  the  Editor  in  respect  to  the  forms  of  words  that  are  Greek.  When
there  exists  a  corresponding  Latin  form,  and  when  this  form  is  more  familiar  to
the  English  and  American  reader  than  the  Greek,  it  has  been  given  In  the  title;
while  in  the  case  of  those  words  that  were  never  Latinized  the  original  is  written.
Thus,  Thncydide^  and  Mendam  and  JUpaminondas  have  been  preferred  to  Thou-
kydide»  and  Menelao«  and  Epameivmidas  •  but  Kakosis  is  written  instead  of  Cacosis.
This  discrimination  has  been  carried  out  according  to  the  best  judgment  of  the
Editor,  who  has  always  made  it  a  rule  to  avoid  what  an  English  scholar  has  very
cleverly  described  as  "the  Scylla  of  Thmikydides  and  the  Charybdis  of  Samtcs"
In  the  orthography,  also,  it  has  seemed  preferable  to  go  only  so  far  in  the  direc-
tion of  scientific  exactnera  as  is  exemplified  by  the  best  texts  used  in  our  schools
and  universities:  and  therefore  the  use  of  the  character  J  has  been  discarded  in
Latin  words,  while  the  distinction  between  V  and  V  has  been  retained.  For  the
greater  convenience  of  the  student,  again,  the  usual  index  raUonne  at  the  end  of
the  volume  is  omitted,  and  in  its  stead  the  English  names  of  the  princij^al  topics
treated  have  been  inserted  in  the  body  of  the  work  and  under  the  single  alphabet-
ical arrangement,  so  that  one  who  wishes  to  find  an  article  and  does  not  remember
the  Greek  or  the  Latin  title  can  turn  to  it  in  English  in  its  proper  alphabetical
place  and  there  find  the  reference  to  tlie  proper  heading.  Tlie  abundant  cross-
references  will  also  greatly  facilitate  the  use  of  the  book,  and  will  prove  a  valuable
guide  in  turning  at  once  to  all  the  collateral  branches  of  a  subject.

In  the  preparation  and  development  of  this  elaborate  scheme,  the  Editor  has
been  greatly  assisted  by  the  advice  and  suggestions  of  many  eminent  scholars,
whose  encouragement  and  counsel  have  l>een  of  the  utmost  service  to  him  at  every
stage  of  the  work.  Unusual  value  is  given  to  the  Dictionary  by  a  number  of
articles  contributed  to  it  by  writers  whose  names  are  the  highest  guarantee  of  tlie
excellence  of  their  work,  as  standing  in  each  case  for  special  knowledge  based  upon
original  study  and  investigation.  It  is  proper  that  these  contributors  should  be
here  mentioned  in  detail.  Professor  Frederic  D.  Allen,  of  Harvard  University,
has  written  the  article  Ttodve  Tab/^a ;  Dr.  Robert  Arrowsmith,  formerly'  of
Racine  Collar®,  the  article  Camerarius ;  Professor  Sidney  G.  Ashmork,  of  Union
University,  the  article  P.  Terentius  Afer ;  Professor  Franz  BCchblkr,  of  the
University  of  Bonn,  the  article  Ihibria;  Professor  Edward  B.  Clapp,  of  the  Uni-
versity of  California,  the  articles  AeschineSy  Aeschylus^  ArhtoteUs,  Ilium,  Pro-
nuficiation  of  Greek,  Syndlcus,  Synegorus,  and  Synthesis;  Dr.  Frederic  Tabsb
Cooper,  of  the  University  of  the  City  of  New  York,  the  article  Sermo  Pleheiiis  ;
the  Reverend  Charles  T.  Crlttwell,  late  of  Oxford  University,  the  articles
Quintns  Ennius^  M.  Annaeus  Seneca,  and  Zucius  Annaeus  Seneca  ,•  Professor
Mortimer  Lamson  Earle,  of  Bryn  Mawr  College,  the  article  Athenae;  Professor
James  C.  Egbert,  Jr.,  of  Columbia  University,  the  articles  Ilonores  (so  much  as
relates  to  the  cursus  honorum),  N'omm  (so  much  as  relates  to  the  Roman  name),
Papyrus^  Princeps,  PrincipatuH ;  Professor  K.  F.  Gkldneb,  of  the  University  of
•Berlin,  the  article  Persia  ;  Professor  Basil  L.  Gildersleeve,  of  the  Johns  Hopkins
University,  the  article  Pindarus ;  Professor  Alfred  Gudeman,  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  the  twenty-one  articles  on  abbreviations  given  at  the  beginning
of  each  of  the  letters  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  alphabets;  Dr.  Isaac  II.  Hall,  of


XH  PREFACE

the  \retro[x>litan  Miweum  of  Art  in  New  York  City,  the  article  Ctjpriiit ;  Professor
A.  y.  WiLUAMs  Jackson,  of  Columbia  University,  the  articles  Rhofjae  and  Zoro-
fwter  ,•  Professor  Francis  W.  Kewev,  of  the  University  of  Michigan,  the  articles
GaUt^  luliu^  Ouettar,  TUu«  Lueretltts  Oant^y  and  lioma ;  Professor  ICouolpo  Lan-
ciANi,  of  the  University  of  Rome,  the  article  Pomjhii;  Professor  Charles  K.  Lan-
MAN,  of  Uarvurd  University,  the  article  ludUi ;  l)r.  C'HAKi.RtN  T.  Lewis,  of  New
York,  the  article  L^koii :  Professor  Ernest  Mondem.  Pkas^  of  the  Stanford
University,  the  article  StUirrt;  Professor  Edwakh  Dklavas  Pkkky,  of  Columbia
University,  the  article  Franz  Bopp  ;  Professor  Tiiosias  D.  Skymoi-r,  of  Yale  X?ni-
vorsitj',  tlie  article  f{oinmt»  f  Pi-ofessor  Mcnhoe  iSMirii,  of  Columbia  University,
the  articles  Actio,  fus,  Zetjaiw^  Zw,  Mtt^istnUfM,  Maiestati,  Pignusy  PrmnnciOj
Senatu^  ;  Professor  P.  13.  TAituKLt,  of  the  U^niversity  of  Chicago,  the  articles  BouU^
Mycotute,  l*ropijlaca^  and  Tinjns,  and  a  number  of  architectural  definitions;  Vr<>-
fessor  A.  F.  West,  of  Princeton  University,  the  article  Libtyrnht  Ari'ns  ;  Professor
Benjamin  Ide  Wheklek,  of  Cornell  University,  the  articles  (rrhnm^if  Imw  and
tVrntvV  Liiir:  and  Dr.  Clarence  \\.  YoiNt;,  of  Columbia  University,  the  article
Dt'in  tift.

For  the  rest  of  the  Dictionary  the  Editor  is  himself  resjx>nsible;  and  in  making-
this  statement  it  is  proper  to  give  some  account  of  the  sources  ii|h>n  which  he  has
<)iuwn  and  of  the  extent  to  which  tliey  have  been  used  in  the  preparation  of  tlio
articles.

The  greater  part  of  the  biographical  an<l  geographical  material  is  base<l  upon
Smith's  Greek  un^l  lifif/ia/i  0/*tJi/tlc(d  Dirtionartj  as  revisetl  and  enIarg«H]  and  pub-
lished iti  this  country  in  IS:»3  by  Professor  Charles  Anthon  and  Professor  Henry
Drisler.  Very  extensive  changes  have,  however,  been  made  in  adapting  this
material  t<i  the  purpose  of  the  present  work.  Staletnunts  that  subse<]iu!nt  in-
vestigations have  shown  to  be  inadetjuate  or  unfounded  have  been  carefully
coiTocted ;  a  more  lively  turn  has  been  given  to  much  of  the  description  and
chai-acterization  ;  such  furthor  information  as  is  now  available  has  been  incor-
poratctl  in  the  articles ;  reference  to  the  loci  vlaHnici  have  betm  supplied ;  and  to
the  more  important  articles  a  g<xxi  working  bibliography  of  recent  publications  in
English,  French,  and  German  bearing  upon  the  subject  has  been  appended.  In
the  casR  of  authors,  the  sources  of  our  texts  are  indicated,  the  principal  tjditions
(including  the  etlitioM^  prhieijie^)  are  noted  with  their  tlules,  uinl  a  selection  of
monographs  on  the  life,  style,  and  subject-matter  is  given.  In  many  cases,  how-
ever, the  original  articles  have  been  wholly  rejected  as  unsatisfactory,  and  these^
have  been  entirely  rewritten.

The  archaeological  |>ortion  of  the  Dictionary  is  based  in  part,  but  only  in  part,
u|)on  the  edition  of  Smith's  Difiiouanj  of  Grrtk  and  lioman  Antiquitit's  as  re-
visetl  by  Professor  Anthon.  Sue!)  of  this  material  as  has  been  drsiwn  upon  has
l)een  very  carefully  corrected  and  amplifietl  in  the  light  of  our  present  knovvle<lge,
and  has  been  providotl  also  with  references  to  the  latest  archaeological  publica-
tions. Very  valuable  to  the  Editor  has  been  Daremberg  and  Saglio's  Ouilonuaire
tktf  AntM/uif^ff  Gra-'jae^  et  Pom-^iin^-^  for  the  early  portion,  and  so  far  as  their  great
work  has  yet  api>eared.  IJiiunieister's  DenknUiler  de*  kl<tmUi-hen  AlieHhumtt  has*
also  been  continually  at  hand  for  rcfen>n<!e  and  consultation;  as  has  Bouche-
Lecleroq's  Jn^tUutlonH  Uotn<juu:A^  with  (rilbert's  Greek  Constitutional  AtitiquHies
in  the  (ierman  original,  and lately  in  the  excellent  English  version  of  Messrs.


PREFACE  xiii

Brooks  and  Nicklin  published  in  1895.  Especial  mention  should  be  made  of  the
third  edition  of  Sir  William  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquitiea
( London,  1891),  upon  which  the  Editor  has  continually  drawn  and  from  which
several  important  articles*  have  been  wholly  or  in  part  condensed.  Some  useful
material  has  been  found  in  Rich's  Dictionary  of  Homan  and  Greek  Antiquities  (5th
etl.,  London  and  New  York,  1890).  The  Becker-Goll  revisions  of  Chai'ilcU^  and
Oallus  are  frequently  cited  or  referred  to  under  titles  relating  to  the  private  life  of
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  as  are  also  Marquardt's  Privatlehen  der  Ri'mier  (2d  ed.,
Leipzig,  18S6) ;  Friedlander's  Darsteliumj  au»  der  Sittengeachichte  Rom%  (6th  ed.,
J^ipzig,  1888-90) ;  and  Menard's  Vie  Pnvee  des  Anciens  (Paris,  1880).  For  ancient
art,  of  especial  use  have  been  the  works  of  Winckelmann,  Stark,  Overbeck,Westropp,
Reber,  Murra\%  Newton,  Michaelis,  Perry,  Krause,  ilelbig,  WoUmann  and  "Woer-
inann,  Mau,  Middleton,  Brunn  and  Fergusson.  For  the  technical  and  scientific
knowledge  of  the  ancients,  Bliimner's  Teehnologie  und  Tenninolofjie  (Leipzig,
1875-87)  has,  of  course,  been  of  the  greatest  aid.  Some  of  the  general  articles  are
mainly  drawn  from  Seyffert's  Lexileon  der  klasnscken  Alterthumskunde  (Leipzig,
1882),  though  it  has,  of  course,  been  necessary  to  add  largely  to  the  material  found
in  this  excellent  but  in  some  respects  too  elementary  work.  Here  and  there  the
Editor  h^  availed  himself  of  the  supplementary  matter  supplied  to  these  articles
of  Seyffert  by  Dr.  J.  £.  Sandys  in  the  English  edition  made  by  himself  and  the  late
Professor  Nettleship — additions  so  admirable  as  to  induce  regret  that  these  distin-
guished scholars  did  not  supply  them  in  all  the  articles  which  they  translated.
Man}"-  useful  suggestions  in  this  and  other  departments  of  the  work  were  derived
from  Reinach's  Manuel  de  Phi/dogie  Classique  (Paris,  1883-84),  a  marvel  of  en-
cyclopaedic knowledge  and  judicious  condensation  that  has  now  for  twelve  years
been  the  philological  pemmican  of  all  classical  scholars.  It  would  be  superfluous
to  mention  the  immensely  valuable  monographs  contained  in  Iwan  Miiller's  Hand-
buck  der  klassischen  Altertuniswisaenchaft,  The  Pauly-Wissowa  Real-Encyclo-
piidie  der  klasaiscken  Altertuinswissenchaft  began  to  appear  too  late  to  be  used
to  any  extent.

For  those  articles  that  deal  with  the  literature  of  Greece  and  Rome  and  those
that  embody  miscellaneous  and  collateral  information,  so  many  works  in  so  many
languages  have  been  continually  consulted  as  to  render  any  separate  mention  of
them  utterly  impossible.  Suffice  it  to  say  that,  besides  the  great  standard  author-
ities in  each  department,  the  s^^ecial  monographs  of  French  and  German  scholars
have  been  frequently  referred  to,  as  well  as  such  papers  of  value  as  are  continually
appearing  in  the  archaeological  and  philological  journals  of  England,  France,  Ger-
many, Italy,  and  the  United  States.  In  preparing  the  bibliography,  much  use  was
naturally  made  of  'Engelmann-Preuss,  of  Professor  Hiibner's  Grundriss  zu  Vorle-
sungen  iiher  die  romiscKe  Litteraturgeschichte  (Irth  ed.,  Berhn,  1878),  and  the  same
scholars  Bihliographie  der  kl^ssischen  Altertumstoissenchaft  ( 2d  ed.,  Berlin,
1889),  besides  the  well-known  works  of  Professor  J.  E.  B.  Mayor,  and  the  Teuffel-
Schwabe-Warr  History  of  Roman  Literature  (London,  1891).  In  preparing  the
short  biographies  of  mediseval  and  modern  classical  scholars  and  their  works,
much  help  was  derived  from  Pokel's  Schriftatellerles^ikon  (1882)  and  from  Pio-
fessor  Alfred  Gudeman's  excellent  Outlines  of  the  Histoi'y  of  Classical  Philology
(2d  ed.,  Boston  and  New  York.  1894).

*  Especially  Amphitheatrum,  Atfileiae,  linccftanalta,  Balneae,  Cirevs,  Eieimnia,  FmtTen  Arnilea,
TTif a  trnm,  Va$.


xir


PREFACE


In  drawing  upoa  these  and  all  his  other  sources,  the  Editor  has  allowed  himself
tlte  very  greatest  freetlom.  Whatever  lie  hm  taken  he  hjis  used  in  the  way  bfjst
adapted  to  secure  ttie  end  ho  liati  in  view.  When  material  was,  in  il8  original
form,  precisely  suited  to  his  purpose  he  incorporated  it  without  a  oliange.  When
change  for  any  reason  was  desirable,  he  ealar-ged,  condensed,  modi  lied,  transposed^
or  paraphrased  according  to  his  conception  of  wliat  was  most  needed  in  the  given
ca.su:  :ind  as  tlie  greater  part  of  his  work  was  compilation  ratlier  tlian  original
exposition,  he  wishes  here  to  express  his  very  great  indebte<lneS8  to  the  many
books  that  have  l>een  drawn  upt^n.  No  acknowledgment  can  be  too  full  or  too
comprehensive;  and  if  the  completed  work  be  found  of  service  to  the  student
of  the  cksfiics,  this  result  must  be  very  largely  credited  to  the  original  sources
whence  so  great  a  portion  of  the  Dictionary  is  derived.

The  illustrations  also  come  from  many  places.  The  various  "atlases'*  pub-
lished in  Germany.  es[>ecially  that  of  tSchi'eiber,  liave  yielde<l  many ;  and  so  have
Baurneister's  DenkmiU^r^  Overbeck's  Pompeii,  and  Falke's  iIeUa«  und  Itofn.
Many,  however,  are  from  photographs,  for  some  of  which  t!ie  Editor  is  indebted
to  the  kindness  of  the  friends  who  are  mentioned  in  the  following  paragraph.  A
good  many  drawings  of  minor  objects  have  been  taken  from  Kich;  and  several
from  Darcrabcrg  und  Saglio,  and  from  Guhl  and  Koner's  Life  of  the  Greeks  and
lioiiiunfi^ — a  work  that  has  likewise  proved  of  service  m  other  departments  of  this
Dictionary.

Some  especial  mention  is  due  to  those  wlio  have  in  many  ways  aided  in  the
preparation  of  the  l«tok.  To  Professor  IIkskv  Dkislkk,  whose  name  is  still  fii-st
among  American  lexicographers  of  ilic  classical  languages,  sincere  thanks  are  due
for  assistance,  information,  and  advice,  as  well  as  for  the  loan  of  books  from  his
wellstoreil  private  liljrary.  Ti>  his  lamented  colleague.  Pn^fessor  Auocstus  C
Mrrrum,  the  Editor  is  imlcbted  for  having  read  a  number  of  tlie  articles  in  proof,
and  for  many  very  valuable  suggestions.  For  a  like  service,  acknowledgments
are  hereby  made  to  Professors  Perby,  Jackson,  and  Eojiert.  Dr.  Kouert
Arrowsmith  assumed  the  task  of  translating  into  F^nglish  the  articles  contributed
to  this  work  by  foreign  scholai's.  Professor  Roix^i.i-o  L.\xciam,  Professor  Fka^<'is
W.  Kei*ey.  Professor  F.  B.  Tahrei.l,  and  Mr.  Henkv  K.  Taylor  have  been  espe-
cially kind  in  furnishing  for  the  Editor's  use  various  photograplts,  drawings,  nml
diagrams  not  reatlily  obtainable  elsewhere.  The  publishing-house  of  llerr  Olden-
bourg,  of  Munich,  has  furnished  some  of  the  electrotypes  used  in  Baumeister's  Denh-
mdler,  and  Messrs.  Estcs  and  Lauriat  of  Boston  have  kindly  permitted  tbc  reproduc-
tion of  son»e  of  the  illustrations  from  their  edition  of  Duruy's  Uthiortj  of  Hum€.
The  house  of  Ilerr  Gustav  Fock,  of  Leipzig,  has  aided  greatly  in  the  pre|)aration  of
the  bibliographical  poition  of  the  liook  by  furnishing  valuable  data  under  this
head.  Finally,  tlie  Editor  would  be  indeetl  ungrateful  were  he  to  abstain  from
a  warm  expression  of  personal  in<lel>tedness  to  his  publishers,  whose  patience
and  consideration  during  many  unavoidable  delays  have  been  as  generous  as  their
liberality  in  carrying  out  the  Editor's  plan  has  been  unstinted.  It  is,  in  fact,  in
the  cultivated  and  broad-mindotl  publisher  of  to-day  that  one  lindR  the  modern
tyi>e  of  the  Augustan  Maecenas,  but  with  a  vastness  of  opportunity  and  a  far-
reaching  influence  such  as  no  ancient  ever  exercised,  for  the  effective  encourage-
ment of  literature  and  learning.

In  sending  forth  at  last  this  volume,  to  whose  preparation  he  has  now  for


PUEPACE  XV

nearly  fiire  years  devoted  every  hour  that  oould  be  spared  from  other  and  most
arduous  duties,  the  Editor  appreciates,  far  more  keenly  than  when  the  work  began,
the  enormous  difficulties  of  his  task.  In  bringing  together  a  mass  of  material
requiring  at  every  point  so  raucli  special  knowledge  and  so  much  mastery  of
detail,  it  is  inevitable  that  what  he  lias  done  should  here  and  there  be  0{>en  to  the
charge  of  inadequacy,  of  inconsistency,  and  perhaps  of  error.  Yet  it  is  still  his
earnest  hope  that  as  those  most  competent  to  criticise  are  best  able  also  to  appre-
ciate the  innumerable  perplexities  inherent  in  the  undertaking,  they  will  judge  his
labours  as  a  whole;  and  that  when  so  regarded,  these  will  be  found  at  least  to
have  done  something  to  promote  the  comprehensive,  intelligent,  and  sympathetic
study  of  classical  antiquity.

Hakby  Thuhston  Feck.

CuLi'MBiA  Univkrsity,  New  York,
Augutt  Ut,  1896.


A  DICTIONARY

OF

CLASSICAL  LITERATURE  AND  ANTIQUITIES.


A  the  first  letter  in  both  the  Greek  and  Latin
••|>liabet6.  The  principal  uses  of  the  letter  in  ab-
*>reviation3  found  in  MSS.  and  inscriptions,  or  on
Coins,  are  given  below.

f.v  Greek. — Abbreviations  of  one  or  even  of

two  letters  are  of  extreme  rarity  on  Greek  coins

>»»1  inscriptions  of  the  pre-£nclideau  period  ;  after

*|>'8  time  a  few  instances  occur,  owing  doubtless  to

™>niari influence,  their  use  being  chiefly  confined

•o  a  few-  fionian  proper  names,  e.  g.  A:=AvXdr,  Aipt]-

^"t,  Aan-cov'ivot. With the  general  introduction

«ft4.  '**^  numerals,  about  the  beginning  of  the

n"li  cenr„ry  B.C.,  the  letter  A,  d,  is  also  used  .is  u

nameral  for  1  and  1000  ( a). Cf.  S.  Reinach,  Traill

«'£pigrapkie  Grecque  (lc*85),  pp.  iKO  ff.  '-K5  flf.

^  ^^Tiji. — The  Romans  mule  an  astonishingly
extensive  iiae  of  abbreviations."  Only  a  very  few
oiit  of  many  thousands  recorded  in  the  indexes  to
•  ^ci^'  ■''■  {i'-777,iii.ll8r>,v.l201,vii.342,Tiii.  1103,
IX.  795,  X..  1165,  xii.  945,  xiv.  583)  can  be  given  here
under  each  letter.  On  Roman  abbreviations  in
general,  cf.  R.  Mowat,  Bull  Epigraph.  IV,  p.  VJ7  ff.
(188^;  E.  HUbner,  in  Iwan  MUUer's  Handbuch,  i.
496  ff.,  523  ff. ;  R.  Cagnat,  Coura  tCEpigraphUi  Latim
(1869),  p.  351  ff

A— al>8olvo,  written  on  voting  tablets,  "I  favor
acquittal ;»'  hence  called  litUra  aalutaria  (Cic.  pro
Mw.  vi.  i5j

^r:  *^tiqno,  designates  a  nay  vote  in  the  Roman
comitta,  in  rejection  of  a  proposed  change.

A —  audi tor,  or  adulescens  in  some  of  the  MSS.
of  Cic.  Thk.  Digp.,  to  denote  one  of  ttie  interloc-
utors aa  opposed  to  M  :=  Marcus  or  magister,

A=Auliigj  Augustus,  Anrelius,  Antoninus,  Africa,
Apnlis,  aedilis.

V  —  Anrelia  (inverted  letter  always  used  to  des-
ignat^  female  names).

'^  — accipiet,  actum,  aeternns,  annus,  aunona,
ara,  armajg^jj^  argento,  anro,  as.
^'^  =  Aquae,  Aponi,  Auli  dno.
AAGG  =  August!  duo.
^AGGG  =  August!  tres.


ivrt,™f  '^'B'"*'  name  for  theiw  abbrovialione  Reems  to  havo  been
Mfirtl  *"'^*'"  or  tingutariae  (cf.  (Jell.  xvii.  »,  I).  At  a  hitcr
P?f""  "Wat  became  Ihe  more  commoD  1i>rin  (rf,  FeMiifi.  p.  IH* :
iitn/  *^'^  ''IPiifirat  tignum  ,il  in  f>rcoritiwi.  tahulif,  hbrit.  lil-
nr\^^^^'^'^^  Mnoe).  ValerluB  f'rubim  wnilcnn  diitMiralc  work
J*.,*'- ""'r  a  part  of  which  hfis  bopti  prrsonwl  In  Ow  Di-
,Al  '"^■'""''Dtan  fvtta  Ifl  dlcplarod  by  ihi'  iprm  Hgln.  The  w(inl
^f* •wobinit  origin.  Most  scholars  rcpard  it  as  a  pyncojiaU'd
'^'>i  ligillum ;  olhenntcrire  it  ftotn  tinguii ;  Mommacn  thinkK
«»nt«cornipnoo  ttom  iiitffularei.


ABACTORES

A'AA-FF  =  aere  argento  anro  flando  feriuudo.

A-B  =  a  balneis  (very  fretlneutly  for  a  or  ab),
amicus  bonus.

A-B-M^amico  bene  merenti.

A-C  =  acre  collato,  armorum  custos,  a  colouia,  a
commentariis.

A-D  =  aute  dietn,  ager  divisus.

A-D-A  =  agris  daudis  adsignandis.

A-D-A'I  =z  agris  dandis  adsignandis  iudicandis.

A-E  =  actum  esse.

AFPR  =  actum  fido  Publii  Rntilii  (Cic.  de
Orat.  1169,280).

AGT  =  AugU8tn8.

A-G-lV*C-P  =  arborum  genera  quattnor,  cetera
privata.

AHNP  =  ad  heredem  non  pertinet.

A-L^actarius  legati,  [et  si  qui]  alii  liberti
[eruut],  animo  libens,  Angnsti  libertus,  area  lata.

AL-F(P)  =  animo  libente  fecit  (posuit).

AO'FC  =amico  optimo  faciundnm  curavit.

A-P  =  aedilicia  potestate,  animo  pio,  anno  pro-
vinciae,  a  populo,  area  publica,  argeutis  pondo,
ager  pnblicus.

A-P-R=aerarium  populi  Romani.

A-P*R-C=ranno  post  Rouiam  conditam.

AQ-ERPP  =  But  qui  eruiit  proxinii.

AQ-ER*P-P-RL  =  a<l  qnem  ea  i-es  pertinet,  per-
tinebit  recte  licet.

AQP=a  qnaestiouibus  praefecti.

A-S  =a  sacris,  a  senatn.

A-S-F  (F-C)  =  u  solo  fecit,  faciundnm  cnravit.

A-V  =  aedites  vici,  argenti  uuciae,  ave  vale.

A*V-C  =  anno  urbis  conditue.

Abacasntim,  an  ancient  town  of  Sicily,  vrest  of
Measana  and  south  of  Tyadaris.  See  Diod.  Sic.
xiv.  78, 90.

Abactorea,  Abigeatdrea,  or  Ablgel  are  terms
used  to  signify  those  guilty  of  cattle -stealiog
{abigeatuB),  which  the  Roman  practice  distin-
gnished  from  ordinary  /urtum  (q.  v.),  when  the
theft  was  of  a  sufficiently  serious  kind.  The
stealing  of  a  single  horse  or  ox  was  abigeatut,
bnt  to  steal  lesH  than  ten  sheep  or  four  pigs  was
only/Mr/iini.  It  wns  nn  aggravation  of  the  offence
to  steal  the  animals  from  a  pen  or  other  enclosnre,
or  for  tlie  abactor  to  carry  weapons.  The  pniiiah-
inent  was  at  the  discretion  of  the  magistrate,  and
ranged  from  banishment  and  degrmlation  from
rank  to  iwnal  servitude  and  deatli. Cf.  Dig-  47,


ABACTUS  VENTER .


ABACUS


14,  Dt  Abig^  ;  Cod.  ix.  37 ;  aud  Rein,  D<u  Crimi-
nalrecht  dor  £&m.  pp.  3'23-325  (Leips.  1B44).

AbaotUB  Venter. See  ABuitrio

AbactUos  (Gr.  d0aKt<rKos),  dimioutire  of  abacu»
(q.  v.),  oud  dcuotmg  a  tile  of  marble,  g^^f^t  s^-j
used  Id  njaktug  ornameutal  pavementti.  See  Mu-
sivt'M  Opus.

AbftcuB  (Gr.  a$a$,  d^oKiop).  (1)  A  square  plate,
eapcuially  tbu  Htoiie  nlab  tbat  coTers  tlie  capital  of
a  coluiiii).  (*2)  A  dice-board.  See  Duodecim  Scrip-
TA ;  Latkl'NCULI.  (3)  A  mathematician's  table
strewn  with  fineBund,ou  wLicb  figures  were  drawn
witli  a«(t/uf.  (4)  Acoiintiug-bourd,  on  wbicbsums
were  worked  for  private  aud  public  accounts.  This
might  be :

(a)  A  tablet  with  a  frame  or  rim,  covered  with
aaud,  in  which  lines  or  tlgiires  could  b«  drawn
either  with  the  finger  or  some  pointed  instrument ;
and  nsed  iu  geometry,  arithmetic,  etc.  (Pers.  i.  131 ;
fruditua pulvis,  Cic.  N.  D.  ii.  18, 48).  The  uame  arena-
tiut,  applied  to  the  elementary  teacher,  implies  that
Ibis  sort  of  abacus  waa  used  by  scboot-children.

(6)  A  development  of  this  simple  form  was  the
abacus  on  which  ^r^m,  calculi,  pebbles  or  counters,
were  employed  in  calculations.  It  was  a  boartl
marked  off  by  ridges  or  grooves  (along  which  balls,
counters,  or  buttons  could  be  moved)  into  com-
partments, for  the  several  orders  of  numbers.  We
liave  examples  of  both  Greek  and  Romau  abaci.
Tlie  Greek  abacus  figured  here  is  from  Salamis,
Aud  is  of  marble,  about  forty  inches  long  by  twenty-
fight  broad.  At  a  distance  of  ten  inches  from  one
of  the  sides  are  marked  five  parallel  lines.  At
twenty  inches'  distance  from  the  last  of  these,
eleven  others  are  marked  and  bisected  by  a  cross


JOJhJV^MaJXftfJ.

■J

3:

H

X

XrPHPaPHCTX

Greek  Abacaa,  or  Calculating  Table.

Hue,  the  point  of  whose  intersection  with  the  third,
(iixth,  and  ninth  lines  i-s  marked  by  a  star.  Along
ttirci'  of  the  sidus  is  arrniigod  a  series  of  characterH
in  the  same  order,  and  so  as  to  be  read  with  equal
t-asi'  whichever  way  tlio  abacus  is  turned  :  the  se-
ries on  one  side  having  two  more  characters  than
the  others.  These  diameters  (  ^  being  known  as
=  drnchnm)  gives  the  following  scale,  reckoned
from  the  left  of  I- :

h  p  A  P  H  p  X

1  6  10  so  100  ROO 1000

Those  characlers  are  of  great  antiquity.  ^  is  n
mutilated  E,  initial  of  ty ;  P  an  old  form  of  fl,  i.  e.
iriyrt ;  A  obviously  represents  6tKa,  aud  X  j^tXiot  ;
whilu  of  the  three  remaining  characters,  H  Jh  for
HEKATON,  the  old  way  of  writing  tKarov,  P  is  P
•«ith  A  iuKcribed,  p,  P  with  H.  The  cliaracteva  on
the  right  of  ^  arc  i  =ob(»l,  C  =  ^  oliol,  t  =  J  obol,
X  =:  xo^tovs,  J  obol.  The  two  additional  charac-
ters iu  the  left-hand  scries  are  P  =  5000  (P  with  X
inscri)>cd),  and  T  =  talent  (of  WOO  drachmae);  so


that  the  lowest  and  highest  money  units  are  at  the
two  ends  of  the  scale.

To  understand  the  use  of  this  abacus,  the  calcu-
lator must  be  supposed  sitting  before  one  of  its
long  sides,  aud  puttiug  counters  into  the  spaces
between  the  marked  lines.  Each  space  represents
an  order  of  numerals,  the  space  ou  the  right  band
being  intended  for  uuits,  the  next  space  for  tens,
the  next  for.  hundreds,  and  so  on.  The  numbers
belonging  to  the  first  four  of  each  series  arc  pnt
on  that  side  of  the  bisecting  line  which  is  nearest
the  calculator;  those  over  five  are  put  beyond  it.
As  five  spaces  out  of  the  ten  would  be  enough  for
these  purposes,  it  is  conjectured  that  after  the  pro-
gression of  drachmas  going  up  to  5000,  a  fresh  pro-
gression of  talents  began  (T:=:6000  drachmas),
going  np  to  the  seventh  place  (1,000,000).  Thus
the  Greek  abacus,  like  the  Roman,  which  was  no
doubt  dorived  from  it,  reckoned  up  to  a  million.
The  fractions  of  the  drachma  were  reckoned  on
the  five  lines  at  the  other  end  of  the  slab.  It  is  to
an  abacus  of  this  kind  that  Fulybius  refers,  when
he  compares  the  nps  and  downs  of  court  favorites
to  the  ^^nj<fiai  on  an  a^oKiov,  which,  according  to  the
line  in  which  they  are  placed,  may  signify  either  a
talent  or  a  chalcus  (Polyb.  v.  26,  $  13).  This  com-
parison is  elsewhere  attributed  to  Solon  (Diog.
Laiirt.  i.59).

The  Roman  abacas  (figured  here  from  the  Kir-
cberian  Museum  at  Rome)  was  ou  the  same  system.


fiUiSiU


Romin  Abacus,  or  CBleuIstlng  Tkbls.

It  is  divided  into  eight  lower  aud  eight  higher
(somewhat  shorter)  grooves:  there  is  also  a  ninth
lower  groove,  without  an  upper  groove  to  corre-
spond. Four  sliding  buttons  are  aftnohod  to  each
lower  groove  except  the  eighth,  wliich  has  five:
each  upper  groove  has  one  but  ton.  Between  the  two
seta  of  grooves  the  following  numbers  are  marked  :

>Xi  CCCI333 CCI33 CI3 C X I

1,000.000 100.0<W  ]0.0«» 1000 100 10 1

The  units  of  any  other  number  when  not  above
4  are  marked  by  moving  a  eorrespondiug  num-
ber of  liuttons  along  the  lower  groove  upwards,
the  button  in  the  upper  gr(M)vc  =.».  The  eighth
row  was  used  by  reckoning  fractions  (apa  recutTenn)
on  the  duodecimal  syBtcni,  l)y  ounces,  or  twelft  li  of
the  as,  and  is  accordingly  marked  O  or  ©  :=
uncia:  each  of  its  five  lower  buttons  =  1  ounce,
and  the  upper  one=6.  Fractions  below  an  ounce
were  reck<(ned  on  the  ninth  groove,  marked:
s  n  Z  or  2

\ \


BOnillDCiL

i  oz.


Eiicil'rus.


diifllA.


See  the  article  Logistica.

(5)  The  name  is  also  used  of  a  woo<icn  tray  or


ABAE


S


ABLEGMINA


platter  employed  iu  ilomeHtic  ecouomy.  Cf.  PHn.
B.  S.  xxxvii.  $  18  and  $  ai ;  Apul.  Met.  ii.  7.  (5)  A
sideboard  for  vessels,  and  fur  otTuriugs  to  the  gods
(Boetticher,  Tektonik  der  Hellenen,  iii.  p.  46).


Abacus,  sideboard. (Rellcric  British  Museum.)

Abae  ('Affai).  A  city  of  Phocis,  near  and  to  the
Tight  of  Elatea,  towards  Opus.  The  inhahttanta
had  a  tradition  that  their  city  was  founded  by
Abas,  son  of  Lyncens  and  Hypermnestra,  grandson
of  Danaus  ( Fans.  10,  35 ).  It  was  most  probably
of  Pelattgic  origin.  Abae  was  early  celebrated  for
its  oracle  of  Apollo,  of  greater  antiquity  than  that
at  Delphi,  and  benceApoUo  is  called  Abaens.  Dur-
ing the  Persian  invasion,  the  army  of  Xerxes  set
fire  to  the  temple,  and  nearly  destroyed  it ;  soon
after  it  again  gave  oracles,  though  in  this  dilapi-
dated  state,  and  was  consulted  for  that  purpose  by
au  agent  of  Mardonins  (Herod,  viii.  134).

Abalienatio. See  Mancipium.

Abantes  ("A^ovrcr).  The  ancient  inhabitants  of
Enboea.  They  are  said  to  have  been  of  Thracian
origin,  to  have  first  settled  iu  Phocis,  where  they
built  Abae  (q-v.),  and  afterwanls  to  have  crossed
uverto  Enboea.  The  Abantes  of  Euboea  assisted  in
colonizing  several  of  the  luniccitica  of  Asia  Minor.

Abautl&des.  A  patronymic  applied  to  Persens
<q.  V.  )t  Acrisius,  and  other  descendants  of  Abas
(q.v.).

Abantlas,  (1)  Any  female  descendant  of  Abas
<q.  v.),  snch  as  Danae  and  Atalanta.  (3)  An  an-
cient name  of  Euboea. See  Abantes.

Abftxis  ('AQapts).  (1)  A  Hyperborean  priest  of
Apollo,  who  came  from  the  country  about  the  Cau-
casus to  Greece,  while  bis  native  land  was  visited
by  a  plague.  His  history  is  entirely  mythical :  ho
is  stoid  to  have  taken  no  earthly  fond,  and  to  have
ridden  on  an  arrow,  the  gift  of  Apollo,  through  the
air.  (See  MUller,  Dorier,  i.  364.)  (2)  A  city  of
Egypt,  east  of  the  Bubastic  mouth  of  the  Nile.

Abas  CA^as).  (1)  Son  of  Metanira,  and  chaufred
by  Demeter  into  a  lizard,  because  he  mocked  the
goddess  when  she  had  corae  on  her  wanderings
into  the  house  of  his  mother,  and  drank  eagerly  to
quench  her  thirst.  {2)  Twelfth  king  of  Argon,  son
of  Lynceiis  aud  Hypermnestra,  gmndson  of  Da-
uaii»,  and  father  of  Acnsina  and  Proetus.  When
he  informed  his  father  of  the  death  of  Danaiin,  ho
was  rewnnled  with  the  shield  of  his  graudfathei-,
which  was  sacred  to  Herd.  This  shield  performed
various  marvels,  aud  the  more  sight  of  it  conld
subtlne  a  river.  (See  Serv.  ad  Verg.  Ae».  iii.  28()).
<3)  A  Latin  chief  who  aK.<iisted  Aeneas  against
Tarnns,  and  was  killed  by  Lansus  (Vnrg.  Aeii.  x.
170). (4)  A  river  of  Albania  emptying  into  the


Caspian  Sea. (5)  A  mountain  of  Armenia  Minor,
identihed  by  Mannert  with  Ararat.

AbbreviationB.  For  abbreviations  found  iu
MSS.  and  inscriptions,  and  on  ancient  coins,  see  the
articles  on  the  different  letters  of  the  alphabet,
and  also  the  article  Numismatics.

Abdfira  (ra'A^Sijpa).  (1)  A  town  of  Thrace,
near  the  month  of  the  Nestus,  which  flowed  through
the  town.  It  was  colonized  by  Timesins  of  Clazo-
menue  about  B.C.  656,  and  a  second  time  by  the  in-
habitants of  Teos  in  louia,  who  settled  there  after
their  own  town  had  been  taken  by  the  Persians,
B.C.  544.  It  was  the  birthplace  of  Democritns,  He-
cataeus,  Prot-agoras,  Anaxarchus,  and  other  distin-
guished men ;  but  its  inhabitants,  notwithstanding,
were  accounted  stupid,  and  Abderite  was  a  term
of  reproach.  {See  Juv.  x.  50;  Mart,  x.25.)  (2)  A
Punic  town  of  Hispania  Baetica,  on  the  sea-coast.

AbderiteB  (A^Hjjpirrjt)  and  Abderita.  A  name
generally  applied  to  the  "laughing  philosopher"
Democritns  (q.  v.X  as  being  a  native  of  Abdera.

Abdertu  {"AfiSrjpos).  The  armour-bearer  of
Heracles  (q.  v.),  torn  in  pieces  by  the  mares  of  Dio-
medes.  The  town  Abdera  was  said  to  have  been
founded  by  Heracles  iu  his  hononr.

Abdicatio. See  Magistratcs.

AbecedaiJl  HymnL  Hymns  containing  as  many
lines  as  there  are  letters  in  the  alphabet,  each  line
beginning  with  a  particular  letter.  An  instance  is
given  by  St.  Augustine  in  his  Jtetractationes,  i.  20.
See  Acrosticha.

Abella  or  Avella.  A  town  of  Campania,  not  far
from  Nola,  founded  by  the  Chalcidians  in  Euboea.
It  was  celebrated  for  its  apples,  whence  Vergil  calls
it  maUfera.

AbgftruB  Cx^yapos),  AcbSnu  ('AK$apos)  or  Au-
gftnia  A  name  common  to  many  rulers  of  Edessa,
the  capital  of  the  district  of  Oarhoen^  in  Mesopo-
tamia. Of  these  rulers  one  is  supposed  by  Ense-
biua  to  have  been  the  author  of  a  letter  written
to  Christ,  which  he  found  in  a  church  at  Edeasa
aud  translated  from  the  Syriac.  Ensebius  (Eccles.
Hiat.  i.  13)  gives  tho  text  of  the  letter  and  also  of
the  alleged  reply.  A  translation  of  both  can  bo
found  in  McClintock  and  Strong's  Cyclopaedia  of
Biblical  Literature,B.  v.  Abgarua.

Abla  (*Aj3ia  )■  (  I )  A  town  of  Messenia  on  the
Messeuian  Gulf,  and  at  one  time  a  member  of  tho
Achaeau  League  (q.  v.).  (2)  The  nurse  of  Hyllus.
in  whose  honour  Cresphontes  changed  the  name
of  Ir6  to  Abia.

Abigeatores. See  Abactores.

Abige&tuB. See  Abactorrs.

AbigeL See  Abactores.

AbZIa  (ra'AjScXn).  (1)  A  town  of  Coele-Syria,
afterwards  called  Claudiopolia,  and  capital  of  the
tetrarchy  of  Abilond.  It  is  mentioned  in  the  N.  T.,
Luke,  iii.  1.  (2)  A  mountain  of  Africa,  opposite
Gibraltar  (Calp*i).

Abisftrea  (A^uraptft).  An  Indian  king  who  sent
embassies  to  Alexander  the  Great,  and  was  by  him
allowed  to  retain  his  kingdom  with  considerable
adilitiona.  His  realm  lay  beyond  the  HydaHi>e8.
See  Quint.  Curt.  viii.  12-14 ;  ix.  1.

AblegmlCna  (anoKtypoi)  were  the  parts  of  the
victim  which  were  offered  to  tlie  gods  in  sacrific-
ing. Other  mimes  were  porriciae  and  pro$ecta.
See  Sacrificil'M;  Victima.


MU.Kirrt


ABSIS


▲btvotl. Hop  KxTHAOHniNAini.
AlMiAbA  Motia, 'Dio  rniiK>*  of  lilll"  coverml  by
thp  Uliti'k  Kurtft  III  OortiiHiiy. Soo  Gkrmania.

AbolU.  A  11)11^1),  lliti'k  rliwk  n'wMubling  the
(llVi'k  t'ktttmjif  i*).  v.),  Hiitl  cnlltMl  by  lloriioo  {tCp,  1.
IT.  Wv)  t(N/W(j'  fMiHNHa. U  wiM  uf  fiiivign  ortgiRr


♦r*  IV  TiW  -^c'wi'r-'v  -*.>'.  '•■'K'  "•v*^  :Jv-*r:i-Y;  5/  Ia-cw

W^Njk-xO-"*- '• '^ " H'»-*«"^ ^irJiMi tliUklV^-

■*-iu t-t.ir». *"■  ^ h '"■ "  *" "■*

7)w  ■*  h  ** »-■-'. ■«■■>■ ■^'-:.i»'*s
»ivt»'" '•■**■ ■■"'•"  '•'_


Ll»*


urn  <u


Cnsci ;  and  tbe  appellatiou  Aborigines  was  only
given  tbem  by  the  Inter  Runiaii  writers.  Regard-
ing the  historical  aborigines  of  Italy,  see  Itaua.

Aborrhaa  {^Affoppas).  A  branch  of  the  Euphra-
tes; also  written  Cbaboras,  the  modern  Kbabonr.

Abortion  Abortoa.  If  we  may  jadge  from  poets
and  satirists,  it  was  nut  an  uucoiumon  practice
among  the  Romans  to  procore  abortion  (Plant.
True.  «W;  Juv.  ii.  32;  vi.  36l?).  Cicerw  (.CIu.  12)
rvUtes  a  case  where  a  testator,  learing  bia  wife
pregnant,  endeavours  to  secure  tbe  birth  of  bis  bod
by  leaving  his  wife  a  handsome  bequest  if  bis  son
bemnne  heir,  aud  nothing  if  be  does  not.  Cicero
charges  Oppianicos  with  paying  tbe  amoant  coa-
tiugeutly  bequeathed  to  the  widow,  and  procuring
abitftion  iu  order  that  Oppianicns's  son  may  succeed,
to  tbe  inheritance.  A  woman  at  Miletus,  who  in
»iwitar  cirramstaDces  procured  abortion  by  tbe  ase
of  drugs,  was  coiulnnDed  to  death  in  tbe  time  of
Cicero's  prvconsulale.  It  was  probably  some  sncb
dangers  that  led  to  tbe  Lex  Comrliar  making  it  a
criminal  otfence  to  give  loTc-potions  or  mediciDes
for  abonioo  \Paal.  Sral.  t.  23.  dl4i.  AD  women
wbo-piuenied  aburtioa  were,  by  a  reocript  of  S«Te-
Tus  an«l  Caracalla.  coodestiDed  to  exilie.

Of  tbe  pracikv  aad  law  in  Grc«c«  still  leas  is
fcaowu.  L^pMaa  in  a  speech,  or  deelaKaiioD.  >■»-
peached  Aatigoatts  tar  procoring  abornoo  \  asr'
\\wTrfKt0mm  aicAMtfin*!.  Frmfm.  11>,  cd.  Bail,  aukd
$a«ppe\  PUlo  rnnMawmWd  it  in  certain  eir-
•rttttKt»»c<«  in  ki»  iifteal  RepaUie  \K€p  v.  9l  p.
4tl  c\  and  so  abo  AnKock  iF^it.  ir.  [viL]  l^

▲bndfttM  CUjmWwX  X  king  of  Swa.  vbo
»ttbtHittnl  w::^  kst  ar«T  t»>  Cyrvs.  wben  b»  kamed
ibai  k&s  viw.  Piutbea.  wbt.*  Vai  Wen  m^it  pna-
<Nwr  Vy  ibe  ^anw.  t»»  tnttuwd  Vy  aiv  witb  gnat
kuMiww  ani  bamaatjr.  He  was  snbatqaMKly
Miha  in  %btt9i^  Air  C^ras  ^ea.  t'y^pp>.  t.  v*^

Abi^aLa<nL  A  sasw«  >tf  OanL  dwvCia^  mt-
evtK.i^Z  Y'f  i^  owousML  ctfcnjtra.  <Ht  thr  wesana
v-vib».  3v«^  v« likw Li^r.  *c  LtMST.  and wbaae

Abeo. * A-i  Aiawaisa  aaziue.  whiaa  «ark  «•

Tiw  *«*t-T"».~N  «"■  :iif  4>rw^  ■»  'mm. .,■?■  A  |_i  im
ii^-;u Jt  £itMkf»  ^t  tav  tan*  *€  Asrafsas^  ^^  a
■y^rtii  it  t^TOva. 3.  Xi  At^ti*  fffmnrimM  ^U
ii.vic^Kis  JOr.  **■««  liMBK  tf.  MrwcmoM.  31  tW
if*-R->iUi.  3V70n«sua  'V^MMv  ib^- jfclF-iaiii  -«■*

Atezcd


'  *•'  »^-""nip»*a  W,  X<rvr^  nc^-m^  •?*•»•«».  mtu.

n*-i ■«* 'OAntt .-—IS. ,u i.s- na£r;u oat 'ZT:

pHoi  .r-'**i;i- ;h.  ;  j.T»ir»*t.-^  i^tc  tiu.  luc  msr^r^  3a
Tint- <-»- :s- !4fc-  « .» .luoLii V«i. "7  mr :,.  i.


V^


ABSOLUTIO

of  any  kind.  It  was  applied  Bpecially  to  the  join-
ing together  of  the  extremitiea  of  a  piece  of  wood,
BO  as  to  give  it  the  shape  of  a  how  ;  and  hence  it
came  to  signify  anything  of  that  shape,  such  as  a
bow,  an  arch,  or  a  wheel  (Hes.  Op.  424 ;  Herod,  iv.
72.)  The  next  transition  of  meaning  is  to  any-
t&lng  vaulted  (for  example,  7  xmovpayia  A^is,.tke
vault  of  heaven.  Plat.  Pkaedr.  247  B) ;  and  in  this
fiensa  it  was  adopted  in  architecture,  first,  for  any
bnilding  or  portion  of  a  building  of  a  circular
form,  or  vaulted  (Plin.  Epiat.  ii.  17,  $  IH),  and  more
especially  for  the  circular  and  vaulted  end  of  a
basilica  (Paul.  Nol.  Ep.  12).  In  Christian  churches
the  apse  came  to  mean  the  end  of  the  choir,  where
the  bishop's  throne  was  placed.

Abaolntio. See  Iudicium.

Abstinendi  Benefloium. See  Herbs.

Abayrtifdes.  Islands  at  the  head  of  the  Adri-
atic, in  the  Sinus  Flanaticus  (Gulf  of  Quaniero);
named,  as  tradition  reported,  from  Ahsyrtus  the
brother  of  Medea,  who,  according  to  one  account,
was  killed  here. 8ee  Absyrtus.

Abayrtoa  or  Apsyrtas  CA^vpror).  The  son  of
Aeet«s,  king  of  Colchis,  whom  Medea  took  with
ber  when  she  fled  with  lasou.  Being  pursued  by
ber  father,  she  murdered  her  brother,  cut  hia  body
iu  pieces,  and  threw  them  into  the  sea,  that  her
father  might  be  detained  by  gathering  the  limbs  of
bis  child.  Tomi,  the  place  where  this  horror  was
rommttt«d,  was  believed  to  have  derived  its  name
from  r(/u>»,  "  cnt." See  Argonautae  ;  Medea.

Abiu. A  river  of  Britain,  now  the  Hnmber.

Abnnu. See  Usus  Faucrus.

Al^denus  {'A^v6r]v6s).  A  pupil  of  Berosns,  who
flourished  B.C.  368.  He  wrote  in  Greek  au  histori-
cal .iccouut  of  the  Chaldeans,  Babylonians,  and  As-
syrians, some  fragments  of  which  have  been  pre-
served to  ns  by  Eusebius,  Cyril,  and  Syncellus.  Au
imi>ortaut  fragment,  which  clears  up  some  difficul-
ties in  Assyrian  history,  has  been  discovered  in  the
Armenian  translation  of  the  Ckronicon  of  Eusebius.
See  the  edition  of  his  fragments  by  Ricbter  (Leip-
«ig,  1825).

Ab^doa  ("AjSudoff).  (1)  A  town  of  the  Trood  on
the  Hellespont,  and  a  Milesian  colony,  nearly  oppo-
site to  Sestos,  but  a  little  lower  down  the  stream.
The  bridge  of  boats  which  Xerxes  (q.  v.)  construct-
ed over  the  Hellespont,  B.C.  4S0,  commenced  a  little
higher  np  than  Abydos,  and  touched  the  European
shore  between  Sestos  and  Madytus.  (2)  A  city  of
Upper  Egypt,  near  the  west  bank  of  the  Nile ;  once
second  only  to  Thebes,  but  in  Strabo's  time  (a.d.
14)  a  small  village.  It  had  a  temple  of  Osiris  and
aMemnoninm,both  still  standing,  and  au  oracle.

Abj^la  or  AbHa.  A  monntain  in  Mauretania
forming  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  African  coast
of  the  Fretum  Gaditauum,  or  Strait  of  Gibraltar.
This  and  Ht.  Calp6,  opposite  to  it,  were  called  the
Colamns  (or  Pillars)  of  Hercules,  firom  the  legend
that  tbey  were  originally  a  single  mountain,  and
hod  been  torn  asunder  by  Hercules.

Acaoiui.  (1)  A  disciple  of  Easebins,  bishop  of
Coesarea,  whom  ha  succeeded  iu  338  or  340.  He
was  Boniamed  iAo»6<p6a\fiot  CLuscut),  and  wrote  a
Lift  of  £usebiu9,  uot  extant;  17  volumes  of  Com-
wteHiarie$  on  Eccletiagle*;  and  6  volumes  of  Miaoel-
Janiea.  Acocius  was  the  leader  of  the  sect  called
AcacianSfWbo  deuied  the  Sou  to  be  of  the  same


i  ACADEMICA

substance  as  the  Father.  (2)  A  patriarch  of  Coa<
stantinople  iu  471,  who  established  the  superiority
of  his  see  over  the  Eastern  bishops.  He  was  a  fa-
vorite with  the  Emperor  Zeuo,  who  protected  him
against  the  Pope.  Two  letters  of  his  are  extant,
to  Petrus  Trullo,  and  Pope  Simplicins.  (3)  A
bishop  of  Meliteii^,  iu  Armenia  Minor,  present  at
the  Council  of  Epbesus  in  431,  and  who  left  iu  the
Councils  (vol.  iii.)  a  Homilij  against  Nestorius.  (4)
A  bishop  of  Amida,  diHtiuguished  for  piety  and
charity  iu  having  sold  church-plate,  etc.,  to  redeem
7000  Persian  prisouers  ou  tbo  Ti^riH,  iu  Mesopota-
mia. His  death  is  couimeMiuruted  iu  the  Latin
Church  on  April  9th.

Aoademla  ('AKaH^fitta),  (1)  A  public  garden
or  grove  in  the  suburbs  of  Athens,  abtmt  siT
stadia  from  the  city,  named  from  Academns  or
HecademuB,  who  left  it  to  the  citizens  for  gym-
nastics (Pans.  i.  29).  It  was  surrounded  with  a
wall  by  Hipparchus,  adorned  with  statues,  temples,
and  sepulchres  of  illustrious  meu ;  planted  with
olive  and  plane  trees,  and  watered  by  the  Cephia-
Bus.  The  olive-trees,  according  to  Athenian  fables,
were  reared  from  layers  taken  from  tbo  sacred
olive  in  the  Erechtheum,  and  afforded  the  oil  given
as  a  prize  to  victors  at  the  Pauatbenaean  festival.
Few  retreats  could  be  more  favorable  to  philoso-
phy and  the  Muses.  Within  this  enclosure  Plato
possessed,  as  part  of  his  patrimony,  a  small  gar-
dentin  which  he  opened  a  school  fur  the  reception
of  those  inclined  to  attend  his  iustructions.  Hence
arose  the  Academic  sect,  aud  heuce  the  term  Acad-
emy has  descended  to  our  times.  The  appellation
Academia  is  frequently  used  in  philosophical  writ-
ings, especially  in  Cicero,  as  indicative  of  the  Aca-
demic sect. See  Philosophia.

Sextus  Empiricus  enumerates  Ave  divisions  of
the  followers  of  Plato.  He  makes  Plnto  founder
of  the  first  Academy,  Arcesilaiis  of  the  second,
Carneades  of  the  third,  Philo  aud  Cliormides  of
the  fourth,  Antlochns  of  the  fifth.  Cicero  recog-
nizes ouly  two  Academies,  the  Old  aud  New,  and
makes  the  latter  commence  as  above  with  Arcesi-
lans.  In  enumerating  those  of  the  Old  Academy,
he  begins,  not  with  Plato,  but  Democritus,  and
gives  them  in  the  following  order:  Democritus,
Auaxagoras,  Empedocles,  Farmeuides,  Xeuoplmues,
Socrates,  Plato,  Speusippns,  Xeuocrates,  Polemo,
Crates,  and  Crantor.  In  the  New,  or  Younger,  he
mentions  Arcesilaiis,  Lacydes,  Evnnder,  Hegcsinus,
Carneades,  Ctitomacbus,  and  Philo  (Acad.  Qnaest.
iv.  5).  If  we  follow  the  distinction  laid  down  by
Diogenes,  and  alluded  to  above,  the  Old  Academy
will  consist  of  those  followers  of  Plato  who  taught
the  doctrine  of  their  master  without  mixture  or
corruption ;  the  Middle  will  embrace  those  who,
by  certain  innovations  iu  the  manner  of  philoso-
phizing, iu  some  measure  receded  from  the  Platonic
system  without  entirely  deserting  it;  while  the
New  will  begin  with  those  who  relinquished  the
more  obnoxious  tenets  of  Arcesilaiis,  and  restored,
in  some  measure,  the  declining  reputation  of  the
Platonic  school  (see  Plato).  (2)  A  villa  of  Cicero
near  Puteoli  (Pliny,  H.  X.  ssxi.  2).

Academtca  or  Academlcae  QuaeationeB.  A
treatise  of  Cicero,  written  B.C.  45,  originally  in  two
books,  named  after  Catnlus  and  Lncnlhis,  but  sub-
sequently in  four  books.  Of  the  first  edition,  the
second  book  (Lucttlltts)  has  come  down  to  us;  of
the  second  (Academica  Poaleriora),  the  first  part  of


ACADEMUS

tlie  tint  lHir>k,  AHfl  frn;;ineiitM  exist.  Tlie  Lncallus
ctxitnjim  811  Hccotinr  of  the  i^iivliings  itf  Aritincbiis
sihI  I'hilit  rf};arUiiig  kiiowlcl^e;  llic  W^iiiniiig  of
the  w^coihI  i-4lilioii.  hcsitlct*  Mdiit*  ^cnernl  oIisetTii-
tiuiiii,  Kivoit  u  sktsicb  i)f  the  bitttory  of  pliil(>i«P|ih,v
from  fH>(Tutr!t  tu  ArcvsilnlJit.  An  rxccllunt  odilioii
of  tliti  JtndemkiM,  ia  Kiiglisb.  i«  tliat  of  Ruld  (ltftJ5).

Academua  CXKolirj^t).  A  lti-n<,  oCtf.u  itlrntificil
with  CadrmiK.  An-onliiiji;  to  other-^tPlnt.  ThM.  :W),
lie  wan  mi  AllnMiiati,  ivho  iI'<u-1onim1  in  Ciulor  ainl
Pulliix  ibe  |»l»ce  wlirre  TLebeas  bad  Bocruted  ihcir
sister  llrlmi,  aflrr  having  rarriM  hnr  i>ff  from
S]>artn:  auiI  in  ^nid  to  bnt'c  bouti  lit^Jily  honored,
ou  tbid  account,  Vty  tho  L^ccdHfiiioiiiiuiR.  rn>m
bim  the  garden  of  Ibo  Acadcmia,  prc«cuti:d  to  tb^
people  of  AtboDS.  is  thuii>;bt  to  have  bveii  iiiuucd.
SeA  ACAI>KM1A.

Aoaina  (nitmra).  A  incaHure  of  ])>ii£th, eqtiivn-
lent  to  l«n  (Jre^'k  ff<*t.  It  wiw  origiiuiHy  a  poiiitMl
stick  that  littally  ratiio.  like  our  roti,jirrrh,or  pnUf
and  nk<-  ibt^  (lerniHU  Stantfe,  to  1>q  itticd  an  a  tu«a»-
nriiiK-rod. Si'e  AcXa.

AcalandruB.  A  river  of  lingua  Oraecia^emiity-
iug  iiit4»  the  kiy  of  Tarcritnm.

AcaJeph^. A  Hhell-liah,  twlonging  to  tbe  genus

urlira,  or  s«':i-npltle.

Acanuuitia.  A  name  4;i%'vu  t»  Cyprus  (<!■  r.).
Seu  At  amah.

AcJLmaa  ('A«cvKir).  (1)  A  promontory  of  Cyprus,
northwust  of  Paphos.  It  In  8uriuountt>d  by  iwo
siiKiir-liiitf  •tuiiniiitK,  anil  thn  rrniiirkiiblf  :ipp<>ar-
ani-t)  uliii-h  it  thus  prt*M.'iilH  to  luivigiiturH  an  itiey
approiiL'b  tb<!  inland  ou  tblM  iiidv,  cbum-41  tiLeui  to
givt  the  uauie  of  Aciituautis  tu  iho  whole  island.
(2)  A  itoii  of  TbestMis  and  I'hawlra.  Ho  was  de-
puted to  act-ompauy  Dinuicil^,  w  bra  Cbo  latt«i'  was
M'ut  to  Troy  to  demand  IK-lou.  Diiriug  hU  stay  at
Troy  he  bocanie  tho  father  of  Mutiiiiin  by  LaodicvA,
oue  of  the  dauffhiers  of  Priam.  He  went  to  the
Trojao  War,  and  was  one  of  the  warrior*  euclowl
iu  the  wooden  boree.  He  nfterwanU  led  a  odlouy
from  AtheiiH  to  Cyprus,  wlipre  he  died.

Acanthis  (uKny^i's),  nifiitionrd  by  Aristotle,
Pliny,  anil  Vi-rgil.  The  Ji'ingilUi  ttpinM  of  Liu-
uiuiUN,  called  "aWnlcviiio"  in  Knghind.

Aoanthua.  (1)  In  arc  hi  texture,  the  nnmo  (civen
tu  the  broad  li^af  niicd  t4i  enrich  the  capital  of  tlie
Curiuthiau  culinuii  (ttee  Colimna).  ('.!)  In  hoia-
By,  a  uiimo  given  by  the  aiicienU  lo  three  differ-
ent plautH,  (a)  iu  VurKil.  a  priokly  tree,  bhpikmkhI
to  b«  bolly;  (b)  an  Kgyplinii  tree,  UeM.'rilH'4l  by
Theopbrastns  as  baviujt  pocU  like  those  of  a  beau  :
and  (r)  an  berb,  mentioned  by  DioAconde«,  and
identical  with  that  which  uow  bears  ila  uauie.

Acapna.  sc.  li^na  (in  Greek,  ^CXa  'mawya).
Firuwooil  specinlly  pi\'pared  to  burn  without
iiinoke,Dud  in  ^reut  reijueHt  in  nntitpiity, owing  to
the  defects  of  the  cbiuineys.  It  waa  prvpan-d  in
three  ways:  (1)  by  vcorcbii))?  the  woinI  uver  a  liiv,
this  being  known  an  li^na  rvfia:  i-£\  by  soakiiij;  in
water  after  removing  the  bark,  and  then  drying:
*(3}  by  nninaring  with  oil-lfea  (ii«iif-ml,  and  then
exjHV'iiig  to  t  liB  Hiiii. See  Miirlial,  xiii.  1.^.

Aoapuon  Mel.  Honey  taken  from  the  hiv«'
withont  Hinoking  out  the  bees. Cf.  PUn.  J/..V.  xi.

Aoamau  ami  AtnpbotSrusL  The  »oni  of  Alo-
maeun  and  L'allirrboe. Their  mother,  heariug  of


her  bnshaud'M  nninter  by  Phegens  aud  his  sonn.
prayed  Zen»,  who  loved  ber,  to  let  her  suns  gruw
up  into  men  at  om-e,  ho  as  to  avenge  their  futber.
ThJH  done,  I  hey  f*Iew  the  sons  of  Pbegonn  at  Tegra
aud  hinitM-lf  at  Psophi^i,  oflored  up  at  Uvlphi  tho
.fcsvela  of  llurnioiiiii,  which  they  thiiM  ae(|nired,
and  ibeu  founded  a  kingdom  eulletl  after  the  elder
of  them  Acartiania. See  Au'Hr..stU(>£A.

Aoamania  {' \Kafuntvia).  A  wevtern  division  of
Grcere,  bouude<l  lui  the  north  by  the  Aniliraeinu
(inlf,  on  the  wiiKt  and  Hnulbwefit  by  the  Ionian  ^ea,
on  till*  northtuuft  by  Amphilorhia,  wliirh  is  wimo-
tiiues  iuehided  in  Aearimuin,  and  ou  the  eai)t  by
Aediliu,  from  which,  at  a  latvr  time,  it  waM  H^pa-
rated  by  the  Acbelons.  The  name  4)f  Aranniula
does  not  occur  in  Homer.  In  the  most  •••ulent
timea  the  land  wiih  iiihabitt^l  by  the  Tapbd,  Tele-
iKiae,  anil  l^Iegen.  mid  subsequently  by  the  Cure-
left.  At  u  later  time  a  r<dony  from  Argoe,  said  to
have  Ihh!«  lr<l  by  Acariiiin,  i^eltled  in  the  country.
In  the  seventh  rentnry  n.C  the  Corintbiana  foniid-
e*!  Hvveral  towiij*  on  the  ciuiHt.  The  Acamanians
Unit  enicrgi-  fnmi  oliFirnrirv  at  the  beginning  of  the
|'elo|>ouni'flian  War,  n.c.  ^111.  They  wjtii  then  a
rude  ]>eople,  living  by  piracy  and  n>liberii'.  and
they  always  remained  behind  the  rest  of  tho
tiroeks  in  civilization  and  rL*tinement.  They  were
good  sliugers,  and  are  praised  for  their  fidelity  and
eimmgc.  The  diflVrcut  towns  formed  a  leagoc,
which  met  at  Stratus^  !^d*1  subsequently  at  Tby-
rium  or  l>euea«.

Acaatua  {'.KKatrrt}^).  The  aon  of  Ppli.^H.  king^
of  loleos,  who  Joined  the  Argonautic  expedition,
though  against  bis  father's  will,  aa  a  friend  of  la-
60U.  At  bis  father'a  death  he  celebrated  funeral
gamoH  wbieb  were  the  theme  of  aucieut  pot-tj*  ami
urliittA,  urid  iu  whicU  I'eleiiN  watt  repnrsfintetl  nn
participating.  He  took  part  iu  the  Calydoni:iii
bonr-huut.  lint  biri  wife  Astydaniia  fell  iu  Iov<>'
with  PeleiiB  (q.  v.),  and  this  brought  ruin  ou  rho
we<ided  pair.  His  daughter  was  Lafidamia,  re-
nowned for  btT  tender  love  of  Prolesilalla  (q.  v.).

Aotttua,  dimiu.  AcatJon  (iTkotoe,  oKuriov).  (IV
A  fuiall  iioat  (see  N'a^'18).  ('i)  In  the  rigging  of  a
ship,  aKiirui  wem  HUiall  muIh,  probably  ntay-ttiiilH,
(:i)  A  drinkitig-v«flBel,abaped  like  a  nimleru  aanre-
buat.

Acb&rtta. See  ABi;Airt'a.

Aooad. 8ee  Akkad.

Acca  I*arentia.  vVccording  to  the  cimiuiou  tra-
ilitimi,  the  wife  of  the  bertlHiiian  Fanhtnlin<,  and
nurtii-  to  Konitiln«t  and  Kemus.  See  Fratrfs
Akvalbh;  U\iir.s:  HoMt-LVfi.

Accenal  ProiKTly  '*  hupcniumeraries,"  from
an'eii»ro.  The  word  is  used  in  Hve  aeiisca.  (I)  A
century  atldcd  to  the  tifib  cla»ii  of  citizeus  in  tho
Serriau  elaMiiltcaliou,  and  describeil  b,v  Ltvy  ( i.
4'A,  7)  as  eornicinn,  fubiriitet^utr.  l.ange,  who  is  now
generally  foHowtnl,  luki-H  the  niiuie  acccnm  ub  used
of  the  whole  fifth  clasn  See  Chmitia  ;  KXKun-
TV9.  i'i)  As  a  military  tcnn,  aixfTin  denoli^K  tho
reserve  soldiers  who,  at  the  time  nhen  each  Koldter
had  lo  finil  hii>  own  urms,  could  piovide  tbeui-
Kelvpa  will)  nothing  letter  than  sticks  and  stoiiea.
From  their  lack  of  ilcfeu^tve  armor  they  were
known  as  velati ;  and  wbfn  any  of  the  regular
trot^po  wore  killed  or  dixabltHl,  the  arcenid  took
their  place*,  and  nneil  ttieir  armour  and  wea|HinH
(Varro,  L.  /..  vii.  M).  They  werw  also  known  uh
fcrtntarii. Allbongb  after  B.C.  U6*.;,  when  the  atato


I


ACCEITILATIO

bcgftD  to  pa;  tta  soldiers.  tliR  wroiini  Kcncrnlly  ttc-
cunnt  l>(;tt<^r  wenpotiii,  tbtn  Culiiiiiit  nf  Trajou  fcbuwfl
M  soldier  artiir«)  only  willi  8tom;h.  (3)  The  iittend-
anlA  on  tb«  «'avalr.v,  wbo  held  tlicir  «]Miro  liorMw;
aIw>  the  nrdrrlics  uf  t\w  couiurious  ( Varro.  L.  L.  v.
C«,  mid  Feat.  ii.  V.  0/>««).  Htfot-'KNTl'ttlo.  (4(  ThiMM*
■ttctidaiiU  i\\MU  X\w  iiiiiKiHti'titCH  wlio  Mtuml  rNuly
to  TPlicvd  ilio  lirion*  if  ueccaaary.  St)  loiij;  iu  tlii*
cufetum  liuttil  tbut  thu  two  collengiioii  witd  pr<>-
cvdt'd  by  llio  (ii»f.v»  utj  nlluriiutc  dnys.  »ii  nocuiutun
attotidv^  o»  tbf  uiio  wlio  did  iitit  buvt^  llio  fa«ui.
Tbc  diitics  (if  tbt^HO  ocvt-itHi  \\m  U>  muuiiuuii  tbe
pvuplv  t(*  tbu  Cointtiii,  uiid  to  i>ra«biiui  tb»  (bird,
sixtlt,  nud  niittb  hour  tif  tbit  iluy  iu  the  Cuiuitiiiiii.
(5)  Ou  iiMcripl  totis  of  tbc  titiio  uf  the  Etii[nre  nicii-
ttoti  U  niiule  at  aooenn  rr/afi.  who  funin'«l  a  cidlegc
ul'  100  meiiiUcn,  charged  with  the  suponiiteudutiuc
uf  the  t>iibtic  roada.

Aoceptilatlo  is  defliird  to  liv  u  rf-I{-ii?>e  by  oiu-
KUttl  titt4!Tri)<!Jiiiuu  between  drblor  and  c-nHtitor,  by
wliieb  viM-h  i>urty  is  exonenitrd  from  tbt*  kuuio  con-
tract, lit  oihrr  wordft,  jiriM'jXJIaiio  ih  tbo  fonn  «ii'
vrunU  by  which  a  cTwditor  iToK-jMie*  liit  cU^htnr  from
•  dobt  or  obliijatioii.  mid  ai;kuowk*d)re>i  Im  1i»m  re-
oeivi'd  that  whit-h  in  fuct  ho  bna  not  tvceivt-d.
This  reloiuM)  of  debt  by  i»cC4']HiliHio  ni)|dif«»  only  to
•nth  Avhitf  jks  havu  bwu  contracted  by  ttipnUitio
(q.  v.>,  conforiuably  to  a  rulu  of  Uomati  Ihw,  that
only  cuuti'ucts  uinde  by  vronla  can  he  put  an  cud
to  by  wordii.  Uiit  the  iivtiitoncws  of  the  R4>man
lawyent  found  n  ui<>de  uf  comidyiii^  wtib  the  iTilt<,
and  lit  th(^  »3tn«  Linm  I'xU'iidiii}:  the  ucri-plibitio  to
■11  kitidB  and  to  any  nuinlwr  of  contructa  Thiti
was  thu  iiivfniion  uf  Galluti  AqniiiiiH,  whi>  dovist-d
a  fonnula  for  rvduciu;^  all  aud  cvorj*  kind  of  con-
tnirti*  to  thu  Htiptilatio.  Tbiii  being  done,  the  ac-
cttplihitio  would  itumudiutLdy  apply.  iun.su)i)eh  ii.t
tbo  aiuttcr  nan  by  Huch  formula  hroufiht  within
thu  guiicnU  rnlo  uf  law  ubuve  lueutioued.  See  No-
VATIO.

Acceaslo.  A  legal  t^^nti,  hy  which  Ih  (ixj>ri-«Hed
tht*  prtutiu'tt  or  JDcrfAAd  of  fliiythlug,  and,  at  the
■me  time,  thu  notion  of  Bticb  produce  or  iucrcuM

cittiiiii);  the  pi'u|K.Tly  of  him  to  whom  the  thing

'  llAelf  boloiig.4. The rnlc  of  hiw  waa  oxpivtMicd

Ibns:  J<xe»itio  ccdit  prinnpali. Exatnplw  of  ftcoea-

tin  are  cuuluiiiud  luidur the hi-ails  of  COMFUSIO,

etc.

Accipenser. A  sturt^eon.

Acctplter. A  hawk.

AccfuB,  Lrcirs. Rifi  .\Tnrs,  Lrcira.

Acclamatlo.  The  public  i-xpreasiori  of  appro-
lintiMU  or  diMipprohatiou,  pleottui-i;  or  diopk-itsuiti,
by  hiud  anclumatiouH.  On  many  oi-cuaiouri,  ihertj
appear  to  have  heeti  certain  forms  of  acelumatiouH
alwayfl  ns<'d  by  tb»  RnniaiiH;  oh.  for  inKtiini'e,  a&
ninrrinRi*!!,  la  flymen,  Fit/mtmarr,  or  Tnlfuno  ( ex-
platneil  by  Livy);  at  rritinipli(!,  lo  Iriumphe,  lo  iri-
umpkv;  at  the  euuchiHitni  of  pljiVH  the  loHt  actor
ca11v<1  out  Plamditv  to  the  it|i«etjt(urh  ;  onitont  were
OMoally  prui)M-d  hy  ^ueh  vxprftkHioim  u»  licncet  prar-
eiarr,  tirtU  rt  fealice,  yon  poUft  mWitui,  civ.  Other
inBtiwiom  uf  acrlathationts  are  );iven  by  FcrrariiiH,
in  hix  trejitiiM)  /V  I'elentm  AeclnmtitioHibiit  et  riaiisii.
In  (imevinft  nfMaur.  fiom.  Attiiq.vo}.  v\.  Cf.  also
HenU'M,  Jrfa  fVatf.  Amil.  \^.~h.  Under  (he  Km-
pitv,  Ili«  inanlfi^ittatiou  of  popular  npplaiiiw  in  the
theatre  and  etrvun  waa  rvduccd  to  a  Kort  of  .sytitvni.
Wh«u  the  cDii>cror  outen-d,  thu  wholo andicncu


ACEiSTES

rose  aud  ffvected  him  in  a  rhythmic  formula.  Nero
selected  a  baud  of  5O0O  kui^'hts  and  citizuiut,  culled
AagM^fani  or  AugufUila,  to  be  tniiuod  iu  »  ^pt^ciikL
form  of  niuaical  Kululation  (Suet,  Xenr,  'iiU.  Tbo
nauiv  luxinmalioaia  was  hIko  giren  t«i  the  dt-crecs
pOMwd  by  l\\Li  S<.-nnte  in  boiiotir  of  tbo  emperor,
on  being  always  carried  hy  acclamation.  See  the
article*  Fl'NUs;  MATKJMr>MUM;  Tricmphcs.

Aocubatio.  The  act  of  iMliuing  at  table.  See
Ce.s'a.

Accubitio. See  Cena.

AcoubltuuL  The  name  of  a  rnuidi  um-d  for  re-
cliniiij;  u[iou  at  uieal^,  and  UMud  at  thi-  time  of  the
Einpirti  in  plwu  of  the  UHeliHium  (t\.  v.).  It  aeums
to  have  hidil  any  nuuihor  of  guests,  and  to  have
been  lower  Rud  more  hixurioiui  ihtiu  the  tH><]int-
am.  Th*'  spreadH  and  pillons  were  C4ille«l  aerubi-
taiia  (Trt-lK'H.  Poll.  Cluml.  U).

AccusaUo. See  CuiMHx  ;  K'ttr.x ;  ImiciTM.

AcA  (in  llt'hrew,  .-twAo).  A  riui-nieinn  sea-
port tuvTu,  tho  niiiiliTu  Acre.  Thr<  tJivekn,  having
cbaugt-'d  the  urigiua]  nainr  into  '.Axi},  connected
with  it  thi)  fabnlouH  Irgtmd  of  Hvnu-leti  having
hwn  bitten  her>i  by  a  noriteut,  and  of  hiM  having
cunM  laKtopai}  thu  wound  by  a  cortain  leaf.

Acerra  i/Kif-iavtaTit,  X^tinva>Tpit)■  Thir  iiiL-cnKO-
box  uited  iu  aacriticet4 ;  called  L»y  tiervius  area  (A«>
ruli».

Horace,  ennmeratiug  the  ^irincipal  articles  n«o-
ecu-ary  in  a  etoletnii  euieritice  to  Iniin,  nientioris
"Flowi'ra  and  a  box  full  of  fmtikinet^uwv"  In  Ver-
gil,  At-neoB  worahiiw  *'  with  corn  and  with  frunkiu-
CBU*M  Inun  thu  full  acorra"  (Arn.  v.74ri).

Pliny,  niiinieratiiig  tho  prineipul  work^  of  Par-
rhaHiiM  of  Kphtwim,  siK'akH  of  ii  piolnrc  rt'prcoru  t-
iiig  a  prit'nt  jin^pariiig  to  (uierilii-i-,  with  a  boy
stuuiling  iM^Hide  biiti,  and  holding  the  iuccnsc-huK
and  a  wrtmth  of  tlot^oi-N.  Thin  wiw,  uo  doubt,  a
vciy  counnou  and  favourito  suhjeot  for  artistH  of
evi-ry  kind.  It  frfquciitly  oeeura  in  bua-rrlicfa
repreAentiug  sucriUceh,  and  executed  nn  vatuw,
fri<^z<-.i,  and  other  ancient  monnniciita.  It  orenra
tbrv4<  tiinen  on  the  l^ilnmiia  Traiaua  nt  Uiuue,  and
ouce  ou  thu  Areli  of  Cnrmtniitino,


^


Acsrm. (Cftpllollan  Uuacgni.)

The  ac»rrn  wna  nlno,  nceording  to  Festus,  a  small
allMr  phu-ed  bvruii;  the  dead,  on  which  perfniiu's
Wi*ri'  hiiniml:  Afirra,  4ira  ifunr  ante  tuorttiuin  poni
Kotehiit,  in  rjiiu  udnrra  invtrHdclMintnr.  There  waa  il
law  iu  the  Twelvtt  Tables  which  retdricted  the  H^«
of  avvrrut'  at  fniift-als  (Cic.  tie  Lty.  ii.  'ii),

Aoestnea.  Thu  CbenAb,  a  rivur  of  India,  eu>|>-
tying  Into  the  Indus. Sot*  UydasI'ES.

Acesta. See  SE<iE:tnrA.

Aceates.  A  mythieal  king  of  Sicily,  tho  friend
uf  Al-uluh  iVerg.  Acn.  v,  757).


AC£TABULUM  8

▲0«tabtUtUn  (^^t'r,  o$vfia<f}o»,  //i^at^tov).  A
■ninll  iilmlluw  v«iwh*1  oriKiually  employed  to  bold
viiK'K'^^  **'  (lauoea  into  whiok  the  food  was  dipped.
It  wttH  aftorwardit  employed  as  a  recoptaole  for
■alml,  wine,  honey,  and  in  playing  oue  form  of  the
cottabiu  (.4.  v.). The  aooonipauyiiig  illuBtratioD


ACHAEAN  LEAGUE


the  twelve  towos  of  which  the  league  consisted
were :  Pelleue,  Aegeira,  Aegae,  Bura,  Helic^,  Aegi-
ou,  Rhypes,  Fatroe,  Pharoe,  OlenoB,  Dym^,  and  Tri-
taea.  After  the  time  of  HerodotuB,  fibypen  and
Aegae  disappear  from  the  number  of  the  confeder-
ate towns,  aa  tbey  bad  decayed  and  become  de-
serted (Pans.  vii.  23,  25;  Strab.  viii.  p.  367  ),  and
Leoution  and  Cerynea  stepped  into  their  place
(Polyb.  ii.  41).  Behc6  appears  to  have  been  their
common  place  of  meeting;  but  this  town,  together
with  Dura,  was  swallowed  np  by  the  sea  dnriug
an  earthquake  iu  D.c.  373,  whereupon  Aegion  was
chosen  as  the  place  of  meeting  for  the  confederates
Plib  ihowiDf  two  sumU  AMUbula.  (Strab.  viii.  p.  384). Of  the  constitution  of  this

. „ ,  . « 1- ,  V  ^ league  verv  little  is  known ;  bnt  it  is  clear  that

fV..m  I>artinl»oiy  and  S«glm  b^  b  v.  shows  two  fh?bond  which  nnited  the  different  towns  was
acetabula  placed  one  on  each  s.de  of  a  sucking  pig ^^^  j  ^^^  j^  ^ jj^j^,  jj,^„  ^  religious  one.

wrvwl  up  in  a  Unx.  The  name  I8  aW.  a  Roman  ^^^  i,^,,^  „f  tbo  Jonnection  among  the  towns
meai..m>of  caiwcUy  inluinid  uHwella«dry  mew-  .„  ^  jjjj^,  .,^j  ^^  ^j^^  .^  ^^j^^*^  ^^^  ^^^^
lire  =  ,»€ »^<^.  and  holding  one  fourth  of  the  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^J  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^  occasionally  quite
ht^mina  and  one  oigbtb  of  the  «'xtanus.  !  juj^j^u^^^t  ^f  (h^  rost  <Tbuc.  ii.  9). The  confed-

Aoitum  (o^wV  Vinegar.  The  kinds  most  in  enitiou  geuerallv  kept  aloof  from  the  troubles  of
repute  among  the  ancients  were  the  .Eg-Vpt""'  a"d  ^,0,^^  j^^rts  of  Greece,  ou  which  acconlinglv  it  ex-
Cuidian.  Pliny  gives  a  full  account  of  the  medical  ercised  uo  particular  influence  down  to  the  time
HnH>erties  of  vinegar.  Among  other  «pphcatuu»iL,  ^|,^u  the  league  was  bi«keu  up  bv  the  Mncedo-
It  was  employed  when  liHVlies  had  been  intriHluceil  niana.  But  thev  were  nevertheless  highly  re-
into  the  stomach,  or  adbeml  to  the  larynx.  Vin-  gi^ectwi  bv  the  other  Greek  states  on  accoont  of
egarwaaal«>  given  in  long-standing  cough*,  just  ,,,^1^  houestv.  siuceritv,  and  wise  moderation.
m»  iu«len»  pmctitionera  give  oxymels  m  cbitnnc  Hence  after  the  battle  of  Lenctra  they  were  chosen
calarrh*.  ami  it  api^an.  to  havo  Iw^n  th»Might  uee-  ,^  arbitrate  between  the  Tbebans  and  Lacedae-
ftilinatleetioMrtftlieear.  AomM  iTALlcrsustbe  roonians  i  Polvh.  ii.  :W  1.  Demetrins.  Caasander.
lWt»ver^»»«lexvr«»ionfv^rtbenuU»bn«i.»rof  cheold  ^,4  Antip^uns  (^>i.alas  placed  parrinonR  in  some
lialiau,  jii*l  a»*i/  Mticmm  i*  ushM  of  Gn-ek  wit.  ^,f  (1,^;^  lowu&.  while  in  other*  they  favonrvd  the

▲chaea  v'\^*iro\.  (U  The  northern  c^vtit  of  the  rising  of  tyrants.  The  towns  were  (fans  separated
lS>l»»|>»wne*«Ss  orij;in.'»lly  ciIUmI  AogiaW.-*  or  Aegia-  frtim  one  another,  and  the  whole  conftfderation
In*,  i.  <>,  llw  c\v»si-laml.  was  UMindetl  on  the  noMb was  gradually  destroyed.

b>  the  iVrinibian  Gulf  and  the  Ionian  St^a.  on  the  ^^i^  tIk  Lmttr  Zeajw-.— The  ancient  confederacy
MMtlh  by  Kba  and  Ar^-adia,  on  tlh'  wo*l  by  tlte  had  thus  reawd  toesi^it  fiVHHue  liuewbeu  ereuts
Ionian  S«».  and  »»n  the  t\»>t  b>  Sii-vonia.  K«->iHvt-  t^^^t  pla<v  which  iu  «i.>Die  towns  noosed  the  aucieol
iuj:  u*  inhabitanls.  *ee  Aon  *rt  ^:*'  A  district  iu  spirit  v>f  iude^^eiHlrncr.  When  in  B.C.3SI  Antigi>-
TlHvssalj.  which  ap|»e«rs  lo  ha»o»»wn  the  ^vrigiual  mis  Oou^ias  »ii*mi.|,>»  10  dri^<^  Pt^tlemaeasCeran-
MSAt  <M  the  Aehaei.  ^3^Tht■Kon^ailp^^»vim'e.mlm■h  m,.  ,v,.i„  O.;,.  thTx>m>  of  Ma^^.Miia.  ibe  Achaeau>
,  utcln^le^l  IVloiwnnesns  and  north<>ni  Grwrt*  s^Miih  axaiW^l  tlumselv*^  of  tbe  opporlacitT  of  shaking
*<<Th«»»ly.  It  was  fx-iTiSK*!  on  ih^  disA^lutiou  K>f  „tf  ,i«.  M*vexioi  i*u  yoke,  and  tvueving  the  old
|W  .Veh*r*«  l.*N»gtte  v»l-  >^  >»>  ^*" Ui'»,  and  Wnor  - '

^Wnxoil  U>  name.

Ac-lMl«au  l.MNF«*  ^.KoH^^•v^^  IVrr^s;  -:
'  V\.A.*s>»  ^.  VW  k\iu:»e  ^m  »NM.KNi.r»:!.M-. .-:  *  viini-
W:  ^^f  town*  ^Mi  tV  \»>Nrth«e»t  *^v^^l  ot"  lV^MxM5•

i«,vv.  t«o  nertN-^U  The  t>\nwr.  ths*;'.):^;  f.-mi.V.
t\M  w);t««l  |w\»»eci^>r.  »*»  »w»ulv  ol  a  wV.ito.:*
vt«-*x-lrr.  »hePM»  ilw  Uner  *».<  »  i>.v  r.*.  ^v.:
lvv\<T*l-^v.-.  10  (tfvsKVJ  iW  to«»**#»)n»)  tS^  »'.,N?i-.r.*-
!>,%;■.  ot  Mjwv»K«ia.

i^  r*-.  y*  '■■ r«*/*' Wii  iW  H<-r».'v»f

Av>>*e*r'T<  vis-'^rt Tsji^kts-w^ t«r?x^ ^v-ci>.*Ar\v>

«;«^  -.?  A11.V-*  a::-'-  •'•^  5^''  *  **^  *^^*^  '"^^  ^'^  *  ^tvj'.'c
TiK^'vv*- 1;>  iXirt.  ,vvTy.w*^  >>  iV  A.>^^»  .^  :>-■<»
^v-aK  -if  *&«*.»'«^  T*  ^**w*  '■*  -^•^'*'*-  •>.-<^'-«^'*-'^
,»Vxr  IOWW.  '•>vi  >J».-.  >«-  (JHt-'w^^  l.v^-i^'
*vY .;-. l>* i^w ,c iVt ^•'•'*^= ^-*-:'*^ ^

*.^■  .->.--;•'  *-Vcli«  «.'*5>  •■^'  >i  -*  *ViC^'^  •■'"■  '
aX^.O.^^ ."■•^ ^  --t'A  ■^'■>' ''"^  .■>4J.>.- ^Kv; •'>■■"'■-


v\^5tV->ieraiion.  The  oi'^ifi,  bowcTcr.  was  no  long-
er a  <>>-.»iuon  norsh::*.  t>:;;  a  re«l  {vlitical  nniou
*«io;is  Ok  towiiK  t-ie  }O.Aor«.  which  firM  abook
oil  i^.<'  \okr  of  i^,'<'  o]*;»rY>ii**rs-  ^ci^  Dyme  and  Pa-
trA*. jiUii  :V.^  *V.;*:.rt'  v\'.v.-V.:,UV:  N  :««<eu  then:  was
s-.-KvvV.'x  i.'-.r.«v.  V\  :>,t  ;K"n:-.>  o:  Tn:aes  and  Pba-
r*.-  ,  r.>V  41  vv^  .,,„-  ^.-^^  anolher  ex-
•.v".<\'.  i'.  t  ^^*<v^i.^■..  a:  (;-ji:r:>.^-..s  ai.J  lyrante:  aikd
*><■■.■..  R^  ':::v  Af*:.  v.^_<  bti.:  vrfihe  ancient
','.i^„v.  :.'..>'><v.  ;■;  ;■  <\*;-.  -.,:-  ,--  j^^  ^^six^r  t<»wu».

»•■ ■•^■■•;*- ■■  ■* .■.■■- ::v:!r»:?i>c -wx*  com-

■.•■.;>.  *■..■.  :^, r.\t  ; -.  :-.■,  ^  y';->  .-"  -.;*  <vci»4:ioiiiMi

Tir-.x-..r.A .v>*f-:  •-:■: -v. ;.■..,.■ 7;..  ri:-,a^»K.i.ial


,-.]  X-  ■•* S

•.'it  *\.-v.
MT:.  *  to.
• ^■.■<f ;


■■- -;^■■.. ?r  ■?,; n

■■■*■<  ., .  ■.  t.  ^ : ,.  .

'.' X>.  .'■,',  •,■1; ,,  !,- ., 1,,.-,.


>ij.;-'u  j^ivi


ACHAEl


0


ACHELO0S


I  4o  ilalibenite  npon  tbe  coniinnn  aflaJra  nf  the  ood-

J  iWlrrititm,  au<l  if  nec4>KAary upon tlioMi  of  any

l«<|ianilr  tunrii  or  v veil  nf  iinlivJLliial!!,  iiiul  tit  i-lnvt

Ltln*  «>nirt-rH  of  tlin  IfNij^iie. i\ft4>i-  tia^  iti);  tbim  tvt*

taMivliffl » linn iiiiioii liiumi;; (lit-liLNctviiK,  tliu

lrlii(i'nii)4  rMiiUnihXy  fxertftl  thtMiiM-lvts  in  tli-IJvcr-

|ii^  mlivr  tnwiis  uWi  fruin  tlit-ir  tyntiilM  niiU  np~

an-sbon. Tht*  league,  however,  tliil  not  ui-r^uiri'

luy gn^t htrvngib until u.c.  '^t,  v^hva ArattiH

iuIimI  6it\viMi,  ItiB  iintivB  plfiro,  with  it,  nuil  kdiiu!

Attn  liktcr  aUo  gaiuo4t  Corinth  for  it. Mcgurn,

TrntfEcu,  ami Epiiluunit)  aooii  folloivctl  ih«-jr  ex-

BI»Ie. Afler«»nlB  Aiatiis  }irevailc«l  iipoii  nil  llie

norw  iniiMirU'Mit  tuwuB  of  Ivluiioiiuwdiia  t*>  join  the

TAiifMlrnu'y,  mill M^i^lojidlipi,  Ar|»08, Hi.'iiiiJot)^,

Vli)iu»,  auil  ndierN  ueru  nulilt^l  tu  it. In  »  hIioiI

fcliue  the  leagiift  Iliii>«  rparli<-il  its  )ii>;li«8t  power,

or  it  PinbriK4>(l  Atliuiifl,  A<-k><iu.  Siiluiui!4,  uud  tht'

rbul« of Ft^lupi>uiiciiU!<,  «*itli ilio exorptiim of

^I'ltrtH.  Tagca,  OrcboiiK-tiua,  Muntiuvji,  and EWn.

Lirvecr  M-cluut]  lo  ruvivi'.  unil  pruiiiJNcd  to  bcitiinc

Mronper  niid  more  UDitc«d  than  ever,  but  It  soon

hliownl  tbut  it.<4  new  power  vcam  ctup|oye<l  ouly  In

rlf-ili-atniKtion  and  itx  i>wti  ruin. Tbe  Acliao&D

l-Xengiic  tnifclit  at  one  titin*  hnvo  b(>conu<  u  firent

^Hin-vr,  and  iniglil  bnve  uiiittrd  Bt  tramt  ibi>  \v)i<ili<

l-«f  rrlopotiMfKii-*  into  OIK'  Stale;  but  tbi*  criKinal

1  '«t)tj<xtM  of  tbr  li-nptv  xrfrt<  in  the  coitrtMt  of  linii*  an

far  forKotton  tluit  it  Koii^bt  tbo  prutvctiou  of  tho*M«

«Ctti*iKl whom  it  had  lti*«ii  foritinl ;  and  ibf  p<<r'

(H'lnii)  (liiworrl  ninong  its  iuetnberi<.  Ibo  boi^tility  of

i(part;t,  the  iiiTn};!ilMi  of  th«  Hoiniina,  uud  tbr  folly

and  ra!4bn<*4«  of  the  lai«l  strategy  brought  nbont

uot  only  the  dibsolntion  and  destructioti  of  the

coufMi'nwy,  hot tbe politiea) annibitaltou uf

the  wboIt<  of  Orecce  in thu  year  B.C.  14(i. <Cf.

Schuru,  Qnvh.  Gtiwh^Nlands  fon  dcr  EnMthmig  dm

(ifiof.  M.  ackarivK-Men HumlrM.  p.  4'J  foil,  and p.  (iO

f«IL;  DriiiiKinii,  Iifm* inr iiem-h.  ttrn I'trJijUn  drr

yriefk.  Slaatrn  ;  Tbirhvull,  Hixl.  uf  iSrmt:,  Vol.  \  )ii

,  p.  Sti  foil ; HerUhnrg,  tiimh.  tirifvlirnltnula  HHter

^Mmvrn,  vid.  i.  [Hallu,  IdTS].)

nel  ('Ax««>' )■ One  «f  tt»o  chief  Hellenic

^arcff,  and,  acc<irding  to  tra«litioit,  dcHcendcil  from

Acbavun,  who  wad  tbe  6oi>  of  XiitlMlH  nud  C'reUsa,

'  aad  grandMin of  TIellon. The  Arliaci  originnlly

'  dwelt  iu  ThrtMuly,  and  from  tbeiioo  niigriiti-41  to

I  ppIoiHiuucHun,  tbe  whidoof  wbii'b  liecauic  nubji^ct

to  llieui  with  tbo  cx(.-e|itioii  of  Aix-udia,  and  ihe

rtiiiuiry  nfterwanU  ealled  At-haca. Am  tliey  wi-re

I  file ruling  Itatioa in PuloponncMnii  in tbe  heroii:

I  1inir».  llonicr  frequently  givcx  the  uanic  of  Acliaci

'  lo  Ibt?  foUecllve  (.ireeks. On  tbe  cnniiiicaf  uf  Pt-l-

^oponui'AnH by  the llernvltdne and the U(>riuu»,

pi|;bly  jrai-s  aftor  the  Trojau  war,  ujany  of  tlie

^clioei  under  TirMinetiuH.  the  son  of  Oreste:*,  left

f  Ihvir  rouMlry  and  t4inh  poKKt-Nxion  of  ihe  nurtheni

l-ctiUMt  of  Pi:lo|»onne>iiis,  ihen  iobahitud  by  toniaun,

'  whom  t-hr>y  cxpclb-d  from  llie  eountry,  whirli  wan

lieiiret'tittb culled  Arbitea. The  expelled louiaim

ItnttiTuted  to  Attica  and  At4)a  Minor. The  Ai-luiei

lf<4-ltle«t III twelve  cities: IVlIen*',  Aeglm,  Aegau,

r  l*ura. lielici*. Aeginm. Hbypae,  PaMae, PUurue,

^01<-un«,  liym*-,  and  Trilnea. Tbeso  twcUi*  elites

forminl  a  league  for  mutual  defence  and  ])rulKe-

i  ttirtt. The  Achaei  had  little  intliieuce  in  tbe  af-

faini  of  rirceee  till  llie  tiuu-  of  the  itneeeHMirs  of

I  Alesuinler In li.i'.  281, the Aehaei,  ^^  ho  were

theo aobjcct t>i the Miicudoutan;*, n*(io1ved to

'  rvlicw tbuir  uiiei<«nt league for  the pur{>otie of

i  ■diking  off  (be  Maci-dunmii  \uke. Thti*  wax  the


origin  of  the  celehmtcd  Arhoean  1.4>agiip  (t|.  v.],
which  did  not,  however,  obtain  mueh  intporlanco
till  D.C.  '251,  VI  Iiku  .\ratiiK  united  to  it  hi.q  native
tuwu,  Sicyun.  The  exnniple  of  i>iryi>h  was  fol-
lowed by  C'orinth  atid  many  other  to»  ijn  in
Urei'ce,  and  the  league,  wkiii  her^nme  the  ehlfif
IMiliTical  power  in  Gnreee.  At  length  the  Ai^luwtl
deelarvd  war  agaiitttt  the  Uomiim^,  who  deHtroy«<l
the  le4igne,  and  thiu  put  au  end  to  the  hid(;]H!U>
deuce  o{  Circeeo.  Corinth,  then  the  chief  town
of  tbe  league,  woa  taken  liv  tbe  Itonian  general
Miiinmlus,  in  B.C.  146,  and  the  whole  of  oonthem
Greece  luada  n  lionuui  proviuco  under  the  doidb
of  Aeline.i(q.  v.).

AobaemAnee.  (1)  The  ancestor  of  the  Fersinn
kiiigK,  "ho  founded  the  family  of  the  Arhuenieiii-
ilae,  which  wa»  tbo  noblest  family  nf  the  Pa-^sfga-
dae,  the  noblest  of  the  Persian  tril>e«.  The  Konian
poets  UHe  the  ndjoctlve  Acbaemeniiis  in  the  grnae
of  Pentiau.  (2)  Son  ori>nriiifl  1.,  wna  governor  of
Flgypt,  ami  rotninanded  the  Kgyptian  fleet  in  the
exjiedition  of  Xerxes  ngaiiii^t  (treece,  B.C.  4H0.  He
waji  defeated  anil  killed  in  battle  by  luorua  the
Libyan,  460(Herfid.vii.  1)7, 'i;t«i).

AcbaemeDlde>,<>r  AcbemenldeB.  A  companion
of  Ud>^»eii->,  wbo  left  liini  bchiml  in  Sicily  when
be  lied  rmm  the  Cyclops  ^Vcrg.  Jrn.  iii.  til4).

Aobaeutt.  (l)8«e  AuivRi.  V2)  A  Greek  tragic
poet  of  Kretriu,  horn  ubout  u.c.  4H4,  u  coutemponi-
ry  of  !?ophocli'K,  ami  eHjiuciuUy  fauioUH  iu  the  liuu
of  natyrtc  4lnima.  He  wrote  about  forty  |>layii,  of
which  only  Hnnitl  frugniunl»  are  prestervoil.  These
have  been  wlite*!  by  L'rIichH  (Bonn,  IVZA).

Aob&ii6  |(i;^tivi;).  A  Feiiiiau  measure  equivalent
to  lo  Attic  /if^ifipot.  According  to  lU-aychia^,  there
wax  nUo  a  Iloeotian  o^ot^^  equivalent  Lo  one  Attio
>*«'Ai^ff>i. Sir  .Mi:i>iMNrti^

AcbariatUa  Dik.6  {axofH<rTtat  din;).  See  Ka.>
KOciiet.

Achamae  ('A^np^oi').  The  prindpol  deuie  of
Attica  belonging  to  the  triho  Oeueia,  60  Htadia
north  of  Alliein*.  near  the  foot  of  Mr  Fnniiw.  Tbe
luud  waff  fertile,  and  the  population  rough  and
warlike,  fiirninliing  at  thn  comniuncemenl  of  tbO
Peloponnehiaii  War  ItOOO  hoplilcM,  or  otie-teutb  of
the  ubtde  infantry  of  the  republic.  The  deiue
givcM  the  naiiie  to  one  of  the  plajH  of  Ari8to]»baue9
(q.  V.)  ('\T(tifttrt'if),  icpn-ftented  a.C.  4iiC>.

Achates.  A  comp-iiuon  ninl  fnend  of  Aeneas
(q,  V,)  in  hin  wanderings,  and  etyled  by  Vergil
/iduit  Aclmifv,  nu  that  bU  fldelity  baa  bccoiuo  pro-
veibial  (Jr«.  i.  li*?)i

Achatea  id;^uTi}ri.  An  iigatt*,  a  prectono  stone
or  gem  Tbco]ibraMtnK  deArribe^  it  OH  a  beanttfttl
and  rare  Ktone  from  the  river  Aehalet;  in  Sicily,
which  wdil  at  »  high  price;  hut  Pliny  tells  na
that  in  blit  tiina  it  wae  mi  longer  in  e»ti:eni,  it
tHjiug  then  lound  in  many  phieeM,  of  largo  oiEe
iind  divemilied  HpiK>aranec.  The  auvient«  diKtin-
gui>«htHl  HguleM  into  uiaiiy  HiM'eies,  to  each  of
^vhich  they  gave  a  uaine  Importing  Mn  diflTerenoe
from  tbe  eoniniou  agate,  whether  it  weiii  in  colour,
tigiire,  or  texlinv.  Tbmt  they  calliHl  the  veil,  Aac*
mtirhitUti,  which  wa*i  K|»riukletl  with  ("pot-n  of  Jasper,
or  blood *rttd  chalcedony,  and  mtw  calletl  "dotted
agate.''  Tin-  wliite  tbr-y  termed  IrintiehatrM ;  tbe
plain  ycllowiah  or  wax-coluure«),  rfruckaten.

AcheloUa('A;^fXufK).  Tbe  largest  riverinCreece.
h  iiHe«  iti  Ml.  Pindiiv,  and  lIow»  southward,  fonn-


ACHKKON


10


ACHTLLF.S


iiig  thti  boundary  bcl^TPen  Acarnnuin  and  Aetnlia, '  iiih>ii  him.  and  stntes  thnt  with  thin  view  sbo
mtul  fnlU  into  the  loninii  Sea  opposite  the  iMlaiiilit  aiiiiiiit«'il  him  n-ilh  auihnwin  iliirin);  tht*  ilny.  and
calli-'d  Kchiuades.  It  is  alxMil:  \'.W  mllcA  in  threw  him  into  Htv  nt  Hvcnini;.  PhIrh;),  hiiving
length.  The  god  of  thin  river  is  ilvscriliptl  oh  ,  dificovt>rt!il  tht-  fjiMhloNM  in  tha  act  of  nnnhi^inii^
the  Bou  of  OcL'uuiiR  and  Telhvs,  and  oh  the  uXAotii  ,  hiH  diihl  to  the  llainco,  orittd  oat  with  alunii^j
of  his  3jWX>  brotlier-ii.  II>^  fought  with  H«raclLt>  i  whereupon  ThfliA,  nbtindouiu)[  the  nl>jert  ^lu-  had
fur  DelEanitTi,  but  watt  con()iii*rrf)  in  the  iwiitcHt.  iu  view,  h'ft  thu  court  uf  I't;loii.H  and  nijuiiiud  tlio
He  then  took  Mie  form  nf  n  bull,  but  wan  ajfaiu  ;  nvinpliii  of  thi:  uc<.'an.  DioIvn  (.'ri;t«!ri9>iM  makcit
overi'omt",  Uy  Ht^raclea,  wliii  deprived  him  of  tniv  IMbiis  to  hiive  rt^vufd  AchilK-tt  fn»m  tlio  fiin  bf-
of  hift  lioriis,  wliioh,  howiiv(^r,  he rocovcrtMl by  I  fore  any  purl  of  biH  boily  hod.  been  injiirt;d  bncthe


giving  tip  th«  horu  of  Atunldma  |().  v.).  Accord-
iuK  to  Ovid  (ilet.  x.  ^),  the  KaindH  cbanged  thr
liuni  which  llcravles  took  from  Acbeloflo  into  ibo


bcvl. What  lias  thus  far  been  itlaterl  in  reUtioD
to Achillt'it, with the .siiiRlo pxeeptioii of  tho
iiamBH  of  hitt  pariMits.  iVh'ns  and  Thi'tis,  is  di-
horti  of  plenty. AchcloH^  wa»  frotn  the  earliest.  I  re«tly  at  variiiiifu-  with  the  authority  of  ilomer,
tiuiO!)  eouftidered  to  he  a  frreat  divinity  through- '  and  mitnt  thciTfnro  \w  re^atxlcyl  aa  a  mem  post- '
out Greece, and was invoked in prayers and  '  Ilomerii'  fable. Kqnidly  at  variance  with  the  |U^^^


eiacrllivc?(.  Achelolla  wa*  re^anlvd  as  the  repn;-
seutalive  of  all  fresh  wator;  hence  wo  find  in
\%'rj;il  Achehta  pocuhi.  that  is.  water  in  f;»rii>rid.
The  SireuM  are  called  Ai-'heloiadcK.  lu  (be  daugh-
ters t>f  AcheloUw.


count  yivi-ii  by  the  bnid  i*  the  nntro  popular  lie-  '
liuu  thatTliPtin  pluuKt-d  her  hou  into  lbi<  wa(<>rm
of  tho  Styx,  and  by  that,  immcntion  rtMidenil  tbo
■whole  of  hid  body  iuvuhn-rable,  oxccpt  the  heel
by  which  sbe  held  bim. Tht.Tu  are  sevcrul  pas-


Achfiron  (*A»rfp«i.). The  imtno  of  Bovenil  riv-  »'M!^'» '"  the  Ilwd  which  plainly  show  that  iho
exs,  all  of  which  wew-,  at  one  time,  Ixjlieved  to  be  po**  *^«**  "o^  ascribe  to  AchilleB  the  po»a»*«iou  of


conneolwl  with  the  low«*r  world.  (!)  A  rivtir  in
Tlwoproti.i,  in  Kpirns,  which  tlow8  timinyb  the
lake  AcheniKia  into  the  loniiin  >(t?a. ("2)  A  i'ivt*r


any  peeiiliar  phyHienl  defence  af;:>inst  ilauijer.

The  care  of  hiK  eilncatinn  and  tiaininj:  wa»  in-
truHUiil,  iirciinliii^  t CI  the  i-oninion  authorities,  tu  tho


in  southern  Ilaly,  in  Brutlii,  on  which  Alexander •■'■"l'"i>'  L'hiron,  and  to  Plmenix.  mn  of  Ainyntor.


of  Epirus  ]>erished.  (3)  The  river  of  the  lower
world  round  which  Iho  shfutes  bover,  and  into
which  the  Pyriphlegetbon  and  Cocytus  flow.  In
late  writers  the  imuto  of  AchuiYin  ia  niied  to  dosij;-
i)al«  the  whole  of  tbe  lower  world.

Acherontia.  (1)  A  town  iu  Apulia  on  tbo  Bum-
niit  of  Mt  Vullur.  (*2)  A  towu  on  the  river  Aob-
eron,  in  Hrnttll.

Acheruaia. Hve  ACflEBON  (I).

AchilleU  ('AxtXXiji'r)- (1)  See  Hombkus. (8)

Wee  HTATIt'S.

Aohilles  rAjyiXXnic).  (I)  A  m>u  of  Garth,  to
whiint  llert^  tlfil  fioin  the  pursuits  of  Zuub,  and
who  pemuaded  her  to  rcluru  and  marry  that  dei-
ty. ('2)  Tho  teaeher  of  tbe  centunr  Chirou  (i|.  v.).
f(3)  Tbo  inventor  uf  the  ostracism  (n.  v).  (4)  A
on  uf  Zeun  and  Lumia,  whose  beauty  wim  i^  ^i^at
bnt,  iu  the  jiid|{nii.-nt  of  Pun,  be  hnre  away  tho
pri7.o  in  every  coutcflt. This  bo  r)il'eiideU  Apliro-


Homer  fipiKiiltcally  uicutioniii  Phoenix  as  his  limt  iii-
Ktrnctor.  ThoAc,  however,  who  pay  inorit  re^arfl
in  ihiH  eiuw  to  tho  siat'Cmcuta  of  other  wriiur»i,
niaUc  Chiron  tti  have  bad  charge  of  Achilles  linit,
and  to  have  ftnl  him  on  the  morrow  of  wild  uiii-
malH;  ncconliriK  to  Libaiuns,  on  (hat  of  lioni!i.
I7aleha.i  baviuK  predict«4l,  when  AolullMi  had  at-
tained tho  miv  of  nine  years,  ibut  'I'roy  could  uot
be  liikeii  witliuut  him,  Thetis,  well  awiire  that  bcr
Aon,  if  be  joineil  that  expedition,  wut  ileMtinod  to
perish,  M!>ut  him  disguised  in  femnie  allini  to  tho
comt  of  Lycoiucdeh,  king  of  the  itilaiid  of  ficynwi,
for  the  purpoHC  of  tx'iuK  concealed  thore.  At  (he
f-<mrt  of  LycorocUes,  ho  received  the  name  «(  Pyr-
rha  \  Llvpfta,  Rufa),  from  hi)<  };oldeu  loukK,  uud
beiyime  the  father  of  Neoploli-mun  by  iK-Tduiniay
one  (tf  the  nioriareb's  ilauKbteiT*.  In  this  Ktalo  of
eoiicealintnt  Ai^hilles  remained  until  dieteovcrud
hy  C)d,Vf>senit.  »ho  eatne  to  the  it«l.ind  in  (be  din-
^lixQ  of  a  travelling  mei-nbnul Th<<  ehiefnitn  of


dit^S  that  she  iitspin>d  Pun  with  a  fniitleiw  pasniou  j  Ithaeu.  uib-red.  it  seeius,  vuiiims  article*  of  female
for  tbe  nj-niph  ICrho  (<).  v.),  and  further  gavu  him  attiro  for  sale,  and  minf^lcd  with  tbeui  some  pieces
a  bidcons  api>cnrnnce.  of  annor. On  u  KUthleu  blaat  humi;  i;ivun  with  a

(G)The  famous  son  ofPelutm,  king  of  Pblluulis  trumpet,  Achilles  tliscovored  tiiuiMlf  by  Aeixin^
in  ThcBsnly,  by  Theliw,  Ihe  wji-tleity.  AcenrdiUK  uimhi  the  arms.  Tbo  younj;  warnor  tbeu  joined
to  Lycophron,  Tlielis  beeamu  tbe  mother  of  Heven  the  army  agninst  Troy.  This  account,  however,
maltj  children  Iiy  Peleim,  six  of  whom  she  threw  |f}f  the  concealment  of  Aehillca  is  cuntiadlcled  by
into  the  lire,  b^^eaiwe  they  were  not  of  the  HBincuat-  the  expr«^ju  aiitborily  of  Homer,  who  n^pn-wentit
unt  with  herself,  uud  bocatiM)  tbe  treatment  tthe  had  him  att  pnirordinj;  diroetly  lo  I  he  Trojan  wur  I'roni
received  wa«  unworthy  of  her  rank  as  a  goddess  ;  the  court  of  hiit  rather.  (II  ix.  -IIW.)  Tlw  Urveka,
Tbe  S4--holia«t  on  Hmner,  however,  states,  that  having  mode  gotul  their  lauding  on  tbo  hhon>ii  of
ThctlB  thww  her  ejiildrcn  inl«  the  Hre  in  oriler  to  Troas,  proved  no  (Hija-rinr  to  the  enejjiy  a»  to  com-
aai'ortsiu  whether  ihcy  were  mortal  or  not,  the  pel  them  to  seek  etlielter  within  their  walls.  Nf>
goddess  supiHwing  that  the  fire  would  consume  ;  sooner  waa  this  done  than  the  Greeks  neie  forcud
what  was  mortal  in  their  natures,  while  she  to  turn  their  principal  attention  to  the  Ukeaus  of
would  preseno  what  wum  imnit>r(al.  The  Kchidi-  snp}Kirtiuj;  their  niiun'roii8  forres.  A  part  of  tb»j
ast  adilH  that  six  of  her  rhihlren  iK-risbMl  by  tbifi  unuy  was  tberel'ore  sent  to  cultivate  the  rich  vole
har8h  exjterimeut,  and  that  t>ln-  had,  in  like  iimn-  of  the  Tbiai-iau  Cher4ou«iins,  then  iihanihvned  by  '
Iter,  thrown  tbe  Mvenib,  nfterwardat  named  Aebil-  thoir  luhahitauts  on  account  of  the  imun^ioits  of
leu,  into  tbe  dames,  when  Poteiis,  having  beheld  tbe  barbarLius  D-um  tbu  interior.  But  th^^  (trisitan
the  deed,  rescDed  bis  otTspring  from  this  perilous army,  being  weakeuud  by  this  tteparalion  of  its


bituutiou.  TEOtzes  assign*  a  dilferent  motive  to
Thetis  In  tbe  cobo  of  Achilles.  Ho  makes  her  to
have been desirouB  of  conferring inimortaUcy


forci',  could  nn  longer  deter  the  Trojana  from
again  taking  tbe  tield,  nor  prevent  suuconr  and
Biipplies  Crow  being  sent  into  the  city. Thus  Uift


th«  •clioliniib  ou  LyoQphron,  and  fil.<w>
ltyDicty(i(-'rrtiMwl!»nn(l  lJ»i'i-MriirypiiH,
Acliilli-4,  lia\iiiir  Li»:(tiiio  fltiarnoiiird  <>(
Pdlyxftiii,  diu  (luti^litrr  iif  I'riiim.  nigiii-
IumI  lo  lliu  moiiarcli  tliiit  lir  nmiM  biv
Rdiiif  liiH  ally  on  couditmii  nf  n*c(?iviDg
hf.T  Iiand  ill  marnngo.  I'riam  oonscnt-
v*\,  aui\  tLi>  |)urtfeshariii}j;roni(*  for  tliitt
|>i)rfMMi^  to  tito  ticniplR  *>f  IliM  Tliym-
bi-neuti  Api)Uo,  Ai'Iulli**  wiw  trcoclier-
onslvfeUili  Uy  I'MriH,  wlio  liad  c<inrcjilr<l
hiaiw^lf  tlirn.',  ttciiit;  iifoiiniliMl  Ity  liiiii
%Ttrli  HI)  amtw  ill  tlin  licr).  Tlic  a*lit<»i
of  tliu  lierit  H't^n*  niinglril  in  b  ^tlden

•iege  miw  pnttrtu'tinl  tn  tlie  liMigtIi  nf  ti'ii  yiMire.  laud  vntn  uid  (<■  n'<|t<iM>^  at  Slgiu'iitii.
Ditrtnc  a  ^rcjil  part  iiftliiH  liun!,  At-litllcM  wiw  ciu-i (5)  Al'UJLLK»i  Tatiis.  a  iiativw  of  Ali'XAndrin,
liloyrd  ill  Ivtttiiriiiiif;  tiie  nvM>iiir4>M  *if  I'riaiii  li.v  t!ie comiwuiily  (ij**igiKMl  lu  (hi*  hvchiuO  or  tliinl  t'l'iitiiiT
iv«lD4-it<in of  tlip itiliiiliiry  rilics  of  Asia Minor, a.u.,  but  probjibly  iiiiivU  liitt-r. He  it*  aiulmr  of
With  a  llret  liv  mvogfd  iUv  connla  of  Mvsiii,  luwlo  |  the  iiovvl  vnilitlcd  "The  Lovoa  of  Leiicipin'  and


frrqiieiit  ili^»euilMtrkntiutiH  of  hi.H  fitrrtMt,  nud  Hur-
cocdtnl  cventunlly  in  dt-titraylii;;  rluveii  citlfx.
Amonjc  tlio  ft|K>ilK  of  ntit.',  Acliitles  obtaimid  the
Wantifnl  Unweii.  while,  nt  tUy  tJikiii;;  of  Tlu'ln',
Chrywit,  th*?  dunjihter  of  L'brywn,  n  pri'*"l  of  Ap«il-
lo  nl  OhrjTMi,  bt^nint'  tla*  prix«-  of  Ad'"'"'""*""- A


CI)to|>tiun  "  {T(^  KOTij  A«i>Kiinr7i'  ku'i  KXc iroi^i^irrn  y,
nil  tntctvstlu^  mid  ^nu-vfiil  iiriHliu'ttiui,  ttintigli
man-Ml  by  much  lici-ntloUHiM-tw  of  phrnm*  mid  nllii-
Hum.  V't'vt  works  have  Im-oii  so  ofim  iniiinlfd.  A
fjood  (.'dilioii  in  (but  by  Jacobn  (Leipzig,  IH'^Ii;  and
tht*  (fit  wlib  11  Lnliii  version  i»  i;ivvn  in  tlif  L'm-


pestileu«i!  chortly  Bfl*T  iiiipt^nrfd  iu (Iih  iJnjriaii  '  h>i  SiTtpl'Trti  of  i\w  Didot c^dtcction  nlil«>d  hy
caiop,  and  Cnlcbn^,  Mironnnffd  by  Ilu*  pn>fl'«-rt'il  ■  Hirsclnj:  (pMrit,  IKSii). Kiiff.  traim  by  .Siuitb  (lx»n-


prnlrctioii  of  AoliilU'N.  %'vi)ltirfi1  to  iittribiitt*  it
to  A)i;niiiriiitiiMi'tt  ilfteiilioii  of  tin*  ilnti>;ht*^r  of
CUryMM,  wborii  her  fatbrr  tiud  etidtfiivorfd  to  raii-

I  loai.  bnt  ill  vain. Tb<-  nirMiartdi,  aitliongh  ib^'ply
oSeudrd.  wan  vuiiip>'ll<nL  at  tii-t  to  Hiirrt-tiil^'r bm  i
captive  ;  bnt.  om  uti  act  of  n'tatiulion,  and  to  li>nli- '
fy  hi-  re«eiilu»iit(,  lie  ib'priv^'d  Aehillcj  ofltriMuIi}
Ilcticv  uru9ti  "the  uut;rr  of  tlio  win  of  IVlt^ntt,''  on  ,
nliit'h  IK  biMfd  Ihfi  urlioii  of  Lho  Uiad. Aohilltvi.  |

foa  hiM  pail.  nithilr<?w  bis  forcoo  (nnu  the  cont^td,


duU,  If^.V.) fky  NoVl*.U*  ANI>  ROMANCKS.

AchiUeum.  A  town  near  tbr  promonlory  81-
gacuiii  (,q,  v.j  ill  lIieTroail,  where  Acbill«»  wiw  8np-
poiM->t1  to  have  btwii  biirioJ.

Achillldes. I'yrrbiiK  i,)^.  v,),wm  of  Anbillm.

AchiTi  The  Lalin  t;<|iiivaU'nt  of Acbtwi  ('Aj^aioOo
8i>e  AcilAKi.

Aoluadiua  or  Acradina. A«tc  SrRAOi^MK.
Acidalia. A  nainr  ;ipplii<d  lo  Aphi(idtt«^  fnnii


'■mad  DfithtT  prayiTB  uor  tntrcalien,  nor  diivct  <if- ,  thct  luiintaiii  Aridaliiis,  near  DiT-lionifttUA,  where
fer*  of  reconciliation,  c^nielipd  in  the  niiwt  tempt-  Uhe  waa  wont  to  Uuth"  wiib  iku  Uraci».
ine and tlatt^riufi  Irrrnt.  roiild iiidnr«* him to  j Aoloa. See  EXKHtlTirs
rr-tiini  to  the  lltdil. 'i'br  d»inlh  of  bin  friend  I'a-
tmrlnff,  however,  by  the hand I'f  llertor,  roiiM:d


bim  at  ]rti);th  ta  action  and  rpveo}(i-,  iind  a  rci'oii-
ciltatiou  hnviny  thrreripnti  taken  plnre  betwron
tile  two  Grvciaii  It'uileni.  RriMMH  \t  oh  it'HtoriMl.  A**
the  arms  of  ArliiUcH,  having  ln-eii  worn  liy  Paln>-
clil*.  bad  iMToiitti  thi^  prize  of  llueloi-,  llephiictt-
tiu.  at  the  re*iuf«t  cd'Tlw'tis,  fuliricntiHl  a  Miit  of
iui)kt'nctr»bl<>  aruioiir  fur  ber  »*oti.  Armyett  in  lbi-4,
Afliill«  liM>k  tlo'  li«!ld,  and  aflt-r  a  f;"'»l  hlnii;fliltr
•>f  Ibt-  Tiojuiin.  and  u  conlcftt  yMlh  the  dod  of  tli«
8t'»niMnder,  '%>\  wIiom-  water*  be  wub  nearly  over-
wheliii«-<l,  bf;  lui^t  HiK:tor,  ehuMMl  him  tbrice  »li)iiiid
the  wall»»  i>f  Troy,  and  riiially  slew  liiui  by  IIih  nid
fif  Adictii^.  ArcortliuK  to  Homer.  Acbilk'a  dr»;;;t!ed
tlie  <*ttr|MM:  of  Hector  nt  bis  chMriot-whtri'ls  thrirr
r^Mind  th«  tomb  of  ratroclnH,  and  from  tlm  Ian*
I  gttaue  of  tbo  p^tet  be  wonid  apiveitr  lo  Ii»vt-  di.no
fbiM  for  Acveral  d«y»  in  iincce-»Kion.  Wruil,  Imw-
iHt-r.  niAkt-a^  Achillf*  to  have  di-ajKiinl  (be  lHnly  of
Hector  twir<'  round  ibe  wiiIIh  of  Tniy.  In  Ihia  it
i«  (trotialdr  that  the  Roman  p«H'l  followed  one  of
Ibo  eyclir  or  elrwi  tho  iraK*'*  wrll<'n<.  The  corpse
of  llie  Trojnii  bero  wuh  nt  liutt  yielded  Itp  to  the
loan  and  *iipp1ications  of  Priam,  who  IumI  cuinu
for  thut  p(irp«if)e  to  the  teut  of  Ai'billnn,  and  a
iruco  was  griutt«d  the  Trojans  for  the  perbirnianee
of  tbu  fUDeral  obM<<iiii(>«,  Ai:bille«t  did  not  loiif;
Mirvtve  his  HI II Btr joint  opponent.  According  lo  the
utuR  geoendly  ixiceivinl  ar^oiuit,  aa  it  i»  given  by


AdUa  Calpuniia  Lex Si'o  Ambiti'»;  Lkx.

AcUiB  Lex, 8«"  Lex ;  KKPKTrNDAE.

AclUuB  Olabrio. Hvc  (iLAiiitio.

Aciii^oea  (iwo-*;*!)?).  A  Prrnian  swonl,  Kbort,
ulraiybt,  »ii<l  tbn-i  diffuriiiii  fnim  the  Roman  «Vo,
nbicli  was  curved,  It  %Vi(s  worn  on  llio  right  nide,
wlifr«:i«  the  Grwek*  and  RoinanM  wore  ihrlr  ?.wonbi
ou  the  left.  A  g»»lden  m  inacnH  wa»  fii;<|iiently  giv-
en to  individuals  »h  a  mark  of  honour.  The  acconi-
paiiylng  lUu^tntlioii  in  fnnii  Ibe  Inw- relief  fonud


AolMM*^  »r  INrnlnn  Swnrd.


ACIS


(il  PerftO]M)li». Till'  u'hI  >f  itiiras  (ij.  v.)  is  frequent-
ly n^pn^HcMileil  with  tlic  m-inaciM.

AoU  (,'Ak(«)  The  M>u  uf  KauuiiH  and  SytnaetbU,
wliu  wan  WIovtMl  liy  tbu  iiyuiph  Ualittvn,  otitl  nUiii
by  lVl,v|ibc>iiiii».  >vbo  »'a»  JL-alims  of  liis  AiiccesA.
IIU  bluutl,  KiisbiiiK  forth  from  under  th<!  rock  with
vhich  be  hail  Iwun  cnisbed.  wiis  rhnngud  by  Gula-
lost  ittti)  tba  rivrr  Acid,  nr  Aviiiin«,  nt  th't  fool  nf
Ml.  Aftnn — u  «tory  |M<rhnpR  wijicestcd  by  the  f*('t
that  the  Hvui*  ju  finPHtioii  )tiirin(;<t  »nt  from  luiil'rr
II  rock.  Tbil  I»'fi<'ihl  b:w  sugRPHlrd  »  iMiml«*r  »if
fint*  poows  in  Kii>;UMh,iiiuoM(;  Ibi-in  (ih.v'k  Snng  of
Pulftfihrmr  m  hi»  Arix  ami  (lalutra;  J.S  IlIackio'K  ,
(ialiilra :  Bnrtiiiimii'K  Voliffthtmifa  Ftuaitta ;  and  .
I'roctcr'rt  7»mfA  i>/"J»h«.

AciacOJus. St>c  Ascu.  |

AcUa. A  kind  of  diirt laouttmifd  liy  Vi'rtjjl,
l.-frn.  %*ii.7:tU)UM  nwMl  by  Ibu  0<u.u. It  bail  a  leal  hum
tlmiif;  iittiicluMi  to  tl,  H<i  Ibut  it  uii};ht  be  drawn
liat^k  iti'niii  ufttir  bi>iu);  thntwu.

AcmouTdea.  A  naiiiu  givuii  by  0%iil  tu  uue  of
th<>  thn^'  iryulopi.'*  i«|.  v.),  I'ttUod  by  Vergil  Pyruo-
luun,  aud  by  otbor  vritors  Argca.

Aoua. Seo  Actus.

Aooetoa  rARniVrjf).  A  sailor tuved
1»y  IlaccbiiH  for  having  (•(tponsed  lli«
rnnw^  nf  tbi'  god  whfii  the  n'nt  of  |b«
rrcw  d«^ir»d  to  itrll  liiin  at  a  mIkvo.
Thf  Irgi'iid  will  liu  futiiid  tiiirrateil
iiud«r  Iba  titlu  UiONYMfK.

AcfioA  inKoyti).  Th«!i  whvtstnito,
cuUBi»titif{  (diit;(ly  of  «tlux  and  utiiui.

Aoontioa  (dxairto^). 8«4!  Hasta.

AconUus  I  Axiii^iof).  S*-!'  i;vi»ippA.

Acqulaftlo.  A  geiieml  vxpr^sslon
for  Ihf!  a<r(|iiiftilioii  or  ovTUorxbip  of
proi"'r(>.  H*v  Ix  irRECiv^siri;  Mak-
cipum;  AcrKssii>;  D«tMtNit;M.

Acrae  or  Acra  ('Axf^ai).  A  tovti
of  Sicily,  wi'fit  of  Hyrucitiie.

Acraepbia  <  'Xnpattftia )  or  Acrae-
phiae  ( 'Ajic,»ut0<ai  >. A  rown  \u  DoeDlln  ai  Luke
Cu]mi!t,  iu which (ho  TIclmiiK  iiMik  reftlgQ  aftur
tboir  town  hml  Iw<mi  de«tn>y«d  by  Atuxundur. It>
coiitninod  a  t«nipte  of  DioiiyKnii.

Acrttc&a. 8cc  Auitiuu?(Tt;M.

Acratiama  (nnfunnrfui).  Tho  uarly  tneal  (npuH-
tfiiw  aitttTTof}  "f  the  f:^L<<^k.-<>,  iJiltou  iumivdJutvly  on
ritthiKr  like  the  timt  brcitkf:ui  in  Fiunvu  iiml  Ocr-
uiHliy.  It  ('uiiKi8ttf4l  of  hrrail  dip)X.-d  IU  unmixed
wlti^i  Inxpftrnf  ouvtV  wbeiicv  tbis  UHtilo  axfiarttTfia.

Acratophdrum  (aKparotftnpov).  A  stuall  veHwt
for  holding  witif;  a  whir-ciip.  Tb«  iiatuti  is  de-
rirM  from  nKparav.  "  Miiiuixwl  wjim',"  »lid  iftipa,
"to  bt'ar."  Pollux  nii-uriiMin  tt  in  bi»  u*:u<iunt  of
ancient  diinkiiiK-vi-w*!;!".  and  dt'^orilM-H  il  aa  r*8t-
iiig,  not  on  a  Hat  bottom,  but  un  small  Mstrugals.

AcriBi6n6  i'\Kfnvi^y^).  thtitaii  (q.  v.),  dangbter
of  AfTJsiitit.

Acriaiaa  ('Ax^imor).  Tho  »oii  of  Abas,  king  of
ArgoH,  by  Ocftlin.  dfliigbtor  nf  Miitiiiii<>na.  Ha  was
born  nt  th«  wtiiu-  birth  a»  PhwItii..  with  wbnni  it  is
Huid  thiit  hi'<pmii-clled  «vcn  in  hri*  mother's  wnmh.
An»'r  muny  iliftan'iisionn,  Prwlns  was  driven  from
Argos.  AiriBins  bml  Dannie  by  Enry<lic»-,  donsliler
of  Lacpdaptnun :  and  iin  oracle  baviiig  diTlnrcd
that  he  •horibl  1ii.si>  bbt  Itfo  by  tbc  baud  of  his


gmtnlHon,  hf  mih'avnnn-d  to  frnstralo  the  prcdic-
tinu  by  the  iniprit>uuttii*nt  of  bis  d&nght«r,  in  ordvr
to  pn'vent  Iwv  Wi-otuing  a  tuothur.  (bee  Uaxar.)
His  vfTorts  failed  orsnwcM,  and  b«  wan  i>v(«ntually
killed  by  lVr»en»i.  »on  of  DAiiae  and  Zens.  Acri-
siua,  it  t>e<^■nl^.  bml  biM'n  attrat'titl  to  Luri^^sa  by  tJi«*
re]>ort8  which  ha«l  reiM^bwl  him  of  the  pmwees  of
Peraens,  At  LarirM-'i,  Penu'UM,  wishing  to  ahow  biv
skill  in  throwing  a  f|noit,  kilhsl  an  old  ninn  who
pnjVfd  lo  Ik<  his  grundfuther.  whoui  ho  knew  not,
and  thiiH  llie  itractu  wax  fiiltilbid.

Acritaa  ('AKfioVatl.  A  proinonlory  uf  Mfsttcnia
in  this  Pt'IoiMinnwrn-s  now  Cape  (Jiillo,

Aero,  IIki.f-xil'm.  A  Roman  granimarinn  of  the
end  of  the  itucund  ceninry  A-b.  He  wrote  coid-
menlarics  (now  lost)  on  Terence.  Horace,  »nd  |><fl>
bapH  Pcraiu^  The  coUeetiou  of  seholia  bearing  bis
name  dtitcs  from  the  seventh  centnry.  Sec  Giiifen-
ban,  tjc*ehick.  d  <•/«»«,  rhilot.ir.  pp.  ;w>rt-313.

Acroama  inKpoana).  Properly  a  musical  pieco,
bnl  tt\a*t  a  play,  dance,  or  a  riH-iiaiiun,  snch  as  were
oomuioh  At  tueaU  (Suet.  I'c^p.  VJ;  Pliuy,  Ep.  Ti.31,
13). Tbo  word  alao  deuoles  the  wiiaioiana  or  acU


ArruHialiL |Stinit>|fiti,  lyiuturrt,  pi i  Hi  )

ors  employed  to  amnxv  the  gnexta  during  au  eu-
tertatnmetit;  and  in  rarrly  used  of  an  n«tor  on  the
stage.  S»'i'  Mnv«in»rdt,  A'V>#n.  AIUtI.  vii.  p.  3S57 ;  aud
the  article  AnahnoMaR.

Aoroaais  (ox^mTirl.  0)  A  Ittemry  discourse  or
leeliire.  The  term  (itself  nf  Greek  origiu  )  Is  ap-
plied by  the  Latin  writers  to  a  discourse  or  dispu-
tation, by  some  instrnctor  or  professor  of  an  art,  to
u  nouieroufl  audieuce.  The  corresponding  Latin
term  is  (iiiifi7jfi.  (3)  U  also  signifiua  a  place  or  room
wUeie  lileinry  invn  met,  a  Utitnre-rooro.

AcTOceratiniB. Sve  CEiut'Nti  Movrics.

ActocoxinthuBiWiciMiKopiif^ot).  A  high  bill  orer-
liau(;ing  the  city  of  t^orinth.  on  wliiL-h  wajt  erected
a  riludel,  calletl  »ltM>  by  the  wtuie  name.  Thii  situ-
atioii  wna  so  iinpnrtunt  u  one  ns  to  be  styled  by
Philiji  ihr  H'tlvrs  nf  (freece. See  CoRlKTura.

AcroUthi  Inicjj-.Ai^i).  Htatues,  of  wliieb  the
exln^niiies  only  |  heitd,  feol,  and  hantbi)  uetv  of
tslone.uiid  Ihen-nniining  part  of  the  IxKly  of  brouae
or  liihlod  \\<nnl  (Viiruv.  ii.  i?,  11).

Aciopodium  (ctKfMirodiof).  The  bu«o  or  pedeatal
of  a  stattio,  so  railed  frota  iU  sripjtorting  tbo  ex*
tremities  or  soles  of  thi*  feet  i'iK(tot.  wove).

Acrop&lia  <dr|>i>iroXif^.  In  nearly  all  llio  eitiea
of  tiivvci',  which  were  usnuUy  boill  ufton  a  bill  or


ACROPOLIS


13


ACROTERIUM


Bome  natnral  elevattoD,  there  wfis  a  liind  of
tower  or  citadel,  reared  upon  the  highest  part,
to  which  the  name  wtpoiroXts  (upper  town)  was
given.  At  Rome,  the  Cftpitolium  (q.  v.)  was
nnalogouu  in  ita  purposes  to  the  acropolis  of  Greek
cities.

The  Acropolis  of  Athens  was  situated  on  a  pla-
teau of  rnck,  ahont  tKK)  feet  in  height,  1000  in
breadth  fmm  east  to  west,  and  460  iu  length  from
north  to  south.  It  was  originally  called  Cecropia,
after  Cecrops,  the  ancejitor  of  the  Athenians,  whose
grave  and  shrine  were  shown  on  the  spot.  On  the
north  side  of  the  Acropolis  was  the  Erechtheum,
the  common  seat  of  worship  of  the  ancient  gods  of
Atbens,  Athcn6  Polias,  Hephaestus,  Poseidon,  and
Erccbtheus  himself,  who  was  said  to  have  founded
tlie  sanctnary.  His  house  was  possibly  northeast
of  the  Erechtheum.  Pisistratus,  like  the  ancient
kings,  had  bis  residence  on  the  Acropolis,  and  may
have  added  the  stylohate  to  the  temple  of  Athen6
recently  id«nli6ed,  south  of  the  Erechtheum.  The
walls  of  the  fortress  proper  were  destroyed  in  the
Persian  wars,  4dO  and  479  B.C.,  and  restored  by  Cl-


one on  the  north  side  was  dedicated  to  Pan,  anoth-
er to  Apollo.  See  Atiienak  ;  and  Boetticlier,  JJie
JkropoUs  von  Jtheii,  \v.  'SG  plates (Berliu,  IStiS).

Acrostlcha  (aKpoanxa).  Acrostics,  which  wero
popular  alike  with  the  Hebrews,  Greeks,  and  Ro-
mans. With  the  Hebrews,  in  acrostic  poetry,  the
initial  letters  of  the  lines  or  stanzas  are  made  to
run  over  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  their  order.
Twelve  Psalms  in  the  Old  Testament  are  so  writ-
ten, the  most  remarkable  being  the  119th.  One
of  the  most  celebrated  acrostics  in  Greek  is  tliat
contained  in  the  words  'lt)<rovs  Xpioros  Stov  Yioc
2tDTi]p,  the  initial  letters  of  which  spell  t;(fli/f  (fish),
whence  to  the  word  i)(dvs  a  mystical  meaning  was
attached  by  the  early  ChriMtians.  The  Romans
borrowed  acrostic  poetry  from  the  Greeks  as  early
ns  the  time  of  Enniiis,  who  composed  one  (Cic.  de
Div.  ii.  111).  At  a  later  period  inscriptional  acros-
tics occnr,  one  of  which  calls  the  reathT's  attention
to  its  character  with  the  line  Inapice,  lector, primor-
dia  rersiculorinn  (Wilraanns,  r>92,  593).  The  argn-
nients  to  the  Plautine  plays  are  in  acrostic  lines.
When  the  last  letters  of  the  lines  spell  words,  the


re -4.

f'C/aPot.ts


BJuncs  or


^S).,^f>^^


\d£S£^


'"•i^S,


PLAS  OF  TBI  AC80POU9  IV  1889,  ISCtCDISO  REBTLTS  OF  TUB  BXCAVATIOXB  BKOni  IN  1883.

(Reduced  Trom  plitn  by  ifeears.  PoDrose  and  Sctiultz,  Jnumal  of  Hellenic  Utadiet,  1889,  pi.  viii.)


moD.  But  the  wall  surrounding  the  foot  of  the
hill,  called  the  Pelasgicon  or  Pelargicon,  and  sup-
posed to  be  a  relic  of  the  oldest  inhabitants,  was
left  in  rnins.  Cimon  also  laid  the  foaudation  of  a
new  temple  of  AthemS  on  the  south  side  of  the  hill.
This  temple  was  hegnn  afresh  and  completed  in
the  most  splendid  style  by  Pericles,  and  called  the
Parthenon  (q.  t.  ).  Pertcles  at  the  same  time
adorned  the  approach  to  the  west  side  of  the
Acropolis  with  the  glorious  Propylaea,  and  began
to  rebuild  the  Erechtheum  in  uiagniticent  style.
(See  Ebechtheum;  Propylaea.)  There  were  sev-
eral other  sanctuaries  on  the  Acropolis — that,  for  in-
stance, of  Artemis  Brauronia,  on  the  southeastern
Hide  of  the  Propylaea ;  the  beautiful  little  temple
of  Atheu6  Nik6,  to  the  southwest;  and  the  Pan-
drosenm,  adjoining  the  temple  of  Erechtheus.
There  were  many  altars — that  of  Zens  Hypatos,
fur  example — and  countless  statues,  among  them
that  of  Athene  Promachos,  with  votive  offer-
ings. Among  the  numerons  grottos  in  the  rock,


verse  is  called  telestic;  when  letters  in  the  middle
of  the  lines  do  so,  the  verse  is  mesostic.  Combina-
tions of  acrostic  and  telestic  are  found  in  the  Corp.
Inscript.  Lat.  v.  1693;  of  acrostic,  me8*)stic,  and
telestic,  in  Flavins  Felix  (about  a.d.  500).  See
Abeckdarii  Hymni.

AcroBtolinzn. See  Navis.

Acroterlam  ( oKpooT^piov ).  A  word  generally
used  in  the  plural,  and  signifying  the  extremity  of
anything.  (1)  In  architecture  it  is  the  sanit*  as
fasligium  (q.  v.),  the  sloping  roof  of  a  building,  and
also  for  the  ornameutal  front  or  gable.  A  more
usual  meaning  is  the  pedestals  placed  on  the  sum-
mit of  a  pediment  to  receive  statues  or  other  orna-
mental figures.  There  were  throe  acroten'a,  one
over  each  angle  of  the  pediment,  (2)  The  extrem-
ities of  the  prow  of  a  vessel,  which  were  usually
taken  from  a  conquered  vessel  as  a  mark  of  vic-
tory. Hence,  the  act  of  so  doing  is  expressed  by
the  verb  aKp<iiT7}pidC(iv. (3)  The  extremities  of


ACROTlliXIOX  14  ACrA

a  statne.  such  as  the  head,  feet,  bauds,  vriDgs,  'senator,  wbu  was  iutnisted  with  this  office.  The
«tc.  acta  were  deposited  in  the  imperial  archives  (iabm-

Actothinion  {oKpoOiyior'). Properly  the  top  of  a lariMm)  or  Id  particular  departmeDts  of  the  public

heap,  and  btuce  applied  to  those  parts  of  the  fraita  libraries,  to  which  access  conld  only  be  obtained

of  the  earth  or  of  the  spoils  of  war  that  were  of- by  the  express  permission  of  the  prarfedm*  urbi.

tend  to  the  gods.  Tbey  were  consulted  and  are  frequently  referred

^.  _  .  _  .,  1 /■  i.w 'to  by  the  later  historians  (e.  g.  Yopisc.  Prob,  2;

Acrotiioiiiii.  AtownonthepenmsnlaofAthos  La^J^d.  Srr.^.  56;  Capitol.  4"/-  «««■•  6),  and
in  Macedonia.  The  inbab.tauls  were  supposed  to  ^^J  ^^^^^  ^^  ^J^  were  published  in  the
live  beyond  the  usual  age  of  man. bee  Meia,  ii.  3. . '  ninrna.

Acta,  (li  The  public  acts  and  orders  of  a  (3)  Acta  Dicrna.  A  gazette  published  daily  at
RoDiau  magistrate  possessing  the  i'm  agendt  cum  Rome  by  the  authority  of  tbe  government  during
popmlo.  which,  after  the  expiration  of  bis  office,  tbe  later  timcH  of  the  Republic,  and  under  the  £m-
werv  submitted  to  the  Senate  for  approval  or  re-  pirOrCorrespondiug  in  some  measure  to  our  uews-
jection  (Suet./HM9.-£t).  After  the  death  of  Inlius  papers  (Tac.  Jnm.  iii.  3;  xiii.  31;  xri.  22).  In
Caesar,  tbe  triumvirs  swore,  and  compelled  all  the  •  addition  to  the  title  Acta  iM'uma,  we  find  them  re-
other  magistrates  to  swear  (Dio,  xlvii.  4^),  to  ob-^ferred  to  under  tbe  uames  iJmrma,  Acta  Pmblieoy
Hfrve  and  maintain  all  his  acta  (in  acta  inrart),  aii#;  Acta  t'tbana.  Acta  JiermiH  Crbamanm,  Acta  T\;ymli,
hence  it  bei-ame  the  custom  on  the  accession  of  and  tbey  are  fivqueutly  called  simply  ..4c/a.  The
each  emiteror  for  tbe  new  uionarcb  to  swear  to  Greek  writers  on  Roman  history  caH  them  ra
observe  and  resjiect  all  the  acta  of  his  predecessoia  virofu^/iara,  ra  dtjfioaui  vwoft^^itam,  n  d^/iotria
from  Inlius  Caesar  downwards,  with  the  excep-  ypafntam,  aud  ra  xmra  vmfu^itara.  The  nature
tiou  of  those  who  had  beeu  branded  with  infamy  of  their  contents  will  behest  seen  from  the  follow-
after  death,  such  as  Nero  and  IKtmitiau  (Tac.  Jhn.  ingpassageofPetronins(cap.53Vwherean  imitation
iv.  4*J:  Pio.  Ivi.  33.  etc.).  The  Senate  also  swore  of  tbem  is  given  by  tbe  actitaniu  of  Trimalchio:
that  it  would  tvcognize  tbe  validity  of  tbe  acts  of  "Actuarins  —  tauquam  acta  urbis  recitavit :  vii.
the  new  empemr.  £ver>'  year  all  tbe  magistrates  Kal.  Sextiles  in  praedio  Cnmano,  quod  eat  Trimal-
o^ton  entering  office  on  the  tirst  of  January  swore  chionis.  nati  sunt  pneri  xxx.  pnellae  xl;  sublata
approval  of  tbe  acts  of  the  reigning  emperor  in  horreum  ex  area  trilici  millia  modiom  qnin-
(Dio.  xlvii.  l!:<;  liii. '^:  Tac.  Jim.  xvi.  22,  with  the  genta:  bovesdomitiqniugenti.  Eodem  die  Mithri-
cxcnrsusof  Lii»sius;  Diu, Iviii.  IT;  lx.26>.  'dates  servus  in  cnicem  actus  est,  quia  Gai  Doetri

(2)  ACTx  Sen.\TI"S,  called  also  Commextarii  genio  nia]t><1ixerat.  Eodem  die  in  arcam  relatnm
Sen'atL'S  i.Tac.  jNa.  XV.  74)  and  Acr.v  Patki'M  est.  quod  euUocari  nou  potnit,  sestertinm  oenties.
(Jnn.  v.  4).  conl;tiuiug  uu  account  of  tbe  various  Ewlfui  die  incendinni  factum  est  in  bortis  Pom-
matters  bnnight  before  the  S«niatt\  the  opinions  of  |teianis,  ortum  ex  aeilibns  Nastae  villici.  .  .  .  laoi
tbe  chief  si>eukers.  and  tbe  deeision  of  the  house.  etiauitHlielaaediliiim  ivcitabantnr.etsaltaariorum
We  may  infer  from  a  passiige  of  Suetonius  (. id/.  2t'.)  testamoiita,  quibns  Trimalcbio  cum  eli^o  exhere-
that  tbe  prtK-etHlings  of  tbe  Senate  were  not  usnnlly  daltatnr:  iaui  nomina  villicomm  et  repudiata  a
published  (ill  the  tlr»t  consulship  of  lulius  Caesiir.  ein'iture  liUn-la  in  lialueatoris  coutabemio  depre-
Ba'..')!>:  but  under  the  din-eliou  of  the  presiding  heusji :  atriensis  Baias  relegatns:  iam  reus  factus
magistrate,  assistetl  by  certain  s«'n»tors  iipiHunted  disjHMisator:  et  iudicium  inter  cnbicnlarios  actum.*'
for  the  puriMtse.  tbede(.'ttH>s  of  (be  StMinte  had  Uhmi  From  tbi»  pass.-)gv.and  fr\>m  tbe  numerous  passages
written  down  and  nHtmletl  in  the  .Ventrinni  long  in  tinvient  writers  iu  which  the  Acta  Dinma  ar«
previously,  und  tbe  debates  on  the  Catilinarian  quoted  (.refereutv.-i  to  which  aiv  given  by  Hiibner),
couspiniey  had  bet^i  widely  cireulttttHi  by  t^icen*  it  woubl  tipik^ar  that  they  usually  contained  the
{Suit.  14.  ir>>  frvmi  notes  taken  by  some  friends  of  follow iuu  matters:  yV  The  nnniber  of  births  and
his  among  tbe  senators.  Inlius  CiHv-iiir  oi-ileitnl  de«tbs  hi  tbe  city,  an  aee^mnt  of  tbe  money  paid
that  tbe  piiH'ee«liugsoftlieS*'U«(e.  which  bmnMH'ii  into  tlu«  treasury  t'n'm  tbe  pivvinces.  and  every-
only  wcasionally  publishwl  Wfoiv.  should  h«'ue»'-  ibiui:  rehainji  (o  the  supply  of  com.  These
forth  be  publi>hed  n-gulavly  e\ery  dity  v  »«■•"•'••■''  piutKuUn*  would  W  extracted  from  the  taMae
<ii-l<idiarw«iWindertheautb«'ri(y  of  tbeBo\evn»>en(,  ^^^tSii^,ir.  \\\-  At\  juicieut  rei;utation.  ascribed  to
fttmi  tho  uotes  of  shoitbiUid  w  ritelN  y  S«'ii.  \li»t,  S»>rvius  ruHius,  .ill  births  werv^  rt'gistered  iu  the
tttiH-f.  l>).  .\ugustns  forb«do  the  pnblioHlt.Mi  of  tVuiple  ot  Veiuis.  and  ;t",  deaths  in  that  of  Libitiiia;
the  pnH'wdings  of  tbe  S*»n«te,  bn!  lhe>  sitll  eon-  :uid  «e  know  ihat  thi>  practiee  was  continued
tinned  to  Ih'  preservi-d;  and  ono  of  the  wnators,  nndoi'  iho  KnijMiv.  oi-ly  tIkii  at  a  later  time  tbe
whoiveeivrd  the  title  ll^  tn  hn  <,»t,ifM«.  «  H!*  fhiwuMi  I'omi'lo  of  Ivmuii  m.is  MilwiittUrtl  fortbat  of  Venus
by  tbe  enipovor  to  conii>ilo  tlio  m'eoiin(  y  Tnk-.  loi  tho  iv»;is(nmm  of  b:r;!is.  ^2'  Extracta  from
Jmt.  \.  4;  Snart.  Uml'.  U;  »>ivlli.  /«»»■(.  No.  '.VM,  tho  A»I:»  t'oiviivi.t.  ,-,M:t,t:'iuij;  the  edicts  of  magia-
3lr<>'*.  This  olth-e  w:t.s  i-oneinlly  held  «■«  im  iMiim.il  H^ito'.,  ilio  lo'^t.-imonts  of  tl:sii'.i£uished  men  re-
one,  after  the  qiKu->lor!thiit  i,  Sn«it.  H,uh  ;i\  )>iii  poil'.  M'  tu.tN,  wuh  ilio  vames  oV  tluve  who  were
bet'or*'  the  pi.ietor^lnp  or  iioOih-Nlnji.  The  pcivoni  m-nuiitfil  .nt.l  oondi-imN-^l.  a;:il  ^-kentse  a  list  of
inlrnsttHl  ^^ith  this  otth-o  noint  not  Wo  eoiilomnli-.l  iho  inti-.lsiKilo-*  who  «viv  oUvretl.  ^3)  Extracts
witbtlu'varioiis»-h'rks(.iifmirM.*iH»|'«/'ftt».»"'.'Mi  ,  ii.-m  tit,-  V(».t  S,'0;»[!;x.  o-ityv.Atiy  all  the  decrees
a\M  the  iVHVHHtt->K  «bo  woit*  piv^eut  Iu  (ho  Mon  .oi.l  .t.  .Itui  uin'^i'*  ^mv  Vvviamatu*^  in  honour  of
ale  to  take  notes  of  it.t  piooooiluu;-.,  .mil  who  «  ,n>  ilio  M'tt-uiuv;  .'Utj^-UM  ^|>  v  curt  circular,  con-
only  oM-lnded  when  tlio  Srmiio  |.,i-*-»o.l  <t i.mono. \n k.,omu  ..i"  t'.v  'o'.vtl-s.  deaths,  festivals,

iVH^N/fuiH  tmilHtH;  tb«l  is.whfu  lli.>\  doli»ioi.ni',l  .*'olm..\vni.-.u>.ot  il>omuvrr.«:  utuilv.  v;oCnriou8
on  asiihjeet  of  the  j;iviile«l  uiipol  lnueo,  lo-ivdlii,!  .iit.t  t-.u-iv  <tou-  .-t.nuwwx.  ^;uh  *s  prvidigiee  and
which  seeiviy  wiij*  ueetv-rtt»>  oi ml\l».thlo  \\\\\>\\ tiui-oU-. (I.,,  .uvi.ot. of  !vw  »-xi:!Tivs.  tbe  confla-

(;uMK>). lt\v;wdouhllo*'.  iVom  iiolo»  aod  |>.i|>ot  ■ .ii.*t X  l*.ol,tu«»;v  nii^iVs,  N.writic*a.  a  list  of

of  these  clerks  tbiit  (he  aeta  woio  eontpOed  hs  (ho  .  iho » -lUom y,  *t».v,.  ,».„(  ,v,i>s.;^rty  amatory  tales


ACTA


15


ACTP.


Kiul  Adrentares.  with  the  uamcs  of  tbo  partivft.
<l'f.  Ciu.  Ad  Fam.  ii.  15.)  Nvwti  of  private  adViim
Vec'inD  lo  titive  Ihhiii  (.'(itntiniiiicated  to  tlic  oQicial


maniimi'Minni!!,  the  appointment  of  Koanlinns,  and
tlip  tiko.  Such  iiinguteriAl  furiotioiis  c<iii)(l  l>vdis-
chiir^fMl  nii,vn-hL-rc,  vvMti  in  the  bathv  or  in  the


««lttorby  wayofa*Iv(.'rtiiH-DK'nt.  (Ct' Quint,  ix  H,  17, utrwMii  (/rniii.  J»$t.  \.  5,  2). Under  th«  Hopnblio

when*  «  widowtrr  fi))ea)c.t  of  hiiQttelf  n«  ^twing  p«c- there  U  iiu  evident;©  uf  Ihi*  iiiftlnxl  of  lo^al  allenta-

/■«.> Th«  fnigaji.'iil«  '*(  witue  Ada  Diuniii  liiivn  <  tion  in  tlivHe  cnurJt ;  but  iiiidvr  the  Kinpint  it  was

llii«)i  publiifhrd  by  Pi^bitis  ;iud  Ilodwi^U,  but  their  uuHluuiiiry  fur  ttic  ]iarti»i  tu  have  u  furmul  ntntu-

r^iiiiin«np«»  ia  mure  ibiin  diiuhLfiil. (t'f  HL^iiizc, tnf>nt  drawn  np  hy  a  pnblic  offlcial  {ar.tu  or  t/f*ttii^


/A- :jf»iriia  IMumvntm  Act.  FrapHeuti*,  Ureifswald,

ih;<i)

It  is  certain  that  tbese  ae(u  were  (iiiblishcd
under  ttio  nntLority  of  the  guveruitirul,  but  it  in
not  stated  under  wbobe  Huitcriuteiulvticti  I  hey  worv
drawn  up.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  ibin  duty
dev«)Ive>d  upon  the  nia};istnil4<8,  who  hntt  Ibu  oare
«f  the  tiihuiae  puitlicae,  uauicly,  the  ceusora  tiiiddr
the  UepuhUr  <I.iv.  iv.  H;  xliii.  It)),  &ud  Munetimus


the  ijuaMHtur*.  euinictiniefl  the  pratjtrti  arrarii  undoi''^xiHt<!Mi'C  of  a  detfihinii  ({ivuii  ajjainHt  hitn. Tliera


the  Kuipin^  (Tiir.  .Inn.  xiii.  2^).  The  actual  la»>k
of  cotupilitig  thum  waa  cuiuuiitted  U.*  aiiburdiimte
olticvr:!,  ctdled  it'Yw<nii  or  aefarii,  who  were  aMStstcd
by  varioun  clerks,  and  by  reporters  {nvlwii),  who
took  down  in  shorthnud  the  pruccediii|i;i»  iu  the
-C'Uarts,  etc.  AHer  the  acta  hud  been  drawD  Dp,
they  were  vxpiisrd  for  a  trine  in  »otue  puhlii.'  plaoe
iu  the  rtty  in  ali/o.  whprn  pf-rsims  nould  rwiul  tlicin
and  tak«  <-opi*>H  nf  them.  Many  Fwribcw,  whiini
Cicero  ti|N>ukM  iif  Nnib>r  thw  name  nf  oprrarii.  made
It  Ihfir  biutiiieiui  tu  cupy  them  nr  make  uxtraot-K
from  them  for  the  tmv  of  the  wnillhy  in  Konu*,
and  eapfcially  in  the  pwvint-eit,  whi-rt-  iliev  were'
flgerly  soo^iht  after  and  fxlmxively  rend  {Cic. Ad
w.  viii.  1;  liii.  H;  Tnc.Ann.  xvi.iW).  After  the
eta  bad  been  ei|>oued  in  public  fur  a  certain  time,
tlwy  wore  dfpiisit*?*!,  like  the  Art*  8(<natnN,  in  some
of  tbv  record  nOife.s  or  the  pnblir  libraries.

The  dtyle  of  the  acta,  aa  i)p]K'ar«  from  the  peM-
age  in  retronius,  waa  very  ttiniplo  nud  eonciso.
They  cuntained  a  baro  ennmeralioo  of  facts,  with-
ont  any  at(<'n)pt  at  ornameut.

HUhuer  has  pmvcd  a|>aiu«t  Becker  { ffnntifntch,


and  coDtirnied  by  the  luatjistrato  {fasfit.  /i»t.  i.  11,
2.  and  1*^,  tf).  In  the  case  of  contontioiu  btisineM,
BO  long  as  the  ief/ix  itfttours  were  in  use,  there  waa
no  need  of  a  written  reconl,  for  the  filia  cmtnUtlio
was  attested  by  witneeaes.  On  the  other  baud,
when/ofiHx/ur  came  into  n»e,  thera  were  nece*Hirily
in  writing,  thvuKh  the  deoiniuti  of  the  iudn  was
givi'u  viva  1,-orr.  There  w»»  n  spi-cial  form  of  action
{inilicuti  aetia)  apiliiMt  a  dHfeudant  who  denied  the


la  evidouov  of  the  existence  ipfa  racurd  (wru,  Fra^m.
Vat.  Itir.  Hit}  nuder  the  Hinjdre.  Tim  cmjmtioKct
fi/raordinan'ae  iufrea«<;d  tho  inipurtuuoe  of  this.
But  the  uxLsleuee  uf  n  writti:n  de<:iflion  was  not
comptilsury  before  thucunstitittiuns  uf  Valeutinian,
ViibMis.  tind  (iratian.

{b)  AcfA  MiUTAUiA  contained  an  uccuniit  of  the
duties,  iiumbnrK,  and  ex]MUiK(>H  of  ea(<h  legion  (Vug.
ii.  19),  and  of  thi>  amount  of  proi>erty  poHMCMsiid  by
each  Holdit'r  (/)«i7u/iuiri  eajitrauf).  They  were  prob-
ably pretierviHl  anHit>g  the  otlieial  paimrs  uf  the
several  legions.  The  mddierB  who  drew  u|>  the»ti
acta  are  fteipiuutly  nienliuin-d  iu  inscriptiuns  and
aneieub  writers  under  variunn  titles,  ns  tihrarius
tet/ioitis,  aciwirias  or  uctartat  ItgioniSy  tabularivs  cos-
ttnuit.  (Of.  Roulcr,  /luerijttioiu  Jiomainei  dv  fAli^rift
:U3,&51,79<i.)

See  LipsiUB,  Fxcnnui  mi  Tac.  Ann.  v.  4 ;  Krneeti,
Exturtvi  ltd  Snet-  /.  Cat*.  -20;  SehlosBBr,  Vtler  dk
QufUen  der  a^tdten*  intein,  G^fhii-Jtwhi  titter,  IttM/ndtrs
Uftrr  iCfiluHgrii,cU;,  in  the  ArrMvyUr  t ietchielite,  ltJ30,
pp.  HO-tbO;  Prntz,  /Je  FoHlihut,  ^mim  in  contcriltcnJia
rrhut  indu  a Tiherio  tiatfue  tut  mortem Seronia (/ritis


i.  pp.  UO  and  t12 1  that  thetw  acria  were  fil»t  pnbliKbed  '  aiuttora  Mtrra  tecmii  videant»r  (Hallv,  IcMU) :  Zcll,
in  the  lir^t  i-uuhUlNhip  of  Inlinn  Cm-M&r.  I'ruvlmifl  ,  f/dter  dU  Zeittaifftn  der  A/tca  iFreiblirg,  lKi4|;  Le
to  thii4  limo  it  was  cuiunion  for  a  .MS.  chrouielu  of  i  Clerc.  £M»  Jourtutmx  citex  Its  RnmninM  ( I'aris,  liCttf) ;
public  evoiit*  at  Hume  to  be  eouipilwl  by  scribea,  Licl>erkHbn,  ttt  Jjtuniia  Homanoruw  .-Ir/i.*  (Weimar,
and  forwardctl  along  with  private  lett'Crs  tu  friends  '  liMU);  eaiKjeially  Hllbner.  Dt  Senntut  J'tiftulu/ue  liO'
at  adiHtJUi'X'iCio.  .lr//Ww.  viii.  1,'i,  i^,  11 ;  ii,  8;  xii.  mtini  Aetia  (  Lijis.  I^^l'ii:  .Soliiiiidt,  ZeitfuSr.fdr  tie-
ti;  XV.  6. Cf.  llUbuer,  p.  31>;  Mumiuaeu,  Hut.  iv. «-AM:AUinM«iucA>i|/V,L{l'S44X3lXt;  RenHBcn,I>rPiunifs


The  Acta  Dinma  are  Inst  mentioned  by  Vopiscus
{/ViiA.  riip.  '£),  and  pnibaldy  continued  in  riai>  to  the
<iownfrtll  of  ihe\\V*.iern  Empire.  Tliey  were  never
pnblinbed  in  INin.-'tahttnople.

(4)  Acta.  Forkns;1a.  These  were  of  two  kinds.
n)Tbo  Itonians  kept  their  private  Bco«tnuts  with  m>
nneh  ac(;uracy  that  tbeir  books  {aerepti  et  t-jj/tmi),
iMjmIs  {iJiittMiriTfihiA),  and  contracts  {gyn'jrafihn\  were
_  jHliiiillcd  an  legal  evidonuo.  Fret)Uently  witnesseH
(por'jrii'.  Ben.  Ben.  il.  *£\,  (  2 )  wr-rn  etnptoycd  to
»bli*h  their  anthentiiiity.  At  a  laterdalc  nota-
ries (tahtHioiKM)  who  liml  officer  (ttatioi^)  in  the
pnhlie  streets  drew  nji  tht^se  docnmcnis,  which
w^rc  ratified  by  the  i^igtniliire  (avbfTi/ttia)  of  the
particM.  A  scnutiis  ronsullnm  passt^d  under  Xero
(Snet.  AVr.  17  ;  Quint,  xii.  8,  l.'i ;  Paid.  S«tt.  tJefept.
v.idd)  preacrilwd  rhe  legal  form  uf  such  duon-
ineute. See  L'niiRX  AccKl'Tl  >rr  KJtPltN81.

(6)  Ada  ittdia'onim  contained  the  record  of  all
iproeewlingH  of  the  niagi<»trate8.  alike  in  couteu-
Itioniiand  iu  nou-cotileations  husinesa.  The  latter
'hioluiled  such  matters  ns  adoptions,  cesii'o  in  iure.


Aiiixqut  Ron.  Actia  [It^T^;  Kcll,  Feriwnndtriftcn  \\\k\'
dtdb.  |Hr»7).

Actaeon  ('AxTatuf).  A  otdvbruted.  hauter,  sod  of
Ai'ibtaen»  and  Ant4tiiiH>.
Having  on  one  occasion
nnwtltingly  seen  Arto-
niiH  nhilc  she  was  battl-
ing, be  wan  changed  by
the  ofleiuU'd  goddess  i  ii  to
a  stag,  and  was  torn  in
pieces  by  his  own  doga,

Aotaena.  Tho  6iBt
king  of  Attiea.  Tli«
piwta  use  the  word  Ac-
taem  AS  un  atljective,  ia
the  seiuii]  uf  "  AKic"

Aot&  ( 1 )  An  an-
cient name  of  Attiua,
found  chiefly  in  the
t>oets.  (y)  The  peniu-
sula  between  the  Htry-
monic  aud  tjingitlu  gat&, AoiMon.


ACrfi  16

DO  vrhivb  Mt.  Arti(i«  in  nitaate^l.  Tlitt  namn  (lutn})
Bigutliea  [iTDpcirly  uiiy  atriji  (if  laml  pmjcctiug  into
the  wo.

Aot£.  Tli«  favonrit«  coiiciibino  of  tlic  Kornnn
etiifMiror  NVro.  Who  wiw  <>rij;iiinlly  n  t<VAvn  fnnii
A(»itt  Miitor,  but  iii'tcr  Neni  Im-c^iiiih  itifiitiiiiird  wiili
IjiT  he  pretiMulpd  tlint  sIii;  waa  (Iw  ilf»riii)il:nit  «f
K'xug  AtLalnn,  anil  at  one  tima  pv«n  thuiighi  of

Actia  ('A«Tm).  A  festival  o-Ieliratpd  every  tbree
years  at  Aolhini  in  E]>irii»,  with  wrestling,  hurse-
inwiiip.  and  wa-tij^ltM,  tii  ht>Donr  of  Apollo.  Tberv
wa«  a  CQlebrattMl  l«m|>I»  of  Apolto  at  Actium,  wbieb


OotD  with  Wonblp  of  Uia  IcUu  A|m>Uo. (CablB*!  4«  Tnow- 1

in  Dieiitioneil  by  Thticy*li(l<*B  and  Stmbo.  After
the  tlefeatof  Antony  otr  Actium.  Aiij:nistii8ciilar]^cd
th«  tetiijile,  jukI  in»titiit<Hj  jjnnien  to  be  cclpl>rat«d
every  four  yt-ars  in  comuiumorutiun  of  his  victory.
See  A  Clint.

AotiSoas.  A  Qftine  given  to  Apolla  an  wor-
i!tbip)>ed  At  Aeiium  (Oviit,  Met.  xili.  71&).  See  Ac-
riA.

Actio.  Hcc  nrtlcU  in  Appendix:  and  .lumciAi.
Pkhcehikk. For  Greek  uclion«.  see  Dike.

Avtia  (  Arr/p).  One  of  the  HeliailoB  (q.  v.),  or
tlan;>lifi'rH  oftbei  Sun.

ActiadneB  {'AKrttrtipijs).  A  king  uf  A'<thii)|>ia,
who  cont|Uen>d  K^ypl.  lie  was  rt'iuurknblo  for  liiti
uioiU'talion  towanU  bis  ncnr  subjects,  an  well  lut  for
bJ!t  jiMlire  and  equity.  All  the  rohlicrs  ami  innlc-
factont.  too,  were  collected  fnmi  everj-  part  of  llie
kingdom,  and.  h.iviiig  lutd  their  n»»cvi  cut  off,  wore
eniablishril  in  libinrM!iilnm,  a  city  whieh  be  bad
foundml  for  the  piirpow*  of  receiving  them.  See
niod.  Si.',  t.  fio.

Actium  Miow  Ln  Piinta^  A  promontory  in
Acaruanin  at  the  mouth  uf  the  Antbr:u;iau
Gulf,  oA  which  Augn»luK  gainetl  liit  celebrated
naval  vielory  over  Aulouy  and  Cleopatra.  Sep-
temlier  2(1.  B.c.  31.  Here  was  u  temple  of
Apollu  Actiaeutt  or  Actiiis,  where  the  lesllval
Aetin  hod  Wen  eelehnited.  AngU'^tnt  revived
the  cek-!>rati<>ii  a»  a  (ininqneuniul  fea^t  in  bon-
our  of  bis  vicl^iry,  auiL  btittt  XieopuliH  {q.  v.)  on
thr  opposite  Htnm*.

The  battle  of  Aetium  isohoof  tliudociAivobat-
tie*  «r  the  u'lirld's  history,  since  the  atake  for
which  it  waA  futiuht  waa  nothing  1p«s  than  the
lordship  of  the  I{uiu;tu  Enipim — tlint  i.s,  of  Ihn  oc-
cidental worhL The  eliniiceH  of  buttle  were  all  in
favonr  of  Antony. Hi»*  tmop«,  enearoped  on  nne
shorn  (if  the  gulf,  were  largely  anperior  to  hiH  ri-
Tal's  in both niiniben*  and  diBcipIine. I(«  had
100,*WKJ  infantry,  -.v*  again»t  the  »lj,lM)il  uf  Otavian
[AngnMna  ),  an  eipial  force  of  rnvalry  ( la/JUO  >;
pfaila hi)*  ohipis  not  only  unmbere*!  50f> — double
„lie  number  thai  Octavian's  admiral  Aghppa  com-
mandod.  bnt  wt-rn  much  larger,  heavier,  and  better
jirorided  with  the  eugiue»  then  iu  mte  for  dis-,


ACTIDS

cbargiDR  missiles.  It  was,  perhapA,  tbU  great  pre-
prindenineo  of  naval  forcu  which  ]e<)  Cleopatra,
who  arp'ompanied  Autony,  to  urge  npon  him  t\\»
plan  uf  letting  the  intsne  of  lliii  war  rest  npon  a
nav.-il  battle.  Sbo  herself,  with  her  sixty  ships,
fomicHi  n  linu  behind  that  of  the  vessels  of  Antouj.


ii^ ^S»«fV


yarena  Vlpaaloi  Afrippa.

For  a  long  time  after  the  liattlo  began,  the  Ifgllt
galleyfl  of  f>('tavian  made  little  or  no  impression
tipou  the  uia-iwivR  sbijw  that  opponed  lb(Tni ;  but  at
last,  by  a  ikilful  uuino-uvre,  Xgrippn  fon-ed  An-
tony to  extend  his  line  of  baltle.  This  done,
Agrippa's  hhlps  snreeeded  in  bivaking  through  it
aud  darting  towards  the  vetwlji  nf  Cleupatni.
Alarmed  at  thiei.  the  Egyptian  <iutH>n  at  once  gavo
the  Higmil  for  llight.  and  with  her  ships  pwt  hur-
ritMlIy  lo  t*ea.  Antony,  forgetful  that  the  cri»ii»  of
the  l>anle  had  now  arrived,  reckleiwly  sailed  ia
puiNuil  of  her,  leaving  }m  fleet  In  win  ur  lose  im
be^t  it  migbl  itibis  absence.  Deserted  by  itAcami-
maudcr,  it  still  fought  on,  but  with  little  heart.


Coin  vt  AttUaj  uul  Cleoi«tnt,

and  by  nightfall  bad  been  completely  ronleil  atld
dei*tri)ycd.  Tlie  tr(H»jw  of  Antony  wet\>  still  en-
ean)pe«1  upon  the  pruuiontury  fronting  the  furees
of  Octavioii;  yet  they  did  not  at  once  give  battle,
but  wait«l  in  the  hope  that  their  general  wtHilU
return.  Scveu  day§  pawed  by,  and  when  be  failed,
to  appear,  after  Home  heMtation.  they  surrendered
to  Octavian  and  aceepteil  him  m  Ihcir  (mnimatidcr
thou  making  liiui  at  a  stroke  the  master  of  the
world.

Actiua,  Lccit;s. See  Amoa,  LucTCS.


ACTOB


17


ADEMPTIO


Aotor  ('Acraip  t. (  1  ^ SmIi i»r  l>i>iiiir<lvit,  filtlicr

Htniiiaiiiiiu  of  Aeiien»,  i>f  wbowu  vonqiicret)  lauce
l7<irni)9  iiiwlc  a  bmut. Tbin  RHtrj'  8«*iiiiiit  In  biivv
;ivtiii  rttw  to  tint  prtivcrl'i  Acbtrijt  ^Miiitm  fur  any
or  K[Hiil  (Juv.  ii.  Untf.

Aotor.  In  griirrit,  »  pUiiiCinf.  In  a  rivtl  ur
jihvnLi?  actiou,  tbe  iilaiuttlf  wiLH  oftiMi  vnllril  /ndi-
•  :  in  u  piibhc  sctiou  (cattaa  pubiim)  ho  n-its  raltrd
rnutatw.  Tim  defendant  viwa  riilU-il  rnnt,  Imtb  hi
privatn  and  public  rnnurs :  this  tfrnn,  buwevor,  iic-
nnliiiK  to  L'i('4>r(i,  might  iiifn>ify  eirlicr  i^arty,  &a
indiM'il  wo  D)i;;ht  (vmclinie  lV<im  tho  wtinl  itnulf.
In  a  |>rivat<>  »ctinn  t)i(<  d«.*feui)ant  iriw  nfr.L-n  ciilU-d
^ffraunix,  bnt  i*itb<T  |inrty  niiglit  Iw  Dtllf^l  w/«r-
r  witb  rc-ipwt  to  Ibo  trtbor.  (See  Actio.)  A
^wtirtTintiiM,  ur  voqinraio  body,  flnr<d  anU  waa  Bned
bj  itK  ai-*or  or  ■v«t/irHj.

Actor  btui  aUti  ttii<  wnAii  of  an  itf^Mtt  or  maitnefr

of  nn<iIbor*H  biisiiii-'i'>  K[>nfmlly. Tlio  ufior  pnUtcuM

wan  iin  olllci^r  wbo  ba«l  tlit>  «u|>erinl>*iidt?iico  or  care

of  flbiTcs  aud  |)ro|icrty  b*'Iin»Kiiig  to  ihv.  Siaif.

ActCH*  on  tbi>  Ntagt-. Sf«  Hl^^TRIo.

Actoildea. rntnicluH  (q.  v.). Sec  »lao  MoLlO*

ActuaiU.  Sbortbiuul-wrileni,  nhn  t.ook  down
L|be  B[ioc<h('H  in  tlir  Scnntn  and  ibn  iiiibltc  hrhphi-
^lirt.  In  ibr  dcbulo  in  tlip  Ruman  Hnnnli>  npim
tb«^  puuiHbrni-ut  of  tliuKi*  who  bad  Im-imi  ronccrnvil
in  tbr  ooiiApirucy  of  CaLrlinr.  w<-  lind  tlic  timt  nim-
tiou  of  bbortimud-writerH.  who  with*  r*inployfd  by
Cic^To  lo  t:iki'  down  tbo  speech  of  Cato,  Soc
AiTA ;  N'ni.iK.

Actuarii  MUitiae.  OfBcers  nnder  tbe  Roman
rniiH'mnc,  n-hosr>  duty  >t  wan  to  keep  tbe  acconnta
of  tbi*  nrniy,  to  t^if  ibal.  tbe  coiiinirt4)rH  »itpjdii'd
I)i4*  Mibliore  niib  provixionfl  nrcontiii);  to  ogruo-
luciit,  and  lo  piTfonu  utbvr  aitnihir  dnti<;*«.

.Actaa.  A  Hotnau  mc-nenrd  of  1un}{l1i.  It  formed
tbn  ba^is  of  tb<*  wbole  itystrtn  of  lanil  uii':tHiirB-
mrnl.  TUe  cto/m*  simfUi  or  fmmtntta  wan  I2U  (Ro-
man) feot  bmg  uml  four  ftft  wide.  Tbu  actva  qua-
VuiHt  wa«  a  wiuari!  of  IW  fc«t  eacb  wny  ■=.  \A,AW
5unn*  fwt  (Pliny,//.  A",  iviii.  ^  9),  The  actus  U
"^an  i-xainplii  of  tbu  ctptiiliinntiou  of  tbc  ilccininl  witb
lli*«  dnorit-fiioal  ^yBtt-m,  il.H  U-nsth  iK-in^  twidve
tiint'ft  tbo  Bt-anilunI  lierrM/Hih  (q.  v.>.  TIic  actus
tTa»  balf  Ibit  iwjrnim.  In  HlMpaiiia  FtaMtira,  tbe
ni'fui  ipufiraitih  nnM  railed  urmt  (alito  wriltt^n  aijaa,
aod  wjnHn]. Cf.  Vairo,  H.  it.  i.  10,  ^  fl.

Acua.  dim.  AcicUa  (fitX6y>i,  &Awis,  fia<f>is).  A
liri-tlb',  a  pin.

We  utay  translato  aciui  u  aeedlr,  wb4*n  irp  tni\y-
pOM-  it  III  IiaVL>  li:4il  at  ouu  end  a  bolti  oruyufortbe
[iBMagoof  tbread;  and  a  j/in,  wUai,  iu^tuad  uf  a


hole,  we  snpjKww  it  to  bart!  bad  a  litiob,  a  small
globe,  or  any  olber  rnlurt;cd  nr  nmaniealal  t«rmi-
uatiou  (cf.  INilltix.  vii.  tH;  x.  Ktil).

Tbti  anni<rxod  t)(Ol^(^«  of  npedlcM  and  pini),  ctiiedy
taken  from  ori^jinaU  iti  l>ronzo,  vary  in  Irngtb  fiinn
un  iii«h  and  a  half  to  atmut  vtgbt  inches.

Pint*  wuru  madu  not  only  of  metal,  bnt  abai  of
u'omi,  iMintt,  and  ivory,  Tb«ir  principal  una  waa
t<)  aw4i»i  in  fii^tiiniiig  th«  garmeuts,  and  nioru  par-
ticnlarly  in  driMMinji;  |b»  liair.  Tbi'  niodti  of  plait-
ing tbo  bair,  and  ibeii  fatiLi-nin^;  it  witb  a  pin  or
niHHllt^,  is  abown  in  Ibt;  antH>x<ul  fignrn  cif  a  f(>inale
head,  tnkcrt  from  a  niarblu  gnnip  vrbicb  waa  found
at  Apt,  in  the  wntb  of  France.


o


&


R


4)


KmAm  umI  Plna


Tim  liair-pin  nn«  vailed  acua  erimtis  araaa  coma-
turia  [Pptron.2I>

AdAmaa  (dAa^ot).  A  namo  j^iven  by  Ibe  an-
dentfl  to  acvcral  bard  KnbKtancra,  and  ninnng  tbo
rest  )jos!iibly  to  tbu  diamond.  Pacllns  describes
tiJtnuat  as  fidbitra :  "  Ita  cidor  rei<onibIt«  cryatnl,
and  IB  apliindid,"  wbirli  ct>rtainly  neemti  appmpri*
at«  to  the  diamond,  tint  Flinv  (H.  iV.  xAXvii.  Ift),
in  bin  acconiitof  oJafnof,  bait  e>vidvntly  conf<nindiMl
lln>  propcrtit's  of  MVural  difforont  inineraltf,  all  of
wbirb,  by  tboir  Iianlncs*!.  rvct-ived  from  th*^  (lnH'ka
tbn  iiain«  tidatias.  Thnu  Ilntycbiiii  applieH  lb«
naino  to  Hti;<'I ;  ToHux  to  f^niinit  of  native  gold;
aiitl  Dionyitiua  Pvrteget*.'^  to  what  woa  probably
linn  i^ryHtala  of  quartz.  In  fact,  tbu  ancjootg  know
diainoiulH,  if  at  nil,  only  in  tht>ir  nupoliiibt'^l  Kialo,
by  wbiub  miub  *^pilb«lH  aa  "all-rtittpltinduut"  wnnUi
ftcnrccly  have  b4«n  Hiigg««t(Kl, 6e«  Gkmua.

AdcUotL Hea  Xkxj.

Addlctio.  A  legal  tcnn  m4>aning  tlm  formal
ananl  by  tbc  praetor  or  otbor  inagiHtnito  of  tiia
pmiwrty  in  lUspute. Sco  Cic.  i'etr.  i.  4,  IS.

Addiz  or  AddixU  <<i8d<f  itihi$tt).  A  Greek
moaanrf,  wbii-b  Ib-'tyrhiiiK  givea  as  eqnal  to  funr
chotMiiL-i?s. fiw)  Chukxix,

Addna. Tbe  A<bla.  a  rivrr  of  Gallia  Ciaalpinn.

Adeia  (/fi^rio).  Wbfii  any  ono  iu  Atbcnn  who
bad  not  tbo  fn)l  privili'^i's  of  an  .Vlbi'iiian  citizi'ii,
micb  as  a  forci^nor,  a  slave,  t^lc,  wiitbed  lo  avctl«e
a  pvraori  of  any  tttTunco  against  tb*'  |HM>pU>,  lit-  was
obltgo<l  to  obtain  tlrHC  pi'vuilsHion  to  do  i^v.  wbicb
poriululon  woH  called  Sina.  An  Aibmiuu  citiiu-n
who  bad  incurred  uTi>tm  wa«  aho  obliged  to  obtain
^tut  befuro  bu  conld  lay  an  tnforiuatlou  against
any  out*. .See  Atimia.

Adelpboe.  A  play  of  Terence  modoUrd  on  ibs
Zvi-awi'St'TiiTKoiTit  *<f  LlipUilos  and  tbc  *A8<X^i  of
Menandcr. Sef  Tkkkntiih.

Ademptio. Sex*  I.KOATtM.


AUUMATI


18


ADOPTIO


AdgDati Se«  t'oGKATin.

Adgnatia S«»i  llKRRs;  Tkstamkvti-m.

Adheibai St^  It:ot-KTnA.

Adiaben^.  A  tlintrict  k<(  A»»yTia,  east  nf  tlio
Ticnit,  hihI  euiiiprisini^  IIil-  uioix*  tvrttle  |M>rti<m  of
tin-  coiiiitrv. t^rK  Assyria.

Adido  Horoditatia. )Sec  Hbres.

Adludlcatlo. St*  Actio.

Adloctl  or  AQectl  (1)  Thow  rlioat^n  tn  All  a
kirnvniicy  in  iiii  tilTlt-c  or  ct>llL'(:iutii,iiiHi  n-rorriti^  nf-
<  trn)%9t  to  tliiwr  cIioMtii  Id  till  up  lliu  {iniiK-r  iiiiinlivr
iif  the  Scntitfl.  Lluiler  lliu  EiiiiHr«,  llio  aiU^cti,  vu\-
iiiUtt'il  ui  the  Stiiatu  li>-  tlic  Piii|it>ri>r,  wcra  lulniit-
tvd  tu  u  pliice  auioiig  the  8viiiiU>rM  wim  liud  hi'ld
tliu  raukof  eoiiiiiil,  [iraetor.  tribuuc.or  quiurittur,  iw-
«ctf(liug  to  the  einitt-ror's  |rlvn»nn.*.  Thi'WJ  wuro
ItDOWtl  aa  adlttti  inter  consufitrta,  praetoriot,  etc. (2)

toisotis  iwlinUted  tu  u  seat  in  the  uouiitiL  ol' u  'rm-

jHHw  or  roionn  \}y  u  vi>t«  uf  thut  budy  tvei'e  oUo
Icuou'ii  aa  (idfecti.

Adiector.  A  prnvinriul  tax-collector  under  tbe
GtiriiiMt  t'ini»«-ror8  (i>n*l3i,S(51t).

AdlocuUo  ur  Ailocutia  A  8]>cech  or  address
made  to  hix  etdditrre  liy  an  itu)>prutor,  and  ouitc*
Biwtidlug  tn  tho  iiioderti  "goiieritl  ord«r''  or  ptt>o*
lniiiiiti*>ii. S*'e  CoNTlo.

Admetua  ('Adfu^rot).  (\)  KiiiR  nf  Phtrae,  wbo
aiitxl  lot-  AlwHttn,  the  dati(;ht«r  of  PeHii8.  Polia«
pmntisotl  lie r  oil  vondiiruii  that  ho  should  come  in
a  chariot  drawn  l>y  Ii<iti<i  and  hoiirn.  TbiM  tAsk  Ad-
nietiis  iicrfiirnii'd  liy  Iliu  tUMtstatict"  ofAindlo,  Tho
^d  tciidi'd  tho  tlorka  ol'  AdinctiiH  f<fr  iiino  ycant,
when  ho  wot*  u1di;;eil  to  survii  a  uiorlnl  for  hav>
hiK  nliiiii  thf  r.v<:i(i|iH.  A|H>ltu  ]ire%'ail(^l  nfton  iho
Mttwnu*,  or  Piil*'H.  to  j^rani  to  Aduirttit*  df-Uverante
fniiu  drath  if  hin  falhiT,  mother,  or  wifB  would
dio  for  bitn.  Alcc<>li»  died  in  liitt  Ht<^ad,  bnl  wad
tbrought  bavk  by  Utjriich'A  from  thu  lower  world.
AtCEBTi*.  {i)  King  of  tho  MoloaniaUB,  to
'whom  Theniistoclca  flwl  for  (irototMioii  when  piir-
Hittd  an  a  |>aity  tu  the  tri-a«4»u  of  I'uiisaniaa. Sw

Admiaaio.  Ri^ccptioii  nraiidicnc«  at  tbe  Roman
«onrU  At  first  all  visiiont  were  Admitted  without
distinction  to  Iho  a/n'a  of  their  wealthy  fiieiids.  Ac-
carding  to  SuiM'cn,  C.  Gracchus  and  Livius  Drii-sus
w«rn  the  rtmt  to  rccL'ivo  name  iirtvaloly  and  olht-rs
inaliniil«'d  iiiiinUcr,  doiihtleBa  for  |i<ditlcal  reanoos.
Afl4'i-wardH  Ihi'tui  diHlinetiouH  hcuatiiu  The  rule,
and  it  waM  Ihi!  excioptioi)  fur  any  oiifs  to  open  Ills
doorH  to  all  conicrti.  fnder  ihc  Eni[iirvi,  fricnda
yeani  diMtiu^niKhi-d  an  amiri  mlmtMiioHit  primntL,  «-
autdiie,  vXv.  The  llmt  aluiie  cuuld  enter  without
dvlay,  and  cutiUl  piiy  a  separate  viidt.  The  n?Ht
had  to  await,  and  tiouietiniuH  to  piirchaae,  tlio  fa-
vonr  of  tho  porter.  At  iho  imprrial  ennrt  tbcru
vas  a  liMly  of  nlavcn  and  fn^pdmrn  artin|;  lu  the
introdiicera  of  vioitorx  ('i{fitium  ndmUt^onit,  Suet.
Venti.  14),  wliii  werH  knmvn  a»  adoiUiu»talf.a.  The
bend  of  thn  o^aum  lulmiMMionU  wiui  t1)C  Ma-jitlir  ad'
HtittioHuw,  Rnbonliuale  himself  to  the  mugiatrr  o^ici-
oniui.  The  maffiftcr  ndmissianum  hiniRuIf  inlriKliiced
tbn  iiiottt  exalted  vitiiloi-8;  and,  at  leaAt  in  thn  lline
of  JiiHtiiiian,  none  were  iutruiluccd  by  the  adtnis-
monaitM  but  such  as  wvn^>  dluttres.

AdmlBaioiiales. S«e  AuMitwio.

Adooia  ('AJUrta).  A  fiMtival  c«l«brated  in  hou-
our  of  Adonis  (q.  vOi  and  intriMliiecd  into  GroecM*


from  the  East  probably  at  the  time  of  Iho  warn
with  iVrsta.  In  f:*'nend  the  oereuiotiieH  lasted
two  days,  the  tirst  lM-in<;  tbe  day  on  which  Adonia
diKajipeared  (n^pttrfu'it),  »nd  the  socniid  that  uu
which  lliu  body  wins  winghl  CC^rrjiric)  by  tho  wom-
en. The  (irHt  waw  a  day  of  monniin);,  and  tbe  aoc-
oiid.  one  of  rejoietu^  and  aiunikemeut,  beraoite  on
it  AdiiniH  wflH  eoiicuived  of  06  returning  to  life  to
ii]>«nd  nix  months  witli  Aphrudit^^-

AdonlB  {'A^wfift.  iM  A  Wanrinil  Tonth.aon  of
Cinyrad.  by  iiiffdiUJjihterSiiiyrnaiq.  v.).  He  waabo-
tovtyl  by  Aphro«1it'^,  hot  d<«d  of  a  wound  which  hu


lf-^.=


*iC^^


iSt


l*c«Ui  uf  AdnniiL iroaipnL)

received  from  a  hour  dnrin^  the  chase.  Tlie  flov-
er  ant-uione  upraii);  IVoai  his  blood.  The  i^rief  of
the  goddeas  at  his  death  wai  nu  Rreat  thut  tbe
goils  of  thc<  lower  world  allowed  him  to  tpend  nix
nioutliD  with  her  on  earth,  ami  tho  remaining  six
in  the  Kliadwt.  (3)  A  river  of  Pho-tiicia,  which
fallH  inl<i  thn  Meiliterraneau  below  Uyhliis.  Ita
wali^fM  wen-  fablt^t  to  dow  with  blood  on  tho  au-
iiiventary  of  tht>  death  of  Adonis,

AdopUo.  (I)  At  AtiikNR  adn)ition  (thnoiiftrtc
or  fitirts)  toitk  place  either  in  the  tidoptei-N  lifo^timo
ur  by  will;  or  a^'Iliu.  if  a  man  dieil  cbildlesA  and
intestate,  the  statu  interfeivd  tu  brint;  into  his
boni»e  the  man  next  entitled  by  the  Attic  law  of
inheritance  ua  heir  and  adoptive  son,  ao  that  thu
race  and  the  religious  ril«s  |>eciiUar  to  it  nii|;ht
not  die  out.  None  but  the  independent  citizen
of  rettiwctahle  cbanicter  could  adopt,  and  ho  only
while  ho  was  an  yet  withunt  mate  heini.  If
tl)4<rM  were  dan|;hter«,  one  of  them  wiut  iioually
Itelnitbotl  lu  ihti  adopted  Bun,  and  the  ro&t  [Kir-
tioned  off  with  dowries.  Ifafler  that  o  male  heir
w»H  horn,  be  and  the  adopteil  had  t'<|ual  ri^ht*),

('i)  At  Komf:  there  were  two  kinds  of  adoption,
both  reqiilrinK  the  adopter  to  In*  a  male  ami  child-
lew:  arrogatio  anil  a^Uiptitui  projiur.  The  former
could  only  take  phiee  where  the  penton  to  be
adopted  was  independent  (m  tint),  »tid  his  adopt-
er hiid  no  proApeet  of  mtde  ufl'itprinK:  nt  the  in-
Htanee  of  the  pniitifex,  and  aft^-r  full  prmif  of  ad>
miiuibility,  it  hitd  to  be  Kunelioned  by  tbeConiilia
Curiala.  (Stre  L'omitia.)  Adoption  pro|)cr  applitni
to  those  still  under  paternal  rule  {jHitria  peteJitna),
thefulher  mdliu);  his  Mui  hy  format  >nonri7>ah'u(q.  v).
to  the  adopter,  who  then,  the  paternal  power  being
Ihmt  ubuliaheil,  claimed  thu  Min  before  the  court
uu  his  own,  and  the  father  allowed  him  to  bo  ad-
judftoi)  to  him.  By  either  trtmNnctiun  the  pontou
adopted  puwd  completely  over  into  tl»e  family
and  nuik  of  the  adopter,  and  naturally  took  bia


ADORATIO


IS


AUULTEUICH


k


name  in  full,  but  with  thn  addition  or  a  Hccond
4:uj;iinnioD  formed  from  bis  own  I'tinuer  m>m^  ij*^-
tiff  by  Che  suffix  -nnut,  e.  g.  Pitbliu*  CnrDPHuH  8ci-
jtio  Atfcutlianiis  (sou  of  Lucius  Aviuiliuu  I'uiilus).
Wimittn,  too,  oonUl  be  nilopttH),  but  not  niTii||;Dteii ;
iii:ithrr  rotilil  tbey  ado|>t.  At  tbe  Utter  end  of
tlio  Brpiildic  w(i  lind  a  ttuttnntentAry  luloptinu  in
vvistriii;*-,  wbicli  at  lirHl  likesrittu  pntdiiced  a
c-haiigu  iiT  ii.-ini(^,  but  not  orstatiiti. Sve  NiiMEN.

Adon(*^o  {v(io<rtt\f»r\fTis).  (1)  A  furui  uf  w-nnihip-
piu(j  ibf  ".l^dM.  lU'vttniitig  to  H-lilch  the  w«rHliip|<*T
proMtraVM  biuisL'If  bL-fon-  (be  Mliitiip  i»f  Ibi;  dcily,
iuid  I'tiou  kiHsed  bis  baud  atirl  xravtMl  il  tuwardM  Ibi-
itDai;i>.  Wbile  m<  duiuj;-  be  luiivud  lii!i  wbole  butly
aruiiDd.  ii<4u:illy  from  left  in  right.  Hence,  st  amver-
u.rt  \»  lutuiftimes  us«>d  for  urbtrare  (Livy,  v.  21).  ('2')
TI>e  t(irii-.iri'ri  paid  to  tbe  Itoiiiaii  emperora  vrus  a  form
iirHaUitntion  borrowed  from  Ibe  Eiutt,  ntid  cousiit-
«l  of  proHtrutinii  on  tbit  4;rouud  and  kiwing  the
ft^t,  ko>t^«,  or  drfJt»  of  tbo  emperor.  Li%*7  8p««k8
4>f  thi-^  !i»  aibtliiria.  It  was  not  a  part  of  tbe  ordi-
nary etiiin»tte  of  tbe  rourt  before  tbe  lime  of
Di'trli'lian.

Adjamyttlum  ['Alipa^ivrrtuty).  A  Kmall  town
of  Mysia  uppiwitt!  Ibu  iHland  of  LtwbuH,  wlilcli  6Ul'<
fcritd  iii*v«ruly  in  tbo  war  of  tbi;  Komant*  witb
Uilliridattut.  It  ia  luentiuuvd  iu  tbe  New  Test.
<Acti>.  xxvii.  2).

Adritna.  Tbo  Kder,  a  river  of  Germany  How*
lug  into  tbe  Fuldu  noar  Cuesel,

Adiastu*  ("AA^rrror).  <l)8iin  of  TulaliH  of  Ar-
fftf,  Boitig  ox[tolkd  from  Argus  by  AnipbiaralU,  bo
tte4  to  I'uiybus,  kiiiK  uf  Sicyon,  wboui  be  snec«edcd
OD  Ibo  tbrono  of  8icyon,  and  institnteil  tlie  Nome-
iLD  gaiufc«.  Afterwurds  lie  beciuiie  recoiieilvd  to
AmpbiiituU^,  and  rc-turueil  to  Li«  kingilom  of  Ar-
^nn.  lie  nmiTied  bi^  two  dangliters  Delpy)^  and
Arjsia,  thc^  funuer  to  TydiMia  of  Calydoii,  and  the
latt(!r  to  I'olyiiives  of  Tbetie^,  both  l'nt:itivt-8  from
tbeir  native  iioniitrHvt.  Hn  then  pri<piiriHl  to  n>-
atore  Pidynices  to  Thebeit,  wliu  bud  bei'U  rxpHlled
by  hiH  knttbt-r  KtoocleM,  altliuci)tb  AniphiaraUK
(<1.  v.i  fonitoltl  tbut  idl  who  ttbonld  «-!i};a;;o  in  tbe
war  woidil  peritib,  with  tbo  exception  of  AdraAtuti.

bujt  ar"i-4<  the  etdebratcd  war  uf  tlio  '■Seven
jainst  ■I'bcbea,''  iu  wblrb  Adrufttuw  \vii*joine«l  by
ix  otber  hcrorat,  viz..  rolynices.  Tydens,  Auiphiu-
ratlit,  Capanfuti.  Hippomedon,  and  rartbeDnpucutt.
Tbis  war  endr*d  ok  nnforltiiiiitt>iy  an  AiiipliiaratiH
bfttl  prMivted.  and  Adra«tiiti  alone  watt  naved  by
tbe  swiftntvw  of  bi>4  bonw  Ari()n,  the  j;ifl  «»f  Her-
acles. Ten  yerint  aflirwanjB,  AilntHlnx  iwn*iiiiil»*d
tbe  six  BOOM  of  tbe  beriM'4«  wlio  biul  fullen  in  tbe
war  to  utaktf  a  new  attuek  iipuii  Tbeb<^.  and  Ain-
phiarul)^  now  prnmiM-d  miuceiu^  Tlii.H  war  in  known
AM  the  warof  tboEpigonl  (<n-iyo»-iu},or  descenilantft.
Thf>)M?4  w(u  tnkt^n  nt)d  ratstl  ro  the  ground.  Tbe
only  Argivo  brro  that  IV-ll  In  thirt  war  vea»  Aegla-
leu«.  tbe  «on  of  Aiiraiftuti:  the  lutter  difv]  of  ffhcf
at  Megara  ud  hi4  retnru  tfi  ArKoti,  and  waa  buried
■n  the  former  city.  Tbe  Ifi^endrj  almnt  Adr»j«tne
AUil  tbe  two  wars  agiMiiHt  TbnbrM  fnnii»li<.-i.l  ample
niAlcriabi  for  tbe  i-pic  an  wtdl  iw  tnvyic  \>m-U*  of
Orveoe.  {2)  S<m  of  the  Pbry^^ian  kiii);  Goi-itiiie,
liavinft  unintenlioiially  killed  liiH  brollwr,  fled  to
Croe>un,  wbii  rviwivod  hint  kindly.  While  Iinut-
iagf  be  ucL-iduutally  kiUi.'d  Alyn,  the  sou  of  Croo-
mtm,  aod  iu  deAjiair  put  au  end  to  Ilia  owu  life.

Adila. Bee  Hadkia;  Maiik  Sltkiiun.

AdrianopSlU. See  Hadiuasopous.


Adrlanua. ivn-  HAt>llUXt:^fl.
Adrogatio  or  Arrogatia See  AiM)i>no.
Adrunietum. J*eo  HAnBt'MKTt'M.
Adscripttvi .'^•e  AcCKNfi  (2).
Ad»«rtor. Sec  Aft-SKirruit.
Ad*e«*or. .See  Ai>MCssi.iit.
AdaiffnatJo  or  Aaalgnatia 8cc  Aueu  ;  Aoba
KIAK  Lecks.
Adstipulatio, See  OntJOATioNim.
Adatipulator. .S<st  iNrtROiWAio.
Aduatfica  or  AdtiatAcum. A  vily  of  Ganl  In
tbii  territory  of  the  Tiinyri, Ivi;  Caefi.  H.  (i.  ii.  '■&.
AduatttcL A  jieoplLt  of  Gallia  Rtdgtea,  dwelling
between  the  Scaldit<(Svbeldt')  and  the  Mo«a(Miuut).
Adula  Mens. ^*e  Ali-ks.
Adulatio. Seo  Ahokatio.
Adulesoena. See  IsKA.Vd.

Adulis  or  Adul6  (*.\Ani'Xi}).  A  rily  of  Autliiopla,
on  u  bay  of  tbM  Rud  Sen  called  Adnliinnns  SInmi.
It  fell  into  the  iwwer  of  the  Anxnmitoe,  for  whose
trade  it  became  the  gnmt  emjuirinm  Hitre  waa
found  the  A/onnmeitum  AiimliUiuim  (q.  v.t,  a  On^ok
iuaeriplion  recounting  thti  (SHUinest**  of  Ptolemy
KuerKetea  1.  in  At»ia  and  Tlirao^.

Adulterium  ttu>tx»ia). Adultery, (h  Gukkk.
Aninn^  Tbe  AtlieiiiiniH.  if  a  man  I'aii^ht  another  in
tbi"  at-t  of  criminal  inten^oiinte  wirh  hlH  wife,  ho
'  nii;^ht  kill  bini,  and  the  Haniu  law  held  with  re-
spect to  a  t-oncnbino  tTroXAnir^). <3lbiT  pnuidhnieut
Wiw  HkfWtik*  permitted. It  appears  thai  iil  Aiheim
tbt*!*  waa  no  wUiliery  uuletta  a  marrii'd  woman  waa
concerneil,  and  even  tbvn  there  waa  no  adultery  if
llie  married  woman  was  a  prostiinte  or  one  en-
I  gttgiHl iu  selling  anything  in  the  agoni. If  llin
i  bniibiiiid  rhoHL*  to  bring  ttuit  against  the  lulidterer,
it  waa  callcMl  fiotxtiat  ypafftri. U  the  adiillery  was
ptuviMi,  ibe  husband  could  not  condone  tbe  offence
under  iH-nully  of  dnj*«a. {See  Atimia.) The  adul-
len-aa  wan  excluded  from  the  temple,  and  if  found
there  any  uuc  might  treat  her  aa  be  pleanetl,  pnv
vide<l  he  did  not  kill  or  nnitilate  her. (3t  Roman.
The  general  usages  at  Rome  ajipear  lo  have  l>eeii
ver>'8imilarto(lie  Alheniaii,  Tliol^-x  luliade  Adal-
terils,  pnH-ted  under  .\ugnMlus.  about  ti.c.  17,  enacted
I  them. By  Vlnn  law,  if  a  husband  kept  liih  wife
I  after  an  art  of  adtilt4'ry  wub  knou  n  to  him,  and  let
I  the  adulterer  ofi",  In;  was  guilty  of  the  otTenco  of
,  leni^inium. The  biiNliaiid  or  father  In  whose  pow-
1  er  the  adnItiTes.H  wad.  liwl  Bixty  daya  allowed  for
I  eommeneing proceeilingB agaluat the  wife,  after
I  wliieh  time  any  other  pertou  might  proMecut*'. A
I  woman  eouvieteU  ofaihtllery  wna  mnleted  in  half
'  of  her  dowry  and  the  third  part  of  her  property
{tmnit),  and  banished  {rtlmjaia)  lo  aome  desolate  ial-
'  and,  Hiiuh  oa  Seripliiw,  ftir  inataiine. The  adulterer
,  wasi  mnlot4id  iu  half  bJa  projM:rty,  and  banished  iu
I  like  munner. This  l»w  did  not  inOiet  the  pnniab-
I  mt<ri)t  of  dt^lh  on  eithor  party;  and in  thoMi  in-
.iftaiirea  under  tbe  eniperora  in  whinh  death  woa
indicted,  it  inuAt  be  cotihidere4l  as  an  oxirnordinary
pnniKhmeut)  and  beyond  tbe  provisions  of  thoJii>
liaii  taw.

Thi'.Tiilian  law  permitted  the  father  (Itoth  adoi»-
live  and  natural)  to  kill  the  mliilterer  and  adultcr-
eaa  in  certain  eoaea,  aa  to  which  there  wcni  aevenil
nice  diariiietions  Mtabllsbed  by  the  law.  If  the
father  killed  only  one  of  the  pnrtiea,  be  bnnight
hiinaelf  within  the  iietmllie*  of  Iha  Cornelian  law
d£  ucaritM. The  hnaband  might  kill  iM>rdOus  of  a


ADrLTUS


20


AEDILKa


cel'taiu  flasMltwrrtUM  in  tli^  law,  wtiom  he  cnndlit
ill  th«  uct  of  uiliilu*ry  with  tii»  wifi^;  bnt  he  roiihl
nut  kill  liin  wife.  The  hiiHtlt.-iiul,  by  the  lillli  t^hap-
IcroftJic  Jiiliuii  law.coiihldolatii  fur  twruty  Uonrn
thi'  Mtluhercr  uhmn  hi;  hnil  cani;til  in  the  hcI,  for
the  piiriKPM-  itt'  cnlliiig  in  nitnfwtfs  to  |)ii>vc  the
Adultery.  If  tlie  wife  whs  (livnrcv<t  for  ailiilt«ry.
the  hnislmnU  \v.i}«entitJei)  tnrctnin  part  of  the  dow-
ry. The  hn»l>:ind  might,  if  he  pUiuod,  t.'tke  a  »nm
of  nion^'y  from  the  iulu)t<Tcr  l»y  wny  of  comiwnsa-
tion,  and  det.iiu  bim  till  he  fotiml  hnretit-s  fur  tho
paynu'nt.  If  tli«  nllegv^l  adnltenir  had  !►«■»  nn-
jnttly  dtftsiiutl,  he  iiiij;ht  bring  itn  action  against
th<^  )ln^bilnd;  tind  if  he  gainrd  hi^  raiiM.  he  and
h\n  •trip'lieti  wtm  releaned.  li'  he  failrtl.  Iho  [au
rt^ipiin-d  ihtf  niimticH  toiUdiver  n|t  tliB  iidiiUeriT  lo
tbu  hii!*hunil  hefun^  Lht;  cnurl  ju  do  n  hat  he  |)Ir:i<u<rd
with  hitu.exoepl  that  he  wun  nut  tn  uhu  a  Unifi'  or
daggor.  tii'O  Kciu,  /Ai«  Criuiinatret:At  Jer  Il6/Her.
AdtllttU. Sec  iM-ANH.

AdventDfl.  Th4:  arrival  of  nn  emperor  in  one
of  tlic  provinces,  an  nvent  oftun  ciiuDieuiorated  ou
Kuutaii  bronze  coin«.

AdTersaria.  A  not^-lK>«ik  in  which  the  Romanit
entered  nn-inonuiila  i>f  any  iniimrtaiice,  eMpecmlly
their  aeconnU  of  money  received  and  Mjicnt  (rot/rx
<utTpti  et  rx/nmju)f  which  (licy  nfterwnnls trausftf rrcd
to  a  Icilger. S«e  Acta,

AdTersariuk. riee  Actok.

AdTOCatOB.  At  Hume,  under  theKepnblic,  n
conipelciit  friend  who  guve  his  advice  in  a  btw^nic
and  i-iinie  into  cunrt  in  person,  not  tu  Npenk  (the
/uitiaittu  niHiMf  did  tbiit),  bnt  to  Knpport  lbi>  ruiwf
by  h\»  pretH<nce.  Under  the.  Empire  tin*  teini  wan
applied  tu  the  c<iaus<;l  who  pU-.tdvil  in  i:i<ni  t  in  iliu
preHeucv  of  the  parties,  for  duinj;  which  \w  was  al-
luwet),  afti^r  tht^  lime  of  Clandiris,  tn  take  a  fee.
&Te  .UlUCIAL  PROCKDfRE; rATltOXI'e.

AdvocatUB  Fisci.  A  Rimwin  official,  timt  ap-
|Miinl''d  by  Hadrian,  to  litok  aHur  the  interf»t«t  of
the  iutperini  treasury.  Stw  Fl.st'('.«.

AdyQ&ti  (aftvpaTm).  Personu  (snpported  by  the
Atlientau  blate  an  Iwing  unable  to  earn  a  livdi-
houd.  uuiiig  topli\*(i(.-al  uilinnily.  Pi»i»truttieilinjl
iiiirodnced  u  hiw  for  the  Kn|tport  of  thoiH?  petdontf
who  had  be^Mi  nniinieil  in  baitlo.  *Soo  Ly»iaB  imift
roil  ti&fvamv-)

Adytum. See  TKUiLtTJ.

Aea  I  \('il.  A  city  HuppoM-nl  by  the  pooU  to  have
lHH<n  tlie  rapiral  of  King  Aovtcti,  uii  the  ririv  Phiuifl.
in  ColehiH.

Aeacea  (AlaKtia).  A  festival  of  tho  A(^j!lnetan9
in  honor  of  Aeaciia  (q.  v.),  the  detailii  of  whieb  arc
unknown.

Aeftoea.  A  tyrant  of  !^dio»,  d«poiie<l  by  Arlntag'
oraK,  B.C.  Q()0,  ami  ref'tored  by  I  he  PerMianH,  Ut
■Khina  be  had  fled,  in  li.c.  4lM. Hee  HcriHl.  iv.  Ilt^.

A«aoIdea.  A  patronirmic  ti.sctl  ufaiiy  dr«eend-
ant  of  Aeai'OH  ( i).  V. ),  such  ns  I'elvu»,  Tvlaiuon,
PbocnH.  Aebillej)  Iq.  v. ),  Fyrrhntt,  miu  of  AchiUeii,
and  PyrrlniH,  King  of  Kpirnn,  who  claimed  de»ocnt
from  AeliiUeii. See  PYimuL-8.

Ae&cna  (Anutor).  Son  of  Znas  aud  Aogina,  a
dangbirr  of  tho  river-god  A9o|»nH,  born  in  the  isl-
and of  Arginn,  wbieh  ilerived  i(»  name  from  bis
mother.  <  See  AkiJIXA.)  Some  tntdilioiiH  n-lule
that  at  the  birlh  of  Aeaoufi,  Aegiim  wiu  not  yrt
inhabited,  aitd'thut  Zeua  changed  iU>;  unt«  of  tliv


inland  into  men  (Mynnidonen),  over  wlnmi  Aeocns
ruled.  Aeacofi  wan  n-uowncd  in  all  Oroeee  for  hitt
jn&ticc  ami  piety,  and  afier  Ida  death  lK-<-aoi*'  rmo
of  Ibr'  thn>e  jndgejt  in  Ilitdes,  the  other*  being  31i-
nos  and  lihadaaianthni). Hec  HAbi:^.

Aeaea  (.KlaiTj).  (1)  Another  name  for  Circ#  (q.
V.I,  derived  from  (he  name  of  hor  birthidnec,  Ala,
Her  son,  Ti:Iegouu»,  the  repnted  fonnder  of  Tnscn-
lum,  is  called  AeaeuH.  i'i\  A  name  given  to  Cnlyp-
Ho(iI.  v.),  who  woa  »aid  !o  live  in  the  ia**''q' of  Aeae»
burvreen  Italy  and  Sicily.  Q

AeantAa  (Aicii^fia).  A  featirnl  Holemi;'.-*od  at
:^alami5  in  houoar  of  Aiax,  of  which  uo  |mrti(.Mlars
arn  known.

Aeanteum.  A  tttillli'menl  on  the  coast  of  Trona
near  tin*  proniontoi->'  of  Rlio4-teum,  and  fatuonit  for
the  tomb  of  .\iux  and  a  temple  to  hit*  memory.  Th«
blat  no  of  I  he  ben*  waa  curried  awaj'  by  Autouy  aud
restored  by  AngnHlun.

Aeaa.  AriverofKpirnkroiliugintotbcIunianSea.

Aebutia  Lex. i^w  Lex.

Aeculaiium.  A  town  of  the  Hirpioi  tn  Sam-
Rlniu.jii.tt  M>uth  of  Heneveutum.

AedepBUs.  A  town  of  Knboen,  famona  for  i(A
hot  baths  in  nnoiont  at  in  niorleni  times.

Aedea. See  Dnui's;  Tk.mi-i.i  M.

AedesiuB  (AiditriosK  \  Cappa^lociao,  a  IMatti-
nif,  or  more  correctly  an  Eclectic,  philotfopher,  who
lived  in  tbti  foiirtli  century  A.D.,  and  was  the  friend
and  mo«t diMi  ingnished  Mrliolar  of  lambliehns  (<(.  v.).
After  tho  ileath  of  his  uuuttor,  the  M-hool  of  Sy rift
vrns  diKpentod,  and  AedeMint,  fearing  the  real  or
fancied  hostility  of  the  Christian  L-DipororConstAD-
tine  to  philosophy,  look  refngc  in  divination.  An
oracle  in  bexainettT  ver»o  reprc9onte<l  a  pastoral
life  as  bis  only  retn>at:  bnt.  bis  di6ciplc-»«,  |M.Thnpa
calming  bi.s  t'earb  by  n  metaphorical  int<:rpn*lation,
com{>eUed  him  to  rettlime  his  lnAtrnction(>.  lie  Aet-
lled  at  PcrgamoH,  wbeit*  be  nnmberetl  among  hia
pnptls  the  Emperor  Jnlinii.  After  tin?  acces«ina
iif  the  latt^'r  tu  the  iin|M'n»l  pnqile.  he  invited
.\M)eMiuM  to  continiiu  bit*  ntMlrnetiunn,  bnt  lli«  phi-
biMopber,  being  uneipial  to  th»  tohk  through  ugB,
wnt  in  his  stemi  t.'brysanlhes  nod  Kubebius,  hia
disciplet". S^*e  Imn  lilV-  by  Knnapius.

Aedes  Vitloaae  or  Ruluoaae.  Stw  Daumtu
Inkkcicm.

AedicUa.  (1)  In  the
ainuular,  a  single  room.
12)  In  the  pluml,  a  humll
honito.  (^^OnuneraEihriue,
either  attached  or  nnat-
taeliMl  to  u  temple.  (4)  A
nielie  ill  the  Wiillfi  of  tem-
)de8  or  boiiAes  containing
imagea  of  gmU  or  goddena-
ea,  like  that  in  the  wcorn-
panying  illustration  (Over-
iwck,  Uitdvtrkt,  pi.  xrx.
1).

AedUea At  Borne,  two
Hcr*< of magistrates, the
Plelwian  ( nnliUi  jtUhU  or  '
fitebeii ) and the Carntc
(luiltles  CHrt/en). (1| Tho

two  Pi,i:uKtAN  AEUiLKa  were  appointed  o.c.  494
at  the  wime  time  with  the  creation  of  the  tribnne-
sliip  of  thf<  plelH,  iM  Hcrvaiitfi  of  tho  tribune*,
and  at  first  probably  nominated  by  thnm  till  471,


I


AEOILES


:!l


AEUAEOX


I


when,  like  tbeoi  nii«l  umli-r  llioir  prpftiileucy,  they
iM-^iiii  tit  \ie  clc-PIt^il  hy  the  wImpI't  Iiu«1,v  vt'  Iho  pIcliK.
'I'hi-y  took  tttciruaiuo  front  thu  lvm\\\c  (arttf a)  ul'thf
plolii'iftti  gi>ililf!H»  CfiT^,  In  wlilrh  th^-ir  official  ar-

llvvt^M  Wen*  kept.  lir-NiiU-*  llii'  clislinly  nl"  iJip  /»/e-
U»^ta,  auil  iifu-r»anl«  ol'  the  stm^itus  wmWdi,  it  vrna
their  tlut)'  Lt)  iiiiiku  iim'iitit  at  ihu  liitliliii;;  nf  iho
tiilmiifit;  ttt  carry  uiil  tliti  iloall»-*«nitfiiiM»  which
Ihcy  iHtJ-xMl.  l»y  hurling  lh«  LTiinina)  down  ("nun
the  Ti*r|M9iaii  Km-k ;  to  look  itfUT  lh<*  iiii)iorl.ulioti
ol'  corn  ;  to  niitch  thr  tr:inic  iu  Ihc  uKtrkolit;  u.ntl
to  or^aiiizti  iinil  Mi)M>rinte]iil  the  I'lvhriau  aud  Ro-
niAii  ilnmcs.  Likt>  the  trihiiuc!),  tlH>,v  could  uuly  ho
chikfeoii  frotu  tUo  body  of  Ihu  {>l'-h»,  and  won*  uo
batIgH  of  ofUoe,  not  no  much  na  the  foffti  firurlrj-la,
even  after  Ibcy  Wcaiiie  au  authority  iuilf pendent
tif  the  thbnne«.  C^)  The  C'tiKLLE  ArniLC^.  fiom
B.C.  'JtilV,  Tvere  taken  at  first  from  lh<.^  jmtriciau
IxmIv  nioue,  sih>ij  nltvr  fruni  imtviciiiiiA  iiud  ]>lobt*'
ioiia  hy  InriiH,  iind  hutLly  rnnii  either.  ElTti-d
y  rnrly  in  the  Corniliu  'rriliiiLi  nrnlt'r  the  itresiilency
of  A.  vonftuL  they  ueio,  from  t  lit!  liitit,  otticerM  of  IIil>
■Whole  [teople,  though  low  in  rank ;  tUoy  sut  in  tint
«»/Ai  cvruht,  fmin  which  they  took  thrir  nauit-,  and
irure  tut  tnrtigida  the  lo'ja  /•roctrjta.  As  in  rutjk,  ho
in  the  extent  of  their  |iowci-ti.  thr>  ftlood  uhove  the
plelieinn  aeilileA.  heiQK  eiilitleil  to  exeieUo  eit  il
jiiritMlictidti  in  market  humiiH'^!!.  where  the  latter
codltl  only  iui|Hi!«e  a  line.  The  fniietioUH  of  the
two  werw  very  niiu-li  alike,  rornprisiiig:  («)  the
aiiperintenilence  nf  tnuln  in  the  nmrket,  where  they
liad  to  tml  wui}*htM  aud  uH'nMnrejt  and  the  qnality
«>r  pkmIh  ;  to  kM'n  diiwn  (he  jirice  of  provi^ioiiH,
hitth  hy  prohihitive  tneiMnrvs  ejipecinlly  jigiiinut
rv);r'.iliTn  nf  corn,  and  hy  the  ptirchatte  anddiheral
di^lrihulinn  of  fiNid  {mm  aHnonae);  and,  UN  re^iinlNi
tlu)  nmncy  u)»rkct,ti>  proKecntc  ihtMe  wliotr:in«t-
■^I  tliu  lawH  of  imnry:  (L)  the  eiuo  of  tlie
eeia  and  hiiihiinca  within  the  city  uint  the  cjr-
'ciiit  of  u  luile  outside,  hy  cleauning,  piivliig,  and
impmving  the  lilrretft,  or  titirrin};  np  those  n  ho
wt-re  hound  to  do  it;  hy  wetliK  that  Iho  i«l.ii*t
iraOii:  nas  unimped<-d;  by  keeping  in  repair  the
tetitpleift,  public  hnihllngH,  and  works,  niieli  un  ivew-
VT»  and  iU|uednclH,  and  oeeing  that  thexe  latter  aud
lilic  lire apiuiralnH  vvfw in  working  order;  {r)  n

[!|«<Tint.'M»l«'tHe  of  henllh  »nd uiornU,  inelnditij;

htj  IhiLpeetioo  of  hnllis,  rtiveni.»,  and  hrolheN,  iind
Iht.-  putting-down  nf  nil  that  iiidunuerefl  public
order  anil  deroncy,  c.  g.  gaiuen  of  ha/at-d,  brenehet*
of  Briniptitary  laws,  introduction  of  roreif^ii  rellK'
ions,  etc. ;  (rf)  the  exhihiiiou  of  gunifi  (of  whicli
tlict  Rounin  nud  Megaletntian  devolved  on  the  eu<
rule,  the  i'hdieiaii  imi  the  plelH^iari  uedilett),  tlie
miiervihiou  of  fejilivitiet*  ul  Iheyeriiir  Lnlmtif,  and
•t  gnme«  given  hy  private  men.  The  e^oil  mI'  the
gnuies  given  hy  tlieni-wlve*  they  delVjiyeii  partly
ont  of  a  «nin  mtt  apart  by  the  estate,  hut  utterly  in-
»de4]uate  tu  the  large  deiunn(l.<*  of  later  tiuieii;
{»Artly  out  of  the  piiK-'e<Hls  of  Iiiicm  which  were  alwt
»|>t;nt  on  }iuhlic  hnildinuf*.  and  partly  out  of  their
owu  reetources.  Thiin  the  uedilenhip  iMrcanie  an
exiwuMvc  luxury,  and  i\»  eujoyuieiit  leu  and  le«A
KCCCMihle  to  lueu  of  moderate  means.  Ainbitiouft
mt-.n  often  H])ent  inen>dib|e  .^uuih  in  getting  up
ganim  to  win  the  iK-opleS  favour,  with  u  vifW  to
LiKhrrhononrx,  though  the  aeclileHhip  wiut  iiol  noc-
ra«ury  uh  u  Htep]iii>g-Htonc  to  tlie»e.  In  Uicero'x
time  the  legal  age  for  thr  rnride  aodiletihip  wa«
Ihtrly-NTven.  Fnuu  B-i. 3fiO  Iheir  nuinlwr  wob  iiii*
ekaugcd,  till  L'ltesar^  iu  b.C.  44,  added  two  luore,  the


plehriaii  itttfikt  cetrtiU*,  to  whom  alone  the  ittni
uNnonut  aud  ihe  uanugeuieut  uf  thu  Ludi  Cerenlcn
were  intru£t«d.  Under  the  Etitpiro  thti  oQtt'*f  of
aeilile  Iwt  muck  iu  Impuitauee  by  »ome  of  its
functions  being  linutle<l  ovn  to  fteparatc  omecnt,
especially  by  the  tiaii-tferetice  of  iti;.  jnriitilictiuii
aud  its  pontttd  of  gatueb  to  the  praetors;  and  it
fell  into  Huch  contempt  thut  even  Aiigttstiia  had  to
make  a  tt>nun-  of  it,  or  the  trihnue^lnp,  a  roudition
of  eligibility  lo  thu  pnielor>thtp ;  and  sncciHHling
emperorM  uflon  had  lo  fill  it  by  eiuupuUion.  Iu
thu  tliint  ceutur>-  A.b.  it  Heeios  lo  have  diitl  ont  al-
togolht-r,

Aedituui^  Aedit&miu  (in  Gk.  nwKo/ior,  iagopot.
iTroioKupos).  A  jierwjn  in  thsrgv'  of  a  leiuple,  who
attemled  to  il»  getteral  onler.  and  ucl)-d  mm  u  tt|M-cieH
of  HiLcriMtan  or  eicerouc  to  viaitora.  In  many  eiMes
they  woie  womeu. 8i>e  Qell.  kli.  10.

Aecton  ( '.\r/d(i)f  I.  A  daughter  of  I'aiidarenfi,
wile  ot  ZethuK,  king  of  Thebes,  atid  mother  of  Ity-
lu>).  Kuviuufi  uf  Niub«<.  the  ivife  of  her  brother
Aiupliion,  who  had  six  Hnim  niiil  six  daughterH.  idie
iVMolved  lo  kill  the  eldettt  of  Nird»/i'a  sous,  hut  by
mistaku  hiew  her  own  koti  Itylus.  Zerm  relieved
hnr  grief  hy  cbaugiiig  b«>r  into  »  night  iugnlo,  wfaoae
uudiuichuly  luiieA  are  reprcHCuteil  as  Aedou'ii  Uni-
eutntioUM  ft>r  her  child.

Aedon  (ar]ia>v).  Ouu  of  the  tiamea  of  the  night-
ingale, niMt  known  an  ^tiXo^rjXo  aud  wpoKftj:  Iti
Lutiii,  tutrtHM. For  oue  legend,  aee  above,

Aedol  or  Haedui  A  |Kiwerful  ]teople  of  GnnI,
living  lH-tw(M*n  the  Liger  (  Loire)  and  the  Arar
CSnAiif ),  and  the  ttrsi  Oallic  tril»e  to  form  nu  alli-
ance with  the  RoniaiiK,  Their  principid  town  wna
Bil>nict6  I Autnuj. 6c«  Ciew.  D.  iJ.  i.  'M  ff.

AMtea  ( A>^n/r  )■  King  of  Colchis  aud  father
of  MedciL  Kur  the  Iogeud«  connected  with  liia
name,  ho«  Ak^yktx's;  ABooNAt'TAi:;  lAtWN ;  Mk-
i>ka:  Pumxi's.

Aeetia,  Aeetims,  Aetitui4,  Patronymics  op-
plieil  to  ilcdea  (q.  v.),  &8  being  the  dnnghtcr  of
Aectea.

Aegae  (Ai'-yot')-  U)  A  town  In  Acluiea,  with
u  I'elt-hrated  temple  of  Posciduu.  originully  una
<it'  Ihe  iwi'lvti  Aelmean  towtiA*.  but  itH  itihahi-
tiiriltt  finhMei^ucutly  reino\ed  to  Aegini.  (3)  A  town
iu  Kmnthiu.  iu  Slacedunin,  the  ancient  capital  of
Macedonia  nud  the  burtal-pluce  of  the  Maceilonian
kings.  It  woB  alifto  culled  Kde>isa.  (3)  A  town  iu
Enboea.  with  a  celebrated  temple  of  I'useidon.  who
was  hence  cnlleil  Aegueus.  (4)  AU»  Akoakab,
uiic  of  the  Iwelve  cities  of  Aeolis  in  Asia  Minor,
north  of  .Sniynia,  mi  tho  river  nylb»,  {ti)  A  ttea^
]H]rt.  town  urt^'ilici:!.

Aegaea. An  adjeelive  applied  to  Aphrodite  a«j
Wing  wiiiKhiinwd  iu  the  Ai-gi-tin  Siin,

Aegaeon  (AtyaiufV  The  hdu  uf  rrainiA(HcAven)
by  <iaeaiKarth).  Aegiu*on  luul  Uta  bvotherA  0,rc»  or
(tyge^aud  C'oMUft  Bl«  known  under  the  nuiue  uf  ihe
rranidiie,  and  are  dcncliUid  as  lui^re  iuon<4tcm  with
11N>  urruft  and  r?(t  heutht.  Mont  whter»  mention  tho
thinl  I'rairid  under  Ihe  innne  of  Itrinn'OH  inHicud  of
Afgneou.  which  is  explained  by  Huui*'r(//.  i.  40:t),
who  any*  that  men  culled  hiui  Aegiieon,  hut  tho
g<HlH  Driii:vus.  Acetuding  to  the  nitmt  ancient  ini-
ditiou,  Aegiicou  and  hiit  hn>1hers  vom]nervd  the
TitaiiH  whi-n  they  made  war  upon  the  god)t,  and  se-
cured Ihe  victory  lo  Zeus,  who  thrust  Ihe  Tllnus
into  Tartarus,  aud  placed  Aegueou  aud  his  hruth-


AEGAEU'U  HAKE


AEGrNA


[to  ijnwnl  llii'iM.  OtliiT  it'(i<'iuls  r*'|tr>e»ent
Mill  aw  mil)  tiftbn  giiintH  wlin  nttiicked  Otyiii-
pim;  mill  iuiiii,v  writ<*ni  n>prLttL'iit  liitii  lui  n  innriiio
l^tHl  iiviug  hi  tlie  Acgncnti  Suu.  Sev  Hi'siod,  ThfA).
14U.  &W,  617,  etu.;  ApoUoa.  i.  i.  1 ;  Hum.  //.  i.  Vm
full.

Aegaenm  Mare.  Tlur  purt  of  tlio  Mvditcrraiman
Sou  iiiivv  e:illrtl  thr  A  re  h  ipo  I  ngo.  It  wq5  bomulcd
on  tlif  north  by  Tlirori*  mid  Miiccdniiia.  (in  llu<
wwt  hy  (inwco,  mid  (Hi  i\w  cattt  Uy  Asm  Minor.
It  contaiiiH  in  itd  ttoiUheni  i>nii  two  f;ron)iH  nf  iitl-
tmds  — tlio  Cyclndrn,  «hirh  w<>r() 'M>|innitv(1  fnmi
tbi'  roiidfjt  of  Attifn  iind  IVloponiiWins  by  i\\c  Myr-
tomi  84.-U,  und  thr  S|>onid4-H.  lying  ofTtlif  ooitHti*  of
Cnria  rtnd  Imiin.  Tlu'  imrl  of  the  Ai'):nr(iii  nhii-b
witMlicd  i\w  HiHiriMl4'«  was  called  tlit'  Iviiriiiii  Si'n.
fntiii  Ibo  isliniil  lonriit,  uiir  nf  Iho  3iH>niileiH.

Aegaleut  i  Aiy<iX*iuf ).  A  tunuiiinin  iu  Attini  op>
|)4>»iu-  SilainiH.  friMii  ^vbicb  Xerxcn  now  tbc  ilefcut
of  Iiis  tifpt.  «.i.  4fH>. C'f.  ikrod.  viii.  W.

Aogiite*  or  Aeguaae  <  al  AiyutTacrai  |.  *'Gont
IMandii."  Tilt'  iniint'  itpplivil  W  tlin>p  islnnds  off
Ibo  wrat  roiiftt  of  Sicily,  boiwi-rii  Dn>|)nniiQi  and
Lilybuoiiui,  nrnr  wliich  llic  Koiiiiius  jjaiiipil  n  nnv^l
vidor)-  over  llm  Ciinliii4;ipianN.  and  tlitiH  bn>nglit
Ihc  First  Piiidfl  W'ur  In  an  riul,  B.r,  241.  Tbf
UlnndH  wcrv  ArftntM  ur  Capmria,  PburUantU,  aud
II)«n».

Agendlcum.  Tbc  nioiloni  Sriis;  n  totrii  nf  the
St'noui-M,  ill  liidli:i  LngdntitMiNiK.

AegBBta. S<'<-  Sku»'>ta.

Aagostua. ^-i  Ai  xsTTfi.

Aogsns  I'Aiyfi'vi.  riic  >uii  of  Patidtou,  kinfi  uf
AUir'n's.  and  fHtbii*  ol'  T)o-si>iui,  whom  be  begot  by
Actbm  ai  Tiik-jch.  Tbeft'im  »i1«>rnanU  euiw  to
Albi-nc  and  a<«toiv«l  Aokcu!^  to  Ibo  tbruoe,  of  nbicb
hr  lintl  bi"f  u  drprivt'd  by  bin  Imttbt-r  Pslla^  Hav-
ing i»biin  Andro(;i*o(*^w«ii  of  Miiii'(*(i|.%'.*,  \tv  wosoori-
qni<n?il  by  lb»l  kin):  iimaI  (.Hmi)>fIKil  to  send  M-vt?n
yontliA  »tid  wvcti  niutdt'U»  lu  Cn-tc  onre  lu  niuv
jmm  ■«  vicitutK  to  ibf  Mtuoimtr.  Wlicn  Tbt^M:■us
•el  out  to  fiTT  hi$  eoiiiiirj  fixmi  ibi«  cruel  tax,  bi>
■m^cU  iu  ctt«-  "f  sitcccHB  t«>  I'Xebnngu  the  bUck
Mil  uf  lits  «bt)<  for  II  whtt4-  ont^;  bnt  forgvttioj:  to
do  M>,  Ar^<rUH  Ntw  tbr  blo^'k  Mitl  on  tbi^  rvtnmtDX
vt:4fivl.  tup^HMiHl  hl»  6on  lo9t,  and  thlTTr  biniwlf
intv  tbe  BFA.  M'birb  i?  tbiis  »iii»iH>»r«l  to  bave  Iimtu
DABMil  At^tnit  aftrr  liini.  Hv  m  said  to  bate  iu-
tn^BOrd  tbf  wnrsbip  of  ApbriMlitd  iutu  AUmsm^
'wbrtv  be  biniwlf  «iu(  iMuiuanrd
wNb  ft  duiiw.  !7i«c>  UCDKA ;  Tux^
u;t-»:  MixoTACB.

AeeUUa  (AomQUmX  0>  Tbe
ifift'  "f  tH'tiH^'^,  Iw  wbtTin  ^1*  is
»3ii-i  ■••ffu  gtiMvly  atifaitb-

tnl  ■  - ~  abvocw  iu  tlur  Ttw

jati  N>  Af .  1  S«  I>KiMriic»-  \  y-X)
.Ab  uIaimI  in  Ib^  .\«|e**a  brlnrra
CytlMcm  mm!  Vvttm.  t.33  Tbc  rarlt-
««|  ■>!■•  far  Um  eaastiy  abuvt*  ibo
SWtll  iban  uf  tbe  Pk4o|KMiacMUh.

A«iflknB(Ai)'«aX«kf  I. TW  van

^SAtm*m^\y  Auii>liiibra.«laii$b-
UrarP)rowui,»nd  a  iii«-tBUr  afllM
•X|pf>tftli«tt  M  1>5  III*  EptftMii
a^iiwt  'WbeA.  VU  va*  the  w«W
Imkr  slaia  Id  iJU>>  war,  aa  M»  <^
thar  «M  Ibr  only  «••  Ibat  aarYiwd
Ihafimiiiaoaleat.  Saabvooaa.


AegYdea.  A  imtroiiyiuio  applieO  to  Tbcacns,  Hon
of  Atfgyiih.

Aegfla  (ra  Ar7(Xn).  A  town  in  Lnconia.  wbero
Dcniflor  \\nA  n  tc-niplo.  Arintorucuea,  tbu  Me&s«u-
ian  leader,  cndeiivoiinxl  on  one  occnaion  to  i>ei£e
a  parly  of  Ijtcttnian  womoii  n  Iio  were  cflfhnliuj;
hoM-  llio  rill's  of  Ibtt  goddt-wt.  Tbv  aib'uipt  fiiilpd,
ttirouKb  The  couragrrOiiH  n->»ti»i(Atico  of  tho  woinf^u,
and  Ari^tomencfl  himitelf  nas  takun  priMonor.  H»
was  r<-lonw<l,  however,  the  same  uight,  by  Arch)-
dunirn,  the  prie«t««s  of  L>eiuetfi-,  nbo  bad  bvforu
iliJN  eberisbcd  ait  affection  for  him.

AegUla  (AiytXi'a>  (1)  Ati  inland  between  Crete
onil  Cytlieru.  (:i)  An  island  west  of  Euboea,  uppo-
Kite  Anifft,

AegimiiiB  {Slylfuos).  A  king  of  the  IViriana,
reigning  in  ThunMaly,  near  th<-  ran^tr  of  Piudaa.
Ik-  aido<l  HeracleK,  uccordiuf;  to  thu  Doric  legend,
iu  litN  coutcHt  with  tbc  Lnplthuc,  and  rt^ceived
as  a  rewanl  the  territory  frimj  which  they  were
driven.  Ae(;iiDius  lit  a  coiupicuntiK  name  anioDg^
tbe  fonndors  of  tbe  lioric  line,  and  mention  is
made  by  the  ancient  writers  of  an  epie  poem,  en-
titles! Aiyi'^ior.  wbieb  is  ascribed  by  some  to  Hr»iod^
by  othcTB  lo  Ce<7n)ps  the  Mileitian.  Tlie  posterity
of  Aegiinins  fomieil  part  of  the  expedition  aj^iist
tbe  Peloponnesns.  and  tbe  rkirir  inHlitntions  of
Aej^iatiiiH  an*  spoken  of  by  Pindar  as  formiiij:  the
rnle  or  nimlpl  of  gtirrninicnt  for  the  Doric  race.
(Cf.  Miiller,  Dotier,  vol.  ii.  p.  12.)

AesiliaiA*7»(i).  (1)A  dau)>hterorthoriv#T  Aflo-
pn»,  ctrrietl  away  by  Zt'ns  nnder  tbc  form  of  an
eagle,  fniut  PbliiiH  to  ibi^  ihlaud  uf  Ounoni'.  She
piVM  her  naiiit*  lo  the  inland.  (2)  An  iKland  in  the
Sinufl  ^aroDiciiK.  nrar  thA  coa.>t  of  Argidia.  Th«
rarliejit  aecouuit)  ^iieti  Ity  the  (ireekJ  make  it
to  liave  b«-en  ori^inatly  uninhabited,  and  to  bavu
Ihh>u  called,  while  in  Ihii*  Ktate,  by  tbc  naiuc  of
Oi'iion^ :  for  kucIi  is  evidt-nlly  ibe  ojeaniug  of  ibo
fable,  wbicU  hlaivN  that  Ztriis,  iu  order  lo  gratify
.VeHcu.%  «  ho  %THh  alone  tlicre.  cbaui;ed  a  »warm  of
atit«  into  uien.  and  tbns  |M*opletl  tt>e  Inland  iPua*
sail.  ii.  ^,  aud  ApuIltM].  iii.  \.i\  7).  U  attrrwards
took  tbe  aaiue  of  Ae^ina,  from  tlw  riaughl«*r  uf
ttK'  Asopn-S  Bat,  whoever  may  have  U-rn  the
earlieitt  setllere  on  tbe  tulaml,  it  \n  evideul  that
ita  slotiy  and  tuipHMlnclivv  votl  lanst  have  driven
tlteo)  at  an  early  |>ertod  lo  engimo  in  luaritiaw
MiSain».  Heure  tbcv  arc  aatd  to  bave  lieru  ihr  firat
abucuiiwdnioiiey  fur  tbe  purpose  of  commetve,  and


I

I


AEGINA

unnA  rppiUr  meainre*,  a  trtiditinn  nhicb,  thongh
l^uo  iltiiibt  untrue,  still  ptmit*  very  clearly  ttt  Ibuic
parly  cnnitni-rcial  tinl>it«.  (Sec  NrMl&MAl'K'i*.)  It
llf^  tDoTv  limn  iirobalile  ilitil  tlu'ir  cotuiiK'iT'ial  rolu-
tiotis  ciuisitl  tin;  ]»ii>|»le  of  Arsiiia  to  be  inrn-awxl
by  colon ien  from  aliripjid,  dikI  St^»lH>^'Xl^ry^Mly  iiumi-
tioittt  Crftaits  »iiioii|!;  the  f«n-i};n  intmlnUniM  wlio
bail  aelLlfO  Diert'.  Aft«r  Die  n-tiini  of  t\w  Hi^ra-
clidutf,  tUU  tHlaud  received  a  DoriuD  colouy  from
Kpiilauma  (I'aiiHau.  ii.  '£)),  and  titim  tliis  period
the  Dorians  j^nulunlly  gained  tlie  nsceudeucy  lit
it,  nntil  nt  last  it  bcciime  entirely  Iiurio.  both  In
Sauguagf  and  form  of  governuient.  Aexiua,  for  a
time,  waM  tbi:  luaritJute  rirnl  of  Athens,  and  the
competitioD  eveutuully  t«nuiuated  in  opeti  hoHliti-

*ttes  iu  whieb  th«  Athenians  were  only  nblt*  to  ob-
tnin  oilvuMlugfHi  by  I  he  nid  of  the  CnriniliianN.  and
by  ni»<»iiH  nf  interline  divisiuiiK  ainon;;  their  nppo-
tieiiLR  (  Hetnd.  viil  4(i,  and  v.  ^1).  Wbi^ii  Darinti
Sfht  deimties  into  (InHfcv  U*  deinaiid  cuiih  and
tralcr,  Ihc  pe«)ple  of  Ae^hia, partly  from  hatred  tow-
Aitlji  the  AthoninnK,  ntid  {tartly  fmni  a  wiAh  Lo  pro-
^H  tKct  tbi-ir  nxtt'ttfttve  cummi^riv  uUniK  the  ciia»l»  of
^H  the  I'erHJAh  iiionan^'liy,  gavt;  tbt-M-  tokenn  of  ntib-
^M  miHioa  I  Iien>d.  \i.  4D }.  YriT  lhi»  condnet  ihey
^P  were  pnniMhnl  by  the  Siuinnns.  In  the  war  witli
^^  Xmca,  ihfrefore,  they  tiidi^l  with  rbpir  ronntry-
men,  uid  ncted  6o  bruve  n  port  in  the  battle  of


. it.


I  A£Glli

romuaut  of  auliquity  vrbich  th)«  iMland  can  boa^t
of  nt  the  pri-tient  day  1»  the  Temple  of  Fallan
Athcu^.  situated  on  a  oionnt  of  the  sauie  name,
abnnt  four  houm' distance  fr«m  tb«  port,  nod  vrhich
U  KUp|>oMid  to  Im-  oiip  <if  tliM  mo«t  anririit  triu-
ple*  in  (.Jreece.  uod  one  of  I  be  oldml  niwinmen*  of
till'  OoriL-  Miyl«  of  architecinre. See  Akginetam^

Aeginetou  Soolptures.  The  marble  petUments
of  the  tA'uiple  of  Athen*^  at  Ae^inn  {*{.  V  >,  di^r'^ov-
ereil  iu  1^11,  reBt<>rwl  by  ThorwaldiH^u,  and  pre-
servnl  in  the  Glyptothelc  at  Munich.  They  are
eHficcinlly  valuable  as  IbrowiuK  li(;ht  fut  the
(■on<lition  of  Urmk  art  in  k.c.  *t*0.  See  SfCi.P-
Ti-BA.

AeeiDetanim  Periae  (Aiyn^Tw*-  ioprri).  A  fetuit
inh'tiKniritt'  Poiwidon,  wbieli  Ijutlwd  tiixteen  i\nyttf
diirhi^  which  time  every  family  took  its  meals
alune  without  Ihe  uttendiince  of  the  »lavi».  Jt«
origin  is  doecribetl  by  Plutarch  (Qnuur.  dVuer,
44  >.

Aegii&cbas  (frnin  alyit  and  ?](&>)■  The  "at>gls-
beahT."  tin  epithet  ap])Hed  to  Zuuit  (i|.  v.).  Soe>
Aegis.

Aeglpan  lAiyiwav).  A  poetical  appcUntlou  of
Pan  (ij.  v.),  as  Uiiug  the  guardiau  of  goatH.


StlamlH  as  to  be  able  lo  ooiitetil  the  prize  of  vntonr
*'>Ui  ilif  Athenian^  theui»elvi>(t,  aud  lo  hear  il  off,
*»  Well  by  (he  utiivepwtl  '•ulVraK*"'  "f  *!"*  et»iifeii-
••alB  Cihii'IiH  1,  Herod,  viii.  yet)  iw  by  the  dei-lwration
^  tbr*  Pyihian  onu-le,  AHor  (h«  terniiii«liim  of
**■  PiT»t*n  war,  however,  the  BtreuHtli  of  AlUi-ns
iff/tijil  lui,  ;.ivitt  f..r  them.  Thfir  th-ft  ..f  w-virnty
I  Wa*  aniiihilal<>d  in  a  ttea<Ut(bt  by  Pericles,  and
,  .  "y  of  tlie  inbibitauitt  wer*  driveu  fnun  Ihe  inl-
""••  while  the rcmaiuiler  werv n-dueed to  the


Aegiplanctna  Moub. A  mountain  iu  Megarn.

Aegfra  {Aiytlftu\.  A  city  of  Acb&eu  near  the
Corinthian  Oulf  (tud  uorthueiil  of  PelUni.  t^-t^
Polyb.  iv.  57.

Aegis  iaiyity  The  Htnrm-eloiid  and  tbiinder-
ch>nd  of  Zoas,  imn^fined  in  Homer  nn  u  vbield
forged  by  llepbaestuht,  bhizint;  brightly  and  fi-inged
with  tOMH-lnof  gold.aiiddiNplavingiuitiici'utrc  the
aTCc-iuKptring  OorKoii'K  heAd. When  Zi-uh  shakes


^^"'^'tion  uf  tributuiien. The  fiigitivtu  iti'itle«l  ut  I  the  neKla,  it  thundero  and  lighlcuN,  and  luirror  aud

'"j'lVa  iiiCyiiurJH,  under  tlm  prote<:tii>u  of  Si»ttrta,  '  penlitinu  full  u|ion  ihouo  against  whom  it  U  liftwl.

""'  ^»  wa»  not  nntil  nfti-r  rlnr  Imttle  r.f  Aegnii-Pot- It  in  borne  not  only  by  Zeu»  "the  aegis- Wnrer."'

"*"'*•  and  the  fall  of  Athens,  that they  wen*  able  '  bnt  by  his  daughter  Atben^,  and  oceaaionally  by

<•  rij^^l,,  |,[MH*s«iou  id*  thvir  unlive  Inland  (,Xen. A|miI1o. AsthoKanie  woni  nieaivn  agoat-MkJii.it  n'aa

"'- fif.  ti.  9,  It). They  never  attaiiiwl,  however, explained  in  later  tiniea  a»  the  «kin  of  the  goat

, '*J'*?irfi*nDerpntsiH'rily. The  «it nation  of  Aegiua Amaltbeu  (<i.v.>,  which  had  Buckled  Zen»  in  hi»  in-

' '•*  it  •iibsequenlly  ft  pri?.o  fur  eneh  wurewdjug fancy. At  the  bi4Miirj;of  ilmonude.  hedrew  it  over

|,- I'l-^ror,  until  at  last  it  totally  diMi|)[H>Hred  from  .  his  ihuuder-Mhield  in  tfiu  r-on(«'«t  with  ihi'  fiiania,

[j/* **"y. Iu  uioilcrn  limes  the  island  nearly  retains  land  t'aNtene<l  on  it  tbe  finrgon'K  head. When  Ihe

L  ,.  ^^'*<^ieut  name,  being  called  Acgino  or,  with  a  i  aegis  became  a  standing  attribute  of  Atbrut^,  it  was

I ..^^'■"Tniplion,  EngiK.aiiil  in  often  visited  by  trav-  j  reprcaentcd  a«  a  skin  witlier  «baggy  or  ncaly,  with

\  . ^>  ht'ittg  bcanlifni.  fertile,  and  well  cultivated.  ^  a  fringe  of  soak««  and  the  (lurgou's  luiod  in  the

[ "  ^*T  back  a»  the  time  of  Pansanias,  the  unriout middle,  and  cither  serving  the  godiless  as  a  breast-

I  "  ?*■ wonld  upjH'ar  to  have  Iteeii  in  niius. That plate,  or  hanging  behind  to  screen  the  back  ami

^^r  aiake«  mention  of  Hoiim  ti-mplefi  that  were shoulders,  or  fastened  like a  shield  ou the  lefl

*^»'diii-,  m,d  uf  the  large  theatre  built  after  the arm.

°^'cl  of  that  iu  KpiUuuriM. The  must  lomarkablu  J Though  the  opgis  properly  belongs  to  Zenn,  it  U


AEGISTHUS

wMotii  foutnl  in  wnrk-t  iif  nrl  »8  liU  nttriliate. A
cutico  ciigrarvil  b^  Nixuti.  hiiwcv<!i.  iif  wliicli  n  cm


Zeus  with  Uio  Ari^ft {Vntfo  r  Cameo.)

Is  liere  girou,  sUonn  liim  vciili  tbo  uegiit  au  his  li-lt
anil.

Tlie  Komaii  t?ui]HM*ont  iiUn  a>tai)ui(.-il  tttu  :iegiH,  tii-
tcudiug  tbcrcb}'  Cu  uxbibil  thi;m(iclvi.':t  lu  tlio  cbur-
acter  of  lui'itcr.

AeglsUiUB  iXiytvSos).  Son  orThyestH«iuul  bin
itftiigljtcr  Telupia.  At  bisbirlh  be  waH('Xp«>s<'d  by
liiHiiiiitliiT,iiinil»mii>;litiipV)y»ItPj>ln'nl«.  His  uncle,
AinMLt,  biiHbiiiiil  to  IV'li)i>ia,  tuiiiMl  bini  »iu]  brongbt
liitn  lu  My^MiHc,  Ibiiikiiiji  bini  to  bo  bin  own  eon  ;
but  Ai^^istliiir^  antl  bis  real  fatlicr  ccnitnvi'd  to  kill
liitii  ami  wizo  tbe  wvtreijjuty  of  thv  State.  Tbis
|iiifiiti«ti  Ai'^iMibiiH  Uwt  agiiiii  by  Iiis  rniixin  A);')'
inotiinitii'N  n'tiii-ti  Trfini  exile;  but  iliuinj;  tliiil
bc^'H  nbhent-'u  at  Triiy  AeKi»tbitA  M-^liiced  bin  wife,
Clytiit'iiuieAtm,  «ud  «itli  bur  belpslew  liini  Irpacb-
vitiiisly  ou  bib  ivtiini.  lu  tbo  vi);btb  year  Mfler
tblH  Uwcd  OivMle^  avcn^etl  biH  fitllicr'tt  di'alb  by
slayiug  At-KltlbtlH.  Sco  AiiAME&IStiN  ;  ATREIt»;
Cl.\TAKMXIiSTRA  ; OrtE-'HT..'* ; l'EI,OIMU.\E.

Aegium  {Alyiof).  One  nf  tbo  twulvn  towiu  of
Avbueji  It),  v.).

Ae£l6  (AcyXT)).  Ono  of  (be  Ilt>KiM*ridcA  (q.  v.),
uud  n  imme  givvii  to  M^veml  of  ibc  nyiupbs.

Aeglea.  A Sntnian  nrvHtlor  nbu  bnd  b(«u  boru
dumb.  Sooini;  M>iiie  uidnwfiil  ntca»tun'H  |iurBU«d
in  u  cunt«kl,  wbtrh  woultldrjirive  bitn  uf  (be*  \nTzv,
bis  iudl}{nali(jti  )£»v»  him  on  a  Hudtlon  the  puwi-n
of  utl«ruiii'r_\  wUii-b  bud  tiitbertu  bL*cu  (leuiinl  biui,
wid  fnnu  tbis  lime  be  »[iuk.e  vtitb  ruac.  6ce  Aul.
Cell.  V.  II.

Aegletas  (AiyXi7T?}t).  A  Bumanio  «f  Apnllo  as
tbir  K'^l  <>'  ''<*y  i^'xl  *'(  tl>''  li^lilniuf;,  dt>rivwl  fn>m
uiyAi/.  "  a|di'iidiiur."  Bw  AmLLO.

Aegobolliun  (tUyofjoXior).  A  rtTcmouy  nf  ])iiri-
fioalion  in  wbicb  tiie  cnndiilatu  wna  pbicwl  in  a
(lit  niid  c«>v(!rvd  nitb  ]M-rf<irttlMl  )H>ardi!i,  ovtT  \rbicb
A  ffiiat  nnx  rtlnin.  Tbe  blniKl  tlnwiii^  down  into
tlin  (tit  htiiined  ilsoconpAiit.  If  a  bnll  uas  mx^d,
tbt)  rite  vas  caJlt»)  taurattutiKin  ;  and  if  a  run,  criubo'

AegObfilUfl  ( Al-yodiiXof  I.  A  titt«  (*i  von  to  Baccbnn
at  Piilniae  in  Uiivutia,  bocaiiM-  bt-  \\a\\  biibHtiliiTi-d
«  ^Bt  {at^)  iu  {ilaco  of  A  yuuUi,  whttni  it  bad  fur-


morly  btt-n  Ibp  custom  in  surnfice  thero  {Panian.
ix.  dt. i^-i-  AKGiiIIOLU'M.

AegosAgae.  A  Gallic  tribf  wbo  nerved  lu  tbo
unii>  ul  AKalus  {<\.  v.), Smi  Pnlyb.  v.  77  fwll.

AegOB-PotJImoB  i>r  AegOB'Pot&mi  (.Viyur  Ilo-
m^f).  A  »maU  xxsex  in  tlic  Tltmciun  Cbore<v
m^Niu,  mi  wbi<:))  inut  a  tuwn  uf  tlm  Knnin  nanii'.
II»n<  tbi>  Albfuintifi  uvn^  tolally  dffcattHl  by  tlie
&|>»rlan  udmirul  Lystumlcr  in  B.c.  405,  in-uctically
lerminutiu]^  IIk*  PclujMmiM.'hian  Wat  (q.  v.i,  Bud
lcadui}{  lu  ibc  cBpturc  of  AlbunH.

Aee:uBae- Wot"  Ak(;ate«.
Aeeyptium  Mare. That  {inrt  of  tbe  Mediterra-
nean wbii'b  wusbeo  tbe  coast  of  E^'pt.

AeeyptUB.  A  c-ounti-y  in  tbe  tionheastern  part
of  Africa;  tbi.*  modtim  Kgypt.  Tbv  nniuv,  in  (tn-ck
ktyvnrui,  is  iM^rUajMa  corni|>tiou  uf  J/ii^ry'/tiA  {t'ily
of  Tiabi,  i.  o.  MempbiK.  Oibcrs  explniu  it  uitb
lau  jtnibabiliiy  ntt  formed  from  tbe  SnuKkrit  //x/i,
"r«  (;u:ird"^=ilj?((jtfo,  •* jtnardcd  ulxMit."  In  Cop-
tie.  riH  ill  bi•'^l}:]y]dl^,  it  in  railed  AVmi  (  Itlark
Latiil)  from  tbe  roloiirof  tbf  Miil.  The  Jews  tttybil
it  Aliuor,  "forriiled,"  or  in  Ibe  dita),tn  dt*nol»*  l>otb
Upjier  anit  Lower  K;;ypt,  .Vu.wiw.  This  »«me  i*
pretterved  in  tliu  mtnleru  Arabic  Misr — a  wurd  ap-
plied by  tlio  Arabs  both  to  tbe  cuuutry  aiid  to  i[«
ca]iiral.  Cairo.

At'eyprus  WBB  bonnded  on  the  north  by  tbe
Mfdilc-tranean ;  on  tbe  ea»it  by  PalfHtine,  ArabiA
retnteo,  and  the  Red  Sea  ;  »n  tbe  south  by  Aetbio-
pi«,tho  divininn  twlween  the  two  cuiiiitricti  l>eing
at  the  Firht  or  Ijitle  Cataract  of  the  Nile,  close  tu
Sycii^;  and  on  tbe  west  Uy  the  Great  Libyan  Des-
ert. Kroni  9yen/  the  Nile  rtnw»  dne  north  for
alioiit  TiOO  miles,  rlirou^rb  d  valley  wlioae  average
breadlb  in  about  Aeveu  iiiilefi,  to  a  point  some  few
inih'A  bvbtiv  !klt'iiiphii>.  Ilcre  Ibe  ri ver  d i v itlt*A  into
braiirbeM  (m-Veii  in  aurienl  liuie;*,  bnt  iiom-  only
t\«o),  u  hicli  Ibtw  tb^ul)^]l  n  biw  allnvial  land,
cnllL-d.  from  iIa  ».ba|H>.  thit  IKilra,  inrn  tlie  Mediler-
raiieun.  The  wholi:  ili^itrict  thu.t  di-ncrilM'i)  in  peri-
udic-ally  laid  under  nater  by  the  oveilluwing  of
tbe  Nile  from  April  t<)  Oet«U*r.  Tbe  rivet,  in  i*nl»-
flidiuK,  leavi'H  Wbind  a  rich  depoAJt  of  line  mnd,
wbieb  fomiB  the  Miil  of  Egypt.  All  beyond  the
reaeb  of  the  iinindiitlon  !»  rock  or  «and.  llenec
Egypt  was  called  the  "Oift  of  tlm  Nile."  The
outlying  portitmit  of  aneicnt  Kgypt  conKisietl  of
tfani-cnllivable  valleys  (called  oaees),  tn  tliemidsli
of  the  Wenteni  or  Libyan  I>eMM*U

ErriNouirtr  am>  Civiuzatiox — At  (be  earliest
peritHi  iif  wbieb  any  recnni  bn.it  been  pn-wrved,
Eftyitt  iHMwwft.sed  a  Very  liigb  dej;n?e  of  civilization,
ami  one  which  prfnippt.ws  numy  ewitnrirs  of  de-
velopuieuT.  It  WHS  th»  bume,  tuo,  of  n  ver^-  large
pnpiilaliim,  nineo  during  the  Fonrtb  Dynin^iy
{ftltoui  :tli4i*t  n.r;.)  uome  HKt.OOU  men  wrre  cmpIoyiMl
in  const  ruftitij;  thetireat  Pyruuiid.  At  the  ttniciif
Nero  (a.i>.  54.1  1bt<  KgyptiauH  nnnibervd  7,fHll*.o<Nt;
and  tbe  population  is  i^Htimated  to  bax'e  bwu  not
mneh  less  nuder  tbe  Phiiraohet.  al  wliirb  time  tbe
ton-iiH  nnnilM>n'tl  1>4H)  w.  agnin^^t  3fMK>  nncter  ibe
Ptiiletiiies  Th*»  popnlatirm  of nuxb'm  Egypt  Proper
in  li*".;  n:i»  fi.-iiH,iKKi.  The  ancient  EKyptiaiiH  np-
iwartubavti  lH>«Miiifniix>Nltiri;;iii,]turtl>  Asiatic  and
partly  Ni){ritii%  «*n{M-rimpoM^d  upon  im  aboriginal
iype.cop]H'r-colunred,\>  iib  liitii  ch^'ck-bonej*.  largo
ti|fM,  tliin  tegn.  and  btrit*-  fwt.  Uolli  tbcM-  tyiws
ap)>ear  upon  tbe  mouuiuunts. ll  in  nut  true,  aa


*'*WI  \ty  the  Orwk  wnt«r8,  tliut  a  cjLsUi  systuiu

A«  T»  liic  kiiowleilge  Mid  cnUnre  of  tlie  anoieut

'^)'t>ti4ii«,  it  ii  i«ii  flic  lent  lu  niftiitioii  cflrUiii  iiitur-

'^''**K  iifwl  ni^tiiiiuntit  facK An  early  an  JiWO  n.c,

^^  I'ymniiVUiiiNlerH  iHj]t)M.'SM;i1  a  tlfliiiite  nyHtoiii

"'  ''Uh.nnloffy,  a deciiiuil KysU-iii nf  iiiimlier)*,  a

''"^^"leilgr  of  grt>Krai»liicrtl  i»ci«rjc(s  uf  gooinelry,

"'  *^tniuuiny,  iiinl proljalily  of  oLt'Uii»lry,  aoat-

*""y, ^„j  iu(.|]i(-jnp. Liiiratiiro  dates  (iqually  far

*''**i  Mnco  of  thift  i>erioil  lYagmi'iilsuf  tliu  »o-cuUimI

*i *"»<*ttc lI<>ok» Luvo  come  down to  us; while

*'''«N»j(a  (q.  V.)  b)ni8t?lf  WM  iiiiiiilmrvil  niiiong  tbo

'•"■uiinj  of  Egypt. ArcLitocturf  aixl  actilptiiro  had

""••■iweil  ttu  extrnnnlitiary  diivelniHiiciil,  a«  sluurn

"X  *-lie  n>niarkit1*ly  fim'  tt})e«iinpii«  of  inuHoury  «lill

e«i»tiu([^  l,y  [(,»,  mliiiirnlily  scieiilific  const  met  ion

,^^'«  iciniiltw,  tUti  cle^atico  of  tbo  cnliimNH,  the

*"**^Uo<l  statues  of  CliPphrcn,  attd  the  sciilpttirM

'"•■^inl  at Mcydoim. Ejiyptittii art  was rigully

^^v«uti(Hial,  yet  ita  remains  ehow  nuiisual  |)la«-


Hrad  of  Wooden  8taiu«  tna  Bblak.


AEC.YPTUS


ABovrrus


nmcb  spirit  Aiid  vigonr  nf  oxe«nitioit.  Tbc  arrhiten-
tnral  dctniU  uf  tlu)  temples  wero  always  oulotiretl.


AndCBl  IVoOIm  (frnrn  ili£  HonuoMOtii]  :  I.  Fcypt«  Eiliminau
(Uw  Ttrb&kc  or  Scrjptuiv) ;  3,  i.  Kthiaplu  ;  1  KvyiHinn.

Ill  arctiilectdro  tlie  vuiilt  or  arch  was  kiinwu  at
leJWt  800  yeun  Wrore  il  cnii  beftliuwn  to  bavu  hct^tt
used  liy  tliu  Koliiiiiit).  To  tmiiHport  tli«  btijjt*  lilurkit
uf  Bt4>iie  fuiiiHt  ill  E^y]itiaii  Htriictnres  iuvolvi-tl  at)
niivaiictid  kuowle«lj;t>  of  oiigiiict-riu(;.  The  iiir-
i:liaiiieal  arid  also  lloiiri»be<],  ikhI  many  iuvculioni^,
(■Itt-'ii  Tuj^nrilvtl  tis  iiiotlcrii,  lin<I  Imhtii  uiiide  ;is  furly
Qfttbu  Fifth  Uyuaaty.  Tbo  bluw-pt|M!,  bvllonN,  uuil
aipbuii!),  ibe  saw,  uIiihoI,  prestt,  baluiicu,  baqiooii.
lever,  plonyli,  and  lulw,  weiv  all  employed.  Itn-
zt>n  appeal-  iliiriii<;  Ibo  Twelftb  Dynanty.  Ati
opa<iiwi  kiitit  of  ^laHA  was  niado  alioiit  li5U)  h.c,
uud  datt^d  e.i)eciiiienH  of  lli«  r<'i);u  of  Tbotbiiies  III.
exittt.  At  th«  Kuwi  iM*nu«l  ike  putter'ii  wbecl  atiil
the  kiln  weiu  known,  aa  well  as  applicutiuua  of
iDvtullitri;)-  aud  tbt-  iibo  of  tin.

MtiHit!  wan  fiiltivatt'd.  fur  tlw  barp  and  Jlutc
wnn*  known  in  ilie  Koiirtb  Uyunsly ;  aud  later  ar«
found  Ibe  bi-ptairbonl,  pentucburJ,  lyres,  dninis,
tniu)|M-tM,  ijoitars  and  I  lie  national  iiihrTiitntiiil,
lb«  iii«triim  {*{.  v.).  Many  of  lbe»e  hifttrumcnift
were  of  Crtusiib-rable  size.

PniutiiifC  was  nliinwt  su*  convou-
tioual  as  architectnru  and  eoidpiure,
Ibo  colotins  generally  being  the  pri-
mary ones  ou  a  wbite  background.
Tbe  pajiyri  containiug  rituala  often
Dxbibit  illnminatious  like  tUow  of  Uid
tneiltievnl  tnituinltt.  Fretwoc*!  were  not
ntiknown ;  encnnittic  is  found  to  date
Uai'Jc  to  only  a  comparatiTely  lat«
perioil.

In  warfare,  tho  Egyptians  aneil
«liii-ld»,  ciiiiaswa  of  leather,  brlnieta,
bown,  siwan*,  cliilw.  shvopIh.  and  axes.
lo  contlncling  aieKc^t  *hey  employed
tbe  tetlmtii  (q.  v.)  and  M^aling-latblerx,
and  appear  to  have  bail  a  knctwUnl^i*-
of  the  principle*  of  uiining  aud  couu-
ter-tnining.  Under  the  liiKbteenth
PyiiaHtv,  war  •  chariots  were  intro-
ili'icfd,  "priiir  to  which  time  tbP  army
was  coiopose<l  entirely  of  infantry.
Bea- going  Ye«iwU  were  not  earlier
than a.c.  2&0ti.  ibongb  galleys  and ooIomo  HraJ


gmall  Kniling  craf^  plied  on  tbe  Nile  at  ■  rery  ear-
ly periiMl.

Coined  money  wa*  first  intrmhicrd  by  tho  IVr-
sianv,  prtnioim  to  which  lime  it  t.<i  ponaible  thai
gold  vircnlHtcMl  in  ringa  or  in  iHtrtions  of  deliuite
weight.  Popular  anmnemeiirs  were  fencing,  jug-
gling, dnneiiig,  dice,  ami  hidl'tighling.

Rei-Igiox. — Tin*  i-eligion  of  ihi*  ancient  Egyp-
tiauH  \v:ig  a  paiitbeiaiic  ttysteni,  each  gwl,  as  niib
tbe  KoinauM,  ttlauiling  for  soiito  special  attribute.
Kacb  principal  divinity  is  accompauie4  by  a  /mt,


or  rotiniu'  ofnaiiK-iHtcil  gixlM.  Aa  wilb  the  Assyr-
iaua,  the  p:)iilheou  ih  grouped  in  triadft,  or  fniuily
group!!,  each  cou^istiug  of  tbin  )>arent  deity,  Ida
wife  and  sifter,  and  a  nou.  Tliu»  tho  goil  Ptah
torma  a  iritul  with  Sekbec  or  Uuttt  and  Iniliolcii.
These  triads  uru  ofleu  a<wocinted  with  inferior  dui-
liea  to  complete  tlMi  pui.  Tbe  wombip  of  uiany
triads  w»m  r^tricted  lo  particular  IwalilieN;  but
other  triads,  ttncb  im  tbu«e  of  OHiritt,  Uin,  iiiid  Ho-
rilH  (all  of  which  «e«>).  were  atbired  all  over  Egypt.
The  dual  ixnioeplion  that  embodies  the  antagu-
n ism  of  good  and  ovil  let  M^eu  in  Ibo  o|>pofcitiou  of
the  enn  gocttt  to  tbe  Great  t>er[M.Mit.  Apap,  the  tyjMi
ofdarkiiestj :  while  0«iri»  la  pitted  against  .Set.  On
tbe  moinimeuta  the  gwia  ate  generally  t*epreaentcd
uiib  bnniau  bodies  but  the  Ueaita  of  animal!!,  ani-
mals Itcing tlietr living emblems. At tbe  close


of  ■  Hj-kHM  Kwt. (UUOe  Grwiu  ScuTpiurt  tram  ta»  r«j(liii.V


AEGYPTUS


27


AEGYPTUS


E^ptian  BnfToons.

of  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  some  foreign  deities
were  adDiitted  into  the  religions  Bystem  of  Egypt.
Among  theae  were  Bar  (Daal),  Ashtarata  (Aahta-
rotb).  Ken  (Kain),  and  Reshpu  (Keseph).  As  with
tbe  GreekB  and  Roiuai]s,8o  with  the  Egyptians,  the
gods  were  couceived  aa  possessed  of  all  tbe  human
passions  and  emotions.

The  chief  of  tbe  Egyptian  deities  is  Ftah,  tbe
Opener,  the  creator  of  all  things,  the  same  as  the
Plicfniciau  Fiitaikos.  To  him  belong  Sokhet,  tbe
Liuuess,  Bast,  Bnbastis,  tbe  goildess  of  tire,  idcuti-
lied  with  Artemis.  Ptah  is  depicted  as  a  bow-
legged  dwarf.  His  son,  Nefer-Tnm,  wears  the  lo-
tas on  his  head.  Other  gcnls  are  Kbunm,  the  ram-
beaded  goil  of  water;  Heka,  the  Frog;  Sati,  the
Sunbeam  ;  Nit,  tbe  Shuttle ;  Kbons  (Force),  the
Heracles  of  Egyptian  mythology ;  Ra,  tbe  Sun ;
Aiuenra,  the  bidden  power  of  the  Sun  ;  Seb,  Time  ;
and  Nut,  tbe  Firmament.  Seb  and  Nut  (Cronos
ami  Rhea)  gave  birth  to  Osiris,  Isis,  Nepbtbys,  Set,
and  the  elder  Horus.  The  myth  of  Osiris  (q.  v.)
was  the  Egj-ptiau  tyi»e  of  tbe  jngdment  and  future
destiny  of  man  ;  and  all  tbe  dead  are  called  by  bis
name.  Each  deity  had  its  sacred  animal,  which
«a8  regarded  as  the  second  life  of  the  deity  whom
it  represented.  The  most  famous  of  these  animals
naa  the  Apis,  or  sacred  bull,  at  Memphis,  whose
worship  was  national. See  Apis.

Another  point  of  the  Egyptian  religion  was  a


belief  in  tbe  transmigration  of  sonls.  All
who  were  too  impure  to  be  admitted  to  tbe
Courts  of  the  Sun,  or  whose  bodies  when  em-
balmed perished  before  the  end  of  3000  years,
passed  from  body  to  body,  having  first  de-
scended tfl  tbe  lower  world.  Tbe  Sacred
Bark  in  which  the  mummy  was  carried  over
tbe  Nile  to  its  tomb  was  a  type  of  tbe  Sun-
boat  which  would  at  last  bear  tbe  purified
spirit  to  Paradise.

Tbe  chief  remains  of  Egyptian  arcbitec-
tnre  are  religions — tombs,  temples,  and  pyr-
amids— tbe  last-named  being  royal  tombs
reared  to  mark  the  burial-places  of  the
kiugs.  Tbey  are  tbe  most  ancient  of  the
Egyptian  monuments,  the  next  in  point  of
antiquity  being  the  rock-tombs  of  tbe  Elev-
enth and  Twelfth  Dynasties,  with  their
mommy-pits.  Later  still  come  tbe  bill-tombs,
with  n  temple  before  them.

Government.  —  Ecclesiastical  government  was
in  the  bands  of  tbe  high-priests,  in  conjunction
with  an  inferior  hierarchy,  overseers,  and  superin-
tendents of  revenues,  domains,  and  gifts.  The  civil
government  was  carried  on  by  the  royal  secretaries


Temple  of  Tbothmes  III,  At  Kftnuik.


of  justice,  finance,  foreign  aflfairs,  and  internal  ad-
ministration. The  army  —  at  one  time  number-
ing some  400,000  men — was  officered  by  noniarchs,
colonels,  and  captains.  In  tbe  time  of  Ranieses  II.
there  were  territorial  regimentfl.  Circuit  judges
administered  law.

History. — In  tbe  third  century  B.C.,  Manetbo
(q.  v.),  a  priest  of  Heliopolitt,  pre-
pared, at  the  request  of  King  Ptole-
my Philadelphns,  a  bistoi*}'  of  Egypt
from  Menes  {B.C.  445&)  to  tbe  con-
quest of  Egypt  by  Alexander,  B.C.
33'2,  a  period  which  be  divided  into
thirty  dyuasties.  The  work  of  Ma-
netbo is  preserved  in  the  form  of
ep^^omes  by  Julius  Africauna  (a.d.
300),  Ensebius  (q.  v.),  and  Oeorgius
Syncellns  <A.D.  tfOO).  Much  weight
is  now  given  to  the  statements  of
Mauethu,  since  he  undoubtedly  had
access  to  the  most  authentic  rec-
ords of  Egypt ;  and  tbe  study  of  the
monumental  iuscriptions  in  modern
times  has  served  to  justify  this  con-
fidence.

Myth  declares  Egypt  to  have  beeit
originally  governed  by  a  dynasty  of
divinities—  Ptab,  Ra,  Shu,  Seb,"He-
siri  (Osiris),  St>t,  and  liar  (Horns)  —
reigning  13,900  years,  and  succeeded
by  demigods  who  ruled  for  a  further


AEGYPTUS  I

period  of  40(K)  yenn Tbe  l^rttt imnOy  1iuid:iii

nioiiivrcli nf  T.^^vpt 1h  M.itil  In  liavi^  lii'en  Mmitm,

wIkksh  fporli id  viirioiiNly  ilat-

Ail 1)3' ililTMri-iit K}£,vpi<ili>)fthUi.

Hru};j«(-h llicfh it  at n.c.  4155,

mill  L«-]iHit].-t  lit a.c.  'itHf^ No

iiuiiiiitni-iilx  ot*Mt-iirML<xiiit. 'Die

nuaL  tiT  liiN  |Hiiit't  Lt  eiutil  tu  liavn

Ikhmi  TLih,  iitiiir  AbyijuM,  uuil  lie

is bclii'vc«l lo liavo fuiiiided

M('iii|>lii'« Hi»  dyiijuily  reij|;i)«(l

»oni(>  '/5(l  years.  In'iiig  fliicc^ftii**!

I»y  the  fwcmui  iJyutiaty,  which

IipIiI  BWJiy  ftir  IW)!)  yeiir*. L'lidt-r

it  thp  worship  iifiutrreil  ntiimiils

in  nwtcrteil  tohnvo  b«};iiii.  Willi

Lbu8iii'civdiiii;(lynnitl>'<ii.c.:i[kt)4!

acoonliii^  to  JtniRttrh)  llir  iii<iii-

iiiuoiitul  hiHtory  tif  E^ypl  com-

fiiuuct'fi. Tli<>  kiii^  Sviiolvru  con-

(jin'ru'd itm SiiiuiiiL' pciiiiiHiilu


WrlilnK


»  AICUYKIX'S

Ht-rodotiia  n>latuK  variau»  interesting  btorics,  atiil
lliu  AruUa  briiuve  thai  Hhc  slill  LunntJi  tbo  third
pyramid  of  Gluli,  wliore  abe  ta  aiud  to  have  b«an
buHod.

Fnimnit-SiivpiithtotboTMfli'di  Uynaidy.  Kftyji-
tiaii  liitttDiy  i»  ob^cnru.  One  ivomuu,  prrbajis,  it,  to
bt>  funml  ill  the  fad  that  the  uuiuai'cbtt  ur  local
^ovcriioiH  bfc-uuic  luori'  and  uhu-l*  iiide[>«uilciit.  to
thi"  dvtriiiiftit  uC  ihe  iiiiporlatic*.*  i»f  tbu  kiiij;«.  Tbr
tJiBcriptionii  ut  8iiil.  rvc«titly  piililished  by  (irilHth,
iihr>w  vhnt  hi  thf  NitiMi  and  'IViith  Dyiia.Htie-s,  lh«
kiiiRs  cif  KxypI  ttuju'd  war  !igniiist  itiivw  rel>olIiniift
uoiiiurrliK,  I'.Kpi'ciBUy  tbuw.'  uf  Tbclx'jt.  The«ie  la«I,
undiT  ih**  Tt'iitb  DyiiAKly.  bf-gmt  to  obUm  the  title
uf  royalty,  ami  did  iii  t'acl  sniTcrd  Ja  (■Mnbliijhin);
their  claim.  hUnv  thiiii  1b»t,  tbuy  uvtirmn  nn<l
i'(iiii|iicri-d  I  tin  n  hole  cniiiiliy  aft(,>r  a  pn>trnr1cd
Hlrri^^li',  mi  thul  thi-  ICli^veiith  DyniiKly  is  Tliflinn.
T1ii-Ln-n.  fniitibehi^aiiiiisi^niflcniii  pmvttii^ial  tnwn,
beuaiiH'  t\w  roynl  ciipilA):  aud  from  Ibe  tluie  of
thf  Twilftli  Uyiinsiy  laUuU  d.C-  iolMi)  Wgius  a
new periud of  politicnl unity nud iiitellcctual


mid  opviivd  tilt'  c'Op[K-r'iiiiiii-M  of  Waily-MagliAra.,

whom  his  itauiu  niid  portrnit  iiiny  Hiill  W  t^eeti.  achicvonivut.  ko  that  in  later  tiiue^  it  wot  rvjjiard-
Tbi'-  erfiatcd  Hmiires  of  Kahott-|i  and  Iii»  wifi-  \cfi-it,  fd  aa  E;;ypt'8  Golden  Aftc  LitfnUure  tlonriiibcd,
tbooldusi  atatUfi*  in  Ibi^  world, datf  I'toiii  tbisifiKii.  and  j,'r«?itt  material  prosperity  preVMJIed.  Nnbia
Tli«  Fourth  Dyuswty  laslvd  lb"  yiNira  [B.C.  ;i7;i;t-  wan  cunqi-ieiTd  :i»  far  lis  ibf  Set-nnd  Caturnct.  lie-
35tJfi).  L'tidiT  it  Khnfii  (Cbcy]>B)  btiilt  tbt*  (Jroiil  Bides  Tlitliee,  otbf-r  cities,  siicU  as  On  (Hi-liopotiit),
Pyramid  nt  Glzuh  ;  liin  Hut'cuMor  Kbafni  (Clu-plin.--  Tanid,  and  HiiliHstiK,  neiv  endHdlittlienI  and  on-
nvM)  built  the  M'cont4  pyrnuiid  ;  an4l  M<<nkiini'a  tnrgod:  wliilf  tbe  t1n>^  itiiw  of  F»>'flni  wok  jjainvd
(MycfriiiiiN)  tlio  third.  From  tbi»  pi*riod  dntr«  for  »;;ri<-iil(nre.  Thu  fxi-avatioiiH  of  Fe trie  prove
almi  tliu  raiiioiM  ritual  kiiowu  lu  tbe  lliiok  of  tlu'  that  Aniennnliat  III.  wkk  lbt>  Moiris  of  Herodotus
Duiul,  and  vai-ioUM  wtirk>4  of  art.  |  who  roimtnirCvd  a  ^''^^t  ttoiiiii  f»r  a  bnincb  <>f  ilip

Tbi;  Kirib  Dyiiahty  t'oinpi'iM>d  nine  kings,  nod  '  Nile  lloning  into  that  tKms  and  liiKiii);  itMdf  iti
lustt-'d  Miiiiu  'iiutj  yt-ai'M.  Tliu  lai^t  of  the  line,  Uiiu«,  I  RwnuipH.  In  tbe  luiildlo  **f  tin*  bu.siii  were  fuitnd
bnilt  the  irniicated  pyramid  near  ii^akktua,  uovt  two  pyriimidfl  with  eobiKsid  fitntuc!*  (anrniouiilin^
callL'd  Flianmb'K  H-vut. .See  FYltA-Mls.  tliem  ;  mid  near  by,  tlie  bir^eitt  of  all  the  leitiplu

Tbe  Sixlb  I>ynasty  coataiuH  tbe  uam«  of  King  !  of  Egypt,  the  Mu<eu]led  Lal)yriutli,  of  nhicb,  liovr-
Popi,  wboM>  general,  Una.  undertook  varinn§  wars  !  ever,  only  Che  foiindatiou  stoucs  have  bcou  [ire-
idid  expeilitinnt.  antoti^  tbem  oiio  to  Palestine,  in  <  served. See  LauyiumuCs.

wbieh  he  m»ed  negro  tnjopti  frum  Niibta.  A  Ulilii-  Between  tbe  Thirteenth  niul  the  F.igbt4M^ii1b
lier  of  t*%ts  beliMigiug  to  tbin  reign  were  found  in  Dynasties  there  exittta  a  blank.  Abunt  o.r.  2li00,
pyi*anild»  opened  in  It^.  It  in  doubtful  wbelber  tbe  progress  of  tbe  kings  of  Chnlden  in  Afiia,  or
t^iieeii  N'itiK'ris  (ip  v.),  wboni  Manetbo  ujisigns  to  '  (Kime  oiber distiiibatice.tHMil  tbell^ksos  or"Sliop-
this  ilynasty,  in  an  hiKtorical  jiei-MonHge. Of  lier,  '  lieni  King's"  into  Lower  Kgypt. These  inyndeiv

appejirtn  have  Iwen  of  Tartar
race.  Tbey  enmed  Memphis
by  stonii,  ex  pel  ted  t  be  TIioIhiii
dyniiNly,  nnd  niudr  the  eilyof
Avaris  (tlin  later  Taiiis'i  their
sriit.  Of  tlieKe  kiiigK,  Jo.i)4<p1i
Willi  priibably  priine-iiiin).ster
to  Ajiepi  at  TniiiH.  llib  gran-
iiiits  me  still  visible  at  Pi-
Tiiiim.  Tbe  llyksoK  made
><iiiie  religious  clmugea  nud

irie<l to  repWe  llio  Woivhfp

.f  K»  by  that  of  t>et. They

\srie  linally  oTertbrown  by
t  lie  Kgypi  iaiiH  of  L'pper  Kgypt

under  Aahniesl.tAmtwth),  who
look  Avarid  byiisMjtidt  and  re*
■stored  tbe  uld  religion.  Tbe
^lUTeeding  kiligi,  Au)eiibot'«p
]..  Tli(.>T.liDleti  l.,Thuthuieh  11.^
■Old  Tbotbuies  111.,  eurried
I  lie  arms  of  Egypt  far  into
lUhiopin.  Nnbia,  nud  Aaia,
Mibdniug  the  wholo  of  Syria
and  pjirtofMeHoiMitamia.  Tbo
ndgn  of  Tbothnie<  HI.  {»  the
inn. ^Jl].JI»^ ,, .>....»>..  1-. ,  .  inoHt  brilliant  period  of  Egyp-


iM


ABGYITUS


tjau liiilnry. To liim,  Kii^h anil tbo «(tnlli<*m

j)h<m nf  £tIiiH|tia,  lilt*  tr-lutiilH,  un  wvll  iih  ArMvri;),

Bali.v  t«Atij«,  Pli(i*tiicin,  niitl  n  ^mmI  imrl  itf  C't'iitrul

ftHia, |>«itl  triliiile, L'n<l*.T  Aii«'Nliiit4'|> IV  .  tW

jilttol  »M  iTiuKveil  tu  AlaliHKtnni  (T<^l-<*l'Aruilri-

■  I.  Aia«l  (Ijc  iituiinilii>i«lic  wiiix|ii)i  uf  tUn  kuii  wati

ftiktiro*!  to  dhiiinir>h  tb«  rcKiiril  [rniil  to  llii?  ullmr

jiriivet**. The  true  ivligiuu  avus  rcntuird  by  Iluivui-

(llonift)  after  ii  iH'ttnd  v(  twiuv  tbirt^-live

Hi?  waa  sncfctftitii by  UniiiooeH I.,  wbo

ii'»d» M  lung  ilyiiii«t>-. His  itilvccMtitr,  Set!  I.  iSe-

llio«>y l.r  bin  virtorittj  iti  A^ia,  iiitrodiii.'iHi  the  wur-

lii|i «>f  B;tal aD<l AKbUroib into ERypr. His

t»* gBrritKUH'il  T>ix',  »iiil Aru<l(i0,  hiiiI Ik-tbu-

U«lb ill  r»imaii. Kaiiii--HiM II.,  tuni  u{  Si>ti,  i)r-

|fr«t4Ml lite Hittiti>s  ami tmtk  Sbalniiui,  Ibx aii-

ItiiniC. »ji«  of  J«ru8al4Mu,  in  a  war  wbirh bt^lnt

\fuut ytut*. A  tablet  of  tbis  uiouarcb  baw  l>t>4>n

l(i>iitt<l war y^yrtlt iti Syria. Kuiiil'-k-h II,  ulno

InTiiiiciiierrd Ktbio|»ia,  irhii.'b bail rt.-viiltt'il,  uiiil

le*tAl«luii4«i| A Aevt oil ibL- Mi-ditri-ntucaii. Ho

lit  if* -wliinie  exploit))  form  a  ba«>i!t  fur  Ibo  mytha

E«iir«>ti aroutiil Ibt? lt?(;einlary  tk-hoatria ( (|.  v.).

IHi» ilatc  1h  about H.c.  V.i£i. ilis  iton  Mt'iH^iJlah

ItnusfVrtMl  llio  »fat  of  }(overi>tiii<tit  in  Mt-ni|>bt(t,

*i>^ ie  probably  tbu  Pbarnob  itf  the  Jowi»h  Ex-

Inliia.

J^ntjtcMLH  III.,  of  tbu  TwciUirtb  Dyuaaty,  wappd
"^^  vrllb  the  PfailiHtliien,  ami  nttb  hoiiiu  of  the
ibdritittK.  tnbex  of  (4tvrL-i4,  gniuing  naval  virttirioe
|bi  Llj^  ^jpillterruurau.  Hitt  fuvuuiite  ti^tuplo  ami
verv  Bt  MetUiict  Habn.  Tlie  Raiiiciuiubi
followpfl  were  ended  by  ibp  higb-prlfistH  uf
b\ir«.  wbo  di'iMiNed  tbr  Inst  Uiiif;  A  iivw  tty-
'^•jr  from  Tunin  wiri't'eflcd,  and  reigned  with
"'•*«  ptiwer.  I'ndt'r  Ibt-ni,  tli«  ]H>lic<»  p<*4wed  try-
"'8  lo  protect  the  (ouiIm  of  the  kings  iVoiu  ihliiii-
^t»f»,  who,  in  roiiiHM)iiei;ce,  «tolo  luaiiy  of  tbo
^*<ituiuieit  niul  hid  tbtini  in  an  extavaiioii,  nbt^rt*
^Wfj  were  foutiil  in  I"^rl.


^^»  trom  Uwtirtal  Tkruple  uf  T>iii«. Iliotngniiibcd  (<y  Mr  VC  M.
r  r«»n-i


tiniliui  fa  tbn  tln«  of  tb«  Tifih  X>j-
nuiy.  I'lrcit  xr.  Xflio  (l,ifti«itaa«
SUluc  m  the  Ua«oum  ufChlntL)

Tbo  Twenty  -  M»coi)d  Dynasty  (  B  c.  950  )
nan  iif  Libyan  ori^n,  probably  vatabliiibcd
by  tbn  p<iuerfnl  I,ii<yaii  bttdr-Kiiartl  which
bad  bcroiuu  cxtrenitdy  intlnenlial.  i?ho«bauk
1.  (tbu  liiblicnl  i^binhnk)  (ilntaU'red  riliea  in
India,  and  inadu  war  ii|mn  the  Jrwisb  kit)|£a
Jeroboam  and  Itelioboani.  Under  Iliu  Twen-
ty-third Iiyiiasty  (of  loniw),  tbo  unity  of  tbo
Einpirti  wiw  lost.  The  difl*«ieiit  pi-oTtno*-*  fell
away  from  tbe  ceiitml  [M>witr,  and  in  tbcTnon-
ty-fonrtb  Dynnsty  Kinf;  Bnct-horin  riil<^l  ovnr
Sa7«  and  ^li-tapbirt  abinw.  Under  tht-  T«enly-
tinb  Pynaaty  (  B.r.  7'if*),  tito  whole  of  Egypt
brc-aitie  un  Btliiojiian  pnivince,  and  it»  vict^
kiii^  Hufl'tTed  defeat  at  tbu  hatida  of  tbi^  Ao-
hyrians,  nbo,  in  ii.c  f>Tl,  nuder  Ati^ar-baildon^
conqaered  Kgypt  and  divided  it  umoii^  tribu-
tary princes.  (Sec  Aa8TKU.)  Many  of  tbe  Aa-
Hyriati  ^arriiions  were  driven  out  iu  K.t.'.  (MiH,
and  wlien  the  Auyrlan  empire  be^aL]  totleetine,
Psanii-tik  (  Ptsainiaeticbtis  I  of  Saift,  desceiidinl
from  Ibe  kiiif;i}  <if  tbu  Twenty-fourth  Dynasty,
fnund<-d  a  new  line  with  Ibu  uidoftin'i'k  merce-
narifjt  fnmi  loiita  and  C'aria.  I'lider  liini  and  liia
snceejisorw.  art  and  learninj;  revived.  Ilia  aiir-
ce»tHir,  Nekao  II.,  bejfan  a  canal  to  connoot  the
Ke<l  Sea  with  the  Mcditerraueaii,  bnt  d««i8ted  at
tbewaniinguf  nn  oraeje,  having  ulhobwit  a  lar^
UDinbcr  of  workmen  in  tbe  attempt, lie  it  viaa


wlio  ilefcatrd  .loiiiab,  kit);;  uf  Jiiitab,  aucl  oooquvred
Piiti'>iiiu!.  Ixit  waA  biiuiuiirdvtcated  b,v  Nel>ncba<t-
]lL^zza^.  111  the  tiino  of  bis  rei(rn,  navigature  from
IMuL'uirii*  (iret  saUedsoutb  tif  tbt"  e<|iirttor,  frutiii-
ineticbiiM  11.  witrri'il  with  tbe  Ktbitt|iiuii«i,  ami  won
fttUowiMt  by  A|>rifi>,  who  wuitileponeU  uiu)  i^tian^b'il-
by  AiiiiwiH  (<{.  v.),  nbo  rei^iiiitl  ufu>r  bitii  ami  t'on-
turttl  intirrL'oHrwj  with  (iiecte,  maiTying  u  (Jrvt-k
wifi^'.  Ho  conquered  (.'ypruH,  but  inourrvd  the  «n-
niity  of  CniubyseM  (t).  v.),  Mrcoiid  kiiiif  of  the  Medcs
niid  Pet«inn»,  wbo  invadtnl  KgyiH.  aitd  ovcrthix'w
the  Mill  of  Aiuiuiiii  nt  the  biitilu  of  IVliisUitQ  (b.c.
&;!T).  tbuH  iDKurint;  ihe  conqiioHt  of  Kj!>-pt,  wblcb
uow  twcamv  u  IVrviaii  )triiviiico.  Ib'ooiiiiiif;  itiKuiio,
C'nitibytfi'K  ('oniQiitU'd  inuiiy  barbiin>n«  licts,  ntubbod
thv  ttacred  bull  Apis,  atid  gavi?  biiitKi'lf  tii>  to  gross
dubuucbury.  Ho  waa  Hiu-cwedrd  by  Dartnn  I.,
Xcrxt?s  I.,  mid  Artaxfrxen  I.,  who  goveniod  wiiU
uuiiiimmtJT'eiuiUliietut,  but  ujjiiiiit^C  wboiu  tbu  K^yp'
tiutiH  roMO  in  utn^iicceaAful  revolt,  beiof^  nidtvl  by
tbfAtlieiiiaiJs.  The  Tweuty-eigbtL  (Salle)  Dynasty
Btrugglfd  nitb  rnryiug  miccviiH  ngniost  tbo  Per-
siauD:  the  Twenty-Diuth  maiiituiiied  n  Gri'ck  alii-
aiice  with  tbe  «aini.>  object ;  but  wiMi  tbv  'rbirtietb,
tbo  Persians  Hually  prevailed,  and  Egypt  rptnaiued
KubJ«ct  to  thi'ui  itatil  tbe  time  of  Alexander  tbe
Great  (B.C.  33:2))  vrbo  iu  that  year  founded  Alex-
»mlria  {q.  v.),  afliT  bavtug  cutiqiivred  Pvniia.  In
B.C.  300,  AU>jiauder'»  guiieml,  PloleiuaeuH,  aMiuutvd
tbe  lillc  uf  King  of  Egypt-  His  mirfwiwuti  ti-aiia-
furuitMl  Kgypt  into  a  Oi-^ek  kingdoui,  both  tb«
lauguagc  of  the  govdruiiiHiit  and  uf  ML-buliiTMbip
bi'iug  Urtek.  (Hw  Alekandiuan  Sciu>ol.)  Tbe
court  of  tbe  FtoU-iuies  becanioacentroof  learniDg;
aud  Ptolemy  Pbitadetpbuu  built  tbe  famous  Mii-
•etim,  founded  tbe  great  Librniy,  and  procured  tbe
Beptuagiut  translations  of  tbe  Hebrew  Scriptures.
From  tbis  time  tbe  list  of  bis  snccesaum  in  as  fol-
lows: Knerget^s  {-JAU-'Sii  H.C.);  Pbilopalor  ( '.Wl-
^4  B-C ),  wlin  ]M>rHHcntHd  tliO  Jews  and  warred
with  Aiitiocbns;  KpipbanvM  (204-181)  nc.) :  Pbilo-
inetor  <l^-14o  B.C.);  Knt?rgen-s  11.(14.1-110  B.C.);
Ptolemy  Soter  II.  nnd  bin  molber  ('leopatm  (116-
81  B.C.);  Ab'xaiidiir  11.,  ilmpatm  BL-renic^  (Hl-«)
B.C.);  Neon  DiiHiyMiiii  (r>0-Sl  B.C.).  Lti[»t  catiie  the
famoRH  Cldip.'iMa  (q.  \,),  lb*'  niistresct  of  Auluny.
AfliT  tii^r  defeat  at  tbe  battle  of  Actiuui  (31  B.C.),
Eg>pt  waa  uiado  a  Uomnn  province  by  AiigiiKtiia
(*a4-Har,  under  u  governor  of  vqueatriiui  rauk. See

ProLEMAEUS,

Kgypi  mitiaiuod  i>eacernl  under  KoDian  mie,  ex-
cept for  tbe  conqiiehl  of  2vQobin  ('.f7U  a.i>.)  and  the
revolt  of  l-^i-miu  {"JTi  a.d.).  (See  Zknoiua;  Fjr-
Htrs.)  Tbe  most  inter^etiug  events  of  tbift  period
arc,  beaidea  tbe  two  jnnt  mentioned,  tbe  vinitif  uf
Veepasiau,  Hadrian,  and  Caracalla  tQ  Alexandria;
thR  perhe^'UtionM  of  Diocleltaii  (q.  r.);  tbe  riau  of
tbo  GuiMlleM,  Mauichaeaua.  and  Ariaiis;  and  tbe
final  MUpremacy of tbe Cbriatiau  failb in  379

A.D.

Wbeu  tbe  Konian  Kinpire  waa  divided  Id  395
A.D..  Egypt  went  with  tbu  Eastern  dtvioiou,  nnd
lat*r  became  one  of  the  great  palriarcb.ites  of  tbe
Cburcb.  IuliltJA.l>..owing  to  bitter rcligiouafendsj
it  became  a  Peptiau  |>rovinee  for  Iwelvo  ji-ars.
In  tbe  year  639.  wb^i  tbe  Arabs  invade<l  tbe  coini-
try,  a  native  (Coptie)  governor  wa.-*  over  Egypt.
adminihti'ring  it  in  tbe  name  of  tbe  Emp«THr  Heni-
oliuK.  Set>ing  iu  tbo  iuvit^ion  a  menns  fur  throw-
ing otT  Ihi-  rule  of  tbe  Greeks,  be  nmile  only  a  pro-
tended ruwintance  to  tbe  Arab  chief,  'Anir  Ibuel-Aai,


who  Iu  tbe  year  G41  took  Alexandria,  and  ruAile  t^4'
»boIe  of  Egypt  a  province  of  the  cnhf  Omar.

BiBLIUUilAi-ur. — See  Wilkiiisoo,  Mamnrrs
Custo*ar  nf' the  AnritMt  Eij^ptiitns  (184?;  new  «!.  by"i
nircb.  Ir'TO);  Brngscli,  /{tctttit  dn  MamuM^ntt  £ff*/p-\
tiens  (lH(ii-^i);  R»u>it>t\,  Arpypttm  Sttilt  (lK|4-r>7)t
l^etMins.  Denhnalt-r  {  IH49-74  );  Sbarjie,  Hisiory  nf
Etj^fd  (  li!l*4<>  I:  Mariette,  Monvmentt  of  Uf'fitr  Ktjyft
(IH77);  Kawlin*ni,y/tjt/'jri/  of  Aadmt  Kmij't  (IS^I);
Ebcm,  /Ctfypt,  //iaturii:al  and  iMnrriptire  (Eng.  trans,
lid  ed.  l^) ;  l--uie-PtK>le,  Art  a/ tfte  Snracma  (ISSfi);
linigiscb  Portba,  IC^fi/tt  under  the  I'fianurht  {'£i\  cd
IHtil ) ;  l!^ni>an,  Ae^ifpitn { ItWKi) ;  Lepage- Keuonf, Ltrt-
artt  (18^1) ;  Masp^ro,  Ai/*-  in  v4mWc><(  E>f;fpl  o-d  At-
syrt-i  (Engl.  traiKi.  l^.tSl;  Ilrimmer,  E^ypt  ilHU).

For  tbo  langnage,  Bnigscb's  Gram>«ain:  IliAv
glilfiltiqve  (11^)  may  be  recommended,  and  Loret'a
Manitel  { ir9*7  );  with  Bnigscb's  dictionary  ( ItfcWX
Gnunmars  of  special  iwriods  bnvo  been  written  by
Pruf.  Krnian  uriterliii.  On  Egyptian  art,  Kee  Pt^rrot
and  Chipiez,  HUtorif  of  Art ;  yinsipCrri,  Arehiologit
h'lfj/ptienne :  Eober,  JJislory  of  Ancient  Art  (Engl,
trans.  l<S>*i);  LUbke,  Ottchidtt  Her  K-Mt,  Ilth  od.
{\^i)  ;  Goodyear,  A  Grammar  o/tAt  Lottw  (1882).

Aegyptua  {.\iyvnrot).  Son  of  Reins  and  Iwin-
brotbcr  <>f  Danails  (q.  v.),  who  BUlHlue<l  the  land
of  tbe  Melampodes.  and  uunied  it  aft«r  himself.
Iguoraut  of  tbe  fat«  of  his  Ufiy  sons,  be  came  to
Argos  aud  tberc  died  of  grief  at  tbeir  death  ;  an-
other accouut  represents  bis  only  surviving  Mia|
as  reconciliug  bini  to  bis  brother.

Aeinautae  (auifavrat).  Mngtstratea  at  Milctns
whose  cublom  it  was  Ut  embark  on  Iwrnrd  ship;
whenever  Ibey  hud  uccuhiou  to  diitcusa  inrportont
business,  returning  only  when  the  busiuuss  was
completed  (Pint.  Quaixt.  6ra«c.32).

Aeiphygia  (attifivyia). See  Exhilium.

Aeisiti  idt'cfftrm). See  PkYTaXEI'M.

Aelana.  The  Klaih  of  the  Jews,  a  towu  on  thai
nortbeni  arm  uf  the  Ked  .Sea,  which  was  iu  coDao*j
queiicc  called  by  tbu  Greekn  AtXayirijt.

AeUa.  A  nnmo  given  to  Jerusalem  after  ilMi
ri'iitoraiion  by  the  Ronnin  cmiwror,  Avitaft  lladria^

UU». B-ev  HiRHOfiOLTMA.

Aelia  Seiitia  Lex. Svu  Deditico.
Aelianum  loo. 8e«  UitifiPKUDENTiA.

Aelianua.  (I)  The  Taciiciax,  a  Greek  wrli
on  war,  alKiut  lOtI  a.i>.,  roni|H>tKHl  a  work  dedicated
til  Tnijan  iHt  tbe  Greek  onler  of  b:i|tle,  with  Bpccin
refi-nuicr  to  ilaceduuiau  ladies  (Tncruci;  &tauia.\
which  JH  exioDt  both  iu  itH  original  and  in  nu  ett
largcd  form.  Tbe  original  used  ftdsely  to  Ite  Bltril>i
ntwl  lo  Arrinn. See  K5cbJy,  iV  Lihrh  JVic/iWn  (1H5'JL

('i)  CLAI'|)II'8 AkI.IAMH,  called THK SoPUIST,  j
Romau  of  PraeneKte,  wbo  wrote  in  Greek,  lived  af(
Rome  iu  tbn  (t<<C4>iid  century  a.i>.  m»  a  teacher  oJ~
rhetoric. His  (tnrviving  workti  aro:  (a)  Twenty  in
significant  /'mnoMta'  LctlrtBi'AyfXiiKtKal  'KirioroXai'
811  culled  Ih-iuu»u  attributed  tu  Attie  peuHunts;  (ft]
niriiir  Jtiniitnite  (flmxiXi;  'Itrrryiu)  or  luisr^'lluniei
iu  fourteen  Iii>okB,soiUB  preserved  ouly  in  extracts
and  |p)  Ik-  yatnra  A»matiitm  {tltfu  Zt^v  'idiurtjrnt]
Tbe  two  )a.st-nieutioned  are  copiouti  and  valnubl
collect  itMi»<  of  all  kiudH  of  curiosities  in  human  aui
I  animal lifo. 8eo  LUbbe.  i*f  Aetiaui  Varia Dim
(I-*^!:  uud  the  cd.  of  the  last  by  Jacobs  (1H32).

IAellua.  A  plebeian  gens  at  Kofue,  divided  intof
tbo  families  of  Gailus,  Laiuia,  I'oetns,  aud  Tubero.^


.A.ailo  I'AtXXM). Ouo  of  tlic  Hnritlcfl. See  HaR-

^anrilia.  TIip  lliird  ilniii^litfr  nl'  L.  At'iiiititiH
|,nlns  (i|.  T.\  wife  nf  Seiiiiti  Africatiu^,  unil  iiintli-
'  of  Coniclin,  who  lioru  the  (tnicclii.
'  A.einUia  Via.  A  Ruiuhu  mud  niiiOu  !>>'  M.  A<i-
^lliiitt  l>'piilns.  cuuttui  tii  li-C.  1^7.  It  roniiiiiivi]
■  Via  FIuTiiinia  fmiii  Ariiuiiiiiu)  lliruugli  BdiiiMiia,
lutina,  lutd  Plmceulis,  tu  Mudiulauaiii  (MilaDj.
'  Vufc

Aemiliuras.  Tbe  cogooiuen  of  P.  Comrliim
>ci|>io  AfricaDus  Miuor,  who  xram  the  »ou  of  h,
AfDiiliiH  PiuiIrh. See  SciPiu.

»A.eiJuliua.  The  name  of  n  celebrated  pnlrirrinii
gniH  nt  Rotiie,  for  the  chi*f  iiiPiiilM^m  of  which  (MM^
Ul- nrticlcs  LcPlitt  s;  pAl'i.trs;  HcACRCrt.

Aexiarla  Isloo  rullnl  Pituecuija  tiud  InakIm^.).
A  ToK'AiiiL-  ialund  ut  thu  eulrauL-u  1u  thu  Hay  i>l'

■Kkfrles;  uud^r  it  tho  Roman  |hj«Lh  n^prc^oiit  Ty-
(boens  (<)■  v.)  a»  lying. It  is  iht;  muduru  lachui.

AAXMftdeA.  A  |>ttlruii,\uiic  aiipliud  H[>rcitK'ull>
iDAacaniDB  or  Inlus,  thn  son  of  Ai-iieaH,aiu]  geuur-
lljr  to  tbow*  who  claiDicd  dc«c«ut  from  bini,  such

AniEtutns  Caeuar  arid  the  Bocmiis  a»  a  race.

Aeneaa  lAiVftur).  A  Trojan  hi--ru,  (he  miu  of  Ati-
(i1ii»fts  and  A|>hnKlit<S,  and  bom  uu  Moniit  Idii.  Ili^
**»  bn>nt;bt  up  at  Uardoiiin,  in  tho  Utmso.  of  Aloa-
tliolLa,  tlii>  hiittbund  of  bis  atstcr.  At  tint  he  Unik
DO  part  ill  thH  Trt'jiin  Trar;  and  it  wa*  not  till
Atbtlles  attacked  him  on  Mount  Idn,  nod  drove
awaybia  tlocks,  that  he  led  hiiiOnrdaninnii  against
tb«  Gmok«.  Henceforth  Aeiicni  mid  Ilrctor  appe-nr
M  tbe  great  hnlwurkH  uf  th«  Trnjinix  tiKiiiiiHt  the
Greeks Ou  more  Ihau  one  uix.-a«ii»n  Aeueaa  was


^"•i  rtAawett  tijr  ijKuiiui.  uid  canying  Aocblsea  from
burning  Truy,

J»»»d  in  battlB  by  the  gmU;  Aphrodite  carried
^h»  off  niieu  he  vras  wounded  hy  DiomodeM,  and
Jwmdcu  wuved  liini  wIiph  hu  was  ou  th«  point  of
P^Wiiug  by  the  bandi*  o(  AehilleH.  Homer  maken
^oillaiiati  to  th".-  cmi||(mtioti  of  Aenenii  after  the
filrtntf  ofTroy,  hut,  on  the  eontrnry,  bo  evidently
''«t|^i'iv«.  Aeiwaa  and  hl«  dia»cend«nts  tut  reigning
"•'"^ysAcr  (bo  extinction  of  the  hoii»e.of  prIam  ;
**!'•'«  iiamitive*  relate  thnt  after  the  capture
**  "*n  Anie;w  TTithdrcw  to  Mount  Ida  with  his
J^""!!*!  and  the  imager  of  tho  g'ldM,  especially  that
«iP«Ilw  {  f'alhuliHm  ):  iind  that  fmtn  thence  he
i|  nr^ir  to  Europe,  and  Hnally  M'ttlcd  at  La-
in  Italy  wbcrv  bo  became  the  anccAtnd  hero  of
""  UHDRnn.  A  ih-seription  of  the  wandvririL;^  of
^^|i|>  belore  be  reached  Latiniu  ia  given  by  Vergil


inhi8.4eN«»il(bk».ii.-Ti.|. After  Waiting  Kpirnsniid

Sicily,  he  was  driven  by  a  fttonn  ou  the  eoiiftt  of

Africa,  ^vhere  he  met  with  Dido  (q.  v.). He  then

>ailed  t<t  LatiuiD,  where  ho  wa»ho»]»ii8hIy  received

by  LatinuH,  king  of  the  Aboriginc«. Here  Aenraa

I  foinuleil  the  town  of  l^viniuin,  called  after  La-

I  vinia,  the  ilaughtor  of  Lalinuin,  whom  hi>  married.

iTumuK,  to  wliom Lavinia  hud  been betrothed,

I  nmde  war  against  Latinu»  and  Aeacati. Latiniia

I  full  in  the  llrftt  buttle,  and  TniuiiM  wna  snbwiinent-

i  l,v  tilain  byAeneatt;  whi'rcni>oii,  after  tin' duatb  of

LatiiiU8,Aanea8  became  Hute  ru  lor  of  the  AhoriginoM

and  Tt^ijntis,  and  both naliomt  weru  uuitMl  into

one. S<Hin  allur  thin  AoueaH  Il'II  in  batllu  agaiu^l

the  KnIuliauH,  who ucru  agisted  by  Muzoutiutt,

king  of  the  Ktraetcnus. Att  bi»  body  WEUt  not  fonnd

after  tbo  battle,  it  woa  believed  that  it  had  bL-cQ

earned  up  to  heaven,  or  that  he  bad  pertnhed  iu

the  river  Nuuiiciua. The  Latinti  ciecte<l  a  uioua-

ment  to  liim,  with  the  inscription  To  the  /•'atber  and

.Yflfire  God. Vorgil  represents  Aeueaaai  landing  ia

Italy  sereii  yearB  after  the  fall  of  Troy,  and  com-

preMtBA  all  Ihn  cvRntd  it)  Italy,  from  the  landing  to

tho  death  of  Tnniiis,  within  the  space  of  twt-nty

flayn. Thi;  Hlory  of  tho descent  of  the  Roniuim

fnun  the  TrojauN  thnHigh  AiMiean  was  bflinvetl  at

nti  f'arly  prriod,  hut  n'Nt«  ou  no  httit'tiric-ul  foitiida-

lion. 8ic  TitoJAN  Wak;  Vkiujiucm.

Aeueaa  Bllvius.  The  gmudson  of  Axe^niiia
and  great- graudKon  of  Aeneas.  Hi«  uame  HlautU
thii4  in  the  littt  of  tho  mythical  kings  of  Alba  iu
Latinm.

Aeneatorei  or  Ahenatores.  I'erfomiem  upon
wlud-instmmoDta  in  tho  Roman  nrmy.  and  divided
into  btftHatoret,  rorfiia«f«,  ttibidtit*.  UticiiKJi,  HDd
called  from  the  hronzu  (nt«)  of  their  iustrumenlA.

Aeneid  (Akvkis).  The  chief  Koman  cpio.  Bee
Vercjilu's;  Kfos.

AenesidfimaB  (Mt^aiHrifios).  A  Bkeptio,  born  at
CnoonitB,  in  Crults  who  lived  a  Httle  Inter  ibnn  the
time  of  Cjceio.  He  wrote  eight  books  on  the  doc-
trineit  of  Pyn-ho  (t\.  v.),  of  whinh  oxtraclH  may  be
fouud  ill  Phoiiiw,  <.'w(/.  212.

Aeuianes.  A  Tbc^naiiait  tnlK^  nolt-d  for  ita
fnf4(uent  mif;rntion8,  and  fmjueiilJy  alluded  to  by
Plntaich  in  bin  t^ueatioHta  G'laenu:

Aenigma  (alviytia).  A  riddh*.  The  Greeks
were  i-wpecially  fond  of  riddli*s,  tho  propoanding
of  which  cvt-n  f'lrnied  u  part  of  some  of  their  senii-
rollgious  ft<Htival)t<!*e4t  Agkionia);  itud  ct*rljiin  per-
Hiiis,  Bii«h  an  TheHHlcet*-!*  of  1'huM.diK  ami  Arititotiy-
muM,  owed  their  celebrity  to  their  cle\'ernes<i  ut
]iroponndingt(fNi9t>iM/ti.  At  tbe8yuipo8iaeii|H<cially,
tho  asking  and  aiiNwering  of  riddles  fonm-d  n  fa*
voarite  amuiiemeiit,  and  those  who  ntucceiusfnlly
solved  them  received  a  priie  in  the  fonn  of  i-akes,
(iweetnicatH,  wn^aths,  eto.,  whilu  tbti  iinsncrct«fnl
were  eondomneil  to  Hwallnw  a  draught  of  wine
HometimeM  mixed  with  milt  wnt*;r,  Hiddltw  were
often  writteu  in  hexameter  vorse,  and  the  tragic
as  well  as  tho  comic  writers  have  iutnidncMl  them
into  their  phiys.  Tlie  most  famons  riddh^  of  an-
tiqaity  in  ]>«i-ha]»«  the  cetehrated  one  pro]»oundcd
by  the  Sphinx  to  Oedipus  i<\.  v.).

The  Romans  cured  little  for  riddteti,  thongh
Aputoiiis  wrote  a  work  on  tho  ttnbji^ut  {  Lilier
LutfitnmwH  et  irripAoruin),  and  mentionn  aoveral
collections  of  riddles  that  had  boon  made.  (8eo
AtheIl:u^ns,  x.  457.1  A  late  writer,  Symphosius  in
the  fourth  centurj'  aJ>.,  wrote  a  work  eiitiUod


AKNOBARBCS

Afni'ynaia  S^p/iasi  Scho/a»tid,  coiilnitunf;  a  linn- 1
drvd  ri<lille«. 'l*be  bvvl  iJHt  of  tbejio  in  in  Rirffc's
AuthJfMjia  Int.,  pp.  187-^207;  tnu*.  lutv  French  hy
Cor]wt  (Paris,  IHtW).  !

AenobarbuB. Si-t-  AEiENOBAKjirs.  |

Aenum  or  Ah^nuin,  sc.  ra». A  bronze  tcskI  '>
bnng  uvcr  tbe  fire  aittl  iistMl  iu  boiliufc. Tfac  vroitl
alM>  (Icsi^iiutea  a  il^'vr'a  cupi>er;  uiii]  tbe  boilent
that  Hupplicd  iiot  wat^T  to  a  batb  were  also  caUnl
aXnit. St^*  BaLXKae.

Aenua.  (1)  A  town  in  Tliroce.  nenr  the  month
of  the  Hebrus,  Kiiid  by  Vfrijil  to  bavt-  bivn  rounttrd
by  Aeuoas. (2)  A  rivor  iu  Kbm*tiii,  iiuw  (be  Inn.

Aefiles  or  AedU  One  of  the  chief  brancbpM
t>f  the  Hclleuic  race,  nud  Btippo&ett  to  bedcuctiniled
friMii  Aeolus,  sou  of  Uolleii.  (Hcu  Aeolcs.)  Tbey
originally  lived  iu  Tboasaly,  tabeequeutlr  Hprvad
over  varinns  pBrtei  of  Oreece,  and  also  aettltitl  iu
Aeolio  in  A^ia  Minor,  and  in  Leab<i8  {r\.  v.).

AeoUae  InsfiJae.  A  gronp  of  inlands  nortbcast
of  Sieily,  irhtTc  Acnlits.  the  giMl  of  tlir<  nind^,
reigiHMl,  TtieHc  iiHliindd  werv  nlito  called  Ilcpbacs-
tiadi'8  or  Vitlcatiinv,  bi'cnnse  HephaeHtus  or  Vulcan
was  bolioved  to  have  bis  wurkiihop  in  one  of  titem
called  Hicra.  Tbi?y  were  nlwi  uaiued  Liparenscs,
from  Lipani,  (be  largest  of  tbi'in.

Aeolic  Dialect. Si^  Dialects.

Aeolldes  (AioXi3»jj).  A  patronymic  applied  to
varions  individuals,  of  nlioin  tbe  uioflt  iuiporlaiit
are  fliDypbus,  »ou  of  Aedliiin;  Odyw>en«,  to  nlniui  it
li  given  becatitto  IiIh  motlmr,  Auticb-Ji,  was  png-
caul  by  Aeuluft  when  sbe  married  LaiTtcs ;  and
Mieicnnft,  tlie  follower  of  Aeneas^  wbo  vras  called
so  figuratively,  from  bis  skill  iu  bIo»  iug  the  trum-
jiet. Tbe  femiuiue  form  is  Aeolin.

Aefilla  (AmXi't)  or  AeoUa.  A  district  in  Mysia  in
Asia  Minor,aud  peojiled  by  Aeolian  Greeks.  In  early
times,  tbcir  twelve  most  importout  cities  were  in-
dependent, and  formed  a  league — Cyni^,  Lnrissae,
Neouticbos,  Teumn<«,  C'illii,  Notiiim,  Aegirusa,  Pita-
ne,  Aegneae,  Mjriuo,  Grynca,  and  Soiyriia.  Those
cities  wpre  enbiHMjueijtly  o%T-rrotiie  by  C'rorsns  and
incorporatfd  iu  Ibu  Fersiau  Empire  under  Cyrus.
See  Lmmu)^

AefilUB  (AtoXot).  (I) The  rulerof  tbe  winds, son
of  Hippotasuud  Melanipp(',daugbt<'rofCliinin.  He
reigned  over  tbe  Aeoliau  l«laudH.  and  made  biei  rv^
ideuce  at  Stroiigyl^,  tbe  uitMleru  Htroniboli.  Tho
island  niu  entirely  surn^unded  by  a  wall  ut*  brass,
aud  by  smooth,  preiHpitous  rocks;  and  hero  Uc
dwelt  iu  continual  joy  and  festivity,  with  bis  wife
aud  his  six  sous  aud  a»  lUQuy  daughters.  Tbo  Isl-
and had  DO  other  tcuantM.  The  sons  and  daugb-
t«r*  were  niBTTied  to  euoh  other,  after  tbe  fashion
•et  by  Z^'usand  I(vr6.  OilyM^us  cam«<  in  the  I'tiurse
of  bis  wAudei-ingH  to  the  ielatid  of  AtH>lus, aud  na»
hospitably  tiutertalued  there  for  an  entire  uioiitb.
On  his  departure,  be  receiveil  from  Aeolus  all  tbo
winds  but  Zi^pbyrui>,  tied  up  iu  a  bag  of  tix-biilc,
Zephyrus  nas  favourable  fur  bU  piisnagc  home-
wanl.  During  nine  days  and  uighth  tbe  nhips  ran
merrily  before  the  wind;  on  the  tenth  thuy  weru'
witbin  sight  of  Ubaca,  wh<>u  Odywwu!«,  who  had
hitherto  held  the  hehu  hinisrlf.  fell  akicep.  Him
comrades,  who  fancied  that  Aeobm  had  giv•^n  him
trcaauro  in  Ibe  bag,  npennl  it:  the  winds  ninbed
out,  and  hurried  thfrm  back  to  Aeoliu.  Judging,
from  n  hat  bad  befallen  them,  that  Ibey  were  buto'l
by  the  godc.  tbe  niler  of  the  wiiulu  drove  theui
with  ropiuaches  from  bis  isle. Tbe  name  Aeolus  baa


AKQOI

Wen  derived  from  aif>Xor,  "  varj-iog,"*  "nusteady,"
a<*  a  descriptive  epithet  of  the  wiiidfl.  (^)  A  sou  of
Hf'llcu,  father  of  c^JHyphus.Crelheus,  and  Atbumas,
nud  till)  niytbie  progenitor  of  tbe  grvut  Aeolic  rare.

Aeon  {nlvv).  A  t*nn  occurring  fre<|ocutly  iu
the  philosophical  speculations  of  the  Guoetics.
who  ouuceivcd  the  emanations  from  Deity  to  Ito
divided  into  tnn  classes:  the  ouo  comprehend-
iug  all  tluwo  substantial  piiuers  which  tiTv  van-
ttttncd  uithin  the  Divine  E««euef.and  wbieb  com-
ptetCA  tbo  inllnilo  plenitude  oi  the  Diviutt  Nature:
the  other,  exlktiug  externally  with  reAjiect  to  tho
Divine  Essence,  and  including  all  linile  an<l  ini-
(lerfect  natnres.  U'ltbin  lln*  Divine  Ksst>nc<%  Ibey,
with  wonderful  ingenuity,  imagined  a  long  **rii-*i
ofemauative  priueiplei*,  lo  which  they  ascribed  a
real  and  siibhtuntial  eKinttt-ncc.  eonuectud  with  the
lirst  Bulistauce  as  a  branch  with  its  rout,  or  a  tifdar
ray  with  the  sun.  When  they  begnu  to  nnfold  tbe
mysteries  of  this  system  in  the  Greek  language,
these  Subnlantial  Powens  which  they  concoivt-d  to
be  conipreheiidfd  within  lb*"  rXij^fia,  or  Dirino
Pb*n)tnde,  they  called  alwytt,  aeons. Sec  Gnuwthti.

Aeora  or  Eora  (aiupa.  iitpa).  (1)  A  festival  at
Athens  arcorapauled  with  sncriHccs  and  bnuquets
in  commemoration  of  Erigoiu5  l,q.  v.).  (if)  A  swing,
which  was  a  farourito  nmuseuieut  in  Greece,  as  in


A«ji«,  or  Swing. (I^utonn.)

modcro  times.  The  illnstrution  shows  a  group  pd-
gngetl  ill  suingiug  one  anotber.

AepoUanas.  An  engraver  of  preciona  stonM,
of  the  second  ceuturj'  A.u.

AepjKuBlAtinTorX  (1)  A  luytbical  king  of  Arca-
dia, from  whom  a  part  of  tho  country  was  called
Aepytis,  (2)  Tho  younger  son  of  Creephontes.  king
of  Mt-HHonia,  and  of  31>'r«|«<<,  daughter  of  the  ArcA-
diitu  king  C.vpselus.  When  liis  father  ami  brothers
were  murdered  during  an  insnrrecLion,At->pyt us,  who
was  with  his  grandfather  CypM.dns,  alonu  tuirapcd.
The  throne  of  Cre^phnutes  wu^  meautimu  occupied
by  Pol3'phonte«.  who  forced  MrrojuS  to  become  hi»
wifu.  When  Aepytns  bad  giowu  to  umnluKMl  he
returned  to  his  kingdom,  nud  put  Polyphonte^  tu
death.  From  him  the  kings  of  Meaaeuiu  wera
called  Aepytidae.

Aequj.  Aequic6li.  Aequicfilae.  AeqttiouluiL
A  people  of  Italy,  ilwelliiig  in  tlie  upper  valley  of
the  Auio,  in  Ibe  mouut.^ii)H  forming  tbo  caateiii
biMiudnry  of  Latiitm,  aud  betweeu  the  Latini,  Sa-
Inni,  Hernici.nnd  Mnrht.  In  conjunction  with  tbu
Voldci,  who  were  uf  the  Mime  lace,  Ihoy  carrieil  on
coustaut  hostilities  with  ifome,  but  went  Biialljr


k


AKQUl  FAU^'l  Sa

UUlufd  ill  n.c.30S. Ou0  of  their  uliief  soata  won
Huuiic  AlgiduN.

Aeqol  raliad 8eci  FjkLrRii.
Aeqniponditun. S«-«'1.ibha;  TRmNjt.
Aera. Si-f  CiiHiixnUMiv.


Aeniscatdrea.  Vagmnts  vim  nin^le  n  Hring  hy
foiliiiic-tcUing  untl  iM-pgiiij;.  Thv  ^irwk«  cull»il
Ihciu  liyvfrrai  (0»'II.  xlv.  1), See  Al;V^tT.V^:.

Aea  (;yaXKot). Much  ronfitwinu  linn  nriseii  fnim

ttie  fuct  tbat  LiutI)  Orwks  nixl  Itmnanstiseotily  uiio

tt^rm  for  copitcr  inxl for  lliiit iiiixtnre  of  r>>|>|MT

AenriL liy  the  r:ou»tUillioi)  iif  Serrms  Ta11ii)9 auit  tin  wbirli  we  call  bmnxe. Excepthif;  ]H'i'lia|tfi


(McCEXTt'HlA).arrurii  wrr<:  citizt^ns  who  werr<  tiot
•ettini  ou  luutl  uf  their  owu.  iiiiil  thercfute  nut  iu-
ctodetl  ia  any  one  v(  the  |>ruiH.Tty  closstu  rontnlrd
oa  Uad-owiiri'Kbip.  The  tcmi  wm  al«o  applii-il  to
tbnH  lUaniling  niiUiiU^  of  the  tribal  iiiiiun,  who
\j-wtn  exeluilff)  fmai  the  ri^ht  of  vntiiiK  aiul  fntni
taUUuy  tervlw,  miil  who  were  hutiiul  to  [luy  »
i]|-tnx  iu  proporttun  tu  tht'ir  itieuiii*.  Citizcim  hi
lie  cliMMKw  anit  trilK'H  coiihl  h«<  t^xiwllcd  fmui  their
Iribr  hv  ibc  ri'iuMin*  in  ptiiiiiihtui'iil  fur  uu,v  fuuU,
aH  |>l>ci-<l  uniuiig  thi!  iivrarii. Hut  when  the  hit


KiM,  cupper  is  Ibu  essifnt  tif  iiiflalii  to  lunl  anil
fashion,  lifiiiK  fniind  hi  hinipx,  iiiiil  nut,  likt*  imii,
hi'ltleii  ill  ore.  IfeMiml  iiml  I.iicn*tiiin,  Aiiil  HiioiiMit
wrilffs  ft«ii4> rally,  iiia4le  the  Afju  of  llroii£c  pr<fCi-xlo
tliul  of  Iruii,  uiiti  tbut  tlivy  ttfre  rii^ht  im  3hiirii1ai)t-
ly  proveil  by  Ihu  fXCAvatiotis  of  iiiiMlfrit  tiiiic-s.
Theft!  iMM.'iiiN  141  h:ive  bocit  n  lime  iiniuviMalcty  mic-
cecUiti};  the  Sjlotio  A|.'u  ivheii  ituplviucut^  woro
huittvu  out  t>f  pun;  oop^HT,  bnt  it  tliil  not  lust  hnm-
thir  ctiNlom  of  iiihling  tin  to  capper  wits  intrndticed^
uml  from  thnr  time  until  the  close  of  anriviit  bis-


ttr  nerf  like^^  iai;  oilmitttil  into  the  triben  (B.u. ;  t<>ry,t-oppor  iinmixt>il  wo*  H«!hli>iii  niiwd  for  itny  |>ur-


•?).  beiiii;  mrollwl  in  lb»«  city  tribes  tB.c.  3«>4>,
lutaicb  wi>ce  oti  that  Recount  lew  eHioeiopfl  thiui
Itbe  country  ones,  a  penul  Iraiittfur  lo  lite  nerarii
Ett'iikiNtwl  ill  oxpnUlou  from  one's  proper  tribe  am)
iTctnovnl  to  one  of  the  city  tribe*  till  at  least  the

1  BCXt  CritHHS.

Aerartl  TribunL See  Aes  K^jiiwntE ;  TRmnM.

A«nuiQin  (ro  Sij^diFio*').  The  ulate  Irramiry  of
It"nic.  Into  wliirh  llowril  ibe  revrnnen  ordiimry
Md  UUaunlinarT.  iitiil  out  of  which  tbv  ni-c<lful


IHMMv,  variiHiti  metolH  bcin^  ndib-d  to  it  to  inrrvntio
ill*  hiu^lneiM.  Itronxe,  oontuiriin(C  ulK>nt  I'J  to  14
jwr  cent,  of  ttn  and  ft*  Ut  W  (wr  cent,  of  copper,
mm  nmdc  at  ii  Vfry  early  i^'ritxl  in  K);ypl  und  AF>ia4
The  niMi  of  it  wiut  iiitrodiicwl  into  Greece  in  pre-
historic limen,  probiibly  hy  lh«r  l'h<euieianK  Tiu
i«  Dot  fonnd  in  (in^rce.  and.  iu  fuel,  exiMa  iu  but
few  parts  of  ICnr»|)c:  I  be  Pha-uioiuiiH  are  Huppowxl
to  have  travrlled  in  M>:ircb  of  it  uo  fur  aK  Cornwall
and  India. The  Hkem-wt  of  the  (jn-ek  word  for  tin

_. »i.n.  defr«vwl. It  wa«  kepi  iu  the  hu^e- (''a'ririr,,x>t)  t«.  the  Saimkrit  kattira  ««-uih  lo  indl-

•wtrflheTewpb.ofSiitnrn.  under  the  chnrjjeof '"»«^'  ^l"'*  »'"  <'r>Kiii»l  «t'lM»l.V  of  Crnck  tm  onmo
thr  .(na^io™. A speeiiil reserve fmid wa-*  the fnmi  India. ToHcco.mt,  hMw,wer.foribeeuorm.ni8
fl»."ioi  M«cri»>,  in  which  the  proceeds  of  receipt*  ;  'in''"''ly  of  tin  which  In  Ihu  Krona^AKc  mu<.t  biive
fnu"  Ihs  nmnniuiBMioniax  (one  IwentiHth  of  the circiilal«d  HirouKh  Korope  i»  not  wtey.
fiw<l  •Invr,.  valne)  were  depoailed  in  Rold  iuaM^.  i *" "on»*T'»  tiino hrunw  i»  the  UHtial  material

for  tri|MMlH,  vc(i»rlii,  annonr  of  defence,  and  even


Ww'o  Aiij;iiiiiuK  divided  the  proTinccs  into  aena-
tonnlaml  im|*rnitorial,  there  weretwochief  trean-
Ww*.  (See  FiaciTs, )  The  aenatorial  treasury.
irDkh  WM  still  kept  in  the  Temple  of  Saturn,  vrnn
left  Bnilfr  the  control  of  Ihu  Senate,  Iml  only  an  it
matter  (if  f„nnal  rij;ht.  Practically  it  pimm-d  into
lb*  bandi  of  the  eni{H'n>ni,  who  al!u>  brou^jht.  tUu
lunagfnwint  of  Iht;  trt^iwuri'-j.  under  their  own  eye
°T*ppolii|tt)g,  iuHlead  of  the  c|Uaet>tor!t,  t-wu  f/ruf-
f^  orrnni  Inkeii  from  tbocM  who  bad  tterved  «ei
CnptanL  BrAtdei  this,  they  diverted  into  their
"*"jfcui  all  the  larger  revenoed,  even  tboHO  that
^Uf  beUmged  I"  the  aerarinm.  (t*eo  Kisci'fl.)
*■"■  in  eounw  of  time  tlie  returns  from  nil  the
pnTioeef  fliiwc<l  into  ihu  imiwrial  Ireaaary,  the
•■•Jwiil  «erarinm  c(mtiniie4l  to  exist  aa  the  city
""""y.  The  aentritiH  militart  vra*  a  pension-
UMl  fdoudrd  by  AucudIum  in  a.D.  )i,  for  di»abl«l
**•««.  [Is  mRim^rDieiit  was  intrusted  to  three
F^/tai  QcnDii  miiilnru.  It  waa  maintained  ont
"lUi*  iui^^rest  on  a  considrruble  fund,  and  the  pro-
*••■' "f  (he  herilane  and  sale  duties.  Sco  Mar-
Vii,  Nfa«f»«ni'..//M».7,  ii.  pp.  Sa3-:«»5.

**'*  A  baaVet  of  ofiiero,  rn»bea.  or  wdgo,  ami
'"^Vjtany  wlwot,  naudfOr  earth. Soe  BAScarBA.

"rflp4(*A*^«ijl.  Thedau^hterufCalrcua,  king
*^'**^aud  wlfcof  Plisthi'iicR,  the  son  of  AlrcMiH.by
^"'n  (he  became  the  mother  of  Auameniiioii  and
'"'tUtbL  After  the  death  of  Plistheiies.  Aerop^
•""•d  4treus  ;  and  her  tun  i»oim,  who  were  edn-
'"•'by  AliBus,  were  freiicnitly  bclievMl  to  ho  lier
•**  ACrop^  was  faithleM  (o  Alremt,  buiitg  se-
"w*!  by  Thyiwlea. See  Peuipidae.

Aerufa  VordiBrin.  The  word  la  uaod  Ggura-
^""''r  sf  auvy. Hot.  S.  i.  4.  IGI.


bpuurp,  lliongh  in>n  waa  begttining  to  bo  niwd  for
utfciiHivc  weapon**.  It  is  probable  Ihiit  wion  after
the  Homeric  age  v^'rapcniH  of  bi-onze  fell  ont  of  nee.
This  compound,  however,  cimlinnc'd  to  lie  largely
employed  for  titensiltt  of  al)  kindn,  for  worku  of  art
and  other  purpusee.  The  interior  of  the  tn-aniiries
of  Mycenae  and  Orvhomeiius  were  lined  «iih
hrnnuv,  bniu?;H  w:im  UMtd  in  hiHiairical  liincH  for
vesM'lf,  caniU'tabra,  chariots,  for  the  inscribing  of
trealieK  and  laws,  for  {lerHonal  ornament,  and  iu
placeH  for  coin.  Also  all  inalnimonts  used  for  re-
ligiouK  purposes  were  made  of  brruize  fium  motives
of  religious  couMcrvatiani.  The  abundance  of  cof>-
l>er  Midlcieutly  accouuta  for  its  general  u»e  among
the  aiieieuls.  We  have  a  remarkable  re(«ullof  thia
fact  iu  the  use  of  }(aXKtvt  and  xaXxtitw.  n  Iimo
working  in  iron  is  mnaab  (Horn.  (id.  ix.  391 ;  Atis-
tnt.  i'ort.^^t.  One  of  the  chief  Hotircen  of  copper
in  antiquity  waa  CypniH ;  from  tlie  namo  of  that
island  is  ilerived  the  lx>w  I^-itin  cuprum,  aud  onr
wnnl  copi>cr.  The  metal  was  almi  procured  iu
Enlmea,  near  tliu  town  of  ('haU-is.  and  iu  other
INU'ta  of  Urecci': ;  alno  in  (?ampaiiia  in  Italy,  in  Ger-
many, and  olHewhurc.  Hut  the  niost  celebraled
bronze  did  not  como  from  thoM  regions,  but  wna
au  object  of  special  manufacture  elsewhere.  'I'wo
of  the  most  cclchraletl  mixinrea  wera  the  Deliaii
(Plin.  xxxiv.  $  tf)  and  the  Aegioetan  (f.  r.  ^  10),
which  were  much  UMid  in  art.  We  learn  that  My-
ron nsetl  the  former  mixiun',  Polyclttus  the  latter.
The  Deliaii  was  reckone<l  the  moro  prvi:i(uis  of
Iheiw,  but  «li)l  more  valuable  wan  the  kr/Miliinn  or
Iiver>co1oiin'd  bnnijee,and  nuist  valuable  of  all  the
C'orintliian.  With  ivgard  to  the  laat-mcntioned,  a
(tiliy  story  wan  told  that  it  wob  produced  hy  a  for-


AES


U


AESCHINES


tnihins  mixlnre  of  tiioltiMl  itictiit!*  <in  tlt«*  iKTii«tuti
cpf  tlw  buruing  of  (%miilh  by  MiimtniuM.  Pliny
Uxxiv.  4  7>M>uMbly  rt'inarkx  that  tliU  story  is  qIk
8unl.  bocmiM)  must  of  the  nnthora  of  the  highly
vnliieil  works  iu  CoriDlhinu  bronze  liroil  at  a  much
earlier  |>eriiKl,  A  I&rge  uninher  of  variptieii  of
bniiize  of  vnrioofl  colours  were  knotrn  to  the  aii-
cieiits.  Slid  it  seeiud  thnt  tbry  tint<'d  their  »tatiie«
by  uiakitiK  them  of  a  jitdictuns  mixtnre  of  sortn.
Thtin  w  t\ni\  inetitioti  of  ii  bronze  liHrat>l^  tb»t  w:itf
jistp,  of  an  Athamnn  thai  bhiKhtHl,  hdU  of  a  Pullas
with  ruibiy  rhefhK  made  by  Phidian.  Th«  aii-
cifiits  alfui  nndanttiHid  the  art  tit'  liartleiiiiig  lht>
tiiet:il  hy  di|>piuK  It  iu  water  »ud  L>x|M>aiuf;  it  to
the  air.  Evl'ii  in  Hunitrr  thrn*  is  out*  ]tiiMMaK«  \Od.
ix.  'JUl)  which  iti  aiipiMmoil  tu  allude  to  Ihix  jtrocesx
vtiich  retfvul  ex]H:rimfuts  have  proved  j)u*»ihle.
Theiuixttiri-  ufcopperaiid  aiiic  which  we  call  brass
iras  known  to  the  Ister  (ireeks  aud  Komuns,  aud
by  them  callnl  orultalrum  (w«>  Plin.  xxxiv  4).  The
chief  niilliority  ns  n'K""'*  tl"?-  kinds  and  work-
iiiji  of  bninxi*  is  Phiiy  yH.  iV.  xxxiv.  ).  Hp  dim-
tiu|*tiiHht^  rop{K>r  on>  into  two  kinds :  rtidmea,
fiinnd  ill  Italy  and  Oertnany,  and  chaldttM  in  Cy-
pnip  and  clsewhrrr.  Of  Corinthian  brour.<*  (^  H>
he  ilintinginHbrn  thrn-  kitidn:  in  tlit-  tiirtt  silver
pn-donuniili-K.  in  Ihr  M-rond  gold,  in  thr  thirtl  the
metals  are  balancdd  and  barmoni7X!d.  Of  Cyprian
bronu  (^  94)  the  chief  claasMt  kiv.  corattarium,  which
ift  of  golden  bne  wboo  divided  into  thin  layers,  aud
rtywlart,  which  cait  he  banimorod  and  drawn  ont
into  bars  and  wir««.  A  commoner  kind  of  copper
Cnot  Cyprian),  called  ealdnn*Mt,Anc^  not  give  to  the
hamnicr,  and  i«  only  tit  for  mcllin);.  At  Capua
they  mldcd  to  copptir  In  make  hr*>n7.e,  1*)  per  cent.
of  Spauisli  ftNmbvHi  arrjaitanum,  which  wot  made
of  tin  and  lead  It)  equal  proportiouH.  Pliny  states
that  ropper  vr:m  largely  uw'd  in  nit^dicine  (^  10i>
loll.),  h4^illg  either  tiiixod  with  milk  or  sulphur  for
extemul  application  to  wouiidii,or  taken  iuiemal-
ly.  mixM  wiih  honey,  in  order  to  eaiiM  vomitiug.
For  a  maoH  of  details  of  thtK  charaetcr  wo  wu-tt
refer  the  reader  to  I*liny  himwlf.

In  the  early  bronze- work  uf  Greece  and  Etrurin,
the  mannfncturing  itn>ceMe»  were  itimple.  The
tisuiil  process  for  utensils  and  ornaments  was  t^t
work  pliitps  with  the  hammer  into  the  required
»h»pe,  fastt'ninje  tliem  with  iiaiU  or  solder,  aud
Wniiiig  up  a  pattern  on  them  in  n7>r>i(4Mf  work,  the
whole  beili};  tinished  with  a  ^raviu)r-t<K>I.  Small
figures  wen*  S4>melinies  i'm.-4t  iu  the  lump.  When
wu  are  lold  thnt  the  (Inwks,  Khorcus  aud  ThetMli>-
rns,  first  ciist  iu  brunce  (Pausan.  ix-41.  (  t),  we  must
perhaps  nndrrstand  by  this  that  tbe»e  arlist«  iii-
Crodured  tb>'  melbo«I  of  cnsting  statues  hollow,  not
solid,  »•>  their  firedee>>«t»ors  hail  done.  These  art-
iitt«  may  have  lived  abont  the  tiOth  Olympiad,  and
«erlaiuly  soon  after  that  time  broiiKn  statuary
flpread  with  great  rapidity  over  Greece;  and  in-
deed bronze  r>ontiiiueil  a  favourite  material  with
fiCnlptors  until  the  decay  of  art.  Of  the  foniialive
prtfcess  wf  have  a  vivid  picture  on  a  On-ek  vnae
of  gtHid  period,  cngTUved  na  the  fronttspieoe  to  Mr.
Mnrniy'.«  Hiutory  of  (irtel  Sm/prsiv.  The  ciiraor-
dinary  aboudanre  of  works  of  art  in  bronze,  found
ou  almost  all  ancient  sites.  eH{ieciaIIy  st  llercnla-
ncnm  and  Pompeii,  is  a  nntiible  fact.

CopttfT  nt  Coin. — In  the  coinage  of  the  Greeks
and  Romiina  copitrr  is  seldom  nniilloyetl.  A  unni-
ber  of  analywrs  made  of  late  years  of  Greek  roins
ehow  a  proportion  of  tiu  of  from  10  to  IG  per  ceilt.,


ntid  »n  occajfionnl  3  to  Ti  per  cent,  of  lead.  RomaD
or*  nyinlnm  iii  repuhlicaii  timeji  nhows  a  pro|Nirw
tion  of  J  to  H  per  cent,  of  tin  and  JG  to  29  of  lead.
After  the  lime  of  Augustus  a  change  was  intnw
duced  iu  the  compiwitiou  of  Kuuiau  coin.  Tbeiico-
forward  neelertii  and  diiputidii  were  madeof  hrasi^
that  iti  to  say,  of  a  mixture  coutaiuiug  90  per  ccnt.j
of  Kinc  and  l:^)  of  eop|H>r;  while  the  oasea  wer«  i
made  entirely  of  copper.  Money  of  copgier  iiud
tin>ii/e  stood  on  a  very  diOen-nt  footing  iu  Italy  to
that  on  wbieh  it  stood  in  Hellaa  and  Asia,  For  to
western  eutuitries,  i*op|>er  was  (he  usual  mtMltnm
of  exchange  aud  measure  of  value:  the  chief  cnr>
reucy  consisted  iu  early  times  of  huge  iiigotn  of
copper  Htaui|>ed  with  »n  oflicial  tyjie ;  and  when
gold  and  silver  came  into  uhi\  they  at  tirst  ptLssrd;
merely  as  the  e<)uiva1eiils  and  repn'seiitutivun  of
so  mnch  copper.  In  the  Eaal,  on  I  lie  other  bund,
where  gold  and  silver  were  the  true  media  of  ex-
change,  niid  r»>pper  was  used  only  for  very  small
valued,  it  was  seldom  minted  save  as  money  uf  no-
count.  (See  NiMlhMATic*.  1  The  Plolemie«  of
Egypt  mintetl  copper  pitnres  of  full  value;  nitd
Branden  {GnrirkhtrrwK,  p.  29i\  is  disponed  to  think
that  the  early  Alhciiiaii  and  other  rop]>er  money
was  niinleil  up  to  full  wei);lit  for  a  tiuu-.  Bnt  thia
wasexoupllonal ;  and  iu  ahnosl  all  Hellenic  sctllo
luenta,  copjH^r  money  was  a  nimtnry  of  tokcna;
and  the  weight  of  it  is  coiUie4|n«niIy  most  irregn-i
lar.  Copper  money  vbs  tinic  minted  in  Greceo
towards  the  end  of  tbc  tlfth  century,  at  which  i>o-
riod  the  cittos  of  South  Italy,  Sicily,  aud  llella*'
alike  began  to  strike  copper  pieces  in  place  of  iha
minute  silver  ciMiis  which  had  hitherttt  poaeed  OM
small  change.  CoDKrvative«  ulijected  to  the  inno-
vaiiun,  as  we  know  from  Arisluphanes  (  A'aa.  7:25).

Since  the  m<wt  ancient  coins  in  Kouie  and  tli4
old  Italian  slates  were  made  of  iii^,  this  name  W119.
given  to  money  in  general,  so  thnl  I'lpiaii  (I>ig.  M^
tit.  16,  S.  158j  says,  Klitim  uurtat  MUwrmMT  ats  thdmmt,
(Cf.  Hor.  ^ra /W^:t4,^>:  £>).  i.  7,'J3.}  Furl  be  hi  m^
reason  we  have  at*  ttlicHum,  meaning  debt,  nnd  or/A
iu  the  pinnil.  pay  to  the  soldier*  (Liv.  v.  4;  Piiu,
U.  .V.  xxxtv.  ^  W  The  Itomamt  bad  uo  otiicr  coin-
age fxc^'pt  cop|»er.  till  B.C.  3t©,  live  yean  befoi
tbe  Fint  Punic  War. iiee  As.

AeaScua  (  Auracw  1  ■  The  aon  of  Priiun  and
Alexirrhoe,  who  fell  in  lore  with  Ileaperia,  tli4
dauf;hter  nf  Cebren.  While  he  was  paraaiiig  bef^
slie  was  sttinji;  l>y  a  viper  and  died.  Antaemi  in  bil
RTief  threw  himself  into  the  sea,  and  was  changed
liy  Thfti-s  into  an  oi|nalir  bird  (Uvid,  Idri.  xi.  1HS\. '

Aesar.  (1)  An  Etruscan  w-oni  equivalent  \&
tbe  Liiliii  devx  (Suet.  i.~*ctar.  97).  Casaalmn  con-
nects it  with  tbe  Gr.  altra,  **  dite."  (S)  A  river  of
Bniltii,  neiir  Crotooa,  in  Sootheru  Italy.

AeschXnea  <  \ltr^i»tft).  (1)  A  great  Atbenian
orator,  horn  iu  B.C.  Sf'ii,  the  sou  of  Att«»tiietns,
a  scht»oluiaster,  and  Lcucothea.  The  stAlemenu
of  IVniotfthciies  iu  regard  lo  ihedisreputalde  cliar^
ncterof  his  parents  an-  probably  groundless.  Afl«>r<
MHue  experience  as  a  mldter  be  entered  upon
the  pntfeiwion  of  n  public  clerk,  winch,  however,
he  soon  left  to  become  an  actor  of  indifferent  *m>
cc«a.  But  his  real  talents,  aided  by  his  ex|»erienDft
of  public  life  gnined  as  a  clerk,  soon  made  bitn'
]tnmiineiit  when  he  tunie^I  his  altvotiou  t^)  a  polit-
ical car^^-r.  In  B.C.  Sfc".  after  the  fall  of  Otynthna,||
be  attracleti  attention  by  MlvooatiuK  a  general'
council  of  tbe  Greek  States  to  contxTt  measntetf


J


AESCUINES


8fi


AKSCIIYtUS


agnitiat  Kiug  Pbiliii. But  tlm  fiitlnre  of  tho  em-

bEssy  To  Arcftriio.  which  ho  uuiUirtonk  in  ]iiin)iiaiii>o

f)f  ibis  pIaii,M<i:ius  to  linv(^H(i<liiu-i)iirAK4Ml  liliii  that

Iw  itDniotlmt4*ly  rhangffl  (tUlcs,  anil %v:ii>  thuncv-

fnrth  111)  lulliprrnt  of  thi*  ju'iu'c  |>urty. lii  this

capnoiiy  ho  jtliiyetl  n  rniiHpicnoufi  part  aft  a  nwni-

Vr  of  the  fammiti  emhoiwy  to  PhJli])  in  n.  c.U-tit,  [ire-'

niiiAiT  to  ih«'  |M?iir<>  uf  riiHorrntrit. The  coiiii>li-

Kletl  iletitils  of  theM<  nix*>t'i>l>»i>8 iihpiI  iint \w

[lv«ii  here. <8c<5  I>K.«i>«riiKMtN ; Phimi' 11.) It

t<nffii'iriit  I4t  luiy  th.it  At^Acliiiuw  na»>  mcmi  ovt-r

rPliili]>'ft  flaiiiry  (th^rc  it  uo  proof  that  hi^  wiik

■tadl^  hribiMl,  lH<yotul  the  fiarilii&ii  Htulriiii'iit  of

nBliiktb«tie»)).  »ii(l  hocanif  L'otivinci*<)  tli»t  u  vhtac

^uice  with  the  Mnccduuiau  king  was  the  uSttst


lNtii<itiul  lluftt-uni,  Naiilos.)

-  .  .11 1,-11..  Alfurisit  iiuiiicdhitfly  nfl^r  the
fouclnpiitri  uf  tliL'  iH-iici',  he  was  iiiiiictv*!  hy  Tiiimr-
')>■>«,  nil  aillicrcat  of  iJeiiiaatLi-ucR.  for  trensoimblu
'''mliKt,  but  waa  triaDtphantly  ncriniMoil.  A  hoc-
■"■^  MciisikMoti,  t>ron);ht  by  Di*utottlh<.'iieH  birutielf
'»».c.aw,  wuM  more  uearly  »iicccMfiil,BinI  Aotwhi-
"•w  rmrronly  o^irniMHl  (-(itivirlino,  aftiT  uii  alil«  ric-
'"*«,iu  nhich  ht!  wan  aUhil  by  ihn  iiil«riM>hHion
"4  Eitxilua  uiil  Phocioi).  AcKchiiicH  i)«*xt  iipiwarK
"mieyf  iLo  rv[in-M*ulativts  4if  Alhcim  at  thi*  Aiii-
J^Wyt^iict'oiiiicll  utlVlphi  ill  B.c.aiiS.  H«-n',  iiH
'>'' Iclbi  ii«,  he  won  fto  L'iiiii){iil  by  uii  niijnnt  i-'oni-
plurut  B|iw;h  the  dnle|{nt4?»  fruiu  Auiphiiwii  biuiiybl
^punet  AlfaeiiM,  that  he  ia  turu  mtule  a  vehcmcut


con iitcr-n Mack  on  tUn  AinphiiiHiani  fur  their  ficoii-
pation  of  tlio  fuiored  plain  of  C'irrhiL  So  infuriated
wore  tliH  AmphiPtyoiis  by  hid  invective  thtit.  after
biiniii)^  thn  biiilrlinf^Kot  thi>  ntTi'tidiiif;  Amphiititiaii
(lotthTR,  tln'V  voti-d  ttt  lioM  a  s|wrinl  nwelinn  of
till-  council  to  cmiJiidiT  what  further  puntHbiiifiit
ahoiihl  be  inlli<:l4>(l.  AIIiphk  and  Tb<'bi>«  n-fiiHed  to
Mciid  drlr^ratrft  tt>  ibirt  aKtcmldy,  ami  thti?t  bc^'^iiioo
involved  in  war  with  I'hiltp  and  tbn  nwt  of  Ibe
AmidiiclyoiiK — a  war  wbloh  riwutttMl  in  tbo  fntal
bnttk'  of  dhaoroiioa  and  ibo  doTrnfall  of  Athuoiuu
inditiHuidciici*.

In  stirring  np  this  nrir  conflict,  Aetirbiufs  cer-
tainly played  into  tho  hands  of  I'hilip,  wbo  waa
awaiting  an  opportunity  for  armed  intorfitn^irc  tu
the  af1nir«  of  Central  fJreec«;  lint  liprc,  too,  the
charge  of  bribory  rwtu  on  tho  tnotiipportod  tmti-
nioiiy  of  bin  bitl4irf.ht  4'nf  my.  Aftrr  tlm  battle  of
Chaeroin^a,  tho  party  nf  Ai'HrbtiinH  natnnilly  fi>ll
inrn  iliHtAvnnr.  Iln  thtfJt  not  figure  pminltionily
in  pnblir  atTaim  a^ain  till  n.f.  \\.H),  wbnn  ho  inado
a  liual  offiSH  ta  itnfoat  hi»  baled  rival.  An  ohHcnm
politician  nainiMl  C'tesiption  had  in  B.C. 336  brought
in  a  hill  proponing  to  coiifrr  a  golden  crowt]  npon
L>eiuo«tbeue4  for  bis  aorvicMi  to  the  Stata.  Aw-
chiucs  raised  ol>jectlon  to  thin  on  tlie  ncoro  of
illeffnlity.  Tim  caae  did  not  come  to  trial  till  six
years  hnd  ela)w^d.  and  then  enoh  of  the  onitori  ex-
haiiHled  rvery  effort  tii  eniiih  bin  oppont-nt.  But
AoMThiiu-R  wiiH  the  weaker,  both  in  fjoniuH  luul  iti
merit,  and,  not  receiving  the  liflb  part  of  the  votoa
of  Ibu  court,  bi<  woH  lintxl  one  tboUKand  drachuiaa,
and  loNt  tbu  right  of  ap}>eiiriug  before  the  people
ill  a  Htaiitur  capacity  again,  lie  \v(t  AtbciiK  iind
went  flrat  to  KphttJinK  and  ufterwanls  t4>  IthcKli'Af
wh^re  hr  in  naid  to  hiivu  opened  n  bcIiooI  of  oratory,
lie  outlived  Iiia  gn-at  opponciit  and  died  at  Sauios
at  the  age  of  seventy-live.

Only  three  orations  of  AcschincM  have  been  pro-
serviMl.ntiil  nil  of  fhoHe  bear,  directly  or  Indirectly,
on  hitquarrrd  witb  Demoslheues.  Their  titlesure:
(a)  Jgttimt  Timarcinu,  (ft)  Oh  the  IHehowt  t^mbany^
(r)  J^nitiifl  Ctrntjihon.  The  occaiiinn  and  subject  of
each  have  been  noticed  iibove.  The  etucond  of  Ibeui
i»  gi'ncrally  cuoHidered  to  bL>  tbn  bi^ttt.  In  natnnit
gifts  uf  onitory  AeaehiniM  waft  infiTtur  to  T>Mmo»-
Ibi'ues  aloiiu  among  biii  eouloiupurarieo.  He  ux-
celltHl  particularly  iu  brilliuiit  iniiTnttve,  uud  waa
al»o  one  of  tlie  llrhl  to  win  a  repntatlou  for  extetn-
piii'Bneouftiiin-iH.-h.  Ho  waa  Iohh  careful  in  hii4  oom-
position  than  L>ouiosthent;»,aiiii  was  inferior  to  him
in  vigour  and  juunil  cariioKtueiia.

The  t'ditions  of  Schultz  (Leipzig, I86:>)  and  Weid-
iier  (Ib'riiii,  InT'Jl  ar^^  nniong  the  nicwt  important.
Kieli»rdHoii'.-i  edition  cd'  WeidnerV  JgaitiMt  VtetiphoH
may  bo  rHeounnHuiloil  to  Anierioan  rKudem.

{M)  A  pbil(Mopht>r  of  Atlienn,  a  pupil  of  Sooniten,
ufler  wbiuiedL-alb  ho  bui-aiiiu  u  perfumer,  liul,iin>et-
ing  with  littlf  isiicet*HM,  wrnt  to  Kitily  and  Nlayod
at  the  court  uf  tJie  tyrant  Uiunyaiun  nnril  that
ruler  was cx|ielled.  Kotnruing  to  Atbeim,  lit-  taught
philosophy  in  privnte  for  a  fi*.  H^TMidoa  orations
and  ejuBtloit,  Ue  wrote  Socratic  dialogues  on  (em-
perniiro  and  (bo  other  virtues.  None  of  these  dto-
bigucK  n^mnins.  Three  othi'rs  that  exist  and  that
are  lUMirilw-d  to  Aeschinos  are  B]inrion.'i,  They  tr»>at
(a)  of  Virliu-,  {h)  of  Riches,  (c)  of  DeJ*tb.  Aenchiaea
pn^teiidird  to  have  reei:lved  bis  dialogues  from
Xuniliipp/-.  rile  wife  of  8oertite».

Acachj^lUB  (AiVxi'Xof).  The  atm  of  Rupliorion,
bora  in  thu  Attic  deme  of  Eleiiftift  in  the  year  B^


AESCHVLUS


36


AESC'UYLUS


526.  Ttio  pcri(H)  of  Ihk  yoiuli  atx)  i^arly  nianhnml
coiiiciilt^s  with  tlip  isrv»t  iiufiniinl  stnifi^lp  whitli
l>«>lli  AnJntic  aiul  Kiir«iH*un  HvIIim  wor«  forced  tn
wajje  ftdiiinc:  tlio  bftrhBriaiiu  in  TitP  first  twenty
j'Miitt  «f  llie  fifth  century.  lit  tliii*  rontlict  hei '
pliiyvtl  till-  part  v(  a  limw  m>lilier  hI  lliv  baltluii
i)f  Miiraltiuii.  .StilniiiiM,  ati«1  Phduvu,  hihI  him  uorkti
aImiuihI  in  trnci-i^  of  the  wurlike  antl  patriotic  fiM*!-
itig  of  (liofu*  Dtirrliigdays.  IVm  bmther  Cyni.'girn§
met  ail  lieroic  dentil  at  Mnrntlion.aiHl  aii<>ttierilj»<
titigiitshcd  soldier  of  Salatiiis.  AiuiiiiuM.  i.t  naid  tu
bav""  iH-fu  of  tlie  snnip  family.  I>itt  this  is  probaldy
an  error.  Wo  know  little  of  the  yonth  and  educa-
tion of  AenchyhiB.  bnt  it  Is  cert^dti  that  h«  Wgaii
bi(4  rsriYt  il«  a  tm}:ic  {loet  before  the  uae  of  ttiirty
yean),  though  Iiim  tint  victory  wn^  not  ^tiined  till
486.  AlKiiit  the  year  -170  he  went  t^i  Hieily  at  Iho
Invilaliitii  of  King  Htero  of  Syntriiw.  Here  he
c»ul{iOM>d  his  Jr/NurUM  Jf'omm  {Xirynuu),  hi  honour
of  the  newly  founded  city  of  Aetna.  HiM  departure
from  Athena  baa  been  UMcrilied  to  mi.indieliueui
by  the  Atheiiiaim  tor  profunatioii  of  tl^Tnyaterie*.
But  it  was  the  poliey  of  Hieru  Ut  attxaot  literary
men  to  hi*  Urilliatit  court,  and  the  iireseiice  of
AetHrhylus  there  needti  no  more  explanntion  than
that,  of  Siinouidf.H  and  i'indar  ilnriuf;  the  luitne
IKtiihI.  I.jil4'r  til  bin  life  he  viMtril  .Sicily  a  wecoud
lime,  where  he  met  bis  death  in  iiiG.  Among  tbe
inatiy  inythiral  detaili*  with  which  tradition  ban
Biirrtuiiidrd  the  life  of  Ae-nrhylnrf,  It  i»  miid  that  he
WH»  killed  by  an  eagle  b-tting  full  a  Iurt4)itn)  nixni
hill  tpuld  heail,  nup|HKin];  it  to  be  a  Htone.  The  high
honour  in  which  he  was  held  by  tlu^  Athenians  aftnr
bltt  death  is  Rhiiwn  by  the  fact  that  in  latiT  tiniea
it  was  made  lawful  t«  reproduce  his  play*  in  com-
petition  for  the  prize  against  new  trngediea.


'jr.


i. ii.


AoM-hrltw. (CnpltAltDo  UoHfim-)

AeKcliylut>  is  Koid  to  hnve  produeeil  beventy-two,
*  or  even  ninety  dramas,  uuO  to  have  gained  the
firvl  priu;  thirteen  times.  As  each  |>o«t  coinpcled
with  four  |days  ( thret-  tragedies  auU  a  itutyric
dnmai,  it  appears  that  Ae(H'h>lnti  was  (tnccessful
in  moTO  than  half  of  all  liia  cootCHta.  Only  neven
of  bia  tragnliiw  have  rotiie  down  to  us.  They  nil!
be  dcAoribMl  in  what  Neems  to  bavo  lH>eu  their
cbrotKiIogical  order.

(1)  The  SupyUttHlf  i'Udrdifs)  take*  its  name  from
the  choruH  repreitenting  the  fifty  dniightem  of  Da-
UUU»  fleeing  to  Argim  for  protection  from  the  imun
of  Afgyptiw,  Tho  prominence  of  tln'  clionis,  the
niiall  number  of  eharMtora,  and  the  ub»rnee  of  a
tirologiie  mark  this  phiy  as  Cho  earUnat  of  ihoso  of


AewhyhiBwhich  wehave,  andconooqncntljtbooldp
est  Greek  drama  extant.  Il«  uuiltniable  tn«rit(>ai^
mucbohDcnredby  the  veryoornipt  state  of  the  text
{2\  Tho  PfmiaHn  iUtpirat)  is  uidqne  among  ititf
Grefk  tr.igodie8  which  wo  poasena  in  drawing  iii
theme  friMii  hlhtory  rulber  than  fnim  niyrb.  Tbs
central  point  of  in Ui rent  is  found  iti  a  Hpleinlid  nar*
mtivc  of  the  battle  of  Katamls,  bnt  by  an  artitiea
of  tho  poet  the  ttceoc  of  the  play  U  laid  in  Saf4^
and  the  laments  of  AtosMv  ami  the  Persian  DObl«|
supply  tlie  tragic  elements.  The  I'er«itn»  voB  pnh
dnced  in  u.l~.  •IT'.j,  ns  part  of  a  tetralogy  coneivtiiiM
of  the  Phitintt,  I'rr^inn*,  Glaucun  iroTMcvr,  aud  /Vnj
melhru^  tht  riie-kindler  iirtpKntit).  I

(3|  The  Hitrn  ogaitmt  Thebts  ('Eirro  iir\  9l)$an
wan  {inuliired  in  ii.c.  467,  as  the  third  play  in  ■
tetrBli>gy  of  which  tho  remaining  pieces  were  tbn
T-^iuM.  fMfijJtu,  aud  the  sutyriu  drama  cHlb-d  Thfl
Sphinx.  It  includeH  a  iiiaguiQceut  deacripliou  ou
the  lM^ven  Aj^i%'c  cliampiuutt  and  their  Thebail
opponDut«,  with  the  linal  vietury  of  Thebes,  and  ft
hint,  at  the  uloae,  of  the  Antigontf-motive,  after-
wards  so  Uoely  worked  out  by  Sophocles.  In  this
play.  IIS  iu  the  Perwiaits,  the  mitrlial  spirit  of  Ae>«-
ehyliiM  ttnds  ample  room  for  manireHtiillon.  BotU
dnitofiH  are  "full  of  war,"  to  ipiote  the  words  ofl
AristophaoKx  {Frogn,  Ur21).

I (4)  Tho  Prvmelknu  liuund  tUfw^rjBiit  ttirfiianft),
with  its  companion  pieces  the  J'rumetheHt  Looked
'  i\v6fi4¥os\  and  tho  I'romelSatt  Ike  J-'ire-btvtrer  tmp-
!  tfiapasi,  treatoL  the  history  of  the  rebelliouo  Titau
!  who  MeadfaMtly  suCfeied  tLie  wrath  of  Zens  for  his
j  beuefiictiuus  to  mankind. Tlie  Fromvtheut  Bounij
thti  only  play  of  the  trilogy  which  has  come  dnwi|
tu  UH,  di-pictH  the  hem,  fi>lt4<red  to  n  nirk  in  Ac^
thia,  and  threateiieil  tty  llernieH  with  a  jieualty  utill
more  wvere, Bnt  he  proudly  refnseH  to  anbaiit  tc
the  will  of  the  new  mler  of  Olynipuii,  and  at  tf
close  of  the  play  he  is  struck  by  Ibi;  thntnlerlMtl
and,  with thn  rock  to  which  he  ih  fantetK^I,  ^tn
onl  of  Mght. Tliti  secoird  play  deMcrilml  tin;  liii:
rnconeiltHtion  and the  lilipnitiun of  Pronn-tliei
whiltt  the  thinl  (Aci^Wefiiphar*  Frole^.to  ArM-hyh
p. ".ill"  foil.)  probably  celebrated  the  esiaUlisbmeit'
of  i'ronictheus  in  Atliua  tuA  a  benignant  deity. N«
Greek  tragedy  has  Ijoen  more  admired  thun  t  he  Pro
metheua  ItoHttd. In  the  grandeur  of  its  ihctinn  am!
the  Huhliniity  of  cbaraot«r  dlsplnyitl,  as  well  aa  »
the  exi|uiBtlc  pathos  of  some  of  it8  scvue«,  it  dtuudii
almoNl  unc4uallu4l. The  Promethean  trilogy  waq
probably  prodneed  either  in  li.t:.  4(W  or  400  (Chrial]
or  about  ten  yearn  earlier  (W<M^kLeiu).

(&)  Tbe  trtiogy  ooni|H>a(!d  of  the  JsM'*"*<iK»M  (V
fUfuitov),  CAcwfpAori  (Xor;^^i)inDd  £Hmrairf««(Eti,
j<k),  I'ouieH  lustin  thelitit,nud  i»  of^wcial  int^Tfrt
fnnn  the  fact  that  it  iti  the  only  cODi)>leto  trilogy
which  ij»  estiint  from  any  of  tho  Greek  t^agf;1liall^
In  the  AiiamtuiHOH  the  poet  tlescribea  the  return  of
the  victoriuiiH  king  from  Troy,  uud  his  nninler  by
ClytucmncHtra  and  her  paramour  AegiHtbna.  In  tbi)
f.'AorpAoW.  OrcMieji,  kou  of  Aganieiniinn,  now  grtiwn
to  manhood, rot  urns,  and  with  the  bdpof  lii»  friend
Pylades  avenge*  tho  miinlvt-  of  bi»  father  by  put*
ling  to  death  the  guilty  pair,  ami  i*  him»ulf.  iu  Inrn,
driven  frantic  by  the  Kriuyes.  In  tho  Kammiia
he  tloea  to  Albeni,  where  he  is  tried,  and  by  tbt
iwlvoeAcy  of  Apollo  antl  the  raAting  voteof  Atheo^
he  is  ar<|uilti-d,  anil  thr  riniiilycnree  cones  to  ar
end.  This  great  trilogy  HhowR  the  genhis  nf  Ae*
chyliin  in  ttM  lo|1ii%c.  Tonn.  Kach  piny  is  roiiipt«t4
in  itMclf,  and  yet  uauh  i»  but  a  single  act  iu  Um


:y  vm

hrialll


AEScinxca


87


AES  GR.\V£


_^_r crime,  vciii^eiince,  anil  Mfiiaiimt.  [ Aeacirotimfonuieuta  Moupjliorrowetlfronitlio
Mm  Is  tbe  mi»f«t  |Miwrrfi»l  of  tlie  Ihrco  \  argrntarii  (t|.  vj  h  hi»  hinl  Klmiw  arutiiid  the  Foniiti.


pIftVJs  aiul  prol)aI>I>  tl»'  gnmtcKt  woik  of  Atj^'liy*
liM,if  iiKlowl  it  in  iK»Mbf  iiio«l  inipit-*tftivi<  trik^vd^-
'  Inpxuteucv.  Tbe  t^Ky  in  usually  kunwu  us  tUo
(/rattia  {'OfHtrrfiai,  mn^vdih  the  »at>ito  play  Ao-
lntftII/)wr4ti(|.>^]M  |irtMliicL-d  iti  B.C.  458.

Tbr  rslwiL  wittkH  nt  Anhchylun  hIiow  n  conaUnt
{in>gnw>  ill  rlrjiuativ  »n He  i<i  mtiii  Ia  hn%'e  ftt|iU>iI


AeaoulaphiB  nr  Asclepius  ('Aa-KAirn-uJr)-  The
ftod  of  tlif  medical  iirt.  In  lloincr  he  in  not  n
diviuily,  but  p*itutily  tlio  "Idnaiolww*  jibysicUu"
whoBo  sons,  Mncliatpii  hikI  Pmlaliriim,  were  tite
pliyBicians  iti  tliw  (Jivek  army.  Thn  dHtiaion  story
irlotes  Uiat  AKHCulnpiiis  war  n  »on  of  Apollo  uiid
t'oniniK,iui<l  tliut  wbon  Comnis  wa.n  with  child  hy


n  AMMiwl  arlor  to  thi;  one  emplnytM)  by  biit  prfd-  I  Apollo  hIi^  became  eiiniiioared  of  Isc-hyv,  an  Arra-
rnwont,  kuiI  iu  biA  Ut<r  pliiyH  ho  odoptM,  mid  uw»  tliun.  Apollo,  iiifuiuied  of  thi)i  by  u  niviMi,  kiltfd
^ilii  fiiJl  uiaatenr,  the  third  actor  flrnl  introdncwi  ConiniH  uiid  iHcbyn.  When  the  body  of  Corotds
l.j  hiavoiiuj^pr  rival,  Sophorlcd  Tbi-cbonil  partjt,  j  war  to  Ik-  burnt,  the  child  ArwnlnptU!!  wu»  siivi-d
nlfinit  tlii^  most  prominent  fi-iitiin'  lM>tb  in  extt^ul  frmn  (hu  Uuuium,  and  was  bronght  np  by  tin*  (<4.-n-
tiitt  itDporlauci',  gradually  ^ivi*  way  bffurr  Ihv  tanr  Chiron,  who  instructed  him  in  tli»  art  ufbpiil-
gnivrlli  (if  tbe  dinlogiiu. In  tbe  »cuni<-  i-flectK,  (ou, ing  aud  iu  hnntiug. Tbt^ruaru  otbur  tuli'M  rf^pcct-

iug  bi»  birib,  accrinlin;;  to  Hnniu  of  n-liicb  be  wa»  a
untivo  of  Kpidaiirnit,  and  thin  wa»  a  cuiiiiuou  opin-


Attcbylun  mndi!  many  iui[miV4<DicnlA,  waing  ex-
tnorditiury  ni<>anM  Co  t-jtcile  wonder  or  awe.  Llko
V^Bgucr,  h«  waa  both  ]HH*t  and  inn«tcinii,  and,  be>
wdrs  tmiiiiDg  liiK  own  cbornseo,  lio  i^  tnid  t-o  har«
taken  part  an  actor  iu  the  )H>rfonnanc«-«  tbein»»'lviM}.

TV  uwt  i_'liar»cl<*ii!slic  ffiitnro  of  hjit  p«.clry  U
itogniHlcDi-.  both  of  thonKl>t  and  filyli',  tbonpb  lie
iKflnflo  Ibr  |p«  niiiMtff  of  Iyri<;  iM-anty  uitd  tt-ndiir
lalbov.  Hill  Ibeulogy  in  strni  and  loftv,  mid  p»T.
Tldcilbylhc  idea  of  h  dtrtttiny  wbirli  coiitroU  nil
thlBg^  htiniaii  and  diviiif.  But  tbo  licnMlitary
nrm  ibul  bnimU-d  ovt-r  tlie  families  of  Lnbdnci)«
itiA  h)l(ip>i  wjts  Hlways  aidoti  in  it4  de»triirtive
*"t1c  111  1.1h>  folly  nod  niekeitticss  of  tlit^  victims
tlMiuH^lviti.  No  ]Mjot,  in  fuct,  has  etatcd  morti  im-
lirrBiivflj-  ilian  ArMbyln*  tbe  luevitabb;  ronneo-
iMi  lietwri'ii  gnllt  and  piiiiiHbiui'ul. flin  slylr,  it

'  llw  roiiffHiicd.  ia  fmtuetinn^a  no  elevated  m  to
ItliuuDt  boniluuitit',  bnt  tbia  apparent  fault  ia
llwuiliiral  nvinlt  of  the  pnefa  inij^bty  L-nrrcnl  of
llhNiglii,  wliicb  conbl  not  tiiid  vijut  iu  the  ordinary
''litnaelh  of  espresAion.

All  llw  exiBtin;;  M8S.  of  AcW-hyliw  an^  aaid  by
V.Diadurr  lo  be  dvnrrd  from  ttm  ('odex  Mi^dii-viiK
■  LauKDiianu«t,  wbieb  dat4TH  luick  t4i  llin  cIcvi'Uth
t:rjiiiir),:tn,l  contiiinH  many  valuable  KchoHa  taken
fioutbc  aiit-ifnt  >;rfln)inariaii»i.  It  ia  the  only  an-
LJMlf  for  the  Choepitori,  of  whieb,  however,  the
tb  ill  a  l>ad  condition.  Tbo  I't'omethtut,  Sftrn
■'•^ifcrt  Tktbt*.  and  /*<r*MiN«  arc  more  fully  reprcwnt-
wl  *'j  M^S.  iLaii  tbt!  nther  plays.  Two  ftwliwa  of  thn
f'xirtoruth  rfutiiry  (Florenlinn^  and  FnnH-siariuf)
•ijijily  thai  purtiiiii  of  tb«?  Agamrmnon  lUnra  iW.V-
I"*l  nhith  1^  missinH  fi»nn  the  Cotlex  Mi-iliei'ii».

Tlw  Aldiuo  nlilin  pi-inrrpK  (LMH)  atui  llii;  edition
«f Stanley  ^UhkUiu,  HK'i:i)ure  wortby  of  noie  among
^  iililvr  iMliiionfi.  To  tbcfui  may  b«  addud  auong
^rvutk«lliti«<litiouHofHermaDD4l.eipzig,185iiii,
KiiTlibuff  (Btirlio,  ItfiHI).  Weil  (Leipzig.  KWo),  aiid
*^  voluftblti  critical  edilion  of  Weeklciu-Vitclli
'^lia.lcKii.  Falcy'a  (Loudon,  1{<79)  iK  tbe  most
cubnaient  Kuglinb  edition  of  all  tbe  playH  with
^"^  Annotated  editiona  uf  single  phiys  are
"ifflfrun*.  Amongibe  more  reeotit.  are  W*'«klein's
****'«  iLriprig,  It**^),  Scbneidewin-HeUHe'a  ,,^50-
■«■«  1  Ik-rlin.  lr(H:i ),  A11«mi'»  Weckltiin'a  Piomr-
"'w  Ikiitun,  lifl)!  ),  TmitTfl- Wecklein't*  PrrnnH¥
t^'l^ig,  11*^).  Tm-ker's  SwppUanU  (London,  18t»l,
""I  Flaijg's  Stra*  atjaifl  Thtltn  (  Boh  ton,  ItWIij.
l>ltiiI(Tf,.  UjU-nn  ArMk^ilrmn  i.\jc\yt\^,  lefTJj  is  an
li|>pii».llde  work  lo  tbnnttulrnt.  Tliu  best  eoui-
^Eiif;hHh  traiialatioii  \a  that  of  riuui]itre;  but
^AgamvmKOH  ami  tlic  I'litrnfltirun  ^e  lui)  furt-
"*<*•  hi  having  versioOK  of  great  exc^-Ueiit-e  by
•*Wl  Brovi  niug  and  Mrs.  Browning  reaiwctively.


too  iu  litter  LiiiiM-  After  be  bad  grown  up,  ho  nut
only  cured  tbe  niek,  bat
rocalled  the  dead,  to  life.
Zenti,  fearing  lest  tueu
might  contrive  to  cflca|w
death  altogether,  kille«l
Ai'Heiilnpiiis  nltb  bin
tbnuderbolt ;  I>nt,  on  tlm
re-pieflt  of  Apollo,  Zcna
plac<*d  him  uinong  Ihu
bIhth.  Ho  was  married  tu
Kpiou6,  by  whom  be  bad
ibo  two  Bonh  spoken  '"f
by  Home r,  ami  alwi  other
ciiildren.  The  ehief  sent
of  tbe  worship  of  Aev
ciilapius  waa  Kpidanrns,
where  he  had  a  t'CnipIo
surrounded  with  an  cr-
tensivc  gnive.  ScrtM-uta
were  Rjicn-d  to  biin,  bc-
oiuiM'  they  were  a  nyuibol
of  renovation,  and  were
believed  lo  bave  the  pow-
er of  diseuveriiig  healing
herlw.  Tbe  cook  was  «ao-
rilicod  to  him.  At  Rome
tbo  wontbip  of  Aescula-
pius wa»  iutrixluced  from
EpidaiinM  in  B.C.  29:*,  for  Iho  pnrpiwe  of  nvettiug
a  i»ejitilcuc«.  The  tiuppoi^ed  deacendaois  ot'Ap^jn-
lapinit  were  culled  )»y  Iho  paLronymie  name  of
Asclepiadae,  and  their  prineiiial  seats  were  Cos
ami  Cnidnnt.  They  were  an  order  or  caste  of
prie«t4i,  among  wbnia  tbe  knowledge  of  medicine
was  regariled  as  a  sacred  secret,  and  wag  trau»-
mitted  from  father  to  twti  In  these  fauulies.

Aeaciilua.  A  speciue  of  Ueea,  commouly  ranked
in  the  luniily  of  oaks.

Aeaepua.  A  river  riaing  near  Mount  Ida,  aod
flowing  into  tbo  Tropontia.

Acs  equcfttrfi,  aea  hordeariuin,  aea  mUltar^-
Ancient  teriuti  for  tbe  pay  of  tbe  Koniun  Hobliers
befoi'o  the  regubir  Ati/icmltuiH  was  iutroduuetl.  Tbe
lir»t  denoted  the  sum  given  for  the  parohaae  of  ft
boreie  for  the  eqiies;  tbe  second,  tbe  atiui  paid  for
the  keep  of  tbe  Itorse;  and  the  third,  tbe  piiy  of  a
f(M(t-»nhiier. See  Kqi'KS.

Aesemia.  A  town  of  Samiiinoi,made  a  Roman
colony  in  tbo  First  Pnnic  War.

Aes  gravd.  A  term  applied  to  the  early  Italian
bronze  or  copper  coins. £>ee  As,


Acsculnplua. (Berlin.)


AESIS


88


AETHRA


AeaU.  A  river  fomiiug  the  bonndary  between
Picenum  and  Umbria.

Aes  mannazitmL  The  money  won  in  throwing
dice  {meaiibus  coiUctum,  in  wbioh  (ibnue  tnanut  means
a  tbrow). See  AtAA;  Tau;  Tessbrar;  Par  im-

PAR.

Aea  militartf. See  Aes  equestre.

Aeaon  (Aitnsv).  The  son  of  Cretbens  and  Tyro,
and  father  of  lason.  He  was  exclnded  from  the
throne  by  bis  half-brother  Pelias.  During  the  ab-
sence of  lason  on  the  Argonautic  expedition,  Pelias
attempted  to  murder  Aeaon,  but  the  latter  put
an  end  to  hie  own  life.  According  to  Ovid,  Aesoo
survived  the  retnru  of  the  Argonauts,  and  was
made  yonng  again  by  Medea.  See  Aroonautak  ;
Iason;  Medea,

AeeopOB  (AuroTTor).  A  famous  writer  of  fables,
the  first  author  who  created  an  indepeudent  class  of
stories  about  animals,  so  that  in  a  few  generations
his  name  and  person  bad  become  typical  of  tbat  en-
tire class  of  literature.  In  course  of  time,  tbanks  to
his  plain,  popular  manner,  the  story  of  bis  own  life
was  enveloped  iii^n  almost  inextricable  tissue  of
tales  and  traditions,  which  represeut  biin  as  an
ugly  hunchback  and  buflfoon.  In  the  Middle  Ages
these  were  woven  into  a  kind  of  romance.  A
Phrygian  by  birth,  and  living  in  the  time  of  the
Seven  Sages,  about  B.C.  600,  he  is  said  to  have  been
at  first  a  slave  to  several  masters,  till  ladmou  of
Samos  set  bim  free.  That  be  next  lived  at  the
court  of  Croesus,  and  beiug  sent  by  him  on  an  em-
bassy to  Delhi,  was  murdered  by  the  priests  there,
is  pure  fiction.  Under  his  name  were  propagated
in  all  parts  of  Greece,  at  first  only  by  tradition  in
the  mouth  of  the  people,  a  multitude  of  jirose  tales
teaobiug  the  lessons  of  life  under  the  guise  of  fa-
bles about  animals.  We  know  how  Socrates,  dur-
ing hit*  last  daj-s  iu  prison,  was  engaged  in  turning
the  fables  of  Aesop  into  verse.  The  first  written
collection  appears  to  have  been  made  by  Deme-
trius of  Phalerum,  b.c.  300.  The  collections  of
Atitoji'a  Fables  that  have  come  down  to  ns  are,  in
part,  lute  prose  renderings  of  the  version  iu  cho-
liumbics  by  Babrius  (q.  v.),  which  still  retain  hero
and  there  a  scrap  of  verse ;  partly  products  of  the
rhetorical  schools,  and  therefore  of  very  different
periods  and  degrees  of  merit.  A  gootl  text  of  the
version  by  Babrius  is  that  of  Scbneidewin  (1865),
and  of  Hartuug  with  German  notes  and  a  trans-
lation (1858).  See  also  Rutherford's  edition  of  Ba-
brius (London,  1883).

Aesopaa,  Clodius.  A  great  tragic  actor  at
Rome,  a  cuutemporury  of  Quiutus  Rosciue  (q.  v.),
and,  like  him,  on  Intimate  terms  with  Cicero.
Aesopua  appeared  upon  the  stage  for  the  last  time
at  the  dedication  of  Ponipey's  theatre  in  B.C.  55.
He  left  a  large  fortune  to  bis  son,  who  wasted  it
in  luxury  and  dissipation,  on  one  occasion  dissolv-
ing a  i>earl  worth  $40,000,  and  swallowing  it,  in
order  to  outdo  the  famous  exploit  of  Cleopatra.

Aea  nid<. Sec  As;  Nu.mismatiu)!|.

Aeatii  or  AeatuL  A  Slavonic  people  living  on
the  sca-coiu)t  in  nori-beastern  Germany  (Kurland),
and  noted  fur  collecting  aud  selling  amber,  which
they  called  plaesum  (Tnc.  (term.  4.5).

Aeatimatio  litis. See  Judex.

Aesttla.  A  town  of  the  Aequi,  between  Prae-
oeste  and  Tibur.

Aes  tizoiinm. A  tax  paid  by  men  who  reached


old  age  without  marrying,  and  first  imposed  by
the  ceuson  in  B.C.  403.  See  Lkx  Iuua  et  Papia
Poppaea.

Aeaynmetea  (alcrvfuf^r.  from  aJira,  ajust  por-
tion). Originally  a  judge^  the  games,  but  later
a  person  whom  his  fellow-citizens  had  volaut«rily
invested  with  absolute  power,  so  that  Dionysiua
ooraparea  the  office  with  the  Roman  dictatorship.
There  is  but  one  express  instance  known  of  the
bestowal  of  this  office,  namely,  upon  Pittacns,  in
Mitylend  (Dionys.  v.  73;  Strabo,  xiii.  617;  Pint.
Solon,  4;  Diog.  Laert.  i.  75.  See  Tittmann,  Grieck.
SlaatMV.  p.  76).

Aetas. See  Impubes.

Aethalla.  AetbftUs,  or  Ilva.  An  island  in  the
Tuscan  Sea,  the  modem  Elba.

AethoUdes  (Ai^oXidi^c).  The  son  of  Hermes
and  Eupolemia,  the  herald  of  the  Argonauts.  His
soul,  after  many  niigmtions,  at  length  took  posses-
sion of  the  body  of  Pythagoras,  in  which  it  still  rec-
ollected its  former  migrations. (Apoll.  Rh.  i.  54.)

Aethl5pes.  A  name  said  to  be  from  aWa  and
£^,  but  perhaps  really  a  foreign  name  vomipted,
was  applied  (I)  most  generally  to  all  black  or  dark
races  of  men ;  (2)  to  all  the  inhabitJints  of  Inner
Africa,  sontli  of  Mauretania,  the  Great  Desert,  and
Egypt,  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Red  Sen  and  In-
dian Ocean,  and  to  some  of  the  dark  races  of  Asia;
and  (3)  most  specifically  t«  the  inhabitants  of  the
land  south  of  Egj'pt,  which  was  called  Aethiopia
(q.v.).

Aethiopia (A2^(on-ta)i  Nnbia,Kordofan,Sennaar,
Abyssinia.  A  country  of  Africa,  south  of  Egypt,  the
Imundary  of  the  countries  being  at  Syen^  and  the
Smaller  Cataract  of  the  Kile,  aud  extending  on  the
cast  to  the  Red  Sen,  and  to  the  south  and  south-
west indefinitely,  as  far  apparently  aa  the  knowl-
edge of  the  ancients  extended.  The  people  of
Aethiopia  seem  to  have  been  of  the  Caucasian  race,
and  to  have  spoken  a  language  allied  to  the  Ara-
bic. Monuments  nro  foutul  in  the  country  closely-
resembling  those  of  Egypt,  but  of  an  inferior  style.
It  was  the  sent  of  n  powerful  monarchy,  of  which
Meroij  was  the  cnpitnl.  Some  traditions  made
Meroii  the  pai-ent  of  Egyptian  civilization,  while
others  ascribed  the  civilization  of  Aethiopia  to
Egyptian  colonization.  So  great  was  the  power
of  the  Aethiopians  that  more  than  tmce  in  its  his-
tory Egypt  was  governed  by  Aethiopian  kings.
Under  the  Ptolemies,  Graeco-Egyptiau  colonies  es-
tablished  themselveN  in  Aethiopia;  but  the  conn>
try  was  never  subdued.  The  Romans  failed  to
extend  their  empire  over  Aethiopia,  though  they
made  expeditions  into  the  country,  in  one  of  whicU
C.  Petronius,  prefect  of  Egypt  under  Augustus,  ad-
vanced as  far  as  Napata,  and  defeat«d  the  warrior
queen  Candac6  (B.C.  2H).  Christianity  very  early
extended  to  Aethiopia,  probably  in  consequence  of
the  conversion  of  the  treaHUi-er  of  Queen  Candac6.
Cf.ActH,viii.27;  and  see  Candace.

Aethl5pis  (AtdumU).  An  epic  in  five  books  by
Arctinns  of  Miletus,  one  of  the  Cyclic  poeta,  said
to  have  been  a  pupil  of  Homer.  The  poem  cover?
the  portion  of  tliR  Trojnn  War  from  the  death  of
Hector  to  the  death  of  Achilles.  The  heroine  ia
Penthesilea  (q.  v.).  This  poem  was  by  aume  added
to  the  /AVirf  by  n  moditirnlion  of  the  last  line.  See
Cycuc  Poets;  Epos;  Trojan  War.

Aethra  (At^p-jX (1)  Daughter  of  Pitthons,  king


,/Tr-<o«2eti,  motbec  of  TIipmua  hy  Ai^geus  or.  acconl-
^tf  t.«>  Aiiotlier  ac«uttiit,  by  I'uwidou.  >Vbile  Ho-
||k  rvavnljr  meutintis  bcr  aa  a  Mrvuit  of  Uelea  at
fjfoy,  hh-r  legend  adds  that  wbeii  tbe  Dioscuri
^ook.  .Apliiduae  and  txi  Tree  their  nisttfr,  wbom  Tbe-
ipeoa  l»d  Qurriud  vff,  tbt-y  cotivt^yed  Aelbm  to
gnor^aft  II  a  Klavr^  wbeuce  »hv  accMiiipuuied  ilt'teii
(41  Ttot;  and  that  on  tbt*  fiill  nf  tbtit  i'ily  lUvy
\iycia  p^lit  her  K^aniUuiiK,  AuauiOM  and  T>Biii(i|dimii),
linck. to  Atlicno. (2)  A  duiigblwr  of  Ont^atius,  by

vbora  Atbia  begoi  tbe  twulvu  Hyadm  (<[.  v.)  and

i^niin,  t!ya«.

A.Stloa  lArrioiw). AOroi'k  [Niiulitr  in  the  latter

lt»lC  of  til''  foiittb  oeutury  11.0.,  «fi[M.<«ially  fumed  for
\ujt  piuturo  of  Alcxiiudvr  tbe  Urvat'M  woddiug  witb
\\tr  l>t<Aiitiful  Uoxaua,  U.L'.  3^. Hvv  I'ictika.

&%titiit'VTuK).  il>  Of  AciidaiaMLtMiiHilaiiiia,a
Orerkiihysirianof  thpdixtb  ccutnry  a.i>.,  wbo  lived
Con«t«ntirioiiti*  on  itii|H<nal phyHiuiiiti in  unli-

H?  vrwn  the  anUior  of  a  ^n-at  initM-vllauy  au

•y  anil  dtaittiUHiN  in  sixtenii  b^HiltH. (3)  An

_ b  (ifl.br  funrlh  cnitiiry  a.D.,  cHlU-d  by  bi»

lAttTwrifs  "  tbt»  AtbiMMt." Kpipbanitin  b.i»  pni-

itt\et\  fiirly-fwvcu  brrutjral  |iriijiuKitiuuH  fntui  tbu

nf  Ai'tinn,  aiming  tbt^ni  tbn  njix'tiun  uf  Ibu

ly  of  tb(5  pnipbvta  aud  aptwtlt^;  tbu  atucr-
Uhat  Ibi'  Son  of  Go<l  wa»  itot  like  the  Father;

ttiur  that  faith  without  irorks  is  sntHrient;

rliLiiri  that  the  luiMt  cnlpable  acbt  aro  tbu
MoeMlim  of  natnn>.  Ho  died  A.l>.  'Mild.  i3|  A  Ro-
nu  gcDrral  lH>m  in  Moetia  towards  tbe  end  of
ihrfwirlli  crntnry  a.i>.  Hp  fwd  an  army  of  Hnns
!•  w^^rew  tb«  ni<iir{ialion  of  the  cnip^Tor  John,
lit  Uii433  b«  Iwcaniu  rnnxiil  anil  grnerHl-iii-chii;!',
uxluKieh  kc|it  hack  thu  Wf^t^^rn  ImrharianA  for
twenty  }par4,  defiMting  Ibe  (iutbH,  HrnittitidiariK,
(iiiili,  iiiid  Franks;  and  at  CbAIonH  muted  (be
f»«ii>n%AttiIa  iq.  v.)  in  the  year  4tt\.  In  -VA,  lliB
•^fl)|XTai  Vtdt<ntiii{au,Jt'alun»  uf  bin  fame,  sleir  biio
w'tli  bin  rtwn  bnncL

■Attoa  (Arm]). (1)  A  volcanic  nioiiittain  in  tbe

it of Sicily biitwefii Tauroiiu'riiniii and

It  is  Miid  to  bavd  derived  Itn  nurni^  from

A*bn.ii(iictliaii  nymph,  udanjjbtor  (if  Ili-avcii  and

trnli. Zuus  hunr<l  iitidtr  it  Typhon  or  Eucela-

*»;  anil  in  it»  interior  Hi  idiacxtnn  an»I  the  Cy-

•lo|a  forgwl  the  thnnd*>rboUM  for  Zoris. Thera

KSBM^vcrat  tmiptiona  of  Monnt  Aetna  in  antiqui-

'I- Out-  occiiried  iu  U.c.  47&,  to  which  Ao*cbylii»

"wl  Umlar  probably  allude,  aikI  another  in  B.C.

^i^hicfiTliiieydiiiL-SBayswaa  tbe  thinl  on  r«Mrd

Uwtirvekh  bad  Mrttleil  in  Sirily. (2)  A  town

frut  of  Monnt  Aetna,  on  the  rnad  to  Catnaa,

ly  eidled  lueMM  nt  liinesa. It  wan  foundeil

■0  "c^IjI  by  thti  iiibaliiUnltt  of  Catana^  who  ha<l

^""""(iclled  frtim  their  owti  town  l»y  thu  Situli.

Tfc«j  jjiv^  ||,u  „[,niL'  of  Aetini  to ItieKnn,  hucaniu

iwir  own  town  C'ataua  had  beeu  calleil  AotDS  by

Ilwtnl.

^^ttta.  Tlie  title  ofa  diilartie  poem  ){oueral1y
••<*iW4  to  Lncilina  liinior,  the  friend  of  Hencca,
*w<i|honcc  priiitcil  with  the  minor  works  of  Ver-
B^  It  eonsitta  of  t>4G  hexameter  linett,  and  do-
"T^  Ike  mountain,  with  an  account  ofa  fonner
•"Viwi.  The  jfOi-m  baa  Ix-en  revincd,  eniended,
»*i  uttntatxd  by  H.  A.  J.  Mnum  tCandi.  1867).

Attoaea  (ra  Alrvauil.  A  fuHlival  celebrated  iu
wiuntr  of  ZeuM  AotnacnH.  mi  called  from  hta  statue
*'  Uouiit  Aetna.  NutUinir  1h  known  of  the  dc-
tiik


Aetolia  (A/rwXiii).  AdiviHioD  of  (>reecp,bDuui)ed
on  (be  we«t  by  Aeamauia,  from  whieh  it  waa  licpii-
ratcil  by  tbe  river  AcholoUb;  ou  the  north  by  Epima
ami  Tbt^aaaly ;  ou  the  east  by  tbe  Oeoliau  LoeriaiiB ;
and  ou  the  5uutb  by  the  entrance  to  the  L'oriuthiau
(Julf.  It  waa  divided  into  two  parts — Old  Aetolia,
from  theAcheloUh  to  the  Eveuuft  and  Culydou:  and
New  Aetolia,  or  tli«  .Acquired,  fmm  the  Kvennn  and
C'alydou  to  the  Ozollau  L<icrianii.  On  the  roaat
the  country  is  level  aud  fraitfnl,  bat  iu  the  lotenor
uioinilainon»  and  niiprndutitive.  The  inonulaiua
eontaiuetl  many  wild  Ucajftn,  and  WL^m  celvbnited
in  inytholo|;y  fur  Ibe  bnnt  of  the  Calydoiiian  boar.
Tbe  eoiintry  nu»  originally  lububited  by  C'nielca
aud  Lelegea,  but  wan  at  an  early  iieriod  colouized
by  (iitM-kH  from  KHh,  led  by  tbe  mythical  Aetolus
(q.v.).  The  Aet4diauB  to^tk  part  iu  tbe  Trojan
War,  under  their  king  Tboas.  They  conlinned  for
a  loug  time  a  rude  and  nncivilir-tsl  jieiiple,  living
to  a  great  extent  by  robbery  ;  anil  even  in  the  timo
of  Tbucydidea  (li.c.  410)  many  of  their  trih<;8  Bi>4>ke
a  laugiiHge  ubich  vtan  u»t  CSnH;k,aud  were  in  tbe
habit  uf  eating  raw  tiesh.  They  apiwur  to  Iia\-e
been  early  milled  by  a  kind  of  leagiif,  )nit  Ibia
league  firal  aviinired  political  inipifrlancp  abuut
the  midille  of  the  third  eeutury  B.C.,  and  became  a
ft>nuUlable  rival  to  tlat  Majjedouiun  niouareba  aud
the  At^hat^an  League.  The  Aeioliau»  took  the  ttldu
of  Autiocbun  ILI.agaiuat  tbe  RumanD,  and  ^^^i  tbe
defeat  of  that  mouarcti,  u.c.  ICD,  they  became  vir-
tually the  Hubjectit  of  Kome.  On  tbe  couquedl  of
the  AchucauH,  B.C.  l-l(>,  Aetidia  woa  iuclade«t  iu  the
Komau  province  uf  Ai-haca.

AetoUoum  FOedua  iri  Koivuk  rwv  AiViuXwvi.  A
C4»nfet]eration  of  the  Aetoliaii  towux,  afterwards
joitied  by  other  towim  and  cautona  of  Greece,  and
forine<l  in  u.c.  33H,  after  the  battlH  of  {.'baerorea,
to  eounteract  the  iuflueuoe  of  Mueodonia  in  tlic
aflaiiR  of  Crecce.  (Bee  Aciijiran  l.fiXGVK..)  Its
polilieul  existence  was  destroyed  iu  i:i.r.  If*t)  by  the
tii-iity  nith  Kuuie  by  which  tbe  AeloliaiiM  Wenme
Kuuiati  subjects.

Aetolua  {AiTwXdi).  The  son  of  Endymion,  who
founded  KIiK  and  IpblanasMa.  Having  accidenlnlly
killed  Apis.  SOD  of  Phuroncos.  he  ded  with  a  band
of  followers  into  the  country  which  afterwards  was
called,  iu  bis  hononr,  Aetolia  (<t.  v.).  See  AfioUod*
i.7,«.

A^oma  (afruna). Sec  FasTiGirM.

A^toa  (tirruc). See  AqI'ILa.

Aex.  (1)  A  lYicky  iitland  between  Tenoi  and
Chiira,  Ao  called  frviiu  ItM  having  the  shape  of  a  goat
U  If  )•  1.'^)  The  giwt  Amnltbra  (q.  v.)  iliat  snckled
Zeiiti,  and  became  a  cutMl«llatiun  under  the  iiani»
of  Aei.

Afer,  CxAEi-»  Dt»MiTii.'is.  The  preceptor  of
Quiutilian,  and  nn  omtiu-  of  ability,  who  was  burn
at  Neniaiie>n«  i^ilmest,  and  died  of  drnukennetw,
A..D.!)0.  He  is  bcKt  retncmberi>4l  aa  having  been
nn  infunner  under  Tilwrins,  Lmtraying  to  death
Ctundia  Pnlelira  niifl  Q.  VaruH.  her  mou.  See  Tnc.
.-iNn.  iv.;'>2;  xiv,  19;  Qntut.  v.7.

Affines,  Afflnltaa,  or  Adfinea,  Adfinltaa.  Affi-
»Ft(  are  tlio  cognati  of  biiHbaiid  and  wife:  iitul  the
relationabip  called  nlllutlaM  i-aii  only  be  the  j-esult
of  a  lawful  marriage.  Theitt  are  no  degrees  of
affiluitas  cnrrrajioudiug  to  tho(>e  of  n>t}n<ttio,  though
there  are  terms  t»  expreiw  the  varinim  kinds  of
affiuitaa.  The  father  of  a  hm-band  is  the  fmyr  nf
the  buEtband's  wife,  and  tim  father  uf  a  wife  io  tbo


AKBANIIJ3


40


AFRICA


MM»r  uf  the  wifo*B  liimibaoit ;  the  term  totnu  cx-
preMcs  the  saine  affinity  n-iih  n<iNpc<:t  to  rlic  ku»-
baud'ct  uiul  wife's  tDntliKPs.  A  )H>ti'h  wife  i»  uitruM
cr  (loiijjbtfr-iii-liiw  l»  ihv  wiu'h  imrenls;  a  wifo'H
JniHltaiid  19  gfitfT  or  »on-iti-law  tn  llie  wifti'ii  par-
t'litK. See  Ct-WNATl.

TiiUK  tlie  aruMfiifui — pater,  mattv — of  ilip>wif«-  \\n-
coiiie  liy  Ihe  inuiTiitge,  respectively,  the  wew  ma^-
nvH,  pioi>orru0,  m-  aotniH  mtttfna—aocfr,  aoct'un —  of  the
busliuiKl,  wtiu  bvcuuiea  nitb  re«(>cot  to  them  sevur-
uUy  piwjcier  uiid  ge$in:  lu  tike  ninuner,  the  cor-
res]Mfudiiig  aiiceators  of  the  huctbanU  respectjrely
Assume  the  Aamu  niuiiea  'witli  reHpeet  to  the  son's
wifr.who  becomeit  with  i-eMjiect  to  them  pronnrus
and  tturuM.  Tbe  aoii  niiil  <biiif;hter  of  a  hiihliniul  nr
•wifv  lioni  of  a  prior  maiTiii;te  nre  riil)e<l  priritfuuM
anit  privigna  wilb  rempt'et  to  their  t>t(i|>-rulbt!r  or
Btvp-iiiolh«*r;  mill,  wilb  r(*iii»Ret  to  kUL-h  rbildreit,
(he  »t*-p-futher  and  ittep -iiiotbor  are  severally
calhid  filWews  and  nortrca.  The  biwhuud's  brother
lioctmms  Irrir  with  rvspect  lo  the  \\\(v,  and  hid  sis-
ter bceomes  pint  irhc  Urcok  yctAotc).  Murna;^'  wun
iinlnwfid  amon>;  per«oti»  who  bud  become  such  af-
fiii(%  lis  above  uiciitioned.  A  purituu  who  bud  kiis-
taitied  such  a  mpilit  dimiuutio  um  to  hue  both  bin
ixeedum  mid  tbe  eivitJU',  bwt  alnu  atl  bitt  aflhiei).

AfraulUB,  Licivs.  The  chief  master  uf  the /a-
bula  ti/g'i(a,Vfln>  doiirishod  about  B.C.  100.  Tukiiij;,'
Meuaiider  for  hia  iiioiicl,  he  achieved  /;reiit  success
ii)  dt'pietiug  Itotiiaii  life;  and  CiceiYi  Hpeakgof  biui
aa  witty  aud  a  ma^U'r  of  laii^tui^^e.  The  titles  of
more  than  forty  of  bis  cu]ue<UeH  uit^  kuoTCti  to  us;
imJ  liiHjB  of  them  Iiave  been  prewrvtd  for  iih,  atid
can  be  fuuiid  in  O.  Kibbeek's  etdluctiou.  Ills  plHyo
kupt  pos&f4wiuii  uf  tbe  fttago  until  aflor  the  liine  of
Nero.  {Se>e  CoMijEI>tA.)  Fur  critieium,  »ee  I-'rute-
riii>  iti  the  llhaHinchc^  Afuacum,  xxxiit.  'M'i.

Africa  (froiu  the  Piiuie  Friiji,  a  diMtriel  uii  (he
north  coaal).  A  iiaiiiu  uited  by  tht^  auriuitia  in  two
HHiiHi'ii,  (1>  t^i)r  the  wIioIm  coutiuent  of  AlVica,  and
(2)  for  the  portion  of  North  Africa  which  thu  Ko-
mana  en:cted  into  a  provtuce.  (1)  iu  the  luont
Keuerul  acuse,  tbu  name  vvaa  nut  n»('d  by  tUeOreek
writers;  aud  its  nM>  by  the  Bomaua  aruHC  fruui  the
cxieusiou  to  tbe  wbob;  contnit^'Ut  of  the  uauie  of  a
part  of  it.  The  proper  Oreek  uauit:  fur  the  couti-
iient  is  Libya  (\ifiiii}).

Considerably  Irrfure  tbo  hintorieal  period  of
Qnwe  begiua,  tbo  Pbceiiici»ns  extended  their
ooinmeroe  over  tbe  Meiliterriiiu^an,  am]  Ibnndrd
several  colonies  on  tbo  uorth  eoiiHt  of  Afrira,  of
whirh  Carthage  was  the  chief.  Tbi;  Gn-ckft  know
very  litile  of  Ihi^  roiittliy  iiiilil  thu  fuundatiun
of  tht>  Dorian  i^oluny  of  C.vniiK^  (  fi.c.  Ii20 ),  and
the  iutcTtoiirw;  of  tJntnk  inivellerd  with  Kyypt
in  the  sixth  and  tlfih  oeuturie.s;  and  uven  ibt-ii
tbeir  knowledge  of  all  but  the  part  ueur  Cyreu<^
•Vftui  derivtfii  from  Hm  Egyptians  arid  I'bienicians.
who  aeiit  on  I  nomn  rt'oiarkabli*  ex)H>ditinnB  to
explore  Ihn  euuutry.  A  Pliu>ntrian  Heet  wnt  by
the  Kgyptinu  Pharaoh  Nccbo  (abont  li.c.  fitW)  was
said  to  have  sailed  from  llm  Ki-il  S<'.-i,  around  Africa,
and  bO  into  tbe  Mediterranean:  thi*  nuthenlicity
of  which  fltory  is  »tlll  a  mattrr  id' dispntc  Wr
atill  possess  nii  nurheutic  aeeount  of  another  ex-
ptilition,  which  tbo  Caribagiiiiuns  despatched
uiidiT  Hanno  (l-^-)  (about  n.c.&IO).  and  which
rcuuhed  :i  point  on  the  west  coast  nearly,  if  not
quite,  an  far  an  latitnde  lO**  north.  In  the  iulerlor,
the  Great  Dcsort  (Babara)  interposed  a  foi-midabk*


obstacle  to  dlacoTcry:  but^even  before  the  tiui<
of  HemdutiiH,  the  people  on  tbe  tiurtheru  coast  told
of  individuats  who  had  cn>:(sed  the  dt-aert,  and  bail
ri;aeb(-*d  a  great  river  Uowing  towanls  the  ea.it,
with  crocodiles  in  it,  and  black  nieit  living  tm  il«
hanks,  which,  if  tbe  story  he  true,  was  probably
the  Niger  iu  its  npper  conrse.  uear  TiinhnetoA.
"I'here  were  great  diftVrenees  of  opinion  as  to  thft-
Imnndaries  of  tbe  continent.  Some  diviilcd  thft
whale  world  into  only  two  parts,  Europe  aaH.
/.Jtia,  hut  were  not  agicrd  to  which  of  these  two'
Libya  (i.  r.  Africa]  bolunged  ;  and  those  who  reo«
pgnized  thn;o  divisions  ditfored  again  in  placing;
the  boundary  between  Libya  and  Asia  either  oik
the  west  of  F.gj  pt  or  along  the  Nile,  or  at  the  isth^
niUH  uf  8ne2  and  tint  Red  Sea;  the  last  opinintf
gradually  pTevailt>d.  Uerodotus  dividew  the  in^
habitants  of  Africa  iuto  four  races:  two  nativaj)
uamely,  the  Libyans  and  tbe  Kibiupians;  and  two
foreign,  namely,  tbe  Pbteniciaus  and  the  Gn.-eka,
Tbe  Li bynus,  however,  wert-  a  Ciuicasian  race;  tbfl
Etbiopiaiirt  of  Uerodoltis  ciiiTe.>t|Hmd  t4>  our  Ncgn
races.  Tbe  whole  uf  tbe  north  of  Africa  fell  siio<
eesKively  nuder  tbe  power  of  Home,  and  nan  finall|
divided  into  pn>vinces  as  follows:  (1)  AKCI'tnt'S^
(2)  LlltVA,  iiK'bidiug  (a)  I.ibyae  \omos  or  Lihyl
Hsurior,  iM  Marnianca,  (<■)  (.'jrenaiea;  {^^}  AfricJ
I'HOPltlA,  tbe  former  cmjiire  of  Carthage;  (•!)  X0<
miiiIa;  rr>)  MaI'kktania,  divided  into  <<i)  Sitifeih
sis,  {b)  Cai-^arieuHis,  (r)  Tmuitaiia  :  these,  witli  (6
Aktiiiupia.  make  up  the  whute  nf  Africa,  accord-
ing to  the  diviMons  recognized  by  tbe  latest  of  till
ancient  gBograjdiers.  Tlie  nnrlbem  district  vrai
better  known  to  ibu  I£oinam»  Ihau  it  Is  to  us.  an4
was  uxtreiiiuly  popiilons  and  tionrisbing.  Afrioi
Propria  or  Pn>viiieia.  or  simply  Africa,  was  tlu
name  iiinler  which  the  liomaus,  after  tbe  Thih
Pliiiic  War,  n.c.  146.  erecti'd  into  a  province  thri
whole  of  ibe  former  territory  of  Cailfaage,  It  ex^
Ivndiid  from  tlir  riv»'r  MnHca,  on  the  west,  which
tlividnil  it  from  Nmnidia,  to  lb«  IhiIIoiu  of  the  Syr-
lis  Minor,  on  the  MoutbeaHl.  It  was  divideil  into
two  districts  (nyiouri),  namely,  ( 1  )  Zeiigis  or
Ze.ngitana,  tbe  district  i-unnd  Cui-tbage;  (^)  Rye%
cium  ui'Uyzaceua,  sunthof  Zeagitaiia,n8  far  a«  tlM
bottom  of  the  ^!y^tis  Minor.  It  corresiHinds  to  tb
motlern  regency  of  Tunis.  The  province  waa  (u\
of  tlunrisbiiig  towns,  aud  was  extremely  fertile
it  furnished  Kunip  with  its  chief  supplies  of  com.
In  tbe  days  or.Slr»bo,  the  earlier  knowledge  [KM
ftessed  by  the  ancients  of  Africa  wns  little,  if  at  all
improved .  The  M«i(literraiie4in  coast  and  Ihe  bankl
of  the  Nile  were  the  only  ports  frequented  by  till
Greekit.  Tbrir  opinion  rc^iwcting  the  coulineoi
ilw^lf  WHS  that  it  formed  a  trapezium,  or  else  thai
the  troant  from  the  Colnnins  of  Ilerculffs  to  Pela
tiinm  might  )te  considered  as  tbo  base  of  a  righb
angled  triangle  uf  ^^  bieb  thu  Xilu  foruied  tlm  jwe
pendicular  side,  extending  to  Aetbiopia  and  thi
ocean,  while  tbe  hypotbunusc  was  thu  coa-ni  com
prohcnded  between  (he  extremity  uf  Ibis  line  ani
tbo  straita.  The  apex  of  the  triaugle  reached  bo
yoiid  the  limits  of  the  habitable  world,  and  wa
coitse<iiiently  regarded  as  inaccessible.  The  knowll
edge  of  the  day  respectiiig  tbe  eastern  and  westen
coast  of  Afrira  apjieara  to  have  extended  no  fur*
ther  than  12 '  nurth  latitude,  or  perhaps  IS'  SOC
The  two  sides  were  supptuteil  to  approximate,  and
betwoou  the  Hes}>crii  .\etbioiK:s  to  the  west  and
the  ciaNcimomi/era  regie  tu  the  east,  tbe  distance
was  supposed  to  be  uompuralively  suiaLI. This  I]


AFKICAS PEJtIUD  Or LATINITY


11


AUATHOCLES


I
I

I


ling  ipucc  was  cxpowd  to  ■•xc«viro  tiiuitii,
twvnIiiiH  lotbe  rnninion  li4;li».'r,  which  forUadc  the
invflll^'r'itiM'nftninitg  wiiliin  itit  |tn-ciiivt«;  while.
St  a  lllllr  diHtaiK'f  Ik\v'M)<1,  tbf'  Atluutic  atiil  Jii-
<llaii»c«Aiiii  nHiT  ltrmi)ilit  to  unite.  Tliu  h.v|t<jtli('itia
t^litcb  w«  have  hvrc  .tlatfil  inntte  Africa  ternimnte
aI  atH)ut  iitMi  half  nf  itatriK'  KMi^th,  aad  represontcd
tLiicuDliuriil  an  tiiiirli  fiiunllt<r  tliuii  Eriru]ke.  Ou
tW  othrr  litiiiil,  Ihn  upiiiinii  of  Hi{i|iitr<')um,  n  liii^h
aatl«l  ensTiJU  Africa  to  IiuHh,  rHiititiiiHil  for  »  htiit;
prnoflcuiiifniiifd.iiulit  MiUiuuii  urT>T«  ami  Ptole-
my Iiii)  ulopu-il  it.  This  adoptiuii,  huwevrir,  tliil
&nt  |ii«r<>ut  tbo  prtiviitus  h,T'iMitheNi(3  rrt'iii  keeping
itiKmuiid  in  soniL'  nieosMru  iu  the  v-vnt  of  KnruiH-.

■  bi-rr  il  cDiimbnt«il  to  the  discovery  «*f  the  rnntn
fcy  the  CajH*  of  Gooil  Hope.  Africa,  ucconlin^  Ui
flinyivi.^^:!),  waa  Three  thuiiMiiid  nix  liiUH)n.'(l  and
tinj-pigbt  Ri>niuu  iiuleh  from  e;iHi  to  west. The

^iMglh  III'  iiw  iiiluihited  purl  of  Africa  n'nn  niiji-
uunhero  to  ex«e«sd  iwo  hundred  and  Hfty
Vnnui  tnilcfi.  W'bniever  niuy  h«  the  diMMinMiouti
til  kbicti  the  very  <:orrup(  nlJite  of  iht;  Kumiin  lui-
JMnk  ill  the  poKtw  «>f  I'tiiiy  nu--  cahrulale<l  to  ^ive
\tafi  thing  ift  HiiOiciiMitly  4'vitiertt,  lliut  the  Ko>
M  khtivr  only  a  third  |»ai't  of  Africa.  Seti  iho
«t»clo  GxuuR&nilA,  with  the  nmp«  iheiw  t;ivoii.

Aftfcan  Period  of  Latiiilty.  Tht>  period  in
thobinl-in-  of  Loiin  liieratnn*  fmni  nhnnt  115-lrtl)
*•t^  wu  iMi  called  bpcaii*^  of  tlie  fact  that  nuioy  of
ibn  pcftmioent  wrileni  <if  this  iwriod  were  ontivoa
"t  Africji,  e.  g.  M.  CoRSEiJCrt  Fkomyj,  Skx.  Iit-
UC*  AFKiCASrs.  L.  Apii.eii:«,  and  the  i:hri»tJan
»ritiT  ti  SEMtMifs  Fluken'a  TetrrcixiANtrs. Sue

SEKIUi  I'tJiMliitS.

'A&Kuitu. (1)  A  iiaiiir  given  to  Mvvral  of  tbe

IwiMosfur  their  vlelories  over  thn  Curthit^iuiaiiit.
*«?Hcuio. (2)  Ik-e  StXTl-s  lt;uL*H.

'^Mcnt.  The  Roman  name  for  th<^  sonthwect
">»<l,Kbicb  the  Grwks  called  Xi^,  and  givuu  lo  it
l»«*»W«?  it  blew  off  the  con»t  of  Africa.

^dlaU  (ayt^fut). Set  STATL'AIIIA.

A«iniede«  (Wyafiiiiijs).  Son  of  Ergiutis  of  Or-
tbmiMU).,  fl,„l  a  famoas  builder,  with  hia  brotlier
ThinlKiciiuiiMi.  T.I.

^^innmnoa{\\yafttfivQtv).  'nte»i>iiof  Atreimand
l"«terof  SlenelniiR.  Driven  fnmi  Mycenae  after
tlwnionlerof  AlrtMm  (().  v.)  by  ThyeitteK  tbo  two
I'^OK priiMX'*  (K'd  to  Sparta,  where  KinKTyiidareoH
g«»MWiii  bis  ilanghtfru  in  marriiiKO — Clyiaemncs-
"•tnAptmemiioiiiarid  Ifcirn  to  Menela)i».  Wbilo
**••  Utter  inherited  IiIh  fiitlipr-iti-law'R  kiuftdoui,
^IPttennon  not  only  dnivo  bis  unelo  out  ofMyoo-
BM*l*qttoextiim1od  liifidoiiiinir>UH  that  in  the  war
H^lW  Tri\v  foT  the  rof  ovnry  of  Helen  the  chief
•"■waiMl  WM  intniHted  to  hiin,  a*  th«  inighticni
|"uiM  III  (irtH-re.  Hfi  contributed  ono  linndrtnl
^'^  Quuued  with  warriors,  benidea  lending  xixly
^  tl>p  Arouliaaa.  (On  the  iuintolatioo  of  bis
^■>i:bter  l|diigenta  nt  Aniia.  »«  ll'ltlurNlA.)  In
•Jocner  be  ia  one  of  tbe  lifuveat  (tgbtein  before
"'>1\  jtst,  by  arrogantly  refnoing  to  let  Chrysca.
M  hf  Ap*dlo,  ranmim  his  daughter  ChrysfiB,
-  -  ifchl  fallen  to  Agarueniiion  as  the  prize  of  war.

■  wwnjbl  a  plague  on  the  Orpcian  host,  whirh  he
"'♦'■"ifda  alitWBt  mined  by  nitlilcHsIy  carrying
^""^  Bri«fli.  the  prlw  of  ArliilleH,  who  linnreforfh
"I^H  rn  liU  tenia  and  refuH«d  lo  light.  Aft«r
'"1  fall  of  Tr«>y.  Agamemnon  came  homo  with  liiH
"iJlitB,  the  princuMi  t'asMinndra;  but  at  nupper  be
""i  h\»  camradea were murdend bv bin wife's


lover,  Aegislbua,  while  the  queen  herv^lf  killed
Caiwandi'a.  Hach  ii4  llonierV  account;  the  tragie
poetM  make  (Jlytju;ntiiejitra,  in  revitnge  fur  b«r
duughtcr'a  imuiolation,  throw  a  net  over  Againeiu-
iion  while  bulbing,  and  kill  him  with  lh«i  help  of
Aegisthu».  In  llonier  hih  children  are  Iphiauaa-
Mi.  L'hr>'M>themiii,  Laodici^,  anil  OrcMtes;  tbe  later
legend  puts  Iphigeida  and  Klectra  in  llie  idace  uf
lpbt:inaiM.'i  and  LuodieiS.  Agaaieiuuon  waa  wor-
Hbipi>ed  tiH  u  hero.  Hitt  name  in  the  title  of  a  play
by  Aewbylna  (4|.  v.).  See  tlie  urircleA  ACHltLKd;
Orkstes;  Pku>pidab;  T&uan  Wak.

Ae^nxoimxonldem(\yafunyofllirf{;i.  Apatrouym-
ic  upplied  to  Oienl4>H  tq.  v.).  tboHOU  of  Agiimeniuoii.

Agamiou  Orapb6  (uyn^iuv  y^KZ'^^).  An  indict'
meut  aaiiing  the  SjiurtauH  brutight  agaluat  thiicie
who  married  too  lute  or  nnbuilably;  uud  alHO
againHt  tlioxe  who  iltd  not.  nnirry  at  all  The  pen-
ally  w:tK  ,'rTifiia. St^-eATIMlA;  MaTHIMoviI'M.

jLeaju.pi>6  ('AyafiWi/l.  A  spring  on  Mount  Heli-
con, neur  Tlimpiiu?  in  Iloeolia,  mtcred  to  the  )ln>ieN,
who  neru  called  from  it  AganippidetL  Im  water
watt  believed  Ui  impart  itoetic  iuMpiratioD.

Agaalaa  (Wyuaiutl  A  Gre«k  artist  of  EpheaiiH,
who  Unnrittlied  probably  in  the  lirst  ceuinry  b,c.
The  Uorghese  UJadiatur  iu  the  Louvre  is  from  bis
hand, bee  Gladia11)KK8.

Agaso.  A  gniom,  giMienilly  a  nlnve,  whotte  bnai*
Dca«  it  wuA  to  take  cart;  of  borscH,  to  drive  rattl«i
or  lo  |H'rfottii  the  lowrAt  menial  ollicej*.

A^atbaichldes  {  Ayndu/f^iJIfjt),  A  Greek  gram-
marian uf  Cnld<.«,  ubi>  lived  at  Alexandria  in  (be
aeeoud  eeutnry  U.C.  He  compuHed  among  other
hiotorical  worlCB  one  on  the  succeMom  i-f  Alexander
the  (tivat.  and  u  drM-'riitiion  of  the  Kcil  Sea  hi  live
b(K)ks. Of  both  of  theew,  hcmuc  fnigiuoitta  reiaaiu.

Agatbatcbua  {' Aya&apxot)-  (I)  A  Greek,  the  in-
veultjr<jff.eeiie-painTing.  See  Vitro  v.  vii.  /'trier  and
the  nnieloK  ]'i»-ri  itA  ;  Theatki'm.  Ci  )  A  Suniiun
painter,  the  conlem|H)rury  of  illeiixitt,  »tn>  prilled
bimhelf  en  tbe  rapiiiity  of  hi*  work,  rweiving  fnnn
Zenxi4  tbe  famonn  retort  that  if  AgaliinreuH  pamt.-
ed  hit*  workH  in  a  ehort  lime,  he  (Zeiixiit)  painted
"  for  a  loiig  time,"  1.  e.  for  piwtfirity.

AgathiaB('AyiitfifT().  A  (ireck  |M)et  and  historian
of  Myihiu,  in  Asia  Minor,  who  wan  liorn  about  A.t>.
530,  »ti«I  died  about  M'i.  ]ty  profcs!<ion  In^  was  »
JnriHl,bul  in  liinKt'icXov.  n  eollei^tion  of  his  own  and
other  c4»uteuiF>orury  ptwnin  in  eight  hookf,  he  made
a  begin  niiig  of  the  Greek  Anthology,  wliieh  ntill  pre-
aervott  lUl  of  hiH  eplgmniH.  Ho  alr^o  wntte  a  liin-
tury  of  .luHtlnian  in  live  bmikn,  in  eontitinntiiui  of
tbe  work  of  I'rocopimi  (q.  v.). See  An*tiui|,(k;v.

Ae9\h6c\eB('\yadoK\r)s).  ASiollian  adventurer,
Ikihi  at  Tliemuie,  and  brought  n]»  u*  n  potter  at
S>ruvnw>.  111:4  htn'ugth  and  iier^onul  beauty  reo-
onimendcd  lilm  to  Danio-H,  a  nolde  SyracnHiLU.  who
drew  him  fnini  olwuenrity.  itnd  o»  whiMe  death  lis
married  bin  rich  widow,  and  ko  beenuie  one  of  the
weallhirwt  eili/eiiM  in  SyraentM'.  Hh  ambitions
srhenirH  then  developed  tlieiMKclveit,  and  lie  was
driven  intoexile.  Aflerseveral  chiiiige»tiif  fortune
he  collected  an  army,  and  won  derlun-d  novereign
of  Symenne,  H.c.  :U7.  In  tbe.  eoiirw  of  a  few  years
the  whole  itf  Sicily  wbieb  wan  not  uinler  the  do-
niinioti  of  Cartlinge  nnbmitl^l  lo  him.  In  .'ttO  he
watt  defeated  at  Hiniera  by  the  (.'nrthagininnii,
under  JIainilear,  who  titraightway  laid  Hiege  to
SyracUBe,  whereupon  he  formed  the  bold  denign  of


AGATHODAEMON


42


AGESIPOUS


svertiiig  the  rnin  wbich  threatened  Itira  by  carry-
ing the  war  into  Africa.  His  successes  were  most
brilliant  and  rapid.  He  constantly  defeated  the
troops  of  Carthage,  but  was  at  length  siimnioned
from  Africa  by  the  affairs  of  Sicily,  where  many
cities  had  revolted  from  him, B.c.307.  These  he  re-
dnced,  aftvr  making  a  treaty  with  the  Carthagin-
ians. He  hatl  previously  assumed  the  title  of  King
of  Sicily.  He  afterwards  plundered  the  Lipari
Isles,  and  also  carried  bis  arms  into  Italy,  in  order
to  attack  the  Bruttii.  But  his  last  days  were  em-
bittered by  family  misfortunes.  His  grandson
ArcbugathuB  murdered  his  son  Agathocles,  for  the
sake  of  snccee<1ing  to  the  crown,  and  the  old  king
feared  that  the  rest  of  his  family  would  share  bis
fate.  He  accordingly  sent  his  wife  and  her  two
childron  to  Egypt;  and  his  own  death  followed  al-
most immediately,  in  389,  after  a  reign  of  twenty-
eight  years,  and  in  the  seventy-second  year  of  liis
age.  Some  authors  relate  an  incredible  Htory  of
bis  being  poisoned  by  Maeno,  an  associate  of  Ar<
chagatbns.  The  poison,  we  are  told,  was  concealed
in  the  quill  with  which  he  cleaned  his  t«eth,  and
reduced  him  to  so  frightful  a  condition  that  he  was
placed  on  the  funeral  pile  and  burned  while  yet
living,  being  unable  to  give  any  signs  that  he  was
not  dead.

Agathodaemon  (ayaffotiattiav).  A  friendly  dis-
posed spirit  of  the  cornfields  and  vineyards,  to
whom  libations  of  unmixed  wine  were  made  at
meals. See  Dabmon  ;  Eventcs.

Agatho8rgi  {ayadtupyoi).  The  five  hundred
knights  who  compose*!  the  body -guard  of  the
Spartan  kings  in  time  of  war  (Herod,  i.  67).

ABttthonCAya^dif).  An  Athenian  tragic  poet,  the
friendofEuHpidesaud Plato.  Hedied about B.c.400.

Agathyrsi  (,'Ayadvpa-oi).  A  people  in  European
Sarmatia,ontheriverMaria(Maro8ch),iuTrausylva-
nia,  noted  for  their  practice  of  tattooing  their  skins.

Agave  ('Ayavf}).  Daughter  of  Cadmus  and  wife
ofEchion.  She,witbotberwonien,inabaccbanalian
frenzy,  tore  to  pieces  her  own  son  Pentheus  (q.  v.).

AgdisUa  ('A7di(mc). See  Rhea.

Agfila  (oyc'Xi;).  An  assembly  of  young  men  in
Crete,  who  lived  together  from  their  eighteenth
year  till  the  time  of  their  marriage.  An  aytXjj
consisted  of  the  sons  of  the  most  noble  citizens,
who  were  usually  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
father  of  the  youth  who  had  been  the  means  of
collecting  the  oycXi;.  It  was  the  duty  of  this  per-
son, called  oycXan^ff,  to  superintend  the  military
and  gymnastic  exercises  of  the  youths  (who  were
called  aytXaoToi),  to  accompany  them  to  the  chase,
and  to  pnniith  them  when  disobedient.  He  was
accountable,  however,  to  the  State,  which  support-
ed the  ayiXat  at  the  public^  expense.  All  the  mem-
bers of  an  iiyAi}  were  obliged  to  marry  at  the  same
time.  In  Sparta  the  youths  entered  the  ayiXai,
nsnally  called  fiovat^  at  the  end  of  their  seventh
year. Sec  Education.

Ageladaa('Ayf}Xafiar)>  A  Greek  artist  of  the  first
half  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  famed  for  his  images
of  gods  and  01ymj)ian  vit-tors,  wrought  in  metal.
His  reputation  was  much  enhanced  by  the  fact  that
Phidias,Myron,andPolyclitnBwere  his  pupils.  See

BTATL'AHIA.

Agema  (oyi^fta,  from  Sym).  The  name  of  a  chosen
body  of  troops  in  the  Maoedouiuu  army,  which
generally  consisted  of  horsemen.  The  agemaseems


to  have  varied  in  immber:  sometimes  it  consisted
of  150  men,  at  other  times  of  300,  and  in  later  times
it  contained  as  many  as  1000  or  2000  men.

Agenor  ('Ay^viup).  (1)  Son  of  Poseidon  and
Liby^,  king  of  Phoenicia,  brother  to  Belus,  and
father  of  Cwlmus  and  Europa  (q.  v.).

(2)  Son  of  Auteuor  by  Thenno,  a  priestess  nf
Athen^,  and  one  of  the  bravest  heroes  of  Troy.  In
Homer  he  leads  the  Trojans  in  storming  the  Greek
intrenchments,  rescues  Hector  when  thrown  down
byAiax,  and  even  enters  the  lists  with  Achilles^
but  is  saved  from  imminent  danger  by  Apollo.  In
the  post-Homerio  legend  he  dies  by  the  hand  of
Kenptolemns,

Agenorldea  i'Ayrftfopiiiijt).  A  descendant  of  an
Agenor,  such  as  Cadmus,  Pliineus,  and  Perseus.

Ageorgiou  Dik^  (ayeapylov  fiiKi}).  An  action
which  might  be  brought  in  the  Athenian  courts  by
a  landlord  against  the  farmer  who  had  injured  hia
land  by  neglect  or  an  improper  mode  of  cultiva-
tion.

Ager ;  Agar  Pnblictu. See  Aorariak  Leges  ;

AORIMEN  SORES.

Ager  Ardfiniae. See  Agrimenhores.

Ager  Deonmannn. See  Agriuensorks.

Ager  Iilmitatae. See  Agrimensokeb.

Ager  Quaeetoxiua. See  Agrariae  Leges.

Ager  Religioaaa, See  Aorimensores.

Ager  VeotigaUa. See  Agrariae  Leges.

Agesander  ('Ay^troi^por).  A  Greek  artist  of  the
school  of  Rhodes.  The  celebrated  grou]>  of  the
Luocoon  is  the  joint  work  of  Agesander,  Atheno-
(loras,  and  Polydorus. Bee  Laocoon.

Ageailaua  ('AyijcriXaot).  The  name  of  several
kings  of  Sparta.  (1)  Agesilails  who  reigned  about
B.C.  U86,  and  was  contemporary  with  the  legis-
lation of  Lycurgus.  (2)  Son  of  Arcbidamus  II.,
and  succeeded  bis  half-brother  Agis  II.  in  B.c.
398,  excluding,  on  the  ground  of  spurious  birth^
and  by  the  interest  of  Lysander,  his  nephew  Leo-
tychides.  From  b.C.  396  to  394  he  carried  on
the  war  in  Asia  Minor  with  great  success,  but,
in  the  midst  of  his  conquests,  was  summoned
home  to  defend  his  country  against  Thebes,  Cor-
inth, and  Argos,  which  bad  been  induced  by  Ar-
taxerxes  to  take  up  arms  agaiust  Sparta.  In
the  year  394  he  met  and  defeated,  at  Corouea  in
Boeolia,  the  allied  forces.  During  the  next  fimr
years  he  regained  for  his  coantry  much  of  its  former
supremacy,  till  at  length  the  fatal  battle  of  Leucira,
B.C.  371,  overthrew  forever  the  power  of  Sparta,
and  gave  the  supremacy  for  a  time  to  Thebes.  In
361  he  crossed,  with  a  body  of  Lacedaemonian  mer-
cenaries, into  Egypt,  where  he  died  in  the  winter
nf  361-360,  after  a  life  of  above  eighty  years  and
a  reign  of  tbtrly>eight.  In  iwrson  Agesilails  was
small,  mean  -  looking,  and  lame,  on  which  last
ground  objection  had  been  made  to  bis  accession,
an  oracle,  curiously  fulfilled,  having  warned  Sparta
of  evils  awaiting  her  nnder  a  "  lame  soveroignty."
In  his  reign,  indeed,  ber  fall  took  place,  but  not
through  him,  for  he  was  one  of  the  best  citizens
and  generals  that  Sparta  ever  hud.

Agealpfili*  ('AyijcrifToXir).  The  name  of  several
kings  of  Sparta.  (1)  Agesipolis  who  succeeiled  hia
father,Pau8ania8,wbileyetaminor,in  B.C. 394, and
reigned  fourteen  years.  (3)  Sou  of  Cleombrotus.
reigned  one  year,B.c.  371. (3)  Succeeded  Cleonirnes


AGETORIA  i

iu  B-C-SAO,  bnt  xnui  hoou  de}HtM}4l  by  hi*  colleague

.^.getoria.  Aiiuther  tmuic  lor  tlie  Cabkea  (q.  v.),
.A-Sgcr  tywfiii),  fnttn  nd  and  (/n-o.  A  torn)  iib<mI
111  ^^iH'nil  for  a  lir!i|i  <>r  inonnd  of  any  kind.  It
iwAtt  tiinrp'  )inr(irtilarly  apidit-'il  tu  a  muntiil,  n»unl-
ly  c«-»iuiM»wd  of  I'lirlh,  wliiili  wiw  riiw»-d  iirfMiiid  a
ttr.Bi«-g<-d  Idwii.  ittiil  win*  unidurtlly  incrwiin'ci  in
in>'a4ltlj  mill  Iii'iiilit  till  tt  e«iiialied  or  iivert<ij»[wd
th»  walla. At  ilio  alege  ufAvariouiUr  Caeaar  niiM'd


"-.'<■


•*^*S.)ir,'


Agpr. iFrem  Celuni  ofTn^lui  t

ki  twetity-tlve  days  an  apgpr  S30  twt  bitmil  and  f*0

Uvt  higli. The  nftK*'i'>*'a**"otiii'tiiiifii  mode  not  nuly

at  «anli,  lint  of  wiknI.  ImnllrM,  ulc,  us  to  tlio  nc-

OPDipanying  illiiHlniliiin,  wlit^iice we read of  its

being  wt  on  fire. Tin'  name  au^'^r  was  alvi  ap-

filird  to  tliff  parlht-n  wall  §ntT<intidiiig  a  Roniun

cneBiDjiiuPUt.  cotnpo^fd  of  tlie  cjrlli  ilittt  from  tin*

ditch  (/oHiii,  wliicli  wiM  iiHnAlIy  nitu^  fi-4_<t  tiroml

■nd  <wieii  fet't  d«v|i:  but  if  »uy  altiitik  waa  ajppre-

Iwiitl^d,  tbc  dr'i'tli  was iticivuHcd to twelve  foct

ami  lilt;  breadlb to  thirtntn  firct. HIiflr|t  (itakca

•erw  ftuniinv  fixed npon tin-  agj-fi,  wbich  waa

tlwDcnlled  raUam. '^'b«ii  Ixttli  nnnUari'  um'd  <jui

tti  t'amitr,  tigg<r  nc  rallam),  Llm  ajif^-r uii'aiiK  llm

ai'iuiiil  (if  rartb.  and  llm  valhim,  rite  Abarp  Htakea

Kl>i<ti  wtTtt  tix<><l  upon  tbe  a}jgcr.

AjUa  (  Ayi'ar). S«o  Cyclic  Toets,

Acta('.Vy»r(. Tbi' nami' nf  Mtvuml kiiij,'M  of

8|»n». (llTli**  jMHiof  EnryHtlifiMut,  tin-  n*iind<Tof

tlir  Tituily  of  tbr  A)4id<u.\ (*J)  Boii  t>f  Ai<-)iiduiii(ie

ll..re))(unl  ii.r.  4'^-;P>*. He  took  an  iirtiM.-  piirf  iu

line  fi^uiniiini'siaiiAV III,  and  itivniU-<i  Atticji  Huvcral

liiu«ft. Whde  Aloibimk-a  was  at  Sparta  Uv  wan  tlic

KO'*lurA)$iH,  und  iaiuiid  to  baro  iwdiiccd  bia  wife

liBMi  tiu  €uutM.M|U<^uc«  of  wbicb  Lfotyt-bidrs.  ibe

MWotAgw,  w«»  excluded  from  t\w  tlirono  ua  ille-

glliiustd). (3)  Sou  of  Arrbidaiinm  III.,  rfigm-d  B-C.

^^''-'TSJ. lie  atlvnt)>li>il  toovrttbrow  tbc  Macedo-

ni*B  (»)WiT  ill  EiiroiK'  wbiU'  Alpsandt^r  tbc  Grrat

«a*ii>  AkIh.  but  w»«  di-f«atvd  and  killi-d  in  battle

*■)  Aiiti)Htlfr  in  tbo  year  330. (4)  Son  of  Kniluaii-

*«ll,nit(5Hfd  B.C.  *J44-840. lie  atleiii|»t4^'d  tu  n--

'*)s1>li<b  tbe  iuntiintioiis  of  Lyi-tiri;<n4,  and  to  elfci-t

■  1iwtini('b  rufonn  iu  tbo  Spartan  Ktate ; but tu*

^u  niijittil  by  bis  collragiie  Lt-onidas  II.  uii'd  tli««

'wJUty,  w«jt  throwu  into  prieon,  and  iLorv  |>iit  tci

«<iU  ity  coniQiHud  of  the  opborci,  along  wilb IiIh

"•M^and  ^iiiudiuolber.

^tatons. Sec  Ciiicus.

AcUIa. Onii  tif  tbe  Grarpn. Hce  C'tlAlllTIW.
Agmen. Tbr  Roman  army  oa  tlifi  march. Seo
fciiincnia.
AcnatL S»  CoGSATto.
AEndmen. bee  Numrn
Acoualia,  Agonla,  or  Agoualea. A  nautc  de-


At^OUA

rlvi'd  from  tbe  obi  I^tiu  atfnnia,  a  victim,  and
given  to  four  ftwlivala  iu  tbu  Itomitn  calt^ndnr.  |1|
ABacHfii-o  lo  laniis.oii  ibc  Utb  of  Jminary.  i'2)  A
aaerifii't)  by  ibu  Salii  (().  v.)  tJ»  Mars  or  Qniriuna,
uu  tbo  ITtli  of  March.  {H)  A  aacrilice  U>  Yoiovia
U|.  v.),  on  the  SUt  of  May.  (4)  A  ft!aat  calkHl  Si<p-
tiaiontinm,  held  on  tbe  Iltb  itf  L>evotnbt.-r,  nbeii
II  victim  waM  otlVred  on  <>aub  of  tbe  a«vvu  billK  of
Rtittni_ H*ie  HnHcbkt',  Itn»  attf  riim.  Jttbv  (  MK').

Agdnea  iuyi>vts).  ( 1  >  A  fn*nvral  ti-nn  ummI  by  tbe
(ir<'ri(hoftlK*t-oiit4?Mlfiat  thr|:n'at  national  fi'Htivala.
8t*r  Olymi'Ia;  Pytiiia  :  Nkmka;  Istiimia. i'i)  Ao

A  legal  t«M'tii  it  18  iiMtd  of  luwaiiitH. Mvu  TiMKMA.

AgonotbStae  l  ayMpoBirai  I.  Tbe  jwrttonH  who
iu  tilt:  tiri-<!ian  t!'""<'^  decidtd  tbu  diapntCN  and
snardcd  tin*  prizea.  Sco  OLYSiriA;  PYxniA;  Nk-
uea;  Istumia.

Agfira  loynfM).  I'l)  A  wonl  that  pn>|)crly  nicaiiB
an  iiMNcuildy  of  iiny  uiiliirr.uiid  in  iiHiiuMy  employed
by  Homer  for  the  ginifral  lutM-mbly  of  llic  pwiple.
Tbu  liyfipa  wntii!  l«  liuvu  In-mi  uoiiAidiTi'd  an  ettsril-
tial  part  iu  the  conntitutiDu  of  thu  early  Gm-iau
■tati's,  tttnco  the  barbarity  and  iinririlized  inm-
ditiiiii  of  tbi.^  Cyclnpwt  i«  characterizi'd  liy  tboir
wu(itiii)i;  snub  an  attavmbly.  The  ayupa,  l.bou);b
itmi/illy  I'onvokful  by  tlip  kin}:— ait,  for  ioHtanro,  by
TiOt'macbns  in  iIip  nbsencc  of  litH  falbcr — Hpptuinf
lo  liiive  Imtii  alHo  HiimniotH':d  »t  timtw  by  aoiih-  iIU-
tiii|!niMlicd  vbiid'taiii,  lu*,  for  irxiinipU*,  by  Acliilb'a
bpfiiri'  Troy.  Tlin  kinp  i>rnipicd  tla;  mo»l  iiii|iiir-
tant  M>al  in  tbfM^  aHw^inblii-H.  and  near  him  «at  the
nobl^ii,  wbilo  tbo  [k^ople  sal.  or  8t<w>d  in  a  circle
around  tb«'in.  Tbe  power  and  rij^lits  of  tbe  people
in  tkctie  ns^t-nibltCM  Itave  bvL-ii  tbe  nntiject  of  much
dispnio.  PlatniT.Tittniann.and  NilZMih  mninlaiii
that  Ibt-  iwoplu  wen-  alloued  to  lipeak  and  vote;
wliibr  Hcen-n  ami  MUller  rliiiik  "that  tbo  iioblea
wore  the  only  ]>er*)iirt  who  pro]H«cd  meamircH,  de-
liberait'd.atid  viiteil,and  that  tbe  [Mtuple  were  only
preHi-til.  to  hear  llici  debate,  and  to  pxprcKM  ibeir
fe^Iitif!  ns  a  body,  nbich  exprettHiuiiH  inj^hl  then
)m>  iioticisl  by  a  prince  of  u  niibl  dl:<|Misi[ioii.''  The
latter  view  of  the  ipi^mtioti  is  ctintiruied  by  tbe  fact
thai  in  no  puH(tii){<>  iit  th«  Otlffimftf  is  any  one  of
tbe  people  n-pn-iwinled  a»  lakinn  [mrt  in  tbe  dis-
cnsMioii ;  wliiU-,  in  tbo  Iliad,  Odyspwiw  iullicts  per-
sonal chaHtiseiueut  upuu  Tburaitea  for  preautuiug


nmnr


=i:r***


[IITIE


■  I — >-


-.tz


W»0  of  a  Irr^U  Aanrn.  iwrorrtlnd  to  Viinivlna

*,  Ik*  njm  nmrl,  >un">-»tl»<  1'> il  *lil. r.l.irm  m'..  .nJ  ili.rr-; 11.  l)i*  ni(la|
K,  tint  thxi*^  la  aaiB*tUi  villi  Um  olbn  hmm  nl  tbw  frjlMtMW,  /,  rf.


AGOBANOHI


44


AKRARUE  LC


to  attack  Mie  utiblps  in  the  ayopa.  Tb(*  p^npto  np-
pcar  lo  linvc-lKWU  only  cullcxt  togwlliir  to  Iiear
\%hiit  had  liccn  alivatly  ugrvoil  npoii  in  lhi«ctiiiiici1
of  llie  tiol>lv«,  which  in  culled  fiov\Q  Ati<l  $va>Koi,
uid  sometimes  eveu  dyu^u.

Aaiuiig  thf  AthfiiiaiiH,  tJio  pn>per  iiamo  for  rho
aMwtiiMy  of  tbv  iwoplc  wax  (KKXiiria,  niicl  nnioiig
Ilie  DnriiniH  AXin.  The  term  ayoftd  was  coiiHiipd  at
Athi'im  lr>  llitf  uM^euiMies  of  the  pfa,vlne  and  dftiii.
Iri  Clrvltj  the  original  tianic  ayupd  coiitiinitrd  To  hv
applii-d  lu  I  hi''  pupil  Iarass>onil>lipfl  till  a  late  pt'ttiKl,

{"£)  The  iiBiUL*  ayopa  was  early  Iriiiisferretl  from
thu  uji»iM)ibl,v  itaelt'  to  the  place  in  which  the  ae-
KeiuMy  was  held;  and  thu»  it  raitic  to  be  nuctX  for
th«  uiiivket-plice.  wheru  Koodtt  tif  all  (Ietw.-riptitinH
wen.>  bmiKbt  and  aold.  The  expi't-'tution  ayopa  rXq-
6fn>(Ta,  "  fiill  marld't,"  wan  iinwi  io  nigiiify  lb**  time
friMii  nioniiiif;  to  ikmiii,  that  in,  from  about  uiiio  to
tWflVtt  o'(:I(M-k,

Tbi-  a^ora  In  Greek  cities  oorrefl{HiudH  to  the
Kuitian  furimt  (q.  v.).  The  chief  aiitboritieci  uu  the
Biibject  are  rausanias  and  Vitruviiis.  The  arcuiu*
paiiyiutt  plan  (after  Vilriivius),  taken  fi'oni  Hirt's
tiivchichtt'  (itr  liaHkitnat  ixxi.,  t^.  Il,  ]-epretfeiil»  the
later  form  o(  the  aKoni.

Sef  Ittteckb.  Ffon,  of  Athfan;  Lcukf,  Tapt/f/rnphff
of  .lUirHa ;  Knitim^  lirUaif,  vol.  ii.;  Htrt,  Lrhrr  d.
Grhiiviif  d.  Griwhen  wnJ  tiiimrr,  i'h:ip.  v.  ;  Wa**h»-
iiiitth,  FJtUemtchf  AUn-thamnkavdr ;  and  Becker-
Ooll,  (7inni7f»,4th  wrono,  ii.  pji.  ITT-'iia.

AgoraiiOtni  (nyopavd/im).  MarkeL-itiiiMti^rH.  In
many  firuok  tuwuii  inii^i^lrates  Miniewliat  iv.>M.Ma-
bliiif;  the  Roman  aediles  (  q.  v. ).  At  Athens  ten
afforanami  were  eboseu  by  lot  every  year,  livg  fir
Ibe  city,  and  five  for  the  port  of  IMnuMis,  They
looked  especially  after  the  retail  tradf,  gavi*  »tnin-
gets  leave  to  en;:axe  in  it,  te«led  \vet>;ht»  and  tneaa-
ures  an  well  as  the  (|iiHlity  of  good^,  coiiHscating
auddeiftroyiiig  wbiit  njix  K]K>ibHl;  they  settled  dia-
piiteM  between  bnyi-m  and  wdlers  on  tb«  wpot,  vr,
if  a  «nil  at  law  waM  necfiwiary,  pniwiiicd  over  it.
See  lim-tkb,  /'wWic  £«»«.  o/ J(Ar««,  pp.4rt,  SB.

AKiaiiia  [  nypavia  ).  A  feitlivai  celebruti'd  at
Argon,  in  memory  of  one  of  the  dan;'hter*t  of
Fr<M-'Hi8,  who  had  been  afflicted  with  madnc4».

Agiaphiou  Graphs  ( aypa<f)iov  ypni^r; ).  The
uami-B  of  uli  persoiiM  »(.  Athens  wlio  owed  any  sum
of  moiiey  to  the  stale  wer*'  reyisU-red  by  ibe  prac-
torea  {npatcTopts)  npiiri  tJiblotH  kejit  fur  that  pnr>
pOBit  in  the  Teitipbi  of  AtbfiK'  i>n  the  Ae-r<i]>o1i.<i;
ninl  bence  the  exp^'fution  of  bcin^  rugisteretl  uu
the  Acro{Mdifi  always  niemis  indi.-bted  to  the  Htatv.
If  the  name  of  an  individual  was  Improperly
«rae)cd,  he  wtiH  tiibject  to  the  action  for  uoii-rugia*
tratiou  (  nypiKftimi  yfmijif) ),  which  nafl  nnder  the
Jnriadtctiuii  uf  che  tlieHluotbetae;  but  if  an  iudi-
vidiial  Vksm  iH»t  reKiHlfred,  he  could  ooly  be  pro-
c««ded  against  by  tirfiti^n  (q.  v.),  and  waa  not  liable
to  th<!  ayfiatftioii  ypntjti].

Agr&phou  Metallou  Oiaph6  (ay^mt^oe  fMToX-
Xov  yiiatfti)).  Ati  aetion  bnuiHlir  lK;fure  the  th*"*-
motbt-lae  at  Atbetm.  iigiiiiiKt  an  indiviihial  who
irorked  a  mittv  without  ha\inf;  invvioUHly  regirt-
teruU  it.  The  stale  required  that  all  miiic8  fthonbl
be  R-gi^'^'f^li  hecaniin  the  Iwenly-fnnrth  part  of
their  profhicn  win*  payable  (o  the  pnbliu  treajinry.

Agtiuiae  Legaa  (AGitAitiAX  Lawa).  I^wadeal-
ing  with  the  diHtribntioii  of  the  Kntnan  pnblie
Iflinl  (itffrv  fiuhUriiM).  SM*\  lu  general  lo  lie  detterilwtd
aa  laws  proxiJiiig  fur  the  allotment  to  (he  poorer


eitizonR  of  lam)  belonging  to  the  Htat«i  or  regnlat-
tng  the  tenure  uii  wbieb  t  liene  laiidN  ishonld  b«  held.
Such  aanignmentft  of  land  arc  nald  to  have  Ureu
luade  n»  early  at  l^>mubl»  ^Varro,  Ii.  Ii.  i.  10,  i),
but  tbft  first  agrarian  luw  vraa  that  ]iropoaed  by
Si>.  CaaaiuH  in  u.i::.  4H>.  The  pnldic  laud^  wei%  the
roAiilt  of  eonqnehl  in  war.  It  wan  not  tilt  towards
tbe  end  of  Ibe  Republic  tliat  ive  bear  of  rhc  »lat*>'»
acquiring  lerrilory  by  the  gift  of  a  foreign  prince.
War  ID  the  ancient  world  made  the  biMliea  and  Ite-
longitigH  <if  tlie  vaiiriiiifthed  the  abNuliilt;  pro|ierty
of  the  virtnm.  No  doubt  either  policy  or  pity  gvu-
erally  interfered  lo  prevent  the  full  exeruiMt  of  the
p4>wrr.  In  Italy  especially,  Ibe  iientouM  were  not
usually  made  slaves:  but  thongfa  the  conquered
cominnnity  waH  allowed  to  exist,  it  was  ilephved
rif  part,  often  of  a  third  parl,of  itMlnndK.  Tbe^eenn-
fiM'aled  landH  had  Mimet  inieH  bi-eti  ut  terly  n-aHt«d  in
war,  Hcinietinied  wcn^  Mtill  uidiaH  and  tn  a  Male  of
cnltivation,  Dumettme»  eonm^tird  of  moorland  and
wimhL Koch  kind  reqiiircft  [*r|iarate  trvaimt-nt.

1.  The  cultivated  hunU  wen*  ileult  willi  in  one,
or  it  may  l>e  in  all,  of  four  wu.vh.

Cii)  Pari  WH«  sold  by  the  qimcHton.  and  hence
caLlcd  affri  quantorii.  According  to  the  (jromal.id,
tlh'  laiul  for  thiH  pnr]HtKe  \xa»  nieaKiire4)  and  divid-
(h1  by  balka  {liiNiln}  iiiln  nipiiire  plcitti  {laln-ruti).
mvuMtr\>m  tea  uci ux  Mieb  Hide,  and  cnnlatning  lifty
iut/rru,  i.e.  tbrrty-one  acn^K,  •<arh.  A.h  rontjiining
one  buutlriil  H4|uan;  aclan,  it  wun  .sometinien  railed
erw/(infl,  Tlit;  eaiiie!>t  inrttanrt;  tvuonleil  of  a  sale
wuH  in  tlic  eiiM'  of  I'oiui-lia,  where,  allhiiugh  the
city  was  snrrenilea-d  when  about  to  be  ktoruii^,
some  of  the  chiefs  ^vere  Hlatu,  Hoiue  of  the  buttband-
men  were  aold  an  slaves,  the  town  wos  destroyed,
and  rbe  bind  wdd  (I.iv.  it.  17).  The  gjile  under  the
spear  («ub  htuta)  gave  full  righta  of  owucr«hip((iai.
iv.  10).  C«iuqueKt  had  extii)guit>bcd  all  previoua
title  or  ntuims  tn  Ihe  laud,  and  the  utale  would  of
course  give  legal  eti'uct  to  its  own  acts  of  trnn^fer.

(fr)  I*:irt  wan  given  :iiitl  assigned  in  fidl  owucr-
Bhip  to  KnniAii  rilixens.  TImh  bind  wnfl  duly  siir-
veytnl,  nieahiLi't-d,  divided  by  bidks  lillci  eentiiriett,
each  coutaiuing  two  bnitdrtd  iufji>ra  (one  bnndi-ed
and  twcnty-tlvc  acres),  aiid  ashigticd  by  lot  to  Ko-
■nan  citizeus.  Sneh  land  was  called  ayri  dad  ad'
iri^nati.  The  oldest  a»HignQicuts  wcro  two  iuijeta
to  eai-h  man;  Ibis  formed  nu  heredltuiufut  yhtfo-
diui'i),  i.e.  bo  bad  not  lli«  mere  use  or  life  intereat
of  the  plot,  btjl  it  ]iaKM'd  to  hia  heira  after  hiui.
The  liitN  of  (Ute  hundred  men  tliuii  formed  nne  ecu-
tnry  {ernt-Hif-iu).  Later  on.  rtevtMi  iugeta  were  re*
garded  aa  the  normal  t^izeof  alol  (Pliu.  B.  jV.  xviii.
^  l**);  but,  in  fact,  there  wa*i  gri-at  variety,  tbo
uiuonut  UQluralty  depending  n|)ou  tbt-^  extent  of
laud  open  to  di>4tribn1it>u  and  the  uniuber  of  eiti-
zeuB  to  share  in  i^  The  survey  and  dtHlributiou
were  effecleil  by  aHi>ecial  coniniis»i»u  of  threv,  live,
or  ten  men  (Cic  Agr.  ii.  7),  trailed  IJIrirt  A.  D.  J.,
i.e.  aip'i»  tlfiudin  ad»iffnnudiit.

(r)  Partof  iheciintJjM^iilcil  1aiid8  were  given  iNick
to  their  fumiot-  owncnt,  and  no  rent  w&a  iiuixmcd
on  theM!  plots.

(rf)  Part  was  neither  sold  nor  aaAtgncd  nor  re-
fttoicd  to  the  furnutr  owners,  but  let  for  a  retii  (iw-
tifftil),  often  for  long  peiiodt*  to  Htate  contraetoni
{  maiicipet ).  vhrt  sublet  to  the  neartst  occnpiera.
Ilyginiia  meiitiont<  ns  long  a  lea^  aa  otic  liiindrcfl
yearn.

2,  HcKideA  the  cultivated  landa  Htill  in  condition
to  bi*  Nold  or  let,  there  were  the  mountain  pnstnrea


I


I


I


I
I


AUKAKIAE LEUES


AURlCrLTrRA


Ah. The  mountain  pjiAtnrrs  nrxl wocmIh

I  emiite'l  {e«»ftx»ii)  to  tlio  old  prnpriotorA,

*  vt  to  tliR  mtinicii>B)it\,  nr  In  llir^  new  R^imun  colo*

ny.  or  rr*rrvt<«l  to  thr  ctiilt^; ntiil  ntlirr  trnct«  of

lauil wt^rv  ofleii iiMfnl an  ]tiuitiireA where there

wor* uot sufllLieiit furmerH I" requiri' Miem an

linbli*  latttL Bomt'ttmekai^iiiiill  n-iit  wiim  n><|iilr(r4l,

j  and  theti  tbey  cano  ninlc-r  the  hL-nd  nf  a^ti  t'ecfi-

iffah*  (Orom.\tp  '.KKJ, '205}. tijouictimeti  Htri]M  of

j  wood  on  the  niouiilHiii  wi>re  aiiiii<xo<l  by  llie  nrixi-

[tiat  aaaignmetit  to  tlie  diff'ert<iit  esttttes  (/Hndi)  uf

I  private  pertwitiH. I'lirtturex,  in  like  tiiuutier,  were

M^nietiDies  appropriKteil tu nidividnHU.  hut  bold

prn  imdirixo  ;  or  ootiir timm  luiide  oomtnou  to  tile

whole  of  lh«  roniin unity iCrom.  j»,  4"*). Appiaii

{BttL  Cit.  i.7)  tmyn  that  tajies  were  laid  for  tlii'  iiki>

of  I  be  cotunion  pustiirefi,  bntb  I'orlMrgeruiid  kiiimIIit

lauiltmlN,  i.  e.  borniHl  catlle  and  Hbeep. The  laitt

I WU  fulU'ctfil  by  Ilie  ]Mtblii."iiiM.

U.  Applaiii<AyH  tbar"  the  larger  pnrt  of  ttie  IiiiiUm
taken  fruni  the  conqnered  bad  been  wiiittwl  by  «  ar,
and  iiiiniltiraled. As  tbe  KoinanA  had  no  time  to
jdistriliulo  it,  tbey  (TRvp  nntiee  that  any  one  who
ikt^d  mifilit  tampornrily  work  i(,  pnying  n  lux  of
ymrly  trnth  of  thr  eewl  crope,  and  a  flftb  of  (lie
plaritatioim"  (i.  e.  fruits;  for  tnslnnce,  oliv«8  and
^Ta{N*>i). There  is  do  other  anthnrity  for  this  d«f-
iiitv hJNlorieal  8tatenien( of  u  notice  and  a  tax.
The  GniniMlii-i  Kjieak  fiM|tK-ntIy  of  osfH  vvcnpatorii,
.e.  liuida  iMdotigin;*  to  mpiatti'm,  and  explain  that
wan  coiif|iipred land occupied by individtialit.
The  wonl  UKwt  frequently  luwd  to  deiiot«  (litti  oe-
iiuition  in  pottiiU-re  •  tbc  occupiers  Bi<e  jMMrwwm-n,-
thc Innda,  /WMrMioaet  — tetnin  which  ilo  not,  bow-
>er,  imply  anyrhing  lut  to  the  legality  of  the  title
lb>-  which  it  in  held, lint  that  this  sort  of  oecupa-
lliun  waA  recugoizi^l  by  law  irt  clear  fiimi  ihu  fju-i
I  that  interference  with  it  by  the  Ktatu  was  the  sub-
ject, nut  of  Judieial  proceetling*,  but  of  Ic^iblative
I  cnaclmenL

It  doea  Dot  deem  jmdiable  that  any  definite  ar-
rtmi;(<taent  w.-ui  matle  in  ttariy  titnev  for  the  oecii-
])«.r)iin  of  public  tan<l  which  whm  not  n»Aigned,nr
•old,  or  It'UBcd ;  and  tlir  Ic^al  rlaiin  iif  tbn  Htatti  to
1  wit!,  it  wnA  tu*  inconlcritabb^  in  liicitry  aa  it
■  ditScuit  to  onfurci!  wiihont  tbn  deNinu-linu  of
Uwie  reasODable  expeciaTionu,  arihiny; from  long
UH,»hicli  are  the  foundation  of  ihc  MtdtcamaiiV
«»!» i>f  pnjperty. It  is  diK)intcil  uhetlicr  the  pa-
triflins  alone  rto  the  exclnnioii  of  the  plcdH-ians>
h"'l.  bt-rtiiw  till-  Lieinjnn  laws,  tbc  right  to  hold  the
iwl'lie  Iwid :  aM  a  fact,  it  wa*  pidbubly  the  caao.
''*"jKrreoriyinally.  and  rontiniied  for  long  to  be,
Iw  MJtni  of  the  gnvcrnnifnl.  and  they  were,  aa  a
jTi'Mlip  tichcHt. Now  tbi^  nc<'ri[«iti<in  iif  tracts  of
"Bil  taoted  in  war  wun  not  a  poor  Rnnian'n  Inn^i-
'~>t  It  waa  at  a  dialanee; it  rcqnircd  capital:
Irt  wta  inaerore,  partly  from  the  enemy  on  the  ,
"Tff,  iiid  partly  from  the  «t-iitc'fi  not  having  as-
•"Snwi  il  SA  priratn  pniperty. Neitbt-r  the  pfiu-anl
*»  Hip  fitiiflll  capitaliht  would  And  the  occupation
W<uvli  Ifttid  at  a  distance  from  Boute  attractive:  j
*'*'**«,  h«-  waa  liablr  Ut  be  caUe<l  oil  to  (wrve  in  I
'■'■ Tlip  rich  Biait  ronid  ri«k  )<onif tiling,  could  I
•"•P'"}' "lavw  lalwiur,  coiihl  jinlgc  of  lite political
••""pNto,  and  have  a  piit«ntial  voiL-**  in  th«*aeli<'n»  '
•' twj  rtiit^, giu'li  po».se<miniiM  bad  a  nalnral  ti-n*  I
Kj  trtaceiimnliilc  in  tho  handh  of  tbt-  few. The  '
«»n  aihlcd  tielil  t^i  ticld  icotttinuare  atfio*},  itarrly
^punliann  fnim Ihoir  poorer  neigh  bo  urn,  jiurtly
''7  vtt^pp,  jmrtiy  \,y  takin;^'  in  any  vacant  lunil .


ndjoining.  Thns  were  fomie<1  the  large  c«(atca
(  Uilifunttta,  hti  fundi)  which,  worked  by  sIavch,
drove  out,  or  gave  no  o|ieQli)g  fur,  free  |H!aaanie,
and,  imrteinling  llie  niin  of  Italy,  routed  the  Grac-
chi to  tbiMr  fainona  legi^tlatinii.

For  8oine  acronnt  of  the  f>pe4!iflo  agrarifin  Iawo,
KOf  ilmnriirlfH  Rogationks  Liciniak;  SKuritoMAK
Lrora;  TnoRiA  Kex;  GRAOcni's.

Agrauiia  {'\ypitvXia).  An  Athenian  festival  in
honour  <if  AgrBnlnn  (q.  v.),  datighter  of  Cecnips,

Agrauloa  {' \yf>avXof).  (I)  Uaughtnrof  Aclaena,
finiil  kingafAthont>,and  wifeofl'pcropH.  {y)I)angh-
teroft^VcropMarul  AgruuluM.of  whom  varioii-iNlonca
are  told.  Athrn6)iiaaiil  to  have  given  Krirhtbonins
in  a  obeat  to  Agnnih>s  nnd  tier  nl!tt4ir  lli'int^.  with
strict  liijunctioiiH  not  too)K:n  it;  but  ttu-ydimiliryml
the  command.  (See  KKicHTiit)Mi;H.)  Agranloa  wsu
snltsoqnently  puninhed  by  Wing  changed  iiilo  a
atone  liy  Hermes,  bi^nnse  Kbe  a)  tempted  to  pre-
vent tho  gnd  from  entering  the  boubO  of  ItcrM^,
with  whnni  he  had  fallen  in  love.  Another  legend
ndatcs  rhat  Agritubw  threw  hfrself  down  lYi'tu  ibo
Acn>iHdiii  bi-cnuKo  an  oracle  had  declared  Ibat  tho
Allieiiians  wnulil  cnnqner  if  mmie  tine  would  »ac*
ritico  liimwif  for  his  nonntry,  The  AlliBidnini  in
gratitude  bnilt  her  a  leniple  uu  the  .\crojioliK,  in
which  the  ynniig  AtbenianH,  on  reL-t-iving  their
UrHl  snit'  of  arnionr,  took  an  oalh  that  (bey  wiruhl
uh\u^VH  defeiid  thi'ir  country  t4i  the  lHt>t.

AgrStae  <ayj>fVni).  The  name  of  nine  niaidena
cboHcu  overj-  year  in  the  iatuud  of  Cos,  aa  prieoiUHites
of  AthoutS.

AsTiania  i  ayptavia).  Probably  the  same  feati  vat
OH  iho  aijiania  \t\.  v.),  and  celchrnted  in  Argos  uud
Thebi-B.

Aer1c61a,  Unakus  Il'lhs.  A  Ktnnan  general,
who  WU8  born  Juno  13tli,  A.o.  TtT,  at  t'ornm  Inlii
(Fn^jns,  ill  Pmvencc ),  the  «m  of  Inliua  Grao-
oinnrt,  nho  wan  executed  by  Caligula,  and  of  Intia
Procilla.  He  received  a  carefid  e<1ncation;  he  tirst
served  in  Hrilaiii.  a  l>,  tilt,  under  Suetonius  Pauli-
nuN ;  wuN  (p)aeMti>r  in  Asia  in  (I^t;  waj«  govt^rnor  of
Ar|Utiania  frum  74  lo  7t>;  and  nan  roimnl  in  77,
wh^n  he  betrothed  bin  daughter  to  the  blHtoriau
Tacitii>4,  and  lu  the  following  year  gave  her  tu  bim
in  marriage,  lu  78  be  roeulved  the  govcrntnent
of  Britain,  which  he  held  for  Boveu  yeura,  <liiring
nhicb  tine  he  Hubdued  the  whole  of  tlio  country
with  the  exception  of  the  highlands  of  Caledonia,
aud  by  bia  wise  administration  inlnxlnceil  nuiong
(ho  inhabitania  the  langiuige  and  civitizatiini  of
Rome.  He  was  vec.ilb'd  in  Wilhroiigh  the  jealouHy
of  Deniitian,  ninl  on  bia  return  lived  in  retiretnent
till  Ihk  death,  in  '2f.\,  v.  hicb,  acconling  to  aoiue,  waa
or<-ii>ioned  by  |HiiiMin  adiniiiiHtercd  by  onler  of  Do-
niitiaii.  Hih  churaetcr  la  dctwu  in  the  briglilest
c^ikitntt  by  bis  tM>n-iudaw  Tacitutt,  whu»e  life  of
Agricola  baa  come  down  to  lis. See  TacitI'^

Agrlcultura.  (I)  In  (iREECS.  Agriculture  was
a  leading  indnalry,  at  luaat  nA  early  an  ilunier.
The  Huil  wan  Hlubboru.  fertile  plniua  Udng  com-
pnratively  few.  and  mountains  and  n>eky  ground
preponderating.  Ibit.  favonre'l  liy  a  getiial  cU-
niHte.  ngricnllnre  wax  cnrried  on  alinoHt  every-
where with  n  zeal  to  which  the  wtuiiR  of  n  dense
population  adiUnl  Ibeir  vtiinulnN.  Tliat  it  wua  re-
garded a.<<  the  very  gnmndwoik  of  social  life  is
olunvn  by  the  fact  that  itJi  gimrdiau  guddewt  Du*
meter  pr««id«d  ahto  over  wediuck  uud  law. It


AUKICULTURA


46


AGKlfiENI'tU


iTos  looked  upon  ns  tlic  moat  1e|Erititnntr>  way  of
cftriiinj^  II  Iit^Ukhk].  It  na»  carried  to  the  liif;h-
«(t  piiclr  ill  tlio  P<'lopni]iT('Him,  wIhti-  vvt-ry  Ncrikp
of  ciiltivnhle  wiil  wtw  rrijjiltt  lo  yii'lil  iti*  croii,  uh
way  W  seen  U>  lliis  ilay  l».v4lii'  nrliliciiil  lr<mwein
lliftt  t«oiirp  every  moiiiituin--'>1iip*!.  Miicb  caro  n'a«
benlowetl  on  intfcaliuu.  Hcarvity-or  wnter  WU8
snpitttfTneiit«4l  Ity  nrtiDcinl  moAiiB;  piovi»iou  was
niatle  ugaiitf>t  irrcijiihu'  Itnrsts  or  iii(miit:tiu  t«r^i}ts
by  fnibiiiikiiiK  and  rc^iiluting  the  iintnrni  outleu,
%«hil«  moitil  iaitdb  wen^  oliiiiinclled  and  »taKiiaut
•wiitcr*  drained.  Water  was  di»tribiUtMl  every-
wIkto  by  ilitclies  iii>d  nuiulH,  under  tlie  HiiperviHioii
of  ■'tiit4<  oftlriulit;  itnd  liivvH  of  ancient  dat«  gnanleil
ii)*HiiMt  the  iinfuir  uw  ofn  wutercoiirse  to  a  ucigb-
b*iiir<  daniiigti. See  KmissarU'M.

Tbv  land  nati  niaiiily  fiiliivuied  by  Alaves  and
Ber6>,  iho^Kh  fiold  labour  v.m  not  dcunied  illit-
b(>n'iT|iiibl<i  lo  the  freeman,  except  wborc  law  aud
cuftluiii  forbndi-  liiti  (.Mit;ii}{inf;  iu  any  »OTt  of  handl-
cnil't.  ai4  at  8purta.  In  tMnue  conutriee,  e!t|>eclally
Arciidia,  the  oUI-world  plan  of  every  man  tilbng
hin  ti).dil  with  hi«  own  hand  ivmnineil  in  fori-e  to  tli»
latet*t  tiiuett;  and  oven  eminent  MaleHnien  likePhibi-
po«mfnO|- V.)  iroiild  not  give  it  np.  FourkindHof
grain  were  chiefly  (cr*)wii — whf^at,  barley,  an*!  two
kind?t  of  f^itcU-f  to  nil  of  wliich  the  climate  allowed
two  HOwingH  ill  thfi  year — bcwidett  millet,  (iRsnine,
variooM  le^timinonH  phuit.H,  and  neviTiil  rtorti*  of
herha;(e  fi>r  fodder.  With  no  less  diligence  was
Greek  hiiBbandry  npplied  to  gnrdening,  t'Mpeeiiitly
to  the  cnllivation  of  thu  vine.  ThiH,  while  Ktead-
ity  ])nrhiifd  oti  tlic  maiiilaml,  waK  dev«lopi>d  to  itn
oxlraor<1iiiary  extent  in  the  i«landM,  luor't  of  which,
owing  to  their  inoiintHlnont*  character,  tlid  not  uf-
foifl  their  iiiliabrtanl!'  aiifficieut  arable  w>il.  In
olivc-ctiUnie  no  part  of  OnM^ce  comiKMcil  with  Al-
ticii,  whidi  alMi  produced  the  bettt  flgH,  the  fruit
nioHt  widely  rnltivated.  Kilcheu-gnrdetiing  was
practlM'd  on  the  i»rgeMt  bchIo  !□  Itoeotia.  I'nn-
aidering  the  cnoruion8  cou^iimptioii  of  llowere  in
wrealhb.  the  rearing  of  theni,e()p«cia[ly  of  the  rutw,
lily,  iiarciMDS,  aud  violut,  uiu^t  hsvo  been  a  Incnt-
tive  busiufM,  at  lea^t  tii  the  neighboiirhmMl  of
great  towos.  Meadow-famiiiig  wiia  nf  next  ta  no
importance,  few  diHtiicld  having  a  aoil  adapted  for
it,  and  »nidi  njeadowM  as  llieit;  won  beiii}}  iihwI  for
imntnn'  rathi-i-  tliiiii  haymaking.  |

i'i\  In  Italy.  In  Italy  al-so,  the  csi8tence  of  the
cuminiinity  wa^  regarded  n^  based  upon  agricutt-
nm.  ThiH  is  pruv<.-d  by  the  practice  of  marking
the  (tile  of  the  future  walls  of  a  new  town  by  a
farrow  drawn  with  the  plough.  At  Rome  CMpe-
ciftUy,  the  body  of  irremovahlo  })ea«anlr>*  long
formed  the  core  nf  the  ctiuinion wealth,  In  polit-
ical life  the  free  pvaoaiit  wuh  the  only  factor  lii-ld
in  account,  and  accordingly  in  war  the  object  was
to  incrROHc  the  iiiiml>er  of  free  peaaanta  by  plant-
ing tboin  out  on  a<t  much  of  biirderlaud  as  could
bo  wreHted  from  the  («ncuiy.  In  early  times  agri-
cultni'e  was  lltonght  the  only  re»i>evtable  culling
in  which  a  Koman  citizen  coiild  engage  :  and  man-
ual bibour  wa.>t  held  in  high  eAtt^ni  and  hrongbt  no
(tinerrdit  upon  jiersoiiH  of  ratik  aud  station,  even
Cato  the  Censor  Morkiug  in  the  lieldii  aide  by  ttide
witli  liift  (davea.

HuHhandry  wft*»  mainly  dirceU'd  to  the  raiding
of  grain,  the  ordinary  cereal  being  at  lirxt  spelt,
till,  in  ilif)  tilth  century  BC,  wheat  began  to  take
a  placu  bcMide  it.  They  also  cultivated  barley,
uillctj  aud  k-^timtuoua  plauta,  as  well  aa  tumipa,


grecna,  aud  herbi  for  fodder.  On  im'gafion  an'
draitiage  the  Itabanii  bi^atowcil  much  paitm.  Tbej'j
had  no  lack  of  gntMs-Iauds,  either  for  pasliira  on
hayniaking;  aud  from  ati  early  time  theM<  weraj
artiiicially  waii'H'd.  Thii  cnllivation  of  tlitt  vino;
aud  olive  exu-nded  ao  Ihnt  of  gralnit  docUued;  *o\
did  the  growth  of  orcharti  fruit,  which,  under  tboi
Int«  Kepiiblic  and  the  early  klin)»irc,  received  A<
voat  expaii»ioi)  both  from  the  improvuracut  of  uft-j
tive  kinds  and  tbe  inirodiiction  aud  uarnralizutioaj
of  ninuy  foreign  fruita.  In  earlier  tiuie«  the  prima^
favouHle  auioug  fhiit  trees  bad  Ikwii,  as  in  Ureeri!,|
Ihe  nutritious  flg.  A|rrieiiUnre  proper  waa  niiueA'
by  the  arquiHilion  of  the  firat  extra-Italian  |WMMeit-J
siiHiR,  Sicily  and  Banlinia;  for  the  corn  suppli^l^
by  tlie  provincials  as  tribnt*^  in  kind  began  to  ti«i
used,  not  only  iu  provi.^ioning  the  arniiett,  but  ia^
feeding  Ibe  urban  popniaiion.  (See  Avno.n'a.)  Aaj
the  !ttat<;,  to  biunour  the  rabble  of  Ktune,  Mold  ibi*
corn  at  the  loweHt.  ]m»«iblp  prices,  M)nieliiiie«f  eveo
lielr>w  ii^  value,  Ihe  growth  of  cpreal*  eoaaed  to  Ifttj
protitalile:  fiirnuTR  kept  it  down  to  a  niinlitniai, ,
and  itHik  to  cattle-breeding  or  U*  raiding  wine  audi
oil.  Tbi'jin  brancbeM  of  industry  not  only  tlonnHhe4l
iu  the  fiice  nf  conijM'tition,  hut,  with  jndicions  mau-
agement,  were  liigbly  n^nninerative.  The  dealli«
blow  was  given  to  tb<*  Italian  |>i.*aMint.ry  by  tlM
increasing  employment  of  slaves  and  llw  almnr)K
tioii  of  Muall  farms  in  large  estates.  (See  I.atifI'K-
lUfM.)  Oil  Ihew,  l>esides  the  growth  of  wine,  oil,
and  frnit,  Ihe  breeding  of  binls.  game,  aiiil  catll*
was  carried  on,  as  well  aa  woo<lcruft  and  s|>ecial
indn^triett  snob  as  pottery,  clmrcoalbnnitiig,  and
others.

Farming  implementa,  in  addition  to  tbe  plough,
or  orrifcHw  (q.  v.),  usually  drawn  by  oxen,  wbicl^
waa  iruclt  the  same  among  tireeks  and  Komant^r
and  always  very  iinperfei-t,  included  a  great  VA-3
rivty  of  hpailcN,  hues,  aud  mattocks,  and  among;
Romans  Ihe  1mrn>w  ( irpa,  ruBtntm  ),  the  use  ufl
wbicb  among  the  Gnn^Ua  in  doubted.  The  aeaaon
for  sowing  idl  cereals  was  usually  autntnu.  Atl
harvest  the  stalks  weiv  rtit  with  ttie  sickle  aUoulj
half-way  donu,  ami  tbo  rest  left  standing  as  atub<4
ble,  to  he  citlier  hnrtM-d  or  ntilizeil  for  manaraJ
Thu  proceaa  of  threshing  wa»  ver>'  defi-ctive.  I

J*ee  Pit;k»jon,  flanhitmlrti  of  thr  AurimtK  (178fl)j|
r>e  la  Mulle,  ^i^namie  I'uliliqur  drit  Homaimi {l**40)^
IbittkyiiH,  fliftt.  of  J ffricmitnrt  {laA^t;  aud  the  artM
cle  Oicul-OMCI.  I

Agri  Deoumatea.  "Titbe-landM."  The  iiania]
given  by  the  Rionans  Ui  a  pari  of  Germany,  eaaffi
of  the  Rhine  and  iiortli  of  the  Danube,  wbieb  tliejTi
took  posw-jwion  of  vibeti  the  (ienuatiH  retired  east"'.
wanl,  and  which  they  gave  to  the  liunls,  and  anb*!
siM|iicntly  to  their  own  veterans,  on  the  payment)
of  a  tenth  of  the  produce  (rfrcamfli.  Towards  tlw'
beginning  of  the  second  century  a.i>.  these  latii
were  iucoriwratcd  in  the  Homan  Empire.

Agfrigentiim  ['AKpfrynct.  The  modern  Girgeu
A  city  on  the  south  coast  of  Sicily,  about  two  tuil«i|
from  tb«!  sea.  It  was  celebrated  for  its  wealth  anv
populonsiies.<),  and  wau  one  of  the  most  splcudiA
cities  of  the  ancient  world.  It  was  founded  by  ai
Doric  colony  fnnn<iela,  about  B-c.  WO;  was  iindeii
thegOTcmmentof  the  cruel  tyi-aul  Plialaris  (aboii||
.')tjt>),  and  siiliMvpiently  under  that  of  Theron  |4Ad«t
Al'ii.  It  Ma(nle*tntyed  by  thr  CarthagiulauK  Uf)?!);
and.  though  rebuilt  by  I'inioliHMi,  never  regained
ita  fonner  grealnetts. It  came  into  the  |M>ver  o£


)  tiia;
audi^

euti]


tli^  Rv^tiMtifi  ill  91».  It  WAS  tlio  iHrlliiilnoc  ofEm-
p^loclen.  TTic-rv  are.  Ktitl  t;if<»iitic  renmtuti  of  tbo
^licteitt  «r>ty,  iiolAbly  of  it»  trliiiile  of  Zeuo.

AerixneoHroft.  Laiiil-!>urv(ojon;  nlso  called
^■•«(irt.fn>ni  yruma,  llir  iiiMlninirtil  umhI  ill  lueait-
firing,  LuiJtjr  tlir  Koiiiuii  i'in|H>riini  tln-y  rorinml  n
collrii^itim.  Llku  lb*!  JiiriHcutmiiliA,  ibey  liuil  iv^ii-
l»t  wrliwU,  null  n'orivinl  batulRuuio  MilaricM  fmiii
tfav  stdti*.  Tlivir  bimiiipii*  wns  |u  luviuiiiru  numi-
wgited  lands  fur  tlio  stalt:,  ami  ordinary  IiiihIk  fui-
iproprirtnre.  auiL  lu  llx  atiit  iiialutniu  iHiurHlarit-H.
writiuxn  uii  t'be  Hu)*|fi*t  uf  ibcir  art  wrn*  VL-ry
llRmvrwiit;  mul  n-e  Im^c  ^itill  strientille  IrDutitioAuii
ilii-  Uw  nf  iHHuidiirir'H,  tiucb  us  iLuw  by  Vi-ootiuiiii
auJ  H,V|;inii(t.  Tbi-y  vri-n'  wmHMimei*  vrxtMl  wlib
jitdicuil  jNtuer,  atnl  wprn  r:illt>«I  uprrlabitrm  unit  rla-
n>Min  tfi  till*  tiiiK*  of  Thi-mltiHtTiit  aiul  ViibMitinian.
A*  ixrlkiaiKTH  <if  l»iitl,  llif  :if;rirui<tiM>ivA  nciv  itir
tufcCMun  tif  ibe  mii^iirx,  ami  tbu  rumlu  of  th<!ir
(lai'ldfii)  nmi  ilt<rivcti  fi-oiu  the  ubl  nii^iii-itil  nieth<i<l
of  fitrmiiii*  tb»  ttrmpiim.  Tho  nortl  frm/i/imi,  IJkr
tbt  (irirk  rJfuimv.  8iui|ily  uiraiiK  u  ilivlHiuu;  itK
•[ifiliraliuii  lu  BlK'ilfy  Ibt;  vault  uf  ibi'  bt^avi-ua  wm
iW  m  lilt!  furl  Ihut  tbft  (lircrtiniis  wm  always
aM!i)rtaiii»>il  nriMinliiiK  In  tbc  trn«  pnnliual  |)»iiitH.
At  tbr  iunuf(iiratiiiii  nfn  ktn^  nr  poimal,  tU^'  atiftur
tiMkoil  1o^^nrlIft  tbt<  (>a«t  ami  tli<<  |H>nM>li  tf>  b«  in-
<Ui];uratril  lonaril!*  tb»  Minth.  Now,  jii  n  ca^e  like
iki/s  tic  iitTMin  tu  1m-  inui^iiniti-il  wss  coiiMtton'd
tiii-c]ucr.«u<l  thn  ilim^tiuii  in  wliieh  Im'  luoliPfl  wan
tboiaabiilitvftiun.  TbuH  wv  litnl  Ibat  in  tlmrujM-
«f  UiMl'^nn'eyiiig  tbe  Aogiir  liMttit^il  lu  tbH  Hiiiit)i;
ixlbi<g(Mla  weru  snppuwl  in  bo  in  tbu  tmrlb,  ami
theuiipir  vtOM  coitsidercil  lu  Iuokiti){  in  flu-  mwa
iBuiierin  nbtcb  tbt>  giMid  lonkiTd  n|inii  tbv  earth.
Hfi»w  (be  uiain  line  in  laml-(iiir%'i'yiii^  wa.s  di-nwn
(run  Dotlh  tu  «outli,aiid  was  rallnl  fOnlo,  ».h  coi-
rctfximliii;:  to  tbu  nxisuf  tbu  world  ;  tbeliiiD  ubicb
niC  ii  ITU  termed  dtCHmoitvn,  lif<:aiiPii>  it  iiiadu  lb*.-
■iforcurn  ci'OM,  liku  tbu  iiuiuvrul  X.  Tbf«4!  Ivn
bitfvffei-r  iiriHhictMl  lu  ibu  »xtn-inity  nf  thu  ^niitiiil
^uti-li  -KBh  |i»  t>o  laid  uiil,  anil  |iiirullul  lit  tbuM-
ivprc  ilntwu  other  liiieM,  accontiii^  lu  tbi<  Bi/.i.<  of
tW  S'Milrutinl''  riHiuirrd.  Tin*  tiinilM  i>f  tbose
dJrkli4M  weif!  iiutiralcd  liy  linlk«,  calli>d  IhuiteA,
■bic!)  »*rif  !i*(l  ait  Iii);h-ru»d.'s,  ll»e  grotiml  for  ibi'iii
fceiiijt  ilMiiictcd  from  ibi*  land  to  Iti*  dividvd.  Am
*'^''T)  liiib  was  wider  ibiui  tbr  utboTH.  ibft  Miiinrii
Wjtritig  apou  tbto  would  low)  /no  tanlo.  Wbrti
utMl  irju  andividrd  it  wn«  ca)U*d  arrifiuiitii  or  urci*
^■"fi*.  tn  wbirb  vlnM  bclotiged  tbo  ago- publicua.
S"  Ali«Af(|AE  LEORt*.

Militftrj  tmrvt'yor*  wr-n-  kiinwn  an  mriatorrj*.  In
■'"linif..  the  ogriiHamor  wancnlli'd  tdinidy  iiMrH«or.
Otlirr  terms  awJiHilvr,  dnrmjtnUtlor.  (iromaticm  is
>fo|"i(rIy  a  [>rufi-iMir  of  tbe  art.  and  gtvmetrrti  a
*^'Iirrof  ii.

Thf  writings  of  tlie  Groitiatiol  wlilch  ans  extJint
**'itniii  •lioi't  ln*ntii<i«  of  about  the  soL'oiid  vviittiry
*^fi  ClirUt.  by  Fruntiiius  {i-mbcildfd  iti  a  oihii-
•""""'.^  of  a  later  writer  c»lli?d  AKt'iininH  Urbi-
«»»),b(  8iculns  Klaccns,  and  hy  nppiircntly  iwi
•fitia*  Wariti);  the  nHiim  of  Myj^ntis;  m-vvral
*""  iiiatbeniatical  triatim's  of  iiiiriTlain  d»te  by
"•"'1*  Ni(t«mn,  a  siM-alli^)  HtM-lbnih,  ami  olbt-m;
<3tnk-uf]iim  iil1ii:ial  it'<;i>tlrrR.  |>r<dfaldy  of  llu-  liflli
^^t'lrj-.  of  tbe  cidontal  and  ntbursnrvoyit  of  laiidM,
wiH*  ID  Italy :  IimIm  and  deticriptioiis  of  diffi-rtnt
«iHl»r)f  Uitindary  bIoiwm;  extracts  from  tb«  Tbi;<i-
<lnMiti  Cn<b>,  and  oou  litlu  (x.  1)  of  JuHtiniau's  Di-
f^l  in  obftpure  aud  barbarous  tract  (cwiaac  lUU-


rantm)  by  one  luuoueiitiuN,  supposed  to  he  achool
exerciues  in  Iaiiil-Hiirve>iiig,  and  some  other  short
pieues.  Tbe  orijiciu  and  date  of  tbe  collection  are
unknown.  Nirbnbr  aw  ukeneil  mmleni  interest  In
tbese  writera,  nud  iii  IMd  Lachntaiiii's  critical  edi-
liott  appeATiKl, and  siipersriled  all  earlier  editiunfi.
In  Irtoii,  a  sevond  volume  wim  piiblinhed,  roiilainilif{
fMUiyn  on  tbe  MHS.  by  Itltime,  on  ibe  Ipxt  by  Lacb-
maiin,  and  on  I  bt-  tint  nf  oolnnieH  by  MoninouMi,  and
All  flabornte  rMuiy  on  thn  whole  Nubjcet  by  Kitdortf.

Agrlmetatlo. See  AoiUMKNfioitES.

Agrtonia  <' '.Nypibinu  1.  A  fi'Mival  celebrated
chiedy  at  OrchotQuniw,  In  Boeotla,  in  honour  of
DiotiyoHK, snnmnied 'Ay^Mupinv.  i.e.  the  wild.  Tlila
fifiliva)  was  stdemniTffd  unly  by  women  and  priculs
(if  Iituiiysus.  It  ennttinted  of  a  kind  of  fjnnie,  in
which  Ibe  women  for  a  lonj;  time  aetetl  t»  if  M*ek-
ing  DiouyNiin,  and  at  latit  ciilled  out  to  nun  nnotltcr
tliat  be  Imil  ew*a|N>d  t^t  the  MnM<«,  and  hatl  run-
ceab-d  biniHclf  with  them.  After  tliif*  llicy  |inv
panil  A  n>past,  and,  having  enjoyeil  it,  aiiiUMtd
tbeniM'lveti  wiib  itolving  riddlcn.  This  iVstival
was  minnrkable  fur  a  feature  winch  pmveH  its
great  Miiltr|iiity.  Sotno  virtfin'i,  who  were  desecnd-
vd  tVoMi  tbe  MinyBll^  and  wlio  probnbly  used  to
RMentble  nroiind  tlie  temple  on  tbe  occasion,  lied,
iiikI  were  followed  by  tbe  priest  armed  with  a
sword.  »bo  wafl  allowed  to  kill  tbe  one  nliont
tte  firtt  canebt.  Tbi<<  Mirriflce  of  n  hnnmn  Wing,
thougli  ori^innlly  it  ninst  hnve  furtned  n  regidnr
part  of  tbe  feslivnl,  mh-hib  to  have  he«ii  avoided  in
later  times.  One  in^tJinee,  huwover,  ticcnrred  in
tbo  days  of  Flutareh  IV<">«'*  GnKC.Sti).  Hee  Mdl-
b'r.  M>  MiNjtrr,  p.  ItitJ.

Agrlppa.  Mahcl's  Vipsaxics.  A  Romiui  gener-
al, who  wuB  bom  in  K.c.  63,  of  an  olMcure  fiiinUy;
>indicd  with  yonng  Oelavins  (arterwnrilK  the  em-
,  jteror  Aiigublns)  at  Apollonia,  in  IHytia,  and  ii|H>n
'  tli(5  mnrder  of  C(u>»nr,  in  n.c.  44,  won  one  uf  tbo
fiiendrt  of  Angniitu*!  ivlin  advised  him  to  proceed
iinmodiaiely  to  Rome.  In  the  civil  wotB  which
followed,  and  which  tenninaled  in  giving  Aligns-
tils  Ibe  Mivereignty  of  I  lie  Roman  world,  Agrijipa
took  un  artivn  part ;  and  liih  miliUrj'  abilities  eun-
triUnted  greatly  to  that  ree>itlt.  Hu  couimaiided
the  llaot  of  AngiixtuH  at  the  hutlle  of  Actinto  iu
B.C.  31.  He  waH  thiico  consul,  and  in  his  third
oonsiiUbip.  in  li.c.  */i,  he  bnill  the  PanthiMiu.  Iu
tbu  year  t^l  be  married  Inlia,  danghter  of  Angns-
tiis.  lie  continued  to  lie  employed  in  various  mlU-
tar>'  eoinmaiids  till  his  rlcHtb  in  b.c.  I'i.  By  bis
BrHi  will-.  I*iiiii|K>nia,  Agrippa  bud  Vlpsaiiio,  mar-
ried to  Tilierins,  the  (iiieceHJior  of  AtiguhtiiN-,  and
by  Inlia  lie  bad  two  dauglilerH,  Inliii  and  Agrippt-
nu,  and  three  sons,  Gains  Caiwar,  Lnuiiis  Oiu'sar,
uu<l  Agrijipa  I*iu>luninn.  The  biHt  was  Itanifihed  by
AugitHiiiH  |o  iho  islanil  of  Fliiiianit).  and  was  pnt  to
death  by  TilM^liiiit.  A.D.  14. See  |Hirtrait  un  p.  16,

A^pplua.  (I)  The  daughter  nf  M.  Vi|»ftaninB
Agrippa  (m-v.)  Altd  of  Inlia.  tLie  iiifumniiH  dangb-
ler  t'f  tbe  emperor  Angiintiis,  and  inarrie<l  l«  (»er-
ni;itii<iiH  (i{.  v.),  by  wboni  she  had  nine  rbildi-en,
among  wlioni  were  (be  eni|H!n>r  Calignln,  and
Agiijipina,  ibi)  nmther  of  NeHt.  8be  nas  distiii-
gnislied  fur  her  virtnes  and  heroism,  ntid  «bared  all
Ibe  dangers  of  her  husband's  enmpaign.<(.  On  his
death,  in  a.d.  17,  she  ri'turned  to  Italy;  bat  the
favoni-  with  wbicb  sbf-  was  received  by  tbe  pooplo
inci-cascd  iho  hntre<l  which  Tt)M>rins  and  bis  moth-
er, Livia,  biul  long  ontertoiiiDd  towards  her. At


AGBONOM[


48


AIAX


length,  ill  a.d.  30,  Tiberius  bnnisbed  ber  to  the  isl-
and of  Fnudataria,  wbere  she  died  tbreo  years
afterwards.  See  the  portrait  on  p.  729.  (2)
Daughter  of  Germanicus  and  Agrippina  (attpra),
and  mother  of  the  emperor  Nero,  was  bom  at  Op-
piduQi  Ubiorum, afterwards  called,  ill  hononrof  her,
Colonia  Agrippina,  now  Cologne.  She  was  beau-
tiful and  intelligent,  but  licentions,  cruel,  and  am-
bitious. She  was  first  married  to  Cu.  Domitius
Ahenobarbus  (a.d.  Si8),  by  whom  she  had  a  son,
afterwards  the  emperor  Xero;  next  to  Crispus
Paesienus;  and  thintly  to  the  emperor  Clandins
(a.d.  49),  although  she  was  his  niece.  In  A.D.  50
she  prevailed  upon  Claudius  to  adopt  her  son,  to
the  prejudice  of  his  own  sou  BritanDions;  and,  in
order  to  secure  the  succession  for  Nero,  iihe  poi-
soned the  emperor  in  a.d.  54.  The  young  emperor
soon  became  tired  of  the  ascendency  of  his  mother,
and,  after  making  several  attempts  to  shake  off
her  authority,  he  caused  her  to  be  assassinated  in
A.D.  59.

Ac;rontSmi  (  aypovofiot ).  The  country  police,
whose  duties  corresponded  in  most  respects  to
those  of  the  astynomi  in  the  city.  They  appear  to
have  performed  nearly  the  same  duties  as  the  %-
lori  {vkapoi}.  Aristotle  does  not  inform  as  in  which
one  of  the  Greek  states  they  existed. See  Htlori.

Agrotflraa  Thyaia  {'Ayportpas  dvo-la).  A  festival
celebrated  at  Athens  in  honour  of  Artemis  Agro-
tera  (from  Sypa,  chase),  in  consequence  of  a  vow
made  during  the  Firet  Persian  War  to  sacriflce  to
Artemis  as  many  goats  as  there  should  be  Persians
slain  at  Marathon.  But  as  the  number  of  Persians
slain  was  so  great  ns  to  exceed  that  of  the  avail-
able goats,  the  Athenians  decreed  that  tive  hun-
dred goats  should  be  offered  every  year.  This  is
the  account  given  by  Xeuophon,  but  other  writers
give  different  legends.

Agiypnia  (^Aypimvls).  A  nocturnal  festival  cele-
brated at  Arlwla,  in  Sicily,  in  houour  of  Dionysus.

Agyimn*  {'Ayvi€vs). Bee  Apollo.

Agylla. See  Cabub.

Agyrimn  ('Ayvptov).  A  Sicilian  town,  the  birth-
place of  the  historian  Diodorus  (q.  v.).

Agyzmus  (dyvpfios). See  EleusinIa.

Agjrrtae  {ayvprai).  Wandering  beggars,  often
claiming  the  priestly  rank,  and  making  their  liv-
ing by  fortune- telling  and  similar  arts.  They  ap-
pear to  have  originated  in  the  East,  and  finally
made  their  way  to  Italy,  where  they  received  the
Dume  of  aeruacatora  (q.  v.).

Aha^w,  Gail'S  Servilius.  a  Honian  who,  act-
ing OS  magiatfr  eqwtum,  in  B.C.  439,  slew  Spurius  Mae-
liuB  in  the  Forum,  because  be  refused  to  appear
before  the  dictator,  L.  Cincinuatus.  For  this  act,
Ahala  was  tried,  but  escaped  condemnation  by  a
voluntary  exile. See  Maeucs.

Abeoobarbus.  "  Brazen  -  bearded."  A  name
applied  to  the  members  of  a  noted  Roman  family,
because  the  Dioscuri  (Cost'Or  and  Pollux)  were  said
to  have  announced  to  one  of  their  ancestors,  L.
Domitius,  the  victory  of  the  Romans  over  the  Lat-
ins at  Lake  Re^illuH  (b.c.  496),  and,  in  confirma-
tion of  the  truth  of  what  they  told,  to  have  stroked
his  black  hair  and  heard,  which  immediately  be-
came red.  (1)  Cn.  DoMiTifs  AiiENOUAitBi'8,  consul
B.C.  V£i,  conquered  the  Allohroges  in  Guul,  at  the
confluence  uf  the  Sulga  and  Rbodanus.  (2)  Cn.
Domitius  Ahenobarbus,  tribune  of  the  plebs,  B.C.


104,  brought  forward  the  law  {Lex  Domitia)  by  which
the  election  of  the  priests  was  transferred  from
the  collegia  to  the  people.  The  people  afterwards
elect'Od  him  Pontifex  Maxiraus  ont  of  gratitude.
He  was  consul  in  96,  and  censor  in  92,  with  Licin-
ins  Crassus,  the  orator.  (3)  L.  Domitius  Aheno-
barbus, married  Porcia,  the  sister  of  M.  Cato,  and
was  a  staunch  and  courageous  support«r  of  the  aris-
tocratical  party.  He  was  ae<lile  in  b.c.  61,  praetor
in  58,  and  consul  in  54.  On  the  breaking-ont  of
the  civil  war  in  49  he  threw  himself  into  Corfinl-
um,  but  was  compelled  by  his  own  troops  to  sur-
render to  Caesar.  He  next  went  to  Massilia,  and
after  the  surreuder  of  that  town  repaired  to  Pom-
pey  iu  Greece.  He  fell  in  tlie  battle  of  Pbarsalia
(48),  where  he  oommanded  the  left  wing,  and,  ac-
cording to  Cicero's  assertion  in  the  second  Philip-
pic, by  the  baud  of  Antony.  (4)  Cn.  Domitius
Ahenobarbus,  son  of  no.  3,  was  taken  with  his  fa-
ther at  Corfinium  (49),  was  present  at  the  battle
of  Pharsalia  (48),  and  returned  to  Italy  in  46,  when
he  was  pardoned  by  Caesar.  He  accompanied  An-
tony in  his  campaign  against  the  Parthians  in  3t>.
He  was  consul  in  32,  and  deserted  to  Augustus
shortly  before  the  battle  of  Actinm.  (5)  On.  Domi-
tius Ahenobarbus,  consul  a.d.  32,  married  Agrip-
pina (q.  v.),  daughter  of  Gtermanicns,  and  was  father
of  the  emperor  Nero.
Ahennm. See  Abnuh.

Ahrena,  Heinrich  Ludolf,  philologist,  was
born  June  6tfa,  1809,  at  Helmstadt,  Germany,  and
was  educated  at  Gottingen,  where  he  became  a
privat-doccnt  in  1)^30.  From  1831  to  1845  he  was  a
teacher  in  the  Poedagogium  at  Ilfeld,  leaving  it  to
become  head  of  the  Lyceum  in  Hanover,  an  office
which  he  filled  until  1879.  He  died  at  Hanover,
Sept.  24th,  1881.  His  principal  works  are  the
treatises,  De  Graecae  Linguae  ZftaleclU  (Lib.  i.  JJe
Uialectis  AeoHcis  el  Pteudo-aeotias,  1839;  Lib.  ii.  De
Dialecto  Dorico,  1843) ;  Griech.  Fonnerilehre  det  home-
risdien  undaltiachen  Dialekts  (1852);  and  liucolicorum
Graecormn  Theocriti,  BUmtis,  Moschi  ReUipiiatf  2  vols.
(185&-59). See  Dialects.

Alajc  {Aias).  (1)  Son  of  Telamon,  king  of  Sal-
amis,  and  grandson  of  Aeacus.  Homer  calls  him
Aiax  the  Telamouiau,  Aiax  the  Great,  or  simply
Aiax,  whereas  the  other  Aiax,  son  of  Ollens,  is  al-
ways distinguished  &om  the  former  by  some  epi-
thet. He  sailed  against  Troy  in  twelve  ships,  and


Aiax. (AeglnelAD  Marbtea.)


AIKIA^ IIIKEt


4»


ALABASTBUM


f


^Ui\  in  the  tlittd  a»  i»ccoii(l  only  lo  Acltil-
iver>'. Ill  tlw  (xintttHt  fur  llu'  nrinniir  of
Achilttii  be  WAS  couiiuertKl  by  OilyKismiH,  hihI  tbiR,
ikys lionicr,  nan  tho  cuiiho  of  I1I4  doatli. L»l«r
|i>ct#  reliitff  that  h\A  lioffut  by  OdvKaeiiH  |lin<w  bJm
flUt  »  »lii(4'  of  niiMlii*fM;  (Imt  h«-  riislictl  from  bin
|'!lrut  »titl  "laiijcbten-il  thu  (tlivt'p  of  Ibp  Grwk  army,
}1!wK'yilif!  tlli<y  wrrr  liiM<MiuiiitfJt;  Aiiflthntut  lp))f;lli
ho  \M\t  111]  end  tu  bi)t  tAVii  life. Fi-oni  bia  bbniil
tUt-n-  i»i»rHii)j  ii|)  a  iiiiriili;  llowor  lx*iiniij{  Ibe  U'ttcnj
Ai  lAi)  uii  it»  If^ikVcH,  nbii'b  were  ul  oii<;u  tttu  iiii*
liAls  of  his  iiAiQo  ami  vXpruMivo  of  u  itigh. IIvdk-T
tnot  nirnttun  his  luisti'cM  Tvciue«Mi. cii  Son
Hcjia, klitgof  the  LocriiKits  sUoculiL-ti  tbvle«»-
'  if  Alix. utied  nt;»iniit  Tmy  111  forty  f>Ui|in. He  is
deaerilwil  as  small  of  BtAtnrc,  tiut  i<kilti-il  in  throw-
ing tb«8|M>Ar,  ami,  iifxt  to  AcliiUps.  the  iiiont  swift-
fbvtwl  ftmiing  tlip  Oreokft. On  bis  rvtiini  from
Twj-  his  vcbwl  w;w  «Tvcki'»l; Im  bimiwlf  wfcly
rrarhMl  a  rock  through lhi>  iuutiNLiitM!i<  of  Poiwi-
duii;  bu(,  AM  he  hoiiMii>il tlint  1if>  woiilil  «'>tra|ii>  in
deCuicr  <if  lb»  imiuoilalA,  PttMtniluu  Mplit  thti  nick
■ilK  Lis  Iriik'iil,  tuiil  AiikX  vtm  awulluwi'd  up  by
tki>  H-a. TIiIa  in  tbi*  acvoiiiit  of  Uomer. Utbcnt
t*lli»tbut  Iheaiintr  of  Alheii*?  wiis  rxritfilagiiiimt
him  lifi'uusn  on  Mn-  niuht  of  iho  cuptun!  of  Troy
tifvinlaUnt  (-'aaNitidra  in  the  teiuptL' of  the  guclilcM
(Ljfwplinm.SeO  uilh  kcIioL).

Afldu Dike  (aUiat  fiiKi}).  An  aclina  brought
•t  Alhpiu  iM-forr  the  Court  of  the  Forty  (of  TtTT<ifM-
nvral,  :i|;)iiii«t  niiy  iiidividnal  tvlio  hud  ttlriK-k  n
diiwa  of  thp  SiHtc.  Any  cill/cii  wh..  biul  Uiivii
(fans  iiitinhed  mif;ht  ]iroc<'(^l  in  two  Mnyx  af;iiiiiHt
lhpi>ffi«iKlbiK  party— oithtr  by  ilit-  nUiut  iUrj,  wbiib
*»•  a  iirivnir ru'tioii,  or by the v^futat yfnifftif,

twhioh  wiu  liHtkiil  npon  in  tli«  Ji«;lit  nf  a  public
l"l»JCllliuil,  aiufv  ttu'  8tat«  wn«  roliHidt^n-d  to  bp
*r»inj[ttl  hi  nn  injury  doim  to  any  riti^fii.  It  Hyt-
ptan  In  liiiro  t>«.'ii  »  pritiripl*^  of  lliu  Attieiiiiin  law
^B  i^ipvean  itMlividiial  who  biul  bi-uii  itijiirvU  more
^B  ^"'i  oiin  tuodi!  of  nbtuiiiiiiK  red ix-i^.*.
^M  Il«»if)(--4?(;nNnry  to  prove  (l|  thiit  thu  di>f«iidaiit-
■  boilMtnck  the  plnimilVolborwi).*- tlirtii  acridrntal-
H  ly'tiiiJRtt:  and  (^) that  the di-femtantHtntck  the
H phloiiffiirst.

^"  in  tbifc  avtioti,  the  «iim  of  motioy  to  \*c  pnid  hy
the  (Iffi'iitlant  an  daniiii;*)*  wiw  lujt  Hxed  by  the
••wi;  bill  ihe  plaiiililV  iMMjcwKMi  tht-  nnionnt  oc-
•"^'"Rtw  ilm  iiijorj-  which  ho  thonjzhl  lio  had  ro-
cwd,  and  the  jiidgen  delcrmiiipd  tjti  tljo  justice
of'fce  claim.
A*^  (  At?7r). 8m  Haiirs.

**klon  ((Tif«Xoir,  nixXov,  or  iuKvoi>,  atKpov).  (I)  A
"**•'  in  general.  Thiin  AbMiiau  uses  trut'ufKXiQt  for
•jiwifino.  |2)  Thi;  idiiff  dinh  or  ronrse  in  a  meal.
Tbr  4Fflwrt,  or  nftcr-cmiiM*,  was  mllwl  t'vducXoy.
^ti  I  m»pa  1.  See  Akora.
^**ioo8a  (ai0ovfra\.  Tlio  op««n  imrlico  or  ve-
•■twliDftbu  llain«:ric  hoiiHO. Sw  noMUs,

****>  I'Alrifl). A  treat  Im'  nn Ituman inaiiiuini

■M  emtmuii,  wriltwd  by  M.Ti-nnitiiis  Vurro  i<|.  r.).

^m ^^  Locntltis  or  Loquena. A  Koiuaii  divin-

^H JJJ- "llu-  Antioiiiiccr."' A short limo  ^it-fof) the

^M GtiiU  t(h.k  K<itiif'  (11.1-.  a^)  n  vnic<-  wa«  beainl  ^t

8oc«  ilui-itig  the  rtili-ncp  of  night  iniiKrnnciiij;  tliat.

Ibo  (ubI,  ^,.^  npproarliiiig. The  Ronitiiift  aftfr-

''*Wi  tnittvd  on tli**  spot  wlmn-  tbi-  voice  bud

|**''lie»l1»u«Jt«r,  withawK-rvdrhrlosiitf  .iromid

^(«AiiHLvciitii». Sva  Uvy,  v.50;  Pint.  Cumiil.


Akkad  orAccad.  Thcimuilu-astcrDdiviKioii  uf
anriuiil  Babyloiiiu  ii«di»liii}(iii>*ht^il  from  ihr  norlli-
WtfKtfni  division,  which  wancalUtl  Siiniir.  TlK^Ak-
kiidiaiis,who  ap{war  to  huru  cotnc  originally  fniiii
Eluui.  wer«  the  dotuiuant  race  in  Uabyloniu  ot  tb«
tiinu  of  its  cnrliodt  biiitory,  and  to  ttu'iu  the  Absyr-
iaim  u«vribc<l  the  civilization  of  Babylouin,  and
the  invention  of  the  cuneiform  wnting.  There
wtut  it]m  a  city,  Akkad,  in  the  "Inml  of  Shlnur."
See  AtiSYKiA;  IJaHVUJ.NIA;  CfSEIPOItM  In-sckip-
TIUNS.

Ako^n  Martyreln  {0x0!}^  futprvpuf).  Ileoriuiy
evidcuee,  ivbich  in  Aihrniuii  law  vriw  ^eticrully  in-
iMluiiMtfihle.  Tlie  one  K^^iicrul  esvuptiou  t<i  thi»
nitu  wa!4  the  ntlcnteil  declaration  of  u  d^lug  pcr-
HOIl. Si'e  EniAltTYUlA.

Ala  in  u  Homaii  hoiitte. Soe  DoMrfi,  p.  MO.

Ala  in  niilitiiry  lauguugo.  SveALAKli;  KxElt-
CITt'S.

Alabarcbea.  A  Raman  ofltcial  stationed  at
.Alexaiidriu  midcr  the  Knifiiru.  The  title  is  aliw
found  iu  Lyoin. .See  AiiA»Anciti».

AJabaatrotbeca  taXaffaaTfto0t)Kr)i.  A  holder  for
boitb-!*,  wbifb,  htn-irig  round  bottoms,  eould  not
Hiaiul  unsupported  d'olliix,  x.  I'-il).

Alabaatnun  01-  Alabaster  ( aXaQairrpm^  aXd-
fiatmis).  A  Hmiill  taiicrliis  or  |»ear-»bn|)ed  vrflsel,
baviiix  no  feet,  ummI  for  holding  pi-rfniucd  and
oiiitnieiitii.  Kuril  veHs«>lti  wem  origiiiHlly  niadi*  of
ulabaHter,  uf  which  the  vui  iety  ealleil  oiiyx-iilabas-
ler  wim  iiHtiuIty  i>niployed  for  tUiH  purpose.  It  is
ilonhlful.limvever,  whether  Iho  veswls  wen;  aanird
frtpm  the  miiterial.  or  t-icc  ixraa.  'I'hcy  an^  ali«n
found  of  Hluue  aud  terra-cotta,  with  u  whil^<  or
cn^aui  -  coloiinid  f;ri>und  and  black  fignrctt.  I'he
riglit-lijiiid  illiiKlrniitui  hIiowa  an  alabai^lnun  frnin
Chiiifii,  carvi'd  into  female  fai-CH  above,  and  h.avinj»
n  bole  in  the  crowu  for  punrlug  uiii  the  oiiiiitieiit.


AUlJAftLruin.

|8rllllll  JIUMUITL)


fVmn'u,  I  p.  cur  )


nr  perfmup  ( IVniii»,  Etruria,  \.  p.  cxxv, ).  Other
niateri:»l(t  were  in  nw — an  ^Ukh,  and  even  gold  {xpi>-
fTtia  aXoj^niTTjm,  Thi'<M-r.  xv.  114).  The  alahii!>lrA
iii^nnlly  had  no  hiuidli-K,  tliongh  we  sometimes  tlnd
epeciinens  witlj  thein.  Tliey  ar*"  first  inmiitiiieil
liy  Herodotus  liii,  HOf.  Hmnr  of  lUt^sn  vessels  had
a  long  narrow  neck,  which  nsu*  M-aled :  so  Iliat
whi>u  the  woman  in  ibo  Uiik]hv1s  is  aaid  to  bn*nk
tho  alabaitler  liox  of  ointmenc^  it  nppvan)  pruhuMe


ALAEA


fiO


ALBINOVANUS PEDO


(hilt  she  ouly  bnilie  tbo  cxtivniity  nf  tlie  nrck
'which  wna  thiui  closed.  {C{.  Bm'kfrGiin,  tiallun,
ii.  p.  37tf).

Alaea  (ra  tiXa'taX  Onmcs  nnniiall.v  celdiratcd
lit  'iVgcu  ill  hoiiuur  of  Atliuiic  Atca.

Alani  i  'aAuvih')- ^"*  Scvthia.

Alaricus  (Old  (ii'imuti  Al-ric,  i.e.u/Zrtc^).  A  kiii^
tif  llic!  Vl^i^:otIl^.  rrmarkalilc  ua  beiti>c  the  lirat  nf
the  liiirlimiaii  tUicI's  who  eiiteroil  am\  Rai-ked  ihi-
city  til*  Kuiiu'.  and  (hu  llmt  enemy  who  huil  n[i-
pf-iti'LHl  liefort*  its  walla  siuci*  the  tiuie  of  rinutiihal.
liiri  tir<>t  Qpikenrntice  in  hislnry  is  in  A.n.  :i'J4,  wlii>ii
hv  »UD  iiivpi^ti'^I  by  ThixHloe^ius  with  lli<*  c-dinrnnnd
flflhu  Gotliir  niixilinries  in  hh  war  with  Rtij^Biiiiin.
Ill  yW,  i>nrtly  from  nufii^r  nt  IwiiiB  n*fnw4l  the  coni-
BUUihI  uf'ihe  annirHof  th<^  F.;wt<'rn  Kiiij>irf.jiinl  jmrlly
tit  the  iu»ii|;Hliiin  of  lhi<  minister  RiilinnNju;  invnili^d
atid  ile^'n^tatf^ilOi  {'('!'«%  till  by  Ibcnrriviil  ufi^t.ilichu,
iiilfJT.lie  \vjiHri)in|H>Ui:<llo<'iu'-fiiirt(i  KpirnM.  lluwoti
eltHi^tMl  kiii/j;  by  hJAfriiuntrynu-n  in  Xir^.  hiiviug  bvcit
])i«viuu8ly.  by  tho  ucakiieMof  Aix'IkUiis,  n{i)i(iiiif(,>4l
|itufect  of  KiiHtc-rii  lllyricuiu.  Tiio  roitt  of  liis  lifo
va»  H|Kiut  ill  thu  t»'o  iuvasioiia  of  Itiily.  The  iirst
(4(KMI)3),  ii]t)tnr«ntly  iinpi-uvokcil,  brought  hiui
only  |o  Ituveiuiu,  aiHl.  after  a  l)lon4ly  defe^'it.  at  Vuh
letitia,  in  >%hich  hJAwife  nud  treasiu-efi  u-ete  taken,
ami  II  niaMnrly  retivat  to  Vitoiib.  iva*  emled  l>y  the
treaty  wltli  Btilicho,  wliirh  transfi'iTiN:!  his  servirt'n
jjnni  ArcutliiiK  lo  HuDoriim,  nnil  iniulc  hira  ])r<-ft'C!t
ofWestcru  in»tfMil  of  KuNU'fii  Illyriuiiiu.  ThuAcc-
ODtl  invaBion  (4UH-41U)  wim  m-caHioncd  by  tlohiy  in
fiilHllin^  his  dciiniuds  fur  ]iuy  uiiU  for  u  wcsLitii
province  n^  tlw  futnru  home  of  his  UAliou,  iw  ulfto
by  the  iniiMUtcru  of  the  (Jotliic  faiiiilied  itt  IttUy  on
titilichu's  ileatli.  Ii  is  lUArkitd  by  the  tkiis^sbgeB
4>f  Ri»m,  in  40H,  4(i9,  aiul  410.  Tho  Hmt  of  these
uuH  raittL'tl  by  a  protuiseil  i-nrisoui.  The  kooikI
unik'il  in  (Jie  unconditiotiul  BLirrtrndiT  of  the  ctty.
atiil  in  thoi)te<posol  of  th<:  Empire  by  Alnric  to  Attn-
Inn,  till,  on  ilicicovery  of  bia  tnDa)Micity.  hu  rt'ittonid
it  to  Ilonotiiia.  The  third  Wiijt  ended  by  the
Iruai^herous  openitig  of  the  Hiilarinn  Oalo,  on  Ati-
gnut  .Mlh, and  thv  mn-k  uf  thi>  tiiy  fornix  dayn.  It
was  ininit;diatp)y  followed  by  tlin  4>c«upation  of
tbo  twutli  of  Italy,  and  tho  d«-'i()|;ii  of  iiiviuliiig
Sicily  and  Afrina.  TfiiM  intention,  howovcr,  was
frustrated  by  IiIm  d<>utli,  after  a  short  illueiw,  at
Conoentia,  whcru  ho  was  buried  iu  the  bt-d  of  the
adjacent  rivi>r  Biitiontiium,  uud  the  place  of  his  in-
terment wa^  ronL-ealed  by  the  ina»aacre  of  all  the
workmen  employed  on  thu  occaHicm.  The  few  per-
itMtiil  trailH  that  arc  recorded  of  him  show  the  true
Miviig«  huinonrof  n  barbariau  eonqnemr.  ftnt  th«
imprcastou  left  upon  ua  by  his  ^m*nil  ohiiraf'tt>r  is
-of  u  higher  order.  The  real  military  skill  di.tpliiyed
in  bit  escape  fmni  Greece  and  in  Im  retn-at  to
Verona;  the  winh  at  Athi'tis  to  tthow  thai  hu  hail
Adopted  the  dm  of  the  Itiith  and  thn  otherexturnol
forms  of  civil  iz*'d  life;  llic  tnoilemtion  and  jnotice
whii'h  he  tdfMMvod  lonanlH  i1h<  Koinana  in  time
of  pr.ieo;  and  the  lininiinity  wliich  dii^tinj^ulshetl
bliiidnriug  lh»  Kack  of  Koniti, all  indicate  sfiinetliiufi
■up«riur  to  the  mere  cnift  and  lawleiw  ambiliou
which  he  tievms  Ui  have  pi)HH4>wied.  Bee  HtMlgkiu,
Ihtift  ami  her  Inraitrrt  (Oxfonl,  188(M35).

Alarii  woru  th«  troopn  of  the  allies  in  the  Ko-
iiiun  army,  and  wvru  no  called  bocanse  they  wt-re
iinualiy  i^taiioncil  in  the  vrin);H  (alor).  The  nlurii
<:ou&i&t«d  of  both  hortK'  and  foot  soldiers,  and  were


CDintnnndcd  by  proefeeu.  in  t1i4^  same  manner  ns
tbo  legionri  worn  tiontinnndwl  by  tribtine«.  Thtt
cavalry  of  (he  ullie*  were  called  f^tea  a/.iW»,  to
dttttin^nish  them  from  the  i^avalry  of  thv  h^^ou*
\tijtii(€t  U'jiunririi};  and  th«  infHntry-M>ldirr»  werV'
called  cokortts  atunae,  to  disliugnisb  iheiii  from  thn
a>fit'ilr»  /i  i/ivnitrittf.

Alaetor  I'AXncrrwp).  Ill  Greek  niytholu^',  aa
averijiiug  daeinou  wlio  do^r^  the  footatvpa  uf  Iha
tinilly,  ami  uveu^tm  ti|>un  children  the  siutt  of  tbeif
falhi-rs  ( Acucli.  /"era.  3M).

Alauda  (xipvios).  The  Inrk.  The  Fifth  I^giott*
from  the  lime  of  IiiIium  Ca>-Har  down  to  the  third
ciMitury  witH  known  hk  Alanda  from  t\w  dovicn  of
a  lark  (nttiutin)  worn  njHtn  tho  helmcto  of  ibe  noU
dterM  conipuning  it. S«>e  Bnet,  /«/.  34.

Alba.  (1)  Alba  FititxTiA  or  i'ttE?rn(»,  n  lowq.
of  the  Mur.-ti,  and  aubtM.-i{neiitly  u  Kuiuan  colony,
sitnutod  on  a  lofty  ruck  ueur  the  Luke  Fuciuii«.  and.
UKed  by  t1ie  Konians  a«  a  Klalv  prinon.  (2)  Alba
Lonua.  the  ninut  ani^^ient  t^iwn  in  J^ntinni,  isnaid  ta
have  bfen  built  by  Axianiuis  and  to  have  C4donizr4.
Uoni«>.  It  was  calh-4l  Lon)rii  from  it«  fttrvlching
in  a  lont;  line  down  the  Albun  Mount  townrdo  tlr
Alban  Ijtke.  It  \^ai4  destntyed  by  TiiIIum  Hontil-
init,  ami  wiut  never  rebnilt;  it-s  itihabi(ant«  wm
renn>ved  to  Home.  At  a  hilvr  lime  the  hiirronnd-
tug  country  was  »tiuIdod  with  the  sjdendid  villas
of  the  Konniit  aririt<«cru<.'y  and  emperois  Iu.  g.  Pom^
pey'a  aud  UomitiaiiV),  each  of  which  was  called
Albaniim.  (3)  Alka  PoMi'EiA.a  town  in  Itigurin^
colonized  by  r<inipisiu5  Magnn^,  the  birthpluc«  of
the  em)>eror  Pcrtinax.

Albania.  {'.KXffavia).  The  aoulheaati'ni  part  of
what  ta  now  Ueor^iia.  iti  Axia,  on  the  woKt  eidn
of  the  Cftftpian,  exleudini^  from  the  rivers  Cyrii4
and  Araxett  on  the  Honth  to  Mt.  Ceranniiin  (thoeasi
pari  of  the  C'aiuaHUH]  on  Ihu  north,  and  lionnded
on  the  wcKl  by  Ibi^ria.  It  wits  n  fcitih*  ptaiits
alionnding  in  paittui'e  and  vineyiii-ds;  hot  the  iii-
hahiljintR  were  llcri'c  and  warliku.  Tln-y  were  ft
Hcytliiun  tribe,  identical  »iiU  the  Alunt.  Tlio  Ko^
uianu  firat  became  ae<|uaiuted  with  thctu  at  thai
time  of  the  Mithridatiu  war.  when  they  uueonii-
t»'rt'd  I'ompey  with  n  large  army.  MfKleru  fienffr
riipby  cckDipriaee  ancient  Albania  under  two  divi-
Kions — Daghc-ntaii  and  LegbistJiD.  The  name  in
our  own  tiuiett  is  applied  to  the  territory  which  in
ati'Cient  liriieH  was  included  in  Illyria  and  ICpinu.

AlbSnus  Lacua.  A  Knndl  l.-tke,  nbonl  live  milea
in  eircnmfrrencf,  west  of  the  Montt  Albauus.  lia-
tweeii  l^tvillae  and  Alba  Longa.  It  i»  the  crat«t  of
on  extinct  volcano,  and  l*  iioiny  bundled  feet  deopv
The  tinixiiiiiiHtn  ^vljich  tlje  Rounins  Winxl  through,
tliowdid  rock  during  the  siege  of  Veii,  in  order  t«
cany  off  ibe  hiip<Tliinmn  wat^ir  of  thn  lake,  ia  ex-
taut  at  tho  pri^flfiit  day. Si^r-  K]iils.SAitlt'M.

Albanus  Mons  wn&,  in  tt«  norrower  signiliea-
tiuu,  the  mountain  in  Latinm  on  whose  declivilf
the  town  of  Alba  Longa  wan  »itnat4^d.  It  waa  tb4
.iaL-n*d  monnlain  of  the  LiiIiiiiK,  on  which  the  relig-
iouH  festival'*  of  the  Latin  LiMigne  wer«-  irlebmledi
ih'rti'ie  /yrj/inu<').  and  on  ita  highpHl  Nnintnit  was  thi
temple  uf  liipitur  LaliariH,  to  w  hirh  the  Rom.
geiierulsaHcunded  in  (liumpb  when  tliiH  honour  w:
dented  Ihetn  in  Kunic.  The  Mouh  AlbaniiK  in  it*!
wider  Hignillcation  included  tin;  Muna  Algidua
the  mountains  about  Tn»ni1uiu.

AJbinovaniia,  C.  I'iu>i>.  An  epic  writorof  the


ALBINUS


61


ALCIBIADES


^fttan  A^,  t&e  frietiil  nf  tbt"  rnungpr  Scnnca,  nlio

.^aUn  liloi/tAii/'iMr  elegant iiuiwiit,  ami  (|iiolc8  him  to

Kbo^v  \\\H  iiliklitjt'  an  B  raPDiitour. Do  is  tiUo  inou-

tioiiott  by  Ovid,  Mnrtml,nnd  (jnilitiliaii He  wrol*

ft  Tfteinii;  Mul  ail  «pic  nil route nipomnr  tiiHtnr5'.

Thff  «'\H«'r  Sf iieca  (Ska*.  H)  cite«  tweniy-tliroe  hcx-

»inet«nnf  lii8,<)('M'^riliiii;;  aitortn  iti  the.  Nurth  Sea.

£ee Huiilw,  Z-r Kfvnla.  iUm  Alb.  /></.  (Frniistuilt,

1^-0 1.

AJbinoB  or  Albas  PoBtTunEuB.  Thn  naniu  of  a
^wpatriruiii  fiiiiiil>  at  K<>tiu<,  niuiiy  <if  llic  ini>Di1>m  of
^>*liioh  litlil  tbf  liigbral  mIIii^vh  i>r  llif!  .Stulo,  Inmi
^HtejMmiut'iH'cuifnt  uf  tb«  Ki-juibliu  U>  il^  tlu^Mitull.
^P^H  foRDdcr  of  tli«  rntnily  ua-t  <lictator  D.r.  4^,
«bvn  he  conqurreil  tbe  Latiiitt  in  tbc  great  liaitle
tmr  Lake  Rtfgitliis  i^.  v.).

Albanaa,  Cixmirs.  A  govpnior  of  Oritaiii  at  the
drjitli  <>f  1Ih>  pni)H'Ttir  ConiiiKMliiA  (q.  V.)  in  A.t>.  ll^j.
lunnlortOMicnre  Iiib  iiriitrality,  3«ptiuiiii8  HcviTUtt
ntnde  him  CacfiAr ;  bnt,  aftor  Si-viiniN  Imd  iierf.aie4l
htiTJTnU,  lie  tnnird  Iiia  Artiio  »g>iinHi  AMiinna. A

tfmt  tiaiile  vcott  fonglit  Uetwei'ii  tb^^tii  at  Liigdu-
nnm  iLtoiix).  in  r>an],A.l>.  197,  ju  wbicb  Albiiiito
litt>1ffrnt4K\  and  billiHl.
AlUoQ  CAXoi'i'tiifl.  Auutbi.*r  uaait*  uf  Hriluiiniu
^H-T.i, nrtd  KignifyioR  "tbc  white  laud,'' from  it«
*liilnrlifli(  opimsitf  ibe  const  oftJttuJ.  Atbiuii  or
AlboDfiilM  (jiu«lir  fitrni;  Ih  tjow  gfucrally  l>clieYod
^m  iftluvfl  breu  till'  early  Kultic  nanif  of  the  wliole
^m  i«l<itil.  Tli«  etyuudogy  of  thv-  word  is  tbe  same  as
H  lUl  »r  J/jM.  Six:  BlUTANXIA.
^H  AJbU.  Tbc  iMtMlurii  Klb(> ;  tbt*  moHl  riwtprly
^H  nvpT  of  fieniiaiiy  witli  uhii-b  Hm  Roinaim  \vt<n<
^P  flci|itainti'd;  uordid  Ib«y  rvacit  Uh  baiiliK  until  tbe
^  eijiMtilirtii  of  Uriihuit  in  B.C.  'J.  Tbti  la*tt  liniimii
■nnir  itiat  [K^at-trnltMl  bo  far  van  that  cunuiini>dt-d

P'-yTilwriim  in  A.D.  5.
Albogalema. 8eo  Apex.
AlMUa. An  nii(!l«nt  imiiie  of  the  river  Ttljer
(q>T.i. Albuta  iH  {iKibably  tbe  pnr»  I^tiii  name,
aJM Tiittrin  ihti  LtniM'iiii. I_'f.  Wij;.  Am.  viti.  SK.

tAIblUa  Aqua  or  AlbtUae  Aquae.  Cold  ho.)-
liliuroKii  «]iriiig<i  iMiiiiiig  tVoni  n  vumW  luku  nbout
*iibtii  miln!)  from  FJoiuf,  and  liowiii>;  into  tbo
Am.  Tlie  largrjtt  of  tbe«e  aptilign  waH  Itnowu  a6
AllniDi-ji.  I'lie  Romans  Mtcemnl  tbc  water  for  its
■tnliriiitl  pru|H'rtiPK.  and  naed  it  for  both  drinking
•"I  Iwitiiug. Cf.  Simt.  .Img.  82.

■*lboja. (I)  A  tabU'l  or  bulletin-hoard  on  which
tli"|'r»fiOT'»edict  wa«  in&L-ribcd. {See  KpimrM.)
tnplu  a  public  plaouat  Uuuir,  hu  that  all
1 1t. Some  think  it  to  bnve  Wen  u  n-liico
nHh  black  lptt«"rH  and  red  tilli's  (nthrinif) ;
''ill"  oilii'm  hold  tbn  Ininnl  to  have  Iwf  n  hhtck
*«>»1  »I»  iMl^m  while. (Si)  A  liHt  of  tbp  mmnbera
•'■By  pnljlic  Ixxly,  an  nfhum  imnatorium  (Tac.  Attn.
'^-  ^v Did  roMsiuH  cnlbt  it  Xcvkw^.
AlbtmjfjL 8re  Ai^L'La  Aqca.
Aibumus  Mona. A  wooded  moiiuiatn  in  Lu-
anuu.|,ii„|  rn*-nlum.
Alcaem('AXit/iro5i. A  fiimoui*  lyric  |>oct  of  MIt-

/•"W.Ui  Lrftbotv.  ail  elder  i:oiileini»oniry  of  8:Lppho.

Ti»«»nl«  iiio  cud  of  the  iwvrntb  century  H.c,  aa

w  »ci(iii  of  B  noble  house.  Iio  headed  the  aristo-

\S^  party  in  their  conteHt4  wjtb  the  tyrant*  of

^■»tivi<  town.  MjTniln*,  Metnuebrim,  and  others.

Bailiril  fniin  hnmi",  he  went  on  romantic  expc-
Bitinii*  lu  far  a*  Kjjypt.  When  tlic  tyrantu  were
fWown.  Biid  bi«  fonaor  comrade,  tbe  wise  Pilta-


ruB,  waa  called  by  the  people  to  rule  the  State,  he
took  up  ariu4  aguinst  bim  nlfto  nn  a  tyrant,  iu  dia-
guise;  but,  attempting  to  fnrco  hin  return  home,
he  fell  into  the  power  of  his  opponent,  wbo  guo-
eroumly  forgave  him.  Of  bta  further  life  nothing
i»  known.  His  poems  in  tbe  Aeolic  dialect,  ar-
ranged ill  ten  bookH  by  the  Alexandrianxiconsieted
of  byniiiH,  political  nougs  (which  formed  the  bnlk
of  tliu  col|pi;tion),dniikiiiK  sougn,  and  love  onn^
of  which  we  have  hut  a  few  nnaatiHfaciory  firag-
monlH.  In  the  upinion  of  the  .iiicieiitA,  his  poetiu
were  well  coiifltrucl«>d,  while  iboir  tone  woj*  in
harmony  with  the  lofly  pitnalou  and  manly  vigour
of  bi»  character.  The  alcatc  ntrojdie,  so  much  used
by  hid  ailuiirer  uuduut  uiiwortliy  iiuitulor,  Horace,
IB  uamed  after  him.  8t'u  Bergk's  I'otiac  Lgiici  (Aili
cd.  I''7t^)  for  the  fragmeuts;  and  Kuck,  Alkaeu*
unfl  *iippA«  (1«W).

AlcamSnes  ( 'A\ito^«Vr}r).  A  Greek  artist  uf
Athens  or  Lcmni>8,  and  a  pupil  of  PhidioH,  who
tlonrifthcd  towards  the  end  of  the  fifth  century
B.C.  Following  his  inHMi^r'ni  ideal  tendcttcy,  he
devoted  btuiN.df  mainly  to  religioim  bubjecta.
working  like  him  in  various  materials,  gold
ami  ivory,  hronxe  and  marble.  His  alutuf?  of
the  winner  in  the  Pentathlon  was  btamjHHl  oh
chiHHic  tiy  tbo  epilbut  uf  ^yxptyofiiyos,  as  the
lhir>tj>hon>«  of  Polyetitiis  was  by  that  of  ica*
f^v.  About  n.c.  4'.i6  be  was  emplnycd  with
PbidioH  ill  decorating  the  tvniplc  uf  7a'11»  at
Ol.vtupia.  The  marhlu  gronpM  of  tbo  battle  of
Ceiiinuru  anil  tiaplibae  iu  iia  we«tuni  pedimoDt
lire  bi«  work.  Of  rheH«  comddiTablu  remaina
bavo  Ixon  bnmgbt  lo  light  by  recent  Genuao
excavations.

AlcathoUa  ('AXira^nnr).  The  huh  iif  PelnpK  and
Ilippod.-niiia,  who  obtained  us  bis  wifti  HvaHchmiJ,
ihe  diiii^htei-  uf  Xlegareuo,  by  nlayiug  the  Cilba&-
roiiian  Hon,  and  HucceedtMl  biit  father-in-law  an
king  of  Megara.  He  ri'Hturcd  the  wnll^  of  Me^ars,
nbich  in  tberefoni  nomettmuH  culloil  Ali'ulboc  by
the  porlM.  In  tliiN  nrjrk  he  was  aasisted  liy  A)]<dlii.
The  Ktoiiii  upon  »bieh  the  god  iiHi'd  to  |ilaco  bin
lyre  wliiln  be  woa  at  work  waa  believed,  even  in
late  times,  to  give  forth  a  ftoand,  when  struck,  sim-
ilar to  ibat  of  a  lyre.

Alceatis  ("AAxijiTTfc). See  Ai>mi{TL-s.

Aloibiftdea  CWKt^iuRijs).  Tlie  son  of  Cliniaa
and  l'iii4itn:ii'h^,  iMirti  at  AtbeiiH  abunt  B.i  .  4.50,
and  on  tliedeatbof  liiHfatber.in  4i7.bniiigbl  upby
hid  reluliiJii  Prrielf*.  Ht*  pL»s«e»8ed  a  beautiful  |ier
Moii,  transeetideiiL  ubiUtieM,  and  great  wealth.  Ilia
youth  was  diwgiaeed  by  his  amours  oud  debaucU-
eriea,  aud  Socrates,  who  saw  his  vast  capabilities,
attempted  to  win  him  to  tbe  patha  of  virtue,  tint
io  vain.  Their  inliumey,  however,  was  stn^igth*
ened  by  muliial  nervicM.  At  tbo  battle  of  I'oti-
daea  (4^!^)  hia  life  w.-ut  naved  liy  8<ieraten,  and  at
that  of  Delinni  (124)  be  naveil  the  life  of  Sorratiw.
After  the  death  of  Clenn  (422)  he  liecanin  one  of
tbe  leading  politicians,  and  the  lie^id  of  the  war
party  in  ntipoMilioii  to  N'iriaa.  In  415  be  waa  ap-
pointed, atiitig  with  Nician  and  Laniucbiis,  an  ci>m-
iiiander  of  tbe  ex|ioditmn  to  8ieily.  While  the
preparations  for  the  expedition  were  going  on,
there  ooonrred  a  myslt*rioii*  mutilntion  of  the
bnstw  of  tbe  Heriiine,  which  the  popular  fejirs  eon-
Ufcted  with  uti  attempt  to  overthrow  the  Athe-
nian couHtituliini.  Aleiliiaden  was  charged  with
heijig  tbo  riuglcailer  in  tbiii  attempt. Hi*  demand-


ALCIDES


£2


ALCUAN


AAKIB,


r


Baft  or  Alcfblutw.


ed  an  iuvrMf  i);atiuii  Iwroro  he  Kct  Hail,  bnt  (hii*  Iiih
riHrinu'f  wuiilil  tint  gnitit;  but  ho  liinl  not  htn-n
]mii(i  ill  Sicily  Ix^fom  \w.  \<s\v^  n'ciiltt'il  tu  tilaiiil  hi»
iriu).  Ou  hiH  rvtiirii  liuiiifwiird
hi-^  iimnngiHl  to  <-ii<-a]te  at  Tliuiii,
and  thence  ])roccc<Ip(l  in  Spiirtii^
when?  he  acted  iis  th^  svdwwi
eneiuyof hisconutry.  Tlmmarh-
inntioiiM  nP  his  oneniy,  A^ih  II.,
iiiilucoil  him  to  iiliandiin  tho
Sitartaii^  .iiul  takt^  n-l'iigc  with
TiKKitphct  iiTM  (-41^2),  ^^  h<Mr  fuvniir
hi*  niKiii  ^aitinl.  Thruil}{h  hifl
iiifliii'iii'fi  Tisfiflphor Ill's  tU'serti'U
the  S|>itrtnDa  niul  piofV>»i^«^4l  his
'williugucsH  to  HS^iist  tllF>  Allio-
niitiifi,  wlio  nrronlhi^ly  n'called
Alcibiiulofl  fnini  huiii^hnient  in
411.  Ho  (lid  nnt  iininrdiiitidy
rrtnni  to  AtlxMin,  hot  nunniiiml
nlmiuil  for  tli«  next  four  ypnrn,
during  which  the  AtliftiiaiiH  na-
d(-r  hirt  eonunaiid  gjiined  Itir  vir-
lorlea  uf  Cynusscnia,  AtijdoR,  nud  Cyzicua,  and  got
|>06so»(ion  of  Ctiiilct'dou  nud  Kyzantinm.  In  •107
Iw!  ivtunicd  to  AthfitK,  wht-ro  he  wns  received  with
grout  eiithnsiatim,  aud  waa  npjiointed  uotuniQiider-
iu-rhtef  of  nil  the  laud  und  sen  forces.  Uiit  the
defeat  nt  Nutinni,  occiidiciit^d  diirii)>;  his  alMtence
by  th«  imprudence  of  liid  lieutenant,  AutlochnH,
furnished  hiit  eneuiioN  u-iih  a  hiuKlIt?  ugtiiiiHt  liint,
and  he  wan  KU]>ei'M'ded  in  liiii  cuiutnuiid  (4(lti).  He
now  \v(>Mt  iniu  voliint:iry  exile  to  hin  fortilied  do-
main nt  Itixanltii^,  in  the  Tlii-at^iau  ClierKonCHiiii.
After  thi)  fall  of  AtheiiH  (404>  be  took  it-fngc  with
PhartiuhaziiH.  Ho  was  nbunt  to  proceed  to  the
conrt  of  Artaxerxr:!,  when  4»ni^  iiijjjlit  liis  h«»n>o  was
*iiri(iniidf<l  by  a  hand  i>f  anneil  men  and  ^et  on
lire.  He  rushed  niit,eiword  in  lianil,hni  fell,  jilercod
with  arrowtt  (-UtJ).  Tin*  as!»ashins  were  proUJdy
either  emplovt'd  by  t)u-  .S[iiirr:)nM  or  liy  the  Imtth-
ent  of  a  lady  whotu  A  hi  hind  ex  had  tcdueed.  He
left  a  Min  hy  his  wifw  Hippnn^tt-  iinined  Aleihijulefl,
who  never  disliii)j;uiftlie<l  hinitM-lf.  Htw  HouAsaye,
Uutolrt  J' Alcibmde,2  voU. (Paris,  1873).

AlcIdeB('AAK(id7t).  A  [lami-appliMltoHeraclrH
(<!•  V.)  as  being  the  grandson  of  Alcnna  (or  AIcaeu<().

AloimedJ  ('AXKc^u'di;).  The  wife  of  Aeson  and
mother  of  lason  (q.  v.).

AlcinOUs  CWKtvofn).  The  aon  of  Xannithofia
and  urnndBOTi  of  I'nsfitlon,  culehrnted  in  the  udtf*-
iti/  as  iho  mier  of  thu  Phaeaciaiia  in  the  iHlond  of
Schcria. See  PiiAHAriA.

Alolphron  {' \\iri<}ipiov).  A  Greek  rhetoriciati  of
thMM-condceiitury  A. II.,  author  of  A  collection  of  114
(iclltioiis  Lfltcrn  in  three  IxMiks.  Thcw,  written  in
tolerably  pare  style  and  tasteful  fnnn,  profen*  to  Iw
froiuaai|ors,peaHnntn,para»iteti,aud  Affacrac.  They
are  »kelebe»  of  rhnrncter,  ingenioiiHly  conceived
and  carried  out,  whiih  p;ive  im  a  vivid  picture  of
thi*  existing  ntate  of  ctillnre.  csjiecially  nt  Attn-ns.
The  lettitrtt  front  hriarrur  are  particularly  interewt-
iDg,  as  their  jdotM  are  taken  fmni  Ihe  New  Altio
Comedy,  especially  the  lo(it  plajn  of  Meiinnilcr.
The  text,  with  a  Latin  verHlon.is  wln«'il  hy  WeMer-
maun  anil  Hereher  in  the  Diilnt  eolleilion  (Paris,
If-.Sfi). S4f  NoVELj*  ANI>  linMANiTA

AlcitliMCAXKidiir}!.  D«nphlcrofi(iiiya«.cluuiKcd
with  ber  wsti'iK  into  liala,  for  refuiinp  to^join  other
woineu  of  Uneolia  in  tlia  wotTiliip  of  Dionysus.


L A.


Alcmaeon  f' AXk^khWI.  A  native  of  Argoa  and  koi
of  Anipliiaraiis  (\\.  v.)  uihI  Kripliyti'.  An  hia  fat  be
in  depart  ing  on  iheoxpedilion  of  the  Seven  agaiiiRh
Tbi'heit,  had  bound  him  and  bix  bn>t1ier  Auiphili**
elius,  then  mere  boyii,  to  avenge  hiui  on  their  raith-|
h>K<f  nifilher,  AlcTuneou  refu«cd  to  take  part  in  ib»
nei-oiiil  evpeiEitioi),  that  of  ihu  Kptgoni  (ij.  v.),  tiln
he  had  Jii-Ht  fulliMiHl  ihnt  filial  duty;  nevertbeleawl
hiw  niiitliiT,  bribfd  hy  Thensander  with  the  gsr-
imnit  of  llarmoiii.1,  {wntiiaded  him  to  go.  The  real
U-nder  at  lln;  Hiege  of  Tlurhrs,  he  rI«w  the  ThehaB
king,  IjaodaiiinN,  ami  nan  the  fii-sl  tn  enter  Ihe  cotl'
i|ticrti.l  city.  On  i-ctiirniiig  liume,  he,  at  ilie  hid-'
(ling  of  tho  Delphian  Apollo,  nvi-ng<>d  hin  father  h;
Hiayiiig  his  mother,  with,  or  acconliug  tu  fiuinu  m
cntints,  wilhont,  his  brother's  help;  but  imiuedi'
ntely,  liUe  OreMeH,  hi^  wns  set  upon  by  the  Furiea^
and  ivandered  dis>ra(>trd,  seeking  piiriticntion  ami
a  now  home.  Pliegens,  of  the  Arcailian  iVophiaJ
half  pnrilifd  him  of  \un  guilt,  and  gave  him  hi*'
dnughler  Arsinoo  or  Alphd^iboea  to  wife,  to  whom
he  pn-M-nted  the  jewels  of  Harmniii.i,  which  hs>|
had  hrmight  from  Argon.  Hut  miod  the  rrnp«
failed  in  tlie  laud.  aiid  be  fell  int4<  hifi  dtxtemper
ngiiin.  till,  after  nnmy  wamleriiigA,  he  arrived  nC
tho  mouth  of  the  AchelnUs,  ami  there.  In  an  If^land
that  bad  floated  up,  he  found  the  country  pronii>)e<|
hy  the  god,  which  had  not  existed  at  tbu  time  of"
liis  dying  mother's curee,  and  so  he  waacoinptcieljT'
cured.  He  nianicd  AcbeloUs'sdanghter.C'ulliriho^'
by  whom  be  had  two  somi,  Acnrnan  and  AmphoU
erris  (q.  v.).  I'lmble  tn  wjthi<raiid  lim  wife's  en-
treatiea  that  ahe  might  ba\e  Harmonia's  iieeklacA
and  robe,  ho  went  to  Phegeus  in  Arcadia,  and
begged  iho&e  trea»nrea  of  him.  prelinding  that  b«i
would  dedicate  tLem  at  L>el)dti  for  the  perfect  heal-
ing of  liie^  mnihii-NH.  He  iihtiiiiied  tliein  ;  but  Pbo'
gfint,  ou  learning  the  truth,  set  hia  Hon  to  wa.^ta;^
him  ou  the  road,  and  rob  him  of  Lis  treasure  and-
hia  life.  Alcniaeon's  kouh  then  areoged  their  fa-
thei'sdeatli  on  bin  miinLenTv.  Alcmaoon  i-eecivud^
divine  himotira  after  death,  and  bad  a  eauetuary  at<
Thebes  and  a  coiisurratcd  tomb  at  Psophis.

Alcmaeouldae  (^ikKfuuuvifiat), A  noble  family^
at  Atlietif,  a  Itranch  of  the  family  of  tho  Xelidne,!
who  were  driven  out  of  Pylim,  in  .MeHfenia.  hy  lbs
Dorians,  and  nettled  at  Athens. In  consi-ipifiiepor
the  way  in  which  Megacle.i,oneof  ( be  family,  treated'
the  iiifiirgentM  under  (\rlon  (n.ir.  til2),  tliey  broughh
n)>oii  tbeiustdveii  ilia  guilt  of  Kaerilege,  and  wer«'
in  conse<)tieiiee  bnuieihcd  from  Atheii«  about  &t&  I
Abnnt  B.C.  5<)(i  thoy  returned  from  exile,  bnt  weml
again  expelled hy PiaistintiKi. In  the  year  548^
thry  roiitracted  with  the  Ampbictyonic  Council  to
nhiiild  the  temple  of  Delfibi,  and  obtained  gr«afc
l»opnlarlty  thronghont  Oieece by  cxi-eiiling  tb«'
work  in  a  alylu  of  luagtiiCicence  which  niu<di  ex^
oewle*! their  eiigageuieut. On  the  expuUiun  of'
Hippiaa  in  .111),  they  wen-  again  restored  to  Atb«aih
Thoy  now  joined  the  popular  jiarty,  and  ClistbenM^
who  wns  nt  that  time  the  hwul  of  the  family,  gaviJ
a  now  eondtitution  to  Athens. See  CriSTHENES. ]

Aloman  ('AXjcfiu*',  tho  Doric  form  of '.XXk^mioivV
The  chief  lyric  poet  of  Sparta,  though  by  birth  ft
t.ydian  of  Sardin.  Ho  was  broii;;ht  i«  I..aeonia  as
a  slave  when  very  yming,  aud  was  cnmncipalul  by,
his  niant^r.  who  discovered  his  genins.  He  proU}
alily  llonrishfd  alMint  n  v.  CS.\.  He  in  Anjd  to  hartf
diwi.  like  Sulla,  of  the  ui-yrfrui  i^fiintlaria.  Alrmosi
i«  bcliovctl  by  sume  to  havo  h«en  the  inrenior  i


^l


gjo^m.^  poetrr,  to  vrlilcb  oIiwh  of  Tenr  tioloiifj;  IiIk
pur  ^^/mia,  ntynf^  «nu(j  1>t  choru)ur«  of  virgius,  liri-
^q\  liTniiiA,  iiihI  1ine«>  in  imiist^  of  lord  mill  viuv.
tbo  larauL^v  fm^tiientHiil'  liitt  purniA  I  lint  riMiiain  ctiu
\^  <V»IIU(I  ill  B*rpk'*  J\n-tiif  Lifrici  Griifri  (4lU  «d.
tirrfc*_>.  'riiu  itiiwt  imiHirlant  fra^iueitt  is  one  ilis-
cov^Ti-il  on  Ml  Kf;,v|)tiiui  papyniH  in  Paris  in  1855.
J^lK-in»u  niM  tlir  iii%'t'iil«r  or  iIih  Crflii;  hfixaiu-
Uv  altui  iinrd  tbi*  clactylit',  minpaeKlic,  tro-
biati^.iiBd  iambic  nit;tri-A.  \V\n  iiAAniH  wf^n*  iiNiiiiIly
irrtti^ii  in  Ktrupbea.  In  ibv  Alonniidriaii  C'aiiuti
Vi-  name  hoatl(!t\  tbe  list  of  Ij'ric  ^kivU. Sve  Canon*

AlcmeuA t'AXK^^i'7X  Tbedniiglitcrof Elect r^oii,
king  iif  Mycriiao,  wLo  pntinispil  tn  marry  Amphlt-
T^iiM.  {inivitlvil  lie  avenged  the  ilvatli  oflivr  bnitb-
«rt<,  «bo  linit  Iwttn  kliiin  tiy  the  utonn  of  Plt^n-lnlis.
Ant^Uilrywii  ninlritiMik  tin*  (iti^k ;  but,  during  bia
ky»rii«o,  Zviiii,  ill  ibe  <li»j;nl.i4!  nf  Aiii]diitryon,  viv
ilnl  Alcim-ii^.  and,  ini-tcixliiii^  to  lie  \\v\  hufbnnd,
Tvliited  iu  wb»t  way  bn  bad  avengi-d  ibt*  deutli  of
Iwr  bmtlipm.  Ainiibitr^-on  biinsolf  n^tiiniod  the
at  iln:r.  Akmen^  bocnnm  t  bo  niotber  nf  llemolea
fZ«init.tind  nflpbiclM  by  Ampbitryou.
A]cy6a6t'AAKL>o*^i.  (l)Tbcdniif;btcrnrAeolii(i
kv)uHlnifourCoyx(q.v.)  (2)  Oneof  thu  Tlt-
iwles  III.  v.^.

Aloyotdtutt  Mare. The  ciuturn  jmrfc  of  the
Curiiiibiiiu  ttiill".

Aldobrandxni  Mamago. 8oe  Fictura.

Alca. Gaming.  i>r  playing  at  a  gninc  of  i-hancu

Itif  iiu>  kind,  liantiiii;  ujih  Imiki'd  down  npon  at
Rniur.  and  Ii<>iiiH>  iileotor  wan  um-t[  as  a  tf-rni  of  re-
pnuili  (Cie.  in  Vat.  ii.  IU.  ■£\;  ad  Atl.  x\v.  5).  It
niu  bUo  rurbifldt'U  liy  Apvuial  laws  during  tbe
liflir*  (if  th*-  Krpiiblie  and  iiiidt^r  thi*  ttinjioron
irrlita  tr^ikM»  aU-a,  Hor.  t'tirm.  iii.  'M,  Ba ;  C'tc.
ft'/.ii23,.'ill-,  Ov.rWW.ii.  470  foil.;  IHy,\l,iit.b).
TlffT)  »ncb  laws  occur  in  tbe  Digest  (1.  c.)— tbe
1^*1  Tll«^pllhli<.•ill,  and  Coruelia— and  likL'wino
kmiiKhi  rxi]iKN/(itni  iind  lli«  prat'tor'a edict;  tb«  lat-
ter tijMiiii|f  wvwrc  ]t«iia]tii's  on  pereuiDs  couipcl-
|ilii|  I'llierb  to  gamble,  and  disjibling  tbu  kemprr^
t-f  pnililing-boiiwK  from  bringiug  any  action  for
*l»iMf;p  III  Www  agaiiiht  their  ctistouicre.  At  wbut
taoe  tW  two  fonuiT  laws  wiirc  pasiw^d  is  fjitite  im-
'•tUiu;  bnt  the  I^*x  Cornelia  wan  probably  one
"TiIh'  Iiwa  of  Ihe  dictator  Snllu,  wbo,  vru  know,
»*l*  wvvnil  enactments  to  cbeck  the  extrava-
SWo-HMii  ex|M>ti«ii)  of  piiviilc  pt-rwotis.  (8*'C  Sl'Mr-
'^*-*  It  lias  bi^en  iuf«rr^il  from  Xhv  Mi{f9  GloriosuM
(n.2,V)tlutt  giuiiing  iniit^t  linvtt  Imuii  forbidden  bv
'■"ill  I'iunlttH'A  time;  bnt  tlw  hv  tahria  {aimiia,
Kitwlilt  in  Ibia  piwwj*gft  s«'^-nitt  nitber  to  refer  to
'■e  LiKb  uf  ibe  gaiii«  than  t«  any  pnldic  cnact-
""'•.  TlioM!  wbt>  were  roiivietcd  ofgaiuiiig  w»*r«
I  *«nJrmnfcd  to  pay  four  tinich  tbe  »mii Ibuy  lia4l

K »i«Ui pseiido-AMon.  in  Cic.  Dit.  {  '^4,  p.  110,  i-rl.
H ^ll'].aiid  K-eame  ii\faoia  in  coik*!] ueucc. Wu
H kiwi*  tfaai  in/atnia  (q.  v.)  wa*  frequently  a  coiinc-
^ Q^&r«  (,r  A  judicial  decision;  aud  wu  may  infer
lui  it  ftu  (H>  in  this  coac  from  tbe  cxpressioa
*'  literw  ('*  llominani  lege,  quae  eat  de  alea.  cuu-
«»«itiini,  in integrtim rM(i(«H,"  Cic.  Phil.  I.  c).
""WM  of  rbaiii-o  were,  bonevPr.  tolerated  in  tbe
•W'lli  «r  Drfeinber  at  tbe  ftalurnalia,  a  jwriod  of
t™"*]  h'tointinn (  Suet.  Aug.  *1  ) ; iiinl imblie
°f'*ntiti\  ftlliiwed  old  ninn  to  aiiimw  tbeniAelveH  in
t»i«  manner  iL'ic.  Jh  Urn.  H3.  M).  irmk-r  the  Kuipire
SWil'Inig  waft  carried  to  a  great  Iieigbt,  niui  the


lawn  Were  pnibably  little  more  tbnn  nominal.
Many  of  tbe  oarly  emppron — Augustus,  ('iiligula,
(.UHadin>4,  Vitvltins,  and  Domltian^werL'  very  foinl
of  guiikiug,  and  M^t  an  evil  example  to  tbrir  sub-
jcets  iti  tbiti  matti-r  (Suft. -•Iitii.  7(t,  71 ;  Lfiu  Cas«.
lis.  22;  Suet.  Cal.  41,  Claud.  :W;  Dio  LasH.  Is.  a;
Suet  -  y^M,  '21 1.  IVifeNied  gumvaterN  made  a  regu-
lar study  of  their  art,  and  there  were  tnmtise«  on
tbe  ktibjeet,  among  wbicb  was  a  book  written  by
the  eiiiiwror  ClJandins  iSuet.  Ctaiid.\.  c).  All  gum-
iug  wati  rorl>idden  linally  by  Justinian  lCo<l. :(,  tit.
43|  8eo  Walter,  Gncltiehte  d.  rom.  U^ekia,  $  763;
H.k\\\,  <'riminnhtrht  drr  It&uitr,  p.  P33 ;  and  for  an
account  of  ilie  guinen  of  chance,  the  urticlcD  Par
iMrAii;  Tali;  TEa.tt:itAB.

Alea  ('.\X«ai.  A  town  in  Arcadia,  soutb  uf  tho
Btyoiphiiliau  Lake,  wtierc  Atheu^  wan  worshipped
under  llie  name  of  Ale».

Aleaea  or  Alaea  ( *.\X((iin).  A  festival  Imld  near
Tegea  in  hutioiir  of  AtlieniS  Alea. Si-e  HaIj>tia.

Alecto  ( '\\TfKToi}. One  of  tho  FurioH. Seo

KL'MK.M1■E^.

Alectryomautla  U'J^iKTputifiavrtia).  A  oioilc  of
divination  pnictUH'd  by  tlie  Grevks.  Tbe  letlura
of  iUk  alpbabi-L  were  uritteu  iu  a  circle;  a  grain
of  nhtrat  or  barley  was  laid  upon  each  letter;  nud
a  coek,  conHecrutod  ur  provideil  for  Ibe  tkccfudoii,
was  pliiceil  within  tbe  oirclu.  TIju  required  iufor-
matiou  was  (ditaitied  by  pnlliiig  lo;;elber  ibitHM
letters  iilT  which  tlm  cock  picked  tbt.'  gnunn  n{
corn.  To  obtain  a  fuller  nnttwer,  they  laid  gntinx
of  com  u|Kjti  tlic  lettenj  a  second  linir,unrl  rcpeat-
od  the  priHTMH.

Aleotxyonomachla  inXtKTpuotmfiaxia).  The  pul>*
lie  ciM-k-figbl,  whii'li  was  bebl  every  year  in  i>ue  of
the  theatres  of  AlbeiiH.  Cock-lights,  in  general,
were  exceedingly  ronimou  among  tbe  (irceks  and
nomnns;  (tut  the  origin  of  this  one  in  particular,
whirli  wassnaetioiird  by  the  laws  oftbext.'ite,  is  not
known,  tlioni;b  Aeliati  hays  that  nhcu  Tbemistocles
mnivbed  with  U'm  Atbcniaun  ngjiinut  Ihr  l''ereians,
hfi  snw  two  ri>ckA  flghtiiig  against  each  other,  ntid
took  the  opportunity  of  oiUlrcssing  bis  suliliers,
reminding  tbeiu  that  theKe  eoeks  were  neither
tightiug  for  their  couulry  nor  for  the  gmls,  hul  only
for  victory.  This  speech  is  «iid  to  have  great-
ly animated  tbe  conrago  nf  the  .\tlieniiiiiH;  and,
after  tbe  war,  they  conmicmoraled  Ibe  invent  which
hml  proved  so  useful  to  thi:m  by  the  annual  fcMti-
vfil  in  the  theatre. 1  Aeliiin,  V.  It.  ii.  3H.)

Aleipterion. See  Auptah;  BAi-vt^Ar,  p.  186.

Alamanai,  Alamaiinl,  or  Almaiini  lOerumu  alU
J/a««cr.  "ftU  nieu"l.  A  oonfedenicy  of  Ciennaus,
cousisliiig  of  Ihe  tribes  Inetweeu  tho  Danube,  tbe
Khine,  and  Ibe  Main.  They  first  eaiiu'  ii^to  eoniact
with  the  RoQuiDH  in  tho  reign  of  Carucatla,  who
oaaumed  the  surname  of  Aletuanuicus  on  itcconnt
of  a  pretended  victory  «v«r  them  (a.I>.  214|.  After
this  time  they  cuntiniiully  Invaded  Iho  Roman  do-
miuioUK,  and  in  tbe  fifth  century  nere  in  |»osse»-
sion  of  Alsiice  and  of  (jerman  Builzeilaud.  See
Gkkmania.

Aieria  or  Alalia  One  of  the  chief  towns  of
Cursii-:k,  <tn  the  east  of  the  inland,  fonmled  by  tho
I'hikeaeuns  in  B.C.  iidi,  uud  made  a  Ifomatt  colotiy
hy  Knlla.

Alesa. See  Halkaa.

Alesla.  A  town  of  the  Mandnbii.  in  Gallia  Uug'
dmieusis,  aud  situated  ou  a  high  hill  luowAuxois);


ALEUADAE


ALEXANDER


whirli  w:i!t  wiinIh-J  by  tlit*  Iwo  rJVfi-s  LTitona  (Ozcl
anil  Oruirn  lO^'ruiti).  It  wiim  (akt-ii  iind  OirMtru.vnd
by  i'ut-»ui  ill  B.C.  ^2,  nTtoi-  »  iiiuiuomble  siugw.

Aleufldae. Hvo  Alkcas.

Alouaa('AA«var).  ATItcs8nlJi)ii,dfR(M>i)il(^l  from
HcTiiclre,  vhn  niled  nC  Limssn.  Up  wu»  the  re-
pnt«(l  foiHiilvr  of  tlio  Alciiiirlap,  u  tllBtiuKtiiHtiisl
family  of  will rh  two  liniiiclies  aro  ineDtiniird  :  tlic
Alvtiaihie  niid  tin)  f}on]iailne — llin  rnrnn^r  mitniii-
int;  nt  Liiris'^H.  the  latter  iiiliaUitiiig  C'rannoti.  In
llm  S«rni»l  Pi'miun  War  iIip  A)i'riu<l:iit  r«|Miiim'ii
thn  IVrHinn  r:uwe,  iiiiil  gav«  aid  (n  Xt>i'x(-s  (n.r.
4W))  (H*'n«I.  vii.  6).  Aftur  tlio  wnr,  wlu-n  L«<jty-
eliidej*  wa.^  went  to  Thcunaly  to  jintiiHli  Iliowj  wim
had  {irovcd  dislo^  u1  to  Grcvc(\  rliv  Aleiindai«  brllird
him  to  a  mild  coitriic.  At  a  tiui-r  |H>riml,  Philip  of
Mucedoi)  foutid  tbo  Aleuadut  iiavful  ulliei*.

I  Alexander  i\\Xi$avdf>a%t.  <1)  AnotUft  name  fur
Pakih  (q.  v.),

{'i)  Ai.KXANOEK  Aktolis,  of  PItfiirou  In  Aelolln,
n-ho  tlnnmhi'd  ulioiit  u  c  'iriO  at  AU'xnndii.-i,  where
h«  Wfu*  fuijdnyt'd  )>y  Ptolviny  jii  Hrriinging  the
tntgediesaud  Hatyric  drainim  in  the  (jrfitt  librnry.
He  nUo  wrote  tragedies.  Hliort  e)dc«,  <<lL*giv«,  and
eiiigrnmH,  of  winch  frngnit>iit«  have  l>ecn  proMrvod,
See  Connt,  Im  I'otftiir  AlcJuimtfitif  (PaHft,  1682).

Ct)  Ai-KXanpf.r  of  Ar)lit(il>ihiAi«,  in  Caria,  who


lUMt  Aottve

peared  at  its  galea ;  and  the  UMHeuibled  Cii^rkv  at*
the  Isthinns  of  Curiuth  elected  him  to  I  he  i-ou-^
uiand  against  Persia.  He  iion  directed  his  araift'
ot^n-iiiHt  the  liarbarians  of  the  North,  and  pioKscd>
|.lii>  Danulin  (Xlfii.  A  report  of  his  death  hnving
rcactipd  Grefice,  the  Tliphiins  once  looru  titok  np,
aniiM;  bnt  a  terrible  piini.Hhntent  nwnit4'd  th<>ni.)
Alexanilcr  totik  Tlit^lK'f*  by  a^ttanll,  defdrfiyeil  alii
lliit  bnildiugN,  with  the  exception  of  the  hoii»p  of  '
Pindar,  killed  inotit  of  I  ho  itiliahitanti*,  and  rtoUt'
tlio  rei<t  a»  ttlavcN.  Hit  now  prppai'itl  for  Iiin  great'
exin-ilitiou  ugiiiuHt  Pcntla.  In  iIh;  Kpring  of  XH\
he  eroAsed  (lie  HelleiijHint  with  iwi»u-  a.'i.OOfl  tneti.j
Of  these  3fl,tHX(  were  foot  and  TiOOrt  hor«e,  and  of  j
the  foniier  only  PJ.tKX)  wt-re  Maoedoninn!).  Ates-;
nndi^r'H  (irst  eiigugenient  with  the  Persians  waa  oftj
the  river  Graiiiens  in  Mysia  {May.  XU),  where  thc^J
Wf^rc  entirely  defeated  by  him.  In  the  following^
year  (333i  ho  collerted  bin  annynt  Gonliuni  (u.v.W
in  Phrygia,  where  be  rut  or  iintietl  the  celeliraledj
Gunliaii  knot,  wliieh,  it  was  Miid,  wan  tn  W  InoA-j
oiied  only  by  the  eoufpieror  nf  A^ia.  From  ibem
hit  luatx'hcd  tu  Ikkuh,  on  the  eoiifiiie!*  of  Byri
where  he  gained  a  gienl  victory  over  DarioH,  tl;
Persian  kin^.  DariilK  hinii«elf  e^-aptil,  bttt  liia>
Diullitr.  wife,  and  cbildrea  fell  into  the  hatid^  ofl
AlL-xuudt>r,  who treated them witli tliu niinost)


flout i}>he<l  about  A.ix  200,  and  \n  known  a»  Eiege-  I  delicaeyand  reK{i«ct. Alexander  now  direv-ted  bi»J
teM,  or  "  the  cx)tound(>!r,"  fur  hin  ex)MMiition  of  ihe  |  aruia  against  the  cici««  i>f  Phoenicia,  most  of  wliichl
com  men  ta  vies  of  Arisl-otle. He  wto|4)  aUu  original
worlu  on  Kale,  Frcu  Will,  mtd  the  Soul,  which,
tranislnteil  Into  Lnti]i,werL-  uiiich  ivad  and  atudicd
in  the  >tiddle  Ages. See  .\ltlSToTELKS.

(4)  ALF.xAM>Kf{  ov  TitAM.KS,  in  Lydia,  A  Greek
phyHieiau  living  at  Itonie  in  the  sixth  cenltiry  a.D.
He  made  a  cnrvfnl  collection  of  excerpts  front  the
older  wrilerw  on  Ihcrupcntics,  iti  twelve  booltH.  See
JtRDiriNA.

(.'))Ar-KXAN"np.ROKrri'rTAKaH,iu  Phrygia, or,  ac-
conling  to  SnidaH,  uf  &lilt-lns,wbi>  tlonrished  in  the
seeund  emitnry  A.r>.  He  Ctiok  the  iiniue  uf  Coriic-
litia  Alexaiidt-r,  from  liit<  bavitig  Vt«cn  n  bIuvo  uf
Coruclin^  I^'intuUiii,  who  gave  him  his  freedom
and  nuide  liini  the  iOHlnii-tor  in  Inn  ctbitdreii.  He
wuH  Kiiiiiauu'd  PolybiNtnr,  from  the  variety  and
miiliiplicity  id'hift  knowbtlgc-.  The  anciftit  writ-
ers cite  oije  of  bis  works  in  forty  bookw,  each  on«
of  whteh  a|tpeflT8  to  have  contained  the  d6Hcrii>-
tion  iif  some  i>articnlar  cunntry,  and  to  have  had
a  separate  title,  t^och  as  AtyvTrrtoKa,  Kaptaxa,  etc.
Pliny  ofieu  r«fera  Im  hiru.  It  is  pndiable  ibat  he
was  the  author  of  ii  work  entitled  BaviMtriuy
fft'wiyojy^,  "A  coUeciiiJu  of  wouderfiil  things,"  of
which  Pliiitiiw  speakf*.

Alexander.  Th«  natue  of  scvenil  kings  of  &luc-
e<li)nia. See  XacrIionIA.

Alexander,  known  jim  thk  Giikat,  »oii  uf
Philiji  II  .  king  of  Mnceilon,  was  born  at  Pvlla,
B-f,  IItIi.  He  waft  edileatdl  by  Aristotle,  who  ac-
(|nired  a  great  inlliLoiuTH  over  ItiN  mind  and  char-
arter.  He  dr^t  iliiilingnihlit^d  hiiuMelf  nt  tliti  battb-
of  ('hacrouea  (SWi,  wline  the  vitu»ry  vctM  uiaiidy
owing  to  bis  inipelnonily  and  courage.  l>n  the
murder  of  Philip  iXiS),  he  a^t>nded  the  ihroue,
at  ihn  nge  of  tweuly.  to  tiiid  himitelf  snrronnded
by  enemies  nn  evi-ry  side.  Up  lirnt  put  down
rel>ollion  in  biK  own  kingdom,  and  then  rnpidly
marched  inl<t  Greeee.  Hij>  uuexpeeled  activity
ovomwed  all  oppositioa;  Thubes,  which  had  beiMi


CoId  rc^)r<>E«UOng  AU>xjni!i'r  Um>  drnil  mk  Zc-us  Atiimoo.


snbniilted;  but  Tyre  was  not.  taken  till  the  tiiiddla
of  :^t3,  afleian  (dtMliiiate  defence  of  Miveii  inonlho,
Ho  next  nntrcbctl  into  Kgy^t,  which  unr«^isling<|
ly  yielded  t»  Iiim.  At  tliu  beginning  of  :I31  hij
founded  near  the  nioulh  uf  the  Nile  tho  city  uf
Ab-\andrii),  and  about  thi-  tutme  time  vitiitcd  lli»|
t*^mple  of  Zens  Ainmitn,  in  the  desert  of  Libyv]
where  lie  was  wilnted  by  the  priesle  as  thw  son  of  i
Zeus.  In  rhn  spring  of  the  sainP  year  ( ^{TtL  |  heJ
M«t.  out  against  Darius,  irlio  li:ul  collected  anoiherj
army.  Ho  ertisscd  the  Euphrates  atid  the  Tigris,
anil  at  length  met  with  the  iniuienM;  hustft  of  !)»-'
riiiH.Miid  to  have-  amounted  to  more  than  a  millioiJ
of  men,  in  the  plains  of  (iangauiela.  Tlie  bnille*
was  fought  in  the  month  of  October,  3.11,  and  <?iided^
iu  Iho  complete  defeat  of  rbe  Fersians.  Alexaudecf
waa  now  1  be  conquemr  of  Asia,  and  begnii  to  adojik
Persian  habits  and  cnstoins,  by  which  Iia  concJM
iiiled  the  affections  of  his  new  subject-s.  FrouJ
Arbela  he  marched  to  Babylon,  Suwa.  and  Persep-,
olis,  all  of  ubieh  (inrrendertil  to  liiiu.  He  is  said
to  have  wt  lire  to  the  palate  of  Perwptdls,  aii*!^
acconting  to  some  uci-ontils,  in  (he  rovelry  of  tti
banquet,  at  the  instiguiion  of  TliiiT'i,  an  Athenian'
oonrtirsitn.  At  the  biginning  of  ^130,  Alexander'
marched  from  PcnM^l>olis  into  Media,  iu  pursuit  of:
r>iirinii.  whom  ht<  fidlowtwl  into  Porlbiu,  whore  tba'
nnfurtnnnte  king  was  ninrden?il  by  FtesMns  iq.  t.)J
■Milrup  of  ftavtrio.  In  'M£i  Alexarnler  eroiv<4'd  tl«
motiiitoina  of  thu  Pantpnmisns  (the  Hindu  KushjJ


*


le  Hindu  KushlJ


ALEXASDKR

Mf^ wmvhiHl intn KnrlTin a<;airirtr Il4f«Miis  ^'^o

^^ twlnyiHl  tti  liiiu  niid  pni  to  tl<-ntli. Diirhiif

f^j^ »irtl  tWi>  y«at«  lie  wiw  cliif  lly  i-UHMKtsI  in  llir

f0i%«^nMt  of  SoKiliatia. Ho  nlso  t:niwM-<l  tlio  lax-

]irL«-«t  Mbv Sir ),  and ilt^f.'»l(-'(l «'ViT.il Srytliiaii

tii'-**^  itortli  of  lliat  rivi-r. lly  tlw  ponqiirest  rd*  n

i(K>«~*>i(o'n  fortreM  hv  tiblninc'4l  pOfmcitRion  ul'  Hex-

mil*. Ili^  i]iiii};liter  r>(  the  Hiurlhiiii  cliinf  Oxynrttv,

wUo*n  lip  niailf  his  wirt*. It  wn*t  iilmiit  tliitt  tiim*

x\u*.t  hf  ItiUeil  hisfritniH.'Iittwin  inlniiikoii  hniwl.

Wc tia<l  |)n>vii»i8ly  piil to  tlonlh  hiH  t'litltiriil  M<r-

vftvtt.  raniiptiion,  on  the  ch»r<;t<  oftn'riMOii. In  '1*^2?

\m  it»vatlt<4l  India,  uihI  rniKi^sl  thr  Intliifi,  i>rti1>a)il,v

tirar  llic  HimU^rii  Attm-k. H<'  trwit  with  tm  n*Hit>tiin(i'

\\\\  lieteaVliv*)  the  Ilv'tnitpt'is  wh<'>r  hi?  who  ii|i)hh«i><I

Vty  PiinK  ati  Iiiiliitii  kin^:.  nhoin  he  tlrfi-jitfil  iiDrr

It  gnlliiiii rMiiotnnco,  and iiHik priftontr,  tinbw

(jiicntljr  rtstohnj;  To  liini  his  kingdom,  ami  tr**ut-

ingliiiti  will)  diDtiiitfui^hril  hnitnnr. Hv  foiinili.<d  ii

luwiioii  llie.  Ilj-diwjtof^willpd  Itiiovphala,  ill  hiMMuir

•(  brt  lionN'  ]tiico|ilml  itH,  w  bo  died  Lcrc,  after  curry-

t")!  biui  thri'ii;;h  n>»iiy  vifturiv*. From  tbcm"**  ht*

p'twirutcd  iiM  far  an  Uie  lly|»hiwirt  ifiarmi. Tliic

»«»  the  fiirilici>I.  [Hiint  which  lie  rt;acbfd.  fur  Itif

lUnduiiiiUi*,  wuru  oiii.  by  luu^  svrviue,  tiiiil  (iii'd


*fAtt,  QotortUiMlaiidinK  hin  (•nlrrnlifti  nnd Jirsy-
I  n».»M  ohligcd  to  Icutl  them  hnck He  iL'inniLHl

K  It  tttf  Hrda»[t4>M,  nud  tbt<n  Miiih'il  dnwn  Ihti  riwr
^  *uli  t  [Mirtion  of  hU  tntupH,  whilr  the  ruinniiiiVr
*«wlwl  Ahmji  the  hniikM  in  two  di%ini.Mm.  H»'
■^iflj  reatihi'd  the  Imlian  {k-raii  alionl  ihe  iiiiilille
^^W.  K«BrchiiB  was  ncnt  with  Ihn  Ihfl  in  wul
*w>Ktti»  const  to  Ibe  IVmiaii  Cnlf  (me©  Nkar*
^I'lj;  and  Alexander  marched  with  the  rent  of
"atufws  Ihronffh  OiMlrniiiH,  in  which  cuuntrj-  liio
wwrwfleriHi  grrally  InHii  wniit  of  wuti>r  and  pn>-
VL^!^  H«  rrafhiHl  Snwt  at  the  In-ginning  of  3!jS,
•'•'■Uallowt*!  himi^lf  uikI  Iiih  IroujMi  nmw  rt*t
*"■  llieir  labourM  ;  nud  aitximm  lo  form  hin  Kitn>-
Ptt  utA  Asiatic  RuhjtvtH  into  oiio  people,  he
■"•ifcbl  A*iatic  wlviw  Cu  about  ri(;!iry  ol'  hfn  g«-n-
1**  ilv  btinMilf  took  a  Mecund  wif«,  Barwin^,  tho
•J*« 'laughter  of  Iinriiis.  TownnU  the  ciow-  ..f
™J«r  ;«5  he  wont  tn  KchntADU,  whei-^  he  loot
'•'■p^it  favourite^  Ilcphar^tiun.  From  Hchiit.tna
«  BUlcbwl  In  liubylon,  which  ho  int«ndwl  to
ntbtke  rsprtal  of  hin  cnipire,  ns  th<r  l)t-«l  pnint
fit  Mauaanicntioii  hotwi-rn  Iuj*  i-asttTii  and  wc-at-


JUalur  <^<  AW\»n<irt  ilic  Hrrmi tSa\4«x}


<<ra  doniiaiona.  Hia  acti<*nirM  worn  nninerons  and
i;it^ntlOf  but  b«  wba  cut  olV  in  the  nddMt  iif  ihfUi,
hoiii^  altiickt'l  hy  a  fever,  which  \Kit*  pn>huhly
a^gra^'uleil  hy  the  qnnulity  of  wine  Im  had  dtnnk
at  a  hani|iict  given  lo  IiIh  princifNi)  oWccrH.  ttt  that
he  died,  after  an  illne>«ofol«vcii  dayit,  in  (he  mouth
of  May  or  Jnne,  B.c.  SiKt.  at  the  ajjc  uf  thirty-two,
afttT  a  PPtKii  "f  twelve  yeara  and  eij*bt  ntoiiths.
lie  appointed  no  one  an  h'nt  tmcf«>AKor,  loit  Jn*t  tic-
fore  liift  death  uave  liia  riii|C  to  |>t<rd ii'iniM.  Kox-
ana  WAN  with  child  at  the  time  of  hiti  dentli,  and
aft«rwanla  horo  a  non  who  w  known  hy  tlie  name
of  Alexander  AegUH  |i(.  v.u

The  iMidy  of  Alcxaiulcr  was  lutfrml  by  Ptt»1c>my
iu  Aloxamlrin,  iu  a  goldcu  eoftin,  and  divine  hoti-
onrd  were  paid  to  him,  uoi  only  iu  K^'vpl,  hnt  aW*
iti  oilier  eutintries.  The  ftarcopha(;;nK  in  which  llin
coflln  was  cuclobc<l  boa  been  in  the  Hrilixh  .Miihimiiii
Hiiicu  lHl>j.

No  charneter  lit  history  hnn  atTordec]  matter  for
more  diHcntwion  than  that  of  Ah^xander;  aint  the
exnel  quality  of  hit*  ambition  iA  to  tliin  day  a  hu1>-
jfct  of  dinpnte.  By  some  he  it*  rogardet)  tie  Htlli*
more  tluiu  an  lien>ic  madman, arlimteil  liy  Ihe  itwru
dcHim  of  peniorial  glory;  oihent  jiivr  htm  the  hon-
our of  Vftiit  and  enlightened  views  of  pidjey.  em-
bracing the  conftohdailcin  aiid  e»tAhliidimeiit  of  an
enipin-,  in  which  commerce,  lenrninK.  and  ihii  iirta
shniiUI  Uourioh  in  common  with  energy  nnd  unler-
priw*  of  ever>-  de«criptiuii.  Each  cIshs  of  reaion-
em  find  fart>«  to  ronnteiiance  their  opinion  of  Ihe
mixinl  character  and  uctioim  of  Alexander.  The
ronnrr  qiu>te  the  wihliicM  of  llin  pemnunl  dBiinj;,
the  Itam-ii  natnrt*  of  niiicb  of  liii  tiTHinieiit  iniut*
tcry.  and  Iiih  remnnteli'MH  ami  nnnecewiary  rnielly
tti  the  van«i niched  un  Horiie  occimioiiN,  and  ea-
prictoiit)  inagnaniniity  anil  lenity  on  othfrm.  Tho
latter  advert  Uy  lactM  like  the  foundulirtu  of  Alcx-
andriaf  and  olhcr  aeta  indicative  of  larj^e  uiid
proaiieclivc  views  of  true  ]Hdiry:  an<l  rejjanl  bis
ex|KKlittuiiH  rather  as  ftchemcHof  iliHrover>-  and  ex-
ploration Ihan  inerc  nilerprtM-a  for  frnitletw  con-
quest.  The  Inith  ap|K'ani  to  embrace  a  |Hirtioii
of  1h)||i  tlieHe  npinious.  Alexander  wan  too  much
HniiMeti  with  military  glory,  and  the  common  Keif-
etl^^oMsment  of  the  mere  ronqiieror,  to  I>e  a  fjn'at
and  eoiiHiNtent  ntateniuan ;  while  snoll  wa.-«  tim
strength  of  llin  intellect,  and  the  li^ht  o|H-nc4l  to
bim  by  Hiirci<«t.  that  a  glimpw  of  the  t^enuino
.■vonrcea  nf  la*>liiiK  trreatnchA  rorild  not  bnt  break
in  npon  him.  The  luHlory  of  N'apoleon  hUowk  tho
nature  of  ihtd  niixtnro  of  lofiy  intellect  ami  per-
Hoital  nmbiiiou,  wbiuh  hat  He)dom  etTected  mucll
permanent  gon<l  for  mankind  in  any  ajje.

In  perHon  this  extraordinary  individual  was  of
the  middle  nixe,  witli  n  neck  snuiewhat  awry,  but
poHHCtwwd  of  a  liorco  aud  luajestio  countenance.
See  Pint.  Jlrsander  ;  .\prian,  f'rjHvt.  .'tUs.  ;  Droy-
fteu.  fient^hifktr  .Hrjrandrrn  Hvji  firvsMrn  (IS77) ;  Free*
man's  llUtaricat  Ennait^,  '2*\  Keries  (IrTTlt);  and  Ma-
baffy.  .Ilcxander'u  Kmiiire  f  l.-**?!.

After  many  dliseniiinnR  nnd  Moody  wan  among
Ihetmielveii,  ihn  (fi'iieraU  of  .Mexaodor  laid  (ho
fouiiilalioiiK  nf  several  ){reat  empires  iu  the  tlinw
qoarleni  of  the  ;;lobe,  Ptolemy  seixml  Kgypt.  whero
lie  linnly  eNinbltdhed  hinvu'lf.  and  where  his  f^iic-
cesMors  were  calb*<l  Ptolcmiot,  in  honour  of  the
founder  of  their  kingdom,  which  nnhHintetl  till  the
time  of  Angimtint.  Helencim  and  his  posterity
n-igned  in  llahylon  ami  riyria.  AutigotiiiM  al  tirst
UHtal)! ishcd  himself  in  Asia  &liiior,  and  Auliputer


ALEXANDER


08


ALEXANDER  AEGUS


AAl\


Com  or  AlexftBdM*  ibo  UrML

I  31iictMl(iMia. Tlieili^McciittaiiiM  nf  Anti|mler  tvere
C'tiit(tiiert*<t  b.v  tlm  HucvufUMm  ut'  Antiduiiiio,  who
ri'tC(iP«l in MHri'iliiiita tlU )( vsim  tr(liic«tl  by  llie
RitntitiiK  ill  tUr.  tlm»nrKiii};  I'l'i-rteuii. L.VHitnnchiitt
uiitili'  liimiwlf  niMsa*r  of  Tlinicp;  atiil Li>ntin>iiH,
wlio  h:iil  ralti^n  |i<)«i^iwinii  of  I'hryt^ia.  ineililaltiil
fitr  »  wliilu  t-u  drive  Aiiri|)»h.'i'  frnm  Uai'i-iliiiiin,
£iiiiM>iicH  estnMi«l>r{1  1iit)iM>lf  in  Ciii>pu<1u(^i:t,  btil
wait  fMwui  itvi-r|>(iwt:n'<l  Ity  Win  rival  AtiliHniiu.H,ainl
HtnrvtMl  t4i  tlt-ntli. Ptiriii);  Xun  lirrtitnr.  KiiinoiieK  ;
•p|iL-uTV4l  80  funnidalilt^  l^i  llio  Miicci'twuni  ipf  Alex*  '
miilvr  fhnt  duiio  of  ibom  dnrcd  to  luwiinio  Um  litle  '
of  kniR.

Tli«  I'lunii'iit  of  the  womlerfiil  in  the  eniiipaigiis
of  AlrXfuiih'r,  uikI  hit  trugic  (U-nili  ut  tht*  Ui*i};ht  !
«)f  hii*  iMjwcr,  ihrvw  au  iiiU-nwlj  rniiiniilic  iiitoient ,
an>uii<i  \i\»  li^iirc,  «ii  thai  AlexaixItT  nui»i  heciiiiie
tli«*  htM'ii  of  miiiaiitio  »t«r.v,  BcarctOy  more  wouiler-
fnl  thitti  tUt!  actiml,  but  fii-owiti^  froiu  uge  lo  .1^"
with  the  luyth-miikiii';  spirit  whivh  cnii  work  as
frcel.vin  fact  nh  in  tlt'tiitn.  Th*n-HrlicRl  r<>niinf  Ihi;
•t«>ry  which  wi?  kimw  is  thu  gtvjit  nminnri*  ron-
tittctcd  nith  tht<  naiiieor  CalliblliutiuA  (t|.  v.i,  which,
miller  th«  iiitlm)iii«  of  the  [lopiilur  tr!i«lilit>ii.  iirofto
ill  Kpypt  aKoiit  A-li.  "iiH*,  Hint  wii*  caiTU-d  thr.iu;;h
Liilin  tri(iiHlnlioi)»  to  tlic  Wi'Ht,  mid  thmn^fh  Aniic-
iiiiiii  utiil  Syi'iui'.  vi^rsiiniti  to  thu  Knst.  It  btvaiae
wiOt'ly  |>o|itiliir  ilniiuu  iliff  Miilillu  A^rn,  aiut  watt
■workffl  iritu  inu-itc  form  by  uiauy  «rilt.'r8iii  FrL-uch
am]  Geniudi.  AlhiTich  of  Ut-KjiiivuM  wnilu  in  Mid-
dlu  Hij;h  (.ierinaii  itti  rpir  on  ihH  miIijihI.  in  tho  fin^t
half  of  tho  twelfth  c«Milnry,  w  hich  wum  the  ha*is
of  the  GeriiiaD  I^Jinijirwcht'M  .■Heinnd^rhucA  n*il.  by
llhiiel,  lliitle,  1[**4|,  aUn  of  the  twdfih  rt-ntiiry.
Thf  French  iit)efs  LjiTiihrrt  li  Court  anil  Al«^xandri'
lit*  Bt'iiiuy  conipo^ul,  iH-tniten  UhO  aiitl  ll^li,  u  ro>
iniiiu-f'  nf  Alex»iiili?r,  Ihu  I  wclvt^-H>  Ihihli-  iin-trc  of
whJKh  jjavM  riM*5  To  tUft  iiaiin*  Alr^aw/rinfA.  Tbv
GiTniua  |i<H<iii  of  Kndnlf  of  Kiiih  wan  liaM-i)  on  tho
Laliu^^|)icof  \ValIfrofCL4tilloii.tihoiii  I'^tHJ.  which
Wcainu  hi-iicfforwapl  tlie  provailin;!  fonii  of  ilw
story.  In  ciiiitroBt  with  it  in  thi*  thirl<'i*nlh-t:«n-
tiiry  Old  KiiKliah  upic  of  AlfXninler  (in  vol.  i.  of
Wfhcr's  Mttri'-ui  lioumm-fn.  IcllCt.  hii»M?d  on  thy  vcr-
Biou  of  CnllialhulieB.  The  Hlory  atiiivai-K  iilno  in
Ibo  Etuit,  workvd  up  hi  t-cHiJniiclion  tviih  niylhn
of  othi'T  imliiiiialiticH,  cH|K-i-ially  the  Ffi^iaii.  It
Apiwam  in  FiidiiHi,  ami,  uniinig  hiicr  nritrrs.  in
Ni/aini.  Fnmi  the  Frntiaiiti  huth  tho  (iii1>»taiicc
of  tho  iilory  and  ilh  frtrui  in  poetical  trcHtniont:
bavit  L'xtf  inh'il  tn  Tnrktj  iiiitl  iilht^r  MohiiniTiifdauM,
who  have  iiilcrprctt-d  Ali^xander  an  tho  iJxu'lnrt.rin
("  two-homeil  ")  of  tliv  Konln,  ami  to  thr  Iliioinx,
whiuh  Inol  had  prtvu-rvri)  no  in()i-(iendtMil  triuli-
tiuus  of  AlvxamliT.  S*"«  ISpii-gel,  t/it  .■i/rjamtrrtnuff
Ui  fifn  Ofirnifttn  ( L«dp.  IKil  i.  ami  Fitii]  Meyer,
Al'ri'nd'v  h  Oraitd  itnnit  la  iMtimlurt  i-Vuufuwe  au
i/oi/fn-iipe  (ii  VoU.  18H6J.

Aloxandor. Tho  nnine  of  Mwrul  kiiiga  uf

FKy[ii. Srt*  I'nii.KMAKrs.
Alexander. Thr iiAmo  of  eevuml  kings  of


EpiruM.  (\)  Hnnianu-fl  XIoi^ssls,  the  brother  of
Oiympiait,  and  HUf-rrwMir  to  Arybas.  H«  eanic  into
Italy  to  aid  thu  Tan;iitiiii^n  u^ainat  tho  iComans,
and  inu-d  tn  nay  thai  while  hm  iicphew,  Alfixander
ih«>  (ircal,  waa  wnrrhig  against  woui«u  (meaning
the  eQ'euiiuau>  iiatioiiH  of  the  Kast),  he  xnui  light-
ing nguii)8t  men  (Jiml.  xvit.:t;  I,)v.viit.  17  and  if?),
lie  was  i<.htiii  by  a  ]>iiranian  while  eriiNHing  the
river  Achenm  in  Bnitliiim  (JuBt.  xii.  2,1.  (5i>  Tlie
son  of  the  orlelirati-il  I'yrrhin*.  To  aveugr  the
death  of  ln»  fattier,  who  had  Inmmi  Hlaln  at  ArgoK,
fighting  against  Anligonntt,  ho  m-ixih)  ii|>on  Mac«>
donia,  of  u  hich  ihn  latl«T  wnn  king.  }le  was  (KH>n,
lnivvevt>r.diivrn  out,  imt  only  from  Maeulotiia.  bnt
uIno  from  h\n  own  douiUtiuus,  by  UemetriiiB,  son
of  Anligonus.  Taking  refuge,  «u  this,  among  tho
A<'«rnniiian8.  ho  «Ufee«*de<l.  by  ibeir  aiti,  in  regain-
ing the  ihrouo  of  Epiriis  (Inst.  xxvi.  3;  itl.  xxviii,
1; Fhir. /*5rr.  34).

Alexauder.  Tho  name  of  auvcral  prince*  of  i
Iinlat^i.  (1)  Ia>:naei:.h,  nionareh  of  Indaea,  son  of
IlyreanuN,  and  hrother  of  AriRtubiihia,  Ut  whom
liti  hiH't-eeded.  it.c  lOti.  He  was  a  warlike  prince,
and  (tUp1ny»i  gr^at  ahi}ity  in  the  difterent  van
in  M'hieh  be  was  eiigage4l  ilnring  hid  reign.  Driven
from  bin  kingdom  by  Iii«  mibjcrtw,  who  di-teMted
him,  he  took  up  nnim  iigninat  tln-ni,  and  waginl  a
cruel  warfari'  tor  the.  n|Mi(ie  of  s\\  yean*,  slaying
iipwanU  of  tifly  tbonaand  of  Imh  foert.  Having  at
last  re  -  ent^nMl  JernNaleni,  h«  rnu-ifJiKl.  for  tho
aninsenieiit  of  hiti  rtnienliineM,  eight  htindn-d  of
hit*  reY4)ltiMl  nubjecttt,  and  at  the  oaiiie  time  eunned
Ibeir  wives  and  riiihlieii  to  be  ina&savred  liefnra'
their  eyea.  Heiiig  re-twlaltlished  on  tlir  thinoe.  ha
intntc  various  vomiuesttt  in  •Syria,  Arabia,  and  i<lu>
niea.  and  lltially  died  of  intemperauco  at  Jenisulem,
U-C.  7tj,  after  a  relgu  of  twenty  soveu  yeiu-a  (Jo-
Kcphna.  At>t.  lutl.  xvil.  2*J,  etc.).

(2)  I'he  nun  of  Arititobulns  II.,  was  made  prison*
er,  together  with  bin  father,  by  I'onipey,  but  man-
aged to  escape  while  being  vonduetvd  to  Konieg
ruiited  an  army,  atui  iuad«  Koine  rciiiqne-^la. Hyr^
|oaliin>.  Kon  of  Alexntider  iHiinaeuH,  }»eiiig  then  on
the  l1tr*me,  Holieiled the  aid  of  tb*t  RoinanK,  aiiA
Miirk  Antony,  being  hcuI.  by  Oabinirnt,  defeated
I  Alexander  near.lertiKalem. Aft^TNtatiding  a  siege
for  Home  limo  in  the  furtrcai)  Alexandreiun,  he  4>Iki
tniiied  ternin  of  peace ;  but  iiol  bnig  ufter,  having'
tuken  ii|»  iiinm  for  (.'at.'»ar,  whu liad  ndeuM-il  bis
'  father,  he  fell  into  the  handii  of  MctuUtiK  Hcipia,  >
and  wan  behejuled  nt  Antloeb  (Jonephus,  .'Inr.  lu^^
,  xiv.  13).

I  (3)  The  lion  of  Jlerod  the  Great,  pnt  to  death  by,
hit  father,  along  with  ArintolailiiK  Iiih  brother,  oQ)
falne  chargeti  brought.  a^otiiiHt  Ibeni  by  Phcroras
their  nude,  and  .^alutuc  their  aniit  [.loiwpbins  ..lirtr
Ind.  xvi.  17J.

Alttxander.  The  name  of  itcveral  kings  of  Syria.
(1)  Surnained  ItALA.-^.  a  peiHoii  of  h)w  ortgiu,  who
pretended  to  be  tin-  ^oti  vf  AntioeluiH  IV.  Kplph- ,
aueii,  and  rrignci)  in  iiyria  B.C.  I.'>0-14<).  Ho  wa(
defeated  and  diilbi-nued  by  Dvnietriiix  II.  NicatOB
{'2)  Snrnamed  Zkiiina  or  Zabinak,  sou  of  a  uier*
j  uhaid,  was  M.'t  up  by  Ftnleniy  I'hyscon  as  a  pron
'  tender  to  the  ihioiie  of  Syrra,  b.c.  Vi».  Ho  wi
derealvtl  by  Anli«ichus  Grypua,  by  whom  he  wi
pnt.  to  ileatb,  l'^.

I Alexander  AegiiB- The  son  of  Alexander  t)
'  (Jfeat  nn*\ Koxittia.  born  shortly  after  tho  dcall
[  of  his  father,  in  B.c.  3S3,  and  acknowledged


tiiti  pirtDer  of  Philip  ArrirttlaeiiH  in  thi>  Empire,
uiKler  tbo  ftuordlaB&llip  uf  Pt-rdicvno.  Antipat«r,
aiti)  PolyAiK-rvltui).  ill  biiri?4-»a)4^ii.  Aloxuatlcr  niid
bis  iiiiiiliitr.Itoxaiia,  M'en>  imprisotted  by  C'uKiaiiilcr
whoi  lif  nbtitiiiod  iMwscMiuii  o(  MacofUuiiu  lu  31l(,
mil  reuniitcd  in  prisou  ttU  311,  whvu  tlioy  wci-c
|)iit  to  ilvAtb  liy  Cas(*an(ler.

Alexander  Soveru*. Soe  SsVEHra.

Alexandra  C.KXi^avipa). Bm  CahaaNDIU.

Alexandria  {\\X»(a»ilfnta,  and  in  CicuroV  time
frriltfti  Ai-K-iAXDREAi.  Tliv  ttunic  uf  itcvL'ral  clt'
mi  ri)iiiiilr<l  li)-  Alcxaiiilur  ttic  Uttriit,  iiiid  imiueit
afirrliiin.  Of  tlicM*,  the  must  iinportnnt  an*:  (I)
I  ea|iiul  ^rAfffiptiiM  l<i.  v.)  ijiMlcr  ihn  I'lolt*-
,  urth-rett  liy  Aloxnndri'  to  he  foiiiii)e4l  in  B.C.
It  WM  Iniilt  oil  Ihf  iinrrnw  ti<>rlc  of  laiul  be-
twtfn  th«  Inkc  Man-otut  ami  the  ModitetTaiieuii,
uppmitt^  In  rhe  iiilniKl  of  rhiirofi,  which  ^Y||N  joint-d
totbrrily  \>y  mi  urtillriul  dilcp.  On  thin  inland  a
pnt  ligbt-bdiise  was  built  iu  Uio  migu  of  I'lolrmy


IWfl,  and  on«  to  Npw  York  in  !«*!.  T\w  niort-
(•ru  eiiy  tttandx  on  the  diU»  iinitiiif;  th»  iHliind
of  Fliunm  tti  the  miiinlund.  ( 2 1  Ai^xanI'KIa
Tlt(>A!4,  aliui  TitoAS  BiiHply,  on  the  »ea-coatit  Huiilh-
%<fi*«t  of  Troy,  wuH  ouliii},'ed  by  Anti^ouiut,  hi-tiee
ualitMl  Autigonia.  hut  urtcrwiirdit  it  rtwiimed  ita
flrHt  name.  It  (luiiri-shed  Krcatly,  l>olh  iiiidrr  tho
Grveka  luid  the  Itonmiw:  iind  both  liiMilA  CiU:)iar
mid  ConHianlinc  thauuhr  of  c^ttibli-thiiij!  tl)i>  tM^at
of  the  Knipirr  in  it.  (^i  Alkxamikia  At>  Ii^^uM,  a
84>aport  at  the  enlrancr  of  Hyria.  a  liillo  Kouth  of
[miir.  (-1)  III  KiiHtiina,  afl^^nvanU  AntIociiia,  nf-
t«>rwardM  (?HAttAX  Spakim,  at  thn  month  of  th«i
Ti}^i»,  bnill  by  Aloxnndcr;  ileslroytnl  by  it  t\iHtf\ ;
rvAtomI  hy  Antii»chn»  KpiphiiniM.  It  nnr*  Dip
liirthplnt-K  of  DiunyHiim  Ftirirgetes  and  I^tdorut*
Churni'i'iiiiH.

Alexandrian Canon. Sun Caxon Alkxax-
Alexandrian  library. Soe  UinuoTiuctJA.


ANCIENT

AIEXANDRIA


I^tliMphii*  (283).  I'nder  the  care  of  the  Plole-
"■'*%*))  tbf>  capital  of  u  fin-at  kiti^tdoni,  and  c«ui-
"•(•iiikjt by  iHiiHwitJou  ull  the  eommcrucof  Kurujie
*itli  Ui«  ta*i,  AJfxoiidiio  whju  became  the  uioBt
•wlthj  and  Hphindid  city  of  the  knovrn  world.  It
*i««Iebraled  for  it*  niagnitlceiit  library,  fonndi-d
h  tbft  (lr»t  two  rtoIeniicB.  The  librnry  f^ndfriHl
wTrrtly  liy  lire  when  Intins  CnuMir  wan  hesiep-d
IB  Alfjaujrift^  and  wu«  finally  di'fttroyed  by  Am-
'^t  tbi?  liontrnont  of  tbo  rolif  Omar,  in  a.I>.  661.
'■I***?!!!*  Romans,  Alexandria  reluinrd  it»  i-oui-
*wn«l  Ull)  liitrmry  imporiiince,  and  bfcnnni  iilwi
'«wfMoi  of  Christianity  und  ihrtdo^icul  Irani-
'*>{'  Iu  iiite  in  nnw  coveiid  by  a  tna»H  of  rinnH.
OaMilo  ibe  wall*,  to  tho  bontU,  Ibc  colnmn  of
iMttUnC'Poropey'N  Pillar"!  Btill  n-nmiuu;  bnt
wt»»riiib«disk«  known  an  •'Cleopatra's  Needles,"
•Inch  flii,:e  ailomcd  tlie  (jntc-wiiy  of  the  royiil
I«I«cc,  have  been  removed  —  one  to  London in


Alexandrian  Muaeum. H«e  MusevM.

Alexandrian  Period.  Tho  period  of  Grwk  lit-
erature, from  B.C.  »>0  lo  m,  during  which  Ah'san-
dria  wan  the  iiitftlrotnul  capital  of  the  Llullenio

world. 8''<'  Al.K.XASDRlAX  ScuouL.

Alejcaudriau  SohooL  Aflt-r  the  decline  of  lib-
i-rty  and  intoUrctual  cnhi\alio»  in  G^^t•c«,  A!cx-
:itidriu,  iu  Egypt,  l»e4:aine  the  home  »im1  centiti  of
Bcience  ami  literftttire.  Tlie  time  in  which  it  held
this  pOBitinn  may  hedivide<l  into  two  pcrltwls—tlie
fiiht  including  the  reigni*  of  tho  Ptolemies,  from  n  c
:!23  to  30;  tho  wcnnd,  from  n.t .  'J»  to  a.i>.  <VHt.  or
fruui  the  fall  of  the  i'toltruim'aii  dynasty  to  the  ir-
ruption of  the  Arulm.  Piiring  the  first  iM-riod  the
intHlerlnal  aclivily  at  Alexandria  was  niiiinly  of
»  pnrfly  lilt-niry  or  srientiHe  kind;  bnt  during
the  iwrond,  i>artly  from  Jewish  oiid  Cllirinliiui
intlni-nceii,  it  dcveloiwd  into  the  upptrulntlvH  plii-
hwophy  of  the  Nco -Plototiihth (q.  v.  j mid the


►


ALEXANDRIAN SCHOOL


68


ALIMENTARII PUERI ET  PUELLAE


religiona  philosophy  of  the  Giiostica. Sne  Gifos-

TICI.

Ptolemy  Sot«r,  the  first  ruler  who  iutroduced
and  patronized  Greek  soience  and  literatore  in
Alexandria,  was  followed  by  a  still  more  mnnifi-
cent  patrou,  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  who  regularly
established  the  celebrated  Alexandrian  Library
and  Museum,  which  hod  been  begun  by  his  father.
This  Mnseum  was  somewhat  like  a  modern  univer-
sity, and  within  its  walls  learned  scholars  both  lived
aud  taught.  (See  Museum.)  The  loss  of  Greek  free-
dom soon  took  from  Greek  thought  m  uch  of  its  bold-
ness and  originality,  but  thinkers  found  substitutes
for  these  in  learned  research  and  criticism.  They
studied  grammar,  prosody,  mythology,  astronomy,
and  medicine,  aud  unfolded  their  information  in
long  didactic  poems  in  epic  form,  full  of  learning,
and  marked  by  perfect  mastery  of  verse,  but  often
dull  to  a  degree,  aud  marred  by  numerous  obscure
and  recondite  allusions.  Kxamples  of  these  are  the
Jrgonautica  of  Apollouius  Rhodins,  and  the  Alex-
andra or  Cassandra  of  Lycophron.  Other  writers
of  epics  were  Eupboriou,  Nicander  of  Colophon,
DionysiuB,  Dicaearchns,  Khiauus,  and  Oppianns.
Many  poets  employed  lyric  and  elegiac  forms  for
snbjects  completely  unsuited  for  poetic  treatment,
which  are  yet  happily  expressed  in  verse.  The
earliest  of  the  elegiac  poets  was  Pbiletas  of  Cos;
the  greatest,  perhaps,  Calliiuocbus  (q.  v.).  Anioug
the  lyric  poets  were  Phauocles,  Hermesiauax,  Alex-
ander of  Aetolia,  and  Lycophron.  Epigrams  and
dramas  were  also  written,  but  of  the  latter  scarcely
auythiug  has  survived  beyoud  the  names  of  the
seven  tragedians  called  the  Alexandrian  Pleiades.
Out  of  the  Amoebcan  verse  or  bucolic  mime — a
rudimentary  kind  of  drama — grew  the  best  prod-
uct of  Alexandrian  poetry,  the  idyls  of  Theocritus
(q.  v.).  Still  more  active  than  the  poets  were  the
grammarians,  to  whom  it  is  mainly  due  that  we
now  possess  the  masterpieces  of  Greek  literature  at
all.  They  were  both  philologists  aud  litterateurs,
who  explained  things  as  well  as  words,  aud  were
thus  a  kind  of  encyclopffidists.  Among  these  the
greatest  were  Zenoilotus  of  Ephesus,  Aristophanes
of  Byzantium,  and  Aristarchus  of  Samothrace ;
only  less  eminent  critics  were  Alexander  of  Aeto-
lia, Lycophrou,  Callimachns,  and  Eratosthenes.
Their  chief  service  consists  iu  having  collected
the  writings  then  existing,  prepared  corrected
t«xts,  and  preserved  them  for  future  generations.
See  Tkxtual  Criticism.

The  Alexandrian  School  had  a  spirit  aud  charac-
ter altogether  difiereut  from  the  previous  intel-
lectual life  of  Greece.  Fi-om  the  atteution  paid  to
the  study  of  language,  it  was  natural  that  correct-
ness,  purity,  nnd  elegance  of  expression  should  ite
especially  culliviitcd;  and  in  these  respects  many
of  its  writers  are  distinguished.  But  what  no
study  and  no  eft'ort  couhl  give — the  spirit  that
animated  the  earlier  Greek  ^loctry — was  in  most
of  these  works  wanting.  In  place  of  it,  there  was
displayed  greater  art  in  coni|H»titiou ;  what  had
formerly  been  done  by  genius  vvos  now  to  be  done
by  the  roles  furnished  by  criticism.  Where  imita-
tion aud  rule  thus  took  the  place  of  inspiration,
each  generation  of  disciples  became  more  artificial
and  lifeless  than  their  masters,  until  ultimately
criticism  degenerated  into  frivolous  fault-fiudiug,
and  both  prose  aud  poetrj'  became  laboured  alfec-
tatiou.  Still,  for  about  four  centuries,  the  Alexan-
drian School  was  the  centre  of  learuiog  aud  science


Alflxuidrfoam  OpsK (Potnpeil.)


in  the  ancient  world.  Counting  from  its  origin  to
its  complete  extiuctiou,  it  lasted  a  thousand  years;
and  its  lasting  influence  upon  Latin  literature  in  the
Augustan  age  must  not  be  forgotten.  We  find  it  iu
all  the  cont«mporary  poets,  and  notably  iu  Vergil,
the  greatest  poet  of  the  group.  See  Matter,  Hittoire
de  V£ooU  d^AUxandrie,  3  vols.  (2d  ed.  Paris,  1840-44 ) ;
St.-Hilaire,  De  r£oole  d'Alexandrie  (Paris,  1845);
Simon,  JETutoire  de  PJScole  ttAlexandrie,2  vols.  (Paris,
1844-45)  ;  aud  especially  Vacherot,  Biatoire  Crilique
de  r£cole  d^Alexandrie,  3  vols.  (Paris,  1846-51).

Alezandrinnm  Opaa.  A  kind  of  mosaic  work
used  for  the  flooring  of  rooms,  its  distinctive  char-
acter l.viug  in
the  fact  that
the  pattern  was
composed  of
only  two  col-
ours, e.  g.  red
aud  black  on  a
white  ground^
as  in  the  acconi'-
panying  specimen  found  at  Pompeii  in  a  house.
See  the  article  MusivuM  Opus.

Alexia  ("AXf^tr).  One  of  the  most  prolific  and
important  writers  of  the  Middle  Attic  Comedy,  aud
nude  to  Menauder  (q.  v.).  He  was  bom  at  Thiirii,
B.C.  39*2,  and  is  said  to  have  lived  to  the  age  of  one
hnudred  and  six  years,  aud  to  faav.e  died  on  the
stage  with  the  crawn  of  victory  on  bis  head.  Some
two  hnudred  aud  forty-five  plays  are  attributed  to
him,  of  which  numerous  extracts  are  still  extaut
aud  display  both  wit  and  elegance.  They  are  ed-
ited by  Hirachtg  (1840). See  Cohoedia.

AlfSnus  Varua.  A  Bomau  jurist,  originally  a
shoemaket-  or  barber  at  Cremona.  Cf.  Horace,  Sat.
i.  3, 130.

Alga.  A  general  name  used  by  the  Roman  writ-
ers of  all  aquatic  plants  that,  liviug  in  the  wnter,
are  thrown  up  on  the  shores  or  river-banks.  See
Fucus,

Alg^dna  Mono.  A  range  of  mountains  in  La-
tinm,  extending  south  from  Praeuest^  tu  Mfc.  Allio-
uns,  cold,  bnt  covered  with  wood,  and  coutainin);
good  pasturage.  Ou  it  was  situutetl  the  town  of
Algidum.  It  was  an  ancient  seat  of  the  worship
of  Diana.  From  it  the  Aequi  usually  made  their
incursious  iuto  the  Roman  territory.

Altca.  A  kind  of  grain  resembling  spelt,  and
also  known  as  tea.  The  name  is  given  likewise  to
a  soup  or  porridge  made  of  this  grain,  and  much
relished  by  the  Romans.

Allctila.  A  short  cloak  coming  down  to  the  el-
hows,  worn  by  boys,  and  spoken  of  as  worn  by
boys  aud  huntsmen.  Rich  derives  the  name  from
the  resemblance  of  the  garment  to  wings  (aloe).

Alieniu  Caeoina. See  Caecina.

Alimentaxli  Pnfiri  et  Puellae.  In  the  Romaa
Republic  the  poorer  citizens  were  assisted  by  pub-
lic distributions  of  corn,  oil,  and  money,  which
were  called  aongiaria.  (See  Congiarium.)  These
distributions  were  not  made  at  stated  periods,  nor
to  any  bnt  grown-up  inhabitauts  of  Rome.  The
emperor  Nero  first  conceived  the  notion  of  extend-
ing them,  uot  only  to  other  Italian  towns,  but  also
to  children  (Aure!.  Vict,  fpt^xii.  4);  and  Tn^nu
appointed  them  to  be  mmle  every  mouth,  both  to
orphans  and  to  the  childi*eu  of  poor  parents.  The
children  who  received  them  were  called  pueri  et


ALIMENTL'S  W

jjHfl/tfV'^dHMirtan*.  and  also  i  from  the  em|>en)r>

pitri'i  ymffji^w*  Vljiiavi  :  hikI  tlie  nfHrrrs  wlict  lul-

loiuiwlerMl tl"^ iiifcr.it.iiti«m were  cnllol qHnralam

^^fi-unitw itlitutMtariar, qnamlnrts atimeuturum,  pri>-

Wm^atortm  alitneniorum,  or  fraeftxti  alimrmtornm.

^r A  (li*(*rtn  uf  Hailriiui  iIHg.'SA,  tit.  1,  o,  1-4)  Mayrt

tUut  iKtyn  Riijoyiril  thv  hvurlitn  of  tliin  inNtiliitioii

UV  t4)  lltfdr  eigliu-fritti  iim)  girU  up  Ui  tlitjr  ftiiir-

I  VH'iiUi  yrnr ;  nnd  ni?  Itrnni  from  hii  iiiNrriplioii  (  Fn-

)  bielti,  StTi.  til9)  iliat  A  boy  four  yntknt  i^ml  Acron

Dibs  fliil  Iiiul  rpcci%'f«l  nine  tiiUfS  ilio  ordiuaiT"

Dtlily  flUtribntioit  of  i^orn. Scii  ilcfijardins,  Z>iii/>.

Hut  tfr  /•i&u^'j  JfiJMf'n/ariia.

Alimenciu,  L.  Ci.NCir^.  A  Konmii  nnnnliht,  nii-
^yry,  aod  .^nritt,  wlni  wiw  {irnet^r  in  .Sti-ily  ii.c
in,  anil  wrote,  iu  Greek,  wvi-ral  works,  of  whith
ihc  hf«t  known  wan  his  Hnnn^rw,  which  oontaitiiMl
au  iMoiint  of  Ihf  Swoiid  Pmiic  War.  ii^jo  tho
aaiW£ra]>h  liy  PIUns  I  Bonn,  1^65).
'Allpheia  {' \Xitl>t]pa).  A  town  in  Arcadis,  on  the
h)td»reaf  Eliff,  nuuUiof  the  river  Alithviin,  (Pulyb.
W.77,)

Al^tu  (rapaTiXriitne).  A  nluve  who  iiftPtidfd
on  biKhrre  to  reiiiovt!  tho  «n[i«-rtliioiiH  hiiir  from
llii'it  liodii'g.  Twri'Mn  (c9isilt(tt\  vivre  used,  or
il«|itUlt>ty  oiiitmiMit.  8eo  Mayor's  note  on  Jtiv.
xllaJ, aud  the  article  Psiuithulm.

AUptU  iaXtarrai).  Pertoii-i  who  anointeil  tUc
bodtex  of  th*!  iithli'tcH.  'I'hK  ohii'f  otvj«<i-t  of  thin
■Mlnliitg  wan  to  cluma  tlit*  [lorrut  of  tlir  tioily.  in
arierto  prevent  lunrh  jwrHiiirHlion  and  iho  wi>»k-
i»>i>«MUWnii**ut  lhcrw)n.  ToetTiH-t  lbi»  nlijrct,  thii
oil  WW  tiot  H)iui>ly  cijn';ul  ovt-r  tbi-  mirfacii  of  I  lin
My.lmt  «l!M>  well  riil)lH:d  iulo  tUv  Hkiii.  Tin*  oil
wfctmised  with  tine  Africiio  wunl.  wivfial  jam  full
ftfKJilch  wpro  fuQud  in  the  batlw  of  Tltiw.  Oiio  ■
oMlmeUiiow  in  the  Itriiixli  Miihchh].  TImh  pro-
piraUity  nnoiatiug  was  callod  7  irafm<TKtva<mKfj
T^ii  Tlitr  atbletu  waa  ngaiti  anointed  after  tby
MBlwl,  ill  order  to  restore  tlu^  tone  of  the  6irained
niutln:  ihi4  anointing  wni  called  g  oiru^rpairfiii.
U^  tlien  Imlhed,  nnd  had  tbe  dn8t,  nwral,  and  oil
"(ni^^rbi'^bmly  by  iiii'an^ofun  'niMlrnnii^nt  nint-
liMt Ui  tiu- Mrigii  of  tht^  RoniiiiiH,  and  culird  irrXty-
><<.>udnfii'fwarilH  ^'trrpa.  Tlii-y  were.  Thm  a  kind
■^■odiul  trainoFH,  iaTpaXtiTrmt. See  Atiii.ktak.

AlDuiif;  ihu  Koinans,  tho  aliplJtc  wci'o  shiveH.
"><ii'.  liw,  likt^  the  Ureek  aKr'tTrrai,  appear  to  bavn
vifihUl  til  tUuir  mnsteni'  ronntitntioit  nnd  nioflt>
o^llfc.  Tlicy  weru  alsocalli-d  Hwo(o?'«ii.  Tliey  o»wd
w  ll*ir  uporationa  a  kind  of  twraper  callwl  Wriyi(,
••"♦U  ifJHfmi,  a  cniflc  of  oil  [gultMt),  which  waft
■Mi»lly  uf  honi,  n  bolth'  (nvp  AMi-ru.Ai,  and  »
■•"vmscI  calb'd  UiilirHla, See  IIalnkaI!.

*B«0.  Till!  niiKlern  KUen ;  theni(rof  afortreBa
J"'fll  hy  [)ru9iiK  Id  BC-  II.  at  the  junction  of  lll(^
^PpUiLippe)  and  tbo  Kliso  (Ainu-), <^>i<^  Oasn.

Atta,  or,  leu  corTcctly,  Alia.  A  (tmall  river
"■'"g  into  tho  TjlMjr  alxmt  eleven  milc.4  from
**""*■  It  is  memorable  for  th»  dcfont  of  thu  Ro-
**«  ">?  Ihf  GnnU  o.i  ita  hanks.  July  IBib,  B.C.  SW,
^."fronliiig  to  MomtONiMi,  as^.  Hence  the  itiem  Al-
*u  nn  nnbieky  ibiy  in  tbo  Kutaau  caluudar.

'IflM;  Ka^i;  Cki.tak.

Al&be  nr  AU&ie.  A  tuwn  of  llm  Sainnitus  on
III*  Vnltnrtiiiii.  CflebraliMl  for  iiK  niaunf^ieturv  of
Ude  iLiriitm  - huuce  called  partita  A  lU/itnit.

■^tentioo. Allileration  U  iIh-  repetition  of


I


ALOAUAE

\\w  same  Ivtter  or  Konnd.  either  intentiannlly  or  nn-
coiiBrioiiHly  iutrmlurod  to  plujutu  lAw  ear  or  to  give
additional  omphnAlH  to  tb»  worda  by  making  4he
HOund  more  forcofnl.  "WTioii  uited  to  any  ^reat  ex-
tent, it  ia  gonttrally  cbaructeritttioof  a  primitive  lit-
erary taal«,  and  ia  found  iu  verso  nnd  pro?te  that
have  not  yet  received  their  Bnal  poliMb.  \\\  Anglo-
Saxon  pool  ry  it  id  one  of  the  thief  uieunH  oi  uiarkin)^
the  iQoirieal  cliuract'er  of  tbo  Uiiom,  the  important
n-orda  being  diKtinguished  by  likeueea  of  oauud,  as
in  tho  following  from  the  i'hofmx:

■-»  FnrvMca  Fnaeal,  ii«  fjn*  IiIomC,
X*  Hafifflea  Mr>Te,  na  Hrymoe  Aryn,
Nc  SuNoaa  hanlu,  nv  Siucfthl,"  vU\

In  Or«vk,  alliterutioD,  tike  aseouancu  nnd  rhyme,
playtt  no  im)>orlaiit  part,  bocunse  the  earliest
Cireok  vertMi  that  we  poasese  n<presentit  a  atnKO
of  development  in  the  art  of  pootry  when  snoh
enide  duvie4*A  bad  alreaily  been  iliararded.  Only
in  a<inie  few  atrikin);  pajuiii(tuH  do4«H  iillitcmtion
stilt  ap[»ear  to  b«  a  cuiimmouh  device  uf  ibe  poel.aa
ill  the  fiinioiiH  line  of  HoplnHiles  i.fJw/.  7'vr.U7li,  when
OedipUH  tauiita  Tiretiiaa  with  his  blintlnoiui:

Tf^Xm  Til  t'  Arn  to*  rt  t^»  «t  t'  ititkmr'  f.

Bnt  iu  Latin  of  idL  perimla  it  ia  un  im]K)rtant  ele-
ment of  coiuiKwiiiuu  anil  style,  less,  however,  it)  the
Augitatan  writera  than  ia  their  predeoeasors  and
HucceiMors.  Knninfl  baa  some  extraordinary  allit-
cratioiiH,  tho  most  nb«iird  In-iiig  bis

"OTtl*  imcT»(i,  lllii  i«nu  iyri»nn«lnlk«ll!"

found  Among  the  frH^ineu Is  of  his  j^nnrj//-.!. Plant  its

useii  alliluratiou  with  comic  educt. LncreliuH  lina

n  deUnit«  Kystom,  using  />  and  «i  to  denote  elTurt^  na

» nBgnoM  nuuilbuv  divvllcro  monllD"  (1. 'Jill};

while  r  denotes  pity  or  aorrow,  as  in  the  faiiioua
line,  M-itb  its  wailing  aound,

'■  Vlr»  vidfii4  vlrn  «j»llf I  rlncera  tHUto  "  ft  WSJ.

8i'n  0\nMATnpi)EiA ;  Pakklhiwk*;  Riiymk;  and
on  the  general  snbject.  Iliiclitiotd.  Oe  /'arrnitotvtieua
iifitid  I'elervin  Hamnnortim  i'ottt.  I'm  (Leipxig,  InKli;
Kbrard,  AHit.  in  d.  Lnt.  .Siirachr  (ItayrRiith,  lr"*ir,
Itoctticher,  I'e  AlUtlrraliaHtM  apud  Humantv  I'i  et
I'tu  (Berlin,  1^4);  Rnidtel,  Ijir  tJtu  Adnominationin
ufittd  iiom.  Poetl.  Com.  (  Httlle,  l8tff  ) ;  Mnnio,  In-
trodicty  to  i^Hi-rttita  (  Camb.  Irf^i ) ;  Crnttnell, //iVf.
of  Uomcm  Litfraturt  (It**^*!.  pp.  '^^8-2^9.

AUium.  (larlic.naid  liy  Horace  I  f7J0<A  iii.4)tohe
fit  only  for  rcaiterK.  It  waa  a  favourite  food  with  Ro-
tnnii  Koldierii  and  bailors,  and  with  tho  KgyptiaoH.

AUobr&gee.  A  ]M)\verfiil  ptjopb!  of  fJaul.dwell-
iiia  I>etwcen  tlui  RbiMlnuim  (Rhoii«|  and  the  Ii*arn
(IhfMv|,aa  far  ao  the  l^icna  LeniannuH  (Lake  of
(Jeucva),  conse<|iitintty  in  the  modeiu  l)auphin6
and  Savoy.  Their  chief  town  waa  Vienna  on  tlio
Rhone.  TlH-y  wei%  oonquered  in  B.C.  121  by  Q.
Kahilis  Miiximns  AlUibrogictu.

Almanac. Hce  Fasti.

Almo.  A  Hiiiali  river  flnwitig  into  the  Tiber  jnnt
Hoiitli  of  Rome,  ill  whom*  wntera  tbo  atatties  of  C'y-
licle  (q.  V.J  were  animully  waahed. (Ovid,  t'oMii,  iv.

AIoH  lT(i  nXwii).  An  Athenian  festival  rrlrtiraled
At  Ek'nu't!*  in  honour  of  Dionysu-H  and  IKioteter,  tho
inventora  of  tbo  plough  and  prol4-et<»r»of  the  frnil-a
of  the  (larlti.  See  A.  Muminsen,  Ueortoiwfit,  p.  3^0
foil.

Alo&dae ('AA»ad<ut  or  AKoAmm  ('AXwidat).


ALOR


W


ALPnARET


8mi9i  of  Pm^ldon  by  Ipliimt^din,  tlie  wife  of  Aloeus,
etoti  of  Conned  niul  I'lisc-idoii :  their  imaifs  wem
£ji)iiutt<>ti  nnti  OtiiB,  Tbey  grvv  every  jvar  jiii
ell  i»  lirt-adlh  ttii<)  n  fut)u>m  in  IuhkIIl,  8ii  llmt  in
nine  ycriirB'  time  tliey  wt^i*  tliirty-i-ix  fwt  bruail
mill  firr^'-foiir  feet  liigb.  Their  Htreii){tli  wan  hiich
thiit  flicy  chained  n|>  the  gi>«l  Arew  niid  kei»t  liini
in  n  limzeri  cnnk  for  thirteen  nu>nlli!4,  till  llieirNtt-p-
inrilher  KrilMteit  betrnyi'*)  Iiin  \ihprculxititi*  to  1)lt<
mes.  wIiociiUK!  I>y  stealth  and  drn^K^^d  liisdisahleit
hi-ulher  nut  of  duruiice.  The.y  tbn.-ntcoe<l  to  Ktorni
hcnvL-ii  itttvlf  li,v  piling  Ohsu  on  OIym|iiis  nnil  IVlion
on  0.<uui,  aud  would  b*ve  done  it,  says  Humor,  hud
not  Ajititlu  slain  Ihciu  with  Lis  arrows  ere  tb(?ir
beards  wvro  (ftx>wii.  The  later  IcRt'Dd  reprtwent*
£phiaUf0  as  in  lovo  with  Ilcr^,  and  Otna  with  Ar-
teniiH.  Another  myth  reprMcnts  Arleiuiit  as  slay-
iiiK  th«tn  by  craft  in  thi5  island  nf  Nuxiw.  She
rnnH  bulwff'u  tlitMn  iu  llm  furni  of  a  bind;  tbuy
burl  thfiir  niMiant,  ami  wound  ea*^h  Dthfi-  fatally.
In  the  later  legend  they  expiate  tbeir  miuh  iu  the
lower  worM  by  bciii^  bontid  with  snakes  to  a  pil-
lar, back  to  back,  wbilb  they  are  incessantly  tor-
mented by  the  screeebiii;;  of  iiu  uwl.  Ou  the  other
bund,  tbey  were  worahipped  as  heroes  iu  Naxos,
and  iu  the  BtMrotlau  Ascra  vere  regaideil  as  the
founders  <if  the  city  uud  of  the  wursbip  uf  tbu
MuM-s  nn  Mntint  IbOieim.

AioXdae. 8i'e  AloaDaR.

Aloeus  ('AA(»(C[).  The  son  of  Posoidoti  and
<?unac(^,  who  marrt^sd  Iptiiuiediit,  the  daiij^hlcr  of
Tripoe.  His  wifo  was  ItetuVfd  by  Poweidon,  by
whom  slie  had  two  sons,  Otus  and  Kpbia1te»,  wlm
ore  nsnnlly  called  tlie  Aloaiiac,  from  ibeir  rt-pnttMl
lather  Aloeiis. See  .\ujai>ae.

Alogiou  graphs  \n\trfmv  y(ja(pfi),  Au  nctJou
whicb  Miijilit  Im'  bronnht  at  Athens  before  Ihu  lo-
<finUie.  ajfaiiist  all  ambaKxadors  who  failed  to  pUAN
their  neeifuutA  when  their  term  of  office  t'spircd.

AJ6p£  ('.AXdiTTf).  {I)  A  town  of  the  0|iniilian
Luen«.  opivosile  Enlii>ea.  (i)  The  daii|{b|cr  of
C'eitivim  iif  Kleusiji,  and,  by  Posoidun,  nwtber  of
llippollioon  (q.  v.);  ttfler  whose  birth  her  fulbur
MOA  ;;o)n^  to  kill  her,  but  the  gotl  obauged  bur
inln  a  fonntaio.

Alop£c6  ('AXtim-«Kr)).  A  deme  of  Altica  bcloug-
ill);  to  I  he  tiilxi  Antiocbis.

AJpeiius(<\Aff7»'cJ().  AtnwuoftbeKpiraemidiaii
l.ocri,  at  the  entrance  of  the  Paw*  of  Thertnopylau.

A]pefl  ("AXirrtr).  A  name  derived  probably  from
the  Ki'Iiie  alh  ur  ii^.,  ''a  height."  The  nionntaiiis
forming  (he  boundary  of  noi tbern  Italy,  which  wei^
dlsimguiiihed  by  the  following  names.  Wui^numer-
Ate  them  iu  oi-der  from  went  to  east.  (I)  A1]ies
Maritinme,  ihc  Maritime  or  Lignrian  Alps,  from
<ieiHia  (Grnoai,  where  the  A|wiiiiiiH*s  begin,  run
went  as  far  an  the  ri%er  Vanis  lA'ur),  and  then
niirlb  I«  Mt.  VesiiUiB  (Monte  Viso;,  oneof  the  bigb-
cKllMiintfluf  the  A1pt«.  («)  Alpes  Coltiueor  Cotlia-
nae,  the  (Vjltisii  AI|w  im  ejilled  from  a  King  Cut-
tins  in  the  time  of  Angm.tnB).from  Monte  Vise  U
Mont  Conis,  contained  M(.  Mntrona,  ufterward-s
e4ilb-4l  Mt.  lauiift  or  lanna  |Mi>nt  tien^trei,  ncro»!»
wbicb  Cottins  construeted  a  road,  wbieh  lieraiiio
the  chief  means  of  I'onntinuiration  between  It^ly
nnd  Omil.  (3)  AlpesGraiae,  alftoSaUnH  (iralns  (the
name  is  probably  Keltic^  and  bus  nothing  to  do
with  Oreece).  the  (jraiun  Alpi»,  from  Mont  l>iii(i  i<i
the I^ittle St.  BeraarU  inclusive,  coiituiu«d the


Ingum  Cremonis  neCramunti  and  i\w  CeSfrwilei
AliH>H,  apparently  the  Littlo  8t.  Uernanl  and  tba
Rnni>inidiiig  moinitainK, The  Liltl»«  St.  Iternard,
which  i!*  sonteliniRs  callwl  Aljiis  (rniia,  is  probably
the  pai>s  by  which  Hanuibal  cmsse^l  tbe  Alps;  th«:
r*»a«l  over  it,  which  was  inipr<iv«l by  Angnstna,
led  to  AiigUHia  (Aoetap  iu  the  t.erfitory  of  the  So*
lasai. (4)  AIjh^s  Fonninae,  the  Penniiit^  Alps,  froni
the  (ireai  Hi.  lieriiard  to  tbe  8inipIori  inclnNt%-e,  tlM
highest  portion  of  tbechuiD.including  MontKlanc,
Monte  Kosu,  aud  Mont  Cervin. The  Great  8t.  IWr-
nnrd  wns  eatled  Mods  Peuniniis,  and  on  its  summit
the  iiihabitnntA  Worshipped  a  deit>' whom  the  If o
maim  called  lupiter  Penniuns. The  name  is  prob-
iilily  derivtKl  fiviii  the  Kellic  fxn,  "a  height." (5)
AljM^h  lA'pontioruin  or  Litpoutiae,  the  I^epontian  or
Helvetian  Alp.s,  fn.ni  tbe  Simplon  to  tbe  St.  Otdb-
ard. (t!)  Alpiw  Kdaetieae,  tbe  Khnetiau  Alps,  front
tbe  St.  Gothaitl  to  tbe  Orteler  l»y  the  paHM  of  ttia
Stelvio. Mt.  Adiiln  is  usually  siipponed  to  \w  tha
St.  Gotfaard. (7)  AlpesTtidentiuoe,  the  motinlaius
of  itoutheru  Tyrol,  in  which  the  Athesis  |Adig«)
rises,  with  the  pass  of  the  Brenoor. {B)  Alpes  No-
rioae,  tliB  Xoric  Alps,  northeast  of  the  Trideiitiuoj
Alps,  coniprlaing  tbe  mountains  iu  the  iietgbboti
homl  of  Salrburg, (0)  Alpes  Camicae.  the  fanii
Alps,  east  of  tiio  Trideiiliiie,  aud  south  of thflj
Niiric.  tii  Mt.Tei-glii. (10;  Alpns  Iiiliae,  the  Jnliai
Alps,  from Mt.  Tcrglii to  the  coin  men  cement
the  Illyrian  or  Daluititinu  muuntniuK,  which  anli
'  known  by  the  nnuie  of  t  lie  Ali>e»  Panuonicne. Th«
I  Alpes  Tnliao  were  so  called  )>ecauH<  luliua  Cae«s^
I  or  AngusdiH  constructed  mails  acmss  them. Theyl
are  also  called  Al|)es  Veuelae.
I Alphabet  yuK^a-fiTjTa,  alphubt-tum). A iianM
i  given  (u  any  collection  of  graphic  representationij
of  sounds,  anil  derived  fniin  the  names  of  tbe  tinit;
,  two  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet. Tbo  word  a^l
;  jthabftuiii  is  not  fonml  in  early  writers. It  oceuifj
I  in  Tyrtulliau,//orr<i/,.')0,anil  from  his  time  ou. Thai
I  vlassical  wrilera  used  the  word  littfratunt,  or  /iWe-1
;  ratnra  prima  (Tv^f,  Am.  xi.  13^). Qnititilian  (i.  1.  34M
uses  the  circumlocution  UUeranim  nomina  eteoHtem
tt,m. (Cf.Jllv.  xiv.  209.)  \

The  alphabet  is  the  oldest  existing  nionuiueni
of  clvilizatinn.  lit  all, some  two  Hunilred  varifitiei
have  existed,  of  which  ouly  llfly  lire  now  iu  ns«.
They  are  all  nuKlilictttions  uf  the  primitive  Vbm-
niciau  alphabet,  itself  probably  derived  fmui  tlM
ideographii-  signs  of  the  Egyptiiius.  'I'hns  i|  ia
seen  that  all  writing  in  its  urigiu  is  due  to  the  uaa
of  pictures  or  Nymliols  standing  for  either  thiDM
or  ab^tructiull^  These  nllimately  became  phono-
graphic, representing  <lj  syllables  and  (^1  elcuicut-
ury  Bouiidn.  Tbn  Greek  aiid  Latin  alphal>ets  arw
of  course,  of  I  he  siH'oud  class.

I.  The  Orekk  Ali'IIabet,— Many  Greek  alphas
bets  are  known  from  inscriptions  on  stoue  or  pot^
tery,Tai->-iiig  aceonling  t*>  the  district  or  the  dato|
hut  the  letters  iu  which  Greek  literature,  properly
so  called,  has  ilesceudisl  to  us  beloug  to  the  touio
alphabet,  which,  heing  fonnally  adopted  at  Atbeul
iu  u.c.  •ICD,  became  that  geitenilly  used  by  n\\  Uet-'
leurs.  Like  tbe  other  (ire^-k  alphabets,  it  is  in
general  idcutieal,  in  the  uaiuei),  forms,  aud  number
of  tbo  letters,  with  the  Plujeuician  or  old  Seiuitio
nljjhubet.  The  Greeks  mnst  have  obljiinod  their
knowled^  of  it  from  the  trading  B«:ttlemeuti»  of
the  Phceuiciaus  iu  the  Aegean  uot  later  tliau  lli«
lentb  century  B.C.  This  lielief  wiw,  indeed,  bel4
by  the  Greeks  themselves;  for  though  their  legend^


ALPHABET


CI


ALPHABET


AKCIENT  ALPUAB£1'&

Q«k>T«W

linince  of

M««i><i>S  III

EnrDih

Kquln-
lent.

Bnrptlui  (trandil-

eralliiD).
RlMVlytAlr.  Mtonllf.

ADcknt

PbauldaD.

Old  B«l>rew.

SoDsrv
UfiDravr.

Old  HHd
tutor  QrMk.

Old  ud

LftUrl^tiB.

AUi»l»

Ox

A

1

f

*<

K-

M

>ft

A

AK A

^Beih

Dwue

B

69

A

3

a

fi

* B

1  Qun«l

Ceuuel

U

>

-V

J

A^

r

<c c

Dftletli

Door

1»

S

«

•^

<t

T

&

A

^ i^

U-

WiDitflW

n,  E

1

r

■♦.

^

n

^

E

II  e £

lV>a

Hook

V

?H

•3<

1

1

Vf^ F

■  ZavlD

Wenpon

z

I^

^^

t

z  z

Z

^ K

Hciieih

Fdioe

Cli

J

Q  (^

^

n

e

II

H H

Hleth

Buke

Th

•

<2i

e®

Q

%

e

■Wod

Hind

V.I.  J

w

4

/n- i

'iv

s

*^

I

\ T

bfib

HJUmad

Bent  Iliml

C,  Cli

<

:K

^L

31

H

K

^K K

W»ter

L

^^

3

V

z
^

A
M

k

Sn

Full

S

^h

>

31

VI

N

Av N

U SiiKkb

pMt

s

1^

•^

^*'\

2d'

D

%

2r

p

ijk

Et«

0

:: o

■^

y

0

o

Oo 0

1

Tt

Uuuth

r.  Pii

K~^

^ ?>?1

31

1

n

PP P

Tttilt

Jkveliti  f

Td

L

J& »')z-

S  V

M

K»H>

Knot?

K.Q

A

A 94)

r*

p

<?

9  O' Q

i_

Bab
Shh

Heul
Tooth

R

w

1

^
5

p

i

tu

S^tCroM)

T.Th

X

n

<

T

-<•  r T

I


I


■MTibttliv  twriV'vtioii  of  letten  torarinns  individ-  altcmaMy  fnim  ri^lit  to  left  anrl  fhim  I«ft  to
itti«,Miclj  M  Pftlflnirdes.  sort  Sinioniiles  of  L'eo*.  rljjibl.  In  IhiIIi  IIh'mi'  nlylpB  tlift  writnr  nft^'n  began
tWaclnit  ill  tn  1(1  net  ion  nrtlif  iilpliAhet  watt  almost  nt  the  bollnm  of  the  roll,  and  nroto  ench  hiicceed-
nai^'erwlly  crrdilwd  t«  Cndmus  li|.  v.),  n  riiifiil-  iiif£  line  oImivp  the  lagf.  In  tlie  sixth  century  tho
Hftnirttl^-d  ill  Bu«)tia  ilU-nnl.  v.5H,Sy)^tlir  iiniue  priictire  uf  writiiiB  all  the  liiiea  frnni  loft  to  riglit
CdduiTiA  lieini;  utidimlitt^illy  llm  suuiu  an  (be  He-  was  Kt'iicrally  a«1<>pt<'d.  At  about  the  luiuie  tinio
bwn  A*j.i(.ii, "an  Ku»t«?rii."  Furihi:r]troof  U  ftrnnd  two  more  vowpIb  wens  evoivwl— 7  oiu  tif  tlm  !<«•-
in  the  fiut  tbut  tbii  names  uf  most  of  the  Ure^k  iiiilir  r/iffA,  aud  la  from  o.  The  clmracttr  (]l»  bud
lni«n  ub  pure  Scmitio  words.  iSife  tbe  table  j  bveu  diir«niiiliat.pd  mil.  of  ^,  j^^  nut  of  k,  mid  ^
almve.)  |  (probabtyj  out  of  <^. TIib  soiiikIh  of  f  (rau)  nnd

Miutari  are  nearly  nil  apred  tlmt  writing;  whh  Q  (Stiiiiitio  kiipii)  bf>){an  to  dinappear,  and  tho  cliar-
IMVii  to  the  Groekii  in  the  Ilotuerir  K^n  (  hcl- 1  actt^nt  an  alpltabrtic  MytnWlH  droppc<l  unt  uf  uiw.
iSHri  16Bf,  and  it  in  piwitirely  »>(jit4-d  Ibat  HhIm  j  Up  tu  thu  lliirtl  ci-iitnry  n.c.  only  tlic  onlliinry  cap-
>f  firtont  wnre  kept  at  Olynipia  frniii  Mm  yirar  n.c. ,  itaU  were  eiiiployrd,  but  iiftiT  this  tiitiu  tbr  mure
''^vtule  ve  .iichi.illy  [nmecss  InHcnptioiin  uf  the  \  mnndi-il  furiiis  known  hh  *' uncials"  wore  lUtTo*
•ffrtitb  ceninry.  In  tbo  hixMi  ci-uiury  wn  boar  diiced,  together  wirh  enrHivi*  forms  in  rorreBpond*
■f  poRnphprs,  chruiiir.Itvrn,  gctu-alugiM*,  legiJ^la-  [  once.  ThetMvrallnl  ■•luinuwiilcs/'or  small  letters,
Iw^  lod  of  ftcbtiols  for  teacbliij;  tho  alphabet  1  familiartousiuourniodorn  hooks, wereiiotevolvwl
Ifeoil.  li,  27  (,  showing  that  by  tlus  period  a  until  tlie  seventh  or  eighth  conturj*  A..r>.  from  ib
•OBwWge  of  writing  uinst  bavo  been  xery  g«n-  eonibinatiouof  nncijila  and  cursives.  From  a  very
"^iy  Effused.  As  all  Orcpk  alphabets  differ  f rom  1  early  d&t«  the  Oreek  alphabet  showed  u  toodenry
«  Pbtrnician  in  having  clianu'terH  for  tho  vow- 1  to  ueparate  into  two  types — the  Eastern,  or  looio,
>k  ^  Kitii[ing  fact),  it  is  iiecettMiry  to  iiM^inne '  and  the  Western,  or  Cbalcidiau.  Thu  llnal  difTcr-
*^  •  kiiow1e«lgD  of  writing  wan  diffiiwd  itver  cnce  between  tho  two  will  bo  seen  by  thr-  fuUow-
wtwfcwB  a  common  ccntn-.  and  that  thin  difl'n- ing  c<unparison :

hmir  iRiftem)  Alphahtt.  —  K  BPAEZHeiK
AMNS0ni»2TY*X1'0.

ChiileiditH  I  \V<sUm)  Alphabet. — A  B  T  A  E  F  Z
H|=bieiKLMNOnQl'STy  X(=x)  *
*(— khj.

II.  Taz  Latin  Ai.pnADET.— Tlie  Cbalcidian  or
Western  Greek  aliilmbft.  was  carriud  by  the  Cbal-
i'idians  to  Italy  n.t  early  as  tho  ninth  (;enlury  u.c
From  it  in  ItiUy  sprang  live  loral  Ilalir  alphabers
—  tho  Ownn,  t"inbhan.  EtruHL-au,  Kaliwan,  and
Latin.  i^-KVi  ViAl-KiTH.}  Ah  (be  LiaiitH  iiltiniatety
attained  to  the  iutalloutual  aud  {Hilttical  leiulei-sJitp


■'on  ocTDpied  a  conHid«rabb*  linir.  Il^'e  MiilialVy,
^^  l,i!tratMrr,  U.  '2,  and  the  same  wtilur  in  the
Jf^nmi cf  Utllenic  Studiet,  ii.  102.)

Al  tlivdate  uf  the  oldest  (iroek  ioscript ions,  the
™"l|  M,  #,  o  bad  been  dovolo|ied  out  of  the  I'luo-
wctab  btfaih-»igns  uleph,  fc(f,  and  A^itt :  aud  i  and
wwitpf  ibe  I'bii-'uieiau  semi-cousouauts  t/oti  ami
■■••  At  Ibis  iM-riml  tbo  writing  was  still  n.'tnH
J"*^*.  i.  c.  from  right  to  left,  afi^er  tho  Semitic
^■^o.  A  liitto  later  the  direelion  is  zigxaj:.  or
•tOHttvptudou  tfiaviTTp'itpTiftoyi,  "plongb-n  i»e,"a«  an
<u  tana  when plonghing,  the liuea i>roc«e<ling


ALPHESIBOEA


62


AMANUENSIS


of  Italy,  the  last-named  alphabet  at  last  supplaot-
ed  the  other  four,  aud  became  the  ooly  ooe  in  gen-
eral use  throughoDt  the  Soman  Empire,  and  later
of  Chriatendom,  thns  beoomlDg  the  prevailing  al-
phabet of  the  world.

The  Latin  alphabet,  reoeired  originally  from  the
Ghalcidian  Greeks  of  Cnmae  in  Campania,  has  ad-
hered more  closely  than  any  of  the  others  to  the
original  Phoenician  type,  discarding  only  two  let-
ters and  addiug  only  three.  Its  archaic  character
as  compared  Y/ith  that  of  the  Ionic  Greek  alphabet
is  seen  (1)  by  its  reteution  of  the  older  signs  for  L
and  S;  (S)  by  retatniDg  the  older  value  of  H;  (3)
by  retaining  F  (van)  and  Q  {kdph).

At  about  the  year  B.C.  100  the  letters  Y  and  Z
were  reintroduced  into  the  Latin  alphabet,  but  are
only  nsed  in  words  borrowed  from  the  Greek,  in
"Which  they  express  the  non-Latiu  sounds  of  Y  aud
Z.  Originally  the  Latin  C  had  the  power  of  G,
liut  later,  when  K  was  disused,  C  took  its  place
and  sound,  aud  the  new  character  G  was  invented
(about  B.C.  312)  to  express  the  sound  formerly  de-
noted by  C.  In  abbreviations,  however,  such  as
C,  Cu.,  for  Gains,  Guaeus,  the  character  C  has  its
old  power  aud  =G.  The  emperor  Claudius  (about
A.0. 44)  tried  to  introduce  three  uew  symbols  into
the  alphabet,  as  follows :  (1)  the  inverted  digamma
J,  to  make  the  consonantal  sound  of  Y  (i.  e.  the
w  sound) ;  (2)  the  character  known  as  anti-sigma
0,  to  express  the  sound  of  the  Greek  ^  (ps  or  frs) ;
and  (3)  the  sigu  h,  to  express  the  sound  of  the
Greek  v,  i.  e.  of  French  u,  or  German  fi.  These
characters  never  secured  any  general  adoption.
The  character  V  was  not  developed  until  the  tenth
century  a.d.  as  distinct  from  U  ;  and  J,  as  distinct
from  I,  is  uo  older  than  the  flfteenth  century.  Pre-
viously, I  and  U  had  been  employed  as  medial  and
J  and  V  as  initial  characters  to  denote  the  same
letters.

As  in  Greek,  so  in  Latin,  cursive  forms  arose  to
replace  in  part  the  angular  forms  of  the  old  capital
letters.  These  cursive  characters  were  used  chiefly
in  correspondence  and  in  busiuess,  aud  are  best
known  to  us  from  the  graffiti  found  on  the  walls
of  Pompeian  housra.  From  the  Komau  cursive
hand  our  own  minuscules  were  developed.

For  further  information,  see  the  articles  Abbre-
viations ;  BOL'STROPHEDON  ;  EPIGRAPHY  ;  GRAF-
FITI ;  LoGiSTicA ;  Palaeography  ;  Pronuncia-
tion ;  Textual  Criticism  ;  aud  the  following
works  :  Kirchhoff,  Gachichtt  dea  griechitchen  Alpka-
hett  (Berlin,  1877) ;  Faulmaun,  Geachickte  der  SchH/l
{Vienna,  l8tJ0);  Humphreys,  Origin  of  the  Art  of
Writing  (London,  1S55) ;  and  Isaac  Taylor,  The  Al-
phabet, 2  vols.  (Londou,  1883).

Alpheaiboea  CAX^cri3ota)  or  ArsintiA  ("Aptri-
vorj).  Daughter  of  Fhegeus  aud  first  wife  of  Alc-
uiaeou,  whom,  though  unfaithful,  she  continued  to
love,  aud  was  angry  with  her  brothers  for  killing
bim.  Her  brotliers  shut  )ier  up  in  a  box,  and
brought  her  to  Agai)enor,  king  of  Tegca,  pretend-
iug  that  she  had  killed  her  liUKbaiid.  Here  she
came  by  her  end,  having  conipassed  her  brothers'
death  by  the  hand  of  Aicmaeou'a  sons.

Alpheas  CAX^ctor).  The  chief  river  of  the
Peloponnesus,  risiug  in  the  southeastom  part  of
Arcadia,  flowing  through  Arcadia  and  EHs,  not  far
from  Olympia,  and  falling  into  the  Ionian  Sea.  In
some  pai'ts  of  its  conrse  the  river  flows  under-
ground; and  this  subterraueau  descent  gave  rise


to  the  story  about  the  river-god  Alphens  aud  the
nymph  Arethasa.  The  latter,  pursued  by  Alphens,
was  changed  by  Artemis  into  the  fountain  of  Are-
thasa in  the  islaud  of  Ortygia  at  Syracuse;  bnt
the  god  continued  to  pursue  her  under  the  sea,  and
attempted  to  mingle  his  stream  with  the  fountain
in  Ortygia.

Alpinna.  A  name  given  by  Horace  to  a  con-
temporary poet,  supposed  to  have  been  M.  Furina
Bibaculus  (q.  v.).

Alsinm. An  ancient  Etrurian  town  near  Caer£.
Altare. See  Ara.

Althaea  f^AXBaia).  The  daughter  of  Thestios,
wife  of  OeneuB,  king  of  Calydou,  mother  of  Tydeus,
Meleager  (q.  v.),  aud  Deiuuira.

Altannm.  A  rich  trading  town  of  the  Yeneti,
in  the  north  of  Italy,  at  the  month  of  the  river
Silis.

Altim  (*AXric).  The  sacred  grove  near  Olympia
(q.  v.)  in  which  the  Olympic  Games  were  celebrated.

Alnntiiiin  ('AXdui^ioi')  or  Halnntlani.  A  town
in  northern  Sicily  celebrated  for  its  wines.

Alna  ('AXoff)  or  Haltu  ('AXor).  A  town  in
Phthiotis  in  Theesaly.

AlQta. See  Calceds.

Altttae  (aXvrai).  Persons  chaiged  with  keeping
order  at  the  public  games  of  Greece,  bnt  mentioned
only  in  connection  with  the  Olympic  Games.  Else-
where the  officers  are  called  fuumyotpopot.

Alyattes  {'AXvamjs).  A  king  of  Lydia,  who,  in
B.C.  617,  succeeded  his  father  Sadyattes,  and  was
himself  succeeded  by  his  sou  Croesus  (Herod,  i.  16).
The  tomb  of  Alyattes,  north  of  Sardis,  ncuir  the
lake  Gygaeo,  which  consisted  of  a  large  mouud  of
earth  raised  upon  a  foundation  of  great  stones,
still  exists. It  is  nearly  a  mile  in  circumference.

Alysla  (*AXvfi'a).  A  town  in  Acamauia,  near
the  sea,  opposite  Lencus,  coutaining  a  temple  sa-
cred to  Heracles. (Thuc^'d.  vii.  31.)

Amalthea  ('ApiXdcui).  A  figure  in  Greek
mythology.  The  name  was  sometimes  applied  to
a  goat  which  suckled  the  new-born  Zeus  in  Crete,
while  bees  brought  bim  honey,  and  which  was
therefore  set  among  the  stars  by  her  nnrsliiig;
sometimes  to  a  nymph  who  was  supposed  to  pos-
sess a  miroculoua  horn,  a  symbol  of  plenty,  and
whose  descent  was  variously  given.  According  to
another  legend  she  is  the  daughter  of  the  Cretan
king  Melisseus,  and  brings  up  the  infant  god  on
the  milk  of  a  goat,  while  her  sister  Melissa  (a  bee)
offers  him  honey.  The  horn  of  the  goat  is  given
to  her  by  Zeus,  with  the  promise  that  she  shall
always  find  in  it  whatever  she  wishes.  From  her
the  cornucopia  passed  into  the  possession  of  the
river-god  AcheloUs,  who  exchanged  it  for  his  own
horn,  which  Heracles  had  broken  off.  It  is  also
assigned  to  Dionysus,  to  Plutus,  aud  to  other  gods
of  earthly  felicity. See  CoRNU  Copiae  ;  Zeus.

Amaltheum  or  Amalthfia.  A  villa  of  Atticus
in  Epirus,  perhaps  origiually  a  shriue  of  the  nymph
Amalthea,  which  Atticus  converted  into  a  beauti-
ful summer  retreat.  Cicero,  in  imitation,  con-
structed a  similar  retreat  on  his  estate  at  Arpi-
uum. Cf.  Cic.  Ad  Alt.  ii.

Amanuensis  (a  tnanu  unriM,  inroypaiftevs).  A
slave  or  fi-eedman  employed  in  writing  at  his
master's  dictatiou. The  amanueiiti*  is  not  to  be


AMARACUS


6B


AMUAKVAUA


-^tiouiled  witb  anotlier  Mirt  of  bIst*,  ad  mdititn
>«4*.  who  vta  u  g«tienil  fuctututii,  kept  rciKly  at
tl  fur  any  hiinl  of  biit.itiriu). Suet.  -Vov,  44.

^m^ mar3#>«a {6fiapaKOi). A plOUt,  prubttbly tllO

,y -»  iiiuti  lUiiriMmtM.

_0f^  irnrinthiin  (aftdfiavrot).  The  amarauili,  or
,2 ^9 'ver-fiuUng,^ tia  itti  iiume  inipltea.  Tlie  itiui]iTii
^-^  B  ■  BM  call  itfior  tii  rriluto,  or  "  velvet-lltiwur."

^^^.jnarynthla  ^AtiapLvBia).  A  fcatlval  of  Artuiuis
l_-  -*.rxiiihiit  ur  Aiunryaiu,  cblebraieil  ori^iiinlly  nt
l^x.a»r)-iitliu»,  lit  Kuboea,  utid  ftnerwunU  nt  M-n-rul
S^«7«8  ill  AtticA,  sttcli  OS  Atbiuuiic.  Avte  Sirubo,  x.
\  .44d ;  pMiisan.  i.  31,  j^  3.

^fc  marynthm  ('.\fiapw6ot). A  town  jij  Kubocn,
^v*^"  fliailiii  ilistaitt  fmrn  Krvtria,  niid  ni>tc<l  for
itA  f«plcnilid  luiuple  v(  ArteinU,  who  ia  bviice  callwl
^mar>Ltliia  ur  Aiuur^'ula.

I^^iDuentu. A  Htnall  riror  in  LntiiiiD,  nbioh,
»rt«-*Tanitiiig  with  tht'  I'ffiis,  fall;*  into  tUa  wa  !«»-
Meen  Cirewit  niifl  Terraciim,  ttMiiigli  thf  };ronti!r
fATt  of  its  wttt4?rH  are  toqt  in  the  Pontine  MarabiMi.
Anumia  CAfttitrtta). Tbe  capttnl  of  the  kings  of
Voutiik.  a  «lniti};l>'  fitrtitied  city  on  bittli  banks  of
tbc  nv«r  Irift. It  wa«  tho  birthplace  of  Milbritla-
tei  tlte  Great  ami  of  the  g«ogntpbi'r  Slr»bf).

'm AndiU  I'Aitavit}- A  kiii^  of  E^^ypt,  K.C.  &70-

H SS&MKoanliug  Aprieit,  uhoiii  bn  (iRtbroued. Dur-

H iugbUlDUft  reign  KgypL  vain  in  li  very  pro8|>crotis

H MwlitiuD, »ihI  lliu  Gr«i>kft  w«re  bningbt  into  much

P eluMfiuteruuumv  nilb  the  Kgyptiniis  than  had  ex-

utailpicvlDUflly. Hoth  I'ytbagonw  and  b<dorj  arc

■>ii  (0  have  viftitixl  him. K<ir  Ills  allianoj  with

Polfcialo, »m;  thit  ortiido  ToLvrRATKa.

AaaKtia  {'Afuwrrpis).  (I)  Tim  wifo  of  Xerxe-s
ttxi  BuHlifr  of  ArtaxHrxM  I.  81i«  was  of  a  cruel
«»d  Tlmlioiive  character.  (Hcniil.  vil.  61.)  (aj
Ako  csllttl  Aiuaatriu4^,  hIimm of  Dnriiin,  ilih ](ut

■  king  of  Pfrwa. She  inairiRd  firnt  Cratpni.H;  tlifii

■  I'loiiysiitB.  tyrunt of  Huraelca iu Bithynia,  B.C.

■  ;EU;  ami  la^t  Lyttluiachus.  U.c.  3(W.  8h«  «an
<hii»iiea  by  her  two  hoiih  uboiit  B.C.  i«H. (U)  A

»^|7  uu  thn  coaat  of  Puphlugouin,  built  by  Ainait-
*ri»  »f(pr  bet  Beparatioii  from  Lysiaiucliua.
AmitL Tbti  wir«  of  King  Lntinirti,  anil  innthiT
*f  Uvii.ifl. She  o|)p4)M:d  the  luarriagu  of  Lnvinia
_ Ml  i«-i*i;jm,  becauiw  Hbc  bad  already  [iroiiiiwd  her

■  to  l^ranti.  Wbttu  nbe  beanJ  that  TnrnuB  Uiul
^L ^tltii  iu  balU«,  )>hu  huuged  benelf. tVerg.  Jnt.

1^  Anfitfatu  (WfiaSovfi.  A  town  on  tho  wMitburn
«•*' "f  t'yprii*.  with  a  celebruled  tcniplfl  nf  Apli-
'*liU.  «liii  wa«  hence  catlcd  Aniathnsia.  There
»8rt  ci>t>[ier-nnni:«  in  tlie  neighbourhooU  of  the
tQwa.

*wiwiinM  CA/uiCc'^r)  *"■  AmaaonldoB  {Wfui-

tw'Jitj. 'Brva^tli-AM." A  luytbical  race  nf  warlike

•'*•".  who  ur"  Kttid  to  have  coin*;  fniui  the  Canca-

*|K*-*Qi(l  til  have  Mettled  in  Am»  Minor,  about  tbe  ri  ver

J l«riuud<)ti,  wbtfm  they  foniuleil  th«  t-ity  Theiiiis-

')••• TtH'V  were  governed  by  a  queen,  and the

j"«i»I-  i-tiiiilrvu  aiii  Haiti  to  huvu  had  their  rfght

.JSiSitPt  o'f  'bat  tbi-y  might  hhc-  tin:  bow  with

They  coufttiintly  occur  in  Cinii'rk  my*

Ouo  of  the  labotirH  iinpoM^ii  iijidm  Hmi-

'  *«  to  take  fnjtn  Hippolyt*^,  the  fjni^en  of

~*  Aiuazoiis,  her  girdle. (  See H>:itA(-ij:s. ) In

•ttt^t,  of  TheMoufi  thry  iiivaiied  Atlico. Tow-

I  tbe  etHi  of  (be  Ti-ojau  War.  they  CBLme,  iiuder


lol


Araiuna


their  qn&en,  Fentbcailea,  to
theauistaticeof  Prinm;  bnt
ahe  was  killed  by  Achillea.
In  works  of  art,  the  Ama*
ton»  are  alwAya  iwpreaonted
with  two  hreABtn,  often  on
horseback,  und  in  St^ytbtan
orOmciandrpwi,  nmird  with
«biidd,axe,  Bi»e«r,baw.fjniv-
cr,  oti'.  Pbldtart.  Polyeli-
tiiH,  aud  CreflUoA  are  among
tbe  futnoiifl  urtlsta  iu  au-
lii)uity  who  iiiotle  statues
of  tbein.  The  traditional
derivation  of  the  word,
from  ci  priv.  and  fi.a(6s,  is
doobttesM  fanciful,  anrl  ia
not  even  siippnrt4>d  by  an-
cient  worku  of  art,  which
usually  tihow  the  breAi<tfl
nninnlilnled.

Ambactl. Accord  hig  to
FedtUH,  the  fJallic  name  forf
itlaves. They  are  mentioned
by  Caesar  (W.  (A  vi.  15).

Ambarrf.  A  people  of  Oanl,  dwelling  eajit  of
tbe  Aedni  Cq  v.),  un  tho  river  Arar  (Saflno).

Ambarvalia.  A  mml  festival  ninong  the  Ko-
tuai]»  for  tbo  piiriAcation  [luilratio)  nf  the  eonulrj-,
and  for  invoking  tbo  blcs«iiig  of  Ceres  upon  the
fraitB  of  the  earth.  Tbe  name  h  expliiinwl  by
Servius  (aj  Verg.  £cL  iii."7)  as  given  iHicanse  the
victim  ambit  aitxt.

There  wcro  two  kinds  of  Aniban'alia,  private
nnd  pnhlic.  The  private  Ambarvalia  are  thnH«
described  by  Vergil  tn  detiiil,  and  with  Hingiilar
beauty,  Grorff.  I.  338  full.  The  victims  (Cato.  R.  It,
141)  were  led  three  tiniea  nmud  the  cornflt-lda,  be-
fore tbe  sickle  waa  put  iu,  accompanied  by  a  cniwd
of  merry-niakero  (cWnut  el  focii'i,  the  rfapera  and
servants  ihinciiig  and  (tinging  the  ju-iiscs  nf  fcr*-.,
while  tht*y  otfured  her  libiitioiiM  of
winy.  Tlie  pnldio  Ambarvalia  111'
disttngui»hed  from  tho  Auibnibinni  { q.  v.  >,  but
have  iH-en  identiQcd  by  sevenil  writers  (HomniaCli,
Hunu'U,  Jordan)  with  the  sacTltice  of  tho  Fr.'iln--^
Arvales  to  the  Uea  Vm.  iSee  I-'katkks  Akvali->'.)
Manpnirdt,  who  on  the  whole  decides  agnini^t  tbe
identity  of  the  two  festivaltsohserx'es  that  thn  cor-
rcApondenoe  of  time  and  place  is  in  favnnr  of  it,  as
well  tm  the  fart  that  the  sa/)vetauritia  were  olVered
at  both;  bttt>  iw  be  iiliir)  points  orit,  thuit*  ih  no
mention  of  the  l-'nitri'M  ArvuleM  iM-atin^  the  bonndi*
(rii-fHinirr  tir  /uKtruret.  Th«  Aiubarviilin  at  Koine
wc.n^  (ixcmI  for  May  VU;  in  other  jiarta  of  Italy  tbe
day  varitvl  in  dillerciit  diittrietK,  but  was  an  itu-
movable  fcost  (/criac  tiativat)  in  each  dialrlct.  Tbe
feuHt  of  tbe  Deo  li\&,  on  tbe  other  band,  was  pm-
rlaiiued  every  year:  and  5Iay  '29  might,  or  might
not,  coincide  witb  one  of  the  dayn  on  wliirb  it  wuh
held.  An  reganl.^  the  locality,  tbe  Rnniaii  Ambar-
valia were  perfornieil,  ncconling  to  Stnibi>,  at  a
spot  called  Festi,  btftween  live  and  nix  miles  fn>ni
the  city  on  tbo  way  to  Alba  (Strab.v.  p.  "iiCH.)),  Thi-
spot  is  identitled  beyond  doubt  with  tho  Foa«»
fhiilia  of  Livy  (i.  iW),  Diouysina.  and  rintar.-b:
tbe  CampiiH  SHcer  Hin'atiornm.  wbt  y

encounter  tottk jiince ;  and  tlie \<  .  ,i

Roma  V'ercbin,  on  the  U-fl>b»ii<l  hidu  of  the  Appian


Way  ut the  fifth  milc-«toui>  I  BurU]  Home  and  tU


AUBER


64


AMBROSIA


Campafftia,  p.  4lt>).  Tlic  Luciib  I>n«»  Diiw  waR  at  |  tin^  Ivefnre  his  fellow-fUijECD*,  in  a  irhltnit^  toga.
aIhiui  tllL'  tasxm  (Ustaiicu  frum  liotiip,  Imii  ou  atlif-  '  On  »»v.h  ctrca«iouB,  the  CBU(lidllt«  uutt  uttciidfil  by
fereiit  roiul.  the  Via  PortiiPiisU.  in  a  Mtiitliii^rly,  not '  Iiis  friiunlH  irininctorra),  ur  fitlluwc<l  by  tlin  poorer
HnciMt«r)y,<lirertiori.  Ilollt  neri^  iluiibtl^-Kiii  on  thu  clri^AMm  yMerintoren),  ivlio  cuiild  in  no  utluT  mtinncr
lKmu<1ur>'  of  ibtf  Agcr  KuiuuuitH,  ur  oiij^iiial  Ri»io.in  n-liow  ihuir  );(HMl-wi]|  or  ^ivi>  thuir  aMtUt-ttno<^.  The
territory;  and  iu  this  last  circiini^tlaticu  we>  may  word  uxxidHiint  oxjiitutMHl  both  the  continual  prae-
trvc«  a  coiiuecliuii  W'twiTii  thit  fcolivat  of  thu  cnec  of  tUu  raiididalti  ut  Rome  utid  his  rotitiiiual
Arralw  and  tht«  AiiitiarvuHa  niihont  aAsutiiiti}; .  sulicilatioiiy.  The  candiilatt^,  in  ^in^  liiH  rounds
that  they  wetv  idi'uliial.  |  or  takini;  his  nulk,  wa;«  uccom]>aiiie<l  liy  a  nomn-

Thp  Aiiil>;irvalia  ftiniiishoiieof  wevrral  iimtancoH  i  ciator,  who  jriivo  htm  tho  names  of  (tiich  }K>ninM  aa
— Iho  HnliirnaHa  at  Chriitlitias  iH-iiig  auulher— of  ho  uii);ht  meet:  the  randidalo  nan  Ihiis  cnnlileil  to
hoaihou  frslivuU  takt-u  up  l>y  the  Chiirth  aud  udOrejw  ihi-iii  hy  their  nanios— au  indirect  compli'
adapttHl  to  Christian umk, TIutv in  a  rlo^  re- nteiil.  nhirh  cniihl  not  fail  to  bo  generully  gratify-


aeniblnrice  to  tho»e  rtt«K  in  thi-  rcivnuMiifti  of  th«
three  Rogation  I>tiy»  which  priHtnic  Afw^fiiMiou
Day,  occurring  ntiarly  »t  the  »ann!  tim«  of  y««r.
"They  irera  ancit'iitly  in  Kngland  callcii  '(Janjj-
i]uy»,'  biH'uuse  [inKt-tiiiiuns  wont  ont  on  those  diiVH:
hyniUH  and  caiiticK'^  Lcin^  ttong,  and  prayers  of-


inj^  to  the  eU-olorx.  The  candidate  accompanied
hU  tuhli-eiM  with  a  nhako  of  tbo  hand  ( prentatio).
The  t«rni  tmnitjniiaa  comprehended  genvRilly  any
kind  of  tii'aliiig,  an  nhnwa,  ftianta.  etc.

That  nnihitii»,  whit-h  wa»  thp  ohj^ct  of  several
pnnal  enactments,  taken  w*  u  ijeneric tvnii,  com-


fereU  at  varionn  haUin^-»|>ou  or  atatioiis  for  a  pretiemlcd  the  two  fi)H>€ie8,  amtaltia  an4l  lanjititme*
blmwing  on  tho  Iniita  of  the  earth."  The  English  <Urih«ry}.  Libtrahtna  And  AvniV/NifiuF  aro  oppoMnl  by
cuHtom  of  "  healing  the  honnds"  at  Whitsuntide Cicero,  as  things  nllowahle,  to  amhitut  ajid  ltrT<fitu\


IK  a  ndic  of  a  niuilar  rite.  Seo  Uetizeu,  Ada  Frvtr,
Arvnt.

Amber. Sea  Elkctklm,

AmHIini-  A  itelgic  tribe  nnhdm-d  by  CaeKar  in
U.c.  »7.  Their  chief  town  wan  Samarohriva  or
Ambinui  lAniieMn.).

Ambigatu*.  A  king  of  the  Celtoe,  iu  the  time
of  Tarquinina  PriHciiM.  Acconliiig  to  the  account
givou  by  Livy  (v.  34|,  he  d^nt  bin  two  iieiphen-9,


OS  things  illegal.  Money  wna  paid  for  rote^;  oud
in  nnler  to  inttnro  secrecy  and  secare  the  elector.
persons  called  interpTttet  wer«  employed  to  make
tb«  bargain,  «fyp«*rrw  to  hold  the  money  till  it  was
to  \m  paid,  ami  divitorca  \a>  diatribntc  it.  The  of-
I'unco  of  aiabitiiN  wom  »  niattt>r  which  belongr-d  to
tha  iadieia  publico,  and  tlir  enai<tmenta  ngaittttt  it
were  nnnieroii!).  Of  tht^M.'  the  Ik-^i  known  are  the
I^x  Acrailia  Ihilbin  (ux.  \^);  the  Lex  <'ornt^U»
Futvia  (li.c.  159):  the  Lex  Auilia  Calimrnia  (U.c.


SigoTw.  «  and  HeIlove.nH,  in  r,n^«t  of  now  settle-  tiitvi»  "'|.  1^^,' :  (he  Lex  AciUa  talpnrn.a  ,ux'.
Jnta.^iththevicwold;miui.hirgthc«rcrtlow.  ^^'J  'l^c  Lex  Tullm  (B.c.ti3);  the  Lex  AnOd.a
ine  nimbcr.  at  Innnc The  two  chieftains  drew '";':^-  «[' '  »''«  ^==  ^""1° "■ '  ''-^  .^

Into  rMpi-cling  their  eonrse.  and  Sigovcsu^  oh-  :  I"»'»  <1«  »»;'>'>'"  »^^}^^  Angustus.  The  pena  tl»
tian«l  (he  mntc  that  led  toward.,  the  Hereyniau  J'tt-^cnhed  by  hc«>  hiws  varied  from  exile  and  ex-
fun-Ht,  Bellovenn^  the  road  to  Italy.  What  is  here  ^■'."-"!"  ^"""  ('»■  S;--"!^.  t"  "'"'"-.v  ""«;;».  The  1^1
8tar«nhnwcver.appcarMobeame>-eVgi.nd.owing  ''"^""--^  «'="J6  ^/«;i.«™.  or  •■  ..-eatuiB,'  an  nftenc*.
itH  origin  to  tlie  H.mn)taneon.  eniigmtioiiB  of  two  |  >*y  t*'"  '"»«  "»  Augushm,  amb.tnn  ,n  its  proper
honte*  of  GalHc  warriorH.  Shh  TUieny,  I/M/wre  ««•'«■  I»"<1  a^appmn-d,  .r,  co.,«e<p,ence  of  Ihu  trans-
J I- f  -.  ;  'HI  ler  of  tlic  elcctnumrroui  tue  ('omitia  III  tbc  oenato.


dca  t'liiuhin,  i.  39.

AmbUuatrlum. See  LfHTKATlo.

Ambl6rix.  A  (Jallicchief  of  the  Ehurontos,who
cut  to  pieces  the  Roman  tmopti  nudcr  SabinuB  and
Cotta,  in  ii.c.  M. Hkc  Cuehar,  B.  ti.  v.  24  and  36.

Ambltua.  Literally  "  a  ffoing  about,''  and  can-
not, pcrbapi4,  be more  nearly  expreii»ed than  by


A  litit  of  triaht  for  anibitutt  nndf:r  tliu  Republic  n
given  T)y  Huin  in  hia  Crimimilrtcht  der  Homer.

Ambivariti. A  Gallic  people  dwelling  \rv»t  of
the  Mosa  (Menae),  neur  Nauiur. (Cac«.if.  fJ.iv.9.)

Ambivlus  Tuipio,  Ltciti). A  popular  Roman
actor  of  tlic  time  of  Terence,  iu  fiveof  who«e  plays


onr  word  canvoaintf. After  Ui«  plebs  had  formed  '  he  apfn-ared. See  tlie  Dida«caline  to  the  Andria,

ailistlDct  claas  at  Homeland  when  the  whole  Utdy

of  the  ollizens  had  brconio  very  greatly  increawd,

we  ftwqnently  rtaid.  in  the  Roman  writttrw,  of  Ihe

great  efforts  which  it  irua  ueceesary  for  candidalea

to  make  in  order  to  wcnre  the  votes  of  the  citieeiig.

At  Rome,  as in  every  cnmninutty  into  which  the

element  of  popular  election  unlerx,  salicitatiou  of

YotcH,  and  open or  wcrot  inflneuce  awl  brtber>-,

wore  among  tho  nieana  by  which  a  candidate  se-

curetl  hia  oluctjou  to  the  oHtces  of  Btate.

Whatever  may  be  the  authority  of  Ihe  piece  cn-


Kftntithnn.  ffrantiiH  Ttmnruitifttini,  flrrifni, nttA  I'hor-
mio  :  alHoC'if.  fttSfnett.  I-t ;  and  Varrn, /,./>.  vii.  W.

Ambracla  (XfilipiiKiai.  The  ma<h:rn  Arta;  a
town  ou  the  left  bank  of  the  Araehtbiis.  north  of
the  Ainbracinn  Gulf,  and  originally  incliida<1  in
Aenriiatiia,  Init  iifterwanlH  in  Kpinu.  Ic  was  col-
onizetl  by  Ihe  Ci>rintliiaMK  about  B.C. 660.  Pyrrhns
nnulu  it  the  eajiitttl  of  hitt  kingdom,  and  itilonied
it  nith  pnblii'  bni1diuj;»  aitd  atatuiM.  At  a  later
time  it  joined  tho  Aetoliun  League,  wiw  taken  by
the  Roman*  in  »,c.  1^9,  and  stripped  of  ila  works


titled  Or  GotTO»i»  de  Pttitiont  Coni^iahia  ad  M.  JU-  \  of  ,irt. Hh  iahabitautft  were  tnitisplauled to  the

tivm  Fiairnn,  it  sccnu*  to  pres.?nl  a  pretty  fair  pict- ^.^  ,.i(y  of  N'ictHKilis,  founded  by  Augiiatna  after

ure  of  tliow*  uriH  and  uicAoa  by  which  a  candidate jj,^  battle  of  Aetium,  n.c.  31.

might  lawfully  r<ndettVOur  to  tjecnn'  tbo  voteB  of

the  elcctom,  aud al«o itome intimnlion  of  those

means  which  wore  uoi  lawful,  aud  which  it  w-is

the  object  of  various  euaiinicnts  In  repress,


A  candidatv  was  called  /nimr,  and  bin  opponent,
with  referenou  to  hiui.  tompeUU*r.  A  candidate
(candidaKtsi  was  M  called  fr.>n.  bin  apiM-aring  in  ihe
pnblic  places,  aneh  aa  the  fori*  uud  Campus  llar-


AmbraoiusSmiia  (Gulf  of  Arta).  A  gulf  of  the
Ionian  8ea  between  Kpirn^and  Acaruauiu,  twenty-
live  inilea  long  and  ten  wide.

Ambrooea.  A  Keltic  people  defeated  1>y  Marios
near  .\i)U&e  ^xtiae  (Aix)  iu  n.c.  lUS.

Ambrosia  (afijipita-ia).  A  name  given  to  any-
thing that  confeni  immnrtaltty. (I^  The  f*Kid  of


,


the  i;oi1h,  whOM  drink  wtw  uectar  (q.  v.).  Dovea
arc  HAitl  hy  Homer  to  briiiK  ambrosia  to  Zens  from
the  (bt  Wr«t.  ('2)  The  ointment  of  the  ti^At;  wbirb
preserved  even  tbe  Asm}  front  decay.  (U)  Tbe  food
uf  tbe  s^tW  hurMa.

AmbroaU  \ra  nfidpotrta). Fi^iitivntH  ob8f>rvpil  in

Gn'^'fi  in  honmirof  Dionyanft. Tbi\v  wwrn  liobl  ihir-

.ing  tlie  moiitb  Lonacon,  At  tbe  time  of  the  vintage.

Atnbrofliiu.  Bishop  uf  MIImh  in  the  fourth
ntury,  anil  one  uf  ibu  hitcHt.  anil  nioHt  diKtiii-
MKhiHl  uf  what  arudennuihitttctl  tliu  FiiLbrntciftbEr
hrtiktiau  Cburub.  Ho  wna  burn  at  Aruluti^  (Arleii),
len  the  iuetrupoli4  of  Gallia  Norbonpn-iifi,  lu^eonl-
IS  to  some  nnthoritics  in  a.i>.  XU.  occortliiig  to
olbers,  ;t4<J.  Hia  futber  •vrtm  tliu  emperor's  livnten-
int  in  that  district,  and,  ntler  his  ileittb,  Ambroxi-,
«bo  VHB  the  youngent  nf  tlirt>e  cbildrcn,  retiirnLMl
witb  the  widnn-  and  family  to  Romo.  Ilrre,  nndfr
tbe  in«tmctioiift  of  bi^  mother  and  bit*  lister  Mur-
tptlina,  who  bad  rowed  virginity,  be  received  a
highly  n*li4;ioiii)  edncation,  ami  that  bia^  in  fnvnnr
of  Catholic  orthodoxy  hy  wbieh  ho  wan  huImw-
qaeutl;  HO  macb  diHtiiigiilsbo4l.  Having  iitndi«d
liw.  bo  pleaded  cnniuwi  in  tbe  court  of  tbe  pr^io-
torina  ptcfeet,  and  waa  in  due  time  appoiuted
proeousal  of  Lignha.  He  tbeiTuiKin  t^>ok  up  iiiii
n^aUfucv  at  Milan,  wbere  a  ciroumiitance  occurred
wlkh  produced  «  anddeu  cbau^e  in  biit  fortuuca,
mill  traDHformed  him  from  a  civil  goveruur  into
I  biNliup.  Auxeutinn,  bishop  of  Milan,  the  Ariati
iMder  ia  tbe  We^t,  dieil,  and  left  Ibai  8ee  vacant,
«)m  a  warm  eoutedt  for  the  ftnccewtion  eii)«ue<l
betWATii  tbe  Ariann  and  Catholics.  In  tbe  niidHt
of  i  ttiBiultnnu.'*  ilitpute  AmliroM'  Hp)>carcd  in  the
Diiilit  <if  tbe  a«isenibly,  and  exborled  Ibem  to  cou-
dael  the  election  peacfably.  At  tbe  roneluxion
of  hl«  addreas  a  cbild  in  tbe  cn»wd  eXL-lniined,
"AoibroHe  i»  bishop!"  and,  wbctber  accidputalty
ur  by  mauugrment,  tbe  reftutt  throffD  a  curions
ii|;hi  npou  tbe  uatnre  of  tbe  times;  for  tbe  Hiiper-
■litiiiim  multitude.  n>gar<ling  the  exctanintion  nit
"IWvitk'ntial  and  miraiMiIuuR  BUgseHtinn,  by  gi-ii-
ftH  kcclainatiou  declared  Anibro»»e  to  Ik*  electt'd.
&(bv  varioufl  altcmptn  to  declint.^  the  cpiw^opn.!
■■An,  Ambrose  at  Kui^tb  entered  iipuii  tbe  tlm-
rbiri^e  iif  tta  duties,  and  ivudered  biuiHtilf  connpic'
unni  by  hiM  decided  and  nnrcniittincr  oppo»iilit>n
'o|be  teiietaofAlianiflm.  To  bis  zealoUH  eiideav-
oorii  abw  was  owiug  tbe  faihirc  of  tbe  attempt
■BAde  by  tbe  remains  of  n  pagan  party  to  re-eslalr-
ttih  the  Kurahip  of  paganism.  The  strength  and
aUIiij- of  Amhrt»9e  were  ancb  tbnf,  although  op-
Fwii  to  bim  on  ecclesiaatical  ptnntn,  Viilentinian
>ii4  hta  mother  rvapected  his  tah^utti,  and  in  mo-
"Mtaof  political  exigeucy  reiiuiriit  binfttwiHtaiice.
Th*iBuit  evnikpirnoiiN  art  on  tlie  part  of  Anibron*'
*u  his  treatment  uf  TbeodoHiiiH  for  tbe  niaMnacn*
U  Thi^uiloniea.  Tim  en)p«n>r  watt  ennHignt-d  lu
inilrEmcnt  uf  eight  montlu,  and  nut  alMiulvMl
"(Blben  until  he  bad  signed  an  edict,  which  or-
•hin«(l  tbnt  an  interval  uf  thirty  dnjs  slionld  pans
Wupf  auy  w^iitvnce  of  death,  or  even  of  eondBca-
boil,  ktmuid  be  pxeentrd.  After  having  ]iaid  tbe
'<»enil  bononn  toTbeodoHinii,vrbo  died  soon  after
'*l»i'rmj{  pcBcealtle  poaseMion  of  tbe  entire  Uo-
i>Ui  tlmpm;,  the  binhop  departed  from  thin  world,
"I'll  It  cotnpotture  worlliy  of  Win  j!rm  character,  iu
*1"  rear  397.  It  in  evident  that  Ambrose  was  one
*f  Hwike  mnn  of  gn-at  euei-gy  of  luind  and  tern-
.ptKRwit  yrha,  iu  thu  adojiliou  of  a  tbtHrry  or  a


party,  hold  no  middle  rotinw,  init  act  with  deter-
miuntion  towarda  tbe  fulbliiK>nt.  of  their  piirpofwa.
Ambro»o  eifeeted  much  Iu  advance  the  Roman
Caibolie  Church  to  tbe  power  to  wbii-b  it  after-
wards attained.

Tbe  uTitingH  of  tbta  t'atber  are  nnnwroas  und
the  great  object  id'almoat  all  of  them  vviis  lo  main*
tain  tbe  faith  and  disciplineof  the  Catholic  Church,
while  Ronie  of  tbeui  are  written  to  recommend  cel-
ibacy aa  the  aitmmtt  of  Chriatiau  perfection.  Ilia
beat  work  is  the  treatise  Dv  Officiu,  on  the  dniica
of  a  Christian  priest.  His  byniutt  are  also  very
fainonH,  lint  only  four  can  be  (imved  to  l>e  bii» —
"  Dens  creator  omnium,'' "  Aeterue  remm  rouditnr."
"  Veni  redempt-ur  genlinm,"and  "  lani  mn-gil  born
terlia."  Tlie  noble  "  Te  Denm  laiidaniuH"  was
long  a»cri)wd  to  bim.  He  iulroduccd  llie  prnctico
of  Hinging  choral  bymns  arranged  antipliotially
(oiiiflNs  JtMbrOfumtu).  He  ia  probably  thu  author
of  a  Latin  Vcrniou  of  tbe  liislorg  of  lU  Jriri*h  War
hy  JoHepbuM,  long  ascribed  lo  one  Hegei»ippu8.
The  best  text  of  St.  AniliroHtus  i«  that  in  Migne'a
I'attoloffia  Latina  [4  vols.).

Ambubaiae.  Syrian  women  who  gained  a  lir-
ing  at  Ihnue  bj'  singing  and  dancing  in  pnblio,
oHien  iti  the  Cir<Mis.  Tbe  word  comea  from  the
Byrian  ombHb,  a  Uute.

Ajmburbiam  or  AmburblalA.  A  «a(;rifire  per-
lonned  at  linnic  for  llie  purilicatinii  of  llu*  city,  na
rlie  Atultarvaha  (q-  v.)  won  iutendiMl  for  tbn  purl-
llcation  o(  tbe  cininlry.  See  Preller,  Jl6m.  Mylh.
p.  a7'2:  and  St:o\TiTAi:niUA.

Ambuataa,  I-'abius.  ( 1 )  Makcus,  pontifex  maxi-
mnx  in  n.r.  •^'*'*.  His  three  smiK,  while  licling  an  nui-
baMHtidnrHlu  theGanUat  I'ltisium.took  partngaitist
tbeni  in  the  military  operationtt.  Theftaulx  tliHiide-
umiidml  them  of  tbe  .Senate,  ax  having  violntetl  tbe
lawof  aationn;  and  on  receiving  a  n-fuwal,  nnirebed
on  Itomc.  (2)  MaikiI'i*,  a  Kiuuan  who  wua  thrice
consul  (lie.  mo,  :i5ti,  3M)  and  dirrutor(».c.  aTiI).  Ho
ciMHpiered  the  Hemiri.  FuMwi.  Tftl(|niniuiis.  andTi-
btnli'H  in  biH  roiiHnl»«lii|Mi.  Hia  son  waa  tbe  famous
Ki-  FabiuH  Maximntt  Itullinnus. Sec  FadICS.

Ajueipaiaa  i'Afitiy^tas).  A  Greek  poet  of  tbe
Obi  Comedy,  coutempunu')'  with  Ariatophaues,
whom  be  twice  overcame.  Of  Iii«  plays  oidy
Blight  fragments  renniin  (Aristoph.  Ran.  14).

Ajnentum. See  Hai4Ta.

Jiiaexin.  An  Umbriau  town,  the  birthplace  nf
SextiJ!*  Koscius,  who  was  defende*l  by  Cicero  in  bia
faniom^  onitiou  Pro  ficx,  Ito»<.'io  Aiicrino.

Ameatratiu.  A  town  of  Sicily,  near  the  Hale-
Bus.  Tbe  Komans  WsiegtHl  it  fi>r  «ev6n  nU'tlthg
wIh'U  iu  tbe  bands  of  tbe  Carthaginians,  but  with-
oiit  success.  It  waa  takeu,  however,  after  a  third
siege,  and  rn^cd  to  the  ground,  the  surviving  in-
balntuuts  Ipciiig  i>obl  as  slaves.  Steph.  Tiyr..  calls
(be  ^^]nw  Ame»ttaltt*  ;  Diodorns  Stcnlus,  Miftlrnlum  ;
anil  I'olvbiin*.  MsUittratum.  (Diod.  Sic.  xsiii.  eel.
'J;  Pulyb.  i.-44.)

/^mtA^  A  city  in  Sophen^  (Armenia  Mator).  od
Ibe  upper  Tigris.

Amllcar. See  {Iamiltar.

Amiiffia  Tbe  Ems,  a  ri  ver  of  N'orthem  Oermaay
Uowiug  into  the  North  Sea. {Tac  .tM«.  ii.  8.)

Amlaaa  {'\fiitr6s).  A  large  city  on  the  coast  of
Pontus,  called  after  it  AmiseuaaSiuna,  ami  a  Cavour-
vte  refiideuce  of  Mitbridatew.


Amftemam.  An  nncifiit  town  of  Ibo  8nblne«,
nii«i  nntablo  ii8  the  biribpluue  of  the  historiau  Sal-
litvt.

AmethystUB  (afiiOv<rTor  or  •ot).  The  aineihyat,
n  itn-fioiiB  »U»Il»^  of  n  imrple  or  violet  colour,  lU
difTeruiit  iI(«(j:iv<*«  of  dwiHH'tw.  Jii  modeni  miner-
Aln^y,  thn  iiiiiiie  hlx  hwii  :t|»[)lioil  lo  two  precious
eloiirH  of  f-iM'tiliitlly  <lifri'i-<*iif  >taliiit>>t:  ll)  lh>'  Ori-
oiilnl  ntiu'lhy(4t,  nhii'h  in  ii  rtim  variety  ufodaiiiati-
tiiio  fipitr  (rr  i'ornii(liiti);  and  I'Ji  the  Occiilental  or
ooiuitiou  aiiicttiyst.  Tlir  aiicit'litn.  on  rbc  alhvr
hand,  rt'okoncd  tivo  siM-cies,  iliffi-rlnB  in  dugrvo*  of
colour.  Their  Imtiait  auictliycl,  to  wlirRli  I'liny
iuttigii»  th1^  first  mnk  iiniong  purple  or  vjolft-co)-
uuml  K^KiS'  appoArn  to  have  1h'**u  onr  Orii'iitiil  «pe-
oi(»,  which  in  nothinj:  tiion-'  than  a  vtoUii'Colourtsl
aikpphiri*.  Wt^  M'A^  onr  umctUyMt,  inili'nl,  plainly
hiilirat^'il  ici  Olio  of  thu  reasons  uaMi^ied  hy  Plitiy
fur  itH  nainf,  lliat  it  dofs  not  reach  the  ciihiur  of
wlnr  l(i,  |ihv..  aii<l  fiJ^,  wine),  hut  lirst  foAift  into
vhilet.  ilo  iift«r\rnnl8  »iit;)(CKts  another,  which
ift  thtr  uioix*  coDiniou  derivation,  saying  that  tho
MiiKi  falsoly  aawrtod  that  Ihc60  gt-ms  wsre  pre-
wrvntive  ngaiost  intoxicAtion  {a,  ptir.,  sitd  ^A^.
hi  i»tfxiv>3U). See  GkmMA.  i

Ainlctotluin.  A  linoii  covering  for  the  breostB
of  woun'ii. Sfp  STUot'iiirii.

AxnictUB  (f'lTt^^ifui).  A  )(enr-.ni1  Icnn  for  tho
utit<.-r  clulhin^;,  a.^  imlutus  for  thu  uiidur  clothing.
SeeTlNlCA;  PaiojIM.

Ar""ia  ((Ip^t).  A  iDi^a«ai«  of  length  =  forty
cubits  lir^;(<i«)  or  «ixtv  tVt>t  (»rd8«e).

Anuni&iiUB  MarcelUnum.  The  Itwt  Roman  hi»-
torian  of  any  iiuportauce,  horn  at  Atttioch.  in  Syria,
nhoul  A.l»-  ;W,  nf  iiobhi  lirecian  descent.  After
rec»'iring  n  nireful  i-dneatiim,  he  early  vntered
tuiUtnry  iMTvicis  and  font;ht  under  Julian  ugaimtt
the  Alomauni  and  PeniiUiH.  In  the  oreuing  of  hin
days  he  n^lin-d  to  Rtnuc.  and  nhont  A.l>.  ;W  Ite^Eau
hid  Latin  history  of  the  euipemn  ifttrum  tiMiamm
IaUth,  from  Ncrva.  a.D.  W,  to  the  death  of  Valeus.
in  ihirly-oue  h4H>k».  Of  thew  ther*  only  rrmaiu
Uiv.k:*  xiv.-xxxi..  inehulinj:  the  periwi  Inuu  aj>.
'X<\  to  :tTJ!i.  whirh  \xv  R'late*  for  the  moBi  part  ju*  an
ttjo-uitne^t.  A  ht<athen  hiniM-lf,  he  is,  neverlhe-
]e«».  fair  to  Ihe  C'hri»tinns.  A*  hin  work  may  he
n-gurdwl  :ifl  a  rontiuualliHi  of  ToritUK,  he  aeema,  on
the  whtde.  to  have  taken  that  writer  for  his  model.
He  resembles  Tacitnf  in  judcment.  itolitieal  arnte-
ncsft.  and  love  of  tnith.  Hut  he  w  far  inferior
in  literary  culture,  thouch  he  lovtt.  to  display  hi^
knuwitdgr.  coiMvially  iu  dwerihing  uatioUK  and
couutiieA.  I-ntio  wa»  a  foragii  Uugoagc  to  him;
hence  n  cnidci»eM  iwvd  claniHlivaB  of  •xpn-a»ii>u,
which  iB  uiwle  eTeu  uxire  rep«tUeut  by  affeeUtiuu.
Immhat^t.  mid  iM-wilderiug  oniaoieutal  imagery.
Tb*^-  b«-*t  eililiou  i»  by  0&r>1thauwD  (liriTo).

fk^mtnnn  ur  Hammon  (F.gspiian  .1»-«*,  llw  hid-
den nr  veilcil  oue'i.  A  gotl  native  lo  Libya  and
l'pp«'r  Eg?!'*  ^^  "**  irprt-swute*!  »omrlin»e«  Itt
the  shape  of  a  nim  with  enonnou*  eiir%iug  burua.
*ometiuM«  in  that  of  a  ram-headc<t  man.  (wfiMUnwe
n*  H  perfect  mau  *laudiug  up  or  Mttiog  ou  a  thmne.
On  hia  bead  were  the  nival  emblem*.  «ith  two  high
lii^tben  rtamling  up.  the  »rmUd»  *>{  *oTereiguty
•»er  Ibe  U|i»er  and  under  world*:  iu  hi*  hand*
Ifvre  the  KepUT  aud  the  ».igii  of  life.  Id  works
«<  art  his  tenw  •»  odour^d  blue.  Beside  biaa
fa  tinmllr  V^•^  »•»»»  V****  *  """^r'|l!lr  "  '*"^''


tb>  cpown  of  tTppcr  Kgypt  or  the  vuliur»«-akia,i
His  chief  temple,  with  a  far-fauied  (»nirle,  hIoihI  ia
tin  OUHW  of  the  Libyan  de«ert,  twelve  days'  journey
from  MeniphiK.  lletween  this  oraclo  and  ttmt  of
Zeuii  «t  DiHloua  n  conuection  ia  »aid  to  hare  ex-
ittled  from  very  ancient
tiintw,  Ko  that  the  Greeks
early  identified  the  l^gVTi-
tian  god  with their  own

f\  hiA ^n\\ ^'^"N  '^  ^^"  Humans  did

afterwards  with  iheir  lu-
piter;  and  his  wornhip
found  an  eiifniueo  at  wv-
ernl  plact-n  in  CJpeece — at
Sparta,  Tlielnr*i,  and  nU*
Athena  —  whence  festal
emhaaKic«  were  regiitarljf
Hent  to  tho  Libvau  (utntM
AmnoD  awl  Mutli  ,„„ry. (See Tlll^OBIA.^

When  the  oracle  wan  coui*nltcd  by  vlsiuira,  th«
god's  symbol,  maile  of  emerald  and  other  stoneq
was  carried  r<mnd  by  women  and  girld.  to  thii
sound  of  hymufjun  a  golden  ship  hung  round  wil^
votive  cnp«  of  nilvcr.  His  replied  were  given  L,
tremnliiUH  aliockit  tommunicated  to  tho  bearer^
whii-li  were  interpreted  by  a  priest.  I

Ammoatl  ('A/ifivi'icM).  A  ]»cop]e  of  Africa,  occ  %
pying  what  is  now  the  CioMA  of  t^i^rab.  Accordiaq
to  Hen>dotU)ii  ^i.  42).  the  Ammoiiians  were  n  coIohi
of  KgyptiauH  aud  Kthiopiana,  npeaking  a  hingiia.^
com|M>s4»l  of  nords  taken  from  bnth  thoHe  uatio^

AmmooiiiB  (  \titiMVioi).  (ll  Tim  pn'ceptnr  *
Plutarch.  He  lanjfht  philoaophy  iind  umthem  4|
ic9  ut  Delphi,  ami  lireil  during  the  dnit  eouiL~a
of  the  Christian  era,  iu  the  reign  of  Xero,  to  wb.^
he  acted  a«  iutrrprelcr  wheu  that  monarch  visi  tei
the  temple  .it  Delphi.  Plutari'h  makes  freipi^
mention  of  him  in  his  writings,  and  partionliarj
ill  Ilia  treatiae  ou  Ibe  inM-ripttoii  of  the  Deliklii
t4-mple.  i'2i  Saccak  or  !>ACCoritOKUjj  (bo  call4
becaufie  iu  early  life  be  Iwid  lM?eu  a  iwrler  t.  '
celebraKHl  philoitopber,  mIhi  itonrixlifMl  alMmi.  Ill
U'gjnning  of  ihe  ihinl  century,  lie  wak  Ikitu  M
Aleiaudria.  of  Christian  pHn>nts,  aud  waa  e«riJ
ito^irucied  in  the  cateebetieal  »ebooIa  estabUibei^
iu  that  city.  litre,  under  the  Chrtstiao  prc««|V
torSf  Albenagoras.  Pantoeuns.  aud  ClcmeUA  Alc!Cl
andrinu*.  he  acipiired  a  strong  pmiieuBity  towanU
philiMfopliieal  HtniUcA,  and  Imm-buic  excoediugly  dei
ftiriiiis  iif  rei'tuiciliug  the  diflerrnl  opiiiitins  nhta||
at  that  tiuie  subsiKUil  Humng  ph ilo^iiphent.  Pnpj
phyry  la^.  £uaeh.  Uinl.  £Vv.vi.  Ui)  relate*  that  Atai
moum«  paoaud  over  Ui  the  legal  eAiablishuieut^
thai  is,  apMtatiaad  to  the  pagau  religion.  Kuad
blus  (I.  c.l  and  Jerome  {Dt  S.  K.  o.  55).  on  the  con
tniry.  aasert  that  Ammunina  continued  iu  tb|
Christian  faith  nulil  the  end  uf  his  life.  But  U  I
pndmble  thai  tb«Me  Chribtiau  fathcra  rvfer  to  u
other  AmmoDiua,  who,  ia  the  third  crntnry-,  iriofi
a  tfanaoHy  of  tht  GMpeU.  or  lo  some  other  iienmj
of  thi*  uaiue.  for  tbcy  refer  to  tbc  aaend  iMHiks  «1
Amoioniiia:  whereas  Aiumt>niusSaeoMi,Be  hh*  pupj
LcHigiuua  attmts.  wrote  nothing.  It  is  not  vttgt
indeed,  to  acrouut  ft*  tlie  particntarK  n>lat«4l  d
this  pbiloftopher.  hilt  n|kui  th#<  snpiHMiition  of  ij
having  ni>nnuuce4l  the  Chri>aian  faith.  AcconliH
to  Hieiuchw  ( /v  f.ito.  ap.  |»|iol.  Bihi.  ii.  461 .  ed.  BoJ
k*rK  AmMoaioa  waa  induced  to  *dopt  the  pi*
of  a  distinct  aclectio  acbool,  by  a  deain  uf  ^uia
an  end  to  tbotr  eoateBtioaa  wbicb  bfct  ao  Imw  a


J


tTVt«^  the  pTiilosopLical  wmhl. Ami
Duiiy  euiiueiiC  Tollowera  airl  lienrwni,  _  ^

uid  CbriKiliui,  wbo  all,doiiliili«!t,  proiniaed  thtoi-
m1t»  tnnch  Olniniiitiiioii  tntm  a  preceptor  wbo
iiinlpriouk  lo  cullRor  into  n  iociiii  all  the  rays  of
"'ic'ipiil  wlmiom. H«  taught  liJs  select  discipltw
wrtnin  Roblitnt*  <Ioclrine«  bimI  mystical  prturficex,
»■'  «n«  callwl  Stoii^OKToi,  "tlio  Iicaveii-tnugbt
philosopher.'' These  inyHterifBWfrecumiiiiiniralei]
totheaumler  aKok'inn  injmictitui  of  secrecy. Por-
f^Tfy  fel»<e&  tbut  riotiiiii.s  nitli  tbe  rent  t>f  tlie
■IMpIoa  of  AmmoiiitiK,  promued  not  Uy  divulge
f*rtJitn  dfigraiiK  wbieb  tb*y  leorntd  in  bis  echoul.
'«*  to  Iwlfje  Ibfm  Mft^ly  in their  purified  minds.
*ob  otrciiDtNlanre  ncctmiita  for  tbe  fact  nicntiouiHl
oa  rfae  lotliority  «f  t<i>i)t;tiiUN  tbnt  be  left  tiotbing
*•»  Writing. AmunniitiH  probiildy  died  iiWiit  tie
J»»ra4S. (3)  A  Cbriatimi  writnrln  native  of  Alex-
andria, who  liveil  ahorit  A.l>.arjO. He  wrote  &  /far-
•••if  of  lh«  Gmjtrfn,  which  .lorntnc-  nitod  nith  cum-
■Beuilatioii. (-1)  Tbe  son  nf  HertniaM,  no  called  fnr
[*»t8tinclioii'<*  «nk(j from  otht-r iiidividuaU of  the
•^siiie,  woji  a  imliro  of  AlexaiidriUj  and  a  di*ciplu
**'"  ProeliiH. H«  ta^^bt  pbilesopby  ot  Alcxutidriu
*l»out  thr hcgiuniiiK  of  the  sixth  century. His
■y»t«in  wae  au  ecl«>ctic  one,  embracing  principles
^•tiveU  from  both  Aristntle  and  I'lato. He  cauiiot
^**  xegaideil  as  an  urit;iu:il  thinker:  ho  wiu  very
•**oii^  however,  in  malheujaticti.  and  \u  the  study
^i  the  exact  sciences,  which  rectifit^d  Iiih  jiid};iiii>iit,
*^»»«I prej*ervwl  him,  iio  doubt,  from  Ibu  extrnv.i-
SSti«esof  tbe  >'ew  Flatonifim. AnimoitiuH  ba»  left
*M>nkmentarie9  ou  the  Jntroditction  of  Porphyry;  on
Ctttfforict  of  Aristotle,  togetltt^r  with  a  life  uf
i  p1)Uo(K)pher ;  on  bin  treatise  O/  tntrrpretutioN  ;
Bobolin  on  the  first  seven  books  of  the  MU-
The scboUa on iho  Afeicipli^tirt have
>MTer  been edited. (5)  A  priest of  one  of  tbe
E^ptiau teraplfs. He  wan  ouc  of  the literary
tneti  who  tied  fnim  Alexaiidriji  1^>  Cori!»ta»tino[d»'
I  sfler  the  defltrUL-lion  of  tlie  p.-ifjiici  ti'niplos. There
twcuuc,  togi'Lher  nitti Hellndiim,  one  of  the
fttvtit  of  Soorittt.-:*,  the  ecrlcsiaMticnl  writer:  this
Vtt  fut  which  appL-nrs  firmly  o«tHl>IiHhi-d,  and  the
Wfcfttmt  ullcg»Hl  by  Vnlckeuucr  for  phiciiig  liini  in
tbe  Tint  or  second  ccntnry  have  ln;en  jicnerally
<vBslileRd  insnOictent. Amiiionins  hriH  h-ft  iin  a
*oik  on  Gn-^'k nynoiiyms,  etc.,  uinlur the tillu
Qipi  itutiMf  xni  titatftdiuay  \i$fuf. It  18  a  produc-
tianoTTery  inferior  nieril. A'lUekenaer's  c*litiou
'^)  liiK  l^t-n reprinted entire,  hut  in a  more
F*lalik'  fiirm,  nl  I^'ipzitj  (I^^Mi,  niider  the  care  of
■^ksSm,  who bnH added tbe  unedited notes of
■"•acimii,  "'"^  ^l"^  critical  U-tti-r  nf  S^'gmir,  iid-
'''**«d  Ik  ViiIfWeu»«?r,  oud  juibllMhed hi  ITtrecbt
inTGi We  biive aiui  n Ircaliste of  Ainnnmiti.'*,
^ii  ■tvpoXoyiar,  "  Od  the  impm]¥.*r  nso  of  wurdt*,"
'^  luu  never  been  printed. i6)  A  physician
'■Alextnitrin.  famous  from  his  skill  in  cnttiiij;  for
•"•tow— an  opemtion  which,  nceonliiiK  to  soint-.
'"  (I'M  iiitrodored. Ib^  itiveiiti^d  an  instrnmeut
■fWnljiiig  ijie  larieer  calcnli  while  in  the  blwlder.
'*'  *t*  ucciiNt<>nK-<l  nlxii  to  make  iit^e  of  caustic
^ScMi(>o»i, (^H[M*eially  red  arm;ntc  in  ln'morrhages.
*i"«ClUBVBr.IA.

AamertJa  la/iv^tm'u).  A  word  nsed  to  doaeribe
I™  Mninj(em«*nr  liy  which  oHbocc*  were  forgoHm.
^'"ml  i*.  rhictly  fonnd  niwd  of  real  or  nllef;[ed
™»"liBi  i>f  the  laws  cnmniitt<>d  din-ing  tbe  con-
nirUnf  u|,|K)«iinK  fortiontt  in  the  (Jreek  republics.
A  iioUliln  auineiily  wha  that  arranged  at  Athena ,


J


?^


Amnliini.


7  AMPMURAtS

by  tbe  lui^diatimi  of  the  B|uirt-an  king  Patisautag^
by  which  tbe  overthrow  of  tbe  Thirty  wii*  brought
about, In  B.C. 403. 8eeGroto,chai>.lxv.;  and  Adkia.

AmnitiB  CA^voror).  A  town  in  the  north  of
Crete  on  a  river  of  (Iw  same  name;  the  harbour
of  CnoBKiis  i<\.  v.(. S*'e  Apollnn.  Rhod.  iii.  877.

Amnimn  lu^n'of ).  A  basiii  or  veaael  in  which  at
the  socriliees  the
blood  of  the  vio-
tims  was  caught
as  it  fell  {ptigu.
iii.  444.)

Amoebaea.
Venn's  that  an*
«wf?r  on.'  another
a1ternatf>ty  in
slrtiphe  nnd  anti-
Nlropbe.  HN  in
(Mune  iif  Vergil's
A'c/w/nra,  v.  g.  the
Sirvcnth,  Kight}i,and  Ninth.  The  amotdincan  form
prevailft  alHo  in  some  of  1  hf  e.irlier  s|MM'inienHof  Ro-
man verse,  as  tbe  fiuugs  of  tbe  FralrCftArvaleafq.  v.).
It  is  only  ouc  of  t lie  many  wnuifestatioua  of  the  Ital-
ian likiug  for  diiilugno.  on  nliicb  sec Tuulfel, //{«(.  0/
;/om./,(7.3,$il(Eugl.trau-,l.by\Varrll^jnaoo.iy9I])[
and  Patiii,  /^tadr*  eur  la  PoAie  Latlnc  (Paris,  1875).

Amor. The  god  of  love. Sao  £h<>h.

Amoiea.  A  cidVctfon  of  pnemn  by  P.  Ovidtus
Naao  it|.  v.),  origiually  in  Ave  lH>oks,  afterwaiils  re-
duced to  three.  They  wore  pubHubed  In  B.C.  13,
and  arc  io  elegiac  verttc.  They  are  olegnut  in  form
and  exprewioa,  but  extremely  licentious  iu  tone.

Antorglna  ira  dfiapytva'^.  Fine  uiusliu  textures
made  of  a  tla^  named  from  the  inland  Amorgna.
See  llvssrs;  CARBAsn*.

AmorgUB  ('A^iopyor)-  Ati  island,  odo  of  the

Hpiinulds  Iq.  v.),  anil  the  birthplace  of  th«  [)oet

SiiuoriideH.  The  Kimian  pni|>ei-ors  used  it  as  a
placfi  of  ImiiiHlimtiiit.

Ampecli5u4  itiftrnx^*"))'  Afibawlorerarrworti
by  Crttk  women  over  tbe  cAi/eii,or  inner  garment.
ScePALUtM;  TrxiCA.

AmpeUoB,  Llcil's.  A  Roman  writer  who  flour*
i»t)ii-4  not  earlier  than  tbe  necorid  ccntnry  A-I>.,  and
wrote  a  iiole-honk,  Lihrr  J/cworidhn,  winch  contains
a  scanty  etdUiclion  nf  aslroiiiMoicat,  geograpliiciLl,
aU4l  hiMlorical  jotlingrt.  Triviiil  aa  tlio  buok  i»,  a
statement  in  its  cliapLer  on  the  wondcn*  of  the
world  hah  mainly  led  to  the  tliscovery  (in  l^H)  uf
tho  ningnilict-nt  sculptures  of  Pcrganium,  now  at
BvrliLi.  AmtteliuH  ba.s  been  eililed  with  notes  b;
Beck  (Ij«lpxfg,  lfilj^.  The  best  text  is  that  of
WGiniin  (Leipzig,  li^).

Amphiaraia  t  dfiffHaptiui ).  Games  celebrated
near  OropiiH  iiv  hinnnir  of  AmphiaruUtt  (q.  v.).

AmphiarAiia  lA^^ia^os).  Au  Argivo,  the  son
of  OVcltie  and  Hyperuniestra,  great-gnnidsou  of  the
seer  Melampns.  In  Homer  be  is  afavonrite  of  Zeua
and  Apollo,  alike  distiiiguisbetl  as  a  seer  antl  a  hero,
who  faki'ji  part  in  thi<  f'alyclonian  hoar-biint,  in
tbe  voyage  of  tht^  Argntiauttt,  atui  in  ibeHX[K<dition
of  the  8eren  iigaiuHt  Tbelics.  Rccoucile*!  In  Adra«-
tns  (q.  V.)  after  a  qnarre),  and  wedded  to  biH  siNter
Kriphy]«i,  ho  agreed  that  any  future  diffcrencee  be-
tween them  abould  be  heltled  by  her.  She,  brlltcd
by  Polynices  with  the  fatal  necklace  of  hid  aucefr
trcaa  Uarmouia,  insisted  on  hor  husband  Joining


I


AHPHICLEA  6

the  war  against  Thebes,  though  he  foresaw  that  I
it  woDld  end  fatally  for  him,  and  Id  departing
charged  faia  yoathfol  sons  Alcinaeon  aod  Amphil-
ochuB  (q.  V. )  to  avenge  bis  coming  death.  His
wise  warnings  were  nnheeded  by  the  other  princes ;
his  justice  and  prndence  even  brought  him  into
open  strife  with  the  saTage  Tydeos;  yet  in  the
fatal  closing  cootest  he  loyally  avenged  bis  death
on  the  Thebau  Melanippus.  In  the  flight,  jnst  as
the  spear  of  Periclymeuus  was  descending  on  him,
Zens  interposed  to  save  the  pious  prophet  and
make  him  immortal  by  cleaving  the  earth  open
with  his  thunderbolt  and  bidding  it  swallow  np
Amphiarafls,  together  with  his  trusty  charioteer
Baton,  like  himself  a  descendant  of  Melampus.
From  that  time  forth,  Amphiaratis  was  worshipped
in  various  plaoea  as  an  oracular  god,  especially
at  OropQB  on  the  frontier  of  Attica  and  Boeotia,
where  he  had  a  temple  and  a  famous  uracle  for
the  interpretation  of  dreams,  and  where  games
were  celebr&ted  in  honour  of  him.

Amphlclea  ('A^t^tfcXria).  A  town  of  northern
Fhocis,  with  a  shrine  of  Dionysus.

AmphicrStea  ('A^^xpai^c).  (1)  A  biographer,
who,  according  to  Diogenes  Laertius  ( Vit-Arittip.),
was  condemned  to  die  by  poison.  See  Athenaeus,
xiii.  5.  (2)  An  Athenian  orator,  who,  being  ban-
ished from  his  country,  retired  to  Seloucia  on  the
Tigris,  and  took  np  his  residence  there  under  the
protection  of  Cleopatra,  daughter  of  Mitbridntes.
He  starved  himself  to  death,  because  suspected  by
this  princess  of  treason,

Amphiotypn  ('A^urrvwi').  The  son  of  Denca-
lion  (q.  v.)  and  Pyrrha,  and  the  reputed  founder  of
the  Amphictyonic  Conncil. (Herod,  vii.  200).

Ampbioty6aeaCAfL(fHKTvo»ts).  Literally  "those
dwelling  around,"  but  in  a  special  seuse  applied
to  populations  which  at  stated  times  met  at  the
same  sanctuary  to  keep  a  festival  in  common,  and
to  transact  common  business.  The  most  famous
and  extensive  nnio^  of  the  kind  waa  that  called,
par  exceUence,  the  Amprictyoxic  League,  whose
common  sanctuaries  were  the  temple  of  Pythian
Apollo  at  Delphi,  and  the  temple  of  Demeter  at
Authela,  near  Pylae  or  Thermopylae.  After  Pylae
the  assembly  was  named  the  Pylaean,  even  when
it  met  at  Delphi,  and  the  depnties  of  the  league
Pylagorae.  The  league  was  snpposed  to  be  very
ancient,  as  old  even  as  the  name  of  Hellenes;  for
its  founder  was  said  to  be  Amphictyou,  the  son  of
Deucalion  and  brother  of  Hellen,  the  common  an-
cestorof  all  Hellenes.  (Herod,  vii. 200.)  It  included
twelve  populatiouH:  Malians,  Phtbians,  Aeniaues
or  Oetoeaus,  Dolopes,  Magnetians,  Perrhoebians,
Thesaalians,  Locriaus,  Dorians,  Phociuns,  Boeo-
tians, and  lonians,  together  with  the  colonies  of
each.  Tbongb  in  later  times  their  extent  and
power  were  very  unequal,  yet  in  point  of  law  they
all  had  equal  rights.  Besides  protecting  and  pre-
serving those  two  sanctuaries,  and  celebrating
from  the  year  B.C.  586  onwards  the  Pythian  Games,
the  leagne  was  bound  to  maintain  certain  princi-
ples of  international  right,  which  forbade  them,
for  instance,  ever  to  destroy  utterly  any  city  of  the
league,  or  to  cut  off  its  water,  even  in  time  of  war.
To  the  aasemblies,  which  met  every  spring  and
autumn,  each  nation  sent  two  icpo/xy^/ioftr  ( =
wardens  of  holy  things)  and  several  pylagorae.
The  latter  took  part  in  the  debates,  but  only  the
former  had  the  right  of  voting. When  a  nation


I  AHPHION

included  several  States,  these  took  by  turns  the
privilege  of  sending  deputies.  But  the  stronger
states,  sncfa  as  the  Ionian  Athens  or  the  Dorian
Sparta,  were  probably  flowed  to  take  their  torn
oftener  than  the  rest,  or  even  to  send  to  every  aa-
aembly.  When  violations  of  the  sanctnariea  or  of
popular  right  took  place  the  assembly  could  in-
flict fines,  or  even  expulsion;  and  a  Btate  that
wonld  not  submit  to  the  pnnishment  had  a  *'  holy
war"  declared  against  it.  By  such  a  war  the  Pbo-
ciaua  were  expelled  b.c.  346,  and  their  two  votes
given  to  the  Macedonians;  but  the  expulsion  of
the  former  was  withdrawn  because  of  the  glorious
part  they  took  in  defending  the  Delphian  temple
when  threatened  by  the  Gauls  in  B.C.  379,  and  nt
the  same  time  the  Aetolian  community,  which  bad
already  made  itself  master  of  the  sanctuary,  was
acknowledged  as  a  new  member  of  the  league.  In
B.C.  191  the  nnmber  of  members  amounted  to  sev-
enteen, who  nevertheless  had  only  twenty -four
votes,  seven  having  two  votes  each,  the  rest  only
one.  Under  the  Roman  rule  the  leagne  continued
to  exist,  but  its  action  was  now  limited  to  the
care  of  the  Delphian  temple.  It  was  reorganized
by  Augustus,  who  incorporated  the  Malinns.  Mag-
netiaus,  Aenianes,  aud  Fythians  with  the  Thessa-
lians,  and  substituted  for  the  extinct  Dolopes  the
city  of  Nicopolis  in  Acamauia,  which  he  had  founded
after  the  battle  of  Actium.  The  last  notice  we  fiud
of  the  leagne  is  in  the  second  century  a.d.  See
Freeman,  Hut  of  Federal  Govemvient  (2d  ed.  1893J;
Tittmann,  Udxr  den  Bund  der  Amphictyonen  ;  Hfil'
ler,  JOortan«/  and  Grote,  vol.  ii.  chap.  ii.

Amphldromla  (a^(f»td/>dfua).  At  Athens,  a  fam-
ily festival  at  which  a  new-born  infant  received
religious  consecration  and  its  name.  The  carrying
of  the  child  by  its  nurse  around  the  hearth  was
the  principal  part  of  the  ceremony,  and  from  this
it  is  called. (IsaeoSjDePyrrAt  Hered.  %  30.)

Amphiloohia  ( 'A/t^iXo;(ia).  The  country  of  the
Amphilochi,  an  Epirot  race,  at  the  east  end  of  the
Ambracian  Gulf,  usually  included  in  Acamania.
Their  chief  town  was  Argos  Ampbilochicum.  See
Ahphilochus.

Amphil5chns  ('A^<^iXo;yoc).  The  sou  of  Ain-
phiarails  and  £riphyl<S,  and  brother  of  Aleuiaeou
(q.  v.).  He  took  part  in  the  expedition  of  the  Epi-
goni  against  Thebes,  assisted  his  brother  in  the
murder  of  their  mother,  and  afterwards  fought
against  Troy.  Like  his  father,  he  was  a  celebrated
seer.  He  was  killed  in  single  combat  by  Mopsus,
who  was  also  a  seer,  at  Mallos,  iu  Cilicia.  Accord-
ing to  some,  be  founded  Argos  Ampbilochicum  ou
the  Ambracian  Gulf.

AmphimaUum. See  Tapes.

Amphion  ('A^^i'wi').  The  son  of  Zeus  and  An-
tiop^,  and  twin-brother  of  Zethus.  They  were  born
on  M  t.  Cithaeron  t and  grew  up  among  the  shephenls.
Having  become  acquainted  with  their  origin,  they
marched  against  Thebes,  where  Lycus  reigned,  the
husband  of  their  mother,  Antto|i^,  who  faatl  married
Din:6  in  her  stead.  They  took  the  city,  and  kille<l
Lycus  and  Dirc^  because  they  had  treated  Antioptf
with  great  cruelty.  They  put  Dirc^  to  death  by
tying  her  to  a  bull,  who  dragged  her  about  till  she
perished  ;  and  finally  threw  her  body  into  a  fonu-
taiu,  which  was  from  this  time  called  the  foun-
tain of  Dirc^.  After  they  had  obtained  poasessiou
of  Thebes,  they  fortified  it  by  a  wall.  Amphiuu
had  received  a  lyre  from  Hermes,  on  which  he


AMPIIIORKIA


AJIPIIITHEATKUM


KUyed  with  sncli  mu^ie  skill  that  the  »toDe«i  moved

lof  tbcir  owTD  ticcord  aud  formed  the  wuU. Amph  iou

lafler  wards  marrietl  Niobi^,  who  bore  him  timii.v  tfonti

au'l  liauj^Iilew,  nil  of  wlinni  wrri'  killeil  liy  Aixdln

ami  Arleaiin,  whRrctipoii  he  pnt  im  <Mi<l  t-o  hif  uwii

hlif". p«.  N'lODK.
-AjBpbiorkia  or  Ampbomoain I  an^iopxia ur
ofi'fHMtuMTui). Tlw  otilh  wliieh  mum  tiikru,  \uti\L  hy
tilt; |>|aiittiflf  Bud  Lbc  dcfciidftiit,  beforu  the  trinl

■  of  A  can»e  in  the  Atbt'iiiao  cuor(«,  Ibitt  tbej  wonid
*]i«*al;  tbe  truth.  In  the  dvaxfiiiris,  or  preliniinftry
iiiv*»8|j^atiuii,  it  waa  ciiUed  &iiafioaia.

-A^nphlpfiUa  i' AfK^imXti'). A  towu  in  Mitcednnin,

^Kor*  the  eatitern  batik  of  tbe  Stryaion,  nimnt  thrpe

^B]iiil<>H  ftuiii  the  »Pa. Thr  Ktrynioii  f)uwe<l  Jiltnoet

^^  rouiiil  the  towu,  ueurl.r  foruiinj!  a  circle,  ivliciir<i  its

o-iiitv  Amphi-poliH. it  \ru»  originally  called  Knnra

PtiiNlcri.thf  "Nint*  \V«yi(,''iinil  Iwloii^it'il  to  the  Kdiini-
■»*.  a  Tbriwioii  peo|i]v.  It  wn»  cobinieed  by  the
AtbfoiAiM  ill  B.C.  437,  who  drove  Ibf;  KdoiiidhH  out
»f  the  pUcf.  It  WA«  Olio  of  the  »iui«l  iiiiportaiit
^f  the  Albeiiiiui  {MiftsewtionH  in  tho  north  of  the
^■^Kx^Aii  8(-a.  Hfiiw  their  indiptution  when  it
fi'll  iulo  tht-  hnndft  rtf  tiriMiduA  (B.C.  -I'^Muuud  of
riiilip  IH.C.  aMi.  The  port  of  Amphipolis  wua
Ei»*n. See  PKlUfPL'S.

.A^nphippoi  (afitftiwrrot}. Bee  DKBt'LTOitKH.
.Ajnphipcoat^loa  (afUfHirp^c-niXas). >^eo  Tkm-

■Amphla  ("A^(/>i().  A  (ireek  comic  poet  of
AtljviiM,  conti-nipornrj'  with  Plnln.  IliK  works  are
U»r»t  1  A(h.  i.  4i.«  foil.,  Moiu.).

.^mphlBsa  CA/i^io-an). An  importAafe  tova  uf

the  Lticri  Ozolao  near  Delphi. See  SAtitKU  War.

AmphithalSjnua  inittf>i0akaftot'\. A  roons  in  Ihe

^BfiroixM^ti'i)  <)tt»rt«ni  of  n  Orr4:k  hoiifte,  opixwile  tlm

^y0(xXa)jof,  »ih1  MM'\  iiig  pndiiibly  tut  it  Nlc-epiii^-room

" ft»r  thf  giitw  ii-n[p  d:iiigbters. See  DoMUs.

Ampbitheatmm  iafi<Ptdtarftor). A  circular  or

eUi|>tlG4l  hiiitdinjx.  amint^d  for  tbc  exhihition  of

coailf«t«  of  Kladiiitore,  wild  Iwasix,  and  for  rthani

•ea-figlita,  all  of  which  cuiistitntcd  the  ludi  amphi-

iAr<tfrd4M. Bee  Ll'l>l.

Tbe  fttkt  ampbithoatrv  was  probably  that  of  C.
ScriboDtttH  Curio,  which  w»$  literally  a  clonhle
I^Mtiv,  bviug  compoaed  of  two  w(H>dcu  theatn-s
Vbnd  eo  pivoia,  ao  that  Ihey  could  l>e  tanied
■^wnd,  apeototors  and  all,  and  placed  back  to
Mt,  fanning  tvro  eeparato  tlit'atnw  for  dramatic
•diMlaj  or  face  to  face,  forming  an  .iinphitbea-
*»  b  ihp  ordinary  sense  ttf  th«  word,  Tlii«  wtrnrt-
Bi"  Ku  errcti-fl  in  n.c.  WA,  and  iti  tK-M;rilKid  liy
Pliny  \U.  A",  xxxvi.  $  116i.  The  next  was  Imil't
^y  lalliH  C'lu-Kir  in  B.C.  40,  and  wa«  also  of  m'oikI.
Tbwe  edigi'M  weiv  vxiK)(<ed  to  the  danger  of  <lc-
''nirttuti  by  tin*.  »nd  Hometimes.  too,  prove<l  in-
*''*^iitt4!  to  Kiip]>orl  tbe  weight  of  the  euornioiin
•""(Ufpf  kpecLutora — often  as  mnny  aa  y<l,UO(J  to
'"'''I  It  WHa  not  until  the  fonrth  cmisnlate  of
uitni  i.n.i:.  IU>)  that  an  amphitheatre  of  Ktonc
**"■  erected  by  r^tatilius  Tanrn^  in  tbe  CiimpiiH
l^MTlm  LSnet.  OrSitr:.  29).  Tlii-t  linilding  wak  t.lii<
'^■''Totiuof  Jt9  kind  until  Iho  rn>ction  of  Ihu  i^reikt
^iV'ui  ainphithrntre.  TIha  wuh  ciirrivd  out  in
dw  n-ijpi*  tif  Vftupahiau  and  Tit  tin,  when  th«  Awphi-
iWffM,  pforiMM,  which,  aincc  IIil-  tinm  of  Br<U',  hiw
I**!*  kiHinn  tut  tbc  CulotMvnui  or  Coliiicnin,  iuuhl-.
^«eQlMiaAtic»l  tnulition  inaki.*H  tbe  urtJiitect  to
^^f  Imcd  a  (.'hristiau,  one  Owiduutius,  aftcrwunU


a  martyr.  8ee  Born,  Some  and  tlu  Campogna,  p,
'£S&;  Middleton,  Attdeht  Home  in  1885.  pp.  303  fnth

This  marvellouH  bniUtiiijc  was  comraeneed  by
VeKpMHian  (Snet.  \'e*p.  9}  rJirly  in  hin  n-i);ii,  and
eoniph-tiiil  by  TitiiN,  who  diMltrat<*d  it  in  iIih  year
A.D.  8U,  on  which  occjutimi  ^>00  aniumlM  of  vaiious
kimU  were  (tlan^htfrcd  (Hnet.  771.7).  Hu  tteuma
not  to  buvu  udduil  the  la«t  ittory,  however,  which
WHM  donu  by  Doniilian,  who  uUu  cnnited  the  oruft*
menial  work  to  bu  rxe<:uleil.  An  ImJlt  by  the
Kliivian  emporora,  the  highest  tiers  of  Heata  iuaide,
and  probably  the  fourth  htory,  wore  of  wood.  Fnr-
tber  nddilioiiB  dale  from  a  jwriod  not  earlier  than
the  time  of  Alexander  Severns.  (Sen  Hnm,  p.  IKUij.
The  name  CubiMu'iim  wiut  probably  given  it  bi>ciin»e
of  itri  enormoiiM  Mize.  No  subM!i|m*nt  public  am-
pbilbi-aliv  ws»  rrrctoil  in  tbc  city  of  Home,  the
little  (iM/'/iMni/tuM  castrottt,  near  the  church  of  S.
Ci'o<;(%  being  probably  intended  only  fur  the  aol-
diirrH  of  the  Guard.

The  Colosseum  became  the  spot  whore  prince
aud  ]>copIo  met  together  to  witness  those  niingni-
nnry  exhibitions.  t]ted(>grni)ing  eflfects  of  wbieU  nn
the  RoQiiui  charaeler  enii  hanlly  be  ovrrentimated.
It  woa  partially  repaired  by  Antoninus  Pimt  (Cu]>it.
Ant.  J*i.  8>.  In  the  reign  of  MiirrinuN,  on  the  day
of  the  Vnlranalii),  it  wiw  Ktmr.k  by  lightning,  by
which  the  np|ier  rows  ()f  ln>nche«  wen*  i^nitiunied,
and  im  inut-h  itiima;rc  niut  donu  to  other  jiartK  of
tbc  Htruetun>  ttiat  the  gann-ft  wi^re  for  wtmtt  yearn
(NdehiiilcU  iu  tbv  Stadinm  iDio  Cass.  Ixxviii.  25).
Itit  resloration  was  commenced  by  Klngabalua,  aud
eompU'ted  by  Alexander  8everns.  A  medal  of
Gordiau  III.  K*preaent«  the  Colosseum  with  the  leg-
eud  MtmififtHtia  ilortiiani  Aht]..  showing  that  fresh
works  were  nndertaken  within  a  few  years.  It
wtiM  again  tttruck  by  lightning  in  the  reign  of  We-
eiint  (Hieron.  p.  475),  bnt  wwt  soon  restore*),  and
tho  games  continued  to  be  otdehrated  in  it  down
to  the  nixth  cetitury.  It  is  UHually  Rtuted  that,  in
conrteiiurnce  of  the  wOf-dcv<»ti(in  of  TBlt-niaehn«,  an
Aaiiitifl  monk,  who  rutihed  into  the  arena  to  lu-pu-
rale  tbe  gladialor»,  and  waa  overwhelmed  under  a
shower  of  Ktoue^  Honorius  abolished  forever  tUe
(Uiurifices  of  the  gtndiatont  {Theodoret.  v.  25) ;  but
there  is  evidence  that  they  wetu  cnntinue<t  even  at
a  later  ]ivriod  (Augustin.  C«n/«M.  vi.  tJl.  In  Inter
times  the  amphithentre  ha«  been  used  aoinetimea
in  war  tu^  a  fortrest*,  and  in  peace  as  a  quarry';
whole  palaces,  such  as  the  Cancelleria  and  the  Po-
lazxn  FaTDese,  having  been  built  out  of  it«  spoils.
At  length  the  poix-s  made  efforts  to  prew-rve  it:
^ixtuH  V.  ulteniptril  to  mm*  it  as  a  woolhni  factory,
und  to  convert  tbn  areadea  into  ^hot>8 ;  Clumrnt
XI.  oncloMcd  tbe  lowwr  arcades;  and  iu  1750  Btine-
dicl  XIV.  eou»c'cra(«'d  it  to  the  ChrUliana  who  had
byen  martyred  iu  Jt.  MolwitLi»tanding  thu  dam-
age.t  of  time,  war,  nud  apoliutiou,  tbe  Flavian  Ani-
phitheati-e  still  remains  complete  onongh  to  give
vm  a  fair  idea,  excepting  iu  some  minor  drtaiU,  of
the  struclnre  and  arrangementa  of  this  deiicriptiou
of  building.

The  very  site  of  the  Flavian  Amphithentre,  as  of
numt  nihers,  fiiniiwbes  an  nxample  of  [be  prodigal
contempt  of  Inlioiir  niid  i'Xp«!U»o  which  the  Komau
I'mperupH  diHphiyed  iu  thf-ir  great  works  of  arclii*
Ivelnru.  The  (jrrrkH,  in  chniMiing  tbe  Kttrj)  of  their
ibratrDH,  alnioHt  alwayn  nviiilrd  tlmmfwdviMiof  some
iMitnrul  hollciw  on  Lbi'  side  of  a  bill;  but  the  Ro'
man  ainpbitheatrus,  with  fvw  exenpttoiiK,  stand
npou  a  plain. The  site  of  the  CoIosKcnm  nas  lo  the


2f  ^

GrMnd  ria&  of  tbo  FIatMii  AiapliltlMiatn!.


4r


-^.vwi


middle  of  tbe  city,  In  the  Talley  betwpon  tlio  Cne*
liaii,  the  Eiti|itilitie,  nnd  the  Volin,  mi  the  m:irHliy
gnniiid  which  was  previonsly  the  lake  of  Neni'u
palace,  »taffim>H  Sfroaig.

"Die  uhl  GODKrlml  vrneniMttB  amphUtwwUl
Eiifttur  tuolcE),  ■tacnt  Naranla  oranl."

(Hon.  de  Sptd.  n  S.)

Ko  mere  maaanres  can  give  an  luloiiiiat^i  t-onenptinii
of  this  va«K  atmcturc,  the  diroeiiKioriA  and  amiiigti-
nientii  of  which  wen  such  us  to  funiiflU  Hcate  for
67,00U  speetatora,  around  ao  arena  largo  enough  to
afford  space  for  the  comhutti  of  several  haudred
animals  at  odc«,  for  the  evolutions  of  mimio  aea-
figbts,  and  for  the  exhibitioo  of  artificial  forests;
vitt]  passagOB  and  staircasfx  to  give  jngrc«8  aod
egresH,  wiUiniit,  confiiNifin,  to  tliu  iiiiiii«iiHo  maim  of
sprctatxirH,  and  iitlu'nt  for  thti  attcndaiita  an  the
arena;  deiiA  fur  thi>  thoiuandH  of  victimii  dovotol
to  ddslniction;  cbaiinels  for  the  rapid  iudnx  and
outlet  of  water  when  the  arena  was  used  for  a
tiattutae/iia :  and  tbe  means  fnr  tlio  removal  of  the
caroas«et  &Qd  the  other  abmninations  of  the  arena.
Admirable  pictures  nf  tbe  mnguitmlti  and  magnifi-
cence of  the  amphitheatre  aud  itd  Hpovtaulcit  are
tlrawu  in  the  E**'iys  of  Mimtaigue  liii.  6i.  aud  iu
the  latter  part  of  Gibbon'ii  twulf^U  chapter.

As  a  general  deseripllon  of  the  buitdiug,  tbo  ful-
lowiug  poBBage  of  Gibbon  is  perfect:  "It  waa  a


bnilding  of  &o  elliptic  flgnro,  fbuoded  od  foar
arches,  aud  rising,  tvltb  four  successive  orders  of
architecture,  to  tbe  height  of  UO  [157]  feet,  The
ontside  of  the  eililice  was  incrnsted  with  marble,
and  decorated  with  statues.  The  slnitea  of  the
vast  convBVR  whirh  formed  the  inside  were  tilled
and  snrronndud  with  Hixt^'  or  eighty  rows  cifscatfl^
of  uiui'blii  liltcwiHU,  cuven-d  with  cnahinns,  and
capable  of  receiving  with  ea>ie  about  SO,fK>0  sjiec-
tators.  8ixty-fonr  vomitorif  (for  by  that  uauie  the
doors  were  very  aptly  distiugniahedi  poured  forth
the  iinmen«e  multitude;  and  the  entrances,  [Hia-
BOges,  and  staircaxCK  were  contrived  with  BU«b
exijuinitc  skill  that  each  jienson,  whether  of  the
mnintorial,  tbo  i:<|iicfftriau,  or  tbo  pli^tieian  order*
arrived  at  liifi  dt'stiiicil  pIa<:D  wilUuiit  trouble  or
coufuKtou.  Nothing  wan  tuuittinl  wliirb,  in  any
respect,  could  be  subservieDt  to  tbo  convnnienee
and  pleasure  of  the  spectators.  Tbey  were  pro-
tected fmtii  the  Hun  aud  rain  by  an  ample  canopy,
nccuxiuuuUy  drawn  over  their  beadn.  TUo  air  was
continually  n-'Crosbed  by  tbe  pbtyiug  of  fonutains,
aud  profusely  iuipreguutcd  by  the  griiteftil  ttcvut
of  aroiuatics.  In  tbe  centre  of  ibe  editlce,  tb«
urrmt,  or  stage,  was  strewed  with  tbe  liuest  saud,
and  successively  assumed  the  must  dillci-i'tit  forms.
At  one  moment  it  WHUiu-d  to  riiM  <uit  of  the  earth,
like  the  gordeu  of  the  HespurideM,  and  wait  after-


I
I


AMPHITHEATRUM


71


AMPUITHEATRirM


^broken  iuto  the  rocks  aud  cavunis  nfThraoe.
Bbteiraneoujt  pipes  conveyed  an  iiicxhriiiBtt-
ble  Bappl.v  of  jraUiT ;  aud  wbat  lm*l  JuBt  before  ap-
peared a  level  plnUi  mJj;ht  bu  HniJilviiIy  vouvcrlC'd
into  a  wldo  take,  covervd  wiih  urtiied  vctwcls,  and
Rplenbbed  with  tbu  mou.Ht«^r4  vf  the  deep. lu  iht
dcciiratfou  of  Ibuse  M.'i?iicct,  the  Koaiuu  ciiipi-ror«
^dittplared  tbelr  Tceallb  aud  liberality ;  aud  ne  reud
various  occiuIoiih  that  ibe  wlu»Ie  ftimttnru  nf
am)»bilht!atre  onnttisted  ritlier  of  silver,  or  of
)  or  of  amiwr. 'Tho  pcM*t  wbo  df^crtUt-H  the
I  of  Coriiiuit,  in  tbi*  cbanivt«r  of  a  itbcpberd
Btmcted  to  Ibt-  cn|)ilal  by  the  fame  of  their  man-
bilicfucc,  afflriuft  that  tbo  uctti  dcsigucd  iix  a  df-
etiie  agairifit  the  wild  iH'UMltt  nuiv  of  gold  wire;
ai  ibi.'  piirtieot*  wem  );ildvd  ;  and  that  tlif  belt  nr
lelrtU*  which  dividcil  the  sevf-ral  rankiii  of  H]>octa-
Iton  fratn  «acb  other  vms  studded  with  a  prociona
lieof  buaiitifidstoucH'*  (tcally,ofglaute«aerae
pliBitatirxi  of  Jowfts;  of. AUACL'LVa).
The  aunexcil  M-oodcut.  representing  a  section,
twt  nf  an  enliro  auipliitbeatre,  but  merely  of  the
exterior  wall,  and  tbo  wal«  included  between  llmt
ud  the  arena,  will  wrvo  lo  convey  au  idea  of  the
nnngriuent  of  ducIi  (itrncliires  in  ^entTul. ][  m
tbat  of  the  Colosaeuui,  and  In  givun  u^mu  tbo  an-
thorily  of  Hirt;  but  it  ia  in  H>uie  r«8{M)cta  ciu^cct-
onl.particaUrly  iu  the  upper  pari,  »tuc«  no  traeea
ofthe  npper  goUcry  are  now  reiuaining. The  wc-
H iT^tM  mioateness  of  tbe  scale  rundora  it  iuipoHaihlc
H ta|ioinioiit  more  than  the  leadioK  (ot'ui  aud  gen-
H  etal  ilMposition  of  the  interior;  therefore,  as  re-
V p^nUibe  pro01e  of  the  exterior,  merely  the  boiKbts
~ of  ibo  cornicefl  of  the  dlfferenC  onlera  are  shown,
^th  Itie  figurea  1,  S,  3, 4  place^l  against  tbein  tn-
■pecthely.


»


f  |W  nn  or  podlutn  on<-ln«in||  it.

^>  >^  fodhuB  IImU*,  od  whkli  w«r»  dwira  or  wnta  for  tbt  mim-

* '  ^*"*  BMnluraoi,  or  ikifw  of  bencbea,  fbr  Ui*  «qn«etitu

*jTlt  Mooad  tnumtauara.

*^>TUtblM  nuaUBum,  elevalad  conaldenblr  aboTC  ibe  pro

*>4litW*.Miil  Hpiiro|>r(Bl«<l  to  lb*  pnllaU.
*' Aa(Q)atuiail«.  or  Kxilniy,  whloh  contnlopd  auUx  for  koul-il
I  iMtermw  gBlI«i7  rnuml  t(w  miminil  of  Ibc  InWior,  far  Uie

*lwluaB  wbo  wvfkfd  the  TvUrliim
J^il^.Tto  fnmaaeUomat,  or  iBOdlofcu.  it  tW  t«|>  <>(  lh<-  t\nn  hbiI

*na4  ■amttaom,  la  ib^  [uiTc<rncDt  r^f  whirli  vfT«  x''*ti>ti

*V>n«n.u  iBUnrala,  to  admit  llgfat  loto  Uie  romllonii  \x-

•artOiMB.
JJ'T,r«iiiorUL
H H<l,tki  uuva  cxiereat  <aUerl«a  throo^t  ibe  eircQinfereiicc  f>t

v  ^iMiaa.  i>iMiD  to  ibrB  ftroulM  of  Uifl  Ami  Ibrra  orden  of

WMHnor,

Ovlog  to  the  smaUneaa  of  the  cut,  the  tntualion
ud  tfraogement  of  Btatronsee,  etc.,  are  not  ex-


praaMd.  u  sueh  parte  conld  banlly  bo  remli-red  in-
t«!Itgibio  exoopt  ui>on  a  gn>atly  incre:t«cd  itcule,
aud  then  not  iu  a  Rtugle  m-rlion,  nor  without  plans
at  various  levcU  of  the  buildiii^c.

Tbo  ColobMOum  covers  altugutbcr  about  tive  acres
of  ground;  the  trfttisverwe,  «r  longer  4liiuneter  of
the  external  ellipse,  is  615  fM't,aud  tlw  <;oujiigaUr,
or  shorter  one.  51<>;  vhile  tboM  of  the  intrriur
elliiwe,  or  arena,  are  2S1  aud  17tJ  feet  respei'tivcly.
Where  it  is  iwrfect,  the  exterior  is  ltt7  feet  high,
and  consisla  of  four  onlera — viz.,  iJoric,  Ionic,  and
Corinthian  —  iu  attached  tbre«-(]u:irter  colnnins
(that  is,  colli uiUH  one  fourth  of  wboi^e  cimiiiifen*uco
apjieurtt  to  be  buried  in  tbo  w nil  behind  tiienti,  aud
au  nppei  ordf-r  uf  Corinlliian  piliiAters.  Wllh  the
exceplioti  of  the  bi«t,  ciwh  of  Ibe.He  lieni  cuusi^ls  of
eighty  colmnni*.  ami  aauiiiny  arcbeH  between  them,
forming  uih>ii  gullcriefi  tbniughoiit  the  whole  cir<
Dunjfereuce  of  the  building:  but  the  fourth  lias
windows  iiiBtvad  of  largo  arcln'M,  and  tbr>«e  are
placed  only  in  the  alternate  intor-columUM — conse-
({[lently,  aro  oidy  forty  in  number;  and  thin  npper
[M^rtion  of  tbe  elevation  inm,  Imth  on  tlial  account
nn<l  owing  lit  the  t'oiupHrative  HUialluess  of  the
«l>oilnit?8  ib<;niselves,  an  expreMsion  of  greater  so-
lidity than  that  lielow.  Tlio  arches  formed  opCD
external  galleries,  with  others  behind  tbeui;  be-
sides which  there  were  several  other  galleries  aud
passages,  extending  beneath  the  seats  for  the  lipce-
t-storK,  and,  together  with  staircasee,  aft'ordiug  ac-
cetw  to  the  latter.  At  present,  the  seats  do  not  rise
higher  than  the  level  of  the  tbinl  order  of  the  ex-
t*-rior,  or  abiuii  half  it«  entire  height;  therefore,
the  upper  part  of  the  edifice  appears  to  have  con-
tributed very  little,  if  at  all,  lo  itJi  actual  eapartty
foraecommotlAting  spectators.  Still,  tbongh  ie  has
never  been  explained,  except  by  conjmTtiinng  t)iut
there  were  npi>er  tiers  of  heats  and  galleries  <at-
thongh  no  ntniains  of  them  now  exist),  wo  must
sappoBO  tbiU  there  existed  some  very  sulllcicnt  n>a-
aon  for  incurring  such  euorinous  expenne,  and  such
prodigal  waste  of  luntiTial  and  labour  beyond  what
utility  seems  to  have  dcuiunded.  This  excess  of
height,  so  ninoh  fcreater  than  was  neieessai?',  was
perliapH,  iu  some  niensure,  with  the  view  that,  when
the  building  was  covered  in  with  a  temporary
rooHiig  or  awning  {wf'irlnin),  as  a  defence  against
the  sun  or  riiiu,  it  shnuld  sreni  well  proportinta-d
as  to  height;  and  also,  perhaps,  in  order  to  ulUiw
tboflo  wbo  worked  the  ropes  anil  other  meebaiilKm
by  which  the  velarium  was  unrtdkd  iii'  drawn  back
again,  to  perform  those  operations  withniit  iucow-
moding  the  spectators  on  the  highest  seats.

With  regard  to  the  velarium  (tj.  v.)  itself,  nothing
at  all  conclusive  aud  satisfactory  can  now  be  gatli-
ored ;  and  it  boa  occasioned  considerable  di--4]uite
among  arcbawlogists  bow  any  temporarj*  covering
could  be  extended  over  the  whole  of  the  building.
Some  buvc  iniogiuefl  that  the  velarium  extended
only  over  jvart  of  the  building  ;  but,  independent
of  other  objections,  it  is  diflh-ult  to  conceivti  bow
such  au  extensive  surface  could  Imvo  bc^u  t<up-
pcirted  along  tbo  extent  of  its  inner  edge  or  cir-
cumference. The  only  thiug  which  nflbnls  any
evidence  as  to  the  mode  id  n'bich  the  velarium
was  fixed  is  a  scries  of  projecting  brackets,  or
oorbels,  ui  the  uppermost  story  of  the  exterior,
contaiiilDg  holes  or  sockets  to  receive  tbe  ends
of  poles  passing  through  holes  in  the  pmjectioD
of  (be  corniee,  and  to  wbieb  ropetii  from  tbe  rela-
rinm  were  tixed ;  but  thu  whole  of  the  upper  part


of  the  (nterior  U  now
ao  iltHUiaiitloi)  aH  t<>
reuiler  it  iiupiwLHililif
lu  d»cid«  will)  £-*"r-
Uiuty  in  wbat  uinn-
iiPi-  tli«  veluriuni  wn«
faxteiied.  Tbo  vrla-
rliim  nppears  usually
t4>  liave  Ikicii  mndu  of
Wjiivl,  Ijnt  nuiro  costly
nmrerials  wen*  iwimn-
ti  iiicH  eiti  |i  Iny  ?<1.
When  tli«  weatJier
dii)  net  ]H!riiiit  t\v
vi'Inriiinitolit!  njtreiMl,

till- Ko  II)  II  It  K lIHI-l)

hi'iind  -  briiiiiiifti  lintN
or  cap*  ipetani),  or  it
sort  of  ]inniMil,  which
Wllfi  cnllod  umbmrV-
/Hm.flYtin  wm&r(i,sh(l4le.

Thn  iiitrrior  of  the
oiHjiUithoatrL'  w:»f*  di-
Tiili'd  into  Ihnr  i>i)  h
—  tll«  tirena,  /•
mid  ^railwu  Thu  i-h'ar
(i)icii  Hpnoo  ill  tbe  vDii-
tro  of  tho  aiii]diilh«a-
trv  was  called  tho
oreiia,  bccau>^u  it  nas .
corcnxl  with  snnd  or
onwdust,  to  prevent
tlie Riadiittors from

alippiiig  and  to  nlworb  the  UIikkI.  Tliu  ttize  of  Ibn
arena  wbm  not  i)1w»,vh  tlio  Katno  in  |iro|Kiriion  to
The  Hlze  of  the  amiiUithcntre.  bnt  it«  avura^  pnv
portion  waH  onu  third  of  the  Bburtor  diameter  of
tho  building.

It  is  now  qnite  cli.<ar,  since  tliu  oxuaratiotis  of
1874-75,  that  thu  amna  hrni  no  actual  tiooriiiK  uf
boonls,  covorrd  n'itli  Kiind,  and  uinvable.  Thi«ru
iDuat  bavo  ticcu  u  aouterrain,  or  voalta,  at  iuter-


AMtltnn  uf  lll«  .


vnis  at  l«aat,  if  nut  tbrmigfaoitt,  boiimth
ua,  aa  lumirtiiiins  thit  aniniHlH  »nddeii)jr-  !■■
apparently  from  beneath  thi!  gnmnd  (sMi
annexed  illustratiou),  and  niachtnery  of  differ
kindfl  was  raised  up  from  bclov,  and  aft«rwi
diftdppcarod  lu  the  tuuno  maauvr.  That  Ul
iTiw  alfto  some  substruction  beneath  the  arcua
Home  anijih (theatres  at  least,  ifi  evidt^nt,  becM
tho  whole  aroua  wae.  ui>oii  particular


McUytf  or  BaatBC  WiM


AMfillTUEATRUM


AMl'Un'IILA'rUUU


l9!1ed  vith  wntor,  aitd  cniivert«d  into  a  ttaumarhui,
wiion*  rrMwld  eufjAgiMl  in  mltillc  ftOa-ligbU,  or  eliu»
rnMoilikA  tuil  other  anipliibiouit  luiuialM,  wore
niade  to  attack  uacL  utbur.  Xcio  ih  suiil  t«i  have
frr(|Ur-allyeiit«rraiuiHl  tbo  Koiuautt  M'illi  ti)K!Ctaclcn
Aiil  ilivenioUH  of  tliia  kind,  wlilcb  tuttk  jtlat-f  iiu-
nwdimMj-  After  the  cuHiotuary  giimoti,  aiiU  wtire
»i;piin  »ncci'viltfd  liy  tlicin ;  cousviiiiiMitl.v,  lt)l'^l^
iDUdl  ItAvo  i>tf«iii  i)t)t  only  uti  abiiiiiliiiit  itupply  of
«ai(<r,  lint  tiiifcliaiiiciil  n|i|>arutU8  nijNilili^  of  putir-
Jn;  it  in  aiul  driiii>)iig  it  off  ngnin  vury  esiiedl-
tifliwly. g*r  XaVMacuIa.

Tt*  .ireiia  vvas  Burrouudi'd  by  a  wall,  distiu-
([iiij"!H'4  liy  tlni  naiui*  i\(  podiinu,  altbouKh  Hucii  hji-
^lUlii>ii,  [wrluips,  ralbtr  Iwluii^a  tu  itivnily  tbn
upiier  |wr1  of  it,  fitriiiin^  tbu  parapet  i>r  balcony
Mon  tlii<  lii'Mt  ur  luneruiuHt  mh-uLm,  iioarMl  lu  t.be>
tnax  The  latlirr,  tbiTcfurt*,  watt  tw  inuru  tbaii  an
of)OQ»fidi?(iiirl,t(iirrouudi*d  by  anal  Inbuilt  cigbltt-n
t^t  hl);li.  uictuiuriiig  fruui  tbo  ^{ruiiud  to  tbr  tci]i
<^  lli«  parap«l ;  u  lieij^lil  coiiKidcrLil  ueti'Muiry  iu
•rter  lo  ruudur  Ibn  iiiiectattini  jiorfLt-tly  secure
(nun  tbi>  uttnuks  uf  thu  wild  licoHts.  Then)  wera
t>w  principal  4intmiioo8  lewliiig  into  tlio  arena,
ivnot  t]i0  (.'nd«  of  i^cb  axis  or  diameter  of  it,  to
vliJrb  M  many  pii8»ageft  led  directly  from  the  ex-
Krtvruf  tJM)  buildiHg;  bosides  secondary  onca  in-
t^TTenirij;  bctwenn  tbem,  and  communicatii)};  with
111*  wMTtiiin*  beoeatli  tin*  si-Atu  ou  tbe  poiliaia.

Tlw  fftill  ur  eticbmiire  of  tlie  arena  is  8U[ipoitod
''*  have  htttu  f:wr.<\  Willi  marldu  nf  mitre  or  letis
fMUlocM;  IwtsideM  wliicb  tbon^  appeai-M  to  bave
Wa,  Eq  ftiittiu  iimiaucvM  at  \vani,  a  aort  of  uetvTork
*^xm]  to  Ibe  tojt  of  tbe  ptwliiiin,  coiihioliutf  ofrail-
'"liior,  nitbcr,  oi»eu  trolltS'irork  uf  nielnl.  Fruiii
''■^mrnlioii  mode  of  tbis  iiotwork  by  ancient  writ-
**'!>.  litltc  nunc  cau  uuvr  be  ttathvntd  n;N]H>i-tiiig  it
'W  iliat,  iu  tbe tiuio  uf  Neru,  >tiii;b  mMtiii);,  or


Tbo  term  poilitm
was  aUo  applied  to
tbe  twrmue,  or  galltry
iteudf,  i  uiniudiatL'ly
abovu  Ibe  lower  ea-
<'I<H»iiru,  and  wLich
w  ft  i»  o  u  1  y  wide
ciinugh  to  contain
two,  or  At  tbe
iuo!it  tbreu,  niiig:c«  of
Ml  u  r  u  b  1 M  M  o  II  t  s  or
cbuini.  Tbi»,  ati  I>eiiig
by  far  tbe  Ih-M  nitnu-
tiou  for  distinctly
viuwing  tbtt  spurts  in
IliK  HfuuA,  nud  also
III  o  r  B  cum  fuodioiisly
art-eKnibli!  t  b  a  u  t  li  o
.scatH  bigber  v]*,  waa
tbi'  [ilaci^  act  apart
furKunaturs  and  other
peraODBofdiHtiuction,
Mich  aa  tbe  amboMto-
dor«  of  foTeiuii  iiarfs;
and  it  W[)«  here,  aim),
tbnt  the  em[ien>i-  him-
self UBcd  to  sit,  ill  an
elevated  place  tailed
sutfifettvt  or  rNtiV-u/iiM ;
uiid  likewise  thv  per-
wtn  who  f^sbitiitt^d  tbe
gameH,  on  ii  place  ele-
vated like  a  pulpit  or
Irihiinal  {fditori*  trihv-
n'lf).  The  Veatftl  Vir-
f(iiiH  at»o  appear  tu
have  hud  a  pUco  al-
lotted to  tliuiu  id  tbe


HHH)S£-rt-HHHH:


SSlSSiii*  •■RSS&fSi^  £S


itiv  l-luviiui  Aupttl-


f'T^


\:^'lM


vmtx


c^


pfiilinin,  an  baa  b«en  OMnmed
fiotn  H  piiMiagc  in  Suetouinti
{Attg.  44i,  though  this  ia  oidy
iiifcn-iilial,  as  tbe  pasiva};e  re-
lates to  an  earlier  rpgiilalioii
rtvtptxtilift  thnlliuatru.  Hume
of  tbene  niiu'blu  iwatH  weru  car-
rivd  away  in  the  Middle  Ages
tolw^  MiM^d  afic|iirtctipiil  Ibroues,
Above  the  podiuui  were  the
^tutux,  ur  (icnia  of  tbe  other
Mpciuatom,  which  were  divid-
ed into  waeniana,  or  storiea.
The  t)r»t  ntarnifinum,  eouHiRling


if"">*


•ti»t«ror  il  mifibi  have  Iicen,
**«ai)unied  with  gilding  ami
u)icr — a  cimiuiMtauoe  that
'"fim  ihe  tdra  of  itn  having
^  l^ilt  m*-t:il  -  work,  with
"*"•  and  oriiaiueiita  of  tbe
^t  DialtTiiil.  A»  n  further
"ftuw,  dilobcft,  called  furi/».
*''*«}iBI*ft  stirroundetl tbe


il^^pt^


^'S:i


Tb*  Colowcam. , Prawn  >>y  Rnufli^r  »ncr  l'bni(i(tnipti»  >


AMrnrntEATRUM

of  foortcen  rows  i>r  Mono  or  nitirblo  seoM,  was
B|)pn))>rlat«d  lo  tb«  <M]u*;«iriuii  order.  Tbe  shUa
■l<l)n>]trtat^  to  th«  t»cuaiur«  and  eqait««  ir^n
cuvvrvtl  with  cu»bluii«  \f»ifiUi}.  which  were  flrti
rt-m*A  in  th«  time  o1  Culifsuta.  Then,  OkdcT  nn  iu-
tc^^'i«l  or  tt|tact'.  trruii*>1  a  yraect^ttio.  nuil  fonuiii>;
ft  continniMl  lauding-phic^  from  i\\iy  »(>vpnil  »lair-
rsMw  in  it,  RncctHMltMl  the  w^c<hu1  iuii«niiuiuni,
trhrtv  wm*  th«>  M>ats  call«l  fvpti/ana,  fur  th«
iKtnt  r1a<^  nf  9}H><-taluni.  ur  the  pofttbu.  Uebind
tbi»  **!s  thf  -Mn'ontl  praecinctict,  bnuiidni  by  a  ratb-
vr  bijeh  wmI).  nUtVL*  vrhicb  was  the  third  mae-
oiannui.  wbrn>  there  wrr«  only  wootlcn  Ixinchr*
far  the  ftiiaii,  or  coinDioa  p«>nple.  Tbe  next  and
^  1mm  diviitiou— natnelr.  tbM  in  the  ht^be«t  part  of
itebuitdinp — rnntt)<t|r*l  of  a  r«doiiiiA<Ie  or  gallery,
Vinn  womeu  nvre  allowed  to  witness  the  «pe«>
tialw  <t(  tho  atnpbitbcAtn;',  S«)nie  parts  of  this
VMv  also  occupie\l  hy  the  pnllati.  At  the  very
•ttmnait  was  the  narmvr  platform  for  the  men
vbo  bad  to  actoitd  to  thv  wUriuoi.  and  to  ex-
ynd  or  aitbdraw  the  awDiag*,  as  inerK  might  Im


74  AWf  HORA

France;  at  Pola,  io  Istria;  and  at  Syrscnse  ai
C'atauia,  In  Sicily.  ,

For  an  ncronnt  of  th«  pamea,  rombat*,  otc,  h«1
iu  the  amphitheatre,  see  the  article*  (^iLAOUTuiuM
Naimacuia;  Vknatiusks.

Oil  (he  general  subject  of  aropbitheatrrai,  tl
reailer  in  referred  to  iJifl  folIuwiuK  fttandal
works:  LijMina,  D«  Av^MtAeaim ;  Nihby,  Di
Afji/tatrv  Fhvio,  a  aopplemeDt  to  Nanlini,  Tnl,|
p.  'J3lH;  Fea,  AWuw  dt^S  Scavi  ae/r  Anjiteairo  F^
no;  Buniwn,  B«sdtrtibm»9  d0-  SUMtii  Horn.  rol.  ii|
L^T«a•y  and  Taylor,  Arckitecfiral  Amti^ititM  i
Anac;  8tirgIJtx,  ^rcAWoyie  der  Bauhuat ;  Hi|
lietehickte  d.  Bamhaisr  Ui  dem  Alttn  ;  Rnni*  Rti
amd  Ike  Cemp^niit :  J.  \i.  Parker,  A'dtatolotiy  t
ftnmf,  part  Tii.;  Middleton,  /lancat  Ji^me  m  IM
id.,  Hfmai»t  a/Anci*mt  Roim  {ttXS).

Amphitxiti  (Wft^pinf).  A  Nereid,  wife  of  f
Midou  i.n.  V.I,  ami  mother  of  Tritoa  (q.  v.),

Amphitmo.  Tbe  title  of  a  comedy  of  T.  Mi)
eios  Plantns  (q.  t.),  and  diflvring  &om  tbe  otbH


r  *


~'\~\


mm


h^iti


iMwtar  af  (te  <


^MMiaik  Bnk  mamImimr  wa«  not  oiil,v  divid-
•i  INm  Mw  atWr  hf  ^  pi«cciiK<t<v  but  «iu  tn-
«MM*id  M  tntamti  V  alMkcr*  («f  pammgf  \*i\
katwcatt  lh»  awU,  eallnl  ara'a*  nr  m^tmnm ;  and
tka  nctlniL  ktalwwu  %-n\»  wmh  ptmrnf^m  ww  <«1M
*  iiMw»  WMtttf  tb»  apar*  giwlwiny  wWww4,
Mk«  a  «Ml|t«v  ftw  1^  foiliiiM  to  IW  lof  ttf  the
taUdiim.  The  e<nl«»lHo«  tn  tW  iMta  fkuw  IW
wMM  iiawticiM  «n««  «*lWd  ■■— >wi.ik  Weaaae,  wy*
ItottabtWfc.  W  I  II II  j^M*al*a  »^>*mNa  «  w4ih*

TImi>  wmv  in  the  aioi^iitlieMf*  <^««k»*V<I
t«lM%  (W«  «tiW4  aeevite^l  tu|«1«lN  WMv  hnaltvfvd
«rfT  the  aia4laf*<«*.  «*<*t  «bwl|  aMiie4tM«>a  UMtnl
ftvM alalia** pla-  '  - t parta nf  tW

Xbi.pix  ■  ■ • ■  ,1-. ,■.■..■-,■.  '^^  im»K»W>.»

a  r«K  >■  -*•  *^'*  '  '  "*  *■*«'

uilfcta  >f  li  I •  '^'""  *'- - t 1.  I  rwtiw  1^^

IMX*  MMfiliUkMtre*  «f  •!"<«>,  t*i  «*vuk.  il..  Ih*!
k«»wii  atv  at  Vf«w«Mk.  IN»**nw..  lN«*»pr-.i.  -i'-|
C»|HM.  in  UtJfyx  al  Xtwr^  AtW,  Mwt  l>4Mk  Mi


of  lii»  iWl  w*  iMaaeaf
W«qwk.  tl  ia  baaad  i
AlcaMi^  aad  law  W
l>r<Kk. and D«74u

D«AMA.

▲npkltiximar
««f  AlBMMMa  Kl

a»d  anwiai^y  fctW*

ptkitiTwi  wa  aUte  ta
«riWMIai«ML


'  n  Wing  in  ^irit  a  b
«  tfa*  ctocy  oC  lapiter  i
M  writetod  by  Molftea
la  SosliriL dee  Sanr


(•A^4.rp,W). i

•f  llmacli^  wbu  is
<See  ALCMBSiL)
waraeaiasS  Ei]^iia%

Stw  AKPRiaUlA

IM  TTC«rl«  naity  «f  etey.  wiik  ft  la«gHh  or  I

tefc  *w<MiJ  a  1  will  1 1  If  iiiiiiiftiii  to
anawtiwo  iiilnft  timl?^  •«  a  feo«.  Imi  oAco  i
lac  (a  a  M«M  |M«M.  **  itel  tft  tiw  stoiv-rDoai]
hm*  tw  h«n  acateoi  «W  waB  ar  W  cnk  m
awA.  « lw«  Wi^lltt  MM  ft«  aan^  to  1w  f«t  in  ■
*"-*-'• I 'II  -r1>-Tff[i-a  Mifti,

h  awwa  »a  ktiPfi  aO^kw;.  and  mow  •


AMPHRYSrg


76


AUYCUS


the  vincdmnii  off  (wm  the  big  fermfntiiiR  vats.
It  was  rMtrtim)  vilb  a  cliiy  fil(ip[ier,  iila-tterfil  nver
irjth  pitcili,  loAin,  or  gypfinm,  niul  liiul  a  I  li^ket  Htiit-
iug  tb«  kind,  tbo  j'ear,  aiul  l\w  <pia»lity  of  tbe
wioa  it  uMitaioeil. Tb«  Greek  atixftopiCe  wms  •


^Argv  )li)nt<l  mensiirr  hoblJttf  nearly  tiin(<  gallnnH
lK<i  HxTliBTEfi);  tbe  RuiuHD  nicasare  colled  oin-
;>Wii  held six galloDB ami ae\-oii piut«. 8w

VlXlH.

ABphrfstu  CA/i^^pvffof).  A  smnll  stream  itt
DieaMl.T  tlunring  into  tlM>  PagaMonn  8iuuB.  On
»*lita]ca  KpoWo  ^il  tbo  bet-d«  i>f  Adiuetua  (q.  v.)l

Ajnpaaga.  A  rivnr  of  Nortli  AfricB  flowing
F"t  Itf  town  of  Cirt*.  aud  dividlof;  Namidiii
[irtm  Uaiiritunia  Sitifeiibts. (Ptol.  iv.  3,  $  -*0.}

Anpaanctua  (or  Amaanctiu)  Laous. A  suiall

JjI"  iu  Kaiiiiiiiiiii,  urnr  Ai?cn-

vliicli,  by  rPa»on  tif  its

If  va[M>nn(,  waa  rejfuU'd

the  entnmcc  to  tbe  luwer

'oAl lCic-/Je/>iV.  i.36.)

^■^  I- A  tall,  slender,  uarrow-
^kfil  vonsel,  witb  a bandte,
•"d  tor  perfnmpH,  iingti^nts,
^■gir,  water,  nnd  wini^  (niu-
Pft>w*oriiii. l^ekyllii  were  of
("Want  uac  at  tbe  toili-tH  nf
<•»*  |juli«. Tbey  alftt  h<iM
U"  oil  tisftd  ill  aiioiniing  iho
of  tbe  di'jul. Tbu  am-
Vuuaul  iu  (bu  ('liritiliaii
ittB  rcceplucte  far  thn
tfvaicr  of  thn  itocra-
|M,«|PI  ibr  hnldiug  the
'ttUorrbriKm.

AopntaUo. 8cp  ItnicirM.

ABpyx  I'Afxm'^).  &ili  i.f
y'^^.  Iiiisbaiui  of  Cbloris,  mid
Mlirr  uf  M(i)i«iu  (q.  T.),  inrbo  was  beitce  kuowQ  as

*"pyx  (rtMirv^),  (1)  A  frontlet  or  baud  worn
'T  "fipi'k  indies  to  confine  tbe  hair;  passing
fl^ikii  Uio  front  of  tbL«  bead  and  faatcned  Uk-
"^  IIWMoftvn  ufguld  or  ittlrur.  and  adorned
''ft  pneioua  atouna. UcHyobiiut  (iiipiKiM<s  meu


rorau  of  the  Arepj-x

to  bavc  worn  frotitlcta  in  Lydin;  nnd  tliey  ap-
pear to  Iiave  boeu  worn  alfwi  by  tbo  Jews.  (2)  A
fnmtlet  woni  by  horses,  nnd  aouietimcfl  by  ele-
pbantit,  (ifit<n  highly  omanidatcd.

AmpUatio.  The  Latin  term  for  n  delay  of  reiv
diet  ponding  thi:  priHliirtion  of  further  cvldt-oce
in  a  caxo  not  clear  Ut  tbo  judges. Hv^  COMi'L-

nUXliINATlO.

Amulfitum  (vtftiairrovt  irtplafLfm,  '^t'Xarr^puw').
A  cbsrui  worn  by  a  linnian  buing,  or  even  by  ^n
auiiual,  to  av<.'rt  evil  or  itecnn;  %wn\  fortune.  Tbe
word  is  from  tbe  Arabic  kamdU-t,  nifianing  ■'  that
wbivb  ia  anapeudeil."  Amuleta  arc  »n  oSd  iu  the
Homeric  ^tStkv  (Ud.  x  Ttth5»;  hut  appear  to  bave
been  iiitrodiicrd  into  Komc  from  tbo  Ea«C  nnder
tbe  «nrly  Ktnpire.  The  woni  Is  tlrst  uftod  lu  Pliny
{If.  X.  xxxvii.  ^  134).  Tlioy  consiHt  of  gcma  cr
t*touPB,mi*talM  (e.g.  coiii»<'r,  iron, culd);  platitsto.g.
lnurul,bclk'b('rr,ltg);  auiuiaNand  partii  orauimata
{v.  g.  tbn  Hpidrr,  tbu  bat,  thr  dofr'a  jtn}],  tUv  aas'a
t«8tirU*8,  ivulFs  fat);  parlji  aud  Heeruliono  of  tlic
bnman  body  |e. ;;.  tbr  blond  of  Klndiatom,  the  cyv*
tooth  of  a  corp8«;;  nnd  artilicial  mhiipeo  aft«u
obaceuti.  ThH.-4»  wero  attncluil  to  a  cbaiti  or  biOt
passed  nvor  one  ahonhlor  aud  under  tho  other.
8oo  Pliny,  il.  -Y.  Uk.  xxxvli.;  O.  Jnbn.  Cther  titn
bofM  liiif-k  in  Berichte  tier  ta-ihsiachen  GattUvhnft
fl8o5);  C.  W.  Kiug.  l^tcious  Stows  and  Sfetats;  Mnr-
4iuan)t,  Riym.  Altert.  vi.  p.  104;  Lnbatut  lu  l>atvui-
borg  aud  Saglio,  a.  b.  v.;  aud  tbo  articles  Ul'lla;
Crepcndia;  Fascincm;  Li:.viilae;  Fhalekar.

Amoliua. See  KoMULt'8.

AmnaalB.  A  level  nstfd  in  testing  the  eveiinc«a
uf  a  burfiKe. Sc«  LiBEiXA ;  Norma;  Rkgula.

Amyolae  ('A^u«Xm).  (1^  Au  ancient  town  of
Ijju!<mia,  on  tbn  Eurotfut,  tM-«nty  milew  80iitbe«Rt  of
Sparta.  It  \h  said  to  have  bouri  tbe  abode  of  Tyu-
ilurua,  and  of  Caator  and  Pollux,  who  are  bence
L-iitled  Amyclacii  Fratrcs.  After  tbe  conquest  of
Pelu|Hinnesu»  by  tbe  Dorian»,  the  Achaeaus  maiu-
taiiied  tbemseWealn  Amyclae  for  a  longtime:  but
it  nas  at  length  taken  aud  destroyed  by  tbe  Laca-
daemuuiauB  under  Teluclus.  Auiyclae  ntJll  coutiu-
ned  meimirubb!  by  the  festival  of  tliu  Hyacinilna
celebrated  at  tbe  ]>Iare  anutially,  and  by  tbe  eolott-
sal  Mtatue  of  Apollo,  who  \va»  heucu  tailed  Am,v-
claens.  (2)  An  aiielflnt  t<iwn  uf  Latinm,  ca«t  of
Temicinn,  on  the  HitiuH  Arayclauuit,  claimed  to  bo
nn  Aebat-an  colony  from  Lucuuin.  Xbe  iubabitaat»
netu  Haid  to  have  deaeil4:-d  it  on  account  of  ita
bciug  )nfeBt4?d  by  fterpeuts;  wbeuce  Vergil  Hiwuka
of  tacilat  AMtfclat  {Aen.  x.  504.)

Amyclidea. Hyaciutbas  fq.  v.).

Amj^ouB  ('A^vkoc). a  sou  uf  PoMiidun  ;  a  gigun-


t\c.  Itiiifc  r>f  th^  Itrhn-riimn  on  llio  nitbyiiiAn  coMt,
who  fiirrfil  i-rtry  Ktruiij^or  tlint  1rii(1p«I  iIiitq  to  box
Willi  lilni,  Whon  tin-  ArKonnntft  wImIiciI  to  ilniw
wntcr  fnun  n  *{>ritix  in  liii>  runiiiry,  ho  forUodc
thriu,  hill  nriw  rniM|iiM'cHl  ainl  killed  iti  a  matoh
wilh  PoI,v«l*in'c»t  iPollui).

Amymoutf  iWfivnut^).  Tli(>ilaitKtiti>rofr>aiiaU«
(q.  v.|,  mill  mother  of  Nniiiilinn  hy  I'OAcidon.

Arayiitaa  CAfivrrat).  (I  i  A  kln>c  of  MnrMonia,
whnii'iBin'»l  fmniAliniil  li.c.5-111  to5<K),And  wab  huo-
ccrih-il  by  htK  mmi  Ali'xnmlcr  I.  (V)  Kili^;  or  Miii-e-
doiiiii,  will  i>(  Philip,  llir  lirulJirr  of  Ponliccu  II.,
rni>(iirHl  tt.c.  ySi^'MW,  ami  ulilitiiird  Mm  crown  hy
titr  nmnlM'  of  thu  nHurpfr  I'mmaiiijiM.  Hf  curt*-
flilly  cultlvatrU  tim  frIeiidtthLti  cf  AthciiK.  IIr  left
hy  hill  wifn  Uiirydl«-<<  throo  Miua,  Ali^xuiidtT,  Per-
(UrrttM,  jind  tlio  faiuuuH  Pfaili|i,  liouco  rjUle«l  by
Ovid,  Aiiiyntlndiu.

Amyittor  {'\nvvTi»p).  A  Iting  of  tho  Dolopoc,
and  I'ltthi-i'  of  PlxM'nix  (q.  v.),

AmyitiB  (iif«t'<rTi  winif,  ri/ifcrrii'  wivitp,  ufivKTri-
Cttf),  iVoin  II  Hiul  ^t'>w.  ti  dritiight  lukoii  withmit
driiwIitK  hrcnih.  Il  wait  a  favourite  iiiiitiHAiiiDiit
with  the  (Irt'ukii  to  try  how  nmvh  they  ooiild  hwhI-
luur  ill  thin  way.  uiiil  vt-rj'  lai-|{0  qtiaiiritir.«  an*  Huid
to  havr  Ikh'H  drunk.  Plnlo  i,>y»y,,  au  At  roiin?-
MMito  SiKTuti-M  and  AloU*iatti>s  lu  draining;  olY  tlio
Ci>nl4'titft  uf  n  wiiicf-coolfr  hoMliitt  i-i)ilit  crmyXni,  or
nearly  two  qnnrtii:  wliilt--  AK-xaiHUT  the  Great  i»
Mtld  to  have  grt^nlly  ex.i.MM'itod  thin  ninntint.  Kpbip-
piu  rclnti-)!  thtit  ho  Huccovdcd  in  emiilyin);  a  vc-mrl
eonljiliinif*  two  yi'nt,  or  more  tlinn  two  j^nllona  atid
ahnlf,  nnd  ufton^ardw  nttt>inp(t>d  to  drink  nM'coiid
ill  tbo  -^aiiH'  way.  This  howcviT,  nlTi'i'tt'd  liim  »o
nnirh  nH  |o  bi-iiig  on  tlio  illneM  wliicli  K'HiiltiHl  in
bin  itralh,  Tho  iinnto  wn«  nlwt  npplicMl  to  a  kind
of  ^-oMarl  ndn|it<Hl  fur  IbtH  kind  uf  drinking.
(AUiPB.  X.  f*K  \y  iV*  fuU. :  07,  p.  447.)

Amythaoo  t.  Aiii'Aiwf).  A  hoii  of  CretbiMu  and
Tym,  mill  fntluMr  of  BiM  and  Mtdatupus.  (OJ.  xi.
£U.i SofOU'MriA.

Anab&aiB  (iit-iVfo'")*  (D  Tb«  title  of  X«no-
phon>  naiTuttvo  of  1b(>  10,000  Cirvrk  troops  in  the
«x|<«Hlitioii  Ulld^r  Cyriiw  lliv  Vouuj;vr  aj^niuftt  his
brotluM  Arl«\('rx«'».  It  in  in  m'vch  iHxtkisof  wliiidi
lb«  rtr»i  aloor  dxnU  \Niih  tli*-  aK^nau.  or  niarcti
up  fW>in  ibc  c%tiu«T,  ihi-  iv«\  rcliitinx  to  Ibe  «(iTd3a-
r«r,  tw  n-trcAt  nnd  »iil>»oqiipiit  iiilvi>utiin!>»  of  (be
Toil  Thoasaud.  (^'i  The  .4iKt^i*u  v/  .^hl^^mt^^r.  by
Arriauim  mi-  v  i.  rontniu'*  an  scomnt  of  ibo  cani-
iMilKuw  of  AteAMiUvr  Itu*  GivAt,  uritirn  in  titv  wc-
ioid  oi>nlury  a  tK  Like  tb«  .4M&a»M  uf  Xouopbou.
il  w  in  avveu  iMuks.

Aniof . 8m  l>toacirw.

AaM^anto  :'.\>dx^mc).  A  Sc.tthtan  prince.
whti  eMDV  to  .Mhrtkit  «b(Mil  II.C  r4M  lo  punrnv  s
co«r*<*  -'^  -"■■'>■  lie  was  a  friend  of  ^don  aud  a
■UOi  -  On  bU  n>tnru  to  his  uattre  laMl,

ba  wj.-  ^--  '  hy  hts  btvibvr  s^nliua^  A  oainbn
of  BfAwHsaM  ir«>rr>  ascrilMo*!  u>  h  iiu.  mni  b*  was  nU
to  Ikav*  lantilvd  Ibr  U>1)o««»  tkc  aadwr^and  Ibe
piUf«^«lMwl-  Aii«aiWr(if«ri>4le8aiflatvd»la
HvfklR^aKriWtnltohim. Sm  8aM«a.  i>HC  xc

iMWina  ( Apm^amt).  a  ftiaiiiw  Gvnk  Syrw
|ia<4.lM>nakMi4  iLC^SfKat  Ti-aM^aa  U^Hm  tovta  of
A«t*,  wbrtW  lalwbltants.  1«  ftffm  iW  ItowiiajJ
)^*k«  vS  IVnU«  «1«T*I<«I  I*  AMetm  tn  Tkncv^  A.r.
%m Ftw  AMn«.  AwMmM  vwt  t>»  tb«  tyrant


ASADTOMENE

rcmnved  to  Athcnnun  Ihr  inTitation  nf  Hlpparalii
and  livi-il  there,  till  the  fall  of  the  Peisiatratldai
on  friendly  temw  with  U\n  fe]|ow-i»oei  Slmotiideaj
and  Xanthippnif,  the  fntber  of  Pericles,  fie  ta  saKJ
to  have  died  at  Abdcra  ia  bi«  eiffbty -sixth  ynal^
choked  hy  thu  etone  of  a  dried  )>;ru)ie.  A  Ktattil
of  bim  iilooil  ill  the  Acropolin  nt  Athena  in  lb|
piiseof  an  aged  iiiiiistnd  innpirrdhy  the  wInc-giNl;
fur  Aliarreon  was  regarded  as  the  type  of  a  [hM
who,  in  B)dte  uf  age,  paid  |terpettml  bouiage  tl
wine  and  love.  Love  and  wine  and  merry  com
pauy  fonued  ilio  favonrit«  enhJcctA  of  his  UgU
sweet,  and  gracefnl  iiong»,  which  were  east  in  I
ttielred  of  the  Aeolic  poota,  hnt  composed  in  1
Ion  ic  d  irtleet.  Ilcsides  frngmcnt^  of  snch  Kongs  nni
of  eh'git'H,  we  have  al&o  a  nnmber  of  epigrams  tldl
liear  his  name.  ITis  soiign  were  largely  iniilntej
and  of  iinch  iinitntiniiB  wo  have  nndiT  bin  numei
eulteetittn  urulKint  Hixty  love-tuings  and  driukiiig>
Hougs  <if  very  variouM  (portly  much  lat«r)  dato^
and  of  dini'rent  degree*  of  merit.  Of  these,  ttM
rcnderiugfl  by  Thomas  Miwre  are  uu»nr{»aK«ed  tl
grace  and  uieluily.  The  geiiuino  rrngiueuls  aVf
cuutuiucit  iu  Bergk's  I'otlae  L^riii  (Jratt:*  (4tb  «4i
I87H).  Tmnslalion  edited  by  itnllcu  (N*.  Y.  1690).  |
Anacrlala  (apaKpims).  The  pleadings  iii^psctf
tory  to  II  trial  at  Athens,  the  object  of  which  v^
to  determine,  generally,  if  the  actiou  would  IH
(f'^fTti^DtKri  d<  Kat  «r  uXwr  tltrAytw  vp')^-  The  tna^
istrates  were  said  a^oK/HMiy  rijy  diK^c,  or  rovr  oil!
rtSiVoft,  and  the  purtien  avoKtHyta-Bai.  The  pro*
em  C4»tisi8t(Ml  in  the  pr^idnetioa  of  proo£>,  «({
I  which  there  were  tive  kin<Ii(:  (1)  the  laws;  (I
wriltea  duciimeiils,  the  prodacttou  of  which  bj
the  oppoetitc  party  might  l>e  L-onipeUcd  by  a  Am
fir  ifitpaif^v  KaTiiarairiv ;  (3)  testimoDios  uf  wil
neiwcft  pn*(»cnt  (^mpruptat),  or  nOidavita  of  ahM-ii
wttnoMes  {iKfutfTvpiaOi  (4)  dcpositiona  of  elavc
extorted  hy  the  rack;  ^5)  the  oath  of  the  partiw
All  tbMe  proofs  were  committed  to  writing,  an
placMl  iu  a  btix  sectinHl  by  a  seal  (t'xlyos)  till  tbe
weni  pHMliice^l  at  the  trial.  Tlie  nsme  avoKffiffi
is  given  to  tlie  pb^ad)ngis  ronitiden'd  expressly  n
a  written  document,  in  laaeoa.  If  tbe  evidetic
produced  at  the  annorisia  waa  ao  clear  and  eot
viucing  that  tbero  could  not  Tcnaaio  any  if'"-'
the  magistrate  conhl  deeiilo  the  qnotiou  v
fN<nditig  the  cauae  to  Lc  trinl  before  the  t\i^  --.
this  was  railed  itaftrnfrrvplm.  Id  tlli*  caar,  the  ou
reoieOy  fur  Ibe  person  agaiusC  wbou  the  de«
sioD  was  given  was  to  Wing  an  actioo  of  i>r
jury  B^iust  llie  wilnraMa  (^viottaprvparv  Urm
These  ploading^  like  oar  nwu.  wen*  ItabV
vrxattoua  dal^^  on  ibr  part  of  the  Ittiganta,  r
eept  iu  the  case  of  action*  conoemiug  mcrcbai
dtsr,  brueflt  aocielies,  ndnev.  and  dowriea^  whi
w«m  neceaaaiilj-  trie>«l  Mttbin  a  montb  fh>m  f
cumawnceiMMit  of  the  suit,  and  wei«  Ifcerrf^
MlM  y^^nw  iUat,  Tke  word  oracMnr  U  WO
liKMB  Msd  of  a  trial  iu  feneral  (p^  rU  ^tft^
•  iA*»\  Tbfi  atrboDS  wnr  tltv  prvpvr  ofloan  M
(be  i»9m^»xf.  &f<-  Meter  awl  ISclmBBW,  Attitct
/V»eM»,- Pla4iivr,fVar»»w«/AV.i#ra.-  andtbetfl

cWa  Aacuox ;  Axnoaxrut;  Axivotu^tA.

ABMtoiitun  {\\Mwri^mm\ A  Iowa  ti  Aam
aU,  Ml  tW  AmbraciaB  Gall

(ihrtifii)^ SeeMrru.
i^Jiiw^v SeeMnma.


An  efiiklKt  of  A^fcndiU  («(.  v.


ANAGLYPTA


7T


ANAXANUIUDKS


^^.ziaglypta  loroyXvirTn). Sro  CAKLATi:kA;  To

.^kJiagnia. I'hn  rliiof  town  tif  tlio Tlt-riiirl,  in
VAty*  ■»".  ui^ur  whirji  CioeTct  bml  a  Him  twlutu.
.A^agiiostae  inpayinxmuX Se«  IjECTOREH.

I^AJiagoges  Dlk6  (uroyoyiJE  JI1K7). If  an  iudlviil-
ml «<>td »  nlav(^  who  bull  M>m«  Hccrft  iliHeoAc —
■it<*li.  fill-  iiibtatico,  ns  epilepKy  — witlioiit  iiifoniiiu;;
lUio imrrli:iM:r  of  tlio  circimiNtiiUci',  it  nun  iti  (he
|M^v«r  of  thti  IntU'r  tu  briii;;  aii  nctitni  uj^uiiiHt  llir
'Vi>ii4liir  wilhiii  a  rortuin  liiiic,  wbirli  wiw  (Ixwl  hy
Um lawH. In  oriWr  to  ilo  iIiim,  be  luul  I0  n^iiort
(^ca-y«iv}  to  (li<>  iirojter  aiitburilics  I.b4<  iiiitur«  nf
tiie diix-iiMi; wbcuce  tba  ;icl.iuu  v/att  callisl  ava-
Ajiasosia  (uva-yi^ymt. A  ft'jttival  cflubrntcd  at
Ery  at  in  Sicily  in  bonoiirof  Aplirudit**.  Nino  tiays  la-
ter, aacfdnil  fcHtiviil.tbc  <tciTuyM-yui,wa«  celebnitwl.
-Aji^tia  I'Ai^iVisK An  Armenian  gCMi»U*S8,  jirob-
^^»My  to  In-  iilfntifii'tl  witb  A[>Uroditrf. Hor  lempte
^Kmuo«|  ill  ilin  ilislinrt  of  ArilitwDL',  in  tbe  territory
^H>frtwepD  ibfi  northern  iintl  (tonllifrii brancln-s  of
tliis Enpbmtee. This  t<>m{>lo  Inid  Het  npart  for  it
» larpe tract of  hiiKl, which  wju*  cnltivnlfil by
miOfl  and  reiuah\  sIuvfs(IrfKi«iHi'>nil. It  wiut  fiimoiw
for  itH  riches,  and  from  it  Antony  in  bi:*  l*iirltilHii
C|;>«^iti(in  tiurriuit  awoy  an  iinuKC  af  the  giMbh^Mt
Jo  iif  solid  Rohl  (Pliny.  //.  A.  xxxiii.4). Aimiiin
I  worMhipped  iilrto  ut  Zela  in  rontus,  and  in  Co*
■■ — Aninit-;  the  LydiitiiK,  the  nuniu  Annltitf  wtut
iven  ti>  Arti-nii8(pBnsan.  lii,  16.8).
■Anakeia  {dyuKtia). A  fe<stivul  of  the  Dioscuri
"1-  ^.i.'T  ■'Ai«iic»f,  held  at  Athens.
■AsUies  ('Avacf  f). Sve  DiOSCl'KI.
^ttakJeteria  idroKXrirfifHa). Tho  uanio  of  a  so-
6»miiiy  at  wliicb  Ihi;  luinority  of  a  youiii;  prince
)  (lii^lnreil  at  an  end,  ;uid  be  aMxiimed  tba  reins
gOT'erninent. Tli« name  \va>*  chielly  applied
Hie  coniin;;  of  age  of  thp  Plideiuuic  kings  of
ITid(PoIyb.  xviii.aS;  xxviii.  10).
•Anakoatfd^  {dvaKa^uHij). Tlip  cert'inoiiy  of  n;-
iniuig  to  his  native  land  the  bmly  or  anltcs  uf
[Dnovbu  had  died  abroad.

Amlemma  idyaXtifA^o). (1)  In  the  plural,  wnlln

^Miill  on  Bironj;  fonndntioDs. {U)  An instntuient

Ufftl  to  »how  I  he  differeut  altitudes  of  ibe  »uu  itt

I  dilfejYiit  i>eri<>dB  of  the  year  (Vitruv.  ix.  7,  ti,

\7\. See  (Jnomox.

Aoiloglsta  aud  AnomaliatB. Si^t^  Piiiu>ia>uia.

AnBDcaeuni  (dyayKaio^}. A  large  driiikitif;-v<-»-

"V  ibtTSB  etyiuolugj-  HuggvHtx  that thw ilrinki^r

'<•  «nn]M-ned  to  empty  it  at  a  draught  iPlant.

^^.ii.:i.:i;i|. See  Amystis.

AaapUyatos  {' AydifiXvirros].  A  Ueiue  of  Attica,
<"■  (W-  Muthweeteru  coast.  It  belonged  to  the  tribe
A»tlc«l,i».

^Aipaa  ('Avdiror).  (1)  A  river  in  Sicily  lluwing
'"to  the  sea  south  of  Syrneime.  (2)  A  river  in
Atanuuu  emptying  into  the  Acbc-lollB.

Aott  The  modem  Guadiuua;  one  of  Ihu  chief
Jj^winfeimirniniptyiiij;  into  the  ocean.  It  formed
*"BowK|(iry  b^'tweeii  Itaeticaand  Lnsitania.

AjiatoklamiiB  (nvnTncnr/Mr). Sec  Kksum.

*^*>umaoliioQ  Orapb6  {dvavftaxiov  ypatpff).  An
™l**clinfnt  of  the  trieraich  who  ba<l  kept  nloof
'""' Miion  while  the  rest  of  the  fleet  was  eu-
^"^  111  a  cause  of  this  kind,  a.^  in  the  kindred
^•'••a  wrrptrrtlas,  d(iXi'«f,  Xmovauri'oi',  yivora^Sw,


fOJBl


!-l^l't


tho  stratoRi  were  iiatnrnlly  the  presiding  jndgea
Tho  penalty  wa«  ffri^iin.  without  cenfi-Miation  uf
pKHlx,  if  vn  may  tnist  Audocides;  vrhereaB  on
ronvirlion  SnXlav  or  Xifrorn^i'ov,  the  property  of
the  ofti-ndi-r  wnt^  confiRcated  (Lys.  e.  AInh.  i.  f  9).

Anaxagfiraa  (' \va^Qy(t(iax).  A  (i reek  phi1n«o-
plipr,  of  CI:l7^inieriiie  in  AKiri  Minor,  born  about  B.C.
500.  Sprung  from  a  noble  fiitnily,  but  wit«bing  to
devote  himself  entirely  to  ecicuce,  he  gave  up  bta
property  to  bis  kiuHineii,  nuil  removed  to  AtUvun,
where  be  livud  in  intimacy  witb  (bo  nnwt  di»ltu-
gulslied  men — above  all  with  IVrirles.  Shortly  lie-
fun*  the  outbreak  of  the  Peloponnesiau  War  be  was
charged  by  the  political  opponents  of  IVrielea  witb
iuipiety.i.e.  with  denying  the  titwlti  recognized  l}y  the
State;  and.  though  ac(|uttted  Itirongh  his  friend's
inlluenee,  he  felt  (Ktmiielled  to  emigrate  to  LaiD|i>
Haeuh,  nhtrte  he  died  woon  Hfler,  aged  seventy-two.
He  not  iin!y  bml  the  houour  of  givii>g  philonopby  5
bouic  at  Athens,  where  it  went  un  lloni'indiing  fur
•inito  a  thounaiid  years,  but  be  waM  the  tii-st  pbi-
toso]dierwho,  by  the  side  of  the  material  prineiple,
introduced  a  Hidiitual,  which  givett  the  other  life
and  fottn.  He  laid  down  tiioiloctnur  in  a  work  "On
Naliire"  in  [h«*  Ionic  dintect.  of  which  only  fnig-
nieulM  aru  prvHerveil.  Kike  P.irnienidea,  be  deuied
the  existence  of  birth  or  death  ;  the  two  procesMS
were  rather  to  be  di-(tfrilN-d  an  a  mingling  ami  uu-
uingliug.  The  nlliuiate  elements  of  combination
aw  inilivisildr,  iiiiprriBhablc  pmnt/rJiu  of  iutiuite
number,  and  <li(l'ering  in  sbaiK',  colour,  ami  lante,
called  by  himself  "seeiU  of  Ibiligs."  and  by  Inter
writers  (from  an  expression  of  Aristotle)  nfiato-
^fifia,  1.  e.  particles  of  like  kind  with  eneh  other
and  with  the  whole  that  is  umde  up  of  them.  At
Hrst  these  lay  mingled  without  order;  but  the
diviue  spirit  — «itf,  pure,  paasiouIesB  reaaou  —  eel
the  unarraDgcd  matter  into  motion,  and  thereby
eriiHled  out  of  chaos  an  orderly  world.  This  move-
uiHiit,  proeeeiHng  from  the  eetilre,  workH  im  for-
ever, peuetniLing  fi^rlher  and  farther  the  iutiuite
uiaiut.  But  the  npplication  uf  tliu  Hpirituul  piiu-
ciptc  was  rather  indieutt-M  than  fully  carried  ont
by  Anaxaguras:  he  hiin»eU'  eommouly  explains
pbeuiiitieua  by  physical  cansei*,  and  only  when  he
cannot  Und  these,  falls  back  on  the  aetion  of  di-
vine reason.  The  fragments  of  his  nuwt  important
work  were  edited  by  ScbaubHch  (liftf?),  and  by

S<dHim  (1H49).  See  alw»  Heekel,  AhitTaiiitriie  Itoc
trinii  df  ftf.fmit  Animtttis  (>ltiliHler,  l)^K8),  and  llidier-
weg,  tJiMf,  of  I'liihtojihy,  vol.  t.  pp.  0U-(!7  ( Kng.
trans.,  X.  Y.  \&'£\.  For  rriticism  of  Anaxagoras
hy  Lucretius,  sec  the  IM  Rerum  Natnra,  \.  K10-9SH).
Anaxagoreia  (dva^ayoptia).  A  day  of  recreation
fur  the  youtliH  at  LnmpsaeUH,  which  took  place
once  every  year,  in  compltaiice  rritb  a  wi}>L  ex-
prussetl  by  Atjaxagoras,  who,  after  Wing  expelled
from  Athens,  !ti>eiit  the  rtMuatuder  of  bis  life  there,

Anaxandrldea  i'.\pii$tivflftiS']s).  (1)  A  king  of
Sparr.ii,  who  n-igtied  from  about  B.O.  fiGO  to  r>aO.
Having  a  barrrn  wife  wboui  be  would  not  divorce,
the  flpbnra  innile  bim  take  witb  her  a  second.  Hy
her  be  bml  (?U-omPueM;  ami  nftrr  tins,  by  his  fir>t
wlfi%  DorieuH,  I^MinidaH,  and  IMeonibrotns.  {tJJ  A
Kbodian  tireek  poet  of  the  Middle  Comeily.  who
tlourisbod  in  n.c.  :t7it.  Me  is  said  to  have  In^en
the  tlrst  to  make  love  affairs  the  theme  of  comedy.
Flis  plays  arc  said  to  have  Iweii  characterized  by
sprightlinesK  and  humour,  but  only  fragments  of
them  are  now  in  exist«ooe.


AMAXARCmJS


78


ANDOCIDES


Anazarchus  (Ava^dpxof).  Aphilosopfaerof  Ab-
dera,  of  tbe  school  of  Deaiocritus,  who  accompaaied
Alexander  into  Asia  (B.C.  334).  After  tbe  death
of  Alexauder  (b.c.  323),  Auaxarcbas  was  tbrowo
by  shipwreck  iuto  the  powef  of  NioooreoD,  king
of  Cyprus,  to  whom  be  had  giveu  offenfie,  aud  who
bad  him  pounded  to  death  in  a  stone  mortar.

AnazarXt^  (Aya^aprn]).  A  maiden  of  Cy pros,
treated  her  lover  Iphis  with  such  haughtiness  that
be  banged  himself  at  her  door.  8be  looked  with
such  indifiereuce  at  the  funeral  of  the  youth  that
Aphrodite  changed  ber  into  a  stone  statue.

Anaziiuandar  (*Ava|ifuu'dpor).  A  Greek  phi-
losopher of  Miletus,  bom  B.c.  611,  and  hence  a
younger  contemporary  of  Tbales  aud  Pherecydes.
He  lived  at  tbe  court  of  Polycrates  of  Samos,  aud
died  B.C.  547.  In  bis  philosophy  tbe  primal  es-
sence, wbicb  he  was  the  first  to  call  apx^,  was
the  immortal,  imperishable,  all-including  Infinite,  a
kind  of  chaos  (airitpov),  ont  of  which  all  things
proceed,  and  into  which  they  return.  He  com-
posed, iu  tbe  Ionic  dialect,  a  brief  and  somewhat
poetical  treatise  on  bis  doctrine,  wbicb  may  be  re-
garded as  tbe  earliest  prose  work  on  philosophy;
but  only  a  few  sentences  out  of  it  are  preserved.
Tbe  advances  he  bad  made  iu  physics  and  astron-
omy are  evidenced  by  his  invention  of  the  sun-
dial, bis  constniction  of  a  celestial  globe,  and  bis
first  attempt  at  a  geographical  map.  See  Ionian
ScuooL;  Philosophia.

AuajdmtSnea  {'Ava^tn^injs).  (1)  A  Greek  pbilosu-
pber  of  Miletus,  a  younger  contemporary  aud  pupil
of  Auaxiuiauder,  who  died  about  b.c.  503.  He  sup-
posed air  to  be  tbe  fundamental  principle,  out  of
which  everything  arose  by  rarefaction  and  conden-
sation. Thisdoctrine  be  exiwnuded  in  a  work,  now
lost,  written  iu  tbe  Ionic  dialect.  (2)  A  Greek  soph-
ist of  Lampsacns,  a  favourite  of  Philip  of  Macedon
aud  Alexander  tbe  Great.  He  composed  orations
aud  historical  works,  some  treating  of  tbe  actions
of  those  two  princes.  Of  these  but  little  remains.
On  the  other  band,  he  is  tbe  author  of  the  Rhetoric
dedicated  to  Alexander,  the  earliest  extant  work
of  this  kind,  which  was  once  included  among  the
works  of  Aristotle.

Anaa^yrXdes  (ava^vpUti). See  Bracak.

Ancaena  ('AyKaiorX  (1)  Son  of  tbe  Arcadian  Ly-
cnrgus,  and  father  of  Agai>enor.  He  was  one  of  tbe
Argonauts,  and  was  killed  by  tbe  Calydonian  boar.
(2)  Son  of  Poseidon  and  Astypalaea,  also  one  of
tbe  Argonauts,  and  tbe  helmsman  of  tbe  ship  Argo
after  the  death  of  Tipbys.

Anchittl6  (AyxidKit).  (1)  A  town  of  Thrace,  on
tbe  Black  Sea,  near  tbe  border  of  Mysia.  (2)  A
city  of  CiHcia,  ucar  tbe  coast,  said  to  have  been
founded  by  Sardanapalus.

AuchlaeB  ('Ayxiinjs).  The  son  of  Capys,  of  the
royal  house  of  Troy  by  both  parents,  ruler  of  Dar-
danus,on  Mount  Ida.  Aphroditi^  loved  bimfor  bis
beauty,  and  bore  bim  a  son,  Aeneas ;  but  haviug,  in
spite  of  her  warnings,  boasted  of  her  favour,  he  was
(according  to  various  versions  of  the  story)  para-
lyzed, killed,  or  struck  blind  by  the  lightning  of
Zens.  Yergil  represents  the  disabled  chief  as  borne
ont  of  burning  Troy  on  his  sou's  shoulders,  aud  as
sharing  his  wanderings  over  tbe  sea,  and  aiding
him  with  his  counsel,  till  they  reach  Drepauum,  iu
Sicily,  where  be  dies,  and  is  buried  on  Mount  Eryx.

Anohiateia  (ayxitrrua). See  Hkbeh.


AnoilA. See  Salii.

Ancilla. See  Sebvus.

Ancdna  or  Anoon  (AyKuv).  A  town  in  Picenutn,
on  the  Adriatic  Sea,  lying  in  a  bend  of  the  coast  be-
tween two  promontories,  and  hence  called  Amean^
or  an  "elbow."  It  was  built  by  the  Syracusans  Id
the  time  of  the  elder  Dionysius,  B.C.  392.  Tbe
Romans  made  it  a  colony.  It  possessed  an  excel*
lent  harbour,  completed  by  Tn^an,  aud  was  one
of  the  most  important  seaports  of  tbe  Adriatic

Anctoi  (SyKvpd). See  Xavis.

Aucna  Marolna.  Tbe  fourth  king  of  Home.
He  reigned  twenty-fonr  years  (B.C.  640-616).  and
is  said  to  have  been  the  son  of  Numa's  dangblbr.
He  took  many  Latin  towns,  transported  the  in-
habitants to  Borne,  and  gave  them  the  Aventtne
to  dwell  on.  These  conquered  Latins  formed  the
original  Plebs.  He  was  succeeded  by  Tarquiuius
Prisons. (Livy,  i.  32  foil.)

Ano^ra  {'Ayievpa).  (1)  A  city  of  Galatia,  in  Asia
Minor,  originally  the  chief  city  of  a  Gallic  trib«»
named  the  Tectosages,  who  came  from  tbe  south
of  France.  (See  Ancyranum  Monumxntuh.)  (2)
A  town  in  Pbrygia  Epictetus,  on  the  borders  of
Mysia.

AncyTanQm  SConnmentQiii.  The  monument
at  Ancyra  (now  Augora),  a  marble  slab,  of  which
tbe  greater  part  is  preserved.  It  belonged  to  the
temple  of  Augustus  at  Ancyra,  and  contaiued  the
Latin  text  of  a  Greek  translation  of  tbe  report
drawn  up  by  that  emperor  himself  on  the  actions
of  bis  reign  {index  rerum  a  ae  geetarum).  By  tbe
terms  of  his  will  this  report,  engraved  in  bronze,
was  set  up  in  front  of  his  mausoleum  at  Rome,
aud  copies  were  made  of  it  for  other  temples  of
Augustus  in  the  provinces.  See  Perrot,  Explora-
tion ArchMogique  de  la  Galatie,  etc.;  the  fac-sim-
ile  of  the  inscription  with  commentary  by  Momm-
seu  (Berlin,  1883);  and  Augustus,  p.  171.

Andabtttae. See  Gladiatores.
Andecftvl,  Andegavi,  or  Andes. A  Gallic
l)eople  dwelling  north  of  tbe  Liger  (Ijoire),  whose
chief  town  was  Andes  (Augers).

Andes.  A  village  near  Mantua,  famons  u  be-
ing the  birthplace  of  Vergil.
I  AndooXdea  ('AvdoKidijr).  Tbe  second  in  order  of
1  time  in  tbe  roll  ofgreat  Attic  orators.  He  was  bom
'  B.C.  439,  and  belonged  by  birth  to  the  aristocratic
party,  but  fell  out  with  it  in  b.c.  415,  when  be  waa
involved  in  the  famons  trial  for  mutilating  the  stat-
ues uf  Hermes,  aud,  to  save  bis  own  aud  bis  kins-
men's lives,  betrayed  bis  aristocratic  accomplices.
Haviug,  in  spite  of  the  immunity  promised  hiai,
fallen  into  partial  loss  of  civic  rights,  he  left  Athens,
and  carried  on  a  profitable  trade  in  Cyprus.  After
twofruitlessattempts  to  recover  his  status  at  home,
be  was  allowed  at  last,  upon  the  fall  of  the  Thirty
Tyrants  and  the  amnesty  of  b.c.  403,  to  return  to
Athens,  where  be  succeeded  iu  re|)elling  renewed
attacks,  and  gaining  an  honourable  position.  Seut
to  Sparta  in  b.c.  390,  during  tbe  Corinthian  War,
to  negotiate  peace,  he  bronght  back  the  draft  of
a  treaty,  for  tbe  ratiflcatiou  of  which  he  vainly
pleaded  in  a  speech  that  is  still  extant.  He  is
said  to  have  beeu  banished  in  consequence,  and
to  have  died  in  exile.  Besides  the  above-men-
tioued  oration,  we  have  two  delivered  on  his  own
behalf,  one  pleading  for  his  recall  from  banish*
meut,  B.c.  410 ;  another  against  tbe  chai|^  of  tin-


AKDRArODISMOir GRAPHS


7«


ANDUONICUS


^^v  f*)]  |iar(ii-i|mlion  (u  the  ui^vsterit«,  B.c.  391);  u

^m-th,a}cuiii»t  ;UciliiMl»<,  iaHpiiriiiiiM. UUuratoi-y

Si  fjl*i"  i^uJ  uitli^M,  unci  its  exiircHsiuas  tboM.^  of

l\wN iw>pfili4r  UnKUnf>e  uf  tlie  day. A  kou(1  text  is

ilLikt  ••rUluH  (Leipzig,  IS^\ :  and  C.  Milller's,  n  itli

inilexn''^J dee  Btavs,  i>i«  nflt«?Af  /frret/xaMJtnf,

Andiapodiamou  Qrapb6  C(U'd/w7ro84cr^t>  or  «tr.
fttKnredtVfMt  'ypa<^^).  An  actiuti  liruii4;lit  lH>furu
the  Foort  of  tbu  Eleven  (oi  ffdrxa).  a^itiiiDl  nil  |K:r-
niiiH  irLu  i-arrieil  off  nhkwtt  froiu  their  iiiutilerM,  ur
ttdncwJ  fret'  men  to  a  alali*  of  hlavery.  The  ^ani-
■ariam  ueutiou  au  oralion  of  AutipboD  ou  this
Hllitcet,  which  has  uot  come  du^vu  to  us.

Andrapfiddn  DUc6  ( atrRp<iir6iii»y  ^ixt} ).  Thi^
ttUt!  ri{'  ihf  i^iahixatria  wbcu  a  property  iu  Aliive«
Hultip  unliject  of  conlondiug  clnituD, The  cause

kbolouj^l  lu  t]i«  cinas  nf  diVat  rrpof  rivo,  and  was
uui!  of  t)i«  [■riviit*^  MiiU  tliat  came  imtler  the  jarin-
(Uetioa  nf  (lie  Ihvimiotltftnc..

AildreUCavdjMtd), 8v«  8YS81T1A.
Aodiia. A  play  nf  Tui-vticr>,  thu  oarlieHt  o(  liia
couwtliiii,  [»niduccMl in n.c.  16t>,  irluMt  llic  author
nt  ntitjr  iitiiulc«u  years  uf  it|;ii. For  the  9toty
c«aue«ttil  nith  ilo  pruducliuii.M-e  TrukxTIUS.
Andila*  {ayifnat). ^«^>  StatvauIA.
AMiooloB  »r  Attdrooles. TIip  «lax'0  of  a  Ro-
mau  ctiMnl.  and  itoDt«>iici^l  to  b«  «xposed  to  tb?
«iU  b«a8lti  ill  tbe  eircuH;  hut  a  Hon  wbjch  bad

Ilieea  la(  Iuoim  n|Kiii  him  cxbiliited  eigim  of  rccog-
iiitiou,  ui«l  Wgan  licking  bini. Vjtvn  iii(|(iiry,  it
>i)|ware)1  ib.-it  AiidroclDH  Lad  run  nwiiy  from  hiK
lUKiet  ill  Africa;  and  tbat,  having  taUen  rpfiign
ioaci^e,  a  lion  entered,  vreut  ii]>  to  biiii,  and  hubl
OQl  hjs  pav. Androclas  extracted  a  Inrgu  thoru
"kioh  hid  «Qt«red  it. Heuecfortb  Ibey  livwl  to-
gellier  for  »ume tiuti'.  tbe liuu entering  fur  his
tJFtkriJift^r, Uut  at  IobI,  tired  of  this  savagu  lifer
I  ^MntcluB  \e{t  tbe  cnvo,  watt  appreboudud  by  Hume
^,  bruilKbt  to  Bouie,  and  coudemiied  to  tbe
He naa puidoned,  uiid presented

TUon,  H'bit'b  be  nstnl  Ut  lend about  tbe

(Swi. /J^w.  ii.  19;  Gell.  V,  14.)

Aitdrogaonia  i'A^poytatvia). A  fusttval  with

I!«M'ii,  Ulil  irvi-ry  year  in  tb«  CvrautieiiK  at  AtbcUH.

Ill  liiiRoiu-  yf  iii« itero  Audm^sww,  miii  nf  MJuub,

■•0  bait  ov(»rcomn  all  his  adversaries  in  tbe  ffwtive

I  of  the  I'auatbeuaea,  nnd  voa afterwanla

i  Ity  onlor  of  Aogcus  (q.  v, ),

AodtogeoB  t'\y6p6yttot).  A  son  of  Miuoa,  kln^c
"'CtMc.by  PaKipbat^.  Visiting  Atbcna  at  tbe  Arat
"Wtiratlfln  of  tlie  Panalbi'iisPit,  be  won  victoriea
'"'trail  till'  cbaiitpiuu»,  wbcti  King  At<gen8,out  of
jf^woy.  tiriit  bim  U*  ti^Ut  the  bull  uf  Muratbou,
^ulcb  kilbxl  bim.  According  tu  another  ucL-onnt
■*  "«i  sbiiit  ill  un  auibiisb.  Minott  avenged  lii«
*"*  ^y  making  tbu  Atlieiiianii  fwiid  iwven  youthn
•W  •BViin  luiiidcus  every  nine  years  aa  TicLima  of
^  Miiintftiir  {i|.  v.). Hev  TllESEes.

.!|ABdn)lepaia  or  Androlepalon  (twSpoKrt^Ui  or
■^^V'^'iu*',!.  Tin-  right  ..f  rt-'priHuIt*,  a  custom
'"''Koited  by  the  internatlonitl  law  of  ibn  Graeka;
"^  wbeu  a  ritixen  of  one  Rtato  had  k II  ted  a  ill i-
*""' attoiber,  and  tlic  conntrynipn  of  tbe  fornM^r
'""Id  hot  unrrftiider  liiin  to  the  rt-latives  of  tbe
<lf><cun|,  it  WB6  hold  lawful  t«  seize  mton  three,
■'*''wn  more,  of  the  eoutitrj-nien  of  the  otlVuder,
*"<I  krmf)  tlicm  OM  b<Mlni;i-K  till  (tatiofncliou  vias  af-
*"'^  or  ibn  homicide  given  np. Thu  triernrcbs


and  tbe  coDiDinndora  of  tbe  ahips  of  war  were  tha
per&ouH  intrusted  with  ibift  nttlue.  Tbe  property
which  tbe  bostageo  bad  with  tlieni  at  the  time  of
Aeizute  was  coiiti»caCed,  n>jder  tbe  u&me  ottrvXa  or
triXai.

AudromAch^  iWripofiax'l*-  '^^'^  daughter  of
Ki-tion,  king  of  tho  C'ilicluu  Tbebcx,  and  wife  of
Hector,  by  whom  sbe  had  a  son,  Scamundriud  (Astj-
anax).  On  tbe  taking  of  Troy,  her  aou  was  burled
frnin  the  walls  of  tlHi  city,  and  nbe  lierwlf  fell  tu
the  Himro  of  NeoptuleniUH  (I'yrrbusf,  thu  son  uf
Aehiliua,  who  took  her  t4t  Epirus.  tibo  afterwardit
married  Holeoutt,  a  brother  of  Hector,  who  ruled
over  Cbaoula.

Aadrom&cbtui  ('Af^ftoiinxoy).  iU  Ati  oimlent
Sielliuu.  Iiithi-l'  uf  the  bintuhuu  Tiutaeu!>.  Hu  cui-
lccl«d  togethtT  tbo  iubabitautd  of  The  cily  of
Naxoa,  wbieb  Uluuytiiaa  tbe  tyrant  bad  draiPtyed,
and  founded  with  tbem  Tauroioeuiuni.  Andnim*
ncbna,  a«  pn>ftM:t  of  tbe  new  city,  etultMC^ijiiently
aided  Tiuiuleon  iu  rest-oiiug  lilierty  to  Syruenau.
(Diod.  81c.  svi,  7,  fi8.J  (2)  A  general  of  Alexander,
to  whom  Tannonio  gave  the  governiiienl  of  Syria.
He  niM  liurneil  alive  by  tbe  Haniaritaiin.  but  bis
death  was  avenged  hy  Alcxandci.  ((^niiit- Curt,
iv.  5.)  (It)  A  brotber-in-law  of  Seleucns  Oailinicns.
(4)  A  traitor,  who  dis<:overod  to  the  I'arthiaiiH  all
tbe  iiieaMures  of  Crns»lU^  and,  on  being  choaea
guide,  led  tbe  KoDian  army  into  a  nitualioii  wbcuco
there  was  no  mode  of  escape.  (5)  A  pbyaician  of
Crete  iu  tbe  age  uf  Nero.  He  waa  physician  U*  the
emperor,  and  inreator  of  the  fuinonn  ine<iicino,
culled  after  biui,  tkeriaca  Jiuiromacki.  It  waa  in-
tended at  llrst  as  nn  antidote  uguinst  poiMiiiH.  but
lHH!ume  aflerwanls  a  kind  of  painicea.  This  misli-
fine  eujo,ved  au  bigb  a  reputation  among  thi*  Ko<
niaUH  that  tbe  eniporoi- Antonlum>,  at  a  later  period,
took  some  of  it  every  day,  and  bial  it  prepared
every  year  in  bis  palace.  It  ccmeisled  offtixty-uue
iugreflieutH,  tUc  priueipal  of  which  wore  squilia,
opium,  pepper,  and  dried  vipent.

Acdromida  ( 'Av&pofn'ftij ).  The  fbtttghter  of
Cepbcua,  king  of  Aethiopia,  ami  Ciu<aii)pifa.  In
cousequence  of  her  moth<^r  biuisting  that  thu
beauty  of  her  daughter  snrpuiwcd  tlmt  of  the
Nereids,  Poseidon  Hent  a  nea-mi^iiMler  tu  lay  wattlt*
the  country.  Tb»  uraclu  uf  Autmuu  prtimiMCil  de-
liverance if  Audromeda  wait  given  np  to  the  uiou-
ster,  aud  Cepheua  was  obliged  to  chain  his  dniigb-
t«r  to  a  tx)ck.  Heiu  she  wa*  fnuinl  and  .^jived  by
Peraens,  who  slew  the  monstpr  and  iibtained  her
an  bia  wife.  She  bad  been  previouHly  )tri>niiftfMl
to  I'hiueus,  and  this  gave  riwi  t»  the  fnniuus  tight
»f  Pbtneus  aud  Perseus  at  the  w<Mhling,  in  nhlcb
the  foruer  and  nil  hisawtiTcialim  M-ero  nlaiu.  After
her  death  she  waa  idaccd  atimug  thu  atatn.

Androa  iafUpvv). Soe  DoMca  (Greokt.

Androiucua  CAvipuviKos).  (I)  A  iwripalctic  pbi-
IofeO|>ber,  a  native  of  Rboded,  who  llunrisbed  about
B.C.  eO.  He  arranged  anil  pnhlisbt-il  the  writings
of  Aristotle,  wbiiib  )t:id  hwu  brought  to  Rotin*  wilb
tbe  library  of  Apelliom.  He  cumniented  on  many
partM  of  tliese  wrilingc;  but  no  i^rtion  <*(  his
worka  baa  reached  us,  for  tbe  treatise  Htp't  fladSuf^
nnd  the  ParnphraM*  of  tbe  Nicomaclicnn  etbicH,
wbii^b  have  1>c«n  published  under  bis  name,  are
the  productions  of  auotber.  The  treatiw-  lltpi
fla^ui'  waa  published  by  HoMtchol  in  l.'itK),  and
wad  afterwni-dH  jmnted  coitjoiittly  with  tbe  Para-
phrase In  ltil7,  1G79,  and  1809. Tbe  Parnpbnwe


ANDROXICDS


SO


AXIO


WHS  pnWI»li«l  t»y  IIohisiuB  in  1607,  nt  Irfycli»n.  tut
itli  HiioiiymoHB  work  i_Inccrti  Jnctoriii  l'araphra»it.
*«W.),  mill  BftiTwantmi inter  tlie  unnu- nf  A ndromcut
of  flhottrM,  liy  tliM  saiiif  Briiolnr,  iti  16I7,  with  the
IroAliHe  tj*pl  Ilo^wi'  atUivi]  to  it.  See  tin*  disHerta-
tiotiK  by  Lltti|{,  Atntrotiihm  roH  Ithodoa  (1H91)  mid
hy  ItJisetier  (iHOlti.  i'Ji  C^TlRHESTES,  nii  itxtnitio-
iner  uf  Atbcu**,  wlio  crt^cUMl,  d.c.  15^,  an  tictiiguiiiU
niorUle  tow^r  in  tbut  city  to  tba  eight  wiuds.  imw
known  am  ilio  "Tower  of  tlw  Winds."  Ou  every
side  of  the  octagon  ho  caused  to  be  ivruught  a
tigurv  iu  r«yt«r(i,  rt>iirescutlu)[  tlie  vriod  nUich  blow

5?-


tbwer  or  Uie  Windi.

agaiost  tliAt  Hiilf<.  Tlie  Vi>\i  of  tbo  tower  wnn  On-
islKd  with  H  ruiiical  iiiArblc,  on  \rliicb  b<-  ]>lncrd  a
Itratfn  Triloti,  bnldiiig  n  waikI  in  hitt  rijcbt  Iiand.
TbtN  Tril<in  iranMn  rntilrivnl  that  bi>  tiimoil  rinind
ivith  tim  winil.nnd  AlwAVfiAtoppoi)  when  bi-din-irt-
ly  fjuNil  ll,  pointing  with  U\*  wniid  over  tho  rigiiiv
of  tbd  wind  At  tbnt  time  Itlowing.  Wilbiu  the
stmetnre  wnn  a  Wftier-clock,  supplied  from  th©
foitntftin  ill  a  itirrot.  Itt'uenth  tht<  eight  tlgnros
of  the  winds  lines  were  trncMl  nn  the  walls  of  tho
luwrr.  which,  by  tho  HhmliiWii  riwt  iigKin  them  hy
dtyleti  (ixi'il  ahore,  indirnlM  the  hour  uf  tbc  day,
ns  llie  Tritutra  wiiiid  did  the  qnnrtor  of  the  wind.
Whtii  th«>  Klin  did  not  shine  roeoarM  waa  hod  to
the  water-olock  withiu  the  tower,  which  building
thns  »ii|iplttMt  iHith  n  rauo  and  a  chronometer.
The  atrni'lnm  still  Kinndu,  tbnngh  in  n  damaged
KtJite.  To  the  oorrertiietts  of  the  suiHllals  Delnmbre
bcAm  tentimouy,  and  lio  deHcribes  the  «rrie«  ns
"  the  ino»t  curious  exiiiting  mouiimenl  of  the  pr«D-
iIcaI  |:tiainonloa  of  antiiiuity."  Them  are  two  on*
irauucfl,  fuciug  mtpectivcly  tu  the  uortbi-ast  and
northwest;  each  of  lhe«e  opening!*  has  n  ixirtim
napporttHi  by  two  coIhuiub. (See  Vitniv.  i.(i,  4.)

Andrcmloiu,  Livic^ Sco  Livivit,

Aiidroultis  (nJIpwwriBt  The  mtu'i  apartiuent*
in  a  <mrk  honM. 6eo  I>OMtT«  iOreek).

Aiidr6a  i'\y9pat\  The  mo«t  northerly  and  one
of  tlu*  largest  iahuids  of  tbc  Cyclad«6,  KKiUM«at


of  EuboM^  twenty-one  inil««  long  Aod  elglit
eurly  attuiued  im|iortancu,  and  colonize*!  Acan'
and  8t»girn  ubotit  B.C.  I>S-1. It  wqm  eolebrnted  for
its  wine,  whence  the  whole  island  WMt  regarded  m»
sacred  to  DionysnH.

Aodrotioii  ('AvAfioriW).  A  Greek  historian,  nn
Atbetiiiin.and  apnpilof  Isocrntos,  who  waj*acenHi>d
of  mnkiti||r  an  illegal  proposal,  nud  went  into  bau-
uihmuDt  at  Megarn.  We  still  have  the  speech  com-
poaed  by  Denioethenett  for  one  of  the  occneicni.  At
Mvgara  he  wrote  a  hif^tory  of  Attica  (ace  AirniAr
in  at-  leatt  twolre  books,  one  of  the  best  of  that
cl»s5  of  writings;  hut  only  fraguieuts  of  it  haro
survived.

Anemontf  {mtftuvtj).  Tho  anemone  or  wind-
flower.

ABC^ii. 8ee  Angaria.

ADsaria  {ayyapiia).  A  word  borrowed  from  the
Persians,  signil^i'iug  a  system  of  pouting  which  waa
used  among  that  [leuple,  and  which,  according  to
Xenopbou,  wo»  estfthlished  hy  CyniH.  Horses  were
provided  at  ccrlAiu  distances  along  tho  principal
roadj)  of  thu  empire;  so  that  couriers  (Syyopot),
who  nlifo  of  c'Miree  relieved  one  another  at  irertaitt
distanccN,  conld  priic«.'ed  without  intemiptioii  IhiiIi
night  and  daylHerod.  viii.lW;  iii.  I'Ai;  Xon.  Cyrop.
viii.  6.  $  171.  Among  the  Romaiia,  tliu-  word  whs
niMMl  to  denote  conipnli«ory  service  iu  forwarding
imiwrial  messages.  8ue  I)igv*t,  1.  tit.  4,  b.  1^  i\
4.  S9 ;  and  the  article  CcRscs  PuBUCua.

AngdistlB. S«e  Uhga.

Angiportna  nr  AngiportnnL  A  uaiTow  laiw
between  two  rows  of  houscK,  sometimea  ending  in
n  cHl-de-sac.  The  number  of  such  places  sceuui  to
have  been  conHtdentblu  in  ancient  Rome,  and  they
were  apt  to  Ije  disrepntabbi  (CatulL  &8,  -1).  The
fonii  intijiportum  is  archaic.

Angli  or  Aiiglii.  A  Gcrtuan  people  on  the  left
bank  of  the  Ellx*,  who  passed  over  with  the  Sax-
ons into  Britain,  which  woe  calloil  nft«r  them
England  —  tCHgta'tahtl.  Some  of  them  appear  to
have  settled  in  .^.ngelu,  in  Schleswig. St*o  Hax-

OSTJH,

AngOtheki  {dyyoSijK^). tJ.^c  IXOTEOA.

AagaUla. See  FLAOiif  m.

Aasoia.  Tho  snake.  Among  the  Roniosu  the
snake  waa  tbo  conventional  represcutntiou  of  the
yciiiHK  tori.  (8<«  GksiL'».>  lience  Ugures  of  ser-
l>ents  were  often  pointed  against  a  wall,  as  the
cross  is  in  mo*lem  Italy, and  au8were<l  the  purpose
of  nnr  sign  "Commit  uu  nuisance"  (Pers.  i.  113).
As  the  emblem  of  AescnUpius  (q.  v.).  the  flumke
WAS  the  sign  that  bung  b«fore  the  Roman  phamia-
cies,  answering  to  our  pwtle  and  mortar.  It  was
also  the  militAr^'  ensign  of  a  cohort,  being  then
commonly  termed  draco.  See  Aspia ;  Draco  v
Gkkics.

Anguatua  Clavna. Sen  Ci^tl'S.

Anicatua.  A  freedman  of  Vero,  employed  hy
bim  ill  many  acts  of  cruelty.

Anigma.  A  small  river  In  the  Tripbylian  Elte^
tlie  MinyciUH  of  Homer,  tlowiug  into  the  loniaia
Sea,  near  Samienm.  lt»  waters  hod  a  diaagrec''
able  Mnell,  in  consequence,  it  la  aald,  of  the  CSD-^
taun  baring  washed  in  them  after  tbey  bad  beeim
wouuded  by  Hsnialea.

Anio  or.  anciently.  Aoien.  A  river  rising  in  tb0
monntains  of  th«  Hernici,  near  TrelMi,  which,  af-


4


I


I


d


ANIL'S


I


Irr  rpct'iviiip;  ihn  hrook  Dipeotia,  forms  nt  Tibor
lit-antiful  water  -  faIN,  and  flows  into  the  Tiber
Ihrve  milnt  almvo  Kntm*.  Tbo  wntpr  »if  the  Anio
wa*  (NtnT*yed  tn  Rome  by  two  nqucihicU  —  the
Jtiio  wtMM  anil  JHio  norii*.

▲illnft('Aymr)-  ^'»>  of  ApoDo  tiy  Rhoeo  orCroH-
ik,  wbow  father,  S(a{i1i.vliix  of  \mxim,  u  mm  of  Din-
nysna  and  Arindue,  coiuinittvd  bur  to  the  wa  in  a
l>ox.  She  waa  oairicd  to  Di>U>s.  and  Iht-re  ^iivu
birth  to  her  m>d  Aiiiiis.  Apollu  tauKht  hiin  <livina-
tion,  and  roade  bim  hi*  pn«ttt.  aiid  khi);  of  Dt^ltw.
His  son  Tha«nfl,  hke  Liniiti  and  Ai-tiieitii,  wan  torn
tu  pieces  bj  dop«,  aftrr  wbioh  no  fb>^«  vtre  ol-
lowtn)  in  the  iHlaud.  Ilitt  dauglittMH  by  the  nymph
r)4iri|t|t4,  Wing  ili'DcciMlnntri  of  l>ifi»yHii»,  had  the
gift  of  iiinitn;'  uitylhiiijz  tbfy  plfaiM-'il  into  «Ttno,
corn,  or  oil ;  but  when  A)j;iimemtion,  on  hi«  way  to
Tray,  wMbed  to  tak<*  tht-nt  from  tlittir  futber  by
ftrrcc-,  Dionvioiitt  cbauij^rd  tht-ni  into  iloTM.

Ank^U  (tiywiXi]}, 8e«  Ha^a.
Anna  Conui^a. Siso  Comnbiva.

Anna  Peieuiia.  An  ancient  Italian  fioiblf«$,
ftlHtiit  whose  exact  nttribiitrM  the  ancients  tbcm-
Iflvew  ntrm  nut  I'lcnr.  SU»  ift  pnrbably  the  uiouu-
'^Mdifu  of  the  current  year,  who  every  month  re-
MVs  ber  yontb,  and  n-a**  tberefuro  regnnlfd  an  a
V^Afmwbo  beKt«>wt'4l  lon^  life,  and  nil  that  coii-
triliiilM  to  it.  AlMint  full  tnuon  on  lhf>  Ides  (I5tli)
<^Martih  (tln^n  the  6nit  nvmtb  of  Ihi'  year),  in  »
fm\e  iif  fniit  trei'it  nt  the  first  tniWtone  on  the
Rainitiimi  Way,  thr«  Koniiim*  held  a  feaxl  nndrr
Iho  n|i«>n  »Vt.  «ishiuj:  each  other  a«  many  yeant
rf  lifc  M  they  drank  cniw  "f  wine.  (S»'e  Ovid,
fvtt.  111.  583  fill  I.)  Tbn  t<*anieil  men  of  Uw  Aiikoa-
tu  A^K  iileiitilieil  Anna  with  Dido's  Mxler,  who,
<n  tb<9  Orotb  of  that  <|Uocu,  bad  fled  fniin  Car-
iImIEc  Io  Aeni'tui  in  Italy :  bu(.  having  excited  La-
nDi»'flje»l(Hiiiy,  threw  herself  into  the  NmnicinB.

*j^liM  (1)  The  title  of  an  epic  poem  by
^nttu  EiinittH  (q.  v.),  iu  n-hich  be  aopired  to
("•1  tbe  itutiru  history  of  the  Komau  people  iu
ktab  Myle.  The  puc*ni  Mail  iit  ei^'htecu  booka,
■Tiuii^  tn  follontc  Hk.  i.,  IninHtnetion,  Knrty
l^iliouM,  Kouiidint;  of  Home,  Deillcatiim  of  Roni-
"Iw;  hU  ii.  and  iii..  The  Recal  Per  in*  I ;  bk.  iv.,
Tbc  Bcpublie  down  t**  the  biiniint;  of  Rome  by
ft«C«nli;  bk.  v.,Tbfl' Samnite  Wan*:  bk.vi.,Thc
^wwiUi  Pyrrhut*:  bk.  vii..  The  first  riuiirWar;
^  riii.  and  ix.,  The  S'^ond  Punic  War ;  bkti-  x.
**lsi.Tlw  War  with  Maeiyloriia;  bkn.  xii..  xiii.
MHl  tW^  Ihe  War  irilb  Syria ;  bk.  xv.,  The  Cani-
P^'Jti  iif  Pulviin*  Nobilior  in  AetoUa ;  bk*.  xvi.,
"ii^  «iid  xviii.,  From  the  Death  of  S«>ipio  to
"■'■' 17i  (dee  EiHJS.)  There  rotiuiin  to  us  of
'uia  pvat  pcK'm  only  fniiiinent!*,  of  which  the
'"f*  wJilion  i«  that  of  Vahlen  (l*i<54(.  8r*  niiwj
"wdBwoTth,  J'y-agmctitt  and  SfKcimirn»  of  JCarly
jj«««(lfl4);  and  Merry  (1692).  f9)  A  history  by
C«ni.iiii,^Tiy,jt„g  (q,  v.),  trualing  in  uistwii  hooka
*l^  Rtitnati  Empire  from  the  death  of  Anguatua
^^^r  tfl  the  death  of  Nero.

^onileB  Leges. See  Lkok»  Avnalks.

*onale»  Mudmi. See  Poxtifex.

Aanotia  ifmm  aunn*.  like  pomona  from  pomum\
p^Mne  iiH-d  (1)  for  the  pnwlnce  of  the  ycnr,  and
liaif«  |2j  f^j,  pjovinioiid  in  general,  eapeclally  for
*"*  f'jni  which  in  the  latter  years  of  the  Rermtj-
'"  »»•  collocled  in  lb©  Htotvhousea  of  the  State.
"^  wtil  til  the  poor  at  a  cheap  rate  Iti  timra  of


scarcity :  and  which  nmlcr  the  emperors  wna  dia-
tribated  to  the  people  gramitonsly  or  given  as  pay
and  rewards.  (See  KKiMKvrAKiAK  LsuKtf. )  (a)
Kor  the  price  of  jiruviHious.  (4)  Knr  a  soldifir's  al-
lowance of  provisions  for  n  certain  time.  U  i»
nwKl  also  in  the  plnral  for  yearly  or  monthly  dis-
tributions of  pay  in  corn,  etc,  Simitar  dtAlribn-
tions  iu  money  were  called  annoiuu  arraiint:  In
the  plnral  it  also  signifieH  proviHioua  given  hm  the
wagvM  of  labon  r.

{b)  Annona  was  auolcnlly  wonhlpped  an  the  god-
doaa  who  profi^red  the  year's  iucn-itM.*.  She  waa
rcprceonted  on  an  altar  in  the  Capitol  as  a  femalo
vkh  the  right  arm  and  sbonldur  baiv,  and  thu
rest  of  the  body  clothed,  holiltog  ears  of  corn  in
Iter  right  baud,  and  the  conmcopia  iu  ber  left.

▲mttUua. .^ec  Ani'li-k.

Aonua. See  (.'Ai.EM)Altti;M.

Anqoina  (uyKoi^a).  A  collar  or  ring  by  n-hich
the  ynnl<arni  waa  fanleurd  to  the  mast  «f  a  ship,
and  cullod  by  our  nwlui-s  a  "truss."  (Isii).  Orig.
xix.4.7.)

Anquiaitio. Soo  ICDKX.

Anna. St^n  llAitTA.

Anaer.  A  |>oer  of  the  Angustan  Age,  and  long
coDsiilercil  one  of  the  enomies  of  Vergil :  but  of  this
tbct«  iii  110  good  eridencc,  fortho  lino  in  V'org.  Eel.
ix.  ;yi  If*  only  trad  it  ion  ally  roferrwl  to  him.  Ho
was  a  writer  of  cnitic  {lootry.  See  Cngrr,  tir  .lu-
ferr  J'tu-la  (Neuhraiidunb.  lti&8),  and  Teuffcl,  vol.  i.
p.  453  (Rng.  trana.  1891).

AnaibarlL A  people  of  Qermany.

Autae  iiraftotmiSti).  Sipiare  pillnni  {ijaadrae  co-
iMmHiw).  Tlit'y  xvere  t-oniiuunly  joined  to  the  Httio
walls  of  a  building,  luring  placed  on  eiu.<h  wde  of
the  door,  so  aa  to  atMiHt  in  fonniug  the  portico.
Thaae  tenna  are  seldom  found  except  in  the  jiln-
ral,  beoause  tlw  puq>OHe  served  by  aiitao  reijuired
that,  Lu  general,  two  should  be  erected  correspond-
ing to  each  other,  and  Aupporting  the  extreiuiliea
of  iho  name  roi'f.  Their  position,  furni,  ami  umi
will  be  best  DUilenttooil  fhtni  the  following  wood-
cut, representing  u  rcstonitiuii  of  the  front  of  the


AA,  UwuIm;  BB,lbcc*Usor<»M:  0,lbesUsr


ANTAEOPOUS


82


ANTHESPHORU


temple  of  Artemis  Propylaea  at  Eleusis,  with  a
plau  of  the  prouaos,  in  which  A  A  are  the  antae.

AntaeopIUiB  ('Avraiov  frdXis).  A  city  of  Egypt
(Thebais)  on  the  easteru  bank  of  the  Nile,  and  one
of  the  chief  Beats  of  the  worship  of  Osiris  (q.  v.).
SeeDiod.  Sic.  i.7.

Antaeus  CAyraios).  A  giant,  the  sou  of  Poseidon
and  Ge'  (earth).  He  dwelt  in  Libya,  and  his  strength
was  invincible  so  long  as  he  remained  in  contact
with  his  mother.  Earth.  Heracles  discovered  the
source  of  his  strength,  lifted  him  from  the  earth,
and  crushed  him  iu  the  air.  On  the  connection
of  Antaeus  with  the  Pygmies,  see  Pygmaki.  The
story  of  Antaeus  is  given  in  Apollod.  ii.  5.

Antalcldas  ('AvroXfct'daE).  A  Spartan,  the  sou  of
Leon,  and  chiedy  kuowh  by  the  celebrated  treaty
concluded  with  Persia  in  B.C.  3S7,  nsnally  called  the
Peace  of  Antalcidas,  since  it  was  tbe  fruit  of  his
diplomacy.  According  to  this  treaty  all  tbe  Greek
cities  in  Asia  Minor  were  to  belong  to  tbe  Persian
kiug.  The  Athenians  were  allowed  to  retain  only
Lemnos,  Imbros,  aud  Scyros ;  and  all  tbe  other
Greek  cities  were  to  be  independent.  (Xen.  Hiat.
Grace,  v.  1,  J  6.)

Antandnu  ("AtTaydpot).  An  Aeolian  colonyon
the  Adramyttian  Gulf,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Ida.

AnteambnloneB.  (1)  Slaves  who  went  before
their  ma«t«r8  to  make  way  for  them  in  a  crowd,
crying  Date  locum  domino  meo.  See  Suot.  Vesp.  2.
(2)  Clients  who  walked  before  their  patrons  when
the  latter  api»eared  in  public. See  Clientes.

Anteceninni. See  Cena,  p.  312.

AnteceasOrea,  called  also  Anteonrsdrea.  Bo-
laan  horse-soldiers,  who  were  accustomed  to  pre-
cede an  army  on  march  in  order  to  choose  a  suit-
able place  fur  tbe  camp,  and  to  make  the  necessary
pruviflions  fur  the  army.  They  do  not  appear  to
have  beeu  merely  scouts,  like  the  epeculatoret.
TUis  name  was  also  giveu  to  tbe  teachers  of  tbe
Komau  law. {Cod.  Itut.  i.  17,  2.)

Antefixa.  Tena-cottas  exhibiting  various  or-
uumeutal  designs,  and  used  iu  arcbitecture  to
cover  the  frieze  {zophorus)  of  the  entablature.


AnicRxB. (British  Hnseam.)

They  were  probably  Etruscan  in  their  origin,  and
wore  used  by  tbe  Greeks.  Tbe  specimen  here
giveu  represents  Atheii<f  superiuteuding  tbe  con-
struction of  the  ship  Argo.

Antola  ("AiTfta). See  Belleropmon.


Antanmae.  A  Sabiue  town,  said  to  have  been
older  than  Rome,  at  the  juuction  of  the  Anio  and
tbe  Tiber.  It  was  destroyed  by  the  Romans  at  an
early  period. (Verg.  Jen.  vii.  631.)

Antenna  {K4pas,  K«paia).  The  yard  of  a  ship.
See  Navis.

Antenor  CAyrTfytap).  (I)  A  Trojan  prince  related
to  Priam.  He  was  the  husband  of  Theano,  daugh-
ter of  Cisaeas,  kiug  of  Tbrace,  and  father  of  uiue-
teen  sons,  of  whom  the  most  known  were  Polybos,
Acamas,  Agenor,  Polydamas,  Helicaon,  Archilocbns,
and  Laodocus.  He  is  accused  by  some  of  having
betrayed  hia  country,  not  only  because  he  gave
a  favourable  reception  to  Diomedes,  Odyasens,  and
Menelatis,  when  ttiey  came  to  Troy,  as  ambassadors
from  the  Greeks,  to  demand  the  restitution  of
Helen,  but  also  because  be  withheld  the  fact  of
his  recognizing  Odysseus,  at  tbe  time  that  hero
visited  the  city  under  the  guise  of  a  mendicant
{Od.  iv,  335).  After  tbe  conclusion  of  the  war  An-
tenor, according  to  some,  migrated  with  a  party  of
followers  into  Italy,  aud  built  Patavium.  Accord-
ing to  others,  he  went  with  a  colony  of  the  Heneti,
nr  Veneti,  from  Papblagonia  to  the  shores  of  the  Ha-
driatic,  where  the  new  settlers  established  them-
selves iu  the  district  called  by  them  Venetia  (Liv.
i.  1;  Pliu.  iii.  13;  Verg.Aen.  i.  242;  Tac.  xvi.  21).
(2)  A  statuary,  known  only  as  the  maker  of  the
original  statues  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton,
which  were  carried  off  by  Xerxes,  and  restored  by
Alexander. (Paiisan.  i.  8.)

Antenorldea  ( 'AynjvopHijs  )■  A  patronymic
given  to  the  sons  of  Autenor.

Antepagmenta.  Tbe  door-posts,  or  jambs  of  a
door. See  Iaxua.

AntepUani. See  P11.AM.

AntfiroB  i'Ayripac).  The  god  of  requited  love,
and  brother  of  Eros  (q.  v.).

Antesignani. See  Sionuh.

Antestaxl See  Actio.

Antevorta. See  Carmbkta.

Anthedon  {' Av0T}6a>v).  A  city  of  Boeotla  ou  the
shore  of  the  Eiiripus,  celebrated  for  its  wiuo.  Here
the  Cabiri  were  worshipped.  (Ath.  i.  p.  31 ;  Pan*
san.  ix.  22.)

Antbel^  (* Ay^^Xi;).  A  small  town  of  Tbessaly,
in  the  interval  between  tbe  river  Phoenix  and  the
Straits  of  Thermopylae,  aud  near  tbe  spot  where
the  Asopus  flows  into  tbe  sea.  In  the  immediate
vicinity  were  the  temples  of  Demcter  Amphicty-
ouia,  that  of  Ampbictyon,  aud  the  seats  of  tbe
Amphictyoue.  It  was  one  of  tbe  two  places  where
the  Amphictyouic  Council  used  to  meet,  the  other
being  Delphi.  Tbe  place  for  holding  tbe  assembly
here  was  the  temple  of  Demeter.  See  AMrHic-
TY0SE8.

AnthgmuB  (Ay6tfiovt)  or  Anthemuaia.  A  city
of  Meeopotamia,  southwest  of  Edessa,  and  a  little
east  of  the  Euphrates.  The  surrounding  district
was  called  by  the  same  name,  but  was  generally  in-
cluded under  the  name  of  Osrhoen^.

Anthesphorla  (ra  ayBtadrnpia).  A  fiower-feeti-
val,  principally  celebrated  in  Sicily,  iu  houour  of
Demeter  aud  Persepbontj,  In  commemoration  of  the
returu  of  Persepbon*!  to  her  mother  iu  tbe  begiu-
uing  of  spring.  It  consisted  iu  gathering  flow-
ers and  twiuing  garlands,  because  Persephone  had
been  carried  off  by  Pluto  while  engaged  in  this


occnpation. TIj^  «-nfut*ii  theiiiM'lvr^.i  jfntherf^l  the

flowrc|-B  for  lliP  parliitiila  wlili*li  Hn-y  woi*-  mi  the

occa«ioii.  and  it  wniilil  h.ivt< tN.>(iii h difi^riit'ii  to

bny  ihv  llowm  for  that  ptii'iium-. Aiitlii'H|ihi>riu

wore a1»a  »oIt'iniiiEC4l m  honour  of  ntlmi-  (l«)li«5A.

r«lM3ciallv  io  liiroMur  of  H«iV,  sumainvtl  'Av^»iu,  ut

Ar}(ot4. Aplinxlii^,  tiwi,  wtut  wurehipptMl  ai  Ciios-

ouH. nDiU>r  till* immo  '\vSeia,  &nd ha«  th«>rrfnrp

l>e«ii  cunipart'd  nitli  Flor&  (q.  v.)(  the  Roman  itr^i'

ty.  n«i  tb«  autbeaphorla  baw  been  with  tbo  Ri>-

mutt  rextEviil  of  tbe^'^^d'tiiiN.

.Ajitbeateiim. Bee  Cajjsnuariuji  ;  Diokysia.

.^atbestenon  CAy34a-Trjpta>v).  Thp  naini!  i»f  the
eif^l) 111  Attic  mtmib,  aiiHwenntf  to  the  r.iid  of  Fcli-
riUM7  Hud  the  beginning  of  SlHirh. 8oe  Calrk-

PARII'M.

.Anthology  {avdoXnyia,  antkoJogla). "Onrlnod

Icf fluwiTs." A  titlt- now  f*uti«rnl]y  ^veo  to  col-
VetioD-i  of  Hbort  ikxtiuk. Both  the  Greek  aud  the
l.allii  anthotngirv  nn>  f:tti)on>i,
<r(TnE  Gbkkk  AxTimLcxn'.— The  earlii^t  aii-
tbolo)!;)-  in  Orufk wan  nompilod hy  Melfnger  iif
GailKn,  iboitt  D,o.  GO,  nndtr  tlie  litiu  Src'r^at'oc,  or
"  (IfuUiid." It  conldiiitNl  ponnix  by  tbo  conipiler
binuttir  tiiid  fi>rty  ttix  otlier  po«ta,  including  Ar-
cbikcliiiH,  Alciicuft,  Atiikcrcon,  Sapplio,  nod  AinKUi-
k  Um. Cunltiiual additions  weru miulu to this
P HtlKtloii,  nnd ill  the  tontU  eentnry  A.D.  Con-
f itaotinc  Ctiphala-s n)ndt<  a  now  couipilation.  ns
' rtiilMMiiims  PlnnndfS  in  tbo  frnirtconth  ciMitnry.
Tli»  Utter  was  lacking  iu  titcnity  ia*lv;  but  bttil
.  inibcl*^  was  tbe  only  one  known to  Wt^t^ni

^^  t.aK]K  until  tbe  ttevcntonntH  c^^ntury,  whrn  Sal-'
^M  liiutiia,iii  14»|j,  fonnd  in  tlu>  librury  ut  Heidelberg '
^^k  |bB  mticli  finer  collcctinn  of  CeidnilaH.  Tbe  c-oity
^^K  wle  by  Salinofiiiiit  was  nut,  liowever,  ptiblishcd
^'  WHl  1776,  wUeu  Bruuck  inrludi-d  it  in  bin  Jna-
l>rti.  Th«  lirat  critinil  cditinn  wom  that  of  F.
i«»b8  (13  ToU.  17fl4-Ir«:i;  nni»L*a  IBUWl?).  A
(Co^  iwcut  Mlttioii  in  tbut  in  Didot'a  Bihi'tatheca
(ISW,  while  excnlletit  M-JL-ctious  havi?  been  niodo
^1  Weiebrt  and  Meim^ke.  8fe  aUo  Tli  nuke  ray's
^•tiiaj)^  Gratca,  with  notes  iu  Eu^liab  (1877).
Tnoflbtlond  of  partiv  uf  the  anthology  Iiave  boDU
*"di!  ia  Rngltiib  by  Wrangham.  John  Sterling,
Mwlvile,  and  Cianiotc:  but  no  translationa  can
8**8  Biiy  true  idea  of  the  tenwnees,  eleganre,  and
tporkWnf  tbe  original.  8<*t)  Symntids,  Studies  aj
■•  CwfJ-  pottt  {\^Ti)  \  Butler,  Amaraalh  and  AtjvhO'
''f'ibWIi;  Mncknil,  Mtri  K^nijmma  (ItfJl):  aucl
^'Mkr,  (j'cM^.  dcr  yrKcA.  Anthalogie  (1876).

<^)  Tub  Latin  AsnioLOGy.—  Unlike  the  Orcok
AnUiolugy,  tbo  coUucliim  known  as  tbo  Latin  An-
'^gj  was  wholly  uiodo  iu  morlem  tiniua.  Tbe
M  Tu  tho  oonipUatiun  of  Scaligtr  (().  v.),  pub-
'■■>I)M  at  Loyden  in  1673,  entttli^d  Cataheta  Vetenm
'^'■'Mi.  A  seoond  oollHctinn  wan  published  by
I^^iliii  at  Paris  ia  1590;  and  a  Htlll  larger  oiio
hf'la  Unnunun  (q.  v.)  ia  175U  and  1773.  Of
~'' i  _'i-ment  wan  made  by  Meyer  iu  1B3&.

*  .tl  text  of  a  Latin  autbology  is  thai

<■'(  i.„«.  ( i-..-.f-70).  It  oontaiiiR  942  poeuia  of  very
"I'^'liWl  laarit,  but  all  of  intorMt  See  tbe  aelec-
J'*^.with  iiiiitm  in  Kngluib,  by  Thiickeray,  Antko-
''9«  biiiita  (1^6)  \  and  tbe  collect i(U>  by  fJaeliiXMis,
"SToU.iltterj). Sec  EriGitAMMA.

AoQinjcioQ  <  av6(}dKiar').  (1)  A  Species  of  car-
bide foand  ia  the  island  of  Chio».  (S)  A  small
'^^Mrstovo  or  brazier  filled  with  hot  coaU

^Btlinx  (SvSpo^i. (I)  Coal  or  oliatcoal,  gcuur-


ally  awA  in  tbe  plural  Sudpaxtr,  liko  the  Kuglinb
*■  eoalH  "  (Ariutoph.  Ach.  'M).  (ti)  A  precious  stone,
the  carbnnelu. (3)  Cinnabar.

Anthrtto^  [ai/ffflfivi}).  The  hornet,  or  vfjipa  embro ;
but  also  U!k.4l  of  ilie  bee  (Aristoph.  Suit.  947).

AuthropophSsi  C\ydftw<xfHiyoi)-  A  people  of
■Scytbia  wlin  fed  on  htiinan  tlenb.  HKro<lotUH  |iv.
Wi)  calU  them  tbo  Audrupbagi,  and  states  that
they  lived  in  a  more  savage  manner  ibiin  nuy  other
nation,  having  no  public  diKthbutiou  of  Justice  nor
estjiblibbed  laws.  He  iuforoiM  ns  also  that  Ibey  a|»-
plieil  tbeuisolves  to  tbe  brtteding  of  rat  lie,  clothed
thciuselvca  like  the  Scythians,  and  H|wke  a  ]>eonUitr
lung  u  age.

Anthylla  ('Av^yXXa  i.  A  considerable  city  of
Lower  Kgypt,  near  tlie  month  of  tbe  Canopic
branch  of  the  Nile,  below  Nnucrmlis.  (Berod.  ii.97,)

Antla  hex. 84-e  Lex.

Antias,  (^riNTf.s  Valkmus.  A  Komou  historian
who  flonriftlied  about  lu:.  SO,  and  wi-oto  tbe  history
of  Rome  from  tbe  ejirlienl  times  down  to  tiKme  of
Sulla.  His  work  nun  full  of  exaggerations,  but  is
still,  ill  a  way,  the  mofit  important  immediate  pred-
eee<8s<ir  nf  Livy.  His  history  was  in  ut  leiwt  sev-
enly-Gve  books,  for  bmik  Ixxv.  ia  (pioled  by  (iel-
Itiis  (vi.9, 17*.  Livy  npiH-iirs  to  havi*  drawn  upi>n
him  lui"gely,  for  ho  meutioiin  bini  by  uanie  Ibirty-
flve  times  in  the  existing  books;  aud  in  the  tirst
de^adex  of  bis  work  followH  hiui  unhesitatingly.
The  fragments  of  the  Aniolea  may  be  found  in
Peter's  Wttoricorum  Rt.iiquint,  i.  '.JOr>,  8<*  also
Ntlzseh,  Hiim.  Annatiitik  (I^CSi ;  and  Teutfel,  Hitt.
of  flow.  Lit.  (Eug.  trans.  I'ftJl).

Auticatdnea.  Two  pamphlets  written  by  Inlins
Caesar  in  dinpavagement  of  Cato  the  Younger,  in-
tended as  a  ri'ply  to  the  eulogistic  utterance  of
Cioero.  Juvenal  implies  that  they  were  lengthy
(\i.  3.11);  Cicero  calls  them  vitufterationfA  Old  Att.
xii.  41);  aud  Pliny  (A>»«r  iii.  V-i)  M:it<'«  that  iu
them  CatMuu-  accuses  Cato  uf  Using  di-iink  in  tlio
strveis.  No  iraguents  of  them  reiiiuin,  though  a
MS.  of  tbeui  is  said  to  have  be<fn  extant  in  Liugu
in  tbe  sixteenth  ceutur}'.  Sec  Koiilez,  .Aet-ife  tie
t' InitrMcfiaa  Puhlique  en  Belgiffne,  xix.  'i.

Aaticlda  ('An-i'icXruil.  'I"he  daughter  of  Autoly
cus,  wife  of  Laertes,  and  mother  of  Odysseus.  She
diedof  grief  lit  tiiolongubHCUceof  herson,  (Orf^M.
xi.  85.^  It  is  said  that  before  marrying  Laertes  she
lived  on  iniiinntc  terms  with  Sisyphus;  wbuuce
OdysseUb  is  sometimes  called  a  eiuu  of  .Sihypbus,

AnticrStea  ('AvTi«pur>ft).  A  Spartan  who  was
said  to  have  slain  Epaminondas  (tj.v.)  ut  the  but-
tle of  Mantiiiea,  ami  who,  in  consequence,  was  rich-
ly rewanled  by  bis  fellowHjountrymcQ  (Plut.  Agtt.
3.'>).

Anticj^a  {KvTlKvfM\  (1)  A  town  in  Pbocls.  ou
abayof  theCriHsaeauGulf.  (3)Atown  inTbossaly,
on  tbe  Spei'ohcus,  uot  far  fi-om  iis  mouth.  Ikitb
towuM  wereoetebratedfur  their  hellebore,  the  chief
remedy  in  antiquity  for  madoe«s:  hence  tho  prov-
erb navi^ef  Aatict/nim  wheu  a  jmrsou  act«d  svDse-
lessly  ( lior.  .-iat.  i'i.  3.  Ititi).

Antldftslsiurridaoic).  Literally  "  an  excfaauge."
A  term  iu  tbe  language  of  tbe  Attic  courts,  ]m;cu1-
iarly  applied  to  itroccediuga  under  a  law  which  is
said  to  have  originated  with  Solon  (Dem.  c  f  Aoe*
nif'p.  iuit.  I.  li.  is  nalural,  however,  to  refer  tbe
law  to  more  democratic  times;  and  the  orators
were  tu  the  habit  of  ascribing  to  Solon  all  lawa,


ANTKiENES


84


ANTir.ILVFHEIS


Mpeoiftlly  tbmw  Trbich  ihejr  IiH|>i>otie4t  to  be  qitnt-
lug  tn  a  ravourablu  mdw.  lly  thiii  Innr.  a  citij^n
uooiinat«fl  to  [H<rr<»nn  u  litur^tn,  sacli  (w  n  trier-
arcby  or  cborrgia,  or  (■<>  nmk  oinnn;;  tbo  pr«pprty-
tiut  pnytifK  in  n  cliiMt  ilisproporlionni  to  his  mcnuN,
vrae  L'tiip«w«ri*il  tu  call  upon  nny  qiialifietl  |HTrs<ni


benelf  OYtni  griof  at  tb«  Knp{Mt<ipd  infidelity  of  bpr
bnsbiLiKl. 8«it>  rF.Lr>pinAR.

Antigfinea  rAvriyiivfia).  (1)  A  town  in  Epirns
at  tlie  jiinrlion  uf  n  tributary  with  tbr  AiniH.  luid
Mfiar  a  aarrow  puMi  of  tb»  AcrocRramiiun  Moun-
tains, li)  A  town  nn  ibc  Orootot  in  Syria,  funn<le«l


lint  BO  cbargea  f«  tak«  the  oftico  in  hia  Btead,  or t.y  AntiKonua  m  tho  capital  of  bts  empire  (n.r.
submit  111  a  complot*  txclmngo  of  property— the ;j(„J);  but  most  of  its  inhabitanta  were  trausfcrrwl

by  Sttlencui*  to  Antiocbiftf  whicb  was  built  iu  itM

nMi{;hlMHirhoo<l.

Antlg&nus  (ArriyoMf).  ri)  King  of  Ania.  snr-
nanuMl  thr>  OSF.-ETED  iMov6<f)6a\tins  or  KOkAw^I.
Hon  of  Pbilip  «f  Klyniintt«,  and  falber  of  Deim--
triiia  Polinri-tftfa  by  8tnit«niic<<. He  wait  uue  uf


char|*t*  in  fiut'Htion,  of  coiinw,  attacliirif;  to  tbc  QrM
party,  if  the  exchanpo  wito  finally  t'ffeptfd.  For
tlifiKo  procL'^diiig^  thn  ruiirlH  wito  oiMnind  at  u
HtatiHl  tinio  every  year  by  the  inagiHtnitt^rt  that
bad  oflit-ial  coguizauuo  of  tbt*  pnrlicular  !inbj<>ct ;
SDch  &»  the  fttrategi  tn  euoa  of  trierarL-hy  and  rat-
iug  to  th(5  pro)wrty-taxea,  and  the  archon  iu  thotw


iirKia,  or  vnn  ntlicrwifw>  lanfnlly  exempt
the  nmf{'mtrnti>K  nir^ht  disniiiw  the  vase  ;  otIierwi«4?


to  Ibe  80VLTeit»ii(y  of  Aftia.


316  bo  dcfratcd


1042,  9  II);  but  in  practice  Ibo  time  mif^bt  ho  ex-
leuded  by  voiiiwnt  of  tbc  cballvngLT.  All  ininiov-
ablo  and  luovablo  property  waa  tninHfen-t>d  in  the
exobange,  with  tbc  oxccptiou  of  niiiiew,  which  were
oxempteiL  from  Iho  cxtmordinary  taxe^  and  litnr-
giae,  aa  beini;  already  taxed ;  and  all  claims  and  ub-
ligationanttachi-d  to  it,  and  particularly  all  dcb(.i.
were  inctndud  in  tbo  tninafer,  as  may  bo  scuu  from
tliti  8pti>ch  nt'uinnt  I'liaenippiiH.

Proffwuir  MabalVy'H  mimrkH  on  ibo  injn<itlcr'  of
tbia  law  are  by  no  meaiiK  tr>o  tttroiiK:  "It  seeni»
atmply  tlio  legiMlaliun  of  tlio  Atbuniiui  Uioh  abuut
property  whicb  tli<>y  bad  iidver  [H»ftsc-S8ud,  and  did
not  uiidprwtaud;  lor  the  olhtr  alltriiulivc— that
Athenian  propurtiu.t  were  niuall  or  of  a  aimtdu  nat'
uru,  HUl'  uiir  rontuU  of  c»tHtt'i> — Is  refntud  by  the
many  di'^criptionii  of  property  iu  ttie  oratora.  It
i«,  In  fact,  in(!Xp1icablu  Ihat  any  iut^lligent  people
flbonid  have  tolerated  hiicIi  »  law,  and  it  in  l-oiicIii-
aire  againxt  ttm  biimuf^a  c»parit5'  of  the  men  wIhi
tolerated  it."  See  Mnhaft'y,  Suri^it  Life  tn  Gmer,
p. 401),  M  ed.,  and  Jehh,  .it'lic  Or.  ii.  KIG.

AntisSiiea  ('Ai^iyr'i")r).  A  general  of  Alexander
the  (Jn-at,  on  wbo8<>  death  ho  recejvtKl  the  satrapy
of  Siisiana  and  supported  ICiimenett.  On  tlie  defeat
of  the  latter.  Antigeues  wnnaeized  and  biinieil  alive
by  bis  enemy  Anti(;(MniH,B.C.3l6  (I'hit.  JIw.'O).

Antigdn^  i'Aprtyotn}).  (1)  A  daughter  of  Oedipaa
by  hifl  motbor  locaat**,  and  siater  of  lament  and  uf
Kteovlea  and  FolyniceM. In  the  tragia  story  of  Oedi-

pna,  Aiiti^oni^  apiteart  aa  a  noble  maiden,  with  a nifying  thti  writing  ptit  in  by  the  dcfeiidaut  in  any
truly  benncatlaehnivnt  to  her  fat  her  and  her  bmtli-  I  ranne,  whether  pnhhe  or  private,  in  aiiNWer  to  tUa


g,  and  liiH  example  wa.-*  foIluwcMl  by
V*lolemy,  I.yHimarhuH,  and  S*'lencri8.  Antigouna
and  biH  turn  Demetrina  were  at  length  defeated
by  I.ytiimachuH  at  the  decisive  battle  of  IpNn;^  iu
I*hrygta,  iu  '^l.  AntignuuH  fell  in  the  battle,  iu
the  eighly-lirst  >ear  of  bin  age.  (2|  Gonatas,  tiun
uf  Demetrinn  Polioreete.K,  and  grumlsDU  of  the  pns
reding.  Ho  aaHiimed  the  lithi  uf  king  of  Mace-
donia after  bia  faibcr'a  drnib  in  AkIu  in  !f83,  bnt
be  did  not  ohtalu  poaaeaslon  uf  the  tlin>ne  till  377.
He  waa  driven  unt  of  bia  kingdom  by  Pyrrbua  uf
Kpinia  in  '^73,  bnt  recovered  it  in  tboi  firlKiwing
year.  He  died  in  l!3i>.  Ho  was  »4Uri«eiled  by  IV*-
metriua  II.  |3|  L>u!M>x  (50  called  becanae  be  waa
always  about  to  give  bnt  never  didi,sou  of  Deme-
triua  of  Cyreu^,  uud  gniuditon  of  DemctrlnB  Polior-
M'tea.  On  tbe  death  uf  Demetrius  Jl.,  iu  329,  b»
waa  left  guardian  of  bis  son  Pbilip,  but  married
tbe  widow  of  DeuietriuH,  and  became  king  of
Macedonia  bimxelf.  He  atipported  tbo  Acbauaa
League  againi^C  Cloomenea,  king  of  Sparta,  whom
he  dofeat<-tl  at  ^ellaHia  in  '221.  and  took  Hparix
He  died  "tiO.  (4)  A  (ireek  of  Caryolna,  who  wn>ta
(alKiut  n.c.  240)  a  Kuminary  of  eurioUK  ami  iutereii-
ing  factn  nurl  tlrlioua  reganling  natnral  hiHtory.
Tbe  wrtrk  iJt  uxtunt  iu  au  abbreviated  furin,  and
U  raliiablo  t>ecan.<te  of  its  uumorous  quotations
from  lont.  writiiigrt.  Kd.  by  Westcrmann  tBrun0>
wick,  l(*^V)). 8ee  Ko]>ke,  iye  Amig.  CVy</io  (1^;:<K!).

Autlgrftpb^  {ayrtypatf}^). A  term  originally  sig-


vn.  When  Oedipriii  hnd  put  out  bin  eyen,  and  waa
obliged  to  i|nit  Tbebec,  lie  wiia  accompanied  by
Autigou6,  who  remained  with  him  till  he  diefl  at
Coloniia.  and  then  relnined  toTlielH-M.  After  her
two  brotbcTV  bad  killed  each  other  iu  battle,  and
CreoD.  tbc  king  of  TIivImm,  would  uot  aUow  Poly-
uitea  to  bo'  buried,  Antigont5  oloue  delied  the  ly-
niut,  aud  buried  tbe  body  of  her  brother.  Croon
tlicreupon  ordered  her  lo  be  immured  in  a  bubter-
raneau  cave,  where  sbe  killed  hentelf.  Her  lover.
Ilaemun,  tbe  son  of  Creuu,  killed  himself  by  her
side.  A  ]>luy  of  Hopborlea  getn  ila  title  from  lier
luune. (if)  Tbe  wife  uf  Peleun  (*{.  v.},  who  hanged


indictment  or  hill  of  the  prutteculnr.  But  wu  find
the  term  employed  not  only  for  the  answer  of  tlio-
defendant,  but  bIko  for  the  stateuient  of  tbe  pluin-
lilf  I  Harpocrat.  b.  v.  avriypatfi^ :  Plato,  A/mt.  Sotr.  "
p.  *27  (';  .Sebomaiin,  Anfiquitirt,  p.  484  ).  Tbua  thv
wuni  "plea,''  though  by  no  means  a  coincident-
(erni,  may  Im  allowed  to  be  a  tolerably  proxiuioti^
rendering  of  dynyiia<fir]. See  DiKX,

Actigrapheifl  invTiyparpi7s).  Cbecking-clerka,
cotitnirotulutona.  Eflieient  checkn  on  the  hnudlin^
of  pnblic  funda,  whether  utnnicipal  or  untinnal,
woro  oveu  more  iicceMaary  among  tbe  Orecka  thai*
in  modero  civilized  couutries;  aud  the  AtUcuians*


I


yiith  tbrir  diiitniit  nf  ofHcial  honesly,  »oTT;;ht  rrf- '
vffr  it] tniiltipl.viiif;  mirli Phi*<!kK. IIaiic<> it  was
thti  ml*  ill  Atbrtiiun  rittatiow  IliBt  whrrerer  then*
■»r»j!i  a  piililir  oIlirt'T  intnurtpd  with  tb(?  payment  i
of  inotirT,  thi'Tv  will*  by  Ijji^  niilc nti u»TtyfMiip<it,
vho  vratrhrd over him »n<1 Itrpt iliiplirnU' nc-  j
coQiitft. TbuR,  it in  proved  by  inwrriptiutiB thni  i
ifacrc>  wa«  an  dvnypaf^wvr  to  i-ncb  (limif  {C  I.  ti.
lOOi;  ami  a  gvuvral  iu  tbe  fit«M  ilinpnAod  nf  blf>
luilitury  cbe«t  itibject  to  a  liku  cuiitrul  ( Dctii.  ,
Jje  Chen.  p.  101,  $  -IT). The  iMliuitiifttriilors  o(  ao-
«rtHl  fiimls.  Buc-b  as  tbu  treuAun'm  of  i>t*Io((,  were
»iiuilar]y  coutrollcd  {hto:  139,  Ul,  100,  IW).

AataibOnua  ('AyrAiiiavotu Hw  LinA?«rs.

Antil6cbuai'At^iXnj(of). TbcKMii  ofNVhtor.wbo

Brcoiii]i.tiiiril  bis TatbtT  tn thp  Trujaii  War,  atiil

Was  (listiugitinbeil  atuoiig  tbe  yuiingt'r  bonwH  for

Waaty  nti<]  lirnvery. llouivr  cjilU  bitii  a  fiivuiiritt*

«<f  ZciiK uiiil  I'uM.-it1uti. Tbc  di;»reHt  frlc'iitl  of  Acbil-

Um  next  to  raltwliis,  Iw  nus  choMni  by  llic  Orfck!*

to  break  tbc  uuwg  to  biiii  of  his  buUivM  cotitpitu-

iuQ*A  fiilL Wbeii  Meuiiiuii  QltBckeil  tbc  agctl  Na«-

tor.  Anttlochtu tbre^r bimsulf  in bi.H  way,  ami

lungbt bis futberH Kafvty  witb bi» life. He,

bki<  Patrocluit.  svn*  ik\«ngv*l  by  Arbilli'M,  in  wbuso

KnYc-tDotiiiil  tbe  a«he4(  of  ImiIIi  frii-uilH  were  laid ;

fVfu  in  tbt)  lower  world  Ody»»vaK  bebebi  tbt  three

paciug  tW  OMphfHlcl  tuL-ndnw,  niid  in  »ft«r-tiTu««

ilw  inbabituuttt  of  Ilium  ofTi^rcd  to  tbcni  jointly

tkKi«cri(i<'(Ni  diw*  to  tbu  dtrud  on  tbe  furelund  of

ADtim&obu*  ('Ayriftaxot).  A  Greek  poet  and
ehtic  v(  Culopbou,  an  eliter  cotitetnporary  of  Platu,
•fcttUt  fcc.  400.  By  bis  two  princi|Kil  worku— thi.*
hngiujtbival  epic  cuUnl  Thehfiit  iQiiiut.x.  l>and
i  ^cie  uf  elegies  named  aftir  bis  loved  uiid  loAt
I^,ai>d  ti'tlinK  of  fammm  lovers  parted  by  death
—\k»  Wnnie  tin;  foundiT  of  letuniod  poetrj',  pre-
^itM  and  prototype  of  tbe  Alexnndriaiift,  who,
^■u  account  of  hia  lenniini;,  assigned  bim  tbe
><nt  jilari'  to  Ilonirr  among  epir  ]K>et5.  (See
(''UK^i  Alxxamikinck.)  la  Htrivini;  to  impart
Mnngtli  and  dipiity  to  language  by  avoiding  all
tUt  «u  common,  bui  atylr  Itecame  rigid  and  arti-
Acial,  autl  nniurally  ran  into  bombant.  But  we
P"— m  only  fi-agmuutti  of  bin  worki*.  Aa  a  Achol-
ic b«  U  reiimikablo  for  having  itet  on  foot  n  erii.-
M  iMlalou  of  tbo  Hooieric  poeiud. 8eo  HoMi:itiT».

Antinote  (ra  'AKriVMin  \.  Annual  fuHtiviils  and
<l<>bii|ueniiinl  gniiiCB  iutttiluted  by  tbe  emjieror
Hainan  iu  Imnoiu  of  Autiuulbi  (•■■v.).

AnttDomlAn,  TliK.  A  name  ofton  given  to  tbe
"■pli^t  Itippioa  of  £li«t  liecaUM!  of  biit  arffninent
*PitiU  tbc  ohBcrvauvc  of  law  (vo^tor),  wbiib  wan
••fiilUnfs:  Wltnievcr  i*  contrary  t«  nature  is  an
•^1:  Uiw  Turcvs  men  to  many  tbingA  that  aro
'*«('«T  to  ibcir  liiclinationa,  and  ht-iieu  to  ibeit
"Moft:  Law.  therefore,  is  au  erfl  and  tdiould  not

•"tf^JWlwl, Sew  HlPHlA!;!.

AfiticoopdllA. See  AntinoI's.

^otluoOs.  il)SouofKupithceoritbueu,tindouo
•'  'W  wiitont  of  Peueln|M*,  waa  alaiu  by  Oilyswrns.
'*'A>(.iiili  of  eJttruordinary  beauty,  born  iit  iMao-
■'"I'^ili*  in  Bitbyiiia,  was  tbe  frivourit«  of  the  em-
V*t>it  Haiirian.  und  his  companion  iu  iill  biit  Jonr>
Jp»  (I'iiitaiv.  viii  !l,  7)  Hd  waa  drowned  Iu  the
JjKajj.  122,  Tbe  grief  of  the  einiieror  know  no
""tiDAi.  Wf.  enrolled  AntiiioUn  among  tbc  gods,
*"*■<)  ■  tvmple  t4t  be  erected  to  him  at  MantTaea,


anil  founded  the  city  of  AntiiioupoliH  In  brninnrof
him.  Ueantifnl  Btnlue«and  bnKtiof  bim  HtillexiMt.
Antlochia  VSvTMX'^y  (''  '^^"  capital  of  the
firet-k  kingdom  nf  Byria,  and  long  the  rbief  eity
of  Aitio.  Il  itlood  on  tbu  loft  bank  of  the  Oront«H,
nlMiut  twenty  miles  from  the  M-a,  in  a  beautiful
valley.  Ic  was  bnilt  by  Seleucns  Nicat^ir,  alKint
H.r.  :miO,  who  eallpd  It  Antindiia  in  honour  nf  biH
fnihei,  AniiorbuH,  and  iteopled  it  chiefly  from  the
nt^igbbouriiig  eity  of  Anligoida.  It  woa  one  of
the  enrliettt  ntrongholtU  of  thu  ChriKtiau  faith;
Iho  tlrtt  plaee  where  tbe  Chrintiau  name  waa
u»ed  {.\ct»  xi.  'Jtl):  and  thu  srf  of  one  of  tbe  four
chief  binbopa,  who  were  calle<l  patriarrlifi.  (2)
Anti«iciiia  ad  >lArANi>nrM,  u  city  of  Curia,  on
Iho  Mfieander,  bnilt  by  .■\nliocbu!«  I.  (Sotcri  on  tbe
site  of  the  old  city  of  I'ylbopolis.  <;t)  A  rlly  ou
the  boiden*  of  Thrygia  and  I'ijsjdin  ;  bnilt  by  col-
oniitro  fnnn  Magnesia;  luoile  a  colony  under  Au-
gn»tnfl,  and  called  Caeaorca,

Auti6oht]B(VAirri'ox''v)-  I- — The  namoof  several
kiiigB  of  Sjrio.  (I  I  SoTKit  (reigned  B.C.  29(1-261),
the  son  of  S'lencuH  1.,  the  founder  of  tbe  Syrian
kingdom  of  tin*  Sidi-ncidae.  He  nuirried  liin  Hteji-
moIhrr8tratonie4^,  with  u  bunt  In-  bu<l  fallen  violent-
ly in  love,tind  whom  hiNfuLber  nniTendered  to  bim.
Hefelliiibal.tIeaguin.<tttbe4ianlMin'JCl.  (U)TllK4>.i
(H.r.  261 -34n).  Miu  and  snceeawir  of  the  preceding.
Tbe  MitcitiauA  gave  bim  bin  Hurnamo  of  B«»c  be-
cftu«>  lie  delivered  them  from  tbeir  tyrant,  Tinmr-
cbiis.  He  earned  ou  war  with  Ptolemy  I'hilailel-
]>hu8,  king  of  Egypt,  which  wdb  bmngbt  to  a  clnao
by  hitt  putting  away  bio  wife  Luodic^.and  marry-
iug  Rereuic*',  the  daughter  of  Ptolemy.  After  tha
death  of  Ptolemy  he  recalled  Laodic^S,  but,  in  re-
venge for  the  iusult  she  bud  received,  ahe  rausetl
Antiocbua  and  Hcn-niet^  to  be  muntenMl.  He  wa«
KUL-ce^-'ded  by  biB  ft'>n  Soleucus  CullinicuH.  Hia
younger  oon,  Auiioehus  Hierax,  ateo  Aatiinned  the
t-rowu,  and  e^arried  on  war  some  yeai'»  with  hia
brotbor.  (Sec  ItKitKMcfc.  )  ('3)  The  Grkat  (I1.C.
'i£^-^f<i),  ttou  and  8ncce«i»or  of  Seleucns  CatliiiiciM.
He  ean-ied  on  war  aguiuttt  Ptolemy  Pliilopator,
king  of  Egypt,  in  onler  to  obtain  CoclO'Syria,
Phoenicia,  oud  Palestine,  but  was  obliged  to  ccdo
these  provinces  to  Itolcuiy,  in  coQM3t|UcQCC  of  btM
defeat  at  tbe  battle  of  Kapbia.  near  Gaza,  in  '1\1.
He  WAA  aftcmards  engaged  for  bcvou  years  ('21'^
liAKJ)  Iti  an  attempt  to  regain  tbo  eastern  proviDces
of  Asia,  which  hud  revolted!  during  the  n>ign  of
Antiocbiift  II.;  but,  though  be  luct  with  great  auc-
cesd,  be  found  it  bopeleas  to  elfecl  the  Mubjngatiou
uf  the  Partbinu  and  Bactriau  kingdiinift,  and  ai>-
corthngly  eonelndi-d  a  jieace  M'Ub  tbum.  In  198
be  conquered  Palctitlriu  and  Coele-Hyria,  which  be
afterwarda  gave  an  a  dowry  with  bio  daughter
Cleopatra  ujmu  her  umrriage  with  Ptolemy  Epiph-
auea.  He  afteruanlH  became  involved  in  hoatili-
tica  with  tilt-  iJomaUN,  and  waa  urged  by  Hannibal,


Ooin  of  Aaiioebu*  ()m  Orc<ii


ANTIOCmjS  I

bo  arrrr?*!  at  bis  court,  to  inviide  Italy  without
loss  of  titnp;  but  Atitiocliiis  did  nut  fullon-  Iiih  iid-
TiCP-  111  l!W  be  cnjsswl  over  into  Gre»-<*:  unil  in
101  li«;  Kiis  ilt'Tcult^d  liy  ttip  KoiuatiM  at  Tlifnuopy-
hw,  ftiul  cumi^ellMt  1u  return  to  A<<)a.  In  190  lie
•wan  iig»in  ileffati.-<l  by  thn  K4Mnfii>i«  iii>cl«r  Lh  8ri|)io,
nt  Mount  8ipylui:4,  neur  Ma^iu^iii,  and  ci>ni|wlled
to  Hue  for  (K'Utii',  iviitcli  v,an  };nint«d  in  l(it3, on  con-
dition i>r  bin  i'«-din^  nil  liiH  dominions  eaut  nfMoont
Tnnriis.  and  paying  1^,0(10  Knboic  tuletits.  In  ordiT
to  mifw  the  uioDey  to  pay  the  RninanH,  hv  attacked
a  wealtliy  templu  tii  Elytnnifl,  bnt  was  killed  by
the  people  of  the  place  (1''7).  He  wn*  sncccedetl
by  his  son  ScltrnctJH  riiitopntor.  (4)  Ei>ipim.ve«
(d.c.  175-1G4),  Hon  of  Atitiocbns  III.,  enctceeded  hit
brother  Selenctm  Pliilopator  in  175.  lie  carried
on  irar against  Egypt  (ITl-lCJ*)  with  great  success ;
nStt  hu  wus  prepnriDg  to  lay  n'wg^  lo  Alexaiidriit
ill  168,  ulit^ii  till)  Rotnaim  conipHllt^d  hJui  t<i  retire.
He  eiideavoiinMl  to  root  out  th«  ,I«wIhU  rtdipioii
And  to  introdoce  the  worship  of  ibo  (Jruek  diviut-
Ik-h;  but  thiti  atterii|>t  Ivd  lou  rii^ingof  the  Jewish
pooplu  uiuler  Mnttatbiaa  and  his  heroic  sons,  the
MaL-cubees,  which  AiitioL-hus  was  niiable  to  i>ut
down.  Ho  attempted  to  pliiudet  n  temple  in  Kly-
mHJH  in  164,  hut  was  repulsed,  and  died  shortly
oilterwarcU  in  b  state  of  mviag  ni.-idtiess,n-]iiRh  the
Jews  and  the  Greeks  etiually  nttribnted  to  bis  sfu?.
rilcgioiia  crimes.  His  subjects  gave  him  the  intme
of  Epima»c9  ("the  tnndman"),  id  parody  of  JCpiph-
«N».  (6)  EiTATOK  (u.c.  164-103),  &0U  and  sncccs
Bor  of  Epiphanes,  was  nine  ye.irs  old  ai  his  father's
death.  IIi'^  was  dethroned  nnd  put  to  death  by
Douietriui*  i^oler.  the  son  of  Seleueus  Philopator.
(ti)  Thko.s,  ^fiti  of  AlexiiiiderBalas.  Ke  wimbnin^hl
foruMnl  a»  i\  claimant  to  thu  crown  in  l44,af^aitiHt
Detuetrius  Xiofttor,  by  Tryplion,  but  he  \\n»  nnir-
dertnl  by  the  luttei*.  who  ssceuded  the  throne  him-
self  in  14^.  (7)  Sidltks  (d.c.  137-li!8),  so  calletl
fniui  8id6  iu  Fumpliyliu,  where  ho  was  hrou|(ht
up,  younger  son  of  Deinelrius  Soter,  suuceeUed
Tryphoii.  He  was  defeated  and  »tuiii  in
battle  by  the  Parthiaus  in  I'ii*.  (H|  Gaii-pi-8,
or  Hook-notH.'d  (u.c.  liio-iXi),  iweoud  sou  of
Demetrius  Nicator  and  Cleopatra.  He  car-
ried on  war  for  st)me  years  with  his  half-
brother,  Antiochus  Cyzicenuy.  At  length,
in  IVi,  the  two  brctheni  agrcc'd  to  shore  the
kingdom  between  them,  —  Atitiuchns  CyK-
iceuuH  Laving  Coele-Syriit  and  Phwntcia,
aud  AniloehiisGryiuis  the  remainder  of  the
pntvinceH.  Grypim  wait  anMiBsinated  tit  %.
(9)  C*^'zrcENt:s,  from  Cyzicns,  wbero  he  was
brought  up,  brother  of  Orypns,  reiguod  over
Coete-Syria  uiid  Pba-iiieia  from  112  to  OC,
but  fell  iu  buttle  iu  95  agaiust  Selencus
Epiphaues,  son  of  Orypns.  (10)  Et'SKBES,
son  of  Cyr.iccnus,  defeate<l  8eleticiis  Epiph-
aDt*(»,aud  uiainlnineil  (he  thioiu-  itguinstlhe
bruthera  of  .Si'leuctis.  He  Miit-n'eded  his  fa-
ther in  OS.  (11)  tririiANKs.  etou  of  fiiypuM
and  brother  of  .Suleucns  Kpijdiauea.  He  riir-
riedon  warngaiuKt  Euscbe«,but  waadefruted
by  the  latter,  and  drowuetl  in  the  river  Oroii-
lc«.  (l*i)  DioSYsui^  brother  of  the  preced-
ing, hehl  the  crown  for  u  short  time,  but  fell
in  buttle  ugEiinet  Arvtati,  king  of  the  Ara-
,bhku&.  The  Syriaus,  worn  out  with  the  civil
brotUi  of  the  Scteueidau,  offered  the  kingdom
to  Tigraties,  king  of  Anneuia,  who  ntiilMl
Syria  to  his  owu  Uomluions  iu  S3,  and  held


8  AirnOPE

It  till  his  defeat  by  the  Romnna  in  60.  HflS)  Abiat-
Icus.  80U  of  Eusebeti.  beeame  king  of  Syria  on  the
defeat  of  Tigranes  by  Lucnilns  in  l!9;  but  he  was
ilepriveil  of  it  in  Go  by  Ponipey,  who  reduced  Syrin
ut »  Roinnn  provinott.  In  thin  year  the  Scleuoidoe
eeawed  to  reign.

n. — KingsofCominageui^.  (1)  A  king  who  made
nn  alliance  with  the  Romans,  ainiut  )t.c.  04.  He  «•-
sisted  Pninpey  with  ti'oops  in  49,  mitl  watt  ntlacked
by  Antony  in  38.  He  wju  snceeiHled  by  MilhriilatM
I.  about:)!.  (2)  Succee<led  Milliridates  I.,  and  was
put  to  death  at  liorae  byAugostns  in  S9.  (3)  Suc-
ceeded Mithridatcs  II.,  aud  died  in  A.D,  17.  l.'pon
his  death  Coniniageii^  became  a  Roman  province,
nnd  rcuminc'd  sc.)  till  \.i*.  2t*.  (4)  Snrnauie«l  HrtTH-
ANK^,  received  bis  paternal  dnniiniou  from  Calig-
ula in  A.li.  38.  He  nswisted  the  Romans  in  Lbeir
wai-R  nguiiidt  the  P.irtliiun8  under  »ro,  and  against
tlio  Jews  under  Ve«piiMtaii.  In  7*2  he  was  accused
of  cnt)a|iiriiig  with  thn  Parthinns  against  the  Ro.
mans,  was  deprived  of  his  kingdom,  and  retired  to
KoTtie,  wliiTe  liM  piisMt'd  the  remainder  of  bis  life.

111.— Literary.  Op  AfiCAUW,  thu  founder  of  tfafl
Fifth  Aeudeniy,  wua  a  friend  of  Lucnilns  and  the
teacher  of  t'iceni  during  his  isttidies  at  Athens  (B.c.
70). Hee  Hoyer,  Dc  Jntiavlio  .tacef.  (Itita).

Ann6p6r\vTt6in}).  (1)  In  Homer  (Oifyn.xi.  380)
Dilnugbteriifr.be  BiMMitiaii  river-god  Astipnii, mother
Iiy  Zens  of  Ainphion  and  Zethus.  In  litter  legend
her  father  is  Nycl^-'ns  of  Ilyria  or  Hysiae.  As  be
threatened  to  puniKh  her  for  yielding  to  the  ap-
proaches of  Zi-u»  under  the  fimn  of  »  sjityr,  «he  fled
to  EpopenH  of  Sicyon.  This  king  her  uiinl*-  Lycos
killed  by  tirder  of  bis  bruHier  Nyeteiis,  imw  dead,
and  led  her  liaek  iu  iduiius.  Arrived  du  Mnniit,
Cithaermi,  jibe  yave  birth  to  tnins — Aniphiou  by
Zeus,  Zethns  by  KiKiptMifl  —  whom  Lycin*  left  ox-
posed  np*)ii  tbe  mountain.  After  being  long  im-
Itrisonedand  tll-treat^ed  by  Diie<5,ibe  wife  of  Lyrns,
she  eseaiHMl  to  Cithneroii,  and  made  aequaintauru
I  with  her  »oub,  whom  a  shepherd  had  brought  up.


I


«  made  ibeni  lAk«  a  frifchtftil  vencemice  iipnu
Dirci  by  ty'iug  bor  to  a  furious  liull,  fur  doiii;;
.•which  l>imij-i!ia!t  drove  hrr  iiiiid,  and  (*lu'  waiulervil
ittirou^h  liri-*fCf  iiuliirbtM'UH,  Iciii^rof  Pbocis,  hetalt'd
ItT  nml  mndc  hi-r  Ititt  wife.  (3)  An  Amazon,  BMtt«r
of  Hippolyti^  tbn  ^ifo  of  Tbet«.*iiH  and  niolber  of

AntipSroa  V.Kyriimpos).  A  Bmall  loland  opposite
Papm.  and  fautuas  for  a  grutto  of  great  depth.

AntipSter  {'Avrivarpot) {I)  Tbe  snri  of  lulntls,

a  Ma<^-il(>i)iiiii. H»  was  lintt  an  nflloor  under  Pliilip,

And  AnornAnltt  vn«  miMrd  lo  tbt>  runic  i>f  n  ^enenil

DiidtT  Ak-xandvr  tbe  Great. Wb<<n  (be  b)tt«r  in-

T.'wlr*!  A«ia  Antipaler  wan  nppaii)t(-d  KtiVfruor  of

Ma(;<<d(itiia,  and  in  Ibis  iitAtinn  bf>  iM-rvod  bit*  iirinrn

*ith  tbe  pratcJit  (idtlitr. He  rc^Iuft-d  ihe  8i>i»r-

taufs  wbo  binl  fomicd  a  cotife<li>racy  aganmC  ttin

UiicedoniaiiA;  and,  having  tbiiM  ne«ar«<4l  tbe  tran-

^lullitj  of  Greeco,  bi*  tn«rch<^d  into  Asia  with  n

l^werful  rtinforcetncnl  for  Alexander. Afl^'rthat

monarch's  dratb  tliu  fcovi^ninii^ntof  M(U'rdonta  ntid

*)f  the  other  Eiiropcnti  provinces  wiis  iillottml  to

Anlipater. He  wan  wion  itiToIv^-d  in  a  wvoro  con-

tvKt  with  tbe  Grecian  Ktatm;  wim  defeated  by  tbe

Atbrntans,  irbo  came  against  biiu  with  an  nnny

irfSD.OOO  men  and  a  fleet  uf  'iW  cbipH;  and  win*

cWly  besieged in  Laniin,  a town  of  Tbewuily.

fiut  Leo^thenea,  tbi>  Albrnian  commander,  liavirig

hfen  ntortally  wonndvd nnder  the  walls  of  the

(ily,  and Auttpater bavlnK receivei) ami8lnn(.-e

boa  UniteniB,  bin  son-in-law,  the  forttttie  of  ttie

wutias  completely  changed. Tbe  Athenian*  were

rwlwj  at  Cranon,  and  compelled  t<j  enbniit  at  AU-

tretloft, 'ITiey  were  allowed  to  retain  tli«'ir  riglitu

ttil  uriTnegeH,  but  were  obliywl  tn  dfliver  U]*  the

■ttttmi  DemoMtheneH  »ih1  HyiNriilcK,  whii  had  iii-

•li|[Ued  tbe  v>*ar,  and  tit  nn-'five  a  MnetHlntii.'Ui  ^ar-

raon  inln  tbe  Munyehin. Anlipatcr  whm  ctiually

•WetNbd  iu  KubdtiiiiK  lh«  olbur  Slates  of  CivtH^e,

•bowcte  mukinK  a  nohlt:  mriiynlc  for  tht-ir  fitie-

^ota;  Hi  he  wttlwd  their  re9|»cctivo  (j;ovi-rumtMit»

*itt  MDcb  mudenition. In  eoiijunctiou  w  illi  Crn-

•f*  lie  wna  the  first  wbo  atti-nipted  to  coutnd

•'"'  ifmwing  pnwpr  of  Pcrdiccas,  and  ufler  Ihe

'■fatli  of  that  cnininnnder  be  whh  invested  nith

'il  bia  anlbority. Kh  vxerriiieil  tluA  jnriMlictiou

*'^n  tbe  ulher  govenmni  with  nnuKnal  tididity,  in-

^S^'y.and  impartiality,and  di^d  in  tbe  eitjbtietli

iW  of  lis  ajie,  B.C.  'M9. At  bin  death  he  Icfl  bif*

'"^CaauiiHler  in  a  imlKirdinale  Htjition  ;  ap]Mtintrd

""IflpnchoD  bi»i  own  imuiedinte  Kurcewtor,  and

'*'H)IIH)iid«'<l  bini  tn  the  other  grneraU  uh  the  fit-

•"ipwiDD  to  prenidf  lo  their  counriln. Aiitipater

•weivpil  ti  learned  edncnliou.  aud  was  the  friend

•oidlwiple  of  Aristotle. lleappeni-H  to  have  pos-

"^■•^  vrry  eminent  abililiea.  and  wna  peculiarly

Iwitiuinibed  for  bi8\-igilarn;c  and  fiileliry  iu  every

^1. It  was  a  sayinfT  nf  Philip,  father  of  Alexau-

*^t"Ihare  slept  Honudly,  for  Antipater  has  been

^"^'-''IJnutin.  li.  I'J,  T.t.  fir. ;  Dit.d,  xvii.  tR,otc.).

j*' Tue  IitcMAKAN,  WHS  the  fath«r  *>(  Ilerml ihn

^J*"',  aud  sceond son of  Antipaa,  goveninr of

Wnpiapa. He  embraced  the  party  of  Hyrcaiins

■8>«»i  Ari^tobnliiH.  and  took  a  very  active  part

'^IbsMntt-^t  Iieiwewii  the  two  brothers  resiwctiiijj

Jwodlce  (if  hifjb-priest  in  ludnra. ArJRtobiilns  at

"rtl.linnt.Ter,  wicoredrd ;  but  when  Pomi)ey  bad  de-

^^  luui  and  n'-Htorril  Flyn-.tnii-s  to  the  poiiiitlcal

"'•ity.Aiitijialrr  soi»n  hrejuiir  the  chief  director  of

*^n  in  ludacji.  ingratiated  himself  with  the  Bo-


mnus,  and  used  every  effort  to  a^grandiee  hia  own
faftiily.  Ho  gave  very  eflectiial  aid  to  Caeaar  in
the  Alexaiidrinii  AVitr,  and  the  latter  in  return
uia<1«  him  a  Roman  citizeu  aud  procurator  of  Iii-
daea.  In  tbia  latter  rapacity  he  exerted  hlnnieir
to  restore  tbe  ancient  Jewixb  form  of  government,
but  was  cut  off  by  a  con)»pinicy,  the  brother  of  the
bigb-prieiit  having  heeu  brilied  to  give  hini  n  cup
of  itoisMiiieil  wine.  losepbns  ninkoit  btm  lo  Imvo
been  fliHtiuguinbfNl  for  pirty,  justice,  and  love  of
country  Mat. /wrf.  xiv.Ill.  CJ)  A  son  of  CiuMander,
aaceuded  tbe  tbmne  of  Macedonia  ».c,  ayc.  Ho
diHpnted  the  erown  with  bis  brother,  Philip  IV.,
and  ean«Hl  \uh  mother,  Thessalonira,  to  be  put  lo
death  for  favouring  riiiltp'ti  side.  The  two  broth-
ers, however,  reigned  conjointly,  notwitb5tauding
this,  for  tbn>e  years,  when  Ibi-y  were  dethroned  by
Demetrius  PoHoruetea.  Antijiater  tbenoipon  tv-
tiretl  to  tbe  court  of  Lysimaebns,  bin  fatbur-in-lair,
where  he  endixl  bis  dayn  (Justin,  xxvi.  1).  [4)  A
native  of  Tarsus,  the  ^liscipte  and  sneeeswtor  of
Diogenes  the  Itabylnnian,  in  the  8toic  f^'bool.  He
flimrishiwl  about  ii.c  H4,  and  in  pmiw^d  by  IhiIIi
Cioero  and  8eneea  aa  au  able  stipporler  of  that
aetrt.  His  chief  opponent  wan  Carneades  iCic.  /^
OjT.  iii.  12;  ^u,Ep.9'3).  (5)  A  native  of  Cyreii*,
and  one  of  tbeCyrenaio  srbwd.  He  was  a  disciple
of  the  firttt  Aristippns  atid  tbe  preceptor  of  Kpiti'
mtdea.  (G)  A  pbibMiopher  of  Tyre,  who  wrons  a
work  on  duty.  Ho  is  silpposwd  to  have  been  of
tbe  8toic  subool.  Cicero  li*c  dmt.  iii.&(Mfi]teaktt  of
him  as  an  improvisator.  CniMiis,  into  wboMentoulh
tbe  Roman  omtor  pntA  thin  remark,  mlgtit  have
kun^vn  tbe  [hm-'I  when  be  whs  (juaecitor  in  M.'iee-
donia,  ibe  same  year  iu  which  Cicero  was  loirti
tli.c.  100).  Pliny  relates  (//■  A'-viuTtl)  rhat  be  had
mi*ry  yi'ar  a  fever  oxi  the  day  iff  his  hirlli,  and
that,  without  ever  expuriencing  auy  other  eom-
plaint,  bu  attained  to  a  very  advanced  age.  Some
uf  biM  epigrams  remain,  the  greater  part  of  which
full  umler  the  c1a«aof  epitapba  (tmri^i/jftci).  f7)  A
poet  of  TUessalonica,  who  llouri»licd  towards  tbe
uud  of  tbe  last  century  preceding  tbe  Christian
era.  We  have  thirty-six  of  bis  epigrams  remain-
ing, {ti}  A  native  of  Hierajwlis.  He  waa  tbe  sec-
retary it(  Sepliinins  SeveniH  and  praeffct  of  Ilithy-
nia.  He  was  the  preeepUir  altio  of  Cai-aealla  and
liela,  anil  rL'jiruacbud  the  foriucr  with  tbu  murder
(if  his  brother.

Antip&ter,  Lucitrs  Carul-ei.  A  Roman  btato-
riau,  and  con  tern  jjorarj-  of  C.  Grnccbue,  who  wrolo
JuHal^,  coutainiug  an  account  of  the  StH:oiid
Punic  War,  in  a  highly  rhetorical  style,  but
valuable  iu  their  substance.  The  work  was  in
Hoveu  books,  -and  dedicated  to  L.  Aeliiia  Slilo.
Livy  uaes  it  liberally  in  bit)  third  decade;  and  it
apivears  aUo  to  have  been  drawn  ni>ou  by  Plu-
Uircb  and  Valeriiia  Maximns.  (sec  Kranz.  lieilr.  c.
Qudlenkril.  dee  i'al.  Max.  (Poscn,  XS76J.

Antiphftnea  i'-Kynrliuvrjt)-  <li  A  cumie  |if>et  of
Rhodes,  Siuyriin,  or  Caryslu?,  born  B.C.  4Ur*.  of  par-
ents in  the  biw  condition  of  slaves.  This  moist
prolific  writer  llio  Ih  Kaid  to  have  composeil  up-
wanls  of  three  hnudred  dramaj»},  notwirliKtaiiding
tbe  meauucBfl of  hia origin,  was fiopopnlnr  in  Alliens
that  on  his  deeea«o  a  de-eree  was  pn-tscd  lo  rpinovo
hia  remains  from  Chios  lo  that  city,  wbitre  they
were  interred  with  public  bononra  (ftuidas^s.  v.).
(i!>A  statuary  of  Arjros,  tin-  pnpil  of  PeridyHui,
one  of  those  wbo  had  studii^l  nnder  Pulycletua.


ANTIPIUTKS


ANTLU


ip  HoitrlNltnl  aboiil  n.c.  400.  Huvpml  worfcB
tiki*  iirllNl  till'  tiifiitlfilK'il  Ly  1'tillniilii.tH  (x.O).  Iln
liiriiicit  NiiiiUDH  n(  itir  liliMnuri  uiiil  uiUvr  hiTnrit ;
ami  hf<  iiiiiilo  nlM>  n  lii-iuon  lionir,  hi  iiiiitAt-imt  ■>('
IliK  hiiDM*  maUI  tn  Imvn  hci'h  eoii(ili'iii^t«<l  by  tli(>
timoko  IvoCoro  Tmy.  TIl^  nilmluiJintn  of  Aryo»
(UMit  It  IM  n  {tn'HTul.  to  npli'hi.  <^)  A  [iitrt  of  MAOl^-
iltMiln,  hiiM^  of  wIhvmi  t<|ii);rfiiii>t  nrn  ])niAorv«il  in  tUo
AtillM>li>|ty.  lit)  tltiurlMliixl  b«tiii-noii  i).c.  lU)  aiid
tli<*  fi'Ikh  of  Aii|[niituii.

AjitlphAtaa  (.\t^iffn'tnjt).  Tltn  klii);  (T tlix  my tb>
k'lil  Uii'dtiyiiuuon  in-  v.t  lu  Sicily  («M^m.  \.  10(>). ,

AnUphntlua  ('Avri^iXXor). Sec  riiKUi.t's.

A.i)tiphlluar\i>Tii^Xti(>.  AOiTrIc  piiintrrlinrn  hi
Kti>|il  ill  llio  liith'i  tiitlf  ut' lhi>  ftiiirt'li  rciitnry  Hx\,
m  (<MliU>liipt)Uiry  uiid  rlvnl  of  Aprlliw;  lio  [irotiuMy
»|H)ii(  lliti  liMl  \mtt  \t(  hin  lifi*  ut  lli«  (tiurt  nf  tlio
lint  I'tiili'iny.  Tliv  iitiripiitM  priiiHi'  tlio  lifclilne'u
»ii(l  ile&tt>riiy  with  wtiii-ti  lie  bmiiUiMl  mil^citf  of
high  nrl,  ■*  «rll  HK  t>ri'tK-«  iu  daily  Hfr.  Tv^o  of
hu  ))li-iiii'vw  ill  tbo  Inltrr  kiuil  won;  i-(tp«x-i<illy  IW
imtu».  outf  uf  n  Wy  blimiiif;  a  tin',  iiml  (luotbcr  of
nuutcii  tliiruliiK  wAKil.  Krv'Ui  bu  bjkviii^  pAiuicU
m  tiiati  ii^iiikmI  iti>lliin  i)>i^>  \^itb  playfnl  iilluatun*
IM  (br  Atttt'i  «  iKiiiKs  i-«rlr»iun«  iti  K«uvr&I  came  iu
Lw>  wdl«l  frylli  (J'liuy,  «.  .V  jlx»v.  Hi,  ISPj.

Ajltiphoo  ('Am^rV  Th«  carliMt  of  tb«  ten
Itrval  Atlio  omton^  bunt  li.('.  i/^"*  in  Attica,  umi  uf
tbrMiiibitt  Sniihitiis  tt)  ttbuni  bo  ownl  bi^  trzuiiiuf;.
Il<*  wiU  tho  It^itittlcr  of  |Hi1itir»l  «UMiiimt(*<>  a«  aii  art.
«hi4'b  111*  taucbl  witb  fiVc*t  «)>|dau««  lu  hi*  ovru
wboid  of  rbrtorio ;  mhI  b«  was  the  Hr»l  vrbo  «rn>t«
%Mii  •)Hnrtbv4t  for  oibcr*  (w  «l<^li%v«  \n  eoiut,  lliougb
b^  a.n<rw«nU  put>U«b<i.<«libr«nuutl«>rUB«WBMne.
W*  aU<  )d<\<r«t  ait  acliv«  |i«wi  itt  Uw  |M4ili<waf  hi*
liUM>  ac  a  hHMt(B(  aiTOWr  of  Uw  «ll|EvrhEc«l  i»ar-
VC.  umI  iIw  n«l  KMlkNir  uf  Uw  4«Mlihhb>ir  «bk-k
««•  «le»ll  to  (iMimmcy  tn  B.C.  411  by  tW  vstab-
MalMMMll of  Ih* CNtlMMl t4  VtMT HHttdlMt. Ik

Mmi  w««i  «■  MnltwAir  H»  S|ttrtK,  t»  pnKh*s
i*MK<»  ftl  atiy  ytif  («  tlw  Ulac— >  cf  t^  «kll(»rrli>
0»  «k»  IMl  ti4^  tW  F\Mir  HM4r(4  W  w  wxvmU
•f  ll^  irMMM.  a«^  M  a|4ta  «i>f  a  H«»4«cir  drfinhcv
^•«W  tvM  vftmfk  W  kwl  iPVTr  ■■a»t»  i«  |MRWia —
«M  iiailiwil  W  4miU  »c.  111.  or  tW  alxly
■■Uiaw  tttilbw4  fe»  litn,  <«I>[  UW**  at*  |«»-
MfT«A— ••B«n1«iakte-ia«n»fT:  Wrt mU? tkt«<r of
tfeMftMwah«aMrMlciaaaa.  TWiwti,!
^i«  WaaaM  MM]t  IbMir  av*  kW  tni  hvA  apwMiii
ifHllhiii «r  W4k  HiMftltf  Mil liilaiitiM  Mk  «k»

^nfcin  mMmn  U»  act  «tf  twwtiw;  H»  w»  nnlk^


ifl  A  aymlH)]  it  wan  iiitcil  byArixlarvbuB  fq.vT
ill  litH  rrilii'iKni  of  ibn  Hotin-rii-  Irxt  to  ilcuut«  lep-
i>titioiiHof  ibi'  hAiiiti  idtm;  fliHl  by  AriHtopbaues  of
Hy7niitinm  to  mark  pnAhngt^x  tliAt  be  regnrilfd  an
Npohoua.  (See  Mabatfr,  Hnt.  n/Chi**.  Gr^k  tjtrr-
ri/urif,  vol,  i.  p.  37.)  Tbc  Kuoip  cbnrnclcr  iras  wblpil
by  tbo  cuipcTor  (.^landins  to  tbe  Itoninii  nlphabet,
iiboiit  A.t».  44,  to  dfuoto  tbc  soiiud  of  tbr  Gn-ek  4'
\h»  or  /Ml.  Se«  Pevk,  Latin  ProHtinnation,  pp.  I'i,
13  (N.  Y.  1890) ;  and  the  article  Ai-I-haukt.

flntilifn  {'\tTUTtTa\  A  town  on  the  west  coast
uf  LoaboH,  though  foiuiurly  ou  u  niuiiU  iftlaad  op-
poftitp  Lc*b»w.  with  wbiL'b  it  afterwards  utiit«4L

AntisQiiueB('.KvTiiT0tptjt).  A  Greek  pbilosopber
ofAthvii»,V>rnabotitH.c.44<i,biitoiiIyabalf-ciUEeu.
U'caiittobistiiutbt'r  natt  a  Tbmcinii.  Hn  mam  in  liia
yuiilb  a  pupil  of  fliirf;ijui,  and  bimM*1f  taiigbt  for
II  tiuiH  »a  a  Dopbiitt,  till,  tuwjinU  uiiildle  lifp,be  al-
tacbiMl  bimH>lf  U>  Socnktos.  and  bt^niUL'  bin  boeom
friend.  After  tbo  death  of  Hociiitcs.  lu  B.C.  39»,  he
established  a  sebuol  iu  the  gyiunasiain  Kvroaapyttt
tbe  only  one  open  to  persous  of  balf-Albeniau  de-
»eeut,  wbeuw  bis  followen  bore  tbe  uame  of  Cy-
iiiri  iKtoHKot").  He  lived  to  tbe  age  of  seventy.
Like  Socraleis  be  n'gnnled  \irla«  as  itecmtary —
indMwl,  aluoe  sufficient — fur  liuppineAO,  Aud  tu  be
a  btatirb  of  kuunled^  that  could  be  Ia4i)*btf  »ih1
that  ouce  acquimt  could  not  be  lost,  ita  «s»eiice
euimisting  iu  frvMlou  rrom  waBla  by  ibo  avoid-
ance of  evil  |by  evil  nieauiiig  pWaainn  and  desire).
Its  acquiatiioo  needs  no  dialeclao  ai:(uuieututiiin,
oalj  fioontia  atnsffUk.  Uia  pvptli^  eipecUlly  t  ho
faoioas  ZH«gMM6  o(  Simtf^  decrraded  hi*  doctrine
to  oyiikiiMn  by  dvprrriatinp;  8.U  kmiwliMlee  and
daapiatng  tbe  eomnt  morality  oi  the  tine.  Hia
pbiloaofthiral  and  rhetorical  mrka  aie  lott,  all  bat
two  alight  decbamatuxiA  uto  the«itttMt  for  Ibu  mnns
•if  Af)htIla^tlM.iiMawl  Uipmm*:  and  even  ibcir
tvuuauMMMs  Is  dfiflwd  They  hare  beru  etliled
'V.  Wiacfcielaasaa  ganch.  lr*tii.  tJeealaoA.
rw  JifiiHnfs  Clyaki  n«a  ft  StrifiiM  CDna-
.1^1..  fw^MdOattfeby  fiiiMihUiaS^X
Sa*L&a«a

('A  in  I  i>  X«*  AlMiaeh;  A
<hmim  aC  ainwitaiaa  iHaadiiifc:  usiih>il  ftow  tbe
raac*  eC  tW  TMna  «•  1W  i  iihiaa  border  o(
I'^MMUeift,  ia  Ik*  ccMm  etf  «  hkk  dSbCnct  ift  1
aadnaacaM  to  thai


}h  aaini  1^  lfc>


•n« tW  hnd  edUksk  to  thai  «r
«!■««  i»  »>iii>rt  Xel<  iMiaisi  >m  tW  ««Mak.

A  «>Mh  wf  Van*  «%^  Y  A.

^T«Ncv  Wai»  •«M*i4  »Qt  Wi^i.  OiUhafc  ««il  IW-

4MAMt««hhWak»«fW«MMPe  Jte  ih»»i««W
«M  *•  two  iMw  Vsi*%  t««o4^^*«w  vthMt  I  *»  fW^


4


AKTOMOSU


«9


ANTONINUS


^"  AnUI*.

oritli  vliich  MutUI  wMoreil  hm  ^nleii
Bruit  nnthini;  mnre  lliaii  the  {uAf^  aixl  bnoket
>A  In  OiTf  PP.  IlJiIy,  Egypt,  and  in  same  parti
Euglaud.

tmoala  liirru/itxrm).  A  part  of  tbe  arax/u-
jtrelimiiiary  pIc^diii^N  iu  au  Atheiiinn  law-
*be  U^nn  ti.iH  iim'iI  of  fai  (i»|}|  tiikt<n  by  bntb
:  by  l1><^  plaiiitiH',  ihat  biM  rouiplaint  was
lUtleil,  aii<l  ibat  Ite  wati  uctiinttHl  liy  no  ini-
moiives;  anil  by  tiiu  durenilaut,  tli»t  Iiib
was  imc.  It  van  iilso  calU-il  dtwfimria.
coQtaiii  <;ilb(jr  tlit>  tlirvct  iifllrtua-
iu  wliivb  cnso  it  whs  irulli'tl  fv6v
;  to  a  ilemnrrer  or  irnjMi-y/mt/*^.  See
E^NAi;  Itl.SDS  ; DlKK  ; i'AltAGUATll^  ;

mia.  (1)  Antonia  Maior,  the  duughter
aCoaius  and  Oclaviu,  wifo  of  L.  Douiitiiis
arbuB,  and  UHiiher  of  Cm.  i><tuiitiu8,  the


father  of  tbn  pnipftror  Nppo.  (2)  Mixtm,  yoiingor
tiiitvr  of  tl)ti  piveedJni^,  n-ife  of  Drowns,  the  brother
ijf  tbp  emperor  Tiberin*,  nnil  mother  of  tJernmn-
ic'Ufl,  the  father  of  [lio  emperor  CuliKidii,  of  I.irin
or  Livilla.nDd  of  the  emperor  Clnitdiiin.  She  died
A.D.  '-iS,  B(X>n  aJter  tlir  accnusion  of  Iirr  gniiidAtMi
Caligula.  Shi^  wan  enlebralt^d  fur  her  bi-auty.  virt-
ne.  Slid  eliaiiitity.  ( !t )  Tlie  daiigbti-r  uf  the  i;in-
pentr  CI»iidiMH,  )irit  to  ilnalb  by  Ntiro,  A.D.  66,  be-
caiiKO  Mbe  reftined  Lo  mnrry  him.

Autonia  Lex. Sec  Lkx.

Autonia  Tuzria.  A  niatle  on  a  rock  nt  the
iiortliwi'dl  comer  of  the  Temple  at  Jcrunalrni,
nrtfriiiiilly  oaIIimI  Hurin.  but  reiiaiued  by  tlctotl  tJio
Great  in  honour  of  M.  Aiituniutt,  Iu  it  ru«ide<)  tho
procurator  of  Iitdoeu.  .Sei'  luwph.  JkU.  lud.  v.  15 ;
and  the  article  Hi£K0i4C>LYMA.

Antonliiua.  (I)  Pit;*,  (ir  Tms  Au&KLittH  IVi^
\nv»  lioiusics  AXToNlxus,  a  Komun  empernr,
A.D.  i:W-l(;i,baru  near  Laouviiiui,  A.n.  N>,  adopted
by  Hadrian  in  134,  and  sucrepded  tlie  iiiltir  in  the
tianio  year.  The  8enat«  ronfirnMl  npnii  him  the
titIeoi'i't««,  or  "the  dutifully  afrofilioiiatr/'lM-caoso
bo  persuadLsl  thi»*m  tn  j;raut  to  Jits  father  lladri.^o
the  apotheu^iK  and  utlu-i-  1iiiii»iii'm  ii!<.iiall>  paid  fn
dece;i8ed  euipi-rot-H.  Tin-  ni^ii  of  AntouirniH  i^  al-
nioHt  a  blank  in  liiHtory — a  blank  cani«f;d  by  the
fiiiNp«-nKi(>n  for  u  lime  of  war,  violcDce,  and  erime.
Ho  wn*i  one  of  tlio  berit  prinees  that  ever  monntcd.
a  ihi-ouo.  and  all  bis  thonghtH  and  t-ut^rgies  were
deilicated  l4>  tbe  hnppineKi(i>f  Iuh  peojile.  Ho  died
in  A.l>.  UU,  in  Ida  seventy -tilth  year.  Ilr  wa»  biic-
teeded  by  M.  Anrelinit.  whom  hn  had  adoptint.  when
he  hitn.<i«)f  was  adopted  by  Hadrian,  and  in  whom
ho  gave  \m  danghter  Faustina  in  niurriagn.  (2)
MAitcri^  AsNits  lVEiiL-(4|  AC7RRIJCS,  wax  born  at
Itoine  in  the  year  A.D.  121.  UjKjn  the  dwath  of
Ceionins  Cotnnmdnit,  tho  em[>enir  Hadrian  tnrneil
his  atCuntion  towanlit  MarcuH  Annfliiiiit;  bnt  ho
being  then  too  yonii^  fur  an  early  aHAnmption  of
the  carets  of  enipin-,  Hadrimi  iidopteil  Antoninns
Piiia,  UU  coiiditiiin  ihat  he  in  bin  turn  Hlntuld  adopt
MarenH  AnndiiiA.  Hin  father  dying  early,  the  c^nre
of  bin  edncAtion  devolved  on  hifl  paternal  grand-
fallier,  Aunins  Vcrun,  who  caiUMNl  him  to  receive  a
gfiieral  education  ;  bnt  philosophy  »» »!arly  liceame
tbu  object  of  bin  ambition  that  hi>  lUMunied  tho
philoHophic  uinntle  when  only  twclvo  years  old.
The  Aperies  of  philosophy  to  whicli  he  utta(;Iie<l
hiiuftelf  was  the  Stoic,  aa  lieing  most  rnniK'ctfHl
with  morale  and  the  cnudin^t  of  life;  anil  t^uvU
was  the  natural  snoitLiieoa  of  bin  t(.-ui|HT  that  he
exbibitrd  none  of  tho  pride  which  anmetJiiieis  at-
tend«d  tho  artiUcial  eluvation  of  the  .Stoie  char-
acter. Thin  wum  the  more  rnninrkable,  as  all  the
bntiour  and  puw(;r  iliut  AntuuinUH  ceiild  bealOTr
upon  him  bceumo  bin  own  at  an  early  period,  atnce
lie  waK  ])nn:tically  aitauciated  with  him  in  the  ad-
iiiiulHtration  «>f  thu  Kuipire  for  many  yenn.  Oti  hiH
formal  acccaiiinn  to  the  BOTcreignty  hiii  firnt  act
waa  (if  a  kind  which  at  once  proved  lii^  gn'-nt  dis-
iuterc(itednea«;  for  ho  immediately  t^ok  Lneini
Verua  a»  bis  colleagnoj  who  liad  iiuleeil  been  asso-
ciated with  him  by  adoption,  bnt  who,  owing  to
hid  dofectH  and  rices,  had  been  excluded  by  Anto-
iiiDus  from  the  successiim,  which,  at  biK  icHtiga-
lion,  the  Senate  liad  confined  to  MureuH  Anrelius
atone.  NotwitliHtandingtlieirdiNiiinilnnty  tifrhar-
acter,  the  two  einperorrt  n'igne^I  conjointly  uilh-
uut  any  diaagreement. Verus  took  the  uoniiual


ANTONINirS


Ktihluiioo  of  ttio  unr  iit{niii*>t  Oto  TArthiuifi,  ffliich
^^  iiM  ti i<.-<r(>H<( fully  riirrii-«l  on  hy  tlio  llniifcuantH  uii-
ili>r  Ithit.iiiiililrirliiK  tli<>  CAii)i>a)^M  mnrrleil  LiicUln,
ttii)  (Iniiftlitor  iif  liU  uolli^KfEnr.  The  iviifti  of  Mnr-
ptiH  Ann'llitN  wn«  ini>ri'  »vuiilAil  ihmi  timt  of  An-
toriiitiiM.  lUtforit  llin  innniitikllitii  of  tlxi  rnrlliian
Wni,  ttid  MAn-oinitiiiik  iiiiil  Kllii^r  (ifrnmri  trilteit
liruuii  llu>Mt  (liKtiirtmi)tit>!<  wliirh  uion<  or  IrdS  »it-
I)it>p4l  lillil  for  tlir  I'RMt  of  hln  lift>.  Agiiiltilt  tlietM^
IttoK,  (ihrr  llin  tt-riiilimtiiui  of  liiintitUifH  with  Tor-
tliln,  llic  twii  cin}M-riii'9i  luiirrlKHl ;  liiit  nliut  vcatt
rilci'Ifil  ilnriiiB  ilitrc  ycttr^*  wnr  iiinl  m'gotlnllou,
until  ihc  (loatli  of  Wrtis,  tii  Hltlc  known.  The
MitlitoM  ili->c«-.iM<  of  Hint  nnKiiitnlili^  coltcngiu^  by
rtii  ni"t|«leny  n'stonni  1<i  Mnu'im  A»n'liiiK  tlit'  (m»1i?
dmniiiiuii;  oikI  fur  llif  iipxt  llvo  yi-nr*  hi^  carriMl
oit  tlio  riuuiouiiin  Wiir  in  punun,  without  rvt'r  re-
luming to  K»int\  Purinn  Hit"**'  faiiguinp  rnm-
|iiil|ins  lu'  cinliimt  nil  tlio  b:iTtt<4liii)ti  incident  t*i  »
ri|{onknai-liinat4>  nnil  a  uiililiiry  life  nitti  A  |mlience
ami  vptrnity  wliicb  tliil  llic  Iiiglipvt  honour  to  bis
pliilooophy.  Few  of  iho  pnrlirulnr  nciions  of  Ibis
iriliuiiH  unrfHrv  bftTo  hwn  fully  ilcstTilK^;  aI-
thougb,  owiiifc  Co  con tltc ting  rpligioiiit  tn),  nnc
*»f  tlw>u»  b«9  Won  «»xow?«liiigly  ct'ti-brntw!.  Thi^t
vfika  ih<>  ilvlivpmitn*  of  Iho  ftn|K'ror  Autt  hit*  Anny
fVviu  Immlni'iil  dungrr  l\v  a  virtory  over  tli«  QiimIi,
ill  coDi*r«ini'nt-i*  of  «n  rxiraorttiriArA*  stomi  of  rAiii,
liAil.  Ami  lt^lltnin|:,  whirh  iliM;oncvrtM]  tbo  bar*
liariAnK,  Mui  u:ii!t,  Uy  ibi>  coiKintmni,  Kguded  ■«
uiintrnloux.  Tbo  (<iu|HTror  And  tho  Itoiuita  iittrib-
ntiHt  tW  iiin«>Iy  c>v<>nt  to  lupitvr  Tooaiw:  but  the
t'hri>li«n't  AlHnnrtl  thAt  tioti  gnutt«d  this  favnnr
on  Ibf  »it|>)ilicAtious  of  thf  Cbristion  soldiers  in
%hr>  UontAU  nnny.  who  Arc  PAid  to  b»vtf  compcwnl
%hf  T^irlfth,  or  M«l«iini>,  legion;  auI,  mi  m  mvk
o(  (liMi  net  loll,  wp  mtv  infontictl  by  Knavbias  tlwl
lh*y  n-crixnl  ft^>ni  an  rniiwr^ir  who  |i«nB«utcd
rhrtMlUnily  Ihr  title  of  tbo  -'ThiiiiderfalC  LtKioa."
Tlic  d»i«>  at  thi>  «\Tiii  im  t\x«>*l  by  Ttll(<n»oni  ns  ajk
1«1.  Thf  pCDpnl  iMoc  uf  tbf  nar  wa*  thai  tbv
Wy^-artan*  wtM  rapnaanl,  but  admittMl  lo  M>iitv
ia  Iba  tanitaftaaaf  iIm  Saplrw  a«  n4uuli>i» :  aimI  »
coaapl***  MV|acali«tt  of  lb«  MarMiuaatii  wi^bt
lkkv«  lbU*««A  baa  iM«  il»a  vaipanr  bam  rwIImI
hgr  tW  wwytracy  oC  AvMlaa  QMaiwa,  «b»  «Bamv«^
Ik*  pvqpl*  la  8niak  TlOa  vwupw  w«a  qvlcUjr  4a-
Mmty«4  bar  a  vaaa^lraey  aaw«c  Ua  vwa  ottovn^
aaA  tlM  ciMftMwy  sbowB  by  iW  aniwnr  lo  baa
l^mOr  WM  aaeaft  MMMiOanr.  AlWr  tbe  lapiwaa-
aba*  aT  tMa  i*<rah  b«  a»a«W  a  |ini«rM»  ibravfb  iba
IbMy  la  vbkb  jaawiMy  bv  loM  bM  wife  Faaukia*.
4aMblM  •f  AalMkinaa  !*>«».  a  ««^wui  aa  Mimlata
«•£•  na  bMoiiftal.  Ui  vboa*  iinna**"*'*-  W
«n«r  iiiM  *•  baTa  aillcaJ  a  bHa4aaaa  ar  (»-
awibitftjlbalbaf  w>tbhatbalbiaaa«fftn*a<H
itjimla,  V)kaa«a«Mii«Mrb»vMM4Alb»«a«aMl.
Hbattirfrtaa— ita*MairiH»lbt1it--n-1-'-T  ^-r
%M*^  Rto  MMm  ta  »»»  ««  aal  «ab»  fteea
aaiil  ailtt  aii  >>wan  af  ««cb«  jaaa^  awl  bia  i«^
Hint  I II I  "Xa  la  Iba  Wabaai  4«CMa  |^i»ahr
MinM.  Aftarnaialat^  »  iba  la^riwUfcri
|yK%.wn>.a»J  ■•«>!»«*<*«*>  I  »aWw»
W  mm  ati**  «•«»  ••»W  a»*?t  by  »ba  mt
^binJLim  »W  Mw  iiaaai  awJ  •aa  a<[afc
M^  bM  *ll  UL  M  «b»  >«|*al>ia  af  «««  r^n.  al

■^^ *■* HlatHam  ana*  IKaa  a

L-titntti'  4Mw»  «bai4  ni'iartiil  la  liba  ata^\ ;
UTttV*!  bte  atf  i«  t^  tiftyafc^b  Mat  af  b»
1  af  bM  Wit^fc. nb  abartb  mwa-


ANTONINUS

Without  waiting  for  the  nsnal  decree  on  the  nccth
sidii  tho  Rnniiin  Senate  antl  jicopli*  v(ite<l  him  ■
gffll  hy  acclnmsiiiciii.iind  Iiif*  initigi-  noa  lung  aftcp
wards  rPKnnh'd  with  [icculiar  vi-neration.


Naraaa  AaniiK \ljmmt

Marcns  Anrvlins  wait  no  friend  to  the  CbrisHaaa
who  were  pci«pruted  doring  the  greater  part  ol
bis  trigu — an  anomaly  in  a  character  so  iinivcr
aally  tuerrtfo)  and  clemeiil  that  may  be  attriUiilei
to  an  rxcn*  of  lagan  devotion  aa  bia  part,  aui
diU  more  lo  tbe  influcDee  of  tho  peraons  by  wbot
Iw  was  aamMiiided.  In  mU  oCbar  fiointa  of  imltr
ami  eODdoet  be  vaa  «■«  «f  tbe  nxmt  excellcii
jirineee  on  reeari,  balk  ia  wmftOi  to  ibe  oalutar
rrgnlatioaa  ba  a4iftaJ  a*«l  tbe  laMpar  vith  wbic
lie  cwnied  tbas  into  iKaetieaL.  Ooaapnred  wit
Tr^an  or  AntooiBBa  Pina.,  be  paaaMj  feU  abort  u
tbe  Btaaly  aenaeaf  tbe  tmm  aad  fk» ateple and  ana
ivalalbHH  TMaa  af  tbe  fltbcr— fkaaaapfaj- ar  aebo
atabip  oa  a  Ibrat  alwa^  wore  ev  leeaaaannaing  Si
a|i|Mar«iw«afiiedailta7-.  Tba  ■■for  wa»  aIjo  hta
M^f  a  writer,  and  bia  JfaJlaliaaa  (T«  y«<  fmniv),  i
lirwk  ttt  i«v4Te  hooka,  bare  deaaoadad  lo  pa*i<r
ty.  Tbey  ac*  a  eePaettaa  »i  aiaaiwa  aad.  tboogfal
intb*8ymta^tba8arietkiliiiikj.wkiek,witbwi
aaacb  caMMctioai  m  akUl  te  riaiiaiitiim.  bcmtb
tba  |Mt«al  oMliaMaaa  af  rtety  awi  baiaeTolenn
IVy  watajatied  Aeva  tnm  tUM  c*  tia«  ia  bia  lei
Ml*  laaaaaaiiL  aaii  ImjjiIj  vkalB  ke  «aa  in  emai
■)a«g tke  i^aabe  dari^  bia  laMiiiiaa  aeaimt  lb
MiwiMiaai  ttia  tbi  ijtt^ ,  ia  i.ia  iiaL  m n»  i  p*"
tbafaMiw  Ike  haqhwaa  bai^  tbe  Aaattiao  nf  a  ■  nat
aial«a«7,*laataib^Oa4Mlac«.aad  an  MaaUmi

MaMaaAamttaa  k*  aae  aaa.  Ike  bcatal  GaMai
daa.ami  <kaa»  i^a^tiiiw  A»a^  Ike  wakncsM
mt  Ikia  vaod  la^mn. bb  tea  grcai  naari^tiliii
«»  bbiaM  ia4nw4«M  aftka  MrtabftiBc;  lb
ahbtagb  bo  waa  aaaaalM^  ia  hM  >ilia»oiiii  I
rtcAaan  bim^  ikcir  aa<a  iriiwiMiil  by  ameb  r
r»a<M«»  mMcMMw  aad  aavaeW^  V  M  e^T  aa

^'*'^*r'  "*"~" — --  ^1  1 1  1 1

tboal  «aft«aafike  AitfaiAoa  aM  tkaaa  e<'<telaki

«Ua*ia.Mriam<SUi4(«9tt. SaeaWtkrmo


latiOQ,  with  iiolcs.  Iiy  LotiR  (lfl60) :  (be  Frcncli  ver-
»iou  byPieiTon  (IfCH) ;  KmuirK  .\/nrr-.4iirr/r(lr'^J);
nnQ  Watson'ji  ilarrii»  AMrrlivM  ANtoninnM  (N.  Y.,
Itf84).  i'Si  Hassiaxvh  Cakacaixa.  ii*cv  C'aracai^
LA.)  (4)  l«iBEHAU!i.  A  iiiytliological  writer  Hitp-
{MHied  t«>  tiAve  tivml  in  tlie  age  of  tlic  Autoiiitips,
and  tn  linvi'  been  a  freeilninu  nf  ouc  of  tlieiu.  Htj
wrote  n  work Qti titled  .-I  CoHerlion  of  MetamorphoitrM
tMrraftopi^trtotw  Sivoywyij),  in  forty-one  chuplcrs.
Editiuu  by  WciitermMnii  (  Hniiiswick,  li^il).  Hv-c
Udt-r,  I>e  Atttoaino  Librrali  (ISm).

Antonius.  (I;  MAftcrs,  tbu  orotor,  was  born
it.c.  143;  woa  quaestor  in  111);  praetor  In  104.
«boa  bv  fonght  Rxniust  lbc>  {limtes  in  Cilicia;
cdiiHul  in  90:  and  i-i>n''or  in  '37.  lie  ticlnnfcc^l  to
5iilta*(t  pwiy,  and  waj»  put  U\  cleatli  liy  Mariim  atid
riuua,  wlifn  tli«,r  4<uter<^d  Itomc.  in  K7 ;  Iuh  bend
niw  cnt  iiflfanil  jdurvil  on  tbc  Knittra.  Cicvro  in«ii-
tiouB  bim  and  L.  CniMiiiH  uh  tlie  niiv^t  diKtinK<iiitlird
Qraton  of  Ibrir  agn,  uiid  bn  is  introdnrcd  an  oiiu
of  tbo  speakers  in  ('irt-n»'M  ffr.  Ortttorr.  (2)  Mau-
'T.i,  snnmuiiMl  t'nr.Ticrs,  cblm-  khh  nf  tliL-  c>n'j>r,
Md  fatber  of  tbu  triumvir,  wan  praoior  in  ii.c'.7r>,
Luul  rrcp.ivrd  the  comniaud  of  tb«  fleet  and  all  the

■  nuts  of  (be  Mt>dit«rmneau,  in  order  to  clear  tbo

■  tu  of  pimltM ;  bnt  ho  did  not  succewl  in  bis  ob-
B  j«ct,  and  nuMMl  h\»  power  tn  plunder  tbe  prov-
B  htta.  He  die^l  shortly  afterirards  in  Crete,  and
V  «u  caUim)  Vreiinu  in  derinion.  (3)  O.ut^t^,  yonng-
~  cr  wa  pf  the  onilur  and niirle  of  tbe  trinnivtr,

wu  expnlWl  fnini  tho  Senatn  in  n.c.  7D,  and  nas
IhewUoagne  of  Cic«r()  In  iliA  prftrttontbip  ((i5|  and
ammlKblp  (6i).  Ho  was  one  of  Catiline'B  enii-
•pmtore,  bnt  deutrt^d  tbo  latter  ou  ClceruV  prom-
ising him  tbc  province  of  Macedonia.  He  bad  to
Ictd  an  army  against  Catiline,  but,  unnillinj;  to
tthi  a^aiuAt  his  former  friend,  bo  gave  tbi.'  crmi-
tovtd  on  tbc  day  of  battle  to  bis  legate,  M.  I'c-
trciiii,  At  tbe  conclnt*ii>n  uf  tbe  war  Antouy  went
inkihit  province,  wbieb  be  plundered  Hbaniefnlly;
Wdm  big  relnrn  to  Home  in  nO  wan  accnswl  both
*f  taking  port  in  CatiltueV  coiiKpinwy  and  nf  ex-
Urtiiia  iu  biH  proTinoe.  Ho  wa«  defwidml  by  Clc-
'^(■iitvra«coudeiune4l,and  n^tired  totb<;  iKlaitd  of
^^tpWloaiA.  He  was  iinb)M'c|uently  reenlled,  pmb-
^klfbyCitcaar.  and  was  in  Home  at  tbe  Ire^iiniiiig
f^lbjear  44.  <4)  Marci's,  tbe  Tkiitn  viR.  was  tbe
"■tiofADtoainsCretlens  and  Inlia,  tboaiKterof  Iit-
limCawar.  Ho  was  bom  abont  ll.c.rtl.  His  fattier
"MYttiUd  bi!  wa<(  still  yoinig,  nnd  bo  was  brungbt

»<'C'>J'I*ntuln9,  who  married  bis  irotber  Inlia,  and
wbn  V)w  pnt  to  death  by  Cicero  in  63  us  ono  of
Caii!ia«'i  conMpiratom:  henco  Antony  liecame  a
ptfwaal  enemy  of  Cicero. Antony  indnlgcd in

Ilii*  «uU<.*st  youth  in  every  kiad  nf  ditMi[iatiou,
^  his  aJTairs  wmn  becanio  deejdy  involved.  In
•'''iIb  nciit  to  Syria,  where  be  served  with  dis-
tinrlion  nnder  A.  GabiniuB.  In  54,  be  went  to
^uwu-  in  OanI,  and  by  tbe  indnonce  of  tbu  latter
"Mtiltclcdfinaestor  (B.C.&2).  Ho  now  became  mie
"flha  iiiiHtc  active  partiuinH  of  Caesar.  He  wan
WtwM)  of  tbo  pJolMi  in  40,  and  in  Jannary  lied  to
*^''*t'*camp  in  Cisalpine  Gaul,  after  putting  biM
'••OaiHin  tbe  decree  of  the  Senate  which  deprived

t*^**w  of  bJH  eonmiand.  In  4-^.  Antony  was  proB-
'■•"al  the  battle  nf  rininialia.  where  bo  eommand-
"ilieleft  wing  In  44,  bf  wasrormnl  with  Caeaar,
•hpohcofleri'd  him  tbe  kindly  diadem  at  tbe  fca-
bialnftbe  Lopercalia.  After  CaeHsr's  mnnier,  ou
"*  lolh  nf  Mnreb,  Antony  triulcavnnrod  to  buo-
**!  to  bin  power. He pronounced  tbn  speech


over  Caeaar'a  b<Hly,  and  road  his  will  to  the  poo*
plo;  aud  he  aIm*  ublained  tho  papera  and  private
property  of  Caewar.  Bnt  lie  funnd  a  new  nnd  un-
expected rival  ill  young  Octavianus,  the  adopted
aou  and  grcat-nejibew  of  tbn  dictator,  who  at  liiist
joined  tbo  Senate  in  onler  to  cnmb  Antony.  (8oe
AuGl'STi'H.)  Towards  the  end  of  tbe  year  Antony
proceeded  to  Cisalpine  (tanl,w]iicb  had  been  pre-
vionsly  granted  bim  by  tbe  Scuato ;  bnt  Dec.  Brntna
n^riised  to  snrrender  tbe  province  t^^  Antony,  and
thren-  himself  into  Mntina,  wben.«  be  nas  besieged
by  Antony.  The  Senate  approved  of  tbe  conduct  of
Rrnlns.  declartMl  Antony  a  public  enemy,  and  in*
trintrMl  tbe  condnri  of  tbe  war  againint  him  to  Oe-
taviaiHis.  Antony  waa  defeated  at  tbe  battle  of
Mntina,  in  April,  43,  and  was  obliged  to  erotw  tbe
Alpn.  Both  tbu  euUHnlii,  however,  had  fallun,  nud
tbu  senatora  now  began  to  nhow  their  Jejilonsy  of
Octuvianna.  Meantluie  Antot)y  was  Joined  by  Lep*
idus  wttb  11  pi>wcrftil  army;  Octavianna  became


MuICUjI  AlllOUIUS.

reconciled  to  biu ;  and  it  was  agreed  that  lUe  guv*
eminent  of  the  slate  sbonbt  be  vested  in  Antony,
Octaviaaua.  and  Lepidns,  nndcr  the  title  of  lYiun-
viri  litpuhliait  ComtitKfHdae,  for  tbe  next  five  years.
The  mutual  enemies  of  each  were  proscribed,  and,
in  the  nnmoruu*!  executions  that  futloved,  Cic'ro,
tvlio  biwl  Htlaeked  Antony  in  bi4  Philippic  Ora-
tiomi,  fell  a  victim  t«>  bis  malice.  In  42,  Antroiy  anil
Ovtaviauna  onisbod  tbe  republican  party  by  the
battle  of  I'bilippt,  in  wbieU  Urntus  and  Cassiua
fell.  Antony  then  went  to  Attia,  wbicb  be  bad
received  ax  bia  iihare  of  tbe  Homan  world.  In
Cilicia  be  met  vvitb  Cleopatra,  and  followed  her
to  Egypt,  a  captive  to  ber  cbarm^.  In  41,  Knlvia^
the  wife  of  Aiitcmy,  and  bis  brotbei-,  L.  Aiitoninn,
made  war  npon  Ot'laviauno  in  Itiily.  Antony
prepar«d  to  8Ui>port  bio  relativeji,  luit  (be  war
was  brongbt  to  a  cIubo  at  tho  beginning  of  40,
before  Antony  conld  reach  Italy.  Thu  opp<irtun.o
death  of  Fulvia  faci1itat«d  the  reconeiliarion  of
Antony  and  Octavianns,  w*btch  was  ccnicnttMl  by
tbo  nnirriage  of  Antony  to  Octavia,  tb«  Hist^r  of  Oe-
tiivianti'i.  Anlotiy  remained  in  Italy  till  3!t,  when
tbe  triutrvirK  roiieluded  a  peace  with  ScxC  Honi-
jM'y,  and  he  afterwards  went  to  bis  provinces  in
tbe  E.-uit.  In  ibiw  year  aud  tbe  following,  Ventid-
iuB,  tbe  lieuti:uaut  of  Antony,  defeated  the  Par-
thian*, In  37,  Ant^my  crossed  over  to  Italy,  when


ANTONIUS  FELIX


ANULUS


the  trinmvirste  was  reoewed  for  five  years.  He
then  returned  to  the  East,  and  shortly  afterfranls
mat  Octavia  back
to  lier  brother  and
surrendered  him-
self eutirely  to  the
charms  of  Cleopa-
tra. In  M,  he  iu-
vafled  Parthia,
but lost  a great Coin  of  Antony,  Btmck  at  Aniioch.

number  of  his  troops,  and  was  obliged  to  retreat-
He  was  more  successful  in  his  invasion  of  Arme-
nia in  34,  for  he  obtained  possession  of  the  person
of  Artavasdes,  the  Armenian  king,  and  carried  him
to  Alexandria.  Antony  now  laid  aside  entirely
the  character  of  a  Soman  citizen,  and  assumed
the  pomp  and  ceremony  of  an  Eastern  despot.
His  coudnct,  and  the  unbounded  influence  which
Cleopatra  had  acquired  over  him,  alienated  many
of  hlA  friends  and  supporters;  and  Octavianussaw
that  the  time  had  now  come  for  crushing  his  lival.


Coin  of  Antony,  with  Worship  of  Bacchus  and
Venus.

The  contest  was  decided  by  the  memorable  sea-
fight  off  Actium,  September  2d,  B.C.  31,  in  which
Antony's  fleet  was  completely  defeated.  Accom-
panied by  Cleopatra,  he  fled  to  Alexandria,  where
he  put  an  end  to  his  own  life  in  the  following
year  (30),  when  Octavianus  appeared  before  the
city.  (5)  Gaius,  brother  of  the  triumvir,  was  prae-
tor in  Macedonia  in  B.C.  44,  fell  into  the  haudu  of
M.  Brntus  in  43,  and  was  put  to  death  by  Brutus
in  42,  to  revenge  the  murder  of  Cicero.  (6)  Lucivs,
youngest  brother  of  the  triumvir,  was  consul  in
B.C.41,  when  he  engaged  in  war  against  Octavianus
at  the  instigation  of  Fulvia,  his  brother's  wife.
He  threw  himself  into  the  town  of  Pernsia,  which
be  was  obliged  to  surrender  in  the  following  year.
His  life  was  spared,  and  be  was  afterwards  ap-
pointed by  Octavianus  to  the  command  of  Iberia.
(7)  Marcus,  elder  son  of  tho  triumvir  by  Fulvia,
was  executed  by  order  of  Octavianus,  after  the
death  of  his  father  in  B.C.  30.  (i?)IUL08,  younger  son
of  the  triumvir  by  Fulvia,  was  brought  up  by  his
step-mother  Octavia  at  Kome,  and  received  great
marks  of  favour  from  Augustus.  He  was  consul  in
B.C.  10,  but  was  put  to  death  in  the  year  2,  in  con-
sequence of  his  adulterous  intercourse  with  lulia,
the  daughter  of  Augustus.

Antonitts  Felix. See  Fkux.

Antoalns  Onipho- See  Gnipho.

Antoniufl  Maaa. See  Musa.

Antonioa  Primoa. See  Primus.

Antron  ( 'Avrpotv ).  A  towu  of  Phtbiotis  in
Thessaly,  at  the  entrance  to  the  Sinus  Malia-
cus.

Antyx  (Atu^ ).  The  rim  or  border  of  anything,
especially  of  a  shield  or  chariot. On  Greek  and


Antyx. (From  an  Etroscan  Tomb.

Etruscan  vases  we  often  see  the  chariot  painted
with  the  antyx  much  elevated,  as  in  the  accom-
panying illostration.  By  the  figure  synecdoche,
the  word  &irrv$  is  sometimes  used  to  denote  the
whole  chariot.

.abla  CAvov^is).  An  Egyptian  divinity,  wor-
in  the  form  of  a  human  being
with  a  jackal's  head.  The  Greeks  [\
identified  him  with  theiruwn  Hermes,
and  thus  speak  of  Hermauuphis  in
the  same  manner  as  of  Zeus  Amnion.
His  worship  was  introduced  at  Rome
during  the  last  years  of  the  Kepnblic
(Luc.  Tex.  32).

AnQU  lua. See  Iu8  Anulorch.

Anfilnaor  AnutUiia  (daicn;Xioc).  A
word  derived  from  the  same  root  as
afuftl,  meaning  something  which  goes
round  (cf.  annua),  and  used  for  a  ring
of  any  kind,  especially  a  finger  ring,  j^  __
The  old  Latin  name  was  vngHltu.  In  i^™of  ADubia
the  earliest  times  the  ring  was  used,
not  as  an  ornament,  but  as  a  seal  (Macrob.Saf.vii.  13,
^  12).  How  ancient  the  custom  of  wearing  rings
among  the  Greeks  was  can  not  be  ascertained,
though  it  is  certain  that  in  the  Homeric  poems
there  are  no  traces  of  it.  In  works  of  fiction,  how-
ever,  and  in  those  legends  in  which  the  customs
of  later  ages  are  .mixed  up  with  those  of  the  earliest
times,  we  find  the  most  ancient  heroes  described
as  wearing  rings.  But  it  is  highly  probable  that
the  custom  of  wearing  rings  was  introduced  into
Greece  from  Asia,  where  it  appears  to  have  been
almost  universal  (Herod,  i.  195).  From  Asia  Minor
to  Greece  proper  the  transition  of  fashion  was  ex-
peditious, and  the  siguet,  now  for  the  first  time
worn  mounted  as  a  finger-ring,  came  into  universal
favour  among  all  the  Hellenic  population.  This
was  a  new  method  for  securing  the  engraved  stone ;
for  the  original  inventors  of  seal-engraving  had
worn,  and  continued  to  wear  down  to  the  very
close  of  their  history  (even  to  the  date  of  the  Ara-
bian conquest),  the  cylinder  or  the  conical  seal  as  the
ornament  of  the  bracelet  or  the  necklace,  etc.  We
have  the  express  statemeut  of  Pliny  (ff.  N.  xxxiii.
4)  that  the  use  of  the  finger-ring  was  introduced
among  the  Romans  from  Greece.  (See  King,  Hand-
hook  of  Eugrared  Gema  [1885],  pp.  12, 13.)  In  the
time  of  Solon  seal-rings  (cr^payTdrc'),  as  well  as  the
practice  of  counterfeiting  them,  seem  to  have  been
rather  common,  for  Diogenes  Laertius(i.  57)  speaks
of  a  law  of  Solon  which  forbade  the  artist  to  keep
the  form  of  a  seal  {tr(f)payis)  which  he  had  sold.
There  are  allusions  to  counterfeit  seals  in  Aristoph.
TAf»ni.432;  and  Thuc.  i.  132. Rings  witbont  pre-


I  boB  ma  Ktmacan  Tomb,


I


cSfnifl  stones  were  called  dirtipf»*r,  Snttpat,  nXt^at,
a^^tf>at,  tbu  iittDio  of  tile  gvm  being  ^^^c  or  ir^/m-
,  irfaicli  n'flH  Mt  ill  n  licact  iv<tiivS6vrf,  jntXit,
■ipa./MH^Ia. palai.  Id  lal«^rtituc»rinK9wciv  worn
tnuoninincut.aud  ^f>(lillaawl3'9(s.  r,  o-i^prtyir}
onio  rcgnlarly  loaded  tbeir  hands  witli  i-iitg».
iwomenlikewiM^iioed  lowenriingmAriKtnpli.
n.  (Vftg.  330,  l!^.  Kocki.bitt  not  no  fro<iiicnt1y  iw
The  nogs  of  womvn  ni>]H-ur  to  huvr  itwn  \vt»
■  than  thfMie  of  int-n.fur  Mime  aro  nietitioiied
I  were  madf  of  iimb«T.  i%'orj%  etc.  Rings  wi-rP
ooetljr  worn  on  tbo  k-ft  banil  and  tbini  tiuger
(G«ll.  X.  10).  but  oIm)  oil  tbo  littU''  litigor  (Liicmu.
DM. Mmr.9, «>  Indird.  Fliiiy  snys  ( H.  X.  xxxiii.
H)  that  they  were  worn  tirat  on  tbo  third,  then
on  the  flmt.  Olid  fluall.v  ou  the  little  linger;  and
IUMrobiuB(*Su/.  vii.  13,^  15).  quoting  Ati>)imC»|>ilo,
■■JTB  that  originally  tbey  were  wuni  un  any  tiuger
lif  ellbex'  band.  But  tbey  do  not  wntii  to  have  be4<n
ever  wnrri  uu  tli«  mid-
dlu  liitger  {digitun  in-
famia).  An  KtniHoau
tomb  I'xIiiliilH  ring««u
the  ii])iit>r  joiiitct  of  the
lingnrx.  (Sue  illustra-
tion.)

The Lacedacmn-

niantt  utv  said  to  have

nsed  iron  ring*  at  all

times  (Pliih //. >.

XKxiii.  9 1. Tho law

dm  not  ap|HtAr  to  liavo  ever  atteuiTil4<d in any

Ondt  Btattj lo conrilcract the grrat partiality

(pt  tbb luxury' ; and nuwbvre in tjp'^rr thws

1^  tt|^it  of  wearing  a  gold  ring  apiir.!!  to  liiive

Wn  coatiDed  to  a  particulAr  order  or  cIamh  of

tttfieuL

The  eiutoni  of  wearing  ringa  waa  beliewd  to
Wpbeeu  iotroduoed  into  Rome  by  the  Subines,
*^  ne  ilesc'ril^ed  in  Iho  early  tegendu  as  wearing
pM  ria|;i  with  iireciouN  niouco  of  great  beauty
ilj».i.ll|.  doriu  (i.5)  dUlcft  that  it  was  iutro-
AmmI  from  Etniria  in  tbo  reign  of  Tarfiuiuins
nllMa,  and  Iliny  derive*  ii  from  t.»reeoe.  At
vluUevfr  titue  riiigt*  may  Imve  bwotue  eiiBtoniHr>-
U  fioar,  thus  luncb  \n  ct-rtjiin,  that  at  fir«t  (liey
'w»  gWienUIy  of  iron,  but  often  of  »tono  IKiiig,
^»li^  (itmt,  p.  17(),  ed.  IBTiOi ;  that  tliry  wore  dcM-
""■"dfix  the  wuue  parpot^e  ba  in  Uroeee — namely,
lit  tensed  as  aeaU;  and  that  every  free  Roiimii
tedarigbt  lo  aM>  mivh  a  ring.  Tliiii  iron  ring  niifi
■xJiIown  to  the  lofif  {tcriod  of  tho  Kepnblic  by
Well  men  as  hiVMl  tho  simplicity  uf  the  good  old  !
Hwi,  .-Hid  it  retained  its  pinee  in  the  ceremony
of  beimthal.  Marius  wore  an  iron  ring  in  bis  tri- 1
wph  over  Ingurtlin,  and  several  noble  families
"l^nwl  to  the  aueient  cnstom,  and  never  wore
goM  ow»  (Piin.  n.  X  xxxiii.  H  12, 21).  I

'^gs  with  us  an*  miiitdy  nsHueiateil  with  mar- '
'i*8>i  an  aiMoctatiun  iKimiwcd
^  the  Romans.  Aa  alrcaily
"ntimieit^  the  tiHulu*  prvnHbun
*••  niipnally  of  inin.  without
*  Moor,  tod  conliuned  to  be  so
•nnUiA  late  period  (Plin.  //.  Y.
"uij.  la,;  iiiough  Tertullian
UfL€}  (nayo  the  luarringe-riug
■*'lbciiiie  gold  oniament  that
••iia»u  wore  in  the  ulden  times.
Wediliug.nngn  with  precinua  stoneu  have  beeu
"Wm  on  ancient  figunui.


Saaiir  rii)( (linlUll
UuMum.)


Tlw  ring  of  the  Roman  emperor  woe  a  kind  of
fitAte  seal,  whn«e  use  was  sometimes  allowed  to
persons  acting  as  his  ropresontatlves. Tho  keep-
ing of  the  imperial  seal-ring  (ewrn  tinnH)  waa  in-
!  trnsted  t«)  a  special  otHC'er.

Ditfereiit  families  appear  to  have  hod  distinct
J  seals  like  our  rn-sts — e.  g.  Oalba's  family  seal  rep-
'  rewntwl  a  ib>g  leaping  from  a  ship ;  Pompcy'n  rin|t
bure  the  device  of  tbico  troidiivs;  Angimtmi  wfoled
,  with  a  Sphinx,  afLc-rnunltt  with  a  bead  of  Ah^xau-
der  thf  Onmt,  and  liiiaUy  with  hiit  own  portrait,
aa  did  Hailriau.  The  Kiupire,  in  fact,  is  thu  grand.
era  of  portrattM  on  gems.  In-lbe  art  of  ungniviug
llgiire!!)  n)Kin  gtMiis,  thu  ouelcnts  fur  »nrpiiM(  tho
l>CHt  work  of  modern  artiatit. Bee  (Jkmma.

Originally,  among  thu  Romans,  the  men  only
wuro  one  ring  and  tbi;  women  none,  except  that  a
married  woman  wofp  that  received  at  uiairingc.
loiter,  tho  love  of  luxury  led  both  mpu  nml  women
to  cover  their  lingers  with  ringn.  In  niie  of  tbn
gnives  at  Kcrtseh,  a  woman  wom  foiuid  with  eight
rings,  Lncian  (f«<t/A<'hap.xii.), ridienling  the  rich,
Npeukf)  of  sixteen  rings.  Martial  (xi.  5i))  tells  of  a
man  who  wore  six  on  eni-h  finger.  Some  even  UHod
ililTrnnit  rings  for  suniun'r  and  wtiKer,  thiMo  for
the  latter  waMoii  Imiiig  ttio  hriivy  for  hot  wt-atbiT
[luv.  i.  '2!^,  will]  SrhoL).  Tba  inaterialn  UHed  for
riuga.  ns  s(H.'n  by  Kuropean  cvUcetiona,  wei-e  Iron,
lead,  ziuc,  bronze,  amber,  i%'ory,  silver,  nud  gold.
Kings  woru  kept  iu  a  l>ox  caliud  diictt/Uolha'a^H.
name  also  applied  to  a  collector  of  rings.  Tor  our-
rings,  se«  Inaures.

Auznr. ^to  TaRRACIN'A.

Anj^  CAtnrrt}).  A  poetess  of  Tegea,  who  rcrsl-
tied  tbo  oracles  of  Aselepins  at  KpidanriiH  a1ii>iit
H.c,  3(N».  ^inie  twet)ty  epigrams  are  all  that  r»-
main  of  her  works.

Anj^B  CAvvrot),  A  wealthy  AtUentan,  the  most
inlluential  and  formidable  of  the  ncenscrft  of  Snc-
rate«,  B.C.  '■XifO.  He  was  a  lejultng  man  of  the  (Viihk
cralical  party,  and  took  an  active  part,  along  with
Thrasybnlns,  in  the  overthrow  of  th*;  Thirty  Ty-
rnuts.  After  the  death  of  Socrntcs,  Anytmi  went
iuto  exile  to  eMrupu  the  vvugeuuro  of  tho  liekto
pr>pnlace,  who  hiid  I'epented  of  what  had  been
done. See  Aclian,  V.  II.  ii.  13; and  the  article

SOfUATES.

AduBB  ('Ao^te).  An  ancient  Boootian  race,fiaid
to  have  beeu  6o  called  IVtnn  Aon,  son  of  Poseidon.
Hence  Llie  poets  fr('t[iict](ly  inte  AutjinuHei|nivalent
lo  Riiootia.  As  Mount  Helicon  and  the  fountain
Aganippe  were  in  Aonta,  the  Muses  are  called  Aoui-
dBH  or  Aoniau.

Aomls  or  AomoB.  A  lofty  rock  iu  India,  taken
by  Alexander  the  (Ireat.  The  Maceduuiaus  named
it  'Ao^vor,  as  being  so  high  as  to  l>e  iuac^osaible
even  to  birds  (u+S^ji'trV

AailA  r.\<por).  The  chief  river  of  tho  fireck
pare  of  lltyricnin  riKiug  in  Mount  Lacmon,  and
flowing  iuto  the  Ionian  Be-a  near  ApoHonio.

Apafiog^  {anayiayri).  A  technical  term  of  Atlio*
ninn  law,  nu'<aiiing  the  profluction  of  a  oHniinal
taken  in  tho  a4'(,  before  the  proper  magi«(rate,
who  then  tf>ok  him  into  custody,  or  made  him
tind  hail.  Thu  name  waa  uliwi  given  to  the  «locu-
meut  in  whieli  the  accui^r  atatri]  the  charge.
But  if  the  ofllcer  waa  conducted  to  llie  spot
where  the  accused  was  staying  the  process  was
called  tffiijyTfiTit.


APAMEA


94


APELLICON


ApamSa  (Airafitta).  The  name  of  several  cities.
(1)  Apamea  ad  Orontem,  a  city  of  Syria  built  by

SeleucusNicatoroQ
the  site  of  the  old-
er city  Pella  on  the
river  Orontes,  and
named  in  houour
of  his  wife  Apama.
(2)  A  city  iu  Mes-
opotamia, of  UD-
certain  site.  (  3  )
Apamea  Cibutus
(KiffwTos),  or  AD
Mae ANDRUM,  n
great  city  of  Phryg-
ia  oil  the  Maeau-
der,  juBt  above  its
uniou with the


MeUul  of  Apamea  Cibolua.


Marsyae.  It  was  built  by  Antiochus  Soter  in  hon-
our of  his  mother  Apama.  The  name  Kifitaros
("chest,"  "coffer"),  which  appears  on  some  coins
of  Apamea,  is  explained  geueraliy  with  reference
to  the  wealth  of  tlie  city ;  but  certain  curious  co-
incidences have  been  foand  which  some  scholars
have  used  in  connection  with  the  traditions  of
the  Deluge.  The  Septuagiut  and  the  New  Testa-
meut  speak  of  the  Ark  as  Kifftaros',  and  the  coins
and  medals  of  Apamea  show  the  figure  of  an  ark
with  two  birds  above  it,  one  holding  a  twig.  A
man  and  woman  stand  beside  it,  aud  above  it  is
the  inscription  NOO  (Nil).  On  this,  see  Mayor's
note  to  Juvenal,  i.  82 ;  and  the  article  Deucauom.

(4)  Apamea  Myrleon  in  Bithyuia. See  Myrlea.

(5)  A  town  in  Osrhotiu^  on  the  left  bank  of  the
Euphrates,  connected  by  a  pontoon  bridge  with
Zeugma  ou  the  opposite  bank.

ApateaeoB  ton  Demoa  Qraph^  (dnaTr}<T€<os  tov
brifiov  ypa<^h)'  ^  public  prosecution  at  Athens
against  any  uue  who  had  misled  the  people  by
false  statements  of  fact,  quoting  imaginary  laws,
«tc.  The  senate  aud  the  law-courts,  as  well  as
the  sovereigu  people,  were  included  in  its  opera-
tion (Dem.  c.  Aristocr.  p.  653,  $  ^).  It  would  seem
that  it  might  also  be  directed  against  generals
who,  like  Miltiades  at  Paros,  failed  in  an  expedi-
tion which  they  had  themselves  suggested  (Dem.
c.  Timoth.  p.  1204,  i  67).

Apatniia  iatTarovpia).  The  general  feast  of
the  phratries  (q.  v.).  held  chiefly  by  Greeks  of  the
Ionian  race.  At  Athenn  it  lasted  three  days  in  the
mouth  of  Pyanepsion  (Oct. -Nov. ),  and  was  cele-
brated with  sacrificial  banquets.  Ou  the  third
day  the  fothers  brought  their  children  born  since
the  last  celebration  before  the  members  (plira-
tors)  assembled  at  the  headquarters  of  each  ^pa-
rpia,  and,  after  declaring  ou  oath  their  legitimate
birth,  had  their  names  inscribed  on  the  roll  of
ifiparopft.  For  every  child  enrolled  a  sheep  or
goat  was  sacrificed,  which  went  to  furnish  the
common  feast.  On  the  same  day  the  fathers
made  their  children  who  were  at  school  givu
proofs  of  their  progress,  especially  by  reciting
passages  from  poets,  and  those  who  distinguished
themselves  were  rewarded  with  prizes.

Apanlia. See  Matrimon'iuh.

ApeleathSroB  (airtXtvdfpos). See  Libbbtus.

Apelles  f  AttcXX^c).  The  most  celebrated  of  Gre-
cian painters,  born,  most  probably,  at  Colophon  in
Ionia,  tfaongb  some  ancient  writers  call  bim  a  Coan
and  others  au  Ephesian. He  was  the  contempora-


ry of  Alexander  the  Great  (B.c.336-323),wfao  enter-
tained so  high  au  opinion  of  him  that  he  was  the
only  person  whom  Alexander  would  permit  to  paint
his  portrait.  We  are  not  told  wfaeu  or  where  hedied.
Throughout  his  life  Apelles  laboured  to  improve
himself,  especially  in  drawing,  which  he  never
spent  a  day  without  practising.  Hence  the  prov-
erb, Nulla  dies  sine  iinea  (rrnitpay  ovStfuav  ypap-
pifv  ifyayov).  Of  his  portraits,  the  most  cele-
brated was  that  of  Alexander  wielding  a  thun-
derbolt; but  the  most  admired  of  all  his  pictures
was  the  "Aphrodite  Aiiadyomen^,"  or  Aphrodite
rising  ont  of  the  sea.  The  goddess  was  wringing
her  hair,  and  the  falling  drops  of  water  formed  a
transparent  silver  veil  around  her  form.  The  orig-
inal was  Campasp^,  a  mistress  of  Alexander.  For
the  painting  of  Alexander  a  sum  of  twenty  talents
(about  $21,600)  was  paid,  and  the  painting  itself
was  hung  in  the  temple  of  Diana  of  Ephesus.  He
painted  also  a  horse;  and,  fiuding  that  his  rivals
iu  the  art,  who  contested  the  palm  with  him  on
this  occasion,  were  obout  to  prevail  through  un-
fair means,  he  caused  his  own  piece  and  those  of
the  rest  to  be  shown  to  some  horses,  and  these
auintals,  fairer  critics  in  this  case  than  men  had
proved  to  be,  ueighed  at  his  painting  alone.  Apelles
used  to  say  of  his  contemporaries  that  they  pos-
sessed, as  artists,  all  the  requisite  qualities  except
one— uaniely,  grace,  and  that  this  was  bis  alone.
On  one  occasion,  when  contemplating  a  picture
by  Protogenes,  a  work  of  immense  labour,  and  iu
which  exactness  of  detail  had  been  carried  to  ex-
cess, he  remarked,  "Protogenes  equals  or  snriiaasee
me  in  all  things  but  one — the  kuowingwheu  to  re-
move his  hand  from  a  painting."  Apelles  was  also,
as  is  supposed,  the  inventor  of  what  artists  call
glazing.  Such,  at  least,  was  the  opiuion  of  Sir
Joshua  Reynolds  and  others.  The  ingredients
probably  employed  by  him  for  this  purpose  are
given  by  Jahu,  in  his  Maierei  der  Aiten,  p.  150.
Apelles  was  accustomed,  wheu  he  had  completeil
any  oue  of  his  pieces,  to  expose  it  to  the  view  of
passeugers,  and  to  hide  himself  behiud  it  in  order
to  hear  the  remarks  of  the  spectators.  Ou  one  of
these  occasions  a  shoemaker  censured  the  paiuter
for  having  given  one  of  the  slippers  of  a  figure  a
loss  number  of  ties  by  one  than  it  ought  to  have
had.  The  next  day  the  shoemaker,  emboldened
by  the  success  of  his  previous  criticism,  began  to
find  fault  with  a  teg,  wheu  Apelles  indignantly
put  forth  his  head,  aud  desired  him  to  confine  hia
decisions  to  the  slipper,  "ne  supra  crepidam  iudi-
curet."  Hence  arose  another  common  saying,  .Y<
sulor  ultra  crepidam  (Pliliy,  H.  N.  XXXV.  10).

ApeUIcon  (' AirtWtKuy).  A  Peripatetic  philos-
opher, born  at  Teos  iu  Asia  Minor,  and  one  of
those  to  whom  we  owe  the  preservation  of  many
of  the  works  of  Aristotle.  The  latter,ou  hisdeath-
bed,  confided  his  works  to  Tbeophrastus,  bis  favour-
ite pupil  aud  Tbeophrastus,  by  his  will,  left  them
to  Neleus,  who  had  them  conveyed  to  Scepsis,  in
Tro.t8,  his  native  city.  Af1«r  the  death  of  Nelens,
his  heirs,  illiterate  persons,  fearing  lest  they  might
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  king  of  Pergamus,  who
was  enriching  iu  every  woy  his  newly-established
library,coucealedthewriting8of  Aristotle  in  a  cave,
where  they  remained  for  more  than  130  years,  and
suffered  greatly  from  worms  and  dampness.  At  the
end  of  this  period  Apollicon  purchased  them  for  a
high  price.  His  wish  was  to  arrange  them  in  prop-
er order,  and  to  fill  up  the  lacunae  that  were  now


APEKK


95


AfHBODlT£


T'fVvqmnt  ooeniTBnne  in  Ihe  luaniiAcriptH.  iit  cou-
luunwuf  Ttioir  iH'^tccttx)  Htntu.  Being,  Iiuwcvor,
.liltlcrt^fM^I  in  |>hilu8<jpby. aud  pu«Mi;Mtiug  Hlill
IJaiiKDioiit, lir  .-ir-4|iiirtrj  hiiiiB«ir ill  in  tiiUUifll-
eiilt  tAMk.jiiivl  |>ul>lt.iiu-(l  rlie  viork^  uf  the  St»>;iril«*
full  «if  faults,  SiiU»oiiiii-iilty  tin:  lilirar.v  of  Apelli-
HMik  rrll.aiiiiiiig  the  n|H>tUut' Atfafiiei,  into  tlie  liaudA
^Bf:<iillB.  1111(1  veaA  cnnii-d  to  Rome. where  lh<-  Rinm-
^BMkriaaTyruiiitiiiii  hat)  luiri'w  tv  theai.  From  him
^MOj'iflsa  w»|p  ohtaili*^  liy  Anilniiucutt  <if  I£hiMU*s,
'^  wHich  nenrd  for  the  ba&id  of  his  Hrraiigtmii'iit  of
the  works  of  ^Vristutlc.

»Kitt«r  thinks  that  tvu  much  iiuM  bc«it  oukIi*  of
this  frU>ry. On  it«  utilhurity  it  hit.1  rvcu  1m.-uii  jire-
IruUed  thnt  the  worka  of  Ari^tolle  have  rcnrhcd
a*  in  tt  Diun:  broken  aud  ill-arruii]{«*d  »hii)ii-  than
sDjr  otbcr  piotluctiuus  of  uiiliiinity. tl«;  thinks
I  that  tbp  8tvr>'  arose  ont  of  aoiuo  luiiilutury  ctiin-
incniliitiiiiiH  nf  thi;'  eilition  of  ArUtotU^  hy  Aiidro-
niciu,  mill  that  it  i*  prohnhic,  not  In  say  itTtniii,
lUat  lliens  wiTft  ntbrr  eflttioMH.  of  the  n'spcotivo
fits  uf  urhirb it  wa.i pn>v>ililp  to  niakt^  n  vuni-
Al liny  ratp,  ar<"i)r<linK  In  him.  tho  ac-
nanattc  vrurkn  of  AriRtotlo  hiivt*  not  rrarhi'il  uh
■oltl;  frum  iht-  ltl)nir>*  iif  Nch'iiis  and  connrtinontly
it  «M  Dot  ucceaearj'  to  h*\v  rruunrKu  nirtvly to
thnbrnUJon  by  Apelticun.eiihnr  ta  oomph* to  or
ntUD  the  Incniiih'  rcstiitiiig  frnui  Ihi.*  dclerioruCion
of  llie  mantivrriptx. Sri*  AlcisTUTici.Kti.

Apea4  uinriwi).  A  MrriaKC  with  four  wheels,
gaxraily  drawn  by  mules. See  Ci'HRi'8.

&penlautianuM  iamviavrnrfLat). S«h>  Phonou

Dike.

Apeoninii*.  A  iii-t'iit  uhuin  of  inomitains  in
It>t;,  kmichin^  off  frum  thoSturitiuir  AlpM,  in  th*>
DciltlibAiirhtMiil  of  Gfnon,  niriiiing  tliagitn:iUy  fmui
tb*  Lijinnsii  Unlf  to  Ihc  Adriatic,  in  tho  vii-inily
•f  Annma;  from  thouce  coiitintunt;  iiMarly  parallel
With  tlie  Inller  gulf,  ua  far  as  the  jiroMuiiitory  of
1^'w|Uii4.aiid  njift'iM  inelinjnx  tothe  Mar^  lurcriini,
^1  it  tilially  tcnniiiates  iii  the  promontory  of
wtra  near  llheKinni.  The  length  is  about
JlMlFolyh.ii.  Iti).

(I)  Maiiiii*.  a  R»mnn  orator  of  the  firbt
<*»tiiry  A.ii,  fie  wa*  a  native  of  Unnl,  but  sin-nt
*"*t  of  hlH  lift?  at  Bomo.  lie  ia  (inn  of  the  np«.<ak-
*•»  in  the  Itialot/H*  of  Tacitn«.  lie  died  a.i>.  <>,
I^'Amh'*!.  a  prefect  of  tlie  Pnu^toriaii  Oiuinls  iin-
"fcttlmtiuiM-'nir  Cunia,  whom,  while  ill,  he  a»iafwi-
■i^,  ItrPteiiiliiiK  that  Ihu  death  had  htien  eau-scd
^ liglttoitig.  The  motive  of  thih  dtH.-<l  wiut  a  di>'
*in<  In  iwctirp  au  elccitou  aa  emperur  at  the  hundn
oftbeOtuirda,  nud  the  same  anibiliun  itttto  led  liiiii
lopn(MnXniD«rinnnB,  tbcBUci-eMfirofCai'iia.  Knll-
■o^Qmlnr  Dimpicion,  after  sncceasfiilly  aueoinpliNh-
"'g  tbift  cniitf ,  Apvr  waa  exceuteil  by  ordei  of
DtodMifcn,  whuiii  th*  uoldiery  had  uinde  emperor
6*^  AnnsL  Tiet.  M:  Vopiiic.  ('aruii,  *• ;  Id,  A'whkt.
Ufoll,

Apeita  Nrtib. Sec  Apiikactih,

ApBX.  A  cap  of  conical  form  worn  hy  the
"■tt"  l»ce  1-"LAMK.V  (.  haviii)^  a  «pike  uf  nljve-
V****  'l»c  top,  trhieh  the  wiinl  n/wj,  in  fael.nrig-
•^y  llftmted.  Without  it  the  llumeim  were  iinf
^•*d  lo  t(o  iDlo  the  open  air  ((Jell.  x.  15).  The
|*fiilik(i»isp  Wort  the  ajKfX.  The  accompanying
'U'WtatioQ  shows  one  of  the  Sniii  wenriiiK  the
*?«  wn1  with  a  rod  iu  his  hnnil. (See  Saui.  >

^^^  9Uayn/mia,  or alfmt  tinffnu,  was a whiti* onp
*^ni  by  Ibr  jUiwitn  dialit,  itiiidp  of  the  skin  of  u


W-


Y


AplfM,  or  Cap*  worn  hy  tit*  PltmlBM  sad  SMI

whitH  vieliiii  hueriticvtl  |i>  Iiipiter,  and  haviog  tlw
a|M:x  ra»ileiif4l  to  it  by  on  olive  twig.

Aphflca  (M^Kun;). A  kind  of  lentil.

Apbfit««  (dtfiirai}. Hve  IIkijiTaR.

Aplildiia(''A<f>(2ra).  An  Aittudemo  iiearDeceleit.

Aphlaston  iaip\airr<>vi. See  NaVIB.

Aphonnea  Dik£  {atftopiiijt  fiUt)).  An  action
bruii;4lit.  auaiii>it  a  hanker  or  mouoy-Iendcr  lo  re-
cover  fmid-'i  iidvauced  for  (he  piirpoM.'  of  heliij;  em-
ployed us  liuuking  capital. See  1'akakatatii£k£:.

ApbractUB ( (K^paitrot  vavs),  callfnl  also  lutmi
ajitrti. A  "hip  whieh
hail  no  d«ck,  lutt.  wan

mendy  eoren<d  with /  . .  KOPKYP
planks ill the f*»re
and after part, ah
in  ri*preHont*d  in  the
following  rut,  taken  . ..  ^-.^^
tntm  n  ooin  of  Coi*^  \  -\\^^'V\ A ?^&
pyra.

TIio  hIi  ipH  whieh

had  deeks  were  ealled

ttaTa^fiaKToty and

ttctae  or  stnttat. Si«

^.y,^  AphraridR.

Apbrodisia  (ra ' A^pot^iam).  Fcstirnlscclebrntcd
in  niHuy  towns  of  Greece  In  houoar  of  Aphrodite!
Iq.  v.).  Tho  especial  scat  of  her  worship  was  at
Cyprus,  No  hhxHly  sacritlces  were  permitted  to
he  offered,  but  only  pure  tire,  tlowers,  aurt  incense.
The  initialed  also  oflVred  a  piece  of  money  to  the
iToddpAH  asa  harlot;  and  n>ceive4l  a  measure  of  Halt
HyiiihidiitiuK  tlie  itrl^iti  of  Aplirodit^  in  the  fteo,
and  1  phalluH  .is  PXpresHive  of  thu  aexual  function.

AphroduUaa  C Af^tpahiatas).  A  town  of  Carta
t4Bcred  lo  ApiirodiK'-. See  Tac.  Attn.  iii.  ^i.

Aplu'odIt6  ('AiJ»^o3(Vii;  Lat,  rnuo.  TheGreek
tfodde^a  of  ]ove,  lli-r  attHbntiM  eombiut-,  with
Hellenic  cunceptionet,  a  g^:^at  many  features  of
Ka^tern,  esiH^ciaUy  rhu<iii(!iau,  origin,  which  the
Cii'eekHiiinfit  have  gntfleil  u]ion  tlieir  tialive  noliuiiil
ill  vei-j-  old  times.  This  dotilde  nalnn*  appenn*  im-
mediately in  tliB  conlriidielory  lales  of  her  nHgin.
To  the  ohleHt  <ireekH  Khi>  w.i.'4  tin-  daughter  of  Zhiih
and  Diomi  iaiid  M  »timii^tiniefl  e.'illed  by  rtiiit  name
hi-rstdfj:  yet  fioiii  a  very  early  liriic  nhe  apprarn  as
Aphrogcuia,  the  "  foaui-horu  "  (nee  ITrancs),  as
AuadyomeuiS  *'Bhc  who  rines*'  out  of  Ihe  ftea,  aud
stepH  iUfhore  cti  CypniH,  which  hml  been  colnnlzod
Ity  Pho'iiieiuiiH  time  out  of  tnind  ;  even  as  far  back
UA  Homer  »hc ia  Cypris,  the  Cyprian, (iiec  Ct-


APHRODITB


96


APHRODire


pRua)  The  same  trHusinariDe  aod  Eaateru  origin
of  ber  worship  is  evideuced  by  tbe  legend  of  the
island  of  Cythera,  on  which  she  was  supposed  to
have  first  landed  from  a  sea-shell.  Other  names
applied  to  her  are  Pelagia  (from  nAayor),  Auadyo-
meu^  (as  having  riseu  from  the  water),  Erycina
(from  Mount  Eryx  in  Sicily),  Paphia,  and  Cypris,
besides  those  meutioued  below.

Again,  tbe  common  conception  of  her  as  goddess
of  love  limited  her  agency  to  tbe  sphere  of  hu-
man life.  But  she  was,  at  the  same  time,  a  power
of  nature,  living  and  working  in  the  three  elements
of  air,  earth,  and  water.  As  goddess  of  the  shift-
ing gale  and  changeful  sky,  she  was  Aphrodite
Urania  {Oiipavia),  tbe  "heavenly,"  and  at  many
places  lu  Greece  and  Asia  her  temples  crowned  the
heights  and  headlands ;  for  instance,  tbe  citadels  of
Thebes  and  Corinth,  and  Mount  Eryx  iu  Sicily.  As
goddess  of  sterm  and  lightning,  she  nas  represent-
ed armed,  as  at  Sparta  and  Cythera ;  and  this,  per-
haps, explains  why  she  was  associated  with  Ares
both  iu  worship  and  iu  legend,  and  worshipped  ae
a  goddess  of  victory.

Tbe  moral  conception  of  Aphrodite'  Urania  as
goddess  of  the  higher  and  purer  love,  especially
wedded  love  and  frnitfuluess,  as  opposed  to  mere
sensual  lust,  was  bnt  slowly  developed  in  the
course  of  ages.

As  goddess  of  the  sea  and  maritime  traffic,  es-
pecially of  calm  seas  and  prosperous  voyages,  sho
was  widely  worshipped  by  sailors  and  tiahermen
at  ports  and  on  sea-coasts,  often  as  the  goddess  of
calm,  while  Poseidou  was  the  god  of  disturbance.
Kext,  as  reganls  the  life  of  the  earth,  she  was  tbe
goddess  of  gardens  and  groves,  of  spriug  and  its
bounties,  especially  tender  plants  and  flowers,  as
the  rose  and  myrtle ;  hence,  as  the  fruitful  and
bountiful,  she  was  worshipped  most  of  all  at  that
season  of  the  year  in  which  her  birth  from  tbe
sea  was  celebrated  at  Papbos  in  Cyprus.  But  to
this,  ber  time  of  joyful  action,  was  opposed  a  season
of  sorrow,  when  her  creations  wither  aud  die — a
sentiment  expressed  in  her  inconsolable  grief  for
her  beloved  Adouis  (q.  v.),  the  symbol  of  vegeta-
tion perishing  in  its  prime,  a  myth  derived  by  the
Greeks  (toia  the  Babylonian  worship  of  Adon  or
Thamnmz,  and  akin  to  those  of  Linus,  Hyacinthns,
aud  Narcissus.  (See  Mannhardt  Wald-  und  Feld-
knlte,  274  [Berlin,  1686].)  In  the  life  of  gods
and  men,  she  showed  her  power  as  the  golden,
sweetly  smiliug  goddess  of  beauty  and  love,
which  she  kuew  bow  to  kiudle  or  to  keep
away.  She  outshone  all  the  goddesses  in  grace
and  loveliness;  iu  her  girdle  she  wore  united  all
the  magic  charms  that  could  bewiteb  tbe  wisest
mau  and  subdue  tbe  very  gods.  (See  Cestus.)
Her  retinue  consisted  of  Eros  (Cnpid),  the  Hours,
the  Graces,  Peitho  (Persuafiion),  Pothos  and  Hime-
ros  (personifications  of  longing  aud  yearning).  By
uniting  the  geuerutious  iu  tbe  bond  of  love,  she
became  a  goddess  of  marriage  and  family  life,  and
the  consequent  kinship  of  the  whole  community.
As  such  she  had  formerly  been  worshipped  at  Ath-
ens ander  the  name  of  Pandemos  (  =  all  tbe  jieo-
ple's),  as  being  a  goddess  of  the  whole  country.
By  a  regulation  of  Solon,  the  name  acquired  a
very  different  sense,  branding  her  as  goddess  of
prostitntion ;  and  then  it  was  that. the  new  and
higher  meaning  was  imported  into  the  wonl  Ura-
nia. See  Meretrix.

In  later  times,  tbe  worship  of  Aphrodite  as  the


goddess  of  mere  sensual  love  made  rapid  strides,
and  iu  particular  districts  assumed  forms  more
aud  more  immoral,  iu  imitatiou  of  tbe  services
performed  to  love-goddesses  iu  the  Eaat,  especial-
ly at  Corinth,  where  large  bands  of  girls  were
consecrated  as  slaves  to  the  service  of  the  gods
and  the  practice  of  prostitution.  Aud  later  still,
the  worship  of  Astart^  ("Star"),  the  Syrian  Aphro-
dite, performed  by  euuucbs,  spread  all  over  Greece.
See  Aphrodisia  ;  Meretrix.

In  tbe  Greek  myths  Aphrodite  appears  occa-
sionally as  the  wife  of  Hephaestus.  Her  love  tid-
veutures  with  Ares  are  notorious.  From  thcM
sprang  Eros  aud  Anteros,  Hartnonia,  tbe  wife  of
Cadmus,  and  Deinos  aud  Phobos  (Fear  aud  Alarm),
attendauta  on  their  father.  By  Auchises  she  v.a*
the  mother  of  Aeneas.  The  chief  seats  of  her
worship  were  Faphos,  Amathns,  and  Idalion  (all
in  Cyprus),  Cnidus  iu  Dorian  Asia  Minor,  Cor-
inth, tbe  island  of  Cythera,  and  Eryx  iu  Sicily.
As  mother  of  Harmonia,  she  was  a  guardian  deity
of  Tliebes.  Among  plants,  the  myrtle,  the  rose,
and  the  apple  were  specially  sacred  to  her  as  god-
dess of  love;  among  animals,  the  ram,  he -goat,
hare,  dove,  sparrow,  and  other  creatures  of  amo-
rous nature  (the  ram  aud  dove  being  widely  cur-
rent symbols  of  great  antiquity);  as  sea-goddess,
the  swan,  mussel,  aud  dolphin ;  as  Urania,  tbe
tortoise.

The  various  myths  connected  with  the  uauie
of  Aphrodite  have  inspired  many  exquisite  poems
in  modern  literature.  In  recent  English  verse
reference  may  be  made  to  the  magnificcut  Cho-
rus to  Aphrodite  in  Swinburne's  Atalanta  in  Cal-
ydon  ;  Hake's  Birth  of  Ventu  f  Morris's  Aphro-
dite in  his  Epic  of  Modes;  and  Rossetti's  r«-
nu9  Verticordia  and
Fen«»  Victrix.

In  ancient  art,  iu
which  Aphrodite  is
one  of  tbe  favourite
subjects,  she  is  repre-
sented in  a  higher  or
lower  aspect,  accord-
ing as  the  artist's  aim
was  to  exhibit  Urania
or  the  popular  god-
dess of  love.  In  the
earlier  works  of  art
she  usually  appears
clothed,  but  iu  later
ones  more  or  less  nn-
drapcd — either  as  ris-
ing from  the  sea  or
leaving  the  bath,  or
(as  in  still  later  times)
merely  as  an  ideal  of
female  beauty.  In  the
course  of  time  the  di-
vine element  disap-
pearml,  aud  the  pre-
sentation became
more  and  more  onli-
uary.  While  tbe  old-
er sculptures  show
the  sturdier  forms,  the
taste  of  later  times
leans  more  aud  more
to  softer,  weaker  out-
lines. Host  renowned
in ancient times Apfandtw  or UabM. (Loorm)


APIIKOGENEIA


07


ArouKj\PHi!:


*r«ire  ibi-  statiii?  al  Ciiiiluw  \iy  Praxitoleii  (a  copy
tf  wrbicb  i«  uuw  jit  Miiuicb),  uml  tli*;  )>utlKi»K
kT  Apbroilii^  AiiailromoDd  by  Apvllct.  Of  orlg-
n»l  stBtiwK  prLVM-r\*«il  to  iim,  tbt<  tniKit  funiAiiB
ire  tbc  A|>hTVHlil6  c>r  Melo«  |»cc  iUuHtratiniii,
lO'wr  at  PariM,  and  that  of  Cupna  at  NajOi-H,  \h>IU
tf  'vrfaioh  Uring  uiir  th»j  loftier  aA[M><-t  of  tbo
[o<ld«e»;  and  th^  Mntic«^aii  Veniitt  at  Floreuci',
he  work  "f  n  lato  Allir  aciilptor.  ('lomufiif's,  in
be  (l(*lifatc  fitniiH  uf  face  ami  Unily  I  bat  plftutctl
h  y(jtui;st<r  agv.  On  tb^  iileiitilicatioii  of  A|ibn>-
Itt^  n-tth  tb«  Roman  goddfMS  of  ]dvi>,  see  Venus.

.Aphrogeueia i'At^ptryima). "  Foaiii-ntiruug."
St.n  •-pithri  lit  A)>bruilil4^  )q.  v.t.

^phtboniUB  ['X^ftdttfios).  AGrv.«\c.  rbetorJciait  of
(kntiot-b.  ubuut  A.i>  4*>0,  a  pu\n\  of  Liliatiiiis,  wbo
WTOtea  (R'biMjl-biKikon  tbeeleoientsof  rbeloric.tbe
/Voyjfmnasma/i,  nitii'li  um<1  in  (K'bools  down  to  tbe
M]VC<tite«t]lb  century.  Tbis  himV  i»  rt^ally  iiu  uil:*j>-
latimi  of  tlitf  i-ba)itur  ho  iiniiu'd  in  Hiu'iiingenrw'x
Hketorif^.  A  roDeetioii  of  forty  falilus  by  Aenop  ulao
liran  biit  itaitie.

Apbftls  ('.\i^LTi'r)- A  town  til  Miu-cdonia  irun-

laiiiing  a  oelcbrutvd  ti'Diplo  and  onttury  of  Zi;uk

Amnion  iPaniuiii.  iii.  18.)

Apia. Si'«  Arts.

■ Aplcina,  Maiu'i:h  GAvtt.H. A  hon-eifont  of  tbo

Hiiinr  of  Aii^ii-stiiK  nnd  Tibeiiun. Hi;  borrowed  tbc

HviM  Aptcios  fnnn  no  epicure  of  tbo  ropublicftiL

r  V^^T*"*!  ^voa  bimself  the  nntbor  of  a  t_-i>iik-book,

TboDgli  worth  a  fortune  of  »otne  $:tTri,0(NI,  ho  he-

cuunliftunicd  l»y  the  fe»r  of  Btarvins  todrotb.niid

w  poisoned  himself  to  eiwniN> siich  a  fate. The

«r11>1iuuiTu  aiUeetioii  of  rcei{W8  for  cooking,  iu

Irn  boakft,  eutitlfd fJr  lit Caqmimiria,  iti  of  htler

Aili>,  inil  wrill^'ii  by  one  Apiciiia  CtieliiiK  in  I  hi'

iLml  fMitur>'  A. II. The  Iwwt  editiitii ie  thaf  of

C.TLScliiicb  (HeidellHTg,  IHG7),  wbo  hmt  iidili-d

''■iiih  rMip««  from  a  Pariit  M8.  of  the  fiownrh  c«n>

turj,

ApUintlB  C.^ffiAoj-dcV  A  river  in  Thewialy  ftnw-
i"g>iitaRiiip-iiH.  near  PbarMthiM  (HertMl.  vil.  I*.^t).

Aploa  and  Aptuae.  A  «iuall  city  of  Apulia
**v  Trii'A.  J/m'mu  Jiud  Tricti  ( JVieae)  arc  terma
w4  m  Latin  of  irttlea.  Ct  Man.  xir.  1 ;  PUn.
B.S.ui.11.

AplAIa.  A  town  of  Italy  from  wbo«o  Hpoiln.
'»lfli  l>y  TurquitiiiM  Sn|ierbn»,  the  C'apiloUum  ai
^e  WM  bt'ituu  (Pliny,  H.  X  iii.  5).

'Moo  r.VirioiK).  {!)  A  t!rv«tk  graiDmarianof  llie
tniemttiry  A.D.,apiipiluflJiilyiuiiiii,  and  prefltd«ut
"flk  |ibilologi<-iil  iwbool  at  Alexandria.  He  alHO
"wlndfuraliineat  liouietiuder Tiheriu* and  Clan-
^""^  A  tain.bnastriil  iiiun,  bo  travelled  abiiiil  the
'"*"k  dlies.  (>iTinf{  popidar  lecttin^t  on  llotnor.
f"f  Jill  many  nritingH  ne  have  only  fraguientfi  left.
'^l|lo«Maou  lliiinerthut  bo»r  bi>4natue  iin>  of  later
'*^&fi:  m  tb«  oth>-<r  hami,  the  Homeric  lexicon  of
'«  inpUiut  ApoUoniilK  in  luwe^d  t)ti  his  geiiiiiite
"*i"i«ir  El.MM^e**,  Hi"*  hitter  eotiiplaii>i,.-t^in>u/  Me
'''*'*7 Hldrvateil  t*>  Cali^nla  at  the  ioMtanre  of  the
Ali>utM)ri»uft.  in  iM'Mt  knon  n  fixim  IiMiepbiiH'a  nolile
'■H;  to  ii. 8«t^  Aul.  Gull.  V.  14 ;  fieii.  KpiKt.  36, (2)

('AwitV (11  Son  of  Fhoroneii!!  and  LaoiliejS.

•f  ArtC'iK, frnin  uhnui  PelujionueHiitt,  nnd  more

AriioN,  wan  I'lilted  Apia  (Pantuiii.  ii.  fi).

il  hhll  uf  M«^nipblH.  ivorKhippL-d  ah  a

lite  Egyptians. Tbero  w«ro  oertaiu

4


(tiKn.s  by  which  he  wa8  recognized  to  be  tbo  god-
'i'liuft,  tbo  body  uiURt  he  black ;  tbero  tauat  be  a
s(]Dttre  whit«  spot  npou  tbo  forehoad.  the  ttjjuro  of
all  «agle  upon  the  back,  a  beetle- aba peil  kuut  nnda


•;


i(IIV,


ri(nir^^  '


l.^y;.iij;j  Mumimi.'Uli>


the  tongii--,  .!■  I  I  .1.1  .  i-reewnt  npon  Hie  right
Mde.  At  MeinphiH  be  had  a  H[)leudid  ronideneo,
containing  cxtenHi%-e  walks  and  (nmiHs  f<»r  hia
amuwuient.  Hii*  birthday,  wbicl)  whj»  pelebraled
every  year,  was  a  day  of  n-joicing  fur  nil  Kjiypt.
1II«ilentb  wnaatieAMin  of  public  mourning,  nhjch
eontinned  till  auothvV  »dcrod  bull  waa  diitcovor«d
by  Ihi*  priest*. See  OsiHI^.

Aptaaon  (Amaauv).  A  Paeouiun,  the  bod  of
Hi]ipiiAnH^  who  aided  Priam  iit  Troy  with  an  army,
but  wan  killod  by  Lyromcdes  (//.  xviL  34M).

Apium  laiXtvo^U Parsley.

Apluati^  {lifftXatrrov).  A  womleii  omameat  oti
the  pin>p  *>(  a  hhip. 8ee  Xavis.

Apob&t«a  ((ijro,3iirjjrL fiec  DlUilTl.TnREa

Apooolocyntoala  iavvKoXnKvvrtafTir).  "  Pump-
kiiiitlcatioii."  A  satire  on  the  dnilieatiun  of  thu
etnp«ror  Clamlitis,  written  nfter  the  death  of  that
prine#«  by  tbt»  younger  Scni-ea.  It  ifi  the  only  ox-
atujilo  remaining  In  iik  of  tba  Hatiru  Menippea
in.  v.). Ed.  by  K.  KUcheler  aierltit.  18)1*2).

Apodectao  (  uiroitKrat ).  "  Receivers."  Pnbllo
oflVeera  at  AtlienK,  tun  in  iiimilier.  wboae  principal
duly  it  «a»  to  collect  th«  ontiiiar>'  taxes  iinil  dls-
trihiite  them  to  tbe  separate  braiirbeM  of  the  ad-
mini<<tralii>n  which  weru  entitliHl  to  them  (Ariat.
/W.  vi.H.  1).

Apodidraakinda  iairn&t&paaKtvlia).  Tbe  gatmi
of  hiih'-atid-Keek.  a  favonrit4*  among  the  Greek
rhiblren.  It  \*  n-prnwrire^l  in  a  painting  found
lit  HerculatMMun. Hee  liekker,  ilnfr*/.  p.  1353.

Apodyteiium  (aymivrrfputv).  A  mom  in  the
Ronmii  bath-honiieH  iiHcd  for  undreatiiug.  See
IUI.VRAR.

ApogrSphA  ( avnyfta(f>ii).  Litenilly,  »  "list  or
regii«ter ;"  but,  iu  tbe  language  of  the  Attic  conrt»,
the  teriu8  anoy(td<f>tw  and  ditoypinpttrBai  hail  thr««
Heparale  appliralioiiK.  (1) ' Airvypntpr)  was  used  in
refereiH'e  to  an  acciiKalion  in  publie  niatteri».  more
|>articnlarly  when  there  were  H4*%'eral  defendanta;
tbe  denunciation,  the  bill  of  indiclnii'iit,  and  enn-
meration  of  the  accnited  wonid  in  tbiit  caiM*  bo
terniud  apograpbe.  and  difler  but  little,  if  nt  all,
fn>iii  the  ordinary  ypa<pfi.  I  '2 )  It  implied  the
oiakiug  of  a  iiulemu  protest  or  aeaertion  before


APOIKIA


96


APOLLO


ft  ii)Bff)BtTilt«.  to  tbo  iiitoQt  tlint  it  QtiKlit  be  pre-
(Hirvcd  by  tiiui  til)  ii  wu4  roquii'ed  to  ht^'  i;iveu  in
eviilrric**.  C-i)  It  was  n  HjH'cilk'ittioii  ut'  ymtpwly.
will  U>  beloiij;  to  \ht*  Klatt*.  but  nrdiiilty  iit  tlio
IKwtt^iiKiou  of  »  jirivalc  [H*rt«<)ti',  \v(iit'h  »{)«citic»tioi)
n*iVA  luutip  with  It  vi«iv  to  lliu  coiiliNraliou  n{  uiirli
|)ri>|ierty  to  llio  ntiit*;.

Apoikia  {amiKla). See  COLONIA.

Apokeryxu  {oxoit^c(i'|tt-).  The  fnmjal  sict  of
tllhiiiliiTitiDg  II  will  At  AiJieiift.  S«o  DrinoH.  <-.  fiotot
tit  AV.w.  p.  ItKlJ,  ^  39

Apolelpftla  (fnrnXfi^f). Soo  DivoimL*M.

ApolllnareB  LudL Sev  LvDi.

ApoUltiaiU,  HiiHiNirs. 8e«  RiDoKiua.

ApoUiuftria,  Sllpicius. Sew  St'LMClDl*.

Apolllula  Promoutoriiun.  A  pruntnutory  in
Kurth  Afrii'u,  foriuiu^;  tbo  west  potuc  of  tbu  Unlf
of  t'aiiliaRc.

ApoUo  ('AfToXXui'J.  8011  of  Z«UB  by  Leto  (Ln-
toim).  ■who,  ncooriliiig  to  the  leguiul  tiiiwt  widely
ciinriit.  boiv  liiut  11111I  bis  tniri-itiHlfr  ArU'ini)^
itl.  ttio  foot  of  Mt.  (Viitliiix,  ill  tht>  iMluiul  of  I>r-
lo«.  Apollo  Hpitean  o|-if>iiMiUy  n»  a  f(o<l  of  ligbt,
Ixttb  in  its  Wiielicciit  anil  it;*  <l(>Mtraclive  oftVct« ;
nuit  of  light  iu  ^eurral,  not  of  tbu  kuii  only,  for
to  tbe  early  tii-mrkti  the  deity  tbat  broiijcbl  day-
li^lit  was  llclius.  witb  whom  it  whn  not  till  aftcr-
nanis  that  Apollo  was  iclt>uti6ed.  Wbilu  tlit*
iiuMiiiinR  of  bis  name  Apollo  Ix  niiu<>rtn)n,  Iiik  <.'pi-
Ihvtb  of  Photf'kJi  and  i.fit-*M  i'ltMirly  mark  liiiu  aw
tbtf  bright.  tUf  Ufi'-gi^ing,  tUt-  former  ulwi  Rt4>aii-
ilig  tliu  puii*,  tlH^  holy:  tor,  ua  IIik  kinI  of  pun.*
ligliti  b»  in  tlw  rnt-my  of  tUrkne^,  with  all  its  uu<
cli'aii.  iiiilinUo\M-d  Itfood.  A^ain,  nor  only  flit*
wv4>iilb  ilay  of  lhi>  month,  his  birthday,  but  the
flrst  day  of  the  moiiib.  !.*■.  of  rai-h  now -bom  moou.
WAN  »i)civd  to  blm,  Btf  it  wna  u>  laniiN.  tb«  Roman
go^l  of  light;  and  according  to  the  view  rhat  piv-
vaikd  in  many  wnX»  of  hii»  »or»Utp,  bo  nitbdn-w
ill  wint»T  limf  *'itliiT  to  Lycta.or  to  the  lly|icrlM>-
rcaiiB  who  dvTfll  in  |K?r}ti'inal  tight  in  the  iitmoat
imnh,  and  n-tarnwl  iu  spriun  to  dinptl  the  |iowm
of  wLuter  with  hin  beaiao.  Wlwn  tbo  fublu  ndalw
that  ia)me«liat«ly  aft«r  hi.**  birth,  with  tbu  (ind
ahot  fmtn  bia  l»ow  he  f\w  the  dnigou  Python  (01
lX>tpliyii«),  a  hideoiii*  ol!)<|iniiK  of  tJa*?*  and  K»anl-
ian  of  tbo  lh*lphic  oniele,  what  <«n'i»9  lo  bo  de-
nut«d  uiu*t  l»o  the  •priiicKtKra  viitory  i>ver  wiu-
Vtr,  that  till«4  the  laml  » ilh  mamh  and  miak  Afi
Ihc  (£0.1  of  light,  hiis  f.'.HtivaIi»  are  all  in  sphog  or
oummcr.  and  many  t>f  thrm  Kttit  plainly  tvveal  in
certain  f.^atnrr'*  hi*  original  alliit-nt^-j^  Tbns>  jbe
LVlphmia,  held  at  Alliens  in  April,  comniemoralwl
the  ralmiiii:  of  the  »  iolr>'  »ea  after  the  eipiinuctial
pid«v(.  and  llie  eoufliMiuenl  teo|wuing  of  navigarioii.
As  llji»  feast  waa  in  honour  of  tbr  pnl  of  ftprtn);.
ao  was  the  Tbatifdia,  hebl  at  Alhcii*  the  next
moutb,  ill  honour  of  the  jroti  of  suiniuer.  Tlial  the
Cfopa  mijiht  rijien.  be  reeei\«l  Unl-ftiiil^  of  Idem.
and  at  the  wime  lime  pr\'pilialoT>-  Rifta  to  iiiduee
him  U»  avrrt  the  parehing  heal.  «»  biirlful  to  fniiln
and  men.  AIkmiI  i\y>  Unix  of  the  ».uu'»  givau*!
altitude  (Jnlv  and  Awgn^t  \  «  Iwn  the  pJ  display*
hw  p..wer,  b.'«th  for  g«Ml  and  lor  bam.,  tbe  Athe-
nian»ioftVrwlbit«heoalo»it»K«bem-.lhetinntm.oih
of  their  >ear  was  name*!  Hee»tonitHKs>n.  and  tb«-
Spartan*bel<l  their  Hjacintbia.  tSee  Mv*M.VTHi^.
la  auUimu.  w»»u  tlie  fiM  wa-  ni-*^**"!*;  i«*  f™ii
of  Uwir  c»nl«w  »wl  |ilauui»»>i»*.  wM  l«Tp*rtuK


fordepnrtnre,  thoy  eplf;hrat«d  the  Pyaa^^eJCTq.

ulieii  iliey  pn)i»ent(<d  hiui  with  the  lirbt-froits  «

bai'%'eAt.  I

AiHillo  glvea  the  rropi  prosperity,  and  pmlerti^

not  only  against  BUlunier  hi-at,  hnt  agaitml  bltj^k^

mildew,  and  the  vcrnnn  tluU  |»rey  njnm  tbein.wi  ^

aa  field  ■  mice and  gi'a*sliopiH'nt. Hmice  be  w.^

known  by  ftpecial  titles  in  «onie  parlM  of  Asia. ^

was  aluo  a  |iati^>n  of  llnrku  and  |Mi«lnre«,  and  ii%a|

wortthiptwd  in  many  diNlriotn  unib-r  a  variety

names  referring  to  the  liree<ling  of  eattli:. In  ^

rtlory  of  Hermes  [q.  v.)  8t«alliig  bJa  oxen,  Apollc:»

hinmelf  tbe  owner  ofa  herd,  which  he  gives  n^-^

IiIm  brother  in  exchange  for  the  lyre  invented \

him. Ottier  ancient  legeniU  Kpeuk  of  him  as  le  va

iiig  the  tlocka  of  Laourdon  uud  A'Jiuftns,  an m

I  iifterwanls  represented  as  a  penalty  for  a  fi«(«|

A.4 a  god  of  Nhepherda be makes  lore to tCj

nynipli!*,  to  Oapbn<^  (q.  v.).  *o  Coronis  (see  Aesc^

I  ULFiutu),  and  to  Cyruix^,  the  mother  of  Aristaetn

I  likewise  a  god  of  henls. 8ome  foriTDt  of  his  «-<►■

I  Mhip and  Koine versions  of  his  storj'  imply  thrs

Apollo,  liko  his  sister  Artemis,  wns  ii<g»rded  ;i» i

pmteetor  of  tender  game  and  a  slayer  of  rapariouM

lM>a4ts,  eH{teL'ially  of  tlie  wolf,  tbe  enemy  of  llitrt^

and  himself  a  symbol  of  the  giHlV  )H>wer,  that  iiu^

svuibt  niiiM'hief,  and now averts  it. Apollo  ]iir^

uiotva  tbu  health  and  well-lwing  of  man  himwl^

As  agoil  of  protitic  power,  he  was  iiiTokcil  at  nfim

dings; and as  a  nnnu,^  of  tender manlioo<l  aii^

tniin*>r  of  manly yonlli,  to him <iik well as  tlad

fonntain-nymplu>)  %rero  roiiKeeraled  the  lin>t  offe^

iiiga  of  the  hair  of  tbe head. In gynmafiia  nia^

lialaestrati  he  was  wonihippei)  eipialty  niib  Hefl

lues  and  Hei-acles;  for  be  gave  |K>wer  itf  eudiiran^

in  boxing,  uith  a«lroitne«s  and tleelnesa  of  fts«|

As  a  warlike  guiL  and  irne  helpful  in light,  li^

Spartans  paid  him  jiecnliar  honour»  in  llieir  C^

neia  iq.  v.),  and  in  a  measure the  Atbeuians I

their  lioedromia. Another  Athouiaii  feimivaJ,  t1

Metageitnia.  gloritleil  him  as  Ihe  anthor  of  neig^

,  hourly  union. In  many  places,  but  above  all

I  Athuu«,  b*9  was  worship|>e<l  ai  Agyieus,  the  god

I  sirvetd  and  highways,  wIiom<  rnde  symbol,  a  cat

!  cal  poat  with  n  pointed  eudtiig,  slooil by  htre4l(

I  doors  and  in  court-yards,  to  nutcb  men's  exit  «dj

I  entrance,  to  let  in  good  and  keep  out  evil,  aiid  wa

litailed  by  the  iiiiiiiii*^^  with  giHa  of  honour,  nicl

aa  ribbona,  wreaths  of  myrtle  or  bay.  and  the  lifeeJ

J At  sea,  aa  well  as  on  land.  Apollo  was  a  guide  xu4

gnanlian,  and there e^prcially nuder the uaiB4

,  l>elpbiuiits,  token  from  hi*  friend  aad  ally  the  dot-

phin.  thesymM  of  tbe  uavigablo  aea. L'uderlhia

character  he  was  widely  wor»hipprti,  for  Ihe  ow«*

part  with  )>eeultar  propittator> litea.  in  wapert*

and  on  promontorieM,  as  ihat  of  Aetiiim,  and  p«H

ticutarly  at  Atliemi.  being  a)«>  trgardiMl  asa  lej|ilfl<|

of  coK>iii«-K While  he  »  as  '.KXt^LfcoKot  <av«rler  nf

ills)  iu  th»-  widest  sense,  he  proves!  bis  p..ncr  iii«4

eapeeially  iu  timm  of  sicktkesa; for.  being  g«d  of

tbe  but  season,  and  himself  the  sender  of  iui«l  epk-

dennes an.) U.e  dt^Ml^l plag^iw.  .weeping  man

swiniy  a«  ay  n  ith  his  nnerriog  akafta.  be  omlJ  alaJ

jtati^lbetKitt«««tti«l  aid ;«  that  be  aud  bisxiil

I  AiMla^aa  wvn  i>*vc««<l  aa  Uie  chief  gods  of  baaB

ing. As  a  UTieur fhini epidemics maiuh,  bid

J,".*.!?^*"  *^  '^p*^  *«  •  ii<.i«-«iii

I  «as  givwi  U.  hb  p«trl>  physical  atlnl.ntea,  ..^


APOLLn


99


AKtLLO


I  ((cmI  i)f  ligbt  lMwain«  a  ^nf\  of  inciitnl  atitl  moral
^rity,  uutl  |lipn!>fon*  m1'  onli>r.  jiiAtice,  ami  legality
linniitii lilt'. An  ttucii,  be,  »ii tlie  uiiu baiK),
Antf  Aiul  HpurtHl  not  the  tiiMleut  offender,  TiiyiiH,
iiulautft^.  tliu  Alujtlat!.  tUu  |in'«timptuon8  Niulx^,
fi^  Ibc  lirerk*  before  Tmy ; Imt,  on the other
t,tu  lb«  giiilt'lililL*!)  Willi.  turniDf;  tn  litin  io  pcii-
■iid  BUppliciitton,  liQ ^vjiuledi  luiriBratinn
ntit  ttir  ntalu  of  critiif  <  which  wh»  re^;anlfil  ah  h
liMNWcelnttdinf;  thf  riiirpi)  :niil  rntshinj;  tht*  h<-jirl),
■ti(l  M  be  brult^tl  Uiu  >(|iirit.  uiiil  roiMlmitttiil ibo
mrcatt  ititn  fivio  lifo  hihI  tvlijtiouM  rellonnbip. Uf
Ilia  br  htuX  bim^lT  M't  the pat Utii,  when,  after
Kyjiig  tbu  tVlphiaii  ilruj^ftn,  he  Ili-il  t'roin  the  laml,
Ii<l M^ron .vriirR' niPiii:tl scrvku in  Adinotus  in
afuitrmciit  for  the  iiiiinli'i',  and,  when  the  time  of
penanci!  was  past,  bad  hitiiitF>lf  imrtl'uNl  hi  the  fitt-
er^ i^ve  of  bay>tree«  by  the  Thi'Ktuilmn  tvinide;
and  uot  until  then  did  he  retitni  tn  iJelphi  mid  enter
ou  bis  office  aw  prophet  of  Zeiw. Thi-rt-fofe  he  ex-
acts fniin  itll  a  n^eog-
niltnii  (if  the  atoning
(Hiwer  of  iMMinnee,  in
i\w U-eth of  Ibo uhl
l»w  of  vLMt[;eauet»  for
l»lo»)il,whirh  only  bred
new  niurden*  and  new
({nlll. The atntiing
rites )>rop(4fiuted by
Apollo's  worship,  par-
ticularly from  Delphi,
contrihiiied  largely  to
iho  spread  of  niihli-r
maiiitns  of  l;iw,  nlVt-et-
iug  not  only  individ-
iitkltf,  bnt  wbolu  idwuH
and  cuiuitriiM. Kvi*)!
without H  p  e  c  i  a  1
pruDiptiUj{,  the  ptrtiplt:
felt  from  time  to  time
the neetl uf  pnrilleil-
tiini and expiation;
•"4  lnBre  certain  expiatory'  rites  hod  from  of  old
*«o  cntineoled  with  his  festivals.
An  tlif  pnd  nf  light  who  pierrea  thrnn(*h  oil
,  ApoUn  i»  the  )j;od  of  divination,  which,
fft,  liaH  in  biH  eaw*  a  purely  etbieal  nii^niti-
«:  forhe,  aa  jiropbet  and  miirHterof  hi>«  fattier
^■,iiulii>H  known  bit*  will  In  men,  inul  helpM  to
''■tlipr  hia  guvrrnnient  in  (lui  world. Ho  iilwnyi«
''^wres  the  truth:  bnt  the  liiniti-'d  niiiid  of  man
^ut  always  tlTSi>p  the  meaning  uf  bin  wiyiiij^H.
'»  U  lilt  patron  of  every  kind  of  prophecy,  bat
jMltrtpwrially  of  that  which  he  inip.irtii  through
Ptttan  iiiRtniioeots,  chicly women,  while  in  a
**u»'rf  MTjftny. Great  a«  was  the  number  of  bi^
J**ir%  iti  Greece ami  Asia,  all wer»t  eclipsed  in
'**e»ml  iiiipi>rtanc«  by  that  of  llelpbi  iq.  v.).

«p»llo  exerciM*^  uii  elevaiiuy  iind  iuHpiriii^  in-
■••feoti  the  mind  aHf;>Kl  of  mil  hi  c.  wbirli,  tliiiiij;h
**l>doiiKinK  to  him  alonn  any  more  than  aftme-
^l  and  prophecy.  wii«  yet  pre-etiiiuently  bit*
l*MbKi>,  III  Houier  he  it*  r<>preHentcd  only  ati  a
'*r»rnit  the  lyre,  while  houk  it*  the  pntvlneo  of
***llaHa;  bnt  iu  conrM*  of  time  he  gruwg  to  lie
''"fnd,  MB  tbey  are  the  t^mldeoseA.  of  «on^  and
|*'Ty,  nod  i»  therefore  M(riiffiryt>f/ii-  (lender  of  the
Ihita^  aa  well  ua  untster  of  ibe  choral  duuce.  which
!•<  »ilb  mnftic  and  fK>n{{.  And  ii«  tlip  friend  of
'"Ulii  iM-antiliea  life  he  i«  intimately  HKM>cialed
*itli  tlw  OiBcea.


l^hlilM  4pi,llu (Agdnn.  Pro


I


fklrnlcrc  A|nllc. (Roni9,  Vftilcau  Mamna.)

Standi!));  iu  thette  mnnffold  relationa  to  uaiiin*
and  man,  Apollo  at  nil  times  bctd  a  prominenl  po-
sition in  tho  rf^lij^on  of  tbe  Greeks;  and  n»  enrly
a«  IKmier  bid  name  iff  conpled  with  tliono  of  Zenff
iiml  Allient^,  aa  if  between  them  the  three  poa-
wuBcd  111*"  Huni  total  of  divine  ]mwer.  His  wor-
Khiji  wuH  dilfiiM'd  efpially  ovrr  all  tbe  n^jfionit  in
whii^b  fireekrt  wen»  Bet t led ;  htit  from  n>ninte  nn-
litpiily  be  hiul  \n'v.ii  llie  rhtef  (;orl  uf  iho  IlMriaiiM,
who  wen;  alxii  tho  firnt  to  raise  him  into  a  typo
of  moral  i'>cellenrr.  The  Iwn  chief  rentrcs  of
tiiH  wrn->liip  went  the  iobiiid  of  DeloN,  his  hirlh-
pliiee,  tvhrie,  lit  liiM  niayutfn-rnl  lentplti  standing
by  the  m'n,  were  lieUl  evi-ry  five  jcarn  the  feslivn
ganien  ealle^l  Drlia,  to  whieli  the  Grenb  t*tate«
Hcnt  Holeniii  emUaiuiiefi;  and  llclphi.  with  itH  ora-
cle and  nnmerons  fei!tivftl».  (See  I'vuiia;  TllR-
OXENIA.)  Foremost  iiniong  the  Beats  of  bin  worship
in  Asia  was  Palara  in  I.yoia,witb  a  fanionH  oritele.

To  the  llnmaiiH,  Apollo  Iwramc  kuown  In  tUo
reifin  of  their  hiKt  king,
Tarqniniim  Snperbnit,
the  fiFTit  Roman  whoeon-
ftuUed  the  Delphic  ora-
cle, and  who  nlHouequir-
ed  the  Sibylline  Uc>uk8
(q.v.).  By  the  iiitlneuce
ofthesewritings  the  wor-
ship of  Apollo  ftoon  be-
came so  naturalized
nmonK  them  that  in  u.i;.
431  tliey  built  a  temple
to  bitn  AA  ^iid  of  healing,
from  which  tbe  exptu-
t<try  proeesuioua  (neo
SfiM'i.icATioNES )  pro-
Hcrihed  in  the  Sibylline
Uookft  nfMHl  to  set  out.  In
the  Lectirttemia  (q.v. I,
llrst  iiiBtitutwl  in  ivc.
31>l>,  Apollo  oeniptef)  tlm


foHMnoHt  plaee. In  n.C ^^^^^ M««up.iea ,Mti.rl«r
ala,  during  the  agony  of Hcukin  tlcrau^ii  Kumi.ur.itj


APOLLODORUS


100


APOLLONIUa


the  Second  Fuuio  War,  tlie  Ludi  Apolliuares  were,
in  obedience  to  an  oracular  response,  established
in  houour  of  bim.  He  was  made  one  of  tbe  chief
gods  of  BoTue  by  Augustus,  who  believed  himself
to  be  under  his  peculiar  protection,  and  ascribed
tbe  victory  of  Actium  to  his  aid ;  hence  he  en-
larged tbe  old  temple  of  Apollo  on  that  promon-
tory, and  decorated  it  with  a  portion  of  the  spoils.
He  also  renewed  the  games  held  near  it,  previous-
ly every  two  years,  afterwards  every  four,  with
gymnastic  and  artistic  contests  and  regattas  on
tbe  sea.  At  Rome  be  reared  a  splendid  new  t«m-
ple  to  him  near  his  own  house  on  the  Palatine,
and  transferred  tbe  Ludi  Saecularea  (q.  v.)  to  him
and  Diauo.

Tbe  manifold  symbols  of  Apollo  correspond  with
the  multitude  of  his  attributes.  The  commonest
is  either  tbe  lyre  or  the  bow,  according  as  be  was
conceived  as  tbe  god  of  song  or  as  the  far-bitting
archer.  Tbe  Delphian  diviner,  Pythian  Apollo,  is
indicated  by  the  tripod,  which  was  also  the  fa-
vourite offering  at  his  altars.  Among  plants,  the
bay,  used  for  purposes  of  expiation,  was  early  sa-
cred to  him.  (See  Daphne.)  It  was  planted  n>uud
his  temples,  and  plaited  into  garlands  of  victory
at  the  Pythian  Games.  The  palm-tree  was  also
sacred  to  bim,  for  it  was  under  a  palm-tree  that
be  was  born  in  Delos.  Among  animals,  tbe  wolf,
the  dolphin,  the  snow-white  and  musical  swan,
tbe  hawk,  raven,  crow,  and  snake  were  under  his
special  protection ;  the  last  four  in  connection
with  bis  prophetic  fuuetious.

lu  ancient  art  he  was  represented  as  a  long-
haired but  beardless  youth,  of  tall  yet  muscnlar
build,  and  handsome  features.  Images  of  bim
were  as  abundant  as  his  worship  was  extensive:
there  was  scarcely  an  artist  of  antiquity  who  did
not  try  bis  band  upon  some  incident  iu  tbe  story
of  Apollo.  Tbe  ideal  type  of  this  god  seems  to
have  been  fised  chiefly  by  Praxiteles  aud  Sco-
pas.  Tbe  most  famous  statue  preserved  of  bim  is
the  Aiwllo  Belvedere  in  the  Vatican,  which  repre-
sents him  either  ns  fighting  with  the  Pythian
dragon,  or  with  his  legis  frightening  back  tbe
foes  who  threaten  to  storm  his  sanctuary.  Other
great  works,  as  the  Apollo  Mnsagetes  iu  the  Vati-
can, probably  from  tbe  hand  of  Scopaa,  show  him
as  a  Citbaroedus  iu  the  long  Ionian  robe,  or
nude.  The  Apollo  8anroctonus  (lizard-killer),
copied  from  a  bronze  statue  by  Frasi  teles,  is  es-
pecially celebrated  for  its  Ijeauty.  It  represents
a  delicate  youthful  figure  leaning  against  a  tree,
dnrt  in  hand,  ready  to  stab  a  lizard  that  is  crawl-
ing up  the  tree.  It  is  preserved  in  bronze  at  tbe
Villa  Albant  iu  Rome,  and  in  marble  at  Paris.

ApoUodorua  ('An-oXXdSwpof).  (I)  A  Greek  poet
of  tbe  New  Comedy,  born  at  Carystus,  between
B.C.  300  and  260.  He  wrote  forty-seven  plays,  and
won  five  victories.  From  him  Terence  borrowed  tbe
plots  of  his  Pfiormio  and  ilpc^ra.  (2)  A  Greek  gram-
marian and  historian  of  Athens,  about  B.c.  140,  a
pnpil  of  AriBtarcbus  and  the  Stoic  Panaetins.  He
was  a  most  prolific  writer  on  grammar,  mytholo-
gy) St^ographyi  aud  liist^ry.  Some  of  bis  works
were  writteu  in  iambic  senarii — e,  g.  a  geography,
and  the  Chronica,  a  condensed  euumeration  of
the  most  importaut  data  in  history  and  literature
from  the  fall  of  Troy,  which  he  places  in  B.C.  1183,
down  to  his  own  time — undoubtedly  the  most
important  of  ancient  works  on  the  subject.  Be-
rides  fragments,  we  have  under  his  name  a  book


entitled  BibUotheca,  a  great  atorefaouse  of  mytho-
logical material  &om  the  oldest  theogoniea  down
to  Theseus,  and,  with  all  its  faults  of  arrangement
aud  treatment,  a  valuable  aid  to  our  knowledge
of  Greek  mythology.  Yet  there  are  grounds  fur
doubting  whether  it  is  from  his  band  at  all,  or
whether  it  is  even  an  extract  from  his  great  work.
Oh  the  Gods,  in  twenty-four  books.  A  good  edi-
tion is  Hercher's  (Berlin,  1B74).  (3)  A  Greek
painter  of  Athens,  about  b.c.  420,  the  first  who
graduated  light  and  shade  in  bis  pictures,  whence
he  received  tbe  name  of  SciaorIprus  (sbadow-
paiuter).  This  invention  entitled  him  to  be  re-
garded as  the  founder  of  a  new  style,  which
aimed  at  producing  illusion  by  pictorial  means,
aud  which  was  can-ied  on  further  by  his  yonuger
contemporary  Zenxis  (Pliny,  H.  N.  xxxv.  60).  (4k
A  Greek  architect  of  Damascus,  who  lived  for  a
time  at  Rome,  where,  among  other  things,  he  built
Trajan's  Forum  and  Trajan's  Column.  He  was
first  banished  and  then  put  to  death  under  Ha-
driau,  a.d.  129,  having  incurred  that  emperor's  au-
ger by  the  freiedom  of  bis  criticisms.  Wo  have  a
work  by  him  on  euginea  of  war,  addressed  to  Ha-
drian.

Apollonia  ('ATroXXui'ia).  (1)  An  important  towo
in  Illyria,  not  far  from  the  mouth  of  the  Aolis,  and
sixty  statlia  from  tbe  sea.  It  was  founded  by  the
Corinthians  and  Corcyraeans,  and  was  equally
celebrated  as  a  place  of  commerce  and  of  leanilnf;.
Many  distinguished  Romans,  among  others  the
young  Octavius,  afterwards  the  emperor  Augus-
tus, pursued  their  studies  here.  Persons  travel-
ling from  Italy  to  Greece  and  the  East  nsually
landed  either  at  Apollonia  or  Dyrrhacium.  (2)  A
town  in  Macedonia,  on  tbe  Via  Egnatia,  between
Tbessalonica  aud  Amphipolis,  and  sontli  of  the  lake
of  Bolb£.  (3)  A  town  iu  Thrace,  on  the  Black  Sea,  a
colony  of  Miletus,  which  had  a  celebrated  temple
of  Apollo,  from  which  Lacnllns  carried  away  n  co-
lossus of  this  god,  aud  erected  it  on  the  Capitol  at
Rome.  (4)  A  castle  or  fortified  town  of  tbe  Locri
Ozolac,  near  Naupactus.  (5)  A  town  on  the  north-
ern coast  of  Sicily.  (6)  A  town  in  Bitbynia,  on  tlie
lake  Apolloniatis,  through  which  the  river  Rhyii-
dacus  flows.  (7)  A  town  iu  Cyrenaica,  and  thf
harbour  of  Cyieu^,  one  of  the  five  towns  of  the
FentapoliH,  in  Libya ;  It  was  the  birthplace  of  Era-
tosthenes (q.  v.).

ApoUonia  ('An-oXXa)»>(a).  A  propitiatory  festival
solemnized  at  Sicyon  iu  houour  of  Apollo  and  Ar-
temis. See  Pausau.  ii.  7,  $  7.

Apoll5iiia  (*A7roXXft»'ir).  A  city  in  Lydia,  be-
tween PergamuH  aud  Sardis,  named  after  Apolloitis,
the  mother  of  King  Eumenes  (q,  v.).

Apolloiiius('Ar.oXXa>i'(oc).  (I)Apollonil's  Rbo-
D1U8.  A  Greek  scholar  aud  epic  poet  of  tbe  Alex-
andrian Age,  born  at  Alexandria  about  B.c.  260.  A
pupil  of  Callimachus,  be  wrote  a  long  epic,  Argomau-
tiea,  in  four  books,  iu  w  hicb,  departing  from  his  uia»-
ter's  taste  for  the  learned  and  artificial,  he  aimed  at
all  the  simplicity  of  Homer.  The  party  of  Callima-
clius  rejected  the  poem,  and  Apollonins  retired  in
disgust  to^  Rhodes,  where  his  labours  as  a  rhet-
orician and  bis  newly  revised  poem  wou  bim  hearty
recognition  and  even  admission  to  citizeuship,
whence  bis  suniame.  Afterwards,  returniug  to
Alexandria,  he  recited  his  poem  once  more,  and
this  time  with  universal  applause,  so  that  Ptolemy
Epiphan«s,  in  B.c.  196,  appointed  him  to  ancceed


APOLU)^^L's


lUI


Aroi»nuR.v


4o«1lieuL«  OA  libnriiui. He  probably  itietl  dnr-

ttt$  tbe  t«nnr«of  thi«  oflloi!. HUflpic^Kteni,  wliu'h

'  «iirvive4l,  bus  a  wrttUn  Niin{>liiMty,tb<iii^li  full-

|ii>^ fkr  fdiort  or  the nntnniliii'wt mid b«<niity of

|Tlutuvr.  U»  iiniforai  iiitMliDLTtty  oftvii  luukeH  it  |iu»-

'  itively  UKltonti,  Ihuiigh  it  is  cuiiMtnicttnl  witli  ^n-ut

I  catv,  upMually  \a  iU  vontitienlioii. By  tbo  Uo-

'  mans  it  watt  niucb  iirtzcd,  utid  mom  than  oni'«  iiii-

il«t«d,a»  by  Varw  AtarttiitM  ninl  Vnlpriun  I'Ibi'imik.

A Valaslilfi  oolU^ction  or  scholin  ii|mn  t(  (onlitirN

tl>e  «B|«ein  in  whirl)  it  wiu*  b(*l<l  by  thn  li-itriu'*!  ol'

<*W, Agood  eilittoD  it>  that  by  Sftiton,  InrtH.

f  ai  Api^uutNtt')^  <}f  TltAlXR**. A  Orerk  wnliitnr

of  CitrH-hvol  of  RlitMl<*!<,  and  joint  niithor  with  hin

xiiilryinnu  TnitriiMMm  nf  tlit-  i->rlrhnitiHl  gniiip  of

lie liWictHiu  Iq.  V.I. Aitiotig  o(ht!r  arltnlii  of  tliv

''naiue'.  iko  worthioHt  of  iiieuliou  in  Aimiuj>M('k  <it

AxiiKXi«,  of  the  firat  century  Ii.C. Fniin  hix  baiiil

^^w  tlie  lIt■^u[:h•)^,  now  Duly  a  tomo,  proHcrvod  iu  tbo

^^Bv^lvnlciv  nt  Koltir.

^K  (3)  Ai^ix<>Mt-t!>  or  Vemoa,  ill  Panipliytia.  A
^^■reck  QiutbtMiuiticiau  calletl  "tbe  Ovometvr,"  who
^Htvpd  at  Pet^aiutiB  aud  Aloxaudria  in  the  tirnt  c«u-
^Bkiry  II.C..  and  wrote  a  work  on  Conic  iSecliunn  in
^^igLt  bookfl,  of  which  wo  have  only  th«  lir»t  four
ill  tbn  orif^iiinl  ^Ibo  liflh,  itiiclb.  am)  iwvoiith  in
|Aii  Arabic  tranHtatiiin,  and  tbe  eighth  in  cxtrnuts.
'  Srboiiianti,  ApoUoninii  ton  Perga  I IK7H).
^4j  AwiLLOSius  Of  TrXXA,  in  Cu|i|»adocin,  tbe
rvlcbratf«l  of  tin*  Noo  •  Pythaynnmus,  Iiv»Ml
[  tilQ  Biidrllo  of  tbd  linst  century  a.d.  By  a
etic  lifo  ou  the  Mii{i|)(Hifd  |iriu(-i|»lL-<f  of
a,aad  by  pretended  nuracbw.  Iieobtainetl
irfas  bold  ajmu  the  multitude  tbat  be  wait  wnr-
^{(•ped  a«  a  god,  and  i»ec  up  as*  a  rival  to  {Jliri«t.
riiRiccnnnt  of  bis  life  by  Ihe  eldt^r  t'bilo«tra(ii*^
t<l-  T.)  ia  more  romauco  than  hititoi-y.  utui  oflcrs  lit-
"^Je  to  buil«l  upon. Having  rcei<ivfd  bia  philottoph-


Aficat^  till  his  twentieth  year,  h«  divided  hi<i
_  ^tninouy  atuuug  the  [K>or,  and  roamed  all  over
"•«  witrld:  he  waa  even  aald  to  )iavo  reartif tl  India
*'icl  Hip  winrcea  of  the  Nilf.  Twice  be  lived  ii(
^tuh:  tiret  miller  NVm,  niilil  tlht  expniHioit  \tt  rhe
^uilintitpben;  and  again  in  Doniitiait'tt  reign,  when
'^*^  hail  to  answer  a  charge  of  ronK]iiriiig  against
'■•'•s  oniprror.  Sinogulcd  out  of  Kijnie  during  bi4
^'^■aljif  cotilinned  bin  life  a^^a  wandering  preacher
^*  luitmU  and  wuikn-  ut  uiarvcU  fur  )t»inu  yeant
^>tit>i>r,  nnd  ta  uiid  to  have  did  at  a  great  ago,
**^-  'iiAiit«r  of  a  school  at  Kpbeaua,  Of  bia  alleged
Tiriagit.  cighty-llve  letters  have  alono  anrrived.
p*?  :li«  w.trk  by  Fetler»clnH»)rlin,  IH71») ;  and  ,^/»<^/-
"•<"<  Ttfanitntit  by  GotlM'hiiig  (leSWj.
i5i  Apmllosios  Dvrtcous  ("tbe  Surly").  A
^T^-ekwholarof  Alexandria,  wbenj  be  ha<l  received


(7)  ApoiJ^xirs  OF  Tyrk,  tbo  haro  of  a  Gre«ik
romantH*  now  lont,  ctmiinuwd  in  Aaia  Minor,  in  Mm
tJiirtl  ec*tilitry  a. v.,  on  tbe  i»o<iel  uf  the  Kpliesiikn
Jiittorif  Iff  AVmyrAoR.  We  have  u  free  Liiliii  Vfir-
tiion  made  by  u  Christian,  nbont  the  sixth  century,
probably  in  Italy,  which  wad  tnucb  road  in  the
Mid<llo  AgcN,  and  tranitli»ted  into  Aagto-8axon,
Engliah,  French.  Italian,  Mlddle-Oreek,  and  <»er-
man,  in  prtMu>  and  venu>.  Iih  inat4trial»  are  nsed
in  the  pticitdo- KbnkeMpearian  drama  of  Ptrietts,
frinrt  of  'ttfrf.  S<>e  tjinirock,  ^JfieUeu  des  Ukakesfttut^
iBimn,  IHTSi;  and  IlHgeii, /./«/■  HamaHvonKoni'jAf-*t'
loniita  in  g^n^n  c^rffiititrnrii  Ittarbnit'int/en  (Il^H).

Apolosetitcum.  (Ij  A  tntatiHo  of  TertnltiiiO
composed  A.i>.  liW,  addretwMtd  to  the  pftwiUa  iu%-
Itrii,  and  coiituining  a  defence  of  Miu  Christiiina
iigiiiiiMt  the  i-bargn  of  diHloyaUy  lo  the  Stalo  and
to  the  eniperor.  The  work  ia  perha|ia  ibo  luont
vigonjna  and  nriglna]  of  any  that  its  anthor  wrote.
Good editiona are  tboac  of OebU'r( Halle,  184l>|;  Kay-
»or  (Pailcrltorn,  l;f(j(i);  and  of  Migne  (Faria,  1h7<I).
(3|  A  poetn  in  1054  lincfi,  by  Commodiatius  (t\.  v.),
composed  A.I>.341),  and  entitled  Gtrntm  Ayoki^rliram
luiitrms  I-itueof  el  Gcnta.  It  ia  written  in  bexain-
etcra  tbat  for  the  most  part  Mt  all  prosudy  at  de*
liatice, and, like  English  he.\aiiieterH. follow  tbe  ao-
centirjLt  ion  of  the  popular  prniiniiciation  of  the  ibiy.

Apologia  imio>Luyiii).  The  title  of  Plato's  de-
fence of  8mTaTrH,  put  into  the  month  of  the  latter,
and  doabtletw  giving  the  Holmtaoro  of  tbe  aperch
rnnile  by  the  philoftopher  before  hia  Jndgea. See

Pij^To;  8orRA-n:s.

Apomnemoneumata  (nvofiprjfiovtvfiOTa).  "  Bem-
iDiftcenoes.'*  The  (jrvrk  title  of  XiMiophon'a  in^
moini  of  Socratea,  bntler  kuowtk  by  their  Latin
title  Afemvritbitia  (q.  v.).

,  Apfini or J^pfinus Fona. Warm medicinnl


«dDcatiou,a.iid  lived  iu  tbe  temple  of  A-tcltipins  ^pihtgit,  near  PafljTirtVn,  hence  ealle^I  Aiinae  I'nta-


viija»',aiid  nint^h  ritipttiitod  by  the  Hick>

Apopo^pais  tnrroRr/i^irl. See  DivoUTIL'M.

*A|>ophSsls  {air6<f>a<Fifi.  Lit«rally,  "a  declaro-
Wtn."  (1)  Tlie  proclaiiiafion  at  Atliuna  of  the  <\v>-
cision  which  tbo  majority  of  the  jiidjjP*  canit.'  to  at
thr  iMitl  of  a  trt:i1,  and  waa  appan^itly  iiia>ile  liy  a
herald  ntidiT  iIh!  dinnrtioiii  of  tho  prcNitlii)^  mag*
iHlrate.  Thi'  deciaioiiH  of  arhitratur»  ttfimrtfrai]
were  called  by  the  same  naino.  {'2)  SncU  procla-
mations being  generally  iumIo  on  court  dayH,  ann-
<^a<ns  caiue  to  mean  the  day  on  which  ihu  trial
took  place,  ('i)  The  word  wna  alfto  employed  to
indicate  the  account  of  a  {K-nMin's  pioi>erty,  which
was  obliged  lo  be  given  when  an  nniiiiona  (f\.  v.)
waa  deiiiaiided.

Apopbfira  (aitvr^pa\. Thia  term,  which  piop-


*>«<:^ucaliun.and  where  he  ended  hisdaya  a  nrrm- erly  un'»ii«  "  pr<»diii*  or  pn>tit  "  of  any  kind,  wna

iiNciI at  AtbeuH lo Hignify  the prolSl. which oc-


|«*i  fit  tbe  Museum,  after  having  laboured  iin  a
l^^arlwat  Itome  undi*r  AntoninnM  Pins,  about  A.n.
I  »-IU  He  tN  the  father  of  HcientiOe  (Jnimmar.  hav-
[''^rWii  iht<  lintt  to  reduce  it  lo  syoteuntlic  form.


u


**niuut  work»  are  Ihe  trentiactt  on  Proimnim,


'^li^rtM.OMijunctionM.nnd  the  Kyntax  of  the  jtarta

**f  •pwxb,  in  four  Ixioks. He  was  followed  eape-

^|^%  by  tlie Latin grammartaiia,  above  all by  .  ...<.,» ..»«  |.»iu »..  >..... c>...i^  .... ^.i.. .<«.  ... •..».

■*"wi«i. See  SkreccTika,  Z>i> /.rArcifrir  .t/ro//(mJu« Hlaves  who  Jterved in (be tieet (Xeri. lirp.  Alh.  \.


criicd  to  nmslent  from  their  aIhvi-m.  It  thufi  iiig-
iiilied  the  sitm  which  slaves  p»id  to  their  inantem
when  tliey  lalKinred  on  Iheir  own  neconnt ;  and
tbe  «nm  which  uintiters  received  when  they  let
out  their  ftlnves  lui  bin*,  cither  for  the  mipfH  or
fur  any  other  kiud  of  labour ;  iind  alno  the  iiuincy
which  wua  paid by  tbe  sdile  for  tho  uho  of  the


'^"•/m  (l^(J9i;  and  the  article  PKIsfUMS.

'*"!  .\iH»ujiN"irB  THE  .Si>fmflT,  of  Alexandria.
"■  piVQiHe  date  A.D.  in  niiknuwn.  Ho  wiii«  the
•Mhnr  of  an  extant  lexicon  of  Homeric  glojises,
"***  00  Apion'a  lost  wriltugs. See  GfA>&SA.


11).  The  tenn  n/i^jthttrn  wn*  nliio  ai>plied  to  the
money  which  wns  paid  by  the  allied  stiile^  to
Hpartu,  for  the  pnrptwe  of  carrying  on  the  war
agaiuKl  Ihe  Persdans.  When  Athens  ncr^nired  the
aitpromacy,  tln'«e moneys  wen:  culled  ipi'ipoi.


APOPHORETA


102


APOTHEOSIS


Apophoreta.  (1)  {airo<t>6prjTa).  Presents  wbicb
were  giveo  to  friends  ut  tbe  etid  of  an  entertuiu-
ment,  to  carry  borne  with  tbem  (Petrou.  56).
Altbough  the  name  is  Greek,  tbe  onstom  U  Ro-
man, for  AthenaeuB  expressly  tells  us  that  wbeu
Cleopatra  presented  to  Autony  and  his  staff  tbe
gold  aud  silver  dinner  service  which  they  had
been  using  at  a  banquet  in  Cilicia,  she  was
imitating  a  Komau  usage.  Book  xiv.  of  Martial
consists  of  an  iutro<luctory  epigram  and  322  dis-
ticbs,  each  describing  and  designed  to  accompany
one  of  these  presents,  wbich  range  ftom  uuts  to
works  of  art  and  slaves.  The  first  epigram  speaks
of  the  Saturnalia  as  the  special  time  for  their
distribution,  Tbey  were  also  given  at  weddings
(Juv.  vi.  203,  scbol.).  (2)  (ano(fiopi}T7f).  A  ntensil
mentioned  by  Isidore  as  a  kind  of  plate.

Apophr&des  Hemfirai  {mofftpaHts  Tifitpai).  Un-
lucky or  unfortunate  days  {dies  tu/cuti),  on  wbich
no  public  business,  nor  auy  important  affairs  of
any  kind,  were  transacted  at  Athens.  Sach  were
the  last  three  days  but  one  of  every  month,  and
tbe  twenty-fifth  day  of  tbe  month  ThargeUon,  on
wbich  tbe  Plyuteria  were  celebrated.

Apopbthegmftta  (airo<f>0iyfMTa).  (1)  A  collec-
tion of  pitby  sayings  gathered  together  by  Cato
the  Elder.  (2)  A  similar  collection  made  by  lu-
lius  Caesar,  and  spoken  of  by  Suetonius  as  Dicta
CoUeclanea.  See  Suet.  lul.  56 ;  and  tbe  article
Proverbiuh.

Apcnrhaxls  (airoppa^is).  The  game  of  "  bounce-
ball." See  Puj..

AporrbealkM  Dlk6  { anopprja-tas  iUtt).  Tbe
term  airoppfjats,  "prohibition,"  bas  a  technical
moaning  in  Attic  law  iu  connection  with  the  sale
of  lauded  property.  Public  notice  was  required
to  l>e  given  of  every  such  sale,  for  the  protection
of  mortgagees  and  other  creditors ;  and  any  one
having  a  claim  upon  tbe  estate  might  interdict
tbe  sale  by  an  mroppTfirif.  Tbe  vendor,  on  tbe
otber  hand,  had  his  remedy  against  fraudulent  or
malicious  obstruction  in  an  action  for  damages,
called  diropp^a-fur  difcij.

Aporrheta  (ra  airoppTjra).  Literally, "  things  for-
bidden." The  word  has  two  peculiar,  but  widely
diSerent,  acceptations  in  tbe  Attic  usage.  In  oue
of  these  it  implies  contraband  goods — i.  e.  those  of
which  tbe  export  (not  the  import)  was  prohibited.
Tbe  chief  of  these  were  corn  (of  wbicb  there  was
a  steady  importation)  and  articles  used  in  tbe
building  and  equipment  of  tbe  fleet.  An  enu-
meration of  these  at  different  periods  of  Athenian
history  is  given  by  Biickh  (/*.  E.  pp.  53,  54).

Iu  tbe  otber  sense,  it  denotes  various  contume-
lious epithets,  from  the  application  of  which  botb
the  living  and  tbe  dead  were  protected  by  Bi>ecial
laws  (Meier,  Att.  Proctas,  p.  4H2).

Aposphragiama  {airwrf^payivpa).  Tbe  device
on  a  siguct-riug. See  AnulI's.

ApostJUeia  (dirtxrroXcir).  Ten  commissioners,
cbosuu  out  of  the  body  of  Atbenian  citizens  with-
out distinction  of  tribes,  in  order  to  secure  the
efficiency  aud  promptitude  of  a  naval  expedition
(omJoToXof)  which  had  been  voted,  Tbey  were
thus  an  extraordinary  authority,  appointed  by
decree  of  the  people  (Bockb,  Urhmden  iiber  das
Srewesen,  p,  466;  Hudtwalcker,  l>e  Diaetet.  p.  71 ;
Meter  aud  Scbomann,  Att.  J'rotat,  p.  lUi,  with
Lipsiaa's  note  in  tbe  new  ed.)>


ApothSoa  (omB^KT)).  A  storebonse  or  maga-
zine (Tbuc.  vi,  97)  for  books  (Luc.  Indoct.  5) ;  a  barial-
place  ( id.  Contempl.  22 ) ;  but  especially  a  place
iu  tbe  upper  part  of  the  house  in  which  tbe  Bo-
mans  kept  their  wine  in  amphorae.  It  was  nsual-
ly  above  tha  fumarium,  since  it  was  thought  tbnt
the  passage  of  the  smoke  tbrough  the  room  tend-
ed greatly  to  improve  the  flavour  of  tbe  wine.  &<«
Cella;  Vinum,

Apotheoaia (airo^^oMrtc,  comatcratio). The  en-
rolment of  a  human  being  among  the  gods,  of
wbich  tbe  Greeks  have  an  instance  as  early  as
Homer,  but  only  iu  the  single  case  of  Leucotbra,
Tbe  oldest  notion  was  tbat  of  a  bodily  removal:
then  arose  the  idea  of  tbe  mortal  element  being
purged  away  by  tire,  as  iu  tbe  case  of  Heracles.
There  was  a  kind  of  deification  wbich  consisted  in
tbe  decreeing  of  heroic  honours  to  distiugnisbed
men  after  death,  which  was  done  from  tbe  time
of  tbe  Peloponoesian  War  onwards,  even in  tbe
case  of  living  men. (See  Herds.) Tbe  snccessois
of  Alexander  the  Great — both  the  Seleucidae,  aud
still  more  tbe  Ptolemies— caused  themselves  to  be
wor8hipi>ed  asgods. Of  the  Romans,  whose  legend
told  of  the  translation  of  Aeneas  aud  Romulus  into
heaven,  lulius  Caesar  was  tbe  first  who  claimed  di-
vine honours,  if  not  by  building  temples  to  himself,
yet  by  setting  bis  statue  among  the  gods  in  every
sanctuary  at  Rome  and  in  the  Empire,  and  by  hav-
ing a  special  flamen  assigned  to  htm. The  lietief
in  his  divinity  was  confirmed  by  the  comet  that
shone  several  months  after  hisdeatb,as  long  as  bit
funeral  games  lasted;  and  under  tbe  Second  Trium-
virate be  was  formally  installed  among  tbe  deities
of  Rome,  as  Divus  lulius,  by  a  decree  of  the  Senate
and  people. His  adopted  son  and  successor  Oeta-
vianus  persistently  declined  any  offer  of  public
worship,  but  be  accepted  the  title  of  Augustus  (the


Apiitliooftlij  of  Antouluuti  Pius  knd  Ftuatliw. (Proa
tbo  PoUcsul  of  the  Column  of  Antontnua  Pliu. )

consecrated),  and  allowed  bis  person  to  be  adored
iu  tbe  provinces.  On  bis  death  the  Senate  decreed
diviue  honours  to  him  under  tbo  title  of  Divus
Augustus,  tbe  erection  of  a  temple,  the  foundiug
of  special  games,  and  tbe  establishment  of  a  pe-
culiar priesthood.  After  this,  admission  to  the
unmber  of  tbe  Divi,  as  the  deified  emperors  were
called,  became  a  prerogative  of  the  imperial  dig-
nity. It  was,  however,  left  dependent  on  a  resolu-
tion  of  the  Senate,  moved  iu  honour  of  tbe  d«^
ceased  emperor  by  bis  successor.  Heuoe  it  was  not
every  emperor  who  obtained  it,  nor  did  consecra-
tion itself  always  lead  to  a  permanent  woraLip.
Empresses  were  oft«[i  consecrated,  the  first  beiug
Augustus's  wife  Livia  as  Diva  Augusta,  and  evou
other  members  of  tbo  imperial  house.


APOTIMEMA


lOS


AP3YCH0N DIK£


The  ceremony  of  Apotheosis,  nsed  from  the  time
of  AiiguBtns,  was  the  foUowing :  After  the  passing
of  tlie  Senate's  decree  a  waxen  image  of  the  dead,
vhoee  body  lay  hidden  below,  was  exhibited  for
seven  days  oa  an  ivory  bed  of  state  in  the  pal-
ace, covered  with  gold  -  embroidered  coverlets;
tlieo  the  bier  was  borne  by  knights  and  senators
smid  a  brilliant  retiuue,  down  the  Via  Sacra  to
the  ancient  Fomm,  where  the  fnneral  oration  was
dehvered,  and  thence  to  the  Campus  Martius,
where  it  was  deposited  in  the  second  of  the  four
stories  of  a  richly  deoorated  funeral  pile  of  pyram-
idal shape.  When  the  last  houoars  bad  been  per-
fonned,  the  pile  was  set  on  fire ;  and,  as  it  bnrued
op.  AD  eagle  soared  from  the  topmost  story  into  the
sky,  AS  a  symbol  of  the  ascending  soul.  See  Hero-
diao,  ir.3;  and  the  articles  Adoustales  ;  MAjnu.
Apotfmema  (amrifiqua).  See  Dos.
Apotyippaatanioa  {airorv/iiravurfios).  Beating
to  death  with  sticks,  cudgels,  or  clubs  (j&  rvftirdv^
airoKTtiifatj  owtp  tori  ^vXov  &<rirtp  poirakov,  J-ex.
Rhef.  p.  198)  which  is  mentioned  as  a  mode  of  execu-
tion at  Athens  and  elsewhere.  See  Fustuarium.
Appailtores.  The  general  name  for  the  free
atteiidanta  of  the  magistrates  at  Home,  as  distiii-
giiisbed  from  the  term  p^lici.  They  reoeived  wages
{merrts)  from  the  pnblic  treasnry,  and  had  places
of  their  own  in  the  theatre  and  circus  (Tac.  Ann.
xvi.  12),  donbtless  near  the  magistrates  ou  whom
tliey  waited.  They  were  divided  into  five  classes
—the  AccEKSi,  L1CTORB8,  Praeconks,  Scribae,
and  ViATORES,  treated  in  separate  articles.

Appellatlo.  The  Latin  term  for  an  appeal  to
a  magistrate  to  veto  the  decision  of  an  equal  or
iuferior  magistrate.  Thus  a  consul  could  be  ap-
pealed to  against  the  other  cousnl,  and  against  all
other  magistrates  except  the  tribunes;  bnt  a  trih-
niie  agaiust  both  his  colleagues  and  all  other  mag-
istrates whatsoever.  On  the  other  baud,  the  provo-
cnd'o  (rj.  v.)  under  the  Republic  was  an  appeal  from
a  magistr&te's  sentence  to  the  people  as  supreme
jadge.  Dnriug  the  imjierial  period  the  two  proc-
esses run  into  one,  for  the  emperor  held  united  in
hiB  persou  both  the  supreme  judicial  function  and
the  plenary  power  of  all  magistrates,  particularly
the  tribuDician  veto,  so  that  an  appeal  to  him  was
at  oDoe  an  appeUatio  atidskprovocatio.  This  appeal,
iu  onr  sense  of  the  word,  was  only  permitted  in
important  cases;  it  had  to  be  made  within  a  short
time  after  sentence  was  passed,  and  always  ad-
dressed to  the  authority  next  in  order,  so  that  it
only  reached  the  emperor  if  no  intermediate  author-
ity was  competent.  If  the  result  was  that  the  dis-
pnted  verdict  was  ueither  qoaabed  nor  awarded,
bnt  confirmed,  the  appellant  had  to  pay  a  fine.  As
the  power  of  life  and  death  rested  with  the  em-
peror and  the  Senate  alone,  governors  of  provinces
were  bound  to  send  to  Rome  any  citizen  appealing
on  a  capital  charge. See  Ephesis.

AppliziiuCAinnai^ff).  AOreekhlstorianofAlex-
sodria,  who  lived  about  the  middle  of  the  second
Century  A.b.  At  first  he  pursued  the  calling  of  an
advocate  at  Rome ;  in  later  life,  on  the  recommenda-
tion of  his  friend  the  rhetorician  Fronto,heobtained
from  Antooinns  Pius  the  post  of  an  imperial  procu-
rator in  Egypt.  He  wrote  an  extensive  work  on  the
development  of  the  Roman  Empire  from  the  earliest
times  down  to  Trajan,  consisting  of  a  number  of
special  histories  of  tlie  several  periods  and  the
several  lauds  and  peoples  till  the  time  when  they


fell  under  the  Roman  dominion.  Of  the  twenty-
fonr  books  of  which  it  originally  consisted,  only
eleven  are  preserved  complete  besides  the  Pref-
ace: Spain  (book  vi.),  Htinnibat  {v'l'i.),  Carthage
(viii.),  Sj/ria  (x\.),  Mit/mdalu  (xii.),  the  Moman  Gvil
Wars  (xiii.-xvii,),  and  Jflyria  (xxiii.),  the  rest  being
lost  altogether  or  only  snrviviug  in  fragments.
Appianas's  style  is  plain  and  bald,  oven  to  dryness,
and  his  historical  point  of  view  is  purely  Roman.
The  book  is  a  mere  compilation,  and  isdisfigured  by
many  oversights  and  blunders,  especially  in  chro-
nology; nevertheless  the  use  made  by  the  writer
of  lost  authorities  lends  it  considerable  worth,  and
for  the  history  of  the  Civil  Wars  it  is  positively
invaluable.  The  best  text  is  that  iu  Bekker's  edi-
tion, 2  vols  (Leipzig,  1853).

Appia«.  A  nymph  of  the  Appian  Well  in  the
Forum  uf  lulias  Caesar,  near  the  temple  of  Venus
Genetrlx,  aud  surrounded  by  statues  of  nymphs
called  Appiades — a  name  also  given  to  prostitutes
living  iu  that  vicinity  (Ovid,  A.  A.  .ii.  452).

Appla  Via. See  Viae.

Applloatloiiis  Zua. See  Exsiuum.

Apriea  CAirpajs).  An  Egyptian  king,  the  Pha*
raoh-Hophra  of  the  Old  Testament,  who  succeeded
his  father  Psamniis  and  reigned  B.C.  595-570,  being
then  dethroned  and  put  to  death  by  Amasis  (q.  v.)
(Herod,  ii.  161).

Aproakletoa  Dik6  {airpoo-KKTfTot  S1K17).  If  there
were  iusufflcieut  or  fraudulent  service  of  the  snni'
mens  (irp<So-KXi}o-ir)  in  the  case  of  a  suit,  the  suit
was  called  airp6(ricXi]Tos,  and  dismissed  by  the  mag-
istrate (Dem.  e.  Nicntr.  p.  1251,  $  15).  See  Dik£;
Prosklesis.

AproatadoQ  Omphti  (oirpotrroiriotf  ypaf^ii).  An
action  at  Athens,  falling  under  tho  Jurisdiction  of
the  polemarch,  which  was  brought  against  those
resident  aliens  who  had  neglected  to  provide  them-
selves with  a  patron  (irpoorartjf).  It  is  probable
that  the  aliens'  tax  was  regularly  paid  through  the
n^pooTon^T,  and  that  he  was  responsible  for  it ;  and
in  that  case  the  default  of  payment  would  of  itself
prove  neglect  to  comply  with  the  provisions  of  the
law. See  Meier,  Att.  ProctsM,  p.  315.

Apribies  ('A^t'vijc).  A  Qreek  rhetorician  of  Ga-
dara,  who  taught  at  Atheus  in  the  first  half  of  the
third  century  a.d.,  and  wrote  a  valuable  treatise
on  rhetoric,  aud  also  a  work  on  the  questions
usually  discussed  iu  the  schools  of  the  rhetori-
cians. These  two  treatises  are  printed  in  the
Bketorea  Graeci,  by  Walz,  ix.  p.  534  foil.

Apaia. See  Absib.

Apnu  ('A^c). A  river  in  Illyria,  flowing  into '
the  Ionian  Sea  (Lncau,  v.  461).

Apaychon  Dik4  (o^vxtof  di'xi;).  An  action
against  inanimate  objects  (Sifn>xa)  which  had
caused  the  death  of  a  human  being.  It  thus
somewhat  resembled  the  English  law  of  deodand,
lately  abolished.  It  was  tried  in  the  court  of  the
Prytanenm,  and,  according  to  Schomanu,  partook
more  of  the  nature  of  a  rcHgions  ceremony  than  a
judicial  proceeding.  If  the  iustrumeuts  with
which  a  murder  had  been  committed  were  cap-
tnred,  and  not  the  murderer  himself,  these,  aAer
the  ephetae  bad  pronounced  their  sentence,  were
conveyed  out  of  the  country  by  the  phylobasileis,
or  presidents  of  the  four  old-Ionic  tribes.  In  the
same  way  were  treated  such  things  as  had  acci-
dentally caused  the  death  of  any  one. Animals


APSYBTUS


104


AQUAE DUCTUS


likewise,  by  which  any  one  had  been  killed,  were
here  condemned  to  death,  and  then  conveyed  out
of  the  country  (FoUiix,  viii.  Ill,  liiO;  Dem.  c.
Aritlocr.  p.  645,  $  89 ;  Schumatin,  Antiq.  i.  470,  E,  T. ;
of.  Plat.  Leg.  iz.  873  E).

ApByrtna  {'A-^prot). See  Absyrtus.

AptSra  (^Airripa).  A  city  of  Crete  aboot  eighty
stadia  from  Cydonia.  Its  name  was  said  to  be  de-
rived from  the  result  of  a  contest  in  mnsio  held  at
this  place  between  the  Sirens  and  the  Muses,  when
the  former,  being  defeated,  were  so  affected  that
their  wings  dropped  fram  their  shoulders  (Steph.
Byzant.  a.  t.  'AirHpa).

Apa&nl  A  Lignrian  people,  sabdned  by  the
Romans  and  transferred  to  Samninm  iu  B.c.  160.

Apulelae  Legea. See  Lkx.

Apuleiua,  Lucius.  A  Roman  writer  of  the  Afri-
can Period,  bom  at  Madaura,  in  Nomidia,  about
A.D.  130.  Having  been  educated  at  Carthage,  he
went  to  Athena  to  study  philosophy,  especially
that  of  Plato;  later,  he  travelled  far  and  wide,
everywhere  obtaining  initiation  into  the  mysteries.
For  some  time  be  lived  in  Rome  as  an  advocate.
After  retumiug  to  Africa,  he  married  a  lady  con-
eiderably  older  than  himself,  the  mother  of  a
friend,  Aemilia  Fudentilla,  whereupon  her  kius-
men  charged  him  with  having  won  the  rich  wid-
ow's hand  by  magic,  and  of  having  coutrived  the
death  of  her  son — a  charge  to  which  he  replied
with  much  wit  in  his  oration  De  Magia  (earlier
than  A.D.  161).  He  afterwards  settletl  down  at
Carthage,  and  thence  made  excursions  through
A&ica,  delivering  orations  or  lectures.  Of  the
rest  of  his  life  and  the  year  of  his  death  nothing
is  known.  Beside  the  apology  above-mentioned,
and  a  few  rhetorical  and  philosophic  writings,  an-
other work,  his  chief  one,  also  survives,  which  was
composed  at  a  ripe  age,  with  hints  borrowed  from
a  book  of  LnciaD'e.  This  is  a  satirical  and  fantas-
tic moral  romance,  MetamorjihoaeoH  Libri  XI.  {de
Atino  Aureo),  the  adventures  of  one  Lucius,  who  is
transformed  into  an  ass,  and  under  that  disguise
has  the  amplest  opportunities  of  observing,  unde-
tected, the  preposterous  doings  of  mankind.  Then,
enlightened  by  this  experience,  and  with  the  eu-
ohantmeut  taken  off  him  by  admission  into  the
mysteries  of  Osiris,  be  Itecomes  quite  a  new  man.
Of  tho  many  episodes  interwoven  into  the  story,
the  most  interesting  is  the  beautiful  allegorical
fairy  tale  of  Ct^id  and  Psyche,  so  much  used  by
lat<*r  poets  and  artists.  Throngbout  the  book
Apnleius  paint«  the  moral  and  religious  conditions
of  his  time  with  much  humour  and  in  life-like  col-
ours, althoDgh  his  language,  while  clever,  is  often
affected,  bombastic,  and  disQgnred  by  obsolete  and
provincial  phrases.  Tlie  editio  jmnc^*  is  that  pub-
lished at  Rome  in  1469;  and  the  most  elaborate
edition  remains  that  of  F.  Oiulendorp  ( Leyden,
1786-Ia23>  The  Cu/»d  and  Fsyche  was  translated
in  1&66  by  Adiington,  whose  versiun  was  reprinted
(Loudon,  1887),  with  an  introduction  by  Andrew
Lang.  Of  the  O'olden  Ast,  as  a  whole,  there  is  an
English  translation  by  Sir  G.  Head  (1851).  and  of
the  whole  of  Apuleins  (It^).  The  buHt  edition  of
the  entire  works  is  that  by  G.  F.  Hildebrand  (Leip-
zig, 184'.2).  O.  Jalin  has  edited  the  Cupid  and  PtifcHt
separately  (Leipzig,  185G).

Apnleina  Batanmiiu. See  Saturninus.

ApoUa.  A  district  which  inclnde<l,  in  its  wid-
est signification,  the  whole  of  the  southeast  of


Italy  from  the  river  Frento  to  the  promoutor>'
lapygium.  In  its  narrower  sense  it  wa«  the  coun-
try east  of  Samninm,  oo  both  sides  of  the  Aafidoa,
the  Dannia  and  Pencetia  of  the  Greeks ;  the  south-
east part  was  called  Calabria  by  the  Romans.  The
Greeks  gave  the  name  of  Dannia  to  the  north  part
of  the  country  from  the  Frento  to  the  Aufidiis,  of
Peuoetia  to  the  country  from  the  Aufidus  to  Taien-
turn  and  Brnndnsium,  and  of  lapygia  or  Measapia
to  the  whole  of  the  remaining  southern  part;
though  they  sometimes  included  under  lapygia  all
Apulia  in  ita  widest  meaning.  The  country  was
very  fertile,  especially  iu  the  neighl>onrhfK>d  of  Ta-
rentum,  and  the  mountains  afforded  excellent  pas-
turage. The  population  was  of  a  mixed  nature :
they  were  for  the  most  part  of  Illyrian  origin,  and
are  said  to  have  settled  in  the  country  under  the
guidance  of  Xapyx,  Daunius,  aud  Peucetius,  thre«
sons  of  ao  Illyrian  king,  Lycaon.  Sul>8equeutly
many  towns  were  founded  by  Greek  coIooistA.
The  ApiiliauB  Joined  the  Samnites  against  the  Ro-
mans, and  became  subject  to  the  latter  on  the  con-
quest of  the  Samuit«8.

Aqua. See  Aquar  Ductus.

Aquae.  The  name  given  by  the  Romans  to
many  mineral  springs  and  bathing  resorts.  (1)
CUTJUAS,  mineral  springs  in  Samninm,  near  the
aucient  town  of  Cutilia,  which  perished  in  early
times,  and  east  of  Reat^.  There  was  a  celebratetl
lake  in  its  neighbourhood,  with  a  floating  island,
which  was  regarded  as  the  umbilicus  or  centre  of
Italy.  Vespasian  died  at  this  place.  (3)  Pata-
vTNAB.  See  AroNi  FoNS.  (3)  Sextxas  (Ail),  a
Roman  colony  iu  Gallia  Narbonensis,  fonnded  by
Sextius  CalviuuB,B.c.  122;  its  mineral  waters  wi-re
loug  celebrated.  Near  this  place  Marius  defeati-d
the  Tentoni,  B.c.  102.  (4)  Statikllab,  a  towu  of
the  Statielli  iu  Lignria,  celebrated  fur  its  warm
baths.  (5)  Mattiacab,  a  town  of  the  Mattiaei  in
Germany,  now  Wiesbaden.  (6)  Badenak,  a  Ger-
mou  town,  now  Ba<len.  (7)  PannonTcak,  a  town
iu  Pannonia,  now  Badeu  in  Austria.

Aquae  Dnotna  (vipayayia,  {ApayaytU»t  vro-
vofias). A  water-conduit  or  aqueduct.

(1)  Grbbk.  As  nearly  all  the  aucient  aque-
ducts now  renialniug  are  of  Roman  construction^
it  has  been  generally  imagined  that  works  of  this
description  were  entirely  unknown  to  the  Grcekfi.
This,  however,  is  an  error,  since  some  are  men-
tioued  by  Pausanias.  The  Greeks,  iu  fact,  at  a
very  early  period,  had  some  powers  of  hydraulic
engineering,  as  is  shown  by  the  drainage  tnnneln
of  the  lake  Copais,  and  the  similar  works  of  Phae-
»x  at  Agrigentnm;  and  we  have  an  instance  of  a
channel  for  water  being  carried  throngh  a  m<mn-
tain  to  snpply  the  city  of  Saroos.  The  height  of
the  mountain  was  150  orgyiae  (900  Greek  fi>et);
the  length  of  the  tunnel  was  seven  stadia  (seven
eighths  of  a  Roman  mile,  or  about  1420  yards) ;  its
section  was  a  square  of  eight  Greek  feet.  The
actual  channel  for  the  water  was  cut  below  tliia,
and  was,  if  the  text  is  right,  thirty  Greek  feet
deep  and  three  wide;  the  water  passed  tfarongk
pipes  from  a  copious  spring,  and  was  thns  brought
to'  the  city  (Herod,  iii.  60).  There  are  still  rt*-
mains  of  this  tnnueh  Htiller  conjectures  that
the  work  was  one  of  those  executed  by  Polycra-
tes.  Indeed,  many  of  the  Greek  water-works  a})-
]>ear  to  date  from  the  age  of  the  Tyrants. See

EMISHARII'M.


AQITAE DUCTU3


IM


AQUAE DUCTITS


Bnt tnui  early  titut>«,  tli«  Greeks,  wlieru  the

neMl»  of  A  city  rullei) fur  tt,  tnniDtnictcd  tni«liT-

gronnd  iMtiduiia  foilowing  tho  iiii<lulatiun»>  iiftlm

.  »aHace  or  carrieil  tliruugli  the  hills  by  tunmOs,

lioid  closely  rvtKMulilin);  the  earlier  Oriental  Hi|ue-

I^UQta,  of  wbicli tliey were pntliably  iinitulioiiit,

ItIi>"»  the  cniiiliiit  >«liioh  }»n)i]»lit:4l  tlii^  arniixili)*

|or ThetMA was attribnted t» Cadmus,  ami ttio

pi&naltzatiou  of  tfau  uiouDtaiu  torreuts  roand  Ar-

Eus  to  I>AUA(iit. Tbe  Greek  aqueducts  were  ii8u-

fclly  rcctjiognlar  cbnnnela  cut  in  tbe  rock  or  vou-

itrncted  of  solid  mo&oury,  but  in  tbe  Troad  wo

lUTc  an  iustniire  of  one  composed  of  eartlienn'are

1»i  pes  (llallli,  Avsgrtib.  Of/der  Uomer.  J\rifiiiHue)

Ax.  AtbcDii  tbe  rocky  part  of  tbe  city  vns  de-
peiitlcnt  on  cJAtems. Two  couduita  entered  tbe
eit^J  oil  tbe  eoMt  from  tliH  nppnr  rniin***  nf  tbe  Ilin-
•TJ.M,  which  loner  dowti  wom  canalii^ed,  :iiid  part  of
|t^ walar  weut tu ftiipplunient tbe  Kjtmakrmmox^
atiiw  which  an  iitider^nmnd conduit ran fi-otn
river,  repeatedly  crowing  uiulnr  ittt  l>rd,  aud
aible  to  use  by  iihaftii,  and  finally  carried  to
tlie  Plracas. Below  the  KnncakruuiiiM,  a  atream
rrx»in  Uymettoa  waa  carrii-d  over  tho  IlissiiH  into

PtUo  city, Later,  two birge oonduita  were eon-
ftt  t-tirte<t  fmtn  I^ycaliettiis  on  the  east  nud  west  of
fcliat  mountain. A  ayHtvu  of  canals  from  the  Ce-
plj&MQH  b*t\'(m1  to  irrigat*)  the  olive- woods  (E.
Oartioa,  VII  Kartem  von  Alhoi). Finally,  lladri-
an,  Ufar  Ibo  cod  of  his  rrif^n,  built  an  aqneiluot  of
,tlie  Buwan  ty|H',  drawing  iln  waltr  fnim  tlin  Co-
kintu. Among the linr»t and l>c»t pn-Hurved
•  f Grei'k  atinMneta  aro  iboAe  uf  Syraruiu^,  nlijch
^IiurjiliilKs (  vi.  100  I u-11k uh wen< laid under
3ubil  to  bring  drlnkiug-water  iuto  tbe  city,  aud
akh  are  still  in  use.
,  - ^  J  RoMA.v. The  Komuna  were  in  a  very  dif-
•^Wmit pobitiou, wilb re«p«ct to tbo itnpply  of

I 'w^tpr,  from motit  of  tbe  Greek  citici. They  at

^■^nst  lud  recourao  to  tbe  Tibet  and  to  wetls  sunk
^^pKa  Uw  city;  but  tbe  uuter  obtained  from  those
^V^ovircra  was  v*^ry  nuwholesome,  and  nnist  siwn
^B  ■***^e  proved  insuffieieut.  CmiHeiiuenlly,  to  ntip-
"  l*Jy  tlio  ilemauds  of  tbo  public  batbh  aiiiP  tbe
r»alieiij  sod  later  of  tbe  growing  popniatioii,  and
****eritltl  of  the  naumafkiae,  ibry  had  rcciiunw  to
I*«ililie  wofka  in  onl<ir  to  bring  pure  water  from
**■  vnnsttlriable  dintaure — from  Hir  hilts,  in  fart,
^liirli  nirroond  tbo  Cumpagna.  The  dato  of  the
fir^t  v|ueilurt  la  awlgiunl  by  l-'ronliuns  to  tbe
y^'ar  A.i;.c.  ■141,  or  ll.c.  312  (iJr  .■l./«y«'J,  tV6.  /&.«.
■*)  ;  Mil  tbe  number  of  aqncdtictK  was  gradually
■ticreurd,  partly  at  the  public  exiM-ii&c  aud  patt-
*y  I'?  tbff  uiuiii6conc»  of  individnalu,  till,  iu  the
titte  of  PrtKopiua,  ihry  aniounlvd  to  fourteeu;
*">*,  eveu  before  lh«y  vrere  all  erected,  they
^'^ijH  well  excite  tbe  admiration  which  Pliuy
**PW»ea  with  resjject  to  tlin  ClaniUau  mjue-
^'Mt  {U,  X  WCXTi.  (,  123).  The  Roman  :niii».-
**Qcti  an;  among  tbe  moat  niagiiillcvut  strurturittt
*•  "UKliiity.  Some  of  tlictto  wot-w  counlructud
*i)^({Tnnud :  others,  latterly  almost  all,  cuii-
^^*i  tb*  wator,  often  for  long  diataiiccH,  tu
*or»n(i  cbanoelii  of  brlok  or  atone,  over  lofty
^J*Im  strr-t<-hing  straight  throngh  bill  and  v»I-
*?"•  They  started  from  a  well-head  (ni/ml  o'/uii'
*^i  >inl  untlMl  iu  a  roservnir  (ftulftlnai),  imt  of
*'"*li  tbe  water  ran  tn  Bomn  iuto  tlinM-  cliam-
I*'**.ljiag  one  above  anothur,  tbo  lownxt  cbiim-
*f  lejuliii^  it  through  Ii^udcu  or  clay  pipfx  into
^  pobbc  foantaiiiB  and  baaius,  Ihi; niiildio  one


t


7


M


If  Mf-


into  the  great  bathing  establisbments.  the  upper-
most iuto  private  hou»ea.  Privnlc  oitiisMUs  paid  a
tax  for  the  water  they  obtained  from  tbe*«  pubtio
.  «  s«iurci«.  Under  Hie
t^  Hvpiibltc  tbo  cou-
ntrtictiou  and  rt^iuir
of  at)  m-<l  tic  ts  d  e  %'  ol  v-
ed  upon  the  ceuitore,
and  their  mauago-
mcnt  upon  tbt>  nedi-
leSfbiitfrom  tbe  time
of  Aiigustiifi,  u[toQ  a
special  rumitr  (w/hu-
ruiM,  asAi-tt'ed  by  a
large  statT  of  ni|H}>
masters,  fountain-
nnuttpra,  inspertom
(  a^aafii  ),  and  uth-
em,  talcun  partly
from  the  number  of
tliu  public  tdavi^H.
The  umoiiut  ot"  wa-
ter brought  iuto
Htime  by  ita  unmei^
oiia  aqueducts,  the
tliDt  of  which,  the
Aqua  Appta,  wiu
projeeted  B.C.  313,
may  )>»  estiTuated
from  the  fact  that
tho  four  Ktill  iu  utai
aril  quito  aulScivut
to  supply  all  the
bousea,  fuiinlaitiB,
etc.ofmoiU'rnKume.
Iu  (be  tiuio  of
SMllaaorilieAiiaaMarctft.TepulB.aail  FVoutluut  iad 07»

thei-e  Were  in  Home
uiuo  aipioducts,  of  which  four  were  constructed  Iu
tbe  time  uf  the  Kepublio  aud  tivo  nudur  the  Em-
pire. Tbcse  were  a«  follows*.

(1)  Tho  AqfA  AfFiA,  begun  by  tbe  oenaor  Ap-
pina  CtauiUus  Caectts  (q.  v.]  in  B.C.  312.  (See
MlddlctoD,  JncicHt  Home,  p.  466.)  lu  length  waa
ll.llK)  patn*,  of  which  11,130  wore  carried  under
the  earth,  and  tbe  reirainiiig  sixty  /mtmim  ou
archea,  froai  the  Porta  Capcim  to  ibe  Porta  Trig-
emiuB,  wbeiv  it  ended. S4»  Livy,  ix.  '^.

<'2)  Th»  ANin  Vtrri.'H,  ootuuieuced  by  tbo  ceUMiT
ManiuM  C'liriua  Deiitatus  iu  B.c.  272,  tbe  exptmse
of  its  coustructton  being  defrayed  out  nf  the
Hpollx  taken  from  Pyn'bns.  Its  source  w  iin  iu
the  i-ivrr  Auio,  above  Tibur,  teu  Kouiait  milca
froui  Ibe  city  ;  but,  because  of  ita  windiiigH,  tbe
actual  teugtb  waa  forty-three  mib'j*,  t>f  which
length  only  '£-il  piutut  were  a)>ove  ground.  There
are  remains  of  thu  aqueduct  near  tbe  Furia  Mag-
giore.

(3)  Tbe  AQtiA  Marcia,  built  by  the  prat^tur  Q.
Marcins  Bex  in  B.C.  144,  at  the  cont  of  ltiO,04X»,OlM
Keaterct*.  It  oouiuivnced  ihret^  luik-t*  south  of  the
Via  Valeria,  Ibirty-Kix  niiK<«  from  Konie,  tiud  ita
liMigtb  Vi*M  wimc  til,710 /luMM,  of  which  74(J3  Were
above  gnnind,  0^35  Iwing  oti  arcbea.  Vitruviua
apeaka  of  the  cxui-nunco  of  its  water  as  proverbial
<viii.  3.  i  1). It  ta  still  in  use.

(4)  Tbe  AgfA  TepCla,  built  by  the  ceuMirs  Cii.
■Servilius  Cae]>io  and  I..  CawiiuN  I^Hl^inutt  in  BjC
V17.  It  C'iramenocd  twi>  miles  to  tbe  right  uf  the
tenth  uttle-Htoue  on  the  Via  Latiua.  Ita  water
waa  slightly  warm  (ftyu/a),  bcuoe  tbe  uame  tqmia


XQVXE DL'CTtlS


108


AQUILHTS


ftpplifil  to  it.  I(  vaa  nfteinarda  ooouectad  with
tlio  A(]im  Iiilia.

(5)  Tbc  AiiVA  IrUA.  built  by  M.  Vipsanins
Attrippa  (q,  v.),  ill  B.C.  XI,  during  hl«  aediltwliip.
]|»  length  wa«  15,4*^^6  puatiu,  o(  ubitih  TWHJ  wen-
abuvo  tn^niid,  pnrll.v  uu  iircbca.

(f>)  Tliv  A'H'*  Viutio,  also  liiiilt  by  Agrippa  dur-
ing tiis  nt'(litt<«<bip  to  Hiipply  liix  baltiH.  (S«u  Bal-
NKAK. )  It  bi>f:aii  nrar  (be  tiifibtb  railo-KfiiQe  un
tbv  Via  Collaliuji,  bi-iii^  in  loiigtb  l-l,IOf>  /fan^us,
of  whifrb  l^,H6!i  ntTfi  iiti(1rr^rtiiiii(l,  ll  in  still  in
tisv.

(7)  Tb«  AgCA  Ai-sirrTxA,  or  Agt-A  AroisTA,
built  Ity  An);ti^tna  It  I'XtcndiMl  from  tlui  L>ncU8
AlnieUniiH.  which  lay  tiT^OO  pojous  to  the  tight  of
the  founironlh  milu-»tonc  on  ibo  Via  Claadia,  n
diaUnce  of  2-^,172  yxunu.  Of  thti  Ifiigtb,  only  358
Ifujni  were  ou  urcbce.  Ua  water  was  so  bad  ba
to  be  nsed  only  for  watering  gardenn  and  fin*  tbf>
aitiiiMiBjU>fe

ifi)  The  AQt'A  ClJiUlHA.  brgnti  by  tbp  ctnporor
Caiigtilii  in  a.\>  '^.  U  lirgun  uear  the  thirty-
piglitb  uiile-ntnui'  iiu  the  Via  SublaeeititiH.  and
fitniiiilked  i-Kcvltt>iil  wat^r.  Km  length  waft  4G,40G
pa*m»,  of  which  954j7  veto  on  nrchi'ii.

(9)  Tho  Akio  Novrs,  the  longt-st  of  all  tbc
A<}u«'ductjt,  being  nearly  lift y  nine  miled  in  length.
It  Wttf«  lM.'gitn  by  Caligula  in  A.D.  38,  and  Ktiiohed
by  Cluiidiiis  in  a\i>.  Sfl.  Of  its  lenxtb,  IMOO  fwt  were
abuvL'  gronud,  tiome  uf  its  atrhes  bring  109  feet
high.  (See  Kruntin.  15.)  Kvar  Ibe  vity  tbu  Aqtia
Clandia  and  the  Anio  Nnva  nniled,  funning  two
ohanuels  on  the  aanii*  arclien.

It  hBA  been  rnb-tiliited  that  thcae  mae>  aipie-
dneta  miptdiwl  the  ciiy  tpf  Kooic  with  some  :^,-
30Ar6SU  gallonK  of  water  a  day,  or  about  'SSi  gal-
lons a  head.  At  tbu  pn'ttfut  time,  forty  gallona
per  head  ara  cousideri'U  itulltcieut  AAcr  tho  tiui«
of  FmntinuH  two  other  aqoeilucta  wore  built.

{\M)  The  Aqia  TitAlAXA.  bnill  by  IVaJnn  ationt
A.t).  110,  and  bruiii^bt  fiiun  tliu  Lacua  Sabatiuaa  to
supply  the  Regio  Transtiberina.

(11)  Tb«  Agi'A  AlcxanprINa,  bnlU  by  Alexan-
dor  SeveruB  in  a.d.  336  from  a  *\mi  betwii>n  Oa>
bii  and  Laho  KegillitD,  abtiut  fourteen  iniieH  fruai
Borne,  aud  intended  to  supply  the  balha  of  Seve-
ras. Theru  was  also

(12)  The  AiiCA  Ckabra,  orifiinally  t-arritMl  di-
notly  through  the  Circus  Maximum  from  a  {Miint
near  the  source  of  th«.>  Aqua  Inlia;  but  ild  water
was  »o  bad  that  it  w«h  ubaiiiluutHl  to  the  j»eople
of  tbe  Agcr  TuHculaiiuH,  aud  heucu  became  knvwD
a«  tlie  Aqua  Dauuiuta.

See  FnjntinUB, /*»  .■iy«rt«A<rfi7i«*  Urhia  lium»Htie ;
Fabretti,  IM  Ji^  **  A-pmtdmlH»¥M  Vctent  Hou»»  ;
Stitylitj;,  An-Atohyir  t^r  h<nd^M»r ;  Htrt.  t^rsritchtr
tier  li<iHlwit»t ;  PlatUtT  and  BuuMeU^  finchtnlmmf  flrr
StuUi  lioit;  Canina,  tStotui  <hlt  ArrhihitKr,!  Ru-
tmi*a:  Bum.  H^^xr  uiJ  tir  t.'»i»"/>rt<;i"»  (li^Th;  l.an-
Ofainl.  Tofoijntjia  ih  Iiff«»'t  A-ttax  (ItK»)  ;  Middleton,
AmaUat  iioi'it  i«  /.W5;  id.  ltc»utHt  €>/  Anriett  HoMt
(leOS):  andtheilliislralion  iu  tho  article  Nk-Mavscs.

Aqnae  Ductna. S«io  Skkvih nu*.

Aqnac  el  Igni*  InterdtcUo. Sec  Exsiudm.

Aquae  Hauatua. S.*  Jskhvititk*,

AquaolidtunorAqiilllciam.  AMierilte«forr»in.
lo  tinu*  of  dn-nnbt.  tl..-  liiunaii  iiwtiwns.  olatl  in
the  Blola.  with  bare  twt  mid  loosi^m-.l  hair,  and  the
magistrateB  ^^  ithuut  ibrir  purpb'  ridM*  and  wiib
.  faw^c*.  u»»'d  to  tarry  in  pi»>cei


\


»Iuu  tt  xtone


which  lay  nntside  the  Porta  Capena  near  the  Temple
of  Mara,  thmngb  Ihr  city  to  the  Capitol.  The  naioe
of  the  Klone  vrun  lopis.or  />flrn  wanniiM  iTaul.cx  Fevk
p.  Vi''),  i.  (1,  tlii<  Htonc  fniui  wliirh  water  llowa.

Aquaeman alia.  A  ewer  iinmI  in  waahing  the
bauttet  at  nicaU,  also  calleil  gnttundum  (Vam  ap.
Non.  r>47).

Aquaill  and  AquariOli  (1)  Slaves  who  carried
wat4Tfor)ialhingiiito  the  women's  ajmrtnientA.  {"i)
PuUlie  dibcent  who  attended  to  (be  aqnedncts
Se*"  Aqi'AB  DrCTTS,

Aqulla.  (1)  The  eagle.  Bee  Sir.NA  MiutarIa.
(3)  (timtr).  In  an-hileetnrv,  the  gribli.^  of  a  Iiuuaei
tbe  pe«limont  of  a  temple See  FA.snuiUM

AquXU.  (ll  .\  native  of  Sinope  In  Aiiia  Minor.  He
first  applifd  limiKelf  to  the  study  of  uiatbeoiatica
and  nrebit«cture;  and  tbe  emperor  Iliidrian,  ac-
cording to  Saiut  Kpiphanins.  made  hint  a  mtper-
intiindont  of  public  iMiildingh,  :iikI  gavo  biui  chturgB
of  the  TViHt.nration  and  etilargeuient  (»f  Jernaalem.
nndcr  its  new  mime  uf  Aelia  Capitolina.  This
commiftsion  adbrded  him  an  op{K>rtunity  df  becom-
ing acquainted  with  ChttHtianity,  which  bo  siiIm^
qnentlycmbracod,  and  received  the  rite  of  baptism.
Beconiiug  aAerwards  addicted,  however,  to  judi-
cial astrology,  be  was  excouimnuicatetl,  aud  then
attached  hiroaelf  to  Judaism  Aqiiila  is  renderMl
famous  by  his  Greek  vemou  of  the  Old  Toatament,
which  he  published  A.i>.  i:iH  ft  is  the  firat  that
wati  ma4lo  aftur  ihu  Septmigiut  translation,  and
appears  to  have  bven  exeeute«l  with  greul  nttv.
Aquila's  method  waa  to  traublate  worxl  fur  wunl^
and  to  express,  oa  Car  a»  tbla  could  cou^'euicutly—— ^
be  done,  even  tbe  etymological  meaulog  of  lennik^
AltboDgh  bb  version  was  andertaken  with  tb«^^B
view  of  opputiiug  and  auperseding  that  of  th  ^^
Septnagint,  of  which  last  the  cbnrehes  ininlf  ii  — ^  ^
after  t1>e  example  of  the  apostles,  still  the  Kiithe'^K?*!
fuuud  It  iu  general  so  exact  that  they  often,  ^.^
preference,  drew  their  texts  froui  it.  St.  Jerou^  ^^
who  had  at  ArKt  ('ensured  it,afterwan]s  pruiM.-*!  m.  ^^4
exactness  Tho  Ilellenitilic  Jews  preferred  it  a&.^^B«
fur  tbe  uae  of  their  synagogues  Suuiu  fniginea.  k.  dd
of  it  are  preserred  intbe^crn/i/tjof  Origen.  Aqia.  m  !«
Joined  to  a  M^cond  itlition  of  bis  version  B4ime  Jcs  -wv.
isb  traditions  which  he  had  obtained  from  the  ral^lal,
Akib]^  liis  prtwrjuur.  Tlii»eilitioD  was  still  more^  fn-,
Vouralilj  received  by  tho  HellcuiMlin  Jrws  t  htm  the,
prrviiiuK  uu«  bad  l>een.  The  eniiN-ror  JuKtinixari,
however,  in tenlieted  thereadiugof  it,un  tbegrutitidj
that  it  only  nmdu  the  Jew*  ntorp  stubbui-u  in  err«^r.
See  Clarke,  Suctt^^o^  0/ SarrtJ  Lit.  i.  44.  ('J)  Ko»f  vi  j
XL'S.  A  I^tiu  rbetorieiau  of  the  third  century  A.X>
autlK^r  of  a  work  iM  /'i^»ri>. Text  by  llalm  (I(?6:?

AquUeia. A  town  in  Liallia  Transiwdaua  ne^
the  head  of  the  Afhiatir,  founded  by  tbe  Konu»M
in  B.C.  \!fL It  was  a  strung  fortnt>«.  aud  intend*"
tn  be  a  iMirrier  against  the  encrouchmenls  ef  tl
Nurlhem barbarians. It  was  taken,  however,
A.D.  A:iii  by  Attila  (ij.  v.),  who  dcatroved  it,  the  i
habitant*,  escaping  to  the  laguuus  of  the  .Wrial^
where  MtlM-^qnontly  anwc  the  city  uf  Venice.

Aqmlina  ur  AquUIiofc  ( I )  A  Roniau  r
who  hild  ufflc  iu  B.C-  ISKt,  tiiiifthing  the
against  Aristouien■^  son  ..f  Euiuen*«.  king  -f

ion, tie  ended  tlu)  Sorvilr  War  in  Sicily.  1.
"«  uas  dofcat.-<l and  taken by Mithridates,
put utu  l„  di-»tb  by  iH.uring  molten  cold
his  ihn«4t. &-.^  Appian.  Ittit  AfrfA..«fai.5o


AQUILUA  VU


107


AKABIA


AquilUa  Via.  A  Rtmiuti  road  bc^nntng;  nt
Ca^oia.  and  niiiuiug  Bouib  through  Lucaiiiii  ntid
Brattii  to  KbL'gium. Bee  Vluc.

Aqullooia.  A  town  of  Sauinliini,  destroyed  by
ctie  Komaim  !□  tbo  Saninitv  Ware  lc|.  v.).

Aqniuain.  A  town  of  tbc  Vulwi  in  Latiiini,
■^tm  hir1li|ilace  of  Jnvfual. It  Traa  c-ok-brnlisl  for

Aqnitanl  A  Qalllc  people  of  Iberiao  ur  Bpauieh
ox~igiu.  itibuliiliug  the  territory  of  Aquilaniii

Aqultaula.  ll)  Tbe  roiinlry  of  tbr  Aipiitanl,
^.^tcDilibg  from  the  Unmmtitis  ((tiirunnel  to  the
^^^TriiMfl.  {'i)  A  Roman  |iroviiiCf  foniKMl  in  tbe
r^ipiof  AiigU6tiM,e>xteiidiiiKfnmi  thii  Li|:t<r(LuinO
Ccv  tbe  Pyrenees,  and  Imnnilotl  on  tLi*  north  by  the
^A«>asCVveDli)t8, See  OaiJ-Ia.

An  iJlt»not,  «Vx«»/>n). Au altur. With  refor-

csucoto  tht«o  tfrrtuK,  ^wpif  pro|>ci-ly  siguilles  any

aslaamiiou ;  tax^pf*  (Lut. y*ocu>)  iucuiih  an  altar  fur

%>u.mt-»ff'i;riu||;n;  ura  anduZ/nte  are  oflou  used  witb-

oui  Miy  ilistinction.  hnt  |)r.^)perly  ara  wan  a  »(rin-t-

O-TC  of  IcH  betgbt  tbuu  aiiare  {attvt\  the  latter  Iw-

•  Tis«rr«tMl  in  honour  of  tbe  superior  godtt,  and

%\m9  former to  the Inferior  goilt,  dt^rniKotlit.  and

*»«»ifc (Cf.  Verg.  />/.  r.  65.) Safrilicei*  t4»  tbe

iti/rnal  gmln  were  not  ofleri'il  ou  allarH,  but  in

c»Titi«a  dng  in  the  ground  anil  kuoirn  a«  tcrohetf

•<*^<iiA.  i!j(i^pui,  XiixKoi  (FeMtna,  «,  V.  aitnria).

Ill  early  tinirs.nnd  always  in  HiiddeiirnuTgeuries,
sltnni  were  made  of  i-arlb,  tnrf,  or  stoni-s  collHetcd
**"  thfl  K|iot.  Otberwifie  tboy  were  htiilc  of  nin-
|"»iry  or  brickwork,  08  ahowii  ia  tbe  IbUowiug
tDnatratioua.


DinL


ZLX


trt


J'


JJtn  (0>tiiinti  iirTnJanX


Rlrntcnn  Altar.


Bulwteqnctitly  a  how  was  adth-d  O^dtrif),  snd  a
•^rrewjioniltnn  proji-clton  at  tbe  top  (<V;yu/Nt)  to
bold  the!  fire.  A  movable  |>nn  or  brazier  iffriin-pov)
'^metiniM  Mrvc«l  thia  pDrpo«c.  Altiua  were  either
*<tRaxe  or  rouucL


rMv^tfio

HaHm


^


c


a-r^


UUr  inoreaUoMRi}


Allar  ,.\antiinL


VlftiiTitw  directs  that  altan,  ibongb  difteriug  m
"**«lun  aceonliugto  tbe  rank  <if  tbe  iliviniiiex  to
*wiii  tiifj  nere  erected,  sbonld  always  be  lonrr
*J*'>tlieitatnc8(«i«v/rtiT(ii  before  which  tliey  were
''****<l  Of  tbo  application  of  this  rule  we  Iiuve
**  'Mmplc  in  a  medallion  on  the  Arch  of  Con-


staatioe  at  Rome,  shown  Id  tho  annexed  iUttstrft-
tioa.


Alur  irllh  SUluo  of  ApoDo  lArch  of  ConsUnllM).

All  altars  were  p1acr«  of  rrfnge.  The  Hii]ipli<
eant«  w*er«  miiHiderod  as  platting  thrmiielveM  nmlcr
tbo  protection  of  tbe  dcitien  u»  whom  tbe  ultan
wure  cuniworated ;  and  violtinco  to  the  uufurfu-
ii&tc,  even  to  itlavea  and  crintiuals,  in  »noh  cir-
Rumtttnnceg,  was  n-Kanlcd  an  violence  towawls
the  dtsilirH  tbem(«elveit.  It  was  also  the  pmcti'-'«
anionic  r.he  (jr<i<kii  tu  take  solemn  oattiM  at  altant,
eitlier  taking  bolil  of  the  altnr  or  of  the  atatne
of  the  goil.  Ciccru  (jtrc  tiatb.  5,  ^  I'i)  exprcmly
taeutione  this  as  a  Onrck  practice.  See  K.  F.
Hermann,  (ionttJlt»at.  AUtrth.,  (  17  and  $  'A.

Arabarchea.  The  governor  of  ITpprr  Kgrpt,  or
theTUebiiis,  nniler  the  Roman  Empire,  tliiw  district
betug  oftiM)  called  <Vrabia  (C.  /.  C  47.')!^. Sue

AlABAIICUBS.

Arabia ('Apo^io)-  Aconntry  at  thet«inihwest«rn
extreniiry  of  Axia,  forming  a  large  {lenitiMnla,  of  a
sort  of  hatchet  hbupe,  liounile*!  ou  tlie  west  by  the
ArabirnM  8iim»  (Re«l  Kea>,  on  the  wmth  and  onnth-
eastby  tlio  Krythraenm  Mare  ((Jnlfof  Habel-Man-
deb  and  Indian  Ocean),  and  on  Iho  norrheit^r  by
the  Fendru*  8inu»  (Pen«iau  Gulf).  On  the  north
or  land  Bide  iln  bonmlarieit  were  sonicwbat  indrfl-
iiile,  but  it  MvemM  to  have  included  tbo  whole  of
the  desert  conntry  between  Bgypt  and  Syria,  tin
tbo  one  aide,  and  the  bnnktt  of  the  Elnpbmlra  <m
tbo  other.  It  wa«  diviiled  into  three  partit.  (1)
AltADlA  I'BTltAKA,  tnclndltig  the  trinnguliir  piece  of
land  Wtween  tbe  two  heads  of  the  Hcd  Sru  (tho
peninsula  of  Ml.Siuai)  and  the  counlry  initncdi-
alely  to  the  north  and  nortbea«l,  and  culled  from
itK  rapital  Fetrat  while  the  literal  signtliruttou  tif
the  name,  "Rocky  Arabia,"  agrees  alito  wjtb  tbo
nature  of  tbe  country.  (3)  AitAlUA  DKiiRltTA,  tn-
clndiug  tbe  groat  Syrian  Desert  and  n  portimi  of
the  interior  of  Iho  Arabian  peninsula.  Ct)  Arabia
Fkllx,  consiatiiiK  of  the  whole  eoittdr)*  n«t  in-
cluded in  tbe  two  other  divinionii.  The  ignorance
of  the  ancients  re4pccting  the  interior  of  the  peii-
initula  let!  tlient  lo  L-la»!)  it  with  Arabiii  Kclix.  at-
though it  prupttrly  belongs to  Arabia  Descrta,


ARABICU3 SINUS


lOS


ARATUS


for  it  conBiBts  of  a  snudy  desert.  There  is  od  the
west  coast  a  belt  of  fertile  land,  which  caused
the  aucieuts  to  apply  the  epithet  of  Felix  to
the  whole  peaiasala.  The  iuhabitants  of  Arabia
were  of  the  Semitic  race,  and  hence  closely  re-
lated to  the  Israelites.  The  iiorthwest  district
(Arabia  Petraea)  was  iubabited  by  the  various
tribes  that  constantly  appear  in  Jewish  history —
the  Amalekites,  Midiaoites,  Edomites,  Moabites,
Ammoaites,  etc.  The  Gi-eeks  and  Romans  called
the  iuhabitants  by  the  name  of  Nabathaei,  whose
capital  was  Petra.  The  people  of  Arabia  Deserta
were  called  Arabes  Scenitae,  from  their  dwelliog
Id  tents,  and  Arabes  Nomadae,  from  their  mode  of
life.  From  the  earliest  known  period  a  consider-
able traffic  was  carried  on  by  tlie  people  in  the
north  (especially  the  Nabathaei)  by  means  of  cara-
vans, and  by  those  on  the  south  and  east  coast  by
sea,  in  the  productions  of  their  own  oouutry  (chiefly
gnms,  spices,  and  precious  stones),  and  in  those  of
India  and  Arabia.  The  only  part  of  Arabia  ever
conquered  was  Arabia  Petraea,  which  became  un-
der Tngan  a  Roman  province.  Christianity  was
early  introduced  into  Arabia,  where  it  spread  to  a
great  extent,  and  continued  to  exist  side  by4ide
with  the  old  religion,  Ijabaeism,  or  the  worship  of
heavenly  bodies,  and  with  some  admixture  of
Judaism,  until  the  total  revolution  produced  by
the  rise  of  Mohammedanism  in  a.d.  GSti.

AraUoiu  ffintu  ('Apaffutis  xoXiror).  The  Red
Sea ;  a  long,  narrow  gulf  between  Africa  and  Ara-
bia, connected  on  the  south  with  the  Indian  Ocean
by  the  Strait  of  Bab^l-Mandeb,  and  on  the  north
divided  into  two  heads  by  the  peninsula  of  Arabia
Petraea  (Peninsula  of  Sinai),  the  eastern  of  which
was  called  Sinns  Aelanites  or  Aelaniticus  (Gulf  of
Akaba),  and  the  western  Siuus  Heroopolites  or
Heroopoliticns  (Oulf  of  Suez).  Respecting  its  oth-
er name,  see  Erythbakum  Mare.

Araobn^  CApaxvtt)-  ALydian  maiden,  danghter
of  Idmon  of  Colophon,  a  famous  dyer  in  purple.
Arachn6  excelled  in  the  art  of  weaving,  and,
proud  of  her  talent,  ventured  to  challenge  Athen^
to  compete  with  her.  The  maiden  produced  a
piece  of  cloth  iu  which  the  amours  of  the  gods
were  woven,  and  as  the  goddess  could  find  no  fault
with  it  she  tore  the  work  to  pieces.  Aracbu^,  in
despair,  hanged  herself.  Athen<S  loosened  the
rope  and  saved  her  life,  bnt  the  rope  was  changed
into  a  cobweb,  aud  Arachnd  heraelf  iutio  a  spider
(apa)(}rij).  This  fable  seems  to  suggest  that  man
learned  the  art  of  weaving  from  the  spider,  and
that  it  was  invented  iu  Lydia.

Arachoala  {'Apaxonria).  An  easteru  province
of  the  Persian  Empire,  bounded  on  the  east  by
the  Indus,  and  noted  for  its  fertility.

Arachtus  or  Aratho.  A  river  of  Epinis,  rising
in  Mt.  Lacmon,  and  flowing  into  the  Sinus  Am-
braciuH.

Aracyntbaa  ('ApdKvv8os).  A  mouutaiu  on  the
Houthwestern  coast  of  Actolia,  near  Pleuron,  some-
times placed  in  Acaruania,  aud  (erroneously)  be-
tween Boeotia  and  Attica.

Arftdtu  ('Apaios).  Au  island  off  the  coast  of
Phoenicia,  with  a  flourishing  city,  reputed  to  have
been  founded  by  exiles  from  Sidon.  Its  harbour,
ou  the  mainland,  was  called  Autaradas  (Uei-od.
vii.  98).

AraeoBt^'loa  (dpaid<rrvXor). See  Tkhpll'M.


Arar  or  Arftxls.  The  modem  SaAne ;  a  river  of
Gaul,  tising  in  the  Vosges  and  emptying  into  the
Rhodauns  (Rhone)  at  Lugdnnuni  (Lyons).

AratSa.  A  name  given  to  the  Latin  translations
of  the  Phaeaomemi  and  Progm*tica  of  Aratns  (q.  v.),
madeby  Cicero,GeTmanicuB,and Avienns.  Theorig-
inal  has  been  translated  into  English,  with  notes,  by
Poete(1680).  Cicerohasquoted  nearly allofhisovn
version,  aud  there  are  besides  480  lines  extant  in  a
single  fragment.  We  have  the  version  of  Gennan-
icus  entire,  with  scholia  (ed.  princeps,  Bologiia,
1474;  best  recent  edition  by  Breysig,  Berlin,  1667);
and  also  that  of  Avienus  in  1B77  lines  (ed.  princeps,
Veu  ice,  1488) .  See  Schanbacb ,  De  A  rati  Jnterprttibms
Bonunut  (MeiDingen,1817) ;  and  the  article  Aratcs.

Aratea  (ra  'Aparrwi).  Two  saoriflcee  offered
every  year  at  Sicyon  In  honour  of  Aratns,  a  general
of  the  Achaeans,  who  was  honoured  as  a  hero.  See
Plut.  Aral.  ch.  53.

Aratnun  (iporpw).  A  plough.  The  annexed
illnstrations  will  give  a  good  notion  of  the  varions
forms  of  ploughs  employed  iu  Greece  and  in  Italy.


trtf  t


^


Prlmitlre  FormB  of  the  Plongta,  Toke,  ud  Go«L

The  following  representation  of'a  Roman  plongli
is  taken  from  a  piece  of  engraved  Jasper.


Ancient  Plough  (Roman).

See  the  articles  Aoricultura  ;  luoUM.

Aratui  {"ApoTor)  (1)  A  Greek  poet,  of  Soli  in
Cilicia,  about  B.C.  270,  contemporary  of  Callima-
chus  and  Theocritus.  At  the  request  of  the  Mace-
donian king,  Auttgonus  Gonatas,  at  whose  court
he  lived  as  physician,  he  wrote,  without  much
knowledge  of  the  subject  but  guided  by  tbo
works  of  EudoxuB  and  Theophraatns,  two  astro-
nomical poems,  Phaenowma  {taivoptva)  and  Prog-
nostica  (Aio(nj^«ia)  (aspects  of  the  sky  and  sif^na
of  weather).  'Without  genuine  poetic  inspiration.
Aratns  manages  his  intractable  material  with  con-
siderable tact  and  dignified  simplicity.  The  lan-
guage, while  not  always  free  from stiffness,  is


AKAXES


M


ARCADruS


HE

e  -


^


hoice,  and  the  veniflcation  eoirprr. Tlii»  pcwms
iijnyoil  a  liij;b  reiint«  with  llie  ;jciierMl  luiblic,  im
(;11 as  witi)  potts  and  apociulit*t«,  autl  the  ^ro»t
itTODoiDcr }li|ti)i;ircbii8  wrot«  a  c^imiuenlary  on
liptn  iu  four  IxKtks. Tlie  Roinaiie  also  took  pleas-
re  in  rvai]iii]|(  aud  traiiBlatiDf;  thcio — e.  R.  Cicero,
irmanicus,  luid  Avionnfl. Eni;.  trans,  by  Poste
X-ni"lon,  IrWf), (.Sw  Abatka.) Araliis  is meii-
j4iiie<l  tiy  liU  coutcniiHirnrjr  Tlic^H-ritiiH  til  tlinHixlli
fill  Sevriiih  hlyK  aiu]  by  tyu  P»iil  in  Iiih  KiMsei;!!
.^ciA,  xrii.'Jb). 8w)  aUo  Ovid,  Jntor,  i.  1^ {i)  A
cvek  patriot,  boru  [□  Skyuu  u.c.  '27U,  who  uxpoUed
fM-*iW  Ui»  nnlivD  Htati*  ibe  tymnt  Nicoolos,  nnd  por-
vaddcil  bin  country  lueu  l-ojuiii  tbuAcha«an  Leagius

■  Kil  ia  :M4  Hecurod  tbt?  aillio«iun  of  Corintb.  He
tftvrfrards  tad  equal  niiccc-s«  with  other  States  in
[-yiilbent  Urt«cu,  on  tbat  the  Lvaf^ue  bei-aiue  povr>

-<ul,  exciiiag  the  jcoloaitr  ul'  the  Aetiilians,  who
»Ailtf  war  npitii it,  but  were  defbafud  by  AnitUB

■  «1«1  l>y  AiiLitfiiniM,  and  fi>r  a  tiuit^  by  Philip,
u«*|ili«w  of  Auti)£oniii^  Tbii^  Klron^  alliunco  uv«r-
t,l«n«  Cl<-«iiiii-iie»t,  kiuti of  Siuiitii.  Ijtti-r,  however,
^r^tiftiucntTfd  the  ill-nil)  of  Philip,  wlindt^struyutl
tsiiu  by  piMM>ti,  B.C.  2i:i. Sec  Pint.  Aral.

.Anzea  t'Apa^ft). Thp  nanip  of  (wveral  rivrrs.

(1)  la  Aniicnta,  riHing  in  Mt.  Aha  or  AIium,  j'liniiij;

tbeCynis,  and  fulling;  with  it  into  tfiv  CnN|iiaii  8ra.

Th«  Anisn*  wan  pnivprhiiil  for  tho  Utrvr-  of  it-t  cni^

r«*ni.  (tj)  In  MrMo]M)taiuia.  t'.i)  In  Persia,  lllf^  riviT
ou  t^liich  IVrMCTHtlJA  fit<KHl.  flowing  Into  a  aall  lakt*
Dot  far  Iwlow  that  city,  l-l)  It  l^i  duiibtrnl  nh«th-
«»■  the  Atbxm  of  Herodotus  is  (he  6aai«flH  theOxuR,
I*a^rt«,  or  Voljpi. (r>)  The  Pcncns  in  Tlicssaly,

Arbaces ('Ap/flacijr).  The  fouiiderof  tli(«  Median
Eiupirc.  according  to  Clfstas.  H«  in  naid  lv>  hav^
tAlien  Nln«veli  iu  conjuntMiun  witli  t^lesiH,  the
Babylofiian,  and  to  have  dentrftyetl  tht^  old  Atsyr-
iMti  Ktupin:  undf-r  the  reign  of  6anlaUH[*ulitH,  B.C.
^^ See  8aiu>a.vafali!S.

Arbela  (to  'A^sfiijAii).  A  city  of  Afliabeu6  In
A«yria,  tUe  headrpiarteni  of  Darius  Cmlouianua
hefunj  ilip  loAt  battle  in  which  he  whs  uverthrowo
hy  AleiaoiltT  lli.c.  XJlj,  whlrh  in  hence  freifui-ntly
eallM  th*.  batllo  of  ArlH'la,  tlioii({Ii  it  waa  irally
foQRbt  Licar  Uant^mettt,  about  Gtly  milea  nest  uf
AiWla.

ArUtex. Set)  Ivwsx.

AiMt«,  PrratisiLe. See  PcritONios.

Arbor  Infelix.  (1 1  A  irt*  that  was  either  Bter-
'K  or  )ifodiife<l  black  lieiTieM  and  fruit  (Plln.
"  -V  ivi.  (  10r>). (2>  The  cross. See  Ckux.

^^bntcttla.  A  welUknowo  actress  in  pauto-
^"■>e  „f  tiie  time  of  Cioeru.  Horace  uUudeu  to
^'^al&a  x.n

Arbtttiim  (Mffl/o,  fiifiaiKv}io»),  The  frnit  of  the
*il«l  Mhtw  Iwrry,  or  arhuins

^'b6taa(i[^^pot). The  wild  strawberry-tree.
*rt)jU  iapQCXff). 8ce  Pk«o.
^"^ A  eily  in  the  northern  part  of  Pba?ni-
"*:  tluhirthidace  of  Alfxanih-r  Sevenis,

^'Ca  [Ktfl^rot).  A  chest  or  cofl'er.  is  used  in  scv-
'^*»)(tiilicatioiis,  of  whirh  the  prii»eipol  are: (1)

I  "**  iu  which  the  Rotnaus  wrre  arfiislomcd  to
ni»»  llifjr  money;  and  the  phrase  fx  arru  toivtrm
T^Mboniraninji  nf  payiinf  in  i-r'H4ly  money. Tbwe

"""*  *«n!  citbiir  unule  of  or  bonnd  with  inni  or
'^■T  rwtuU.  The  term  arror  was  niinally  uppliwl
*o  tU  obeatii  in  which  tho  rich  kept  their  money,


aod  was  opposcil  to  the  snialler  /o«A,  Mcevha,  and
i-ritmfita.  ('it  Tbfl  area  was  frer|neutiy  nsed  in  later
times  us  eiinivatent  to  tlie^unu— that  ia,  the  im-


.;ir:iiii:itMiii||{itilrlMtNl[titrTMU.'lli<-


KookB  Arcs,  or  Tnoara-dwit. (Ftom  Ponp(><li

perialtrcasury.  See  Aehaaium;  Fiscrs.  C3)  Tha
area  also  Hi^jttilled  the  cofhti  in  which  persons  were
bnriml,  or  the  bier  on  which  the  c»rpi»e  wa»  placed
l>revi<nii,ly  to  Uiirtal.  (4)  It  was  ah»  a  strong
cell  niadt!  nf  oak,  in  which  criminals  aud  slaves
were  coulined.

Arcadia  ('ApKtJiia).  A  country  in  tho  middle  of
tho  PeIop<mneKUf<,  !«nrrnnnded  on  nil  f>idcs  by  inonft>
tains,  tbf>  Switzerland  of  Orccce.  The  AcheloUs,  the
greatest  river  nf  thti  Pcloponnceim,  riii^-a  in  Arcadia.
Tho  northern  and  cantern  parts  of  the  country  were
l>arTen  and  unproilnctivr ;  the  western  and  Aonih*
ern  were  mom  fiTtih-,  with  niimcmnH  valli-ys  where
com  was  (frown.  Tlie  Areadians  regarded  Iheuj-
Ktdvi'ti  )LH  the  most  anciiait  people  in  (Greece:  tlie
Greek  writcn  call  thrni  indi^ciions  and  Pclas-
Ktiiurt.  Tht?y  were  chit'lly  employed  in  hitntiitf
uiid  in  tlio  teiidiUK  of  ciittlr.  whence  their  ivnnthip
of  I'aii,  who  wa.H  r.-^iKrcialty  the  gnd  of  Arcjulia,  and
of  Artemis.  Thry  wore  pnssinnately  fond  of  inoHic,
ami  cultivated  it  with  »ncce»s.  Tbu  ArcadiuUH  ex-
perienced fewer  changes  than  any  other  iteuplu  in
GreiM-e,  unit  retained  possession  of  their  country
upon  the  i^onfiHcut  of  the  rest  of  the  Pelopotincnua
by  the  Doiians.  Affer  the  Second  Meswniuu  War
the  different  towns  became  independent  repub-
lics, of  wbii'h  the  moHt  intportanl  were  Mautinea,
Tugea,  OrtihoiuennM,  pHophiN,  am!  Plienens.  Like
the  8wiss,  the  Alvadiaun  fri><iiient]y  nerved  as  mer-
cenaries. The  Lacedaenniniatm  irtado  many  at*
tempts  to  obtain  postuMsion  of  partH  of  Arca^lin,
but  thcM>  attempts  wei-o  finally  frmttratcd  hy  tlie
battle  of  Leuctra  (h.C.  371) ;  and  in  oitlnr  to  resist
all  future  aKfiressious  on  tlie  jmrt  uf  Hputta,  (ho
Arcadians,  upon  the  advice  of  Epauiimnnlim,  bnilt
the  city  nf  Mej;iilopotiB.  They  subw;tincntly  joined
the  Arhacaii  I..»a{;ue,  and  finally  became  buhject
to  the  Kumans,

Arcadlouin  Fo«dua  (Kmvaf,To  \\ftKa&tKaw).  The
Arcadiaii  League,  estahlirtlicd  some  time  ufier  the
battle  of  Leucfni  (B.C.  371),  when  the  victory  of
EparoinondfiH  had  destmyed  the  supriMoacy  of
Sparta  in  the  tVloiioniK'sns  and  restored  the  iu-
deii*iHleii(«  of  the  An  aihan  towns.  (See  Gn»lf,  x.
pp.  SOO,  317  foil,)  The  Arvatlian  League  Hucceeded
in  (^ivinjr  unity  to  tho  Arcadians  for  only  u  short
lime,  however,  and  its  iuflueuou  ooou  deuliued.  See
MEtiAii)roua.

Aicadioa.  Emperor  of  the  East,  rider  Hon  of
Theodosins  I.,  and  hnither  of  Hoiiorins  (q.  v.},  who
n'ceived  llm  Wi-strni  Knipire.  Arcndius  waa  liotU
weak  and  vicious,  a  tiiol  of  faviniritef.  and  an  in-
efllcient  raler. Duriug  his  reign  Alaric i  <i.  v.)


ARCAJttUS


IM


ARCniLOCHCS


rnmgwl  tin*  Kmpirc. Arrailiita  mlwl  fVoni  a,t*.  3D5

Aronilna.  A  porsnn  in  rliargr  nf  thi'  mniiKy-
oliosl  In  (^-nt  liniiws. S<n'  Auca.

AroaB("AuKui).  Akingoftti<-Arcii<U»ti)sftmlR<m
of  AniB  uihI  Calllslo  (<|.  v.),  from  whom  Amidia  wua
ei)1i)KM»d  to  Iwre  derivml  tU  driho  (Apollod.  iii.

Arc6  or  Aicao  CVkoO-  Acity  of  Plionnlolft,the
I'irlli|tl)i<-i'  of  AlrxitiiiK'r  Sovrnin.

Axo^fiL  A  oovrriNl  oftrtingo  or  litU.T,  spread
wit))  clot  hn,
wliirli  wn.i  iiM'd
iluiiit'tunttiuirtt
In  Kitnu'  Ut  car-
ry iIioiikih)  mill
Inilnii,  noil  U
moiittitiuMl  in
lli«»  Twclvi!  Tn-

Wen. It  in  said  _

(«  hiixT  ohtAin- ^"^ ,fi.o.«^Ir«,N«.^M«.^l«l)

ed  tlic  name  of  urcera  oa  aoconni  of  its  rewmUlauco
tn  1)11  an-ii.

AToevUanB  (*Apc«riXaor).  (1)  Son  nf  Battils,
kiu];  of  Cyreni^,  who  wait  ilnvpii  IVuiu  hEtt  kingdom  '
in  a  f)P4lition,  ntu\  diod  u.c.  575.  Tbe  istH-oud  4if  Ihiti
twnir  died  li.r.  5fU)  ^Hrrud.  tv.  lo9}.  (2)  A  |>liilo6-
•plicr,  lioni  at  Ptlan^,  in  Aetilis,  the  founder  of
ttkat  fftia  Icnnnl  Ihc  Mtddlt^  Acud«my.  Tht?  p(^' '
rlod  of  his  liirth  ia  uituidty  gtvcu  u^  B-cUlti.  Aroes-
ilaltjh  At  tint  applinl  htmaelf  to  rhetoric,  but  anb-
•e^inouTly  pAseml  to  the  Btndy  of  philosophy,  in
which  hr  hR4l  for  tearherH,  tint  TIiM)pbnultt8,  tbeu  ,
Cmntor  ibo  Aca«li'mirian,  and  pnibably  also  To-
Iciiio  (DioR.  IjM:rt,  iv,  W,49;  Cio.  Amd.  i.  9),  Be-
«idM  th>>  iii^tructore  above  uauml,  Arcrailaiia  U
almi  Mbid  to  havr  diti^rntly  att^ndc^  tbo  lc«tnr«a
of  tho  Kntrian  MrnnlnmnA,  tbv  Mc)Tnriiii)  I>iodoru»,
and  tlio»r<'plir  r)iTho.  l(i^  lovr  for  thn  itnilddiu^
of  iht-si'  iitdividuab)  bait  hwM  ivftMml  to  an  tbc
•AiiTTu  tif  biA  M-t-ptifiAin  uud  hit  Akill  lu  rrfutinj;
philotutpbicid  principltNs.  At  tlio  Kain«  titnv  it  it>
ou  uU  bauds  udmitt«^d  that  of  pbil<MK4>brr»  Plalu
WRft  bl*  favimritt*.  He  «4.tiu<(  to  have  been  MUi.vre-
ly  of  opinion  that  bid  vi«.>w  uf  thin^*  did  not  diA^cr
ttvni  the  true  spirit  of  tlw  IMntouic  doctrine  ;  nay.
luori'.  tbal  it  wm  perfMtly  in  a^^n'eitiont  with  tbcm
older  ptult.t9«>|>hK'al  teai-biiiins  ftvtu  nhivh.aoMinl-i
inj:  to  tli«'  ••pniioti  of  nijui\,  I'laiu  luul  drawu  hla
own  doctnn«-«—  uauH'Iy,  Ibow  Kit  6i»0l«l««,  Pmr-
UruideAiMid  llcn«vli1u«.

IpoQ  tbe  di-alh  of  t.^T»i«or,  lh*>  ftcbnol  m  tl»e
Ac*«Vuiy  v«ii>«  it-AtiMVrtv*!  by  a  cvrtaiu  SucralivUM
lo  Am-^ilatl",  «« 1»'  bfr\'-  lutt\Hlnc«sl  tbe  old  Socnilic
Im^iLiimI  »r  ii-.i<  lilti)*  in  diaKiifcuos,  altbonitfa  it  vnut
r»:"  ■ ■<n  tbau  N'.'  '  "' >  II-

Br  de. Aro^  .  .Uf

|o tukxr cxuiuiuted bin 0|>iiiit>it* it> <tiu>\ih;. al

IhbI  lh»  *Bri»Hla  w«ra  not  M^u«tul««l  wtib  any
vock  whlrb  wMtUt  etmOdetttljr  tw  aaetibrd  to  him.
y^w,  IM  bU  dweipk  Laeyilm  abu  BtMtaiiknl  ftuui
writLns  •'-  ■■-'-■■^rnU  IIwbm»Ivw  Btif^fcf  tv  hare
4i«lw  wkdy  vt  hi*  t^iUihiBa  wJy  fhat

tbe  w.^--  -^  -  -^  «i|ip««MMit<w  vf  vkaaft  C%r]M|pfiaa
wm  Ibe  ■nal  MMi«««it-  Swct  •  cettfa*  wmitt  mA-
■nMy  W  b«tb  «lel^c4lv»  awl  «M«t«>te.  •m4  w>
canlut«tr  «•  bAV*  HnW  ttel  w*  «wi  tnfcM^uU?
^raMM  viib  laiyart  tm  Wa  4»HfinH«.  AvtMiUnc
to  tbw*  miiiinta  (W  twMha  i4  bla  •(MntMa


formnln  that  be  kn«!vr  nothing,  not  pvpn  th&t
n*birb  SiKntli^H  bail  v%'er  luaintainM  that  lie  knew
— namely,  his  own  iKnuraneo  (Cio.  Antd.  i.  12).
This  expi«84ioii  of  bin  opinion  implicitly  ascriboa
to  Arceailaliit  a  full  conscionttiiraH  tbiit  lie  difTcred
in  a  moot  iin[Mirl.ii)t  point  from  tbe  doelrine  of
Sooratea  aud  Plato.  Uut,  as  tbo  ancients  do  not
appear  to  have  aiMtrtbcd  any  such  conviction  to
ArcediluiU,  it  ftcvms  to  Iw  a  more  probable  opinion
which  impnte»  to  him  a  desire  to  restore  tbe  gen-
uine Platonic  doj^ma,  and  to  pnrify  it  from  oil
tliose  precipe  and  iniaitive  dHenniuationa  which
bis  i:(iicce«si>re  hwl  appended  to  it.  Indeed,  one
statement  «txpri4wily  declarva  that  tbe  aubjeot  of
bis  k-ctnru  to  bin  nuMt  Rccoiu)dtHbed  ncltolani  was
thn  dortrino  of  Plalo  (Cio.  /.  r.);  and  b»  wnnld
therefore  apjtear  to  have  adopted  thin  formula
with  a  view  to  mbot  luoru  easily  tbe  id>jf!ctinnH
of  the  do^iatista.  Now  if  wo  thus  attach  .4rc««-
ilafls  to  Plato,  we  must  &iipi>o«w  him  to  hnvo  boea
In  tbe  same  ca^e  with  many  othera,  nud  nnable  to
discover  in  tbe  writings  of  I'luto  uuy  Hxod  and  de-
terminate principles  of  science.  Tht*  ambigaoos
manner  in  which  almost  every  view  U  tbcreiu
ailvaimed,  and  the  results  of  ouo  iuv««tigallou
udmittnl  only  couditionalty  lo  other  inquiries,
niuy  x'erbaps  Itave  led  biiu  to  regard  the  s|>eca-
lations  of  Plato  in  the  lij^ht  of  men>  shrewd  and
iutellin'-'nt  ronjfctnr»-«.  Accordingly,  we  are  told
tbnt  Aixi^ilaiis  denied  the  cvitaiaty  not  only  of
iuteUcL-tual,  tmi  abto  of  fieusnooa  kDOwl«dgitJ  ^Clc
Dr  ^>rrti.  iii.  IS).

Axchelanm  i'ApxO^aot).  (1>A  klngof  Msoedonia
(B.C.  413-3W),  who  improved  ibe  conditioti  of  the
eonutry  and  patronised  art  aud  literatnni.  (i)  See
MiTHiUDATEs. 1 3^  See  Abctttub. (4)  See  Pui—

UtfiOPUIA.

▲rchaatiStua  i'.KpxitrTpmm). A  poet  of  Gela
in  r^tcily.  who  douriabrd  about  Ik-C  31^,  and  com
poseil  the  bunmronadidalir  poem 'HAvmi^in  ((3oo«h
Cbe^r),  supposed  to  dehrriW  a  gaationoiuic  loo^
ixNUid  tbe  then  kvowm  world,  vrilh  plaiful
of  >Iourr  and  tbe  dogmatic  jiluloBophers.  Tbe  w
tnenMM  fraicmrntB  duqiluy  mnrh  talent  and  wit.
was  iinitslctl  in  Latin  bj  Hnuius  t*!*  ^^

Archiaa. See  Licrtlts  AJiCiiiAS.

See  Mxiuctrs.


See  erARTA.


Aichiater  lapxiarpot).

Arcttiduaua  {'A^x^^'H*'''^

Arohil6chn»  C'-Vx*Vx^^ A  OnA  lyric

ei^iHviAUyrmuwot  aot awriterof  luopooWi. lU
P^nw,  b«  wa»  tbe  mmi  nfTrlretrIre  bjTBilave-voi
btii  WW  drivra  by  puverly  to  go  with  a  ceilon
ThaK-«i  in  M.r.  T»  «r  TOS. Fhxn  ThwH  b^
M^H)  drivra  by  want,  aad  by  tbe  eoattMs  wlk.
bis  ourretniMd  naiiiiB  far  tSTMlhre  bai  drm
upon  bilaa. He  bmbb

itvm  place  to  Ha**^  ■«iil»e«  bia  rauum  t*
bo  WM  alBbi  ia  a  i(b«  by  tbe  Utamrn
Ixtof  afWevards.  wbea  tbie  aaa  Tiaitcd  tbe
pblaa  tetaipb^,  tbr  psd  is  4aM  to  bare  drivco
firnaa  bis  tbneboU  as  tbe  al^yvr  ef  a  aert-ati*
Ibe  Maasa^  aaA  nfliiai  to  adaii  bia  vatO  be
|««yltiatoil  Ibe  eeal  eC  Ibe  pari  at  kta  Hm^
elan  «bkb  ett|iiiuaai  tbe  U«b  ealae  wtt  aa  Mm(»
art  V  Ibe  aacilairtBt  vba  ftmmA  bm  ett  a  1««~^
vllb  Miwawr.  riater.  waA  ^■phaeiiii ;  for  Afe»*-
Iwebas  ba4  aa  eslnec4i«af7  peeCiaal  feaias,
eaabWtl  Mto  to  lavMM  a  lee^p  aaaAec  ef  ae'
.  ttufc  aaA  to  Mealpatito


ARCHIMEDES


lU


AKCHITECTURA


ina6t«r.  He  bronght  iambic  poetry,  iu  particular,
to  artistic  perfection.  The  many  miafortuiiea  of
his  Btormy  life  had  bred  to  his  irritable  nature  a
ileeply  settled  iudiguatioD,  whicb  in  poems  per-
feet  iu  form  aud  alive  with  force  and  fnry,  vent«d
itself  iu  bitter  mockery  even  of  Lis  friends,  and  iu
merciless,  nupardouable  abuse  of  his  foes.  Such
was  the  effect  of  bis  lampoons  that  Lycauibes,
who  had  first  promised  aud  then  refused  him  bis
daughter  NeobuM,  banged  himself  aud  his  family
in  the  despair  engendered  by  the  poet's  furious  at-
tacks. Of  his  poems,  which  were  writteu  in  the
Old-Ionio  dialect,  aud  taken  by  Horace  for  bis
model  ill  his  epodes,  only  a  number  of  short  frag-
meuts  are  preserved.  The  best  text  of  these  will
be  found  in  the  collection  of  Bergk.

ArcliimedeB  CApxti^h^tj^)-  ^  remarkable  matb-
ematicinu  and  inveutor,  born  at  Syracuse  iu  B.C.
287.  After  spending  a  long  time  iu  travel  and
study  be  returned  to  his  native  city,  and  there  in-
troduced agreatnumberofiuveutions,  among  them
the  endless  screw,  first  used  by  him  in  launching
large  ships;  and  the  so-called  Archime<1eau  screw
(cochlea),  used  in  draining  the  fields  after  the  an-
nual iunudatiou  of  the  Nile.  Dnriug  the  siege  of
Syracuse  by  the  Romaus  (315-313),  be  invented  the
catapults  which  long  kept  the  enemy  at  bay,  being
adapted  for  use  at  both  short  aud  long  range.  He
is  said  to  have  set  fire  to  the  Romau  ships  by  means
of  powerful  buruing-glasses — a  story  which  Buffuu
iu  1777  showed  by  experiment  to  he  not  at  all  ab-
surd, aud  which  Ball  regards  as  not  improbable.
He  first  establiabed  tbe  truth  that  a  bo<ly  plunged
in  flnid  loses  as  much  of  its  weight  as  is  equal  to
tbe  weight  of  unequal  volume  of  the  fluid.  When
Syracuse  finally  fell,  he  was  slain  by  the  Roman
Buldiers,  who  were  tempted  by  the  bright  metal  of
bis  iustrumeuts,  which  they  took  for  gold.  Cicero,
when  quaestor  in  Sicily  (B.C.  75),  discovered  the
tomb  of  Archimedes  (Taac.  D\»p.  v.  23).  There  still
eiirtt  uine  treatises  by  him  which  have  been  edited
u  ith  a  Latin  version,  by  Heiberg,  3  vols.  (Leipzig,
lp«0-8l).  See  Ball,  Siwrt  Siat.of  Malhematic8,pp.
59-70  (Loudou,  1888).

Arcbimimua  (apxitttfiot). See  Mlmub.

ArchiteotOra  {apxtTtKrovia,  apxtrtxropiKT}).  (I.)
Grekk. — Of  the  earliest  efibrts  of  the  Greeks  iu
urcbitecture  we  have  evidence  iu  tbe  so-called
Cyclupeau  Walls  sorrouudiug  tbe  castles  of  kings
in  the  Heroic  Age  of  Tiryus,  Argos,  Mycenae,  and
elsewhere.  They  are  of  enormous  thickness,  some
I>eing  constructed  of  rude,  colossal  blocks,  whose
gups  are  filled  up  with  smaller  stones ;  while  others
are  built  of  stones  more  or  less  carefully  hewn,
their  interstices  exactly  fitting  into  each  other.
Oradnally  they  begin  to  show  au  approxiuiutiou
to  bnildiugs  with  rectangular  blocks.  The  gates
let  into  these  walls  are  closed  at  tbe  top  either  by
the  counes  of  stone  Juttiug  over  from  each  side
till  they  touch,  or  by  a  long  straight  block  laid
over  the  two  leaning  side -posts.  Of  the  lutt«r
kind  is  the  famous  Liou  Gate  at  Mycenae  (q.  v.),
so  called  fiitjm  its  two  lious  standing  with  their  fore-
feet oil  tbe  broad  pedestal  of  a  pillar,  and  remark-
able as  tbe  oldest  specimen  of  Greek  sculpture.

Among  the  most  striking  relics  of  this  primitive
age  are  the  Bo-called  Briaavpoi  (treasuries,  usually
nubterrsnean)  of  ancient  dynasties,  the  most  con-
siderable being  tbe  treasure-house  of  Atrens  at
Mycenae. ( See  Mycenae.  ) The  usual  form  of


Gate  or  Thorlcos.

these  buildings  is  that  of  a  circular  chamber
vaulted  over  by  tbe  horizontal  courses  approach-
ing from  all  sides  till  they  meet.  Thus  the  vault
is  not  a  true  arch.  The  interior  seems  originally
to  have  been  covered  with  metal  plates,  thus  agree-
ing with  Homer's  descriptions  of  metal  as  a  favour-
ite ornament  of  princely  houses.  (See  DOMUS.)  An
opeu-airbuilding  preserved  from  that  age  is  the  sup-
posed Temple  of  Her6  on  Mt.  Ocha  (now  Hagios
Elias )  iu  Euboea,  a  rectangle  built  of  regular
square  blocks,  with  walls  more  than  a  yard  thick,
two  small  windows,  and  a  door  with  leaning  posts
aud  a  huge  lintel  iu  the  southern  side-wall.  The
sloping  roof  is  of  hewn  flag-stoues  resting  on  the
thickness  of  the  wall  and  overlapping  each  other,
but  the  centre  is  left  open  as  iu  the  hypaethral
temples  of  a  later  time.

From  tbe  simple  shape  of  a  rectangular  house
shut  in  by  blauk  walls  we  gradually  advance  to
finer  and  richer  types,  formed  especially  by  the
introduction  of  columns  detached  from  tbe  wall
aud  serving  to  support  the  roof  aud  ceiling.  Even
in  Homer  we  find  columns  iu  the  palaees  to  sup-
port the  balls  that  surround  tbe  court-yard  and
the  ceiling  of  the  banqueting -room,  The  con-
struction of  columns  (see  Culumna)  received  its
artistic  development  first  from  the  Dorians,  after
their  migration  into  tbe  Peloponnesus  about  B.C.
lOOU,  next  from  the  louiaus — and  from  each  iu  a
form  suitable  to  their  several  characters.  If  the
simple,  serious  character  of  the  Dorians  speaks  in
the  Doric  order,  no  less  does  tbe  lighter,  nimbler,
aud  more  showy  genius  of  the  Ionian  race  appear
iu  the  order  named  after  them.  By  about  B.C.  650,
the  lonio  style  was  fiourisbing  side  by  side  with
the  Doric.

As  it  was  in  tbe  construction  of  temples  that  archi-
tecture had  developed  her  favourite  forms,  all  other
public  buildings  borrowed  their  artistic  character
from  the  temple.  (See  Templum.)  The  structure
and  fnruitureofprivate  houses  were,during  the  best
days  of  Greece,  kept  down  to  tbe  simplest  forms.
About  B.C.  600,  in  the  Greek  islands  and  on  tbe
coast  of  Asia  Minor,  we  come  across  the  first  archi-
tects known  to  us  by  name.  It  was  then  that
Rhoecus  and  Theodorus  of  Samoa,  celebrated  like-
wise as  inventors  of  casting  in  bronze,  built  the
great  Temple  of  Hei^  iu  that  island,  while  Chersi-
phrou  of  Cuosus  in  Crete,  with  bis  sou  Metagenes,
liegau  the  Temple  of  Artemis  at  Ephesus,  one  of  the
seven  wonders  of  the  world,  which  was  not  finished
till  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  after.  In  Greece
Proper  a  vast  temple  to  Zeus  was  begun  at  Athena
iu  the  sixth  century  b.c.  (sec  Olympikum),  aud  two


ARCHITRCTURA


lit


AfiCHITECTL'RA


more  at  Delplii  .ind  Ol.viiipi.'i — one  of  the  Corin-
lliian  8{>iiitliiiriiK,  I  lie  oilier  Uy  tiie  Kleaii  Lilioii.
Horr,  Atiil  ill  the  wr<?tcrii  rf>|onio«i,  the  Ditrtr  ntylc
still  itreiloiiiiiintDd  i-vrrvn-hcn*.  Aiiit>n<;  the  I'hiof
rouiniiiH  nf  thin  |M>riiMl,  in  attdilinn  to  many  rriiiM>il
tcui{>U'.s  ill  Sirily,  eA|M.>«iBl)y  nt  8e1iiiiiH  uiiil  Agri-
fCentiiin.NhntiUI  l»n  mt-iitionoit  iho'IViiiplo  of  PoDvi-
iloii  nt  PaeHtniii  (Piwiduuia)  iti  Sonth  Italy,  one  of
the  bf«t  [irewtrM  and  miwt  hcaatiftil  reHce  of
iiiituiiiity.  Thn  ['^triotic  fervour  of  the  Persian
Wars  creAtwl  a  general  cxpansinn  of  Greek  life,  in
which  nrvhitt'ctniT  an«.l  the  »i«ter  art  of  actilptiire
vreru  nut  slow  to  titke  u  part.  In  theae  depart-
n]ent)<i,  M  lit  thu  wholi'  iinwtiril  muvenieiit,  li  ceu-
tral  pofliliou  vitut  tiikuii  hy  AiIh-uk,  wh<>sH  Icjuliiif;
i^tAt^smen,  Cimoii  Ami  P«ricl4>M,  luvixliM)  thi>  gn*ut
SMoiirrcs  of  the  state  at  onco  in  wtn-iiijlln'iiiti"  :itnl


this  department,  when  onco  the  fiindamen  (at  fotvu
hiul  thiiK  b«oii  laid  dowu  in  outline  at  Athooo,  b
Hhovrn  by  the  tbt'Jitre  ut  Kitidjiiiruii.  a  work  of
Polyclitus,  uu8iirpa««cd,  aa  the  uiit-ietitH  testify,  by
any  later  lhi'aln!ti  in  hannoiiy  nnd  huanty.  An-
other was  built  at  Syraeiuo  before  D.C.  i'M.  Nor
is  it  only  in  the  erection  of  single  bnlldlu^B  that
the  great  ad%-nni>o  then  made  by  arrhit4^rtnre
shows  itaclf.  lu  laying  ont  new  towim,  or  parts
of  towns,  men  began  to  proceed  ou  ortintio  princi-
ples, an  innovation  dne  to  Hip|NMluitiii8uf  Mil«tiw.
See  Thkathum.

In  the  fnnrth  ceiitnry  B.C.,  owing  to  tlie  climoBs
wrunghL  in  llio  Greek  miud  hy  the  PulopouiieMM
War,  in  place  of  the  pitr«  and  even  toue  of  the  pre-
cediii^  perifHl,  a  flettire  for  uflTeeX  Wcanio  more  and
wore  geuenU,  ImIIi  in  architecture  *ud  sculpture.


^1


■^^l^=^?u


■^jSSi


j%rvr^


I'nrrh  ill  Ibfl  KrwbllMaiK  ml  AUieiia. (Dnwoi;  by  Boaiitr.t


be«ntl(ying  tb<>  city.  Pnriojt  thia  period  amw  a
group  of  rn»Mt«-n'''<^'*»  *'*»*  *■''"  oiitonish  ii»  iu  their
raiuM,  noiuo  iu  the  form*  of  »  jwflenw!  Doric,  othen
ID  the  Ionic  (*tyl*!,  which  had  now  f.mnd  tla  way
into  Attic*,  and  was  here  developed  into  nobler
shaiMw-  The  Doric  order  is  nsprirMUt«d  by  the
Tempi*-  of  Tbeneos;  the  Propyluca  {q.  v.).  I'liilt  by
MncMiL-Iait;  theI'arthenon<q.v.).a  joint  pnHlMCUou
of  Ictinns  and  CallicraKw— while  Ihu  EiTchtheum
(a.  V.)  is  th«  luosl  brilliant  creation  of  the  loulo
oriler  iu  Attica. See  Atiie.nak.

The  proprew*  of  the  dnima  t"  itit  iterfi-ctlon  in
thin  period  led  to  a  ODm»|»>i.ding  improvement  in
the  bniJdiug  of  theatre*.  A  flone  iheatr.-  wo.  b^
■run  at  Athen;*  even  »i«'fore  the  Pcrciau  ^\  iir».  Hiid
the  Ol-um  of  Poriclea  Bcrved  similar  puiinm-H.
How  6ood the  hig»ie»t  iwmlu  vtatt^  achievod  lu


The  ■oWr  l"»«.rio  Btylo  fell  into  abeyance  and  c«v«
way  lo  ihc  Ionic,  by  [ht«  »iile  of  w  hich  a  n*-w  nrder,
the  Corinthian,  tuiid  to  havo  bwu  invented  by  tb*
wulptor  C'HlIimachM!'.  with  ita  nmrn  gorgeona'deo*
omtioiiR,  Wcame  inen'a-iiriKly  fashionable.  In  th«
flntt  half  of  the  fuiirtb  eentnry  arose  what  the  an-
cienta  confiiderv.1  the  larj.'ust  and  grandest  tempi*
111 (he  Pelopoim,.*,,*,  that  of  Athene  nt  Tegoa,  a

,  work  of  the  M-nlptor  and  architect  Scopaa.  Dur-
iuR  the  niiditle  of  the  cenlurr  another  ..f  tba
"(M^vru  wonders,"  the  *.plendid  tomb  of  ManM^lna
at  Unlnttniawtnjt.  was  oouatnictnL  (Se«  Maiso-
l-KVil.)  Many  magttiBeeot  temples  artMe  in  that
ttnie.  Ih  Amu  M.,„»r.  the  temple  at  Epbeaoa,  bnmtHi
down  by  ll,.r.>^tn.tus  w.w  rebniU  by  Alexan.lcr'a
U.M »nluUH.t n,uHnu«., Iu the iaUnd» the

1  rulB»  of  Ui«  Ten.pW  of  Alhrne  al  Priao*,  of Spoils


Uaosoleum  si  BiUiMmaimn t^Mtomtlon  bj  It«ber.)


I


>l  ITilrttiA,  of  DioiirstiK  ut  Toott,  am)  »ttM>rti,  even
tutliu  liny  filler  a  ItrilUiuit  tentiliioii)'  to  tlioir  fiinner
Aiituu^  AlLotiiaii  biiililiiigH  iif  lliat

lit  of  LysicrateB  (q.  v.)  is  coii«i)ii;-

'Hi  gntccrul  elogikuoti  autt  Blabor&Ui  devul-
vftamt  of  tht^  CurintUiau  style.  lu  the  Buocecdinn
Kg*.  Grrck  urtUitet-'ture  shows  itn  fliiMt  acliii--vi;-
Difiiifl  iu  the  builtliuK  o(  tbc-utros,  eiticvially  thoKc
otAwtic  towns ;  iti  the  KorKeous  p«l»oeK  of  newly
hiUt  toyui  capitals;  iia<l  in  Kt^nernl  in  the  luxu-
rivia  oDmplctcneiw  of  ptivate  bnihliiiKH.  As  ui)
l»ip«taiil  upefimen  of  \\\n  Unt  :i({h  uf  Attic  iiruhi-
tfttqiv  nmy  uImi  be  niuiitioiieil  thu  Tuw«r  of  the
WiiiiJf,  Hi  AthctiK. S*?e  ANi>Ros[Ci:fl.

till  Bnn>f.vN  AND  KouAN.  —  III  arcbitvctiim,
"■  *oll  IU  Hcolpturo^  the  UomaiKt  ivrru  It)U|;  iiikKt
In  iofluenoo  of  the  KtruM.'atiH,  ^vho,  thmigh  nut
P^iwaing  the  gift  of  risiD^;  to  the  idojU,  iiiiitod
'f^^rfwfiil  ttt-tivity  and  inventiveness  with  a  pns-
•w  fof  covering  tlioir  Imihlings  with  rich  oriio-
■•Dlal  farvitig.  None  of  ttieir  t4<nipleA  have  siir-
^'^*^,  UiT  thoy  hnilt  nit  the  nppnr  pnrtH  of  «-oi>i) ;
'"^^  Uuiy  proofs  nf  their  Rctivily  in  hiiihlini;  Tv-
"'^'d,  Bnrrivinc  from  vftrionn  iigrH,  in  thn  shapr
"^t-'mljii  »u(i  wjilb*.  Tim  lattiT  irlcarly  nliow  Imw
*'")'  [iiuifrvAM'd  from  piliu);  up  ptilygunal  ttltK-k»
"' '-jc!ope«ti  wtylc  to  mgulnr  tonrM;^  of  Mipiurcil
*ta»r.  iii-rt.  gii,a  there  a  building  Htitl  sliows  that
"*<'  tlriK^eHiiH  originally  mndo  vfiiiltings  by  Ict-
||"8  b*inzoutal  ronrH'sJiit  over,  na  in  the  nncJoiit
^'f^k  fitftrtwffai  alM>ve  mentiontnl :  on  the  otinr  liund,
*""»•' tTyiilil  pat4.'WEiyH. «»  nt  Voltemi  nnd  Feriigia,
"nilrit  lliu  Ini'"  iirch  of  >»»•<! t;w-»hiiprtl  HtoncN,  the


Etrnscan  iugennl-
ty,  and  from  the  in-
trodnction  of  n'hicb
a  iieiv  and  mn};niti-
rent  developnmnt  of
arcbtti^cton.*  takes
Itfl  riw.  Th»  moitt
iuipiuiinK  of  ancient
Itnliaii  arch  bnild-
in^  in  to  be  w!<*n  in
thu  Miners  of  Kouie
conntnirted  In  the
■ixth centnrj- b.c.

&e«  ClX>ACA.

When  all  oilier
troreH  of  Etnmcau
influence  wer*)  be-
ing Hwcpt  away  ut
Home  by  thii  intcu-
sioii  of  Greek  form*
of  art,  espc.rially  af-
ter the  conqiit'Ht  of
Greece  in  the  luiit-
dle  of  the  second
century  B.C.,  the  Bo*
uian  ftixhite^ti*  kept
slivo  in  fnll  vi^jfour

the  Rtl'tDKHII  IlK'lll*

Oft  of  hnililiii({  the
arch,  which  they
developed  and  eoni-
pleted  by  the  in-
vention h  of  tho
cross- arch  (or
fcroined  vanll]  nnd
tliedonio.  Wiihthc
arch,  nhich  lulniita


of  a  bolder  and  more  varied  maua^ieinent  of  Hpacen,
^^^e  KiininnN  rnmbint^l,  iu>  ii  deeoral  ivh  nlf  inent.  the
columnH  nf  the  Gnwk  urdnnt.  Anions  thi^e  their
^on'inf{  love  of  (Kiinp  gave  the  prefurunuo  more
nnd  mtinj  to  thu  Corinthinn,  adiltii(r  to  it  after-
wards a  ntill  mom  gorgconn  embellmhniiMit  in  what
in  called  thi'^  Konian  or  Cimipo^iitii  i-npilul.  Anoth-
iT  service  rt^iideii-d  by  the  KoiiiiinH  wtv*  the  intro-
dnctlon  of  hnilding  iu  hriek.  A  more  vigorous
advaneo  in  Komau  arelutccture  dates  fixxn  Ihu
o|>euing  of  the  tliird  century  ii.c,  when  tln-y  l»e-
guii  making  great  militury  roadi  and  lupioiInetH.
In  tho  fimt  half  of  the  second  ceiitnry  tlipy  biiiltf
on  Greek  in'itdelH,  the  iirst  baniliea,  wliiuh,  iMwides
its  prarlical  utility.  Hervod  to  embelliBU  the  Fo-
rum. Soon  after  tho  miildlr  «f  tlm;  c^-iilnry  np-
IK'anfl  the  tin«t  of  their  inoru  ambit  tuus  teniplea  lu
the  Greek  ntyle.  There  \»  fiiniple  grandeur  iu  the
riiliia  of  the  Tabiilarinm  ((|.  v.),  or  Record  Office,
built  B.C.  7a  ou  tho  elope  of  the  Capitol  next  the
KoraiQ.  These  are  among  the  few  remainn  of  Hit-
man  republican  architecture;  but  in  the  laHt  dea-
ude«  of  the  Republic  simplicity  grndtially  disnp-
[>eared,  and  men  were  eager  to  display  a  princely
pomp  in  public  and  private  buildings;  witiioMlhu
lirst  stone  theatre  ere<;t4jd  by  Ponipry  ah  eaily  aa
n.i-.  r>r>.  TliiMi  nil  t-liati  went  iHifore  wua  eclipsed
by  tho  vaitt  wiirkH  nnd<!rt»koii  by  (Jacfiar  -  the
Theatre,  Aniphitbeatri',  Circ«»,  BuHltira  lulia,  Fo-
rum CoeiiariH  with  itH  temple  to  VeiniK  licro'lrix.
Thejw^  wert-  tiiiinhed  by  Aiigiislua.nndHr  whom  Ro-
man archilei-ture  *H.-em»  to  have  renohiMl  ilM  eulmi-
natiiig-poiut. Angnstus,  aided  by  his  »ou-iii-law


MtittdttclJoti  uf  which  into  Italy  is  prolmbly  ilue  tol  Agrippa,  a  man  who  understood  building,  uot  only


ARCHITfiCTURA


lU


ARCUITECTDRA


Arch  of  TItua  at  Rome.

compleited  bis  nncle's  plans,  but  added  many  mag-
nificent strnotures — the  Forum  August!  with  its
temple  to  Mars  Ultor,  the  Theatre  of  Marcellus
with  its  Portico  of  Octavia,  the  Mausolenui,  and
others.  Augnatus  could  fairly  boast  that  "  hav-
ing found  Rome  a  city  of  brick,  be  left  it  a  city
of  marble."  The  grandest  monument  of  that  age,
and  one  of  the  loftiest  creations  of  Roman  art  in
general,  is  the  Pantheon  (q.  v.),  built  by  Agrippa,
adjacent  to,  but  not  counected  with,  hia  Tberniae,
the  tirst  of  the  many  works  of  that  kind  in  Rome.
This  structure  is  remarkable  as  being  the  only
ancient  building  in  Rome  of  which  the  walls  and
archea  are  now  in  a  complete  stnte  of  preservation.
It  was  erected  by  Agrlppa  in  B.c.  27,  the  original
inscription  being  still  retained  upon  the  architrave
of  its  porch.  The  Pantheon  is  a  circular  structure
146  feet  and  6  inches  in  height  aud  inner  diameter,
with  a  portico  103  feet  long  composed  of  sixteen
Corinthian  cohimus,  46  feet  iu  height.  Inside  the
portico  at  the  entrance  are  two  niches  which  once
contained  the  colossal  statues  of  Agrippa  the
builder,  and  of  Augustus  Caesar.  The  walls  of
the  building,  which  are  Vi  feet  thick,  support  a
dome  or  cupola  of  vast  dimensioua,
constructed  of  concrete.  At  the  ver-
tex of  the  cupola  is  an  opening  nearly
30  feet  iu  diameter,  lighting  the  in-
terior.

A  still  more  splendid  aspect  was
imparted  to  the  city  by  the  rebuild-
ing of  the  old  town  hnrned  down  in
Nero's  fire,  and  by  the  "  Golden  House  "
of  Nero,  a  gorgeous  pile,  the  like  of
which  was  never  seen  before,  but
which  was  destroyed  on  the  violeut
death  of  its  creator.  The  immense
and  complicated  structure,  or  rather
mass  of  structures,  known  as  the  Pal-
ace of  the  Caesars,  formed  one  of  the
most  striking  achievements  of  Roman
architectural  genius.  (See  Palatium.)
It  was,  as  Professor  Lauciani  puts  it,
a  labyrinth  of  "endless  suites  of
apartments,  balls,  terraces,  porticoes,
cr^'pts,  and  cellars,"  having  its  main
approach  ou  the  Via  Sacra. At  its


arched  entrance  was  a  magnificent  quadriga  cnt
from  a  single  block  of  white  marble  by  Lysias.
Beyond  was  a  peristyle  of  fifty-two  fluted  columns
adorned  with  a  host  of  exquisite  statues  repicseut-
iug  the  Daualdae,  and  adjacent  to  a  great  library.
The  maguificeuce  of  the  palace  as  a  whole  may  be
conjectured  from  a  simple  summary  of  the  treas-
ures which  we  know  to  have  been  lavished  upon
the  mere  vestibule — a  hundred  aud  twenty  columns
of  marble  and  bronze,  statuary,  bas-reliefs  by  Bii-
palus  and  Anthermus,  a  quadriga  in  gilded  bronze,
exqaisiteivory  carvings,  hundreds  of  medallions  in
gold,  silver,  and  bronze,  immense  collections  of
gold  aud  silver  plate,  gems  aud  caraeos,  and  a  co-
lossal bronze  statue  of  Augustus,  fifty  feet  iu
height.  (See  Lanciani,  Ancient  Some  in  ike  Ligitl
of  liecent  Di$ooveri€$,  ch.  v.).

Of  the  luxurious  grandeur  of  private  buildings
we  have  ocular  proof  in  the  dwelling-bouses  of
Pompeii,  a  petty  country  town  in  comparison  with
Rome.  The  progress  made  under  the  Flavian  em-
perors  is  evidenced  by  Vespasian's  amphitheatre,
known  as  the  Colosseum,  the  mightiest  Roman
ruin  in  the  world;  by  the  mined  Thonnae,  or
Baths,  of  Titus,  and  by  bis  triumphal  arch,  the
oldest  specimen  extant  in  Rome  of  this  class  of
monument,  itself  a  ci-eation  of  the  Roman  mind.
But  all  previous  buildings  were  surpassed  in  size
and  splendour  when  Trajan's  architect,  Apollo-
doruB  of  Damascus,  raised  the  Forum  Traianum
with  its  huge  Basilica  Ulpia  and  the  still  sni'viv-
ing  Column  of  Trt^an,  besides  other  magnificent
structures,  including  libraries,  a  great  temple,  a
two-storied  gallery,  and  a  triumphal  arch.  The
Basilica  had  five  halls,  the  central  one  being  27
yards  long,  aud  the  whole  structnre  61  yards  wide.
It  was  paved  with  slabs  of  rare  marble.  Only  a
part  of  this  Forum  has  yet  been  excavated,  bnt
enough  has  been  brought  to  light  to  justify  the
vivid  description  of  Aumiianus  Marcollinus  (xvl..
10),  whose  account  refers  to  the  time  of  the  em-
peror Coustantiue's  visit  to  Rome  in  the  year  356.
No  lea^  extensive  were  Mie  works  of  Hadrian,
who,  besides  adorning  Athens  with  many  magnifi-
cent buildings,  bequeathed  to  Rome  a  Temple  of
Venus  and  Roma,  the  most  colossal  of  all  Roman
temples  (see  p.  763),  and  his  own  Mausoleum  (q.  v.),
the  core  of  which  Js  preserved  in  the  Castle  of  Sc.


Coloeteum  at  ltoin«.


ARCHITHEORUS


116


ARCIFINIUS  AUER


wsm


<>:^


OompoBlu  CkpltaJ.


Augelo.  While  tbe  workB  of  the  AntoaiDes  already
show  a  gradual  deoline  in  arohitectnral  feeling,  tbe
Trianiphal  Arcb  of  Severus  ushers  in  the  period  of
decay  that  set  in  vith  tbe  third  century.  In  thia
closing  period  of
Roman  rale  tbe  r
buildings  grow
more  and  more
gigantic — witness
tlie  Baths  of  Cara-
calla,  tfaoee  of  Dio-
cletian, with  his
palaoe  at  Salona
(tbree  miles  from
Spalatro)  in  Dal-
matia,  and  the  Ba-
silica of  Constan-
tine, breathing  tbe
last  feeble  gasp  of
aucient  life.  Bnt
oatside  of  Rome
and  Italy,  iu  every  part  of  tbe  euoiinous  Empire  to
its  utmost  barbarian  borders,  bridges,  uuniberlesa
ivmains  of  roads  and  aquedacts  and  viaducts,
ramparts  and  gateways,  palaces,  villas,  market-
places and  judgment-halls,  baths,  theatres,  amphi-
theatree,  and  temples,  attest  the  versatility,  mi^es-
ty,  and  solidity  of  Boman  architecture,  must  of
irliose  creations  only  tbe  rudest  shocks  have  been
able  to  destroy.  See  Reber,  Bi»t.  of  Ancient  Art,
Eng.  trans.  (N.  Y.  1883) ;  Lttbke,  Getchichte  der  Kunat,
vol.  i.  (new  ed.  1691) ;  Fergusson,  Hiat.  of  Archttte-
tuTf,  vol.  i.  (new  ed.  1891) ;  and  Balkeae  ;  DoHUS ;
Palatiumj  Tbmplum.

Architbeonu  (dpxiBiapos). See  Delia.

Aichon  (^Spxatv).  "Ruler."  The  Athenian  name
for  tbe  supreme  authority  established  on  the  abo-
lition of  royalty.  On  tbe  death  of  the  lost  king,
Codms,  B.C  1068,  the  headship  of  the  state  for  life
vas  bestowed  on  his  sou  Medon  and  his  descend-
ants nndcr  tbe  title  of  Archon.  In  b.c.  753  their
term  of  office  was  reduced  to  ten  years;  in  714
their  exclusive  privilege  was  abolished,  and  tbe
right  to  hold  the  office  thrown  open  to  all  the  no-
bility, while  its  duration  was  diminished  to  one
year;  finally  in  b.c.  683  the  power  was  divided
among  nine  Archons.  By  Solon's  legislation  his
wealthiest  class,  tbe  irtyraKoirtofuiiifU'ot,  became
eligible  to  tbe  office;  and  by  Aristides'  arrange-
ment after  tlie  Persian  Wars,  it  was  tbrowu  open
to  the  whole  body  of  citizens,  Ctisthenes  having
previoasly,  in  the  interests  of  the  democracy,  sub-
stituted the  drawing  of  lots  for  election  by  vote.
Tbe  political  power  of  the  office,  having  steadily
decreased  with  time,  sank  to  nothing  when  de-
mocracy was  established;  its  holders  bad  no
longer  even  tbe  right  to  deliberate  aud  originate
motions,  their  action  being  limited  to  certain
prieetly  and  judicial  functions,  relics  of  their  once
regal  power.

Tbe  titles  and  duties  of  the  several  arcbons  were
as  follows:  (1)  Their  president,  named  emphati-
cally Archon  or  Archon  Eponymus  {(ipj(o>v  c'lruvu-
fiot)  because  tbe  civil  year  was  named  after  him.
Ho  had  charge  of  the  Great  Dionysia,  the  Thargelia,
the  embassies  to  festivals  (Otaplat),  and  tbe  nomi-
nation of  choregi;  also  the  position  of  guardian-
in-chief,  and  tbe  power  to  appoint  guardians ;  tbe
presidency  iu  alt  suits  about  family  rights  (such
as  qnestious  of  divorce  or  inheritance),  aud  iu  dis-


putes among  tbe  choregi.  (2)  The  Archon  Basilens
(Spx^v  ^ao'tXcOr),  called  so  because  on  him  de-
volved certain  sacred  rites  inseparably  connected
with  the  name  of  king.  He  had  the  care  of  the
Eleusiuian  Mysteries,  aud  was  obliged  therefore  to
be  an  initiated  person ;  of  the  Lenaea  and  Anthes-
teria;  of  gymnastic  contests,  over  which  he  appoint-
ed a  superintendent ;  aud  of  a  number  of  antiquated
sacrifices,  some  of  which  fell  to  the  share  of  his
wife,  the  j3ao-iXMj'0'a(queeu);  aud  lastly,  the  position
of  president  iu  all  suits  touching  religious  law,
iucluding  those  trials  for  murder  that  came  within
the  jurisdiction  of  tbe  Ephetae  (q.  v.).  (3)  Tbe
Archon  Polemarchos  (^Ap^av  troKipapxos,  leader  iu
war)  was  originally  intrusted  with  tbe  war  depart-
ment, and  as  late  as  tbe  battle  of  Marathon  had  the
right  of  voting  with  tbe  ten  generals,  and  tbe  old
royal  privilege  of  commanding  the  right  wing.  Af-
terwards he  only  bad  charge  of  the  state  sacrifices
offered  to  the  gods  of  war  and  to  the  shade  of  Har-
modins;  tbe  public  funerals  of  those  who  fell  in
war,  and  the  annual  feasts  in  honour  of  them;  aud
finally,  jnrisdictiou  in  all  questions  conceniing  the
personal  andfamilyrights  of  resident  aliens  (/wroucot)
and  strangers.  All  this  rested  on  the  old  assump-
tion that  foreigner  meant  enemy.  Each  of  these
tbree  superior  archons  bad  two  assessors  chosen
by  himself,  bnt  responsible.  (4)  The  six  Thesmo-
thetae  (BtapoBirai,  law-givers)  administered  justice
in  all  cases  not  pertaining  to  the  senior  archons  or
some  other  authority,  revised  the  laws  once  a  year,
and  superintended  the  apportiouing  of  public  of-
fices by  lot.  The  several  archons  exercised  their
jurisdiction  at  different  places  iu  the  city;  that  of
the  Polemarch  aloue  lay  outside  the  walls.  Dnties
common  to  all  nine  were :  tbe  yearly  appointment
by  lotof  theHeliastae  (q.  v.),  the  choice  of  umpires
iu  the  Panatbenaea,  the  holding  of  elections  of  tbe
generals  and  other  military  offlcei-s,  jurisdictlou  in
the  case  of  officials  suspended  or  deposed  by  the
people,  and  latterly  even  iu  suits  which  had  pre-
vioosly  been  subject  to  tbe  nautodicae,  (See  Nau-
TODICAE.)  If  they  bad  discharged  their  office
without  blame  they  entered  the  Areopagus  as
members  for  life.  (See  Arkopaous.)  The  office
of  archon  lasted  even  under  the  Roman  rule.  See
Lugebil,  J?«r  Geschichte  der  Staataverfatsung  von
Athm  (Leipzig,  1871)  ;  Meier,  Index  Archontum  Epo-
nyiHoi-KMi,  etc.

Archones  {apxavrjs).  Tbe  chief  farmer  of  the
taxes  at  Athens. See  Telones.

Arohytas  (*Ap;(urar).  (1)  A  musician  of  Mity-
leu£,  meutioued  by  Diogenes  Luertius  as  baviug
written  a  treatise  on  agriculture.  (S)  A  famous
Tarontiue  astronomer  aud  geometrician,  the  son
of  llestiaeuB.  He  was  seven  times  elected  gov
ornor  of  his  uative  city.  He  is  said  to  have  been
instrumeutal  in  rescuing  Plato  (q.  v.)  from  the  ty-
rant Diouysius.  Mauy  stories  are  told  of  his  in-
gennity.  For  him  is  claimed  the  invention  of  tbe
screw,  of  the  pulley,  and  of  a  woodeu  pigeon  that
could  fly.  He  is  also  reported  to  have  attempted
to  calculate  tbe  number  of  the  grains  of  sand  upon
tbe  sea-shore.  Only  a  single  fragment  of  his  writ-
ings has  come  down  to  us  iu  Puiphyry.  He  per-
ished iu  a  shipwreck  about  B.c.  394.  See  his  life
in  Diug.  Lai-rt. ;  Plato,  33d  C;  and  Horace,  Carm.
i.  xxviii.,  with  the  commeutators.

Arclfinina  Ager. See Agrlmetatio  ; Agri-

HENBORRS.


ARCFTESENS


116


AttCUS


ArcftSnenB.  An  riiitlii>t  of  Aih>Uo  as  beariiijc  a
bow,  nilli  wtiicli  be  lU'tttmycU  Ibu  itorjwnt  Fytboii.

ArctlQua. See  CYCUt:  Poktb.

ArctOBio/Ncroc).  "TbciBoar."  Thn  iinmoof  two
eouslcllatiouttDcar  tbi'Norib  Pulu.  (If  Thp. (fRCAT
Beak  (^V«  MmJoy).  nl«o  callvil  ilie  Waoox  {fJaut-
Irwn).  Tbe  ancient  Iialiaii  uamc  i>rtbi»  cuaNtrlla*
liou  was  Seftem  Triones,  lltut  IB,  the  Scvoil  PiDllgh-
ing  Oxen,  alnn  Sfftentrio.  and  u-iib  tlio  r>|)itbct  Maior
to  di«lili);niHb  it  fniiii  tbe  Sfpttntrio  Minor,  or  />»rr
B*ar.  (2(  TnK  Lesser  or  Littlr  BkaR  (r>»(i
Minor),  UkexriMs  cftUeil  the  WaOOX  and  0^"N()«UttA
(dog's  tail  I  fVoin  tbe  n-bcuiblanco  of  tbe  coiiHtel-
IftCJon  to  ibo  nptiimod  earl  of  a  ^Iuj^'h  tail.  Tbe
consit'llatioD  before  the  (treat  llcar  was  raUcd
Bo6fts,  Arctopki/faj-,  or  Arcturiu.  At  ft  later  time
Arctofhylai  became  tbe  ^I'lieral  nanie  of  tbe  coD<
slellatiiHi,  and  tbo  word  Arctvnts  WAfl  coiiliued  to
the  rbiof  fclur  til  it.  All  tbe(w<i  cnn'ttellation>«  are
coiiiiocted  lit  luytbology  witb  ibe  Arrailiau  nymph
Calttttio,  ihu  daiifcbler  of  Lycaoii.  Metanii>r|>)i<xsed
by  Zetm  uiwii  tbe  earib  into  a  Mlie^lwar,  Catliatd
wan  pursued  by  her  Min  Arrai*  in  tlie  clia«e,  and
wbeu  be  was  on  the  {loiikt  of  kilting  her,  Zeoa
placed  tbcm  both  ninunK  tbi*  ^tan — Calliitto  becom*
til);  rbe  Great  Bear,  and  Area»  tbt^  Little  Bear  or
Bodies.  In  tbe  poets  iIm  epithets  of  these  stan
fanvtf  roiiBtJint  ref»?r»'Mce  to  the  family  nnd  conntry
of  CalliHto:  tbuH  wc  find  tht^m  t-a11e<l  /.^»io<ni
Jrcfo*,-  Maewtiia  Arrtos  and  Maenaiit  Urmi  (firom
Mt.  Maeiialint  in  Arcadia);  KrgmanihU  Una  (fVom
Mt.  Hrj-mantbus  In  Arcadiai:  /'nrrJUuuiH  SleHae
(fniiii  the  Arcadian  town  Parrliutin).  (See  Cal-
XJSTO.)  Tbuu|cb  iiioHt  tnwlilions  idvutified  BtioteH
with  Area.",  ottiem  pronminrod  bini  to  be  IrartiH
or  biit  dangbier  Krigon(5.  Hence  the  Sep  ten  trio  iie--^
an*  called  fJopft  Icarii.

AretflruB. See  Anrros.
AroubalUi^ A  croflA-ltow. 8en  Balluta.
Arc&la  ( Kt^Jwrior). \\)  A paiutcr'tt  i^olour-box
(Vnrn*,  R.  R.  iii.  I",  \). [•£)  A  stone  coOiu. See

Aiufiliim. A  kind  of  porter'a  knot  or  pad  for

n.Mii};  luirdenn  nn  tbo  bead. See  CKSTlcil.l.t:8.

Arcttma  or  ArcimuL A  oariole  or  small  car*
ti>g»  to  liulfl  one
penou  only  iPiuil.
Diae.  p.  U).

Axoua  (^idf.  ri-
^fV  The  iMtw  iiBod
for  HbiMitiiitt  ar-
mwH.  Two  klada
oflHtw  vtriv  knu^vn
to  aiitltiulty.  One  roUKivled  of  llir  (wo  boma
of  tho  antiibipe,  or  an  arm  of  wood  iiinillRrl,v
akapo«l,  Jiilnml  by  a  bridge  which  mtvihI  bo(li
as  a  hobi  fur  tho  bund  iind  im  a  n>Nt  for  tbo  ar-
row. The  nlrinft,  tnivU<  of  ptalli'd  biir«o-liHlr  or
twUted  ox-giil,  wiiN  faHl'Minl  to  ciicIt  Piid  ( tl|i.  t ).
Tbe  other,  onlled  tb<>  HcylUiitii  or  PitrlhUu  bow,
wuB  made  nl'  a  plore  of  Ib'xlldo  wood,  tho  ehiU
of  wlili'li  \\\'\v  tipped  wllh  mt'lat,  aittl  bent
■lightly  upwiirdn  to  bold  llii>  utrliiK  ^flic,  Ui.
The  armw  ^(Ir  (Uimlr,  or  Tiiftr^iti;  l.iil,  jriiyiViu)
wiiH  UKuIr  of  u  nicin  of  n*i'd  or  ll^bt  wood,  ono
i>nd  ruriilRbud  with  »  lbnv.«'i(riii>ri>d  |toh)t,  Monif'
tlmm  nlnipb>  Mild  itMio'liliM'M  Ixiibfd,  Ibn  mIImt  end
Willi  ri'Mlbcrm.  A  imlrlt  III  tlie  mIiiiII  wl-vod  li»
ptaen  ll  on  Ibt*  •Irliitf.  'I'be  urrowit(rtiid  aonu'lim*^
tbe  how)  woi-o  kiipl  In  a  iiulvot  i</)>i|»< r|ii|,  ;tA<o*r>.»)


matle  of  leather,  wooil,  or  melal,  fitte<l  ■
pi^ndrr,  and  tfotnetitu*'*  (>]»en,  coinvtimed
iid.  Tho  qnivcr  wa«  wont  cither  on  tlii
uonling  to  tbe  On*ck  manner,  or  iu  Oris


Bowi  utd  Qnlren.


ion,ODtheleffchip.  TfaeCrelann  had  theft
of  beiu^  the  best  archers  anuiii};  the  Oruel
generally  served  among  the  light -uriuM
ries  a*  a  vpficial  corpa.  Muonted  bowl
employed  by  the  ancient  AtbcniatiM  (Aee  I
but  it  waa  not  until  Bftor  tbe  Punio  V


Aniunw. (Kloh.)


QtcAk  Bfwa iBBiniltim  Tmhi)

arrbera  fonuotl  a  regular  part  of  the  Roin
They  wen*  then  fnniiMhed  by  the  alIie«J
by  rveniitiug,  and  were  nio«lly  taken  ftt
and  tbe  BAtearic  Ulauda. Se«  AXMA. j

AnntB  {fornix,  capita).  An  arch  siispai
(he  tiewl  of  an  atterture,  or  carried  fron
of  a  wall  to  another,  and  terviug  oh  tin
relllnjt  to  tbo  npaee  below.  An  arch  is  fi
n  iwrieM  of  we^tgv-like  «lnnee  or  of  bHckS|
tiifl  each  other,  and  all  bound  firmly  tog
tbe  preoftnrr  of  the  centre  one  npOD  tha(
laller  1*  thurrfitiv  distinguiabed  by  tbaj
k(\T»lonc.

ll  wooM  i«cem.  ai  tlrst  si)>ht,  that  ibfl
tbu»  dr(Snr«l,  and  a«  nwd  by  tbe  Roinoiu
known  lo  ilio  Givel»  in  the  eoriy  period!
hliitorv,  uibcrv^iap  a  lungniige  cocopion^
anil  of  nii'Ii  rvauly  application,  would  J
wanted  a  uaim<  |>t\)[K>rly  Greek  by  whii


ABCUS


117


ABCI/S  TRIUMl'UAUS


lisb  it. Tlio  Use  of  both  arches  and  vatilts  ai>-

par»,  liawnrpj-,  to  liavn  been  ktiuwu  let  tliftn  evmi

efurf-  tli^TrnjanVar,  and  its  ti«t>  ix  fxi'mplitifHl  iti

lo  of  till!  i!arliiu<t  iMiildiii^M  iittw  re[»niiiiiif{— tlii?

rltaui^f  l>iiilt  at  OrchnnieiniM  liy  MiuyaH,  kiiiK  uf

Bo<K>tiA(Piia»uu.ix.38),aiiil  llin  tn-n><iir>*  of  Alrt'tin

It  My«'i)iu^  (PauM»u.  ii.  16). Hiitli  of  tlii-AT  workii

txe couDliuctMl  imt]i*r]cn>uiMl,  niu) rach  of  thi'Di

ie(>t>Binl«  cif  a  rircuJar  chuiiilii-r  ftirini-d  by  nigtilur

reonr»e«  of  fttouM  laid  liori/^m tally  nvor  each  oth-

•r,  eJMh  oDorae  projecting  towards  the  interior,

ftDd  iMjrond  the  one  Wlow  it,  till  thoy  meet  in  au

apex  over  the  ccotre.  mid  tbntt  rcsuDd>lo  the  iustdc

•f  *  domo. Each  of  the  horizontal  courscA  of  stoova

trnned  a  perfect  circle,  or  tno  etomicircular  archvtt

[tlned  togetltcr, OS  the  suKjoined  idau  vill  reuder

cidvQt. Son  Schliemaiin,  Mycfnae,  p.  4:t;  Leake,

tfor«>if  ii.  377;  mud  the  articles  iUicHrrmTLKA ;

ITCKKAK.


Tb«  priueiplo  of  the  coiifttraction  w  that  nf  an

vcb-«liaped  maw  reaiatiiig  a  jpval  8n|i(Miiiciiiiilj«iit

^etghl,  aud  doriviug  lis  strength  and  coherHiii-c

ftom  iliD  wcii^ht  iit«vl£ ThuK  it  Keinft  that  the

Orwks  did  uuderBlJuid  the  cuustruelivo  priuei(de

on  Kliicb  the  an:h  \a  {*>imcA. They  math;  ubc  of  a

ftttitriVMee.  even  before  the  Trujuii  War,  by  which

^'n^Vfn  eaabtod  to  gain  all  the  oiIvaiitupuN  of

**"»  ucbiray  in  making  corridors,  or  holluw  gal-

■wifiL,  aud  which iti nppeunttico refteinblwl the

fotntcd trch,  Biioh  uh  is  now  termed  Gotbio. Thin

••■iffoetud  by  cutting  away  the  Hnperineutnheiit

*i«»ia  the  muuuer  alreiKly  de»«;ril>ed,  at  au  angU-


1-^i


^


-  v


Malad  Anil  I


I  iiyus,


of  forty-fire  degrees  with  the  hnn»>D.  Thn  mode
of  cnrmtrucLiun  aiul  apiicjiniDec>  uf  HUnb  archei  are
repreM'iitud  t:i  the  aiinrii*4l  drawing  of  the  vralla
of  Tiryim  from  Sir  W'illiiim  OvWa  Arpolit.

The  principle  of  the  true  arch  was  kuowu  to
the  Kgytitiunit,  but  it  i^  remarkable  that  they  did
not  make  inw  uf  it  in  their  moet  muMive  v^orfaa
<Wilkin»ou,  ii.  21W,  cd.  of  Vfiti).  Tho  Asoyriaiis
UHvd  iL  iu  stiUtvrruuean  buitdiugii  (Layurd,  ,ViiHr<>A,
i.  167 ;  ii.  atioi.  There  are  altio  a  few  upeciniens  of
the  tmn  urcb  in  andent  Griwce.  At  Oetiladai%  iu
Aearnonla,  is  n  iHwtt-ni  of  a  perferi  urcb  in  the
polygonal  walU  of  the  rity  (L,<ruke.  .Vor(A*r«  //r«c<,
iii.  SOO  neq.) ;  and  at  Xerokampo,  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Sparta,  iH  a  bridge  on  the  true  arrh-prtnct-
plc  ()lnn*,  'Jour  in  Hreet-e,  ii.24b),  though  llio  liitL«r,
iu  the  o]>iuioii  of  many  archieiHiigii»tM,  is  uf  Rorniiu
oouHtructiou  (Deuniit,  Etmria,  ii.  250  mmj.).  But
tliivtc  ai«  ran-  inNiuun't;  and  tho  EtriiM'ann  am
the  0nit  people  nho  employtsl  thu  trne  iir<-b  cxten-
sively.  Jlcneu  tht>  n«o  of  the  arch  passed  iiilu  tho
arcbitecturu  of  biiildings.  Tlie  Uoiuaiiit  probably
borrowed  it  froui  tliv  KtruHvans.  TIiuh  the  Cloaca
Maxima,  long  bolil  to  be  the  oldest  iuHtiinoc  of  the
arch  at  Itoivie,  and  uirributeil  to  tbuTuirioiiiii  |(W>e
ViAiXVK),  cli)t*bly  rtvsemhlea  the  canal  uf  ibe  Marta
( Dennis,  Kuuria,  i.  430  (»eq.) Set'  pp. 373 and  iWri.

Arcua TilumpbaJiflL  A  irinmphal  »ndi.  Thrae
arches  wen-  i>eculiar  to  tin-  RuniariB,  and  wnv  usu-
ally <t(5lauhed  structures  built  aeruwt  tliti  princi-
pal Htrouta  of  the  city,  ainl,ac<:onling  U>  the  npace
of  their  ree>[H!ctivo  local ititit,  CiiUHialcd  of  t-itlu^r  u
BJiiglo  arch  way,  or  of  a  central  one  for  carriages,
wUb  two  amaller  ouea  on  cueh  side  fur  foot-piut-
•engera,  which  Bonietimes  hud  aide  commuuica-
liona  with  the  central  arch.  Sometimun  there
W4;re  two  archea  of  equal  height,  side  by  side.
KacU  front  waa  orunmentod  with  trophies  and
ba»-reliefii,  which  were  altro  placed  on  the  Bidea
of  the  paa»age«.  Both  l'u\-adeit  had  usually  eul-
uuius  agaiust  the  piers,  auppottiiig  an  eutabla-
ture,  iturm'>unted  by  a  lofty  attica,  on  the  front
of  which  wua  the  IiiHcriptiuu,  and  ou  the  top  of  it
broniM)  chtiriiitN,  war-horseii,  HlatiieH,  and  tmpliiea.
'I'lte  triuinplial  :iri'h  n^caUH  \i»  origittul,  llm  city
gate,  in  the  cuiictitilratiuu  of  orituuiuut  on  the  fa-
^luleB,  wtiile  the  Kidea,  which  iu  the  city  gale  ara
buried  tu  the  wall,  arc  cumpuiiitivvly  plain.

BcertiniuH  ih  the  firat  nimu  recurd  Hbo  cn-ctud
anything  nf  thti  kind.  Ho  built  nu  arch  in  lUu
Fornm  Boartuni,  alnyut  B.C.  19(1,  and  another  m
the  Circuti  Maxiuiuo,  each  of  which  xraa  sur-
mOQUtod  by  gilt  statues.  Six  ymrv  afl<^rwarda,
Scipio  AfricauuB  bnilt  another  on  ihe  CIiviih  Cap-
itoliuus,  on  which  he  placed  iwveu  gilt  Htatues
and  two  figures  of  horsea;  and  iu  n,c  li!l,  Fabins
Maximus  btiilt  a  fourth  in  tho  Via  SacriL,  which
ia  called  by  Cicero  tho  Fornix  FnbianuM.  None  of
the«o  renruiu,  liie  Arch  of  AuguHtoH  at  Kitnini  be-
ing one  of  the  earlieBl  among  thrMr  Hlill  nUuiding.

There  arc  twnuty-one  areheit  ncordcd  by  differ^
ent  writent  oa  having  been  erected  in  the  city  of
Home,  live  of  which  i4ti]l  i-eiuaiu  :  (I)  Ancus  Ditiiiif
which  wnn  erected  tu  the  honour  of  ClaudiuH  Dru-
Mia  on  the  Appiuu  Way.  Ci)  AitcuH  Tin,  at  tho
foot  of  the  rulatiue,  which  ^voa  erect«d  to  the  hoo*
oar  of  'l'itii!4  after  his  coiniuofit  of  Indaen,  but
does  uot  ujipcar  to  have  btHMi  finished  till  after
his  death,  aiiicv  in  the  inscription  upon  it  he
in  called  1Hvn»,  and  ii  also  repreiwuted  as  being
carried  np  t^i  heaven  ujhiu  au  eugle. The  boa-re-


ARCU8  TRIUMPHALI3


118


ARCUS  TRIUMPHALIS


Arch  of  Conslanlinc  al  Rome.


Hefs  of  tliis  arch  represfiit  tli«  spoils  from  the
Teinplf  of  JiTiiHaloiii  carried  in  triiiniphiil  prores-
fiion.  Tlii:4  iii'cli  huH  only  a  eiiigle  (>i)«iiiiig,  with
two  coliiiMiis  (if  the  I£itiiiuii  or  C(iiiipo,site  order  on
each  sill.-  nfii.  (;{)  Aiit'LH  SEiniMi  Skvkiu,  which
wnM  cn-ittid  by  tin*  Si'iiato  (A.n.  'JUT)  at  the  cml  of
thfl  Via  Kiina,  in  honour  of  that  t-inpcror  and  his
two  Houa,  Caracaila  and  Geta,  ou  accouut  of  his


conquest  nf  the  Parthians  and  Arabians.  (4)  Ar-
cus  Gallieni,  erected  to  the  honour  of  GallieunB
by  a  private  individual,  M.  Aurelius  Victor.  (5)
Aiicus  CoNSTANTfNi,  which  is  larger  and  more
profusely  ornamented  than  the  Arch  of  Titus.
It  has  three  arches  iu  each  front,  with  columna
similarly  disposed,  and  statues  ou  the  entabla-
tures over  them,  which,  with  the  other  sculpt-


Arch  of  Scpltmlas  Bcreru.


ARDALUS


119


ARES


nred  ornamenta,  originally  decorated  the  Arch  of

Tnyan.


Arch  of  Aagnrtiu  at  AO0U.

See  Burn,  Rome  and  the  Campagna;  MiddletoD,
Ancient  Rome  in  1885;  id.  Remaina  of  Ancient  Rome
1<^3) ;  aiid  the  article  Architectura.

Ardflloa  ("A^oXor).  A  sou  of  Hepboesttis,  and
tbe  reputed  ioventor  of  tbe  pipe,  wheuce  the  Muses,
to  whom  he  gave  it,  are  called  ArdalideB  (Paosau.
ii.21).

ArdanioD  (apliayioy).  A  vessel  of  water  placed
at  tbe  door  of  a  honse  io  wbich  a  dead  persoa  was
lying,  in  order  that  those  leaving  might  purify
tbeniselves  by  spriiikliug  with  the  water.  See
Axistopb.  Eccla,  1033.

Ardea.  Tbe  chief  town  of  the  Ratuli  in  La-
tiam,  situated  about  three  miles  from  the  sea,  one
of  the  most  ancient  places  in  Italy,  and  tbe  capital
of  Tumus.  It  was  conquered  and  colonized  by
tbo  Romans  B.c.  443  (Livy,  iv.  9).

Ardaenna  Silva.  Tbe  Ardennes,  a  vast  forest
in  the  nortbeast  of  Gaul,  exteuding  from  the  Rhine
ind  tbe  Treviri  to  the  Nervii  and  Remi,  and  north
u  far  as  tbe  Scheldt  (Tac.  Ann.  viii.  42).

Area.  Any  open  space  (purus  hctu).  (1)  A  site
for  a  building,
(2)  The  site  of
a  bouse  puUed
down  in  conse-
quence of  its
owner's  tresBon
and  devoted  to
religions  uses
(Cic.  ^djl«.  iv.  I,
2 1.  ( 3 )  Ad  open
Rpace  in  front  of  Area  before  a  Sepnlchra.  (VlllaOorBlnt,
a  temple,  house,  *°"*->

sepulchre,  or  public  building. (4)  A  market-place,
(a)  A  threshing-floor  ^ur).

Areg&nla  {'Aptjyovlt).  Tbe  mother  of  Mops  us
(q.  v.)  by  Ampyx.

AreiopftguB. See  Areopagus.

AreUt^,  Arfilaa,  or  Arelatam.  Now  Aries ;  a
town  in  Gallia  Narbonensis,  at  the  bead  of  the
delta  of  the  Rhone,  ou  the  left  bank,  aud  a  Roman
colony.  Tbe  Roman  remains  at  Aries  attest  the
greatneu  of  tbe  ancient  city :  there  are  still  tbe
rains  of  au  aqueduct,  theatre,  amphitheatre,  etc.

AxMsoiXca. See  Armorica.

Arena. (1)  Sand,  aeubject  to  which  Vitnivius


(ii.  4)  has  devoted  a  chapter. (2)  See  Amphithea-

TKCH.

ArenaxlL  Gladiators  fighting  in  the  arena.
See  Gladiatores.

Areopftgoa  ("Aptios  nayoe).  The  bill  of  Ares
(q.  v.).  A  rocky  eminence  lying  to  the  west  of  tbe
Athenian  Acropolis.  To  account  for  tbe  name,
varions  stories  were  told.  Thus,  some  said  that
it  was  so  called  from  the  Amazons,  tbe  daughters
of  Ares,  having  encamped  there  when  they  at-
tacked  Athens;  others  again,  as  Aeschylus,  from
the  sacrifices  there  ofiered  by  them  to  that  god;
while  the  more  received  opinion  connected  tbe
name  with  tbe  legend  of  Ares  having  been  brought
to  trial  there  by  Poseidon  for  tbe  murder  of  hia
son,  Halirrhotbius  (q.  v.).

To  no  legend,  however,  did  the  place  owe  its
fame,  but  rather  to  the  ancient  criminal  court  or
conocil  (fj  iv  *Apft^  naya  ^ovXt])  wbich  hold  its
sittings  tbere,  and  sometimes  received  tbe  name
of  17  Sva  /3oti\i7,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Solo-
niau  Senate  of  Four  Hundred,  or  the  later  Clis-
thenian  Senate  of  Five  Hundred.  Solon's  legis-
lation raised  the  Areopagus  into  one  of  the  most
powerful  bodies  by  transferring  to  it  the  great-
er part  of  tbe  jurisdiction  of  tbe  Ephetae  (q.  v.),
as  well  as  the  supervision  of  the  entire  public
admiuist ration,  the  couduct  of  magistrates,  the
transactions  of  tbe  popular  assembly,  religion,
laws,  morals,  and  discipline,  and  giving  it  power
to  call  even  private  persona  to  account  for  offen-
sive behaviour. See  Solonian  Constitution.

Ares  {'Apijs).  The  Greek  name  for  tbe  god  of
war,  son  of  Zeus  by  Her^,  whose  quarrelsome  tem-
per Homer  supposes  to  have  passed  over  to  her  sou
so  effectively  that  be  delighted  in  notliing  but
battle  and  bloodshed.  His  insatiable  thirst  for
blood  makes  him  hateful  to  bis  father  aud  to  all
the  gods,  especially  Athene. Hia  favourite  haout


--^^■::^.


Hwd  of  Ares. (Glyptothck,  MBnlGb.>


ARES


ISO


ABGEI


Tb  tue  nm  of  tll**  wild  and  wnrliltn  Tliraoijuis.  In
I'uriii  ami  t'i|ni|ttiKint  tlio  iilrjil  orn'.'irlikf  litmtes,
lit>  ndxatici'M,  iirunnling  to  llmiii-r,  iKtw  on  fooi,
lion-  in  »  rliuvioi  dmivii  by  inagiiitiu;iic  KUt<(l>,
ftltoiidt'd  l>,v  liii«  v4{iiBlly  bloodtliinity  bifttvr  Krih
|j(btrili>|,  liiA  ttuiiM  l>tjiu)iM  nud  rboUus  (fear  aud
fright),  uiid  Kti)-o,l]ioguddo6»  of  battle  auil  waiter
«>r(-ttim  (lie  liiuiewU'boiug  called  Kuyolioft),  i-usliltJ^
tti  blind  ragv  tbruii|;li  iudliicriiniinit«  slauKbtur.
Though  tiglitUtg  on  the  Trojuu  side,  the  bl4>od»hed
only  in  dear  to  his  betarl.  But  bis  unbridled
Mreitgth  and  Idiud  valour  turn  to  hiM  dlHadvait-
togc,  and  iilwnyit  briiti;  about  bis  defeat  in  tbo
|>l¥acuuo  tif  Atbfii6,  the  goddowi  of  onitred  bat>
luliouK ;  hi<  t»  alw  tioatou  by  li«roea  figbtiug  under
ll^r  l«Nid«>r(thip,  an  by  FTttnii-U's  in  thu  I'uulest  nilb
Cyt'uno,  and  by  Diomodti  Itofore  Troy.  And  tbix
vjuw  of  Anw  a«  tlir  bloiKltbintty  ic^d  of  buttles  is,
in  iIh;  main,  that  of  laC^-r  tia»«  aliW.  As  varly  as
Honii'r  liu  is  the  frit-ml  and  Iotc-I  of  Aphrodite,
«  ho  ha»i  honta  him  Eros  and  Ant«ro!c,  Dcimos  and
l*hti)><>»i,  us  well  as  Hormonia,  wife  of  Cadmus  the
fonudtT  of  Thebew,  where  both  goddewt'ij  vrcro
wurabipped  as  uncoatral  deitto».  II»  in  not  named
•o  oitcD  as  the  s^**  ^^  p«ac«;  but,  a«  Ares  or
finyaltus,  he  ytma  doubiless wonbipped  ever}'-


A


'c;?,


Ana t^Uk  iMdnw.  Roimi)


>  11k«


Hii


inh«rp>  notald.i  tu  H)twi«.  lu  AnMulla.  and
fikthrr  of  m>mMlMlU> It) Klia. At .Hpn
ll^HP*  virtv  fta«M4Ut.xH\  10  biui  uudvt  ll>- '
|>TkiMril*a. Al AiWm*  Um> akwtont  »M«»  \^  a
rftHirt  ff  JiMtUv,  tlto \iv,n'.[»i;u*  ri V  \  w*»  .-.
WKMti*blm, t  .ihoOlyu*|»<ku

■OAl  had  «*|  • f  >  and  «t<wdvtsl

Elm  XI  hi>»  l\v  Uad  »1«4U  U*UHtH4hllM  Ita  «0tett«|t


n1M^lA  wore  the  Hiwar  and  tlu
lli^riire  the  inti'iKlnntion  of  IrunijH-tN,  two  |>rif4
of  AifA,  tiinrrhing  in  front  of  iltt^  armies,  btui
iltfi  tortrli  fti  the  f<H^  nx  tlm  Hignal  of  bmite.

In  uorlcH  lit  art  liv  nas  reprcttontMl  aa  a  jotu
and  hauiKuuie  man  of  atroug,  sinewy  frame,  t
hair  in  nburt  cui-U,  and  a  somoivhat  sonibra  lot
in  his  counttiuanoe ;  in  the  early  alyl^  he  is  beardi
and  iu  atmour,  in  the  later  buardleMi  and  wii
only  tlio  helmet  on.  He  is  often  reprettentFed
company  with  Aphrodite,  and  their  boy  Eros,  wl
l>laya  with  hi»  father's  arm**.  One  of  the  mo
famoui)  statues  extant  in  that  in  the  Villa  Ludovi
givi^n  above,  which  dinplars  him  in  an  eusy  reelii
attitude,  nilli  lii«  arms  laid  a»idu,  and  Krus  at  b
feet.  On  bis  identification  with  the  Italian  Mai
we  Maiu>.

Arestoride*.  A  patronymic  applied  to  Argi
(4.  v.).

AretaeuB  ('Ap<>au>r).  A  physieian  of  Capp
docia,  born  near  the  cloae  of  the  second  century  A-
Ue  was  the  author  of  two  works,  eaeh  in  foi
booko,  on  the  cauaes,  symptoms,  uod  cure  of  aoal
and  chnmic  pains.  He  wrote  in  the  Ionic  diala
with  nincb  elegance  and  clearness ;  and  bis  tra
tiiMJs  »how  a  cornN:tuc«8  of  anderstandiug  with  r
£ard  to  iniHlicinu  unusual  among  the  ancient  vri
tiTH  on  this  subject,  lie  ditKuunses  with  exiieci
aotitenoMJ.  of  the  uorvee,  of  iudige«tion,  and  pvi
an  excellent  account  of  diseasua  of  the  Ihroat  at
tonsils. See  Mann,  Aniaei  7%ervpia  (1856).

Axetaldei  (tifMraXvyoi).  Literally  "  itcrsons  dt
ooDtbiug  about  virtue."  Originally  poor  stoics  1
cynics,  who,  being  nnable  to  gain  a  living  by  the
pablic  lectnree^ obtaioei!  a  precarioasmaintenani
at  the  tables  of  ihc  rich  by  their  philoeophical  ce
Tecssiiou.  The  nauiu  U  generally  equi\-alent '
panuinu  (q.  T.)  or  tcmmt. See  tsuot.  Auff.  74.

Arat4  ('AjMfTi|>.  The  wife  of  AJcinoUs  (q.  -w
king  of  the  Pbanciaua,  and  the  prutector  of  Od^
sens  (q.  T.i.

AxethiiBa  ('ApcAiMra).  <1)  One  of  the  Xona.
and  nymph  of  the  fountain  of  the  Mime  namo-
tbe  i^huid  of  Orfrgia,  near  Syracnse,  For  '
•tory,  aee  Alfiirc«.  (^)  One  of  the  llaspex&i
(q.  v.).

AratiaonL  A  Bomaa  eolony  in  Etraria  C '
llaL  V.  t£t)

Arednm. See  ARumrx.

Axetaa  ( '.Vr<x  )■  -^  famous  warrior,  wlH
only  weapon  was  an  irtm  cinb,  and  who  w
tn>.M<UeT\»nsl>  tflain  by  Lycorgita,  king  of  Afcadj
fH^*  Pau^n.  viii.  II.

Alalia  CVr^X  Tbe  name  of  Iwo  kiogi  *
'Sfiarta,  tbe  Atvt  n-ixoiug  B.C.  309-985;  and  U
avcottd,  w  a  child,  aboat  a  c  SM-iKAl

Avc4.  A  hcaaiilbllwnlceaB  changed  Into  a  tU
hr  Arotlo  iHfg.  rak  306).

Al«tt. We  Isan  trem  Uvy  (i  31)  that  Noxi

nMiarora*e«i  flacaa  tot  tbe  cek-btatiou  of  religio '

^  loaat  whkk  van  tm&td  hj  the  ponlifioc*  or^

lu  eaUa  %ham  the  *'chapala  af  tbe  argei,"  u.*

'  thvy  w«n>  twemyo>¥m  in  number,  distri

.1  ta  \h»  aifl^nal  Oktikts  eC  the  city. ^

know  bat  Ultfe  wt  tbe  frtiealir  iMes  to  w  ti  icb  tU'

««t«a|>«dic4.aiiidtbalUlU»lawdatportaut.  Tbt

we  an  leM  IbaA  Aa^r  wm  aalciaBly  Tinted  00  ^

UbecnUm  er  ftekival  «r  Baocboa;  and,  ala»,  t>»


ARtiKin-AlUI


in


ARaoNAirrAR


£;


ij*Ter  the  tlnnifii  l)iati»  went  (int\  to  tljeiii,  ho

I  to  (itlliprv  to  crrtaii)  oliifi(:rvniioe.f. Tbey  m-<.-iu

|iM> to  havd  iKH'it  ilio  defiooitarie*  of  llic  tupo-

ruphicjtl  tvconli). Tlicro nae  a tnditiou  tbni

laae  nrijri  wnru  iiainctl  fmtii  the  rliii^ftaiiis  wliu

with  Ilt-rvtilrK,  tho  Ar);ivt>,  t(>  Riiiitf,  nnd  ao-

■ipiml  tht'Ca|>itulilif<.  tir.  as  it  wtwiiticii^iilly  rnlliMt,

kturiiiuu  Hill. S««  Aal.  Gelt.  x.  16  :  Varn>,  /..  L.

-w.  .«5.

Xbe  oauie  ar^  rraa  nlaogiveu  to  cftrluiii  fiKori^
tlkruwo  iuto  the  TiWr  fruui  tb«  Sublicinn  Bri(1(;ii,
oil  tbe  Idea  uf  >lay  iu  every  >vur.  ThiH  »&a  ilmm
l>y  tbe  pontitictvi,  tho  v(»tul»,  thr  gjiartont,  and
other  citiEeiiH.  aAer  the  itcrfununiict.'  of  the  ciia>
■loinary  iuicriflpt»(«.  The  iinagtv  wfrre  tiiirty  in
kiiniUiT,  iiiuili'ftrbntni^hcM.  anil  in  tlie  fnrni  of  int'U,
>vid  niak<-«  varioiin  «u|i|iof(it)on»  to  account  fur
th*  oripfiLi  uf  llitv  rit*' ;  we  can  only  p*iiij*'ctnre  that
It  wa«^a  MynilMtlical  oflV'nns  to  pn>[ntiato  tbi^  eotts,
anti  that  lhi<  niiinbrr  van  »  n-{irfiwntative  either
of  tUi:  thirty  (latririnn  ninud  at  Home,  or  porhaps
^nof  the  thirty  Laltti  ttJunnhiiiK.  P*-i*  Varro.  L,  L.
^Vvii.  44;  Ovid.  Fait.  v.  Gil  ;  and  F<'t>tut<,  a.  v.

^P Axgentaili  iTpatFrC'*Tat). Deatvra  in  inonfty,  iti-
^■clndiug Diixiey -chan-^crv,  umiriMm,  and baukure
prtiper. See  TiiAi'KZtTAK.

Argenteiu.  A  Roman  »<itvrr  coin,  valni-d  at
ahont  twelve  cents. .Set-i  Nlmissiaticb  (K*mian).

IArgeotoratum.  Tbe  uuKtoni  city  of  5tni»-
bnrg ;  a  Ftoiiwin  ninnicipluni  in  Oallia  Bolgica,  uu
Uie  Uhiof.  The  Ri>maim  bad  a  uiuunftii.^Cory  of
*nBa  brre;  and  here,  aUn,  th<i  «m[>cror  Jiiliau  ile-
'eatw!  the  AlRmannl.  In  tbe  sixth  oeutury  we
flud  it  caljml  Stratiiibiirgiiiin,  whence  ciirae»  the
ttioderu  itanic.

ArBeatum  (apyvpot). Stiver. The  Allieniuus

t  obtained  lhi:ir  silver  from  the  iiilver  tnincH  at  L:iu-
rium,  which  were  jtftierally  reganU^l  an  the  rhief
•onrce  of  the  wealth  of  Alhena.  We  learn  frnm
AAnopboD  that  tbci>o  mines  had  boeu  worked  in


wife  ofpolynioca  (q.  v.)  (Hyg.  Fab.  m  Mid  ?8). Sm

Arglaa  Orapb^  lapyiat  ypatftij).  An  action  to
wliirb  any  Athenian  citizen  waa  liable,  accorillng
to  the  4)Id  hiw.  if  lie  eouhl  Liot  briii(;  cviileuce  that
he  bad  sonm  lawfnl  culling.  The  law  waa  intro-
(iiieeil  by  Draco,  who  made  tbe  poualty  of  convic-
tion death  ;  fiohni  re-«nact»Ml  the  law.flnbatitiiling,
however,  for  tbe  capital  pnniMliment  a  fine  of  100
drachmae  forlbe  lirMt  cunviciion,  and  a  looit  i>f  riv>
ic  ri^btf)  (dniiia)  if  the  Hanie  pcnwtn  waa  convicted
tbn'ft  times  of  indolcnL-e.  Accordiiiff  to  IidinK  P«»|-
tnx,  Draco  did  not  impoHe  a  Mivrrer  lUiDirthiniMit
than  oTtfiia,  and  Sidoii  did  not.  punish  it  at  all  till
thi-  third  olfence. See  I'lut.  Sol.  117  ;  Poll.  viii.  4a.

Argllctum.  .\  di.'^trirt.  in  Rome,  exteiidiiix  fnmi
the  south  of  theQniiiual  to  tbe  Capitoline  mid  the
Fornin,  It  vti\»  chiefly  liiliahitml  by  nieohanieii  and
b(ink>«'lhT«  (Man.  i.  4).  Varro  derivea  the  iianio
fnnn  nr$j\Hn,  "pritt^T'B  clay,"  anil  Homo  make  it
.irgi  Irium.  am  refi^rring  to  the  hero  Ai-guH  (Vcrg.
Am.  viii.  :t4>^;).

ArgUla. See  Creta.

Arsmiisae  (Wpy tyoZirm].  Thn-c  fniall  intlauds
off  tbe  cuoat  of  Acolint,  iip{Hmitt)  Mvtih-ni^  in  Les-
bos, celebrated  for  the  mtval  victory  of  llie  Athe-
nians uver  the  Lwwdaeiiioniano  ninler  (^alllcrati-
ttas,  B.C.  40tl. Se«PxLui*()NNKKiAN  Wak.

Argiphontea  ( 'A(»yfu^o>njr  (.  "  ArgntHilayer.''
.\n  (Epithet  applied  to  llcmies. See  Aitiii'H.

Argitis.  A  8iM>ciwi  of  wine,  nclehrat<id  by  Ver-
gil for  its  dnrability.  It  in  iKdieved  to  have  been
a  white  wine. Sire  Vcrg.  Heart/,  ii.  99,

Argivl ftoe  Abgos.

Argo  CApyw). Sec  Aiiao!?ArTAB.

ArgoUcnB  Sinna. See  Aimos.

ArgJUis  ('\fryo\it). See  Ajtcoa.

AjeonaMtaeCApyovavrai).  A  name  given  to  those


**<Mtfl  Aiitiqitity; and  Xeiiopbou  sjwuks  of  them  I  who  mailed  iu  the  Hbip  Argo  nnder  tbe  lead  of  laaon

*•  If  h(»  ooiieidered  ihem  inexhanatible. In "-"%  ""'I-  v.),  son  of  Ackoii,  a  gi'neration before  the  Tim-

tiBw  of  DemiMithenea,  however,  the  pmlU  ari /^'^lau  War,  to  Aea,  afterward^  identified  with  Col-

"I^wb  ilieni had greatly  diniinirdiwl; and in  ^'^.ii- | ^.at  the  oaatern  cihI  of  tine  Erixine  Sea. Tho

•■•WMiil  rentnry  of  the  Chrintian  em  (be*',- '  l» uf  j  Atbeltiou  was  nndertaken  for  the  recovery  of  the

longtr  worked. Tba  ore  from  uhieh . . «  ver- F""'**' "e*-ce  id  thii  rain  on  which  Phrixtw,  sou  nf

■WiW  olitaiiied  w:iii  called  "dilver  earth"  f*  'Cftleriiw  uMhaniaa  (q.  v."}.  had  lied  fpuni  Iuh  father  and  Ino,

'ri.  or  Dimply  apyvfiirtt). Tlie  aanie  (i!rllon*eni^) bin  slep-nH»ther,to  the  cnnrtof  AeCten.king  of  Aea,

*■«  iIki  a[>pliecl  to  the  om  by  Ibe  Unniav 4.who a  niigbty  magician. Having  hvuu  boHpilahly  re-

"hulncil  moKt  of  their silver  from Spain. See

CaBUttIU; 3lETAl.l.t'M.

IT"-  relalivf  vjiluu  of  gold  and  silver  differed
WMidtltmlilj  al  dineit^nt  periudn  in  Grv*-\i  and  Ro-
^w  birtory.  Herodotus  mentions  It  a«  1  to  I'.l;
rUloMi  to  12;  Menandcr  as  1  tn  10;  and  Ijvy
•^  I  l<j  10.  ftbont  B.C.  ItSt.  AcconVmg  to  Sucto.
"'^  Idiujt  Cae-iar,  on  one  occasion,  exehaiiged
PWiiff  ailvt-r  in  the  pniportion  of  1  tn  9;  but  the
*i«t  [L,n»l  pru{>ortion  nmler  the  early  Roman  em-
I*^'»  «M  ahnut  I  to  12;  and  from  ConatantiiK
*"J"dliiiao  about  1  to  14,  or  1  to  i^.

rof  Uh,  |(^>  ,,f  Hilver  in  roiniine.  see  the  articW
J'^'Wi*; iJKNAKlt:^; 1}ka<'1im.\,  and eapecially


AiSentom  Vlvum  i  Spyvpos  yyrdt  1- Qilickaii-
'"  '•(  ninrrury. See  Pliny.  //,  X.  xxxiii.  20.

^f  I  'Xfryfit). See  C  YOl^JPKJi-

^tX See  Annus

^P*{'.\pyiiai. The  dauKbler  of  Adraalna  and


ceiveil  by  him,  and  ninrried  to  bin  danght»r  (Miiil-
clup^,  hu  had  »aeritlced  tho  ratu,  turd  hniig  its
fleece  np  in  the  grove  of  Arcs,  wbei-e  it  was  cnanl-
ed  by  a  hteepless  dragon.  The  tusk  of  brinciiig
iL  back  was  laid  upon  IaF>on  by  his  nncle  Pe)ia.4,
son  of  Poseidon  and  Tyro,  who  bad  de]trivcd  Itia
half-bnilher  .AeHon  of  the  Hnven<igiity  of  loletia
in  TliPHMily.  .\eiunif  to  protect  bis  sou  from
Iho  plotH  of  PeliiiK,  hnil  ronveye<]  him  scorf^tly
to  the  I'entuur  i^'biron  on  Monnt  Pelioii,  who
bronght  him  np  nntil  he  waa  twenty  years  of
age.  Then  lafuni  came  bonw,  and  without  u
shoe  on  his  left  fool,  having  lost  it  in  witdlug
Ibrough  a  nioniitain  lurn-iit,  prewnt'ed  hiiiistdf
before  PeliaM,  demanding  his  faihiir'M  rent or.-tt ion
lo  his  sovereignty.  Tbe  crafty  Pelias,  whom  an
oracle  bnd  warned  against  a  oiic-sboMi  man,  piom-
isail  on  his  oath  U^  do  what  he  asUt-d.  if  limon
wonid  go  iiibtend  of  bim^telf  to  bring  tho  golden
fleece.  This  task  tiie  oracle  ha<l  iin|>osed  iip«>n
hiuiKcIf,  but  be  was  too  old  |o  pcrfoitn  it. Anoth-


ARGONAUTAE


ARGONAUTAE


er  vereiou  of  the  story  is,  that  lason,  after  com-
pletiag  his  edncation  with  Chiron,  preferred  to
live  ID  the  001111117;  'tha.t  he  came,  with  oue  shoe
ou,  to  a  sacritice  tliut  Pelias  was  offering  to  Po-
seidoa  on  the  sea-shore ;  that  Pelias  asked  him
what  be  wonld  do  if  he  were  king  aud  bad  been
forewarned  of  bis  death  at  the  baud  of  a  subject ;
and  that,  upon  lasou  answering  that  he  woald
make  him  bring  the  golden  fleece,  Pelias  gave
him  the  eomtnissiou.  Her£  had  put  that  answer
into  Iosoii'h  mouth,  because  she  regarded  him  with
favour,  and  wiahed  to  punish  Pelias  for  having
slain  Sidero  in  her  temple. See  Salmonbus.

The  vessel  for  the  voyage,  tbe  tifty-oared  Ai^o,
is  said  to  have  been  named  after  its  builder  Argos,
a  sou  of  Pbrixus  after  bis  return  to  Orchomeuue,
the  home  of  his  fathera.  Tbe  ship  was  built  of  the
pines  of  Peliou  nnder  the  direction  of  Athen^,  like
Her£  a  protectress  of  lason,  who  inserted  in  the
prow  a  piece  of  the  speaking  oak  of  Dudona.  The
heroes  who,  at  lason's  call,  took  part  iu  the  expe-
dition (fifty  all  told,  oocordiug  to  the  number  of
the  oars),  were  origiaally,  iu  the  version  to  which
tbe  Miuyan  family  gave  currency,  Miuyans  of  lol-


AtheD^  supeiiDtendlog  tbe  Buildfog  of  tho  Argo.
tav.  4fi.)


^


cos,  Orcbomenns,  Pylos,  and  other  places.  Among^
them  were  Acastus  the  sou  of  Pelias,  a  close  friend
of  loBon ;  Admetus,  Ergiuus,  Euphemiis,  Periclyme-
Dus,  and  Tipbys.  But,  as  the  story  spread,  all  the
Greek  heroes  that  could  have  been  living  at  the
time  were  included  among  the  number  of  tbe
Argonauts — e.  g.  Heracles,  Castor  and  Polydeuces,
Idas  and  Lynceus,  Calais  and  Zetcs  tbe  sons  of
Boreas,  Peleus,  Tjdens,  Meleager,  AmphtaraUs,
Orpheus,  Mopsus  aud  Idmon  the  prophets  of  the
expedition,  and  even  the  huntress  Atslanta.  loson
takes  the  command,  and  Tiphys  mauagos  tbe  helm.
Setting  sail  from  Pegasae,  tbe  port  of  lolcoe,  the
Argonauts  make  the  island  of  Lemnos,  where  only
women  dwell,  aud  after  some  considerable  stay
there  (see  HrPSiPYLfe)  go  ]>ast  Samothrace  and
through  the  Hellespont  to  the  island  of  Cyzicns,
where  they  are  hospitably  received  by  Cyzious,
the  king  of  tbe  Doliouea ;  but,  attempting-to  pro-
ceed, are  beaten  back  by  a  storm  at  night,  and,
being  taken  by  their  late  friends  for  pirates,  are
attacked,  and  have  tbe  ill-fortune  to  kill  their
young  kiug.  On  tbe  coast  of  Mysia  they  leave
Heracles  behind  to  look  for  Hylas  (q.  v.),  who  has


been  carried  off  by  nymphs.  On  tbe  Bitbyniau
shore,  Polydeuces  vauquisbes  tbe  fiebrycian  king
Amycns  (q.  v.)  in  a  boxiug-matcb.  At  Salmydessus
iu  Thrace,  tbe  blind  seer  Pbiuens,  whom  Calais
and  Zetes  had  rid  of  the  Harpies,  bis  tormentors,
instructs  them  with  regard  to  the  rest  of  their
jouniey,  and  especially  how  to  sail  through  the
Symplegades,  two  floating  rocks  that  clash  togeth-
er at  tbe  entrance  to  the  Black  Sea.  By  his  ad-
vice lasou  seuds  a  dove  before  him,  and  as  she  has
ouly  ber  tail-feathers  cut  off  by  tbe  colliding  rocks,
they  venture  ou  tbe  feat  of  rowing  the  Argo  tbmugb.
By  Herd's  help,  or,  according  to  another  account,
that  of  Athene,  they  do  what  uo  man  has  done  be-
fore: they  pass  through,  the  ship  only  losing  ber
rudder.  Skirting  the  southern  shore  of  tbe  Poutns,
they  meet  with  a  friendly  reception  from  Lycns,
kiug  of  the  Maryaudini,  though  here  tbe  seer  Id-
mon is  killed  by  a  wild  boar  iu  huntiug,  and  the
helmsman  Tiphys  dies  of  a  disease,  whereupon
Ancaens  takes  bis  place.  Past  tbe  laud  of  the  Ama-
zons they  come  to  the  island  of  Arettas,  wheuce
they  scare  away  the  Stymphaliau  birds  (see  Her-
acles), and  take  on  board  the  sous  of  Phrizus,
who  hod  been  shipwrecked  there  ou
their  way  to  Greece.  At  length  they
reach  tbe  mouth  of  tbe  Pbasis  iu  the
land  of  the  Colcbians.  Upon  losou's
demand,  Aeetes  promises  to  give  up
the  golden  fleece,  on  condition  that
laaon  catches  two  brazen-hoofed,  fire-
breatbing  bulls,  yokes  them  to  a  brazen
plough,  aud  ploughs  with  them  tbe
field  of  Ares,  sows  tbe  furrows  with
dragons'  teeth,  and  overcomes  tbe  niail-
clad  men  that  are  to  spring  out  of
them.  Tbe  hero  has  given  up  all  hope
of  success,  when  Aphrodite  kindles  in
tbe  breast  of  the  king's  dangbter  Me-
dea an  irresistible  love  for  tbe  stranger.
Medea  gives  him  an  ointment  to  pro-
tect him  from  the  fiery  breath  of  tbe
bulls,  as  well  as  tbe  strength  to  faaniess
them,  and  advises  him  to  throw  a  stone
tbe'Uevi  '"  among  tbe  earth-bom  giants,  who
storv  '  ^^'^  ^'^'  ^*'^^  other.  But  when  all  this
f \  is  done  Aeetes  does  not  give  up  the

.q-  -f^  Then  lason,  with  the  help  of  Medea,
"vf^r**!  be  promises  to  take  home  with  faim  as
bis  ^ife,  throws  the  dragon  that  guards  it  into
a  sleep,  takes  it  down,  aud  escapes  with  Medea
and  bis  comrades.  Aeetes  sends  his  bod  Absyrtua
in  pursuit,  whom  lason  kills  by  stratagem.  An-
other story  is  that  Medea  takes  ber  little  brother
Absyrtus  with  her,  cuts  him  to  pieces,  and  throws
tbe  limbs  oue  by  one  into  tbe  sea,  so  that  her  father,
while  pursuing  her,  might  be  delayed  iu  picking
them  up  aud  laying  tbem  out.

As  to  the  return  of  tbe  Argonauts,  the  legends
differ  considerably.  One  of  the  oldest  makes  them
sail  up  the  Phasis  into  tbe  river  Oceanus,  and  over
that  to  Libya,  where  they  drag  tbe  ship  twelve
days'  journey  overland  to  Lake  Tritonis,  and  get
home  across  the  Mediterranean.  Other  accounts
agree  with  this  iu  substance,  while  otben,  again,
mix  up  the  older  tradition  with  the  adventures
of  Odysseus.  The  heroes  sail  up  tbe  Danube  into
the  Adriatic,  and  are  within  hail  of  Coroyra  {C!orfn>
when  a  storm  breaks  out,  and  the  piece  of  oak  (torn.
Dodona  foretells  their  ruin  unless  they  have  the
murderof  Absyrtus  expiated  by  Ctroj. Heuoe  they


ARGONAUnCA


la


ARIADNE


A^iil  ap  tlie  Eridniiiiii  into  the  Rhone,  in<l  so  into
,  tti<i T>'rrbiiQiuii  Sra  to  tin*  island  of  CirL-(<,  who
[iiiritlni  llieui. Tbi')'  go  jtH»l  the  ieJiind  of  tlio  Si-
no.  ngitiitnt wliuna  uiDicii: tbi.'  iwiigH  i>f  Orphetm
[>r«>teci  tb«iui. All  but  IIiiIca  (q.  t.)  |iaim  in  sufety
piwvca  Scylla  and  Chui'.Tt>iliB  witb  f.bti  help  o(
li0  gods,  and  rcAoh  tliv  inland  of  tbo  J'bneauians.
rliere  l»0ou  ouurics  Medea  to  cviulu  tbe  Avnivnev
tbvir  bo«t  AlcinuU<4,  who,  in  bi»  capacity  ott  tim-
^Jre, bas  ^ireo  jud^ieut  tliat  tlie ^tr)  MetU-ii  bn
|rliv«re4l  op  to  her  C'ukUiau  [loreuen). Already
ritliiu  stglit  of  the  Pelo[i<)iuie8n8,  a  stunu  drivni
l3t.«iM into  tb(^  Liby»n  Syrtea,  nL«nc«  tbey  carrj*
h*-^ir fehtft,  Mived  by  dli'iii«  HKAistaiioe,  In  Lake
rritoiii«. Tbence,  guided  by  Tritou  Iw*^  EL'PHK-
>t'!*i iuto  tbtt  Mediterranean,  tbey  i-eliirn  by  way
dC  Orvte  |u  loIcuH.

I>unug  thL>ir  nbM>nc«  Poliiis  baa  put  to  di*iilb
gAcnou  Olid  biii  miu  PromaclitiK,  and  Inttoii'it  lunrbrr
aa(*  taken  ber  own  liCi-.  Medrn  i*bI8  to  woik  to
j^'CUp!  ibeui.  Bt'fore  lln-.  eyt-«  of  lVli»H'iidaaKbti>rH
I  culM  np  an  old  lu--}cont,  and  by  boiling  it  in  a
iccnldrou  reHtt->ri-it  it  toltfoand  yotitli.  Pmni-
'iiifC  i"  like  uiannor  to  UMiew  tbo  yotitli  vf  ibe
^Kvil  PelioH,  ftbe  indnceit  tbeni  to  kill  tbcir  fnibiT
fc*»"l  Iben  leaven  ibein  in  tbe  Inrcb.  Driven  away
»>'  AcAMtuH,  tbd  Hon  or  tbf  murdered  kinj;,  Ia»on
•w«l  Medea  lake  i-Ffiigf  witb  Cc<-on,  king  <if  C«>r-
'Utli.  Kut.afler  ten  >ear»Mf  bAppy  nedb«'k,  lawn
'«»lvei8  to  murrj'  C'reon's  datiyblflr  Ci-cLlwi,  or
^  Slatted.  On  this.  Meitea  kilU  tbo  bi-ide  and  ber
rattier  by  sendiu]^  tbe  iiu»ini«|»ectinf;  inniden  a  poi-
***"*^<l  iTibo  and  a  diadem  as  a  biidal  t;itt,  uinrdei-s
^^^•*r  itTTii  l\rn  sons,  Merinenis  and  Plierett,  in  ber
^^P^itlitens  bnnhand's  sight,  and,  etM-.ipiiig  in  a  car
^BBrn^vii  by  M'lpciiCflf  sent  by  her  graudfntber  Helio6,
Hp|«kM  ber  way  to  AeRctia,  king  of  Athene.  (See
"■^toEA.!  Insun  in  saiil  to  have  comn  by  bix  death
"•rough  (be  Argo.  wbieh  be  liad  set  np  ami  cou-
"mii'd  on  tbe  IblbniiiH.  One  day,  when  he  wha
'iity  dnuii  to  refit under  the  ubip,  tbe  »teni  fell

and  killud  bini.

_  Tbe  legrnd  of  the  ArgnnaiitN  is  nxIreDiely  ati-

^>*it)t; cv4-n IIdiiht Hpt-akH nf it a^  iinirersally

^'"owu. We  tifKl.  ttiiil  it  treated  in  detail  in  Piii-

'»r; then tbe Aiexuiidriun ptM^t Aiiolbmiiig nf

*Uij«Ieii  iq.  v.i  irird  to  hmniniru*^  the  varioiin  ver-

'i«niii,and  woa  followed  bytlip  Latin  (vu«tfl  Valeriiin

I'laccux,  Varro  Ataernns,aud  tbelatoUreek  Pacudo-

1  On^hetiH. Be«  Rovcher,  Amnfiirlirhpm  Lrximn,  MO-

I  ^37  ;  A.  Lang.  rH»loiH  nnrf  .Uy(A,  pp.  "M-Wl  (I**!) ;

*iul  id.  Intnidurtidn  to  Mr>t,  HiiiU'rt  Iruunlulimi  of

fOliinniB  HouMrhuM  Talrn  (18«4l.

Argonautlca. See ApoUAiNirs ; Vaij!KP>
^Lal-cls  ;  Vaiiko.

AipM  ("Apyoc)  is  wild  to  have  signified,  in  the

wij^ttl^  iif  tiif,  Maci^lnninii!!  and  TlieJtanliaiiK,  a

^•>lu,  aud  it  may  lliereftirn  rontaiii  tbe  Hlinie  hhiI

•*  *1»  Laliu  word  ug^f. In  Hompr  we  find nieii-

lioii  iftihc  IVloMgic  Argnji — that  is,  a  (i>«n  or  diw-

ttwi  i)t  TlteMUily — and  of  Ibe  Aelintiin  Argfui,  by

*oic|i  be  tneuim  wimrtimes  the  whole  IVluponne-

'*'*i«uiiioiinu-»  Agaim-mitou's  kingdom  of  Argus,  of

*kiel)UTcciiiK  wofl  the  eiiiiital,  and  aoTnetimea  the

"**«  tif  Argoi. As  Argon  frequently  signilips  the

*bu|e  P<'lt>|i(mnesn!*,  the  nio*it  important  port  of

"iBKi',  m  th«  'ApytitM  often  occur  in Homer  a»t  a

*•!'»■  iif  vhe  whole  body  of  the  Cireckn,  in  which

•*"**■  Mic  Rnmaa  p»fct«  aluo  n»u  Argiri.^-ilf  Alicos,

'diHtfirt  fif  Polopouncsiia,  lying  Itetwcen  Arcadia


and  tbo  AafMia  flea,  and  iil»o  called  by  Greek  writ-
cn  Argia,  W  Argolici^,  oi  Argnlih  Under  the  Ho-
uiaus  AruOlis  became  the  usnnl  noiue  of  tbe  euuu-
Iry.  {"i)  Tbe  chief  city  of  Argolla,  abont  two  mile*
from  the  sea,  on  tbe  Sinus  Argolieim.  Il  wa«  fabled
to  have  been  built  by  hevnn  (.'yelope«  from  Syria
<Knrip.  //>A.  in  Aul.  15*^,  r>'M)  for  InaehuH,  tbe  first
kiiiK.  Tbe  city  was  under  tlie  eripecial  proteetioii
of  ljen5.  Its  inbabitauls  were  eallt-d  Argivi  and
Argoliei — ^uames  which  ore  olten  iijiplioil  to  ibo
uboli!  Ureck  riuie.  <  Hee  IIkli.a^.)  Tbe  city  in
often  spokeu  of  in  the  plural  form,  Aryi.

Argoa  AmphlloohYcum.  Tlie  rhief  town  of
Ampbilni'bia  in  Acanmiiiu,  on  the  Amhrncinn
Guir

Argui  ("Aftyae).  (I)  The  son  of  Zeus  and  Ntubc,
and  tbint  king  of  Argon,  (tl)  Called  Panopt«(t,  •'  all-
itciMng,"  as  having  u  hundred  eyes.  Hu  wom  the
wtn  of  Agenor,  or  Areator,  or  Inofbus.  lleni  uj»-
poiut«d  liini  guardian  of  the  cow  into  which  In  had
been  nielauinrphosecl ;  hut  Ilertues.  at  tbe  com-
mand nf  Zeuii,  (M'nt  him  to  nloep  by  tbe  nweet  riotpji
of  lii«  Intf ,  and  tbiMi  nit  off  Iuk  head.  Hen:'  trans-
plaut4>d  hiH  eyi-«  tn  the  tail  <*f  the  ]H>neock,  ber
favoririle  binl.  See  lo.  (tt^Tlie  biiibler  nf  tbe
Argo,  Kon  of  Pliri&im  (A]Hill.  KhcHl. !.  112).

Argyraapldea  i  aftyvfnitnriiStt).  A  division  of
tlie  >!;ii'fd<inj:in  tinny,  who  uerr  mi  enlleil  boeauaa
tbey  curried  shieldM  covered  u  ilh  silver  plateji.
They  w^ire  held  in  high  honour  by  Alexander  tbo
Great,  ol'tf^r  whose  death  they  went  over  to  Antigo-
nmi.  Livy  menlionN  tbeiu  an  tbo  royal  cuhnrt  in
the  army  of  Antigotins.  The  Roman  emperor  .Alex-
ander Sev4>riiii  hiid  in  bi-i  army  ii  body  nf  men  who
were  cjilled  ayt/firoaipidrM. { Uimprid. .-( lejc.  Sev.  &0.)

Argyrlou  DUcd  {a/yyvpiov  diV^).  A  civil  snlt  to
compel  the  defendant  to  pay  over  to  the  plaintiff
money  in  bis  posscttsiun,  or  for  which  be  wam  liable.

Argyripa. See  Akpi.

Argyritia  ia^ryvp'irts). See  AltOKNTitM.

Argyrokopelon  i  ajryvpoKt>wua» ).  Tbe  utiut  at
Athens. See  Monrta  :  N'L'MlKMATICti.

Algyrol&goi  iopyvpoXoyot).  The  Jthips  of  ibn
Albeniatin,  riHienHibly  employed  dnritig  the  Pelo-
pniineAinn  War  tn  levying  the  rcgiilnr  triliule  from
the  allies;  but  often  engaged  in  niiiking  arbitrary
exa>.^tions  and  fwTicd  contributions  even  f>om  neii-
tnvla.  Cf.  Thiic.,a.  iii.  ID  ;  iv.  50,  ?:>;  Xcn.  Hrll.  i.
1,8.  >

Axej^rpa  (Apyvpnt). tice  AltOENTUM.

.  AxeyTotamiMB  (a-^ftorafiiai).  The  native  fiunn-
cial  oiBcers  of  the  t«"eek  provinces  dnring  the  ptn
rlod  of  Roman  rule,  and  diHtingnished  from  the
rnfilat  or  Komiin  i|iinestnrs. {('.  T.  G.  27K7.)

Aria  i'\pia  and  'Xfttla)-  The  most  important  of
the  eahU-rn  pmvinces  of  the  ancient  Pcrsiini  Kni-
pire,  buniideil  on  the  eaitt  by  thu  ParnginmiKadae,
on  llm  tiurth  by  the  Margiaua  imd  by  llyruaniii,  on
the  went  liy  Paitliia,  aud  on  tbe  iMc.ilh  by  the  dea-
ert  of  (.'arinaiiin.  Fniui  Aria  Wits  derived  tlut.name
under  ^^  bieh  all  the  ensleni  pruvinoes  VBte  inolud-
ed. See  AniANA  :  PEItSlA.

Atladn^  C i\pia.fivf\).  Tbe  daughter  of  MiiuK  and
Pa*tipbati,  who  fell  in  love  with  Tbeseus  when  he
came  to  Crete  to  kilt  the  Mirintanr.  aud  gave  liim  %
clew  of  yam,  to  help  him  to  find  his  way  bock  to
tbe  light  of  itay  after  slaying  the  monster  in  the
Labyrinth. She  then  esca^rad  witii  bim. Huiuar


ARIADNEA


tN


ARrES


rfiptvfifints  AHadn<S  lu  «Imn  hy  Art^'inis  iu  the  isl-
autl  of  Din,  close  to  Cn»t«?.  iit  th«  ii><|iieat  of  Dio-
ii,V8Ufl.  But  the  Inter  lt>}(pnil  nliiflM  tlte  meue  to  the
isle  of  NaxcM,  where  tlip  slnirilwiiiiy  Ariadu^  is
doAcrted  by  Tho»c)iN.  Oti  wjikiu^,  eho  is  in  the
Ui}i>tb)>  of  dospnir,  wlian  Dion.VMiia  oouiea  and  rai»c«
bor  to  the  dignity  of  u  t^ud'H  wife.  Zt^iis  graiitd
bpr  imniortiilily,«iul  i*L't«  her  bridnl  gift,  a  crown,
ftiiioiig  thpi  man;  Khc  itvcived  dlviue  hcKtoim:  nt
NnxtH*  her  fwttivals  were  beUl,  miw  with  diitmat
rilt-M  recalling  bvr  abnndoiiniput,  and  nun'  with
bttcchurialiuii  revelry  Wfiltinn  the  happy  li ride  of
Dioiiytius.  The  stury  of  Ariadnd  hjx»  Up«ii  !i  fa-
vourite! «ul>J«ct  for  artists  and  jmcU  in  all  u^ctt.


\^


SlMivlnf  Ariwioj. (VutcuL)

At  Athens  in  tfae  aiitiimu  tbey  held  a  joyoua  f«8-
tival  to  her  and  DioiiywiH,  wliii'h  Thuwus  wan  sup*
pcMi'd  to  have  fmindeil  on  hla  return  froiu  Crete.
Iu  Italy,  wlien>  they  identilied  IHonyBUB  with  their
wiiiti-god  Liber,  tbi'y  al»o  took  Ariadn^  for  the
wine-gcMldi'ftH  Libera  Ui-  v-l.  St^e  in  £rj;Ush,  F.
Tennyeon'a  Ariuilne,  nud  Bom's  Jriad»f  in  ,VflX«».

Aiiactnea  ('.V/xndffdi).  FetttivulK  held  in  liniiimr
of  Ariuilii/  in  Naxnit,  and  hIko  In  CypruH.

Ailaeus  {'Aptaiot).  The  friend  of  CyroB,  and
eomtnund'LT  of  the  left  \vii>i;>  of  h\»  army  nt  the
battle  of  Cunaxa  {<|,  v.)  iti  h.C.  40).  After  the
dukth  of  Cynift  ho  destined  the  Greeks,  and  tbm
procurpil  Ilia  panlon  from  King  Artaxerxe«  (Xeu.
Anub.  i.  Hj  ft,  etc).

Ariana  ( 'Afiiav^ }.  A  name  deri^'ed  from  Aria
(q.  V.)  and  applied  tii  Hip  easterc  provinces  of  the
Pemiun  Kitiidi-r,  iiirhnlinc  Ari.i,  Pa-^hio,  the  Pant-
liaininjtdue,  ArucbwiiL,  l)r^n;;i:iuu,  <.>cUro(iJa,  and
Cuiiiiaiiia. S*e  Pkkmia. V

Ariarathea  l'.\ftuif)a6^s).  ^VUe  name  oi  Revernl
kinjtx  of  CuppndoKia.  (1)  8vii  of  Ariamnen  I.,  dc-
fenled  by  Perdiccaa,  and  iTncified,  n.c.  322.  Kn-
nieneK  then  olituiiied  pnaiH-M^ioii  uf  Cappadocia.
(S)  Son  uf  HohiplienieM,  and  nephew  of  Arinnithes
I.,  reeovi-riMl  Cnppnily<^'ii*  after  the  death  of  Entiie-
uea,  'M'i.  He  v,nn  ^ru'eeeded  by  Anninties  II.  {'A)
Son  of  ArianniPd  11.,  ami  jjrs.iHUoii  ofth"  preeedinj;,
married  Stnitaniefi.danjjhler  of  ADtiocliiia  II..  kiii>;
ufSyiiM.  (■l)Sonoftheprec«fdinK,reisne<l220-l«W,
He  uiarrivd  Aiilinchi»,  the  dansbter  of  Antiuebua
the  Great,  and  niKxiHtvd  Autiochunin  bi»  war  against
the  Uomaua.  After  the  defeat  of  Antiwhns.  Ari-
arnthM  HOed  forpeaee  in  l^,  whieb  heobtnitied  on
fiivonrablo  tennK.  {5)  Sun  of  tlie  prcoeding,  sur-
natned  Philopator.  reijpied  H>:t-I3<>.  He  asHlKied
the  Romann  in  their  war  against  Ari»t<'nii-n*  of  Frr-
gaoms,  and  fell  in  iliis  war,  ac.  130. (G)  f^un  of  the


preceding,  reined  laO-'JC.  H«  married  1
sJHter  of  Mithrid'ttej*  VI.,  king  of  i'ntitnii,  ■
pnt  to  death  by  Mitliridatm.  (7)  Son  of
ceding, almmnrdered  by Mtlhridatea,  w bo n
posseHsion  of  his  kingdom.  The  ('uppadoc
Itelled  against  Mithridates,  and  phured  n|
throne  <H)  the  secoDd  son  of  No.  6;  bnl
speedily  driven  ont  of  the  kingdom  by  M
tea,  and  shortly  afterwants  died.  (9)  Son
barzaiiett  II.,  reigned  42-:H>.  He  was  depo
pnt  to  deatli  by  Antony,  who  iipjK>inted  Ai
an  his  succtiiwor.

Ariaapae  C-'<fi"ttnrm')  or  Agriaapae.  A
in  ttie  Nonth  part  of  the  Pernlan  province  <
ginini,  on  the  borders  of  Geilrodift  (Arr.  J

a?,  4).  I

Arioia.  "Sow  Riceia;  an  ancient  town
nm  At  tbe  fuut  of  the  Albiiii  Mmint,  on  lliu
Way,  sixteen  mile*  from  Rome.  It  waa  t
by  the  Roniniis,  with  iho  other  Latin  tc
B.C.  :W8,  and  received  the  Roman  fvniich
its  neighbonrhood  were  tbe  celebrated  gn
temple  of  Diana  Arictun,  on  the  borden
LacnB  Keranreni^is.  Di.ina  was  worahipp
with  barharons  cnsioms;  her  priest,  rail
NeaiorenHiti,  was  always  a  runaway  slave,  ■
tAiued  luH  nllice  by  killing  his  predecewtoj
gin  combat.

Thin  enstom  ia  very  strikingly  ftUii
Macanlay  in  the  following  Iluea :

"  f  roQ)  wbcra  llio  wib-b'i  fbrti
O'Mluitifn  llu>  darii-bluv  nu,
From  Che  Mtlll.  Ktmr  tek*  tbal

B«waUi  .trlcm'*  ln<««—
TlwM  Iran  tn  uhrw  dim  ahiulow

Tlw  glmsUv  jirii-el  ilt.iii  rvlttn,
Tte  pnen  who  kI«w  ihc  KUyer,
And  ihall  liluwlTbe  slalD."

—BaUit  •/  iMkt

Aiiea  Upirit).  Thu  bntturing-rani,  one
moKt  edectire  cngineti  u»ed  by  tbe  anci
niakc  a  breach  in  the  walla  of  a  be«iegei
Originally  it  contiiHted  of  aatrong  pole,  wi
wonntcd  head,  lirought  up  to  the  wall  in


.»ri<»,  B*ttori  UK-nun.

times  by  hand,  in  later  times  on  wheeli
final form  it  was  cun«trneted in  the  fo
manner : A  nionc  Wain,  sometimes  oonij^
several  pieces,  and  meaaiiring  from  ai:  "
<iiii< hundred feet  long or more,  wa
ropes on a  t*troiigly mounted Imriz'
and swnug baekwatds and fnrw
bioeen  the  stones  of  the  wall  -
A»  tbe  engine  utootl  elosi'


ARIM.A.SPI


Its


ARISTAGORAS


[taUMliig-rmm  uoter  abml  rcjtwto
Jriftim*.  (ColaiDO  of  Be|iiliniiw
8«nnK.|


vorkiuf;  it  were  tiheit*^^!  by  a  roofed  shell  of

Ih,  callrxl  the  tjiin  tnrtoiso-shoU  {teaUdo  ane-

)  Htiil  fwiitiiii;  uii  »  fniinrtrork  ttiat  run  ii|hiii

I*. To |iroti!ol the i\n>(  ami  Bides of the

hell sgaiuMt  tiiw tliruwu from tlu.'  waUit,  tliey

ero conleil witb

kw  or  well-HoaktxI A?y/y'''.^////A

liid^M,  or  other  aim- <  "■  ■-  ''.ggi^-*

1 1 1  n  r  contrivauccA.

fTliploOMMiedatDtiM

rr.n> (licki^l out

lor  the  waI]  with  n

[  •Imtiff  iron  houk  at

^tliM  end  ot'jk  (H^le —

H»f> nall-Hiokle {/alx mum/U),  on  it niu«  called.

"5itiKl»>  holes  Were  piiiM^hcd  in  tin-  nail  with  the

IvuIl-LoriT {lei-fLrai,  m ram with u  «liDr|) poiDt,

I'Vliicli  *»»  pufthinl  fitrwnrd  uu  rolterH.

Tbo  l>efiii>f{ed  irin«l  to  kuock  the  niDiV  ht-iid  off

by  (Iropiii II f;  licnvy  ntoueti  oil  it,  or  to  catch  it  in

'  UouM?  ami  turn  tbo  hU>vr  aside  or  npwnrdv,  or  t*y

lt'A«lcu  th«  force  of  it»  blown  nith  ftand-h»;i(i  ami

'  Inat9. By  the  uka^k  of  war,  n  town  tlmt  wished

(o  M^carr  iudnlgcnt  trcutiiient  inii»t  titinviHlei' h«-

ff*trv  the  mm  toiiebtsd  the  walls.

Ariznaspi  ('Apifuunrai').  A  pL>o|t1e  in  the  north
*f  Scythia,  rciovwuitMl  an  m«n  with  only  imiu  eye,
;  >rLi,t  fon^hl  uitli  the  i^rilYiiiM  for  the  |iowHi«Miiiti  of
k2ie  f;tdil  in  tlieii-  nei;ihlHjiirhtHid.  The  f^ertn  of
lh»»  falilu  in  j>erhjiiw  t<i  he  rixwguiziHl  in  tho  f«ol
"'■t the ITral MouiilniiLH nUonnd in gold. 8«»

-A^imaxes  C.Kpifta('ii  or  '\pt<-fui(tjt'i. A  iMtwor-
'^"' Itniinn prinre  of  Stigilitinii,  who  ttvaled  Ales-

(■^'itlor  tltt--  Great  wiih  ininh  inwilcnce,  and  who,
*■  conntqiienre.  lifter  KiirreiidoriiiK.  wo"  «'tuciliod
•*««?lher  with  hi«  futiilly  (Quint.  Ctirt.  vii.  11).
^ilmi  (.'AfHfiot)  and  Axfina  {ra  '\ptfia).  The
'Ain««  of  n  uiyihicii)  people,  dintrict,  and  mn^e
I  ^*  ■tiiHiDtain*  ill  A^ia  Minor,  whiL-h  tlip  fdd  Gre-ek
^^P^^'^Ut  made  the  btieue  of  iho  punisbment  of  the
^J^»*u«ter  Typlioeus  (q.  v.).

•^limXaain. Now-  Rimini;  a  town  in  I'lnhria,

*** Ihf mouth of the  little river Ariiniiiiin. Il

^a»  orislnally  inh»hil*'d  by  rndiriatii*  and  Ftdan-

^^2'**nii,  H>a  aftt'rwardM in the pottseA^iinn of  ihe

^^^*- ticiuen,  atid WHM colnui/ed by  the K<iinnti8 in

^^^-*^--  "SGi*,  fn>ui  wliich tiuio  it  appears  tm  a  dour-

**^hMi^ ptiice. After leaving Cisalpine tianl, it

^i*^  the  tjntt  town  on  the  caetoni  ooaftt  of  Italy

*^  vrhich  a  perwon  arrived  In  Italia  proper.

Ailobarsaties  (*ApioffaitCtirt]i). 1.— Kixos  on
*^ M  lui^  OK rnNTid. (  1  I  Beiraywl  by  hin  luin
**<tliriitnteft  to  the IVrhiiin  king,  abunt n.C.  40U.
'^>  Snii  of  MithridotrK  I.,  reiyiie«l  'jea-Xi". He  re-
^^"lt«l  from  Artaxerxe*  in Itt^y,  and  may  be  rG-
,  K»rfl«l  AS  tli« foonder  of tint kingdom  of  Pon-
*"*- (3)  Son  of  Milhiidnt4>s  III.,  n  ignwl  S6fi-24'».
*»m WiiB Bncr«*dcd by  Milhridat4>» IV. II.
K»>*iifi  OP  f.M'CAr»octA. <  I )  Snrnanml  Philoi..

"»»«ni»,  Tfii; I B.r.  tKWKJ,  and  was  eleited  king

*y  Ibe  Cappiidoi-ianH,  nnilor  the  direction  of  thi
^iiwii*. He wat several times expellod f
^^  ItlajjiliMu by  Mithridiitp-",  bnt  vnv*  Hiially
}  Pompcy  in  *K1,  sliMitly  Ucfure  hi»  di
FliUotiuli^r,  Biu'c<.'e4U-d  his  iatbi


doned  him,  bnt  even  enlarged  bis  territories. He
\riu  Hiaiu  in  n.c  42  by  CaiwinH.

Ajion.  (1)  (\pivf).  A  OivRk  poet  and  musi-
ciiMi,t>f  MothymiiA  lu  1.«»Ikir,  uliodoun^he<I  about
B.C.  (>*<[■'>.  Ill  the  conrKB  of  a  roving  life  Iim  iijient  a
cnn*tider«bli)  time  at  llieeonrt  oflAjriaiider.  tyrant
ul*  C'orinlh.  Here  bo  linit  gave  (Itu  djtliyrnrnb
h).  T.)  an  artitttie  form,  and  waa  thervfon^  n-^anhsl
!i»  the  inventor  of  thai  atylu  in  general.  He  is
henl  known  by  ihti  slnry  of  hitt  reftLMie  on  the  bnok
of  a  dolphin.  l^•^llrIling  fntni  a  joiimey  thn>ugh
Lower  Italy  iinil  Sti'ily.  he  tninted  himself  to  a
craw  of  CVtrinthian  sniloni,  wlio  reiwdved  ti»  kill
him  on  the  o]ten  sea  for  thr  aako  of  Imh  trensun's.
A.t  a  butt  favour  he  extorlod  the  ]HTtni»sinn  to  sing
liiM  Hongs  onre  more  Ut  the  lyre,  and  then  to  thraw
himMdrinto  (he  t*fa.  H'ia  strains  drew  a  nnnilier
of  diilphins  aronnil  him.  one  of  which  tmik  htm  on
its  iMick,  and  cnrriod  him  safe  to  land  at  th^  foot
of  the  foreland  of  Tacnamm.  Tbeno*  he  hastened
to  Corinth, and  convictoil  thosailorK,  who  weiv  t<dl-
iiig  Periander  that  they  bad  left  the  minstrel  safe
at  Tarcutimi  (Hyg.  Fah.  194).  A  bronze  atatnc  of
a  man  on  a  dolphin,  ivbich  stood  on  the  top  of
Taeiianim,  was  snpposed  to  Ix*  hh  thnnk-offering
to  Poseidon  (Herod,  i.  24).  A  h\  nni  ofl)mllk^giving
to  the  god  of  tlii^  .'tea,  pivjtprvt-d  uiidrr  bis  name,
1ipLitng.s  toa  Int^'rtime.  (*J|  C\fnitt»}.  A  fabnIotiH
horee  said  to  hav«  tieifn  begutten  by  Poseidon.

AiiorlBtiu.  A  German  ^^  ho  hiid  Koiiijinm-d  a
greiil  part  of  fianl,  bnt  n»s  drfeati^d  by  ('iu.>»air
and  driven  back  acroas  thu  Rbitic  in  ii.c.  TiS  (Caus.
U.  r..  Jtk.  i.).

Arjstaenfittu  ('.VurroiMTor).  A  Greek  erani*
mat-ian  and  rhetorician,  of  N'icaea  in  Bilhynia,
friuuil  oX  Libuitinx.  who  pruiaes  him  in  the  highest
tcnns ;  he  was  killed  in  an  eartluiimke  at  Ntcomo-
dia,  A.D.  IIT*.  His  iianio  ie  crrniieontily  atlaehed  to
acolleution,  probably  composed  in  the  hfth  orfcixtb
I'onlnry,  \*(  ernlic  Epistles,  feirble  imitations  of  Al-
L-ipbiun.  lootm*  in  tnn<i  and  declamatory'  in  style
The  text  and  a  Latin  vei-Mio4}  are  cnntaiiuH]  in  the
Uidot  pidhielion  of  the  Eptfituiographi  f;ra«ei (Faxis,
lW;i>. Se«  No\T.tJl  AM»  ROMAXCKS.

Atistaena  f 'ApKn-nioj).  A  son  of  Apollo  and  Cy-
ren<*,  was  boru  in  Libya.  He  afturwanln  went  to
Thrac:p.  where  he  fell  in  lovo  with  Eurydic*?,  the
wifeofOqdoMis.  The  latter,  while  tleeiiigfrum  him,
perished  by  Ihe  bit*  of  a  wrrjient ;  wheienpan  the
Nymphs,  in  anger,  destniyed  the  betv*  of  Arintams.
Tlie  way  in  which  he  n-oovercd  his  bees  is  relatwl
in  llM!  Fourth  Georgio  itf  Wrgtl.  Aft^r  his  death
ho  Vk'AJi  worshipp«d  ns  a  goil,  tm  acctMiut  of  tlie
benefda  be  ha<l  conferreil  upon  mankind.  He  was
nrgBrtb-d  as  the  protector  of  flocks  and  shepherds,
of  vino  and  olive  plantations;  ho  taught  men  to
keep  lH>es.  and  averted  frtmi  tlii!  fields  the  ttnn<Mm
heat  of  tlie  sun  and  other  ^iiiiwe*  i.r.'nsiuuti»nia.
Tic  Is  said  taJMMlMLllu  ■  ■"'  ■  o^'  ^'ealth.  Tbo
~X,  anil  betti-r  timtia
ty  wjis  acted  hnit  in
^-^"d  Ibrm  snitable  to

'  • -'  t;^  /LIT'  ■***'  •#'  clmrns  and  parab*.

^  M  lfc|^2r'^  1^  uaitioti  to  tho  Middle

^,.  ''•^iVtVi "^  nnoieiitj'.  Ariatophanea

_i.  -^ '"'•'bih.  i_**'^«^t'''ii  Cratintis  and  Euikh
w  Mi'H)  p^^ "^-m ^^_r^^  *


^  '«tf^.p


u.


h  as  the  furmer  nor  ao
■mhiniiiu  thu  severity  of
•  the  iithm-. \W\ai  v;*a


ARI3TARCHUS  11

some  troops.  Id  499  his  army  captured  and  barned
Sardis,  but  was  finally  chased  back  to  tbe  coast.
Tbe  Atbeniaus  now  departed ;  the  Persians  con-
quered most  of  the  louian  cities;  and  Aristagoras
in  despair  fled  to  Tbrace,  where  he  was  slaiu  by
tbe  Edouians  in  497.

AristarohuB  (' Apttrrapxor).  (1)  A  Samiau  math-
ematician and  aBtrouomeratAlexaudria,  who  flour-
ished between  B.c.  280  and  264.  (3)  Of  Samotbrace,
the  celebrated  grammarian,  flourished  B.c.  156.  He
was  a  pupil  of  Aristopbaoes,  and  founded  at  Alex-
andria a  grammatical  and  critical  school.  At  an
advanced  age  be  went  to  Cyprus,  where  he  died  at
tbe  age  of  seventy-two,  of  voluntary  starvation,
because  be  was  sufferiug  from  incurable  dropsy.
Aristarcbus  was  the  greatest  critic  of  antiquity.
His  labours  were  chiefly  devoted  to  tbe  Homeric
poems,  of  which  he  published  an  edition  which
has  been  the  basis  of  the  text  from  his  time  to
the  present  day.  He  divided  the  IHad  and  Odys-
sey into  twenty -four  books  each.  His  text  of
the  Homeric  poems  is  substantially  the  ground-
work of  our  present  recensions.  It  had  marginal
notes  indicatiug  tbe  verses  wbicb  Aristarcbus  re-
garded as  spurious  or  donbtful,  and  pointing  out
anything  worthy  of  remark.  Tbe  meaning  of  the
notes,  and  tbe  reasons  for  appending  them,  were
explained  in  separate  commentaries  and  excur-
suses, founded  on  a  marvellously  minute  acquaint-
ance with  the  language  and  contents  uf  the  Ho-
meric poems  and  the  whole  of  tireek  literature.  He
was  the  bead  of  the  school  of  Aristurckeans,  who
continued  working  on  classical  texts  in  his  spii-it
till  after  the  beginning  of  tbe  Empire.  Of  his
numerous  grammatical  and  oxegetical  works  only
fragments  remain.  An  idea  of  his  Homeric  stud-
ies, and  of  their  character,  can  best  be  gathered
from'  the  Venetian  scholia  to  the  Iliad,  which  are
largely  founded  on  extracts  from  the  Aristarcbeans
Didymns  and  Aristonicus. See  Homeeus.

Axiateaa  {'Apitrrias).  An  epic  poet  of  Procon-
nesus,  of  whose  life  we  have  only  fabulous  ac-
connts.  His  date  is  quite  nucertuin.  He  is  rep*
resented  ns  a  magician,  whose  soul  could  leave
and  re-enter  its  body  according  to  its  pleasure.
Ho  was  connected  with  the  worship  of  Apollo,
which  he  was  said  to  have  intnidnced  at  Meta-
poutum.  He  wrote  an  epic  poem  on  the  Arimaspi
(q.v.),in  three  books,from  which  Longinns quotes.
See  Hevod.  iv.  13.

ArlatJSrae  Cxpumpaii.  An  island  on  the  coast
of  the  Peloponnesus  (Pansan.  ii.  34),

Arlstides  ('AptoTfi'SijO- (1)  An  Athenian,  sur-
nanied"theJu8t,"souofLysimachU8,  of  an  ancient
and  noble  family. Hefought  at  the  battle  of  Mara-
thon, B.C.  490;  oud  in  the  next  year, 489,  was  arcbou.
Hf  ynn  the  i^at  rival  of  Tbemistocles,  and  it  was
I.,  recov^*ou :„^  ^nceoftbe  latter  with  the  people
ues,  315. He  -jUrLiliiii  ii  in (q.  v.)  in  483  or  482-
Son  of  Ariamn^u  ejT^^  4^  ^t  the  battle  of  Sal-
married  StratOie  did  goJflS^vico  by  dislodging  the
of  SyiU. (4)  Sa  band raisea  *-«i  armed  by  bim-
He  married  A  islet  of  Psyttalea. jje  was  recalled
theGreat,andient  after  tbe  battle,  Wo,  appointed
the  Romans, following  year  (479),  and  cou^nanded
arathes  sued  f|||  at  the  battle  of  Plataea. In  477
favourable  tellies  had  become  disgusted  with  the
named  PhiJ^pansauias  and  tbe  Spartans,  he  and  his
the  Roman'  Cimou  htui  the  glory  of  obtaining  for
gamus,anue  command  of  the  maritime  confederacy


e  ARISTOCLES

(see  Confederacy  of  Delos);  and  to  Aristides
was  by  general  consent  intrusted  the  task  of
drawing  up  its  laws  and  fixing  its  assessments.
Tbe  first  tribute  of  four  hundred  and  sixty  talents,
paid  into  a  common  treasury  at  Delos,  bore  bis
name.  This  is  his  last  recorded  act.  He  probably
died  in  468,  and  so  poor  that  be  did  not  leave
enough  to  pay  for  his  funeral.  His  daughters  were
portioned  by  the  State,  and  bis  son  Lysimachns
received  a  grant  of  land  and  of  money.  (2)  Tbe
author  of  a  licentious  romance,  in  prose,  entitled
MUedaca,  having  Miletus  for  its  scene.  It  was
translated  into  Latin  by  L.  Cornelias  Bisenna,
a  contemporary  of  Sulla,  and  became  popular
with  the  Romans.  The  title  of  his  work  gave
rise  to  the  t«rm  "  Milesian  "  as  applied  to  works  of
fiction.  (3)  Of  Thebes,  a  celebrated  Greek  painter,
who  flourished  about  b.c.  360-330.  His  picturea
were  so  much  valued  that  long  after  bis  death
Attains,  king  of  Pergarans,  offered  600,000  sesterces
for  one.  (4)  See  Theodorus.  (5)SecQriNTiUANi'S.
Azistion  ('Aptariwi').  A  philosopher  who,  by  tbe
influence  of  Mithridates,  made  himself  tyrant  of
Athens.  He  committed  suicide,  on  the  capture  of
Athens  by  Sulla  in  B.C.  87.

Aiistlppua  ('A/}(iTTtinror).  A  Greek  philosopher,
a  native  of  Cyren6  and  a  pupil  of  Socrates,  after
whose  death  in  B.C.  399  he  travelled  about  the
Greek  cities,  imparting  instruction  for  money.  He
was  founder  of  the  Cyrenaic  School,  or  the  system
of  Hedonism  (from  17001^,  pleasure).  His  doctriae
was  that  as  a  basis  for  human  knowledge  the  only
things  real  and  true  are  our  sensations,  and  not
tbe  external  objects  that  produce  them ;  that  the
aim  of  life  is  what  all  living  things  strive  after,
pleasure;  and  that  virtue  Is  only  so  far  a  goiMl
thing  as  it  teuds  t-o  the  production  of  pleasure.
Tbe  wise  man  shows  his  wisdom  in  governing  bis
desires;  mental  trainiug,  indeed,  being  the  only
thing  which  can  qualify  ns  for  real  enjoyment.  In
pleasure  there  is  no  difference  of  kind,  only  of  de-
gree and  duration.  Aristipi>UH's  writings  seem  to
have  disappeared  early ;  five  letters,  in  tbe  Diiric
dialect,  which  have  come  down  under  his  name
are  undoubtedly  spurious.  See  Ueberweg,  Hist.
of  Phihsophy,  pp.  59-98,  Eng.  trans.  (N.  Y.  ISTi) ;
his  life  by  Diogenes  Lat'rtius ;  and  tbe  articles
Cyrbnaici;  Epicurus;  Puilosophia.

Axiatobulus('AptoToj3ouXor).  AGreekfaistorian,
who  in  bis  youth  accompanied  Alexander  tbe  Great
on  bis  campaigns,  lu  bis  eighty-fifth  year,  when
living  at  Cassandrea  in  Thrace,  he  wrote  a  work
upon  Alexander,  in  wbicb  he  recorded  faia  careful
observations  on  geography,  ethnography,  and  nat-
ural science.  The  book  is  highly  praised  for  its
trustworthiness,  but  only  fragments  of  it  have
reached  us.  He  and  Ptolemy  were  the  chief  au-
thorities for  Arrian's  AnabasU.

AxlatoclSa  ('AptcrTOKXrui).  A  beautiful  woman,
who,  while  offering  sacrifice  naked,  was  seen  by
Strato,  who  fell  violently  in  love  with  her,  ami
contended  for  her  so  furiously  with  his  rival  Cal-
listbenes  that  she  died  during  tbe  struggle,  u)K»n
which  Strato  took  bis  own  life,  while  Callistbeues
was  never  seen  again  (Plut.  in  Amat).

Ariat6oles  ('ApurroicX^f).  (1)  A  Greek  u-tiet,
and,  like  his  brother  Canacbus,  a  scnlptor  in
bronze  at  Sicyon.  He  flourished  about  B.C.  4tV).
and  founded  a  school  at  Sicyon  that  lasted  for.  a
long  time. (2)  An  Athenian  scnlptor  of  tbe  1


ABISTOCKATIA


RitTDo  by  M*.  Aqnilliis  in  129,  atul  was  tliera  put  to
death.

Ariatophftnea  C .\fiurro<Pu»t}i).  (1)  Tlie  ;;rentctt
nritiT  iif  (in-ek  rutncdy.  He  livot)  at  Athens,  u.c.
444-3-4H.  HiKfatUer.rhilippaH,  isHiuil  to  liavvhtfii
not  (i  native  Alheninn,  hut  a  HclllHr  from  Khotli'M


tof  the  6miu->  iJutiiM),  uiithor  of  a  rcHof
Tlit<  Atbriiinii  Ilo|ilir«,"onerif  ihei'iliIcBt
renainliig  monuiurutb  of  Attic  art,  Hve  cnt,  p.  049.
Aitatoeratla  (af}*<rm*paT!u).  Literally,  "tb«
goivmui'^ii  itf  the  lic»(."  Ah  uHf<l  tiy  FInU),  Aria-
lollf,  JVIybiiiH.  aii)t  uthc-rv,  it  luciiiit  ^ivvrtiuu-'ut
1.^  KclikM  wbusc  »iiprviniicv  wa*  foiiuilrd  U-m  on  '"■  K^Jl't.  «■>>"  nft^rwanU  acijnired  ciliziiimliip.
wiallh  tliwj  on  iK-r»-»iinl  distinction :  wbt-n-iiBKOv-  H»w«%er  this  umv  I.e,  th«  il(<nmK<»Knfl  flfou,
tnim«ot»ij-UieM..ttIlhvwa*oA*yoi>y;a.  8w»Ari«.  I  "*»"*«  iliftplt-awtre  Ari«t«phiHH-H  hxd  incorml,
M  ir.3.  ru:  I'lata  J'oi  p.  aid  A  :  and  llw  ariicWn  I  '"^"^  *«  «""  "'  q"*""*'"  '>'»  r'tjl't  t"  »!»•  *-ili7.en-
ElTATWDAlf.  GKOMcmi; I'ATRiai.  |*'''P- H'"  ^""^  coniwl.v  H|ip«iir*-J  in  n.c 427,  hut

.._.»-_ ...  .» , ,, .  . 1  1 »  I  was  not  perftirnniil  umh-r  Win  o«  ii  uiitnc  hin'tmiw

Axlstodemas Amimionu(tv). (1)  A  ilesccnilant _,. '.,  ,  ,  <■  i  ■ ■

-  f^  "*'_'/.  . _. of  Iir«  yiiiith ;  and  w'vcnu  nioru  tjf  htH  play*  wr.ru

hroiijjht  iiiKHt  thi>  htagi:  hy  CaliiHtraiiitt  and  I'hilou-

i(l*-s.  till  iu  4*24  h(>  hraii^ht  out  ?'A<-  Kmiiktjt  in  hi»

own  peraou. Forty-fuur  of  hitt  play*  wero  knnwu

7r ",.".'■"' '■'7''' "I'^iiT  ~"  I'^i.i '. " t«»  antiquitv,  thDiiuh  fonr  of  ihem  were  coniiidcrtd

thociiiftl  lion  inlu  the  rvhrpuDiie^iis,  aud  ni»  two , ..ft 'X.e i  i  .i  ■

,  . .  ., , 1 .  ,' ,  ,  u r  II * douhtful. Of  tucso  we  poeacMt  eleven,  the  only
«H9  obtdinro  Spuria,  which  would  havt*  fallen  to  , /, i  i-  ■  -  i. i  - i

ii_ ,j,.  ,  ,, ' , ., 1 .  ,  1 ! .1 fi . comph'ie  (trock  comcdiett  wnifh have  unrv  vcd,
mt> Ot  A  MesMUian.  thr  chiff  hero  iu  tho  FiPft , .', ., ....  j  ^  <•

u . ,,,  11  n 1  1..  I I. .  hen  (den the  title*  and  iiuni<^rnns frauinvnut  i>f

Hmmiiti  \NBr. lit'  luicrihird  biti  own  danehliT .....  t>i ■  ..  -rji i  l

^ ,^  ,.  .  .,  -.  11,1 twentj'WX  other*, llii*  eleven  are:  (I J^nf -^™«"'-

K to  nTT  his  country'. He  whb  nfterwardd  vlecli'd  ,  f  . . ,  ■ i i  ■ .i

H  kiiie  iu  nl(ir»>  of  KnphaJ'<)i:  iind  condnneil  the  war  .  ., .->  f^ '\  ,, ,.  ". ,.^. ... , , -

■  ..-r .,1 .J _.  .11^1 *i .' 1-  * I  over  Cnilinnx  imd  bnpnlis,  li.r.  lit*.  wnll<«n  diirnia
H  i^liuuhn  Npartania.  till  nt  IfUiitli,  In  dnie  n<ni*(t- 1 . _ .  n  i  ■ w . • \ .i t.i

■  VT , , ' .  ■  1.1- IT  .1 I  the  icroat  ridononntutnui  War  l«  imhice  thr  Atlw-

■  aop"  ImpeUfw.  h« put  an  mil to  hin  life  on  thr -  .  , '  ,.,.  -i-i, t-  i u ■,

P toail)>jfIitiid:int*hter.  ahont  R.c.  723.  '  - i .  i... /  \ .1,1 .• .

I  njuiiti<>uedanoV4^,n.('.424,a]M>vrown(Hlwithlhi'tirt!it
Allrtogilon  i'.Ap.oxoy«;Tu.P), Si!«  HAnMODltrs. |  ^^^^,^  „,„i  „i,„p,i  ,|ire,:tly  againxt  the  di'maKo^ue

Aitttomlchtu  ('.VitTTopixtn).  TbesouufCltf-  Cteoii.  i:i)  7'fir  ('fvuff*  (Nfi/iAutt.  B.c.  4'i3.  hi»  nimt
wlcBiiu  or  Cleoducus.  t|[ranil9un  of  Hyltiw,  jfieat-  faiDouA  and, in  liin  own  opIuiuu.hiM  iiKMtniicmtwfnl
pnmUunttf  lirracles,  and  father  of 'IVuietins,  CrtiH-  picro,  thoanh  when  played  it  only  wou  tb<!  thicd
plnuin.,  atitl  AriHiodeuins.  H«  ffll  iu  l>attle  when  prizo.  \Vc  have  it  now  in  a  iHM-nnd.and  appiiriMilly
'f  iiiTntir-il  til)*  Ptfloponiu'SUM  :  hut  bin  ttoini  whd^  iintiui^htMl.cdition.  It  ix  ilin*vU'd  iiKnin»l  the  p<*r-
»wre*iiri-.wlul,aiid  conquered  thu  I'eioponnenntt.  niciona  iuHuenco  of  llio  .SophiKtft,  ua  Iho  n»pre««n-
Ariitom^nea  rApiffTo,wV^(i.  A  Mpwenian,  the  f»t'^«  "f  "'i"""  Socratno  i«  attackod.  (4)  Tkr
hwx.f  thf.  s.ronil  war  with  Sparta,  who  hclonps  "'""*"  (2*^^«tit,  hrougbt  out  in  MX.  4«,  and,  like
■on^lolrjiond  than  tohifttory  Hf  wxh  a  native  1 1***  *"«  foIlowiuR.  i^wanled  with  tho  Bocond
rfAudwia.and  w»«  sprnns  from  the  royal  line  of  priae:  it  i*  a  satirn  upon  tlic  Atheuiau  paashm  for
ATyiBii.  Tlrod  of  the  vnke  of  Spartn*  he  tieRau  lawsnils.  (5)  Ike  I'tact  (Ei/i^i^j,  of  the  year  ac.
'I"  WIT  in  ».c.68ri.  AftVr  ih.-  dctVal  of  the  Mes-  '''^'-  "-pominfuding  the  coiipltiHion  of  pcac*.  (tl)
*in«ofc,  ii,  the  thinl  year  ..f  the  war.  Aristomene»  ^*''  "'"'«  '  'Opi-itftf »,  ocli'd  in  »,c.  414,  and  Pspo».
"Pirate,!  to  the  nwninlrtiii  fortrvMof  Ira,and  tbei-e  ""K  the  romantic  hopes  hnilt  on  tlie  expediti.oi  lo
'"tiuijiinrd  the  war  f.ir  .IrviMi  yean*.  cniiHlantly  •^"''ity.  TbtH  i*  iniqueMtionakly  the  happiest  iim-
wvBpnx  tli«  land  of  I^^ronia.  In  oni*  of  hiH  iu-  dnrlion  of  tlie  (Kwt'e  Reiiiiift.  and  is  inarked  hy  a
«lMniiiiib«  Spartans  overpowore.!  him  wilh  supe-  p»nifnl  n-HTve  in  tlie  cniploytueut  of  drainatir  ui-
'iw  nniiilM-Pk.  and,  carrriu^f  him  with  llftv  of  hiit  "'"""w-  ''>  T*^'  /yiW'-ni*''  i.\u(rt<rrpon|>,  im'.  411,
"mmdw  lo  SiBirta.  can't  Ihcin  iuto  the  pi'l  whett;  *  WoincnM  CormpiMicy  l.i  hriiip  al>ont  IK-Jie« :  ll»>
••o^waiwd  criiainals  were  thrown.  The  re«t  |>er-  '^*  "^»'"-  '"i'i*^<l.v  polilica]  plavH.  (ri|  TbrMmnpliit.
•^wl;  hot  not  HO  Ari*tonii-iieM.  the  favoiiritp  of  riatkMe  i&t,rfw(fK>fna(ovirm),  probably  (o  In-  .luted
iHfKOlU:  for  legends  tell  how  au  eagle  borx-  bitn  »*^  *^*^-  ''  '*  written  against  Enripidebs  dislike
■P  nn  iu  wiu(ci*  a»  he  tvll.  and  a  fox  cnideil  liini  "^  women,  for  which  ibe  women  who  are  celuhrat-
•fttliethitd  dav  from  the  cavern.  Bnt  tho  eitv  , '"K  ^"^'^  The«niophoiia  drag  him  to  ,|iwtiec.  (l»>
•'Iri.fcliirb  h^  had  mi  Innjr  tiu.ce«wfrdlv  defend"-  ^**  ^'^^9»  (lhn,iaxot},  which  was  acted  in  B  c.  40r>,
•^.Ml  ililo  the  liaofU  of  the  Sparlanw,  wlio  again  ""^  '''*"  »'»*'  ^^^  I*"**-  ^^  '»  »  P''"*^*^  »pirkling
'•amf.  madters  of  Mecfceuri),  KO.  IMW. AriKlonie- "''•>  ?•*"'»*. ""  f'e  'I't^'iy  "*"  tranUr  art,  Ibe  liliime

of  nhich  ii  laid  on  Earipidea,  then  nK>ently  de-
eea8ed.  I  10}  KrcltmuitHuir  t'V.€KX>f(rtaCt,i>tTai).  or
Tbr  National  Atuwmhlj-  of  Women,  n.c.  31W.  It
ift  levelled  »){ainftt  the  vain  utiemptit  to  ruHtoro


of  HanuleB,  aon  of  Ari!>touiai*bn».  brollier  of  Te-
meniu  iiml  Crt-nphonteH.  and  fallior  of  Kiirysthe-
iKs  ftuil  Proclcfi.  He  wan  killed  at  Naiipactng  hy
iliMb  of  ligtitniug.  just  aa  be  waa  setting  out  on


"*"  Kttlcd  af  lalymUM,  ht  Khodes.  wlieru  be  niar-
"*<l  tii« duu^fhlrr  to  Uainugi'tiiM,  king  of  IiilvHUfi.

Aiiiton  C.Kfii^,^*-).  (1)  Of  ChioK.  a  .Stoic  phi-
'*''Pli*r,  «ud  a  diwiplf  of  Zenn,  who  tlonrihhed
■«"»  n,c.  aw.  (2)  A  Prripatetic  philosopher  of
''''".  ill  the  taland  of  ('i-iw.  who  uncceeded  Lycuu
»•  l*j«l  iif  the  Peripatclie  ichuol,  about  u.c.  WO.

Arlrton iaptffTm). BreakfaNt. See CE»a ;

AHuUmioiu  ( 'Xptirrnifucof  ).  A  natnml  non  of
fc"n.em»,  n.  of  IVrgatnnfl.  Upon  the  death  of  hitt
'*>tber  attain*  HI.,  u.c.  13:1.  who  kft  bin  kih«-
*'*Bi  tq  the  Riiinane,  AriHtonions  laiil  claim  to  the
^n.  Ho  defeut'Hl  in  \'M  the  couamI  P.  l.ifiniu.-*
vriMku, .  bnt  iu  i:U>  he  wan  hinmelf  dett:rtU-d  and
'■*''ii prisoner hy  M. Puqivraa.  was earned to


the  Atlteuian  ^tatu  hy  eut-aud-ilried  roiiHlitntioua.
( 1 1  r  I'tutuv  (nXotTftci.  or  The  (.iiHl  of  Wealth.  The
blind  god  is  rvatured  l^*  night,  and  betlor  tiiuea
uro  brought  about.  This  play  nan  ncle«l  lintt  iu
B.C.  4UH,  then  in  '.Hvs  in  a  ivviised  Ibrin  snitable  to
tho  time,  and  dntpeufting  with  eliorm^  and  pnrulm-
sin.  ThiH  play  marks  Ibn  transition  to  the  Middle
Comedy, .S««  C'uMOF.lMA.

Ill  the  opinion  of  the  ancientt,  AnKtnphnnea
iMildti  a  niiddlt'.  plac«  between  CratitiUH  and  Fupo-
liH,  being  neither  ao  rough  an  lh«:  fonner  nor  ao
mild  ivi  the  hitler,  bnt  oouihiniug  tlie  teverily  of
the  one  with  the  graco  of  the  utlier. What  waa


ARiSTOPHOX


13«


AKISTOTELKS


:


(linnjilit  of  iiiin  in  his  iiwii  itinc  is  PTiilunf.  fnim
]*lnl<)'<i  Siftnpmium,  whfnt  I10  ih  iiiimWn'd  luimri^
llie  no1ilf<Ht  ofnii*!]  ;  and  uii  t>]»i^Ritu  ultrilmtiMl  to
ttijit  [il)il<»iupti<>r  HayH  tiial  tlic  (jruct>it,  Iwikiiij^  tur
nil  L-tiiiuriDj{  Hliririi:,  fuuiiil  i^  iit  tbo  miii]  ufArift-
lop1t»n«N.  Hk  iiiitU-M  uiiclLTHluuitiui^,  fci-'liii^,  and
fmiry  in  a  drjrn-ir  iiii*wp»»c<I  Iiy  f«w  poula  of  nii-
ti[|uit,Y.  Hi»  ktHTti  KlancH  )H;iieti'nteiH  tbu  many
oriU  of  hH  tiuiu  and  ttn-ir  most  bidden  cniiseH;
his  BC(ini  for  nil  that  i»  Unnp,  iiiitl  tiis  piitriotiR
epjrit,  Imrntiig  to  hriuff  hnck  ttie  grand  dnya  of
Marntliun,  urge  him  on,  witlinnt  i-fKimrt  of  per-
B0118  or  r*K»nl  for  self,  m  dm^j  tliw  fiinlrji  lie  w««
into  dnyliRlit,  and  ln.Hli  thmi  nitli  xtinKin};  snr-
ca8in:  while  Iiim  iiiexliantitililf  fancy  iiivcntn  nvor
iit>n-  anil  uri(;iiinl  niiilnriulH,  wliirli  lie  ninni|Mi-
lat>'i4  nitl)  pt'vftHU  ma-stiiry  of  tangiiagti  and  tt-rli-
iiic-iil  .tkiU.  If  )ilNjoktt»  nro  oft«rn  onartto  and  acl-
nally  iudvceui,  tlio  fact  mmtt  bo  iDipiitc^d  to  cht*
character  of  the  Old  Cometly  and  llie  licoutiona-
ness  uf  tbo  Dionyaiac  foHtivid,  ilurtit};  wbicli  tbv
playH  were  acr^l.  No  litcratnre  hn*  auytbin^  to
tiompnre  with  these  coniwiic**.  Anrient  iwholnrs,
reoogniztrii;  their  gn'st  importiinrc.  boj^Utwrd  in-
Auite  piiiiiit  in  coiumenriu];  on  tlieni,  and  valnable
n-licH  of  tbt>ir  \vririn|:H  iire  nnBbriiieil  in  Ihn  exist-
ing (;nllectioii.i(  of  wliolta.

TIiP  priiicipnl  MS.  of  AriHtopliuneA  h  thai  »f
RAV«niin,  wbJ4'h  ooiitainH  tb**  I'k-ven  t'xtaiit  idiiytn.
Next  in  ittiportatii-t-  is  thi-  (lodex  Vcnt-liis  Marcia-
nu.-4  of  iii'arly  tbv  Kiiuir  duto.  bnt  nhlclt  luctoi  thu
.IrJitirttiaaH,  T/mmophoriiuutuie,  l'*xlc»iazit»'ie,  and
Lj/niittratt'.  lioib  of  llieiw!  ur«  probably  derived  from
DUft  Alcxatnlrian  archetype.  The  editio  prineepn  of
Arintopbaoos  \»  tlmt  of  Aldun  (Venice,  141lHt,  eon-
taiiiinf;  nine  pInyH,  to  n-bit.ib  Junta  added  ti.ro
inotv(I5I5).  The  ed  of  InvcndzKi  Kftck  wnttains
0  collation  of  the  KaviMina  MS.  Othvr  edirionn
B[i?  those  of  Itekker  (1h*J9);  Diinlorf  {5th  ed.
lS*i9);  Mfineko  (lf«0);  BlaydoB  (1*^;  llolden
(Mh  ud.  LHf^).  Eiig.  trans,  of  eit^lit  plnyn  by
Hndd  (IBtJ7);  of  five  plays  by  Freit.  (IrfTI).
Thorp  in  u  fomidelo  connonlnnro  by  Punbnr  (lf<rC1).

(2)  AlllJiTOPllANKS  TIIK  GitAMMAltlAN  (or  SCIIOL-
AK)  of  llyzantiuiii,  bom  about  O.c.  'XV,  ^vc1lt  in  his
early  yonthto  AleKnndrin^nnd  wit^t  tlierv  a  pitpt)  of
Zenndotuttnnd  Cidltniat-him.  On  the  death  of  Apot-
loniuH  of  Khodeft,  Aristopbniiett,  vrben  pait  liis  six-
tieth year,  vrna  nppoiutod  to  be  chief  librarian,  and
ilied  nt  the  urp  of  wvenly-Heven.  Hi»  f;itiu*  was
eclipsed  by  that  of  hirt  pxptl  AriBlarvhn»,  bnl  be
f>ti1l  pn-ssetl  for  one  of  tlm  abU>»«t  gramDiarianB
and  critics  of  anlitinily,  diMtingnUbed  Ity  indna-
ti-y,  lenriiing,  and  Honnd  jtidginctit.  In  addition
to  t\w  Honirrir  iKinoH,  which  formed  hiH  fii\oiir-
Ite  Htttdy,  and  of  which  he  was  the  tirat  to  ntttTtiipt
a  really  orittvul  lent,  ho  devoted  his  bdmiirs  tn
He«iuil ;  the  lyric  ]>M>t«,  e8]>ccial]y  Alcneiiit  and
Pindar;  atnl  the  tragic  and  coniic  poclM,  AriH-
topbaneii  and  Meuniider  in  imrtirnlar.  Thv  re-
veived  inlrodiictuiiiH  to  the  playii  of  the  tnigo-
diann  itnil  AiiMtophnofM  nv»  in  Llieir  beat  p&rlH
derivi-d  fnmi  him.  lie  wax  hIm)  ihu  nalhor  uf  a
large  and  niurh-tpiotod  Mork  of  a  lexicogrnpliicnl
character,  coiiMidernble  fraginritta  of  wbicb  stdl
Binvivi-. f^e  IIomkkl.h;  Tkxti-al  CitmciitM.

Aiiatfiphoii  {'AfufTTuifHui').  The  nnitic  of  two
Attic  omtont,  both  con tern|H>rH ripe  of  l)cino»the-
neH.  Tbi!  firM  (of  the  dcnif^  Az^'iiiti)  ilefetided  llif
law  of  L<-ptino8  agninitt  I>enioistliniii>H  in  B.c  >VA.
Jiu  omiioii  ofeith^T  Arifttophon  in  I'Xljitii.


AriBtotSIes  (' .\pt<rr(rri\tjt).  A  great  philo»wiph«
())<>  Hon  of  Ni(-oinui*linK.  Ronrt  physician  to  I'hilip  II
4if  Macudon.unil  boni  in  h.c.  tt<l  al  St-sgim.u  Hina)
town  ill  the  Thnician  (Miuleidtct^.  Up  receivai
from  hii«  father  a  (ratnitig  in  tho  tiatnral  wienol
of  th(!  day;  bnt  hiit  pbi]iMo]>hical  e<lnnntioii  irflj
obtained  in  Athenit,  wher»  he  niiH  a  ]Hipi]  and  coin
panion  of  riitlo  daring  the  but  twenty  yc-an  <d
the  latt«r'8  life  (3U7-:t47l.  H\s  niiinl  was,  bow
ovtT,  of  too  exact  ami  nnimaginative  a  lyiM>  to  an
wpt  tbp  mystirnl  idealism  of  l*latu's  lat«r  yeaq
and  WH  timi  him  grndrially  drveioptng  a  (tyftlon
of  pirdo-Mipby  of  bi;^  own,  distinct  from,  and  ofte|
autagoniHtir  to,  tbiit  of  his  teacher,  whose  doo
triuvM  hu  nevcrlbelcfiB  always  treated  with  piooi
reH^K^el,  even  when  conli-overting  llit^m.  In  th|
Inter  yeani  of  hin  HwuM-Jniion  with  Flalo  und  tbI
Academy  hn  iH^gan  to  leetnre  on  liis  owu  aeiwout
trenting  etipecltilty  the  nnhjeet  of  rhetoric.  At  tlM
death  of  I'lato  the  prc-«niiueiit  ability  of  Arislotlt
would  socru  to  have  designated  him  to  Nitcceed  ((
Ihc  leadcr»hi[>  of  the  Acaduiuy,  but  his  divergerioi
from  bit*  luaster'A  teaching  wuh  too  great  to  multt
this  pofisihie.  At  the  invitation  of  bis  friend  lleii
ineiut,  rider  of  Ataruous  uud  Atmoh  in  MyKia,  he  r^
paired  to  his  court,  where  be  itpent  Aeva-rat  yeart
and  married  hiK  uiece  and  adnpto)  daughter  Pylb
i.-iK.  His  son  KtconiacbiiH.  however,  wiut  the  08
spring  of  ii  later  union  with  Hei-py1li>«,  said  to  tiHTt
been  a  slave,  lint  to  whom  he  te!ttil!i>H  the  wamitM
gratitude  io  his  will.  Fnnu  1^4  lo  :t4*J  be  nntt  agin
in  Athens,  but  in  tlic  bitter  year  he  acceptetl  M
invitation  from  King  I'hiUp  to  undertake  the  ovfis
Bight  of  the  ethicntion  of  his  mu  Ab^xnndor.  U  Ij
not  too  faneifiil  to  trnee.  in  the  lofty  views  of  tin
future  coiiiiiien>r,  and  his  paxaionnto  lovo  for  lln
Uoiiiei'ip  poems,  the  inllncnc4*  of  his  tbrc«  yeaq
association  with  th'C  great  philoMipher.  Arislotll
did  not  forget,  in  thin  iiiHiieiitial  [losjliou,  lb
town  of  bin  birtli.  bnt  obtained  from  Alexandfll
that  Stagim,  ^liirli  hud  been  ileHtroyed  by  l*bili|l
Mlionld  be  rebuilt.  On  Alexiinder's  necifution  ^
the  IbriHie  of  Maeedon  in  :t35,  Ali»lotle  reiiitiMid  U
Athene,  aud  establi:thed  his  sebuDl  in  the  gyninsi
siniu  kuovMi  us  the  Lyceum,  from  whose  Bljni||
walks  I  irr/n'irixroi  I  his  pnpils  bpcumo  known  w^
PcripalettCH.  lie  is  euid  to  have  given  two  cIomi^
of  leolitres  :  the  more  altstrnsu  discnssious  iaicpoai
furrtKai  ill  the  morning  for  an  inner  circle  «|
udvaiieed  pnpil-i,  and  Ibu  |K>pular  discoupMNt  t<^
npurd)  ill  the  evening  for  iIm*  geuuml  IxHly  a{
lovers  of  knowledge.  At  the  death  of  Alexaudefi
in  '££A.  the  anti-Muc4>doni:iii  par(,\  in  AlbeuM  recua
ervd  a  temporary  ascon<lency,  and  ArittloLle  vtm
Involved  in  au  accnsatiou  for  impiety,  to  t:aca|ij
which  be  tied  to  Chatcis  iu  Knl>oea,  in  nnler,  aa  hi
said,  "that  the  Atlieiiiaus  might  not  for  a  second
time  commit  u  sin  against  philosophy."  yiere  hi
died  noon  after,  in  .t'i'2,uf  a  stoniaeh  eoitijilnint.  J
grave  nxently  (Itiyi)  excavated  nt  Chalcis,  by  tlN
explon>l'H  of  the  Anipric'Un  School  at  Atbemi,  %
idi'iitilietl  with  eoiiHidHrabh-  prtdmbtlity  as  that  di|
Aristotle.  His  wilt,  perhaps  giMitiine,ts  prfs«rr«4
to  us  in  ItiogtMies  I.aprtiiis,v.  1.  A  st.-ittielte  tn  tW
Mattel  Fahiee  and  a  Iife-Hi7.e  stutiie  in  the  Vilb
Spiula  nt  Uouio  repriMlnee  the  keen  features  of  tbj
profound  thinker.  Mis  clminctor,  if  we  muv  jnd^
from  the  tone  of  his  writings  oail  from  the  pro
visiousof  his  will,  was  mild  and  generous;  and  tb
slaiiden)iiHre]H)rtj4fiiiind  in  s^ieh  writers  as  At  henM
im  may  Iw  itisiniHsed  us  nib'riy  wiUinnt  foundatifrt


d


ARISTOTBLEa


12U


ARISTOTELES


Thp  inuDy-AiilM  activity  nf  Arieutrle''6  oriDd  and
Mh  prodigious  imluHtry  »r^  »bovin  in  the  •stent
lutil  variety  of  bi^  whiirif^.  whirh  f  mliraeod,  ao*
<:unUug  1o  Di(»geuca  Lai-rtitit*,  146  works  in  400
'KM.ks.  Auutb«r  lidt.  which  (wviiix  lo  n-Jtt  utt  the
^kQihorityof  ih*  I'cripatetic  Audruniou»,wlio  in  the

iiiu*  uf  Ciwro  puhlisht-'U  n  now  eftitirtn  of  Am(otle'«
I Vurka,  gives  the  tiiim^ter  ot'  boobs  as  ItXXt.


I

I


Hcsd  ot  ArWoUa

Tbebiftory  of  his  writingfl,  if  a  widely  oocepteil
UiditinB  be  trnt*.  is  n  mniNntic  one.  After  the  drat h
d(Tbeo|»hresttis,  wbu  bail  snrrtHHlrd  In  t1g«  leniU-r-
>Iiipi)(llipPt?riimlctic8i'hu(il,hiHlih|-ury,iric  hilling;
llifvritkti  or  Ari^tolli?.  is  Miiil  to  have  pawtctl  inup
ilif  Ituilg  uf  his  pupil  NeleuH  of  SoopHis  in  the
Tt^ail.  The  heirs  of  Nuh'tis,  to  prot4_<ct  th«  bimks
froiu  ttM  htenuy  gmsH  of  thr  AttuliUH  of  t'vrgiiii)ii.t,
<^<iiftsl«l  tbcni  ia  a  vnalt>whi:ro  tb**y  vfi-*rt>  iiijurutl
I'TiluapQess  nutl  the  cuvukch  of  molbs  ami  wuriiiH.
lutliiitbiiliug-place  they  were  disco vf  red  about  the
}'^t  K-C.  lOU  by  ApeUicou  iq.  v.).  a  rich  bookdovor,
vidcnnrpyed  CoAtfaeo8.vbeucetbey  were  taken  to
BwHan«rtbe  oaptiin*  uf  AUiPtis  by  Siillii  in  H.c.
*  lu  Rome  they  wion  attmetwl  th«  attention  of
<^Un,  and  the  new  edition  then  ptfjtjired  by
Andntmias  (see  abiivHi  cave  a  fn>jih  iiupetuH  to
lb*  ftmly  of  ArtKtode  and  of  jdiihiMiphy  in  fiiMi-
e!ll,  KiraoKrly  ruougb,  the  hst  of  works  in  Diog-
•M*  Lai'rtins,  nitmlionul  aliuvr,  dues  not  m^-ui
l«  BDOtaiQ  any  of  the  forty  Irealiws  in  our  Ari»-
I'xle.safl  it  is  not  im]M>HKiblR  that  the  whole  eat-
■^opie  it  a  list  of  forgeries,  compiled  nt  a  time
•hw  tlio  real  works  wore  lost  to  sight.  The
P**t«  [uirt  of  what  has  come  down  to  ok  nn-
'**"l»  iianio  of  Aristotle  is  nndonbtwlly  KPnuiiw?.

Ti<ew»rk«  of  Ariistotle  fall  natnrallv  iimler  three
'"•^i  I.  DialoRties  and  other  works  of  a  popular
'^'•otw.  II.  Collections  of  facl-s  and  material
*"' *'ieatific  treatment-  III.  Systemnlii-  works.
Ansa^  bts  wrtiinj^h  of  a  jHipnlar  chitraci4tr  the
"% oae  whirh  ne  pt^weM  of  any  coUHei|uencti  ia
'»*  bilthwtitiK  tract  On  the  Putittf  nf  the  Alhewntu,
"^tly  (lisciivfre*!  in  sum*  Egyptiuu  papyri,  anil
?*■***!  tty  Krnyou  under  ihc  auspices  of  the  British
*'*<ttni  (London.  IfflJlt.  It  Is  written  in  a  clear
"^  ntiy  siyti*.  and  sheds  a  Hootl  of  new  li|;l)t  on
^tbniaii  political  history,  and  especially  on  the
^■^•tilntion  in  Ari«(totle'«  ow  n  time.  Of  the  worku
^niie  tecond  claa«  nothing  worthy  of  mention
^M*  Usn  pfM^rved.  The  sysloniatic  treatises  are
5


marked  by  a  se%-ere  plainness  of  style,  with  none
of  the  f[olden  flow  of  laogna^^  which  the  aiicieula
praised  in  Arixlotle.  ThiM  may  be  due  to  the  fuet
that  tfaetw  wt>rks  were  not,  in  most  caM.>a.  pnlilished
by  Aristotle  himudf  or  during  his  lifetime,  hue
were  cnliteil  after  his  duatlir  fronj  uiiDnislied  M88.,
by  Kndenins,  NieoniachuH,  or  Theophnottiis.

Aristotle's  systematic  treatisi>s  may  Ih>  gmuited
tn  several  divisions,  iu  acconlauce  with  the  Huh-
Jeets  rliscnsscd,  as  follows:  1.  Logic.  II.  >'utural
Science,  III.  Psychology  and  MctaphyMics.  IV.
ElhicH. V.  Polttlctt. V'l.  Kbetoric.

I.  The  writings  OD  the  general  snbjeoi  of  L^mic
were  included  l>y  the  later  Peripatetics  under  the
oame  of  Orsraaon,  or  InHtrnmeiit,  aa  having  U*  ilo
with  reflsoniiig,  the  chief  tu.'»trnmcnt  of  diulecrio
•ltd  stieiitilic  invealigatinn.  Thpy  pnihnire  (1)
the  CiUffforifx  (llmYynpiai),  triMttiiig  of  the  ten  fun-
dnuieutal  formn  uf  predicating  exislt^ncfi  (probably
tiot  by  Ariittullc  himself,  but  by  one  <if  his  pupils).
{^1  On  Interprettittan  {lltpt  ' Y.(i^iqvtias),  dealing  with
the  forms  and  parts  of  the  s»utcnce.  (A)  Prior  anil
J'ffsterii>r  Ann/i/lict  i',\va\\rTi.Kh  npt'rrtpa  and  "Y(rr*pn),
contaitiiug  ia)  the  iloctrino  of  sciuntilk  yironf  uinl
(b)  of  cogtiitiriti  or  knowledge  in  general,  [i)  The
Tnpiea  (TobikmI,  on  the  art  of  dialectic.  (lij  Tho
fy>phi%ltriil  H^ftttali-ms  {^mptartKt*!.  *RA«y;(rn|,  an  ex-
amiualinn  of  (lie  fallacivH  of  thu  Ho]diiHtH,  then  in
■iiieh  vogni-.  All  <if  tim  niuol  iinporluni  of  ArrK*
ioIIc'b  workit  ill  111*-  domain  of  Logic  have  come
down  to  IIS,  and  they  Include  the  most  enduring
contribution  which  the  great  analyst  has  made  to
human  1  bought-.  The  scienue  of  deductive  rra-iiMi-
idg  b:iN  made  no  esw^ntial  progress  sinctf  his  day.
II.  Tlu'  workM  in  the  department  of  Xatt'Rai.
SriKNCK  are  (1 )  th*-  I'h^arji{4>vaiiir]  'AKpuatTis).  This
is  not  a  trnatisu  on  physics  in  tlio  nuMlpru  senso
of  tint  Iftrm,  hut  is  happily  slylcd  by  ITegf*!  the
"mctaphynirji  of  physini."  It  tn.-als  of  the  prinri-
pIcH  of  ci^iHlenrc.  of  iiialter  and  form,  explaining
thi<  fundamental  noiici'ptJons  in  accordaiicv  with
which  wo  look  at  tim  jiheuunieua  of  nature.  i2)
Oh  the  Ueiivftis  iVlffti  Oipaimir).  {'S\  (M  t ieiieratiOtt
ami  Ikcai/  iUtp't  i^i^itrtat  Koi  ^dupnt),  discussing
the  pairs  of  opposites,  hot  and  eolil,  and  wet  and
dr)-,  and  how  their  different  cotnbinulinns  prmluco
the  four  elements  of  fire,  air,  earth,  and  water.  (4)
Hfttorolo^  i  TiUrtmiioXiryiKa).  (  5)  liraearcJuM  altent
Animaln.\i  «■</>!  ro  T.taa  *l<rro)>i'ni).  (6)  On  t/ie  Parta
if  A  iiimiil»{iltfil  7.uta¥  Ma^iiiav).  <7)  On  (Ac  Htneralian
ofAnimu/a  {lUpi  '/.t^utv  r§i'itTt(at).  C^l  On  fjurumotian
nf  AitimaJt  (lUp'i  [I«/>fia(  Z^ou*).  (Uj  A  uumlier  of
shorter  works  are  iisnally  cliiAMrd  togi>lbt<r  under
the  liea4l  of  Parva  Xaturatiii.  They  treat  of  M>ufW
and  FwiiKatiun,  youth  autl  agu.  and  othi-r  phcnom-
eiin  of  lifo.  The  trealises  On  Pl'intF,  On  the  t^si-
L-erje,  On  Motion,  f.M  Jlrs/'iration,  Oh  C*t/ovr,  On  /'Ay»-
ioffjtom^.  On  Slntntrt  Sltiltmntlf,  and  the  colh^etiou
of  varion«  scieutilic  Prvhtem;  are  all  of  doubtful
aulhiuiticity.  The  above -meutioucd  works  ex-
hibit an  ostouishing  breadth  of  observation  iu
uataral  history.  The  lirxrarrheMahottt  Animu/i  shows
an  acquaintance  witli  almost  ftvn  Itnndml  ditl'cr-
cut  s)>ocies,  and  the  ot>HervationH  on  the  purpose
and  adaptation  of  the  orgniin  of  %-:iriiMiK  oreaturr^
are  cbaraoterized  by  n'niarkablc  innight.  IIL
P(-YfIIiU.OGY  ASl»  MKTAI-nYSHft,  il)  On  ihf  Soui
(n«pi  T^e  'VvxTft).  TIiIn  trcatifM''  itiight  fairly  bo
cloNHtsI  with  the  workK  on  natural  science,  as  it
does  not  deal  with  psychology  in  the  modeni
sense,  but  with  the  physiology  of  the  vital  prin-


ARISTOTELES


180


ABISTOXENUS


oiple  in  animals  generally,  (fi)  Tlie  Sfetaphyaics
(MtratfivtrtKa),  as  the  name  indicates, forms  th«  high-
est step  iu  Aristotle's  syMtenif  and  deals  with  the
first  principles  of  all  existence.  Here  he  grapples
with  the  deepest  qnestioua  of  philosophy,  but  with
leas  clear  and  satisfactory  results  than  he  reaches
in  many  of  his  discnsaious.  His  doctrine  of  mind
(vovs),  or  the  godhead,  as  the  power  that  moves
the  starry  heavens,  is  not  sufficient  to  account  for
the  strnctnre  of  the  universe  or  the  origin  of  ex-
isting things.  IV.  Ethics.  The  ethical  works
of  Aristotle  embrace  (1)  the  Nxcomachean  Ethics
CWBtKa  NtKO/xqx*'°)>  (^)  ^^^  Eudemean  Ethia  {"HBiko
Eid^fitta);  (3)  the  so-culled  Magna  Moralia  ("HBtKti
McyoXa).  The  foundation  principles  of  the  Aristo-
telian system  of  morals  appear  alike  In  all  of  these
works,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  first  alone  is  the
work  of  the  philosopher  himself.  He  teaches  that
happiness  is  the  highest  good,  and  that  this  is
fouud  iu  Qu  activity  of  the  soul  in  accordance
with  virtue.  Virtue  is  a  permanent  state  of  the
soul,  aud  consists  in  the  mean  between  the  too
much  {imip^oKTi)  and  the  too  little  (eXXri^tt).  The
Nicomachean  Ethics  is  one  of  the  most  interesting
of  Aristotle's  works,  and  his  descriptions  of  some
of  the  virtuous  characters  (see  bk.  iv.)  are  exceed-
ingly impressive.  V.  Politics.  Closely  connected
with  the  Ethics  is  the  Politics  (IloXtruca).  The  best
onlering  of  the  State  was,  to  Aristotle's  mind,  the
worthiest  problem  for  the  philosopher;  aud  though
bis  treatment  of  the  subject  was  uot  brought  to  a
logical  conclusion,  yet  the  work  contains  much
valuable  iuformatlon  and  abounds  iu  interesting
remarks.  The  Economics  {OUovofUKa)  is  probably
the  work  of  some  later  writer  of  the  Peripatetic
School.  VI,  Rhetoric.  The  rhetorical  works  in-
clude (1)  the  Poefta>(nfpi  nouTTtK^c))  i^iid  (3)  the^rf
of  Rhetoric  (T<x»t?  'PrfToptKT]).  The  first  of  these,
though  insiguificaut  in  length,  has  received  more
cousideration  in  receut  years  than  almost  any  oth-
er work  of  the*  author.  The  famous  definition  of
tragedy  in  chap,  vi.,  the  discussion  of  the  parts  of
tragedy  in  chap,  xii.,  and  the  distinction  between
epio  aud  tragic  poetry  in  chap.  xxvi.  are  passages
of  the  great«st  interest  and  value.  The  celebrated
doctrine  of  the  KoBaptrts  effected  by  tragedy  (vi.  2)
has  giveu  rise  to  much  discussiou,  but  has  not  yet
been  satisfactorily  explained.  The  doctrine  of  the
three  "unities"  of  tragedy,  upon  which  so  much
stress  has  been  laid  by  the  French  critics,  was
first  promulgated  by  Aristotle  in  this  work.  The
Rhetoric  treats  of  oratorical  proof,  aud  its  leading
elemeuts,  together  with  an  tutereating  discussion
(bk.  iii.)  of  style — all -marked  by  the  author's  usual
clear  and  exhaiiativo  treatment.

In  reviewiug  the  works  of  Aristotle  we  are  at  a
loss  whether  to  admire  most  his  vast  and  accurate
observation  of  nature,  his  profound  acquaintance
with  the  literature  of  his  day,  or  his  deep  and  pen-
etrating insight,  his  keen  analysis,  aud  bis  unfail-
iug  good  sense.  In  his  love  for  research  and  his
critical  tendency  he  may  be  ivgarded  as  the  fore-
runner of  the  Alexandrian  Age  which  was  soon  to
open.  His  style,  though  ao  concise  as  sometimes
to  be  obscure,  is  oft«n  a  model  of  condensed  euei^y,
and  his  oocaaioual  illustratious  are  marvellously
appropriate.  His  influence  on  the  course  of  humau
thought  siuce  his  day  hoM  been  almost  boundless.
Iu  antiquity  lie  was  the  most  honoured  philosopher,
while  the  early  Christian  it-ritera  compared  Pinto
and  Aristotle  to  Moses  and  Christ. Ho  was  the  ora-


cle of  the  Middle  Ages,  when  his  writings^  tbroagb
his  followers,  the  schoolmen,  were  almost  all  that
saved  Europe  from  utter  barbarism.  The  Arabians,
in  the  reign  of  the  calif  At  Momon  (a.D.  013),  began
to  translate  his  works,  which  became  the  fonnda-
tiou  of  Saraceuic  culture,  aud  were  brought  by
them  to  the  knowledge  of  Western  Enrope  through
the  medium  of  Latin  versions  from  the  Arabic.  In
Arabic  tradition  Aristotle  is  the  **  wisest  man,"  just
as  bis  pupil  Ishkauder  (Alexander)  is  the  hero  of
warlike  fable.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  almost
cauouized  him,  and  his  philosophical  system,  as
modified  by  the  great  Dominicaita  Albertns  Mng-
nua  and  Thomas  Aquinas,  lies  at  the  basis  of  Catli-
oltc  theology  to-day.  But  when  the  Renaissancf
gave  bock  to  Europe  the  knowledge  of  Plato,  ilie
popularity  of  Aristotledeclined.  Plato's perfecrion
of  form,  aud  the  fact  that  he  wrote  for  the  enlight-
ened public  generally,  rather  than  for  an  inner
circle  of  special  students,  no  doubt  contributed  to
this  result.  The  Reformers,  who  reganled  Aristotle
as  the  bulwark  of  the  Papacy,  attacked  Iiim  bitter-
ly, and  by  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  he
had  been  almost  set  aside.  It  was  reserved  fur  the
nioeteenth  century,  through  the  labours  of  Schleier-
macber,  Speugel,  Brandis,  and  others,  to  find  the
key  to  the  true  historical  appreciation  of  the  value
of  Aristotle.

The  iufiuence  of  Aristotle  on  the  vocabulary  of
modem  philosophy  is  worthy  of  especial  notice.  A
large  number  of  terms  which  are  in  coustant  use
to-day  are  derived  from  him,  either  directly  or
through  the  medium  of  Latin  equivalents.  Some
of  these  are:  principle  {dpxff),  nbjact  (yieoKtipnw),
matter  (materiesz=.v\i}),form,  end^  final  emue^faatlty
(  Swafus  ),  energy,  category,  predicament,  habit^  meatif
extremty  qttintessenee,  ntetaphyncs,  etc.

The  great  edition  of  the  Frossiau  Academy  (Ber-
lin, 1831-70),  in  five  quarto  volumes,  contains  the
text  in  Bekker's  recension  (i.  and  ii.);  the  Latin
translation  by  Pacius,  Argyropylus,  Beasario,  and
others  (iii.);  the  Scholia  edited  by  Brandis  (iv.);
the  frogmeuts,  aud  the  Aristotelian  Index  of  Bo-
nitz  (v.).  A  convenient  text  editiou  is  publisbed
in  the  Tenbner  Series  (Leipzig).  Annotated  edi-
tious  of  single  works  are  nnmertuia.  Among  them
may  be  mentioned  the  Psychology,  by  Treudeleu-
bnrg  (Jena,  1877);  the  Metaphysics,  by  Scfawegler-
Bonitz  (Bonn,  1848);  the  Nicomaehem  Ethics,  by
Ramsauer  (Leipzig,  1878) ;  the  Politics,  by  Susemihl
(Leipzig,  1679);  the  Rhetoric,  by  Si»eugel  (Leipzig,
1867);  the  Poetics,  by  Vahlen  (Berlin,  1884).  Val-
uable English  works  are  Grant's  Ethics  (Loudon.
1866)  ;  Bywatei-'s  Ethics  (Oxford,  1890);  Newman's
Politics  (Oxford,  1887);  Jowett's  Politics  (Oxfonl,
1885);  Wallace's  Psychology  (Cambridge,  1884):
Grote's  Aristotle  (Loudon,  1872),  The  ancient  com-
mentaries of  Alexander  Aphrodisiensis  (a.i>.  200)
and  Simplioius  (a.d.  530)  are  of  gt«at  importance
historically.  The  Paraphrases  of  Themistitis  (a.d.
375)  are  occasionally  useful  in  settling  doabtful
points  in  the  text.  The  literal  trauslationa  in  the
Bohu  Library  are  of  respectable  merit.

AilstoxfinuB  CApioT^ffvof).  A  Greek  philoso-
pher aud  musician,  a  native  of  Tarentum,  and  a
pupil  of  Aristotle.  He  lived  about  b.c.  330,  and
was  a  prolific  writer  on  various  subjects,  bat  most
particularly  on  music.  In  contrast  wltb  tbe  Py-
thagoreans, who  referred  everything  to  the  rel*-
tiouB  of  numbers,  he  regarded  music  as  founded  on
the  differeuce  of  tones  as  perceived  by  tho  ear. Of


AaiTHUETlCA


m


AKUILU.


hu  'AppowcA  Srotj^tiu  tliriw  Inwki  an>  iirraervud,
t>t)t  tbf)*  ant  iicitbur  coinplcti:  uur  In  tlif  ir  original
tbnfKr. Tlivy  liavu  lifcii  rditol  ity  Muri|iifUtl  (Bur-

Itu.  ItSSBi. Only  a  purt  uf  Ijitt  'Fvd>iijca  Zrotj^tta  biu

sorriTcd. Sec  Mlhica.

Axi^anet^to»(iipt6fii}TtMfit^r4x'»t)-  Bee  Abacus  ;
Ijioiftica;  Mathkmatica.

Aritu  ('Apriof). A  t'l'IMiraliMl  writer  ami  tbiuila-
|Unor  Alexnndrtn,  whodeiiiv4  tliu  vtt-Ttiul  lUviuit;

Iaild  c«li6ilUalaiitiulil.v  of  the  Sc-cuud  Person  of  tbn
Trinity.  Tlioiij^b  luiifb  persecuted  for  his  herrsy.
fco »iic«!««1<mI  iu  wiuiiiiij;  tlie  invour  of  the  omiKinir
t'>i»lnnliiie,  mid  snpiilant*Hl  bis  j^^at  oppoii^Dl  St.
Ailifliiabiua.  Wheu  atiout  lo  filter  the  cutbedrn)  nl
Cui»Un1itinpl*'  Jn  triuniph,  lie  8iiiUI«nIy  died,  a. I'.
Sill.  Twm  bun  tbesfctnf  the  Ariaiisf^RtH  lU  iianiit.

Ariosta  i'Sttwvvia).  A  district  an  tho  nurtb
nut  of  Chics,  ftininu!}  fnr  itn  wjiio.

Anna,  Annaturm  (oirXn,  ?nv(i,  rtCxfa).  Arms,
■raiour  Tbu  vrenpuuit  ufattjuik  and  defenoe  em-
plujcdby  tbc^iioelu  uf  biBtoric  tUnesare  DBBeutialI>-
Ibumou  thofio  witb  nbtcb  the  Homeric  heroce
I  sppcareqaippetl  in  an  earlier  age.  The  chinijtCB
Sndoall}'  introduced,  {-Hiieoially  after  the  remitiu
Wire,  teiideil  to  niakf  tbu  aminiir  li>;htpr  ami  to
(;i<i<  KTrstcr poorer  of  moviiinpnl  to  the  rnnihatant«. ;
fvt  i1i>rftiRiv«  annoiir  Ihey  iiru-d  a  ht<lini>t  (xupus,  ,
rtwYi;  acoirawi  (^«i/miJ)  {nee  ThoiiaXi;  u  t^inlii'
{(mii)  nf  leather  or  felt,  ccn'uriti;;  Ibi^  hiwcr  part  of
ibebudy,  and  nuuTbiiii;  doivu  tu  thr  middle  uf  tbu
ibiglu.  6*itnptimcit  tbiM  cuuniHtcd  of  iiurrow  iilri]m
(ilWtTijji-yiOTrinjfii)  arranged  either  in  single  or
•i<>al>lerowa,Bnd  corered  witb  mciat.  Sometitaes
I:  wu  a  cvjaipleto  coat  phitutl  with  bands  of  tneln),
TbegtraveS  (xi^^idfc)  cnvurrd  th(>  front  (uirt  of  tbn
I'p  hnra  the  ankles  to  jnst  above  the  kne«,  and
nimiitpd  of  tlexible  metal  plnte-s  or  leather  fa«t-
wiM  fvhiud  with  buckles.  The  weapons  of  de-
(Vnw  yitTf  completed  by  the  shield.

Tot  iifTeiisive  weapons  they  bad,  besid««  tho
fwtird  {(!^t).  tlio  latirn  (flopv),  tlv*-  to  lutVRn  feot
l"<i;,  Tbix  waa  uf  in>n,  ih>ni»tinir-f)  broiultr,  nonin-
tiBM  ouTowur,  and  HouiutiineH  h»uk«d  and  witb
«iron  Jdiiit  on  the  bntt  end  which  nerved  to  fix
the  fpfnr  more  easily  in  the  gronnd,  or  conld  bo
*■<«  nn  rtffcuBive  weapon  wheu  tho  regnlor  head

|*<»liniki*n  off.  The  covalry  iise^l  a  sbortei'  lauc«
iittArwi  fnr  barling  as  well  as  ihniBtiug;  tbia  was
ibufhiihiirter  than  the  Macedonian  a-aptaaa.  The
ftUwr  *mjKiim  of  attack  were  javelins  {axovrta)
*' <liiri!n>Dt  sizes,  the  longer  kinds  of  which  were
li^rlffi  iiy  tneaus  of  a  thong,  buu  h  and  arrow*  (iwu
^U^i.iml  ftliuga.  On  the  iM|ui[tDiuni  of  tht*  dif-
'"■""il  kiiid»  of  tnM»p9.  SCO  Gtunetae;  Hippkis;
•lofUTAK  ;  Pelt  AST  AE.
AiQobf*  the  Koniittm  the  full  e()iiipnieut  uf  do-
"■"oreanaour  nimilaflycuusiated  of  helmet  (<■««!*,
^^Um'iTKaa  (sew  LuitiCA),  greaves  (ocrm),  and
""nil  (c^yi^Mj  teutuM).  Witb  reguni  to  the  greaves,
'*  niuu  |i0  tioled  that  in  l»Ier  time>s  the  inf:tntr>'
*vre  ti^-m  „niy  y„  |)„i  right  leg,  wbitb  waa  uu-
l"WerfMby  tbeHbield.

failles  ihu  AWnrd  feHsia,  giatiiMg),  the  horse  aod
'""t  t4  ibe  legion  alike  Uhod,  as  an  offensive
''"Von,  the  lauce  <se«  llABTAt.  ll  wft«  only  tho
''^l-nrmpd  tr<x>|is  that  fought  with  Javelins  and
':''*?»■  Then  the  jnlum  iq,  v.)  watt  intn»dnce<l.
Jim  fur  a  part  and  Anally  for  the  whole  of  th«
^Kttji,  xt,i,4  ^■;nft  tiie  ntisdile  nhicb  tbi>  RiinianH
'■■tied  At  the  euniin«hcement  of  a  battto  beforu


&rTlMr<>on.  fruru « POOI-
V>»Un  rxinuac, (lUch.)


coming  to  elom  quartera  with  their  Mwords.  Itowi
were  not  a  national  weapon  with  the  Romans,
and  were  only  us«d  by  their  allies.  See  EXBliCi-
Tt's;  LKOIt>.

Annamenta. A  tenn  more  particularly  applied
to  the  luekle  uf  u  Mhtp. &eo  NAVTS.

AimameDtaiiiim  (6w\o$ifKTi,  vKtvedtiKtj).  A
place  where  armwntnUt  (q.  V.)  were  kept.  A  nsval
ariteDal.  A  very  celebrated  one  wan  that  in  the
Piraens  (q.  v.),  bntit  about
B.C.  IM2-330,  atid  doatrored  by
Sulla. See  Pint.  Snlla.  U.

Aimailtim.  A  cupboard,
tM>iik-caae,  or  closet.  In  pri-
vate bonses  it  was  UHnally
pluceil  in  the  urnnia  <q.  v.).
Ill  an  inscriptio'u  (Orelli)
45411)  tliH  wurd  JH  applied  to
a  Hflpulchre.

Anuenia  (  \\piir¥la ).  A  '
country  of  Asia,  lying  be-
tween Ahia  Minor  and  the  Caspian  Sea,  in  a  lofty
tablo-laud,  backed  by  the  chain  of  tho  Caucoaaa,
watert>d  by  the  rivers  Cyrus  and  Araxcs,  anil  con-
taining t  he  sources  of  the  Tigrib  aud  of  tlie  Knphr»-
te»,  tho  latter  of  which  dividoa  the  country  into  two
niier|ual  parts,  which  were  called  Maior  and  Minor.
The  |KH>ple  of  Armenia  wore  one  of  the  mosfan-
cient  fatnilies  of  that  braocb  of  the  hnnmu  raco
which  is  calluii  Caucasian.  (See  lMKi-KrnniT-*N
I^ANUt'AGES.)  They  were  conqucnnl  by  the  As-
syrians and  Pemiatis.and  weri!  at  a  later  time  snb-
j'ect  to  theOreok  kingsof  Syria.  When  Autiocbua
thii  Great  (q.  v.)  was  defeated  by  ibe  Konions  (B.C.
11H>),  the  country  regained  ils  independence,  and
was  at  this  jwriod  dtvide<l  iiitoXhe  two  kingdoms
of  Armenia  Maior  and  Minor.  Ultimately,  Armenia
Minor  was  uuule  a  Koman  jirovjnco  by  lS-»jan  ;  and
Armenia  Maior,  after  being  a  per|)et"al  ol>fect  of
conl«tition  hctwcon  the  Romans  and  the  Patlbians,
was  snlijected  to  the  revived  Pentian  Empire  by
iu  tirst  king,  Artnxcrxca,  in  a.D.  3l!6.

AimUauaa.  A  kind  of  military  tunio  worn  by
ftMit-aoldiers  and  reaching  to  the  knees.  See
Mayor  on  Jnv.  v.  143;
uud  Ducauge,  ■.  A.  v.
(ed.  Favre,  1833).

Axmilla  (^iXtof,
&}iii).  A  bracelet  or
armlet,  Among  Ibv  '
Persians  and  Modes
IhtMo  omamentH  were
worn  by  mm,  prol>>
ably  uM  a  mark  of
distinctiuu  (Herod,
viii.  li:i )  i  but  in
UrtMico  they  seem  to
hnvu  been  eoDfined
to  womon,  or  to  ef-
feminate men.  The
Greek  name  u<ftt  is
(also  ipoKovTtt)  was  giveo  tbein  because  of  their
Hcriwntiiit)  ahupe.

Broeclcts  wc^ru  likewise  worn  at  Kume  by  latlies
of  r.itik,  but  it  was  considered  a  mark  of  effemi-
'  iiui-y  for  men  iu  an  onliiniiry  way  to  use  such  fem-
j  iniiiu  ornuuieuts  (Huet.  i'ul.  W ;  AVr.  :k>).  They
were,  however,  publicly  conferred  by  u  Koman
I  general  upon  twildiem  for  deotls  of  exlroordinar^


BncelQl. (On  SUluu  of  iilMplug
ArUflnd  In  (hnVminin.)


AKMILLUM


182


ARQUITES


merit  (Liv.  x.  44;  Pliii.  //.  .V.  ixsiii.  $  37^.  in
wbicb  t'4U»e  tlmy  wertj  worn  Ob  a  tuurk  of  lioimur,
Mid  jiroliably  difliTCil  in  form  fri>iu  tb«  ordinJir.T

orniinicribt  uf  tlie  \iiti<\.


Thii  cut  below  sli«« h  t\w  Rihhjiu  military
bracelet.  Tlio  «rigii)al,  wbicli  in  of  pnro  gold,
WM  fouud  ill  Chfshirc.  KngUiid.


Koman  UlliU/)'  BraceML

Annlliuin.  A  wine-jug  {urrtoiiu)  umU  in  nacri-
fioM,  uid  carritMl  on  ihe  stioulder  {armus),  whence
rbc  nnme.

Aimilustritun.  A  Roman  fefitival  for  the  puri-
-ficaliou  of  annfi,  and  celrbrati'd  ai)nua[ly  on  tbf
ItJcb  of  October.  11  marked  tli«  eixl  of  tbe  ram-
paiguiiiK  sf>a»i>n,  iw  the  Qu)i)qn»(riiH  marked  tbc
iie);itininR  of  it.  Rm  Mmniniwii,  Itiscr.  Lat,  Ant.  p.
404;  and  Livy,  irvii,  IF?.

Azminiua.  The  Latintztid  form  of  Hmaotm^
"  the  cbiuftiiin."  Son  of  Ki){innT.  and  rliicf  of  lh«
trilm  of  the  CberuHci,  who  inluibitiHl  tbit  rimntry
lo  rbi>  iiortb  of  the  tlurtz  MoiiutatHH,  uow  funtiin);
tbe  Aoiitb  of  Hanover  and  iiriiniiwti'k.  He  wait
bom  ill  B.r.  Iff;  and  in  his  youth  hi>  toil  \\\k  Clirt-
niHci  as  aiixiliarioa  of  the  Knmnn  kginos  iu  Ger*
many,  whure  be  l(^n^nt-d  tbo  Roman  lan^uaj^f,  waa
admitted  to  the  freedom  of  the  city,  and  tnroUwi
amoiig  tbc  e4|oit««.  In  a.i>.  9.  Anninius  pcranad-
e*!  his  conntrytncn  to  nnn  nfrainHt  the  Itomaiift,
who  vrrro  now  maittenf  of  ibin  part  of  Germany.
His  attempt  waa  rrownrd  with  snccesB.  Qnintil-
Ina  Vanift,  who  wn«  Atationcd  in  tlie  ronniry  with
tbnw  logioua,  van  dMtroyod.  with  almnflt  alt  bin
troops  (b«oVjlru8i;  and  tbo  KomanH  bod  to  rt«-
linquish  all  their  posacMiioiii  lK<yond  tbo  Rhine.
Iu  A.P.  14,  Amiiniui  bad  to  defend  bin  conutry
agalDst  Oennoaicos.  At  first  ho  was  nncceftHruI,
but  OerniauicMs  made  j>ood  his  retreat  to  the
Rhine.  It  w»8  iu  the  conrse  of  this  campni^
that  Thnanelda,  the  wife  of  Armintas,  fell  into
the  bandti  of  the  RoiimtiH.  In  a.i>.  ItJ,  Armining
WHH  defeateit  by  (ii^nnaiiieitft,  and  bitt  country  was
prohaldy  only  saved  from  m»bjfv:tion  by  the  jeal-
ou«7  uf  Tibc^UH,  who  recalled  Oeriuauicus  iu  the


followint;  year.  Ar  length  Amiinins  aim«d  at  ab-
Kolul«  power,  and  wait  iu  c^Miitfiinenco  cut  otf  by
bis  own  relations  in  the  lhirry'iM.-vrnth  year  of
hi«  a^e.  A.u,  \*X  A  colossal  Hlatnc  of  Amiininn  by
Handel  was  erected  in  An^nst,  187!%  near  DetniuM
in  Gemiatiy.  See  HottKer.  f/mminn  tier  Cfccnuutsrv
J'ant  (1^741,  and  the  article  (iKILMAMA.

▲rmoracia  (/mi^jWt). HuneradiHh.

Armorifca  or  Aremorlca.  The  name  of  th«
tiorlhwi-Ht  conil  rtf  diaul  from  tbc  LigrriA  (1^trc>)
to  the  Se(|uan»  (Seine),  derived  fnttii  the  Keili«
ar,  air,  "upon;"  wkiV,  m6r,  "the  wa.**  I.ntrr,  the
name  waa  confined  to  Brittany.

Army. See  Castiu;  ExfHCiTl'e  ;  Lmio;  Sa-

ClUMKNTtJM,

Ajn6  {'Aptnf').  A  flangbter  of  Aeolns.  who  gare
her  mime  to  two  town)*,  one  in  Tbewtaly  and  the
oilier  in  Boeotia.  roKt!idon.nudertb<<foniiof  abnl),
iMX'nme  her  lover  (Pniisan.  ix.  40;  Ovid,  Altt.  Ti.4).

Aineia  ('ApM^i't). The  same  as  Arniit  (q.  v.),

Amia  i'.Kfn-tt).  A  feetival  held  by  the  Argiv
in  Ausnst,  ilnriiif;  which  they  killed  any  dt^  thai
came  into  the  Agora;  lience  the  niimo  xxwi^am,
given  tu  Ihe  feaat  (Alheii.  iii.  p.  \)9  e).  The  naa
aacre  uf  doga  was  probatily  due  to  Ih?  frar  o^
mai1n«as,  as  was  the  similar  killing  of  d'tgs  i
Roma  in  the  aame  month,  w  hii-h  ih,  Imwever.  os'
ally  aasigned  to  their  having  failed  to  give  noti*
of  the  attack  of  the  GniiU  on  the  CapttoL  S-«
Pliny,  II.  y.  xxix.  S».

Amobiua.  An  African  v,  ho  won  a  high  tc>]
utntiuu  ii»  a  nioiiter  of  rUvioric  at  Bicca  in  >«  i
niidia,  iu  the  reign  of  Diocletian.  Hm  watt  at  tavs
a  heathen  and  an  atwuilant  of  Chritttianity;  tjii
on  iKConiing  a  Chritttiun,  to  prove  ihe  sincLTif.
of  his  DoiLverMiou,  ]»;  wrote  (nlKuit  A.D.  295)  Tfn
extant  work  Adrenug  Htnttt.  This  is  a  snjterf  t
cial  and  rhet^irital  defence  of  Cbriptianity  aud  nf-
tock  on  polytbridm.  bnt  it  is  full  of  instrncboa'
with  regard  to  the  con  tern  ptirnry  heatlicnisni  ab«^
its  various  wonthips.  It  i»  cnntaiiie<1  in  serrri
Imoks.  The  ti'Jit  h  deriveil  from  a  US.  in  Fltl^
of  (he  ninth  centnry,  in  which  the  work  ts  en  '
titled  Adva-avg  A'ii/ivm-«.  The  rtUlio  prmee/ta  istllstf
of Sabaens ( Rome,  1543),  Good editiona are thoM
Hillebraud  illiille,  li<44),  and  Keillentcbeid  ilBSh]
Eng.  tr»ri».  iu  the  Amte-\ictHt  Lifir»ry,\o\.  xix.

Araua.  The  modern  Anio:  the  chief  river  ol
Ktniria.  which,  rising  in  the  Apennines,  and  flow
ing  by  IMiMio  U'isn),  emptied  into  the  Tniwan  Sea.

Arfitol  HiSroi  iufxiroi  Itpoi).  "Sncrcfl  ploog'
ings."  thrill)  iti  nuin)M!r,  lield  in  Attica  in  lli
loontb  Maiiniu^tt-'rion  (\ov.-Dec.),  to  eomnietnorafl
tbu  iniftitntioii  of  ugricnilnre.  The  lirat  pltingf
ing  wnt4  liL-ld  at  Sciru«;  the  second  on  the  Raricri
Plain  near  Ktensii* ;  the  third  under  the  Acropoir^
A  family  of  pricata  known  ns  Koi/C^-ytot,  a  sort
ArvHl  13i-otlierhood  (sec  Khatkks  Arvai.K9).  ei
fur  Ihe  sncred  plough  and  oxen,  Soo  Svhouii
tirierk.AU.U  'Kfti.

ArpL .Sic  ARGVRlfA.

Arplnum. A  town  of  Latinm  on  the  river
brenus,  originally  Ix'longing  lo  the  VolsviauB  tai>«
aflerwanls  to  the  t^aniiiitt-jt,  was  »  Roumu  mun'j'
ci)iiiim,  and  I'ecrived  tbe  ito  Muff'ragii,  or  right
voting  in  tin;  Roman  ('oinitia.  B.C.  1^ It  was
birthplace  of  Mariii.<t  and  I'icora.

Arqultea. 8i>v  SAGiTTAiut.


ABRA


ARSACES


Ana.  ArrJlbo. An  ^aniMt. The  nnrrl  armbo

te  Semitic,  aiiO  ctccun  {appoBity,  /~<VX)  in  Oeii.

xxxviil  17-20,  uf  a  T\ng,  brncclel*,  niid  fttnff  given

u  ft  pleilK^  for  the  prl(^e,  anil  ttio  corre«panilihg

Tfrrii  iu  Hi*1irew  6«rcnil tttncK. Tbn  PhiiMiicJun

trkdnrs  probably  brongbt vtonl iind cnttom lo

<ti«ece,  nuil  PUotUM  pn>b»Mr  fnllowtstl  ju  thifi  »

OrMh  nriginat. He  nticd  tbi^  won)  for  ntiything

j;iT(>ii  As  Htfp)  of  a  bargain  boin^;  uiikIo  imhI  ms

1>tcdge  of  itti  fnltilnieiit. The  original  lilra  twvtiiH

tolurD  btH-ii  II  tvmponirv  dvpnttit  rerliiiitiEblu  un

Ik  IwrgaiD  being  fulHlltHl. Tha  tliiu};  tlintt  *erv-

tug  M  OfTfl  ("  esruiut " — "  orlo*,"  Scotuh  :  let  urrAi-t,

J-'rauch;  "••rlwt  ikcony,'*  N'nrlli-Cnniitry  KiiglinUK

giv^a  on  hiring  u  wrx'ant — "  ytiLM-u's  sbilHiig"  in

«uliAting  mcruiu  i  UauA^M.  Oottfheller,  tt'fiiika^f,

in  Oamiiuy) — inigbt  bo  u  tuere  t^kcu  or  a  plt^dge

•f  lamo  vaiue,  m*  a  ring  or  n  piece  of  money,  or

mijjlit  poM  into  jwirt  payment  of  the  price  or  part

t)«JiTcry  of  tbo  thiD>(  pnrchonod,  anil,  occunliiig

tu any  spifciikl  afireemctit  ur  custom,  might  U«  for-

Ani  tAt)I«>  l>y  the  party  not  rurrj-ing  mit  tiin  tiargain,

auc'hftirfrit  bi>ing  in  lien  of  nr  iu  aihlitiun  to  dUier

f^ineiliM  for  breach  uf  contnu't.

.Airvdnm. Thn moilom An-zzo ; om- of  the

Kuom  imporiant  of  the  twelve  citU^  of  Ktnirta,

vv^  ftiluatc^  in  tbti  uorlhca»C  of  the  eonntry  at

Cli«]  foot  uf  the  At>«uuine«,  and  poseeswd  a  fertile

t^'^^criiory  u«ur  chti  eM>iirc4>s  of  the  Amnii  and  the

'ilffr,  pHKluciiig  good  wine  and  corn. It \\a»

k.xti<:uli>rly  i;ei«>brutcd  for  itn  {HiIK^ry.

.Ajifaephoria  <,ru  appTjifMipfai. A  festival  whicb,

'a^»«onliug to tlio vaHouK wars in whirh tlie

■^a^iBe  is  written  (fur  we  Bnd  fparjtfu'ipta  or  ipprj-

l^*^pta).  is  attnbnii-d  ti)  difforcni  d«?itii^». The  tirat

Tv^rni  is  t]rriv«d  from  AppiiTa.  and  thiiH  woiild  iu-

licate  a  fvatirnl  at  whicli  tuyalcrioun  Ihingn  were

■«^^iTi«l  about. Tbi-  «>ther  iinniu  would point  to

lfln»  vr  Hen»<<,  who  was  bolieveil  to  l>p  u  dangh-

ti^t  uf (.'ecrops, and who«u wunbip was lutl-

nuudy  conneeted with thai of  Atbon<(. Utit,

^nrn  admitting the latter,  we  still  have nufU-

<**««  gronnd  for  believing that  the  festival  was

•"InmiiKwl.  ill  a  higher  Kenne,  in  bonotir  of  A(hen6.

It  wb»  lield  at  Atheuft.  in  the  niuiith  of  8citopbo-

r»«n. Sw  Momuisen,  Hrortolof/ir,  pp.  -Hit  full.

Anhidavtis  ( 'ApptAoior  l.  Tlit>  twin  of  Philip
•of  Mftcedon  and  a  female  dancer,  riiitiiuia  »>f
I-atwsj,  He  was  of  imbecile  uud(*nitutiditig.  On
^^f  death  of  Alexander,  B.C.  IKS,  he  wiiu  elcet-
*^  Itiag  under  the  nutne  of  Philip,  and  in  3^
^  ftiJirTied  Kurydicfi.  On  their  reliini  to  Mace-
*>nia  he  and  hU  wife  wore  madfl  priwiners
•■^  put  t4i  death  by  onler  of  Olynipiw*,  lu  the
J^r  317.
A«ia.  (1)  See  Paetls.  (3)  See  TiiRAi^tiA
Anianiu,  Fuivius.  AOreek  aatbor,  who  wrote
^*^yoii  pbiti)M>(»by  and  btntory.  He  waa  Ixirn  at
^'^'^Oueilia  in  Bitbyaia,  towardtt  the  end  of  the  fintt
^^Otury  A.D.,  and  waa  a  pupil  of  the  Stoic  philomi-
^^t  EpicTetus.  He  lived  niider  the  emperora  Ha-
"•"'■'LAulouiuu*  Pine,  and  M»rcn»  Aorelius.enjoy-
'"Kahich  reputation  for  I'liliiire  and  ability,  which
^'''H^-iii^l  him  the  eitizeUHhip  of  Rome  and  Athene,
*'^d  high  ofKees  of  Ataie.  micti  as  the  governontbip
^^  Cappadooia  under  Hadrian,  A.U.  IltG,  and  tbe
■^'""aliJiip  undt-r  Antonion.-i.  HiH  last  yeiint  were
'I*M  it)  Jii«  native  lown,  wlier<*  be  tilled  the  «»ftico
"f  ptitn  to  Deiueter,  and  died  at  an  udvaneed  age,
^^^m  the  likeneis  of  Un  character  to  that  nf  the


fumomi  Athenian,  he  wan  nicknamed  ''Xenophon
Junior." Of  his  philu»ophtcal  worka  we  have  fttitl
the  tir»t  haJf  (four  books)  of  the  IMscovrtt  of  AJj-
iciettts.  a  leading  anthorlty  for  the  teneta  of  that
philosopher  and  the  Stoical  etblci:  and  the  band-
j  book  called  the  AVAriV»<4on /,/  Epifi^im,  a  *hort
^  mnnnal  of  morality,  w  hich  on  account  of  ltd  pithy
.  and prnotical preeept^  Itecame  a  great  favourite
with  PugatiN  and  CbriHtianH,  had  a  commentary
,  written  on  it  by  .Simplicins  in  tbe  Htxth  century.
I  and  after  the  revivnl  of  learning  wti»  lung  nw^l  oa
.aM'bouldKKik. Of  bin  numerous  binlorieal  writings
we  pOMCBH  the  chief  one,  tbe  AttahiitU  of  Jltsatuirr,
I  in  seven  books. This  is  a  complete  history  of  that
.  conqueror  from  his  acceaaion  to  his  deatb,  drawn
from  the  be«t  sourceo.  cflpecinlly  Vtolemy  and  Ar-
istobuluK,  and  modelled  on  Xenophnu.  uf  whom  we
are  reraindeil  by  the  very  title  and  the  number  of
books,  thongh  it  baa  none  of  XenophmiV  charm.
It  is  tbe  Wet  \vork  on  Alexander  thai  has  siirvtved
fn>in  antii|nity. To  this  we  should  odd  the  InHica,
a  short  work  on  India,  written  in  the  Ionic  dialect,
'  anil  eHjM<cially  valnablefor  itsabMirael  ufXean-hns's
I  report  of  his  voyage  from  the  inontb  of  the  Indus
'to  the  Persian  (tulf:  also  tbe  descripliou  of  another
^coasting  voyage,  the  iWiftha  Ptmli  Eiaini,  and  a
I  tridiiig treatise on bunting,  tbe Ct/neifetir.u». A
work  ou  tactics  wrongly  ascrilMMl  lu  hiiu  is  prob>
ably  from  the  hand  nf  Aelian  tbe  Tactieiau. Of
his  other  histories — o.  g.  of  tbe  successors  of  Alex-
ander, of  Trajan's  Imtllc*  with  tbe  ParthiaoH,  of
his  own  native  roniitry  till  its  HbMnr|itioi)  into  the
Rinpim,  and  the  campaign  agninst  the  AUni  dur-
ing liis  rommiinii  tn  Civppndoeia~we  hnvf  only  ab-
straets or fraginent«. The best edition of  the
AnabastM  in  that  of  KiHlger  (1646). There  is  an
Engll)<h  translation  by  Chinoock  (1^^^).

Arrogatdo. One of  the Bnman methods  of

adoption- 8ee  ADomo.

ArBjtceaf'.\pa-dKi}f).  The  nameof  (l)thefonnder
of  tbo  Parthian  Empire,  wbich  was  also  tKtnie  by  nil
hissucoeeBorA,wbo  nere  bence  called  iUa  A niaruliu;.
He  woBof  olwcurc  origin,  but  be  induced  the  Por-
tbiaus  to  revolt  from  Autiochus  II.,  king  of  HjTia,
and  became  the  tlrst  monarch  of  the  Partbians,
about  ».c.  ^56.  Tlie  events  which  immediately
followed  are  stated  very  ditferenily  by  ilitt'erent
historians.  He  reigned  only  two  years,  and  was
sncceedml  by  hia  brother  Tiridalee.  (3(  TtRl-
date.-*,  ndgned  thirty-seven  years,  B.C'-  WK-an,
and  <tefeated  Heleucns  (?iillinictts,  the  sncceasor
uf  Aittiitchiis  II.  (H)  ARTAnANr.<^  I.,  son  of  tbe
preceding,  was  uttueke^l  by  Antiocbus  III.  irlie
Great),  who,  however,  at  length  recognized  him
at  king,  about  2H).  (4)  Priai'ATIIs,  son  of  the
preceding,  reigne^l  fifteen  years,  and  left  three
sons,  Pbraates,  MithridateN,  and  Artabnniis.  (fi)
PfiKAATEA  I  was  sncceiMlcd  by  his  brother
Iff)  MiTnini>ATK6  I.,  who  gre^itly' enlarged  the
Parthian  Rmpiiv  by  his  oonqaeste.  lie  defeated
Demetrius  Nicator,  king  of  Syria,  and  took  him
|M-isinicr  In  1%^.  He  died  dnring  the  captivity  uf
DemetrinH,  l>etwei>n  138  and  130.  (7)  PnRAATIct
U.,  son  of  tbe  preceding,  defeated  and  slew  iu
l>attle  AntioehuH  Vil.  Hidetes.  it.c.  VM.  Pbraates
himself  whs  shortly  after  killed  by  the  Hcythians.
ii*)  Artadanui^  II.,  youngest  son  of  No,  ■*.  fell  in
battle  against  tbo  Thogarii  or  Tocharii,  apparently
after  a  short  reign.  (9)  Mitiiiiii>atE'>  II  ,  son  of
the  preceding,  added  uany  uatioua  to  the  Parthian


1


ARSACES


ISi


AR9  DONATI


IVi


Ovife  ut  ATMCM  n.  (Htihrtduca  I.).

Empire,  whence  lie  obUiiied  thesiiniaiiw  of  Great.
][e  sent  aci  niiiliaABOilor  to  8ii1Ia,  b.c'.  93,  (10)
MnaM'IIUIR  (?),  tliu  8iicce*wn'  tif  the  iirtrwling,  of
n-lium  uulLiiiiKiskiiKWii.  (II)  SA>'ATlirK;KS,  iriyriwl
K^rfnycani,  aiiililieil  altoiit  B.C.  70.  (l*J)  PiiitAATKS
III.,  Hiiii  i>r  lbi«  preceding,  lived  nt  the  tiiuti  of
the  war  livtwecu  the  RomRiiH  iiiul  Milliridates  of
PoiituH,  by  both  of  whom  hi-  vrn*  cmirtw].  He  wan
iiiurdt^rud  by  his  two  »ni)!(.  Mitlindal:oa  aiul  Oroduti.
(la)  MiTUniDATEK  III.,  fiorj  of  the  prcceditig,  was
ex|iellcd  from  the  throne  on  atcomit  of  his  cmelty,
and  wft8  Biicceedod  Ijy  hi«  brolhor  Orode».  fl4)
Oiiout:8  I.,  brother  of  thw  ]M-uro<Iiiig,  watt  the  Par-
thian king  n-h<HM!  geudiil  8iireiiuit  dt?feal«d  CrM-
sii«  and  the  RiHiiauH,  B.C.  ^>'i.  (See  VnAfi»rf^)
After  thn  dwilli  of  Cransus,  Orodes  gave  the  c«in-
maiul  of  the  army  to  his  »oii  Facorim.  nUoiiivmlpil
Syria  both  iu  51  aod  &0,  but  was  iu  eai-h  year
drtvru  buck  by  Cnuius.  In  4U,  the  ParlbiauH
ajjaiu  invaded  Syria,  uuder  the  coniuiaiid  of  I'uo-
onitt  ami  Labieims,  bnt  were  defeated  iu  :)9  by
Yontidins  Uassuti,  one  of  AiiUmy'if  legale*.  In  liti.
Pnconis  nnce  tnori;  JiivHdL-d  Syria,  but  w:iM  roin-
plctely  defeated  and  M\  in  the  battle.  This  ile-
feat  was  a  Bcwre  biovr  to  the  aged  kiug,  OroduH,
who  dhortly  afterwanln  mirreudLTL'd  th«  ertiwn  to
(lis  Mtn  Phnuites  during;  hii4  Hfeltme.  |ir>)  PnitA-
ATKH  IV.  was  a  crnel  tynuit.  In  3Cy,  Antony  in-
vade^I  Pnrthia,  but  wait  oblij^ed  tu  i-utn^iil  tiftrr
tofiini;  a  tjreat  part  vf  hi«  army.  A  fuw  yrant  aftt-r-
wardK  PhniiUeH  wi»«  driven  out  of  the  connlry  by
hid  hubjetitft,  and  Tiridntcs  proclaimed  king  in  IiJk
■toad.  Phniat«s,  howt^vvr,  was  soon  rtHtored  by
the  Scythians,  and  Tiridat««  tied  to  AiigUMtiia,
carrying  with  hiiu  the  youngest  son  of  Phrantes.
AugnslUB  reBtored  his  son  to  Phrantea,  on  condi-
tioti  of  his  Burrendoriiig  the  Uoninii  fitandards  and
Iirisouers  takeu  in  (he  war  wtlh  Cnissns  and  Au-
tOQy.  TLey  were  given  up  in  'i(>,  and  their  rea*
loration  waa  o«1ebrar4>d  not  oidy  by  iht^  piM<ta,
but  by  foBtivmla  and  conimemorativti  niontinientN.
Phmatee  also  sent  to  Angu^tMs  an  h(u>tagea  hid
four  hong.  In  A.U.  y,  Phraale*  wii*  poiaoned  by
hitt  wife  'rhoruHifta  (iiu1  her  son  Phrnataoec.  ( Itl)
I'HRAATA<,'K.s  reign<'4  iinly  u  nh«rt  tinip,  ak  he  wiw
expelled  by  Ids  nubjectM  on  acronnt  of  hia  crimen.
The  Partiiitin  iKibleft  lti*!n  eh-elt-d  an  king  Onwiott,
who  wuN  of  thi>  family  of  thu  ArMaeidu*'.  ( 17 )  UuO-
DBti  II.  ahto  n^igned  oitly  a  tthurt  tluH'.  an  he  wait
killed  by  the  Parthiuna  on  tu-coiint  of  IiIm  eruclty.
Upon  bin  death  tbo  Parthiuns  applied  to  the  Ho-
mans  for  Vououca,  ono  of  the  mtua  of  Phraat««
IV,,  who  was  oceordingly  gruntetl  to  tUeiu.  {16)
VoNuNK-H  r,8ou  of  Pliraalei*  IV^.,  was  also  disliked
by  hiM  8nbj(<ct«,  who  tbcrefori'  invited  Art.ibanua,
king  of  Media,  to  take  )M)«B<^8»<ioti  of  the  kingdom.
Artabanu»  drove  VoiiourR  out  *>(  Parthia.  who  re-
aided  ttrKt  tn  Arueiita,  next  in  Syria,  and  suUm-
qftditly  in  CiUrifl.  He  was  put  to  death  in  a.D-
19.  till)  AitTADANirg  lil.  obtaJDcd  th«  Parthian
kiogdom  auou  after  tho  expulaiou  of  Vouuuum,


about  A.D.  16.  ArtnbanuH  wn^s  involved  In  In
tilitiea  with  the  itoniaiw,  and  waa  expelled  inoq
llian  ontx)  by  hid  Knhjvrta.  CiOt  GoTARZlw  su^
c«e<led  hiH  father.  ArlabanuH  IIL.  bnt  wa^  defeats
by  hia  bnilher  Hardatifs  and  retired  into  HyrrattU
(21)  ilAItI>ANES,  brother  of  tliu  prevrding,  v^  om  pai
to  death  by  his  Huhjeeta  in  47,  whereuimn  OulurM
again  obtained  the  crown,  (^i)  VuNuNiZb  I]
Hiiccecdcd  Gotarees  about  50.  Iliit  reign  woa  tAmti
(33)  Vou>Gfi«BB  I.,  son  of  Vonoues  II,  or  Arb^
baiuia  III,  Soon  after  his  ocoesbion  he  conqueral
Anuenia,  which  he  giire  t«  hia  brother  Tiridatd
He  carried  on  war  with  the  Rvmanti,  bnt  wan  di
iViited  by  niindtiit^  Corbido,  and  al  length  mad
|H-ai'e  with  tilt'  RoniaiiH  on  eondili<ni  that  Ttridalfl
i^honld  receive  Arnienia  om  a  gift  from  the  Ronitj
empcrov.  Accordingly  Tiridatv8  cauit<  I"  Rum*?  I
KI.  and  obtained  from  Nero  the  Annenian  tnivra
('■H)  PaCm'iUUs  sncceeded  hia  father.  Vidogcsrs  t
and  was  a  contemporary  of  Doiuitiau  and  Triijii^
f'i&)  CUOSROES  or  OsRoiis  Kueeeeded  hi»  bnilll^j
Pocorufl  duriug  the  leign  of  Trajan.  Hia  t-onquc^
of  Anueuta  oocoaioned  the  inTohioii  of  Parthia  kjj
Trajan,  who  fttrippisl  it  of  many  of  its  provincaj
anil  made  tbt?  Partliianit  for  a  limu  Kiibjert  ^
Rome.  (S«!  TKAlANl'ft,)  Upon  tin-  death  »»f  Tra
jau.  iu  A.D.  117, Hadrian  reliiuinit^hiti  the  coniiiivM
of  Tni,|aii,  and  made  ttir  Eiiphratir^,  an  befu  i|
the  eniilei-n  bonudary  of  the  Roman  Kinpiru.  ('
VoLOOf:i{)':.s  II.  miiceetled  hist  father,  t'liu»>rol^,
reigned  fnun  al»ont  a.d,  122  tu  149.  (-^7)  Vo:
8K6  IH.  waa  defeated  by  the  geneiala  of  the  _
pemr  Verns.  and  purchased  jteace  by  ending  Mcalj
potatnia  to  the  Kfiinnnt*.  Kmm  this  time  to  i|
downfall  of  the  Parthian  llinpire  Ihrre  in  gv^
r;nnfiiNion  in  the  li^t  of  kingn.  The  last  kinj^J
Parthia  was  Aktabanl'h  IV.,  in  whoeo  reign  fl
Persiaue  recovered  their  tong-Ioat  inder^endcni


They  were  led  by  Ailaxerxes,  the  son  of  I
and  defeated  the  Parthiamt  in  three  great  bitll'
in  the  laMt  of  wbirh  Artabuium  wait  taken  priMttM
and  killed.  a.It.  t£26.  TUiik  eiidtHl  the  PurtbiM
Kmpire  r>f  the  Antac-jilae,  aft«r  it  hod  cxixtiM  9A
years.  The  Puriliiaim  were  now  ubligrd  to  ni^
rnit  to  Artaxerxert,  the  founder  of  the  dyaaead
of  the  Saosauidae,  which  continued  to  rei(;n  CJ
A.D.  051. See  Pa  mill  A.  H

Arsacla  ('Apo-axia), See  Riiag,ve.  i

Araacldae. Tlie  name  of  a  dynasty  of  Purtb  Sl|
kingH. iSuf?  Aksai'Kh.) It  wa.*  also  the  iiani**
a  dynasty  of  Anneuiaii  kingn,  who  reigned  in
nunia  fi-um  n.C.  149  t«»  a.d.  428.

AxB  Amoris  or  Ars  Amatoria. A  poem  on
art  of  love  by  P.  Ovidlus  Nawt Cq.  v.i.  hrilli
luid  licentious,  nb'ise  immorality  was  ai  h<ast  tH
pretence  of  its  author's  subsequent  baninhincut
Augustus. It  is  iu  three  buok-^.

Ara  Donati. The  title  of  a  gRunauu'  by  Aeli'


i.


ARSINO&


DoiiatitPi  pq.  V.)  that  v<iLt  a  TBTourito  fichonl-lionk  in
>  Ibe  MttliUi*  Aj^fa,  »a  llmt  in  Ohl  Kiiglisli  tlie  word
•  "dotinl"  ^Chaacert  U  iummI  sh  a  geunrUi  Irroi  for  a

liminmsr.

AistnM  ('Apcrti'iM;). (1)  Tbc  daugUter  ofSlulea-

pr,  umI  muthor  nf  Ptnli-uiy  I.  nf  Eg^'pt,  li>'  Pliiti|t,

fith«r  of  Al«x.aiiiter. During  livr  pn-tfiiancy  »lio

vru  mameil  to  Lii^iia. (>E)The  it»iit;)itet'  »t  I'uil-

ciuy  I.  of  E|f>pt  aiitl  Brrt?iiii;e, Slu*  iiiarned  Ly-

•iiniu'hiiA,  kiiij;  *>(  Tlinice,  who  wan iilrtaily  ad-

vuuchI  ill  yt* iir>,  liy  »hotii  (die  liai)  M-vt>rtil  rltildrvn.

Lyf^itROt-'lm*.  wttitig  unt  fur  Amiu,  U^ft  lifr  in  \fa(.-c-

iloiiia,  wirti  two  fcotiH.  Ly»<imiivhu8  and  rtiili)),  n

|i«rt  of  tlie  fruiu  t>f  llieir  iuiii>u. Thin  iiiuiiarrti

ijiaviijg  Ijccii  fJaiii  in  iiii  tixiK^dition,  Ptoleiny  Vv

t-ntiutia  Mizrd  on  Mncvdunla,  but  loiiKI  not  take

lUv  vily  iif  Cuaaanilha.  wtiurc  Amiuot^  Liad  takrn

^fii(;p  wilb livr children, lie Itioirfom aHi.>reil

i«?r  hifi  liand  iu  umrriafxv,  ami  witti  uiucli  dilltcat-

t>-  I'ltlainwl ber  conitcut. Hnt  no  Mmnrr  biul  hi'

kM^rn  idniitt<*'1 iuU)  Ibn  city  for tbo {Mir^iofw*  of

ctslulmtini;  tL<^  iinptiatM,  than  b«  canted  btr  two

I  to  b«  Main,  and  fxitfd  Amino^  herMt'lfto  Ka-

knrr. Front tbi-« tHhiml Hh<< ^kkmi took hi'r

iepman  io  wetl  Ptolemy  PhiladrlphtiH.  bcr  own

liruiW,  Ibe  fiptt  iiifttanrt'  of  tliin  kind  of  nnioii,

am]  aliicb  bcianio  aftcrn-ardn  m>  rnnniion  in tbi>

liinnof  ibe  Pudcniiett. AllhotjKb  many  jrear>  nUl-

•t  iboii  Pfolpniy,  cbe nvvfrlholciui  invpirp^I biiu

willj»wb  !i  pUMinii  that,  ntdT  bi-r  diiith,  be  Rave

'••^tiMiii'  to  ont'of  ib«  nonKwof  Ef(y|it  (Arsinoitis).

um]  loH>Vi>rai  citi<44  both  in  Ibat  (NMinlry  and  clsf^-

"kprr. Mn  nven |j«ve  ordrfx  to  bavw a  t4'ni)d<>

noilcd  Ui  hor,  but  biit  own  dt:ath  and  that  of  the

vtbitcvt  prvvi^ntc*!  the  fullllnK'iil.  of  liin  wivbcn.

It  »»  iutnidMl  to  hnvR  bad  ibf  cpilinj;  nf  b>ail-

"tooe.  fti)d  !h«  tttaliieof  iron,  in  iin!*T  that  Ibf  lut-

("TinillLtBiipu'ar  toht-NUMjM'tidvd  iu  lht>  utnriin.//.

•V.miv.  14). (3t  A  dniifjblerof  LvBiniai-biiM.  king

■f  TbntCf,  and  the  earlir'r  n^ifo  of  Ploh-my  Pbilu-

•IflpliM. She  hecamu  hy  him  the  uiotbtT  of  Pio]-

*"J  III.  (EuetKcteHj,  Lyftiuiacbus,  and Bert-tiirt^.

^Ur  rtolciuy's  union  with  Atnino^,  hi»  own  siit>

((t,  ilio wiM Itutijsbcd to Co|itii!f. Tbt^ charge

*A>ii)cbt  a|{uinttL bpr  wnn  a  ilnni^n  to  nvnrtbrow

Wrivtl. (4)  nnut;ltti>r  of  Plobniy  111.  and  Ht-r-

rnic^  niatHitl Plolpuiy Philupjttor, ber brothfr.

ilff  biuband  MuhM-qiK-utly  having  Iweunie  enuni-

"•"•fl  of  Ayathoelca,  and  being  coinijh;tely  inb-il

^I  tiki*  niiniiUi  and  bei'  biutbent,  waa  induced,  at

"■"^r  llI9tt^lltion,  (u  older  AndtnaS  to  bm |Hit (o

^b. ^5)  A  daughter  of  Ptolemy  Aulet»\ pni-

tliiBwal  nuecn  by  Ganymeiltis,  whon  CucAar  ar-

"ked Alexandria. She was eomjiu-re*!, and

^nglii  ill  trinmph  to  Rome;  but,  an  thiH  proved

''■l^ftwng  t«  tlie  |R4iple,  nIih  Wii»  wt  at  lilieny.

^•Wij.ivcitiy,  ut the  inHtij;ation of  ber  younger

^'^^f  Cki>palra,  nbo  wiu  put  to  deiitb  by  the  or-

'^''»''f  Ant.Hiy,  tn  Ibe  Ti:niplo  of  ArtemiH  at  Mile-

'"•  i;  Uirt.  Itrtl.  Ala.  4 ;  Appiaii,  BeU.  Civ.  v,  9).

*'«ui6e  C\ptr(patj).  The  name  of  several  riliea.
"(ti  cjitltd  after  one  or  other  of  tbo  p«'.r»«)ns  men-
'''''i(<|  nlwve.  Of  theae  tho  mrwt  important  were:
*'•  Id  (he  NnniiM  ircriio|»olit«'w  in  I^ower  Egypt,
"'*'  "T  npon  the  hrnd  of  tbi*  .Sinn«  IleroopoliteA.
"  ■'•i  bmn.b  of  tlie  Hed  Sea  rUnlf  of  Siu-z).  It
V»»fteTwanU  called  Clt^jpntra.  (Si  The  chief
*"y"fli»r  Koniott  Arwinfdtcit  in  Middle  Egypt;  for-
'•wljTalb'd  ('nM.'*Hlilo|Mdi»t.fnmi  it«  being  the  elnef
**(  ''f  ibe  Eg^  ptiau  wornbi]!  uf  the  crueoiUIc.


I Ai«  Poetloa. A  poolieal  epi<.tte  written  by  Q.

.  Hurarioft  FlnvctiB  I  <).  v,  I  in  bexainetei-H,  and  ad-
dresHail  to  the  I'itMM.  It  iit  Ir'hI  regardetl  hh  nu
ex])reMinu  of  hi»  nmtnred  views  on  topics  con-
iiei*tei)  wjtb  Iit4*rary  Ktinlie«.  It  aboundii  in  bappy
Inmaof  phrase,  and  ix  marked  thronghont  it«  liuciti
by*  Honnd  seniw  and  excellent  litarary  ta«te-

Art,  Anciknt.  Sue  Ibe  articlcH  Xrs;  Ancili-
tkcti'Ha;  AuHfSi;  rAEI-ATTRA  ;  CoLrsiNA ;  Pic-
rii.K; (iKMJkiA  ; NrMiaMATicw; Phtcha  ;  Statu-

AKtA.

ArtJIba  (dpraffrf).  A  Persian  measure  of  capac-
ity, nnu'h  uhhI  hu  a  com  •  meiiHure,  and  contain-
ing ■%!  choonioea,  or  I'^t)  gall»iii>,  neJirly  (Herod,
i.  It«).

Artabantia  {'Afrrad^tvos).  ft)  ^ti  of  Hy8las}HM
und  lH-i>tli«rof  Duriun;  in  frei|nen1ly  meiitione<i  iu
tbv  riMgu  of  bin  nvplirw  Xerxua  on  n  wim*  anil  flunk
coniiNcllor.  (*J)  An  llyrcaniaii,  coniniainler  of  llio
body-gtinni  of  Xerx^-ft,  artttaw> muted  tbitt  king  iu
B.r.  i&>,  bnt  wiw  dliortly  altorwiinlH  killed  by  Ar-
laxerxea.  {'•i)  Tbo  name  of  M^vetal  kingit  of  Par*
Ihia.

Artab&WB  ('■'^pTo0aO>f)  ur  Artavaadea.  A  king
of  Arinriiia,  the  »on  mid  »inece«Kor  of  Tigraiu'**,  who
iH'gaii  lo  reign  about  U.c.  70.  ft  hum  prtm-ipally
tbrongh  bis  treacbeitms  ]iilvic<<,  h»  (o  Ibw  mode  of
entering  Partbia,  that  CraMius  futle«l  in  biti  vxitv-
dition  uguiiiht  that  country.  Ho  wim  HiilmL-tpieut-
ly  taken  by  Antony,  to  whom  ho  hud  altto  nt-ted  a
treacheroas  part  in  bis  P.-irthinu  eX|n^dilioii,  who
ted  him  in  Iriinnph  at  Alexandria,  lie  wan  jiut
to  ileatb,  after  the  bnltle  of  Aclinni,  by  Cleopatra,
wbi>  wbtln^l  til  obtain  iisKistance  from  Ibe  king  of
Metlin,  and  therefore  (tent  him  the  head  of  Arla-
vnwleg,  bis  enemy.  Tbo  prince  appeatH  to  have
lieeii  a  very  well  educated  nmn.  He  wrote  iu
Greek  two  historical  workd,  winie  tragedies,  dis-
courses,  etc.  (Pint-  Antfju.  50,  seqq.).

Artax&ta  ( ra  \\pra(aTa  ).  The  ehief  city  of
firvaterAnnenla.aixl  tim  Kontof  the  kings.  Ii  was
homed  hy  the  Roman  (.'orbiilo  (q.  v.),  nnd  wlien  re-
built by  Tiridnlen  u-iin  named  Neroneii,  in  boiiotir
of  the  eniiteror  Nen>. See  AttTAXiA8.

Artaxerxea  (' Apra^ip^t).  The  name  of  four
Per»iitii  kitign.  ill  8iirnnined  Lonuimani's,  from
bin  righr  hiiinl  being  longer  tliiin  liitt  left,  »iK'a.'ed-
ed  bifl  father,  XerxcM  1.,  and  ri-igin-*l  «.c.  4I!5  -I'^'i.
Ill*  carried  nn  war  againni  the  Egypt  innn.  ^%bo
weni  int^iHted  in  their  revolt  hy  the  AtbeuiaiiA.
He  was  mtcceedril  by  his  son.  Xerxes  II.  (*/)  .*<nr-
nnmed  ^Inruox,  fmtn  hift  good  memory,  uneetvd-
cd  his  father,  Darins  II.,  and  r>'igned  ti.c.  Wh~^^9.
Reopecling  tln^  war  hetweeti  him  and  biH  brother
Cynis.  M'o  t'vnfrt.  TiMoipheriics  was  appointed  jin-
trap  of  Western  Awia  in  the  place  of  Cyrus,  and  wan
actively  eiigagfil  in  want  with  the  Oreeks.  Artax-
erxes  had  lo  carry  on  frerpient  wars  with  Iribntiiry
jirinctw  and  salrapfi,  wlxi  endeavoured  lo  make
theniselvex  independent.  Thioi  he  nniintnined  a
long  struggle  agninnt  Evagoms  of  Cypnnj.  from
SfT)  to  37G;  and  hia  atleuiptM  to  rceovpr  Eg>'^it
were  imsiicceitaful.  TowanU  the  end  of  hij<  reign
be  put  to  ileath  bis  eldest  son  Dariiii4,  who  bnd
formctl  a  plot  to  aasaasinate  bira.  Hit  liu*t  diiys
were  still  fnrtl»er  embittered  by  the  nnnatural
condnct  of  his  son  Orbn?*,  who  canived  the  destruc-
tion of  two  of  bis  brother*,  iu  onler  to  sercnre  tbo
sncci'Hsiim  for  himself. Arlaxcrxvs  was  sncovcded


ARTAXIAS


136


ABTEHIS


by  Ocbne,  who  ascended  tbe  tbrooe  aader  tbe
name  of  Artaxerxes  HI.  (3)  Also  called  OCHUS,
reigued  b.c.  359-338.  By  tbe  aid  of  bis  Greek  gen-
erals and  mercenaries  he  reconqnered  PboBoicia
and  Egypt.  TLe  reins  of  government  were  entire-
ly in  tbe  banda  of  tbe  eunncb  Bagoas  and  of  Men-
tor tbe  Kbodiau.  At  last  be  was  poisoned  by  Bagoas,
and  was  sncceeded  by  bis  youngest  son,  Arses.  (4)
Tlie  founder  of  tbe  dynasty  of  tbe  Sassauidae.  See
Persia;  Sassanidai.

Arta^das  CA/n-a£i'ar)  or  Aitaxe«.  The  name  of
three  kings  of  Armenia.  (1)  The  founder  of  tbe  Ar-
menian kingdom,  was  one  of  the  generals  uf  Antio-
chns  the  Great,  bnt  revolted  from  bim  about  B.C.  188,
and  became  an  independent  sovereign.  Hannibal
took  refuge  at  tbe  court  of  Artaxias,  and  super-
intended tbe  building  of  Artaxata,  the  capital  of
Armenia.  Artaxias  was  conquered  and  taken  pris-
oner by  Antiocbus  IV.  Epipbaues,  aliout  16&.  (3)
Son  of  Artavasdes,  was  put  to  death  by  bis  own
subjects  in  B.c.  20,  and  Augustus  placed  Tigranes
on  tbe  throne.  (3)  Son  of  Polemon,  king  of  Pon-
tus,  wa8  proclaimed  king  of  Aimenia  by  German-
icuH  in  A.D.  18, He  died  abont  35.

Artemldonu  ('A^#;iid»poc ).  (1)  The  Geog-
rapher, a  native  of  Epheens,  who  travelled  about
B.C.  100  through  tbe  countries  bordering  on  the
Mediterraneau  and  part  of  the  Atlantic  coast,  and
wrote  a  long  work  on  his  researches,  the  rraypa-
<Povfitva,  in  eleven  bonks,  as  well  as  an  abstract  of
the  same.  Of  both  works,  which  were  much
consulted  by  later  geographers,  we  have  only
fragments.  (3)  The  Dream -interpreter,  born
at  EphesuB  at  tbe  beginniug  of  tbe  secoud  cen-
tury A.D.,  flumamed  "tbe  Daldian,"  from  his
mother's  birthplace,  Daldia  iu  Lydia,  wrote  a
work  on  the  interpretation  of  dreams,  tbe  'Ofci-
poKptfiKa,  ill  four  books.  He  had  gathered  bis  niatt:-
rials  from  the  works  of  earlier  authors  and  by  oral
inqniries  during  his  travels  in  Asia,  Italy,  aud
Greece.  The  book  is  an  acute  exposition  of  the
theory  of  interpreting  dreams,  and  its  practical
application  to  examples  bystematically  arranged
according  to  the  several  stages  of  human  life.  An
api>eudix,  counted  as  a  fifth  book,  gives  a  collec-
tion of  dreams  that  have  come  true.  For  the  light
thrown  on  the  mental  coudition  of  antiquity,  es-
pecially iu  the  second  century  A.O.,  and  for  many
items  of  information  on  religions  riti-s  and  myths
relating  to  dreams,  tbet«c  writings  arc  o(  value.  See
Eeicburdt,  De  Arivmidoro  Dalriiano  (ltj93).

Artemis  CApT€ftts).  The  virgin  daughter  of
Zeus  and  Leto  (Latoua),  by  the  comuou  account
born  a  twin-sister  of  Ai>ollo,  and  just  before  him,
at  Dulos.  The  Ortygia  (see  Asteria)  named  in
another  tradition  as  her  birthplace  was  tuterprcted
to  mean  Deloa,  though  several  otiier  places  where
the  woi-^hip  of  Artemis  had  long  prevailed  put
forwanl  pretensions  to  that  name  and  its  myth-
ological renown,  especially  the  well-known  island
of  Ortygia  oft'  Syrnciise.  She,  as  well  as  her  moth-
er, was  worshipped  jointly  with  her  brother  at  De-
les, Delphi,  aud  all  tbe  most  venerable  spots  where
Apolln  was  houonied.  She  is  ainiiefl,  as  be  is,  with
bow  aud  arrows,  which,  like  him,  aud  often  together
with  bim,  she  wields  against  monsters  aud  giants;
hence  the  piean  wan  chanted  to  her  as  well  as  to
him.  Like  those  of  Apollo,  tbe  shafts  of  Artemis
were  regarded  as  the  cause  of  sndden  death,  espe-
ciallv  to  maidens  aud  wives. But  she  was  also  a


beneficent  and  helpful  deity.  As  Apollo  is  the
luminous  god  of  day,  she  with  her  torch  is  a  god-
dess of  light  by  night,  and  in  course  of  time  be-
comes identified  with  all  possible  goddesses  of
moon  and  night.  (SeeSELEKE;  Hecate;  Bexdis;
Britomartis.)  Her  proper  domain  ia  that  of  nat-
ure, with  its  hills  and  vulleya,  woods,  meadows,
rivers,  and  fountains ;  there,  amid  her  nymphs,  her-
self the  fairest  and  tallest,  she  is  a  mighty  hnut-
ress,  sometimes  chasing  wild  animals,  sometimes
dancing,  playing,  or  bathing  with  ber  companions.
Her  favourite  haunt  was  thought  to  be  the  monn-
tains  and  forests  of  Arcadia,  where,  iu  many  spots,
she  had  sanctuaries,  consecrated  hunting-grounds,
aud  sacrad  animals.  To  ber,  as  goddess  of  the
forest  aud  the  chase,  all  beasts  of  tbe  woods  and
fields — iu  fact,  all  game — were  dear  aud  sacred;
but  ber  favourite  animal  was  held  all  over  Greece


Dtana  of  Versailles. (Lautk.


to  be  the  hind.  From  this  sacred  animal  aud  the
bunting  of  it,  the  month  which  tbe  other  Greeks
called  Artemision  or  Arteniisios  (March-April)  was
named  by  tbe  Athenians  Elaphebolion  ('EXa^^*^
Ximi'),  and  her  festival  as  goddess  of  game  aud
hunting,  at  which  deer  or  cakes  in  the  shape  of
deer  were  offered  up,  Elapheholia.  As  goddess  of
tbe  chase,  she  had  also  some  influence  iu  war,  aud
the  Spartans  before  battle  sought  her  favour  by
the  gift  of  a  sbr-goat.  Miltiades,  too,  before  the
battle  of  Marathon,  bad  vowed  to  her  as  mauy
goats  as  there  should  be  enemies  fallen  on  tbe
field;  but  tbe  number  proving  so  great  that  the
vow  could  not  be  kei>t,  five  hundred  gouts  were
sacriticed  at  each  anniversary  of  the  victory  iu  the
month  of  Boedromiou.  Again,  she  was  much  wor-
shipped as  tbe  goddess  of  the  moon.  At  Ama-
ryntbns  iu  Enboea  the  whole  island  kept  holiday
to  ber  with  processions  and  prize-fights.  At  Mu-
nychia  iu  Attica,  at  full  moon  in  tbe  month  of  Mu-
nychiou  (April-May),  large  round  loaves  ar  cakes,
decked  all  around  with  lights  as  a  symbol  of  her
own  luminary,  were  borne  iu  procession  and  pre-
sented to  her;  aud  at  the  same  time  was  soleni-
uized  the  festival  of  the  victory  of  Salamis  iu


ARTEMIS


18T


AKTRMI.SIUM


I


[7ypnit«,  btwjkiiw  uii  that  uccahjoii  tlio  }i;tKl(t«>Mi  liml

booe  lit  her  full  gltiry  on  tlit^  Cin-^ekn. An  niirivni

Itrtne  of  tli«  M<M>ii-g<Hl«leiwt  at  Draiirnii  in  Attica

vsm  litflil  ill  HDcU  Vfiif-miCioti  tb»t  thr.  nr]tiiD>iit»,

ori^iiutUy  a  iin-rt-ly  lm.al  festival,  was  aftrrwanlH

uiult)  a  public  t:«?rRnHiii>',  in  wliit-h  Atlit'itD  iiwK

rul  (le|Milit<»  ev«r>'  ti\e  yi-Hpt,  niid  a  prwrinvt  wa«

dfalicAlt^  to  "Artvmis  of  Hraiiruu"  un  ihu  AiTup-

»ih  ilaelf. (See  Acuopoub.  ) At  thja  feaxl  llii'

Kirk  l»otwoeD  Hrc  and  ton  yean  ul'  a^o,  dad  in

on-oo)iiured  gantical«,wct«  cuutiuttvd  by  iljuir

ers  in  procemioD  to  the  gixlilcsit  aud  uuui-

Dde*1  to  her  cnrr;  for  Art«iiiiH  in  aUo  a  pnittH.--

(  pf  youth,  especially  tliotw  of  bt-r  uwii  hex. As

[such  sbe  piitmnizvtl  a  iiiir»e«i'  festival  at  Sparta  in

Ik  t«uipU'  (mtftiilt*  tli«  town.  Ut  \vliich  litilo  boya

twcrt!  lirnuf^bt  by  thpir  iiursrK  ; wliiln  r)ii>  InniuiiHUt

F  Ibpir  Apaturia  (ij.  v.)  pri'M*nliMl  hi-r  witli  tlx^  htiirnf

Uij-i. AlmiiAL  L-vfrywIii-m  ynnii;;  girU  thvc rinl  tht'

firgiu  giMldoNH  UH  tlH!  ^uunlian  tif  tlirir  niaiilcn

yvan,  uixt  biTfon*  iuarrin|;iT  tb<-y  offurtMl  np  tn  iter

it  luck  of  tbt^lr  hair.  tUfir  ginlU-,  aiitl  Llicrir  uuiiibMi

gnnnunt. Hhv  naa  nliMi  w<»nibipp(^4l  in  many  parts

•ft  Itw"  f^od^lesH  of  gooi!  repiil*.*,  f^pceially  in  yoiitbK

lud  uiaidnUH.  iiud  vtrh  rrK^ireb^d  an  an  cni>niy  »(  all

iliairilfrly  doinKft. With  hrr  attributes  as  tlio  g<nl-

(IwB  of  lb«  moon,  antl  an  tho  proinotf^r  of  bi'Allby

<l<ivpl[>ptnent,  vjiperially  in  tlie  feumle  frainft,  ik  con-

biwttHl  tht^  tinttfin  of  h<T  aasitttiiif;  iu  obiltUdrth.

(•Svn  >Uj:'rilYlA  ) In  farly  tiinos  bnninu  »a€ritlc«;«

h»d  btvu  ufTrml  Ut  ATti*niin. A  relic  of  this  wad

tht'  >wirly  ciwlom  olwrvnl  at  8pnrta  of  flojiyiui;

(Iip  Iwyii  lill  iht'y  bhMl  at  tht»  altar  i»f  n  dt-ity  nut

OQkiiitwn  clAcwbrrt'  and nuintnl  Arli>n)iM  Urlliia

(the  upright),  prvhably  from  b«r  atiff  {Huitunt  in

^^^  antiquated  wiMMlun  iniaf{>.'. At  8parta,  ait  in

otbxr  |>la4.'ei+.  tb«  unt-iunt  iniit^u  nas  biokud  upon

»■  tilt-  Hjuuu  which  Iphi^t-nia  aud  Onuttttt  br«>ii>:bt

"Way  from  Tauri5  (th«  tJiinu-a) — viz.,  tbtit  ul'  tht-

''^uric  ArtoQiifr.  a  8i\Mbiatt  deity  who  wiu>  idvtnti-

I ""^l  with  ArteialK  bfi-anac  of  tho  hiiuiaii  sacriiicen

^^  **»uim«>n  in  hor  uori^hlp. The  Artemis  i>f  KphesuB,

^P  ^1,  m  greatly  houonn-d  hy  nil  (he  lonians  of  AhIu

(Ai«t«,  xix.  ^),  in  no  Gre«k  divinity,  hnt  Asiatic.

This  i»  MifHfitMitly  tthovrn  by

I'hp  fact  that  rnnnrhK  worn
*uj|>lii_vi<4t  in  lior  womhip —
*  prartirc iinilv funMjjn t^i
t»r»)«k  idtfun. The  tJiTt'k  »-oI-
*»ii))U ideiiliHod her with
■h»?ir  owu  Artf*tui«,  bf^'cansc
•h»*  «ru  {;i>dd<r'M  of  the  uioou
"*»•]  4  power  of  nal  nre,  pre»-
.eut. ia moutitoiiis, wocMid,
M»«l  inanhy  places,  nourisli-
q"K  Ufu  in  pl»ut9,  animalfi,
'*1  innn. Bnt,  uulikr  Ar-
t"!!),  mIik  wa.t  uot  n-garded
**  ■  '^'ni''''  '""  *"  "  lootlier
,  '**lfl'!lt«'r■motln■r,:u»iMcI^^^r-
^V>' Uioffii  by  Ihu ninltiludu
^^J  '"Mifttit  it)  thu  effigy. Her
^j^^ifHliip,  trail  tic  and  fanatical
^ Mrrthf  tnanin^r  orABiu,wa»
**"»c«d  haok  to  Uie  AmazouH.
^ BRnW  of  other  dei[ie«
^m  '^Wne to Ai^iu wnre alun
^P  ^nrHliipiwd by thH firtM^kn
^'titi-r  ltu«  name  of  Art*nii»t.

Artiu)ii8  apfiearfi  iti  workn
^'fArtaittbe  idpal  of  atihlrm
6»


Ancl'itil  RciirMwuiMtlon  of
Ui«  RplNmlBu  Artenift


maiden  h(*aiity — tallofHtatiire,withbrtwandqiiiv<?i
nil  hiTdhouldtT,  or  torch  in  htir  haiid.ainl  ^tnt^rally
lending  or  carrying  a  hind,  or  riding  in  a  chariot
drawn  by  hindfi.  Il«r  conunono^il  i-hiiraclt^r  is  that
ofahnnti-ntK.  Iiiirarli»rtiintN3tbiit!gurc  iKfiilh^raniJ
stronger  and  the  uhitbing  mom  coiiiplflt! ;  in  luler
wiirhH  nfai*  i»  n-prtttontrd aw  moiVMli!ndi*ratid  lighter
of  f(M)i.  th«  hair  looHo,  the  drotts  girt  high,  the  (aet
pmti'ct4^d  by  thu  t'rvtau  shoo.  Tb«  ino«t  celebrated
of  hi:r  HxiHling  Htatuea  is  the  l>iaiia  of  VoraaiUeAr
front  Hadrian's  villa  at  Tihur.  Uu  the  identitio*-
tiuu  of  Artemis  with  tbu  Italian  Diauu,sce  Diana.

Artemisia  C^prifittrta).  (1)  Thu  daughter  of
Lygdami»  of  llalicaruauiia,  reigm.tl  over  Halirar-
uassiiii,  and  also  over  Coa  and  other  adjanetit  inl-
ands. Kbe  joiued  the  fleet  of  Xerxes  ^'Ix'n  he  In-
viuled  GrtMicc,  with  Ave  veMeNj  the  heat  HipiipiMMl
of  thn  vrbnin  tliwit  aftvr  thoiw  of  tliu  Ridotiiaiis;
and  Hhe  diHphiyiMl  ho  much  valour  aud  skill  at  the
hatth'  of  Palainid  jm  lo  i-lii-it  fmm  Xerxes  the  well-
kno%vn  mmiirk  that  thu  iiicu  had  acted  like  womeu
if]  tho  fight  and  the  wouieu  like  men.  The  Athe-
nians, iiiitignani  that  a  woman  shuuld  appear  in
arum  against  thmii,  offered  a  regard  of  10,000
drarhniae  to  any  uiiu  who  should  take  her  pritiouer.
She,  howevflr,  escaped  aft^r  the  action  (Herod,  vii.
99;  viii.  m,  93).  If  wo  aro  to  believe  Ptolemy
Hepbaestion,  a  writer  i^'ho  mixed  up  many  fables
with  ttODio  trtilli,  Artemisia  Hi[h»»p<ji)Riitty  coiii;eivK<t
an  attachment  for  a  youth  of  Abydon,  mimed  l)»r-
danus;  but,  not  mei-ting  with  a  return  fnr  her  pn»-
»ion,  she  put  out  hit  eyes  while  bn  slui>t,  and  l.liuu
threw  hcrwlf  down  front  the  Lovitr'a  L«:ap  at  the
pruimmtory  of  la-iicut^.  (2)  Aimther  ttueen  of
Taria,  not  in  bo  eimfounded  with  the  preceding.
8!ie  wfiM  the  daughter  of  Heeatoniiics,  king  of
Caria,  ami  iiiarrifd  her  hiothur  MiLUS4ilii>i,  a  spe-
cies of  union  sanetioned  by  the  customs  of  the
cniintry.  ^Iie  li>at,  her  Inihbaud,  who  was  remark-
able for  iK^rsoiial  beauty,  B.C.  365,  and  she  hecame,
ill  eoiiHeipiiMiee,  a  prey  to  the  dt-eputt  aMictioD.  A
Rplemtiil  tomb  wait  erected  tn  his  memory,  calleil
Mausoleum  (Mau<rwA»o*,  sell,  fiytj^ii'ioi'.  i.  e.  "  tomb
of  Mansolus".!,  niid  the  most  iioteil  writem  of  tho
day  were  invited  to  attend  a  liienuy  conteHl,  in
which  ani]»le  rewards  werw  to  Iw  bestowed  on  lho»e
who  nhould  celebrate  with  mmt  ability  the  pral^ca
of  the  decenaisl.  Aiiioiig  the  individualH  who  came
together  nil  that  oci'ssion  wei'«,aecordlng  to  Aiilua
GelliUH  (I.  IS),  Tlieopompiis.  Theodeetes,  Naufrit**e,
aiid  even  Isocrates.  The  prize  was  won  by  Theo-
poutpus.  Valerius  Mnximns  and  Anhis  (JelHua  re-
late a  marvellous  story  concerning  llm  exceasivo
grief  of  Arleniisia.  They  say  tliat  «lie  actually
uiixoil  Ihe  ashes  of  her  Ivtisbaiid  with  water  and
drank  tbem  olf  (Vnl.  Max.iv  (t).  The  grief  of  Ar-
temisia, fioigiiant  though  it  wan,  did  not  cuum;  her
to  neglect  the  care  of  her  dominioiis:  site  con-
quered thu  inland  uf  RhtxliM,  and  gained  po(we«>
sinn  of  siiiiih  Gn*ek  cities  on  tb<>  mainland;  and
yet  it  is  luiid  that  hIic  dj«l  uf  grief  two  years  aft«r
the  lottH  of  her  hiitihand. See  MAtTMji.KL'.M.

Artemiaia  ira  'Afn-rfiitrta).  Krativala  celebmtMl
io  hoMonr  of  Artemis  iq.v.)  in  varJona  parts  of
Greece  iu  the  spring.

ArtemiaiiuD  {'Aftrt^ictny).  A  proraont^irr  on
the  Mortliwe-lem  coast  of  Eubuen,  and  noted  for
the  nava!  victory  won  by  the  Greeks  over  the
Fi'D^iaiw  oil  the  same  day  a«  tho  battle  of  Ther-
iiiupylne  tHerod.  vii.  175),  iu  b.c.  4r«0.


ARTES  LIBERALES
Arte*  Liberales. See  Libbraleb  Aktes.


188


A8CIA


Artlazein  (apridCttv). See  Par  Impar.

ArUnces. ArtisaoH. See  Collegium.

Artj^noi  or  Artjhiai  (aprwoi,  Sprxrvcu).  A  de-
liberative and  executive  council  in  ArgoB  and  £p-
idanroB,  iuiiide  the  governing  aristocracy.  See
MHIler,  Dorier,  ii.  140.

Amndo. See  Calamus.

Anuia.  An  Etruscan  word  wliich  was  regarded
by  the  Romans  as  a  proper  name,  bnt  perhaps  sig-
nified a  younger  son  in  general.  (1)  Younger  broth-
er of  Lucamo,  i.  e.  L.  Tarquinius  Priscns.  (2)
Younger  brother  of  L.  Tarqniuius  Superbua;  was
murdered  by  his  wife,  (3)  Younger  son  of  Tar-
quinias  Superbus ;  fell  in  combat  with  Bmtas,

Arura  (Spovpa).  A  Greek  measure  of  surface  =
21,904  sq.  ft.  English.  See  Hultsch,  Metrol.  p.  38,
D.4;  and  id.  p.  384.

AraalAnns  MessliiB.  A  Latin  grammarian  who
flonrished  about  a.d.  390,  and  made  an  alphabeti-
cal collection,  for  use  in  schools,  of  words  that  ad-
mit of  various  constructions,  with  examples  from
Terence,  Cicero,  Vergil,  and  Sallnst.  The  title  of
the  collection  was  Exempla  Ehcutiomim.  The  text
is  printed  in  Keil's  Grammatici  Latini,  vit.  449.  See
GrSfeuhan,  Getchichte  d.  clans.  Philol  iv.  194-196.

Axfispez. See  Haruspex.

Arralea  Itatm. See  Fratres  Arvales.

Arc  {(bepa).  A  height  within  the  walls  of  a
city.  The  same  city  could  have  several  area,  aa
was  the  case  with  Bome ;  but,  as  there  was  gener-
ally one  principal  arx,  the  word  came  to  be  equiva-
lent to  Acropolis  (q.  v.).  At  Rome  one  of  the  sum-
mita  of  the  Capitoline  Hill  was  especially  known
aa  the  Arx,  the  German  school  of  topography
placing  it  on  the  northenst  summit  {Arx  CaeU)  and
the  Capitoltnm  (q.  v.)  on  the  southwest  (Palazzo
CaffarelH).  At  Rome  the  Arx  was  the  regular
place  for  taking  the  auspices  (Livy,  i.  18;  x.  7);
ontside  the  wall  the  barnspex  turned  towards  it  if
it  was  in  sight  (Livy,  iv.  18). See  Haruspex.

Aryan  Ifangnages.  See  Indo-European  Lan-
guages.

Aryballoa  (dpi(0aXXoO.  A  vessel  resembling
the  ampulla  or  \^Kv6ot. See  Ampulla.

Aixanentf  ( 'ApCavtjyj] ).  A  district  of  Armenia
Maior,  bounded  on  the  south  by  the  Tigris,  form-
ing part  of  Gordyene'.

As  (/i6ra).  A  poand  ;  the  unit  of  weight  among
the  Romans. See  Libra  ;  Pondera.

Aa.  The  unit  of  value  iu  the  Roman  and  Old
Italian  coiuaRes,  and  made  of  copper  or  bronze,
(See  Aes.)  It  was  originally  a  pound  of  copper
{mm  grave),  of  the  value  of  1G|  cents,  and  was  un-
coined (aen  rude).  Servius  Tullins  stamped  upon
it  the  figures  of  animals  (hence  the  term  pecunia,
from  pecua).  In  the  First  Pnuic  War,  money  be-
ing scarce,  the  a»  was  reduced  to  one  sixth  of  its
original  weight,  and  to  a  value  of  2.8  ceuts.  In
the  Second  Puiiio  War  it  was  again  reduce<l,  so
aa  to  weigh  but  one  ounce,  having  a  value  of  1.4
cents.  The  Lex  Papiria  (b.c.  191)  still  furthur
reduced  the  at  to  half  an  ounce  in  weight,  and  a
vahie  of  7.9i  mills,  which  continued  the  standard
weight  and  value  eveu  under  the  Empire.  For
a  fuller  account,  see  the  article  Numismatics
(Roman).


Asamlnthna  (a<rafuvdos,  o-ko^i),  ifx^aa-is).  A
bath-tub  used  iu  Homeric  times,  in  which  the
bather  sat  while  hot  water  was  poured  over  his
head  and  shoulders.  See  Od^as.  x.  361,  aud  the
article  Balneae.

Aaander  CAvayipot).  (1)  Sou  of  Philotas,
brother  of  Parmenio,  and  one  of  the  generals  of
Alexander  the  Great.  After  the  death  of  Alex-
ander (B.C.  323)  he  obtained  Caria  for  his  aatrapy.
(2)  A  general  of  Pharnaces  II.,  king  of  Boapom's,
whom  he  pnt  to  death  in  b.c.  17,  in  hopes  of  ob-
taining the  kingdom.  He  was  confirmed  in  the
sovereignty  by  Augustus.

AsbeatXM  or  Amianthtu  {Sff^turot,  d/iiairror).
A  mineral  obtained  by  the  ancients  from  India,
Cyprus,  and  Euboea.  It  was  well  adapted  for
making  the  wicks  of  lamps,  because  indestruc-
tible by  fire;  and  hence  the  Greeks,  who  used
it  for  this  purpose,  gave  it  the  name  &tr^t<rros,
which  means  inextinguishable.  Pansanias  men-
tions that  the  golden  lamp  which  bnmed  day  and
night  in  the  temple  of  Athen£  Poliaa  at  Athens
had  a  wick  of  this  substance.

It  was  also  spun  and  woven  into  cloth.  Thus
manufactured,  it  was  used  for  napkins  (x'ip«Kfut~
ytiot  xft^potutKTpa),  which  were  never  washed,  but
cleansed  in  a  much  more  effective  manner,  wheu-
ever  they  required  it,  hy  being  thrown  iuto  the
fire.

Another  use  to  which  asbestine  cloth  waa  ap-
plied was  to  preserve  the  remaiua  of  dead  bodies
burned  iu  the  funeral  pile.  But  the  expense  of
this  kind  of  cloth  was  so  great  that  it  conld  only
be  used  at  the  obsequies  of  persons  of  the  most  ex-
alted rank.  The  testimony  of  Pliny  has  been  cor-
roborated by  the  discovery  of  pieces  of  the  cloth
in  ancieut  Roman  or  Italian  sepnichrea.  The
most  remarkable  specimen  of  this  kind  was  fbuud
at  Rome,  a.d.  1702,  in  a  marble  sarcophagna,  en-
veloping a  skull  and  bonea,  aud  in  size  about  five
feet  by  six  and  a  half. It  is  uow  in  the  Vatican.

Asoal&phua  ('Ao-KaXa^f).  (1)  The  son  of  Ares
and  Astyoch^,  who  led,  with  his  brother  lalmenua,
the  Minyans  of  Orchomenna  against  Troy,  and  waa
slain  by  Deiphobu8(//.ii.512).  (2)  The  sou  of  Ache-
ron and  Gorgyra  or  Orphug.  When  Pluto  gave  Per-
aephon^  (Proserpina)  permission  to  return  to  the
upper  world,  provided  ahe  bad  eaten  nothing,  Aa-
oalaphuB  declared  that  ahe  had  eateu  part  of  a
pomegranate.  Persephone,  in  revenge,  changed
him  into  an  owl  by  sprinkling  him  with  water  from
the  river  Phlegethon  (ApoHod.  i.  5, 3).

Aacftlon  ('AtrxoXaiv).  One  of  the  chief  cities  of
the  Philistines,  on  the  coast  of  Palestine,  between
Azotus  and  Gaza.

Aacania  ['AvKwia).  (1)  In  Bithyuia,  a  great
fresh-water  lake,  at  the  eastern  end  of  which  stood
the  city  of  Nicaea.  (2)  A  salt-water  lake  on  the
borders  of  Phrygia  and  Pisidia.

AacaniTia.  The  son  of  Aeneas  (q.  v.)  and
Creilsa.  According  to  the  ordinary  account,  he
accompanied  his  father  to  Italy,  and,  thirty  years
after  the  building  of  Laviiiinm,  founded  Alba
Longa,  where,  after  his  death,  his  step-brother
Silvins  reigned.  To  him,  by  his  name  of  Inlus,  the
gens  lulia  traced  ita  origin. See  Trojan  War.

Aacaulea  (daKavXrjt). See  Tibia.

Aacla  (iTKiirapvoy,  rvKOf).  (1)  An  adze,  used  in
working  wood,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying


ASCIBL'KGIUM


1S0


A»EBE1AS  GKAPHf


.^ DDK. The Irft-linntl iigiire irpreiwiit*  i»

>fifp4ttpcuter  sliaping  tlt«  rib  of  n  tp?^«'1  with  nii


AKift,  or  AtlXr.

{3}  A miwon'H  hammer iiMt'<) in  drfttHtii^
lt»ne. 0)  A  bricklayer's  tmtl  Tur  luixitig  mortar.
H)  JV  ho<-.

^^-acfbUTfiliiiii. The  modem  Asburg;  aa  audeut
lnv%  sx  i.u  the  k-it  bank  of  tbr  Hhhio.
A.aclepi&dea. See  AB;*cx'LAi'irs.
•^^.aclept&deB  ('AtrxXtjinad^cl. A  Greek  poet,  a
tat  i  vt'  iif  Sanios,  and  a  yoniif^r  coDtemporory  of
^KTItc;«j4.:riliiii. Hn  vaus  tli«  nutbur  of  thirty- iiine
^r1^'Rniuiif>  oiotflly  vrutio,  in  the  Greek  Authology.
jb^ wflll-knuwM  AHclvpi:t<b'an  iii(>tre  vraa  [>«rba)M
i>ft.W»«Hl  aft«'r  him. 8e«  AntholciOV.

•A^clepiea  (ra  \\trK\titUtu).  FtRtiviklfl  cele-
^r^tvd  in  pluv«8  where  ti.'inplc»  of  AmVpiiis  (Aui-
fBlapiufc) exiKtrd,  uiiil  of  w biob  tbu  uiimi  crl^'brateil
*A»  tbikt  of  Epiiluiinift,  bold  t^very  liftb  yi-iir,  nine

•  4<^>  (saftcr  the  Istbuiian Oauies. Svo Schol.  ad  Piiid.
A'"'*?,  ili.  tt'i :  Pull-on.  li.  9fi,  f  7.

'^lac1epiod6tUB('Ao'KXi7rii>d<7rott. AGn-vk  wri(-
'^t |»i]ptl  of  the  8t<tic  PoMidoiiiuit  of  liliodev,  who
,  *^^<\  it.c.  31. Uii  the  batii))  of  bin  Icctiireti  AMvlepi-
I  (MiutaH  iecnis  to  h&vo  wrlttrii  the  iiiiliiary  ti-eaiiHi'!
\-c*i  iiudcr  hifi  uame  on  the  Macedoniau  niili-
T  »y«t*iii.
'Aadapina  ('AtrxXirirtuf ). St-p  AESci'i,AFif«.

AiooUa  {ra  a<rKuXw).  "  Tb««  Iraping  upon  the
Icalber-bog '*  wiiH  nut*  of  the  many  kinds  of  atause-
ravnU  in  nbt'^b  tho  AibuiiiuiiK  indulged  daring  the
Authutcria  and  uth«r  ftwIivnlH  in  honour  of
IHonyiQi^. Tbu  AthcuianH  ha(!riiii:cd  a  ho-goat  to


Awupeni,  ftvoi  aii  Anclonl


I:  Ouicltif  on  »  Wioo  (Ic-.n. (From  tn
Aactont  Otm  In  KtsumJ


■^.-  K<xl.  madn  a  bog  out  of  the  akia,  stiioarrd  it
f.  *>  oil,  and  then  tried  to  dance  upon  it  (Verg.
I  ~°'»-ii.  3J|*4i.  Thp  various  accidbiit*  accompaiiy-
R  *bla  Attempt  aflTunled  Ri-eat  amuwnicnt  to  Ihr
^^tjiioiH.  rio  who  imcc^iided  wan  victor,  uod  ro-
""Vi^  ILc  ftkiu  as  tt  rewuitl.


Aaconiua  Pedianua,  Qri.N'Tt't).  A  Roman  gnun-
raarinn  and  hiMtorian,  probably  born  at  I'atavititn
abont  the  year  a.d.  3.  Hu  lived  lalKrrly  ut  RtiinL*,
whem  h»  iMij<iy<;d  thu  favour  of  men  iii  Itigli  placr.
During  the  rri^im  of  ClaudiiiK  and  Neru,  liaviiig
cari-Hilly  Ktndicd  (hn  lit4>niture  of  tho  (.'Icproitiau
age,  and  availing  bimi^nlf  of  dtate-papen  then  ex-
isting, bo  coniiKtacd  for  tbo  uso  of  bis  own  Bonn  hia
vnlnabte  historical  commcnturioH  on  Cit^cro's  ora-
tiona,  of  which  only  those  on  Ave  orations  (  /n
PUtouem,  Pro  tSnAwro,  Pitt  Milone.  Pro  Carnrlio,  In
to^  Candida)  are  preserve<l,  untorlnnately  in  awry
fragmentary  condition.  Tbo  commontaricfi  on  the
y<VTine  orntiona.  which  bear  lits  natnn,  belong
probably  to  tho  fonrih  oi'iitury  a.d.  TImy  treat
ohiefly  orgramiuaiieal  pointH.  Xo  other  norkahy
AaconioB  have  snrvived.
Ho  died.  aRer  twelve  years'
bliaduoHH,  about  a.d.  HV.
The  tdilio  firiiicepi  is  that
pablisbed  at  Venice  in
1477.  Text  iu  thoeditioim
of  Cicero  by  C.  G.  St^hUtzc
and  Orelli  •  Bait«r.  8e«
Griif«nbaii,  GfJir/i.  li Uats.

j^iio/.  iv.  2<e.

Aacopera  j<i(rK<nri);>a).  A
large  kn:i]i6ack  of  uiidress-
*h1  le-ather  carried  by  travel-
lerH  on  foot  (Suet.  SWo,  4fij.

Aacos  (ao-Koc).  (1)  A  wine-skiu.  ('2)  Ve»»eli,
ouch  as  those  nhown  iti  the  accompanying  IIIuh-

Iratiniif uscil
for  wine.

Aacra  ('Ao--
Kpa).  A  town
in  Itoeotia  ou
Moatit  HA'I'
CHI, where  He-
■iod  resided,
who  liml  re-
tnuved  thither
with  his  father  fmui  Cyitid  in  Aeolin,  Hiid  who  in
therefore  t^alh-d  Asci-aeiu. See  TIe^iodhs.

Aactilum.  (1)  FicCnch,  the  chief  tr>wn  of  Pice*
nam,  and  a  Uomuii  miinicipiiiiu,  was  clentroycit  by
tho  itoraaos  in  the  Social  War  (b.c.  eft)),  bnt  m';m
afterwards  rebuilt.  (2)  ApfLUM,  a  town  of  Apu-
lia in  DauDia,  on  the  coutlnett  of  Samuiuni,  near
which  Pyrrtins  defeatetl  Ibe  Romans  Ili  the  year
B.U.  '2711.

Aadrfibal  ('Avipovlias). See  HAflDItt*BAU

Asebeiao  OraphA  (dat&iiav  ypaif/r}).  Ono  ot
tliti  innny  fonoB  preacribed  by  the  Attic  laws  for
the  ini{H-acliuienb  of  impiety.  Tblif  criue  was  ap-
pai'iMitly  as  ill-d*^fitiMl  at  Athens,  and  tliHmfore  oh
liiible  Ut  lie  made  th**  pii'l^-xt  fur  pei'siviitimi,  aa  it
bas  t)«en  tii  all  o(bt<r  cdutilriex  in  nbicb  thu  ctvil
power  has  atteuiptud  to  reach  offiqic-en  iwi  much
beyond  the  uutnnil  Uiuits  ofilit  jiirimlii'iiftii.  TIiu
occasions,  bowevur,  upon  wbicb  tin-  ALlu;niaii
accuser  profeased  to  i'«uii;  forwuni  iohv  bo  clutucd
aa,  6ntt,  breaches  of  tbu  ccnimunial  law  of  publio
woi-abip;  and,  secondly,  indications  of  that  which
ill  aiialngfins  cjues  of  modem  tinie-s  would  be
called  bnlorodoxy  or  heresy.  Tlie  fnrmt-r  eniupre-
bended  eiii'macbmeiit  upon  t:oiiSiM!rnted  grounda,
tho  plunder  or  other  injury  of  tompk-s,  the  viida>
tmu  of  asyluiUM,  tho  lul'Crrapliou  of  Hacrificca  and


AaooL (OcrBsLi's  StruHm.\


ASELLtO


140


ASINAKIA


festivals,  the  nuitilntiuti  of  Hlatiien  uf  tliL*  );m(1k,  \hc
iutHHtuctton  of  Ueit)«8  not  ackiiinvk-ilgu-d  by  tb«
Btalo,  etc.

The  liptntiral  ilHlini)uuiiciuii  may  bu  «xfiniiklifiMl
by  Ibo  RXitnUuni  of  Pi-ntA};oraa  for  writiu^  that
"  bo  couM  nut  Irurii  wbclUiT  tlie  gods  fxintetl  or
not";  in  the  [torfucutiun  of  AuoxufjoruB— like tbnt
of  GuUlen,  in  iiftf>r-timv(),  for  itupiiguiiig  the  re-
colvi><l  oiniiiuuF)  iibciut  tbti  huh  -and  tbo  coudem-
nation  of  i»iH.'rul«t!i  for  not  liolfliug  the  objecto  of
the  public  wunhip  to  be  ^ods.  Any  citiztto  in
the  t.<njuymont  of  free  civic  riKht«  uii^bt  briu^  tbe
ucDMition,  and  tbe  Arcbon  Ba^ileua  wn»  the  luiig-
{■trat4<  nho  (wndudtMl  the  ex»niinAtinn.  The  court
was  the  Awojiagus*  (q.  ▼.)  or  the  Heliwitic  Court.

8t«  I)lCA»iTKtfi.

If  tht^  acuntHT  fuilci!  to  obtAin  a  fifth  of  the  %-otua
of  tbe  dioastfl,  he  f()rf«;il«<l  a  tUoibiaud  ilracbtuafl,
and  incurred  pmbably  a  modified  (iripii,  thousb
not  to  the  oxt^rut  of  cxcluaiou  (xoat  otUc«  (Deiuoatb.
c.  Eubul.  p.  1301,  i  28).  8ee  Meier,  Att.  Prostu;
Schoniaun,  Antiq.  i.  4^.

Aaellio,  Gaiits  (f)  SKaiTROKius.  A  Riiniaii  nuniil-
ist:.  He  wflji  militAry  tribnno  in  Ppnin  under  P.
Soipto  AfricanuA  in  it.c.  i:i:i,  and  wruto  a  blKtor)
of  Komo  from  the  timo  of  the  I'unic  Wars  to  the
age  of  tbe  UraccLi,  or  Inter.

Asia  ('A^ria).  A  daughter  of  Oceauas  aud  To-
thys,  wife  of  Inpetus,  aud  mother  of  Atlas,  Epi-
melbeus,  nnd  PrometbcuH  {Hoa.  Thmg.  3fi0).  The
name  of  the  continent  of  Asia  is  trHditionalty  de-
rived from  hers.

A«ia(\\(n'aU»  the  poets  Asia  (Airif).  One  of  the
three  gieat  dlvlbious  vrbich  the  ancients  made  of
the  known  world.  Jt  was  first  used  by  \\w  Orecks
for  tlio  nesteni  part  of  Asia  Minor,  especially  tbe
plains  watered  by  the  river  t'a.Vster,  where  tbe  lo-
iiiau  colonists flr>tt settled;  luul  Ilii>nce,n.stbeirgeo-
graphical  knowledge  advancwd,  tliey  exl^iidcd  it
to  the  whole  country.  The  Knnlbern  part  of  tbe
continent  was  suppo-ied  tn  extend  much  fartheir  to
tbe  cast  than  Jtn'ally  ilotvi,  while  to  tbe  nortli  anil
iiorthen<tt  part»,  wlitrli  wen-  ipiitr  unknown,  initc-h
too  small  an  i>xti-iit  m  ;i.s  :iN>ii|pi4>d.  Tltc  ditTc.rc^nt
opinioiiH  .ilH)Ut  tin:  boiinilariON  of  A^Ja  aw  the  sido
of  Afheanre  mentioned  undiTArnicA  :  on  the  aide
«»rEur«i)o  the  boundary  was  formed  by  ibo  river
Tanflis  (Don),  the  Pains  Maeotiii  I  8e»  of  Azof),
Piiutns  EuxiDUB  (Block  Sea),  Propontis  (8ea  of
Marmom),  aud  the  Aegean  {Arcbijielago).  The
UHwt  geueral  division  of  Asia  was  into  twc»  parla,
which  were  different  at  dilTerent  tiuieH,""*!  ktiown
by  diOereut  names.  To  the  earliest  Gin^ek  colo-
nists tlu>  river  Halys,  the  eastern  boundary  of  tbe
Lyiliai)  kingdom,  forn)e<l  n  natural  division  be-
twfon  rrPF.Ratid  LoWRnARtx;  audalterwnnlsthe
Enphruteu  w»m  ndopt*>d  iw  a  more  natnral  luxnid-
ary.  Another  division  was  made  by  the  Taiirua
iuloA^lA  lNTKATAUHCM,i.e.  tboimrt  of  Astamtrth
and  northwest  of  the  Taurus,  aud  Amia  fxtha  Tait-
RUM.  all  the  re«t  of  the  continent.  The  divintun
ultimately  a<1opted,  but  apparently  nut  till  tlic
foitrib  century  nf  nnr  era,  w:is  rliatof  A^IA  MaIor
and  KhW  MiNoit.  (1)  Asia  Maiob  was  tbe  part  of
the  contineiil  eoat  of  the  Tnn.iTs,  tbe  Knxine,  an
imngiunry  line  drawn  frr>ui  the  Knxine  to  Tniperns
(Tri'bizond),  to  the  tjnlf  of  Ii<sai«  and  the  Mediter-
ranean ;  tliUH  it  itieJQdeil  tht^  eountrie.i  of  Snrmatia
Aiiiacica.  with  all  the  Soythiiin  ivWye«  in  the  ca«t,
Colchia.  Ibcriu,  Albania,  Anoeuui,  Syria,  Arabia,


Babylonia,  )frM>piitnuiin,  AimyriH,  Mvdiifc,  Bust
Persia,  Ariuna,  Ilyrratiia,  Murgiooa,  Boctri
Kogdiana,  India,  tho  laud  of  thf-  Sinae.  and  6ei
respL-utiug  wbieli,  hcv  the  several  articlea.
Ama  MiNim  (AiuitidiA)  wa^  tbe  iMMiinsiila  oii
extreme  west  of  AhIii,  bouuded  by  the  Em
Aegean,  aud  MediieiTaueao  on  tho  north,  i
aud  south :  and  on  tbo  oast  by  the  luonntaici
the  wi?st  of  the  upper  counM  of  the  Kuphr
It  was  divided  into  Myato,  LydU,  and  C'ltrii
the  west;  Lycia,  Pamphylia,  and  Cilicia,  on
south ;  Bitbyuiti.  Papblogooie,  and  Poutus,  oi
north;  and  Ptirygia,  FiKtilhl,  Oalatia.  aud  Cfl
docia,  in  the  centre.  (It)  Asia  PitoPKiA,  or  sii
Asia,  the  Romun  proviueo  formed  out  of  the  1
dom  of  Pergamtii*,  wbiob  w-oa  bcfjuoatbed  tc
Kumans  by  AtUlus  III.  lii.c.  130),  ntui  the  G
cities  on  tbe  weitterii  coast,  and  tbe  a^Ji
islands,  wiib  Kbodes.  It  included  tbe  dlst
of  2Iysia,  Lydia,  Caria,  aud  Phr^-gia;  and
governed  at  lint  by  propraatora,  afterward
proconsuls.

Asia  Palua  ('Atrmr  Xti^oiv).  A  marsli  in  L
fonut«i  by  the  river  CaVater  near  ItA  mouth-
noted  OS  tbe  haunt  of  water-fowl  (Horn.  /I.  it.

Aaiarcbae  < 'Atridpxt"  )•  I"  the  Roman  |
ioce  of  Asia,  the  chief  pn^ideiits  of  the  ivli|
rites,  whose  ofllee  it  was  to  exhibit  gatue«
theatrical  nniusemcnts  every  year,  in  houoc
the  gods  and  tbe  Homati  eni[ieror,  at  their
expense,  like  tbe  Roman  nediles.

Aaiatic  Style  of  Oratory.  The  tlorld  i
abounding  in  tropes  aud  rhet4>ricfll  divplay,
thus  ojipuHed  to  tbe  Amc  8tvi.K  (q.  v.|.  O
Asiatic  Hehool  at  Rome.  HortonsitnB  (q.  v.)  w*
most  conspicuous  example. See  Ciceiv,  U^

Aalila  (do-iXXa).  A  wooden  pole  or  yoke,
hy a  man  either  od  his  two  ahuuldera,  or  )


Aviitt,  «r  PqIo  fbr  Chrrrii:jt  Bantaia.


ItlottnUMi  I  li  IrvB  *  Wmw luif  fbani  ai  SliJ4wi  lt«,lbaiMi«v
In  i)if  Flpnatkw  Mwiiwn  N*v  I  H  fVnn  •  ilndu  wm  b  ife*  H)
CtiUairtloii.

commonly  on  one  shoulder  only,  and  useil  for
rying  burdens.

Aailus  (mtjrpoi,  tabaaw). The  gad-fly  or  b'

fly

AaJrwria. A  comedy  of  Plaotna  (q.  t.)  wi


ASINAKUS


141


ASPENDUS


»fe


farcical  plot,  tukiMi  fmm  tlm  '0*>nyorafD»iiinpliiluii.
It  was  writteu  about  ft-C.  194.

AsinJbruB  i'Aaivapos).  A  river  in  eatiteru  Sicily,
w)  Klitt-li  111**  Athfitiiaiitt  wore  dcft'alwl  by  Ihf  Synt-
ctsftUB,  B.C.  413,  ill  llir  Ptlopoiiufsiaii  War  (q.  v.).

AilD6  {Wtritrrii. I'l)  A  tuuu  iu  LHCiitiiu  un  tlio
Mft«OMt  brturuu  Tu«^iiarum  mid  (rvlhiiiiii. (2)  A
toirn  iu  Argolis,  west  of  li«nuino^,  built  by  tliu
Drropn  (q.  T.}. (3)  A  town  in  MesaeiiU.
AalniiiB  PolUo. Sec  Poluo.
Arndpum  i 'Ao-cmriic ). (I)  A  rircr  in Tltefi^aly
rifting  in  Mt.  Ofta  ntid  i-ro|ityinK  into  thp  Hiiiiis
Maliaonii. (S)  A  river  nf  U(>coiiii  litiiiig  in Mt.
Citbacron  auil  flowing;  into  tlic  Hiiniinn. On  itn
batiks  tbr  battlr<  nf  Ptntaoa  wiw  t'ongtit. (^1  A
/iv«r  of  Acfajtea  tl«%<riiig  into  tb«  Corinttiiaii  Ciult'
uctar  SicTon. (4)  Thr  g<td  of  tb«  ladt-nann-d  rivor,
and fntlirr  of  tim  iiyiopti  Ai^giua  (q.  vj.

.A.«pa»la  ('Atnrav(o). (1)  A  celebrated  Tfomnii,  a

nAti  ve  of  Miletus. She  came  aa  an  adviMiturQas  to

A-ttxena,  iu  tbe  time  of  I'ericles,  anil,  by  tbe  cum-

l_I>iiteMl  obarrns  of  lier  person,  manners,  itnil  conver-

Batiou,  complftvly  won  tbe  aOWtioii  aud  oatecni

'~«>f  tliat  distingniidied  stntmmai). ilemtution  bad

fre^tl  bw  fn>m  tbe n^KlraiiitH  wbich  PiiHtnm  laid

OQ tbt*  luluratton of tbo Athnniiin nialrtni.  nnd

*lie Itail  «iiHcbL>4l  b«r  niitul  nitli  accom|>liHlin)«iit.^M

"•'liicb  WITH  rare  vvcit  auioug  niuii. liir  ui-<|iiniut'

**ice  with  IVriclri*  aeemn  to  liav«  licguu  wliilc  be

^'^"ma  Htill  iiiiiU'd  to  a  lady  of  high  birtb,  miU  wi*

^L<Mkti bardly  doubt  tliat it  v.ax  AHpania  n  bn iin«t

^Bi^bttarbed  ttiis  union,  nlthongh  it  iit  Hjiid  to  bavo

^^P*««D  dSaBoWcd  by  tnutnal  conKcnt. Uut  aOer  part-

^^P^^S &oni  his  wife,  w bo  had  borne  him  two  iw>U8,

' «*ori(;lM  attacbed  him»«lf  tn  Aspacin  by  tl»o  uio«t

i»t.iiuuto  rtdutiuu  wbicl)  tbo  laws  permitted  bim  to

•=**utrat't  with  a  foreign  woiuau  ;  aud  she  acquired

**i  abct'tidvury  over  bim  wbicU  soon  became  uvto-

rto»i*,  Biid  fiiniifthed  the  couto  poets  with  nn  in-

bxliaiiatihle  fund  of  ridicule  aud  bis  entiinv»  with

* t^roniid  for  serious  ebargen. The  Sainian  War

■Wa*  tecribed  to  her  interji08ition  on  Iwbiilf  of  b*r

^irtbplaci^,  aiifl  rumours  were  oet  afloat  wliirh  n'p-

'twwited  ber  an  mini»tering  lo  tbe  vic«8  of  IVricLes

by  tbe  mnst  odioUH  and  di-gradiuK  of  oflic4.'H. Tb«re

V'aa,  pcrhajw,  as little  foundation  for  thin  rei>ort

aafitrxMHiilar  one  in  whiuh

Pliiiiiib,  w  Its  i  ni  p  I  i  c  a  t  e  d

(Plat.  J\nrl.  laj; though

Mnuiig  all  the  Impntiiiiona

^•""i^t againHt rcriclen,

tlii>  ift  tliut  whirb  it  is  tbe

«"«t  dimcult  uloarly  to  rw-

'ut*. But  wo  are  inclined

'*»  Mieve  that  it  may  hnve

*'''*en  fititu  tbe  peciiliiu'nut-

"***  uf  As|>asia's  jirivate  cir-

*'**".  which,  with  a  bold  neg-


»*et'


of  OdtaMiftbcd naagc,


"■h*  compose*!  uot  only  of

^*  ntmt  intelligent  and  oc-
^^pli^lied  men  to  be  found

J^thens,  bat  also  of  nia-

r^».  wbo,  It  in  said,  were

J^igbt  by  their  hnibsnds

rj  *'htuu  to  her  convenuition. This  nium  have  Imen

Jjjflily  iiisttrnrtive  as  well  aa  bnlliatit,  miul-o  PlaUi

^^  not  lieaitati)  to  dcflcribo  her  aa  tbe  prLM^eptretta
*|^8uont«^and  to  a«««rt  in  the  .ifmexenvx  thiit  she
'"^  furuieU  tbe  rbetorie  of  Periclea  aud  composed


ACflACIA
AapMta. (Tailoan-I


one  of  his  most  adniin^d  harangues,  the  celebrnled
funeral  oration.  The  iunovatiuu.  wbiohdrew  wom-
en of  free  birth  ami  goml  Btanding  into  her  com-
pany for  »urh  a  piirjiow,  niusl.  even  where  tbe
tnith  w:is  nndon<too<l.  have  tmrprised  aud  oQi^nded
many,  aud  it  wom  linhle  to  the  groHsest  mirujon-
stniclion,  And  If  ber  fi'tnale  friendti  were  fH)me-
linies  seen  wnlrlnng  tbr  pmgnuM  of  the  workn  of
I'hidiaii.  it  was  e-asy,  (hniugh  biK  intiiuni^y  with
Pencletj,  lo  connect  thin  fact  with  »  caluiony  of
the  name  kind.

There  was  another  rumonr  still  more  daugerona,
which  grew  out  of  the  ubarocter  of  the  |K:r»uuM
who  were  admitted  to  tbe  soeiely  of  Perlcleei  ami
Aspaeia.  No  )>er»oua  were  more  woleome  at  the
lioutw  of  PerivVff  than  Bucb  as  were  dintiiignialied
by  philnnojihical  etluiUes,  and  especially  by  the
profHHMion  of  new  pliiloHopliical  leneti.  The  mere
prenenec  of  Anaxagoras,  Zeiio,  ProtAgorsH,  himI
other  celebrate<l  nii':ii,  who  wore  known  to  bold
doctrinvfi  very  rcniotu  from  the  religions  roin-oi»-
tiouH  of  the  vulgui',  wuH  Htidirinit  to  ni.'iko  a  iTirt-ln
in  which  they  wi'^re  familiar  paMH  for  a  miIioijI  of
impiety.  Snch  wt>re  the  materials  out  of  which
the  comic  poet  llerniippun  formed  a  criminal  pros-
erution  against  A'^pnsia.  His  indictment  included
two  hniuis;  nn  otfeiiro  against  rcliginu,  and  that
of  cnrnipting  Athenian  women  to  gratify  tbo  pas-
HioiiM  of  PericJcs.  The  danger  was  averted ;  but
it  wiMMK  that  PrritleB,  who  plendcd  her  cause,
found  inti-d  of  bin  most  HlrenntniN  exertions  to
HUVii  AHjiaMiii,  and  {biil  be  even  drHcendrd,  in  ber
behalf,  lo  ceurs  and  eiitreatlefl,  which  tiu  similar
emergency  of  bis  owu  could  over  draw  from  liim.

An4>r  tbo  death  of  Purivle«,  Aspasia  attached
herself  to  a  yonng  man  of  ohscnre  birth,  nuuied
L.yHicles,  who  rooe  through  ber  iulltionce  in  tuoutd-
iug  btH  character  to  tH>mo  of  tlie  highest  em)>loy-
meuts  in  ibe  Bepubtic.  (See  Plut.  /VnW, ,-  Xeu.
iftiti.  ii.  6.)  ('2)  Daughter  of  II<;rmotimu!i,  aud  a
native  of  Phocjiea  iu  Ai^ta  Minor.  She  waa  so  re-
markitble  for  her  tM^anty  that  a  sairap  of  Persia
cjirried  Imr  ofl'  and  made  ber  a  prcseut  to  C'ynis
the  Youiixer.  Mer  modest  de[>ortuient  Hmm  won
the  ulTeetionD  of  tbe  prince,  who  lived  with  her  as
wirh  a  lawful  wife.  Kor  niuno  at  fintt  was  Millo
(vurmiEioii).  which  had  been  given  her  in  early  life
on  jiccniint  of  the  brilliaDcy  of  her  complexion.
Cyrus,  Itowuver,  changed  it  to  A^partia,  calling  ber
thus  after  the  mistremi  of  i*ericlei>.  After  the  death
of  the  prince  f^be  tell  into  thn  hands  of  Artaxerxes,
who  for  a  long  time  vainly  songlit  to  gain  ber
affections.  8be  only  yielded  at  last  to  bis  suit
through  absolute  ticcetwity.  When  the  monarch
declared  his  »on  P.irin9  hin  Miccessor,  the  latter,  as
it  was  cnet«>mary  in  Persia  for  an  heir  to  ask  >
favour  of  bin)  wlm  had  declared  him  such,  ro-
ijucslfd  AspHxUi  of  liitt  failier.  AnpsMia  wtin  ae-
corrllngly  sent  for,  and,  eontrary  In  lln-  kind's
expectation,  made  choice  of  Dariui*.  Artaxerxes
therefore  gave  ber  up,  in  accordance  with  estab-
lished custom,  but  soon  took  ber  away  again,  and
made  her  a  prietttess  of  Artemis  at  Kcbutuna,  or
of  tbo  goddess  whom  the  Pei-nians  called  Annttis.
This  station  leiguired  ber  to  pass  tbe  rest  of  her
days  in  chastity  (Pint,  jlr/or.).  Justiu,  however,
Hays  (x.  1)  that  Artaxerxes  ni&ile  her  one  of  the
prlesteMses  of  (be  sun.

Aapendua  ('.Atnro^nr  )■  A  city  of  Piunphylla,
lying  for  the  luont  part  on  a  rocky  precipice,  on
the  banks  of  the  river  Eurymedon. It  was  a  flour-


A8PKR


142


ASSTRIA


Iflhinj  plBW  ov«n  before  the  «xp«Utitm  of  tlio
youuizer  Cjmn  (Xeu.  .4»i«(».  i.  2,  19).  It  was  Iiere
that  tbe  Atlif^niau  patriot  Tlinwybiilus  U'raiiiiat^fl
hiK  lift'.  H4-iiig  off  tbe  coiwl,  lie  levi»d  coutriUi-
tiiii)8  from  tho  Aspniiciiaii*.  who,  jwiziug  au  oppor-
Itniily  wlicn  be  was  «ui  Mliorc,  mirpriwU  bim  iu  his
t«ut  lit  uight,  uutl  pit'W  bill!  (Xeii.  //«^.  ^r.  iv.  »).

Asper,  AEMiurs.  A  Roinau  gramaiarinn,  tbe
mitluM-  of  H  coiiiiimiitary  ou  Vi?r};il,  now  exifitinj;
ill  k  frftgnieiitiiry  coiulUioii,  and  written  prohnbly
olMiitC  A.u.  HO.  Iu  thitf  he  treated  syatomatically
Vcryil's  doviationu  from  ordinary  iisago  in  (.yntax.
Sim?  Hibl>p«k,'8  I'roli'gom,  Ut  Vergil,  p.  liW.  Aoothor
As)>«r  vs-i'ote  an  .irti  Giammatica,  printed  iu  KeiL'8
liramuntlici  Latini,  v.  b47.

▲sptudtus  (iTtrt^oXror). 8oo  BlTUURN.

Aspls  (dtnris). Sm  Cupei'8.

▲apis  {dtnris).  Tin-  lisp,  a  Kpeciiw  of  dradi;
M>rpeut  often  nieutioiiiid  liy  both  Greek,  and  Ko-
man  wrll«ni.  It  would  miim  tliiit  Hcvcral  diQVnmt
Hpccie.s  of  poisonons  rcplili-a  were  koovra  to  the
ancicntti  under  tliiH  cuinuinu  name.

AssarScaa  ( 'AatrapaKos ).  Son  of  Tms  and
ibumler  of  tho  collntvml  Hno  U>  winch  Anchiw^s
and  AcncM  Iw'long  in  tht»  royiil  honse  of  Troy.
See  Axcmees :  Aknbas;  Daudanus.

Aaaaxlon  {titra-apiov}.  The  Grrak  name  for  Ihi^
I,;ittii  na  (r^.  v.).

Asser. The  ]iuli>  of  n  litt«r. Bcu  Lkcttca.

Asaartor  or  Adaertor.  CutilairiH  thu  ttamo  root
ao  ihu  vi'rb  adatrrrf,  wliivh,  whi'U  i*oti|il»d  with  thi<
woni  tnaiui,  Hi^uiiwn  to  lay  hold  of  a  thing,  to  draw
it  Utwards  oue.  Heuce  ttio  pbrano  adsrmt  in  /i7^«fr<
titiem,  or  libtrali  adsertre  manu,  applii-H  to  him  who
lays  his  hand  on  a  jtcntoii  n*|>utt.'d  to  l>c  a  hIuvc,
aud  asitrti  or  maintains  bia  fn>cdom.  Tbu  purson
who  tbns  maintuiueil  the  freedom  of  a  reptitLHl
Hlave  waa  called  atiaertor,  and  by  tbo  laws  of  the
Twelve  TabtoH  it  waa  enacted  in  favour  uf  liberty
that  such  adtcrtor  should  not  be  calltnl  ou  to  give
security  in  the  sacraneaii  tKth  to  more  than  the
auionutuf  Qftyaaa-
itH.  T!i«  person
«  hoMH  fruodora  waa
tkuH  claiuicd  vas
said  to  be  adaertus.

Aaaeasor  or
AdaesBor.  Liter-
ally oue  who  flita
by  tbo  side  of  an-
other. Tho  con-
aiils,  praetors,
governors  of  prov-
iucKB,  and  tbu  iu-
dicuM  wuru  uflun
imperfectly  oo-
t)nutut(Hl  with  tliB
taw  and  the  funuit
of  procvdure,  and
it  was  uecewary
that  tbey  shonld
have  the  aid  of
tboKO  who  hod
made  the  law  their
study.  These  ud-
viBcwwere  known
as  osMMorei.  Tbu
prtttftettu  firaetorio
aud  praf/tttvt  MfW,


nnd  otbor  civil  and  militnry  functionarieA,  bad
thflir  aswissorR.  Tli*>  emperor  Alexander  Hvvi^nu
gavo  tho  a8M:tK)nrs  a  rvgiilar  (talary.  8oc  Retbuiann-
Hollwcgj/Af/- roiHi**cAe  0>iV-/Vo«m,  iii.  129,  ^  141.

Asaidui. See  LocmxnEB.
Aaalguatio. Tlie  Latin term  far  tbe  assign-
ment of  public  land  to  vitizeua  or  oolouioB. 6m

AOltARIAK  LeOES  ; COLO.N'IA.

Aaaua  ('Ao-iror).  A  city  in  the  Troad,  on  tbt:
Adramyitian  Onlf,  oppo«it«  to  Lej*liOA,  afuirwanU
called  AiKilIouia;  the  birthplace  of  Clcauthea  tbo
Stoic.

Aasyriann  Oreok.'Atrffvpi'o;  in  Assyrian  inscrip-
tiouscalled^uMc;  iu  thePursiaiir-^'^i'ra;  audio  the
Median. /IvAira). The  country  properly  so  culled. in
the  iiarrowi'ftl  st-uwi,  was  a  district  of  Asia,  extend-
iug  along the  east  side  of  the  Tigris,  which  di-
vided it  ou  the  west  and  northwest  from  Mesopo-
tamia and  Babylonia,  ntul  bounded  ou  tbe  north
and  cast  by  Mount  NipUnt<-s  aud  Mount  Zagnu,
which  separated  it  from  .\rui«nia  and  iMtnlia,  and
OQ  the  sontbeast  by  Suoiana. It  was  watered  by
several  streams  flowing  into  tbo  Tigria  from  the-*-
east,  two  of  wliiub,  tho  Lycus  or  Zabatus  (Or«aL^
Zab)  and  the  Capnis  or  ZatiaM  (Little  Zab),  divid
ed  the  country  into  three  parta. Tbe  district  be^
(Wf^en  tbu  npp'P'r  Tigris  and  Ibc  Lycns,  c-nllcd  At—
turia,  was  probably  the  most  ancient  M^nt  of  th<
mouai-chy,  containing  the  capital,  Nineveh  or  NL  —
una. Tlie Lycus  and tlie Little Zab bonnde<l
the  finest  poTtiou,  called  Adiuben^. Tho  district
sontheast  of  tbe  Little  Zab  contained tbe  tiro
HubJivisiuns  Apollouiatis and Sitl-aceud. In a
wider  sense  the  numu  Assyria  was  uatfd  tu  dw-
ignaiH  the whole  countr>'  watered  by  the  Tlgni
.-uid  Etiphi-ntPM,  iiidudiug  MesoiHttamia  and  Baby-
lonia;  and in  a  hIJII  more  extended application
it  roeuJit tlie  %vli<il«  Atuiynaii Empire,  oue  of  tlio
lirst  groat  Ktati-tt  uf  which  tvtt  have  any  record.

The  n'markable  fertility  of  tlie  country  enabled
it  to  support  a  large  population;  and  ita  great
material pi-osperily,  poner,  and  culture  are  at-


AASYKIA


US


ASSrUIA


ftDcieut  writers,  as  well  oa  bj  tlifi  mon-

H  reuiaiu  lu  us  In  (be  »lia|M>  of  raiuH

'of  cities,  uxtouaire  canals  sod  wut«r-wcirkit,  uuil

pruofft  secarcd  b;  excavaUirs  (>r  thu  possoiisiori  of

Ibn  artH  ami  acieiicML At  tb«  jireMMit  day  tba

rnimtrjr  is  ulioiwt a  ileaert ; but from  Tukrit  tu

Uajjilnd.  aud  iu  tbi!  vicinity  of  Niiievob (t|.  v.),

abuudont  rmun  uiark  tbo  former  wealtb  and  upleii-

r  of  thu  iKoplu.

EniNuLouY. — The  Awyriami  wan>  a  braiicb  of

Stfiuilic  rucp,  to  nbich tbn Hyriaua, Fbcuni-

Jewft,  and  AtttbH  bcbiiiKcMl,  and  wlitch iit

"^  Chaldaisa  H)i|>cani  to  bavo  stipplunt^l  tbe  tjcytfaic

or  Tnraiiiau  fitnck  a»  curly  tm  ti.c.  21lM). Aitsyria

bod  in  tbe  narlicKt  lintcn  a  rloa^t  coiiDfictiou  witb

.^«Uitopia  BimI  Ai-abia. Hoiico  Herodotus  epoaks

of  Benuooburib  aa  king  of  tbe  Arabiana  aa  well  aa

«>f  tbo  Ai«syriana. Sop  Daqylonia.

LakguaGF.. — Tbv  laiignii);!:!  nf  the  Assyriaus  ts
^lirU  to  tbo  Nortb  tlniuc!]!  of  tb(<  Siiniili<T  ruiiiily,
il»  vocabulary  Kbowiu^  a  clone  nftinity  to  H<>lirew
■xkiid  Pba'uictiiu.  In  tbu  fiilucM  of  itH  verbal  ayHt^tni
«iid  ricbnewt  of  i^yuonytnit,  buw^rcr,  Jl  rL>»>i>uib1PH
She  Arabic.  Tbeetbnii:  ty|>i!uf  tbn  AHHyrinini  ii«  tbn
&loiUcuiodili(.*d  by»oiut<it(linixturLMvitb  Akkitdian
^lemeuLa.  SevAKKAn;  C'l'neifoiui  Inkciuitions.
Aiayhau  lileratiin:  iH  known  to  tin  L-tiiL-tly  fn)in
tbe  diaoovBrr  iu  the  palace  of  AMur-bani-pal,  at


[W:,


m


■  '^MfSmMSSmtSmM


^J?9**^


^^'<^^<.'


Sf^^S^.


"•>'


Cbj-  Tfchlel  with  Cyllailifr,  tmpn^MAd,  (mm  hV-jyiiiiJik,

ftueveb^  of  a  library  of  many  tboiiMaiid  t:LMf>t«

SoUeet^^ by  that  king and  bi»»  falbtr,  Kmir-bail-

UapUcate  oopie«  of  aoiuo  of  tbetw  tuMct«

&ve been fonod  In  excavating  tbe  Bul>ylui]iun

■itir*»- Of  tbesc tablets,  Diaay oro NvUaburirH,

onahcfl,  geogmphics,  and  other  vdiicational


^W


'  r  ^■-'


'im


ItUKXihtd  TftUel  ImprcaMd  with


J  works,  oficu  condieit  iu  tbe  ftucioiit Akkadian

and  Kiimiriau  tongnt^ ;  no  tbat  fnnn  tbeni.  Anufyr-

iolojruu  bave  learned  niucb  about  tbo  older  lan-
guages of  Cbaldora. Tbu  ricbent  litunir;  diMor>

eriea,  bowaver,  bavu

been  iu  tbe  Held  o(
'  poetry  ami  tnytbol-

ogy.  In  l^^tlit;  lato
I  Mr.  UttorKo  Htnitb,
|uf  the BhCiAh Mu-

M-iini,  diKCovc-red a

series  of  t-nblet«  coti-

tuining  ati epic  in

twelvt; books, one

of  which  rvlateii  to

thu Icgunil of tho

Dolugc,  and  bi'urs  a

Tery  ittrikitig  renem-

blant'u to the uv-

uonut  givtm iu thu

Old  Twttiujient. Iu

liotb accuuuta tho

DL>Iugo  \»  a  jiuuiKh-

lueul fur bnmati

sins; it) both,  tho

builder of au nrk

gntherti  into it hta

familyuud  thebeaata

of  the  tietd;  in  both,  tbe  uik  wtfln  niton  a  luouo-

iaiii; in  botli,  |v*sr4j  Itetwe**!!  Omi  and  man ia  re-

HioriHl;  and  iu  both,  a  nign  of  the  rcsT'Oratioii  ia

ibu  a|ipi>:irun<-e  of  the  rainbow. Mauy  other  In-

turetttiiig  nwinblaocfH  to  portioii!^  of  tbe  Dock

of  (iL'UCHijt  aru  uoutaiuud  in  the  Aasyrtau  lableta.

The byujus  aud prayers are likewiao beautiful

aud  puutic.

KKSirLT.H  OF  KXCAVATIONH.— Succenilflll  OXcaVft-

tious  have  beL-ii  niatle  by  tiottu,  Lityard,  M^uant,
Oppert,  Kawliuoon,  Siuitb,  and  otliers,  with  thu  re-
wilt  of  opening  up  many  paliicca  nud  temples,  and
bringing  to  light  aculptores  covered  with  inscrip-
tioiix,  and  i  ncludiiig
obelisks,  spbiuxea,
winged  lions  and  bulls,
and  bas-reliefs  of  bat-
tle •  scenes,  sieges,
li  u  11 1  s,  etc.  Many
smaller  objects  are  no
leatt  iiitcrcHtiug,  Huch
asoroamenta,  bellH.ou-
grovod  gems,  and
bronzes.  It  bas  been
leanied  tbat  the  Asayr-
ians  were  acqnaliit«d
with  glass;  thai  ibey
employed  tht«  arcb  in
buililiug  ;  tbat  they
UHi-cl  tho  lens  OK  a  mag-
nifying iuHtruinput ;
and  had,  among  other
lurobnnical  apgdi-
nucea.  the  h'^'er  and
the  mllpr.

HKLiotoN.  —  The
religion  of  Assyria  was
simpli-r  than  that  of
the  Babylon  inns,  al*
though  polythei»tio  iu
character.  The  na-
tiou;ilduilyMua  A».sur,
regarded  fu  thu  fuuud-


;;>:


^.v''


Nt-tiU. (BillliJi  Uuuuin  }


cr  of  tlio  nfttinn.  Rwiiile  liim  them  air  two  priti-
otpftl  triiuls,  with  tminy  luiinir  ilfities.  Tbe  firet
triwL  is  known  as  the  Nature  Triiid  <Anii  "  llie
Proge«iU»r,"  ltd  "the  Lonl  ol"  the  WorUl,"  Hoa
"the  LdhI  v(  the  tk'»,  Kiven*.  iiiitl  F(>uiitnhi!>^).
The  w>cot)(l  triad  iit  the  Celestiul  Triad  (Sin  the
Mi>on-(;(Ml,  Shaniaa  the  Siiii-Kud,  littar  the  ^iar-
guddeut).  Minor  gods  are  Merudach  or  iManliik,
M>n  of  Uea;  Nebo  lite  god  of  learuinc,  who  \mw-
■euiUB  uaiiy  of  tho  attrihates  of  the  Greek  HvniicH
(q.  V.) ;  Bud  XurKal  and  Xasku  the  Trar-gotU.  (Sec
SKit]g(i,xvii.  30.1

HijjTOKY  —Ancient  acconnt«  of  Assyrian  hiato-
ry  are  thoee  of  BvroBu»  (ij.  v.t,  a  Graeco-Chaldean
pnett,  who  nrotu  al  Bsihylon,  where  he  hatt  aeo(.>«ii
to  th*»  iimcri|iti(mal  rLM;<inis,  about  B.C.  268;  of  He-
roilutuN;  anduf  Ct«8iuMof  CuiduH.  phyaiciaa  to  the
Pemiaii  king  Arlaserxea  Muemon  (B-C- 4*15).  The
uurrative  of  Berosua  boa  met  with  lutich  contir-
matioii  fruui  rocout  excavations  and  exploratione.
lit  tliL-  Bjble  unrrative  we  are  tuld  that  Ninereb
wuH  fimuded  fruui  Babylonia.  "Uut  of  that  land
[liabylouia]  be  [NimrtHl]  went  forth  into  Assyria"
(Oen.  X.  II) — and  thU  utatement  is  fully  confiniied
by  the  resnlts  of  rp<reiit  explnra-
tions.  The  earlinttt  inHrriptiotis
fontjd  on  the  hrickn  fmtn  ARhiir
(  Kilt-h  •  Bh(-rgat),  the  aiu^ii'iit
capital,  givi:  To  tilt'  ttrxt  mliini
of  the  land  tho  Akkadian  tithi
of  Pateai,  or  "  liigh -prit-nt  itf
the  city  of  AMiir,"  and  to  the
city  ittu-tf  the  Akkadiaa  niuoc
of  Pal-bl-ki.  Tbe  next  uotieo
of  Awyrin  does  uot  occur  nntil
the  Assyrian  king  Piil,  or  Tig-
lAth-pi3eeer  11.,  iuvaded  Palea-
tloc,  and  wa»  bought  off  by
Meuabem,  king  of  Ihrael  (u.c.
73ei>.  In  the  winie  reign  wo
find  the  Jewinh  king  Ji-hoabaz
(Aliar.)  be«oniiiig  a  %':i88al  of
the  court  of  Ai««iyria,  aiul  the
trittcs  beyond  Jorilan  carried
away  captive  (D.c.  734).  In
ILC.  TVS,  SainariA  in  captured
by  Hargou  the  Tartan,  who  liad
TiHuri'ed  tho  throne  from  his  wfnk  niaBt«r,  Shal-
mancflor  IV.  The  next  reference  to  A^^yria  is
that  of  tho  Kicgo  and  capture  of  Jeru»aleni  by
8argon  (  Iwiiah,  x.,  x\.,  xx. ),  and  the  Bifge
of  Anhdod  (H.c.  ?ia-71l).  This  event  is  now
proved  to  be  dintinot  froni  the  niege  by  Senna-
ehrrlb  in  B.C.  701,  which  terminated  apparently
ui  a  diMutter  for  the  Aiwyriau  aniiy.  Tlio  hwt
mcntitm  of  Aw-yria  in  tbe  record  of  tho  niunlcr  of
SenDacberib  by  his  HOns  in  B.C.  QUI,  and  the  ac-
oeuion  of  his  faithful  son  Ksar-baddoii,  the  most
powerful  nf  all  tbe  As»^yrian  mouarcbs,  for  ho  cnr-
rieil  bi!!>  anuK  as  far  as  the  ileditcrraneau  and  ron-
qnered  F,g>-pl.  Little  credit  ts  to  be  attached  to
the  fXjK-dition  of  Holofemee  recorded  in  the  ajh^C'
ryphal  Book  of  Jndith.

After  this  the  Empire  appt<ani  to  have  gradually
decayed,  until  at  hiMt,  in  tbe  reign  of  Ai>wur-bani-
pal  or  RardanapatuA,  or  that  of  Csar-haddon  U.
(flarakoH),  a  league  for  its  deHtrnction  was  formed
between  Nabopolassar,  governor  of  Babylon,  and
Cyaxare*,  king  of  Media,  which  wiw  ritrengthened
by  tbe  uutrriitge  of  Xebnchadnoifxar,  flon  of  thi*
_  former,  to  Nitocris,  daughter  of  tho  latter. The


war  and  siege  are  Mid  to  have  been  inter

by  an  iovasion  of  the  Scythians,  which  fLi

CyaxareH;  but  at  length  Nineveh  hms  taken  atl
deiitroyed  about  n.c.  605,  or,  iicconling  to  Ra«
liusoii,  C'.i6.  In  the  time  of  IMriua  lIvHlaftpC
Ansyria  rebelled  witboat  succesn  in  cunjuncLiu
with  Media,  lu  the  time  of  llenidotus  tbe  cap
tal  had  ceased  to  exist;  and  wbcu  Xenopho
paH-Hcd  it  till!  vi-ry  name  was  forgott'Cn,  though  b
lc4titio«  to  thtt  extent  of  the  deserted  city,  and  at
Morts  tbe  height  of  the  mined  walls  to  l>e  150  £mi
An  inroi>Hid«rable  town  seems  to  have  cxistod  v
itj«  ruins  in  tfae  reign  of  Claudius:  and  the  lai
notice  we  have  of  Nineveh  in  the  classics  is  I
Tacitus.

The  fanciful  history  related  by  Ct«aias  is  no^
fouud  to  be  based  on  distorted  Oraeeo-Persiau  tn
ditious;  and  though  the  writer  mauagetl  to  mak
tho  ancient  world  give  credit  to  him  in  prtfrrent
to  Herodotus,  bis  work  is  now  proved  to  be  vei
nil  trust  worthy.  According  to  him,  fur  thirty  gei
orations  after  Niiiyas  tho  kings  led  a  life  uf  luxi
ry  and  iudolencc  in  their  palace;  tbe  Inst  of  then
8urdanapalun,  made  a  vigorous  defence  against  Al


AnjTiui  I>HeU^nBK, (R^lferthnn  KmtrunJIk.)

bflccs.  the  rebel  governor  of  Media,  but,  fiudiiigt
in)|iossiblc  to  defeuil  Nineveh,  he  set  tire  to  U
pnlnco.  and  bnmed  himself  with  all  his  lrea»nr«
This  event  took  phire  13I.N}  yeara  after  Nini^i
Now,  the  nbovo  ar<^oniit  repn^sents  Nineveh  j
have  |»eriMlj<^t  nearly  three  centuHee  Iteforo  ti
real  date,  whirb  was  almut  li.C.  606^  and  is  nttd
ly  itictmipatiblo  with  S<-riiitnre.  Herodotiis  ft
ttigUH  to  the  Empire  a  duration  nf  520  years,  M
Rerosns  of  5'JG.  In  order  1«  reetiucile  Ibejw  ctn
dieting  acconntfi,  hiHt>orians  have  hupiioHed  th|
Nineveh  was  twice  destroyed,  but  Ibia  snppot
tiou  i«  now  generally  rejected.  However,  th|
part  of  Nineveh  wa**  actually  dcetmyed  by  tire
proved  by  the  condition  of  the  slabs  and  statin
found  in  it«  rttins,  which  show  the  actiou  of  iji
tense  heat.

BiBMoriiiAi'iir.— For  Assyriat]  archiwilogy.  or
tbe  works  of  L.iyard,  Opiwrt,  and  8milh  ;  Pern
and  Cbipiez,  CAn/rfA  ft  Antyrir  <Eiig.  trans.  18w4
For  the  ndigion,  see  fiayce,  JMyn'a  (IHSS);  Rober
son  Smith.  IMiffion  o/ the  fktkitet {lS>iii) ;  Tide.  Cot
paratire  Itut.  of  Itelig.  (Eng.  trans,  lBiJ4| :  8ayo
Bibbtrt  S.ectvrt9  (Idtf7). For  tbe  laDgu«igc  and  U


ASTA


146


ASTKONOHU


*


^


vnturv.  fiee  VvUtnxich.  Au^risehe  Cr'nimma/iit  <Erig.

imxi. by Kunuedy,  18«Jk id.  JaaifritcMn Horter-

\ fcw*, vols, i.-iii. (I8(f7); Pcjeer, JCci/lnachri/Uicftf

BikHotkfJt  OH90»; Suycf,  Lectures  on tkt  .Sv//<ifrary

mj  firammar  )  1877), For  tlio  hif>toi-y,  see  Uuwllu-

Mu.  n*  Pitt  <!r«ot  AfiMKircAies  of  tht  Ancient  EoMt-

»n  IVorUi,  4  voIm,  {I^8-«7):  Opiwrt,  Hittoirr  dea

£mpirt» de CiuildA:  at ^Axayrie  <  IHK* ) ; Leiior-

MMit,  Manuei  d'ffiMtoire  Jncwnnv  rfc  VOrimtt  3  volii.

<I'«W>;  M^DADt,  Anmilm  i/rt  ifow  fr.JH^n> (IH74);

Jlasfiero,  Histoire  A»c\enur  dc»  J'euplcg  de  POrient

(4th  eA.  18tf3);  Sayto,  AHciml  Empirra  of  the  Kaat

^tddl); id.  t'rtsh  iJtfht  from  the  Ahdent Jfonumtitt*

^liSd6>; Maspero,  Lt/e  in  Andail  i^ypt  and  Aui/ria

C  Cng.  tranit.  16£«).

▲ata.  (1)  The  modem  Asti  in  Piedruoof,  an
io7mid  town  of  Lignria  on  the  Tauarn«,  a  Roman
colony.  {2f  A  tovu  iu  lli^imuia  Baetica,  uear
Gsi<l)»,  n  Roman  coluoy.

.Astabdras  ('AtrnV^npaO  nnd  ActSpua  ('Atto-
)roi/«>'  Two  riTvra  uf  Aetliiu|>ia,  liaviiig  tLeir
•OTlToea  in  tlio  hi^hIa^lU  uf  Abytutinia,  and  uniting
tu  form  tbc  Nik'.  Tiii*  laud  enclosed  by  tbem  wua
tti«  islatid  of  Mem^  (q.  v.|.

■^^BticuB  {'AoTDicor).  Acel«braled  city  of  Bitby-
>*<»,,  oil  the  Sinns  Aatac«Dn»,  abay  of  tbe  Propontia,
saouliHiy  from Mi>Kuni, but  afV'rwards  receircd
pfr««*h  colouist»  frnui  Allit'nt,  nbo  culli'd  (be  place
'OH->i».  It  was  dentroywl  by  LvHiniacbnK,  bnt  wjir
IxiUton  an«igbbMll^i■l^  nite  by  Nii'uiu«dtw  I.,  wUu
fc-iajcd  bis  now  city  Nicouivdiu.

•^^start^  ('Airrdfm]). f>cc  Ai>iiieoi>it{:.

-^Jteiia  CA<TTfpi'at.  A  duiij^htcr  of  tlie  Tilan
^■^^Viua  and  the  Titauid  Pliool>^,  simer  of  Loto,  and
"•^rthtr  of  Hecat^S  by  IVrwo.  sou  of  the  Titan  Ciin».
**>^  is  Mid  io  have  turned  into  n  qnuil  {Sprv^)
"•^O  plaiige«l  into  the  sea  to  oecapo  tlie  advances
"^  Z*nji.  Aft«r  her  the  itiland  of  Delos  (q.  v.)  was
'^'^t  called  ASTEttlA,  and  Inter  OllTTttlA.

-AatSria  ( 'Atrrtfiis )  or  Aateria  ( 'Atmpia ).  A
^^viall  Ulatiil  betwuen  Iihaea  and  Cepballenia.

.Astiaea  ('Atrrpaia)- Th»  dan^lititr  of  Zena  and

"^"Jriiiiii,  and  goddctiM  of  jiialirr,  wim  livrd  dnr'tng

^tkcUoldcu  Age  among  mm;  bnt  when  the  wicked-

i>«iaiof  men  increiuu^d  nhe  wiihdn^w  ro  heaven,  and

^MraH  placed  among  the  staro nnder  thu  name  of

Virsti. llvT  stdter  Pndicitin  (Aidwr)  loft  the  earth

ftluBi;  vuh  her  (Hyg.  /W/.  Aatr.  ii.*2&).

AatraeuB  ('Atrrpainr].  A  Titau,  hnsband  of  Eoa.
«Ddf»tljprof  fbe  winds  and  the  fltara,  whtiUceOvld
calb  tbc  winiht  AMtratit  JratreM.

AatxagcUua  t  i\(rrpi'rynKoi\  A  wnrd  which  liter-
'^"y  "i^'nilkii  that  partioutiir  1toii»  tn  Ibr  nitlilr^  of
^'**ili  iiiiiulni|iedM  ubieh  ihr  (Jrccks  »m  wpII  lUHtliP
*'0iftQ9  naed  for  dice  and  other  pnipo»e«,  .oh  dc-
■"rtlwii  nader  the  corre*.pomliug  Latin  word  Talvr.
^atechnieal  torrao«rn)^ii/ifjiBU8cdby  Vitrnviiis
1^  «  erttain  monldiug  (the  aatragal;,  nhich  seeins
"'oave  derircd  its  name  from  its  reacuiblanco  to
*'*Ttng  or  chain  of  tali,-  and  it  is,  iu  fact,  always
***i  in  pneitinns  where  tt  seems  intended  to  hind
j'*K*ttwr  the  parts  to  whioh  it  is  applied.  It  he-
""•J&i  properly  to  the  more  highly  decorated  forms
*:  'be  Ionic  onler,  in  whirh  it  appears  ns  a  lon<*r
•^'"g  to  the  larger  monldiugs,  esipet-.ially  the  «chi-
'■'  fovolol,  particnlurly  in  the  capital,  as  wbown  in
'"■  fiillowuig  woud-ent.  whkh  represonts  an  Ionic
f*t»ital  fonud  in  the  rniua  of  the  Icuiple  of  Diniiy-
*^  St  Trag. It  is  also  oftou  used  in  the  entabla-


tnn  fts  au  edging  lo  the  divisions  of  the  fmniloe,
frieie,  and  architrave.  The  lower  flgnro  iu  the
illnstratiou  rcpresouta  a  portion  of  the  astragal
which  rnns  beneath  the  orowniug  uionldiug  of  tho
arohitraro  of  the  Temple  of  Kroohthens.


^.,'■<^.2.>'^-.;•v-,;^■^^:;l


1 1  r


iilJkfht


Aftntaln. (Fmm  ImiIo  Opltsl.)

The  term  Is  also  applied  to  a  plain  conwx
moulding  of  the  Ham*^  sectional  outline  uh  the
former,  but  without  the  division  iuti^i  linkit,  like
a  forva  on  a  smalt  scale.

Astrateiaa  Oraph^  (^aoTpartiaf  ypnipii).  An
accusation  bn>ught  agaiiidt  jierwous  nbo  failed  to
appeur  among  the  tn^iiKi  after  tliey  had  been
enrullml  for  the  campaign  by  the  geuorals.  The
court  nos  conipOfM>d  of  holdtcnt,  and  the  generals
presided. See  EXEIICITL'S,  p.  IJ49.

Aatrolofia  iatrrpft'Koyia).  Equivalent  to  malro-
nomiii,  a  wnnl  which  is  not  earlier  thuu  Seneca.
See  Artj«»numia.

Afltronomia  {{itrrpevo^i'a)  and  Aatrologia  (ii<r-
TpnXtrYia).  These  terms  were  at  first  synonymons
expreesious  among  the  ancients,  1>olh  sigiiifyiJig
'*  the  HcicncB  of  the  slarH."  But  afterwanla  aAlrtd-
ogy  came  to  mean  that  part  of  the  ncience  which
deals  with  the  supposed  indncnco  of  thu  stars  on
the  destinies  of  men.  Am<rn|;  the  (>reeks,  afilrun-
oniy,  the  origin  of  wliirh  they  themselves  nHcribed
to  the  Atwyriaus,  Babylonians,  and  KgyptiiiuH,  was
for  centuries  the  subject  of  philosophical  specula-
tion without  A  sufficient  groundwork  in  observa-
tion, because  mathematics  and  mechanics  had  not
reached  the  reqnisit/!  degree  of  perfection.  The
list  of  observing  a.^(rounni(>rH  opt>n8  with  P^nduxng
of  L'nidns  iu  the  first  biilf  of  Ihi*  fdiirth  centnry
B.C.,  who  asanmi'd  that  the  earth  wan  upherical,
nnd  tried  tr>  explain  thn  phenomena  of  the  hcnvens
by  a  coro[iIicated  thwiry  of  roncnntrii;  spheres.
Aristotle,  too,  niatutitiniHl  and  proved  the  upherical
form  rif  thi^  iMirt  li,  which  he  toi>k  to  he  the  immov-
able  ctTntre  of  thu  nnlveran.  AKtmnomy  was  first
raised  into  a  n-al  sciotice  after  D.c.  .tOO  at  Eho<lcB
and  Alexandria,  in  the  Mumutu  of  whirh  town
the  first  observatory  was  built ;  and  Aristyllus  and
Timocharea  detenuined  the  places  of  the  lized
stars  with  comparative  accuracy,  thoij((b  tvt  yet
with  very  rude  apparatus.  A  great  step  in  lutviinco
was  taken  by  Artstorcbus  uf  9auiut>,  who  ob!M>rTnd
the  summer  solstice  at  Alexandria  in  n.u.  ^79,
maintained  the  earth's  rotation  on  her  axiit  nnd
revolution  ninnd  the  snii,  and  made  an  nttem]>tr
by  no  means  contemptible,  lo  nttccrtaiu  the  stzu
and  dialaueo  of  tho  sun  and  moon.  His  suecesHor
KratosthenM  also  rendereil  essential  service  to  tho
progreu  of  the  kcicuce;  thus,  be  came  very  near


to  rietrrmiiiiiig  the  exact  nliliqiiiiy  nf  the  elliptic.
TliH  )rti«  fiiiiiulnr  of  HuiRiilitir  untnitiomy,  anil  the
grvateHt  tii(leji«<u(i(>ut  obKvrvt-r  of  uiiti(]tiity,  was
HipparchuK  uf  Xiraea  (in  tlin  secoiiil  ceutury  B.C.),
V  )m  diKCDVuriHl  lliu  pn^cctwloii  of  (liv  ci|Utiiux«-.ti,
aiul  ili-t«?rroiiifii  tliu  Iffitgtti  af  ttic  twhirycar  (at  '•}&')
ila.vfl,  5  liuum,  55  iuuiuIi-a,  12  Mjcuiitlb),  ub  wi'll  ii(«  lliu
tiiui)  uf  tliu  muun'H  re  vol  ii  Li  mi,  aitil  tlm  itiagiiitiiilu
and  diftlanoMi  of  che  heavenly  ItodicA.  Tho  last  im-
portant stttrouomer  of  aiiti<)iut,v,  and  tlti*  greatest
ofWr  Hipparclius,  is  Claudiuii  Ptolemueua  lu  the
second  o«uturj  a.d.  In  his  chiuf  work,  commouly
known  by  its  Arabio  uaino  ofAlfiM^t,  ho  digL>«t>
ed  the  diticoveriea  of  his  pr«deG4S88Dr»,  espocially
HippuroLua,  and  his  oirii  into  a  formal  sjBteni,
whicti  passed  current  all  throut;b  thuMiddtvA^tw.
According  to  it  the  earth  18  ii  Hphert*  rei^tii)|;  mo*
tioDlesB  in  tlm  tniddlt)  of  the  ei|fmlly  spheriual  uni'
verse,  whilu  the  buu,  moon,  ]ilaneU,  and  tixed  Btar«
roll  at  various  distaucoK  atviiud  her.

Tho  Konians  reganlfd  afltronomy  oe  aii  idle
sprculalion,  and  Kavc  little  attimlion  to  it.  When
lulius  Caenar  reformed  tliu  Rnuiau  culoudar  lit!  wait
uhlixvd  u>  hiiuii  an  aiitruuouier,  Soeigeaes,  from
AloxandriA  to  ht-lp  Uini.

Astrology,  In  tlw  narrowt-r  i<#n«o  of  the  won!,
and  applii'il  to  prMlictions  bluest  upon  the  observa-
tion uf  the  lit^aveiily  b<Nlie«,  arose  among  tho  Clml-
dneann,  and  in  Grb't-codid  not  conie  into vogno  until
after  the  time  of  Ahixandi^r  the  Gnntt.  In  Itoaic
the  ]irofe»4ion»l  aetrologPtu  were  called  CUaldaci,
or  Mathematici,  tlio  latter  name  ivfening  to  the
astroiiKtiiical  ralciilatione  wbieli  tht-y  mode.  In
the  Republican  iMtriml  tbcy 'were  ktionti,  biiC  lield
in  nttercouteui])t.  In  u.c.  139  their  unpopularity
was  «)  great  that  they  woie  expelled  fnun  itoiue
aud  Italy.  But  in  the  turbulent  times  of  the  civil
WOTS  their  reputation  ro^u  coualderably,  nud  6lill
oiore  under  the  Empire,  «  ben  the  most  extenaive
demands  were  made  upon  their  science.  They
were,  indeed,  rei^eiitedly  driven  out  of  Italy  and
involved  in  trials  for  treason  Imaiattu);  but  this
only  HiiliaiiefHl  Ihu  cnii.sidnraliiui  in  wliicli  tbey
were  held,  the  mora  mi  att  tliey  were  frequently
taken  into  conunel  by  the  etnpemm  and  the  mem-
bers of  tho  imperial  family.  In  Intix  lininH  all
that  the  Cbaldaeana  were  forblddtMi  Ut  do  wan  to
consult  the  Htnra  ou  questiouH  referring  Ut  l.lie  em-
peitir'a  life,  which  wan  mude  a  criminal  ufleiice.
The  Chriftltait  emperotR  (but  none  before  tbemi
UHned  many  pndiiliitiouA  againiit  all  coniiultatian
of  niirrologera  whatever.

In  The  practice  of  tbeir  art  they  nsed  calendam
written  on  tablota,  in  wiiieh  were  (set  down  for
OTery  day  tbe  motion  and  relative  difdanceit  of  the
ntarB,  whether  Incky  or  nnluuky.  By  another  set
uf  tnblota  tlioy  niatle  their  calcnlati<>n«  uf  ever>'
hour  in  detail,  noting  tbo  liunr  of  a  pemotra  birth
and  the  relative  poaition  of  the  couiiiollatioi]  dom-
inuut  at  the  time.  In  accordance  with  this  they
determined  the  I'nrtnncfl of  bim  who  was  born  at  the
hour  in  ijUHntioii.  Ity  a  Kiiiiilar  process  tbey  aecer-
taine<I  the  t  imes  that  were  favourable  or  anfavonr-
able  to  any  umlertaking.  Among  the  lucky  stare
were  lupiler,  VeuuN,  and  Luna;  among  the  uii*
lucky,  Ssttim  and  liars  wen?  the  chief.  Mercury
was  lucky  ur  uulurky,  ari;urding  to  eirrumntanren.

For  an  account  of  ancient  rutlrononiy  anil  aAtrol-
«gy,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Bidl,  Short  Ilutorif  of
JUatkenatiea  (1838);  Lewis,  J'/ronomy  o//Ae  AneiimtM
Booker,  ataSmeh  lUr  rUm.  AUerth.


Wliewell,  Hittory  o/  Mil  Indumrt  SaenetM  ^  eiiS
!/%'>*);  Wolf,  fj'r-iK/iii-hu  dtr  Aitnutomit  (1S77) ;  Do-i
\ikm\ira,  tlutoirt  dt  FAitronomie  \,\*^)',  tho  trejiti««<
of  Iiiltun  l-^ruiioufl  in  Latin,  of  Manetho  aiid  Ftol-.
umy  iu  Qravk;  and  the  Latin  poem  of  Maoiliufj
(q.  v.),  entitled  Attran<,mica,

Astttra.  A  river  iu  Latinm,  flowing  betweeoi
Aiitiiim  and  Circeii  into  the  Tyrrbeiiiau  ^a.  At<
itMiuuulh  it  formed  aMmall  idlaiul,  with  a  low  it  niHinl
it,  alsii  culb^l  AiilurM,  whore  Cicero  hail  an  v:iiil»l«-.

Asttires.  A  warlike  people  in  tbe  uurtbwefttl
of  tipatu,  bounded  ou  the  eaat  by  the  Cautabri  audi
Voccoot,  ou  tho  west  by  the  Gallaeei,  nu  the  north!
by  tbe  ooeau,  and  on  tbe  suuth  by  the  Velioue«.
Their  chief  town  waa  Aaturica  Aiign.ma  f  AKtorga),
and  they  hare  given  their  nnuie  aleo  to  tbe  luwlerui
Spanish  jtrnvince  of  A»tnrias.  I

AatyAgea  {' \trrvayi]t).  A  SOU  ofCyaxarca.  and
last  king  of  Media  (q.  v.)  who  reigned  U-CSM-Soft,
and  wa«  depriveil  of  hie  kiugdom  by  \\\b  graudwn,
CyniH  (q.  v.),

Asty&uax  ('AirrtNivn|)-  The  aon  of  Hector  and
Aiidi-ouiachf^.  Afli*r  the  captun-  of  Troy  the  Oreein
hurled  bim  down  from  the  walli<,  thiit  he  might  Dofc
restore  the  kingdom  of  Tmy. See  IIbctuk.

Astynfimi  (arrrtivii/ini}.  The  title  of  ten  offlcera
at  Athens  drawn  annually  by  lot  from  tbe  tea
tribes,  live  for  tbe  city  and  five  for  tho  Piraeus.
They  formed  a  kind  of  city  police,  responsible  for<
the  cteauliness  and  order  of  the  atrvelM,  and  pml>-l
ably  for  tbe  safety  of  the  public  buildings,  fiesj
Duckh,  iWV.  Econon%^  of  Athem,  p.  203  full.  See,
also,  AEl>tLK8.  il

Aaylia  (dtn/Aui).  "InviolabiUtr."  (1)  T1n|
seoiirity  of  person  and  proiicrty  uujoyoit  by  am*]
baasadors,  beralds,  athlutc»,  un  their  goings  t«)  ami '
from  the  great  guniee,  and  nnmetiroea  to  iudividu- ;
als  by  special  favour.  See  Pint.  Aivt.'i6.  {^i\  Tbe
right  of  sauctuury.

AtabiUun.  The  name  given  iu  Apntia  to  Iba
sii-ucco  or  parching  southeast  wiud^  now  luoolly
known  as  ultino.

Ataclnl.  A  people  of  Gallia  Karbonensin,  whose
cttiiilul  was  Narbo  (Xarbouue).  Tbey  derived  their
name  from  the  river  Atux,  now  the  Audo.

Atacmuss  Varko. See  Vaiiro.

Atalanta  CATaXaKn^).  A  Gieek  heniine  of  the
type  of  Arteuiis  (ij.  v.).  There  were  two  slighlly
different  veniioua  uf  her  story,  ona  onmnt  iu  Ar
cailia  and  the  other  in  Itiwutia.

(1)  The  Aih:aDiax  VElifiiON.  Atalnntn,  daugh-
ter of  Sieii*  and  Clymuu^,  wan  exjnised  by  her
father,  who  had  ileaired  male  uflnpring  only.  8b«
was  suckled  by  a  bear,  niitil  nhu  was  foiiud  and
brought  np  by  a  party  of  huntera.  Under  their
care  she  grew  up  to  be  a  bontreKS — ke«u,  »wifl,  and
beautiful.  .She  took  part  in  tbe  (Talyduttiun  lioor-
hunt,  was  the  IJrst  who  struck  tbe  hoar,  and  tv-
oeived  fnim  Meleager  tbe  hejul  nud  skin  of  the
iwast  as  the  prize  of  victory.  (Bee  Meleagbr.)
She  is  also  aw^miated  with  the  voyage  of  the  Ar>
gouaiita  She  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the  eulrvutiea
of  her  numerou.s  miitors;  bnt  at  last  she  ])mpi-
tiated  tbe  MratJi  of  Aphrodit<5  by  returning  tba
faithful  love  of  Ihc  beautiful  Mitanion,v%hu  biul  fol-
lowed her  pefbi'tleutly,  and  ttuOercil  and  stniggleiSj
for  ber.  Their  kou  wa:^  ParthenuiNieus,  ono  of  ths|
8even  against  Thebea.  Swinburne's  poem,  At<tLimtai\
in  Clt/yc/an,  givesa  magnificent  setting  to  the  ai


(3)  Tbb  Bokotiax  Tkbsion. Atulanta  wu  the

4&iigbter  of  Bcboeneiis,  son  of  Aitiaiuas,  nutl  diH*

tiiiKQlsltvd  for  bfaul,Y  aud  Bwiflnens  of  foot. An

■irmcle  warned Iht  a^iiiiiBt  iiiarria;;*^,  nnd  sbo  nr-

t<mlin^))')ivt>ilaloiifly  life  in  ttie  forest. Sbe  nwt

Ihe  uliltvNfWH  f>f  her  HiiitorK  li>  challeiif^iiiK  thi^tii

toTsu*  Willi  lieJ",  «%'pr|jilc[njL;  tlieui  ni  the  nwfi  and

•{Mwing  iheni  iii  tb«  back. 8b«^  wu  at  leugth

bultrn,  however,  hy  Hip}iouienc!i,  who  during;  the

nee  droppeil  on  Ihe  ground  thrt-e  golden  apples

Itiveii  biui  by  Apbruiltt^. Ata];inta  fttoupeid  down

Ifi  pick  up  tho  applcH,  nnd  thuK  luitt  tho race.

Hip|Ki[iK'ne«  forgot  to  render  thuuktt  tu  Aphrodit<^,

and  the  gtHldcM  tii  auger  ciintted  the  pair  in  their

pA»«tiiD  to  pmfruie  the  sanctuary  of  Cyltet6,  where

itey  wen-  changed  into  Hontt. See  W.  8.  Landor's

{iif/jictnnrs  and  Atatitnta.

A-targStu  C '\rnpymit)- See  Syria  Dra.

A.tax A  river  of  (>unl,  now  the  Ande.

.A.t£('An}). According  loHonitir,  thedanghtcrof

^uh:  iii^rtirding  tu  HuHiiMl,of  KriM(nr  Strife). She

^M^lutuif]eM  infatuation,  the  infatuation  being  gen-
tra.lly  ImiM  to  imply  guilt  om  itn  cuntH:  and  evil  us
iU  couac()uunce. At  Omt  nhe  dwelt  on  Olyinpnit;
\)ul  aflcr  nhu  had  ctitrupi>eil  Zuu»  hirnsrlf  into  |ii.s
nutb  oath  un  the  ucciUtiou  uf  t)ie  hiitii  of  Hi:rai:U-.8
(.H.T.),  be  burled  her  down  to  earth. Here  she
puitats  her  mtHsion  of  evil,  walking  tightly  hm-x
iHit'fl  bends,  hilt  uerer  toncliing  the  gronnd. Uu-
kindbergo  the  Lilni(rrayera),  the  lanie,  wrinkled,
wiaiuliiig  danght^m  uf  Zeus. Tho  I.itni,  if  called
iit^  IipaI  tho InirtM  intlicled by  ht6;  bnt  tbey
liriu^  ffL-nh  evil  upon  the  stubborn. In  later  times
Al^Li  tniUHrnmieil  into  an  avenger  of  unrighteuiiH-
M**,  like  r>ik<'-,  the  Knnye«i,  ami  XeniesiB.

AteiuB  Caplto,  OAura.  A  liooiau  jnrlst  of  the
■<«•>' Aq|;iifitns  and  Tiberius,  who  was  horn  about
■U:- 30, aiiil  dlM  aboiil  aj>.  tiE2  Unlike  his  con-
tMiiwriry  AntisltuH  Labeu  (q.  v.),  ]i«  g-e<-oni mended
biBWlfto  Iho  ruling  |K>weni  by  his  Hnbininitive
Kltitade.  He  waa  rewanlod  by  many  tokenH  of
^nrtioQ;  auuog  others,  by  the  conMnUhip,  to
vliitii  lie  woa  elect^jd  In  A.D.  5,  before  attaining
Itelegali^e.  As  a  Jurist  (aKaiu  unlike  Antinlinn)
'*  npreteuttMl  the  conservative  teudeuey,  uinl  mt
^Miaw  the  ftinuder  of  a  special  aehool  calknl  ibt^
Siimtm,  after  his  pupil  Uiutnrius  Sabinus,  and
^Ppnw.-din  ita  tbfiiry  of  legal  interpretation  to  the
t»di(il  Achout  of  PnHinluH. See  Iihihhih-iie.vtia.

Atakia  loriXcLal.  Imtnanjty  from  pnbtio  hnr-
■■uiBwiis  enjoyed  at  Athenx  by  the  nrchmis  for  the
»i»b*in(t;  by  the  defwettdunts  of  (xsrtain  iwrsons,
•■  irfcoai  it  had  been  conferred  n«  u  reward  for
pvit  MrviccB,  a«  in  (he  ca«H  of  Hnrniodins  and
^Ojltflu;  and  by  the  inhabitants  of  certain
J*"^  8t«tf«.  It  wa*i  of  several  kind;* :  it  might
"••gimenil  ImiUQnity  iariXtta  hnavTtov)^  or  a  nnprc
^*i*l  exemption,  a«  from  cust^uinlnties,  frtnn  tho
mwiIm,  tir  from  providing  sacritices  (iWX^ui  U-
9^)  Eiemption  fmm  military  service  was  oImu
'''"d  tcnXf  in.

AtaUa.  Thfl  modurn  Aversa ;  a  town  in  Cam-
P"<ilk  between  Capna  and  Neapolis,  origiually
*li«btt«d  by  the  Oftcan.i,  afterwards  n  Roman
""^Wpintn  and  a  colony.

AtelUoae  FablUae.  Playa  of  a  farcical  nnt-
"''r  M>  called  ftuut  Atella.  n  l4twn  of  the  Onci
")  Casipaata. See  Comukdu;  LiTEiiATUttK  (Un-


Aternum.  Tlie  modem  PescAra ;  »  town  ia
central  Italy,  on  the  AdriatJj^,  at  the  nmtith  of  the
river  Att^nnri,  wat  thi^  ronituon  liarbnnr  of  the
Viralini,  Marrncini,  and  IVlignt.

AteatA.  The  luodorn  EaIc  ;  a  Roman  colony  in
the  eonnlry  of  tho  Veueti  iu  nurtboni  Italy.

Atbamanla  {' \6aiuivia).  A  mountainous  couu-
try  in  the  sonlh  of  Epirns,  on  the  \vt-Mt«rii  hide  uf
PinduM,  of  which  Argithea  wa8  the  chief  town.
The  Athantanett  were  a  Thewdiltan  {H'opte,  who
ha<l  lic^n  driven  nut  of  Themsaly  by  the  Lajiithae.

Atb&nasl'Afn^rl.  The  son  of  Aechi«  and  V.na-
ret(^,  iiiid  king  of  OrehomenuR  in  Boeotia.  At  Ihe
command  of  Hitrt^,  Atbumoa  morrim]  N'epheliS,  by
whom  he  became  the  father  <tf  I'hrixuH  autl  Hclld.
fSne  PlllllXt^r^.)  Unt  hrwa«iterrtilly  inlnvewitblho
inurtid  Inu,  the  daughter  of  Cmlmni),  by  whom  ho
begot  Learehus  and  Moltcert4>A.  Haviug  thus  in-
curred tbe  onger  IxJth  of  Herd  and  of  Mepholtf,
Atliainas  wntt  tieized  with  mjtdne«8,  and  in  thi«
slate  killed  his  owu  son,  Learchus.  luo  threw
herself  with  Melicertett  into  the  sea,  ami  boih
were  changwl  into  marine  deities — Ino  liecoming
Kcncothea,  and  Me1  Icertem,  Paliienion.  Athnmax,
as  the  mni-dertr  of  hia  hou,  wm^  idtligctl  to  dee
from  Itoeotiii,  and  settled  in  T)ir»4aly.  Hence  w«
have  Atl)afnnntiadt>H,  a<>ii  of  Atljariiiut,  i.  e.  Palan-
mon  ;  and  Ath.iumiitis,  dangliter  uf  Alhania«,  i.  e.
Hell6.

AthanaaluB  {' .\0a»amoi).  A  Christian  bishop
of  the  fourth  century.  He  was  a  iiativB  of  Egypt,
ami  a  deacon  of  the  Church  of  Aluxaudria  under
Alexander  the  HJMhop,  whom  hu  Kuorenled  iu
hi»  dignity  a.D.  ^iG.  Previoua  I'll  bis  obtaiuiug
Ibis  high  odici*  he  had  boeu  private  s«'ci«tary  tu
Alexander,  and  hod  uIno  led  fur  some  time  uu  as-
cetic life  with  the  renowned  St.  Anthony.  Alex-
ander hod  altM>  taken  him  to  the  council  at  Nice,
where  he  gained  the  highest  eatecm  of  the  fathera
by  the  talent  which  he  displayed  in  the  Ariati  con-
troversy. (Sl^e  Akius.J  He  \\at\  a  great  shanj  in
the  decreea  piwsed  here,  and  thereby  drew  on  him-
self the  hatrnlof  the  Ariani.  On  hiM  adv»uc«ment
U>  the  pndacy  he  dedicated  all  hitf  time  »tid  talents
I«  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  and  resolutely  re-
fns(Ml  tho  re<inest  of  Conslantitte  for  the  re«tom-
tioii  of  Atius  to  the  Catholic  omitiDiiuon.  In
rcveug«i  fur  lliis  refn»ial.  (be  Arian  party  bnitight
several  aeciiftations  agaiuat  him  boforu  the  em-
peror. Of  thoae  he  wan  aoi)uitted  in  the  lint  in.
stance;  but,  on  a  new  charge  of  haviug  detained
Rbi|i8  at  Alexandria,  laden  with  corn  for  Constan-
tinople, either  from  eonviction  or  policy,  be  wna
found  gnilty  and  baniithei]  tii  fiaid.  Here  be  re-
maine<l  in  exile  eighteen  months,  or,  as  some  ac-
counts (tay,  upwards  of  two  yi^rs,  his  aee  iu  the
meantime  being  imncciipied.

On  the  death  of  Constjmtino  he  was  recalled,
aud  refttored  to  hi*  functions  hy  Constantius;  but
the  .\rmn  party  made  new  contplaints  iigaintit  him,
and  he  wan  condcnmod  hy  9ti  Arian  bisliopet  luutem-
bled  at  Antjoch.  On  the  oppo6ile  side,  lOU  orthiv
dox  bishops,  assembled  at  Alexaodtia,  declared
him  innocent ;  and  Pope  Inlins  coii(lrme«l  this  find-
ing, in  eonjunctiun  with  luore  than  :)tK)  hisbops
assembled  at  Sardis  from  the  Eaot  and  Went.  In
conscfpience  uf  this,  lie  roturued  a  aueond  time  to
his  diocese.  But  when  Coustaus,  emperor  of  the
West,  died,  aud  Conslaiitius  l>ecame  master  of  the
whale  Empire,  the  Arious  again  veutured  to  riae


tip  UKaitiKt  AthiinnHiiiK,  Thoy  conrlrmniKl  him  in
thi!  (-iMini'ilKflf  Arlrn  ami  Milan,  atifl,  uh  lliu  wurtby
[]atri»rf-li  n-f'iisc<l  tu  linti'ii  U>  iinylliiiifi;  btit  iiii  »x-
[irrsK  L'tmiiiiuuil  uf  tliu  (Miijicrur,  ulirii  hu  wom  nuo
day  preparing  ui  oeleWraTe  u  fttstival  in  the  vliarcb,
a  body  of  soldiers  auddcnly  nishcil  in  to  uinko  bim
prisoner.  The  wirronudiDgpriesU  mid  monks.  Ui»w-
ever,  placed  him  in  Bccurity.  Atbauasiue.  dii*plnoe)l
for  a  third  time,  ded  into  tbo  deserts  of  Egypt.  His
eneoiies  pursued  bim  even  here,  and  set  n  price  on
his  bead.  To  relieve  the  hemiits.  who  dwelt  in
the^e  solitary  placra  and  wlio  wuiitd  not  Iwtray
his  retreat,  fnmi  siifffhiii;  on  liis  aveniiitt,  be  w»nit
inU»  th(i»*e  parts  of  tbn  ili-jwrt  which  w«rfl  entirely
nuinbahiled.  He  wuft  fuUuiveU  hy  A  fiiithfal  Her*
vant.  who,  at  the  risk  of  his  life,  HUpptied  him
with  tbu  means  of  fiubaiHteuco.  It)  tbis  uudis-
tui'bcd  Hpot  AthoiiaBJus  composed  many  writings,
full  of  eloquvucc,  to  strengthen  the  faitb  of  the
believers  or  expose  tke>  falaebooda  of  his  enemies.
When  Julian  tlie  Apiislate  ascended  tlie  tbmue.
he  alluMMl  the  ortbtnlox  hi^hnps  to  return  to  their
chnn^bes.  AthannMins,  thereftire,  returned  after
an  ahsenr.e  of  six  years.  The  luitdneM  which  lie
exercised  tonattls  his  enemies  was  imitoteil  i)i
Gnul,  Bpain,  Italy,  and  GitH^e,  and  re.^tored  jieare
to  the  Cbnn^h.  Hut  this  pen<:<:  \ras  inlerrnpttHl
hy  the  complaints  uf  the  heathen,  whose  temples
the  zeal  of  Atbauastiis  kept  always  empty.  They
excited  the  emperor  against  him,  and  ho  wim  obliged
to  tly  to  the  Tbebnis  to  save  bis  life.  The  death
of  the  OQipcror  and  the  accession  of  Joviun  again
brought  bim  back;  bnt  on  Valeus  becoming  em-
peror eight  months  after,  and  the  Ariane  recover-
ing their  snperlority,  he  was  once  more  compelled
to  fly.  lie  concealed  himself  in  the  tomb  of  hit*
father,  where  be  remained  four  mouthn,  nulil  Va-
luns.  moved  by  the  presHiug  entreaties  and  threat^^
of  the  Alexandrians,  iiUnwed  him  tn  return.  From
this  |>eriml  he  remained  nndistvirlwd  iu  his  oillce
until  he  died,  tn  a.d.  :t73.

Of  the  forty-six  yran*  of  his  official  life,  he  spent
twenty  in  banishment,  and  the  gn-atiT  part  of  tlic
remainder  in  deftMidiiig  llie  Nicene  C'tiHtd.  Atliu-
nasinii  m  mir  of  llu;  gn;iiti-HL  mi'n  of  which  the
Chnri'h  (^n  lioast,  llindeep  niind.bifl  notiln  heurt,
bis  tnvhirihlo  i<onrage,  \m  living  faith,  biH  nn-
bounded  benevoh'uce,  siucoro  hnmiliry,  lofty  e!«-
qn«acc,aud  strictly  virtnons  life, gained  the  honour
and  h>voof  all.  Iliflifritingflnroon  polemical,  his-
torical, and  moral  anbjoets.  Tlie  polemical  treat
chicdy  tif  the  doctrines  nf  tbo  Trinity,  the  ineama-
tioii  of  CltriAt,  and  the  divinity  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
Tbo  historical  ones  are  of  the  greatest  imimrtan™
for  the  history  of  Ihe  Chnrch.  In  all  his  wrltlnufl
the  stylci  is  distingnisbeil,  eonsidering  tlie  age  in
■wbinli  they  were  pn^Inced,  for  eleaniean  and  moder-
ation. Din  npohigy,  addresHcd  to  tliB  emiK-ntr  f'on-
staiitine,  is  a  muKtt*rpierp.  The  cn'etl  which  liears
his  nam«  is  now  genenilly  alloweil  not  to  have  h(M!n
bis.  It  wan  Aral  printe<!  in  Gn-ek  in  1540,  and  sev-
eral iimea  afterwaiils  tu  1071.  It  ba»  been  qnes-
tionedwhether  this  creeil  wua  ever  receivcfl  by  Ibu
Oreck  and  Oriental  Churches.  In  America  the  Epis-
copal (.'hnrch  has  rejected  it.  The  best  edition  of
Atbnnasins  is  in  the  I'alrolngin  (irtu'co-l.atimt  of
Migne  (IHOM.  His  epitttleK  »n<l  Miniti  of  hi^  onitiona
were  translntnl  with  noteit  by  J.  H.  Newman  (H4S2|.
Athenaet'A^^rai).  Thwchiefcity  of  Attica.  The
long  southessteni  triangUi  of  llie  uurtbeni  i>enin-
BDla  of  Greece,  which  termiuates  in  tbo  abrupt


promontory  nfHnninm  (mod.  Ciro  ColtSuDiila),  hi
its  must  iutrrt-'Kting  and  important  divjsiou,  topi
graphically  as  well  ok  historically,  on  the  wctiterd
^ide,  Ctcirig  lh»  Saronic  Gulf.  Hen\  at  a  pninl
midway  between  Snnium  and  the  proiDoiitor|
that  faces  8alamis.  the  low  Cape  Zoster  tomiinatel
(he  Anhydros  rtuige,  a  lower  uontinnation  of  Hyi
mettns.  The  long  coiTtiDuaus  i-idge  of  AnbydnN
and  Hymettns  [\(m  metres  at  Us  greatest  heighlj
rxlemU,  iu  a  slightly  northeaat«rly  ilirection,  town
anU  thn  range  of  PenteU'  {UtvrtXfj),  the  aneieuf
KiilcHsos  (B^X7<ro'6f|  or  l'euu>licon  (Ilti^rAuiov  mA
Hfxtt,  I*Bt.  Mons  PentelicuH),  fn>m  which  it  is  M>p^
arated  hy  the  jiaas  through  which  the  nnMleni
railway  rnua  sonTbt^aaterly  towimla  the  ancieul
mincM  of  Lanrium,  near  Suniom.  Tho  Pouteliciu
range  (lIMi.C  metres  high)  oxtendB  northwest  and
Bontbeast,  and  forms  w  ith  Hyniettnit  and  Anbydnn
a  Well-nigh  continuous  dividing-wall  between  ttu
eaateni  plain  of  Attica,  the  Mcsogaea  {'\UtTayaui\
and  the  middle  plain;  while  the  plain  of  Mar*
thou  in  the  mtrtheast  Is  approachable  from  Xhi
Mesogtlea  only  by  a  narrow  way  betwi.'cu  Pealeli>
cuK  and  the  «ea  townnls  lj;nl>oea,  and  from  tlM
middle  plain  by  two  difliciiU  nmnnt-ain  ways  b»
twocu  Feiit<di<-us  and  I'anius.  This  last  rang!
(14112  metres  high)  lies  to  tho  northwest  of  Peutclii
ens  und  extends  nearly  oatt  and  west.  PaosahH
only  by  way  of  Decelon  (mod.  Tati^T)  in  the  ean
and  Phyl(^  in  the  weiRt.  it  cffiMtiiolly  cnta  off  Attii^
fi-otu  Hueotia.  In  it«  fhrtliei^t  extent  towardil
the  wvvt,  when*  it  continues  in  the  Cithoentd
range,  it  divides  the  western  Attic  plain,  tbfl
Klensininn,  from  Kueotio.  The  middle  AtlM
plain  is  sejiarated  from  the  Kleuflinian  by  a  lowi
er  mountain  moss,  .Aegaleos  r.\iydAcwr)  or  Coryi
dalloH  (KopuJaXArir)  (-Mi?  melrett  high),  which,  le«TJ
ing  Misy  way  betwc<?n  itself  and  Pameo,  coutinoc^
sonthwmt,  broken  midway  by  the  poM  of  Dapta^
\i6,  till  it  tomiiiialeM  in  "the  roeky  brow  wbiuH
looks  u'er  sea-buro  Halamis."  Within  these  naCJ
nrfl-l  rnuiparts  lie6  that  which  we  m.iy  call  pm
tjcelltmct  the  Attic  plain,  a  groat  V-shaped  lecedj
oiwu  towards  the  seu.  Ittt  more  important  intefl
ual  featuree,  which,  taken  in  eonnectiun  with  ilfl
enclosed  character  on  the  one  bond  and  ita
ooccfis  to  tbo  sea  on  thi>  other,  rendered  it  an  idn
theatre  for  the  development  of  a  Greek  state,
must  now  examine  in  detail.

From  the  oftHhoot«  of  Pamca  and  Pent^licns
the  noi-tbeaHt  riHi>>H  the  most  oonsiderablu  waiepi
way  of  the  plain— the  CephissoB,  wbicb  atl'orded  il
uncieut  as  iu  modi-rn  times  a  perennial  source  of
irrcgution  fur  the  lieldn  of  the  Attic  fanner.  As  tt
approaches  the  sea,  below  the  heights  of  the  etlfi
it  seems  to  have  been  mot  by  another  stream  fnifl
the  east — the  Ilt^ns,  which,  rising  tcinn  Hymettu^
is  in  modern  times,  owing  to  the  denudation  of  iti
parent  monntain.n  much  more  insignificant  sireaq
than  in  ancient  time-s,  hnrdty  more  tlioti  a  dry  Iks^
in  Slimmer.  Hence  the  ditUculty  of  determining
its  entire  coarw.  Tho  Eridanna  mentiimod  by  aq
cient  untbors  seems  to  have  been  u  stream  fro*
the  dfOictouH  and  w)ioles<iiiiP  fonut-ain  of  Kaitttf
rian(^  [Kattrapinvfi,  .inc.  KtXXot'  n^pa),  aiktitbea!*t  C
the  HonrccA  uf  the  IIIkmus,  into  which  the  strea*
emptied  east  of  tbo  city.

Between  the  CophisHUs  and  the  Iliasna,  ftbw
midway  of  tbo  plain,  a  short  range  of  hilla.  form4
like  tlx!  other  heights  of  the  plain  of  bluish-gri
I  limestone  and  bearing  to<dny  the  nameTuurl


ATHENAE


100


ATIIEXAE


^■y  DMt  mid  wp9t,  Irft  tlio  hard  liliie-

oe  projecting  hi  ihreo  grciit  iirotiilbtir-

"llke  booea  of  a irastud  bntly/'  as  Pluto

BL-tn'M^ii  fnnr  mid  tivit  KiigliKli  uiloA  aoiithwest
of  lilt!  Acn^iolU  ^^u  lliid  AH  outpost  un  the  sea
the  ri>cky  pc'uinsiila  of  Act*S  or  Mimichin,  wliicU,
ori(iii)Hllj-  an  Ulnml,  like  Halaniis,  nas  grodnally
unit«4l  to  the  i>l»iii  b,v  tbi^  Hoil  wished  fixiin  above.
Kortli  of  it  li<'K  thn  »«;«iirti  laudlucked  harbour  of
!'inl(rll^<^*lf«Ii»l)r);  cii»l.  tht?  larger opeu  roadstead
of  Phalermn  (^'^liXfjfMv),  ihe  earlitr  port  of  Athens,
into  whivti  till''  OpIiiM^iib  aud  Dissiis  drain,  ami
which  in  teriuitmtwl  on  the  iMJiith(.*4i«t  by  C»i«i
Coliad  (KwXhis  t'lKpa).

If  we  exniniiie  the  M>tl  of  the  plain  from  the  Nca
inland,  we  (iud  that  the  Mtiidy  coast  it)  succeeded
by  a  swampy  nlhivial  tttrip,  Iho  Halipedon  CAXi-
irrflov,  "8att-plain"  or  "  seH-pInin'*).  This  Afcaitt
^iveM  placo  to  the  plain  profier,  wliicli,  thiiiiKl>
"  light  nf  wiil''  and  rt-qniritiE  diligont  cnJtivalion,
in  yet  the  natural  liouie  of  tlie  nlivc,  and  it  nnt  dl
adapted  to  the  growth  of  wheat  and  vpfiptables.
The  stony  foot-hills  above  tlie  plain  (*»AA«ws)
were  terraced  and  ntiliiwd  for  thf  cidtivation  of
the  vine;  while  the  fraKrant  niiMintain-plantrs  par-
ticularly ofpiii'ple  Ilyniettns,  fiirniflhed  pa«tnra£<'
not  only  for  nheep,  but  for  tbt^  h«e«  that  Lave  nia>1e
Attio  hout'y  ptoviTbial.  The  (JK-trve,  l<»o,  wa»  made
t»  flonriHli  tM>  wi'll  in  tlit-  plain  (bat  Attic  IIi^m  were
tu»  famoDH  as  the  oil  and  honey  fruui  tbo  eamc  re-
(fion.

Tu  these  rfM>urceB  we  must  add  tbe  abnndouce
of  potters'-clay,  and  ihu  wealth  of  material  for  the
artbitcct  and  thu  st-iilptur  aflordM  by  the  quarries
of  reutciieujt,  H>  uiettns,  and  Kleiisis,  as  well  as  by
thoKo  of  the  hilltf  of  tbo  city  and  tbe  heights  of
Piracnn.

In  bis  efforts  to  wring  from  tbe  soil  its  ntt«r-
most,  the  farmer  was  aided  by  a  climate  exception-
ally favourable.  In  the  Allir,  year  tbereare,'>n  tfao
average,  not  mom  than  thirty-five  days  nn  which
the  san  does  not  sliow  itself;  and  though  tbe  north
winds  from  snowy  Fames  render  the  winter  cold
most  penetrating,  their  steady  breath  by  day  dur-
ing tbe  greater  p!»i-t  nf  the  year,  alternating  witb
the  equally  steady  H4'a-lin><eze  by  night,  cotiihined
with  a  wonderful  purity  and  dryiieiw  of  air,  gave
to  Attica — and  atill  given  to  her,  though  in  a  less
degret.' — a  cliuiale  at  once  physically  nod  nieutalty
exbiluntting.  Justly,  then,  might  "tlir  children  of
Ercrbtheus"  be  callud  "  blewwd  of  old.  and  children
of  tbo  happy  gods,"  "lightly  walking  through
brightest  and  crleareat  air,''  whore  the  goddess  of
all  fertility  "  irrigatetl  tbo  soil  from  the  strennn*
of  ever-flowing  C(^pbi88Ils,  and  brealbetlover  them
lomperato  bret-zes."

We  mm  now  to  tbe  derulapmcnt  of  tbe  little
city  which  grew  up  in  tbe  midst  of  this  excep-
tional euvinninient.

As  in  tbe  case  of  otlier  ancient  Oi-ecian  settio
ments,  so  in  that  of  Athens  we  tiiid  an  nvoidAui;e
of  immc4liat«  proximity  to  the  sen.  snch  as  would
have  I)«on  obtained  by  a  Hottlemeiit  on  the  height
of  tbo  Piraeus.  The  tmtnrnl  centre  foi;  the  de-
velopmiiUtof  a  town  neither  n-mote  from  the  sea  nor
yet  immedintcly  acwtMible  from  it — such,  too,  nn
to  be  eimimanded  by»  tmtiiral  asylum  in  the  event
of  hostile  inroads — jeafibrdetl.iu  the  case  ofAthene,
by  the  group  of  bills  Iwlow  Lyeabettus,  Nitt  only
do  we  llnd  here  a  cuutrat  and  isolated  position  in


a  plain  ttvt  apart  from  the  rest  of  ibe  world  hy
nature,  but  aUo,  within  a  narrow  vouip»»H,  arabU
land  with  u  watcr-Niipply,  tbe  material  fur  the
primitive  artisan,  and  an  airy  and  wbolesoine
poailioti  for  lialiiintion  upon  a  fonndatii»n  of
native  rock,  thus  loaviDg  tbo  cultivable  area  aa-
,  encumboivd.

I It  is  not  of  special  moment  to  os,  io  tracing
'  tbe  material  development  of  tbe  little  oomumnity
which  baa  done  more  than  any  other  towards  the
protnolion  of  civilization,  whether  we  give  to  the
earliest  iubabitante  any  other  name  than  Atbcui-
nnH. Tbe  term  Pelasgiau  itself  needs  interjireta-
tiun  ;  and,  So  far  as  any  precise  knowIed>;f<  goes  "b
^  might  OH  nell  regard  these  early  (wcnpnuts  of  the
,  "land  iinsuckeil"  as  quite  as  truly  nn  ontgrnwih
I  of"  tiie  gnnind  itself"  as  their  symbolic  cicada. It
I  is  evident  from  tbe  luei'e  consideration  of  tbeir
j  environment that we must accept  (be  view  of
I  Thucyrlides,  that  Attica  was  exceptionally  slablr
in  popniation,  and  trnco,  so  far  as  pott^ible,  tbs
gradnnl  Accretions  ui>oii  tbo  primitive  nucleos,  hj
I  whatever  name  we  choose  tu  designate  it.
I Tbo  earliest  and  most  permanent  traces  of  ho-
I  man habitation to  be  found  at  Athens are  tbe
I  foundattnnsof  liouses  cot  in  the  rock  of  tbe  group
^  of  hills  designated  by  the  gwneral  unnio  of  Puyx.
These  are  extensive  enougli  to  warniil  the  belief
,  that  this  region, which in bistoricnl limes  lay
wa^te  for  tbo  most  part,  waa  tbe  ae&tof  s  thriving
towu,  according  to  tbo  conditions  of  that  primitive
period. WhelhcT  the  remarkable  rock-rutl  tugs  and
tbe  semicircular  Pela»gic  wull  upon  the  bill  called
jMir  exceilenee  Puyx  be  tbe  monuments  of  a  pn>-
biatorio  worship  of  the  primeval  god  of  the  sunny
sky  of  Greece  aa  ncll  as  of  its  alorinii-r pbeno-
menu,  Zeus  Hypsistos,  or  whether  wo  an*  to  see
bore,  us  baa  been  the  prevailing  fasbiun,  tbo  plnoi*
of  the Albeuiau popular  assembly (thai  which
noder  the  former  8op[K>sition  is  tbe  altar  liccom*
ing  under  the  latter  the  famous  bema,  from  which
tbe  orators  "shook  tb'  ai-senal  nud  fulmiu'd  over
Greece  "),  to  any  one  who  has  been  i1|khi  the  ground
the  extreme  antiquity  of  these  imposing  works  is
at  once  obvious. To  the  early  pfrio<l  under  dJs-
ctissiou  seeni  to  1>elong  also  tbe  rock-hewn  cham-
bers, one of wliicb \h (mditionally known a>
the  "Prison  uf  Socrates" — an  imiKtssible  deaignv
tiun.

We  cannot  sopposf^  that  tbe  inbabit'ants  of  tbiv
Hrsc rock -city,  or Cranaa (Kporad),  conccmr<L

tbcmaelves  witb  Che  aea,  if  at  all,  beyond  the  dr

mnnds  of  their  daily  existence,  which  would  banl1>y
lead  them  tieyoud  llsliery.  It  was  only  euterpris  —
ing  acoretious  from  without  that  eon  Id  ntilijce  aoL^H
develop  the  entire  revoiiriTs  of  nainrv.

Further  traces  of  the  early  city  are  to  bo  fonn^^
in  the  ancient  names,  wbirli,  attached  to  the  sew-  -
eraldistrictsiu  and  about  the  later  city,  main  taioL ^
themselves,  not  only  in  tbu  mouth  of  the  peopl  ^|
but  in  public  records,  lliroiigb  the  entire  btstoK~jr
of  Athens. Antuiig  the  most  certainly  di>ttiugiibi'V*'
able  of  these  primitive  divisions  (3^^oi)  is  l\m.C
kuowu.  as  far  hack  as  we  can  trace,  an  C«-nimic  *.i*
|Kf/M^«iK<>rl.  ^o  oalle<l  from  tbe  poiters'.^Ia^whio/i
ben-  furnifihed  abundant  material  for  one  of  iho
••arlicfltofbuninii  nidiitilries. TbiH  region  9tn>tclir-«
northward  from  the  rocky  brow  of  the  ArcopagiiD.
Mflitf^  (MfXin;)  seems  to  have  lain  to  the  suDtb  «(
rernmictifc,  and  to  have  embraced  the  lliti  of  ibe
Nymphs  aa  well  as  tbe  Areu^iogu^. CoUytns  (KiX-


J


T1)»  ThnBaia


^1  KtrKtcbeil  to  tbt'  iic>rlliea»t  of  the  Aorop-

r»th,  biinlttrinf;  on  flir  n4M*t  not  only  npoD  Ceranit-

I  ens,  but  ftlwi  iip*m  Mi'lit**,  tka  ecemu  [»roved  by  ii

Dtntmo  of  A  lK>ini(lary-)tt4iiit<  in  8tnitH>. Dkuntia

(^^Hi)  nmy  tm  ]ilnrcil  imxl  l<i  Cullytim,  aimI  )ii*-

IKWD  l)i<*  AcniptiliH  arnl  I.ycAlN>ttii<f. Ceriaitoe

(KiiiKiiAai},  wUlitti  ibe  Ixinler  uf  w hirli,  jtiHt  bolow-

llifiprwipica  of  lli«  NvmiibK*  Hill,  lay  the  ilp(in.'N-

sl'JW, fomieil  [tnrtly  by  iiaturr,  jmrtly  by  fiiinn-yinK,

f^l  Ibe  Harntbniui  ( Bupd^/Mf),  a4ljnitu-il  Melite

"B  Ih*  w»»l ;  wbile  Ci«!l6  (KoiAf)),  coiiwiiiatit  witli

'ti  owae,  i>ccti|>i«d  tbo  giill>  lM.-twwii  lh«  Hill  of

tlnNrtDpli!!  auU  tbe  beU  of  tbo  IlirunH. Tim  core

"ftlitwaocieiit  Oistrict*  in  tbe  rock-cily  of  Melit^.

To  ilie  Durtb  nf  CVruniii^iis,  nml,  aijpiiretitly,  nt  nil

boiMoDtditle  tbe  city  limits,  lay  C-oIodoa  llippios,

ulM  fnitii  itH  bill  (KoXwiif).

^Vlijlc  rb«  ancii-nt  cti.y  tbtis  inalntatTi«Hl  itself  in

|WliitlR  itiUnil  iliiilnct  jiiRt<le«rntH*<l,  ibnw  iiitlii-

l«cn>  lifjriiiiitiig  lu  iiiakB  tbpniw'1vc8  f<;tt  fnitii

Iwhicb  n-oti!  to  ^ovrrti  tim  lUvititiy  of  tlio

Th«  Pho'iiiciaii trffldnra  apiifar  to

liMlflHMiad  tbelr  ciistouiary  trading- pustA  at

ttl>  IKit  Tuetoly  on  Salamlii  (^rblcb  ba»

Its  Pho-nieiaii  name ),  but  a)eo  on  tlie

toau  opjmsiio  aiul  on  tbo  hi'igbta  of  the  Piraeus

^'idlTMlermM.  Aitcicnt  rock-ciittingitin  the  citadel

"I  VirMn*  weiu  t«»  nttest  early  nettleineut  there.

^*  wu,  tmleeil,  siicb  n  ponition  as  we  know,  uot

'"•'yfmm  Thurydiilea,  but  also  from  varinna  umte-

^reoiain*.  t«  bavp  Iwen  hioihI  likely  to  be  eluwen

"ythttp  early  imvi^atoiif  of  tbt*  Mediterraneiiti,

""l  tMiiilors  between  Orii»iit  aiul  Occident. T^i

'"  >n(|t«.  a  mixi'il  Orientnl  roant-BCttlfuieiit  in

'"irliplwnif  iotiw  plnyed  tbe  leading  part,  apin-ars

"Wduc  the  itdditmii  of  Ajdirodit^  and  Heriirb-s

'***»rt^  aud  Melkart)  l*>  Ib«*  jiriniilivc  native  mov-

'■Ipof  Zetw  and  tbe  Nymphs,  ••datichten*  of  U-'jib*-

^"^mt  Zenis"  tv^how  cult  attached  to  apHngs  and

•*'*f-«ffli»i». Tbe  ritual  of  these  two  foreigu


dciticH,  08  carried  on  in  tbo  historical  period,  cer-
tniitly  pointa  to  n  very  early  iutrodnctinn  of  their
wontbip,  As  to  the  priinitivo  wonshiii  of  Zens,  ref-
ereiicQ  bitti  already  been  tiiiule  U*  wh»t  Diay.  not
itu]indiably,  bn  deemed  bin  primeval  nanctnary  on
tbe  I'nyx;  c<mreniinj[  n  Hcroiid  early  wat  of  hia
wni'Mliip,  not  far  remMVi>d,  we  are  better  inff>rnM>d,
Hitiitheiiot  of  the  Acropolitt,  ubnve  the  fountain
Callirrhoe  and  the  lH:d  of  tbv  liiNHim,  waH  nhnwii  in
ancient  tinu-M  ui)  iiiniiiiiif(  iu  the  roek  iutu  which,
accunlin^  t*^  llie  h-^eiiil,  the  luRt  VKstigi-H  uf  Pru-
ealion'M  Huod  had  Miiuk.  Hem  DiMiealiuii  wub  kuUI
to  have  "  built  tbe  ancient  aanctiiary  of  Olympian
Zeus,"  whone  worship  rcniaiited  Used  at  this  »pot
tbrou^b  all  the  snlisequent  biBti.iry  of  the  city.
Cleft  rock  and  spring  are  fit  emblems  of  the  wor-
abip  of  Zetis  anil  bis  daughters  at  tbis  spot  by  tbe
primeval  Crauai.

The  gradual  inflnenceH  of  tbo  iuiliix  info  Attica,
both  overland  from  thti  nnrtli  and  ovrrw^a  fntnv
tbe  west,  may  be  tracifl  in  the  g<id»  added  to  tho
Athenian  jiiintbeoii.  Tbe  Ktiiiyan  Artemiii,  thn  Pe-
IftHgic  Henues.  tho  ThracUtu  Area  who  gave  hla
name  to  tLe  ArcopaguH.  Hephaestus  the  handl-
eraftsniati'a  gud,  giiidually  encniached  uimu  the
domain  of  tbe  older  cuU-s;  while  Poseidon  gained
a  tteat  at  Pbalornra,  and  later  iliaputetl,  acconliog
to  thu  legend,  tbo  posHes^ion  of  tbe  land  with
Atlieut^,  the  iutellectiial  development  of  the  old
Oriental  niotber-goddeHS,  who  retAincd  bur  guar-
diaiiahip  of  tbe  olive-tree  even  after  she  bad  re-
xigned  ber  core  of  the  fields  to  Glensininn  Deme-
t^r.

Tlie  in^nrsionH  from  Ibe  north  and  from  the  iea»
u'lieb  gradually  brought  in  l]n*se  uimv  diviutliea,
forced  the  growing  slnte  of  the  (.'riiuari  tu  t4iko  up
a  M?eurer  position  ou  the  rock  of  tbe  Acropolis,
which,  falling  olT  prcctpilouttly  on  ull  sidex  except
the  west,  readily  tent  itself  to  the  fortiUcutious
which  tbe  early  inhabitants  of  Oreeoe  knew  ao


ATHENAE


Utt


ATilBKAE


W1.-11  bow  to  build,  and  %viiirl)  wr  cou  uudrnttaiid
BJucis  the  ruiiia  of  Tiryn^  ami  Myccnne.  uti  wi-ll  iiji
tUe  Acrupolia  it*telf,  Imve  bwn  fnilmiittL-nl  t*i  imri--
ful  i^xcuvnluni  and  stiidy.  Hitl-.  im  (lie  tiip  of  ihi;
rock,  wliioli  wax  li'vitllcd  and  pi-ovidnil  witb  rv-
tttiiiiiig-wullH,  UM  \v«<]|  UB  TvitU  n  siirrunuding  fort)-
6riiti»n,  wati  cKtnblii^hcd  lUo  uocicnt  Polis  (OuXtc,
a  Iltui  long  reliiiiied  an  tUe  oQicinI  dof»if;iiHtion  of
tlio  Acropolis),  the  Hoat  of  llio  wor»Iii|i  of  Zeiis  Po-
1i«na.  Here,  on  tlni  ttortli  nidr,  wbrre  we  now  see
tbe  miuH  of  thti  later  Krntditlifinni,  wore  the  old
«aiictiiary  of  tbti  lot-al  diU!iiion  KiTchtli«tin  and  thu
pnlareof  tbontyal  race  nf  thr  Cevropid  and  Kr«i;h-
tbeid  UiiigH,  Uie^  foiindaHonit  of  nhi^li,  ah  veil  an
of  privule  dtvt^UiiigH  of  (be  aaine  tf{>iH:b,  have  bet;u
tracfd.  Up  to  tbiK  palace  kti  from  tbe  uortb  a
Btuirwiiy,  uuvartbcd  iu  tbo  rucuiit  exuavatiuiiH,  and
lu  tbe  euclosurc  neat  of  tbe  pii-Mut  Ki-ccbtheum
WA-*  lh«  MHTi'd  olivc-lri'i-,  tlic  ^ift  of  Athciii^,  and


tbo  morblo  balntttrudu  iibout  the  Utor  Ionic  tem-
,de.

TliiiM  by  tbe  Hacrod  oUvo  and  llic?  hollow  in  tbe
ruck  wUU  ill*  mystorioun  tridt'iit-iuark — wbrrr  tlio
waves  could  be  beard  when  the  iH>iiib-wiud  bk-w —
IJouri^lied  tbi^  old  prie«t1y  and  kindly  raev,  bi-minod
in  uot  only  by  tbe  wnll  yf  the  polin  proper,  but
hI«o,  as  it  seems,  by  a  lower  wall  envloHiug  tbe
skirU  of  tlie  Acro]H>lis,  Tind  vailed  IVoui  ita  i>in«
>;ate8  Entieapyioti  ('JivptdnvXtw),  the  area  witbtu
wbtrli  and  ht^1()w  the  rnnipiirttt  of  tbe  citadel  was
known  as  tbii  ?olarKi""on  (t6  niXo^»y («<»>).  The
main  ttnlnincr  ti  nn  tlipii,  an  it  box  always  1mm<u
p»irforcfl.  At  tlu-  Wfst  i^iid  of  tbe  t"iljidel,»  fortilinl
wiiy  winding  up  lo%(ardH  Ibf  riKbt,  tbo  ancient
w;in-ior'ii  fxposed  aidv,  Iwlow  the  bastion  of  Atben^
Nik6.

The  loniaus  who  imiuigratcd  ocnutt  tht>  Acfxroti
brorigbt  iu  the  Didiait Ap<dli>,  tlif  j:««d "f  Ionic


■*?'■


;E3*


r. I


RulM  M  (tie  mytDpieuin.


liard  by  it  tbe  tomb  of  Cccrops.  both  under  the  pro-
t«ctiou  of  the  old  local  uyniph  FaudrtreoH  (Coero-
pium  and  Pandroheum).  IJudfr  tbo  iiortbwont
brow  of  the  Aorii|Hdis,  liolow  thti  "  loDg  rockH"
{fuiKpai  iriTfMi),  wutt  ibo  (grotto  of  Pan;  aud  iitill
farther  to  tbe  west,  within  tbe  moduru  bastion  of
Odywens,  n  spring  called  Clepsydra  (KX<^V°t
*'Blie  thai  bidou  htT  water"),  popularly  snppowed
to  pniM  undcrKninnd  to  Pbalemm.  This  epring
was  and  nlill  is  approached  from  above  by  a  »'•
niarkabb!  furtilird  winilin^  atairway  cut  in  ibo
riK'k.  1'ndrr  tin;  miuMi  fiicr  of  tbe  Amipolin  WL-rv
a  cave  and  spring,  with  which  the  wonihip  of  tbe
bealsr  Aflclepius  can)«  to  ho  asflooiatod:  and  in  the
ftontbwMit  spur  of  the  saerul  rock,  wboiice  AeK^'im
was  said  to  haw  Hung  biniHcIf  down.  Atbeni^  was
establinbed  as  gMldess  of  victorj'  {N<Vij),  wiir»bipi»;d
iu  an  noi-iaitb  primitive  idid  with  tbo  Haeritiee
*  a  perfect  cuw,  aa  so  beautifully  reprciwuied  ou


cobuiization  and  civilUatioD.  This  new  and  im-
IMjrtaut  fact^ir  in  tlte  Athenian  Htatv  eMiablisbetl
ilsulf  south  of  the  AeroiKdia  in  what  Thucydides
reganled  nn  old  Atheiiii,  iu  tbe  rexiim  ignited  Cy-
dBtbouaeuDi(Kvda^ii»'aofy),extfndin|;s«>iiie3000in&'
trea  around  the  uoutlteast  dank  of  the  Acropolis  and
up  towards  Lycabettus.  T'lvder  tbe  iMMitb  face  of
tbe  AeTopolift,  cIu4H>  to  tbe  later  Dionysiac  Tbeatro^
the  nonbern  Dionysus  of  Kleutherae  was  ml
lishit]  in  tbe  Lcnaeuin.  neui  the  sanctuary  uf
■'  pnblie"  Aphrodite  ('A^poSc'n/  mivfitjfios).  To  Lb'
MHitli  uf  this  Htwins  to  have  latit  the  old  market
place,  the  nynpti  of  tbe  Ionic  utrrv.  II«-re  was  ea^
tablirthed  the  ftnut  tuwu-ball  —  lhe  Prytaneuui  or
Kasileuni  —by  n  bieh.  under  the  auspicefl  of  Tbouiia,
the  "wrptre-bcahiig''  kiuK>i  adininislenHl  jnafio«-
Tbe  snleuin  court  of  murder,  wi  won  us  the  tjikiug
of  bnniau  Hfc  camo  to  be  recitKni/.eiI  as  a  stale
offence,  was  established  ou tbe  Areopagus,  in  a


I


I


ATtlENAE


163


ATHENAE


r«1«ft  bt'neaLli  wliicli  tb«  Eiiuii'iiicles  f  "  ttic  ktv

l«ii>il*" — lut llif avoiignni of bliNMl, the ICrinyfs,

Twore  berr  called — wi>mMtteiiinly  won»hii»iK>(I. Tlic

Ibotlioii  of Ibe exPCDted, lu wi-ll lui iiiiriHcaUiry

loffering*  Mid  ottscoarings,  wen  thrown  into  tbn

Mfwp  r»c«s»  of  the  Barathram. Tbu8  the  hi^hi'At

[  pricAlbiKM]  was  ussooiuteil  with  the  Acnipolis,  whilf

I  the  kiug  cAtiK  tlnwu  u>  pruaule in hJa  pttlilicul

fiitictioj)  liver  tht'  I«»Lic  nobility  of  C.vt1tithen»vuii).

|Tbi*  ThiVMNui  uublL**,  tru«  to  Ibeir  luiiit  iiistiiK'l.

DDCouraged  chMcr  inlereuunw nilb tb«  w^».  iiixl

DfdAtbeaaeiim  wa^  Iiiiketl  by  »  hi^h-niail  to  ['b:i-

'Tcniin, nhuiic>o tbvy  traOlL-ktxl «l»n»atl ; wherfan

the  (ullncnct.-  of  the  Tyrinii  tnult^n  wftiin  ti>  hiivc

miMie itaelt' felt uixtu thti  L*i-hiiiuiii  city  of  >[(^-

\\t6  by  a way leading up from the Kalutniniiui

Strait.

Id  the  naeantime  Ibo  Renu  uf  the  luler  city  wa«

l^rnpiilly mafiiririK in the iDdiiBtriiit 8ettleni<!ui

iirthwi-At iif  th«  Arrfi[tolis  in Cemniicns,  wiiith

"emu  to  h«vn  kept  paice  in  its  development  witb

Ibe growing opihmitiini of the h>wer cla»^e« lo

•be  enenkiiehnienti*  and  extortions  nf  the  loiiio  no-

Hlity. Afl<T th«  period  of  femient  foUowe<l  by

be  Soloniaii  |pf*i:i)alinn,  at  th<«  openiiijr  of  the  Hixtb

f^iiturv,  caioi-  thii  timt  ^U'mi  |»eri>Nl  of  the  Atlie-

,  state — tho  ibtniocnitic  desiiotittm  of  the  Pitib-

t  eentre  of  ^craTity  of  thn  city  now  KblftfKl  to

[the  point  at  which  it  reoiainud  evL>r  ufterwanht—

|in  the  centre  of  the  settleiuoni  of  the  Ccruuiicaa,

bicb rapiiUy  ontgrew  in  importnueo  the  eOutc

Cydolheiiaeiini. Here yrtie  etttnljlitihiKl  the  altar

F'of  the  Twelve  Gods,  from  which,  as  fnun  tho  ^old-

L  en  uiilfwtone  of  Rome,  digtunc««  wert; itMikoned ;

[and.  bnv,  loo,  was  the  focus  of  Athenian  woXvnpay-

\poniwf. On the Acro[HiliR,  PisiMEriitiiH probably

bniU  tlic  I«mple  of  Athen^  PoliiiK,  "the  old  tetii-

I  )ile,"oii  tb«  flit«  between  the  later  pArtbenon  iind

r  EnctatheuiM.  where  it«  plan  has  lately  Imeii  made

vQt. From  thiii  [icrlod,  loo,  we  dat^'  the  iiiMtitii*

lion  of  the  Kreiit  Fanuthcnut-a  and  the  carryiii);  of

ttn  sacred  vbip  fiunt  the  ouu-t'  CernniienN  iinmnil

vii  itilo  tho  c-itudel. Thuit  did  I'i^istratns  add

DM!  glory  to  the  cult  of  hi^  patnni  goddess. I'pon

0#  i4>rTare  nlK»ve  Cnllirrbni',  ridurtratiw  began  a

!li«u  (emple  to  Olympian  Zens,  but  did  not  carry

"111  Ilia  Btubitiont^  d«'iti(;n. lb*  h1h4>  built  in,  or  led

M  ili|Qednvt  from,  Cullirrhoi*,  wliieh  thun  became

Etine»enmos {'Kfi'taKpavvot,  "the  fuiinlnin with

■ine  piiMw^y.  iiud  lonn  continnMl  In  I»o,  oa  il  ha*l

^■.tbe  main  water  Mipjdy  of  tbe  town. Tlie  en-

fotni^uivtit,  if  not the  introilnclioti,  of  the  r>i»-

&rwH  wurvhip,  which borv  anch  abnndani  fnirt

in  the  Mecee^lmf;  ceutnry.  »eoni^  aUo  to  bare  been  I

to«1^|  of  PH[M*<-)al  care  In  Pieiittratds.

CliHe  ujion  tlw  downf:dl  of  the  Pi.siMratideuu
'Jitttuin  and  the  »lrii};Kli>rt  of  the  Clisthenean  riv
"■rai  ratne  the  IVmiaii  wan*  und  the  sack  of  the
^rojKili*  liy  the  barbariaiia.  The  renntins  of  the
"I'Mil  tliriiie*  of  the  pro-Penjinii  |M.*riud.  with
^vtiotiB  painted  (H-diiueuta  of  auft  HtiHie,  und  llm
•**''iCTiiif  Parian  oiarhle,  executed  by  srlisln  tindiT
'"•  (wlroiiage  of  the  Piwititratidae,  are  among  tbu
**l  prwiouB  tretunrcH  brought  to  light  by  tho
*^fMion  of  the  Aeropolin.

^*  wide-reacliinj;  whcmca  of  naval  empire
■Weil  •pranft  from  tho  fertile  brain  of  Themis-
"*'w,  who  fostered  tho  icrowth  of  the  Athenian
■"ywiJ  flrBt  nJiw  tho  Htrnlegie  iniportance  of  the
PifSeui,  were  destined  never  to  bo  fullv  realiiuid.


Before  the  Persian  warn,  ThumiBtiRdejt  had  (-aiiwrd
tin*  PiraeoH  to  liu  fnlly  fortilied  und  itmde  u  slnnitf
naval  Ntatton,  iuvcHtod  with  ben\y  fortrfwu-wallii
alHMil  Ibe  citadel  of  Mnuichia.  and  with  ita  bar-
boura  (L'antharoti,  the  larKejst,  Mnuichia,  and  Zea}
unrmwcd  and  easily  closed.  After  the  devastation
of  tho  city.liQ  whotie  merit  it  watt  thai  he  "fastened
rlie  city  Co  tbe  Piiaenft,  tbe  latid  to  tbe  ««a.'*  wonld
fain  have  mode  tlie  Piraeus  the  centre  of  the  new
city-developnient — iuprvf;u>ihle  by  hiiid  and  sea.
Bnl  the  maohiniitionn  of  tlie  I'elnpiinni-jiianH  neceK-
nitated  the  bnrried  forlilicatiiui  of  the  old  (tile  willi
an  oflV'<'tire  wall,  and  tliOH  eiiabb'd  the  coniwrva-
tire  party  of  Artxtidtw  and  Cinioii  to  ean'y  ont
their  deNiKti  of  muintainiiiK  the  "  wheol-»ha[M-'d''
city  almat  tho  AiTopoIin,  with  a  M*|taratv  port-
town  ami  naval  Hlatimt  at  the  I^iracnit.

Tho  Tht-nilnloclran  wall,  the  »ueoeaHor  of  oldur
fonihcAtiiniH,  pojiMNl.  ox  well  aa  can  be  made  out,
over  tbe  Piiyx  hill  from  the  Uaratbrnni  lo  the  peak
ortbe31ii(M>uui,iikirted  thelli«ani«,  which  lay  like  a
moat  without  it  to  the  soutb,  cnrved  sontliea^t  of
tho  Aeropotitt,  couiing  orttnud  townrdH  the  uorlli-
f^nt.  no  as  to  avoid  the  fmit  of  LycabcttUH,  and
tinally  passed  eant  and  we^t  ncntit^  the  plain,
taking  in  the  liitle  water-eonrses  I'nnn  L^citbift-
tus,  ami  tinally  l>eudiii)f  abont  to  the  iHiiiit  tVuni
wbirli  wi)  Ktai-Unl.  It  Included  Collytnit  and  l>i^»-
mea,  cat  M*ilii^  in  twain,  formed  an  "inner"  and
an  "onter"  ('orainienK,  and  excluded  CoeM.  Tlio
dimensions  of  tbe  space  tlnm  eiiel«»e<l  were  about
'HXM  motroe  eatit  and  woitt  by  15U0  uotreti  north
and  south,  the  Acixi|H>li!)  lying  Home  &iK>  metres
nearer  the  Mnitli  tttde.  Of  the  Kotoa,  wo  note  two
in  Melitt; — the  Melitid  OaU'  (Mf^i'dcc  trvXai)  ami
the  "Oatoof  the  linmemen"  ('Imradtt  iroXai);  then
the  }C»lo  on  tho  Honlh  leading  to  Phalernm  ('irvi^'ai
iriiXm);  the  Gate  nf  Diocharea  (A<o;i(cifHn'r  irv^oi)
and  the  Piomean  Gate  {^to^ij/s  nCXr))  in  tlio  eaat;
tbe  Aehartiian  Gate  i'AxapviKr)  m'\'}\  in  Ihe  north;
and  tlie  Pipylftii  lAt'iri'Xo^-),  tbe  most  inijHirtant,
Ih-twecn  llii;  inner  .iml  ontrr  C'eraniici,  when!  ron-
aiderable  remains  of  the  aiicii-nt  foundntionN  are
stitl  tn  be  Hoeu.  South  of  tbe  laiit  wa«  the  Piraic
Gate  (llwipairfi  iri\i]\.

To  nnite  the  city  thns  fortified  with  the  Piraeus,
tbe  Long  Walla  wer*-  began, at>ont  U.C.4CU — a  north-
ern, rnn  from  tbe  Hill  nf  tht-  Nymph»  to  Mnuichia,
and  a  aonth«-rn.  coniiccling  the  city  with  Phaln-iiin.
Between  tUese.nnder  Periele^BMecond  Piraie  Wall
wofl  btnit,  parallel  to  the  nortliem,  completing  the
system  and  linking  city  and  {Hirt  by  a  long  double
furtiHeation — Ibe  trxtXt},  or  "  leg«."

Witbont  and  near  the  gates,  particularly  the
Uipylou,  the  dead  were  interred;  aud  public  fn-
uerula  were  Holenniized  over  tho  aabcfi  of  military
herocH  in  the  outer  Ceramicus.  Beautiful  remuiiw
of  the  torirb^  of  the  period  BUecoediiig  the  Peri-
clean,  Imt  bearing  abundant  traces  of  the  Phidian
art.  have  been  fortunately  preserved  to  us  near
the  Dijiylon,  and  form  one  of  the  must  nlriking
ntoitninenlK  of  the  anriunt  city.

To  the  Cimonian  period  soemii  to  belong  tho  im-
podiiig  temple,  the  beat  prnjwrved  of  all  Gn'ek
Iniildioge  of  classical  times,  on  the  hill  ovyrbwik-
ing  the  Ceramicus  fnmi  the  we«t — the  no -called
Theseum,  not  improbably  lo  be  named  the  HeriMi-
lenm.

On  the  Acropolis,  in  i-onDe<-tiou  with  a  uew  and
exteuiiive  plan  of  wulling,  levelling,  and  enlarge*
ment  of  area,  preparatiouM  seem  tn  have  been  mado


ATHENAE


ATHENAK


by  Cimnn  (ttt  an  iTn]>nHin^  ni*w  tPinp)p  on  t be  site
now  <ic4nii>ti-4l  Uy  tlm  HurUivntiti.  Hrro  not  only
wiiJi  tb"  im'giilar  wigu  of  llio  [tntiiiici!  miHi'd  and
reinfou'otl  by  :i  bifiti  wall  uiilsitiu  lb«  l'elua(;taii
rainpnrt  Hiiit[ti)rliii)j  a  d(M'(>  inner  ^^ld^l^.  but  u
bi^vy  fuiinilalioti  wom  built  up  from  Ibe  bvd-ruck
OM  KiipiMirt  for  u  ^reut  tuniple  strnrtai-e,  di'stined
not  to  bt!  cduipb'led  nvcortliuiH;  to  Ibe  origioal  de-
»ign.  On  ibo  north  Hide,  abw,  the  pUt^^nn  of  the
Acnipuli)*  was  built  up  nnd  \rnllefl,  ilrimi»  nf  col-
nuins  and  portions  of  nrcbitmvfs  hciiij^  friM>ly  used
in  tbe  coDMniction  of  tlie  widl,  nml  iirphilectunil
frn;^en(«,  iu8crd)«d  niurblelabb'tN,  mid  ttven  stnt-
nes  t^niployed  as  );rn<linx  nuit*irial.  The  buHtion
of  Nik<^  n-jie  also  newly  fortitied.  Thniipb  the  nnt-
nn-  of  Ciniou's  wbobi  nudiTtakinn  wiw  diM-nratiri"
mthrr  tbnii  HtratPf;ic,  it  uiiglit  yet  he  truly  Naid
(but  ibtr  Aprr^)liM  wm  waIImI  by  tbn  Ptdajtgiann
uitd  Ciuioti.

P^Hl-Uw,  having  at  Imn  dispofial  the  troaftnri'fl  <>f
the  Atlio  L«agui>,  wbii-h  wt-r*'  trauslerrcil  in  Ath-
ens (B.c.  454)  and  nppareutiv  kept  in  the  Opi«tho-
donHW — a«tlie  "ancient"  ri-dntrntidtau  temple  of
thu  roliii9.  coiuroonly  CAlK-d  front  its  lenj^th  tbn
Heeatompedou  ('K«uiTo^rr«&>»'l,  and  appareiilly  rv-
biiilt,  at  leant,  in  part,  nn  its  ori<;inHl  hiIp,  mas
henr«>forth  tinned — rearwl  upon  Ciumn's  ffHiitdn-
tion  Ibv  ukw  antl  nin^'iiiliveni  r>orio  Pnrtheuuii
(dwiioated  B.C.  4:if).  The  iirvbitt'c^ture  vent*  in-
ttUAt«!d  lo  tctinuji  nnd  tbo  «riilptiirc  to  PbidiiUi,
whose  tbiywiIephaiKitie  ^latue  of  Ibe  Partbeuoa
Adorn<Kl  llw!  room  to  whirb  alone  tlie  tenii  Par-
thenon ("the  vir>;iuV  cliainber")  ^tnelly  applied.
The  Propylnen  ( q.  v.  J.  n  nittKi*ive  ornaineuial  eu-
trancf-  t<i  the  Aorop«»liK,  in  wliioh  the  Mnrie  and
Ionic  Rtylew  weriv  happily  blended,  row  under  the
gublancdof  the  brilliautarobiloct  Mnetticles;  and.


although  never  romph't'fl  ncrordiiiff  tr>  the  airlii-
leern  deHij;!!,  it  reinanied  anutng  the  (greatest  won-
detH  >>f  lh«  eily.

Of  the  hoNt  of  HtAtnea  of  all  kinds  which  fiutt
thruu^Hl  the  AcropoliN,  partieularly  dnrinj;  the
tifth  century — uinonf;  Ibeui  the  great  bmnzcitlatuo
of  Atheni^  as  chani|noii  {vpt'ifutj^ory,  the  linuize  fit*-
ure  of  tho  Woodi^i  HorM-,  lh»  heifer  of  )lyri>ii,  and
manyolherainentiuuedby anctttnt  writers — we  can
take  but  pouing  Dotioe.  Their  itninber  wtui  cod-
slAtitly  increaaing  down  to  the  times  of  the  Ko-
luau  Knipire.

•Some  time  in  the  period  covered  by  the  firM
Athenian  empire  the  Atat^rly  little  Ionic  temple
of  Atbeui5  Nik^  eeeuitt  to  have  be<.'ii  reared  upon
the  (UHilhvveAt  ba«liuu  of  the  Acropolis.  an«l  t<ur-
niunded  lui  ibn-e  sidet^  nrith  the  exi|iii)»il«  marble
l>aluKtrade,  fniKiuents  of  which  ue  *itil]  prv«erved
on  the  Aenipotin.

Tito  new  Krechtbcuin,  withitafamonsiHtreh  of  the
MaideD8orCnryarid>(-)i,waaiueonrM<ofconstrucltua
nt  the  close  nf  the  tifih  century. 8ee  p.  112.

The  afii^Tsi  of  the  inner  Cerasiicns,  bonndeil  nu
the  flonth  by  the  nbmpt  brow  of  the  Ar«opafpi».
under  which  hUmA  tlip  ttlatnes  of  the  E|M)nyini^
the  naiuninkr-henira  of  the  l«n  Clihtbencan  Iriben,
AeeniH  to  bnve  Iw^en  divided  by  n  line  of  Htaun
lleiiti:u.>  into  n  iiortborn  aod  a  soutbvru  half.
Alwrnt  the  Koutbern  half  atood  rariontt  jiublic
buiUliufnt,  the  Council -ball  {Bovktvriipu>f\  the
Koyul  Hum  ( Srou  Ba<ri>ctar  I.  the  Paiute^l  8to&
IStou  nmKtXtjK  the  Melroon,  the  temple  of  A|u>Uo
Patroris,  08  well  a«  the  altar  of  the  Twelve  i-ioda
iiuil  the  stJttufiit  of  the  deiuwratie  heroes  Hamio-
itiuM  and  AriHto<rilon.  In  ita  wider  est*>iit  the
a|;ora  of  tlVramicii8  18  bounded  on  the  woot  by
the  bill  of  the  8u-cjLlled  Tbesiuim,  and  on  the  eaut


I
I

I


I


Vlnr  of  thC'  AIImdIu  PratflM*- Ilt<at«nMoiL (Rebor.)

the  gai*"  «f  AiWn*'  ArrlirKi'tic  Itn  chinf  i-x-
i»lint;  miiuuDieiit  in  tiiv  later  Hlirii  uf  Attains,  kiiiK
of  Perfeninoft.  Ttie  lueolinii  uf  tlioMi  piiblii:  wnrkH
zkcctU  to  b^  rooi|tlt'iiimiti'il  Ity  n  wotil  in  rrcani  to
private  Hinir.tareti.  Tlio  iUvt'1Iinj;-hnnM>H  i>f  llin
city  (InriD^  tho  pi^riod  of  Adiciiiuu  Kn'nttio«H  ataoU
in  strikiuj*  ruiitra^t  with  tliu  public  Hlniuliirtw.
Built  nlnn^  nan^w,  irr«ii*ii1ar,  auit  ill-kept  Htrecl«,
Kbi*y  fCATu  but  littU*  iti>lirutioii  of  the  •Micinl  \tn*\-


lion  nr  menlth  of
their  nccnpanbt.
lu  tliitt  n^Hpect
tlieobl  vily  sefjtu
to  have  Uwn  iii-
fttfiur  to  tlia  Pi-
rociiti,  which  WAA
better  Initl  our.
tuiil  e  ti  u  t  a  i  II  c  d
more  naiiiptuotu
prtvntn  bdihIingK.
At  all  ttiiM'A,  tinw-
oviT,  in  both
towim.  honften  ami
huitHD-fnrntiurn
■wrrc,  for  Ihii  miwt
part,  cxln-mr-ly
Hiniplo,  aixl  thu
huKtling  opcn-uir
life  of  the  male
V J ll  Bl  1  A ^ popiilHlion was

-V ^ B  ■!  1  W V not  couducivti  to

private luxury.
See  I>5Mt'S.

TlioLoiigWnlls,

lii'dfrnyrd at iho

rlofw  nf  the  Pi'lo-

iHiiiiiCAJAii War,

u#Ti)roH>rcm«ilal

the  birth  of  tho

iiowAthi'iiiiiiifiu-

pirUfiindiTTCbioh,

and dnrinj; the

fiiiltHcxpiriit  period of  tho FlrlleiiiHlia suc<M"i8or8

uf  AlfXiimliT,  tbp  »iat*« rrroiv«l further  ndom-

iiR'iit. ii.vriirguH  fiiiupU'tt-'d  Ihf  t;ri<at  slutir  tli»a-

tiv  witliiii rim  Lr«iiaiium,  oviTliipplii};  llir  iinrieiit

OrvlH^Ktrn  or  '*dHiicing-ring,*'  tTac»»H  of  whifli  am

still iliHTcrnibk'. TliPHtrei>tofthoTripoil((,  windlux

about  the  f»ouih«ati|i'ni  fuotof  the  AcrupuIU,  is  fttill

marked  by  Iho  dcliciito  i-horaj'ic  moiiutiR'nt  (q.  v.)

of  LvHicrnt^'M  <»-«'.  :i:J^li. Tho  Kton  of  Kuaiciiefl  lies


■J|trlll>.


1'krli rV>»ll III


I  ^EsFDlUK  tBouL


46  tbe  went  of  tbo  great  tleatre.  Th(>  eanterii  side
of  ihft  mnrkut  uf  Cemmicos  is  ninrkoil  )>y  tbvgr(?ai
8l«iuf  Imzaarof  AtUluh,  prcvionsly  noticed.  Biiild-
iug  wax  trurried  od  by  Aatiocbns  Epipbanen  till  his
death  (in  B.C.  164)  npon  the  she  uf  tbe  olil  ciHuctiiai')'
of  Kens  on  the  IIissiir,  wlit^n'  IL-ulrian  finully  mareil
bis  roloesal  0>nnlIiian  t<>miiln,  tbe  few  ri^muning
«oIituiiiH  of  whicli  [tbn  (rrt'Xoi)  Are  one  of  tbe  uio«t
pitiniineiit  Ath<*niati  laiiiltiinvk.<v.  Near  it,  townrtlH
tbe  Arr<>{Milii4,  Hmlrian  Mt'l  tbe  gntc,  ntiil  tttantliik^;.
wbich  ftbniilil  M>|)ar»t<-,  iicc<ir<liug  to  Uh  iiiscnir-
tion,  "llw  AthriiH  (if  TIhwiih"  fnim  "  tbt'  Alla^ns
fif  IfAilrinii."  An  octugoiiibl  tt>uer  nitli  \vuti:r-
«look  wllbln  and  wnAtbfrr-vanR  on  tho  suinmit,
and  br»rin^  on  il«  scvern!  face*  relief*  represent-
ing tlio  winds  (Horologtiiiri  or  "Tower  of  tin"
Winds"),  Moa  crccrcx)  by  Andronicna  CyrrbestCK  |
(q.  V.)  soutbeiut  of  tbe  ngorfl,  wbern  it  still  8taui1».
Tbe  ftimoiiB  Herotles  Attioni^  linili,  in  honour  of  biti  |
deml  wife  Rrgilln,  tbe  grent  Odenni,  iidjoinitin;  tbn  |
StoQ  of  KnaieiieN,  iindur  tbo  Miiitb  western  nlope  of
tbe  Acropolin.  Tbeae  ure  miuiug  the  nioHt  pniiu-
Incutt  moimmotiifl  of  tbe  Utor  Owrk  ami  the  nriu^eo-  j
Roiuau  period  tbut  stUI  attract  ib«  TiaUor  to  tbe
auL'lont  Htte.

The  ftub.wi]iient  history  of  the  roontnnents  is  one
of  rapine,  defacetneut,  and  destmetioti.  The  traces
«f  tbe  Valerian  nail,  fomiin;;  a  Rivat  loop  north  '
■of  the  Acropolis,  and  tbe  intdiipval  au«I  nioilom
rortilliTatiuiis,  that  bavc  bivn  remuveil  ft-imi  the
appn>arh  Ut  the  Arro^Hili.s,  are  mi'laaeholy  wit-
Utiwu-A  to  barbarian  invimion,  inoilia^val  slavery,
and  tbe  struK^li-  of  rcawakouiug  tilxtrty.  Tbo
archivoA  of  the  Mtory  of  tbe  material  growtb  and
devctupuiciit  of  tbu  Athens  that  bos  infincnced
tb€  world  bad  bet-u  laid  up  for  a  curious  poster-
ity buiK  befoi-e  tbex*  ntructures  aroM.

IliauofinAPHV.  ^ —  Curtiiw.  SUuttgrMchichte  ron
JtfirM  ^llcrtln,  I'iiili  in  niont  valuable  work.  I'Oti-
tniniiig  u  full  eidlection  of  ancient  aiithoritlt^H,
citatiouH  of  niodcro  i>iiblicatioim,  exrotlent  draw-
inpt.  plani*,  and  niiiim);  art.  "Atben"  in  llanmei-
»ter'«  IffukiHiiJrr  df«  klagtiiAt'SeH  Altertkutns;  "Atben"
in  Hiideker's  iirirchtnlaud  (Eiij(.  trans,  left)).  Other
Morks  nru  citetl  by  Ciirtiua. So«  Hrlla.s.

Atheoaea  ('Affitfata).  An  ancient  fealiTat  oni;-
Minlly  belt!  in  honour  of  Arlifiii^  at  Atbens,  ntid
of  an Agrarian  churaoter. bee  Cbaiakla  ;  Pan-

ATIIRNAKA.

Athenaeum  {'.\6i)raintf).  Tbe  first  public  edu-
cational institution  at  Rome,  built  by  llailiiau
nlKiut  A.D.  135.  The  biiiUliiiK  vras  in  tlie  form  of
a  theatre,  and  brilliunlly  fiti^Hl  up.  There  rbet-
orif-ians  and  jMietH  held  ibeir  recilatitnix,  and  sal-
nritnl  pnifewMiPt  gave  their  leelnr*»  in  the  varionit
braueheii  of  gvuurat  liberal  educatiun — phihwophy
nnd  rhet4>ric,  as  vrotl  an  gninmiar  and  jnriKpni-
dcnce.  This  continued  until  at  leaat  the  fiAh
century  a.  d.

Atbenaeas  (Wdiii^int).  (t)  An  engineer,  and
canl«'nipi>niry  of  Arcbiniedea.  who  tlouri>ibed  about
B.C. '.JlO.  He  was  the  author  of  a  work,  tttill  pre-
aerveil,  on  eugine-s  of  war  *  tl*pi  Mijxanjtttrrwv).

(■•2)  Tbe  Greek  wbolar,  a  native  of  Naucxalid  tu
Egypt.  Ho  was  cdocated  at  Alexaudria,  where  he
lived  from  a.p.  I7ft-i3rt.  After  this  be  lived  at
Rome, and  there  wrote  bin  Aciirvocrot^tarai^ir"  Ban-
<|uet  of  the  Leaniwl"),  in  lifir*n  books.  Of  Ibiwe
the  lirst,  second,  and  part  of  the  third  are  only
preserved in a  aolevtiou niadu  tu tbo  eleventh


eentnry ;  tbe  rest  survive  in  a  tolerably  complete
state.  Tbe  work  shows  astoui»bing  leamiut:.  and  ,
contains  a  number  of  uoticca  of  ancient  life  which
would  otbem^t6«  have  been  lost  The  aniliur  <
gives  ua  coUections  and  extracts  from  more  than  '
LVH)  wiirks  (now  niniitly  loHt).  :iud  hy  more  than'
700  writer<t.  HIm  Imok  in  tbniwii  into  tbe  foi-m  of  a
oourerHatiiin  bi^ld  in  the  year  a.d.  il^  at  a  dinner'
given  by  Larenitins,  a  neb  and  acnnnplisbed  Ro-
man, and  a  de»ccnd»nt  of  tb<i  great  aiittqnarian
Varnt.  Among  the  giirjtta  are  the  most  learned'
men  of  the  time,  iiidiuling  Galen  tbo  physician  i
and  I'Ipian  the  jniiNt.  The  e^iuvprKaliim  ringes
over  nnniberless  »ubji;ct«  connected  wf  lb  doniextio
and  sooial  life,  manners  and  eiiBloui».  trade,  art,
and  science.  Among  tbe  ma<it  valuable  things  iu  |
tbe  tiook  ar«  ttiQ  nntncroufi  juiAMiges  from  priwo-'
writ'Ts  ami  poets,  especially  from  the  masters  of  i
the  Middle  Comedy,  fioml  editions  are  tbi>«e  of
Dindurf  (lWI7t;  and  Meineke,  4  vols.  (l(*5d-67|,
Tben>  tM  » literal  English  Ininfilation  iu  the  Bohn'
ClaNiical  Library,  3  vobi.  (1B&4).  j

AthenagGras  ( '.\dr]vny6pat).  A  Father  of  thAi
Cbiireli,  a  native  nf  Athmie,  nnd  in  pbiloeopby  m
Platnni-il,  He  wrote  a  treatise  on  the  doctrine  of
the  rtfsnrrection  of  the  lK>dy  and  a  defence  of  tbo
Chriiitians,  blfn<1ing  the  (enching!;  of  tbe  Ureek|
phibwtopbers  with  tbo-e  of  the  Church.  He  flour*
isbed  in  the  secoud  half  of  the  itceimd  century.

Athenfi  i'A^vf])  or  Pallas  Athend.  A  Gre«k  |
goddess,  ideniihed  vitb  the  Roman  Minerva.  Ac<i
eonling  lo  the  story  mot-t  genendly  current,  she  wsil

I  the  daogbter  of  Keua,  who  had  owallowed  bis  6r»ti

!  wife,  Metis  (Counsel),  the  dungbler  of  Oreanus,  in<
the  fcAr  that  she  would  bring  forth  a  Non  stmngcrl
than  bimnolf.  nepbaefitns(or,acL-or(ltog  to  anollier
Version,  Prometlleu^)  clave  open  tbe  bfad  uf  Zrun
with  an  axe,  on  which  Atben<<  sprang  forth  in  fiid;

I  armour,  tbe  go^ldess  uf  utomnl  virginity.  Rut  her
ancient  epiiliet  TptToytutm  ibom  of  Trltou,  or  tbe

'  roaring  th^od)  points  ti>  water — that  is,  to  Oceamig
— aatbe  source  of  her  being. Ocoauus  x\a»,  aef«ir^l-

I  lug  to  Homer,  the  origin  of  all  things  and  of  all

I  deitiea.  Tbe  worship  of  AtbeutS  aud  tbe  *tor}'  of
her  birth  were  aecor<lingly  ciuinected  with  inii»]r
brooks  and  lake/>  iu  various  regions — e«i|>e<-ially  ia
Boeotia,  Tbessalia,  and  Libya — to  which  the  uamo
Triton  waa  attached.

From  tbe  firsi,  Athent^  took  a  Ter;-  promineoi
place  in  the  Givek  {topular  ndigion.  The  llomeiie
bymus  represent  ber  as  tbe  favourite  of  her  father,

.  who  refuses  her  nothing.  When  aolemn  oatha
wore  to  be  taken,  thtty  joined  her  name  with  tboM
of  Zeus  and  Apollo,  in  a  way  whieb  sbows  Ibat
tbe  thi^ee  deities  repreaent  the  emiMKlimcnt  of  all

'  iliviue  authority.  \Yitb  the  excepiinn  of  the  twd
g)Hls  just  mentioneil,  there  ia  no  other  deity  wbiMd
original  cbaractc'r  as  a  power  of  ualnru  nudeiweu^
S4I  remarkable  ,'^n  ethical  developnient.  Both  eunJ
eeptiouH  of  Alben^,  the  natural  and  tbe  ethicai|
yvt'Tv  intimatflycoiinecletl  in  tbe  religion  uf  Attiew
who.iu  eapital>  Athens,  waa  named  aft^-r  Athena
and  was  the  most  imi>orlant  at^at  of  ber  worsbipl
.\tben6  was  originally  the  maiden  daughter  m
the  god  of  heaven:  the  clear  transparunt  a-tberj
>vbo»e  purity  is  always  breaking  forth  in  niiveile4
brilliancy  through  the  clonds  that  surround  it.  A«|
a  deity  of  Ibe  sky,  »|ie,  with  Zens,  ia  the  mistreM
of  thunder  and  lightning,  Like  Zens,  abe  carries'
tbe  aegis  (q.  v,)  with  tlie  Gorgon's  bea<l,  tbo


A'fUESS


I&7


ATHENE


I


•


I


;|U)d  tto  t4irror8.  In  tiiiui)-  slKl*
',  She  b)  reprvftontftl  m  liiirlitig  tb>>
itliiuii)«r-l>ult.  But  hixo  alHit  m'IkIh  ilowti  fnitu  sky
to  (ATtli  light  1111*1  wiinutb  aiitl  fruitful  Uuw,  aud
vilb  theut  i>nii>]K:rity  to  ticlJ«  oimI  jtlouta.  A
^tiuto  •cricA  uf  I'uhles  utitl  UHUf*i-«i,  belut)t;ii>K  f^
jHxiuUy  to  tb^  Atbeuiuu  teli^iou.  reprt'^eut  ber  aa
*he  h«l)M'r  iiud  prottclor  of  agriculture.  Tbe  two
«lvtti(M  ErvchtheUH  iiud  KricbthnniuK,  boiionr«l  in
Silica  tut  powen  of  tb«  fruitful  wiil,  uri'  ber  fnAtcr-
«-lnlilrvu,  Sba  wm  vonhipjied  nilli  F.rtM:btbeiiti
intbr  tctnplf  iiauied  afler  biui  Ibt*  Er«(-bttii*ittu,th(;
suirtuary  uti  tbe  Athfriiau  Acnipuliu.  Tbu
of  bor  t-'iirlttwl  prityitt.t**H'9,  till:  dHi]gUt«rt)  of
Crerops — Agbiiiriui,  Piiitdmsinf.  and  Hcrw^^— myuify
Itii*  bri^bl  air.  tbu  dew,  mid  t'uv  rain,  and  art-  mere
ItentoiiiflcationB  of  their  qualitliM,  of  such  value  to
the  Atbfiiian  territory.

Tb«  Bowing  bcmou wa»  opened  in  Attirn  by

tbr««HCiwl  servicM  of  ploiigliinf;. Of  tbeM,  two

Dcrre  ID  boDOtir  of  Athene  a»  inventive  of  the

{ilougb,  irliile  tbe  third  took  pbicc  in  honour  nf

l)enwt«r. It vfiut  Athene,  uIho,  who  bad  taii^lit

nii'ii  tiiiw  |4i  attach  «t&t-u  to  the  yoke:  above  all,

nbe  h»d  given  thuni  Ibo  olivt;-ir<'e,  tbu  treasure  of

AttJck Tbi»  tree  she  had  tunde  to  grow  ont  of

tbe  riKk  of  the  citadel,  when  diaputitig  the  pitwM>.t-

•ton  of  tL«  liuid  with  Fotteidon. Sevi;ral  fr»tiv'Bl»,

brnvieg  Tvti'reuce  to  these  fiiuctiouit  of  the  g'^ldesit,

w*»  celebrated in  Attica — the  Callynt«riw  and

Plyntrrii*,  tbe  Soirophoria,  the  Arrhephorin  or  Ilcr-

M|>l>oha,and  tbe  O&chophoria,  which  were  common

loAtliFi)^  with  DioiiymiH. (See  Diunymia  ) Even

Ihi  chief  feiut,  the  PantttheiiavH,  waa  oiiginully  a

buTttt  fcntirsii. It  let  algtiilu'ant  that  tbe  preM>ii-

tMim  of  tbe  WirXnc  or  uiautle,  the  chief  ofTerin;;  at

t^  edilimtiuii,  took  place  in  tbi!  sowing  apu^ou.

Biitkft«rward(>  more  wa«  luadu  uf  the  iul«lleetuiU

SifUbtvtiiWed  by  tbe  gtHldesH.

AtlM^if  was  \ery  generally  regarded  as  the  god-
■I'M  of  war — an  idea  wbieb  in  ancient  times  wa«
Ilia  prrvuiliig;  one.  It  wat<  eonuet-ttsl  with  Ibe
urt  ihftt,  like  her  fnther,  Zeus,  »he  was  onppused
to  be  iUilf}  t4i  «enil  Ktomin  and  hiul  ivt^ather.  In
U>»  cajuicity  Hbi*  appeare  in  Hlory  mi  the  true
•oWiii  of  all  bold  warriors,  «ucb  ajt  PeraeuM,  B*>l-
•"f^l'lioii,  LiHoii,  HeraclHs,  DiomedeH,  and  OilydneuB.
Bat  lier  Courage  in  a  wim;  coiirugc,  not  u  blind
l^iieu  like  that  of  Arex;  and  tibe  in  ulwavH
'*T'e«ent(»d,  ■ceordtugly.  a»  getting  the  belter
■^  kisL  111  thin  L'oiineetiou  Hhe  was  honotin-d  in
Athcuiiiu  worsliip  mainly  bh  n  ]iroteetor  nnU  de-
'*t)iW ;  ihuH  ilo  tjike  a  striking  example),  »be  whs
'Wiliip]»Ml  oil  the  cita<tel  of  Atbens  under  tbe
•iwip  of  UfMifiuxof,  "champion,''  *' protector."
""  ^  wiw  nlto  a  goildeHfl  of  victory.  Ae  tbe
innmiUkattnn  of  victorj-  (Athend  Nik^)  she  had
*  ■•oood  and  especial  t^tmplo  on  the  Athenian
*'''^liiL  tHaa  AcROPuu*.  1  .\iul  tbe  jrreat
I***'  in  the  trniplen  nipre«iMit«M]  her,  like  Zenn,
•itbXilttf  in  her  ont*itreU;hed  hand.  The  ucciii»a-
"J'"' of  peace,  however,  formed  the  main  Hplnre
«  Iter  activity.  Lib©  all  tlie  other  deities  who
**"■  wtpposcd  to  did|>cnHO  the  blessings  of  nature,
"l^btheprotpctretw  of  growing  cbildiini :  and,  as
^  lpNtdei4s  of  tbe  clear  Bky  and  of  piite  air,  ediu
''|**"*'it  brjllh  and  keepti  off  slckt]vt«».  I-^irlber,
^^  »  iwitli  ZoU8)  the  |»utruneu  of  the  Athenian
TPWffciu  or  unions  of  kiiist'olk.  At  Atheu*  and
''PWa  tiie  prutccu  tbe  popular  and  deliberaCivo
^mtiluit; iu many  plocue,  aud especially at


AtbeuM,  the  whole  Stale  Im  under  ber  care  (Alhen6
PoUoB.  Poliuchua).  Elsewhere  she  presides  over
the  largt^T  niiiomt  of  kindred  peoples.  Tbe  festival
of  Atbeu6  Itonia  at  Conmeu  wna  a  eoufederiito
festival  of  all  Bouotio.  Under  tbe  title  oftlayajmit
she  waa  worahipped  as  the  goddeas  of  the  Avh»«nn
League.

Speaking  broadly,  Albeu^  represeuta  human  wit
an<l  clevernesH.  and  presides  nvtr  tbe  whoh^  moral
liud  intelloctnal  side  of  hnman  life.  From  her  Mrs
dorivml  all  the  prodactioOH  of  witMloni  and  under-
atau4iug,  every  ari  aud  acicnce,  wbotber  of  war  ur
of  peace. A  number  of  diacovcries,  of  the  ntoa&


AifetBA (TttUu  MaMaiB.)

varioQs  kinds,  is  ascribed  to  her.  It  has  been  al-
ready mentioned  tbut  ohe  wiia  crMlited  n'itb  the
iuTeutiun  of  tbe  plough  and  the  yoke.  She  was
often  associated  with  Poeeidon  ns  the  iiiventreMS
of  horse-tainiug  and  Hhip-bnilditig.  In  the  Al  beniau
story  Hbe  t<iacbe-s  EHehtboiiiiiH  to  fjiMtuji  hi^i  horses
to  tbe  chariot.  In  the  (.'itrinthian  story  sbt;  (eaebea
Uellvro|>hon  to  siiUlni'  Pegasus.  At  Linduit  In
Kbotieo  she  was  wor»bippeil  as  the  godduia  wbu
hclpe*!  Daiiails  to  huild  the  flntt  lifty-oarud  ship.
In  the  fable  of  the  Argtmnuts  it  is  she  who  in-
strncts  the  bniider*  of  the  (imt  ship,  tbe  Argo.
Even in  Homer  all  tbe  productions  of  women's


ATHENODOkt'S


rs»


ATHLKTAF.


art,  as  of  ftpiiiiitii^  iintl
weaviiJ^.ureoliuraclvi--
ized  as  "  works  of  Alli-
«n^."  Many  »  IluXXit-
Jiiay,  orstatin'  of  Fnlliis,
bfirv  u  HpiiKlU*  aiiit  ti'uf
t:iiriii  its  tuft  liiiiiil.  As
tliL*  hiIkTIvma  ntnl  [irotcc-
trvxM  uf  itrt)4  and  linndi-
wurb.  ftli"-'  was  wor»liip-
]H:d  at  the  Chnlkuiaf
vt  l'Va8t  of  SuiithB,
uiiiler  tbe  title  of  "E^
•yiimj.  CiidiT  tliis  DAiue,
tuo,  atie  is  lueutiuued
ill  apverul  itisL-ri|ittou9
fttiintl  1)11  tliH  Arnipiilifl.
Hi>r  gniiiiiH  RuvHiK  the
titfli]  itl'iuiiHic  auddaiLC-
iii}{.  ahe  in  iiivviitur
vf  the  tliitti  urid  till)
trmii|ier.  lu  wul)  tin  uf
tbt  Pvrrbie  war-iluucK,
ill  wUicli  itbo  woM  Miid
tu  lia Vtf  b«Mj  the  earliest
performrr,  nt  tbe  cete-
bnitinu  "f  tbe  victory
of  the  G<mU  over  the
Oiniit44.

It  WHS  Phidias  [q.  r.)
wbr>  lluiilly  ilxe<i  the
typicHl  ro{in»a»:itntiou
«f  Atheiii^  in  wurkH  of
an.  Aiuitng  bii^  riumer-
DtiH  BtuttU'H  of  Iter,  tljrBB
— tbi!  tuoHt  uultibrittM
—  were  Met  up  on  the
Acri>|»DltA  of  AtbeiiH.
TUeav  nciw:  (1)  Tho
coltxwfti  »t4it)ie  of  Atli-
«liiSPurthetiiM.HToiig]it
lu  ivory  Hint  j;(ilrl.  thirty
feut  in  hei|£lit  (with  the
jttfdfNlal),  mid  Mtuudiii^
ill  the  Hart httuuii.  (8t-t>
Pahtukno.v.)  Tbegod-
driM  was  iv\tn>»vnlet\
witiirtiix  A  Iuii{!;  n>tK!
fHlliiigddWii  tut  be  feet,

uid  nil  her  hreust  was  thn  ncgi«  with  ttip  Dorgiiii'<i
head.  Alieluiet  vra»  oti  liei-  hi'iid;  iu  one  bund  oliu
bore  aVictury.aix  feet  ill  lu'igbl,  ill  theotlieralniiee,
which  leaned  against  n  nliield  iidornrd  with  uceii^H
from  the  l>altlett  uf  tbe  Aiuiuoiih  nitli  tbe  Oiiiuti:).
(*2)Tbe  hronie  statue  uf  Atlieii^  l'roiiiacbo».erect«'d
from  llie  prticei-dn  of  the  spoils  taken  at  Marntbuii,
and  Atniidiiii;  Ix^twi^tiii  the  Pntpylava  and  thi*  Kt-
ecbthciini.  The  propurtiuiiH  of  tliiH  Mtatue  wvn  m>
.  glgttDtic  thikt  th<>  ulcaniiii^  |ti>tiit  of  the  lance  mid
the  crPKl  of  tlip  bvlnii?t  were  risiblu  to  senitien  on
Bppmui'htti^  the  Ptntenia  frfini  Siminra.  Vi)  The
Li-inniiin  Pallas,  no  named  bccunse  it  had  been
detlicated  l>y  lli«  Athenian  eolonists  in  Lemnos.
Tlie  attractions  of  tbiH  Mntiie  ivon  for  it  tbe  name
of  "the  Beautiful."  Like  ibe  wecond.  it  wha  of
bronze;  Iwing  a  repretienfatian  of  Athen^  nit  tlm
f;i>dik-!w  of  peace,  it  wna  without  a  belmet.  See
MiNKKVA.

AtheDodoms  <'A&rjp6b»pot)-  (1)  A  Rhorlian
HM]I|>ti>r  iiMKK-iatM  villi  A]ee«and«r  and  PolydnrtiH
LU  prodiioiog  tbe  fainoiM  j^np  of  l>rioctK>n  (i).  v.).


C^)  Of  TnntnM,  a  Stoic  ]diilosoplier,  Rnrnaiued  C
lio,  who  vvHHlteoper  of  the  libriiry  ai  Pergaiuiu
uflerwanlei  removed  to  Honiis  whero  be  lived
M.  Ciito.  at  wliciBe  boiiM*  he  died.  t3)  Of  Tati
Stoic  pbibxHipher,  ftuniauietl  Cananitett,  fromi
in  Cilicia.  the  birthplacu  of  bi»  father.  He  tj
nt  Apolluiiijv  in  Epirnu,  where  the  yonng  Oct
(Hiil>Ne<Iiiently  Ibe  euiperor  An^tiHtiiH)  wa«  ui
bindiMMpieM.  He  Heeoin]>iini>'d  rlie  latter  tn  I
niid  lierame  oiio  ot  his  inlintnte  frieiida.  O
ix-eaxion  he  ii4  ttahl  to  have  ndvii^ed  the  em
aiwiiyx  U>  repeat  the  letters  of  the  Ureek  ali»!
before  giving  way  to  any  inipnlse  of  auger.

Atbeais.  The  modern  Adige  or  Ettwli;  a
riMng  in  tin-  ItliaHiaii  Aljw.  It  receives  llie  A
(Ki»arh),  flowh  tlirtniKh  iipiK-r  Italy  pabt  V<
and  fnllH  into  llm  Adriatic  through  many  tuoi

Atliletaa  iadXTjTai.  d0Xijr^p§t).  A  term  in  s
neM  applied  to  IhoM)  who  coutended  for  |
{^ff\a)  in  the  ^nnies  which  required  aini
Kktll,  and  ngilily  nf  body,  in  contraitialinoti


ATHLETAE


Ib'J


ATHLETAE


'bo  eogagHl in e<iiic)itrlau and  udsIcbI
;  thfvn^b  in  a  gunvml  sonbc  it  is  found  ex-
inWd  «veu  to  tlifvif.

'lb«'  CMiilrAtii  of  ilir>  Athlota«  were  iii ruuuuiK,

tv-ntliii};, bositiif;,  (lie  |KMilath)<iii,  nml th<*  {taii-

liiitn. DetHila  uf  llieMu  will  bti  fiHitiO  iu ihv.

IHmitv  IUliL-|f«  LL'CTA;  PANCItATIUM;  Pbntatii-

:ix;  PcGtt^TL'it ;  Stadu'u.

lu  «*rty  tituL-n  iu  Orvi-co,  athletic  games  were

VMoccflmoiiAllyiit  fectivuls  iu  lioooiiruftbe  aoiia

%m\  lwrDea,lint  cftporinlly  ut  the  fitiienila  uf  dibtiri-

gniHlitd  toen  ;  thun  in  ttic  fluid  [xsiii.t  itauiea  art?

l>ii^  nt  tlir  fuiienil  of  Patroo1ii». Uiit  the  war-

ii»r>,  nn  A  rote,  tin  not  appear  to  liuvc  trained  m-

1<fcUU)'  for  tbi.*  i:nnin«;  since,  ma  [mrt  of  llii-ir  gen-

(nl  eiliicatiun,  tlicy  tuid  Ihwu  inHtnictvd  in  gyiu-

tuntu'^ In  ihtH  di!|iiinnH'nt,  Orvciun  le^vud  Tolil

how  Hemclm,  Ppleua.  aiiJ  Tb**ai>UH  hiid  tic«u  i-ol-

tlirati-d,  oa  vtarv  niMi  CaMtur  and  Pollux ; but  iu

lU  Honicric  Age  there  were  fenr  wiio  made  nth-

li-ucs  A>  bui:li  tbctr  especial  bualues*,  tliuufib  wc

uiii*T  not  for^rt  the  pMnoKe  (Od.  viit.  104)  where

iua  rvpruBclicB  Otlyiiaeuii  aa  ni>l  beiuK  "  likv

ilele.'' Gnmt*^ were becoming fiiirly fre-

id  tbe  flp«wi!il  akill  rtHjuired  iu  the  cod-

gmduuily  dttm.indtnf;  increaAed  applico'

'llhe  riifft^runt  bntni'heti  ol'  ntbtetien.

In  the  next-  ai;t<,  albk'ticm  h<>4-anie  tlie  nutiouul

Hxil^oic  f>|wrt,  anil  never  t'eii>u<<l  to  Uh  ho  till  the

■iifHt  timMi  of  the  uiicirut  wt>rld :  fur,  in  tbe  lirvt

ii^tUitcr,  tbcy  MiliMtied  llie  urlintiu  iunlinct  of  the

<.'ii-ik\  u^ Ibey  di:Yi-loi>L-(l ihr humun fntuie in

vtfvii^ib  and  beauty, lint  aa  it  vraa  the  national

like borsn- racing in Koglaud,  urery  dc-

!ut  tendfl  to  lieconie  mure  and  tuont  pro-

iftUted. The great  fealivftls colleeted t«-

KAIct  llie  grt;ute«t  eoucourM*»  of  the  lueiuheni  of

■  lo  nice;  and  thf  emnlatiou  to  tmccced

uimieutte  gJitberiDKS  of  their  couutry-

i:i'.:>.  uu(i  the  extravagaub  hououM  and  renartU

l^lnwed  by  the  vitiee  ou  their  citizenB  when  vic-

i<  n»in,  n^nderei) vti:tory  in  the  {;»in«H  the  most

'''Arinl  di»tiuction  a  Greek  Cntihl  acijuin*;  ho  tluit

'"^tiy  nimiiii  -viOH  reaortod  to  in  order  to  attain  the

»migili  iiinl  <kill  Dociwaary  for  sucecM.

Eiinpitlt'i  \Aalol.  Trag.  1)  &|R-akH  with  bitter
'i^iI^iL(il  of  the  atbletefi,  who,  1(0  Kflyh,  aro  (he
CTT'iip-ii  1^'  lilt!  countleatt  evili)  of  Hdlatt,  who  ore
■Uict  to  ibeir  belly,  a  defreuerale  lot,  uaeleM  lu
*u,  ouabU-  to  bear  old  age  or  misfortune  — for
thfii  traiiitug  Is  not  an  ennobling  ti-ninlng.

Thn  Btliletie  eunlextH,  jnttt  lid  are  the  *'  weightM"
^  lb«  tiug  in  thi«  cuuutry,  nvre  divided  into
'■''Kl»t"(«»C-0n)  and  "  beuvy  "  (^^o)  or  "  violent^
UliuM).  See  AriKtot.  Pol.  V.  4,  7  foil,;  Oalen.  vi.
**K.!  Philodtr.  (;yin«.  8.
^cinuuing  in  each  nf  tbe  two  main  cla.v*eH  be-
I  *■**  •evertr  and  w^veiwr  as  lime  went  on;  for
■  "»t»  anil  more  striking  perform iiuces  were  vx-
H  I"YIM.  Wh  bear  of  a  rule  that  the  eoni|>etitorfi
H  ''^b^pin  had  to  dwear  that  they  had  diligently
H  «>"<H«I  tru  month*  U*  the  reuogrii7A'd  Hpocial
r  ''*|Wn(;iiiathletipB(PmiHan.  v.24,9).  TbiawoM  to
I  '■I'llaiii  that  common  itynteni  of  alhletic  training
I  "fi'tb  jitrvailod  in  all  Hellenie  wivittling-schooln.
I  '*'  ■'rdliiary  gjranaAliu  niintter  who  tauintht  tbe
'^tluliudily  exeruises  as  a  branub  of  general  ed-
'"'bnii  iraa  called  muiarpiftrjr,  and  bo  who  tniiinil
*"'•  trim  were  iulvoding  to  eoinpete  in  the  gatne«>
*'^  llw  yi-fwairnit :  but  tlilK  di-ntinetion  di»a{^
I*****!  10  later  timea. The  yipiwnn^f  waa  io  cou-


«tutit  aupervision  of  his  pnpilit,  follovod  tbem  to
the  games  (Puutmii.  v.  ti,  ri|,  where  be  made  all  nec'
t^tMjary  preparation!!  for  their  contest,  ami  during
the  struggle  ittooil  by  vrilb  wordu  of  i;n<:oiirugf
nient  or  reproach  iPbilostr.  f>.vni».  tfO).  Jiiat  an  a
physician,  a  tntiner  rerptin^l  implieit  obedience  in
ihoiM)  for  wiioin  lie  pnm-ribed  iKpietet.  Hnvhir.  tW),
KtilHinliuate  1(1  hint  wax  tbe  aXritmjt,  who  origi-
nally, 08  bin  name  iudicatcft,  looked  to  the  anoint-
ing of  the  body  ;  but  ofteu,  eapcciiilly  in  later
times,  took  niucb  more  upon  himself,  heeiuuo  con*
fuseil  with  tbe  TratAtrrpi'^r.  and  used  to  preacribe
the  cour&c  of  diet  to  be  eaten,  and  evi'u  bow  it
was  to  be  eaten.  Tbe  diet  of  athletes  is  said  to
have  Iwen  fiTsli  cheese,  dried  llgn,  and  wheat ;  but
Dromons  uf  Stymphalnt^,  or,  according  to  others,  u
trainer  called  Pylbagoraa,  intrudnced  a  nu*iil  diet.
However,  it  in  very  unlikely  that  tbe  athletiw  wer«
DVtr  trained  on  anything  but  meat.  Pork  was  the
principal  meat  UKed,  tboiigb  we  llud  also  iM-ef  and
goal'H  llcsh.  l-'ihh  was  considered  bad.  They  pnib-
ably  dnuik  water  and  not  wine  after  their  exer-
ciM*s.  us  Lhe  latter  waa  daugon>UK:  and  thry  hiul
to  abHtiun  from  all  cukes.  The  bj-eud  they  ate  was
of  a  parttculur  kind,  slightly  leuveue^i  and  hard-
ly bukeil  at  all.  The  uhuiiI  cioirse  was  to  eat
breml  for  Ibe  ninming  meal  and  meat  for  the
evening.  After  the  mnrntng  nit-ul  their  exeroit^e«
continued  till  the  evening,  interru|>lvd  only  ity  a
few  intervals  (Galon,  vi.  Itit^-ltifl).  Tbiiw.^  who  sub-
mitted to  the  severest  training  (jiituos  TfHitfifit  duay-
Katotjiayia,  adr]<i»tyia)  had  to  eut  euormous  maKM-s
iif  nn'al  after  the  day'ii  exereiMi:  two  niiune  (:='i|
lbs.)  v>an  a  very  aiuall  amount  for  an  nlltlete,  who
generally  slept  it  oil'  late  into  the  next  day  (Galen.
i.  is,  K.),  though  wo  sometimes  hear  of  athletes
promoting  digestion  by  walking  (Pliii.  //.  .V.  xi.
$  *2iSi).  Many  athletes  did  really  eat  vast  qnan-
tities  of  food;  so  mitch,  iu  fact,  that  iheir  appclito
became  proverbial  f  Arlstoph.  I'ax,  34).

Tbe  exercises  which  athlete*  went  ihruitgh  wero
the  onlinary  oneM  of  the  pHhu^At^a  aud  those  r^
quired  fur  the  games ;  ihoiigh  M-e  sometimes  find
athletes  going  through  exercises  which  weru  not
di>parlmetits  of  coni]»elition,  mert^ly  in  order  to
increase  Ibcir  strength,  such  as  pulling  heavy
weights,  bending  bat's  of  inuj,  nreuchiiig  bnek
tbu  necks  of  bulls,  knircking  suspended  hugs  of
naud  backwards  and  forwards  by  blows  of  their
lists  {KwpvKotifiKla),  and  also  working  with  ii  mat*
lock.  Tbe  uthletes  ]iraL'tlst<d,  as  a  rule,  each  for
a  separate  event.  Heiif^  the  oiie-siiledne?M  even
of  their  physical  tminiitg,  and  the  fact  that  those
who  trained  for  tluit  event  which  compriHe<l  tho
un)Ht  varied  exertions  (such  as  the  pcntalblon),
were  justly  considered  to  have  the  besNpropor-
tioned  frames,  flut  simietimcs  the  athletes  al-
Eeniptctl  nnire  tbaik  one;  for  it  was  cousideriTd  a
great  honour  to  be  victorious  at  Olympia  lu  Imlh
wrestling  and  in  tbe  pancratium  on  the  same  day.
There  were  ouly  w-vcn  snch  victors  besides  ibeir
mythic  pTe<leeessor,  lleraclee.  A  certain  Politco
ronqnered  on  the  same  day  in  tbe  three  diflVn*nt
kinils  of  races — tho  stadinii,  the  diaiilw,  aud  the
dolicboH  (PausHii.  vi.  13.  3).

Vietms  iu  lliu  prineipal  gamea  wore  called  I«po*
i-iKnt;  tboM*  iu  tbe  separate  games,  uXufiiriavtKat,
etc.;  aud  those  who  went  snccosaful  iu  all  fonr
gamea  were  the  ntptnfiovlKai.  In  Itoman  times,
however,  we  timl  this  bitter  term  nppliwi  to  cele-
brated aililet«a  "wbo  bud  been  victura  iu  n  great


ntiinlMT  of  ^iimrit,  even  ttinii^h  iliry  wi-re  not  ttie
four  gri'dt  nticH.  Another  Hlriiiigc  titli>  of  ilintiu-
fjiliKtittt  utlllrlfiiiit  Kiinil'  «■(»  Trrt(irtflofo»'iJC7r.  wliirli
wiu  Hiriotly  npiilinl  tollinMMvliiicunqucreil  iu  Inflli
vrrfHtliiiK  uiiil  llx'  itaiKirutiuii).

In  riii'lv  tiuivK,  tlio  ntlil«i«8  TMed  t^o  praetise  in
llio  K\»<ii'<*iiii»-  wlitTi'  tUo  youuj{  men  wbo  hnci
niailv  wiiiH-  pnigrcrt*  iu  gyinniwtics,  and  were  ml-
viincvil  from  t!n>  |utltit>RtrN,  wont  tlmMij»Ii  their  (tr-
tliit»r>  iinpDtfiNwiunal  excn^iwa.  In  Itoniau  timrs
»••  &m\  the  nthtouu)  frcqiientini;  tlin  |iiilae«1riin,
titt:-  i!>ninni4iii.  rynfi  (cownil  {ilwrs  fur  dm  in  liwl
wontliiTl,  niMJ  thi<  Hlailiii.  Thrri'  witrc  alsn  exer-
oiHitiu  )tlnr<>8  in  (h(<  ^reat  Roman  hnlncAt^  tt).  v.).

(ll'i^rnn)l,v  lht<  nihlctei)  niwd  to  ctiutond  vritb  a
Itfnilo  arontid  Iht'ir  hiiuH  [fiia(»fia,  ntpi^mtia,  or
«iii)|>ly  (itftn  ),  Mcciinluig  It)  Till'  viiJiioui  or  the
8pnrtaiih;  Imt  vfrr  !io<m  it  Itccamc  ibf  cnsloni  to
cmitond  iinkril.  It  wna  fin^fewtioiial  for  Roman
uihh'ifsi  lo  wcAr  thfir  linir  IihI  np  in  a  knot
rallei)  cinati.  Thp  ()rw>k  U6  w**!]  as  the  Roman
iithhtU'H  iiM.<«)  Hontt'Dinrft  ii>  i>hnvp  off  Ihcir  liair
In  IhMt  lMR#>nrp  which  ArmtophaiKM  coIIimI  "  ilie
bitw)  rni|i'*  |<r<a<^iW.  rhnm.  Kl'-').  Kurtber,  they
ucrnAionallr  wi>n>  n  cap  (iftthrieulmm);  and  a*  their
wondtTful  «tyli'  of  Imixiuc  cont-ii-lfd  in  ftwiuRihi:
l\>nnd  tlicir  arms  and  not  f^lriLin^f  out  titraight
flvni  ihi'  ^huuldrr,  they  ubcU  to  wvar  gtmnU  for
thr  van  \atxtftvT%6»s  or  aw^rtitt).  For  Ibe  battvrml
car*  of  aDri(>ut  boxen,  wv  PUt.  J^rotug.  343  B :
Mart,  vii  .*«.  o.

lie  -n-ho  took  to  the  pmf«w8ion  of  an  athl^l*^
»pMntn  abftndoiit*<l  it  Wfoir  his  tbirly-tiflh  year,
vrhich  was  ronvidrn-'d  tlH^  af:v>  at  which  be  vra«  in
thr  prmte  of  nmnhofMl ;  but  if  bv  lt*tt  never  won
a  victorj-  liy  that  time  he  penerally  gavp  «p  tb«
IniKtnrNs.  A  wirccwful  athlete  coritiuuecl  to  eou-
^trnd  iu  the gamea  till  hiit  Httvngth  failed  tPlul.

■r.  UmL  4);  mhI,  a*  might  tte  r\tiecl<<d.  iu  many

tasA,  aa  bo  advaueetl  iu  yearn,  Weanie  a  trainer
ofywiB|«rBwn:  o.  g.  Iccu$iPaa«an.  vi.  Id,  .'<v.

To  be  an  Olympic  victor,  whl  C»r«it>,  wa»
e»teeine«I  by  the  Greeks  a  greater  plory  than  a
tiiuttl|>h  at  KuUte,  And  iudeml.  the  virioriouT*
Qreek  athlete  n<M  to  h*v*  a  kiml  of  triumphal
mtry  into  tb*  |o«n  bix  virl^^ry  had  ennobled.
d«mHind«d  by  a  larce  crowd,  wmelitoes  with  a
i;Tma«l  pn*ei>iwiitu  <tf  cbartt>t*.  rlad  in  %  purpte
taantle  like  a  km^.  he  drove  into  th«  city
lhRm|tl)  «  bpNieb  maile  in  the  wall  for  bis  char-
M  lo  pMa  tbiwii|[b — ft  ^mbe)  tbat  ctt»r«t  tibich
fatmMMtA  sttrb  eiliiMw  bad  «o  xtmA  of  wall*  iPlnt.
"^f  it.  hi.  Tban  fUllowrO  lb*  baiw|u*i,  doriii;
mbieb  the  vietor  b«*n)  hi»  pnOvM  mat  by  a  Ijrri-
r*l  eboniv  and  ia  tba  nrm  «(  the  crfsaisat  yaato
oC  tbe  day.  i^tn1esla  vbt«b  invoUetl  tb«  kvawn
«f  Hwb  a  uiuMpbal  <«Vi7  «^<«v  lerbnteally  ealM
^■—i  M«*Jk«*nM.  nb^b  nt  early  limea  n^ir  tbe
^umt  icrNki  ftativala  otily ;  tmi  in  lm|iriial  Ktwia
M*  |irtvil«|E*  was  exfewdetl  tti  otbi^r  gaatea  fliia.
JQriML  X.  11*.  IW  SiUM  HMMtal  rrwanK  lm\
««•»  fi^-va.  Kvan  a*  mlacvtl  by  AmImi,  tbe  wnaejr
wvranl  vbirb  Iba  Alb>a>aai  natv  lb«  \  i<^*  iu  tW
0M«^  RMM*  «aa  aM  *wiBbiai.  aa4  IMla  «ba
Tfo«n«  M  aay  «r  lb*  Mbar  ipwaii;  wwna «<■»»■  b*
fw««<nE4  wtaiaaaac-  in  ibe  IVt*iM««a  a^A  tbe
kiianar  aT  tlw  ArM  aeal  la  tt-e  aHnablW*  aa*!

jOaxttM  «««*  oAmi  iiuafci  b(»  b«M  4u  bk»  aa4«vr
>ii4  al  <H!raip«a U  (bri.  Hatv  t<«««  *#  i«r
^- .1  mr  <fl^  V «»  Itt  tbat  lb*  TWlat  ai  kba


Olympic  gtBMt  «>||oyed  a  blessed  life  Ifiiot  futxi
pttmis).  \

Yt^t  among  the  many  judgnaents  paaacd  by  ihi
aucieiiiH  un  ih<-  uthlrtm  wc  caD  find  scarcely  aii|
That  are  favourable.  Allusion  has  been  ninde  ta
The  fltriciurt's  of  Xennplianiw  and  Earipide*.  whj
nttitrk  tbeni  for  their  nii.BleSRDc««  to  t)ie  iitat^
niii  for  their  want  of  onltivation.  Even  from  tli^
ydiyBifol  point  of  view  their  tralnini*  appeam^
to  thoughtful  men  of  science  utterly  bul.  Plal«
aeee  in  the  athletes  a  habit  of  body  which  U
sleepy  and  very  subject  to  diseaM>.  »liich  is  to^
highly  and  extnivagantly  trained,  and  which  ucdl
fitN  tlient  for  social  or  p<i1itical  dntti>s.  They  avji
withimt  inforiuation,  cultivation,  or  grace  c4
manner;  hard  and  brutal,  all  violence  and  licrt^
ufw  (ib.  410,  411).  Aristollt)  declares  that  t^
habit  of  iKMly  of  atlileten  is  uot  suitable  fi>r  tlm|
vigorous  phy»ic»l  condition  which  n  citizen  bhoL  aj
have,  nor  for  lieallti  and  the  procreation  of  child
It  Ia  tof»oae-$(de«l,atid  the  dltK>ipIlne  which  Ac
open  it  in  too  Revere.  Plntnreh  ttiKapprovea
the  itr^if  iraXanrrtKif  aud  of  athletic  Imiiting
erally.

VTe  must  now  hastily  review  tbe  rise  of  athl
game«  at  Rome.  Exhibitions  of  gladiators,  nta-fc
athlcle*,  were  tbe  national  ^porl.  Cicero  Ray»
M.  Marius  of  the  athletic  C4iiite«t«  exhibited
Pntiipeiiis  in  B.C.  £>&.  "Why  should  I  think  you
gr^tiMl  not  having  seen  the  nthletesa,  wbea
have  despised  tbe  gladiatorv?"  A  certnin  kind  4l
athletics  had  indeed  been  indigenous  in  Italy  (rmrm
the  earliest  times  (Lfv.  i.  35),  aud  wo  hear  of  cr^
te«(t«  in  wrestluig  aud  boxing  at  the  Roman  gnma?^
but  the  whole  practice  was  utterly  unKyntcma  w
(cf.  Suet.  Auf  4.'>).  and  so  quite  nnlikr  tlie  fUl  'm
rate  manner  in  whicb  it  was  cultivated  iu  Urrr^fl
It  was  from  Greece  thai  tbe  wieDtittc  prartirr  M
athletint  rame.  In  fur.  Isti  U.  Fulvias  N'uliil»«
gave  the  Ant  exhibition  of  prafeasiouul  Gn^^
athletc!<  at  Rome  (Liv.  xxxix.  22X  We  dn  u  ^
(MiwE-ver,  bear  of  a  idmilar  exhibition  agiin  K^
Snlla'*  timr.  b»it  there  were  a  few  others  dnr*  a|
tbe laat  ceotui?  ot  the  BepobUc. Varto  C4>


ran


ATHLOTHETAE


161


ATLANl'ES


platQS,  iudeed,  of  there  beiug  a  gymnasium  at
every  villa  (£.  £,  U.  1,  1);  but  this  was  probably
for  tnediciually  prescribed  exercises  (iatraliptiee),
uut  regular  athletics.  But  it  was  not  till  the  Ac-
tiau  games  were  established  by  Augustus,  and
other  periodic  games  (Dio  Cass.  li.  1)  which  com-
prised gymnastic  contests  in  their  programme,
tliat  athletics  got  a  steady  footing  among  the
Jlomans.  FVom  that  time  these  certamiua  Graeca,
OH  they  were  called  (Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  21),  became
more  and  more  popular.  Nero  in  a.d.  60  built  a
gymnasium  and  instituted  a  new  set  of  games
called  Neronia,  of  which  athletics  formed  a  part,
as  they  did  also  of  the  important  Agon  Capitoli-
nns  established  by  Domitiau  in  a.d.  86,  who  fur-
ther built  a  magnificent  stadium  for  athletics  iu
tlie  Campus  Martins,  large  enough  to  hold  30,000
siwctators  (Suet.  Dom.  4,  5;  Friedlauder,  p.  466).
After  this,  athletics  gradually  attained  increased
prominence  in  the  Roman  games,  till  finally,  in
ilie  fifth  century,  they  supplanted  the  gladiatorial
shows.

It  is  highly  noticeable,  however,  that  the  names
of  the  athletes  which  are  preserved  in  inscriptions
are  almost  all  Greek ;  not  more  than  four  or  five
being  Roman  (Friedlander,  p.  472).  Everything
connected  with  athletics,  technical  terms  aud  all,
are  Greek  (cf.  Jur.  iii.  68).  The  reasou  is  that  for  a
long  time  it. was  considered  quite  nnbecoming  the
Roman  dignity  to  he  an  athlete.  The  nakedness
of  tbe  Greeks  offended  the  Roman  sense  of  pro-
priety (Cic.  Tutc.  iv.  33,  70).  The  Romans  saw
tbe  uselessness  for  war  of  the  athletic  training,
for  they  themselves  had  been,  as  Folybius  says
{i.  6,  6),  "  the  true  athletes  in  the  feats  of  war,
trained  in  contests  with  tbe  Samnites  and  Gauls."
Like  all  other  classes  in  the  community  under  the
Roman  Empire,  the  athletes  crystallized  into  socie-
ties or  guilds  (trvvoSoi).  They  were  well  organ-
ized, had  presidents  called  Xystarchi,  and  used  to
make  provincial  tours  and  give  exhibitions  (Fried-
lander,  p.  475).  The  chief  of  these  societies  in  the
second  century  was  that  of  the  Herculanei  (cf.
C.  /.  G.  5906  foil.),  who  had  their  own  special  gym-
nasium, with  its  council -chamber  {caria,  Orelli,
2f>88),  its  records,  its  temple,  and  its  president,
who  bore  tbe  title  of  apxttptvs,  and  who  was  also
overseer  of  the  imperial  baths.

On  athletics  generally,  the  chief  ancient  work
is  Philostratus's  VvfitiaaTiKos  (see  Kayser's  Teubner
text.  ii.  261-293).  Modern  writers  are  Kranse,
(iymnagtik  und  Agonisiik  der  Bdlenen,  passim;  Her-
mA'Qn-^\\i.TaueT,Pricatalterthumer  der  Griechen,  $$  36,
'M',  Becker-Goll,  Chariklea,  ii.  213  foil. ;  Grasberg-
er,  Ertiekutig  und  Untrn-ickt  im  klatiaiachen  Altevthum,
voU.  i.,  iii.,  passim ;  Gulil  aud  Koner,  Das  ]^bm  der
(iriechen  tind  RiiiHer,  52;  and  especially  Friedlander,
Drn-atellunqen  atit  der  SHtenge$chichte  Rotnn,  ii.  459-
491;  M.Planck,  in  Pauly'sAviA/rncydb/Mi^ie;  Bus-
wmaker  and  Saglio,  iu  IHcL  dea  Antiijuitia ;  and
Itliimuer,  in  Baiimeister's  Uenkmdler  des  klassiscken
AUrrthum^  8.  V.  AtkUUie. See  also  the  article  Gyh-

NAMIIM.

AthlotbJltav  {affKo6iTai). See  Agoxothetae.

AtboB  ('Ada>r).  The  mountainous  peninsula  also
called  Acri:,  which  projects  from  Chalcidic<;  in
Macedonia,  At  its  extremity  it  rises  to  tbe  height
of  6:149  feet ;  the  voyage  round  it  was  so  dre-tded  by
mariners  that  Xerxes  had  a  canal  cut  through  the
isthmus  which  connects  the  peninsula  with  the
6


mainland  to  afford  a  passage  to  his  fleet.  The
isthmus  is  about  1^  mile  across,  and  there  are
distinct  traces  of  tbe  canal  to  be  seen  at  tbe  pres-
ent day.  The  iteuiusula  contained  several  flourish-
ing cities  iu  antiquity,  and  is  now  studded  with
numerous  mouasteries,  cloisters,  and  chapels.  In
these  monasteries  some  valuable  MSS.  of  ancient
authors  have  been  discovered.  See  Riley,  Athoa,
or  the  Mountain  of  the  Monka  (London,  1887).

Atla.  The  mother  of  Augnstns  Caesar.  See
Augustus.

Atla  Lez. See  Lex.

AtlUa  Lttx. See  Lex  ;  Tutor.

AtUloB  FortunatianuB.  A  Latin  grammarian
of  the  fourth  century  a.d.,  who  wrote  n  manual
of  prosody  for  schools  (Omiiis  Summa  Aletrorum),
See  H.  Keil,  Grammattci  Lattni,  vi.  pp.  245-250.

AtUiiu  ReBfilaa. See  Rbgulus.

AtUla. The  mother  of  tbe  poet  Lncan. See

LUCANUS.

Atimia  (arifila).  The  forfeitnre,in  Greece,  of  a
man's  civil  rights.  It  was  either  total  or  partial.  A
man  was  totally  deprived  of  his  rights — both  for
himself  and  for  his  descendants — when  he  was  con*
victed  of  murder,  theft,  false  witness,  partiality  as
arbiter,  violence  offered  to  a  magistrate,  and  so
forth.  This  highest  degree  of  on^t'a  excluded  the
person  affected  by  it  from  tbe  Agora,  and  from  all
public  assemblies;  from  the  public  sacrifices,  and
from  the  law  courts;  or  rendered  him  liable  to  im-
mediate imprisonment  if  he  was  found  in  any  of
these  places.  It  was  either  temporary  or  per-
petual, aud  either  accompanied  or  not  with  con-
fiscation of  property.  Partial  drtfjiia  involved  only
the  forfeiture  of  some  few  rights,  as,  for  instauoe,
the  right  of  plea'ling  in  court.  Public  debtors
were  suspended  from  their  civic  functions  till  they
discharged  their  debt  to  the  State.  People  who
had  once  become  altogether  artftot  were  very  sel-
dom restored  to  their  lost  privileges.  Tbe  con-
verse term  to  arifiia  was  fjrtri/iia.  See  Leiyveld,
De  Infamia  ex  lure  Attivo  (1835) ;  Meier  and  Scbo-
mann,  Att.  Process,  p.  563;  Wachsmuth,  Hellen.
AUerth.  (2d  ed.),  ii.  195  foil.;  and  the  article  In-
famia.

Atlnla  Lex. See  Lex.

Atlantes  (*ArAai7fs).  An  African  people  living
near  Mt.  Atlas  who  daily  cnrsed  the  sun  at  its  ris-
ing and  setting  for  its  heat. (Herod,  iv.  184).

Atlantea  (avXavrrr)  and  Telamonea  (Tf\afiwvts}.
Terras  used  in  architecture,  the  former  by  the
Greeks,  tbe  latter  by  tbe  Roniaus,  to  desig.
nate  those  male
figures  which
nre  sometimes
fancifully  used,
like  the  female
caryatides,  in
placeofcolunius.
Both  woi-ds  are
derived  from
rX^vat,  and  the
former  evident-
ly refers  to  the
fable  of  A  1 1  n  8,
who  supported
the  vault  of
heaven ;  the  hit-
ter perhaps to


AUontea


(From  Temple  at  AgrlgeDtum;
Prof.  Cockerrll)


ATLANTICUM  MARE


162


ATBOPATENE


the  Btreogth  of  the  Telamontan  Aiai, A  represen-
tation of  such  figures  is  given  in  the  preceding
illnstratioD,  from  the  temple  of  Zens  Olympius  at
Agrigentura. 8ee  Caryatides,
Atlantlcum  Mare. See  Ocranus.

Atlantitdea  ( 'ATXavriSet ).  See  Hesperides  ;
Pleiades.

Atlantic See  Plato  ;  Tihaeus.

Atlas  ("ArXaf).  "  Bearer  "  or  "  Endnrer."  The
BOnof  tbeXitau  lapetusand  ClymeD^  (or,  according
to  another  account,  Asia),  brother  of  Menoetius,
Prometheus,  and  Epimetheua.  In  Homer  ( Od.  i.  58)
he  is  called  "  the  tbiuker  of  mischief,"  who  knows
the  depths  of  the  whole  sea,  and  has  under  his  care
the  pillars  which  hold  heaven  and  earth  asunder.
In  Hesiod  he  stands  at  the  western  end  of  the
earth,  near  where  the  Hesperides  dwell,  holding
the  broad  heaveu  on  his  head  and  unwearied
hands.  To  this  condition  he  is  forced  by  Zeus,
according  to  a  later  version,  as  a  punishment  for
the  part  which  he  took  in  the  battle  with  the
Titans.  By  the  ocean  nymph  Pleion6  be  is  father
of  the  Pleiades,  and  by  Aethra  of  the  Hyades.  In
Homer,  the  nymph  Calypso  ia  also  his  daughter,
dwelling  oo  the  isl-
and Ogygia,  the  na-
vel of  the  sea.  La-
ter authors  make
him  the  father  of
the  Hesperides,  by
Hesperis.  It  is  to
him  that  Amphitrit^
flies  when  pursued
by  Poseidon.  As
their  knowledge  of
the  West  extended,
the  Greeks  trans-
ferred the  abode  of
Atlas  to  the  African
mountain  of  the
same  name.  Local
stories  of  a  moun-
tain which  support-
ed the  heaven
would, no  doubt, en-'
courage  the  identi-
fication. In  later
times,  Atlas  was
represented  as  a
wealthy  king,  and
owuer  of  the  garden
of  the  Hesperides.  Perseus,  with  the  head  of  Me-
dusa, turned  him  into  a  rocky  mountain  for  his
in  hospitality.  In  works  of  art  he  is  represented
as  carrj'ing  the  heaven,  or  (after  the  earth  was
discovered  to  be  spherical)  the  terrestrial  globe.

Atlaa  Mona.  The  general  name  of  the  great
mountain  range  which  covers  the  surface  of  uorth-
ern  Africa  between  the  Mediterranean  and  the
Great  Di'sert  (Sahara)  on  the  north  and  south,  and
the  Atlantic  and  the  Lesser  Syrtis  on  the  west
and  east.

Atoaaa  ('Aroo-o-o).  The  daughter  of  Cyrus,
and  wife  successively  of  her  brother  Canibyses,  of
Snicr»lis  the  Magian,  and  of  Darius  Hystasiws,  by
whom  she  became  the  mother  of  Xerxes.

Atramentom  (fiJXav).  A  term  applicable  to
any  black  liquid,  but  specifically  used  of  three
ooloriug  substances. (1)  Atramfntam  tutoHum —


AUU.


[From  tbe  Parnese  collection
now  at  Naples.)


blacking  for  leather.  (2)  Atramentum  tetAoritm  or
pictorium — a  black  pigment  used  by  painters.  (3)
Atramentum  Ubrarium  (jttXav  ypa^tKov) — ink,  for
which  see  Writing  and  Writing  Materials.

Atraz  {"AT/Hif).  (1)  A  town  in  Felasgiotis  in
Thessaly,  inhabited  by  tbe  Perrhaebi,  so  called
from  tbe  mythical  Atrax,  sou  of  Penens  and  Burs,
and  father  of  Caeueus  and  Hippodamia.  Heuce
Caeneus  is  called  Atracides,  and  Hippodamia,  Atra-
cis.  (2)  A  river  of  Aetolia  falling  into  the  Ionian
Sea.

Atreblttea.  A  people  in  Gallia  Belgica,  in  the
modern  Artois,  which  is  a  corroption  of  their
name.  Their  capital  was  Ncmetocenna  or  Neine*
tacum,  subsequently  Atrebati,  now  Aitos.  Pnrt
of  them  crossed  over  to  Britain,  where  they  dwelt
in  the  upper  valley  of  the  Thames,  in  what  is  now
Oxfordshire  and  Berkshire.

Atretui  ('Arpcur).  The  son  of  Felops  and  Hippo-
damia, grandson  of  Tautalns,  and  brother  of  Thyn-
tes  and  Nicipp^.  He  was  first  married  toCleo!a,by
whom  he  became  the  father  of  Plisthenes ;  then  to
Aei*op^,the  widow  ofhissottPli8thenes,who  was  the
mother  of  Agamemnon,  MenetaUs,  and  Anaxibia,
either  by  Plisthenes  or  by  Atreus;  and  lastly  to
Pelopia,  the  daughter  of  his  brother  Thyeste&.
The  awful  fate  of  the  house  of  Pelops  affonied
materials  to  the  tragic  poets  of  Greece.  In  con-
sequence of  the  murder  of  their  half-brother  Chry-
sippns,  Atreus  and  Thyestes  were  obliged  totak*'
to  flight.  They  were  hospitably  received  at  My-
cenae ;  and,  after  the  death  of  Enrystbeus,  Atreus
became  king  of  Mycenae.  Tbyestes  seduced  Aer-
op€,  the  wife  of  Atreus,  and  was  in  cousequence
banished  by  his  brother.  From  his  place  of  oxilo
he  sent  Plisthenes,  the  son  of  Atreus,  whom  he  ha<l
brought  up  as  bis  own  child,  with  oixlers  to  iilay
Atroits;  but  Plisthenes  fell  by  the  hands  of  Atrein*.
who  did  not  know  that  be  was  his  own  sou.  In
order  to  take  revenge,  Atreus,  pretending  to  be
reconciled  to  Thyestes,  recalled  him  to  Mycenae,
killed  his  two  sons,  and  placed  their  flesh  before
their  father  at  a  banquet,  who  unwittingly  partook
of  the  dreadful  meal,  Thyestes  fled  with  horror,
and  tbe  gods  cursed  Atreus  and  his  honse.  The
kingdom  of  Atreus  was  now  visited  by  famine,
and  the  oracle  advised  Atreus  to  call  back  Tliv-
estes.  Atfeust.who  weut  out  in  search  of  him,
came  to  King  Thesprotus,  where  he  married  his
third  wife,  Felopia,  the  daughter  of  Thyestes,  whom
Atreus  believed  to  be  a  daughter  of  Thesprotns.
Pelopia  was  at  the  time  with  child  by  her  omi
father.  This  child,  Aegisthus,  afterwards  slew
Atreus,  because  the  latter  had  commauded  biin  to
slay  his  own  father,  Thyestes.  The  oldest  accoimts
of  the  Pelopidae  do  not  mention  tbe  horrible  sto-
ries that  are  generally  connected  with  them.  See
Aegisthcs;  Agamemnon;  Pelopidae.

Atildes  (^ATpfidijs).  A  son  of  Atrens.  A  name
usually  applied  to  Agamemnon  and  his  brother
Mcuelafls. '

Atriensis.  A  Koman  house-slave  belonging  to
the  familia  urbana,  and  having  especial  charge  of
the  ati-ium. See  Plant.  Jein.  ii.  2  and  4.

Atiluzn. See.DoMUS.

Atropaten6  CArpoTTanjvTj),  or  Media  Atropa-
tia,  the  northwestern  part  of  Media,  adjacent  to
Armenia,  named  after  Atropates,  a  native  of  the
country,  who,  having  been  made  its  govoruor  by


ATROPOS


168


ATTICCa


Alexander,  foimded  there  a  kingdom,  which  long
remained  independent.

Atrdpoa  (*ATpojrof,  from  a  priv.  and  rpiirw).
"The  Inflexible."  The  Fate  who  cuts  the  thread
of  life  that  is  span  by  Clotho,  and  measnred  oflF  by
Lachesis. See  Moerae  ;  Parcae.

Atta,  T.  QuiNCTius  or  QuiNXicrus.  A  Roman
dramatic  poet,  author  of  togatae  (see  Cohoedia),
ttIio  died  b'c.  77,  and  was  a  contemporary  of
Afranius.  He  was  celebrated  for  his  power  of
drawing  character,  especially  in  conversational
8ceue8  in  which  women  were  introduced.  Of  his
comediea  only  twelve  titles  remain,  with  a  few
iiiHiguificant  fragments,  which  will  be  fonnd  in
Ribbeck,  Scaenicae  Bomanorum  Poena  Fragmenta.

AttalXa  {'hrraXfia).  (V)  A  city  of  Lydia,  for-
merly called  Agrolra.  (d)  A  city  on  the  coast  of
Pamphylia,  founded  by  Attains  II.  Philadelpbns,
and  aabdned  by  the  Bomans  under  P.  Servilius
leauricus.

AttAluB.  The  name  of  several  kings  of  Perga-
xans.  (1)  Son  of  Attains,  a  brother  of  Philetaems,
BQCfecded  his  consin  Enmenes  I.,  and  reigned  b.c.
241-197.  He  took  part  with  the  Romans  in  the
tftniggle  agniuHt  Philip  and  the  Achaeans.  He
w.is  a  wise  and  jnat  prince,  and  was  distinguished
l»V  his  patronage  of  literature.  (2)  Suniamed  Phil-
ADKLHHi's,  second  son  of  Attains,  sncceeded  his


Coin  of  Attalua  I.

brotlier  Eumenes  II.,  and  reigned  B.c.  159-138.
Like  his  father,  he  was  an  ally  of  the  Romans,
■iiid  also  encouraged  the  arts  and  sciences.  (3)
Stiruamed  Philometok,  son  of  Eumenes  II.  and
Stratonic^,  sncceeded  his  uncle  Attains  II.,  and
reigned  B.C.  136-133,  In  his  will  he  made  the
Romans  his  heirs,  but  his  kingdom  was  claimed
by  Aristonicns. See  Aristokicus.

Atthidogrftphl. See  Atthis.

AttbiB  ('Ar^/r).  A  chronicle  of  Attic  history  in
which  especial  attention  was  paid  to  occurrences  of
political  and  religions  significance.  After  the  last
half  of  the  fonrth  century  a.d.,  chronicles  of  this
kind  were  composed  by  a  number  of  writei"s  (At-
thidograiihi),  among  whom  Audrotiou  and  Phi-
loctiorus  (q.  v.)  deserve  special  mention.  These
Writings  were  much  quoted  by  the  grammarians.

Atthis  or  Attis.  (*ATtfit,  'ATTir). See  Attica.

Attfca  ('Attiic^).  a  division  of  Greece,  in  the
f"nn  of  a  triangle,  two  sides  of  which  are  washed  by
the  Aegaean  Sea,  while  the  third  is  separated  from
Boeotia  on  the  north  by  the  mountains  Cithaeron
and  Fames.  Megaris,  which  bounds  it  on  the
northwest,  was  fopuerly  a  part  of  Attica.  In
ancieut  times  it  was  called  Act^  and  Acticd,  or  the
"coast-land"  (d«^),  from  which  the  later  form,
Attica,  is  said  to  have  been  derived.  According
lo  tradition,  it  derived  its  uame  from  Atthis,  the


daughter  of  the  mythical  king  CranaUs;  and
old-fashioned  etymologists  found  in  it  the  root
which  appears  in  that  of  the  goddess  Athene.
Attica  is  divided  by  many  ancient  writers  into
three  districts.  (1)  The  Highlands,  the  northeast
of  the  country.  (2)  The  Plain,  the  northwest  of
the  country,  including  both  the  plain  round
Athens  and  the  plain  round  Eleusis,  and  extend-
ing south  to  the  promontory  Zoster.  (3)  The  Sea-
coast  District,  the  south  part  of  the  conntry,  ter-
minating in  the  promontory  Suninm.  Besides
these  three  divisions,  we  also  read  of  (4)  the  Mid-
land District,  still  called  Mesogia,  an  undulating
plain  in  the  middle  of  the  country.  The  soil  of
Attica  is  not  very  fertile.  The  greater  part  of  it
is  uot  adapted  for  growing  corn  ;  but  it  produces
olives,  figs,  and  grapes,  especially  the  two  former,
in  great  perfection.  The  conntry  is  dry ;  the
chief  river  is  the  Cephissns,  rising  in  Pnrnes  and
flowing  through  the  Athenian  plain.  The  abun-
dance of  wild  flowers  in  the  country  made  the
honey  of  Monnt  Hymettus  very  celebrated  in  an-
tiquity. Excellent  marble  was  obtained  from  the
quarries  of  Peutelicns,  northeast  of  Athens,  and  a
considerable  supply  of  silver  from  the  mines  of
Laurium  near  Snnium.  The  ten-itory  of  Attica,  in-
cludin^g'the  island  of  Sal  am  is,  which  belonged  to
it,  contained  between  700  and  600  square  miles;
and  the  ^lopulation  in  its  flourishing  period  was
probably  nhont  500,000,  of  which  nearly  four
fifths  were  slaves.

Attica  is  said  to  have  been  originally  inhab-
ited by  Pelasgians.  Its  most  ancient  political
division  was  into  twelve  independent  States,
attributed  to  Cccrops',  who,  according  to  some
legends,  came  from  Egypt.  Subsequently  Ion,
the  grandson  of  Hellen,  divided  the  people  into
four  tribes,  GeleonteH,  Hopletes,  Argades,  and
Aegicores;  and  Thesens,  who  united  the  twelve
independent  States  of  Attica  into  one  political
body  and  made  Atliens  the  capital,  again  di-
vided the  nation  into  three  classes,  the  Eupa-
tridao,  Geomori,  and  Deminrgi.  Clisthenes  (b.C.
510)  abolished  the  old  tribes  and  created  ten  new
ones,  Bcconling  to  a  geographical  division  ;  these
tribes  were  subdivided  into  denies  or  townships.
SeeATHENAE;  Cli5THF.nk8;  Demus.

Attic  Nights.  See  Noctes  Atticae  ;  Geixius,
Aclus.

Attic  Style  of  Oratory.  The  name  given  to
that  style  of  ancient  oratory  that  makes  only  a
sparing  use  of  verbal  ornament,  tropes,  antitheses,
and  rhetorical  devices,  but  is  restrained,  dignified,
and  severe.  It  is  thus  opposed  to  the  so-called
Asiatic  Style  (q.  v.).  The  best  example  of  the
severely  Attic  style  is  to  be  fonnd  in  the  orations
of  Demosthenes. See  Cicero,  Bruia%y  95.

AttlcoB  Herodes,  Tiberius  Claudius.  A
Greek  rhetorician,  bom  about  a.d.  104  at  Marathon
in  Attica,  who  tanght  both  at  Athens  and  at  Rome.
Among  his  pupils  were  the  future  emperors.  M.
Aurelins  and  L.  Verus.  He  was  made  consul  by
Antoninus  Pius  in  a.d.  143,  and  died  in  180,  after
having  accumulated  a  large  fortune,  much  of
which  he  spent  in  embellishing  Athens.

AttiCcus,  T.  POMPOXIUS.  A  Roman  of  an  old
and  wealthy  equestrian  family,  boru  B.C.  109.  Ha
received  a  good  education  in  boyho<Hl  and  youth,
and  went  in  the  year  B.C.  &W  to  Athens,  where  he
lived  until  65,  devoting  himself  entirely  to  study,


ATTILA


164


ATTIS


and  niiich  respected  by  the  citizens  for  hie  gen-
en»ity  aud  cultivated  refinement.  In  65,  he  re-
turned to  Rome,  to  take  posseBsion  of  tlie  in-
heritance left  him  by  his  uncle  and  adoptive
father,  Q.  Caecilins.  He  now  became  Q.  Caeciliiis
Poniponianus.  From  this  time  onward  he  lived
on  terms  of  intimacy  with  men  like  Cicero,  Hor-
tensius,  and  Cornelius  Nepos  (who  wrote  a  life
of  him  which  we  still  possess).  He  avoided  public
life  aud  the  strife  of  parties.  This  fact,  in  addi-
tion to  his  general  amiability  and  good  nature,  en-
abled him  dnriug  the  Civil  Wars  to  keep  on  the
best  of  terms  with  the  leaders  of  the  conflicting
parties — Cicero,  Brutus,  aud  Antouius.  He  died
after  a  painful  illness,  of  voluntary  starvation,  in
the  year  B.C.  32.

Atticus  was  the  author  of  several  works,  the
most  cousiilerable  of  which  was  a  history  {Liber
AnnaJis)  dedicated  to  Cicero.  This  gave  a  short
epitome  of  the  bare  events  of  Roman  history  down
to  B.C.  54,  arninged  according  to  the  series  of  con-
suls and  other  magistrates,  with  contemporaneous
notices.  But  his  most  important  contribution  to
Latin  literature  was  his  edition  of  the  letters
which  he  had  i-eceived  from  Cicero.  He  also  did
great  service  by  setting  his  numerous  slaves  to
work  copying  the  writings  of  his  contemporaries.
In  philosophy,  he  was  an  Epicurean.  The  trag-
inenta  of  the  Liber  AnnaJia  will  be  fouud  in  Peter,
Bi$t.  Frag.  214.

Attila  (in  German,  Etzel).  The  son  of  Mnnd-
zuck,  or,  OS  he  is  less  correctly  called,  Mandras,  a
Hun  of  royal  descent,  who  succeeded  his  uucle
Rugilas  in  a.d.  433,  and  shared  the  supreme  an-
thority  with  his  brother  Bleda.  These  two  leaders
of  the  barbariaits  who  had  settled  in  Scythia  and
Hungary  threatened  the  Eastern  Empire,  and  twice
compelled  Theodosins  II.  (q.  v.)  to  purchase  peace.
Their  power  was  feared  by  all  the  nations  of
Europe  and  Asia.  The  Huns  themselves  esteemed
Attila  their  bravest  warrior  and  most  skilful
general;  while  he  gave  out  that  he  had  found  the
sword  of  their  tutelar  god,  the  Scythian  Mars,  the
possession  of  which  was  supposed  to  convey  a
title  to  the  whole  earth.  He  caused  his  brother
Bleda  to  be  murdered  (a.O.  444) ;  aud  when  he  an-
nounced that  it  had  1H^eu  doue  by  the  command
of  God,  the  murder  was  celebrated  as  a  victory.
Being  now  sole  master  of  a  warlike  iieople,  his
unbounded  ambition  made  him  the  terror  of  all
nations ;  and  he  became,  as  he  called  himself, "  the
Scourge  of  God  "  for  the  chastisement  of  the  human
race.  In  a  short  time  ho  exteniled  his  dominion
over  all  the  people  of  Germany  aud  Scythia,  and  the
Eiistein  and  Western  emperors  paid  him  tribute.
The  Vandals,  the  Ostrogoths,  the  Gepidae,  aud  a,
part  of  tlie  Franks  united  under  hia  banners,  so
that  some  historians  assure  ua  that  his  army
amounted  to  700,000  men.  His  portrait,  as  given
by  Joruandes,  was  that  of  n  modern  Calniuc,  with
a  large  head,  swarthy  complexion,  fl.it  nose,  small
sunken  eyes,  and  a  short  square  body.  His  looks
were  fierce,  his  gait  prond,  and  his  deportmeut
stern  and  haughty  ;  yet  he  was  merciful  to  a  sup-
pliant foe,  and  ruled  his  own  people  with  Justice
aud  lenity.

Havlug  heard  a  rumour  of  the  riches  and  power
of  Persia,  he  directed  his  march  thither,  but  was
defeated  on  the  plains  of  Armenia,  and  fell  back
to  satisfy  his  desire  for  plunder  iu  the  dominions
o£  the  Emperor  of  the  East. He  fouud  a  pretext


for  war,  went  over  to  Illyricnm,  and  laid  waste
all  the  countries  from  the  Enxine  to  the  Adriatic.
The  emperor  Theodosins  collected  an  army  to
oppose  his  progress;  but  in  three  bloody  battles
Fortune  declared  herself  for  the  barbarians,  ami
Constantinople  was  indebted  to  the  strength  of
its  walls  aud  to  the  ignorance  of  the  enemy  in
the  art  of  besieging,  for  its  preservation.  Theo-
dosius  was  at  the  mercy  of  the  victor,  and  wa»
compelled  to  pnrchose  peace.  A  scheme  was  laid
in  the  conrt  of  Theodosins  to  assassinate  Attila
under  the  cover  of  a  solemn  embassy,  which  inten-
tion he  discovered;  and,  without  violating  the
laws  of  hospitality  in  the  persons  of  the  ombav
sadors,  wisely  preferred  a  heavy  ranaom  for  the
principal  agent  in  the  plot,  and  a  new  treaty  at
the  expense  of  fresh  payments.  On  the  accessiou
of  Maroian,  Attila  demanded  tribute,  which  w»ii
refused ;  and,  although  much  exaeperat«d,  he  it-
solved  first  to  tuni  his  arms  against  the  Western
emperor  Valentiuian,  whose  licentious  sister  Hono-
rio,  in  revenge  for  being  bauished  for  an  intrigue
with  her  chamberlain,  sent  an  offer  of  herself  tn
Attila.  The  Hun,  perceiving  the  pretence  this
proposal  supplied,  preceded  his  irruptions  into
Gaul  by  demanding  Hoooria  in  marriage,  with  a
share  of  the  imiterial  patrimony.  Being  refuseil,
he  affected  to  be  satisfied,  and  pretended  he  was
only  about  to  enter  Gaul  to  make  war  upon  The-
odoric,  king  of  the  Ostrogoths.  He  accordingly
crossed  the  Rhine,  a.d.  450,  with  a  prodigious  host,
and  marked  his  way  with  pillage  and  desolation,
uutil  completely  defeated  by  Theodoric  and  the
famous  Aetius  iu  the  bloody  battle  of  Ch&lons  (451).
He,  however,  recruited  his  forces,  and  paeaed  the
Alps  the  next  j'ear,  invading  Italy  and  spreading
his  ravages  over  all  Lombardy.  This  visitatiou
was  the  origin  of  the  famous  republic  of  Venice,
which  was  founded  by  the  fugitives  who  fled  Ht
the  terror  of  his  name.  Valentiuian,  nuable  Iu
avert  the  storm,  rejiaircd  from  Ravenua  to  Rome,
whence  he  aeut  the  prelate  Leo  with  a  solemn
deputation  to  avert  the  wrath  of  Attila,  who  cou-
sented  to  leave  Italy  on  receiviug  a  vast  sum  as
the  dowry  of  Houoria  aud  au  annual  tribute.  He
did  not  much  longer  survive  these  transactions ;
and  bis  death  was  singular,  he  beiug  found  dead,
in  consequence  of  suffocation  from  a  broken  blood-
vessel, on  the  night  of  his  marriage  with  a  beauti-
ful youug  virgin  named  Hilda  (453).  His  body  was
enclosed  in  three  cofflua — the  first  of  gold,  the
second  of  silver,  aud  the  third  of  iron.  The  cap-
tives who  ha<l  nmde  the  grave  were  strangled,  in
order  that  the  place  of  interment  might  be  kept
concealed  from  his  foes.  See  Thierry,  Wstoirt
d" Attila  (4th  ed.  1874);  and  Hl'NNI.

Attis  ('Att(s)  or  Atys  ("Arur).  A  mythological
personage  in  the  worship  of  the  Phrygian  goddess
Cybel^-Agdistis.  The  sou  of  this  goddess,  so  ran
the  story,  had  been  mutilated  by  the  goda  iu  terror
at  his  gigantic  strength,  and  from  his  blood  sprang
the  aliuond-tree.  After  eating  its  fruit.  Nana.
daughter  of  the  river  Sangarius,  brought  forth  a
boy,  whom  she  expcwed.  He  was  brought  np  first
among  the  wild  goats  of  the  forests,  and  afterwards
by  Hume  sbepherda.  and  grew  up  so  lieanttful  that
Agdistis  fell  in  love  with  him.  Wishing  to  W(m1
the  daughter  of  the  hing  of  Pesainas  in  Phrygia,
he  was  driven  to  madnesH  by  the  goddess.  He
then  fle<1  to  tlie  mountains,  and  destroyed  his  man-
hood at  the  foot  of  a  pine-tree,  which  received  bia


A-rnus


165


AUGEAS


aplrit,  while  from  his  blood  sprang  violets  to  gar-
land the  tree,  Agdistis  besonglit  Zeus  that  the
body  of  ber  beloved  one  might  know  no  corrup-
tion. Her  prayer  was  heard ;  a  tomb  to  Attia  was
raised  on  Mount  Dindymus  io  the  sanctuary  of
Cybel^,  the  priests  of  which  had  to  undergo  eraas-
cnlatioD  for  Attis's  sake.  A  festival  of  several  days
was  held  in  honour  of  Attis  and  Cybelfi  in  the  be-
ginnJag  of  spring.  A  pine-tree,  felled  in  the  forest,
was  covered  with  violets,  and  carried  to  the  shrine
of  Cybel^  as  a  symbol  of  the  departed  Attis.
TbflD,  amid  tumultnons  music  and  rites  of  wildest.
enrrow,  they  sought  and  mourned  for  Attis  on  the
iiionutaiDB.  On  the  third  day  he  was  found  again,
the  image  of  the  goddess  was  parified  from  the
contagion  of  death,  and  a  feast  of  joy  was  cele-
lirated,  as  wild  as  had  been  the  days  of  sorrow.
The  poem  of  Catnllns  (q.  v.)  which  deals  with  the
story  of  Attis,  in  galliambic  metre,  is  one  of  the
weirdest  and  most  )>owerfnl  productions  in  all
literatare.  With  regard  to  it,  see  Ellis^s  Catullus
m  ed.  1889),  and  Grant  Allen's  Attia  (1893).

AttiUB,  Lucius.  An  early  Human  poet  of  dis-
tinction, who  forms  a  link  between  the  ante-clas-
sical and  classical  periods  of  Latin  literature ;  for
Cicero,  wlien  a  boy,  had  met  him,  and  in  after-life
admired  his  verse.  Attius  was,  like  Horace,  the
win  of  a  freedman,  settled  at  Fisaurum.  He  be-
gAu  his  career  with  a  tragedy,  the  Atreus,  and  was
the  author  of  thii'ty-six  more,  besides  Annale$  in
hciamet«r  verse,  a  history  of  Greek  and  Roman
poetry  (Didascalia),  and  two  praetextae.  His  liter-
nry  characteristics  are  dignity,  vigour,  and  uinch
rhetorical  skill  in  the  choice  of  words.  Consid-
erable fragments  of  bis  works  remain  to  us,  and
can  he  tbuiid  in  Ribbeck's  Tragicorutn  Somanorum
fraijmeHta  (Leipzig,  1874) ;  and  L.  MUlter's  Lueiliu*
(1872).  He  is  the  author  of  the  famous  maxim
of  the  tyrant,  0(/eriHf  dum  meluani,  quoted  by  Cicero.
He  is  said  to  have  introduced  some  cbaugea  into
the  received  forms  of  spelling,  such  as  donbling
the  vowels  when  long,  as  in  modern  Dntch — thus
oara^  vootum.  He  died  B.C.  94.  8ee  Boissier,  Ia
Poitt  Attius  (Paris,  1857).

Attina  or  Attns  Navitu. See  Navius.

Atfima.  The  modern  Adonr;  u  river  in  Aqni-
tania.

Auceps.  A  bird-catcher  or  fowler,  whose  oc-
cnpatiou  was  called  catatpium  {avis -{•  capio).  The
fowlers  used  for  catching  birds  gins  and  snares
(^lyei,  petHcae),  rods  tipped  with  bird-lime  {arun-
diati,  calami),  uetfl  held  by  two  parallel  rods  (a»iito),
and  traps  (rraawaiuM).

Aactlo  signifies  generally  "an  increasing,  an
enhaocement,"  and  hence  the  name  is  applied  to  a
pnblic  sale  of  goods,  at  which  persons  bid  against
oue  another.  As  a  species,  auctio  signifies  a  pub-
lic sale  of  goods  by  the  owner  or  his  agent,  or  a
Hiilo  of  goods  of  a  deceased  person  for  the  pur-
pura of  dividing  the  money  among  those  entitled
to  it,  which  was  called  audio  hereditaria.  The  sale
was  aometimes  conducted  by  au  argentarius,  or  by
a  Mojficffr  oMctioTM ;  and  the  time,  place,  and  con-
ditions of  sale  were  annouacecl  either  by  a  public
notice  (toiWa,  cdbvm),  or  by  a  crier  {praera).

Tbe  Qsaal  phrases  to  express  the  notification  of
a  ule  are  amctiottem  proseribere,  praetiicare ;  and  to
dftrrmine  on  a  sale,  auctionetn  conslittiere.  The  pnr-
^hawnt  (enyitorM),  when  assembled,  were  sometimes


■aid  ad  tabulam  adeMMt.  The  phrases  signifying  to
bid  are  Uceri,  Ucitari,  which  was  done  either  by
word  of  mouth  or  by  such  significant  hints  as  are
known  to  all  people  who  have  attended  an  auc-
tion. The  property  was  said  to  be  knocked  down
(addict)  to  the  purchaser.  An  entry  was  made  in
the  books  of  the  argmtariuB  of  the  sale  and  the
money  due,  and  credit  was  given  in  the  same
books  to  the  purchaser  when  he  paid  the  money
{expeiaa  pecunia  lata,  accepta  relata).  Thus  the  book
of  the  argentarius  might  be  used  as  evidence  for  the
purchaser,  both  of  his  having  made  a  purcliase  and
having  paid  for  the  thing  purchased.  If  the  money
was  not  paid  according  to  the  conditions  of  sale,
the  argentarius  could  sue  for  it.

The  praeco  or  crier  seems  to  have  acted  the  part
of  the  modern  auctioneer,  so  far  as  calling  out  the
biddings  and  amusing  the  company.  Slaves,  when
sold  by  auction,  were  placed  on  a  stone  or  other
elevated  thing,  and  hence  the  phrase  hom9  tie  lapide
emptus.  It  was  usnal  to  put  up  a  spear  (hasta)  iu
auctions — a  symbol  derived,  it  is  said,  from  the
ancient  practice  of  selling  nnder  a  spear  the
booty  acqnired  in  war.  The  term  asta  pubiica  is
used  in  Italy  at  the  present  time  to  signify  an
auction.  By  the  auctio,  tbe  Quiritary  ownership
in  the  thing  sold  was  transferred  to  the  pur-
chaser. See  BoNORUM  Emptio  ;  Sectio.

Auctor.  (1)  One  who  originates  and  proposes
a  /ex  or  senatus  contultum — in  imperial  times  often
used  of  the  emperor.  (2)  In  law,  tbe  owner  aud
sometimes  the  vendor  (venditor)  of  goods;  also  the
maker  of  a  will.  (3)  A  person  whose  concurrence
is  necessary  to  give  effect  to  a  legal  transaction.
(4)  A  person  nnder  whose  anthority  any  legal  act  is
done.  See  Tutor.  (5)  In  criminal  law,  tbe  insti-
gator of  a  crime.  (6)  In  jurisprudence,  a  jurist  to
whom  the  iw  respondendi  had  been  given  by  the
emperor. See  Iurisconbulti.

Aactorltaa.  The  meanings  of  this  word  corre-
late with  those  of  auctor  (q.  v.).

Atiditorlum.  (1)  A  place  where  poets,  orators,
and  critics  were  heard.  (See  Athenasum.)  (3)
Under  the  Roraau  Empire,  the  enclosed  conrts
about  the  Foriim  where  magistrates  heard  civil
causes. See  Basilica.

Anfidla  Lez. See  Lex.

Aufldtu.  The  principal  river  of  Apnlia,  flow-
ing with  a  rapid  current  into  tbe  Adriatic.  Venn-
sia,  the  birthplace  of  Horace,  was  on  tbe  Aufidos,
now  the  Ofaoto.

Acig6  (Awy^).  Daughter  of  Aleus  of  Tegea,  and
mother  of  Telcphus  by  Heracles  (q.  v.).  See  Tele-
pHce;  Teuthras.

Angeaa  (Aiytias)  or  Angfiaa  (Avye'ac).  Son  of
Helios,  or,  according  to  another  account,  of  Pbor-
bas,  and  Hermiood.  He  was  king  of  the  Epeians  in
Elis,  and  one  of  the  Argonauts.  Besides  his  other
possessions,  for  which  Agamemnou  and  Tropbonins
built  him  a  treasure-house,  he  was  owner  of  an  enor-
mous flock  of  sheep  aud  oxen,  among  which  were
twelve  white  bulls  consecrated  to  the  Sun.  When
Heracles,  at  the  command  of  Eurysthens,  came  to
cleanse  bis  farm-yard,  Augeas  promised  him  the
tenth  part  of  his  flock.  But,  the  task  completed,
he  refused  the  reward,  on  the  ground  that  the
work  had  been  done  in  the  service  of  Eurysthens.
Heracles  replied  by  sending  an  army  against  him,


ATTGtTGS


16S


AUGUR


il«&~wn»  (Sefent«tl  in  tlie  i>n««e8  of  Elia  hy  Eitrv-
tii»  luul  Cteatns,  aoiirt  of  Uolioti^ ;  Uiil  Heruclrs
ft|))H'Mn>il  1)11  llit'  &ctiiie,  and  slew  the  Mu1i«>nidu«,
nuiL  witli  ttiiMii  tliuir  iiiicle  Aageas  auil  liU  m>u&.

8iM> HKICACI.Ki«; MOLIONIDAC.

Augltea  iaiyirrff). Probably  the  turqnoisc.

Aug;iir.  A  diviuer  b,v  lueatia  of  birds.  Tlio  der-
ivnliuii  iif  tbi>  xfonl  in  iiucertain.  Sodii*  aiicieut
graitaimriaua  derived  it  frum  am  and  gtrv  iFeatus.
K.  V.  augur;  Serv.  ad  Vcrg.  Aei*.  v.  5W).  iu  sni>i>ort
uf  wldoU  we  may  tueiitioii  tbe  aiialu^y  uf  OH'tpex
and  dH-orpi,  anil  the  nuci^tit  forma  augrr  aud  ange-
rntttt  i\aaU*i\  by  Pi*iM>ian,  i.  6,  ^  tttt;  nii<l  llii^  dnri-
vnliiiii  is  mtw  :iiT4'[)l('d  liy  MniiiniK«>ii,  Man|iian1l,
Iloil4>bi^-L»clttn*t),  and  iithfm.  Of  nit)di<rii  Hii^g^'*'
ttoitit  may  bv  iiit-ntiiitiiMl  Ihnl.  (if  Atifivrlit  and
KircbhofT,  conn<x:tiux  the  nunl  with  tint  Uiiibrtan
mklur  =.  nuctar  {cf.  itu  at  tiHt/urum  i-um  auclvntaU.
t,|Uit|MiiclHM,  Cic.  He/^n;/.  ii.  1*2,  31;  mmX  NiwDfii,  Dmm
^  Ttmftlum,  p.  S\ ;  aud  that  of  Vauie«k,  fniiii  ai-is  nud
the  root  •/tv  (found  iu  Saiii>krit  aud  iu  yijpvtui,  yar-
rift).  Kick, and  apparently' Kuntxcconnvct  ir  nith
au^,  imQ*arut  {c(.  <i)t</iisrHM  iiu^iu-iuin  in  ICnuiust,
and  takr  it  to  nioau  "aiwistant";  n-bileLaugeaud
Bn^l  »M  in  the  word  the  uj«t  ift«*A  ^aa  iu  y«v«\  and
nndvnitani)  by  it  ''  au  appnyriator."  By  Ctivek
writers  o«  R»uiuu  affain^  the  augurs  are  called
uCynx-fnt,  otuMnnkXiu.  otwrarctfireM,  oiwvurTui't  mou-o*

Thr  anftnn  nt  Kiini<>  furinM  n  iirii^lly  citlltgimi*,
lra«litioitally  saLil  to  hav«  tiooti  founded  by  Roam-
liiK.  aud  iu  the  im«t  aucieui  liui^a  uo  tmiiaactiou
i(K>k  placv,  vitli«r  of  a  ptivtiie  or  a  public  nature,
wiihunt  cnuAultinx  tht>  uuRpict.'«,  and  hence  we
find  the  quo»tiun  otiked  in  a  wfU-kuown  |»a«aafi^
of  Li r 7  iri.  41.  4t.  "Anspiciia  hauc  nrbem  cuntU-
tam  ease,  auspiciis  bellu  ac  i^ace.  domi  tuiliiiaeque
ninnia  gvri,  <)Qi8  est,  \\\\\  if;nort?t  f"  But  the  pri-
\ai«  angur  »«<>tus  Xn  havf«  falleu  into  eontmipt.
Thus  Ciowo.  while  argiiinu  in  favour  of  diviua-
tiou  iu  general,  follows  £nnius  iu  cla^siug  the
Afi»-*M  aajraf  with  other  iuipoaiois  {th  JMv.  i.  58,
13VV

The  public  ftogtira,  on  the  other  baud,  are  of
great  ituportanee  in  Koiuau  history.  The  culU-
giuni  originally  con»i»te<l  (if  tbre«  patriciaDs,  of
whom  the  king  wa»  one.  Dnriug  iba  ngal  period
tb(^  numlwr  waa  dmibli>d :  iu  B.C.  'MO  tl  was  raitusi
Iu  uiue  ^four  |ialriciau»  aud  tive  plrboiaiis);  a4id
in  the  last  century  of  the  Kepuldic.  uudei  Sulla,  to
flOeet],  aud  ftually  by  lu-
UuM  Caesar  to  sizt««u,  a
BiUibw  whifh  contiuuol
vnalmred  uodar  Um  Kw-
plrr.  It  eau  faa  ab«w»
thai  Ibe  e<»llpfr»  of  augwn
tWittiHWd  to  exuk  until
Iba  aod  nf  the  fourth  ora-
tar;  a..ix  Ttw  4»ffirtt  wiu,
«u  a«««mui  of  tt«  |toJiti-

l; eal  tv|»*riauee,  uiucb

|«M^kaiWr,«lidoulj  Altnl

\%^  fnmm  vT  Ucti  Uinh
LnU  4MiDCidiM  Btaril.
[It  waa  M4  aw  Ufci  aa
r  sat  Maf  M««l«i)*il
fc-ufa^  auar  •«»<

Ysrsariia tk '


I  ««•  «C%tMUy  tlM Mia


np  by  co-optfttion  ;  but  after  B.c.  iD

ulective,  (ho  tribes  choosit));  one  of  the]

previously  uouiinntetl. An  au^wrntui  hud  I

bcfoi\i  lb(^  iii)};ur  i'ntcix-d  upuu  hii«  dutiea. In  alh

probability  lb*.'  augurs  ranked  according  to  anuior^

iry,  aud  tbt;&euiorangnr  pre»i<led<>v*vr  ihu  buaiue

of  the  collegium.

Tbe  itisi'/ma  of  tbo  ofiice  were  the  trabea,  a  slat.
dress  with  H  purple  border,  and  the  fitumM  (q.v.)^
atad' without  knots  and  curved  at  the  top.

The  science  of  Roman  aiiK'ny  was  based  fhief^^_
ou  \vrilleu  tntditiuu.  TbiH  was  cuutniut'd  pn^^^i^.
ly  iu  lUe  Litri  Angvrofes,  the uldeift maunaJ  4>£-b

tei;bnii-al  pracliru,  and  partly  in the 0>naira/^^__^^^H
Atiy»rair.a, a ciilleeliou  of  au^weiH givpu in  r-^ ^ht^
tain  v.iitifii  to  tbu  iii<|ninef«  of  the  t^enate. In ^^k^^.
ci(>nt  tinier  the  chief  duty  of  the  augnfM (\'ii»^^ ^
ohnrrve,  when  comnuvsioucd  by  a  uiagiiitnttcuz:^  ^^
no,  the  omens  given  by  birdif,  and  to  murk  out n
Um/ilum  or  cuiiKecnitfil  h|iucc  withiu  which  tlio
servation  look  place. The  proceeding  wa«  a& fVif.^
Iowa  :  imuHttiutel,v  after  nddnigtii,  or  at  Ihe  d.  s^  xvri
of  tbe  day  on  which  the  official  art  was  to -Vis^^^
[dace,  the  nugiir,  in  the  presence  of  I  be  nmgi9t.vs»f|,
iietectrd an elernteil  spot  with as  widp a -x-itf'n-
MS  WOK  obtatnabtc. Taking  his  Ktatiou  hfr^!i, bp
dn'w  with  his  staff  two  Ktraigbt  liueis  cnttiof;  r»rip
auolhrr^  11h<  one  from unrth  tu Konth,  Ihe otittr
from  east  to  went. Then  to  each  of  the«e  slmij^lif
linen  he  drew  two  parallel  ItncH,  thnx  fnnntii^  »
rectangular  fignrt\  which  he  eouju-crnted  ikeronl-
iug  to  a  prescribed  form  uf  words. Tbis  space,  ss
Well  as  the  space  corresponding  to  it  iu  Ihe  t#ky,
was  called  a  ttmf,him. i  See  Temj'lisi,  ) At »I*
|K>int of  iuterseetiou  in the  centre  of  lbs  ree-
(angle  was  erertetl  tbe tt^nNimltam. This  W>s
a  eqaare  teut,  with  il«  entrance  lookiug  wu'li'
Here the  augur  sat down,  aaked the  goiU ^"^
a sign according to a preMrribod fomiiila.  tsi>e
waite^l  for  the  answer. Complete  quiet,  a  rl*^^
sky.  aud an absence of wimi wrre nere;
eouditions  of  tbe  ob«erratiou. Tbe  least  iiol
«aa  saflteieot to  dbturb it,  aniees indeed
noise  «aa  oceaaioocd  by  onwna  of  terMr  ii
supposing  the  augur  to  have  obserrrd  them,  or
iuteud  doing  so. As  he  looked  south  ibe  an|
bad  the  east  on  his  left,  tbe  west  on  bis  right. Ae-~
cordingly.  tbe  Riunai»  regarded  aigna  ou  tbp  leO
side  as  of  ptnaperoua  oaten, ctgna  ou  tbe  right  side
as  unlucky — tlM  east  being  ilaaaie«l  the  ivgiou  o'^
light,  tbe  weal  that  of  darkaesa. Tbe  reverse  <
(be  case  fa  andeut  Gr««ce,  where  tbe  ob
kwked  ttonlivanla. In  bis  otacervalion  of  bh
lb»  aa^iir  did  not  eoeflne  biiSB^  to  not  iriag  tbcir
Aigbl. The  birds  v«i«  dtMii^«isbed  aa  nittn  aud
MeiBM. Tb«  mHim  iuclitd«d  birds  lUce  eagl«  uid
vuliitiea,  whicb  ga^^  atfna  by  ibeir  maatitT  of
llji-iuc. Tba  aseiMa  wen  binls  which  gate  >>it:i^
by  Ibeir  try  aa  ««U  a*  ibetr  flight,  such  as  rs**'"^
owU.  aud  cmvs.. TbM«  wen  alao  birds  mhi*^^
were  ludd  saewd  to  panieolar  guds,  aud  tht  merv)
^ppsarawea  of  vhicb  waaaa  aiaatt  of  good  <*r  evil-
Tlic  aacor**  wpart  w»  exfnaaed  io  iltr  v>»r«l'
aMs  ■  iaiMaiil,  "  tbe  Wida  alW«  it^;  or  s&s  i(^
"  «a  aaotber  (lay  "  L  «. » the  aagny  Sa  ptmtniK^
^"W  osacistcala  waa  baud  by  tUa  nport. T1»*
-  -nw  of  aa(«i7  inciaded  ocber  kiwfa  of  aai^iC
beaalM  kba  »>■■■■  aUua  af  bitds,  a  enateeoa  pi«^
•as  widek  bad  driyni  o«t  of  m»  in  tba  I
alaa  ac*. TbMa  mum'.  (1»  Si^aa  la  tbe  sky  I
k Tbe  MMBt  ia^inaat  mmd  dcctaira


•(•


AUOUR


117


AUGUR


inritlcr  aiul  liKlttuinf;.  Lixhtinnf;  wiw  a  favour- 1
ItU-  otnrn  if  it  appcnrod  tu  tliv  left  uf  tlir  iiiigur,
tidllaiitinl  to  tliu  right;  titifavuiinible.  ifit  Uiuihed
ri>iu  ni;bt  Ui  liift.  In  ci<rtiiiii  rANCM,  im,  lor  t-xuiu-i
>W,  tbut  of  the  aswuililiu)>  of  tbu  Couiitia,  o  storm
tu  taken  ju%  an  aliiMi)(iL«>  [imliiUition  of  the  tniH't-
Dg.  (S)  StgiiH  from  the  l>fIiavioar  of  cbickeiis
(bile  eating.  It  vran  a  guml  omen  if  the  chicken
Hfthed  eagerly  out  uf  its  cage  at  its  fcHid,  and
trapped  a  bit  out  of  ita  beak;  an  nnfavouraUtt?


fMMmMm


Avplcto  PuIblA. (Ita>  relief;  RotDs  ) (froni  GDcp's
Aun  nfirri,  I.  lav.  xvl.)

jm  if  It  was  anwilltng,  or  refused  altogothor,  to

wftTfl  it«  oage,  or  flew  airny.  or  denliitod  it«  food.

Thii  clear  and  Biiuplo  method  of  gutting  omeux

vt»  ^nerally  adojilL-d  by  armit--a  in  tbu  tiuld.  the

HtokcDs  being  taken  about  iu  cbai^  u(  a  ti)»eciul

lUoiionary  t  ptiUuhut ). (3)  Signs  given  by  the

or  motion  of  auituaU,  lu  ri>|ttile-s  nod  qnadni-

<Kiii  th(*ir  rouDM^  orer  a  given  |tie<^  of  ground

.•■fM  JitedrAtria  or  rx  quudttijtfitibua  ). {  4  )  Hignii

'inn  tiy  pIi«uoti)ciia  of  t^uror  ( tiffua ex  tlirit ).

Might  couHifit  in  diMurbancea  of  the  act  irf

»f  lUch  UA  tbu  fulling  of  nn  object,  a  nr>i»c,

slip  in  tbe  rL-cltiLtioii  of  the  funnula:

CO  occurring  in  tbn  course  of  public

I,  Buoli  RM,  for  instduce,  au  upil<>ptic  Hi-iziirr

iag  |iiac43  in  ihi)  publiu  oAAembly  —  an  event

'SBieb  bnike  up  Ibe  meeting.

tht  two  la*(t-iiie«iione<l  vlaneeH  of  Bigns  were
fwially  uot  nfikeil  for,  Wcause  the  former  were
i^***!!?,  the  latter  always,  unlucky.  If  they  made
■{ipettranco  uiia.ski>d.  they  nontd  not  ho
over,  if  Iht^  olw-Tver  saw  them  or  wished
'•(Uicm.  Everj'  olHcial  was  expected  to  lake
on  eiilering  upon  hiM  orllce,  and  on  every
ion  of  performing  an  official  act.  Thus  the
'f^  imjtfnnm  and  atapiriiiin  were  often  virtually
^ojmuna.  The  nutpiiriu  were  fnrtlier  divided,
IttoiftUnj;  to  the  dignity  of  the  magistrate,  into
'■■I  stHl  Mu/ioni.  Tb«  gniatvmt  nuspicin  were
which  wen.*  taken  by  the  king,  dielator,
'))*.  pnurtorv,  nttd  cen)M>rH;  itio  li^Mtr  ncra
'wn  Iiy  aediles  and  qnnewtors.  If  two  nmgis-
j^t  tbongh  ruiltgtir  (collnagnes).  wore  of  itu-
di^ity — auunuug,  for  instance,  that  a
and  a  praetor  were  in  the  same  camp — the
officer  iklone  \\at\  the  right  of  taking  tlie
If  tlie  txiUtgat  were  cqaal,  tbe  auBpioos


poaaed  ttom  one  to  the  other  at  stated  ti
publio  act,  whether  of  peace  or  war  (c
river,  for  inittuuce,  or  ligbtiog  a  battle],  could  be
nudertakeu  withoat  auspices.  Tbey  were  espfr*
oially  necessary  at  tbe  electiou  of  all  officialH,  the
entry  upon  all  olllrfw,  nt  nil  Coniitia,  and  nt  the
departure  of  a  general  fur  war.  Tbey  ba<l,  fur-
ther, to  l>e  taken  on  th»  aelua)  day  and  at  the
uctnal  place  of  I  be  glveu  nndertaking.

The  augnm  nlway.i  continued  in  pooaeaalon  of
tm]Hirtant  functioiin.  In  cf^rtuia  places  in  tlie
city,  fiU'  iuHtanc^i  ou  the  Arx,  and  at  the  meetiug-
liliteii  iif  the  ('omiLia,  thine  were  pcrmuuent  poAta
of  (iliNcrvaiiou  for  tuking  the  regular  auspices.
These  p1acc«  wore  put  under  the  care  of  the  an*
gnrs.  Their  bouudarieit  might  not  Ih<  altered,  nor
tbe  view  which  tb^y  coninmuded  interfertid  with.
Tlie  nugiirti  bad  authority  to  provBul  the  erection
of  buihliugti  whicb  would  do  tbui.  Tbey  lunl  aUo
the  j>r>wer  of  consecrating  prieHt»,  an  well  on  of  in-
auKunitiug  a  part  of  the  localities  intended  for
i-eligiomt  pnrptM«;»,  tiud  thn  pl»ee»  where  public
biifiincsa  waj*  carriftl  on.  They  were  alwayi*  pres-
ent at  the  Coiuitia,  and  were  autborizod,  if  the
signs  which  tbey  saw  or  whicb  were  reporUMl  to
them  Juatilied  the  proceotling,  to  announce  the
fact  and  postpone  the  business.  If  the  ccmstitn-
ttonal  charact«r  of  a  public  act  was  callpd  in  ques-
tion, the  college  of  aagurs  liiwl  the  excluRivo  pow-
er  of  deciding  whether  thorv  viw  a  (law  {K\tiuni\  in
it,  or  not.  If  tliere  were,  tbo  act  waa  nercMiarUy
nninilled.  The  drew  of  tho
angur  was  uaually  tbo  prtte-
facta  ((|.  v.),  but  sonitillmoa
( poKttbly  on  military  ex-
(ludltiotifl)  the  trabeo,  an  Iq
tbe  acci>mpauying  illustra-
tion.

By  the  end  of  tbe  re-
publican period  the  augurs,
and  tbe  whole  bunineiw  of
(be  niiKpice'4,  bad  ceased  to
tie  reganled  as  deserving  afr-
rioiis  attention.

Ob  tbe  whole  subject  of
nugury  among  the  Houiaiia,
M-e  Slii.'W'i'V,  Dr  Jurr  Avifiidi
np»d  liomnttof  (Lips.  1721);
Wert  her.  tie  Anguriia  Jioma-
itiJi  (Lemgo,  l«J5|;  Creu7.<'r,
.S!tmboHk,u.\i.yr^.ctc.:  MUl-
ler,  Etrutker,  V\.  p.  Uf>.  etc.;
Ilartung,  THf  lirWyion  der
Riiwur,  i.  p.  tW,  etc. ;  Oiltt-
liiig,  Gftvhiclitf  rfei*  tium.
Slaatn-rrf.  \>.  liW,  etc.;  K«-
biuo,  HittH.  VerfauHmg,  p.  34,
etc.:  Keiii,  art.  Angurra  in
1'  a  n  1  y's  UriilrnrtivUntadie  ;
i'rcllcr,  JtomiMke  Jfylhologie,
UI9-111  (eil.  IK'^);  Nisseo,  Dot  Templum,  chap,  i. ;
Mommiwn,  UifmUckea  SUtattTvchi,  i.  73-114;  Mar-
quardt,  Hifminrhe  StaattvfncnUung,  vi.  3til-3W;
Lango.  liomi'Kln!  AUtTlkHmvr,  I.  286-298  (=i.  330-
M5l  i  Walter,  OrwbichU-  ilea  riimitrhv  Rerktti,  ^4  151,
152;  M:u1vtg,  rHe  Ver/aaaung  iisif  yfritaltung  det
r&miachen  Slaalta,  li.  tt3:i-64:f  ;  MifliKinlet.  J^n  Jntti-
Ittliong  J'nlili^uet  dfs  Ilomaina,  i.  73,  ii.  416-423;
Willems,  Le  I>r<rit  Public  Homaiu.  2:)9-242,  324-326 ;
Kiiutze,  ProIfgoMtetta  lur  Gftchirhtr  iJoni*,  61-102 ;
Bnucbe-Leoleroti,  art.  Augur  aud  Aunpida  id  Da-


\^^


\l


['


'm^


Angnr  waulng  ilie  Trabea.
(BrVtub  MUfiUn.)


ArcrRAcci-rM


ISB


ACGL'STUIUS


;  uid  8aglio>  Diet.  dM  AntiguitA,  aud  Hia- 1
Unrt  dt  la  IHtiMation  datu  VjHtiqHii^  <  l<^71f-H-2).

Aui^uraofUam.  A  [iluo«  on  tbn  Arx,  on  th**
Btitniiiit  nf  the  CupitoHue  HitI,  conitecrat4><l  for
pnrpo»o«  of  augqiT.  Seo  Arx  ;  Auoctt ;  TeM-
PLCM.

Augusta.  Tho  name  of  seven!  towna  foniiiletl
or  coIijiilzmI  liy  Aa^ut^tuu.  Of  th)»rt',  uuu  of  tbo
tnoHt  important  wim  Aiiuusta  Prac'turiu  (AosU).  u
towu  of  tht  S&lasai  in  Upper  Ituly.  at  the  foi)t  uf
tlte  limiaii  aii<l  Pcuuine  Alp«.  Tltt;  luudtsni  town
siiU  coDtaitiit  uuiiij  Roniuu  remniuti.  ilw  motut  im-
portvit  of  wbicb  are  ibe  towu  gM*^*  niiil  »  Iriani-
pbal  Drcli.  In  all,  seventy  cities  in  ilifferent  partA
of  thf  R'luiau  Knipin^  werv  nnni'Ml  Att^ntrta,  atuong
tbeni  London  (Lotiiltniuin),  wliicti  xvati  »oiovtinieH
fltyU'd  Ati^ni«ta  TrinobauIJa  from  the  Uritittb  triW,
tbe  TnnMl»aiit«'H  (Tac.  Jutt.  xiv.  31).  See  LON-
DINIl'M ;  Skba^ta;  TltRMld: Vixukuci.

Auguatae  Hiatoriae  8criptore&  Six  writers
(Afhimt  .SiMirtiiitiiis,  VulcutinM  (faUicniiUB,  Tiebvl-
lias  Pollio.  Flavins  Vopimrmt.  Aelitut  LampriUiuit,
and  lulius  CapitollnuK)  nho  wrut«  the  lives  of  the
emperors  fn>m  Hailrinu  to  NiinieriannH  (aJ).  117-
2b4).  Tbesfs  livo«  are  all  wiually  lUwuiil  of  lit^niry
excellence,  but  apjM'ar  to  be  written  tnitbfitlly,
and  are  valuable  for  th«>  information  n-hich  tbi*y
give.  The  l>p«t  text  ii^  that  of  H.  Pfter.  2  vuU.
(I^eipzig,  Ir^).  Tbt)  only  KuKli»h  tnuialation  is
tbat  of  J.  Bernard  (Lomloii,  1740).

Auguatalea,  !tc.  ludi ;  or,  AusnstaUa,  ae.  ctr-

liuninii  (SffiidOTa,  AvytnurraXtu).  tJanies  celebrated
in  bononr  of  AuK'iKtnH  Co^aar  at  Kouie  and  tu  oth-
er part«  of  tbt?  Empire.  Two  festival*  nvre  known
under  tbi-^  nanic.  (II  The  23d  of  i^pteniber.  the
birthday  of  An<!:n»itii8,  c«lebntteil  after  b.c.  13  by
gamefi  held  in  tin*  Circim  (Diu  Ciuw.  liv.  'il^,  'Ms.
{i]  The  An^iifttalta  proper  Itcld  for  leu  daya  an-
liiially  (Oct-  3-lii),  iDi4lilate4l  in  &.C.  19,  when  An-
gofttus  returned  to  Kotue  after  Msttlint;  ibe  pror-
iacea  (Dio  Cius.  liv.  34).

Auguatalea,  ac.  cin.  A  religions  aasociatioD  at
Rome  forni«l  for  the  tuaiuteuauce  of  the  worship
paid  to  the  deiticd  L'wesare.  See  Flamkx  ;  MfSI-
CIPU'M  ; .SEVmi  ; 8'iI)AIJTA&.

Auguatinua,  Aukkucs.  One  of  the  mont  re-
nowufd  Fathen  of  the  Chrltlian  Chnreli.  waH  iMini
at  TagaHi*',  a  city  of  Afiiea,  XoveuiWr  KUli,  a.d.
3M,dnrinx  the  reign  of  the  em|>eror  Cnnstsntinn  II.
He  has  related  hi*  o«  ii  life  in  Ibt*  work  lo  wbifh
be  gavi"  tbtf  title  of  Vonft'utio»€»,  and  it  \x  from  this
wmrco.  together  with  the  lUtractaiiottn,  w>Hie  of
hiB  letters,  and  the  Vita  Ponidit  of  the  M>nii-l'ela-
ftian  Grniiwliui*,  that  we  derive  onr  princijial  iu-
forniatiou  rt^Hitectiu)'  him.  His  |mr«nt«  M<itt  him
to  CarlhiiKe  to  complete  his  I'dneatiou,  hot  he  dis-
api>uiat«.'d  iheir  exi»ectalionii  by  hia  ueRlivt  of
sertouH  study  and  liiH  di-votiou  to  pleaanre,  for  in
hit  sixteenth  yt-ar  hr  lM.*caiue  verj-  fonil  of  women.
For  liftven  vi-ars  he  was  conneetcd  with  one,  by
whom  be  had  a  !U)n.  He  lt>ft  her  only  when  he
ebauxeil  hi*  wlmle  rotirw*  of  life.  A  bo»»k  of  t'le-
cro's.  the  /iorf<T»««*,  whiob  has  not  roiin»  down  lo
our  timeft.  led  bim  to  the  »tndy  of  pbilojw.phy:  and
when  be  found  that  this  did  not  Aalisfy  his  It-el-
ings,  be  went  over  to  the  Mi-r  of  the  Manichueniis-
He  was  one  of  iheir  diwiplei*  for  nin.-  y*'iin:  but.
after  having  obtained  a  correet  knowKilp!  of  their
doctriue«,  ho  left  theiu,  and  departed  from  Africa


I


to  Home,  and  tbciiee  to  Milan,  where  he  aunouueod
bini8*-lf  as  a  teacher  of  rht-toric. St- Ambroae  was
bislKip  of  thi»  city,  and  hi*  discourses  converted
Aiigiiittiiie  to  the  orthodox  faith. The  rciuliug  of
St  Paul's  epistles  wrought  aii  eutire  changu  in  bia.
lifennd  character. The  (.'albolic  Cbnrrb  liaaafc*-
tival (May  3|  m  cnnuneioorJiliou of  ihbi  event _
He  retired  into  solitude,  wrote  tlwre  many  book*.^^
atid  prepared  biinMclf  for  iNiptiitm.  wbicb  he  rrK  _^
ceivMl  iu  the  thirty-third  year  of  bis  age,  togethi^  ^^^

with  his  son  Adeoilaius,  from  the  hands  of  Ati.-^

hrose. He  reiurmxl  lo  Afriea,  sold  bis  estate,  ai^  ^-^
gavu the procci'ds |o the poor.  tvtaJnins on  "^/^^
enough to  support him  in a mMlemie  mnnnt^^.  ,^^
Aa  he  waa  oucc  present  in  the  church  at  Hipk. -^^ ^^
Ibe  bishop,  who  was  a  very  old  man,  Hij;iiilici%^  "S|

diairu  lo  cMWsecnitc  a  priest  to  aawist  and  f*uce^s^^^^P
him. At  the  desire  of  the  pe*)ple.  An^inaline
t«t«d  niK>n  the  holy  office,  pn-acheil  with  ext
dinary  sDcceas.  and,  in  the  year  :ft)5,  became  l>  £
op  of  Hippo. He  euleml  into  a  wann  controv^
with I'elagius  loiiceniing the  doctriuea  of  t~i
I  will,  of  itrncv,  and  of  predestination,  and  wrr»t<^»  j
iMiok coneHniin}; them. Angnstioc maiutair»  -mmI
thai  mt<ii  were  justitiod  lueivly  through  g[»<'e.  a.  ^nl
uot  thmugb good  norks. He  died  August  as-«crli,
A-D 430,  while  Hippo  was  besiegwl  by  the  V>m "-
data.

I There  hftve  been  Fathera  of  the  Cfaorch  »(—»*•*
'  learned — moAters  of  a  better  language  and  a  {lue
taste;  hut  none  have  ever  nniie  jKiwerfuHy  touch
I  the  human  heart  and  waiiueti  it  toward*  leliKu*
'  PaitiiurM  hare  therefore  given  him  for  A  srnV
a  liamiug heart. Augnstiiie  is  one  of  tlM>  iu<'
voluminous  of  the  C'hrislian  writers. His  worf
iu  Migue'ft  FalnAogia  Latimi.  till  16  volumej*  (ixiti ^■-
xlvii.l. The  first  oftbose  contains  the  works  wbi  -^l*
!  he  wrote  l«efore  he  was  a  priest^  and  his  lirtntfr-  -^*-
'  tiottfs  atid  Cvn/tMHiiK*  i  the  former  a  critical  nyx^^tv^
!  of  his  owu  urttiugt),  and  Che  latter  a  curiouii  ik'sii
j  inlereMtiiig  picture  of  hia  lif«. The  remainder *>f
tht'se  volumes  consist  of  a  treatise  On  tkf  Vitif  *^
I  Ctitd  KDt  Cieitate  Dfi);  eoiuraentariea  on  Scrtpttirw,-
episttes  on  a  great  variety  of  subjects,  'toctritrij/,
'moral,  and  pf>r«onal ;  6t^nI]ons  and  honiilles;  trea-
tises on  various  points  of  discipline  ;  and  ehihernt*
argnmenta  against  heretics. With  the  eireptiva
of  those  of  Aristotle,  no  writings  contributed  uw>re
than  Augustine's  w  ennmrage  the  spirit  of  n»\f
tie  disputation  whieh  distinguished  the  M'holantir
ages. Tbey  exhibit much facility  of  iuvnition
and  Htreugtb  of  reasoning,  with more  arguneul'
llian  eloqueuceand  more  wit  than  learuing. Kres*
mtut  calls  AnguHtine  a  writ**r  of  olismre  subtl«tv>
who requires Iu the reader acute penelnUion,
close  attention,  aud  quick  recollection,  and  by  uo
means  repays  him  for  the  application  of  all  lb***
nN|ni!*ii<is. It  wn8  St.  Augustine  wtm  tiuHllyi^ral*'
liithed the vocabulary  of  e>ccle(nastieal Latinity.
wttiug  the  stamp  of  his  authoritj'  upon  the  lie*
coinages  That  till  tho  pnge«  of  Tertulliau.

Tin*  l»r*t  complete  t<«liiion  of  bis  works  is  *lil'
tbat  of  tlie  Benedict iuea,  of  which  the  last  reprint
was  iu  l!«>-40.  There  b  au  Engli»*h  trnnsUlloO
of  the  whole  in  15  vols.  (Edinb.  Ie75-«V|.  »ee
Milmau,  f^tia  VMHututmity.  H  vols.  (K.  Y.  and  !»"<*•
I'-in-ft'i:  id.  liial.  af  ChriMtiamit^,  :(  vgla..  i„w  ed.
(N.Y.I.-Cl);  Cloth.  ;VrA«|.  f trvAenMm- jN)r»'"
(  A-(^-beu.  1^40):  Bitidemaun.  D«r  htiUgt  Anvvfi'
Vllorlin.  1SU-(»1;  Doruer.  AngHMti*^  «r<a  '*«'''^
fiseAst  SfSteM  wad  mh^,  rW*yioa*p*i/a«.  jnmetMuf^


AUGUSTULU3


169


AUGUSTUS


dSerlin,  1873);  Ponjonlat,  BiaUrire  de  Saint  Jugw-
tin,  6th  ed.  (Tours,  1875);  BobriDger,  Auffuttiti
(Stnttgart,  1877-78);  and  Beuter,  Augualiniache
Studien  (Ootha,  1887).  See  also  Regnier,  La  La-
Unit^  de»  SermoM  de  Saint  Jugtutin  (Paris,  1887).
There  ie  a  new  critical  edition  of  the  works  of  St.
Angustine  in  tbe  Vieuna  collectiuu  of  the  Latin
Fatbers  (Corp.  Vlndobon.  vol.  xii.),  edited  by  F.
Weihrich  (Vienna,  1877).

Angustttlus,  RouC'LUS  Momyllus.  The  last
Roman  emperor  of  the  West,  tbe  son  of  Oreatea,
who  commanded  tbe  Roman  army  in  Gaul.  Ores-
tes caused  bis  son  to  be  crowned  in  a.d.  475,  aud
during  his  reign  the  sod  was  bnt  a  puppet  iu  tbe
hands  of  tbe  father.  In  tbe  following  year,  how-
ever, the  young  emperor  was  dethroned  by  Odoa-
cer,  king  of  the  Heruli,  who  put  Orestes  to  death,
but  treate<l  Angustulus  with  consideratiou,  allow-
ing him  to  retire  to  Campania  with  an  income  of
6000  gold  pieces  for  his  snpport.  The  name  Au-
^tiBtulns  was  given  to  this  emperor  in  derision,
bat  is  nevertheless  the  appellation  under  which
he  is  best  known  in  history. See  Odoacer.

Aagnstns.  A  title  given  to  the  Roman  em-
perors, and  equivalent  to  aacrosanctua.  It  is  ren-
deral  into  Greek  by  the  term  ZfjSairrdr  (Dio  Cass.
liii.  16).  Tbe  feminine  form,  Angnsta,  was  often
given  to  tbe  women  of  the  imperial  family,  like
the  modem  title8"Royal  Highness"  and  "Imperial
HigbDMH."  Under  Diocletian,  tbe  appellation,  Au-
gustus, was  definitely  applied  to  tbe  two  joint  em-
perors, and  the  title,  Caesar,  to  each  of  tbe  beirs-
presumptive. See  DOMINUS.

Aagaatns  Caesar.  The  first  Roman  emperor,
was  bom  on  the  23d  of  September,  B.C.  63,  and  was
the  sou  of  C.  Octavius,  by  Atia,  a  daughter  of  Inlia,
the  sister  of  C.  luUus  Caesar.  His  original  name
was  Gains  Octavius,  and  after  his  adoption  by  his
great-uncle,  C.  lulius  Caesar  Octavianus,  Augustus
being  only  a  title  giveu  him  by  the  Senate  and  the
people  in  B.C.  27  to  express  their  veneration  for
liim.  He  was  pursuing  bis  studies  at  Apollouia
•whea  the  news  reached  bim  of  his  uncle's  murder
at  Rome,  in  March,  44.  He  forthwith  set  out  for
Italy,  aud  upon  landing  was  received  with  en-
thnsiasm  by  the  troops.  He  first  joined  the  re-
publican party  in  order  to  crush  Antony,  against
whom  he  fought  at  Mutina  iu  conjuuction  with
tbe  two  cousuIb,  C.  Vibins  Pansa  and  A.  Hirtius.
Antouy  was  defeated,  and  obliged  to  retreat  acrtMs
tbe  Alps;  and  the  death  of  tbe  two  consuls  gave
Augustus  tbe  command  of  all  their  troo[w.  He  now
retamed  to  Rome,  aud  compelled  the  Senate  to
elect  him  consul,  and  shortly  afterwards  he  became
reconciled  to  Antony.  It  was  agreed  that  tbe
Roman  world  should  he  divided  between  Augustns,
Autouy,  and  Lepidus,  under  the  title  of  triumviri  rei
puUicae  conatilumdae,  and  that  this  arrangement
Kboald  last  for  the  neit  five  years.  They  published
a  protcriptioy  or  list  of  all  their  enemies  whose  lives
were  to  be  sacrificed  and  their  property  confis-
cated; upwards  of  2000  equites  aud  300  senators
were  thus  pnt  to  death,  among  them  Cicero.  Soou
afterwards,  Augustus  aud  Antouy  crossed  over  to
Greece,  and  defeated  Brutua  and  Cassius  at  tbe
decisive  battle  of  Pbilippi,  in  B.c.  42,  by  which  the
hopes  of  the  republican  party  were  ruined.

AiigQstns  returned  to  Italy,  where  a  uew  war
»w»ited  him  (b.c.  41),  excited  by  Fulvia,  the  wife
of  Antony.  She  was  supported  bv  L.  Antonius,
6»


the  consul  and  brother  of  the  triumvir,  who  threw
himself  into  tbe  fortified  town  of  Perusia,  which
Augustns  succeeded  in  taking  in  40. Antony  now
made  preparations  for  war,  but  the  death  of  Fnlvia
led  to  a  reconciliation  between  the  triumvirs,  who
concluded  a  peace  at  Brnndnsium. A  new  division
of  the  provinces  was  again  made:  Augustus  ob-
tained all  tbe  parts  of  tbe  Empire  west  of  the  town
of  Scodra  in  Illyricum,  Antony  tbe  east  proviuces,
and  LepiduB  Africa. Antouy  married  Octavia,  the
sister  of  Augustus,  iu  order  to  cement  their  alli-
ance. In  B.C.  36,  Augustus  conquered  Sex.  Pom-
pey,  who  had  held  possession  of  Sicily  for  many
years  with  a  powerful  fleet. Lepidus,  who  bad
landed  in  Sicily  to  snpport  Augustus,  was  degraded
by  him,  stripped  of  his  power,  and  seut  to  Rome,
where  be  resided  for  the  remainder  of  his  life,
being  allowed  to  retain  the  dignity  of  Poiitifex
Maximus. Meantime,  Antony  had  repudiated  Oc-
tavia, on  account  of  his  love  for  Cleopatra,  and
had  alienated  the  minds  of  the  Roman  people  by
his  arbitrary  conduct. Tbe  Senate  declared  war
against Cleopatra; and in September, B.C.  31,
the  fleet  of  Augustus  gained  a  brilliant  victory
over  Antony's  near  Actium  in  Acamania. In  the
following  year  (30),  Augustus  sailed to Egypt.
Antony  and  Cleopatra,  who  had  escaped  iu  safety
from  Actium,  put  an  end  to  their  lires. Augustus
now  became  tbe  undisputed  master  of  the  Roman
world,  but  be  declined  all  honours  and  distinctions
which  were  likely  to  remind  the  Romans  of  kingly
power. On  the  death  of  Lepidus,  iu  b.c.  12,  he  be-
came pontifex  maximus.
On  those  state  matters
which  he  did  not  choose
to  be  discussed  in  public
he  couBulted  his  person-
al friends,  Maecenas,  M.
Agrippa,  M.  Valerius
Messalla  Corvlnua,  and
Asiuius Pollio. The
wars  of  Augustus  were
chiefly  undertaken to
protect  the  frontiers  of
tbe  Roman  dominions.
Most  of  them  were  car-
ried on  by  bis  relatious
and  friends,  bnt  several
he  conducted  in  person,
as  when,  in  27,  he  at-
tacked the  warlike  Cau-
tabri  and  Astures  in  Spain, In  20,  he  went  to
Syria, where he received from Phraates, tbe
Parthian monarch,  the  standards  and prisoners
which  had  l>een  taken  from  Crassus  and  Antony.
He  died  at  Nola,  on  the  19tb  of  August,  a.d.  14,  at
the  age  of  seveuty-six. His  last  wife  was  Livia,
who had  been  previously  the  wife  of  Tiberius
Nero. He  had  no  children  by  Livia,  aud  only  a
daughter, Inlia, by  his  former  wife Scribouia.
Julia had  married  Agrippa,  and  her two  sons,
Gains  and  Lncius  Caesar,  were  destined  by  Au-
gustus as  his  successors. On  tbe  death  of  these
two  youths,  Augustus  was persuaded to adopt
Tiberius,  the  sou  of  Livia  by  her  former  husband,
and  to  make  bim  his  colleague  and  successor. See
Tiberius.

Augustus  is  described  as  having  been  something
below  tbe  middle  size,  but  extremely  well  propor-
tioned (Suet.  Aug.  79).  His  hair  was  inclined  to
curl,  and  of  a  yellowish-brown;  his  eyes  were


Angnaltu  Cusar.


AUGUSTUS


170


AULA


bright  and  lively;  but  the  general  expression  of
bis  counteoaDce  was  remarkably  calm  aud  mild.
Hla  health  was  throughout  his  life  delicate,  yet
the  constant  attention  which  he  paid  to  it,  and  his
Btrict  temperance  in  eating  and  drinking,  enabled
him  to  reach  the  full  age  of  man.  As  a  seducer,
adulterer,  and  sensualist,  bis  character  was  like
that  of  bis  UDcle  (Suet.  Aug.G9,71).  In  his  liter-
ary qualifications,  without  at  all  rivalling  the  at-
tainments of  luliuH  Caesar,  he  was  on  a  level  with
most  Romans  of  distinction  of  bis  time;  and  it  is
said  that  both  in  speaking  aud  writing  bis  style
was  eminent  for  its  perfect  plainness  and  propriety
(Suet.  Aug.  68  foil.). His  speeches  on  any  public


StAtue  of  Augustus. (Vntlcan.)

oocasion  were  composed  beforehand,  and  recited
from  memory ;  in  fact,  so  careful  was  be  not  to
commit  himself  by  any  inconsiderate  expression,
that  even  wbeu  discussing  any  important  subject
with  bis  own  wife,  bo  wrote  down  what  he  had  to
say,  and  read  it  before  her.  Like  bis  uncle,  ho  was
somewhat  tinged  with  superstition.  He  was  defi-
cient in  military  talent;  but  iu  every  species  of
artful  policy,  in  clearly  seeing,  and  steadily  and
dispassionately  following  his  own  intorost,  and  in


turning  to  advautage  all  the  weaknesses  of  otbere,
his  ability  has  been  rarely  equalled.  His  deliber-
ate cruelty,  bis  repeated  treachery,  and  bis  sacri-
fice of  every  duty  and  every  feeling  to  the  parpoees
of  his  ambition,  speak  for  themselves;  and  yet  it
would  be  unjust  to  ascribe  to  a  politic  premedita-
tion all  the  popular  actions  of  his  reigu.  Good  i»
iu  itself  BO  much  more  delightful  than  evil  that  be
was  doubtless  not  insenBible  to  the  pleasure  of
kind  and  beneficent  actions,  and  jierbaps  sincere-
ly rejoiced  that  they  were  no  longer  incompatible
with  his  interests.

Among  the  various  arts  to  which  Augustus  re-
sorted to  gain  the  good-will  of  bis  people,  aud
perhaps  to  render  them  forgetful  of  their  former
freedom,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  was  the  en-
couragement which  be  extended  to  learning,  and
the  patronage  which  he  so  liberally  bestowed  on
all  by  whom  it  was  cultivated.  To  this  noble  pro-
tection of  literature  be  was  prompted  not  less  by
taste  and  inclination  than  by  sound  policy ;  and
in  bis  patronage  of  the  learned,  his  usual  artific«
had  probably  a  smaller  share  than  in  thooe  other
parts  of  bis  conduct  by  which  he  acquired  the
favourable  opinion  of  the  world.  Augustus  was,
in  fact,  himself  an  excellent  judge  of  composition,
and  a  true  critic  in  poetry;  so  that  his  patronage
was  never  misplaced,  or  lavished  on  tb<Me  whose
writings  might  have  t«nded  to  corrupt  the  ta8t«
and  learning  of  the  age.  The  court  of  Augostus
thus  became  a  school  of  culture,  where  men  of
genius  acquired  that  delicacy  of  taste,  elevation
of  sentiment,  and  purity  of  expression  which  char-
acterize the  writers  of  the  age.  To  Maecenas,  the
favourite  minister  of  the  emperor,  the  honour  is
due  of  having  most  successfully  followed  out  the
views  of  Augustus  for  promotiug  the  interests  of
literature;  bnt  it  is  wrong  to  give  Maecenas  the
credit,  as  some  have  done,  of  first  having  turned
the  attention  of  Augustus  to  the  patronage  of  lit-
erature. Ou  the  contrary,  be  appears  lai^ely  to
have  acted  from  the  orders,  or  to  have  followed
the  example,  of  his  imperial  master.

Augustus  was  buried  in  a  mausoleum,  whose  re-
maiuB  are  still  to  be  seen  at  Rome  ou  the  Via  de'
Poutefioi.  It  was  a  pyramidal  tower,  328  feet  in
height,  covered  with  white  marble,  surmounted
by  a  statue  of  the  emperor,  and  divided  into  three
stories  by  receding  steps,  each  story  being  planted
with  cypress-trees.  Before  this  structure  was  set
the  tablet  of  brouze  contaiuiug  the  iiider  rerum  a
ee  geetamm,  which  he  had  had  prepared  (Suet.  Jmj;.
101).  A  copy  of  this  important  inscription  was
found  iu  modem  times  on  the  iuside  of  the  aniae
of  a  temple  at  Aucynt  (now  Angora),  in  Galatia,
and  has  been  published  in  fac- simile  by  Prof.
Mommsen,  with  a  commentary.  It  is  reproduced
in  the  illustration  on  page  171.

For  many  interesting  details  regarding  the  per-
sonality of  Augustus,  see  the  life  by  Snetooius
(ed.  with  Engl,  notes  by  H.  T.  Peck,  N.  Y.  ld«9>,
aud  the  following  works:  Ampere,  VEmpirt  Ro-
matn  d  Rome,  3d  ed.  ( Paris,  1867 ) ;  Dezobry,  Bom
in  Jahrhunderte  dee  Aitgustw  (Leipzig,  1837) ;  Beol^,
Augtute,  aa  FamWe,  et  sea  Amia,  4th  ed.  (Paris,
1868) ;  Schiller,  Geackichtf  der  rim,  Kaiaerseit  (1883) ;
and  Oardthauseu,  Augantua  (pt.  i.  1891).

Aula  {avXfi).  An  open  yard,  or  court.  In  the
Homeric  house  the  avKi]  served  the  purpose  of  a
farm-yard,  and  was  surrounded  with  fJum-buUd-
ings  and  rooms  for  the  men-servants  of  tho  booia-


AULA


171


AULAEUH


In  the  later  Greek  house  it  waa  a  kind  of  qnad-
niogle  surronnded  with  a  colonnade,  into  which
the  rooms  of  the  hooae  opened,  and  waa  naed  as  a


Aulaeam,  usually  iu  the  plural,  Auiaea  (7
avXaia).  A  curtain,  carpet,  or  hanging,  mostly  of
the  heavier  and  richer  sort. Its  uses  were:  (1)  in


/,


J- .1/  '  1  -■'


It-  cS..


J


place  for  exeroise  and  recreation  (A.  Wiuckler,
©w  Wo^nhUuMT  der  Hellenen).  For  further  par-
ticalars,  aee  DoMUS.


temples  to  veil  the  statue  of  the  god ;  (2)  iu  honaea,
like  the  mmlern  porti&re  curtains;  ('i)  to  stretch
over  colonnades,  aud  thus  to  form  a  tent ;  (4)  as  a


AULEKCI


172


AUREUS


drop-Dnrtain  in  the  Roman  theatres.  Thie  curtain
disappeared  under  the  stage  iuatead  of  being  rolled
np.  Henca  auhua  premuntur,  "the  onrtain  is  let
down,"  ^'hen  the  play  begins;  and  aulaeum  tollitur,
"  the  play  is  ended."  See  Wieseler,  TheatergebSude
(1851),  and  the  articles  SiPARiUM;  Tapes;  Thea-
TRUU;  Velum.

Anlerd  A  powerful  Gallic  rao«  divided  into
three  tribes:  (1)  Aulerci  EburovTces,  dwelling
near  the  coast  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Seqnana
(Seine)  in  what  is  now  Xormandy,  and  having  as
their  chief  town  Mediotannm,  afterwards  Ebaro-
Tioes  (Evrenx).  (2)  Aulerci  Cxnohani,  dwell-
ing soathwest  of  the  preceding  tribe  near  the
Liger  (Loire),  and  having  Snbdinunm  (Le  Mans)  as
their  capital.  (3)  Aclerci  BrannovIces,  dwell-
ing east  of  the  Cenomani  near  the  Aediii  (q.  v.).

Anils  (AvXi'r).  A  harbour  in  Boeotia  on  the
EnripuB,  where  the  Greek  forces  assembled  before
sailing  for  Troy. See  Ipbiokhxa  ;  Trojam  War.

Anion  (AvXwy).  (1)  A  district  and  town  on  the
borders  of  Elis  and  Measenia  with  a  t«mple  of
Asclepins.  (2)  A  town  in  Chalcidic^  in  Macedonia.
(3)  A  fertile,  grape-producing  valley  in  Italy  near
Tarentam.

Anlnlazla.  One  of  the  best  of  the  comedies  of
PlautuB  (q.  v.),  bnt  lacking  the  cooclneion.

Anlos  GMlina. See  Geluus,  Aulus.

Anrea  Domna. See  Domcs  Aurba.

Anrella  Ztex. See  Lex.

AnrellonL See  Genabum.

Aurellanna.  (1)  Lucius  DoKincs.  A  Boman
emperor  (a.d.  270-275),  distinguished  for  his  mili-
tary abilities  and  severity  of  character,  was  the
•on  of  a  peasant,  bom  about  a.d.  212  in  the  ter-
ritory of  Sirminm  in  Illyrio.  His  father  occu-
pied a  small  farm,  the  property  of  Aurelius,  a
rich  senator.  The  son  enlisted  in  the  troops  as
a  common  soldier,  aucceaeively  rose  to  the  rank
of  centurion,  tribune,  prefect  of  a  legion,  inspector
of  the  cump,  general,  or,  as  it  was  then  called,  duke
of  a  frontier;  and  at  length,  during  the  Gothic
War,  exercised  the  important  ofSce  of  comroander-
in-chief  of  the  cavalry.  In  every  station  he  dis-
tinguished himself  by  matchless  valour,  rigid  disci-
pline, and  successful  leadership.  Tbeocliiis  affirms
that  in  one  day  be  killed  forty-eight  Sarmatiaus,
and  in  several  subsequent  engagements  nine  hun-
dred and  fifty.  This  heroic  vtUour  was  admired
by  the  soldiers,  and  celebrated  in  their  rude  songs,
the  buMen  of  which  was  "MiUe,  mills,  mille,  milU,
miUe,  mille,  oocidil."  At  length  Valerian  II.  raised
bim  to  the  consulship,  and  his  good  fortune  was
farther  favoured  by  a  wealthy  and  noble  marriage.
His  next  elevation  was  to  the  throne,  Clandios  II.,
on  his  death-bed,  having  recommended  Aurelian  to
the  troops  of  Illyricnm.  The  reign  of  this  mon-
arch lasted  only  four  years  and  about  nine  months ;
bnt  every  instant  of  that  short  period  was  filled
by  some  memorable  achievement.  He  pnt  an  end
to  the  Gothic  War,  chastised  the  Germans  who  in-
vaded Italy,  recovered  Ganl,  Spain,  and  Britain  ont
of  the  bands  of  Tetricue,  and  destroyed  the  proud
monarchy  which  Zenobia  (q.  v.)  had  erected  in  the
East  on  the  ruins  of  the  aftlicted  Empire.  Owing
to  the  ungenerous  excuse  of  the  queen  that  she
bad  waged  war  by  the  advice  of  her  ministers,  her
secretary,  the  celebrated  Longinns  (q.  v.),  was  pot
to  death  by  the  victor;  but,  after  having  graced


bis  triumphal  entry  into  Rome,  Zenobia  henelf
was  presented  with  a  villa  near  Tibur,  and  allowed
to  spend  the  remainder  of  her  days  as  a  Roman
matron.

On  his  return  to  Rome,  be  surrounded  the  city
with  a  new  line  of  walls.  He  abaudoned  Dacis,
which  had  been  first  conquered  by  Trajan,  and
made  the  southern  bank  of  the  Danube,  as  in  the
time  of  Augustus,  the  boundary  oftheEmpire.  He
was  killed  by  some  of  his  officers  while  preparing
to  march  against  the  Persians.  (2)  Cakuus.  A
physician,  a  native  of  Numidia,who  lived  abont  thft
fourth  orfifth  century  a.d.  Helefttwo  books,one
entitled,  JAbri  Quinque  Tardarum  tJtw  Chroniearmm
PtunoNum,  and  the  other,Xt^ri  2Ve*  CeUrum  tiveJeu-
iartttn  Ptuaionnm.  Both  are  drawn  &om  Greek  an-
thers,— from  Themison,The88aln8,  and,  above  all,
Sorauus.  His  work  is  particularly  valuable,  as
preserving  to  ns  an  account  of  mauy  theories  and
views  of  practice  which  would  otherwise  have
been  lost;  but  even  of  itself  it  is  deserving  of
much  attention  for  the  practical  information  which
it  contains.  Caelius  is  remarkable  for  learning,
understanding,  and  scrnpulons  accuracy;  but  bis
style  is  much  loaded  with  technical  terms,  and  by
no  means  elegant.  He  has  treated  of  the  most
important  diseases  which  come  under  the  care  of
a  physician.  He  also  wrote  a  compendinm  of  the
whole  science  of  modicine  in  the  form  of  a  cate-
chism {Afedidnalea  Responrionea),  of  which  consider-
able fragments  remain.  So  far  as  known  there  are
now  no  MSS.  of  Caelins  Aurelianus  in  existence,
the  Lorsch  codex  used  by  Sichard  in  bis  editio
prinapt  of  the  Tardae  PoMtioms  (Basle,  1529)  having
since  that  time  been  lost  The  best  edition  of  the
two  works  together  is  that  of  Amman  (Amsterdam,
1709),  reprinted  at  Venice  in  1757.  See  the  treatise
ofTrilleri,iVofae  in  Cite/.  .^Ikts/.  (Leipzig,  1617).

Anralln^  Marcus. See  Aktoninus.

AnreUua  Victor,  Sextus.  A  Roman  historian,
bom  in  Africa.  He  was  probably  governor  of
Pannonia  under  Julian  in  AJ>.  361,  and  in  389  pre-
fect of  Rome.  There  is  a  history  of  the  Caesara
from  luliuB  to  Constautius,  written  abont  a.d.
360,  which  bears  his  name.  This  appeara,  how-
ever, to  be  no  more  than  a  compilation  from  more
comprehensive  works,  Suetonius  being  much  em-
ployed. The  same  is  the  case  with  an  £jn(Dat«,  con-
tinued down  to  the  death  of  Thettdosius  I.  There
is  also  a  short  but  not  altogether  worthless  book,
entitled  De  VirU  IUu9lrih%a  Urb^  Bomae,  which  is
attributed  to  Aurelius  Victor.  It  begins  with  the
Alban  king  Procas,  and  comes  down  to  Cleopatra.
It  is  not  by  Aurelius  Victor,  nor,  again,  is  a  little
book  which  has  been  attributed  to  him,  called
Origo  Oentit  Bomaniie.  This  is  full  of  forged  qno-
tations,  and  belongs  to  a  much  later  period.  Edi-
tions of  all  four  of  these  works  by  Schroter  (Leip-
zig, 1831),  in  2  vols.  There  is  also  a  good  separate
edition  of  the  Da  VirU  JUuMtribus,  by  Keil  (Breslan^
1872),  and  of  the  (Hgo,  by  Sepp,  new  ed.  (Eicb-
stadt,  1885).

Anrea.  The
earth  •  boards  or
mould -boards  of
the  Roman  plough.
See  Aratruh.

Anreus.  (l)The
generic  name  for  a
Roman  gold  coin  *""■"■<>' Aofustaa (BrliWi  HusaoiiL>


AUBIGA


178


AURUH


(aunmt  mnniiiiw).  (S)  A  gold  coin  which  nnder  the
emperors  was  eqnal  to  abont  $5.10.  It  was  first
struck  io  the  Second  Pnnic  War.  See  Numishat-
ICB  (Roman) ;  Nuhhub  ;  Soudus.

Amiga  (^vioxos).  The  driver  of  a  chariot  in  the
Circus. See  Circus;  Curkdb.

Aniliiia.  A  prophetess  held  in  high  repnte
among  the  ancient  Germane  (Tac.  Germ.  8).

Anrtacalplum  [orroyXvifiis).  A  pick  or  probe
for  the  ear  (Mart.  Epist.  ziv.  23;  Scribon,  Cbmpof.

aao).

Aurora. See  Eos.

Annmi  (j(jnMT6s).  Gold,  from  its  malleability
aud  the  circamstanoe  that  it  is  found  lying  in
lamps,  was  one  of  the  earliest  of  metals  nsed  by
man,  and  among  the  most  primitive  resonrces  of
civilization.  This  was  Biispected  by  the  ancients,
who  make  the  earliest  age  of  the  world's  history
an  1^  of  gold.  In  the  Heroic  Age  we  find  that
gold  was  pat  to  a  great  variety  of  uses.  Homer
speaks  of  the  houses  of  Menelafis  and  AIcinoQs  as
fall  of  silver  and  gold ;  the  armour  of  Glaucns  was
of  gold  (II.  vi.  236),  so  were  the  handmaids  of  He-
phaestns  {H.  xviii.  417),  and  the  doves  on  Nestor's
cop  {II.  xi.  632).  So  in  the  decoration  of  the  shield
of  Achilles,  the  ohest  of  Cypselns,  and  other  works
flf  art,  mncb  gold  was  employed.  And  that  this
plenty  of  gold  was  not  a  mere  figment  of  the  poet
we  know  &om  the  beat  testimony,  that  of  graves.
At  Mycenae,  which  is  in  Homer  called  iroKvxpvaoi,
Dr.  Schliemann  has  dug  up  a  prodigious  quantity
of  gold, — cups,  and  Jugs,  and  masks,  and  ornaiuento
uf  M.  sorts.  The  graves  of  the  Crimea  (though
these  are  of  later  date)  also  yield  abandauoe  of
gold,  the  corpses  which  are  discovered  in  them
being  covered  &om  head  to  foot  with  gold,  beaten
into  the  shape  of  animals,  rosettes,  and  designs  of
all  kinds.  In  the  nse  of  gold  the  wealthy  loniaus
of  Asia  Minor  copied  their  neighbours,  even  bind-
ing their  hair  with  it,  in  which  oostom  the  Athe-
niaoB  are  said  to  have  followed  them  (Thuo.
i  6). See  Caslatura.

There  can  be  no  question  that  to  the  smiths  of
euly  time  gold  must  have  l»en  the  metal  which
gave  most  scope  for  the  artistic  faculty.  Its  ex*
treme  softness  and  malleability  enabled  even
workmen  who  had  no  more  elaborate  tools  than
a  hammer  and  nails  to  work  it  into  any  given
shape.  All  the  vessels  of  Mycenae  are  thus  ham-
mered out  and  joined  into  shape  by  nails,  and  the
earliest  statues  of  the  gods  were  produced  by  the
same  method,  which  was  called  by  the  ancients
tr<fivptj\ar«u'.  They  did  indeed  sometimes,  instead
of  welding  two  surfaces  of  gold  together,  unite
them  by  a  solder  of  borax  (Scbliemanu's  Mjfcenae.
p.  231),  but  practically  this  process  was  unusual.
Casting  in  hollow  moulds  belongs  to  a  later  period.

In  the  preparation  of  gold  the  ancients  used
only  the  simplest  processes  of  melting  and  refin-
ing. When  gold  occurred  mixed  with  silver  they
frequently  did  not  separate  the  silver,  but  treated
the  mixed  as  a  simple  metaL

Asia  was  the  source  of  gold,  from  the  days  when
the  Argonauts  sailed  to  Colchis  in  search  of  the
golden  fleece,  to  the  days  when  Alexander  aud  his
captains  seized  and  dispersed  the  enormons  hoards
laid  Qp  during  many  generations  by  the  Babylo-
nian kings  and  their  Persian  successors.  Arrian
and  Diodorus  give  us  accounts  which  might  well
seem  fabulous  of  the  quantities  of  gold  seized  in


the  great  cities  of  Asia.  According  to  Diudoma
(xvii.  71),  iu  the  city  of  Fersepolis  alone  Alexander
captured  a  treasure  in  gold  and  silver  of  120,000
talents.  The  wealth  iu  gold  of  Croesus  is  testified
by  his  gift  to  Delphi  (Herod,  i.  50)  of  above  100
solid  bricks  of  the  metal.  A  private  iudividnal,
Pythius,  in  the  reign  of  Xerxes,  possessed  three
millions  of  gold  darios  (Herod,  vii.  27).  The
sources  whence  the  gold  of  Asia  was  drawn  were
various — India  was  one  of  the  chie£  Iu  Arabia,
also,  abundant  gold  was  found  and  freely  exported
(Strabo,  xvi.  3, 4).  Lydia  supplied  great  quantities
of  river-gold,  both  pure  aud  mixed  with  silver.
(Bee  Elkctrum.)  But  the  richest  source  of  all,  in
the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  was  the  country  of  the
Arimaspi  (q.  v.),  where  the  gold  was  guarded  by
grtfBns,  and  with  difficulty  won  from  tbem  by  the
hardy  natives.  Most  modern  writers  suppose  that
the  reality  which  gave  rise  to  this  fable  was  the
gold  mines  of  the  Caucasus,  whence  gold  penetrated
through  the  country  of  the  Scythians  to  Persia.  A
similar  story  was  told  or  invented  iu  regard  to  the
Indian  gold  (Herod,  iii.  102) — namely,  that  it  was
found  in  a  country  infested  by  huge  ants  (fiv^pijxcr))
from  whose  pursuit  men  could  only  escape  when
riding  on  swift  camels.  The  motive  of  these  stories
for  deterring  adventurers  is  very  manifest.

The  gold  mines  of  Europe  were  also  important.
The  Carthaginians,  and  after  them  the  Romans,
obtained  their  main  supply  from  Spain,  iu  the
rivers  of  which  country  was  a  rich  deposit  of  gold,
notably  in  the  Tagns.  Both  in  Gaul  and  in  Spain,
at  the  time  of  the  Roman  conquests,  whole  districts
were  covered  with  rich  auriferous  deposits,  yield-
ing nuggets  to  the  inhabitants  on  the  application
of  the  simplest  systems  of  washing.  In  the  prov-
inces of  Asturia  and  Lusitania,  according  to  Pliny
{H.  N.  xxxiii.  7H),  the  workmen  went  through  the
laborious  process  of  undermining  whole  hills  by
their  excavations,  and  then  turning  on  rivers  to
wash  the  fallen  earth  and  separate  the  particles  of
metaL  Gold  was  also  found  iu  the  Italiau  Padus,
in  the  Hebms  in  Thrace,  and  other  rivers.  Polyb-
iuB  states  (xxxiv.  10)  that  in  his  time  great  quanti-
ties of  gold  were  found  on  the  surface  of  the  grouud
iu  Pannouia.  In  Greece  proper,  gold  was  found  iu
small  quantities  in  the  islands  of  Siphnos  and
ThasoB,  and  in  larger  quantities  in  the  mountains
of  Thrace.  These  last,  however,  seem  not  to  have
yielded  their  full  supply  until  they  fell  into  the
hands  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  who  procured  frt>m
them,  it  is  said,  1000  talents  a  year  (Diod.  xvi.  8).

Diodorus  also  informs  ns  (iii.  12)  that  in  Upper
Egypt,  on  the  confines  of  Aethiopia,  were  gold
mines  which  were  worked,  from  the  time  of  the
early  kings  of  Egypt  onwards,  for  the  benefit  of
the  state.  But  here  the  gold  was  not  found  as
elsewhere,  on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  but  ex-
tracted from  the  heart  of  the  mountains  by  a
number  of  miserable  slaves.  Diodorus  describes
the  process,  which  appears  tu  be  that  of  extracting
gold  from  quartz.  The  stone,  he  says,  which  con-
tained the  metal  was  softened  by  fire,  and  then  de-
tached in  masses  by  wedges  of  iron.  These  masses
were  brayed  in  Btone  mortars  and  ground  to  the
fineness  of  sand.  Finally,  the  gold  was  detached
by  washing,  the  workmen  aiding  the  process  with
their  hands  and  with  fine  sponges.  The  metal  was
purified  by  being  placed,  together  with  a  certain
I  quantity  of  lead,  salt,  tin,  and  bran,  in  Jars  hermet-
I  ically  sealed,  and  exposed  for  five  days  to  the  heat


AtJRUM  COHONARIUM


174


AUT0LYCU3


of  a  file,  after  which  time  the  foreign  Bubstaoces
were  foand  to  have  evaporated.

In  bis  thirty-third  book  the  elder  Pliny  traces  the
history  of  the  use  of  gold  in  Rome  from  earliest  times.
He  says  (chap,  v.)  that  when  the  G^als  sacked  the
city  no  more  than  1000  pounds  weight  of  gold  could
be  found  in  it  for  ransom.  The  stock  of  gold  in
the  treasnry  had  increased  seven  ye^rs  before  the
Third  Pnnio  War  to  17,410  ponods;  and  after  the
snccessfal  termination  of  that  war  the  metal  caroo
into  commoner  nse  for  decoratiou,  as  for  coveriDg
oeilingB  and  walls,  as  well  as  for  vessels.  The
onstom  of  wearing  gold  rings  was  so  late  in  Rome
that  even  Marius  wore  one  of  iron.  (See  Andlus.)
The  great  influx  of  the  metal  and  its  nse  for  all
purposes  of  luxury  dated  in  Rome  as  in  Greece
irom  the  time  of  Oriental  conquest.  For  ancient
testimonies  as  to  gold  mines,  see  Sabatier,  Produo-
UoH  del' Or fd$V Argent,  el  du  Cuitre  cka  1t»  Ancient;
and  for  the  nse  of  gold  in  coinage,  see  Nuuibhatics.

Atimm  Coronarlom.  When  a  general  in  a  Ro-
man province  bad  obtained  a  victory,  it  was  the
cnstom  for  the  cities  in  his  own  provinces,  and  for
those  from  the  ncighbonring  states,  to  send  golden
crowuB  to  him,  which  were  carried  before  him  in
his  triumph  at  Rome.  In  the  time  of  Cicero  it
appears  to  have  been  nsnal  for  the  cities  of  the
provinces,  instead  of  sending  crowns  on  occasion
of  a  victory,  to  pay  money,  which  was  called  aurum
ooronarium.  This  offering,  which  was  at  flrst  vol-
untary, came  to  be  regarded  as  a  regular  tribute,
and  seems  to  have  been  sometimes  exacted  by  the
governors  of  the  provinces  even  when  no  victory
bad  been  gained.  By  a  law  of  Inlius  Caesar,  it
was  provided  that  the  aurum  coronarinm  should
not  be  given  unless  a  triumph  was  decreed ;  hut
under  the  emperors  it  was  exacted  on  many  other
occasions,  as,  for  instance,  on  the  adoption  of  An-
toninos  Pius.  It  continued  to  be  collected,  appar-
ently as  a  part  of  the  revenue,  in  the  time  of  Val-
entinian  I.  and  Theodosius.

Aunun  Ltutralo.  A  tax  imposed  by  Constan-
tine  on  all  merchante  and  traders,  and  payable  at
every  lustnun,  or  every  five  years.  See  Zosimns,
ii.  38.

AanmcL See  Italia.

Aa«ol  or  AtucU.  A  i>eople  in  Aquitania  in
Gaul.

Aaaetaal.  A  Spanish  people  in  what  is  now
Catalonia. Their  capital  was  Ansa  (Vique).

Anson  (ACtrw).  A  son  of  Odysseus  and  Calypso,
from  whom  the  Ausones  were  said  to  be  descended.

Auaftnea  (ACo-ovrr ) ;  Anaonia  {Aiaovia).  See
Itaua.

Auaonlna,  DEcrMUS  Maonus.  The  most  re-
markable Latin  poet  of  the  fourth  century  A.D. ;
born  about  310  at  Burdlgala  (Bordeaux).  He  was
son  of  the  private  physician  of  Valentiuian  I.  and
afterwards  prefect  of  lltyria.  Educated  thorough-
ly in  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  law,  he  practised  as
an  advocate  in  his  native  city,  where  he  after-
wards became  professor  of  grammar  and  rhetoric.
He  was  then  invited  by  ValentMkian  to  undertake
the  education  of  his  son  Oratian,  who,  after  he
bad  ascended  the  throne,  conferred  upon  him  tbu
consulship  and  other  distinctions.  After  the  ait-
saasination  of  Oratian  he  retire<l  to  his  CHtate  near
Bnnligala,  where  he  continued  to  reside,  in  full
literary  activity,  till  ^0. He became  a  Chris-


tian, probably  on  accepting  the  office  of  tutor  to
the  prince.  Besides  composing  a  turgid  address
of  thanks  to  Oratian,  delivered  at  Treves,  Aoso-
nius  wrote  a  series  of  poems,  including  versee  in
memory  of  deceased  relatives  {Parentalia),  verses
commemorating  his  colleagues  (Commemoratio  Pro-
fetaorum  BHfdtgalmtium),  Hpitaphia,  Eelogae,  Efi*'
tulae,  Epigrammalay  and  a  number  of  miscellaneoos
pieces,  one  of  which  {Motdla)  is  the  narrative  of
a  tour  from  Bingeu  on  the  Rhine  to  Bemcastel
(Tahemae)  on  the  Moselle,  and  then  up  the  Moselle
past  Neumagen  (Noviomagum)  to  Treves.  Its  snb*
ject  has  secured  the  poem  some  renown.

Ansonius  is  not  a  real  poet,  but  he  tries  to  make
up  for  lack  of  genius  by  dexterity  iu  metre,  by
the  manipulation  of  words,  and  by  omamente  of
learning  and  rhetoric.  The  consequence  is  that
his  style  is  generally  neither  simple  nor  natormL

The  ediUo  princepa  of  Aosonius  was  pnblisbed
in  Venice  (1472  foil.).  There  are  separate  edi-
tions of  the  Moadla  by  Backing,  with  notes  (Ber-
lin, 1628);  a  variorum  (Bonn,  1842),  this  with  a
German  translation ;  and  by  Schenkl  (Berlin,  1863).
There  is  an  English  translation  by  C.  T.  Brooks,  iu
Waring's  Bride  of  the  Rhine  (Boston,  1678).  The  oth-
er poems  may  be  found  in  the  editious  by  Schenkl
(Berlin,  1683)  and  Peiper  (Leipzig,  1686).

Anspez. SeeAuouR;  Haruspbx.

Anspiclnm. SeeAuoua;  Harcspez.

Auater.  Called  Notus  (Noror)  by  the  Greeks.
The  south  wind,  or,  strictly,  the  southwest  wind.  It
frequently  brought  with  it  fogs  and  rain ;  but  at
certain  seasons  of  the  year  it  was  a  dry,  sultry
wind,  injurious  both  to  man  and  to  vegetation^
the  tirocico  of  the  modem  Italians.  The  name
auater  is  from  the  root  found  in  the  Latin  uro, "  to
burn."

Antailatae  (AAraptoroi).  Au  Illyrian  people
living  in  the  monntains  of  Dalmatia.

AathentlonxiL  A  private  collection  of  the  later
imperial  edicte,  styled  also  Ltfrer  Authentieormmr
made  later  than  a.d.  560. See  Novellak.

Anthepsa  iavOi'^s),  which  literally  means
"self-boiling"  or  " self-cooking,"  was  the  name  of

a  vessel  which
was  used  for
heating  wat«r,
or  for  keeping
it  hot.  Itsfonn
was  not  great-
ly different
from  that  of
our  modern
tea-urn,  a»
shown  by  the
annexed  illus-
tration.

Aatb«p«.  (FnHn  the  Naples  Uwenm.)  ^^  auThJ^ao
among  other  costly  Corinthian  and  Delian  vessela.
Iu  later  times  they  were  made  of  silver.

Autoohthfines  {avroxQavti). See  Aborioixks.

Autolj^cns  (AvTciXuKoc).  Son  of  Hermes  a»d
'  Chiou^,  or  (accordiug  to  another  account)  Philonis;
,  father  of  Anticlea,  the  mother  of  Odysseus.  In
I  Greek  mythology  he  figured  ae  the  prince  of  thievea.
I  From  his  father  he  inherited  the  gift  of  making
I  himself  and  all  his  stolen  goods  inviaibls,  or
'  changing  them  so  as  to  pxeolude  the  poaiiWHty


AinX)MElKtN


na


BABEL,  TOWEB  OF


r^fH'Mitl  to  bave  giveu  lieroclca  iotttruc-

>T1.

AotomfidoD  f ALrro^cdttfv),  Son  of  Diorp* ;  tbo
cotiimili*  Atid  fliAnut«i<r  of  Achilh;*  (q.  t.},  luid
nfUrnranU  of  PyrrUuM,  ihf  m>ii  ut' Acliilles.

Antomolias  Graphs  taiTofia^iat  ypa<ft^).  An
acciisAtioo  hrougbt  ugaiiiNt  pcrsouo  guilty  of
Imving  diwrrteU  to  tbo  t-uemy.  Sc«  Abtratrias
OitArfnc.

AatOD04i  iXOnt^t}).  A  ilnii(;htcr  of  (.'admim
■ml  wifv  of  Ariatikciis,  liy  wluitii  »he  bpcaiuu  tbu
luollier  of  Acliicou  (q.  v.). 8cu  raiiMtn.  i.  44.

Antonfimi  (avDiyoftai),  The  Qreok  name  fur
Stiktci  Ibat  wiTo  goveniwl  by  ibeir  own
and  not  subject  tn  »iiy  forcigu  puwvr.

AiudUarea. See  SociL

AOXO  {.Kl^iif. &it  CllAIUTKa

ATemus. Sec  Lt'ciUKL'tt  Lacl's.
ATesta. Sec  Persia  ;  Zuroaatkr.

AvUdub  (or  Avlaniiu),  Klavii'i). A  Latin  fitb-

iillitt.of  u'hune  i.\<>rkii  w«  liavn  a  (u>Il(*i:liiiu  cif  forly-

fvrM  f%bl(«  ill  elt*<;iac  vvrtte,  wbniw  L'uutjiusitiou  umy

eoiijbctti rally  b«  iui(tigut.'4l  tu  tbe  fuiirtb  cvntury  a.d.

Tlk'yuv  tledicated  to  prow  lu  a  eurtuiii  ThediWiuK,

by  (ome  ideutifieil  willi  Theoib>siu»  >[a<^-i-ubiriK,  tln-

_ malhiM  o(  the  Salttmalta. Tbt.-  bonk  was  um'<I in

■ tbeKhool»ibjwt)  tbron^b  the  Miildlt-  A^rH,  ilnriiit:

K «bich  it  WM  lunch  iuiitatiwl,  am  in  (lu^  .Vvrim  .^i-m*

H itiia  of  Alexundet-  N(^ckaul,  cuuiponeil  in  the  tbir-

H tnnitli  i^ulnry. (iuin\  tt'Xt^  nf  Aviiuni't  nn;  thoec

of  Ui'lmiunit  <  ItiTliu,  |H4S^K^nbl)t'^([^i|tzig,  IH;^),

Ud  KobuMou  KUiSj  ir  i  tb  apparalua  criliciM,  cuinmoa-


I


tary,  excunuM,  aud  index  (Louduu,  1887).  Tho
nATJiest  .Vi/vuji  Aviuniu  has  bven  fdiurd  by  Onisw)
(KnnlKfdMTK,  18t>^) ;  nud  tbe  rra){tUL-ut»  uf  Nuckain's
'nc>rk  luay  he  funn<l  m  Frubuer,  |i.  415.

Avienas,  Kurrs  Kesti's.  A  Latin  ))<M>t  of  tbe
fourih  century  a.d.  He  wtxjt«  iu  bcxiuurtirr  vitm
a  trauslatiou  uf  tho  PhaenOHunta  of  Amiua  (q.  v.);
a  geography  based  upuu  Diun.vuiiH  iVricgotcii  (,/^«-
wTijiNo  Orbi»  TnTamm)]  ami  anntbrr  gfyigraph*
ina)  piAO)  {Ora  Afaritima)  in  iatuliicK, dcKciibiiig  tbu
euama  of  the  Mwlitotraofan,  il(ui*k,  iiud  Caspian
ftwut.  Of  tlw  latit  work  only  a  part  of  tho  tlist
Uouk  id  exiaut,  Hu  i«  kui>t<r»  in  buvu  written
aUo,  in  iambics,  a  iKiotirul  vrntion  of  I,ivy  nud  a
coudeuMd  iKiraphrsAcr  *>f  ttiv  Jcneid  ofVLTgil,  of
which  iHM't  hv  ii«,  iu  »lyli>,  au  imilutor.  Tlio  rriUio
prineefin  of  ibe  coniplwto  workti  wiu  pnblittbod  in
Veuico  (USH).  A  good  etiitiou  ia  ll'>U|t>r'tt  (luua-
linick.  1KH7).

Axameuta. The  aouga  uf  tbe  Salian  prieatA.

See  t.'ARMINA  HaIOAHIa; KALII.

Axlu6  iiiiiyif). St)«  SKCt^KIS.

AjdB. Sve  CuiiHiTS.

Axiua  ('A^iotX  ThH  cbirf  river  of  Uooedoula,
rtMiug  in  Mount  Scunlusuud  fiovriug  HoutliCMt  iutu
the  Tb«i-nuiicuM  Siuus.

Ajcdnea  {a^oytf,  Kvp^inr).  Woodf-*u  tubleta  paiut-
rd  whito,  autl  uinilu  to  t*iru  on  an  nprigbi  axin,  on
ivhich  were  in»crilied  tbe  lan-aof  HuIud  (q.  v.).  8oo
Ifemiauii,  Slant9itllfrth.  $  If?,  1.

AKOtna  ("A^wtoc).  AhIuIihI  or  Asbdond  ;  a  rity
of  Pjilt>Hliu«  near  iUh  w*a-cnaKt.  It  waa  ono  of
tbu  6vc  i-liiff  tciwuH  of  tbe  PbiliKtini-f,  anil  a  acut
of  tbo  wontbip  of  Dagou. See  Herod,  ii.  1&7.


B


f


B,  M  a  HTmbol.

h  (ibKKX.— lu  lnt<!  Greek  iiiNcripttonii  we  aume-

timc*  flud  B  l/j}=^a<nX(Koff.  (iot}Out  or  /iovX^s ;  aa
*  ^■—'^tj^ivfitm  fiavyifs,  aix  tliuiw  iu  all.  B  ff  :=
S:  ,3='AMJU.

In  Urcf.—

B=ltiMl||iti,  bnunflciavina,  boaua,  Ixw.

ll=lwlerauus  =  veterouua  {C.l.  L,  x.  71!));  also
t<liit=vlui.

H'b=iKtuiH  beue.

B-B>M*Kr=buniA  lieue,  niulia  bene.

BRVV^lMini  viri.

Ult— bfina  d*'a.

BUSM^brnu  do  ae  mereuti ;  B-H  D-8=bcue

l'4'=lM)im  furtiiua,  bouum  factum.

II  M  =  l>eiic  ujcreuti,  bouu  lui-iiiii,  bouao  uicoiuriaf,

tiMiiijka,

'^^  i*=bcne  ueKiitt  f«cit,  bouao  metuuriae  fe-

B'K'F'b  S=!benB  niprcnti  ferenint  de  sno.
o  W'M-p  — bene  innrKnti  ineuinriaui  jioHiiit.
D'MPrrbeae roereutl nociuit,  bonne  uienutriaii

[•Miii

^M'Pc— bciji;  nurrenti  puucniliiiu  cnravit.
^'^■R^lMiiiat;  incinorinv  rL-ligioEUi.
BM \*=ln„im.  memoriae  vir.
■WniB  jiBcr.
"lieacat.

■^j  pnblicae  natua.


B-V=lwue  Tale.

U-V-V=balnea,  vina,  VflODB.

BaaL Soe  BKi-t'fl.

Baalbek. S(><;  IIkuui-uus.

Babel,  TowKit  oi*.  The  tower  mcutlonvd  In
GeneniH  xi.  n*  having  beco  cninniencfd  by  tbe  dc-
sccudantH  of  Koah  on  tbe  plniii  nf  Sblnar  (Suuiirt.
iu  onler  to  ii*acb  tbu  heuvvna  and  (Iiuh  VKcaiie
from  iho  diiiijit*!-  of  »  wxoud  Didnge,  Ji'bovHh,
lion-fver,  citufoundcd  tbo  laugnago  of  the  hiiild-
ers,  Ml  that  they  no  longer  understMMl  one  aunlb-
fv,  aud  tbus  bocame  ftcnttercd.  From  thin  the
tower,  whivb  n^uiaiiied  untliiiubcd,  woa  ciilkd  Bttb-
et  or  "ooufnsion  "  (Ilcb.  baibfl,  to  confound).  Thin
etymology  i«,  however,  only  a  spoctucu  of  Obi  Tes-
ttiuicut  purouumnKia,  in  ibitt  Babel  is  iu  reality
tho  AHHyriaii  bab^ili,  "ibi*  gnle  of  dud" — a  Semitio
iTudiTing  t>r  tbo  8uii)iriau  uume  Ca-dim(ra.  SoUio
fragmcuM  of  a  c-unL'iform  text  were  dbw:overed  by
Mr.  George  Smith  routaining  a  uarrativu  clnwly
parallel  to  tbe  Iliblical  acuouut.  The  sfory  iu
tire«k  mythology  of  the  attempt  of  tbo  Uinnttt  to
scale  liL'UTcu  i^  probably  au  echo  of  Uabyluuiiui
tradition. See  GltiA^fTCS.

Kothiug  ift  known  regarding  tbe  nite  oft  he  Tow-
er nf  Babel,  beyoiul  tbe  fact  that  it  wa»  in  or  very
uear  Baliylon.  It  is  generally  held  to  he  ivprv-
aeiitvd  by  tbr  great  pile  tt'm  Ninimnd,  wbicb
atauda  iu  Boraippa,  a  suburb  uf  Babylon,  eight


A


BABRIUS


176


BABYLON


miles  distant,  and  dedicated  to  the  god  Neba
8ir  Henry  RawlioBon  made  tbe  discovery  that  the
pile  consisted  of  seven  stages  of  brickwork  on  an
eartheu  platform,  each  stage  being  of  a  different
colour.  Tbe  temple  was  known  as  the  Temple
of  tbe  Seven  Lights  (planets),  each  stage  being
consecrated  to  a  light  or  planet.


Ptu)  and  Elevation  of  the  Temple  «t  Boratppa,
mewuremeDt.)


(From  Oppert'i


Another  proposed  site  is  that  of  the  ruins  now
called  Amram,  within  the  city  of  Babylon.  Here
tlie  mound  is  1100  yards  in  length  and  800  in
breadth.  See  Lenormant,  La  Origtnea  de  VHtatoire
ePaprit  la  Bible,  vol.  i.  (1882);  Smith,  Account  of
Gmfsit,  ed.  by  Sayce  (1680) ;  and  Sayce,  Freth
Light  from  the  Ancient  Monumentt  (3d  ed.  1686).

BabtiuB  (Baffpioc)  or  Babiiaa  {Baffptas).  Tbe
compiler  of  a  comprehensive  collection  of  Aesop's
fables  in  choliambio  metre.  The  book  is  probably
to  be  assigned  to  the  beginning  of  the  first  cen-
tury B.C.  Until  1842  nothing  was  known  of  Bab-
rius  but  fragments  and  paraphrases,  bearing  the
name  of  Aesopns.  (See  Aebopus.)  But  in  that  year
a  Greek,  Minoides  Minas,  discovered  123  of  the
original  fables  in  the  monastery  on Mt.  Athos.


In  1857,  he  brought  ont  95  more,  the  genuineness
of  which  was  disputed  by  Cobet  and  other  schol-
ars. These  were  edited  by  Lewis  in  1859,  and  are
included  iu  Bergk'ti  Anthologia  Ljpiea,  4th  ed.  (1683).
BabriuB  has  been  edited  also  by  Lachmann  (Berlin,
1845),  and,  witb  additions  from  the  Bodleian  and
Vaticau  MSS.,  by  Gitlbauer  (Vienna,  1682).  The
style  of  Bahriua  is  simple  and  pleasing,
tbe  tone  fresh  and  lively.  The  fables
of  Ptiaedrus  (q.  v.)  were  imitated,  with
considerable  closeness  to  the  original,
from  the  fiv6oi  or  p,v6iafifioi  of  Babrios.
An  excellent  text,  with  di88ertation^
notes,  and  lexicon,  is  that  of  Rntherford
(London,  1883).

Babylon  (Bo^vXui').  (1)  The  name
of  a  fortress  in  Lower  Egypt  on  tbe
right  bank  of  tbe  Nile,  opposite  the
pyramids  of  Obizeb.  It  was  said  to
have  been  founded  by  exiles  from  Bab-
ylonia, and  under  tbe  Romans  became  a
place  of  considerable  importance.  (2|
A  celebrated  city,  the  capital  of  the
Babylonian  (Chaldaean)  Empire,  situ-
ated on  the  Euphrates.  The  ancient
accounts  of  its  origin  and  of  the  struct-
nre  of  the  city  are  extremely  confused.
The  god  BeluB  (q.  v.)  is  spoken  of  as
its  founder,  and  also  Semiramis  and
Nitocris.  According  to  Diodonis  (ii.  7),
Semiramis  employed  upon  it  two  mill-
ion workmen  collected  from  all  parts
of  her  realm.  It  must  be  understood,
however,  that  nearly  all  the  ancient  ac-
counts of  Babylon  refer  not  to  the  prim-
itive city,  but  to  the  later  capital  auil
residence  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  Herod-
otus describes  it  in  the  first  hook  of
his  history,  as  if  from  his  personal  ob-
servation.

The  shape  of  the  city  of  Babylon  was
that  of  a  square,  traversed  each  way  by
twenty-five  principal  streets,  which,  of
course,  iutersected  each  other,  dividing
tbe  city  iuto  625  sqnaree.  These  streets
were  terminated  at  each  end  by  gates
of  brass  of  prodigious  size  and  strength,
with  a  smaller  one  opening  towards  the
— ~~)  river.  Respecting  tbe  height  and  thick-
"  -'  ness  of  the  walls  of  Babylon,  there  are

!  great  variations  among  the  ancient
'  writers.  Hei-odotus  makes  them  200
royal  cubits  (or  337  feet  8  incfaee)  high
and  50  royal  cabite  (or  84  feet  6  inches)
broad,  which  seems  incredible.  A  diffi-
culty also  presents  itself  with  regard  to  the  extent
of  tbewallsof  Babylon.  Herodotus  makes  them  120
stadia  each  side,  or  480  in  circumference.  Pliny  mud
SolinuB  give  them  the  circuit  at  60  Roman  miles,
which,  reckoniug  eight  stadia  to  amile,  agreea  with
the  account  of  Herodotus.  Strabo  mi^ee  it  385
stadia.  Diodoru8,from  Ctesia8,assigns360,bntftt>m
Clitarchns,  who  accompanied  Alexander,  366.  Cnr-
tiuHgivesSflS.  Taking thecircnmferenceof Babylon
at  365  stadia,  and  these  at  491  feet,  each  side  of
the  sqnare  (which  is  equal  to  91^  stadia)  wiU  be
8.485  British  miles,  or  nearly  8^.  This  gives  au
area  of  72  miles  and  an  inconsiderable  fraction.
It  is  to  be  remembered,  however,  that  tbe  walls,
like  those  of  most  Oriental  towns,  enoloaed  rath-
er populous  districts  than  mere  cities, lliftt  the


ftre»  eucUwpd  I>y  tlio  wnDe  of  Babylon wns  only
partly  liuitt  ou  u  pruvml  by  tbc  vrords  uf  Qnintiin
CurtiiM (v.  4)f  who  says  Ilint  '■  tbe  bnildingH  in
BaUylon  are  uot  contiguous  to  tlie  walls,  but  some
b^ODsidarablo  sinoe  wu  left  all  aruiiud." Uiodo-
■nu,  DiOKOTer,  describes  a  vast  space  takeu  up  by
■the  palaces  nnil  pnblio  bailditigti. Tbe  enclosure
P  of  nu«  of  the  palaces  was  a  square  of  15  stadia,
Of  near  t^  mite  ;  tbe  otbnr  of  5  stadia — bere  are
ioon<  tbau  Si  si)iiare  miltw  occupied  by  tbe  pal-
arM  alone. Btwidnn  IIm-hh,  (buru  wora  iba  Temple"
indTiiw^rnf  B»hiM,  of  vHftt  uxt4?nL;  and  Ibe  Hunt-
ing; CardeuH. Frum  aH  thiH,  uml  much  moiv  tbal
m^\it hv luldnued,  «*u may  collect moat vlear-
Ijr  that miirb  vavaut  space rcinainifd  within tbe
vslla  of Babylun; aud tbifl  vrould smem to  do
sway,  in  sumf  dcgix-tf,  with  the  un-at  diflicalty  re-
•pecticiglhe  mitunitudtiof  the  city  itself. Nor  is  it
stated  w  the  efffct  of  tbe  tmbscquent  dvclilic  of
Babylon,  Iwt  as  the  ni^tnnl  stale  of  it  when  Alex-
anilnr  first  entered the  place,  for  (.'nrtins  leaves
us Id  tiDdflnMaud  that  tbe  system  of  cnltivatiiig
.  large  proportion  of  tbe  enolusetl  space  originate


PUn  i>f  liabfloD. {Auordinf  lo  Rlch->


^  *itb  the  fiMindaliou  itjwif;  and  Ibi:  history
^  its  two  fticgwh,  by  t'ynis  and  DariiiR  HystiuiplH,
**Vbt  to  abow  it  (llenu«irs  Orogiaph}/  of  Jlrrotto-
'^•i-447).  Tbe  vails  of  Uahylon  were  built  of
r^^k  baked  iu  tbe  son,  cemented  n-itb  bitnmou
innteai)  of  mortar,  and  irore  eticompiiMMl  by  a
"fM  Slid  deep  dib-li,  lined  with  the  Kama  niat«-
'i*!*,  u  were  also  the  banks  of  tbe  river  in  its
^<*UM  through  tbe  city,  tbe  inhnbitsnts  descend-
^t  Ut  tbe  vatcr  by  steps  tbrongh  the  smaller
***  gstea  already  nientinne<l.  Over  the  river
*■*  >  liridgi%  connecting  the  two  halves  of  tbe
"*y.  *«lilch  stood,  the  one  on  its  eiuttcni,  the  other
'"' tta  western  bank;  the  river  running  nearly
J*"***  and  sonth. The  bridge  was  five  furlongs  in

"{tk  mm)  thirty  feet  in  brcndth,  nnd  bad  a  pnl-
**«wich  end,  with,  it  is  ssi<l,  a  siibterraiienn
f*'"'!?'' Wnentli  the  river  from  one  t<t  the  other,
J*^  *"'tk  of  ^emirauiis.  Of  this  bridge  no  traces
"'veyet  I»eeu  found.

"^Ilbin  or  iiwir  the  city  wiw  the  Tomple  of  Bt!ln»^,
"'  Bui,  «  hicU  Uerudotua  describi-s  as  a  square  of


in'o  stadia:  in  tbe  mitlst  of  this  arose  the  cele-
linited  tower,  to  which  both  the  same  writer  and
Strubo  gtvir  an  elevntluu  uf  one  stiuiinm,  aud  the
sinuo  measure  at  its  base.  Tbe  whole  was  divid>
cd  into  eight  separate  towers,  one  above  anothi-r.
of  decreasing  dimensions  to  the  summit,  where
stood  a  chapel,  coutaiutng  a  conch,  table,  and
other  things  of  gold.  Hero  tbe  principal  devo-
tions were  performed ;  and  over  this,  on  the  high-
est  platform  of  all,  was  tbe  obsfrvatory,  by  the
help  nf  which  Ibt)  BubyloniuiiH  am  said  U>  have
atlainiwl  to  great  skill  In  aKlronomy.  A  wind-
ing sLaircuse  ou  tbe  outside  furniod  the  asueut  Ui
this  stupendous  edifice.  The  Old  Palace,  which
stood  ou  the  east  side  of  tbe  bridge  over  the
river,  was  3J  miles  in  extent.  The  New  Pulace,
which  sliMMl  ou  tbe  west  siilc  of  the  river,  oji-
posite  to  tbe  other,  was  7^  miles  in  extent.  It
was  Biirrnunded  wiib  (liree  walls,  one  within  an-
ntber,  with  couBiderahle  spaces  helweei)  them.
These  wiills.  ns  also  tlin»e  uf  the  other  palace,
were  emhellished  with  au  intinite  vurii-ty  of
sculptures,  repre^wnting  all  kiniU  of  aniinnln  to
the  life.  Anioug  the  rrst  was  a  nirious
linnting-pirce,  in  winch  ^i'lninmiis  on
hursehiiek  wiut  llnuwing  her  javptiii  at  »
leopanl,  and  her  husbatid  NinuH  piercing
ft  lion.  In  this  lost  |ial.ire  were  the  IInn>;-
ing  Oardeiifl,  so  celebrated  among  the
Gri*ks.  Tlicy  c-mitniiied  a  sqnare  of  4(M)
feet  oil  every  side,  aud  were  carried  up  ta
the  manner  of  several  large  terraens,  one
above  another,  till  tbe  height  equalled
that  of  the  walls  of  the  city.  Thu  ascent
was  from  terrace  Iu  terraoe  by  stairs  ten
fret  wide.  Tbe  whole  pile  was  saslaiuixl
by  viit4t  arches  raised  upon  other  antbes,
one  aUtve  Htitither,  ami  Atrengtbened  by
u  wall,  Hurt'outidlug  It  on  every  i^ide,  of
twenty  -  two  feet  iu  tbicknow.  Ou  the
top  of  the  arches  were  first  laid  large
tlut,  Htuues.  hixtoou  feet  long  and  fotir
broad ;  over  these  was  a  layer  of  reeds,
mixed  with  a  great  quantity  of  bitumen,
upon  which  were  two  rows  of  bricks  close*
ly  cemented  together.  Tlie  whole  was
coverwl  with  thick  sheets  of  lea*!,  upon
which  lay  tbe  taouhl  of  tbe  garden.  And
alt  this  flcHtragt)  was  eontri  veil  to  keep  the
muistnrt'of  tbe  niouhl  from  rimiilng  an  ay  through
the  aiThi'-.H.  The  earth  laid  thereon  was  tut  dtn^p
that  large  trees  ndght  take  rout  iu  it;  aud  wltli
such  the  terraces  were  covered,  tu\  well  as  with  all
other  plants  and  (lowers  that  were  jiraper  to  adorn  a
pletutnre-ganlen.  In  the  upper  terrace  then'  was
Mil  engine,  or  kind  of  pump,  by  which  water  was
drawn  up  out  of  tbe  river,  and  from  thence  the
whole  gardeu  was  watered-  In  the  spores  be-
tween the  several  arches  uimn  which  thtit  whole
structure  rested  wore  large  ami  magiiilicent  a]iart-
ments,  that  were  very  light,  and  bad  the  advantage
of  a  lieniitifiil  pri9«]ivcl.  Artiyiiis,  tbe  wife  uf  \eb-
ueliadnezzar,  haring  been  bred  in  Media  (for  she
was  tbe  danghter  nf  Astyages,  the  king  of  that
Country),  deatrcd  to  have  something  in  imitation
of  her  native  bills  and  forests;  and  tbe  monarch,
in  order  to  gratify  her,  is  said  to  have  raised  this
prodigious  structure.  Near  Babylon  was  the  fa-
mous Birs  N'imroiid. See  Bahki.,  Thwek  of.

Buhylon  was  probably  in  the  icruith  of  its  glory
uiid  dumiuiun  just  before  the  death  uf  Nebacbaii>


•


k


.  army,
uuo  purt  M  tb^
place  wbptr  ilm  rir-
er  entcrwl  the  city,;
nitd  tlitiotlit^rwbt^rt
it  c»ine  out,  vritb
onlera  to  cnt^r  iIm
rbniiiiel  uf  tb«rivet!
Ml 8  O » U AM thtf

ftbould  find  it  for^
ftlfl«,  Tliti^  bappft)^
cd  by  iiiiUiiiglit;
for,  b,v  cutting  diiuB
(lie  bank  Iruilng  \q
(be  f*reut  take,  an^
milking,  beside^
opc-utiif^s  into  tbf
ircuchea  which,  i^
tlio  coDtve  of  tliij
twii  yeans*  sicgcha
tieeu  dtig  srotiii4
thr  city,  tbf  rir<
was  so  druiiivd  ai
il»  wat^r  ibat  it  1»^
cuBe  Doarly  dr^l
When  the  anny  i
Cyras  colored  ili
channel  frum  ttt^i
UNStf.  Tb«  s|mm1«  of  Nincxfb.  JitiiwIoui,  and  '  re«i>cc1ire  «lationa  on  each  si«l^  of  Ibe  city,  tb«
Kcypt  had  enrichf^l  it:  ilx  amii«A  hitd  swept  like  ,  ni»be4l«iuw-anItowanUlh«  centre  of  Ibe  place;
ft  Uimui  t>\  rr  thr  fiiirwt  c^>unt  ri«t»  nf  tlie  KiLst,  and  !  tiudin]^  tfae  ^ies  leadittf  towanlct  Ifae  river  leAo
hail  at  this  time  uu  lunger  au  enemy  to  cniiicnd  j  in  tbedmnkenneasaodDegliftiaeaiiftbe night,!
w  lib ;  Ibe  arts  aa4  sebBttceaf  driv«&  fntui  I'bwni- 1  eatered  tbem.  and  mcK  by  ooueert  at  ib«>  i>aUe«  I
eia  and  Ksj'W.  *r***  vvotrcd  bare;  an<l  bitbrr  the  |  fore  any  alarm  bad  been  givoa;  here  the  gu
HMInwHihirii  of  Ibo  WmI  ombo  io  imbibe  instnic- 1  |utrt*kiDg,  no  dunbt.  in  the  negUfence  and  dii
Ifaw.  ttA  &11  of  Bftbytoa,  before  the  Tictonuns  der  of  the  night,  wer«  sarpriaed  and  killed.
ftnaa  of  Cyr«B«  owiimd  ilc.  S3^  The  beisht  and  |  after,  tfae  sttUien  of  Cjna»  bftTtug  lulled  the  gn
•Inac^  of  tfae  walla  bad  long  batted  erery  effort ;  aad  neetiftg  with  no  real^aace.  adraucrd  towi
of  the  iurader  llartug  «iide««tood.  at  Uugth.  th«  baaqaehng-ball,  where  tbej  eneooutctnl  1>^
that  oa  a  certaiu  day,  ibea  near  approarbiug,  a  sbaxsar.  tbe  ill-Catcd  motLarch.  and  alav  him,  w  «l
lEreal  mnaual  frMttvat  was  to  be  kepi  at  Babyluo,  bis  anned  folloven.  Seey  hwerer.  Cmt's,  p.  4^
vbe<i  il  wa  ciistnniary  for  the  IJahyluiitaBt  lo  ,  I'mAer  Cyma,  Babyhm  va>  redoceil  to  the  na.fli
a^Mid  IW  mif^i  iu  rvvvlltug  and  draakaaiwa,  be  of  a  proTUicial  city,  aad  barbif  nrolted  nn«1i{
tfanacfat  tbi*  a  fit  kip)Mrtitajiy  for  «»e«llag  ^ -  -

■chtaw  erbtafc  W  iMd  piauned.  Tbta  ««•  fttt  vtfa-
•r  tbaa  tm  lagfttoi  tb*  city  b>  luraiac  tba  c«ai««
af  tba  rit***^  laiii  afcaylwof  "fa^gfa^fa^Bab-
jlaaiaa^.  wbo  laabtd  afaa  lb*  tfrvr  aa  tmm  of
tbair  fimau—  yrnlirrtii.  b«t  aal  Ibt  aaulkat
ayfwbiaataa.  Araarth^.  aa  tba  alfbt  «f  tbe
Icaal.  b*  oeait  a  yarfyaf  bb  ww  ta  ibo  bMd  •£
IW  ««aaU  abkfa  fad  la  tba  lenai  laka  mmlm  bj
KobaebvftaMaar  iv*  ^rvei^-*  tba  waUta  af  lb>  Ea-


' Kit (RldLl


S;^<^<ss^^.,


Ibirtii  vbOa  be  wx«  f»c\t^  tbe  faaafta  of  Iba  rir<
or  witb  walk  W  bnrk  aad  bilawM.  TU»  fatty
bad  duoc«tiia>,  a»  *wia  a»  H  a  aadarti>  la  exaawan
lavakaic  *ba«a  tbe  cnal  baab  or  daai  wbteb  kff4
tba  aakwa  W  tb*  tivar  (a  Ibtir  fWew  amd  tri*-

^^^  aratnA feboai (tMa tbe caaal aWre  awtfcwaed;

^^B wb4>»  Cytaa^  ta  tbe  waait» .  dtT^tta^  tba  wat  af


Dariaa  Uystaapia  vaa  aoTatdy  pauiAtd,  and  1
Xenca  |iliia*md  aad  daipoik^  afiar  wfaicU  I
•leadQy  iaa^id £i*e  BaBixosui.  t\

Bftbrloate  (B^»Amm  ,-  Ea  Iba  Awyrian  inacritt
tioaa  called  fiaWa  ;  uk  tba  INtiJMi,  BmUrmMtt). i
fdain  aatend  fay  tba  lavcr  Mnaaa  of  the  Tigm
aad  ffapbraifa,  aad  tmwt^  Aa  Badero  proriood
^  bab-Azafat. Tba  fcaailaiiw  «C  Babykmi*  rm4
titd  rnaiidwahly  danag  tba  di<nent  perioda  t4
Hikjliaiaa  asd  Awjiiaa  fowtt^  bat  ta  geacavl
■  liiirl iwlly  of  tM
aad  paftily  af  tba  ftoo^
^  tW  MoaaRbaef  A«j«^
itcfia  aMd tb«r  ootpoa*^
Wall"  *>f,
Ibe  lliiiiiiil  aibiiai TW  l%Tia  Uvw  forard »
aalatal  laHma  baB■tea^fiB^  ifaumJi  tbe


lM«afN«aKft<;


'  pco^


^jMMmiii^^


I  tti  «tv  i»i*»  k  tt'bw


«abKi«*oatr


ofVe.


t)t]ri^oaa«afibMi
I liliathaCWM
a«k  t^  daaact  lyi^  «Mtc

iiW  *aHe  tba  tannery  i
tMT  «•  tba  aaatb.  tbi

fartoit'  I
Mbaondtd

-"'T 111 11  _'[

fa»  laat  W  tte  OiJl.ia>*  Mi  bM  alvK
■a  «tf  Iki  Hii>i  ■  aa4  mmt  fatfla  diMrieWfl


BABYIX>NIA


179


BABYLONIA


I


I


of  it  Bit  BuppIyinK  ono  third  of  the  Kmin  pnHliicttL
hj  tbe  whole  PiTMinii  Ktnpim— n  i'art  to  which  thit
hiscriptioi»  benr  witn*>H!>.  A  tiin^iilU-t'til  KyNtt-in
of  Artificial  irrif*»tuiii  i-nhaiiciHl  iIiim  iisilnral  piii-
iliicttTeuera,  a  nutwurk  of  dhhiiIh  linviiitJ  exti'iulfil
««<T  the  cijtire  territory,  imnic  of  ihmi  lM'ih(;  »till
navigable. Olid  the  grealotit  of  rliftn— thr  Niir  SUl-
^k,  which  couiiectnt  thcTiurin  «ilb  ih«  Euphrtitra
— bnviog  b(!eu  iimxI  tLt  lale  us  a.p.  700.

Bjihylunia  wiu  tlividfil  into  several  provinceBof
rarjing  naiiiUT  and  eictent  nt  diffen-nt  jterimU.
TlivebiHrdivtsinn  wn«  into  th««  two  large  provinoNi
of  Bntntr  tShinari  or  Sontb  liabylonio,  nnd  Akkiid
or  Nurth  Babylonin.  which  latter  extended  fnim
the  city  of  Kabyinn  to  th«  A«»8yriau  frontier,
ilabyluii  wan  Ihi-  rnpilnl  of  Siiniir,  and  the  doublr
rity  Sippara-Akkiii)  (  A}iih1<'')  on  both  bniike  of  the
KupbrulfM  vroN  I  he  capital  of  North  Riibyloiiin.
Minor  diviaiou^i  m^n*  riuit-DiiniytiN,  Kditia  {'Kdt-ii),
Gambiihi  (AfadJ)  uitd  Mm  Kaldti.  the  land  of  the
_ CluiklDeaiift  on  Iht  iVr^iiati  (iiilf.

■  ElUNOUiOY  AND  t'lVILIZATION, — Ihlltylottin  WOS
^La  laoil  of  mixed  rncei*,  as  is  teAriliecl  both  by  the
^niipml  and  profaue  writent  of  aiiti<)nily,  niul  by
^pifc  lirt«rofj"it*oii«  charaeter  of  itn  liDgtiialic  niid

■  moimruentnl  reiniiiiiH.  The  11i-9t  populaljou  nan
K Uj^ro- Fill! lie  iu  its  racial  aBlIiatioutf,  as  is  sti-n  by

the  MaiapA  of  thin  peri«id,  which  fxhthit  fealiirea
(•r  n  (Hiro  Tartar  tyjie,  n-ith  <hdio(.-«plialic  KkiillH,
hi|tlicbwk-hou«tiT  aud  itlaiitiii^  ttyea.  ThiM  typi^  iK
^iliaic&IIr  alten^l  to  ibe  Pnito-Mtnte'i  aiid  to  llie
l^milfid  of  Hii.siHiiti.  The  iiuiue  of  Snniero-Akka-
4iiuis  baa  h»rf^u  applied  to  IbiH  puople,  who  urigi-
Dilly  tame  fmui  tim  motintaini*  to  the  northeast,
*lwiicB  the  name  JWarfot,  "  mountaineerH.'*  At
Ujc  time  of  their  linmltn^iion  into  Habyluiiia  they
u*  bfliorod  to  have  brought  with  them  the  ele-
BCBh  of  civilization.  Not  long  after  them,  the
fcaiiw  i<Dtere<L  nabylonta,  their  typo  bIbo  appvar-
^i  In  tlie  glyptic  remains ;  and  later,  other  ethnic
^I'nientswere  addeil  to  the  popnlatiou  by  the  iiat-
•'*l  operations  of  war  and  commerce.  That  the
^itii-  jinmigrants  ultimately  attained  to  a  high
i*pu  uf  indneiiee  in  th«  land  iH  Hern  in  lh«  fart
^U  early  aa  B.C.  38U(t  w(>  hud  a  8etnittr  linn  of
^'Dp,  and«r  Sargiiu  uf  Akkwl,  riiliug  iu  North
^lijlouia.

tbefiahytuniau  people  were  po#*eiMt(*d  of  aciTtl-
*tioiiwho«!  gnratiieHH  lion  oidyof  lat«  bcfii  pmp-
sdjappm^jaied ;  for  the  lUiriiKie  notices  in  lli:nnl-
"'"»  Kid  other  aucifut  writers  j-lvo  lillle  nion;
liiKii  kfaiut  snji^RlioD  uf  the  truth.  The  recnv-
1y  ad  det'ipheniient  in  nrpnt  times  of  many
IwtliUHia  of  inscrihcd  tal>letM  from  the  libraries  of
«>«  oldest  citie«  of  Babyloniii,  give  Hs  a  m<"anB  of
"•otwlnicling  a  very  nccunile  piclnrn  of  the  soci-
•**>Bywf  tlieir  ancient  life,  and  one  more  clear  in
*  "Iftaiift  than  that  given  ns  by  the  rcconln  of
"••Wt  any  other  ancient  people,  except  pcrhajiw  ■

TbsgoTcrnment  was  despotic,  and  of  a  typinnlly
"'iwilal  typo.  The  laws  wc'ro  administored  by
"'I'rtine  judges  under  whom  were  ordinary  jiidgfs,
*^t»t  ID  the  gates  of  the  temple  and  at  the  great
ji*Ip  itf  the  eily  to  hear  canses.  and  gave  jndgment
•^""trirt  conformity  with  jirecedent,  the  chief  pnn-
i*luiirats  being  fines,  Ifwii  of  civic  rights,  imprison-
*tit,  and  deatb.  Appeals  could  l>e  made  to  the
""?.  The  rhief  taxe«  were  the  ''kingV  tjix,"  or
'*t*>n  all  property  ;  tlie  "ariny  tax";  and  the  rax
^Tied,  like  the  English  '*  ship-money  *' of  former


^••U^13?


'<A,


:-P


BabyUntU)  nnck.  wlUt  Cuwriftinn  iMcrtptiao.

tiro«s.  upon  certain  districta  for  ships.  Local
taxes  were  temple  -  titbt-s  (  rjtn'/wm  ),  the  fir»*t-rrnit
tax,  the  sheep  tax,  and  a  tax  for  Ihi^t  nniintenanc«
of  roads  and  canals.  A  ntlver  cnrrency  was  em-
ployed (talents,  maiiehrt,  shekels,  paras),  coined
numey  having  been  introduced  in  the  reign  of
Darius.  These  early  coins  w^ore  perhaps  the  tuira-
drnehnui  [f|.  vj  of  thd  Athenian  Greeks-
Women  'MTiipied  a  favourable  position,  espoeial-
ly  after  iniirringt-,  which  was  effected  by  both  a
i-oligif'iiH  and  a  civil  ceremony.  Oft'ences  agaiust
a  mother  were  severely  punishefl,  sometimes  even
by  matilation.  Women  could  own  slaves  iiu<t
other  projierty  in  their  own  right,  nnd  uoiild  eveit
*}t)gJtg4  ill  business.  All  ChaldueanH  of  frt>e  birth
were  eiliicnied.  Slaves  were  protected  by  law
against  harsh  treatmeui  (V<im  Ibeir  masters;  Ihey
could  own  property  ;  and  iu  fact  worn  often  taught
trades  and  other  »t>lf •  Bup|Kjrting  uccnpatiouii  by
their  owners.

Art, LlTKRATt7KR, AXD MAKtrFACTIlRKS.— Tho

recent  explorations  of  Kassam  at  Sippaiii  and  of
De  8arzec  at  Tel-Id  have  a«lded  immensely  to  our
knowledge  of  I'haldnean  art,  which  had  hitherto
been  reprpwntMl  by  a  few  engrnvcd  eylindors  and
gems.  Till'  statues  di(M'^>ven'd  hy  lln-se  geiitlemeu
have  much  arltHtir  nM>rit.  Tim  largef-t  is  nearly
tifn-MJzf,  is  iiecuratr  in  itH  anatomy,  and  it*  rarvet.
ill  hard  gn-en  diurite.  Another  »vrii  ninro  reniark-
ablo  piece  of  wurkmaushij)  tit  a  bi-wl  cut  in  rvd
porphyry,  the  execution  making  it  evidcnl  that
tools  of  rare  excellence  must  have  been  used,
^venil  bnjnze  statuettes  attest  a  knowledge  of
the  art  of  casting  metals.  Many  tnlismaos  Uld
nmnletK  hnvo  lieen  found,  Ifie  stoiiee  selected  by
the  lapidaries  being  gn^eu  and  red  jasper,  haeniit-
tiln,  chalcedony,  crj-etal,  ranu-lian,  lapi« -laxuli,
sardonyx,  and  onyx.  Mimic  was  cijltivato<l,  iia  th*
seulpton*  pruvi)  by  their  r«-pre*ientation»  of  Die
harp,  eymlialn,  aiul  other  iiiKlnunenls.

Among  the  Siimero- Akkadian  [Mipnlalioii.  the
scrH>e  caste  contained  many  niembeni  of  high  nink,
and  literature  in  caus£(|iieiice  was  highly  v(.teenied.
As  has  hcon  already  stated,  every  fn-u  Bubyloniaii
hud  a  cert-aiu  amount  of  education.  iQc^liidiug  a
knowledge  of  tablet  writing.  Libraries  werecoiu-
mon,  and  tablets  liave  been  found  dii-ecting  the
student  how  to  tisk  for  such  works  as  he  needed
from  thn  libniries;  whence  it  n|>i>earM  that  a  ver^'
careful  system  of  cataloguing  prevailed.  Various
schools  uf  litt'rature  are  noted  us  having  existed,


BABYLONIA


180


fiABYLONU


each  iuflueoced  by  local  achools  of  thought.  In
the  moBt  aocient  school  of  Eridbn,  for  example,
magic  was  cultivated,  with  the  result  that  mauy
works  ou  magic  and  its  coguate  subjects  were
written  and  compiled,  among  them  the  series  of
tablets  known  as  the  "books  of  spells  relating  to
diseases  of  the  head,"  and  having  a  remarkable
resemblance  to  the  Atbarraveda  or  Black- Veda  of
tbe  Aryans.  The  school  of  Erech  produced  the
epic  poem  of  Gizdhnbar,  consisting  of  twelve
books  arranged  according  to  the  twelve  signs  of
the  zodiac.  An  admirable  specimen  of  Babylonian
literature  is  a  tablet,  of  which  both  Assyrian  and
Babylonian  Terslons  exist,  describing  the  war  in
heaven  between  Merodach  (Marduk)  and  the  de-
mon Tiamat.  This  tablet  came  from  the  lihraiy
of  the  Temple  of  Nebo  at  Borsippa.  Besides  poe-
try and  magic,  the  remains  of  these  great  libraries
have  yielded  specimens  of  historical  writing,  legal,
geographical,  and  religious  composition,  and  trea-
tises on  astrology,  divination,  astronomy,  and  myth-
ology, besides  fables  and  proverbs.  Tbe  greater
part  of  the  Chaldaean  classics  were  copied  by  the
Assyrians  under  Assnr-bani-pal,  and  thus  became
a  part  also  of  the  literature  of  the  Northern  Em-
pire. See  Abstria.

The  natural  products  of  Babylonia  were  very
numerous,  comprising,  besides  com  and  other  cere-
als, many  kinds  of  frnlta,  such  as  grajtes  and  mel-
ons, and  also  vegetables — sesame,  onions,  garlic,
cucnmbers,  etc.  Trades  were  varied,  and  the  tab-
lets make  especial  mention  of  weaving,  dyeing,
pottery,  building,  and  many  other  mechanical  arte.

Chronology  and  History. — Hitherto  students
of  Babylonia  have  been  almost  entirely  dependent
upon  the  fragmentary  portious  of  tbe  Canon  of
Kings,  drawn  np  by  the  Oraeco-Chaldaeau  priest
BeroBus(q.v.),aboutB.C.268;  but  these  lists  are  now
confirmed  and  superseded  by  Babylonian  Canon  in-
scriptions dating  from  the  sixth  ceutury  before  our
era.  The  documents  are:  (1)  a  Canon  of  Kings  by
their  dynasties,  exteuding  from  B.c.  2200  ontil  B.C.
647,  partly  mutilated,  but  capable  of  restoration ;
(3)  the  Tablet  of  Synchronous  History  of  Assyria
and  Babylonia,  which  gives  the  names  of  the  Baby-
lonian kings  from  about  B.C.  1800  to  B.c.  732 ;  (3)  a
Chronicle  Tablet  giving  the  chief  events  in  Baby-
lonia, tbe  month  and  day  being  given  in  moat  oases,
from  B.C.  747  to  B.C.  660 ;  and  (4)  a  collection  of
dated  contract  tablets  extending  from  B.C.  680  to
B.C.  150.  This  unequalled  series  of  chronological
documents  gives  an  almost  complete  sequence  to
Babylonian  history,  and  although  there  are  still
lacunae,  the  basis  is  now  much  more  sure  than
when  we  were  dependent  solely  upon  the  second-
hand statements  of  Ctesias  and  Berosus.

It  is  now  evident,  from  the  mouumente  and  in-
scriptions which  have  beeu  obtained  from  the  tra-
ditionally oldest  cities  of  Chaldaea,  that  the  civili-
zation of  the  ancient  people  of  Babylonia  has  an
antiqnity  rivalling  that  of  ancient  Egypt.  The
earliest  monument  of  which  we  can  accurately  fix
the  date  is  a  stone  whorl  in  the  British  Museum,
brought  from  Sepbarvaim  by  Mr.  Kassam.  It  is
an  oval-shaped  stone,  inscribed  in  what  is  called
line  writing — that  is,  writing  in  which  the  charac-
ters are  formed  more  by  lines  than  by  the  ordinary
wedges,  a  style  that  goes  back  to  a  time  when  the
hieroglyphic  or  pictorial  system  of  writing  was
beginning  to  be  discontinued.  The  king's  name
Inscribed  is  that  of  Sargon  L,  king  of  Akkad,  who


la  now  universally  aaaigued  to  the  remote  antiqui-
ty of  B.C.  3600,  and  other  inscriptions  of  this  dis-
tant period  are  to  be  found  in  other  European
museums.  Older  still,  in  all  probability,  are  the
very  archaic  records  found  by  M.  de  Satzec  at
Tel-16,  iu  the  neighbourhood  of  Erech,  which,  writ-
ten in  tbe  ancient  agglutinative  dialect  of  the
Snmero- Akkadian  inhabitants,  must  precede  tbe
Semitic  inscriptions  of  the  northem  kingdom  of
Sargon  and  his  successors.  These  early  inscrip-
tions are  mostly  of  a  very  short  character,  contaio-
ing  little  more  than  the  names  and  titles  of  the
kings  who  ruled  the  cities,  but  at  the  same  time
they  afford  us  informatiou  as  to  the  state  of  civili-
zation existing  in  Chaldaea  nearly  4000  years  before
the  Christian  era.  Tbe  Empire  had  not  become
one  consolidated  whole,  and  polyarchy  was  the
most  prevalent  form  of  government,  each  city  being
ruled  by  its  local  king.  Thus,  Sargon  was  king  of
Akkad,  and  especially  styles  himself  king  of  "  the
city.**  Ur-bahu  and  Dungi  were  rnlera  of  Ur,  and
others  held  sway  iu  the  cities  of  Eridhn,  Lano,
and  Babylon.  Some  of  these  early  rulers  claim
the  titles  of  king  of  Snmir  (Sbinar)  and  Akkad,
a  division  which  in  after-tlrae  bad  the  gec^raphi-
cal  signification  of  North  and  South  Babylonia,  but
which  in  the  earlier  ages  are  certainly  rather  to
he  regarded  as  ethnic  than  local  divisions  of  this
early  population.  Babylon,  though  always  one  of
tbe  most  important  citiea  of  the  empire,  was  nut
the  earliest  capital,  for  tbe  cradle  of  Chaldaean
civilization  was  iu  the  region  of  the  south.  Here
all  the  ancient  legends  connected  with  Gizdhnbar
as  Nimrod  are  located,  and  find  tbelr  centre  in  tbn
city  of  Uru-ki,  tbe  Erech  of  Genesis,  the  name  of
which  means  "  the  city  of  tbe  land,"  or  capitaL

The  next  most  important  city  iu  this  southern
region  was  Ur,  tbe  sacred  city  of  tbe  Moon-god,
tbe  ruins  of  which  are  marked  by  the  mound  of
Mugheir,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  the
city  from  which  Abram  came.  Larsa  (Senkereh),
the  Ellasar  of  Gen.  xiv.;  Sergnl  or  Kulann,  the
Calneh  of  Genesis,  now  marked  by  the  ruins  of
Tel-IA  on  tbe  Shat-el-Hie ;  and  Eridhn,  the  most
sacred  city  of  South  Babylonia,  called  f^vquently
the  "  Holy  City,"  were  all  seats  of  local  rulers.

The  first  ruler  who  succeeded  in  combining  those
various  city  kingdoms  into  one  consolidated  whole
was  Ur-babn,  whose  reign  must  be  placed  about
B.C.  2700.  This  ruler  restored  temples  in  nearly
all  the  above-mentioned  cities,  and  appointed
"  priest  viceroys "  to  rule  in  them.  He  was  suc-
ceeded by  his  son  Dungi,  who  has  left  ds  a  large
number  of  inscriptions.  Already  Chaldaean  civih-
zation  had  made  great  progress  and  was  far  ad-
vanced, and  the  sciences,  especially  mathematics
and  astronomy,  were  studied;  while  the  ships  of
Cbaldoea  navigated  the  Persian  Gulf.  The  first
really  historical  chronicle  belongs  to  this  period,
and  is  found  on  a  statue  of  Gudca,  which  shows
tbe  Babylonians  already  at  war  with  Elaro  and
the  nations  to  the  west.  The  wars  with  Elam
form  the  chief  features  of  the  bistoiy  of  this  period.
Iu  B.C.  2280  a  powerful  confederation  of  Elaraiies
under  Kudumakhnndi  invaded  South  Chaldaea.
and  sacked  the  capital,  Erech,  carrying  away  the
statue  of  the  divine  patroness  Nana  or  Istar.  This
dynasty  lasted  until  about  B.C.  2120,  and  was  very
powerful,  as  shown  by  the  numerous  ioacriptious
of  tbe  kings  found  in  various  ports  of  Babylon.
Of  the  kings  of  thia  period  two  are  apeoioUy  iu-


BABYLONIA


lA


UABVLONIA


.Ktidiir-iiiatitig,  nlio  appearB  to  hn^i^
ffniuount  oftbe  Cdiirrdrrntioii  of  kiir^H,
imnl  the  title  of  "  lord  pf  tbe  vwx ."  nr
Hon,  llri-akii,  wild  wmsnilernf  I>ana.
is  nluin^i  niiivenially  idoiitilu'il
vitli  the  Arioch,  kiugof  Kllawir,
Gen.  liv.  This  dynasty  wna  ovcr-
hc  powerful  noiirper,  Kiu^  Ktiammnnt-
feikn  not  Iv  b»ve  lieeu  ul'tmtiv«  Ual>.v-
b,  hut  nitht-r  »  Kamilti'  or  C^wtciiii  wlio
tn  thu  luiiil  ami  svutlei]  hiiiiHt-lf  of  tbiH
lepivtuiinn  tn  m-itm  tUu  thrcitifl.  Tlutf
IkBty  is  uiii!  uf  the  iiuwt  iui]i4)i'laiil  pv-
&yluui)tii  hintory,  uh  ^rval  pulitk'al
k  placti  at  lliiw  ttiim.  It  wom  ut  IbiK
hkhylou  hcgau  to  ohxiiiuu  i(9  iHuiliuu
^  ut'  the  H\hule  Hiiipin;.  Khaiituiiint-
|he  ttiiuplesof  Bt-I  at  Uahylnii,  Jittba  in
Id  restorod  Kcvurol  of  the  uicred  nli-
a  Bttbylouiii^at  Ur,  Erecb,  uud  Lai^a
I  snfferrd  at  th«  baiitlH  of  ihti  Kluuute
tts  greAtotit  puhlic  work,  bowcvtT,  wbm
ption  of  a  oannl  cnllt-nl tlio  river  of

Es,  "joy  of  nii-n,''  winch  tU*Tc  is  little
1'  Xar  Ma)kn,  or  Bnval  River  of  the
SiiA  raiiu)  croswd  North  Bubjloiiia,
VkU  8i[ipara,  and  18  now  represcuied
•h  Cftiiat,  imp  of  tbu  few  ancient  cnttalit
t  (he  (ircw^iit  dAy,  ThiM  dynasty  lasted
JAre,  the  fuiiudur  liitii»i*lf  rnliriK  fi>i-|y-
'y  iiiimcrouA  collection  of  itiBcriptiuiiN
iu  the  BriltKli  Mii»fiiti)  abows  that
t  Ual»ylouia  wiw  or4Mipit:tl  by  a  miirh
Utiou.  coDiiiatiujK  nf  8fiiii<-ni  -  Akka-
lle*.  KasiitM,  and  n  InrKL''  •^nnitit-  cl-
I  SoRiltoa  Appeiu*  principally  aa  trad-


._-*a<I  \ta  ImiifWMion, (BrlUftli  MuKpnin  )

^ooM>diti{E[  d.viiaaties,  extending  over
kbnnl  (jlK)  years,  coositilvd  uf  »  intxt-
te  and  ntin^Seuiitic  priiiL-es,  who  rnli-d
bat  capit^d.  Tbe  history  of  this  period
to  derived  rn)m  tin-  Tablet  of  Syncbn'-
^and  otily  n  ft-w  Babylouiaii  records  uf


the  pt'rifMl  bnve  Keen  pr«'MTVt>d.  Ono  of  llie  most
iiii|M>rt.iiit  is  the  nienioriat  Hluue  of  Nehiichailiicz-
znr  I.,  B.C.  IIQO — a  nnnrper  who  ftejxed  the  tbruHH
mid  wng?dwaragaiiit>t  tberi)>iugKaipirt!ofAB-<yria.
Ill  Ihtii  inscriptiou  tbe  king  recordo  tbo  result  uf  a
campaiffn  ng»in»t  the  Elanittv  cliiefti  iu  tbe  rvgiuu
of  Nauiri  or  Kiir<lislan,  and  on  (he  bank:i  of  tbe
Uini  Biver,on  which  the  city  of  SbitEtbau  wuauft«>r-
nnnlw  built.  The  deocription  of  the  cainpuigu
iiiidrrtakeit  in  tbe  )iot  aiiuimer  luonthH  is  ex-
Irvniely  i^rHphii:  for  «o  nnrient  a  document  :  "  In
tbe  uioiitli  Tanuiiiiz  he  liHik  the  road ;  tbe  rookK  were
biiruiufi;  and  Hfon-hed  like  fire;  from  tbi;  ganlena
n'Sjt  burned  all  vegutation  ;  there  nraa  tin  water  in
the  springs,  and  cut  off  were  the  drinking-plaoee;
tbeatreugtb  of  the  great  liontui  wi-arii?d,  and  to  tbe
I  warlike  hero  hi*  coiinigo  returiieil"  Thv  writer
then  describes  the  battle,  ill  whii-li  the  IhibylontaiM
j  were  iiudoiihledly  worsted,  and  only  naved  from
romplKtn  defi'jit  by  tbe  aid  of  tbo  governor  of  aa
adjnceiit  riiy  who  refused  to  siirrentJor  to  tbo
Klamiti's.  In  return  fur  Ibis  the  city  huH  a  charter
of  freedom  granted  it,  declurin};  it  freo  front  taxca
and  from  the  iinnnl  levy  for  men  in  time  of  war.

Th«  luHtory  is,  after  this  date,  chietly  to  be  de-
rivod  fniiii  Amyriiin  w>iirco8,  and  it  is  not  until  tlie
lime  of  XabiiiNiTiir,  the  Xalionasstir  of  the  Canon
of  Frnlemy,  that  wn  have  atty  t-oniplete  neipience
of  ltal>ylonian  hbitory.  Onr  iiifommtinn  is  now
chietly  derived  from  the  iiuiHUtant,  hut  nnfurtu-
natolj  fragmentary,  Chronicle  Tablet  alrcmly
ApokcQ  of.  NabonaiMar.  whose  rolgn  forms  an
important  epoch  in  Babylonian  history,  aiteended
the  throne  in  B.C.  747,  and  ruled  for  fuurteea  years,
Diiriut;  liis  rcigu  tbe  country  was  in'ioo  invaded
by  the  .Assyrians,  and,  though  they  claim  tUo  vic-
tory, they  do  not  seem  to  bavn  shaken  the  king
on  his  throne.  Nadion  (the  Xailinosof  Ptolomy),
who  siicceoded  to  bis  father's  throne  in  B.c.  734,
only  ruled  for  two  yeans  when  one  of  the  jwipular
revolts  iinsent«d  him  and  placMl  Ukiiiztrit  (tbe
Ctiinizoros  of  t'toleiny)  on  the  throne.  In  tbo
third  year  the  eoinitry  was  invaded  by  the  armies
of  Ttglath-pileser  HI.,  king  of  Ai^yria,  who  drovn
tbe  liabylonlan  king  from  his  capital  iulo  the
nianthe4  of  South  Babylonia,  wheru  bo  found  hint
ind  pnt  him  to  death,  ascending  his  Cbroiie  luider
the  Babytoiitnn  name  of  Pnlu  or  Ptil.  TbiseoiM|iit*8t
■  if  Babylonia,  in  li.c,  739,  was  a  very  iui}iortniit
•--vout  iu  the  htstor)'  of  tbe  Kingdom,  for  it  brooght
the  two  CAiirta  of  tbe  north  and  south  kingdoms
once  mure  into  done  relution^thip.  The  death  of
SbahnaneMcr  IV.,  king  of  Assyria,  and  tbo  nsiir-
jtatioti  of  tbo  throiio  by  Sargon  tlie  Tartan  in  B.C.
Tti,  was  the  o])pi)rlunJty  wized  by  the  Babyloniana
for  once  nioi-o  becoming  indupendeut,  under  the
leadership  of  a  princo  of  very  ancient  dcjiceut —
Merodach-l»nla<lan  II.  Tbin  priiioc  was  one  of  tho
most  popular  rulera  of  the  middle  Babylonian
King<lom,  and  was  supported  by  all  chissoH  of  the
people  aH  well  an  by  tbe  Kltimitc  court,  who  were
Ilie  iiHwt  powerful  opponentfl  of  Assyria.  For
twelve  ywim  Ibn  wars  in  Syria  and  other  parts  of
the  Empire  kepi  tbe  AsKyriiins  from  despatching
KUlliciuntly  Ktroiig  foreeit  to  the  sniith  to  crush  this
powerful  priiii^.  In  B.C.  712,  Sargiui  was  pnrpoa-
ing  to  march  into  Biibylonia,  when  a  ronnteracthm
waa  caused  by  tbe  Biibyliminii  prinrc  nendlng  an
embassy  to  Hrzekiab  and  the  other  priiires  uf
Syria,  and  raising  u  revolt  which  called  the  lu-
vaders  away  (tj  Kings,  xx.  C); but in  u.c.  710  the


BABYLONIA


182


BABYLONU


storm  broke,  and  Sargon  captared  Babylon,  pro-
claimiug  hioiself  king.  Ou  tbo  assassination  of
Sargon  in  B.C.  705,  Herodach-baladau  returned,
and  after  a  reign  of  some  nine  months  was  driveD
from  the  laud  by  Sennacherib,  seeking  refuge  in
the  Elamite  provinces  on  the  east  shore  of  the
Persian  Gulf.  For  some  years  Babylonia  was  now
mled  by  viceroys  and  princes  appointed  by  the
kings  of  Assyria,  althongh  several  native  princes
attempted  revolt.  lu  B.c.  688,  Sennacherib,  after
a  very  severe  campaign,  in  which  he  defeated  the
allied  Elamites  and  Babylonians,  became  sovereign
of  the  two  kingdoms.  Hia  son  and  successor,  Esar-
haddon,  attempted  to  carry  out  a  policy  of  a  more
conciliatory  kind,  and  divided  bis  time  between
the  two  conrts;  but  the  violent  opposition  of
Egypt  in  Syria  weakened  his  power,  and  the
Elamites  and  Babylonians  constantly  harassed
him.  Shortly  before  his  death  he  appointed  his
eon  Samas-sum-ynkin  (the  Saosdnchiuos  of  Ptol-
emy) rnler,  which  appoiucmeut  was  confirmed  by
bis  sou  and  successor  Aasur-bani-pal.  This  prince,
tempted  by  the  intrigue  of  the  Babylonian  priests,
revolted  against  his  brother,  and  was  defeated
after  a  terrible  war,  in  which  Babylon,  Sippara,
and  Borsippa  were  besieged,  and  burned  himself
iu  his  palace,  B.C.  647.  Kundalanu,  who  succeeded
him,  was  little  more  than  a  viceroy,  depending  in
every  way  upon  the  Ninevite  court,  although  tab-
lets are  dated  iu  his  reign.  On  the  disruption  of
the  Assyrian  Empire  after  the  death  of  Assur-baui-
pal,  the  throne  of  Babylon  was  seized  by  Nabu-
abla-utzar,  or  Nabopolassar,  the  general  of  the
Babylonian  garrison,  who  had  married  a  Median
princess,  and  was  himself,  no  doabt,  of  collateral
descent  from  the  royal  line  of  Babyloniau  kings.
The  general  disruption  of  the  states  of  Western
Asia  which  took  place  iu  B.c.  625,  subsequent  npon
the  inroad  of  a  large  mass  of  Aryan  and  other  in-
vaders from  the  east,  afforded  the  Babylonians
an  opportunity  for  throwing  off  the  hated  yoke  of
Assyria,  and  Nabopolassar  was  proclaimed  king  in
B.C.  625.  He  was  succeeded  in  B.C.  604  by  his  son
Nebuchadnezzar,  one  of  the  greatest  sovereigns
who  ever  ruled  over  the  ancient  Empire.  During
a  long  reign  of  forty-three  years  the  prince  suc-
ceeded iu  recovering  the  long-lost  proviuces  of
the  kingdom,  and  once  moi-e  making  Babylon
queen  of  nations.  He  not  only  restoi-ed  the  Empire
and  rebuilt  Babylon,  but  almost  every  temple  aud
edifice  throughout  the  land  underwent  restoration
at  his  hands.  It  is  an  astonishing  fact  that  not  a
single  mound  throughout  Babylonia  has  as  yet
been  opened  by  the  explorers  which  has  not  been
found  to  contain  bricks,  cyliudent,  or  tablets  in-
scribed with  his  name.  In  B.C.  599,  he  captured
Jerusalem,  and  sent  Jehoiakim  captive  to  Babylon ;
and  eleven  years  later,  owing  to  the  still  disturbed
state  of  the  kingdom  (b.c.  588),  he  destroyed  the
city,  and  removed  most  of  the  inhabitants  to  Chal-
daea.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  succeeded  in  B.c.  561
by  his  sou  Evil-merodach,  who  released  Jehoiakim,
but  was  murdered  by  his  brother-in-law  Nergol-
Sharezer,  who  was  the  rah  makhu,  or  "  chief  seer,"
of  one  of  the  temples.  His  reign  lasted  until  B.C.
556,  his  son  Labasi-Kudar(the  Laborasoarchad  of
Ptolemy)  only  ruling  a  few  months.  The  throne
was  in  &.c.  556  nsurped  by  a  powerful  and  active
prince,  Naba-naid  or  Nabonidus,  the  sou  of  a
"  chief  seer,"  whose  reign  is  the  most  important,
next  to  that  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  in  later  Babylo-


nian history.  The  inscriptions  of  this  king  are
found  in  almost  all  temples,  and  some  of  them  coo-
tain  important  historical  facts.  In  a  cylinder
found  at  Sippara  the  kiug  records  his  restoration
of  the  temple  at  Rharran,  which  was  destroyed  by
the  Scythians,  and  in  his  sixth  year,  B.c.  549,  he  re-
cords the  overthrow  of  Astyages,  kiug  of  the  Medeo,
and  the  capture  of  Ecbatana  by  Cyrus  (q-v.).
In  the  king's  seventeenth  year  the  whole  land  of
Babylonia  was  in  revolt  against  him  for  neglect-
ing the  duties  of  court  and  religion,  leaving  all  to
bis  son  Belshazzar.  During  the  summer  of  this
year  Cyrus  invaded  Babylonia,  advancing  from  the
neighbourhood  of  the  modem  Bagdad,  and  reaching
Sippara  ou  the  fourteenth  day  of  Tammuz  (June),
which  the  garrison  yielded  without  fighting.  Tiro
days  later,  Tammuz  16,  Babylon  was  taken  in  the
same  manner.  Cyrus  appointed  Gobryaa  ruler.
Three  months  later,  Nabonidns,  who  was  a  prisoner,
died,  aud  after  a  week's  mourning  by  the  people
was  buried  on  the  fourth  day  of  Nisan,  b.c.  530,
Babylonia  now  became  a  Persian  province,  aud
under  the  rule  of  Cyrus  (b.C.  538-529)  and  Cambyses
(529-521)  it  appears  to  have  been  peaceful.  On  the
accession  to  the  throne  of  Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,
the  old  rebellious  spirit  once  more  asserted  itself,
and  for  three  years  (521-519),  the  city  held  out
agaiust  the  Persians  under  Nadinta-Bel,  who
claimed  to  be  Nebuchadnezzar,  son  of  Naboni-
dus. Again,  in  B.c.  513,  the  city  revolted  under
Arakba,  an  Armenian.

With  the  overthrow  of  the  Persian  monarchy
Babylonia  came  under  the  short-lived  dominion  of
Alexander  the  Great,  who  died  in  the  capital  (b.c.
323).  SeleucuB  I.,  to  whom  it  hod  been  promised
at  the  conference  of  Triparadisns,  contested  and
won  the  possession  of  it  from  Antigouus  (b.c.  318).
About  B.C.  140,  it  was  taken  from  the  Syrian  mou-
arcbs  by  the  Parthiaus.  It  came  into  the  hands
of  the  Romans  only  temporarily,  fii-st  under  Tnyan
(A.D.  114);  under  SeptimiusSeveru8(A.D.  199);  and,
again,  under  Julian  (a.b.  363).  When  iu  6&0  the
successors  of  Mohammed  put  an  end  to  the  new
Persian  monarchy  of  the  Sassanides,  the  province
of  Babylonia,  where  Bagdad  was  built  (762-766),
became  the  seat  of  the  califs  till  1258.  Since  1638.
when  the  Turks,  for  the  second  time,  took  it  from
the  Persians,  it  has  been  under  the  dominion  of
Turkey,  divided  into  the  pachalics  of  Bagdad  and
Basra.

Kkugion.  — During  its  long  history  many
changes  took  place  iu  the  religion  of  Babylonia.
The  primitive  Snmoro- Akkadians  had  a  sort  of
fetich-worsbip,  regarding  every  object  of  nature
as  the  abode  of  a  spirit  or  living  principle  (Zl)
which  governed  its  relatiouship  to  man.  The
priests  of  this  religion  were  a  olaas  of  exorcists
dealingonly  with  the  malevolent  poweraof  uatnre —
sickuess,  disease,  and  otben«  hostile  to  the  life  of
man.  From  the  libraries  of  Nineveh  the  liturgies
of  these  priests  have  been  recovered  iu  the  form  of
magical  formulas,  incantations,  and  hymns,  from
which  it  appears  that  the  first  gods  of  the  Sumero-
Akkadiau  tbeogony  are  the  Spirit  of  Heaven  and
the  Spirit  of  Earth — the  Dinffri,  or  Creators — the
pareuts  of  all  the  other  gods.  These  other  gods
are  very  numerous,  each  locality  having  its  own
local  pantheon,  but  in  subordination  to  some  one
divine  patron  of  the  city.

One  of  the  earliest  seat-s  of  the  Babylonian  wor-
,  ship  was  Eridhu  on  the  Peraian  Gnlf,  the  seat  of


UABVLUNICCH


US


IlACCIlVLtDKS


r.itus  mtb  Klllgleji  at  U  '


tlw  wonihip  of  Eo,  thr  "lord  of  the  wavf*"  aft

well  &>  "lord  of  tawH."  ami  idviitintMl  with  tlte

iDysierioiu  fiBb-diviuily  of  Bi-njnii*  i<\.  v, >,  who  n>

Ules  tliAt  lie  taQjflit  Hit*  i>arl>'  iiihabitaiits  of  Uif

laoil  tlio  plcnients  i>f  civilization. The  wif«  of  Ka

»!*  DaT-kina,  the  "lady  of  the  earth. " The  i«»ir

had  A  son,  Tbdicpux,  "the  ouly-bcg'jfteii,"  wht««c

wonbip  id  united  to  that  of  bis  eietvi,  Istur,  v,h»  ir«

alto  )ii«k  coiiMirfc. Nrxliii  iniportiittco  cainv,  anion;;

lAe  local  deitiuN,  the  gud  Mul-lil  UWlim  or  Bel  uf

tbe8faiiimX  whone  Microd  city  mm  Xipiir  (NIIVitV

Ho  it  wu  who,  mcfonltng  to  uuu  v<>rHinii  uf  l)ir>

«toT7  of  tbe  Deluge,  ileatmyed mankind. lli»

aanw  tii«aiut  "lord  of  gbost-lnnd,"  and  liifl  wife,

Vif  ikigat  or  AUat,  is  the  "liwly  of  phost-laud."

TtxriT  child  waa  Namtar,  tlw  di-inon  of  fi-vt-r  and

^bc»<3d«w  of  fat«,  vbo  contmlit tliii ugvnciea uf

^V ^fter  the  ^Foutio  inflnetn  ' h>  ^..n  to  preTail,

»^p«eially  Id  the  northeni  i-itiem,  Sanias,  the  nun-

9«3>«L,  oHuaira  great  impurlaiico. Many  cities  liiul

CA««ir  uwu  loi-al  snn-god  or  solar  hen* ;  and  in  Sip-

I l?»a*ni.  where  stnwl  tho  Temple  of  E  Biibaru  (Tlie

l^unMuf  Lnstre),  tbis  worship  attained  its  liiglit-nt

*l«=T«li>{iuieiit. The  Ktt^^t  S<Miiitiu  prince  Sargon

1--  Inc. '.l>jUO)  did  much  to  advance  tho  unit  of  the

^utt,  which  aa  it  »pn?ad  over  L'haUlaen  hroiight

V^xint  a  gradual rhangn in the rfligitm  of  thi>

coiiolry, rmiiUiiig in an Hnnilgiuimtinn uf tlio

S^initir  and Akkadian syHli'init. Thtm  ktkw np

th«  ttiinnhip  nf  B(!l-Sl(;iiidiiclt(Munlitk)  win*  gradn-

&ny,(roui  buing  uuly  a  local  nun-gml,  bvi-unic  (he

K^ut  national  Ur^ity,  ait  AnHiir  wan  uf  tin*  Axnyrianx.

•<•  roiD|iIrtcIy  uvi-ivhaduwing  all  thit  other  tlivini-  \

tiutlint  till-  lalnr  faith  of  Uabyluuin  appriHiubea  a  '

PWrtniuiiutbeiinn. Hiif  temple,  which  ntood  ou  the

*swr[ii  Hiilc  of  Babylon,  was  one  of  the  wonilerw

of  tliB  viurld. (See  Bauvi^dn.) Otiier  rlivinilies

<»f  tile  later n^ligion are Zirpnnit,  tlio wife uf

^f'^iwUtli; NeUo  |.!M'fl  Awvria)  with !ii» aponso

"••init;  N'tiirp,  Hie  god  of  «')ir;  Nei*gal,  tliR  gml

*»f  "l«alh;  ami  (iibil,  thu  (irc-gtwl.

HtfeuuGKArilT. — Se»>  l-avard,  Siiterrh  and  tiatii/-
'*•" 'l?(i7) ;  Lc-niimiant,  .VdiiurJ  iFftuloirr  .inrirnin-

*  fOrioK  (9th  ed.  IHfti> ;  id.  /^  l.angur  rrmiliif

*  ta  Cij/iWf  (l!?75); Oppcn,  Ilhloirf  df*  Kmpirt^a

*  CirtMA  ft  ifjMyiNf  (1i?ii;&};  I'fciTOt  aud  C'hipiez,
^M'eryff^  jrt  in  VhaUiaea  and  jM^t/ria  (En^;.  tinns.

**)i  iCawlinMtn,  Cum-^form  In»niplioH«  0/  ffnt-
"^  •<«■  (Brit.  Mils.  ldtJl-S4);  Sayte,  dwwwi  Km-
J''^  tf  thr  fUi^t  (IKAI);  id.  F}v»h  JAt/hl  from  the
-*»»tnl  J/oRunirNti  (It^);  DtOitMzeli,  Wo  lag  ri.w
Jl^trtf  (l.-^l).  Tho  reader  In  alw)  mffrml  to
^  iUy/onfan and Oiienla/ Ueoord, Uegnn in

Bibyioaicam  fgenerally  >"  the  plural,  Baby-
^tU).  A  Babylonian  nhanl  or  ciiverlet  placed
?Vw"irbe«. AIbo  a  horse -blanket. See  pAU.tUM ;

**0WIB(MA:  8TRAOi:i,rM.


TUnrlu. (BM-relior  thm
Ui<3  VilbBoifbeM,)


Baooa.  <1)  Proiwrly  a  berry,  and  \ubA  of  the
olive.  (2l  A  bMd  of  glass,  amethyst,  etc.,  ntrnng
ou  a  ueeklat^'e  or  worn  as  the  pendant  in  an  «ar-
riug. Hee  Ixaikis;  MiixiLfe.

Baooar  or  BaociUrla  (^duxapit).  A  plant  aa  to
vboao  identity  there  in  eouKirlnrable  (li-tputti,  Homu
aaaiguing  thu  name  tn  the  foxglovo  ami  ntheni  to
the  clary.

Bacchae  [Boxxtn),  (1)  Tlie  female  foltoworH  of
llmrehim  or  Oiouyattn  ((|.  v.)  In  his  wanderiuga
tUroDgh  the  East,  and  repri-M>nto<l  a^  rrowiu^d  with
VLoe-leaves,  wearing  fawii-nkinn.  and  carrying  tho
thyrsus  in  Ihfir  hands.  They  aru  aUu  known  aa
Maeiiadea  (fniin  fiaivofim,  to
rave)  and  Tbyiadw*  ifi-oni  6vto,
to  nacrifice).  iS)  Pricstewos
of  Bacchua  or  Dionysus.  8(>e
Baooitantks_  {3}  The  title
of  a  play  by  Kuripidiw  which
tnmtMuf  tire  arrival  of  Diouy-
HUH  al  Tbi-buH  aud  the  death
of  PeiKheiiB  i(\.  v.).

Bacchanalia.  Festi  v  aU
held  in  Itnlyin  honour  of  Bac-
chus. SecDiOKYSiA;  Liuns-

ALIA.

Baccbauallbua, Sknatis

CONSlI.TT'MltE.  SeeDlO.NY((IA.

Baocbautea.  Men  ami  women  wh«>  jniiie<i  \a
the  L)touy«inii  feitivain  ilruMaed  In  Aaintlu  robni
and  bouuetst;  and  with  thrir  heads  nrenthoil  with
Vina  and  ivy  leavtiH,  with  fuwu-sklns  (rc^^/Atr)
thing  ovM'  their  Nhnnlilei-H,  and  lhyr«r,  or  btuut
Hpeam  tnined  with  vine-]i-ave8,  iu  their  handu,
they  ran  through  the  country,  whuutitig  fo  Ifac^e!
EhoU  lacchff  la!  It)!  »niiigiiig  Ihrtr  tliynii,  heat-
ing on  druniis,  and  MJttniling  varinun  iuntniinfiDtA.
Indecent  enibleiUN  wimi'  carri^Ml  In  procession,  and
the  ct'iiHniunieH  ofu-ii  aaKumed  a  nnist  immoral
c'har.ict<>r  and  leiidenH'y.  The  women,  wlio  bnro  a
chief  part  in  theno  frantic  revels,  were  called  Bac-
chae, ilaeiiadea,TUyIade«,  Eusdv«. See  1Mi»N'Tj*[A.

BacchiSdae  y^aKxtdiiai).  A  Coriutbiau  clan  de*
Hcended  from  Bacchis,  one  of  the  early  kings  of
Curiuth.  Ju  their  baiida  the  royal  power  rtMiuiiuod
until  overthrown  by  CyiMwhis  (q.  v  ).  Soo  Punsau.
ii.4:  II.t.mI.  v.iW. *"

Baccbldea.  A  comedy  of  Plautus  (r|.  v.),  and
citnsidered  by  crilird  an  among  bis  be^t.  The
i>riginal  wa»  puHNihIy  the  Aic  I'^anarciv  **f  Menan-
der.  The  liawhidea  was  performed  in  B.C.  l*^.
The  llrrtt  Kccniw  wtv  lust  between  the  fourth  and
sixth  (riitiiries  A.r>.

BacchluB  uud  Bitbus-  Two  oelehratutl  glwlia-
toiTt.  uf  equal  age  and  strength,  who,  after  comjuer-
ing  many  competitors,  engagtNt  with  each  other,
and  died  uf  mutual  wotindK;  whennu  the  proverb
to  expreKt  e4|uality,  IHthun  ooKfra  Bacchium.  See
Honire.  Kitinl.  i.  7,  20.

Baochua  rBtu^uO' S^  Dionysus;  Iacciids;

1.1  111  R.

Bacchylldea  (Bait;(uX(J'jr).  A  Greek  lyHo  poet
who  llimri«hed  in  the  middle  of  the  Irflh  century
l5,c.  He  wa«  a  native  of  IhIIn  in  the  iiihind  of
Ceos,  the  nephew  and  pupil  of  StninnidtM,  and  a
contemporary  of  Pindar.  For  a  long  timo  he  lived
with  his  uncle  at  thn  rnnrt  ot'  Micro,  t>'rant  of
Hyracuae.  He  almi  n^itldc»l  for  a  conalderahte  time
at  Athens,  where  he  won  many  victoriea  iu  the


BACENIS  SILVA


184


BAIAE


ditfayranibic  contests.  Later  on  his  home  was  in
the  Felopoiitiesus.  It  would  appear  tbat  he  at-
temptetl  to  rival  the  many-sided  talent  of  his
nncle,  bat  was  inferior  to  him  in  sublimity  and
force.  Only  a  few  fragments  of  his  poems  remain.
He  attempted  a  great  variety  of  styles:  hymns,
paeaus,  dithyrambs,  drinking-songs,  love-songs,  and
epigrams. See  Bergk'a  Poetae  Lyrici  (4th  ed.  1878).

Bacenia  SUva.  A  forest  which  separated  the
Suevi  from  the  Cfaenisci,  probably  the  west  part
of  the  Thnringian  forest  (Caes.  B.  O.  vi.  10).

Bactra  (ra  Bturrpa)  or  Zariaspa.  The  modem
Balkh.  The  capital  of  Bactria,  at  the  northern
foot  of  Monnt  Paropamisus  (the  Uinda  Kush),
on  the  river  Bactrus,  about  twenty -five  miles
south  of  its  junction  with  the  Oxus.

Baotria  (Boicrpi'a)  or  Bactriana  (Batcrpuxvif).  K
province  of  the  Persian  Empire,  bounded  on  the
south  by  Mount  Paropamisus,  which  separated  it
from  Ariana;  on  the  east  by  the  northern  braucb
of  the  same  range,  which  divided  it  from  the  Sacae ;
on  the  northeast  by  the  Oxns,  which  separated  it
from  Sogdiaua ;  and  on  the  west  by  Margiana.  It
was  included  in  the  conquests  of  Alexander,  and
formed  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Selencidae
until  B.C.  255,  when  Theodotna,  its  governor,  re-
volted from  AntlochuB  II.,  and  founded  the  Greek
kingdom  of  Bactria,  which  lasted  till  B.C.  134  or
135,  when  it  was  overthrown  by  the  Parthiaiis.

Baotnu  (Boicrpor).  Now  tlie  Anderab;  a  river
of  Bactria  emptying  into  the  Oxus.

BactUum  (fiaicnfpia,  pandas,  ffKYjinpov,  cricin-aXi;).
In  Greece  the  practice  of  carrying  a  stick  was  as
common  as  with  us,  aa  is  seen  by  the  testimony  of
Greek  vases  and  sculptures,  which  show  ns  walk-
ing-sticks of  all  forms  and  patterns.  The  Athenian
dandies  of  the  time  of  Aristophaues  afi'ected  the
straight  cane  with  an  ornamented  bead  (nc^criK^
^aKTrjpia),  while  old  men  and  rustics  carried  large
canes  with  a  crook  (KafiiniXrf).  In  the  ruder  states
of  Greece,  such  as  Sicyon  and  Sparta,  hnge  chib-
like  caues  {a-KvraXat)  were  common ;  and  these  at
one  time  were  the  rage  at  Ath-
ens (Aristopb.  Av.  1383).

It  appears  that  the  kings
of  Sparta  carried  a  truncheon
iffaKTTjpia)  as  the  ensign  ot
their  authority.  On  the  oc-
casion of  one  of  them  lifting
it  np  in  a  threatening  atti-
tude, Themistocles  retnmed
thecelebrated  answer, "  Stri  ke,
hut  hear."  In  reference  to  this
custom ,  the  tm  □  cheon  {bacului)
was  carried  in  the  hand  by  act*
ors  on  the  Roman  stage.  The
dicasts  at  Athens  received,  at
the  time  of  their  appointment,
a  fiaicnjpla  and  vvfLffoXor  as  a  Ag^ennon  with  SUA.
mark  of  their  antbority.  (From  ftGre«k  vue.)

At Rome walking-sticks
were  uuknown,  except  in  the  hands  of  the  aged  or
infirm;  but  the  staff  was  used  upon  the  stage  by
actors  who  personated  kings  and  princes  ( Soet.
.yero,24). See  Caduceus  ;  Sceptrum;  Scytalb.

Baebia  Lex. See  Lex.

BaectUa.  AtowninHi8paiiiaTarraconensis,we8t
of  Castulo,  iu  the  neighbourhood  of  silver  mines.

Baeterrae.  The  modem  Beziers ;  a  town  in  Gal-
lia Narbonensis,  on  the  Obris,  not  far  from  Narbo.


Baetifoa. A  division  of  Spain. See  HiSPAini.

Baetia.  The  modem  Guadalquivir  (Waily  el-
Kiher) ;  a  river  of  southeru  Spain,  fonnerly  called
Tartessus,  rising  in  the  territory  of  the  Oretani  and
flowing  southwest  through  Baetica,  to  which  it
gave  the  name,  until  it  empties  by  two  mouths
into  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  north  of  Qades  (Cadiz),

BagiatAiiiia  (Boyttrravor).  A  mountain  of  Media,
southwest  of  Ecbatana,  and  sacred  to  Zeus.  Heir
Seutiramis  (q.  v.)  formed  a  park  or  garden  of  twelve
stadia  in  circumference,  and  cut  her  image  on  the.
face  of  the  rock  (Diod.  Sic.  ii.  13).  Alexander  is
said  to  have  visited  the  spot.

Bagoaa  {Bayatae).  An  Egyptian  cnnnch,  tilKhly
trusted  and  favoured  by  Artaxerxes  III.  Octii)\
whom  he  poisoned,  b.c.  338,  giving  his  fle»b  to
cats,  because  he  had  killed  the  sacred  bull.  Apis
(q.  v.).  He  was  put  to  death  by  Darius  IU.  Cm\i>-
mannus,  whom  he  had  attempted  likewise  to  de-
stroy, 336.  The  name  Bagoas  frequently  occurs  iu
Persian  history,  and  is  sometimes  used  by  Latin
writers  as  synonymous  with  eutiHchtUf  which  in-
deed seems  to  be  the  original  meaning  of  the  Per-
sian word.

Bagrfidas.  A  river  of  Northern  Africa,  falliug
into  the  Gulf  of  Carthage  near  Utica,  near  which
Regulns  was  said  to  have  slain  the  serpent  200
feet  long  (Pliu.  H.  K  viii.  14).

BShr,  JoHANN  Christian  Felix,  a  classical
scholar  of  distinction,  was  bora  at  Darmstadt  in
1798.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Heidelberg,  and  won  so  much  reputation  as  a
classicist  that  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-five  be
became  Professor  Ordiuarins  of  Classical  Pbilolnpy
in  that  aucieut  seat  of  learning  (1823).  He  died
November  27th,  1872.  His  greatest  work  is  his
Ge$ckichte  der  romiachm  Litteratur,  whicfa  tint
appeared  iu  16*28,  aud  reached  its  fourth  edition
iu  1870.  In  it  the  subject  is  presented  with  a
lucidity,  taste,  and  accuracy  that  are  rarely  foniiil
combined  in  so  unusual  a  degree.  To  this  hist«)nr
be  added  three  supplements,  dealing  respeclivfly
with  the  Christian  poets  and  historians  (I@36),  the
Christian  theology  of  the  Latin  Fathera  (1837).  and
the  Inter  Roman  literature  of  the  Carlovingisn
lieriod  (1840).  He  also  published  an  excellent
edition  of  Herodotus,  of  which  the  aecond  edition
appeared  iu  1861.

Baiae.  A  city  of  Campania,  on  n  small  bay
west  of  Neapolis,  and  opposite  Puteolj.  It  was
originally  a  village,  but  the  numerous  advantages
of  its  situation  soon  rendered  it  much  frequented
and  famous.  Its  foundation  is  ascribed  in  mythol-
ogy to  Bains,  one  of  the  companions  of  Odysscas.
The  cause  of  the  rapid  increase  of  Baiae  lay  in  tbe
fmitfnlness  of  the  snrronnding  country,  in  the
beauty  of  its  owu  situation,  in  tbe  rich  supply  of
shell  and  other  fish  which  the  adjacent  waters  af-
forded, and,  above  all,  in  the  hot  mineral  springs
which  flowed  from  the  neigbbonring  mountaina
and  formed  a  chief  sonrce  of  attraction  to  invalids.
Baiae  was  flrst  called  Aqnae  Cumanae.  Knmer-
ous  villas  graced  the  surrounding  country,  and
many  were  likewise  bnitt  on  artificial  moles  ex-
tending a  great  distance  into  the  sea.  It  is  now.
owing  to  earthquakes  and  inundations  of  tbe  sea,
a  mere  waste  compared  with  what  it  once  wa.i.
The  modem  name  is  Baia.  Many  remains  of  tbt>
ancient  villas  may  be  seen  beneath  tbe  wat«-r.
:  The  classics  of  the  imperial  age  teem  with  allu-


BAIUU'S


»6


BALNEAE


B»iUlii& iBirlLt


UDiia  to  tlic  Kpteiidoiir.  iho  luxury,  au«l  ib«  txi-
voUties  iif  ibu (uiuchis  niicifut wntcriiig-plaM.

BcltUos  (  ax^o<tn''P>>f  >- A
porter; any  "in- c-mplo.vwl
to  carry  t)iinl<-iis,  wIii;lIiLn'  a
iUv«9  or  a  frfH'niAM  (i-'k.  Par.
nVi). Til**  iM^irfiTK  at  fii-
i»raU «ecB vallod rr^til-
t*«. See  FrNrs.
Bakera. Sre  PlirTon.
Bala  iBoXnt}- Au  vpitbvt
of  th(>  S>'riau  king,  Ali>xau-
<3«t  {q.  \.).

Balantion  (/JuXcurruw). A  learhoni  Imj;  hIuiii;
.irtMiiHl  ilii"  neck,  aud  iiiwd  U>  carry tlif  |inn«'.

Balfttro.  A  profuHinnal  jeHtcr,  btifTtHni,  or  |)»r-
asit«-  III  ii|iiUt  uf  ilif  difli-rKiit'i*  of  t[iiaiitit,v.  htln-
Ir^  i»  probably  counccled  wilb  tuit'trti  )li>  bloat  like
*  atsfep)  and  b«iicc,  to  •{wak  fouliiihly.  II  is  duillit-
toon  il»)»  akii)  to  (>i*tterv,  a*i:bult(?rer  ((Jell.  i.  15t,
BaaljitroufJi  were  paid  for  tbvir  JvhTm,  uud  tbi'  tables
nf  Xht  vcalthy  >vcrK  ^ciivrully  u|>eu  t»  tbt^ui  for  tbc
ta-lccrif  tbtf  uiuuMiucul  lbi;y  ullurded. See  .Sct'B-

ILA. 1 pAttAMTl'S.

^blbtnufl^  DECtMt'R  Caicuus. A  Komau  wbo

va.t%  pmclaiiiK^d  einpi^ror  by

the  .Seitato  with  I'upivims,

[  fi» Wuf  death of  tUt*  Gor-

,  A-i).  '<£(?■ Hh wiia

1  by  the  sdldiery  af-

Kii  rrlgu.

SalboA  L,  Ci>its'PXirs,  of

iia«tt-^ A  Mitdter  wboM^rved

ontlrr  Piinipi?y a^aiuitt  Ser-

U>rin«  in  Spain,  and  rw^iverl

frrmi  bim  ibf  ^\U.  of  Ruutan

^liii-uiliip, and, rctuniiug

*>(b  liim  lo  Kuint-*,  lived  ou

iuiitiiRte  ii'niia  iriib  Caeaar

** »tU as nitb Pompey.

In  B-c  56,  be  wa«  accused  of

'uviiig  ilingaliy  assumed  Uo-

"^■11  riitn'osliip  ; wiw  do-

fniOe,] i,y citiTn, wh(M»e

*)**rli  lias  com*"  down  to  ns;  ADd  wa»  awjuitted.

Dt'ivil  War,  Bnlbiis  h;Ml  tbe  iniiiia^eiiiciit  of

u'b  affaire  at  Roiue. After  tbc  dcutb  of  Ca«-

"  K»itt«d  the  favmir  of  Octaviaiius,  who  roieed

llutllP  ccinttiilNhip  ill  it.c.  40.

^aIso  called  Oynmealae  iYv^vr)ffiois  by
Two  islaiidH  ill  tlie  MediierraUKiui.
'  «uiw(  of  Bpniii,  diNtingiiiiibeil  by  ibo  <*p-
'dwi  Maior  ami  Minor,  niieiire  tlu'ir  iiiodiTU
*****  Minorca  and  Miintrcu.  Tbfir  inbaliitants.
^  nllod  Dalcarrfl,  n-i>rc  euli^bratfd  lut  -^lin^orti.
■Wjwfrt  aubducd  B.C.  123,  by  Q.  MoU^tlnR,  who
"•"■■wtl  acoordinijlr  Ihi;  tiuniiinii>  Ibd.-iiricns,

B«H  liAJuw  OF. S<-e  Apoiikhaxis;  Curycos;
P^-'VRLs:  KoLus;  Uakpa&tim j  Pila;  Trigon;

^•aitya  (UaXATTvr). See  ELBi'siTfiA.
**IU«a. See  ToKMKXTrM.

^•loete,  Balixeae,  Balnki'm,  Bau-vepm,  TnEit-

"ttKl  Baths.  — ftilbiiijc  wa*  n  procliot^  fmniliar

^JwGraeka  of  bolb  Avxrn  fnmi  the  earliL-at  tinifj*.

'>liift«rii  Voter  aud  MiU.  Tbiia.NauHlcaatdaitgb-


Balbuiui.


rft* '


I  tcT  of  Alctiiotls,  king  i)f  Pha«noia,  eoea  out  wiih  ber

aii«ndanC9to  wH8hlic-r<'lothetj:  and  after  the  taak  la

dniio  she  batben  hentt'If  in  the  rivor  (0(/.  vl.5H,  65).

Odyiwoua,  who  itroinluriet)  to  tho  •tame  8pot.«ti-i|H)

'  and  Lakea  n  bath,  whilv  Xuiniicua  and  bf«r  Mtrvanta

{ sUiud  aside. Wann  fpriliKt  wnro  aUo  rcftDrl^tl  to

I  for  tbe  purjMue  of  batbiii^f. Tb«>  'H^iixXcui  Xovrpa

'  sbowu by  He)diart>tUff  or  AiIkmi^  to  Heracleti  are

cclrbiTite^l  by  thv  |M>ct^ Pindar  hikmiUh  of  ibir  hot

liatlLs  of  tho  nymjibs  nud  Ilonmr  (//.  xxij.  14^)

ceK-bratos  one  of  Die  titrciims  of  tbe  Ht'uiiuindcr

for  itA  wann  u-ini>eraturu. ])athiu;j;  iu  riven*  nr

I  tbe Hra {-^xptiKwrtlv)  wnK nlwayn coiumon for

I  Ihn younj^. Not to kinnv  bon-  to read and lo

ttwiin  were proverbial  niurk<t  of  thf i(;itoriiroiis.

A  phnigo  ill  tbe  Eiirotaa  always  KiifBcfd for  tho

,  LarrdaetJioDiaits  (S47bitl.  on  Tbnc.  ii.  :tH). Tbcre  ap-

'  pisirH  to  h»ve  bffn  a  swimming-bath  (xiAti^rjl^/hi}

at  Atht'iiK  iti  thr  Ijinv  uft'Iiilo  (/ffy.  4u3  Dy.

Tbe  arlilii-ial  warm  batb  was  taken  in  a  veMol
called  fiiTu^ivBnt  by  Honirr,  niid  tfttiatrit  by  Athe*
naoiLS.  It  wii«  tiu  doubt  of  wrx»il  ur  luarblt*,  aa
■  be  epithet  tC^trrot  is  nppliiMl  to  It  {Oil.  iv.A**)^
aud  in  tbo  case  of  Menebiiifi's  Kf;yi*(>)*>i  pri'iwnta
( Oti  iv.  I**)  it  was  of  Bilver.  It  wonld  appear
fVnni  the  deiwHptioD  of  the  bath  adminiHtenMl  to
Oilytweusin  the  [>a1.iceof  Circ<(,  tbat  tbix  vi>tKM.ddi(l
'  nut  c-outaiu  watnr  itself,  but  w«h  only  uhmI  fur  the
bather  losit  in  while  the  warm  water  was  t^onred
over  Iiitu,  which  Maa  hi-atfHl  in  a  largo  caldroit  or
tri|MMl,  under  which  iIia  liro  was  placed,  and  wbcti
Mufiioiunlly  warmed  was  takou  out  in  other  ves-
sels aud  poured  over  tbn  bead  aud  shonlderB  of  tb«
pereoii  wlio  sat  in  the  tiadftii>0ot.  Where  clcauli-
Dess  uieitdy  wus  the  object  Miiij^ht,  cold  bathiug
waa  adupted,  wbich  was  cousldeKd  as  moMt  brae*
ing  to  llic  nerves;  hut  after  violent  bodily  exer-
tiun  or  fatigue  wnnn  water  was  inwle  use  of,  iu
order  to  refrbsh  the  body  aud  relax  the  over-t«ii-
siun  of  the  lUDscles.  Ilc-siod  {O/k  TM)  proti!st«
•gaiust  uieu  elaborately  cleaning  (rftaiiipvvftr&ai}
their  bodies  with  otfumiuate  baths,  I-  e.  those  of  high
temperature,  wbich  shows  that  this  luxury  hml
begun  iu  his  day;  aud  iu  Homer's  time  coii»itau(
indulgence  iu  tbe  wurui  bath  wiis  cnti.sideritl  aa
«  mark  of  luxury  and  elleniiuaey  (fiif.  viJi.  249|.
The  nse  of  the  nanii  hiiih  was  pn^iwled  by  luiih-
ing  in  cold  water  \II.  x.  r>7fi).  The  later  cnstuni
of  plnuging  into  cold  water  after  tlie  wanii  balb
lUvi/lloui'd  by  Ari-ttides  (vol.  i.  Orat.  '2,  Sti^r.  Senn.
p.  516),  who  wrote  iu  lite  Mcond  century  of  our
era,  was  no  doubt  borrowed  tVom  the  Romans.

After  bathing  both  twxes  anointed  themselves
with  oil,  iu  order  that  tbe  skiii  miglit  not  lie
left  harsh  aud  rough.  uHt*^**'"".^'  of'*''  wanu  water.
Tbe  iiHo  of  prt'cinns  ungiientA  (ftCpa)  was  unknown
at  that  early  period.  In  Ihe  buroie  ages,  as  well
as  in  later  limes,  refr«shmeut«  were  DsaaUy  takeu
after  the  batb  {fW.  vi.  971.

At  Atlicn.t  the  frtiqucnt  use  of  the  public  batlta
was  regarded  by  strict  moralists  in  tho  lime  of
Socrates  and  Demosthfiics  us  a  nmrk  i>f  luxury
and  oflemluaey  ;  thus  it  is  a  sign  of  dcaiondizA*
tion  ou  the  part  of  a  ship's  cn>w.  Aorortlingly
Phociou  wu«  saitl  to  have  uever  batbed  in  a  pub-
lic bath,  and  Socrates  to  bare  mnile  use  of  it  very
M>Idom.  it  was,  however,  only  tho  warm  baths
to  wbich  objection  was  luaile.  and  which  in  an-
cient tiiuco  were  not  allowed  to  bo  huilt  within
the  city  (Atben.  1.  IU  hi;  for  the  Greeks  did  not
at  all  approve  of  people  lieing  dirty  ;  only  cleauU-


BALSTEAE


IM


BAL77EAC


naM,  tboyTfiotiiflit,  abuuld  be  AttAined  by  the  ttae
uf  mid  wnliT,

Tlie  bfttliK  (&akav*'to)  were  eilher  public  (dij^-
<nat  ^tfftomtvonTa]  or  privat.n  iu)wi,-idio)TiKn).  The
furninr  woru  tbo  pro}>Griy  of  the  Htnto,  but  rh«  litt-
t<>t*  wi<rc<  built  by  privute  indivuLnalit.  Such  pri-
vnli»  bntUs  fti<.*  inpiitioiied  by  Tliitarcb  [/VhiWt.  ^4).
KatliM  of  tbi»  kiinl  wrro  pmbubly  uioHtljr  iiiteiniwl
for  the  I'Xcbisivu  use  of  llio  persuiis  to  wlioiii  tht'y
holoiiKf^d  (Xpii.  Jiep.  Ath.  ii.  10.)  Tbore  itppt^aro
to  linv*.'  bocti  a  sriaI).  abnost  nomiuui.  chnrgi*  for
tbo  iipw  of  Uic  piihlir  bat  lis.  Thiit,  in  tlic!  iiiHcHp-
tbm  of  Aiiduiiin  (i.  107),  Ibe  piictt  in  iixed  iit  tnu
oUiilki  =i  obul.

W(<  Viiuw  vri7  liftlo  of  the  Imtka  of  tbo  Atho-
iiiftiia  durin({  t!iu  republican  iieriodf  fur  tbu  iic-
ouuut  (if  Ltician  iu  his  Ilippiun  ridatos  to  bntbs
cuimtnK'tvd  tifler  tbo  Kotiiau  model.  Ou  aiioieut
vuHos  ou  wbicb  pcrsouft  are  represented  batbiii];i
we  Heldom  tiud  uaytliiii);  com.>ApoiidiuK  to  a  mml-
eru  bath  iu  wbicli  |H.*rbou8  can  ataud  ur  sit :  but
tht<ii:>  is  always  a  muud  or  uval  baaiu  (Xour^p  or
XoiTij^Moc),  ri'Mtitig  im  a  Klimd  \vKtUrraTw\  by  tba
Hiile  of  n-liirh  thu««>  who  are  balbing  are  rupre-
HiMiled  alaudiiig  uudr«HHe<l  aud  washiujj;  ihena-
iN.'lvv»,dM U  Mtvii  in  tbu  fulloniu);  illustratiou  taken
froai  Sir  W.  HaniiltouV  vaMca.


m


.j_^^


Bnt  besides  tbe  Xtwrq^Mr  and  Xovr^^a  there  were
also  vcMoU  for  bnlhiiig,  latpr  rit«Mi};h  fnr  persona
tu  »it  in,  whtrh.  a»  »Catcd  aboro,  are  callctl  mro-
tur^  bj  tlooier  aad  ■wXm  vr  iniKrpm»  by  the  Int-
er iiiToka.  The  Xavnip  ihus^  as  w«  shall  mm-,  cur^
iwapouded  to  ttae  Kooun  JininiM,*  tbs  n'<Xor  to
Ibe  tielimm  ur  d/rrtM.

la  tb*  batba  Lhen  wa»  also  »  klud  of  Mdoriflc
or  vapuor  halli  eaUed  *«yHa  or  aypiaiyiap,  whkh
U  lucuitaaed  as  c«rly  aa  Um  lima  of  Hendolua  \i\\
TftK  Jununc  the  cbawben  of  tbe  QnA  balbiug
eatatktisiinieut  waa  th«>  jXetvr^iHais  Lat.  umeUriim.
Luctaii  Kififf*.  p  Ti'\  •|w«k»  uf  tbeandvrvw  with
il»  iftanm^wKamnivnt  {,<*im»ru\  i  but  aa  tbey  fwtii
ta  W  ankuoTru  to  Artvtoile.  ihcy  «-«»  probably
iatrodnwd  Aunt  Ktxue.  Ilvucv  ArtMtKle  lelU  a»
Ikal  tbdaa  vbtt  ataie  »lotb«a  fturn  lb*  balba  wmv
p«alahabte  vlib  daath.  A»  Iba  baiba  Moat  ttw
^••atlr  «4)»i»*d  tbe  gjamavt*  *u*i  yaliaeitm.  ottrt
it  lb*  raoMW  nf  tbaaa  Ultw  btiiblmir*  aarred  Ibe
iparyw*  Af  iuMlnMabiC<4««Mu  i;XeB.  At*,  .f  (A.  ti  lOi.
Abotti  tbeaa  loaoH  tb«  rp^Jjm  naed  l««  bwf,  K*u4(-
iaf  oal  for  an  laritatioa.  W«  baar  of  wrmMUuc
«id  plajriaiC  *^  cvdabm,  btaJdta  a  ureal  ili<«l  of
wiMMilioM  caiiic Mk  iw  lb* balW  T>» aLua  tbac*
Ittepait  of  abtwrtTWafbr.tW.  «V


Either  the  bath  or  siinple  aooiutiug
generally  fonned  part  of  tbn  biistueM  of  dreauug
for  dinner.  It  was  generally  takou  Hhortly  beforp
tlin  dfijrvoir,  or  pni)ci|>al  uieul  of  the  day.  Kpictc-
tui*  ii»iJw.  i.  I,  '£))  nuMiiions  noon  aa  tbr  hour,  white
voluptuaries  balhwl  reiwrntedly.  It  wn.-*  tbe  priK-
tiee  t^i  take  tirot  a  niinu  or  vapour,  itud  nftt-rtranU
u  cold  bath,  thiUiKb  in  the  time  of  lliuu^r  tbe  cold
bath  nppeai-8  to  have  befti  taken  finU  atul  tbe
warni  aflcnvardpt.  Tbe  cold  water  was  uttnally
poured  OU  tbe  back  or  shonldern  of  tbe  bat  ben  by
tbe  ^aXayrCs  or  bin  aatiifltuiita,  who  arc  chIIimI  iro^-
XiTai.  Tim  veiwel  from  wbicb  tbe  water  wa«
poured  was  called  {Apia;  there  is  uieution  alao  of
the  Apvraiva.  wbicb  must  have  been  much  Hnftller
Uathiug  establish uieiita  for  women  existed  amoug
the  Gi«ekB.  whether  belouging  to  tbe  .»tnte  or
maintained  by  private  enterprise.  We  learn  from
V^arro  <£,.  L.  is.  68)  that  the  earliest  Greek  halnenm
in.  Borne  contained  a  department  for  womea.

Ruulez  (C^oijr  dt  Vaats  peints  liv  J/uxfr  d«  LeyJe^
pi.  xix.  I)  givva  u6  a  vase  paiuting  of  a  bath  io  a
palaeaira,  wbeiv  two  ahownrlMtbadeitci^iid  oo  mei
from  spontii  ftbaped  like  panthers'  beatU ;  and  Pi^
nofka  yBiUler  antihn  Lebens,  pi.  XTiLi.  9}  shows  qh  ,
batb  for  woujtiU  situilarly  arrangetl,  while  nu  ua^
published  vai^  paiutiog  iu  the  Louvre  rcprcseia-^
a  Kokvfi3f}ffpo .  r>r  >"  iiniiiiiig-Viilb  for  women.


Slu>wer  Bul»  fur  WuEum- (Proui  •  Grc«k  Xtm.}

The  perwoua  who  bathed  probably  brought  vi
them  atrigiU,  oil,  and  towcla,  or  bad  them  t-3irr«^
bj-  a  slave. Tbe  Rtrigil,  which  was  called  by  I**?
Greeks  mXryyis  or  fvoryia.  was usually  niailp  *-T,  ■
itoD,  but  socaetimea  also  of  other  materials. Fc^^
lux  »aya  ( x.  I^^I),  "The  cbith  which  is  wora
womcu  round  their  luius  when  taking  the  bstli,
by  the  men  who  bathe  tbem.  is  called  Ju  Xm-rpi:
The  Greeks  alao  oaedditT'ereiit  materiaU  forcWi
i»g  or  washiDg  tbeawalrea  in  the  bath,ro  vUi
the  general  name  of  fiim^  was  gtveu.  aud  wlu
were  aapplied  by  tbe  ^Moms. This  pC/ifua
ly  cooai»te«l  of  a  lye  made  of  Ua»e  or  wood-a49^
(KOl^^.or  uitnim^aad  of  fnller'a  earth  iyij  xtfialL.''
.\rii>to|>h.  ft^.  710  aod  Sefao). ;  Plat.  Htf.  iv.  iX  .^\

Amoug  tbe  Grwka  a  pentm  wax  always  baiLs
at  birth,  marriage,  aod  after  de^ib ;  whettcr  it
Kkld of  tbe Uanlauiaos;  ait  lUyriau iteoplo,  td"
they hatlte  only thnee ia  tbetr  Uvea — at  bir^'''
roarriaEe.  aud  after  death. Tbe  water  iu  wlal<^
tbe  bride  wm  batbad  at  Athaas  w«»  takeu  froiu
tbe  fmmiain  of  C^UIrrbaSv  vUeli  waa  called  fro"i
Ibe  Uoa af  P&aialniias  Yhim^wii—

Tba  naSwal  warm  apfiaga  (*^  or  "HpaiXfxt
XeM)M)  WW*  MM  wilj  aataiBad  m  sarml  in  Hen-
e)Mw  kM  aba  cMaMHad  UgUjr  madiciuaL  Vi»
b1  ifrtay  of  A  liiiMia  Sa  Baboea  wet^  Earned  fnr
tbe&r  baallae  iH«»Mti«a,  aa  atea  vaa  a  coU  sprluf


Iirbicb  flowed  f»r  n  time  (Atben.  iii.73).  lu  luur
Itimtu  it  WuAnie  a.  ^nttkl  n>«Kirt  t'nr  pleaaare  a«  well
lk«  )i«*:iltli,  <«^{i^ially  in  the  Kpritij(.

Roman  Ra'As. — Tliu  nunln  baiitttu,  balineae,  bal-

%tum,  lHiUt€UM,  Ikgrmae,  ni'u  all  coniinuiily  traiisLited

by  oar  {{QDoral term  "butb"  or  "bulliH";  but  in

(ltd  Trritiiigsor  tbv  unrlin-  niid  bi-tt<;r  atitlioni  tbry

are  used  nitb  diM^riiuiiuitinii. liiilneum  or  hali-

VIM,  whit'li  i»  ilcrivt-il  fiixii  tbii  Gn'i:k  lin\fivtinv,

ligDificA,  ia  iu  priuiniy  »iniiS4^  a  tiaih  or  bittbiiig-

v«nel,  Micb  as  most  |>er&«)ii«  of  auy  coii^'qutMicc

waong  Ihc  Kninans  itosacAAiMl  iu  tbvir  oirn  bouses

(Cif.  (tif  ^rr.  ii. :{),  nud  bcDoe  tbe  ebamlicr  %i'hicb

containisl  the  biitb,  Khicb  ia  al&o  ibe  )im|ii>r  triius-

Utiun  iif  tbe  word  halMtuium. Tbo  diiuiuative

liktulitm  id  adopted  by  Souis:a  [Kp.  WJ,  ^  \\)  U*  dev

ipaU<  tb«  h»tb-rtNtiD  of  Hcipio,  in  tbe  villa  at  Ll-

trrtmm.  and  in  expressly  Q^-d  to  cburiicterizti  tbe

DitMli-jily  of  rvpnbljcai)  manDors  oh  compurad  with

tli»liixiir>' of  bi.4  own  tiuie«. Bnt  wbcu  tbu  batlM

of  )inval«  tudividuaU  became  mom  sumpiiiouK,

and  eou)pnse«l  maity  rooms iiiHt^'ad  of  tbe  ixie

small  t'bamber  dcacribod  by  8«nm.n,  tbe  plural  tntl-

m»a  or  bulinea  wofi  udoptitd.  wbicli  Htill,  iu  corti'ct

Iaui{nAg?,  bml  rvriTvucr  only  to  tb«  bathit  of  in*^

vatc  persona, iititntat  and  Wimh*,  whicli  acconK

irig  tu  Vurro  (L.  L.  viii.25,  ix.  41)  bavo  no  ftingular

iitiiuWr,'  wen*  tbf  jmhlic  baibs. Unt  tbis  accii-

ra«*T  of  (lictiou  itt  nv};]f('t«d  by  many  of  ibe  flul>se-

qa«Qi  wni«r«;  and  «vt>n  in  Mio  tiin^iof  tbe  Ropnl>-

lie,  Wortim  waM  w^tA  fur  a  public  butb,  but  (larlic-

ulatty  by  tbe  |H>etH,  atuong  wlioin  bnlMu  ia luit

nrtcowQitinly  mied  in  tbe  plural  nuinlwrtn  itiKinCy

the  public  batlj)*.  Kinre  ibo  word  bultuae  vunld  not

bci  iutruducffd  in  an  bciametor  vcrae Thermne  t$ip-

MA(,"hoc  «pringB".i  Di«ant  proi>erl,v  warm  MpriiifjK,

or  lut lid  of  warm  water;  but  canto  to  bw  applied

to  lliiiwtniaguiticent  v>dillce8  wbicli  grew  iiji  undur

tUt-  Kiiipir>>.  tu  place  of  tbe  ^iiuple  balneae  of  tb*:'

R"IMililii-,aiid  wbiob  comprised  witliin  Ibeir  tango

of  kiliiiiigu  all  tbe  appurtonoucea  bKlonging  to

tb»  Gr«b  gjQ""wia,  as  well  us  a  regular  CHtab-

l>4hnKat  apprupritttMl  fur  battling  ('.Inv.vii.  2.13).

VriUn,  bowuver,  dhb  llirae  terina  witboat  dialtuc-

tiou.

The  Romans,  in  tbo  oarlivr  jieriods  of  their  his-
****" T, nwil  rbe  batb  but  seldom,  and  only  for  liealth
••"l  clawliDOas  ooi  aa  a  luxury.  Tbna  w*  lenru
^<^Seii«ca(£^.  86,  >  IS)  tbat  tbe  ancimit  Roinaiia
^'''M  their le^SAud  arms  daily  ami  batbed  ibfir
*bnlc  Uwly  once  a  week.  Tbe  room  wl  apart  for
^•''•pwrpuae  waa  oallvd  Airaln'nu  or  iatrina  (q.  v.),
'"'I  wjw  plar«d  near  tbt*  Icitcben,  so  that  warm
*aier  Qiigbt  he  eauily  pnMMtred.

"  i»  uul  rHrurdt<d  at  wbat  piTciso  period  the
"^irf  llie  warm  balb  wan  lirst  iiitrodncud  amoii);
■'■eSomatia:  but  we  iL-arii  fnun  Seneca  tbat  Svipio
jl^iiwarra  balb  iu  his  %illa  at  Litcninm  ;  wbicb,
"^•••et,  woi  of  (be  simplfst  kind,  coHsifitiug  of  a
^*Sl«  cbauber.  juM  autliricnt  for  Ibe  iiec««itary
*"')»«». and  wiibuut  auy  preteniiiinnH  to  luxury,
'•••"ftmall  and  dark,"  bo  sayn,  "afrer  tbe  ninn-
"*"f  tlie  anrienla  "  8oneea  aUo  descrilHW  tbe
V^Ur.  bxthn  of  former  timi^i  as  oAi»c«r«  cl  ^tgnVi
-'"''^  iadirtit ;  aud  wbUo  tlieir  arrangements  were
>»implej*t  kind,  nfdiles  of  noblo  birth  dii]  not
lla  to  look  after  them  pi>rsoDally.  These
*•'*  Utlu  of  warm  water;  bat  the  prActice  of

*  Adwt  t«.  b»Nef  «r.  naod  In  ibe  ■tnffiilitr  lo  ilctignat*  ■  prt-
■ ' aiM  VMM  by  HdlDMliia  yltuer.  XL  1I»|.


heating  an  apartment  with  wano  air  by  a  hoUov
nnderneatb  tin:  Hour,  so  ait  to  proMuce  a  bot-atr
batb,  iH  HtatiHl  by  Valerius  Miirimns  (Jx.  I,  $  1 )
and  by  Pliny  (//.  .V.  ix.  $  Itirt)  to  have  b*en  in-
v«iit«l  by  Sergius  Omta,  who  lixed  in  tbe  a^e  of
L.  CniMHUN,  tbe  orator,  btffore  tl)«  Marsic  War.

In  the  time  of  Cicero,  thon^b  young  people  nsed
in  Miimnirr- to  balbe  in  the  Tiljor,  yet  the  use  of
batbd,  both  publie  anit  private,  of  wann  water  and
hot  air,  bad  become  geiit^ral ;  and  we  learn  fntui
one  of  bis  oratious  that  ttntrv  were  already  bitibs
{bulitt'it  ifcniiii)  nt  Home  wLieh  wuru  o^ien  tu  tbe
public  upon  pnymcut  of  a  Kmall  snui  {pro  t'aei.
'i.'>,  |>1).  Uesidea  ptibltc  batb»,  otbern  were  built
by  private  »pfcniator«,  who  either  wurkM  tbvm
tbeinael%'e«  or  lenaed  tbeni  out.  SonietimcA  eten
tlie  State  teamed  out  tbi*  public  bntbit  under  certain
conilitions,  touching  certain  |>ooplu  to  lie  a4lnuttt.-4l
friM!,  houra  of  op«^uing  and  elosing,  height  of  wa-
ter, etc.  Tbe  lossee  or  worker  of  a  bath  thalteator)
app[*are  to  have  stood  very  low  in  social  estimatiuu
i.Inv.  vii.  4).

Jonlau  has  collected  a  vast  number  of  the  iinmeji
of  the  battiK  fi-oiti  tbe  Kegioiiarti,  aiitl  they  appear
to  be  iieai'ly  till  railed  after  tbe  {lowessor,  though
wc  dnd  one  of  Mercnriun  and  one  of  Diana.  Tht?re
werw  brttb.s,  of  courne.  in  the  countrj',  anil  they
profifjtfted  to  be  (niit^.'  «p  to  city  style — e.g.  an  m-
itcrrplioii  baa  /a  prntdiin  .InrWW  FauJitiniamu:  bali-
'irir«.  tovalnr  moif  urbico,  d  omnU  /lumanitita  prar-
«latur  I  Marini,  Atti  Je'  /'rute/H  ArvtU,  p.  fj.TS,  wIhtb
a  sijuihir  ]tnifL-»aion  of  a  t>aUtnt<fr  ia  to  bo  found,
vmiiin  vommixUi  pmnUiHfur).  A  ttign-hoanl.  in
Ori'lli  i'>]2H,  uf  the  Tberuiue  of  J|,  CnnwuM,  offent
salt  and  fre.nh  water  bathh.  Tbeau  baths,  wbieh
were  worked  by  private  iiidividualM,  appear  to
havu  tjceu  calb-d  balnea  meritorin.  Agrippa  add-
ed 17M  batliM  to  ihoKe  which  exinted  already  iu
Rome.  In  Ibe  time  of  Comdantinu  there  were  no
less  than  i^iH  in  the  city,  aud  the  Kegionarii  ac-
tually ivckou  9:>2  (Ik^cker-tJoIl,  (iaUut/ui.  140).

In  the  earlier  age!«  of  Komuu  bbtory  a  uuDk
givater  delicacy  was  obM.'r%'od  with  reApect  to
bathing,  even  HUtoiig  tbe  nmn,  than  was  UHual
aiuuiig  Ibe  fin^eks;  for,  a^'cnnling  to  VateiiuH  Max-
iiHu*  (ii.  I.'J?),  it  was  tieemed  indecent  for  ji  falber
to  bathe  in  company  with  hi»  own  non  after  he
had  attained  tlio  age  of  jiubcrty,  or  a  Hoii-jti-law
with  hi.K  fathi-r-in-law.  Hut  virtm-  pniweil  away
as  wealth  inun.-afwd ;  and  when  tbe  tberniQe  canio
into  use  nut  only  did  tbe  imui  liatbt^  logrthvr  in
unmbers,  bnt  even  men  nud  women  strijiped  and
liatbed  promiscuously  iu  the  same  i)ath,  as  in  cer-
tain Anstrian  cities  tr^day.  It  it  Irnc,  however,
Ibnt  the  public  e»tt'Ublishmcnt«  gcuevnlly  eontainod
wparate  bathK  for  both  sexes  a'^joining  each  other,
aM  in  neun  to  have  I)e4in  tbe  case  at  the  Wtbs  of
Pouipeii.  Aldus  Gelliiis  (x.  !t)  relates  a  8tor>-  of  a
comiiirs  wift;  who  tiHtk  :i  whim  to  bathe  atTcaiium
(Teano),  a  tiiiiall  provincial  town  of  Campania,  in
tbe  nien'M  batliH — probably  l>ecaii»e,  in  a  Mmull
ton-ii,  the  female  department,  like  that  at  Ptnnpt'ii,
was  more  conQiicd  aud  Icfut  convenient  than  that
aasigned  to  the  men  ;  aud  an  onler  was  coriHe<i(iont-
ly  given  to  the  quaestor,  &I.  MnHuH,  to  turn  tbe
men  out.  In  the  Lex  Metalll  VipattceuHis  the  wom-
en have  the  use  of  tbe  batb  from  daybreak  till  the
meventh  hour,  the  men  from  the  eightli  hour  till
the  seroiid  hour  of  the  night.  If  al  Kome  there
were  separate  establiKhmeiit>t  for  the  women,  men
at  auy  rate  appear  tu  have  been  able  tu  gel  into


which  »as

(baltitaior).
Iwluw  »  c«l
tviTr iitlmil
(Juv.  ii.  151Q
TbepiMtl
venal  (vi.'«
hii«  Ue^ii
shon-  lb  lit
I>aid  no  feel
lakeu  TO  ia
they  paid  1
Iiric«  thsQ  I
by  the  tat
Vipiwc^tiBii^
tiflfl  lieeti  al
ferml  Io,I|m
half  ail  (Mi,
en ail as.
Sulla  ga%'e
pie the u(
bfttbs  an<l
day  of  his
them,  and  they  were  a  posaihle  place  for  AMignn-  jiiineral.  and  Anguntnit  on  his  retnrn  frwa


I rnrat«  Imlhs,  tolin
k.  I'MwifB*  fur  comBinniCTtioa
I Hot  bMlu,  roblorui.
■I  Rot-nir  bUk,  taamimm.
b.  Raervoir*  fijf  n>lil  uid  pct-
bafm  wAini  aUutma.


MtmHBalh.

b  Coftl  or  wood  vtor*  rooma.
11  ClMeUi'

q.  AllMttUntf'  rooma

r.  UBdMKniuDil  rill  (InUB*.

L  rm  pip«.

a.  AlUr  uf  [iiJtw  AbnslM.


liono  (Ot.  -J.  A.  iii.  6391; — a  )>a9eag<>  which  fur-
ther shows  that  thero  wire  Rmnll  private  vhaiubers
with  Uaths  ill  then), such  asvrv  tiud  in  the  Stabiaii
baths  nt  Fomiwii."  But  whether  the  men  and  wom-
en were  allowwl  to  n»e,»acb  other's  chainltem  in-
disc rial i nil lely,  or  «niu«  of  the  public  eutublii'h-
menta  had  only  one  coinmoii  strt  of  balbn  fur  liolh,
tbeeuAtoin  prevailed  iinder^tht'  Kmpiiv  of  nieu  aud

womeu  bathing  iudischminately  togeth<>r  (Fliu.  :  (.'aligiila  matle  it  a  en|>it!il  oftVuce  to
if.  .V.  xxxiii.  $  133).  This  ciiiitoui  was  forbiddeo  by  '  the  luxury  of  bathing  npoti  auy  reUgioi
Hadrian  (Spart.  Badr.  18)  and  by  M.  Aurdins  Anto-
ainus  (Capitolin.  jNroH.23);  and  AleSKUder  lieve-
nu  prohihited  any  baths  commou  (o  both  aexes
llUI»fii  miitaX  from  being  opened  in  Rone  (I^m-
prid.  Jfrx.  ^rr  ^4^.  AltboiiKb  the  praotioe  w«a  not
adopted  by  wouien  of  rvsjicciAbility,  vet  this  Icffis-
laUuD  was  not  j»i>nunnently  efftn'tive,  and  t>Tr>n  llie
ceuanrm  of  the  Fathor>i  of  the  CtiriHtinu  Chnrrh
nod  the  CAUous  of  eotinctl:!  did  not  avail  to  sni*-
prr»  it.  Justiutau  TvctiKuizt**  it  n-i  n  ground  of
divorric.  $i  /•ari*  nivr  ita  IttruruT^a  cjrf,  «/  atm-
w«nr Uttaermm  mm ciri* lihntiitu  ctium kahert

When  th«  public  liaths  (Nrfanto  ^tre  Ont  iusti-
ftiied,  thc,v  were  only  for  the  lower  onlem,  who

alone  luilhed  in  pulOtr  ;  the  jMiiplr  of  wealth,  as  ,  of  taking  a  liath.  when  hoMncfts  hud  be
welt  as  thotte  who  fomicd  th«  (M|iii*Htnan  and  ntn-  '  at  the  tenth  hour,  and  rren  Ial<er  (ii).  W
atofian  onlrtx.  ntwHl  pri^al«  batbti  in  their  own
honscs.  But  iiH  rarly  ev^n  as  the  time  of  Inltus  pannt,  notice  wan  piven  b;  the  iwundof
Caenar  we  find  no  )•'»  •  |ic>r*onA(j[e  than  the  moth-  dtrrMnrNM  jilan.xiv.  Id).  One  of  these
vr  itf  AnstinlUH  nnikini:  nm?  of  the  pnblie  e«tabH;>h-  the  Inscriptiun  Ftrmii  Bml
mrntcxSnrl.  .Iitti.'>it^;  and  in  prtMY«!<  of  time,  rrrn  <  TUcmia*  Dtodetianap  in  the  yrar  ld4fl^
llir  rniitrror^  thi'niMrlri's  Imthnl  iu  public  with  the  |  into  the  pooBeasHtii  «if  the  1eanie«l  Fnlvl
ux-nncKt  of  the  (voptr.  |  y  Apfirmii.  ad  Ciaccon.  De  THMm.y. A  a|

The  Itatlii  weir  opoiveil  nt  iinnri«e  and  eloMHl  at  f^Miud  iu  tb»  new  baths  at  Pukp«ii,  ai
NutiM't.  Thi<  niiknv  lnni|i«  found  in  the  tiatho  nt  (  f/)f>ff.  p.  Ht  plaeea  in  the  baitbL  a  sou
l*oini>eit  wrn'  iimsI  (rt|-  lifihltni;  the  n^nn*  and  the
ilnrk  (m^jti:'-',  iui-..i.lmn  to  Mtwen.  fViN/<.  Xturf  l.Vs
aud  do  not  ii>->t'x>»illy  imply  nltiht-bathlu|t.  Ibit
iu  the  time  of  Alexandov  Sr\eiu*  tl  would  ap^w^ar
that  the  l«tlu  were  kept  %\\w\t  an*>r  idi^htl^U,
TW  ftlluMon  In  Jtnennl  {\i,  4ltf)  pndMkbly  ivfem
lo  private  lM«h».  ^ ^

Tlie  priM>  t*f  a  t'ntli ' ■^>  wa«  a  iiiiAdi-mi».
|b«  •uialleal  pii*r«  nl nrr,  fmui  the  H|;e


f*hvo  them  baths  and  barttera  for  n  day.
openeil tim  luitlis  prntiiitomdy  to  l>otll
women  fi'T  a  year,  and  afterwards  pive  4
his  Thermae. Such  nniniticciico  Mas  re^
emiKTors  aud  al«»  by  private  individn;  "

Tho  batUtt  wirre  clo«c«l  when  any  ue
misftirtiino  happened,  just  as  wc  shuuli
theatres;  nnd  SnetoniuR  (.ays  that tl


They  were  origiDully  phuxd  nndor  th^
tecdence  of  the  nedileo,  whose  bnxiiieKii'
keep  them  in  repair,  aud  to  see  that
kept  cleau  and  of  a  propM^cmiicratura.
pn^ivincw  the  same  duty  mRus  to  bavoj
njKiii  the  quMstor,  ■■  niay  be  inferred  fit
fiellins  (x.  3).  J

The  time  usually  anipit^  by  the  Ri
laktDg  the  bath  vn»  the  eiffhth  honr,  o
■fterwaidft  (Mart.  x.  48;  xi.  52).  Before  t
none  but  invalid*  were  allowrd  to  bathe)
Vtlrnvius  reckons  thr  kotirslM-xt  adapted)
iuK  to  be  Irom  mid-dny  uulil  .ibotit  snitl
riiiua  took  his  bath  at  the  niuth  honr  1
nnd  .It  the  eighth  iu  winter:  and  Marti


nater-eU^ck,  with  ap|uu\Mitly  eeme  laed
•Irikin^  the  hcnin  attarheil.

While  the  bath  was  um-.I  f.>r  bealtll
eb'anl>neej»a  siufitc  <w«  wan  considered
St  a  li»»,atHl  that  only  uben  requisite
hi\iiHr.>  .tf  ibe  Empire  knew  DO  saob
I  he  iinily  l>aih  was  someiime*  repnuad
•e\on  and  ri|cfat  time^  in  meeeMkiu
whu^h  the  eniwror  Camaoodni  im


BALNKAE


189


I BALKEAE


vith.  Oordiau  bathed  four  or  five  times  a  day  in
aommer  and  twice  in  winter;  tlie  emperor  Gallie-
niis  six  or  eeveu  times  iu  summer  aud  twice  or
tbi'ice  in  winter.  Cq^imodns  also  took  his  meals
/in  tlie  bath — a  custom  which  was  not  couOned  to
a  di-iHolute  emperor  alone.

It  was  the  usual  and  constant  habit  of  the  Ro-
maus  to  take  the  bath  after  exercifle,  and  previous-
ly to  their  principal  meal  (oena);  but  the  debauchees
of  the  'Empire  bathed  after  eating  as  well  as  be-
fore, iu  onler  to  promote  digestion,  aud  so  to  ac-
qnire  a  new  appetite  for  fresh  delicacies.  Kero  is
related  to  have  iudulgcd  iu  this  prRCtice  (Suet,
jy'fiw,  p.  27;  cf.  Jnv.  i.  142).  This  practice  of
carrying  off  the  effects  of  gluttony  by  artificial
meaoB  of  inducing  perspiration,  which  bad  takeu
tlie  place  of  the  hard  labour  and  exercise  of
Btemer  times,  was  severely  coudemued,  aud  some-
times proved  fatal. See  Cena.

The  Bumaus  did  not  coutent  themselves  with  a
single  hath  of  hot  or  cold  water;  but  they  went
through  a  course  of  baths  in  successiou,  iu  which
the  ageucy  of  air  as  well  as  water  was  applied.
It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  precise  order  in
which  the  course  was  usually  taken,  if  iudeed


there  was  any  general  practice  beyoud  the  whio^  although  to  a  nioderu  these  seem  extraordinarily
of  the  individual, Under  medical  treatment  thai  •elaborate  in  their  arrangements.


siiccesBion  would,  of  coarse,  be  regulated  by  the
uatnre  of  the  disease  for  which  a  cure  was  sought,
aud  would  vary  also  according  to  the  different
practice  of  differeut  physicians.  It  is  certain,
however,  that  it  was  a  general  custom  to  close
tlie  pores  aud  brace  the  body  after  the  excessive
perspiration  of  the  vapour  bath  either  by  anoiut-
ing,  or  by  pouring  cold  water  over  the  head,  or  by
pliiugiug  at  once  into  the  piscina  or  into  a  river
{Auaou.  Mb$eU.  341).  Musa,  the  physician  of  Au-
gnstus,  is  said  to  have  introduced  this  practice
{Plin.fl:  JK  XIV.  $  77;  cf.  Hor.  Epiit.  i.  15, 4),  which
became  quite  the  fashion,  iu  consequence  of  the*
benotit  which  the  emperor  derived  from  it,  though
Dio  Cass.  (liii.  30)  accuses  Musa  of  haviug  artfully
caofiod  the  death  of  Marcellus  by  an  improper  ap-
plication of  th<  same  treatment.  In  other  cases
it  was  considered  conducive  to  health  to  pour
warm  water  over  the  head  before  the  vapour  bath,
■ad  cold  water  immediately  after  it ;  and  at  other
times  warm,  tepid,  and  cold  water  baths  were
taken  in  succession.

The  two  physicians  Galen  aud  Celsus  differ  tu
Hoiiie  respects  as  to  the  order  iu  which  the  baths
bbunld  be  takeu — the  former  recommending  first
the  hot  air  of  the  laconicum  {aipi  Btp^i^),  next  the
bath  of  warm  water  {vbap  dtpfiov),  afterwards
the  cold,  and  fiually  to  be  well  rubbed  (Galeu.  d<
M^etfuido  Medendi,  i.  10,  pp.  706,  709,  ed.  Kilhn);
whilst  the  latter  recommends  his  patients  first  to
sweat  for  a  short  time  iu  the  tepid  chamber  ((epi'
d'tritjm),  without  uudressiug,  then  to  proceed  into
the  thermal  chamber  (ealidarivm),  and  after  hav>
iiig  gone  through  a  regular  course  of  perspiration
there,  not  to  descend  iuto  the  warm  bath  {solium),
but  to  pour  a  qnautity  of  warm  water  over  the
hea<l,  then  tepid,  and  fiually  cold,  afterwards  to
be  scraped  with  the  strigil  (perfrkari),  aud  final-
ly rubbed  dry  and  anointed  (Gels,  de  Med.  i.  4).
i^uch,  in  all  probability,  was  the  usual  habit  of  the


among  the  Orientals,  who,  as  0«ll  remarks,  "  suc-
ceeded by  conquest  to  the  luxuries  of  the  enervat-
ed Greeks  and  Komans."

The  principal  ancient  authorities  on  baths  are :
Vitrnvins  (v.  10) ;  Liiciau  ('Ifnrt'ar  ^  ^oXaveiov,  a  de-  '
tailed  description  of  a  set  of  baths  erected  by  an
architect  named  Hipptas);  Pliny  the  Touoger,  iu
the  two  letters  describing  his  .villas  ;  Statius,  SUv.
\.  5;  Martial  (vi.  43,  and  other  epigrams);  Seneca
{Epist.  51,  56,  86),  and  Sidouius  ApoUtuaris  {Epist.
ii.  2).

But  it  would  be  almost  hopeless  to  attempt  to
arrange  the  information  '  obtained  from  these
writers  were  it  not  for  the  help  afforded  us  by  the
ext-ensive  ruins  of  aucieut  baths — such  a<j  tha
Thermae  of  Titus,  Caracalla,  and  Diocletian ;  the
Thermae  of  Pompeii  excavated  in  1654-58;  and
numerous  public  and  private  baths  throughout  the
whole  extent  of  the  Roman  Empire,  the  most  im-
portant of  which  are  referred  to  iu  the  list  of  au-
thorities at  the  end  of  this  article;  but  above  all
the  public  baths  {balnme)  of  Pon^ieii,  which  were
excavated  in  18*24-25.  Before  describing  the  de-
tails of  the  Roman  public  baths,  attention  may  be
oalled  to  the  simpler  baths  used  in  private  houses,


The  cut  given  on  the  i>receding  page  is  a  ground-
plan  of  the  Roman  baths  at  Badenweiler;  aud
though  less  elaborate  than  the  baths  attached  to
some  Pouipe^u  private  bouses,  it  is  interesting
from  its  compactness  and  the  arrangement  of  the
women's  and  men's  baths.  A  full  account  of  them
is  given  by  Dr.  Heinrioh  Leibnitz,  Die  romiachen
Bdder  bei  Badenweiler  (Leipzig,  1860).

The  so-called  Old  Baths,  adj^'i^i^S  ^^^  Forum
at  Pompeii,  afford  an  instance  of  a  complete  set
of  public  baths  so  well  preserved  that  iu  some
of  the  chambers  even  the  ceilings  are  intact,  A
grouud-plan  of  these  is  given  ou  the  next  page.

The  whole  building,  which  comprises  a  double
set  of  baths,  has  six  differeut  entrances  from  thg
street,  one  of  which,  6.  gives  admission  to  the
smaller  set  ouly,  which  are  supposed  to  have  been
appropriated  to  the  women,  and  five  others  to  the
male  department,  of  which  two,  c  aud  excommu-
nicate directly  with  the  furnaces,  auotbe  other
three,  fl_3,o2ijDj,with  the  bathing  aportmeuts,  of
which  a,  tEenearest  to  the  Forum,  was  the  prin-
cipal one ;  the  other  two,  a  3  aud  a  2,  being  ou  differ-
eut sides  of  the  buildiug,  served  for  the  convenience
of  those  who  lived  on  the  north  aud  east  aides  of
the  city.  Passing  through  the  principal  entrance,
a,  which  is  removed  from  the  street  by  a  norrow
footway  surrounding  the  imula  (the  outer  curb  of
which  is  marked  upon  the  plan  by  the  thin  line
drawn  rouud  it),  aud  after  descending  three  steps,
the  bather  finds  upon  his  left  baud  a  small  chamber,
I,  %vbich  contained  a  water-closet  (latrina),  and  pro-
ceeds into  a  covered  portico,  g  g,  which  ran  rouud
three  sides  of  an  open  court — atrium  (A) — which
was  68  ft.  long  and  53  ft.  bi-oad ;  and  these  together
formed  the  vestibule  of  the  baths — f€stibulu}a  bal-
nearutti  (Cic.  Fro  Ca--l.  iM),  in  which  the  8er\*ants  be-
longing to  the  establishment,  as  well  as  the  attend-
ants of  the  bathers,  waited.  There  are  seats  for
their  accommodation  placed  underneath  the  jwr-


Komana  when  the  bath  was  resorted  to  as  a  dailyJUico  (g,  g).  This  atrium  was  the  exei-cise  ground
Kuuree  of  pleasnre/  and  not  for  any  particnlaryfoi"tbe  young  men,  or  perhaps  served  as  a  prom-
medical  treatment ;  the  more  so  as  it  resembles  iuljenade  for  visitors  to  the  baths.  Within  this  court
ninuyreapects  the  system  of  bathing  still  practiscdvthe  keeper  of  the  baths  (6a/»«ttor),  who  exacted


BALNEA E

In  this  ciiiirt,  tik4*n-tKr,  an  ln-in^
tlie  tnuiit  pulilic  plar^*,  ailverttw-
incuU  Tor  the  tlirutn*,  ur  nther
auuourice^eiitw  of  geuenil  inter-
otf ,  n  IMC  {KMtted  u|».  uuL-  nf  irhich,
autiounciuK  a  j^IadiiitiiHtil  alimr,
still  remains.  At  thr  twa  aida
of  the  eiitruuovjlo  it  wet%  oiuiur
BuatA  i»rAofar>.  mi  is  th^oriitlor
vliivbcotidaoHr&un)tli^klrniic«
a  U  into  tlie  sanip  vpcliliiile;  «,
a  smnll  ct^U  of  siniilitr  tiw  lu  lh«
curre^imtMliiif;  one  in  ilto  t>)>iM>-
frite  cHirritlor,  if;  e,  ;i  pawcit;*
nf  cummiiiiiL-atinn  wliicli  li-iuls
inlti  lliu  L-lmtiibft  It,  itiu  opv-
(/i/frrJiiiN,  »  vniiin  r«>r  unilit-asin^;
iiiul  n  hieii  ih  tiUa  iicoeA9il>k-  hum
tbcHtrcerby  ilieiliKira  3,  rliroiigh
the  corridnr  p.  lu  nliich  a  sniftH
iiicho  is  ol>M}rval>li>,  vchicli  prol»-
ably  M.'rre(I  f«T  the  stiitloo  of
Hnollicr  iwfMnifot',  who  collrcfe
tlic  money  from  tluwci  ontcvio^
I'ltjm  the  uurth  btirrt.  In  t1ii«
ntoni.Tvbirh  >vii^:tr^fi.  loQKAQtl-
ft.broiul.unthKvitiitoi-timinilbiiii
mt'tl)of»rc(!nT*^rinKtb<--bath^T^^
ujMtdfitirium  jirnbiitily  lictnutjrU

llta  /rigidai-iHm,  which  lit  Pliii;

viltii  it  iMljoiiMHld'Un  £;»«l.v^

f '.'ot;  tbonKliintht'K>'^'^tt^*^'"i-  '^
at  Konic  lbe/iif/i(f(tr-iMM  uuil • ^jt
caldarium hu<l  tlimbtlew  cad
w]tainti;  iifH^lptrhum. In  iHpi:
rf,v/rHt«»ttlirhiith»M-»rfn»iT»iIl1
clothing,  which  wok  lakf  t «  in
chttr)(«  by  sh»ves  known  tw  (tr/s-a-  I
l'ir,n<>tiihoil4  ill  nnrinit  tinii^e*  for]
thvir  iliahontBty  iMff.  xlvii,  IT\


BALXEAE


191


BALNEAG


room  u  ooe  to  tlie  fbmacea,  ooe  to

D.  while  the  sixth  oppiipd  ujKm  tlie
C.  with  its  culil  iihiDfi;e-1)atb  i^oirpoy,

■fitt,  pigctHtt,  bnplittrfium,  patrna).
lit  this  cbau>bi-r  is  of  white  tuiirblp,
t*  ill.  ill  iliaiiifttT.  nnd  about  U  tt.  1>  In.
nppi'oiu-litfd  hy  two  marblo  Btepa,  as
f<(flh>\%iti|;  illu^trntiou.  _^.

friffitiariitin  I  he bather  who  nlnlint  In
tlir  witrui  bath  auil  sweating  iimi-tsH
UpiitariHM  V>. This  trpiiltiriHtu^'-i  ft.  ,
,Lniad,di(I  nut  cDiituiii  wntor  oitnrr  »t  i
It  tbi^  ImtbKol'  lltpiiiiiit,  hilt  wan  iiiLTulyi
ivanii  air  of  alt  agri.>ea1ilo  tuiiipHratiiru,


>"V/''V^  --.^'---— vv^-v'-


n  of  lb*  Old  Dsihs  at  foapali (OvcrteolL )

WI>aiv  tht;  hiMly  for  th«  great  btat  of
ihI  %variii  bnihit,  ami,  ti|i(iii  rtMiiniiiij^,
bo  (lunger  of  aido-HinliU'ii  trauhitimi
oil'.  lu  Cbi;  bathu  nt  Puin(>cii  tbitt
A'vd  likewise  an  an  tipodttitnam  j'or
r»k  tb*  waiTu  bath ;  for  which  pui-jMJsc
ip  nre  cvidciiilyadapl^-d,  ibf>  wallh  )>«-
lata  A  Dumber  ol'  Hepnrato  couipait-
Mos  for  receiving  the  ifurmeuttt  wbt-n
Bcricjinrtlfinresof  the  kiud  calle<!  Ai-
or  TelaiDoiies.  wliicb  prnjeut  from  the
>]Kirt  a  rich  roiniier  alKjve  tbeiii.  Three
BB  were  tHao  found  lu  tl;v  room,  which
m  well  by  Its  (wiitiyiiity  to  ihi!h\j«i-
adjoiniug  chamber,  as  by  n  brazier  of
1m»},  ill  which  the  c-hurronl  itshes  wtre
«hcu  thu  excnvntiuu  wu-t  made'


Krai.iT  or  Ibo  »M  Bnlh4  «l  PotiipKll

Silling  and  fK-rspiritig  be«id«  ciich  a  brazier  wns

calb'd  ft4  Jtommum  aitdatf  (Siict.  .liiy.  h3). A  repre-

M'litatioii  of  it  is  tfivtfti  in  the  above  illimriittinii.

It«  uhulnlt!itt;lb  wa»"  fl.,  and  it«breadlh*Jfi.O  in.
The  Irpiilaiiitm  in  generally  the  uioHt  highly  orna-

uiHiittHl  riMiii)  ill  batliH.  It  waa  merely  a  room  to
ftit  in  and  be  anointed  in.  lii  the  Old  Hatha
at  Pouiprit  thn  tloor  is  moiaie,  tbu  arelied
ceiling  adorned  wllb  stucco  iind  pntntiug  on
a  ouldiired  gniuud,  the  walla  red.

Aiiointiug  WHS  iierforiacd  by  slaves  called
iiN«rorM  and  aliptue(f\.  v.).  It  soinetitneH  tonk
ji'iico  before  K"i"K  ("  tbe  hdt  bath,  and  »otup-
tMiifs  after  the  rohl  hath,  belVir*'  pnllintr  mi
fin'  ctotheif,  ill  order  to  elieck  Mid  pei-Hpira-
no[i  (GaliM).  X.  -ID).  In  w>nie  batliK  ih  u  n|i«-
riul  room  tdtvUivim-iiim  ur  MJir/oriMrii)  fur  thitf
tmrpDfM'.  Fur  an  account  of  the  viirloiia
'kinds  of  oilii  and  Bccnti*  UMcd  by  the  wealthy,
>■•■>  tlie  lifleciilh  book  of  Atbenacufi,  the  tbir-
Iri  iitli  houkof  lbe//uftirui  A'aliiia/NrufPliuy,
:i]ul  cf.  Suet.  Cut.  37.

t'toui  thi-'  ttpiitiuium  a  dmir  openiid  iritiS^K^
the  cdWrtninii,  a  cbanilier  5^1  ft.  long  and  17^^
ft.  wide.  Its  niowiic  tlimr  wawdJreelly  alHive
I  he  fiimnce  or  liyimraiij^^^^^valiN  al.Ho  wlti'
hollow,  torniingagrej^^^^^K<I  with  benlcd
At  Olio  und  WM*  l^^^^^ianin  ilabrnm^
.iii-l  al  the  nlher  a  <(npPiKi»lar  liathing-
|.l,irit  (jrwXof,  alrriif,  n^W"-  *t*'«''J  phciuu^f
.i]-jniiai'he<l  from  llie  pbJform  ( «'Ao?rj  )  by
KiepH.  Thu  ttlmif  wao  16)  '*'■  ^^"S*  ^h  ^^-  ^idc,
and  2  SX.  deep.  The  "Tdtrrtiii  was  TJ  ft,  in
diameter  and  t^  in.  deep,  and  \taj4  rntscd  :ij  ft.
from  the  groiiud.  It  held  cold  water,  for
I'Miiring  uiKiu  the  bather'ti  hcail  before  ho
irU  the  room.  These  Uaitius  are  of  niarblo
in  the  Old  Batb8,  bnt  we  bear  of  aJrri  of
w)lid  silver  (Plin.  W.  .V.  xxiiii.  ^  loJ}.  IJc-
eaiiNo  of  the  great  heal  of  the  roiiin,  tho
luiltiitiium  was  but  slightly  ornameuied.

The  Old  U.atb»  have  no  lainnicum.  which.
wu.'i  a  chamber  Htill  hotter  than  tlie  ealda-

g^^H  t'iiiifi,  and  uMid  Himply  aa  u  ewouling-rooui,
having  uo  bath.  It  wa^  said  to  have  beeu
iutixidiicefl  at  Koiuo  by  Agrippa  (I>io  CtuM.

till. 27), and waa also called tntdatoriHm and

The  Aifx/irtMiiiYic-,  or  banging  •Ihtoi'H  alK>ve  tho
Ay/KHYiftvfNnf,  art)  de«urib«d  in  the  following  pas-
sage from  Prof.  Middleton^H  Aitcienl  liotHr  in  ISiiS
<p.  '.i'M),  bvin  wbicb  tliu  iiluetratiou  on  page  193  is
taken:

"  Vitruvins't)  description  of  the  bypocausts,  or
hollow  lIuorM  iiwd  for  healing  llie  hot  t«jonjii  icali-
f/arfa),  agrees  closely  with  many  existing  exaiii-
pleif.  The  lower  lloor  wa!<  to  lio  laid  with  3  ft.
tiles  {leijulae  bifMniatev)  over  a  Ivd  of  ooncret*.  on
ibiK,  all  over  the  area  of  tho  i-ooin,  row.s  of  Hhort
]>illani  {jiiitu-)  were  built  U>  bupport  the  upper  or
'hanging  floor'  {i>tttprH>iurn),  Tbc.>4t  pilac  were  to
1>e  *J  ft.  high,  madu  of  ttgnlac  bcwaleii,  or  tileii  ti  111.
M^uaie,  «vt,  uot  iu  luurtar,  but  with  olay  iu  thu


BraSEAE


in


BALNEAE


S  f  «l


TsplilananL |ur«rt«ok. )


joiuts.  Tn  r.xldtinp  rxamplos  tbcsft  olny  joiut*
Imvii  1>c^ii  li.ikvil  iiiui  lirii^k  by  ilit  nctton  uf  the
fii-u'"  (raihtT  "  bot  air,"  for  tUere  was  not  a  fire  in
thu  hgjMvaiuttim,  but  iu  tbc  kitpoeaH«is).  The  {iju-
ftngcs  tVom  the  furuaco  to  tin;  bypocnnst  niul  the
tiuv6  iu  tho  walls  uppcnr  to  have  bccii  calU-^  cnni-
atili  {VliuH.y.  in.  VM).

The aitoHytcrittHt had a {laiiNnire,  q, ronininni-


C»KUrluiu  cf  llie  Old  UxllM, (0«rt»ek.


caring  with  the  month  of  the  rnrniitH  r,  a
pntiSfinHlum  or  itrajtiijufiun;  and,  iiaMtlng  d
thnt  pdjisngc,  n'c  reach  ibb  ubauiUcT  M,
which  the  prnefumiMm  prujectx,  autl  whid
(•ntcreil  fn>ni  the  street  at  c.  It  was  aft&igUf
thi-  /ornacatorea,  or  persoiia  iu  charyo  of  the  ■
OF  \t»  two  8taiic4i»es,  one  leaiU  to  the  niof  o'
btitliH,  Hiid  uiiR  to  Ibo  boilers  coutuiutng  ihew
TUvTv.  wvm  three  boilers,  ouuof  whii-bimWa
fci^theltl  the  hot  wnt*r:  a  st^cond,  the  t«pid
rfiiiitfiM):  and  l]ie  third,  the  cold  (/hyirfan
Thi*  narm  ual^r  wan  inrnvd  into  thu  unrru
by  a  jii{>e  through  thitVatl,  iiiarkcd  ou  the  ]
L'ndi>riioiiih  thv  hut  i^haiuWT  wim  uet  tb«
cu!t4r  furnace  d,  of  uioru  than  T  ft.  iu  diam
which  bealt'd  llie  wiiltr  and  poni-ed  lint  nir
tin-  hollow  cells  of  the  hnjMU'nuttum.  It  p
from  the  fiiriiiive  under  tlie  IJnit  and  lattto
t^aldriiiih  by  two  fliien,  wliirli  are  markedi  '
ilii;  plan.  Thti  boiler  eoiitainjn){  hot  water
I'hiced  immediately  OTor  the  furnace;  au-
Die  water  was  drawu  out  fntni  tbt-nee.  It
supplied  from  the  next,  the  h^jntiariiim,  v
van  raim>d  a  little  higher  and  stood  a  )
wny  oU'fnmi  the  fnniace.  It  was  already
siderably  heutrd  froiti  itit  coutigulty  to  the
nare  and  the  hypoeauHl  below  it,  bo  that  it
plieii  ibi)  detlcinncy
*>r  the  former  wilh-
<>nt  niuteriully  diuilD-
i^liiUK  it«  U'lupera-
iiin':  and  thu  vAcutiiD
in  ihia  lost  was  again
tilled  up  from  th«
f ar t bf  n (  removed,
which  cviiiained  the
*-<>ld  water  reeeiv-
i-d  directly  foun  the
84iu»r«  rcbervoir  tw^en
btihiud  ihem— a  jtriu-
riplr  whirh  biL*  at
leu«ib  bei-u  intro-
duced into  the  mod-
nubmhiug  establish- '*"'^' ^SiT^y «


lULXEAE


las


BA.LNEAE


%^^\


5<fe^«


^K  —


LAtft


-r  ft!


Si


TCPID^AIUM


^.


Uag  Om  DUba  in  IIm  ThcmM  •!  Quac&UL |Uiddleu>a


■U  nit  hrfl  nlib  brlck.
r  ftn  of  Wall  wJih  iK>  brick
lift

MMm.  or  npit^T  fliHir  of  hf
moH.  •iipponnl  try  i>llUri>
t*r  dcnr,  «<ih  rai>irort  onlf

' •tid  wall  liiilbc.
iijrpocitux,  i«reil


HR.  HoiizooUl uil v«nlosl wr-

lion>  of  tll« ll<l«  tItM.  WJyirU

line  U»  WKlla  or  till)  r^tiU-

riiim
an.  Imii  boMtteU.
JJ.  ^lorki'l'Jiiinled  fl<l«-)H[i«  gf  t«pt

■Untim.
R.  lUin  «>t«r  pipe.
U.  Vauluofciypt.  iiiMl»of|iuuir<i

•tonv  ooocret*.


The  boilers  themwlvwt  no  longer  reniitin,
jmpreMionii  wliicti  (hoy  have  Inft  in  th^
n  wltirh  they  wtru  imliHliltHl  am  clearly
nd  cna1il»  iik  to  aM><*rtain  tlieir  nttpfctive
und  i)itn«'iiMionHt  th*?  linti  of  which,  thu
t,  is  r«>prf«onte<l  on  pi-i'cwlinj;  i«»f:i;.  Snch
n  bniltfrti  »|i|>rar  to  liav«  1mm.']|  ralliHl  mili'ti-
aioiiUkrity  of  sliajw  to  a  milo-Btunn  (Pallnd.

*).

1  the  ooppffn  (beru  is  anotfaor  corriflor
lutit  tbo  uuiirt  or  alriuni  (K)  upprtiprialod
nulla  of  tbo  bntb.^iiul  tvtiich  ba«  iImi  tbv
noe  of  BU  iiuuiedintv  foiuaitiuii'ution  with
t  b;  the  door  »t  f  'i.

m  proL'ceU  to  tb>>  ailjoiiiiuf;  sot  of  batlm.
en  M«i]{n«d  to  tbt;  wonxM).  The  cntraiK-*.'
t  door  b,  wbicLi  coiitliiclv  into  a  t*ny,\\\
t, »,  and  tliuiire  into  the  afiotlt/lfhum  IT
ke  thf  one  in  Ihu  nitMi's  liath,  hait  u  M>at
i,grattiiB)  uu  «ilhur  aide  biiilc  up  aKuiiMt
Tlitit  oiM'iia  ufiou  a  cold  liath.  J,  au-
to th<?  matatio  of  the  ittbrr  w:t,  but  of  iiitiili
llui«<nsiuna.  There  arc  fonr  Htt!{»<t  on  I  In:
dcM-'oiMl  into  it.  Opposite  to  tbu  door  of
into  the  apoilt/lfrinm  is  nnotbt-T  doom  ny
■ds  to  the  lejiiJarinm  II.  nrhicti  alno  cuiu-
n  with  the  tbunnal  rliainl>er  V,  on  i>ii<>
vhicb  w  a  wumi  liatb  in  ii  Niinun'  n'r<>s8,
Mfmrther  extremity  the  labrinn.  Tin-  tinor
bunber  vi  Ani4p<_'nd(Hl,  and  iln  wu1!h  pprfn-
r  fluni,  liko  tbo  t-orri--»]>o ruling  oriu  in  ihr
Ubs.  It  in  to  be  CHpfviiilly  uotict^l  timt
inwin  in  tbo  vtonitu'H  bntb-t  bml  tjo  bnizif:r.
al]Laaj|;ing  or  HnHpoiido<l  dour.
having  gone  through  the  regular  conree
intinn.  The  Romans  made  tiae  of  ioKtrn-
iUm)  Btrii/Hf  to  HcrapP  ofl'  tlie  pf«n«pirtiti<tii,
tlie  lume  way  an  \vc  are  ari!nKtt>mcd  to
l»n  twent  off  n  hornf  with  a  pinrc  nf  imn
tcr  be  ban  mn  n  brat,  or  coinc»  in  from
ciee. Tbo  ulrigil  wa»  aljw)  uiwd  hy  ibu


Orecke,  who  callod  it  arXfyyit  or  fw-
rjr^.  Tbe«e  inRtratnunts,  niuny  of
which  have  bpon  discovf^rt-d  amoiif;
the  rniiiR  of  ttiu  vorionK  bathx  nf  nu-
liqiiity.  wpk  luiulf*  of  Iwnu,  liroDzc,
iron,  and  Ailvi*r:  all  rorrcspundiu}:  ia
form  n-tt  li  the  opitbtrt  of  Martial,  "cNfro
iii»lriMgffe /erro"  (Jtiv.51).  The  poorer
clafiM'S  wetc  obliged  to  scrape  tbew-
ftutveM,  but  the  iuofl-  wealthy  took  tbeir
slnvdn  to  tbv  bnlhM  lor  the  purpose — a
fiiot  which  is  i'lncidat«d  by  a  curious
Ktory  robit«d  by  Hpartiauua  (  Hadr.
IT).

The  Btrigil  watt  by  no  miiaus  a  blunt
iiiMlruiuiMit,  conMHpiently  itx  iMige  waa
Hi'fU'iied  Ity  tU*'  ajiplicatiim  uf  oil
that  vtas  dni]>[H'd  upon  it  froiu  a
Hinail  vcHMt^l  culled  yaUtM,  wliicli  bad
a  narrow  neck,  ho  ait  to  di^icharge  its
contetita  drop  by  drop,  I'min  wbeuce
tlu'  tiamo  in  token,  A  rtipreHentntion
of  a  yutint  in  given  on  thA  foltotriug
)iiigt.<.  AngitHturi  is  rotatud  to  have
HnttVr«d  from  un  <iVLT-vioIei»t  utte  of
thu  Htrigil  (Suut.  .-lifjT' ^}-  InvaliiU
and  purftoii«  of  a  dolicad'  habit  made
iiBO  of  9|Hiuge«,  which  Pliny  Wiys  an-
swered for  towels  am  wrll  a«  ntrigibt,
TUey  were  finally  drii^d  with  loweU
(/jiitAi) and  auointediJuv.iii.2G3;  Plin.  il.X.xxxi.

H'iSfoli.).

Tbo  common  people  were  anppUed  with  theeo
ni-c^csMiries  in  the  hatha— oifinia  comntoda  prawtan-


0.


.-yr.-t?


Watn«u'a  Bath. (Tonipeil.l


BALNEAE


191


BALNEAE


tur — as  ire  saw  above;  but  tbe  more  wealthy
earned  their  own  with  theio  (Pere.  v.  126).

After  tbe  operatiou  of  scraping  and  rtibbiDgdry,
they  retired  into,  or  retnaiued  Id,  the  tepidarium


StiiglU  with  Gnttns. (Poaitd  Id  Roman  Baths.)

nntil  they  thought  it  prudent  to  enconuter  the
open  air.  But  it  does  not  appear  to  have  beeu
customary  to  bathe  iu  the  water,  when  there  was
any,  either  of  tbe  tepidaiium  or  the  frigidarium;  the
temperature  only  of  the  atmosphere  iu  these  two
chambers  being  of  consequeuce  to  bi-eak  the  sud-
den change  from  the  extreme  of  heat  to  cold.

Notwithstanding  the  ample  account  which  has
been  given  of  the  plans  and  uWtges  respecting
hatha  in  general,  something  yet  remains  to  be  said
about  that  particular  class  known  as  thermae,  of
which  establishments  the  baths,  iu  fact,  consti-
tuted the  smallest  part.  The  theTUT&e,  properly
speaking,  were  a  Roman  adaptation  of  the  Greek
gymnasium,  or  pataeatra  (see  Palaestra),  as  de-
scribed by  Vitruvius;  both  of  which  coutained  a
system  of  baths  in  conjunction  with  conveniences
for  athletic  games  and  youthful  sports,  exedrae  in
which  the  rhetoricians  declaimed,  poet?  recited,
and  philosophers  lectured,  ae  weU  as  porticoes  and
vestibules  for  the  idle,  and  libraries  for  the  learned.
They  were  decorated  with  the  finest  objects  of  art,
both  in  painting  and  sculpture,  covered  with  pre-
cious marbles,  and  adorned  with  fountains  and
shaded  walks  and  plantations,  like  the  groves  of
the  Academy,  and  served  at  Rome  all  tbe  purposes
of  a  modern  club. It  may  be  said  that  they  began


and  ended  with  the  Empire,  for  it  was  not  nntil
the  time  of  Augustus  that  these  magniliceut  struct-
ures were  commenced.  M.  Agrippa  is  tbe  first  wbo
afforded  these  luxnries  to  his  countrymen  by  be-
queathing to  them  the  thermae  and  gardens  which
he  had  erected  in  the  Campus  Martins.  Tbe  Psn-
theon  (q.v.),  now  existing  at  Borne,  served  origi-
nally as  a  vestibule  to  these  baths;  and,  as  it  was
considered  too  magnificent  for  the  purpose,  it  in
supposed  that  Agrippa  added  the  portico  and  con-
Mcrated  it  as  a  temple,  for  which  use  it  still  serven.
It  appears  from  a  passage  in  Sidonins  ApollinariA
that  the  whole  of  these  buildings,  together  with  tlt^
adjacent  Thermae  Neronianae,  remained  entire  in
the  year  a.d.  466,  Little  is  now  left  beyond  a  ffv
fragments  of  ruins  and  the  Pantheon.  Tbe  example
set  by  Agrippa  was  followed  by  Nero,  and  after-
wards by  Titus,  the  ruins  of  whoee/thermae  are  still
visible,  covering  a  vast  extent,  partly  nndergronnd
and  partly  above  the  Esqniline  Hill.  Thermae  were
also  erected  by  Trajan,  Caracalla,  and  Diocletian,
of  the  last  two  of  which  ample  remains  still  exist :
and  even  as  late  as  Constantfiie,  besides  sevrrat
which  were  constructed  by  priv^ate  individuals,  P.
Victor  enumerates  sixteen.  >

Previously  to  the  erection  of  these  establisb-
ments  for  the  use  of  the  population,  it  was  cns-
tomary  for  those  who  sought  the  favonr  of  the
people  to  give  them  a  day's  bathing  free  of  ex-
pense. Thus,  according  to  Dio^Caasins,  Faustns,
the  son  of  Sulla,  furnished  warm  baths  and  oil
gratis  to  the  people  for  one  day ;  and  Augostas,
on  one  occasion, furnished  warm  baths  and  barl>erB
to  the  people  for  the  same  periotl  gratnitously,
and  at  another  time  for  a  whole  year  to  tbe  wom-
en as  well  as  the  men.  From  thence  it  is  fair  to
infer  that  the  guadrana  paid  for  admission  into  ttie
balneat  was  not  exacted  at  the  t'bermae,  whicb,  aa
being  tbeiforks  of  the  emperors,  would  naturally
be  opened  with  imperial  generosity  to  all,  and
without  any  charge,  otherwise  the  whole  city
would  have  throngea  to  the  establishment  be-
queathed to  them  by  Agrippa;  and  in  confirma-
tion of  this  opinion  it  may  be  remarked  that  the
old  establishments,  which  were  probably  erected  l<y
private  enterprise,  were  termed  maitoriae.  Mo«i,
if  not  all,  of  the  other  regulations  previously  de-


Chief  Hall  of  ibe  TbermM  of  Caracalla. (Realoratlon  hj  Reber. )


U.aTEL'S


lailcxl  as  relating  to  the  economy  of  tlio  b&ths  up- '
pl,V  cf]aiUl>'  to  the  thrrmar;  but  U  \H  to  thcM?  cslnb-
lUtinicoia  txprcially  that  the  diSBoliilv  uouduct  of
tlir  ctniHTtint.  Atitl  othfi  liixuriouti  iinlitlKeiiL'va  of
tlio  pKopIr-  111  ^noiiil,  ilvtiLili^il  HI  Ihe  coiiiputiitionn
of  thi^  KAEiriAts  mill  luter  writers,  miut  bt:  cousiil-
■  ntxl  u>  rtfcT.

'lliu  DtiKloiit  U  rniitionpil  »f{iiinHt  an  iMiiHtra-
IfOit  fonnti  ill  sll  tb<'  itUtrrflictMiimnra.  It  iKBlyksl
A  *'  R«pTr«<>ntatinii  of  a  Roman  Kath,"  uml  ih  mud
in  be  from  the  Tbemi>«  of  TitiiN  ni  Raiuu.  It  in,
ill  fact,  a  ilmwioK  mode  in  1^5.1  by  (iiuvaiiiii  Au-
l4iiiio  RiVfToui,  ati  Iliilinn  nii-hitrct,  tu  illustrate  a
ir<Miti»t'  by  .lohariiM'it  AntiiDtuH  Kiruun  ('rviueuais,
and  wiM  drawn  afii>i-  ihf  draoripttoii  uf  the  batba
iri  Vitriiviuiit.  Ill  (hut  tn*atiHe  it  lit  mylcd  aiiiiply
**  t-'ifpirn  Autiqni  ttnliiit-i,"  but  it  niM  put  forth  Uy
ot»«  P-  A.  Maflet  iD  1704  oa  a  picture  of  thn  "  Kutha
of  TilUB."  Th«uce  it  got  iulo  many  other  works,
au*l  r«ceiir««d,  unfortnuat<*ly,  a  f;«-iieral  acc^plaur*^,
though  coutainiiijt  ncYeml  iiuportnui  orron*.  See
3&an|tianll.  t*rirattebru  dfr  Itiimrr,  \>^.'ZH\.^\.

Bim.lmiRAl'HV-— On  the  tiiNject  of  \\w  ancient
talbx  tin*  r«»4h'r  i«  refrmnl  to  HarfiiiH,  lir  ThrrtniM
T>tnir«(lli^rviui«,  Tht».\\\.  a7It-J7yj;  I'Virnriiw.  I)t
Jiuitttit  (l'i>lii<*itH,  The:  iii.  'lAC-^lOt; Moiil|'iiiici>Ut !

t_jNtif  Erpl.  111.  -^M-'il-^:  Pnlladio,  l.f  Termf  Ati
Jiomuti,  p<l.  Hcniuoz^i  *.  Cunirron.  The  Itathn  of  the
iComut:  Slie^lilx,  .1>fh<ioft>tiie  lirr  ItaHkuH^t,  til.
241  ifffi;  Hirl,  tinrhuhu  drr  Kmiicuu^t,  iii.  'iW-
'J36;  (!anin«.  L\1rchilrtlitra  Jntim  (2d  «l.  Iri44);
Biiwniiiker  and  DHmnitxTf;,  CFurm  d'Oiiftow.  ii.
>C*^^ri;  Brtbi  lit  .Vhk.  liorihtHieo,  li  49-^'i :  Clfll.
I't'mptitita,  chaik*.  \i.,  vii.  (  lf,S7 );  Saglio.  ftift.  ilea
■^alifwil^  i.  tUei-^'4;  iiuhl  and  Koiior,  [tat  LtbfH
d^r  (iritrkfH  uittf  itiiturr  (l^ti);  OvurlH>4:|(. /'oMpni
(ltli«^.ll!84);  NiAMHi.  PompcianimrUr  AVm/irn,  (■hii)»>>.
v.,  vi^Tii.;  ik-€krr'ii  tlnUua,  ml.  (irdi,  iii.  liM-i:>7:
M««|ajirilt,  PfitaOfbtM  Jrr  UiimtT,  i.  aJ^-'J**:  l^ii-
ciaiii,  A»dmt  h'omr  in  thf  L'ujht  of  Sirmxt  IHmvv-
*no^]Mr.\:  \UiUl\ctou..1neicnt  iiomr  in  WJh5(1(*65);
wdiil, /fnaaiiiit  of  Jit»iVwf  Howe  (If^lW).

Blttns  fin  tliu  )ibiriil.  hiltfih A  bolt  (lu  (jk.

rfXnjiwi,  nod  MimeliiiirH  »  wiiuan's  girdle. (1)  A

•llMildrf-belt,  and  ofteiifBt  a  swtn-d-hclt. Among

llu)  Gny-kft,  aa  the  «wnrd  iiHimlly  hiirii;  by  tho  left

wl'''t«WIl  woA  soiiportwl  by  tin*  ri;;ht  dhonldcr,

piuipiiii: obliqiH-Iy

ovrr  the  bi^^iuit.  UM

ohown  in  the  ram-

CO  horogivvu  from

till'  KIoreiitiiiL'  Mu-

!»fUUI.

'I'lic  IComauH,  on
thtii  other  hand,
usually  wore  the
fiakenif  over  the
)i>fl  H  li  o  n  1  d  «  r,
though  not  always.
(84'«  Vwn.B.  G'.v.
44.)  .Sbiiild-bvlU
aniuiig  the  (tttM.-k»
were  worn  in  the
reverse  ordur  from
theHword-bftt.the
two  crosnint;  over
th*f  brpiwt.  ReltA
'^  I^Mnilly  madu  of  leather,  sometime*  oma-

»"■'"*<  With  «ilT«r  anil  gold.  Tlwy  werw  often
'■ple^  jIjq  tQ  Kiipport  the  quiver.  Tlw  belts
"'lilt  Roman  emperors  were  so  magniBrent  that


a  ipeeial  offlcer  {hiltenriut)  had  ehju^  of  lh«ni.

8CC  CtSUfLl'M  : PlIAUfcTHA.


"*'*'« irionniuie  Uuienni  i


B»tl  nf  Honeolo  Wwrier.

('J)  A  bolt  or  collar  paiuting  round  a  horsc'ii  aei-k
and  tirouiit,  partly  for  proK'otion,  and  partly  for
ornament.  It  wat  oflvn  decorat^'d  with  embosaod
work,  and  Miinetime*  carried  bellit.  S(*e  Piialuiia;
TlXTISXAIIlI.fM.

(:))  The  hidt  on  the  celestial  globo  repieseutiag
the  Hun'A  coiirso  and  Iwaring  the  signs  of  Che
zodiac  (MtiiiiliiiH,  i.  079).

(4)  Tlie /irticrinctio  (Aiu(«pi)  of  the thoatrv.

See  TlIKATnt'M.

<^)  In  arohitct'lure  (Ionic),  au  ornamental  bniid
which  i-'tK-iri'lea  the  putcinus,  or  ItoUter  of  the
capitui  (Vitniv.  iii.  5, 7X

Bandoalae  Fooa.  A  fountain  in  Apulia  some
nix  milu#  fntm  Vunnttin,  and  niu<lc  funioutt  by
Horace  in  hia  ode  (iii.  I'A)  beginning

-*u  toDs  Dukdaaaa,  iptaadidiDr  rtlrol"

BmUhment. See DsPfiitTATio ; Ex^tuuM;

ttSTRACIMMCS; I*TlY(iK; Ilm.KiiATm,

BaiUu.  Bankeri^  und  Baiiktne.  Sm  TkaPR-
tir.\r.

Bautia.  The  nuHlrni  Banzi :  n  town  in  A]tuliii
near  Venn^iu  Here  wsm  found  the  fiMnoiiM  bn)nr.e
tablet  known  u»  the  Taiu'I^  HantIMa  (q.  v.),  tou-
tnluing  iiii  tm)MiHinit  fragnienl  of  tlw  Oscno  laa-
goage, 8«v  ObCl.

Baptae  iBasraO.  (1)  A  name  given  to  the
prlesla  uf  Cotytto,  the  Greek  goddesa  of  lewdness,
and  derivini  by  some  from  Hatrrv,  "to  tinge"  nr
"dye/*  fiitui  their  painling  Minir  Rlipeka  and  blut^k-
eniiig  their  ey«lid&.  See  CoTVTr<i.  (2)  A  comedy
orKu]H>1iM  Iq.  v.)  in  which  be  atisailcd  the  efl'umi-
nacy  and  dehanohery  of  hta  couutrymeD.

Baptiaterltim  (;3airrt(m7/>tai>).  A  large  baoiu
Into  wbieb  bath-
ers could  plunge
or  even  h  w  i  in
aliout(Plin.A>piJit.
ii.  17.  U).  U  is
more  roinmonly
calltHl  niilntifriuM
or  pitrtHa.  Se*i
Bai.neak.

BaiftUitoo  (da-
jradftoif).  A  deep
pit  at  Athens  into
which  oriminais
and  the  dead  bod*
ten  nf  exe<'UtCfl
erim  iniils  wen^
cast.  84H> Xeii. /Af/
IeR.i.7,20;  anil  the
article  f'AKDIw.


BnptiMtrrlum. (rompail.)


^


BABBA


196


BABBABl


Bu-bA.  I,  Gl»'KK  (nvy^v,  ycVctor.  ifwrjft]). — Of
thtw,  yivfiw,  i>n>ii«rl,v  "cliiii,"  lit  tbr  rai-Utwl
woitl.  MMOTof  is  t\wi  iiiiiimtarlir ;  irairsfx  tlir
liair  on  lb»  tiplli«r  lip;  )i»uat  or  lovXus  llif  lirnl.
down.  'yTn7inj  in  8iHnot.liti(w  roj*irictod  to  ihi-  liiiii-
aliitni  Itii-  ii]>iH!r  auil  lower  lIpK — tbat  is,  to  the
fivtm^  axui  tin-  jTiirnrDs-  coin-
liiucd  ;  yiytioy  to  tliu  li^^unl
pttipor,  tho  LiairoD  tlio  ctiiii.
Tliure  in  no  ii)i«cinl  word  for
llio  wbiftkors.

The  Grffkft  regurde<l  the
l>eard  lut  u  badge  i>f  virility
which  it  watt  ii  diK^raci?  In
be  without;  and  iti  the  Ho-
luen?  liuie  it  bad  ewn  u
HUiirtity  an  uuion^  Ihv  iIcwh,
»o  that  n  cutninon  form  of
tmlrmt.v  woa  to  lonrb  tlu*
besrd  of  the  pi^n«uu  addre.<w(-
od.  It  wart  only  KliAvnn  as
»  Biffu  of  niDuniing,  though
in  this  ciiis«  it  wiks  inKtcad
often  left  nntriitiniL-d.  A
smooth  face  wnn  n.-ganliMl
its  a  ai^ii  of  uffoinioacy
(Atheu.  xiii.  566  a).  The
Siwirtuns  piinifthcd  cowards  by dhwvi  ng  uffa  imrtioii
of  their  beards.  Kruin  the  eurliusl  liiui's,  however,
Ibp  ^bnrin^  of  the  npjior  lip  wax  not  uiicoiniuon.

Ill  lli«^  time  of  Alexander  the  Groat  Ihu  i-UMl'im
of  Hniootb  shaving  was  intnMlucwl  (Chr.vMippua  ap.
AthiMi.  :tiii.  oGr>  u),  and  npn^iul  fntm  the  Macedo-
niotiB,  whoBc  kingii  are  n'pn'Htnitcd  ou  coiiw,  etc.,


-~^^


rcnrlcti-  thaviag  crock


;S


Coin  ol  Alexander  Ifaa  GrvkL

with  smooth  faws,  Ihrmighont  the  whnln  Greek
world.  Laws wvm pntued agaiuflt it, nithout ciRect,
at  RhodeA  aad  Kyzantiiiiu  ;  and  ovou  Artstolle,  we
are  told,  conforoicd  to  the  new  ctiHiom  (Diog.
Lai'rt.  V.  1),  uittikf  the  nibet  pbiiosopbers,  who
relaiued  tho  heard  at*  a  bad>;u  of  tbtir  profeMtiui),
A  "mail  with  a  l^eanl"  iwwyMrf/rpo^t)  after  IIk-
MaccdoniHn  period  implied  a  iibitonopber  (rf.  Pern.
fv.  1,  tuaffiuter  fmrbutitt  of  Socrates),  ami  we  have
many  itUiiKioni*  to  thin  ciistotn  of  the  I:it«r  pbi-
losopbrnt  ill  siirh  provorbe  na  "  tin*  heanl  does  not
make  the  tuigit"  |)rk>y«i«rpo0ia  ^tXotro^r  ov  iroui,
Pint.  lie  r».  et  0»ir.  'd).

II.  UoMAN. — Th*'  Humana  in  cnrly  limes  wore
the  heurd  unt-nt.  a«  we  leiini  from  the  insult  offered
by  the  Gntil  to  31.  I'npiriuB  <Liv.  v.  41),  and  frt>iii
Cicero  |P/v  V'ifi.  14);  and,  according  toVarroand
Pliny,  tbi;  Roniiin  benrdit  were  not  8havt<ii  ||ll  b.c.
30fl,  when  P.  TiehiiiiH  Mi'iiiu*  bmiigbt  ovtir  a  liarlter
fnmi  Sicily;  nnd  Pliny  luhtx  ibnt  ih«  lit>tt  Rotiinn
who  n-aa  »have«l  {ni*uM)  every  dity  w»>i  St-ipiu  Afri-
caiiiu.  (Cf.  Gell.  iii.  4.)  IIi»  ciiMom.  however,  wiut
84i4>ii  followed,  And  shaving  bvciinie  a  ivf^iilar  thiii)(.
The  lower  onlers^  then  an  now,  were  not  always
aliltf  to  dn  the  Mine,  Olid  hence  the  ji-^rn  of  Mitrliul
(rii.  il5;  xii.  &9). lu  the  later  times  of  the  KLpiibllc


Aumc  or  Aagusttu  Cui


ibciT  warn  many  iureneM  who  shaved
(inly  piirtially,  ami  trimmed  it,  »o  ba  toj
uniiinuMitJil  form:  to  them  Ibu  tonnn  h
Hiid  f/i»rbiit»li  am  applh^d.  Wn  hear  of]
oiling  their  cbiua  to  foi'Dc  a  prciiialiireU
beard  (Petron.  75,  10).  |

lu  a  geueral  way,  iu  Kome  at  tbitt  til
beui-d  (burba  /irotuuisa]  was  oou^ideivil  4
slovoitliucfis  and  »(|ua]or.  The  eeu6i>n»  I
uiid  P.  Liciuimt  coni|K'lleil  M.  LiviusJ
bc«n  biiiii^hed,  ou  bi»  retdoration  to  tliff
Hhaved.aiid  to  lay  mniit  bitt  dirty  oppe4
then,  hut  nut  till  then,  to  eoiue  intit
ute  (I.iv.  xKvii.  :t4).  The  linit  time  ci
v.-a»  regartled  a»  tbe  Iw}(iniiinK  <>f  niaV
the  flay  ou  which  ibia  toi>k  place  wait  I
iiM  a  festival  (Jriv.  iii.  It^*).  There  yfi
ticular  time  fixed  for  rliis  to  lie  douo*^
however,  it  wan  when  I  lie  yotniR  Hoinat
the  t^Offa  viritu, Auguslua  did  It  in  U

foartlii
ligttlall
tioth.  ;
ctit  off*
casiona
seorattt
«od.  1
put  bl

gnl(1«q

with  iH>arhi,  and  dedicated  it  to lnpl|
limisiSuet.  .Wj-.  V2y  '

With  the  emperor  Hudrhiti  tbe  lieat^
revive.  Plutarch  »av»  that  this  «_-imim)I
(o  hide  some  MCunt  <m  bin  fare.  The  prft<
wards  beoame  common,  and  till  the  tta
stantiiie  the  Ort-at  Ibu  vm]>t:rors  appe^
and  coins  with  beards;  but  CuiistantU
snccessora  to  I  he  end  of  the  j

sixth  ceutnry,  with  the  ex-
ception of  Jaliau,  are  rep-
resented as  lieaitllevs.  The
contrast  bet  wecu  the  ciwtom
of  the  early  em]>erurB  and
thuseof  Hadrian  and  hisstic-
cessui-s  OS  to  tbe  heard  is  seen
ill  the  iUTumpauyltig  boads.
The  Romans,  unlike  tbe
tireekK.let  theirlKturditgrow
In  time  of  mourning;  do
did  Augunttis  fur  the  death
of  Inliiis  Caesar,  and  the
lime  when  he  had  it  shaved
olf  he  made  a  season  of
festivity  (Die  Cass,  xlviii.
'M ).  Other  occasions  of
moiiniing  on  which  tbe  beard  was  alio'
werv,  appearance  a»  a  mu,  coudemnntU
public  cnlatnity. For  au  account  of  b

TONH<»K.

Barbiii.  Bofidapot  was  orlgiually  '
ejiiihet  ftir  a  piM*ple  apeakiuj;  any  Ion
(ireek.  Itu  origin  ia  onotmitopoetic,  siQ
attempt  to  imitatu  the  ronfustHl  sonndit
language.  It  was  not  until  after  the  Pot
that  tbe  iinnie  l»egau  to  carry  with  it  fl)
of  hatreil  uiitl  rontempi,  and  to  imply
nod  want  of  L-ultivatioii.  Tbr  nation^
the  (•ret'kx  had  tlicn  risen  to  kucIi  int4
I  bey  di^4>nii-tl  thein»elve4(  ubovu  all  otti
in  gifu  mid  culture,  and  looked  dovrnl
with  a  auuoe  of  auiHrriurity.


^^


BARBARICUS  SINUS


197


BASIUCA


The  RomftUB  were  origiaally,  like  other  nou-
Hellenic  peoples,  inclnded  by  tfae  Greeks  iiuder
the  name  of  bariari.  But  after  the  couqaest  of
Greece,  aud  the  transference  of  Hellenic  art  and
cnlture  to  Home,  the  Romans  took  ap  the  same
podiiion  as  the  Greeks  before  them,  and  designated
as  barbarians  all  the  nations  who  differed  in
langnage  aud  manners  from  the  Graeco- Roman
world.

Barbarloiu  Sintui.  A  gulf  on  the  eastern
coast  of  Africa  below  the  month  of  the  Binua
Arabicns.
Bubers.  See  TosaoR.
BarUtM  {ffdp$iTot).  See  Lyra.
Baica  (BapKn).  Now  Merjeh.  The  second  city
of  Cyreuaica,  in  Northoru  Africa,  100  stadia  from
the  sea.  It  appears  to  have  been  at  first  a  settle-
ment of  a  Libyan  tribe,  the  Barraci,  bnt  abont
B.C.  560  was  colonized  by  the  Greek  seceders  from
CjTon^,  anil  became  so  powerful  as  to  make  the
wpstem  part  of  Cyreuaica  virtually  independent
of  the  mother  city.  In  B.C.  510  it  waa  taken  by
the  Persians,  who  removed  most  of  ite  inhabitants
to  Bactria;  and  under  the  Ptolemies  its  ruin  was
completed  by  the  erection  of  it«  port  into  a  new
city,  which  was  named  Ptolemals.

Baica  or  Barcaa  (Bapxar).  A  Pnnic  word
meaning  "  lightning"  or  "gleaming,"  like  the  He-
brew haraij  with  which  it  is  related.  It  is  found
sa  a  sort  of  agnomen  applied  to  the  names  of  dis-
tinguished warriors. See  Hamilcar.

BardCno  (BapKivAv).  Now  Barcelona.  A  town
of  tbe  Laletani  iu  Hiepania  Tarraconensis,  with
an  excellent  harbour.

Bardl  A  celebrated  poetico  -  sacerdotal  order
among  the  ancient  Gauls,  who  roused  their  coun-
trymen to  martial  fury  by  tbeir  strains,  and
for  this  purpose  were  accustomed  to  follow  the
camp.  From  tbe  language  of  Tacitus  (Germ.  3),
some  have  supposed  that  a  similar  order  existed
among  the  ancient  Germans.  Tbe  passage  iu  ques-
tion, however,  involves  a  doubtful  reading.  They
who  adopt  barditua  as  the  true  lection  make  it
signify  "a  bard's  song."  The  reading  frequently
adopted,  however,  is  barritiu,  "a  war-cry."  Prob-
ability, nevertheless,  is  strongly  in  favour  of  the
Germane  having  also  hod  their  bards.

BardocQcaUtia. See  Cucullus.

BaiwL See  SoRAXCa.

Ba^naiL  A  people  in  the  northeast  of  Spain,
between  the  Pyrenees  aud  the  Iberus(Livy,  xxi.  19).

Baiia  (fiapis).  (1)  A  boat  used  on  the  Nile  to
transport  merchandise,  etc.,  across  the  river. It


Bklia. (Rawlioton


is  described  in  Herod,  li.  96. (3)  In  the  Septua-
gint,  the  word  denotes  a  tower  or  palace  (Ps.  zli  v.  9).


Barium.  A  tt>wn  of  Apulia,  on  the  Adriatic,
noted  for  its  fisheries,  whence  Horace  calls  it
"  fishy  Barium"  {Sat.  i.  5,  97). It  is  now  Bari.

Barun6  (Bapiripf}).  A  daughter  of  Darius  Codo-
mannns,  who  married  Alexander  the  Gi-eat,  B.c.  334,
and  had  by  him  a  son  named  Heracles.  She  wits
secretly  put  to  death  by  Coasander,  along  with  her
sou,  when  the  latter  had  reached  his  fourteenth
year  (Justin,  xv.  3).  According,  however,  to  Dio-
dorus  Siculus  (xx.  28),  he  was  slain  by  Polysper-
chon,  who  had  agreed  with  Cassauder  that  he
would  commit  the  dee<l.  Plutarch  says  that  Poly-
spercbon  promised  to  slay  bim  for  100  talents.  We
have  followed  Arrian  (vii.  1)  in  making  Barsin^
the  daughter  of  Darius.  Accoiding  to  Plutarch
(Fit.  Alex.)  she  was  tbe  daughter  of  Artabazus;
while  another  anthority  makes  her  father  to  have
beeu  named  Phamabazus.  It  is  therefore  said  by
some  that  two  women  of  the  same  name  are  re-
ferred to  — one  a  Greek  and  one  a  Persian,  and  both
married  to  Alexander.

Baaanlstae  (^atravurrai). See  Tokmentum.

Baaftnoa  i^daravos). See  Tormentum.

Baacania  (fiauKuvia). See  Fascinuh.

Baacanda.  A  word  borrowed,  like  the  English
basket:,  from  the  ancient  British  language  (Welsh,
hasged)  and  mentioned  by  Martial  (xiv.  99)  as  itu-
portedfrom Britain.  Theorigiualformof  basketap-
pears  to  have  beeu  imitated  in  silver  (Juv.  xii.  46).

Baallela  ( jSao-iXcm ).  A  festival  with  games,
open  to  all  Greeks,  held  at  Lebadea  in  Boeotla,  in
honour  of  Zeus  Basilens. See  Diod.  xv.  53.

Baidlena  {^aaiKtvs^.  See  Archon;  Maoistbr
BiBEMDi;  Rex.

Baailla.  (1)  An  island,  famous  for  its  am1>er,  in
the  Northern  Ocean.  Modem  writers  have  sup-
posed that  it  is  in  reality  to  be  identified  with  the
southern  extremity  of  Sweden,  and  mistaken  by
the  ancients  for  an  island.  (2)  A  city  on  the  Rbe-
nns  ( Rhine ),  now  Bftle,  and  iu  the  Middle  Ages
known  as  Basula.

BaalUba  (ra  jSao-iXtKo).  The  Greek  code  of  Ro-
man law,  commenced  abont  a.d.  876  by  the  em-
peror Basil  I.,  aud  finished  by  his  son,  Leo  the  Phi-
losopher, who  reigned  a.d.  866-911.  It  comprised
the  Institutes,  Pandects,  Code,  the  Novellae,  and
tbe  imperial  Constitutions  subsequent  to  the  time
of  Justinian.  It  is  in  sixty  books,  subdivided  into
titles.  Tbe  publication  of  this  authorized  body  of
law  in  Greek  led  to  the  gradual  disuse  of  the  orig-
inal compilatious  of  Justinian  iu  the  East;  but  by
its  means  the  Roman  law  was  so  firmly  estabUshod
in  Easteni  Europe  and  Western  Asia  as  to  main-
tain its  hold  there  among  the  Greek  populations  to
the  present  dny.  See  Rndorif,  RUm.  ItechUgetchickte
(Leipzig,  1876),  and  the  article  Icstinianus.  The
best  modem  edition  of  the  Basilka  is  that  of  Heim-
bach,  6  vols.  (Leipzig,  163^70).

BaalUca  (trroa  $atrt\ucTf;  the  pure  Latin  word
being  regia,  sc.  aulfi).  A  state  building,  nse<1  by
the  Romans  as  a  ball  of  justice  and  a  public  meet-
ing-ptacB.  The  earliest  basilica  bnilt  at  Rome  waa
called  tbe  Basilica  Poreia,  after  the  famous  M.  Por-
cius  Cato  Censorius,  who  bnilt  it  in  b.c.  184,  prob-
ably on  the  model  of  tbe  irroa  jSao-tXcior  ("  royal  col-
onnade") at  Athens.  It  stood  iu  tbe  Fomm  near
the  Curia.  Tbe  later  basiliras  usually  bore  the
name  of  the  persons  who  bnilt  them.  Buildings
of  the  same  kind  were  constantly  erected  in  tbe


B.<5njCA


198


BASILISCUS


provliwefl  to  mrro  as  linlU  cf  cxclmiif^e  or  roiirtii
of  jiiiitice.  Tlie>  form  uf  (be  boAilicn  van  oblong; :
tbn  intoriorwiut  a  Lull,  either  uitlimit  any  divisions
or  divided  liy  runs  uf  |iillunt,  witb  n  miiiii  novo.
Kud  two,  or  KouMitLiues  four,  Kidv-atitloH.  Gallorius
for  ripoctaiurs  ^«re  uft«ii  add«d  above.  If  tlic
ItHHilicit  waa  uaeA  as  a  ball  uf  jiiHlic«,  n  i!i|mce
(iiHiiiilly  id  tliv  form  uf  a  tiir^  witiivirciilnr  niche,
and  I'ouUiiuiiig  a  tribiiiiul)  wuh  Het  ii]»  at  tim  end
of  tbe  nave  for  tbu  uticoiumud:itioii  of  tbu  cuurt.


^n


o o a o


Aft'**r  thp  tinii'  of  ('ntiHtiintiiii>  ilif  fln-at,  nf  wbone
l^raat  baKiltrH,  with  it^  nave  and  1  wu  uinlei*,  ntaj;-
niBcent  ruiiitt  «lill  reitiaiti,  many  baMilicuM  wpi-u
tuntL'd  into  Cbrinlian  ubui'cli4-K,  utid  ujauy  cbiir^licH
wcrt)  built  upon  tbu-  nuuie  pEuu.
BeeidtM  the  BatUica  Porcia  already  uicDtioited


taJi-"


i.i


^r-


.. .L^


Ttw  Bultka  Bi  Trtvca.


H  liaving  bc«n  the  esrlicet  Rmnnn  ftlruiHiire
of  tbe  kind,  there  were  at  Rome  fully  twru-
ty  othnni  creeled  at  ditftTeiit  periods,  of  vhich


th«  fnlloning  are  iiuiflt  freiiiienily  mentioned  I
ancient  authora:  (1)  /iitUira  Se/npronia,  tu>\
ittructed  by  Titus  licmpnininA,  tt.c.  171.  nrnl  lui
poitcd  to  have  becii  between  lliw  Viciii*  Tui^i'ai  an
thn  Vclabriini.  (2)  Bittilka  Ovtmia,  wliicli  iri
above  the  Cotnitiuat.  (^t)  Hamilictt  PauH  Amili
or  ItuHtlictt  Acmitia,  calltsl  nitto  /frf/tii  I^vli  I
Stalina.  Cicero  nienlions  two  lutsilirns  nf  tit
name,  of  wliich  one  wiim  built,  nml  the  otberoD
roMlurod.  by  Panlim  AeinitiiiB.  Both  llic«e  nlifie
were  in  ibu  Foriiui.  and  one  vtoH  celebrated  fiT  i
open  iierixtylo  of  Phrygian  eoliinins,  wbicb  PI
tareb  (  Vit.  Oitut.)  «tattu  was  erected  by  L-  Acmila
Funlus  iltiriiig  IiIa  coDHulship,  at  au  exjif-nw
lAUU  taleiitB.  hcut  to  bim  by  Cipsar  fmiu  Qaiil,
a  bribe  to  Kain  bim  over  from  ilie  aristocntia
imrly.  (4)  B-ifilien  I^tmpeH,  calle<l  also  ivyiij,  d*
the  theatre  of  Pompey.  (5)  Stmifteii  /«/m,efrc«
by  IiiIinHC'Kf-'>ar,  in  tbe  Fonini,  iiud  oppnaitv  tofl
M.-utjlii-n  Auniilia.  tt  was  from  tho  iTiof  uf  L'
buibliii^  iliul  Ciilt^ula  aeatteriM)  luouey  ntnrt
tbe  {H-o|de  for  veverul  ttiiccesMive  daya.  (t>)  IP:
iiea  Phtria,  of  Ihu  furni  uu  ^^bicll  the  (.'lirir-l  :
cburvbus  were  uiodi'lled.  <7)  Biiallien  Vlj/'m
Trniani,  iu  tbu  Fornm  of  Trajan.  (8)  BomH
C't/tatantini,  erected  by  tbe  enii^ci-or  Conntanti
etiip|iuned  to  l»e  tbe  niin  now  reuiniuiti^'  on  the  ''
Surra,  uHar  Ibe  Temple  of  Rome  ami  Viioas,  ti
i-imiiuonly  railed  tbe  Temple  of  Peiu'c.  Ofalltlm
lUii^tiilicHtit  eilitinw  iiotbin^  now  rematUB  b«yc:
tliu  ({ri>und  plan,  and  llie  liaAejt  and  ttome  port
of  the  culuuuiH  and  Mnj)cr»tructare  of  oerej
Tbe  buftilica  at  PotupL-ii  ia  iu  betlvr  ptveerratii
tbe  external  wallet,  laiij^es  of  vulamtis.  and  tnbti
of  tbe  jnd;;c.t  beiii;;  tttill  tolerably  iwifect  oti  I
ground  floor.  See  tbe  iltustrutioii  on  pu^«  199.
Tlie  Forum,  or,  where  there  was  more  than  oi
ilie  one  wliicb  wa^  in  the  mosit  freqn*>iitpd  a
central  part  of  the  city,  was  alwnyit  welecCeil  i
the  site  of  a  battilica;  and  hence  it  is  Ibat  t
clai^sic  writers  not  infre(|iipntly  ubv  tho  ten
f'trrum  and  basilira  ttyuonymonaly. See  FoRVU-

BasiUdea  {MatriXeiiijt)- The  fother  of  Heme

tun 11).  V-).

BaailindaOacriXiVfta).  A  children's  K'>»i«pl'>>'
by  both  Gi'eekft  oud  Boina»
and  practically  identic:
with  nnr  euiue  of  '"fnll
your  lemlcT."  Siw  llerw.!
114:  SulM.  jV«ni,35;  Huni
£put.  i.  1.  69.

BaailiBcus  (^avAtna
Tbe  ba(<i  I  isk,  aometia
called  t-ocfailripr,  fiuin
V ul;;ar beli4'^f  in  modem  ti>
(bat  it  ia  pi-mlnced  from
fjlH  of  a  cock.  Nirandtr
8cril>«8  it  OM  bavinj;  a  i»«i
biMly,about  lln-ee  paluH  k
and  of  a  shilling  colottr.
tbe  nuciunt  nntborx  »p
with  horror  of  the  |KiiM*ti
the  bnstliak.  wbioh  they
linulobo  of  Aodeotllya  ■
nre  na  ti>  prove  fatal,  (
only  when  iutrodiiwd  t
a  won  II  i],  but  also  wl
transmitted  throngh  another  object.  AvierniiA
lat«i  tbe  raw  nf  a  ftoldlor  in  nboin,  luiviog  Ini
tUed a basilisk with n 8|H,ar,  itn  vtoonrpifl


d


R•^m&lll»  '>f  th^  Rulllcft  Kt  I'oinpcH. (Orerbeck  i


bUl.udilso  toht8bonWr'VrlHl•l)^  li[>  wax  nrciileut-
&il)  ffiiundnd  Ity  it.  Litiiin^iiK  n<r«fr>i  tliiH  cn'utiin*,
Mowiilioufil  by  tbe  aiiciuiitH,  to  tbi;  lacnia  ignana.
Oikliiict  snpiHiflMi  tbe  StTipliirnl  bavilisk  to  be  tliu
Hill*  nitli  lliu  cofrt-o  t/i  cupello,  but  lliiH  In  nut
tovwl  ill  Africa.  Tim  i>iT]»^iit  wliicli  is  ili>(icnbt!<l
under  Uie  imini*  of  bmikah  aiifttvcro  very  welt  m
Dwt  ivcpoeU  to  tUo  ancient  descnpliuud  of  tlie
iMuilitil;.

BailHnm  iHaaikfiov).  A  tall  liea(l-i1iTH!>  pectil-
iu  Ui  tile  kings  of  Egypt  niul  to  the  Egyptiau
foAitw  Isia  (<).  V.)- See  Flat  Xfc  7i.  el  Onr.  If).

^BkBUiti«mi(o-/Xffiurl. (I)ACljriBtiati  writer.snr-
1  Ike  Great,  of  Cuviuiruii  in  C;ip|)a<loctn. He


wuft  bum  of  a  noble  family  in  a.i>.  329.  waa  eda-
iTMt<Hl  ill  rlititoric  at  CuuHtaiitiii<>pl«  aitil  AibcDs  by
Libaiiiiii^  and  Hiineriiia,  and  BiibHtMjiienlly  ttMik  up
tlid  prtifesjiioi)  of  advocate.  Miit  it  vru^  not  long
brfiirr  lie  dt:diuiited  liijiiw-'lf  to  I  tie  twrrice  of  tlie
ClmrcU-  He  ilintiuguisliwl  liiinnrir  fHi>«ciully  by
lliu  ri»i»laiic«  to  AriuiiiMii  and  rliu  nieaAun'N  he
adopted  for  rt-gulating  tliu  nionaslic  tuystom.  He
died,  tUe  bi»bop  of  tliu  native  city,  iu  A.b.  :t79.
lie  coni|H)scd  a  reriiwd  liturgy  wtill  io  use  in  the
East,  and  known  an  the  "Liturg^y  of  ttio  Huly
Basil."  Bolides  liin  writings  on  )>oint8  nf  doctrine,
we  bare  nn  address  l>y  liim  to  yoiiDg  uieu  on  the
tises  of  Grevk  literature,  tbe  study  of  which  be
earnestly  recuumiiMided,  in  oppusitiou  to  the  pri^-


BASSAE


«0


BArrus


ndiMB  oftmtny  ('lirlHtinin'.  Hi'  lias  iilso  left  a  rol-
Icctiou  of  four  liiHulrcil  U'ltera,  \iliiiii  ure  ti)CHleI»
in  thfir  way.  Auioiif;  tliviti  ant  tfaow  aildrefowd
to  LiUnutiis,  liis  )ta;;nii  iiiettiictor.  A  8taii(]aYt1
edition  of  bis  ivorktt  itt  timt  of  tlm  AI>b<S  Miguo
in  4  volh.  (^-3:f>  of  liiM  Patrolotjia  (iraeco-I.atina
(PnrJH,  ItSOC).  Tlio  Grt-fk  Clnircli  ct>lt-1>ri(t'eM  tlie
diiy  of  Ills  ik'dlU  (Jutiiiarj'  IkI),  tbi^  Honiaii  Chnruh
tbnt  cf  hit)  tinl  inn  lion  (June  14tli).  {'i)  Tlit)  nume
of  fievoral  of  tin-  Byzautiiir  <'ni]H'rorii'. See By-

ZANTINT  M  l>irt:iIlL'M.

Baasae. See  Phiualu.

BasB&ra,  BaseiUia  [fiauffafta,  xaaoafia).  Origi-
nally a  imtne  };tvpn  to  ttiu  ft>x,  mitl  pi\>liulily
Egyptian  in  itH  <iri;;iii.  (i>iuc«  in  tbc  lii(-ri)(>ly|ibti
the  fox  is  called  \ea»nr  (Coptic  ta«"');  »nd  K^yji-
tian  pricKtFi  an'  fuiMH)  iv}inw(>iitr[l  uh  wGiiriug  nbal
ap|H<ar  to  lio  fox-HkiiiH.  (Hi-h  Kciimuh,  fieukxnairr,
ii.  11*2,  12(4.)  In  Lydia  au<l  Ttitueo  the  word  itt
applieil  to  the  dreiw  of  tbc  BaccbauaU  (DussarklvM),
which  Is  dfHcribcid  as  variegated  and  teaching  to
the  feet.  Tho  Lydiaii  DionyBtis  ift  b«nce  styled
BasHnretls,  hot  tbt^re  m  uo  genuine  Hellenic  con-
oeptiun  of  a  fox  in  couuectiou  with  Diouyaiis.  See
RoHher,  J u^/iiAiV.  LexikoH  da-  gixech.  uad  rUm.  iljf-
ihologie, «.  h.  v,

BaasTiB,  AiT-'imrs.  A  Kotnnn  historian  of  the
liuir  of  I'iheriiiK,  who  Lrfiitetl  of  th«  uxpiratiou  (if
the  Ki'piildio  und  the  fi>undiiiK  of  the  Enipiri<.
QiiintiliiMi  (x,  I.  lo:{)  Hpcuks  of  hia  lihri  UUi  Oer-
maHtci.  which  may,  however,  have  boeu  a  part  nf
the  other  work.  Mi«  narrative  was  coiitiuued  liy
Pliny  the  Elder,  and  upptara  to  have  iKH-n  «*ie<l  by
Dio  CominB  uiul  Suetonius,  ^untatious  from  it
are  to  hi'  fiiiiiid  ill  Seneca,  Stutm/rin^,  vi.  18  and  2.X
See  H.  IVIei .  J/iji/.  Fruffm.^iH

Baataruae.  A  people  who  litst  inbahiled  that
pari  of  Kuropfiiti  Sunnutia  whieb  f(irrt>«pcnHlH  \vitb
a  part  of  Poland  and  Pniwita,  and  wbo  Hftcrtvanlo
cjilahhiihed  themM-lveii  in  the  xonth,  to  tho  left  and
right  of  the  Tyrat*  (Liv.  xl.  6B).

Bastema.  A  kind  of  Utter  or  palanquin,  nsed
by  Homan  vonieu,  reeembliug  the  Uetifa  (q.  v.).
Tlie  dhTor  waa  calkd  batternariMa. See  Ginzrot,


Dit  Wafitn  drj-.H//«t,  from  which  the  accompanying
illufltration  in  takun.

Batavi.  An  cdd  (Jemmn  nation,  whieh  inhab-
ited a  part  of  the  pnwcnt  Holland,  especially  the
island  called  Dittitvornni  loNnhi  (nindeni  Hetwre),
formeil  by  that  brnnrh  of  the  R)iine  which  ouiplies
into  the  eca  near  Lnjidnnnm  Katavonim  (L^ydeii).
|t>Kclher  with  the  VahaliM  (Wiinlt  »nd  MoHaiMaaa).
Their  t<Triti>i'ie8,  however,  extendwl  nnich  beyond
the  Waal.  TacitiiB  cownieud*  tlicir  bravery.  Ac-
cordins  to  him  tbry  were  originally  the  name  aii  the
fatll  Iq.  v.>,  a  German  tribe,  wbirh  had  emifirated
from  their  conn  try  on  acconnt  tif  iloniestie  troub-
les. This  nin«i  have  happened  l>efore  the  time  of
Cacear. When  GermanicuH  naa  alKint  to  invade


BaltirUD.


Gftiinany  from  the  fiea  ho  nmde  their  island  tlie
reudczvomt  of  his  llrot.  Iteing  Buhjngatvd  by  the
Uomans,  they  served  them  with  anch  courage
and  fidelity  as  to  obtain  the  title  of  friends  ami
brethren.  They  wen>  exempted  fronrtrit'nle«  ami
taxei),and  ]M>nnitte<l  to  choose  thetrleadei>  among
themselven.  Their  cavalrj-  wjw  piirtioulnvly  excel-
lent. During  the  rei-ju  of  Ve«p«Man  they  revoll-
e<l,  under  this  eiMnmaiid  of  Civilrn,  from  ibe  Rit-
maUH,  and  extorted  from  them  fiivonrubh*  tenus
of  peaoo.  Trajan  and  liadriun  Kubjngatetl  thein
agaui.  At  the  i'lu!  of  the  third  century'  the  Si^alnia
Franks  obtained  pOHSetwion  of  tho  Insala  Itatavo-
rum.  Tlie  capital  of  the  nation  was  Lngdnnnm
Hatavorum,  now  I^ydeu  (Tac.  Hist.  ir.  Vi  ;  xik.  3/1.
Baths  and  Bathiug. 8fe  RAi.xEaK.

Batbj^cles  \\ia&vK\T)s). Acidebrntod  artist,  mip-
puKi-d  to  have  been  a  native  of  Ma)i;iieKiu  on  lb
ilaeaiuler. 'J'lie iieriml  when he  ^ouritihtMl
given  rise  to  much  diKcnsaifJii. It  wa«  probahl
in  the  MRP  of  C'roc«us  (Pausau.  iii.  191 ).

Batbyllus  (  Ba^vXXor  }.  (1)  A  young  Sumii-^.  «
tlie  favnuriw  of  Polycrates  (q.  v.),  and  alludei]  -^^  ,
by  Anacreon.  <2|  An  Alesaiwlrian  yonth,  the  t~~9^
vourite  «f  Mfleeeiin«,  and  noted  for  his  graceRr">,
dancing  ill  the  pantoniiuie^  (.Tnv.  vi.  GS),

BatiUum  m' VatHlum.  Au  iron  shovel  wilk'%  ,
tihort  handle  used  for  various  piiTposee.  especij^H  «
us  a  lin'-mlinvel,
cbaHiig-diiKh,  and
for  burning  in-
cense. See  Hor-
ace, Sn '. i. 5.

;m;.

BatracbomTOinackLa  (Dtrrpfl;(o/iiw>p);^ta).  T*Ik»
Battle  nf  thf  Vm^s  and  the  Mice.  The  title  of  nu
epie  ixM'lii,  falsely  Itearing  the  iinmc  of  Homer.  I(
was  rt  paroily  of  the  lliml,  ami  was  probably  Wfil-
ten  hy  Pigren  (q.v.).  (S^-e  HrtMERr8.|  It-eouKi«ta
nf  S94  hexiuneters,  and  has  hi^'n  eilited  by  Enir'Hli
in  his  edition  of  Houier  (I^ipzif;,  \'US\  repriiit«^l
Kl  Glasgow,  IHl-l):  Miitthiae  (Leipzig,  lilVKif ;  a  s  ol
Mitwehke  (I^-rliii,  \i^A).

Battesing-Ram. 8ee  Auirji.

BattiSda«  iVianialiai).  Kings  of  Cyrcn(^  dnri  *iB
eight  ^generations.  (1)  BattL'B  I.,  of  Tb^nk.  l**"*  *
colony  l,o  Ariica  at  the  command  of  the  Delphic  <:»i*
ade.and  fuiiuded  Cyreu6  about  B.C.  631.  (i)  .■^  »■
CK.'iil-ifs  1.,  son  of  the  prece<liiig,  reigned  B,c. Ti*^
583.  <:()  BArmaU.,surnamcd"lheHn|"l',v,"Ht»  J'
tho  preceding,  r^igued  583-M0(f)  (4>  AHCKSILA-**
II.,  sou  of  the  preceding,  Kiiniameil  "the  Opi*  *'^"
sive,"  ruigiied  alHint  5fi0-rw0.  His  brothem  v%^°'
drew  from  Cyren^, and  foumled  Barca.  (5>  Bat*"*'^
IU.,or  "the* Lame,"  son  of  the  preceding,  mg»»*"
about  &.'iA-5;W,  ill  which  period  Demouax.  a  M*  »<  ^|'
nean.wilh  the  aid  of  the  people,  gave  a  new  con*"*
lutioii  to  ihecity.  whereby  the  ntyal  power  ■Kivf*  *'^
doeed  within  very  narrow  limit**-  ItJ)  Am-ESU-af*
HT..  fiou  of  the  preceding,  reigned  about  DaV-T-"-

(7)  Battiis  IV.,  of  who««  life  we  hiivi^  no  acci'ii'"-'

(8)  AucESiiafK  IV.,  at  whose  death,  nbont  4i>''.,*
popular  goTemment  was  establ  islK^I. Stre  t'tRKVE

BattiSdes  (HottuWij?).  A  patnmynuc  of  t'**"
limii.biis  {(i-  V.I  from  his  father  Biittus.  Tlie  nW"'
is  also  applle<l  lo  (It  the  people  nf  fyrr-ni^.  a  ]'l*^
fouiideil  by  Battus,  and  i^X)  to  tlwj  kings  of  C)rfi«'-
See  Cyrf.nk.

Battus  (B(irmr). (1)  A  liMwdaeinoiiian  ^^ '"


I


I


BAUCALL9


SQl


BKKKl-U


f  IL-C  Gi\f  liiiilt  tilt!  tnwii  uf  C.vrvti6  willi  a  coloiiy

I  fivui tbe  iiilaiKl  of  TluTa. His  |>ri>)t«'r  tiatiii*  wim

,  AristoteleH.  bat  be  received  lite  name  of  Uurtii^

[  from  bi»  haviug  on  impvdiiiicnt  in  )ii»  N[H-<:*cb  liiaf

:  -ttMpi^v^z  tostntter), tboiigb  Herwlf»toi(iv. liidlKaye

that  fiams  is  a  durirativD  fn^m  a  h\hyaa  dialect,

[  »]id  laeaaB  "king." lie  rrigtu-ii  ovi>r  Cvrfiii  for

'  jiliutit  thirty  years,  and  wan  siicfiH-df^l  by  bitt  son

[  JVrevnilafia. See BATnAnAi! ; C'ykknk. i'i) A

Bbr)ilien.l  »{  l*yliw.  who  iinmiiwd  Hwrint-w  that  hv

'WuiiM  uiit  expuKi' ItiH tlitrft  i>f  Ibii lluckw  of  Ad-

UtetuB,  wliicb  wci-e in  chargu  of  Ajmlbt. Havin)^

Ll^roken hia  prumitui,  be  waa  turned  iDt«  a  atouo

[Ovid,  J/rt.ii.  702).

BaucftUa  {SuvKoXit).  A  Inixe  winc-conler,  madi!
a>MUtlly  <if  t<artlii'uware. S«;i;  Atbeuauiis,  xi.7b4  c.

Baucldei  {^vkiS'js).  A  kind  of  rnntly  Hiino  of
«AlTrun  colour  wuni  by  vomcn  (I'ull.  vii.99.J

Baucis  (BovKic). StiO  PHILE310N-.

Baiili.  A  coUvftioii  of  villu  Wiweca  Miitcuum
jaud  Boiiw  lu  Cain|iunla.

Bavins.  A  dull  po«t  who,  wtlh  Mcriiis,  »(-
tackiu]  Yvr^il,  Horuci',  and  vtlier  Aiignstiiii  writ-
^n.  So<^  Vera.  Kcl.  iii.  90 ;  v.  36 ;  Huta«o,  Spod.  x.
1  ;  ADd  tbe  article  Vxrgiui's.

Baaroae  »r  Baxae. Saitdals  mad«  of  leaTw,

twign.  orfibri',  and  worn  byconiiu  nctoni,  wbil»  the

TotAuruuM  n-a«  jirrnlijir  tn  tb»  tni}];ir  dtagr  {iHidiir.

Ori§.  xlx.  'XX). Philiifti)jdii*i-M  a\m\  vtnu^  Handal^  of

.this  dcMfiiitioii,  at  Icimt  iu  lalfr  tiinos. Of  \\w

llwu  h»:rfof  itU'tW'u  iu  tbe  aceuiii]>iniying illiifttia-

Ition,  tbe  up|M?ir  uuo  woa  worn  on  tbe right  foul.

>lt  Uaa  •  loup  UD  the  right  nlde  for  faaleuiiig  the

fian*]  which  went  uctoh«  tbe  iufttr|t. Thitt  baiid.

togellwr  with  the ligature cunuecced  vitli It^


Bkzcae. iBrliUb  UaMDm.}

wbieli  waa  inserted  between  tbe  great  and  the
•^'ikI  Iw,  is  made  i^f  llie  uli-in  uf  the  paiiyrua,  uu-
Biviiie4  jtij  nnwriMiglit.  The  lower  lignre  abowH
■••OiUl  hi  wbirb  the  portion^  of  the  palni-lt^uf
•j*  Iftarlioed  with  giiiat  nculiiPttn  ami  regnUrity.
^<>«  Nving  Biid  binding  being  etlec.ted  by  libr««  tif
l^PyniB.  The  tbren  boles  nmy  be  ob(wvvr<l  fur
''"^ptua^D  uf  tbe  baud  ami  the  liualure  already

«»6tioiml.

B«rda See  Barba.

b'^hakweoB  DikA  iiitSmaattAt  fiUi}).  An  notion
F*""!"*'!  u  \  ender  to  make  a  good  title,  or  r«  pur-
■™'  iW  trnuH  of  a  contract  to  sell.  See  Meier,
•'"  ''"MM,  p.  &74.

^btiacam. 8e«  B»:tntiA(u>i.

Btbrycea  (B»i(pw«r)-  The  original  inbabitautH
*|*Bul,y„i„  (4|.  v,),wbieb  wan  id^i  called  Bebrycia,
"*>i  llfbrjc«^,  a  daughter  of  Danalta.


Beoker,  WiLirci.M  Adolk.  A  well-known  writ-
er on  elii*«iL-al  HitbjeelM,  buru  at  DrvHdeu  in  179tl.
Knt^Ting  tbo  I'nivrmity  of  Leipzig  in  1816,  bn
Htiidied  at  fir^t  tboolugy,  and  HiLbttei|uently  ulasii-
cul  philology.  In  1840.  be  travelled  auJ  ntudiod
in  Itniy,  returning  in  184'i  to  lake  tbe  prufenAor-
ahip  of  arctiiuology  at  Ijelpzig,  where  bitt  lectiireti
I  were  very  largely  att'ended.  His  lively  iiuagiua-
ti'iii,  prompte<l  by  bis  minute  knuwlL*dgo  uf  au-
tiipiily.  lt!4l  bim  to  write  bin  two  fanioiitt  works,
wliiidi  have  tui  HiitxeHKfully  reproduced  pietnive  nf
Ibe  uiicinut  Hociely  of  finwee  and  Rome,  wbib*  giv-
ing ilk  dBlui)  a  vuHt  amount  of  andiii-i>logir:i]  iu-
forrnutioi).  Tbette  work-i  nra  ('a//u(l«i]tzig,  IKU),
a  t^nosi-uarrntivu  of  lifn  iii  Rdine  undnr  AugM8lu»;
uud  Charities  (Leipjtig,  IH-tO),  u  wtory  of  (tocieiy  ID
ancient  (Jreecc.  Tla-iie  two  works  buve  liccii  re-
vised, rc-edited,  and  trauitlati*d  by  iitimrrtiuH  Achol-
arn,  au<l  hove  been  a  storehonae  of  infonutitiou  to
Htiideitts  in  all  Undo.  Hie  formal  treutiite,  /J«  Co-
Miin'jt  liniHiinonuN  FahuiU  (Leipzig,  1837),  itt  another
valuable  prodnotion,  ah  \*  also  bi«  baud-biKtk  of
Komaii  nntitpiities,  carried  on  afl«r  his  death  by
Maniuardt.  Berker  died  at  Meisneik,  Sept.  ij9tb,
1&46.

Beds  (YenehabTlis).  Tbe  most  diittingniubed
scholar  in  tUc  \\»vU\  ut  the  tiiuo  be  lived,  boru  at
I>iirhnm  (Kngland)  in  or  .ib'Uit  the  yenr  A.D.  GT^.
Me  remained  fortbirtoeli  yearo  it)  tbe  monastery  of
St.  Peter  tinder  the  raiu  of  Ibe  abbot.  He  waa  or-
duiiied  [irit'sl  in  hia  Lbirtielh  year,  and  devoted  hi«
life  Iti  MiiL'b  literatnie  a«  wiu  pos^ibln  ill  thonoduyd,
gaining  u  knowledgeofClrcok,  Latin,  Hebrew,  med-
icine, nnd  lutrououiy.  He  wim  tbe  anthor  of  nu-
ineruits  buDiilies,  hymns,  epigrams,  blogru)tbtes  uf
Aaiiito,  norka  ou  chronology  and  gnimtuar.  and
eonmjeiitarlen  on  vuriona  book«  of  the  New  Tenia-
ment.  Hin  muxt  valuable  productiuu  i«  bis  Uiataria
fCrc/Mymtiea  Gmtia  Anghrum  in  fi\'e  btMiks,  to
which  wo  owe  nenrty  nil  niir  iiifarmnt.ion  regnrd-
ing  l.b«  biiit^iry  of  Kn^tanil  to  A-it.  731,  :ind  which
King  Alfreid  traiiMhited  into  Anglft-Haxon.  A  good
English  vefbiou  m  that  of  Giles  ( IM-|;V).

Bedrlftcum  or  Bebrificum.  A  huinlet  in  Cisal-
pine (ioul.  between  Veioini  nnd  (.'i-eioaiiii.  where  \n
the  same  year  <a.i>.  00)  Olbo  wok  duffuf4^d  by  tbe
troops  of  Vitelliiis,  and  Vitc1liu«  by  thuite  of  Yen-
pasiau  (Tac  UiU.  i.  10).  Tbii  tuoderu  uame  u»  Ua-
ueio

Bed  -  clothing. See BABYi.ONict'M ; LoDix;

STKAtin.t'M.

Beda. ike  Lfctus.
Beer. See  Cfkvksia.
BeggaiB. See  Mendici's.

Bekker,  Ibima.nuki..  A  dittlingtiished  German
)iliilolof:inl.  who  wait  born  at  Berlin  in  1785.  He
took  bis  degree  ut  tbo  Univensity  of  Hulle  in  1B(>7,
being  regnnied  na  the  moitt  brilliaut  pupil  ol  K.  A.
Wolf  tq.  v.).  Ill  IHll  he  became  Professor  of  CIiia-
tiical  Philology  at  Berlin,  where  he  died  iu  1H7I.
Ikkker'a  life-work  lay  in  tbe  line  of  niuniiEicript
recenBirin,  for  wbirh  a  long  course  of  cureftil  study
in  the  librarii'»  of  Kntiice,  Germany,  Knglaiid,  uud
lixly  well  fitted  bim.  and  which  he  <-arrie<I  oii  in-
dependently of  tbe  printed  editions.  He  ilid  nmcti
valiiiibtc  work  upon  tbo  CWpuMl/uirrijititf'iuui  Orae-
airttm  ,'  Olid  pnblittUeil  Ancoh/t't  Qniixn,  It  vols.
(Berlin,  Itfll-'-ftl;  be^idcA  iuiportant  recension.'*  of
the  texts  of  Plato,  Ariitiotlu,  tbe  Actio  oraions


BELESYS


203


BELLEROPHOX


AriBtopliaoes,  Thucydidea,  Theognis,  Sextns  £m-
piricus,  Livy,  and  Tacitns.

BelSsys  (BAeo-ur).  A  Babylonian  priest,  who
Bnccessfully  conspired  with  Arbaces  to  overthrow
Bardanapalas  (q.  v.),  the  king  of  Assyria.

Belgae. See  Gaixia.

Belg!ca. See  Galua.

Belginm.  A  division  of  Gallia  Belgica.  The
name  is  often  used  of  the  whole  conutry.  See
Caes-A  G.  v.  24.

BeUdes. See  Belus.

Belldes. See  Belus.

Belisana.  A  deity  of  the  QanlB,  identified  by
the  Romans  with  Minerva^

Beliaaxiua  (Slavonic  Beli-  Ttar, "  White  Prince")-
One  of  the  greatest  generals  of  his  time,  t«  whom
the  emperor  Jastinian  chiefly  owed  the  splendour
of  his  reign.  Sprung  from  an  obscare  family  in
Tbrace,  Belisarins  first  served  in  the  body-gnard
of  the  emperor,  bnt  soon  obtaiued  the  chief  com-
mand of  an  army  of  25,000  men,  stationed  on  the
Persian  frontiers,  and  in  a.d.  530  gained  a  com-
plete victory  over  a  Persian  army  not  less  than
40,000  strong.  The  next  year,  however,  he  lost  a
battle  against  the  same  enemy,  who  had  forced
their  way  into  Syria — the  only  battle  which  he
lost  doring  his  whole  career.  He  was  recalled
from  the  army,  and  soon  became,  at  home,  the  sup-
port of  his  master.  In  the  year  532,  civil  com-
motions, proceeding  from  the  rival  factions  of  the
circus,  who  calle<l  themselves  the  Green  (Pra*ini)
and  the  Blue  (  Veneti),  and  who  caused  great
disorders  iu  Constantinople,  brought  the  'life
and  reigu  of  Justinian  iu  the  utmost  peril ;  and
Uypatius  was  already  chosen  emperor,  when  Be-
lisarius,  with  a  small  body  of  faithful  adherents,
restored  order.  Justinian,  with  a  view  of  con-
qneriog  the  dominions  of  Gelimer,  king  of  the
Vandals,  sent  Belisarius,  with  au  army  of  15,000
men,  to  Africa.  After  two  victories,  he  secured
the  person  and  the  treasures  of  the  Vandal  king.
Gelimer  was  led  iu  triumph  through  the  streets
of  Constantinople,  and  Justinian  ordered  a  medal
to  be  struck,  with  the  inscription  Beluarius  Gloria
Ibmianorum,  which  has  descended  to  our  times.
By  the  dissensions  existing  in  the  royal  family  of
the  Ostrogoths  in  Italy,  Justinian  was  induced  to
attempt  the  reduction  of  Italy  and  Rome  under
his  sceptre.  Belisarius  vanquished  Vitiges,  king
of  the  Goths,  made  him  prisoner  at  Ravenna  (a.d.
540),  and  conducted  him,  together  with  many  oth-
er Goths,  to  Constantinople.  The  war  in  Italy
against  the  Goths  continued;  but  Belisarius,  uot
being  sufficiently  supplied  with  money  and  troops
by  the  emperor,  demanded  his  recall  (a.d.  548).
He  afterwards  commanded  in  the  war  against  the
Bulgarians,  whom  he  conquered  in  the  year  559.
Upon  his  return  to  Constantinople  he  was  ac-
cused of  having  taken  part  in  a  conspiracy;  but
Justiuiau  was  convinced  of  his  innocence,  and  is
■aid  to  have  restored  to  him  bis  property  and  dig-
nities, of  which  he  had  been  deprived.  Belisarius
died  A.D.  565.  His  history  has  been  much  coloured
by  the  poets,  and  particularly  by  Marmontel,  in  his
politico-philosophical  romance.  According  to  his
narrative,  the  emperor  caused  the  eyes  of  the  hero
to  be  struck  out,  and  Belisarius  was  compelled  to
beg  his  bread  in  the  streets  of  Constantinople.
Other  writers  say  that  Jnstiuian  had  him  thrown


into  a  prison,  which  is  still  shown  nnder  the  ap-
pellation of  the  Tower  of  Belisarius.  From  this
tower  he  is  reported  to  have  let  down  a  bag  fast-
ened to  a  rope,  and  to  have  addressed  the  passers
by  in  these  oft-quoted  words:  "Give  an  obolus  to
Belisarius  (Date  obolum  BeltMrio),  whom  virtue
exalted,  and  envy  has  oppressed."  Of  this,  how-
ever, no  contemporary  writer  makes  any  mention.
Tzetzes  (q.  v.),  a  writer  of  the  twelfth  century,
was  the  first  who  related  this  fable.  Throu^^h
too  great  indulgence  towards  bis  wife  Antonia,
Belisarius  was  impelled  to  many  acts  of  injustice,
and  he  evinced  a  servile  submissiveness  to  the
licentious  Theodora,  the  wife  of  Justinian.  See
Mahon,  Life  o/Beliaariui  (London,  1829).

Bellerfiphon  {BfXKtptxJMv)  or  Ballerophontea
(BtXktpo<l>6yT7}s).  Son  of  Glaucns  of  Corinth  (or,
according  to  another  account,  of  Poseidon),  and
grandson  of  Sisyphus.  His  proper  name  is  said
to  have  been  HipponoUs ;  the  name  Bellerophontes
implies  that  he  was  the  slayer  of  some  now  un-
known monster.  In  later  times  his  name  was
wrongly  explained  as  the  slayer  of  a  certain  Cor-
inthian, Bellerus,  on  account  of  which  he  was  sup-
posed to  have  fled  to  Proetus  at  Tiryns  or  Corinth.
The  wife  of  Proetus,  Anteia  (or  Stheneboea),  fi-11
in  love  with  the  beautiful  youth ;  he  was  deaf  to
her  entreaties;  she  slandered  him  to  her  husbanti,
who  resolved  on  his  destruction.  He  sent  Bet-
lerophon  to  Lycia,  to  his  father-in-law  lobateR.
with  a  tablet  in  cipher,  begging  him  to  put  the
bearer  to  death.  lobates  first  commissioned  Bel-
lerophon  to  destroy  the  fire -breathing  monster
Chimaera,  a  task  which  he  executed  with  the
help  of  his  winged  horse  Pegasus.  (See  Pegasl'S.)
Thereupon,  after  a  fierce  battle,  be  conquered  the


BelleropboD,  Pegums.  udChlmMn. (Tlacfabe)D.  Huailuui
Vases,  to).  I.  pL  1.)

Solymi  and  the  Amazons,  on  bis  return  slow  in
ambush  all  the  boldest  among  the  Lycians,  and
lobatcH  now  recognized  his  divine  origiu,  kept
him  with  him,  and  gave  him  half  of  his  kiogdnm
and  his  daughter  to  wife.  The  children  of  tbi»
marriage  were  Isander,  Hippolochus,  the  father  of
Glancus  and  Laodamia,  and  the  mother  of  Sir-


I


I
^


BBLLUNA

l»y  Z^fOM. Afterwards  Bt-Ueropbou  wosliaivii
tilt; ^utlft,  oad  vanOrrcd  aliout  ikluuc,  ile-
iorlufc bin  hvHrt in  gnrrow. HU  scm  lKaud«r
[iraa  kill«il by  AniM  iu  battle  ugniiial  ttie  8«i-
Ifmi.  while  Laudiiiuia  wm  sacriiiued  to  tUu
wrath  of  Arttuuis. This  i»  thi«  lloititiriti  vt-r-
IJQU; Uiir, occonliiiff to Fiiidar, Beilt^ro-
phuii'a  hij^h  furtiiiio  lumle  him  m>  uvcrwwii-
iiig  ihftt  li«  wi«h«4l  to  niuiiiit  tu  hPAV<'u  ou
I'c^itMiH. ZiMiH,  bowv\«r.  drove the bur»o
vildwtlh  a  t;aclfl,r,  unci  Ik-tlvr»t>^<>"  l'*^"  *^*"^
ouDD  to  »  niieemblo  end. I]e  wiu  bonotin-d
u  a  h*,'P(i  in  Corinth,  an  onctrMun^  In-iiig  cou-
Mcrated  to hfm in the cypres*  grovo of
CninctnD, Sod  Morris,  litlleropkon  in  Jrff<t§y^t<i,

Bellona.  Hi  Tlir  KMniaii  godiluM  of  war,  in
carty  Lntiu  calk<<l  DtU'Iluiia.  An  old  Italian  cli-
vinily,  ])robnMy  of  Sabine  origin.  f<hn  wan  nnyt-
pOMil  t^i  I)*.*  the  nifc  or  sister  of  Mam,  and  witn
iilnilitiHil  with  Uio  Greek  Kiiyu  ('¥.i,vu>).  Hi^r
tanvlr,  wbich  wm  sitnatc4l  in  th«  CainpnN  )Iar-
tiaft,ouii>iilv  the  (lid  iVuncrium.  won  himmI  fitr  uu^-t-
bp  of  the  Senatv  vihfti  it  Trnii  ik>jiliiig  with  rh«
untitMulont  of  foreign  nHtioM!*,  or  Koiniin  generals
■boeUitned  a  triuiupli  on  thtir  return  from  war,
ferltniasc  bo  reniemtwred  that  ntiiler  Htich  eir-
nutauccA  a  general  nitght  not  enter  the  rity
Tbe  |iillar  of  war  (CoIuiuMii  Iti-IMc-a)  stixwl  Imnl
by.  It  wjM  from  tbts,  an  n-prtvienting  the  Imiin-
^  of  the  onemy's  territory,  that  the  Fetialis
tk«w  his  lant-e  on  det-Ianiig  war.  Sro  Vni-
UXf.

(^  Quite  II  diflrrent  goddeu  in  tbo  Itellnna
wboiB  tliH  Rnnntn  goveniineui  brought  from  €<*•
■Ua  iQ  ra[«|iailoria  tnwanU  the  begmniog  of  the
iw  miilnry  hc,  during  tlie  Mitbridatic  War.
Till*  Belltiim  vrns  worsli i [ipwl  in  a  dilVcreut  loeal-
itj,  Btid  « iib  a  servicy  coudncteil  by  Uappadoeian
P"ntt»  and  priostoiiies.  Tlic(*e  Bellotiarii  moved
tiMs  city  in  prooetwiou  at  tlje  feAtivubt  of


BKNliFlCIL'M

Benut  iji^fio). The platforiu  from  whii'b  Iho
oratunt Hpoke iu thu Atbcuuui  amwrnbly. Sve


Ibe goililmg,  in  black  raiment,  aud  Hhed  their  on-n
liloalatthw  nacririre.  waiuuling  tbeniaelvc*  for  the
P"T«JW  in  tbei  arum  and  loins  with  a  two-tnlgwi
Ui>.M  ]>roitbeaytcig  auiid  a  wild  uoUe  of  ilnims
•"•I  trrrapeu.

BeOorSoi  A  people  of  Guid  inhabiting  the
"I^iof  llie  niiutern  BeanvaiH  In  the  li\is  du  France.
5«Cj«i.  B.O.  ii.  4.

BtUowa, Se«  Folu.-!.

B*Ui. Seu  TlSriXNAbfLfM.

3*IoiiB^Xi»ii.  (1)  Tbbsou  of  Libya,  granddangh-
'^  of  to  and  I'oseiibni,  nod  fiit'her  of  Aegypliis,
l^ula,  OpIitMiH,  and  PhineuH,  tti  each  of  n-bom  the
jWrwiymic  Belideit  in  applieil.  The  daiigliters  of
""uits  are  known  an  Ilcllthm.  (2)  A  name  given
™  •*i"end  kiiiga  of  the  Kiuit,  wIjom!  rxintence  ap-
y***  t>xir»imcly  doubtful.  The  iiioHt  ancient  in
'*'•'•,  itiog  of  Aasyria,  father  of  Nintin,  whose
'P'^li  it  hi  imiNMHlble  to  detnnnine.  <8)  A  king
^I^jdia,  fatbor  of  N'inna  (Hcmd.  I.  7).  Tbo
"*'M«f  A«yTiB,or  tbo  remoto  Ea«l,i8  thought  by
■**kihotbo  same  with  tbo  Ureal  Bali  of  Hiadn
■»)rltiaio]^^afl  wrII  i»  the  Baal  who  nan  thi-'prinei-
'*' nila  ileity  of  the  Phfpnieion  and  Conannitish
""*'••.  Tho  Belns  of  Babylon  and  Assyria  haa
"*  ■•kntily,  boworer,  with  the  rhf^nicinii  Baal,
^t  that  both  tiore  Ibe  title  of  Bel-Ba'ab  or
"'"ti"  8m  Ahkvkia  :  nAnYU)NiA.  (4t  A  river
'"  Spii  wluf*  gl«8»-making  was  inveuled  (Pltn.
'^  V  r.  m


Tito  B«raa  ol  the  yayx  «t  Albraa.

Beaaous  LacuB.  The  modern  Logo  di  Ganla
in  tiiH  north  of  Iluly,  out  of  which  tho  Miucins
(Mincio)  llowM.

Bendldeia  (BrvfiiSfui).  A  Tbraciau  festival  in
bonoar  of  the  goddess  Bt'iidis  (n,  v.),  who  in  said
to  be  identical  with  the  tireciun  Arlcmiit,  and  with
the  Koniiiii  Diana.  The  festival  was  of  a  barcha-
nalian  cbaratli-r.  Fix>ni  Thmce  it  was  brought  lo
Athene,  wbl'r^^  it  wiw  I'elebrated  in  the  FirutMie,
in  tbo  month  T^argvlion.  Tho  templet  of  Bendia
was  called  Uii/Hitirtov.

Bendia  [Bci^i'r).  A  goddusa  uf  the  moon  umoog
fh«  Thracians.  She  wiw  inveittMl  with  power
over  heaven  and  earth,  nuU  idi^ntilied  by  the
Greeks  with  Artemis,  Hecattf,  and  I'ltrwiphon^.
Tho  wor»li]p  of  tliirt  goddesa  was  intiodniH^d  into
Atticii  by  Thntciau  aliens;  uiid  was  so  jyopnlur
that  in  Pluto's  tiniu  it  iHwatne  a  stato  ceremonial
at  Athens.  A  ptlblic  festival  was  instituted  called
the  Butididein,  at  which  there  were  torch-racoa
aud  a  solemn  procession  of  Athenians  and  Tlimci-
atis  lit  thi^  I'iraciis. Heo  AitTK.Mts.

Beneficium,  BeneBoiarina.  The  wciril  bemr^-
ciam  is  of  frci|)ii-nt  oci^iirrrnce  in  the  Itoinan  law,
in  tbo  HfiUHo  of  some  it[iecial  privilege  or  favour
granted  by  tho  pnudor  or  the  emperor  to  »  olaiM
of  {^nMoiM  ou  some  special  gnuind  of  e<{nity :  but
the  word  waa  also  uhihI  in  otbcT  seiiHeH.  In  the
time  of  t'icero  it  was  usual  for  a  general,  or  a
governor  of  a  province,  to  r«port  to  the  treuHory
ian-itrinm)  tho  names  of  those  utiiler  hi^  ronnnanU
who  bu4l  done  goiKl  ser^-icu  to  the  Statu;  ihoae
nlioHc  nanit'S  witp  entered  in  sul^Ii  report  wertj  said
in  bi'nrjieiia  ad  aerarittm  drfcrri  (Cic.  Pro.  Arch.  5;
Ad  l-'am.  v.  V4f ;  nod  the  note  of  Mnnatius).  It  waa
i-e<|nired  by  a  Lex  lulia  that  Ibu  nauiea  should  bo
given  in  within  thirty  days  after  the  accouiila  of
the  genernl  or  gnvemnr.  /n  hmrfiriin  in  these  pas-
sagi<H  may  mean  that  the  pRnuins  so  reported  were
roiisiderMl  as|>enionFi  who  bud  iliwHrved  well  of  the
.State,  and  so  the  word  benejicittm  may  have  refer-
roci;  to  the  McrvlceM  oftbu  indiviiluals  ;  hot  *n  the
objett  f<tr  which  their  si;rvic««  were  roi)ort*d  waa
the  benclit  of  tho  individuals,  it  seemn  that,  the
teiin  bail  reference  to  the  grntnity  in  the  fonn  of
money  or  piTcaenta  given  for  such  sorvicra.  The
honours  and  ofllces  of  tbo  llomau  Stato  In  tbo  rt<-
pnldicnn  period  were  called  the  benrjicia  of  the
lionian  pimple.

Beneliciiini  also  sigiiiBcd  any  promotion  con-
feiTod  on  or  grant  made  to  aoldieni,  who  wore
thenoo  called  henrfidarii;  this  term  xtoh  a  common
one,  as  wu  S4''o  from  inscriptions  in  Grnter  (li  4;
cxxx.  5),  iu  iHimo  nf  whinh  the  word  hcnrficiariHH  m
reprpMutad  by  tbo  two  Irticro  n.  r.  Bonofloinrius
is  ulso  useil  by  Caesar  (/>«  Bttt.  Cir.  i.  75)  to  exprcM


UENEFICIUM  ABSTINENDI


204


BENTLEV


the  person  who  had  received  a  benefichini.  It  does
not,  however,  appear  from  these  passages  what  the
bcDefieium  actually  was.  It  might  be  aiiy  kind  of
honour,  or  special  exemptiou  from  service  (  Suet.
Tib.  12).

Grants  of  land  and  other  things  made  by  the
Komau  emperors  were  called  henejicia,  und  were
entered  iu  a  book  called  Liber  Boueficiorum.  The
secretary  or  clerk  who  kept  this  book  was  called
a  commetitariis  beneficiorum,  as  appears  from  an  iu-
Bcriptiou  in  Gruter  (clxxviii.  1).

It  was  the  practice  of  the  kings  and  leaders  of
the  tribes  which  took  possession  of  the  western
proviuces  of  the  Roman  Empire  to  grant  lauds  to
their  nobles  t-o  be  held  generally  for  life  on  condi-
tion of  special  personal  service.  Lands  so  granted
were  called  henejicia.  From  about  the  end  of  the
ninth  century,  when  henefitia  became  hereditary,
tbey  wore  also  called /eoda  or  feuds.,  the  two  words
being  used  indifferently  to  denote  the  same  con-
dition of  landed  property  (Guizot,  Biatoire  tU  la
Civilisation  en  FranoOj  iii.  p.  247).  The  beneficl-
ariuB  is  ho  who  has  a  beneficium.  Grants  made
for  the  purpose  of  endowing  churches  were  called
henefifAa ;  hence  the  word  '*  benefice "  came  to  be
applied  to  an  ecclesiastical  preferment.

Beneficimn  Abstinendi. See  Herbs.

Beueveutnm,  The  modern  Benevento.  A  city
of  Samnium,  about  ten  miles  beyond  Candinm,  on
the  Via  Appia. Its  name  is  tiaid  to  have  been


BoDereDtum  In  Samnium.

originally  Maleventum,  and  to  have  been  changed
because  of  the  evil  omen  contained  in  it.  ( See
EUPHEHIBH. )  The  more  auspicious  name  was
given  it  in  B.C.  271  (Livy,  ix.  27).  It  remained  in
the  possession  of  the  Bomans  during  the  whole
of  the  Second  Punic  War,  and  obtained  the  thanks
of  tlie  Senate  for  its  firm  attachment  to  the  Re-
public at  that  critical  period  (Livy,  xxvii.  10).
We  subsequently  hear  of  its  being  a  second  time
colonized  by  the  veteran  sohliers  of  Augustus,
and  also  a  third  time  under  Nero.  Beneveutum
was  Kitnated  near  the  junction  of  the  Sabatus  and
Culor,  now  Sabbato  aud  Galore.  Its  position  was  a
very  important  one,  since  here  the  main  roads  in-
tersected each  other  from  Latium  into  southern
Italy,  and  from  Samninm  into  Campania.  Under
the  Lombards,  Reneventam  became  the  capital  of
a  powerful  dukedom.  It  abounds  in  remains  of
ancient  sculpture  above  any  other  town  in  Italy.
The  most  beautiful  relic  of  former  days  at  this
place  is  theArchof  Tr^an,  which  forms  one  of  the


entrances  into  the  city. Near  Beneveutum,  Pyr-
rhus  was  defeated  by  Dentatns,  b.c.  274.

Benfey,  Tueodor.  A  dislingnisbed  philologist,
who  was  bom  near  Gottingen  iu  1809.  He  pursued
the  study  of  classical  philology  at  the  universities
of  Gottingen,  Munich,  Frankfort,  and  Heidcllwrg,
and  later  won  distinction  by  bis  Lexicon  o/Grttk
Roots  (Berlin,  1639),  aud  by  his  edition  of  the  .S^hiui
Veda  (Lei])zig,  1848) — a  work  which  laid  the  foiii)-
dation  for  the  scientific  study  of  the  Vedos.  He
also  published  a  Sanskrit  grammar,  with  a  chre^-
tomathy  and  glossary  (Leipzig,  1854),  a  short«r
Sanskrit  grammar  (Loudon,  1868),  aud  a  Sanskrit-
Euglish  dictionary  (London,  1666).  In  his  maga-
zine Orient  und  Oocidmt  be  published,  iu  1863-64,
a  translation  of  the  first  mandala  of  the  Big  Veda-
To  comparative  mythology  and  folk-lure  he  con-
tributed a  translation  of  the  Panchatantra,  2  vols.
(Leipzig,  1859).

Iu  1862,  Dr.  Benfey  was  made  Professor  of  San-
skrit and  Comparative  Philology  at  the  University
of  Gottingen,  a  chair  which  he  continued  to  fill
until  his  death  in  1881.  He  left  unfinished  a  Ve-
dic  grammar,  for  which  he  bad  collected  a  large
mass  of  material.  His  only  work  in  classical  lit-
erature was  his  earliest  pubUoation-~a  translation
of  Terence  (Stuttgart,  1837).

No  scholar  did  more  than  Beufey  to  eularge  tbe
range  of  the  study  of  Sanskrit,  a  work  to  whicli
he  brought  the  zeal  of  an  eutlmsiast.  As  a  com-
parative philologist  he  was  in  some  respects  »
follower  of  Franz  Bopp  (q.  v.),  from
whom,  however,  be  deviated  iu  de-
riving all  Indo  -  Euro}>eau  words
from  mouosyllabic  primitive  verb^
a  conception  which  depeuds  upon
his  theory  of  the  origin  of  stem
suffixes.  These  he  regarded  as  near-
ly all  derived  from  a  fundaments!
radical  -y/ant  appealing  iu  the  pr?s-
eut  participle  of  verbs.  In  his  de-
fence of  this  singular  thesis  he  is
obliged  to  assume  permntatious  uf
souud  that  violate  the  most  elemeu-
tary  laws  of  tbe  science  of  phonol-
ogy. His  view  is  to  be  found  set
forth  both  in  his  Lexicon  of  Gt«i
Roots,  iu  his  Sanskrit  grammar,  and
in  numerous  essays.

Beuna.  A  carriage;  a  word  de-
rived from  the  Keltic.  As  a  wagon  of  basket' work
is  stilt  called  benna  in  Italian,  Jienne  in  South
German,  and
bantieia  Bel-
gium, it  is  <-■/.■
conjectured  ^'^
that  the  ve-
il i  c  1  e  from
the  Column
of  Antoninus
shown  here  is
a  benna. *

Bentley,  Richard,  perhaps  the  greatest  anion);
the  clnssicitl  scholars  of  England,  was  born  at
Ouhon  in  Yorkshire,  January  27th,  1662.  After
s]iending  five  years  at  the  Wakefield  Gramniir
School,  ho  entered  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,
in  1676,  taking  the  Bachelor's  degree  in  1679.  No
record  has  been  kept  of  his  career  as  an  nudcr-
gradnute,  though  he  is  known  to  have  given  evi-
dence of  a  strong  taste  for  classical  Btndy. In


BcDit*. (From  the  Cnlnoui  of  AntoDlnm.)


BERKCYStlA


•Mb


BKBl^Klce


1093,  hiaeollef(efpivi!  liliu  tbc  nitiKiiulniriit  nriieail-

muter  to  tlm  8|ialiliit^  Urnuiuiar  Scbooi  in  Llu-

culuKbirc, an  nfllro  wUicb  lir'  sbortly  resiguod  to

brcmiif*  tutor  to  tin;  boh  of  Dr.  Htilliniftleet,  after-

nrila BUliup  nf  Worcrster. Iti  1(>^,  bo  went  to

ixford  ^-itli  his  pupil,  and  K^iin^*)  »ii<'ti  rt-ptituliou

ly  bis  L'TDditiou  onto  be  twict- appointed  todt^liver

Ifat*  U^tyl<*  I^rtnrrxoii  tbe"  Kvidi'tn-cHof  Ki'li^tuii."

In  \WH  bu  took  onltTK,  iitid  rRreiveil  from Hinbop

Slillingflnct  vorioQH  prefermrn(«,  with tbe nfTici'

of  librarian  to  tbp  Ri»y»l  I.ibrnry  ut  St.  JttimWw.

In  170O,  be  Iwcomp  Miw*t<'r  of  Trinity  C'tilU'Kc,  t'lim-

brid|<p,  Mid  in  1717.  Ri'i;iiiH  Pruft-wor  uf  Divinity.

His  UTO|rHnrc,  ]^ec<l,  mid  violuiit-v  iti  biH  rclationit '

■ritb  bi«  roUfiiguoA  of  t]M>  aiiivemity  made  bis  Kiib-

iriiariit  fikrecr  otie  of  coutiiiiial  fttrifo  and  eontro-

TMiy, In  I7IS,  tbe  L'nivcrnily  S-.Miat4)  votod  to  do-  ,

ytiTebim  ofbitt  dcgives;  in  1734,  Ink  deposition  mb

Uutcr  WAt*  prunouuccd  ;  yvt  bis  ability  Riid  force

•[  ehorai^tcr  wcro  aiicb  ibat  at  tbt«  tim*.'  of  his.

(le«tli  be  still  retained  hiit  offices  as  vrell  as  his

decrees- Hc>  died  July  Uib,  l7Aii.

iA  B  pbilolo;:!!!!^  Beutley  may  be  truly  eaid  to
hive  mtittiliMbrd  thu  principles  uf  biMloriiral  rriti-
n«m  and  op«<nMl  a  new  era  for  rluHsicjil  hiOiolar-
»bi|i,  Mttbat  in  (tennany  to-<lay  bis  nuine  jh  beUi
iu  tli«  liigliHMt  bonnur  us  tbe  greai«!«t  of  Kn|i;laud'H
pbiliilociMltt.  His  hiturrtatMn  tifion  the  ICpi»tUji  of
?%tihr'i${\flJO)  );av»  bini  an  iuimediato  rcpulaliou  ,
kllovvt  Kiirt>iM'.  These  Eputlejt  pt)r|>orted  to  bo
Ibf  proilariioii  of  Pbalarisd).  v.i,  and  tu  datt;  back
t"  Ihi' sixth  century  B.C.  Tbisi-lnim  Bentley,  in  a
pAjKr  iiabli!>htNl  for  Wottoii,  aliovvfd  l^i  lie  fulM*.
wberruprm  tbe  Chnfttt'hnn'b  (Oxford)  editor  nf
tlf)  t:pi»Uf»,  the  Hon.  (.'btirleit  Doyle  (uflerwurd
^I'lfOrreryi  altackvd  Bentley  in  a  diwu-rluliou
■hioli  Dyco  hits  rbjtrucl<;ri£ed  lui  "  a  ti!^u«  of  an-
f<r(cit|  learning,  dt-xtitn^iis  nialica,  and  happy
TkillerY."  To  this  Bentley,  snperior  alikt:  in  '
■eboliinbip  and  »it,  made  bis  iminorlul  reply,'
111  whirh  nn  answer  was  irver  given,  and  which
•»  »  nut Vfl loudly  brilliant  effort,  uniqno  in  he-
iof  «t  nnoe  jiuptwiug  In  its  learning;  nnd  fsinciitat-
ini;  ia  jia  iDgouions  n«o  of  all  the  arttf  of  noiitro-
^n»y. The  he«t  editi<in  in  Wnjiner'n  (IrCI).  ]

WuT  importunt  works  of  Bentley  nr*i  bi^  Lfttrr'
!«J/j//,nn  the  ehi-onicter  John  Malebis  (ir^Jt);  tin,
"•litioii  of  Horace  (17II) — an  epoeb-nrnkinj;  master-'
Hiw,  leceutly  Lilited  by  Zangenieister  (lerfJ'Ji;  an,
"liUw  af  Terence  (ITW) ;  and  an  C4litinn  of  Pant-  '
'*«  /.Off  (I'Tf.;),  earried  out  on  the  (tame  plan,  atui  I
•■ell  Ii-dS  happily  execnt*d. A  very  n*rnnrkatilu  I
?n|)iiul  nf  lipnliey's— remarkable  c«inj«ldering  tbo  I
tiaiat  wliich  it  wmi  put  forth  —  was  hi«  piftn,  pnb-  i
■■W  111  17*31),  I'f  printing  an  edition  of  the  New  !
•"fMieut  in  which  the  rcc«ivcd  CJreek  text  (thnnld  i
''tttmcteil  by  a  rarefnl  conipnrisiiTi  of  the  oldest
**Wbi{  Greek  MSS.,  and  with  the  Viil^rnte. This
P^fowl,  which  was  reeeived  wiib  ft  storm  of  oji-
I«i)li(in.  natt  not  carric«l  out;  bnt  tbo  principles
Milfiwti  by  Ih-iitley  have  been  adopted,  and  have
pMarwl  hiiporfani  resnlts  in  the  bi»rid»  of  Lacb*
■"mjunl  iir-lier  lextnal  critles  of  Inter  titin-s. See
"«<ik.  iiff  of  ItcHtlctf,  2  vols.  ( IH33) ;  aTid  Jebb,  HeHt-
^Ihsai;  with  iIk*  arlleln  Tbxti'al  C'liniCISM.

■  Bencyntla  iHtprtwrial  A  snrnatnc  orr>WM,
"** M.iont  Herecyntns  in  Plingiu,  where  she  was
JsntcHlaiiy  wnrpbipped. Bee  FCiika.

I  B«neyntii  lRrp€Mvyrun)  and  Berecyntae  (Brpr-

|L ***^S>  A  Pbry([ian  tribe,  celebrated  by  tbe  poetH


iu  connection  with  Cybcl^,  so  often  itylcd  Sert-

ei/utia  mater  (Verg.  ^f/j.  vi.  785).

Berecynttu{D(/Minii'rot).  A  tt)ontit«in  in  Phrygia
Mnjor.un  tbe  ban kn  of  the  river  fianguriuH.  It  wiis
sacred  111  Cybel^.  who  is  heuco  styled  licrecj/nti^i
mater. Sie  Kiika.

Berenice  (R«)MwVij).  A  name  common  to  sev-
eral women  uf  antiifiiity.  It  is  of  (tTuek  origin,
and  meauH  '*  victory-brlnpnjj"  or  "  bearer  of  vic-
tory," tbo  initial  11  being  writt'cu,  arvonliiii;;  tu
MuciMloniaa  nHa};iv  for  iho  letter  <^,  or,  In  other
words,  KtfitViKr}  beini^  put  for  ^tprvirt),  jiixt  us
tbn  Maceihinians  ssiil  RiXiirrrof  fur  ^iXunrot.  Tho
mo.1t  remnrksble  of  this  name  were  the  foUowjit}; :
(1)  The  ^TuuddanKhter  of  Caaaander,  brother  of
Antipater.  She  married  Philip,  a  Macedoninu,
probably  onn  of  the  nihcers  of  Ah'Xnnder.  iind  be-
came by  him  tlio  mother  of  many  children,  ainoni;
whom  were  Magns,  king  nf  Cyrene',  and  Antigon6,
whom  she  married  to  PyrrbnK,  king  of  Kpinis.
8bo  folloived  into  Egypt  Kiirydic<S,  danghter  of
Antipat>er,  who  returned  tn  that  country  t«»  rejoin
her  hiishiuid,  Ptolemy  I.  BereniciS  ttihplri-d  this
prinee  with  no  Ntr^mg  a  psMiinii  that  \w  piir  away
KnryilicA,  ultli<in^b  lie  hud  children  by  ]i>rT,  and
msrriiit  tliu  former.  He  also  gave  tbo  pretV-nnice,
in  tliH  ancL'i-miun  to  I  bo  throne,  to  her  mm  I'loleniy,
tidtwilhHtaniling  the  better  elaims  of  his  ott'tprtng
liy  Kiirydic<5,  Bcretilctf  was  remarkable  for  her
beuiity,  and  her  portniit  often  ap)>enrs  on  the  med-
nit  id'  Plolemy  I.  iibin;;  with  that  of  the  latter.
('.')  DnngUter  of  Plolemy  Philadelpbns  nud  Arsinn6.
Slie  folhiwod  hi*r  nnither  into  eiile,  and  retinvl
with  her  to  tbo  court  of  Magua.  at  Cyri-n<^.  who
married  Ar»>ino6  and  a4lopte<t  IkM-enlu^.  This  will
Kervti  to  i-x[dain  why  Pulybiit«  Jind  Justin  make
Ueretiicf  to  have  bt^eu  the  danglitcr  «>f  Mngiis,
whiUf  C'atlimnchiis  gives  Ptolemy  Pbiladi-lphiis
anil  An4imt6  as  her  pur«nl«.  After  the  death  of
Mngas,  Arsino6cngfiged  hf:r  daiighti^r  in  marriage
Co  Demetrius,  sitn  uf  Demetrius  Poliorccf**-!;  but,
on  the  young  prince's  having  eonio  from  Mace-
donia to  Cyrend,  she  became  attached  to  liim  her-
self. Demetrius,  conducting  himself  insolently,
WHS  slain  in  a  coiinplracy,  at  tbe  h»>nd  of  which
was  Berenice,  The  latter  tlierciipon  married  her
lirothpr  Pt-oh*my  tKiierget^-sl  III.  A  chort  time
afl*r  fliH  nnptinla  Plolemy  woa  obliged  to  go  on
an  expedition  into  Syris,  iiud  Ber(<nic4<  made  a
vow  that  Hint  would  cnjseerate  her  beanlifnl  bead
of  lair  to  A[dirodil4^  if  her  hnsbantl  rotiirm^'l  Kufe  to
Kgypt.  Upon  his  return  she  fnllilled  her  vow  in
the  t<^mple  of  Aphr>idit6  Zephyrites.  On  thi<  follow-
ing ilny.  however,  tbe  hair  whs  not  t4>  bo  fonnd.  As
both  t-be  monarch  and  bis  queen  were  greatly  dis*
iiniete^l  at  the  loss,  Couou  the  ^imaritaii,  nu  emi-
nent astrtmfimnr  of  the  day,  in  nrilor  to  coucilmt«
tbo  royal  favour,  ileelari>«l  Ibat  tlie  bicks  of  Bere-
nice bad  been  removed  by  divine  inCerpoNitioD,
and  traunbile^l  to  the  HkieH  in  tbe  form  of  a  c»n-
sCellatioit.  Hence  the  eln>tlcr  of  xtan*  ncnr  tbi:  tail
of  tb«  Lion  is  ciilled  Conut  Heitmimn  (Iten'niutS's
hair).  Caltimacbns  wnite  a  piece  on  this  Niitiject,
now  lost,  but  A  iraiiKlatioii  of  which  into  l.alin
verse  by  Catullas  has  reached  niir  time  (I'litnll.
Carm.  Ixvi.),  Berenice  was  put  (o  dpnth  n  c.  yi6,
by  the  order  of  Ptolemy  IMiilopator,  Iht  son.  CI)
A  dangbter  of  Ptolcniy  Pbihwlelpbiis,  given  by
him  in  mnrriage  to  Anlinchns  Tbeon,  king  of
Syria,  in  order  to  remrnt  a  jM^aco  iR-twrrn  tbe  two


BERENICE


BEBNHARDY


conntrieB.  After  the  death  of  her  father  Antio-
obns  pnt  her  aside,  and  recalled  bis  former  wife
Laodic^.  This  last,  having  taken  off  Antiochus
by  poison,  soaght  to  destroy  Berenice  also  as  well
as  her  son.  This  son  was  surprised  and  carried
off  by  an  emissary  of  Laodic6'8,  and  shortly  after
pat  to  death ;  and  Berenice,  iu  searching  for  him,
was  entrapped  and  slain,  b.c.  246.  (4)  Called  by
some  authors  Cleopatra,  was  the  only  legitimate
child  of  Ptolemy  IiathyniB,  and  ascended  the
throne  after  the  death  of  her  father,  B.c.  81.  Sulla,
who  was  at  that  time  dictator,  compelled  her  to
marry,  and  share  her  throne  with,  her  cousin,  who
took  the  name  of  Ptolemy  Alexander.  She  was
poisoned  by  the  latter  ouly  nineteen  days  after  the
marriage.  (5)  Daughter  of  Ptolemy  Anletes.  The
people  of  Alexandria  having  revolted  against  this
prince  iu  b.c.  56,  drove  him  out,  and  placed  upon
the  throne  his  two  danghters,  Tryphena  and  Ber-
enice. The  former  died  soon  after,  and  Berenice
was  given  in  marriage  to  Seleucns,  suruamed
Cybiosactes.  Uia  personal  deformity,  however,
and  vicious  character  soon  rendered  him  so  odious
to  the  queen  that  she  caused  him  to  be  strangled.
Berenice  then  married  Archelails;  but  Ptolemy
Auletes  having  been  restored  by  Gabinios,  the  Ro-
man commander,  she  was  put  to  death  by  her  own
father,  B.c.  55.  (6)  A  native  of  Chios,  and  one  of
the  wives  of  Mithridates  of  Pontus.  On  the  over-
throw of  this  monarch's  power  by  Lncnllus,  Ber-
enice, in  obedience  to  an  order  &om  her  husband,
took  poison  along  with  his  other  wives,  but  this
not  proving  effectual,  she  was  straggled  by  the
eunuch  Bacchus,  B.C.  71.  (7)  Daughter  of  Agrippa
I.,  king  of  ludaea,  and  bom  a.d.  28.  She  was  at
first  affianced  to  Marcus,  sou  of  Alexander,  but
this  young  man  having  died,  Agrippa  gave  her  iu
marriage  to  his  brother  Herod,  king  of  Chalcis,  by
whom  she  became  the  mother  of  two  eons,  Bereni-
«ianus  and  Hyrcanus.  Having  lost  her  husband
vhen  she  was  at  the  age  of  twenty,  she  wont  to
live  with  her  brother  Agrippa,  a  circomstanoe
which  gave  rise  to  reports  injurious  to  her  char-
■acter.  To  pnt  an  end  to  these  rumours,  she  made
pro^wsals  to  Polemo,  king  of  Cilicia,  and  offered  to
become  his  wife  if  he  would  embrace  Judaism.
Polemo  consented,  but  she  soon  left  him,  and  re-
turned, in  all  probability,  to  her  brother,  for  she
was  with  the  latter  when  St.  Paul  was  arrested  at
Jerusalem,  a.d.  63.  The  commerce  between  the
gniltypair  became  now  so  public  that  the  rumour
even  reached  Rome,  and  we  find  Juvenal  alluding
to  the  affair  in  one  of  his  satires  {vi.  155).  She
followed  Agrippa  when  bo  went  to  join  Tespasian,
whom  Nero  had  charged  to  reduce  the  Jews  to
obedience.  A  new  scene  now  opened  for  her;  she
won  the  affections  of  Titns,  and,  at  a  subsequent
period,  when  Vespasian  was  established  on  the
throne,  and  Titus  returned  home  after  terminating
the  Jewish  War,  she  accompanied  him  to  Rome
along  with  her  brother  Agrippa.  At  Rome  she
lived  opeuly  with  Titus,  and  took  up  her  abode  iu
the  imperial  palace,  as  we  learn  from  Dio  Crtraius,
who  states  also  that  she  was  then  in  the  flower  of
her  age.  Titus,  it  is  said,  intended  oven  to  ac-
knowledge her  as  his  wife;  but  he  was  compelled
by  the  murmurs  of  his  subjects  to  abandon  this
idea,  and  he  sent  her  away  from  the  city  soon  after
his  accession  to  the  throne.  Such,  at  least,  is  the
account  given  by  Suetonius  (Tit.  7),  who  appears
more  entitled  to  belief  than  Dio  Cassias,  according


to  whom  Titus  sent  Berenice  away  before  his  ac-
cession to  the  throne,  and  refused  to  receive  her
again,  when  she  had  retomed  to  Borne  a  short
time  after  the  commencement  of  his  reign.  There
is  a  great  difficulty  attending  the  history  of  this
Berenice  as  regards  her  intimacy  with  Titos.  She
mast,  at  least,  have  been  forty-two  years  of  age
when  she  first  became  acquainted  with  the  Romsu
prince,  and  fifty-one  years  old  at  the  period  of  the
celebrated  scene  which  forms  the  subject  of  Ra-
cine's tragedy.  Many  are  inclined  to  believe,  tbere-
fore,  that  the  Berenice  to  whom  Titns  was  attacbnl
was  the  daughter  of  Mariamne  and  Archelalis,  and,
consequently,  the  niece  of  the  Berenic-e  of  whom
we  have  been  speaking,  she  would  be  twenty -fire
years  old  when  Titus  came  into  ludaea.  The  story
of  Berenice  forms  the  subject  of  a  play  by  Kacioe,
Berenice.

Berenice.  (1)  A  city  of  Egypt  on  the  coast  of  the
Sinns  Arabicus,  from  which  a  road  was  made  across
the  intervening  desert  to  Coptos  on  the  Nile,  by  Ptol-
emy PbiladelphuB,  358  miles  in  leug^h.  From  this
barlMurtbevesselsofEgypt  took  theirdeparture  for
Arabia  Felix  and  India.  It  was  through  the  median
of  Berenice  also,  and  the  caravan  route  to  Coptos,
that  the  principal  trade  of  the  Romans  with  India
was  conducted.  By  this  line  of  communication  it
is  said  that  a  sum  not  less  than  what  wonld  now
be  $2,000,000  was  remitted  by  the  Roman  traders
to  their  correspondents  in  the  East,  in  payment  of
merchandise  which  ultimately  sold  for  a  hundred
times  as  much.  The  ruins  of  the  ancient  Berenice
are  found  at  the  modern  port  of  Habest  (3)  A
city  of  Cyrenaica,  called  also  Hesperis.  In  its  vi-
cinity  the  ancients  placed  the  gardens  of  the  He»-
perides.  It  is  now  Bengazi,  a  poor  and  filtby
town.  Few  traces  of  the  ancient  city  remain
above  ground,  although  much  might  be  brought
to  light  by  excavation.

Bergk,THKODOR.  A  distinguished  classicist,  who
was  bom  at  Leipzig  in  1812.  Between  the  yearn  I^
and  18^  be  held  the  chair  of  classical  philology  in
three  universities — Marburg,  Freiburg,  and  Halle,
retiring  iu  1869  from  ill-health.  His  greatest  com-
pleted work  is  his  Foetae  Lyrici  Oraeci,  3  vols.
(Leipzig,  1843),  of  which  the  fourth  edition  a]i-
peared  in  1878.  After  his  retirement,  he  began
his  Oeaehichte  der  griechiuhen  Litteratur,  of  whirb
he  finished  only  tlie  first  volnme  (Berlin,  1H72),  the
second  and  third  being  edited  bv  G.  Hiurichs  (Ber-
lin, 1883-84). He  died  July  20tb,  1881.

Bemays,  Jakob.  A  distinguished  philologist,
born  of  Jewish  ancestry  at  Hamburg  iu  1834.  He
studied  classical  pbilology  at  Bonn,  and  became
professor  tbere  in  1866.  He  was  a  prolific  writer,
but  his  magnum  opue  was  his  e<1itiou  of  Lncretins
(1855).  Other  important  publications  were  his
life  of  Joseph  Justus  Scaliger  (Berlin,  1855),  Lu-
eian  vnd  die  Cyniier  (IH77),  and  a  translatiuu  of
the  first  three  books  of  Aristotle's  Politice  (1873).
His  Qeaammelte  Ahkandlungen  were  edited  after
his  death  by  Prof.  Usener  of  Bonn  (1687).  He  died
May  26th,  1681.

Bemtaardy,  Gottfried.  A  well-known  Oermsn
classical  scholar,  was  born  near  Frankfort  in  1800.
He  pursued  his  studies  at  the  University  of  Ber-
lin, and  in  1639  became  director  of  the  philologi-
cal seminarium  at  Halle.  His  chief  philological
works  are  Syntax  der  grieehudten  ^arveh*  (1£S9k
Paralipotnena  Syntana  Oraeeae  (1864);  aod  *  eril-


B£ROfi


S07


BESTIARII


icft]  edition  of  8nidae»  4  vols.  (1634-53).  His  two
works  on  Greek  and  Latin  literature— GnocAwcA*
LiteraturgaehiekU  (1WS7-76)  and  the  Orundrisa  d.
rommhm  Lit.  (5th  ed.  1872)— are  valuable  contri-
batiooa  to  hUtorioal  literary  study.  He  died  May
Mtli,  1875.

BeioD  (Bfpdij).  (1)  An  old  woman  of  Epidannis,
nnree  to  Semel^.  Herfi  aasomed  her  shape  when
she  persuaded  SenieW  not  to  receive  the  visits
of  Zens  if  be  did  not  appear  in  the  majesty  of  a
god  (Ovid,  Met.  iii.  278).  (2)  The  wife  of  Dory-
chis,  whose  form  was  assumed  by  Iris,  at  the  in-
stigation of  Her^,  when  she  advised  the  Trojan
women  to  bum  the  fleet  of  Aeneas  in  Sicily  (Verg.
Aen.  v.).

Beroea  (Bt'poia).  (1)  A  large  city  of  Macedonia,
south  of  Edessa,  and  of  great  antiquity.  Refer-
eace  shonld  be  made  to  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,


Coin  of  Beroea,  in  Syria,  with  the  Head  of  Tniaa.


Tvii.  11.  (2)  A  town  of  Syria,  now  Aleppo  or
Haleb,  near  Antioch,  and  enlarged  by  Seleucns
Nicalor,  who  named  it  Beroea  after  the  town  in
Macedou.  In  the  Old  Testament  it  ia  called
Cbelhon.

Berosiu  (Bij/wo-or).  A  Greek  writer,  born  in  Bi-
thynia,  and  a  priest  of  Belus.  He  lived  as  early
as  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  about  b.c.
280  wrote  a  work,  dedicated  to  King  Autioclms  So-
ter,  ou  Babylonian  history,  in  three  books  iBahyh-
niea  or  Chaldaiai).  The  work  must  have  been  of
great  value,  as  it  was  founded  on  ancient  priest-
ly chronicles  preserved  in  the  Temple  of  Belus  at
Babylon.  Its  importance  as  an  authority  for  the
ancient  history  of  Asia  is  fully  attested  by  the
Aitgments  that  remain,  in  spite  of  their  scanty
□umber  and  disordered  arrangement.  They  are
preserved  for  us  chiefly  in  the  works  of  losephus,
Eusebins,  and  Syncellus,  and  have  been  editotl  by
W.  Richter  (Leipzig,  1825),  aud  by  MHIIer  in  the
second  volume  of  the  HUtoricorvm  Grafwrum
Fragmenta  (of  the  "Collection  Didot").  published
at  Paris  in  1848.  The  work  entitled  Antiquitatum
Lihri  Quinque  mm  CommentariU  loannis  Annii
{Rome,  1498),  published  in  Latin  as  a  work  of
BertwuB,  was  in  reality  written  by  the  Dominican
Giovanni  Naoni  of  Viterbo.

BeryUus  O^^vXXor).  The  beryl;  a  precious
stone  of  the  emerald  species,  and  much  used  by
the  Romans  in  the  adornment  of  their  cups.  Pliny
state*  that  the  Indian  lapidaries  were  accustomed
to  oolonr  rock-cryetal  in  such  a  way  as  to  coun-
terfeit the  beryL  The  same  writer  speaks  of  six
varieties  of  the  beryl,  or  of  what  he  considered
such.

Borttoa  (B^pvror).  Called  in  the  Old  Test.  Bero-
fka  and  Berathai.  The  modern  Beirilt;  an  an-
cient town  of  Phoenicia,  about  twenty-four  miles
srwith  of  Byblns,  famous  in  the  age  of  Justinian  for
the  study  of  law,  and  styled  by  that  emperor  "  the
motber  and  nnrse  of  the  laws." The  civil  law  was


taught  there  in  Greek,  as  it  was  at  Rome  in  Latin.

It  had  also
the  name  of
Colonia  Felix
lulia,  from
August  ni
Caesar,  who
made  it  a  Ro-

*T. .  nian  colony,

Coin  of  BorytuB.  ,  _ j

and  named

it  iu  honour  of  his  daughter  (Flin.  H.  K.  v.  20).

The  adjacent  plain  is  renowned  as  the  place  where

St.  George,  the  patron  saint  of  England,  slew  the

dn^on ;  in  memory  of  which  a  small  chapel  was

built  upon  the  spot,  dedicated  at  first  to that

Christian  hero,  but  now  changed  to  a  mosqne. It

was  frequently  captured  and  recaptured  during

the  Crtisades.

B«a  (be-i$  =  bintu  parte*  attu).  Two  thirds  of
a  unit. See  Ab.

Besa  or  Beasa  (pfftra,  ^rjiraa^  fSi^trtof).  An  Alex-
andrian vessel  used  both  as  a  drloking-cup  and
for  holding  perfumes,  etc.  The  vessel  was  named
from  having  upon  it  the  features  of  the  Egyptiaa
god  Bes,  modelled  in  the  clay.  It  was  iu  the  shape
of  a  flask,  broad  at  the  bottom  and  narrowing  tow-
ards the  top.  SeeKranse,  ^njrfwicfi'W,379,380,407,
408.

Besai  (Bf(r<roi).  A  people  of  Thrace  dwelling  in
a  district  known  as  Bessica,  between  Mount  Rho-
dop6  and  the  northern  part  of  the  river  Hcbrua.

Beasus  (B^o-tror).  A  satrap  of  Bactria  under
Dari!i8  III.,  who,  after  the  defeat  of  Darius  by
Alexander  the  Great  at  Arbela  (b.C.  331),  seized
him  with  the  intention  of  currying  him  as  a  pris-
oner to  his  own  satrapy.  Being  hotly  pursued  by
the  Macedonians,  he  murdered  his  royal  captive
and  made  his  own  escape.  He  was  subsequently  de-
livered into  the  hands  of  Alexander,  and  that  mon-
arch, according  to  one  account  (Justin,  xii.  5),  gave
him  up  for  pnuishmeut  to  the  brother  of  Darios.
Plutarch,  however,  states  that  Alexander  himself
punished  the  offender  in  the  following  manner:
He  caused  two  straight  trees  to  be  beut,  and  one
of  his  legs  to  Ije  made  fast  to  each ;  then  suffer-
ing the  trees  to  return  to  their  former  posture,  his
body  was  torn  asunder  by  the  violence  of  the  re-
coil (Pint.  Alex.).  Arriau  makes  Alexander  to  have
caused  his  nostrils  to  be  slit,  the  tips  of  his  ears
to  be  cut  off,  aud  the  offender,  after  this,  to  have
been  sent  to  Ecbataiia,  and  put  to  death  in  the
sight  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  capital  of  Me-
dia.

Beatlaxll  (^pu>-
fiaxoi).  Persons  who
fought  with  wild
beasts  iu  the  games
of  the  Circus,  They
were  either  persons
who  fooght  for  the
sake  of  pay,  and  who
were  allowed  to  bear
arms;  or  criminals,
who  were  usually
permitted  to  have
no  means  of  defence  BesilMii.
against  the  wild
beasts. The  be$tia-

rii  who  fought  with  the  beasts  for  the  sake  of
pay,  and  of  whom  there  were  great  numbers  in  the


(Baa-rellef,  Palazao  Onlnl,

Rome.)


BETROTHAL


S08


BIBLIOTHECA


latter  days  of  the  Republic  and  nnder  tbe  Empire,
are  nlwaya  epoken  of  aa  distinct  from  tbe  gladia-
tors, wbo  foiigbt  W'itb  one  aDother.  It  appears
that  tbera  were  scbools  iu  Rome  in  wbich  persous
were  trained  to  6ght  with  wild  beasts  (acholae  beatia-
rum  or  bettiariorum). See  Gladiatobbs.

Betrothal See  Matrimonium  ;  Sponsalia.

Betting. See  Alea  ;  Pioncs  ;  Sponsio.

BiaiOn  DUc6  (ffiaiav  Sikt}).  An  action  brought
in  any  case  of  brntal  violence,  and  brought  nnder
the  Jorisdiction  of  tbe  Forty.  In  practice,  it  was
mainly  restricted  to  { 1 )  the  illegal  seiznre  by
force  of  any  kind  of  property,  especially  of  slaves ;
and  (2)  tbe  rape,  or  attempted  rape,  of  a  free
person.

Bianor  (BtatHop).  A  son  of  the  river-god  Ti-
ber, and  of  Manto,  daughter  of  Tiresias.  Servins
makes  bim  the  founder  of  Mantua,  and  identical
with  Ocnus.

Biaa  (Bias).  (1)  Tbe  sou  of  Amytbaon  and  Ido-
men6,  waskingofArgoB,  and  brother  to  tbe  famous
■ootfasayer  Melampns  (q.  v.).  (S)  One  of  the  Seven
Wise  Men  of  Greece.  He  was  son  of  Tentamus,
and  was  bom  at  Prien^,  in  Ionia,  about  B.c.  570.
Biaa  waa  a  practical  philosopher,  studied  tbe  laws
of  bis  country,  and  employed  his  knowledge  in
the  service  of  his  friends,  defending  them  iu  the
courts  of  justice,  settling  their  diapntes.  He  made
a  noble  use  of  bia  wealth.  His  advice,  tbat  tbe
lonians  should  fly  before  ttie  victorious  Cyrns  to
Sardinia,  was  not  followed,  and  the  victory  of  tbe
army  of  Cyrns  contirmed  the  correctness  of  his
opinion.  Tbe  inbabitants  of  Prieu^,  when  be-
sieged by  Mazares,  resolved  to  abandon  the  city
with  their  property.  On  this  occasion  Bias  re-
plied to  one  of  bis  fellow-citizens,  who  expressed
astonishment  tbat  bo  made  no  preparations  for
bis  departure,  "I  carry  everything  with  me."  He
remained  in  bis  native  country,  wbere  he  died  at
a  very  advanced  age.  His  countrymen  baried  bim
with  splendour,  and  hononred  his  memory.  Some
of  bis  apopbtbegms  are  still  preserved.

BibaciUuB,  M.  FURIUS.  A  Latin  poet,  bom  at
Cremona  abont  B.C.  103.  He  appeara  to  have  com-
posed a  turgid  poem  entitled  Aethiopa,  on  tbe  leg-
end, very  pnibably,  of  tbe  Aethiopian  Memnou ;
and  alHO  another  on  the  months  of  tbe  Rhine.
The  latter  is  thought  to  have  formed  part  of  au
epic  poem  on  Caesar's  wars  in  Gaul.  Both  works
are  lost,  and  we  bave  only  a  oonple  of  fragments
remaining.  Horace  {8at.  ii.  5,  40)  ridicules  a  laugh-
able verse  of  his,  in  which  Inpiter  is  represented
as  spitting  snow  upon  the  Alps:  Tupiter  hihernas
cana  nive  eonspuet  Alpa.  This  line  occurred  in
the  beginning  of  a  poem  which  he  had  composed
on  the  Gallic  War.  Quintilian  (x.  1,  06)  enumer-
ates Bibaculns  among  the  Roman  iambic  poets,
and  in  anotber  part  of  bis  work  (viii.  6,  18)  gives
this  same  line,  citing  it  as  an  instance  of  harsh
metaphor.  To  render  bis  parody  more  severe,
Horace  substitutes  Fnrius  himself  for  the  mon*
arch  of  the  skies,  and,  to  prevent  all  mistake,
applies  to  tbe  former  a  laughable  species  of  des-
ignation, drawn  directly  from  bis  personal  appear-
ance, j^t'ngrui  tentui  omaso,  "distended  with  his  fat
paunch."

Bibfiais  (/9i'3a(nr).  A  gymnastic  dance  prac-
tised among  tbe  Spartans  by  both  men  and  women.
See  Saltatio,


BibUopola  (fii$\iotra>Xris). A  bookseller. See

LlBRR.

Blbllotheca  OSijSXio^^Ki;).  A  library.  (1)  Greek.
The  largo  libraries  of  the  Assyrian  and  Egyptian
monarchs  were  unknown  to  the  Greeks  till  tbe
time  of  the  Ptolemies.  We  do  indeed  bear  of  a
library  formed  by  Pisistratns  (Anl.  Gell.  vii,  17),
which  Anlus  GelHus  calls  "  the  firac  public  li*
brary  " ;  "f  another  by  Polycrates,  the  tyrant  of
Samoa  (Atbeu.  i.  'S) ;  and  among  private  collec-
tors we  hoar  of  Nicocrates  of  Cyprus,  Enctid  tbo
Arcbon,  Euripides  (Athen.  i.  3),  Euthydemns  (Xeu.
Memor.  iv.  2 ),  and  Aristotle  (Straho,  xiii.  1).  But
it  was  tbe  Macedonian  rulers  of  Alexandria  who
fii-st  created  a  public  library  on  a  large  scalf«.
Ptolemy  Philadelphua  collected  books  from  si)
parts  of  Greece  and  Asia,  tbe  larger  nnmher  of
which  he  deposited  in  tbe  Museum  (q.  v.),  a  bnild-
ingin  theBrucbium  qnarterof  Alexandria,  and  tbo
rest  in  the  Serapenm.  Zenodotus  was  tbe  first  li*
brarian,  after  him  Callinjachus  (who  made  a  cata-
logue called  the  TlipaKts),  then  Eratosthenes,  then
ApoUonins,  and  then  Aristophanes.  Tbe  nnmber
of  volumes  in  tbe  two  libraries  seems  to  have  been
between  500,000  and  600,000.  Books  iu  foreign
languages  were  brought  to  Alexandria  and  trans-
lated for  tbe  purpose  of  being  placed  in  the  Hbrar\-,
and  the  Septnagint  version  of  the  Old  Testament
is  said  to  have  been  made  in  this  way.  Galen  te\U
us  tbat  tbe  autograph  original  copies  of  Aeschylus,
Sophocles,  and  Euripides  were  procured  for  the
library.

This  priceless  collection  suffered  considerably  in
the  siege  of  Alexandria  by  Julius  Caesar,  iu  the  de-
struction of  tbe  Bruchium  qnarter  by  Anreliau
(A.D.  273),  and  by  the  edict  of  Theodosins  for  tbe
destruction  of  the  Sernpoum  (a.d.  389),  until  it  was
Anally  destroyed  by  tbe  Arabs  (a.d.  640).  (See  Gib-
bon, chapter  51.)

A  rival  library  to  that  at  Alexandria  was  started
by  tbe  kings  of  Pergomns,  but  was  transported  to
Egypt  by  Antony,  who  made  a  present  of  its  200,-
000  volumes  to  Cleopatra.  By  the  second  or  tiist
century  B.C.  there  seem  to  bave  been  libraries  in
most  Greek  towns. (For  bibliography,  see  below.)

(2)  Roman.  Tbe  first  public  library  in  Rome
was  that  founded  by  Asinins  Pollio  ( Plin.  II.  -V.
vii.  30),  and  was  in  the  Atrium  Libertatis  on  the
Aventiiie.  lulins  Caesar  bad  project'Od  a  grand
Greek  and  Latin  library,  and  bad  commissioned
Varro  to  take  measures  for  the  establishment  of
it;  but  the  scheme  waa  prevented  by  his  death
(Suet.  lul.  44).  Tbe  library  of  Pollio  was  followed
by  that  of  Augustus  in  the  Temple  of  Apollo  od
the  Palatine  Hill  (Suet.  Au^.  29),  another,  the
Bibliotheca  Octaviana  (so  called  from  Angnstus's
sister  Octavia),  forming  part  of  the  Porticns  Octs-
via.  There  were  also  libraries  on  the  Capitol,  ia
the  Temple  of  Pence  founded  by  Vespasian,  in  the
palace  of  Tiberius,  besides  tbe  Ulpian  Library  (po
called  after  its  founder,  Tr^an ),  which  was  thf
most  famous  (Gell.  xi.  17;  DioCass.  Ixviti.l6).  Tliis
library  was  attached  by  Diocletian,  as  an  orna-
ment, to  bis  tltermae.

Private  collections  of  books  were  made  at  Rome
Hooii  after  the  Second  Punic  War,  sometimes  fmm
the  spoils  of  Grecian  or  Eastern  conquest'.  Thuii
Aemilius  Panlus  brought  to  Rome  the  library  nf
Perseus,  king  of  Macedonia ;  Snlla,  tbat  of  Apelli-
con  of  TeoB ;  Lucullns,  the  extensive  one  of  tl>^
kings  of  PuutuB,  to  which  he  gave  the  pablie  free


BrDKACTR


The  Bfiiil  of  Ctcerti.  Altirim,  VaiTn.  ikiiil

Dtbcni  tn  iuureuiug  tlimr  ttbranen  \a  well  kuowii.

BoroDM  SomiuDnloiia  pntwrMtifl  n  tjlimry  nf  6^2,000

books. TovrarcU  tli*.'  oml  of  iUo  I{i<|>iil)lii:  tl  licc-mito.

In  fact,  tbc  fiirtlhnu  to  havt*  a  riHMii  elegouLly  I'nr-

Binheti  u  A  libniry,  and  rewrvei!  fur  tbut  piiitMinc.

BovcTer  tKD<'nint  nr  iitmliHliouH  »  [mtmhi  iiiii^Iit

be,  it  wiu  fosbiimnlile  to  »(ipfnr  IcAniMl  \*y  huvitiit

a  library,  thniit*)i  lit"  tuiglit  uover  vvvu  read  I  bo

tilW  «f  the  iMMiktt. Seiii-ca  (ZV  TrttiKj-  An.  9)  vim-

driDiis  Ibo  mgo  for  uu-re  book-colIi^tliiiK,  mul  nil-

\in  those  wbo  vrrre  mure  ]iteaM>(l  witli  tbt?  «iiil-

«iile  thnii tbc inxiiJ*!. Liiciaii wrotu  u  tHiiwmU*

piecQ  to  viLynum  tliis  common  folly.

Viti  rDDil  iif  iirovtiicial  librarieo  at  Milan,  Cumntn,
Tibur,  antl  rutruo.

A  library  j;vnt'rnlly  bail  an  uanteni  iispect  (Vi-
ttur.  Ti.7).  In  llercitlaiiRttni  a  libniry.  fully  far-
uUwdj  bat*  Xtft-ii  tliitcnviTeil.  Kuuiid  tho  wulli*,  It
tiMtcweft  cuntairiiii^r  th»  iHKikN  in  rulla,  iiud  a  ri'C-
CJWgulat  OOM  nconpiiHl  tho  cvntrt}  of  tLe  room:
Umm  cwch  werT>  iinaiWn-il.  It  wua  a  very  small
foum — BO  emitll  ibat  »  imtiwu  by  stratcbinK  oiit  bin
»nnH  nmld  tniicb  lH>lb  Ktilofl  of  it :  y«t  it  cotituintnl
170«  nilU.  Tb«  i-MH»  were  caltetl  citbcr  nmtnrin,
Uieul<tMrnUt,/irruli,  or  nidi.  AHiniun  Pollio  b»il
•tet  ibtt  f^wbidii  in  his  public  libniry  of  nili)niin>;
tbf  r^tn  with  tbe  (lortraitsarHl  buKli<ofrHlrbrnl«<l
tncit.M  «vll  AS  i4tntn(>8  nf  MinTvn  uiitl  Ibo  Miim's.
Tbt*  M;nu|iln  wiu  8<Htn  folbiw-cd  in  iIh^  ]irivati<  li-
bnirira  iif  tbo  rirh.  Tin*  Ubmrii  a  fjiltiinthmi  »r  hth-
lioth<f«rii,  wba  biul  cbHrt;o  nf  Ibr  librarltw,  vfere
ilBUAlly  alftVfj*  or  frccilnif  ii. tnt.'  LiBKlt.

On  wick'ut  lllir»rius,  wi<  Uliiiebl,  JJie  alrjuudri-
nitt/itn  Bihliulhtkrn  ;  Birl.  /*w  imfiiv  liue/tWfMin
(leeS!);  Egger^  Vallimtttfue  ft  POri^ine  lU  la  fith-
tiognpkU;  Polybiins  xii,  27;  Li]i4iuH,  Dti  Itih-
UeM#ni  it^ntiurmii  in  0(iura,  vol.  iii. ;  Brcker-fJoll,
OaUii,il4li«^*^4:  Seniiiil.  LtM  LirTf»tl<inM  t  Antui-
■W.cliai),  ^•'•'  ^■j''"''  ^"A*"  'J*nii*tTni«fi"n  of'  Anfi'gni
AA(|*;ti>:  Bernlmnly.  lif'fH.  LitUr.  v'tKl;  Ciut-
UlUili,  Ikltf  tiihtiittrrhr  nriP  AnticJiittl  (HoluKUa.
1^);  and  llu>  inti^n>H(tnK  rbnptt^r  on  tbo  antijciit
n  IjBBctatiJ,  Anrirtit  Haine  in  the  Light  of  tUf^nt
^>intfH«$  (IKHrf).

B{btact£.  Tho  nuMkrn  Aiitun;  a  large  town
*^tb«  Awliii  in  (ictnl,  on  the  Arroux,  ono  of  tbo
^'<-J]ra  »f  the  LiKcr  (l»irv).  ItA  mn<liTn  nutne
**  tvoriapiion  nf  AngniitiHliinnni,  liy  which  it  vrma
■noittt  U)  iniiHTial  limes.

BUmx  llif  rao4U-ni  Bifrvrc;  ft  town  of  th«
l^Bi  in  Gallia  D«l(;ica,  not  far  from  the  Aisne.

Bibftlua,  L.  Calpukmua.  A  Human  -tliit^'omftD,
""•«(  ll»  arislornilie  party.  Ho  married  Forcia,
^•UnjjIUfrofCaid.  Hu  uum  CaeHar'suollL-ugne  in
liiee«i«iiiHhip  :  but  lindiui;  it  itn|>o8»ibIe  to  thwart
"^dMi^tiH,  n*tirL-d  tu  bis  own  hunso  and  took  ao
''^'^  1*011  ill  the  coudQL-t  of  atfuira  as  to  give  rise
^  ^U  fliiipram  which  Su«;touinH  (Jul,  id.)  hoa
P'ttWViiil:

Nmiltbtilaqiilniunin  iiniterflwl  Ca4«ani  hctunil;
'hat  llllKilD  Deri  ri>ut>ili>  Mit  inriiikul.

[*"Hirioni A  conch  for  tivti  perKone,  nH<-d  at

J™  (Plant.  Baech,  iv.  3,  tH). Tln^  word U  a

'^^rvi.  iqtlf  Latin  and  half  Grvvk. See  Tiucu-

r^^CotQlgCii. An  flpithot  nf  Biici^biiH.
i^BiTfl.  -r,,j» ^n  earthen  vcswl  with  hiindlf^,
rii'kft  for  holding  nint*,  and  sonie-
— .  il  iiiHal  or  Qab.


Bidana.  (1)  See  RAfiTUCM.  (9)  Sm  BtuE::(TAL,
Bideotal.  An  erection  on  a  spot  where  ligbt-
iiiiiu  hull  fjillC'ii.  Tbe  name  in  derived  from  Ibe
MU'rilic*'  of  u  young  sbeep  (bidmi)  by  the  }utniKpicr*
at  the  place.  8ometimp»,  fri)m  tbo  reMombliincc  of
the  fctrnetnro  to  the  month  of  n  well,  it  wns  uollfd
}/u(rnl.  OH  in  the  t'Jiwi  of  the  puieitt  Lifi^nitt  vr
Srrifntniitniim  at  the  eaatcrn  end  of  I  ho  Kornm
IloniHnnm,  and  nnother  mi  tbo  Coniitinni.  <8ee
PriKAl,.)  When  lightning  had  Rtnirk  a  fiiKit,  It
wiM*  held  noci-jwary  rontfere  fulgur,  rilher  pnbfice
or  priratini,  Hccording  to  tho  nutnn^  of  thu  pinct?.
If  a  man  hnil  liomi  killed  by  the  Ugbtning,  It  wus
nut  lawful  to  tmrn  tbe  coriMw,  but  be  wa«  hnned
on  tbe  spnt  ll'liii.  H.  X.  il.  i  l-if»).  Everything
which  hwl  be<>n  »t<orehed  or  Hc&lturt<d  by  the  lt;cbt-
nhig  wao  •olemtily  mdlocleil  by  the  (xtnliff  (.who
waa  at  a  later  data  wwiwtwl  by  the  luinitpin*)  and
pile<l  up  with  a  low  niiiitorcHi  prayer.  A  hiJeiu
wtu)  offervd,  and  u  sumll  onulonnre,  neither  paved
nor  covf-reil,  wan  built  iiroiiud  the  heap,  and  waa
rnrtbcr  surrounded  by  an  exterior  wull,  Itvariug
thu  legend  ^u/jjrur  eonditum. Many  iuacriptiuuii

of  thin  kind  are
still  uxtaitt,  uid
«t  PompL-ii  »  bi-
dentnl has been

_____ _ _  diftcoveredf  of

"^ fc"^ n^^^'"~' "7^'^' r^ which the  outer

protection  is
funned by  eight


ll'irnstaa  of  a  BlileaUl (PoraiMlt)


Doric  culuiniis  (Mazois,  Ktiine*  ilf  P^'fitpei.  t.  iv.,
pi.  ii.  Hi.).  It  waa  not  lawful  to  tn-ad  ih\>*  iocttt
reliifiiMtii»,t>r  even  to  look  into  it  (Ammisn.  xxiii.  5).
From  Horace  (.!.  P.  471)  it  appeurs  to  bavo  been
bolie  vcd  that  a  person  who  was  guilty  of  profaiiinj;ii
bidontul  would  Ihi  puuitthedby  theKo^lswilb  frenzy.

BIdiaei  iHiSia'nM,  filfiiiH  or  ;3idtmO.  Mugi>*iratM
in  Sparta  whose  hnslnow  wm  to  inHpeel  Ihc  gym-
na^lic  exercise*.  Their  house  of  mw-lhig  uifix''"'*
was  In  tbu  market'placc  (I'ansan.iii.  ll.i^i).  Th^y
were  either  live  or  six  in  nnmher.  and  liml  a  prwi-
dent  who  Is  called  in  iuHcriplions  irfjta^ftvf  fitbiw
(C.  /.  O.  i.  6U). See  tJYMNASll'M.

Bidis  (BlSof).  A  amall  town  in  Sicily,  w«et  of
Syracuse.

Bier.  Sect'KRK.
trum;  PuKirs.

Blfrona  An
epithet  of  lanus
(q.  V. )  an  biung
represented  with
two  faces.

Blga  or  Blgae.
The  Ijttiu  unmo
for  a  chariot  and
pair.  HtM  CUB-
Bis.

Bigainla ooe  ^^^^  oiftwu. (rmin  «  ooiaj

Matiiimoniuu.

Bigati,  sc.  nt^mmi.  Bomau  coins  (denarii),  bav-
ins *h**  devieo
of  a  t  wo-horm^d
chariot  (higa).
See  DKSAItlfS.
BUbOia  Tbo
modt-tn  Itnn-
hola  or Bam-


Uigfttl  Nanni


boln,  u town


lULI.X


KO


UITL'KIGKS


B(l]rcliii>6- tPompelL)


of  thp  CoItiljCTi  in Hispania  TnrraonnensiH,  fo-

iiiuufl as bciog Ibo nntiro plncc nf tbR poet

Martial,  who  ofteu  i-efern  t<i  it  with  plwisure  und

atfectiuik (8cu  Mi4rt.  i.  iit ;  x.  103, 104 ;  xli.  Id.) It

stood  on  a  rocky  koight  in  a

barreu,  mggod  conutry  throngh

which  rau  the  river  Snlo. Bilbi-

Hswafinoful  for  itHiuiiiiu factum

of  arms,  ami  iieiLr  it were  the

iMths  iiaiiiMl  Crtim  it  A([iiau  Bil-

bitoDae.

BillT See  T£LA.

Bilyohnia,M;./'«¥rN*7.  A.1atnp
funiisIn-Ml  with  two  iiozkIim  and
wicks,  sit  a*  to  give  out  two  sep-
nra:<»  llaitics  (Pel.  Sat.  xzx.t2|.

Bimater. An  epithet  nppltcil
to  Diouyans  na  having  h.it),  hi  n  faahion,  two  uiuth-
er*. St*r  DiONYscs.

Bingiiim.  'I'bo  nioderti  Bingcu ;  a  towu  of  Oer-
niaiiia  Prima,  tin  the  Rhino,  wcat  of  Moguntiacuiu
(MayciJCi!)- t^'«  '*'»«•  ^'*'-  iv.  70.

Bion  {Hiav}.  (1)  A  Gi-cek  bneolic  poet,  who  tloiir-
ishcd  iu  the  second  half  of  the  seeonil  rnntnry  B.O.
He  lived  mostly  iu  Sicily,  where  he  is  said  to  have
died  by  poison.  Beeidee  a  niiiTibcr  of  tiiinnr  poemm
from  bi«  hand,  we  have  a  king  descriptive  epio
called  The  Dirge  of  Jrfom*.  His  style  in  more  re-
markable for  grace  than  for  pownr  or  HinipHrity.
(2)  A  native  of  Bi>ry«tliene«,  ni-Jir  rlio  mouth  of  the
Dnieper,  who  llonriMhe<l  about  n.c.2ri0.  Sold  as  u
alavo  ^^  hen  a  boy,  he  was  fret>d  by  hiH  niaAter,  who
was  a  rheturii^inn.  After  studying  at  Alhuuft,  ho
lived  fnr  a  contnitlenihle  period  at  the  court  of
Antigonun  tionatiiH  in  Macedonia.  Illtt  sharp.  in>
cisive  MiyiiigH  wem  proverbial  iti  aiitif]n]ty,  tut  in
the  passage  of  llonice  {Kpint.  il.  2,  (K)).

Bipallum. A  douhlo  mattock. See  PAia.

Bipennis. A  two-edged  axt*. See  SEcURia.

Btremis  (5iiti»jrar)i S<mi  Navis.

Birrus  ot  Burnis  (Jiippos).  A  cloak  or  ca|K!  fur-
oibhtMl  will)  u  liood;  a  heavy,  coaiso  garment  for

nso  in  bad  weatli-
er.  It  was  made
of  wool  or  beaver,
with  a.  loD|^  nap.
The  word  ia  aliwi
naed  a»  aynony-
UluniiWith  LACKR-
NA,  c  r  c  u  L  L  u  fl,
and  E^AHiiM,  u\i  of
whiL'h  sue.

Bisaltes. A  tribe  dwelling  iu  Mai-mlonia.

Bisantb^  (MiaafBrj).  A  Tluinciau  towu  en  the
PropontiH,  Hubsi^qiuMitly  known  aa  Uhaedtwlum,
irheucv  itn  moileru  nauui  HuiltiHlo,

BiaeUluai. Rev  Hntuk.

Btftsexttim. See  Calenwahii'm.

BUt6nes  (Oiaruyti).  A  Thracinu  people  who
dwelt  bel\vt>en  Mount  Khii4hi|>/-  and  the  Aegean
8oa,  on  Lake  BiNtoiiiM,  near  Abderu.  rnmi  the
worship  of  DionyKUR  In  Thrace,  the  female  Bac-
obaualtt  were  called  Bistonidew.  I'llny  montiouH
one  town  a^*  belonging  to  the  BidtoDeB,  i.  e.  Tirida.

Bit. i<ee  Flir.N[*M.

Bitbyula  {UtOwia).  A  diHtriot  of  Asia  Minor,
honiuled  4»n  the  wt-st  by  Mysia,  on  the  north  by
the  Pouluti  Euxiuns,  on  the  caat  by  l'ai>hlngonia,


Ptihcrmiui  wtUi  Blrma. (Prom
Pomi>«iAit  Sutue-i


and  ou  the  Bontb  by  l'hr>'gia  Kpictetaa.  It  was
pneseaaed  at  an  early  iwriod  by  Thracian  trlbM
from  the  neighbourhood  of  tbo  Istrymou,  eatlod
Thyni  and  Uithyn),  of  whom  the  fonuer  dwelt  uii
the  coant,  the  latter  iu  the  interior.  The  country
was  snlHlued  by  the  Lydinus,  and  afterwards  1ms
e«ue  a  part  of  the  Persian  Emi)ire  underCynis,  and
WMi  governe<l  by  the  Hatra|»ft  of  Phrygia.  During
the  decline  of  the  Persian  Empire,  the  iiortheni  part
t>f  the  country  became  inde^f^ndeut,  onder  native
prlticeci,  who  resisted  Alexaiulerand  hi»  Miccweeors,
aud  cstahliHhed  a  kingdom,  which  lajitod  tilt  the
death  of  NIcomcdca  III.  (it.c.  '•!),  who  Ix^qaeatbed
it  to  the  iSonians.  L'nder  ArigUKlus  it  wati  made  s
proconsular  prorinec.  It  was  a  fertile  eoiiutry,  iu-
teriAccted  with  worwlcd  moiintaius,  the  highest  of
which  was  the  Mysiau  Olynipiis,  ou  it«  southern
IwRjer.


Coins  or  UltbynU,  mMh  (he  Um(U  uf  Koui^n  £iu|«m«

The  chief  towns  of  Bithynia  were  Chalcedi
Prusa,  Ucrnclea  (Foutica],  ^icaea,  and  Bitbyuii

(Claiidiopolia).

BJton  IlitVufl  and  CleObia  (KA«'o,3ir). The  m
of  Cydipp)^,  a  jiriestt'ss  of  Her*  at  Argos. Th
were  eelebrated  fnr  their  aftratioii  for  their  iHi'lli«>l
who«ie  chariot  they  once  dragged  during  a  feoli^r'
to  theToULpleof  IIer(^,adiNranceofforty-tivcatadt  i
Thi'  prieslcMi  prayed  to  the  g'lddess  to  graut  th'^iai
wh>it  \t:u<  lioKt  for  morl-ulN,  and  during  the  iiif^ht
they  l>4»t1i  die<1  while  n^threp  in  the  temple. (Herud.
i.  M  ;  Val.  Mar.  v.  4  ;  Cic.  Tiifc  I)i*p.  i.  47 1.

Bitiimeu. A  wonl  used  by  the  Rotuan  writerv.
especially  Tacitus  aui]  Pliny,  to  iudinate  a  ■pecie*
of  miuenit  pitch  or  oil. The  curre«]M>ndiiig  Gnvk
word is  (itr^MiArnc,  the  luodeni apph.i]t. It  ww
brougLit  vhietiy  from  the  Dead  Sea  (AHphultite*^
and  was  uctod  iu  building  as  a  oemcut. Iu  Syria
it  was  qaamed  in solid blocks. In Zocyiitbo*
(Zaute)  there  wat*  aud  still  is  a  ]pitch  spriuK  ibM
has  been  at  work  for  more  than  two  IbuusjUid
ye.ir». SeePliuy,  JW.  ^.  viii.  I.'');  xxviii.IO.

BlturTonm.  The  modont  ilourge«:  kuotrnalfo
iu  aucieut  tiiueji  as  Avahicch;  the  chief  torn  of
the  Bituriges,oii  the  Avara(Kvre],n  branch  of  tic
filler.  The  walls  of  the  town  are  carefhilT  de-
scrilied  )>y  Cuenar  (B.  f7.  vii.  ^),  who  bcsiepd  it
and  tinjilly  took  it  by  asHault  in  lt.O-  '*'2.

Bltuilgea.  A  nnmeriMia  aud  powerfhl  Kellit
piMiple  in  Gallia  Aquitania,  having  iu  early  riODM
the  supremacy  over  Ihn  other  Kelta  itt  Qaal- Tbrf


Bivixm


111


BOEUROMIOK


irrn*  divided  inUitwo  triltcii:  (t»  BlTUHIUKsCuBt,

lltk  Avnricutu  u  their  cnpitiU  {Uourges» ;  (U)  Bt>

UES  Vn'isci  or  UOUMI!!  -tbeir  cnpitAl  wa«  Bar-

(Burilvjiiix  K on tbf lelt  bnuk  of  the  0ft-

nna  (Cftronue).

BirlaiiL A  mad  or  street  which  braochw  iuto

Ftwo  forks  iPllo.

[iT -V. vi. :«;

VpTg, vl*n. is.

S3*it;  nt  the
point  of  diver-
gence betn-oeu
two  sneb  nmHa
or  strertii  in  the
town  of  Pompoii
tbbM  is  ftlvrft^B


iRkh.)


Birlnin  In  rarapcll

founil  a  fountain,  oa  in  the  fxaui]ilu  hora  givea,
vhieli  repivRciitH  r  hiciutn  iu  that  city.
Bivouac S««  CAf»TnA  ;  ExcroiAE.
Bixon^ iBi(ainj). A  city  of  Tbrace on the
hiiitna

Blxya  {BtCvT}).  A  Tliracian  city  on  thu  Enxiiio
Sr«.iii)rlhncst  nf  ny/aiitiiiiH.  The  ]Kiet«  declare  it
tubave  lieeu  Mhunuvd  by  RwallitnA  U^catiftu  of  ibe
(lie  uf  Tereua  {q.  v.). sVc  0%  id,  Afet.  \l  « J  full,

Bkhia  IMkA  (fiXdffjif  HUq).  A  gerierui  uaiue
for  so  kctioQ  availuble  in  coaofl  where  one  person
hftd  iDstatued  a  loiia  by  the  couUiict  of  another,  no
nitlcr  vhothvr  the  injury  oriKiiial«d  in  a  fault
<■(  DiDimun  or  comnuw^ion.  The  diK-JuratTuo  of
Ifai  iilnintiff  BeeniB  alwnyi)  to  have  l>egnn  with  tlu<
vonln  *L|!j^<i^( t**,  followed  by  the  iiuuiu  of  the

Tbe  pivficr  Atlwniaa  court  to  t«ko  cnftniKonce
of  llie  Hclion  wi»  detcrmiintl  by  the  Bubjerl  oP
litigxtioD,  Tbuii.  A  tiXii,^f)  ill  tho  nniiket  ivf.  Arift-
topli. ) w^.  1407)  would  ronn»  liffore  the  Ag*irjiho-
*;  HwigiirouH  buildiuit»,  beforw  the  Asiyonoiui ;
•wani'ttial  caMtK,  before  the  ThfwuiiUhetae ;  and
iWrcUluiK  to  the  law  of  iuheritaut-c,  before  the
Airlwiii  E]>onyiuU8.

fiUckHnitha. 8ec  Kabicil

Blanket «*•»*  Babtlonici'M;  SxiiAGtTLrM.

Blaito[dioenio«a  ^UXatmx^iVixcr).  A  |»«o[i1if  of
^•fbiiiia,of  Pho<niciaa  origin.  8«e  A[>pian,  Ve
'w^.vi.sa

Blatta.  A  name  given  by  Ri)man  writer)*  to  an
niNict  belonging  to  the  orllioiit^ra,  of  which  the
"KiuiU  knew  g«venil  WiiidH.  From  their  Mbuii-
'^'■e  llie  light,  Vergil  calli  thvni  laci/ug^if.  The
"•"tiPBu  ctH>kroach  {hVitUt  Amfriainn)  is  our
*I*fiw, Sh^o  priii'unA,

Bttajea  iBXt/iwr).  A  jteople  of  Aethio])ia,
^imabty  fabnlntis,  as  they  are  deecribed  aa  hav-
!^  tl9  bwU,  but  the  eyes  and  niniilh  in  their
"*<«l.  (See  Pliny,  //.  .V.  v.  8;  Anini.  Marcell.
"^-  'L The uuine ia lUao written Blenimves

Boidioea  or  Boudicea.  A  4)ne«n  of  the  k-eni
I'^'^riijiiu,  having  lierii  pliiiiiiefiilly  Irealed  by  the
""•Hiiin,  who  even  ravished  her  two  daiighl^m,
^^i\tA  nu  insurrection  of  the  ItrltoiiK  againHt
^'r  rtii|jre*iw>rH  dnring  the  ntisence'  of  Snet^miiiH
""lii'iH,  tlio  Tiniiian  governor,  on  an  ex|n?dili.iii
w  tbu  inland  uf  Monn.  Kho  took  tlie  Uonmii
'"'"nieii  of  Camalofltiniini,  Txindiniuni,  and  dIIkt
Pl*»»,  and  slew  nonrly  70,(N)0  Romans  and  their
•'^'i*-  She  wtw  ol  length  defeated  with  great
I^by  Suetonius  Paulinna,  and  {int  an  end  to  her


'own  llfn,  A.D.  61. Sco  Tacitna,  Ann,  xlv.  31 ;  and
Teuuyaon'a  noble  poom,  Boadicea.
BoBta. See  Natib.

Boochna.  (1)  A  king  of  Mnurelania,  and  father-
in-law  of  Ingiiriha  (<).  v.),  with  wh<iin  at  ftnit  he
maile  war  ngaiiiHl  thu  Runiaii^  but  whom  he
afterwarilH  deliven-d  up  to  i^olla,  tliu  4|iiat<8l4>r  of
Marina,  n.c  1(K>.  (2)  Tbo  aou  uf  tbe  precwting,
who  look  part  in  the  Civil  Want.  Ho  was  con-
linned  in  hia  kingdom  by  Aiigaittui;.

Bodotria  oi-  Bodeiia  Aeatuarium.  The  Firth
ol'  Forth  ;  an  i-ntuury  on  the  t^iisteru  cuaxl  uf  Scot-
land. S<:e  Trntitnii,  Atpru.  23  and  25.

Boebeia  (liotliijis).  A  lako  iu  Theaaaly  near
Monnt  Ow*n  <Herod.  vii.  i"^).

BoBckh, Piiiijfr At'orsT. An  arrbuiologJKt,
.  bom Novt-nilxx li-4th, ITf^, at KarlHruhn. Ho
I  entered  the  Uiiiveraity  of  Malln  in  lrT(>:{,  and  was
intiiieneed  by  the  remarkable  prelertiouK  of  F.  A.
Wolf  (().  V.)  to  engage  in  the  atndy  of  claaitieAl
philology,  of  which  he  bocaute  professor  at  Heidel-
berg in  1WJ9,  leaving  that  chair  to  take  tlie  pro-
'  fcMortihip  of  rhetoric  and  ancient  htemtnro  at
I  Berlin,  where ho  loctared  for  Bomo  forty years
'  with  extraordinary*  enccess. His  is  one  of  the
1  greatest  names  in  thu  history  of  philalo);y  as  a
I  science,  in  that  he  conceived  of  It  ns  an  organically
eonstitiited  whole: ho  that  liin  lectnrert  inuliided
grammar  (forntnl  and  hiMUirieaO,  exeguHift,  arche-
ology pniper.  and  the  Mtiidy  of  aneient  literature,
hi>4l'(iry,  jKditJcit,  rtdigioii,  and  ttoeiety. In  ith«»rt,
I  ho  aimed  itl  an  intellectnal  n^jiriHbiclion  of  nntiq-
'  uity  ou  till  itx  sideh,  as  easential  ti>  a  fniitfnl  Htudy
of  the  rla«nic«. This  view,  which  e.xciLe4l  much
opposition  for  a  time,  gave  on  nndeiiiable  im|H>tu)4
to  profonml  and  accurate  Hi>hohii-Hhi{i. HIh  great
works  are  iiu  edilimi  uf  Piudar  in  2  vols.  (1611-
'ti); his  treatise  JJie  Stantfuinnhtttung  tltrr  Athe-
fier,  y  vota,  (lc!17 ;  third  ed,,  by  Krankel,  IHSli)— a
nionuineiit  ofanbtle  annlynia,  minute  research,and
vast leikrning; bis Hetr^Aogi^chf  Untenuchungen
iifirr  Qetnchtt,  Htin:{fu»te  und  Matsf  detAlUrtfi'jmji
(11538) ;  hin  Urhmdrn  iibfrdiM  Stev&mn  detattiJKhrn
Staiits  (1^0); till) Corfmit  lmirrip(ioHum  Latum-
rum,  of  which he began the piildication at  the
cost  of  the Royal  Aeadeniy  of  Berlin,  and  whiuh
has  been  eontiiiiied  liy  Franz,  KirL-bhoO',  Mommscn,
Cnrtlns,  and Rohl ; eititioiis  of  tUe  Antiftonf  of
Hophoules  [1843),  and  of  the  fragments  ascribed  to
Philolalls; besides  a  eollcction  of  lectures,  essays,
etc.,  with  the  title  QmimmeUe  kUtne  Sfhrift<n,7
vols.  ( l^JSe~74  ). Me  dieil  in  Berlin.  Augi'ist  3d,
lHfi7. -Sne  V(in  I^ntseh,  Phil.  Ajts.  xvi.  (1>W6).

Boedromla  i^or^hpoma).  A  fi'Hltval  rulnbnited
at  AtheiiH  oil  the  Hevnithday  of  Ihn  mmith  of  Bou-
droniioii,  ill  honour  of  Apolhi  BtiiHlroniinii  (Sliillerf
f)or.  ii.H,  $  5j.  The  name  BiH-droniiiM,  liy  which
Apollo  was  called  in  Boeotia  and  other  part*  of
(Greece,  seems  to  indicate  that  by  tbiH  featival  bo
was  htiuoured  as  n  martial  god,  who  either  by  his
actual  pi-escucc  or  by  hlH  onvclos  aflnrded  a&iist-
iHiee  in  the  dangers  of  war.  The  origin  of  the
fr«tival  is,  however,  traced  by  different  niilhora  to
dinVreiit  eveuto  iu  Grecian  alory.  8ee  Plularoh,
Tk(*r«»,  'it.

Boedromion  (  BoijA/M^tuf  >.  The  namo  of  the
third  Atiir  miintli,  answering  to  the  latter  half  of
St^)itember  and  the  Ixtginning  of  OeU'>ber.  See
Calkndarium.


DOEOTARCllES


212


BOF.OTIA


Boeotarcbes  {tioi^tTapx'}S)-  The  Rr>«titi»nH  in
tvncicDt  times  ocriipifMl  Ariit^  in  TlitMiHaly  iTliuu.  i.
13).  Sixiy  y^'unt  afVc'-r  the  tjikiiig  of  Troy  tln'y
were  fxpcllod  hy  the  Thi'HNiilitiiM,  ami  xt'tlU'd  in
the  country  tlicii  ('ulU'4l  (']t(lnii:i)«,  Init  urtt-ruunl!*
BoCfitiii.  Thu  li-iiili^r  of  Iho  IW-oliunH  won  Kiug
OphDltiiK.  It  vvdulil  KL-uin  (hut  thi'ir  kiii^H  ruletl
tliu  wliulu  country  froui  ThKhes.  Lutcr  uii,  tUv
eonutry  wasdivtdL'il  iuUtftcvoral  Stnte^, mntaining
ench  a  iirinripnl  riiy,  with  iU  allies  itml  ilepeiid-
autN.  I'lii'  tminht'r  Kiid  iiiinip-s  r.f  t!i4'ht>  iiiiU^pnndt^tit
gintL-H  nro  ilitTervntty  givini  hy  <UflVrt*nt  writers  on
tli«  sMltjwet;  wp  Unnw,  hnwflver,  fur  rwrtnin  ttiiif.
t]i4>y  fortnRd  a  rnnli'di^ritcy  railed  th^  Ittinnlian
I^^agur,  with  ThclM-b  at.  iIk  ))ffld,  and  FrrM^niari  is
ofnjMninti  that  IIip  {Kdit-irnl  union  grrw  out  of  an
older  Aniiihiclyoiiy.  Coiiuiioii  KHuetuarK'M  wi-rn
the  temple  of  the  Itrfinian  Ailitiii6  nriu-  ConirioA,
wlieco  tlio  Pauiboootiii  werc<  c'elcttratcd,  and  the
Tomplo  of  I'osoiilon  iu  Oncht'stiia.  Tbucydidfs  (iv,
03)  uiLMitioiiH  fiuvci)  tndeiicndcut  Stflt<.-A:  TheU-tt,
[lAtiurtiitt,  CoTouca,  CVvpae,  Thospiao,  Tauagiu,  nod
Orchomeiiiiit;  ami  ue  lennt  from  iuscriptinna  that,
at  one  time  or  othor,  tbo  following  belonged  to  the
Hamo  I'liLfts :  AnlhHton,  Ijebnd4*a,  HyettiiH,  Acrae-
pliia,  Clioniin  (or  Komia.  Demowtb.  /''.  L.  $  141,  etc.),
Thi»b<(,  CbacHMu/a.  O.  MilUer  {  Otrhoiii.  p,  -10:1)
supposes  ibero  were  originally  fonilccit  free  States.
i*iolial>]y  tbu  number  ililVui-ed  ut  ditr^reiit  (iiiie^.

Kiu.-b  of  tbo  prJiieipul  tontnt  of  Uoeotin  dooms  to
have  bud  il^  £r^^nc  and  iivvXi}.  Tbo  ffovXij  was  pro-
aided  over  by  an  arcUon,  who  probably  hod  tmc-
oeeded  to  tbe  prie^jtly  fuiictious  of  the  old  kiugs,
lint  possessed  little,  if  any.  executive  authority.
The  polp mart- 1)8.  who,  in  tn-arie**  uiid  agreements,
an^  iiientioiied  next  to  the  arelion,  Imil  tioiue  exet^-
ntivt^  authority,  but  did  not  eomiiiund  for<.>eH  e.  g,
ihey  could  imprisou,  and  they  din-pted  the  levies
of  iriM>]>H.  ItnT,  lK'Midef4  tlic  arclKMi  of  i>iieh  ttepa-
ralu  Htatu,  thertt  was  au  areboii  of  the  cunfe^leracy
— ic^j^wi'  <V  Kotpw  ttoKurwi"  uioHt  piMbably  always
a  Tbebau.  lliti  name  wim  ullijLcd  to  all  alliances
and  uouipacta  which  coucertied  the  whole  coii£<.>d-
enicy,  aud  he  was  president  of  what  Thtirydides
(lallH  the  four  coiitieitei,  who  directeit  the  allair^  of
Iho  leagne  (Arii**  W.  Kvpot  «;(ovo-i).  On  important
qiieetiotvH  they  »eem  tit  have  been  tinited;  for  the
Hatn»  author  HpenkM  i>f  thi^m  ax  rj  ^ov\ri,  aud  in-
forms na  that  the  determiiiatiomiol  the  Il<H;otarchs
rtM|uiri:d  the  ratitication  of  this  budy  before  lliey
weri!  valid.  We  may  now  explain  who  these  Boeo-
larcliH  were.  Tliey  were  properly  the  niilit.iry
boada  of  the  confederacy,  cheisen  by  the  different
States;  hut  we  aUo  lind  them  discharging  the
fbnotioaR  of  an  executive  In  varioUR  matters.  lu
feet,  thoy  arc  represented  hy  Thiioydidcs  iw  fonn-
itig  an  alliance  with  foreigrL  Statea;  a^  receiving
amba^ttadoni  on  their  return  home;  im  negotiating
with  envoy**  from  ntber  coiintnert,  ami  iLcling  a»
the  repitm-iitalives  of  the  whide  h*agut>.  though
tbo  ^L-X^  refused  to  ttanetitni  the  meat^arcH  lliey
bail  reoolvcil  on  in  the  particular  caae  to  which
we  are  now  alluding.  Another  instance  in  which
the  Itocotnrcha  appear  a**  executive  is  their  intvr-
fen^ico  with  AgeJ^ilaiiH,  on  his  embarking  from
Aniifl  for  Asia  (b.c.31K)J.  when  they  prevented  hitn
offering  sacrifice  as  lie  wished.  Still,  the  principal
duty  of  the  Bueolareh»  was  of  a  military  nature:
thus,  they  led  iuto  tbu  tield  tbu  triH^ps  of  their  re-
BjR'Ctive  States;  anil  when  sit  lioiiie  they  took
whatever  Diea«ure«  were  re'|uinit«  to  forward  the


'military  nimrationR  of  the  league  or  of  their  nwn'
'  Htatu.  For  Bxampio,  wo  read  of  oiio  of  the  TheluniJ
Uoeolarche  ordering  the  Tliehaus  to  eomc  in  anDal
to  the  ecclesia  for  Iho  purt>otM)  of  being  reaily  tal
attack  Plataea.  Kach  State  of  the  ttnifedL-rory'
elected  one  Bocotarcb.tUo  Tbubaim  two,  nllbi«ii]ili,
,  on  one  uccitsiiiu^ — i.e.  after  the  ititiini  ortlie  rxik-ai
with  Telopidaa  (u.c.  :i79)  — wo  read  uf  (here  being;
I  three  at  Thebes.  The  lotal  unmberfnmi  the  wholei
I  confinlenwy  varied  «irli  the  number  of  Ihe  inde-
pi'iidimt  Statefi.  Mention  is  made  ot  the  Uoeo*{
larrliH  by  Thiirydiilcs,  in  cotineclinn  with  the  ba^!
tluof  Delium  (n.c.  4*20-  Tber?  is,  however,  a  dif>i
fureiK'e  of  opinion  with  rcKpert  In  his  tnraiiing;|
Honio  niideriitand  litin  to  ttpc.-ik  of  eleven,  Aonio  of  i
twelve,  ami  others  of  tliirti-en  BiH-otareliH.  Dr.:
Arnohl  iNdiHjKiMHl  to  adopt  llie  last  numher;  aiidJ
wo  think  the  roiitext  is  in  favour  of  tbo  opiiiioa|
that  there  were  then  thiriccu  Uocotarcba,  m>  ibati
the  numlier  of  free  States  waa  twelve.  At  the  tinjoi
of  tli'j  battle  of  Leuctrn  (u.c.  3Tl),  we  tlud  acveql
Boeotarchs  trentioned  ;  on  aaotbor  occasion,  whod
Greeco  was  invaded  by  the  Gauls  (  B,c. 'iTO  ),  w  ^
niad  of  four.  Livy  alates  that  there  were  iwrtvM
but  tiuroru  the  time  (n.c.  171)  to  which  liix  AtatJ
ment  n^fei-K  Platarn  had  been  rennited  tn  tl^
hiagno.  8ti11  iho  niitiiber  uipntioned  in  aii,v  ra(*e  1
no  teat  of  the  actual  niiniber,  inasmuch  as  u«  ]«j|
Dot  6iire  that  all  the  UueotarcIiH  wuin  sent  out  «
their  rospiboHvo  at«t«6  ou  every  cxpnlitioo  or  ]
every  bjittlo.

The  Boeotarchs,  when  engaged  in  inUilary  ^^
vice,  formed  a  council  of  war.  the  decitioiia  I
wbicli  were  determiueil  ou  by  a  miijority  of  vt»t-j
the  president  being  one  of  the  two  Tliebaii  n«>4^
tarchs  u'ho  e^imiiianded  alteniiitely.  Their  |Mrri«
of  Kttrviee  waa  a  yt'ar.  l>egiiiTiing  about  Iho  wiij^
solstice;  and  whoever  continued  in  otftc«  loti^^
than  liitt  time  waa  pniiishable  with  denth  both  "I
TbelH'H  and  in  other  cities.  Kpaniinondas  anil
lopidas  ilid  so  ou  titeir  iiiTasioii  of  I^iconiu  (B
Jtjd),  hilt  (heir  euiiiieiit  M'rvicea  Mivcd  llieta;
fact,  the  judges  did  not  even  come  to  a  veto
spoctiiig  the  former  iovSi  apx'l*'  t*^*  avrov  01
Tiji'  ^^^rjtpoy).  At  the  oxpiratiou  of  the  >enr.a  U4w-^
tareli  was  cligil>lc  to  othve  a  second  time,  aud
lopidaa  waa  ri-peatedly  cltoAQu.  FroiD  Iho  ei.
of  Kpaminondaif  and  IVIopidaa,  who  were  brongr
iH-fori-  Thebati  judges  l^uotoraO  for  transgrwui
of  [lie  law  which  limited  the  time  of  ufllce,  we  iiir
conclude  liiat  ea<;h  Hi>ct>tJirch  waa  re«potisiM«
his  own  State  aloiin,  and  not  to  the  gi'iieval  Ian-*
of  the  four  conucila.

Mentiou  is  made  by  Livy  of  au  electjou  of  Boetf
tarchs. He  furcheriuforiusna  that  the  league  (i
dham)  wua  brokeu up  by  the  Komatjs  B.C.  11
$till,  it  must  have  been  partially  revived.  a»  weitf
told  of  a  secomi  breaking-np  by  the  Kouiaiis  anvH
the  doHlruilion  of  Coriulh,  B.C.  146. SeeFreem^Nj
IlUt.  of  Faierul  G'^remmrnt  I.IUM),  and  Ten  Br^
jel.  iJv  Fi>fd(re  Jiijtotiat  {(inn\U\gen,  1834).  1

Boeotia  ilioturta).  A  country  of  Greece  pm^l
lying  to  the  northwest  of  Atlica,  and  shut  in
the  chains  of  Heliixin,  Cilhucron,  Parnasaiis,  £
towardtt  the  sea,  Ptidls:  Mhtch  luoitnlaius  euci
a  large  plain,  constitnting  the  chief  )>art  of  f'
country.  Jfumerous  rivers,  of  which  the  Ce|»''"
ans  was  the  most  iuipurtan(,  deacetiding  ftoin  thi
heights,  had  probably  stagnated  for  a  lonij  lime,  ,j
aud  fonaed  lakt-n,  oC  vvliieb  Ilie  C'opaiH  was  'he
largest. These  samt^  rivers  app^'ar  tn  have  raroiw


tU»  snil  of  Boiwhn,  wliicit  i»  ■mong  the  most  fniit-
1  iu  Gtwcit. Boeoliii  wua  oIkd  j>crbapii  the  mast
ickljr  settled  jwrl  of  GriH-ci-,  fur  no  otiirr  could
low  an  rijiinl  nutnbrr  nf  iiu|iiirt-»ut  uiiitro. Thii
uiilry,  nn  w«  Iej»rn  fnxii llio  concutrt'iit  testi-
ilouy nf  8trnW, ]*iiii«aiiiHH,  and otber HiiciiMit
vrium,  niM  tlrittr  ii<.'ciipi«d  hy  twvtfnil  bnrl>aniii(»
cliuiii.  iinditr  llto  varinii«  nami-fl  of  Aeout- x,  Kctoufw,
Ttriiiinfoeft,  and  Hyaiilcs. To  tboito  micceeded,  ac-
atiding  to  tbe  ctMOtuoD  nrcoDut,  L'aduina  and  bis
fiilltiwtTs,  <nh(i,  after  exiicliin^  ttouiv  of  the  iudij;-
riittus trills  nbnve lueiitiimud,  and C()iiciliatiu|<
olbrnt,  founded  a  city,  whicb became  afterwards
•»  wkbnited  midcr  the  name  of  TheUee.  aud  to
which  lie  gnvo  tbi'  nann;  uf  Cuilmi'a. Th«  deaoend-
ftiil))  v(  CadniUB  Wi-re  c<tm)ielK'fl,  sttbHeqiiuntly,  l»
rvjiiiiiti!  Boeotia,  aflrr  th<?  raiiliivH  of  Thubifn  by;
tlie  £|>igoui,  and  Ut  Mwk  rrfiifjp  in  tb<<  omiutry  of  ;
llw  lllyrian Kufbclei>ji  ( IK-rml.  v.  (11). Thu-y  re-,
gained  jnwise.teiun,  however,  of  tlieir  former  torri- '
loir,  hut  were  ouoo tuorc  i*xi>clli-d,  as  we K-iii*ti .
fnnu  iitrabu.  by  a  uuiueroua  huiilc  uf  Thrai-'iaiis
aim!  utiirra. Ou  tbid  ocoo.'^iuu,  having  witbdinvrn  I
iDUi  Tbe«a»ly,  tbry  uuitLKl ^heIIlHclvt^B  with  tbv  '
iwopla  of  Arn^,  a  diatrict  of  that  province,  and  for  '
tiM  fint tiiQH auniued thn nani«  of  hoeotiatin.

I  After  a  lapw  of  nnme  yearn,  lhi\v  Mem  compelli'd  '
to  abuidou  Thfwiialy,  when  tht<y  uiicc  nioi-«  muc-
«*eded  iu  rp  -  evtubliiibit]}*;  theinHtOveH  in  Ihwir
on);tQal  aUoilr,  to  whioh  (boy  now  coiimiiinif-utiMl
th«  name  uf  Bocutia.  Tbitt  ovcnt,  acronling  Iu
TliiiririUileii,  uccnrrud  ubinit  itisty  yeant  aft«r  the
cnptiirc  of  Tniy  ;  bnl,  in  oidur  to  Tecoucile  this

|»<c«niit  with  the  matt-meiit  of  Hi)nier,  who  dis-
tiactly  nnnies  the  UucutiaiiH  among  the  iirerian
'•'rcM  OMeinbled  at  tb.il  niemorabl*}  ftiej^o,  tho  hia-
toriaii  atlmit»  that  a  Bouutittn  divluou  {arrolia<rfiae)
li*d  alirvady  luittled  in  thin  |>roviuce  prior  to  tbe
niigraiiou  of  the*  gvoAt  body  of  tbe  uatiou  (i.  W).


I


b


I


ikjw..ti.


*  be  jjnveniment  of  Ijorotiu  reniaiiu'd  nndrr  tlic

"l^^tiarchical  fortn  till  thi:  dratb  of  Xatitlius,  who

**'•  ill  Aiiigln  vuuibal with MclaiilbiiH  tbu  Mesari-

*"*<!.  ^bvu  il  wa«  itetmniiu-d  tn  udupL  a  rupnbli-

**!»  vatiHtitntiou. This,  though  liniierfeetly  known

**»  tifc,a[)|ieurs  to  have  Iwwu  a  cooipoiind  of  ari»lo-

*fBti(.'  ami  dciDocrntic  principles,  llie  former  bt*iug

^Uparvnt  in the  appointment  of  tltirt^^en  annnal

'"agirtnilM  named  lUveoturclis  (bco  Bukoiakc-IIks),

*h«  I»rc»iiled over  the  military  a*  «cll  iut  civil

'•"lifcrtmeiila ; the  latter  in  the  e8tah1i»hmttit  nf

'"nrcBOiwiU,  which  were  puawwcil,  in  fact,  of  the

*uv«fei|p,  aiith«irily,  since  all  rattaanrrH  nf  itnpor-

**•'!*  wero  to  iMi  Aiihniittcil  to  their  delilKunlioU.

'•"•p'drral  aaaembly  of  the  Boi'OtlAii  Republic  wna

■"♦M  In  tbe  louiple  of  tho  Itonian  AthLMiii. From

^"  mteiu  aud population  uf  their  territory  the

r^'^'tsiuii  njiKht have played tlio flret part in

j^iWe,  if  ihey  had  not been  preveulM  by  the

J^  pjvernmtriit  of  rUo  citioa,  hy  the  jealonity  nf

i'*'**.ainl  the  cuuHeqneiit  want  of  union.  And  yet

""•tinroplo  of  Bpoininundaa  (q.  v,)  and  Pelopidas

J^'-l  ahiTivanU Mhowed that thf* neuiin* of

*•  aiBii  eonid  ontweigb  all  ibew.  defects. The


Boeotians  wen*  re};anltMl  by  their  iieit;hboni-8,  the
Albeuians,  ait  natnndly  a  stupid  raee.  Mneh  of
this,  b(»wevfr,  wim  wilful  examjenttiun,  and  luuHt
Ik;  aa4Tibo<l  To  tbu  niilidual  enmity  which  tttieiuit  to
have  exixteil  from  the  cavlitiht  tiuius  between  tbcHc)
two  uatioiiH.  ltl(in-ovi:r,  thin  country  proilucnd,  in
fact,  nmny  illuHlrions  iiieu,KUi'h  ju  liv^iod,  Pindar,
rincarch,  KpaniinuiiiliKi.  and  IVIopida».  In  lloeo-
(ia,  to«>,  Moiliil  Helicon  wju»  wicrod  t-o  iho  Mnseit,  to
wlioni  also  many  of  tbe  fontitain*  and  rivers  of  tUa
uouutry  wcro  couAecralod.  In  Biwotin  are  Hcvural
celebrated  ancient  battlo-ficlils,  the  former  glory  of
which  ban  bt^t•ll  incrcaaetl  liy  later  eventH;  namely,
riutnea  (now  the  villain  Kokhi),  whitro  PniinaniaH
and  AliMtidt'H  efltaliUHlK.*il  the  liberty  uf  Ureece
by  tlu^ir  victory  ovor  Murdonitm;  I^uih^tia,  whcru
EimmiinnnlaH  triunipheil  over  tho  Spartaiut;  Cor-
i>neii,  where  Ili'C  Sjiavtan  AgeMilalis  defeiitfd  thn
TUebanH;  and  Cbueronea,  wlicre  I'Idttp  founded
Macclnniuii  eii[)reiUHcy  on  the  rnins  of  Greciau
ficetloiiL  Near  Taim^ra,  the  hirlhplaeo  of  Corin-
na,  llie  bent  wine  was  proiliiced;  jn-ie  alsn  cocks
were  bred,  uf  reuiurkahle  sixu,  bisaiity,  and  cour-
age, nith  which  the  Grecian  uili^w,  pasHionately
fund  of  coch-tighting,  weri»  supplied.

The  bcmt-hniiwii  tiivvuH  of  Bouoliu  wero  Orcho-
ineniJH,Tt'gyra,  }-1aliii.n.im,  f'tMuiiea,  ami  Chaeronea,
near  Lakt?  Cojiain ;  Laryiiiua,  Fhocae,  Aiilis,  Ueli-
uni,  and  Ornpns,  near  Ihu  Eiiripn»;  Thi»l>6,  Aacra,
ThcHpiae,  and  Luucti-n,  iicai*  llie  Gnlf  of  Corinth;
Thebae,  In  Iho  plain  between  Lake  llylioa  and
Monut  Tciiuics.tiiK  ;  Potniac  and  TlierapUitn,  noiith
of  Tliehefl;  and  I'latiiene,  Krethrae,  Elcnm,  Tuiia-
gra,  and  Pherne,  in  tbe  valloy  of  the  Abopan.

Boethius  (belter  Boetlns),  AMriutt  MANura
Toic<)t'Al'('»t  Skvi;iiTnli((.  A  Bonian  Htattwiuan  uiid
ficbolar,  boru  in  Gome  ahont  a.i>.  475,  ami  one
I  of  the  distlDgiiiHhed  family  of  the  Anieii,  who
hod  for  some  time  heen  Christians.  Having  Iwien
left  an  orphan  in  his  chi1dhoo<l,  lie  wom  takoti
in  his  tenth  year  to  Athens,  whrru  he  rt-uiuiucHl
eighteen  yeari,  ami  iicqiiirod  a  fitock  of  knowl<
eilgit  far  lii-yoiid  I  he  average.  Afinr  hia  rfitum
to  Kouio.  he  wa.H  hohl  In  high  esteem  among  his
COD  temporaries  for  his  lenrniiig  and  eloqneni-e.
He  allraotcd  tho  attenlion  of  Theoilonc,  who  in
A.i>.  510  jimdo  hiia  couttul,  and,  in  t^pite  of  bis  pa-
triotic  and  indepoudeiit  nttitmle.gnve  him  a  prom-
inent share  iu  the  goveriunciit  The  trial  of  the
consul  Albiuns,  however,  brought  with  il  the  niiu
of  Boiithiim.  Albinns  was  acciiHt'd  of  niainlaining
a  Hticret  unilerstanding  with  tho  Byzautino  court,
and  Boethiiis  sluod  up  boldly  iu  hia  dufuuce,  de-
claring that  if  Alhiuiis  wan  guilty,  so  was  bo,  and
tho  whulu  .Scnalu  with  him.  Thirs  involved  in
(he  same  charge,  he  woii  scutunoed  to  death  hy
the  cowardly  assouLbly  whose  cause  he  hail  repre-
sented, lie  vras  thrown  into  prison  at  Pavio,  and
execntinl  in  the  yearSSS.  While  iu  prisou  he  wrote
bis  fitmoiiK  work,  He  Ctmsolatione  I'bilonopiiae,
ill  five  books,  a  splendid  t«slimony  tu  his  noble
mind  and  to  liis  scholarly  attainments.  The  etUtio
priucriiK  wiis  i>iibtislie4l  at  Nuremberg  iu  1473  by
A.  Cobnrg4)r.  An  Anglo-Saxon  version  mado  by
.\lfrod  the  Great  exit«tii,  uf  uhich  an  edition  by
Fox  appeared  in  London  in  lUtM.  A  good  edition
of  the  Latin  text  is  that  of  I'eiper  (Leipzig,
187  U

Bexitles  writing  the  treatise  De  ConnotaUoHv,
Boetbins  also  tniushded  many  works  on  philoso-
phy, rhetoric,  and  inatbematics  fi-om  the  Gi-eek,


BOGUD


iu


BOKA  CADCCA


mtMt  ofwliich  are  exUiit.  His  tnnixIntionB  from
ArJKlotlft  i;riivo  liiin  niiicti  iiiflii«iicti  in  the  develctp-
meiit  oI'dcholaHtkrisiii ;  and  liui  tiiatitiikia  of  f^fomo-
try,  nritliuietic,  ami  iiinsic  weru  luiti;  iihmI  in  ttiu
iiiediicv'ul  BclinnlFt,  He  woh  thu  liutt  Kj>iimii  writvr
of  uuy  iiott;  li>  sbun"  a  goud  kiiunludgti  of  Ibe
OvMk  laDgnnge  and  litvriktUTO.

Bogud, See  HoccHUS.

Bolae  (xXoiof).  A  collar  of  wnnd  r>r  iron  jiiit  cd
tbe  necks  of  slaves  nr  cntiiiiiaU  an  a  {iiiiMHbiui'Ut,
Bev  tlu)  pitii  ill  Plant.  Capt.  iv.  3, 109.

Boll  Oii«  of  the  iiioHb  powerful  of  tbe  K«Uiu
people,  auld  to  buvo  dwelt  originally  in  Galli»
Traasalpliitt,  Vmt  in  wtiut  part  of  Ihe  country  is
nncortniti.  At  an  i-arly  time  tli^y  niiKrnte^t  in
two  great  «wftnn«,  one  of  wliich  umiufiL  the  Alps
aiid  settled  in  the  country  between  the  Po  and
Ihe  Apounluus;  the  otiier  crosM'd  the  Hblne  aud
settled  in  Ilio  p:irt  of  (Jerroony  called  lUiiberoum
(Bohmeii,  l(<ih('iiiia)  aftrr  (hem,  and  between  the
Danube  and  Ibe  Tyrol,  The  Boii  in  Italy  long  car-
rie*l  on  a  fienie  jttriij'gld  with  tin-  Bonian»,  but  they
were  at  IftiiKtIi  siilHlned  by  tlw  consul  P.  Scipio
ill  B.C.  1!)1,  )ind  snlMii<<|iiciit1y  inucjrporated  in  the
liroviitco  of  Onlli:t  CiMiilpimt.  Tbe  Boii  in  Ger-
many iniiuTaiiied  tlit;ir  |H)vver  lougin-,  hut  were  nt
length  sillnllied  by  tho  Marcoiaaiiui,  uud  expelled  ,
from  the  country.

Bola.  Bolae,  or  Volae.  An  ancient  toirn  of
the  Aeqiii,  belonging  to  the  Latin  I-^Migue.

Bolb£  iBuX^r;). A  lake  iti  Mncedoniu,  enip(.}iu)r

itself  by  a  hhort  rivor  into  the  Stryiiioiiio  Gulf,
iifar  BniiiiiitcuB  aud  Anion.

Bolbitine  (lioA^.r.Vfj).  Now  Roaetta;  a  city  of
tiower  Egy[>t,  near  tbu  month  of  »  branch  of  tbe
Nile  (the  wcHternmost  but  one),  which  wiuj  cnlletl
the  IJolbitiiM)  luoutb  {rit  KoXffinpov  arofta^

Bolater. .Si-  Cuuita ;  Fclvini's.

Bombycltnum  tfniin  ftufiftv^.  "a  *.ilk-wonn  ").
Oui!  of  tho  naua-M  itpplied  to  uilk,  for  whieL  sue
Skiuclm.

Bombyliiu  i^fi^vXins).  A  <Tnnkiug*  vomcI
with  a  very  iiorruw  uiaiitb,  whenc«  it  in  called
tTv<rroftos  or  oTtvoirTOfior.  The  uunie  l«  anppoMd
to  Imve  been  formed  in  iuiltatiou  of  the  noise
which  water  or  any  liquid  utakcd  in  piMwiug
tbroufrh ii  iinrrnw  opening.

Bombyx  {^ofijiv^). Tho  silk-worui. See  Seri-

Bomllcar.  A  Nnmidion, deep  in  tho  lonfldcnce
of  lugnrtbn.  When  lugai thu  uas  ut  Rouio,  in  n.c.
lOlt,  B«iniilcar  etfi-cted  f<ir  him  tho  attMuwiuation
of  MiWHivft.  In  n.c.  107,  be  plotted  agaiuat  lu-
gurtba. See  InorirriiA.

Bomoolkes  i^wftovUTft).  Aaiong  the  rigoroun
eierci»(.!»  to  which  the  Spartan  youths  were  sub-
yxU>d  waa  a  ncourging  before  the  altar  of  Ar-
Mjiuis  Ortbiu  or  Ortbosia.  II«  who  lieUl  out
longest  under  tbo  itcourglDg  waa  styli^^l  Bomo-
nikoii  — u  great  honour.  See  Plutarch,  ImsI.  Lac,
■^I'J,  32.

Bomofl  (^eofiot). An  altar. See  Asa.

Bona.  In  koinun  law,  the  word  bomt  is  (Ii
tM>iuotiine«)  ascd  to  t-xproHH  the  whole  of  a  iuan'»
propiTty  ;  ami  in  tin*  \tliraA*;H  hrni'Trumempt to,  cts-
aio,  potacMto,  the  word  fx/na  has  tbia  meaning.  It
uxpn'MKMt  all  that  conceniH  a  niau'tt  pniprirtary
position,  wbotber  aa  owner,  pOMsoBMir.  creditor,  or


j  debtor. ThuR  tbe  word  bona  is  simply  tlie  pro[
I  erty  sm  an  objecl ;  it  doen  not  exprea^t  tbe  natiiH
of  tbe  relation  betweeu  it  and  the  pentou  who  baii
the  owiiersbip  or  enjoyment  of  it.  |

i'i)  In  ftomo  plftco8  tho  word  ho$iij  ia  UHcd  to  sigi
nify  a  man's  aftNelo,  i.  o.  hiA  pro)>erly  after  tbe  del
dutilion  of  that  which  ho  owes.  It  Ls  iiIko  used  fiM
separate  imrtious  of  a  man'a  property.  ,

Tbe  legiil  expre«Hion  m  fjoni$,n»  opposed  tod^i
minium  or  Qniritary  ownenhip,  meaiis  tbat  propi
erty  is  held  iindi^r  a  praetorian  or  fMintt^ble,  ati^
notntider  u  civil  or  legal,  title.  Tbe  di»tinclioo  hi
explninc4l  in  tbo  fnllowing  paMage  of  Oaitis  (11
40):  "AnMuig  forrigucn*  iperrffrim)  there  is  onlj
one  kind  of  uwiierabip  {<lt/fniniuui),  tto  ihaX  a  mat
is  either  the  ownor  of  a  Ibing  or  be  is  not.  An^
this  was  formerly  tbe  case  among  the  Kouian  |>ea»
pie ;  for  a  mau  wja  either  owner  er  iure  Quirittu/i^
or  not  owner  ot  all.  But  afterwards  tbe  owue»
ship  was  divided,  so  that  now  one  man  may  be  lh|
owner  of  a  tbiuj|{  according  to  strict  law  {domintit
fx  iure  QtiirUi'.im)t  nuil  at  the  same  time  auotbiri
may  bo  ealitlcd  to  the  benelicial  owuerabip  of  tl
{in  hmia  kah^rr'}.  For  innljinre,  if  I  do  not  ronvei
to  yon  a  rt*  m/inrf/'i,  either  by  the  foi-tn  of  fnawj
patitj  or  uf  in  iurr  cewio^  but  simply  tlelivvr  it  til
yoii,y(>ti  acquire  the  praetorian  title  to  tbit  tbin^
but  it  will  nunaitt  mine  er  iurf  t^uiritium,  tin  j
{Ktsseasion  gives  yon  a  civil  title  by  uhncapti»ii
For  -when  the  iisucaptiun  is  utteo  cttmplnte,  fru^
that  time  it  begins  to  be  yours  abhulutely  i  phr%
iiire);  that  is,  it  Is  youn*  both  in  boniM  and  il'i]
yoiini  tv.  iure  Quirifivm,  jiiHt  as  if  it  hnd  b«3>^
maucipated  to  you,  or  tnuisferrcNl  to  yoa  by  in  i

Mttttf."

Qairitnry  owuenbip  originally  and  properly  oi
uitii'd  lb»t  ownership  of  a  thing  «*hich  van  rtcti^
nized  by  the  law ;  it  did  not  express  a  compound
but  a  siinpUi  nutiuu,  which  was  that  of  al>aolD  4
owuership.  lint  when  it,  na»  once  establitlife^
that  one  man  might  have  Ihe  (jniritary  owueniJu  H
aud  another  tbe  sole  right  In  the  eiijoymi>ut  of  tn
aanie  tiling,  the  complete  notion  of  Quiritary  otrflri
ership  became  a  notion  componnded  of  the  ^tri^
legal  not  ion  of  owuership  and  tbat  of  tbe  right  V^j
enjoy,  as  united  in  tbe  sitiue  person.  Ami  us  i
man  might  have  both  tbe  Quiritarj-  owueishipti:^
tbe  right  to  the  enjoyment  of  a  thing,  so  one  luiglBl
have  the  Quiritary  owiHjrship  only,  and  anotltMij
might  liavi)  tbe  enjoyment  of  it  only.  This  ban
owiienthip  wan  smnetimes  expreiwed  by  thf  san^
terms  (<M-  ivre  (^uirittUM)  as  tbat  ownertthip  whic^
was  complete,  but  aomelimes  it  wns  appropriate  ^
csUmI  nvdum  iu»  Quiritiutit  (Oaina,  tti.  100).  It^
historical  origin  of  this  double  owuenthip  is
known. See  DoMiNicM ;  IvB;  Manciph'M.

Bona  Cad&ca.  Caducum  ^from  aido)  sigulf^
"tbat  which  falls,"  mid  in  it«  general  legal  mljj^
might  be  anything  without  an  owner,  itrwhat
person  eutitlwl  to  neglectexl  t<i  tjike  (Cic.  lit  Or.
31 ;  PhiL  x.  5) ;  but  the  ntriet  legal  aenae  of  ea-
aim  and  bono  taducti  is  that  stated  by  in|»  3
(  Frit^n,  tit.  xvii.  d€  eaducU),  wbiub  is  as  ^
low.i :

If  a  thing  is  left  by  will  to  a  person,  so  tba*
iiiigbt  lake  it  by  the  tug  ciptis.  but  from  Bomo  emtM
dtit^  not  takr  it,  that  thing  is  called  cad»enm*t^
if  it  bad  fAlloii  from  hitii ;  for  instance,  if  a  l^ar/
was  left  to  au  unmarried  person,  or  a  LutinUM  /u*
niatiun.  and  the  unmarriod  person  did  not  nilMn
a  hundred  days  obey  the  law  (i.  e.  by  inarryi


.3


bOXA  DEA


SIS


fiONOKU3( EMITIO


I


»


or  if  within  lh«  saitit*  tini*  tlir  LittinifinViti  nut  ob-
tiiiu  ibu  iu«  Quiritium,  ur  if  a  ArreM  er  purtv  or  a
legatMi died  or  bcraiuu a  perryrinuM befora  tbo

«'pe»iiig  of  tbe  will,  the  thin^  triu  eadueum.

Caducum.  ur  lBp«e  of  n  UuviKO,  itiijilit^H  tliat  a

valid  devise  baa  beeu  mmtia,  wbtcli  ibu  dnvisev  in

ntiahlc  or  anwilliDg  to  lake.

C>tflun/m  fiirtbtT  iiiipliea  that  tho  will  of  nliicb

<lii:  lapiKtl  devise  is  a  jiart  hiui  cutitL'  iuU>  operstion.

Strictly  nt>v»kin)£,  a  deviao  wbicb  fnilnl  iu  rite  t«»-

-tAtorV  lifelinie  wa«  not  nuiunim  ;  it  wan,  liowever,

tieatiHl  liho  n  en/ittrum,  and  (m>  itaitl  to  be  in  eau$a

<->irfurt  (OW.  vi-.M.a),

Eitli«r  a  Hbare  of  ati  tnlieritancp  or  n  particular

i^foium  rntgiiL  bvc-uinp  raiiueiirn. Tbe  law  nllndod

'C^io  till-'  pHMui^*  of  I71]iiun  citfd  almvo  in  tho  Lex
X»lia  et  i'Apin  Fup|inua.  Thin  law,  which  wwi
puwd  iu  the  tiintt  of  Aiiguvtnii  (a.[>.  9),  hnd  th<!
iloiiblfl  object  of  onponragiiif;  DiiuriagPH  and  rn-
ricliing  the  treasury —  /iwvrriMm  (Tac.  Ann.  iii.
^) — and  contaiued  n-ith  refer^iiue  to  themt  two
olijentd  a  g;rpnt  UDiuher  of  pntvittioiKi.  Miirlial
(t.  75)  alludes  to  a  person  who  marrii->d  iu  order
toeompl;  with  the  law.  For  the  dos  caduca,  see
Dds.

Booa  Dea  ("TIio  good  gmltless")- An  Itnlinii

deity,  llllppc^t*<^d  to  pn-slde  over  the  earth  and  all

the  Mnwiij^u  which  Kpring  from  it. She  waa  also

ptttron  (^cidilcKN  of  chuttity  and  friiitfulnewt  iti

iMi. Tbo  iKiiiieit  Faunii,  Muia,  and  Opn  were

_  ually  no  nioix'thnn  varying  uppullaii«)iL8  given

^y  tlie  priesiA  to  the  Bona  l><<a. She  in  reprcHunted

In  Works  of  art  with  a  seeptre  in  her  left  haiul,  »

'^^ath  of  vine  leaves  ou  her  head,  ond  a  Jar  of

""iu©  at  her  side. Near  her  image  wa^  a  conse-

crated  aeriwnt :  indeed,  u  iiiiinher  of  lanii)  rterpeiits

**"««  kept  in  ber  totopte,  whiub  was  iiliuated  in

■iCoiiie  on  the  shipc  of  tb«  Arentine. All  kindH  of

'*«aling  plants  were  prewrved  in  ber  nanctuiiry.

^he waa  n^ardetl  iu Rnuie  lu  au  aiiHtere  virgin

'K"«l«1«aB,  whose  tomple  men  were  forbid dwii  t«ont<T.

"hft  belonged,  aeeonlitigly,  to  the  cin-le  of  deitieH

f»o  were  wonship[M'd  by  tbe  Ventjil  Vii-ginH. The

"nifcrinry  uf  the  fonudution  of  her  temple  wjia

'^lU  mi  thn  l«t  of  May,  wbcu  prnyera  were  o(Ii*rrd

to  bur  for  the  averting  of  eartliqnakeH. Be*

J>  this,  a  secret festival waa  hold  to her  on

^uair  of  the  pnbtio  welfare,  iu  the  botiKC  of  the

•^Wiciatlng  consul  nr  praetor  of  the  city,  by  uiatroiiB

*"il  the  VeatJil  VirgiUB,  on  tbo  night  of  May  'i-\.

*^*>  inislroas  of  the  bonne  presided. No  man  waa

^kiwed  to  be  proseut  at  thin  celebration,  i^r  even

^  hear  tbe  uanie  of  the  gnddetui. After  oflVriug  a

'**eriflce  of  incking  pigt«,  the  wimn-n  pprfunmMl  a

•wicf,  accompanied  by  Mtringfd  and  wind  i»Htni-

uieuiH. Under  tbe  Euijiire  th«>  fi'Hiiva)  di<geiiRr-

^te«l  into  n  myMttc [R'rfornianea  of  uxtnivagaut

»'»<\  tiiilwcut  character  (Juv.  vi,  WVi).

Boua  Fides.  A  t«nn  frequently  nned  by  R»-
•n^o  nriuirfl,  especially  by  the  jnmta,  and  i«  op-
N*h1  Id  meaning  to  mnla  Jidfn  and  itohu  mnlvt.
ttimptiet  ibe  abkvnee  of  all  A'and,  inftincerity,  un-
Wt  deaUng,  aud  bad  faith,  aUii  ia  hence  a  necs-
"T  bpcdient  in  all  binding  contraeta.  liona
M*fmidert  Is  aaid  of  bini  who  ha4  arqninrd  tbe
N^Uiioii  of  a  cbiog  under  what  he  believra  to  br

.  ^tBriou«  artinns  arining  ont  of  inntnni  dt-al-
!''i^inch  aa  buying  and  Milling,  lending  anil  bir-
'"Ci^rliMrahip,  and  otben,&ona^<^^j  is  equivalent


to  ne^unm  and  ittttum;  and  such  actions  were
sometimei*  called  bona*  Jihi  itetionr*.  Tbe  for-
mnla  of  the  praetor,  wbi<-b  wa^  (be  authority  of
(he  index,  empowered  him  iu  such  ciwea  to  ioqnire
and  determine  at  lona  jld^^  that  is,  aoGordiog  to
the  real  uieritd  of  tho  caitc.

Bonam  Copiam  lurare.  A  phrase  expressive
of  the  act  td'  taking  »u  outh  to  one's  solveocy
(Varro,  Z.  L.  vii.  105).  The  expreiMsion  used  by
Cicero  {Ad  Ptim,  ix.  IG),  hcmim  wpiitm  ciurare,  is
usually  interpreted  to  oieao  the  laking  of  an  ontb
by  a  debtor  to  tbe  fact  of  hia  Inaolveucy.  See
Bosonn^  VKmio.

Bona  Vacantia.  The  proi>erty  left  by  n  person
at  death  not  disposed  nf  by  will,  and  when  thero
is  no  legal  heir. 8ee  IlEKBa.

Bonna.  Tho  modern  Bono.  A  town  on  the  left
bank  uf  tbe  Rhine,  in  Lower  Germany,  and  in  the
territory  of  th«  ITbii  ;  a  ntroiig  ftirtrv**  of  the  Itti-
mauSf  aud  tho  regular  qnailcnt  of  a  Rnnnin  le>
giou. See  Gkumama.

BoDonla.  (l)^'^' FR'-'tiNA. iSi  84^1  (iRitiiitiAcru.

Bouonun  Ceaaio.  As  will  be  seen  by  reference
to  thu  artinle  Bonam  CoPtAM  Ihraiir,  the  |iriucipt«
of  relii^ving  iuMdvunt  duhlont,  wbu  fnllilleil  vei'-
lain  coudilions,  from  Hjibilily  to  imprisonmvut  waa
reeoguiied  to  some  oxteiit  nudur  tbo  Republic.
luliuK  Cue*ar,  when  eouwnl,  B.C.  4rt^  a*  a  tomjiuraiy
mcntotre  of  relief  in  t.iiuu  of  distrtMs,  owing  to
tho  Civil  War,  <l)«rhiirgcil  dcblHird  who  niado  ovttr
their  proporlv  to  ihr-ir  crvditors  from  (In-ir  ilobtH
(Ch.-*.  I)e  Bell.  Cie.  iii.  I ;  cf.  Poste's  Oaiu*,  p.  347,
2i\  ed.).

Cautio  UntoTttm  waa  iutrtHluoetl  by  a  Lex  lutia.
This  law  allowed  nu  inwdvent  debtor  to  nniko  a
voluntary  assignment  of  his  property  ut  bus  cred-
itors. By  making  wicL  awiignment,  tbe  debtor
obtained  thrive  advantages:  (I)  IIo  vKeattctI  im-
prisonment, (3)  lie  did  not  breonie  iiifami4.  <3]
Iu  respect  to  property  acquired  snhseqiieutly  to
the  assignment,  he  had  tb<'  f>enejifix>m  eumpetaitrnf
when  siiwl  by  lii«  old  creditors — i.e.  li«  cm»uIiI  iv-
tain  HiifHeii'iil  for  his  bare  niaiDtiMmiicu.  Hi-  had
not  Ihid  right  against  crediltira  who  hiul  bfi:oiiii)
so  Hiihi^tinuut  to  the  act  of  aAsignmont.  Tbo
propt<rty  :ifiHigiiL><l  by  the  debtor  was  sold  by  tbo
proetwut  of  ht'norum  emptio  (q.  v.),  the  proceeds  be-
ing distributed  among  tbo  eredilort*.  It  it)  to  bo
noticed  that  the  usslgument  did  not  operat-e  afl  ib
discharge,  after-acquired  property  being  liable,
Hubject.  t<i  the  limilatiun  explained  a)>ove.

Bonorum  CO'Uaiio.  By  the  rules  of  the  civil
law.emantipalod  L-hildreii  had  no  rights  to  the  in-
lieritanco  of  thvir  father,  siucc  they  had  become
strangers  to  his  family.  (See  Hmancipatiu.)  Bnt
in  ctnirse  of  time  the  praetor  gnmted  to  emauoi-
pate<l  children  the  privilege  of  equal  snecoKHiou
with  tboMo  who  remained  in  the  power  of  tba
father  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Tbirt  fav<uir  waa
granted  to  emaiici[>.tted  ebihireu  only  on  condi-
tion that  tbt'y  should  bring  into  one  t'omuiou
stock,  to  bo  distributed  with  their  fallier'<4  e.Htnte,
whatever  pn>perty  they  luul  at  tliv  tiino  of  tbe
faihur's  death,  and  which  would  have  l>enn  ao-
qinrud  for  tbe  father  iu  case  thoy  hud  5till.|e-
uiained  in  bia  power.  This  waa  called  co^Rm
hottf/rum.  ^

Bondram  Bmptio.  The  tetdniical  tenn  in  Ro-
man juridprudence  for  the  aeiznre  uf  goi>da.  '  ^a


BONORUM P0SSE8SI0


216


BOPP


mau  seuteDced  to  pay  a  certain  sum  did  uot  per-
form bis  obligatiou  wiibiii  thirty  days,  the  credi-
tor obtained  permission  from  tbe  praetor  to  attach
hia  goods.  After  a  reuewed  respite  of  thirty  daya
the  sale  followed  by  auction  to  the  highest  bidder,
the  inteudinj^  purchaser  bidding  for  the  whole
property,  with  its  assets  and  liabilities.  The  for-
mer proprietor  might  intervene  aud  promise  pay-
ment at  any  time  before  the  fall  of  the  hammer.
The  property  once  knocked  down  to  him,  the
buyer  became  the  absolute  owner.  A  person
against  whom  these  proceedings  were  taken  in-
curred iri/amia. See  Manus  Iniectio.

Bononun  PossesBlo.  Tbe  technical  term  in
Bomau  law  for  the  succession  which  the  praetor
gave  to  the  inheritance  of  a  deceased  person.  See
Herbs.

Bonus  Ihrenttifl.  A  Roman  deity  first  wor-
shipped by  tbe  rustics,  aud  represented  as  hold-
ing iu  one  hand  a  cup  aud  in  the  other  a  spray


Bonos  Ereotaa. (British  Hagenm.)

of  wheat  or  other  grain  (Varro,  R.  Jt.  i.). He  per-
sonified the  favourable  issue  of  events.

Books  and  tlie  Book  Trade.  See  BiBUO-
tjieca;  Liber.

Boonae  ^o&vai).  Persons'  iu  Athens  who  par-
chased  oxen  for  the  public  sacrifices  and  feasts.
They  are  spoken  of  by  Demosthenes  iu  coujunc-
tion  with  the  wporrotoi  and  those  who  presided
over  the  mysteries,  aud  are  ranked  by  Libauius
{Dedam.  S)  with  the  o-irwyat,  generals,  and  ambas-
sadors. They  were  elected  by  the  Ecclesia.  There
is  often  found  ineutiuu  of  them  on  inscriptions  as
paying  into  the  treasury  the  money  received  for
the  hides  of  sacrificed  animals  (df^/iartxdi').

Bootes. See  Arctos.

Bopp,  Franz.  The  founder  of  the  science  of
comparative  philology,  and  one  of  the  pioneers
of  Sanskrit  studies  iu  Germany,  born  at  Mayence,
September  14th,  1791.  His  parents  having  re-
moved to  Aschaffenhurg,  tbe  young  Bopp  there
attended  the  gymnasium,  and  afterwards  enjoyed
the  instruction  of  Windischmann.  At  the  sugges-
tion of  Windischmann,  he  weut  to  Paris  in  IttlS
to  continue  bis  studies  iu  Oriental  languages,  es-
pecially iu  Sanskrit,  aud  after  five  years  in  Paris
to  Loudon,  where  be  remained  until  l&iO.  Dur-
ing his  sojourn  in  Paris  and  London  he  received
from  tbe  Bavarian  Academy  of  Sciences  an  annual
stipend  of  1000  florius.  In  1820  he  was  anxious  to
l>e  made  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  WUrzbnrg,  but
the  authorities  considered  it  entirely  unnecessary
to  create  a  chair  for  that  language. Iu  the  follow-


ing year,  however,  the  brothers  Von  Humboldt,  uf-
ter  great  exertions  iu  his  behalf,  bad  him  appoiut-
ed  professor  extraordinariu*  for  Oriental  languagM
aud  the  science  of  language  at  Berlin,  where  be
was  made  a  member  of  the  Academy  in  1822,  and
professor  ordinarius  in  1825— a  {HWitiou  in  which  he
was  active  until  stricken  with  apoplexy  iu  li^.
He  died  October  23d,  1867.

His  principal  works  iu  the  field  of  comparative
philology  are  :  Utber  das  Conjugatioiutt/slem  der  Soh-
alcr'U  -  Sprache  in  VeigUicfmng  mit  j'enem  der  yritchi-
vcAen,  lateinischen,  persUchen  and  gerwanitdten  Sprnrht
(Frankfort-on-the-Maiu,  1816),  published  iu  an  En;:-
lish  translation  in  1819 ;  VergUichendt  Orammatik  Jet
Sfinskrit,  Sendi  ArmenUcAen,  Griechischen,  Lateinische*,
Litauischen,  Altslawischen,  Gotisckenund Deitschn{htfr-
lin,  1833-52;  second  edition  ie5&-€l,  third  edition,
posthumously,  1868-71) ;  Die  keitischen  Spracha  i»
ihrem  Verhdltnisse  turn  Sxtnskrit  «.  s.  w.  (Berlin,  1^39);
Uaber  das  Atbanesische  in  seiaen  oerwmdtschq/iHcJun
Bexiehungen  (Berlin,  18^);  Vergletckendes  Aceentua-
tiotmystem  (Berlin,  1854).  His  Sanskrit  publi-
cations include  considerable  extracts  from  the
Mahahhdrata,  very  valuable  works  on  Sanskrit
grammar,  and  the  Gloisarium  Sanscritum.

Bopp  was  not,  it  is  true,  the  first  to  remark  upon
the  striking  resemblance  of  Sanskrit  to  the  olaKji-
cal  aud  other  European  languages.  That  resem-
blunce  bad  been  observed  before  1568  by  Filippo
Sassetti,  and  subsequently  by  many  others,  uolicB-
ably  by  P6re  Cceurdoni  in  1767,  aud  by  Sir  Will-
iam Jones  in  1766;  Jones  claimed  a  commou  ori-
gin for  Sanskrit,  Persian,  Greek,  Latin,  Gothic,  aud
Keltic — an  idea  carried  out  in  much  greater  detail
by  Friedricb  von  Schlegel  (q.  v.)  in  1808.  It  was,
however,  reserved  for  Bopp  to  put  this  startliug  doc-
trine (for  such,  and  eveu  preposterous,  it  seemed  to
most  classical  scholars  of  that  day)  upon  a  scien-
tific basis;  aud  this  he  did,  at  the  early  age  of
twenty-five.  His  predecessors  had  noted  cliiefiy
tho  resemblances  between  individual  words  of  Sau-
okrit  and  those  other  languages;  Bopp  turned  bis
gaze  upon  the  grammatical  structure  of  all  these
tongues,  and  was  convinced  of  its  substantial  iden-
tity iu  them  all.  Tbe  i-esults  of  his  iuvesligalioDB
are  embodied  iu  the  Conjvgationssystem.  Tbe  saiae
method  was  thereafter  applied  successfully  to  the
investigation  of  other  families  of  speech.  Bopp's
object  was,  however,  uot  merely  the  comi>arisun
of  languages— this  was  with  bim  only  the  meaus
to  an  end — ho  sought  to  explain  by  this  method
tbe  genesis  of  inflectional  forms.  Bis  views  oa
this  point  seem  to  have  passed  through  three
stages  of  developmeut.  (1)  The  first  stage  is  rep-
resented by  the  Conjugationsst/stem  of  1616.  Frie^.
von  Schlegel  (Sprache  und  IVeisheit  der  Indier,  IflOW)
bad  divided  all  languages  into  two  grou|>s,  the  m-
Jtectional  and  the  agglutinative ;  iuflectiou  be  called
exclusively  an  inner  change  of  the  wonl,  and  denied
to  "suffixes"  a  derivation  from  originally  inde-
pendent words.  Bopp  adopted  Schlegel's  theory,
but  expanded  it  thns:  a  word  may  uot  only  modi-
fy itself  internally,  but  may  absorb  the  "verbum
substantivum,"  ease.

Bopp  was  clearly  still  under  the  influence  of  a
doctrine  commoiily  held  at  that  time,  that  fver>'
sentence  is  necessarily  a  reflection  of  a  logical
judgment;  as  tbe  result  of  this  doctrine  be  de-
clares that  in  strictness  there  can  exist  but  one
real  verb,  the  verb  to  be.  (2)  Three  years  later,  iu
tbe  English  edition  of  the  Ctoiy'iiyotiBinfyrtwi,  Bupp


BOOTS  AND  SHOES


S17


l«.iSrOKl'3


^


^


0ilO|*tf>ft  ibr  principle  af  rumpogitioti  tn  acToiiiir  for

iullrtitioiuil  ruiinic. Tliu  dm-trini;  nfrunt^  Utu\  Wen

jitUaiKfil  iu  Eiiri)|Ht  Mtuir  fiirty  ii'i-nrn  iM'Ttirr,  arifl

Jkipp,  l)iitliii}{ it not unly  tulMtAuliatf*! by tlir

eitiupture  of  Sautikrit,  but  iilso  rx[»pHHi*tl  itt  ilrtiiil

liyi)iMinci4''nt  Hni(ingriimniarinhs,initili-  ii  liiHowii

f  jutk  fat  ai'.ri^iiint  for  the  cxiitiii))^  jbriiiri  of  lAiigiiiii^c.

^  niute  iui|witniit  devirtlion  from  Scbl<'gi*r»  vifws

10  Uci|ip'A  (U'liviillon  of  tlie  porKoiial  ciidiugs  of  tlic

v«rli  fit>m  tlu?  ^MTKonal  pmuninm— an  iilen  prnhii-

X*^J  alitainod intlii'octly  front  oliMrvntiou of  tlie

Scmitif  iBii^'iiugcfl. -Of  rrnl  inflet-tions  (in  tlie

Sclilei;elian  senile)  Rnpp  now  re^oj^nizee  mily  cev-

t-min  rowel -cbanf^eH  anil  the  reiluplicHtinn." CI)  In

hi.1  OMM/NirdttW finiHtutitr  (  IKtll  I,  Bnpp,  breitUing

octmplt^K'ly  ivUh  84!hli'^i>l,  rnniniils  liiuii^eir  to  the

"  *jUli>t)»Ative"  tIi»ory,  iicronliiift to wliicb all

^woiUh  <if  liiilo-Kuropt'ou lan^iiafifH itre tlenviMl

/rotn  inottttiiylljibic  rooti*.  wbicli  aru  nitbei-  rtrbu/or

pMwvKomuMl;  tbe  fnnna  of  iullrctiun  ariM-  entirely

f'rnm  tlie  contbinjitioli  of  clifl'urcut  roottt.  of  wbicb.

an  each  coniMnation,  all  but  unu  bnvo  a»NUoic(l  a

|>itrvty  !iabonliiiut«  utiti  tnodifyiujf  obnnictvr. A

criirioil!!  tymlxJic  prilioiplis  in  n1»r>  ililviiltrtHi  by  bim

<«■.  %.  the  feniiuint^  forttiH  arc  "fuller  oud  roiiud*

'vr^},  wxl  n  mtrhiinkat  principle  uf  bnliitioet  n^u-

l«tilig  tlw*  "weij-lit'^  of  nytlnblc*. fiupp  ftpeakfi

•>neii of  "pbysiriil Iaw»"  (wliirh rin.' ninviidays

<'*»il«l  "pboiietic  luwii"|,  an'I  «triiwH  frcinK^iil.  nift-

aitliirn  fniin  tbe  uattinil  twrirncti*. Of  yival.  Mijitiiri-

«^Kiic«  for  hU  lniiL[iiii«tic  vieWH  are  ulno  IiLh  froi|nrtil

V^'nuinifltiitioii uf  language,  aiiil tbu prntiHtenre

wiLli  whicb  he  8]^ak8  only  of  its  *ieci>f,  of  deterio-

*vtif>ii  froul  nu  eiirlicr  ntnjfo  of  perfection,  aud  not

**r  it«  MiDuUatieoils  yrvrrtli

Bopp'a  dibcuveries  n-snlled  less  frota  any  fttrict-

ly  ScicDlitk  method  of  iuveetiKation  iuatittitt-)!  by

(■itu  than  friiai  his  rrnitukable  Keniui*.  and  it  cau

tWrrfonit  hardly  bo  said  that  \m  fouuded  ii  (wbiM^I,

^bou|Eh  hid  divcoveriea  net-ded  niurh  Huppli'menr-

*"g in  detail  (whinh  tbpy  rereived in  v«ry  gn-ut

u>*uunirB  tbron;;li  tbe  learning  itnd  fceniuituf  PotI  i ;

tlioiigh  hiK  inelnKimi  of  tliti  Muluy-Poiyiifnian  laii-

8na)jea  in  the  lndo-Kiirup<'un  ({roup  Iium  Imin  rii-

'ii*ly  rrjticleil by  later  wliularw;  luid  tbou^li  lii»

^mjMralii-*  Gr'tminar  baa  beeu  Mtprimrdrd  by  latci-

worka;  yet  tbo  futtiHlationit  of  coinjmralive  philol-

*>K7  are  still  In  tbe>  ninJn  as  ho  coiihtnicted  tbem;

Wid  tint  fur  biu  liD||;ni»t)c  «tndent«  inij^ht  still  Ite

^nihhiiit  upon  nand,  as  tbey  bnilt,  aud  could  not

h^t  build,  ertt  bij*  ilay.

The  lutwt  recent  and  extensive  work  concerniiid

J^V  i*  a.  L^fmann's Frtmi fft^p  : tttu  Ijrhi'n  and

*^t  Wuatiuehaft  (vi^\.  I.,  n«rltu,  IWH).  ronlaininy

tB  a  roliiniinoUA  apiwndis  Hopp's  i-orrr-nponilcuei:,

"e^w  Wftin* piibliKhtNl,  with  Windiwhnmnu,  De

^T.  iLiid  olli*r  rtobolars  of  nnto. Tlio  biiat  char-

*(^l«riuTiuu  of  Bopp'tt  Ncientitic  jMMition  itt,  liow-

•ver.Btdl  to  be  fuiiud  in  DflbHlekV  tntrixluctinH  to

*'  ^»ig  of  lAtftjHOffe  (English  translation  by  Miss

'  iiii^,  Leipzig,  1^84),  from  which  the  abovw

' '  II  !••  lurgtL'ly  tAken. >Se«  alsn  an  nrtlrto  1\v

•'^  Kulm  ill Cntrrt  Zfit,  \'*<S^\  and  oue  by  Rrng-

^'"1  iiirl  Streitberp,  forming  an Irilrmlnutiou  to

'^"'•'.(IKJt-lKj  of  their  new  perimlifjil, /siAw/rrwd-

^^fottriiwijrn. lite  fcame  volume  alho  r'ontatuH

•*•(*» of Lefniiiiinn  book.


I  Vangioiiea,  and  at  a  later  time  Worniatia  ;  a  towo
I  i>f  tbe  Vaiigionra  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rliinti  in
'  I'pprr  Cii'miany.

I Boreas (  Ik>ptur). In Greek tnythology,  th(«

I  \oiih  Wind,  son  »»f  Aslraenn  and  Eiw,  brother  of

i^i'phyrns,  Knrn^,  and  XotiiK. Hit*  home  wom  in  iho

'Thraciun  t*i»Iiity»Ie(win»t,  on  tli**  Blnrk  Si'a. 'vrhitber

^  he  carried  Oritliyia  frmn  tin*  gaiueit  on  tlit;  lliM(u«,

when  her  father,  Erechllimis,  king  of  AtheiiK  had

refused  her  to  hlni  in  mArria{j;e. Thrir  ebildre.D

wt_'re Calais and Zetes,  the  »>o-ealle<l Borotiile«,

(.'leopatra,  the  wife  of  Phiiivuft,  and  Chioud,  tho  he-

luvotl  of  Poseidon. (Sec  Eumolpus.) It  vaA  Ibis


BOFEA"?


J^OBU  and Slioea. See Calckl's  ; L'auga  ;
WKPiftx.  Souu;  StTOB.

"ttbttomilCTU. Tbe  modem  Worms,  al*>  called


Bor««a iRtftiff  ttnm  tb«  Tower  or  tli«  Winds  at  Albms  >

relntionAliip  which  w;m  nifernnl  to  in  the  orucln
^ivcii  tu  lliti  Alhciiianx,  when  tbt;  Ileet  of  Xurxea
waHupproachiujj;.  that  "they  Khoiild  call  upon  their
hruther-iu-lflw."  Uoreiui  answeretl  tbeir  |>raycr
and  *uentlue  by  debtmying  a  part  of  tlio  enemy's
flovt  on  ihc  prunionUn'y  of  iiicpias,  wben^ipon  they
built  liitii  an  ultitr  i>n  t)ii>  banks  of  tbe  IUsmus.

Boreaomi  ox  Boreaomua  ijiof)* air fiai  or  (Sopcncr-
fAos}.  A  feNtivul  celobrutud  by  the  Albrnians  in
honour  of  RuntaM,  uhieh,  aa  llerodttliiH  (vii.  1d!>)
wem^  to  think,  nait  inHtitut4Ml  during  the  Feniian
War,  when  the  AllieniAmi,  being  coumuimled  by  an
orafrle  to  invoke  their  yttfififHtt  iiiiKnvpnt,  prayed  t*r
Ihircait.  The  tit^-t  cif  Xerxes  was  wxtn  afterwards
almoi^t  entirely  deittroyed  by  n  north  wind,  near
<.':ipL>  ScpiaH,  an<l  the  grnlet'nl  Athenians  erected
to  liiH  honour  a  t«uiple  on  the  baiikn  of  tln^  Iliiwus.
Pt)wiibly,  however,  this  merely  revived  an  earlier
culubraiioit.  A  f>iinilar  foxtivnl  of  Boreas  wait  cel-
ebrated annually  at  Mi-calopoHit,  ami  by  tlio  Thu-
rians. 8ce  Aelian,  V.  H.  xii.  til.

Borolppa  (tu  Do^jcwnra).  A  suburb  of  Babylon,
about  vi;;!it  uiiIo4  dirttnut  from  Miat  city,  and  con-
t-uiiiitig  Ihe  pile  Birs  Njmroud,  Kpucriilly  n-gonled
iiH  tb»  retniuns  of  the  Tuwer  of  Babel.  Atx  JUoSLf
TtiWER  f)F.

Boryathfines  (  hopvaOiyiis ).  nflerwnnls  Dana-
PRis.  Tbi-  modern  Dnieper,  n  river  of  Knrnpean
Harnmlia,llowinf{  intothe  Hnxine.  Neiirit'ttmoiitli,
atid  at  itrt  junction  with  the  Hypanis,  lay  the  town
of  Uory»tbcneH  or  IbiriHtheniH  (Kndak),  almi  railed
Olblfl,  OlbinpoliM,  and  Miletiipoliit,  a  nidtuiy  of  Mile-
tDH,  and  tbe  most  important  Greek  oily  un  ttie
•lorth  of  the  Kuxint>. Seu  Oluiu1>uU8.

Booius. Sec  Dt'BOIS,  fllM^N.

BospfiruB  (liatnrapoi).  A  name  applied  tw  a
atroit  of  the  sea.  Thi're  were  two  straits  known
In  antiquity  by  lliin  appellation,  imniety,  tbe  Thra-
eion  and  tbp  Cimmerinu  Bosporus ;  the  fomrer  now
known  liy  the  name  of  tbe  tittraits  or  Channel  of
Constantinople,  tbe  Intlvr  the  tjtratt4  of  Oaffa  or


BOSTRA


218


BOUL^


Tlieodosia,  or,  according  to  a  later  denomiDation,
tbe  Straits  of  Yenikal^.  It  coiiuects  the  Palus  Mae-
utis  (Sea  of  Azov)  witb  the  Eaxine.  Various  rea-
sons bavo  been  assigned  for  tbe  name.  Tbe  best
is  that  which  makes  the  appwUatiou  refer  to  tbe
early  passage  of  agricultural  knowle<lge  from  Kast
to  West  (ffavs,  au  ox,  and  «6pos,  a  passage).  Nym-
pbins  tells  ns,  ou  tbe  authority  of  Accariou,  that
the  PbrygiaUH,  desiriug  to  pass  tbe  Thracian  strait,
built  a  vessel,  on  whose  jirow  was  the  figure  of  an
ox,  calling  tbe  strait  over  which  it  carried  them
fiois  itopos,  Bosporus,  or  tbe  ox'a  passage  (cf.  Ox-
ford in  EngliHh).  Dionysiua  of  Halicarnassus,  Va-
lerius FIoccus  and  others  of  tbe  ancient  writers


Map  of  the  PropoDtiB  aad  the  Thracian  Boeponu.

refer  the  name  to  tbe  history  of  lo,  who,  when
traDsformed  into  a  cow  (^£e)  by  Her6,  swam  across
this  strait  to  avoid  her  tormentor.  Arriau  says
that  the  Phrygians  were  directed  by  an  oracle  to
follow  the  route  which  an  ox  wonld  point  out
to  them,  and  that  on  one  being  roused  by  them
fur  this  purpose,  it  swam  across  the  strait.  (See
Aesch.  Prom.  Vine,  732 ;  Long.  i.  30.)  The  strait  of
tbe  Thracian  Bosponu  properly  extended  from  the
Cyaneau  Bocks  to  tbe  harbour  of  Byzautinni  or
Constantinople.  It  is  said  to  be  sixteen  m^es  in
length,  including  the  windings  of  its  course,  and
its  ordinary  breadth  about  one  and  a  half  miles.
In  several  places,  however,  it  is  very  narrow ;  aud
tbe  ancients  relate  that  a  person  might  bear  birds
sing  ou  the  opposite  side,  and  that  two  persons
might  converse  across  it.  Here  Darius  (q.  v.)  is
said  to  have  crossed  ou  his  exi>ediLion  against  the
Scythians.

BoBtra  (tu  BooTpa;  O.  T.  Bozrab;  Bnsrab).  A
city  of  Arabia,  in  an  oasis  of  tbe  Syrian  Desert,
south  of  Damascus.

Bottia  (BoTTt'a)  or  Bottiaea  (Borrtaia).  A  dis-
trict in  Macedonia,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river
Axius,  extending  in  tbe  titue  of  Tbncydides  to  Pie-
ria  ou  tbe  west.  Tbe  Bottiaei  wore  a  Thracian
tteoplo,  who,  being  driven  ont  of  tbe  country  by
the  Macedonians,  settled  in  that  part  of  the  Mace-
donian Chalcidic^  north  of  Olynthus  which  was
called  Bottic6.

BotUns  (oAXar,  ^vtrKt)).  A  sausage ;  a  favour-
ite food  of  both  Greeks  and  I^mane,  and  sold  in
the  streets  aud  places  of  public  resort  by  venders
known  as  hotularii  (Mart.  i.  42,  9).  These  sau-
sages, like  our  own,  were  usually  made  of  pork,
cooked  in  a  frying-pan,  and  eaten  hot  (Juv.  x.  355 ;
Fetron.  31). Sausages  were  also  made  of  the  blood


of  animals,  like  the  German.  BluUttint  (Tertntl.
Apol.  9). Tbe  name  tomaculMn  is  f>cca8ioaaUy  used
for  hotulut,  but  rather  means  sausage-meat.
Bonae  i^ovaC). See  Agela.

Bonkfiloi  {^oCkoKoi).  Members  of  a  religions
college  at  Pergamum  during  tbe  Roman  Empiiv.
engaged  in  celebrating  the  mysteries  of  Diouysos
jcadTy^^wi'.  There  appear  to  have  been  colleges  of
a  similar  name  throughout  Ionia  and  Pontns.  See
Foncart,  Lea  AasocicUiORS  Seligienwa  cAez  la  Gnci,
pp.  114-116.

Boul^  (BovX^).  In  the  Homeric  Age,  a  BooM, or
council  of  principal  men,  was  probably  a  well-
established  and  important  feature
in  every  Greek  state.  The  Boulri
of  tbe  Greek  army  before  Tror
cousists  of  tbe  kings  or  priucipid
chieftains  { ffaa-iX^s,  yiftmntt ),
who  meet  at  the  call  of  Agaaaeni-
non,  commander-in-chief,  for  frw
aud  equal  debate  on  queetions  of
policy.

In  historical  times,  a  Bonl£  is
found  in  very  many  Greek  states,
but  it  is  only  at  Athens  that  tb^
institution  is intimately  kuown
to  us. Here  there  were,  strictif
speaking,  two  bodies  bearing  tbi»
name — the  Senate  of  the  Areop-
agus (see  Arbopaoub)  and  tb«
Senate  of  Five  Hundred. It  is
tbe  latter  body  which  is  always
meant  when  tbe  BouI6  is  spoken  of  without  furtbei
designation,  and  it  is  this  which  is  here  described.
Composition,  Organization,  ktc. — The  mem-
bership of  the  BonI6,  which  under  the  Soloniao  con-
stitution had  beeu  400, 100  from  each  of  tbe  foar
old  tribes,  was  raised  by  Clisthenes  (b.c  50&-^0ij
to  500,  50  from  each  of  tbe  ten  new  tribes. When,
in  306,  tbe  tribes  were  increased  to  twelve,  tbe
Boul6  was  increased  to  600,  but  in  the  time  of  Hn-
driau  it  was  reduced  to  500  again. Tbe  senaton
(jSovXcurat)  had  to  be  at  least  thirty  years  of  age.
Their  term  of  service  was  from  the  beginning  to
the  end  of  au  Attic  year. They  were  selected  by
lot ;  the  senators  of  one  tribe  not  being  taken  in-
discriminately from  tbe  entire  tribe,  but  so  thit
each  deme  of  the  tribe  should  have  a  Gxed  immbei
of  members. Possibly  the  demes  nominated  can-
didates by  ballot,  and  the  lot  was  need  only  to
select  the  neceeeary  number  from  among  tbc«'
nominees. Every  senator,  before eutflriiig  into
oflBce,  had  to  undergo  an  examination  (dow^o-ia)  b;
the  nstiring  Senate. At  tbe  expiration  of  bis  term
he  had  to  render  an  account  (cSf^wa)  of  his  official
career.

In  order  to  facilitate  the  despatch  of  bnsinran
and  to  secure  rotation  of  authority,  the  year  wa«
divided  into  ten  periods  (35  or  3ti  days  each,  iu
ordinary  years),  called  prjitania  (irpirraveiat) ;  and
the  senators  of  each  tribe  in  turn  assumed  the
leadership  for  one  prytany,  under  the  name  of
prytana  (itpxjravtts).  The  prytaoes  had  their  b^iul-
quarters  iu  the  pi-ytaneum  {irpvra»tio¥\  or  tkola*
{$6\os),  a  circular  building  near  the  Senate-honM-
OovXf  vnyptoi').  Matters  of  business  could  here  be
brought  before  them,  with  a  view  to  prompt  con-
aideratiou  by  Senate  and  Ecclesia.  Erery  day  ouc
of  the  prytanes  was  selected  by  lot  aa  rpisteiff
(imirranjt  tw  irpvravdttit). He  kept  tbe  pnbUc


BOULKUSEOS  GRAPHE


219


BKACA£


sesl  and  the  keyd  of  the  temples  ia  which  were
deposited  the  public  treasure  and  the  public  ar-
cbiv«a.  lu  the  fifth  ceutnry  this  epistates  also
presided  at  the  meeting  of  the  Boal^  held  on  bis
duy,  as  well  as  at  the  meeting  of  the  Ecclesia,  if
oue  was  held.  Early  in  the  foarth  ceutury,  per-
baym  in  378-377,  a  more  complicated  method  of
necuriag  a  chairman  was  iutrudnced.  The  afore-
said epistates  selected  by  lot  nine  j^ro^ri  {wpotHpoi),
cue  from  each  of  the  non-pry  tauiziug  tribes,  and
out  of  the  proedri  a  secoud  epi$tatea  (firtOTirnjc  rSty
vpoiUpmi'),  to  serve  as  chairman  aud  oari'y  forward,
with  the  assistance  of  his  fellow-proedri,  the  legis-
lative busiuesa  of  the  day.  No  one  could  serve  as
tirurranif  ray  frpvraviov  or  as  tirurranis  r£i>  irpo-


impeachment  for  conspiracy.  In  this  case  /3ov-
Xcuo-foif  is  the  abbreviated  form  of  iinfiov\fva-tns,
and  is  the  name  for  two  very  different  actions  at
Attic  law.  (1)  An  actiuD  fur  conspiracy  against
life,  and  instituted  (a)  by  the  person  attacked,  if
competent,  or  by  his  or  her  legal  patron  (Kvptos) ;
or  (b)  if  the  plot  succeeded,  by  near  kinsmen  or
the  Kvptos.  (S)  An  action  against  the  person  who
had  wrongfully  inscribed  another  as  state  debtor.
See  Ps£Ui>kngkafh£»  GrafuIe.

Bonlenterion  (^ovKtvrripiov). See  BoULfi.

Boustrophedon  ()9ouoTpo^7d6v).  The  zigzag
method  of  writing — i.e.  alternately  from  right  to
left,  aud  left  to  right. See  ALPnABKT.


1  ^E 1  r


iA'%


Eumpl«  of  "BouHtropbedoa"  Writing. (From  Slgeaio.)


i^^v  for  more  than  ooe  day  in  the  same  jear.
The  Bool^  bad  also  a  secretary  (ypap.pxertvi),  who
kept  the  records  of  both  Boal6  and  Ecclesia.  A
acHSton  was  held  every  day,  except  holidays ;  there
would  perhaps  be  300  sessions  in  a  year.  The
usual  place  of  meeting  was  the  )3ovXrvn7pu»>,  near
the  Agora.  The  pay  for  attendance  was,  in  Aris-
totWa  time,  five  obols  per  day.

FcNcnoNS:  (1)  jt^ffit'flttM. — According  to  the
theory  of  the  Athenian  constitution,  no  subject
could  be  acted  upon  in  the  Ecclesia  until  it  had
bt«n  considered  in  the  Boul^  and  a  bill  (irpo|3ov-
Xfv/ui)  there  drawn  up.  The  Boul^,  however,  was
a  mere  committee  of  the  Ecclesia,  not  a  coK>rdinate
legislative  body.  Its  concurrence  was  not  neces-
sary to  the  passage  of  a  measure.

(2)  ^distil wtraMre. — These  were  very  numerous
and  extensive.  For  example :  the  Bonl€  decided
on  the  claims  of  pauper  cripples  to  receive  the
dole  provided  for  by  law ;  it  determiued  who
shoalil  belong  to  the  cavalry  (Inwftf),  and  in-
spected the  cavalry  horses,  condemning  the  unfit;
it  superintended  the  navy  and  the  docks;  above
all,  it  had  a  general  oversight  of  the  public  finance,
presiding  over  the  farmiug  of  taxes,  the  renting
of  mines,  payments  to  the  special  financial  offi-
cials, etc.  These  and  other  admiuistrative  duties
<lonbtle8s  constituted  the  bulk  of  the  work  of  the
Boiil^.

(3)  *^sili«jal.— The  Bonl6,  like  other  magistracies,
could  punish  thoae  who  violated  its  authority.  It
could  also,  either  of  its  own  motion  or  on  the  de-
ouuciation  (fio-ayy<Xi'a)  of  a  private  citizen,  pass
Kutence  on  officials,  especially  financial  oflSciale,
for  ualfeasance  iu  office.  In  the  period  of  the  de-
veloped democracy  its  power,  in  most  cases,  seems
to  have  been  limited  to  the  imposition  of  a  fine
of  500  drachmas.  The  evidence,  however,  on  this
point  is  confusing.  See  J.  W.  Ueadlam,  Eltie^im
^  J^aMfA«iw,cbap.ii.

BonleuMM  Oniph^  03ovX<vo-c«s  ypa^H)- -^^


lO  <%l/^fl


BoTlllae.  An  aucieut  town  in  Latinm  at  the
foot  of  the  Albau  Mountains,  on  the  Appian  Way,
about  ten  miles  from  Kome.  Kear  it  Clodius  was
killed  by  Hilo  (B.C.  &3).

Bonrs  aud  Arro'WB. See  Aitcua ;  Pharktra  ;

SAOtTTA.

Brabeum,  Bralniuxi,  or  Braviiun  (fipa^t^ov).  A
prize  given  to  the  winner  at  the  public  games
(Prudent.  Utpl  2n<ft.  v.  538).  The  cry  bravo,  as  a
sign  of  applause  or  approval,  ia  derived  from  this
word.

Bracae  {ava^pHtf,  BvXokoi).  Trousers ;  panta-
loons. These  were  common  to  all  the  nations
that  encircled  the  Greek  and  Roman  population,
extending  from  the  Indian  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean.
Hence  Aristagoras,  kiug  of  Miletus,  in  his  inter-
view with  Cleomeiies,  king  of  Sparta,  described
the  attire  of  a  large  portion  of  them  iu  these
terms:  "They  carry  bows  and  a  short  spear,  and
go  to  battle  in  trousers  and  with  hats  upon  their
heads.''  Hence,  also,  the  phrase  bi*acafi  militU
arctu,  implying  that  those  who  wore  trousers
were  in  general  armetl  with  the  bow.  In  par-
ticular, we  are  iufurmed  of  the  use  of  trousers  or
pantaloons  among  the  following  nations:  (1)  The
Medes  and  Persians  (irtpi  ra  o'cAfu  ava^vpHas).
(2)  The  Parthians  and  Armenians.  (3)  The
Phrygians.  (4)  The  Sacae.  (5)  The  Sarmatne.
(6)  The  Dacians  aud  Getae.  (7)  The  Tenloues.
(8)  The  Franks.  (9)  The  Belgae.  (10)  The  Brit-
ons {retrret  bracae  Britonit  pa«)>€H»).  (11)  The
Gauls  iGallia  Bracata,  now  Fruveuce;  wgalos
bracatoaque;  ^f^vrat  am^vpi<ri.  As  fictlvoi  fipaxas
irpotrayopf  vowt).

The  Gallic  term  "brakes,"  which  Diodorus  Bic-
uluB  has  preserved  in  the  last-cited  passage  (Iv.  30),
also  survives  in  the  Scottish  "breehs"  aud  the
English  "  breeches."  Corresimnding  terms  are
used  in  all  the  Northern  languages. (See  Skeat,


BRACCHIALli


220


BRACHHANAE


Etgmolog.  Diet.  a.  v.  "Breechea.")  Tbe  Cossack
and  PersiAD  trousers  uf  tbe  present  day  difiur
iu  no  material  respect  from  those  which  were
anciently  worn  id  the  same  countries.

Ill  conformity  with  the  preceding  list  of  testi-
monies, tbe  monuments  of  every  kind  ^rbich  con-
tain representations  of  the  nations  included  in  it,
exhibit  tbem  in  trousers,  thus  clearly  distiugnish-
ing  them  from  Greeks  and  Koniaus.  An  example
in  seen  iu  the  annexed  group  of  Sarmatiuns,  taken
from  the  Column  of  Tnijau.


SunuitUoB  wewring  BncM. (Colnmo  of  TnO'ti')

The  proper  bracae  of  the  Eastern  and  Northern
nations  were  loose  {Ktxo^^^o-fiivai,  laxae),  and  they
are  therefore  very  aptly,  though  ludicrously,  de-
scribed ill  Earipides  as  "variegated  bags"  (roitt
^XoKovf  Tovs  iroiKiXovs).  To  tbe  Greeks  they  must
have  appeared  highly  ridiculous,
although  Ovid  nieiitionstbe adop-
tion of  them  by  the  descendants
of  some  of  the  Greek  colonists  on
the  Eiixine  {Trial,  v.  11,  34).

Trousers  were  principally  wool-
len ;  bnt  Agathias  states  that  in
Europe  they  were  also  made  of
linen  and  of  leather;  probably
the  AsiaticH  made  them  of  cotton
and  of  Hilk.  Sometimes  they  were
striped  (rirgatae),  ornamented
with  a  woof  of  various  colours.

Roman  soldiers  Sghtiug  iu  tbe
North  were  obliged  to  wear  tbem,
owing  to  the  severity  of  the  cli-
mate; and  by  the  second  century
they  were  worn  even  at  Rome.
The  emperor  Alexander  Sevenis
wore  white  bracae;  some  of  his
predecessors,  scarlet  ones  (cocci-
neae).

Braoanun,  meaning  properly  a  breeches-niakcr
(Lamprtd.  Alar.  Sevei\  24),  came  to  be  useil  uf  a
tailor  in  general.

Braoita  Gallia. See  Gallia.

Bracchlal^  (irrpi^paxtoviov).  A  jiiece  of  de-
fensive aimonr  which  covered  the  bracchiunt,  or
part  of  the  arm  between  the  wrist  and  the
elbow.  It  is  distinctly  mentioned  by  Xeuopbon
(Cgrop.  vi.  4,  2)  as  part  of  the  accoutrements
woru  by  tbe  Persians,  and  is  sometimes  seen  on
figures  of  Roman  gladiators,  though  the  Latin
name  does  not  occur  in  this  sense,  except,  per-
haps, in  Trebell.  Cland.  14.


Bracae  worn  by  Rn-
man  Sotdlcr  (Col-
umn of  Tn^Jan.)


Braoololini,  Gian  Francesco  Pogoio,  one  of
the  most  not«d  names  iu  the  history  of  cltuttk-al
study,  was  born  at  Terranova,  near  Florenc**,  iu
1380.  He  studied  Latin  under  John  of  Ravenna.
and  Greek  under  Maunet  Chrysoloras,  after  wbicli
he  became  a  copyist  of  manuscripts,  in  whicli  piir-
snit  his  dexterity  brought  him  the  acqaainrancc
of  the  chief  scholars  of  Florence,  by  whose  aid  lie
was  received  into  the  service  of  the  Roniau  L-iirJA
(1403)  as  a  secretary.  Iu  this  oflSce  he  slioirril
himself  an  enthusiastic  advocate  of  classical  Htmly,
and  took  a  most  important  part  in  tbe  revival  nf
learning,  caring  little  or  nothing  for  tbe  exriiin;:
political  and  ecclesiastical  movements  of  tlie  |h-
riod.  Bracciolini  (or  Poggio,  as  he  is  usnallj'  calli^l  i
is  best  known  for  his  remarkable  success  in  rrcov-
eriug  the  lost  masterpieces  of  Latin  literature  hy
bis  researches  iu  the  libraries  of  monasteries  ttnil
convents,  where  manuscripts  of  priceless  value  i<i
the  classicist  were  lying  hitherto  nuknowti.  In
one  of  bis  epistles  he  relates  how  he  discovered  at
St.  Gall,  iu  Switzerland,  Quintitiun,  Verrins  Flsfnis
( in  part),  and  the  commentaries  of  Asconius  Vr-
diauus.  To  him,  likewise,  we  owe  maunBcrijitH  of
Lucretius,  Columella,  Siliua  Italicus,  Manilius  Vi-
truvius,  Ammianus  Marcelliuus,  Nonius  Murrellns,
Probus,  Flavins  Caper,  and  Eutycbes.  At  Laiigrrg
he  unearthed  Cicero's  oration  Pro  Caecina,  anil  at
I  Monte  Cassiuo  a  codex  of  Frontinus.  No  consider-
,  atioua  of  morality  stood  in  Bracciolini's  way  nbeii
'  the  question  of  securing  a  valuable  manascript
.  was  before  him.  If  a  codex  could  be  gained  only
,  by  fhiud,  he  employed  fraud,  as  when  he  actaally
bribed  a  monk  at  Hersfeld  to  abstract  mann-
scripts  of  Livy  and  Ammianus  from  the  conveut
library.

Bracciolini  was  an  extensive  traveller,  and  liat
left  some  lively  pictures  of  the  conteinporarr
life  and  customs  of  different  European  countries',
especially  of  England  and  Switzerland,  as  vfU
as  some  curious  notes  on  the  remains  ofautiijn^
art  iu  Some.  He  likewise  describes  the  trial  of
Jerome  of  Prague.  To  pure  ]iteratni*e  be  was  a
voluminous  contributor,  writing  orations,  epistle*,
treatises  on  rhetoric,  translations  from  tbe  Greek,
moral  essays,  and  fabliaux,  all  in  Latin,  as  ntll
as  a  history  of  Florence,  written  in  imitatiou  uf
the  style  of  Livy.  His  Facetiae  are  remark-iltl*
alike  for  their  indecency  nud  for  their  caustic
satires  on  the  secular  clergy.  Of  this  cIom,  bit
most  famous  writings  are  his  violent  and  often
filthy  diatribes  against  Valla  and  Filelfo,  who  re-
torted in  kind,  and  thns  established  a  bad  prrce-
dent  which  was  followed  in  the  later  controversirs
of  tbe  Scaligers  (q.  v.),  Scioppins,  Salmosius,  and
Hilton.

Bracciolini,  who  remained  a  layman  until  bis
death,  retired  iu  1452  to  Florence,  of  wbicli  i^
public  he  became  the  chancellor  and  historian.
There  be  died  iu  1459,  and  was  buried  in  tlw
Church  of  Santa  Croce.  A  statue  of  him  b_v  I>o-
natello  commemorates  his  services  to  tbe  human-
ities.  His  life  has  been  written  in  English  by
Shephenl  (Li  verpool,  1802).  See  ahw  J.  A.  Symoudv
The  Iteuaiasatice  in  Italy  (ISdR).

Bracelets. SeeARMiLLA;  Caslatura.

Brachmanae  or  Braohminea  (Bpaxftoptt)-  A
name  used  by  the  ancient  geographers,  eometiniea
of  a  caste  of  priests  in  India  (tbe  Brahmins),  anirw-
times,  apparently,  of  all  the  people  wbow  religiuu


BRAIVCHIDAE


ttt


BRENNUS


Brnhiintiuin,  itnd  »ometimoa  of  a  piu(ical&r|

CViW. i**0  I.VDIA.

Brancblda«  (^ftayj^l^t),  afterivunlH  UmiVma. A  |

<»laci'  oil  ibi-  wu-e"»ii»t  of  lotiiii,  a  littlt*  mmtli  of  !

^lilctiiH,  auU  ccU'l»)-ntc4l  for  its  tPitijrte  uiid  urncU'  :

<»f  .\l«ollo,  niiniunir<l  Itidytitena- Tliix  onul«<,  which

tti^*  IiinluiiA  hi'ld  ill  tho  hi^iicKt  i-ttt<>ciii.  n-im  i>uu\  ;

lo  ]mvo  bftri  fi>iiiHlr>(l  hy  HniiiuliiiH,  win  iif  A|»ullo  j

l»y  n  MilfHiiiii  woniaii. Thti  rf|niU*<l  <h-M;L'iiiliiiit»

■jClliin  llrniichitH,  tlii>  Itriiiic1iiil:ti\  v.vvv  the  hiTtili-

tury  niimstcni  of  tbi*  oriu'lo  (Ilonid.  i.  157). The

t4--ni)>lc,  rallMi DiilytiiftfiUiu.  which  wnn  dtmtnivvil

l>j  X<'rxc«,  wtui  afterwnrJs  rfhiiill,  aud  its  nilti*

cdiiUiiri  Mtnic twaiitiful flpccinitftiH  of th«  Ionic

onlrr  of  oTL-biU-cturc.

Bmd^daa  (BfMtriiat).  Thi:  luost  diittiiignishtMl
Spttiau  iu  thi*  lirHl  (tftrt  of  Ibv  Pelopoiiucstiiii  War
^q.  v.). lit  B.C.  AiA,  At ihc  hcnd  of  a  ftinall  forcp.

■liaviug  elllHivtl a  lU'XtiMouM itinrcli  tliron^h  Ihi'
b«>«tili<  (.-i>iiiitr.v  of  Tbvt»nl,v,  be  ):ik)iic-d  poesei^sioi)
of  inaDjr uf the  cittoo in Miicedonia ttml: wt-rv
wtilijflct  to  Athi!ii«; hit*  jn>*'»t»"''t  iiDniisitiou  wan
Arapliipulis. In  i'^ti,  with  on))'  ii  baiidftit  vf  \w\-
i»t6  mill  mert;«iiarj' InMii^,  bo  ((uiiicd  a  hrilliaut
victttPT  nrcT CK'oiK  who  hnd  beeu  sent with a
imir^rfnl  AthiMtiiin  furL***  to  recover  AiujihiimliB.
1 BnMila»  wa«  «lain  in  Ihi*  battle. Hu  wat  bnrii-d
^L  wiibin  tb«  city,  Hiid  tliti  iiihuhitants  houuiired  him
^P  asabenj  by  yearly  ftucrifm-H  luid  by  j^nnuta.
■  Thucydidi'a  pmii*ej>  iilikc  Ibo  uh^iirHMicc  and  the

bWnlity  and  wiodoni  of  UniKiduK,  nnd  I'lato  coin-
yur*  klm  to  Achilles.

Bnildaa  {hitaaiAtta).  A  festival  held  atiiuial-
1;  U  S|iAriii  with  ornlioUH  and  rontfatn,  in  nunu-
W7  uf  llraHiduti  |i|.  %'.),  wbo,  nfliT  Imh  dH»tIi,  in
■.c.  &ij  ni-riviid  tbt!  boiiatir!!  of  a  bt^ro.  He<>>
f*ima,  iii.  14.

Bnttai(not  hractra:  kim*  l.aoliinuun  on  I.iicr«t.
iv-^f.  A  flnely-lteiitvii-oMl  jilnt*'  of  tni'l:il,  <'H[if>ui-
*lly  i>f  gold.  ThiokiT  iibil<v>«  wnit;  nillt'd  laminae.
■tw  Kitjil-bratcr  in  ntyU'd  braUrarit%u  or  hraUtaior.
'(••w  (ilktrs  wen'  uwil  for  adornin);  ittJitrirt<,  fnrtii-
l<m,  wiiIIk  and  rriliii^n,  and  uarim-ntn  wbiuh  \r<>n>
t^Kt  calUil  mie»  auralae  or  iigUlataf.  Pliny  I  H.  X.
iniii.  4  Cij  aay(i  that  from  uii  onncc  of  gold,  7G0
l''«*t*,(iiwli  fonr  fiiigem  H(|inire,  conld  he  hoatco.

Bnunxi  iBpavpt^v).  A  df>ine  of  Attictt  on  tbo
•■*t*rn  bank  of  ih*-  rivrr  KraniniiH,  with  n  ce!©-
"W**!  temple  of  Ai't«luiH,  who  was  in  ronavquencc
**"»!  Rrnnrouta.

Btiaroola  (n'l  U^imyjweiaJ.  An  AHiP  fratival
•HdnKrry  fifth  ycur  in  lb*-  lilllc  town  of  limiinm,
'"  kwiwar  ut  ArU'Milj*  Uronrouiii.  At  Jlratirou,
'Jrfvltt  mid  Iphi(;unia  (q.  v.)  on  thetr  retnrn  froiu
riirikwi-n;  Auppo-uMl  to  havt^  landed  and  to  b&vo
•"ftltiB  »tatuc  of  ih(?Tuiiricj;o*hli'i«.  Tht:  feotival
***  vimIct  the  9ii|K*rinti<nd«uc«  of  ton  if^inroiut;
""I  tUf  chief  soli-'innity  conHtst^'d  in  thi*  rin;iim-
"*"«  ihiit  Attic  ^rl*  hotwoon  the  nijrjt  of  flvr
•M  tcti  years,  dre««i*<l  tti  crocns-coliuirvd  (lar-
'^MiU.  «t>Qt  i„  ftt>l«inn  prowwaioit  to  tbo  «arictu-
*0.  where  tbry  wurt*  fon»«M'ril«l  to  the  goddofw.
'""OfF  |i,i„  ^t:t,  tbo  Upanotit'v  ftncrilicfil  a  Boot,
""^  tlio  (rjrls  porfonnt'd  n  pnipitiatory  rite  in
*hitli  tbry  inittatiMl  bearn,  Thin  ritr  niuy  have
***>'!  Iriwn  from  tb>>  fact  tliiit  the  hrar  wim
**'^  In  Arl«miH.  cftitfchilly  in  Arcadia;  bnt  a.
^J^'*"*  ptwwr^'ed  iu  Sntdn'<  relah.>9  its  nriK'n  a*
^••:  In  the  Attio  town  of  Phanidoe  a  bcnrwjis


kept,  which  waa  ao  tame  that  it  was  allowed  to  go
about  qnlte  freely,  and  rti-eived  itit  fooil  from  and
aiuonfic  uien.  One  day  a  ^irl  vvntnn,>d  t^o  pluy  with
it,  and,  on  treating  thu  antiiinl  ratbor  bar»hly,  it
tnnifd  round  aud  tory  bur  t4>pi«rt««.  Hit  brothcni.
cnriigrd  at  tbia.  went  out  and  killed  the  bear.  Tlio
Athcniiius  ttierenpuu  were  viailM  by  a  plHifUc ;
and  whi'ii  they  cont»u1led  the  oniclc,  the  auNwer
woM  ^ivHO  tilut  they  would  rid  tbfDMflvLia  i>t' the
fvil  which  bail  bL'fnlk'n  tbeni  if  tbuy  would  co»ii>vl
Kunit>  of  their  eitizima  lo  make  their  danghtera
propiliato  ArlciniK  by  a  ritv  called  apxTtCtiv,  for
the  cnnic  eoniinittml  agaiiiHt  the  uuiiuul  ttacred  to
tbn  (ludileMi.  The  eoinuiand  wa:i  wore  than  obeyed  ;
for  the  AtheiiiauH  decreed  that  fniiu  thenceforth  all
woiupu,  before  ibcy  couhl  marry,  ahoilld  have  uDce
taken  iMirt  in  tbih  festival,  and  have  been  conae-
crated  to  the  goddess.  Hence  the  jiiilw  theniHrlvou
wi-H'  ralliMl  apKTOt,  the  ctnisecratioii  o^rcta,  the
iii-t  of  eoiiBtscnitiiiK  ii^rr<i^(ti'.  and  to  oelnbrate  the
feiitfval  apKTtvttr&ai.

There  was  ali^n  n  ()nini|iieuriii)l  frHtlval  railed
URinrnnia,  which  was  rcbrbiatiil  by  men  aud  dla-
hi)|iiie  vvi»iiien,  at  Hmuntn,  in  hanoiir  of  Dionyhiix.

Brennufl.  The  l.atinir.tMl  form  of  tbo  Keltic
liik  ftniN.  ''a  princti."  (1)  A  goriomi  of  the  Ualli
Senones,  who  etit'cred  Italy,  defeated  the  Jtomans
at  Ibu  river  Allia,  aud  ontcn-d  their  city  without
opposition.  The  Romaufi  fled  iulu  tlio  Capitol,
and  left  the  whole  city  in  the  po&»eH6ion  nf  their
etieiuien.  The  Oauls  oliuibcd  the  Tarpeian  Rook
ia  the  niifbt,  and  the  Capitol  would  Itave  heeii
taken,  hail  not  the  Romans  been  afrakenod  by  the
noino  of  the  aacrcd  gn>He  in  the  Temple  of  luno
ami  immediately  rejielled  the  eiieiny.  |8c<i  MaK-
Ui:a.)  (.'auulluH,  who  waa  in  baninhment,  marchiid
to  the  relimf  of  ilia  country,  and  totally  defeatod
the  (janlSfSD  that  not  one  reiuained  to  carry  homo
the  news  of  their  deatmction.


Hie  Brenuus  Sbl«U. {[ttxlHelE }

The  deatmctloii  of  cb?  Gaula  by  Cftmillna  U
the  national  account  given  by  the  Konian  writem,
and  id  replete  with  error  and  exaggeration.  The
domination  of  tWo  Gaiils  in  Italy  waa  certiiinly
of  long  contitinanco,  and  wan  not  tcrminati'd  in
the  dramatic  manner  of  the  legend,  ^--v  Camii^
l-rs;  CKLTar;  Kiino,  Vor^nrMrktc  Horn*  (IWR);
and  Monmitw!ii.  tlinl.  nf  Jtomr.  vol.  i.  p.  427  full.

(3)  Another  Gallic  leader,  who  made  an  ir<
niptioa  intoGre«<ce  at  thu  bend  of  an  army  of  bis
rountrymeii  ooiiHiflting  i>f  ^^9,l>I.N>  foot  and  2U,(NMI


BREVIARIUM  2

horse.  Aft«r  ravaging  varioas  parts  of  nortbern
Greecfl,  they  marclied  against  Delphi,  and  endeav-
ouretl  to  pluudor  the  temple.  But  the  army  of
the  invaders,  acconliiig  to  the  Grecian  acconut,
were  seized  with  a  panic  terror  dnring  the  night,
and  being  attacked  at  daybreak  by  the  Delphians
and  others  of  the  Greeks,  retreated  in  the  utmost
confusion.  Large  numbers  perished,  the  Greeks
continually  hanging  on  the  skirts  of  the  retreating
foe;  and  Breunns,  wounded,  and  dispirited  by  his
overthrow,  killed  himself  in  a  fit  of  intoxication,
B.C.  278  (Pausan.  x.  19).

Brevlariaiu.  (1)  Tlie  title  of  the  brief  history
of  Rome  by  Eiitmplus  (q.  v.) — more  fully
Breviarium  ab  Urbe  Condita.  It  is  writ-
ten in  simple  style,  and  was  largely  read
both  in  the  original  Latin  and  in  the
Greek  translation.  The  best  text  is
that  of  W.  Hartel  (Berlin,  1872).  (2)
A  similar  work,  written  at  about  the
same  time  by  Sex.  Rufus  Festus  (q.  v.).

Breviaxiain  Alarloianum,  or  simply
Brevtariam.  Alavic  the  second,  king  of
the  Visigoths  (a.d.  484-507),  who  reigned
over  part  of  Gaul  and  Spain,  commissioned
a  body  of  jurists,  no  doubt  Romans,  to
make  a  selection  from  Roman  statute  law
and  from  the  writings  of  Roman  jurists,
which  should  form  a  legal  code  for  his
Roman  subjects.  The  code  was  completed
in  A.D.  506,  and  submitt«d  to  a  council  of
bishops  and  nobles  held  at  Aduris  (Aire)
in  Gascony,  and  by  thum  approved.  The
work  was  then  promulgated  by  Gojarin,
the  count  of  the  palace  (corner  paJatU),  a
certiQed  copy  forwai-ded  to  each  cornea,  and
the  use  of  any  other  law  prohibited.  In
some  of  the  MSS.  it  is  called  Lex  Theodosii,
and  the  name  Breriarium  Alaricianum  does
not  appear  until  the  sixteenth  century.
The  Breviarium  contains  several  sources
of  Roman  law  otherwise  almost  entirety
unknown,  especially  Paulns  and  the  first
five  books  of  the  Codex  Tbeodosianus.
There  exist  besides  the  MSS.  of  the  Brevi-
arium the  MSS.  of  epitomes  made  in  the
Middle  Ages.  The  standard  edition  is  that  by
Haenel  (1H49).  See  also  Biedenweg,  Commen-
tai-ii  ad  FormuUu  Vingoth.  novia$ime  reperta»  (Berlin,
1656).

Bzlareiia  (Bptdpcoir). See  Aeoaeon.

Biibeiy. See  Ambitus;  Crimen  Repetunoa-

Rl'M.

Bricks. See  Fictile;  Latkk.

Bridges. See  Pons.

Brigantes.  The  most  powerful  of  the  British
tribes,  inhabiting  the  whole  of  the  north  of  the  isl-
and from  the  Abus  (Humber)  to  the  Roman  Wall,
with  the  exception  of  the  southeastern  corner  of
Yorkshire,  which  was  inhabited  by  the  Parisii.
The  Brigantes  consequently  iuhabitetl  the  greater
part  of  Yorkshire,  and  the  whole  of  Lancashire,
Durham,  Westmoreland,  and  Cumberland.  Their
capital  was  Ehoracnm,  now  York.  They  were
couquered  by  Petilius  Cerealis  iti  the  reigu  of
Vespasian.  There  was  also  a  tribe  of  Brigantes
in  the  south  of  Ireland,  between  the  rivers  Birgus
(Barrow)  and  Dnbroiia  (Blackwater),  in  the  coun-
ties of  Waterford  and  Tipperarj'.


a  BKITANNIA

Brigantiims  Lacwa.  The  modem  Bodensee.  or
Lake  Constance ;  also  known  to  the  aucieiiU  an.
Venetus  and  Acronius.  The  Rhonus  (Rhine)  dons
through  it.

BtUesBos  (BptXijo-ordf).  A  range  of  hills  nnilin^
Mount  Peutelicus  with  Anchesmus.

Brtsels  (B/Mmji'r).  The  daughter  of  Brisen<)  of
Lyrnessns,  who  fell  into  the  bauds  of  Achilles.  Imt
was  seized  by  Agamemnon.  Hence  arose  the  dire
feud  between  the  two  heroes.  (See  Achilles:
Agamemnon  ;  Trojan  War.)  Her  proper  name
was  Hippodamia.


The  Rape  of  Srlsela. (Pompelui  Pilnring.)

Britannia  (Bpfrrovui),  called  also  Albion.  An
island  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  the  largest  in
Europe.  The  Phcnuicians  appear  to  have  been  tta-
ly  acquainted  with  it,  and  to  have  carried  ou  tberr
a  traffic  for  tin.  (See  Cassiterides.)  Commercial
jealousy,  however,  induced  them  to  keep  their  <lih-
coveries  a  profound  secret.  The  Carthaginians  sm-
ceeded  to  the  Phauicians,  but  were  equally  iiivi«-
terions.  Avienus  (q.  v.)  in  his  poem  entitled  Ora
Maritima,  makes  mention  of  the  voyages  of  a  certain
Himilco,  in  this  quarter,  and  professes  to  draw  Iii«
information  from  the  long-concealed  Funic  atinaK
Little  was  kuown  of  Britain  until  Caesar'b  time,
who  invaded  and  endeavoured,  although  ineSertu-
ally,  to  conquer  the  island.  After  a  long  iiitcna).
Ostorius,in  the  reign  of  Claudius,  reduced  the  muib-
eru  part  of  Britannia;  and  Agricola  subsequently.
in  the  reign  of  Domitiau,  extended  the  Roman  do-
minion to  the  Frith  of  Forth  and  the  Clyde.  Tbe
whole  force  of  the  Empire,  although  exerted  i<>
the  utmost  nnder  Septimius  Sevems,  conld  not.
however,  reduce  to  subjection  the  hudy  nati^*^
of  the  highlands.  This  emperor  divided  the  c«iib-
try  into  two  parts — Britannia  Inferior  or  Souibero


BHITANNU


BRUCTEW


Britain,  and  Britannia  Saperior  or  Xortheni  Brit-
ain—each under  a  special  prefect.  When  the  Em-
pire  vaa  divided  ander  Diocletian,  Britain  became
a  tliocese  of  the  pra^ecinra  of  Gaul,  and  was  gov-
erued  by  a  rtoartii<  reniding  at  Eboracum  (York).
At  this  time  it  waa  marked  out  into  five  provinces,
as  fullows:  Britannia  Prima  (England  sonth  of
tbe  Thames),  Britannia  Secuuda  (Wales),  Flavia
(.'acsariensis  (between  the  Thames,  Severn,  Mersey,
and  Hiimber),  Maxima  Caesarieusis  (all  tbe  rest  of
Eugland  up  to  the  Wall  nf  Hadrian),  and  Valentia
(Scotland  south  of  the  Wall  of  Antouiuus).  Ptol-
emy enamerates  fifty-six  towns  {coloniae,  mun'unpia)
of  Roman  Britain,  two  of  which  (Eboracum  and
Venilamium)  had  the  rights  of  Roman  citizenship.
EUoracnni,  Deva  (Chester,  c<iatra\  and  Isca  (Caer-
leoii)  were  military  centres,  each  being  tbe  station
fur  a  legion  of  Roman  soldiers,  chiefly,  however,
GaiiU,  Germaua,  and  Iberians.

To  what  an  extent  the  Romans  succeeded  in  in-
trudncing  the  relinemeuts  of  their  civilization  into
Britain  may  be  seen  in
Ibti  great  number  of
tlieirremains  that  have
lieen  found,  iucluilitig
roads,  houses,  batbtj,
painted  walls,  altars,
oniameuts,  mosaics,
sculpture,  bronzes,
coin8,pottery,aud  vari-
ous implements.  Brit-
aiu  continued  aRoman
province  until  a.d.  ""  -^-  —  ■■

4'26,  when tbe  troops,  Copper  Coin  or  Antoninus  Pius.

having  been  in  a  great  •X^^^^v''*'  "'""'""  **""'
measure  withdrawn  to

assist  Valentinian  HI.  against  the  Huns,  never
returned.  The  Britons  had  become  so  enervated
ander  tbe  Roman  yoke  ae  to  be  nuable  to  rejiel  the
incursions  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  north.  They
invoked,  therefore,  tbe  aid  of  the  Saxons  (a.d.  407),
by  whom  they  were  themselves  subjugated  and  at
length  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  the  mountains  of
Wales.

The  name  Britain  was  nnkuown  to  the  Romans
before  the  time  of  Caesar;  though  Aristotle  as
early  as  the  fourth  century  b.c.  speaks  of  the  i/^o-ot
BpfTon'ueai.  Some  deduce  the  name  of  the  Britons
from  the  Gallic  Bntti  (Cymric  h-Uh),  "painted,"  in
utlusion  to  tbe  custom  of  a  part  of  the  inhabitants
of  painting  their  bodies;  but  Rhys  rejects  this
etymology,  without  suggesting  any  that  is  more
lilausible.  The  other  uame,  Albion,  is  etymologi-
rally  connected  with  the  Gaelic  alp,  "a  high  hill,"
i>r  the  Latin  allnu,  "  white."  This  was  nndoubt-
rdly  tbe  Keltic  uame  of  tbe  whole  island.

BritAio  was  famous  for  its  Roman  walls,  of
which  traces  remain  to  the  pi^sent  day.  The  6ivt
was  bailt  by  Agricola,  a.d.  79,  nearly  in  the  situa-
tion of  tbe  rampart  of  Hadrian  and  wall  of  Severns
iiifntioued  below.  In  a.d.  81,  Agricola  built  a  line
'if  very  strong  forts  from  the  Frith  of  Forth  to  the
Frith  of  Clyde.  This,  however,  was  insufficient  to
check  the  barbarians  after  bis  departure.  In  a.d.
Vm,  therefore,  Hadrian  erected  a  famous  wall  from
BoaloeM  on  Solway  Frith  to  a,  spot  a  little  be-
yoml  Newcastle-npon-Tyne.  It  was  sixty-eight
English  or  seveoty-four  Roman  miles  long.  Twen-
ty yean  after  this,  LolHus  Urbicns,  under  the
empeior  Antoninus,  restored  the  second  wall  of
Agricola,  which  is  commonly  called  the  Vallum


Antonini.  -But  tbe  greatest  of  all  was  that  of
SeveruB,  begun  a.d.  309,  and  finished  the  next
year,  and  which  was  only  a  few  yanls  north  of
Hadrian's  wall.  It  was  garrisoned  by  ten  thou-
sand men.  See  Wright,  The  Kelt,  the  Soman,  and
the  Saxon  (1889);  Cooto,  The  Romans  of  liritaii^
(1878);  Scarth,  i?oma)i  BHtaift  (1883).

Britamdoua.  The  agnomen  of  the  son  of  the
emperor  Claudius  by  Messalina,  and  born  in  a.d.
42.  Agrippiua,  the  second  wife  of  Claudius,  in-
duced  the  emperor  to  adopt  her  owu  son  Nero,
and  to  give  him  precedence  in  the  siiccossioii.  Ou
the  assumption  of  imperial  power  by  Nero,  Britan-
nicus  was  put  to  death  by  poison  (a.d.  55).  His
story  is  the  subject  of  a  play  by  Racine.

Bxitcnnartia  {BpiTonapnsy  "sweet  maid").  A
Cretan  goddess,  supposed  to  dispense  happiness,
and  whose  worship  extended  througbont  tbe  isl-
auds  and  along  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean.
Like  Artemis,  with  whom  she  was  sometimes  iden-
tified, she  was  tbe  patroness  of  hunters,  fishermen,
and  sailors,  and  also  goddess  of  birth  and  of  health.
Her  sphere  was  Kature  in  its  greatness  and  ita
freedom.  As  goddess  of  the  sea  she  bore  the  name
of  Dictynna,  the  supposed  derivation  of  which
from  the  Greek  hiKTvov,  "  a  net,"  was  explained
by  the  following  legend.  She  was  the  daughter
of  a  huntress  much  beloved  by  Zeus  and  Artemis.
Miuos  loved  her,  aud  followed  her  for  niue  months
over  valley  and  mountain,  through  forest  and
swamp,  tilt  ho  nearly  overtook  her,  when  she
leaped  from  a  high  rock  into  tbe  sea.  She  was
saved  by  falling  into  some  nets,  aud  Artemis
made  her  a  goddess.

BzlxelliinL.  The  modern  Bregella  or  Brescella ;
a  town  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Pailus  (Po),  in  Gal-
lia Cisalpiua,  where  the  emperor  Otho  (q.  v.)  com-
mitted suicide  in  a.d.  69.

Bil^a.  The  modern  Brescia;  a  town  in  Gal-
lia Cisalpiua. Through  it  flowed  the  river  Mella.

Briao  (B/M^u).  A  goddess  localized  iu  Delos,  to
whom  women,  in  particular,  paid  worship  as  being
the  protectress  of  mariuers.  They  set  before  lier
eatables  of  various  kinds  (fish  being  excluded)  in
little  boats. She  also  presided  over  an  oracle.

Bromins  (Bpdfitor).  From  j9p(/ia),  "to  roar";  an
epithet  applied  to  Dionysus  as  tbe  noisy  god  of
the  Bacchic  revels.

Brontes  (Bpoi^s). See  Cyclopes.

Bronxe. See  Aes.

Bmohium  {hpvxtiov).  The  Royal  or  Greek
quarter  of  tbe  city  of  Alexandria  (q.  v.)  enclosed
by  its  own  walls.  Here  were  tbe  finest  of  the
public  bntldiugs,  and  upon  it  the  Ptolemies  lav-
ished every  form  of  ornament — obelisks,  sphinxes,
flowers  aud  gardens,  and  colonnades.  Among  the
great  structures  that  stood  here  were  the  famous
Library  and  Museum  with  its  hnndreds  of  thou-
sands of  volumes,  its  corridors,  theatre,  menagerie,
and  lecture-halls;  the  Palace  of  the  Ptolemies;
tbe  Caesarium  or  Temple  of  the  Caesars ;  the  Mau-
soleum of  the  Ptolemies  (containing  tbe  body  of
Alexander  the  Great) ;  aud  the  Arsinoeum,  a  monu-
ment raised  by  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  to  his  siHter
Arsino^.  The  name  is  also  written  PYRUCiiirM
(nitpo;iffioi').

Bructfirl  A  German  people  dwelling  on  each
side  of  the  Amisia  (Ems),  aud  as  far  south  as  Lup-


BBUNCK


i-H


BRLTTS


pin  ^Li|>|>c).  Tliry  jiiiiii^il  llu-  Hatavj  (q.  r.)  JD
tlit«ir  revolt  u^u■tl4l  tin*  Roiiiiiiik  in  a.d.  US.

Bronck,  Kiciiakd  Fiuni^om  Piiiui'fK.  8e«
urlii'U'  ill  tint  ApitLMidix.

Brundisium.  The  tnutlern  Uriufljsi ;  ii  «>!«-
l»i'iitt-4)  vhy  on  t)it^  noant  <if  Aptiliii.  hi  tlie  tt'i'ritory
of  tli«^  CalaKri.  Hy  IlieGrei-kn  it  wiw*  r:illt-il  B^c-
r/triof,  a  von]  n-liidi,  in  tlitf  Mt>.-«ttii[Miiii  )Hni;iiiif;<'>
wij;iiilie«lu  slab's  Ih'ihI,  IVom  t)i«  nwiiililaiict' wliicli
itfl  dinVrt;iit  IiiirlKnirn  hihI  I'l-i't'ks  hon'  tn  tkiitlt>r».


'^X


u


lt<ini«D  Pillar  al  BrnnillAinin.

Hurodotas  ii|iaakB  of  it  oa  a  iiloce  Koitemlly  well
kuowii  (iv.  W).  Uruudittium  eooti  Wciinit?  n  fnr-
tuidttlil*  riml  t«  TAreiitiini,  whioh  biul  hitherto  eii-
groaneil  all  tbi>comntiTre(>rtliiM  jinrl  of  Italy.  TIih
RomaiiH  aiiiicxfit  it  in  h.v.  'iAh  ( l-'lor.  t.  'JU).  From
tliis  period  Iho  pnM]>fnly  or  kIiIm  port  coiiliuncd
to  increa.'*u  in  |>ix>(M>rtion  \iilli  tlic  fircntnvM  uf
till'  Kniuan  Km|iiif.  Ijar;:<-  Iht-io  weiv  nlwiiys  »la-
tinimd  tUore  for  the  cooveynoco  of  tntoiw  into
MacediuiiA,  Grpew.  or  Asia ;  unci  from  thu  couieii-
ii>nof>of  itH  harbonr,  and  iN  f»riliiy  Dt'nrriMw  fmni
vvpty  otUfi-  ymt  of  Italy,  il  ht-wnnn  a  wnt  of  I>ovvr
to  ibnCiilaia  of  Dyrtbacliiiim.  At  Urnudiitiiim  ihu
Aitpiau  Way  6nd(>d.


Bnitti&ui.  RIavi'H  >vln>wi  duly  il  nil
Kntiiun  niu^iMlnitt-H.  The  uunn;  Ih  coQ
l>lutncii  UB  diir  lit  the  fart  timt  ilieae  f
originally  lakc-n  fwui  amount  tlit^  Brt
cans*)  Ibid  puople  rviiiiiiued  aleadfastly
HannilMil  (Aul.  (Jul),  x.  It,  ^  19);  hiitliotli
2,  ^  4)  and  Dimlorits  (xvi.  15)  Mtate  tbwi
iiigiiJtii-8  in  the  Lncniiian  dialect  "revolj

Bnittiuin,  Bruttiua,  iind  Bruttio^
iiiort'  nHtiiilly  lallt'il  Bmttii,  iW't^r  iho  i|
Till'  Huutliurii  I'Xtrvuiity  of  Italy,  wpi^
Ltit'anin  l»y  n  line  drawn  from  tlir  ni(i
Lans  toTliurii.  and  enrronndiMl  on  tbc^
sidcH  liy  till'  M-ii.  It  \TiiS  tlir  votiitir,
ancient  timc«(h>notria  and  Italia.  TtiC
motintainon».  as  thc<  A)>fiiuiii«*B  nitt  y
drtwu  lo  the  Sicilian  .Sintit«;  it  contJil
lent  |>ii9tiir»£0  for  cattle,  and  the  valloj
giHHl  vnra,  olive»,  attd  fniit.  The  varlic
atitv  of  tliu  cuntitry  were  Oenotrtain*.  8
ty  wiuiv  LncaiiiaiiH,  \a\ut  had  rp^tdteil
coniitryniBii  in  Lm-uuin,  took  posMcs^
country,  and  were  lieuei-  rallod  Bnillil
which  word  \»  naid  to  mean  "rebcU'*
gituge  of  the  Lncaiiiaufl.  This  peopB
inhabited  only  the  interior  of  the  land
was  almost  entirety  in  the  pntiAcssiou  <4
coloniea,  At  the  close  of  the  Second  1
in  which  the  Urnttii  had  l>e«u  the  alti^
bal,  they  lost  Ihmr  indeiietideuce,  and  it
hy  tliH  Ronuins  with  ^ii^at  tHM'fHly.
dei'lnrvd  In  lip  pnblic  HiavoK,  anil  were  t
lirtorti  and  iiervautb  of  the  mnfjistratua.

BrotOA.  (1)  L.  IiTNirs  Bstrrus.  A
Koinaii,  the  author,  accoidiiig  lo  the  )
eiidH,  of  tln«  Krrat  rvvoliition  wliidi  drft
the  Proud  fmtii  hin  thruue,  un<l  which  i
the  Doiuuhir  for  the  regal  govcrniw.il>
the  sou  (if  MarL-iiH  Inniiih  aud  uf  Tai
second  daughter  of  Tarquiu.  While  jri
yrara,  h«  saw  hit)  father  aud  brother  rf
order  of  Tarqiiiu,  and  having  uo  lueaii
iiiK  them,  aud  fenriiiK  the  same  fute  to
alTecled  a  ttlupid  air,  iu  ortler  uut  to  ^
tbniiidabli*  in  the  eyes  of  a  r>ii»ptciuiit
tyrnut.  This  artitice  provLnl  siicceiMtTd
fiir  dereiviMl  Tun|uin  and  lliu  other  0
the  riiyal  family  that,  tliev  >;aVL<  liiui,!
the  Kiirnaine  of  ItnitiiK,  as  iudicalivot
poHinl  mental  imlHi-ility.  At  length,  4
tia  hud  W'eii  otitni}j;e<l  by  SextuH  Tar^
tUH,  auiitl  the  iiidiKuntion  that  iK-rvudo)
threw  ufl' tlio  iiia»k,aiKl  biiatchiiig  tho4
the  boBoiii  of  the  victim,  swore  upoil
exile  to  the  family  of  Tan|iiiii.  Wearft
the  tyranny  of  tliin  moii»ri:lii,  aud  ex4l
theiiim-tarle  of  (lie  fancnil  Mulemnili(>af
the  iieople  Hboliitlicd  royolly,  aud  at
idiiefautbonly  to  the  Hi-nate  and  two  |
named  at  lint  pi-aet4>rtt.  hut  Mibiiet|ucu)
Urntns  and  the  bimbaud  of  Liic:retia  Uf
ventetl  nith  tliis  important  ottice.  TbOf
their  eiitrunee  upon  ita  duties  hy  nial
pcuplu  t^k^  a  solemn  nuth  never  ogAit
kiuj{  of  Home.  KlforlM,  nevnrtbela^
made  ill  favour  of  the  Tanpiinit:  anj
iwnl  from  Etniria.  under  the  pretext  •
a  ri'sloralion  <if  the  pro[>erty  of  Tarqt
fuuitly,  formed  a  secret  plot  for  the  tf
the  new  government;  aud  tlie  Moia  i


BRUTDS


2i6


BRirrus


tAdiM  Inntufl  BratnK (THtluk  KoMnia.)

I  couDect«d  irilb  the  conapinicr. A  discov*

fbriug  boeti  uiadt^.  Iliu  diiua  of  tliu  ctmsiil  luid

Uicif  M»iumpli<wH  vi'tirL*  IritKl,  ciiiiileni)ic<l,  ami  cxc*

cnW  hy  tliti  on1»rM  of  iliu  ffttber,  aUtioiigli  the

IMiople  «ren>  willing  that  hv  ^lionM  pardon  ilietii.

ftvin  tli'u  tiiuv,  Briilua  M>iiglit  only  to  ilio  liini-

"If.  \m\,  M.me moutlis al'tt-r,  a liattle botweeu

<I^»  Rumans  and  tlu; Lruojis  of  Tiirr|iiiu  otmbkd

^"■)  tn  );rntify  Inn  wiali. H«  eiicouuteivil,  in  ll]<-

^lil,  AruriH,  thi^  tfLtu  uf  tUu  fxiled  iiioiinrcb ;  ami

*'itli  Bu  lunch  iiuiwtiiosity  did  itmy  ninU  1<>  thf

^  Mtitclt  Hint  ttoth  fi-U  dead  on  the  »pol>  piiirced  U)

l^bcArt  cjicb  by  tliu  n-capim  i>f  thu  utbt<r. TbL>

rl«fte  uf  Uriitus  W(L4  carriii]  tu  Rome  in  iriutupli.


L'uiii  n>t>ruftBiiltBK  itM  riiU'trra  «^  UruUM
kd  lo  doalli  by  LKbira

"'•MMiil  Valerius  pninniiiicud  a  fiiiiiTal  eulogy
"■"f  ii,  adiaiiw  uf  bnmwi  was  raiiwd  to  tlie  umiii-
^uf  tb«  decvoMvd  ill  tbti  C'lipitu),  uiid  the  Ro>
*■"  •owwo  wore  luouruiiig  for  uu  entire  year.
(■*'  D.  Ii  ML's  BRUix'b.  luudlcr  of  ihc  bor*o  a.v.c.
JJ8,iu„I  consul  X.V.C.  4i9  (  Liv.  viii.  12,  29).  <  3  i
"  U'Mvs  BitLTUs,  continl  a.I'.c.  (!15,  obtained  it
J"*"*?!!  for  bis  8occt;**e«  iu  Spain,  (4)  M.
'"siu  Bkltls,  father  of  tbe  BruiriB  who  waa
^^^H«ni«d  in  thf  awnUHioaliuii  uf  CiuiMLr.  He
^KiliQccj  tli(«  jiarty  nf  Mariii»,  and  wfu  ovw-
•■«««  by  Puiu]Mty.*  After  tbu  death  of  Siillft,
B*d  ibe  renewal  of  bootilititiit,  he  v^aa  bvaleg«d
"  Hutiua  by  Puiopcy,  who  c-imjiclled  bim  l«i
•'^'*i»d«r  afler  a  long  rc-tiatauco,  and  caust-d
'"b  bi  Im  put  lu  death,  lie  vriut  hrother-iu-law
''>Cmo  hy  bin  wU'e  SorviliA. UruLus  was  au  able


lawyer,  and  wrote  on  tht<  Civil  Warn  iCir.  BruL
Oi;  id.  Or.  ii.  32;  lA.  Pnt  ClmnLUX}.  i5)  MAiicrs
Irxit's  Bni'Tt'N,  Huu  of  th«  pnictrdiiig,  wax  by  the
luiilhtfr'ti  nide  nephew  of  M.  Cato  ^irtiM>nHii)j.
Hn  uei'oiupnuied  hu  iiiiclti  to  Cypi'UH,  A.t'.c.  1195.
where  the  lattur  \va<ii  M^tit  by  Cloiliua  to  annex
that  iHland  to  the  Uouiuu  Kitipin-.  It  iipiirni-ti,
however,  that  he  did  not  copy  the  exHni|ile  of
Cato'ft  integrity:  fur.  having  bMrome  tho  cird-
ttor  uf  tho  citizouit  of  Saluiniit  to  a  large  amount.
hf>  eniphiyefl  on«  Seaptin-s,  n  man  of  infamnns
cliaractpr.  I<i  enforuj  the  payment  of  the  ilfhl,
together  with  an  iiilereNt  four  titneit  exoeeding
the  rate  allowiKl  by  hiw  (  Cie.  Ad  Atl.  v.  SI  I.
Whvn  t'it'i'ni  yoverned  tbe  pnivinco  of  Ciliriti.
til  which  Cyprus  aiH-iuii  to  havo  been  atiitexrd,
BriilnM  wrote  lu  him,  and  was  aupiHirlrd  by
AttiL-ita  in  hix  nique«t,  eutrvoting  liim  to  givu
Si'aptina  a  coiumiHsinn  oa  an  otttcpt  of  the  Ko-
Uian  govomnient,  and  to  allow  him  to  employ
a  military  force  to  exact  from  the  Snlaniiniiins
the  n(turioo»  interest  which  he  illegnlly  de-
nuiuded.  Cicero  wiu  too  upright  n  inngibirate
to  comply  with  unvh  mincRta,  but  thiiy  were  bi>
agrettable  to  the  practiro  uf  the  limra  that  tie
continiH-d  to  live  ou  inlimute  liMina  with  the
nuni  w  ho  rould  pn;fer  them ;  ami  Iho  literary
tiwtes  of  nnitnx  were  a  ri^ornmendation  nldch
li<:  could  not  resiBt ;  wi  that  he  appearn  koou  to
havo  forgott^m  the  affair  of  Scaptiiw.  and  to  liavo
(ipolien  and  thought  nf  Bnitim  with  great-  re-
gard. They  l>oth.  iadeed,  wew  uf  the  name  party
in  jHtlitica,  and  Bnttiis  actively  exerted  hiniiH-lf
in  fho  Horvico  uf  Poroiiey,  nlthongh  bin  tiwii
father  lind  been  ]int  to  death  by  the  order**  uf
that  roniniaodvr.  iVriiig  taken  prtNotior  in  tliu
battle  uf  PhaiMdia.  he  nM-eived  hia  lifft  front  the
cttDiineror.  Before  Caewir  Mtt  out  for  Africa  to
carry  oti  war  agaiuMt  Seipio  and  lubn,  he  oou-
iVrred  on  llrutna  the  govenimeut  of  Cisalpine
(jau),  and  iu  that  pruviove  Bnitna  aceurflingly
remained,  and  wiut  aoiimlly  holding  au  olfU'o
under  Caedtu*  while  Uia  tiiicle  Ciito  wum  inntri*
taiitlng  tbe  contest  in  Africa  and  cotnnntted
nnicidti  nuher  than  fait  alive  into  ihe  hands
.  of  the  enemy.  Hia  character,  however,  .neeran  to
have  beon  greatly  impnived  Mince  hiH  treat-
meiit  of  the  SulHininiaiiH,  fur  hti  is  fuiid  lo  ba^u
governed  (.'ianlpiiiu  (jaul  with  gi'uiil  ititegi-ity  and
hnuiiiuity.  In  the  rear  u,c.  45  hu  relnmed  to
Hume,  but  afterwards  aot  unt  to  nioec  C.te«ar
ou  hi»  return  frcm  Spain,  and,  iu  an  interview
which  be  had  with  him  at  Nicaea,  pleailiHl  the
caiiHo  of  DeiiitaruH,  tetrarch  of  Oalatia,  with  anch
warmth  and  f]-eedoni  that  ('M'Mir  waa  Htriick
liy  it.  and  was  remiiidecl  nf  what  he  iiHwl  fri»-
(piently  to  bay  uf  Brutnti — that  what  bin  iiielt-
natiuuM  luigbl  be  luude  a  very  grtrat  dill'ertiijce;
but  that,  whatever  they  wei-o,  lliey  wunld  be
nothing  lukewurni.  It  was  about  tbnt  time  aluo
that  BrutUft  divorced  hia  tlrut  wile,  Appiu.  dangh*
tvr  uf  Appiiiit  CInndins,  and  married  the  la-
niona  I'orcia,  his  couaiu,  tbe  daughter  of  Cato.
Soon  after,  be  received  another  mark  of  Cae-
ftar'a  favour,  iu  being  appuiiited  protitur  urba-
niiH,  B.C.  41 ;  and  be  wan  holding  that  uflHoe
when  he  rewdvod  to  become  the  assasHln  of
the  man  whoso  government  he  had  twice  ac-
knowledged by  consenting  to  act  in  a  pub-
lic atatiou  nuder  it.  He  waa  led  into  tiie  uou>
spirocy,  it is  said,  by  CoMiua,  who  nougbt at


BRUTUS


226


BUBASTIS


first  by  writiug,  and  afterwanU  by  meaus  of  his
wife  luuia,  the  sister  of  Brutas,  to  obtain  his  cou-
sent  to  become  an  accomplice;  and  Plutarch  iii-
fonns  us  that  wheu  the  attaclc  was  made  on  Cae-
sar iit  tho  Setiat«-hoase,  the  latter  resisted  and  en-
deavoured to  escape,  until  he  saw  the  dagger  of


Uarcua  luDius  BrutuB.

Bmtus  pointed  against  him,  when  be  covered  his
head  with  his  robe  and  resigned  himself  to  his
fate. See  Caesar.

After  the  assassination  of  Caeaar,  the  conspira-
tors eudeavoured  to  stir  up  the  feelings  of  the
people  iufavonr  of  liberty ;  hut  Antony,  by  reading
tho  will  of  the  dictator,  excited  against  them  so
violent  a  stonn  of  odium  that  they  were  compelled
to  flee  from  the  city.  Brittus  retired  to  Athens,
and  used  every  exertion  to  raise  a  party  tbei*e
among  the  Roman  nobility.  Obtaining  possession,
at  the  same  time,  of  a  large  sum  of  the  public
money,  be  was  enabled  to  bring  to  his  standard
many  of  the  old  soldiers  of  Pompey  who  were  scat-
tered about  Thossaly.  His  forces  daily  increasing,
be  soon  saw  himself  surrounded  by  a  considerable
army,  and  Horteusius,  the  governor  of  Macedonia,
aidiug  him,  Brutus  became  master  in  this  way  of
all  Greece  and  Macedonia.  He  went  now  to  Asia
and  joined  Cassius,  whose  efforts  had  been  eqnally
successful.  In  Rome,  on  tho  other  hand,  the  tri-
umvirs were  all-powerfnl ;  the  conspirators  had
been  condemned,  and  the  people  had  taken  up
arms  against  them.  Brutus  and  Cnssius  returned
to  Europe  to  oppose  the  triamvirs,  and  Octavius
and  Antony  met  them  on  the  plains  of  Philippi.
In  this  memorable  conflict  Brutus  commanded  the
right  wing  of  the  republican  army,  and  defeated
the  division  of  the  enemy  opposed  to  him,  and
would  in  all  probability  have  gained  the  day  if,
instead  of  pureuing  the  fugitives,  he  had  brought
reinforcements  to  bis  left  wing,  commanded  by
Cassius,  which  was  hard  pressed  and  eventually
beaten  by  Antony.  Cassius,  upon  this,  believing
everything  lost,  slew  himself  in  despair.  Brutus
bitterly  deplored  bis  fate,  styling  him,  with  tears
of  the  sincurest  sorrow,  '*  the  last  of  the  Romaus."
On  the  following  day,  induced  by  tho  ardour  of  the
soldiers,  Brutus  again  drew  up  his  forces  inline  of
battle,  but  no  action  took  place,  and  be  then  took
possession  of  an  advantageous  post,  where  it  was
difficult  for  an  attack  to  be  made  upon  him.  His
true  policy  was  to  have  remained  in  this  state,
without  hazarding  an  engagement,  for  his  oppo-
nents were  distressed  for  provisions,  and  the  fleet
that  was  bringing  them  supplies  hod  been  totally


defeated  by  the  vessels  of  Bmtas.  The  couditioD  iif
things,  however,  was  unknown  to  the  latter,  auH,
after  an  interval  of  twenty  days,  he  baz^iiled  a
second  battle.  Where  he  himself  fought  ia  jht-
son,  he  was  still  successful ;  but  the  rest  of  lim
force  was  soon  overcome,  and  the  conflict  ciidnl  in
a  total  defeat  of  tho  republican  army.  Escaping
with  only  a  few  friends,  be  passed  the  nigbt  in  a
cave,  and,  as  he  saw  his  cause  irretrievably  miiipd,
ordered  Strato,  one  of  his  attendants,  to  kill  liim.
Strato  refused  for  a  long  time  to  perform  the  pain-
ful office;  but,  seeing  Brutus  resolved,  he  tumed
away  bis  face,  and  held  his  sword  wbilo  BniiDH
fell  upon  it.  He  died  in  the  forty-thii-d  year  of
his  age,  b.c.  42.

A  great  deal  of  false  glnmonr  has  been  thrown
around  the  character  of  Brutus.  That  he  van  a
stern  and  consistent  patriot  throughout  tho  vhole
of  his  career,  the  sketch  which  we  hove  given  «f
bis  movement-s  prior  to  the  assassination  of  Caesar
most  clearly  disproves.  Why  hold  office  under  one
who  was  trampling  upon  the  liberties  of  his  coun-
try t  Why  require  so  much  solicitation  before
engaging  in  the  conspiracy  T  Was  ho  not  avaro
that  Caesar  was  a  usurper  T  —  this  would  (how
a  miserable  want  of  penetration.  Or  if  he  jirefer-
red  security  to  danger,  where  was  the  Romaii  pft-
triot  in  thisf  The  truth  is  that  Brutus,  uotwiib-
standing  all  that  has  been  said  of  him,  wns  bni  a
tardy  patriot.  His  motives  towonls  the  close  of
his  career  were  no  doubt  pure  enough,  but  he  ought
to  have  hod  nothing  to  do  with  Caesar  frum  the
moment  when  that  general  began  to  act  with  trea-
son towards  his  country.  As  a  student  and  man
of  letters,  the  character  of  Brutus  appears  to  more
advantage  than  as  a  patriot.  He  was  reniarkuMe
for  literary  application,  nsnnlly  rising  with  this
view  long  l>efore  day,  and  it  is  said  thut  ou  the
evening  previous  to  a  battle,  while  his  army  vaf
in  a  state  of  anxious  suspense  and  alarm,  be  calm-
ly occupied  himself  in  his  tent  with  writing  an
abridgment  of  the  history  of  Polybius.  One  of  the
most  singular  circumstances  in  the  life  of  Bnitns
is  that  of  the  so-called  apparition  which,  it  was
said,  appeared  to  him  on  one  occasion  in  bis  teui
at  midnight.  "Who  art  thonf*  inquired  Bnitn^
"Thy  evil  genius,"  replied  the  phantom ;  '"wo
shall  meet  again  at  Philippi.'^  And  so  it  hap-
pened. The  spirit  reappeared  on  the  eve  of  the
second  battle  of  Philippi — a  story  that  r^uiiuds
oue  of  the  Bodach  Glas  in  Waverley.  See  Plutarch's
life  of  Brutus.

Brygi  (Bpyyw)  or  Biygea  (also  Brvoi  and  Frc-
GE8).  A  barbarous  tribo  iu  northern  Macedonia-
believed  by  the  ancients  to  have  been  the  ethnic
source  of  the  Phrygians ;  hence  the  name  ia  some-
times use  for  Phryges. See  Pubtgia.

Bubaosos  ( Bu/Sao-o-dr ).  An  ancient  city  of
Caria,  east  of  Cnidus,  and  giving  its  name  to  tb«
hay,  Buhassius  Sinus.

Bnbaatis  (Bou^aorir)  or  Bnbaatoa  (hov^trm).
The  capital  of  the  Nomos  Bubastitea  in  Lower
Egypt,  which  stood  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the
Pelnsiao  branch  of  the  Nile,  and  was  the  chirf
seat  of  the  worship  of  the  goddess  Bnba8ti8(Pa»ht\
whom  the  Greeks  identified  with  Artemis,  aud  who
was  regarded  as  the  dangbter  of  Ra  and  bride  wf
Ptah,  symbolizing  the  sexual  passion.  More  thnu
70,000  persons  sometimes  took  part  in  her  festival*
at  this  place. Here  also  the  cata  sacred  to  Buha>-


BUBO


387


BUCINA


lis  were  buried.  The  modern  name  of  the  city  is
Tel  Battt.  Here  in  1887  the  French  explorer,  M.
NaviUe,  discovered  the  ruins  of  the  great  temple  of
Bubaatis,  and  further  exoavatious  in  1888  showed
the  city  to  have  beeu  a  very  important  place  un-
der the  Hyksos. See  Aegyptus.

Bubo. The  homed  owl.

Bnooo  (from  bucca,  the  cheek).  The  name  of  a
stock  character  contiunally  iutroduced  into  the
Atellan  playa,  aud  represented  as  a  gabbliug  fool.
Isiilorus  {Orig.  x.  30)  gives  buoeo  ^=  $arrulu». See

XTEU.ASAB  FaBDLAE.

Baocttla. See  Galea.

BaOOphfila  (Bovx/^oXa,  also  Bovxf^aXf  I'a,  BovKf
4>a\ia).  A  city  on  the  Hydaapes  in  northern  India,
built  by  Alexander  the  Great  after  his  battle  with
Poms,  in  memory  of  his  favourite  horse  Bucepha-
lus (q.  v.),  who  died  there.

Bucapliftlaa  (BovKt<f)aXos).  A  horse  belonging
to  Alexander  the  Great,  so  called  either  because
his  bead  resembled  that  of  an  ox  (^o6r  m^oX^);
or  because  he  had  the  mark  of  an  ox's  head  im-
pressed upon  his  flauk ;  or,  according  to  others,  be-
cause, like  an  ox,  he  had  a  black  mark  npou  his
bead,  the  rest  of  hia  body  being  white.  Plutarch
states  that  the  horse  had  beeu  offered  for  sale  to
Philip  by  a  Tbessaliau,  but  had  proved  so  unman-
ageable that  the  monarch  refused  to  purchase,  and
ordered  it  to  be  taken  away.  Alexander  there-
upon expressing  his  regret  that  they  were  losiug
so  fine  a  horse  for  want  of  skill  and  spirit  to  man-
age it,  Philip  agreed  to  pay  the  price  of  the  steed
if  his  sou  would  ride  it.  The  prince  accepted  the
offer,  and  succeeded  ia  the  attempt.  Bucephalns,
after  this,  would  allow  do  oue  but  Alexander  to
mount  him,  and  be  accompauied  the  mouorcb  in
all  bis  campaigns.  In  the  battle  with  Porns,
he  received,  according  to  the  same  authority,
several  wounds,  uf  n'hich  he  died  not  long
after.  An  ancient  writer,  however,  quoted  by
Plutarch,  states  that  he  died  of  age  aud  fa-
tigue, being  thirty  years  old.  See  Arrian,  Anab.
V.  19.

Bnchanan.  George.  A  famous  classical  scholar,
the  most  distingnished  in  tlie  annals  of  Scottish
classical  philology.  He  was  born  of  humble  par-
eutage  at  Killearn,  in  February,  1506.  At  the  age
of  fourteen,  hia  uncle  sent  him  to  the  Uuiversity
of  Paris,  where  he  acquired  a  local  reputation  for
his  facility  in  writing  Latin  verse.  In  1522,  be  re-
turned to  Scotland,  aud,  after  serving  in  a  military
expe4litiou  against  the  English,  matriculated  at
the  UDtvereity  of  St.  Andrews,  from  which  at  the
end  of  one  year  he  received  the  Bachelor's  degree
(lo2S).  In  1526,  he  returned  to  France,  where  he
soon  took  the  Master's  degree  at  the  Scottish
College  of  Paris,  and  after  two  years  of  great  desti-
tution succeeded  in  winning  a  professorship  at  the
College  of  Saiute  Barbe.  In  1535,  he  once  more
visited  Scotland,  having  been  made  tutor  to  the
son  of  the  Earl  of  Cossilis.  Soon  after  be  ntrder-
took  the  education  of  an  illegitimate  son  of  the
king  (JamM  V.).  Having  written  two  satires
against  the  Franoiscau  clergy  (entitled  ^nnium
and  FranciMoanua\  he  was  imprisoned  at  the  instiga-
tion of  Cardinal  Beaton,  but  escaping  fled  to  France
(1539),  and  was  appointed  to  a  professorship  in  the
College  of  Bordeaux,  by  Andr€  deGonv^a,  its  head.
At  the  end  of  three  years,  an  outbreak  of  the


plague  forced  him  to  leave  Bordeaux,  whence  he
went  to  Paris,  receiving  a  professorship  in  the
college  of  the  Cardinal  le  Moyue.  By  the  influence
of  De  Gouv^a  he  was  called  to  the  newly  founded
Uuiversity  of  Coimbra  in  Portugal  (1547).  Here
hia  heretical  opinions  led  to  his  enforced  seclusion
in  a  monastery,  where  be  began  his  celebrated
version  of  the  Psalms  in  Latin  verse.  Upon  hia
release  he  visited  England,  anbsequeiitly  returning
to  France  to  l>ecome  tutor  to  tbe  sou  of  the  Mar^
chal  de  Brissac  (1555).  In  1560,  he  returned  to
Scotland,  which  he  now  made  his  permaueut  home.
In  the  struggles  between  Queen  Mary  and  the
Scottish  peers,  Bncbanau  bore  a  prominent  part.
He  bad  beeu  the  classical  tutor  of  tbe  queen,
to  whom  he  dedicated  his  version  of  the  Psalms,
bnt  after  the  death  of  Damley,  took  sides  with
the  faction  of  the  nobles,  joining  at  the  same
time  tbe  Reformed  Church.  In  1566,  the  regent,
Murray,  appointed  him  Principal  of  St.  Leonard's
College  in  tbe  University  of  St.  Andrews,  and  soon
after  Mary's  imprisonment  in  Locbleveu,  Buchanan
was  mode  Moilerator  of  the  General  Assembly.
lu  1566,  be  accompanied  Murray  to  the  famous
Conference  of  York.  While  Lennox  was  regent,
Bnohanau  assumed  cliarge  of  the  education  of  tbe
young  king,  James  VI.,  afterwards  James  I.  of
England,  who  in  after-years  always  spoke  of  his
learned  tntor  with  respect  and  pride.  From  1570
to  1576,  Buchanan  was  Keeper  of  the  Privy  Seal,
resigning  it  to  devote  his  time  to  the  preparation
of  a  history  of  Scotland,  which  was  published  a
month  before  hia  death.  This  event  took  place
on  September  28th,  1582,  and  was  followed  by
his  burial  in  tbe  Greyfriars'  Churchyard,  Edin-
burgh.

As  a  classicist,  Buchanan  was  best  known  for
his  skill  in  Latin  verse,  in  which  be  easily  ranked
flrst  among  bis  contemporaries;  and  be  is  gener-
ally regarded  as  the  most  brilliant  of  all  the  British
humanists  of  tbe  sixteenth  centory.  Hia  range  of
subjects  was  wide,  from  veraions  of  the  Psaluis,
theological  topics,  and  political  pasquinades,  to
erotic  verses  whose  Indecency  may  be  regarded  as
purely  conventional,  though  grotesque  enough  as
the  production  of  a  professed  reformer  of  re-
ligion.

As  a  man,  Buchanan  was  stem,  strong-willed,
and  domineeriug,  making  many  enemies,  whom  be
attacked  with  a  violence  of  invective  that  belonged
to  the  custoDiB  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived.  Be-
sides tbe  works  mentioned  above,  he  wrote  a  vio-
lent diatribe  against  the  queen,  Detectio  Mariae
Regintte,  and  a  bold  political  tract  De  lure  Begni,  in
which  he  states  the  doctrine  that  kings  exist  only
by  tbe  will  of  tbe  people  and  for  tbe  people's

good.

His  wt'itinga  were  edited  in  the  laat  century  by
tbe  elder  Burmann.  See  Irving,  Life  of  George
Buchanan  (1817).

BnoXna  OSvjcokii).  A  kind  of  born-trumpet,  orig-
inally made  out  of  a  shell,  in  which  case  it  is  often,
especially  in  poetry,  denoted  by  concha  (Gk.  jcd^Xot),
and  was  made  uot  ouly  from  tbe  bucimim,  but  from
uiany  other  kinds  of  spiral  shells.  It  is  happily
described  by  Ovid  (Metam.  i.  335).

The  bucina,  as  seen  in  art,  agrees  closely  with
his  description,  and  also  with  the  shape  of  tbe  shell
ftiictninn,  and,  like  tt,  might  almost  be  described,  in
the  language  of  couchologiste,  as  spiral  and  gib-
bons. The  two  drawings  in  tbe  annexed  illustra-


UUCOUCA


BL'fHOMA


Bnclou. i»om  uclMil  frMta  Md  Kulpiurv.)

tioTi  iiKnw  with  this  account. Bo«  CoRNt;;  Li*
tits;  Ti  ba.

BtlOoUoa  (ra  BavKoKuca).  Tim  poonw  of  Verj^il,
written  it.c.  4I-;K>,  in  imttntioii  and  in  pitrl  IruiiH-
lutioua  of  Thfocritiut  (q.  v.).  Many  iillii«i<>ii8  to
cuiil«DiiK)ntij  hi«t(>ry  »r«  iucludt-d.  In  Cite  MSi^.
the  iiidividuul  jhwuih  are  called  Kclogae,  and  nrv  tu-
ilay  uftcni^t  spoken  of  aA  "the  Eclngnes."  A  re-
cent trnnslatiou  in  that  uf  S.  Piihuer  (London,
18C3).  (See  VKRGlurs.)  Uticolica  were  also  writ-
ten in  Grook  by  Bion  aud  >loechu«;  and  in  Latin
br  Calpornltw  SiculuB  (q.  V.  ),  niidiT  Xero;  by
Septimius  SeiviiDd  iOpiuotla  ItMrtiliu),  of  nuccrtaiu
date:  by  Aa»nni(t«  (q.  v.);  and  hy  Il«»<'thin»  (ij.  v.),
ivhuew  Carttm  PHcoUcum  baa  soniH  merit,  6e«
Hiinj;»?r,  J)r  Poetii  Ruutanorum  ^uru/ioa  (Halle,  1841);
and  W.  V.  8ellur,  Komaa  Poets  0/  the  Att^uttan  A$«
(Oxfurd,  1883).

BucolTcum  (ri^  Bol;Ko^uAv  arofui).  Que  of  the
IDCinlhft  (tl'tlie  Nili!  (llerml.  vit.  134).

Bufo. The  toad.

BuIeS  (Keltic).  A  stnati  lealhem  bag  which
vtws  cArried  on  the  arai  (Nun.  ».  v.  p.  'd,  ed.  Mer-
cer), ill  the  8anie  luauner  oh  the
ui4K]eni  retiriilc,  by  travellera,
who  U!k4  it  an  a  money  bog
(L'icil.  iiaU  vi.  p.  80,  1  *n\.  (ler-
hich  ;  V^^rru  ap.  Nou.  I.e.);  and
by  furutera,  as  a  pouch,  contaiu-
injt  the  deed  at  aowinn  time  ^the  R„,p^  ,^.,p,
mipu  trrrt(itto(f}6pos  of  the  Gn-ek
Anthology},  to  which  dm  the  example  here  given
wn«  applied  ;  il  is  home  by  a  fijinre  fiirnlHbed  tvith
viii-ions  iiMph-nienI*  of  himbandi->'  on  a  bcantitdl
ttilvcr  tasta  of  the  Xeapolitau  MuMuniu  {Mu;  liorb.
xii.  47).

Bulla  (DovXiff).  A  town  of  Ph oris  on  the  shorp
of  the  Sinus  LVi-iuthlacui),  southeast  of  Anticyro.

Bulla.  A  circular  plate  or  biMA  i>f  metal,  ho
CbII'nI  from  its  re-^euiblnoee  in  fnnii  lo  n  hiibbic
Qoutiti);  upon  watei*.  Urifrlit  studn  of  thiit  desorip-
lion  ueru  nMid  to  adoni  the  sn-pnl-belt  (aiirea  bnili*
eiiigula ;  huUia  aaper  baltrua}.  Another  uae  of  them
waa  tu  doora  the  parts  of  which  wero  fastened  to-
gether by  bra**-heuUed,  or  even  by  guld-headed,
uuils. The  inaguifloent  brouzu  duurs  of  the  Puu-


Goldea  DtitlL (Dr^ilib  MoMBm.)


tmulfft

4


tkeon  al  Kome  are  ouiichetl  with  liighly  ortamen'

C4l IlO(l»C«.

We  most  freqoeully  read,  bowevor,  of  bulla«  ■
oniunienrs  worn  by  ebildren  An^ppniled  from  til
ni*ck,  and  e»|ivcially  by  the  wtns  of  the  noltli-  at
weallhy,  Hncb  a  one  is  r.ilird  hcrtM  bullatu*  ""
Juvenal.  Htit  bulls  wan  iiiatli*  uf  iblu  p  la  tea
jfnld.  Ita  usual
ftiriu  in  shown  lu
thennnexedillns-
I  ration,  which
reprcHeotR  a  line
bulla  prewrvtsl
in  IhcHritishMn-
iieum,  and  i»  of
thu  Hizc  of  the
original.

The  bulla  waa
worn  by  children
of  both  boxeu  for
oTooniL'ut,  as  u
token  of  pateruiil
affection  and  a
siguofhi^b  birth,
aud,a!j  it  wajtt^iv*
en  to  infuntB,  it
fl(nnnrinie8  wrv-
ed,  like  other  i>r-

uatuents  or  pldythitigH  {nejmndia),  to  reco^tiit^
loat  child.  Probably,  aJso,  il  contained  0111  ukyj
Sm  Amclktum.

Instead  of  the  bulla  of  gold,  boys  of  infcrinf  I
iucluding  the;  chitdreu  of  freedmuii,  wore  1
piece  of  leather  (forum).

The  use  of  the  bulla,  like  that  of  the  xmutV
(q.  v.),  waM  derived  from  the  Klruscans.

Ou  arriving  nt  adolescence,  the  bulla  was  I
Hfiide, logetliFir with the  pruetextAf  nud it
ofien  coutteenited,  on this  oceasiuu,  to  the  La^
ox  to  somu  divinity. See  KAtHriNL'M.

Bullia  ( UovAXi'v). A  towu  of  Illyria,  ou  the  c
Houlij  of  .\polloniB.

BupSlua  {Sovnn\ot). A  Bcniptor  and  uk-
b<jrti  in  th<-  inland  of  Uhios,  and  son  uf  Aulhcj
or  rather  ArehcunuM. He encountered  il
uio«ity  of  the  poet  Hippotiax  (q.  v.),  the  cd
which  is  said  to  have  bcuu  the  refusal  of]
to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  HiJ
while  others  iufurui  us  tlmt  il wa«  owj
wlalue  made  In  derision  of  tlw;  pi»ct  by  ,
The  satire  and  invective  of  the  bard  wd
veru (hat, aceunling to one ucctniiiti
hatiged  liimself  in  tle^pair  (Ilomcv,  A'/>
His  brother's  name  wutt  .\tbeuis. In
the Htutiie  which nitiialua made in
Hippunax,  other  works  are  mentioned  J
the  joint  pHHluetimin  of  the  two  h\{
C'allim.  Fray,  'JO,  ed.  Krnesli.

Buphonia fra  $ov<f>6vta). A fi-^
honour  of  Zens  at  Athens. The  li-^.j|
with  this  festival  is  u  tiingntar  one
laws  given  by  Triptolciuus  to  the  aJ
more espteinlly reunirkable ^toi<
your  eldent — Honour  th«>  gods  by
Aiitt  fruits — Hurl not the liilioui
the  beast  «)uploye<l  in  ngricnltt:
oll'entled  ngaiuat  this  liuit  cnum
Uauieil  Thaulou,  »ho,  ut  the  fe:


BUPRASIUM


229


BUSTIRAW


ex]>iation-fen8t  {^ov<p6yia),  instituted  for  the  pnr-
poae  of  atoiiing  for  tbis  iuvuluutnry  offence,  it  wai
fonod  afterwards  expedient  to  coutinne.  The  cer-
emooieB  obeerretl  in  it  are  not  a  little  aniuaiug.
t'lrst  was  brought  water  by  women  appointed  for
the  office,  fur  the  purpose  of  sharpening  the  axe
and  kuife  with  which  the  slaughter  was  to  be
committed.  One  of  these  women  having  banded
the  axe  to  the  proper  functionary,  tbe  latter  felled
the  beast  and  then  took  to  flight.  To  slay  tbe
beast  outright  was  tbe  ofl3ee  of  a  third  person.
All  prejtent  then  partook  of  the  flesh.  The  meal
Hui?<bed,  the  bide  was  staffed,  and  the  beast,  ap-
pareutly  restored  to  life,  was  put  to  tbe  plough.
Now  commenced  the  steer-trial.  A  judicial  assem-
bly was  held  in  tbe  Prytanenm,  to  which  all  were
siinimoiied  who  had  been  partakers  in  tbe  above
trautuLctiou.  Each  lays  the  blame  upou  tbe  other.
The  water-bearere  throw  tbe  guilt  npon  the  sharp-
ener of  the  axe  and  knife;  tbe  sharpener  of  tbe
knife  casts  it  npou  the  person  delivering  it  to  the
feller  of  tbe  beast ;  tbe  feller  of  tbe  beast  upou
the  actnal  slaughterer,  while  this  last  ascribes  the
whole  gnilt  to  tbe  knife  itself.  Tbe  knife,  unable
to  speak,  is  found  guilty  and  thrown  into  the  sea.

Bnpraslum  (Boxnrpdfrtov).  An  ancient  city  of
Elis  mentioned  by  Homer  [11.  ii.  615).

Biira  (Bovpa).  One  of  the  twelve  original  cities
of  Acba«a,  formerly  situated  near  tbe  sea;  but
having  been  destroyed  by  an  earthqnake,  it  was
rebuilt  by  the  survivors  about  forty  sta^lia  from
the  shore,  ou  the  river  Buraicus  (Hero<l.  i.  145).

BniaXous  (Bovpautos).  An  epithet  applied  to
Heracles,  from  his  temple  uear  Bura.

BnrcUgftla.  The  modem  Bordeaux ;  the  chief
town  of  the  BitnHgee  Vivisci,  on  tbe  left  bank  of
the  Gammna  (Garonne).  Under  the  Empire  it
was  a  place  of  great  commercial  importance.  Aa-
ttonhis  (q.  v.),  who  was  horn  there,  describes  it  in
his  little  poem  entitled  Ordo  Xohiliam  Urbium.  Tbe
(inly  reniainiug  Roman  monument  in  the  town  is
tbe  amphitheatre  locally  known  as  tbe  Argues,  or
Palais  Gallien. It  is  in  a  greatly  damaged  state.

Btircligalens6  Xtlnerazinm. See  Itineraria.

BoTgnndionea  or  Bnrgaitdli.  A  powerful  na-
tion of  Germany,  dwelling  oHginally  between  the
Viadus  (Oder)  and  the  Vistula,  and  of  tbe  same
race  as  the  Vandals  or  Ootbs.  They  were  driven
imt  of  their  original  abodes  by  the  Gepidae,  and
the  greater  part  of  them  settle<l  in  tbe  coantry  on
the  Maine.  In  the  fifth  century  they  settled  in
(ianl,  where  they  founded  the  powerful  kingdom
«f  Bui^undy.  Their  chief  towns  were  Geneva
fO«neva)  and  Lugdunum  (Lyons).  See  Dubois,
La  Bourgogne,  vol.  i.  (Paris,  1667).

Burial  Ritea. See  FtNus.

Burta. Tbe  beam  of  the  plough. See  Ara-

TRIM.

Bnxmaim.  The  name  of  two  celebrated  Dutch
rlasHical  scholars.  (1)  Pietp.r,  known  as  "  tbe
elder,"  bom  at  Utrecht,  June  36tb,  1666.  He
itudted  at  the  university  of  his  native  town,  from
which  he  receiveil  a  degree  in  laws  in  1688.  He
Mpeut  Botne  time  in  travel,  visiting  the  great  seats
of  learning  in  Germany  and  Switzerland,  and  on
his  return  practised  law.  In  1691,  he  was  ap-
p'>inted  receiver  of  taxes,  and  in  1696,  Professor
uf  Eloquence  and  History  iu  his  Alma  Mater.  To
the  dnties  of  this  chair  be  soou  added  those  per-


taining to  the  chair  of  Greek.  In  1715,  be  was
called  to  the  University  of  Leyden  to  succeed  tbe
renowned  Perizouius  (q.  v.)  as  Professor  of  Greek,
Rhetoric,  and  History,  where  he  remained  until
his  death,  which  occurred  March  31st,  1741.  He
was  an  indefatigable  editor,  producing  conimeii-
tartes  on  Phaedrus  (1698),  Horace  (1699),  Valerius
Flaccus(1701),Petrouiu8(1709),Vellein8Paterculus
(1719),  Quintilian  (1730),  Ovid  (1727),  and  Lucan
(1740).  He  likewise  edited  tbe  works  of  tbe  Scottish
scholar,  George  Buchanan  (q.  v.),  and  continued
the  magnum  oput  of  Graevius,  Theaaunu  Antiquiia-
tuM  et  Hiatoriarum  Italtae,  besides  preparing  a  short
manual  of  Romau  Antiquities  entitletl  Antiquitatum
Romanarum  Brevia  Detciiptio  (1711).  A  number  of
his  poems  and  orations  iu  Latin  were  collected  and
published  after  bis  death.  As  a  commentator,
Burmann  was  diffuse,  laborious,  and  pedantic,  and
bis  stately  quartos  are  to-day  but  little  consulted ;
yet  they  have  furnished  much  material  for  succeed-
ing editors  who  possessed  the  taste  and  discretion
which  be  unfortunately  lucked.  As  a  controver-
sialist, be  {wssessed  a  most  irascible  temper,  and
.  was  involved  in  many  violent  disputfjs  with  con-
j  temporary  scholars,  uotably  with  Le  Clerc  and
I  Bentley.

I  (2)  Pibter,  known  as  "  the  younger,"  tbe  nephew
of  the  preceding,  was  born  at  Amsterdam  in  1714,
and  after  studying  at  Utrecht,  filled  professorships
at  Franeker  aud  at  tbe  Amsterdam  Athenaeum,
besides  acting  as  the  keeper  of  the  public  library
at  tbe  latter  place.  His  published  works  com-
prise editions  of  Aristophanes,  Vergil,  Claudiau,
and  Propertius,  besides  a  selection  of  the  Latin
Anthology  (1759  aud  1773).  In  1777,  he  retired  on
a  pension  and  died  in  the  following  year.  Tbe
Anthology  is  his  only  work  that  is  now  regarded
as  important.  See  L.  Miiller,  Geaekichtt  der  claw.
Philologie  in  den  NiederlandeH  (Leipzig,  1869),  aud
the  article  Anthou>GY.

Bualria  (fiovaipis).  (1)  A  reputed  king  of  Egypt,
son  of  Poseidon  and  Lysianossa,  daughter  of  Epa-
phus,  or  (as  Plutarch  states,  from  the  Samiau  Aga-
tho)  of  Poseidon  and  Anipp^,  daughter  of  the
Nile.  This  king,  in  consequence  of  an  oracle,  of-
fered up  strangers  on  tbe  altar  of  Zeus ;  for  Egypt
having  been  atllioted  with  a  dearth  for  nine  years,
a  native  of  Cyprus  named  Thrasius,  a  great  sooth-
sayer, came  thither,  and  said  that  it  would  cease
if  they  sacrificed  a  stranger  every  year  to  Zens,
Busiris  sacrificed  the  prophet  himself  first  of  all,
and  then  continned  the  practice.  When  Henicles,
in  tbe  course  of  bis  wanderings,  came  into  Egypt,
he  was  seized  and  dragged  to  tbe  altar;  but  be
burst  bis  bonds,  and  slew  Bnsiris,  his  sou  Am-
phidamas,  and  his  herald  Cbalbes.  Historically,
there  is  no  such  king  as  Busiris,  and  the  myth  is
in  all  probability  only  a  legend  of  tbe  former  sac-
rifice of  human  victims  to  Osiris  (q.  v.),  of  which
uame  Busiris  is  only  a  corruption.  (2)  There  were
several  cities  named  Busiris  in  ancient  Egypt,  tbe
most  celebrated  being  pliwed  by  Hero<lotn8  in  tbe
middle  of  tbe  Delta.  It  possessed  a  noble  tf  niple
of  Isis. See  Herod,  ii.  59.

Bustirfipi.  Persons  suffering  tbe  extreme  of
poverty ;  and  so  called  because  they  satisfied
their  cravings  by  snatching  from  tbe  flames  of
the  funeral  pyre  tbe  bread  and  other  eatables
which  tbe  superstition  of  the  living  dedicated
to  tbe  dead. See  Catull.  lix.  2.


BnSTtTAltU.


ISO


BTBLT7S


Bustnari*.  A  prostitoto  who  plied  ber  vooo-
tion  on  lb.!  outskirts  of  tbe  city  among  tbe  ftwto
ami  lniri(il-iilucc!». St-c  Mart.  i.  xxxv.  B.

Bustaarii. Hvo  FuM.'»;  OLAiUATOltM.

Bnetiim. A  I'liueml  jiyre. S«m!  Fi'NTJS.

Bates  (IW)im;r).  (I)  A  Tlu-actiiii,  tb«  sou  nf  Bo-
rvas.  IIU  liniibor  Lycurgiis,  wUobc  lifu  bv  lia<l
att«miit€d,  batiishtHl  liiui,  Aud  bu  settled  on  tbe
islaud  of  Kl.n>iij;yl<^  or  Xaxoa.  lludiiig  Iicr«  no
wiv«K  fi^r  bimw>]r  :ui<I  bin  cumpauious,  be  carrteU
otf  ttnuie  women  fniui  Tbeiutalyi  ivliile  Ibey  wer«
celebrating!  a  Aacnlit-c  t<i  Uiouysns.  Odc  of  tbeae,
Cornnis,  whom  bu  bud  fitrccd  to  be  hia  wife,  prayed
to  DiuiiysnH  fur  vL-iig»'iiuce,  Tbe  jjod  drove  biiu
mad,  uiid  ha  tbniw  bimself  iuto  u  well.  (.2)  Au
Albmiiiii  b(>ro,  Hon  of  tbe  Albeuiau  ['aiidiou  and
Ztiuxippi^.  A  tiller  of  tbe  soil,  nnd  n.  ncjit-bird,  be
waA  II  priest  of  Atbeli*',  the  giHbb'Hs  vf  tbe  strong-
hold, nud  of  I'oseidou  £recbtbi>im,  and  ibiiM  lUicos-
l«r  uf  the  priestly  ca*te  of  tbi^  Biitiida<:  and  Eteo-
bulndoe.  He  shared  an  altar  in  tbu  Errchtbcnni
witb  I*o&eidoii  and  Heplia«-stn8.  Tbo  latrr  story
rtipreneut^d  him  ott  tbe  son  of  Tidcun  ami  XiMixip-
p^,  and  ail  taking  part  iu  ibc  i>xi¥tdirioii  of  tbe  Ar-
goimiils.  (:t>  A  det^ceiiilnnt  of  Aniycii»i,  kiiigof  ibe
Bebryces.  He  wan  one  of  tbe  Argoii&.nt«,  and  on
ps«)<iug  the  it«Und  of  |bt>  Str^u«  leaped  overboard
in  order  to  owiui  to  it,  but  wns  caugbt  up  by  Aph-
rodite, wbo  conv4'ye4l  biin  to  Lilybaeum  in  Sicily,
Here  itbc  became  by  him  tbe  mother  of  Eryx  (q.v.).
Ue  was  renowned  on  a  boxer.  (4)  An  armour- 1
bearer  of  Aitchlsen,  uiid  nficrwanlH  of  Ascnniiis.
Apollo  astnimed  biif  form  wbcn  be  deitreudni)  froni
beavcu  to  eocourage  A»cniiiii-H  in  battle.  Biites
■was  killed  hy  Tiirnus.  .Se»»  Verg.  Jen.  ix.  6-17
foil.  I

Bnthrotum  iKnvBp^yrov).  Now  Butrinto;  a
to^rn  of  EpiriiH,  a  llonrisbiug  seaport  on  a  Hmnll
peiittiKuIii,  oppxiitti  Corcyra.

Buto  (Boi/r«).  ())  An  Egyptinu  divinity,  the
iiiirMe  of  UoruB  and  Babastis,  tbe  cbildreu  of
(>tiriit  and  Uie,  wliom  sbc  saved  from  tbe  pentecu-
ttonii  of  Typbon  by  concealing  theui  ia  the  float-
in)::  itdand  of  CItvmnis.  Tbe  Greeks  identified  ber
trirh  Letts  and  represented  ber  as  tbe  goddesH  of
nigbt.  Sec  UoKvs;  Isis;  Osimit.  I'J)  A  city  in
Lower  Egypt,  stood  ne.nr  lb.*  Sfbennytiu  brancli  of
the  Nile,  on  tbe  lake  of  Butn.  It  wiis  relelinited
for  its  oracle  of  llio  goddetvi  Buto,  in  bononr  of
wboni  a  festival  was  held  at  the  city  every  year.

Buttznann,  Piiilu-p  Karl.  A  distingiilsbed
clo&Hical  fU!bolar,wbowael>orn  iu  Frankfort  in  17C4.
He  studied  classical  i>bilology  iiuder  Heyne,  and  iu
17c^  WJ19  niadf  aaaistont  iu  tbe  Royal  Library  at
Berlin,  Hnb««qiieTilly  befoining  tbe  librarian  (IH1I).
From  IPiW  to  180^  be  aino  beld  a  profe-saorHbip  in
the  .Toaobimntbal  Gymnasium  in  Berlin.  Hix  best-
known  works  are  bit  Gi-eek  grammar  (179*^),  of
'wbirb  the  tweiily-itecond  edition  appeared  in  1h(;9;
and  birt  LrxilogHM,  3  voU.  (H^IH-SS;  2d  ed.  1«G()).
It  in  a  valnable  Mtndy  of  tbe  difllcnit  wnrdi*  foniid
in  Hnmer  and  He^iiHt.  There  is  an  Kiigli-sh  traun-
lation  of  it  by  Fl!)blak<^.  Ilnttniaiin  iiIho  pn1di!>hed
An\fuhrtU-he gnrrtiitchf  Spriichlehrf.^i  \oliiAl'il9-'27 );
IfemostUenv*  in  \fidiam  ii'*2'i);  .W,#(AW(i9in«,  a  collee-
tioti  ufeABayt;  (l?WH-*^)|;  and  continned  Spalding's
gn-at  edition  of  Qnintiliiin.  Ho  also  edited  .Sfi^-
uvr't  Journal  from  1796  to  1808. He  died  June

aist,  ic*-^^.


BntfraBi{lioCTvpovf.  Buttur.  Tbe  ulde«l  men*
tioD  of  butter,  tbongh  dnbiuua  uiid  objKure,  is  io
the  acc<Mnii  givoii  of  tbo  Hcytbiaus  by  Ueiodutas
(iv.  2).  Accorditig  to  him  tboy  pourvd  the  milk
of  nian^s  into  noodeu  vciutvls,  eauiied  it  to  be  vio-
lently Ktirred  or  sbakun  by  their  blind  ftlaves,  and
tbua  separated  tbe  part  that  arose  to  the  surfbo-,
which  they  consiilered  more  valuable  and  more
delicious  than  that  wbieh  was  collected  Im-Iow  it.
llerodotns  here  evidently  npeaks  of  the  ricbe«l
part  of  tlio  ndlk  being  seitaral^  from  the  n-st  by
shaking;  and  that  what  br  allndfj*  to  bero  was
actually  bntter  woidd  plainly  apiwar  from  coni-
pariug  witb  what  he  ruiyrt  the  mneli  elearer  ac-
count of  liis  coutcmporary  Hippocrates.  "Tlie
SeytliiaiiH,"  fpmarks  this  liiilor  writer,  *- pour  liu)
milk  of  their  mares  into  wtniden  x  e.xMels.  and  shake
it  violeutly;  tbie  causes  it  to  foam,  aud  ibe  fst
part,  which  is  light,  rising  to  the  surface,  bocomea
what  is  eallcil  bnttor  (o  Qoifrvpw  icaXoC<ri|."  Men-
tion of  butter  occurs  wvonil  times,  iu  fact,  iu  tbo
wHiiugs  of  Hipporrflt^^s,  aud  be  prewriliea  it  ex-
ternally as  a  uu'dicint ;  though  be  gives  it  another
uame,|)tJlrnon  (iTtKf^tni>|.

It  wonld  appear,  however,  that  butter  mnKi  hari
Ijipen  very  little  known  to  the  Greeks  and  Rinuatis
till  the  end  of  the  siH^iid  century.  It  ajipean,
also,  that  when  they  bad  learue<l  Ibt*  art  of  mak-
ing it,  they  employed  it  only  as  au  nintmt-ut  lu.
their  baths,  and  paiticnlarly  in  medicine.  Pliujr-
recommends  it,  mixwl  with  honey,  to  l»e  rubbet'%,
over  ehildrcn's  gums,  in  order  Io  ea--)c  the  poiit  u
ivetbtug,  and  also  for  ulcers  in  the  mouth.  Tlk
Komaus,  in  geiivml,  se^^u)  to  have  nwd  bntter  fo'
anointiug  tbo  bcMlies"  of  their  children  to  render
I  them  pliable;  and  wc  are  told  that  tlie  anrisTit
Burguudians  smenrod  tboir  hair  with  it^  Exce^ jt
in  i>ioscoride4  there  is  no  indication  that  il  tv-  om
used  by  the  Greeks  or  Romans  in  cookery  or  t.lio
'  preparation  of  food.  No  notice  in  taken  of  it  Vy
Apieiim,  nor  is  it  meiilioned  hy  Galen  forsktiy
other  tbau  medical  purjHM4.<>s.  This  is  easily  xic-
counted  for  by  tbe  ancit-nts  having  entirely  ace  t)»-
'  tomed  tbenuelves  to  ilii)  use  of  oil;  and,  iu  likv
nmnucr,  butter  at  present  is  vorj'  little  emplc^ved
in  Italy,  Spain,  Portugal,  aud  the  sonihrm  r»«»rts
of  France.  One  chief  cause  of  this  is  the  difllctsllj
of  preserving  il  for  any  h-ngth  of  lime  iu  n-ann
ronntrieM,  and  it  would  mhiui  that  atuniig  11j<
'  ancieutit  iu  the  wintb  of  Eur':»ii«  it  was  ralbwr  in
an  oily  Ktale  aud  almost  liipiid.
I  Buxum  (iri'frtf).  Tlip  wood  of  tbe  hox-tre*.
I  omploye<l  largely  in  making  tablctA  for  writi'W
(hence  often  called  ceraia  bnra),  for  tops  (Pri"*.  *"■
&l),  and  for  comba  (Jur.  xiv.  liH).

Buxeattim. Origimilly  Pyxns  (nu^nvd;  »i'>'^^^
on  Ibe.  wi-st  cooHt  of  Lncaniu  and  on  the  river  1*""
xeiitiUH,  was  founded  by  Mieythus,  t>raut  of  >1<^
'  (wiiia,  n.v.  -171,  and  was  utHemnrds  a  KoniHU  roloi'T-
Byblia  ( \^vji\U). Tho  duughtt-r  of  Mdetn*  »"^
Moilifa,  who  was  in  lovo  with  her  brother  Csm****
whom  she  pmrsned  tbrongh  varions  lands,  till  *'
longlli,  worn  out  with  wrrow,  nhe  was  tliauK'*'
into  a  fountain. .See  (jvid.  Mvt.  ix.  44ti  loll-
I Byblu8(He/3Xot). (l)ThemmU'rn  JrWTI;  averj
'  ancient city  on the  coast  of  Plurnicin,  Mwe*'"
Iterytus  and  TriiKtlit,  a  little  north  of  thn  ri«'
Adouitt. It  was tlic chief  sent of  Ibe  wfli
of  Adouis. Huro  lue  tbe  remains  of  a  Konuui  tl
aire,  of  wliich  tbe  carca  or  nuditorinm  is  u(


i


I


I


y


I


i

1


I)VK8A


^1


BVZANTINUM IMPEUtCM


et. Tb«  duind  wiut  iiiiciotitly  nppliett  to  tl>c*
Vbiile  of  PbivuJoia. (2)  A  towu  of  Kg)'pl  iu  tlte
vUiH,  fuuiuim  for  il»  papyrus  {i\,  \,),

Byrsa  ihiptra,  fn>iii  tbi>  Piiiitc  Baska,  :i  fort),
riti!  citadfl  of  Cartbage. Si«  Cakthaco.

ByBsua  {dCv<ror\.  A  uauiu  derived  from  th«!
Scljrrn-  brits.  anti  u«iially  u|>)ilii*d  to  linen,  but
Diut<iiuii-s  to  rrry  fine  cottou.  In  it  tUe  KK.v|)iiiiu
nnrntnii'»  wrre  wrappvd.  (See  Hei-oii.  ii.J^i;  I'lm,
i.  rt  'Aril-,  ay  ) 8trabo  even  applieo  the  word  to

m.

Bysacituu  (BvCoKiav).  The  aoutberii  jwrtioii  of
tlic  Rorniiti  iiruviiii>tj  of  Africa;  now  tbu  etouibi-ni
I'iiti  uf  TiiiiiH, fti'i"  Afkka.

Byzautiue  Hiatorians.  8re  HrZANTINt'M  IM-
I'KiUl'M.  »1 tbc  riid.

Byiaiitinain Imperlum. Tbu Bjrznntiue or
J  iiailvm  Komau  Kuipirv,  com|jrtrbL>nitiu(c  at  llrat,  iu
[  jlttia,  (bf  ixiuiitry  on tbi«  Mdc  of  tbe  Ku|diratcH,
J  llt«>  coovtA  of  Ihc  iJlack  Sen.  atiit  Akib  Minor; iu
t Africa.  Egypt; and  iu  Europe,  all tbe  coiintriea
iShno  tbe  IlelIe»|Ktut  to  tbv  AdtiutiL'  aud  I>uiitibL'.
|TbiMsnrvtvvd  ibi*  Westtni  Eiuitin*  I<W<>  ,vi'Hr».  iind
rn«  pvt-ii  tiu-rriiwd  by  tb«  luiditiuu  of  Italy  iiiid
cmiHtM  t>f  ibit  Miflitt^rraiifaii It futntni'nreit
•m,  nlivii  TbeodoAJiiH  ilividod  1h«  Rniimii  Eiii-
•  !■«  I>ftiveeu  bin  two  mjuh,  An'udiim  ami  llumiriim.
Fhe  E**"toiii  Kui|iirt< fell l*i th<*  obb-r,  AroaiJiuH,
sraiigb  wlioac  wcakiit^m  it  HiilTrr«'4l  luiuiy  uiiiifoi-l-
tt)««- DtiiiiiK  bis  uiiiiority  UiitiiiuH  wa»  bin  ^imr-
iati  and luilitiitei-, b4*tneoi) wlium nutl  Htilii.-lio,
W  iiiiiil«trr  («f  tlie  Western  Empire,  a  (ieree  rival-
ry •'xiBlnl. Tht*  Ootbs laid waste tireece ; En-
troititu,  the  aiiL-cenwir,  and  f.t»iiin«,  tbu niunlem'
^^f  KnliauK,  wern  ruiiiiM)  by  lh<'ir  own  crimca. Tlii<
^^tiiT  |i>flt  biH  lifo  In  a  eivil  viir  exoitisl  by  biui
^Hft.l>  ¥Mi. AiTadiiin am) bis Eiupiro  were uow
^Hnltnl  tir  bin  proud and cnvetoim  wife,  Etidoxia,
"tlU  htr  deaib  (a.i».  41H|. Tbo  InanrianH  and  the
Hutu  wAftlcil  tbe  piovinrfM  uf  A«ia  and  tbu  r.oiin-
**>'  iJi>iis tbe Daiiubf. TlieiHliwiiin tbp  younyi-r
mccw.|„i  bis  fAtbLT  (  a.i>.  4Uej,  under  lUc  guar-


dianabtp  of  liift  »\»lt^r  Piilrberia.  Naturally  tif  an
infmiir  uiind,  bin  i>ducaliou  had  niatle  biiu  i^jitiro-
ly  imbecile,  and  unlit  for  Milf'CiHuiuand.  I'ldebe-
riu,  wbo  bore  tbo  tillu  of  AuifitHia,  adiainixterpd
tlio  kinijduni  ably.  Of  tbu  Wuwteru  Ktiipirc,  wbich
bad  htxn  ceded  to  Vulentiniiin,  Tbeodwiiu*  I'e-
luljitxl  vreatoni  Illyria.  Tbe  Greeks  foUKbt  witb
(tucce«M  iif^aiuat  tbe  kiiifj  uf  tbe  remans.  Vanuiea.
Tbe  kiugitotn  of  v\nneiiia.  tbruwn  into  c<itifiiMion
liy  internal  diA-^TiKHtuK,  jtnd  clatnied  ut  the  KUtue
time  by  ilif  H-aniiiin  and  Ibe  rvntiaiiH.  iH-came
now  au  apple  of  contention  tietween  ibe  t»vo  na-
tii>iiaCA.l».4<l»).  Attihi  (i|.  v.)  laid  waste  tbedoniiii-
ionsofTlitKHluHiiisi,  and  obliged  liiui  to  ]Miytributc
After  the  deatb  of  ber  bn>tber,  I'tileberia  nat
ackoowle<I^ed  rnipreM  ( \.lt.  450).  bi-iiig;  tbe  lirrtt
woniui)  who  attained  tbi-t  d)};nity.  Sbt-  gave  ber
lintid  to  tbe  »eiiat4>i-  Marciaii,  and  miMHl  biui  tu
tbe  throne.  lli«  wiwloni  and  valour  averted  the
attackit  of  the  }Uw»  from  tbe  frr.>ntiei-&,  but  be
did  not  Mippnrt  tbo  Western  Enipirt'  in  tt»  wara
uKninat  ibe  lluus  and  Vnndali}  witb  sutKcient  en-
ergy, lie  atfonlcil  Mlii-lit-r  to  a  port  of  the  Gtjr-
iiiau't  and  t^annulianH,  uliti  were  ditveij  in  the
Il'iniun  iVoutieifi  by  tbe  ineupfjons  of  llie  Iluua.
Fulcberia  died  liefon?  biia.  iu  451*.  Ijuo  1.  (a.d.
457),  a  prince  praittud  by  i;uigl4*iiipiii-nr\  antbora,
wati  cho»cn  aucemaor  of  Maiciuu.  Hih  expeditinua
against  tbe  VandaU  (a.d.  4G7)  werv  ttoMi'-eetutfiil.
His  pratidami  Ijcn  would  bave  sneeoedud  biin.  Iiut
(Ibx)  a  minor  shortly  after  biin,  having  itumed  bis
father,  Zeiio.  biH  colleague  (A.l>.  474).  Tbe  govern-
ment of  ibit)  weak  emperor,  wbo  waa  bateil  by  bia
Mabjvcta,  waa  diatnrbed  by  rebelliouti  iim)  iut-eroal
diaordtTH  of  ibu  Empire.  Tbe  Gothn  depopnloted
tbeir  pruvincoH  till  their  king,  Tbeotlohr,  turned
biH  arma  againtit  Italy  (a.d.  ii!^}.  Ariiidn^.  widow
of  Zuiio.  ruini'd  the  ininintei'  AimNlnctinH,  whnm  abe
iiiarrieil.  to  tbe  throne  (a.u.  4m).  The  nation,
ouce  excited  to  diMonleiitx  and  tinnnlln,  conlil
Dut  be  entirety  uppeantnl  by  tbe  ulleviatioti  of
t)i«;ir  burdeus  and  by  wiw;  decree*.  The  foi-ce»  of
the  Einpire,  being  thus  weakened,  could  not  offer
an  eH'ei-.tual  reKiMluiiee  to  the  IVrsiflUK  and  tbe  bar-
bariaiiM  along  ilif  Danube.  To  prevent  their  iii-
eiimiitUH  into  tbe  (HjuiaHula  of  ConHtiuitinojile,
AnaMtaMiufi  bnlll  tbe  Long  Wall,  aa  it  is  called.
Aftur  file  dt-alb  of  AuuNtiUiinn  tbe  rnddient  pm-
elaiwed  .liuttin  ):m|ieri>r  (A.i>.  Sl.'^t.  Notwiihtitand-
iijg  hia  low  birth,  be  muiulained  ptKweHniou  of  the
tbityue.  KeligiouA  persecutions,  which  be  under-
took at  tbe  inntigatiou  of  tbe  clergy,  and  vahmia
rrimeH  into  which  be  waa  liediiceil  by  biv  ttephew
JuKtiniaii,  diHgrai-e  bix  rHign.  After  bia  early
deatb,  in  af2l,  he  wa-t  Nin-eeeiled  by  the  name  Jns-
tiiiinn,  to  whom,  though  he  detii-rveK  mil  the  name
of  the  (ireal,  many  virtiicx  of  a  nilt-r  i-ajuiot  be  do-
iiIlmI.  He  wuH  n;m)wue(t  aft  a  brginlatur,  and  bis
reign  wuA  disiinguiHbuit  by  tbe  vietorien  of  bis
general  BeliiuiriuH:  but  bow  unable  be  ujim  to  re-
vive tbe  strength  of  bia  Empire  waa  pixtved  by  its
rapid  ilecny  after  bis  death.  Jutitin  II,.  lii^  huc-
(.■HMHiir  (A.i>.  .'Ui'tl,  waft  nil  avaricious,  cruel,  weak
prince,  gnviTueil  by  ))h  wife.  Tlie  L<indmrds  tore
fnmi  bim  part  of  Itidy  (A.p.  5Pu^).  His  war  with
Purftia,  fur  tln>  pft.«wi«iou  of  Amifiiia.  wna  niisiic-
eoaafiil ;  the  Aviiri  plundered  the  provinci^K  on  the
Danube,  and  tbe  violence  uf  bin  grief  iil  iheHc  uuk-
fortuucH  deprived  bim  of  x-eimnn.  TiberiuH,  his
ministor.  a  nnm  of  merit,  was  derlared  Caeoar.  and
tbe  geuernl  JuHtiniun  conducted  the  war  ngaiust


BYZANTINUM  IMPEKIUM


232


BYZANTINUM  IMPEfilUU


Persia  with  success.  The  Greeks  now  »1lied  them-
selves, for  the  first  time,  with  the  Turks.  Against
his  successor,  Tiberius  II.  {a.d.  578),  the  empress
Sophia  and  the  general  Justinian  couspired  in
vain.  From  the  Avuri  the  eiuperor  purchased
peace;  from  the  Perslaus  it  was  extorted  by  his
general  Mauritius  or  Maurice  (a.d.  582).  This
commander  Tiberius  declared  Caesar  iu  the  same
year.  Mauritius,  uuder  other  circumstances,
would  have  mmle  au  excellent  monarch,  but  for
the  times  he  wanted  prudence  aud  resolution.  He
was  iudi'bted  for  the  tranquillity  of  the  eastern
froutiers  to  the  gratitude  of  King  Chosroes  II.,
whom,  in  591,  he  restored  to  the  throne  from
which  he  had  been  deposed  by  his  subjects.  Nev-
ertheless, the  war  agaiust  the  Avari  was  ausuc-
cessftil,  through  the  errors  of  Commentiolus.  The
army  was  discontented  and  irritated,  now  by
untimely  severity  and  parsimony  aud  now  by
timid  iudulgeuce.  It  finally  proclaimed  Pbocas,
one  of  its  oflBcers,  emperor.  Mauritius  was  taken
in  his  flight  and  put  to  death  (a.d.  602).  The
vices  of  PLocas  aud  his  incapacity  for  gov-
ernment produced  the  greatest  disorders  iu  the
Empire.  Heraclius,  son  of  the  governor  of  Afri-
ca, took  up  arms,  conquered  Constantinople,  and
caused  Phocas  to  be  executed  (a.d.  tilO).  He  dis-
tinguished himself  only  in  the  short  period  of  the
Persian  War.  During  the  first  twelve  years  of
bis  reign  the  Avari,  aud  other  nations  of  the
Danube,  plundered  the  European  provinces,  aud
the  Persiaus  conquered  the  coasts  of  Syria  and
Egypt.  Having  fiually  succeeded  in  pacifyiug
the  Avari,  he  marched  agaiust  the  Persians  (A.D.
633),  aud  defeated  them ;  but  during  this  time
the  Avari,  who  had  renewed  the  war,  made  an  un-
successful attack  on  Coustautinople  iu  636.  Tak-
iug  advantage  of  an  iusurrectiou  of  the  subjects
of  Chosroes,  he  penetrated  into  the  centre  of  Per-
sia. By  the  peace  concluded  with  Siroes  (a.d.
638)  he  lecovered  the  lost  provinces  and  the  Holy
Cross.  But  the  Arabs,  who,  meanwhile,  hatl  become
powerful  uuder  Mohammed  and  the  califs,  con-
quered Phieuicia,  the  couutries  on  the  Euphrates,
Iudaea,Syria, aud  all  Egypt  (a.d. 631-641).  Among
his  desceudants  there  was  not  one  able  prince.
He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Coustantine  III.,
probably  iu  conjuuctiou  with  his  step-brother
Heracleouas.  The  former  soou  died,  and  the  tat-
ter lost  his  crown  and  was  mutilated.  After  him,
Constans,  son  of  Constautine,  obtained  the  throne
(A.u.  643).  His  sanguinary  spirit  of  persecution
and  the  murder  of  his  brother  Tbeodosius  made
him  odious  to  the  nation.  The  Arabs,  puraiiing
their  conquests,  took  from  him  part  of  Africa,  Cy*
prufl,  and  Rhodes,  and  defeated  him  at  sea  (a.d.  653).
luterual  disturbances  obliged  him  to  make  i>eace.
After  this  Le  left  Constautinople  (a.d.  659),  and
in  the  following  year  carried  on  an  unsuccessful
war  against  the  Lombards  in  Italy,  in  which  he
lost  his  life  at  Syracuse  (a.d.  660).  Constautine
IV.,  Pogonutus,  son  of  Constans,  vanquished  his
Syracusau  competitor  Mezizins,  and  iu  the  begin-
ning of  his  rcigii  shared  the  governmeut  with  his
brothers  Tiberius  aud  HenicliuH.  The  Arabs  in-
undated all  Africa  and  Sicily,  penetrated  through
Asia  Minor  into  Thrace,  aud  attacked  Constanti-
nople for  several  successive  years  by  sea  (a.d.  669).
Nevertheless,  he  made  peace  with  them  on  favour-
able terms.  But,  on  the  other  baud,  the  Bitlgari-
auB  obliged  him  to  pay  a  tribute  (a.d.  C^Oj. Jus-


I  tiniau  II.,  his  son  and  successor,  weakened  the
power  of  the  Marouites,  but  fnnght  withont  siic-
C088  against  the  Bulgariaus  aud  Arabs.  LeonitiiiK
dethroued  this  cruel  prince,  had  him  mntilatwl,
aud  sent  to  the  Tauric  Chersonese  (a.d.  695).  Le-
onitius  was  dethroned  by  Apsiniar,  or  Tiberius  III.
(A.D.  698),  who  was  himself  dethroned  by  Trebe-
lius,  king  of  the  Bulgarians,  who  restorcil  JuHtin-
iau  to  the  throue  (a.d.  705);  but  Philippicus  Bar-
danes  rebelled  anew  against  him.  With  Justinian
II.  the  race  of  Heraclius  was  extinguished.  Tin-
only  care  of  Philippicus  was  the  spreading  of  Mon-
otheism, while  the  Arabs  wasted  Asia  Minor  suil
Thrace.  In  opposition  to  this  prince,  who  wan
universally  hated,  the  different  armies  proclainiHl
their  leaders  emperors,  among  whom  Leo  III.,  th*
Isaurian,  obtaiuert  the  hegemony  (a.d.  713-7H).
Leo  repelled  the  Arabs  from  Constantinople,  which


Gold  Coin  or  I.eo  III. iBrltiah  MuMum.)

they  bad  attacked  for  almost  two  years,  aud  sop-
pressed  the  rebellion  excited  by  Basilius  aud  the
former  emperor  Anastasius.  From  736  the  aboli>
tiou  of  the  worship  of  images  absorbed  his  atten-
tion, and  the  Italian  provinces  were  allowed  te
become  a  prey  to  the  Lombards,  while  the  Arabs
plundered  the  Eosteru  provinces.  After  bis  death
(a.d.  741)  his  sou  Coustantine  V.  ascended  tfae
throne,  a  courageous,  active,  and  noble  prince.
He  vanquished  his  rebellious  brother-iu*law  Ar-
tahasdua,  wrested  from  the  Arabs  part  of  Syria
and  Armenia,  and  overcame  at  last  the  Bulgari-
ans, against  whom  be  bad  been  long  uusuccesaful.
He  died  (a.d.  775),  and  was  succeeded  by  his  bod
Leo  IV.,  who  fought  successfully  agaiust  the
Arabs;  and  this  latter,  by  his  son  Constautine  VI.,
whose  imperious  mother  Iren^,  his  guardian  and
associate  in  the  governmeut,  raised  a  powerful
party  by  the  restoration  of  the  worship  of  images.
He  endeavoured  in  vain  to  free  himself  from  de-
pendence on  her  and  her  favourite  Stauratios,  and
died  iu  7i^,  after  haviug  bad  his  eyes  put  out.


Gold  Colo  ot  Ireo^. (British  HoBeam.)

The  war  against  the  Arabs  and  Bulgariaus  was
long  continued;  agaiust  the  former  it  was  uiisnc-
cessful.  The  design  of  the  empress  to  many
Charlemagne  excited  the  discontent  of  the  patri-
cians, who  plaeed  one  of  their  own  order,  Niceph-
urns,  upon  the  throne  (a.d.  803).  Iren^  died  in  a
monastery.  Nicephorus  became  tributarj'  to  ihtr
Arabs,  and  fell  in  the  war  against  the  Bulgarians
(a.d.  811).  Stauratius,  his  son,  was  deprived  «f
the  crown  by  Michael  I.,  and  be  in  turn  by  Leo
V.  (a.d.  813). Leo  was  dethroued  aud  put  to


SYZANTiNUU lUPEKlL'M

oath  by  Mii-hiM-1  H,  (a.u.  BSti). Piirtnf;  ilio  reign

^of  tba latter  the  Aratn  <toitquerrt1 Sicily.  l^>wor

Italy, Civt*), auil  oilier countiion. Mirliiu-1  pro-

tiiUiletl  tbo  wumliip  of  iiitAi:i-a,  at  ilii)  iiUu  hi.-t  »<»i

Tbvopbiliis. TbctMluta,  ^uurditin  ol hiii .ton Mi-

t)ia«l  III.,  put  u  i>tu|>  tu  llm  dispute  nbotit  iiiiaj^i-s

|aj».  841}. Diiiiug A crutil iHirtwvutioii of  tlir

taaicbneaiis,  the  Arnbtt  deviuttati^d the  A-tintic

Ipntvlnw*. Tlici ill9!(oliii« bihI extntvajjant Mi-

,  «ba«l  coulineit  his  niotUvr  in a  itiniiiiMtL-i-y. The

P>r«n]m*^nt \raa aduiininioi-cil in his naino by

U*rda»,  his  iinclt*.  aiid  aft«r  tin*  ilvath  of  nnrdiui

byBtuil,  who  na«  put  to  dcutli  by  Mi(;hiiel  i\.u.

^|. Biuii  I.t  itUo  came  to  the  tliruiic  tu  8t)7,  waa


L  Ooia  CMn  of  Bua  I.  ud  bl<  8on  CobMadIUM.

I  (Brniab  Matevm.  l

not  altogetber  ■  contemptible  uKinarch. K»  died

j-tt.ft*. The  rvign  nf  hia  leaiiiud  miu,  LuoVI.jWaa

tiul  \ftry  happy, Uv,  died  a.d.  1>1I. Hla  mu.  Con-

rtautiuB  VII.,  PorphyrogtMiitim,  a  miui>r  «h«n  ho

Mcecedcd  hU  fnthrr,  waa  pltKxiI  uudei  the  giiar-

Aiauliili  of bin cvlleafTim Alexander, and after

.VtHiudcr'n  dratb,  in  OVi.  under  that  of  biit  innlb-

«i  Zu^ AomannK  ]>iiroi)^ii(i)t.  lii^t  genend,  i)blit;Ml

lun,ia  919,  to  MhiLTH  the  thrune  with  hrin  uiid  biit

ohUdnii. CoDstautint)  i4iib^e({Ui>ntty  took  m>lt>  pcw-

•••iun  of  it  QKaln,  and  r«igue<l  luildly  but  woak-

I^ Hi«  auii Komnnii!< II,  nuccoeded  liilii  in  95U,

M  fouyht  »uco»»»fnlly  «j;iiiri8t th« Ar»h». To

Mm  wrcoedcd.  iu  DfKt, hi» general Niwpbonis,

*^t)  wu  put  (o  death  by  liiti  own  genera],  John

iuaiacw  i\,D.  970j.  who  carried on a Bncce*wfiil

^plguiniti  the  KiiMimis. Bntil  II..  son  of  K'jion-

bBDce^ed  thi»  abb- prince. He  vauquishe<l


BmII  n. iProm  k  PmJtcr  ai  Pirii.>
(D'AciBCutirt,  Ur 17)


BVZANTINL'M IMI'EHIUM

the  DnlgariAni)  and  the  Arabs.  His  brother,  Coo-
fttantitie  ]\.  (a.d.  Hfio),  vrao  uot  equal  to  httn.
KoiiianuH  III.  became  emperor  (a,d.  10-^8}  by  a
niam&ge  with  Z'tfi,  datigbter  of  Conatautiiie.  This
diMolittt*  but  able  princess  cauned  her  hnsbaiid  to
\m:  execiiliMi,  Huil  Hiicwwively  rai.wd  to  the  throne
Miflia.tl  IV.  (A.D.  1034), Michael  V.  (a.d.  1041),  aud
CiMiHtantiiie  X.  (a.d.  104:2).  HnHKiaun  and  Aratu
meanwhile  devnultiteO  tbe  Empire.  Her  ninter
Theodora  ituccoeded  Uer  on  tho  tbniuu  (a.d.  |0r>3).
Iler  Micressor,  Miebiiel  VI.  (a.d.  lOSfi),  ira«  de-
throned by  ti^aac  Couiuenua  iu  10o7,  m'Iiu  iMieamo
a  innnk  (a.d.  \(W).  His  succestioi-,  Coiistaiitiuo
M.,  DuciM,  fonffht  tinccessfally  agaiust  the  Uzni.
Kndoeiii,  bin  Mtfe,  Kuurihau  of  his  oons  Michael,
Andniiilctin,  and  Coustaiitiue,  wan  incniNtctt  with
thu  udnilniNtratioti  (a.d.  t0fl7j,  married  ItomaoDs
IV.,  and  hrott^ht  him  the  crown.  He  carried  od
au  un«neceHHfnl  war  atjaimtt  tlm  Turks,  who  kept
him  fur  Aume  lime  priMxMter.  Michael  VH.,  «on  of
Coustantine,  deprived  him  of  the  tliron«  (a.d
lif71).  Michael  vcnn  dethn)ne<l  by  NicephorUB
IU.  (A.D.  HXii:*).  aud  the  latter  by  Alcxluii  I.,  Ccnn-
ueDris  (A.D.  lOHlj.  Under  hiH  reign  the  crLi&adea
i-uniineneed.  Hik  son,  Juliu  II.,  came  to  the  throne
in  1118,  and  I'nught  Mitb  great  fincceas  ngaiuBt
ttit>  TnrkM  and  otlier  ItnrUarhiuK.  The  reign  of
bin  Hou  MaiiticI  I.,  who  Kuccecded  him  in  1143,  wna
ab(o  iiul.  uufoi-tun.Hte.  Hi-H  ftoii,  Alexiun  II.,  sue-
coedcd  (A.D.  11K)),  and  wax  dethroned  by  bin  guar-
diun  And^JnicnM,  a.i  waa  tho  latter  by  Inaiic  (a.d,
11^).  Afier  a  reigu  ilialurlfcd  fruuv  without  and
within,  Ifuiac  was  dethroned  by  hia  brother,  ^Vlex-
iuB  III.  (A.D.  1195).  The  cruBatlers  restoifd  him
and  hi.s  win  Alexius  IV.,  but  the  seditious  Con-
nlantJiin[HditanH  pniclaiuied  Alexius  V.,  Ducaa
Morznpblns,  emperor,  who  put  Alexius  IV.  to
death.  At  the  vame  time  Isaac  II.  died.  During
the  last  reigns,  the  kings  of  Sicily  bad  made  uiauy
cnnrincsts  on  the  ro.ij*t8  of  the  Adriatic.  The  Lot*
ills  now  forced  tlipir  way  to  Constantinople  ia.d,
1204),  eoutpiered  the  rity.  and  retained  it,  txigeth-
er  with  nKWT  uf  the  Knropean  torriUiries  of  the
Empire.  Baldwin,  count  of  Flandeni,  was  made
emperor;  Boniface,  marquis  of  Montferrai,  ob-
tained Thea-^aUfiiica  as  a  kingdom,  and  the  V&-
notJaUB  acquired  a  large  extent  of  territory.
In  IChodes.  Philadelphia,  Corinth,  and  EpiruB,  iu-
di'peudent  aovereigiis  an)Be.  Thewlore  Laacaris
iH-ici-d  (in  the  Ariiatic  provinces,  bore  the  title  of
emperor  ut  Nice,  and  w.ih,  at  finst,  more  powerful
than  Baldwin,  A  dcjiecndant  of  ihu  Connienl,
named  Alexiux,  eMtablisbod  a  priuclpallty  at  Treb-
isoiid,  iu  which  his  greut-gnindKOU  John  took  Iho
title  of  bm]H)ior.  Neither  Ualdwiu  uor  his  Rucecs-
Biirs  were  able  to  secure  the  tottering  throne.  Ho
hiuD^lf  died  in  captivity  among  the  BnlgnriauR
(riiW.i.  Tu  him  succeeded  Henrj-,  hia  brother,
with  Peter,  brother-in-law  of  Henry,  aud  hla  ttou
Kttbert  (a.d.  Vi-^l).  Wttli  the  exce]itinu  of  Con*
srantiiiopie,  all  the  rcinainitig  ByzantiU'O  terri-
tory, including  ThesBaloiiica,  was  conquered  by
Jobu,  euiperor  of  Nice.  Baldwin  II.,  hndber  of
RtilKTt,  u[ider  the  guar<linnship  of  his  colleague,
Jobu  Urieniie,  king  of  Jernsalcm,  died  in  1"J37.
Michael  I'abieologiis,  king  of  Nice,  conquered
Countauliuuple  in  1261,  and  Baldwin  died  iu  the
West  a  private  punion.  The  sovereigns  of  Nice,
up  to  ibis  period,  w«;re  Tlie(Mb»re  Lnscads  fA.D.
I*i04>;  John  Diuas  pjifatzeH,  a  g<w»d  monarch  and
8uccesf(fiil  warrior  (a.d.  V2'£i) ;  Theoiloro  IL,  hla


BrZANTnnTM TMPERm*


2M


BYZASTrrM


sou  (a.d.  1250),  vcho  wBit  ilppriveil  nf  llie  crrtwn
by  Miohai'l  Palaenln^pm  (a.d.  120U  t.  In  rjBl,
Micli.'u^l  tiMik  C'oiiNtniittnoplo  fmiii  llio  t.Jktiim.
Ht*  taliuni-iHl  Ui  iiiiitu  liimni-lf  witli  thb  Lntiu
Church,  but  liin  mni  AiHlnmiciiH  mioiiticml  llit-
C4)tiiic4iti»ii.  lut^M'uii]  t)iHturl)iiiicc'K  mill  furuigti
wars,  pftrtiniUrly  with  the  Turks,  threw  the  ex-
haiiHtf;il  Kmpire  into  confiisiou.  Audmnkiiji)  111.,
his  grftiidson,  obliged  him  Ut  divide  the  throne
(A.  11.  I'-^ti),  mid  nt  loitgth  wrested  it  eiitirely
from  tiim.  AndmiuciiH  i1it.'d  n  monk  (a.d.  Ut^).
AudrotiiruK  IV.,  who  usccuded  ihit  thmnc  in  the
Hame  yeitr,  vrnf^ed  wiir  un*iu(-cv)»)!il'ul]y  iiRain^t:  the
TnrkH,  ami  diml  A.t>.  1341.  Hi^  Hon  John  wan
nltliged  tu  Shan?  tho  Ihrunu  with  bis  ^uarUiiii!,  John
Catiiticuxfiiiiifl,  dtiniifE  Usii  yeim.  Thn  mm  of  (ho
Ifttt^r,  Maiclu'W,  wiM  alfin  niihh^  enip«rur.  but  John
Cautacuzouiid  rctiigucd  thu  ci^iwu,  aud  ilutthon-
was  compcUwd  to  nbdicate  ;a.o.  135oj.  Uudor  the
reign  of  Juhi),  the  Tarks  Ih-st  obtained  a  linu
footing  in  Enrope,  and  conquered  Gallipolis  (a.u.
13&7;.  The  family  of  Pahieologit'^,  from  this  time,
WMV  gradually  dfipnvml  of  their  Eiiro[>eaii  tcrri-
torii'n,  partly  by  rcvnlt  and  partly  by  the  Turks,
Thr  Sidlati  AmuraTh  took  Adriaiiopln  A.n.  1:U>1.
I{j^ii7A;t  conqiici'f^l  ahnciHt  all  tht-  Eiinii>^An  prov-
inci'«  vxcopt  (.'ouAtantiuople,  and  obliged  John  to
pay  him  tribute.  The  lattor  waa.  aumc  time  after,
driven  out  by  his  own  mm  Mauiii-l  (a.i>.  I3U1).
BajOKct  booicgod  Constantinople,  defvateil  an  aiiiiy
of  Wt,stem  waiTiors  nuder  Sigismnnd,  near  Nico]»-
oltH,  anil  Manuel  was  obliged  tu  place  John.  »nn  ut'
AndroniciK*,  ou  hlB  throne.  Tiinnnr't>  invaMinn  of
tbo  Tnrki.<ili  pruvincos  a:tvpd  CoiiKtantinnple  for
thill  timn  (a.d.  1-102).  Matnirl  thou  rei'<>ven*d  hja
tbritue,  aud  regained  acme  of  Ibtf  lust  pruviti4.'ed
from  the  conteodtng  sotis  uf  llaJaiiL't.  To  him
9iiecee«lod  bin  auu  JuUn  (a.[>.  l-t'^'i),  whoni  Amn>
rath  II.  (!trip]iod  of  all  IiIh  territories  except
CouHtantiuople,  and  extorted  fruui  liim  a  tribute
iJLV.  1444).  To  tho  «uperor  John  Bacc«eded  his
brother  Coustantine.  With  the  atMittlauce  of  hia
general,  the  Genoe-^e  Jnstiniau,  he  withstood  the
aiiiH^'ior  forces  of  the  enemy  M'ith  frnitleHii  oour-
age,  aud  fell  in  the  dvfuiicie  of  Conatanlinople,  by
the  Cuu4(i6«t  of  which,  May  '.^Ih,  A.D.  ]4r>:t,  Moham-
med II.  put  an  end  tu  tho  Gre«k  or  Byzauline  Em-
pire.

The  eveuta  vrhlcb  have  jnst  been  detaiteit  are
recorded  by  a  seriea  of  Uivek  authi»r».  known
by  the  guneral  iiaoH  of  Ityzautlne  historian*.
Tbeir  works  relate  to  the  history  of  the  lower
Empire,  fruni  the  fourth  c«ntur>*  to  the  couqnnst
of  Ctm«tanliiii>ple  by  the  Tarks,  and  to  the  Turkish
history  fut  iHtnii-  period  litter.  Tiiey
display  in  their  wriliuga  the  faults
of  a  doKeui'ratc  age,  but  are  val-
uable for  ih«  infurmation  whieh
(bey  furaish,  being  the  principal
«ourc«  frvim  which  we  obtain  the
hiatury  of  tlie  decay  of  the  Eastern
Empire.  The  miwt  valuable  oflhe
numlier  are  Zouuras,  Nicetaa,  Xi-
cephorus,audt'halcuud,Ylaa.  Thiwe
four  form  a  continual  hist^try  of
the  Byxnutinc  Empire  to  the  year
14T1).  Of  the  remaining  antbori,
who  give  ua  hiBtorieii  of  ih'ta<'h(>d
|M>rtions  of  tbla  game  |KTiod,  the
following  deaervA  particular  mm-
tioi),  and  are  given  in  rhroualogical


[iinler:  (l)rrncopln8(4|.v.);  ('2)  Agathiaa;  (3)Theo-
phylacliiK;  (1)  Xirephoma,  patriarch  of  Couhtautl-
iiu^lu  ;  45)  Joliaiinea  Scylit7.4:iii;  (6l  Antm  Crumneua;
(?)  Gcorglus  Acropotita;  (a)(rt-orgiuB  PaehynuTCs;
|U)  Johauuc>t(.'antacnicrriu<i;  (lU)ficurgiua  Codiuiia;
( 11) Constau Linns Porpli,^  rugenitns ;  (Vii  Ducas ;  ( 13»
Anselnnis  KanduriuK;  (U)i'etrU8GyUiufi:  U^iZos-
iums  ;  I  Uii  lieorgius  PJiraoza.  BeaideA  oUitious  of
itnlividuat  works  or  of  entire  anihors,  we  have  the
united  works  of  thet^e  writers  with  a  Latin  transla-
tion in  wliat  is  cnlletl  tlie  Corptit  Scriptoium  But
By:anliac.  3(1  voU.,  by  Lahbd  ( Parin,  I6r>4-1T11|;
reprinted  at  Venicp  in  1729-^(3;  and  a  similar  col-
lect luti  in  4H  vola.  beguu  by  N'Icbulir,  Bekkcr.  Haw*,
and  (be  IHndorfa  ( H<mn,  1^*3H  full.).  .Sei:  Knmi-
bacher,  CeMinchte  dfr  bttsanthiiiifhm  Littrrnlur  tMii-
ntch,  1^91).  For  an  account  of  the  Ea«teni  Em-
pire, see  Dn  Cnnge,  ili^t.  rff  rSmpire  dr  ConxftiNfi-
nople  90ug  lea  ^mpfrttm  Franfois  (llJ5tti:  Gibbon.
/>ef7i'He  akii  Fall  of  the  Ilomatt  Fmpire  ;  UiilImanD,
Grtchichte  dfr  byziinti^clteit  Ifaadefn  (IHW);  Heyne,
Auiiquilatn  Btfiantiuae  (It'Oc'-ll);  Lebcau.  Ht»i.  du
littK-Empirr  (1824-36);  Manast,  A'sgwijtjtcn  Btfzan'
fittor,  2tled.  (1H74>;  Fiulay,  ffiftory  of  Gi-rrtv,  T  vols.
(IKifi;  ad  ed.  lcT7  );  Ga«i|iut,  L'Kmpirr  Utunmtiit
I  Paris,  18i^H  ) ;  MnbatTy,  The  firrtk  »'«( W  yml^r
IlomttH  ifiriij/  iLoDitun,  li;%W);  Bnrj',  Hitlofy  nf  the
hntei'  JiomtiH  Emyirt  (Loudon,  1?^);  aud  Oiuao,
Storti  of  the  £Uf:ttntine  Emjiitv  (S.  Y.  1894).

Byaantium  (  BvCdvrioy  ). A  cclehralcd  city  of
Thrace,  ou  the  shore  of  the  Thrneinn Bo^pom*^
callcil  al  a  later  )>erioil Com-tastinoimlis,  an^_
nmdo  the  capital  of  the  Eastt*rn  Empire  of  the  R'w  — .
mana. It  w;i.s  fi>nnde<l  by  a  Dorian  colony  frut^^
Mcgara.  or,  rather,  by  a  Megariau  colony  in  eoujuaciisL ..
tiou  with  a  Thriiciun  priuce. For  Byzaa.  whom  il  ^^
city  nckiiowU'dg«d,  and  celebrated  in  a  fosttTal  vo^^
its  founder,  was.  acconliag  to  the  legeud,  a  Min  «  kf
Poticidou  aud  CVroessa  the  daughter  of  lo,  a «.««!,
ruled  over  all  the  atljacctit  oonntr}'. The  ra«-]y
commerce  of  Megara  wait  directed  principally <o
the  shores  of  the  Propoutis.  aud  this  people  ta.sd
founded  C'hnhvdon  stfveuteeu  years  before  Itycxku-
linui.  and .'^k'lymbria  even prior to (.'hntcedon
I  Herod,  iv.  144>. When,  however,  their  irade  -was
extended  still  farther  to  the  north,  and  lind  readied
(he  shores  of  the  Eiixine,  the  harlK>nrof  Chulreciou
sank  in  iuiporlani-e,  auil  a  commercial  station  'wa^
retguircd  ou  the  oppimile  side  of  the  idrait, Tb'a
Atatiou  was  Bvziditiuui. The  apiK'lIation  of ''blind
men  "  given  to  the  Chalcedoniaus  by  the  Peiw'an
geueral Megal>aru« (  Herwl.  Iv.  144),  for  baring
overlooked  ibe  fiU))ehor  site  where  Byzautiatu  was
afterwards  foundeil,  doM  uot  therefore  apjiwir  to


BYZANTIUM


t&o


UYZANTIUM


Wen  Well  merited. A»  long  as  Cbaloedou

>Uo  nort  hero  most  point  reitclied  by  the  coiu-

of  U«^{aLr»,  itit  aitnatioQ  was  ptcfemble  to

by  the  oj'pMtito  [ii»le  of  the  Uosporuu,

tinnso  the  nirtout  <>ti  ihitt  latttT  side  runs  duwii
[frttin  tho  north  luoru  (ttrtitigl^r  than  it  dntvt  i>ii  i\w
ilde  of  Chalcedtiii.  sud  Ibo  tjarliimr  of  thin  rity,
Ibi'ivfijn*,  is  mure  avcesttibltf  to  V4<8M>tit  uutuiii^  fn>iii
doiith.  Ou  the  other  Uuud.  Uyzautiuui  vsoa  fur
ior  (o  Chulocduii  fur  Che  uorthcrii  triulc.  itiiici!
le  current  that  s«t  in  strou^l^'  fruiii  tho  Kiixiiiu
Carried  v^uels  directly  into  tho  harbour  of  Uyziiii-
tiuiu,  bill  i)TPVrnt«ft  their  approuch  to  L'haleedou
ia  a  8tr»ii;ht  voiirw  (.Polyb.  iv.  J3).  Tht?  hwbour
of  fiyutuliuu)  wait  iiecnliarty  favotircMl  by  iiatnro,
Wing  d**p,  caiuieiiMiit,  and  Hlit>[(<'ri>d  from  every
Morm.  From  its  abaiM>.  mid  (ti{«  rivli  iiilvuiitHj^K
IhM  connected  with  it,  tbt->  harbour  uf  Kvzaiiliiim
•btailird  the  nainv  of  Cliry»«ccrfta,  or  "  tli«  Gnldfu
Horu,"  vrhich  wiw  aloo  ajiplii'd  to  the  promontory
ffoeck  of  laud  that  contributed  to  form  it.  Aud
f«t,  notwitlitttiiudiiig  nil  the»o  a^IraiitaKes,  Byzaii-
liuiu  rvmiiiui'd  for  a  long  tirtii:  nil  iitcousiderabit!
Wwu.  Tho  decliuiuy  <:uuitiiun--»  of  Me^fiini,  utid
the  cbanicter  which  Ityziuitium  tiltlt  siiHtniiiHtl  of
beiug  u  hair*barbahttu  (ilace,  muy  nurvv  U>  account
tuT  Ibw.

Al  »  subMiiuout  period,  the  MiU'Hiaiis  aunt
UtbM*  ft  stroog  colony,  uid  no  ultentl  Uiv  the  bet-
ter Ibo  aspect  of  things  that  tbey  are  re]{Brdo<l
by  aoow  iinci«n(  writers  as  the  founders  of  the  rlty
i»BelC  Wbuo,  at  a  I«t«^r  day^  ihy  iintunvctiuii  of
tb«  Afitttie  (traekH  hud  been  crumbed  by  DaritiM,

Iftndlbr  Peiitian  lleet  was  reilucjug  in  obt!dieno«  Hie
Gr*f)>l(  cities  aton^  the  Ifelle^ipuut  aud  the  Fropuu-
tiii,(Iie  Bymnlincg,  together  with  a  bodly  of  C'bul-
ce«li»iiuLs,  wonld  not  wait^  ftirTFG**  coming  of  tho
I*<at»iBUf),  bnt,  Icnviiig  their  habTlatioiiH,  und  Itue-
iog  Ut  the  Eiixine,  built  tho  city  of  Meitembria  uu
tbe  tipper  coaat  of  Thrace  (  Heruil.  vi.  33  ).  The
PeniatH  destroyed  the  eiuply  rity,  and  no  Byznn-
ttfiQi  iVir  nome  time  thc-renfter  existed.  This  will
explain  why  Scyloi,  in  bin  Peripliia,  [uiMMfil  by  By-
uuiiDB]  iu  flilencfr,  while  ho  iiiuntiMUH  all  the  Cirtt-
L  olfttiwttletueutH  iu  this  quartur,  uud  among  them
I «vw  Ueaembria  Itaelf.

i  Bftantiutu  rpap|>eured  after  the  overthrow  of

^^^<!K,  sume  of  the  old  iuhiibitantn  having  probn-
*ly  retunint ;  and  here  PauMiiiia»,  the  i-oiumaud-
^  uf  the  Greciuii  furces,  took  up  his  ((uurters
(Icirii),  He  gave  th«  city  a  code  f^f  law  a.  aud
*  Kovcmment  mmlelled,  in  some  degru:%  aftur
^  Sportau  form,  aud  heuco  he  wa»i  reganb-d
^7  uiM  At  the  true  foim<ler  of  the  city.  The
^fhwilnus  Hnccoodiug  to  the  hegemony,  Uyzaulium
Wl  oiiiler  thfir  control,  and  received  so  many  iin-
I"fi«nt  atlili  lions  from  them  that  Amniiaiitis  Mar-
*lliiiii!,,  ill  a  later  nge,  calls  it  an  Attic  colony
lUii.-)),  The  cily,  h«twevor,  who  a  I>oric  oiiu,  in
uiigmgc,  ciutumx,  aud  laws,  and  mniuiiifd  wi  pvon
'^'*'r  llm  Atheuiana  hail  thu  etuilroi  of  it.  Tha
""^'titetiance  of  this  military  jiost  Woame  of  great
'"(PortajiM  to  tht>  Gi-eeks  cLiiring  their  warfare
*iU)  (i]Q  Persians  in  mubseqnent  years,  and  tbi<i
Jifniitataiice,  together  with  the  advantages  of  a
"''•lire  and  iiow  coutinnally  increasiug  com-
0|<>tea,  ^ve  Bysanrinm  a  high  rank  nmoug  Gre-
'j^  citlM.  A  fter  Alh)/>n»  aud  3t«»rt a  had  weakened
"^  t»wer  of  each  other  by  uHliunal  rivalry,  and
^''tlirr  ciiubl  lay  claim  to  the  empire  of  the  nva,
fUutinin  l>ecame  an  iudejieudent  city,  and  turned


its  whole  altentiou  to  commerce.  Itn  Htrnng  miIii-
ation  euabletl  it,  at  a  subsoqneut  period,  to  rct^ist
sncceaefully  the  arms  of  Philip  of  Maeedou;  nor
did  Alexander,  in  hia  eagerness  to  moreh  iulii  Attia^
niuke  any  »tt«uipt  upon  the  place.  li  pruaerrud
alrio  a  uuutnd  obnmcter  under  bis  Nncee-saors.  Tbo
gifat  evil  to  wbii^h  the  city  of  Ryzantinm  wai  ex-
poMC-d  cainu  from  tbo  itdand  country',  the  Thrncinn
trilwrt  cuntiuuHlly  making  inruraioii-i  into  the  fer-
tile territory  urotiud  the  plnoe,  and  currying  off
mure  or  letts  of  the  products  of  tho  tifldb.  Tbo  city
fluflered  severely  also  from  the  GaulM,  bi-iiig  coni-
ptdltMl  lo  pay  n  yearly  tribute  auiounttug  at  least
to  eighty  taleutb.

Afu-r  the  departure  of  t]iv  GaulB  it.  again
bB4-ame  a  llouriNhiug  pluce,  but  iN  most  pros*
penfus  ]»eno4l  was  iluriiig  Ihr  Roman  »wny.  It
had  tbniwn  it^udf  into  tbu  aniiH  of  the  Komans
us  early  a.s  the  war  uguiimt  the  youtigir  Philip
of  MiicimIoh,  uud  enjoyt-'d  from  that  [H-opln  not
ouly  cuniplelu  protcttioii,  but  also  iniuiy  valu-
able commercial  privileges. It  was  allowed,  mure-


Com  f>f  Bj'HOtluni.

over,  to  lay  a  tell  on  al)  veiwola  passing  through
the  strnits— a  thing  which  hiul  been  attempted  b«^
fore  without  Hucce»s — and  tliiH  UA\  it  shared  with
thin  RomniiH.  But  the  day  uf  tuitifortune  at  length
came.  In  the  ronCont  for  the  blnipire  betwccti  He-
vorusnud  Niger,  Byzantium  decltired  for  the  latter,
and  atood  a  siege  in  coufletiiience  which  coutiuiied
long  after  Niger's  overthrow  and  death.  After
three  yearn  of  almost  incri'dible  exertions  the  place
HUrreudL'iTd  to  Severnti.  The  few  remuitiing  in-
IiabitanfH  whom  fanune  hod  eparud  woru  sidd  as
Hlaves,  the  cily  was  razvd  to  the  ground,  its  terri-
tory given  to  Periiithuq,  and  a  small  village  tiH>k
the  plnce  of  the  grt'at  enminerclal  emjuiriiiiu.  Ke-
jventing  soon  »ft«r  of  what  he  had  done.  Severn*
rebuilt  Byzantium,  aittl  lulorneil  it  with  numerous
nnd  tjplcudid  buildings,  which  iu  a  later  age  dtill
burn  biN  name;  iiiit  it  never  reeoveretl  its  foriuvr
rank  until  the  day.s  of  C'nu^iluntiue.  Cunslanliiie
bad  no  great  adectinn  for  Konie  as  n  city,  nor  Inul
the  inhabitants  any  great  regard  for  him.  Ho  felt
the  nece*!*ity,  moreov<*r.  of  haviug  tho  capital  of
the  £mpii>;  iu  Home  nion.'  central  quarter,  from
which  the  movemettta  of  the  Oermnu  tribes  ou  the
one  hnud,  and  tlione  of  tlie  Pcntiaus  on  the  other,
might  be  observed.  He  buig  sought  for  audi  a  lo-
cality, and  bidieve<l  at  one  time  that  ho  had  fuunil
it  ill  the  neigliltonrliiHKl  of  the  Sigaeau  promtnito-
ry.  on  the  eoaet  of  Trons.  He  bud  even  commenced
building  hero  i.vhen  the  superior  advantages  of
Byzautium  aj^  a  centre  of  empire  attracted  his  at-
teiitiou.nuil  ho  liually  resolved  to  make  this  the
cnpital  of  the  Roman  world.  For  a  monarchy  pos-
sessing the  western  )>ortiou  of  .\sia  aud  the  largest
part  of  Enn>iie,  together  with  tho  whole  coast  uf
the  Mediterranean  St^,  naUire  h«rsclf  seemed  to
have  duHtiiit-^d  Byumtitim  as  a  capital.

Conatantine')!  plan  was  carried  into  rapid  execn-
tion(A.D.il^). The  ancient  city  had  pofiseesod  acir-


i


BTZANTIUBT


Stt


ctiitofiorty  stiulia,  aud  t-ovored  merely  I  wo  hills,  one
cinso  to  tbu  wntisr,  ou  wbicb  tlie  ISei'n^liu  at  i>r(»ii*ut
stiiiids.nticl  niiotbera<]joiiiing  il.aiid  esU'iidiug  to\v-
nnlstliyitil^'rior  lowliat  in  niiwtli*/?(WKffl«,or(irtfat
market.  Tbe  new  city,  calltMl  Cutiatiiut  iuuiKtIU,  ur
"City  of  CoMalaiitiiie,"  wiu  tbrfte  limes  ii8  lar)|i[f,ati<l
cuvcrril  fuiir  hi1Ktog4'(licrwitb  {>arti>f  nfiftli,  bHv-
iiig  a  circuit  of  somc^vhat  ItMvi  ttiait  futirteeii  geo-


1


'i


SL  8»ptil«,  ■!  OuoiUxitliiDpla.

graphiciil  miles.  ]|^ very  effort  wim  mailu  to  (>mWI-
lifjli  ttiiH  iii>wcn)>itnl  of  Ibe  Rdiimn  »'<»rl(1 :  Ilit>  iiiiipti
i!i|»1t!iiflitl  [KliticHH  wHFe  i>r«cti>(1,  incliKliiig  uii  iinpB-
riiil  jHilaccjiiimiHnniKredidi'ui't'sfortliticliiffofflci'rw
iif  tbu  i^uurt,  cbtirtilii^ti,  bath!*,  u  bipptHiinita- ;  and
Inlmbitaiita  wen;  |nucurcU  from  every  quarter.  Its
rapid  iiicrL-aae  called,  from  time  to  time,  fur  a  cor-
rdtpuiidiug  eulur^eiueut  of  tbe  city,  aotil,  in  the


reign  of  Tlipodoftiiw  II..  when  the  nvw  walls  wpte
erected (the  previoUK  oiic«  baring b<?eu tbruwu
down  by  nil  eiirthiinake},  Cou»Uutiuopl«t  uttaltiMl
to  the  size  whieb  it  at  present  bus, i'biileobdylait
MitppOttCA  the  wtttlii  of  the  city  to  l>e  111  tttmlia  in
oircitmfereiice; Uylliiif),  alKnit 13 Itiilioti miles;
imt,  according  l«  the  Iw-st  miMterii  plans  of  Cou-
Htuiiliiiotde,  it  is  not  h'svt  llnin  19,700  yards. Tin*
iMimber  of  gates  is  twenty-
ei^ht — f(>nrte«n  on  the  nide
of  the  port.  Beven  towarfU
tlje land, and  nsmanyontbe
Propntitiw. Tbrclty  i»b(iilt
on  ntnnngidar  pivmontory,
&iid the namWr of hills
which  it cflrerw is serett.
liettidee  tbc  name  of  Con-
«IniitiiiO|»dis  {KwararTifmi
fniXic), IhiM vily bad alsu
the more  impiMii|;  nu«  of
New KuuiL' {Sia 'Pu/iifX
ubieb, however,  gi'Adually
fell iDto disn»e. Accord-
ing to fome,  the peasants
in  the  liclgbbonrhoml.  while
they  repair  to  Cunniantiiio-
ple.Nny  iiiromipt  Grwk  tbnl
they  are  gmng  ra  tam  batin (i-iv  <r  tov  irdXii'),  "to
tliM rity."  wbciire lii\n  ariiwii ihr  TnrhiHh uanif
of  tht-  plure,  Atarnboiil. ('oii.*laikliiiopIr>  was  taken
by  rh(?  Turks  niidLM-  Mobanimed  II.  on  the  29lh  of
Miiy.A.D.  1453. Kw  Bvzantinum  Jmi'KUIum;  Cos-

STASTINfS.

BfEaB  (BvfnF). The  legendary  fonnder  of  fly~-<
zautiuin  (q.  v.). Cf.Diod.  Sie.  iv.  49.


K,  c,  X


K,  as  a  symbol.

In  Okkbk.— K  =  it(iTAiM  (on  sepnlchml  tnaertii-
tioas),  Corinth,  Cnttoua  (on  coins),  Kai<Tap,  K^uTot,
Ka\a¥&S>w.  xni  (e.  g.  C.  I.  fi.  Ill,  GOO,  I'^l,  131i^,  'J02ft,
2433). «'=20:  ,«='iO,(>l)0.

^■=iioppa,Ti  luttiT  iu  the  pHinitivc  Ilollctdo
alphabet,  originally  placfd  between  n-  and  ^.  nnd
answering  to  tbo  Lntiit  tj,  both  in  form  and  Migiuti-
cation.  As  a  numeral,  it  dottignates  iKi.  The  ptitme
letter  is  very  fre(|uwnlly  fnrnid  on  tbw  coiw*  of  Cor-
inth and  her  western  eolontc«,  [mrtirnhirly  Crotona
and  Syractise,  as  a  synilMd  for  tb«  city.  A  koppa
Willi  aUn  branded  on  Corinthian  liorMrs,  iik  a  kind
of  gnurantee  tnidc-mark,  Corinth  being  fiimoiid
for  its  Hind. Heuoe  Koitira-tia-t  (sc.  tfnrot)  in  Arist.

L3i'ii/>. '^3,  4:t7  ;  Frugm.  Anagyrns,  41 ;  ut  KoirKat^npos
iu  Liifian,  Atlr.  luitorlaH,  j,  r>.
K&  —  KaT(ix6ouiotv BtoU {C.  I.  O.  lias,  M72  =
Karbel,  /Lpiffr.  iW).
KX  =  t  Moipo'it  xpV»<ri  (^'  '•  <?•  6932).
Ix  IdLTtK. — K  =  Kne^o,  Kalcndac  (very  freqa«Dt
hofora  B.C.  I*),  tliereafler  generally  dinploc^  by
KAL),  kalendarinm,  candidatus,  va«t«llitm,  ounJtiXf
ciinlo,  carissimnn,  eiw«a.
H=ca8tr»  (also  K-K).
K-K  =  cQlnniniae  caiiu«.
KL^pnpnt  legis.
KO=:eannpbori  Ostiensrw.
K-Q=:  knleudae  Qnluctilett.
K'S  =  earns  snis.


C,  08  a  symhol.

In  Ohkkk.— O  (half  of  0)=  half  an  olmlng.

In  Latin. — C  ^Cikcsar,  tiaius,  eandidatms
tntm,  cedil,  eentnrio,  een!>neiunl,  viuere»,  circl
eirviiH,  citru,  civis,  claris-iiiniiH,  elaeoiiirinK,  Cft  a««j
dills,  cohom,  folonid,  Fotuiltali!^  riint|H]»,  condet^K^ix
(bunco,  tiUrra  tri»li$  Iu  Cic.  Mil  6.  15),  coniux,  »:?■*»«•
«ulc,  creatns,  curavit.  niria,  etc.

O  ^Gaia,  c(jntnrio,  eondnctor,  ooronarum.

CC  =  Cae«arv>s  (dim),  Gai  (duo).  OJsG-jU
ditae. 000  =Gaiae  Irea

■CC  =  cenj»nemut  cuneti,  c«rtB  eoimt*n8  i\e^*»^
collegium  centoimriurnm,  colonia  Clundin,  coloiif
L-olnuiav,  cou»taus  Commodu  (ngens)  cimtm  cai
ceris.

CCC- =r  colre  convocarl  cogi,  coloui*  ©»pM
Clandia,  cum  consilio  collocutus,  calumniae  parett'
dae  eaiua.

C-A^cnram  ngeus,  ouatos  anoornm,  colonic
Augnstn..

C-A*A -A  =  colonia  Aelia  Angustii  ArelaniitD.

C-A-D-A-I=:coloui»  ogroruui  dundoniiu  lAfifi'
uandorum  iiiH.

CD  =  colonia  Beneveutana,  coniagi  hotias.

C  BF  (or  .M  or  MP  or  >l-P)  =  ooningi  Ikmiw  f*"
cit.  uiereiiti,merenti  fecit,  merenti  posnit.

CC-A-AA=eoloui  coloniae  Angustse  Alcl**''
drlnae  AbeUinatinm.

C-CK^eurator  ctvinm  Romnnonini.

C-D  ^compos  dal.  consHiIto  deenrionnm.


A


«37


CABEIRIA


C-DD  =  oieatoa  decreto  decarioDum.

C*E-B'Q  =  ciiiere8  eius  beoe  quiesoaut.

C-F=:claris8ima  femina,  cl.  filius,  coniux  fecit.

C-F-C  =  censores  faciundum  curanmt,  coniax
fiiciuodam  cnraTit.

C-F-C-C  =  colleg)aQi  fabnim  centoQarioram  Co-
mensiuio.

C-F-F=:cariBsimae  filiae  fecit.

C-I^colouia  lalia,  clarissimos  iaTenis.

C-K-F^coDiagi  karissimae  fecit.

C-L^Gai  libertiiB. 0-L  :=uiulieri8  libertns.

G'M  =  civitas  Mathacoram,  collegium  menso-
rnni.

C'M-F  (P,  y)=:olaria8imae  memoriae  femiua,
pner,  vir.

C'P=:  Castor  (et)  Pollux,  castra  praetoria  (pere-
grina),  censoria  potestati,  comprobatnm  pondua,
cui  praeest.

C-P-F  =  Clandia  pia  fidelie  (legio).

C-P'M-P  =  coningi  pieutissimae  memoriam  po-
suit.

C-P-P^conductor  pubHci  portorii.

CQ-V=:cnm  quo  (qua)  vixit.

C-B-P=cnrator  rei  publicne.

C-8  ^  cariseimus  eibi  (snis),  couiugi  aanctissimae
(suae),  cum  saii.

C-S-P-N-C  =  coDBularis  senfascaliB  proviuciae
Namidiae  CouBtautiuae.

C-S-O^cum  BuiB  omuibuB.

C*y  ^  civitas  Ulpia,  clarissimus  vir,  eolonia
VieDiienftie.

C,  as  tbe  synibol  for  100,  being  the  first  letter  of
centum,  is  the  youngest  numerical  symbol  iu  Latin,
for  this  letter  originally  represented  tbe  Bound  of
O,  which  was  introduced  into  the  Roman  alphabet
at  the  beginning  of  the  Second  Punic  War  (accord-
ing to  Plut.  Quaeat.  Som.  S77  D,  by  a  freedman  of
Sparius  Carvilius  Rugn).  (See  Alphabet.)  The
siglam  for  100,  iu  use  before  this  time,  was  probably
9  =  l9,  the  Etruscan  designation  fur  100.

Z  (chi)  as  a  symbol.

XMr  =  XpicrTos,  MixafjX,  Ta^pi^X  (Bull,  de  Cor-
re»p.  Heilin.  ii.  30).

Cabalia  (Ko^oXta).  A  small  district  of  Asia
Minor,  between  Lyciaand  Pamphylia,  witha  town
of  tbe  same  name.

Cabeizl  (Ku/Scipoi). See  Cabeiria.

Cabeliia  (rd  Kofftipia).  The  mysterious  rites  of
the  Pelasgic  gods  knowu  as  the  Cabeiri,  celebrated
in  tbe  islands  lying  betweeu  Euboea  and  the  Helles-
pontf  in  Lemnos,  Inibros,  and  especially  in  Samo-
tbrace.  This  worship  was  also  kuown  on  the  ad-
jacent coasts  of  Europe  and  Asia  Minor,  at  Thebes
and  Andania  in  Greece,  and,  according  to  Strabo
(iv.  p.  196),  in  an  island  near  Britannia.  Like  the
Klensinia,  an  almost  complete  secrecy  had  been
inaiutainetl  as  to  the  ceremonies  and  teaching  of
these  mysteries.  Yet  we  know  the  names  of  tbe
f^ods;  and,  from  an  examination  of  the  various
forms  under  which  we  find  them,  Leuormant  has
beeu  able  to  discover  what  he  calls  a  Cabeiric
gronp.  They  are  four  in  number,  thns  dift'ering
««)»entially  firom  the  Phcenician  Kabirim,  who,  as
tbeir  Semitic  name  shows,  are  also  "great  gods,"
bnt  are  eight  in  number,  representing  the  planets
and  the  Dniverse  formed  from  their  union.  The
uames  of  the  Samothracian  Cabeiri,  as  revealed  by
Mnaaeas  of  Patara  and  Dionysodoiiis,  two  hiuto-


rians  of  the  Alexandrian  Age,  are  Axieros  (=  De-
meter),  Axiokersa  (  =  PeraepboniS),  Axiokersos
(=:  HadesX  Cosmilos  (:=  Hermes).  (See  the  scho-
liast on  Apoll.  Rhod.  i.  917.)  Sometimes  the  two
goddesses  blend  iu  cue,  viz.  Earth  (Varro,  L.  L.  v.
58) ;  sometimes  as  Aphrodite  and  VenuB ;  but  to
most  of  the  Romans  they  represent  Inno  and  Mi-
nerva (Serv.  ad  Verg.  Aen.  iii.  12).  AxiokersoB  ap-
pears further  as  Zeus,  Uranns,  lupiter,  Apollo,  Dio-
nysuB-Liber;  and  Casmilos  as  Mercarias  or  Eros.
The  group  is  a  primal  mother  goddess,  whose  is-
sue are  two  divinities,  a  male  and  a  female,  from
whom  again  spriugs  a  fourth,  Casmilos,  tbe  order-
er  of  tbe  universe.  For  a  full  discusaion  of  the
varied  evidence  on  which  this  grouping  is  made,
the  reader  is  referred  to  Lenormaut  in  Daremberg
and  Saglio,  i.  757  full.

Herodotus  (it.  51)  is  the  first  historian  who  men-
tions them.  Though  known  while  Athena  was
flourisbiug  (Aristoph.  Pax,  277),  it^was  not  till
Alexandrian  times  that  they  really  became  fa-
mous. During  this  period  Samothrace  was  a
sort  of  sacred  island,  as  it  was  under  the  Roman
dominion,  for  the  idea  was  prevalent  that  the  Pena-
tes (Serv.  tid  Vei^.  Aen.  ii.  325,  iii.  12,  viii.  619)  were
identical  with  the  gods  of  Samothrace.  Legend
told  how  that  Dardanns,  Eetion,  or  lasion,  and
Harmonia,  wife  of  Cadmus,  were  children  of  Elec-
tra  and  Zeus ;  that  lasion  was  given  the  mysteries
by  Zens,  married  Cybel^,  and  begat  Corybas ;  and
after  lasion  was  received  among  the  gods,  Darda-
nns, Cybel6,  and  Corybas  brought  the  mysteries
to  Asia.  The  legends  vary  in  details,  but  almost
all  agree  in  making  Dardanns  and  lasion  sous  of
Zeus  and  Electra,  and  connecting  the  Samothra-
cian myBtertes  with  them.  It  is  to  he  remarked,
in  passing,  that,  while  legend  brought  the  myste-
ries from  Samothrace  to  Asia,  there  can  be  hardly
any  doubt  that  the  passage  was  the  other  way  (cf.
Strabo,  x.  472);  for  the  whole  tenor  of  the  wor-
ship is  Asiatic.  We  have  many  inscriptions  of  Ro-
mans who  were  initiated  (C.  /.  L.  iii.  713-731),  and
we  hear  besides  of  other  Romans  of  high  position
who  were  initiated,  among  them  probably  Cicero
{Nat.  Deor.  i.  42,  119).  Throughout  the  Roman
period  the  Cabeiric  mysteries  were  held  in  high
estimation,  second  only  to  the  Eleiisiniau,  and
they  were  still  in  existence  in  the  time  of  Liba-
nins.

From  the  earliest  times,  the  Pelasgi  are  said  to
have  sacrificed  a  tenth  of  their  produce  to  the  Ca-
beiri in  order  to  be  preserved  from  famine.  The
chief  priest  was  probably  the  Upotpaynjt  meu-
tioned  by  Galen  (iii.  576,  ed.  Kiihn);  and  the
purifytug  priest  kotjs  or  koiV-  '^^^  /SairiXrvr  of
tbe  iuscriptious  was  the  highest  eponymous  mag-
istrate of  Samothrace.  As  iu  all  mysteries,  the
votary  must  be  purified  in  body  and  mind  before
initiation ;  and  thus  we  bare  some  evidence  of
auricular  confession.  But,  as  far  as  we  kuow,
there  was  not  any  special  preparatory  intellectual
training  required.  Women  and  children  appear
to  have  been  admitted  as  well  as  men.  Of  the
religious  ceremonies  themselves  we  may  say  we
kuow  nothing.  They  consisted  of  dpu/xcea  xai  Xc-
yofitwa.  We  hear  of  dances  by  the  pit  Samothracet,
and  the  priests  who  executed  these  dances  were
called  Saoi  (t).  The  Romans,  who  traced  their
Penates  to  Samothrace,  i-eferred  their  Salii  to
these  Suoi.  There  were  two  classes  of  votaries —
the  ftvarai  and  the  fiCimu  €inrt^«U,  mgatae  pii — tbe


CABILLONUM  8

latter  being  apparently  those  initiated  for  the
first  time.  In  the  Samothracian  mysteries,  aacra
aodjpere  (iropoXa/t^dycti'  ra  fivtrr^pta),  which  is  the
regiil^  phrase  for  primary  initiation,  seems  to  be
applied  to  the  higher  grades.  Bat  the  whole  mat-
ter is  qnite  obscnre  and  unsettled.  See  Hlrschfeld
in  Conze,  Unter$uchitngenauf8aniothrake,  pp.  37-39.

The  scholiast  on  Apollonius  Rhodius  tells  us
that  the  initiated  wore  a  purple  band  (raivt'a)
round  their  waist  (which  reminds  as  of  the  Brah-
minical  thread);  that  Agamemnon  quelled  a  mu-
tiny of  the  Greeks  by  wearing  one;  and  that
Odyssens,  who  wore  a  fillet  for  the  band,  was
miraculously  saved  in  shipwreck.  Presen'ation
in  times  of  peril,  and  especially  in  perils  ou  the
sea,  was  the  chief  service  tbat  the  Cabeirl  were
supposed  to  render  to  those  who  called  on  them
by  name,  and  none  knew  their  names  except  the
initiated.  It  was  the  electric  fires  of  the  Cabei-
ri  that,  accofding  to  the  legend,  lighted  on  tbe
heads  of  the  Dioscnrl  daring  the  Argooautic  voy-
age. Diodoms  further  says,  in  the  course  of  an
important  disonssion  on  the  Cabeiri  (v.  47-49),
that  those  who  were  initiated  became  more  pious,
more  righteons,  and  in  every  respect  better  than
they  were  before.  On  tbe  basis  of  this,  Leuor-
mant  thinks  it  probable  that  the  doctrine  of
rewards  and  punishments  in  a  future  life  was
inculcated,  thongh,  with  Lobeck,  we  may  well
suppose  that  do  more  is  necessarily  implied  than
tbe  impulse  to  virtue,  which  is  always  united
with  religious  emotion  excited  by  impressive  aud
gracious  ceremonies. (Cf.  Apoll.  Shod,  i,  917.)

The  initiations  at  Samothrace  took  place  at  any
time  from  May  to  September  (see  inscriptions),  iu
thin  differing  from  the  Eleusinian  and  more  re-
sembling tlie  Orphic  Mysteries.  There  appears,
however,  to  have  been  a  specially  great  cere-
mony at  the  commencement  of  August  (Pint.  Xu-
cuii.  13).

From  the  manner  in  which  Cicero  speaks  of
the  Samothracian  mysteries  in  the  passage  al-
ready cited,  it  is  probable  that  he  was  initiated.
He  says  of  their  ceremanies,  quibtu  explicati$  ad
rationemgm  revocatia,  reium  nuxgia  nalura  cogno-
$citur  quam  deorum.  And  the  Cabeiri  themselves
do  appear  to  be  symbols  of  the  creation  of
the  world.  From  the  primeval  mother  emanate
or  differentiate  themselves  two  elements  —  mat-
ter (earth)  and  force  (especially  fire,  celestial
and  terrestrial).  Indeed,  the  name  Cabeiri  ap-
pears to  mean  "  the  Burners,"  from  xaittp  (see
Welcker,  Du  Aesehyi  Triloyie,  pp.  161,  211),  and
by  tbe  action  of  the  former  on  the  latter  the  or-
dered world  is  generated.  Tbe  etymological  iden-
tity of  the  Pclasgian  with  the  Phoenician  Cabeiri
is  doubted  by  Lenormant;  the  name  of  the  latter
being  from  a  Semitic  root,  which  in  Arabic  appears
as  kehir,  "great."  Many  hold  that  all  the  ceremo-
nies of  the  Cabeiri,  and  those  of  tbe  other  myste-
ries, were  pure  Inventions  of  the  priests,  nothing
more  tbau  mora  stories  about  gods.  The  reader,
with  regard  to  this  phase  of  the  subject,  is  re-
ferred to  the  article  Mystekia.

For  informatiim  on  tbe  Cabeiric  mysteries,  see
Lobeck,  A^laopli.  pp.  1203-1295  ;  Schomaun,  Gneck.
Alierth.  ii.  403-407;  Preller,  Gr.  Mi/thol.  i.  695-709;
Welcker,  Gr.  Gdttnkhre,  i.  328-3:«,  iii.  173-189;
and,  above  all,  the  article  by  Lenormant  in  Durem-
berg  and  Saglio,  i.  757-774.

CablUonum. The  modem  Ch&lon -sur-Sndue;


8  KAKOSIS

a  town  of  the  Aedni  on  the  Arar  (Sa^ne)  in  Gallia
Lugdanensis.

Cabira  (ra  Kafittpa).  A  place  in  Pontus  on  tbe
borders  of  Armenia ;  a  frequent  residence  of  Mith-
ridates,  who  was  defeated  here  byLuculIn8,B.c.71.

Cablxl See  Cabeirijl.

Caoa.  A  sister  of  Cacns  (q.  v.),  who,  accordiug
to  one  version  of  the  fable,  became  enamonred  of
Hercules,  and  showed  the  hero  where  her  brother
had  concealed  his  oxen.  For  this  she  was  deified.
She  presided  over  the  excrements  of  the  human
body  (cf.  tbe  verb  oaoare)  aud  bad  a  chapel  (sacrJ-
lum)  at  Borne,  with  a  sacred  fire  coutiuually  burn-
ing iu  it,  and  virgins  to  perform  her  rites  (I^tant
i.  20,  p.  110,  ed.  Gall ;  Serv.  ad  Verg.  Jot.  viii.  190).

CaocAboa,  lees  correctly  Cacabub  (icaKKa3oi,
KoKKo^jj).  A  cooking-pot.  The  statement  of  Yarro,
£.  L,  v.  127,  VM  Hfrj  eoquehant  cihum,  ah  eo  caecahawi
apjieUarunt,  may  be  accepted  in  proof  of  the  meau-
ing  of  the  word,  however  absurd  tu  au  etymology.
The  Greek  forms  KaxKofft}  and  kokko-
0OS  both  occur  iu  tbe  Comic  Fnig-
meuts,  and  the  former  is  as  old  as
Aristophanes.

The  different  processes  of  builiug
and  frying  are  not  always  clearly
distinguished  iu  the  aucieut  kitcheii.
(See  Sartago.)  It  seems  certain,
*^***S!i  )^*^  however,  that  the  coccabns  was  used
for  boiling  meat,  vegetables,  etc.;
and  that  it  was  placed  immediately  upon  tbe  tire,
or  upon  a  trivet  {tripus)  standing  over  it.  It  is
thus  distinguished  from  the  ofnujn,  which  was  sus-
pended over  the  fire  (Serv.  ad  Vei^.  Jen.  i.  213);
aud  D'om  the  autkepsa  (q.  v.),  which  was  probably
not  used  for  cooking  at  all.  The  material  varied.
Atheuaeus  mentions  the  KaKKo^rf  as  equivalent  to
the  x^P'^ — '■  ^-  ^^°  earthen  cooking-pot — aud  so
usually  In  Latin  (^ctiU$).  But  caocabi  were  some-
times of  metal — atanHeua  (of  tin),  or  argettteiu.  See
Colum.  R.  R.  xii.  42, 1.

Kakegoxlaa  DikA  {KaKtjyopias  SUt]).  Au  action
for  abusive  language,  brought  in  tbe  Attic  courts,
aud  also  known  as  Ktuofyoplov  Huaj.  Any  penun
was  liable  who  applied  to  another  certain  abusive
epithets,  such  as  ''murderer"  (avdpo(f)6wK),  ** par-
ricide" (iraTpaXoiar),  eto.  (See  Aporrheta.)  By
a  law  of  Solon,  it  was  equally  forbidden  to  speak
evil  of  the  dead.  If  the  persou  slaudered  was  a
public  officer,  the  offender  became  liable,  in  addi-
tion to  the  usual  penalty  of  500  drachmas  fine,  to
artfiia,  because  iu  the  person  of  the  officer  the  State
had  also  been  insulted.

KakologiaB  Dik^  (jcoicoXoyuir  diiaj).  See  Ka-
iUEOORiAS  Dike.

Kakoaia  (KOKoo-tr).  In  the  Attic  lav,  Kmmats
signifies  oue  of  the  following  kinds  of  ill-treat-
ment :

(1)  The  ill-treatment  of  parents  by  their  childreu
(jcdxaa-ts  yovitav),  the  term  yovt'is  iuclndiug  also
graudparents  aud  great-grandparents.  RrfiiMl  to
supply  the  parents  with  means  of  snpport  or  tu
bury  them  with  proper  honours  at  death,  r()naUy
with  actual  abuse  or  disobedience,  formed  initlaucea
of  KOKatTKs.  Au  illegitimate  child,  however,  was
not  liable  to  this  action.

(2)  Infidelity  or  ill-treatment  of  wives  by  their
husbands  (fcoKuo-ic  yvvaiKnvX  including  also  ihv
neglect  of  the  law  of  Solon  by  which  the  husband


tsOM  boaud  to  viait  hi*  wife  Uiruu  tliiiM  uv«ry
month,  at  tcAst,  if  she  Wfitv  aii  hciiruwi  (V\ut.  Sol.
)»)■ In  the  coiuMly  of  CraiimiA.  rnlUrd  the  M'ih«

\Fl«ak  {Hvrivif),  C»me<ly  vim  represented  as  thr
irifip  of  Cratinas,  who  brought  an  nctioii  ogaiuiit
bim  because  ho  ncglectc*!  her  and  dnvntod  nil  Ills

tatipntion to  thu  wine-dobk  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.

[  Equit.  :j!J9).

(3)  Itgary  committed  against  undiaim  or  wid-

t  were  oil  conf>idpml  to  1ji>  uiidtir  the  Miwoial

etion  of  the  uhifrurchcm.

All  case*  o(  KOKtatris  belonged  to  tbo  jarisdictiou

or  lUe  chief  archnn  iu  the  catto  of  citizens,  or  to

tlu!  polemarel)  in  the  euo  of  nMofci  (Meier,  Atl.

ftoewf,  p.  3i®  ;  Perrot,  £todi  »iw  le  Droit  Public,  p.

SMi. If  a  person  wronged  in  any  nay  ori>hi"»B,

lH*ircMM-ii,  i»r  widows,  the  archou  could  inllict  a

fine  bt»ij*cir;  or,  if  ho  cniisidcrt'd  tlif  iH-rson  iliv

'  Mjrviiig  of  gn>at4^r  piiuiKhnu-ni,  i-on1d  briii^  him

~bni  tbo  Ilotiaca. Any  piivaio  imlivhlnal  (*oi)ld

I  vens**  ]mrtic8  guilty  of  KOKtairtc  by  uieanti

Tof  IsyiiiK on infonuatiou ( tttrayyt\ia ) before

\%hc  ebiuf archon, thongh someuuica tho ac-

lemwr  proct^ded  by  means  of  a  regnlar  iudictaiout

Mypfl^T),  with atl opaKpttrit before the arohou.

Tbow-  who  acctued  pomona  guilty  of  KiiKoiair  iu-

citrtnl  uo  danger,  us  waa  UHnally  the  cane  if  the

I  delitudaut  wan  acquitted  and  they  did  not  obtain

|tbe  ilftfa  part  of  the  votM  of  th<4  dictuds.

Tb^pnutshmeut  does  not  appear  to  have  U-en
I  fixiNt  f«r  The  Jifforeut  casoB  of  Kiucums,  but  it  was
geurialk  severe.  Thuec  found  guilty  of  xcuwo-if
,  yoviwir  Iij»t  their  ciril  rights  (ori^itn),  bnt  were  al-
lowe,I  u>  retain  their  property  ;  if  the  xuxwo-tv  con-
i\^Ui\  IU  beittiog  their  parenie,  the  liandH  of  the
ufleiiilrrs  might  even  be  cm  ofl".

Kakoteohnlon  Dikd  iKOKortx*'*^*'  ^^v)-  An
>MiiiU  ill  the  nature  of  nno  for  the  .tnlvomatiou  of
lierjar;.  and  might  be  brought  agiiiimt  a  party  to
*  I'Wviyuii  suit  whoM)  witnetuiUlM  ha4l  been  cou-
^lct«l  tff  j>erjury  in  an  action  y^*viofut(}Tvi}iaiy.
T^^  (Iflaiht  relating  to  thin  action  urn  nut  known.
See  Mirier,  Ml.  /Vowm,  pp.  45, 36G.

C^Otia. In  Italian  oiythdlogy,  a  fire-spitting

Siiiut,  ||](.  mjn  iif  Vulcan,  wlm  lived  iieiir  the  pluce

*"«?  Runm  was  afterwnrda  built. When ller-

*llr '^""^  '"***  ^^^  neighl>oiirh<i(id  with  the  cattle

^ '^■cryou.  Caoua  iitule  miuiu  of  them  while  the

icro  iv»,  sleeping  Olid  draggwl  tlieni  baekwanl*

"'^^  111*  cave  under  u  opur  of  the  Aventine,  so  tliiit

""^ti'  tmrprint*  gave  no  clue  to  tin*  ilirei;(.iuu  iu

*lrii^h  :Vy  had  gone. He  then ch^ed tbe  en-

"^<v  to  ibe  cave  with  u  rock,  which  ten  pnlrs

"ti'ipu  were  unable  In  move. Hut  the  lowing  *if

^  Mttlu  guided  the  hero,  in  hi>t  W'arch,  to  the

^S^it  imck. Ho  tore  ojHjn  the  cave.  and.  iifter  a

*"fiil  Wriiggle.  fclew  Cacus  with  hitt  club  fOvid,

J*!'- i  *»3  foUl. Upon  thin  lie  built  an  altar  on

"•"iwl  to  lupittr,  under  thu  title  uf  Pater  In-

**'*«r,  "  the  iliBOOveror,''  and  Bacriticed  one  uf  the

p'tle  iip(,[j  j,_ Tim  inbabitanl:*  paid  him  i-vL-ry

'^JiwiT  fiir  freeing  thein  of  till-  uloll^tc•r;  and  Evhu-

^1*  bo  hail  been  tUKtructeM)  hyhismorher.Carnion-

••'n  Uie  hire  of  prophecy,  HaluUd  him  an  a  gwl.

^tniitu  !■  theu  gaid  to  have  enrablinbcd  hii  own

"KKiii*  Mervice,  and  to  hove  inatrnctod  two  noble

■*il'»»,  tlie  Potirii  and  the  Pinarii,  in  the  HHi»^e»

2J«olM^rved  at  the  j^su-rificc  (Livy,  i.  7). This

man  to  bo  ottered  ou  ibu  Ara  Masinur


which  he  bimsitlf  had  boilt  on  tho  oattle-oiurket
[Fvrum  /JouriHw)  wli«re  the  cattle  bad  b«ea  pn«t>
urttd.

CadSver. A  tH>i-|>i»v. 8oe  Kcni's.

Cadi  {K<iA(M).  A  rily  of  Phrygta  Kpictetus  on
tim  iMirders  of  Lydia.

Cadiaoua (  Ka&i<TKOf ). A voting  •  urn. See

PtiEPlU'S.

Cadmea  (Ka^fid'o).  The  citadel  of  Th«beii.  See
Thkh.*  i:.

CadmeiB  <  Kadtti}it)<  An  antioul  nsmo  of  Boootia
(i|.  V.J.  and  of  TlielH'A  (Hen.  Op,  16U  It  in  oleo
applied  to  f^uieW  i([.  v.).

Cadmufl  (Kd2/ior).  (1)  The  miii  of  Ageuor.  king
uf  Pliii'uicia,  and  of  Telephawta.  Hih  bister  Eu-
ropa  bi;ing  carried  olT  by  Zuuh,  Cudnnm,  with  hi8
brolbLTrt  Phueuix  aud  Cllix,  wn^i  Hcniont  n-ilb  the
command  to  look  lor  her,  and  imt  tu  n:lurii  wi(b-
oiii  her.  In  the  course  of  bis  wuuderingft  ho  tame
to  Thrace.  Here  bis  nnnhrr.  who  had  acconi-
pnniiMl  him  no  far,  brenthi'<l  lier  last;  and  Cadmua
ajkplieil  for  c^ntusi'l  to  the  Delphic  oniclo.  lie  waa
advii«cil  not  to  week  \un  niHter  any  more,  hut  to
follow  a  cow  which  would  meet  him,  and  found  a
city  on  the  sfKit  whom  she  nhnnld  lie  down.  Tho
cow  met  him  in  Pbocia,  and  led  him  into  Boeotia.
He  wuA  intending  to  HtLoriHce  the  cow,  and  had
will  hiii  eouipauioUs  to  a  ueighbonriug  Hpriiig  to
bring  the  necessary  water,  when  lliey  were  all
s1nii>  by  a  serjieiit,  the  oHitpring  of  Ares  and  the
Krinys  Ti^nphon^,  tlint  gininted  tlie  Mpriug.  After
a  severe  (ilrnggle,  r'ailnins  destroyed  tho  drugun.
aud  at  the  command  of  Atheni$  sowed  its  teeth
tyver  the  neighbouring  gnntml.  A  host  of  armed
men  seining  u]>,  who  immediately  fought  and  i«lew
each  other,  all  except  five.  The  survivors,  who
wore  ralle*!  JSpartoi,  "  woivo,''  lielpe*!  (.'adnnis  to
build  the  Cfldtnea,  nr  the  titri>iiglinld  of  wliut  wa9
afterwards  Thebeb,  which  boro  his  cianie.  They
Were  the  anceittor&  of  tho  Ttieban  aristocracy  ;  ;in<]
oue  of  tbom,  Kchiou,  "  Ibu  serpunt'n  sun,"  beeawo
the  hnslinud  of  Cndmuti's  duughlcr,  Agavi^.  Cad-
mus did  atonement  to  Axu'i  for  eight  years  for  the
slaughter  of  the  dragon.  Theu  Zeus  gave  him  to
wite  Hai'inonin.  the  daughter  of  Ares  aud  Aphro-
ilili^.  who  bore  bim  a  son,  Polydoms,  aud  foar
dunghierH,  Aiitouoi^,  luo,  Agavj',  and  SeineM.  (i<ee
HAnMuNtA;  8iiMEi.fi.)  CruKhed  by  ilie  d-rrtble
doom  tvhieh  weighed  upon  hit*  home,  he  after-
wards sought  rutircmuut  among  the  Kuchelii  in
Illyrta,  a  country  which  he  uauied  after  liiH  moii
Illyriua,  who  was  bom  tberu.  He  resigned  thu
kingdom  to  lllj-rius  ;  aud  then  he  and  his  daugh-
ter Huriuonia  wei-e  changed  iuto  serpents,  and
ciu'iit'tl  by  '/tfUA  to  Elysium.

Thu  Hucieiil  tradition  was  that  Cailmiis  brought
tiiiteeu  letler»  from  Phieuicia  to  (treere,  to  which
I'aliimode^  added  xnbsefiuenlly  four  more,  6,  $,
(^.  X'  DL>d  8iinonide«,  at  a  still  later  period,  four
othurx,  (,  tj.  ^,  a).  The  traditional  alfdiabet  of
Cadmus  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  folhiwiug:
A,  n,  r.  A.  E,  F,  I.  K,  A,  M.  N,  ().  li.  !*,  2.  T.  nnd
the  names  were,  '.\\(fta,  B^a,  raftfui,  AArn,  Ki',
Vnv,  'ituTO,  Ki'trcrrtt,  .SiififSSa,  Mv,  Ni<,  Oi;  Ul,  'Pi,
Ziynn,  Tut,  The  explanation  which  has  just  been
given  to  the  uiytli  of  Cadmus,  and  its  conuoction
nith  ibc  PeliUigi.  Iiave  an  im])i»rtitnt  Waring  on
the  qucstiiui  relative  to  the  existence  of  an  early
Pelu^j^iL-  ulpbobet  in  (Jrcofe.  8«!e  AlJ-ltAllBT;
PELAHJt. tV)  A  native  of  Miletus,  who  Itoiiriabed


CADUCARIAE  LEGES


iM


CAECULD8


f.  n.r.  fiao.  riiiiy  <  ff.  .V.  vii.  (  5f> ) calU  him  the
„_^-'  iiut:ii<ril  a(  the  lotjoitrafihi.  hi  nimlbfr  |taK-
Migf  lie  nmkp§  him  to  li»v(>  boi>n  thu  Itrwt  pnitw-
wrltiT,  thuiiRli  clwwliciu  ho  nttrilmti'a  this  lo
Phnvr^ilrs.  Acconliti^  U>  u  rcmnrk  of  Initrratvf*
(ill  hiHilUt-rturMe  Tltpi  '.\widft<r*oKt,  CartmiiM  wjik  the
tlrnt  that  hitm  the  lilU'  o(  anffmrrti^t  by  whii-li  iil'-
potlntiiiii  van  thon  tiieaut  an  eloquuiit  itiiiii.  Hn
\rnilct  oil  tho  niitli(iiiiieM  (if  his  imttvc  city.  Hifl
work  nnit  nlirld^ji'ij  Uy  Hioii  of  PrdcnnneKQs, tjeo

Ll)IKM4ltAl'lll.

Caducariae I*eges ; Caducum. Seo Buna

t'AIUCA.

Caduceua  (iciipv«<iAi-).  Tho  titafT  or  mace  car-
tioil  Uy  On'rk  Bluhauadotii  nii<t  hvrnltU  in  tinw  of
wiir  (lltmMl  is.  IIlO;  Thiic.  i.  5:1)-  Tho  name
in  oflpii  iilvpn  In  tlie  slafl'  ur  wund  with  whlcli
Hcrinrs,  ur  Mercury,  Ih  conventionally  r»'iirvMiitcd.


Bwiii  with  PMlawia tTnm  u  Aaewat  Vt-


O


The  railiirrn*  iraik  orifctnally  only  au  oli\-t^hnui<'b
«tlh  K^rlanils^  which  wpit  anmranls  fonuM  iiit*)
MiaknL  AtKMit  ihvwr  MiaVm,  Inlrr  mythiilof:»tii
like  llygiuiu  inrontetl  rariou!*  Ktorif^— chat  Hrr-
MM  once  fbaod  twi>  &nak»  A):hiiof;.  ami  diviilrd
Uma  witli  his  vrand:  f^mi  whic^h  cirrnnHtaoce
tbay  wvn  nvnl  as  an  t^ml^m  ^^f  pe«e^

FlWtt  c^mvus  vraft  formod  itw  vront  r«^r*afw,
which  MfniAfit  a  prrsftii  wnt  to  ttrat  of  peace.
Tbiu  AuliM  <^W>Utuft  tritft  118  that  (j.  fahiiu  mtat  to
tfw  OulluKlniMn  «  >pMr  mmA  n  Mdneroa  u  tlio
vatMaM*  «f  war  or  peac*  (kwAMi  •#  aMfcxaat,  m^o
dai  Aalff  «tf  ^Mn«V Tlia  ptfia—  of  th*  oaJbpaitiigti

It  wwftM  •|tfe«r,  )utHt'\«^,  thai  l\»  Bmus  mm-
bMMAon  4M  tml  HMtally  rarr^*  th«  catttMMn,  mimv
)I«n4mi  litfonus  «»  iUaI  ih«>y  carriWl  n^rrata  (aajf-
aMM)i  ao  tiMit  MO  «Mt«>  michi  tiOtit^  tb«4»,  t«  tW
awn»  laaaaw  a^  tbo  iin^k  atnttaaaarAffva  rArrtnl
U»  i^'«iM,  TYie  lUiiUTattiw  ctwn  alwT*  !■  ttvm
MUltnSi  f%*Taiw  <*  r«Ni  .l^mtw,

CMAwraL A  p«^W  af  Knlitr  ChmI  Ky<««  (h-

t«tvil  iW  l«lfl  WMnWriN  tettNcb««  «if  tW  GM«M^  ->

ii.)*rattiw>  k TW4r  f<a|Htal  ««a  tN\«iMk«  altonrwx:  ^

0»#M<HMna  \  kMt«1«f  Unot)«0C«hw>lk  tht  ttamt
til  <Af>«iv<  N»  mlw  nhicki  i>ro4'»P**>  tt,  iIn'

CwAnivt  ,.v It  naa  wumi  mnl  ^  hnl-


clothing,  but  also  for  Karm^nts,  baiifln^ra.  and
t«nt». Sec  Plin.  U.  .V.  ±lx.  $  13.

Cadua  (rridoc)- A  lar^^  rarthenwarr veturl,
nio»i  frv(|iit>utly  UMd.  like  iho  umpftora  tq.  v.l,  for
hoUling  wiu»  nfter  it  bad  bc«n  drunu  frum  Iho
Wo/i'>"n((|.  v.);  ami  efipccinlly  iuiportcd  tvinc,  lu  this-
Chiaii  (Athen.  xl.  473b). Other  coniiiioditicH  wei'i?^^
also  Btorrd  iu  oie/i— e.  g.  oil,  flg»,  beatift,  hunry

anil  nalt  ttsb. Its  shape  n«eu]bled  thiit  of  tlie  nm

phora  |<|,  v.),  except  thai  il4  hiwer  end  wna  OToii^
The  word  mntu-linicMiit-nitt^HU  well-lMickot(yfn<X<ic ""w
Arialopham-M  twioc  {ArtM,  UKMi,  I(in3j  un««  IIw*  wor---
iiaior  of  ihe  voling-urn,  oommonly  styled  Kaiitrxtt^
See  CisTA ;  Fsepuus.

Cadj^tia  <Krtitmtt A  town  of  Syria.  mentioiL ,
by  lU-rodotus  (it.  ISO),  RnppoM'd  by  soaio  to
Oath,  by  othera  Jennmlem  (El  KadsV

Caeciaa  (vaixiot'l.  A  luiHbcjml  niiid.  f^e  ^^
0«I1.  ii.  -i-J.

CaecUia.  4! am,  orTauaqult Hec  TANAqt'i]

Caecilia  Lex. S»?«  Lkx.

CaecUia  MetoUa 3w  Mktki.1^.

Caecilias  Metellua. 8eo  Metrllcs.

Caeciliua Statioa or Statiua Caeciliua  A

nrtti>r  of  L:iiin  ooinody.  He  wom  a  Gaul,  nf  t  Mie
race  of  the  Iiianbrlaua,  who  view  i>eltle4l  in  L'pf^v^r
Italy,  and  vtta  brougbl  to  Home,  probably  uUt*  «ii
B.C,  191.  as  a  prisoner  of  war.  He  wa*  set  free  *-'y
cue  of  the  C'aecilii,  Iwcame  T«y  iutiiuate  »»<**
Euniiid.  and  died  not  long  aAer  bim,  O.C.  1G6  I^

wae>  loiig  heforv  he  cmild  obtain  a  footing  on  *.  ^«
8tag«;  but,  lbi&  one*  achieved,  be  wou  a  consiil ■*"''*
able ivputalion,  aod wax iiiiinbnred ainoog "C- 1^  i
masters  of  liitt  crafl. The imlueiice of  Kui»  miiA
— eaw  |o  bare  1i«eii  apparent  in  thr  roniparat  a  re
oiiv  and  rpgolarity  witb  which  hit*  piwfi.  tv-*?nj
conxtnicted. Cicero,  however,  find*  fault  willi *^*
defecti^v  Ijilinity  (Cic.  .M  J».  vii.  3, 10);  tiiid *<■
must  ihrrt-fore  infer  that,  betn^  of  foreign  exi  «~»>«'-
tioii.  he  never  snri-e«-ded in ftilly m»>leriug t'""
tiirrlift)  of  colhxpiial  Latin. The  lilies  of  **»""■
forty  of  bi«  play-i  bovr  tinrrired. The  coureni «  I""
niiHLtly  1«orrowe«1 fmni  Mod.-iodpr,  iind  Kii1*ei>  "'
his  titlcH  are  tbuse  of  pUvis  uf  Mi-nnuder. ^
Teaff<-1,  C«ent»m»  Sl^imi  (.Titkingeti,  llSc',.

CaecisuL  The  name  of  a  family  of  the  Ktnu-
ran  city  of  Volatrrrarv  pnbaldy  derived  fmm  tht
river  Caeeuia,  wbicb  flows  by  ibe  town.  U) '^•
CaiciXa.  wUna  Cicetw  defended  in  a  Invwiit.B-^
fl9.  ii)  A.  CAlCtXA,  aou  of  ihe  prpceiliiift.  « !">
pablicbcd  »  UWUofH  work  ag«iii»t  Cae;«ar.  ■>"!
vaa  ta  oomi|«earr  acnl  iulo  rxtle  after  ibr  l]iltl<^
of  FfcafMSa.  ax.  481  (3)  A.  Caecika  AuExrs-
<l«*c«l«r  in  BarticA,  ia  Spaio,  ai  Xeni's  drstl't
awl  MM  «f  tbr  iirf  awt  in  joiomg  ibe  piriy  *^
(ialW.  H«  Mmd  tnt  ander  Ualba.  and  sft^**
wnffda  wmAcc  TtteWas ;  bat,  proving  a  trsilot  <■*
lb«  Utter,  W  jaSmA  Vrimnaian,  i^aiMt  wham  isl'^
b*  raaarnvd,  aiMl  waa  date  by  ardar  of  Titus.

Caaolbaa  A«ar. A  aMnhy  dlmkt  in  UU*^'

Wa4arii«  w  tfc*  GmH  ft  AayeW.  clme  to  (1io«^;

iili>>rtrf  te  Ha  vne  ^Carra^int  in  tli"  age  "^

In  tW  tiaw  «f  raajr  tbc  rrpoiatkiti d

■e  WW  eMirrl;  givcb See  Tiyx-¥.

Caa^Mafc.  A  «aa  •(  Vakaa,  coocMved.  u  «<•"
Mvy.Hy  MaaatfMraasW  waa  ahlinc  by  the  li<^*
fi|«ri.  Imv^  Wa^aA  fisnk  ta«a  bar  buMim.  A'*''
a  lt«P  nfifM  t»  ylaailuiag.  aad  lapiae.  be  ba<"


CAELATURA

Fraenest^;  bat,  being  unable  to  find  inbabit-
ants,  be  iniploreil  Valcau  to  tell  bim  wbetber
be  really  was  bia  father.  Upon  this  a  flame
suddenly  shone  aronod  a  niultitudo  who  were
nsaembled  to  see  some  spectacle,  and  they  were
immediately  perauadoil  to  become  the  subjects
of  Cneciilus.  Vergil  says  that  be  was  found
oD  the  hearth,  or,  as  some  less  correctly  ex-
plain it,  in  the  very  fire  itself,  aud  hence  was
fabled  to  hare  been  the  son  of  Vulcan  (Verg.
Jm.  vii.  680).

Caelatura  (ropcvrtxij).  Both  the  Greek  and
the  Roman  name  come  from  the  words  denot-
ing iu  the  two  languages  "the  gravel's  tool"
(raelnm,  npivt) ;  and  in  its  general  seose  oaeia-
t*ra  may  l>e  taken  as  meaning  the  arts  em-
ployed in  the  production  of  ornamental  works
in  metal,  both  in  relief  and  in  intaglio,  includ-
iug  repouas^  work,  chasing,  and  engraving,  but
excluding  statnary. See  Statuaria  Abs.

The  chief  literary  source  of  our  information
regarding  the  toreutic  art  is  Pliny  (H.  X.  xxxiii.
^  154-157);  and  a  complete  list  of  the  pas-
sages in  the  ancient  writers,  referring  to  this
art,  has  been  made  by  Overbeck  iu  his  Antiken
Scltr^flquelleH,  s.  v.  '*  Torentik."  It  is,  however,
from  the  artistic  remains  of  antiquity  that  its
history  can  Iwot  bo  studied — remains  that  are
magnificently  represented  in  the  great  museums
of  Europe.

The  earliest  specimens  of  ornamental  metal-
work  discovered  on  Greek  soil  are  those  found
by  Dr.Schliemann  at  Hissarlik  iu  the  Troad,cou-
siating  of  a  large  number  of  objects  iu  gold,  such
as  bracelets,  ear-rtngs,  and  diadems. Among  the
specimens,  of  which  a  detailed  description  will  be
found  in  Scbliemann's  IHoa  (London  and  N.  Y.,  1880),
may  be  mentioned  the  following :  bracelets,  consist-
ing of  a  thick  gold  plate  piped  with  wire  and  adorned
with  spiral  ornaments  of  gold  wire  soldered  on  the
plate ;  a  diadem,  composed  principally  of  hexago-


t:  ~  "^^■,


CAELATUBA


^.^


Bnorhes  of  Gold— uttul  ilze. (Schliemum,  lliot,  p.  488.)

oal  leaves  of  gold ;  hair-pins,  consisting  of  a  quad-
rangnlar  plate  ornamented  with  spirals  of  gold
wires  soldered  on like  the  bracelets  j.nNt  men-


Gold  Diadem  trom  the  eo-called  TrMsnre  of  Priam,  as  actoallf
worn. fSchllemaoD,  Ilios,  p.  168.)

I  tioned ;  gold  disks,  of  which  one  represents  a  tlow-
I  er  of  star  form,  in  repouss^  work. The  appellation
j  "Treasure  of  Priam"  given  by  the  discoverer  to  a
largo  class  of  these  objects  is  misleading,  inasmuch
'  as  the  art  descril>ed  iu  the  Homeric  poems  is  quite
I  certainly  of  a  more  advanced  character. The  His-
,  sarlik  metal-work  is,  in  fact,  the  product  of  a  half-
barbarons  people,  and  its  simple  aud  unambitious
character  may  be  dincerned  in  the  preference  for
such  ornamentation  as  the  spiral  (a  form  whicii
is  naturally  suggested by  the  cnrliug  nf  gold
wii-e)  and  in  the  infrequent  representations  of
animal  forms. An  early  though  more  advanced
style  is  represented  by  the  objects  discovered
by  Schllemann  at  Mycenae,  wbicti  may  be  sp-
proximately  assigned  to  a  date  not  later  thau
B.C.  1000. The  Mycenaean  objects  are,  on  the
whole,  the  work  of  rude  local  artists,  scarcely
toucheil  ns  yet  by  Oriental  influence. The  si>ec-
imens  in  gold,  which  are  extremely  numerous,
consist  principally  of  plaques  iu  repouss^  work,
bowls,  diadems,  and sepulchral masks  rudely
imitating  the  human  countenauce. Round  bos-
ses and  other  circular  patlerus,  and  esj>ecially
combiuatious  of  spirals,  are  the  basis  of  most  of
the  patterns,  but  floral  forms  and  imitations  of
insects  aud  of  marine  life  are  also  employed.
Among  the  most  instructive  objects  may  bo  men-
tioned the  following:  1.1)  Gold  diadems  found
on  the  heads  of  corpses. The  diadems  are  gt-n-
erally  pitted with copper  wire to  give  them
greater  solidity. ('2)LoKenge-shapf(l  buttons  of
wood  plateii  with  gold,ornameute<l  with  intaglio
and  repouss^  work, ('i)  Perforated  oruameutN  of
gold  with  engravings  iu  iutaglio. (4)  Gold  cylin-
der adorued  with  rock  crystal;  a  dragon  of  gold
'with  scalfs  of  rock  crystal. (5)  Scabbards  of


•


HworiN.  rciinwitthiK  a  lion-hoiit,  wiugctl  moustor!),
DhIi,  and  |»liiiilK,  'Diu  inuuea  of  the  lious  are  of  rotl
Itolil.  i]h<  tioilicH  uf  u  piiier  tint  lu  tliu  same  metal.
A  iliitticiftini)  nf  ciiloiir  in  nltM>  observed  between
till'  mfii  mil)  the  lUit  Hnimromg  iu  it,  niid  further
TAricly  l«  i)lituti>i.>4  Uy  tbe  iihh!  of  enamel  in  tiw
)iiit<|(};i''unul.

Tlin  iifKt  iinportiint  epoch  in  th«  history  of  our
•illijfot  hiMt  Ih'cii  (iKtiiiniiimtyd  flm  OpHtwii-Pho'iii-
cUn,  All  (>)Hu-]t  »liiMi  till-  riiilo  KriiiiiFi  of  the  (in-tiks
fwt  [(tii'ir  to  li'iirii  ill  tlir  t'<itn]>nrativcl\  fuU'iiiiC«d
nrliHtii*  Mrtiixtl  <if  IIk'  Pliiniiciiin^.  Tliin  is  the
|H<riiMt  nf  iirl  itpMcriliod,  iIuhi^Ii  »ith  iMiiiit)  iiiM'tic
■-tu)>ol1lHUnH-'iit,  111  titi)  lloiiu-ric  )kH>iiiit,  in  uhicb
■■niiipMbitloiia  tlio  lilgtior  works  of  mL'tatlio  nrt  arp
Mtwikxii  of  aa  roiitlng  IVom  n  foreign  and  espocinltjc
ft  riiirnii'inn  •umrci^  TIiiih  it  ia  from  the  kiitg  nf
f'ypriis  that  AKniiiomnipii  receivrs  tlio  jiroKeiil.  of
"ii«  niiid'*'*  (//.  \i.  lit),  ajid  iVoiii  Kgypt  that  Mono-
ill*  briii};M  hiivk  tripmlH  and  tlic  hneket  nf  Hideii
'Oitiv.  UA  fnll.l.  TliiTrntorilfMiiicd  liy  MiMiolnlls
fur  IVliMDiichiiN  cimira  tii  him  from  the  king  of
tho  SIdoiiliuiH  ((H  iv.  Cy\ii:  //.  xiiii.  741).  iiiid  it.
I»  the  ^iiUtiiiau»  Mhn  iiiudc  thv  silver  ornter  gir-
ffu  hy  Ai'liillt'o  n«  ti  ]ii'iici'>  at  the  Funeral  Ga.mi>a.
Kveii  ihr  riKWmtf  Hmuetic  doseriptioii  nf  (he
tthiultl  of  AcliilloK  may  he  uhowu  tu  havu  hnd  a
tun^|t»lt>  Ihwim  in  wnrks  of  Phrouiviuii  aix.  Thitt
Diu'iiiciiiii  »rl,  AS  Tvv^aled  to  nn  by  tbe  an-hieo-
loKlcal  iltM'uvvrii-tt  of  rpceut  years,  was  not  iu  it-
M'lf  ori^iiukl,  hut  wiM  fnrim*il  V>y  n  nirious  bl«*itd*
hit;  nf  th<>  iirt  nf  ihtf  K^yptinti^  aud  tho  AsHyriaiiB.
It  niti>  Im-ni  \m3  ftiidietl  iu  th«  immeraus  m«tal
ho»U  thnt  hnvo  Iwim  t'onml  in  Mvoml  luvolitivs
<wiM.'oiAlly  C'yjtruA  nud  ItAly,  \%'hieh  had  iu  early
diiytt  rchiiutita  with  the  I'ba'iiioiAu  trador».  Tbe
•|MM'b  Kt'iiorally  aM>i);uod  for  th«  vxiH-utiou  of
tb<emif  WniA  in  the  soveuth  or  eighth  ceutnry
Ike.,  thon^ih  ilt«  utanufactnn'  of  Ibvm  occunltug
to  tredliinuiil  i>aii«ni<i  inity  have  coiitiuued  lo  m
hklcr  )H>i)nil.  In  the  itrtl^u''  ilnti}£U«  nf  tbfiM  ve^
»e\s  it  u  r><]MH'iidly  im)Mirlant  to  itnle  tho  amiig;ft>
ukciit  of  the  i^ul)^^!'!*  in  isiuorutric  louej^  aud  tba
(^«.|Ufnt  uitii^hni:  of  A^-yrtau  and  Egyptiau  ele-

iurut>. tW  I'M'Ut  s.

A*  •priinicu*  of  f«rly  ji-wvlnr  we  may  ntm  l«
the  nl>jvci»  of  goUX  i  uow  iu  tho  Louvno  aud  tbe
Briti»b  MuMTumV  fuuud  hy  S«ltiuaua  at  Caaiinia
in  Khmlfv.  which  luay  bv  p^ganl^tl  ma  products  of
Pbifuiriau  Art  tu  tbi*  <M^hth  CTUtur>'  Ba'.  A»  an
«kam|*Ii!<  of  tlwtfi^  w«  uiav  take  th*>  {mUv  jrold
pUt^nrM  which  Wknigtnl  l«i  *  mn'khM-v  aud  wht^b
atv  viuIkiwimI  with  tb«  att*-n<ati-  ilvwititt  uf  a  t.>it-
taut  of  pnuiitiro  ty^v  with  K(;\ti|iati  ht:a«l-drr«Us
atljliii*  la  htiid.  Mild  n  wtbj^i-d  fruiAltf  figuxv  (tb«
(wdiU-~a  Aiii>iiti!>  i>r  AnalTi^'  ttxhiitii;  a  liuu  and  a
fAttthi': \  '  ite  11  oritauM'utnl  witll  a  I*-

fiMnVi'  -til  *iyU> (Ih-  uiaii«>  i<i  fMwmA

te  aia»Aiiijf  u>g<<(ii*r  ntinat*  i^uuka  of  (oM.
Wmilv  th*  MU«  af*  narktd  out  by  Hmo  ffi— miI
of  aiMltar  fimutiWa,  (^  th«>  umw  idat|a*  U  IW
hmA  «I  aa  *»t}»%  ailotrwNU  }tk«  tW  itua,  with
gnuMtkuwti  ilMi|Ea».  I'Wai  the  |da\^a«  liwir  arv
oi—ynn^-^  pmiwfttaaat*  ^  vhaiiilMK  awl  Wai>i  of

E|pyt^«  M>lew IH  «atU  )««irlTV  tl>«t^  VII  C;rr>^-«-

ifMttv««tauilt«»alU»caM:  i<

■If  111  ii^wHh  Wan  Witdi  »f  Ktyr****  yWwKtx,

ywtrr.  sfeaird  to*  Wv*  Wmni  ftMiait  at  AiW4M.  ao4
htkm^ati  IwalHHv  »•  tb»  An«  UU  Mf  tW  ai^ih


century  B.C.,  is  on  ear-ring  published  in  the  Jokri
mif  of  iji:llenir  SttiJiai  (toI.  Ji.  p.  '-iiA),  on  tilt'  oidoug
pendant  of  which  is  represented  Aide  by  sido  •
pair  of  female  fiKuies.  beaten  out  in  relief.  Tbtf
anus  of  both  these  Ogares  are  jitniightened  chMir-
ly  to  thr>ir  Bidea,  and  their  drMM  and  uttitudn,
though  very  archnic,  present  n  rejtemblauce  m
tbe  Canephori  of  the  Ervchlbeum.


^


Ow  k*a«lM%*  of  IheJowaliT  «f  the  Am  I
of  titvok  an  »  Mainly  4KriTv4  ttom  two  »•- —
wmfwtt tW  «v«rftlMaa  in  tW  M«ibe  of  twatbert
BwHOa  attit  la  thaa*  U  Etraia. Of  tbe  Eirosrtfi

Wv«li7.  iW  t^vTia^  tba  Vaticaa,  and  ibe  Brit>«&
MtMaWM  fiouM-  iiiiMii  m  mmk  rkoicv  fxawpl*^

rW  iklwfc  ftvM  awlWra  gwaia.  wbkh  Iwl.^t';
«u  a  ic«m  oxtattt  »a  tba  tortifc  eratan  ill\  sD
«•«  UK  \ha  Man«H  of  «ba  Wrniiil^i aud  auy  ^
*Vt»td  W  kW  «lakwM«  O.pi.i  A^.^.,  A  ^  i>*- 1
fc  St .  n»iila«i.  and  IB  tb*  '


CAELATDRA


CAELATURA


Antigmth  dit  Bosphore  CimmMen.  The  great  Euro-
pean jewel  -  collections  contaiu  specimeDs,  nuri-
valled  ID  workmanship,  of  all  the  various  objects
of  persooal  adornment — necklaces  with  peudaots,
ear-rings,  bracelets,  brooches,  etc.  The  main  ef-
fect in  this  jewelry  ia  due  to  the  combination  of
small  figures  and  flowers  in  repouas^  work,  with
fine  filigree,  grauulated  patterns,  and  vitreous  in-
lays. Precious  stones,  such  as  garnets,  are  some-
times introduced,  but  in  the  best  age  the  jeweller
made  comparatively  little  use  of  them.  The  an-
cleut  jeweller  is  distinguished  by  his  delicate  ma-
nipulation of  the  gold,  his  mastery  of  modelling,
bis  extraordinary  minuteuess  of  work,  and  by  the
technical  skill  which  produced  the  granulation
(i.e.  the  soldering  of  extremely  miuute  particles
of  gold  ou  a  leaf  of  gold)  which  is  especially  no-
ticeable in  the  jewelry  of  Etniria.  This  Etruscau
jewelry  in  its  earlier  period  betrays  an  Oriental
influence,  but  is  in  its  later  and  finest  stage  so
thoroughly  Greek  in  character  as  to  be  a  fair  ex-
ponent of  the  capabilities  of  the  Greek  jewellers.
For  details  as  to  the  form  of  the
various  object's  of  personal  orna-
ment, the  reader  is  referred  to  the
separate  articles  in  this  diction-
ary ;  but,  as  furnishing  a  sam-
ple of  the  fertile  invention  aud
surpassing  skill  of  tlie  Greek
workman,  we  may  here  refer
to  two  classes  of  ear-rings,
of  which  there  are  good
specimeuB  in  the  Gold-
mament  Room  of
theBritish  Mu-
seum.  The  first


The  beautiful  gold  necklace  shown  in  the  illus-
tration given  below  forms  part  of  the  Castellaui
Collection  in  the  British  Museum.  It  consists  of
a  circlet  of  roses  bearing  alternate  pendants  of
vases  aud  female  heads,  all  exquisitely  modelled.
The  roses  are  each  composed  of  three  rosettes  of
diminishing  sizes  superimposed.  Of  the  pendants,
the  centre  head  is  simply  that  of  a  beautiful  girl,
while  the  two  on  each  side  of  it  have  cows'  horns
and  ears,  and  represent  lo,  who  was  changed  by
Zeus  into  a  cow.

A  very  fine  specimen  oi  jewelry  not  intended
for  wear  is  the  votive  gold  crown  found  at  Ar-
mento,  and  now  at  Muuich.  It  is  composed  of
branches  of  oak  intertwined  with  garlands  of
flowers,  while  winged  flgnies  are  placed  amid
the  foliage.

Another  important  branch  of  the  toreutic  art  is
constituted  by  the  production  of  gold  aud  silver
vaseSj  elaborately  adorned — generally  with  reliefs
in  reponss^,  or  with  ornamenta  separately  made
and  soldered  or  riveted  to  the  vessel.  (See  Cru6-
ta;  Emblema;  and  cf.  Plin.  H.N.
xxxiii.  $  139,  etc.;  Ovid,  Metam.  iii.,
V.  80;  Juv.  i.  76;  Quintil.  xi.  47.)
With  the  increase  of  luxury  under
the  successors  of  Alexander,  this
branch  of  art  began  to  assume
especial  prominence.  ( Cf.
Athenaeus,  v.  29,  30;  PHu.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  $  1&4,  etc.)
Among  the  more  impor-
tant vessels  in  the  pre-
cious metalsuow  extant
should  be  mentioned
the  following :  (1)


Etnucau  Necklace  flrom  Turentum  (ac.  600). (Id  the  Cutellanf  Collection,  British  Huaentn.)


class,  which  is  the  simpler  and  perhaps  some-
what the  earlier  in  date,  consists  of  ear-rings
formed  of  twisted  wire  aud  terminating  at  one
end  in  the  head  of  an  animal,  especially  a  lion.
The  second  class  consists  of  the  specimens  at-
tached to  the  ear  by  a  book,  which  is  covered
by  a  ronud  disk.  The  disk  itself  is  generally
adorned  with  some  subject  suitable  for  a  me-
dallion, such  as  a  full  face  in  relief,  and  beneath
it  are  suspended  one  or  more  small  figures.  For
these  pendants  Victories  are  often  chosen,  and
au  especial  favourite  is  a  tiny  figure  of  Eros  hold-
ing various  objects,  such  as  a  scroll  or  a  musical
instrument.  As  exquisite  specimens  may  be  no-
ticed a  pair  (  Cdinptes  Re»du$  de  la  Comm.  Arch,  tie  St.-
Pflersb.,  1870-71,  pi.  vi.,  figs.  11,  13)  composed  of  a
rosette,  from  which  hang  three  chains,  the  two
outermost  terminating  in  pendants:  from  the
middle  chain  haugs  a  goose,  inlaid  about  the
feathers  with  grannlated  work.  In  the  centre
of  the  rosette  is  a  garnet,  from  which  radiate
leaves  Id  blue  enamel,  forming  a  star  pattern.


The  magnificent  silver  yt^e  in  the  Hermitage
Museum,  which  was  found  in  the  tomb  of  a
Scythian  king  at  Nicopolis.  It  has  the  form  of
an  amphora,  and  on  its  upper  part  are  friezes
of  Soytfajans  and  animals,  in  high-relief;  leaves
and  fiowers  adorning  the  body  of  the  vessel.
The  decoration  is  partly  iu  reponss^,  and  part-
ly consists  iu  ornaments,  like  tlie  lion -masks
and  the  head  of  a  winged  horse,  separately
made  and  gilded  aud  then  soldered  on.  This
vase  has  been  assigned  to  the  fourth  century
B.C.  (2)  Silver  vase  in  the  Antiquarinm  of
Munich,  ornamented  externally  with  a  circular
frieze,  in  which  are  represented  Trojan  cap-
tives, in  low  relief.  (3)  The  Corsiui  vase,  on
which  see  the  memoir  by  Michaelts,  Daa  Cor-
siniache  Silbergefast,  ( 4 )  Specimens  in  the  Ber-
lin Museum  from  the  stiver  treasure  found  near
Hildesbeim  (Hanover)  in  1885,  some  of  which  go
back  to  the  time  of  Augustus  or  earlier.  They  have
much  execntional  merit,  but  present  the  Roman
characteristics  of  exuberant  ornament  and  exag-


Rooua  UlKllif-bowL (roUD'l  at  Kilil<>i>holm;  noir  In  [terlio

gorntrd  relief.  (5)  .Si>ectn)oi]ft  in  ibo  BitlHotll^qnc
Kiitioualt*,  Paris,  from  tlie  treasure  <liscover*(l  at
Boriiny  in  Fmnoe.  Tlic  v»e6  are  of  varying  inorir,
out!  AiffvT  ill  tlAtc — oiiu  dim  bniii^  nrnaiuontei)  in
very  |imniiiirnt  rppntitw^,  the  oiIilt  in  lower  relief
Willi  Hliglit  Hiiil  ili'licato  Utirt*.  (6)  The  ffniA  |ta-
teraol'  KcniH-i>,  into  which  are  luwrtet)  fioUl  coins
rnti}>ing  fntiii  tlailrinii  tu  Getn.  The  bottom  of
th«  vuM<  i(4  ailoriirtl  will)  u  iargo  mcdallioit  i-xc-
ciitctl  iit  rr|Hm!i«^,  ami  l>Dnl«n-«l  tiy  a  wrt^iith  of
laiirnl  IcavcA  iu  I»vr-rellcf.  (7)  Silver  va«es  found
al  rom)»o)i.  iiml  now  iu  thu  Miii§euiii  at  NapleA.
This  list  uinjr  be  coucludrd  with  a  refrriMice  to
the  fi[M<cimi'iitt  in  the  o«<tebrat«4l  itilver  in>asure
(liHCOviTfsl  At  Rome  in  179:1,  and  now  in  the  Hrit-
iah  UuM'iiu).  It  consistft  of  ciusket«,  vases,  trap-
ping, aufX  ornaiuciila  of  eilvor,  and  was  pn>bAbl,T
exrrtilril  fur  the  most  part  almnt  the  end  of  the
fifth  rentitry  a.i>.  The  figuiTii  and  oniauentA  on
niiMt  of  the  objrrln  arv  gnierally  utDbosKd  and
chased,  and  giUting  is  applied  to  the  iMlteni  ports.
The  figures,  a»  might  \tv  expected  at  mh  late  n  [m>-
riod.  arc  coan*el>-  exevutcd  and  uf  elouitiy  pni[Hir<
tiotia.

Tu  tbe  exaiuplee  uf  oruaioeutal  metal -work
Yvhit'h  hare  now  been  mrotionctl  iu  this  article.
aimI  which  urr  principiilly  iu  >told  and  Mlver.  must
hv  attttnl  certain  Hpecluiens  lu  brotize  which  arv
ailorned  IU  with  eitfiravwl  dceitriis.  ti)  with  lljc-
arm  in  relief.  A  rrtunrkable  Bpecinieu  of  archaic
(ireek  eni^raving  ir  fnnnd  on  the  hmnxo  cnimwi
diaoorrrrd  in  the  Ited  nf  the  A1phea»,  and  pbotn-
^mplipd  in  the  BtJUtm  de  Corr.  //rn.(|i4S).  p.  I.
pi.  i.-iii.  Bc«ide«  figuroa  of  unttnaK  the  de»ij:^
show*  u  KT'nap  of  »ix  hnniun  fi^nnw.  Kngmved
dfwipiN  (H'eur  most  frrHiueiitty  upon  the  ciirnlar
inrtal  iliAka  nscd  aa  niimini  by  the  ancienlK,  tbe
IwvfWtoUxauf  which  couMaffom  Ktniria.  Tfaocigh
fiu  Mtine  of  Uio  Gtrnaoaii  inlmn  tbr  drawlngt  an
«f  n  nuwterly  chanwt^r.  tbv  gnMt«r  tinmbvr  an
exwniMl  ItwMely  and  wiiboaK  Mnob  iv^nrd  to
hrauly  of  eominwUkon. Sm  SPMCtxru.

I'hu  eovent  of  the  ininoi*  of  box-like  furra-
moNlly  fiMitid  in  (Irrvw  pmpvr — nffWr  faruitnUile
Bp«>cm>e»i«  ot  rrllefw  rxerulnl  In  bronw.  Sfx-vnl
of  ihein  IwloDi;  to  a  tt***"'  i^ehiid  of  vltwk  art:
Ihi-ir  <nit<jwt)s  ax  a  rule,  arp  IhhmwpiI  I'hmi  the
ejeleo  of  \phnHlit4^  and  of  | lUiii>  >ii!i.  t-tiM^  rtaiu-
p1««  of  tin<ek  rr^NmiMi(  w*-i«-k  in  brwrn*"  ape  al»>o  t"
to  acMi  iu  lb»  p)a«|tiM  with  (i^titva  in  rvlkef,  whirh


ODCB  aenrod

je«t«.  I

Kngmvingaou  Diinors  of  purely  Greek  woric  nr*
rare.  Among  the  iu(Mt  beantifiil  cxanii>l««  may  h«j
cile^l  the  mirror  reprcKnting  the  Getiina  of  tha
Cork  Kighi«  (Miis^e  de  Lynni,  and  tlitt  apecimeo'
with  the  hero  Corinthua  crowued  by  a  woniau  who;
perMin i lii*8  the  Corinthian  colony  of  Lf^ncaa.

UiBUiK.utAi*iiv. — Schlieuinuii,  Mj/cmnt  (1H7>>);
Milchliiirer,  />*B  .Iii/Tmi^  der  Kunst  iu  1irm:ftf»!at4
(IrjHa);  Itrunn,  Ifie  A'xmt/  Ui  Hornet  (IKiOi ;  Cirr- ;
tuont-Oanneau,  L'/'«agtnt  rit^mrirvHf  (lisl<il>);  Ttv
CL'Aiiola,  Cfpnu  (1877);  Cnlouna-Cc-cCAldi,  Jl/bm- 1
mrnfii  Ant.  tie  C%j7Te(1683);  Dvnnii,  CUif*  tmd  Crwr-
to-iM  of  fCtmria  (Ifl78);  Ciutallani.  l^JF  On-Jirtiia
ItiiUana  (1872);  Burh«r,  iiearhirhu  der  tfrhnUrhfn
Kiimfe  CiesO);  Newton,  £*ta^  on  Arl  and  Arxhnit-
tyif  (ItiKJ);  Ite  Li  lias.  Lex  Orient*  de  fOrfKvrtrig'
C/omoHo^  (IWK);  King,  //aidftowt  of  Eignvetd  lUmi'
(i8*it»);  id.  Anliqmc  f.'cTWJt  and  Ringn  {lH7;i|;  Murtha,
IJAri  £(iii*7ii(!(l8*);  Benl#,  VArt  Oitc  aranl  VM-
rl6a  (1870).  See  also  a  valuable  pa)»er  on  Amncut
Gotd  fTork,  by  Mr.  lIuniphreys-DaTeuport,  in  X/ar-,
pa's  Magtuinr:  for  July.  IrfS'i;  and  tbe  articles  AJC9;  i
ABCRN'Tt  M  ; Al'RfM; CRI'STA.

Caeles  Vibetina. See  Virkssa.


Sec  Lex.
Af.s


rxoRii3i;  Lkx  Ii


[nj4


Caelia  Lex.
Caelibatua. Hae

F.T  PaI'IA PitPPAEA.

CaaliuB.  |1)  A  young  Roman  of  coiididemhli^
taleniK  and  acrumpliMlimenlK,  tnlrn«led  to  tb«  car-]
itf  Cicero  on  hin  lirvt  iiitrodnctlou  tti  the  Forun^
Having  imprudently  eiigagtH)  in  an  intrigne  wtt^
Clodia,  the  well-known  Msler  of  Clodiits,  and  tta  -  4
injf  uftcrvrai'ds  dcMTted  her.  ahe  acenwd  him  of  ^m
Attempt  to  potMtn  her,  and  of  having  Ihutuv  ^
mtiiiey  fmui  her  in  onler  to  pmonr»  the  nMianii^_a|
ttou  of  Dio,  the  AU-xaiidrian  ninbaNsador.  He  ^^a
dufeuded  by  Cicero  in  an  oration  which  is  «till  -^
taut.  (-2)  ArnruAxrs.  a  medical  writer.  (:C3
AfiiKUANfs.l  i'i)  Sabi'ms.  a  writer  in  tlie  «^
of  Vespasian,  who  rnmpoi»ei)  a  tnjatisc  on  cj
ediot«  of  the  rnmle  nfdiUw.  l4i  One  of  the  i4e>-  ■%-«
hills  on  which  Rome  wa»  built,  bnl  now  deM-nt.«j
Ri>mn1iiR  ftnrrnnnded  it  with  a  diich  and  rani|»Jic1
and  it  waA  eudnNcd  by  walU  under  the  >nci')«<liiM
kiu)^.  It  is  suppoaed  to  have  rcccirctl  its  uauM
from  Ca<;les  VibeDoa. Sec  Roma.  1

Cajslmn  (yXi^^awu>,  roptvs).  The  fpnveHs  tool]
See  CAKiATT-a*.

Caementum  {Xanini,  irrt'pof).  Hubble  or  stuuTI
an4lnMMe«l  nioues  uh^I  with  mortar  to  form  thr
concrete  walls  of  Roiubd  bnildiuga.  Vitnivitu
aotva  two  kinds  lii.  C^),  the  ifH*  rr/in^afawi,  i be
tnoiT'  haodMMue  but  less  darable  kind  of  Horfc;
and  the  primitive  o^ta  tm-crinmi.  Its*  siRbtly  l»«**
•xtmuely  cnoBC  becaaae  of  tbe  way  the  stooe*
v«n  mMMd  ta(c<jber.

Ooaente  wn  extenitivelr  na^\  at  Daiae  io  t^*
AnpwtMl  AffjOi  ax  a  fnnndation  for  Mtiliceft  bol^
otit  ioto  the  nea  {Tibnll.  ;2,  3,  45 ;  T{or.  Car*.  *»'•
I.  XI,  ^.  3),  the  KmnanN  having  discomrecl  ttio'
{H^nolana  ami  lime  furmctl  an  hydraollo  cctaevl
tVitmTiii*.  ii.  fl.  ll.

The  mn«t  rnxuMre  relte  of  Roman  times  to  Oft*' '
Kritain,  the  great  military  wall  which  exleuil'*'
frwm  ibe  iBoiiih  of  the  Tyne  to  that  of  the  Sul-
'nay,  t«  a  »tnielurs  ef  faceil  coocri'te,  r«roic4  llf
ervt-tiii{:  iwn  faeee  of  large  atones  and  6Utag  Q


CARNfi


M6


CAEBITUM  TABULAE


tbti iiit«rveuinK  tiiMct> nitti  iilt«n)Ate  courws  of
^H  rubble  uue fuut •li'ep,  auil inurt«r  fuur tucbp«

^H  Mnnjaf  ttii'^ircat  Homan  achiovpm«iit«in  liiiild-
^BliiK-  <^"IKiciall,v  ill  iliMiuiit  pruvincra,  am  t»  be  at-
^V  trilint«Ht  u>  tli'm  luethoil  itf  cnntttnictinii,  \ilii<:li
etitfliltMl  tLeni  to  raiJM.'.  with  roiiiiiarativi-ly  iiii-
Hkil1«l  baiiilH.  and  fn>m  niat^rinls  uhicli  are  nc-
4MHniibl«  iu  Dio«t  regioDS  or  easily  procnrod,  tttrnct-
iirea  wbicb  in  a  short  ticu^  were  united  iuto  solid
liotuogeuL'tiiis  lUAsscs  of  great  tcuai-ity. See  Mid-

ktlletoii,  .-lif-iViif  tiviM  in  ISifS  ;  id.  Ruitaius  of  Afttiemt
/ir*'w  ilHlhi);  aud  tlie  article  DoML'S.
Caeni  (Kni^^)  ur  CaenepOlis  (KaipijiroXitX {\\
A town  nf  Kgypt,  in  iliR  Pniinpolilaii  itutuc,  sup-
II |HJc«e(l  tn  be  tliB  priiM*nl  Gheiiiii^. (2)  A  towu  uuar
^K  tbe priHiiontory  of  TaviinniM; its  proviuua  uauio
^g  wajb  Tacimnim. 8c4i  TAF.XAltrH.

Caenens  iKauftvs).  Tfio  m>u  of  Klatns  and
Hip|iia,  tiuc  of  tbe  Ljipitlioo  of  Uyrtou  in  Tlioasaly.
Tbe  ttiory  wtui  cUat  tie  watt  uri^iuiilly  a  girl  uauicd
Cacai»,  wbooi  her  lover  Poacidoii  chaiige<l,  at  lier
ft^  own  mineat,  into  iv  uiaq,  and  at  Ibe  ^aiiie  time
^p  r«Uflered  ber  tnviilu«rublt>.  Caeueiiti  took  part  in
Ibe  Argonanlir  expedition  and  tlif  Calydouinn
bfxar-liiint. At tin* niarriii^f  nf  PiriiliitUrf, tlit*

»Ceutaunt,  findiiifi  Uiin  itivnhienibU*,  criishtid  tiiiti
*<*  *]«ath  with  tin-  truiikft  of  Ireei-,  and  be  \mv%
iiftorwanls  cbaiiijoU  into  u  bird. Sf«  PiitlTnoCs.

Ca,eni  l Kati^oi}.  A  Thrnciati  jivople,  bi'twevu
tlio  ni;u:k  Hva  mid  tbu  F:inyHiiN.

Caenlna.  A  town  of  tlii>  Snbiiiefi,  in  Latlnnt.
whtiHo  king,  ALTon,  U  «nid  to  liavf-  carried  on  tbi*
"fHt  Mar  againiit  Kouie.  After  tbeir  dofvat,  uioiil
**«  t!i<.«  iubnbltauta  reinofcd,  to  Borne.

Caeata  (Kmi-i'sj. 8i>e  Caeneus.
Gaenya  (Kaivusi. A  proiiiontory  of  Italy  nortli
^_?' Hbegtuin,  facing  tbo  iiromoutory  of  Pelornii  Iu
^■picily,  and funning  wilb  it  tliu  uurroweat  part
^r*f  ibr  Frt'tuni  Siculiini.

CaepiOk  t^*^-  SKRVlt.tCfl. A  Rmnaii  couHnl,  B.C.

'|^».  Hcut into Ualliu Narbuiii'iinih  U*  oppnm-  llic

*-  i'uliri. by  wbuin,  in 10r>, bi* «iU4 duft-'jiU-d, Ut-

K«2tbrr  with  tUo  couaiil,  Co.  Slnlllns  or  ManliiiH.

l''iKl>ty  tbouaand soldiers and forty tboniiiuid

I  *^Uip.  folio  vers  are  said  to  bavn  pi^ri^lied. Cuepio

I  ^univeil the battle. Init t*n years atterwai'ds

'^t*.  961  he  xvam  brougbt  to  trial  by  the  tribune

^-  NorlKiniM,  oD  acoooDt  of  his  miocondiiRt  in  this

^'■u-. He  wiM  condemneil  and  rast  into  prison,

^'wre,  seconling  to  owo  arcount,  be  diefl ;  bnt  it

**'*•  mure  guiiL-rally  Htat^-d  that  lia  escuiHMl  from

t>^>«»ii  aud  lived  in  exilu  at  Hiuynta.

^  Caert (always called by tlio Greek writers

^>vXXui. One  of  tlie  nKwt  consid+iniblM  cities  of

•ibntia,  ami universally  neknowU'dged  to liave

^n  ftmtidwl  by  the  Tyrrheniau  PtOasgi  (Dion.

"•Li.  20; iii.  (JO). It was  situated near the

***>«:,  10  the  weet  of  Veii. Ancient  writers  seem

J*^«dto  aci>oiint  for  the  obsiige  of  name  which

tnlftt-ity  iM  nllowcd  to  have  nndt-rgone,  the  RomauB

"^'^Wfftllini;  it  nnytliing  bnt  Caer^,  except  Vergil

"■*'»■  riii.  47-^). Slrnbo  related  that  tho  Tyrrhcni,

**  »rn»inj{  befon- tliin  city,  were  bailed  by  the

"•^  frotu  the walbi  with  the  word  Xaijir,  ac-

•ingto  Ibe  Greek  mode  uf  salutation  ;  and  that,

^  tJiey  bull  iDttde  themselves  niastei-s  of  the

n*c«,  lliejr  changed  its  tiatne  to  that  form  of  greet*

■  variationa  of  thia  story  may  be  aeen  iu


ServiUB  {ad  Afi.  viii.  bV7).  According  to  one  4if
Tlieut,  given  on  the  antboritj  of  Hyginns,  the  Ro-
luous,  and  not  lli»  Lydian^,  chnnged  Uh  name  froui
Agylla  to  tlaert'.  All  tbt-Me  explauatiunn,  bosvcvei-f
are  11  nsatiM factory.  It  bait  Imh*!!  suppo«ied  that
Caer^  luiglit  be  Ibe  origiiml  name,  or  jMirhaps  that
which  the  Sieull,  tlie  aiiuient  possessors,  gave  to
the  place  before  the  Fela^^gic  invasion.  Aeoonl-
ing  lo  Mllller  (/Aie  /Ctntkrr,  vol.  i.  p.  H7),  the  two
itames  for  the  place  point  to  two  ditterent  st-ems
ur  races  of  iijhnbit»ni«.  This  same  wntor  nmkca
the  genuine  Ktriiriaii  nami*  tn  have  been  Cisro.

The  earliest  record  to  bo  fnniid  of  the  tiiatory  of
Agylla  in  iu  Herodotus  (i.  lf>7).  Th.it  writer  iii-
fomis  1(8  that  the  Pboirneaiiit.  having  lii^en  driven
from  their  native  city  on  tlie  shoren  of  Ionia  by
the  arm«  of  C'yriis.  fonned  eHtabtiHbrnentM  iu  Cor-
siea.of  whii^b  the  Tyrrheniann  and  rarltmginiaua,
jealous  of  their  uautit.'al  hUill  ami  euterpritiing
i(]»irit.  sought  to  disiMwsetw  thrill.  A  neveif  nttiuu
accordingly  took  pliue  in  the  S«-b  uf  Hardiuia,  be-
tween the  Phouueuiisaiid  tbe»mibiiied  tteel  of  the
latter  powers,  hi  whifb  the  former  gained  the  day  ;
but  it  was  HUL-li  a  victory  us  left  them  little  n>oin
for  exultfltiou.  they  having  loNt  several  of  their
Khip.f,  nnil  the  ri-Ht  being  ne-urly  all  dinjibled.  Tlie
AgyileatiR,  who  appear  to  have  iTHiatitnttNl  the
l»riiieipal  fniTe  «if  tbo  TyrrbeuiariK,  on  tbeir  n-lnra
Imme  lauded  their  prisoners  iiinl  Ht<HU'd  thnni  to
death;  for  which  act  of  rniclty  they  wcru  himju
vij(it»Hl  by  a  strange  caluiuily.  It  wait  olMtiTvod
thai  nil  the  living  rreutun'a  which  approached
the  spoi  where  the  PhtM-aeans  had  hrou  murdered
were  iiiinii'ditttely  W'IzmI  with  eonviilNivc  dJALor-
tioiis  ami  parutytia  airecltotiR  of  the  liudM.  Od
cou»nltiiig  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  to  learti  bow  tbuy
might  expiate  their  offence,  the  Agylleniw  were
coUMiiniuled  to  ot-Icbnitu  the  olMo^iuieA  of  the  dead
and  to  hnld  gamt-s  in  their  honour;  which  onler,
the  historian  inforuin  us,  wns  pauctually  attended
to  up  to  ht»  time.  Wb  learn  also  from  Stnibo
that  the  Agylleatis  always  abtftaine^t  from  piracy,
to  which  the  other  Tyrrheuiau  citici  were  nuich
Hildii'led.  Aeconlicig  to  DionyniuA,  the  lionmnB
were  lin*t  eiigagiMl  in  hostilities  with  Ciu'rd  under
Tlie  reign  of  Tarquiii  the  Elder,  and  Bul)sci|acully
under  Servitta  Tulliuts,  by  whom  a  treaty  was  con-
eluded  lK<lwe«ii  the  two  statcH  fiii.  2H).  Long
after,  when  Rnni«  liiul  t>eeii  taken  by  the  Gauls,
tlie  inhabitaut.5  nf  Cacrd  rendereil  the  former  city
an  impo'rlaiit  wrvice  by  receiving  their  priests
and  Vt'MtnlK,  uuil  defentiiig  the  Ganis  on  llicir  re-
turn Uirtxigh  thi?  ^ibine  territory;  on  whirh  oe-
ca*)iou  they  recovered  tin'  gold  with  which  Rome
is  Miid  to  have  piirchsMsd  itA  liberatinn.  Tliin  is  a
ciirioiiH  fact,  and  nut  nieutioiieil  by  any  hii<Ltoritin;
hut  II  agrees  very  well  with  the  aocount  nhlcb
Folybiiis  gives  ns  of  the  retreat  of  the  GanIs  (i.  f>).
Ill  return  for  this  OASistnucc.  the  Homaim  requited
the  Cncrites  by  declaring  thum  the  public  guests
of  Itoitie,  and  a<tmittiug  them,  though  not  In  fnll,
to  the  riglit«  eiijoyod  by  her  citizens.  They  were
made  eitirtns,  bnt  without  the  right  of  voting;
whence  the  phrases,  «n  Oieritittn  lubulm  rrfrrrt  ali-
qvfm,  *'  to  deprive  one  of  his  right  of  voting,"  and
Ciirritt  cmi  i/iysi,  "  wnrtliU'M  iK'nwufs"  in  ntferenoe
to  citizens  of  Knuie,  sincu  what  would  be  an  hon-
our to  the  pooplr  of  Caerf'  would  be  a  pnoiiih-
nieut  to  a  native  Roman  citizen.  See  Hor.  Epi$t.
i.  C,  ta>.

Caeritum  TabUae. Se«  Cakum.


CAESAR


««


CAESAK


war.  A  title  of  the  Kdiiiati  cmpernn,  and
ort(luftll.v  II  tMtiiilv  iiiiuii)  o{  tim  iijuiiK  IiiHh.  It  was
MHuniMl  li;  OctiivianuK  an  tliu  nitoptcd  fuin  of  tlie
■rent  ilirtiitor,  ('.  liiliiiK  I'lioiuir.  iiud  woh  b,v  bim
Dlindr^l  <lo\vii  to  Ilia  »il(i)>te4l  8i»i  Tilteriils.  It  cnii-
tiiiii<><l  to  >to  iiwil  Ity  Caligiilit,  ClniiiUiiA,  mill  Nero,
iw  nii'iiilHtra  ritliiT  l>y  lulujituni  or  iViiii^ln  Oooceut
of  CiK'nar'n  fninily ;  tint  ttioii^Ii  thu  fimiily  UecHino
oxtinrt  nitli  N<'m,  Hiicrtjedin^  ciiipcrnnf  etitl  rc<
taitirtl  tt]o  iiunio  im  part  of  t1iL>ir  titliw,  mid  it  was
thi*  prnctiro  lo  (in^tix  it  to  tlieir  un-ti  tiHincit,  lut,
fl>r illHtlUlCtt,  /iHfrriilifr CiifMir />(iiii f lautw  Aut/titiux.

Wlii'ii  lladHun  iitliiptml  Ai'Hiik  V'i>nm,  lii<  ivUuwi'd
thtf  UttiT  lo  lukt'  ttit)  title  «r  Ca«»ar  (KiiBrt.  Ael.
Ver.  It;  luul  Ti-uiu  tliiu  tiuio,  though  the  title  of
Ai^tttfu  coiilliitied  lu  bo  voiiliiivd  Ut  tbo  iTi};;uiug
vni|H<ror,  tliat  ot  Vtuf»ar  waa  ultto  grautcd  tlic  nvc-
oud  ]K>i-)ioii  ill  ilic  BtAto  tkiid  the  bcir-pi'C8auii>tive
to  tin-  tlimim. Sev  Al'UL^sTUe.

Tin'  uniiit'  CufMr  was  varioiialy  derived  by  the
nuritMitA.  MoiKti  HWtiftiiiiig  it  directly  to  faetlo,  to
dtMifiti^  that  tilt)  t^ntt  l^an^r  of  the  name  was  rut
friiiu  hit  tuulhor'ti  iltoniM  by  lh«  "Caenariau''  o|ier-
ntloii  (riiii.  //.  .Y.  ^il.  9,7);  and  others  ex|daitiing
il  fritni  ntrMirieM,  bccAiiso  tlic  llr»t  Caesar  wa*  hum
with  a  full  bt'nd  of  hair  (Fcst.  p.  44  Mull.).  Doe-
d(*rlt<ln|5v*(m.  Hi.  tTtaasigiis  it  to  cttenw,  aa  applied
to  lhi>  rolonr  of  the  ftkJii.  or  perhaps  of  tlit-  eycA.

Crwiu-,  Gaii  tf  IruiN,  or,  ii«  the  iiaiuo  iri  writ-
ton  lu  KiifjIiHb,  Ji'Ui'6  Caemak,  vas  honi  oo  the
lUtli  of  July,  lu  li.r.  lUi  or  UX).  Thi^  latti>r  date
n^ta  u|Km  tho  slatfUii'Ut  i>f  »<>.vt>rBl  ancient  autlior-
ilino,  but  MommNen  has  »>bowu  that  the  earlier
date  is  uiun*  pn>bahly  eom-rL  The  Caesar  family
vaaof  patrli-ian  >tiK-k.  It  Itrlon^nl  tu  i\\r  proud
gru«  of  the  lulil.  whu  trnonl  their  iuicet»tr>'  back
til  the  very  hcgluntn^  of  Ibnuiin  history.  In  the
ecutliry  U'tnern  li.c.  Uhi  ami  til),  »<veral  Cac^arit
Itehl  public  o(Hoe«.  at  least  fonr  being  honoured
with  the  cHtn9iiI»hip.

Of  the  yonth  and  cttnratioii  of  lulitiit  Catwnr  lit-
tie  is  knomii  eM-eptiiig  that  be  va.*  iindrr  the  in-
•trnetiou  of  |h«  dislingi:i»hol  t^'aeher  of  grantmar
ftiid  rhclortr,  H.  Ant»aiu»  tinipho,  who  fitr  a  time
IwiSbl  iu  hia  botiK.  Thou|;h  alltr<l  by  tlt<»eeul
vttb  tlM  axiatotra«>,  be  man  btxMt^hl  into  irtatiou
vilb  Um  ^paUr  mrlj  Uuvugh  tbe  nwrUgv  of  bis
iwftt  lalt*  viik  tba  gnNit  )m4w  Mario*.  In  b.c.
fix  he  hiukM-lf  uianrMMl  Cumtdia.  Um  <]auj:ht«r  >tf
MannsVuh^vt  ar\l<^l  ^npiHtrter.Cioua.  ThUivrxvd
fisnlUi  vihis  t>-i£aiuuig  tkm  asceiideooy  at  KA>a»c  th*
IUk»u iu|[  \r*r. unlMwtCanMr  to divttrcv Imt.  I'u-
llk*  IVn  ' V- - '^*- ■■■• a«ay  Uieir  miw

mx  SuU  .  . rrfuaed. SaUa

cnyftfc^.^..  ^.'  ,-.v, •....-■  — <>  >-«uk«d  ika  |«ieat-
Wo4  sf  luUMTv  whiA  kad  W««  caafiB*ml  apwi
U«  Uinnsii  (W  InflvHKw  of  MMiw.  Aa  bia  Ufc
««  mam  \m  Amcm,  Iw  ««tit  iato  kUte^  Wi^
yw III  tnm  fHe*  l«  plM*  by  $«IUV  wiawriaa.
Aflvr  a  li«»  bis  fhvMbs  aMrd  by  tW  Vraul  Vir-
fiaa^  MftvemlMt  tn  •MMTinf  |MknbMi  CM-  bin  frun
SutW  wkv  W  MuJ  to  barv  yriMnferil  it  witk  tbc  tv-
MUk  IbM  Cwaar  «v«M  aaiaw  tin*  br  tb«  rnia  nf
liw  criitermty,  ^  U  IUm  iWra  «aa  «MUiy  a
MaHiMk  SwMi  aAwlv*nU  AmAtwm  <if  (ai^iaf  iW
MtitaCr  aayrtWK*  MiMibMMl  ■iftiMry  M  •
3WUIC  Hmbmi  vtf  mak.  h»  >4wr4  «W  alajff  wf  U.
MtaMC^M  TImw— a^  »  W  w«a  bMMjpnf  H)iUh«4«.
H«M  W  aavva  il»  Ufc  Mf  a  Mh.%-4rtMief .  «Ml«y^
1^  •»  gntu  brmrat}-  tbM  b*  ««*  WmtwrwA  vnb  «


il


Hcrviro  of  P.  Serviliun  in  Cilicta;  bat  immedial
on  tiearin);  of  tJiu  deiilh  uf  Sulla,  in  7ti,  he  returned
to  Kome.

The  follovinf;  year  Cneaar  introduceil  bimtelf
to  piihlio  notir«>  by  l>ringin>{a  rlinrge  of  provincial
t-xtortion  aj{aiii»t  Gnuetin  llohihellu,  who  had  Itren
pHK-nnsnl  uf  Macedonin.  Though  nnsucceaaful,  ia
7t>  li»  wiiH  invited  to  accniie  Galitn  Ancooias  of
similar  niinconduvt  in  GretMW.  AuloniUH  alao  wu
actiuittitl,  but  tho  young  pruaccutor  gained  greil
pnpiilnrity  and  a  uunsidfirnblo  reputation  f«>r  ora-
tory by  htH  xiIl'uh.  He  now  Htarled  fur  Rbode*.  tu
pimnti  tho  Htudy  of  uratiiry  under  Molo.  Nearlli-
Ivtua  bo  waa  captured  by  piratea,  and  vat  dctaiui'd
ou  the  ialaud  of  Pharmucnsa  nuiil  be  could  get
together  a  rausoin  of  llfty  talents  (over  $5f>,000).
Having  been  set  at  liberty,  be  procared  sliips,  rap-
tured the  pirates,  took  tbein  to  Pcrgamos,  and
crncified  thorn,  thus  caiTying  ont  a  threat  which
he  had  jestingly  pronounced  when  with  tbeui.  He
fflMUit  atthori  tiuient  Rboiles,  and  then  parted  over
to  Asia,  wh(»re  lie  rendered  gallant  service  ajiaii>«
an  anuy  of  Mithridales.  Iu  the  winter  of  t4-^3,
he  rvlurned  to  Rome,  having  been  chosen  to  fill  a
vacancy  in  the  college  <»f/»uNfi/f>-«t.  He  now  threw
htnifcif  into  political  Ilib  with  au  energy  tha
yielded  to  DO  op)Ki«tition  and  a  reckless  liheraliti
that  hesitated  at  no  expenditure.  He  waa  affahl-
to  every  one,  and  uo  appticnut  for  aid  went  awa.
empty-h:indc<l.  He  soon  exhnuHted  his  iiiheritaoi
ami  Wcnine  deeply  involvetl  in  debt ;  but  hiit  po
ularity  waa  unUmnde«l. Having  taken  a  stand

opposition  to  the  8ullan  coiiMilution  ntid  tlio  ai

tocracy,  he  rcecived  tho  officea  in  the  gift  of  t-
pcoplo  iu  regular  sttcoeasion.  Iu  B7.  he  wn.'s  qm^,.^
tor.flerTingnuderAnUailna  Veins  in  l-'tlTtber  Spt^a^
In  116,  ho  was  cnnile  «e<UIc.with  M.  Blbnlusan  m^.
league.  Extravagant  cxpcnditnres  upon  gi^rv
and  bnildinga  raised  hi!»  popularity  to  the  higt.a«.
pitch.  He  increased  tbe  p«]wer  nml  tntlnenr^s-  .
the  impnlar  party  in  many  ways,  but  by  no  ^Ivi^
art  diti  be  kindle  tbe  euthuMaatti  of  the  poptxl
im»rw  than  by  privaielv  resloritig  the  trophir-s  of
Marina,  which  bad  been  di-stroyed  by  Bulla,  and
tvpUotDg  tbann  by  uighi  ou  the  Capitol.  Uariaa'i
\'et«7Baia  crowded  around  Ibeni  with  teats  sifd
Khoatiag.  Tbe  Senate.  Dotwithatanding  tbe  for-
mal dennneiaiton  of  Marina  as  a  public  enemjr.
H  as  obliged  to  ytdj  lo  the  popular  IbeJiog  aud
leave  tbem  in  the  place  of  tioooar.

Caeaar  was  charged  wilb  ctmiplicity  in  bolb  th*
CatiHuarian  c«Mfi>rMa8B.bat  evidence  iswantJiti^
la  €8;  be  was  pcaMai;  nnring  htaaelf  with  ft«at
afm—  sod  diacflvtiaB  Aaud  ue&um  of  violeovA
Tb*  faUttiriMg  jmt  W  goTeriMd  1^  pmnnee  vt
PwlhM  9rakm  wHk  diMiMtfaw,  bMh  jm  a  dTtl  »<i
■i«wtralar  —J  m  m  yawml.  He  sabdned  levcinil
ttibn  att4  caylared  lb*  eit;  of  Brigaurinni.  iu  il^
•xmn*  aactbwlw  pwt.  At  tiae  expiratitio  *>*
bb  j^ow  ef  «Aa«  ha  <^v  bM>k  to  Boim  «it^
to  aa«Wy  bi»  cmHton.  Iu  <»).  ^'
tummX  fcr  SO.  ibe  arialocrary  auikiof
tvetj  aAa«  to  mbwi  tb«  Bliftiw  of  Bilmlo*  **
bia  cwfttofa  to  sAst  bis  !■#■!■  ui.  Abeat  tl)l«
liwa  ba  ba— g.Vi  ahost  »  mnMilia4i<vi  beivt")
l>i«H<y  Mid  Mm  It  Cnamm,  ansoring  with  ibc"
tetolh»vaalWaakM«ma»«ha  First  triomnrsV-
IVm  kmo  ««■«  •mnfthaaed  Ibrtbsr  bv  the  nuf'
iii«<i>  of  bis  ImblM  Jrtto  to  Tempts,  DnnV
Ma  wtoaMiiti  W  —  f>au»tt«l  in  ptwaotlag  tl»
tolMniiaa^lSMHnjMdOiiii;  aAtheaMMtlBO


l>e  Icept  his  Btondiog  vtiih  ibo  people,  and  wm  rape-

ciH-Uy  serviceable  to  the  iniportuut  body  oi  cquUeo.

IiiHt«*ud  uf  the  usuttl  prucoiisulur  cuuiuiiiiiil  fur  one

y^*x,  hii  easily  ublaiued  tho  Koveruur8l)i|>  of  Cl&al-

pint* GanI,  Ill>riciiiu.  and Tin ncMil pine Ouiil,  of

lE^bicli  ouly  the  HOUthuaBtcru  portion  hud  been  sub-

(jntHl,  furfivti  yean,  together  with  thrcoutrul  of  four

lemons. DnrioK  t^  next  nine  yeare  |.'iH-,'j<l).  Cai^

•r  wsM  enKiigetl  in  tliu  ('un<|ne«t  uf  Trsimalpine

}aul. 3animt<n)  werv  devuliMl  tu  niilit«ry  i>|icra-

|i*>tib;  but  wbeu  putaiblo  be ttpent  a  ]>art  of  lUa

>'snt«r  iu  Ciftolpiue  GanI,  iu  cloee  coumiuiiicntioa

pt'ith  his  friends  at  Honiv. Id  M,  he  nKuiii  rccoii-

•  ilr«l  I*(mi|>vy  and  (.'ratiaiis,  wbo  met  nith  liini  nt

■  im;  in  5!>,  his  couiuioud  vis  continued  for  live

ly  c-ars  lonj{er. The  eoiiqiiest  of  tiaul  wns  no  easy  mat-

t«?r.liotli  friini  thi^  oi1viiiir«iii4«nt  of  itt  civilixntion

llldlW  cbHriii'lnrfif  tht>  niiintry  (Ae«  CiAl.l.lAi; bnt

Cav'Uir  a<<rotnpliMhed  it,  in  n  ii«<neM  uf  i-iinipiii^nH

wliiclj,  fur  varidly  and  ok  ill  nrtarliusiui  wril  tut  nn-

rctiiittitiK  energy  of  uuivrnnnit,  aru  niiHiirp»8M:d  in

Ltljt*  uuuitltt  of  warfaru. Hu  tnicr  lindgi^il  thn  Ktiiim

Iftiicl  iuvndcd  0<-'nniiny;  tnicc  alno  hi;  cm^m'd  nvrr

VU*  Itriuiii,  reducing  the  trllicA  along  tint  MMitlienst

to  uominal  finhjeolirm. By  the  yunr  'lU,  CtaiiI

I  comidi'l*-ly  com|uei*d,  and  well  on  the  way  t«w-

>  couipU'(«  orgouization  ab  a  Koniau  province.


Com  uf  lulma  Ciu.-fiir  u  tiuuiur.

fttb  of  lulia,  Poni)>ey's  n-ifu  and  Cnewr's
bter,  ill  54,  and  thai,  of  Cruiuiua  a  year  latvr  in
Ca«t,  broke  the  cuiuiuou bond  between  tb<^
"^o  great  uiilitary  leadeM  and  pul  oji  end  to  the
■compact  of  the  triumvirate. Poiiiiwy,  viewing
'f'th  j^aloimy  nud  alarm  the  vtcturion»  tareer  of
«i»  jomigtT  rival,  ent«?red  into  an  alliance  with
^^»  ari«t4>cratic  party,  and  eudeavoiired  to  elieek
Uiv  iticr<>a«i iig  power  of  Cae.'>ar  by  lueauH  of  sena-
torial cnaclnieiita. Iu  bis  interest  the  Senate,  early
*u  Be.  W,  piuiHeil  a  den-eo  that  cju:li  of  tho  eom-
tnandcnt  dhoulil  give  up  a  te^iou  fur  the  I'urthiiin
^n. As  Poni)»ey  had  lent  one  uf  hiH  to  CiU-Mii*  in
^ithuwiLS  Htiw  deuiaudcd  buck. Althoii}.'b  the
■<it«(u  uf  il)i>  wIio1l>  iiiutt*;r  was  clearly  to  wvakun
^^<Mar,  be  gave  n|i  Poni[)ey'!«  Iv^ion  and  ont^  of  hi**
f**!!  wtIiii.>otcd;  but  tliu  triM>|>8,  inaleatl  of  being
^■•pttltbed  to  tbu  Eaxt,  Wisre  placmi  in  ciunp  at
^'ofiQk. It  tM:-cauie  t^'li-arer  uvury  day  that  Caesar's
"Win  wure  iK>wiTle«v<  to  obtain  for  him  the  rec-
'*S^ilioii  and privileges  to  which  be  was  justly
*(>^^t|«|; iiiuL  tho  senatorial  party  and  Tumpvy
wvnlil  Hcroplo  at  Dotbing  to  gain  the  advantage
'»w  hiio. While  his  coimiiiftsion  prevontwl  hini
''*n  entering  Italy,  and  no  dtHpriiMitioii  frotn  it
***  panted.  Pompey  was  pennittcd  to  aitniitiister
*"  ncpurtant  coinmand  iti  Himiii  throu};h  Ueuteti-
^"^luiil  at  the  »aine  time  ren)aine<l  at  Konie. The
oinjux  WHO  rcachetl  early  in  January,  B.C.  49,  when
^li'Spftulo,  ainid  ijreat  uproar,  decreed  that  Ciiesar
"'  '  -'iibaud  bis  army  by  a  certain  date,  under
'>f  being  considered  a  public  enemy  if  he
— ''  "I  do  so;  and  that  the  magistrates  shoiiUl
^kfl  iDoasnres  to  provide  for  the  security  of  the
The  tribunes  M.  Autouias  and  Cj.  (Jatt>>inQ,


who  had  In  vain  int^rftosed  theirveto,  were  obligetl
to  flee,  and  took  refuge  with  Caesar,  calling  upon
hUu  todcfeudlhe  inviolable  sanctity  of  their  office.
War  was  now  inevitable.

With  the  vigour  and  despatch  characteristic  of
bis  piwioDB  udlilai-y  o)KTaliuuB,  Caesar  at  once
crossed  the  river  Ktibieou.  Ilie  suiilheru  boundary
of  bin  pn>vinee.  Within  tbn<«  niualhs  he  was
master  of  Ihf  whole  of  Italy.  Puni]>ey  and  tho  more
£ualouH  adii«ri-ntM  of  th(<  urist<wratie  p:i)-ty  having
lied  U)  Greece.  Ho  uuw  M;t  imt  for  Hpaiu,  anil  (toon
difliieraeil  tUo  forces  of  Ponipey  then-,  lucauwhile
gaining  posncMsiou  of  Sicily  aDd  Sanliuia  also,
tlirougb  his  lieutenants  Curio  and  Valerius.  Iu
Africa  and  Illyticum  hU  officers  were  leas  sue-
cesafni ;  but  on  his  way  back  from  Spaiu  he  forced
t  lie  snrrtmder  of  Massilia,  which  in  bis  abienei'  bad
withstood  n  »iegi'  nt  the  hnmls  of  Trelmiiins  nuil
DHciniUB  Bnitnp.  Uy  this  time  Pompey  had  gath-
cn-d  a  large  artiiy  in  Greece,  and  bafl  also  a  jiower-
ful  Hvrt  at  hid  si-rvice.  Nothing  daniitfd,  Caeaar
rnism^d  the  Adriatic  in  Jainmry,  4H,  and  with  a  far
tnfi-rior  fun^c  tried  Co  bliHrkadu  Win  oppoiicut  at
nyrracbium.  Being  niuinceejufnl,  and  a1s<i  reduced
tit  straicfl  fur  siippliea,  lie  withdrew  into  TheMaly.
Pompey  followc<l,  over-conlideot.  Tho  decisive
battle  was  fonght  on  the  plain  of  Phantalns,  in
Tbcssaly,  AuguAt  i»th,  B.C.  48.  Pompey  had  47.(MH»
iufauiry  and  7<H*i'  cavalry,  Cac*ar  barely  'H.iM)
infantry  and  MJOi>  cavalry.  But  superior  general-
ship ami  discipline,  and  the  counige  of  dnspair,
won  the  day  against  greater  nnmbers.  Poni{»ey
H«d  to  £gy])l.  whero  he  was  immediately  mur-
dered.  When  tbi*  newa  of  the  victory  rt-aehed
Rome,  Caeoar  wiut  appointed  dictator  fur  u  ytiar,
and  utb4«r  offices  alMj  wure  e<Mirerrt!d  npott  biiii.  so
that,  nnditr  the  forms  of  the  old  constitution,  bo
]H>aacsae<l  absolute  aullKirity,


Cuiu  of  lulliu  CuMar

Tlaring  followed  Pompey  to  Egypt,  Caesar  waa
there  for  a  time  iu  great  danger  on  aecomit  of  tho
dioturbauce  known  us  the  Alexandrine  War,  wbicU
aroM!  from  a  disjinre  regarrling  Ilit>  Hiici't*»sion.  llo
placf'd  Cleopatni  on  the  llinmu,  ami  in  ttii*  Hjiriufj
of  47  prorceded  to  Pontic,  wberv  bo  drfentcil  I'liai^
naces,  a  sori  of  3lil]iridate«,  m;ar  Zcla,  animiuic-
iug  tU»  victory  at  Home  iu  the  fniuoiijt  despatch,
I'rni,  vidi,  vici,  '•  I  eiunw,  1  saw,  I  cunquereil.'*  Early
ill  4i),  he  crostwd  over  to  Africa,  crushing  the  rem-
tuiiit-s  of  the  ^Mtatorial  forces  there  at  the  bnttio
of  Tliapsus,  April  6.  Keturning  to  Kome,  where
his  finpremacy  wns  no  loiigor  di.tpnted,  ho  treated
his  former  opponents  with  nidooked-fiu'  clemency,
and  inai]giirate<l  several  nalutary  refonnt,  auiong
which  not  the  least  imjiortant  was  th<"  rearrange-
Nieiit  of  the  calendar.  The  «on»  of  P<im[»ey  gath-
ered an  army  in  Spain,  which  he  dtfeat(*d  at  the
buttle  of  Mnndu,  Miireli  I7lli,  B.C.  4'i.  iMiriug  tho
ensuing  months,  Caesar's  powers  as  a  civil  ail  minis*
trator  bad  full  Bcopt-.  His  projects,  few  of  which
were  destined  to  Uv  realized,  were  characterized
by  statt^!«manship  of  a  high  order,  which  has  come
to  be  the  more  admired  the  l»etl«r  it  baa  )>era  nu-


CA£SAK


248


CAESAR


derstood.  But  he  was  not  beyond  the  reach  of
malice  aud  envy.  A  conspiracy  was  formed  against
him ;  the  leaders  of  it  vere  Marcus  firutus  aud
CassiuB.  The  conspiratora  wei-e  actuated  by  difliar-
ent  motives — some,  no  doubt,  by  personal  jealousy
and  hatred ;  others  by  a  patriotic  desire  to  restore
the  old  repiibltcau  couatitntion;  a  few,  perhaps,
by  ambitions  designs  upou  the  spoils  of  State.  On
the  15tb  of  March,  B.C.  44,  as  Caetuu*  was  entering
the  ball  connected  with  Pompey's  theatre  to  at-
tend a  meeting  of  the  Senate,  he  was  set  upon,  and
fell  pierced  by  twenty-three  wounds.

Caesar  holds  a  unique  place  in  the  history  not
merely  of  Rome,  but  of  the  world.  In  his  time  the
goverument  of  Some  had  been  found  wholly  in-
adequate to  meet  the  administrative  demands  of  a
great  empire. More  and  more  the  military  became


-'■'■S


lulius  CMsar. (SUtne  in  the  Paltzio  del  ConMiTBtoti,  Rome.)


pHraniouut  to  the  civil  jmwer  in  the  State,  and  tbe
otd-tiuie  balauce  of  ])otitical  parties  gave  place  to
violent  strifes  between  successful  generals.  The
■  perpetuation  of  the  Roman  government  demanded
central izatiuii  of  authority.  Cherishing  the  ambl-
tiou  to  become  the  great  political  leader  of  his  gen-
eration, Caesar  became  buprenie,  not  by  usurpation,
but  by  the  natural  exercise  of  extraordinary  exec-
utive abilities  nuder  political  conditions  which
admitted  of  no  alternative  between  anarchy  and
absolutism.  He  appears  to  have  had  a  truer  insight
into  the  needs  of  his  country  than  any  of  his  con>
temporaries.  His  genius  was  not,  as  oft<!n  repre-
sented, merely  destructive,  but  was  constructive  as
well.  After  his  death.  Homo  hatl  no  peace  or  pros-
perity till  political  authority  wasagain  concentrated
in  the  hands  of  Augustus. But  this  many -sided


man  was  great  not  merely  as  a  statesman.  As  a  geo-
eral  he  is  ranked  in  the  same  class  with  Alexander,
Hannibal,  and  Napoleon  ;  as  an  orator  he  was  reck-
oned in  his  day  second  only  to  Cicero;  aud  us
writer  he  has  long  hIiico  received  a  place  among
tbe  world's  greatest  masters.  Tall,  with  fair  com-
plexion and  expressive  black  eyes,  sensitive  in
regard  to  his  appearance  and  neat  to  tbe  xergf
of  effeminacy,  gracious  in  addrras  and  Epica-
reau  in  both  tastes  and  beliefs,  in  external  cbu-
acteristics  he  might  have  passed  for  a  man  of  tbe
world,  at  home  in  the  gay  society  of  a  laxunoDs
capital.  But  iu  auibition,  in  energy,  In  tbe  abil-
ity to  form  plans  and  to  bring  things  to  pass,  be
belied  all  appearance,  and  has  probably  made
a  deeper  impression  upon  humanity  than  anj-
other  man  that  has  ever  lived.

With  the  exception  of  a  few  fng-
raents,  Caesar's  speeches  have  per-
ished. A  like  fate  has  befallen  liis
poems,  most  of  which  were  composed
in  early  life,  and  his  ti'eatise  od
grammar,  iu  two  boohs.  Amorfc
other  writings  that  were  pubUiilied
was  a  tract  written  in  opposiiion
to  Cicero's  panegyric  on  Cato,  io
two  books  (see  Amticatones):  a
treatise  on  astronomy,  aud  a  collec-
tion of  witticisms.  Only  his  iu  vain-
able  "Memoira"  are  extant — *'0d
the  Gallic  War"  [Be  Belh  GaUieou
iu  seven  books,  and  "On  tlie  Ci%ii
War  "  (De  Be/io  CivUi),  in  three  books,
the  fonner  published  probably  in
-  _  B.C.  51. These  works  are  written

in  a  simple,  concise,  straightforward
style,  remarkably  free  irom  military'
technicalities  of  the  sort  to  trouble
the  reader.  They  were  do  doubt
designed  to  justify  the  author  in  the
eyes  of  bis  countrymen,  bat  their
credibility  on  thewhole  is  not  there-
by seriously  impaired.  An  eighth
book  was  added  to  the  Gallie  War
by  Aulus  Hirtius;  and  nnknown
authors  extended  the  Ctril  War  by
narratives  concerning  the  Alexan-
drine, African,  and  Spanish  wan.

BiBUOORAPHY. — The  chief  source*
for  tbe  life  of  Caesar  are  his  own  writ-
ings and  the  works  of  Cicero  (partic-
ularly tbe  Letters),  Sallust's  Catilime,
the  biographies  by  Plutarch  and  Sue-
tonius, aud  the  treatises  on  Bonian
history*  by  yelleiusPaterculn8,Appiau,andDioCas-
siuB.  The  ancient  authorities  are  examined  with
much  painstaking  by  Drumann,  in  his  Geachehu
Som$  (vol.  iii.);  worthy  of  mention,  also,  is  tbe
extended  treatment  of  Caesar  in  Mommseu's  Hu-
lory  of  Home  (vol.  iv.  of  the  English  trauslatioo ),
iu  Duruy's  History  of  Rome  (vol.  iii.),  and  iu  Meri-
vale's  Hiitory  of  the  RouumM  under  the  Enifmre  (volt,  it
ii.).  Special  works  are:  Kapoleon  \\1.,  Uiatoirt  de
Jules  CUfsr  (2  vols.,  with  valuable  atlas,  Paris.  Idf& ;
English  translation,  New  York,  ISfS ) ;  Delonne,
GiUar  und  seine  Zeitgatossen  (deutscb,  bearbeit«t  vuu
Doehler,  Leipzig,  1873);  Fronde,  Cataar:  a  Sketch
(New  York,  1864) ;  and  Fowler,  JtUius  Caesar  and  Ute
Organization  nf  the  Roman  Emptre  (New  York,  1892)-
For  the  history  nf  Caesar's  campaigns:  SUst^w,
Heencesen  md  KriesfUkrvng Ouar» ( NordhaaBea,


CAESAR


a«9


GAESAKEA


);  F.  do  Sauloy,  t.^  Vampaym*  tk>  Ju/fM-Ottar
In  Gmkt  (Parid,  t8(E>) ;  A.  v<iti  fialcT,  Oxrtart
^^itthtr  Ktity  tint/  'Jftfi/e  wj'ncjt  ttHiyerknet/ft  I'M
*«1..  Freibar^  nm!  TUbiuKirii,  IrtSO,  ri*|iiititf-4  I'^t*4i :
StoffcL  lltiioirr  dr  Julei  f.Vaar  : fi'uprre  rifite  (*J  VoIb.,

"^illiftUuof  tTi'eul7-four]»latP«,  Paris,  l«c?7):  Jinl-

«oa»Omiir'rrflr»iy  lUfHitoi),  l!?fV*):  nml  I'nililicli. />«

AVusrirMn  CaMar»  i^^iirioli,  l^^l). L'ftpfiil.  nliMi,  iit

t'ii*»  oiunwtiuii  arc: KiiMtow,  Alias  »  Owmum  ifil-

iiM^^m  Krt*gr  (Stull^^itrt,  l"^**) ; A.  von Kiuiipeii,

•^  ^'.•tdCoforia  tU  fie/io  (tulUca  Commcniariot  T'tfiuhit

i«»>tli*,  l?aai ;  JaK  U  h'hiu  <U  C^Aor  (Paris,  ItJfHi ;

*"<I rf[iM:iial]y  I>(^lljarllillH, (iKujntiAU hittoriqne tt

'  "'*— inulnitntv fU In lifthh ninminr.  (4 voU.,  Pnrin,

l^^<t-XI). Kur  CaeMii-'K  writfiif^  wh>  FalIiM>.  -Ih-i-

[y^c luifoHH^t  lie* Co—Mtnltiiit*  tie  Jnlrt  (XMr  (PailH.
»Vj; ami TroIIuj*, ll't CvmrntnUtrUa of Cacs<ti-
^Uiiiiilclphiat  l***!")- y**^  tlie  extant  purtraits  of


Dititcr  (3  partM,  I<«ipi:i|;,  ld&t-76;  Sil  eil.  of  UalUe
War,  1884),  aiKl  Il4>friiiiiiiu  f'iU  eii.,  Vietiiia,'  IHr^} ;
crilicjil  Mlitioiifi  <>f  tlm  liat/ic  War  by  FriK*Ji  {Vl*-
kiiIh,  lH4ilj,  Holdrr  (wiLti  iiitirriil  iutlrx,  FrniWurt;,
K-^H-J),  aiMl  Kfililcr  (vnl.  i.,  U'i|iKt)C,  Ir^t).  Ainoiic
the  iiiiiiirrorifi  Hiiiiolutt^l  trilitimifl  urn  tliitsn  liy
Kmnt-r  (licrlid  ;  fit  li^l.  h'li/..  I  Jte  VfrliL-Mrf-ii*;  Aiiri.,
von  W.  liitU-iiljcrgiT.  IHWI;  tk  Ikl,  Civ.,  lUlo  mii-
((('iirlH-itctc  Ant),  von  Yt.  Iliirnmnn,  1^)),  DoltvreiiiL
|l4f>i]>zi|^,  iii)ig4'urWit^t  vim  It.  Dioter,  ite  lit/,  tjuf.y
lUeAiifl  Irtl>0-1«;  t/c  «</.  OV..5t<' Anfl.,  lHy4),  RbiMii-
hard  (8tittt(;urt;  <k  fit!.  G'll, 'tc  Antt.,  heraiixg.
von  a  Hfrziig,  iHlhi),  Molwrly  lOxfonl ;  O'liUiv  U'nr,
■it}  M.,  Irf7(^;  OriV  H'.ir,  18W»),  and  IVskeU  (Cam-
luidjjc:  Giil/ir  Wtir,  5  vnU..  Ir-Tf^aS ;  CV«Y  Wnr,
ISuok  I.  IfODl,  Alltiii  anil  Grti<ii<iiigli  (Rnglon  ;  Cattu-
Woi,  I6f^ ),  um\  Kv\»ay  {hmUm;  litiUic  [F'O.Ttli  itl..
1:94). Uf  lUa  Mivt'i-al  lexicuui*  tu  CauKiu',  MtMuel's


^ •


',  -^'l


Sllit  ami  RLilnn  tiT  <'u4.-<Mmi  m  ^'.tiiit


hin.ie(i  BerDonlli,  HSmitcA*  Jkonogroft^M  (vol.  i.,

i'R.r4&-iiei(.

TliK  Ua3.  iiiKiii  wliicli  llic  tuxt  of  Causar'f*  Com-

u^niUiioi  It  l>a»Mt  full  ilil<>  two  classeH,  known  st»

•  «h1  g. Tliu  a  groii|i  aeeiUH  tti  Uo  nioti'  fuithfnl .

^ii|(.„fj^jQ,^j  f^fiu^  |)ut  vuiitaiiiB  only  the  Uiinio

"w:  t)iL<  heal  rt'jirt^ciilfttiveo  nre :  u  M.S.  of  thv

nmidur  Icutli  ct-utory  at  Amsterdam  (A).  Hiree  of

'**leollicctiUiry(B.  C  at  Parin,  R  iti  tlic  Vatican),

^  ■"bft  uf  tbo  elevcntb  wiitnry  (M,  aI»o  at  Puri»J.

"*«*!?.  of  tb*^,•i  daw  include  alw  tbt- Civil  Wi.r

^iHi  t) .  .-oiiiiiuialidUM,  tby  ln'nt  b«iiiK  a  PuriH  MS.

ventb  or  Iwclflb  cfnlnry  (T).  a  Vaticitn

<  tweirih  i;uiitiiry  (V),aiid  one  uf  the  thir-

•'li  c*nlnry,  at  Vienna. Critkal  oditiouB  of

i^i  wwrkm  am  by  Niii|H'rdfy  (L«ii|f«ig,  IH47  j

•*'  DQtinor  ("2  voIr.. Piiri»,  l^^dT): cunvenient

'"'  "  C4tli  reprlut,  Xt^) ;


lAxicon  OiMrtrwflMwi  (Berlin,  1887-EW)  and  the  /*«£•
cvn  CucM" iiiriMiN  by  Uenf^u  and  Prt-Jiii!i'  (Lfi;>zig,
IH90)  are  the  bi>Ht.  A  briuf  bn>liui;ni|>by  of  tbe
tiion<  recent  litomtiirp  dealing  with  Caeaar's  vorks
it  given  iti  IVnrtVl'H  Hhfory  of  Hotnan  Literatttrt,  ♦^
iy&,  UKi(Khj{.  tr.  by  Warr,  lJ*>2l.

Caeaarauguata  or  Caesarca  Augusta.  Tlio
inodci-u  SaragoeBA;  a  town  of  IIis|Miiiia  Tarruco-
iienAia,  named  ttmn  it«  foiindur,  Augn»tiia  Caosnr.
It  Tvad  the  birtbiilnce  of  the  |K>tit  E^rudentiiis.

Caesarea  (Knicrtipfui).  O)  Tbc  princi)inl  city  uf
8nmnrJ».  silnati-d  on  tbt*  coitMt.  and  niicit-iilly  i-ullrtl
TniTirt Slriitxinta, " Strutn'a tower."  Who ilii» Strain
wag  i»  not  clearly  a^certaiucd.  Tlie  tlntt  iiibald-
tant.*  wore  Syrians  amJ  Greek**  {.Tosepli.  Ant.  IimI.
XX.  Ci),  It  was  siibse<|itcntty  made  a  ni:i;;nilicent
uity  and  port  by  llorod,  wb«  calltHl  it  CueKjirvu,  lu


CAESARION


2S0


CAESTUS


bonoiir.of  Aiignstus ;  and  It  now  began  to  receiye
Jews  among  its  inhabitAuts.  Frequeut  couteu-
tious  heuce  arose,  iu  coueequence  of  the  diversity
of  faiths  that  prevailed  within  its  walls.  Here
the  Rumau  goverDor  resided,  aud  a  Romau  garri-
80D  was  coiitiuuallj'  kept.  Vespasian,  after  the
Jewish  War,  settled  a  Romau  colouy  in  it,  with
the  additiouat  title  of  Colonia  Prima  Flavia.  In
later  times  it  became  the  capital  of  Palaestina
Pi-ima.  This  city  is  fi-eqaently  meutioocd  iU  the
New  Testament.  Here  King  Agrippa  was  smitteu,
for  neglecting  to  give  God  the  praise  when  the
people  loaded  bini  with  flattery.  Here  Cornelius
the  centurion  was  baptized;  aud  also  Philip,  the
deacou,  with  hie  four  daughters ;  aud  bere  Agabus
the  propliet  fbretold  to  Paul  that  he  would  be
bound  at  Jerusalem  (Acts,  viii.  10).  The  modern
name  of  the  place  is  Kaisurieh.  It  was  the  birth-
place of  Enaebius.  (3)  The  capital  of  Mauritania
Caesarieusis,  and  a  place  uf  some  note  in  the  time  of
the  Romau  emperora.  It  was  originally  called  lol,
but  was  beautified  at  a  subsequent  period  by  luba,
who  made  it  his  residence,  and  chauged  its  uame
to  Caesurea,  iu  honour  of  Augustus.  (3)  Caesarka
AD  Akgakum,  the  capital  of  Cappadocia,  called
by  this  name  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  previously
Mazaca.  It  was  situate  at  the  foot  of  Mouut  Ar-
gaens,  as  its  uame  indicates,  aud  was  a  place  of
great  antiquity,  its  foundation  having  even  been
ascribed  by  some  writers  to  Mcsech,  the  son  of  Ja-
phet  (loseph.  Ant.  lud.  i.  6).  The  modern  uame  is
Kaisarleh.  (4)  Caesarka  Phiuppi,  a  town  on  the
uorthurn  contiues  of  Palestiuo,  iu  the  district  of
Trachonitis,  at  the  foot  of  Mouut  Faneus,and  near
the  spriugs  uf  tbe  Jordan.  It  was  also  called  Le-
sheiu,  Laish,  Dan,  and  Paneas.  The  uame  Paneas
is  supposed  to  have  been  given  it  by  the  Plio;-
nicians.  The  appellation  of  Dau  was  giveu  to  it
by  the  tribe  of  that  name,  because  the  portiou  as-
signed to  thtiiu  was  "  too  little  for  tbebi,"  and  they
therefore  '*  went  up  to  light  against  Lesliem  (or
Laisb,  Judg.  xviii.  29),  and  took  it,"  calling  it
*'Dan,  after  the  name  of  Dau,  their  father"
(Josh.  xix.  47).  Eusebius  aud  Jerome  distinguish
Dau  from  Paneas  as  if  they  were  difl'ereut  places,
though  near  each  other;  but  most  writers cousider
them  as  one  place,  and  even  Jerome  himself,  on
Ezek.  xlviii.,  says  that  Dan  or  Leshem  was  after-
wards called  Paneas.  Philip,  the  tetrarch,  rebuilt
it,  or  at  least  embellished  aud  enlarged  it,  aud
uamed  it  Caesarea,  iu  honour  of  the  emperor
Tiberius ;  aud  afterwards  Agrippa,  iu  compliment
to  Kero,  called  it  Nerouias.  (5)  Caesarea  Insula,
now  the  island  of  Jersey.

Caoaailon  {Yicuaapioy).  The  son  of  Cleopatra,
said  to  be  hers  by  lulius  Caesar.  Plutarch  calls
him  the  son  of  Caesar,  but  Diu  Cassius  aud  Sneto-
ui  ,\s  doubt  the  assertion.  He  was  put  to  death  by
Augustus  Caesar.  See  Dio  Cass,  xlvii.  31 ;  Suet.
Jul.  52  ;  Aug.  17.

Caea&xla  Arae.  Meuitonod  by  Ptolemy  as  near
the  Tauais,  iu  what  is  now  the  country  of  the  Dun
Cossacks.  They  are  snpjtosed  to  have  been  erected
in  honour  of  one  of  the  Roman  emperors  by  some
neighbouring  prince ;  jwrhaps  by  Piilemo,  in  the
reigu  of  Tiberius. See  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  15.

Caesarodunum.  The  modern  Tours;  chief
town  of  the  Turones  or  Turoni,  and  subsequently
i-alled  Tur<nii,  on  the  Liger  (Lnii-e),  ju  Gallia
Lugduiieusis.


Caeaarom&gaa  (1)  The  modem  Beanvais;  tbe
capital  of  the  Bellovaci  iu  Gaul.  (2)  A  city  of  Ibe
Trinobantes  iu  Britain,  answering,  as  is  thought,
to  what  is  now  Chelmsford.

Caeaara,  the  Twelve. A  collective  namegiveo
to  the  first  twelve  rulers  of  imperial  Rome :  luUos
(B.C.  48-44);  Augustus  (B.C.  30-a.D.  14) ;  Tilieriiis
:  (14-37);  Caligula  (37-41);  Claudius  (41-54);  NfW
(54-69);  Galba  (69);  Otho  (69);  Vitellius  (69-70);
Vespasian  (70-79);  Titus  (79-81);  Domitian  (Sl-
96). Their  biographies  were  written  by  Suetonitu
I  in  his  Vitae  Ditodroint  CaenirMm,of  which  the  staud-
I  ard  text  is  that  of  Roth  (Leipzig,  1858).
I Caesiua  Baaaua. A  Latin  poet,  a  friend  of
I  Peraius  the  satirist,  whose  book  be  edited. He  is
said  to  have  perished  during  the  eruption  of  Ve-
I  suvius  in  a.d.79. He  had  a  high  reputation  iu  bis
I  day  as  a  lyric  poet,  and  is  said  to  have  composed  a
'  didactic  poem  on  metre. There  is  a  conuiderablfi
'  fragmeut  in  prose  on  the  same  subject  which  bean
{ the  uame  of  Caesius  Bassus,  but  this  is  perhaps
from  a  prose  version  of  the  poetical  treatise,  wbirfa
we  know  to  have  been  largely  used  by  later  writ-
ers, especially  luba  aud  Terentiauus  Maunis.
Caeaonla,  Milonia. See  Cauodla.
CaeattiB  (from  caedo,  and  not  to  be  coufonuded
with  cettut,  from  Greek  jccordr).  The  thougsur  bau<ls
of  leather  which  were  tied  round  tbe  bauds  of  box-
ers, iu  order  to  render  their  blows  more  powerful.
These  bands  of  leather  were  also  frequently  tied
rouud  the  arm  as  high  as  the  elbow,  as  is  shuwu
in  the  followiug  statue  of  a  boxer,  the  original  »f
which  is  in  the  Louvre  at  Paris.

The  caestus  was  used  by  hol-
ers from  the  earliest  times.  The
ordiuary boxing -gluves were
called  iu  Greek  Iftdrrtv  or  liiat-
Tts  m/KTiKoi. When  Epeius  aud
Enryalnsin  the  //iW(xxiii.6^1)
prepare  themselves  for  boxiof;.
they  put  on  their  bauds  thou^
made  of  ox-hide. (Cf.  Theocr.
xxii.  81;  Apoll.  Rbod.  ii.  5^)
But it  should be recollected
that  the  caestus  in  heroic  tiniM
appears  to  have  consisted  mere-
ly of  thongs  of  leather,  aud  dif-
fered materially  from  tbefrigbt-
ful  weapons  loaded  with  lead
and  iron  which  were  used  in  lat-
er times. The  different  kinds
of  caestus  were  called  by  the
Greeks  in  later  times  /utX^ai.
(nrtipai  fiatiat,  o^aipai,  aud  fivff
/if^Kcs— of  which  the  ^cXij^oi  gave
8ut«eor«  Boxer  with  the  softest  blows,  aud  the  iiv*-
IbeSuvS  t*^"""M7««  the  most  seve«. The^«-
Xt;(ai,  which  were  the  mt»t  an-
cient, are  described  by  Pausanias  (viii,  40,  $  3)  as
made  of  raw  ox-bide  cut  into  thin  pieces,  and
joined  in  an  ancient  manner;  they  were  tied  un-
der the  hollow  or  palm  of  the  hand,  leaving  the
fingers  uncovered. The  atbletae  in  the  palaes-
trae at  Olynipia  used  the  fui\i)(ai  only  iu  practis-
iug  fur  the  jmblic  games.

The  caestus  used  in  later  times  iu  the  public
games  was,  as  has  been  already  remarked,  a  m>wt
formidable  weapon.  It  was  frequently  coverwl
with  knots  and  nails,  aud  loaded  with  lead  aud
iron  ;  whence  Vergil,  in  speaking  of  it,  sayi,


CAICC8


Mi


CALAiruS


IdkCIiII*  wpU'ltl,

1  idnrabd  iiuuio  farrMiun  ngnlMnt.
poaka  of  ttlffrantia  plumbo  leffmiua.
\  in  ibe  IiaikIh  of  ii  Iruiiu'd  huxur,
jntiiitl}'  oticiuii oiled  (l«iilh.  The  ftvp-
fhct,  Miiiietiiiiett  calletl  yvuTty^ot,  or
t."  LuL-iIiua»i>«akHof  Ik  boxer  whoM
•u  buUoreit  )iy  the  tivp^^Kts  us  to  r&-

\i*ss  Atiilktar  ;  Pugil.
I  tbti  oacjiiiiH  frci|Ui-utl>  occur  ld  nu-
DtA. Tliuy  av'P*^'*^  '^  tiuve  bwu  of

M  a|tpearK  by  (bo  followiu){  Hpoci-
[Diu  ancient  nintiuraouts,  of  vrbicb
jlvon  by  Fiibretti.


OMHtui (Pabr«ui.)

ii

k^r). A  river  of  Myitin,  ri»iug  tu
!■  and  tluwiug  ptMt  Pvrgniutm  inlo

}iiir.

p  iund«ni  Gnetn;  a  town  in  Lntiiim
I  of  Campania,  nitiiatM  i>ii  a  (troni-
feune  UHtuu,  and  on  »  buy  of  Mm  n^tn
{i  Bluos  CalotauuH.  It  )>usM'HHe<l  an
iDur.  and  wa«  oiild  to  buvo  derived
ICaietu,  tbe  uuph>  of  Avueaa.
\ SeeGAius,  Oaia

tPLACSKTA; SCIUHUTA.

lIKTt^,  called SmyknaKCS  (Km*TDC

bnautbornfapof^ii)  in  foiirEeeii  l>ooks,

pnntiuiislion  of  \\\*^  fliail  of  Hoiuer.

k  fonrtb  rcnlnry  A.ii. Tbe  puetu  wntt

toea  (Sii-aNbnrjj,  1H07).

Tbo  puuiiisnla  in  tbu  AoutbeAMt  of

ft  from  Taroutnin  to  l)n;  Proniontu*
,  aod  fDruiiii)^  port  of  Ajiutiit  (ii.  v.).

jXoKTa).  Origiiiidly  tbu  niinui  nl'  |ijirt
Dd  aflerwanlM  a  t«)vin  uti  Lbu  uuilb-
tcily,  founded  by  Diicotiiia.
'  Tbe  modern  Caloborra;  a  town  of
In  Hiapanin  Tai-ni<:oi)onBii!i,  near  tbe
I  It  waa  tbo  birtbplaeo  of  Qnintil-
Ikgiirritant  an?  8aid  lo  have  fat-f!n
td  rblldron  in  tlm  Pxtremity  of  t.brir
'  (hail  vield  to  Pompcv  in  B.C.  71,
Vii.  6.

fis)  and  Zetes  (ZTrr^r).  Tbe  Borco-
Borata  and  Orlthyia.  Tbey  n'L>re
itroua,  aud  took  part  in  ibv  Ai'^onan-
I  Coining  in  tbe  conrw  (d'tbeeiitiT-
hleBaiia,  thuy  net  fnw  Pbiticnn  fq.  v.).
of  tbfir  niHtcr  Ot-opatra,  fntni  tbe
ibg  tbuQi  lbnMi;;li  Ibe  air  oii  tbeir
Idiug  to  mm  nlory,  they  pi>ri.sbiHl  on
[  ovcurdiii);  lt»  amtibiT,  tb<\v  werti
jda  by  HtTucIes  on  tbe  island  of  Tr-
^tarii  from  tbti  funeral  i^ainm  of
rs.)  Tbia  was  in  n-'lribntiou
vbicb  ilipy  bad  pivcn  to  tlie  Argo-
L  of  Myata,  to  leave  Ucraclca  be-


hind. Tbi-tr  grarm  aud  inoiuimnnts  wt^ro  ahuwD
in  TotioH.  One  of  the  piHam  wan  Mid  to  uiuve
»bun  tbe<  uortb  wind  hlvvr. Boa  Ahgonaltar.

CalAmia  (KriXa;<(rV  A  (frock  artist,  wbo  tfoiir-
inbril  at  Atbeua  abont  B.C.  470.  Ht?  wnrUrd  in
iiiarbh'  arid  metal,  &a  vcM  ai  gold  and  ivory,  and
n-na  tnaater  of  aculprnri'  iu  aU  ita  brnncbea,  from
the  ebiw?tling  of  aniall  silvHr  veaaeU  to  tbe  execn-
tion  of  cob>6flal  ntutnrH  in  bronxe.  Ilia  A]toIIo,  at
Apolloiiia  in  Pontnt<,  vae  ISO  foet  liigb.  This
Htatiie  naa  carried  away  to  lionie  by  Ltirnllna
and  Kct  up  on  Ibti  Capitol.  We  In-ar  of  Htatiira  of
tbe  k'xIn  and  lirmic  wonu'n  from  bi«t  band,  as  ivrJl
aM  of  nKM)  on  liorM-bnck  .and  fonr-bonwd  cbai-iota.
Hih  boniea  am  Haid  lo  bav<*  lHH<n  niianrpaAHt>d.  Hla
fcinalo  Agnrcit,  if  wn  taay  bt-lievo  die  ancirut critic*,
were  cbaract«riz«d  by  aiitiiiue  bartdiut^HH  and  uever-
Ity.  but  relieved  by  a  touch  of  grac«  and  delicacy.
CaJamlBtnim  und  Calamlster.  A  eurliug-iroBf
so  onllt'd  fnmi  iU  reJMiiiibl;iiice  to  »  roed  (caiamuMy,
and  uat!*\  among  tbo  Konians  an  eai'ly  oa  tbe  time
of  Plantns  {Curr.  ir.  4,  SI  I.  It  was  ftotnetimra  «tn-
ploycd  by  men,  tboiigb  t*nob  wtre  cunaidereil  efltun-
iiiat*.  Fi^jnrativfdy,  tbe  word  denot*;*  au  cjiceM
of  literary  oniiuncnl  (Hnet.  luLZiG).

Calftmoa  (al^o  1Iaiil'>:i>o; iu  Greek  KoXafioe).

A  reed. Keeda  were  exttumivwly  nse^l  by  tbo  an-

cieutfi  for  tbatchlng;  fi^r  making  math  mid  other

kiuda  of  plaited  work; himI  in  tin*  following  nsea:

(1)  Iu  DmBlf.  to  form the pandean ]ii{K'» (trv-

fiiy^l,  wliicb  conHJHtetl  of  n'i'da  of  dif-

foFLMit leiigtbs faMtvned by wax,  aa

Hhowii  in  tbeareonipnnyingcnt.takca

from  a  terni>cotia  relief  iu  tbeBritiah

Mu^ntii. See  SvttlNX.

{'£)  A  light  lluto  formed  of  a  Htuglo
ri-ed.
<:(i  Tbe  tibaft  «f  an  arrow.
(4|  A  ]"eed  pini  (caiamia  iicrifilarnit\
"Jft"*^"™  sharpei'e'i  I'lte  Ibe  moflerii  ijuill  pen
wltb  a  kuife,  and  cteft  al  llie  poUit.
Tbe  beHt  reedn  for  peu-makiug  canie  from  Kg>'|>t
and  CnidiiK.  Tbrsi;  reed  pens  are  tttill  known  in  tbe
Kiuit,  and  Ibe  Aiabt*  use  tbe  word  i-alam  U*  denote
tbi^m.  They  were  cnrritMl  in  a  sort  of  writii)g-r.a»e
called  i/itni  raJamaria  {KaXafiii).  {Cf>  8n('t.  Viauit,
301 Him-  WltniXtl  AND  WltlTING  Ma  rKi{lAt.*4.

(6)  A  tiHbiiig-md.

((!)  Tbo  fowler'tt  limed  rod,  which  woa  aomotimea
compiMEMl  of  floparate  jointa,  ao  that  It  oould  be
lengtbcnod  to  suit  tbe  fnwler'a  convenience.  It
waa  then  called  harundo  treaetru  or  tata,  aa  wcU  Bl
f«/.i«thj»(Petron.  Sot.  109).

(7)  A  light  Egyptian  boat  made  of  reoda  (ctiaao,
Juv.  V.  89).

(8)  A  horizontal  rod  piuiaud  tbr<»ngh  the  war|)  in
weaving  (hfirvndo,  Ovid,  .l/*-f,  vl.  55), Sec  Tr.iJi.

Calautloa;  also  Calautlcaixp^ilr^Qv).  A  ft;mi-
nine  bi-ad-dr<--iin  uf  uuL-i-rtaiu  form,  but  thou^bt  by
ICicU  to  signify  a  aort  uf  covering  for  the  head  with
lappets  banging  dowu  tu  tbe  ahouldern  on  Utili
Hi4lca,  and  when  drawn  together  concealing  the
face.  The  word  is  aumetimett  uitMl  In  tbe  heuMi  of
mitra  (l[.  V.).

Oal&nua  (KdXavtxX  A  celebrated  Indian  philoa>
oplicr,  one  of  Ibe  gynuioJiophititA.  He  followed  Alex-
ander frinn  India,  iiml,  bircuniing  ill  wbnn  they  bad
reached  Fcntia,  lie  ili'Min-d  to  have  bi»  fiineral  pile
erected.  Having  offerud  up  biit  ]»riiyiTK.  poiinnl
libatious  upon  biuiself,  and  cut  off  part  of  hi*  hair


Pipe. (Krum


A


CALATUUS


252


CALCHAS


Blave  prefleDting  her  HiBtreas
with  uCalaibus.


aod  thrown  it  into  the  fire,  he  ascended  the  pile,
and  did  uot  move  nt  the  approach  of  the  flames.
Plntarch  aays  that,  in  takiug  leave  of  the  Mace-
donians, he  desired  them  to  spend  the  day  in  mer-
riment aod  drinking  wilh  their  king,  "  fur  I  shall
see  him,"  said  he,  "in  a  little  while  at  Babylon."
Alexander  died  in  Babylon  three  mouths  after  this.
Calann»  was  iu  his  eighty -third  year  when  be
burned  himself  ou  the  funeral  pile.  See  Cic.  De
Viv.  i.  23 ;  Arriao,  AntA.  vii.  2,  4  ;  Plut.  Vit.  Alex. ;
Aelian,  V.  U.  ii.  41,  5,  6;  Val.  Max.  i.  8.

CalftthuB  (icaXt(^or,  rakadoi).  A  Greek  word
though  found  in  Roman  authors,  the  pure  Latin
word  b«iug  qualuB  or  qualum.  The  name  ealatkua
is  applied  to  the  following  objects :

(1)  A  woman's  work-basket,  especially  one  that
contained  the  materials
forspiDuing.  Itwas gen-
erally mode  of  osiers  or
reeds,  but  sometimes  of
silver;  and  was  nar-
row at  the  bottom  and
broad  at  the  top,  as  in
the  annexed  illustra-
tion taken  from  a  paint-
ed vaae  (Millin).

(2)  A  simitar  bosket
nsed  for  carrying  fruits,
flowers,  grain,  etc.

(3)  A  vessel  shaped
like  a  wicker  ealathus

and  used  for  holding  milk;  also  a  wiue-onp  of
like  shape  (Verg.  Georg.  iii.  402).

(4)  As  a  religious  emblem,  the  ealathus  was  car-
ried in  honour  of  Demeter  aud  of  Tellus  as  denot-
ing abuudauce ;  and  is  found  io  counection  with
Atheuf;,  the  goddess  of  the  art  of  weaving.  Priest-
esses are  also  represented  as  wearing  the  calnthas
ou  their  heads,  and  iu  imperial  times  the  god
Serapia  (q.  v.)  ia  thus  depicted.

Calatla.  The  miKlerii  Caiazzo ;  a  town  in
Samnium,  ou  the  Appia  Via,  between  Capna  aud
Beneventuni.

Calatintia,  A.  Atilius.  Consul  B.c.  258,  and
dictator  iu  249,  when  he  carried  ou  the  war  in
Sicily.  He  was  the  first  dictator  to  commaud  an
army  oatside  of  Italy.

Calator  (from  calo,  to  call ;  Gk.  KoKfrrotp,  from
KoXta).  Originally  a  slave  employed  as  a  crier;
later,  the  Jiomenelat&r  (q.  v.)  who  accompanied  a
candidate  for  political  office  ou  his  canvass,  aud
prompted  him  (Hor.  £!pigt.  i.  6, 50).  (See  Ambitus.)
The  word  ia  also  applied  to  certain  attendants  ou
the  members  of  the  higher  onlers  of  priesthood.

Calaitrda  (KaKavptta).  The  modern  Poro;  a
small  island  in  the  Saronic  Gulf  otT  the  coast  of
Argolis  and  opposite  Troezeu,  possessing  a  celebrat-
ed Temple  of  Poseidon,  which  was  regarded  as  aa
inviolable  asylum.  Hither  Demosthenes  fled  to
escape  Autipater,  aud  here  he  took  poison,  B.C.  322.
His  tomb  was  oue  of  the  sights  of  the  islaud.

Caloar  (/luw^,  lyKtvrpie).  A  spur,  an  imple-
ment not  mentioned  iu  Homer,  who  speaks  only
of  the  use  of  a  goad  {K€VTpoy).  Iu  Greek,  it  is  in
fact  often  doubtful  whether  the  writer  is  referring
to  the  spur  or  the  goad.  In  wurlts  of  art  spurs  are
seldom  represented,  but  bronze  Rpurs  have  b»en
found  at  Dodona.

The  early  adoption  of  this  contrivance  by  the


Romans  appears  from  the
meution  of  it  iu  Plautns  and
Lucretius.  It  is  afterwards
often  alluded  to  by  Cicero,
Ovid,  Vergil,  aud  subsequent
Roman  authors.  On  the  oth-
er hand,  we  do  not  find  that
the  Greeks  used  spurs,  and
this  may  account  for  the  fact
that  they  are  seldom,  if  ever,
seen  on  antique  statues.

The  spurs  of  a  cock  are
also  called  oalearia.

Calceus  {virodrffia  koiKov).
A  shoe,  part  of  the  regular
Roman  dress,  and  usually
worn  in  public.  Each  or-
der, and  every  gens,  bad  its
particular kind of  caloetm.

The  patricians  wore  a  malleus  or  calcnu  patridai.
This  was  a  shoe  of  red  leather  with  a  high  wle.
like  that  of  the  cotharnua.  The  leather  passed
round  the  bock  of  the  heel,  where  it  was  furniKhtMl
with  small  hooks,  to  which  the  straps  were  fast-
ened. It  was  origiually  a  part  of  the  royal  drt-sR.
and  was  afterwards  woru  by  generals  ou  the  occa-
sion of  a  triumph.  In  later  times,  with  the  rent
of  the  triumphal  costuuie,  it  became  a  part  of  the
dress  of  the  consuls.  In  the  secoud  rank  came  tlie
calceus  senatorius,  or  alioe  worn  by  senators.  Tbi»
was  black,  aud  tied  round  the  leg  by  four  straps.
Iu  the  case  of  patriciaus  it  was  ornamented  l>y  s
crescent -shaped  clasp  (/una).  The  caUtvt  of  tbe
equites,  aud  of  ordiuary  citizens,  was  also  blacL
The  latter  was  called  pav ;  it  rose  as  high  aa  the
ankle,  aud  was  fastened  with  a  simple  tie.


Calcartft.  Bronte  ?t>an
(British  Muwum.;


Ordinary  Calceus. (From  k  Marble  Id  the  British  llnwam.)

Calcluu  (KoXxac)-  A  celebrated  soothssyer,
son  of  Thestor.  He  bad  received  from  Apollo  the
knowledge  of  future  events;  aud  the  Greeks,  ac-
cordingly, ou  their  departure  for  the  Trojaa  War,
nominated  him  their  high-priest  aud  prophet.
Among  the  iuterpretatious  of  events  imputed  to
him,  it  is  said  that  he  predicted  that  Troy  could  not
be  taken  without  the  aid  of  Achilles;  aod  tliat,
having  observed  a  serpent,  daring  a  solemn  sacri-
fice, glide  from  nuder  an  altar,  ascend  a  tree,  ao'l
devour  nine  young  binls  with  their  mother,  ami
afterwards  l>ecome  itself  changed  into  stoue,  be
inferred  that  the  siege  of  Troy  would  last  tfii
years.  He  also  foretold  that  the  Greciau  rt«i-
which  was  at  that  same  time  detained  by  contrary
winds  iu  the  harbour  of  Anlis,  would  not  be  able
to  sail  uutil  Agamemnon  should  have  wicriticirtl
his  owu  daughter  Ipbigenio.  Calchas  likfwi'*
advised  Agamemnon,  during  the  pestilence  l>.v
which  Apollo  desolated  the  Grecian  camp,  to  re-
store Chryseis  to  her  father,  ae  the  only  nieau^  '>f


CALCULATOR


253


CALEDONIA


appeasing  tbe  god.  (See  Trojan  War.)  He  was
consulted,  iadeed,  on  every  affair  of  importauce,
and  appears  to  have  often  deturinlued,  with  Aga-
Diemnoii  and  Odysseus,  the  iiui>ort  of  the  oracles
vbicli  lie  expouuded.  HU  death  is  said  to  have
Iia]>I>eDed  as  follows.  After  tbe  taking  of  Troy,  he
accoitipauied  AmpLitochus,  sou  of  AmphiaraUs,  to
Colopbou  in  Ionia.  It  had  been  predicted  that  lie
should  not  die  until  he  found  a  prophet  more  skil-
ful tliuu  himself:  this  he  experienced  iu  tbe  person
of  Mopsns.  He  was  unable  to  tell  how  many  figs
were  on  tbe  branches  of  a  certain  fig-tree ;  and
when  M0118U8  mentioned  the  exact  number  Calchas
retired  to  the  wood  of  Claros,  sacred  to  Apollo,
where  be  expireil  of  grief  and  mortification.  Cal-
chas  bad  the  patronymic,  Tbestoridea.

Calculator  (XoyKmjr).  Iu  general,  a  keeper  of
accounts,  bnt  some-
times a  teacher  of
arithmetic — an  of-
fice of  mncb  repute
among  teachers.
The  name  is  derived
from  the  calculi  used
in  reckoning,  for
which  see  Abacus;

LoGISTICA.

Calcttil. See
Abacus  ; Duode-

CIM  SCRIPTA  ;  La-
TRUXCULORUM  LU-
DUS;  LOGISTICA.

Calda  or  Callda
<bC.  aqma).  A  hot
drink  of  the  Greeks
and  Rowans,  montioued  aa  early  as  Plato,  who
culls  it  $tpfi6v.  It  was  probably  nothing  more
th»n  hot  water,  flavoured  with  spices  and  herbs;
aud  though  wine  was  ofteu  drunk  with  it,  there
is  no  g<KMl  reason  for  considering  caida  a  sort
of  punch  or  uegus  iu  which  wiue was  already


CalcuUlor. (Baglio.)


Caldarium. (Jfturo  Borbtmico,  zIL
PH&.}


k  r^-"


Bronze  VwmIi  for  MiviDg  the  C&lda. (Pompeti.)


mixed.  Hot  water  is  occasionally  mentioned  as  a
drink  (cf.  Athenaens,  ii.  45  d ;  Lncian,  Aiin.  p.  575 ;
Mart.  viii.  67),  and  the  most  that  can  be  inferred
from  the  passages  usually  cited  is  that  wine  was
separately  served  while  tbe  guest  had  the  choice
of  hot  or  oold  water  to  mix  with  it,  according  to


his  taste.  Shops  or  taverns  called  thermoftolia
served  the  same  drink,  and  we  read  of  decrees  of
the  emperors  closing  tbem  on  the  occasion  of  a
death  in  the  imperial  family.  (See  Caupona.)
The  water  was  heated  for  this  purpose  in  an
ainum  or  caccakui  (Q.v. ),  and  kept  hot  in  the
authq^Ma  (q.  T.),  a  vessel  resembling  our  tea-nrns.

Caldarium.  (1)  The  hot  chamber  of  Roman
baths.  (See  Balneab.)  (2)  The  boiler  ixaXxfiov)
used  in  heating  tbe  water  fur  tbe  baths.  (3)  A  porta-
ble cooking-stove.  In  this  sense  tbe  word  ca/darium
occurs  ouly  in  late  authors,  though  tbe  thing  itself
is  well  known  through  nnnierous  si>ecimcus  found
at  Pompeii,  aud  now  iu  the  Naples  Museum.  Tbe
classical  term  for  it  is  probably ybcus.  In  Seneca's
time,  Romau  epicurism  brought  tbese  stoves  into
the  dining-room  {cenatio),  that  the  dishes  might  be
served  to  perfection.

The  caldarium  here  figured  has  been  described
by  Rich.  The
sides,  which  are
hoUoWjContained
water;  and  a
small  cock  pro-
jects from  one  of
them  (seen  in  tbe
engraving),  by
which  it  was
drawn  off.  The  foor  towers  at  the  angles  are
provided  with  movable  lids ;  tbe  centre  received
the  lighted  charcoal,  and  cooking  vessels  might
be  placed  on  it  or  snapeuded  over  it.  Another
contrivance  (see  Authkpba  )  seems  to  combine
the  two  purposes  of  sopplying  hot  water  and
keeping  dishes  hot.  It  has  the  cylinder  with  a
place  in  tbe  centre  for  a  charcoal  61-e,  which  is  tbe
characteristic  of  an  autkqita;  and  it  is  also  fur-
nished with  a  shallow,  oblong  tray,  into  which  the
hut  water  from  tbe  cylinder  was  drawn  by  a  cock,
aud  on  which  dishes  may  have  been  placed.

These  caldaria  might  be  shaped  like  a  mile-stone
(us  in  a  specimen  fig-
ured Mua.  Borbon.  iv,
pi.  59,  also  by  Saglio)
or  in  more  eccentric
designs  (dmoones  et
miliaria  et  complurea
formaSfSen.Nat.Quaest.
iii.  24,  $  2).  Tbe  same
passage  describes  boil-
er* tubes,  not  unlike
those  of  the  modern
steam  -  engine.  These
contrivances  show
great  skill  iu  the  ecou-
omyof  fuel  and  tbe  con-
veniences of  life.

Cal6.  Tbe  mod-
ern Oporto;  a  port-
town  of  the  Callaeci
in  Hispaniu  TaiTacu-
ueusis,  at  the  mouth
of  the  Durius.  From
Porto  Gale  the  modern
name  of  tbe  countrj-,  Portugal,  is  supposed  to  have
come.

Caledonia.  A  country  in  the  north  of  Brit-
ain, now  called  Scotlaud.  Tbe  ancient  Caledonia
cumprebunded  all  those  countries  which  lay  to  the
north  of  tbe  Forth  and  the  Clyde. It  was  never


CALESDARirai


3U


(U.LENDARIUM


onmiiloeeTy  Mitxlufil  hy  tbe  Rotnana,  tliotigh  Agrid-
ols  iKitn-tratcd  to  llie  Tay,  niul  JSevenis  iuU>  the
Tory  ht'art  uf  tliu  ctiiintry.  The  tmiue  i»  probably
tfcoLAtliiizfd  t'urui  of  rlitt  nativH  tiauit\Cali(hi,nnil


ana  with  the  vriul«r  soUtiu?. The  table  gWen
loM'  hhoWH  tho  aucocmioii  uf  ili«!  Atlic  uiautliH.  -^j
niiuibor  of  days  tb«y  coutaiuml,  auil Um  oai

spoiiding  luoiitlia  of  our  yvar.


•i McUKilliu.m  |M.tui„Ti.«)  ■'  »  "  "  "  AitfutL

8.  ltc«dmcnton  (thuiVowHt)  '■  fto  ■*  '*  •■  !fc|it«iDl


4. lyaiU-p«ll>D  (DmirC^i*.}

ft. MaliuaclBrlfHi  (HiiiiMitTiipiMt)  "  au

K  fOMiit«oa  ii]cHf«iArwt}  "  211

7.  a*in«lioD  ira*i<iX-«*>  " 9o

10,  linnyrliiiui  (%■,>■. ux<">l  "  311

14. Sr.imiihnfiiiD  (i^i^uqMpiav)  "  3tt

lirst  appcani  iti  Lutaii  (vi.  6^).  Tho  root  in  fnitnd
in  the  WeUh  cefyJii,  "a  wtmily  rrtrtat.'*  Tho  Rtf-
maua  uIhi  tialltnl  in  Urituniiiu  Harbani.

See  Tftc.  A^nc.  II.  '£>,  'iG,  'i7;  Aiiiiutau.  Moiccll.
xxvii.  B;  Plin.  IT.  N.  iv.  ItJ;  Ptolemy,  ii.  3:  Wil-
win,  Prthitlorir  Anwtta  of  Scotiaad;  Rliys,  Cftiic
Britain  (2i1  eil.  1684);  and  the  article  Dhitanhia.

Calendarium  (more  pnipitrly  Kai,km)akii'M|.
OriKiimlly  thv  occouiil-lmiik  iti  which  dtihtn  were'
eiiturwi.  Am  ihew  dehts  fidl  due  oii  tlm  Kn1('tidn,
tbe  tiaiiut  ifut  its  finst  eigniilcatluii  froui  tliut  ThcI  ;
ootntiig  latrr  to  inuati  a  nrgiHti-r  iif  the  dayn,  wvt^kK.
aiul  DtiiitthH. The  Greek  terms  tiro  qf^ttrnkuyiov  and

(li  (jiiiKEK.  The  Oroek  yeor  conBlnted  of  twelve
nioiitlia— Ruuie  "  full."  i.e.  of  ;ft>  days  each ;  the  oth*
ert«,  "  hulluw  "^  or  iiR<otu]dete,  of  !ft>  4lay»  oji«h.  This
niii4le  Tip  a  liiaur  year  of  :)&4  dny»,  11  diiys  Hhurt  of
tlir  solnr  yHar.  To  iiiuiutaiti  Miiite  coni'upoiidinirt*
Uetweeii  the  Itiiiar  and  th»  Holur  yeant,  and  to  [>ro-
vid*i  lit  luaHt  for  llie  feHtivalM  of  iIib  seiutoiiM  alwayti
occurring  at  Ihe  right  tiiiiL^  of  yeur,  tUu  AthHuiaiis
early  remirtiMl  to  the  method  of  intt^realutioii.  A
Mpuco  uf  liiiii-  WON  taknii  wlileh  iiivliidetl  um  many
days  an  would  t-xactty  miiki-  up  eight  »olar  yean,
auil  could  easily  Ite  dint rihn led  amutig  tlio  nuuie
iinuiber  of  lunar  years.  This  space  of  time  wiu
cullfHl  n  ■' great  year."'  Then  in  every  third,  Hixtb.
nurt  eigbtti  year,  a  moult)  of  U'.t  or  :H)  ii;iys  wm  in-
serted, »ty  thnt  I  be  yt"nr»  in  (pu'*tiiin  rooHititfH)  oarli
of  US)  or  3H4  day».  Tbi^t  tuvHlem  -wan  intnidiieetl  at
Athens  by  ^oloii.  Th«  pnHod  of  right  ycam  wait
80tDelimc«  eallt^l  twatri^^it^  or  a  period  of  luiie
yenn,  liecanse  it  bvgait  again  with  every  uiiith
year;  ootiii'timcH  MJcmrrijfKtr,  or  space  of  eight  years.
For  lliiM  the  nAtronomors.  of  whom  Metnu  (q.  v.)
lit  the  Pi-rieli-aii  Age  may  Uo  taken  aa  a  represen-
tative, inbslltntcd  a  more  aenirnte  KyKtem,  whirh
vaa  afterwards  Mlopted  in  Athi'nH  ant)  other  ritiet
as  a  eorrectiou  of  the  old  calendar.  Thia  wan  the
ivvtaxaittKarrtipii  of  iiinelirt-u  yfiini.  Tho  aller-
iinto  '^fitll"  and  "boUow''  lamilliH  were  divided
into  three  devndvn,  couniHtiiig  of  10  or  9  days
caoh,  aa  tbe  ra^e  might  be.  The  day*  of  the  last
decadn  were  counted  from  more  to  less  to  corre-
Kp4ind  with  the  waning  of  ibe  moon.  Thus  the
Iflsl  of  tbe  month  wns  nillnl  llie  KHh  of  the  wan-
ing luoon,  the  thX  tti»  9lh,  tbe  ^£M\  tbe  Htb,  and
so  on.  The  reckoning  of  th»  year,  with  the  ortler
and  uames  of  tbe  luonlhit.  ilifTen'd  morn  or  lens  in
ditfurvnt  States,  ibr  only  c«>mtiiou  iruiut  being  the
nanieM  of  thu  niunthn.  whii-ti  were  alnionl  witlioat
oxceptioii  taken  from  the  chief  festivals  celebrat-
ed in  them.  The  AtheniuuH  and  the  other  Ionian
peoples  began  their  ye<ar  with  the  llrst  new  (uoun
aft«r  the  Hunimer  Milstioe,- llie  Dorians  with  tbe
aMumiml  eciuiuox,  the  Buoutaans  and  utliur  Aeoli-


!fc|iieoib«r.

Nuveuibor.

••  " n^-^mbwr.

■'  •*  "  JiiBmry.

"  '■  "  Fwbrowy.

Uarob.

..  ..  ^^

At the time  when tbe  Julian Calendar  vw»
adopted by  the  Allieniiius,  probably  nbou;  *  1^
time  of  tlie  emperor  Hadrian,  tbe  innar  yc»r  s^\-
]>earH  to  have  been  cliangeil  iut^i  the  M>lur  ]ie«&.i;
and  it  has  fni-ther  been  coujeclnnM)  thai  tUt  l>e-
ginning  of  the  year  was  trausfenisl  from  iIk  ti'%  xn-
mer  iwtittice  to  the  auluninal  eqniuox. Tlie  itit-^r-
ciilary  niiiiith  was  a  M^coiid  Poeeideon  iuwrteil in
the midttle  of  the  year. The  oAicial  syf<(eui of
numbering  tho  years  diflvrcd also, very  ojui-Ib in
the various  .SlKtes. Tho years received tl»«r
names  from  tho  mngistrales,  vomctinics  vecular,
sumelimesspiritiial. (See  Kponii'>il'».) llislurictl
chronology  was  liret  compntcd  aeconling  loOlyni-
piaiiit,  or  |H!rioiU  of  four  year*,  lieginning  B.C.  T7(i,
by  tho  historian  Tiniaens  in  the  third  centiirtHC-

I S )  KoMAN.  The  Konmn  year  was  rii|tpo«r4l
to  have  cousistotl,  under  Roniulns,  of  10  niontlu  —
four  "full''  om«  of  :il  dayh  (Msn-h,  Msy,  Julr.
and  October)  and  t»is  "  hollow  "  of  30  dwvt,  (.^jiril,
Juue,  Angnst,  Si'ptcnibrr.  November.  lK-ci-ml»r)-
But,  as  a  space  of  304  days  makes  np  neilli'i  *
(iolar  mtr  ii  Innar  year,  it  Is  difflcnlt  to  mMv
hiaud  the  bo •  called  "year  of  RomntiiA."  Kln|;
Nunia  was  popularly  ftnpposMl  to  have  JiithNliiced
tho  year  of  12  months  by  a<lding  Jauunr)'  vii
February  at  Ihc  end;  for  tln'  Kouinti  year,  it  ni'i»'
be  remembered,  Iw-'gRii  originally  with  SUitlfc
By  this  fiystem  every  mouth  except  Kebnuiy '
un  odd  number  of  days:  March  31,  April  J9.
:{1,  Jane  '£),  Qiiiulilis  31,  Sextilis  S9.  8ei<l>-iii1''f
'J9,  Octotier  31,  November  'Al.  December  'H,  J«""-
nry  29,  February  28.  Numn  is  also  credite«i  •I'l'
the  attempt  to  square  this  lunar  year  of  3rii><ii<'
with  the  solar  year  of  3lJ5  ;  hut  how  lie  ilnl  it  ••
uut  certainly  known.  The  Dvceuiviri  Id  ac.  <j*
pn'hably  indvdiiceil  the  syoteui  of  adjustment  af-
terwards in  use.  Aeconling  to  this,  a  cycle  "'
foar years  was taken,  in the aecund yev  ^


I


MH.  ltd.

»ia .  i>A« .  riin* .
■bi .  ■»• .  urn .

MK,,


•MaWMkD.


^


Rooms  Csfaadu.  wllb  OepT  aI  IsterfplM  hr
Jmoauy. (msfwiL)

which  an  intercalary  iiioutb  (ownf£f  m(r
of  33  days  was  inaerteil  lwtwe«n  tLe  *.'^
SSth  of  February,  and  in  the  fourtli  year  a  nw"'''
uf  22  days  betneea  the  23d  and  24tli  uf  fiifai-


CALENDAKIUH


265


CALIDAKIUM


aiT.  Thns  the  period  of  four  years  amounted  to
1465  da.vB.  Bnt  this  gave  the  year  an  average  of
366^  days,  or  otie  day  too  many,  so  that  a  special
rectiflcHtton  was  necessary  from  time  to  time.
Tliis  was  probably  carried  ont  by  the  omissioa  of
ail  intercalary  month.  It  was  the  business  of  the
poulifioea  to  keep  the  caleudar  in  order  by  rega-
lar  intercalation;  but,  partly  from  carelessness,
partly  &om  pelitical  motives,  they  made  inser-
tions aud  omissions  so  incorrectly  as  to  bring  the
calendar  into  complete  confnsion,  and  destroy  the
correspondence  between  the  months  aud  the  sea-
sons. The  mischief  was  finally  remedied  by  In-
lias  Caesttr,  with  the  assistance  of  the  mathema-
tician Sostgenes.  To  bring  the  caleudar  into  cor-
respondence with  the  seasons,  the  year  B.c.  46  was
lengthened  so  as  to  consist  of  15  mnnrlis,  or  415
days,  and  the  calendar  known  as  the  Julian  was
introduced  on  the  Ist  of  January,  b.c.  45.  This
calendar  is  founded  simply  on  the  solar  year,
which  is  well  known  to  be  a  discovery  of  the
Efjyptians.  Caesar  fixed  this  year  at  865}  days,
which  is  correct  within  a  fev  minutes.  After
this,  the  ordinary  year  consisted  of  365  days,  di-
vided into  12  mouths,  with  the  names  still  in  use.
Every  fourth  year  had  366  days,  a  day  being  in-
serted at  the  end  of  February.  The  Julian  Calen-
dar maintained  its  ground  till  1582,  when  Pope
Gregory  XIII.  correct«d  the  trilling  error  which
ittill  attached  te  it.  The  old  names  of  the  months
were  retained  with  two  exceptions — that  of  Quin-
tilis,  which,  in  honour  of  lulins  Caesar,  was  called
luliiis,  and  that  «f  Sextilis,  which  in  b.c.  H  was
called  Augustas,  in  honour  of  the  emperor.  The
old  divisions  of  the  lunar  month  were  also  re-
tained for  convenience  of  dating^  These  were  {(t)
the  Kaleudae,  marking  the  first  appearance  of  the
new  moon  ;  (b)  the  Nonae,  marking  the  first  quar-
ter; (e)  the  Idus,  marking  the  full  moon.  Kalen-
dae  meabs  properly  the  ruLy  of  summoning,  from
mlare,  to  summon.  The  pontifex  was  bound  to
observe  the  first  phase,  and  to  make  his  announce-
ment to  the  Rex  Sacrorum,  who  then  summoned
the  people  to  the  Capit-el,  in  front  of  the  Cnria  Ca-
lubra,  so  called  from  mlare.  Here  he  ofiered  sac-
rifice, and  announced  that  the  first  quarter  would
begin  on  the  fifth  or  seveuth  day  (iuclnsive)as  the
case  might  be.  This  day  was  called  Nonae,  as  (ac-
conliiig  to  Roman  calculation)  the  ninth  day  be-
fon^  (he  full  moon,  and  fell  in  March,  May,  July,
and  October  on  the  7tb,  in  the  other  months  on
the  5tb.  The  appearance  of  the  full  moon  was
called  Idns  (probably  connected  with  the  Etrus-
can word  iduare,  "to  divide"),  because  it  divided
the  rnouth  in  the  middle.  The  days  of  the  month
were  coanted  backwards,  in  the  first  half  of  the
mouth  from  the  Non^  and  Ides,  in  thd  last  half
from  the  Kalends  of  the  Ibllowing  month.  The
Romans  also  bad  a  week  called  intemuHdinum,  or
the  interval  between  two  nundinae.  It  consisted
of  eight  days,  and,  like  our  weeks,  could  be  divid-
ed between  two  months  or  two  years. See  Fasti.

After  the  establishment  of  the  Republic  the
Romans  named  their  years  after  the  consuls,  a
custom  which  was  maintained  do\^n  to  the  reign
of  Justinian  (a.d.  541).  After  the  time  of  Angns-
tns  it  became  the  practice  in  literature  to  date
events  fix>m  the  foundation  of  Rome,  which  took
place,  according  to  Varro,  in  B.c.  753;  accortliug
to  Cato,  in  751.

Tbe  Day. — The  Greeks  reckoned  the  civil  day


from  snnset  to  sunset,  the  Romans  (like  ourselves)
from  midnight  to  midnight.  Tlio  natural  day  was
reckoned  by  l>oth  as  lasting  from  sunrise  to  snn-
set. The  divisions  of  the  day  were  for  a  long
time  made  on  no  common  principle.'  It  was  for
military  purposes  that  tbe  Romans  first  devised
such  a  principle,  dividing  the  night  during  ser-
vice  into  four  equal  watches  (tigiliae).  Corre-
siMuding  to  this  we  find  another  division  (prob-
ably calculated  immediately  for  the  courts  of
justice)  into  mane  (sunrise  to  9  or  10),  forenoon
(ad  meridiem),  afternoon  (de  meridie)  until  3  or  4,
and  evening  {tuprema)  from  thence  till  sunset.
After  the  introduction  of  sundials  and  water-
clocks,  the  day  and  night  were  divided  each  into
twelve  hours;  but  the  division  was  founded  on
the  varying  length  of  tbe  day,  so  that  each  hour
of  the  day  was  lunger,  and  conversely  each  hour
of  the  night  shorter,  in  summer  than  in  winter.

It  should  be  observed  that  several  of  the  East-
ern nations,  for  the  purpose  of  preventiug  confu-
sion in  their  calculations  with  other  nations,
dropped  the  names  of  their  months,  and  merely
counted  the  months,  as  the  first,  second,  third,
etc.,  month.  For  extended  information  see  Corsl-
ni.  Fast.  Att.,  which,  however,  is  very  imperfect;
Ideler,  Handbuch  dsr  mathem.  «.  techniscfum  Chro-
nol.  (Berlin,  1826);  Clinton,  Fast.  HeUen.  vol.  ii.
Append,  xix. ;  aud  mure  especially  K.  F.  Her-
mann, UAer  griechiwhe  MonaUkunile  (Gottiugen,
1844) ;  Th.  Bcrgk,  Beitrdge  zur  ^iedtiaehfii  Mo-
natsJcunde  ( Giessen,  1845  ) ;  A.  Boeckh,  Ueber  die
tierjahrigen  Sonnenhreiae  der  AlUn  (Berlin,  186;));
Mommsen,  Ckronologie  (Leipzig,  1883);  Idelei''8
work,  Lehrbueh  der  Chronologie,  2  vols.  ( Berlin,
1826);  Mommsen,  Die  rdmieehe  C/o'onoUfgie  (Berlin,
1858) ;  and  Matzat,  liom.  Chronologic,  2  voU.  (Ber-
lin, 1883).  For  further  information  connected  with
the  aucient  measurement  of  time  see  the  articles
Astkonomia;  Dies;  Horologium  ;  Lustrum;
Nundinae;  Saeculum  ;  Yigiliab.

Calanua,  Q.  Fcpiub.  A  tribune  of  tbe  plebs,  b.c.
61,  when  he  succeeded  in  saving  P.  Clodius  (q.  v.)
from  condemnation  fur  his  violation  of  the  mysteries
of  the  Bona  Dea.  In  59,  he  was  praetor,  aud  from
this  time  appears  as  an  active  partisan  of  Caesar,
in  whose  service  he  remained  until  Caesar's  death
(44).  After  this  event  Caleuus  joined  M.  Antonins,
and  subsequently  had  the  command  of  Antony's
legions  in  the  north  of  Italy. He  died  in  41.

Galea  The  modern  Calvi ;  the  chief  town  of
the  Caleui,  an  Ausouisn  people  in  Campania,  on
the  Via  Latina,  said  to  have  been  founded  by


OolnorcslM.

Calais,  son  of  Boreas,  and  therefore  called  Threicia
by  tbe  poets.  It  was  celebrated  for  its  excellent
wine. See  VtNUM.

Calfitea  or  CalJStL  A  people  in  Belgio  Gaul
near  the  month  of  the  Sequana  (Seine).

CalXda. See  Calda,

Calldazitim. See  CALnAKiUH.


CALIKNOHUM


see


CAUGL'IA


Cjilieudnua  A  tail  rnniilu  IioAtl-tlress,  but
wlitMlitT  ft  xvij;  of  ralnr  liiiir  ur  an  urrarigviiiniir.  of
flrs))frU-t,  It  Ik  intt  vnuy  to  (letvruiiiie.  The  Crii-
(lulitii  Miholiiisl  4>ri  tliu  locfm  ciauicvt  of  l-forsce
{Sift.  I.  f^,  4HJ  g^wm  txith  )>xplaiiatiuuH.  uitliuiit  ut-
totlt|>t.tlt^  Ui  tl«vHlo  lit>U«i.'oii  tlit<iii  Qpepium  cuj/iiU
aut  firinit  intfifw§ithiN«  mu  fttpilUHierttfim  atit  ga*
Urkiiliit  eapilittf  ornatncutum).  But  tjdlerioiltu
lim>  iiii'iiu  A  wf^  tBiiut.  0th.  Vi,  xvilh  Caeauliou'ii
iiuiot;  uiiil  tlio  liuiiKMir  of  till!  |>A««»^«  ix  ducidt'Oly
111  fiivoiir  of  tlilrt  rviidoriiiK :  onu  of  tbu  two  itlil
vrniiirQ  ilrojM  tu>r  fal{«e  tcvilt  iii  her  Hi^UI.  ami  tlii'
otiu'r  \wT  (n\w  tiiiir.

Ciillsa.  A  siToug  And  hoavj  Khoo,  or  mtlici-
Nnitdul,  worn  Vy  Xhv  Kuiiibii  ftoldii.T8.  Altlunigh
tho  ii»e  »'f  thU  spwioft  nf  cri/4ViimcNf«m  cxtoiulod
t<t  tlut  4iciilitnot)«,  it  n-Ks  not  wont  liy  tho  superior
olHrf^rs.  Hviice  t1if>  cniiininii  5nldi«rH,  mclndtug
vniitui'ioiiH,  vivTv  (liHlii)giiiHli(Ht  by  tb«  name  of
foli^Ui  fSiici.  Aufi.  3.'i  8«irvi<>H  in  thf  raiikH  whs
ftlso  dMifciiAicd  Hfter  ihift  articln  ofatiii-e.  TIhik
Mttrins  wm  HAid  la  ha\»  riMMi  to  tbu  coiutiUhip  •)
ntti^^  I.  o.  (Vom  Ibc  ruuks.  Tbe  vuiperor  Caligula
(q.  v.(  rec*»vnl  ibat  coguomeii  wbcn  a
boy,  in  c^ll^t•qIlol|(^t'  of  noariiig  ih«  oi
iig«,  wbirb  bis  fatlwir,  Qcnuaiiiciis.  ptn
u|Htn  bt6  bnn  iit  onlnr  to  [dcase  tlir  m>1-
dim  (Tnr.  .-Iitn.  i.  41 1  Tlir  triuiiipbal
uitMiimxMtlHttf  Rnair  shciw  tooAt  diMilii't-
ly  tli<<  ditTrrpiii-r  iM'iwtM'u  tb^  ctiH^t  of
llw  cuiiiuion  »olilivr  aud  tUo  taltttu
worn  by  im^ii  of  bij;b«r  ruitk.  iS«eCAL-
^___  —v'^*"-'*^-  '^l"^  wliih'  *-xhibii*  a  uBuber
<!MTiiaM  "^  strafie,  thnni^b  which  tb«  foot  U
]Mkrti»lly  MTii :  \t  biW  tbe  ealfeu*  (q.  r.)
to  ait  oi-diuHty  cUkh'^I  ^tllv.  Tbf  sole  of  tbe  tuiifa
"wtut^  Ibtckly  »lnddc«l  niib  liobii»iU,

Thv  Ai/tjM  jywvM /•■ti*rM  (Sufl.  Catig.  ^i),  made
Stt  Uw  iiM*  uf  rMirirrs  nju  |truluibl>  mitrli  lighter
fh*A  lb*  tvdbiiary  abiMt  worn  by  Ibc  suldM-rsk -Se«

<x>s  **«  sC  OecvuMiictta  wwl  Aj(tip|>ma,  « aa  botu
A.lh.  Mv  U  (^  oaMp..  pfwteblr  In  Ovnuwy,  snd
WM  totwiclti  ut>  aawttn  ibr  kcttMM  (Soei.  Oi%.
$X Hif-  ^*^  fraa  Ibr  9iiUtvr»  tkr  »sr-

■MK  ol  ^  .  >.  ttam  bt»  Wu^  arrayrd,  «bra
^ibt  ronu.  likv  a  to— Btt  aoUka,  mad  «cana|:
a  |Mir  «f  MA(9«r,  a  kioMi  (rfakse  wr  oavcciag  fur  iba
«M«  and  ebMr  ^  t>»  c<MMo»  mUhcs.  TU«
«••  4aM»  tn  aHM  t«  fcvavB  twwpAs  Wm  €k»  gat  J-
vm  .^^  IW  tnafii.  oa^(«U  UnseIC  bawvnr.
JWhltwl  tW  ayfWIaHnw  i»  alW»-4aym.  »■<  ^i^^&<T\  J
Aat  U  Gm«»  C^MKar,  «  bWh  i»  afatt  liia  fcblwiwJ
WMM^  t'|M«i  bt*  fiubrr'k  ik«tli  Im  Wi^rd  tkwm
Srhm^  Mri  Utt4  «1lli  Kfca  MMlb«e  liin  brt  eXilis,

MBUk  Ma  ^1  iirt-ff  awJ»a<lw  t,  mhmm  HmfnX  vn-

•MMf  «f  Ml  fiwfeteM«iMt,  AiMttW  OMlt  Itia
tmmwiU  >t<»«h  vW*,  W«»|t  tarttvA  l«  Oaf«Hw
hfli  «W  Ma|Mv*.  W  anwMawA  tW  ijtmi*  nwft  %a

vMifliMRMW  ullk  IW  «>af«tc«»  t4  (bM»  va  fiMN«v  «•


[ ;  wi  tbu  T»barMM  «laM


brecdiuK  a  Kcnud  Pba<  iLiMii  I..1  ibc
tbv  wiirld.  Tibrriu»  bad.  by  bu
poiut*^  bi»  Iwu  graodsotu,  Uai«ia  (
bvirins  G«iueUos.  the  laliet  tbe  aon  o
beinoftbcKmpire.  Tbefinxaciof
«vor,y»alo  aweiahto  the  Senate  Cm-
drvlarioi;  ibe  iuTalidit?- of 4be  will;
■Tttdily  efftcted,  and  Tiberiaa  Gem
clarvd  ton  y^MUf  ta  rnlc^Gaist  CaeM
iwaedtatc^  intKlaituni  evpenir.
■crat  was  leceifW  witb  tbe  mmH  i
batb  at  ftoflaeaad  ID  tba  fruvineea,  a
«f  ibe  acw  fanee  Mmed  at  fint  la  |
thtmmlaimtimammminigaM.  Aati
■  Ma  part — •  diMtanli
mmttx  kiavilf  fasdeea*
iiifi»iiaito»ag— el
.  Bknfitjr,  a^lwtiei
b»  ftnlf  ^iMd  aa  tbe  tbRM,  md
■HiliihLiariiatrrttbedM^eftfcaj
an^lbt  W  miTr4  ■■  aai^  eCbaee
lakM  bv  ibft  SeaMe. Be  lateaM

a«A  «f  bia  leMter  See*,  nrt  &*•  tf


ti— afcrtiiaiia Bai

iNeoa

crT>b««MhUl

*ea  wA  tvM. te  Him 1  ce^f^
lb  tbe  a«atf  tl^  ^|y  eT  that  afca

WbM  bt  ««a  dbHM  ei^idU  te  «

««Cbi ■!  iithi er  U»  n


CALIGULA


267


CALIX


appeared  magcaniinoiis  and  noble  to  the  eyes  of
the  world,  wbeu  he  fell,  on  a  aiidden,  dangerously
ill,  ia  coiisequeDCe,  as  has  been imagined,  of  a
love-potiuu  given him  by hii  mistress,  Milouia
Caeaoiiia  (whom  be  afterwards  marritMl),  with  a
view  to  secoriug  his  incoustauC  affections. Ou
recoTeriog  from  this  malady,  whether  weary  by
tliia  time  of  the  restraints  of  hypocrisy,  or  actually
derauged  in  his  intellect  by  the  inflammatory  ef-
fects of  the  potion  which  he  bad  taken  (Jut.  vi.
614),  the  emperor  threw  off  all appearance  of
virtue  and  moderation,  aa  well  as  all  prudential
considerations,  and  acted  ou  every  occasion  with
the  mischievous  violence  of  unbridled  passions  and
usDton  power;  so  that  the  tyranny  of  Tiberius  was
forgotten  in  the  enormities  of  Caligula. The  most
-exquisite  tortures served him for enjoyments.
During  his  meals  be  caused  criminals,  and  even
iuDoceat persons,  to be  stretched  on  the rack
and  beheaded ;  the  most  respectable  citizens  were
daily  executed. lu  the  madness  of  his  arrogance
he  even  cousidered  himself  a  god,  and  caused  the
liouoors  to  be  paid  to  him  which  were  paid  to
Apollo,  to  Mars,  and  even  to  Inpiter. He  built  a
temple  to bis  own  -divinity. At  one  time  be
wished  that  the  whole  Soman  people  had  but  one
bead,  that  he  might  be  able  to  cut  it  -off  at  a
single  blow. He  frequently  repeated  the  words
4)f  Attius,  Oderint  dum  TMtuant. One  of  bis  great-
■est  follies  was  the  building  of  a  bridge  of  vessels
between  Baiae  and  Puteoli,  iu  imitation  of  that  of
Xerxes  over  the  Hellespont. He  himself  conse-
crated this  grand  structure  with  great  splendour ;
sod,  after  ho  bad  passed  the  night  following  in  a
revel  with  bis  friends,  in  order  to  do  something
extraordinary  before  his  departure  he  caused  a
crowd  of  persons,  without  distinction  of  age,  rank,
or  character,  to  be  seized  and  thrown  into  the  sea.
Oil  his  returu  he  entered  Borne  iu  triumph,  be-
cause, as  he  said,  he  bad  conqnered  nature  herself.
After  this  be  made  preparations  for  an  expedition
.atfainstthe  Germans;  passed,  with  more  than  200,-
000  men,  over  the  Rhine;  but  returned  after  he  had
travelled  a  few  miles,  and  that  without  having  seen
an  enemy. Such  was  hia  terror  that  when  he  came
to  the  river,  and  found  the  bridge  obstructed  by
the  crowd  npon  it,  he  caused  himself  to  be  passed
over  the  beads  of  the  soldiers. He  then  went
to  Oaal,  which  he  plundered  with  unexampled
rapacity. Not content with the considerable
booty  thus  obtained,  he  sold  all  the  property  of
his  sisters  Agrippina  and  Livilla,  whom  he  ban-
ished. He  also  sold  the  furniture  of  the  old  court,
the  clothes  of  Augustus,  Agrippina,  etc. Before
he  left  Gaul  he  declared  his  intention  of  going  to

Britain.  Hecol-
leoted  his  army
on  the  coast,
embarked  in  a
magnificent  gal*
ley,  but  returned
when  he  had
hardly  left  the
land,drewuphia
forces,  ordered
the  signal  of  battle  to  be  sounded,  and  oom-
mauded  the  soldiers  to  fill  their  helmets  with
sbells,  while  he  cried  out,  "This  booty,  rav-
ished from  the  sea,  is  fit  for  my  palace  and  the
CapitoL"  When  he  retuined  to  Rome  he  was  de-
sirous of  a  triumph  ou  accouut  of  his  achievemeuts,


CoId  of  C'sliKula^  witb  his  head  and  that
tif  AuguMiu  (th«  iMUr  crowned).


but  contented  himself  with  an  ovation.  Discon-
tented  with  the  Senate,  he  resolved  to  destroy  the
greater  part  of  the  members  and  the  most  distin-
guished men  of  Rome,  as  was  proved  by  two  books
which  were  found  after  his  death,  wherein  the
names  of  the  proscribed  were  noted  down,  and  of
which  one  was  entitled  Oladius  (Sword),  and  the
other  PugiUtia  {Dagget).  He  became  reconciled  to
the  Senate,  however,  when  hefuund  it  woi-thy  of  him.
He  supported  public  brothels  and  gaming-houses  in
the  palaoe,  and  received  himself  the  entrauCe- mon-
ey of  the  visitors.  His  horse,  named  Incitatus,
was  bis  favourite.  This  horse  be  made  one  of  his
priests,  and,  by  way  of  insult  to  the  Republic,  de-
clared it  also  consul.  It  was  kept  in  an  ivory
stable. and  fed  from  a  golden  manger,  and  when  it
was  iuvited  to  teast  at  the  emperor's  table  gilded
oats  were  served  up  in  a  golden  basin  of  exquisite
workmanship.  He  bad  even  the  intention  of  de-
stroying the  poems  of  Homer,  and  was  on  the  point
of  removing  the  works  and  images  of  Vergil  and
Livy  from  all  libraries — those  of  the  former  be-
cause, as  be  said,  he  was  destitute  of  genius  and
learning ;  those  of  the  latter  because  he  was  not  to
be  depended  upon  as  au  historian.  Caligula's  morals
were,  from  his  youth  upwai-d,  abominably  corrupt,
but  after  be  had  married  and  repudiated  several
wives,  Caesouia  retaiued  a  permanent  hold  on  bis
affections.  His  extravagance  equalled  his  cruelty,
for  in  a  single  year  he  squandered  the  entire  savings
ofTibeniis,sonie  928,000,000,  afavourite  amusement
of  his  being  to  stand  on  a  balcony  and  shovel  gold-
pieces  into  the  street.  At  length,  a  uumber  of  con-
spirators, at  the  bead  of  whom  wei-e  Chuerea  and
Cornelius  Sabinus,  both  tribunes  of  the  praetorian
cohorts,  murdered  him  in  the  twenty-ninth  year
of  his  age,  and  the  fourth  of  bis  reign,  a.d.  41.  Hia
life  was  written  by  Suetonius.  Bee  Baring-Oould's
Tragedjf  of  the  Caesars  (Loudon,  1893).

Callx  (ffvXif ).  (1)  The  driukiug-cup,  usually
made  of  earthenware,  round,  with  a  broad  top,
feet,  and  horizoutal  handles.  The  usual  capacity
was  three  eotylae,
or  1.3  pints.  The
eantharus  (q.  v.)
diffei'ed  from  the
ealii  in  being
larger  and  hav-
ing vertical  han-
dles. Besides
earthenware,
other  materials
are  mentioned  as  used  in  the  making  oi  ealioes —
e.  g.  wood,  brass,  silver,  terebinth  (Wp^ctfor),  and
possibly  glass  (Photius,  s.  h.  v.).  Certain  places
are  mentioned  by  Atheuaens  as  noted  for  their
mauufactui-e  of  drinking-cups,  among  them  Argos,
Chios,  Lacedaeuion,  Rhodes,  and  Teos;  and  Mar-
tial speaks  of  Surreutum  and  Saguutum.


Earlr  Cnliz. (Blrdk)


Latest  CUIx. (Birch.)

In  Juvenal  (v.  48)  we  read  of  calices  called  after
a  shoemaker  of  Beneventum,  which  had  four  noz-
zles. Tliis  was  Vatiuins  (Mart.  xiv.  96),  who  was
afterwards  a  buffoon  iu  the  court  of  Nero  (Tac.


CALLATCI


2»


CAWJMA0HCT8


t


Ana.  XV.  S4>,  ami  tlie  ctipB  Troro  called  rd'fRM
(Mart.  X.  :i,  4). See  Bircb,  Aneifnl  roflrry  I  leTS).

(9)  A  lubo  n.>gu1atitig  tbe  aup[>l3'  uf  water,  ani]
ftttacbed  Ui  the  eotl  of  eavb  pi[>e  where  it  entertKl
the  caslellnm  uf  an  arfiicduct;  it  wa«  prubahty
of  lead  iu  the  time  of  Vitnivin?i,  (iiicb  only  b<'i3iK
uieulioued  by  biiii;  but  wuh  made  of  bmiizu
{tienens)  when  Froiiliiitiii  wrote,  in  un.U*r  to  ubeuk
tbu  mgiipry  (if  Ibe  lUfmtrii.  wbo  were  able  to  in-
ereaiu^  or  diuiiiiiHb  the  flow  of  water  from  the  rea*
orvnir  by  compreHHJng  or  extondiug  tbe  k-nd.  As
a  further  ttectirity,  the  ealh  was  atampui)  wilh  the
owuer's  uuiiie  as  well  as  tbo  capacity.  There  are
two  speciiiiuiis  of  Biicb  calicea  iu  the  Kotuaii  nni-
seiiiud^oue  iu  tbe  Vatican,  another  In  the  Mnseo
KiiTheriano.  Pipes  which  hail  uu  nt^M^  were
termed  wlntae.

Callafol  ur  Callaeot.  A  people  of  Spain,  in  tbe
northufwieru  part  of  the  country.  They  itihabiteil
what  waa  ouue  Cralicia  (»»  ICutrop.  iv.  19).

Callatis  (RoXXartr).  A  town  uf  MncHia,  on  tiie
Rlnrli  8e4i,  oi-i^rinnDy  n  colouy  uf  Miletus,  and
afterwards  of  HflDMrlen.

CaUtf. Sm  CAi.fc.

CalUas  (KriX^iiic)  and  Hipponious  i^lirvuytKot).
A tinble Athenian family,  celeliriLlecI fur Itiuir
wcjdib. They  enjoyed  the  beitMlitary  dij(i;nity  of
titreb  •  blearer at tlie Eleiisinian Mysti^riet,  and
«taimcJ ilefwent from Triptolemii*. Tlit) tiret
meralicr  of  thie>  family  of  any  note  wa»  the  CalUas
who  fought  at  the  battle  of  Jlarathoii,  B.C.  490,
and  w:iM  Hfterwnrile  unibu^satUir  from  Atherm  to
ArtHxvrxeit,  and,  according  to  ttotnu  iKconutM,  ne- '
goriali'il  H pDAi't'  with  Peraia,  B.O  44!>,  on term 4  I
Diimt [nimiliuting  to  the lalltir. On Imh  ri^turii  i
t-o  Atheus  he  waa  atTKimed  of  luning  taVeii  brilwi'M,
and was couiletuniMl tro  a tine uf  fifty talenU.
His  fton,  HipjMJuicuH,  wa»  kilk'd  at  the  battle  uf
Helium  in  B.c  4*^4. It  wua  bio  divorced  wife.  h.ikI
not bis widow,  whom Pericles married. His
daughter  Ilippnret^ wua  luarned to  Alcibiulea.
Call  iaa,  Hon  of  this  Ilippouicus  by  tbe  lady  \\\iu\
marriMl  Pnriclert,  dissipated  all  hlsauce^tral  wealth  i
on  HopbiMt«.  Ilattvrers.  and  women. Tbe  sceue  of  ;
Xenopiioii'a  Bttnquct^  and  nUo  iliat  uf  Pbit'oV  /Vu-
tagoras.  It  laid  at  hiM  houne.

CaUicolon^  (KnAAiKoXui^).  A  hill  in  the  diH-
trirt  of  Troa«,  dcririnf;;  it.8  name  {koKi)  KoKdvtf)
fmin  the  pleasing  regularity  of  its  form,  and  the
groves  by  winch  it  seems  for  ages  to  bsvp  been
ailornef).  It  is  meutioued  by  Homer  iu  tbe  Hiad
(xx.;.;i.  K.I).

Calliorfttes  ( KaXXiK^Ktr^r  >.  (1)  An  Athenian,
wbo  ejiiiited  Dion  (q.  v.)  to  be  asbaMtiiatcd.  (2)
An  otticer  intTuated  with  the  earo  of  the  treaaareB
of  8h«»  by  Alexiinilrr.  (3.)  An  arcbitect,  wbo,  in
coiijiineiioii  nirli  lirtinns,  built  the  PartboDOD  at
Athi-ui*,  iiud  who  nadiTt^Htk  iili^ii  to  romjdete  tbe
Long  WuIIm  termiid  tTKi\i}  [Plat.  IWicL  e.  V.i).  He
appears  to  have  dnnriHbed  about  n.C-  441).  {•!)
A  sculptor,  difttingiiiKliMl  priuci|»ii)]y  by  the  mi-
nuteness  of  bitt  performances.  He  is  mentioned
as  a  Lat^edaemonian,  iind  is  associated  witb  Myr-
m^eide«  by  Aclian  <  T.  //.  i,  17),  ]d  conuccTiun
witli  this  artist  bu  is  ^aid  t^  bavo  made  some  char-
iots which  could  be  eo%vrc(l  with  tbo  wings  of  a
lly,  and  to  have  insc-ribiNi  on  a  grain  of  the  plant
ifMimum  Mime  verM>»  of  Hoim-r  (  Piiii.  vii.  'Jl  >.
(jalen,  tbeiffore,  well  applies  to  liiru  tbe  epithet


^kouiiortxvot-  Atbenaeiin,  howcwr,  relat<*«  that  \
engraved  only  large  vaaes.  Tbe  age  iu  which  I
lived  in  uncertain.

CallicratXdaa  (KoXXtiifNirifiac).  A  Spartan,  wl
xueceede<j  Lysander  in  tb«  ronimand  of  tbe  0W|
ile  took  Methymna.Biid  routed  tbe  .\tbiiniMi  fioi
under  Conon.  He  wua  defeated  and  kiilcil  net
the  Arginnsae,  in  a  oaval  battle,  b.c.  406.  He  wi
one  of  tbe  last  wbo  privterreil  tlie  trne  Bpnrta
character,  which  bad  bocomo  greatly  a1t>Tr<l  A
the  worse,  during  the  Petopounesian  War,  by  t[
haUii  which  the  LAceila<Muoni.'iii»  bad  rontract*
of  lljjhting  beyond  the  liiidta  of  their  cfuititrjr.

CaUldr&nua  (KnXAi'Jtpo^ioc).  According  to  Liv
(xxx%'i.  1-5^,  tbe  highest  sumraltof  Mount  Oota.  1
was  occupied  by  Cato  witb  a  body  uf  in>t>p6  iu  It
bat  t  ic  fuugbt  at  the  paas  of  Thermopylae  bet we«
tbo  Koniaiiti,  under  Acilius  tilabrio,  and  tbe  arm
of  Antiochim;  and,  owing  to  this  mantcuvre,  t^
latter  wa«  entirely  ronted.  j

CaUimlobua  ( KuXA(>ixor).  (1)  A  Greek  artiil
who  tii'iiii^Ufil  iti  tbe  second  half  of  the  lifth  oeO
tury  B.C.  Ill-  waa  tbe  inventor  of  the  CuriutbiK
unler  of  pillar:  and  tbe  art  of  Uiring  marble  isaU
attributed  ti>  him,  tlmugli  perbajw  he  did  no  nioi
than  bring  it  to  perft>L-tion.  The  ani*innt  crili*
n^pruM^nt  bim  an  unwearied  in  poliHbing  and  |X3
fi'CLing  bin  work  ;  itidt^^d,  they  ullegu  Ibat  his  pog
diiclions  lost  aouielbiiig  tlmtugh  their  exeeH!f%
retiuemL'ut  and  purity,  Onu  of  bin  eelebrat:^
works  was  tbi*  gulJeu  chandelier  in  the  En-^
theum  at  Atbeus.

Vi)  A  Greek  scholar  and  poet,  the  chief  repi
I  Beutarive  of  the  Alexandrian  School. He  was r4
'  sou  nf  llnttiiH,  a.nd  1  hu.s  Kprnng  from  the  uobi
family  of  ihe  Battiadae. \\f  at  tintt  gave  his  Iei4
ures  in  a  suburb  of  Alexandria; but  was  oil^p
wards  summoned  by  Ptolemy  Pbiladelphn^  to  tlri
Museum  there,  and  in  almiit  li.c.  Qt^  was  made  nh
rator  of  the  library. He  held  this  otBce  till  bi»
death,  which  took  place  alKUit  h.0.  *240. He  diil  a
grwat  service  to  literntiire  by  sifting  und  catalog"*
ing  the  nnmerons  bmiks  collected  ui  AbtXADihiA-
The  reimtlfl  of  hin  labours  were  publiMbt.-d  In  liis
great  work,  called U'maKts,  or  "Tablets." 'Jljii
contained  VH}  book)*,  and  vas  a  catalogue,  arranged
in  cbroiiologii^al  order,  of  tbe  works  coutaiaed  !■
tbe  library,  with  observations  on  their  gtrntittt*^
ueiMs  an  iudicatiou  of  the  first  and  lost  wtmi  j"
eai'li  book,  and  a  note  of  its  hnlk. This  work  liu<^
the  funndatioo  of  a  critical  study  of  Grtyk  lilef*^
tare. Eight  btnidreil  worka,  partly  in  pniM-  w^
partly  in  verse,  were  attributed  altogetltcr  lo  t'"!*
iimacbuK;  but  it  is  tti  bo  obaerred  that  be  avoid-
ed, on  principle,  the  composition  of  long  [iMaih
so  aa  to  be  able  to  git  e  more  tbuught  (n  tlj**  srtii^
tic  elaboration  of  details. The  e»once  of  CaUl"''
Aclius's  verse  is  art  and  learning,  not  poetic  f/an*'^
m  tbe  real  sense. Indeed,  sotne  of  bis  conipt"*
tions  bad  a  directly  learned  object — the  Atru- *''
"Cannes,"  for  iiistanee. This  was  a  votlecnoii  «
eltfgiitc  poems  in  four  books,  tit-atiug,  with  crc»l
erudition,  of  the  fuundiktion  of  citias,  tbe  origin*''
r^liglouit  eeremoiileti,  mid  the  like.

Through  his  writings,  as  well  m*  rhrongti  U*
oral  lnstruciioi>,<.'animacbnaoKereitK-'d  iiu  iiunifii*'
iulUieuce,  not  only  on  the  oonrHu  of  leaniing,  !<■(
ou  tbe  poetical  lendeuclee  of  the  Alexaaiiili)'
School  (I),  v.).  Among  his  pupils  were  tbo  nrtst
celebrated  savants  of  the  time,  Kraloslbene*,  Aria-  ,


CALLINU8


269


CALLISTO


topbanes  of  Byzaatinm,  Apolloniaa  of  Rhodes,  and
others.  Of  his  writiugs  only  a  very  few  have  sur-
vived in  a  complete  Bbite.  These  are;  six  hytuns,
fire  of  which  are  in  epic  and  one  in  elegiac  form,
and  sixty -four  epigrams.  The  hymns,  both  in
their  language  and  their  matter,  attest  the  learned
taste  of  their  author,  Hia  elegy,  entitled  the  Coma
Bereniet*^  or  "  Lock  of  Berenice,"  is  imitated  by
Catullus  in  one  of  bis  remaining  pieces.  Ovid,  in
the  twentieth  of  his  Heraidet,  as  well  as  in  his
Ibi»,  took  poems  of  Callimachns  for  his  models.
Indeed,  the  Romans  generally  set  a  very  high  value
on  his  elegies,  and  liked  to  imitate  them.  Of  his
other  works  in  prose  and  poetry — among  the  lat-
ter may  be  mentioned  a  very  popular  epic  called
Ilecati  —  only  fragments  have  survived.  A  good
edition  of  the  remains  is  that  of  Stshneider,  S  vols.
(1870-73) ;  and  of  the  Hymns  and  Epigrams  those
of  Meineke  (1861)  and  Wilamowitz  (1882).  See
Conat,  La  PoMe  Alexandrine  (Paris,  1882).

CallinuB  (KaXXitwc).  The  creator  of  the  Greek
political  elegy.  He  was  a  uative  of  Ephesns,  and
dourished  probably  abont  B.C.  700,  at  the  time
when  the  kings  of  Lydiawere  harassing  the  Greek
cnlonieH  of  Asia  Minor  by  constant  wars.  One
elegy  from  his  hand  has  survived,  in  which,  in  a
simple  and  manly  tone,  he  endoavours  to  arouse
thu  degenerate  youth  of  his  fatherlaud.

CalliOp^  (KaXXiom;).  One  of  the  Mnses,  daugh-
ter of  Zeus  and  Mnemosynfi.  She  presidedover  epic
poetry  and  eloquence,
and  was  i-epreseuted
holding  a  close-rolled
parchment  and  some-
times  a  trumpet.  She
deri  vedher  namefroro
her  beautiful  voice
(cnri  T^t  KoX^f  oiroc).
Calliope  bore  to  Oea-
gnis  a  sun  named  Li-
nns, who  was  killed
by  his  pnpil  Heracles
(Apollo<l.i.3,2).  She
had  also  by  the  same
sire  the  celebrated
Orpheus.  Others,
however,  made  Apol-
l<i  the  sire  of  Linus
and  Orphens.  Hesiod
(Fra^.97)  says  that
Urania  was  the  nioth-
t:r  of  Linns.

Callipatira  {KaWtvartlpa).  The  daughter  of
Diagoras,  and  wife  of  Callianax,  an  athlete.  Ac-
cording to  the  common  account,  she  went  with  her
son,  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  to  the  Olympic
Games,  having  disguised  herself  in  the  attire  of
a  teacher  of  gymnastics.  When  her  son  was  de-
clared victor,  she  discovered  her  sex  in  the  joy
of  the  moment,  and  was  immediately  arrested,  as
women  were  not  allowed  to  appear  on  such  occa-
sions. The  punishment  to  which  she  was  liable
was  to  be  cast  down  from  a  precipitous  and  rocky
height,  but  she  was  pardoned  in  consequence  of
the  peculiar  circumstances  of  her  case.  A  law,
however,  was  immediately  passed,  ordaining  thut
the  teachers  of  gymnastic  exercises  should  appear
naked  at  the  games  (Paosan.  v.  6,  5).

CalUphoD  (KoXXk^i'). A  painter,  a  native  of
Bmum,  who  decorated  with  pictures  the  Temple  of


Cftllio|i<5.  tht)  Mum  of  Epic  Poetry
(Suiue  in  the  VftticBD.)


Artemis  at  Ephesns. I'be  subjects  of  his  pieces
were  taken  from  the  Iliad  (Pansan.  v.  19).

CaUlpOliB  (KaXXi'iroXir).  (1)  A  town  on  the
east  coast  of  Sicily  not  far  from  Aetna.  (2  )  The
modern  Gallipoli,  a  town  in  the  Thracian  Cher-
Bouesus  opposite  Lampsacus.  (3)  A  town  in
Aetolia.

CaUlirhfifi  (KoXXtppoi})  (I)  afterwards  called Eu-
neacrunus  {'Evvfaxpowos),  or  the  "  Nine  Springs,"
because  its  water  was  distributed  by  nine  pipes,
was  the  most  celebrated  well  in  Athens,  situated
in  the  southeastern  part  of  the  city,  and  still  re-
tains its  ancient  name. (2)  See  Alcmaeon.

Callla.  A  narrow  cow-path  in  the  mountains
(Isid.  Oriff.  IT.  16, 20).

Calllatd  (KaXXt'on;).  An  island  of  the  Aegean;
called  also  Thera  (q.  v.).

CalUateia  (KaXXiirrria).  Beauty  shows;  festi-
vals celebrated  in  different  parts  of  Greece.  See
Athenaous,  xiii.  609.

CalliathJineB  (KakXtaBfVJts).  A  Greek  historian,
bom  at  OlynthuB  abont  b.c.  360.  He  was  a  rela-
tion of  Aristotle,  from  whom  he  received  inatrnc-
tion  at  the  same  time  as  Alexander  the  Great.  He
accom)>anied  Alexander  on  his  Asiatic  campaign,
and  offended  him  by  refusing  to  pay  him  servile
homage  after  the  Persian  fashion,  and  by  other
daring  exhibitions  of  independence.  The  conse-
quence was  that  the  king  threw  his  friend  into
prison  ou  the  pretext  that  he  was  concenied  in  a
conspiracy  against  his  life.  Callisthenes  died  in
captivity  in  B.C.  328,  in  consequence,  probably,  of
maltreatment.  Of  his  historical  writings,  particu-
larly those  dealing  with  the  exploits  of  Alexander,
only  fragments  remain ;  but  he  was  always  ranked
among  the  most  famous  bistoriaus.  Indeed,  his
reputation  as  the  companion  of  Alexander  and  the
historian  of  his  achievements  maintained  itself  so
welt  that  he  was  made  responsible  in  literature
for  the  romantic  narrative  of  Alexander's  life
which  grew  up  in  the  following  centuries.  This
was  translated  into  Latin  to%vards  the  end  of  the
third  century  a.d  by  Inlins  Valerius  (q.  v.),  and  be-
came the  main  authority  for  the  mediteval  adapta-
tions of  the  myth  of  Alexander.  See  the  work  of
Westermann,  De  CaUiatkene  (Leipzig,  1638-42).

CalllBto  CKaXXtfrro))  (called  also  HelIc^).  The
daughter  of  Lycaon,  king  of  Arcadia,  and  an  nt-
tendant  of  Artemis.  Zeus  saw  her,  and,  assuming
the  form  of  Artemis,  accompanied  the  maiden  to
the  chase  and  overcame  her  virtue.  She  long  con-
cealed her  shame ;  but  at  length,  as  she  was  one
day  bathing  with  her  divine  mistress,  the  discov-
ery was  made,  and  Artemis,  in  her  anger,  turned
her  into  a  bear.  While  in  this  form  she  brought
forth  her  son  Areas,  who  lived  with  her  in  the
woods,  uutil  the  herdsmen  caught  both  her  and
him  and  brought  them  to  Lycaon.  (See  Akcaw.)
Some  time  afterwards  she  went  into  the  tenicnus,
ur  sacred  enclosure  of  the  Lycaean  Zens,  which  it
was  unlawful  to  enter.  A  number  of  Arcadians,
among  whom  was  her  own  son,  followed  to  kill
her,  but  Zens  snatched  her  out  of  their  bunds,  and
placed  her  as  a  constellation  in  the  ^ky  (Aiiollod.
iii.  8;  Hygin.  Fah.  177).  It  was  also  fubled  that
at  the  request  of  Her^,  Tt-thys  forbade  the  conintel-
lat  ion  of  the  Bear  to  descend  into  her  waves.  This
Ifgend  is  related  with  great  variety  iu  the  circum-
stances. Acconliug  to  one  of  these  versions,  Areas,


CALUSTKATIA


260


CALYDON


baviiig  been  separated  from  Iiis  mother  and  reioed
aiiiuiig  uieu,  met  her  uue  flay  in  the  woodo,  aud
was  on  the  point  ut'alayitig  her,  wheu  Zeiia  traiiH-
ferred  the  mother  and  son  to  the  skies.

iCalliatiatla  (KaXXitrr/joria).  A  town  in  Fapb-
lagoiiia  on  the  coast  of  the  Euxiue.

Calllatrfttna  (KakXttrrparos).  A  Greek  rhet^iri-
ciau,  who  probably  flourished  in  the  third  century
A.D.  He  was  the  aothor  nf  descriptions  of  fourteen
statues  of  celebrated  artists — Scopas,  for  iostaiice,
Praxiteles,  aud  Lysippns,  written  after  the  man-
ner of  FbilostratuH.  His  style  is  dry  and  affected,
and  he  gives  the  reader  no  real  insight  into  the
qualities  of  the  masterpieces  which  he  attempts  to
describe.

CaUium  (KaXXwi*),  called  CALUP0US  by  Liry.  A
towu  iu  Aetolia  iu  the  valley  of  the  Spercheus.

Callyntexla  (KaXXvynipia). See  Pltntkria.

Calo.  A  common  slave ;  often  the  slave  of  a
soldier.  The  word  is  a  contraction  of  each,  akin
to  eacula.  (See  Feat.  p.  146.)  Even  under  the  Re-
public the  nomber  of  slaves  following  a  Roman
army  was  large;  under  the  Empire  it  sometimes
exceeded  the  uumber  of  the  soldiers.  Each  legion
was  followed  by  its  own  ealone$  ;  aud  to  prevent
conftision,  in  case  of  au  attack,. they  were  organ-
ized and  subjected  to  military  discipliue.  See
Lisa;  Ssitvug.

Calor.  A  river  in  Samnium,  flowing  past  Bene-
ventum  aud  falling  into  the  Vultnruus.

Calp^  (KaXiri},  KoXiric).  A  lofty  monntain  io
the  moat  southern  parts  of  Spaiu,  opposite  to
Mount  Abyla  on  the  African  coast.  These  two
mountains  were  called  the  Pillars  of  Hercules.
Culp6  is  now  called  Gibraltar,  from  the  Arabic
Oebel  Tarik — i.  e.  **  mountain  of  Tarik,"  Tarik
being  the  Hooriab  general  who  flrst  led  the  Moors
into  Spain,  A.D.  710.

Calpls  (KoXn-ir).  An  urn  ofteneat  used  for  carry-
ing water,  but  sometimes  for  holding  unguents,
wiue,  or  as  a  cinerary  urn. See  Hydhia.


Greek  Women  wtth  Calpls.

Calpumla.  Danshter  of  L.  Calpurnins  Piao,
consul  B.C.  58,  and  last  wife  of  lulins  Caesar,  to
whom  she  was  married  in  B.C.  59.  She  survived
her  husband. See  Caesar,  Gaius  luuua.

Calpumla  CJena.  A  plebeian  gens  which
claimed  to  be  descended  from  Calpus,  a  son  of
Numa.  It  was  divided  into  the  families  of  Bestia,
Bibulus,  aud  Piao.

Calpumla  Ziex. See  Lkx.

Calpomias.  (1)  A  writer  of  mimes,  not  to  be
confounded  with  the  pastoral  poet  of  the  same
name.  (2)  A  Chriatiau  in  the  time  nf  Hadrian  and
Antoninus  Fins,  from  whom  we  have  fifty-one


Declamationes  remaining.  <3)  Titus  CALPritNirs
(called  SicClus),  a  Latin  poet,  a  native  of  Sicily.
lived  during  the  first  century  of  our  era,  iiudcr
the  emperor  Kero.  Iu  the  earliest  editions  of  liis
works,  and  in  all  but  one  of  the  M8S.,  eleven  ec-
logues pass  nuder  his  name.  Ugoletus,  however,
at  a  later  period,  guided  by  this  single  MS.,  showed
that  four  of  the  eleven  were  the  work  of  Nemesi-
auus.  The  Eclogues  of  Calpuruius  are  not  withoat
merit,  though  greatly  inferior  iu  elegance  aud  sim-
plicity to  Vergil's.  They  are  dedicated  to  Neiue-
siauus,  his  protector  aud  patron,  for  he  himself
was  very  poor.  Iu  the  time  of  Charlemagne  tfaesv
pieces  were  placed  in  the  hands  of  yonug  scholars.
Besides  these  poems,  which  were  written  iu  imita-
tion of  Vergil's  Bueolica^  there  exists  a  poetical
panegyric,  De  Laude  PUoni*,  which  is  now  gen-
erally attributed  to  Calpnmins.  Editions  of
this  are  those  of  Held  (Breslau,  1831),  and  Weber
(Marburg,  1859);  of  the  Ecloffuea,  those  by
Glaeser  (Gottiugeu,  184S);  with  Nemesiauus  by
Scheukl  (Prague,  1885);  aud  with  commentary,
introductiou,  and  appendix  by  Keeue  (Loudou,
1887).  A  good  translation  of  the  Eclogurs  iutc
English  verse  is  that  by  E.  J.  L.  Scott  (Loudon,
1891). See  Einsibdkln  Pokms.

Calthttla. A  yellow  garment. See  Crocota.

Caluznnla  (in  old  Latin,  Kalwnnia).  The  Lstio
word  for  slander.  It  was  technically  applied  to
false  accusations.  The  person  falsely  accnted^
if  acquitted,  had  the  right  of  accusing  the  prme-
cutor  in  hia  turn  on  the  charge  oiealumnia  before
the  same  jury.  In  civil  cases  the  penalty  was  a
pecuniary  fine;  io  criminal  oases  the  ealumniator
lost  his  right  to  appear  again  as  a  prosecutor,  aotl
iu  early  times  was  branded  on  the  forehead  with
a  K  (Cic.  Pro  Hoae.  Am.  20, 57).

Calnnua,  Cn.  Dohitius.  Tribnne  of  the  plebs,
B.C.  59,  wheu  he  supported  Bibniua  against  Caesar,
praetor  iu  b.c.  56,  and  consul  iu  b,c.  53,  throii);h
the  inflnenco  of  Pompey.  He  took  an  active  part
iu  the  Civil  War  as  one  of  Caeaar's  generals.

Calvua,  Gaius  Licinics.  A  Roman,  equally
distinguished  as  an  orator  and  a  poet.  In  the  for-
mer capacity  he  is  mentioned  with  praise  by  Cioeiu
{Brut.  81;  ^.  ad  Fam.  vii.  24;  xv.  51).  He
was  also  the  frteud  of  Catullus,  aud  three  odei
(14,  50,  96)  of  that  author's  are  addressed  to  him.
in  M'hich  he  is  commemorated  as  a  most  delightful
companion,  from  whose  society  he  could  scarcely
refrain.  The  fragments  of  his  epigrams  which  re-
main do  not  enable  us  to  Judge  for  ourselves  of
his  poetical  merits.  He  is  classed  by  Ovid  amoog
the  licentious  writers.  He  lived  B.C.  8S-47.  See
Teufl"el,  But.  o/B<m.  lAt.  }  213,  5-7.

Calyoadnua  (KaXvKadvos).  A  considerable  river
of  Cilicia  Tracheia,  navigable  as  far  as  Seleacia.

Calydnae  (KdXvScai  vijtrM).  (1)  Two  small  i»l-
auda  off  the  coast  of  Troas.  (2)  A  gronp  of  islands
off  the  coast  of  Caria,  belonging  to  the  Sporadea.
The  largest  of  them  was  called  Calydna,  and  afler-
wards  Calymna.

Calj^don  (KoXi/dwi').  A  city  of  Aetolia,  below
the  river  Evenna,  aud  between  that  stream  ami
the  sea.  It  was  famed  in  Grecian  story  on  ac-
count of  tlie  boar-hunt  in  its  neiglibourbwMl  (sr*
Mklkagkr),  the  theme  of  poetry  from  Honior  to
Statins.  We  are  told  by  mythologista  tbatOeoeus.
the  father  of  Heleager  and  Tydem^  Mlgnsd  *(


CALYMNA


261


CAMBVSES


Calydon,  while  h'w  brother  Agriii8  settlefl  in  Pleu-
mn.  Frequent  wars,  however,  arose  betweeu  them
oil  the  subject  of  contiguous  landH.  Some  time  af-
ter the  Pelopotineaian  War,  we  flud  CalydoD  iu  the
possession  of  the  Achaeaos.  It  is  probable  that  the
Calydonians  themselves  iuvited  over  the  Acbaeaiis,
to  defend  them  against  the  Acamaniaus  (Paiisaii.
iii.  10).  Their  city  was,  in  conseqaence,  occupied
br  an  Achaeau  garrison,  until  Epaaiinoudas,  after
the  battle  of  Leuctra,  compelled  them  to  evacuate
the  place.  It  was  still  a  town  of  importance  dur-
ing the  Social  War,  and  as  late  as  the  time  of  Cae-
sar. Augustus  accomplished  its  downfall  by  re-
moving the  inhabitants  to  Nicopolis.

Calymna  {KdXvfura). See  Calydnae.

Calypso  (KaXv^cd).  A  daughter  of  Atlas,  ac-
cording to  Homer  {Od.  ii.  52).  Hesiod,  however,
makes  her  an  oceau-nymph  ( Theoff.  359),  and  Apol-
lodorus  a  Nereid  (i.  2).  Like  Circ6,  she  was  a  god-
dess of  human  appearance,  and  dwelt  in  solitary
state  with  her  att«ndant  nymphs  on  an  island  named
Ogyg'a.  in  tlie  midst  of  the  ocean.  Her  isle  pre-
Heuted  such  a  scene  of  sylvau  beauty  as  charmed
even  Hermes,  one  of  the  dwellers  of  Olympus  ( Od.
T.  72).  Calypso  received  and  kindly  entertained
Odysseus,  when,  in
the  course  of  his
wanderings,  that
hero  was  thrown
upon  her  domains
afl«r  his  shipwreck.
She  detained  him
tliere  for  se  v  e  u
years,  designing  to
make  him  immor-
tal and  to  keep  him
with  her  forever;
but  Hermes  arriv-
ing with  ft  com-
mand from  Zeus,
she  was  obliged  to
consent  to  bis  de-
parture. She  gave
the  hero  tools  to
build  a  raft  or  light  vessel,  supplied  him  with
provisions,  and  reluctantly  took  a  final  leave  of
him.  As  regards  her  island,  Homer  seems  to  have
conceived  Ogygia  to  lie  in  the  northwestern  parts
of  the  Western  Sea,  far  remote  from  all  other  isles
and  coasts;  and  he  thus  brought  his  hero  into  all
parts  of  that  sea,  and  informed  his  auditors  of  all
its  wonders.  Odyssens  had  two  sons  by  Caly^iso,
named  Nauaithoila  and  NausiuoSs.

Calyptra  (xaXvnrpa).  A  veil  worn  by  young
women  in  Greece  as  well  as  in  Italy,  used  to  con-
ceal the  face  from  strangers.  See  Horn.  Od.  v.  232 ;
Kurip.  Ipk.  T.  372.

Camaloduntun.  The  modern  Colchester;  the
capital  of  the  Trinobantes  in  Britain,  and  the  first
Ruuian  colony  in  the  island.  It  was  founded  by
the  emperor  Claudius,  A.D.  43.

CamSra  (Kafiopa)  or  Caxnflra.  Any  arched  or
vaulted  covering,  and  anything  with  such  a  cov-
ering. It  is  chiefly  ased  iu  the  following
seiiRes:

(1)  Of  an  arched  roof  which  might  be  {n)  an
oiwM  trellis  -  work  with  creeping  -  plants,  etc.,
trained  over  it;  or  (ft)  an  arched  or  vaulted  ceil-
ing formed  by  semicircular  bands  or  beams  of
w«km1, often  gilded  or  fitted  with  plates  of  glass;


Olfpso. (From  k  painted  Vue.)


or  (c)  a  barrel-vanlt  of  solid  stoue-work,  as  that
of  theTulIianum  prison  at  Rome. See  Carcbr.

(2)  Small  boats  used  in  early  times  by  the  people
who  inhabited  the  shores  of  the  Euxine  and  the
Bosporus,  and  so  called  from  their  broad,  arched
deck,  described  by  Tacitus  iHUt.  iii,  4).

Camarina  (Kafuipiva).  A  town  on  the  southern
coast  of  Sicily,  at  the  month  of  the  HippariSr
founded  by  Syracuse,  B.C.  599.  It  was  several
times  destroyed  by  Syracuse;  and  in  the  First
Punic  War  was  taken  by  the  Romans,  and  most
of  the  inhabitants  sold  as  shives.

Near  the  walls  on  the  north  was  the  Pains
Camarina,  which  was  a  marshy  pool  formed  by
the  stagnation  of  the  Hipparis  near  its  raoutli.
Its  miasmatic  vaponrs  made  the  city  unhealthy,
for  which  reason  the  iuhabitants  were  anxious  to
drain  it,  but  were  counselled  by  the  Delphic  Ora-
cle not  to  do  it  {M^  Kivti  Kafiaptvav  •  dKivTjrot  yap
afitivtov).  In  spite  of  this  advice,  the  marsh  was
drained,  aud  in  consequence  tbe  city  was  laid
oi»eu  to  attack  on  tbat  side,  and  was  captured.
The  story  is  doubtless  apocryphal,  but  the  wonls
of  the  oracle  passed  into  a  proverb  among  tbe
Greeks.  See  Verg.  Aen.  iii,  700,  701  aud  Serv.  ad
he.

Camboiiii  Monies.  The  mountains  which  sep-
iirate  Macedonia  aud  Thessaly.  They  were  a  con-
tinuation of  theCerannian  Mountains,  termioating
in  Mount  Olympus  on  tbe  east.

Camb^sea  (Kofi^uinjF).  (1)  An  early  monarch
of  the  line  of  the  Achaemenides,  tbe  successor  of
Teispes,  who  was  himself  the  successor  of  Achaem-
enes.  He  must  not  be  confounded  with  Cam-
byses  the  son  of  Cyrus,  who  was,  in  fact,  the
second  of  the  name  in  the  line  of  Persian  kings
(Herod,  vii.  11).  (2)  A  Persian  of  good  family,  to
whom  Astyages,  king  of  Media,  gave  his  daugh-
t«r  Mandau^  in  marriage.  The  issue  of  this  union
was  Cyrus  the  Great  (Herod,  i.  46,  107).  (3)  The
son  aud  successor  of  Cyrus  the  Great,  ascend-
ed the  throne  of  Persia  B.u.  530.  Soon  after  the
commencement  of  his  reign,  he  undertook  the  con-
quest of  Egypt,  being  incited  to  the  step,  accord-
ing to  the  Persian  account  as  given  in  Herodotus
(iii.  1),  by  the  conduct  of  Amasis,  the  king  of  that
country.  Cambyses,  it  seems,  had  demanded  in
marriage  the  daughter  of  Amasis;  but  the  latter,
knowing  that  the  Peraiau  monarch  intended  to
make  her,  not  his  wife,  but  his  concubine,  en-
deavoured to  deceive  him  by  sending  in  her  stead
the  daughter  of  bis  predecessor  Apries.  The  his-
torian gives  another  account ;  hut  it  is  more  than
probable  that  both  are  untrue,  and  that  ambitious
feelings  alone  on  the  part  of  Cambyses  prompted
him  to  tbe  enterprise.  Amasis  died  before  Cam-
byses marched  against  Egypt,  and  his  sun  Psam-
menitus  succeeded  to  the  throne.  A  bloody  battle
was  fought  near  the  Pelusiac  mouth  of  the  Nile,
and  the  Egyptians  were  put  to  flight,  after  which
Cambyses  made  himself  master  of  the  whole  coun-
try, and  received  tokens  of  submission  also  from
tbe  Cyrenaeaus  and  the  people  of  Burca.  The
kingdom  of  Egypt  was  thus  conquered  by  him  in
six  mouths. See  Aeoyptub.

Cambyses  now  formed  new  projects.  He  wished
to  send  a  squadron  and  subjugate  Curtbage,  to
couqtier  Aethiupia,  and  to  make  himself  master
of  the  famous  temple  of  Zeuit  Ammou.  The
first  of  these  expeditious,  however,  did  not  take


J


CAHENAE


262


CAMILLA


place,  becanao  the  Pboenioisns,  who  composed  bis
naval  force,  would  not  attack  one  of  their  own
colonies.  The  army  that  was  sent  against  the
Aiomouians  perished  in  the  desert,  and  the  troops
At  whose  head  be  himself  had  set  out  against
the  AetbiopiaDB  were  compelled  by  hunger  to
retreat.  How  far  he  advanced  into  Aethiopia
can  not  be  ascertained  from  anything  that  He-
ntdotus  says.  Diodorus  Siculus,  however  (i.  33),
makes  Cambyses  to  have  penetrated  as  far  as
the  spot  where  MeroS  stood,  which  city,  accord-
ing to  thin  same  writer,  he  founded.  (See  Me-
ROE.)  After  bis  return  from  Aethiopia,  the  Per-
sian king  gave  himself  np  to  the  greatest  acts  of
outrage  and  cruelty.  On  entering  Memphis  he
found  the  inhabitants  engaged  in  celebrating  the
festival  of  the  reappearance  of  Apis,  aud,  imag-
ining that  these  rejoiciugs  were  made  on  account
-of  bis  ill  success,  be  caused  tbe  sacred  ball  to  be
brought  before  him,  stabbed  him  with  his  dagger,
of  which  wound  the  animal  afterwards  died.  He
also  ordered  tbe  priests  to  be  scourged.

Cambyses  is  said  to  have  been  subject  to  epilep-
sy from  his  earliest  years;  and  the  habit  of  drink-
ing, in  which  he  now  indulged  to  excess,  rendered
him  at  times  completely  furious. No  relation  was
held  sacred  by  him  wheu intoxicated. Having
dreamed  that  his  brother  Smerdis  was  seated  on
the  royal  throne,  he  sent  one  of  bis principal
confidants  to  Persia,  with  orders  to  put  him  to
death,  a mandate which was actually  accom-
plished. His  sister  and  wife  Atossa,  who  lament-
ed the  death  of  Smerdij,  hekickedso  severely  as  to
bring  on  an  abortion. These  aud  many  other  ac-
tions, alike  indicative  of  almost  complete  insani-
ty, aroused  against  him  the  feelings  of  his  sub-
jects. A  member  of  the  order  called  the  Magi
availed  himself  of  this  discontent,  aud,  aided  by  '
the strong resemblance  M-hich he bore to tbe '
umrdered  Smerdis,  as  well  as  by  the  exertions  of  !
a  brother  who  was  also  a  Magiau,  seized  upon  the  I
throne  of  Persia,  and  sent  heralds  in  every  diree- .
tiou,  commanding  all  to  obey,  for  tbe  time  to
come,  Smerdis,  son  of  Cyms,  and  not  Cambyses.
The  news  of  this  usurpatiou  reached  Cambyses
at  a  place  in  Syria  called  Kcbatana,  where  ho  was  I
»t  that  time  with  his  army. Resolving  to  return  I
with  all  speed  to  Snsa,  tbe  monarch  was  in  the  act '
of  mounting  his  horse,  when  bis  sword  fell  from  its  |
sheath  aud  inflicted  a  mortal  wound  in  his  thigh.
An  oracle,  it  is  said,  had  been  given  him  from  Bu-
tus  that  he  would  end  his  life  at  Ecbatana,  but  he  .
bad  always  thought  that  the  Median  Ecbatanawas  I
meant  by  it. He  died  of  his  wound  soon  after,  B.C. '
522,  leaving  no  children. Ctcsias  gives  a  different  {
account. He makes  Cambyses  to have  died at  \
Babylon  of  a  wound  he  had  given  himself  on  tbe
tvnioral  muscle,  while  shaving  smooth  a  piece  of
wood  with  a  small  knife. According  to  Herodo-
tus (iii.  66),  Cambyses  reigned  seven  yeara  and  five
months. See  Prksia.

Camenae.  Prophetic  nymphs,  belonging  to  the
religion  of  ancient  Italy,  although  later  traditions
represent  their  worship  as  introduced  into  Italy
from  Arcadia,  and  some  accounts  ideutify  them
with  the  Muses.  The  most  important  of  these
goddesses  was  Carmeuta  or  Carmeutis,  who  had
a  temple  at  the  foot  of  the  Capitoliuo  Hill,  and  al-
tars near  the  Porta  Carmentalis.  Tbe  traditions
which  assigned  a  Greek  origin  to  her  worship
state  that  her  original  name  was  Nicostratd,  and


that  she  was  tbe  mother  of  Evaoder,  with  nbom
she  came  to  Italy.  On  the  etymology  of  tbe  word
Camena,  which  Is  usually  regarded  as  =  Camena.
from  tbe  root  of  codmii,  "  the  songstress  "  (Monim-
sen),  see  Nettlesbip,  Enayt  in  Latin  Literatan,  pp.
47-50  (Oxford,  1885).

Cazneraiiiu,  Joachim  (Oer.  KAMMERMEUtrcR),
bom  at  Bamberg,  April  12bb,  1500,  was  next  lo
Melanchthon  among  the  scholars  who  contribated
to  reviving  the  study  of  classical  antiquitiM  iu
Germany.  His  family,  originally  Likbuard,  es-
tablished itself  towards  the  middle  of  the  fif-
teenth century  in  tVauconia,  aud  assumed  tbe
name  of  Camerarius  from  the  hereditary  office  of
chamberlain  to  the  Prince -Bishop  of  Bauber;;.
Joachim  was  first  led  to  the  study  of  the  claesica
by  George  Helt,  at  the  University  of  Leipzig.  Id
1518,  he  went  to  Erfurt  and  began  to  teach  Greek,
and  in  1521  Joined  Melanchthon  at  Wittenberg.  H«
published  a  translation  of  the  First  Olyntbiae  of
Demosthenes  iu  1524,  and,  after  worsting  Erasmus
at  B41e,  was  appointed  in  1526  Pntfessor  of  Grerk
at  Kuremberg,  aud  was  sent  iu  1530  as  delegate
to  Augsburg,  where  he  took  a  large  part  in  the
preparation  of  the  Confessiou.  In  1535  he  was
called  to  Ttlbiugeu,  where  he  founded  tbe  clastucal
coarse,  aud  after  six  years  undertook  with  great
success  tbe  i-eorganization  of  the  Uuivenity  of
Leipzig,  where  he  remained  for  the  rest  of  his  Iif4<.
He  died  iu  1574.  Camerarius  was  reuowned  u»t
only  as  a  great  teacher,  but  especially  as  an  in-
dustrious editor.  He  was  among  the  first  to  ^evi^e
texts  with  scientific  care,  aud  left  nearly  150  works
on  varied  subjects.  Besides  a  number  of  biogra-
phies aud  books  couuected  with  the  Refonnatioti,
his  chief  work  is  bis  Commentarii  Lingwu  Gratoat
et  Latinae  (Bile,  1551).  He  also  edited  the  om-
tions  of  Demosthenes,  Sophocles  (1556),  Quintiliiiu
(1534),  Cicero,  4  vols.  (l.'>40),  Herodotus,  Tbucydi(Irt<.
Plautus  (1552),  Theocritus,  the  Etkie§  of  Aristotle,
Theopbrastus,  and  wrote  a  numismatical  work,
Biatona  Bei  Nummariae.  See  Bursian,  Gadiichtt
der  Class.  PhUologie  (Munich,  1883),  pp.  185- IW;
and  W.  Pokel,  Fkilolog.  Sckriftstellerlezioon  (Leipzig.
1882).

Caznetla.  An  ancient  town  of  Latium,  cou-
quered  by  Tarquinius  Prisoua.

Camerinnm  or  Camarincun,  more  aucienilf
Camers.  The  modern  Camerino;  a  town  in  T'm-
bria  on  the  borders  of  Piceuum,  and  snbsequent-
ly  a  Bomau  colony.

Camerlniu.  A  Roman  poet,  contemporary  with
Ovid,  who  wrote  a  poem  on  the  capture  of  Troy  br
Hercules  (Ovid,  EpUt.  ex  Pont.  iv.  16, 18).

Camions  (Kafuxdc).  An  ancient  town  of  the
Sicani  on  the  southern  coast  of  Sicily,  and  on  i
river  of  the  same  name,  occnpyiug  tbe  site  of  the
citadel  of  Agrigentum.

Camilla.  A  queen  of  the  Volsci,  and  daughter  of
Metabus  and  Casmilla.  Her  father,  who  reigned
at  Frivenium,  having  by  his  tyranny  rendered
himself  odious  to  his  subjects,  was  by  4bem  ei-
)>elled  from  his  dominions,  and  forced  to  take  ref-
uge from  their  fury  in  the  lonely  woods.  Here  be
bred  up  the  infant  Camilla,  the  sole  companion  »(
his  flight;  and,  having  dedicated  her  to  the  ser-
vice of  Diana,  he  instructed  ber  iu  the  use  of  thv
l>ow  and  arrow,  and  accustomed  her  to  the  pnu'-
tice  of  martial  aud  sylvan  exercises. Sho  was  so


CAMILLI,  CAMILLAE


263


CAMPANIA


rtfiiiarkable  for  her  swiftuess  that  efae  is  described
liy  tbe  poets  as  flying  over  tbe  coru  without  bend-
ing the  stalks,  aud  skimmiog  over  the  surface  of
tilts  water  without  wetting  her  feet.  Attended  by
a  train  of  wamor8,8he  led  the  Volscians  to  battle
against  Aeueas.  Many  brave  chiefs  fell  by  her
baud ;  but  she  was  at  length  herself  killed  by  a
suldier  of  the  name  of  Anins,  who,  from  a  place  of
concealment,  aimed  a  javeliu  at  her.  Diana,  how-
ever, who  had  foreseen  tbb  fatal  event,  had  coiu-
tiiisHioned  Opis,  one  of  her  uyinphs,  to  avenge  the
ileuth  of  Camilla,  and  Amns  was  slain  in  his  flight
from  the  combat  by  the  arrows  of  the  goddess
(Verg.  Aen.  vii.  803  foil. ;  xi.  532  foil).

Caznilli,  Camillae.  Boys  and  girls  employed  in
the  sitcriHces  uf  the  Flanieu  Dialis,  the  Flamiuica
Diulis,  and  in  geueral  in  religious  rites  and  cere-
monies. They  were  required  to  be  perfect  in  form
aud  sound  in  health,  free-born,  aud  with  both  their
parents  alive ;  or,  in  other  words,  according  to  the
«xpresHiou  of  the  Bomaus,  pueri  seu  puellae  inge-
hui.  felieiMimi.  patrimi  mntrimique.  The  origin
of  these  words  gave  rise  to  various  opinions  among
the  aucieuts.  Diouysius  supposed  them  to  corre-
spoud  to  the  jcdd/iiXot  among  the  Curetes  and  Cory-
bsutes ;  others  connected  them  with  Cadmilus  or
Cosmilus,  one  of  the  Samothracian  Cabeiri ;  but
we  know  nothing  certain  on  the  matter.  (See
Cabeikia.)  Respecting  the  employment  of  the
Camilli  at  Romau  marriages,  see  Matjuhonium.

Camilliu,  M.  FuRiUs. A celebrated Roman,
called  tbe  second  Romulus,  from  bis  services  to  his
country. After  tilling  various  important  stations,
and,  among  other  achievements,  taking  the  city  of
Veil,  which  had  for  the  space  of  ten  years  resisted
tbe  Roman  arms,  be  encountered  at  last  tbe  dis-
pleasure of  his  countrymen,  and  was  accused  of
haviug  embezzled  someof  tbe  plunder  of  this  place.
Being  well  aware  how  the  matter  wonld  terminate,
Camillns  went  into  voluntary  exile,  although  bis
friends  oflfered  to  pay  tbe  som  demanded  of  him.
During  this  period  of  separation  from  his  country,
Home,  with  the  exception  of  Che  Capitol,  was  taken
by  tbe  Gauls  under  Brennus  (q.  v. ). Camillus,
though  an  exile,  was  invited  by  the  fugitive  Romans
jit  Veil  to  take  command  of  them,  but  refused  to  act
until  tbe  wishes  of  the  Romans  besieged  in  the  Cap-
itol were  known. These  unanimously  revoked  the
M-uteuce  of  banisbmeut,  aud  elected  him  dictator.
The  Doble-minde<l  Roman  forgot  their  previous  iu-
gratitnde,  aud  marched  to  the  relief  of  his  pouutry ;
which  be  delivered,  after  it  bad  been  for  some  time
iu  tbe  possession  of  tbe  enemy. The  Romau  ac-
-cunut  says  that  Camillus,  at  the  head  of  au  army
of  forty  thousand  men,  hastened  to  Rome,  where
lie  found  tbe  garrison  of  the  Capitol  on  the  point  of
purchasing  peace  from  the  invaders. "  With  iron,
and  not  with  gold,"  exclaimed  Camillus,  "Rome
buys  her  freedom." An  attack  was  instantly  made
u|>oii  the  Gauls,  a  victory  obtained,  and  the  foe
left  their  camp  by  night. On  the  morrow  Camil-
)as  overtook  them,  aud  they  met  with  a  total  over-
throw. His  triumphal  entry  into  Rome  was  made
uiuid  the  acclamations  of  thousands,  who  greeted
bimwith  thenameof  Romulns,  Father  of  his  Coun-
try, aud  Second  Founder  of  the  City.  After  perfonn-
iug  another  equally  important  service,  in  prevail-
ing upon  his  eountrynien  to  rebuild  their  city  and
not  retnru  to  Veil,  and  after  gaining  victories  over
tbe  Aequi,  Votsci,  Etrurians,  aud  Latins,  he  died


in  the  eighty-ninth  year  of  his  age,  haviug  been
tive  times  dictator,  once  censor,  three  times  inter-
rex,  twice  military  tribune,  and  having  obtained
four  triumphs  (Pint.  CamilL;  Liv.  v.  46  foil.;
Flor.  i.  13;  Verg.  Aen.  vi.  iSJo).  We  have  touched
on  merely  a  few  of  the  events  connected  with  tbe
history  of  Camillus,  iu  consequence  of  tbe  strong
suspicion  which  attaches  itself  to  the  greater  part
of  the  narrative.  In  no  instance,  perhaps,  have
the  family  memorials  of  the  Roman  aristocracy
more  completely  usurped  tbe  place  of  true  history
than  iu  the  case  of  Camillus.  The  part  relative
to  the  overi;hrow  of  the  Gauls  appears  to  be  pure
fictiou. See  Mommsen,^i^^  of  Borne,  bk.  ii.  ch.4.

Canuniu  {KOfuvoe). A  chimney. See  Domu8.

Camlnu  {Kdftttpos).  A  Dorian  town  on  the
western  coast  of  the  island  of  Rhodes,  and  tbe
principal  town  in  the  island  before  the  foundation
of  Rhodes. Here  Pisander  was  burn.

Camisia.  A  liuen  shirt  woi-n  next  to  tbe  skin,
is  first  mentioned  in  the  fourth  centnry  by  St.  Je-
rome (Sp.  64,  u.  11),  from  whom  we  learn  that  the
word  was  used  in  the  popular  language,  and  that
in  his  time  the  camisia  was  worn  by  soldiers.  It
is  also  mentioned  by  Isidoms,  and  by  Panlus
(Fest.  s.  V.  9upparv9,  p.  311..  M.),  who  gives  it  as
the  equivalent  of  tbe  older  word  guhueula.  From
the  word  camUia  comes  tbe  French  chemise.

Camp. SeeCASTRA;  Exskcitds.

CampSsns.  A  kind  of  boot  worn  by  tbe  Ro<
man  emperors  aud  military
oflScers  under  the  later  Em-
pire (Trebell.  Poll.  OaUien.
16,  with  the  note  of  Salma-
sins).

Campana. A  hell. See

TlNTIKNABtn:.UM.

Campana  Lex. See  Lex

Campania.  A  district  of
Italy,  the  name  of  which  is
probably  derived  from  ca»»-
pua,  "  a  plain."  It  was  sep-
arated from  Latium  by  the
river  Liris,  and  from  Lucaiiia
at  »  later  time  by  the  ri%'er

Silarus,  though  in  the  time  c«mpagi» (From  M>rt>ie
of  Augustus  it  did  not  ex- 8iatu»  of
tend  farther  south  than  the
promontory  of  Minerva. Iu
still  earlier  times,  the  '^  Ager  Campanus''  Included
only  the  country  around  Capua. Campania  is  a
volcanic  country,  to  which  circumstance  it  mainly
owed  the  extraordinary  fertility  for  which  it  was
celebrated  iu  antiquity  above  aU  other  lands. Tbe
fertility  of  tbe  soil,  allowing  iu  parts  three  crops  in
a  year,  the  beauty  of  the  scouery,  and  the  softness
of  tbe  climate,  the  beat  of  which  was  tempered  by
the  delicious  breezes  of  tbe  sea,  procured  for  Cam-
pania tbe  epithet  Felix,  a  name  which  it  justly  de-
served. It  was  the  favourite  retreat  in  summer  uf
the  Roman  nobles,  whose  villas  studded  a  consider-
able part  of  its  cooHt,  especially  iu  tbe  neighbour-
hood of  Baiae  (q.  v.). The  earliest  inhabitants  of
the  country  were  tbe  Ausones  and  the  Osci  or  Opicl.
I  These  were  subsequently  conquered  by  the  Etrns-
I  cans,  who  became  tbe  masters  uf  almost  all  the
,  country. In  tbe  time  uf  the  Romans  we  find  three
'  distiuct  peoples,  besides  tbe  Greek  population  of
'  Cumue  : (I)  The  CaMpani,  properly  so  called,  a


Kmperor
found  at  Carthago.)  (lir,c-
Ish  Museum.)


OAMI'ASI'il

mixpil  rnov,  cniiflKtiiig  of  Etruscan*  and  lt)t>  nrig-  the  I'linthonn  and  fjorrlcDM  n

tiiitl ii)linV(itniit4i  of  llie  country,  <lwolliti)^  nioiig  vukI  :  niiil  tlio  (.'ninpiiK  Minor,  or  Tilwnn"

thv  roast  fmin  Siiiiieofm  to  Piieittitm. Th(*y  mpft  pictl  the  lower  portion  of  thr  oirciiit  tonariU  ilir

the  ruling  riito  nt  C'apnn. (;i)Tkr  &II>lciN'l,iiii  An-  Vi;t  Ut*<*la,  frt)n)  the  Ponn  Ai^liiia  to  tlic  I'oim  In-

iw>ni»o  jH'opli^  in  thu  nortliwrat  of  Iltf<  t-ountry  on  uirnlntKiH. Sco  CoNti.

tho  ItctHura  of  Siinitiiuni. (3)  Tlic  I'lCRNTTxi,  in Tiiut  tlie  C'atnpun  Afiirtitis  WH  origiiioUy  villir

tlir  noiilliriii»t«Ti)  part  of  the  coiiulry.  onl tin-  city  in  uppiirvnt — nntl,  from  tlie

CampaapAlKd^ff/io-jnil. A  miHtrt-jwofAlexmidw  "f  ^ivy  BiiU  DiouysiuM  above  refriTwl  to;

tlir  <in  iit.  ininiortaliz.^a  by  A|m  ll«<.  to  wliom  slie  '>  .  from  tliu  custom  of  bohling  Ibc  Comitia  Centu-


cat  a*  (111!  tuoilel  fur  biti  Apbiodit^  Anudyouitrn^.
Src  A  Pkit.i.E.'*.

Campefttr^  ^k-.  gutJiijar).  A  kiud  of  girdle
or  n]u-oii,  wlilch  Itio  Koninu  yoiitbtt  wore  roand
Ihnr  lohiH  when  they  exorcised  naked  in  the
Ciuiipim  MsTtiuA.  The  rnuipestn^  waa  eometimeB
Mom  ill  wt\rm  wnither.tn  place  of  the  Inntc,  tinder
Ihf  t.'tiii  (llor Kjiifit.  i.  II.  18).

Campldootorea.  Fei-Hons  who,  like  thn  roudeni
drill-sergeunt,  tnnght  Komun  wildiem  tlieir  exer-
eltHw.  In  the  times  of  tliv  Kepnblie  thin  duty  wiw
diwliiirgrd  by  a  centuriuu.  or  u  veteran  Boldier  of
merit  and  diHtinction. 8ee  Plin.  I\intQ.  1.1.

Campi  Raudii.  A  plain  in  the  uortb  of  Iiuly,
Doar  VcrcrUai',  whprt^  Marina  and  Catuluit  defeat-
ed the  Cirnbri  in  n.c.  101.

Campus  MartluB. The  term  eampm  («a^Trac)


intn  ttieiv,  which  could not be  held  within th»'i
Ponuwham : hence  the word tumfius  i*  put  for
the  couiitiu,  which  mUo  explains  the  exprcattiou  of
Cicero,  /'ora  domina  rumpi,  uud  of  Ltican,  Ttnalit
campus,  which  tneanit  **  the  corrupt  voters **;  thirdly^
becaniie the  geiierats  who  demanded a  triumph^
not being allowed to enter  the city,  ivniaiued
with  their  arrnieH  in the  CantpUK  ilitrtinn ; aiMl.
finally,  ItecnriHe  i|.  wax  not luwrul  to  bury  within
the  city,  whorenn  the  uiounuieniM  of  the  illuKtri-
oUB dead were among the most nlriking onia— ^^
tneuttf  with  wliii-h  it woji  emWlliHlicd. (See  ^E —
I'lTLCRCM.J Knt  it  WON inctinlcd in the city  bi^si.,
Aureliau  when  he  cnlar};cd  the  wuIIh.

Thu |iriuci{>al L-diticen nhieh iidorued thin  f'^~,—
mona  plain  are  de«eribed  by  8trabo. It  wah  -•'
ered  with  perpetual  verdure,  and  was  u  favouri'^-
n>surt  for  air,  exercise,  or  recreation  when  the  \~^ma


belongs  to  the  language  of  Sicily,  in  which  it  »ig-  l>ourB  of  the  day  were  over.  Its  ample  area  *
niHed  a  hip|>odronie  or  nice-c«>uiHe;  but  among  the  crowded  by  the  young,  who  there  initiated  the  -«_
RoauDs  it  was  useil  to  deuot<-  nn  o|»en  phun,  eov- ',  itelves  in  alt  warlike  and  athletic  exercises,  atnL  J
divd  with  heibugc,  and  M-t  apart  fur  the  piirpone  l^he  games  u»fnul  to  the  palaestra;  for  which  [^  -^1
uf  exercise  ur  aututicnieni.  Eight  of  those  plains  pose  tbe  contiguous  Tiber  rendered  it  ttvohi^^  -^
am  vunmerate*!  by  P.  Victor  oa  appertaining  to  the  appnipriate  in  early  lintel,  before  public  lut.
city  of  Rome,  among  which  the  inoj^t  celebrated  were  estnbliHbeil.  Hence  eumptt*  is  uwd  oa
wan  the  Campns  Uiirtiiis,  so  culleil  beouU5e  it  was  Beld"  for  any  BKeruise,  menial  or  boilily.  Wl:
consL-erateil  to  the  go*!  Mnm.  Sonip  flitft-Tonco  ex-  <»i  honea  were  alm»  kepi  in  the  Campntt  Martii>i
ist«  between  Livy  and  Di<m>Nin<^  Hulicarnaosnt  re- 1  uudcr  portioua  in  winter,  and  tu  the  o[K>n  |»1  j
speoting  the  period  at  which  this  coutM-eretiou  took  .  <l"rt>)g  summer— iu  order  to  give  ex]iertucw««  ^
place.  The  ftiriner  states  that  upon  the  expnlftiou  ,  luounlinK  and  dismounting;  a  uoceasary  l»tTa»0>
of  tLeTanpiin.s  the  i>ropte  took  poMM'tmion  of  their  '  tice  when  stirrups  wei-»  not  in  use  (Veget.  i-  SSjL
property  ((/f^rr  7V/rf  rr(((ivmin),8itumte4l  bel  wet>n  the  '  HtirH!-racc«  (,tquiria)  atiM  took  ptncc  here,  exoeiit
city  and  the  Til>er,  and  assigned  it  to  the  gtHi  itf  when  the  Campus  waa  overllowed.  The  CaiDpntj
war,  by  whiMe  name  it  was  subsequently  didtin.  Martins  in  the  moet  dcuaely  jiopuUted  putliu"
i;ni»hed: wheren.«  the  latter  »aj8 that the  Ager unnlem  Kouie. See  Ko.Va.

Tar<inini«rnm  h»<l  bei-o  n»nrT.ed  from  that  ilivini- Campus  Sceleratoa. A  place  within  the  ir»IM  ]
ty,  to  whom  it  Monged  of  old.  and  appn»priat«l „f  R„,ne. near  the Porta f^llina, where  V.«r*l
by  the  TnniuiuA,  so  that  it  was  only  reelorwl  to  itx  \  Virgius  \\  ho  h.id  lost  their  chaotitv  were  hiiri^xJ
origiiml  service  upon  their  expnlaioii,  a  statement ,  »Uv« ,  Liv  viii.  IS  ). It  was  nnlawfnl to  biirj


which  gains  continuation  from  a  taw  of  Numa,
qtloted  by  Festus,  teeunda  »fn'U\i  in  Miirtu  arum
i»  eaatpo  mlit'iuriliii  vtru  mlurrit  ttudita.

From  the  greater  extent  and  in)]H>rtanc«  of  this
plani  lieyond  all  the  others,  it  was  often  spokeu
of  u«  "  the  plniii,'^  kixt'  *$oxjf>  without  any  epithet
to  distinguish  it  ;  and,  luervfon*.  whenever  the
word  ift  tMi  nsMit),  it  is  the  Campus  Martins  which  is
to  be  understtMMl  m  always  rrferml  to.

The  general  designation,  Cnuipus  Martins,  com-
prised two  plains,  which,  thoagh  generally  spok-
en of  oollectjvely,  are  aoiDetiiiiMi  distinguished.  , .  .

The  fonner  of  tbeaa  was  th«  *o-c«Uml  Agt*r  Tar- oro((s.crMJ-oriCipM(Tertiill.  .ipiti.  IS;  ad Xit.i.U,
i|ninlornm.  lo  which  Javenal  rsfMw*  mds  8upert» It  i^  aiiplli>d  to  Ti-ry  b'un  pet«iMw  (Stratti*
ThfuNi  rt^is  ayrvm  *  the  other  was  given  to  thr Pollux,  x.  1^;  AntM.  I*,  xi.  107),  as  we  Mbonhl
Kninan  p«ople  by  the  vestal  virgin rtAin  Tumtia "a  skeleton.'' It  is  the  saoM  word  as  tlD*  U'l
«>r  Suffetta,  and  is  sometiinc»  caltrd  Campus  Tibe*  ,  f^Ufii^  "  a  booth."  both  signifyiug  a  coiutrmti
riniM,  and  MtmetimeACmnpiiK  Minor.  |  lilu  a  aoaffold  or  framework. The  wunl  t-f'

1%  is  difficult  to  dt*(ei>ttuie  lite  preei»t>  limits  of  have  been  also  used  Cur  the  outline  Ugurv  i
lbs  Csuipm*  MartittM,  but  in  gi<iii<ral  lenus  it  may  soulptors  oihI  paiutets  nwxl  ae  a  model  (Si
Wdneribitl  a#.sitoat(il  U^lureo  tht.'\'ia  Lata  and (>■  h.  v.).

Via  Flamlni*  on  tlie  north,  the  Via  K*et»  on  thr CanAoA  (Kavwtir). Th»  daughter  of  Ah>I
Mtuih;  a>.  bouudnt  by  ltii>  Tiber  on  ilu>  we«t,  and Kumet*^  ami  nuatnss  of  PiHetdou,  by  wh


the  dead  within  tlie  city,  or  to  slay  a  vestal;  •»"^
both  these  nntrlotious  were  evaded  by  a  lirtfV
entombment.  See  Feelus,  a.  v.  prvbntm ;  ^^t-
Z>DiNif  V\  Pliu.  EpUt.  iv.  11;  Mayor  on  Jar.  t^-
10;  and  the  article  VKSTjOJca.

Camus. See  CaPiOTRtiL

ConXbus (xdfai^of «r Kainntdot\, A woodi>D
sto<.>k  or  framework  asod  by  |M>ttcr»  and  ecalpt*'"  |
txHiiHl  which  the  clay  woa  laid  (Poll.  vii.  ItUi. 1°  i
•mall  stalOMi  {ti0iUa)  and rnssels it was  i>f  ^^i
simplest  desoriptioD.  and  mostly  of  the  form  ef  ■


CANACHUS


265


CANCELU


had  seveiml  children.  She  entertAined  an  un-
uataral  passioD  for  her  brother  Macareus,  and  was
puuished  by  her  father  with  death,  or,  according
to  another  version,  fwrnmitted  suicide  irith  Maca-
rens.  See  ApoUod.  i.  7,  3 ;  Byg.  Fab,  ti38,  242 ;
Ovid,  Seroid.  xi.

CanXchiu  (Kovaxor).  A  statuary  of  Sioyon,  who
studied  his  art  under  Polycletns  (q.  v.)  at  the  be-
ginuiQg  of  the  fifth  century  b.g.  His  chief  work
was  a  colossal  Apollo  in  the  Brauchidae  Sanctuary
at  Miletus,  known  to  ns  by  a  bronze  statuette  in


Apollo  of  CuucbuB. (British  UuMum.)

the  British  Mnseum.  He  also  made  the  chrysele-
phautine  Aphrodite  kept  in  Sicyon.  His  brother,
Aristocles,  was  almost  equally  celebrated  in  the
same  department  of  art.

Canaliofiliu.  Properly  a  small  channel  or
canal,  and  also  used  in  the  following  special
senses:  to  denote  (1)  the  channel  or  barrel  of  a
catapult  (Vitruv.  x.  15);  (2)  a  splint  (Cels.  viii.  2) ;
(3)  th«  grooves  carved  on  the  face  of  a  triglyph
between  the  three  uprights  {/emina,  futpot),  while
thoM  »t  each  end  where  the  outside /emtna  sank
to  the  level  of  the  metope  were  called  temieana-
iieuli. SeeCANAUs;  Culchna.

CanaUa  {<rtt\i}»). A  channel  or  canal,  is  used,

like  its  Eoglish  derivatives,  to  signify  a  water-

9*


rrrrinr


Cuftlts  in  Arcbltectan.


course,  whether  open  or  closed,  and  next  any  other
passage  which  resembles  a  watercourse.

The  method  of  constructing  conduits  is  described
by  Vitruvius  (viii.  7),  who  distinguishes  the  cana-
lis,  which  is  lined  with  masonry  (ttructilis),  from
the  leaden  Jiatula  and  the  earthenware  tuhilut.
A  ruder  kind  of  conduit  was  made  of  timber
or  earthenware  to  carry  water  fvova  a  spring  or
stream  to  cattle  in  a  meadow.  Again,  canalu  de-
notes a  feeding-trough,  which  was  in  the  case  of
domestic  birds  placed  inside  their  house,  and  fed
from  the  outside  by  pipes  (Varro,  H.  R.  iii.  7,  8 ;
11, 12).

Similarly  «ana2M denotes  the  channel  of  asewer,
as,  for  instance,  that  in  the  Forum,  which  is  at  one
spot  exposed  to  view,  and  was  a  favourite  station
for  loungers  (Plant.  Cure.  iv.  1, 15).

CanalU  is  also  a  trench  or  vein  in  a  gold-
mine (Flin.  H.  2f.  xxxiii.  $  66);  the  barrel
or  channel  for  missiles  {trvpty$)  in  a  cata-
pult (Vitruv.  X.  13,  7);  a  reed-pipe  (Calp.
Eel.  iv.  76);  in  the  med-  ^=,,^,.__^__^
ical writers, a spli ut  '

(Cels. viii. 10, 65)  or a

canal  of  the  human  body
(id.  iv.  1,  38) ;  and  fiually,
in  architecture,  the  "chan-
nel" or  flat  surface  rnn-
uing  between  the  dbacut
and  the  eehinut  inside  the
volute,  as  in  the  accom-
panying cut  &om  one  of
the  triglyphs  of  the  temple
of  Segesta  in  Sicily.  See
Column  A.

Canaila  (Kayapia).  The  largest  of  the  cluster
of  islands  called  by  the  ancients  Beatae  and  For-
tunatae  lusulae  (q.  v.),  and  uow  the  Canary  Isl-
ands. Pliny  says  that  this  island  derived  its  name
froui  the  number  of  very  large-sized  dogs  (canes)
which  it  contained.

Canftthron  {Kovapdov  or  KowaBpov).  A  Laconian
car  made  of  wood,  with  an  arched  plaited  cover-
ing (hence  the  derivation  probably  from  icdwa,  "a
reed"),  in  which  the  Spartan  ladies  used  to  go  to
Amyclae  for  the  celebration  of  the  Hyacinthia.
We  may  compare  the  Roman  pilentum  (q.  v.).  (See
Polycrates  in  Atbenaens,  xv.  4, 139  f.)  The  nature
of  its  adornments  was  at  times  fantastic.  Eustath.
on  II.  xxiv.  190  is  in  error  in  stating  that  xavyaBpov
and  ireipws  are  the  same.  The  latter  is  a  basket
put  into  the  chariot,  and  used  for  holding  the
necessaries  for  a  journey,  and  also  for  a  seat
(Bucbbolz,  Horn.  Real.  ii.  1,  228).

CanoflUailna. See  Cakcelu.

Canoelli  (KiyxXi'drEi  dpv0ajcroi).  A  screen  or
lattice  of  open  work,  placed  before  a  window,  a
doorway,  the  tribunal  of  a  Judge,  or  any  other
place.  At  Athens,  in  the  Senate-house  and  law-
courts  bpv^KTot  were  the  inner  partition,  and
KiyicXiScr  the  gates  opening  into  it.  Balconies
projecting  from  the  fronts  of  houses  were  also
hpix^KTot  {maeniana).  The  material  was  origi-
nally wood,  as  the  name  d/iv^oKror  shows  (L.  aud  S.
s.  V.) ;  and  such  were  also  the  cancelli  put  up  at
Rome  for  temporary  parposes,  as  when  funeral
games  were  given  in  the  Fomm  (cantxUi  fori,  Cic.
pro  8e$t.  58,  $124;  cf.  Ov.  Am.  iii.  2,  64).  But
they  might  also  be  in  metal,  as  in  the  cancelli
before  the  Temple  of  Vesta,  rebuilt  by  Severus,


CANDACE


266


CANDELABBUM


coajectarally  restored  hy  Lanciani  from  ezistinf;
remains,  or  in  marble.  In  the  Baailica  lalia,  low
marble  screens  or  cancelli  shut  in  the  otherwise
open  arches  on  the  ground  floor;  and  a  great
nnmber  of  fragments  of  these  eoreens  are  now
scattered  about  the  Forum.

Hence  was  derived  the  word  &ineellariua,
which  originally  signified  a  porter  who  stood  at
the  latticed  or  grated  door  of  the  emperor's  pal-
ace. The  cancellarius  also  siguified  a  legal  scribe
or  secretary  who  sat  within  the  cancelli,  or  lattice-
work, by  which  the  crowd  was  kept  off  from  the
tribnoala  of  the  judges  (Cassiod.  Var.  xi.  6).  The
chief  scribe  or  secretaty  was  called  cancellarius
Kor*  t^ox^v,  and  was  eventnally  invested  with  ju-
dicial power  at  Constantinople.  From  this  word
has  come  the  modem  "  chancellor."

CaudSc6  (Koi'Sajci;).  A  name  given  to  the  qneen-
mothera  in  Mero€  in  Aethiopia.  Some  women  of
this  name  appear  in  history,  but  they  seem  to  have
been  merely  queen -regents,  goveruiug  during  the
minority  of  their  sons.  Some  aucient  authors,
however,  state  that  it  was  customary  for  the
Aethiopians  to  be  governed  by  queens  called  each
by  the  name  of  Candac^.  Snidas  speaks  of  a
Candac^  who  was  made  prisoner  by  Alexander
the  Great,  but  this  appears  to  be  a  mere  fable.
A  Candac^,  blind  of  one  eye,  made  an  irruption
into  Egypt  daring  the  reign  of  Augustus,  b.c.  33.
She  took  and  pillaged  several  cities,  bnt  Petronius,
the  prefect  of  Egypt,  pursued  her  and  penetrated
into  her  dominions,  which  he  pillaged  in  turn,  until
she  restored  the  booty  which  she  had  carried  off
from  Egypt,  and  sued  for  peace  (Dio  Cass.  Ixiv.
5 ;  Plin.  H.  K.  vi.  S9).  Mention  is  also  made  iu  the
sacred  writings  of  a  queen  of  Aethiopia  named
Caudac^  (Acts,  viii.  37).

Candaolea  (KovSauXijr).  A  monarch  of  Lydia,
the  last  of  the  Heraclidae,  dethroned  by  Gyges  at
the  instigation  of  his  own  queen,  whom  he  had
insulted  by  showing  her  when  naked  to  Gyges.
(Consnlt  Herod,  i.  7  foil.)  His  true  name  appears
to  have  been  Myrsilus,  and  the  appellation  of
Candanles  to  have  been  assumed  by  him  as  a  title
of  honour,  this  latter  being,  in  the  Lydian  lan-
guage, equivalent  to  Heracles — i.  e.  the  Sun.

Candavia  (Koydaovui),  Candavii  Montks.  The
mountains  separating  Illyricnm  from  Macedonia,
across  which  the  Via  Eguatia  ran.

Candela.  A  candle,  made  either  of  wax  {eerm)
or  tallow  {a^>aeea),  was  used  universally  by  the
Romans  before  the  invention  of  oil  lamps  (lucer-
nae)  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  $  119).  They  had  for  a  wick
the  pith  of  a  kind  of  rush  called  msirpus  (Plin.
H.  N.  xvi.  $  178).  In  Livy  (xl.  29)  f(ucea  canddu
intoluti  appear  to  be  packets  wrapped  up  in  a
kind  of  waxed  cloth.  In  later  times  candelae
were  only  used  by  the  poorer  classes;  the  houses
of  the  niun*  wealthy  were  always  lighted  by  lu-
eemae  (Juv.  iii.  387).  See  Becker-Gull,  Oallus,  ii.
390.

Candelabmin  ('Kvjn'tiov,  Xvxm'oi*,  \vxy">v,  \vx-
Wa).  Originally  a  candlestick,  hut  afterwards  used
to  support  lamps  {Xvxvovxos),  in  which  significa-
tion the  word  most  commonly  occurs.  The  cande-
labra of  this  kind  were  usually  made  to  stand  upon
the  ground,  aud  were  of  a  considerable  height.
The  most  common  sorts  were  made  of  wood  (Cic.
ad  Q.  Fratr,  iii.  7) ;  bnt  those  which  have  heea  i


found  in  Heroulanenm  and  Pompeit  are  mostly  of
bronze.  Sometimes  they  were  made  of  the  mars
precious  metals,  and  even  of  jewels,  as  was  tbe  oue
which  Antioohus  intended  to  dedicate  to  Inpitet
Capitolinus  (Cic.  Verr.  iv.  28).  In  tbe  temples
of  the  gods  and  in  palaces  there  were  freqcentlv
large  candelabra  made  of  marble  and  fastened  to
the  ground.

There  is  a  great  resemblance  iu  the  general  plan
and  appearance  of  most  of  the  candelabra  wbicb
have  been  found.  They  usually  consist  of  thrre
parts:  (1)  the  foot  (jSdtrtr);  (2)  the  shaft  or  stem
(xatfXdf);  (3)  the  plinth  or  tray  (durKoi), largo
enough  for  a  lamp  to  stand  on,  or  with  a  socket  to
receive  a  wax  candle.  The  foot  usually  couBit^ts
of  three  lions'  or  griffins'  feet,  ornamented  vitb
leaves;  and  the  shaft,  which  is  either  plaio  ur
fluted,  generally  ends  in  a  kind  of  capital  on  which
the  tray  rests  for  supporting  the  lamp.  Some-
times we  find  a  figure  between  the  capital  and  the
tray,  as  is  seen  iu  the  candelabrum  on  the  right
hand  in  the  annexed  illustration,  which  represents


J^


Pompelui  C&odeUbra. (Naples.)

candelabra  fovnd  in  Pompeii,  aud  now  in  tbe  Mn-
seo  Naziqaale  at  Naples.  The  one  on  the  Ifft
hand  is  also  a  representatiou  of  a  candelabruni
fouud  in  the  same  city,  aud  is  made  with  a  alidini;
shaft,  by  which  the  light  might  be  raised  or  loit-
ered at  pleasure.

The  best  candelabra  were  made  at  Aegiua  aod
Tarentum  (Plin.  H.  If.  xxxiv.  6).

There  are  also  candelabra  of  varions  other  form.
though  those  which  have  been  given  above  are  by
far  the  most  common.  They  sometimes  consist  of
a  figure  supporting  a  lamp,  or  of  a  fignre  by  the
side  of  which  the  shaft  is  placed  with  two  branch-
es, each  of  which  terminates  in  a  flat  disk,  Dp«»i
which  a  lamp  was  placed. A  candelabmm  of  tht>


CANDELABRUM


267


CAKEPHORUS


Poinpelui  CftodeUbnim. (N&ples.)

Utter  kind  is  given  in  the  preceding  illnstration.
Tbe  stem  is  formed  of  a  liliaceous  plant ;  and  at
the  base  is  a  mass  of  bronze,  on  which  a  Silenas  is
seated,  engaged  in  trying  to  pour  wine  from  a  skin
which  he  holds  in  his  left  baud,  into  a  cnp  in  his
right.

There  was  another  kind  of  caodelabmm,  entirely
different  from  those  which  have  been  described,
wliich  did  not  stand  upon  the  ground,  but  was
placed  npoD  the  table.  These  candelabra  nsnally
consist  of  pillars,  &om  tbe  capitals  of  which  sev-


Pompelsn  Candelabrum. (Naplea)

eral  lamps  hang  down,  or  of  trees,  from  whose
branches  lamps  also  are  suspended.  The  preced-
ing illustrstioD  represents  a  very  elegant  candela-
brnm  of  this  kind,  found  in  Pompeii.

The  original,  including  the  stand,  is  three  feet
high.  The  pillar  is  not  placed  in  the  ceutre,  but
at  one  end  of  the  plinth,  which  is  tbe  case  iu  al-
most every  candelabrum  of  this  description  yet


found.  The  plinth  is  inlaid  in  imitation  of  a  vine,
the  leaves  of  which  are  of  silver,  tbe  stem  and  fruit
of  bright  bronze.  On  one  side  is  an  altar  with
wood  and  fire  upon  it,  and  on  the  other  a  Bacchns
riding  upon  a  tiger.

Candidattts. See  Ambitus.

Candles. See  Candela  ;  Fax.

Condys  (Kovivs).  A  gown  worn  by  the  Medes
and  Persians  over  their  trousers  and  other  gar-
ments (Xen.  Anab.  i.  5,  ^  8).  It  had  wide  sleeves,
and  was  made  of  woollen  clotb,  which  was  either
purple  or  of  some  other  splendid  colour. In  tbe


CandyB. (Perwpolltan  Sculpture.)

Persepolitan sculptures,  nearly  all  the  principal
personages  are  clothed  iu  it.

Canephoria  ( itavT]<f>opia ).  The  office  of  a  cane-
phorus  (q.  v.).

Caneph5rus  (xai^^por).  A  basket  -  bearer.
The  Kovfioy  or  Kavovv,  derived  from  Kovva,  *'  a  reed,'*
was  in  the  Homeric  times  a  basket  used  for  bold-
iiig  bread  (//.  ix.  217j  or  other  edibles  for  meals,
ortbe  sacred  oitXai  for  sacrifice  {Od.  iii.  441).  Some
few  golden  utensils  were  used  iu  state  sacrifioen,
though  tbe  usual  Kava  irofiiriKa  were  no  doubt  ;^aA-
Ka  (Michaelis,  PaHhenon,  p.  359).  One  of  silver  in
referred  to  in  tbe  C.  I.  O.  Sti55, 19,  and  one  of  earth-
enware iu  DioD.H.  it.  23  (Grimm).*  At  Atbeus  tbe
KavQvv  was  used  in  religions  service  only.  A  par-
ticular part  of  tbe  ceremony  seems  to  have  been
called  jcavovi'  or  Kava,  when  the  basket  was  carried
round  the  altar  (Eur.  H.  F.  926),  laid  down,  and
the  ovXat  takeu  therefrom,  mavaarpov  signifies  a
bowl  and  also  a  dish  made  of  cork  or  earthenware
(Hom.  Eipig.  xiv.  3).  Tbe  Eoman  canUtrtim  was
used  for  just  the  same  purposes  as  the  Homeric
Kavovv — viz.,  for  boldiug  broad,  necessaries  for  sac-
rifice, and  remains  of  a  feast  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  6, 105).
Its  epithets  signify  "flat" — e.  g.  patulis,  lata^
etc.

They  were,  then,  flat  baskets  used,  among  other
purposes,  for  carrying  the  requisites  for  religious
ceremonies.  At  the  Paoatbenaea  they  were  car-
ried by  adult  maidens  of  high
birth,  who  were  genuine  na-
tive Athenians;  but  wbeu  a
private  individual  sacrificed,
his  daughter  or  some  maiden
of  his  family  acted  as  his
eajiephorm.

An  antefixa  in  the  Brit*
ish  Museum  (see  illustration)
represents  two  caoepbori  ap-
proaching a  candelabrum.
Each  of  tbem  elevates  one  arm

to  support  the  basket,  while

she  slightly  raises  her  tunic ^^^^^^_ (BriiiBhHu-
with  the  other.


CANES  268


CANON


Canes  and  ^77alklne*stioka. See  Baculcm.

Canlonlires  Diea.  Certain  days  in  the  eniumer,
preceding  and  ensuing  the  heliacal  rising  of  Cani-
cula,  or  the  dog-star,  in  the  morning.  The  ancients
believed  that  this  star,  rising  with  the  sun,  and
joining  bis  influence  to  the  fire  of  that  Inmiuary,
was  the  caase  of  the  extraordinary  beat  which
usually  prevailed  in  that  season;  and  acoordingly
they  gave  the  name  of  dog-dayt  to  aboat  six  or
eight  weeks  of  the  hottest  part  of  summer.  This
idea  originated  with  the  Egyptians,  and  was  bor-
rowed from  them  by  the  Greeks.  The  Bomans
sacrificed  a  brown  dog  every  year  to  Canionla,  at
its  rising,  to  appease  its  rage. See  SiRiua.

Canldla.  A  Neapolitan  courtesan,  whose  real
name  was  perhaps  Gratidia,  beloved  by  Horace;
but  when  she  deserted  him  he  revenged  himself
by  holding  her  np  to  contempt  as  an  old  soroeress
{Spod.  v. ;  Sat.  i.  8),  thongh  his  famons  palinode
{darm.  i.  16),  begiunlog  0  matre pulehra^ia put-
ehrior  is  thought  by  some  to  have  been  intended
as  an  apology  to  her.

Cania  (xufl)!').  (1)  The  dog;  an  animal  domesti-
cated among  the  ancients,  and  used  for  hunting,  for
guarding  houses,  and  also  kept  aa  a  pet.  In  Egypt
it  was  even  held  in  reverence,  and  at  Cynopolis
received  divine  honours  in  the  person  of  the  dog-
beaded  (or  Jackal-headed)  god  Anubis  (q.  v.).  Ar-
temis was  said  to  have  given  Procris  a  dog  that
was  always  snre  of  its  prey,  and  &om  this  dog
tradition  derived  the  mighty  Molossian  honndis
and  those  of  Sparta.  The  mastiff  (oanii  Anglicua)
was  imported  into  Rome  from  Britain,  and  was
carefully  bred  for  the  wild-beast  fights  {venationea)
in  the  amphitheatre.  Lap-dogs  (oatuli)  were  reared
in  Melita  (Malta).  Honse-dogs  took  the  place  of
the  modem  domestic  cat,  a  creature  unknown  to  the
Greeks  and  Bomans. See  Faxus. (2)  See  Siiuus.

Caniatrtim  {vt^aarpov). See  Cahepborub.

Canna  (kovm). A  cane  or  reed. See  Calamus.

Cannae.  A  small  village  of  Apulia,  situated
abont  five  miles  from  Cannsium,  towards  the  sea,
and  at  no  great  distance  from  the  Aufidns.  It  was
celebrated  for  the  defeat  of  the  Romans  by  Hanni-
bal. Folybius  tells  us  that,  as  a  town,  it  was  de-
stroyed the  year  before  the  battle  was  fought,
which  took  place  on  May  Slst,  B.C.  1216.  The  citadel,
however,  was  preserved,  and  the  ciroumstanoe  of
its  occupation  by  Hannibal  seems  to  have  been  re-
garded by  the  Romans  of  sufiBcient  importance  to
cause  them  oousiderable  uneasiness  and  annoy-
ance. It  commanded,  indeed,  all  the  adjacent
couDtty,  and  was  their  principal  southern  depot
of  stores  and  provisions.  The  Greek  writers,  es-
pecially Folybius,  generally  use  the  name  in  the
singular,  Kayva.

The  decisive  victory  at  Cannae  was  owing  to
three  combined  causes :  the  excellent  arrangements
of  Hannibal,  the  superiority  of  the  Nnmidiau  horse,
and  the  skilful  manoeuvre  of  Hasdrubal  in  oppos-
ing only  the  light-armed  cavalry  against  that  of
the  Romans,  while  he  employed  the  heavy  horse,
divided  into  small  parties,  in  repeated  attacks  on
different  parts  of  the  Roman  rear.  The  Roman
army  contained  80,000  infantry  and  6000  cavalry,
the  Carthaginians  40,000  infantry  and  10,000  cav-
alry. Hannibal  drew  up  bis  forces  in  the  form
of  a  convex  crescent,  having  his  centre  thrown
forward  before  the  wings. He  commanded  the


centre  in  person,  and  here  he  had  purposely  sta-
tioned his  worst  troops;  the  best  were  posted  at
the  extremities  of  each  wing,  which  wonld  enable
them  to  act  with  decisive  advantage  as  bodies  of
reserve,  tbey  being,  iu  fact,  the  rear  of  the  other
forces.  Hasdrubal  commanded  the  left  wiug,
Hanno  the  right  On  the  Roman  side,  want  of
nniou  between  the  two  consala,  and  want  of  spirit
among  the  men,  afforded  a  snre  omen  of  the  fort-
une of  the  day.  Aemilius  commanded  the  right,
Varro  the  left  wing;  the  proconsuls,  Regains  and
Servins,  who  had  been  consuls  the  preceding  year,
had  command  of  the  centre.  What  Hannibal  fore-
saw took  place.  The  charge  of  the  Romans,  aud
their  immense  saperiority  in  numbers,  at  length
broke  his  centre,  which,  giving  way  inward,  bis
army  now  asenmed  the  shape  of  a  concave  crescent.
Tbe  Romans,  in  the  ardour  of  pursuit,  were  carried
so  £ar  as  to  be  completely  surrounded.  Both  fisDlcB
were  assailed  by  the  veterans  of  Hannibal,  who
were  armed  in  the  Roman  manner ;  at  the  s«iii«
time  the  cavalry  of  tbe  Carthaginians  attacked
their  rear,  and  the  broken  centre,  rallying,  attacked
them  in  front.  The  consequence  was  that  they
were  nearly  all  out  to  pieces.  The  two  proconsaU,
together  with  Aemilius  the  consul,  were  slain.
Varro  escaped  with  seventy  horse  to  yennsia.  The
Romans  lost  on  the  field  of  battle  70,000  men ;  and
10,000  who  had  not  been  present  iu  the  fight  wen
made  prisoners.  The  Carthaginian  loss  amounted
to  5500  infantry  and  200  cav^ry.  Such  is  tbe  ac-
count of  Polybins,  whose  stAteraent  of  tbe  fight  is
much  clearer  and  more  satisfactory  than  that  of
Livy.  Hannibal  has  been  censured  fur  not  march-
ing immediately  to  Rome  after  the  battle,  in  which
city  all  was  consternation.  But  an  explanation
of  his  conduct  may  be  found  under  tbe  article
Haitnzbal.  See  also  the  account  in  Col.  Dodge's
valuable  military  study,  Hannibal  (N.  Y.  1891).

Canoe. See  Cthba.

Canon  (icavAv).  A  word  probably  derived  from
Koofva,  "  a  reed,"  and  properly  meaning  a  straight
rod. Its  special  applications  are  as  follows;

(1)  In  the  Homeric  shield,  tbe  Katfowrt  are  the
bars  to  which  the  shoulder-belt  (rcXofM»0  ^"  "*"

tached ;  or  tvo
parallel  ban
used  as  handles,
through  oiie  of
which  the  war-
rior placed  bis
arm  while  h»
grasped  the  oth-
er. See  tbe  ac-
companying il-
lustration.

(S)  Id  weav-
ing, a  straight
round  rod  to  which  the  alternate  threads  of  the
warp  were  attached  by  means  of  strings  havinjc
loops  at  each  end,  one  loop  fastentng  the  string  to
the  jcovttv,  the  other  fastening  it  to  the  warp.
This  arrangement  of  strings  and  loops  was  called
fiiTos  by  the  Greeks  and  lieia  by  the  Romans.

(3)  A  carpenter's  rale,  much  like  our  own.  See
Rkgula.

(4)  Tbe  beam  of  a  balance,  mora  often  called
(vyow  (Anth.  Pal.  xi.  334).

(5)  Horizontal  curtain-poles  of  ail ver-gUt(Cbarei
ap.  Athen.  538  d).


Cuonea  on  Homeric  Shield.


CANON  ALEXANDRINUS


269


CANTICUH


(6)  In  a  figurative  sense,  xavav  came  to  be  nsed
for  whatever  served  as  a  rule,  model,  or  norm.
Tbns,  of  grammatical  rules  (Adbod.  Epigr.  136),  of
the  laws  of  style  (fixcAd  Fam.  xvi .  17, 1),  of  logical
tests  of  truth  (Diog.  Laert.  x.  37),  aud  of  the  rules
of  Hciilptnre  (Galen,  iv.  354-355  KUhn).

(7)  III  the  fiscal  affairaof  the  later  Empire,  ea/um
was  used  of  the  regular  payments  of  tribute,  es-
pecially of  com  sent  to  the  capital  (Cod.  Th.  xiv.
15.  3).

Canon  Alexandrlnns. The  so-called  Alezau-
drian  Canon,  arranged  by  Aristophanes  of  Byzau-
tiani  (q.  v.)  and  his  disciple  Aristarcbns  (q.  v.).
Tbe  daily  iucreasiog  multitude  of  books  of  every
kind  had become  so great that  there  was no
exprcssiou,  however  faulty,  for  which  precedent
might  not  be  found ;  aud  as  there  were  far  more
bad  than  good  writera,  the  authority  aud  weight
of  numbers  were  likely  to  prevail,  aud  the  Ian-
gnage,  consequently,  to  grow  more  aud  more  cor-
rupt. It  was  thought necessary, therefore,  to
draw a  line between those classic writers to
n-hose  authority  au  appeal  in  matter  of  language
might  be  made  and  the  common  herd  of  inferior
authors. In  the  most  cultivated  modem  tongues
it  seems  to  have  been  found  expedient  to  erect
some  such  barrier  against  the  inroads  of  corrup-
lion ;  and  to  this  preservative  cautiou  we  are  in-
debted  for  tlie  vocabulary  of  the  Academicians
delta  Crnsca,  and  the  list  of  authors  therein  cited
aa  sflfording  Uiti  di  lingua. To  this,  also,  we  owe
the  great  dictionaries  of  the  Academies  of  France
audSpain  of  their  respective  languages. But  as  for
the  example  first  set  in  this  matter  by  the  Alex-
andrian critics,  its  effects  upon  their  own  litera-
ture have  been  of  a  doubtful  nature. In  so  far  as
the  Canon  bas  contributed  to  preserve  to  us  some
of  the  best  anthors  included  in  it,  We  can  not  but
rejoice. On  the  other  hand,  there  is  reason  to
believe  that  the  comparative  neglect  into  which
tbnee  not  received  into  it  were  sure  to4all  has
been  the  occasion  of  the  loss  of  a  vast  number  of
writers  who  would  have  been,  if  not  for  their  lan-
guage, yet  for  their  matter,  very  precious;  and
who,  perhaps,  in  many  cases,  were  not  easily  to
be  distinguisbed,  even  on  the  score  of  style,  frfim
those  that  were  preferred. The  details  of  the
Canon  are  aa  follows :  ( 1 )  Epic  Poets. Homer,
HeBio<1,  Pisauder,  Pauyasis,  Antimacbus. C^)  Iam-
bic Poets. Archilocbus,  Simonides,  Hipponax.
(3)  Lybic  Poetb. Alcman,  Alcaeus,  Sappho,  Ste-
Bichoms,  Pindar,  Bacchylides,  Ibycns,  Anacreon,
Simonides. (4)  Eleciac  Poets. Callinns,  Mim-
nermns,  Philetas,  Calliniachus. (5)  Tragic  Poets.
Fir$t  Clou:  Aeschylus,  Sophocles, Euripides,  Ion,
Achaeus,  Agathon. Second  Clast,  or  Tragic  JPleia-
det:  Alexander  the  AetoUan,  Philisciis  of  Coreyra,
Sositheus,  Homer  the  younger,  Aeantides,  Sosipba-
aes  or  Sosicles,  Lycophron. (6)  Comic  Poets.
Old  Comedy:  Epicharinns,  Cratinus,  Eupolis,  Ar-
L«topban^  Pherecrates,  Plato. Middle  Comedy  :
Autipbaues, Alexis. Neto Comedy: Menander,
Pbilippides,  Diphilns,  Philemon,  Apollodorus. (7)
Historians. Herodotns,  Thucydides,  Xeuopbon,
Theopompus,  Ephorns,  PhilistUB,  Anaximenea,  Cal-
lixtbenee. (8)  Orators. The  ten  Attic  orators:
Antipboo, Andocides, Lysias,  Isocrates, Isaeus,
Apscbines, Lycnrgus, Demosthenes, Hyperides,
IMuarchns. (9)  Philosophers. Plato,  Xeno-
phon,  Aeschines,  Aristotle, Tbeophrastns. (10)
The  PoKTic  Pleiades. Seven  poets  of  the  same


epoch  with  one  another:  Apolloniua  the  Bhodian,
Aratns,  Pbiliscus,  Homer  the  younger,  Lycophron,
Nicander,  Theocritus.  See  Couat,  La  Poi»ie  Alex-
andrine {PnriB,  1883);  Susemibl,  Oetehiehte  d.  griech.
Litteratiir  in  der  Alexand.  Zeit,  *2  vols.  (1892) ;  and
the  article  Alexandrian  School.

Canoplonm  (or  Canoblcum)  Ostitum.  The
westernmost  month  of  the  Nile,  twelve  miles  from
Alexandria. See  NiLUS.

CanSpua  (Kavwn-ov)  or  Canobua.  An  impor-
tant city  on  the  coast  of  Lower  Egypt,  twelve  geo-
graphical miles  east  of  Alexandria,  It  was  near
the  westernmost  mouth  of  the  Nile,  which  was
hence  called  the  Canopio  mouth.  It  was  cele-
brated for  a  great  temple  of  Serapis,  for  its  com-
merce, its  luxury,  and  its  debanchery.  Here  was
prepared  the  dye  known  as  henna,  which  the  wom-
en of  the  East  have  always  used  t^  stain  their  fin-
ger-tips (Herod,  ii.  113).  Before  the  founding  of
Alexandria  (q.  v.)  it  was  a  most  important  place,
but  after  b.c.  300,  its  greatness  declined.

Cantttbri  A  fierce  and  warlike  people  in  the
north  of  Spain,  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  As-
tures,  and  on  the  west  by  the  Autrigones.  They
were  subdued  by  Augustus  after  a  struggle  of  sev-
eral years  (b.C.  35-19).

Cautttbmm.  A  standard  used  in  the  time  of
the  Roman  Empire.  Its  form  is  unknown.  See
Tertnll.  Apol.  16.

Canthflnu  {KavBapot).  (1)  A  kind  of  boat,  of
which  little  is  known.  See  Aristoph.  Pax,  143.
(3)  A  driuking-cup,  furnished  with  handles  (ean-
tharus  ansa).  It  is  said  by  some  writers  to  have
derived  its  name  from  one  Cautharns,  who  first
made  cups  of  this  form  ;  according  to  others,  from
the  resemblance  to  an  inverted  beetle  (KovBapos).
'fbe  cantttarns  was  the  cup  sacred  to  Dionysns,
who  ns  frequently  represented  on  ancient  vases
holding  it  in  his  hand,  as  in  the  following  illus-
tration, which  is  taken  from  a  painting  on  an
aucieut  vase,  given  by  Millin  (Peintures  Antique*,
pi.  53).


Dioii7«us  with  CanthaniB. (From  a  Tan.)

Cantlcum. A  technical  term  of  the Roman
stage. In  the  narrower  sense  it  denoted  a  nieto-


CANTIUM


270


CAPISTRITM


dy  or  »ir  compmted  iu  cliUDgiug  rhytliuts,  tlie  t«xi
to  nliieh  wHu  sung  tmliinfl  the  8tag»  to  the  iiucam-
l>aiiitiietit  of  a  flntf.  wliiU^  thn  uotor  cxpntMctl  the
ini'anii));  l>y  (miitomimc.  Iu  Cicero'n  time,  how-
ever, tho  cantiea  were  soinotimes  performeU  by
the  actors.  lo  a  %ti(li:r  seii&c  the  word  might
menu  auy  ijort  id  a  play  n-liicb  ivos  not  Bituply  re-
citetl.  hut  Hong  or  perfurtued  iu  melodraoia  with
tnitnical  nccouipauinieiitA. See  Dkasja.

Canttiuii.  A  diatriet  of  Uiiti^in,  ucarly  tlie
■ante  06  tho  iiioderu  Kent,  but  iucliitliii);  Loiidiiii-
am  Iq.  t.).  The  uamu  in  d«uv«d  fri>ni  the  Keltic
hint,  aa  angle  or  curve.

Canuleia  Lex. See  Le.x.

CanulMufl.  Caics.  A  Roiuan  tribune  of  the
IH'opk'',  who  iu  B.C.  4-IS  umAa  u  Ian  jM^ruiitllng  tho
ninrriage  of  patricians  with  plobeiaiifl,  and  also
requiring  that  oue  of  the  two  couitula  should  1>«
ohoHen  annually  from  among  tbo  plcbeiaua.  See
Livy,  iv.  3,  etc.

Canushun  (Kavvaiov).  Tho  modem  Canosa.  An
import^tnt  town  in  Apulia,  on  the  AutldnB,  founded,
acconliiig  Iu  tmditituL.liy  Pioiuedes.  It  way.  nt  all
e\  iMitM,  a  Grvek  colony,  and  both  Gn-uk  and  OEtcaii
wen-  spoken  there  in  the  timti  of  HoraKf.  It  wsh
celelirultid  for  its  miiica  mid  )t«  wodIIi-ii  mHini-
faotnreSf  but  had  only  a  deficient  Bupjdy  of  water.
Many  heautifiiL  Greek  vosea  have  been  diacovertid
faeru,  aa  well  as  coins  and  other  remains.  Livy
slates  tliat  tbo  fugitivoa  of  the  Roman  army  after
the  defeat  at  Caunuo  (q.  v.)  were  generously  re-
oeired  here,  and  treated  with  luucli  kindness  by
Busu.  a  wealthy  lady  of  the  eity. See  Liry,  xjtU.

Cap. SvO  (lALKRUg  ; Pn.I.Jif8.

CapAueuB  {Kawaftvs).  Sen  of  Hipponofls,  and
One  nf  tbt)  Buvvn  heroeo  who  marclied  against
TbebeM.  He  waa  Btruck  by  Zeus  with  ligbtning
as  he  WHa  aoaUiig  llio  wuIIh  «{  TheliCH.  becaUHe
he  had  dared  to  defy  the  g<Ml.  VUib^  his  body
was  baraing,  bis  wife  Kvndn<^  ieapetl  into  the
flatnes  and  destroyed  herself.  See  Srvkn  Against
Thkkk^.

Capella. See  Capra.

CapeUa.  (OMAnriAVCsMrsErs  Felix.  A]>oet,
bum.  according  to  Caftttiodonini,  at  Mudaura  in
AtVica;  he  callfi  bimNelf,  howAvor.  at  the  end  of
bis  work,  "  the  fotfter-cbild  of  rliv  city  of  Kliwta";
whether  it  he  that  he  was  born  at  Carlliage,  or
else  received  his  edncalton  tbere,  whlcli  latter  is
the  more  probable  o)>tDion  of  the  two.  The  MSS..
however,  give  biui  the  title  of  '■  the  Carthagiuian."
In  prnci'Mfl  of  time  he  attained  to  proconsular  dig-
nity, bat  whetlicr  he  was  a  Chriftliau  or  not  is  a
matter  of  nneeHainty.  Abont  the  middlti  of  tho
liflli  centnrj-  of  onr  tvra  be  wrote  at  Roini'  a  work
hearing  (he  appvllalJou  of  Sittint  or  Stitifriain,
divtdtHl  into  nine  bookt.  It  is  a  spwies  of  tncy-
clupn-dia.  lialf  prose  and  half  verse.  mmU-IIed  aftt* r
tho  Varroiiian  satice.  The  first  two  books  form  a
detached  and  separate  work,  entitled  De  yuptHs
PhiMogiae  §t  Mcrrurii,  and  treating  of  the  apothe-
osis of  Philology  and  her  marring^  with  Mercury.
We  tlnd  in  il,  among  other  things,  a  doHcriplion
of  heavpn,  which  shows  that  th>'  niyftttc  notions
of  the  riatonists  of  that  day  apprnximatod  iu  a
viTv  singnlax  manner  to  thp  tnttlis  of  Christianity.
In  the  srvrn  following  liookn  Capella  treats  of  the
seven  sciences  whit-b  formt'd  at  that  time  tbo  circle


of  liuuiau  study — nnmi-ly,  grammar,  ti
geometry,  astrology  (aHtninuiny  ),  ar
uinsif,  which  compn?heiulM  poetry.
A1.E8  Abtes.)  Tliia  work,  written  in
ated  and  ped&ntie  Htyle,  was  iutrodr
schools  in  the  Middle  Ages ;  heuO(
queutly  copied,  and  the  text  baa  beo<
ly  corrupt.  Tbe  prosody  shows  tba
begun  to  destroy  the  distiuotion
fur  we  fiud,  e.  g.,  laqtutx^  JljigUurH,
On  the  text, see  Dirk,  Df  Martutno  C
daiuh  (Berne,  I8a5).  The  best  editi
la  Is  that  of  Kysseubardt  (  Leipzig
editio  prineepi  was  that  of  Uodiao
1499).  The  distiuguished  jurist,  Gi
the  work  when  only  fourteen  years
Ad  elegiac  poet,  mentioned  with  comi
Ovid  (/Vif.  ivi.  36).  We  have  no  n
pmducttoDS.

Capena.  (1)  A  gate  of  Rome,  noi
St.  Sebastian,  iu  the  southeast  pat
Rome,  {i)  A  city  of  ELruria,  soutbe
Sorait)*.

Caper,  Flatii^s.  A  Roman  grao
llonriMhed  under  Tn^an.  Of  him  i
Nunill  treatises  ou  orthography  aud  do
Text  in  Keil'ii  (irammatici  irt/isf,  vol

Capfitua  SilviuB. Seo  BtLViL'B.

Caphareua  (Kn^i^^ir)-  The  moc
Oro;  a  rocky  and  duiigemns  promo
sonttx'nst  coast  of  Euboca,  where  tb
is  fuiid  to  have  Ifei/u  wrecked  ou  Its
Troy  (Eurip.  Truad.  90).

Capia  (ali!u>  ralliHl  OArEi>o,  CaPfL
Dl'NcC'l^).  A  HQiall  earthen  voase
nsed  in  sacrifices.  Il  bad  hundica  i
tinit^H  s[>okmi  of  an  a  pitcher  {arewiii
tim<-H  as  a  cup  (/MCMfum).  It  is  joii
litittti  among  tbe  sacred  implenionts  o
aud  both  are  often  represeiitud  toget
aud  medals.

Capiatnun  (<^op3«ia.  Kftfi6e,  tfuftJit).
rived  from  capio,  and  denoting  lirst
ter  for  animals,  and  apparently  mai^
It  was  usmI  in  holdiug  the  bead  of
which  required  any  healing  operation
animals  at  the  stall,  and  in  fastening
yoke.  Iu  n'pre««-M)taiioi)s  of  Baccbaii
sious,  tlie  tiguni  or  patiiliers  are  att
yoke  by  capiatra  made  of  vine-brancli


Tlfsn  wiUi  Csfiiilia (T&Uosa

In ploughing  Holds  which  werv  ]
vines  or  other  tre««,  the  halt<T  bad  a

attached  to  it,  oucliwiiig  the  mouth,
vent  the  ox  from  cropping  the  ten  '


CAPITA  AUT  NAVIA


271


CAPITOUUM


iis  capittrari).  Also,  when  goatherds  wished  to
obtain  milk  for  making  cheese,  they  fastened  a
iQuzzle  or  capia-
trnm,  armed  with
iron  points,  about
the  mouth  of  the
kid,  to  prevent  it
from  sucking.

Bauds  of  similar
materials  were  used
to  tie  vines  to  the
pdlwipali)  or  trans-
verse rails  (iuga)  of
a  trellis.

The  tet'oi  <f>opfitid
was  also  applied  to
a  coQtrivance  used
by  pipers  (fxvKfjTai)
and  trumpeters  to
compress  their
mouths  and  cheeks,
and  thns  to  aid  them
in  blowiug.  This
was  said  to  be  the  in-
Tention  of  Marsyas.


CftfriitnuiL


(From  fto  Etmsoan

V«M.)


Capita  aut  Navia  (Naviu).  "Heads  or  tails";
the  name  of  a  game  derived  &om  the  fact  that  the
early  as  had  ou  oue  side  a  double-faced  lanus,  and


E^rly  As,  stiowlDfC  Haul  uid  Prow  of  Ship.

OU  the  other  the  prow  of  a  ship. See  As. (Ha-
•crob.  Sat.  i.  7,  22 ;  Fest.  s.  v.  nana,  p.  169  M.).

Capital.  A  kerchief  of  woollen  or  linen  cloth
worn  round  the  bead  by  Komau  women  in  early
times,  and,  after  it  had  gone  out  of  general  use,
retained  as  part  of  the  costume  of  certain  priest-
esses (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  160).  Among  these  were
the  Vestals ;  a  coin  engraved  by  Saglio  shows
a  kerchiefed  female  head  and  the  letters  V.  V.
— i.  e.  Virgo  VettalU ;  but  not  the  Flamiuica
(Rich),  whose  coiffure  was  undoubtedly  the  tululua
(q.  v.).

CapltaUa. See  CAPtrr.

Capital  Lettma.  See  Alphabet;  Maiuscu-
u..

Capfte  CsuaL See  Caput.

Capttla  Deminutlo. See  Caput.

CapitiniiL  A  portion  of  a  woman's  dress,  said
by  Varro  to  be  so  called  because  it  covers  [capit)
the  breast  {Varr.  L.  L.  v.  131).  The  word  itself
might  lead  us  to  suppose  that  it  was  originally,
like  capital,  a  covering  for  the  head;  but  there  is
ezprcM  testimony  that  it  was  worn  over  the  tunic,
'Covering  the  breast  and  not  the  head.

Caplto,  Atkiub. See  Atkius  Capito.

CapXto,  C.  FontAiub.  A  friend  of  M.  Antoniua
<q.  v.),  who  accompanied  Maecenas  to  Bruudisium,


B.C.  37,  when  the  latter  was  sent  to  effect  a  recon-
ciliation between  Octavianus  and  Antony.

Capitoline  Venui. See  Venus.

CapitoUne  "Wolf See  Romulus.

CapitoUnl  liUdi. See  Ludl

CapitoUnoa.  (I)  A  surname  of  lupiter,  from
his  temple  on  the  Mons  Capitolinus.  (2)  A  sur-
name of  M.  Manlius  (q.  v.),  who,  for  his  ambition
in  aspiring  to  sovereign  power,  was  thrown  down
from  the  Tarpeian  Rock,  which  he  had  so  nobly
defended  (Flor.  i.  13  and  26).  (3)  MoNS,  oue
of  the  seven  bills  on  which  Rome  was  built,
containing  the  citadel  and  fortress  of  the  Cap-
itol. (See  Capitouuh.)  Three  ascents  led  to  its
summit  from  below,  (a)  By  the  100  steps  of  the
Tarpeian  Rock,  which  was  probably  on  the  steep-
est side,  where  it  overhangs  the  Tiber,  (ft)  The
Clivus  Capitounus,  which  began  from  the  Arch
of  Tiberius  and  the  Temple  of  Saturn,  near  the
modem  Hospital  of  the  Consolazione,  and  led  to
the  citadel  by  a  winding  path,  (c)  The  Clivus
AsTu,  which,  being  less  steep  than  the  other  two,
was,  on  that  account,  the  road  by  which  the  tri-
umphaut  generals  were  borne  in  their  cars  to  the
Capitol.  This  ascent  began  at  the  Arch  of  Sep-
timiuB  Severus,  and  from  theuce,  winding  to  the
left,  passed  near  the  ruined  pillars  of  the  Temple
of  Concord,  and  from  thence  led  to  the  lutermon-
tium.  The  Capitoline  Hill  is  said  to  have  been
previously  called  Saturuius,  from  the  ancient  city
of  Satumia,  of  which  it  was  the  citadel.  After-
wards it  was  known  by  the  name  of  Mons  Tarpe-
ius,  and  fiually  it  obtained  the  appellation  first
mentioned,  &om  the  circumstance  of  a  human
head  {caput)  being  discovered  ou  its  summit,  in
making  the  foundations  of  the  Temple  of  lupiter.
It  was  considered  as  forming  two  summits,  which,
though  considerably  depressed,  are  yet  sufficiently
apparent.  That  which  looked  to  the  south  and
the  Tiber  was  the  Tarpeian  Rock  or  citadel ;  the
other,  which  was  properly  the  Capitol;  faced  the
north  and  the  Quirinal.  The  space  which  was
left  between  these  two  elevations  was  known  by
the  name  of  Intermoutium.  (See  Roha.)  (4)  An
appellation  said  to  have  been  given  to  an  individ-
ual named  Petilius,  who  had  been  governor  of  the
Capitol.  (Compare  the  commentators  ou  Horace,
.Sat.  i.  4,  94.)  It  is  also  related  that  he  was  ac-
cused of  having  stolen,  during  his  office,  a  golden
crown,  consecrated  to  lupiter,  and  that,  having
pleaded  his  cause  in  person,  be  was  acquitted  by
the  judges,  in  order  to  gratify  Augustus,  with
whom  he  was  on  friendly  terms.  (5)  lULirs.  one
of  those  later  Roman  historians  whose  works  form
what  has  been  termed  the  Augustan  History  (Au-
gusta Historia).  He  lived  during  the  reigns  of  Di-
ocletian and  Constantine  the  Great,  and  we  have
from  him  the  lives  of  Antoninus  Pius,  Marcus  Aure-
lins,  Verus,  Pertiuax,  Albinus,  Macrinus,  the  two
Maximins,  the  three  Gordiaus,  Maximus,  and  Bul-
biuus.  He  wrote  other  lives  also  which  have  not
reached  us.  The  greater  part  of  his  biographies  are
dedicated  to  Diocletian  and  Constautiue.  Hisworks
8bow  carelcHsuesa  and  want  of  proper  arrangement.
See  Augustar  Histohiae  Scriptores.

Capitoliom.  A  celebrated  temple  and  citadel
at  Rome,  on  the  Tarpeian  Rock.  The  foundations
were  laid  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  a.U.C.  139,  B.C.
615.  Its  walls  were  raised  by  his  snccessor  Ser-
viUB  TnlUuH,  aud  Tai'qniniiis  Superbus  linished  it,


CAPITULDM


272


CAPITULUM


A.U.C.  331,  B.C.  533.  It  was  not,  howeTer,  conse-
crated antil  the  third  year  after  the  expulsion  of
the  kings.  This  cereniony  was  performed  by  the
coDsnl  Horatiue.  It  covered  eight  acres,  was 200  feet
broad,  and  about  215  long.  It  consisted  of  three
parts,  a  nave  sacred  to  lupiter,  and  two  wings  or
aisles,  the  right  sacred  to  Minerva,  and  the  left  to
luno.  The  ascent  to  it  from  the  Fomm  was  by  a
hundred  steps.  The  magnificence  and  richness  of
this  temple  are  almost  incredible.  All  the  consuls
successively  made  donations  to  the  Capitol,  and
Augustus  bestowed  upon  it  at  one  time  3000  pounds
weight  of  gold.  The  gilding  of  the  whole  arch  of
the  Temple  of  lupiter,  which  was  undertaken  after
the  destruction  of  Carthage,  cost,  according  to
Plutarch,  21,000  talents,  or  $24,780,000.  The  gates
of  the  temple  were  of  brass,  covered  with  large
plates  of  gold.  The  interior  was  alt  of  marble,  and
was  adonied  with  vessels  and  shields  of  solid  sil-
ver, with  gilded  chariots,  etc.  The  Capitol  was
bnmed  in  the  time  of  Snlla,  ax.c.  670,  B.C.  83,
through  the  negligence  of  those  who  kept  it,  and
Snlla  rebuilt  it,  but  died  before  the  dedication,
which  was  performed  by  Q.  Cat-
nlns  in  B.C.  69.  It  was  again
destroyed  in  the  troubles  nuder
Vitelltus,  on  the  L9tb  of  Decem-
ber, a.d.  69;  aud  Vespasian,  who
endeavoured  to  repair  it,  saw  it
again  in  ruins  at  his  death.  Do-
mitian  raised  it  for  the  last  time,
and  made  it  more  grand  and  mag-
nificent than  had  any  of  his  pred-
Capltoiium.  (From  ece88or8,aud  spent  12,000  taleuts
*  'n«^)  in  gilding  it. See  Roma.

CaplttUtun  (iiriKpayov,  xiovoKpavov).  The  capi*
tal  of  a  column,  wbich,  in  the  infancy  of  building
as  au  art,  was  nothing  more  than  a  simple  aba-
cus, or  sqnare  tablet  of  wood,  placed  on  the  top
of  a  wooden  trunk,  the  original  column,  to  form
a  broad  bed  for  the  architrave  to  rest  upon.
From  this  simple  beginning,  it  became  eventual-
ly the  principal  ornament  of  a  column,  and  a
prominent  feature  by  which  the  different  archi-
tectnral  orders  are  distiugnished ;  being,  like
them,  and  strictly  speaking,  divided  into  three
kinds,  the  Doric,  Ionic,  and  Corinthian  capitals,
which,  with  the  Soman  alterations,  make  five
varieties  in  use  among  the  ancients ;  for  the  Tus-
can is  only  a  species  of  Doric ;  and  the  Com-
posite is  formed  by  a  anion  of  the  Ionic  aud
Corinthian,  having  the  foliage  of  the  latter
surmounted  by  the  volutes  of  the  former  —  a
bastard  capital  iutroduced  iu  the  Imperial  Age,
when  the  genius  for  invention  was  succeeded  by
a  love  for  novelty  aud  splen-
dour, and  first  employed  iu
the  triumphal  arches  at  Rome,
where  a  specimeu  is  still  to  be
seen  on  the  Arch  of  Titus.  (See
Column  A.)

(l)CAPITULtrMDORTcUM.  (a)
Greek.  The  Oreek  Doric  cap-
ital, which  is  the  simplest  of
all,  being  divided  into  no  more
than  three  principal  parts:
the  large  square  abacus  at  the  .
top,  retaining  in  this  order
its  primitive  character  to  the
last;  the  echions,  or  quarter  -p,,i,  order.  (Phlga-
round,  immediately  below  it; ie«:  Mucb, pi. ii.)


7


and  the  annli,  or  anulets,  Just  above  the  neok  of
the  shaft.

(6)  iionum.  The  Doric  of  the  Romans  is  more
complicated  and  varied  in  its
parts.  Instead  of  the  limple
abacus,  they  substituted  s
moulded  cymatinm and  fillet;
in  place  of  the  echinus,  anoro-
lo,  often  broken  by  carviog,
as  in  the  example ;  instead  of
the  anulets,  either  an  astragkl
{astragalu*),  or  a  bead  and  fil-
let. The  example  is  from  «
Soman  temple  near  Albsiio.
(2)  Capitulcm  lOSlCTK.
(a)  Ghwk.  The  Greek  Ionic
capital  oousists  of  two  leading  features :  the  abacus,
whioh  is  smaller  and  lower  than  in  the  Doric,  bat
still  square  in  its  plan,  though  moulded  on  the
exterior  faces ;  and  the  volutes  {valuta),  or  spiral
monldings  on  each  side  of  the  front,  wbich  aie


DorJO  Order. (Albsno;
Hucb,  pL  19.)


Oreek  Ionic  Capital (Krecbtbeuin.Atfaeiu:
FerguBMD.  >

frequently  connected  by  a  pendent  hem  or  fold,
as  in  the  example,  and  haug  down  much  lower
than  the  sculptural  echinus  between  them.

(h)  Homan.  The  Roman  Ionic  does  not  differ
very  materially,  nor  in  its  essential  parts,  from
the  Greek  specimens,  excepting  that  it  is  often
elaborately  covered  with  carving ;  the  volntes  an
in  general  smaller,  and  the
tasteful  hem  which  bangs
down  between  them  in  the
preceding  engraving  is
never  introduced;  bnt  that
is  not  to  be  considered  as
a  uniform  characteristic  of
the  Greek  order;  it  does
not  occur  in  any  existing
edifices.

The  annexed  specimen  of
the  Soman  Composite  is  ta-
ken from  the  Arch  of  Titus.

(3)  Capitui,um  Coris-
THiuM.  The  Corinthian  capital  is  the  richest  of
all  the  pure  orders,  and  the  specimens  now  remaii)-
iiig  of  it  in  Greece  and  Italy  do  not  materiaUr
differ  in  any  characteristic  point.  It  consists  of
an  ubacus,  not  square,  like  that  of  the  Doric  aixl
Ionic  capitals,  but  hollowed  on  the  sides,  and  hav-
ing the  angles  cnt  off,  and  a  rosette  (Jto*)  or  otbet
similar  ornament  in  the  middle. Under  the  aba


Romas  Oomposlta.
oTTItna)


(Ar^


CAPPADOCIA


278


CAPUA


GoriDthtui  CbdIUL  (Trom  tha  Tem-
ple of  VesU  at  Tlvoli.)


COB  are  small  Tointea  {heliees,  Vitrnv.  It.  1,  12),
beoding  downwards  like  BtalkB,  two  of  which  meet
nnder  each  angle  of
the  abacns,  and  two
in  the  centre  of  each
face  of  the  capital,
where  they  sotne-
times  tonch,  and
sometimes  are  inter-
woven  with  each  oth-
er. The  whole  is  snr-
roQDded  by  two  cir-
cular rows  of  leaves
(folia),  each  leaf  of
the  Qpper  row  grow-
ing between  and  be-
hiud  those  of  the
lower  one,  in  snch  a
manner  that  a  leaf
of  the  apper  row
falls  in  the  centre  of
each  of  the  fonr  faces
of  the  capital.  In
the  beat  examples
these  leaves  are  carved  to  imitate  the  acanthus  or
the  olive-tree. See  AjtCHTTECTURA.

Cappadttoia  ( KamralloKia ).  A  district  of  Asia
Minor,  to  which  different  bonndaries  were  assigned
at  different  times.  Under  the  Persian  Empire  it
included  the  whole  country  inhabited  by  a  peo-
ple of  Syrian  origtti,  who  were  called  (from  their
complexion)  White  Syrians  (Leiicosyri),  and  also
Cappadoces.  Their  conntry  embraced  the  whole
northeast  part  of  Asia  Minor,  east  of  the  river
Halys  aud  north  of  Mount  Taurus,  which  was  af-
terwards divided  into  Pontus  and  Cappadocia
proper.  (See  Pontus.)  When  this  division  toot
place  is  uncertain  ;  but  we  find  that  under  the
Persian  Empire  the  whole  country  was  governed
by  a  line  of  hereditary  satraps,  who  eventually
became  independent  kings.  At  a  later  period
CappadfMsia  proper  was  governed  by  a  line  of  in-
dependent monarcbs.  In  a.d.  17,  Archelafis,  the
last  king,  died  at  Borne,  and  Tiberius  made  Cap-
padocia a  Roman  province.  Cappadocia  was  a
rongh  and  moontainous  region.  Its  fine  pastures
supported  an  abundance  of  good  horses  and  mnles.

Capra  or  CapwUa  (AZ£).  The  brightest  star  in
the  constellation  of  the  Auriga,  or  Charioteer,  and
said  to  have  been  originally  the  nymph  or  goat
who  nursed  the  infant  Zens  in  Crete.  See  Amal-
thsa;  Zel'8.

Capraxla.  (1)  A  small  island  off  the  coast  of
Etruria,  inhabited  only  by  wild  goats,  whence  its
name. (2)  See  Aeoates.

Capreae.  The  modern  Capri;  a  small  island,
nine  miles  in  circumference,  off  Campania,  at  the
southern  entrance  of  the  Gnlf  of  Pnteoli.  The
scenery  is  beaatifal,  and  the  climate  soft  and  ge-
nial. Here  the  emperor  Tiberius  (q.  v.)  lived  the
last  ten  years  of  his  reign,  indulgiug  in  secret  de-
bauchery, and  accessible  only  to  his  favourites.

'  Capzlccuntis.  The  Goat,  a  sign  of  the  zodiac,
between  the  Archer  and  the  Waterman,  and  said  to
have  fought  with  Inpiter  against  the  Titans.

Capvlpea.  "  Goat  -  footed."  An  adjective  ap-
plied to  Pan,  to  Fannus,  and  to  the  Satyrs,  all  of
whom  are  represented  iu  works  of  art  as  having
goat's  feet.


O^Mik (Pompflll.)


Capronae.  Locks  of  hair  falling  over  the  fore-
head. The  modem  "bang"  or  "fringe"  (Apiil.
Flor.  i.  3.  3).

Caprotina. See  Pbilotis.

Capaa  (Ktn/ra).  A  strong  aud  ancient  city  in  the
Bonthwest  of  Bycacena,  in  Northern  Africa,  iu  a  fer-
tile oasis  surrounded  by  a  sandy  desert,  abounding
in  serpents.  In  the  war  with  Ingnrtha  it  was  de-
stroyed by  Marius ;  but  was  afterwards  rebuilt,
and  erected  into  a  colony.

Capaa  (dim.  Capsula,  Capsella)  or  Sorlnium.
A  box  for  holding  books  and  papers  among  the
Romans,  usually  made  of  beech- woml  aud  of  a
oylindrical  form.  There  is  no  doubt  respecting
their  form,  since  they  are  often  placed  by  tlie  side
of  stataes  dressed  in  the  toga.  The  accompanying
illustration,  which
represents  an  open
capsa  with  six  rolls  of
books  in  it,  is  from  a
painting  at  Pompeii.

There  does  not  ap-
pear to  have  been  any
difference  between
the  capsa  and  the
scrinium,  except  that
the  latter  word  was
nsually  applied  to
those  boxes  which
held  a  considerable
number  of  rolls  (Martial,  i.  2.  4).  Boxes  used  for
preserving  other  things  besides  books  were  also
called  capsae,  while  in  the  scriuia  nothing  appears
to  have  been  kept  but  books,  letters,  and  other
writings.

The  slaves  who  had  the  charge  of  these  book-
chests  were  called  eapaariiy  and  also  crutodet  »cri-
niorum;  and  the  slaves  who  carried,  in  a  capsa  be-
hind their  young  masters,  the  books,  etc.,  of  the
sons  of  respectable  Romans,  when  they  went  to
school,  were  also  called  eaptarit.  We  accordingly
find  them  mentioned  together  with  the  paeda-
gogi.

When  the  capsa  contained  books  of  importance,
it  was  sealed  or  kept  under  lock  and  key ;  whence
Horace  says  to  his  work,  Odiati  clata  et  grata
aigilla  pudico  (Epiat.  i.  20,  3).

Capaarii  (1)  A  name  applied  to  two  classes  of
Roman  slaves:  (a)  Those  who  took  care  of  the
clothes  of  persons  bathing  at  the  public  bath-
houses. (See  Balnbae. )  (&)  Those  who  had
charge  of  the  eapaae  in  which  books  or  letters
were  kept.  (See  Capsa.)  (2)  Soldiers  who
guarded  the  cheats  coutaining  the  military  pa-
pers and  registers. (See  Dig.  1. 6, 7.)

Captlvl  "The  Captives";  one  of  the  must
popular  of  the  plays  of  Plautns,  and  styled  rather
extravagantly  by  Lessiug  "the  best  piece  that
has  ever  come  upon  the  stage."  It  is  unusually  re-
strained in  language  and  action  (fahula  atataria),
and  in  the  prologue  Plautns  takes  credit  for  its
freedom  from  indecency.  It  has  no  female  char-
acters aud  no  love  -  intrigue.  Good  separate
editions  are  those  of  Sonnenschein  (Loiiduu,
1880),  Brix  (Leipzig,  1884),  and  Hallidie  (Loudou,
1891).

Capaa  {KairvT}),  A  rich  and  flourishing  city,  the
capital  of  Campania  uutil  ruined  1)y  the  Romans.
Its  original name was  Yulturuum, which was


CAPULU3


974


CAPUT  EXIOKI M


bbangod  by  thu  T.iiTrlimii,  hAct  they  bcrame  nias> ;  be  formMl  from  the  Uuee  spccimcus  ben  ini
lt«r«  of  :lif  (ilftj^fl,  to  Capiiru Tl\r.s  laltt-r  name  was dtioed.
I  III)  rhicHlly  tltTivi^il  fnint  tli:i(  i>(  tlirir  kuiiler  Cupys,

vnIio,  acuortliiig  to  l-'c;tliift,  rcecivutl  lUis  ai>|M>llatioa

from  tiia  Ti-et  being  dt^roruie<t  au<l  luriif^  iunard.

Thu  unuio  ia  uot  uf  Latici,  but  probably  of  Omqd

ovigin. Tho  Lacius,  howerer,  ju'otomleU,  uotwUb-

etftiutiii^,  ut  oijci'ibe  the  fuuudatiou  uf  ibe  city

to  Roiuiiliin,  who named  it.  as ibey  ntutetl,  afler

one  of  bis  aucesit'ors. Capua  was  the  chief  city

of  the Miiitlicrii  Tyn-beiii,  aitil ev«ii afl<<r it  fell

iiiiibT tli6 Roniiui iloniiiiloii ronllliut'i) to be a

povvorfiil ami tluiiriAbitiji; place. Capua  Uvi-ply

ofl'tMiilctl  tbu  Kuiiiaus  by  opttuin^  ita  gates  to  Kau*

iiibal  aftvr  lb»  victorj*  uf  Caauac  (4.  v.),  though  the

luxury  ami  ilobuuchory  of  tb«  plflM.'  did  much  to

impair  tlieeuergy  of  his  Iroopit  nbo  wiutervd  tbfro.

Tti«  Teii;{t!auo«  iudicted  by  Komo  upon  the  Cafi-

uaua  wiiA,  however,  of  a  must  fearful  uature,  whoa,

livdi  yotiP«  aftur,  ihu  city  a^aiii  fell  under  ili«  do-

iiiiiiitiii. Moitt  of  the 84>iiatorH  atid  principal  iti-

hiibitatitit wfi-e  put  lo  death,  the  gitiater  part  of

the  reiiiaitiiiig  citizeuH  wore  fudd  iuto  f<bivery,  and

by  a  dticrcv  of  the  ^enatv  tho  Capuani  oease*!  lu

AxisI  aa  a  people. Tb(>  city  aud territory,  hon--

ever,  did  not  be«ouo  thereniioii  desvrtcd. A  fvw

iuhabitantM  were  alloiTHt  to  remaiu  in  the  former,

and  the  hitler  woa  iu  a  great  meoaure  sold  by  the


Capntt. tMuUuKoa.]


Rbiim  it  ChpoB.


(2)  Thr handle of  a pluu|{h (Ovid,  Pont,  «.  _
37),  of  wbicb  the  uiual  uume  wbjj  ttica. See  J
ritt'M.

Ci)  A  birr  or  cofllu. See  l-Vxos.

Caput A  wonl  wbirli  fmiu  the  Bcnsuof  "be
lilrral ur  met  a  pbor  ical
eluding iimh-r the laiier
nieaniug of "fiuurce." "'>VKi*-J
iiiuvs"), coiucs to  tti^nify: ^  }y
A sioglc por&un or thiu^ a»
ili»liliet from an af{grej^ialo
(/n*/.  iii.  16,  6; Diy.  6,  1,  1. 3i
Hfucfl perbap6 ita unc Ut vi-
pr*'ft8  a  "cbapler"  of  a  Ian
(Oif/.  9,  a.  i,  pr)  and  a  tcrrilortaJ
unit  for  the  piiriWMe  of  land  taJl-
atlun riiider  Ibe  later  K»i)>i  r*
{Cod.  lO//). (»)  A  human  iH-ii'*.'
iCata.  jy.  G.  Iv.  U>),e.  g;.  an  a  h" ''-
jiTt  of  tho  poll-ltix iltif.Uf, *■
H.  ^);  and  iu  this  Ktiw  «»-«;"
hlaves uiaj- be  iucludnl,  a« '"
tho pliraso noriifu  miie  fir^"^
tftjnitur (Itttt iv. ^,  5). '3*'^
tlirro iit a lendenry  lu  h'sira*"
thu  term  to  ciliEena  of  MUieM*  *
Htance;  ihuH  Ihn  loi\e«t  c«'titt«  "j
of  Serviua  Tulliiitt  wtiupriswl  •  'j
proUttirii ami eiijtitt  lyutt ;
n  horn the bitter, buviiiK 1
tie  or  no projjerty,  were bar*
rated as  bo  nmny  hffui  uf  >_:
izeiiH  lOell.  xvi.  10;  Clc.  lU  f^
ii.  'H). (Ji)  A.  btinmn  hvioa
ganled a« capable of t>'
rigbr*  (  =}tfrMH'i  (. (4)  That  capatiity  or  tl*


Romans  to  the  neighbouring  cominnnitica.  InlJuH
Caesar  sent  a  powerful  colon.v  t-o  Capua,  and  under
tho  emjierors  it  again  llourished.  But  it  suffered
greatly  from  the  burbuiiauH  in  a  later  agis  «o  mitch
Bo,  iu  fact,  that  the  biNhop  Landiilfus  and  the  Lom-
bard, <^ount  I^iido,  tvannferred  tho  inbabitanta  to
Cuiliniim,  on  tho  Vultunma,  uud  this  ia  the  lite
of  Mioderu  Capua.

Capftlua  (KMrnj,  Xodi})-  (1)  Th(^  bill  of  n  sn-ord,
which  was  fi-vqueutly  much  oniamvnteil.  (See
tit^DlL*H.'|  The  baadlea  of  knives  were  aloo  vlabo-  r/s,  frtuii  trhich  the  fate  of  friends  wav  fm
rately  earve<l ;  and  uf  the  l>eantiful  workmatmhip  the  nthi-r,  hmtUin,  frtini  which  they  prr-lid.
.flpmetiiues  hetituwed  on  theoi,  a  judgment may  >  faie  of  euemiea. S««  Fliuy,  H.  X.  xi.  if  I'^jj


legal  rigbt6  iheuisulvus.

Caput The  principal  of  n  debt. See  Frv^

Caput  Zlxtonim. TIh*  cmivex iip|>iM-  pari
the  livur  of  a  victim,  fnim  which  the  haruoij
chiefly  drttw  their  prognostications  rcganliiigi
iug  0%'tinti. Any  iliwnM>  or  dvQcieocy  in  lhi|
gai)  WHK  regardiMl  as  of  iinfavorablo  tni|Mirtl
was  divide^l lnt-<>  two  parta — one  oalU'd/'i'j


CAPYS


t7S


CARACALL&


El  -wry.  *  '"■  9 :  CU-  rf*  Di>.  II,  la,  la,  5  98  foil. ;  and
tbo  'ariiclM  Aiqck;  Divinatio;  IIaih^iprx.

^7apy«  (KoirwI.  (I)  Son  of  A*Baracil»,  ami  fittliftr
yf  >\iii-hiM'ft.  ("2)  A  coiiiimiiiou  uf  Aeuc-UH,  fium
jrt*  *  "P  C'ajiuu  was  suiil  tn  have  derived  ito  iiauie.

crapy*  SUvina See  t$iLvn,T&.

C7arabaa  lc<ip(i)3os.  upi^ioi'i.  A  coiAcIe  or  boat
na«Jo  "f  nicUcir-work.  ami  covered  with  rawhides.


fell  III  thl»  horrihle  bnu-hery  was  tb«  colebrated
luwyor  PitpiuiauiiB.  And  yut,  ufler  this,  by  u  siii-
jCillar  net  of  coutradirtiiui,  iw  not  only  put  to
d#ittb  luuny  of  thow  who  hiul  been  nntccnied  in
the  murder  of  his  brother,  but  evLUi  dL-iiianded  of
tlie  Senate  tliat  be  iihould  bo  cnniUed  BMiiuig  the
gtuis.  Hi»  patteru  won  Bulla,  n-hoae  tomb  be  ro-
dtorwl  and  a<lunted.  Like  this  dictator,  be  en-
richtMl hi»  ioldiem with  thi«  ron«t  extravagant

„ .RC.i  Myiie^riW*  th«  carabus  an  used b*rgewH-«  which  extortion  ennbU-il  him  to  fiiruish.

■;^V litm  iu  fii»aiu  from  having  beeo  Men  bv  him  in  '  The atigmcuutmn nf  pay  reteivwl  by  tbem is
iinrain. Thf  subjoin*^  illndtralion  i*  token  from  I  «W ^  •»»"  amounted  to  1&*0  inillioii»  of  nwi-

(1ttiriu-v  leroen a year. A«  rniol aa CaliKula  and Nero,

^^ _^  but  weaker  than  either,  he  rvgunloil  the  Senate

Caracalla
Ikltng  the Roman  Liurna  (<|.  v.),  and  flntt  lutri>-
duv«d  at  I^iuie by  the euj|>«roi- Aitreliiiit Auto-
niuti»  BaatuaiiuA, ^vbu conipeDi'd all plvbeiann
-vrlio  eiime  to  court  to  woor  it,  and  hence  received
\\%v.  oaiue  Uaracalla,  by  which  he  is  beat  known

i«  liUtory  (Aurel  Vict.  f/>;/.  aiX  Iq  it*  W*^r '  ;;;;L'rud"iopT^d"him
form  It  came  iu  later  times  to  be  worn  by  the  j^  cvervthinc  which  it
clt^rgy  under  the  iinuie  of  catwock  {mUnna,m}tt-\^^^  ^  ^^^  iniitato
t^tt*)' Like  the  lir^a.^t  wan  furuinbed  with  a  |  ^^  ^^^  ^^.^,,,,  ^  y^^^^

donian  pbalmix  of  Hixtoott  thoiuiand  men,  all  tiorn


A Oauliih  outer  );iirmuiit resem-


and  people  witb  viinal
bfttmd  and  enntempt.
Fmiii  motivnx  <if  ava-
rice, hu  gave  all  tie
ftvemvi)  of  the  Empire
the  rijj;ht  of  citizeu>
ship,  uud  wan  the  llrst
who  received  Egyp-
tians into  the  ikMiate.
or  all  his  folliee,  how-
ever, the  greatCAt  wa«
his  adminitioii  of  Al-
exander of  Maeedon.
Fnmi  Ills  infancy  ho
made  tbia  munoreh  Ida


(Tiuean.)


cowlorhood  {<-ucuflu»].

CuacalU,  AtRrJJPR  AyrnNtNCft  lUssiANra.
TU«'  .-Itlciit  »«fn  of  Septiaiins  N^vcrus.  His  name
CaracAlU  was  derived  from  n  iipecie«  of  Gallic  caa-
MH'Vv  hioh  he  iiitroduciHl  at  Route ;  and  that  of  Baa-
«ianiiB  from  bin  malerual  grandfather. Oaracalla


in  Macedonia,  and  cominaiuU^l  by  oltlcE^iK  bearing
the  »aiuu  numi«  with  thoM  who  bad  iKTved  under
Alexander.  Convinced,  moreover,  that  Artstotlo
hail  participatctl  in  the  couDpirncy  ii^iiiuHt  the
son  of  PUlUp,  he  cauacd  the  wurks  of  the  pbilos-


wiut  iMru  ut  Lugduuum  (Lyouol,  A.u.  18t5,  uud  wan  '  opher  lu  be  burned. With  Cjually  foolltth  entbu-
*I'poirite«l  by  his  father  Co  tw  his  colleague  in  the '  aiiuun  for  AcLillos,  he  made  blm  the  object  of  bis


govfnimeul  at  the  age  of  thirteen  years;  yet  be
^  luJil,  «<v«n  at  this  early  age,  tii  have  atleiupt-
^  111*  futber's  life.  Beverns  died  a.tj.  "211,  and
*M  iDcceedwI  by  bin  two  aouh,  Caracalla  and
Geia  The«e  two  brnthersi  bore  towarda  each
other,  even  from  infancy,  the  must  iDveteraiu  ha-
"^-  Aft<;r  a  campaign  oguiimt  the  Oaledoiiiana,
'huycoiiclndbdadiBgraceful  jteaceaud  then  wiHhvd
V*  diTlde  the  Empire  Iwlween  tlicm;  but  their
T^igo  wa.1  opiHJwd  by  their  mother,  Inlia,  and
"y  the  principal  men  of  the  Stale;  tto  ibnt  Cam-


dcc[>e!it  veneration.  He  went  to  Ilium  to  visit
the  gntve  of  Mnnier'A  hero,  and  imisoned  httt  fa-
vourite freednian,  named  Ftvitus,  to  imitate  Achil-
les in  bin  grief  for  Falrocluti.  His  conduct  in  his
CHm|>aigns  in  (lunl.  whtire  be  committed  all  »orte
of  croelliew,  was  »t)ll  more  degrading.  He  ntisscil
over  the  Khiue  iiitit  the  counCiitin  uf  the  C'atti  and
.\tenmiini.  The  C'atti  defL-at«d  him,  and  pciuiit-
ted  Uim  to  rejiOBS  the  river  only  ou  condittou  uf
paying  tliL'in  a  large  Hum  of  mnney.  Hl'>  next
raaruhiMl ibrough ihe land of  the Alenianni am


^


'^<^Ua  now  resolved  Ut  gel  rid  of  IiIn  brother,  by  an  ally,  iind  built  several  fortifications.  He  tbei
''***>ltig  bim  to  be  WBOMinate^l.  Aftt^r  many  uu-  catltHl  together  the  young  men  of  tliv  tribe,  as  if
*l*^Ofeaifill  atteiupl«,  be  pretendetl  to  de«ire  a  rec-  'he intended to take  thi^m into  his  service,  and


^'tlliitloD,  and  re<iueiitud  bin  motbcr  to  procure

■Km ao  iuterviuw  with his hruthLT lu her own

^f*^tioeDt. Get*  a)>peare<l,  and  u-aa otublH-^d in

*"•  tDijttier**  onua,  A.D.  'it'i,  by  several  eeulurions,

*bi»  lud  received  orders  to  this  effect. The  prae-

™ria«  gtiarda  wei^e  prevailed  n|>on,  by  rirh  don»-

""Ds.  Iu  procluitn  Cantcalln  »ole  etn|>err>i-,  and  to

'"■■eljLrc  (leta  an  enemy  to  tlio  State  ;  and  the  Sen-

*•*  Mutimied  the  niMuinatidii  of  tlio  i-iddierK. Af-

^^  thift.  the  whole  life  of  Canicjilla  wast  nnly  one

**rie*  of  cniellie*  anil  act«  of  .-xtriivaKaot  folly.

™' »bi) had been in any way  coiitiectcd with


caui«r(l  hlH  own  trootw  to  surrouud  thcnt  and  cut
them  iu  [lieces.  For  this  barbarous  exploit  he
amnmt^d  the  nuniame  of  Aleniannicns.  In  Dacia
be  gained  »onie  o^Ivautages  over  the  (7«)ths.  He
sigu»i  a  treaty  of  jiruce  at  Auttoch  with  Artu-
bnntw,  the  Fnrlhian  king,  who  ttubmitunl  to  all
his  demands.  He  iiivite<l  AlHlaren,  the  king  of
KdesHii,  an  ally  of  the  Komimii,  to  Anti<H'b,  load-
ed bim  with  cbatuB,  and  took  poiweHHiou  of  bis
estates.  He  exerciwd  the  kuiuc  tn'acbery  tow-
ards Volugeaea,  king  of  Armenia;  but  the  Ariueni*


—  ..... .— ..  .« -..J .--.. -.~. .- ans  ilew  to  ttnna  and  repuUed  the  llouions. After

^}*  WfiTt;  put  to  death,  not  even  their  children  !  thiii,  Caraualla  went  to  Alexandria,  to  punish  the
^">g  iparod.  The  historian  Dio  L'assius  makes  j  jwople  of  that  city  for  ndiciding  him.  While
I'"' whol4^  titioiber  of  victims  to  have  amounted  to  jireparatlons  were  making  fur  a  great  maiwacre,
-^'-'JI'N)  (Die  Ca«».  Ixsvit.  4), Among those who  I  he ottered  becutotnlis  to  Senipis,  and  visited  the


I


CARACTACU8


276


CARBASUS


Carlcfttura  of  CkncalU  as  ao  Apple-seller. (ATlgnon.)

tomb  of  Alexander,  on  which  he  left  bis  imperial
oruaments  b^  way  of  offerlug.  He  afterwards
devoted  the  inhabitante  for  several  daye  aod
uighta  to  plunder  and  butchery,  and  seated  him-
self, in  order  to  have  a  view  of  the  bloody  spec-
tacle, OD  the  top  of  the  Temple  of  Serapis,  where
be  consecrated  the  dagger  which  he  had  drawn,
some  years  before,  against  his  own  brother.  His
desire  to  triumph  over  the  Parthiaos  induced  him
to  violate  the  peace,  nnder  the  pretence  that  Ar-
tabauns  bad  refused  him  bis  daughter  in  mar-
riage. He  found  the  country  undefended,  rav-
aged it,  marched  through  Media,  and  approached
the  capital.  The  Partbians,  who  bad  retired  be-
yond the  Tigris  to  the  mountains,  were  preparing
to  attack  the  Romans  the  following  year  with  all
their  forces.  Caracalla  returned  without  delay  to
Mesopotamia,  without  having  even  seen  the  Par-
tbians. When  the  Senate  received  from  bim  in-
formation of  the  submission  of  the  East,  they  de-
creed him  a  triumph  and  the  surname  Parthicus.
Being  informed  of  the  warlike  preparations  of  tbo
Partbians,  be  prepared  to  reuew  the  contest;  but
Macrinus,  the  praetorian  prefect,  whom  be  bad
offended,  assassinated  him  at  Edessa,  a.i>.  217,  on
bis  way  to  tiie  Temple  of  Luniis.  His  reign  had
lasted  more  than  six  years.  It  is  remarkable  that
this  prince,  although  he  did  so  mnch  to  degrade
the  throne  of  the  Caesars,  yet  raised  at  Rome
some  of  the  most  splendid  strnctnres  that  graced
the  capital.  Magnificent  thermae  bore  bis  name
( see  Bai^XeaE  ),  and  among  other  monuments  of
lavish  expenditure  was  a  triumphal  arch,  on
which  were  represented  the  victories  and  achieve-
ments of  hia  father,  Suverus,  and  of  which  an
illustration  is  given  on  page  118.  Notwithstand-
ing his  crimes,  Caracalla  was  deified  after  death
by  a  decree  of  the  Senate.

CamotAcoa.  A  king  of  the  Silnres  in  Britain,  a
people  occupying  what  is  now  southern  Wales.  Af-
ter withstanding,  for  the  space  of  seven  years  (a. d.
43-50)  the  Rowan  arms,  he  was  defeated  i  u  a  pitched


battle  by  Ostorius  Scapula,  and  bis  forces  put  to  the
rnnt.  Taking  refuge,  upon  this,  with  Cartismau-
dua,  queen  of  the  Brigautes,  he  was  betrayed  by
her  into  the  bands  of  the  Romans,  and  led  to  Rome.
Great  importance  was  attached  to  bis  capture.
Claudius,  who  was  emperor  at  the  time,  augment-
ed the  territories  of  Cartismandua,  and  triumphal
honours  were  decreed  to  Oatorius.  This  exploit
was  compared  to  the  captnre  of  Syphax  by  Scip-
io,  and  that  of  Perseus  by  Aemilius  Panlus.  The
manly  and  independent  bearing,  however,  of  the
British  prince,  when  brought  into  the  presence
of  the  Roman  emperor,  excited  so  much  admira-
tion that  bis  fetters  were  removed,  and  freeilom
was  granted  him,  together  with  his  wife  and
children,  who  bod  shared  bis  captivity.  Therv
is  no  evidence  that  Caractacus  ever  returned
to  Britain,  and  be  is  believed  to  have  been  in
Rome  at  the  time  of  his  death  (Tac.Aitn.  xii.  33
foil.).

Tradition  says  that  the  Clandia  mentioned  by
St.  Paul  C3  Tim.  iv.  31)  was  bis  daughter  and  in-
troduced Christianity  into  Britain,  but  there  is  no
historical  evidence  to  support  this  legend.  Carac-
tacus is  believed  to  have  died  in  A.D.  54.

Carttlia  or  Carttlea.  The  modem  Cagliari  ;  the
chief  town  of  Sardinia,  with  an  excellent  har-
bour.

Carambls  (KdpaiiffirX  A  promontory,  with  a
city  of  the  same  name,  on  the  coast  of  Papbla-
gonia.

CarinuB  (Kapavot  or  Kdprjvos).  A  descendant  of
Heracles,  and  said  to  have  settled  at  Edessa,  in
Macedonia,  with  an  Argive  colony,  about  B-C.750,
and  to  have  become  the  founder  of  the  dynasty  of
Macedonian  kings.

Carauaiui.  A  native  of  Qaul,  bom  among  the
Menapii.  His  naval  abilities  attracted  the  notice
of  Maximian,  who  gave  bim  the  command  of  a
squadron  against  the  pirates.  He  proved,  bow-
ever,  nufaithful  to  bis  trust,  and  too  much  bent
upon  enriching  himself.  Maximian  thereupon
gave  orders  to  put  him  to  death ;  bnt  Caransins,
apprised  of  this  in  season,  retired  with  his  fleet
to  Britain.  Here  he  succeeded  in  gaining  over,  or
else  intimidating,  the  only  Roman  legion  that  re-
mained in  the  island,  and  finally  proclaimed  him-
self emperor.  Ho  forced  the  emperors  Maximian
and  Diocletian  to  acknowledge  his  antbority,
which  he  maintained  for  the  space  of  seven  yean
{2e&-293). He  was  assassinated  by  Allectns.

CarbSaua  (  Kopnaa-ot ).  Cotton  ;  an  Eastern
product,  originally  called  tree-wool  (Upta  anh  $v~
Xov),  like  the  German  BaumwioUe.  See  Herod,  iii.
106 ;  and  ib.  47.  It  was  brought  by  the  PboBDi-
cians  into  Spain.  The  Greeks  gained  tbeir  first
real  knowledge  of  it  at  the  time  of  the  Indian  ex-
pedition of  Alexander  the  Great,  after  which  its
use  became  general.  The  finest  cotton  came  from
Egypt,  where  the  priests  wore  cotton  garments;
aud  from  Arabia.  Caecilins  Statius  mentions  cot-
ton at  Rome  as  early  as  B.C.  180,  and  later  it  was
used  not  only  for  articles  of  clothing,  bnt  for  tent-
cnrtains,  awnings,  sails,  etc.  (See  Plin.  S.  X.  xii.
^  39 ;  xix.  (  10 ;  Cic.  Ven:  v.  IS,  $  30 ;  Verg.  Aen.  iii.
357;  Lucret.  vi.  109.)  There  were  manufactories
of  cotton  goods  in  Malta,  whence  cotton  clotbiug
was  called  r€*fu  Melitciiais  at  Rome  (Cic.  Vrrr.  ii.
72,  4  176  e(  at.). Raw  cotton  was  used  for  staffing


CARBATINA


277


CABCER


pillowa  in  the  East,  uid  the  MftcedonianB  filled
tbeir  saddles  with  it  (Strabo,  693).  Pliny  speaks
of  cotton  nnder  the  name  go$ajfpiuM  (  xii.  (  39  ).
The  word  carbanu  is  Indian,  the  Sanskrit  form  be-
ing IcarpAaa.  Ou  the  nse  of  cotton  by  the  ancients,
see  Harqoardt,  Priva(Ie&e»,  pp.  470-474.

CarbatJEna  (Kapfiarivt)).  (1)  A  sort  of  mde  shoe,
made  of  nntaiined  ox-hide,  placed  under  the  foot,
iiid  tied  with  several  thongs  in  such  a  way  aa  to
cover  the  whole  foot  and  part  of  the  leg  (Lncian,
Alex.  p.  246 ;  Xen.  Anab.  iv.  5, 14).  (3)  A  skin-cov-
ered Btnictnre  nsed  by  besiegers. See  Tkstudo.

Carba  The  name  of  a  family  of  the  geus  Papi-
ria.  (1)  C.  Papirius  Carbo,  a  distinguished  ora-
tor, and  a  man  of  great  talents  but  no  principle.
He  was  one  of  the  three  commissionetB  or  trium-
virs for  carrying  into  effect  the  agrarian  law  of
Tib.  Gracchus.  His  tribnneship  of  the  plebs,  B.G.
131,  was  characterized  by  the  most  vehement  op-
position to  the  aristocraey ;  but  after  the  death  of
C.  Qraechus  (131),  he  suddeuly  deserted  the  popu-
lar party,  aud  in  bis  cousalship  (130)  uudertook
the  defence  of  Opimins,  who  had  murdered  C.
Gracchus.  In  119,  Carbo  was  accused  by  L.  Lici-
iiius  Crassna;  and,  as  he  foresaw  his  coudemna-
tiou,  be  put  an  end  to  his  own  life.  (S)  Cn.  Papirius
Carbo,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Marian  party.  He
was  thrice  consul-ruamely,  iu  b.c.  85,  84,  and  S3.
In  83,  he  carried  ou  war  against  Sulla ;  but  was  at
Ungth  obliged  to  fly  to  Sicily,  where  he  was  put
to  death  by  Pompey  at  Lilybaeom.

Carottacx  The  modem  Carcaesoune ;  a  town  of
the  TectfM^es,  iu  Gallia  Narbonevsis.

Career  (Stafttrr^ptov). A  prison.

(1)  Grrkx.  Impriaonmeut  was  seldom  nsed
among  the  Greeks  as  a  legal  pnuisbment  for  of-
fences. Among  the  Athenians,  with  whom  we
are  chiefly  ooocerned,  it  was  practically  unknown
in  the  sense  of  confinement  for  a  definite  period
after  conviction.  They  had  neither  the  appliances
in  the  shape  of  walls  and  bars,  nor  were  they
willing  to  incur  the  expense;  and  they  preferred
either  banlabment  or  the  death  penalty.  Capital
puDishmeut  was  Inflicted  without  hesitation  for
comparatively  trifling  ofiences,  but  by  more  hu-
luaue  methods  than  those  of  modern  Europe  nntil
quite  recent  times.

Imprisonment  before  trial,  on  the  other  hand,
WAS  common  enough,  tboagfa  bail  was  freely  ao-
crpted  in  cases  other  than  capital ;  the  terror  of
exile  was  in  general  thought  sufficient  to  keep
a  man  to  his  bail  (tyyvij).  The  iarmers  of  the
taxes  and  lessees  of  other  revenues  (rrX£vat,  /uo--
6oifuvot),  as  well  as  their  sureties  (ol  iyyvi»fuvoi)t
were  liable  to  imprisonment  if  the  duties  were
not  paid  by  a  specified  time ;  and  in  cases  where
default  was  to  be  feared,  they  might  even  be
imprisoned  at  the  discretion  of  the  Senate  or
law-courts.  This  was  the  great  safeguard  to
iusare  regularity  of  payment.  Again,  persons
who  had  been  mulcted  iu  penalties  might  be
confined  till  they  paid  them,  not  only  in  criminal
cases,  bnt  in  some  civil  actions  instituted  for
damages  as  well.  Certain  of  the  3nftai  also,
if  they  exercised  the  rights  of  citizenship,  were
subject  to  the  same  consequenoea  (Demosth.  e.
Timoer.  p.  732,  (  103).  We  read,  moreover,  of
ifvuot  aa  a  public  stigma  put  upon  disgraceful
offeuoes,  such  as  theft ;  but  this  was  a  irpotrriiuffia
or  additional  penalty,  the  infltctiou  of  which  was


at  the  option  of  the  court;  and  the  Sta-ftdg  itself
was  not  so  much  an  imprisonment  ae  a  public  ex-
posure in  the  mSoKanK.^  or  stocks,  for  five  days
and  nigbte^alled  also  ip  £vXa  it6i<r6at  (Demosth.
he.  eit.,  p.  700,  M  J  PP-  733-733,  $$  103, 105 ;  p.  736,
(114).  One  more  description  of  imprisoumeDt
remains  to  be  noticed,  that  in  the  interval  be-
tween condemnation  and  execution.  In  this  last
case,  owing  to  the  insecurity  of  the  building,  the
prisoner  was  chaiued,  and  was  under  the  special
custody  of  the  Eleveu,  who  were  also  responsible
for  the  execution  itself. See  Hbndeka.

There  are  several  passages  from  which  we
might  iufer  the  existence  at  Athens  of  imprison-
ment as  a  punishment  by  itself — e.  g.  Plato,  Apol.
37  C  ;  Lam,  ix.  864  E,  8B0  B,  and  especially  x.  908.
But  such  vague  allusions  prove  nothing  against
the  persistent  silence  of  the  historians  and  or-
ators. "  Of  imprisonment  as  a  punishment  by  it-
self," SchSmanu  argues,  "  we  have  no  certain  ex-
ample ";  and  this  remark  in  his  text  is  supported
by  a  good  uote  (Antiq.  i.  489,  £ng.  trans.).  The
opposite  and  less  probable  opinion  has,  however,
been  ;naiutained  by  E.  F.  Hermann  (3taat§(U-
Urth.  $  139)  and  Caillemer  {ap.  Daremberg  and
SagUo).

The  prisou  at  Athens  is  frequently  meutigiped
iu  the  orators,  both  by  its  usual  name,  ittrfiarijptop,
and  the  enphemistlo  equivalent  oUtifia.  But  the
plural  lt§afutT^pia  does  not  seem  to  occur  in  any
Attic  writer,  though  there  are  passages  where,  if
a  plurality  of  prisons  existed  at  Athens,  we  should
almost  certainly  find  them  mentioned.  This  argu-
ment seems  almost  decisive  iu  favour  of  the  opiu-
ioD  of  J.  H.  Lipsins  {Att.  Proeeu,  p.  73  u.),  that
there  was  only  one.  The  authority  of  Hesychius
and  the  Etymologicum  Magnum  is  iusufflcient  to
prove,  in  the  face  of  probability,  that  there  was
an  Athenian  prison  called  Gijattov ;  and  there  is
no  proof  that  the  other  names  for  prisons  record-
ed by  the  grammarians  are  to  be  referred  to  Ath-
ens. Among  these  locid  names  was  avayKauw  or
ayoKatw  in  Boeotia,  Kipapos  in  Cyprns,  k&s  at  Cor-
inth ;  and  among  the  lonians  yofryvpff,  as  at  Samoa
(Herod,  iii.  145) ;  jSaXauccr  or  /SaXa/xaKcr,  $Xiopov,
t^v,  <rip6s,  all  mentioned  by  Hesychius.  The
appearauoe  of  the  Latin  career  in  the  Sicilian
Greek  KapKopov,  and  conversely  of  the  Greek  \aro-
fiiat  iu  the  Latin  laiitvmiae,  is  noticed  by  Momm-
seu  as  a  proof  of  the  early  intercourse  betweeu
the  Bomans  and  Sicily  (B.  H.  i.  167,  Eng.  trans.).
Some  of  the  above  names  may  be  slang  or  nick-
names, such  as  are  often  applied  to  prisons  in  our
own  day :  thus  yopyvpa  is  explained  to  mean  "a
sewer";  t^/m'  may  be  connected  with  Tiror,  "a
mouse-trap."  The  gate  through  which  crimiuals
were  led  to  execution  was  called  xap^yfuw  or  $vpa
xapatvttos  (Poll.  viii.  103),  a  grim  joke  which  can
hardly  have  arisen  at  Athena,  where  executions
were  private.

The  Attic  expression  for  imprisonment  was  dciy,
a  word  which  by  no  means  implies  the  use  of
chains  or  fetters.  The  phrase  in  the  oath  of  the
fiovXtvrai,  or  senators,  oiHi  d^irat  'A^vaiwy  ai/biva,
is  explained  by  Demosthenes  (e.  Timoer,  p.  746,  $
147)  as  a  security  against  arbitrary  tmprisuDmeut
by  the  executive  government  without  trial.  It
was,  in  fact,  the  habeas  corpus  of  the  Atheniau
oonstitution.  But  he  is  careful  to  add  ($  151)  that
no  such  words  occur  in  the  oath  of  the  Heliastae
or  dicasts;  the  law-courts  had  aluolnte  power


CAKCER


478


CAKCER


ore^met)*!  live«.  liberiicfl,  mid  fuituiir-i.  Wo  1iavr<
nlsu  the  jilirasi*  'tdfo-jiot  ffivXaKif  iatt  tii  Thiic.  iii.
M),  lik«  tlio  lilieni  cuatodia  uf  Ibe  Romans,  tiigut-
fii'iiig  thut  u  {wmou  wa»  uuder  Htrict  titirveillaucc
and  ({iinixl,  lliuiigli  uot  euiiQiinil  williiu  the  wallti
of  a  jinmiii.

(2i  UoMAN.  Tbo  oiliest  pritittii  at  Kume,  tra-
ditionally tUe  only  oiXK  in  earl.v  iimt-»  t  Jnv.  iii.  3iy),
waa  called  Himply  Career;  ami  is  ntill  to  be  tiecn
ou  tbe  erwteru  tilope  of  the  Caiiitoliuo  Hill,  to  the
rlgbt  of  tbo  ascent  frooi  tbe  Foniiu.  Tin-  name
Llfunei'tinuB,  usually  applied  to  tbe  Career,  is  uie-
dUeval  ami  uot  olnsmicnl.  Tbe  Tnlliauuui  i-uUHiHttt
of  A  Iar^4>roh1nn|{  upper  and  a  Hninllcr  niidorgrnund
airoiilar  dun^non ;  tbt<  lattor  is  that  call»il  tbe
Tulliniiiini,  a  uaint>  wlili'li  Iiiin  oftt^ti  been  incor-
rectly explainiHl. Am  ihta  uriginal  ereetiou  of  tbe


•'A t:


^:<^


.;,  "^


h


''•■>


''■'-,:V]


■  -  L'


iC:;,«*J5l*i?'-.^-'-


, '^a

■■s^^.


Saetloa  at  ihe  Talllanum  at  Rome.

Career  was  attrihntiod  to  Adcqa  MarclnR  (TAyj,  L
S8),  it  was  ciinjcftured  hy  the  etymologlfits  tbat
the  name  Tiilliaunm  must  bavc  bei^n  derived  from
SerriDS  Tnlliua,  "evidently  a  double  mistake,  as
the  lower  obainber  would  certainly  not  have  been
added  aflertlii*  upper  one  "  (Middleton.  Anc.  Rome,
|>.  t«)).  It  is  now  agreed  tliat  it  18  from  tbe/w//i7,  or
iiprii){!8  for  wlinw  walcrh  it.  ftirmed  a  reservoir;
(bat  it  waMbiiilt  in  ttio  firHt  instniicH  iiimply  tn  pni-
tei't  tbe  water  supply  of  tlit^  Capitol ;  ami  wan  only
in  later  limea  u»od  lu  a  pun  uf  tbo  priaou  wben  a
caplh'e,  as  iti  tha  woU-kuowu  intitaDco  of  Itif^iir-
tba,  WM  doomet)  to  be  killed  by  cold  aud  etarvation
( KcstUB  nnd  P.  Diac.  s.  v.  (aUH,  pp.  3i»2-;JKJ.  MUl-
Icr;  Pint.  ifar.  12  ;  Burn,  Itomf.  nnd  the  GamfNtffna,
p.  81 1.  The  name  tlitfrffme  originally  meant  "  well-
lloriBu,'*  Tba8  Livy  Hiwaksoftlie  tiifamons  Pleniini-
usaa  (ieiert*t»ln  TutUniuim  (xxix.22),  n-Iiiidi  in  aii>
t'other  (uiAKAge  ia  expresfled  by  tbo  wordfl  in  infnriO'
r-fwn  dim\9*ua  cavferem  u«>itu»que  (xxxiv.  •14).  It  wa«
here,  too,  tbat  LcntuIuH  and  tlje  other  accomplices
of  Catiline  were  »tranj(led  by  onler  of  the  triumviri
fijpitnles:  and  Salluftt  describL-R  It  as  aiink  twelve
feet  ill  the  oarlb,  Mtron^ly  walled,  nod  with  a  roof
vaulted  with  ntone  arches  {Cnt.  hh\.  In  reality,
H  modern  iiiTeNtigationn  bavu  Hh«iwn,  tbe  con-
i(trm:?tinn  Is  wi  old  tbat  it  poinlH  tu  a  time  when
the  areli  wiu  not  uttetl  in  Roman  andiitecture,
Htmidinff  next  amung  exitttiug  remaiu»  to  tb^  pre-
hJHtoric  w&IIh  ou  tbe  Palatine;  tbo  roof  being  of
stone  dlabo,  each  overlapping  tbe  one  bonealb  it,
an approxiinalliin to tbe true nrob  found nts«t


in  the  well-kuown  treaaury  of  Mycenae  Bii9~o1
primitive  buihlinga. Tbo  upper  rbainlter  is
of  very  early  date,  but  later  tbnn  tbo  Tullianaio^'
aud  it  is  uot  in  il»  primitive  condition. A  project-
ing titring-cnur8««  on  Ihe  ontftide  records  a  ree1ora~
tiini  in  t  be  reign  of  Tiberius  by  tbe  eonauUj  tuffift  i
for  tbe  year  a.d.  W. Another  name  f«r  this  pn*-^
of  tbo  pri>t<in  wuh  Kobnr,  in  old  Latin  Robns. Ttx«
Rubur  is  sgHikun  of  us  a  place  of  execution  in  6e  -^.
erul  passagcA  (Livy,  xxxviii.  59  ;  Tac.  Ann,  w.  '^^^^v
and  U  spoken  of  by  Middleton  as  "tbe  »cene ^^
cunutlesa  butcberies  and  hIow  torture  siicb  ait  t_  "^
Rumuus  delighted  in," During  each  trinnipb^ j^
bis  nnnnte  itp  to  Lite  Capitol,  tbo  vietorious  £ -^^i,.
end pansi'd  far  a  while  near  tbo  Tulliauum l.iVt,
word  watt  brought  him  that  Mime  of  bi»  priuc%  j,^
cuptivKM bud  beeu  put to  death in its  glo«i:^|„.
vanll. Tbe Scalar IJenuxiiae (called by I^'Jii,!
GradiiN  G^mitorii,  "ktair  of  idghs")  led  from. t^
Foruui  to  the  diiur  uf  the  upper  pritiou,  aud '^e>iv
the  dead bodies  of  SabiuDH,  of  S'itelliui,  of «^
iatiUH,  Hud  many  other  noted  persons  nero ^x-
posed. (Cr  Tnc ///#(.  iii.  74,  t:<5; Suet.  TV*, ^jj.
Vitell.  17;  ami  the  timching  story  in  Pliny,  JlZi  JV!
viii.  1-15,  uf  tbe  faithful  dog  who  there  watclvd
bis  master'B  body  ul|{bt  am]  day  and  broit^lift  j^
food.)

The  Dune  Hobtir  waa  given  to  the  TuniatiTTm
fVom  the  oakiMi beams \rot»ra)  that  lined it hi
early  times. Plutarch  (Murium,  IS)  calU  the  lavxn
duiigeou tA  ^afiaffpok. A tradition of  tbe £«>
man Chnrch iittikeN ,*<t.  Peter  and !>t.  F'unI to
have  been  imitrisniicd  hern  in  tbe  time  of  ,V<^w.
and  declares  tin-  spring  which  Htilt  exiotfl  tnhf**'
Hpriing up  tniraauluUMly  for  the baptiHin  uf <  I"*
jnihra  by  St.  Peter. The  building  ba*i  i1wjv**t»
been  uanjcd  S.  Pietro  in  Carcere. Sec  Jliildlci  *^"''
Retnaiiit  of  Ancient Home,  i.  pp.  l&l foil,  nli<?'*
a plan and section are  given ( I^nduii,  l^'T^'*
nnd  itonmiseu,  Ilitt.  of  Romr,  i.  3UH  (Americua «^
18SS),

SHnu»r,  in  the  piusBge  Already  cit«d,  gives  *^'
impree*ive  pictnre  of  the  lower  vnnit  in  which  I*"
gurthft  mid  also  Verclngetorix  penshcd.  "Tb*^"'
ift,"  he  sjiys,  'Mti  tbe  prison  »  chaoiber  named  t^^
Tulliannni.  about  twelve  feet  below  the  surface  *'
tile  earth.  It  in  hurroimdod  by  walls,  and  con-r*°
by  n  vaulted  nmf  of  slone ;  but  \\»  nppearsnc*?  '•
lepnbtivo  and  ft^arful,  becoaiie  of  the  neglert.  t*"*
darkness,  aud  the  fiteuch."  Access  to  tbe  lu^'*''''
dungeon  was  originally  poastble  only  through  C'*^
bole  in  the  coiling.  The  exact  pr«|wrtion!t  of  t'"'
vault  arc  19  feet  in  leugtb,  10  feet  in  width,  a"*'
CI  feet  in  height.

Tbe  name  Mamertinns,  oftea  applieil  to  thtf
prison,  was  bestowed  npou  it  in  the  early  p«<  <"
the  Middle  Ages  from  a  statue  of  Murs  ^Mamo'*^
which  NtiMtd  near  it  on  the  Clivns  Ai:geDtftrJvA
From  The  name  statue  is  derived  the  modero  DM0'
of  tbe  tttreet.  Via  del  Marforio.

This  prison  wan  obviously  too  small  locont*!'*
any  number  of  priMuicrs,  and  probably  ttam  ***'
first  was  appropriated  to  those  oondemnerl  '**
death.  The  earliest  mention  of  another  prwo"  **
ill  the  days  of  tbe  Decemvirate,  b.c,  450.  Ai'H**,
Claudius  is  said  Ui  have  butU  one  for  poIitK?'**
purposes,  to  overawe  tbe  champions  uf  plebeian  i  ■  ^*~
erties  (Livy,  iii.  rj).  It  was  into  this  prison  Ilm'  '■*
was  himself  thrown,  aud  comiuitted  suicide  nh>  '
awaiting  hifi  trial.  At  a  later  period  we  Ami  ^
additional  prison  called  Lautumiue,  or  Btop^V^■^


CABCERES


279


CAKDO


riea,  in  the  immediate  ueighbonrhoDd  of  the  original
Career.  It  is  not  likely  that  there  were  ever  any
(quarries  on  this  spot,  which  was  to  the  □orthwest
of  the  Fornm;  but  it  may  have  been  named  after
the  Syracasan  Xaro/xi'ai  mentioned  above,  which
were  thns  used.  Vano  {L.  L.  v.  151,  Milll.)  iden-
tified the  Lantamiae  with  the  TuIIiauam,  and  has
been  followed  by  some  of  the  modems;  bnt  they
are  distingnished  by  the  best  writers  on  Roman
topography  (Becker,  Bom.  Alterth.  i.  262-368;
Burn,  p.  eO).

With  the  growth  of  the  city  other  prisons  be-
came  necessary ;  bat  the  words  of  Roman  histo-
rians generally  refer  to  these  alone.  Close  to  the
Career,  and  between  it  and  the  Temple  of  Concord,
were  the  Scalae  Qenioniae  (q.  v.),  where  the  bodies
of  criminals  were  exposed  after  execntion.

Carcfoea.  A  row  of  small  vaulted  chambers,
forming  the  starting-point  of  the  races  in  the
circus. Bee  Ciscus.

Carohedon  {Kapx^iuv).  The  Greek  name  of
Carthage. See  Carthaoo.

Carchealnxii  ( icapx^o-tov ).  (I)  A  kind  of  cup,
rather  long,  narrower  in  the  middle  than  at  either
extremity,  and  with  handles  (Srra)  stretching  from
the  top  to  the  bottom. Asclepiades  (iu  Ath.488  foil.)


mentions  carchtsia  among  those  vessels  which  have
feet.  It  was  a  peculiarly  Greek  cup  (Maciob.  Sat.
T.  21  till*.),  and  generally  of  a  splendid  nature.
(2)  The  same  term  designated  the  tops  of  a  ship—
i.  e.  the  stmctare  surmounting  the  mast  immedi-
ately above  the  yards  {anttnnae). See  Navis.

Cardamj^K  (Kopda/ivXtjX  ^  town  in  Messenia ;
now  Scardamonla.

Cardea.  A  Roman  divinity,  presiding  over  the
hinges  (cortiinei)  of  doors — that  is,  over  family  life
(Tertull.  fuh.  GnoMt.  10).

Cardia  (Kapbia).  A  town  on  the  Tbraciau  Cher-
sonese, on  the  Gulf  of  Melas,  the  birthplace  of  Eu-
menes  (q.  v.).  It  was  destroyed  by  Lysimachus,
who  built  the  town  of  Lysimachia  in  its  immediate
neighbourhood.

Cardo  {Baipos,  arpo^ivs,  trrpotfny^,  ytyytiVfios).
A  binge,  a  pivot.

The  first  fignre  in  the  annexed  illustration  is
designed  to  show  the  general  form  of  a  door,  as  we
find  it  with  a  pivot  at  the  top  and  bottom  (a  b)  in
ancient  remains  of  stone,  marble,  wood,  and  bronze.
The  second  figure  represents  a  bronze  hinge  iu  the
Egyptian  collection  of  the  British  Museum ;  its
pivot  (6)  is  exactly  cylindrical.  Under  these  is
drawn  the  threshold  of  a  temple,  or  other  large
edifice,  with  the  plan  of  the  folding-doors.  The
pivots  move  in  holes  fitted  to  receive  them  (6  6),


each  of  which  is  in  an  angle  behind  the  antepag-
mentnm.  When  Hector  forces  the  gate  of  the
Grecian  camp,  he  does  it  by  breaking  both  the


Door  and  Hluge,

hinges  (d/x^or/povc  daipovs)—i.  e.,  as  explained  by
the  scholiasts,  the  pivots  (crrpo^tyyar)  at  the  top
and  bottom. See  CataRacta.

According  to  the  ancient  lexicons,  cardo  denoted
not  only  the  pivot,  bnt  sometimes  the  socket  (fora-
men) in  which  it  tamed.  Poatin  appears  to  have
meant  the  upright  pillar  (a  h)  in  the  frame  of  the
door.  The  whole  of  this  "  ptwt,"  including  the
pivots,  appears  to  be  called  (rrpo^tvs  and  cardo  by
Theophrastus  and  Pliny,  who  say  that  it  was  best
made  of  elm,  because  elm  does  not  warp,  and  be-
cause the  whole  door  will  preserve  its  proper  form,
if  this  part  remains  nnaltered.

The  Greeks  and  Romans  also  used  hinges  exact-
ly like  those  now  in  common  use.  Four  Roman
hinges  of  bronze,  preserved  iu  the  British  Museum,
are  shown  in  the  following  illustration.


Ctrdines. (British  M aseum. )

The  proper  Greek  name  for  this  kind  of  hinge
was  yi'yyXti^r :  whence  Aristotle  applies  it  to  the
joint  of  a  bivalve  shell ;  and  the  anatomists  call
those  joints  of  the  human  body  giaglymoid  which
allow  motion  only  in  one  plane,  such  as  the  elbow>
joint.

The  form  of  the  door  above  delineated  makes  it
manifest  why  the  principal  line  laid  down  in  sur-
veying land  was  called  cardo  (see  Aorihensokes)  ;
and  it  fbrther  explains  the  application  of  the  same
term  to  the  North  Pole,  the  supposed  pivot  on
which  the  heavens  revolved  (Ow'iA,  Epist.  ex  ]'ont.
ii.  10,  45).  The  lower  extremity  of  the  universe
was  conceived  to  turn  upon  another  pivot,  corre-
sponding to  that  at  the  bottom  of  the  door;  and
the  conception  of  these  two  principal  points  in
geography  and  astronomy  led  to  the  application  of
the  same  term  to  the  east  and  west  also.  Hence
our  "four  points  of  the  compass"  are  called  by
ancient  writers  quatvor  eardines  orbU  terrarvm;  and
the  four  principal  winds,  N.,  8.,  E.,  and  W.,  are  the
cardiaaies  venti  (Serv.  ad  Verg.  Jen.  i.  65).


CABDUCHI


CARUEN  SAECULABE


Cardnohl  {Kapiovxoi)-  A  powerful  and  warlilce
people,  probably  the  Kurds  of  muderu  times,  who
dwelt  iu  the  mountains  which  divided  Aaayria
from  Armenia. See  Xeo.  Jnab.  iii.  5,  15.

Carla  (Kapta).  A  district  of  Asia  Minor,  in  it«
southwestern  corner.  It  is  intersected  by  low
mountain  chains,  muuiog  out  far  into  the  sea  iu
long  promontories,  forming  gnlCa  along  the  coast
and  inland  valleys  that  were  fertile  aud  well-wa-
tered. Tbechiefproductsof  the  country  were  coru,
wine,  oi],and  figs.  The  coast  was  inhabited  chiefly
by  Greek  colonists.  The  inhabitants  of  the  rest  of
the  country  were  Carians,  a  people  nearly  allied  to
the  Lydians  aud  Mysians.  The  Greeks  considered
the  people  mean  aud  stupid,  even  for  slaves.  The
country  was  governed  by  a  race  of  native  princes,
who  fixed  their  abode  at  Halicarnassus.  These
princes  were  subject-allies  of  Lydia  aud  Persia,
and  some  of  them  rose  to  great  diutinction  in  war
and  peace.  (See  Artemisia  ;  Mausolus.)  Under
the  Romans,  Caria  formed  a  part  of  the  province
of  Asia.  As  the  Carians  were  often  used  as  mer-
cenaries, the  proverb  arose  (V  KapX  Mvdufri/fU',
equivalent  to  the  familiar  Latin  experimentam
/acere  in  oorpore  vili.  Cf.  the  scholiast  on  Plato,
Lacha,  187  B;  aud  Polyb.  x.  32, 11.

The  country  was  said  to  have  got  its  name  from
Car  (Kdp),  the  brother  of  Mysus  and  Lydos  (Herod,
i.  171).

Carioatara. See  Graffiti  ;  Pictcra.

Caxlna. The  keel  of  a  ship. See  Navis.

Carinao.  A  street  of  Rome  where  Cicero,  Pom-
pey,  aud  others  of  the  principal  Romans  lived.
From  the  epithet  laulae,  which  Vergil  applies  to
the  Carinae,  we  may  infer  that  the  houses  which
stood  iu  this  quarter  of  ancient  Rome  were  distin-
guished by  an  air  of  superior  elegance  and  gran-
deur (AtH.  viii.  361  full.).  The  name  Carinae  is
probably  derived  from  the  street's  positiou  iu  a
hollow  between  the  Coetiau,  Esquiliue,  aud  Pala-
tine hills.

Carlnua,  M.  Aurelius.  The  eldest  sou  of  the
«mperor  Cams,  who  gave  him  the  title  of  Caesar
and  the  rank  of  Augustus,  together  with  the  gov-
ernment of  Italy,  lUyricum,  Africa,  and  the  West,
when  he  himself  was  setting  out,  with  faia  second
eon  Nnmerianus,  to  make  war  against  the  Persians.
Carus,  knowing  the  evil  qualities  of  Carinus,  gave
him  this  charge  with  great  reluctance ;  but  he  had


CtrlDUB.


no  alternative,  as  Numerianus,  though  superior  io
every  respect  to  his  elder  brother,  was  too  yonog
to  hold  so  important  a  command.  As  soou  as  Ci-
rinns  entered  Gaul,  which  his  father  bad  particD-
larly  charged  him  to  defend  agaiust  the  barbariaoK,
who  menaced  an  irruption,  be  gave  himMlf  up  to
the  most  degrading  excaeses,  discharged  the  mo»t
competent  men  from  i)ublic  employment,  aod  sub-
stituted the  vile  companions  of  his  debaacberieH.
On  hearing  of  the  death  of  bis  father,  be  indulge<l
in  new  excesses  and  uew  crimes.  Still,  boveTer,
his  courage  aud  his  victories  merit  praise.  He  de-
feated the  barbarians  who  had  begun  to  attack  tli«
Empire,  among  others  the  Sarmatae,  and  be  after-
wards overthrew  Sabinus  luliaous,  who  bad  as-
sumed the  purple  in  Venetia.  He  then  oiarcbfd
against  Diocletian,  who  had  proclaimed  himself
emperor  after  the  death  of  Numerian.  The  tvu
armies  met  in  Moesia,  aud  several  engagemeuta
took  place,  in  which  success  seemed  balanced.  At
last  a  decisive  battle  was  fought  near  Margntu,
aud  Carinus  was  on  the  point  of  gaiuing  a  com-
plete victory,  when  he  was  slain  by  a  tribune  o(
his  own  army,  who  had  received  an  outrage  at  bU
bauds.  This  event  took  place  a.D.  385,  so  that  the
reigu  of  Carinus,  computing  it  from  his  father's
death,  was  a  little  more  than  one  year.  His  life
was  written  by  Vopiscus.

Caxlstia  or  Chaxiatia.  A  Roman  family  cele-
bration held  OD  February  33  {viii.  Kal.  Mart.)  fol-
lowing the  Dies  Parentales  (February  13-21)  and
the  Feralia  (February  21),  which  days  were  sacred
to  the  dead.  The  feaat  was  a  thanksgiving  for  the
survivors.  None  but  relatives  were  invited,  aod
on  this  occasion  quarrels  aud  miaunderstaadtDga
were  ended  ;  wheuce  some  derive  the  word  Caristia
from  x(v'Co/*^t  '^"t  ^^^  better-approved  speltiiig
is  against  this  view,  and  Ovid  regards  the  word  u
conueoted  with  cams  (Ovid,  Fast.  ii.  617).

Caimania  (Kapfioyta).  A  province  of  the  ancient
Peraiau  Empire,  bounded  on  the  west  by  Penis
proper,  on  the  north  by  Parthia,  on  the  east  by
Gedrosia,  aud  on  the  south  by  the  Indian  Ocean-
See  Persu.

Carmelua  (KapfitjKot).  A  range  of  moautaioa  in
Palestine,  commeucing  on  the  uorthem  border  of
Samaria,  and  running  through  the  southwMieni
part  of  Galilee,  till  it  terminates  iu  the  pmmoQ-
tory  of  the  same  name  (Cape  Carmel).

Caimen.  (I)  De  Figuris.  An  anonymous  di-
dactic poem  on  rhetorical  figures  discovered  in  a
MS.  at  Paris,  and  published  by  Quicherat,  aod  la-
ter by  Schueidewiu  (Gottiogen,  1841).  It  consists
of  1^  or  186  hexameters,  and  treats  of  the  figores
of  speech  in  such  a  way  that  each  figure  has  three
lines  of  the  text.  The  peculiarities  of  its  diction
lead  one  to  place  its  date  during  the  later  Empire.
See  Tonffel,  HUt.  Romat,  Lit.,  Eug.  trans.,  451, 1.  (Si
Dr  PonderIbus  et  Mensuris.  a  poem  foand  io
some  of  the  MSS.  of  Priscian,  but  undoubtedly  ear-
lier than  his  time,  and  probably  of  the  fooiib  or
fifth  century  A.D.  It  has  208  hexameters,  the  best
edition  of  wbiofa  is  that  of  F.  lloltscb  in  bis  Seript.
Afetroioff.Jiom,(lS66).  (3)  De  MorIbus.  SeeCATU,
DiUNYSius. (4)  De  Philomela. See  Puilouxla-

Carmen  Saeonlare.  An  ode  written  by  Hwaca
at  the  request  of  the  emperor  Augustus,  to  be  song
at  the  celebration  of  the  Ludi  Saeoulares,  B.C.  17.
(See  LuDi.)  It  is  composed  in  nineteea  sUnaai
(seventy-six  lines),  iu  the  Sapphic  and  Admia


RmuIdm  of  a  Cuicriiim  it  CwmcL


vliicb  wen-  iliviile4l  Iwt.wi'*!!  swi»  clionifWH.
nposeil  o(  Imi^k  ami  tlie  ollirtr  of  girln,  who
&VF  nwpouHively  aiitl  imw  in  cliorutt.  The
imeiit  of  thu  Btauziwt  l)Ctn'i.'*^ii  the  two
luu  Immju  a  Hubjuct  of  dlspalo  aiuoDfj;  vari-
[on> ;  but  nil  Are  agreed  upon  this  unu-h:
«  fine  two  HtanzM  wor«  saua  liy  the  joint

the  Hecond  hy  the  ^lirla,  the  tliiril  by  the
he  uhiih  half  by  boyH  and  liiilf  by  nh-U,
be  hut  Htauza  wm  ugani  Hung  by  the  iiiiil-
U,

moot  ver8««  vrriit«>ti  to  onlor,  the  Curwem
r«  boa  IHl'le  poetical  iiterit,  though  rhutori-

cvlleiil. See  HoiUTII^S.

leota  or  CATmentla.  An  utirieiit  Italiiiii
I  of  pn>phery  who  proteetei)  wouieii  111
rtb. In Kome Nbe hud  »  prleMt stt»rhi'd

the  Jiamvn  CunMrntn/is,  »iid  H  ithniio  lii'nr
If,  under  the  (.'upitol,  iiuinrd  iiftiT  ht-r
'itrtuenlaliH.  On  ibiit  ajxit  the  Uoiiuui  ina-
■Wmited  in  ber  honour  the  fentival  nf  the

■JU*)  the  Hanien  mid  [Hintifex  asxistiuj;,
fcfBwutJie-,  railed  Porriniu  or  Antevorta,  mid
rt«f  wi5re  wnrHbipptHl  an  h«r  HiutiirN  am)  at-
t».  Thnw  nanien  vivnt  Hanwlimvn  i-xpl»ined
^renince  lf>  iduldbirtli,  iHnnuliiui;H  an  itulieat-
t  powrr  of  (he  ){i)dd»ui  of  fntr  t-o  liMik  iniu
it  antt  fucuru. In  the  le^ruil  of  the  fmiti-

iif  Roma,  Curmvuta  appeunt an  the pni-

luolher,  or  wife,  of  the  Arcudiuu  ntniiiger
KT  Cq.  V.I. St^e  Camknak.

nentalia..  An  oM  Ituman  festival  held  on
Ui  uitd  U%tb  of  January  in  honour  of  Car-
m  Cariiieuiia. 8«o  Caiihenta.

itwDtalis  Porta.  One  of  the  i^attv  uf
in  t1ir>  nei^bbonrhtKHl  of  the  (';ipilit1.  It
■fu'/wjtnli  callt^l  SreVrataj  l»ei-anite  the  Fa-
MTit  through  it  iu  }{(iinti  to  thf  fatal  45X{iedJ-
»lw-[v  iii..j'  [wrii-heil  (V'eri;. ,!«».  viii.  3118).

noloa  Baliaxia. Thu  riimil  mhikb  (ofduwra-

iIm-  Salii  (q.  v.),  who  Hiinj*  ihvin  ditriiij;  the

**bm*  of  Mars  and  Qiiiriinm. Tltctie.  by  the

W  of  the  first  centory  b.c.,  bwl  bvcouu*  ouiu-


h-lligible  even  to  the  pri<<i«t«  thcmHelvea  (Qnlot.  L
(S.  44>).  and  wcni  coniwqin'nrly  written  donn  luid
huDcefomrirt)  repeale<1  niepely  na  a  forninla.  L.
Aelintt  Siilo  wrote  n  coniuientary  on  llieni  (Varni,
/..  f..  vii.  'i:  Kent.  141,  140,  411),  *2:W,  Miill.).  Only
two  or  three  coo»i:vttMl  bits  of  the-»e  hyiiiiiH  havo
come  down  to  n>>,  and  tlietic  in  a  very  corrupt  Ktalu
in  the  pagea  of  the  }{iHmninrianf».  <Cf.  Temit.
MnnniH.  ]i.  2201.  rulncli.)  Tliey  will  be  ftiuinl  rol-
lect*!d  and  explained  by  Her)j;k  (Ojmtc.  \.  47")  .^iid
Conuuu  (OriytHf  f'oS*i»  Horn.,  Berlin,  1k4(1).  S<'e
alMi  Wordsworth,  FmymtnU  anri  S/tcitMmt  *>/  AV»»-/y
lAitin  {Oxford,  1H74),  and  Alleu,  iieJunanU  of  AoiVy
Latm,  p.  74  (Uonton,  1884).

Cama.  A  lioinnn  divinity,  whose  name  is
prtibably  conneeled  with  ciro,  "li«»h,"  for  »lie  wna
reuimled  aa  the  prntiK-lor  of  the  physical  well-
bt;iu<:  uf  man,  Her  fentival  was  celebrated  on  June
1,  and  W.18  believed  to  have  been  inntitntfd  by
BrnliiR  in  the  tlr»t  year  uf  the  Republic.  Oviil
eiinrtiiinda  tliiH  godduw  with  Cardeu  (q.  v.).  See
I  Macrub.  :Sat.  \.  lif.

Caraac  (Kaknak). See  Tiiedae  (S).

Camac.  A  villayo  iti  France,  twenty  milea
AOUtheaKt  of  LiMiunt,  retnarkable  for  the  nnnilKT
of  its  Oallo-Koniati  reinal[ja,  found  in  a  Rroup  of
niouudH  ktioivu  na  "Cu-e^ar's  Camp."  Thehc  re-
inaiim  coniiniHc  puiK-ry.  ;;la8»ware,  coinit,  inm  oh-
jectji,  broniWrt,  and  Htatnary.  8od  Uilu,  Krmra-
tiona  at  Carnat',  2  vols.  (Icf77-^1).

Camarium.  (1)  A  larder.  <V)  ■*  ^^  "^  ^^»*
fnriiiNbiMl  with  meat>hooka  or  pegs  for  haii;:iuK
liamo,  bacon,  ete.  {i*laiM.  Capt.  (v.  4,  t»|.  (3)  A
diteh  or  foww  into  wbi«h  the  bodice  of  the  poor-
e«t  clumea  uf  the  people  were  thrown.  See  tlw
eiirioua  aooonnt  of  one  on  the  E«Miniline  Hill,  in
Lnnciaui,  Ancient  Howe  in  tkr  /j'/iti  0/  liicenl  Ijimcuv-
met,  pp.  ti4-tI7.

Camea (tu Knpv«(« ). A festival celebrated

in boiiunr  of  Aiwdlo  f'ameua  ( *' tbo  proti-eior  of

Uocks'')  M  early  a»  the  lime  "f  the  itiiMil):rallou

of  the  Thirians. In  keepitin  up  the eelehration,

[the  Doriaiw  uharactfiriatiually  gave  it  a  warliki


CAKNBADBS


CABPICNTCM


I


coliiur.  Iiy  tnitmrnniiin^  tbfir  origJnnl  pmtornl
tleity  iutu  tlio  )^<><l  <>t'  tlit^ir  li^htiii};  nrmy.  The
Canu-u  liwtcd  u'uw  diiyK,  iVum  ibt^  7lh  to  ibv  iritli
ol' tLe  moiitli  Curituii»  (Au£UBt-8i!|itonibcr).  The
l)r»CD(.MliiigH  Hyutliiilixod  tbu  lifu  iif  HoMioiB  in
VttUip.  Ill  uvery  tlii'LT  phratriae  i>r  oAna  uilie  placrK
vftftv,  Mt  ttparl,  uti  wliicb  leiiu  or  UiuttiH  wura  put
up.  Ill  ihvuK  tftita  uiuo  uieu  liad  tboir  uicaln  iti
c«itiiuiiiii.  All  urtliuiLry  ]>rocoeiliiig8  noro  carrii-'il
ou  at  (h«  word  uf  couiuiaud,  givcu  out  by  a  biM-
old.  Olio  part  or  tUu  feutival  rei-allcHl  tU  uii>;t-
ually  ninit  cbaraotvr.  Thio  watt  a  rute,  in  wbit:ti
outj  of  ttiti  runiitirii,  suppucted  t^j  Hyiubului.'  ibe
UleuiugH  of  Imrvust,  slarUsl  in  advuncu.  utterinx
prayem  ft»r  the  city.  TIic  iHlmm,  fialteil  "  viiita>;e-
riiiiiiers,"  pnmioil  him,  and  il"  llicy  ovprtimk  biiii
tlie  occnnviicu  wu  lakt'ti  an  a  f;u»d  miu'ii ;  if  tliey
failed,  ai4  a  had  uih'.  Aft^M-  tlio  twviity  -aixtb
Olyiupiail  (n.C.  ti76i  ii  uiuHirul  troutcst  wuh  add-
ed, at  wliich  tbu  iiHMt  ct^lL<1inilr<l  arliHiM  in  all
Ofeuou  wmtt  ucutiMtuuiud  lu  Lumpvtv.  Tbu  tirat  art-
Ut  vbu  sang  at  tbts  cuutMt  was  Terpauder  (q.  v.)-

Canieftdea  (Kn/a^o/ti^r).  A  pLilouipbirr  of  Cy-
ZVI16  11)  AlVira,  fniiiider  of  a  «ect  called  tbo  Third  or
Iiow  Acadeiiiy.  Tht*  Atht^iiiatis  fwnt  biiu  with  Di-
ogciics  tliv  Stoic,  and  Critohiiitt  tlie  Pvi-ipatetic,  as
amltaasttUor  to  Route,  B.C.  155.  CariK-adea  ex-
celled ill  the  vvhcuintit  and  rapid,  CritolaUs  tn
tbe  CDiToot  and  elngaut,  and  Dioj;encn  in  tbe  ^m-
plr  and  moduHt,  kind  of  elncinuncv.  Canieadea*  ia
piirtirulur,  attratilcd  tlio  »tf**iitioii  of  hiH  iit>w  an-
ditury  by  tho  mibtlc^ty  of  IiiM  n^aNoninjt  ami  tbu
ducui-y  of  Ilia  latigiiaf;«*.  B«forL<  Uultm  ami  t'alo
tbe  Cunttor,  bu  baraii^niHl  with  grrat  variuty  of
tbuQgbt  and  vopioiiiiiifs^  of  diction  in  praJwi  of
Jujtlicc.  Tbu  UKiXi  day,  to  eslabliitli  bin  dtictriiic
of  tlio  untiertaitity  of  biiniiiii  kiiowltnlgt^,  Iw  uii>
dcrtuok  to  tvfutt*  all  bin  foriui>r  argiinMMiiH.
Many  were  captivntnl  by  bJB  eloi)intn(\t ;  bin
Calo,  appn.dirnii)v«*  lest  tbe  Koman  youtli  tliouM
lose  tlieir  niilitJiry  vbara<-t<'r  in  tlio  pursuit  of
iirucian  luarninK,  iM>nuad«d  tlio  Soiiatc  to  aciid
buck  tbi'«e  pbilosupbers,  without  delay,  to  their
own  (irbonlK.

Caniradra  obtained  sncb  biftli  reputation  at
hotnt*  that  otbnr  pbiI>M«opIii?ni,  when  tboy  had  dis-
iiiiRW'd  tlieir  Hcbolant,  frcquontly  eanio  to  bear
biui.  It  wiw  tliu  diteirino  of  tbu  Now  Aca«lctiny
that  the  NunHi4,  ibu  uudofstauding,  and  the  iuiag-
tuAtiou  fit-MiiieiJlly  deceive  ub,  aod  tbureforo  cati
not  be  iufullibk'  jnd<;e8  of  truth;  but  that,  from
tbe  impression  wliicb  we  jwreeive  to  be  produced
ou  tbe  luiiid  by  means  of  tbe  xeuses.  we  infer  ap-
penntucofi  of  truth  nr  proliahilities.  lie  luain-
taiiie*!  that  the^ie  do  nut  alwnyit  nirrespond  to  the
real  natiirt-  of  tliiiigi*.  and  thai  tbrri!  is  no  inlklli'
bbt  iiietbiMl  of  detenuiiiing  wb^^n  they  are  true  or
fal^e,  aud  cou)»e«iueutly  that  tbuy  afford  iio  cer-
tain eriteriuu  of  truth.  Neverlhelcfu,  with  re-
spect tu  [be  conduct  of  life,  Cftrul■'ude^  held  that
probable  apjiearaneea  are  a  Huttlcient  guide,  be-
oaUDe  it  id  iinreiiMtnnble  that  ftume  dei;nn.<  of  cred-
it fehoiild  not  be  allowed  to  thooe  wiiueivtes  who
ooiuiuuiily  give  a  I  me  report.  He  maintained
ibut  all  the  knuwltvlgi!  tbe  butnau  mind  ia  capa-
ble of  attaining  ia  not  acieiicc,  but  upiuiuu.  He
died  ill  B-c.  lay. See  \Eir  Ac&nKMY.

Cameo*. S«e  Cakvka.

Cailll  A  Kettle  |>eople,  dwelling;  iii>rth  of  tltc
Veuvti,  in  the  A1|k<«  ('ntiiicae. 8ee  AiJ*e».


Caranntum.  An  anoietit  Keltic  town  in  Tpp*'
Paiinouia,  on  the  Danube,  eaht  of  VindoUnia  <  V't-
uuital,  and  sulrsequently  a  Rotuiui  muuitipium  or
a  colony.

Camutea  A  puwerful  people  in  tbu  ceutie  of
Gaul,  between  the  Ligcr  aud  the  Seqtuuia;  ibeit
capital  waa  Ueoabum  (Orleans).

Carpfttes  (al»u  called  Au-es  Ba9T&uMcabv
Tbu  luudi-tn  Carpathian  Moii  11  tains;  the  mottfi.
laiu^  Nepiiruling  Diieia  from  Sarnuitia.

Carp&thua  iViTumaBot)-  The  iniMlem  iScar[>«|Q_
to;  an  Inland  between  Crete  and  KliodeM,  in  ti^^
aea  named  after  it. Ita  chief  town  wae  Po»idiiiu^,

Carpentera. See  tVueit.

Caipeutum.  A  eart;  also  a  rectangular  tir-cn
wheeled  carnage.  eiu-bMed,  ntid  with  an  arched  «:ir
Hloping  cover  overhead.

Tbu  earpetitiiiu  wa:t  nsed  to  coDvey  thr  B<iiii  .x^^n
matrons  in  the  public  festal  processjoun:  ami.  ^^
this  waa  a  high  distiuctiou,  the  prlTilcgv  of  ridf^iS
iu  a  cariMDtuiii  uu  such  occ»^iona  was  alloKMl
particular  women  by  npecial  grant  of  the  SiMit  ^C^^'
Tbi*  \v.i*  done  ini  Wliftlf  of  A(;rippiiia,  u  bo  ovul  ^isJ
lienwlf  of  the  priMlege  »«i  far  an  oroii  to  enter  t  'M*
Capitol in her  uartMMiium (Tac.  .dan.  xii.  4^1,  ^

lucdul  w  aa  struck  (1


I


*»'


Cai^Miucnu. iUHaI  uf  CaIicuU.)


illustration)  te  co-
mcnioratc  thisdrc****
of  tbe  Heuate  In  L»«-r
favour. WbeuCIt»«'-
diiiH celidtivle<l Is  is
triampb  nt  ItnniHi, In-
wa«  follow4Hl  by  ti'a
empresd,  MfaAiIi  na
in  her  carpentu  n

(&iei.  c-ii«.y,  1:).

This  Garriagti  con>
taiued  »rat!i  fur  IW".
and  Honietiuieii  f"'


I


three  iM>rw>im,  bealdea  the  ooaehman  (Ijv.  I  Zii^^
It  waw  euniinouly  drawn  by  tt  pair  of  mules  ««
pcntuMt  mutiirr),  bat  more  rarely  by  oxen  or  1
and  tHHiieliniee  by  four  horses  like  a  ynorf'-ii/a.  Y'-f
grand  oecn«iuuB  it  wa<i  very  richly  udom<.*d.  Agn|>-
pina'a  carriage,  ait  ulmve  representee!.  »bowB  paiDl*
ing  or  carving  on  the  jiaueta.  aud  tbe  head  a  6^
|M)rt«d  by  Carjatides  <q.  v.)  at  the  four  ant**-
The  convenience  and  atateline»i  of  ttie  carpsilW
were  alwt  a88ume<l  by  magistrates,  and  by  mes*'
luxurious  habits,  or  thoae  who  bad  a  paealea  td
driving.  When  Caligula  tu«tituted  game«U)lotih
er  soU'ninities  in  btHiour  of  bta  deceased  owtbtf>
Agrippinu,  her  carpeutum  vent  lu  the  prooflpk*
iSuet.  Cdli;/.  15).

Cariwnia,  or  covered  carta,  were  much  oimI  I>7
the  Britons,  a\ul by  the Ganla.  tbe  Ciudtri,  tb^
Alliibrogee,  and  otber  Northern  nationa  (Fli<'  '-
Id  ft  oi). Tbem.  together  with  the  eartJ<  *>i  ^^
niiire  comtoon  form, ineludiug  liam;age-wi((»ti*'
ap|H<(ir  to  htive  been  comprehended  tinder  tlio  t"^
turn"  or  ^wTti,  whiuh  i:f  il»c  Keltic  name  wil^  *
Latin  termination. The  Gante  and  Metvetii  icf*
a  gieiit  multitude  of  tbem  011  their  military  ci)*^
diHons;  aud,  wheu  they  were  encamjie*!,  arT»"(f^
them  in  close  order,  ko  an  to  form  cxicnalve  Ua^
of  eireiimvallntion  (Caie^.  B.  G.  i.V4,^Mt.

The  agricultural  wnt*-r9  u»e  CfirpenniM  t*  d**
Dote  either  a  common  eart  or  a  cart-lowl— O' if  *
**i>rt«rcon»  <-'"7""'''j  fPaIlad.x.  I).


CAurs^us

'arpeBsns. See  Cartka.

EacpetAni.  A  iiuirerful  |H.Hi)tle  iu  HieiitBuia  Tar-
riiuuflid,  with  a  fertile  territory  on  tbe  rivei-s
kus  auil  Tai^iis.  Their  impitiil  v>:\»  TnlHtiim
bkdo).

rCarpi  or  CarpiinL A  Gtimmn  prnpU'  ilwi'lling
■tv«enllieC'«riiatb)aiiiIuuiitniiiNaii(l  tlicDuiiiibc.
,  Carpia. fttw  Oahtea,
y  Carpoph&ra  (Kapin*p6pa). See  Dkmcteb.

'  Carpou  Dik4  (ko^wtoO  iixTf).  A  civil  iwitiDti  n(
l|lli*ii<t  uiiilrr  tlia  jiiriiuliction  of  thi<  llieHiHotht^ttiv,
mitutml  iigaiiiHt  a  fitmu-r  for  tlvfjiutt  iti  p^yxifit
I  ma  (Sli'irr,  Aft.  Phh-.  p.  5iUj.  It  wum  aUi»
|ppttMl  to  niiforce  a  judicial  awanl  nliva  the  iiu-
ipcrMfnl  liti^int  n>fti!4t'il  to  Hiirn'ii<)<'r  ttto  laiul  to
ft  oppuiivut,  aiiit  lui^ht  be  iiiH'tl  lo  •Icte-riiiiiii.!  the
Sit  lo  laud,  SH  lUu  JiiilgtuHiiL  wiiiihl  detunuiue
feviber  the  plaintiff  couWl  claim  reut  of  ttie  de-
kdaot.

Bairae  or  Carrhae  {Kappiu\  Tbe  Harau  or
Wrruu  uf  ibe  Scriptarcs;  a  city  of  OsrboL-nd  in
■Mt|H>iiinitn,  wbert^  Cnunus  met  bis  dcatb  iifter
I  aefpiil  by  the  Fnrlliiaus,  B.C.  53.  Se«  ClUtiftCi*.
Cairaga  A  kind  of  tVutihcatiuu,  conmHting  uf
pvai  uumb«>r  of  wn^oua  |>Ihc«(1  rumiU  an  uroiy-
wai  em|do;('e<l  by  burbaroiiii  nutionit,  a«,  for  in-
Uiee,  the  Scythians,  IjanU,  and  Ooths.  Bee
^«t.  iii.  10.

Caniagea. See  Bastsrna  :  Carpen-ti:m  ;  Car-
Etca*.  Cuatm;  Crtwt'fi;  HsiiEurH;  Keda.

CvrOca. A  carriajie  used  in iui]if>n»l  timnx,
ami  firtil  m*uti(inBd  by  Pliny  {Ff.  X.  xsxiii.  ^  140^.
Lk<'  ttir  rtJii  it\.  v.),  it  viiis  II  tnivclliiigHiarriAgn
pi  fimr  n-bi^ulit. Xeru  in  i^Aid  to  buve  travelled
!kitljijOO|I,aiiiiirid.  IMio^.  HI)  or  even  KKWL-arrucae
"  irt.  AV.  30). Th^sc  carrifiKf*  wi-rw  soinellnioa
id  Rutne  by  persons  of  illHttnotion,  like  the
ibiDi(i].v.},in  wliichcAML- tbey  aji|)«artobave
Wen-d  with  iflate-Hiifbroiizt-.tiilver,  and  e-vvu
1,  ttbiuh  wrrt«  Koniotiiaos  unmnieuttid  with  eoi-
work. Martial  speukx  of  an nurea  cmrrvra
'liieli  cost  the  raluo  of  a  furin;  imd  Alexander
'unsaMouredevnutorKnt  Kom«  to  ntw  oar-
lUcMaiid  ivdau  {dated  v>itb  silver (.l..aini>riil.
Jkj.Stv  43). Tb<*««  am  tin-  carmcat; argtTttH'
^.  Hit  nsv  of  which  within  Konie  spread  in
CDonw  of  tbe  Ibint  cenltiry  from  tin-  hi^h
to  private  persons. Wo  have  no  r*-p-
ionH  nf  carriages  in  ancient  norks

iri  which  can  be  eafcly  eaid  ut  ho  oann- ^_

•*:;  liiii  Ibvn.'  are  several  ilbiMtniTinns  of  '

nTtioge*  uruuniented  with  j>lat<'«  of  ruvlal.
Camicat  w«re  ulso  used  for  carrying  wonn>n,
*iul  weie  Uicn,  as  well  perbai>e  a<i  in  other
••**»,  drawn  by  mules; whence  I'lpian (Mj,  2|.
"t  1. 1.  3C,  i(  H)  Mjieakt)  uf  iniiiae  cirrvctiriiit^.

CuTUa.  A  two- wheeled  eart  like  IhutMhowniutbu
anncxod  llhiBtra-
tioD.  ItwaAUttfdin
tbfl  Roinitn  armies
idiit!tly  for  till- traiih-
ponution  of  l>ag-
^ageaudstorcfi.aiid
dianii  b\  buUoclu.
fe«f  Ciie«.  if.G.  i.3;
Uv.x.itf.

^^nefiU. The  luiHleru  C'arHoli ;  a  town  of  the
"^ni.  in  Latiitiu,  colonized  by  tbe  Uooians.


CAKTliAGO

Cart. ReaCAHRt'S;  PLAUt)TfiL-M.

Cartea  ( .'iNo  called  (^akth.ira,  CaRpia,  Cas-
PE*Sf!i).  Sloru  aiitriL'iitly  Turlossus;  a  celebrated
town  and  harbour  in  the  Hoiiih  of  Spain,  at  the
head  of  tbe  i;ulf  of  whiih  Moiuil  Calp6  fuiiua  one
rtidc,  founded  by  tho  I'boMiiciauH,  and  colonized
n.C.  170  by  -IWO  Hutiuiii  Hotdiera.

Carthaea  {Kttpdaiay  A  town  on  the  eoatb  «lde
of  ihn  inlainl  of  CtKW.

Cartb&ga  A  rich  and  powerful  city  on  the
nnitbi-rn  coiwt  of  Africa,  tbe  ciipital  of  one  of  the
greaUist  enipin?B  of  antiiinity.  Tbe  Konmn  uouio
Cart bafio  and  thoOnwk  Kapx^^m-txrc  Uilhcoimp-
tions  i>(  the  native  Pnnic  Kirjath-Hadeabath,  or
"New  Town,"  wi  called  to  difltingnieh  it  from
Tyre,  or  powibly  from  tbe  eurlicr  settlement  at
Utiea  (f\.  V.)

Cartbnf^o  waa  oitnated  un  t\m  pt>ninHnbi  forminK
tbe  nortbeaat  corner  of  uioilnrn  Tiiniti,  bnt  topon-
mpber*  differ  in  their  view«  of  the  exact  locality.
OiieBchooI  holds  that  tho  city  occnpieil  the  north
of  the  piMiiiiHnla,  while  tbe  other  m-boul  placoM  ita
«ito  upon  the  wmtheru  portion.  The  uioat  ijicner-
ally  acc*'pted  view  in  the  latter.

An  iinportniit  feature  of  the  city  wa«  tbe  liill
with  it«  citadel  (ByrBa;,  snrruuBded  by  walls,  and
appi-oiicbed  by  n  aeries  of  sixty  alep».  On  tho
land  Hide  a  triple  wall,  on  which  were  monuted
to  worn  and
caHCiuatee,
snrronuded
the  city,  and
afforded  ebel-
ter  for  SOU
eleplian  tn
and  H  n  ni  e
40U0  horuPM.  Two  ar-
tificial harbeunt— one
rectangular^  for  mer-
chant veeiMjU,  open-
ing into  the  Hey  of
TnntN,  and  with  a
narrow  paiwuge  that


^nu (i.ul(iniii  ofTr^Juit


Flu  or  lynu  CfttitM^a

conhl  be  cloiwd  by  chains,  and  a  necund  circular  har-
iMtur  for  ships  nf  »  ar— gave  Carthage  acntm  to  the
tw.'a.  Tlw  second  bikrhnat  {Kothout  contained  in  ita
centre  an  inland  with  tbe  oQlciidretiidence  of  tbe  na-
val coniiuauder-in-ohief.  Althungh  these  liarbonrH
mo  now  nniuli  diniiniMlicd  in  «ir,e,  their  nituatlini  ia
ptill  readily  identilled.  Between  tbe  lagoon  and
Ibe  tiea  a  atrip  of  laud,  calletl  by  Roman  writeni
ihc  TaiMiia,  is  also  plainly  t<t  be  recognized  to-day.
lleyond  tbe  walls  of  ibe  city  was  the  beautiful
Hiibiirbof  Magalia  or  Mt^pira  (now  MarnJ,  and  still
farther  a  grejit  necrojMilts  of  sepulchres  atrvngly
built  and  canjfnlly  iirceurved.

'Tim  people  of  Carthage  were  members  of  tbe


4


CART HA 00


IN


CARTHAGO


frrent  Somilio  rncc,iiti'l  Wlon|;<Ml  lu  tlm  PlMfiitcion
brniirli,  Hinctf  Cal*lUll^o  was  miltUnl  \  |tn>bu1il>  ultual
tlm  miilillo  of  llii^  luiitli  uuutury  B.C.)  either  by  m
cubtiiy  ilimclly  Mini  friiiii  tUe  I'tiiuuiclau  city  of
Tyrr,  nr  frum  tbe  Tyriuu  offsliooi,  IJtka.  Tbey
woru  L'luAcly  akiu  U>  the  (.'iiiinunites  who  behl  I'al-
eutiiiu  Uofoi-u  the  Jcn-isli  iiivoiiioti,  anil  tbeir  luii-
((iiiigti  rescnibliMl  th«?  Hebrew,  Ihtcaiiiite  of  tbf?ir
gtJii(«ra1ly  kuon-n  Ptitpniciaii  nt-igiti,  thif  RiinmiiK
oallM  thciii  Poeui  o;-  Pnnici,  from  •toiiriKts,  RiBiiify-
iiig  "  tbo  RtMl  Moil,"  or  jn'rliapH  r<tff.iTiiig  Ut  tbo
)iuhit4  (tfioinKii),  tbti  symbol  of  th»!  .Syrinii  i;tiiu<l.
Tint  iiauiB  SarroKUi,  given  tu  Phd'uiciaii  warvK,
MTVcs  attiii  to  coiiiieiH  thu  IVx-iti  with  their  orig-
inal Syrian  homo  (Sil.  Ital.  tx  3lt>).

Cortbago  was  the  foaDgest  of  tbo  Phcruician
ooloiiieH  ill  tbo  northern  territory  of  Africa,  the
earlier  unoa  being  lUiea,  Tun i<4,  and  Hatlriunetntn,
ill  the  ilitftrict  of  Zeiigitaiia,  Kippo,  itiii]  Leptie.
Over  all  tbeau,  wliich  m-itc  onco  imlepeniKMit  of
bvr,  C.'ii-tbagii  tlnally  attauietl  at  once  conirncrrlal
ami  political  mipretuKcy.  Tho  biHtory  of  this
gnuhial  rirw'  to  power  is  iiiiknowii,  for  no  liiMt'onral
uoticc«  oarliur  than  cbu  sixth  vuiitury  B.C.  ai'o  now
a%'Hi1uhlo;  atid  at  that  period  Cartbagu  wan  al-
ntady  tbu  centre  at^d  tbo  capital  uf  a  mighty  em-
piiv,  (.'Xtondiug  from  tbe  borders  of  OyreiiiS  to  tho
Straita  of  Gibraltar,  aud  holding  as  proviiiced  tbe
Uuleario  Lilanda,  Malta,  Sardinia,  aud  Bome  ttettlu-
mcntH  uti  the  coast  of  Spain  and  Gaul.  An  im-
mense revenue  flowed  iut<i  tbe  coders  of  »be  .State
from  tho  rieh  grain  Innd^  of  Kniporiannil  Byzacinui
Soutbeaittof  llw  city,  and  coinuierue^xteutliiig  over
tbe  known  worbl  bl-onght  wealth  to  the  eitixeiiH.
SontU  of  tbo  Afriean  coartt.  tbu  power  uf  Cartilage
exiviuled  a.H  fur  aa  I^ake  Tritonla  (ij.  v.),  whieh
wa.H  cuiiiieet-ed  by  a  canal  with  the  Lc^JUier  li^yrtia.
Busidea  tbo  Uartbu}*iiiiaui>  uf  pure  I*1iu>iiioiun  dc>
Acent,  the  arl!tt»>cruuy  of  tbo  Kmpirv.  three  other
claHtieH  of  snbjuctii  are  mentioned.  Thwteary;  ^a)
the  Libyo-Phcunicians,  a  mixed  raet.>,  tlic  otfspring
of  intennaiTiageFi  bPtwt-en  tho  LtbyanK  and  tbe
original  PlKvaii-ian  twttlt^rK;  (fi)  tbo  Liliyaiie,  an
entirely  diflferent  raeo  from  tbe  Pliivniriuim,  and
|4>  JHtiue  extent  ignorant  even  of  the  Piinju  laii-
gaage;  and  (e)  the  NomatU,  wbu  livetl  cmi  the  lH>r-
dentof  tbe  Empire?  towards  tbeNiuitb.and  profesoed
an  allegiance  of  a  doubtful  .sort  to  the  gorornmunt
of  Cartbage.  The  Libyo-Phirnielaus  foniind  tUe
ngricultiiral  claM,  tilling  tlte  tleblii  in  ZeitgiCai>:t :
bat  were  i-egarded  with  a  certain  suspicious  dislike
by  the  Carthaginianis  of  pure  bbjod,  inncb  aa  the
Mexican  gentry  of  unmixed  .Spaniith  linengt^  regard
thtJir  fri  low-conn  try  men  of  mixcnl  descent.  The
LibyaUH,  who  wen'  tbo  urtgiintt  uwnert)  uf  tbu  aoil,
and  had  \reen  diHposneMcd  by  tho  Phiunieiau  colo-
nitftfl,  formed  tbo  bulk  of  the  Cartliagiuiau  oruiy;
but  the  har»h  treatment  v^  hioh  tbey  ruoeived,  and
perliupii  tbe  remeuibrutieu  of  tbeir  former  owner-
ship uf  the  land,  made  them  diMoutented,  aud,  at
timtui,  iniitiiioui).  Tbe  Noma<tit  ftirniahe<l  Carthage
witli  a  (lerce  and  warlike  irregular  c-avalry ;  yet
their  biynlty  wjw  always  uocertnin,  and,  in  fact,  it
wan  by  their  aid  tliat  Rome  Anally  sul>due<(  tbe
Carlhagiuiaii  people.

The  roinuiLTeiftl  and  maritime  enterpriKe  of  the
(M'ople  uf  Carlbage  waa  remarkable  in  antirjDity.
They  were  great  navigators  and  explorers.  Ooe
uf  their  admintlti,  Hanno  if\.  v.),  as  early  a«  tho
nixtU  century  B.r.,  nuile^l  through  tbe  Straits  of
Oibnltar  out  into  the  Atlautio,  puhaed  down  tbe


western  coast  of  Africa,  entered  the  Senegal  fClire.
teii  f  I,  and  having  reached  a  bay  auppoaed  to  Iw  uu
tbe  soutberu  bonlers  of  Sierra  1^'one,  returneil  only
vbeD  compe11e<l  to  do  ho  by  the  difficulty  of  pni-
viNiouiug  bis  nbip.  A  Gn.>ek  MS.  in  tbe  library  of
lEeidelberg  Uuivenity  profeaaea  to  l»e  tbe  trans-
latiun  of  tliB  aeeount  which  Itauno  pbiced  among
tbe  arcliives  kept  in  tbe  great  Tem[de  of  Molech
at  Carthage.  (Se«  Africa.)  A  little  later,  a  s«-
Olid  t'artbaginian.  oue  Hiuiileo,  ia  believed  to  have
viaitixl  tbu  northern  cooats  of  Earope.


CDtn  et  C«rtttag«,  w\%b  'WlagoA  notM.

Relioion. — The  religion  of  tbe  Oirtbagiuiaiis^
like  that  of  the  other  Cauaaaititib  peopteH,  wan  m
form  of  Gre-wofbbip. Aa  with  all  Semilea,  tbe  ht<
and  practice  of  religion  formed  a  part  of  tbe  dni!
life,  and  profoundly  iutlnenoed  tho  dcTelopuietit  <
tbeir  civilization. Their  chief  god,  Molccb,  rcjn
Rented  tbe  destructive  iuducMiee  of  tbe  fuin,  mil  r^m.  q
bi)t  temjde^  bninan  victims  were  iiuoudaled  "i-wrii
lire. TheM>  victims  wen>  nsually  priMiners  tak«-u mo
war,  but  not  always,  for  when  Agatbo«-Ies  be^ici;*^
thueity,we  aiv  tuLd  that VOO  uoble  children  Iwlm  %^.
iug  to  native  families  were  offered  up  to  aevtit
the  favour  of  tbe  go<l. Tbo  moou-goild<.*as  TauitA
or  Tanittt  (Tuiiitt)  appears  to  have  been  ideDti«--Aj
with  A.-!lituroth,  Melkart  with  Heroclett,  and  aaeii-
goit  wbont  the  Greeks  ideutided  with Poepidtm
I  wa.s pn-ibabty  the  tsauie  iis  the Pbili»tine  JeJ'r.
Dagon. Kites  iti  hnntinr  of  deilied beroM  wtv
'  celeltrated,  whibi  unimalH — e.  g.  tbe  lion,  bid),  »r-
I  petit,  etc. — and  h»v]\  of  tbo  Greek  divinities  uili"
'  Cartlnigiciians had beard of in Sicily  alMi  n-
I  ceivod  (t]W!cial  worship. Tbei*  in  no  oviUonw  it«i
j  the  priests iVinned  a  iteparato  coaIc,  cnutiuiil  lo
eeitain  families. On  tbe  contrary,  sacriticr*  »(*■
'  pear  to  have  been  offered  by  the  mugistrairKsml
military  lejulent. Tbe  inscription  a  aud  ba«-M;li'''<t
thus  far  discovered  and  studied  alTord  norniiBrn»-
tion  of  (he  rbnrges  uiaile  by  tbe  Greek  and  KiHiua
writers,  that  the  Carthaginians  were  gtiiliy  oNl>'
,  see  tie  and  unnatural  pructieea  in  the  roti<lii<*M'i
their  woi-sbip;  and  it  i»  probablo  thai  lie  ^f***^
'  nieiils  of  tbe  CbriHliuii  Patber.-*  refer  to  Riiniiin  w"'
;  imt  to  Plneniciah  Carthage, The  morality  iii'ifw
Carthaginians,  lu  fact,  appears  u>  have  bceiioiir'
nally  of  evoii  an  ascetic  ubaruGter,  iw  befltltd  an
iudnstnonsiinil  btrgely  ligricultnral  peoplei.\rt*f'-i-
f}eeon. i.bj. The  PboMiician  theory  of  (SWciiT'"^
was  given  by  a  rialivi<  antbor,  Saiicbouiulb<>ii,l'.<")
cither  at  Tytv  or  Herytnt  in  tbe  tenth  ceniufy*'  ■
who  wrot«  ill  Phu'iiiciau  a  history  in  aiue  Uw*'-
containing  an  account  oT  the  tbi>ology  aud  iinb<('i>'
tie*  of  PbaMiiciu,  and  of  tbe  ucigbboiiritis  ••*"^"
This  work  was  translated  into  (ireek  un'ltr  "'"
drian  by  Philo  of  Ityblns,  and  of  it  aome  fm;?"'""*
have  beou  preserved  in  the  history  of  Euxrbin* "'
Caestirea. An interesting  siimmnry  of  the  ih'**"
Btauce  of  theM'  fingmontA  is  given  in  Dafi*'**'*''
fAoj/e.  pp.  IW-2«.i  (X.  Y.  1861).


CAKTHAUO


t»o


CARilUliO


GkjVEBNMKNT. — Tli«  forni  of  gnvcrmmjul  Hi  Car-
iHfi,K:,  whiuti  AriatotlL'  praiseM  Air  itx  attibility  aiiil
bt  iis  Hiiecoa^  in  socuriug  tlio  gtsucnit  liiippititHs
|%litl  pitHpnity  of  llie  pvupit;,  wai*  uriettocrnliv  in
Ib^  cuimtitntlou  ^Aristot.  J'v/it.  li.  H).  Thu  princi-
\^\  [iiiiKititrutf4  IvtjTftfs,  lleb.  sophetimf  Law  Iiihmi
>->itt])arpd til butti the KMiimn  c^Mimilit  uiid tliif

t!'l^artJUl kingH. Tbeir  uiiuiIm.t,  liowi?vBr,  in u»il
■Irlinitvly  knuwD,  uor tbu  vxt«ul uf  their  tvnii
tfrtllic*. Tliey  wuro  eligiblt'  fur  rv-vlt-otioi]. A
i^UHtc,  cIccUhI by  {lopulur  vote.  piirtkM|ittte4l ju
Hit  pivi-rutUL-iit  witb Ibii  nfftlea.  and  \\\m  lilli-d
laiicrl.v  from  tbe  iiiukM  of  the  wroltliy. Tberti  »{>•  I
fxrars  t(i  have  btfii  u  sort  of  iTiferemliim  to  lhL'|
]wo|ile  wben  the  tvJTetet  iiihI  the  Hetiute  disu^eed ,
npuii  Qoy  counk*  of  actiou. There existL'd  alau,
ude liy  nidn  with thi-  rp^'il'*''  j;ovenim4<.ntal  or- 1
gaiiizniioii,  n  pow«>r  wbirli,  like,  that  nf  the  8p»r-
taii rphnni,  };rTulniilly  fj^kineil iUm  ival  rontrol  of
the i>t:it4'. TliJN »'iu) tliv hi^he»T. uriHtocnicy,
H|jarUii3ti  t'WcUid  hndirff  of  «nniniiMitiiiH  t[N-utaix-hii»(!
^^o  iNHiKtitiitrd thai the oiitgoiiiK invrinlicrH  pn^
•ervcd  their ponvr for nndther  y<-ar,  aud  ThiiH
iiiiprtiiMMt  upon  tho iiiAtitutioti  a  consistent  aud
ByuinH-tTical policy. TheAO [tciitan.'hi'eM cleot-
«d  a  coniiril  of  lO-l  iiiciiiborn,  who  at  Ia8t  iisiiriked
^Um* authority  of  the Scati- ; Ihoo^h Uniiiiibal
ucceedod  iii  cheeking  their  poorer,  and  in  rost^ir-
ttg  to  the  people  aouio  lual  share  in  the  gorcni-
Inriit

UtKTiiKT.— Tlie  hirttory  uf  Cartilage  falU  nutu-

I  Tully  into  four  periiHlit : (l.  fniin  tin*  foiindntiou

1  of  the  city  t»  th»  begiutiiiii^  of  thn  warK  with  8yr-

,ue.410;  (2)loth<;  U<t:tiinini;  ofthe  wuririth

,a.c.S65;  (3)  lo  the  dc»trueti«n  of  thu  eily

I'T  tile  Kouiaiia,  B.C.  14n;  (4)  frutu  the  restoration

o(  Uk  oiiv  tu  its  Itual  destrutitiun  bv  the  Arahet,

The  {ut-vigu  conqutMtta  of  Carthage  were  uuder-

'flk'n  with  the  uhJfL-t  of  eteonriug  her  euniineroe.

•''O'lU  (ells  iiH  of  a  kiag,  MalchuK  (the  Latin  forni

W  Uid  royal  litln),  who.  aflor  («K'ce«K:-«  in  Africa

f^id  Sicily,  was  defeated  in  .Sardinia,  and  tnrneil

llisuma  acainti  his  country. Ho  niii«t  have  lived

''"tveeii  B.C.  600  and  r>5n. A  more  hiotorieal  {wr-

*oa^  la  bi«  Hiiccettsor  Magu  (Itetwet-n  B-C.  05(1  and

^),a]iid  t'}  he  thu  founder  of  the  inililary  |Miwer

'^  Uw  Carthaiciciiauii. llin  iMin»  vvu|-e  llaiMlnibat

■odilaiuilcar.  hilt  grand-touH  IlanniliHl,  llasdriihid,

*>i4tia[ipho,  HOiia  of  lliutdriibal,  and  llintileo,  Han-

t)v.iD(l  Ot(«ci>.  soni  of  il;initlrar. By  the  t'-uvvfiy  of

ihli  Cutnly  the  CurthaK'Uian  Kinpiri)  wa«  eMtah-

Inhnlover  Sanlinia,  whieh  wiw  not  lu^t  lIU  afler

•bf  KiiKi  punie  War,  over  the  lialeiiric  Islanda  and

l^n  of  Hicily,  aud  over  |>orlioii8  of  Lignria  ami

*'»ul. Tliere  an;,  however,  few  eventa  of  which

'»  [-tinniuloi^y  in  cerlain. The  llr»t  in  (he  wa-

BsbtWtw«;u  the  HtruAcaiiit  and  (.'arthit^riiiiaitHOti

(Iwiiiiv  band  and  the  Phnca-auB  of  Aleria  in  Ciinti-

**«ii  Hit)  other,  which  ocenrred  in  B.C.  63t>. The

"mchum.  driven  from  Asia  Minor  by  Uarpagiia  in

^.bad  M'tlleil  at  Aleria  or  Alalia  in  Corsica,  hut

**?»<P**  ill  piracy,  which  dmnnnded  the  interfer-

*«•  uf  tti(  tummerciftl  naval  powers. The  Pho-

**"»»««  the  battle,  Init  with  ouch  loFtn  that  they

*J^W«I  Conico.  and  Betthnl  at  Velia  in  Italy.

^'I'tiiB  \\-4n premorviHl thret) tivntiuii between

kT^**'*"*'  '*'""*'■  '*'*^  Ontt  of  which  belontrM  In

™y«irn.c.  StW.  the  Hecond  ]irohahly  to  the  periiMl

^»M  Bj.%4^)  and  410. Their  oUjeet  in  tu  n--

I  Pnuic  wateiit,  aud  it  iet


notioeable  that  the  aeroud  treaty  preruM-ilMW  strict-
er liniitM  than  thu  tirHt.  aud  tentitieH  to  a  rotiaider-
able  (iciperiority  of  Carthage  over  Koine.  To  thci
ireriud  of  about  B.C.  5U(J  belong  the  expeditioun  of
Uuuuoand  HiuulL-o — the  otic  to  found  volonien  on
the  we«t  eoiiHt  uf  Africa,  which  won  probably  ex-
plored as  far  an  the  months  of  the  Sme^l  and
Tiamliia,  the  olh<<r  to  nhtain  a  kcitwledge  of  the
.Atlatilie,  whit-li  nuinlLe<l  in  the  tliscovery  of  Hrit-
aiil.  Hut.  the  luont  important  event  of  the  tirnt
pfriod  wiut  lliu  batlln  of  Himera,  fought  bt'tweeu
Hamili'ur  and  Uclo  uf  SymeiiM-,  about  the  yoar  B.c.
4'^.  Terillna,  tyrant  of  HiitLera,  on  the  north  coiut
of  dieily,  driven  out  by  Theru  uf  Agrigeuttim,  tui>
plored  aud  obtained  help  fVoui  the  Carthaginian  a.
Thero  wan  nmiBtcd  by  Oolo  of  Kyrnciiae.  An  ao-
vouut  of  this  battle  is  giveu  by  Herodotns.  The
fort-fw  (if  Hiimilrar  coiniisteil  of  :tUUO  ahips  and
3lX),0U()  ni^ii  —  Phof^nirianK,  Libyans,  Iberian*,  Li-
^iriatiM,  Ilelywi  ([HThapii  Yolaciauti),  8nrdiniaim,
aud  CutvicanB. He  was  defeated  with  great  lo«a.


Cu-ilufllnUui  WRiTlcr, (Cabtoirt  du  KroaocLt

For  tHiventy  yeant  the  CarthagiuianH  made  no
further  ell'ort  fur  the  Hubjiigatton  uf  Ijieily.  Tbia
battle  Ih  one  of  the  nioHt  impurluut  in  anricut
hiHtuiy.  The  expedition  in  which  it  lennitnited
waM  undertaken  iu  coiijnurtion  with  that  of  thu
IViTtiutJN  againnt  the  Greeks  of  Attica.  The  iicai-
tr  ftimultuncouM  defeata  at  llimera  aud  Sulamia
dt-nided  the  (|UitHtion  whether  8ointtio  or  Aryau
iiatiniiK  itliould  hoUi  the  empiri*  of  the  West.  Tlie
only  other  uvetittt  of  any  iuiiKirtAUce  iu  this  pD<
riud  of  whieli  we  have  an  aeeonnt  are  the  Tnorc
cnnipleto  Mulijiigation  of  the  Al'rieau  di?puiidenciea
by  the  family  of  Mago,  and  tlio  nettlement  of
the  dihpnted  hotiudary  between  Carthugu  ouit
Cyren^.

The  fwicoml  |>eriod  of  140  yeam  fB.t:.  410-369)  la
oecnpied  with  the  artempto  of  Carthage  to  reduce
Sicily  to  the  condition  of  a  Bithject  province.  At
tbib  time her  aettleuiuuta  M'cre confined to  thu


CARTHAGO


286


CARTHAGO


TTf^rrni  ooruPT  tif  the  inland,  while  on  the  tattU
ern  atamt  B^'rucaso  inidertonk  the  defence  of  Gre-
cian [iHlioiiiilU^,  and  naged  the  batllo  of  AryADa
ftfEaiiint  Houiilett,  until  both  coTtktjuluii(»  fell  be-
font  thi;  biiprt'Oiucy  of  Koiue.  The  rt-piilae  of  the
Alhuiiiuim  from  Syracuse,  and  tbe  same  rivalry  be-
tweou  K^ettta  aud  tieliuua  which  had  inTtted  Atbe-
ninu  interfert'Dcc  in  the  aflfaira  of  the  iiilaDd,  io-
diicrd  the  CarthaKiniiiUii  to  renew  au  eDterprise
which  had  Ik'cii  iiilerrinitfil  fur  se^-only  years.
Hnunibnl,  son  nf  Oiso,  Hlormfd  Sehn^ix,  mid
avoii;;e4l  at  nini«rn  the  dt>»lh  of  big  (^randfalhtr.
Oieitures  of  j>enro  were  rcjiwled,  ninl  ]>n'[)iLra-
tloiiB  made  for  a  more  %i}ionma  attark.  In  40tl,
Hauiiibal  and  Himilro  deittroycMl  tho  yrt-at  city  itf
A|^igei)tiiiii,  ovfTthruw  tlm  iiiighty  colnmnn  of
her  liMiii>l4-fi,  and  covered  a  thiurtHhliig  Hitii  with
a  luaHH  of  riiiiiH.  Hannibal  died  hoforc  Agrigen-
tttin ;  Himih'o  procoedcd  to  attack  Gela.  Sym-
ciUH'  wan  uovi  govoruc-d  by  Diuuydiuii,  who  from
an  oWcnre  positiou  bad  raided  hiuitrolf  to  the  rank
of  de.s|Hit.  lu  405,  a  treaty  made  by  Carthago  so-
cnred  u>  her  the  po«seflBioii  of  her  conquests,  and
to  Diuuybins  a  Anuer  pinition  ou  the  tbrone.  But
he  no  sooner  felt  hiuidelf  Bccnre  than  be  hastened
to  drive  the  enemy  from  the  island.  Wnr  broke
out  in  :{96,  all  Sicily  fell  before  the  Pniiic  anua,
and  Dionyttiim,  ilriveti  by  Hiinilco  to  take  refuge
within  the  walU  of  Syracuse,  was  tliero  bettiegeil.
Feslileuce  cniuc  tt>  lii^  aMSiHtauce,  and  the  Cartha-
eiuitins  were  tb^fi^al^-d  :  15U,filK>  Punic  cori>MMt  lay
mibnntHl  on  Ororiau  wijl ;  and  HimiU-ir,  unable  to
bear  the  coututnpt  of  biM  feUow-citlzeus,  xtitrved
himself  to  dentil.  Tlio  Ijbyann  rose  in  rebt-llioii,
aud  Cnrtbagv  was  threntfued  by  an  army  of  :^00,-
000  men.  The  attempt  of  Miigo.  between  3i>6  nnd
3&i,  to  procnru  a  more  favourable  rcualt  had  little
effect.  Ten  years  nfterwardH  be  led  auotber  ex-
pedition. The  defeat  of  Cabala  oenrly  lost  the
pOMetwiou  of  the  whole  of  Sicily,  but  the  brilliant
victory  of  Corsica  rcotoivd  the  bjihitice,  and  the
Halyciiv  wum  accepted  an  the  boundwry  between
the  two  people*.  Kourle*!]i  yearrt  of  peace  en-
auod.  In  3t>8,  the  niisfortuuea  of  Carthage  en-
coaniged  Dionysius  to  a  uow  but  nusuece«aful
effort  to  complete  the  purpose  of  his  life,  but  his
death  }Mit  an  eud  to  a  renewal  of  the  alte]ti|it,
and  his  son  and  successor  mode  peace  nith  the
Cwthagiuiiiiis.  The  weak  government  of  I>iony-
sius  H.  was  fuvourable  to  the  cxi^usiou  of  Cartba-
gjtiiun  Empirv  in  Sicily;  but  they  found  an  an-
tiLgoiiiKi  of  difler*-til  mettle  in  thf^  Corinthian
Tiinolpon,  who,  ufler  librraliug  8yracu»e  from  it.s
tyrants,  made  %Yar  iiguiniit  Carthage  for  six  yearn
(B.C.  :M&-340|.  The  defeat  of  Ibo  CriniiKNUH  in.r.
&40)  wa*i  most  crusliiug.  Tlio  Hidy  I^L-gioii,  coni-
|M»M:d  uf  2^)00  uieii  of  the  IhwI  fataiUcK  of  Curllnige,
wtm  destroyed,  aud  the  host  uf  miu'ccuarii»i  cut  to
pieces.  Peace  reatrniiicd  the  I'arthngiuians  with-
in ibcir  old  bouudary  of  the  Halycus;  thi?  (Jreek
cities  wure  deeliire*!  fi*e  ;  and  Cartbbge  iitoraised
never  again  to  support  a  despot  iu  Syracuse.
The  next  thirty  years  contain  little  of  note  ex-
cept imcea  of  frifudly  intercout^e  between  Car-
thage and  Rmne,  and  a  rrt-ord  of  assistance  given
Ut  the  Tyrions  when  l>esiege«l  Viy  Alexander  the
Grear.  She,  however,  sent  auibas^u'loi'fe  to  Babylon
In  congratnlnut  the  conrjueror  on  bis  return  from
Asia.  Agathoeles  (<|.  v.)  wax  the  Qiivt  tti  discover
that  the  fteeuhii'  enemies  of  liiH  roiittiryaiun  were
VDluerable  in  Africa. After  l>t»cuuting  de*t|M>t  of


Syracuse,  and  eetab]i8hing  his  authority  over  t
grcAt towns  in  Sicily,  bo found  that be  had ^
reckon  with  the  CartbLigiuians. UuituccetAfu)  Q
the  ifitaud,  he  ti-ausferrud  bis  forces  to  th«  uiaiqii
laud  in  310,  reduced  Carthage  to  the  laat  extreq^^
itieti,  and would probably have obtained moi«
signal  success  had  not  the  revolt  of  AgTigeulq^j
caller!  him  home. Peace  made  lu  300  couliijii«||
till  the  death  of  Agathoctea  in  2t^. His  Iom  pd.
couraged  the  extension  of  Funic  dominion,  snd  at '
la.Ht  obliged  the  Syrarusiins  to  call  in  the  aiwiil-  ,
anee  <if  Pyrrhus,  tlo;  rhivalrous  king  of  Epirnt,
He  left  Italy  in  277,  anil  in  a  nhnrt  time  drevi<  \},o  '
Cttrtbaginiitus  from  the  wiwt  and In'siege.)!  theu
ill  the  distant  fortress  of  Lilybaeum. But  bit  al-
lies were untnio to him. Carthage  and  Som
were  biiiguoil  agaiunt  htm. He  left  Sicily  in  Hi,
and his dcfiftrturo from Italy in the  ftdloviof
year  left  the  Carthagiutaus  to  stand  iu  >>li«rpafi-
lagonisiii  to  the  Laliu  branch  of  the  Aryan  it«eL
The  third  period  of  Carthaginian  htst^iy  u-
londs  from  B.C.  'idi  to  14(i — froiu  the  outhnvk  of
the  first  war  with  RuQ>e  to  the  flual  auuiliiUun
of  the  city  by  the  conquerors. Thiei  id  dm  Ibe
place  for  a  detitiled  account  uf  the  Punir  nan,
which  occupy  a  largo  sjiace  in  every  Goiunn  lii>>
tory. We  must  utuiteut  ourselves  with  »  huHf
summary. The  tint  war,  which  lasted  tri>m  hX-
'Mi  to  'i41,  was  a  cnuteat  for  the  po«Mt«siuo  of  Sic*
ily. The  Carthaginians  in  undertaking  it  ffll  le*
cure  of  their  mastery  over  the  sea. Their  kmba**
aodors  told  the  Romaui-  that  they  coulil  uot  evn
wash  their  hands  in  the  sea  without  iierttiiMloi«f
the  CarttiHgiiiiann. Montesquicn  conAiden  it  raw
of  the  cbit'f  cou.ws  of  the  rise  of  Roman  gn-swi*
tbnt  tl>ey  wert;  careful  to  borrow  fmm  llitir  pa*-
miea  whatever  was  calculated  to  improve  tfarim'^
efflcieticy. The  Romans  not  only  built  a  tloel.)"'!'
i  developed  a  novelty  of  tactics  which  jireciseljsf'
,  cured  the  object  which  they  hail  in  view. TW
I  were  encouraged  to  further  exertion  by  lh<  "c-
\  tories  of  B.c.  360  and  B.C.  256,  iind  were  solioidol  t«
I  caution  by  ibe  defeat  of  the  following  year. Tl»
I  war  was  practically  ended  by  the  brilliant  sncew
'  of  Catulus  iu  B.C.  'MU,  and  Sicily  was  lo^t  to  tb
'.  Carthaginians. The  next  three  yearn  aud  ahilf
I  )a41-y37)  were occupied by  a civil  war.  wlii'h
shows  us  ou  what  insecure  fouudaliuns  the  |*»<'
of  Carthoge  was  based. The  large  army  of  i"^
ceuaries  which  hud  been  employed  ogaiust  fif^
was  incaiitiuusly  ndmiiteii  tuto  the  city. Cuilr'
preteueeof  ileuiaudiug  ptiy  tbey  rose  against  tbtV
employers,  and  were  joine*! by  the Libyim  •!•*
I  Numidiants  who  cultivated  the  siirrooudinit  Iab^
in unwilling  wibjection. The insurrectiim  "*
I  i}iielh-d  witli  ditliculty,  hut  a  similar  revijloti«>
I  in  Sardinia  was  nioru  successful — TtK)  CartbAgii^
I  iaiiM  wi<re  barbarously  uiunlcreil,  and  the  iMf**
1  slon  of  the  iHland  passed  to  the  Romano. AU  *•
,  know  of  the  twenty  yean  which  cUftoed  \xtvn
>  the  beginning  of  the  second  war  with  ]i»w*
contiued  to  the  succcues  of  Hamilcar  oixl  ^
family  in  Spain. Iu  b.c.  'il^.  Hannibal,  wlm  b»i
swoni  06  a  boy  eternal  enmity  to  the  Kouiuia>'>*'
gao  the  enterprise  to  which  he  devoted  Uia  lift-
His  uliject  was  not  so  much  to  conqaer  Italiou  eoil
or  Italinii  cities  as  to  break  up  the  coufedemtf
upon  wbieh  the  greatness  of  Kotue  depeuded,  an^
I'O  niidii  the  fabric  of  its  empire  sluuo  by  mw-
He  sought,  therefore,  ou  the  one  baud  to  ronrt
Ureeka  and  Oi'ieutali  to  a  joint  attack  upou  tba


CARTHAGO


S87


CARTIBUUJM


eomiDon  foe,  aod  od  tbe  other  to  bow  dissension
amoiiff  the  L&tin,  Sabetlian,  and  Oacan  tribes,
SDd  to  nrge  them  to  rediion  Rome  to  that  posi-
tiou  of  comparative  inferiority  which  she  had  oc>
copied  mauy  centuriee  before.  Both  these  plans
failni.  Hannibal  was  badly  eapported  from  borne ;
be  found  that  to  combine  in  nnity  the  shifting  pol-
icy of  tbe  East  was  to  weave  a  rope  of  sand ;  and
be  discovered,  above  all,  that  Roman  supremacy
was  established  ou  a  basis  of  complete  secnrity.
Far  different,  in  fact,  washer  position, seated  among
kiudred  peoples  bound  to  her  by  affin  iiies  of  blood
and  language  as  well  as  interest,  governed  by  the
wise  policy  of  a  patriotic  Senate,  and  restrained
by  tbe  overpowering  force  of  devoted  legions,  from
that  of  the  city  of  merchants,  torn  by  factious,
Biirronnded  by  alien  and  even  hostile  tribes,  de-
fended by  mercenaries,  and  swayed  by  interest
and  passion.  The  defeat  of  Hasdrubal  at  the  Me-
taunie  iu  B.C.  307  crushed  the  last  hope  of  the  in-
vader; Spain  was  recovered  by  the  genius  of
Scipto;  and  iu  B.C.203,  Hannibal,  not  nnwilltngly,
obeyed  tbe  order  to  embark  from  Italy  to  retard
tbe  ruin  nf  his  country  which  it  was  too  late  to
save.  The  battle  of  Zama,  in  302,  put  an  end  to
tbe  war  in  the  following  year.  It  was  due  to  the
niagaanimity  of  Scipio  and  Hannibal  that  peace
was  concluded  on  such  terms  that,  while  Rome
bad  no  longer  to  fear  Carthage  as  a  rival,  she
was  content  to  recognize  her  existence  as  a  cum-
morcial  commnnity.

For  the  next  six  years,  Hannibal  governed  the
city  which  he  bad  not  been  able  to  preserve.  He
refunued  tbe  constitution  in  a  demouratical  sense,
and  paid  with  surprising  facility  the  enormous  in-
demnity demanded  by  Rome.  He  was  engaged  in
ptauuiug  a  combination  against  Rome  with  Anti-
dchiis  of  Syria  when  he  was  driven  from  power,
aud  forced  to  take  refuge  in  tbe  East,  where  short-
ly afterwards  he  fell  a  victim  to  Roman  hatred.

The  interval  between  B.C.  183  and  150  contains
little  besides  the  history  of  internal  disseusions —
struggles  between  the  Roman  party,  the  demo-
craticai  party,  and  the  party  of  Masinissa,  which
tore  the  city  in  sunder  by  their  quarrels.  The  so-
called  Third  Punic  War  (b.C.  149-146)  is  one  of  the
Mdiiest  events  in  all  history,  and  the  greatest
blot  upon  the  reputation  of  the  Romans.  Jealousy
of  their  old  antagonists  had  been  shown  by  cou-
staiit  acts  of  injustice,  and  at  last  tbe  sight  of  the
prosperity  and  riches  of  the  city  impressed  npou
the  uarrow  mind  of  Cato  the  convictiuu  that  Car-
tLage  must  be  blotted  ont.  A  pretext  for  war
Was  wantonly  invented.  Tbe  anxieties  of  the
Carthaginians  to  secure  peace  at  any  sacrifice
was  made  tbe  instrument  of  their  destruction.
When  they  saw  that  tbeir  ruin  was  resolved
upon,  and  that  compromise  was  hopidess,  they
defended  themselves  with  an  energy  which  would
have  saved  them  at  an  earlier  period.  The  sen-
tence of  the  Roman  Senate  was  ruthlessly  carried
out.  The  city  burned  for  seventeen  days,  and
concealed  its  very  site  under  a  heap  of  ashes.
The  plough  was  passed  over  it,  and  the  ground
was  cum^  forever.  In  the  words  of  Mommsen,
"  where  the  indastrions  Phoenicians  bustled  and
trafficked  for  five  hundred  years,  Roman  slaves
henceforth  pastured  the  herds  of  their  distant
uasters."

The  history  of  Roman  Carthage,  which  consti-
tDt«B  the  fourth  period,  can  be  given  in  a  few


words.  In  B.C.  122,  Gaiua  Oraccbus  led  6000  col-
onists to  Africa,  and  founded  the  city  of  lunonia.
The  colony  did  not  prosper.  In  b.c.  29,  a  second
colony  (Colonia  Carthago)  was  sent  ont  by  Angus-
tus  in  fulfilment  of  a  design  of  lulius  Caesar.  This
liecame  so  prosperous  that  Herodian  declares  it  to
have  disputed  with  Alexandria  the  second  place
in  the  Empire.  In  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century,
it  became,  under  Genseric,  the  capital  of  the  Van-
dal kingdom  (439),  and  in  a.d.  533  it  was  stormed
by  Beliaarius.  In  a.d.  (i98,  it  was  entirely  de-
stroyed by  the  general  of  the  calif  Abd-ul-Melek.

For  centuries  after  this  final  destruction,  tbe
site  of  Carthage  was  a  quarry  for  both  the  Afri-
cans and  for  the  merchants  of  Europe.  Genoese
vessels,  trading  with  Tunis  in  the  Middle  Ages,
seldom  returned  without  a  cargo  of  Carthaginian
marble.  The  cathedral  of  Pisa  is  even  said  to
have  been  built  out  of  the  ruins  of  Carthage.
Recent  times,  also,  have  aided  in  the  work  of  dev-
astation, since  the  marble  blocks  of  the  ancient
walls  have  been  within  the  last  few  years  in  part
destroyed  by  the  operatious  of  the  Tunisian  rail-
way. The  aqueduct,  over  fifty  miles  in  length,  is
the  only  remnant  of  the  greatness  of  the  city's  past
that  still  preserves  a  real  impressivenesa.

BiBUOORAPUY. — The  reader  is  referred  to  tbe
following  works:  Mer,  Memoire  »ur  U  Pertple
(VHanntm  (Paris,  1888);  Bottger,  OeschiehU  der
Carthagen  (Berlin,  1827);  Davis,  Carthage  and  her
Bemain*  (N.  Y.  1661);  Hennebert,  Hiatoire  tTAni-
hal  (Paris,  1870-78);  Bosworth  Smith,  Carthage
and  the  Carthaginians  (London,  1879);  Perrot  and
Chipiez,  History  of  Art  in  Phcenicia  and  her  De-
pendencies (Eng.  trans,  by  Armstrong,  1885);
Church,  Carthage,  or  the  Empire  of  Africa  (Lon-
don, 1886) ;  and  the  sketch  iu  Mommsen,  Hist,  of
Borne,  vol.  ii.  The  famous  novel  of  Gustuve  Flau-
bert, SalammbS,  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  ancient
Carthage,  and  is  both  learned  and  brilliant.  See
also  the  articles  Dido;  Hannibal;  Punic  Wars;
and  for  a  notice  of  the  Carthaginian  language,
Phcenicia.

Carthago  Nova  (KapxT]i»v,  ^  Nca).  The  mod-
em Cartbageua;  an  important  town  on  the  east
coast  of  Hispania  Tarraconensis,  founded  by  the
Carthaginians  under  Hasdrubal,  b.c.  243,  and  sub-
sequently conquered  and  colonized  by  the  Romans.
It  is  situated  on  a  promontory  ruiniiug  ont  into
the  sea,  and  possesses  one  of  the  finest  harbours
in  the  world.  At  the  entrance  was  a  small  island
known  as  Scomhraria,  famous  for  the  fish-sauco
made  from  the  »comJn-i  or  mackerel  caught  here.
See  GaRum,

Cartibttlum.  A  particular  kind  of  table  de-
scribed by  Varro  (L.  L.  v.  125)  as  frequently  eeou
in  the  atria  of  Roman  houses  during  his  boyhood


Cartibulum. tFrom  PompelL)


CARU3

(ttWut  BO.  100).  Rotb  the  tinine  and  the  thing
weio  iipimrontly  bfuutiitng  ubnulute  iii  liis  liuii-.
H  wad  uu  oUluiig  Blab  of  tnarlili;  eiij|i[Hirte»l  uu  a
aiiiglo  br»ukt>l  or  cotmclo  (uwt  mtitmclUi) ;  it  «tnod
ii»nr  tlm  iiii[>1iiviiitii,  and  bniiizii  vckmuIs  vtsw
|ilai?t*d  11)1011  il.  Snub  a  table  lias  beuu  iliituuVrTiKl
in  moru  tbau  uiie  bornte  at  Poui|ieii,  with  a  fuuii-
tuiii  btibitid  it  Hbitpeil  lik«  »  cipptiif  i>r  Hciuuru  pil-
lar, anil  tluwitig  into  the  iiiipluvriiiu.

Carus.  ^T  At'itKUt.'^.  A  Koiuan  umperor,  who
aiicctwiltfti  Prubntt.  H«  wan  first  appoiiiteil,  by
(be  lattur,  pi'^etoinau  preleut,  and  after  iii»  lEeatli
waa  cbtitieu  by  Iho  army  to  be  bis  Hiiccewior,  A.n.
128S.  Carus  oroatcd  bU  tvru  Koiiet,  Cariiins  and
Nuiiioriiinuft,  Cavaara,  a*  »oou  a*t  bo  wjm  elevated
(M  rbo  Enipirt?,  and,  some  tiniH  aftur,  gav»  tlieiii
eaoti  tli«  tittu  uf  AuguaC'US.  On  ibe  uvwa  iif  llit^
deatb  nf  Prubiis,  the  barbarians  put  tlH-'iiiHslveri  in
mutiiMi.  HiJtl  Cams,  Ht^iidlui;  Iuh  hiui  ('uiiitiitt  iiitu
Oaiil,  disparted  with  Xtiiutiriutiuii  fm-  Illyi'k'iiiu,  'm
iirdur  to  o[ip(>»H>  tb«  Sariaatao.  wbo  tbivatvned
Tliraoe  and  Itnlv-  He  t*low  16,000,  and  mado  •^,-
llOU  priHOhui-4.  Pr<KM'4>diii>;  aftor  Ibiit  against  tbu
FursiatiN,  bii  iiimli!  liinisL^lf  iuiMt*;r  of  MvBoputaiuia,
and  of  tbc  ciiie»  uf  Svlunvia  auil  Ctv^ttipbun,  and
took  tit  cotiMquouco  the  tinruainos  uf  PenticuH  and
PartUicii-t.  He  died,  hnwe^'er,  in  tlie  midst  uf  bin
tHiceosiHM,  A.D.  '^1.  (tiv*i  Apkk.)  HIh  wboitt  i-eif;n
was  OHO  nf  not  mon*  than  nixteeti  or  aevMiiteeu
uioiilbM.  CtiriM  vtiu  dttilifd  nft«r  bit  death.  Ac-
cording to  Vopiacus,  by  whom  litn  lifu  waH  writ-
ten, hti  held  »  middle  niuk  betrr«Miu  good  aud  \y.i-\
priiioea.

Carventum.  A  tuwii  of  the  Vol-tri,  tu  which
ibi!  Curveiitaiia  \vx  iiieiitiouL'<l  by  Livy  (iv.  5:t,  tt>
belonged,  botnrc«u  Stguia  aud  the  nourotta  of  the
Ti-oniM.

CstrvlUus  Maximue.  (U  Si'l'lttl's.  Mrii^e  oon-
tinl,  u.c.  '^H  atiil  '.'7:1,  both  tiinua  with  L.  Papiriua
CnifMv.  liiTbirirtli'at ooii-
siitabip  tb«y  gained  biitU
iaiit  vivtui'tva  over  tlie
8ainiiit«!H.  and  in  their
aO(M>nd  thity  broii^^ht  the
8amtiit«>  War  to  a  i-lune.
<S|  SPURirts  Hoii  of  the
■  |iriM!Mlitig,  tn-icH  cotiHul,
B.c.*.f34  aud  '.t^,  ia.<iuid  to
have  been  tliw  tir»t  p^rwa
at  Uuiue  w  budivMrijudbu
wife.  Sl'o  ValL-riiift  Max-
imal, ii.  1,  4;  Alii.  QcR
IV.  3;  xvii.'-Jl.

Caryae  (  Kapvai ).  A
towu  in  Ljicouia  near
tbe  bordcnD  of  Aiuadia,
originally  ln'Inn^KiI  to
tbu  territory  of  Tfgea  in
Arcadia.  FlmouIh  llgnn^8
ill  ari.'bitt-inuri:i  that  »up-
port  burdens  uro  ttaid  to
bavM  btHtn  callwd  C'AltY-
ATIUK8  lit  tnkuQ  of  the
abjijct  »]avf»ry  to  which
thu  vrumrii  of  Caryut'
Wtfi'H  reduced  by  the
tirnoka,  aa  a  pniiiNb-
iiiviit for joining the

Pt«r*iaua  at  the  invaHiiin „ ,. ,_. ,. ., ,

4)t  Greece  1,Vuruv.  1.1,  &>.  tliauat.  AUieaa)


CASEPK

Caryanda  (KafivavSa).  A  city  of  Caria.  on  ilittle
iftland,)jiicu  pri>bubly  nnit«d  with  th«*  maiiilani).  /i
wiu*  I  he-  btrlliplac-e  uf  the  getigrapber  Soylax.

Caryatldea  iKopviinlitf). See  Cakvae.

CarystOB  iKopu^rror).  A  town  itu  thn  HOntlieni
c^.is^t  of  KnlKM^a,  foiiiidud  by  Dryopea,  ei:lt;brU«d
fur  ita  marble  qiiarriiM  atid  for  th«  niiuoral  kiuivn
an  iuIhHv*  Iq.  v.).

Ca«a.  (t)  A  cottage.  Sec  DoMi^a.  (3)  A  hover
or  riLstic  arbntir.

Casa  RomtUl  The  tbat<?hed  cottagn  af  R<>iiiu-
liiB  on  the  CapitoUne  Kill  at  Komt>,  for  whirli  »e«
the  arlicltf  DoMUS,  p.  53<>.

Caaaubon,  \akkc.  A  great  elaasical  ^rholar  of
thf  nixtvt-ntli  rentnry,  bom  at  Geneva,  Fel»nia.irj
15tb,  I'lriO.  Wlioir  only  tweuty-fonr  yearn  of  a^c.
be  wa«  apiM)inti*J  pn)fo88or  of  Greek  al  CmrvB,
from  wlikb  town  be  waa  ralle.rl  in  Iii96  Ih  ■  Ik  ko
clirtir  at  MoTttpelli«!r.  lu  ir>98,  be  bpciinie  m>"m1
lilirurian  at  Pariit;  bnt  ou  the  death  of  Il^nry
IV.  this  position  became  luaeciiro  by  r«i»»u  <*f  <■*•*
Prot«etantiHm,uiid  in  1(310  he  rtiiuovod  tuEo^Isiid,
wliurv  hii  \»:ia  roceivttl  with  great  favour  by  Jatocs
I.,  who  iniidt^  him  pi-nboiidary  of  Canterbury  ian<l
WfKtmiimtt-T.  Ciwaiibou  was  hitterly  attackwl  l»T
iiianyaM  having  aold  bis  conscience  for  prefennpn't
aud  thus  bccomimg  the  hired  advocate  of  Jiai^'*-
lu  1G14,  Uo  wrot^  his  S^eereitalionejt  nontra  Bar*>-
fiium,  ill  criticJHrn  of  the  Annai€$  Bctlauutiei  of
Cnriltnal  DaroQitu.

I  \t-.tnbon  was  a  sclmlar  nf  great  ap]iIicatioD.  re-
1  i-M  I  vcnetit, and ciiudoitr ;  iuiK'fatigalde  in nwearcfa,
aud  with  an  excellent  faculty  of  iUiiitralioD. Hr
hiid  by  uiiweiirii'd  labour  acquired  a  vast  fund  of
infomialioii,  and  his  ditfiitie  and  cxbanntire  ooot-
iiieiilariea  ihiiw  how  rirlily  Htorvd  a  mind  be  p<M-
BosHHd. lie  n'preaaatw  the  u«u-Cicon>ui«ii  •cliool
of  Hixteenbli-coiitnrj-  Latinity  to  which  Scali^;"*
and  LipHiu!«iilHi>1wlougud,tbe.-ie  three  beiuh'^'^''"'"
at* tlui "Trinnivirato" by their couteuipoiatK*.
Thii wiirku of  (?iMaubou comprise the trraln«
/>(•  Hiilirian (fratvfi  I\r?»i  et  Rftmnnorum  ^^^*
(IftJG) ; De  Libertatf  Erfi^jivuitini  \  16071 ;  tli«  i
eit'itionrji  already  mentioned  ; and  aniiotaC«d  i
tloiiH nf  Stnibo  (15)^); DionyitiuH HaL  I  1^~
Arirttotle  (ir>lKyi; Pliny's Letters  (1591); Th
pb[-»NtfiH  ilTtit-i);  Diiigenea  l.ai;rliua  <15IK1);  Mfl
iiiii«  (15!V>>;  Thoocritiis  llolHI);  Atbenaeun  ll'**-
1000); tbr Hiat.  Augnata  llfiOS); Peraius  (l^^ij
Piilybiiut  (1509);  and  the  tUit.  prin,  of  Poly
Of  lh<'.se  the  mo«t  ambitious  work  ia  the  cetiin
lary  u|>on  Atbeiiaeua,  in  the  prvparution  of  whirli
ho  siieiiC  teu  years. Perhaps  the  most  valiul'l''  '•
the  Persias,  which  SoiHger  enthusia-ttically  il*'"^
"divine." CaHanlxtri diMl  iit  London,  Jolt  1*''
1614. His  lifB  baa  bcfln  writicn  liy  Mark  Pftliw'j
(Oxfiirvl,  ]i?75),  of  which  a  second  cditioii.  edil»
by  Prnf.  Nettkisbip,  appeantd  in  189*2.

Casoa,  P.  Skiivilius.  A  tribuuo  of  tb«  pU\>**
H,c.,  44.  aud  one  of  Caci^r's  aasaaaiua.

Casct 8ee  Abokiuinics.

Caaeus  (rupor).  Chee-w,  made  by  ilie  Greek*
and  Komaus  of  the  milk  of  cows,  shRep,  and  R"**^
ami  e;if*ii  either  like  cream  i;htt«»e  fn*idi.  yr  diK**
And  banhitiAd.  It  w»m  pmased  ini4>  nroaninoL*'
foniif  by  moulds  of  Itoxwood.  S»*«  Varro.  B.  iT-  "V'
H;  Colum.  vii.  S,  7;  and  especially  Pliny,  H.  3'''
xi.  ^  U7.


CASIUNUM


289


CASSIODORUS


CariHnqm.  A  town  iu  Campania  on  the  Tnl-
turiiue,  and  ou  the  same  site  as  the  modeni  Capua,
celebrated  for  its  heroic  defence  against  Haaoibal,
B.C.  216.

Ca^Cna.  A  comedy  of  Plautus,  which  has  come
down  to  Ds  iu  the  form  of  an  abridgment.  It  is  based
n|M>ii  the  KKrjpovfttPot  of  Diphilns,  with  the  addition
of  obscene  and  vnlgar  passages  to  snit  the  Roman
tnste.  A  good  separate  edition  is  that  of  Geppert
(Berlin,  1866),  and  that  of  SchSU  (Leipzig,  1890).

CannnmL  The  modem  S.  Oermauo;  a  town  in
Latiiim  on  the  river  Casinus.  Its  citadel  occnpied
tilt-  same  site  as  the  celebrated  convent  Monte  Cas-
kIiiii.

Caaidtis. The  district  containing  Casius  (q.  v.).

Casiaa.  (1)  The  modern  Ras  Kasarouo ;  a
moimt'ttin  ou  the  coast  of  Egypt,  east  of  Pelnsinro,
with  a  temple  of  Inpiter  on  its  sammiC.  Here  also
was  the  grave  of  Pompoy.  (2)  Jebel  Okrah ;  a
mountain  ou  the  coast  of  Syria,  south  of  Autioch
and  the  Oroutes.

CaamSna  (Kairfiivrf)  or  CasmSnae  {Kaa-nevai).
A  town  in  Sicily,  founded  by  Syracuse  about  B.C.
613.

Caaperla  or  Ca^Mrfila.  A  town  of  the  Sabines
00  the  river  Himella.

Caq>iae  Fortae  or  Fylae  (Kao-irtat  IlvXat).  The
Caspian  Gates;  a  name  given  to  several  passes
through  the  mountains  round  the  Caspian.  The
principal  of  those  was  near  the  ancient  Rbagae
or  Arsacia.  Being  a  noted  and  central  point,  dis-
tances were  reckoned  from  it  (Polyb.  v.  44, 5).

Caapil  {Kaaniot).  The  name  of  certaiu  Scyth-
iau  tribes  arouud  the  Caspian  Sea.

CaapU  Montea  (ri  Kdavtov  Spos).  The  modem
Elbnrz  Mountains;  a  name  applied  generally  to
the  whole  range  of  mountains  which  surround  the
Caspian  Sea  on  the  south  and  southwest,  at  the
distance  of  from  fifteen  to  thirty  miles  from  it-s
shore,  and  more  especially  to  that  part  of  this  range
south  of  the  Caspian,  io  which  was  the  pass  called
Caspiae  Pylae  (q.  v.).

Casplxl  (Kacnrcipot}  or  Casplrael  {Katnnpatot).
A  people  of  India,  whose  exact  position  is  doubt-
ful ;  they  are  generally  placed  in  Cashmere  and
Xupaul.

Caapimu  Uare  (t&  Katrmov  iriXayoe).  The  mod-
ern Caspian  Sea,  also  called  Hybcanium,  Ai^anum,
and  ScrraicuM — names  all  derived  from  the  peo-
ple who  lived  on  its  shores;  a  great  salt-water
lake  iu  Asia.  Probably  at  some  remote  period  the
Caspian  was  united  both  with  the  Sea  of  Aral  and
with  the  Arctic  Ocean.  Both  lakes  have  their
surface  considerably  below  that  of  the  Euxine  or
Black  Sea,  the  Caspian  nearly  350  feet,  and  the
Aral  about  200  feet,  and  both  are  still  sinking  by
evaporation.  The  whole  of  the  neighbouring  coun-
try iudicates  that  this  process  has  been  going  on
for  ceutnries  past.  Besides  a  number  of  smaller
.streams,  two  great  rivers  flow  into  the  Caspian :  the
Biia  (Volga)  on  the  north,  and  the  nutted  Cyrus
and  Araxes  (Kour)  on  the  west;  but  it  loses  more
by  evaporation  than  it  receives  from  these  rivers.

CaMander  (Kaira-avfipot).  The  son  of  Alexander's
general,  Antipater.  His  father,  on  hia  death-bed
1B.C.  319),  appointed  Pulyspercbon  regent,  and  con-
ferred npon  Cassander  only  the  secondary  dignity
of  cliiliarch. Being  dissatisfied  with  this  arrange-

10


ment,  Cassander  strengthened  himself  in  various
ways  that  he  might  carry  on  war  with  Polysper-
chon.  First,  be  formed  an  alliance  with  Ptolemy
and  Antigonus,  and  next  defeated  Olympias  aud
put  her  to  death.  Afterwards  he  joined  Seleucns,
Ptolemy,  and  Lysimachus  iu  their  war  against
Antigouns.  This  war  was,  on  the  whole,  unfavour-
able to  Cassander.  In  306,  Cassander  took  the  title
of  king,  when  it  was  assumed  by  Antigonus,  Ly-
simachns,  and  Ptolemy.  But  it  was  not  until  the
year  301  that  the  decisive  battle  of  Ipsus  secured
Cassander  the  possession  of  Macedonia  and  Greece.
Cassander  died  of  dropsy  in  297,  aud  was  succeeded
by  his  son  Philip.

Cassandra  {Katra-avSpa).  The  danghterof  Priam
and  Hecuba.  She  was  beloved  by  Apollo,  and
promised  to  listen  to  his  addresses,  provided  be
would  grant  her  the  knowledge  of  futurity.  This
knowledge  she  obtained,  but  she  was  regardless
of  her  promise  ;  and  Apollo,  iu  revenge,  determined
that  no  credit  should  ever  be  attached  to  her  pre-
dictions. Hence  her  warnings  respecting  the  down-
fall of  Troy,  and  the  subsequent  misfortunes  of  the


Cana&drs.

race,  were  disregarded  by  her  countrymen.  When
Troy  was  taken,  she  fied  for  shelter  to  the  Temple
of  Athen6,  hut  was  exposed  there  to  the  brutality
of  Aiax,  the  son  of  Olleus.  In  the  division  of  the
spoils  she  fell  to  the  share  of  Agamemnon,  and
was  assassinated  with  him  on  his  retoru  to  My-
cenae. (See  Agaubmnok.)  Cassandra  was  called
Priameis  from  her  father;  aud  Alexandra,  as  the
sister  of  Alexander  or  Paris.

Cassandrea  (Kao-o-dvtipua). See  Potidaka.

Caaaia  Lex. See  Lex.

Cassianl. See  Iurisprudentia.

Cassiodoras  or  CasaiodoiliUy  Fl.  Magnus
AuREUUB.  A  distiugnisfaed  statesman,  and  one
of  the  few  men  of  learuing  at  the  downfall  of  the
Western  Empire,  was  born  about  a.d.  480,  and  died
about  A.D.  575.  He  enjoyed  the  confidence  of
Theodoric  the  Great  and  his  successors,  and  con-
ducted for  a  long  series  of  years  the  government
of  the  Ostrogothic  kingdom.  Several  of  his  works,
besides  fragments  of  his  orations,  are  still  extant :
(I)  a  history  of  the  world  from  Adam  to  a.d.  519
(CAronica),  rather  meagre  in  substance;  (2)  a  his-
tory of  the  Goths  (  HUtoria  Golhica)  to  526,  of
which  we  have  only  the  version  of  lordauis  (£>e
Oi-itjim  Actibuitque  Gelatum),  an  abridgment;  (3)  a
coltectiun  of  official  documents  (  Variaram  lAbri


CASMOPEA


«0


CASTELLL'&l


(4)  H  number  of  theolo^cal  niul  semt-lbeo-
lugivnl  worka.  itiuutig  wbich  iirt>  the  /nttitHfiones  Iti-
vincirMM  rt  Saefuiariutn  Lifleramm,  a  verboitt*  coiil-
tiK>lit»i-y  1)11  tlio  PsaliUK*,  beaiiles  it  treiitix*.'  Itf
AiifHt  I  aud  (&)  Kruiiiiu»lit:»I  works,  of  whUtli  only
oDP,  JJe  Url/ii>ifraji&iii,  t[|i8erveH  mention.  Latu  iii
life,  Caiu<iiHlurim  viiteretl  the  UeiiiMlictiiie  Oliler,
and  lu  u-IO  relirvtl  to  a  iiioitaatfry  in  Ciiliibrin
wliict  be  bail  tiiuittv<lf  fouiitlvd  (a. p.  5'J^)).  IIU
t«Hc-biiig  ItMl  thu  uionkfi  or  tbac  orilvr  to  prize  nn-
cicnt  llltinitiiru.  ko  tliiit  ilui  lti-ni'iUctlu4<8  Hftcr-
U'linU  |>t>rtbruiL*d  u  [>rictrloM  m.tvicu  to  clnasiciil
8c>botarsbi]i  in  prvM'rs'itit;  MSS.  of  uuthora  wLo
Would  in  all  probability  bavts  otb«rwiM«  been  lost
tu  uri.  On  tUia  point,  see  tbo  work  of  OUeris,  Cus-
uiotlurt,  Conttrvaltur  tUa  Lima  <U  tAnliquUi  ImIw
iParia,  1*11 ).

Tho  tttxth  prMctfn  of  all  tUe  extant  worku  of
CiweiiodorUA  it  tbat  of  Foruciiiis  (Paiii),  157^J),  ra-
prlut«d  in  Mignc'a  Mif/o/oyrn.  There  la  a  {jood
Ktigliitb  trnuidatioa  of  u  part  of  tbo  Vnntimtu,  by
llodgkUi,  The  tetters  of  Oufiojortdi  (Londoit,  ItSW),
with  nu  Intmclnctiou. Seo  Iukuanih.

Caaslopea  (  K>i(7i7i('fr<i'i )  or  CaBsi6pA  (  Kno-iri-
oirr/|.  Thu  wife  of  CcpliLMiH,  in  AiMliiopia,  itial
uiutUer  of  Andrutut'iti.  nbom'  buuuty  hIib  exlollt^d
above  tbitt  uf  tlio  Noreids.  (Svu  Andromeda.)
Sbu  was  afterwards  placed  iiiuong  tbe  otant.

Cuala. A  holinct. Sco  Ctalka.

Cacaiterldes  (KaffaiTtf/liii).  IniaiuU  in  tbe
Western  Oct-au,  wbere  linwaj*  found,  snpposctl  to
bu  tbe  Scilly  I^lnncUof  tbe  mndt'rne,toi'ct Iter  wit b  n
part  of  Cornwall.  Tbn  term  CattHiteriileH  iniltrived
front  tlie  Orei'k  Knaatrtpot,  "tin."  Tbe  tin  wnn
obtaluvd  by  tliu  itbindent  from  tbe  mainbuid,  nriil
aftvrwnrdti  sold  to  straugcnt.  Sulinna  (  cb.  'HX)
nu'ntions  tbcst!  iolaudH  nniler  the  name  of  Siluntni
luonluo,  and  Siilpioiua  Scvvms  (ii.  &1},  under  tbal
of  byliua  Insula.

Casalos.  (1)  SfCRtt'H  Oastiii's  Vihcklunl's.  A
Ri>uian  distingnisbod  for  having  carried  throuji^b
tbe  lli-»t  agnirian  law  at  Rome,  by  wbicb  bo  gained
tbo  enmity  of  Uta  fuIlow-piUriciand,  who  accubed
biui  ufiM*ekiug  rvj^nl  powrr  and  jnit  bini  to  detitli.
He  held  tbe  con»nb>bi)i  in  u.c.  IjI>2,  4113,  niiil  4Hti.
From  bia  time,  tbe  Cassii  are  [tlitbeiaiift,  having
pivbably  abandoue<1  the  patrieinlo.  Seo  Aoka-
RLLK  latQBS. C^)  UAll'f<  I'AMtlCS  LtKVui.Vl.'ii.  uue  of

tlieouiupiratoraagaitiot  Inlins  Caesar.  Kven  when
A  boy  be  la  said  to  bave  been  remarkable  for  bia
pi'ide  and  tbe  violence  of  bit  temper,  if  we  may
believe  tbe  anecdotes  reconled  of  bim  by  I'hitarcU
(/fruf.  9)  and  Valertutt  Maximum  liti.  ll.  lie  nc-
rompanied  CniHSUK  into  Pnrlbia  as  liin  i)iiafi»ti>r,
and  distinguished  liiinneir,  after  ttip  df*ath  of  bi-H
general,  by  coudnotiug  the  wreek  of  tbe  Runuiu
urmy  buck  to  Syria  in  Kafety.  At  the  lie^iuniug
of  the  Civil  Wiir  be  wint  ono  of  Iba  tribtineM  of  I  be
people.  We  llnd  bini  after  tbi^  commanding  the
Syrian  stpiadron  in  Poiuik-v'h  fleet,  and  iuffating
tbe  coaals  of  Sicily.  A  short  time  before  tbe  bat-
tle of  Pbnrbatia  he  bad  bnnied  tbe  entire  dcet  of
tbe  eaeiny,  aoiouuting  to  tbirty-live  ships,  in  tbe
barbnnr  of  Mesanna,  Tbe  newN  «f  Ponipey's  de-
foat,  bowf^ver,  deterreil  bim  from  purMiing  bis  ml-
raDtages;  and,  resigning  tbe  cnnti'Kt,  be  ^nbnutted
to  Caeaar  in  Aitin  Minor,  when  tbe  latter  was  re-
loraiDg  from  Egypt  into  Italy.  Cicero,  however,
aeeerla  that  iit  tlii.'<  very  time  Ca»»itifl  hail  intoiidi;d
to  awnstiiuate thu man wbuse  cletuciu'y  bu was


willing  to  solicit,  bad  not  nu  accident  prevpt%
cd  tbe  accumpIUbmeiit  of  bii^  pnriiose  {Fhitipp. \  j^
U). He  was  not  only  spareil  by  Caeaar,  but  n-  a^,
ap|>otuted  by  bim  mie  of  bi«  lientetianl«.  a  fnvik  «,^
beRtowed by inngtbtrate'!! npou their fneud>, |,|
onler  to  ii)veii>t  tbein  with  a  pnblir  I'liarscl-er,  a.-a,tti
ItinD  enable  llieni  tu  ivfide  or  to  travel  iu  ^li,
provlncea  with  gieidereomfurt  and  dignity. £v~
iliiring  Ibe  laitt  campaign  of  Cac»Ar  iu  S)Kiiu,  Ij*  g,
sins  wrote  to  Clccm,  saying  that  he  wa»  nuxi*^,
that  Caetuir  Hbonbl  be  vietoriouo.  fur  Thai  be  l^f,
ftrred  an  old  and  merciful  master  to  a  new t^,,
cruel  one  (Cic,  £ji.  ml  Fam.  xv.  IS*), He  aliw*
get  her  with  Dnttnei,  was  ftpp«»int*Hl  one  uf  the  ln-jti^l
tors  for  the  year  7(>9,  at  a  monmut  in  which  hu  xv ut
entirely  discontenled  with  Caeaar's  guvrrnuiftji;
and  be  is  said  to  bave  been  tbe  perftun  by  tv-|ioM-
intriguea  tbe  Unit  eleuients  of  tbe  connpiraey  «-«•»
formed. Caiwinfi  bad  married  Innin,  (be  »i^I*•^ ttf
KrnlUH,  and  it  waa  partly  Ibrougb  bor  means  (!««!
he  ntnrle  bin  appniaches,  wben  seeking  togainuvfr
her  brother  and iudnce him to  join  iu tti«  plcrt.
AftL-rilit:  aK-HUAifinHtiou  of  Caesar,  Cas!iinB,to{[etl»er
with Hriitntf,  rained an army,  and waa OKt !•>
fh:lttvinii and Antony at Philippi. The  vitig
which  ('awimi  eummnuded  being  ilefeatc*!,  be  lOi-
flgiiied  that  all  was  lost, and  killed  binuwlf,  ii.i'.  •>'2.
Brutus  gave  btni  an  bonouralde  bnrial.and  rBlt«d
bin),  wilb  tears,  tbo  Innt  of  tlie  Itnmami. (31  PA*-
MliNSl*.  SO  oalleil  from hie  linving lieru  l>en» at
Pitrnia  in  Italy,  was  a  T,jitin  \tafX  of  conftlilpntbl*-
talent. He  sitled  with  nnitii.<«  and  Canfiiis  in tb«
Civil  War,and  Mbtained  tbe  office  of  mililniT  crib-
iiue. After  tbe  defeat  of  tin-  repubticnu  ft.rre»  li»
retired  to  Athenn,  and  wan  pni  to  death  bi  Q.  ^'m-
riiis,  who  bail  ber-n  sent  fuT  Ibnt  jnirpow  li>  «>el»-
vinnns. He  must  not  be  confonuded  with  Ca-ssiu?
tbe Etnirian,  who  ajtiwara U*  have  beeii  a  tery
rapid  and  poor  writer. l4i  HemFna,  aa  i-ariy  "i^
nHli*<>t  of  Home,  who  duuiiiibed about  H.C-  U'*-
(5)  A  Roman  lawyer,  who  r«luced  to  a  sricoti^
system  tbe  legal priuciplcM  »et  f<irtb  by  Ati''"*
Capito. Ilia  school  ii*  railed  CaM>iant. ftV  A  Ba-
nian orator,  distingniKlicd  for bt»  rloipiPliw ,  iH"!
fund,  at  the  nuuw  time,  of  imlulging  \t\  utilru'''
cunipo^ition. Ho  was  exiled  by  AugUBtim  <»  <^''
i^lund  of  SeripbiKs,  where be  ended  bi<  <lii>^  '"
wrelebeduosa. His  fiill  name  wat.  Tins  Cis^'*
8r,\T.nL's. (?)  Cassuu  LuNcrsre, Sec  Lo-m"^'*
(?)  Cassil'8  Tkux. a  Greek  pbyfciciau,  who  'iv*^
iu the reign of  Tiberina  and nrote  a  tti^JH"
with the title 'lurpuoi 'Airo^'ai Ka't  n^n^iXv"'^
^vama. It  i»  printed  iu  Idtler'a  Fhjfifiri  tt  3/r^^^
Orafci MiHvn» (Berlin.  KMlj. (9) Dio.**. ***
Diox.

Caaalvelaunua.  A  Uriliab  chief,  n»l««l  o"''*"
country  north  nf  the  Tame.-vis  iTbanip*),  sikI  *"*
intnmted  by  tbe  Uritonn  witb  tbo  auprftnc  «'"'
maud  on  Caesur's  wcoml  invasion  of  Btituii''''^
;A.  Ho  niu»  defeated  by  CatRar,  and  wan  uUn;**
to  sue  fur  jieace. C'f.Caca.  Ii.  ii.  v.  11. 19.

CaataUa  (KaoraXca),  A  celebrated  foiltitai*  •*
Slount  Purnn.-wns.  in  Mbieb  tbe  Pyibia  wa****"*"
tonu'd  to  bathe;  »«cred  to  Apullu  and  tbo  Ma*'*',
who  were  hence  called  Ca»lalide4l.

CasteUanl  Clata. See  CiST.\  CAfiTKi-uiSLU"* ,

Caatijllum. The  diminutive  of  «ii*lrM«.andi
iinting  (1)  a  small  fortre»A,ur  id)  a  small  io«aM'
taiulng  a  gatrieou  (.Cnrt.  v.  3),


I


LSTELLUM  AgLAE


39 1


CAAIKA


joae. A  naerroir. Sec  Aquae iu  throe  double  rou-s  of  tcutei  oti  vaob  biite  of  the

ria  prattorui,  wbiob  niaiU  a  rijilit  »injle  willi  lliu
imv^vaia).  A  town  of  The*i«ly.  ^"*  ffriiuripalU.  ItH  wlioU-  loiiytli  »a«  divwleU  l.y
Jimuewo.  uorlhttf8t  o(  the  j.mn.-  *lrtxU  50  tV-«t  in  « iiltb.  «liilc  acitWf.  it.  iW>m  oiib
I  IK  uuliccd  by  Hi-nMlolui.  in  bin  l'"tTi*l  nuiiparl  to  llit  oUier.  ran  the  cia  quintana.
eiTible  Blorm  txi»?rieuc«d  by  ibo  '^"''"  *"'^""'  *'''*'  "^  ""^  '^"^  "'^  '^"*''  *"*  t'>riii-d
f  thiH  coast  (vii.  l-^ai,  i  towttnlfttlie  intervening  stroels. Sdiitiiif;  from  the

I  ttu  prattorh,  the  first  tw»  lines  of  ti-ntn  on  pnrh
■a^> ). Brother  of  Pollux. See  |  .jj^  contained  the  c»viihy  and  iufiinlry  of  t.ii<;  |,'-

I  yiou  each,  while  thv  ibird  row,  lying  ut!aru'4t  in
L  Knnmn  rauip,  fortiliud  with  a  the  i-amiiarl,  contaiuiil  Ihu  cavAlry  uud  infuutry
LHcb,  oiit»i<lv  of  wbirli  »  Koinan  of  tbr  alliiMl  vontiiig(Mit».  In  tlie  hinder  purt  of
t  a  •tii}:le  nigbt.  It  was  niorkeil  the  camp,  tUructly  ujioti  the  ntn  j/rincii^iiiu,  and
ilecciMl  for  the  |iiirp<wc.  Kt-'nvmlly  on  both  sides  of  thv  via  jrraetorut,  were  tlie  touta
A  hill.  TbesAiuefduii  wtif>  nlwnys  of  tbv  twclvo  military  tribunes,  npjiimito  lite  four
9  i\fiMivX9  wcru  iiuliciitMl  by  col-  rittikt*  of  Ibi*  IvKtnnH.  On  Wtl  ttides  wvru  ttie  tents
idcex,  90  that  the  divisions  «f  tbo  of  tbu  prar/ecti  of  the  nllicd  cotitin^'titK,  plnced  in
lue  ill,  could  find  llioir  placvt*  iit  tliu  smiiti  nay  upitotitlo  thonu  of  Itm  troo|>»  under
din  of  thr  Accond  ctmtnry  It.c-,  nc-  tlit^ir  uouiumnd,  Tbei]  followed  tlii!  beadi|nsrti-ni,
:ounl  of  FuljhiMH  i\\.  37>,  the  jdan  or  praetorium,  n  ttpnce  2t>0  feet  sqnurc,  tnlireeclvd
mtinlar  anny  of  two  Ie^ioll)•,  with  by  the  r/'i  j/ruttoria.  In  lhi»  wa»  tlie  goneral'ft
lugeut  of  IiaUnti  alltt-H  uiid  itn  tt-nt  {toheriuieulnm);  hi  front  wiu  tlio  nltnr  on
was  QB  followR  (m-v  pbm): The wbtoh  the  geuerAl  HacriHcvd,  on  tlit!  left  the  nufm-

Ti»h{uT  tukitig  tbo  anvplcee.


tte tt  tt l»C IPS'  iM  » «V J»J»  K» «« IF


it

*  U

*  T


■  k

n  1  a

&
^

';

••

_*

%

n  n

5 «

-r-1


f*  « ^S'firincipafit


M

S

^
^

<

s


WAiN*w'-«pT(w«»«"


w—

"<.*w  nnB

iM«tf

3P


ertfi  - narr^


l«


I


3^[,*.^»..  '


PUb  oT  a  BoiDJUt  Cftinpi (Iftor  Pvlyblua )


>T  it«  front  bc>iug  oa  the  Mdu  far-
iieioy.  It  biid  two  main  ntreets
The  ria  principulh,  HXl  fett-  wide,
.  into  a  fri>ut  ]taTt  nuiouiiting  tn
I  of  the  whole,  and  a  bat'k  piirt
the  euemy.  Tbut  roud  etidt-d  at
flpffi  prinnjmli»  ifcrtra  and  the

m  priiwipolit  at.  right  angles,  aud
1«  l«iigth  of  the  cauip  iuto  two
1  was  50  f<e«t  in  widtli,  and  ended
c porta  dec'imami  iu  I'runt  and  (be
on  the  side  opening  townrda  tbe
'roUl  part  wtre  encamped  I  be  twi>
tftllied  contingt^ntii. Tbey  lay


j^ftUwd  contii


unil  on  the  right  the  tribu-
Tial.  This  watt  a  hank  of
earth  covered  with  turf,  ou
wtii<-Ii  ibe  general  took  bis
Hlund  when  nddn^Ming  tlm
tniiipf  (iwe  Ani.ot:c"rH)i  or
ad  til  mistering  jnstice.  Ou
the  right  of  lb©  protUtrium
\\w^  the  'pKtettvrium,  con-
tiuiiiug  the  ([tiarttTH  of  tbo
|iiiyni3Ht(fni  and  the  train
of  artillery.  Ou  t  be  left  wajt
the/wMm,  a  meelitig-place
fur  tlic  »olilier».  Between
thoMT  spHces  and  the  laternl
raiiipnrls  were  Ihe  teuiM  of
the  select  troops  who  com-
posed The  body-gnnrd  of  tbo
general.  Tbo««  of  the  cav-
alry had  their  frent  turned
inwnnU,  while  tbone  of  the
itifiintry  wei-c  tnrned  tow-
antu  the  wall.  The  tentii  of
the  pieki>il  allied  truopH  oc-
cupied the  liinder  part  nf
the  camp,  wjitcli  woj^  bound-
ed by  a  rri)s»i-road  100  feet
iu  lireniltb.  The  leut«  of
the  cavalry  hM)ked  inwards,
those  of  the  infaulry  tow-
ards the  rampart.  Tlic
auxiliary  trno|>s  were[K)stcd
at  the  two  angles  of  this  Hpaee.  Tbe  rampart  wim
divided  from  ibe  tenia  by  an  open  space  'ilW  feet  iu
»ii-lth.  ThU  waK  npecially  iuttiuded  to  facilitate
xltv  utarcb  iif  the  tniopjt  at  their  entrance  aud  exit.
The  cunHtructiau  of  tbe  fmiillcations  altrnyg
bugau  before  the  genend's  teut  was  pJtcht'd,  The
legioDftries  constructed  the  nimpart  and  ditch  in
front  atid  rear,  while  the  allies  diil  tbe  samL<  ou
either  side.  The  Ktaket)  re^piired  for  tbe  forma-
tlou  of  an  nhittit  on  the  outer  hide  of  tbe  wall
wera  carriod  by  the  aoldicrs  IbeuL-wlvea  ou  the
uinrcb.  The  wtiule  work  vea»  camiM  ou  ntider
arms.  The  wnicbes  (rienhine  and  rij/iViiif)  were
kept  witlt  great  Klrietuesa  both  by  day  and  idght.


Tbe  vi'jUiat,  or  iiight-watcbeA,  were  ndieved  four


CASTKENSES


292


CATACUMBAE


times,  the  trumpet  eoundiug  on  each  occaaiou.
The  posts  of  each  night-watch  wem  iuspected  hy
fuur  Roman  equltes.  The  password  for  the  night
wus  given  hy  the  general.  Each  gate  was  giiard-
e<L  by  outposts  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  the  light-
annud  troops  (velites)  being  also  distributed  as  sen-
tries along  the  ramparts.  When  the  cump  was  to
break  up,  tbree  siguals  were  given;  at  tbe  first,
tlie  tents  were  taken  down  and  packed  up;  at  the
second>  they  were  put  upon  beasts  of  burden  and  in
wagons;  and  at  the  third,  the  army  began  itsniurcb.

After  tbe  time  of  Polybius  tbe  Roman  military
systeui  underwent  many  changes,  which  involved
alterations  in  the  arraugenierits  of  the  camp,  but
we  have  no  trustworthy  infonnatiou  on  this  sub-
ject in  detail  until  the  beginning  of  tbe  second
ceutiiry  a.d.  The  treatise  of  Hygiiins  (q.  v.)  ou  cas-
trametation  gives  tbe  following  statements  as  to
the  practice  of  his  time.  Tbe  ordinary  form  of  a
camp  was  that  of  a  rectangle,  the  length  of  which
won  about  a  third  part  greater  than  tbe  breadth.
In  former  times  the  legioas  were  posted  inside
the  camp;  but  now,  being  regarded  as  tbe  most
trustworthy  troops,  they  were  encamped  along  the
whole  line  of  ramparts,  the  width  of  which  was
now  limited  to  60  feet.  They  were  separatetl
fi-om  the  interior  of  tbe  camp  hy  a  road  30  feet
wide  (via  aaguUiria),  running  parallel  to  tbe  line
of  ramparts.  The  interior  was  now  dividml,  not
into  two,  but  into  three  main  sections.  The  mid-
most of  these  lay  between  the  via  principalit,
which  was  60,  and  the  tia  qnintnna,  which  was
40  feet  wide.  It  was  occupied  by  the  praetorium
and  the  troops  of  tbe  guard,  and  was  called  the
wing  of  the  praetorium  {Intera  praetorii).  The
auxiliary  troops  were  stationed  in  what  was  now
the  front  part,  or  praetentura,  between  the  Ma
principalia  and  the  porta  praetoria,  and  the  rear,
or  retentura,  between  the  tia  quintana  and  the
porta  decumana.  The  via  praetoria,  which  was
also  60  feet  wide,  led  only  from  the  praetorium
and  tbe  forum  in  front  of  it  to  the  porta  praeto-
ria,  as  at  this  time  tbe  qvaestorium  was  situated
lietweeu  tbe  porta  decumana  and  tbe  praetorium.
The  general  superintendence  of  the  arrangements
was,  during  the  imperial  period,  iu  the  bauds  of
tho  prae/ectiis  ca$trorum. See  PiiaKfectcs.

All  the  important  literature  on  tlie  subject  of
camps  will  be  found  in  the  work  of  Marqnardt
and  Mommsen,  v.  390-408.

(2)  Cabtra  Praetoriana.  The  pernianent  en-
campment on  the  outskirts  of  Rome  where  the
Praetorian  Guard  was  stationed  (Suet.  Claud.  31).

(3)  Castra  Navalia.  a  line  of  fortifications
drawn  up  around  a  fleet  to  protect  it  from  attack,
when  it  was  drawn  np  on  the  shore  (Caes.  B.  O.
V.  22). The  term  Castra  NautIca  is  also  nsed.

CaatrenaeB.  The  minittri  of  tbe  Roman  em-
peror, whose  residence  in  the  early  days  of  tbe  Em-
pire was  often  called  antra  or  praetorivyn,  in  ref-
erence to  bis  position  as  imperntar.  The  whole
of  his  servants  formed  the  famiVut  cnttreiisus.

Caatnun. See  Castkllum.

Caatnim.  (1)  Inui,  a  town  of  the  Rutnli,  ou
the  coast  of  Latiuni,  confounded  by  some  writers
with  No.  2.  (2)  Novi'M  (Torre  di  Chiaruccia),  a
town  in  Etruria,  and  a  Roman  colony  on  tbe
coast.  (3i  Novu.M  (Giulia  Nova),  a  town  in  Pi-
cenum,  probably  at  tbe  mouth  of  tbe  small  river
Datiuum  (Sulinello).


Caatflla. A  woman's  petticoat. See  Tunica.

Caatfilo  (KaoToXuv).  The  modem  Cozlooa;  »
town  of  the  Oretaui  in  Hispania  Tarracouenain,  ou
the  Baetis,  and  under  the  Romans  an  important
place.  In  tbe  mountains  in  tbe  neigbbourboud
were  silver  and  lead  mines.  The  wife  of  UauDi-
bal  was  a  native  of  Castulo  (Livy,  xxiv.  41).

Cat. See  Faeus.

Catabathmua  (Korodad/ior)  Magnus  (i.  e.  great
descent).  A  monntaiu  and  seaport  at  the  iuuer
curve  of  a  deep  hay  on  the  north  coast  of  Afiicft*
considered  to  he  the  boundary  between  Egypt  aud
Cyrenaica.

Cataotimbae  (tbe  name,  not  older  than  the  third
century  a.d.,  is  formed  from  Kccra-^- Kvft&ij^  "a  hol-
low place").  A  name  given  to  subterrauean  burial-
places,  of  which  the  most  famous  exist  in  £gypt,
Rome,  Naples,  Syracuse,  and  Malta.  Tlie  so-calltHl
CatacombsofPai-is,  as  places  of  interment,  are  mod-
ern, dating  from  the  close  of  tbe  last  centurj'  ouly.

Tbe  Catacombs  of  Egypt  ara  vast  in  extent  aud
extremely  numerous,  running  througb  the  range
of  nionntaiuB  in  tbe  vicinity  of  Thebes.  (S<«
Thkbae.)  Among  them  are  especially  to  be  not«d
the  caverns  in  which  the  bodies  of  the  The-
ban  kings  were  originally  inteiTed.  These  were
forty-seven  in  number,  and,  like  tbe  more  elabo-
rate of  the  other  tombs,  were  covered  with  hiero-
glyphics and  ornamented  with  pictures,  mostly  Id
fresco.  The  oldest  of  them  now  existing  are  not
less  than  4000  years  of  age,  and  have  long  since
been  plundered  for  tbe  sake  of  the  ornaments  sud
other  valuables  contained  iu  them.  A  most  inter-
esting collection  of  these  frescoes  ean  be  found  in
tbe  drawings  aud  coloured  plates  of  Wilkinson's
Mannefs  and  Customs  of  the  AucieHt  EggptUuu  (Lon-
don, 1847).

The  Romau  Catacombs  were  origiually  quanies*
of  wliich  some  are  of  very  great  antiquity,  anteilat-
ing  tbe  traditional  date  of  tbe  founding  of  tbe  citj*.
These  were  subsequently  extended  so  that  at  last
all  tbe  seven  hills  of  Rome  were  pierce<l  by  tliem.
They  are  low  dark  corridors  or  vaulted  balls  ex-
cavated in  the  soft  volcanic  tufa  a.nA  pmtzolana,  iu
the  lateral  walls  of  which  apertures  were  made
for  tbe  reception  of  corpses.  In  all  there  are  some
forty  Catacombs,  each  forming  a  network  of  gal-
leries, usually  intei'seutiug  one  another  at  right


Romaa  C«locomb«. Oaltery  with  T/»eu1i. {Trv-tk
Nonhcole's  lI'iMa  SntlerranetL)


CATACl'JIBAE


CATACL-MHAE


leasioiiall.T  ratliRttng  fmm  n  c<inimnn

pasMnes  am  of  an  nviM"app  lift>;ht  of
d  of  mi  ;iv('ragii  x%-i<lt.ti  of  fnitn  thrcr

Til**  iiiH>rTun-M  {tocalif  iiwd  uh  ^ihvi-m
Ht  llif  diiK-M,  aiul  Hirn;  co\m-(l  in  by
lortitoM  bc:iri[i;k;[  ctHier  rfii};mnH  em-
tnary  inM>vi|iliouft.  Tlie  whole  length
ii  CjitiwomU^  18  from  ;>IW  to  Iw*'  miles,

i  p«timatMl  to  bave  coiitcinud  fully

9  n'liwnilirrpil  tliat  wliilo  tin-  Ortu'ltH
finully  Hilopti'il  cri'Dinlioii  lu*  u  uichiih
of  Ihfir  ilrail  (sw  Frxrs),  (li«i  Ejt.\|t-
BiTH,  iiiitl  Iiitlrrly  t)]H  CliiisliauH,  n*-
Unuont  aa  luoru  in  acconliLiiec  with
m  the  Knbjfvt  nf  a  fnrnre  life  Hnice
CliriBtiiiDS  ii>»eil  naO  f;rcntly  cxiteiRled
kDOBD  excnviitidiis  now  called  Cittn-
oiil,T  afterwnnia  i^iiiploy^'il  tlieia  for
oouc«alm«ut  during  tbe  vikrious  jier-


Mi


^'i


Gronud  llan  uf  ttnoiaa  OiiMOObtL


pst  1inre8»icd

I  at  iiiterMkla
le  of  Ntro  lo
jCletian  (A4i.
»|iiitnr  error
tatacombs  to
iriginally  the
iouKly  con-
es nf  n>fiii;n
litivu  Chria-
ty  were  rntb-
■or  Springer
'  legally  rec-
3tclyacc«.*9silik'pI)tr(^aoflMirial.  Rt-artKl
t  of  the  cnsloinn  of  beatben  Koint',  thu
Inimuiilly  percoiTt-d  iio  reftBoii  to  de-
le artistic  priiicii'lea  of  aniiqnity.  In
ibiiit-nt  nf  tlie  C'nriu-otnl)»  tlioy  adliereil
*!ivt'  funiij*  hamletl  down  by  their  aii-

I  in  dt^tiigii,  choirc  of  colour,  Sittuping
Ibd  tliialraent  of  snbjerr,  they  were  eu-

II  by  ibo  ciutomary  rnleH."

rtonoiis  pasAA^es  of  tli^  Catacoiubn  are>
broken  by  tli«  introibu-tion  of  larger
led  nn  cyhicnla  or  fntiiily  bin'iaI-|iIiiot.*».
Bo  chamlK-ra  net  apart  f"t  worsliip,  bnt
t  rarlitT  than  the  I'onrlh  «-iitiiry.  Tbo
[cavutiouB  wore  niiiiK'  by  a  rogntar  ao-
om.  In  iiuist  casM,  the  bodio!4  to  be
re  wnippod  fu  cloth,  and  after  the  con-
Hul  htid  l>ecn  phici'd  upon  the  bmaAt.
irorunuidUtsandmcnioriaU  were  added.


Earthen  lamps  were  frequently  eet  l>y  tbe  slab*
wliirh  rlofl«1  the  nicheM.

Tlic  dfH'oralion  of  tbi>  Catacombfi  U  interrMlinj;
ait  thntwing  light  upon  the  diTVidupnicnt  of  early
(^hriHliao  nrl.  Many  of  the  paitilingrt  aru  frewuipa
of  rbi*  fint  and  rewind  conniry,  and  in  thuirsnbjecta
are  chifliy  symbolical  of  the  bnite-iof  ChriKlianlty,
the  UesiirriTtion  Ih-iuk  a  favnnrite  theme.  The
Good  SheplirnI,  the  Miraclex,  Daiiiitl  in  the  den  of
lionn,  and  thu  HehruwH  in  the  lien,'  fnriiace,  aUo
occur  with  fn-qiKincy.  Tin*  finlt,  too,  by  a  kind  of
acruMlij;,  in  likewise;  un  iniporlanl  xymbol,  on  which
wo  A(  RO»Tlcn\.  A  un-al  iinnilMT  uf  tniicriptions,
many  of  Ibi-m  of  niuch  inltttttal,  occur.  Therv  are
no  repreaontatiou-H  offtcenca  of  martyrdom  parli«r
than  the  Mfth  eentiiry.

The  most  imivoriant  of  the  Cat-acombs  and  the
only  ono  that  ba«  tieeu  even  yet  qnilo  thor-
oughly explored  in  thnt  of  St.  CaMlHtna  on  the
Via  Appia. The  one  furtbcHt  distant  {n\x  mile?)  ia

that  nf  St.  Alex-
ander.

Interments  in

I  he  CatJi^oniUfl
were  dlwontln-
ned  in  the  ni'th
ccntur}',  but  the
cBveros wero

if"  *"  Rtill yisitod as

rontalning t  he

^ tiunhHofttiemar-

g, il tyre. As  early  aa

^  A.1>. 370, Po|>H

"■  nuiuai»UK  cjuiscd

II  p  e  r  t  u  r  e  fi  for
**■ li^Uting to  bo

made,  and  had
^^  tlio  niuat  impor-
^/r t:iut  toudw  fnr-

Initibcfl  with  !□-
scriptions.  In
the  year  IV37,
diirinj;  the  siege
of  Rome  by  the
6utli!f,th(*  tombs
wi-ro  pillat^ed,
and  ii^ain  by  the
Lomb»nlnin755,
for  ihi'  Make  of
theornamcntMof
gold  and  bilver
contained  in
them.  From  tbe  time  of  Poj*  ruauhalis  I.  (eI7-
»24),  the  Oatncondm  gradually  fell  into  obUv>
ion,  iinfll  utider  IS>pu  Hnnl  III.  (in  1535)  in>
vt:atit{uiion  of  them  wils  once  more  begnti.  Tbo
uiidiuKiaittic  and  learned  priest,  Father  Bosio,
^K'ut  thirty  yearti  in  <:xplorli)g  the  paasaireo,  and
in  making  drawiugH  of  tbe  nio«t  inlertiatiuK  nb-
jecu,  Hiicb  aa  lami>«i,  vases,  and  mounmouts.  cou-
laiiieil  in  them.  Hia  gn-at  work,  Jloma  Sotletranea^
veils  ixiblinlie^l  |iu  Italian)  in  HXH^  three  yearn  af-
ter bin  death,  edited  by  Father  Severani.  It  was
translated  into  Lathi  by  Father  AritiKhi,  and  is
still  the  moat  important  tionrco  of  information  on
the  subject.  In  17*i(i,  appeared  B<ddetli's  valuable
folio,  which  was  Hallowed  dy  t  lit' noble  emit ribntion
of  Seronx  d'Agiiicourt,  HitUnre  it-  PJri  par  lr«
MonHiarHttt,  ono  of  the  most  learned  of  all  the  works
reLiliii^  to  tliu  CntacrunbH.  Otiiei'  vabiablo  Itooks
for  tbe  Nludent  are  thoM  of  Pcn-et,  /^4  Calucombet


CATADT7PA


9M


CATAI*UR.\CTI


^^


iMefhtr  uf  ComOur.  CatMouba  ul  Si.  C«llMua.

iff  fiomt  (Pari«,  1H5:i|;  Nortbcoto,  Kotnan  CatanMnht
(Loiiilnii.  IS50K  l»>*r,  Tkr  Vitji  of  Home :  it*  TtHx-
nilmtlf*  mmtt  Monnmrntt  (ucw  ed.  Ic^):  KoUiT,  /^
(^NlACOM&ra  r/r  Komt,  ^  vols,  j Paris,  1*-1) ; D»>  Kksai,

i'rwmmmin  ArtMttogiquf  iM  c*l  Pnrin.  1?^7>.  Pm|>-
itlur  wnrks  nre  KiiiT'Et  n'*lkt  in  tiomr  (llth  vi\.
LiUKlitn.  IIS^S'l:  Ijkgr^zo,  I*ompti,lrt  CatantiulKw,  tt
rjlhamhra  iParU,  l^T'j);  Ria,  PoHrjf  <ij  VhntU«»
Jrl  iKii|;  tniuii.L4iiitlou.  lfT>4);  ForbcM,  liambtt*  i»
iiom0  (Lotuhxi,  IHt^l;  Fiirrur.  Tke  Earty  iMjt*  •/
Ckruliawi/y  lLoui)i>n,  le>^t;  KUtl  Uiuc'inui,  Itame
rajraa  «ad  CArM/tfiN  ^Uovlofi.  1H93>.  Tbc  iuMrip-
tluiis  lo  tlie  uuniber  of  wiuc  10.000  uv  kivou  by
De  HoMd  in  bis  /iiwTJj>f«oJtni  CArMtinMc  (It<>7-^1).

Catadupa  (ra  Kar«Aovini  flud  oi  Koniiovwm).  A
iiAiDr  ^iM'ii  to  ib«  cAuracts  of  ibe  Nilo,  aud  also
lu  fbi'  |iarts  of  Ai'thiojiia  lit  iboir  iioijEhWnrbotd
(Hvnil.  ii.  17).  Tbo  Lalia  Kord  in  nsml  ns  a  uou-
let  ptiiml. S«*o  XiLrs.

Catacosia  iKonrymymX Sa*  Asaooosa.

Catacrftpba  ^guiuyyu^ijl See  PicrvtA.

Catalauui. Sm>  CarcLAi-M.

Catalsptoa  immj  XfinW).  A  eaUrcUon  of  fuor-
tii-u  |H>rniA  It)  elrgiac  niul  iJiiuUtc  xxme  on  YaritHU
kdbjiTt*,  Aiul  oM-rilirtl  to  Wrgil,  lo  whose  age,  at
IfVst,  lb«.T  cTrtaltil,v  brloug.  Tbc.v  arr  ofteu.  bat
IvM  hirrreil.v,  ralktl  Catjojecta. Sr«  Vnuitut's..

CataloffO*  of  Shipa.  A  iuiiu»  ixtittilarly  ^tvru
111  tbv  Mxxmd  bairof  ihr  bCCOiMl  Utok  i^  lW  IJtoJ
i4>4-^7t.  iu  itbicb  tile  |««et  NmaenHw  iW  )f«il*
rr»  aud  R>ivM  of  tba  Gmk  Immm  MWimiM  HiyMf
Tiv}.

CataMc**  VK«rWJi«>«t>. TIm>  ImI  uf  lb«>««  pn^


Honfi  lit  Athriia  who  vt>re  linMi-  lo  mili-
tury  sorvice. See  A^stiiatcias  GRAi-iii

Catalyaj^ tou Demoa Orapb^

{KitTti\{tTt(us  Tov  tJifiov  ypaiftrj).  All  ac-
tion bruitght  ngatimt  persoDs  vlto  al>
teretl.  or  tried  to  alter,  tlie  democratic
formof  govcriiinrtit  nt  Alliens,  and  cuu-
lii?ct4?d  ivitb  flir  irpofiotrias  ypat^i).
I'HorMWlAS  iiKAfUk.

Catanutos. See  Ganymrrrs.
Catina  (Koroyij). Acily  of  Sicily,  ^^^
tbr  eastern  coast,  at  Ibv  bnsc  of  Artnn
niul  a  i<burt  diataDC« lielon-  tbo  i~ivr>r
Acisaiid  tlmCyclopiini  8copitlJ. It  *%-»%»
f»iiiiilt'<l by  »  4H)btny  from  Cholcis |„
Kobotfii.  iu  B.C.  7HI>,  tivp  yenrn  nfter  (Ih>
aettlfuwut  of  Syraciiw. Catiina,1ilci^  gti)
the  otber  colonies  of  Gn-ciatioripin.nrM'n
became  iudeiieuUent  of  any  furrifii  r**"-
trot,  .iiid.  ill  couseqiiiMici-  of  ibc  fcnil  i  tjr
of  tbe  ttiiiTonudiug  country,  iillaiunl to
a  coiistdcrablo  dcfn**-*^  of  iiroHpiritj*. I^
doiw  not  npiiear,  Imwever,  to  hav^  li***"

at  any  liiiw*  u  pnpiibtii»  city  ;  m»\  Ik«*  **

IS  .'>^J^^I  Hirro  of  SyracuHC  wnn  cinibUiil  widi*:^"*'
ditltciilty  to  trau.-ifer  tbe  inhnltiUuti*  '**
L«-*oiitini.  A  ucw  colony  of  I'llnixm  ■-'"^
hiiins  aud  Syraoiitiana  vrjut  rMalilUI  »*•*
ben*  by  birii,  and  tbe  place  culled  Act  «»■•»
fniiM  its  proxiiuily  to  tbe  uiuutit&iu.

AfteribeUealb  of  iiJero,1b«  new*:^*'^"
onislH  were  driven  ont  by  the  !tie«s1(*
and  Ibn  old  inbabitnntH  from  Leonft  i"^
Lben  cauie,  and,  recovprJMfc  powirw«i'*'>
of  tbe  pbire,  cbaii^eii  itfi  uaiue  again  to  0»L)«.>'*-
We  tiuil  C'ataua  nft4T  tbiH  powuwwotl  for  a  )>l«or(
tioie  by  tliu  Atbi'iiiiiiM,  and  lubseqnently  fjilliti^
iulo  tbe  bauds  of  Pioay-tiuK  of  Syrai-iiiw!.  Tbi^
tyrant,  .iceonliuj;  l«  DinduruK  Sicolus  (\i\\  13),  ftnld
tbe  iubabitauts  as  Hlaveft.  and  j^nvc  tbe  rily  In  bt»
ii]erce]inr>-  troop».  tbe  L'ampatii.  to  dwell  in.  It  J»
pntluildc*,  boweviT,  tlint  he  only  sold  thfw  irfa^
werv  Ijiken  with  itniiN  in  Ibeir  bnudm.  nn<l  tbaf
many  of  ibo  oUl  pnpnlatiim  remained,  since  XVivt\y  •
aiaa  afliTvranU  jHTsnadi-d  tbeae  same  Canif<ii'>
tfl  migrate  to  ibv  city  of  Aetna.  Catuna  bll  tiilo
tbe  |Ktwer  of  the  ]^lmaua  during;  tW  KinI  Vv»^
War.  Tbe  modem  itaiiie  is  Calaiii:i,  and  ihr^li"'
tance  from  it  to  the  summit  of  Aetna  in  given  a*
thirty  miles.

Cataooia  (Karanfta). A  fertile  dintrict  ii  t
iiouthenxtrni  jiart  of  (.'appa^loria,  to  wbicli  it  ^'^
first addml nmb*r tbe RoniaiiK, with Mrlitrii^*
vbicb liaa  east  of it. It bod uo iupoitAi*^
tontia.

Cataphiaoti  (<oTd^p«croi>.
aU^-,  f«>und  cbiedy
amimg  Ibe  armiea  of
tbe  Eastern  uaiiuDS.
Tbey  an  irst  heard
of  in  the  anay  of  ib«
elder  Cyrva,  and  la-
ter iu  the  armtea  of
Antioehna  Epiphi^
uoK.  Fruitt  lb*  tiaia
of  AuMAiMW  PIna

Ihejr WM ffiMMHOM

iu  the  amies  of
Rome. The  ann««r


I


CATAMRATPS


196


CATENA


t>pearsto)iavel>c«>n  nsnrt  ofuralff-arnionrfi^Xii**-
T><1. (.S«' Amni.MnrcplI  xvi.  IK,  j^;  Tar.  Hist.  i.VJ.)

fitc  Wiiffl  t«|>rul>al(ly  IVrti;in.  Int'  CmPPKU-ARll.
)Tlii«  word  ciitphroctu*  is  •'<mtr'tiiiip«  nttplieU  ti>
ill)])  with  tlvck«.  Sii)  AniWAtiTift;  Navis.
Cataplrites  {Karanttpanifiif}).  A  snunriiiig-leiid,
ni>>uttti<;  of  a  ^licfe  of  letul  fnstnird  to  n  coril,
TI"  lend  wiw  f^eHfted,  bo  tlint  Bpeoiinens  of  the
kind  of  Uollcim  mii;ht  Iwttcr  nttinrh  tlipmsrli'Mi  to
it. Sco  Lnclliiis,  iii.  ^  (p.  Ill  cil.  Milll.).

tCatapulta.  Sec  Toioiknti'U.
Cstaracta  (KaTap/xitcrt^r  or  iitikiii.  (1)  A  port-
lliit;  M)  cnlleil  bi-causv  it  fell  witli  great  force
«I « loftfl  tit>iw<-.
Arcoritiiis  111  Vegetias,  it  wns  nii  adiliiional  ilo-
icr,  iinft|iei)i1e<l  by  irou  riuga  bihI  ropes  iH-forcthc
i[iii<«ofa  riiy.  In  snoli  a  uiniiiicr  timt  wliun  tbii
riM-iriy  hflfl  cniue  up  to  tl(e  cntca  llin  portrulliii
>ui;;lir  W  let  ilou'ii  fM>  Hit  to  xlint  Tlii-iii  in,  and  to  uii-
bIiI*'  tlie  lipKtv^ed  to  iu>«ail  Ilieiit  frotn  itbova  In
'  ACootnimnjrilig  iilutioftlio  priucij^ol  eiiiniucclo


"ntiilifii,  there  iiri>  twf>  siHi-wiiy*  for  foot-pfliw*»n-
S^MHiiI  n  mad  brlwetu  tlicni,  ftoirt**!!  fet*t  wi<1<>,
^'^  oirrtagpft.  The  g»t«'S  w<*rf  |ttiic«l  nt  A  A,
^Wxinaou  pivuta(»cv  CaBIKjI.  «t  JH  pnivt'd  by  ihc
in  ihv  povemeut.  which  Mtill  rfiuain.  TIiIr
of  tb«  mad  wa^i  noar««t  to  thn  town  ;  in  the
•Pp^il*  dlrcctiott,  tlif  road  Icil  into  tlie  coiinfry.
"»  [MrtonlliH  was  at  U  U,  mid  was  nimlo  to  »lide
"n^ruuvrBcut  in  the  walls.  The  sidewjiyFi,  »cpiire<l
■lib  Mnailcr  gates,  were  rmifed  in,  whtin-n*  the
rwtimi  „r  ilie  innin  road  bt-ttreei)  the  gnles  (A  A)
^1^  tlic  pertcnlliB  iB  B)  wai*  oj»n  to  the  aky.
'*"*.  Ilit-rrforc,  an  !*(I»ti'k  was  made,  the  a>«Ril-
*"'*  •«»  ritlier  excliiilcd  by  the  imrtriilliii,  or,  if
"*■')  (lilted  their  way  into  ttie  harhican,  ami  al-
""M«I  tohrntk  down  Iho  gates,  tlie  citizens,  siir-
'^"utllijjj  and  allftckinn  them  from  nliovt*.  had  the
S"aifM  posnibk-  facilities  for  impwling  nnd  de-
'""yiiiK  tlicin.  Ve-Kftiufl  speaks  of  i\w  entiracta
*•  ail niirjVn f  contnvanre;  and  it  nitpenrw  to  have
"*)> cBipInyeil  by  the  Jrws  at  .lentBalom  tut  early
"tlw  ilon'of  David. (See  Jer.  xxix.)


(2)  A  hoarding  bridge  like  the  <7>mi«of  Dnllina,
so  calleil  lM>can»e  it  d««c«ndcd  like  a  porttulliii.
See  t'OttV  I'la.

(3)  A  nhuoe,  or  itorltnps  a  weir  witli  ttlnioea  or
bntche»  in  it,  for  n-gnlatitig  tht?  height  of  water  In
a  rnntiiuK  stream. 3eo  Plin.  Ji^tut.  x.  60.

CatarrhacteB  iKarafipaimii).  |li  A rirerof Pam-
pliylia,  uliicli  di^AcniiclH  frntn  the  innniitaiii«  of
Tniiriis  ill  n  great,  brokt'u  waterfall  (wlieriee  its
nniue).  (3)  Tlio  tenu  Is  itloo  applietl,  first  by
t^tmlK>,  lo  the  cntarnelH  of  the  N'ilc.  which  are
dtsiinpHKtied  as  Cntarrlincteft  Slnior  and  Oniar-
^hacle^  .Minor. See  Nilus,

CatfiBcdpes  Orapb6  (Kurnfriconqr  ypa<f>ii).  An
action  allowed  by  Altir  law  to  Im*  bronglit  a):aiiiHt
"pie*,  who  if  eaii^ht  were  put  to  ihu  torture  in
order  to  exturt  fnxii  tlirm  mfornintiou.  and  then
execnt«d.  Only  foreigners  were  linble  to  tlitii  ao-
llon.  Citisteiifl  Hiiilly  of  the  rriine  were  accnttcd
of  iTfiofiixria. Stju  PliotiosiAH  Clurnfi.

Cataocopluzn.  A  sumll  vessel  (NArr«  itjuvula-
t'lria}  \me*i  for  reconiioiterlug  (Aul.  Oetl.  x.  3<1).

Catasta.  A  raised  platfonn  iiimn  which  slftvea
were  exposed  for  sale,  bo  that  the  iulciidiiiK  piir-
cliHsers  iniKlit  more  readily  examine  their  poltiltt
(Tibrill  ii.  :(,  tW;  Pen*,  vi.  77t.  The  platform  wa«
fioiuclininti  m.idr  to  mvolvn,  as  apitears  fntni  Sta-
tins r>SV/r.  Ii.  l,7^j).  H'hi-u  the  plalfiirni  was  uiw.-,d
In  private  »iali!g  it  waa  called  etitntiu  arcana  (Mart.
lx.tW.5). See  SenvLS.

Cateia.  A  miwile  nsed  in  war  l>y  the  Geminuii,
fJniilH,  nud  some  of  the  Itnlinntt,  and  ascribed  by
Bonm  writt-rH  to  the  Persiniis.  It  was  Rnp}>(Jii*>d  lo
I'l'Nfinblc  the  rb'/M,  which  wnHiiS(»rt  rifdnrt  sluddetl
with  ]>oiiitM,AtKl  alKiiil  a  foot  and  a  half  long.  {See
Aid.  Ocll,  X.  25 ;  Iwd.  Ori'j.  xviii.  7  ;  Serv.  ml  Atn,
vii.7IW.I  The  rnfr-in  was  also  kiinwii  ni»  frtitonil,
from  the  iiaiiir  of  tin-  jipople.

CatelaunL  The  ntmlei-u  C'liAUiiia-snr-Mame;  u
town  in  iJuiil,  iiear  which  Attila  (*)■  v.)  was  ilft>
feftt«d  by  Aetiiisiind  Tboodoric,  A.D.  451.

Cat«Ua. Bee  Catena.

Catena,  dim.  Catella  {itXvais,  dim.  aXvaiov,
uXtxriAiov) A  cliliill.

Tlincydides  infonns  its  that  the  Pintncaua  made
QHe  of  "long  iron  cliains"  to  st)«ipeiid  tlio  1>e.inis
whieh  they  let  fall  npon  the  battering  i-ama  of  their
aiwiilantc.  iSw-  AuiEii'.)  Under  thi- n<intnii(?,i>ris
oners  wert>  ehatne<]  in  the  following  m.iniier :  The
■wddier  who  wju*  apiudotrd  lo  jjunrd  a  ptirticnlar
e«plive  Imd  the  eliaiii  fjiwtened  to  the  wrist  of  his
loft  hand,  the  li^ht  remaining  at  liberty.  The
priMiner,  oil  the  contrary,  had  the  chain  fknteued
I  to  the  wrist  of  bh  right  hantl.  Hence  dfcrtnu  in-
1  tcrtnrt  Mt4nit  means  to  submit  to  captivity:  feri't*-
,  rem  in  tiniftro  oiUu-tm.  The  prisoMcr  and  the
Mddier  who  had  the  care  of  him  yfti^fw)  were  snnl
to  Imi  tieti  to  one  another.  Somctimc»,  for  sreater
M'cnrity,  the,  prisoner  wa*  chained  to  livo  soldieis.
one  on  each  side  of  him.  If  he  was  found  gnilt-
less,  they  broki?  or  cut  astiinler  his  chain»>.  TnHli>»d
of  the  common  materials.  Iron  or  bronxe,  Antony,
having  got  into  his  power  Artarasdes.  king  of  tlm
Armenians,  paid  him  the  pretended  compliment
of  having  him  bound  with  chniD9  of  gold  {Veil,
Pnt.'rr.  ii.  88).

ChniiiH  which  wore  of  superior  vnhie,  cither  on
account  of  the  material  or  the  workmannhip,  are
commonly  called  rotrl^'te  laXvtrta),  the  diminutive


J


CATENARIUS


2M


CATILINA


flxprewftiig  ttinir  Giicnean  aiu\  delicacy  an  well  an

tliftt'iiiiuuLcuiMH. TlicnpuctiiiL-ntiiif  uiieirtil  cliniiiH

wlik'h  wo  have  in  broh/c  lunipfi,  iu  Hcales  (twe  Li-

BUA),  and  Ut  oi'iiiinieiitK  for  tUc  [lerKoii,  especially

DucUlncca  \see  MonilEi,  show  n  groat  vnrioty  of

el«gaut  and  iiigvuiouii  [iatt«riia. Boshlos  a  iilain

circle  or  oval,  tbo  Bcparato  Huk  in  uftt'ii  slmprd

like  tbc  figure  ri,

or  is  a  bar  wit))  n

circle  at  uiicli  end,

or  a&8UD)rii  other

ii^^^ for  III  8,  somu  iif

^  «. ..  ^ ™_. .. .,  which are horu

GMUA— uu  n  Uoka.  iBrlltobMuMuin.) ,  „., ,. ,

*  Ahowu. JhtiltiikM

are  alfto  found  bo  closely  cutwtued  tlmt  the  chaiu

roTtcmblos  jilaiUMi  wire  or  thn'adt  like  tho  gold

chuiuti  uow  ninuMfuctnred  at  Veuico. This  is  rt*p-

re*«ute<l  in  the  lowut  lijjiire  of  the  illustratLoii.

Thoso  v^lunble  cbaiim  \v«re  ^luetimes  givcu  as

rvwanU  to  the  8»Idien«;  but  tbey  were  comutouly

worn  by  liulifH,  either  on  i]\(i  neck  or  around  the

waiHt;  and  w^re  iiiwd  to  wisiH'nd  jiearls,  or  jeweln

sot  iu  gold,  keyft,  loekotH,  and  other  trinkets.

Catenaxius,  mc.  Canis.  A  watch-dog  cbaiucd
up  ill  Iho  ve^libn-
luni  of  a  Roiiiat)
li(>u8C,U8ually  with
the  uotice  Ca  V  8
CAN  EM  (  Peiroii.
19,  72).

Caterrarll.  See

GLADUTDltEtt,


Cathaea. A
country of Aftia,


Oo«  m  Voftiif (I'oinpell.)

the  pivcise  oituHtloit  of  which  is  doubtful.  Mflu-
uiTt  ]>lact'i4  it  uorlhcAst  of  the  UiiUi,  iu  the  viciu-
ily  t>(  tbo  Uyilraotea.  The  chief  towu  waa  Huu-
gala. Diodnruis  Sicotns  calln  the  people  Catberi.

Cathaei  (Kadatoi).  A  grt-ut  and  warlike  )>eople
of  Iiuliti  iutra  Uaiigeui,  upon  whom  Alexander
mado  wnv;  tliough  modern  Orieululi.-»t«  i-egard
theiu  w  ix  warlike  caate  {Kahatiigaa)  rather  thou
A  !<ep]ii.ilL'  Iribe.

CatharmL 8«o  Ll-stkatio.

Catbddra  (Kudi&jtu).  A  acat.  The  word  was
ioor«  particularly  applieil  to  a  scut  with  n  back
but  uo  arms.  wbereoH  the  eelia^  bowuvur  spleiidkl


iu  itff  luatorlnl  or  di};tiificd  in  its  nsaoelsttomr
neither.  The  back  \va»  unuully  corvetl  or  hulhiir,
and  luinr  enough  for  the  arm  lo  retit  upon  it  n^ith
ease.  OS  in  the  preceding  illuHtration,  taken  from  i^U
Witlinm  llaroiltou's  work  ou  Greek  vases.  Oa
the  cuthcdm  is  ftcnted  a.  bride,  who  is  being  fuuDi4
by  a  funiole  slave  with  a  fnn  matle  of  iMsacock^
feathers;  under  ber  feet  is  a  footstool.

There  wiis  also  the  ait/iettra  Itwja,  or  enay-chsirj
and,  more  UixiiriouH  atill.  the  cat/tfflra  nuyiiut,  r*
si'uibling  the  uiiMleni  titeuuier-chulr.  Thru,  un  UDir|
tlu<y  wiifw  often  niiuli*  of  wicker-work  (m/«vjj, '

Thn  rnthcilra  wiu  nioro  umkI  by  women  than  hj
men  (heuco/ffliinMf,  Mart.  iii.  63).  It  was  a  toaril
of  etteminacy  wheo  a  uiati  was
seen  stretched  out  ou  a  reclio-
iug-chalr.  To  sit  ou  catliodroe
at  table  was,  however,  less  luxu-
rious tliRu  (he  ordiuary  reclin-
ing posture,  nud  woe  considetwl
proper  for  boys.  (  See  Cbn'A.  )
Tlie  seat  was  not  stutfed,  but  a
ciiBliioii  was  commonly  placed
upon  it;  and  acover  luiglit  aliio
Lu<  thrown  over  the  back.

Another  sort  of  cathedra  was
a  Acduu- chair,  in  nhicb  wom-
en wrre  accuatomed  lo  bo  cfti-
ried  about,  instead  of  in  a  lec-
tica.  Tho  «'/A»  catliMra  of  Juvenal  fi.
which  the  successful  forger  is  carried  mpinut^'
probably  an  iiucurtained  lecliea;  it  is  iuMilexH
rather  than  effeminacy  wliioli  liero  provokes  t-|
nige  of  the  satirist. 8tie  Lbctica.

Catheter  Ua^fr^p).  A  surgical  iustruiiM'nt  tot
drawing  off  vat«r  from  tbe  blndder.  The  purs
LuLiti  name  ia^fiftuht  nenen. Sec  CiiiHt!uui*. |

Catillna, Lictis  Skmoii^w. A Roman  'if  |«-  l
triciiiii  mnk,  and  thr  loxt  of  the  gens  8«'rgia. Of  j
his  father  aud  grandfather  little  is  kuntrii :  Ibe  |
fonucr  would  seooi  to  have  beeu  iu  iudigont  cir-
oumetuuccK,  from  the  lunguagu  of  (jninliiB  Ci(Vf« |
{Dc  Pt(ili(fne  Consulatna,  *i),  who  speaks  uf  C«iilw« ]
IU  having  been iMirn auiidnt tbo  poverty  oi  liii '
futber  i'm  jxitris  e*je»tate\. TUt-  gn-al-gmndfitber,
M.  SergiuH Hiliis or Silii, distiiiguiHhcd bimvlf
greatly  in  tbu  Second  Funic  War,  and  wai  [irr*-
ent  at  the  battles  of  TiciuuH,  Tn-biu,  Tnwiw-
nus,  and  Cannao. I'liriy  speaks  of  his  cxploitaiB
a  very  sniniatcd  strain.

Tbe  crnelty  of  C'ntili&e's  dispositiou,  hi*  ""•
daunted  ri'solution,  and  tbc  depravity  of  hiin«-
als  tilttMl  liini  for  nrriiig  a  distinguished  [>tft 'o
the  turbulent  and  tiloi>dy  scenes  of  the  i»ciio4 '"
which  he  livcd.  Up  embraced  tho  Itilcnw'  »•
Ridla,  ill  whoHH  army  h«  hebl  the  ofHw  of  ipiaMW'
Many  citizriiN  nf  noldc  birth  nn<  snid  by  Qtii'i^"*
Cicero  toha\e  fulleu  by  hia  baud;  and,  ac^^nliaS
to  Plutarch,  he  bad  assajwinuied  bis  own  IxDiti''
duriug  the  Civil  War;  uiul  now,  to  flctven  h'*
self  from  i>rufli*cntioii,  persuaded  Bulla  tojritliti"
down  among  the  proscribed  a»  »  |N*n<oit  »(iil  »!'**•
He  murdered  to<i,  with  bis  owu  handN  hi* •'«'*•'
husband,  a  Koman  kuiglit  of  peaceable  cbamc)*'-
One  nf  the  wor^t  actions,  however,  of  vkicli  ■>*
wnn  guilty  wonhl  ^lein  lo  havn  lireu  the  )iMH
of  JI.  Mnrius  Gratidiaiiiu*,  a  near  relative  «( '■*
celebrated  Maiiu*).  Sulla  luwl  put  the  uauie  "f  t'"'
iudividnal  on  \\w  Hat  of  the  proscrilxvl,  wlifWip**
Catiliue  entered  tbe  <lwelliiig  of  the  unfortuot"


CATILINA


297


CATILINA


man,  exhausted  upon  his  person  all  the  refine-
Ttienta  of  cnielty  and  tusiilt,  and,  having  at  last
pnt  an  end  to  his  existence,  carried  his  bloody
lieail  in  trlnmph  throngli  the  streets  of  Some,  and
bronght  it  to  Snlla  as  he  sat  on  his  tribnnal  in
the  Fornni.  When  this  was  done,  the  murderer
'trashed  his  hands  in  the  Instral  water  nt  the  door
of  Apollo's  temple,  which  stood  in  the  immediate
riciiiity  (Sen.  ])e  Ira,  iii.  IB).

Catiline  was  pecnliarly  dangerous  and  formi-
dable, as  bis  power  of  dissimnlation  enabled  him
to  throw  a  veil  over  his  vices.  Equally  well  quali*
fied  to  deceive  the  good,  to  intimidate  the  weak,
and  to  inspire  with  his  own  boldness  his  depraved
at^ociates,  he  evaded  two  occnsations  bronght
against  him  by  Clodios  for  crimiual  intercourse
with  a  Vestal,  and  for  moDstrous  extortions  of
which  he  bad  been  guilty  while  proconsul  in
Africa  (a.u.c,  687).  He  was  charged  also  with
having  murdered  his  first  wife  and  his  son.  A  un-
nierons  group  having  been  formed  of  yonng  men
of  high  birth  and  daring  character,  who  saw  no
other  means  of  extricating  themselves  from  their
enormous  debts  than  by  obtaining  the  highest
offices  of  the  State,  Catiline  was  placed  at  their
bead.  This  eminence  lie  owed  chiefly  to  his  con-
nection with  the  old  soldiers  of  Sulla,  by  means  of
whom  he  kept  in  awe  the  towns  near  Rome,  and
«veD  Rome  itself.  At  the  same  time,  he  numbered
among  his  adherents  not  only  the  worst  and  lowest
of  the  riotons  populace,  but  also  many  of  the  pa-
tricians and  men  of  consular  rank.  Everything
favoured  his  andocions  scheme.  Pompey  was  pur-
suing the  victories  which  Lncullus  had  prepared
for  him ;  and  the  latter  was  but  a  feeble  supporter
of  the  nobles  in  the  Benate,  who  wished  him,
bnt  in  vnin,  to  pnt  himself  at  their  head.  Cras-
sns,  who  had  delivered  Italy  from  the  gladiators,
n-as  now  striving  with  great  eagerness  after  power
and  riches,  and,  instead  of  opposing,  countenanced
the  growing  ioflueDce  of  Catiline,  as  a  means  of
his  own  aggrandizement.  Caesar,  who  was  labour-
ing to  revive  the  party  of  Marins,  spared  Catiline,
and,  perhaps,  even  encouraged  him.  Only  two
Romans  remained  determined  to  uphold  their  fall-
ing country :  Cato  and  Cicero — the  latter  of  whom
alone  possessed  the  qualifications  necessary  for  the
task.  The  conspirators  were  now  planning  the
elevatiou  of  Catiline  and  one  of  bis  accomplices  to
the  consulship.  When  this  was  effected,  they
hoped  to  obtain  possessiou  of  the  public  treasnres
and  tbe  property  of  the  citizens,  under  various
pretexts,  and  especially  by  means  of  proscription.
It  is  not  probable,  however,  that  Catiline  had
promised  them  the  liberty  of  burning  and  plunder-
ing Roma  Cicero  had  tbe  courage  to  stand  as  can-
didate for  the  consulship,  in  spite  of  the  impending
danger,  of  the  extent  of  which  he  was  perfectly
aware.  Neither  insults  nor  threats,  nor  even  riots
aud  attempts  to  assassinate  him,  deterred  him
from  his  purpose ;  and,  being  supported  by  the
richest  citizens,  he  gained  Lis  election,  B.C.  65.
All  that  the  party  of  Catiline  could  accomplish
was  tbe  eleotiou  of  Gains  Antoiiius,  one  of  their
accomplicen,  as  colleagne  of  Cicero.  This  failure,
however,  did  not  deprive  Catiline  of  the  hope  of
gaiuing  the  consulship  the  following  year.  For
this  purpose  be  redoubted  the  measures  of  terror
by  nieane  of  which  he  had  laid  the  foaudation  of
his  power.  Meanwhile  he  had  lost  some  of  the
most  important  members  of  his  conspinicv.  Au-
I0»


tony  had  been  prevailed  upon,  or  compelled  by
Cicero,  to  remain  neutral.  Caesar  and  Crassaa
had  resolved  to  do  the  same.  Fiso  had  been  killed
in  Spain.  Italy,  however,  was  destitute  of  troops.
The  veterans  of  Sulla  only  waited  the  signal  to
take  up  arms.  This  signal  was  now  given  by
Catiline.  Tbe  centurion  Manlius  appeared  among
them,  aud  formed  a  camp  in  Etruria.  Cicero  was
on  the  watch,  and  a  fortunate  accident  disclosed
to  him  the  counsels  of  the  conspirators.  One  of
them,  Curius,  was  on  intimate  terms  with  a  wom-
an of  doubtful  reputation,  Fulvia  by  name,  and
had  acquainted  ber  with  their  plans.  Through
this  woman,  Cicero  learned  that  two  knights  had
undertaken  to  assassinate  him  at  his  house.  On
the  day  which  they  had  fixed  for  the  execution  of
their  plan  they  found  his  doors  barred  and  guarded.
Still  Cicero  delayed  to  make  public  the  circum-
stances of  a  conspiracy  the  progress  and  resources
of  which  he  wished  first  to  ascertain.  He  contented
bimself  with  warning  his  fellow-citizens,  in  general
terms,  of  the  impending  danger.  But  when  tbe
insurrection  of  Manlius  was  made  known,  he  pro-
cured tbe  passage  of  the  celebrated  decree,  "that
the  consuls  should  take  care  that  the  Republic  re-
ceived no  detriment,"  By  a  decree  of  this  kind,  the
consuls,  or  other  magistrates  named  therein,  were,
in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  the  State,  armed
with  the  supreme  civil  and  military  authority.  It
was  exceedingly  difficult  to  seise  the  person  of  one
who  had  soldiers  at  his  command,  both  in  aud  out
of  Rome;  still  more  difficult  would  it  be  to  prove
his  guilt  before  those  who  were  his  accomplices
with  him,  or,  at  least,  were  willing  to  make  use  of
his  plans  to  serve  their  own  interests.  Cicero  had
to  choose  between  two  evils — a  revolutiou  within
the  city,  or  a  civil  war;  and  he  preferred  the  lat-
ter. Catilinehadtheboldnessto  take  his  seat  in  the
Senate,  known  as  he  was  to  be  the  enemy  of  the
Roman  State.  Cicero  then  rose  and  delivered  that
bold  oration  against  him  which  was  the  means  of
saving  Rome  by  driving  Catiline  from  the  city.
The  conspirators  who  remained — Lentnlus,  Ce-
thegua,  and  other  infamous  senators—engaged  to
head  the  insurrection  in  Rome  aa  soon  as  Catiliue
appeared  at  the  gates.  According  to  Cicero  and
Sallust,  it  was  the  intention  of  the  conspirators  to
set  the  city  on  fii-o,  and  massacre  the  inhabitants.
At  auy  rate,  these  conaeqneuces  might  have  easily
followed  from  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  with-
out auy  previous  resolution.  Lentnlns,  Cethegus,
and  the  other  conspirators,  in  the  meanwhile,  were
carrying  on  their  criminal  plots.  They  applied  to
the  ambassadors  of  the  AUobroges  to  transfer  the
war  to  the  frontiero  of  Italy  itself.  Those,  how-
ever, revealed  the  plot,  and  their  disclosures  led  to
othere  atill  more  important.  The  correspondence
of  the  couspiratora  with  their  leader  was  inter-
cepted. The  Senate  had  now  a  notorious  crime
to  punish.  As  the  circumstances  of  the  case  did
not  allow  a  minute  observance  of  form  in  the
proceedings  against  the  conspirators,  the  laws
relating  thereto  were  disregai'ded,  as  had  been
done  iu  former  instances  of  less  pressing  danger.
Caesar  spoke  against  immediate  execution,  but
Cicero  and  Cato  prevailed.  Five  of  the  conspira-
tors were  put  to  death.  Qaius  Autonins  was  then
appointed  to  mareh  against  Catiline,  hut,  on  the
eve  of  battle,  under  pretence  of  being  disabled  by
the  gout,  he  gave  the  command  to  bis  lieutenant
Petreius. The  battle  was  fought  at  Pistorla  in


CATILLUS


im


CATO


Etnirln,  nnA  eiulei)  in  the  complete  ovprttirou-  of
the  iiiiiur>;i'iit».  Ciitiliiie,  uii  tioiliiig  tbnt  all  vem
loHt,  re^ulvfil  to  die  sword  io  Lntid,  and  his  follow-
tn  imitat«il  his  exauiplc  (U.c.  l!^).

The  liislory  of  Culiliiie's  conspiracy  bM  be**!!
written  \>y  Snlliist  in  tlie  cxtn-titely  nMo  mono-
grnph  kitomi  na  the  IMtum  CatUinae.  t?ee  also
tho  Uvea  of  CueearaucI  Cicero  liy  riiitnrch  ;  Mumin-
wii.  IliAtvrtf  of  llamr,  iv.  iiXi-'^io,  21*J-*2*2;i:  nml  tlit*
ruiil-  iir&li>»n.<t  i>f  Clet^ru  kinMVii  na  ttiv  Orttlionea
CatiHniiriur,  much  rvaU  iu  wbools.  Tin.*  i*U)ry
fiinu»i  tliL*  siihJL'ct  of  n  tcUiou*  EugliftU  play  by
Ucu  Juuaou.eutttlctl  CtitUinc't  Coimpiraiy.  itroilucvd
lu  1011  f  mid  uf  »  lion  -furgotU'ii  druiua  by  Hlepbcu
Qwuuu.  It  itt  the  bntiis  of  the  bitttuhuul  uuvel  by
llei'bort,  The  Uomun  Traitor^

OatUlna  or  CatXlas. ^ee  TiQCR.

Catillua, 8i"u  C'atixi's.

CatluuB  or  Catlnum,  ditu.  Catillds  or  Catii.-
LL'M.  A  dish  or  phitlcr  ou  which  viBiitU  wort:
durvcd  ii|).  Othor  iiaued  fur  siuiilar  tnble  iitciihils
will  bens  be  noticed;  bul  it  luiiritbvi  udiuittod  that
the*  lUDerciiceH  uf  tib;viif.  umtoriaU,  or  iioe  are  not
always  clearly  iniliL'ared.  Eruii  the  diHtiiK'iioti,»o
o«<M*uli»l  to  our  iiotioDM,  Ix'tweeii  ditube^  imd  plates
dora  not  0«niu  to  Imvo  been  cli«er\'e<I  (Hor.  isut.
i,  3,  93);  thvre  i»,  iu  fact,  nu  Gre«^k  or  Latin  woni
for  *■&  plate"*  iu  the  luodi-rn  aeust-.  Varn>  do-
HuribeA  tho  catinua  iin  dvi'p  vnouKh to hold  Ihu


were,  rmscfs^  "  the  old,"  and  Maior.  ''  the  eldw,^
Iwth  atlndiug  to  his  haviu^  preoeilejl,  in  ordpr  of
time,  the  youn^r  Cato,  who  coniiaitiM)  nuioidr^ife
Utica.  Cato  lht<  CfUMir  was  born  in  n.c.  ^14  A
Tuaculiim,  of  plt'tx^ian  pai-enta.  His  family  wti*
in  very  moderate  oiiviiioMtanctiij,  auti  Utile,  if  any-
thing,  was  known  of  it,  nntil  he  hiiiiself  made  th»
name  a  conspicuous  one.  His  father  left  hiui  a
Biuall  farm  in  the  Sabine  lenitoiy,  and  here  tti»
IJrst  ycju^  of  bin  youth  were  spent.  The  stato  uf
piiblii!  atfairs.  however,  soon  coaipeUeil  him  t*
lake  up  arms  for  the  defence  of  hih  country.  The
Second  Punic  War  had  brokea  out,  and  Han»il>at
had  iuvuled  Italy,  Cat^o,  therefore,  served  Iuf.  Iir«t
cauipai^u,  at  the  age  of  ^i^venteeu,  uinler  Kaliiiift
Maximus.  when  he  1>esies«d  the  city  of  Cajwa,
Five  yearn  after  this  he  fought  Hudt-r  the  ffain»
cututnauder  at  the  ^iege  of  Tan'nlnm,  and.  afler^
tliH  vuptnre  uf  t)iU  placu,  became  aetjuaiutetl  witiL
Ihu  Pylhagon-aii  XearvhiiH,  who  initiatenl  hiui  itiio^
thu  priucipleH  of  that  system  uf  philosophy,  nitl:^
which,  iu  practice, he  had  ulready  become  fauUU^
Thu  witr  being  ended,  Cato  returned  to  his  fant^
Near  this  there  stood  a  cottage  brlon}(in>>  to  31^
uius  Curiun  Dentatus,  who  bad  repcatir^ly  tc:^
uiiiphed  over  the  Sabtuos  ouil  Sauiuitet.  and  li^
at  length  driveu  Pyrrhus  from  Italy.  Cnio  vr-  ^
acvustome'l  frei|Ufntly  to  walk  over  U*  Ihu  humt.  ■^j
alHMle  of  tins  nMiowiiPfl  conitnauder,  wherH  he  w-j


.  struck  with  admiration  nt  the  fnigalilv  of  il>  oc\- ■
tnavy  of  meat  or  vcgelablis  iL.  L.  V.  1*20).  They  '  ^^^  ^,„i  (,,„  ^^^^(^^l  managument  of  the  fiinn  wUicJ
«ere  mostly  of  eanheuivaiv.  aud  were  kept  iu  va-  „,,j^  ,atacb.^t  lo  it.  Hunc.r  it  b.«^am.-  hia great  niJ
rlous  sizes;  to  have  the  catinus  too  small  for  Us  j,^t  to.iiin!atc  hi*  iliu«triou8  neighbour,aodaao»3
CMnU.nt«sboWi.dawaiaofslyletHor.ff/..ii.4,77).  iiim  ^  ^^^  ^,,^i^x.  Having  made  an  cMiuiate  uT
The  historic  turbot  of  Duwtltan  requiiwl  «  dish  j,;^  l^^,u^  ,„„j^  t>\a.v^.  uml  exiHrnscs,  he  iippiicil
madconpurims,.  (Jay.  iv.i:n  foil.);  Vil<aiiua  had |jjp,^if  n>  Uusbaudry  with  new  anloor.  and  n-

trvuehed  all  supertluity.  Iu  the  moniing  br  wejii  |
to  the  aruall  u*viu%  in  tbo  viciuity  lo  plejd  sikI  ;
defend  the  causca  of  those  who  applied  to  liiai  ftir


goin*  a  step  beyond  thi:>,  and  built  a  special  fur-
nace iu  which  to  bake  a  gigantic  putiiut  (Pliu.  I/.  JV.

xsxv.  $  163). The  PATINA  (iliiu. puUlUi}  was  also

commonly  of  earthenware; it  was  bowl-sbaped, iJ^TsiaVcT. fhenc7bereturncdtohi«aeliir«l<'!n^
and  occnm  frennoully  iu  Horace  lu  the  sense  of  a „jth  ^  plain  cloak  over  his  shoohlcrs  iu  «intfr.


diith:  but  it  was  likewise  used  for  cooking,  and
then  ba«1  a  cover  il'tant.  PtteuJ.  iii.  2.  51).  Thu
actor.\eMipushad»  patina  north  IW.llOO  !>vflterces;
thnranterint  is  ui>t  de^f^ibeil.  pARui'si!j(«-|if)c»^(r)
was  iu  GnH'k  app1ie«l  i-ither  to  the  ilish  or  its  cod-
tenls.  a^  is  provnl  by  Alhruaeils,  with  abundant
41uotatiou)<  from  the  eotuir  pm*ts — though  Atticists
irictl  to  rx'strict  the  wonl  to  the  latter  sense;  in
Roman  wiiter»  it  is  aiway>  tho  former:  originally
a  stjuare  or  oblong  side-«Ush  for  delicacies,  it  came
to  meau  any  dish.  There  mm  sL>o  au  apsis  or
^mi»  <4|.  v.). cither  roiiud  or  M-mictrcuIar,  like  mod-
em sulnd-plate«;  and  i;ahatai^  soivl  t^*  ha%'e  l>ceu
of  a  dM'p  shape.  The  lknx  varied  in  form,  but
•MWs  to  harv  been  always  *>f  metal;  huge  silver
1mic«a  wetv  among  the  miwt  c<i«tly  ol^i*eia  <»f  Ro-
roan  rxtmvagaiice.  We  also  lind  a  pan>ii»is  iu
silver  (Z>k;.  xi.i.iv.  %  L  Id,  ^  9i.  The  tirecW  nVo^,
a  bnaid  aud  so  a  wooden  trencher,  wight  be  ofotb-
rr  maierialA — e.  g.  silver; but  silver  di«bes  wow

L thought  vulgar  by  tbe  Gtveks,  at  least  iu  early
tiutn«  ^Atbeu.  vi.490a).
Tlie  nttiUit  was  a  w*ucer  for  picklc«  or  oUwr
rondinieuts  <Hor.  Sat,  ii.  4,  TM.
Cato.  A  suniame  i^  tbe  Poivian  fatuily.  derive«l
frt^tm  the  8*biite  csr«ii,  cognate  with  nri,r»*  ili  &L
IVtlUllijCATVi,  "Uniann^l  t  ■  i  io

lb»'  MTterily  isilh  >\hu-h  '.  .  lIIc«

ai  a  rv4i«i4',  and  Iioum'  i-i>iu.i^.ul>  »t>it'4t,  ^  the
|nv*riit  da),  "Calo  lltr  l>u>ar." Otket  suniautes


.and  almost  aaked  in  summer,  he  IuIkiurhI  ^Ik
his  servants  till  they  had  ootiolndud  their  los^
after  which  he  nat  down  idong  with  them  at  \iM*t
eating  the  same  brvad  and  drinking  the  satue  wtoa
Valerius  Flaccus.  a  uoblo  and  powerful  SiHnu>
who  occupied  an  estate  iu  ibe  ueighl*otirha)il  of
Cato'e  resideuce.  persoaded  the  young  Csto  tv  »
move  to  Rome,  aud  promiaod  to  assist  bmi  bf  lii(
iDflneuc«  aud  patronage.  Cato  oaoie, accorlrt>|l;>
to  the  capital,  with  an  obooure  name,  and  ifilb  >*
other  nwKiroea  t  hau  bis  owo  talen  t»  aud  the  ssl  "f
tbe  getncims  Flaccus;  bat  by  the  puriiy  «f  ^"
monli,  tbe  a(ui«i«  eoerg^-  of  bis  character.  k>*
kaoTrledge  of  Che  lawa,  his  duency  of  tJ(>nitt»»'
and  tbe  great  ability  that  markeil  his  iwrly  fufVDit'
eaiver,  be  soon  won  for  himself  a  di^ti"-' ''*"■"''
luune.  It  was  iu  the  camp,  howuver,  i:>'
at  tbe  bar,  that  be  stiove  lu  r»iM>  ]itmM'<>
uencc.  At  the  age  of  thirty  be  wunt  as  luil'tW
tribane  to  Sicily.  The  ueii  year  he  was  '■'»'*'*
qgaeator.  and  waa  aiiacbed  to  the  army  ""^^
Sclplo  AMeanos  was  to  carry  into  Africa,  si  ■b''''
|ien<>d  iberr  commeurrd  Iwiwcen  biin  auJ  ll*'
o<miuauder  a  rivalry  and  batn^l  which  hist«A*i>'
111  death.  C-aio.  who  bad  reliune«l  to  Uunu','^
cased  Si-.pi.inf  evtravagauec;  and  though  heM'*
iu  »i:  - 'a5  charge,  yet  hw  «ral  for  tbe  l^^

be  |;>'  .  Ii[tu  great  luduunec  over  tbe  uioil^

of  ihi-  * >•-  \>'nr»  subsL-4)Ucut  Ut  this.a{Ur

having  t  ■  ..  .-..:•. ^.\\  ^tcdlle.  be  was  cbowU  prasUil.


CATO


SB9


CATO


*»(1  tlift  iiroTluce  of  danliain  fell  to  Iiiin  by  lot.

M'n  tiit**f^ily  mill  jn^tifM^,  white  clifuiliar^in);  thin

i>nirf>,  lmiii}!til  liim  tiiNiiliriH^t  mill  iiiiMt  t'livniinthtf

cqatnMt  iTitli  tliirfw  will)  liAil  pivciHitt*!  liiiii. Hi>rt>,

tao,  il  wan  thai  litt  bi'oaiiK*  nc<jiinintcil  with  llu*

pool  Eniiiiif>,  whii wtut  thi;ii ifcrriii^ aniotijj  lh»

C^UUriaii  ItrvicM  attntih*^]  fo  llx-  army. Kruiii  Kii-

biiu  bv  ai-iiiitreil  the  (in^rk  liini;uagc;,  and,  im  Ihh

()c{iattiirc  fruui  the  itiliiiiil,  he  took  thr  Imiil  idoiig

mil  liim  to  Konio. Ho  nan  Hiinlly  elcctc-d  coiimhI,

a.c.  IW.  ami  bii  collengno  in  otflco  wii«  Vulcriiiit

FJufxat,,  his  early  frioii<l. While  coiii^iil  he  mieii-

uikiisly  lint  fmitlfiMly  opposMl  the  nUtlitioit  of  tUc

faulting  Opitinu  Lair  (w>o  OFfiA  Lex  |,  aiul  aoou

I  »fVer  lhi»  set  <mt  for  Spiiin,  which  hatl  atteiaiued

[  |i>  aliak«>  off  tho  Rotniin  yoko. With  iiowly  ruiseil

Mrtf>«~>[i«,  nhivli  he  w>uii  ctmverted  into  an  vxcplleiit

1  trns  j-,br  ijntckly  rotluccMl  ihaL  iiruviric*^  to  snhmis-

l«k>i),«iiil  iibtikiiifil  the  hoijunn^  nf  u  iri(mi)i|i  at

ISouw. Hardly  hail  Ciilo  d«i«ceiided  from  the  tri>

jaixiphal  churiut,  u-ben.  layiti;;  UHidc  tbo  ciiuitulur

[p»l><;  and  nttdiitniiift  the  gurb  of  the  lioiit^nnnt.  Iil*

I  •r<:*^jD)|taiiii!<l,  iWHUoh.  tho  Iii>iuau  cuDiuiniider  Sem-

tt^*iiiii»  iiUu  Thraui>. llii  artcrwardu  iilauttl  hiiu-

i«lf  nailrr  t)ic  unler*  of  Mauiii«  Acilius,  tho  ounmil,

lu  li;;lll  ii^iitai  Antiochtia,  and  carry  tin*  \v»r  into

Tlitvwily. by  a  bold  march  he  ttelzed  upon  Callid'

tQUtnii.4ino  of  the  nickiext  Htittnuito  iif  Th«^niiiip.

Tlar,  and  thus  dePidtnl  Ibw  issuo  of  the  coiiilict.

Tor  tliid  signal  *orvic*«,  the  consul,  in  the  excftw

«f  bm  vuthuniasui,  cmbractHl  hiui  in  the  protKMKrf

•f  lli^i  whole  nruiy,  uud (•schiiuii'd Ihnt it  was

■witbor  ill  biat  )x)wur,  nor  in  that  o(  the  Uuniaii

t>ra)4e,  to  nwanl  biiu  a  rucuinitetiftc  com uieusit rate

«Uhhiii<l«<gertdrH.L.  11>I).

8ev«o  ynirs  laior  lie  obtniucd  the  office  of  cvn-

Rtt.  iiotwitlu^taudiug  the  powerfnl  oppo«ition  of  a

^JH'  part  of  the  nobility,  who  dn.-nd(.-(l  to  have  40

•TcTBiu  ius[iector  of  public  niornltiat  a  tinieirbMi

biMiy,  thu  rcBolt  of  their  ABtatic  com)ne«lft,  ha<l

•kiTMi  otit  many  of  the  t-arlier  virtue*!  t»f  the  R*)-

■uu  f*oiAv. He  fnltilU-d  tbi»  trust  nilh  iiillrxibit;

f^fm. Some  of  liiM  at^lA,  it  it  trtio,  would  ncetu  to

We  |imf-j«Mled  froiu  that  [>ngnacioiu  bitttirnPHtt

''li^ii  uiUHl  be  cnntrnoled  by  a  man  euguged  in

('oenUnl  Hti'ife  and  intItction«:  thus,  for  example,

'■)  tralc  away  his  bonw  from  Lucius  iScipio,  and

*xpell«il Manilius from the  Seuato for  kissing

111*  wife  ,Q  the  preeeupe  of  bin  children. Still.

^Hirer,  most of his  prooet-dings  when censor

^trait*  a  uiau  who  aimed,  by  every  method,  at

!>iii£  up  the  triin  npirit  of  earlier  daytf. Hence,

jh  bi<t  mi'nitnreM,  while holding Ibia  olBL'e,

liini some nblmiuy  and  u|ipu>itCiou,  they

^^  lu  the  (ind  with  Ibu  blgbeiit  applause;  and

■Wii  Im  refeigned  tbo  ceiiaortihip  the  iiL<o])le  erected

~|lUt8(?  to  bim  in  the  Temple  of  Heallb.  with  an

■Minlile  iuM-'ription  teettifying  his  faithfnl  dis-

^if'  of  the  duties  of  bia  office. C'ato'ti  attncb-

"'t  III  the  old Bomau moraU  was  still more

'"ly  wen  in  bis  oppoKitiuti  to  CariR'uileif  (q.  v.i

'  bit  4'4illeagtif.-4,  whet)  he  petHUiulLMl  tin;  Senal«*

►  «nri  b:irk  these pbiloMipherH.  without deUiy,

•  tltp;t  uwii  (ichoola,  through  fear  Iwtt  the  Hoiunn

*'li  hlmtild  loiw  their  uiuilial  character  in  tbc

'iirit  nf  (•reeiuu  k-tmiing. The  nbole  political

■  af  Cato  was  one  coutiuued  warfare. He

HIjMutAotly  acciiainK  others,  or  mifde  the  sub-

;^of  aoimsatiou  himself Livy, although  full  of

««lliuni;litit  for  bin  character,  still  does  not  seek  to

ppeoted  of  having  excited


the  nccusntion  brongbt  agaiunt  Sripio  Afiiranna,
wliieh  eompflled  that  iUn&triouB  man  to  ]l^avti  tbft
capital,  He  was  also  the  meaua  of  the  coudein-
nation  of  .Scipio  AAiativus,  who  wuiiUl  have  lir«n
dragge*!  to  prison  hiwl  not  Tiborlus  i;racebn»>  gcn-
eronidy  inttrferod.  An  for  Cato  bimitelf,  he  was
tifty  timo8  accused  and  aa  often  ucijnillcil.  Ho
waa  efghty-tlvo  year^  of  age  when  he  »aw  hlmaelf
uomjHillfMl  to  .iiiswer  the  loMt  accnaation  bronglit
ngain>it  him,  and  the  exunUum  of  Ui*  ajw^ech  ou
that  occasion  wah  marked  by  a  peculiar  and  touch-
ing siiiipUcity:  "It  la  a  hanl  thing,  Romans,  to
givo  an  account  of  one'n  conduct  tiefore  the  men
of  an  ago  different  from  that  in  which  one  has
himself  lived."

Tho  last  act  of  Cnto'a  pDbllo  life  wu  his  em-
baasy  to  Carthage,  to  settle  the  diapiito  between  the
Carllmginiaus  and  King  Ma»>iniMa.  This  voyage
uf  bit)  iH  rendered  fauioUH  in  bi6lor>',  »iiic«  l^o  it  klU
been  Bttribnl«d  tbc  destruction  of  Carthage.  In
fact,  struck  by  the  rapid  recovery  of  this  city  from
the  loss  it  bad  shatAinod,  Cato  ever  after  ended
every  speech  of  his  with  the  well-known  wordu,
Pnut^rea  evusco  Ciir(fmgit\em  tJUt  deitnd-xm  ("I
am  also  of  opiuioQ  that  Carlbagc  ought  to  be  de-
sti»yeii">. Soo  CAKrnA<io.

Cato  dieil  a  year  afn^r  bis  retoni  from  this  em-
boMMy,  ill  the  eighty-titYb  yew  of  his  ago.  Al-
tbougb  frugal  of  tlw^  public  rttveniies,  be  does  uot
api>ear  to  have  btrou  iudiflerent  to  rioh«tir  nor  to
'  have  neglected  the  ordinary  means  nf  acquiring
thorn ;  and,  if  I'lutarcb  (.peaks  truly,  some  of  the
modetf  to  which  he  hml  recourw  for  incrvasiug  his
rosonroes  were  anytbiug  but  rcput.nldo.  Towards
Ibtt  end  of  bis  life  bu  \\ah  fond  of  indtilgiiig  iu  a
gliisa  of  vriue,  and  of  iuvititig  daily  »omc  of  his
ueiglibonnj  to  sup  with  him  at  his  villa;  aufl  tbe
!  couvenaliou  on  these  oiTcaftionit  tunicfl,  uot  a^  one
'might  have  suppotHid,  cliiully  on  rnml  affairs,  but
I  on  the  jiraises  of  givut  and  excellent  men  among
tbo  Konmiis.  Ho  was  twice  married,  and  tuul  *
-turn  by  each  of  hi>«  wives.  His  conduct  as  buft*
baud  anil  fatlier  was  ci|ually  exemplary  In  fact,
Cato  nuiy  be  taken  as  a  fpr-cimen  of  the  Sjiliino>
Samnito  character,  narrow,  bigoted,  and  oliHiirtate,
yet  inspired  with  a  strong  sense  of  duty  uud  on-
iuipvacbable  int<*grity.

Among  the  literary  lalwurs  of  Cato,  the  first
I  that  deiMirvus  mention  is  tbe  treatise  De  Jt<  Jin*-
,f»cd,  mure  pi-oiKirly  styled  £k  Agri  C«/fifrti.  which
appears  to  have  come  down  to  n»  ia  a  mutilated
st4it«,  since  Pliny  ami  other  writers  ullnde  to  sab*
Jcets  as  treatuil  of  l»y  Cato.  and  to  opinions  as  de-
livered by  bim  in  this  book,  which  are  nowhere  to
bo  fouud  in  awf  part  uf  tbe  work  now  extant.  In
its  present  state,  it  is  merely  tbo  loose,  diseou-
neoted  Jounial  oi  a  plain  farmer,  expressecl  with
mde,  ftomelimes  with  aluuist  oracular,  brevity;
and  it  wants  all  those  ol«>gaut  topics  of  emlH:t-
lisliment  and  illiistrHtlon  which  the  subject  might
have  so  naturally  suggested.  It  consists  solely
uf  tbf!  dryest  rules  of  ugricaUure,  and  some  re-
cipes for  making  various  kinds  of  cakes  and  wiu«.
Serving  says  it  ia  Mldressed  to  tbe  author'^  kou,
but  there  is  no  dodlcatiou  now  extant.  Il  is  di-
vided into  chapters,  but  tbe  author,  apparently,
bod  never  taken  tho  trouble  of  reduciug  bis  pre-
cepts to  any  sort  of  mcthiMl,  or  of  following  any
geueral  plan.  The  liumlrtNl  and  eitxty-two  chap-
ters, uf  which  this  work  cuusiats,  seem  so  many
,rut(M  committed  tu  writlug,  as  tho  daily  labours


OATO


300


CATO


of  tlif'  flelil  snggofitcd.  I{t<  gives  directiona  aliotit
llid  vliiuyitnl,  tlitii)  goes  to  his  corn-tiulds,  Ahd  re-
turns agiiiu  to  tLc  viDcynrd.  His  troatisc,  tbcrc-
iim,  wu  oviilciitly  u»t  tutendod  na  a  ivgnlar  ami
well-corn powMl  buok.  but  lueraly  as  a  jonrtml  of
iiicideutnt  ob^erviitiuiis.  Tliat  tliis  wns  its  nt-
aitwt  I iro tension  in  fnrtlier  ovinceil  by  tb«  brxtvity
uf  tho  precepts,  niid  llie  dt^Hciency  o(  all  ilhistni-
lioiis  or  cinbt>lli.sliitu'iir.  Of  Iht*  tulyle.  hi*  of  cniirae
wnidtl  bu  littb>  ran-fiit,  im  hit*  tni>iniininfla  wi>re  in-
(i-iidiMl  fur  lh«-  ii>M>  Diily  of  liix  family  and  bis  Mln%'PA.
It  if>  ih^rafui-u  nlwayH  siinptu,  and  Mniii^tiriiiui  rudi>,
but  it  is  not  ill-ndnplod  to  ihu  Hobjix^t.  niid  HtiilH
4Mit-  uotiuiiM  of  tbti  Boverc  timiitit.-»  of  itn  niitbor
uiid  Ibi)  chnratti;r  of  lUo  uiick'tit  Kouiniiii.

llcsidrs  tbis  b(M»k  on  ii^fricnllitif,  Cato  k-ft  be-
hiud  biiii  viiriuiis  workd,  wbicli  liavr  nliiicMt  en-
tirely pcriabed.  He  left  »  huudre*!  and  fifty  orn-
tioiiii  <Cio.  Bruttia,  17).  wbicb  wero  extant  in  tb©
time  of  C'ivcit),  tbout^b  nlino!«t  entirely  nrg]cct«4l,
tuid  n  tiook oil  military  iliHCtpliue  I Vfget.  I.  i^t.  Both
Ciocm  iiud  I.ivy  b:ive  tixjuxvAe*!  thomselvog  very
fully  "II  the  subject  »if  Cnto's  oniticnst.  Tlte  for-
iitrr  ndmitu  tbnl  bix  "iBiigiiagu  is  nnti<tu»ti-d.  and
miiiin  of  bin  pliraiw^  liiii-nb  and  itn-b-^iiiit.  Ibit  only
cbangt*  tbat,"  be  cuuliiiiics,  "wbivb  it  vms  not  in
Ills  power  (o  cbaoge— add  iinaibor  and  radencii —
pi  re  an  oiuior  turn  to  his  sonteucps,  and  n->guiato
tbt'  »iructiiro  and  connection  of  liitt  wonU,  and  you
will  tiud  no  one  who  can  cluini  prefereuce  over
Cuto."  Livy  prinriimtly  »p«>nki*  of  the  facility,  as-
I»piity,  and  freecbtni  of  bis  »tyb'.

Of  tho  book  on  military  discipline,  a  good  deal
b:iii  bi'en  incoqiuniU'd  into  ibo  work  of  Vegeliiis:
and  ('irent^H  urnlitinii  nuiy  coiiwdu  nn  for  the  want
of  tliirw  of  Cnto.  Hut  tlio  b>M  of  the  Mven  Uioktt
Dt  Originibnt,  wbicb  he  commeiiced  iu  hia  vigor-
oiiitobl  ago,  and  tiutabciljiiBC  beforv  bis  dvntti,  must
over  b«  deeply  doplonHt  by  tbc  bistoriau  and  tbo
autiiinary.  Cato  U  snid  to  have  begiui  an  inf|uiry
into  tliti  history,  nnili|niti(!«,  and  language  of  the
Roman  people,  nith  a  view  to  conuteracc  the  ia-
Unenco  of  Ihp0rr<>k  taate  ititrotluced  by  (be  Sci|>-
io«. The  linit  Imok  of  the  vnlnabV  n-ork  D*  Ori-

r^inihHK,  o!*  «-c  art'  infornu'd  by  Cunieliui'  NVj-os,  iu

'  hid  short  life  of  Cato.  contained  tb«  «sploit«  of
Ibi*  kings  of  Konie.  Cato  woa  the  lirttt  author
«bi»  nlteinplrd  to  fix  the  ern  of  tbo  fonndatiou  of
K<Miu'.  wbieh  be  calctilaleit  in  bis  Orltfint*,  and
d<.'ienniueit  lo  have  been  in  the  llr»t  yenr  of  tbc
7lh  Olynipiatl.  which  \^  aI«o  lliv  e»tiui.-ile  foUowitt
lir  Plouyttius  of  Haticnni.xMn!i.  The  second  and
Ihlnt  book.li  trvated  of  tbc  orisni  uf  the  dttlvreut

I^UitiM*  of  Itnly,  whence  the  wbide  work has rv-

p|ve«l the rtniue **( Oriyhtr*. The fourth and

\h  iMtok!)  oiinptv bended  ibe  bt«tory  uf  1b«  Firxl

ml  8eo«md  I*nnir  War*;  and  in  the  two  reniaiiiing

rtks  the  author  tUsc<L>K*«sl  the  other  wan*  of  tin-

''iliHnaiii*  lit!  the  time  of  Scrviux  (iaiba,  who  over-

thn'w  the  I,i)»ttAitiaii». The  «.-bote  work  exhibit-

ctl  iiirnl indii*<iry  and leaniiii);.  and.  bad it de-

entletl  tu  n»,  would  iiiitpii.<^tionably  bavo  thrown

Ruch  ligbt  niwui  tbe  early  ivriiNl-t  <>{  Rotuan  hi»-

«7  ftud  the  antiiiaitU'4  of  the  different  Atatm  of

Italy. Dionysioft  of  IlalicamaJKiu,  himself  a  fted-

Iklons  iu<|ttirvr  into  mitiquitie*.  b«ara  ample  tenti-
uy  lo  the  reih'Arvb  and  accnrikcy  of  that  part
Wlilob  tlTlkta  of  the  orii*iu  uf  the  aucieui  ItalinJi
eiUci^  Cato  '*>'»*  Ibe  Qnt  of  hts  cwiiiin.incn  vrbo
wn»te  vm  the  «Hl«Jrt'l  of  uie«liciiie.  Tht»  wm  done
in  *  «ork  entitled  i'^Mmtt»f^n>u  fu.<  MtUttnr  Fi-


li^,  Senit,  Familiarihim.  In  thislMwk  nf  domM
medicine,  duck,  pigeons,  ami  tiare  were  tbc  fiN^
be  obiedy  recommetidetl  to  the  »ick.  Hi))  rem^
dies  were  principally  extracted  from  berb*;  bu4
oftlewort  or  cabbage  was  hi«  favonrite  cure  (Pliii,
II.  _V.  IX.  i}  D).  The  recipes,  indcwl,  coutaiuni  is
his  work  on  ngricnltnro  show  tbat  bin  metlical'
knowledge  did  not  exceed  that  which  usiiMltf  t^s-
itita  among  a  seini-luirbarouM  rare,  and  uiil)-  rs*
tended  to  the  nioHt  ordinary  ^iniplpft  wbicb  eat
rire  atVords.  Aiilns  GelUntt  (vi.  IU)  mentioos  C'«li«1|
Lifrri  Qiiftrwtionum  Jifiatoli^tr'nn,  and  l.'ii'«>in  bi^
Ajyphthegmota  (De  Ojfi^iit,  i.  '£)) — the  tint  ecu ucl
pic,  probably^  of  that  class  of  works  wbicb,  itiil^l
the  api>ellntiuD  of  Ana,  were  ouoe  so  liialiiuiiaiAl
and  prevalent  in  Fratice.  ,j

On  the  life  of  Cato.  fle«  Plutarcb  aud  CunieLKif
Nepos;  Corfcese,  D«  iV.  Pwv.  CnO>ni$  ViU^,  Oprril*^
ei f.ingfui  (Tnrin.  ISp^l; itnd  Weitu*.  Qiinnliafk  rM
Cntonian.  Capitn  V.  ifioltiiigeu,  l.-ftff). Tht  fr-a|
iimuIk  ofCattyM  writings  lexcopt  the  n-urk  oo a
ricnltnre)  an)  collectwl  by  Jorilau  fLwpzii;,  1S*5|
Tbc  Wnt  text  of  Ihii  fi€»  RnMtiea  Ik  tb»i  of  tv(
(LeipKig,  IrHI). See,  ou the language,  Ibe  w«ir
of  ('iirtc«e,  Ommmatiat  Catoniitmt  (Turin.  l*CiL.
(a)  Marci* *.  son  of  Cato  tbo  Cenwr  by  bit tin
wife. He  distinguUbed  himself  greatly  in rbi
bntllo  of  Fydnn,  against  ['er*^*,  king  of  M««-«hIi».
nin, and received bigb eiibij^inm^ from Aenil*
ins  ['anhiFi,  the  Il(>m:in  rnmmander  ou  tbat  t^rci-
sinn,  n'hoAo  dangbttr  Tertia lie  aftcrwanU  uwr-
rifd. He  dieil  vrhtbi  filling  Ibo  office  of  pmeior
(Tint.  Cat.  Mai.  20,  24). (3)  Salumcb,  or,  iu  Ha-
tareb calls bim,  SAfjOXINr$ (SdXau'tMtt,  «>D  uf
Cato  Ihu  CeuMir  by  bi?>  Fuiotmd  wifti. Tliift  mtcuhJ
wife  was  tbo  dnnghtcr  of  one  Salonius  nlin  M
bo«a  Cato's  lecreiary,  and  wit^,  ai  the  time  of  ib*
marriage,  a  member  of  biji  miinin?. Salouiii^  like
his  bulf-brtdher  MurciiA,  die*)  vrbeu  praetor. H*
lol>,  however,  a  aon  named  Miircu^,  who  sllaJM^
to  the  cou»nUbip,  and  who  wax  tbe  father  (if  Cil«
the  younger,  coiuniouly  calleil  l*lieensi»  (PI'iI.  ('<*'■
Mai.  1C». (4>  VAt-ERirs.  ii  celebmted  granidun*"
and  [toet  in  the  lime  of  ^ulla. He  was  depfivol
of  all his  patrimony  during  the  excv«»es  ti  llw
Civil  War,  aud then  direcietl bis  attenltim  »
literary  pnrvnits. To  him  lias  been  oAcriM  ***
poem  of  1(«  hexaiueterB,  entitled  Dintf  it  H^-
tarnm.  an impnvAlioit against the peraoti  "Iw
bait  cauwNi  Ibe  bx*  of  Ida  et<taie,  and  a  la«w»*
for  bi<^  love.  Lydijt. Tell  by  ratdcbc  (Jei*!^'
an<l  Ribbeek I  Kiel, l"^  \ See tbe  treaii^  "*
Cato  by  NaekinitiBuQii,  |447l.  and  Hnnpt'i  riliii^
of  Vergil,  p.  676  )  Leijalg,  I^;i»; ."iiiFliiuiu*  "i""'-'
tious  ofber  works  that  have  not  cunie  ilonti  lui^
— the  Diitmt  and tbe  iH-liff/t'ttitf—ht-sitWi  tw
ti^e* ou gramuiar and ibetotie. (ftt  JIjiKHN
calletl  alfti  )hXoK.  nnd  I'ticcnms,  fnim  Iiis  J<*'''
at I'lica.  was great -gran^laoii to I  he  cpile*>r '''
the  same  name,  and  was  born  n  «■,  93. A  Ao"
time  after  hts birtb he la«t l>«tb  hi«  panno-
aud  was  bnuiglit  np  in  ibr  bouM*  t>f  Uriiisn'""
aua,  bin uucle ou tbe niotbcr'n nide. trc»  I"
early lifip Cato dii^played a inattirily uf  jwlf
ueut  aiHi  ID  iutirxible  tirtuue.*M  it(  characlei  ^
above  hia  yean;  aud Sar{iedi>n.  bi« iiifttnKt*-
being  areii9tomed  to  take  htm  frei|npiittj  to  t^
re»idrnct< of Sulla,  who bad Im-mi IiIm tkthtf*
frirnd,  the  yoqag  CaU».  then  bnt  fonrte^o  yot*
of  Bigp,  stmrk  witk  bartwr  at  tho  ld<w>dy  m^im
tbat wriv  pMriiig  anond biu,  at.ked  bi»  ptt-


CATO


301


CATO


ceptor  for  a  sword,  that  ho  might  slay  the  ty-
rant. His  afiectiouate  dispositiou  was  clearly  dis-
played iu  his  strong  attachmeDt  to  Caepio,  his
brother  by  the  mother's  side,  as  may  he  seen  by  a
reference  to  the  pages  of  Plutaroh.  Being  ap-
pointed to  the  priesthood  of  Apollo,  he  changed
bis  residence,  and  took  his  share  of  his  father's
estate;  bnt,  though  the  fortune  which  he  thng  re-
ceived was  a  coDsidemble  one,  his  mauuer  of  liv-
ing n-as  simpler  and  more  frugal  than  ever.  He
formed  a  connection  with  Antipater  of  Tyre,  the
Stoic  philosopher,  made  himself  well  acquainted
with  the  tenets  of  that  school,  and  ever  after  re-
mained true  to  its  principles,  pushing  them  even
to  aueteriCy.  His  first  appearance  in  public  was
against  the  tribuuea  of  the  people,  who  wished
U)  remove  a  column  of  the  Forcian  Basilica  which
incommoded  their  benches.  This  basilica  had
been  erected  by  his  great-graud father,  the  censor,
and  the  young  Cato  displayed  on  the  occasion
that  powerful  and  commanding  eloquence  which
afterwards  rendered  him  so  formidable  to  all  his


Porcia  aod  Coto  UticeoBis, (Vaticao.)

opponents. His  first  campaign  was  in  the  war
against  Spartacus  (q.  v.),  as  a  simple  volunteer,  his
lialf-brother  Caepio  being  a  military  tribnne  iu
the  same  army;  and  he  distinguished  himself  bo
highly  that  Gellius,  the  praetor,  wished  to  award
hiro  a  prize  of  hononr,  which  Cato,  however,  de-
clined. He  was  then  sent  as  military  tribune  to
Macedouia. There  he  learned that  Caepio  was
lying  dangerously  ill  at  Aenns  in  Thrace,  and  Id-
stautly  embarked  for  that  place  iu  a  small  paa-
tage-boat,  notwithstanding  the  roughness  of  the
sea  and  the  great  peril  which  attended  the  at-
tempt, hut  only  arrived  at  Aeuns  jnst  after  Caepio
had  breathed  his  last. Stoicism  was  here  of  no
avail,  and the  youug  Roman bitterly  lamented
the  companion  of  bis  early  years. According  to
Plntarch,  there  were  some  who  condemned  him
for  acting  in  a  way  so  coutradietory  to  his  phil-
osophical principles;  but  a  more  nufeeliug  charge
was  the one brought  against  him by  Caesar,
in  bis  attack  entitled  Antimtones  (q.  v.). It  wna
there  stated  that,  after  all the  lavish  expendi-
tare  in  which  Cato  had  indulged  iu  performing
the  funeral  obsequira  of  Caepio,  and  after  having
declined  repayment  from  the  daughter  of  the  lat-
ter, he  nevertheless  passed  Caepio's  ashes  through
a  sieve  in  search  of  the  gold  which  might  have
melted  down  with  them.

When  the  terra  of  his  service iu  Macedonia
hwl  expired,  he  travelled  into  Asia,  and  brought


back  with  him  the  Stoic  Atheuodorus  to  Komet
He  was  next  made  quaestor,  and  discharged  with
so  much  impartiality  the  duties  of  this  difflcnlt
otBce,  aud displayed so much integrity  in its
various  details  that,  ou  the  last  day  of  his  qnaes-
torship,  he  was  escorted to his house  by the
whole  assembly  of  the  people. So  high,  indeed,
was  the  opinion  eutertained  by  his  couutrymeu
of  the  pnrity  of  his  moral  character  that  when^
at  the  Floralia  giveu  by  the  aedile  Messins,  Cato
happened  to  be  a  spectator,  the  people,  out  of
respect for him,  hesitated about ordering the
prostitutes to strip themselves naked,  accord'
iog  to  loug-estahlished custom,  nor  would  they
allow  this  to  be  done  nutil  he  had  departed  fron»
the  theatre  (Yal.  Max.  ii.  10,  8). When  the  cou'
spiracy  of  Catiliuo  was  discovered,  Cato  support-
etl  by  every  means  in  his  power  the  acts  of  Cic-
ero, aud  was  the  first  that  gave  him  publicly  the
honourable  title  of  Pater  Patriae. Opposiug  af-
ter this  the  ambitious  movements  of  the  first  tri-
umvirate, they  managed  to  have  him  removed  to
a  distance,  by  sending  him  out  as  governor  of
the  island  of  Cyprus. Having  executed  this  tmst
with  ability  aud  success,  and  having  deposited  in
the  treasury  nearly  seven  thousand  talents  of  sil-
ver, he  again  took  part  iu  xniblic  affairs  at  Rome,
and  again  contiuged  bis  opposition  to  the  trium-
virate. When,  however,  the  rupture  took  place
between  Pompey  aud  Caesar,  he  sided  with  tlie
former,  aud  was  left  behind  by  him  ^  Dyrrha-
chium  to  guard  the  military  chest  and  magazine,
while  he  pushed  on  after  Caesar,  who  had  been
forced  to  retire  from  the  siege  of  that  city. Cato,
therefore,  was  not  present  at  the  battle  of  Phar-
salia. On  receiving  the  news  of  this  event,  he
sailed  to  Corcyra  with  the  troops  under  his  or-
ders, aud  offered  the  command  to  Cicero,  who  de-
clined it. He  then  proceeded  to  Africa,  where  he
hofied  to  meet  with  Pompey;  but  on  reaching  Cy-
reu6  he  heard  of  his  death,  and  was  also  informed
that  Pompey's  father-iu-law,  Scipio,  hod  gone  to
Inba,  king  of  Mauritania,  where  Varus  had  col-
lected  a  considerable force. Cato immediately
resolved  to  join  them,  and,  in  order  to  effect  this,
waa  oomi>eIled  to  nmke  a  long  and  painfnl  march
across  a  desert  region,  iu  which  his  troops  suf-
fered severely  from hunger,  thirst,  aud every
hardship,  but  which  privutioua  his  owu  example
euablo«t  them  manfully  to  endure. After  seven
days  of  suffering  his  force  reached  Utica,  where
a  junctiou  between  the  two  armies  took  place.
The  soldiers  wished  to  have  him  for  their  general,
but  he  yielded  to  what  he  conceived  to  be  the  su-
perior claims  of  Scipio,  who  held  the  office  of  pro-
consul ;  and  this  fault  oa  bis  part,  of  which  he
soon  after  had  reason  to  repent,  accelerated  the
ruin  of  the  cause  in  which he had embarked.
Scipio  having  wished,  for  Inba's  gratification,  to
put  all  the  inhabitants  of  Utica  to  the  sword,
Cato  strenuously  opposed  this  cruel  plan,  and  ac-
cepted the  command  of  this  importaut  city,  while
Scipio and Labienns marched against Caesar.
Cato  had  advised  them  to  protract  the  war;  but
they  hazarded an engagement at ThapsuN, in
which they  were  entirely  defeated, and  Africa
submitted  to  the  victor. After  vainly  endeavour-
ing  to prevail  upon  the  fragments  of  the  con-
quered army,  as  they  came  successively  to  Utica,
to  unite  iu  defeuding  that  city  against  the  con-
queror, Cato  furnished  them  with  all  the  ship)*  in


fcATO


30i


CATCLLCS


the  harbonr  to  convoy  them  wlii^rcver  thf y  wisliwl
to  go.  Wlieii  llm  QVoiiiiif*  of  that  Uny  cnmc.  Iio
rctirod  to  bUowu  n|>artDM?iit!«,  niiil  employed  him-
self  for  some  time  tii  readtug  the  Phaolo  of  Pln-
lo,  u  dialogue  that  turns  tijHiii  tlio  itiiuiortfility  of
tliu  siml.  He  eodejivourcd  nt  thr  witiio  time  to
lull  tlie  auspicious  of  liis  fricndti  by  MHMuitig  to
take  A  lively  iiitcreat  in  tlie  fate  of  tlir>H«  who
were  escapiiij!  by  sea  fmiii  Uticii.  jmd  by  H«iidiii|;
aeverni  tinier  to  the  M.>ii.tid»  tii  Ii<ani  the  nlnUa  of
the  wiiiil  aTuI  wealhur.  But  lowartU  niortiiitg,
when  all  wan  quiet,  ha  atablicd  liiiiisolf.  Hv  fell
frooi  hitt  liod  mitti  tho  hlotr,  iimL  tho  uui»c  of  his
full  brought  his  »on  utid  aeiVADts  into  thtf  ruuiit,
by  whose  asfiirttanco  he  wiia  raitiod  (wm  the
grouiiil,  aud  an  attempt  was  Diiulri  to  biud  tip  the
wound.  Their  effurts  to  save  biiu  nere  in  vniu,
forCulohnd  no  sooner  recoven-d  hisHelf-]>OHne«t4iou
than  hu  lure  open  Ihu  wiiiind  :i};:tiii  in  mi  elTprtnal
a  niuniter  that  he  iuHluntly  exjHrcd.  He  <lit>d  at
tha  age  of  forly-elglil.  When  Caennr  lieurd  of  Ihk
fnl«,  he  i(t  ttnitl  lo  liavo  exclaimed,  "  I  gru<l}{e  thei-
tliy  death,  Caio,  xiucc  tbou  IniHt  gnid^etl  tne  the
Baviug  of  thy  life."  Snch  wa.-*  tlu^  rod  of  a  man
wbom  a  better  ptiiluAopliy,  t»y  tuacliing  him  (o
strui^glo  with  his  prednuiiiiant  laiiltM  irj^lcud  af
enccurafjiu^  tUcm,  would  bave  rendered  truly
amiablu  anil  ndtnirahle.  Ho  possessed  the  ^reat-
e»tl  integrity  and  tinniiess;  aud,  from  tbo  liej^in-
uing  of  liiH  [Kdittcnl  career,  was  never  Bwayoii  by
fear  or  interfwt  to  de.sert  that  which  ho  considered
tlio  canrtc  of  liberty  ami  jastice.  Dnrin);  the  Civil
War  he  h.td  the  rare  merit  of  uniting  to  tbe  sin-
ciiri-«t  ardour  in  the  iranitn  of  hit^  party  a  steaily
rnganl  for  jnatire  mid  bonmnily;  be  wiudd  nut
countonunco  cruelty  or  rapine  hiM^nUAe  prnctineil
by  bis  Aasoclates  or  coloured  with  n  iircteiice  of
public  advatitagea.  Bui  philosophical  pride  uver<
ftbadowed  the  last  scoiiee  of  bis  life,  ami  led  him
to  iudnl^o  hift  selfish  feelings  by  suicide,  rather
than  live  for  the  bappinefts  of  his  family  aud
friends,  nud  mitigate,  ae  far  as  lay  in  his  power,
tlio  distressed  couditiou  of  bis  country.  His  char-
acter, bnwever,  wiis  ao  pure,  .and,  siuco  I'oiujiey's
4leatb,  no  8uiH>riiiv  lo  that  of  all  the  leaders  en-
gaged with  him  iu  the  name  canae,  that  liitt  oi>-
pouuntA  conld  not  refntte  bim  their  rof|>ect.  (fi)
M.  PoKclt'S,  son  of  the  prccetling,  was  spareil
by  L'netuir,  but  led  a  fiomewhiLt  immoral  life,  nit-
til  he  etfaced  the  titniita  upou  bin  clmractei-  by
B  gleriourt  death  at  I'hilippi  (I'lut.  Cat.  Mhi.  73).
(7>  DioNYsiVH  Cato.  a  namo  erroneously  giveo
(o  tho  author  of  a  collection  of  moral  maxima
in  fiuir  IwHiks,  laiieh  used  as  n  school-boi»k  in  tin-
Middle  A^es,  and  li-aiislale^l  into  Kngli>>h  before
1479  by  Itciieiliet  Uurgb,  whose  ver*)ion  waa  printeil
by  Caxton.  Kach  maxim  consists  of  two  bex-
flmetent,  the  wb<de  immber  of  maxims  beinj;  lti-|.
The  style  i.i  fairly  ;;»od,  and  shows  the  ihk'ui  Ui
(late  fnmi  about  the  Uiiid  century  \.IK  Tlie  all-
ied Ion  is  proce<Ieil  by  titty-six  short  pr«iverh»  in
pro&o  with  a  separate  preface,  by  a  dlHcretit  au-
thor, probably  of  later  date.  The  hexameters  are
IJenenilly  spoken  of  as  T)i»tiefui  Catonii  [Cotonia
Duitich*»  de  Mofitnt*  nd  FUhim  ),  and  in  a  Paris  JI.S.
as  Lii^'  Catonit  Phihuffphi,  but  the  name  Cato  is
probably  nso<l  merely  ti>  desigunio  the  maxims
as  shntwd  and  wise.  Tbo  ailditiou  of  the  name
Diony>iius  is  doubtless  due  to  a  confusion  arising
fmni  Mm  fact  that  one  of  tho  earlier  MSS,  of  the
Difiicfia  conlutned  also  a  trauslatfon  of  the  Peric-


upcnH


fftniit  of  Dionysinii. A  good  text  is  that  of  Hmi

(Iterlin.  iet»).

Catretu. 8co  CncTScrs.

Cam  or  Chatti  Cue  of  ibc  most  im;
natiotis  of  Ovnuatiy,  bounded  by  the  Vijinrjhi
(Weser)  on  the  east,  the  Agri  DecnmatM  on  tiw
si>utb,  and  the  lihine  on  the  west,  iu  the  uiwlem
Hesso  ami  tho  adjacent  countries.  They  werr  a
brunch  of  the  Humiitmes,  ami  ure  first  U)eiiti<ni'*d
by  C'tuMtnr  utnler  tbo  erroneous  name  of  Snrvi
They  were  never  completely  subjugated  by  tli
Kunmiis;  and  their  jMiwer  was  givaiiy  BngnwtitQi
oil  the  declioe  of  tho  Chemsci.  Tboir  capital  w%
Mattiimi  (Mailon).

Catullus,  Gaii-ij  Valkrivs,  A  celebrated  EC
man  pwt,  boru  in  the  territory  of  Verona,  al«*^
n,c.  ti4.  His  praeuomeii.  Gains,  is  not  giveu  in  »-i
good  M88.,  which  only  mention  hid  e^iguoiu^u:  I  a
GaiiiM  is  accepted  on  Iho  authority  of  A|iuic>||
{Jpal.  10).  In  cuiiHe4|ueuce  of  an  iuvilatiou  fr^^
ManliiiH  ToniuatUM.  one  of  the  noblest  pslrici  ^
of  the  Stale,  lie  pnic*HMletl  in  curly  youth  toB»n|
where  hu  ap|M-ani  to  have  kept  but  iOiUtTer^
cuuipany,  at  least  iu  point  of  mo|-al  character.  ^
intjtniretl  his  fortuue  so  much  by  bis  extravagt^
tbut  ho  complaluB  he  had  no  one


Fnclum  qui  velfiris  p«4cia  gnbaU.
tn  cullo  «lbl  coUocmn  ptaslt


4r9l


This,  however,  must  have  been  nrittnn  [la:
jest,  as  his  tinanaes  were  alway.n  sulKcieat  to  allo^
him  to  keep  tii>  a  delightful  villa  on  the  prtiiusall
of  Kirmio  and  an  exi>ensive  reMideuoe  at  TibuD
With  a  view  uf  imprttviug  bis  {ictMiuiary  clrcuiaJ
utanccs,  he  adopt-ed  the  u.timl  Kouiau  mude  ef  rm,
establishing a dimiuished furinue,  aud acc<uiu*{
pauied  liains  Memmlus.  the  cclebnited  ^riHl  o^,
Lncretiutt,  to  IJithynia,  where  bo  was  apiwiuf'Ji
praetor  to  that  province. His  wtnation,  howrrei"",'
was  bat  little  ameliorated  by  ibis  expedition, «■•*<,
in  the  course  of  ir,  he  lost  a  beloved  hrolhri  wlio^
was  along  with  him,  aud  whose  death  he  IsokhI'  f
ed  ill  Terse  never  snriuiasKMl  In  delicacy  or  pdbi*  |
He  came  hack  to  Rome  with  a  nhattcml  MPMiii"'  j
tion  and  a  lacerate<l  heart. Fmm  the  pivuHl  «
bis  retnni  to  Italy  to  his  deceaMv.  bid  tiuie  ■f|»*"'
lo  have  iMHjn  chielly  occupied  with  the  pnufcnlit""
of  amours  in  llie  cupHal  or  iu  the  s«lili»le»  irf  ^"^
mio. He  died  B.c.  .S4.

The  distracted  and  nnhappy  state  of  his  f'*""'
try,  and  hisdingnst  at  the  treatmeui  wliicli  bcli*"
received  from  Memmius,  wore  [ierh»{M  (»iiflt<'i*"'
excuse  fur  shunning  political  employment*:  '"'*'
when  we  coiisiiler  bis  taste  and  gt-nirw,  ttc  cinnw
help  n^gietting  that  be  was  merely  an  iitlertt'l*
debauchee.  He  lovt^l  Clodia  (supposed  Ui  U'*
been  the  sist«'r  of  the  tribune  C1odiiis),a  Ixaa''^
but  shameless  woman,  whom  bo  has  celebt*"*
under  the  imme  of  Lesbia.  Among  hift  friend*'"
rnuked  u«t  only  meet  men  of  pU^isMre  and  fn*''*'"
in  Itome.lMit  many  of  her  eminent  literary  and  f^
litirat  characters,  such  as  Cornelius  Noptis.Cif''*
aud  Asiiiius  Pollio.  His  enemies  se*'m  lo  ^•'*
been  a*  numerous  at  hi**  lovi^s  or  friendship*,'™*
competitions  In  poi-try  or  rivalnbip  iu  giJIwtiT
npjiear  always  to  bave  Ik-cu  a  snltieii-nt  eau«  **
bis  dislike:  and  where  au  antipathy  »-]»*«« rw
ceived.  be  was  nnable  to  put  any  restraint  on  i^*
e.xprettsiou  of  his  hoslile  fL-elings.  His  |MK>nis  krt
chieHy  emidoyed  In  rhc  indulf^ence  and  cnomic-UK^
ratiou  of  these  various  passions. Tbey  have


CATL-LLfS


ttft


CAL'CON'ES


[irirIM iiitn  lyric,  «ln^inr.  !iu<\  ppi<rmnifnitic,  an

in'uiitEFiudit  roriTuniriit  from its  i;iMi<<-ni1ily,  liiit

t«  nrljirb  nl)  can  not,  irilli  etrirtnes?.  )w  tTdnct*!].

Ho  Mv>ni»  to  liav«  l»p«»n  llip  rjirlicsi  lyrir  poet  i»f

LfttJnm.iintwiilwMiiiUiigtliei-laitiuif  Horvirt^  toiliir

uittebou»tir. Much  ofliiM  [lovir^'  appcnrK  to  linvb

been  lofit:  the  |)iccva  tliat  rcniitiu  to  u»  ill6  in  all)

exliibit,  ill  Miij^ular  voulrunt,  tlio  m-d»ii[i1  );rosBneas

«b)cli  IH  inibibc4l  from  ik'pravt!*!  liabita  ftiiit  Ioobo

iruitviiiatioQft,  togvtlier  witli  exquisilo tuticlics  of

Mttiiiinciit  uDcl  ta«t«,  aa<l  tb>-  poHitli  of  hitotkctua)

citUtvauoD. Tbo8v  nbo  turn  wiih  <Hsi;i)iit  from.

tboonnnu  impuriti*^  tbiit  sully  bis  page«t  may  l>e

iucliowl  to  wniuler  Ibat [irniw*  of bin  dmlicacy

*ln>iiW  ovi*r  b;ivi'  bw»  coiiiili^t  with  ttio  naiiiH  of

(;utnilns. Itiil to  many  nt'  bis  efl'iiMioiin,  distiii-

[(iiishcil  Villi  liy  fancy  anil  feclinfr,  tbis  prnisv  is

jiijitiy  •luf'. llany  of  bin  amatory  tritb*A  an.'  (|uite

tiiirrvnll).<«l  in Ibu t'legaiico  uf  tlii-ir  playfiilnvnif ;

atiil  no  uiitbor  biM  fxcflled  him  in  Ibu  pnrity  ami

iifaloeM  of  his  slyle,  tbe  rli'li^iilfiil  cako  niiil  Hiin-

(ilictty  of  bin manner.  Ami in Kracefnl turn!*  of

Uintigbt  ami  felicity  of  cUctinn. Snmv  of  hiti  picceK,

hkb  breathe  tho  bi^hor  eiitbimititum  of  tbt>  art,

III  an  eotoiire<l  with  n  siTignlar  pirniivHijiionosA

'f  i«i»i;ery,  inci*a«e  onr rcj;n*t at llw  manifettt

'BiutiUtii)ii  i>f  Ilia  worki». Amnti^  tbt'iw,  tlii>  imtst

ftaioi k;il>l<<  iM,  ]>erliHpis  tbe  Ailin,  a  pitem in  the

plbumbit:  rni'trr,  uiul  unlike  the  wnrk  of  nny  oth-

•r  l-atiii  nntbur  in  the  strnnc<»neM  of  its  «ul>jcct

tod  itx  wptni  imnfilmitivo  (ktwcr. No  one  of  liii*

I^Wirjil  preileo^wirN  vras  more  venwd  in  fJreek

lit^rttnrv  than  C'alnllua,  iitid  Iiik  exteiivive  knowl-

of  t(A  btfautioM  prtwnred  for  biiu  tb«  ap(>ella-

•(Docttit.

Clititlbis  tntntflali'il  many  of  ilio  shorter  and

K^K  ilelicatt* pirccN  of  ibe  Gnwk.-),  an  attempt

*'>Kti  liiibvrto bud bevn thought iinpiHu^ibU'.

tli'vngh  ihc  broiiil  liiimonr  of  their  coincilifs.  tbc

TrbnoHit  pathoti  of  tb(>ir  tnigfdiu!^,  and  thu  romaii-

l^c  iiilprv^t  of  tbt>  (AlytMfft,  bud  ittuoiL  the  trnimfor-

1*. HiH  stay  ill  Uitbyiiiii,  tboiigh  tittle  nd-

iiia to bis fotitiiif.  iviidcreil htm bettor

lintpd  Ihan be  ini^ht otbernicti? bnve  been

*i'ljtlir  protluctioUN  of  iVreece:  and  be  was  there-

'"'J.iB  a  sreat  dejrree.  indehte^l  to  Ibis  exiieditiun

firtlioj^felicitonft  tiims  of  expression,  that  gi-are,

ilicity,  nnil  parity  nbirb  are  thf*  rbiirai'teriHtiL-H

|nM>mH,  iind  of  wbicb  Itilherto  Gn*(H:u  atone

Ifforded niiMlels. Indi*rd,  in all bin  verHes.

•wther  i<1f>i;iiir  or  heriitr,  wm  pi>rceive  bis  imita-

i;p(ittuf  llio  UrtM'kK;  nitd  it  mnsl  Iw  admitted  tbat

drawn  fnim  ttiriu  bis  cbnii:L-<4t  utoroa. His

.l*i»K;ire  frp<[Uetit ;  bia  hitn({i-N,  similes,  meta-

i,Aiid  nildresH«8  to  him-oeU'  art-  all  flrrek;  nud

•"B  in  tbr  verbid  pat  ion  of  bin  ml.*.-  ne  see  rlsiblo

J****  <►!  their  origin. NeverUu'It*)!,  bo  was  the

inTeatoriifa  new  siwciee  of  Latin  poetry;  and  as

"  **i  ilie  flr^t  who  nsed  such  variety  of  mens-

"■*!  ind  ]MMha|w invented  i<M»nie  that  were  iitw,

"'Wm  amply  entitled  to  call  the  jvoetical  volnme

''•icti  b.« presented to  Cornelius Nepos Ifpidvs

•"••i  UtttUut. The  expresHinns,  too,  sind idtnmit

"' tfce  Un*«>k  Ian jjiiiiKe,  whirli  be  ban  mi  enrefiilly

*"'«"(c.|,  flr«  woven  with  nueh  art  into  the  lestum

•f  li.-»  coin [kjfcit ion.  and  so  aptly  paint  tbo  Inipntt-

M<»ik[  idwus  of  hiH  nitiH>,  tbat  tliey  have  all  tbe

Bnliand  nntariii»hed  hnt**  of  orfginnlity.

tlic  il^.  of  CntiilliiH  nio  of  recent  date,  and
ilcrive«i  t'ntin  a  »lrtgle  codex  iC«dex  Vero-
)  i>f  wUicU  Katlwr,  bi&bop  of  Veroua  {a.d.


9C5)  made  some  nse,  and  nbirb  in  tbe  fonr(e«nth
eentiir>-  was  ajjain  copied,  as  also  a  third  time,  and
then  Hnally  lottt.  The  earliest  and  best  MS.,  copied
diivrtly  fr<»n  ihe  Ctwlex  Veronensis.  is  one  Jii  I'nris
(Geniianfiiisis),  nearly  related  to  which  i«  the  Codex
OxonieiisiH,  probably  copied  about  llie  year  1400
(Uiibreua).  lu  all,  there  are  Kome  tieveiity  MSS.  of
Cntullits,  on  which  sve  R.  Kllts'fi  prolegomena.

Old  Mlitious  of  Catullus  are  those  of  AvaiiciuK
(Aldus.  Venice,  lUH) ;  of  Mur«tn».  with  a  conniien-
tiiry  (Venice,  15o-l);  of  Scaliger  (Paris,  1577);  of
Voas  ('Ix)udou,  lijct4 ) :  and  of  Doring  (Leipzig.
!788-^i).  Great  editions  are  tbost>  of  Lachmatin
(Berlin,  1*»);  of  fiebwabo  ( llerlin.  Icy« ) ;  of
Bithrens  (Leipzig.  lii*85);  and  eK|)eeially  of  Kobin-
son  KlliD,  commentary  (Oxford,  \f<76,'M  e<I  Ifji^}
and  text(Oxfonl,  18CG).  Trnnslatiotie  arc:  {Freiidi)
l»y  Rostand  (Paris,  1880-82);  (Knglisb)  by  Martin
lir<t^l),Craii9tuDU(1d67),aml  Ellis(1871);  and(Ger-
uiani  by  Hieao  (1864).  Criticism  of  Cntullns  may
bo  found  In  RlM>eck,  Catatlut:  ein«  Uterar'hUloriiuM
Sliz^  (Ki*jl.  I86;i);  Conat,  /I'ude  «»r  CafuU«  (Paris,
lf*75);  Ncttli'ship,  Kttny  in  L,itin  Ijl«rntur«  (Lon-
don, l*;fi);  Vaccoro,  Cntvtio  a  la  I'ofMta  (Palenno,
laSR);  Scitz,  De  Catv/li  CarminHiua  in  Trf*  Paritt
Dittrih»€n<tix  (I{»stHtt,lH87).  8eti  also  Munro,  CriH-
ritmx  'inxt  I-JfurUtUionn  of  CitluUtm  (IH7C);  and  Sellar,
liumftn  Putts  a/the  /iejmhiic  (2tl  od.  I*li.

CatOltia.  (I)  Q.  LtrTATit'S.  A  Koman  naval
coiiitiiander,  famotui  for  his  victory  over  Ibo  tlect
of  the  Cartbaginians, consisting  of  400  sail,  oil'  the
Acgatea  Iminlae:  forty  of  tbe  Cartbaginlan  vessels
wore  Slink,  seventy  taken,  and  the  remainder  dis-
]>en»ed.  This  celebrated  victory  put  an  end  to  the
Firwt  Punir  War.  (2)  QfiNxrs.  A  celebrated  lii*-
mau,tho colleague'  of  Mnriiti*  in  the  coiisnlHhip,  and
one  who  jointly  Irinmpbcd  with  hini  <tver  tbe  Cim-
hri.  ITc  was  condemned  to  death  by  Marios,  during
(be  tyrannical  sway  of  tbe  Intlei',  ifncl  snlfiN-ntcd
bimseir  in  a  iieM'ly  plaxtered  loom  by  tbe  steam
caused  by  a  large  firo  [YM.  Paterc.  it.  22).

Caturlgea.  A  Lignrian  piMiple  in  Gallia  Narbo*
neiit^is.  tiear  tbe  Coitian  Atj**.

Cauoaaiae  Pytae  (KavKatruxt  UvXai). 8ee  Cau-

Caucftsna,  CAtXASii  Mo>rrEB  ( K^iJicairos,  r&
luii/Rii(ria  t*pt}).  Tlie  modern  CnncasUB;  a  great
chain  of  mntintaiiis  in  Aiiia.  extending  from  tbe
coat  shon?  of  the  PontnN  Kiixiinm  ( lUack  Sea )
to  the  west  sboro  of  tbe  Caspian.  Them  ai-o
two  chief  paascK  over  the  chain,  both  of  which
were  known  to  tbo  ancients:  one,  noar  Derbent,
WHS  callcil  Alhanlae,  and  sometimes  Caspiaa  Py*
lae;  tbe  other,  nearly  in  tbe  centre  of  the  range,
was  called  Cnncasiac  l*ylne  ( Pass  of  Dariel).  That
tite  Greeks  bud  some  ragne  knowledge  of  the  Cau<
raans  In  very  early  times  is  pioved  by  tbe  myths
rcNpecting  Promeihens  and  the  Argonauts,  from
wbieli  it  (teems  Ibat  tbc  Cnucasns  was  reganled  as
at  the  extremity  of  the  earth,  on  the  border  of  the
river  Oceamis.  When  tbo  soldiero  of  Aiexiuidei-
ndvniH-ed  to  tbftt  great  range  of  niomitains  wbicli
funned  the  northern  boundary  of  Ariann,  tln^  Parii-
]iauiihius,  tbey  applicil  to  it  the  name  of  Caticiwns;
afterwards,  for  tbe  sake  uf  ilisliiirtimi,  it  was  called
Cancasns  Indirii!). $pu  Paiiopamisc^.

Cauci- See  Cbauci.

Cancoues  (Km'icMMt).  The  name  of  peoples
botU  in  Greece  and  Asia,  who  bad  disappeared  at


er  t1niC9.  The  CanrMui.'B  in  Asiii  Minor  ar«
lutiulioiicd  by  Houi«r  as  alltvs  of  tb«  Tr<tj:iiiK,  uiid
Are  placed  in  fiitbyuia  aud  Paplilaguiiia  by  iU«
geograpliura,

Cdtidex. Suo  CoPEX.

Caudiiun.  A  u»n-u  lu  Samuiiim  an  the  mtut
fnili)  Capim  lo  Bt'lii'Vi^ntuiii.  lu  tbi->  ii<<it£bbi)iir<
hootl  Men?  xUv  oelvbmUsd  Furoulae  C'ninliiuu',  *ir
Catidiuft  F'li'k.'s  iinrrovc  |>ajM<>(i  iu  tbe  nioniiitiiuH,
where  a  Roiimu  uriii.v  8HtTeotl«"ied  tci  the  Sam-
uites.  and  tvim  »t!iit  umler  tbe  yoke,  B.C.  321.  U  in
nuw  ciUlul  tbv  valley  uf  jVi-puiu.

CaulioQU.  Ill  unbilecture,  tbe  elgbt  smaller
ll>u^^H  nr  otidkii  ill  ibt-  Coriutbiaii  cniiitiil,  simiig-
iug  ont  uf  tbu  fiiui'  priuoipal  uues  by  wliirh  tbe
eigbi  rohnes  uf  rhe  citpital  are  Huataiiiott.  8ue
CaI'ITimm  ;  ("oirsiXA.

Caulon  or  Caulooia.  A  town  in  firutUnm,
northeast  of  Ixuri,  oi-i)tint)lly  callud  Aiilou.

Caunua. 8eu  Uyblia.

Caunua  (KuC-*k>c).  Ouo  of  tho  chiof  cities  of
Caria,  on  its  M>nthc-ni  coaHt,  in  a  very  f<?rttb?  lint
anbealtby  Aituatioi],  It  ivas  rminilcd  liy  thi'  Cnt-
tauH.  ItH  di~iml  tijc^  (CaHKrar  Jicui)  m-m  bigbty
eelxbmttil. TliPipaiutitr  Pritt(ig<MH?«\riMlH>ni  lu-ru.

Caupo  (Kiin-ijXtjr,  $fvatii'tKos).  An  innkeeper  who
Uxt^t'd  tr«%'ellem  ui  bis  btntoe,  nutl  vraa  anBwernble
for  ibu  «ilo  cuitloily  of  ibeir  property  whilo  tbey
rE<uinin{<<l  there  (i>jjr- iv  11, 1  pr.). Seo  CAfPusx.

Canp5ua.  (1)  An  inn,  where  travellei-(4obtaiue<l
fiHid  iuhI  liKlging:  in  wbieb  hvamv  it  aimwtTLMl  tn
tbe  tirvvk  wonbt  rravfinKthiv.  Korayaytnii,  and  xarrt-
XiMTtr.  (fi)  A  Kbop,  where  wine  and  ruAdy^drettsed
meat  were  auld  ;  hi  iin'ek,  KonrfXt'iov,  Tbe  perauu
who  kept  a  mupana  n*n«  called  euupo  ur  a>pi/;  a
boMteiw  in  «i/w.  rarely  rmijMna.

I.  Uakkk  !sn8. — In  the  iiarlieat  ajtcs  of  Oreeeo,
aa  in  tb«  Ka^t  ut  all  times  and  iu  newly  iwttleil
ooluule^,  tber«  wns  no  pruvinion  for  tbe  enluitabi-
mout  of  tnivcllert.  and  the  dnty  of  hospitality  wan
univerBally  aeknuwletlged.  (See  Husi'iTit'M.)  Tbe
growth  »)f  tniflic  njinh-rnd  inns  nm'eiwary.  and  in
later  tinu'S  they  appear  t<i  hav«  Iiten  very  nnmer-
nnn.  The  K^'eiit  tintnbt-r  tif  feHttvals  whieh  were
celebrated  in  the  dilTetviit  townsuf  Grei^ec,  beftidca
the  four  great  inilioual  gunH«>,  tn  which  persons
flocked  fnmi  all  partM  «ff  tbe  IIcIUmhc  world,  must
have  reipiired  a  cunsuluniblo  nuiuliBr  of  inns  lo
acconiniodntu  hI  rangers,  not  «nily  in  the  pluces
where  the  festivnlB  wero  celebraUMi,  but  a1-«>o  on
tho  romls  lea^Uiig  lo  those  placoa.

The  accommodation  |ti-ovided  was,  however,  far
from  luxnrlons,  and  the  character  both  of  the
honsos  and  of  ihtur  laodlorits  wos  very  iiulifTerenl.
Inns  were  regarded  as  little  better  than  brothels;
iTfu^oK* Ccrui  Kiit  iTQpiroiioiTKrjtrai  are  joined  togeth-
er (Tlieopbp.  CAiir.  6) ;  Kan^Xcin  xai  irop«ia  iPoII.
ix.  34).  The  orgies  uf  Pi-nn^lrins  Poliort^etes  in  the
AcrojxdiH  snirgest  to  a  comlo  |M>el  tliat  "be  took
jt  for  an  iun":

A  Ti^ii  iiMturmohit  wiikAuailiw  l^ttXitfrr

(PblHppul./r  -23  >I.  (i/<.  Pint.  I>emrtr.  26).  More-
over, tivsldcs  ibechiirge!!  of  fraud  and  adnltei-ntiun
to  which  tbey  were  liable  in  cumnii>u  with  other
CfinfAot  of  retail  dealers,  the  hruta  wore  ol>«ii  ac-
ctlMsl  of  more  w;rion8  erbneA.  Two  stories  l^lIll  by
Cicero,  hnt  taken  from  Ureek  life,  both  turn  on


CAfPONA

mnnlers  cnuiinitted  by  innkeoiwrs  for  the  sake
gain  {De  fur,  it.  4,  M-1 ;  ^*<  Die.  i.  27.  ^  hti  Th|
higher  I'bisiH-K  nwed  these  iravfioxtla  as  little  its
sihlt; ;  yet,  in  ilrfiintt  ofotbirr  aceo  nil  noil  at  ion,
pnblie  ninliasstidoi-sorAtlu'ns  werefeaniotimea
stmined  to  Unlgr  and  evi-n  to  transact  di|ilonullc
business  in  Uu-ni  lAesch.  JM  F.  L.  ^  97  ]  L)vni.A-

Thi-  wonl  K(iirF)X«in»>8ignifie4l,a8hastMH>oslrra<ly
remiirked.  u  plaec  where  wine  and  retnly-ilnwwd
ppivislons  Were  sobl. KdtriiXof  signifies.tn  geiicnU.
a  retail  trwler  who  sold  gi>od»  in  small  «innnli(i<im.
Tile  term,  however,  is  ninre  particularly  flp(»linl  W
a  person  who  si>ld  ready-dressed  provisions,  aitd
especially  wine  on  drnugbt  trichol.  Arjsl4i|ili. /*'(/!.
p.ll&d;  Plat.  ti'i>rf/.p.Cd';>U). When  a  rrtsil^lfalvi
in  other  commodities  is  spoken  of,  the  uanivuf  \%\%
tmde  is  usually  pn-Qxeil. Thetie  icain^Xria  »pn.-  nvt
reoortud  to  n«  clnhs  {\iaxtu>  trai/xltnt,  ur  fi>r  pur-
poses of  gmMl-fclhiwabip,  bnt  merely  for  witisli
drinking;  ami  hence  nt^re  extremely  disreput&UK
I  Isocralv.s  telbi  tut  that  In  Ihu  "goiHl  oUI  linB«»*
'(I.  (.'.tbe  democracy  of  Solon  and  CleiHthfumk oo
I  respectable  slave  would  bave  ventured  l«i  rsr ar
drink  in  a  KomfXilov: whereas  in  bin  own  tiiuo
young  men  of  tbe  greatest  r«s|>ectabibty,  ilri  veu
by  an  absurd  prejudice  from  the  schools  of  philof-
ophy  and  rhetoric,  spunt  their  wbule  liiue  in  these
nud  aiuillar  establish  men  ts,  iu  drinking.  Ksuilitiifft
and  debauchery  (Isocr.  Air^'p.  ^  Aif:  Atitul.i  iS^\.
;  We  are  therefore  not  suqirised  to  read  of  the  \om
estinialion  in  which  innkiMi[M'rs  were  t^lil.

II. Ki)U.iN IX.Sfl.  —  A Roman  waysiilo  lun  (ft
the  roception  of  tmvflllurs  was calletl  init  oulf
riiujuniit,  bat  niso  ttif/^ruii^Jjfrerikfriam,taui  6i/«twi
eUcerituria  (the  last  in  Plant.  Jfen.  u.  'A,  irl :  Varr.
Ji.  H.  i.  2, 33). AUnig  all  tho  grvut  roads  of  I'")''
there  were  iiiiis,  as  we  s^e  from  tho  di'ftcri|iri<'u
wbirh  Homce  givca  of  bis  jniimey  froai  K"iih'  !<•
Krundiisiiini {Suf.  i.  b). Th*y werw l.iilii  w
a  ftpccnbitioit  by  nuighbonring  propn*-T<
either  let  to  A landlonl  or  managed Iv -  "
Tbey  utiually  Included  a  tttuhttum  for  Iiohm  ftac
mnles;  hence.  Lti  the  I>igest,<MM/>o/f<»iiinl  irfoMi'^
are  im>re  than  ouee  meutionud  together. Wlwn
the  trnttic  was  greatest,  there  migbt  be  sevrniliB
the  aame  (dace. To  take  the  Appian  Wsy  «I"U^
w(«  tliul  tliL*  station  Tnf*.  TalH>riiae  (fio  ./lrf«4''-'''
M,  \'.\),  Korunt  A|>pii  (tijrrrlMin  r,t*if»milnii  iH'if
1.  c.  A),  TalMtrnae  C'iUfdi(!).ie near  Siinuessa  dV<i
/Cj>it. p.  45 Mf, Ctiudi euupfmuif {Hur.  1.  o. -ill-
From Plantns  downward,  IhiMo  hastelriu  oecia
rc|>eaf<Hlly  in  Latin  litt^ratnre. Anib,^ss«dt>r»>"**
asnally rereived at the public ex|M<ase  iu  ^
cent  Imlgings:  bnl the KbinHan  emljassy  i>f  >^^-
167  wa.H  driven  to  a  mrdidum  detrnntnam  d*'*-
xlv.  'ti  }. Ciwro  mentions  a  eopo  dt  pw  IaU'^
suborned  as  a  false  witness  (Pro  ClutHt.UH.S^^'-
and  the  discreili table  tippling  of  Antoniii*  ■"  '
(itujMnuUf a  few  miles  from R>niio  on  tbr  ^^^
Klaniinia  (PMt,  li.  31,  4  77). Cynthia  ditivr  [".i*'
t'lftfrna  on  her  way  to  Latinvium.aml  thf  >'
uf  the  tJiv  em -brawlers  disgiislrd  her  {"■•
(Protwrt,  V.  e,  19). The  Hprigblly  Vcrgilian  t'-V*
(q.T.)  shows  ns.in  a  very  modem  ftwbioii.  ibr  «•*"
Itetttion  between  rival  eatablishnienlA  and  tlicii^
vert  iter's  art  In  full  operation.  Thv  ueoomiiK-UU'")
at  these  pbicea  wat  getirrally  of  a  jioor  kri'-l,  ^"'^
extremely  cheap. In  Polybius's  time  iu  Cis-di-ii  i"
<ianl  there  wvte  no  ilcm^  in  the  bill:  the  u«lu'*»*
charge  (.inquired  befoTcbaiid,  it  should  be  adilel)


CAUPONA


ao5


CAUTIO,  CAVERE


rarely  exceected  half  an  a«  (Polyb.  ii.  15).  For  the
early  iiu]>erial  period  we  have  the  record  of  the
well-knowD  relief  at  Aeaeruia,  represeuting  a  host-
ess reckouiug  with  a  parting  guest.  The  dialogue
between  the  two  is  giveu  at  leugth,  aud  the  charges
are:  breatl  and  a  pint  of  wiue,  1  as;  meat  {pul-
mentaritim),2 assfs ;  male's proveuder,3a««ejt;  and
auotber  less  decent  item,  for  which  we  refer  tlie
curious  to  the  inscription  itself.  (This  relief  is
figured  in  the  Bullettino  NapolUniio,  vi.  1,  nnd
tlieiice  in  Daremberg  aud  Saglio ;  the  inscription
is  in  Mommseu,  Inner.  Rtgn.  Neap.  5078  =  Orelli-
Heuzen,  7306).

At  Rome  there  must  have  been  many  inns  to
accommodate  strangers,  but  they  are  burdly  ever
(>;ii(keu  of.  We,  however,  find  fraquenc  mention
of  bouses  where  wiue  and  ready-flressed  provisions
were  sold,  and  which  appear  to  have  been  numer-
ous in  all  parts  of  the  city.  The  bouses  where  people
were  allowed  to  eat  aud  drink  were  called,  almost
iudiacrioiiuately,  eauponae,  popinae,  thermopolta,
and  tnUrnae  tinariae.  The  si>ecialty  of  the  ther-
I'tifjwlia  is  noticed  under  Caxda.  These  places
were  priucipally  frequented  by  slaves  and  the
lower  classes,  aud  are  qualified  by  such  epithets
as  nigra,  J'umoin,  iminumla,  vnHa  ( probably
"  greasy,''  though  it  has  also  been  takea  in  a  good
Beuse ).  Among  other  discomforts,  they  were  only
furuished  with  stools  to  sit  upon,  instead,  of  couches.
This  circumstance  is  illustrated  by  a  painting  foand
u[  Pompeii  in  a  wine-shop,  representing  a  drinking-
sccueiu  which  there  are  four  persons  sitting  on  stools


A  W)De-ehap. (Prom  a  PalDting  mt  Pompeii.


around  a  tripod  table.  The  dress  of  two  of  the
figures  is  remarkable  for  the  hoods,  which  resem-
ble those  of  the  capotes  worn  by  Italian  sailors
and  fishermen  at  the  present  day.  They  use  cups
mode  of  horn  instead  of  glasses,  and  from  their
whole  appearance  evidently  belong  to  the  lower
orders.  Above  them  are  different  sorts  of  eatables
hung  npon  a  row  of  pegs.

From  the  moral  point  of  view  the  Roman  iuus,
whether  lodging-houses  or  mere  drink-shops,  were
no  better  than  the  Greek.  Hence  we  find  minx
Uihema,  fornix  joined  with  nneta  popina,  and  the
legal  aspect  in  Dig.  ixiii.  2, 43,  $  9.  Nor  are  other
r«Gonls  wanting.  Behind  the  wine-shop  at  Pom-
peii, where  the  paintingdescribed  above  was  found,
is  tbe  celebrated  brothel,  the  contents  of  which
are  LOW  carefully  preserved  in  the  Naples  Museum,
Tlie  Aesemian  inscription  already  mentioned  tells
tbe  same  tale.  Wine  or  eating  shops  used  for
innnoral  purposes  were  called  gaiieae,  and  are
oftea  classed  with  the  lustra.  Naturally,  there-
fore, persons  who  kept  houses  of  public  entertain-
niout  of  any  kind  were  held  in  low  estimation.
Tlie  common  opinion  as  to  their  honesty  is  ex-


pressed by  the  epithets  perjidua  aud  maligntu,
which  Horace  gives  to  them  {I.  Sat.  i.29;  v.  4).

Under  the  emperors  many  attempts  were  made
to  regulate  tbe  popinue,  but  apparently  with
little  success.  Tiberius  forbade  all  cooked  pro-
visions to  he  sold  in  these  shops  (Sitet.  Tib.'ii);
and  Claudius  commanded  them  to  be  shut  np  alto-
gether. They  appear,  however,  to  have  been  soon
opened  again,  if  they  were  ever  closed ;  for  Nera
restricted  them  to  the  sale  of  cooked  vegetables,
and  prohibited  meat  (Suet.  JVer.  16);  and  an  edict
to  the  same  effect  was  also  published  by  Vespasian.
See  Zell, Die  Wirihshduaer  der  Alien,  in  his  Fer'un-
nchrifUn  (Freiburg,  1826);  Becker-GoU,  Oallua,  iii.
27-45.

Caura. A  town  of  Hispania  Baetica.

Caurus  or  Coras.  The  Argestes  of  the  Greeks ;
the  northwest  wind ;  aud  in  Italy  a  stormy  wind.

Canaa  Liberalis. See  Assertor.

Causla  (icavo-i'n). A  felt  hat  with  a  broad  brim,.

formings  partof  the  national  costume  of  the  Mace-
donians aud  neighbouring
peoples.  The  name  is  de-
rived from  its  keeping  off
the  heat  (Kavats).  A  purple
eamia  was  worn  by  the  Mace-
donian kings  as  part  of  the
royal costume. See D  i  a-

DEMA.

Canter  (xavrijp,  Kavnipiov).

(1)  A  branding- iron  or  cau-
tery, used  either  by  snr-  Hermefl  wearing  the
geous  or  for  branding  cattle  r*","!*".'  "^F**™  *
and  slaves  (Pallad.  i.  43,  3). ^'""''^^'^•I

(2)  An  iustrnmeut  employed  in  encaustic  paiuting..
See  PiCTURA.

Cautio,  Cavere.  These  words  are  of  frequent
occurrence  in  the  Roman  writers  and  jurists,^
aud  have  a  great  variety  of  significations,  ac-
cording to  the  matter  to  which  they  refer.  Their
general  meaning  is  that  of  security  giveu  by  one
person  tx»  another,  or  security  which  one  person
obtaius  by  the  advice  or  assistance  of  another.
Tbe  general  term  {cautto)  is  distributed  into  its
species  according  to  the  particular  kind  of  the  se-
curity, which  may  be  by  mtiadatio,  by  ajideiiu-
»io,  aud  in  various  other  ways.  The  general  sense
of  the  word  cautto  is  accordingly  modified  by  its
adjuncts,  as  cavtio  Jideiusaorta,  pigneraticia,  or  hy-
pothecaria,  aud  so  on.  Cautio  is  used  to  express
both  the  security  which  a  magiatratua  or  a  iudex
may  requii-e  one  party  to  give  to  another,  which
applies  to  cases  where  there  is  a  matter  in  dis-
pute of  which  a  court  has  already  coguizauce ;  and
also  the  security  which  is  a  matter  of  contract  be-
tween parties  not  in  litigation.  The  words  cautio^
and  cavere  are  more  particularly  used  in  the  latter
sense.

If  a  thing  is  made  a  security  from  one  person  to  an-
other, the  cautio  becomes  a  matter  of  pignus  ovofhy-
potftera;  if  the  cautio  is  the  engngement  of  a  surety
on  behalf  of  aiprincipal.it  is  a  can tiojideiusaona.

Tbe  cavtio  was  most  frequently  a  writing,  which
expressed  the  object  of  the  parties  to  it;  accord-
ingly, the  word  cautio  came  to  signify  both  the  iu-
strnnient  {chirogmphum  or  imtrumentum)  and  the
object  which  it  was  the  purpose  of  the  instrument
to  secure.  The  phrase  cavere  aliguid  alicut  ex-
pressed the  fact  of  one  person  giving  security  to
another  as  to  some  parliciilar  thing  or  act.


CAVAKDIUM


8M


CECROPS


Caufion<8  which  were  a  branch  of  itijmlationet
■were  such  rontnict'f  rm  ivniild  be  gmtind  of  actiiins.

In  tnany  onses  n  hfn-e*  uoiiM  ikiI.  Hiifuly  pay  toga-
•ciw,  nnle«8  thn  l«Kate«  gave  wscurily  (<M»/(i<>)  to
Tcfuixl  in  csuw  thu  will  iiiiilor  which  ho  claimed
ehoiild  tarii  out  to  \ic  Vh\a\.  Thu  eautio  }fNei<ma
WHS  the  etiKagiMiU'iit  by  which  the  fiertu  Iwitml
hiiiiHtOrtnfiiirii  lliRCoiiditioua  of  his  testator's  will,
or  u»  yiv(»  L|i  (he  iaheritftiice.  The  herea  wivs  also,
in  (K>nie  ciwea,  hoaud  to  give  sorririty  fnr  tliL*  pay-
moiiC  of  legacit-'s.or  tlie  legatee  wftnerlitled  tn  the
honornm  poaffttifi.  Tiit^'trg  nnd  airtitora  were  re-
<|iiinMl  lo  give  tsecnrily  iMtiivltire)  for  the  duo  aJ-
miiiistralioa  of  the  pniperty  iiitrnstvd  to  thetu,
itidt^s  the  tut^ir  was  iippuiiited  hy  teMtflmeut,  or
uiileHS  the  r.urator  wan  u  curator  legitimut.  A  pro-
rtiratifr  wtio  aiti^d  in  the  name  of  aii  abaeut  pnrty
might  he  rcqnired  to  give  security  that  the  al>Heut
)>arty  would  consent  to  )>e  ennehided  by  the  au't  tif
i3\* procurator:  tliiri  secnrity  was  aspiwies  of  juitU-
datw,  inetnded  niidnr  the  gi'tiim  aiulio.  In  thf
case  of  damnum  infrrttnti,  thu  owner  uf  thu  land
or  proj>orty  thrratiniml  with  thu  iniiwhiuf  might
call  for  Mctirity  on  the  iMrsou  threatening  the
misohiof.

If  a  vendor  Bohl  a  titing,  il  was  usnat  for  hiiu
to  deeliirc  that  be  had  »  kikk)  title  to  it,  and  that
if  any  [icwon  recovered  it  fmni  tlie  pnrchnser  by  a
betUT  title,  he  wonlil  make  it  goml  to  the  pnr-
chnaor;  nnd  iu  sonie  cnsen  thetwriO'^  was  for  donble
the  vuhie  of  the  thing.  Ttiis  was,  in  fact,  a  war-
ranty.

The  won]  r<iutio  wait  aIkd  applied  to  the  rolciMu
which  adehl'Or  obtaiiitil  from  hiit  croditoi'  on  Mttia-
fyiiig  bi»  drinaiid :  in  thiN  ttriiHo  eautio  ih  equiva-
lent to  ft  modern  receipt ;  it  Ik  the  debtor's  Kecnhty
against  the  Bame  demand  being  luado  a  Hccond
time.  Thiia  eatere  ah  aUqvo  siguitie*  to  obtaiu
thill  kiinl  of  Rccnrity.  A  person  lo  wliom  the  u»u»
fruHna  of  a  thing  was  given  ndglit  bo  required  to
give  Heciirity  that  lie  wonld  enjoy  and  use  it  prop*
■eriy,  aud  uot  waste  it,

Carrre  ie  aUu  applieil  to  expreaa  the  prufttssional
atlvice  and  aRftislaiire  of  a  Eawyer  to  his  client  for
bi»  conduct  in  any  legal  matter.

Tho  word  Mrtre  and  it*  derivatives  are  alao
utted  to  exprestt  the  provisions  of  a  law  hy  which
anything  in  forbidden  or  ordered,  as  tu  the  phrase
Vnutum  ett  lege,  (^tc.  It  ia  also  ummI  to  exprcHS
the  wonls  iu  a  will  by  which  a  teHtatur  dcclarvit
hi»  wi»h  (hnt  certain  thingM  ^honlil  ho  done
after  his  <U*ath.  The  preparation  of  the  luHtru-
raeuts  of  eautio  was,  of  couitw,  tb«  bustucss  of  a
lawyer.

U  iH  unneceasary  to  particnlarize  further  the
e|>ecii!»  of  Mutio,  AH  they  belong  to  their  aeverul
bciidti  iu  the  law.

Cavaedluin. 8eo  DoMt;)*.

Cavalry. See  KqcES :  Exehcitcs.

Cavea.  (1)  Tho  and  i  to-
rintu  of  a  theatre.  See
TiiEATltrM.  fS)  A  coup  ill
which  thu  HacrLt)  cbickt-mt
weni  kept  ami  cnrrii-<l  to
the  place  where  thu  uugii<
lies  were  to  be  taken,  by
observing  tbo  manner  iu
whifh  tlipy  fml  ( Cic.  S.  D.
a.  3). Shc  Aroi:H.

Cavere. See  C&tTiu.  mtg ,ric|i  >


Cayster  or  Caystrua  {Vidvorpov).  Aeeh
river  of  Lydin  and  Ionia,  ihnving  lielweni  tlw
raugea  of  Tmoliis  nnd  McMogiH  into  the  Ae^iii,
a  little  northwest  of  Kphesn*.  To  this  ilaj-  it
abounds  in  Hwann,  aa  it  did  in  Hotncr's  time.  71k
valley  of  the  Caystrna  js  ontlwl  by  Homer  "t!ie
Asian  meadow,"  and  is  probably  the  dietrict  to
which  the  name  Attia  wha  tlntl.  upplicfl.

Cea. Kee  Ceo8.

Cefidas  ( Kfo^nr)  or  Caeftdaa  ( KaidAar).  Adce\i
caveru  or  chasm,  like  thu  QdpaSpov  at  Athens,  in  «  «>
whieli  rbe  Spartans  were  accUKlomMl  tn  thni  »9t
porbon<4  condemned  to  death  (Thiie.  i.  VM).

Cebttuna  or  Oebenna.  The  moileru  CeveuD?-  e;
a  range  ofmotintains  in  the  wmth  of  Ctaiil,ci[U<i^  ^-
ing  north  as  far  as  Lngdunum,  and  se)Hir.itiui4  L  'Sie
Arvenii  fi-oui  tho  Helvii.

Cebe»iK«^7c).  A  Greek  philosopher, and  ilutfti
of  Socrates,  nnd  also  oneof  thnillterlocut«nlHll-•
Plato  introduces  in  Ihh  dtatogna  entitled  P^ae
He  waa  born  nt  Thehe*,  and  compo-stHl  llinw  <
lognca,  called  tlrhdomc  (^t*\(it)],  Phrynichvi  i**'^  _
inx9^),  and  ri'aax,  or  llio  Picture  {Ulva^).  The  %  2«a<
ia  tho  only  one  whieli  hiiN  come  dunu  to  us.  L  C:  ia
coinmftnly  cited  hy  i\n  I.aliTi  title  Vehrti$  T«f>»9f4
(i.  c,  pifla),  and  In  fl  nionil  Hketeb  or  picture  of  li  ri-
umu  life,  written  iu  a  plcntdug  and  simple  st^-]^
Some  criticH  have  nii»ed  doubts  as  to  the  aalli**ri-f
ticity  of  thifl  little  work.  It  contjiius,  iiuht^l,  a  j
very  pure  velu  of  morality,  hut  i.i  not  coraposMJ.  mm
they  thiuk,  tu  the  true  spirit  of  the. SocratirftcUoo/;
aud  they  are  iucIino<l,  therefore,  to  regnnl  it  a«  tbv
work  of  some  Stoic  who  wishwl  to  i*ht»tt  that  bnp-
piuess  consisted  in  the  prart ice  of  virtue.  Hut  J'l
iaexpivwly  ftttriluitiHl  toCcbes  hy  Luciau(/>r  J/«^
cetje  ronduvt.  i'2i,  and  after  him  by  Tertnlhan  {Ik
Prancript.  adv.  Hmrel.  39  i.  Diogenes  I-aiTtiii*  f  i'-
Vio),  Chak-idina,  aud  Suidas.  Woltf  wa^  ilw  Sr-l
among  the  nioderus  who  venture*!  to  rail  in  '!»»'*■
tioi)  thi.i  testiutoiiy  of  the  ancients.  "So  wer*  '"
antiriiiiiy  has  mot  with  a  wider  circulaiieo.  I"
the  Middie  Ages  it  was  extremely  popnlar,  sikI  '*
has  lieeu  trauslatctl  into  ainuiMt  ull  the  aioikni
luuguftges,  including  even  the  Arabic— ttii*  ver-
sion, iu  fact  (of  the  ninth  century  A.D.),  l-emg '"^
only  Bftnrce  for  the  close  of  the  dialogue.  TIip  1»<
eilitions  of  CVties  are  that  of  ScliwerghSw
iSlraMbitrg,  1H06J ;  that  of  Thieiue  (l*erliii.  I*"!*
with  (JcLinitn  note.t  of  great  merit:  of  JcrnuDiO**
foKl,  11:77);  aud  of  I'lirhona  (Boston,  IWiff).

C«brenia  (Kt&fifjvU).  Daughter  of  C^'hirt*.  J
river  goil  in  tho  Tnmd,  from  whom  the  t*""**"
Cebmitf,  (he  river  Ucbren,  and  tho  «urro«nii»''s
di^trioi.Cebreuin,  took  their  names.

Cecropia. See  ATiiENAii ;  Attic*  ;  Ciccii»r*-

Cecropa  (K»'«p«^). A  hero  of  the  I'ehisgi*-  r»**J
said  til  have  been  the  firnt  king  of  Atlica. IU  *•"
married  to  Agrnulos.  danghter  of  Aclaciie,  by  "»!»•
Iw  had  a  son.  Erysichthnu.  who  KtireriHlcd  hiB»
king  of  Athens,  and thrw  daughter*.  Ag™"  V|
HerWl.  anil  Pamlni-sos. In  his  reign  Ptneiden  ****
Allien^  eoutendeil  for  the  possestiioii  of  Altip"i  **'
Cwrops  decided  iu  favonr  of  the  goddejm. Cec^fz
i.s  .oaid  to  have  founded  Athens— the  cilad'I  ^.
which  was  calle^l  Cecropia,  after  him— to  ha"**"
videil  .\ttioa  into  twelve  commnniti«B,aud  loW
introduced  the  Uret  elements  of  civilized  life. (^
Atiiesak.  ) Ho iuslilnted inarriaye. aboliiW
bloody  »acrincc!i,  aud  taught  liia  auhjects  ImviV)


CEDIT  DIES


807


CEI-SUS


tvorship  the  gods.  The  later  Greek  writers  de-
«cribo  CecropB  as  a  native  of  Sals  iu  Egypt,  who
led  a  colony  of  Egyptians  into  Attica,  and  thns
iiitrodnced  from  Egypt  the  arts  of  civilized  life;
but  tliis  account  is  rejected  by  Home  of  the  an-
■cients  themselves,  and  by  the  ablest  modem  critics.
Cedit  Dies. See  Leoatum.

Cedxeniia,  Georgius.  A  Byzantine  writer  who
wrote  au  historical  work  beginutug  with  the  crea-
tion of  the  world  and  continoiug  to  the  year  a.d.
1057.  Of  his  personality  nothing  is  known.  The
history  has  been  eilited  by  Bekker  (Bonn,  1839).

Celaenae  (Kt\m»ai).  A  great  city  in  southern
Pbrygia,  situated  at  the  sources  of  the  rivers  Mae-
autler  and  Marsyas.  In  the  midst  of  it  was  a  cit-
adel, built  by  Xerxes,  on  a  precipitous  rock,  at  the
foot  of  which  the  Marsyas  took  its  rise;  and  near
the  river's  sonrce  was  a  grotto  celebrated  by  tra-
dition as  the  scene  of  the  flaying  of  Marsyas  (q.  v.)
by  Apollo.  The  Maeauder  took  its  rise  ia  the  very
palace,  and  flowed  through  the  park  and  the  city,
below  which  it  received  the  Marsyas.

Celaeno  ( Kt\aiyw ).  One  of  the  Harpies.  See
Habptiak.

Celendfirla  {KtXivitpis).  A  city  on  the  coast
of  Cilicia  Trachea,  to  the  northeast  of  the  Ane-
murian  promontory.  It  was  founded  by  the
Pbceoiciaus,  and  afterwards  received  a  Samian
colony.

Celer.  (1)  The  joint  architect  with  Sevenis  of
the  famous  Golden  House  (Domus  Aurea)  of  Nero.
See  Palaiiuh. (2)  See  Eonatii.

C^fireo.  According  to  Livy  (i.  15,  8),  a  body-
guard of  300  chosen  by  Romulus  to  atteud  him  iu
peace  and  war.  Livy  leaves  it  uncertain  whether
they  were  cavalry  or  infantry.  According  to  some
accounts  (cf.  Dionya.  ii.  13, 16, 29)  they  were  Infan-
try ;  while  accordiug  to  others  (id.  ii.  64)  they  in-
cluded both,  or  were  ouly  cavalry.  The  last  view
is  that  which  has  been  usually  taken.

Celes  (xcXfif).  (1)  A  horse  for  riding  as  distin-
guished from  a  draught  or  carriage  horse.  (2)  A
race-horse  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  $  10).  (3)  The  same
as  Celox  (q.  v.).

Cdetnuu.  A  towu  in  Macedonia  on  a  penin-
sula of  the  Lacns  Castoris.  It  is  probably  to  be
ideutiBed  with  the  later  Diocletianopolis.

Celeos  (K(Xfor).  King  of  Eleusis,  husband  of
Metanira,  and  father  of  Demophon  and  Triptole-
muB.  He  received  Demeter  with  hospitality  at
Elensis,  when  she  was  wauderiug  in  search  of  her
slaughter.  The  goddess,  in  return,  wished  to  make
bis  sou  Demophou  immortal,  aud  placed  him  in
the  6re  In  order  to  destroy  his  mortal  parts;  but
Metanira  screamed  aloud  at  the  sight,  aud  Demo-
phon was  destroyed  by  the  flames.  Demeter  then
bestowed  great  favours  upon  Triptolemus.  (See
Triptulkml'S.  )  Celeua  is  described  as  the  tirst
priest,  and  his  daughters  as  the  first  priestesses,  of
Ih'tiiieter  at  Elensis.  See  the  Homeric  hymu  to
Demeter,  146  foil.

Cella.  (I)  In  its  primary  seuse,  eella  means  a
store-room,  of  which  the  following  were  the  priu-
cipal  descriptions:  eella  penaria  or penuaria,  where
all  kinds  of  provisions  (penus)  were  stored,  espe-
cially those  of  which  a  stock  was  laid  iu  for  a  long
time;  eella  promptuaria,promptvarium,  or  pfomum,
the  larder,  where  meat  and  other  things  required


for  immediate  consumption  were  kept;  eella  ole-
aria,  the  magazine  of  au  olive-yard  in  which  the
oil  was  storetl,  and  which,  according  to  the  treat-
ises on  farming,  ought  to  be  lighted  from  the
south,  that  the  oil  might  not  bo  chilled  iu  winter;
while  the  ceUa  tinaria  shonid  have  a  northern
aspect,  to  avoid  excessive  heat  aud  great  changes
of  temi>crature.  The  eella  vinaria  described  in
the  ancient  authors  is  the  store-room  of  a  vineyard,
in  which  the  new  wine  was  kept  in  dolia  or  eupae,
wbile  older  wiue  was  put  into  amphorae  and
matured  in  the  apotkeca.  The  eella  tinaria  was
partly  underground  (Becker-Giill,  6allu$,  iii.  51,
433).  The  eelUi  vinaria  of  a  wine-merchant  was
discovered  in  17d9  nuder  the  walls  of  Rome.  It
was  raised  a  little  above  the  level  of  the  ground,
and  divided  into  three  compartments,  the  first  or-
namented with  arabesques  and  a  mosaic  pavement,
the  second  nupaved  aud  containing  a  row  of  very
large  dolia  two-thirds  imbedded  in  sand,  while
the  third  was  a  narrow  gallery,  six  feet  high  and
eighteen  feet  loug,  with  various  earthenware  ves-
sels, also  partially  snnk  in  the  sand  and  ranged
iu  double  rows  against  each  wall.  (See  Dolilm.)
The  slave  to  whom  the  charge  of  these  stores
was  intrusted  was  called  eellariut,  a  ratiottihi/a
celiac,  promut,  promus  eoiidtu,  or  procurator  pen i ;
under  him  was  the  tvbpromus.  (2)  Any  uumber  of
small  rooms  clustered  together.  Thns  the  word
was  applied  to  the  dormitories  of  slaves  (Hor.  S/it.
i.  8.  S),  to  the  bedrooms  of  au inn,  and to the


sure  Ccllae. (Ricb.)

vaults  of  a  brothel  (Petrou.  8, 4).  A  brothel  is  also
called  cella  insa-ipta,  because  the  price  of  ench
inmate  was  inscribed  on  the  door  i^Mart.  xi.  45, 1).
The  porter's  lodge  or  janitor's  oflflce  is  called  eella
08tiarii  (Petron.29)  or  eella  ianitorin  (Suet.  ViUU.
16).  (3)  In  the  baths  the  cella  ealdaria,  tepidaria,
a,nd /riffidaria  are  respectively  those  which  con-
tained the  hot,  tepid,  and  cold  baths.  See  Ual-
neae.  (4)  The  interior  of  a  temple  was  also  called
cella. See  Templum.

Cellar. See  Apotheca  ;  Ceixa;  Doml's.

Cellaiias. See  Cella.

Celox  («'Xi;c,  KfATTtoc),  from  xc'XXu,  rdh, "  (o  nrge
on."  A  swift  boat.  This  peculiar  build  of  boat
is  said  to  have  beeu  invented  by  the  Rhodians
(Plin.  if.  JV'  vii.  $  208).  It  was  mnch  used  by
pirates,  but  was  more  especially  employed  as  at-
tendant on  the  fleet,  either  for  briugiug  news  or
negotiating  with  the  enemy.  Further,  each  State
appears  to  have  had  such  boats  for  various  oflieini
purposes,  just  as  we  hear  of  bTj/ioa-iai  aKaroi  at
Athens  (cf.  Plant.  Capt.  iv.  2. 93).  Built  for  swift-
ness, they  were  necessarily  narrow,  and  Appian
calls  one  o^t;.  They  had  no  decks,  and  only  one
bench  of  oars  (Polyb.  v.  62,  3).

CelBoa.  (1)  ACLfS  CoRXELii-s.  A  celebrated
physician.  His  native  city  is  unknown ;  some
writers  coutendiiig  for  Rome,  others  for  Verona.
The  time  in  which  he  lived  has  also  been  made  a


CELSUS


CELTAB


subject  of  controveray,  but  the  most  probable
opinioa  ia  tbat  be  lived  Id  the  first  balf  of  the
first  ceutary  a.d.,  and  wrote  uuder  Tiberius  aud
Claudius.  Celsus  composed  a  large  work,  on  the
plau,  iu  some  measure,  of  an  eucycloptedia,  in
which  he  treated  of  philosophy,  jurispnideDce,
warfare,  agricaltare,  and  mediciue.  It  was  en-
titled De  Artibus.  Unhappily,  however,  only  the
eight  books  (from  the  sixth  to  the  fourteeuth)
which  treat  of  medicine  have  come  dowa  to  us.

Komau  literature,  otberwise  so  barren  of  good
medical  authorities,  can  boast  of  possessiug  io
CelsiiH  oue  who,  for  elegance,  terseness,  learuing,
good  souse,  aud  practical  information,  stands  un-
rivalled.  His  preface  contains  an  adutirable  ex-
position of  the  principles  of  the  different  schools
which  hiul  risen  up  iu  mediciue  before  bis  time;
and  in  the  remaining  part  of  tbe  first  book  there
are  many  pertinent  remarks  ou  the  best  method  of
preserving  tbe  health.  In  the  second,  which  treats
of  the  general  symptoms  and  phenomena  of  dis-
eases in  general,  be  has  drawn  &eely  from  Hip-
pocrates. The  last  part  of  this  book  is  devoted
to  the  snbjeot  of  diet  aud  regimen;  and  here  bis
views  will,  with  a  few  exceptions,  be  admitted  by
the  unprejudiced  to  be  wonderfully  correct.  In  the
third  book  he  has  treated  of  fevers;  and  hera  his
distinctions,  remarks  upon  critical  days,  and  treat-
ment will  be  found  to  be  particularly  deserving
of  attention.  The  other  parts  of  his  work  it  is
unnecessary  to  go  over  minutely;  but  oue  may
point  out,  as  particularly  valuable,  his  divisions
and  treatment  of  ulcers.  It  is  remarkable  that
no  ancient  writer  has  treated  of  the  diseases  of
the  sexual  organs  with  the  same  precision  that
he  has  done.  The  dififerent  shades  of  cutaneous
diseases  he  has  marked  with  a  snrprisiug  de-
gree of  precision.  But  of  the  whole  work  tbe
most  interesting  part,  perhaps,  is  tbe  seventh
book,  which  treats  of  the  operations  of  surgery
according  to  the  views  of  the  Alexandrian  School.
His  account  of  those  performed  upon  tbe  eye
may  be  instanced  as  particularly  excellent.  The
operation  of  lithotomy,  as  described  hy  him,
though  not  exactly  the  same  aa  that  now  gener-
ally pi-actised,  has  had,  even  in  moderu  times,
its  admirers.  Celsus  bas  the  merit  of  being  the
first  author  who  makes  mention  of  the  applica*
tion  of  tbo  ligature  to  arteries  for  stopping  hem-
orrbage.  The  best  MSS.  of  Celsus  are  in  the  Vat-
ican, the  Lanreutiau  Library,  and  in  Paris — the
oldest  being  of  the  tenth  century.  They  all  have
a  common  origin.  The  best  editions  are  those  of
Targa  (Padua,  1769,  and  Verona,  1610);  Milligan
(Edinb.  1831) ;  Ritter  and  Albers  (Cologne,  1835) ;
Renzi  (Naples,  1851);  and  Daremberg  (Leipzig,
1839).  Milligau's  edition  has  a  good  index,  and
that  of  Renzi  a  good  lexicon.  See  Kissel,  Celsus,
eine  ki$t.  Monog,  (Giesseu,  1844),  and  on  the  Latiu-
ity,  Brolen,  De  Ehcatioue  Cels'x  (Upsala,  1872) ;  also
tbe  articles  Chikuhgia.  aud  Mkdicina.  (2)  A
Platonic,  or  perhaps  Epicurean,  philosopher  who
lived  about  a.d.  180.  His  name  ia  famous  as  tbat
of  one  of  tbe  bitterest  enemies  of  Christianity.
From  a  motive  of  ouriosity,  or,  perhaps,  iu  order
to  be  better  able  to  oombat  the  new  religion,  Celsns
caused  himself  to  be  iuitiate4l  into  the  mysteries
of  Christianity,  and  to  be  received  into  that  secret
society  which  St.  Clement  of  Rome  is  supposed  to
have  founded.  It  appears,  however,  that  the  sin-
cerity of  the  neophyte  was  distrusted,  and  that  be


was  refused  admittance  into  the  higher  ceremoniei.
The  discontent  to  which  this  gave  rise  in  the  breast
of  CelsoB  inflamed  his  resentment  against  the
Christians,  and  he  wrote  a  work  against  them,  en-
titled 'AXi}^7f  Aoyoc,  "  A  trae  discourse,"  in  vhich
be  employed  all  the  resources  of  his  intellect  and
eloquence  to  paint  Christianity  as  a  ridicnlous
and  contemptible  system,  and  its  followers  as  s
sect  dangerous  to  the  well  -  being  of  the  State.
There  is  no  falsehood  to  which  he  bas  not  recourse
in  order  to  represent  iu  an  uutme  light  the  Chm-
tian  scheme  of  morals,  to  parody  aud  fulsif;  tbe
text  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  aud  to  cs-
Innjniate  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ  aud  \\\t
disciples.  He  styles  Christianity  a  doctriue  leud-
ing  to  pervert  and  corrupt  the  human  race,  aiid
exhorts  the  government  to  extirpate  the  sect  if  it
wishes  to  save  the  Empire.  Tbe  discourse  itself  ii
lost ;  bnt  Origen,  who  refuted  it,  in  a  work  divided
into  eight  books,  has  given  us  so  coniplete  au
extract  from  it  that  by  tbe  aid  of  this  we  can
follow  all  the  principal  reasoning  of  the  author.
Celsus  wrote  also  a  work  against  magicians  and
sorcerers  (Kara  Mayaiv),  which  is  cited  by  Origea
and  Lucian.  The  latter,  who  was  his  friend,  ad-
dressed to  him  his  memoir  on  Alexander,  tbe  falM
prophet,  in  which  he  extols  the  wisdom  of  Celsos,
his  love  for  truth,  and  his  amiable  manners.  See
Keim,  CeUai  wahres  Wort  (18r3);  Aubtf,  La  Poll-
mique  Patenne  (1878) ;  and  Pdlagaud,  Etu^  nr  Ctim
(1878).  (3)  Albinovanus,  a  friend  of  Horace,
warned  against  plagiarism  (JSpiit.  i.  3,  15)  and
pleasantly  ridiculed  {Epiit.  i.  8)  for  his  foibles.

Celtae  (KcXrat)-  The  ancients  had  no  compre-
hensive name  to  denote  generically  the  collective
Keltic  peoples.  The  Continental  Kelts  were  called
Oalli  or  Celtae  by  tbe  Romans,  and  roXorat  or  KtX-
rai  by  the  Greeks,  all  these  names  being  applied
only  to  tbe  Kelts  of  the  Continent,  with  whom,  iu
the  popular  view,  tbe  people  of  Britain  bad  no
ethnic  relation.  Caesar  understood  tbe  racial
identity  of  the  Britanui  with  the  Galh,  Cettnf,
and  Belgae,  bnt  the  geueral  usage  of  the  words  as
stated  above  embodied  the  prevailing  belief.

According  to  Prof.  Rhys,  it  would  appear  prob-
able that  the  west  of  Enrope  had  in  early  times
experienced  two  Keltic  invasions,  since  the  two
distinct  names  iu  Greek  and  Latin  are  not  usetl  os
synonymous,  bnt  as  denoting  two  dififerent  etbnio
divisions.  Thus  in  the  ecclesiastical  writer  Salpi-
cins  Severus  (fourth  ceutury  A.D.),  Celtic^  is  differ-
entiated from  OaJlicd  (Migne,  Patrolog.  Lat  vol.  xx.
col.  201,  Dial.  i.  36) ;  and  Caesar,  three  centuries  l^e-
foi-e,  wrote  tbat  one  of  tbe  three  peoples  of  Ganl
was  called  Celtae  iu  its  own  tongne.

The  two  waves  of  migration  may  roaghly  W
represented  geographically  as  follows:  (1)  the
Kelts  of  Gaul,  Spain,  the  Isle  of  Man,  Ireland,
and  Scotland;  and  (2)  the  Kelts  dwelling  near
tbe  Rhine,  tbe  Alps,  and  in  England  and  Wales.
Schleicher,  iu  the  BhHnuehes  Museum  for  1639,
expounded  his  theory  of  a  Kelto-Italio  period,
according  to  which  the  people  who  nfterwanls
separated  iuto  Greeks,  Italians,  and  Kelts  are  n"-
garded  as  having  left  the  early  home  of  tbe  mre
together,  the  Greeks  branching  off  first  into  Hel-
las. Then  followed  tbe  Italo-Keltic  period,  dur-
ing which  the  Italo-Kelts  developed  those  linguis-
tic forms  which  the  Keltic  and  tbe  Latin  alune
possess  iu  common~e.  g.  the  future  in  -bo,  the
passive  formation  in  'T,  the  dative  eadiog  -bus.


CELTAE


809


CENA


ami  the  formative  sufflxes  in  -tio  and  -trie.  See
Peile,  Imtroduction  to  Grtxk  and  Latin  Eti/mology,
pp.  21-27  (2d  ed.  1872);  and  H.  Ebel,  KeHische
Studifn.

Historically,  the  Keltic  and  Latin  races  come
into  contact  not  earlier  tbau  the  fifth  century
B.C.,  wbeu  the  Gauls  crossed  the  Alps  and  began
first  to  press  against  the  Etruscan  commnnities
in  the  north  of  Italy.  Their  leader,  Bellove-
siis  the  Biturigan,  directed  the  Inaubrion  migra-
tifin  iuto  the  valley  of  the  Padua  (Po),  where  the
oiliest  Keltic  settlement  vaa  established,  to  de-
velop later  into  the  important  city  of  Mediola-
iinm  (Milan).  A  second  invasion  followed,  and
founded  the  towns  of  Brixia  (Brescia)  and  Vero-
na. Theuceforward,  tribe  after  tribe  poured  into
Italy,  dislodging  the  Etmscans,  and  at  last  (B.C.
396)  coming  in  contact  with  the  Umbrians,  and  in
3;^^  facing  the  Romans  in  successful  battle.  This
was  tbe  year  in  which  Brenuns  with  70,000  Gauls
crossed  the  Tiber,  won  the  bloody  victory  of  the
Allia  (q.  v.)  on  Jnly  Id,  and  three  days  later
marched  through  the  open  gates  of  Rome.  (On
the  date,  see  Mommseu,  Hiat  of  Borne,  i.  428,
Amer.  ed.  188ti.)  They  often  returned  to  Latium,
hut  were  less  successful  in  following  yeara.  The
Romans,  who  had  at  first  despised  them,  now
strained  every  nerve  to  avenge  the  defeat  of  the
Allia,  Camilliis  (q.  v.)  routed  them  at  Alba  (B.c.
367) ;  Servilins  Ahala  repulsed  them  in  front  of
the  Porta  CoUiuB  (e.c.  360);  and  the  dictator  Gai-
ns Sulpicius  PeticuB  won  a  decisive  victory  over
them  in  358.  Yet  iu  the  year  350  tbey  bad  again
returned,  and  encamped  for  au  entire  winter  ou
the  Alban  Monnt,  joining  with  the  Greek  pirates
for  plunder,  till  Lucius  Furius  Camillas,  son  of
the  great  general,  dislodged  tbem.  The  increas-
ing power  of  the  Romans,  aud  perhaps,  as  Momm-
seu suggests,  changes  beyond  the  Alps,  put  an  end
to  the  migrations  from  Gaul ;  and  the  Kelts  begau
to  settle  down  into  a  less  predatory  condition  be-
tween the  Alps  and  the  Apennines  as  far  south  as
the  Abmzzi,  the  chief  tribes  being  the  Insubres,
Boii,  Lingones,  aud  Senoues,  the  territory  of  the
liu)t<nanieil  being  on  tbe  coast  of  tbe  Adriatic,
from  Ariminum  to  Ancona,  the  so-called  Ager  Oal-
licns.  Here  the  Kelts,  uniting  with  tbe  Ligurians
and  Etrurians,  gradually  took  on  the  character
of  a  settled  community,  until  at  last  they,  with
the  rest  of  Italy,  became  subject  to  the  all-em-
bracing power  of  Rome.

Of  tbe  Kelts  who  first  swept  over  Italy  and  de-
stroyed Rome,  tbe  historians  give  a  picturesque  ac-
count. Brave,  open,  impetnous,  they  were  swayed
by  every  passing  impression ;  "  they  devoted  them-
selves chiefly  to  two  things — fighting  and  egprit"
(rem  militarem  et  argute  loqui,  Cato,  Otig.  ii.  frng.  2,
e<l.  Jordan).  Despising  agriculture  as  disgraceful
and  nitflt  for  freemeu,  they  followed  the  profession
of  arms  like  soldiers  of  fortune.  The  Romans  he-
fure  the  battle  of  the  Allia  had  despised  tbem  as
barbarians,  and  on  the  occasion  of  that  memorable
conflict  hod  sent  against  them  only  au  ill-organ-
ized and  over-confident  army.  The  legionaries
*ere  appalled  when  tbe  onset  of  these  fierce  war-
riors smote  tbe  Roman  phalanx.  Stripped  naked
for  battle,  sword  in  hand,  utterly  heedless  of
death,  the  Keltic  hosts  of  Brennus  fell  upon  their
enemies  with  an  ardonr  and  impetuosity  that
swept  away  an  army  in  an  instant.  Yet,  with  all
tbeir  bravery  and  brilliaucy,  the  Kelts  never  made


any  lasting  political  impression  npon  the  conn-
tries  that  they  overran.  They  lacked  tbe  politi-
cal, coustmctive  instinct  which  the  Latins  and  the
Germans,  too,  possessed.  They  destroyed,  but  did
not  create,  and  in  a  few  cenLuries  bad  everywhere
succumbed  to  the  steadier  valour  aud  more  en-
during power  of  the  Romans.

See  Mommseu,  Hiat.  of  Rome,  bk.  ii.  ch.  iv. ;
Thierry,  Hiatoire  des  Gaulou  (Paris,  1828);  Ebel,
Keftinehe  Studien  (Eng,  trans.  London,  18^) ;  Die-
fenbach,  Die  Alten  VoUcer  (Frankfnrt,  1861);  Bel-
loguet,  Ethnogmie  Gauloise  (Paris,  1858-61);  Stark,
Kekiache  Forgchungen  (Vienna,  1869);  Reyuand,  De
PKuprit  de  la  GavU  (Paris,  1866);  Scaritb,  Roman
Britain  (London,  1883);  Rhys,  Celtic  Heathendom
(1888);  Wright,  The  Celt,  the  Roman,  and  the  Saxon
(4tb  ed.  London,  1&J5);  and  also  tbe  article  by
Wiudisch,"Keltische  Sprachen,"iu  tbe  Ailgemeine
Encyklop&die  der  Wissensehaften  und  Kunste ;  Von
Becker,  Versiteh  einer  Losung  der  CeUenfrage  (1883) ;
MUlleuhof, />«t(/5cA«  Allerthumakunde  (Berlin,  1687);
Hilbner, /nscnp/iones  Britanniae  Chrittianaa;  Bntm-
bach,  Corptu  Inscriptionum  Rhenanarumf  vols,  ii.,
iii.,  v.,  vii.,  and  xii.  of  tbe  Corpus  InMcriptionum  Lati-
narum  of  the  Berlin  Academy;  aud  the  articles
Britannia;  Druidae;  Gaixia;  Hibbrnia;  His-
PANIA ;  Indo-Europban  Languages.

Celtibeil  A  powerful  people  iu  Spain,  consist-
ing of  Kelts,  wbo  crossed  tbe  Pyrenees  at  an  early
period,  and  became  mingled  with  the  Iberians,  tbe
original  inhabitants  of  the  country.  Tbey  dwelt
chiefly  in  the  central  part  of  Spain.  Tbeir  conn-
try,  called  Celtiberia,  was  monutatnous  aud  unpro-
ductive. They  were  a  brave  and  warlike  people,
aud  proved  formidable  enemies  to  the  Romans.
They  submitted  to  Scipio  Africanua  in  the  Sec-
ond Punio  War,  but  tbe  oppression  of  the  Roman
governors  led  tbem  to  rebel,  and  for  many  yours
they  sucoessfuUy  defied  tbe  power  of  Rome.  They
were  reduced  to  submission  ou  the  capture  of
Numantia  by  Scipio  Africantis  tbe  Younger  (b.c.
134),  but  tbey  again  took  up  arms  under  Ser-
toriue,  and  it  was  not  till  bis  death  (B.C.  72)  that
they  began  to  adopt  tbe  Roman  customs  and  lau-
guage.

Celtitci  (I)  A  people  of  Lnsitania,  whose  terri-
tory lay  below  the  month  of  the  Tagus,  aud  be-
tween that  river  and  tbe  Turdetaui.  They  were
of  Keltic  origin,  as  tbeir  name  imports.  Their
chief  towu  was  Pax  lulia,  uow  Beja.  (2)  A  people
iu  Gallaecia.

Cemeteriea. See  Catacumbar  ;  Sepulcrum.

Cena,  less  correctly  Coena  {htiirvov).  Tbe  prin-
cipal meal  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  correspond-
ing to  our  dinner  rather  than  supper.  As  the
meals  are  not  always  clearly  distinguished,  it  will
be  convenient  to  give  a  brief  account  of  all  of  tbem
under  the  present  bead.

I.  Greek.  The  materials  for  an  account  of  the
Greek  meals,  during  the  classical  period  of  Athens
and  Spnrta,  are  almost  confined  to  incidental  allu-
sions of  Plato  and  the  comic  writers.  Several
ancient  authors,  termed  dFiiryoXt^yoi,  are  mentioned
by  Athenaeus;  but,  unfortunately,  their  writings
only  survive  iu  tbe  fragment-s  qnoted  bjr  bim.  His
great  work,  tbe  Deipnotophistae,  is  au  inexhaustible
treasury  of  this  kind  of  knowledge,  though  very
ill-arranged. See  Athenaeus.

The  poems  of  Homer  contain  a  real  picture  of
early  manners,  in  every  way  worthy  of  the  anti-


CENA


310


CENA


qnarinn^  attoution.  Am  tlicy  stniid  npnrt  from  nil
olhi^  wriliug6.it  will  be  couvfnioni  Iwcxbibii  in
one  view  ibe  sliile  of  tilings  wliicli  tboy  de-scribe.
It  is  uol  (o  bo  cxiK'ctetl,  however,  tliut  llit!  Hoiueine
meals  dIioiiM  ax  »U  a|s:rL'e  witU  i^ip  ciiBtuinii  of  u
lnt4>r  pet'iual.  AtbeuiUMis  i  i.  c4),  who  lias  t^iilonMl
ftilly  into  ilio  biiliject,  leiiinrk'i  (in  the  Bimiilicit>
fiftbe  IIiiTucric  bniii(tiftfi.  ill  wliirb  kiiit;f<  niiil  iiri-
vni«  luuii  ntl  itartako  nf  thr>  «aiiie  food.  It  ira^
coitiliioiJ  etioiixh  for  ro.vul  [lorMiuftgM  To  {uvpnrc
thi<iro»-n  uicitln.uuil  Of]yBMait(0d.  w.^!2)dvcluea
hiuiM.-lt'uti  mvau  iiruUciLMit  iu  IbL<  i-uUuar.v  nrt.

Three  iiuuii^m  of  mouls  oc<.'ur  ii>  tbo  liiad  uqi]
(yt/y*wv — aporrair,  fSimvop,  biifiwof  or  Atipnot.  The
vrord  tif}taTiv  uuiftiriiily  meaus  tht*  early  as  &uftjroy
dotfiit  the  liile  luoul :  but  ttinvor.  thtMijfli  ceuuraDy
tucauiu);  tbe  itiiil-ility  riipal,  in  rioiiiPliiiuts  used
wlwro  vro  tiboiiUl  j>X[M't:t  ttpitrrou  i  Or/,  xv.  3£t7]  ur
evuii  io/moi'  (OJ.  xvii.  ITU).  AVe  should  be  cnrefiil,
bovt ever,  bow  w«  argtie  from  th«  itusettled  hubJtH
t>f  91  caiiip  to  thu  t<OKulur  cuittouiH  of  ordtn&ry  lift^.

Ill  tbo  lloiutrlo  A;jC  it  was  uaual  to  ait  at  tablv;
ntid  thi.s  custom,  we  are  told,  wua  ktpt  it[>  iu  his-
torical tiuied  by  the  Cretatia.  Each  >;iiu»t  bud
geuvrnDy  his  owti  tnble,  and  au  equal  »hiux'  of  fuo<l
w«»  placed  before  each  (  heuce  Sair  t'lVrj),  cxceiit
n-U«*ti  II  Miwuiidly  di»tingiiii*hed  j^UfHt  wu»t  hDiiuiired
by  g«t,liiig  a  birder  [mrtiou  ( //.  vii.  :i21  ).  What
Btrikett  tia  lu  i»t>(.Miliiir  iu  thu  IloiutM-ii'  diiiiierii  in
thfir  i^li^iiMis  (dmractrr.  They  piirtaki!  inure  or
le»i  uf  ttii'  iiiilure  ttf  u  fiicrltiec,  Wgiimiiig  witli  au
utfciin^  of  )i;irt  of  (ht-  lucut  to  tlit:  ^odt>,  and  both
Ur^iiuiiiiig  aud  ending  with  a  libation  of  wiuc:
while  tbu  tcruiit  for  9hiti;;ht«rlnK  nuiinuU  for  a
uiotil  {'ttptCtiVrdvuv)  aiul  lor  Iho  MlaiightiTed  anl-
iiialH  (lfpi)iii)  aw  borniwtsl  frum  tin-  biiijiiiaji*?  of
ndi^tonx  ut-ri'tuony.  The  (h'iK>ri)itiiin  *■>(  the  dinuex
given  by  EuinHfus  to  Ody»»iMi»  ( tA/.  xiv.  4'J(i>  given
a  good  [lii-ture  of  a  diuner  iu  thi;  Iloinci-ic  Age  in
humble  society;  and  that  (liveii  by  Acbillca  to
OdysHens  i  //.  ix.  21*J  foil.)  iimy  be  taken  ua  typical
of  ibe  bantpiel^  uf  the  gitjat  In  thu  same  [>eviod.

Beff,  mutton,  swino'fi  and  gnat'ii  tivt*\i  wert?  the
ordtuary  meats,  generally  tMit«n  roJicted,  thongh
Boiiictinie<(  ttoiltM)  {  Jl,  xxi.  SlvM-  Ki«b  uiul  fowls
weru  alinotit  iiiibnowu  (Eustaib.  ad  lloru.  Or/,  xii.
3rtt>).  Many  sort*  of  wine  are  meiititmod.  notably
thi)  Maroneiiu  nud  the  I'rainntan,  NcMlorbad  wiiie
vlewu  years  uld  ((a/,  iii.  3£ll.i.  A  tiniall  <|nau1ity
WHS  imiii'iHl  iut4]  each  gnettt'^  cup  to  iiiaki-  a  libu-
tiuu  with  {tTtap^dfitvoi  ttiratatrtv),  before  tho  wine
Was  rvgularly  sen'c<l  out  for  drinking.  The  gao«tH
drauk  to  each  other  ( Oil.  iii.  4iM.  iuid  a  si^coTid  lilta-
tiun  lo  the  gods  clo?H;d  the  rt'pant  iOd.  iii.  ^'^J.

The  tirevkb  of  a  biter  agv  nftOiilly  )itirtook  of
tlircti  tnealK.  called  tiic/xirio'^d.  tipio-mv,  and  Atinvop.
The  l.-ist,  which  corrc.tpondH  to  tiio  biiftTmy  of  tbu
nouerto  }K>tMnt^,  ysnn  the  evening  meal  or  dinner;
the  SpifTTov  wan  Iniicbi'un ;  nud  tbo  oKpaTiafta,
which  un»werb  to  the  lifntrray  of  liuiner,  wa*  the
vurly  uienl  or  brcukfiist.

The  uKpoTifff^a  wait  taken  immediately  after  ris-
ing iu  the  morning  (Arintoph.  Amk,  l^i*^).  It  Uttti-
ally  ctiUM»t*^d  of  bread  di(i|>ed  iu  unmixed  wine
(  »KfmTot),  wheuce  it  dorive<l  its  natiie  (  Athcu.  1.
UK

Next  followed  tlic  'tptvTov  or  liiiicbeou.  Tlie
li(ue>  ut  which  it  »">>  taken  iit  uncertain,  though
we  may  conclude  fioiu  umny  circnnn'tauces  that
it  WHS  alM>nt  ibe  middle  of  th«  day.  and  that  the
uivul  auHWcred  t^  tbc  lioiuiiu  i-rondium. The  mar-


ket lime,  at  wbicb  provisions  soem  to  have  be
bought  for  tho  ripio-roy,  wm  fmm  nine  o'clock  1
noon.  Iu  Aristoplmne»  (  Ve^,  •iti^-til^)  Philoclc
describes  the  pleasure  of  reliiriiing  home  after  .
tending  the  courts,  anil  partaking  of  a  good  &fn
rov.  It  was  usually  a  Riniple  meal,  but  of  coir
varied  according  Votho  habiLa  of  iudividnalB(3Ei
Oreaa.x'i,  18  J.

The  principal  meal,  however,  was  ih«  htlm
It  xrajt  usually  taken  rather  latu  iu  thr  day,  f
quently  nut  before  sunset  (Lysias,  de  Oud.  Eraiot

♦  «a).

The  AthcuiauA  were  a  social  people,  and  n<
ver3'  fond  of  dining  iti  company.  Liitcrtalnmei
werci  usually  given,  both  in  the  Heroic  Age  a
later  timeei,  when  sacritlcea  were  offerwl  lo  X
gods,  either  on  piibliu  or  private  occasionH;  a
abio  on  the  auiiivenuiry  of  tbo  birthdays  nf  me
here  of  the  family,  or  of  illustrions  [tenons,  whel
er  living  or  dead.  Plutarch  (^jrw/i.  viii.  1,  f
s}>eiikM  of  an  cntertainmeut  beiQ|;  given  ou  t
auuiversarv  of  the  birthdays  of  both  Socrates  v-
Plato.

Dining  clnbs  were  verj*  common,  tho  membf
of  which  contributed  each  a  certain  Riim  of  luonc
called  crufi^oXiJ,  or  bniugbt  their  own  proviaio
with  tbotu.  When  Ibe  tir«t  jdan  wa8  adopt^l,  tb
were  &aid  <jrr6  a\:fiiioKi>y  Arinv<4»-.  luid  uuu  indivi
ual  was  generally  iiilruiste*!  with  tho  money
procure  tbe  provisions  and  make  all  the  neceMa
preparations  (Terence, £*i«ii(c/..  iii.  4).  When  t
KEscond  plan  wa8  adopted,  they  were  naid  chrA  tm
^I'Jtor  ^tvtrvnv,  iH-caiim*  the  jiniviaions  were  broajK
in  baskets.  This  kind  of  entertainment  is  spob
of  by  Xeiiophon  ( J/«'«.  iii.  14,  $  I).  In  Homer  1
word  Spimos  correiiponds  with  tbe  later  diru  (mfs|
\iav  dttjTvov,  while  tiXaTriPt}  denotes  n  public  eiit
taiiuueut  ou  a  festival  or  some  such
(Athen.viii.3G3e).

The  moot  uhiiaI  kind  of  entcrtninmeuts,!
ever,  were  thow  in  which  a  imnujti  iuvited  I
friuMidn  to  his  own  bouse.  It  wa«t  expected  tb
they  Hhnnld  coini<  dre8ftt>d  with  more  than  oiillusi
care. and  also  have  bathcfl  shortly  before;  ticnci
when  Socrates  was  going  to  au  eutcrtainmrDt  a
Agnllion'o,  we  are  told  timt  he  both  washed  aoi
put  on  bis  shoes — things  which  he  seldom  <lii
(Pinto,  Syt'/)  174  A).  As  soon  as  tbe  gneote arrirn
at  the  liiuise  of  their  host,  their  shoes  or  ssm^sli
were  taken  ofl'  by  the  slaves,  and  their  feet  nuhf*
(itroKvtiV  and  diroviCnv).  In  ancient  works  of  «r
we  frequently  see  a  slave  or  other  imtmii  tvpf^
sentcti  iu  the  act  of  taking  off  the  shoes  tif  i^*>
guests,  of  which  au  example  is  given  oti  tl»  ueX
page  from  a  terra -cotta  in  the  British  Mo**"'
Afi*2T  their  feet  bad  been  washed,  tbe  gtHiU  n
clined  on  the  cXivui  or  couches.

Sitting  at  meals  was,  as  has  already  hroi  t*
marked,  Ibe  practice  of  tbe  Heroic  Age,  bul  in  (•'
clus»ic»l  ]»eriud  was  eon  fined  to  Crete.  Wftio*''
however,  when  admitted  tobnntjucLs  on  eitrsoT*'
uary  occasions,  such  as  a  nmmago  (for  tlioy  w*'
geucrally  excluded  fruin  table  wbeu  gneiitl  tt*"^
invitetl).  took  the  sitting  posture  (Luuiao,  C'ss^-^'
and  so  did  vbildreu  (Xeii.  Sifmff.  i.  ti).  A  rery  mMJ
mon  representatiou  ou  funeral  niouuments  is  *''
family  meal,  with  tbe  husband  rtNCliuing,  slid  c'
wife  and  children  sitting  itt  bis  side.  NS'hetv  vo*
en  are  represented  ns  rvcliniug  at  a  meul,  Hutj^S-
meant  for  /it/nerae.

It  was  usual  for  ouly  two  [wrsous  to  i


OOMBJ
Ut«,4M


CES'A


fill


CENA


pftfh  coiicb.  Id  aticieot  works  of  art  ne  n^aallj-
tJ^i|R<^aeBt«  repntMiii-rtl  iu  this  way,  but  soose-
i«  a  largfr  tiiimWr  on  one  long  kXiVij.
IgBMtft  rtM;ltne(l  with  their  left  arms  ud  atri(K.-(]
yitlows  f  tiToyicwput  \  ami  havini;  tlioir  ri;;bt  arms
iree. (Cf.  Ari8U»iiU.  Vr^>.  1210.)


jLiU


■v«  tftkltij  «ir  lli4-  SIkim  of  (k  nuosU (Drliisb  Musvutn.)

After  flic  gtiu8t«(  linrl  iilaccil  thcuiM-lves  nn  the

«Xi»-oi,  tbo  slaved  liruu;;!!!  iu  wnttT  to  wiwili  tlu'ir

hnuil*;  aud  then  (lio  ilinuer  was  ttcrveil  np,  tlie

vxprvnioii  for  wliu'li  wus  riir  rpun-tfac  tlof^'fynv

(Aristopli.  Vetp.  l"iH>). Fy  tus  r^irrfar  tltrfftifniv  we

»re  to  utuIfi'Ntaiul  nut  incrcly  the  ilihlie*t,  but  tlio

UbU'9  llipmwln'fl  (Pliiloieii.  <i/i.  Atlitu.  iv.  146  f).

[It  a|i|wiiirs  tbat  a  ttil>le,  willi  proviRionn  upon  it,

bufui'O  each  xXiyt]'. aud  thuct  hv  find

lut  works*  uf  art  which  repreftriit  ban-

^UfU  or  Nyinpohto,  a  Munll  (jiUIq  ot  triptx)  plaoinl

\Mrtttn  the  (kXi'vij:  aud  whtn  tbci-e  are  more  than

two  perwjiin  ou the icXtri;.  !M.'Vt-ral such tablet*.

TUuie  tabli<tt  were  evidently  huiuII  uuoiigb  to  be

uiin'nl  with  eaMO.

lo  fitting,  tbv  Greeks  ha<1  uo  knivett  ur  forks,
wt  Badtt  »»«  ofllii'ii'  liiigura  only,  except  in  eating
Wiipi  ur  utber  Ii<itiid«,  which  ilwy  part4H>k  of  by
HMna  of  a  Hpooii  IfiCarpok),  or  a  piet'e  of  brtiud
■conpol  out  in  tlw  >tii»]>o  of  s  tapoon  (fivariXt})  iSiii-
•1m,».t.  ^voTiArj).  Aftvr  (.'ating,  tJiey  wiped  llieir
QDltirT^  ou  picc«i  of  bread,  eulled  dnvfuiySaXiai,
*liiclj  ffi-ri'  then  thrown  to  the  dogs  (Aristopb.
^■iV-iy  Napkins  (j^fipo^uucT^)  were  not  iiwd  till
iHe  KitQiiiii  jteriod.

It  u[t|it>iini  that  the  arrangement  of  the  dinner
*•*  lulrutiled  to  certuiii  bIhvps.  Tim  one  who
■fcl  tUc  chief  utaiiagimient  uf  it  wa«  called  rpant-
(•"rwiiif  or  rpii7n("K\tiiot  (Atbeu.  iv.  170  « ;  Pollux,
''^  II;  vi.  i;>).  The  Greek  wont  fur  a  wteitu  was
yp'Viutnlkm'  (Alheu.li.49il').

"  "uuhl  eiooed  tho  limits  of  this  work  to  give
•*■  •ceoiMit  of  the  diirrrem  tliohes  which  wore  in-
•""liiwd  at  a  (irwk  dinner,  though  their  imniher
* '*r  Mow  those  which  were  nsnally  purtitkL-u
'■Tat  u  Roman  cntertaiitnient.  The  moat  (loiumun
,  'Wji  iiuoug  the  Grrek«  was  the  pif«,  a  kind  of
^it  <aike,wliit'h  wan  prepnre<l  in  iliffcrvnt  ways,
"•PpMri  by  the  various  uanieti  whieh  were  given
*"*t  (riitlus.,  viwfi).  The  c^i-onj  /iiiCa.  of  "hitb
•^llodeun  partakea  on  returning  home  from  the
*'<'<''t«(Ari«topb.  Vfrp.  610),  id  eaid  by  the  6cbolin«t
'•hive  been  made  of  bnrley  and  wiue.  The  fta(a
^ifoshabi  to  the  \mtmt  times  to  be  the  vointnon


food  of  the  lower  cloaeos.  Wheattin  or  hurley
bread  waa  the  second  most  u«nal  npix-ies  of  foo«l ;
it  W118  sometimes  made  nt  htinu-,  btil  moro  iiaunlly
bought  at  the  market.  The  vegolubli-^  ordinarily
t-nt«n  were  mallows  ifutXttxif),  lettucos  (6pi6a^)^
cabbagTH  (Jtd^iwot),  beans  {Kvafuii),  lentils  d^tuni).
etc  Pork  will*  thu  favourite  animal  forwl,  a«  wa*
the  cose  among  tbu  RoniaiiH.  SansagCA  uIbo  wera
Very  commonly  eaten.  It  in  a  cnrions  iVt.  whirli
Plato  (h'rp.  iii.  I'i,  404)  hiin  nunurkcd,  that  ue
i)«ver  rend  in  Homer  of  t\ui  heroes  partaking  of
fish.  In  later  times,  however,  flth  was  one  of  tbfr
l^vourite  footU  of  the  lireekft,  iiiHi>uinch  ao  that
the  name  of  a^av  wan  applii'd  lo  it  kot  (^nvijv.
A  minute*  accuntit  of  the  diiheii  which  the  Greeks
wern  u(K-unUimed  lu  eat  is  given  at  the  end  of  tli*^
ativonth  book  of  AtheiiaeaB,  urrangud  iu  ulphubet-
ical  onler.

The  unliaiir}-  meal  for  the  family  wan  cookcil
by  lb«  miKlrcsH  of  the  liouw,  or  by  the  female
hlavcs  iinde.r  her  din-etion ;  but  for  special  ocea-
(liuUN  pnifi-Miiuiial  ctHikw  Ifiaytipoi)  were  hired,  of
wliuni  then!  npimur  to  huvr  bi'en  a  grej*t  iiumber
(Diog.  LniTt.ii.T2).  Tlifynrofreipiently  iiiiMitioix.il
iu  the  fmgincnra  of  thn  eomie  pneta,  and  thtiMi-
who  were  ncquuinted  with  all  the  refinem«nt»>  of
tl>eir  art  were  in  greitt  ilemiiDd  in  other  parts  of
Greeco  besides  their  own  country,  Tho  8ici|iiin
conks,  however,  liinl  llic  giviitest  reputation,  and
H  Sicilian  book  ou  cookery  by  oue  iiithaecnn  ia
mentioned  in  the  (7oi-{;ifla  of  Plato  (p.&lBlt);  but
tbe  luoat  celebmtiHl  work  on  thu  subject  was  the
rairTf}o>i<ryin  of  ArebeNtratnii  (Allien,  iti.  104  h).

A  diuDor  given  by  an  opulent  Athenian  usually
contttHtcd  of  two  courses,  called  rot-iM-'clively  npiirai
rfH'air(ai  ftiid  iivrtftat  T/jaffffui,  Pullin  (vi.  tf3),  in-
deed, 8|H.-aks  of  tbrcii  courses,  which  watt  the  unui-
bcr  at  a  Roman  dinner;  and  iu  ilie  tuitne  May  uo
11  nd  other  wrltcitt  under  the  Human  Empire  Kpeitk-
iitg  of  three  coarae«  nt  Grvck  diiiuem;  hut  bt^fore
the  Koniau  oonqiiOHt  of  Gi-e«ce  and  the  ititroiluo-
tion  of  UomoD  cuittotnH,  we  read  of  only  two  cnaracs.
The  first  courae  embraced  tbe  whole  of  what  we
wmaider  tho  dinner— namely,  tlsh,  poultry,  meat,
etc.  (iliirrfiitra);  the  second,  which  corro«i>onded  lo
our  desitert  and  the  Kotnau  Minna,  confintcd  of
dilliereut  kinds  of  IVuit,  sweetmeats,  confecliotis,
etc.  (TfiwyaXta).  Tliti  Komall  tirst  coni^e  uf  salads,
vegetiihle^,  etc.,  niw  unkuowu  to  the  Greeks  iu  the
time  of  their  indet>eiideuc«.

When  the  tirsi  course  was  finished,  the  tableft
were  taken  nwny  {aXftttn,  itn^tptw,  t^avraCuv  tqs
TpaniCat),  and  water  was  given  to  the  giiefttj*  lor
the  purpose  of  washing  their  hiiuds.  Crowns  niado
of  gurUknds  of  tluwers  were  also  then  given  ta  llicnt,
OS  well  at4  vniious  kinds  uf  peifunics.  Wine  was
not  druuk  till  tho  first  coui'm;  waa  liui.thed ;  but  as
soon  OS  the  guests  had  washed  their  bunds,  un-
mixed wiutt  wuit  produced  in  u  large  goblet,  calle4
f*fT«>'i»rrpi>i'  or  fitravurTfiis,  of  which  each  drank  a
little,  after  iHutring  out  a  small  (piautity  as  a  liba-
tion. This  libation  was  said  to  bo  made  to  the
"good  Hpirif  {ayadov  ialfiOftit),  Rud  was  naimlly
nccouipunied  with  the  stinging  uf  the  piran  mid  Tbo
playing  of  llutes.  After  this  libation  mixed  wiuo
was  bmiigbt  in,  and  with  their  first  n\\i  Ilie  guests
drauk  to  Zter  Swnjp  (Xon.  Si/mp.  ii.  1).  With  llie
irrroybui  the  S^in'i'OK  closed;  aud  at  the  introduc-
tion of  the  desHcrt  {iivripai  rpiintCai)  the  iroror,.
wfitrvtrn/v,  or  Kitpof  commencetl,  of  which  au  ac-
count is  given  iu  the  article  Symposium.


CENA


til


CESA


II.  'Romat;.  TIk'  Riimati  nicaU  wore  Ifuttif^iituut
(mfMTttrna).  pramhttm (apicrav),  tHrretutaf  niiit  cctta

latldfultim,  nl»o  called  tilatum  (FnAt,  p.  34Gi  1>is
Cantw  llif  wiiirt  iiKoil  M-HHMinivltmf.'*  prrfnuici)  iritli
•Mcftfl  or  tiliu,  WHJt  u  tili(*U(  inort)iii(;  meal  tukoii  iit
illffi*rwtic  finite  by  ezvly  and  1aU>  riu-i's.  'Thnu  n*c
And  it  takeu  by  itcboulbo,T8  nt  covk-oi-ow  (Mart,
xir.  !£t3K  but  geiiorally  tbo  Komnos  iiM^d  to  cut
it  abuiit  tbe  third  tioiii-,  oertaiuly  not  bit«r  tli.tn
tlio  fourth  t.Mart.  viti,  <i7,  *J).  Tlio  scboulboya  hiul
a  kind  of  [■oucabl^  [adijiatai :  but  iisnally  tbe  uioal
coiittisteiL  of  brciid  fiettsonfd  witb  SAlt  or  with
bouey.  or  diiipud  iu  wine,  or  uf  (tatc»  and  olivua.
Atexnndi-r  S**v«niH  iiwmI  to  havt"  milk,  oggtt,  and
Tnuham  iLiitnprid.  .iirx.  Srr.'Ji)).  Rr<>nil  ;iiid  rht'iMH*
<A)>iiL  Mrt.  i,  1)?),  and  ev»u  moat,  apj^eiir  to  biivt<
beiMi  HOHietinuw  taken  (Murl.  xiii.  nil;  but  to  make
tbc  icnlacHtnm  a  heavy  meal  wa»  iiut  iu  accordance
with  Roiimri  niHunur^.

As  withiiiirowii  riiibersnoon  was  the  time  fur  the
lirincipal  meal  ^tf  ibe  dny — viz..  dimivr — »u  with
the  primitive  RomaiiB  tbis  wns  the  liuio  for  etna
<KmI.  M:  cf.  p.  3SH.  Mdll.*.  It  was  only  in  later
times  that  praadiiim  lM>came  custotnarj-  (laid.  Uriff.
XX.  2.  U).  Wo  may  fair-
ly tmnftlnte  this  wmtl
"  htiicbeon.''  When  city
life  poshed  the  dinrn'r-
hoMT  later  and  later,  a
luid-day  menl  b^rantn
«<80en1inl.  Jt  was  taken
alHiiit  the  e^ix  t  b  butu-
(Anth.  Pal.  X.  «.  and
echolia**t),  nul  «>  i-.irly
aa  tbo  lifib  nor  m)  taic
as  the  j<eveiitb.  Miit  if
Olio  tmik  no  irnltuulHm,
be  niiist  imnU  lake  the
jii^wrfiwffi  carlicr.and  this
is  tli^'Te  a  «  n  n  why  wo
tiiid  AiiMiiniiH  enling  his
praNffiirMi  n  lit tlf« after  the
fourth  hour  (  Ephcmai^
in  CoijK  I'iitt.  Lot.,  ml.  Welter,  p.  1217).  Prandium
s««ai8  to  have  been  pri>iH'rly  ihe  naiiiu  of  the  Bol-
dier's  muniiiig  meal  (I»id.  Onij.  x\.  2,  11).  For  Ibe
ordinary  citlwu,  tbo  meal  varied  from  a  pieef  nf
bread  eaten  in  Ihe  hand  (,^n.  Ep.  h:{,  G)  Iu  an  «1ab-
oiate  enterlaiiiment,  v^itb  liot  and  eold  UtXi,  fowl,
and  meat,  with  vegetables  and  fruit.  (Cf.  Mayt>r
ou  Phil,  Kp.  iii.  5,  11.)  The  nu^alH  were  rather
6avour>'  dishes  tliun  si>Iids— e.  g.  they  were  keruels
of  pork  <.7/«iirft'«r,(//ifMdirt,"  sweetbreads"!).  Ofieri.
aa  at  our  liincbeoiis,  the  meat  of  the  previous  day's
dinner  wjia  wrveil  w>hl  or  wamiwl  op  (Plant,  i'rrs.
i.  3.  '2ot.  Wine  (Tae.  AnH.  xiv  '2).  lint  wine  ami
WftUTtMart.  vlii.(t7,?),and  irn/ifiiin  (Cir-  f'luritl.  f)l\
166)  Wlto  drunk  at  it.  Thin  lattpr  pa5.i»age  refpis
to  a  btrge  wedding  breakfaHt  wliich  i^  cnlled  pran-
ditim.

yrrt^ndti  wne  in  atieicnt  limea  an  a^cruoou  meal,
}^V0ii  to  workmen,  alM  calleil  uMfnvNJHm  (Nonius,
p.  Wl  If  prfintiinm  waa  not  taken  at  mid-day.  me-
rmtht  wftH  a  hil*f  pmndium  taken  in  tbe  aflemoon
iCalp.  Ed.  V.  flO).

Tlie  principal  meal  nf  tbo  day  wnfl  rrwa,  "dinner."
Tboei(;htli  hour  in  tttnnuier  and  tbe  ninth  in  win-
ter wa«  Muneliineti  tbe  time  for  the  hath  (I'lin.  Kp.
iii.  lti^>.  and  after  Ihnt  came  diiijier;  but  pi-obably
tbo  hath  waa  naually  a  little  earlier. Tbe  ninth


was  of>osid«red  the  normal  dinnRr«honr  fClc.  Faia.
ix.'Jii),  timncb  buKinesa  must  have  on«n  deferT^wl
it  till  after  tlie  tenth,  and  even  latter  (3larl.  Ul.:i6,
Ti).  TbeHP  wep?  Immcly  repn(<t« ;  f"r  the  uior«  faab-
tonahle  bai)r)uetH  were,  th«  earlier  they  l»egaa
I  Palmer  on  Hnt.dinf.  ii.H,:)).  Ilant|iielM  uhicb  bepaa
earlier  than  tbe  iiinib  hour  were  ralleil  timpethra
convicia.  or  dv  die  cenare  (Catnll.  47,  6).  The  i^"*
ahviiys  Inatod  for  uliat  wonld  swni  to  «s  a  venr  --
long  time.  Even  Pliny  tbe  Elder,  who  wa«  »i:
miserly  of  his  time,  used  to  spend  three  honn
at  bis  dinner  (PIlu.  Ep,  iii.  \  13).  while  old  Tat.
nsed  to  remain  conrersiug  over  thit  meal  tmiil  liil  _.^-.
at  ni^ht  (Cic.  .*k>n.  U.  46i.  The  huaine^j*  .if  t.|it-  An  .^
waadiuu',  and  tbu  time  for  eiijuymeul  hud  atrivri^^^
Iberu  w:iM,  aeeonlinjily,  no  neeesMitx  to  break  iii»—  (
the  meal  till  bLHliime,  which  waa  mticb  e;irli  .^g^,
than  with  iih,  an  the  KomaiiM  got  up  at  dayl>t»iL.^^^|

8yni]MHiia,  of  cmirtte,  lasted  lilt  midnight,  and  e^ ^g^

nifvniiiig.  Tlie  ancient  Ifumaits,  like  the  anc)<"^^Mn
(■ny;k!*.  uaed  to  kit  at  dinner  (I«i<l.  Urig.  xx.  II,  ,^^J)
and  Culiimella  (Xi.  1, 19)  ibiuks  Ibe  rilirM  sbov—^
nut  recline except  on holidays;  and  Cato  tb

Younger,  in  sign  of  mourning,  always  aai  at  inn^^vd,
afwr  the  battle  of  Pharsalia  ^Piut.  Cat.  iiim.


x^


-^••'■1'


_-■:!•


H


■  '■^'


However,  ia  tbe  limes  with  which  we  ate  b«rl»-
i|uaiuted,  Ibe  Roninns  dined  in  the  nfrfifai /9erv.
on  Jm,  i.  73tM,  in  the  circle  of  the  family— tlnfinrt
reclining;  tbe  wife  sitting  on  the  feefw*  iVal  Mu
ii.  1.31);  tbe  ehildn^u  b«'.'»ide  thp  cnnrhi"'  ^"*
Claud.  391,  or  on  a  lower  conch  (Suet.  Auy  ''•^i  -i' '
with  a  separate  ami  morv  frugal  table  (Tac  -^"■•
xiii.l6t;  lb«  snhonlinate  iH-r^Mina  (Plant,  f-'/''' 'i'-
1,  111  anil  alaveaon  iK'nebei*  ^m/W/Zin).  It  v  i-  ■--
tomary  fur  the  wife  and  childnn  to  dine  «iiii  ^"
men.  except,  apparently,  in  times  of  noiirula^
(.Snet.  Cttlig.  24t,  though,  of  conrw.  there  wem  |ffl
tlemen's  dinner>{nirtie<«  (Hor.  .Sot,  ii,  S).

On  tbe  other  hand,  we  lind  cns««  of  wan^n  iv-
dining  where  them  waH  cnnwived  lo  If  aoll'ii'S
ImiUI  or  indelirate  in  their  poaturo.  Thtm,  in ''*'
following  ilhintrntion, taken  from  Motitfiiticon(J''-
£rp.  Suppl.  iii.  (id),  wbifli  sernis  inlemled  tu  reprf"
Bent  a  i(ecne  of  perfect  matrinmnial  felicity, 'i*|
huBbanil  and  wife  recline  im  a  Pi»fj(i  of  rirh  mit
rials.  A  three-legged  table  {a  upriail  wild  risn*
Wfore  them,  and  their  two  aona  aro  in  front  <»(  l^
wifa.  one  of  Hiem  Mtling.  in  the  manner  alMn■^'ll^
neribed.  on  n  low  «|»ol.  and  playing  wifh  llic'H
Several  women  and  a  boy  arc  )icrfunnitig  a  pIC"''
of  niufiic  for  the  enterlninment  of  the  laanii*!
pair.  -


CENA


813


CENA


A  Fftmily  FeaaL (UoDtfkucon.)


The  very  wealthy  Ronmns  bailt  separate  diniog-
rooma,  and  to  the  article  Triclinium  and  those  on
Lectl's  and  Polvinus  the  reader  is  referred  for
the  arraugement  of  the  conches  and  of  the  gnests
at  table. For  the  tablra,  see  Mensa.

Diiriug  the  later  Kepublic  and  the  Empire  the
Dumber  of  gueats  at  a  private  diuiier-party  was
nsnally  niQe,  and  sonietiipes  less  (GelL  xiii.  11,2),  but
to  have  more  was  conddered  unseemly  (Cic.  Pi».
37,  f>7).  Geoerally  uninvited  guests  (undtrae)  were
brought  by  one  of  the  invited  guests  to  make  up  the
iiiDe(£pf«(.i.5.26);  or  perhaps  a  client  was  asked, iu
order  not  to  leave  a  place  empty  (Juv.  v.  17).  The
guests  used  to  drera  for  diuner — the  diuuer  dress
(rt«iis  cenatorta)  being  geuerally  a  light,  highly  orna-
Dieiited  coloured  tunic  (prtuina  Bgnthesis,  Mail.  x.
29.  4).  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  changing
of  cue's  gjfnthetia  during  dinner  was  other  than  vul-
gar ostentation  (Mart.  v.  79,  2),  but  it  was  some*
times  required  by  religious  ceremonials.  Dress-
aandals  (mleae)  were  generally  worn  iu  the  bouse
of  the  host,  but  were  taken  off  (demere  8olea$)  before
recliniDg  for  the  meal.  Tliey  were  taken  charge
of  by  the  guest's  own  slave  whom  he  brought  with
him,  for  each  guest  had  his  own  footman  (seiTus  a
l^dibut)  to  wait  on  bim  at  table  (Plant.  Ti'uc.  ii.  4, 16;
Pctron.  58  and  62).  If  the  gaest  did  not  come  in  a
Utter,  but  walked,  Le  oftep  wore  boots  {calcei,
Plin.  Ep.  ix.  47,  3).  The  regular  expression  for
ritiirig  from  table  was  toleat  potco-e  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.
H.  71).

The  places  were  pointed  out  to  the  guests  by
the  nomenclator  (Atheu.  ii.  47  e) ;  and  when  they  had
taken  np^their  reclining  position  laccumbere,  dis-
eambere)  at  table,  water  was  brought  round  and
poured  over  the  hands  of  each  guest  (Plant.  Pera.
V.  1.  17),  and  the  bauds  wiped  in  a  towel^  or  nap-
kin {mantela,  JHuppa)  provided  by  the  host,  ihough
sometimes  brought  by  the  guest,  iu  order  to  carry
away  the  presents  that  the  host  frequently  gave.
(See  Apophoreta.)  Later  manteU  was  used  for  a
table-cloth  (Isid.  Oiijj.  xix.  26.  6).  It  was  not  till
towards  the  end  of  the  first  century  a.d.  that  ta-
ble-cloths began  to  be  usetl.  Martial  appears  to
be  the  first  to  allude  to  them  (ix.  59,  7).  Some
times,  apparently,  grace  was  said  (Quiutil.  Declam.
31)1,  p.  583,  ed.  Burmanu),  aud  then  the  first  of  the
tliree  jtarts  of  the  meal  was  proceeded  with.

This  was  called  promultis  or  ffiutatto,  giutm ;  also
frigida  Men$a.  The  cold  dishes  of  this  part  of  the
meal  used  in  early  times  to  occupy  a  place  at  the
conclusion  (Pint.  Quaeat.  Conviv.  viii.  9, 28).  It  con-
sisted rarely  of  substantial  meats,  mostly  of  hora
d'tritvrea  which  whetted  the  apjietite,  aud  al**
served  the  purpose  of  the  modern  dinner-pill —
e.  g.  shell-fish  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  4.  28),  Tjeetables  with


savoury  sauces  (Mart.  iii.  50,  4),  olives  (Hor.  Sat.
ii.  2,  46),  niusbroome  (Juv.  v.  147),  and  also  eggs;
from  which  came  the  expression  ab  ovo  ad  mala
(Hor.  Sat.  i.  3,  6),  to  signify  from  the  beginning  to
the  end  of  the  meal.  See  further  for  the  edibles
which  constituted  the  guttus,  Apicius,  4,  5;  Plin.
Ep.  i.  15;  Macrob.  Sat.  I.  c;  Celaus,  ii.  29;  Mart.
X.  48,  7-12;  v.  78,  3-5.  The  drink  was  muhum,
"  mead  " — a  mixture  of  wine  aud  honey ;  for  plain
wine  was  thought  too  strong  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  4,  26).
Hence  the  t«rm  promultis — i.  e.  the  mulaum  taken
before  the  chief  portion  of  the  meal.

After  this,  followed  the  cena  proper,  which  in
early  times,  and  even  later  in  simple  families,  was
the  whole  diuner  (Mart.  x.  48.  3).  It  is  from  Lu-
cullus  that  Athenaetis  dates  the  beginning  of  ex-
travagance iu  dining.  When  this  part  of  the  meal
consisted  of  several  courses  (ferciila,  mteras) — we
hear  of  six.  Augustus  never  had  more  (Suet.  Aug.
74),  and  seven  (Juv.  i.  94),  but  the  usual  number
was  three  (Mart.  xi.  31) — the  separate  courses  were
called  prima,  alt^a,  tertia  cena,  and  appear  to  have
followed  in  a  regular  order  (Lucian,i>e  Merc.  Cond.
15).  Each  course  was  brought  in  on  a  tray  {re-
potitoriam,  Petron.  33),  which  was  generally  of
wood,  but  sometimes  of  silver;  aud  the  arrange-
ment of  the  viands  on  each  dish  aud  of  the  dishes
on  these  trays  was  a  branch  of  art  (Jur.  vii.  184),
the  artist  being  called  structor.  Indeed,  the  ar-
rangiug  of  the  whole  diuner  was  so  impor-
tant a  function  that  it  required  a  special  mignr-
domo  called  tricUniarcha  (Heuzeu,  Index,  p.  189),
with  his  special  $ervi  tricliniarii  (Heuzeu,  6367).
It  was  probably  only  at  the  imperial  court  that
there  were  tasters  [praegmtatorea').  Between  the
promuWa  aud  the  cena,  as  well  as  after  each  course
of  the  cena,  the  repontorium  was  carried  away  aud
brought  back  with'the  following  course,  the  table
having  been  previousl;^  wiped  down  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.
8.  11),  and  the  bite  that  had  fallen  having  been
gathered  up  by  the  analecta  (Mart.  vii.  20.  17).
Occasionally  the  caiVer  {carpUtr,  diribitor,  scissor),
whose  function  the  eii'uctor  sometimes  fulfilled
(Mart.  X.  48. 15),  carved  the  meat  (Petron.  36  and
40)  at  the  open  side  of  the  table,  and  it  was  car-
ried round  by  slaves  (Petron.  33  and  40).  Carv-
ing, too,  was  a  branch  of  art  and  had  its  learned
professors  (Juv.  xi.  137;  cf.  v.  120).  Sometimes
the  course  was  put  on  the  table  and  the  gnests
themselves  took  what  they  desired,  and  in  the
way  they  did  so  it  was  easy  to  see  what  guests
had  the  manners  of  good  society  (Luciau,  DcMerc.
Cond.  15).  There  appear  to  have  been  mmus  (ypa/t-
fiariSia,  Athen.  ii.  49  d).  Between  each  course  the
gnests  washed  their  hands  (Lamprld.  Heliog.  25),  for
it  must  be  remembered  that  the  Romans  used  to
eat  with  their  fingers  (Mart.  v.  78,  6).  except  iu
the  case  of  soup,  eggs,  aud  shell-fish,  for  which  a
coclear  (q.  v.)  and  a  ligala  (q.  v.)  were  used.

The  viands  served  up  at  luxurious  dinner-par-
ties are  far  too  numerous  to  be  described. Eliib-
orate  descriptions  will  be  found  in  Hor.  Sat.  ii,  8;
Macrob.  Saturn,  ii.  9,  12;  Petron.  33  foil.;  also  in
Rwker-GoII,  GaUua,  chap.  8. They  contained,  as
Philo  says,  "  all  the  prodncts  of  land  and  «ea,  riv-
ers and  air." Copious  accounts  of  the  diflVrent
kinds  of  ffKMls  and  drinks  are  given  iu  Gatlns.  iii.
\  331-367,  412-442 ;  Marquardt,  rrivatlehen,  398-448  ;
I  Daremberg  aud  Saglio,  a.  v.  Cicaria. To  admit  of
I  the  gluttony  required  to  consume  snch  dinners,
1  vomitiug  was  resorted  to,  rules  for  which  were


CENACULUM


814


CENSOR


laid  dowD  by  physicians  ( Cels.  i.  3,  29,  ed.
Krauae ;  QaleD,  vi.  391) — aa  indirect  proof  of  the
prevaleuce  of  over-eating  aDiong  the  wealthy.
But  such  extravagauce  must  have  been  confined
tu  the  npper  classes,  and  can  give  ns  uo  idea  of
ordinary  family  meais.  The  hill  of  fare  of  a  plain
dinner  is  to  be  found  in  Martial  (x.  48,  13  foil.).
The  main  course  consisted  of  kid,  cutlets  (ofettat),
beans,  early  spronts  (prototomi),  chickeu,  and  cold
bam.  While  eating,  Trine  was  usually  dmuk
(Petron.  34),  but  in  small  qnantities,  for  it  \ras
thought  to  blunt  the  taste  (Hor.  Sat.  ii.  8,  38).

After  the  cena  proper  was  taken  away,  and  the
tables  Tvere  removed,  the  offerings  to  the  gods
(the  mola  ealaa,  etc.)  were  thrown  into  the  hearth  ;
and  when  a  slave  announced  that  the  gods  were
propitious,  sileuce  for  a  short  time  was  observed
in  respect  for  the  gods  (Serv.  on  Aen.  i.  734).  The
gods  were  the  Lares,  and  if  they  were  not  in  the  diu-
ing-room,  they  used  to  be  carried  in  and  placed  ou
the  table  (Petrou.  60)^  or  a  special  table  with  a
saltcellar  and  some  meat  was  placed  before  their
shrine  (Arnob.  adv.  Gentee,  ii.  67).

Thereafter  followed  the  dessert,  menaae  aecundae
(Hor.  Sat.  ii.  2,  122),  alHTcaHed  bellarta  {Gell.  xiii.
11,  7),  just  as  "second  course"  and  "sweets"  (in
England)  signify  the  same  part  of  the  meal.  Other
names  were  impomeuta,  tiriHturvit.  It  consisted  of
all  sorts  of  pastry  (see  Becker-Goll,  Gallas,  iii.  363-
367),  fresh  and  dried  fruits,  apples,  grapes,  etc.  The
meHsae  $ecundae  formed  the  transition  to  the  com-
miMatio  (q.  v.).

At  distinguished  dinner-parties  the  company
was  amused  in  various  ways.  These  nmusementa
were  called  acroamata.  (See  Beid  on  Cio.  Jrch.
9,  20. )  Respectable  and  cultivated  hosts  used
to  afford  readings  by  their  anagnotlae  (Mayor  on
Jut.  xi.  IBO),  often  of  their  own  works,  and  we
can  well  believe  that  this  became  an  insufferable
nuisance.  It  was  no  doubt  a  mark  of  culture  to  ask
for  some  charming  poetry  (Pers.  i.  30),  The  prac-
tice of  reading  dnring  meals  is  still  kept  up  in
Roman  Catholic  collegei^  Music,  too,  used  to  be
introduced,  sometimes  choral  and  orchestral  per-
formances (tymphonia,  Cic.  Verr.  iii.  44,  105;  aud
Wilkins  on  Hor.  Ar$  Poet.  374).  There  used  to  be
actors  also  (Pliu.  Ep.  i,  15.  2),  and  story- tellers
(nrf4a%i, Suet.  Aug.7A).  At  "fast"entertninments
there  were  introduced  girls  to  play,  sing,  and
dance  (Liy.  xxxix.  6;  Hor.  Sat.  i.  2,  1 ;  Mayor  on
Juv.  xi.  163),  gymnasts  ipetauHBtae),  fools  (moHo-
»e$),  "amusing  vagabonds"  (acitrrae),  etc.  Formal
B[M;ech-mBkiug  was  uuknown.  These  amusements
were  produced  dnriug  the  cena  and  oontinned  on
into  the  com,mia»atiOf  if  such  followed.

On  Roman  meals,  see  especially  Marquardt,  Pri-
vatlcben  der  Bomei;  257-260,  289-321 ;  Becker-GoU,
Gallus,  iii.  311-370;  Daremberg  and  Saglio,  s.  v.
Coena,  in  which  works  all  the  literature  on  the
subject  is  collected.

CenactUum. See  DoMUS.

Cenaenm  (Ktjyaloif  iUpov).  The  northwestern
promontory  of  Euboea,  opposite  Thermopylae,  with
a  temple  of  Zeus  Cenaens.

Cenatorla  VaatiB. See  Cena  ;  Sy>tuesis.

Cenobreae  {Kwyxpiai).  The  eastern  harbour  of
Corinth  on  the  Saronic  Gulf,  important  for  its
trade  and  commerce  with  the  East.

Cenohrsia  (Ktyxpn^t)-  A  small  island  off  the
Spiraeuni  Fromontonnui  of  Argolis.


Cenohrltu  (K^;^^r)-  ^  river  of  Ionia  near
Ephesns  and  Mount  Solraissns,  where  the  CnretiH,
Hccoi'dlng  to  some,  concealed  and  protected  L^io
after  her  delivery,  when  she  was  pursued  by  (be
power  of  Her6.

Cenomiiui.  A  powerful  Gallic  people  wbo
crossed  the  Alps  at  an  early  period,  and  settled  in
the  northwestern  part  of  Italy,  in  the  oouutry  of
Brixta,  Verona,  and  Mautna,  and  extended  uorlb
as  far  as  the  confines  of  Rhaetia.

CenotaphlTiin  (Ktvardtfnof,  Ktvos  Tatftot).  A  cen-
otaph— i.  e.  an  empty,  or  honorary,  tomb,  eivctt^l
sometime  as  a  memorial  to  a  person  hurie<i  rise-
where  ;  oftener  to  one  whose  body  could  not  )>e
found  for  burial  at  all.  See  Vei^.  Aev.  iii.  3M:
Xen.  Anab.  vi.  4,  $i  9;  and  the  article  Funis.

Cexudtor.  A  provincial  census- taker.  Scf
Censor.

Consor  (ri/iirnjc).  One  of  the  officials  w1io««
duty  it  was  (after  B.c.444)  t«  take  the  place  of  Ib^
consuls  in  superintend  nig  the  qainquennial  cen-
sus. The  office  was  one  of  the  higher  magistraric-).
and  could  only  be  held  once  by  the  same  per*ni.
It  was  at  first  confined  to  the  pfttrloiaoa;  bat  in  b.c
351  was  thrown  open  to  the  plebeians,  aud  afitr
339  one  of  the  censors  was  obliged  by  law  to  lie  a
plebeian.  On  the  occasion  of  a  census,  theceiiM>r>
were  elected  soon  afTer  the  accession  to  office  i>f
the  new  consuls,  wlio  presided  over  the  asseiuMy
They  were  usually  chosen  from  the  number  «)f
oontnlaree,  or  persons  who  bad  been  cousnls.  .Ac-
cordingly the  ceusorship  was  regarded,  if  not  a*
the  highest  office  of  State,  at  least  as  the  highest
stop  in  the  ladder  of  promotion.  The  newly  eleciMl
censors  entered  immediately,  after  due  summmis.
upon  their  office.  Its  duration  was  fixed  io  R.('.
433  to  eighteen  months,  but  it  conid  be  exteii'li^l
for  certain  purposes.  For  the  object  of  csrryiiij;
out  their  proper  duties — the  census  and  the  soWmn
purification  (fusfrum)  that  concluded  it— they  had
the  power  of  summoniug  the  people  to  the  CanipiH
Martins,  where,  after  d.c.  434,  they  had  an  official
residence  in  the  Villa  Pnblica.  The  tribuoes  had
uo  right  of  veto  as  against  their  proceedings  in
taking  the  census;  indeed,  so  far  as  this  part  »t
their  duties  was  concerned,  they  were  irresponsibtf,
being  bound  only  iu  conscience  by  the  oath  wbi^b
they  took  on  entering  upon  and  laying  down  th^ir
office.  Having  no  executive  powers,  they  li«l  iw
lictors,  but  only  messengers  (riatorM)  and  beraldft
(praeoonea).  Their  insignia  were  the  teita  cHrtli*
and  h  pnrple  toga.  The  oollegiato  character  o(  tin-
office  was  BO' pronounced  that,  if  one  censor  di^l
the  other  abidicated.  From  the  aimple  act  of
taking  the  census  and  putting  up  the  new  list  of
citizens,  their  functions  were  in  course  of  time  «•
tende<l,  so  as  to  include  a  number  of  very  impor-
tant duties.  Among  these  must  be  mentionnl  in
particular  a  general  superiutondenoe  of  coodurt
(irgimett  moram).  In  virtne  of  this  they  had  tb*
power  of  setting  a  stigma  ai>on  any  citizen,  rrj^snl-
less  of  his  position,  for  any  oouoeivable  off<eii<^
for  which  there  was  no  legal  punishment.  Snrh
offences  were  neglect  of  one's  property,  celilwify.
dissolution  of  marriage,  bad  training  or  bad  trfst-
meut  of  children,  nudne  severity  to  slaves  and
clients,  irregular  life,  abuse  of  power  in  oOif^.
impiety,  peijury,  and  the  like.  The  offender  mifilii
be  pnnish<<d  with  degradation — that  is,  theccnvip'
could  expel  a  man  from  the  Senate  or  the  ordo  nfc*


CENSORJNL':)


31&


CENSL'S


I


fcf;  unhef  godIiI  tronitrur  hira  from  a  conniry  tribe
iulo  ou«  of  tbe  less  r«^pectu1>le  ctry  tribM).  auil
tbiu  lurtitil  liis  rigbt  ot'  voliui;;  or,  n^itiu,  tlioy
c^ulil  txpel  liioi  froiu  iLic  tribes  nltogetlicr,  aud
ttu  conptcTijly  tl*jirive  hiui  ot*  tliu  ri^bt  i>t'  vot-
iBj[.  Tilts  Ust  itennlty  tnij;tit  be  accum{iatiie<1  by
u  dnb  ill  tbe  ebspe  of  aJdilionnl  tojuitioii.  Tbe
DCDBun  bid  oltHt  (tie  power  of  issuiug  edicitt
■Saiiwt  praoticoH  which  threat«nwl  the  8inii»tlrity
irifsiueiCDt  Roman  luanoers — fur  iuBiunee.  u^fniimt
luxury.  Tbne  edicts  bad  nut  tlie  forcv  of  l»nr,
tiul  rbeir  iraiugnwsioii  lui^^ht  hv  iniuinbed  by  the
II4JSI  coiisora.  Tbe  effect  of  tlie  ceii'«[>rhi]  sttfEinA
iu<l  paubhiueat  \a»ted  until  tbe  next  cetisua.  The
wiiwnt  of  both  ceiimirs  wiw  reffiiirvd  to  ralifv  it,
iiid  ii  ilia^tly  atfeuteil  uicii  only,  uot  woiiieii.
Tliv  ceuMiK  exereiitcd  a  spi-ciBl  itti)i«riiitendeuce
^ftrtiufqiitft  oud  ibo  8cu»t-e.  Tbey  lind  Ibo  Iniio
SntlMt,  at  power  of  rjectiii^^  tinworlhy  uiciuber»
■ud  of  ptesiu^  oTor  iip\r  Cfiiulitlateti  for  the  seiin-
K'ritl  imuk— u»,  for  instance,  those  who  htu\  held
•'«mlc  oflicest.  Th«  tfjHitrn  ha<l  to  [kws  dingly,  each
iMiliDg  IJg  borsK,  In-fore  the  c«H!«irj»  in  the  Fornm,
ift'T  llift  completion  of  llie  general  eeiiiiin».  (9w
TliAV£iTli.t.)  An  huiiourMblir  dixmiwal  was  then
i^iVfiii  (0  the  siipfi'mnnunteil  or  the  intirm;  if  uii
'^WiKMUowfoliiiil.or  had  provionaly  been  found.
TIB  worthy  of  his  order  (ns  for  neglecting  to  cnro  for
b*  lifiptet.  Ik*  was  cx|M>lled  from  it.  TU©  vacant
["UMswerc  fiUi-d  up  from  the  number  of  such  indi-
'iilnali  Da  niipeared  from  the  ijeiuTsil  ceosns  to  be
iiritaliU'.  iSec  EguiTKS.)  There  werecertaio  other
<'l<3lio  nttnclied  to  the  ccM.'Hir*>hi|>,  for  the  due  jtcr-
fununiiTO  "if  which  they  weio  reopontiiblc  to  Itic
iifli'lrt,  xtid  subject  to  the  auihority  of  the  HeitniK
wltlji;  veto  of  the  tribunes,  (l)  Tbu  Ii-ltiiig  of  the
imlilio  dnuuiiit  luDds  autl  tax«H  to  the  bi^he.-*!  bid-

''  'iiThe acceptance  of  tenden  from  the  IoxvonI
'  '  T  fur  worku  to  be  pnid  for  by  the  Htjir«.  lu
'•III  these  ca««»  the  (wriod  was  Hmitijd  to  fivi-
Vr«»,  (3)  Sni>ciiuteudeiicti  of  the  cou.il riicl inn
^<1  tnuuteuiiuce  of  public  bnildiugit  and  i:ronutl»,
t^wplw,  bridKcs.  uerrcta,  nqaeduet«,  strcetM,  monu-
iivtits,  ami  the  like.

After  ii.c.  Iti7,  RntuHu  citizens  were  freed  from
»I1  lu^liou  ;  and  ufier  the  time  of  Miinn-^,  the  li«-
Wy  to  niilitury  service  vran  nnide  geiiernl.  The
^'*'r»hiii  wan  UOTT  a  HUjinrllinHiH  officn,  for  it*
■^liiul  object,  the  cen«ij»,  wan  hanlly  ncccjumry.
''"lln  liiallked  the  cuoMin*  fur  their  |M)w«r  I'f  med-
»"lig  in  (inittem  of  private  condnt-l,  and  ncr4)nl-
!*ftb.  in  hU  constitution  of  ».(:.  f?!.  the  ojftco  was,
'foot  funnalty  Hlxi1i»bed,  practicnlly  superscdtnl,
I'  irn*  rcMored  in  n.C-  7it,  in  tbe  con»nl»thip  of
™>KV  ai'd  CrnsMiiA,  and  cootiuned  to  exist  lor  n
'"i'i  'imc,  until  under  the  Empire  it  disappeared  n*
'*«iwiriit/'  iittlce.  The  emperor  kept  in  his  own
""^  the  i-iyht  of  taking  tbe  rensus.  FIc  took
*"*  aUo  the  other  fnnelioiiR  of  the  reiisor,  espe-
'"ily  tl]«  AiipervJKion  nf  nniriilx,  a  pmcei^ling  in
*Wli  hf  bail  f'aejwir'fi  ex.'unph>  to  MippoiT  hiin.


Tl»


c«re  of  public  buildings,  however,  ho  coin-


""Ittil  lo  ■  ftpecinl  bmly.

t^taBorinuB.  (I)  One  nf  the  ephemrrnl  Komaii
'''i^rwra  who  ftppeaivd  in  so  threat  nuinbera  onder
"""ttilfn  of  OaJIienm*.  and  are  krKiwn  in  later  Ro-
""'J' Ipttlnry  ub  "the  Thirty  TymutH "  (f|.v.).  Ceiiso-
'lautliml  been  diBlingiURlicd  in  oatiips  and  in  the
"'fak:  he  UihI  been  ttvire  coiihuI,  twico  priietitrian
C^fwt.  thnM-  times  prefect  of  Rome,  aud  four  liinet.
:  hHving  pawMid  lh^tn^b  this  bou-


I  onrable  cnreer,  he  retired  to  i  he  country,  being  now
i  advanced  In  ycar«,  and  lame  from  a  wound  he  bad
.  receiveil  iu  the  war  agaiu^l  the  IVrrtiitnsdnrinj;  the
I  reign  of  Valerian.  It  wa.<t  uuder  these  circnuiHUuci^A
that  be  won  proclaimed  emperor  at  Bologna,  A.D.
*.f7i>,  in  Bpice,  utit  would  aj>]>eiir,  of  bis  own  wi»hF«;
and  by  a  8pecic«  of  pleasantry  ho  was  uiukiianied
CTlaudiuii,  In  alluiiiou  to  hift  lanienera  <  etauduiif
"hiuie").  The  strict  discipline,  however,  which
be  wi>«hed  to  introduce  gave  offence,  and  be  wa*
fiUin  by  tbe  very  sotdierv  who  had  raided  him  io^
the  throne,  {*i)  A  grnmmnrian  and  phib^scipbcr,
who  nourished  under  Maxtmnn  and  Gorrlianus,
nhont  A.li.  *J3H.  He  wrote  a  HUiall  work  entitled
Dr  Die  Xaluli,  which  was  so  cnllcil  hecauMi  cnm-
posftl  on  nrca«inu  of  the  birthday  of  bis  weidthy
frieiid  Q.  C'crellimi  f  a.d.  23H  ),  nnd  largely  taken
from  the  Prnltim  of  Siietouiue.  It  trcnt«  of  the
tiuie  of  birth;  of  the  iulliienco  of  one'ii  geniua.  tu
Well  Alt  tbftt  of  the  stars,  npnn  the  birth-period  of
nri  iudividiinl ;  and  ciubraccfi  many  other  topic«  of
.ncbrTHiologir'jiLinittbemnlical.niid  civnio;;rapliical
character.  The  otyle  of  CcnBorinui*  iogood.  thoiisU
nntfi^ne  from  thelileuiiHbenualiinil  to  hit  time.  We
liHvoalMJK  fragment,  f^.1/Wnir,!)Mcribt'd  to  the  name
writer.  He  composed  aIho  .a  work  on  accentn,  and
another  on  geometry,  Iml  the»>e  ]a»i  two  have  not.
roacbe<i  114.  The  priuclpal  M88.  arc  tbe  Cmhtx
Colonien^is  ( fonuerly  OnriaiitndtiensU  t  of  the
nerenth  century,  and  one,  iu  tlie  Vatican  of  the
tenth  ceiilnry.  The  first  critical  cilition  of  Ceiiso-
riiinfi  W.1S  that  of  Jalin  (Berlin,  l^(r»).  A  lafri'r  one
is  that  of  HnltAch  I  Leipzig,  l?*U7).  Ct)  C.  MAltLlfS.
A  Romun  diHtingiii!ihed  m  having  l>een  the  only
one  to  lie  twice  choauu  cennnr  un  B.C.  S94  and
ngaiu  iti  'i}lj.'>v

Ceosuales. TUosc  who  made  the  ccuiior'it  liflta.

Cenmu  (ri^^).  A  register  of  |iersous  and
pL-o|)erty,eou»titntitig  n  claim  to  tbe  rights  of  citi*
r.i^nshi;)  III  Athens  and  at  Rome.

1.  At  Athena.  The  ccusti?  at  Athens  seems  to
date  from  ttie  constitution  or^nlou.  This  legistiitor
niiule  fonr  nlasws  {Ti(ii)finTat  tAjj).  |a|  Peular4nno-
fHivfiMfin',  or  thoMe  who  receiveil  500  nioaxui'ufi,  dry  or
lii)uid,fr<im  their  lundH.  (ft)  KaiffltLtiiBirns).  who  bad
an  inwnne  of  :MH]  measures,  (c)  ZtutjUnr  i^twirai),
wllofM!  income  wat*  liiO  meA^ill'cs.  )rfl  fhtlmidrjrit),
or  vvpiit  mini.  The  word  rlfiimn,  a^  lifted  in  the  ora*
tors,  inuauM  tbe  valiiaCioD  of  the  pi-operty — i.  e,  not
ttiecapilal  itself.  I>ut  the  taxable  eapital.  Now,  If
the  vflUmiiou  of  the  income  was  that  given  in  Ihtt'
distribution  of  the  c]a.<MeH  Just  meulioned,  it  in  not
iliflicnll  to  get  at  the  valuation  of  the  capital  iu-
plied.  .Solnu  reckouL'd  tbe  dry  measnro.  or  mcrfim-
nN«,  nt  n  dnicbma.  llut  it  i^  jirubnble  that  Iho-
I  income  WON  ivekoued  at  A  twelfth  part  of  tbe  viiliie'
I  of  the  land,  i>u  the  Mime  principle  which  originated
the  Hi/riarium  fovima.  or  >*^  per  cent.,  at  Home  :  and
ifsii.the  luudedpro|x.'rly  ofa^rrrtfiropionfcWiiitHirA  wus-
rfiokoncd  at  a  talent,  or  12x5CN>=r6(>tHi  dniubnias;
that  of  It  kiiiffhl  at  Pix3(N>  =  36(MI  drHrbm:i« :  and
that  of  n  Sfu^it^A  at  12x  l.nd  =  l-^IW  dniehmas.  Iu
the  lirst  ciatw*.  the  whole  eHtale  wit«*  coiinidered  un
taxable  capital;  but  in  the  second,  only  ^.  or  '3I)W-
drnchuiai;;  and  in  Ihi!  thinl,  J.  or  lUUO  diuchnias;
to  which  Pollux  alludes  wheu  he  Miys.  in  his  chmi-
»y  way,  that  tbe  tlmt  class  ex]>eiided  one  talent
nti  llie  public  accuuul ;  the  Second.  30  niinas;  tbe-
tliinU  1<>  minai* ;  and  the  thetn.  nothing.

In  order  to  ttetti*^  iu  wliat  ciima  a  man  sbonlil


CENSUS


816


CENTAURI


be  entered  on  the  register  (on-oypat^i?),  he  retnmed
a  valuatioi)  of  bis  property,  subject,  perhaps,  to
the  check  of  a  coiinter-Taliiatiou  {vtnrrifiTfo-ts)-  The
valuation  was  made  very  frequently;  iu  some
states,  every  year;  in  others,  every  two  or  four
years.  The  censors,  vho  kept  the  register  at  Ath-
ens, were  probably  at  first  the  naua'ari;  bnt  nfter-
waptls  the  demarchs  performed  the  ofiSce  of  censor.
Although  this  iustitntion  of  Solon's  seems  particu-
larly calculated  for  the  imposition  of  the  property
tax  (tta-ff>opa),  Thncydides  (i.  141),  speaking  of  the
year  B.C.  438,  says  that  it  was  then  that  the  Athe-
nians first  raised  a  property  tax  of  200  talents.  It
seems,  however,  that  the  amonnt  of  the  tax  consti-
tuted its  singularity;  for  certainly  property-taxes
were  commuii  not  only  in  Athens,  but  in  the  rest
of  Greece,  before  the  Peloponnesian  War,  and  Anti-
pho  expressly  says  that  he  contrihated  to  many  of
them.  In  the  archonsbtp  of  Nansinicns  (Olym.
100, 3 ;  B.C.  378)  a  new  valuation  of  property  took
place,  and  classes  {<ru/tfioptaO  were  introdnced  ex-
pressly fur  the  property  taxes.  The  nature  of
these  classes,  onr  knowledge  of  which  principally
depends  on  a  note  of  Ulpiau,  is  involved  in  consid-
erable obscnrity.  Thus  much,  however,  may  be
stated,  that  they  consisted  of  1300  individuals — 120
from  each  of  the  teu  tribes — who,  by  way  of  a  sort
of  liturgy,  advanced  the  money  for  others  liable  to
the  tax,  and  got  it  from  them  by  the  ordinary  legal
processes.  In  a  similar^mauner  classes  were  snb-
sequently  formed  for  the  discharge  of  auother  and
more  serious  liturgy,  the  trierarchy ;  and  the  ttra-
iegi,  who  nominated  the  trierarchs,  had  also  to  form
the  sgmmoriae  for  the  property  taxes.  (See  Litur-
oiA.)  What  we  have  here  said  of  the  census  at
Athens  renders  it  unnecessary  to  speak  of  the  sini-
itar  registrations  in  other  states  of  Greece.  When
the  constitution  essentially  depended  on  this  dis-
tribution acconling  to  property,  it  wils  culled  a
timocracy,  or  aristocracy  of  property  ( n^oicparia,
diro  TifiTfftaTfiiv  iroXtTfia).

(2)  At  Rome.  Aft«r  the  establishment  of  the
constitution  of  Servins  Tnllius,  the  number  of  Ro-
man citizens  was  ascertained  every  five  years
(though  not  always  with  perfect  regularity),  to  de-
termine their  legal  liability  to  the  payment  of
taxes  and  to  military  service.  This  process  was
called  ceR$tt8.  The  census  was  originally  taken  by
the  kings;  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  by  the
consuls ;  and  after  B.C.  444,  by  special  oflBcers  called
ceugorea.  (See  Censor.)  The  censors  took  the
auspices  on  the  night  preceding  the  census ;  on  the
npxt  day,  their  herald  summoned  the  people  to  the
Campus  Martins,  where  they  had  an  official  resi-
dence in  the  Villa  Pnblica.  Each  tribe  appeared
successively  before  them,  and  its  citizens  were
summonetl  individmilly  according  to  the  existing
register.  Each  had  to  state  on  oath  his  age,  his
own  name,  those  of  his  father,  his  wife,  bis  chil-
~  dren,  his  abode,  and  the  amount  of  his  property.
Tlio  facts  were  emhotlied  in  lists  hy  the  censors'
assistants.  The  census  of  the  provinces  was  sent
in  by  the  provincial  governora.  There  was  a
special  commission  for  numbering  the  armies  out-
side the  Italian  frontier.  Tlio  censors,  in  putting
np  the  new  lists,  took  into  consideration  not  only
n  man's  jtroperty,  but  his  moral  conduct.  (See
Censor.)  The  census  was  concluded  with  the
soleuni  ceremony  of  reviewing  the  newly  consti-
tuted army  (Inatrum).  (See  LUSTRUM.)  The  re-
publican census  continued  to  exist  under  the  early


Empire,  bnt  the  last  lustrum  was  held  hy  Vespasian
and  Titus  in  a.d.  74.  The  provincial  censas,  intro-
duced by  Angustus  and  uiaintained  dDriiij;  the
whole  imperial  period,  had  nothing  to  do  with  llie
Roman  census,  being  only  a  means  of  ascertain iiie
the  taxable  capacities  of  the  provinces.

Centaari  (Kivravpoi).  A  Theesaliau  race  fahlo)
to  have  been  half  men,  half  horses.  The  Centaurs
and  Lapithae  are  two  mythical  tribes,  which  are  al-
ways mentioned  together.  The  former  are  spoken
of  twice  in  the  Tlind  under  the  appellation  of"  n-ild-
creature8"(^p(r),  and  once  under  their  properiianH'.
We  also  find  the  name  Ktvravpot  in  the  Odyisf^v-
They  seem  to  have  been  a  rude  mouDtain-trilx-.
dwelling  on  and  about  Monnt  Peliou.  It  in  ven
doubtful  whether  Homer  and  Hesiod  conceived
them  to  be  of  a  mingled  form,  as  they  were  8ab>c-
quently  represented.  In  the  fight  of  the  Cent»iir^
and  Lapithae  depicted  on  the  shield  of  Heracles,  tlif
latter  appear  in  panoply  fighting  with  spears,  wtiile
the  former  wield  pine  clubs. Piudar  is  the  esrlie^t


Centaur. (Rome,  Capltollne  Utwoatn.)

poet  ertant  who  expressly  describes  them  as  semi-
ferine.  According  to  him  {PtftA.  ii.  78  foll.l,  ib*
offspring  of  Ixion  (q.  v.)  and  the  cloud,  was  a  m>ii
named  Centaurns,  who,  when  grown  up,  waaden'^i
about  the  foot  of  Mount  Pelion,  where  he  iniit^l
with  the  Magnesiau  mares,  who  brought  Atrth  I'l*'
Centaurs — a  race  partaking  of  the  form  of  Uu!i
parents,  their  lower  parts  resembling  their  dani-s
and  their  upper  parts  their  sire.  The  common  3>'-
count  makes  the  Centaurs  to  have  been  the  immoli-
Ate  offspring  of  Ixion  and  the  cloud.  By  liia  *'>'*'
Dia,  Ixion  had  a  son  named  PirithoUs,  who  atarii<^l
Hippodamia,  daughter  of  Adrastus,  king  of  Ar^"*^
The  cliiefs  of  his  own  tribe,  the  Lapithae,  were  all
invited  to  the  wedding,  as  were  also  the  Cetii>"r9,


CENTESIMA


817


CENTUMVIRI


who  dwelt  in  the  ueighbonrhood  of  Pelion.  TLe-
seu8,  Nestor,  and  utfaer  straugers  were  likewise
present.  At  the  feast,  Eurytion,  one  of  the  Cen-
taurs, becoming  intoxicated  with  the  wine,  at-
ffiiipted  to  offer  Tiolence  to  the  bride ;  the  other
Centaurs  followed  his  example,  and  a  dreadful
cuiidict  arose,  in  which  several  of  them  were  slaiu.
Tbe  Centaurs  were  finally  driven  from  Pelion,  and
obliged  to  retire  to  other  regions.


CenUsr  and  Eroa (Lonvra.)

According  to  the  earliest  version  of  this  legend,
Eurytion,  the  Ceutanr,  being  invited  to  the  man-
HJou  of  Pirithotis,  became  intoxicated,  and  behaved
BO  ill  to  the  women  that  the  heroes  rose,  and,  drag-
ging him  to  the  door,  cut  off  his  ears  and  nose,
which  was  the  occasion  of  the  "strife  between  the
Centaurs  and  meu"  (0</.xzi.  295  foil.).  When  Her-
acles was  ou  his  way  to  hunt  tbe  Erymauthian
Iwu-,  he  was  eutertained  by  the  Ceutanr  Pholus;
aud  this  gave  rise  to  a  conflict  between  him  ami
the  other  Centanrs,  which  terminated  in  the  total
discomfiture  of  tbe  latter.

Tbe  most  celebrated  of  the  Centaurs  was  Chiron,
the  son  of  Cronus  by  the  nymph  Philyra. See

ClUKON.

Centaalma,  »c. par$.  Literally,  "a  bnudredtb
part.''  A  tax  of  one  per  cent,  levied  on  all  goods
rX[K)eed  for  public  sale  throughout  tbe  Roman
Empire.  This  tax  was  introduced  after  tbe  civil
wars,  and  the  income  resulting  from  it  went  to  tbe
military  treasury  (aerarium  milxtare).  It  was  also
known  as  vectigal  rerum  venalium  or  centesitiia  remm
ttnalium.  See  Tac.  Ann.  i.  78 ;  Suet.  Calig.  16 ;  Dig.
1. 16, 7.

Centtt^bnae  Usurae. See  Fenus.

Cento {Ktyrpav).  ProperIy,apatchworkgarmeut.
In  its  secondary  meaning  the  word  was  applied  to  a
l>oem  composed  of  verses  or  parts  of  verses  by  well-
kuowQ  poets,  put  together  at  pleasure  so  us  to  make
a  uew  meaning.  Homer  and  Vergil  were  chiefly
uwd  for  the  purpose.  The  Christians  were  fond
of  making  religious  poems  iu  this  way,  hoping  thus
tu  give  a  nobler  colouring  to  the  pagan  poetry.
For  instance,  we  have  an  Homeric  cento  (f/omero-
CtntoHtM)  of  2343  verses  ou  the  life  of  Christ,  as-


cribed to  Atheuals,  who,  under  the  title  of  Eudocia.
was  consort  of  the  emperor  Theodosibs  II.  Anoth-
er instance  is  a  poem  kuowu  as  the  Christut  Palima,
or  "  tbe  suffering  Christ,"  consisting  of  3610  verses
from  Euripides.  Instances  of  Vergilian  centos  are
the  sacred  history  of  Proba  Fattonia  (towards  the
end  of  the  fourth  centnry  A.D.),  and  a  tragedy  en-
titled Afedea  by  Hosidius  Geta.  See  Delapierre,
Tableau  lie  la  Litt&ature  da  Cenlon  (Paris,  1675).

CentonazU.  Makers  of  patchwork  (cetito)  for
clothes,  aud  of  the  heavy  cloths  bung  upon  earth-
works aud  other  forttficatioDB  to  protect  them  from
fire  or  to  break  tbe  force  of  missiles.

Centritea  (Kri^pirtjr).  A  small  river  of  Arme-
nia, which  it  divided  from  the  land  of  the  Car-
ducbi,  north  of  Assyria.

Centojn  Cellae.  The  modern  Civita  Vecchia;
a  seaport  town  iu  Etruria,  which  first  became  a
place  of  importance  under  Trajan,  who  built  a
villa  here  and  constructed  an  excellent  harbour.

CentumvXrl.  Judgesbelougiug  to  a  court  which
was  one  of  the  two  permanent  courts  of  plebeian
judges,  instituted,  probably,  by  Servius  Tnliius,
and  continuing  nntil  the  fall  of  tbe  Western  Em-
pire. The  other  collegium  was  that  of  the  decem-
viri (q.  v.).  The  actual  number  of  centuraviri  va-
ried at  different  periods.  Festus  (s.  v.  centumviralia
iudicia )  says  that  they  were  nominated  by  the
praetor,  three  being  taken  from  each  of  tbe  thirty
tribes.  The  ninety  thus  obtained  would,  with  the
presiding  decemviri,  make  up  tbe  exact  sum  which
tbe  name  deuotes.  When  tbe  number  of  tribes  was
incroased  iu  B.c.  241  to  35,  there  were  105  ceutum-
viri;  but  the  old  name  was  retained,  accoi'ding  to
Festns,  for  oonveuieucfe,  aud  under  the  Empire  tbe
number  had  riseu  to  180  (Pliu.  £p.  vi.  33).  At  this
time  it  is  improbable  that  they  were  any  longer
selected  from  the  tribes,  between  whose  nnniber
and  their  own  there  was  Ho  relation.  Fmm  a
passage  of  Dio  Cassius,  oue  might  conjecture
that  they  were  takeu  by  lot  from  the  decuriae
iudicum  instituted  by  Augustus;  and  from  Ovid
(Trist.  ii.  96),  that  no  one  could  escape  the
duty  if  drawu.  It  would  seem  that  under  the  Re-
public the  court  had  uo  jurisdiction  unless  the
whole  number  of  members  sat  together,  for  it  was
only  in  tbe  aggregate  that  they  represented  tbe
people;  but  later  (probably  under  Augnstus)  it  was
divided  into  four  divisions  or  sub-courts,  which
sat  and  judged  apart  and  iudepeudently  of  each
other  for  the  quicker  despatch  of  business  (Quint.
Irut.  xiii.  5, 6),  though  some  causes  were  heard  by
two  divisions  sitting  together  (ib.  v.  2, 1),  and  oth-
ers even  by  the  whole  united  body  (ib.  vi.  33),  which
then  (Pliu.  £p.  v.  21),  as  under  the  Republic,  was
presided  over  by  a  praetor.  The  old  custom  was
for  the  conrt  to  sit  in  the  open  Forum,  but  iu  Quiu-
tiliau's  time  (xii.  5,6)  the  four  divisions  sat  on  raised
seats  (tribttnalia)  in  the  Basilica  lulia.

The  procedure  before  the  ceotumviri  was  always
that  of  the  legia  actio  called  iai:ravtentum.  Even
when  the  le(ji$  actionea  in  tbe  aggregate  were  swept
away  by  the  Lex  Aebutia,  about  b.c.  240  ( Voigt),  the
old  process  was  expressly  retained  by  that  statute
for  centumviralia  iudicia  (Gaius,  iv.  31 ;  Gell.  xvi.  10).

It  seems  to  be  the  better  oiiinlon  that  the  juris-
diction of  the  centumviri  was  limited  to  civil
causes.  The  civil  suits  which  fell  under  their  cog-
nizance especially  were  those  known  as  real  actions
(Cic.  de  Oral.  i.  38,  173),  while  tbe  decemviri  were


CE^rrUNCTUTS


919


CEPHISOOOTl'S


more  particularly  coucerned  with  quostioiifl  of
status  {lifmrtui,  ciciliu,/antHia  :  Cic.  J^v  Cuet:.  33,  97  ;
i*n  If^mo,  'Jit,  7ti).  The  real  uctioii-t  comprise  nl)
suits  iiluiuiiiig  j)ri>iK'rty  or  iura  in  re  afumi,  sucb  as
u  T\)Htt  ut'  way.  a  iisutruct.  L'tc,  and  tbuae  lelattuK
tu  iiiLtiL'itaiiL'es:  titcacupeuf  tbecfiitnmvii'aljurirt-
diction  is  clcuutvU  b.v  the  pliiuliliK  of  tliu  /iostii  (ttie
symliolof  Qniritury  uvvuersbip)  in  tUv  ^ruuiid  wtiera
the  conrt  was  siltjiif{  (8»n*t.  Oflav.  'Ad),  auil  by  ibe
vm  of  the /etUiea  in  th«  nBcriiineiilnl  procetbins,
8i"«  Si'buoidf  r,  Za"  VfnfumvifiilU  htjieii  u/iud  littmiHot
Oriijine  ;  Tt}(cr4ti'uiii,  Im  luiiiaims  a/iud  fioinan^i.

CentunciUus.  A  |inrti-col»ui-eiltlreiWhiniiUrto
tbflt  of  tbr?  rumlerii  |jarlc'4|iilii,  wuni  bylheact(>r»
(if  Uiiiiiaii  pHiituuiiiuc. SeaCE^To;  MiML's;  Tax-

TU.MIMIS.

Ccuturia. 8e4*  COMITlA  ;  EXERCITirs.

Centuriata  Comitla. See  CuMtru..

Centwrto  UKoro^apx^i). 8«e  Exercttus.

Centuripae  iKtmavpurm).  An  aiicicut  tovra  of
tbu  Siculi,  ui  Sicily,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Aetna,
nnrt  not  fur  fmrit  tbe  rivur  Sjyumcthiis.  UuiUt  tiif
Romntm  it  was  oue  of  tbe  most  ttonrisbiug  cities
on  tbd  iHlauil.

Centussis. A  nuni  of  UKI  aucs. See  Ae.

Ceoa  I  Kits)  or  Cea.  Ati  iHlaiul  in  the  Aegean
Sen,  now  Zl-u  :  unu  ol'  tbu  Cycljilus  kj.  v.;,  betwrrn
the  Attii:  iiromiiiitory  8untiiui  auit  tbu  iMbiml  Cytli-
uu»,  uelcbrat4:(l  fur  ltd  fLTlili.'  M>il  and  it:i  t!*'">'^'
diiriitle.  Its  chief  tovrii  w&n  lulis,  the  bii-lliplRCL-
of  Simoiiides.  wheuce  we  read  of  tbe  Ccae  mnnvra
nenute  (Hor.  Carm.  ii.  I.  liC).

Copb&Id  iKri^Ai}).  All  AltiL*  dciiiL*  on  Ihti  rixht
bank  of  tbu  EriufiuuH.  It  bolun^vd  tu  tkc  tribe
Aciitiianlis.

Cephalloii  (K«4/)ciXiW).  A  Gr^ek  writer,  vlioae
uulivit  ciinutr>'  is  unknown.  C'«pbaliou  in  naid
t(i  bavu  lived  during  tbu  rei^u  of  Hadrian,  aud  tn
have  bf«n  exiled  to  Sicily  for  some  olloiice  kiwu
to  tbe  eui|H-i-or.  lie  wrote  an  abridf^iuent  of  nni-
verwil  bifttury  (£i/rr«(to«  'ItjropiKast  (Tvia  NiiHl»  to
tlie  JeutLi  of  AlexandiT.  ll  tvas  in  ttie  lunic  dlu-
tect,  Uku  (b(^  work  of  HvrtHlotU)*,  uiul,  likt*  this
vltfo,  waa  divided  into  nine  bookft,  t'iii-b  named
»nor  unu  of  tbe  Mil»c«.  Uc  coiij|MMU.'d  ultio  rb^
turical  decluuiuiioua. Uis  work«  ore  Iohi.

CepbalienU  (Ke<t>aX\ijvia}.  The  modern  Cefa-
loiiift[  ciiUftl  by  Hnnier  HanM^  (lo^ij)  or  Samoa
< £n^or) ;  tbe  lAr);«nl.  iMlnnd  in  tbu  Ionian  ■Sr'a,  sep-
arated from  Ithaea  by  u  uurrun-  cbainitl.  It  i»
VHry  itKinntainoiiJi.  Its  obief  lowiib  wt-ry  Snuid,
Ful<5,  C'ranii,  and  Pi-oni.  It  never  obtained  polit-
ical importance  It  is  now  one  of  the  seven  Ionian
islaudu  ceded  by  Groat  Britain  to  Gref«:«  in  1^64.

Cepbaloedltun  (Kd^Xu.Aioi').  A  town  on  the
iiorthtTU  coast  of  Sicily  in  the  lerrit<»ry  of  Hiincru.

CephSlon  i  Ke^oAwi').  A  uative  of  GrfKtiha
ill  TnuiM,  uul  to  be  coufouudeil  wilb  Cepbiiliun.
Ceplialou  wrote  an  historical  work  entitled  Tivjau
AVrwfi  {TftutKii).  He  apiwiir^  lu  lin\t:'  b«y>u  auteriur
to  Alexaiiiier  ibe  On;Hi.  and  Itt  cousider»l  by  Pin-
iiytsins  of  nalieuriiaHiSua  worthy  of  reliuucu  oa  au
liiittorivul  xvriler. Hi«  work  ia  loat.

CeptaSltiB  4K<'0aA»TK  (It  The  &ou  of  Dtdou,
and  a  graud-um  uf  Aeohis.  uiarriwl  to  Procria,  the
ebh'sit  dantihr^r  of  Erechlbeiis.  They  ilwtdt  at
Thoricot*  iu  Attica,  and  livwl  Iwppily  t4<iielhei-  till
euriosiiy  lo  trj'  the  tidellly  of  bii  vtid  uutercd  the  i


mind  of  CophalDS. Feigning  n  )onniey  of  eiHht
years,  bo  4h»gai8ed  hims>elf  aud  canie  to  PriKris
with  a  splendid  jewel,  which  be  offered  to  her  ou
dishonourable  terms. After  luucb  he»ituti<>u  ab»
yielded, when her husband ditK-overcd biiutelf
and teproacbed  her  with  her  conduct. Sbe  |]«t
from  bun  iu  abaniv,  bin  Ibey  werv  soon  after  rec-^
ouciled. L'epbaliis  went  constantly  to  the  cIihm!
and  FrncriH  ftrnwing  anspicioue,  aa  she  had  failo
bernelf, faucietl that ho wan ottracted by tb^^
chanuK  of  wuii<  other  fair  one Sbe  qacstione<^3
the  Hlavv  wbti  nm.'d to  aocoin|wuiy  hiin :  ami  ^^
tnld  her  tliat  bis  niiuster  utted  fre*ineutly  to  a«c«t:%^
tbe  Kuuimil  of  a  bill  and  cry  out,  "  Come,  Nepbe\  ^
comer Prucris  went  to  the  designated  hilt  a^,^'
eonreided  bcnielf  in  n  thicket :  and  ud  bei  h«x
band'a  eryiiig,  '"Come, Nepheli5, coineT  (whi^
was uuthtug mniv Ibau  an iuvocaiion for  u^ttit,
cloud,  viipiXrj,  to  inten>o9e  itself  lietween  bitu  kimI
tbe  »corcbiu<;  beams  of  tbu  .^nu  i,  hIio  mailed for-
%vnrd  towarda  bcr  bn^band,  who,  in  hid  asloiatsb.
tnent,  ibrew  hiij  dart  ami  nnwitiingly  killed hrr.
{  See  Hyg.  UrG;  rf.  Ovid,  ilri.  vii.  tJtil  foil.  > T(iii
'legend  la  tidd  with  i;K-at  vahalioiia. Crpbalun,
[  for  his  invohnituiy  criiue,  was  haut(ihe<l. He  weut
to  Theljcs,  wliich  wan  at  that  time  mTaged  by  a
I  fox  which  nothing  could  overtaki",  ami  ln-jniuwl
.tVnipbitryon  in  the  clioae  of  it. Hin  dog  Ltu'laps
ran  it  down  :  but,  Jn.xt  an  be  waa  catching  it,  Zen
turned  them  both  to  stoue. CepbaluM  tbeu  awW
Amphitryon againnt tbu  Ti-Ieboaiis,  aud  on  llrtr
j  couqueat  he  HVttlL'd  in  (hi;  i«bmd  name«l  frooa  bini
I  CeiilialleuiA- (2)  An  Albeuiau  oratnr,  who  flour
I  inbed  lowai'da  the  end  of  the  Pelopounesao  War,
iind was  ono of  those who  contributed  inoit  W
'  overthrow  the  rule  of  tbe  Thirty  Tyrant*  Iqv.i.  Al-
I  though  be  lived  during  a  very  atonoy  periwl,  aud
'allbnugb uo  ouu  ever  |>ro|>o«ed  or  eauHMl  lo  b*
{NUfaed  more  lawa  than  be  did,  yet  he  uever  lixl
any  uccnsatiun  brought  against  him — a  remsrkaU*
fac:  iu  the  hiJitory  of  Atli«n«. We  mnst  om  ert-
fouud  him  with  Cephalus,  the  father  of  Loitt
who  came  from  Syraru.w  and  settled  al  Allirt*
SnidiiB  makes  C'^pbaliis to  have heeu  tint  fird
orator  that  made  nae  of  an  exordium  aud  iwron-
tion. (3) Tbu  father  of  L.v-siOM  tbu  orator. II*
was  a  untivu  of  Syracuse,  but  SL<ttled  at  AtlKOt**
I  a  reaideut  sojourner,  or  one  of  the  (t4Tou(ni.

I Cephcia  (KTj(i>r)!s). A  name  given  iu  AiidrotiK<l*
I  ail  dau}£litcr  of  Cephena  (Ovid,  A.  J.  i,  1^).

Cepb^nea  iKij<injtnti.  (1 1  Au  ancient  uamenftli*
'  Per.si:in.s(Hdt.vii.CI).  (SeePKRSiA.)  r^iAiwaw''
i  tbu  AeibiopiiiUB,  from  Cepbeus,  oue  of  tbrir  kiii(>

Cepbetu  {Kiftfttxis).  (1)  King  of  A)'thiu|)in.A>B
of  llulus,  bnobnnd  of  C'aiiaiopea,  and  fnthurvriB*
ilromeda  (q.  v.).  He  was  jilaced  among  the  ti"*
after  bia  death.  (3)  Sod  of  Aleua,  one  of  tI*Af-
gouaiita.  He  was  king  of  Tegen  in  Arcmlim*'*
[teriebed  with  moat  of  hia  aoiiff  iu  an  ex[>cditidu
against  Heracles.

Cepbiaia  (Kij^^).  A  dome  v(  Attica,  at  tb#
foot  of  Mount  Brilewus,  and  near  the  ionte*  *
tbe  Cephi»i*na.  It  waa  the  favourite  residcof"^
Herode*  AtiicuB,  who  had  a  beantifut  villa  ben-

CephJaodatus  <Kfitfn,r69ont).  A  statuary  »»f
AtbeuR.  who  llourisbed  about  B.o.  379.  Two  »«**
of  his  nn»  spoken  of  by  the  aiirientA— A  HrfW*
uouri.-*hiiig  Diouywu  when  an  infant,  and  ooeoT"
public  aiwaker  iu  Iho  act  of  deliveriug  an  oratio*-


CKPHISOPHON


819


»


Thvtv  wu  anotber  «cnlptor  of  the  same  nnmo,
iiMulljr  callwl  •'  tlifl  Yooiinvr,"  the  son  of  Praxit-
tlw,«bit  iluiirishtTil  at  Atbvus  in  u.C-  ^->"-

C«pIilsAplion  {Kr}ff>i0-fttp^v).  A  frieui)  of  Kitrfp-
iiJAt,  ^Itu  14  >ai*l  tu  Iiavo  liotU  aiiled  in  the  roiu-
]i(Kdiitiu  of  hib  drAmn^  and  to  bavu  appearad  an  an
■ctiitiii  them  ou  thv  stage.

Cephiras  [Ktjtptaot)  atid  Cephlaens  {Kfji^ta-
titX  111  A  celHirated  rivor  of  Givvo',  tlial  riiwa
at  tli»  foot  of  PaniasAits,  cUtw«  to  l.ilaea,  and,
iDrr  travvniing  the  pUins  (if  TlioviM  and  pftrl  uf
iIm  LIwotiiQ  ttfnit»ry,  (;iiii>iic^s  into  tho  Copaic
Like  lit  the  lattvr  cunntry.  (Sec  CopaIs.)  lie-
siikI  uiupiirea  it  to  a  M-r|>en(,  frojn  the  many  niu-
>io<iiti«£of  it«  countc.  The  mixlern  naiue  'im  Maun)
PtilaiiH).  According  to  the  poets,  tlic  sou  of  the
riteryod  C^phiv^din  iiitrotlnwd  the  worship  uf  the
lirarw  into  Kocotia,  and  hence  tho  i>ceuliur  at-
iiuLioeut  which  thvy  witre  Baid  to  have  fur  the
Tat*nof  this  sin-am,  (Soo  Giiatub.)  (i)  A  riv-
er of  Ailica,  gruenilly  didtiugnifthctl  hy  tho  name
of  AtticiM,  to  prevent  ila  tK*iii|;  c<mi founded  with
tlie  CViihissuB  which  flowed  nuar  Kluusis.  (3)  A
tirrr  muniiig  n«ar  EleiiBta.  |4)  A  river  of  Argu-
li\fl(i«iiTi^  into  the  luuchiu.  (J>)  A.  river  iu  Uii*
inlautlortiatamis.

Cepotaphium  iKirinn-tM^tovl.  A  toinh  pUoeU  id
*R«i'Uu  (KTJTucj. 8ee  Skpl'lcklm.

C«r  (K^). See  Kkres.

Cent  (Kfjftis).  Wax.  By  niutuiiyniy  the  word
n  bUa  iiM<(|  of  tho  pages  <if  a  taMot,  for  whioh  *«*.•
TtunaK;  TiyjTAMEKTUii ;  WiiiTisa  and  Wiut-
UG  Uatiruls.  For  ica  cuiployiueut  hy  athlctca,
*MATni.eTAK;  C'ekoma. Fur  it»  usu  iu  painting,

•w  hCTlTRA.

CBramictiBlK#pa/ifiK(ic).  (l)Now  Kcmnm;  ahny
•^Cnria,  north  of  ilm  penin«nla  of  iJori*,  rucfiviiig
HiiioDH!  from  the  city  of  Ceran)ua  in  ita  vicinity.
')!.■  One  (if  ibe  niosl  cuitHidurahle  and  important
iWtiof  lite  city  of  AtliPiiH.  Its  name  was  derived
"Wii  tlw  hL-ro  Ceramns  (Panswiii.  i.  3),  or  perhaps
"'*>  *tna«  {Miitvriea  which  were  formerly  silnat-
«J  \ketr  (llcmd.  V.  fjiH).  It  iuclndo4l  probably  the
^n,  tbu  Stoa  Ua«it«ios,  and  the  PockiU*,  as  well
**  varJoQfl  (ith«r  tcniploe  and  piiblie  hnildingn.
Ai>tii|aarini  are  not  decided  a«  to  the  genund  ex-
"Ot  and  direction  of  thii*  part  of  the  ancient  city,
■"w •canscly  any  trace  rtinuiinn  of  its  inouinuento
""l  edifices :  hut  wf  may  ctTlahily  conclude,  from
t'ttirifisearchcD  and  ohi^ervationa,  that  it  lay  eu>
ItiHy  nu ibe  sontb side of  the  Acropolis. Hve

J^*'fcniia(K<>o^oc(.  A  Doriau  seaport  town  on
'"B'mli  Bide  of  the  Cnidian  CiierscmeaiKt,  on  tlie
^t  of  Caria,  froni  which  the  Ceramic  Gulf  took
"■BMW.

Caribos  (Ktf}atrovt\  A  floiiriMhiug  colony  of
™"*P*  «ii  the  coaat  of  Pontus,  at  the  month  of  a
"T  of  ilii*  same  name;  chietly  celehraletl  aa  the
l*  •wfroBi  which  Knrf)|>e  oht-iiiiied  l»oth  tlie  cherry
.  "^  'U  name  (mvMirm).  LnculliiR  is  aaid  to  havp
J^^giit  liack  plaulM  of  the  cherry-tree  {xifiatros)
'"li  liiDi  |.>  Home  (laid.  Oritj.  xvii.  7, 16l ;  but  tUiH
'"'^  pnihahly  oidy  to  gome  ]mrticular  aort«,  an
I'^tConuiiigsM.ui  to  have  had  the  tree  much  earlier.
J*****!!  full into decay  after the fuuuilatiun  of

CeraunUMoutes  (raKrpovVuic^ijI.  The  modern
WrJBuimj  arangdof  monntaioeesteodiiigfrom  the


mr-


frontler  of  Illyrtemu  along  the  coast  of  Epims,  de-
rived their  name  from  the  f^iuent  thunder'Siornis

which  occuri-ed  among  them  {  xtftavpuv ).  Thet*
mouiitaius  tnado  the  coaat  of  Epima  daiigorotis
to  ships.  They  were  also  called  Acrorerannia,
though  this  name  watt  proi>er1y  applied  to  the
promontory  sejiarating  the  Adriaiit-'  and  lotiian
aeas.  The  iuhahitauta  of  theae  moiintaius  were
culled  C'erauuii.

CerbSnia  ( Kifi^tpat).  The  fani<m»(  dog  of  Iladex.
the  frnit  of  Kchidnu's  union  wUliTy]>hiin.  Ilt^  was
feitulioneil  at  llie  cu-
tt'uiice  uf  hell,  ax  a
iviitclifid  lieepvr,  tu
prevent  the  living
from  catering  ilie  iii-
ff-rtial  regions,  and
llie  dfad  from  eacap-
iiig  from  their  cun-
fltifninnt.  Orpheiia
hilh'd  him  to  fth'ep
with  his  lyre ;  and
IlfiMclfsdriiggrd  him
from  hell  in  ihv  per-
formance of  his
twelfth  and  la«t  la-
honr.  (See  Uera-
CLR8.]  The  poets
diftVr  in  their  desyiiic
tiona  of  this  fabled
animal.  Ht-niml  nn-
aigtih  him  tifiy  heada,
Ccrtwnu.  (Krolu  A  ttiuniv  Statuf.  I  calling  lilm  Kva*  if*it-
TrjKapTciKoptjvoi^.  8oph-
ocle8(7Vaell.  1114) Styles  him  '\iiov  TpiKpavnv  oKiXa-
«a,  "the  tbrec-hcaded  dog  of  Pluto,"  and  in  ihiH
laat  account  tlo  Latin  poela  geuei-ally  cuiuciile,
deitcribing  liiui  al»o  tu  having  »er|)enta  crtihrd
about  hia  neck.  Horace,  lm\M'Ver,  calln  him  btlna
wnfjtv]i«  if/d.  ii.  1'6,  Hi.  either  by  jH^olio  amplitica*
tioUfOrehieiu  aecordauce  with  oumeGrtek  author-
ily.  Champolttnn  lraee«acnnuiihmiuli>gy  between
the  Egyptian  and  the  Gractau  niytbulogy  an  re-
giinh-i  the  dog  of  Hadea.

Caroaaomm  |  Kcpxao-w/ior  noXu).  A  city  ol
Lower  Egypt,  on  the  wejt  iMiuk  of  tlie  Nih?.  at
the  point  where  the  river  divided  into  its  tluve
principal  branehee.

Cerclna  (K>/MiVa)  and  Ceroinltia  (Krpto>7nr).
Two  l<iw  ielaiidi!  off  tli«  novtii  roast  of  Africa,  i'l
the  moath  of  the  l^ttwer  .Syrtia,  united  by  a  hriUge,
aud  posHe«siag  a  line  harbour.

Cerclta«  fKfpKirai).  A  people  of  Asiatic  Sar-
matia,  pn>ltiibly  to  lie  ideulilied  v\ith  the  Cirea»t-
vians.  They  dwell  on  the  eastern  eoa«t  of  the
Pains  Maeotis,  or  Bea  of  Azov.

Cercopes  (  KipKomtr ).  Droll  and  thievish
guome.s  who  robbed  Heraeleii  in  Uin  alceji.  Somo
place  them  at  Thermopylae;  otberis  at  Oetbniia
in  Euboea,  or  in  Lydid.  tSee  Henid.  vii.  tjl(},  aud
the  article  Mklajifvouh.)  A  iHJi;m  Kn(.ille4l  K<^
KtaiTft  was  nsc-ril>ed  to  Ilonntr.  (f-'f. MUllcr,  Duricr,
ii.  1-2,  ^  10.)

Ceicopa  (K/pxw^).  {!)  One  of  the  oldest  of  the
On<hic  poui»i,thu  aiilbor  of  an  epic  ou  the  descent
of  Orphtfus  into  Hadea,  (Sec  Orphic  Pueis.)  (*2>
\  MiU'Mau  poet,  the  rival  of  Hesiod.  He  tn  said  to
have  written  an  epic  railed  Jeftimiun.  «hirh  is.  hy
Mumi',  ascribed  to  IIe*iod  hiniwlf. Stni  HEsntors.


CEKCL'RUS


320


CEKOMA


Oercnnu  itiftKrwpm,  ttptcovpot).  A  It^hi,  fiwift,
iipi-ii  M*s«cl,  Ih-st  meiilioncd  l).v  Homilotus  fvii.  Wl
88  iH-iug  iimmI  ut  the  tiuiu  (•!'  tbo  Pvntiati  wars.  It
wsn  ]>ru]M'llvil  by  oars,  and  was  iifteil  botli  iu  coui-
itlLTCi''  auil  iti  >vur  (Ltv.  xxxiii.  19).  IVt  iavaulum
wHii  variuiitily  ai>cnlK'il  to  tbu  Ctii-cynKniitt  anil  to
tbi:  Cyiirioles. See  ^"AVls.

Cercj^on  (KtpKvuf).  Bon  of  Posciilon  or  of  Hc-
I>tltt(^■i|l)».  A  cruel  lyrniK  at  KK-iisis,  who  jiiit  U>
ilvath  tiis  ilnti^htcr  AIu|m5  aiiU  killcil  nil  iiti-iiri^ra
wliutu  lie  ovcicauie  in  wrcHtlitig.  He  was,  in  the
euil.  coiiquen-<l  ami  »laiu  by  Th«sun5  ((i- t.).

Ketk^ra  (Kiincvpa). Si-^o  CoitCTlu.

Cerdo  {Kipivf).  A  naiiif)  given  to  the  lowest
ehu«*  of  Wurhnii'ti  ami  <Jerivetl  fnun  KtpfSvi,  "  gato,"
It  in  sorucIimeH  niHKtl  witli  tlu>  addition  of  tbo  name
of  the  tra«le— e.g.  jtiff'/ro-rt/o,"  a  cobbler";  offnA?/'i-
her,  "a  suiitli."  The  tiniao  lit  aUo  geuorically  nacd
Id  a  con  tent  pi  nous  aciisc  like  tbo  Kngli:ib  "snob,"
"cad.*' etc. Sec  Juveiinl,  \v.  IKJ,  witb  Mayor's uote.

Cerealia. See  Ckhkh,

Ceroe  (from  the  •/  kr  of  irroirc).  An  old  Ital-
iini  >:««Ides8  of  a^icullnre.  Tbo  Cero»  wlio  wa.i
wor«lji|>|ied  at  Rome  is.  however,  the  Kitmc  ns  the
Greek  I)«metcr.  Her  cult  was  iutnHluciMl  inider
the  Iljiliau  untue  at  the  iMine  time  as  \lnii  of
Diouystui  nud  Penephou^  who  iu  the  siuiw  way


CWrw. (PampvUn  VIM  |«lBluif.]

received  the  Italian  tionies  of  Libor  and  libera.
(See  etc  y.  D.  ii.  24. 3.)  It  nu»  in  DC.  496.  uo  tbc
oceaaiDn  of  m  dtvu^tht,  that  the  Sibylline  Bookv
ordered  the  introduction  of  the  wo»hip  of  th«>
three  deities.  This  wor«bi[i  waa  hu  (Ircidwlly
lireek  that  tlK>  tvntide  dedicnli^  ou  a  *>}>ur  of  the
Areutine  in  B.C.  4W,  over  lb«  tutrauco  to  the  t  U*-


I  ens,  was  built  in  Orm-k  style  and  by  Greek  nrtiiif
,  and  the  itervico  of  the  go<bl(>9»,  founded  on  t
(■reek  myth  of  Dcnicter  aud  Perscphon£,  was  \*
furniod  in  the  UiX'ck  toijgno  by  Italian  woueu
Greek  extiuction.  The  worshippers  of  the  goddi
were  almost  exclusively  plebeian.  Her  temple  ti
placed  nnder  the  care  of  the  plel>cian  oeiHlct*.  wl
as  orerseera  of  the  corn  market,  bad  their  offic
Rstdeuce  iu  or  near  it.  The  tlun»  which  tl
impo«e<l  went  lo  tbe  nbrine  of  Ceres,  lU  did  I
property  of  persons  wh«  biul  offended  ogail
tbein  or  agninist  tbe  tribunes  of  tbe  plebs.  Ji
as  tim  ]intrit'ians  uutvrtainud  each  other  w:
niutnal  ho.s]>it»litie»  at  the  Mcgulesiau  Gaii
(April  4-10),  »o  did  the  pleltcians  at  the  Cereal
or  games  inlriNlnceUat  the  founding  of  the  Tetu]
of  Ct-rcH.  Tbiiwi  held  in  later  times  were  given
the  ardilcfl  from  the  l'2tb  to  the  l^th  of  April,  a
auother  festival  to  Ceres,  hebl  in  Anguttt,  wjui
tabli&hcd  before  the  S«cnnd  I'nnic  War.  This  i
celebrated  by  women  in  honour  of  the  n-nuiaii
Ceres  and  Proserpina.  .\ft«r  ftutting  for  nine  d*
the  women,  clothed  in  whil*-,  aud  udurued  v»
crowns  of  ripe  cars  of  com,  uffcred  (o  the  godij
thefirst-frHitsofthebarvcM.  Afler  B.C.  I91,a,  I
(iriiinium  CrrrriK)  was  lutrmluced  by  cummaaif
the  Hibylliiic  Itooks.  Thi*  was  originally  otiserT
every  four  years,  but  iu  later  times  was  kept  s
naally  on  the  4rh  of  f  >ctolier.  The  nnlivn  Itali.
worship  of  Ceres  was  pn>bnbly  aiaintniufd  in  i
purest  form  in  the  conuiry.  Herii  the  couiiirjT«<
offered  Cetvs  a  sow  (porot  pnteridanea)  Xtvfatt  tl
befpuniux  of  the  harvest,  and  dedicatrd  to  tl
Uie  firat  cuttings  of  the  com  < /jru«inWi«ni}.  9
Dkmktkr.

Kerea  (Kijp*^).  The  i^crsouiflcd  neMsnl;  <
deslh,  dcscribeil  by  Homer  a»  formltlahle,  dUT
aud  hateful  Iteiiigs,  Iwcansw  they  carry  off  ntn
the  Joyless  house  of  Hmle^.  .\ccording  to  Hukl
Ihcy  arc  tbe  daughlent  of  Night  <Nyx),  and  rate
of  tbe  Moentc  (q.  v. )  and  punish  men  fur  Ibi
criiueM.

Cereas. A  wax  cainlle  wilfa  &  rush  wick. 9

CaXIiF-1-».

Cerevisla. Ale  or  Ifcvr. Rfse  CKKVEiUi

Cerilll  A  town  in  Brnitinm  on  the  tca/A'
little  south  of  the  month  of  tbe  LaQs.

Cerintbus  (K^ptv^r). A  towu  on  (he  ewrt  col

of  EulM>oa,  on  the  river  Budotus.

CemA  (Kf>vi)).  Au  Islaud  without  tholHllm
Hercules,  ou  the  African  coast,  mentioned  by  Mail
(q.  v.)  iu  his  Pcripl'ii,  but  not  identitied  with  i<
knonu  to-day.  Here  he  esLablislteil  a  eolouy,'
it  was  always  th^  deiwt  of  the  Oarthogliiiaiw
the  Atlantic  coast  of  .\frica.  Hauuo  uys  tb»l
was  the  ^ame  distance  from  the  Columus  of  ti
coles  that  Carthage  was.

OesnSra  BenaHatem. See Hbkbs;  TkS

UKNTCM.

Ccnraaa 6e«  SALTATia

Cttroma  (Kfjpatfui).  A  eoaipoeltiuu  of  na
ditfen-ut  refereuoes:  (1)  A  plaater,  with
tbe  principal  lugmiient  (Hippocr.  397,  4*^;
like  Ktpiof,  au  ulcer  exudiug  wax -like  toif
I  Plin.  Val,  i.  35  fin.i.  it)  A  mixture  of  oil.  «»x.«
earth,  with  which  athletee  under  the  Roman  F.I
ptre  rubbed  tlieutselres  before  wreatling  iM*
iv,  W.  vU.  32; Pliu.  H.  y.  xxxr.  $  !«; Flul-


; TBS

1


I.:LKKETAM


321


CESTICILLIS


» keep  the  bMir  free  from  iliis  coiii|ioiniil,
Iworu.  (So<*  Jiiv.  lii.tkj.witi)  Moyi<r'»  imUM
|f3)  Tbe  \}\aec  u-ben*  ibe  cerutnu  won  m<Ktt.  lim^U  ;
iieiice,  ll»©  wfvfetliiig-riu);  (Sen.  Srft.  Vit.  xil.It).
Carretaiii An  lUcfriiin  |N^tt>l«  in  Hii]>aiiiH  Tnr-
nf!ii!ii6,  iiilmtiitinl  tli«  iiKHltTii  (.Vn1n^nt>  in  ihi-
'jn;ii»«!«:  ihey  were  cclebmteil  for  Ilttir  hams.
Cersna  (Ktfjo-air). 'Sow  i\w  MorlcDH ;  a  river  of
Oilicin  emptying  into  tlio  Gulf  of  Ihxus  on  tlii'  i'»Nt.
Certamlua. S^-e  Atiiletak.
Certi,  Incerti  Actio. A  name  wittch  hiu  Itceii
I  fcivfn  by  noinc  writers  to  llitiHio  actions  in  n-lilch  u
trictTininiitu  ur  in<lvt»rininaU.*  itiitn,  lut  ttiociLM*  may
!»«:,  i&niFiilioncil  in  tliu  (ur\n\i]n  ieon J ^mnn I iv  rrr tar

Certonlum  ( Ktfn-uvioc).  A  town  iu  MyMia,  nieu-
li<>iriHl  only  l>y  XL>iio[ilii>n  {Aiuih,  vii.  8.  8).

Cerftohi  {Ktptiixw).  The  rti|)c'H  vt  liicit  Htt[t}M)rlf(t
tbe  yitnl  of  n  Mhip,  pawing  from  it  1o  thu  top  of
tlwj  DiHt.  Ill  Muiiie  uiicicnt  moiiunienta  we  iu«
furir,  an  in  the  fxllnwjii^  ilhiMtmtion,  tuk«n  fnitn


VnwI  vllh  C«rudii. (I'rtiti]  ■  Vaucaa  MS.  of  VargHl

«ne  <if  thepictni-pHin  lli«iMR.i»f  Vergil,  which  was
given  tiy  h'lilviiu  l."nii»iis  to  th«  Valii-an  lilinirT.

Ccnu«a  (i^t^L-^iov).  Whiti^Ieni),  or  /jfuw'n  guh-
<*'*"»iu.  The  ancient  cchikp  wh«  jirt-pansl  hy  i-x-
pofcinj  lenil  to  the  vaponr*  of  viin';'ar,  and  the
wh(i|p  rm^tliml  is  niinnt«ily  flescrituwi  by  Thoophnw-
*w(/> /ji/iiV.  UH),  Similar  |trrM'nMe«arr>i1oMcribe(l
''J'lHwiirorifli'a  nnil  Vitro viiih.  C*'rnfwa  wfwJQ  coia-
'*'«i  hm  aruoiij;  women  as  a  fa-cii  vnamel.  See
PUut  J/«/.  i.  ;v  idi.

Cerveftia,  Cerrisla,  »r  Cereriaia  (Ci^f)-  AU
"'  Vfr;  %  tM^vcrof^e  scarcely  ever  ilrunic  by  the-
aikrifTii  ()ri*<:krt  nint  Romans,  aUhontfli  It  wus  vi^rj'
S^^'Tallv  i\sr*l  by  iho  Mnrronudinf;  ualions,  \vhni>i'
•ilj|tHl(-lii„nt«  were  U'jw  ftivonnilile  to  tb«*nn>wth
*f^  vines  (IS  iiallia  aliitiint  pravinciiM,  PHd.  £/.  M
^"•nfH;  Tac.  ae^m.'i:^).
^  fv^imhitin'n  t(r.-iti*iiidit  that  tlip  EKyi'tiAiiH  drank

■■''*"."r-wiii«"  iH  Mn(>iM>rtm1  by  tin*  in-w-riplioin*.  in
"liipli  It  u>  «jill«(l  h,ii\  IfinL;  or  j4«i.t,  ami  by  Strali.
J""'  '■  14,  ami  Diml.  i.  31,  who  ib-wiritH-w  it  a.*,  a
»*Vfhi(;(,  iiliiiont  ftH  fragrant  ns  wine,  and  «-«lU  il.
C'*»»i  wLilc  foliimello  (X.  lU)  lolls  oa  that  (lie
'^'  H«vriu  and  lupini!  entorod  into  it.i  romponi-
bow,  tlw.  fonner  doiibtIf*H  to  >jivi^  it  fragrauro,  tlio
™'*t  ift  artrrc  the  Katne  purptxw  ii«  the  modrrn
"l''  flnt  the  mclhods  of  ittt  pn-panitinn  varied
*(Wf»Ii,  u.  r>i,  A  Miniilnr  drink  wax  iniule  by  the
£lhlii|>',n„K  frnui  millet  nod  barley  (ib.  xvii.3,  )it.

TIh!  brer  or  bnrU'V-wintt  of  Crelts  waa  knuwti  an
II


KvpfM  or  Kovfitu.  A  Hiniilar  iHivcrage  pMWll  nmI<T
tbv  name  of  ^jjOtdi' in  the  north  »f  Oreect*  nml  A<>iii
Minor,  beiiiK  made  of  burley  by  tht"  rhr>*t;iani4  and
t'iu>oniun4,  of  biirlcy  or  of  rontd  by  ihe  'PhrHciann,
whilo  Ihr  I'aAoniiin.H  alto  tiiai\f  rra(>afiias  i*v  itapa-
tiirf  from  millet  and  llcHbant'  {K6fv(a).  Of  (ln>  ttar-
ley  drink  nillitd  trlK-ni'.  Aristotle  tella  ub  that  tho^i
inebriattMl  by  it  fall  on  the  biu-k  and  on  no  other
part  «)f  lh(>  lM)dy  (Arhcn.  x.  4-17).  We  are  loM  by
Xenophon  that  tliu  Aruieniaua,  itiHietid  of  drinkin};
their  ale  in-  beer  on t  of  ciiiM,  pbu^cd  il  bcfuru  Ibeni
in  a  hirp;  bowl.  Tliia  iHiing  fnll  to  ilu-  brim  wiili
tli«  grains  as  well  au  the  fenuenti-d  litjuor,  tbe
guests,  when  tbey  pledged  one  auotb(.-r,  drank  to-
Kelhnr  out  of  the  samo  bowl  br  sloopinn;  tlowii  to
It.ulihon^h,  whi-n  this  token  of  friendship  v>»n  no(
ilttende*!,  th(*y  adopted  the  ninrc  refined  nietliod
of  sucking  n|>  tbv  fluid  thront;h  tubes  of  cane  (Xcn.
Aniifi.  v.5,Sti).  ZC'tfof  was  the  dHiik  of  Lnoitanin
(Strab.  iii.  :t,  7)  ;  in  Mpaln  it  waM  knotvii  iw  nteliii
oreerea,  while  cerrrniii  uaa  Ibe  naiuw  u.s4'd  hi  (ianl,
u'bnre  other  drinks  of  the  Mort  weri*  uoninnin  (Plin.
1.  c.).  Thuii  roeidoiiiuH.  in  Athetraeus.  Miyx  lliut
while  the  richer  cliuMtes  in  tjaid  itiiport  wine  fittin
Italy  and  the  ditftrit't  of  Mui-beilles,  Ihe  poor  drink
a  be«r  niaile  from  wheat,  with  or  uithonr  the  ad-
dition of  bonvy,  which  is  called  xofifia.  TIiIh  (.bd-
lic  nw)  «>f  bwr  in  illntitrale<l  by  a  i-iirioiiH  circwliir
bottle  foninl  in  (7aid  aud  prvM-rved  in  the  MoHi^e
Curnnvidel  at  Pari*:  it  lieam  the  legend,  "fJwpita
re]*le  lagoiia  cerresa"  ^Jiet>ie  Archeoli>giijue,  IWiH,
xviii.WG).

The  beverage  of  the  Germans  wan  luado  from
barley  or  «\lieat  (Tac.  Gtirm.  S3)i  The  licer  of  11-
lyria  and  raiinonia  wa«  callrd  H'tfffiin  or  tahttium
(IlieroM.  /<r<ii.  V.  1^);  and  at  the  court  of  Alliln  in
,  raiuionia  a  beverage  eaUed  fii'dor  (inend  f),  or  one
of  barley  calLeil  Ka/iuf,  wort  ntteil.  The  Greeks  uud
ItointmH  regarded  tluH  iMirbariaii  drink  with  inn'
toinpt,  aM  I*  linen  by  an  e|iip^in  of  the  empiM'or
Julian  (,1«/A.  Put.  \x.  aGTi).  Soe  ]Jieker<lyke,  Vuri-
MiiieM of  Al* and  Herr{\'i^'^)\  uud  Mew  anil  A«timi.
Th«  Ih-inha  of  the  W.^rlJ  ( l*W),

Cervi,  so  called  fnnn  Ibeir  reneinblnnce  to  the
horna  of  a  Btag.  HnineheH  of  treoK  iiiterloe>'d  with
their  poinlH  projtHrTiiij;,  inied  in  war,  an  pnli^aditij;
or  chrrfii'J'-4lc-/ri»r,  \u  front  of  or  upon  eartbworkn
or  forlilioatioiiH  (CaeM.  /?.  0.  \ii.72;  Liv,  xliv.  II,
4),  and  »onietiuieK,  Mhen*  there  wen>  no  forlilii-it-
tiona,  (itiick  itimply  into  the  level  ground  (Sit.  lial.
X.  413,  414).

Cerrical  (irpoirKiftiitKuioi',  irvrUfKi^v),  A  pillow
or  rtiHbioii,  to  Hii|>|Htrt
tbe  bead  or  Hboiibler,on
a  IkmI  or  dinin^eouch
(ilart.  xiv.  lit*;  Siiet.
jV(rr,  G).  Tbe  word  is
i(lb>»  iiteil,  like  it«  (rrcek
cnnivaleuta,  lu  a  lead
special  sense  to  denote B-^  «'«>  Onrlcl <p*«»poii.i

any  cushion  (Jnr.vi. 353;  Pelrcin.^i^,  I). 8e«  Vvu-

KiOTyceum tKrtpvKtuiif).  BeeVxuvcKVf*;  Praeco.

Keryx  (K^ipv^).  A  herald.  See  CaddckUs;
Krtiai.I!*;  Frakco.

Ceaaio  Bouonim. See  FtoNonrM  Cksaio.
Ceoaio  iu  lure. Sva  In  Ii'Rk  Crrrio.
CaatiDillua. A  pnrter'H  knot,  i>r  pad  for  carry-
ing bunleiiK,  known  to  uh  r>tdy  through  Ihe  gloat


CESTIUS  PONS


S»


CHAERONEA.


In  Fwrtaa  fs.  v.).  Tlie  Owek  woi-U  is  tvXij.  or  ir««(-
pa,  fntin  ira  liejiig  [winteU  iiitu  a  circulur  sllBiK.
Setj  AitcrLfM.

Ceitiuft  Pone. St«  Pons.

CeRtrlnd  i  K«rrrp(Vij).  A  district  of  Eplraii,  wpa-
nii-tl  iVi'iii  Tlll^8pIt)tia  \>y  thv  ri vvr  Tliyaiiii').  It
r,ntt  Maitl  to  biLVe  lukfii  itA  uiititu  fTi>tii  Ct.'striiiU'S,
tlic  .-Kill  uf  Ileluims,  liaviug  previi>iiety  liorue  the
ii|ipclULiuri  ot'CatiMoanin.

KeatioBphend6ne  («cr(rrj3o<r^<i'dni^). See  Fcn-

Cectmin  (Kterpov). Koe  Fictura.

CettOA. Seo  Cae»tus.

Cesttw  (xevruc).  It)  Hoiiiur,  ail  ailJr«tivo  np-
|>licil  l<>  the  f>irdli>  Cifias)  »(  AplirtHltti^,  on  wliivh
were  eiiibioiilpml  all  ninniier  of  etitireiilciitH  to
love.  Il  nii'iiMn  ■' pcrforiittKl " — i.  i*.  witb  holes
inailo  l>y  tlio  lUTilk — "»«ml>nM<teiV4l,"»/r«  pictm —
iinil  i«  fortutMl  fniiii  \\iv  luiiiic  btwi-  (viz.  l-an  =z/eri'
IT)  UH  Kfd^ia,  or  Ktvriui  for  Ktv^rros.  It  ik  to  bu  c;uu-
fliituretl  tbo  Bniiio  tiH  tbc  oTfjtii^iuy,  raivia,  /itVpn,
tm}6ob«tTiiQi,  f'ttcia  jvrtoritJtn,  ittaTnuiifhtrc  wliieli
in  foiiiHl  oti  Ht-atni-fl  of  ApbrmUt^  trnm  imxt  the
sktu  (Mart.  .\iv,  'iOSV  {^w  li«iniii»iftt<;r,  Dt-nkiiul-
Ui',  etc.,  p.  36*1.  tig.  XKl.)  (t  wam  .icconlin^ly  uuMle
uf  9onie  onft  FdilimtiHiri).  In  Mart.  xiv.  60, /'c//iV  is
pixibAbl.v  nliiii  we  Hbiiiibl  call  kiO.  Ila  ubjtwt  wan
li>  tiii|>]Mi]-t  ikiiil  MHiii'tiiiieM  lo  i-Diitpn'M  tuu  full
iKHiouift,  likn  tbo  iiioilDni  coi'M4't,  but  it  wait  not
iisimI^  liku  tilt;  latter,  to  pincb  lit  tbc  li^tii-L>.  Tbe
Itrevks  and  Kouiana  were  )«trniigcr»  to  ih'm  itijiin-
uub  practicv  (Buiinioi»tOT,  t.  c.i,  aii<l.  ac-unnlirigly,
every  girl  liiil  uot  wear  oiip.  Wiiickelnifmu  ami
Saglio  coDsblcr  that,  nwiii};  tu  it»  apleiHluiiF,  tbe
Kfcrrdc  of  Apbro(Iit*S  wan  a  belt  woru  otilaiile  tlie
ilreaa.

Cetei  (KiTTcioi).  A  peopio  of  Mynin,  the  old  in-
Iia1iitaiit6  of  tbo  tonntry  about  I'ergaiuUM,  and
upon  lli<:>  CV'liiiB,  nioiiliniiud  by  lloiuer.

Cetbesua.  (DA  lloinaii  consul,  in  B.C.  332.  He
was  obligc-il  to  lay  don-n  hia  otHce  on  accontit  of
some  iafonnality  iti  Ihh  election,  {'i)  M,  CoitNK-
l.lL'ti,  A  diHliti^iuiibeil  K<.iaiaii  orattir.  Being  ftent
tM  prufttor  lo  Sicily,  ho  (inellt-d  a  sedition  of  the
Mtldiem  In  that  iMlauiI.  He  wait  callud  to  the  crii-
Mipihip  befurc  lu!  b:id  heou  couHul,  a  thing  not  in
Bcconlanw  witli  Roman  n»ag4>.  and  idttninLMi  tbts
Utter  office  %ix  ycum  itubM>(iu«'nt1y.  ii.c.  *^)4.  II«
eari'iod  on  tbn  war  »;{ainKt  tbu  (.'urihatfinijius  in
Einiria,  and  dcftrated  Magu,  nbu  wat^  t-ouiln^  with
Huppovi  for  Hatinibal.  In  alhifiitni  to  lufi  peiitiia-
Hive  vloqneuce,  KiuiiiiM  twic4<  ealU  him  fiuailar  uie-
d'lUii.  llurace  (Ej>i»t.  ii.  -i.  Uti;  A.  /'.  5il|  uitvd  him
a«  art  authority  on  llie  umj  of  worda.  i'A)  C.  Coit-
SKlJt;s,  proriniKul  in  .S[Miiii  in  b.c  StKl,  defeated  a
imnieronK  army  (if  ihf  St-detani.  Iteing  «I(tcted
ctmHu)  II.C.  IW,  be  j!iiiri«-d  a  yii-nt  victoiy  «vi<r  tbe
IilsiibreH,  and  on  his  rvtiirn  to  Koui«^  obtained  tbe
hotionrs  of  a  triniapb.  Tbo  people  liavinj;  aftcr-
wanl»  idumen  him  eea^ir,  ho  Aa(«i({nod  dixtinct
places  to  the  nriiators  at  the  public  )iiuiie«.  (4)
C  (>ou.VKiJr8,  a  Homau  r>>nderfld  powcrfitl  by  bit*
hiUneneo  with  Marine.  He  liim»Dlf  was  wJiotly
governed  liy  a  wntniin  niitned  Praecia,  who  ob-
tained for  LiicnllilA  the  };<)vernnu>ntof  Cilieio.  {h)
C  Cr>RNRl.ll'A.  a  Roman  of  tbo  mot«t  corrupt  and
ubnndoniMl  oharaeter,  and  one  of  the  accuntplices
uf  Catiline.  Hu  wat  HiraiiKlod  in  priiwi)  by  order
o!"  the  ijenat^*. See  ( "ATtUNA.


Cetlaa  (Kijrfiof  t. A  Miiall  rirer  of  Myna,
itig  into  tbe  L'ulciis  clotw  lo  PerKimnts.

CetO  (Kr^rwl.  A  dau^cbter  of  PoritUB  and  i'tOtit,
who  married  Pborryit,  by  whom  nhtf  batt  ibe  three
OorgoriH,  the  OraejM*,  Kchtdna,  and  thn  iirt|>Mit
that  watche«l  the  golden  appliM  iu  the  (vaideii  of
tbi-  HesiKjridfrt.

Cetra  or  Caetra  )  Katrpia,  Kairpa ).  A  «mill
i-outul  shield  inud«  of  ox-bide,  and  fonidn^  ■  part
of  the  di'feunivf  aiuiour  of  Ibi-  L>.%ci. ^iH*e  Ali.Mi  ta


K


L^


SoMlcfs  with  Otn« (From  a  «*  t^  \-ni»vuw


It  was  iilao  worn  by  the  SpsnianU  and  Kuiiret^^nl.
au(f,  find  by  the  nailvea  of  Briiaiu  iTac.  A^jric.  3fii

It  dwK  not  appear  thai  tbe  Rntoan^  ever  \vor>
fbe  celrii.  Livy  comparON  it  to  the  }t^Ui  of  rli"
CrrvfkH  and  MricedonintiM,  which  waa  aUo  a  kiumII
1i;;bt  Mhti'hl.

Cetua  (k^ov).  Any  large  lUh;  Bomettmc*  !'■«
whiilf,  but  ofii'u  tbe  lunny-llsb.

Cejhs  (Kr^if).  Tlie  hoMband  of  llahyoiif.  »••<*
witli  Imt  eliiiiiged  iikto  a  bird. S'e  llAUrVOVS.

Chaboras. The  same  at-  the  A>M>ri  ba^  (t\.  v.).

Chabrias  (Xa/S^/oc).  A  relebniied  Alln^u*'*
geiiunvl.  In  B.C.  'S*^.  he  was  one  nf  the  i-omnw"*'**
erst  nf  tlm  foreew  H«nt  Ixi  tbo  aid  of  TbelM-s  n^iilii**
AgcnilaflM,  when  he  adopted  ftpr  tbt?  first  liuiedi**
mntuenvru  for  wliieh  he  beeaino  no  crlcbnUnt — '
ordering  hia  men  to  nw  ait  the  attack  witb  tlie^''
B(>earM  poinli'd  agaiiiMl  the  enemy  and  their  »lili'I«l*
roating  on  ^<UL^  knee.  A  Htatiie  was  afler*»r<l*
ei-ccted  at  Athena  to  CLabrius  in  tbia  {tostare-  I"
376.  be  defeated  the  Laeetlaenmniatia  off  Xato^
and  iu  301  fK>iiiituaiid£d  the  aliipa  of  the  Ecyptis*"
inonari'b  Taehos,  then  in  rxdK-llion  against  pi-m**-
At  the  KJege  of  Chios  (li.c.  'Xu)  he  fell  a  virfini  **
hilt  exreHnive  valour,  rt^f using  to  altmndon  bi»  »l*'r
after  it  waa  disahliMl.

ChaerSa,  C.  CAtwiiiw.  Trihiitie  of  the  praelori-
RiieuborlK;  foimcd  the  conapiraey  by  wbirhllK'C***
peror  Caligula  <q.  v.)  was  ulain,  A.I>.  A\.  Cli«e>r«*
w»K  put  til  death  by  ClandiuN  upon  bi»  aeci*M)i'**'

Chaaremon  (  Xutpij/iaivK  A  Greek  tmci.Hli**^
who  tlonriished  at  Atlienx  nbont  «.c.  3r<P.  M**
stylo  was  :«moolh  and  pictareni^ne,  hut  bis  \*\»S*
were  artitiria),  and  Iwtter  adapteil  for  tvwli"*?
than  for  porforuianee.  Aft-w  fragnifoUofllH-ni'^
luain,  »litcb  show  f>ome  intngintiljve  powei  (Ari*^
Voct.  i.  l». Kd.  by  Hartaib  (Mainz,  lH4:t).

Chaeronoa  (Xftir>wi'foil.  A  town  in  BoeoU*- ""
the  ('i-pbisan-*,  near  I  be  frontier  of  Pliori*,  mi-un-r''
ble  for  tbe  dt-f<-at  of  the  Athenian'*  and  the  W^
tiaiiH liy Philip  of  Macedon,  wbirh  ern«bisl  il"*


CHAIKS


323


CHALt'8


libi-rtiea  of  Greece,  B.c.  333,  mid  for  Sulla's  victory
over  the  army  of  Mithnilaten,  B.c.  86.  Cbaerouea
WM  the  bii'Cliplace  of  Ptiitaruh.  Several  Temaiiiit
of  the  ancient  city  are  to  be  seen  at  Capraena,
more  particularly  a  theatre  excavated  in  the  rock,
aiiuquedoct,  and  the  marble  liou  (brokeii  in  piectJH)
which  adorned  the  Repiilchre  of  the  Boeotians  who
fol]  at  the  battle  of  Chaeronea.

Chain. See  Cathedra  ;  Sella.

Chalaenm  (XaXaiof).  A  poi-t  town  of  the  Locri
Ozolae  on  the  Crissaeau  Qrilf,  on  the  frontiers  of
I'hocia.

Chalastra  (XoXaarpa).  A  town  in  Mygdouia  in
M.icedoiiia,  at  the  month  of  the  river  Axilis.

CluUo^  (XoXkt})  or  Chalcla  (XoAjcta).  An  island
of  the  Carpathian  Sea,  near  Rhodes.

Chalcedon  (XaXKijSui').  A  Qreek  city  of  Bi-
lliyiiia,  on  the  coast  of  the.  Propoiitis,  at  the  en-
trance of  the  Bosporns,  nearly  opposite  to  Byzauti-
niu,  nras  founded  by  a  colony  from  Mcgara  in  B.C.
6t6.  After  a  long  period  of  independence,  it  be-
came sul>ject  to  the  kings  of  Bitliynia,  and  most
of  its  inhabitants  were  transferred  to  the  new  city
of  N'icomedia  (b.c.  140).  Under  the  Romans  it  re-
gained much  of  its  former  importance.  Here  was
hflil  the  fonrth  Ecnmeuical  Council  of  the  Church,
in  A.D.  451.

CfaalolAtc^  (XaXKiSt'x7).  (1)  A  district  of  Mace-
donia, between  the  Sinus  Tbermaicus  and  Strymo-
iiicuB.  The  lower  part  of  it  fonneil  three  peninsu-
la.1— Phlegra  or  Fallen^,  Sithonia,  and  Athos.  The
Muall  town  of  Chalcis  gave  name  to  this  district.
(*i)  Another  iu  Syria,  wljacent  to  the  town  of
C'lialcis.

Chalcidlcnm.  An  annex  or  a4.ldition  to  a  ba-
nilica  (q.  v.),  of  a  nature  made  clear  by  the  so-
called  fuUonka  at  Pompeii  which  bears  this
name  in  an  inscription  upon  its  front.  This  shows
that  tbe  cbalcidicnm  was  an  entrance-hall  to  a
public  bnilding,  designed  for  the  shelter  of  persons
waiting  to  be  admitted,  or  who  might  transact
their  basiness  under  it ;  it  was  wholly  or  partially
roofed,  and  might  take  the  form  either  of  a  deep
porch,  or  in  some  cases  of  a  cloistered  court.  Such
a  vestibule  is  foand  in  many  Christian  basilicas ;
the  former  type  occurs  in  St.  John  Lateran  and
Sta.  Maria  Maggiore  at  Rome,  the  latter  in  St.
Ambrogio  at  Milan.  Tbe  foundations  show  that  a
cbalcidicnm  of  this  kind  once  existed  in  front  of
tbe  vast  basilica  of  Constantino  at  Rome.

Chalcidlna.  A  Platonic  philosopher  of  the
sixth  century  a.d.,  who  translated  the  Timaettt
uf  Plato  into  Latin  with  an  elaborate  commentary.

Cludoioecia  (y^akKioUta).  An  annual  feast,  cel-
ebrated with  saorifioes  at  Sparta,  in  honour  of
Atben^  sumamed  Cbalcioecus  (q.  v.),  or  Goddess
of  the  Brazen  House  (Pausau.  iii.  17,  3).

Chaldoeciu  (XaXxtotcor).  An  epithet  applieil
to  Athene  at  Sparta,  from  her  having  a  brazen
temple  {^aKKovt  oIkos).  See  Thnc.  i.  34;  Pansan.
iii.  17,  3.

Chalcis  (XoXxt'c).  (1)  The  modern  Egripo  or
NVgroponte ;  the  principal  town  of  Euboea,  situ-
ated on  the  narrowest  part  of  the  Euripus,  and
united  with  the  mainland  by  a  bridge.  It  was  a
very  ancient  town,  originally  inhabited  by  Abau-
t4«  or  Cnretes,  and  colonized  by  Attic  lonians.
Its  flonrishing  condition  at  an  early  period  is  at-
tested by  the  numerous  colonies  which  it  planted


in  various  parts  of  the  Mediterranean.  It  founded
so  many  cities  in  the  peninsula  iu  Macedonia,  be-
tween tlie  Strymonic  and  Tbermaic  gulfs,  that  the
whole  peninsula  was  called  Chalcidic6.  In  Italy
it  founded  Cumoe,  and  in  Sicily,  Naxos.  Chalcis
%va8  usually  subject  to  Athens  during  the  great-
ness of  the  latter  city.  The  orator  Isaens  and  the
lK>et  Lycophrou  were  born  at  Chalcis,  and  Aris-
totle died  there.  (2)  A  town  in  AetoHa,  at  the
month  of  the  Eveuns,  situated  at  the  foot  of  the
mountain  Chalcis,  and  hence  also  called  Hypo-
chalcis,  (3)  A  city  of  Syria,  in  a  fruitful  plain,
near  the  termination  of  the  river  Chains;  the
chief  city  of  the  district  of  Chalcidic^,  wliicb  lay
to  the  east  of  the  Orontes.

Chalciu  (;(aXirovff  or  j^akKlav).  Under  Aes  some
account  has  been  given  of  the  use  of  bronze  or
copper  for  money,  which  began  iu  most  parts  of
the  Greek  world  about  B.c.  400.  At  Athens,  the
cbalcus,  or  "  copper  "  par  etcelUnee,  is  said  by  Pol-
lux (ix.  65)  to  have  been  equivalent  to  the  eiglith
of  an  obol;  in  some  other  places  it  was  the  sixth
of  an  obol,  and  contained  seven  lepta.

Copper  coins  {xaXxia)  were  first  issued  at  Athens
in  the  archonship  of  Callias,  B.C.  406.  In  the
Eeclenmume  <616)  Aristophanes  speaks  of  the  de-
monetization of  certain  copper  coins,  and  the  re-
version to  a  silver  currency.  It  seems  likely  that
the  coins  referred  to  in  both  these  passages  are  the
pieces  still  extant  with  the  head  of  Athene  on  one
side,  and  an  owl  with  two  bwlics  and  one  head
on  the  other,  which  resemble  tbe  silver  diobols  of
Athens.  Coins  of  late  perioil  struck  in  Syria  hear
the  inscription  xeikitovt,  which  declares  their  value.
Ai'xoXica  and  other  multiples  of  the  chalcns  were
also  struck  at  Chios  and  other  places.  When,
however,  bronze  coins  do  not  bear  inscriptions
stating  their  value,  the  latter  cannot  with  cer-
tainty be  fixed. See  Ndmis.matics.

Chaldaea  (XaXdai'a).  In  the  narrower  sense,  a
province  of  Babylonia,  about  the  lower  course  of
the  Euphrates,  the  border  of  the  Arabian  Desert,
and  tbe  hea«l  of  the  Persian  Gnlf.  It  was  inter-
sected by  numerous  canals,  and  was  extremely  fer-
tile. In  a  wider  sense,  the  term  is  applied  to  the
whole  of  Babylonia,  and  even  to  tbe  Babylonian
Empire,  on  account  of  tbe  supremacy  which  tbe
Chaldaeans  acquired  at  Babylon.  (See  Babylon.)
Xeuophon  mentions  Chaldaeans  in  the  mountains
north  of  Mesopotamia.  Their  original  seat  woa
most  probably  iu  the  mountains  of  Armenia  and
Kunlistan,  whence  they  descended  iuto  the  plains
of  Mesopotamia  and  Babylonia.  Respecting  the
Chaldaeans  an  the  ruling  class  in  the  Babylonian
monarchy,  see  Babylonia.

Chalk. See  Crbta.

Chalkeia  (ra  ;yaXKria).  A  very  ancient  festi-
val celebrated  at  Athens,  which  at  difterent  times
seems  to  have  bMl  a  different  character,  for  at  first
it  was  solemnized  in  honour  of  Athene,  sumamed
Erganf^,  and  by  the  whole  people  of  Athena,  whence
it  was  called  'Adijvata  or  Uavit^ftot.  At  a  later
period,  however,  it  was  celebrated  only  by  orti-
sans,  ettpecially  smiths,  and. in  honour  of  Hepbaes-
tus,  whence  its  name  was  changed  into  ;yaXic(rn.
It  was  held  ou  the  thirtieth  day  of  tlie  month
of  Pyanepsion.  Menander  comiKM»ed  a  comedy
calleil  XaXxcta,  a  fragment  of  which  is  preserved
in  Athenaens.

Chalua  (XdXos). A  river  of  north  Syria.


Chaiybes l  X<iXiv3«r  ). A  |H>upli>  i>f  I'oiiIiim,  iit

Ahiu  Muiiir,  vvIiii  i||llu)lit4^d  tlitf  wlinli'  counl  floiit
tl)i'  liiJuinmiti  I'riMiiuiitoriniu  In  tlie  viviiiily  nfllie
ri%'i'i'  Tlii'iiiiu«li>ii,  lit^t'iliiT  witli  II  |Ktrii(tt)  i»t*  xhv
iuiirr  iMiiiiiliy.  Tln'v  were  celtibratfil  in  iiuti<|tiit,T
^iir  llio  nn-Al  iruti  iitiiirH  antl  ToiKeM  nliich  i>xiMCc(l
In  ttinir  ctMitiiiy. 84><i  Mp.TAi.i.rM.

Cbalfbou  \\n\v(it»»;  O.  T.,  Hellmti).  A  cori-
H^iloTftlrlo  oily  of  iKtnlHTii  Hyiin,  i»'''il'n'''>  llio  hhiud
iih  llonwii  (q.  v.).

Cbalybft.  A  rivor  of  Hitpniii.i  TnimcoiietiHiB,
ill  tin-  r«Mii>try  of  tin-  Oi'lrilM'ri.aml  one  of  tUi;  trib-
iilahfN  of  lUr  Hn'iiia.  ]tit  wHtcnt  >vvrt'  fatiinl  for
liartU-nltit;  Ht«'4-I,  ho  Itiat  IIr<  iiaiuv  ^fiAi/^  vciku
Kivi-ii  tn  it  frtmi  tUix  circiimittancv.  Tti«  tniMlcni
iinnic  i»  iliK  i^ticltra.

Chamavi.  A  |H<o|i1n  iu  G(>rniiin<r,  who  tlret  ap-
|iriir  iu  tliv  lu'ighlHiiirlioiHl  of  llie  Rliiiif,  lint  afl«r«
wnnis  mi>;rn(«il  vaM,  ilffi-Aii'd  the  Rrit(.*b>ri,  aud
(Wtitrtl  lH"tw«Mi  tin.'  Wt-wi  tind  llic  Harx,

Cbafines  (Xooi-ff).  A  IVIiiKf^inii  proplp,  otw  of
llii'  tln^oe  iwoples  wUich  iiiIial»iU'il  K|»iriis,  Men*  nt
ail  i-arluT  period  in  j>yttiK>s8iuii  of  the  nholo  of  llie
roiiiiiiy,  liiti  Miili>u'i)m<titly  lUrcIt  along  th«>  ronRt
Mriiiii  thit  tjwv  TUyAux'tM  to  tht^  Acniccraiiiiiait
|irt>iut»iititry,  whk-h  •IUtri<'l  iras  thotvfon?  L-a]|<>«l
ChttoiiiM.  Ity  tbit  |ii>4'iit,  Chnoiiiuti  is  umnI  ii»  eqniv-
al«&t  lo  K]iirolieu6  t'Hirtt^rtxocX

Chaoa  (Xitot^.  Aoronlhi);  lu  llc«(io(l,  lb»  yawti-
iltfc.  tiiH'tithoniAlilc  iihytm  vhii-h  voi*  the  fir«t  of  all
t<xii>I)U)t  ihiii){)4.  From  ('ltao«  nmttr  Guca  ^Karth),
Titi'l;triin  (lli'llt,  uikI  Kro*  <L4*v(<)-  Chaos  Wre  Ere-
bu:>  Hint  Nii-ht:  fntiii  ihcir  tittioii  »|iraiiK  Aothcr
and  Hrturrn  |  Sky  aitil  l)n>  ).  Thv  r«>nc«|itiMii  of
ChHiHi  *i»  il»'  c«iufu!«if*l  tuaw  out  of  which,  iu  Ihc
brttuiiini;;,  ihi*  »r|Miiato  fofns  of  thiii;;^  anwt*  is
crrtMifotis  Nud  twlouga  lo  a  Ulvr  iHrifMl.

CtMiadra  tX'V>"i\>u)''  A  luvrn  io  IMiocin,  on  lh»
rivor  rluinulruSt  Mtnatcil  uu  *i>  miiiicncr  iiol  far
from  Liliu-a.

Cbanue  (jcofXi^. "  a  luiH^dM  caiu|t  "*»,  Thf  uam«
nfwvrral  citivtswhich  ttmk  their  i>rimu  from  mili-
tary Maltiiu^  Thr  wm.%  rviuarkAble«>f  Ibeui  stood
al  Ihc  tuiMith  of  the  Tijiris. S««  AIXXanpKIA  H).

Char«a  iXapfrX  (l<  An  Athenian  grucrat,  vlio
»ur<x'4Hlr^t  to  tb«  cx^tuauiiKl  aftor  ihf  cttitdcmnalitm
«D%I  dvwtlk  of  Lcoatbmiea.  lie  vcmti  sviil  1>y  tlic
AlbrttiaM*  agauMt  Alaxandrr.  tjrraut  %>(  rhunw>,
but.  iiHlcwd  uf  CMWing  lo  actiou  with  thr  (%^,  he
kantaaMl  tb«  Atkviuau  allkMit  lo  snrh  a  drgrp^  by
kia  »xturthoiw  awl  oppivaaioa  that  tb«  8ocia)  War
was  Ibr  rvattll  (B.C  WX  8«aw  Itnw  after,  hr  vm
ami  W  aid  Hyta«l)am  aipuaal  l*hUip  of  Uarrtlou.
%«|  b*  oi)l>  tncQmHl  itif  f^iMMiaiM  fif  hl»  f\<.  and
«arilv4  tb«  dtf«^<ut«ut  i-t  iW  allic«,  a**  tbat  tW
A.tlM«)AM  fiuaUj  rrcallnt  bta^an«t  put  l*bortoa  ia
bla  iilaee.  Tbitc  kuwv\rr.  did  uul  |UTit>«l  ibvai
tnm  thumaimg  Wm  tut  ibeir  gvaanl  at  lb*  baaila
af  CbafHiaara..  wbaw  bfa  tgiMMrmaw  a»4  tompactty
■aaccd;  rotttrihahni  h>  lb»kMB«4^tb«4a;^.  Hf'trM
«M»aribdOT  wbMM  AWJuuHlvr  onlt«vil  ta  W  cMir^
««tcI  up  to  biM  aAvr  4b»  4M<««tiaa  «/  TWbM:
km*  b»  s«M«>c<tmt  ta  ai  nm^lag  tt*«OM|«wor,»n^
vaa  fecauilwl  li»  hv«i  a*  AlbMia.

(a»  Or  MiTTUn*. A  Q>wk  bhlatUa.  wfcya  >  n
Wa  «f  A^wJif  «W  OmM. Ha  vaa  Iba  aakbar
«f  a  raai^ttkiailT*  wmk,  cvMlaiatBC  at  baat  ^mi
..afM  «ba  tab -rbw«y  lb»  AMatalir  li*-^W
Tbn  bM««*>  bwl  IW  nyMalte*  «f


iM'iii);  trnMivorthy  and  fiiU'ri*fttiii^. Otilv  a  (i"w
fniKnn'ni)*  iif  it  n'niHiii.nl.  by  Gcit-i  <Ix-itni^.  1'«44il  i
(3)  Of  Ummhj  in  RituDKS. A  Greek  nrrLsi,  a  ]
[m|H'li)f  I.yxtpiniK. In  lt.c.V^he  prutlncM  iho  )ai^-  '
L>8t  litnliip  known  in  anttqnity — the  colos.'tal  iiniigi>  '
of  thi!  8iin,  1:^)  I'itt  lii;tli,  idac4>il  at  the  mtrBure  ot
till*  harbour  of  If|iodt-»,  and ^i-nprnlly  known  m
thi-  t'L>!o«!ii«  uf  Hliodes. This  wa«  UrHtniyed  by  nn
carthtitiake  m  early  as  B.C.  224. Tbo  thiioibtt  vrrre
thJ<'k<M-  than  the  average tt|mn  of  u  tnunV  hand,
tln> tingvrs larger thou uiany ordinary xlatuu.
fHM'  (Vii.r»ssi,(*:  6e\icn  WoMiEus  ok  tiik  \V(»iiti>, ,

Charfolea  ( Xa/HitXiic ),  ( 1 )  One  of  the  Tbirt,ia|
Tyrant*  avl  nver  Athens  by  the  Lo^-ed amnion ian^
gind  |H>»4t^sin<;  greai  iuflnvncc  aii)oti(];  liiit  tti^
l.jiCin-rt  (XiMi,  Mm.  1.2.31).  (i)  A  celebrated  phj^
hiciiiti  in  (111-  IrHJn  of  TibfriiiH.  TowaHr  thr-  ri^
tif  ihtiT  PNi|n>i'or'fl  ltf4\  Charities,  on  taking  Iruve^^
htnv  lis  if  niKiiit  to  jiMirufy  abroad,  inauagcd,  i
gnuipiiig  the  batid  of  Titifriii)«,  to  ft^-l  his  pnl^n
and  hocnine  instantly  couvinvrd  thai  Iho  hil-^^
)iad  not  inoro  than  t«o  diiyo  lo  livi>.  n  iwrrrt  wh^^M
he  divulged  to  Macro  y'l'ac.  Jnn.  vi.  fiO),

CharYclo  i\nf»K\»). (llA  uyiuph. dniightrr^ |
A]>i>!ltt  iind  x^  ill*  of  (h**  renlanr  Chimn  (ij.  v.).
A  nyiiipb,  ili«  iitt>tbt:v  of  TirvsijM  (q.  v.).

CbarDa  I7  ^ofx^ai. Otii>  uf  ibe  thrtv  frxti  ^'
c«-[<;br»t^d  at  IJoIpbi  every  ninth  ypor  ra  a  tltaa*  1|
giving  for  having  been  deJtveivd  at  odp  time  fi-^
a  famiuf.  |

Cbarilans  or  Cluullliu  WapIXaet  or  Xu^XAo^
A  king  of  SiMirifl.  sun  i>f  FoIydfTto^.  wbi>  in  mid  m
have  rt-roive*)  bin  name  tnmt  the  grneml  joy  fj^tifum
exrittnl  liy  the  justice  of  birf  uncle  Lycurgii*.  w(»«Ni
he  idwci^l  him.  yet  a  arw-bom  infant,  on  Ihr  n>t  laf  1
M-al,  aud  iKide  the  SpaitaiM  ackuowU*d){t<  hJtti  Tur
ibeir  king.

Charinaa  fXa^Hi^d  A  comic  dancer  at  S|tnr<a  <
a  MttH-k  ebaiat-ter  iit  tbf>  Doric  cometly.  likp  lUf
Spanish  (ti-neiuao. See  Mtiller,  Itorvr,  iv.  7,  f  1

Chaxia  tXo^rX  A  name  applied  1*y  HonKT  (/'■
xviii.3e'i>iuibcwifeofllei>hac*tUft.  lii  tiirWjit#«^'
on  the  other  band  (riii.  :K^),  Aphrodili^  it  (ian>*^^
a*>  hi?k  Kpnuse.  It  amonut^  tn  the  &auie  tUinjK  iti  ll*^
tignrali«ees|klauali<>n  xf  the  luytb,  since  Urar'ai^"
Iteauty  werv  both  nrgardm]  as  the  rhnractiimti*^
of  Hc-pbantoa^  laboara. ^<r<-  t.'UARiri>.

Chariala  (X^jtaX  A  festival  iu  iMMiimr  of  d*'
llrrice«  {('barite«\,  with  daiice«  which  rontinant  ^
night.  A  fake  w»«  given  to  UK»e  wbo  Itinail**'
awake  dnrittg  tbe  t»h»le  titoe.

Cbarirtwa  Fi^Tii^i S>iiirATEiL A  writer
LaUb  grawar.  wbu  d»arl«h<><i|  inwanla  ibr  moI
Ibe Amtlb  eaatatj  aJik Ht»  Jn  l.'maaiMltaM  •
wMb  in  Aire  baati^  iwpaffcclly  prt-^Tx-d.  inara*^

«r<a«b»  of  oUc*  aebalaz*. Ita>  .

tbe  a—ww»  ^awlatfaaa  i  •

l^am  httwmtmi^ Oar  •r^  '"

Iba  0>4ax  N«»fulitaB«s  ot  :Ue  MVi-iilb  oi  'i^|,'  y
cmlar^r.  Tbr  b>r«i  eritkal  t«xt  i»  tbat  of  II.  K''**
(iaktoUnMattikr.  UiiM%raLi.tLcfitfig,U67>- J


V  w)  f«-«'«

r1


(Xa|Hm>  <W


(Graixa). G*'


cbana


■Ml  biaiily  »D  aatara  and  bamau  life. i<"


tTbviri


.  ihmj  are  tba  offitpring  of  t^
r  m€  0«auui» and Kiir>ii<*°i'''
tat»i:iiblwu»*(jOTLTbaliaiBloi>'>-


CHARITON


335


CIIAKON


and  Aglma  (BrilliAtice).  Aglaia  is  tlio  joniigeBt,
and  thti  wife  of  Hepliaestiia ;  fur  the  inspiratioii
of  the  Grac«8  was  deemed  as  necessary  to  the
plastic  arts  as  to  music,  poetry,  science,  eloqnence,
beauty,  and  eiijoynieat  of  life.  Accordiugly,  the
Graces  are  iotiiaate  with  the  Muses,  with  whom
they  live  together  on  Olyiupns.  They  are  associ-
ated, too,  with  Apollo,  Athene,  Hennes,  and  Peitlio,
but  especially  with  Eros,  Aphrodit6,  and  Dionysus.
Bright  and  bUthe-heurted,  tliey  were  also  called
the  danghters  of  the  Suu  and  of  Aegl^  (Gleam).
They  were  worshipped  iu  conjnuctiou  with  Aph-
nxlit^  and  Diouysns  at  Orchomeuns  iu  fioeotia,
where  their  shrine  was  accounted  the  oldest  iu
the  place,  and  where  their  most  ancient  images
wore  found  in  the  shape  of  stones  said  to  have
fallen  from  heaven.  It  was  here  that  the  feast  of
the  Charitesia  was  held  iu  their  honour,  with
uiuaical  contests.  At  Sparta,  as  at  Athens,  two
Charitea  only  were  wonthipped,  Cleta,  or  Sound,
and  Fhaenna,  or  Light ;  at  Athens  their  names
were  Auxo  (Increase)  and  Hegemon6  (Qneen)-
It  was  by  these  goddesses,  and  by  Agraulos
daughter  of  Cecrops,  that  the  Athenian  youths,
ou  receiving  their  spear  aud  shield,  swore  faith
to  their  country.  The  Charites  were  represent-
ed iu  the  form  of  beautiful  maidens,  the  three  be-
ing generally  linked  hand  in  band.  In  the  older
ru presentations  they  are  clothed  ;  iu  the  later,
they  are  loosely  clad  or  entirely  undrapeil.

Charlton  (Kapiray).  An  erotic  prose-writer  of
Aphrmlisias  in  Caria,  whose  date  is  uncertain,  bnt
probably  uot  earlier  than  the  fifth  century  a.d.
He  was  the  author  of  a  romance  entitled  The
Lore  Adtenture»  of  Chaereas  and  CalUrrhoe  {rh
tttpi  Xatpiav  Koi  KaWtppor^v  fptariKa  SiTfyfifiara),  in
seven  books.  Only  one  MS.  of  this  ia  known  to
exist.  A  Latin  versiou  with  notes  was  published
by  Reiske,  3  vols.  (Amsterdam,  17.50);  a  commen-
tary by  Beck  (Leipzig,  1783);  and  a  beautiful  edi-
tion of  the  text  in  1812  at  Venice.  A  good  French
translation  is  that  of  Larcher  iu  the  Bihlwihique
da  Bomaiia  Qrefn  (Paris,  1797).  It  was  rendered
into  English  by  Becket  (Loudon,  1764).

ChannandS  (Xap/wdi;).  A  great  city  of  Meso-
potamia, on  the  Euphrates.

Cbamildea  ( Xapftlfirjs ).  A  son  of  GlaMcoii,
ronsiii  of  Critias,  and  maternal  nncle  to  Pluto.
He  gives  his  name  to  one  of  the  Platonic  dia-
logues, in  which  be  is  represented  as  a  youth  at
the  opening  of  the  Peloponnesiau  War.

Chaxmion  {Xdpfiiov).  One  of  Cleopatra's  female
attendants,  who  killed  herself  fifter  the  example
of  her  nii-stress.

Charzulfl  {Xapfxis).  A  physician  of  Marseilles,  in
Nero's  age,  who  revived  the  use  of  cold  baths  in
Rome  iu  cases  of  sickness,  after  the  practice  ha<l
been  discontinued  since  the  time  of  Autonius  Miisa
(q.v.).  He  was  very  successful  in  his  professional  la-
bours, aud  amassed  great  riches  (Pliu.  H.y.  xxix.  1).
Charon  (Xdpav).  (1)  A  doity  of  the  lower  world,
Hon  of  Erebns  and  Nyx,  who  conducted  the  sonls
of  the  dead  in  a  boat  over  the  river  Acheron  to  the
infernal  regions.  The  sum  exacted  for  this  service,
from  each  of  the  shades  ferried  over  by  him,  was
never  less  than  an  obolus,  norconld  it  exceed  three.
A  piece  of  money,  therefore,  was  geuerally  placed
by  the  ancients  under  the  tongue  of  the  deceased,
ill  order  to  nieet  this  necessary  demand.  Such  as
bad  not  been  honoured  with  a  funeral  were  not


permilte<l  to  cuter  Charon's  boat  without  previ-
ously wandering  on  the  shore  for  oue  hundred
years.  If  any  living  person  presented  himself  to
cross  the  river  of  the  dead,  he  could  uot  be  ad-
mitted into  the  bark  before  he  showed  Charon  a
golden  bough,  obtained  from  the  Cnniaeau  sibyl ;
aud  the  ferryman  was  on  one  occasion  imprisoned
for  an  entire  year  because  he  had,  though  against
his  own  will,  conveyed
Heracles  across  the
stream  without  firat  re-
ceiving from  him  this
necessary  passport.
The  poets  have  repre-
sented Charon  as  a  ro-
bust old  man,  of  a  se-
vere though  animated
countenance, with  eyes
glowing  like  flame,  a
white  and  bushy
head,  vestments  of
a  dingy  colour,
stained  with  the  mire
of  the  stream,  aud  with
a  pole  for  the  direc-
tion of  his  bark,  which  last  is  of  a  dark  rusty  hue.
The  earliest  mention  of  Charon  in  Grecian  poetry
seems  to  be  iu  the  ancient  poem  of  the  Minyas,
quoted  by  Pausanias  (x.  28).  The  fable  itself  is
considered  by  some  to  be  of  Egyptian  origin,  and
in  support  of  this  opinion  they  refer  to  the  ac-
count of  Diodorus  Siculus  relative  to  the  state-
ments made  by  the  Egyptian  priests.  The  latter
asserted,  it  seems,  that  Orpheus  and  Homer  had
both  learned  wisdom  ou  the  banks  of  the  Nile;
aud  that  the  Erebus  of  Greece,  and  all  its  parts,
personages,  and  usages,  were  but  transcripts  of
the  mode  of  burial  iu  Egypt;  and  here  the  corpse
was,  on  payment  of  an  obolns,  conveyed  by  a  ferry-
man (named  Charon  in  the  language  of  Egypt)
over  the  Acherusiau  Lake  after  it  had  received  its
senteuce  from  the  Jndges  appointed  for  that  pur-


Cbaroa (Stackelbers.)


CharoD,  HcmiceorUercury,  bdiISuuI. (From  a  Roman  lamp.)

pose.  (3)  Oue  of  the  earlier  Greek  historical
writers,  a  native  of  Lauipsacns,  supposed  to  have
flourished  between  the  Bcvcuty-fifth  and  seventy-
eighth  Olympiads,  about  B.C.  464.  Charon  cou-
tiiincd  the  researches  ot  Hecataens  iuto  Eastern
ethnography.  He  wrote  (as  was  the  custom  of  the
historians  of  his  day)  sojiarate  works  upon  Persia,
Libya,  Aethiopia,  etc.  He  also  subjoined  the  his-
tory of  his  own  time,  and  he  preceded  Herodotus
iu  narrating  the  events  of  the  Persian  War,  al-
though Herodotus  nowhere  mentions  him. From


CHABONHAS


CIIKUllOMAK


r


'tu^'iitenU  nr  his  writings  wliich  mmntn,  U  U

ti(vM  thitt  hi»>  tvlntiuii  to  MiTmlotiiK  whh  tlint

ilrv  cliroiiicli'i'  to  ni> hiistorinii,  iiniliT  xrhoso

liUi^'VO'.vthiiif;  ni'<|iiiro«1iroRiKl  rliamrlrr.  Clio-
I  \\  ni|<-,  lM>4ii1('i«.  A  t'hrtiiiiclc  »f  hisoTrn  country,  m

liTiiI  ol'ilit!  curly  )iUt(iriutiN<li(i,  wliiiwi'R'  tliviirv

lli>tl  "  lIiinij^nipIirrH"  (^^M,  i-nrrrM]K)iiiliiiK  to  Ilia
Imiii  (iMtiit/rXjiiiifrlit  iml  tntKifunfoniiitril  uitlio^u,
ki-Mini,  limitf).  Tim  f^H^llH>lltl)  ur  C'Imi-oii  liuvv
Imm'U  collfy-'twl  by  Krcusecr,  in  !iis  lliM(orin>nivi  t.tr>w-
'•ruiu  Aiiti'fiiiintitnorutii  Fm^mfiitn,  jj.kU  foil. ;  ntnl
li>  MllllPr,  F/vij/.y/*V"r.  (/mW.  (Paris,  184l(.

Charondas  i\aj>b>ySuc).  A  cvlebruUMl  l«K>ola-
tiir,  twini  lit  ('iituiiu  in  Sicily,  wlinrB  In*  OiiiinHltr^l
Hlutiit  l»A'.  tti".  VVf  li;ivp  vi'ry  !'««■  ili'lHiU  of  ItiH
lifi>.  AriHtotl*"  iut'n.>ly  inl'oniiH  uh  tliiit  lit'  wam  oT
IIh-  Imiir^tHiii)  clatut  ufcili/fUM,  iuul  that  lir  frunit^d
Idws  fur  the  potipK*  of  Cutaiia,  aa  well  hh  for  nllier
ritininniiitii-x  which,  like  them,  wen;  (U-^i-fmlnl
rpMii  ChAk-im  in  Kiibiwia.  Afliiin  qiMb  (  ('.  //.  iii.
17i  thnt  he  uii.-*  Mibset^pieiitly  ilrlren  into  cxili:
fnMn  C'lilaiiii.  ami  took  refn};e  in  Khi'Kiuin,  whiTL'
hp  !tii<<ri-eil«*il  ill  intrniliiriti];  liin  Inws.  boine  an*
tlmrH  iiifurai  \\n  thai  lie  mmpile'il  lii»  Inn-n  for  the
'riinriitnd:  hut  hi*  livnJ,  in  fnrt,  a  hniK  titiif  In'fure
thr  fttnnilntlim  uf  Thurintii,  niiicn  hit  laws  wore
»hru)(nli'(l  in  part  hy  Atiaxi)ai{K,tyrHnt  of  Rhf^iiim,
M'liti  ilicd  B.('.  -ITtt.  Tlif  \i\vin  of  CliiironilaH  wen-,
liki'  IhoM.'  of  luaiiy  uf  tlii^  auciiMil  le);i.«tatorM,  in
vcfM*.  and  funncil  |tart  uf  the  iiistrucliuti  of  ihe
youug.  Tlietr  funic  rcarhcd  even  to  Atlicnft.
where  they  were  *iihg  or  ehanrec)  at  rejuuls.
The  preanihle  of  tlieso  iiiw«,  ba  preservv<t  to  as  by
StoUieiM,  IS  thonght,  so  fnr,  at  teoAl.  m  regAltU
tlie  form  of  expn'uion,  not  to  1m  f^'iiuine ;  autl
IleTiie  #i)itiMK-s  it  to  ha^o  Iwcn  taken  t'mni  aouie
]*> tluicarrau  ttvatiM.'  on  the  Uwoof  Charotiiliu.

Tbv  wanner  of  tlii<t  lejfi^lntor's  ite^ith  itt  [le9er\-
ing  nf  toeiitiiMi.  He  had  iiiAtle  ii  law  that  ito  uiau
tthoiihl  l>e  alhiwf^l  to  ooinc  aruteil  into  the  astwrn-
hly  uf  lliv  |MKtplf.  Thu  )M-iiulty  fnr  infriii)*etiient
WHu  death.  He  V>vcainv  the  vicliui  of  bin  own  law  :
foi, liHviitj;  retunie4lfrvmptin>inlii};boujeruhbci-ii. he
rntrivd  the  eiCy.  and  pre*eule«l  hitntielf  before  the
aiwetidilt  of  the  iMople  without  ivtleclio)*  that  he
rsiiTird  a  swofxl  li\  hi9  side.  Some  ooe  thvreu|K>ti  tts
innrknl  lo  faioi,  "You  are  violatiog  yoor  uwu  law  '
His  iv|dy  nms,  "On  the  cotitrary,  by  Zeii!*,  I  will
esinbU»h  it  ~  ;  anil  he  »le>A  bitii.self  oil  IIm*  h]'*''-

Charta  tx<V<^''-  P*!*'-  S**  Libeb  ;  pAPVRrs :
Warristi  Axti  WurnNii  Mattriau^

Cbarybdia  <  X^tv^titt). See  8i  ^  lUl.

Cbasuatl  Chaatiaril.  or  ChattuajiL  A  |M>o}>le
of  Uenuany,  alliea  or  ilepeuduula  of  the  Cherusci.
lliey  dwell  iiurth  of  the  Cballt :  au«l  in  later
liinra  lb4>y  appear  b«twecu  the  Kbine  ami  tbe
McMa  vMaAxi.  as  a  |N»rt  of  ihi^  Kraiika.

C&attl Sr-e  C\TT»

Chauoi  or  CattoL  A|i«<(pte  in  iWnorthmBlani
part  of  lierauttty,  t>clwmt  the  Amista  (KinA>  aOfl
\h»  Albis  tEllliei  They  wrtv  lifter  snbditml  by
tJM  BiMMMM.

Obaboaoate  (yyi*|i>WV  (l>  Tb»  wonNMat
of  lb*  IaihU  diiriitji  daiieinit.  ($ee  Ski.T4Tltvi  <*)
TW  gMllenlalioii  etuphiyeU  ia  paitliMuwie.  (S««
PaNT»vt«i*«.t  (3i  S)iarTiii|e,  An-  whfrb  Hm  ivfft*!
Uf  «onl  it  <tnm^\m.. Sf*  ri'VMlAn'A  |

Chabounla.  (4H^tati'»V. In  tb<e  Allteniau  as-
•Mnblim  Iw  omIm  nT  Twiinf  wvn*  )irartii-«l— the
Tiallot  I  «y-  Pwrnntii.  tW  «kilMr  by  a  abo«


of  hanrin  {xttpfrmnlv). Tho  latter  wa«  tbo  nfttrnl
m«Mte  of  coiiitnc'tiiit; bnsiitess. 8eeivt  voiiii);.  in
f;eii(tral,  wna  only  il8C*l  when the ]»er«onAl tniar-
vmta  of  indiridnnls  were  concrnied :  as  when  ibi<
question  wiw  the  condeninalinn  or  urqiiittal  of  a
liriiMin  put  ti]Hin  his  trial,  the  reuiiiwinu  uf  a  piuii»b-
iiieut  or  of  a  i>eeiiniBrj-  line  paynhlfi  to  the  Slate.
the  eonferring  of  riti»,niHhip  on  Ktruiigem,  or  linal-
ly  the  bniiishineiit  of  n  citizen  by  o&lmeiiini. Open
Voting  was  empbtyed  on  (|ue«liuub  of  )»ublic  poli-
cy, Hucli  att  war  or  |H>iiee,  in  voting'  upon  lawv,  and  ^
in  (H>uie  B|w.'uial  kindit  of  trialn  *n\  nialtei?  wliiol
concerned  the  |iet»]ilr.  »»  n)Miu  iiffifioKai  atid  t'taay
ycXi'u. In  the  elei^lions  of  iuaj|£istnit4>s  t<i^)f<iiii«
o-iai).  some  weru  chuseii by  lot ( dp^^  tki}fMtTfi\
oMiHrH,  and  those  of  eonrM'  the  nior>-  ini|Miriatil
e.g.  tite  trrpanjyoi — by  hliow  nf  band*.  iap)(ff  ait
or ;y«ifMvrof7r^l. The liudoubleil dialinrtion
tneen ^(/h'^'fo-^^ii  and ;[<ipDToirr(e  if  tiot jUvta
observed: We liud Ihi: word ■\fnj<^iitn$ni iimi^^Z
nhere the  voting  wa-s rcully  by  stiow  of  bai^^^2
(DeinoM.  Olifttlh.  I.  J  :J).  1

The  ;^ttf>aTOl^ia  wa»  takeu  Qnt  ou  tbe  afflmiali  -^«J
then  on  llie  nef^ative,  ttide  of  ilw  qaeitiun  at  i««^  ^|
lh«  nnniWr  of  haiiiU  wnseounteil  earli  tiuio  b)  ^^  g
henitd  ;  and  thepre.^idenl.  n|M»ii  thr  herald's  rv(i«c.:»y
fleclareil  whether  lheiiu*B4ir  umv  had  the  luajoi^  «  (  ,

It  ifi  iin|Mirt;int  l«>  underKtaud  clearly  the  e^^jx^
imiimU  of  this  word.  A  vote  coiideiuuiu}{  au  ar
eiisetl  (terHKi  u  koto xtipoTv)>ia  :  one  ncciiiitliij}:  ta  mmmi,

t«  conlirui L»


(Ij


ina^'tAlr

tli06C  vtho  vole<l  for  Itie  continualiiMi  of  (he  Jaw,
or  the  couttniiaucc  in  oAJee  of  the  nin^iAtraU',  ^t*!*
•laid  imx'tftoroifiiv,  ibuve  on  Ibe  other  N>ide  awv\tt'
pomrtlf  :  dia;(<(^>oroMa  is  a  vote  (nr  one  of  im«  al-
terualivoH;  ai^i;(cyoroMi*>  to  vote  against  it  itn^V
t>Mtiuu  ;  Wflojirtparttria  is  the  8bow  of  hiuds  <Ni  I  be
previous  qneAlion — 1.  e.  whether  the  pro|)lc  •!'''
aired  fuilher  ditx-uuion  or  not.  'llic  coin|"<iiii'l' J
of  ^(}^{'fa-Aii  Irnvo  similar  meaniii}(8  iScbooM)**^'/

jw-iw»r-.  PP  lai,  i-j:..  -ill.  *3:.i,  33t>).

Cbele  ix'jX'tt A  woni fonne^l fruw  Citr  k«-'j
X<f  "to  ^pe,"  and  useil  in  vanouit  way« — oft'
eraeka  in  a  lione'»  hoof,  for  Ibe  hoof  iii>elf.  aod
maity  tbin^  that  at«  buuke*!  or  forked  — <*.  g  < J
clan»  of  a  crab,  tho  lalocia  of  a  bird,  of  a  i
jiwtniineut  ( Hipp.  4T  l.»4 1,  of  (be  notch  of  thr  i
of  the  two"  tiiii;rr>"of  lbe'*baiMt  '\«iiia»r/<(>i»l
iu the nilaymlitt ^q.  v.t  graaped Ibe b>u-k-4lr|
fttriug,  uf  a  cac\eil  breakwater,  and  (in  a»lr
of  Ibat  |tart  of  ibe  beaveiia  next  Virjtto.  cntb
by  tbe  anuA  uf  Ibe  ScoI|moii  <Verg.  Gtory.  L :

OwUdoidaijiAiAMMk In  tbe  iaUml  of  I
wbeo  ilkeswallo«r*i>Mttmcd<i.e.  iu  Ibenioi
drouitiai,boya,c*lle«l  yXJiwijii',  went  fi*
to  hMM>MkiBg  gifts,  |ita4eM«dly  for  the
and iMi^ajfaaaac thai  haabe««i  pre»ervi
iianw(vm.SMt. Thr  ptart»r«H^«XidMtai
to  hava  haan  iauodnoad  hjr  Cteu)>ii|n<>  of/
a  Una  vhan  Um  wwa  «a»  ta  great  dt%t  i

OkaMdoadaa  ItaaUaa  i  \tXt6m*mi  nV-^

UlanOs*). Agra«p«rCr»MiaSI  i^Iauil
ed  b\  UmacMwaftihallawa^aK'tkepnMi
Hi*r«  «r  (."haMoua,  ao  tht  soalh  roa.-i


CIIELONATAS


327


CUIMAKKA


Chelonatas  pCrXaivarar)-  A  promoutorj,  now
Ciipe  Turnese,  iu  Elis,  opposite  Zacyutfatis;  the
uioBt  westerly  point  of  the  Peloponnesus.

Chelontf  (\(X«i^).  A  nymph  who  was  the  only
line  of  the  deities  that  did  not  attend  the  nnptials
of  Zens  aud  Her^,  and  who  even  made  the  cele-
liratioii  a  subject  of  ridtcnie.  Hermee  tfaerenpon
precipitated  her  into  a  river,  on  the  banks  of  which
her  mansion  was  sitnuted,  and  transformed  her  into
n  tortoise,  nnder  which  shape  she  was  doomed  to
{lerju'tual  silence,  and  to  the  necessity  of  always
carrying  her  dwelling  about  with  her.  The  Greek
for  a  tortoise  is  ;(<Xwin},  and  hence  the  fable  arose.

Cbelya  (^Avr). See  Lyra.

Chein6  ix^nrj).  (1)  A  cockle-shell.  (S)  A  niens-
lire  of  capacity,  which  api>car8  to  have  varied  from
1)04  pint  to  0.016  pint.  The  symbol  for  it  is  X.
Se<>  F.  Uultscb,  Metrologici  Scnptore§,  a.  v,  x^f^^'

Chemmia  {Xifiput ;  later  PanopOua,  UavoiroXis).
A  great  city  of  the  Tbubais,  or  Upi»er  Egypt,  on
the  eattti  bank  of  the  Nile,  celebrated  for  its  mau-
ulacture  of  liu-
t'li,  its  stone
qnarries,  and
itH  temples  of
Fan  aud  Per-

Cheniscns

i)(Jt»laKos),  Au
ornament  re-
Keuibliug  the
li«ail  and  neck
«f  a  goose  (xnv)t
placed  some-
times on  the
)imw  and  some-
t  line  a  ou  the
>leni  of  a  ship.
•See  Navis.

Cheops  (X('o^).  The  Greek  form  of  the  Egyp-
tian Khnfn,  a  king  of  Memphis  in  Egypt,  of  tlie
Konrth  Dynasty  (cir.  B.C.  3000),  and  famous  as  the
builder  of  the  largest  of  the  pyramids  by  the
forced  labour  of  the  people.  He  waa  succeeded
by  hJB  brotlier  Chephran  (Khafra),  who  built  the
next  largest  pyramid.  See  Herod. ii.  134;  and  the
article  Aegyptus.

Chephren  (Xc^pijv).  A  king  of  Egypt,  the
brother  aud  snccesaor  of  Cheops  (<).  v.),  whose  ox-
atujile  of  tyranny  he  followed,  reigned  tifty-six
years,  and  built  the  second  pyramid.  Tbe  Egyp>
tiaus  BO  exrcrated  the  memory  of  the  two  brotbevR
that  they  called  tbe  pyramids  not  by  their  names,
but  by  the  name  of  a  poor  shepherd,  Philition,  who
lived  near  by. See  Pyramis.

ChemXbon  or  Cbelronlptron  (xtpviffov,  x'^po-
nm-potf).  A  basin  for  holding  the  lustral  water  at
a  racritice,  or,  in  general,  for  washing  the  hands.
The  water,  whether  sacrificial  or  not,  was  called
Xtppt,'^.  The  bowl  was  sometimes  of  silver  and
sometimes  of  gold.  The  shape  was  round,  and
Ijoth  shallow  and  deep  ones  have  been  found.  The
liiire  Latin  name  is  malluvium.

^^'^^'^P*  Oc'^'V')- '^  Chernibon.

Cberriphron  or  CteriCpbon. Si'it  Kpiiksus.

CheraoneauB  (X«/i<rdv7;(ror  ,*  Attic,  Xt ppovrftr os).
A  Greek  geographical  term,  equivalent  in  mean-
ing to  tbe  Latin  peninsula.  The  earlier  form  in
^'krrrontwut,  the  word  being  derived  from  x*PP°^


Cbenlsct. (From  Paintings  round  ftl  Her
GuUiDeum.)


(later  from  x'P<ros),  "a  contineut"or  "mainland,"
and  t^troc,  "  an  island.''

The  most  noted  Chersonesi  in  ancient  times
were  the  following:  (1)  Chersonrsus  Aurea,  or
Golden  Chersonettus,  a  peninsula  of  Farther  ludiu,
corresponding,  according  to  D'Anville,  Kennell,
Mannert,  aud  others,  to  the  modern  Malacca.  The
positive  knowledge  of  the  ancient  geographers  can
hardly  be  said  to  have  exteuded  much  beyond
this,  their  account  of  the  regions  farther  to  the
east  being  principally  derived  from  the  natives  of
India.  The  name  given  to  this  region  by  the  an-
cieuts  has  reference  to  the  popular  belief  of  its
abounding  iu  gold  ;  and  here,  too,  some  inquirers
into  early  geography  have  placed  the  Ophir  of
Solomon,  an  opinion  nmintained  also  by  losephns.
(2)  CiiEKSONKSUH  CiMBRlCA,  a  peuiuHula  in  the
northern  part  of  Germany,  answering  to  the  mod-
em Jultaud  and  Schleswig-Holstein.  (3)  Cher-
SONESL'S  TaurIca,  a  peninsula  between  the  Pontus
Enxinus  aud  the  Pains  Maeotis,  answering  to  the
modern  Crimea.  The  name  was  derived  from  tbe
Tani'i,  a  barbarous  race  who  inhabited  it.  It  was
sometimes  called  Clieraouesns  Scytliica  and  Cher*
sonesus  Magna.  (4)  Ciiersokesus  ThracIca,  of-
ten called  simply  "the  Cher8onesns,"and  tbo  most
important  of  nil.  It  was  a  peninsula  of  Thnice,
between  the  Sinus  Melasand  tbe  Hellespont.  The
fertility  of  its  soil,  and  its  proximity  to  the  coast
of  Asia  Minor,  early  attracted  au  influx  of  Grecian
settlers,  and  its  shores  soon  became  crowded  with
flourishing  and  populous  cities.  From  this  quar-
ter the  Atheuians  drew  their  chief  supply  of  grain.

CheniBcL  A  people  of  Germany,  between  tbe
Weser  aud  the  Elbe,  southeast  of  tbe  Chanci.
Under  the  conduct  of  Arminins  (q.  v.)  they  defeat-
ed aud  slew  three  Roman  legions  commanded  by
Varus,  A.u.  10,  in  the  Saltus  Teutobergiensis.  They
were  afterwards  defeatefl  by  Gennauicus,  aud
never  recovered  their  former  eminence.

ChiUarcboB  (x'^^opX"')-  ^^*^  commander  of  a
thousand  men. See  Exercitus.

Cbilo  (XeiKtaVt  XtXui')-  A  Spartan,  ranked,  on
account  of  his  wisdom  and  experience,  among  tbe
Seven  Sages  of  Greece.  He  dtracted  bis  attention
to  public  affairs,  aud  became  one  of  the  ephori,  B.C.
55<)  (Diog.  La*;rt.  i.  68).  Many  of  his  maxims  are
quoted  by  the  ancient  writers,  which  justify  tbe
high  reputation  connected  with  bis  uanie.  He
died  of  joy  at  an  advanced  age,^  while  embracing
one  of  his  sods  who  bod  gained  a  prize  at  the
Olympic  Games.  Chile  appears  to  have  travelled
much  abroad,  and  it  is  probable  that  he  visited
Sardis,  the  capital  of  Croesns,  a  monarch  who  had
sought  an  alliance  with  Sparta  (Herod,  i.69).  It
was  at  the  court  of  tbe  Lydian  monarch,  in  all
probability,  that  bo  saw  Aesop,  since  Diogenes
Laertius  speaks  of  a  question  put  by  tbe  philoso-
pher to  the  fabulist  (Diog.  Laert.  i.  68  foil.).

Cblmaera  (Xlfiaipa).  A  fire-breatbiug  monster
of  Lycin,  destroyed  by  Bellerophon  (q.  v.).  Accord-
ing to  Homer  the  Chimaera  was  of  divine  origin.  In
front  it  was  a  lion,  behind  it  was  a  serpent,  and  in
the  middle  a  goat,  and  was  brought  up  by  King
Amisodarus  as  a  plague  for  men.  Hesiod  calls  her
the  daughter  of  Typbon  and  Echidna,  and  by  Or-
tfaos  the  mother  of  the  Sphinx  and  the  Neni«*an
lion.  He  describes  hor  as  large,  swift-  footed,
strong,  with  tbe  heads  of  a  lion,  a  goat,  and  a
Reri>ent. In  nnmen)ns  works  of  art,  as  in  statues,


CIUMI^UIUM


3>28


CHIKOGRAPUrM


'I'l


ff


M.0


Chios
l^ric  iif  lilt-  lurKrat  (IIkI  iuimI  futuoi
iMliliiilrt  III'  tbi:  .Aetrciiu,  luy  ujipmiu  I
llift  |H-ninAiilu  of  I'liizoniuiinc.  uii  tt
e>i&!i(  uf  loiiiA.  It  vrus  nilciiiiuNl  h
iho  loiiiaiis  u(  tho  tiiiif  nl'  thftriEivi
ttii^ratiuu,  tiii'l  tv>iimiii<Hl  nii  iikI
f  Ni^N.  |>i;tnlciit  aiiil  ]M)werfnl  iiiaritimf  Mai
lilt  ilie  defcul-  of  tlio  luniaii  iirrcl
by  tlio  PerHiiiini,  K.C.  494.  ofl'T  wliio
■lie  CliiaiiH  ucre  iiu)>j('ri««l  Ui  tIi
PtTHiaiit*.  Tlio  lialtlc  of  Myeolr.-tTI
frtH-d  Cliiiw  fniiii  tlic  remmu  yok
aiMl  it  bccauiv  n  luouiUeror  tin*  Allii
iiiau  League,  iu  wbicli  it  wa«  fur
lotij;rinK'>lbovluM«tan<1  nu)«tr;tv<H4
«l  ally  »f  AtlieuB;  but  im  iiusiiccfc,
fill  iill^'inpt  to  n-volt,  in  412.  l»-tl
iftt  roii<tiH>Mt  aiiit  (levaKlalioii.  Cim
wiw  celebrHtMl  for  it«  winr  aittl  ti-^
l>li*.  or»li  tlio  Slair^A  wliicb  a«|>k
til  till*  bdimiirof  lK>itit*  iltr  birtli|iB.
itf  Iloiiiur,  Cbiiis  tvAH  ^L'liorully  ks
I>llen^>hmt  ■ml  tb«  ChiniBern (Fromal^ncotui  iu  ihe  Untlnfa  Hawum.) ititliTtMl  by  tbc  ailcieitls  to  hnri^

\h-h1  rluiui;  ami  it  uiin)b<^rr4l  iitr««

mxl  the  cuius  uf  Cotiiith.  Stcyoii,  iiMil  otbcr  citien, iU  iiativcn Ibc  hiHluriaii  Th<-o|KinipnK.  i1h> ft

ibo  Cbiomera  is  goii<;i-nlly  rc)irei*oiit4Ml  aa  a  lion, Thi^ocritii!!,  am) utbci'  tMiiiiK-iit men. Uh  nlj

nith  n  cnntV  biinil  iu  the  iniddle  of  its  biu-k,  and

tail  eniliiig  in  a  Himkii'H  lit-ad. Tbe  brniuc  Cbi-

liinrni  of  Arn-liiuii,  now  in  rioreiipp,  in  n  very  crlr-

brnt4Ml  work  of  tirt. Evmi  in  nntiqiiiiy  tbft  Chl-

iiiiivnt  wfUi  rc'jj;ar<li!tl  am  a  t-yuibul  uf  tUv  vulcanic

cbanictc'i'  of  lUo  Lyciau  soil.  Vl\ I  V^'siA.  M*!/ \ TVy£'f*j

Chimerium  (Aniupto*'). A  proitiniitory  on  1b«<

const  of  Ki<iriis,  opptixltt*  tbit  inland  of  I'n\u«t.

Chion  iXiwk). a  nalivu  of  Heniclra  FuDtica,  c<iia  of  eiiMs.

ami  ilisciplf  nf  Plato.  Auiinatcd  l>y  iKilitiL-ul  Z(*al,
lin  left  AthviiH.  wliorc  bi*  bad  re.iiilctl  for  the  xpare
of  tlvn  yt'arM,  a(li<ndinf{  the  inHlriirtiuiiN  of  Platii,
and  raluntpil  bmiin  vitb  the  dt'tt-i'minaliun  uf  frv«-
iug  hi*  native  <'ity  fmni  thn  yoke  uf  lyrnnny.
Cl('Br«1)n«.  vi\m  ruled  at  Hcraclvu,  w:u  nul.  it  in
true,  a  guml  priuoe:  but.  iu  sliiying  biui.  L'hioii
vrns  tbr  caii»r  of  Ibis  city's  falling  ntidvr  a  \<runM<
tyniiit.  Siityni*.  the  brntlirr  uf  L'lfaix'biiit.  L'biou
biinsirlf  ftdl  a  \ictini  to  tin*  laltt^r^K  elfvaliun  Iu
po«-fr  tB-C.  :iVt).  \Vi-  have  eo^xiitff ii  If llfrs  eaid  U»
have  booi)  writlft)  by  (?bioii.  Thi'v  ar«  {irinripatly
wldroasMl  to  biH  falhiT.  Malrin:  but  tbfir  utilli*>ii-
tfcity  b*s  l>o«u  callwl  iu  i|iit«liou,  Hud  tbn  rval
aiitbor  ift  ftu|>[w«M->«l  tu  hikvt  li€>«n  a  FlatoniHf  of  ibo
foiirtb  century.  Tbc  ^lyl**  is  clear,  Miuple,  auJ
aiiimat<Hl. Kititiou  by  Ort-lli  i,Li-i|kci^l8l(i).

Clil6a6  (\it>i^  I.  1 1)  Daugbtvr  of  Botmw  and
Oiiiliyiii,  inodH'i'  ot'  EunioliUM  by  Pttscidun.  i^ec
Kl'MoU't'6.)  tttt  tlKn)>blcr  of  I'tuilaliou.  molher
iif  rhilatiiniou  by  A|k»1Io,  ami  of  Anlolyotw  by  Hcr-
ttu-M.  Slio  vc-.t»  ftUfn  til  Ailt-Diit  for  xcntuHnic  tt>
roiiipAiv  tK>r  own  Iwukiily  nitli  Ibat  of  llw  pHldesa.

Chlonldva  \  \iA»tAr)t ).  Knid  to  hav4>  Ikvb  the
oarlii'it  »Til*r  of  tlir  old  AlbiMilau  CftiiiMy.  (Cf.
Ait«tot.  /*«**.  ill.  5.  I  Hi«  iffrnvrriilalions  date
fUmt  »>('.  I"-"?.  Tbt'  n.tiue«  of  ibnT  of  htM  roi»r<Urn
art'  nvonliHl.'Hfwic,  IlriMrni  \  'AatrvfHoi,  ami  llrw

S>/. T«>  Jn>t|ZV)  fmiit  th'fmv  litl^^  no  tiboiiUI  euB*
ttdo  that  bin  ooMltvlitr*  bad  a  |tadilii-al  n'fi>r««e«,
and  wrrv  INill  of  |K>rMUin]  Miltn»:  aud  fhMu  an  alln-


ntlntimtiium (Bnili

Uii>»Bm.  I


city,  ChiuM  1  Kliio),  »|o«^l  ou  tbe  naaicrii  aiik  o
tbe  iNlaud.

Chiiamaxium  (\tipana$a,  x'^pofin^uiv) XV*
of  |M'rauibiilia4>r,  or  who'lcil  i-buii\  drawn  by  Inn*
iSi>c  r«troiiins.  'ii^.) Ill  lilt!
accompnnyiiiK  illnHtration  of
a  niarblo,  the  wbe*l«  are  evi-
dently oni.iiuentaL

Chiridota. Si^c  Tcxica.

Chirisdphus  (\f  4p4<ro^or).
A  Liki'MiM'iuoiiian  ;  wna  ftciit
by  the  Siiartana  to  aid  Cynw
iu  hid  ex|K*ditiuii  ai^aiiMt  Inm
bmiher  Art.-»TienKP*.  iic.40|.
.Vftrr  tbe  battle  of  Caiiaxa,
and  tb«  Bubscqoctii  anv«t
of  tbc  Grevk  geaeniU.  Chiri«o)ibaft  wa»  appeio*
Olio  uf  Ib«  u«w  g^nertlA,  and.  in  conjnuclioa  w  ]
Xcnophon  (q.  v.l.  bad  ibo  chief  conduct  of  tt)«  '
Irwit. SrC  ANABAJtl*;  XKN'-pnoN.

Cbirogrftphnxn  i  j(rv^tfa4><w\  A  word  wt>l
meant  Iir*i,  »«  it*  il«»rivacina  inipliiit.  a  liandwttli'
or  anlo^aph.  In  1hi:s  't*  simple  wum;  x^tp  '
Orvck  and  m^tmm*  in  Latin  are  oft«n  %n1«tit(tM
for  it,

I>ik«  ^inlita^  wi»nU  in  all  langna^pfc.  if  >c<jnirri
M<venil  leflintrid  •pnMeA.  Fnini  iU  6r*t  mt-n>ii»$
VK  catiily  deTiv«l  that  of  a  nifninliirv  in  a  will  "'
Alhrr  ioMmineiit,  i>«|M!vlaIlT  a  iiot«  «if  liatid  flfrii
by  a  debtor  to  hiM  iredilor.  In  thi«  laMi>f  i-u*  •>
Mou  ill  Vkiru^hiit  ( /'Mir/'.  *n  bli.  H.  ^  we  may  tiifrr  !  did  not  ^'^>t>At*lnt<Mbc  Irj^al  oMijnttion  (for  iIkmI'^'^
tliat  (hey  W('R>  Hiiomkc,  like  tlHM«  of  Kptclianuit^  '  iutjg;bt  lw>  provitl  iu  hihiio  AiJier  «r*y);  it  waanilf
tld.  Ill  MciiK^kr,  I'aiM.  t-'ntf.  vol.1.  a  itn*<f '^  lb*- old


pn«


CHIROtiRAPUY


329


CHIRURGIA


Accordiug  tu  Ascootus  (in  Vtrr.  iii.  36),  cAiro-
jrapAum,  in  the  seuae  of  a  promiBSory  note,  was
(listiDguished  from  sifngrapha ;  the  former  was
always  giveu  for  money  actually  lent,  the  latter
might  1)6  a  mere  sham  i^reemeut  to  pay  a  debt
which  had  never  been  aotiially  iiicnrred.  The
chirograpkum  was  kept  by  the  creditor,  and  had
only  the  debtor's  signature  ;  the  agngrapha,  on  the
coDtrary,  was  signed  and  kept  by  both  parties.
See  Cautio  ;  Falsum.

In  the  Latin  of  the  Middle  Ages,  t^irographum
n-.is  uswl  to  signify  tribute  collected  uuder  the
sigu-mauaal  of  a  person  in  authority,  similar  to
tlie  briefs  and  benevolences  of  former  times  in
Great  Britain. It  was  also  used,  till  comparatively
recent  times,  in  the  English  law  for  an  indeutnre.
Duplicates  of  deeds  were  written  on  one  piece  of
parchment,  with  the  word  ckirographum  between
them,  which  was  cut  in  two  in  a  straight  or  wavy  ,
line,  and  the  parts  given  to  the  care  of  the  per-
sons  concerned. By  the  canonists,  as  Blackstone  i
remarks,  the  woni  iyngrapka  or  sgngraphua  was  |
employed  in  the  same  way,  and  hence  gave  its  i
name  to  these  kinds  of  writing.

Chirosnipby. See  Palaeography.

ChlFon  (Xri/xaf).) Tbo  most  celebrated  of  the
Ceatanra,  and  son  of  Cronos  and  the  nymph  Phily-  I
ra. Dreading  the  jealousy  of  his  wife,  Rhea,  the
gu<I  is  said  to  have  transformed  Philyra  into  a
Biare,  and  himself  into  a  steed;  and  the  otfspriag  |
of  this  anion  was  Chiron,  half  man  and  half  horse.
Tbia  legend  first  appeared  in  the  poem  of  the  i
GigaHtomachia,  and  it  is  also  noticed  by  Pindar  |
(Pyth.  iii.  1,  foil.). Probably  the  praise  of  Chiron


Cblroa (Ponpeian  Palntlog-)

by  Homer  <//.  xi.  632),  for  his  love  of  jnstice,  led
to  the  view  of  him  as  the  offspring  of  ttie  god  who
ruled  over  the  golden  race  of  men.  To  Chiron
wu  intmsted  the  rearing  and  edncatiug  of  lason
and  his  son  Medens,  Heracles,  Aescnlapitis,  and
Achilles.  Besides  his  knowledge  of  the  mnsical
art,  which  he  imparted  to  his  heroic  pupils,  he
^M  also  skilled  in  surgery,  which  he  tanght  to
11*


the  last  two  of  this  uarober.  In  the  contest  be-
tween Heracles  and  the  Centanrs,  Chiron  was
accidentally  wounded  in  the  knee  by  one  of  the
arrows  of  the  hero.  Grieved  at  this  unhappy
eveut,  Heracles  ran  up,  drew  out  the  arrow,  and
applied  to  the  wound  a  remedy  given  by  Chiron
himself  But  in  vain ;  the  venom  of  the  hydra
was  not  to  be  overcome.  Chirou  retired  to  bis
cave  longing  to  die,  but  uuable  on  acconnt  of  his
immortality,  till,  ou  his  expressing  his  willingness
to  die  for  Prometheus,  he  was  released  by  death
from  his  misery.  According  to  another  acconnt,
he  was,  ou  his  prayer  to  Zens  for  relief,  raised  to
the  sky  and  made  the  constellation  of  Sagittarius.
Chirou  was  the  husband  of  Nais  or  Chariclo,  and
their  daughter  Endeis  was  the  mother  of  Pelens
(Apollod.  xiii.  IS).  Id  art,  Chiron  is  represented
as  of  a  noble  and  intellectual  cast  of  countenance ;
while  the  other  Centaurs  exhibit  brutal  and  sen-
sual traits.  See  Bottiger,  Vaaetigem&lde,  iti.  p.  144,
etc.,  and  the  article  Centauiu.

ChixoDomia  (xtipovofiia).  The  movement  of
the  hands,  which  was  an  important  part  of  Greek
and  Roman  dancing,  had  the  uame  of  j^ttpovofxla.
Herodotus,  in  the  story  of  Hippoclides  stand-
ing on  hie  head  before  the  guests  of  Clistheues,
uses  the  curious  expression  roivi  o-xAro-i  txtipo-
vofiritrt  (vi.  129).  It  was  likewise  a  feature  of
any  pantomimic  performance.  The  word  is  also
used  in  the  seuse  of  trKiafutxia,  or  sparring  (Pausan.
vi.  10,  i  3). See  Pantomimus  ;  Pugilatus  ;  Sal-

TATIO.

.  Cbirondmoa  (xttpovofun).  Generally,  any  per-
son who  employs  the  art  of  gesticnlatiou  to  ex-
press his  meaning  without  the  aid  of
language;  thence,  also,  a  pantomimic
actor  on  the  stage  (Jut.  vi.  63);  and
one  who  performs  any  duty  with  reg-
ular, studied,  or  theatrical  movements;
whence  the  same  term  is  applied  by
the  satirists  to  the  slave  who  carved
up  the  dishes  at  great  entertainments
with  a  pompons  flourish  of  his  knife
(Jnv.  V.  121;  cf.  Petron.  xxxvi.).

Chiropfid^  (xttpoTrilii}). A  handcuff
(Diod.  XX.  13). SeeMANiCAE;  Pedicae.

CblropodisU. See  Toilet.

CtUrotonia  (xciporoWa). See  Cheiro-

TONIA  ; PSEPHL'S,

ChiniTgia  (x'tpov^ia).  Surgery;  a
word  meaning  literally  "  handiwork,"
The  practice  of  surgery  was  at  first
conBidere<l  by  the  ancients  to  be  mere-
ly a  part  of  a  pbysiciau's  duty ;  but,
us  in  later  times  the  two  branches
(if  the  profesHtou  were  to  a  great  ex-
tent separated,  it  will  perhaps  be  more
cuuvenient  to  treat  of  it  under  a  sep-
:irate  head.  Without  touching  upon  the
disputed  question,  which  is  the  more  an-
cient branch  of  the  profession,  or  even  trying  to
give  such  a  definition  of  the  word  chirargia  as
would  be  likely  to  satisfy  both  the  physicians  and
the  snrgeons  of  the  present  day,  it  will  bo  sufficient
to  determine  the  sense  in  which  the  word  was  use<l
by  the  aucieuts;  and  then  to  give  an  account  of
this  division  of  the  science  and  art  of  medicine
as  practised  among  the  Greeks  and  Romaiis,  re-


'  "CnrarKGiA  sm

the  urllole  MsuictNA  for  fartbur  ]>ar


CHinUUGIA


DppeiflV


ir/i^£tot  rijatif);  from  wLicli  it  would  np
cwrioin  ppraouo  coiiiiiiod  theruselvee  Ut  lurticul
operatiuuA.

Tbe  naruee  of  several  persons  are  pnMerved  ir
practiHaJ  MirK^ry  as  well  ai«  iuiKliciii«  iti  tlir*  tiit
iintni?4liately  Kiicceethn^tlkHHi'  of  Hi|i|HicruU-«;  ti
(tIiIi  |:)i«  excepliuii  of  wiiiKt  frAgiiit^nlit,  iiiM-Tlnl
the  u't'ititifiH  \i(  Guleii,  Otih:kAio>i,  Ai'iinft,  etc.,  i
tlieir  writiii|;«  tiuve  iwtblmd.  Art-liiigailiiift  (
servoH  111  111'  iiiwiitiouMi,  aa  be  i»  antti  to  have  Ite


tiriilant.

Tlu<  woi'tl  fJiinirffia  ih  ilvrlvixl  from  x*'f>  "  ''''^  i
liatitl,"  mill  if'yop,  "a  work,"  oud  io  rxplitiiied  by
CvtNMH  ilte  .\fnt.  lib.  vil.  I'niefiit.)  to  mean  tbnt  pari  ,
of  ino4lki:ln»  quat^  vionn  cural,  "whitrli  tivattt  ait*
niutitrt  by  aii'idiH  i»rtlii!  hanil  ";  in  l>ii>^<iieM  I^uorlioH
(iil.H&)it  inHH(«i  liK--un'8idToi'T»'^i'fii'*«i  Kaittv,  "by
cilttitifc  and  biirniii};.''  Oniilliiijc  Ibt*  fabinotu  and
lay t  llT»l(>^i■■j|l  p<-i-iiiiiiu^f«i.  A  \n>\  In,  AnHciila|titi>t.  Ctii>
roii.Ptc,  tlx' only  fiMlniii  Inidilimm  vch|MH^titjK  Ibfi  I  tUo  timt  foreigri  Mirgvou  who  Milled  at  Row
•tfll*i  of  xiiriti'iy  iwfntv  tbo  twlatdinliiiiool  uf  tlie  re-  &.C.  ^19  (Fliii.  //.  -V.  xju:l.  ^  13).  Ho  wft»  at  fil
ptililirM  of  (ino'ro,  niid  (-vi'ii  iiiilil  llic  tItiK*  uf  lliu  '  vrry  well  received,  the  itm  QmiriUum  wsm  confem
ri'|iipoitii(*Miaii  War,  are  to  \m  fnuiid  lu  tU«  Hvid  \  apuo  biui,  a  iibop  vrsut  boiigbt  for  liiui  at  IW  pil
niul  thl^Marif.  TlKtrv  it  ap|H>an  (bat  mirgery  wru  i  He  exjieuHi'.  utid  lie  recei%'«d  tbe  bouourabte  ti
nliiKMt  raiiri'ly  I'Miiiiiu-il  \o  tbt»  trvutuient  nf  |  of  Viibicrttrin!*;  whiob,  Iionerer,  on  account  of  "
woiiitiU.  niid  tbe  iina^riimry  power  nf  cnvhant-  !  freipivot  uiie  of  the  koifT-  aud  caiitery,  woa  ici
ntelit  vra*  jntnod  with  (be  one  tif  t4>pical.nppllcA-  '  cbHU|;r«l  by  ibp  IConiaos,  vbo  vere  iiutiaed  iov\
ti«ii«  (//.  ill.  itlHi.  Tbo  liiwUit  tvceiifd  mirnery,  a  uiixU*  nf  praclic*^,  into  ibnt  of  Caniifox.  A*cl«
toK^tbrr  with  lbl^  iiIIht  bmiirbifi  of  iii<.-dioiiii-,  adtMt,  wlio  livcil  At  itx*  Ur^iiiuiii^  of  ibe  tiiHt  ^
frum  tbo  K^ypfiaiDi;  and  /Vtun  mimio  obttervationH  tui-y  U.c,  is  oaid  to  bave  been  tbe  Itrnt  |K*r»uu  ^
made  by  (be  aU'bit-obi){)MtN  wlin  :tocoiii)taiiiL'd  tbe  proiMiMnl tbc;o|H^raliooirftraobeotoiuy (L'ovl.Aiii
Fiviii'b  exited)!  1(111  to  KgypI  ill  WM.  and  l>y  itiibse-  De  Moib.  Jeiil,  I.  14,  fi  HI  Hii-  4.  $  'JO).  Acntnoni
iioout  inwHtixatont.  it  uppearA  tbal  tbere  are  docn-


iiifiitft  fully  proving  ibat  in  very  remote  liuit«8  this
extrnortliiiary  )HHiple  bad  i^eaebed  a  degree  of  pro-
tleieiiry  of  wbioli  ffw  uf  tbr  moderns  have  anycou-
oejiCiou.  rpoii  the  eeilii)gH  and  walU  of  tbe  tem-
|tlM  at  Karnac,  I.tixor,  etc.,  baA-rvliefs  are  o<>en,
rt<pr(HM<nting  linibt  Ibat  have  Um*«  cnt  off  wilb
iH»[itiiui<nl«  very  niinilnr  to  thoMi  which  nio  em-
ployed fur  ainpiirMlioiiH  at  Ibe  pi-rwnt  day.  Tlie
aaiiie  Incilrinnent.i  m-e  a^itiii  oUMT^ed  in  the  hioro-
Ulypblrtt^  and  vo^tl|;><)»  of  other  Hiirgieul  opei-atiottfi


of  Alexandria,  Hiiroameil  Xtdaronot,  who  is  «u
posed  to  have  lived  rather  Inter,  in,  c«'lebnil<>d  i
the  annaU  of  sur((ery  for  bavin/;  Imvii  the  first  i
pro]>o»e  and  to  perform  tbe  oi>orntion  of  litbutnr.i
or  breakiuK  a  calculus  in  tbe  Idatldvi'  whrii  f<iiiiH
to  be  tou  lartte  fur  aafe  extraction.  VrUa*  \m
tuiuiitely  de«cribe*l  his  mode  of  operating;  (/If  Jfn'
vii.  *JQ,  ^  3,  p.  43t)),  which  in  aome  n-^jiecU  rr«>Qi-
bliw  that  of  i'ivialf>  and  nourtrlonp  in  th«  t*r\y
pari  of  Ibo  pmmMii  eenlnry,  aitd  pnivca  that,  lion-
over  much  credit  thtty  may  deserve  fur  perleciiiiJI
tb«  o[icnilinn  aud  liriujciug  it  out  of  oblivion  iohi


may  b«  tnuwt.  wbicli  uH'onl  conviuein^  proofs  of

the  fckill  of  tb<>  ancient  Egyptians  iu  thin  braiieli public Hotirr, the pnUM' of  baving ung^'ftH.*

of  inMu-al  M■^^nw^  I  tbuu^^bt  of  it  IwlouKS  t*>  ll>«  aucienta. "Abwli

Tbo  rarliesl t^mikiuiug  surreal  vrritiu(f» are  dr  trolcbel,"  says  CeUiis,  "is  lUrd  ujioti  tli«*l<w

Ui<>*t<  in  tbe  MippoenUie  Collecllon.  where  there  '  in  wirb  a  way  as  easily  in  bold  it  llnu,  ev«i«l«i


uto  len  ireali"*^  oit  thi'<  vnbjiTt,  of  which,  how-
er(>r,  only  ttiio  ik  eonMiden^il  iindoitUirdly  gfiniiiiv.
lIlp|>ocrate#  iti.r.  4tiiX-:t:>;  f)  far  Kiirpaiuvd  all  bis
ptMlrerMor*  in  tbe  tM>ldhf«a  atnl  srim>9«i  of  his  oji-
eration*:  and  though  tbo  sraoty  knonlMlf;e  of
•naloiny  po»arA*e«l  m  llnw<*  limeti  prvvonted  bis  ai-
I'laintHft  any  verb-  great  |>f*rfeetiou,  &till  onv  nbould


lihakeu.  so  that  it  may  not  rnrolvc  backwanl:  tbro
an  irou  iustmmenl  U  ttsed,  of  wodenilu  thirkiiM*-
thin  ai  Ibe  fmnt  cud,  but  blnut,  wbiob,  wbniiP'
plied  to  the  st«u«  aud  struck  at  ibe  otlifl  ri'<l<
elearca  it :  great  care  mast  be  tok^n  that  t^  iii'
ftinimeni  do«*  not  come  into  contact  with  •'"'
bladder itnelf,  aud  that  n«tbinc  full u|kiu  it  ^^


mther  adinitx' hi<(;rnii)9.  wbieb  onaMvd  him  to  ilo  rbe hn^iking  of  tbe slona." Tbe next  Miryi«

9**  niucb,  than  Idamc  bim  Iw^atiM'.  wilb  bi»  inipcr-  wriirr afl*r Hippoemtea,  wbnao  wtirka  ur*'  »""
(ir.-i itif.it  nuilion.  be  coubl  i«>t  Act>Hnp1t)>b mure I  rxlaiil.  is  Cel»n^  who  lived  at  the  Iwgiuuiilt "'

(Ne  llll-l\N  RaIK>.) Tbr  M-ientiHc  *kill  in  n^luc-  th^  fiwt  ceutorj-  xJ*-.  W»d  who  ba«  tlevoted  ^^

[.l»>fl  ft *r lores  and  luxalioti:*  dispbixinl  in  bis  work*  four  Um  book*  of  bis  work  IV  Af rriMa u.  8ul«rf'

■■V  /\wrf»m.  IH  Jrtirmht.  rxcilrs  Ibe  ailaurmlion  .^f  cially  the  aevMifb and ei);blb.  rutin  ly  In  90^%*'

fliilirr  1,  HMiolk.  (  ktrm'-fi.  i ;  aud  b*  w  m<  iuuisI  \*i\*W  e«l  mailer. It  ploiuly  npi>car^  fn^rn  iradinj  Cri|
Wy Ibe iiivei)t'>r of  \\\r asiftr,  an old  snricical
l»««bln<'  f^vr  dislue&tum!)  of  Ibo  abonlder,  whirh.


iKau^H  ihtw  tkUen  Uta  dlavaar  et^|imHl  for  a  lunt:


aos that  afaiee  tbe  tiiite of  ||ip{MH:ra)«M  '""S*^

had  awda  rtty  great  itro^^ress  aitd  bail,  twli<e"<

tva<-Wd  m  Ugb  degrw  vt  perfection. Wr  ti»^  <"

lime  a  p«al  rrf«UtlnD. lu  bb  wtw^  ih  C^|hIw  J  bim  iWcwUvrt  HeoUon  of  tbe  um<  of(hrlix>«"^

jViIshMbs  W  gi\w  niiintr  ditvcttom  ftboat  tba  for  lb*  wnM  «f  boanrrbagv  from  wonmlrd  lil"^'

■*»•  •mA  moAt  of  vnug  tlie  in>phi«e.  awl  whm  !  tmm4»  (t.  ««  f  »,  p>.  909') ;  aud  thf  (Vl*i»n  uk^'*

tlip  Bfwnlor  agalikM  iW  itmhaUlity  ttf  bis  b^iag  aT  »«i|»«tsliM  waa  cMiiiuoed  down  to  e«ui|ar**

4er*tr«<)ij^|WM<nma«irUwefaiitaiii,  asberou- tivfU  WMlen tiMC*  (vii.  33,  p.  4ull. Me  r*  tli'


hayyoid  trt  \ttmmH  t Dt  Jf«r«  Imlfmr,  lib.  ftm  aatWr  mh» ghm diPt«tioiu  for  i be op«nH*<*"
T.  tMK.  HL  ^  5«».  ed.  KftbnV  A«if«tatM«.  ia  lb*  of  IttiMMnr  iik  ifaJL  vii.  «fi,  «  -J,  p.  4;Hi,  and  ihf
■  ■JtwawwKrflba  «««d,M  MidnrtibMidte  IhelnMtbod  *i<cirib><l  liy  bin  (called  tbo  «,».«««•  "*i
Hlff  iiirtie  OaU^elio«l:  %hcmf%  wiiina  h  «Mle  ^w.  or  Cwlm^  mttUd*  camtiimrA  to  l>e  vni»^

«r  %k»  TMiwnA  W  a  liwV  ai  ibe  imtiU.  afWr  tW  '  UH  Ibr ii i  of  CIm  «xtcentb  nnf*^

«m4  hm  W«  «<ifhi»ly  dMtrwy«4  \if  faiiwi.  U  waa  |Mfffcfai  ■!  Vmn.  BantoMix.  ami  «<t"'
The  aaib«r  oT  tk»  ^'Oml^*  vmmtmtf  MiriWad  fflM<«  to  F^mw,  «poa  fftUMiia  of  aU  agM.i:Te«
iv  llipi^^n««M  Ma^  hU  fflli  Ml  l*  fOTtoM  aa  teto  aa  vha  kiMw  |wrt  «f  Um  >evenie«i*tl>  <n'
Uw  wfvmtlo* «nMi«kMi!r,  bHrt  t*  Imv*  H  iof«r>  tmtji  and  a  ^aAm  aatbar  lAlbui  "a  UtM^^
mmm  ifweiftlly  >PtaiMiar4  M  ll  i^^HryM  Al^agi ^l  W  rfriMiafc  it  alwa;«  lo  be  prrfmrtl  (^


4i--i


CUIUUKGU


331


ClJtKL'KGIA


I


Inmlflrfuuncou.  He  ili>Bcrtbea  (vii.  35,  f  3,  p.
tluT  iipcmtiun  of  infitmlutia,  w bioli  wtut  bo  emu-
dhiuIt  itrriurmutl  by  ibe  nncietils  ii|H>ti  siii^era,
iiU)„  anil  is  uftcu  alluded  to  tu  clasitical  autliurs.
iSncJuv.  ri.  73,  37V;  Heiieou,  iu  Laotaut.  //iViw.
hita.  i.  16:  Mart.  A/w/r.  vii.  &i,  1.  Is.  2h,  lit.
siv.'JIS,  I:  TertiiU.  ^  tbfPfia  Mi/.  Il.t  He  uIhu
<lc««cril«  (rit.  ^,  f  1,  p.  iS7)  tile  openitinii  nf  i-ir-
ritmctMioD  niliKltKl  1o  by  81.  Paul  (1  C'»r.  vii.  It*).
Vw\tm  Xvjfiavta  {fJv  Hr  AM.  vi.  63)  imiiHcribi-B
AntylliiH  a  ifccoud  metkocl  of  perfunuio];  tliv
itpMutimi.

Tbtt  lutluwiiig  (ieftcriptiou  by  CuIkuh  uf  tlio  nee-
rjt»rj  i|nali6cat)Oua  of  a  surgcuu  UetMrrvoM  tu  U:
tliwted:  "A  durgwou,"  ttays  lie  (lib.  vii.  Pruyfat.l,
•■oujjbi  to  be  yoitug,  or,  at  auy  rat*,  not  very  old  :
Ills  liAud  should  be  tinu  and  slvojly,  niitl  uert'T
iduike;  he  «liould  be  abl«  to  uso  his  left  hinid  iw
miililf  Mh)B  right;  Itis*  eyeRiRlit  slmnld  Iw  cltmr,
uit  Ins  uiind  not  eiisily  »tnrli(Ml ;  tin  sbonld  bn  wi
bmalijricl  lit  pity  as  to  niak<:  liini  di'hinniH  of  tlif
tvoirtry  of  lii«  jiativnt,  but  not  m>  far  an  to  Niiflvr
hllNirll'  tu  Ite  luovrtl  l>y  bin  cri(»;  liu  nliuiild  n«j-
tfaer  hitrry  ih«  i>p4M-Altoii  more  than  Iho  case  re-
'I'lirrs.  n«i-  tut  leKt  than  ifl  nftcftfiwiry,  bnt  do  ov-
BtTtbiuj;  jibtt  as  if  the  othcr'u  Mreuius  made  no
iOilMVwidU  u|*on  him."

Dnitting  ijcribouiua  Largaa,  Mo»chioD,  and  Bo-
H>ai,  ilie  uext  AOTbor  of  imjiorcaucc  U  Cavtinct
Attrelinnuit,  who  in  sup|>o«ed  to  have  lived  about
A»  bc^uutng  of  the  sucoud  cuntnry  a.d.,  and  in
nliiiw  norko  there  is  inach  sni^icul  uiattur,  but
Mtbiug  lliitt  can  lie  flailed  originnl  lie  rvjiM'^ted
iiutl  Iho  opiTAlion  of  ti-nc-beutiiiny  (lie  Morb.
in.  4,  ^  39),  He  mentiuns  a  eoiwi  of  aacitcs
tint  wua  oured  by  lapping  lib.  iii.  8,  ^  VZ%  and
aWi  a  fMnsoti  wl)i>  rei'ovcrcd  at't«:r  bnio);  kliot
tlimmli  itie  |uiig9  by  an  an-ow  (ib.  ii.  12,  ^  1-14).

OaU-ii,  ilu>  uiohI  vohiniinoUH  ami  at  thn  sauw
tiuw  tit)  iniinL  valuable  in<-dical  writer  of  autiqui-
^h  'a  toit»  «di*bmt<.-<l  as  a  lln^g(^uIl  than  as  »u  anut-
''■i't  and  physician.  lie  appi'ars  to  bavo  prac-
twd  lurgcry  at  P«rgainnft,  but  U]tnn  hti»  removal
to  B(iine  (A.D.  165)  he  cntirtdy  confluvd  hlniiiM-'lf  to
■wlitini!  ilM  ifetfi.  Metl.  vi.  in  /m€,  torn.  x.  p.  455).
nUwrilitij;!)  prove^  howtjvcr,  tlmt  he  did  not  «n-
*it*lr  iib»»id<in  anrgery.  Hi»  Coninicittarieit  on
^U'lMilJBP  iif  HipiK»cniteH  Df  O/ficinn  Mti/iri,  and
^**  Ircatiao  Ue  Faaciit,  nbuw  that  be  wtin  well
^ttted  evpu  in  the  miDor  details  of  the  art.  He
•rpwn*  ulao  to  Lnve  been  a  skilful  oiierntor,
^\kU  no  givat  lurgicul  uivcuttons  are  nttrib-
"Mwiiiiu.

Antyllns.  who  lived  some  time  lietvreon  Galon
""1  0ritu9ia4,  in  the  earliest  writer  whoa©  direc-
tiuiisforjierfonning  trach«»toiny  are  »lill  extant,
w'tti;li  liic  ojH-ratiou  (tin  M(al«il  abow)  was  pni-
^^"^  hy  A-tclepiadea  altoiit  IbitHi  huinlred  yeartt
"^"T«.  Only  a  ff  w  fragnn>nts  of  the  writings  of
*»trllnii  tvuiain,  and  among  thorn  the  following
^*'0«>»  in  preserved  by  Pnulns  Aegineta  (/Je  lie
■*''«'•  »i.  :t:n :  "When  we  proceed  to  perform  lhi«
•I*Wton,  we  mnftt  cot  throngb  »onie  part  of  the
^hi(||ti|M.,  b«low  the  larynx,  abont  the  third  or
Ji'wti  ring;  for  to  divide  the  whole  would  be
'^gvciitui.  Thit)  plaoe  is  coninindiunt),  Iwcauite  il
•"•"t  cuTcred  with  ouy  Htub.  und  becjiWMe  it  h(w
"'^tlMti  iituateil  near  the  divided  part.  Tbere-
'i**.  beDding  the  head  of  the  iiatieut  backward,
**  Ibai  the  wiudpi}>e  may  come  uiora  forward  to
'"View,  we  make  a  traubversv  ttectiun  between


two  of  the  rings.  «o  that  in  this  case  not  the  carli*
lage,  but  the  menibrauc  whinb  unites  tbe  carti-
lage!) together,  tit  dividm).  If  the  operator  hi:  a
little  timid,  he  uiay  &nt  ittretch  the  Hkiu  with  n
hook  and  divide  it :  ihrn.  iimcuwling  to  the  wiud-
pil>e,  and  Heparatiug  the  vctutclM,  if  Hny  are  iu  the
way,  he  may  tuuke  the  inoittion."

This  o[)Hration  appuunt  to  have  been  very  gel-
dom,  if  ever,  perfonned  by  the  ancients  upon  a
Uuiuan  Iwiug.  Avenzoar  triwl  it  njiou  a  goat,  and
found  it  might  ha  done  withont  much  danger  or
difliculty ;  bnt  lie  nayn  ho  should  not  like  to  ln<  the
lir«t  iwnou  to  try  it  nfion  a  man.

Oriltuaius,  idiynicrian  to  the  emperor  Jnliau
(A-ii.  361 1,  profi^AM>i4  to  be  nu-rely  a  ennipiler;  and
tJiuugh  there  in  in  liiti  groat  work,  entitled  livtn-
■y*>^«<  'larpiKoi  iCoUecta  Atc^icinalia],  niueh  sni-gicnl
matter,  thi?re  in  nothing  original.  The  H»m«  may
be  naitl  of  Aetius  and  Alexander  TruUianus,  both
uf  whom  lived  towarda  the  cud  of  the  nixth  ci-n-
tury  A.n.  Panlu:Ft  Aegineta  boo  given  up  the  liAh
and  sixth  books  of  bis  work  Ve  Jle  Me^lica  eutiivly
to  Nurgerj-,  and  has  iusened  much  nttvful  matter,
derived  in  a  great  measure  from  hia  own  observa-
tion and  experience.  Albucasis  transhited  into
Arabic  great  |>art  of  these  two  hooks  as  the  baftis
of  bin  work  ou  Rurgery.  Paulus  was  particularly
eekbrnted  for  hift  skill  iu  untlwircry  luid  femnle
diseases,  and  was  called  on  that  account,  by  tlie
Arabians,  Jl-Knicdbel(,  "the  Accouobeur"  fAbul'
famj,  Hiet.  Dgmiat.  p.  ISI,  ed.  Pocoeko ).  He
probably  lived  towards  the  end  of  tlie  soveuth
century  a.[>.,  and  is  (he  last  of  the  ancient  Greek
and  I^itin  nitoilical  writers  whose  surgical  works
remain.  The  names  or  several  others  iire  reeordeil,
bnt  they  are  not  of  Niidieiuut  emineticu  to  rofpiire
auy  notice  here.  For  further  information  on  the
subject  butli  of  niediciiio  and  surgery,  see  Mkdi-
CINa;  and  for  the  legal  qualiSealions,  social  rank^
etc.,  both  of  idiyMcians  nnd  surgeons,  among  the
ancient  (Jreeks  and  Komans,  see  MKixct's.

The  hnrgical  iiiHtrunicnts  from  which  the  ac-
companying vngnivings  tNo<i.  1  lo  10 1  nre  uintle
were  foninl  by  a  pbydieian  of  St.  Pi^tersimrg  (l>r.
Savenko)  in  1819,  at  Pompeii,  in  the  Viii  Coueiularis
(BtradaCousulare),  in  a  house  which  isHUpposed  to
have  belonged  to  a  Burgeon.  They  arc  now  pre-
■»erved  in  tho  innscnm  at  Portici.  The  engravings,
with  iiu  neciiUDt  of  Ihem  by  l>r.  Suvenko,  were
oiigiinilly  published  in  tho  lictnt  MMicah  for  li^l,
vol.  iii.  p.  A'JH,  etc.  They  were  afterwards  iuM-rted
in  Proriep's  Sotutn  ant  rfmn  (tebUte  drr  yatnr-  wtid
llrilkuHde  for  IftS,  vol.  ii,  n.  W,  p.  57,  etc.  The  ao-
compan>-ing  flgnrus  nre  copied  fn>m  the  Germuu
work,  in  which  »oine  of  them  apiiear  to  be  badly
drawn.  Tbeir  authenticity  Miisnt  lii-Ht  doithlcd  by
Kilhii  [Itr  iNntrnmrttti*  Chintry.  OfcWbw*  Cuijuitin,
cl  iitiptr  ICffwi*ii»,  Leipzig,  H'j{3).  who  thought  they
were  the  same  that  had  been  described  by  I^aynrtlt
in  his  Ccfrtf.  Jntiq,  Monujucnt.  Iffrrutnui  K^u*.  (Nap.
I7r>4,  fol.,  n.  236-S94).  When,  however,  bis  disser-
tation was  afterwards  reiiublinhed  {Opunc.  Aradfm.
Afeti.  rl  I'hiM.f  Leipzig,  IrW,  il.  309|,  he  iicknowl-
edged  himself  to  be  c<nnpletely  siilittlied  on  (bis
point,  and  has  given  in  the  tract  ivforred  to  a
k^arncd  an<l  iiigetuous  description  of  the  instru*
meats  and  their  supposed  iinei,  from  which  tbe
following  account  U  chiody  abridged.  It  will,
however,  be  wen  at  once  that  tho  form  of  most  of
thcQi  is  M>  simple,  nnd  their  uses  so  obvious,  that
very  little  explaoatiou  is  ueccMtsary. Altogi-theCj;


CHIBURGIA


881


cnmrRUtA


they  givp  a  very  Iiigb  idea  of  Uoth  thp  HcivDco  and
the  practice  of  surgery  nruntig  tlin  R<ii[i«iig.

1,  2.  Two  )in>1ie-8  (tperiUum,  ^17X17)  inA(l>>  nf  iron ;
the  largfvr  kIx  iiH^liea  long,  tlut  smallrr  fniir  and
n  balf.  'ii.  A  cfttitery  ( Kavrijpiap )  luado  of  iroD,
rather  more  tbau  four  iuchea  Jong.  4,  5.  Two
Inncein  (ti'DlpflintH,  trfilkrj)  mailo  of  c<»p|»cr;  the
forntcr  tn-o  iiR-hctt  and  u  Ualf  long,  tlit*  other  itiroe
inches.  It  Be«m6  doubtful  whoiber  thpy  wer«
tiHod  for  blood-lettiiif,'  nr  for  o|H>iiinf;  abnceesw,
etc.  6.  A  knife,  niiiiaiTiiilly  niiide  of  copfver.  the
blade  of  wliirli  is  two  iiiubfH  and  »  hairbuig,  and
ill  tho  broiuleHt  prirt  nii»  riicli  in  breaillli ;  the
bnck  iH  i^trniKbl  and  thick,  and  the  edgo  UHK-b
eurvetl;  tlu!  bundle  in  Kottburt  that  Savonko  tbinks
it  must  bavo  l)ceu  broken.  It  \u  uueertaiu  for
wbnt  pnrtieiibtr  purpose  it  was  used:  Ktlbn  cou-
Jectnrv8  that  (if  it  bo  »  Hitrj^ical  iiiatrnineut  at  all)
it  may  have  been  made  nith  snch  a  cnrved  edj^e
and  Hiich  a  slrai^lit  ibiok  hack  in  order  that  it
mif;bt  be  olriiuk  with  a  bamtncr,  and  eo  amptitaie
fiiigera,  [oe«,  etc. 7.  Another  knife,  sp^iarentlj


K


Suff  tnl  Iiwlraa»«at»

made  of  copper,  the  bliule  of  which  is  of  a  trian-
gular Kb»|M>,  tn-o  inches  lonR,  and  in  tlie  broiideet
purl  ei)tht  liiie»  in  breadth;  the  bock  is  straif^ht
and  one  line  broad,  and  thia  brca4llb  rontiniies  all
the  way  to  the  i>oiul,  which,  therefore,  ik  tioi
iibaqt,  bnt  giiar<led  by  n  Hurt  of  bnttva.  Kilbn
Ibinkxti  may  have  been  iiyeilforeulargiog  wonnda,
etc.,  for  which  it  would  be  particularly  fitted  by
it«  blunt  po)i.t  and  broad  biu'k.  !i.  A  needle,
aliuut  ibree  inches  Ion);,  made  o(  iron.  9.  An  ele-
vattH"  (or  iiistrnwent  for  niisiog  depmwed  portions
of  the  eknll).  maile  of  iron,  five  incbea  long,  and
very  mnch  rewmbling  tbo«o  made  n»e  of  at  the
prciMTnt  liny.  lO-l-l.  DtlTftvnt  kindit  of  forccpe
it9l»€llae\.  \o.  lU  has  the  two  ftidm  i»e|>arate<l
fitrni  each  other,  and  Is  Atu  ioches  long.  No.  11
Is  alno  tire  inehe4  long.  No.  \'2  is  thre«  incbe«
and  a  hulf  bmg.  The  siile^  are  narrow  at  the
|tQiiit  of  union,  and  l»eronio  bnta«ter  by  degrees
lowanlH  the  other  end.  where,  when  i'IommI,  they
Would  form  n  kind  of  »rch.  Il  hltould  \hs  noticcil
thai  it  is  rnniobed  \>i(b  a  inovabb'  ring,  exuvtly
like  ihe  lenucillitiu  forer)vt  einploynt  at  the  prr«eut
tlay.  No.  i:t  waa  vimwI  fur  pnlllii^  oat  bair»  by  Ibe
ruota  (f^)coXat3iV).  No,  14  is  oix  inches  long,  and  is
belli  in  tl»e  iniddh^.  It  wa»  probnbly  u»etl  for  e\-
liwrltng  foivlcii  iHMlie*  thai  had  utiiek  in  lheie*uipb-
agiip,  or  gullet,  or  in  the  tntttom  of  a  wound.  \'*.
A  male  catheter  ^iie«en/«fHhi  I,  nine  incbcA  in  length.


[^'


^^^^^r:^ M


I


Sqrflca)  liLBtniomU

The  shape  is  retnarkablc  from  ita  having  the
onrvu  tike  the  letter  8,  which  in  the  form  tbkt
r«<inveuted  in  the  la»t  century  by  the  cvlebl
Kroneh  durgeon  J.  U.  Petit.  16.  Pnil»ably  1
mate  cntlieter,  four  iiiehva  in  length.  CelsUi
)terilw8  both  male  and  female  cathetera</VJtflid
^  $  1,  p.  4-29).  17.  Supposed  by  Kroriep  to  h
iu>4trnment  fur  extracting  teeth  ioiiovroypa,  ViA
iv.  ^  IHl):  but  KUhu,  with  much  more  praUsUI
conjectures  il  to  be  an  instrument  nseil  in  aa
tating  pnrt  of  an  enlarged  ornla,  and  i)nidM  <
BU.s  [Ik  Mrd.  vti.  Vi,  ^  'i,  p.  404 1,  who  ssjtt  Ihst'
method  of  upcratlu^  is  more  coovenient  thai


Sutflcal  iBfltniinetiu

take  hold  of  thw  nvnia  »viih  tlw  fiirce|», !
to  cnt  off  iMdow  it  as  much  aa  ia  neeeiCMif
ll>.  Pnibably  two  xiwilulae.  Noh.  fitt-lCi  ai«
hap»  Ihe  iiitu>t  intcn-ating  of  alt,  n»  Hhowing
mrauM  eiuplored  tiy  I  be  Komana  in  the  explore
of  Mime  of  the  internal  eavitim  of  tliu  iNnly
the  discurery  and  tivalment  of  diaease.  T
are  takea  from  Beoed.  Vnlpi.  fUH«/r<i;.  rfi  t«M
StrmmrmU  CJiirmrgici,  etc.  i.\ap1c«s  IMT),  Mm
p.  39,  i.*te..  Mbrn?  there  is  a  dfluitril  and  Inr
dcHoriptiou  of  ibriii.  Nu».:A).  til  arc  two  vie«i
the  same kind  of  lustrumcut — vix.,  a  dilalwr


gioae  (JUmtt^,  Piitil.  Aegin.  v'l.  711)  No.  !fli  \n  %
<tihitor  ftai  \ifipotta<rrnXtvst  id.  vi.  78);  anil  "So.  '33,
nippcn  for  vuiiipr««iiing  Teina  or  extracting  Hjtlin-
leiv^l  bone*.

Sec  Pliny,  Huta^'ia  XafumlU.  l>ks.  xx.-xxxii. ;
Bfaooanl,  JIi»t.  of  Mtdicit\e  lEug.  trauo.  [*liilud«l-


I


pWil,I8fi?(;  Riit«r  von  Rilli-r»lialii, /J/e  Ilallatmt-
^ffHcB  iiUen  RoviM  (IJeiliii.  IH75| ;  C«xf,  The  Writ-
tkgt  of  mftptxTatf*  and  Qaltn  Kpitomisai  (Phil.
^''W);  \Vat»oQ,  The  Mfilicil  ProJe*$iun  in  Ancient
7'"w#  (N.  V.  1856);  Duiicliton,  Wat.  of  Metlirint
{It'll-  l?7S);  Damutlivr^,  HiU.  r/«t  Seiencta  Medx-
w'a  CParm,  lr*70-73) ;  (iarratl.  Mylha  i»  Medicine
*-VV.  i*^>;  auil  MiiUcr,i/«m/fruc/i,  v.pp.IOtffolL

CWtxwi  f;^iTw»'). 8««  ExoMisj  Tunica.

C^loaia  {,\iTa*vm).  A  fcaat  cclelirnted  iu  the
■*'!«■  villitjtc  nf  Chiton*  in  lioiioiir  of  Artemis  CUi-
^•iiB,  ou  nilltnl  aa  «fariiiy  tbi;  loose  tunic,  or  x'^^i'j
of  llio  liiiuiitiaM.  A  niiuilui  IVast  «aB  Leid  at  Syra-
"'»^' S*  Atlienai-u«,xiv.  p.  (J-iO.

^^^l^mya  (;fAa>it'>s).  A  abort  umutl«  fonutiig  a
I'»ri  «#r  iijp  outer  raiiiteut  of  the  (Jrwks,  and  of  the
""iiisfcun  ill  iiiijHjrittI  tiuu-8.  lea  material  wa»  nsu-
*"y  ^nollen;  and  it  ilitfered  from  the  i^crriov,  the
'*'"'l  rtmiettia  of  ibti  male  m?x.  iu  ibew.'  r»*«pect»:
"'*  it  viu  luni-li  ttmiillcr;  also  (iiior,  tliiiiinr,  iimro
^""'^'KHled  in  «M»I«>tir,  iiml  more  Hiwceptililn  nf  cirna*
""lit,  !(,  iiinrt'over  4liliisn*d  in  beiujj  ohloiin  iu-
»lr»il  *tf  sqiiiire,  its  length  Iieiii({  genurally  about
'"l*"*  ilftlirradlh  (Flut.  JVj.  v'*!).

i^iifi  clitnmyH  caiiiu  uriKiiiully  {fom  Mac«d4niii
^^  'f  bcwmly,  and  wan  the  drw«  of  hnut«rs,  of
,^*llcn», w.jH'^ially  on  horsi-ltuck.ainl  of  aoldiers.
'••^twi  i«  Imvc  licfru  part,  of  the  uaiiid  di-e&s  of  a
**^aii  (Arintupb.  7-.J*.  9W8)  aud  wiia  worn  at  Alb-
***  '*>  tlw*  e/iheiii  from  aboul  8«veiU*'<'ii  to  t\v*;iily

!ir*  ff  «ge  (I'hilfUHiu,  p.  3ti7,(<d.  Mtfiiiebt*').

,. J^**  ihlaiiiy«  ati  wiirn  by  yonlhc .  by  »olili«m,  oud

■*'  *iunu;t>  (lirtrrLMl  iu  colour  ami  itiniiifw*. accord-

*8  t*»  it*  purpose,  and  the  iigu  and  rauk  of  the

~'*ft;i-_ "fiip liuuter cointnonly wcut out in a

"■"tie  of  a dull,  iiicouhpicuoim colour,  ua IhvjI

*''t*t«l  ro  escape  the  notiMof  niUl  animaU  (Pull.

'''■^*'V. The  moro  omainoiital  nunittcjt,  bfiiij;  de-

**5^»M|  for  wnntnn,  wrv  tnntefnlly  decunilfd  with

''"''iirti'rI/tiiifcMs, Wrg.  •■Icii.  iv.  Itt7);  awl  iIiosb  worn

"5  rbo'ijiciaiis,  Trojan*.  Phrygian**,  and  otlu-r  Aki-

allcfc  wt-ro  al-Mj  (■nibrniderrd,  or  interwoven  with

P^d  (\>rg.  Jcti.  iii.  4.-e3-*H4,  xi.  77ft:  Ovid.  J/rt.  v.

"V Actors  had  tbvir  cbluiiiva  omaniontcd  with

l*lil(lMl.iv.nG).


The  uannl  inodA  of  weanitg  tkn  mantlo  wait  to
pass  one  of  iu  ihort«r  aidea  round  the  iiM.'k,  aud  to
fa»(cii  it  by  means  of  a  brociob  iw6fim},^fibula),  oitbt^r
over  thu  breast,  in  wbioh  ooso  it  hung  down  tlm
back,  reaching  to  tho  calvits  of  the  legs ;  or  ovrr
tb«  right  ahotilder,  tto  as  to  covi>r  the  left  arm,  as
iti  tbtr  wcll-knowu  example  of  the  Belredcro  Apol-
lu.  In  other  inotuuces,  it  wae  made  to  depend
gracefnlly  from  the  left  ehoiilder,  of  which  the
bronze  A|Htllo  in  ihu  BritlHb  Museum  (aee  right-
baud  figure)  preeeuUADexamplu;  or  it  w»h  thrown
lightly  behind  the  back,  and  pawed  o%-er  either
oDc  arm  or  tihouldcr,  or  over  both  (as  in  left-hand
tlgure);  or,  lastly,  it  was  laid  upou  Ibu  throat, car-
ried bebiuU  the  ueck,  aud  crosoed  »u  an  to  hang


CUamya iTbo  inn  oe  tba  laft  ttom  k  psmUiic  oa  ■  naa ;
ikni  VII  Ibii  rIglK  ttvm  llt«  tintuik  Moseuoi.)

down  the  baek,  and  »ometime.'i  )t4  extremities  were
again  bronght  forward  over  the  arme  or  sbouldorH.
In  ehnrt,  the  remain*  of  ancient  art  of  every  de-
BCiiptioa  show  iu  how  high  u  degree  the  mantle
ooutributed,  by  it**  endless  diversity  of  arrange-
ment, to  the  display  of  the  biinnin  iVirin  in  it«
greatest  beanty.  The  aptitndi;  of  the  mantle  to
1>e  inruttd  in  every  pomiible  form  uiimnd  tlte  body
made  it  urH^ful  even  for  defence.  The  linnLer  used
to  wrap  hui  eblauiys  about  hia  left  ami  when  pur-
suing wild  uuimab,  aud  preparing  to  light  with
them  (Poll.  V.  It*;  Xeu.  CifHeg.  vi.  17).  AJeibiadca
died  tlgbtiitg  with  bia  luaiitle  rolled  round  hia  left
baud  iuateoil  of  a  tihield.  The  annexed  illiititratlou
exhibite  a  ligrire  of  PoM.>idon  amxKl  with  the  tri-
dent iu  bin  right  hand,  and  having  a  cblainyA  to
protect  the  left.  It  ifi  taken  fraiu  a  medal  which
was  Ktrnek  iu  eomuii-'muraiion  of  a  naval  victory
obtained  by  Demetnub  Poltorcctes,  and  WOA  evi-
dently dcMgued  to  express  his  bcukc  of  Poseidou'ii
Muccour  iu  the  coutliut.  Whea  Artemis  go«»  to  the
chase,  an  nhe  does  not  reiiuire  her  mantle  for  pur-


CliUunyH.


(PoMltlon  tnim  k  mmUI.  in^  Artvnli  ttom  a  autut
in  tba  Vkiwu  I


CHLOfi


334


CH0REGU3


poses  of  defence,  she  draws  it  from  behind  ovet
ber  shoulders,  aud  twists  it  round  her  waist,  ao
that  fhe  belt  of  ber  quiver  passes  across  it,  as
shown  in  tbestatuesof  this  goddess  in  the  Vatican.

It  appeal's  from  the  bas-reliefa  on  marble  vases
that  dancers  took  hold  of  one  another  by  the
chlaniys,  as  the  moderu  Greeks  still  do  by  their
gcnrfs  or  handkerchiefs,  instead  of  taking  one  an-
other's hands.

Among  the  Romans  the  chlamys  came  more  into
use  under  the  emperors.  Caltgnia  wore  one  eu-
ricbed  with  goUt  (Snet,  Ckilig.l9);  and  Alexander
Severus,  when  in  the  country,  one  dyed  with  scar-
let (Lauiprid.  At.  Sev.  40).

Chlo6  (XXo)}).  '*  The  blooming."  An  epithet  of
Demeter  (q.  v.).

ChkMia  or  Chloia  (XXdcui  or  XXota).  A  festival
celebrated  at  Atbeus  in  honour  of  Demeter  Chlo£,
or  simply  Chlo^,  whose  temple  stood  near  the
Acropolis  (Hesych.  s.  v.  XXoio).  It  was  solemnized
in  spring,  un  the  sixth  of  Thargelion,  when  the
blossoms  began  to  appear  (hence  the  names  XXdij
and  XXde(o),  with  the  sacriQce  of  a  goat  and  much
mirth  and  rejoicing.

Chloxia  (XXm/x'e).  (I)  Daughter  of  the  Theban
Amphion  and  Niob6  (q.v.).  She  and  her  brother
Amyclas  were  the  only  children  of  Niol>6  not  killed
by  Apollo  and  Artemis.  She  is  often  confounded
with  the  following.  (2)  Daughter  of  Amphiou  of
Orchomenos,  wife  of  Neleus,  king  of  Pylos,  and
mother  of  Nestor.  (3)  Wife  of  Zephyrus,  and  god-
dess of  flowers,  identical  with  the  Roman  Flora
(q.  v.).

Chlonu. See  Coxstantius.

Choaapea  (XadoTnjs).  (1)  Now  the  Kerah  or
Kara-Su;  a  river  of  Susiana,  falling  into  the  Ti<
gris.  Its  water  was  so  pure  that  the  Persian  king»
used  to  carry  it  with  them  in  silver  vessels  when
on  foreign  expeditious.  (2)  Now  the  Attock;  a
river  in  the  Paropamisus,  in  India,  falling  into  the
Cophes  (Cabul).

Chobna  (XujSor).  A  river  of  Colchis  falling  iuto
the  Enxiue,  north  of  the  mouth  of  the  Phasie.

Choonlx  (xoif^i)-  A  Greek  measure  of  capacity,
the  size  of  which  is  difiereutly  given ;  it  was  prob-
ably of  different  sizes  iu  the  several  States.  Pol-
lux, Suldas,  Cleopatra,  and  the  fragments  of  Galen
make  it  equal  to  three  cotjflae  (r=1.4tj66  pint  Eng-
lish); another  fragment  of  Galen  and  other  author-
ities make  it  eqnal  to  four  cotylae  (^1.9821  pint
English);  Rhemuins  Fanuius  and  another  frag-
mijut  of  Galen  make  it  eight  ootj/I(i«(=:  3.9641  pints
English). The  symbol  fur  xotf'f  is  x  *^^  X-

Cbodphfirl  (XoiT^dpoi).  "  The  Lihatiun-bearers."
The  title  of  a'play  of  Aeschylus  (q.  v.),  the  second
iu  the  Orcstean  trilogy,  and  named  from  the  fact
that  the  chorus  is  composed  of  captive  Trojan
women  who  are  charged  with  the  duty  of  briiiging
the  libations  to  the  tomb  of  Agamemnon.  The
subject  of  the  play  is  the  murder  of  Clytemnestra
and  Aegisthus  by  Orestes.

ChoeiUuB  [XoipOioK  and  XolptWos).  <1)  Au
Athenian  dramatist,  one  of  the  oldest  Attic  trage-
dians, who  appeared  as  a  writer  as  early  as  B.C.
530.  He  was  a  rival  of  E^ratinas,  Phryuichus,  and
Aeschylus.  His  favourite  line  seems  to  have  been
the  satyrio  drama,  iu  which  he  was  long  a  popular
writer.


(2)  A  Greek  epic  poet,  born  in  Samos  abont  b.c
470,  a  friend  of  Herodotus  and  afterwanis  uf  the
Spartan  Lysander,  He  lived  first  at  Athens  hihI
afterwards  at  the  court  of  King  Archelaiis  of  Mace-
donia, where  he  was  treated  with  great  coiuidrn-
tion,  aud  died  about  b.c.  400.  He  was  Ibe  first
epic  poet  wbo,  feeling  that  the  old  mythology  vas
exhausted,  ventured  to  treat  au  historical  subject
of  immediate  interest,  the  Persian  wars,  iu  an  epic
entitled  Peram.  According  to  one  account,  tLe
poem  was  read  in  the  schools  with  Homer.  TLe
few  fragments  that  remain  show  that  it  did  nni
lack  talent  aud  merit;  but  little  regard  was  paid
to  it  by  posterity. Ed.  by  Niike  (Leipzig,  1617).

(3)  Of  lasos  in  Caria.  This  Choerilus  was  also
nu  epic  poet,  who  acCiOmpaniecl  Aiexamler  tlie
Great.  Alexauder  promised  bim  a  gold-piece  far
every  good  verse  he  wrote  in  celebration  of  liin
achievements,  but  declared  that  he  would  mther
be  the  Thersites  of  Homer  than  the  Acbille»  of
Choerilus. Cf.  Hor.  A.  P.  357.

Choes  ixots). See  Diontsia.

Chonla  (Xtavia).  The  name  in  early  times  of
a  district  iu  the  south  of  Italy,  iuhabited  by  tbe
Chones,  an  Oeuotrian  people.  Choniu  appears  to
have  included  the  southeast  of  Lucanla  aud  tbe
whole  of  the  east  of  Bnittlum  as  far  as  the  proui-
outory  of  Zeiihyriiim.

Cboragic  Monument  of  Ifysicrataa  ^
Choregus.

Chcvaamll  (Xw/kut^uoi).  A  people  of  Sogdiana,
who  iuhabited  the  banks  and  islands  of  the  lower
course  of  the  Ozus.  They  were  a  branch  of  the
Sacae  orMassagetaa

Choraulea  (^opavXi^r). See  Chobus  ;  Tibickx.

CboroBia  (xof>7>>'<i)- See  Choregus.

Choregus  (xop^ydr) ;  in  Latin,  Cho/ngOM.  Tlie
person  who  supplied  a  properly  trained  cbomtt.

(1)  Grebk.  The  maintenance  of  a  cMongif
(xppTjyia)  was  one  of  the  regularly  recurring  sUb*
burdens  {iyKvicKuu  Xeirovpyitu}  at  Athens.  Origi-
nally the  chorus  consisted  of  all  the  inhabitants  in
the  State.  With  the  improvement  of  the  arts  of
music  aud  dancing,  the  distinction  of  spectatora
and  performers  arose ;  it  became  more  a  matter  of
art  to  sing  and  dance  iu  the  chorus;  paid  per-
formoi-s  were  employed ;  aud  at  last  the  dnttesof
this  branch  of  worship  devolved  npon  one  perwnr
selected  by  the  St«te  to  be  their  representative,
who  defrayed  all  the  expenses  which  were  incurred
on  the  different  occasions.  This  person  was  tbe
ohoregiia.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  managen  of  a
tribe  (firifit\Tpxii  <f>vXr)s)  to  which  a  ckorryia  had
come  round,  to  provide  a  person  to  perform  the
duties  of  it;  and  the  person  appointed  by  iheiu
had  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  choms  in  all  pUvK,
tragic  or  comic  {rpaytpioUt  icu/io»dotr)  and  satiri-
cal ;  and  of  the  lyric  choruses  of  men  aud  boy*.
the  pyrrkichiitaef  cyclian  dancers,  and  flute-playetv
^X^P'TY''"  ovSpaat,  or  aviputtMs  xopoir,  imilintois  x'^
pots,  wxippix^arais,  fcvicXiai  x^PV'  ivXijmif  ajftpatnf''
et-c.  He  had  firat  to  oo^lecc  nis  choras,  and  then
to  procure  a  teacher  (xopodiddtimiXof),  whom  ht
paid  for  instructing  the  ckoretitae.  The  chorep
drew  lots  for  the  first  choice  of  tcMohera;  for  a§
their  credit  depended  upou  the  soeeeas  of  tbeir
chorus  in  the  dramatic  or  lyric  contests,  it  was  of
great  importance  to  them  wfaoee  aasistance  they
secured. When  the  choms  was  compoBed  of  boys


CHOREGUS


886


CHORUS


the  cboregns  was  occnsiouiilly  allowed  to  press
children  fur  it,  in  case  their  parents  wore  refrac-
tory. The  choms  were  generally  luniiituineil,
during  the  period  of  their  iustrtictioD,  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  clioregiiB,  and  be  had  also  to  provide
such  meat  and  drink  as
would  contribute  to
strengthen  the  voice
of  the  singers.  The
expeuses  of  the  differ-
ent, choruses  are  given
by  Lysiaa  as  follows  :
Chonta  of  men,  3U  mi-
nae;  with  the  tripod,
aOniinae;  pyn-hiccbu-
nif>,  H  miuae  ;  pyrrhio
cboms  of  boys,  7  mi-
uae; tragic  chorus,  30
mioao;  comic,  16  mi-
nae ;  cyclian  chorns,
300  niinae.  According
to  Demosthenes,  the
chorus  of  flute-players
cost  a  great  deal  more
than  the  tragic  chorus.
Tbe  choregus  who  ex-
hihitetl  tbe  best  musi-
cal or  theatrical  enter-
tainment received  as
a  prize  a  tripod,  which
he  had  tbe  expense
of  consecrating,  and
sometimes  be  bad  also
to  baild  tbe  monu-
ment ou  which  it  was
placed.  There  was
a  whole  street  at
Athens  formed  by  the
line  of  these  tiipod-
temploB,  and  called
"The  Street  of  tbe
Tripods."  A  well-preserved  specimen  is  the  Cliora-
gicMouumeut  of  one  Lysicrates,  shown  in  theillus-
tratiou.  The  laws  of  Solon  prescribed  forty  as  the
proper  age  for  the  cboregns,  but  this  law  was  not
long  in  force. See  Chorus.

(2)  Roman.  The  cboragns  among  the  Romans
(Plant.  Trin.  iv.  2,  16)  was  a  lender  of  costumes
and  profwrties,  and  to  him  the  aedites  used  to  give
a  contract  for  supplying  the'  necessary  accessories
fur  a  play.  In  Plautns  {Cure.  iv.  1),  tbe  cboragns
delivers  a  sort  of  parabasis.  Under  the  Empire
the  procnrator  aummi  choragii,  appointed  probably
by  Domitiau,  was  a  regular  imperial  minister,
with  a  great  many  subordinates,  and  bad  charge
of  tbe  whole  supply  of  decoration,  machiuery,  and
costume  necessary  for  tbe  performance  of  tlie  vari-
ous shows  OS  well  in  the  amphitheatre  as  in  the
theatre.  A  subdivision  of  this  ofBco  was  the  ratio
omanentofuia,  which  had  special  reference  to  the
"  make-np  "  of  the  actors.  Under  Gordiau  we  find
tbe  name  bad  vanished.  Apuleius  {Apol.  i.  13)
ha<l  spoken  of  tbe  choragiutn  thifmeltcum ;  hut  the
fnuctiotiary  called  logi»ta  thymelae  now  took  the
place  of  the  procurator  »Hmmi  choragii.  In  the
fourth  century,  at  Rome  tbe  praefectus  urbi,  in
the  East  tbe  prae/ectua  praetorio,  and  in  Africa  the
proeonnl  looked  after  tbe  games.  In  the  fifth  cen-
tury, at  Rome,  Milan,  and  Carthage,  we  find  this
done  by  trihuni  voluptatum.

ClicnlBODtas  {;^iB/)i{bvr«r). "Separators." A


name  given  to  such  of  tbe  ancient  scholars  and
critics  as  held  the  belief  that  the  lliatl  and
Odyssey  of  lloiner  were  written  by  different  au-
thors. Tbe  names  of  only  two  of  these  critics —
Xenon  and  Hellauicus — have  come  down  to  ue.
See  HoMERUS.

ChoTob&tes  {jf^apo^an^s).  An  instrument  for
determining  the  ulope  of  an  aqueduct  and  tbe
levels  of  the  country  through  which  it  was  to  pass.
From  tbe  description  given  of  it  by  Vitruvius,  it
appears  to  have  differed  but  very  slightly  from  a
common  carpenter's  level,  wbiclV  consists  of  a
straight  rule  supporting  a  perpendicular  piec4>,
against  which  bangs  a  plumb-line.  Tbe  chwo-
fMitea  bad  two  perpendiculars  and  plumb-lines,  one
at  each  end,  instead  of  a  single  one  in  the  middle
(Vitruv.  viii.  5, 1).

ChoniB  (  xopos ).  The  word  ^^opor  in  Grrkk
meant  a  nnmber  of  persons  who  performed  songs
and  dances  at  religious  festivals.  When  tbe
drama  at  Athens  was  developed  from,  the  ditby-
rambic  choruses,  tbe  chorus  was  retained  as  the
chief  element  in  tbe  Dionysiac  festival.  With
the  old  dramatists  the  cboral  songs  and  dances
much  preponderated  over  the  action  proper.  As
the  form  of  tbe  drama  developed,  the  sphere  of
tbe  chorus  was  gradually  limite<1,  so  that  it  took
the  comparatively  subordinate  position  which  it
occupies  in  the  extant  tragedies  and  comedies.
The  function  of  tbe  chorus  represented  by  its
leader  was  to  act  as  an  ideal  public,  more  or  less
connected  with  tbe  drajnatia  peraonae.  It  might
cousist  of  old  men  and  women  or  of  maidens.  It
took  an  interest  in  tbe  occurrences  of  the  drama,
watched  the  action  with  quiet  sympathy,  and
sometimes  interfered — if  not  to  act,  at  least  to  ad-
vise, comfort,  exhort,  or  give  warning.  At  the
critical  points  of  tbe  action,  it  performed  long
lyrical  pieces  with  enitable  actioi^  of  dance  and
gesture.  In  tbe  better  times  of  tbe  drama  these
songs  stood  in  close  connection  with  the  action  ;
but  even  in  Euripides  this  connection  is  some-
times loose,  and  with  the  later  tragedians,  after
tbe  time  of  Agathon,  the  choral  performance  sank
to  a  mere  intermetxo.  The  style  of  the  chorus  was
distinguished  from  that  of  tbe  dialogue  partly  by
its  complex  lyrical  form,  partly  by  its  language,
in  which  it  adopted  a  mixture  of  Attic  and  Doric
forms.  Tbe  proper  place  of  the  chorus  was  on
the  orchestra,  on  different  parta  of  which,  after
a  solemn  march,  it  remaineil  nntil  the  end  of
the  piece,  drawn  up,  while  standing,  in  a  square.
During  the  action  it  seldom  loft  the  orchestra  to
reappear,  and  it  was  quite  exceptional  for  it  to
appear  on  tbe  stage.  As  tbe  performauce  went
ou,  the  chorus  would  change  its  place  ou  the  or-
chestra; as  the  piece  required,  it  would  divide
into  semi-choruses  and  perform  a  variety  of  artis-
tic movements  and  dances.  Tbe  name  €fifii\€ta
was  given  to  tbe  tragic  dance,  which,  though  not
lacking  in  animation,  had  a  solemn  and  measured
character.  The  comedy  had  its  burlesque  and  of-
ten indecent  performance  called  K6p6a$ ;  the  sa-
tyric  drama  its  Hkhhhs,  representing  the  wanton
movements  of  satyrs.  The  songs  of  tbe  choruses,
too,  had  their  special  names.  The  first  ode  per-
formed by  the  entire  body  was  called  irdpohot ;
the  pieces  intervening  between  tbe  parts  of  tbe
play,  trra<rifui;  the  songs  of  mourning,  in  which
the  chorus  took  part  with  tbe  actors,  KOftfioi The


CHORUS


SM


CHRYSKLKPHAirriNA


nnmbfir  of  tUo  members  (j^ofirurat)  wu,  iu  trage-
dios,  ui'igiuolly  twelve,  niid  uftor  t^pliocLea  fiftvcu.
Thin  WHS  |irobal>ly  tllL'  uiiiuber  nllowed  in  Ibe  mi-
tyrio  drama;  the  oborus  ia  tbe  Old  L'ouieily  uum~
bered  tweuty-four.

Tbe  bnsiueas  nf  gettins  tbe  nieiubers  of  tbe
cborus  tuxetlicr.  iiujiuj,'  tliDm,  iiiuiutuiuiug  ttieia
duriug  tbu  tluiQ  uf  pmcttcv,  »iid  geuurutly  <;iiui[>-
pitig  tUein  for  jMii-foriuaiii.'**,  wan  n-gardfU  an  »
Xtirnvfiyiaf  or  public  Horvice,  and  devolved  ou  u
WBAllh}-  priv'Ato  citi/(^ii  called  ii  )(Qp^y^t,  to  wliurn
it  WOM  a  iiiatt«r  u(  cousidc'i-nblu  truublu  uud  ex-
IMiisf.  Wo  know  fruui  iudivtdiinl  iuettaiicca  tliat
tbe  n»at  of  a  trngic  chorus  rnigbt  run  up  to
tbiity  luiuao  [about  ^t>)r  of  a  coiuic  cUorua  to
Bixt«eu  miiiae  (about  S'^'>1.  If  viclorious,  tlie
fhoregut  recviveil  a  orowu  nud  n  lliiely  AvrougUt
tripcM].  TliiN  hi>  eithfr  deiIiriil*Nl,  with  »ti  iiifiori[>-
tioii,  to  m>nie  deity  on  »  iiiPinoruil  (if  h'lH  triiunpli,
or  H*!t  up  oil  n  innrble  Klriii^tun^  luijlt  for  tbe  piir-
|)OM^  til  till*  foni)  of  n  ti-niple,  iu  a  strtH^t  iiaim^d
tin*  8ln'i:t  of  Trip4Mls,  froiu  thr  uuuiIhm-  of  tlH-se
luiMiiiiueiitH  \vliit:l)  n'i-n>  eriMrted  tlu-re.  Otu-  of
tbi-M:  lueinorialp,  ]>ut  up  by  u  eurtatii  Lyi^irruten
ill  ii.r.  ItX'j,  ftlill  reiniuiLs.  (See  C'lioitKUtrs.)  After
tbe  rcloponnesimi  War,  the  prosperity  of  Alhoas
doelinod  so  much  timl  it  was  oftou  difficult  to
find  a  BUllirient  iiiiiuber  of  choregi  to  xupply  the
fejitivals.  The  Stute,  tbcrefoit',  had  to  take  the
business  npoti  itself.  Hut  many  choruses  came  to
ail  ead  altogether.  Tlu^i  was  the  caw  with  the
oomic  rhnniti  hi  tlii>  later  yeiini  of  AiiiitapUaneH ;
and  the  p<iet8  of  thi<  Middle  aud  New  Couiedy  ac-
corvliiigly  droppf-d  the  elioriift.  Thin  exphtiiia  tJio
face  that  then*  ik  nn  jiniper  ehoruK  iu  the  Ratnan
comedy,  wbiuli  i>t  au  iiuitatiou  of  the  Neiv  Comedjr
of  rbv  lJre<eks.  Iu  thoir  tragodies,  however,  iml-
t»t4Hl  fi-oni  (Ireck  origiiml*),  the  Kouiuus  retained
Ihe  chorus.  wUicli,  as  the  Koumu  ibeaire  had  uo
orchestra,  wa*t  placed  ou  the  ittagt',  aud  an  a  rule
IMTfonned  iK'twi-eu  the  octtt.  but  aometiuies  dur-
ing the  iwrfonuaiice  ns  well. Sw  Uhama;  Thka-

TBUM.

The  Roman  ohorus,  iu  faet,  belonged  e^iieoiuliy
to  Xhn  crepiiluttie — i.  e.  the  tragediett  uiotlclted  on
HOd  derived  from  the  fireek  oubh;  but  it  also  ap-
peiini  in  the  nattuiiiil  tragedy  of  Iho  Homans.  the
jinu-Uitntae,  Kvru  tli<iUf|;li  Diuiuude^  doclaruii  that
tlie  limnuu  comedy  had  no  chi)ruM.  yet  this  is  only
true  genurully,  for  tliere  is  an  iiudoubtod  chorus  of
fi»lieriiiou  in  tbe  Ruden*  of  Plautiis.  It  was  prob-
ably tlie  whole  company  of  artons  yentt-rra,  ijr^),
uot  acborn!»,whicli  iwidlhC'I'Irtudite"  Milh  which
comeilivrt  end.  Then>  apjiear  to  have  been  ctio-
niw*  in  tln'  fnint/itniiHH*  and  iu  llie  pyrrhiAii  of  the
Eu)|iire,  TIm-iv  ^van  uo  tix<sl  uwiwXtvr  uf  rkoren tat ,
Ail  that  part  of  the  theatre  which  waa  the  Creek
oirheAtra  wa(<  given  up  to  the  a|ieetatora  at  Koine,
tbe  chorUK  had  to  mx-npy  the  htagc  (Vitrnv.  v.  ti,
2).  Tbo  Homtiu  choniN  took  more  part  in  the  ae-
tiiin  of  the  drama  llmii  did  the  tinx'k  chonm  (llor.
Ar»  I\ftt.  193).  It  wa»  led  by  a  ntagUttr  fhori,  who
hail  hi«t  place  in  Ihe  middle  of  the  chonis.  aud  so
wan  called  me^'''fuinn  (Pliit.  ICpint.  il.  U,  6).  The
muxicnl  accouipuniuient  w:i>  played  by  a  eho-
nitde*  ou  a  double  tlnle.  lletwceu  the  acta  tbe
ehonta  (probably  iu  trageily>  uud  Ihe  tibioen  (in
cotuedy)  uaed  to  aiug  or  play  iDouatus,  At\t.  ad
Atidritun);  and  llorae*  {Art  l^^t.  1S*4>  esitecially
urges  that  tbe  Mibjeet  of  tht<  songs  sLonld  be
pertiueiil  to  ihc  action  of  the  drama. The  chorus


iras  cotnpoBcd  of  men  who  \YerQ  professtoaala  (i
tijites\,  and  who  were  fur  the  mosl  part  sla
Aa  the  ch(>rn!t  of  the  Itumau^t  twoietiuiea  re|
seuttid  women,  they  mu»l  have  worn  maaka.  They
were  probably  dnwscd  afl*r  the  uiauuer  of  tbe
Orecka,  aud  the  dlT«ae«  ap|>eur  to  have  been  rery
bplendid,  lis  was  the  whole  pruduclion  of  plays  at
the  eud  of  the  Republic  and  during  im|wrial  tiujva
— ''■  S-  purple  ohlaniydns  w«n>  wanlvd  for  a  cbuni&,^
of  Hohlieix,  aa  is  ttdd  in  a  well-kuowD  alary  of  Lu — .
cullub  (Hor.  EpUf.  i.  6,  40).

Tlie  literature  un  the  subject  of  the  ohona  t^
very  cxt«QHivu.  The  mottt  important  worka  an
B.  Arnold,  art.  "Chor"  iu  Haumeiater's  Ik^kmSt
tics liastischen  AUtrthumr,  pp. It^^U -^1 ;  Sommorhrud
:icatnica :  Mtiff.  Me  rhuritcke  TVcAaut  des  ^/thoife
R.  Arnoldt,  JJie  eharitehe  Tecknik  de*  Euripidri:
CaKtetH  in  r>areuiberg  uud  Saglio,  art.  "Chorus
A.  Mllllcr,  liie  tfiierJiiitriien  Tiuhnauiherlh&mer.  \tx  tz,
two  laHl  works  full  rpfereiire  is  madt!  to  th<*  l>
mcrou»  Works  on  the  mibject.  See  abwi  O.  It.  i
beck,  ttit  romuf/i^  Tiog^'idic  im  SCeilaUer  der  W^*^.*^  »
tiU7,  IKU  full. ;  aud  thu  articles  t'OMoEDU  ;  Urrij-^"
RAMBis;  Drama;  Tjieatri^m:  Trac:oedia.

Chronitim  Mare.  A  uame  applied  by  the  t^f^.
clcuts  to  the  Frozen  Occau.  The  Cinibri,  accur«t.
ing  to  Pliuy  (iv.  1^),  called  it  Morimnnisa — i.  ^
"the  dea<l  uea."

Chrouogram.  A  devica  of  the  Eoniana  of  cIm
later  Empiif,  liy  which  in  au  iuacriptiou  tliL-  lettsn
that  form  thi-  lunuerals  to  denote  its  dulf  wt-rs
written  larger  than  the  rwt 8ee  Hilton,  CA/vjm*-

Chrouoloe^ia  {xpovoKtyyia). See  CALU-vnARIf^l

Chryaa  (.\pt<ra).  A  city  on  the  coast  of  tb«
Tmad,  iiearTlieWt,  with  a  l«inpltt  of  Apollo  Snii^'
theiLt;  celebrated  by  Homer.

Chtysanthlua  ( XpwrnvAof  )i  An  cj^di^-IJc  pliilo*'
opher  i>r  t«itriiiii ;  made  higb-priiMt  of  Lyilia  hy  t  *^
em|H:ror  Jidian,  aud  aupposcd  to  iMMMsa  a  |io«r*'*
of  COD  vei-Alug  with  Che  gods  aud  of  predictiDg  fs-*-^
urc  eventtt

Chryaaor  IX^txrdw^l.  Son  of  PiiseidoQ  aud  1^^*"
duM,  brother  of  I'egasus.  aud  father  of  Ihr  llu^^'*'
bended  giant  Oeryon  and  Kcbidua  by  the  oce^*-*
nymph  Callirrhoi>.

Chryaa&rena  i  \pvtranp«vt,  "  Of  the  Oi>lil«^^"'
Swonl").  A  aumnnic  of  Zeus,  from  biit  leiajile  *'
Stratouic<5  iu  Caria.  Th«rc  was  a  political  unft*"*
of  ccrtoiu  Cnrtau  8lates.  which  held  its  mcetit***
bore,  uuder  the  name  of  Chrysaorium.  Tli  «^
States  had  Tutc«  in  proportion  to  the  uumber  **
towns  they  posscaaed.

ChryaeiafX^io-f/iO. Daughter  of  Chry»iw,jirft*"*
of  AiMillu  ut  L'liry»<^,  aud  ^lkeu  priitoner  by  AchLl'"
lit  tlie  capluif  of  Lyrnea«iu  or tha  ny{io]ilaci*'i
Thebes. In  the  distribiilion  of  the  boi>ty  ^e  -^ffv
given  to  Agameuiuou. Her  fatlitT  ChryM:»cOBa0  ^
the  caiup  of  llie  Gitickii  to  solicit  her  rattstitn.  but  W**
repiilwd  by  Agamemnon  with  Imrsh  wonU. Tl****"
nimii  Apollo  ^ent  a  plague  iuto  Ihe  camp  uf  <^
Grcoks.  aud  Agamemuou  was  obliged  to  rt»l">n^
hor  to  her  father  t^v  appease  tbe  auger  of  tlir  }^"'
Her  proper  uaiuo  was  Aalyuomik See  AcillUJ^'
TiioJAX  War.

Chryaelephantina  (sc.  oyaXfiara).  TliU  Um,
though  ivstin^  ou  no  Ireticr  authorily  tliJiii  tint
of  the  Scholiast  ou  Aristophanes  iEtf.  \\&i),  ^  ""*
custoiuarily  used  to  denote  tlioae  gold  and  ivMf'


CHKVSENOETA


S07


CHltYSULURAS


»


itttun  which  w«ra  the  bigbuAt  alUiiimentn  of
Gmeli  piMttu  Kii.

XIm  iim  of  iboM  Ofwtlr  mat^rialn  nccms  to  hiivo

"oenu  origiuuUy  a  tie %* clop iiiritt  uf  tlw  uurly  art  uf

WL>cKl-cftnriug. Tho lirHt iu-list<t wtin pnxluccd

ettryaelcpbiuitine  Btuttioit  wore  piipils  of  iJiiMMMUia

ind  SeylUs,  tbo  CrelAii  "UacdnliiU.'* Thauj[;li  \vc

be«r  of  110  sach  works  Ity  these  iniut«ni  thnnw^lvrs,

they  n«ediroT7  inuoiijunction  with  ebony  {FniiHiin.

ii.  33.5);  by  gibliug  thu  wood.  ■  quite  cutinium

proceed i tig,  the  transition  would  bii  nmdc. Thu

ap|>ro|iri*tcn«.'iui  of  thu  two  nmtoriuU  wotihl  t1iL<u

sngi^ut  the  mtriction  uf  tho  ivory  t«i  uiidv  purlM,

of  Kold  to  droiKiry,  ctr.,  a  core  "f  wood  utiH  nndfr-

]f  iifg  the  whoti>. Huch,  )irob.ibly.  w^re  the  woibH

of Dorytdiduii,  TbooclL'A,  PoulaK,  iind  other  nnUlH

of  tl>«  vu-lier  portion  of  the  nixth  century  it.c. Wo

do uot  hear  uf  many  chryselephantine  works  of

ituportanco  during  the  lalo  arobaic  or  traimitiouat

pericMl. Tho  couHlruction  of  colossal  tignres,  sncb

1  U«  Olymidan  Zeus  and  tbc  Atbcut^  I'artheuos  of

'hi<li:ui,  or  tbo  Argtvc  Hor^  of  Polyclctus,  c»u  have

.ad little in  conuiion  with  iiirr*^  wihnI  •  curving,

or rh<rMt,  of  coiir>i^,  a  mo*<t  itlulHir»tK internal

ft-anipwork  wa«  iiect«s«ry. St*  Coi^ssrs.

CbryBCodfita  (j^pwrivitray.  Mi'Cu]  dbhcA  (laucea)

iiBe«l  by  ibe  Kuiunus  for  iwrviu^  n|)  fuod  at  table.

M»riiNl  ujeutious  thi'oi  several  times  {ii.  4^;  ii. '>3;

Ti.34;  XI.  3»;  xiv.  117)  as  m  use  by  tbc  woullby,  and
1  •iMHiii.lly  nt'lioes  mullet  at  beiug  served  upon  tboiu.

The  ilorivation  of  tbt*  word  and  tbc  cpiihot  .)f«r«
Hpp1i(*tl  to  them  by  Martial  render  it  probable  that
thra«-  (limbee  wore  uiado  of  silver,  :iud  were  a<bjrued
(pnjliftWy  on  the  lini)  with  ornaments  in  relief,
vivught  In  f^ld  and  altacbetl  by  means  of  sidder-
^DS  or  riveting.

Chiyies  (Xpva-Tfn). See  ClllcYSKlH.

Chryaippus  (Xf/i^criinTof). \\)  A  sou  of  Pclops,

«»rriy.l  off  by  Laiiw  (Ai»olli>d.  iii.  5.  t>). Tbis  i:ir-

eitiu4i]||ice  bocuoic  a  theme  with  many  aricient  writ-

«■*»,  :nit]  hi>ur4*  the  story  usNomed  dillrrout  shaiMw,

^'conlitigtutbefiiury  oftbiMe  whtihaiidbtl  it.  Tbe

death  of  Cliry»i|)pns  waa  also  re>latcd  in  different

ways. Acoonling  tn  the  coninion  iiecount,  he  was

*iaiuby  Atreus, at  the  iitsligation  of  hiH  step>iui>th'

•"f-  Hi]>|Ht<Uuiia. (Ooa-iuU  Heyno  iitl  he.). (2)  A

Sloic  iiliitnnojdier  of  Soli  in  Cilicia  Cnninestris. He

"*eO  |,i^  ^v^t(leltce  iit  Athene,  a'lil  iK-cann;  a  dis-

cifle  n(  Cliuiitbcjt,  the  succeitsor  of  Zeno. lie  was

^UUilly  (liKtingiiinhMl  fi>r  uutural  abilities  and  in-

diutrjr,  i^bluni  sniveling  a  day  to  elapse  witliout

*ritui^  Sou  ItuM. He  wnitfi  several  liiiudred  vol-

''an»,nf  whitfb  three  liiindied  were  on  It.gical  sub-

i**t*T  I'Ul  ill  all  be  bornnved  largely  from  otb^ra.

""  NuJiitalned,  wtlh  the  Hloics  in  geui^nd,  that  tliu

•^'''lil  ir»»  (Jiwl,  or  a  nnivei^il  etruMiou  of  lii.^  spirit.

""d  Uun  the  »u)H-rior  part  of  tbis  hpiril,  which  con-

*i»M  iu  tnind  and  n-asoii.  was  lln<  eoninioii  nalnre

Jlf  Ihlupj,  containing  the  wholu  ami  every  piut

"^■"^iKoct  he  »|M_>nlcH  of  (iod  as  the  power  of  fiiti>

1  lljf  neee««iry  ebnin  of  eveutK;  sometimes  be

'Miiuj  fire;  und  wmietimes  be  deilii"**  tb«  fluid

'*"*i>f  iiKtnn.',  as  wnlcr  and  air;  and  ugiiin,  the

'^u.  MM),  mtKin,  and  sttiiN,  and  the  universe  in

"*'i  tlin«e are  comptvbeudcd,  ami even those

^7'*  who  have  obtained imauirtulily. He was

'  fi'iid  of  the  figure  mr'Utn  in  arguing,  which  is

ecilled  by  rerwius  '*the  heap  of  <.'hry!«ippns.*'

^■litruunKoabonudMl  more  in  carious  subtleties

US  than  in  solid  arguments. In


disputation,  iu  which  ho  s^tcut  the  grealent  part
of  bis  life,  he  disouvered  a  degree  of  promptitude
and  confidence  wbicb  approached  tuwaribt  atnlac-
ity.  He  often  said  to  bis  pieceptiir.  "titve  me  duo
triues,  and  1  will  Und  urgnments  to  support  tlincn."
It  was  a  siugnlur  proof  uf  his  haughty  iipirit  that
when  a  certain  }>erson  asketl  him  what  preci'ptor
hfi  Avould  ailvim^  bun  to  <!ho<we  for  liis  son,  bo  said,
"Me;  for  if  I  tbongbt  any  philosopher  excelled
me,  I  would  myself  beoonie  his  pupil,''  With  no
much  contempt  tlid  be  bK>k  down  upon  the  dis-
tiuetiuus  of  rank  that  be  would  never,  as  other
pbiluMopbersdid,  pay  bis  ctmrt  to  princes  or  great
men,  by  di.-dicutiug  to  thcju  auy  of  his  writiuga.
The  velienienee  nnd  arrogance  with'  which  he  sujl*
l»ortetl  hU  tenets  created  him  many  uilverNariMi,
particularly  iu  the  Academio  uuil  Epicurean  MCta.
Even  bts  friends  of  the  Stole  acbool  ooniplained
that,  in  the  warmth  of  dispute,  while  be  was  at-
teuijitiug  to  load  his  adversary  with  the  reproach
of  obscurity  and  Hbsnrdity,  his  own  ingenuity  oflea
failed  biiu,  ami  li'e  a<b)pt«d  such  nunsnnl  and  illog-
ical  modes  ul*  reasoning  as  guvc  his  opiM>iieiits  great
wlvantagM  over  biin.  It  wan  alwi  a  eoiinunu  jirac-
lic'it  with  CbryfiippnM, at  dilTerent  tJn.keN,u>  lake  the
oppubite  sides  of  the  same  iiucsiiou,  and  thus  fur-
nish bis  antagonists  with  weapons  wbieh  luight
easily  be  turned,  as  oocaaion  offered,  agaiuHt  him-
SL-IC  Carneades,  who  was  oue  of  his  most  able  and
skilful  advL-rsarics,  fie<inently  availwl  liiiuself  of
tbia  eircumslanrc,  a»d  n>futed  Clirysippus  by  con-
victing him  of  iuL'onsisteney.  Of  his  wriliugn
(he  is  Kiiid  to  have  ]>nblbdied  700  works  in  all)
nnlbiug  nMiiains.  except  a  few  extniotN  wbieb  am
preserved  in  the  works  uf  Cicero.  PI  iiturch,  Seneca,
and  Aulus  Uetliiut.  These  fragmcutfl  wutti  colloci-
e<l  und  edited  by  IVterHcu  in  l(*i7.  He  died  iu  tbo
14:M  Olymiiiad.  n.r.MOH,  at  Ibe  iige  of  eigbty-tbrM.
A  statue  was  erected  to  his  memory  by  I'Uiloiny.
t^ee  the  uceount  iu  Zeller'b  •S'foica,  EpKHttani,  aud
fktplia  (Kiig.  truuB.  London,  1H70).
Chrysofupldes. See  AftrtViufii'mEa.

Cbryaoc^nu.  "TlieGoblen  Horn";  originally
the  proinontciry  upon  wliicli  ihe  city  of  Constanti-
nople (Ilyzantiiiuil  wan  built. Hie  Ilv/AN11I!H.

ChiyaogOnuB,  1-.  Ciut\Ki.lls.  A  favmiiile  friwd-
nian  of  Sulla,  and  a  man  of  protligute  character.
He  was  Ibe  falhU  aecuset'  of  Hex.  Koscius,  whom
Cicero  defeiidi-d,  B.C.  HO.

ChiysoloraB,  Manl'HL.  A  Greek  sebobir  who
is  commonly  regarded  us  having  Ix^en  the  first  to
reiutroduccOreek  llteratunMUto  Italy,  in  Che  bmr-
teeiith  century.  A  native  of  Constantinople,  be
was  (WMit  by  llie  Greek  emperor  John  rulaeologua
to  Itnly  and  England,  in  order  to  MH:k  aid  ngninsl
tlie  Tnrkf*.  This  mission,  wbicb  was  about  Ihu
yeiir  KKMI-i^l,  iintdo  Cbrysoloras  known  to  many
iiilliK-nrial  Ilnliaus;  so  that  when,  iu  VAU,  be  maile
his  home  iu  Flor«>nce  as  a  tejicber  of  Greek,  he  was
received  with  much  consideration.  I'oggio  Urau-
eiotiid,  Leonanlo  nriinn,  Kilfll'o,  Gnnriiio  liuarinif
nod  many  otber  scliidiii's  wb»>»o  names  ai"  ansoct-
iited  with  the  Henaii^iuce,  were  pupils  of  Chryso-
lorus,  who  later  engaged  in  tlie  imblti-  service  under
the  popes  (irefjory  \I1.  and  .lobii  Will,  lly  order
of  the  latter,  he  attended  the  Council  of  Coustauce,
where  he  diwi,  April  15th,  1415.  Two  of  bis  works
have  been  j'tlitted  :  ilie  'EputTTf^artt.  for  some  tiiue
the  only  Greek  gmniuiar  used  in  Western  Europe;
and  Epiitiotae  HL  tie  ComjHttalione  FVrrria  el  .Vora«


CHRySOPOUS


888


aBOTUtTM


ttnmlir. H  tltllllIM^r  of  utlion,  liowft%-rr,  tttill  cxint
ii> MS. Him MJii, IniiANNtcs (;ilHYsoijt)iiA.s, wiui

CtuysopJSliB  (  X/jiifTofToXic  >.  Now  Scutari ;  k
fiiiiiliL-il  i>luou  uii  the  Uo(>)K>riiti,  oppi>sito  tu  Ity/aii-
tiiim,  nt  (lie  spul  where  tlie  UuBpui-iis  vrsut  gtiiiur-
b11^  citHutetl. It  was  origiDally  the  port  uf  Cbal-

OCllull.

Chrysoatdmua  (XpLWiirrro^oc)  (St.  Jolin).  An
eniiiii'iti  FiiiliiT  of  tlic  Clim-rli.  liom  nf  »  iiiilil«
fauiilr  »t  Aiitioeli,  A.U.  347.  His  fatliL'i'M  iiiuiii!
WDM  ^mmiihIiik,  und  tbc  Harnamo  tif  I'liryHtisioin.or
"guliU'U  nwittb,"  nhtniniMl  by  the  «iu,  was  given
to  bim  on  lun^oiirit  of  bis  eloQiiouce.  He  wan  bred
to  tbe  bur,  Utit  r]iittliMl  it  for  an  iiscetic  lite:  Urst,
wiib  R  nintik  on  ii  iiiounlaiu  near  Aiitioch,  au<L
tlieii  ill  a  cnvM  by  birimtlf.  He  n?ianined  in  this
rotiroiiient  six  ywn-H,  wlmn  be  retnrnwl  to  Aiiliocb,
and,  beiii^  nnlaiiinl,  lH-4-:iniu  ho  cplebnitdl  for  bis
tali'iits  jL8  a  |ir<!itr1ii>r  lb.'tt,<ni  tbt;  iltuitb  of  Xect-a-
riiiH,  i>nrri.irtTli  of  ('(iiiHtantlr)0|ilit,  b^  wiut  cliosun
to  »ii])pl,Y  biH  pluco.  On  obtiuuitig  tbis  prefer-
ment, wbich  he  wry  luin-jUiugly  acc«pttid,  Im  acted
with  great  vigour  and  austerity  in  tbo  ruform  of
Abuaes,  anil  oxbibittsl  ull  tUe  niidtakcu  nutioiiA  of
tbe  (lay  in  roj^ard  to  celiUicy  nnit  the  niiinaittiulife.
He  altto  persecuted  (he  pi^an^  nud  betvtica  with
gmki  zeal,  aud  eouj^ht  to  extend  bis  upiscopal
power  with  Hiicb  nnreiHittin^  anioiir  that  ho  in-
volv*-d  liitoself  in  a  ■[itarnd  with  Thfopbilns,  bitdi-
op  of  Ah'xiiiidrin,  who  «ii,)oye<l  th<^  palnMiass  of
IbB  i*mpn))w  Kn4U>xia;  wbiob  i^Liurre]  furltfil  in  Win
^nnal  ikjKMtitiun  liy  u  synod  helil  iit  C'halcedon,
A.l>.  MKl.  H«  was,  howt:%Tr,  no  popular  in  Con»t»n-
tiiiopbi  that  n  formiditliltt  inKiiirt'clion  tnisued.  and
tile  eiuprcv*  hyrnelf  interfrrcd  fur  hi.i  return.  Tow-
ftrda  the  end  of  the  t«.inie  year,  uwin^;  to  bia  zeal
relative  to  a  statue  of  Kndoxln.  plaued  ntrnr  tbo
great  cbnrch,  and  cnnning  a  di*>tnrlmnce  of  pnlilic
worsliipt  all  bis  tronhltts  were  renoweil.  If  1nn>,
that  in  <inu  of  bit  Kcnnons  lb»  rnijircMi  wnif  roni-
pared  by  him  to  Ht-nnliaw,  who  n«>kefl  tbo  bead  »>f
Jobii  in  a  chari;er,  the  uiitft-r  of  Kinlo.^in  wam  not
illti));r(hi'r  niijiiKlilialiJM.  Tlu>  vuiiM><)neni:e  uf  bt*r
n»entnient  Wjut  the  aMM-iubling  of  another  synod.
And  iu  A. I).  4U4  tbn  pntriarvh  svaa  again  depuaed
and  wilt  into  exile.  Tbc  place  of  bta  1>ani!ibnit>ut
was  Cnrri.snA,  »  bnnOy  town  atnong  the  ridgva  of
Muniit  Taiirns,  tin  tbo  contlnes  of  Cappadocia  and
Cilicia.  Ho  MiHljiincil  hintwlf  with  mnub  forti-
tailo;  but  having,  by  nie;uiH  of  Inn  f;reat  iullneiiee
and  many  aflherrnte,  [irtKiirftl  the  iotcrcessioii  of
lliu  Weittern  einiM^ror,  HntntiiiiM,  with  his  brother
An'adiint.  he  wim  onleit-tl  In  In*  reuit>v«il  Htill  far-
ther finnn  tbe:  capital,  anil  died  on  the  jonrney  nl
Cuuiana  in  Fontna.  A-t).  4U7.  at  the  u^u  of  sixty.
Upiidon  wuH  ninrb  dirideit  in  regnnl  to  hi»  merits
for  some  tinn-  after  bis  death,  hnt  at  length  hit*
partisans  prev.iited,  and  thirty  years  ftxini  bis  de-
eeaae  liv  wiw  reniovnl  fioin  his  plaoe  of  inteniient
aa  n  saint,  and  bin  miuiins  were  mot  iu  prooMsion
by  tbe  cniiwnir  Th<MHhipiin)  II.,  on  their  reoioval
fmni  the  pbiee  of  ht!t  ori);irml  intfrtnrnt  to  Con-
atjintinople.  The  Knnniii  Chiirvb  cclebratea  8L.
CbrvHOfkioin  <ni  the  VTtb  of  .hinnary;  tbo  Urook
Clinreh,  on  the  Utb  uf  Noveiiibor.

('hrvNiiKtoni  wa.'*  a  volnnitnoiis  writer,  hnt  wore
elMpient  than  either  learned  or  acute.  Allbotif*h
fklling  t«l)ort  of  Attic  purity,  his  style  is  free,  tM>pi-
ouH,  and  uualTectciU  and  his  diutiuu  often  glowiu};


and  elevated.  Ttie  niimerons  treat i«ea
by  which  be  cbielty  Ruined  his  repntatiol
onrioiiM  for  the  inforuiaiion  they  coiita
cuiitonin  and  tuanuers  of  the  times,  ns  u
hi.H  declaniatiun  af^atiiHt  prevailing  vicai
MvH.  Tilts  first  eiitirt'  fin>ek  edition  of  I
of  CbiyHuntoni  woh  that  of  Sir  Heury  1
Eton,  in  *i  voI.k.  foHu  (ltU:t);  bnt  thai  oC
eon,  PariH,  with  annotatioim  and  his  lifl
folio  (171H-38,  reprint»-d  by  tbc  AbW  Mig
Ir^UI),  in  by  far  the  muxt  complete.  Sai
homilies  will  ho  found  tratululoil  iu  tl
Librnnj  of  the  Fntherti.  Tlio  iwuler  i*
nliw),  to  the  work  of  Neaniler,  trnnHhit«i
pletou  (It^t*?!),  and  to  Newman's  l{i*titri/^
(If^y);  .Stephens,  A7.  Chry«>sfom :  IIU>
Timfj>  ( l!fl2j ;  Thierry,  Chrj/mntotn  rt  Th
KwLixir- ('M  ed.  li?74l;  and  Busk,  Lifr  II
or  tit.  Ch  rymmfom  { 18«>).

ChryaotbSmia  (\^jv<rude^ir>  (1)  A  d«
Aflame  till  I  on  and  Clytaemne^tra.  (*2)  i
who  tii-st  olitained  tbe  [KXilical  prize  at  1
an  Kaincs.

ChryeuB  (j^^iMroOr). Soe  ACKtTU.

Chthonia  [\0fw'ui).  (1)  Daogbtor  of  1
lis  of  Athens,  who  was  saohlieed  by  t
to  gain  tbo  victory  orcr  the  men  of
(See  Krecuthkl'S.)  (9)  An  epithet  uC
(q.  V.J,

Chthonia  {j^Boina). A  feslivnl  oele

Ilenuion^  in  honour  of  Dcuietor,  saniaim
nia.  A  description  nf  it  is  given  by  Paw
3&,  {  4,  etc.),  and  it  is  also  inentioiio<l  hy  j

Chthonian  Ooda  {6fot  x^iifioi,  from  ^^
earth").  The  deities  who  rule  under  I
or  who  are  connected  with  the  lower
ILuIes,  riuto,  rersephon^,  Demcter,  DiaD
cntt',  and  Hermes.

Cbytra  {xvrpft\.  An  earthen  vusacl  foi
use,  e.<i|>ccially  for  cooking.  It  won  ordli
tinpalnted.  aud  lionce  all  nnprofitabte  U
deMcribotl  hy  the  proverb  jfyrpu*  iroMu
paint  a  cliytra."  A  very  remarkable  Ufl
vesseU  of  earthenware  anionji;  the  Gree
put  iiifunU  into  tlicm  to  lie  exposeil
H'tn.  IIHH).  llunoc  tbe  exiMwuPo  of  chi
calleil  ty)(VTpi(fiv.  and  the  misenible  wc
practisfil  it,  ('yjjirrpitrr^'oj.

ChytriiXurpoi,  "Kea.ttof  PotJt").  The
of  the  Autbebtcrta. Sttc  UlONYtUA.

ChytrdpuB  (^vr/xm^vt). A  stand,  on  1
often  piiice4l the  x^'^t^''  ***  '^t'  heat-
ed. Sec  Chitra. The  name  is  also
given  to  a  j^tV^i  with  legs.

CibUao.  A  town  of  Lower  I'an-
nonia,  situated  on  the  Saras,  about
tlfly  miles  from  Sinuiuui,  and  abont
one  hnndn-d  iVoui  the  contlitetice
of  tbe  Savns  :tiid  the  iMnnbe.  It  wait  fi
the  duleat  of  Licinios  by  Cviustautine,  a.I
WAS  aUo  the  birthplace  of  Omtiun.

Ciboriam  (vi^u/mov).  i'rx>|M>rly  the  si
Kgypliau  benn-plaat  (eotaai^ia).  tbe  boat
iug  calimt  KiMifuic.  Those  shelU,  and  ii
Icaveti,  loo.  were  mode  into  drinkiug'-l
were,  no  duubt|  of  the  MUne  shaiie  as  tb
shell — broad  at  tbet-opoiid  becoming  an
ards  the bottom. They  were HUtootk  |


CIB0TU3


389


CICERO


(Hor.  Od.  ii.  7,  22),  and  often  were  wrought  in  a
costly  mauner  (Atben.  xi.  477  e).  No  certain  speci-
TCKXi  of  one  can  be  given.  In  eccleniastical  Latin,
e&orium  means  the  vessel  used  to  liold  the  Host,
or  consecrated  wafer,  during  mass.

Cibottu  (Kt0(ordr). See  Apamba.

Clbjh^  (Kifivpa).  (1)  Magna;  a  great  city  of
Phrygia  Magna,  on  the  borders  of  Caria,  said  to
have  been  foundeil  by  the  Lydians,  but  after-
wards peopled  by  the  Piaidians.  Under  its  na-
tive princes,  the  city  ruled  over  a  large  district
called  Cibyratis.  In  D.c.  83,  it  was  added  to  the
Roman  Empire.  It  was  celebrated  for  its  mann-  i
factnres,  especially  of  iron.  (2)  Parva  ;  a  city  of  I
Pampfaylia^  on  the  borders  of  Cilicia.  i

Cicada  (rcrril). A  species  of  insect,  freqnent-
ly  mentioned  by  the  classical  writers. It  is  orig-  J
iually  a  caterpillar,  then  a  ohrysatis,  and  is  con- 1
verted  into  a  fly  late  in  the  spring. Its  song  is  i
much  louder  and  shriller  than  that  of  the  gross-  |
hopper. The  ancient  writers,  and  especially  the
poets,  praise  the  sweetness  of  their  song;  and  Flu-  I
tarcb  says  they  were  sacred  to  the  Mnaes. Ac-  |
cording  to  Aelian,  only  the  male  cicada  sings,  and  '
that  in  the  hottest  weather. This  is  confirmed  I
by  the  discoveries  of  modern  naturalists. The  ci-  '
coda  is  extremely  common  in  the  south  of  Italy.  1
It  is  found  also  in  the  United  States,  being  called
in  some  parts  "the  harvest -fly,"  and  in  others,
very  erroueously,  "the  locust."

Cicflio. (1)  Marcus  Tuluus. The  greatest  of
the  Roman  orators. He  was  born  at  Arpinnm,  the
native  place  of  Marins,  B.C.  106,  the  same  year  which
gave  birth  to  Pompey  the  Great. His  family  was
aucient,  and  of  equestrian  rank,  but  had  never  tak-
en part  in  pnhlic  afiairs  at  Rome,  though  both  his
father  and  grandfather  were  persons  of  considera-
tion in  the  part  of  Italy  in  which  they  resided.
His  father,  being  a  man  of  cultivated  mind,  deter-
mined to  educate  his  two  sons,  Marcus  and  Qain-
tas,  on  an  enlarged  and  liberal  plan,  and  t<i  fit
them  for  the  prospect  of  those  public  employments
which  his  own  weak  state  of  health  incapacitated
him  from  seeking. Marcns,  the  elder  of  the  two,
BOOD  displayed  indications  of  a  superior  mind,  and
we  are  told  that  bis  school-fellows  carried  home
such  accounts  of  his  extraordinary  parts  that  their
parents  often  visited  the  school  for  the  sake  of  see-
ing a  boy  who  gave  so  much  promise  of  future  em-
inence. One  of  his  earliest  masters  was  the  poet
Archias,  whom  he  defended  afterwards  iu  his  con-
'  sular  year;  and  under  his  instruction  he  attained
such  proficiency  as  to  compose  a  poem,  though  yet
a  lioy,  on  the  fable  of  Olancns,  which  had  formed
the  subject  of  one  of  the  tragedies  of  Aeschylns.
Boon  after  he  assumed  the  toga  virilia,  he  was
placed  under  the  care  of  Scaevola,  the  celebrat-
ed lawyer,  whom  he  introduces  so  beautifully  in
Mveral  of  his  philosophical  dialogues;  and  in  no
lung  time  he  gained  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the
laws  and  political  institutions  of  his country.
Tins  was  about  the  period  of  the  Social  War ;  and,
according  to  the  Roman  custom,  which  made  it  a
necessary  part  of  education  to  learn  military  science
'>y  actual  service,  Cicero  took  the  opportunity  of
»rving  a  campaign  under  the  consul  Pompeius
ijtrabo,  father  of  Pompey  the  Great. Retnrning  to
imrHuits  more  congenial  to  his  natural  tastes,  he
commenced  the  study  of  philosophy  under  Philo
the  Academic. Bnt  his  chief  attention  was  re-


served for  oratory,  to  which  he  applied  himself
with  the  assistance  of  Molo,  the  ablest  rhetorician
of  the  day;  while  Diodotus  the  Stoic  exercised
him  in  the  argumentative  subtleties  for  which  the-
disciples  of  Zeno  were  so  celebrated.  At  the  same
time  he  declaimed  daily  iu  Greek  and  Latin  with
certain  young  noblemen,  who  were  competitors  in
the  same  riKe  for  honours  with  himself.

Cicero  was  the  first  Roman  who  found  bis  way
to  the  highest  dignities  of  the  State  with  no  other
recommendation  than  his  powers  of  eloquence  and
bis  merits  as  a  civil  magistrate.  The  first  cose
of  imi>ortauce  which  he  undertook  was  the  defence
of  Roscius  Amerinns,  in  which  he  distinguished
himself  by  his  oonrageous  defence  of  his  client,
who  had  been  accused  of  parricide  by  Chrysogo-
nus,  a  favourite  of  Sulla's.  This  obligiug  hira,
however,  according  to  Plutarch,  to  leave  Rom&
from  prudential  motives,  the  power  of  Sulla  being
at  that  time  paramount,  he  emi^oyed  his  time  iu
travelling  for  two  years  under  pretence  of  his
health,  which  he  tolls  us  was  as  yet  uneqnal  to  the
exertion  of  pleading.  At  Athens  he  met  with  T.
Pomponins  Atticns,  whom  he  had  formerly  known
at  school,  and  there  renewed  with  him  a  friendship-
which  lasted  through  life,  in  spito  of  the  change
of  interests  and  estrangement  of  afiection  so  com-
monly attendant  on  turbulent  times.  Here,  too,
he  attended  the  lectares  of  Autiochus,  who,  under
the  name  of  an  Academic,  tanght  the  dogmatic
dootriues  of  Plato  and  the  Stoics.  Though  Cicero-
at  first  evinced  oousiderable  dislike  for  his  philo-
sophical views,  he  seems  afterwards  to  have  adopt*
ed  the  sentiments  of  the  Old  Academy,  which  they
much  resembled,  and  not  until  lato  in  life  to  have'
relapsed  into  the  sceptical  tenets  of  his  earlier  in-
structor Philo. See  Philosophia.

After  visiting  the  principal  philosophers  an<Y
rhetoricians  of  Asia,  he  returned  at  the  age  of
thirty  to  Rome,  so  strengthened  and  improved  both
in  bodily  and  mental  powers  that  he  soon  eclips«l
in  speaking  all  bis  competitors  for  public  favour.
Such  brilliant  gifts  speedily  gained  him  the  suf-
frage of  the  people;  and  being  sent  to  Sicily  as-
qnaestor,  at  a  time  when  the  metropolis  it-self  was
visited  with  a  scarcity  of  com,  he  acquitted  himself
in  that  delicato  situation  with  so  much  success  as  to-
supply  the  clamorous  wants  of  the  Romans  without
oppressing  the  province  from  which  the  provisions-
were  raised.  Returning  thence  with  greater  hon-
ours than  had  ever  before  been  decreed  to  a  Roman
governor,  he  gained  for  himself  still  further  the  es-
teem of  the  Sicilians  by  undertaking  his  celebrated
prosecntiou  of  Verrea  (q.  v.)  for  his  misgovernmont
of  Sicily.  Yerres,  though  defended  by  the  infin-
ence  of  the  Metelli  and  the  eloquence  of  Hortensi-
UB  (q.  T.),  was  driven  in  despair  into  voluntary  exile:
Five  years  after  his  quaestorship  Cicero  was  elect-
ed aedile.  Thongh  possessed  of  only  a  moderate
fortune,  he  uevertheless,  with  the  good  sense  and
taste  which  mark  his  character,  was  enabled,  while
holding  this  exi>en8ive  o6Bce,  to  preserve  in  his  do-
mestic arrangements  the  dignity  of  a  literary  and
public  man,  without  anyofthe  ostentation  of  mag-
nificence which  often  distinguished  the  candidate
for  popntar  applause.  After  the  customary  inter-
val of  two  years,  he  was  returuetl  at  the  head  of  the
list  as  praetor,  and  now  made  bis  first  appearance
on  the  Rostra  in  support  of  the  Manilian  law.
(See  Lex  Maniua.)  About  the  same  time,  also,
he  defended  Cluentius. At  the  expiration  of  hi»


5-.


Vmetonblpnu)  rcfiiwil  to  uvcf{ii  a  foroiKU  prov-
iuoe,  tho  n»iml  mwanl  of  that  niaj^itftracy ;  but.
liHviiitt  (111-  i-iiii!iti1it1ii[t  ill  vifw,aiMl  nrlyiii};  i.>ii  Lia
iilUTCVt  witli  Curfttii'  villi  P>iiii)l»e,Vi  ]iu  ullirwucl  tiulll-
iiig  U)  (livtirl  biiii  from  that  L-Arevrofglory  fcirvtliirh
hf^  now  bt'lioviHl  liiiii.si-lf  t-o  Xm  dcHtinoti.  Having
HUt-coodcii  at  iLMigtIi  in  attAiiiing  to  tbo  Iiigli  office
of  ivliicb  ho  wa«  In  quest,  lie  sigimtizcd  bis  coiisul-
flliip  hy  crushing  tin-  ruiiKpiracy  uf  Luciuti  L'litiliiio ;
ami  thp  llumaiin  bnilcil  hint,  nii  the  di&L-over>'
nut\  uvfrtbrow  nl'  this  nplariotin  |>lot,  »a  the  Father
ihL  l»ivcivr  uf  hitt  citiintry.  Hih  cun(»iilut«  wiu
ilirrrrdwl  by  the  ri>Litni  nf  PouiiH'y  fnmi  tho  Eiuit,
uihI  tlio  rataltLiHUiiirnt  of  tlio  First  Tritiiiivirut'P ;
which,  iliKaiiiiniiiliiig  his  hi>|ioK  of  jHililiral  gnuit-
ut»»,  LiHlui:r«l  biiu  to  r^ttuiov  his  fumuBic  and  litor-
ary  ocuti|)aUoni<.  Fttrni  tbefic  hi  xku*  callo<l  away.
nllor  Hu  interval  of  four  y<.-.ir&.  by  tbe  tbre&tooiug
nit>Mflniv»  of  FV  Cloilius  («|.  v.t,  who  ut  length  biic-
crvdcil  in  driving  him  into  vxile.  This  erout,
which,  conifidvniig  tb«i  cirt'iiiiislancvo  voiiuevtwl
with  tt>  \xiitt  Olio  Iff  thu  itioMt  glontntti  nf  Li»  life,
tilk'd  him  with  tht;  iitmosl  diativMi  and  dwtiKmdeii-
vy.  It«  history  in  ah  follows:  L'JoiliuM,  rifomV  bit-
ter cnoDiy.  hud  caij»etl  a  law  to  be  renewed,  declar-
ing every  one  gniliy  of  tivnson  who  ordered  tbe
exeoution  of  a  Itoman  citizmi  Wforc  the  peo)ite
had  ronilrnin<<il  him.  The  blow  wan  aimed  against
t'li-ffo,  nil  ui-oouitt  of  tbe  punish  men  I  he  htid  l'iiii'-'  <t
to  Ih-  iutlicttHi,  l>y  the  atitbority  of  the  .St'Oale,  np-tn
the  arronipUcrTt  of  C'niiline.  Tbr  )llii»lrioiit»  e\-
eomtnl  put  on  mourning,  and  H|)[M'arL>d  iu  public.
aeroin]>auit-d  by  the  eipiites  and  many  young  ]mi-
frieiati».  demanding  ttu*  prottn-tion  of  the  (teople.
(.^lodiuo,  however,  nt  tbe  beatl  of  his*  unued  adher-
culs,  fnoiiUed  thmi  reinraUsUy,  and  ventured  eveu
to  besiege  the  ^nale-houw.  Ciceni,  upon  thi»,
wcul  into  voluntary  exile.  Hin  combicl,  however,
in  this  revcr««'  i>f  fortune,  thowotl  anything  but
tlw  timiutve  of  a  tuaii  of  fortitude.  He  naudensl
itut  (tn*i'<'«',  bewailing  bin  luisemble  eoiidiliuu,
:u«iug  the  eoiiMjlat ioiia  which  Ids  frieUfU  at<  .
tempted  |o  ailmiu)»ter,  and  tbuuuing  the  public
lionoiim  \t  ith  \\  hieh  the  Grv^rk  cities  were  oa^r  to
load  tiiia.  He  ultiutately  ttn^k  ivfiigc  in  Thewta-
louiea  with  I'laiK>u».  Clodiu«.  in  the  nieantinie.
pn>ourr«l  DOW  deciven.  in  cHiaw4)ueuiM!  oi  which
Olrv*\>'i  c*m«lrj-»eal»  wen-  t"ru  d»wii,and  a  tem-
|ile  of  l.iWrtaM  bniil  on  lh«  site  of  hia  huiiae  at
Ituitu-.  Hi^  will.'  and  cbihltrli  were  also  exiKMcd
lu  ilbu»ai;r  from  hi»  etubillere«l  (terMH'Uton^  A
ll«\  Durable  ebttiige.  bomrvvxr.  mkui  look  plMMia  tho
juiud»  of  his  i-ouiilrynioii.  TIk-  iniH>b-uc«  of  C'kK
diaa  bt-cniiie  tUMip|H>rlaMe  |o  ull.  l^KlI|wy  «(k«out^
mgcil  t'itxru's  frieuda  to  get  biui  reralle«l  l»  Rome,
■ttd  tbe  Semitv  fttso  d«clM«d  tbJit  it  « tHiM  uoi  at-
tend to  Mty  boattMoa  liatil  lh»  ilevtre  w  bich  oftU'ivd
bii  bauiAhuienl  naa  revokud.  Thiuugb  tlic  ival
fif  tbt<  cnitsul  Lrululltis  attd  at  the  prv>|B.«itlou  uf
•vwral  tribuar»,  tbe  drvrrv  of  rec«U  fwd  tbe  a»- ,
•MBldy  uf  the  peo|»le  in  tbv  fol towing  yettT,  In  »pil«
««f  abio«>d\  luiunU.  ia  which  OtccroV  limlh>>rtjuiu-
Im  Miu  tUiig«^nnt-.ly  wntitvdrd:  iumI  the  ontlt>r  ns-
luniiug  to  hi')  t>  •  try  aflar  ma  *bo»ttc«  of  ,

i«<a  unuttliN  vt  K^  '  ifh  «>w«T  Mark  ef  bou-


trial  for  the  deed,  uusnrceK«fuIly  den
MlU>.>  Five  years  ufler  hiH  rvtum  fn:tiu  exile  ht
reooiTed  the  governmeiit  of  Cilinin.  in  (ronhpi^neuot
of  Foiujiey'K  law,  which  obliged  tht^e  M>naloni  ul
couHular  or  praotorinu  rank,  who  bud  never  belt
any  foreign  cnmmnnd,  to  divide  the  vacant  pruT
iticeti  amutig  tbein. Ciooro  oondocted  a  war,  whit


«MtT. TheSenal-
•Mtry  tnetuttletl
tamkB  of  VI-'
barm,  wrn-
^>w4ftoMHb-


):al«»»Wi4bis
•totttOe


I  IIIOUK^It  <I<


A^T  1^  bMd  ^^  M  i  Wt.  n  h« w  b.<  art«cwMAs  In  •  pcbtie


in  this  office,  with  good  Bttccess  against  ths  plath
dertug  trilM-«  of  the  moQiitaiu  dttitxieta  of  Cilivta,
and  wjis  greetc«l  liy  his  noblien*  with  tbe  Itlle  "f
IiuiKtrator. Hereaigiwd  his  comtunnd.  and  n-turueil
to  Italy  about  the  chiae  of  the  year  SO,  tulundiit^
to  prefer  hiti  claim  lo  a  triumph  ;  but  the  iroubloi
uhich  were  just  thoD  commencing  between  Cacsi^
and  Pouipey  prevented  him  from obtaiiiiug  otk.^
His  returu  homo  was  foUowett  by  earnest  eiiitco.^
ours  to  reconcile  Potupey  with  Caoatar,  and  by  ver-
»>pirilcd  liebavtonT  wheu  Caeoar  re^iniivd  bt»  pnea
enre  in  the  Senate. But  this  independent  tempei
w«4  only  transient ;  Nud  at  no  jK-riod  of  hid  p'lltliff
life  did be  display  Kuch  tuiMcrublo  vacillation  al
at  the  optruing  of  the  Civil  War- His  cuudiivl,  iv
this  respcet,  had  beeu  faulty  eaongh  before,  fur  Ik-
then  vacillated  betwefMi the  several  tucmtwrs  "i
Ibo  F)[«t  TtiauTuate.dcfending  Vatiuituiu  otdri
to  please  Caeaar,  and  his  bitter political  vneniy
Gabiuimi to iogratiat« hLniself uilh Poaipi-
Now,  however,  we  tind  hiiu  tirst  accepting  »  c<«ii-
mkitf'ioii  frxtm  tlw  Republic  ;  then  courtiug  CAf"^-
u«-xt,  «>n  P^>ai[ie\'s  sailii^  for  Greece.  resulviDi;  I*
follow  him  thither;  preaeiilly  detenuiniugie'Uo^
neuiral :  iben  btfoi  oa  miring  to  the  PiMavf'ti"
in  Sicily : and  wbra  iaallv  ho  ha»l  jtiiiwl  ^^ i
eatap  in  t;nx<ee,  exblbitiog  auoh  timiility  awld'*' i
nitttent  »s  to  draw  frooi  PiMBpey  tbe  bitter  rMtW^'
Cmfi*  W  UrtM  Cittn  trtmttut,  mt  aw  timnt  (UaOV^
SmI.  it  3>.

After  ibe  hatUa  of  FlwnaliA  <h.c.  V*)  anil  *^
tii^ht  of  ^onfKy,  bo  rAuhmI  lo  take  the  comiu'i^
of  aa«a  iPMipa  tbctt  uadw  tbe  caden  of  Cato.  bnt  ■**
taravd  to  Italy,  wbieb  waagovernwl  by  ABioujF.tb*
wpnviHttaiivw  of  Caeear.  Hi*  tvtarn  waa  attend
with  w>%e<iil  Nn|4MMaBt  riroauBataiicae,  until  ^


CICERO


Ml


crcERo


Dnqaenir  wruio  to  liim,  anil  wm>ii  after  rMcivM  '

jja  tbr  most  friendly  H|iirit. Cicero  now  drv  :

Lbinisolf  rntirply  to  literatum  luiit  |il)ilo»o]»l)y.

ktfl  of  Iii9  private  nflair«,  howiiVfT,  involvril

am  in  gnmt  emliiuTAWKincDt. A  largo  sum,  wliirli

bnd  tulvHnrml  lo  I'onipt^r,  liml ini|>«veriH))o<l

liiii.Hnd  lib  wan  fiircml  to  Htniiil  iixlttlttfil  to  Atli-

Bji  fur  iircrtn-nt  a*»int»iiw. Tlic*o  Oifli<-iilti<'8  led  i

lltii  (11  »  kI«p  wliich  it  lias  Won  oiifttmnftry  lo  re-  '

»rU  with  j^rritt  sevrrity — ttir  <livorc«  of  liirt  wifn

fitrvntiu.  rbim<L!li  tie  wam  t)H-ii  in  Inn  Nixty-secnnd

rttT,  and  hi^  niArriugo  with  hii  ri(-}i  wnttl  Piittlilia.  i

who  wn«  of  nn  age  dis])r»|><)rtioiiiile  to  his  own.  i

frt,  ia rcviru'iDg  this  pt'i<c€<'diii;K,  wo  mnfft  not

lilnpt  the  iniMliTii  ntnnilard  of  propriety,  fursotfnl

ftf  tlir  rhanu'liTi>f  an  npc  which  rcconrilr^l  tn-tioDH  '

Ivvi'ti  of  inttral  tnrpiiudo  with  ii  rppntittinn  forlnin-

|(i>tr  And  virtnr. Ti-nitttin  wm  a  wnnmn  of  a  innot

uuA  iiud  viulriit  l4'iu|M>r,  and  Inul,  IwHideK,  in  |

bt  degree  nintrihnt^Ml  to  hifl  prt->M>nt  ciiibor-  |

•at  by  bur  extrnvngtnirc  in  thi^  niana^tiiout

of  bit  prirato  atTuirs. by  bcr  bo  bud  htid  two  ehit-

'Iwn— a  lou  bom  tbc  yt^ar  beforv  hiH  coti8iiUhip, '

■lui]  »daiight«r,  whose  lot^a  |te  waa  now  fated  to  i?s-

IHriftict^, Tu  Tiilltu  he  was  tenderly  attacfaod,  not  I

ooly  fniiu  the  excellence  of  her  ilisjmHition,  bnt

frotu  li«r  h>v6  of  |Hilit«  lileracttn:;  and  her  death

uw  iiiok  fiuui  liiui,  tvi  he  no  i)uth«tica1Iy  hiiiioiilH

(oSulpirliii*,  the  only  eomfurt  «hiub  (b«  fonn*e  of

imbllc  event*  XiaA  left  him. His  dif^tress  wa«  in-

mmtA  tiy  the  anfecliDg  roiidnct  of  Pnbiiliii,  whom

tMOoa  divnrceil  for  tvfltifylng  Joy  at  the  death  of

kvstrp-daiightcr. It  wna  on  this  occnsioQ  that

■0  wtvtr  the  trratiw  /)k  Vomtolalhuf,  with  a  view

to  Btiltgatt)  the nnf^iiiih  of  bin  (tnlferitign. IIIm

InBBdt  were  nmidnonM  in  their  attontinnit; and

(3MHr,irbDbAdtn<»ted  him  with  thentiuiMt  kind-

MvoobiaTCtuni  from  E);>pt.ni^nitled  the  nwpeot

^  bin  IiIk  cbaractcr  by  Mt'iidiiif;  a  letter  of  cuii-

*i>)nce  from  Spain,  where  the  n-uniinii  of  the  Poni-

[*Un[iiirly  »itill  engaged  hint. But  tio  HtlentiuiiH,

bownpr  couHiderate,  conid  fwiftou  Cicew's  vexa-

ti^n  It  Mi'iog  the  conutry  be  bad  formerly  eaved

l»jhUcM',rtionB  now  snbj<*cted  to  the  dominion  of

*rfBglenjwtor. HiBtpeecbi'S,  indeed, for  Marceltn^

*tid  Li^ariiis  exliil»it  tnicea  of  ineon»i«twK7  ;  bnt

■wtlw  ntiiHt  purt  he  rctireil  fltnii  piihltc  bunineM,

^'A  B»Vf  himwdf  np  to  tbe  coniptHiition  of  tbo»o

■wliB  vbich.  while  they  mitigated  bis  |K>lilical

•"^WBihate  aecured  his  literary  Cauic.

. Tha  umaatnation  of  Caesar,  which  took  place  in

•,  'wfaOowing  year  (bc.  H\  once  more  brongbt  him

*■«  the  ttage  of  public  affairs. He  bopcd  to  regain

P'*t  political  inflnence:  bnt  Antony  took  Cocwar's

P'«e.ftiid  all  that  waa  left  Cicero  to  do  w:i«  to

'^POkf iIkmo vigorona oratioiin aKaiimt Uini

'BK'fa  itv  known  by  the  name  of  rbtlippicM.  and

'^eqiuilljr  diatingiiiabed  for  rhiqiieniw  aiid  ftntri-

™l>. liiii  enmity  tuwardit  Antony  induce<i  liini

''^uiVfiiir  the  >'onug  OctaviuuiiM,  iilthongb  the  pre-

^"^1  moderation  of  the  latter  by  no  means  de-

"'^^l  liiiD. Witb  him  originnteil  all  the  '■nergelio

"■^Blloiid  of  the Senate in favour  of  the  war

'iith  IIhi  couttiil5  and  the  yotmg  Caeflar  were  cou-

"•ctltg  upiiu^t  Antony  in  the  uani«  uf  the  Kepnb-

*";  »inl  iVir  a  time  the  priiH|H'ct  sueined  Ui  brightf  it.

V^  Isat.  however,  Octa^ianns having piHMetuMid

'nit*|f  of  ibo  eoiiKulMhip,  and  having  formed  tbu

^'lliaoe  with  Antony  and  Lepidns  known  ua  tbe

i^'iid  Triumvirate,  Cicero  became  convinced  that

lAn  end. At  Toscninni,  whither  be


had  retired  with  hin  limtbrr  and  bin  iii'phow,
h«  learnt-d  that  <X'taviaiiiiH  tiad  battely  denrrled
htm,  and  that  bin  nanu*.  ot  Antony's  demand,  had
hoMX  ailded  to  the  li«l  of  the  proscribwl,  lie  re-
paired, ill  a  hI»I«  of  iridi*ci»ioii,  to  the  scn-FOiwt
and  enil»arki'd.  (.'ontniry  wiiid«,  however,  drove
him  back  to  thn  ftliore.  At  tbe  ro({ne«t  of  his
slaves  he  embarkml  a  mwiond  time,  bnt  »ogii  re-
turiiiyl  again  to  await  bis  fate  at  hiit  conntry-seJit
near  Formiae.  "1  will  die,"  Maid  he,  "in  that
country  which  I  have  so  often  savetl."  Here,  iIiimi,
ho  wa-i  disposed  to  rcinniii  and  to  meet  his  death  ;
but  hlx  tilaves,  who  wore  warmly  nttitchutl  lo  him,
oonld  not  Iwar  to  see  him  fbiie  wicritieed;  and
when  the  party  of  rtoldiont  sent  to  rnnrdcr  him  wiw
advancing  towardti  tbe  villa,  they  abiKMit  nsed
force  t4>  make  him  ont^T  his  litter,  and  to  allow
tbem  to  carry  bim  once  niori'  on  lK>onl  of  the  vea-
Kol,  which  wtitt  ittill  lying  ut  Caieta.  Rnt,  ivt  they
were  bearing  tbe  litter  towanlii  the  sen,  they  were
overtaken  in  the  walks  of  Ins  own  gronnd<^  by  the
Noldiers  who  %vere  in  search  of  him,  and  who  wore
headed  by  nno  llereunins,  a  centurion,  and  by  C.
I'opilius  Loenas.  Fopilius  wtui  a  native  of  ]*iee-
nnni,  and  ha<l,  on  a  former  occanioo,  been  snccea:!-
fnlly  dcfendeil  by  Cicero,  when  brought  to  trial  for
Honiu  nllonce  before  the  courts  »t  Itonio.  At  the
assistance  of  ad vot;ates  was  given  gratnitoiiii)y,lhe
connection  ttetwcen  them  and  their  clients  nivi  en-
teemed  very  differenlly  from  what  it  is  among  ns;
and  it  wa«  therefore  an  instance  of  pccnliar  aln>c-
ity  that  Fopilins  olTere<l  bi»f  services  to  Antony  to
miinler  hiit  patron, from  no  other  motive  than  the
hopo  of  gaining  bin  favonr  by  ebowing  such  readl-
nenH  to  deittmy  hiit  grejitefit  enemy.  The  slaves  of
Cicero,  iiiidiHinayed  at  the  appearance  of  the  aol-
diem,  prrparwl  lo  defend  ihcir  uiasler;  but  lie  rc-
fnscd  to  allow  any  bloml  to  lie  shed  uii  his  account,
and  eommnndeil  them  to  Ket  down  the  litter  iu]d
await  the  isMiio  in  silence.  He  woh  oheynd ;  and
when  the  soldiers  enuic  up  he  stretched  oat  hiH
bead  with  [icrfcct  calmuess,  and  subnntted  bin
neck  to  tbe  sword  of  Fopiltna.  He  du-d  in  hJH
sixiy-tbird  year,  H,c.  4U.  When  the  murder  wan
accoinplifjbed  tlie  (whliern  rnt  off  his  two  hand.i
ulw>,  aa  the  instrnnieuta  with  which  be  had  written
bin  Philippic  orations  ;  and  tlte  heatl  and  hands
were  carried  to  Rome,  ainl  oxposird  tiigL-lbernt  tlte
Rostra.  Men  crowded  to  .see  the  monnifiil  sight,
and  testified  by  their  tcnr$  the  compassion  ami
afiection  which  Uiii  nnwortby  death,  and  his  pure
and  omiable  character,  had  no  jnstly  deserved.

On  the  whole,  antiipiity  may  be  challenged  to
prmluce  an  iinlividnitl  ho  upright  and  no  nmi.-kblo
an  Cicero.  None  interest  iih  more  in  their  lives;
none  exrito  mora  jminfid  eiiiolions  tn  their
deaths-  Otbern  may  bo  fonnd  of  loftier  uud  nuire
heroic  chamcter,  %vho  awe  and  ftnbdno  the  mind
liy  the  grunilenr  of  their  ^'iews  or  the  intensity
of  thuir  exertions;  bnt  Cicero  wins  onr  airevtioim
by  the  itit«'Xrity  of  bi»  pnhlic  condnct,  tin:  pnrity
of  hia  iii'ivaie  life,  the  gcueroi^ity,  placability,  and
kiudnvAS  of  bia  beart,  the  playfiilneHs  of  his  tem-
per, and  the  warmth  of  bin  dometttic  nttachiuents.
lu  ttUK  resiH'ct  his  lettent  are  invaluable.  Here  we
HiH'  the  man  withont  dbtgnise  or  alfeetation,  ewpe-
eialLy  in  his  lott^-rs  to  .\tlicns,  t<o  whoiii  he  onlHia-
oiiied  every  thonght,  ami  talked  with  the  aanie
frankness  as  to  himself.  It  muttt,  however,  t)«
ronfc8.sed  that  Ibn  publication  of  thin  aanto  corrc-
spondcnco  hoa  laid  open  the  defects  of  hia  politi-


CICERO


8<S


CICGKO


«nl  i^haractor.  Kverytliin^  Hceuiod  to  point  out
Oicuri)  US  the  nitvHt  |M<riiuii  nl'  the  day  to  liu  n  me-
<1iiit4ii'  tH}ta'i?«ii  cout«iiLlit>K  fitcltonn.  Antl  yul,  nf-
ter  tlje  evtftitfiil  )»erit>il  uf  his  <.-iitiftiilflii|».  we  spu
biin  rMiffuiiiK  tbe  IiIkIi  atation  iti  thv  Rt^piiblic
vrbich  he  hituni-lf  miKlit  hav'.'  tillerl,  tn  the  yoiitij;-
ur  t'atti,  who,  vviili  >uily  hulf  his  aliihtiv.t,  litilu
fiirpftiitht.  !Ui<l  no  uilflrvsM,  jkihhl'SbwI  th»l  limt  rp<i-
iliHiti*  for  II  nLMloxtiiiiii,  liruiltiuw.  Ciciint,  on  the
•('(inti'ury,  wnn  im*!tulutu,  tiiuid,  uiid  iiicoiiMi stunt.
Hi<  tulkml,  iiidcvt),  ltii'({i.-l,v  ut' [iin!iii>rviii|{  a  niiililJe
4;i>inm\  hut  ha  wan  coutintmlly  vacillatiug  rram
oiiu  to  tbo  otliur  uxtruiuo ;  always  tuo  conHdeiit
4ir  tmt  ilvjt't'tiiil ;  incurrijicibly  vuin  of  ttneccsR,  yet
meanly  iiauegyriziii);  the  }{tiveruiueDt  of  a  usurp'
«■'.  His  furb«i};Ut,  sattncity,  practical  tfoud  aot]»i>,
Jliid  siiitttiliir  tai't  iti  dicectitiK  lueu'n  measures,
wt)n>  Inftl  for  want  of  tliat  HtrRn](th  of  ntiiul  wliteli
|>nii^r4  tliftii  nioiulily  to  mir  oliji^ct.  Fin  won  norer
<lt>ridMl,  »ud  upver  touk  an  inipiMtunt  st**|i  wilhuiit
aifli-rwnnls  nipciitir)^  of  it.  Nor  can  w«  account
■for  tho  lirnnii-.sN  mul  rcMoliitinu  of  liU  consulatt',
lltdmN  we  illHcriiuiiiato  Iji^twiM-ii  the  eii»n  of  ii'sihI-
iug  a  party  aud  thai  iif  balancing  CDiiU-iidtng
iiitoresrs.

We  may  now  eonaidor  Cicero  as  a  publio  npftakor
Slid  writer.  Tlir  URATiu<C!t  that  lie  is  kiio»-ii  to  have
composed  amount  in  all  to  107,  of  whiob  seventy-
seven,  irither  eutireor  in  iiart.havo  bpen  preiscrved.
jLlI  thotte  pronoiiufied  by  him  diirtng  the  live  years
iiit^rroninK  between  hi»  eloetinn  to  the  rpiiU'Hti>r-
nbip  and  tlii>  wdilcsbip  have  iwrtHbed,  except  that
fur  M.  TiilliiUi,  the  rjoirdium  and  narraiio  of  which
were  liniutfht  U)  Hghl  by  dm  discoveries  of  Mni
in  the  AaihntAian  Library  at  Milan.  Fmni  llm  t^ainn
4|narler  bitve  bt-en  obtained  luany  olber  proof*  of
Uie  eloqneoce  of  C-ieero,  amon)^  the  nioiit  iiiijwrtant
uf  wbieli  aru  a  lar^e  frii>;iut>nl  of  the  oration  fur
^•anriis,  and  del-aobed  purliouA  of  tlnit  delivered
ajrninMt  Clotlins  for  htN  pnifauatiou  of  the  mynterieH
nf  the  Bona  Dna.  Of  all  tbo  luMt  oration^  tiie  two
■tost  n^grrttml  »ru  that  in  dcfi>ni;u  of  Ci>nie1iu!4,
and  tho  H|>t^^h  deltvuml  by  him  in  the  Temple  of
bellonA  in  qnellinj;  the  disturbance  cxeil^^d  by
the  law  of  Otho.  (See  Ku^tciA  Lex.)  Tbi*  la«t  is
•aiil  to  have  iMfu  one  of  the  tuoHt  sij^ial  victories
of  clofiuencu  o\'ur  the  turbnlenc«  of  huoian  paa-
sioUB,  while  to  tim  fonuer  Cieeni  hituself  fiiiN]neat-
ly  alludes  as  amon^  the  ohmI  5tiitthed  of  \\\»  eom-
ixviitions.  The  onition  ft>r  Marcclliu  is  tnaintaiued
by  many  to  Xm  a  Hpnriuux  iwrronnaiiuo.  It  would
B>.>eiu,  however,  after  weighing  all  tba  argnmenta
A«ld(ici<4l  by  miKlei  u  eritiea,  that  a  |kart  ia  actually
gfluuine,  bnt  that  luncb  bns  been  kubsequeutly  In-
C«riH>lal4'd  by  *Mtw>  rhetorieiao  or  devlaiuior.

Of  the  itllKTotuCAL  WORKS  of  Cioent,  tbo  laoat
iidmir«(l  and  lluisbed  i»  tbo  dialogue  D«  Oratore,
•f  which  t'iwro  bimbolf  highly  approved,  and
which  Ills  fin>--nd>t  were  aconstoraed  to  roganl  a8
ouo  uf  the  lluifst  of  li\»  pitxlnotious.  In  the  />nj<
taring  Pitrtitionm,  the  hnlijeet  in  the  art  of  ar-
ranging and  dbitriliutiug  tlie  partA  of  aa  oration  .
8o  at  to  adapt  theru  in  iha  liesT  inaiiiier  to  their:
|iro{wr  end — that  of  moving  and  [M<r»uading  an
uudieui*o.  lu  tha  dialogue  ou  fAmons  orators,  en-
tilled  ^rrf^w.hogivosashortdettchptidnof  all  who
liad  ever  doiiriBbei  ia  Oroeoe  or  K^ine,  with  any  |
con»id€rable  rcpataliuu  for  ulix|uentH-,  down  to  lii-t
own  linir.  It  waa  intended  an  a  fourth  and  «np-
|(lvtDrilial  1>ook  Ui  the  treAtiac  Dt  Onilore.  The
49rtt0r,  uAAtvuted  to  llrutiia,  and  wriUeu  at  bix


Mlicltattoti,  was  intertded  to  Qoinplnte
workrt  jtiftt  tuentionml.  It  ouUrges  uu  the  I
vouritu  t'ipic  ^f  Cicero,  which  bail  alreiuly  b«
partially  dtdeu»tied  in  the  treatiae  D^  Onihtre — I
^.'haracttir  uf  the  perfect  onttor;  and  6eek'»  t'Q  c4
tirtn  litH  favourite  pro|K*^ition — that  pert'ectioD
onitoty  requires  an  extensivt.^  tuMjuaintuuce  wi
every  art.  It  ia  on  the  uieriUi  of  tbi»  work
[lartiiiuliu*  that  Cinuro,  in  a  letter  to  a  friend,  i
Herts  litH  pertVct  wJllingneM  that  lits  repulati
should  be  Hiaked.  The  Tcpicji  in  a  oompeudii
o{  the  T'/ph't  of  AriMlotle.  Tbo  treatise  I)f  Upti
Oenere  Oriit/iruin  was  originally  iutoudcd  oa  a  pr
ace  to  a  trunidaiioti  of  ihu  eulebraLed  oratioUH
DeniiMtbenex  aud  Ae»cbinefi  De  Goroaa,  The  w«
De  IneeiUhne  woa  a  youthful  perromiauce;  m
that  addrasaed  to  Hereoniua.  acuording  to  '
brat  nntbonties,  oevor  proceeded  fnita  bis  -j]
In  all  Cirfm's  rhetorical  works,  eirept,  imtUji
the  Orutvr,  be  profe*»es  to  liave  digi*.?ited  the  ttt
riplenof  tlio  Arinlotelian  and  Isoeratic  wbmda  r't
Olio  Hiiinhexl  NVBtem,  selecting  wtiat  was  best
cacli,  and,  an  ott^aaion  might  itlTrr,  adding  rvtoiirl
aud  pn>ct!ptit  of  hi:^  own.  Tbo  BubjiH;t  is  coaiitdera
in  thren  diHrJitet  llghta,  with  referenoo  to  jtf  ib
case.  (;2)  tlio  AtH-ak»r,  and  (3|  the  .ipMH'h.  The  cam
as  ruspctita  itii  nature,  ladeSuit*-' or  io<U-llu)t«;  wjtl
referouce  to  the  hean-r,  it  is  judicial,  ilulibiaairre,
or  descriptive;  as  regnnla  tbo  (»|ip4M)eiit,  tho  di-
vision in  fourfold — according  as  the  fact,  iti  iiai-
«re,  ita  qnality,  or  its  propriety  ia  callwi  ia  iiui*:^
tion.  The  art  of  the  speaker  ia  diivcted  (o  lirn
|tuintM  :  the  Miuret:ii  i>f  per>na»ion  (nlicttirr  ■'<)'>'
cal,  imtheiic,  orarguinuncalive),  urrang«^ni«'ai,<!i<~
tion,  memory,  delivery.  Antl  the  ajieerli  itwif
ootisista  of  aix  parts:  introduction  (or  exunlitiaii.
8tat«ment  of  the  case,  division  of  the  ^iibjei'ti
l>roof,  refutation,  and  conulustoii  or  jK-nitaii'*'
Cicero't  laudatory  oratioiia  are  among  hi-^  baft'''
est  efforts.  Nothing  can  exceed  tbc  ta*l«  vi^
beauty  of  thoite  for  the  Mauilian  law,  fur  Hnn^'l-
lua,  for  Ligariiis,  for  An'^hia^,  aud  the  Niutti  Pii'l
ippir,  which  19  pnnr.ipally  in  praise  of  S<,-tviu*
Siilpioiiia.  llul  it  in  in  jinlimal  uluqueni.^{unicO'
larly  ou  subjecta  of  a  lively  caat,  a^  in  bin  •(Mwrb^
for  Caelina  aod  Murocna  and  against  (.'aecili^^
that  hia  taleiita  uo  displayed  to  the  bc»>t  adriu-
tagc.  To  both  kiods  bis  nrbane  and  pb-aMni
caat  of  mind  imfiana  iuexproesiblc  grace  and  iM*
icacy;  historical  allusions,  phUoMtpbical  Kot'-
ineutfl,  descripMona  full  of  life  and  uaiinv,  »"'*
polite  raillery,  snpce«d  eiich  other  in  ibr  ■"*'*
agreeable  manner,  without  ap|»cuirttiii*e  ii(  Atiii^
or  effort.  Of  this  italnra  are  biji  pictnnn  vt  *^
eODfufiion  of  the  Catitiuarlan  couapiniturs  oa  A^
t*^ulion  (In  Cat.  iii.  3) :  uf  tlte  deulb  of  MMcIlD*
iftv  Oiel.  10);  of  Bnlpicina  unilertakii>i:  tl-e  ••'""
Itjwsy  to  Antony  \PhHi^.  is.  S);  |)if-  c^i
ilntWH  Mrrattlinoi/V<>  C'neJ.O);  and  bi--^  :^
of  olil  Appina  fruwnin-:  »\\  bin  degeiier.tti-  iltW^"'^*
ant  Clmlia  <  ib.  G  ).  But.  by  Ibo  foiiitatton  o^  "
style  which  Adapu  itxclf  with  ningaliir  fr-lioir  ^
tivifTy  claas  of  subjecta.  whether  lofty  oi  fiaul**'^'
phibHOphteal  or  forensie,  Cicero  anawem  an***
exactly  to  Ilia  own  detinition  of  a  perfect  irf****'
(  Onil'^)  thati  by  hia  plansibiliry,  pallw*.  «"'*
vivacity.  Among  many  exrclleucea  poaw»«'d  ^
Ciccru'a  oratorical  diction,  the  eri-at^vtt  i»  iu  '^"f*
bilily  to  the  gruiuaof  tb?  Latin  langaagr:  IboD^
the  diffusnnesii  thence  ueoeasarily  rc'sulling  ba»^*
po;»e«i  it,  both  Ln  bi«  own  day b  and  since  lit*  tiia^


CICERO


3i3


CICERO


iftllwfriliri-tmnnf  those  wbo  bnv«  aflfrrt^d  tocnii-

iVma  ila  A«miu-  chamcler,  iu  conapAri^mt  wjtb  the

■iDiplJciiy  uf  Attic  wnlei-H  Mid  lUu  sireiigtli  «f  Do-

iwMltK'fiP*. (tit'ok,  buw(.*vur,  U  cel»*1iriil(!<l  for  ro-

]>iutLSiir'W  111  il4  vo«abiilttry  iuh)  {tiM-HpinitUy  in  iU

[ilirs«9,  uikI  itH  cuit»*<:^4|iiuut  fuuilily  of  expntdtjiug

llif  unci  ni>vi>l  or  nlMttniMt  idfiui  with  itn^oiHiou  uu<l

defiance. Honcti  tbe  Attic  ettylu  of  clutjiivtivc  wuh

triui  lUi'l  siiu|ili;,  becaiitto  ttiiiiplicity  niiil  |iluiiiiioH>«

*«|toiii'l  inctiiu|iatili1i.'  ^itb  uluanioM,  cu(<ixy.  Ami

Wrtnuuy. Unt  it  wiu  n  Bingiiloi'  ^vmtt  uf  juiIk*

iMuit,  in  IfCDoraneo  of  tlio  very  itriooiplija  of  cum-

paiition,  which  iii(]uc«4l Unitiin,  Ciilvim,  Sulliist,

uit  uttiont,  to  iraitnte  thi<i  Ipmo  iiud  Htive.re  beauty

it)  tliotrown  lU'feotive  Uiiffiiiige,  and  wi'u  to  pro-

nnoitcc  th(>  oppoititu  kiod  of  divlioii  ilelicii^tit  in

tultf  mid  purity. In  (irtNik,  indevd,  tbu  >Toi-di*

fn]l,  av  it  ffnT«-',  nktnmlly  into  ii  itiHtinrt  mid  bar-

uouivuB  utdcr;  and,  fmin  thr  exuberant  richnvvi

of  llunftttirialit,  loss  in  Irft  to  thv  ingunuity  of  tbu

artiit. But  tha  Latin  tniigitage  is  ciniipnrntivcly

K«ak,  icaiity.  aud  iiuuinitical,  aud  rLHiuir^-H  consid-

cnblo  akiU  and  itmut4{L'iueiit  to  rmidur  it  oxproit-

HVaaBtlKimoeful. SimpUcity  in  Lnlin  !>>  Hcat^^dy

•cpftnible  frotu  baldness;  aod  jn^tly  an  TtM'oiici>  in

eelebntdl  for  ch.iAte  and  unadorned  diction,  yot  |

efeu  1k',  compared  with  Attic  writwrK,  is  ll»t  and

betTy. Asaiu.  the  |>«rfection  of  slrengtb  in  clear- ,

■M*  itnitfMt  to  brwrily;  aud  hi  this  cftmldiialtnn  '

iMin  in  iiHiially  nnutpial. From thr«  vnguitniiM  i

«iit  niir«Tt»iuty  uf  iimatiLiiK which i-baracteriztf  |

iu  i^nratc  vrords,  to  lie  perspLcuoas  it  innHt  be,

fdlL What  Livy  aud,  much  more  Tacitns,  have

jaiiM.l1  iti  eucr;^,  they  have lost in perspicuity

Mil vlegance. I^tin,  in  nliort,  i.t  not  a  philoatrph-

1*1  laDgdage ;  not  a  laiii^ua;;*.'!  in  which  a  deep'

ttuulur  ]i  likely  to  express  bimnelf  rrith  purity '.

otseataeu. Xow  Cicero  ratbiT  mode  a  lauHua^^v  ,

UiU  a  Atiflo,  yet  not  no  miiHi  by  the invention

•  by  the  riimbinntiDu  of  wordn. Sunn*  lei-ntH,  in- ,

*lMi,  Iiu  pbiloKopliii;ttl  HuhjoctM  compidhnl  biiu  to  j

M*n,aiiil  Ibeso  are  oft4>u  lidinlnihlo — a.  if.  r/Hfililim,

^'^HtiUui:=vouirTit,Vi>a-ii7T}c'  but  his  gmal  art  lies

UtlieuiiplieatiouufexiatiuK  tuaturiuLt.  in  coiivi^rt-  '

^  Ibe  very  dtsadvauta^H  of  tho  )un*;uage'  into

IxKuiltes,  iu  enriching  it  with  cironnilocntidus  and  '

"••tililwni,  in  prnniu;;  it  of  Uanih  and  iiuconth

*irnxw)iw,  and in AysteniatizinK the Ktrnctiire

*rf»  iietilvnee. This  is  that  mpia  'liee/uli  irhicli  [

Jfaliwd  Cicero  the  bisk  tt'otimony  of  Caesar  to  bia

tii'ditive  power«,  and  which  makt*.'*  him  Ihn  jjreat-

W  toHtt'ruf  composition  tho  wtirbl  liius  over  aoam.

Woeoinn  iiiixt  to  (^ict-ru'j^  rillLO»ji'IIIirAL  WIIIT-

'*«*.  after  n  brii-f  Dnniui^tution  of  ivbiuh  wu  ^hall

•*■'«  few  rvmark.4  on  tbo  character  of  bia  philoiu

•Pkyit«elf. The  trealiso  Xte  Uf^ibus  bas  roachod

^'oiiu  Imperfect  8tat«.  only  three  Ijookn  remain-

'"g.  aud  t)tv«e disflgortKl by  numi^rons  chasms

^  wiiiiot ho Hiipplied. It traces tlie pbilt>-

"Palc  {itini-iplus  of  jnriispriidHnci!  to  tbitir  remot-

•* •otiiww,  art-H  forth  a  iKuly  of  lawn  conformable

**  l^nni's  idea  of  n  wi'.ll-m^ulatcd  Htatt%  and  is

""^Pwod  trO  bavn  treated  in  tbu  booka  that  are

■^  "f  tlie  L'xecntivn  pciwnr  of  tnagl-strati^  and

'Krij^litA  of  Roman  eiti/^na. The;  trcali-se  iJe  Fi-

■*•*  HahoTum  et  M'llorum is  written  after  the

"••wer  uf  AriHtotle,  and  discuasca  the  chief  goo^l

■""I  Ihe  chief  evil  (tummum  fx/ntim  ft  tnmmiim

^'iini;  in  it  Oici'n>  explaiiia  the  several  opinions*

*JJ*<ttilnfHl oil tbii* noliject  by  the  pbilo*i]>liei-»

Qaaationea  ivlulcs


to  the  Academic  philosophy,  wbo^  teneU  Cicero
liiniHolf  bcul  embraced.  It  is  nn  ooeouut  qui]  dt>>
fence  nf  the  doctrines  uf  the  Academy.  In  the
7'uariititiuie  Duiptitiit'untf»,  live  booktt  ate  devntHil
to  ua  many  dill'ereiit  ijiieatioim  of  pbib)M>pby.  hear*
iiig  tbu  nii>HL  Htrtingly  on  the  practice  of  life,  and
involving;  topics  the  tiioMt  osHeutial  to  human  bap-
piucM.  Thcy'rfrtf/AvtHBcoutaiufi&defiinconfdix  par-
adoxcaof  Ibo  Bloica.  The  work  De  Xntura  Vorufii,
iu  three  bi>okri.  embracea  a  full  examination  of  the
varioiiit  tbuorieaof  heathen  autii|nity  on  the  nalnre
uf  the  gods,  to  which  the  treatitie  De  Dirinatums
may  lie  regarded  aa  a  hupph-intMit.  The  e»M«ty  De
OjtuiitM,  on  moral  duties,  liitn,  not  nnaplly,  lieen
stvled  the  bcathen  Whole  Duty  of  Man ;  nor  have
the  dinbi^giieH  Dt  Sfnertutf  and  J/f  Ainintiii  bL-vii
iiiconi'clly  ri'^anb'd  a.s  ainoiig  the  mont  highly
lini^bed  and  pleoMlng  performanveB  of  which  any
laiignaifi;  can  b*iaat.  We  have  to  lauietit  the  luM
of  the  trealiHcit  Df  CoiniiihttiQne,  De  Oli/ri'a,  and
the  our-  entitled  Jlurteimut,  In  which  IomI  Cicero
nihlertooU  the  defence  of  learning  aud  pbilo«ophy,
and  left  to  bin  llbiMtriuiia  competitor  the  ta<ik  of
arraigning  them.  It  wan  thi«  book  wbioh  tirst
b«l  St-  Aiignstiiie  to  the  utiidy  of  Christian  philos-
ophy and  the  doctriiiea  of  Chrifilianity.  The  trea-
tise De  lifpnUiot  \ia»  \tc4m  in  part  n-«cuoii  from
the  deHtn>ying  hand  of  timo  by  the  labourv  of  Mai.
Except  the  workti  Dk  fnct'ntione  and  De  OntUtre,
thiH  woa  the  earlicHt  of  Cicero'a  literary  prmhic-
tioua.  It  was  given  Ut  the  world  in  ii.c.53.Jii8t  be-
fore its  anther  set  out  for  hid  procouaular  govern-
meat  iu  Cilicla.  He  wan  then  iu  his  Ufly'third
year.  The  object  aud  spirit  of  the  work  were
highly  patriotic,  lie  wished  to  bring  the  cousti-
tution  back  ti.i  its  tlrat  priuciplen  by  an  impretwiiou
expoiiiuve  uf  it«  theory;  to  iiillaiue  his  contempo-
raries with  ibe  love  of  virtue  by  pourtrayiug  tho
chanirter  of  their  ancMtt^im  in  its  piitueval  puri-
ty and  beauty;  and  trhihi  be  wiu  ntiHing  a  monu-
ment to  all  future  agea  of  what  Rome  had  biH?ru,
to  iiiculcute  npuu  hiM  uwii  tiiiici  \t  hat  it  ought
Htill  to  be.  We  kluiw  it  to  have  b<en  IiIm  origiu.il
purpose  Ui  niaUo  it  a  very  velnmiuouq  work;  for
lie  expressly  lelln  biit  imitber  thai  it  waa  to  \tv  ex-
temled  to  uiuu  booka.  Krucsti  tbinkii  that  thi^y
were  all  given  to  the  world,  ultlioiigb  L'Icero,  in  n
letter  to  Atticiin,  on  whioh  that  leiirne«l  and  aceu-
rat«  scholar  maki^M  Ibis  very  remark,  tipeaks  of
thero  tia  hi-t  aU  pludgea  or  nnrutieD  for  bii»  good  lie-
huvltmr.

Cici^ro,  an  a  philo»opber,  belongn,  a|Hiti  the
whole,  to  the  New  Acailemy.  It  tuiN  biy.'n  dia>
puted  whether  he  was  really  atta>i.-bc<l  tu  Ibis  HytH
torn,  or  had  merely  rosortoil  to  it  us  being  ihr  best
adapted  for  I'uruisbiug  liim  with  oratorical  argu-
ineittH  suiteol  to  all  orciv«iionM.  At  lir«t  ita  ailoj»«
tion  vTiiH  Niih<(iiliary  to  lii.s  ottier  plans,  Uut,  tow-
anla  tlm  conclusion  of  his  life,  when  bo  no  louger
tnainlainud  tbu  place  be  waa  w<int  to  hold  in  the
Heiialo  or  tin:  Forum,  and  when  philosophy  formed
the  ocnnpalinn  "  wilb  which,''  to  quote  his  owu
wonbt,  "life  wasjiiHt  tolerubb-,  nud  without  whiub
it  would  have  been  iaU*lei'abhi,"  he  doiilitieriM  b^
came  couviuccd  that  the  prliicipUv)  of  the  New
Academy,  illnstrated  as  tliey  hud  beeu  by  Carnea-
des  fq.  V.)  ami  I'bilo,  formed  tbc  KiiundcKt  ayntem
which  bad  descended  to  mankind  from  tbo  »ehnu]a
of  Athens,  The  attachment,  bowerrr,  of  Cicero  to
the  Acoilemic  pbiloaophy  was  fn;o  fnmi  the  exclu-
sive spirit  of  Hcctariuni^ui,  and  bonce  it  did  no&-


CICERO


3M


CICERO


imtvetK  Ills  ftifmctiiig  fmin  other  »iymi?mi»  what  he
fiMiiiil  it)  llirtii  riiiiforntiililr  to  virtue  itml  n^Hwtri.
HU  otbieal  iirliici]tli-H,  hi  pAriiciilAr,  App^NAr  ocliv-
tlc,  baviiiiK  Won  in  a  groAt.  iiirAjiiin-  fiinnMl  fhini
the  opkniotiH  nf  Ui^  Stuic*.  Of  most  of  tlio  Oivok
•mU  hr  «i«'iik»i  with  iv!i|icct  an<l  es(4;^ra,  For  The
KpiriirciiiiH  11)0110  hv  hclmdh,  iiotwithsrAncling  hia
IVirivUhi])  for  Attinis,  to  Imvy  ciitcrraiiieil  a  *lc-
ridinl  Avt^rHioii  hikI  cuiitcm)ii.  Tlif'  genornl  piir-
pimp  of  fii'iTo's  pbiloHiiiliirul  works  wiw  nUlier  to
mIvo  n  hi)i|orv  (if  the  nmii'iit  philr>^niiliy,  tliaa  ilog-
limtifAlly  hi  iiiiMilnito  opJnioiiH  of  )ii»  uwii.  It  wim
hlM  grual  iiiin  to  cxpUlii  to  hm  fcllnw-oitizBiiH,  in
tlit*ir  oirti  htiit(tiii|{4<.  wliittevrr  llio  faj;*')*  of  GriKH'r
bud  Ittii^ht  oil  thi*iitoftt  iuiporl»Lit»ubjvctfl,  in  onl<^r
to  rtiliii'^u  lh<'ir  iiiiiuls  niul  reform  Uu-ir  tuonilN.

Ill  tbwni'ticiil  luv<!»!l((ttlion,  lii  Ihb  tlevflupiiieiit
urub-itiiict  lilona,  »iiil  In  llie  aiml.vftiftof  (iiiiilitionaud
puiTi'ptioiiH,  C'lctTu  c'Aii  not  tK>  n>gnr4'('<l  a»  In  any
ilofcnw  nil  invculor  or  a  profoittut  orijj^iual  tbinker,
nntlcJliiiuH  lionitihnl  wiib  I'liitound  Ari»tntlt'.  Hi«
|Ht(i|i)iiii'  merit  »H  »  pliiUituipliicul  wrilor  liiy  in  bin
lttiniiiotiH]in*lp4i)iM3»rt<x]>o«ilu>iioftheluailiiig]>riii-
cHploK  hikI  iliHpiitt'M  of  ilii*  iiitcient  8i-1i<H>tK.  hikI  do
woi'kNlmiixtiiiiN-d  rh>iiiutiiit|inty  prx'wiii  (Mu-onctse
kiiit  ttoiiipii'bi'iiHivo  A  vitifr  of  the  upiiiioim  of  the
Cln^fik  iiliilnmnilmrn.  The  uio«t  oltvioiin  [MH:itliari-
ty  of  I'ii'vi-o'a  philottopbleul  writings  is  ilicir  funu
of  il)nl»}iiit>.  Tho  bK'>a  was  1>otTow«d  frotii  Pluto
luid  Xmoplioii ;  hut  tbo  nnturu  of  t'icpro'i«  (11a-
bt^uo  Ih  An  ilitlVrvnt  fnuit  thtii  of  tbo  two  Atbeui-
•UH  n*t  UAH  111;*  Mhjrrt  in  writing.  With  them,  tb«
ttocrAtU'  uukU'  of  tLVgnnu^iit  coiiM  bAnlly  tw  du-
fiUyoi)  iu  uiiy  utht-r  t*liHp<< ;  wbercAs  t'i(-^ro'«i  Aiui
WAn  to  cxi'itt'  intcrc.'il,  mid  b«  avaiImI  bim.'*<'lf
nf  thin  uiiNto  nf  ouni|hiciitiini  for  tbe  lift.'  And  VAxir-
ly,  th«*  ea-M*.  (Hnttpiuuity,  and  vigour  whii-b  it  giivp
to  btA  dtM-UMions.  Tb«  nmjo.«ty  and  sptcudoiir
orhtM  introtbieltnn5.tbvrlo<iiiencp  with  which  Imth
■ttiM  of  A  qnf*1iou  An*  sMcccK-tivfly  di^tplAyei),  the
ol««nK<«w  and  tfrmMu-^  of  his  ittAtom«>ut«  on  nb-
•Unci  pttiitl",  bin  rxtptUilr  AlltiMnnit  to  tbe  t/cfOif
or  l4nir>  of  ibt<  Hup)Ki«cU  «ottiron«lion.  bit*  digtv*-
•4atM  Iu  pntiw  o(  pbiluMphy,  Mnl,  lastly,  tbr  mvl-
«iljr  aiiU  riohoeM  of  his  ttyks  unite  to  tbruw  «
olMmi  MMiwI  thm*  proilaciiun»  which  has  been
Ml  U  •rtry  ^{v^

CtvMo'k  BPrnvLAK,  m«rty  oim>  ibotMuuKt  v!*&4)  ia
•H,  an  conpfwad  In  (bin y-«ii\  UiokA.  meimo  of
wliMi  wv  aMnmwI  10  Attirti»,  lbr>x>  to  bt«  bcolH-
«r  QvtitW*  «M  lo  Bralus,  Attd  sixMwa  to  bis  dif-
fbnal  MwkIb;  mA  Uivy  Avm  •  klilaix«f  bis  lifo
tnm  hit  fcnMk  ,t«*r. Aaioo(  tlwao  adanaMd '
M  ltt$  fHoMib  {Ad  PymitimrMt  *am»  nccnr  writtou  1
to  ia«K  bj  ftnitM»  MAtaHiw.  PUncoa.  C^stisiw  ant  j
■IImk fWtb»vnMraliM<iftU*MMnl«^blel
tojiaU Willi  af  CWmoV  writta^  ««  mn  liJtbNa '
IU  Tinv  Nt*  IMtburS  ^kvcdiMA,  lbo<i(b  w  pWMK  ,
a&  tb*  iTisiM  «Uy  iwiljt  *  yMt  wf  Uhot  OfifiMn^
MMIibMl. Tb*  MkaM  jmuriiniin  ky  9Kt  •jw  tht
MMM*  Iw  AMic«M,  M-  lb(9  Ml  «alr  ttMw  c««*i
l%b«  *»  ib»  bMuc?  fif  ib<r  itMMs  b«l  itM  tjir^  w
•  iitt  tMiRbl  lMoibv|prt«iiN>c4*m««<r«f  CtMf*,
btnatlCit^  ««•  iwwMlifliiA  M  aM  ihsM  •»«»•
bMHi  bb  Ihw^lMi  «Ml  ItaHr  ••  «Mi  M««it  «f
bt». TW  — Ifcwiktoyrf lb«  utiiipia<i«LiL  ykb  i


I  •*  lb«  iwabli  «•  lbs  I


k  W  «ll  bM  IV*  <ni  *M  XVA.V

Ilk  tMmcAt.  uri  hhtomtal  woheb  h»«


of  hie  commentary  on  biK  ■■nnnnlnhip  ai
lorj'  of  his  own  timet,  aro  allogcilirr  loitt.  Ofl
forninr,  which  compriMwl  the  beroio  itocms  AfnfaS^
.Ifarhit,  And  on  hlfl  own  non«inliki(>,  ti'AUitlatioiiiiof
parts  of  HonitT,  Acschytni,  Sophocles,  and  Arsriu,
cpigraniit,  pK-.,  but  little  renmtns  cxei^pt  winifi  fn^.
nivntJi  of  tbe  Phafjurmet^a  and  Di'Htemria  of  Amtit*,
It  mny.  bowev(-r,  be  qneAtioDiHl  wh^-tber  litrmtiir*
has  Hutfercd  mnch  by  this  loss.  We  should  re-
frain  fiuni  speaking  contemptiionsly  of  llw  [wifljo
jiowern  of  one  who  itoattessed  *o  mnrb  hurr.  m
mnph  tAxt«,  and  sn  fine  nn  rar :  but  his  jiofim
were  principally  coinpiweil  In  IiIh  yoitth :  siiil  iirti>'r-
wards,  when  his  powem  wem  more  nintnrc.hitoe.
cnpationa  did  not  allow  even  blH  iietlve  niiHl  ibe
time  iie«CH.Mary  for  pcdisbiug  a  language  tbni  riiU
more  ruggntl  in  venH>  than  it  Vfin  In  prose.  IlmiM
we  Hni)  that  his  onn  con  temporaries  crilici^  un-
favoiinibly  bis  attempts  iu  I'ervc,  a  favt  tn  qlilcb
lie  bini^tetf  bears  witness;  and  sncb  siierlim-u*  h
remain  itbow  tbe  antf-clnsslcol  foodit«MS  for  sUit-
etAtivc  jingle:  as,  for  instance,  the  Gamoas  iiiw
wbicb  be  quotes  iti  his  Df  Opieii*  (i.  77):

"Cpduil  wnatL  UigaB,  rooccdsi  laonM  Iftodl,"

nud  the  aliAurdly  egotUt4c«l  hexameter  sOMnd  aI
by  Jnveual  iu  bis  Tenth  Satire :

'O  fArtunuftm  luum  me  coDMie  Romm'"

His  contemporary  history,  on  the  other  bond,  cm
hArdly  have  conveyed  mure  explicit,  ami  rrrtsialj
wonldliATecoutaiDed  leas  fait  bfnl.infomistioDthaa
hi«  private  eornwtpoDdence:  while,  with  all  tbr  pM*
etnitioii  he  ASjtnnMtly  poAseMed,  it  may  lie  tlodtiMl
if  \\\n  diSii)^  Aod  grocefnl  stylo  of  I bongdi  >u>d
composition  was  Adapt«d  for  the  depth  of  rvUK-tw*
and  condensation  of  mviAoing  which  aie  i^m  t\a*i
excx-lleucos  of  bistonnU  (ttnii>o«ition.

UASrscKin^— The  MSS.  of  Cicero  an;  m  onwr-
oDs  Aud  so  scatten.>d  over  Knropo  as  to  preclnik  iw
exJiaustiveennmormtion  of  themhen>.  Thi*  LsURfi'
tian  Library  nlone  contains  188  oodioes,  of  vhicti
the  oldest  date-t  back  to  Ibe  (enth  oentory.  Tb«
Iiildiotbi><iue  NattotuUe  at  Paris  poaM«Mst231,c<>l'
lectc^  prior  to  tbe  Sevolation  nf  ITi^.  Six  of  tkM
date  fncn  Uia  iiUth  ovitar}  ;  13H  an>  of  die  i^
lecotli.  Tlbe  oldeaC  eoUeetion  uf  tbe  letters  aif^
mitiarm  la  tbe  Codex  T««eUe»ds  (now  tbd  Cuikx
SIMteeoa)  of  tbe  nlatb  eedtarr-  Petmrcli.  is  1345.
discovered  at  Yerooa  tbe  le<iera  to  BnUiw-Q^'*"
ero,  aud  Attieus.  Tbe  118.  Ibond  by  ivinurli  k»
agimin  bee«  lost,  eo  tbat  ooIt  a  ropy  of  It  ren^tA
CHber  inpoctanl  Ciecrvniaa  M$8.  aru  «s  lollo**^
a€  tbe  foart«m  Pbillppiea,  tbe  Valicau-BsBitinO
MS-  of  Ibe  ninth  e<eiitary  ;  of  the  omiioiM  a^u*'
Voms^  tbe  VatkAo  paliw|iaial  of  tbr  fMtnh<fl
eaatmy.  aad  two  WetfeabOttei  itt^.  dependf^'
■pMa  Pari*  codcoE  of  tbe  aln'>'  ^o'.f.r-v;  »f  th«
CaHIJMiiaM  sntiow^  tbe  Xm^  -.  -x  «>f  tli»

laalb  ea«lacT.  AMd  Ibe  Maaki-  :--  :  (li'<rW<-
eaib  eealWT ;  of  Ae  aialiew  for  Atvhia*.  t^''  ^
des  BnxvliMM  (gtawilii)of  the  rMvnUi  f*^
taiT;  oftbeataHMioalbeManatanUw,  lli«C<*l^
ExtartoMrfafrfUwtwvlAbcvotury;  uf  ib»  onti""
fht  MIK  lb*  MmM  MS.  il^^XA)  aod  a  pslinp*^
al  Toria ;  of  lb*  Iwilli  Ih  Omt»rr,  DnUvi,*^
fbwlbr. tbe  C%4*x  taaiwits  (Lodi),  or  nUlicrliii*'
«oyiMofite(lcw4M  aMid*  after  1«a;  of  tli^i^
titimtt  Ovo«H^ar^  «  PteH  XS.  of  Iho  ebsrenlli  i^"'
1017  iNtfw  :«U  I :  Mf  tb*  7^1^  *  eodex  at  Ut'^'"
oM  l«*  at  S«.  tUIl :  of  t^  nmtim  Dt  t^*^
a  M^at8l.OaB;of  IbepkOv-


CICERO


345


CIUONIA


mpliirat  n-oi-k»,  tlie  CixUctM  LcideuBOB  (Voasiani,
84  Boec.  X.,  and  86  saec.  xi.),  the  Coilox  Laiireiiim-
■iiiB  S.  Marci  (S57)  of  the  teuth  century,  ami  tbe
Codexyiudobonensi8(Vienna}of  the  tenth  century.
AcollectioD  of  600excei*pts  from  Cicero's  phitofloph-
ical  writiDgs,  made  by  a  certain  HadonrdiiA  in  tlie
ninth  centnry,  id  iu  the  Vatican.  For  the  treatise
De  Legibut,  the  best  MSS.  are  the  Leyden  codices
( Vossiani,  84  saec.  x.,  and  86  saec.  xi. );  fur  the
Piiroidoxa,  the  same ;  for  tbe  De  Finibus,  the  Pala-
tino^VaticanuB  of  the  eleventli  century;  for  the
Arademicn,  the  Codices  Leidenses  already  men-
tioned ;  for  the  Tasrulanae  Di*putatwne»,  a  MS.  at
Paris  dating  from  the  tenth  centnry,  and  one  at
Brnmets  of  the  twelfth  century;  for  the  Timaetis,
the  Codices  Leidenses;  for  tbe  De Ifatura  Deorum,
tbe  same;  for  the  Cat4>  Maior,  a  Codex  Leideusis  '
(VosR.  F.  12,  saec.  x.) ;  for  the  De  Dimruitione,  tlie  |
Palatiuo-Vaticanns  not«d  above;  for  the  De  Fato, .
a  coilex  nt  Vienna  (189);  for  tbe  Laelius,a  MS.  at
Mnnich  of  the  tenth  century ;  for  the  De  Offieii«t  a
31S.  at  Bern  of  the  tenth  century,  and  one  of  tbe
»iimc  age  at  Paris  (6601).

Editions. — The  edit'io  prineep$  of  the  entire
works  of  Cicero  was  that  by  P.  Viotoriiis  (Venice,
1534-.17).  A  famons  old  edition  is  that  of  Lambi-
Dtts  (Paris,  1566) ;  and  those  of  Graeviua,  nnfinished
(Amsterdam,  1^),  Ernesti  (I«ipzig,  1737,  last  ed.
1H20),  Orelli  (ZUrich,  1836-30),  revised  with  Baiter
and  Hatin  ( 1845-4S2),Nobbe  (Lt'ipzig,  1%0),  are  very
often  cited.  More  recent  are  the  editions  by  Kiotz,
11  vols.  (Leipzig,  1863-71) ;  revised  by  C.  F.  W.  Miil-
ler,  not  yet  completed  (Leipzig,  1878- ),  and  Baiter
and  Kayser,  11  vols.  (Leipzig,  1861-69),  with  index.

Among  special  editions  may  be  mentioned  that
of  the  orations  with  English  notes  by  Long,  4  vols.
(London,  1855-62);  of  the  oration  on  tho  Manilian
law  by  Wilkins  (London,  1885);  of  the  Second
Philippic  by  J.  E.  B.  Mayor  (London,  1878),  and  by
Oaotrelle  (Paris,  1882);  of  the  Catilinarian  ora-
tions by  Halm  (latest  ed.  Berlin,  1886);  of  the  ora-
tion fur  Arrhias  by  J.  8.  Reid  (Cambridge,  1884);
of  the  oration  for  Balbns  by  Reid  (Cambridge,
1^9) ;  of  the  ftration  for  Plancins  by  Hnlduu  (Lon-
don, 1881) ;  of  tho  oration  for  Milo  by  Purton  (Cam-
bridge, 1877).  Si>ecial  editions  of  the  rhetorical
Works  are  those  <»f  the  De  Oratorr,  3  vols.,  by
Williins  (London,  1893);  of  the  Orator  by  San-
dys (London,  1885) ;  of  the  Bnitna  by  Kellogg
(Boston,  18tS));  and  of  the  Partitionee  Oratoriae
by  Piderit  (Leipzig,  1867).  A  critical  i-ovision  of
Cicero's  philosophical  works  is  that  of  Schieho
f Prague,  1884);  and  special  editions  of  individual
tn^atises  are  that  of  the  De  Legibn*  by  Vnhlon
(Berlin,  1883) ;  of  the  De  Finibun  by  Reid  (in  prep-
aration), and  Langen  (Milnster,  18SH);  of  the  Aca-
demica  by  Reid  (I»ndon,  1885) ;  of  the  Tuaculunete
by  Heine  (Leipzig,  1881);  of  the  De  Natura  Dw-
rum  by  J.  B.  Mayor,  3  voIh.  (CiiUibridgc,  1885);
of  the  Cato  Maior  by  Reid  (Cambridge,  IriSH),  re-
vireA  by  Kelsey  (Boston,  1884);  of  the  De  ojfu-iin
by  Holtlen  (Cambridge,  1884),  and  by  Stickney
tN.  Y.  I8H8).  All  excellent  edition  of  the  eiirre-
i<lM>iidciice  of  Ciftero,  with  notes  and  an  introduc-
tion, M  that  by  Tyrrell  and  Pui-8t>r  (London,  18^6,
f»ll.).  Recent  collectiinis  of  tho  fragmentn  of
('iccn/s  writings  are  those  of  Baiter  and  Kayser
(1H6S),  and  C.  F.  W.  Mliller  (1879).

Special  Works.— Orelli,  Onomnntirum  ef  In-
dkea,3  vols.  (1838);  Krnesti,  Claris  Cicfrouiaaa
(Halle,  1831);  SchUtz,/<erjro/)  Cieenmianfiui,  4  Vols.


(1817);  Nizolins,  Lfiieon  Ciceronian nm,  3  vols,  (last
ed.  1820) ;  Mergnet,  Lexihon  gu  Cicero't  Rede/i  (1877-
84);  Snringar,  Cieeronvi  Annaleg,  2  vols.  (1854)^
\{\Tit»\,Untn-aue}iungen  z.  Cicero' a phUomph.  Sehrif-
(#n(1877);  Levin,  Z^fO/rtu  on  the  Philofu/phy  of  Cic-
ero (Cambridge,  1871);  Davidson,  Life  nf  Cirer»
(1894);  Middloton,  £//c^C»«rro(l74l);  BrUckner,
Lehen  C»«er<»'«{1652);  Vovttyth,  lAfe  of  Cicero  (XUfA);
A.  Trollope,  Life  of  Cicero  (1880) ;  Boissier,  Ciei'rmt
et  aesAmis  (4th  ed.  1888),  See  also  Mommsen,  IHa-
tory  of  Borne,  vol.  iv.,  and  against  his  well-known
view,  the  defence  of  Cicero  by  Gerlnch  (Basel,  1864).

(2)  Marcus,  only  son  of  tbe  orator,  and  the  per-
son to  whom  the  latter  addressed  his  work  De  Offf-
ciia.  He  took  part  in  tbe  civil  contest  at  an  early
age,  and  served  under  both  Porapey  and  Bmtni*.
After  the  battle  of  Pliilippi  he  retired  to  Sicily  and
joined  the  younger  Pompey.  Subsequently,  how-
ever, he  took  advantage  of  the  act  of  amnesty  that
was  passed,  and  returned  to  Italy,  where  he  lived
for  (tome  time  in  a  private  capacity.  Anguntns,
on  attaining  to  sovereign  power,  made  him  his  col-
league in  the  cousulship,  and  it  was  to  Marcns  Cic-
ero, in  his  quality  of  consul,  that  he  wrote  nn  ac-
count of  the  victory  at  Aetium  and  the  conquest
of  Egypt.  Marcns  had  the  satisfaction  of  execut-
ing the  decree  which  ordered  all  the  statues  nni)
monuments  that  had  I>cen  erected  to  Antony  to  be
thrown  down.  After  his  consulship  he  was  appoint-
ed governor  of  Syria,  from  which  period  history'  iw
silent  restiecting  him.  He  died  at  an  advanced
age,  and  was  notorious  for  dissipated  and  intem-
perate habits.

(3)  QuiNTUS,  brother  of  the  orator,  and  brother-
in-law  of  AtticuH.  After  having  been  praetor
in  B.C.  62,  he  obtained  the  government  of  Asia.
He  was  subsequently  a  lieutenant  of  Caesar's  ii»
Britain,  and  only  left  that  commander  to  accom-
pany his  brother,  Marcus  TnlliuR,  as  lieutenant,
into  Cllicia.  After  the  battle  of  Pharsalia,  in
which  he  took  part  on  the  side  of  Pompey,  he  was
proscribed  by  the  triumvirate  and  put  to  death  by
the  emissaries  of  Antony.  He  had  a  marked  talent
for  poetry,  and  hail  planned  a  poem  on  the  invn-
sion  of  Britain  by  Caesar.  He  also  composed  sev-
eral tragedies,  imitated  or  else  translated  from  the
Greek,  but  which  have  not  reBche<l  us.  Eightecu
lines  of  his  are  prewrvcil  in  Q.  ViceroniH  Reliquiar,
edited  by  Btlcheler  (Leipzig,  1869)^  He  was  the  au-
thor of  the  piece  Commentariolam  Petitionin,  naiinl-
ly  printed  along  with  Cicero's  letters  to  him.  It  i»
addrcNsed  by  Quintns  to  his  brother  when  the  Iat>-
ter  wim  a  candidate  for  the  consulship,  and  gives-
advice  with  regard  to  the  measures  he  should  pur-
sue to  attiiin  his  objei^t,  particularly  incnlratiiig
the  bent  means  tu  gain  private  friends  and  ac-
quire geiienit  pi>i>ularity.  There  is  an  edition  of
this  wink  by  Kiissuer  (WUrzburg,  1872).

CicOnes  (Kiko^s).  A  Thracian  people  on  the
Ilebi'iis,  and  near  the  coast  of  tho  Aegean.

Ciconia.  (1)  A  wonl  meaning  literally  "  i*
stork.'Mmt  also  applied  to  a  mimic  gestm-e  expres-
sive  of  ridicule  or  contempt,  produee<l  by  bending;
tho  forelinger  into  the  form  of  a  slnrk's  neck,  and
IHiititing  it  towards  the  i>erBon  ridiculed  with  »
rapid  motion  of  the  two  top  joints  np  and  dowi*
(Pers.  i.  5H,  with  the  commentators;  Hieron.  EpM.
125,  18).  (2)  A  contrivance  employed  by  fnrmerM
to  test  a  labourer's  work  in  spade  husbandry,  ami
prove  if  all  his  trenches  were  dng  to  a  uniform  ami


Cin'NNA


346


tIMMF.KII


1tn)|i<>r  width  aiid  dfptli.  It  cnii^UtiMl  of  an  ii|»>  '  |Htwor,  it  pomeil  rmm  it!«  ntlipr  iiiwui  In  In*  mnnv.
ri^ht,  with  n  cniHii-biir  ntDxi-il  to  it.  nt  riglit  nii-  plriycd  in  Kun>)M^  ultui.  MiinkH  and  mirliorilra  a).
f^kw,  liku  Itic  K'lUT  T  hivci't<^d,  ftii  tbat  tlie  loug  iiiuat  nnivciitiiUy  udopttMl  iht*  ciliriiiin  ax  til  lo  im
bruiicli  iiu'nsni-vd  tlic  de|itb,  niid  tUu  tvro  »»hortcr worn fur  lli<.-  M»kf  of  liiitiiilialiun,  iiud  tlirj  Mi|h


M


posed  tlivii  i-iid  to  liu  iiiun;  cuuipk-tidy  ntlnitiud  rt
tbiii  part  of  lbt<ir  itiiuitiil  waa  ucvt-r  waMlied.

Cilfoium  Man£  (^  K«Vi«(a  daXawa ).  'Mii-  ttnrtfa.
piiKlcrn  portion  of  the  MvditerraticAn,  lMitwi«iiCi-
tiria  and  Cypnis.  iij*  far  a»  tbe  Gnlf  of  Is-sii*.

CTlix  (K.X.^). S*'*  rtl.IciA.

CiUa  (KAAa). A  »aiiill  tuna  in  tbt<  Tntiul,
brattrd  for  Un  temple  of  Apollo,  ifaniuiiicd  Cill

CUUba  {KtXXifiat.  rillibantinm).  tl)  In  Grroce,*
treatle  uL- stand  fur  aiiytbius,  <-»|weiall.v  fnr&itiirid
(Ariatopb.  JcA.  11*22).  ['i)  hi  Itmitr,  a  diniu;;>tsl>l«,
at  lirst  aqnarp(VaiT.  L.  L.  v.  ll^f.aiid  thco  nximl.

CiluiL  A  povvi'rftil  ElrnM.<an  fatiiil.r  in  Arrc-
(iiitu,  drivrii  ont  of  Ibtdr  nativu  town  in  B.C.3UI,
Init  n;filon-fl  I>y  tint  Knuiaiis.  Tbt'  Ctbiii  **»
nubU-K  or  Luc'niiiai»*)t  in  tlii*tr  Ktalt*,  atid  mdj^  of
tlu-ni in  anL-iL-iil  tiinrit  lutiv liavi-  hflid  cvcu  tti"


Ann»  the  width  and  evciiuoMof  tbotroiicli  (Colnin.
iii.  13,111.

Cicyima  fKiVfcMi). A  di^ne  of  Attica.

CidariB(«t^ii/«s). SiH-^TiAitA.

CiJicia  (KiXiKi'n),  A  diHirict  ui  IIh'  Miiitlu'UMt  of
Asi;i  Minor,  iMHindi'd  tiy  Ibo  ModilKrrani'un  on  tbu
tuiiitii.  Mount  AinaiiiiH  on  Dk-  i-aal,aDd  Muunl  Tun-
roM  on  ihi-  nurtlt.  Tbc  wi;i»teru  part  of  Cilicia  i»
iittuntectrd  by  the  olTuboots  of  the  Taiinift,  vrhile
hi  its  I'astcrii  pait  the  inonutaiu  cUainit  inclose
luiK'h  IiLr>;(.T  tracts  of  level  cuiiiitry;  and  heuce
anm'  thu  divisiou  of  the  country  iutu  Cilicia  Aspvra
«ir  Tnirlica,  and  Cilii-in  Cnnipiwtris — tb«  bitter  hv
iug  al^o  caltt-il  Cilicia  Prnpria.  TIil*  firnt  inliabi-
tanlM  of  thi-  country  :iru  HtippoHi'il  lo  Imve  ht^Pii  of
the  Syrian  racr.  The  niylhieul  >*tury  dorived  tlicir
iiaiac  from  Cilix,  tin:  mui  of  Af;enor,  wlio  Riurtcd

\>itli  bis  hmtlient,  Cadiniis  aud  i'hoenix,  for  Kii- „.  - . .  , ,

rupr.  but  «toH*il«hort  on  the  coast  of  ANJa  Minor.  ^'-.'Si^  'I'Smt-V.  T".  name  has  bceu  miM
and  peopled  with  Ins  folhmers  the  plain  of  Cilicia.  ^^•I'Hy  memorable  by  C.  Cilniua  MaocmiM.  8«
The  country  remained  independent  till  the  time  '  ^'■*'^'-"*'''*'^-

n(  lli«  Pei-Nian  Kmpire,  under  wliieb  it  formed  a  Clmber,  U  TlLLU'S.  A  friend  of  Caesar,  r<wir
Mlnipy,  Imtit  app.-ars  to  have  Ik-hh  still  governed  '"R  '''"""'  'i'"'  "»'■  I'rovinee  of  Hithyuia,  but  «iil«»-
by  it^  native  princes.  Alexander  mibdawl  it  on  M"*'"'".v  "1H' of  his  munlerers.  B.C.  44.
litH  niart-b  into  l'p)Hir  An'm,  and  aftt<r  tbu  divinion  Cimbri  (Kift^pot).  .K  Keltic  people, prolAlIf'*'
of  bis  i-ui|nt-u  it  formnd  a  part  of  ibe  kin);ilom  id'  the  sanii'  rare  tw  llir  Cymry.  (Sre  CkmaK.)  Tbo;'
thi'  Sek'UL'idae.  lis  plains  were  sritli-d  by  tin'«-k»,  apiH^ar  lo  have  inhabited  the  peninsula  wbioli***
and  the  utd  iuhabilaniK  wm-u  fur  the  miMt  part  L-allcd  after  tlieiu  ChiTwoncxuN  Cimbrii-a  (.IiillatMll
4lriveu  back  iTito  the  mountains  of  Cilicia  Aspora,  In  conjnnelion  with  ibe  Tentonos  und  Auilmn'W
whure  they  reuiained  virtually  iuflepcutleul,  prac-  ,  they  miKrated  south,  i;\ith  their  wives  anil  cIiiliM.
(icinir  ndibory  by  land  anil  piracy  by  sea,  till  Fnm-  towards  the  close  of  the  second  centnry  ac-:  *"^
pi\v  drove  ibeiii  from  the  st^a  in  Iiih  war  againnt  the  whole  luist  in  saiil  tn  have  conlniiieil  300,(Ul
lh»  pirate^ ;  and,  haviug  rescued  the  level  country  lighting  men.  Tbcy  defeat«4  Mvcral  Ruauui  ■''
fioin  the  iKiwer  of  Tigranes,  who  had  nvermn  it,  mien,  and  canseil  the  greatest  alarm  at  Dmow.  '■■
he  rmeted  it  inin  a  Uonniii  jiroviiiee,  B.C.  t)7-6t!.  It  C-  113,  they  routed  the  consul  fapiriiiM  Ctrl''*
The  nionnlain  rouulry  was  not  made  a  pn>vtnre  iirar  N'on-ia,  and  then  crossed  over  into  Gaol
till  the  rvi^it  of  \VNpa«ian.  The  Cilieiittis  bore  a  which  they  ravaj;i>d  in  all  ilirtMrtions.  In  llDilbty
luu  charaetet  aiiiuiig  the  {;ret.'kN  and  Hoiniins;  ao  defeated  tbu  couhiiI  luuius  .Silaiiiis:  and  ia  107. 1'x'
Ibat  the  Ciuinus  (Kaprc),  Cappadociaus  (KdTnni-
•HoKtt).  ami  1'ilicia.nn  (Kt'Aucfrl  wera  inlled  the
*'  tbrw'  bad  K's  "  (rp/n  Kihnrd  miKiara).

Ciliclae  PyUeCai  Ili^ni  r^v  KiAucmt)  or  Portae.
The  chief  paws l^elween  Capjiadocia  and  Cilicia,

ibningU  tbo  Taunio,  ou  the  maU  frvm  Tyaua  to ,  'X  f'""  K"iue.  mambod  into  tijiaiu,  wlnn-  tlw)  J*-
Tai-siis.  Itiiftineil  two  or  three  years. The  Koniaui,  a"*"'

CUieium  (iiamt). A  hairelolh. The  uiat«Hal  ,  *' •  »""^  ''*'.*"  "'•'''^'"K  prei.aratiou,*  to  n^^ii-t  tb«tr

of  «hi.  h  the  t;re-k*.  and  Komnns  niniost  iiniver-  ,  f*'""">">''-  ""H''.  nnd  had  plac^l  ihcii  tro,»i«  ■»»»
aallymado  thi-*  kind  of  doth  was  the  hair  of  goat*..  »!»' t"»;'tMund  of  Marms.  The  barbahausrpfniH
The  AMati.s  mad-  it  of  cau,elVh«ir.  U.-als  were  !  *"  ^'^"'  "' '^*  »*'  "'"'  year  lb.- Tentone^  werrd«-
bn«l  for  tluH  purpose  in  Cilicia  :  and  li-..ui  this  ?^'*«'  "*•»>  ^'"^  *"  l"^'""  ^V  **^""«  """^  M«^
-couutrv  the  Uilia  name  of  the  cloth  ^^m  derived,  f^^*''"'  '  '\'*.*  "'  V.'"'*  '^'^  ""'''  J*^"  (»*"',',
Lvcia.Vhrygta.  .Spain,  aiul  l.ibva  al«»  pr-Khued  the  *  "»""■'  *'"'  *'""■  ''"'*'*  **•"-'  l'*!*-*;**  desttaywl  JT
iwime  article. The  ilotb  obtaiiuHl  by  ..pinning and Mariiis  and  CalnliiN  in  the  decisive  baltle^"^

laviiig  goafs-hair was  ncarlv  black,  and wa*. (  a"'l" £»»^lii,  "rar  \  enuia,  in  the  uorlbont»I)

Mi  for  the  coaiNe  dK^  which  iiailore  and  tisher- '-""  *  ""'»»"»,  '*"  fi'uhrrH  iltJTU).


consul  Cassiua  Longiinis,  who  fellja  Ibe  lultki
anil  in  1(C),  llioy  gained  their  iniiHt  brillianl  vloti>0>
near  (he  lihoiie.ovfr  the  iiuitwl  armieMof  tli«cwi»'
sni  Cu.  MiilliuH  and  the  procomiul  S4>rv'ilin*C«?|M
Instead  of  crojssing  the  Al|is,thu  Ciinbri,  ftirttiaAte-


WOil

UMxi

men  wore,  as  it  was  the  least  likely  tn  be  tie-
Ktniyed  by  being  wet:  also  fur  liorse-cloths,  tents,
aarlis,  and  hags  to  Indd  wnrknieii'it  tinds  {/abrilia
rowil,  and  for  the  pur|HNH^  nf  envering  luililary  eu-
giliej»,Hiid  the  walls  and  toweiw  of  Iwsieged  rilivs,

NO  iw  to  ilojuirn  the  force  of  the  ram  (iwe  AlilKi*).  and  of  a  bi-ttoriraj  |M>oplt<.  The  niytbiral  CiinOWT''*
«ud  lo  prvMcrve  the  woodwork  frmn  Iwiiig  sot  on  uieiitioiicd  by  iiomer.tlwelt  in  ilw  fmlltrst  W»it»*'
lire.  j  the  ocean,  enveU»i»d  in  constant  mists  and  da'*''

Among  the OrientaKsaekclotb,  which  wjib  wHb  jnoaa.  Later  writers  sought  to  localize  theffl,  "■''
Ibem  always  haircloth,  was  worn  in  eipress  morti-  aceonllagly  placfMl  tbem  either  in  Italy,  uo»r  ll»*
Jbalion  and  grn-f Aft»r  the  decline  of  the  Kouiaii  ,  lake  AvDrniis,or  in  Spain,  or  in  the  Tauric  CbfW


Cimluus  or  Ciminiua  Mons.  A  niige  »f  wfi»°'
laiiut  in  Ktrnria.  thickly  coverx'd  with  wood  i*»''
tun  Ciaiintii»,  Silvn  t.:in)inirti,  near  a  lake  of 'b«
Biinii>  naniL-,  northwest  of  Tai-qniuii.

Cimmetii  iKui>i(piot>. The  name  of  a  mylbH)*'


CIMMKRIUS  BOSPORUS


847


CI  HON


ooaiu.  The  historical  Ciinnterii  dwelt  on  the  Pa-
hiB  Maeotix  (Sea  of  Azov),  in  the  Taurtc  Chersoue-
8QS,  and  in  Asiatic  Sannatia.  Driven  from  their
abodes  by  the  Scythians,  they  passed  into  Asia
Minor  on  the  northeast,  and  penetrated  west  as  far
an  Aeolis  and  Ionia.  They  took  Sardis,  B.C.  635,  in
tbe  reign  of  Ardya,  king  of  Lydia;  hut  they  were
exi)elle<l  from  AJiia  by  Alyattea,  the  grandson  of
Antys,  about  B.C.  600.

Cimmeiiiu  Bospfinxa  {Ktfifiipios  Bdcnropor).
See  Bosporus.

dmolns  {KiftaXos).  An  island  in  the  Aegean
Sea,  one  of  the  Cyclades,  between  StpfanGs  and  Me-
Um,  celebrated  for  its  fine  Tihite  eartli,  nsed  by
fiillen*  for  cleaning  cloths. 8ee  Cketa  ;  Fullo.

Cimon  (Kifimv).  (1)  Tbe  son  of  Miltiades  and
of  Hegesipyl^,  the  daughter  of  Oloms,  a  Thracian
prince.  His  education,  according  to  Plutarch,  was
very  much  neglected,  and  he  himself  indulged,  at
firat,  in  every  species  of  excess.  At  his  father's
death  be  seems  to  have  succeeded  to  a  very  scan-
ty furtnne,  and  he  would  perhaps  have  found  it
very  difBcutt  to  pay  the  fine  of  fifty  talents  which
had  been  imposed  npou  his  parent,  and  which  the
sou  was  bound  to  pay  to  tho  public  treasury,  had
nut  Callias,  one  of  the  wealthiest  men  of  Athens,
sirnck  by  the  charms  of  his  half-sister  Elpiuic6,
(itulertaken  to  discbarge  the  sum  as  tbe  price
of  lier  hand.  (See  ElpinicIi.)  Cimon,  however,
bad  attracted  notice  and  gained  reputation  by
the  spirit  which  he  displayed  on  tbe  occasion  of
leaving  the  city  on  tbe  approach  of  tbe  Persians,
when  he  was  the  foremost  to  bang  np  a  bridle  in
tbe  Acropolis,  as  a  sign  that  be  placed  all  his  hojies
iu  tbe  fleet ;  and  also  by  tbe  valour  with  which  he
fought  at  Salamis.  Aristides,  in  particular,  saw  in
him  a  &t  coadjutor  to  himself  and  antagonist  to
Tlieniist-octes,  and  exerted  himself  in  his  favour;
and  tbe  readiness  with  which  the  allied  Greeks,
when  disgusted  by  the  arrogance  of  Pansanins,
united  tliemselves  with  Athens,  was  owing  in  a
great  measure  to  Ciiuou'a  mild  temper  aud  to  his
frank  and  gentle  mauuers.  Tbe  popularity  of
Tliemistocles  was  already  declining,  wliile  Cimon,
by  a  series  of  successful  enteriirises,  was  rapidly
ri»ing  in  public  favour.  He  defeated  the  Persians
in  Thrace,  ou  the  hanks  of  tbe  Strymun,  took  Eion,
aud  made  himself  master  of  tbe  whole  country.
He  conquered  tbe  island  of  Scyros,  the  inhabitants
of  which. were  addicted  to  piracy;  aud  brought,
tbvnce  to  Athens  what  were  deemed  tbe  bones  of
tlie  natioual  hero  Theseus.  He  next  subdued  all
tlie  cities  on  tbe  coast  of  Asia  Minor,  and  went
against  tbe  Persian  fleet  which  lay  at  the  mouth
of  tbe  Eurymedon.  Tbe  Peraians,  although  su-
perior in  nnmlMF,  did  not  dare  to  abide  an  engage-
ment, but  sailed  up  the  river  to  place  themselves
inider  the  protectinn  of  their  land  forces.  Cimon,
bowever,  provoked  them  to  a  battle,  and,  having
defeate«l  and  sunk  or  taken  two  hnudred  ships,
laude<l  his  men,  flushed  with  victory,  and  com-
pletely routed  the  Persian  army.  Returning  to
Athens  after  tbeao  two  victories  thus  achieved  in  a
aitigle  day,  he  employed  tbe  perquisites  of  his  com-
luand,  aud  the  resources  which  he  had  acqnired
from  his  successes  over  the  barbarians,  iu  the  em-
helliahroeut  of  his  native  city  and  iu  relieving  the
wanu  of  the  indigent.  He  laid  a  part  of  tbe  foun-
dotiouB  of  the  Long  WnlJs  with  magnificent  solid-
ity at  hits  own  cost,  aud  tbe  southern  wall  of  the


citadel  was  built  with  tbe  treasures  which  he
brought  from  Asia  into  the  coffers  of  tbe  State.
He  also  sot  the  example  of  adorning  the  public
places  of  the  city  with  trees;  and,  by  introducing
a  stream  of  water,  converted  the  Aca«1emy,  a  spot
about  two  miles  north  of  the  city,  from  an  arid
waste  iuto  a  delightful  grove.  (See  Acadbmia.)
He  threw  down  the  fences  of  his  fields  and  or-
chards, that  »U  who  wished  might  enter  and  par-
take of  their  fruits.  He  not  only  gave  the  usual
entortaiuments  expected  from  the  rich  to  the  mem-
bers of  his  own  borough,  but  kept  a  table  con-
stantly open  for  them.  He  never  appeared  in  pub-
lic without  a  number  of  persons  attending  him  in
good  apparel,  who,  when  they  met  with  any  elderly
citizen  scantily  clothed,  would  insist  on  exchanging
their  warm  mantles  for  his  threadbare  covering.
It  was  the  office  of  tbe  same  jtersons  respectfully  to
approach  any  of  the  poorer  citizens  of  good  char-
acter whom  they  might  see  standing  iu  the  mar-
ket-place, and  silently  to  put  some  small  pieces  of
money  into  their  bauds.  This  latter  kind  of  ex-
penditure was  certainly  of  a  mischievous  tendency ;
aud  was  not  tho  less  that  of  a  demagogue  because
Cimon  sought  popularity  not  merely  for  his  own
sake,  but  for  that  of  bis  order  and  hia  party.

About  B.C.  466,  Cimon  was  sent  to  tbe  Tbracian
Chei-Bouesus,  of  which  the  Persiaus  Still  kept  }ioa-
session,  aud  having  driven  them  out,  next  reduced
the  islaud  of  Thasus,  and  took  possession  of  the
Thosiau  gold  mines  on  tbe  neighbouring  continent.
Scarcely,  however,  had  be  returned  to  Attica,  when
an  accusation  was  preferred  against  him  of  having
been  corrupted  by  the  king  of  Macedonia,  because
be  had  lefrained,  not,  according  to  the  common
account,  from  attacking  the  Macedonians  then  at
peace  with  Atheus,  but  from  striking  a  blow  at  the
1  Tbracian  tribes  on  the  frontier  of  that  kingdom,
who  bad  recently  cut  off  the  Athenian  settlers  on
the  banks  of  tho  Strymon.  (See  Amphipolis.)
From  this  accusation  Cimon  had  a  very  narrow
J  escape.  Having  been  sent,  however,  after  this,
with  a  body  of  troops  to  aid  the  Spartans  before
Ithom€,  and  the  latter  having,  after  some  interval,
sent  back  thoir  Athenian  allies,  whom  they  sus-
^lected  of  not  lending  them  any  effectual  assist-
ance, the  irritation  produced  by  this  national  in-
sult fell  principally  upon  Cimon,  who  was  known
to  be  an  admirer  of  the  Spartan  character  and
constitution,  and  he  was  accordingly  driven  into
exile.  Subsequent  events,  however,  made  the
Athenians  feel  the  want  of  this  able  commander,
and  he  was  recalled  and  sent  on  an  expedition
agoinst  Egypt  and  Cyprus;  but  was  carried  off
by  illness,  or  the  consequences  of  a  wound,  in  the
harbour  of  Citinm,  which  place  he  was  besieging
(B.C.  449).  His  spirit,  however,  still  animated  his
!  countrymen ;  for  the  fleet,  when  sailing  home  with
i  his  remains,  gained  n  naval  victory  over  a  large
'  squadron  of  Phtenician  and  Cilician  galleys  near
I  the  Cyprian  Salamis,  aud  fallowed  up  this  victory
by  another  which  they  gained  on  shora,  either  over
the  troops  which  had  lauded  from  the  enemy's  ships,
or  over  a  land  force  by  which  they  were  supported.

Cimon  wae,  beyond  dispute,  the  ablest  and  most
successful  general  of  his  day;  and  his  victories
shed  a  lustre  on  tbe  arms  of  Athens  which  almost
dimmed  the  glories  of  Marathon  and  Salamia.

(2)  A  famona  painter,  a  native  of  Cleonae,  who
flourished  about  B.c.  460.  He  is  said  to  have  been
the  first  to  paint  in  perspective. See  Pictura.


ClSAErilON


MS


i-ASSA


CiaAethoa  {Kivai6wv)-  <>Tir.  nfilir  iiiiMt  jinilitic
of  tVi. (.•>i;lii-  |»iwt». SL'e  Cvcuti roBTAF,; llo-

duSra  {K*wiipay A  Bm%\\  iftlaiid  io  tho  Aegeau

Sva,  vrwt  of  Naxoti,  celcbrntixl  for  Its  urtichokeB

Cinoia  Lex. See  Lbx*.

Cluoluuatus,  L.  QriNcrtrs.  A  Kntunii  )mtri-
i-i;iii,  rtlin»e  name  bcloiign  M  thtt  eadier  bistury
oflltu  Kcpiiltlic,  ami  hnii  n  well-kuuwu  auil  Hpirit-
HliiTiuj;  Icgt'iiil  coil II uf  Km!  willi  il.  His  (mhi.  Cih'jmi
Qiiiiictiu9.  Iiiul  Ih'vd  liniiirt)ii!tl  uij  lUTiiiiiir. ufliib  vio-
lent Iai)(;itagi*  tnwanlu  tlio  tHbiiiiff,  anil  tlic  fatlit'r
liml  rt'tirtMl  t^  liJH  own  ]mtl'iin(>iiy,  uloof  fi'oiii  Ihi[i-
iitur  tiininltM.  The  HiiccfHNPtt  uf  tlitt  Aciiui  him)  Wt]-
Bci  ill  n.c.  4M  rr-iHlurinl  Ihf  (qipoiiitnuMit  i)f  ii  ctic-
(ftlor  iiccti^*«ary,  niiil  I'iiiriiiiiiiliift  van  (.■Iid.hcii  Io
(liiiT  liiyli  ollioo.  TUe  dcle^'atea  who  were  wut
r<i  ntiiuiDnro  tliia  to  bitii  fuiiiid  tbu  Koiuuii  iiotile
|tlougliiiif{  hid  own  HelilM.  iiiid  fi-uiu  llie  [>litii;;li  lio
wiw  transfcm*il  to  the  l)i;;hi'«l  iiiaKit*tra*-y  of  bitt
iiiitivei  Stiitu.  Tilt'  (lioUitor  tai<l  vuiuitt  Iijh  riirul  lia-
UilitnL'iilH,  ivKi*ittiit?4l  Iht^  eii^igiiK  of  MliMoliit«  [tower,
U-vi«'il  a  uew  urnty,  uiarclietl  all  iii^lil  to  I>riug
tli»  tici't'Miiury  Hticooiir  Id  the  coiihiiI  )liiiiic-iriFi,  wlio
\%IU!  mirroiiiiiletl  by  the  etii'iiiy  aiitl  MuckailiMl  iii
liU  camp,  aiitl  Uefure  inoriiiiig  KiirroiitidiMl  tlic  uji-
i<in,v'H  nrniy,  and  rcdiicvd  it  to  a  coiiilitioii  exactly
siiiiilnr  t<>  tbat  iii  wliicli  tlie  Homiiuit  liml  bcmi
placed.  Tho  bmlli'd  At'ipti  were  gind  to  Nulunit
Io  t!ie  vlclor'n  |iTin«;  iiiml  Ciiicinimttm,  tlieivi^xitt
returning  in  rriiini|ili  Ui  iJotiic,  laiil  down  hiit  ilic-
latorial  imwi-r.  afltr  huviii;;  liclii  it  only  fourteen
davd,  and  i-ctiinif<l  to  Iii)*  furrn.  At  an  advanced
agu  lio  was  agaiji  a|ipiMiit4Hl  dictator,  to  tvatraiii
the  [mwLT  of  SpiinUi*  Macliuh  (■].  v.)*  aikI  »)!ai[i
|)i'(fvcd  tiimt^elf  tlic  dtdiv*'ivr  of  bw  contilry  (Val.
Max.  Iv.  4,  T  ;  Liv.  iii.  *2i>).

ClnciimuB  ( (Xt| ).  A  ringlet  of  hatr.  See
Coma.

CLnciufl  AJimentus. 8«e  AUMRVrt^t*.

ductus  (  fitu(a*tui,  iT«(iiC<»i"i ).  A  sort  of  kilt
reoctiiiiK  U>  tlm  kncci*.  wnni  l>y  lucn,  instoiul  of
the  tunic,  while  noiking  ( Varr.  /-.  /,.  v.  114).

Ciuctus  QaUaua. .Sre  TiXiA.

Ciiieaa  iKii'fnd.  A  Tlii;»iuiltui),  a  niiuiater  and
friend  **(  Pyrrhiis  and  t;ni|doy<Ml  Uy  the  Jailer  on
many  eDibiinnictt.  lIv  Imd  iH^t^-ii  a  (iiipil  of  Dciuon-
llienvm,  and  |>utVM.'(»(^d  conniilfrAhU^  talviit  iw  uii
orator.  Having  Wen  nout  by  I'yrrhiiM  to  Rinnu
with  iir«i|>oHiiU  of  peace,  liu  rompai^d  )he  Innate,
nn  hid  netnrn,  to  nii  mwembly  of  kiiij^s,  nnd  a  war
with  tim  RiimniiN  to  a  i-<)iile«t  with  aiiotliiT  Lernao-
ait  hydra. Ho  dit-d  about  B.C.  S76. Sec  PvHIini'S.

Cinerailum.  A  niche  in  a  h>inl>,  ailapt^'d  ft<r
ihr  rfct-'ption  of  a  largi)  cincrnry  urn,  or  ii  »tir-
i-oplmfrnn,  ascontradistingniabet)  from  cotumbafium
(i|.  v.),  wbicli  WI18
uf  Minaller  diimtu*
»iioiiH.  and  uu  1  y
formed  to  receive
tt  pair  of  jars  {ol-
lar)  (luscript.  np.
Ornt.'SSO.IO).  Tlic
ill  tiEttratiua, which
representa  itn«
Mde  uf  a  sepnl-
obrul  chamber,  aa

it Nppeiire*! when  ClMnnum. (iCirb  I


lintt  cxcHViiiud,  prcsenttt  an  nrruuKtiawnt  ftiiniTat
to  that  sec  forth  i>y  the  prtrcding  inKriptir>n.«iih
two  co/irm6iiri<i  at  the  hotlom,  over  whieh  ambt
Hain<<  innnWr  of  cinerary  oirhfA  fur  uroa,  uid  i
larger  one  in  llie  ccnim  iriMMariitm  mAf/aHim),«il)i
iti*  warcophagUM. See  SEPL'U'KtiM.

CinerarJua. St*  CALAMlsTmsi.

dugres. SeeFONl'i*;  SEPi'LLBtTl.

Cineaiaa  {Ktytitrlaty  A  tlilliymmbic  ponl  of
Allii^UH  wbn  w:u4  ridicnled  by  AriBlopblui»>  nil
ulliL-r  nritum  id'  comedy,  in  reveugo  for  wlii<:Ii  br
Hucceeilfd  in  Kocuring  tho  abolition  uf  thu  di»nfi«
for  conn;dy. fie«  ClloitlHiCH.

dngx  Tho  nuKlprn  Cinca ;  a  river  in  HiN^iia
Tarraconenajs,  fulling  with  the  Sicorii  miK  the
Ibcruu.

dnget6rix.  A  f  lani,  one  of  the  first  men  iti  ibf
city  of  Ihe  Treviri  (TrfeTCH.  TrierX  who  nllnrhwl
himtwlf  to  MiH  RontaoH,  though  iton-)n-ln«r  U  Mu-
tionmrnH(q.  v.),  the  tu'wiof  ihe  iudc)iendi<iil  partj.

dugtUum. Sfo  Baltkl'S  ;  ZoXA

dngtUum.  A  town  in  i'icennni  on  »  n>rV,  baUt
by  Lnbi^niis  Khnrtly  Iwfore  the  brvaUing  out  of  tb^
Civil  War,  B.C.  49. It  ii>  now  Cingolo.

Ciulflo.  A  hlttvo  who  aided  iu  druftHingiliul;'*
Imir.  The  name  iti  giveu  fivm  the  ctitU  or  piiwiler
employed  for  tinting  tho  hair  a  light  nul>iiMMSrr\.
ad  Verg.  Mm.  xii.  611). See  Coma.

Clima.  1 1 )  L.  CoHNELifs.  An  adfapnoit  of
Mariutt,  who  ptayvd  ac<ni»piriionH  jiart  iti  the  ci™
war  belwcHfn  that  leader  and  Snlla,  HnTJng  ttr
t.-iined  to  the  coitKulHliip,  afl«r  the  pritseriplJoofl'
Marina  l\v  hia  opponuut,  ho  began  fo  oxort  bini^clf
for  the  recall  of  the  former,  and  accnsed  SiiIU,wl»
waa  joHt  going  wt  prucointnl  Ui  Aoin,  of  mnlBilBli**
i»l  ration.  That  cttniinaiuler,  however,  HioV  to  •»"*■
ticc  of  the  complaint.  Aft-cr  the  departitrn  '"
Sitlla,  he  bronght  forward  oiico  inoro  llit'  li«  «
•Sutpicinii,  which  adniilteil  (he  ItaliaoH  inr«all  lb*
thirty-live  tribe*  without  dinlincii.in.  A  wvipf
riot  ensned,  numbers  wen^  ulain,  and  t'iniia,  *'*''
bis  chief  partisans,  wa.»  driven  fnmi  the  city  by  !•*"
colleuguo  OclavioH.  The  Italian  towii.s.  r<'gar<hi'2
the  canxe  of  Ciium  aa  their  own,  n'wived  biin*'"'
tho  nlrnont  conliality.  lie  colhx-ted  thirty  Je^'*"*'
called  the  proscribed  to  bin  anppart.  and,  williJ'*"
rins,  Scrtorius.  and  Cnrbo,  marched  upon  aui!  !■«''
p4>8«ie(i«ion  of  Rome.  A  «reue  of  biniHltiluvl  a*'
lawlcHti  rapine  imw  fluaned,  which  has  pprli»|*  "■*
paralttd  in  anrieiit  or  inwlem  limej^,  and  hi*  »•
aervedty  proenrtt<l  for  lh<w«*  who  wore  the  wVf*
in  it  the  nnmitigatcd  aldiom-nce  of  t>o<''t<''''^
Ciniia  and  .Marias,  by  their  own  anlhority,""*
declared  llieinnclves  coimuU  for  the  ennniiiff  «*'■
hnt  Alarinn  dying,  after  having  liclit  that  offical*'
only  wvciiteen  days,  I'innn  remained  in  effect  th"
aliHolnle  ma«t«^r  of  Koine.  During  llie  »parr  "'
three  yean*  nfier  tlii«  victory  of  hi*,  he  cotiUii**'
to  hold  pow*.'«,sion  of  the  govemtoent  at  haM*^  *
pi'riod  during  »hieh,  an  Ciceixj  reinarkk.  Ihe  K'~
pnblie  wa<i  willioiit  laws  and  wilbont  digititf-  ^'
letij-th.  however,  SnII».  after  lerniinuting  the  **'
with  Mittiridate*.  prepare*!  to  iiiarcb  boine  '*''■'
bis  army  and  pniiiHh  bis  opianienl:*.  (.'iniia, o"^"
Ilia  cnUen^im  Carho,  reiudvetl  l)ien;n|>oii  to  ttf^
the  Adriatic,  and  anlicipate  Snlla  by  atucih^J
bini  in  Greece;  but  a  mniiny  of  ibeir  tHM»i«  «»'
rtned,  in  wbieb  Cinna  wan  nlain,*u,c.  77.  Hanel>tv>
viulenl,  always  ragt?r  for  vengeance,  addictnl  '*


CINNAHUS


849


CIKCti


tlt-biiiicliery,  }irecipitato  in  his  plans,  but  always
4ltH)iI;tyiiig  courage  in  their  execution,  Cinna  at-
Miiieil  to  a  power  little  less  almolute  thau  that
afterwards  held  by  Sulla  or  Caesar;  and  it  is
M>inevhat  remnrkable  that  be  should  be  so  little
known  tliat  scarcely  a  single  personal  anecdote  of
hint  is  to  be  found  on  record.  {'2)  One  of  the  cou-
8)iiratorB  against  Caesar  (Plut.  Cues.).  (3)  Gaius
Hfxvius.  a  Roman  poet,  intimate  with  Caesiir,  and
tribuue  of  the  people  at  the  time  when  the  latter
was  aeaassinnted.  According  to  Plutarch,  he  went
to  attend  the  obsequies  of  Caesar,  but  being  miH-
taken  by  the  populace  for  Cinua  the  conspirator,
was  torn  to  pieces  by  them.  Helvius  composed
a  poem  entitled  Smyrna  (or  Zmyrna),  on  wbicb  he
was  employed  nine  orteu  years.  Four  fragments
of  it  have  reached  us.  It  appears  to  have  been
ciiaracterized  by  considerable  obscurity  of  mean-
ing  until  the  grammarian  Crassicius  wrot«  an  able
oninmentary  upon  it  (Suet.  Oram.  18).  Some
otber  fragments  have  also  reached  na  of  other  pro-
ductions of  this  poet.  They  may  be  fonnd  iu  L.
Mailer's  edition  of  Catullus  (1870).

Cinn&nua,  Ioannks  ( 'laxmn^r  KtWa^or).  One
of  the  beat  known  of  the  Byzantine  historians  who
donrished  about  a.d.  lloO.  He  wrote  the  life  of  the
enipcmr  Maune)  Comnenns  and  of  his  fathiir  in  six
lK>ok!t,  still  extant. Kd.  by  Meineke  (Bonn,  1^36).

Cinyps  (Kito^).  The  modern  Wiid-Kliakan  or
Kiuifu;  a  small  river  on  the  nortberii  coast  of  Af-
rica, between  the  Syrtes,  and  forming  the  eastern
liomidary  of  the  proper  territory  of  the  African
Tri)>oli».  The  district  about  it  was  called  by  the
nainp  name,  and  was  famous  for  its  fine-baired
peats.  The  Roman  poets  use  the  adjective  Ciny-
pLins  iu  the  general  sense  of  Libycus  or  Africus.

Cinj^as  (^Viivvpas).  Supposed,  in  the  Greek
mythology,  to  have  been  king  of  Cyprus,  the  oldest
I>ri»4l  of  Apbroditt^  io  Papbos,  the  founder  of  that
'ity. and  the  ancestor  of  the  prieHtly  family  of  the
(:i)Tradae.  His  wealth  aud  long  life,  bestowed
npon  him  by  Aphrodite,  were  provcrhial ;  and  from
ApuUo,  who  was  said  to  be  his  father,  he  received
tht  gift  of  song.  He  was  accounted  the  founder
^  the  ancient  hymns  snng  at  the  services  of  the
Papbiau  Aphrodite  and  of  Adonis.  Consequently
i'-  was  reckoned  among  the  oldest  singers  and
ii'''.-icians,  his  name,  perhaps,  being  Phrenician,
'>r:\t^  from  kinnor,  "a  harp."  The  story  added
:.*;  he  was  the  father  of  Adonis  (q.  v.)  by  his
•  "  .  daagbter  Myrrha,  aud  that,  when  made  aware
<■:  •"-•-  oin,  he  took  away  his  own  life.

Oppna.  (1)  Originally  the  trunk  of  a  tree  with
.'•  bnncbee  lopped  off,  left  standing  in  the  ground
*^  1  Mump,  or  else  stuck  in  the  ground.  The  ci|)-
:  ■*  was  someliroes  shariMined  to  a  point,  and  thus
t-onl  in  forliGcation as  a  sort  of  cttevaux-dt-frue

^^  B.  Cvii.73). (2)  A  low  column  of  stone,

- ':.Bi««  round,  bnt  oftener  rectangular,  and  used

M  a  mark  of  the  division  of  land  by  the  agri-

■  *  *«■«().¥.);  and  (&)  as  a  sepulchral  monument,
K-L-  -  u(  Uie«e  having  been  exhumed.  The  illus-
"^'■'<  hrte  given  shows  a  cippus  coutalned  in
'  '  Twnlry  collection  in  the  Rritish  Hnseaui,  and
'"--'«*  to  tbc  memory  of  one  Viria  Primitiva.

'  n  •rvexsl  cippi  are  found  the  letters  S.  T.  T.  L. ;
'  -^  j>,  .3«l  Uki  terra  I«ri«,  whence  Persins  says,  Aon
— — if^M  »■■«  imprimit  o»ta  {Sat.  i.  37).

I',  vac  aim*  osaal  to  place  at  one  comer  of  the
'•"•"  .i^-^nMiml  a  cippus,  on  which  the  extent  of


Sepukbral  Ctppui. (BritlBh  Uubduid.)

the  bnrying-ground  was  marked,  along  the  road
(in  front e),  and  backward  to  the  fields  [in  ayrum)
(Hor.  Sat.  i.  8, 1%  13). See  Sepulcuum.

Cippus  or  Cipiu,  Gbnucics.  A  Roman  praptor,
on  whose  head  horns  suddenly  sprouted  as  he  was
leaving  the  city.  The  hanispices  declared  this  por-
tent  to  indicate  that  if  he  re-entered  Rome  he
would  be  made  king,  to  avert  which  he  inipoHod
perpetual  exile  on  himself  (Ovid,3ff/.xv.5t3ri;  Vul.
Max.  V.  6, 3).

Clrc6  (Ki'pK)}).  The  sister  of  Aeetes,  king  of  Col-
chis, and  daughter  of  the  Sun  and  Pers^S,  or  Per-
sels,  one  of  the  ocean-nymphs.  Circ6  is  celebrated
for  her  skill  in  magic  arts,  and  for  her  knowledge  of
subtle  poisons.  According  to  Homer  (Od. if.  135 foil.),
she  dwelt  iu  an  island  (Aeaea),  attended  by  four
nymphs,  and  all  persons  who  approached  her  d  well-
ing were  first  feasted,  and  then,  on  tasting  the
contents  of  her  magic  cup,  converted  into  beust«.
When  Odysseus  hnd  been  thrown  on  her  shores,  he
depute<l  some  of  his  companious  to  explore  the
country;  these,  incautiously  partaking  of  the  ban-
(jnet  set  before  them,-were,  by  the  effect  of  the  en-
chanted potion,  transformed  into  swine.  When
Odysseus  himself,  on  hearing  of  their  misfortune
from  Enrylochus,  set  out  U*  release  them  or  share
their  fate,  he  was  met  by  HermeH,  wlio  gave  him  a
plant  uamed  TMo/y(/MiXt;),iM)tent  against  lierniagir,
and  direct4td  him  how  to  act.  Accordingly  when
she  handed  him  the  medicated  cup,  he  drunk  of
it  freely;  and  Circ^,  thinking  it  had  proilneed  its
usual  effect,  striking  him  with  her  wand,  bade  hint
go  join  his  comratles  in  their  sty.  But  OdyMens,
drawing  his  sword,  threatened  to  slay  her;  and  th<^
terrified  goddess  bound  herstdf  by  a  solenni  uutli
to  do  him  no  injury.  She  afterwards,  at  his  desin*,
restore<l  his  companious  to  their  pristine  form,  and
they  all  abode  iu  her  dwelling  for  an  entire  ycir.
Circ^  is  said  to  have  had  by  Odysseus  a  son  uuint-d
Telegonns(q.  v.),  who  afterwards  unwittingly  »le«
his  own  father  in  Ithaca,  whither  he  had  wandered
in  search  of  him. See  Ouvkkki'S.

Later  writers  took  great  liberties  with  the  nar-
ratives of  Homer  nnd  Hesioil.  Thus,  for  example,
Dionysins,  the  Cyclic  poet,  makes  Circ^  the  daugh-
ter of  Aeetes  by  He<-at4*,  the  daughter  of  his
brother  Perses. He  gi»eH  on  to  say  that  Hbe  waa


CIRCKir


350


CIRCCS


Iitorrtwl  toTW  kiiiji;  of  lltu  IjiuniAtiaiiB,  wtiom  she
Htiwiiivil  ami  m'txtnt  \i\n  kiiiKiloiii ;  but.  );ovt>riilti|;
yrruiiiiciiily,  she  was  L>xiit>ll«<l,  iiuil  then  llivl  U>  :i
ilitwi'i  i8lt>  i>f  tlio  oceiiii.  or,  as  aom^  nani,  U*  llic
iciiillniiil  tiHiiHMl  from  tier  in  Iliily.  (H«i>  ClltCKII.)
I'liw  l^'iliii  writers  l)ii>iii;«  tixik  iH*r;i.<«i(i:t  to  ooitiirut
Tiivi*  wiili  tlioir  own  H<-iiiily  iiiytlinlnj^y.  Hva  Civ.
ff.  Jt.  iii.  H>,  4H;  uihI  the  arliclii  SfVLLA.

CiltieU.  Alt  ancient  town  of  I^itiuni  on  tlit<
pminonlory  Cii'ccum  (Ki/nccio)'^  kiuI  1>y  tliu  Koniiui
pot'U  to  have  boon  Ihi*  abo<U'  of  Ciro«S  (q.  v.).  Un
nytttetH  wtsro  highly  e«ttM?nu;<l  Uy  the  Ronidim  (.Jtiv.
iv.  Ul>i.

Ciroeslnm  (Ki/ixijo-tor).  A  city  of  Mt-'HopotAinia
on  till*  fOAt  liuiilf  of  rbo  Knphntttw,  tit  the  month
of  the  AhorrhrtM.  It  niiirknt  tlii;  cxtrvniti  vftnteni
limit  of  itm  Roman  Kiit|iin'.

CircXuuB  {Ka(tKinot,  lliafiririjt).  A  conipius  The
ouniptkMH  UHOil  by  fltatiiiirie^,  BKliitects,  masons,
ami  car|ient«rB  i*  often  rejtreflented  on  tito  tontbs
of  anoh  artiticere,  together  with  tltn  oilier  tnstru-
nnMit«  of  Ihetr  iitt^fetwion  or  tmdp.  TIio  annexed
llliistration  exhibitn  two  kititin  of  ri>rii|ift«w»,  viz.,
llio  coiiinxiii kihil iiitetl for ilr.ialn|^  eirrtrA  antl


(.IrculntOT.


Ijunin)


Ciralal. (Orator,  fVp. /MerVjp^  I

mrntitirini;  iliHlniiPf^.  and  one  with  carved  lofB,
jirubably  inlciKlcil  lo  miMumro  the  IhicktieMof  ool-
niniui,  tfylinilrioiil  pieces  of  kooiI,  or  piuiilar  ob-
jects. The  common  kimi  is  dcacriliotl  by  the  «cho-
Itiut  ou  Aristophanes,  n-ho  corai»ariL'9  it«  fonu  with
that  uf  tbe  h-tter  A.  The  myllinto;*iMtfl  nnpitoKod
tbiii  iuatnimeiil  to  have  bevu  iiiventril  by  Perdix,
who  WHS  llw  napbvvv  of  I)a«Mla1ii»,  ami,  Ihrotigb
cttvy.  thrown  by  hun  ov*r  tbe  proripico  of  the
Athenian  ADro|ioli!i  (Ovid,  Mft.  viii.  ^1).  Com-
pasMNt  of  variims  forms  were  diacovored  iu  a  stat-
uary'a  tioiitic  at  Potnpvii.

Circit6r«a  drcaltoras  <R-«j><Vo>m).  Ilorsi'nien
«h»  m^ilo  tlic  roiMiiU  ill  the  lluninn  camp,  ami  tu-
ftppct<Ht  (ho  sentry  |>o«t(i.  Fonr  of  these  inspector*,
who  wi-rt>  Kcleclr-d  f««r  this  iloly  every  day,  aeeoni-
in|c  lo  »  rp|tulaT  cycle,  received  from  the  trilmne
writlcti  ioBtmctton*  as  lo  the  time  when  they
wcro  (o  viait  each  i>«»*t,  and  the  iinmWr  of  jmstfl
to  be  visited  After  receivioB  Iheir  tinlrni,  they
wvnt  ami  |Mi9tr«l  llH-inwUe^t  by  iho  Ar?<t  loaniph-
of  tlh>  truirii^  tlMt  eoiiinrion  of  whtoh  waa  revtuirrtl
to  Me«  lUai  Ibe  biMirK  of  the  watch  wm  pn^peily
Ktrvn  by  the  sound  of  lb*  trmupet;  then,  when
Ijio  itmc  came,  ihc  firtMit,>r  of  the  flnt  watch  pnw
caaJrd  «u  hi^  r^>and«  to  nil  the  pw^t^:  if  hr  fonnd
iW  lEWtrd't  AW  Mke  aud  on  duty,  he  t^wk  their  taU
lata;  if  he  fwiud  ibem  a<«lrcp.  or  any  htic  absent
(Vnm  his  pi*at.  he  railed  H|>on  IIk  frirnds  who  oe-
e4Mii]Muiied  him  t«i  witn*4B  tbe  fiwl^  abd  »>  ]uu«m1
AB  Ut  the  next  |kmI.  Tha  tune  waa  done  by  the
tirtmihTtm  of  tbe  other  watches  Tlie  ne\l  mom-
ton,  itll  lh<>  tiwpeetoT*  HppeMTd  l*«(ihiv  the  trtl»-
iinea,  And  prewntisl  the  tatdelA  they  hail  received;
a*«r  joiMil  %iho'«'  tablet  wa»  not  pr^Mliieed  wa*  re-


quired to  aecoDiit  for  it. If  thi;  fanlt  lay  nilli  \\»'
riiruitor,  he iraa  liable  to  ti  Htoning,  wLieb  *a6
;;ciH<niiIy  t'atnl. Sun  Castiia.

Circiua A  strong  wind  blowiug  in  Htv  matit-
em  part  of  Gatil
from the north-
west. St!e Anl.
Gell.  ii.  tW.

Cironlator.

TIk"  n»)ni.iii  namo
for any stroll-

m  o  n  n  t  r  b  a  ii  k
whi»  inado  hia
living  by  fouta
of  niugio  or  by
t  lie  cxbibitiun
i>f  trained  ani-
mals (Pet  ron.  tV).

Circomlitlo. Sec  Picn:HA.
/Circamluvio. Alluviul  bind.
f Ctrcua  (xtpKoti A  bnihlinji  used  by  Uif *^
j  mans  (or  chari4ii  raceji  and  oilier  nroiisciueut«, ■**"
Vgeneral  form  of  which  was  horrowtrd  frura  the ^"
fro8po/Mic  of  the  Greeks. (See  lIil'f<>l»tinMl'»  )  ^^

namo  is  derived  from  the  circnit  made  bylbr  ^^^*
itig  cbariota  iTarr.  L.  L.  v.  153).

The  Circnit  MajLJmmt  in  Rome  was  for  a  Itiog  I
the  only  building  of  the  kind,  ami  apiiearx  Iv  It-
been  the model fruiD  which all later  rirfi
eopieil. Vitriiviini does not mention the  cia
in  hid  treatiso  un  Roman  architecture. Arom^^^'''>t
to the le(;end,  Romulus held (be  C'on«tliilla<'-  -9  *^
gamui  ill  hunonr  of  tho  Latin  deity  Couimii *"*
CONsraUAl,  iu  the  Vallia  Mnreia,  »  long,  iiar
iloprvssiou  between tbe Palatine  and Avei*. "■iiwl
hilla. It was during the c«lebrntioii of (^
games  that  tho  rape  of  the  Suhlue  wonieu  h
to  have  taken  place  (Vnl.  Max.  Ii 4). The  I  — ^'"tf
level  bottom  ami  sloping  Hidea  of  the  Vullii  ^r4<ir-
cia  made  it  a  natnrally  convenient  plare  for  r~^it*»
to  bo  held  ami  seen  by  a  crowd  of  siM-ctatora. «4»
probably  stood  or  sat  on  the  grassy  slopes  otf" tii<
two  htlb  long  before  any  archilcctural  ttrac?tura
vaaeraotod. See  Grid,  ^.  .^.  i.  107.

Woodan  seata  {fori)  for  the  |>eople  arc  «i<'  '*
barn  been  firat  coiutruetcd  by  Tan)uiniu»  TH^'m
(Liv.  i.35).aud  tbeoe  were  frerjncntly  burnt nt-dn*-
balli  iu  the  aame  material :  restorations  in  n  r-^
and  %.c.  1T4  are  roentionwl  by  1-ivy  ^viii.  2n,  awl
xU.  97V Iu  tbe  time  of  Inliiis  Caesar  moiim-  "^  <^^
»teats  were  for  the  first  time  constnict«l  uf  Minb,
bnt even  then  and many yrars  later  tW  TI"''
tiers  and  galleriea  were  still  of  «ooil. Very  *"'■
oos  arridriitfl  are  raoorded  to  have  h«pi«'i"«l  u*'''
mauy  of  the  eniperora,  owing  to  the  failnre  "f  ^
womtai  Mate  «ben  cmwded  with  people. N"  1°^
tbiui  1000  pemna  are  said  tn  have  Iwen  Ltllfl  <"
thia  way  during  tbe  rrign  of  .\iitonintiH  Pin^ "*'
onyaias  (iii.  *i»V  who  describra  tho  Cin-Uf  Mntl-
mna  as  it  was  afler  lulios  Caoaar***  itnpnivrmrnl*'
says  that  it  thou  bcW  IfiO.OOO  people. A  li^''""
tive  flpp  in  HO.  31  waa  followed  by  imptirt«i''  i*
toratiomi,  and  Angnalna  addnl  a  magiiit\i^cnl  tn^'''
hlc  pmtrimm-  or  iui|ierial  hux.  and  ploceil  >»  *''
ceuliT  of  the  fpimn  ibe Egyptian  o1»elisk  wl*'
iwiw  Klaiuls  in  tl»c  Huxa  del  Pi>p<do  (Suet  A'1
43-4htl In  K.U-  3^^  snt>tl>#r  iirr  ileAtriiyed  llif  "^
|wr  tiers  «tf  f#atB  oa  lb»  Avenl  ine  side,  and  •  p**
pan  itfib*  Cireaavaa  mio<)  iv^utnil  and  etilstf^


ciKoua


861


CIRCUS


by  Claudias,  who  rebuilt  in  white  marble  tbe  car-
eere$,  which  were  tbeu  of  tufa,  and  replaced  the
(ilil  wooden  metat  by  new  ones  of  gilt  bronze  (Suet.
CVdwf.  !fl).  After  thia  Testuratioii  the  Circns  con-
tiiiited  seats,  partly  of  marble  ami  partly  of  wooil,
iiir  250,000  spectators,  showing  that  It  had  been
much  enlarged  siuce  tbe  rebuilding  of  luliiis  Caesar
(Pliii.  MJV.  xxxvi.  $  103).  lu  thereiguof  Doinitian
tlie  marble  seats  were  carried  still  higher,  and
thenceforth  the  danger  of  fire  wRBmncb  dimiuished,
thongh  wooden  galleries  (maeniana)  appear  to  have
existed  at  the  top  of  the  eavea  for  many  years  later.
Great  additioual  splendour  was  given  to  the  Cir-
cus Maximns  by  Trajan,  as  is  recorded  on  tbe  re-
vtne  of  some  of  his  firHt  brasses;  and  from  his
time  the  building  must  have  been  among  the  most
iiiapnificent  stniotures  of  tbe  Roman  world.  The
whole  eaeea  with  its  tiers  of  seats,  the  eareerea,  the
emperor's  pultinar,  and  tbe  central  »pina  wore
';tben  of  gleaming  white  marble,  decorated  witb
,  ^old  and  colonrs,  studded  with  jewel-like  glass
moasicB,  aod  adorned  with  long  lines  of  col-
umns made  of  richly-tinted  Oriental  marbles  and
rows  of  large  statues  in  marble  and  gilt  bronze,
together  with costly metal screens and richly


general  construction.  Additional  help  i»  givt-n  by
tbe  well-preserved  remains  of  tbe  Circus  of  Max-
cutius,  of  which  a  plan  is  given  on  tbe  following
page.  Though  quite  ditierent  in  gronnd-plim,  yet
in  the  arrangement  of  the  scats  and  in  its  external
facade  the  Circus  once  cLjsely  resembled  tbe  Colos-
seum (q.  v.),except  that  tse general  effect  must  have
been  much  more  splendiii^since  in  the  Cireus  noth-
ing but  marble  and  gilt  bronze  was  visible.^Part
of  the  exterior  facade  of  the  Circus  is  forMTtnttely
shown  in  tbe  great  oil-painting  in  tbe  museum  at
Mautua,  giving  a  bii-d's-eye  view  of  Rome  as  it
was  in  the  fifteenth  century.  A  fac-simile  of  tluH
is  shown  in  De  Rossi's  Pinnie  di  lioma  anteriort  al
XVI"'  Secoh  (Rome,  1879).  See  also  Middleton,.
Ane.  Home  in  1885,  p.  287,  and  fig.  10  on  p.  83 ;  id.
Remains  ofAnc.  Rome  (London,  1893),  vol.  ii.  pp.  40-
60;  and  the  article  Roma.  There  is  an  interesting
etching  of  the  sixteenth  century  which  shows  a
large  portion  (uow  destroyed)  of  the  concrete  voults
wbich  supported  the  long  line  of  the  carea  scats.
Excavations  made  a  few  years  ago  at  the  foot  of  the
southwestern  slope  of  the  Palatine  have  exposed  a
long  series  of  chambers,  which  formed  part  of  the
immense  substructures  of  the  Circus. These  cliani-


Cireus  UaslmuB. (KeBtoration  by  Benvenuto.)


sculptured  thrones  for  officials  of  rank  (Plin.  Paneg.
h\).  Still  further  accoiumotlation  was  added  by
Coastaotine;  and  Constautius  set  on  the  ^na  a
second  obelisk,  which  his  father  had  transported
from  Thebes  (Anrel.  Vict.  Caes.  40),  and  which  uow
Htands  in  the  piazza  of  the  Lateran.  After  this
liiial  eolargenient  tbe  Circus  held,  acconling  to  the
y'ltitia,  the  almost  incredible  number  of  385,000
I'eople.  The  Iwst  MS.  of  the  Xotitia  gives  485,000
at  the  number  of  possible  spectators  in  the  Circns,
which  probably  includes  the  crowds  of  people
"Utside  the  Circus  on  the  upper  slopes  of  the  two
Jiilte,  who  would  have  a  distinct  though  distant
view  of  the  whole  arena.  It  is  impossible  to  dis-
cover with  absolute  accuracy  what  the  size  of
tW  Circns  Maximus  was  when  complete;  it  can-
imt,  however,  have  been  less  than  2000  feet  long,
l>y  more  than  600  feet  wide,  measuring  outside.J

In  spit«  of  its  enormous  size  very  little  nowTC-
inaiuB  of  the  Circus  Maximns ;  but  the  excavations
of  recent  years  have  brought  to  light  some  very
intereBting  portions  of  tbe  substrnctures ;  and
these,  with  the  help  of  some  drawings  made  in
the  KJxteenth  century,  when  n  considerable  por-
tion of  the  Circus  was  still  very  complete,  enable
It*  to  form  a  fairly  accurate  notion  of  its  plan  and


hers  were  used  for  brothels  (Juv.  iii.  65),  for  refresh-
ment stalls  (Dionys.  vii.  72),  and  other  purposes.
They  ojieu  upon  a  road,  paved  with  flint  blocks,
which  appears  to  have  run  at  the  foot  of  tbe  Pala-
tine along  tbe  whole  northeastern  side  of  the  Circns,
andledfromtheForumBoarium  to  the  Porta  Capena.

Owing  to  their  lofty  positions,  the  palace  of
Augustus  and  the  other  imperial  buildings  on  tbe
Palatine  must  have  commanded  a  very  complete
view  of  the  races  in  the  Circus;  and  some  of  the
emperors  built  special  additions  to  their  palaces
to  enable  them  to  see  the  games  withimt  leaving
their  residences  (Suet.  Calig.  18). See  Palatium.

Ahrangements  ok  the  CiHCfs. — The  drawing
of  the  Circus  of  Maxentius  given  on  the  next  page
will  Kei've  to  give  an  idea  of  the  arrangements  of
the  Circus  Maximus,  front  which  it  was  copied.

According  to  Livy,  the  Roman  senators  from  .'i
very  early  period  had  the  privilege  of  special
seats  at  the  Circns.  Augustus  arranged  a  com-
plete chiHsification  of  (be  spectators.  He  reserved
tlie  podium  for  the  Senate  and  persons  of  iiigh
rank,  and  allotted  special  seats  to  soldiers,  mar-
ried plebeians,  boys  and  their  paed/tgogi,  women,
etc.  (See  Suet.  Atig.  44;  Nero,  11;  and  the  Mon.
Ann/rannm,  ed. Mommsen,  Berlin,  1883.) Until


CIKCUS


86S


CIRCUS


'. ' t. 1 1__I LJ~A


"Cl


^


"  '  " ^  1^'


IVli  or  IIm'  Cln<o»  of  MuDntliu.


AA rarrprei*.

it Piirta  rntn(Uti> Mitranc«  Itk  mire  tiT  tliB
carcar««.
CC  nra(liiR,iiHi*nriliK  >>pM-utorK

n.  Tribnottl  iMdknm

K.  fulvluur,  KalnrihoMn|Mnir

P.  Piirto  TrluiutituilU


BH.  EDlnnoH  Itetweeu  the  nuoom  «ail  gn~
(Ins.

M.  Town^

K.  AlW  IIIIM,  UantiiBlllie.
LE. M«tae

N.  (SM  p.  ais.)


this  cIa»iilii»tioii,  the  (act  lliiit  men  niiil  wtimen
xil  tijf^ollit-r  ia  tilt!  Cit'pns  hiu\  beci)  niic  of  Ua  |ie-
i^'iiliurtties  a»  n  place  of  .imaseiueiit— n  foot  ofUin
alluUeil  to  by  Oviil.  Catliions  {ptdcini)vcn  uwmI,
f3|>«{:iall,v  by  Indira,  on  tbe  Lant  marble  5«aifi,  niiil
t'outstouls  {srafxiln)  were  ^ollletiI1lt■pl  iiitrxHlticcd,
lliMii);h  rijrh  tjriuhts  was  rtii  low — only  t.liirU*i*ii  tu
I'linrlt^eii  liicht'M  )ii);b — tb;il  tbime  cnii  hiive  bb<.Mi
«f  but  littlp  I1SI-. Soi.  Ovi.l,  .1.  .1.  i.  IGO-lCa.

A  lar^'H  iimuber  of  iiiLt-tvitriiiK  iiiiHC!n|>LiiiiiM  Imrt^
bi'i'ii  fiiiinil  at  iliO'crc^nt  tiiiur.t,  which  throw  much
light,  on  tbi^  wny  in  whic-b  tli«  wriila  weru  ii|t)uii--
(itiiii>^l  in  llie  cirei  iiuil  amphitbuutr(>s  of  itoni«.
)rti-r  Laiiciuiii,  Intfrii.  il.  Antit.  Fine,  Uotue,  lt!84.)
Th(>  futfii  wuH  divided  itito  bundft  called  vtnmUvnt
\*y  tho  horizoutiil  (KMsngptt,  amhulncni  or  pnitdnr-
iiitne*:  tliuro  were  probably  three  of  tlnw'  divi-
et'iiis  nr  maejiUtun  in  thi<  TircuH  MnximnH,  without
coiiiitiiij;  ths  ((allery  nt  lh«  top.  The  lowest  of
ihesi'  diviHioiiH  whh  citllrd  marnuinum  primum,
aw\  tlif  hiKht>nt  wiui  calb;d  auuimum ;  eacli  of
ihrsi'  biiiMl»  of  irpalA  n-uM  iiliio  ilivi<lifl  by  lliKlita
of  (iLi'lihi  into  rufuti,  which  were  uuiobere<l;  eacU
line  of  Hcatu  (*fi-adu»)  m  eai'h  eiiiieiu  was  nlso  iinm-
Wi-tjd ;  uinl  Ml*  theiv  were  no  divisions  to  sejmratti
one  place  I'roiii  tho  next,  eiu'h  grailus  ys\\n  niea»-
iiri-d,  and  niloltnent  wan  nniilo  to  varioiiB  t'-l»S!W!n
•tfa  llxoil  number  of  feet  niwiRiirtMi  from  one  »'iid.
'I'huB,  for  fxauiiilo,  the  spare  alloltr<l  (o  a  oifUgi-
iim  of  prieMtti  nii);ht  he  described  a«  f<dtow«:  "  In
the  tintt  iiiae/iianum,  in  tho  twrlflb  eimeuity  iiinr
fectof  f/r«/j/t  4  and  Ti."

In  iidditioti  to  the  rav*a  |imp«r  and  iti*  ftofiitnu,
varioni^  state  boxed  wertt  ronMtructed  of^  marble,
with  eolumoR  anil  urclieB  tu  siipiKtrt  the  cntaUla-
ture  and  roof  of  vach.  One  BOnos  of  tht^so  (**mA*>m-
Jft  or  ttn/i/entu*)  was  over  thu  etinvrret,  and  oppti-ara
in  have  been  occupiC'd  by  llm  f^iver  of  tho  t!'^'))*''*
(  t^iitar  Mpectaatlarum  )  and  liln  frioiids.  Another
^■levatwl  box  tthe  tribunal  imlicum,  It)  wa«  jdawil
at  oue  side  fur  the  nnipirra,  who  decided  which
4>bririot  fiFi^t  croflsed  tbn  line  ehallted  on  the  arena
in  frwnt  of  them.  8oo  Hetiten,  Acta  Fratrnm  Ar-
ml,  p.  :J7  tUtrlin,  isr4).

A  Hi'parat*  puipinar  or  utalc  box  |E)  for  thu  im-
perial family,  of  great  itizo  and  ma }{ni licence,  wo-t
«n.'e!«d  on  the  I'aluliue  Hide  of  tbr  Circnn  Maximus
(Suet.  Ctitud.  4).  All  interesting  relief  of  ibo  third
«T«!ntnry  x.v.,  found  at  FoHgno,  ropreiutittf  the  pre-
Mdiug  niagiNtratc  or  editor  of  tbe  gamea  sealed  iu


ht« h»X OT«T

the  oireera;  W
hold«tn  hishiuil
a  lio^  of  lufluey,
uhicbbri^,tlK>n[
In  giro  In  lliu
wiMuinaebjuiDf-
rer,  who  lift*  ilrir-
rn  lip  athI  t>  M-
Intiii);  huu  ftvoi
UpIow.  a  lirai-
lai'8eenoisn'|>n-
8«<ntiMl  oiiKTenl
of  tho  ivory  c-m-
sular  diptrrbof
the  foiirlli  aiid
ti  f  t  h  ecnlTitiet.
(Soe  Gorl,  TV
Mur.  Vet.  Diji..
Florence,  17511).
ThcrhieforiboK
is  tbe  celeUrnti'd  leftl"  of  a  fourth  wntury  dipljeh
111  tbe  Mtiseo  (^nirhiiauo  al  Bn-wiii.  On  lbi«  lh>^
Iiresiding  couttul  oitti  in  his  puirinar  ,*  in  the  nictia
below  four  quatirigae  arc  ra«:ii>g  nniod  rlie  tfiiM.
which,  like  that  on  the  LyoiiH  inonaie,  iic  a  Imig
tank  <tf  water.  Tho  vij^y  in  which  the  n'hwi  wur*'
loo^Hfd  ^oinid  1 1'"  Iftdy  "t  til''  driver  ttivri^-i\  i»
t'TcNirly  slifwrn  :  each  hohlsVi  bin  TTniuTwIfitl  swtii*
to  be  a  conibiiiation  of  wliib  mid  ^oud;  nml  ibfv
all  yiOAV  fuMciiu  round  their^p^js  ami  hiidiBa-  The
horpca'  logs  are  also  clow-lA  bomid  jiUmi  wi^h
tliniig.s.  See  Krohucr, /ia  Vcnrric  Autiipu  i?*^^
ItOT).  \

On  the  ivories  tho  consul,  or Yllier  prestdnit  *'f
the  gumeji,  is  nsiially  represenicti  lu  the  puJrii<-"'t
maiiiiirireiitly  ridieil  in  the  ttit/'i  pXin  and  fuilhiitn.
and  in  Hoino  cusca  holding  in  hj^  aaud  the  jmJpp^
or  napkin  with  which  h«  gave  th&  bigiial  FiiVtbc
utart.

'J'he  stiu'tiiig  eml  of  ihe  Ciivii-i  wy  fonnwl  **>'
row-of^liiall  vunlt-tsi  i-bumUnrH  (r.trr«rn;i  A),  »■»*''
lar^o  enough  for  one  ehnriot  and  ilUjiono*. ^'
thcnv  cnrtrres  thera  wptv  nt  tho  uiost  t\rHir Kn**''
had  two  doors— one  behind,  by  which  (1
entered,  and  one  in  front,  oponiug  into
Thirt  latter  doorway  wiw  closed  l\v  fohlihjtJt'
with  ojien  work  {nihcelli)  in  the  pi
doors  were thnuvn  o|wn at  the  start
{Irntorea),  tw«>  to  each  doorway  (na  iu  th«'iK'<^''
puuying  illiiHiraiioiO,  who  flung  ibeni  op«i)  d>u"'''


I>aora  ar  Oiroens  op«a«Ml  hy  SIsvn.
Vvtiviri.  I


lUnfOo  \Mrtt^


laiieuin»ly  at  the  Hi|;nal.  Iu  early  limctt  lie  i«**
appear  to  have  begun  at  the  cttnrre*  :  hnl  W*
the  actual  start  took  place  at  a  hue  niark'^d*'*^'''
areiin  with  while  chalk  or  lime  (tj/Arx  liumX^
Itenee  NoiitetimoJt  called  freta  or  taU  iK).  A  slnu-
lar  white  lino  for  the  tintsh  wna  dranti  oppi<«*w
thu  Judge's  l>ox  ilJ),  at  a  )>oint  iine<|nully  dlitaiit


aRcus


Sd8


CIBCUS


turn  tlie  two  mtiae,  Thi>  «tiirting-line  wu  drawn
liposite  the  mttae  tlittt  vrvrc  iiuMTst  the  canxre*.
Im  eareeret  received  no  light  oxoepi  what  oatno


Doora  of  Cu-cem. [BrlUib  MoBHio.)


Imogh  the  grating.  Tboir  nurow  opcningH  are
kU«d  /aueet. The lofty  state  -  lioxutt  nlwvo lb«

innM,  with  their  colonnatlei)  and  arches,  tuwered
Ik  ftu  ImpoaiuK  height,  athi  tho  whole  Htntotttre
Hu  knowu  us  the  oppiHum,  ivonx  its  ivBombUoce
lu  tb«  g*te  and  towon  of  n  city  (Varr.  L.  L.  r,
K3).

A  linuR  nr  C'»mi:alla  bhuwtt  the  ext^rual  favMle
if  ihtt  itppidum,  uud  a  sort  of  birdVeye  view  he- '  befiQ  a  coiiiitiuti
|wuj  of  the  iuttrior  of  the  Circu«,  with  its  $piua,  ^  form  of  tpiita,  cuu-
eciitrul  ohdidk,  and  aediculat,  and  tttutuea  lu  quad-  '  DiHtiDg  uf  a  loug
rijpv  K-t  at  the  top  uf  hia  wall  sarrvuudiuft  the  '  tauk  of  water  tii-
t»tta.  It  wilL  Iw  seen  from  tho  typical  phiii  gi%*en  '  sttrud  of  the  niur
that  the  aircenr-ji  (A  A)  are  Blightly  curved  .  hie  podium  ;  otut-
lU,  aud  ore  cviitftruvt«d  nu  a  iMKnieiitat  line,  iies  and  <>ther  or-
eaotn:  of  which  i»  struck  fmui  a  iKiiiit  uiidway  I  u»ui«iitti  nland  va


to  which  BccoKs  wnu  givoti  by  a  ladder.  One  of
tlifHP  fggh  wiw  reiiiKVwt  after  each  lap  {mrrifiiliim)
waa  run  (Vurr  Jie  tiuxt.i.'i,  11),  them  being  tinuttl-
ly  aeven  tapH  to  each  race  (mimfm).  According  tn
Livy  (xll.iifT),  themi  oca  were  lirst  »et  «ii  the  fphut
by  the  ueiisura  in  B.C.  174 ;  hut  Dio  Cati»iu9  attrilj-
Dtea  their  intmdiiction  to  Agrippa.  in  the  reign
of  Angnstus.  He  in,  however,  probably  «.'iirifiiftiiig
tbotn  with  another  vuries  of  ornaineiit^  —  H«veh  '
dnlphitiM,  which  were  aet  on  a  ainiihir  ofiiitulii  aivd
atTVeil  a  aiiuilar  purpose  (Juv.  vi,  590).  These
ilidphitid  itiuHt  have  been  ton  heavy  to  take  down,
and  were  probably  merely  uiovcd  in  aomc  way  to
iudieate  the  iimnbcr  of  laps.

lu  some  ancient  pit prese illations,  oh  in  a  mo'Sato
found  at  LyuiiH  and  tlgnrcdon  pago:Uir>,thetiolphini4
t'onn  fonutains — water  t»p«iating  from  the  month
of  each  Hsh-  Thia  shows  that  they  could  nut
have  been  n  holly  renioTed.  The  eggx  bad  i!4»ine
sacred  connection  with  tho  DioRCuri.  and  the
dolphinH  with  Neptune  (or  ConMiin] — ileitie)>  who
were  the  pnlronn  of  horars  anil  racing  (Terlnll.  Df
Spect.S).  T](c  Ly(j[m  tuoaaic,  whiub  no  doubt  rep-
reeeuta  the  local  circus,  boa  what  uppeam  to  have


peduMtala  in  the
water. Two  wir-

copbagi  Ju  ttieSala


I  hHtween  the  line  uf  the  gpinu  and  the  side  of
>  atrnu This  plaa  was  adopted  iu  order  that
!  cbariolH  iu  all  tho  earctrea  might  have  as  uear>
FM  iHiwiblu  a  posiliou  of  equal  advantage  at  the dulla tiiga in  the
*■■•- The  etjiecial  caTCtr  occupieil  by  each  chariot Vatican haro ro-
l£jcc<]  on  )iy  drawing  luta.  Uefs which repro-

I  $pitm  fbauk-bonei  waa  a  long,  low  wall,  or soul  a  t-har lot-race
'  platfurtu^uf  marble  (MM),  Hut  lu  lUe  middle
<^the  arena  to  aaparate  the  going  and  returuiog
""*'i>«e  of  the  racers. The  line  of  the  spiiui  is  not

P*'allel  to  that  of  the  oirat,  hut is  lilightly  in-'  _  _

cUaetl  8o  as  to  leave  a  wider  space  at  K  than  that '  nrnanieots,  among
pr  the  vemieironlar  end.  The  object  uf  thiH  whii^li  are  statues
P^ttta  to  bavo  been  that  the  chariots  might  have  |  of  Apollo  Melios,
""'t^  lipace  «  bnre  ihny  wert^  cntnded  logfiitbcr  at Cyhel6,  Victnry,  a i|iiadrig», and an it1>nlisk.  oa


of  Cupids  in  tho
Circuit  Maxiiinia,
and  show  ulnarly
the  tpina and its


U«uo.


|R«Uef  ]n  tb« BrItUtt  Uu-


^  etiirt  than  at  oilier  points  wbvre  aoinu  would
P*^u  begii  n  U>  tail  off.

i  ^arieiiH  moaaics  and  reliefa show  tho  wpina  (MM)
^^ercd  with  a  aeries  of  atatues  and  orunnientul
*^^ctar««,  Biioh  as  ohcliaks.  small  /t«li^uUu  or
^'^Hlies,  coliimns  snnnonatefl  by  statoes,  altara,
'*^>pliif>»,And  fountains. In  otldilion  ti»  these  were


well  UH  the  iiggs  and  dolphins.  The  mft*it  are
fihuwu  at  «'at:li  i-nd ;  a  similar  reUuf  i»  given  iu
the  illustration  above.

The  meiae  {LL),  the  gi^ds,  were  three  tall,  c<ui-

icalobJoct«(Ovid.^Vef.x.  IlHi;  llor.  Cfnv/i.i.  I,  5is«t

on  a  semivirciilar  plinth,  at  a  sliorf  dialanee  I'umi

eaeh  end  of  the  irpiiui. Krotn  thi^  lime  of  C'lumli-

f*t«  of  seven  marble  egga  [oru)  at  iraeh  end  of  ■  nu,  they  were  of  gilt  bronzr  decorated  with  bands

ipiuii — each  »et  mounted  on  a  Nmall  aallcil't,  ,  i[) roliof,  »a  is  shown in ibr  above illUHti'atiou

from  a  reliff  in
the  Uritish  Mu-
M  e  I)  m.  T  h  e  s  e
funucd  tho  turn-
ing-points for  the
chariots.  The
prititae  mcUie  are
not,  us  might  he
expected,  the
ones  aeorest  to
the  start,  but
tho-te  near  tho
aemicircnlar  end
of  the  Circus,
miiud  which  the


tAui'leiil  rolhrr  lu  lb«


enters


861


ciRCra


ebaiioU  miido  their  Jlrtt  inni-  Tcrtullinii  {De
Speet.  V.  S)  mentintiH  that  the  uiirieiit  nliar  of
CoUHtiB  in  the  CirciiN  Maximum  \\r»  itd  pritnu*  me-
ttm;  it  appe-ars  to  liavo  hreii  in  ihr  »pi/ni,  nnil  wtm
i>uly  exposed  to  view  ilnriiitj  ttiu  prugrrsa  of  tbo

Rtiiiiaiiifiof  thcxf>mi7,ftrrippc<1  nf  nil  its  rich  mar-
ble lUvorntioiiA,  I'xi.'it  ill  thci  ttirt^uft  of  MaxciitiuK.
at  VieuiiH  in  Frauco  {ISiiU.  Jn>i.  \HG\,  p.  14^),  and
iu  thu  eireiiu  of  C'nrtbage  (Kalbe,  L' Emplacement
Je  Cnrthiuje^  p.  40).

TIio  areDA.  or  «iU(Ty  floor  of  tlie  Circus,  liko  that
of  tbti  i-VloSirtetiin,  viix9  on  some  orra«ion»  strewn
with  glitrcrinj;  |«arlii:lp8  of  niica,  vci\  lend,  or  p<ii-
filuiOM,  by  tlie  ostentntimift  extmvaijaiico  of  tlin  |
pniiwroM  (!?net.  Val.  W\. That  pari  of  tbn  arcnii '
wliii-b fornieil  the oonrso  fi»r  the  chariots was'
known  as  the  tptitium  (Jtiv.  vi.  .V?^). The  npuce
near  tin*  f/irreres  wns  kuoivu  lu  the  circus  primuii, ,
wliil^  that  oti  eavb  Hiibi  of  the  epina  vbb  tbo  eircvs
intrrhr  (Viirr.  L.  L.  v.  154).

Before  tlie  confttniction  of  amphithoatreB  in
Rtnntf.  tho  Cirrus  Miiximtis  was  used  for  elndin-
turial  tlgbtit  «'ilb  wild  lieiutK  and  other  ttccues  of
bntcbory.  Th*  Ancynu'an  iiis»hpti»ni  reconti  that.
AngnstUK  tiiiil  no  1<-ah  than  :t5(l(l  wild  beasfs  ftlaiiyb-
ter«d  in  tho  <'irfii't,  Fonim,  and  amphitheatre,  in
twpnty-»ix  cxhit>ilion8.

In  oiTiitT  to  ki*ep  tlu^  iM-axts  fiinn  rencliiug  tliL-
Bpeflalorfl  on  thu  <vir«f,  liitiim  Ca4'i*ar  funRtriicl^d
a  canal  l('wifi»\  tvu  fuet  wide  antl  leri  teet  deop
all  round  tlie  areuii ;  this  vran  snpplii-d  by  a  fitrram
which  ritill  riinft  tliroti^h  Itio  Htn  of  the  CircnK,
near  thL>  uiodeni  Via  dt*'  tVrchi  (Sntt.  Inf.'M)}.
Aftvi'  tbo  erection  of  the  amphitheatre  of  StnlilinK
Tannis  iti  the  rei^n  of  Angnstn?,  the  Circos  Miixi-
luim  appeara  to  have  been  no  loii};er  need  for  li>;ht«
witli  braAt«.  and  the  rrtripnn  was  therefore  filled
up  by  Nero  (Pliii.  //.  -V.  viii.  (  21t.  It  wa»,  liow-
i>v-cr,  again  introduced  In  later  times  (LtiuipriU.
Ile/iog.  •-£!).  I

Othkh  Circi  at  Romr. — Few  mmainit  of  other'
nrei  exist  tt)(ljiy  nbove  (imnnd  at  Konir.  The  im-
portant edifieeH  of  this  sort  wi-re  as  fDllowd  :  I

(1)  The  Circus  Flnminiun  wliidi  gnvr  its  ininn*  ■
to  the  Cnmpnn  Fltinilniiit,  mi important  part  of
the  Campnff  Murtinn  (<i.  v.). It  was  founded  in  '
honour  of  the  inMiMir  C.  FhiminiUH  XL'pcw,  killed
at  tho  battle  of  Luke  TraKinieiniti,  R.c.  217.

(2)  The  Circus  of  Cnligola  and  Newt  in  the  Horti
Agrippinac,  at  tbc  foot  of  the  Viiii<:an  Hill  (Suet.
Claud.  21).  No  truces  of  thin  circna  arc  visible  at
Ibe  pi^titwul  time.

<3)  Thr  ClrcUA  of  Hadrian  in  tbo  Campiit  Vaii-
cunus,  uuat  the  enii>eror*s  Mnusoletiu].  No  tracer
of  it  now  remain.

<4t  The  Cin-iis  of  MaxeutjitH  on  the  Via  Appia,
two  Diile8  frotn  the  widU  of  [{oiite,  im  HuhR'iently
well  preserved  l«  ithow  itH  original  f<>nn.  though
it  tH  coroplt-tely  utripped  of  its  marble  Heatit,  col-
nmuH,  aud  other  rleh  dfcoratituift.  Till  l??'i*t  it  wa»
thought  to  be  u  eitin.t  built  by  Caracalla,  hut
Ihri^*  iuacriptiona  which  wen-  then  found  rdiowed
lliat  it  was  dedicated  in  A.ix  'Ml  to  the  memory
of  Romulus,  who  died  in  a.i>,  a09,  by  hi»  father
Jllaxentitis.  The  pliiii  of  thin  eircuM  in  Khown  on
page  'JytJ;  the  gniiler  part  <if  the  citernnl  wall  is
stilt  standing,  txit  the  concrete  vanllu  which  su[y-
ported  the  suat9  faavn  mostly  fallen  in.

(Q)  The  Circus  of  Salluat,  called  after  the  liis-
torlao.


Tiis  CiRCt-6  GAitKS. — The  guntt  in  the  oimu
{Lmti CirtenMn)  op<>u«d  with  a  grand  procemion
[pompft).  which  gathcn-d  on  the  Capitolinc  Hill,
passed down tbc C'llvu* Capilolinns into tli«
Fonini,  along  tUo  Via f^acra,  then  branchetl  off
along  the  Vicuii  Tuscns,  and  so  tbnmgh  the  Vela-
brum  into  the  Foruiu  Ikiarinm, whero van  the
eutrniicc  into  tho  Circua  at  tlu?  I^irta  Ponipa*--. U
then  passed  one*  round  tho  tpina.  pausiug  to  t.ffVr
HncriHci'B  and  to  tuilute  tho  imperial /Ju/ft/ni/".  The
gorgeous  proceBsion  whieb  oitena  a  niodeni  bnll-
figbl iu  Spain I>car8  mnch ivaemhiauee  to  i\it
Roman  pompa  circcn»ia:  it  win<U  round  the  arena,
and  then  pauBCM  to»ilnie  tho  prcniiling  otHcia),wl)o
give!4  ihc  Bignnl  to  lie^in  by  throwing  a  key  to  ibct:
chief  fujnuln. The  Roman  proce«ittoD  wa«  ht-oihH^
by  the  imwidlng  nmgitttrule,  or  in  Home  cMuei  b^^^
tbc  ein|ieror  bim.M>lf.  iu  a  hi'ja  or  qumlrit/a,  nvw
ing  the  dffi^tiaud  infiiguiaof  a  trinmphaDt  geiiitruL g
probably  a  survival  from  the  tiino  when  thn  iutt-^
cilxtiHM*  were  celebrated  in  honour  of  vietorioi^al
geuerals. A  gold  wreath  wns  hchi  over  hi»  1)im«,«]  |
by  a  slave  (Liv.  v.  U;  Jiiv.  x.  :C>-4G:  Pionys.Tii.  i
7'^). N'cxt  came  a  crowd  of  imhie  citi/ene  on  fi»c»t  I
and  on hontebnck; then  the  ehahottt  and  liors«>  j
men  who  were  to  tnk**  part  in  the  game*,  acrosu-  '
paiiiwl  by  mnidciani*. Next  in  onlcr  wrre  priei«|«y
gronpeil  Jti  their  vnrUm»  rolUyifi ;  beiircM  of  holr
wat**!',  incense,  luid Karriticiul implements;  nnd
ptatiies  of  dfilicH in  chnriota  [fetutff  dra*rn by
horses,  Kiulrs.  or  elephants,  or  else  borne  in  liltrr*
t/emtlit) ou men's itbonldere,  and nllcutled hy
nnblti  Kitmnii  youths  (Diouys.  vli.  T3|. Stalitcd  iu
litteri*  and  iti  a  car  drawn  by  four  c>Io|)liButi>i  are
Bhown  in  nn  ancient  sarcophsgns  relief  iignred  ia
tin?  .4')rt./«*MKty.  tav.o. The  games  mainly  ei>ft-
wsted  of  chnriot-race«; tho cars  (cwrrwl  Wf^'fi
drawu  by  varioiiK  numbers  of  honws,  fn»iu  tww  li'
to  ten,  and  culled  htyue.  tri^jae.  quiidri^te.  t/i*'^-
»ep(ani>.ig<ti,  and  so  on  according  to  thf  unmlMT
iitturhrd  to  each cjir. In  enrly  tinx's  hi^t*  iiiJ
tpnifit-if/tir  were  mostly  iiaeil ; but  under  (Iw  IW'*'
Kmidrv*  wtMiderfuL  skill  waK  dinplayed  by  mum  of
the  driven  in  managing  a  large  ninnlMTof  hotw^
III  a  hi'jii  both  horses  wen*  iinii«r  a  yoke  liuf^f')'
and  weiv  railed  njni  iur/afeii ;  iu  charitit^  with  ^^^
nr  nuire  borM>H.  only  tbo  two  iu  the  uiiddli*  *"***
yoked  ;  thofio  at  llu^  sideui  nere  merely  atlaebc^  l*?
IraccH  [j'une»)j  and worw therefore calbxl  f"*
fiinale$.

The chariotB were light stmctnrcn  of  voaa
bound  witb  bronze,  high  in  front  and  open  be-
hind. The  Sola  della  Uign  in  the  Vnticaii
named  from  nn  nacieut  trestoredt  luarhb'  ch<
iwsaibly  a  votive  offeriug  for  victory  iu  the  CI
See  CcHRfs.

Aitriyne, — The drivers  {uuriipie  or  tigUa^'^^^
were  usually  slaves  or  men  of  low  daw. Tb^y
wore  a  »hort tunic  laced  round  th«  biMly  vi^*\
leathern thongs {ftuciae)', other thongs  brffli"^
their  thighs. The  accompanying  illustrarioii  -Ii"*'*'*
the *lalne of  ati  ai>ri{tii,  iio  doubt  souic  dW«"'
guisbeil  niuiicr;  it  is  now  in  the  Vatican  I'T'"'
marble  Am/./  ,-  the  anun  and  legs  have  l»c*iQr«>l"'f»**'*
lu  well  as  the  bead. That  shown  iu  the  oat  ilt***
not  lielting  t-o  it. The  nurignt  wore  a  Iot.  cji*'*'
litting  cap — Dot a  bnitiie belmet. Thmigll  b^
longing  lo  a  ileH]>i$e<t  ela^s,  the  favourite  niri^*
in  the  degraded  times  of  the  Empirr  wrre  t*"*'''
honoured  and  l>ted,  and  ihcir  mwiety  was  aoogh*
after  by  (he  diissolute  Roman  youth. V«ry  gt**"


0IRCU8


366


CIRCL'8


I


*


•kin,conrag»,  ind  coolnew  were  m^nireil  to  f^nide

»m  cbariut  tncceiu^iilly  ruiiiitl  tlic  sliurp  tnriis  of  tb«
nifUu.  aiUDD); a  Jostliii|>
crowiturutlicr  hui-MCH  oiid
rliariots,  especially  a*
eieb  rlrivcr  Irieil  to  ti[Hwt
hferinti).  CoDBtnntucci-
dMIa  mnit  bnve  liap-
I»*nfil.  for  Almost every
lucieut  f«prc«entattoii
of  >  ciroiw  nice  shoit's
one  or  more  chariots
■  tBrUrnotl ; aixl  ttii»
*M  espfciiilly  ilaiig«r-
L oiu,  as  tbfl  aurign  (lni\-i>
^ *illi  IliP  rcliift loop  ml
Knoudliiswuiitt. Tbut  liv
^pB||hl  liarc  a  cliauvt?  or
~  cutting  liiin«tlf  Ireti  in
•"awofnccideut,  bewore  a
"'rvbl  knife  i/>iU)  stuck
in  hifl  nsi^t- l>aiHU;  tbt»
tt  sliawii  ill  tlie  Vaticou
•fatiifl  h(tm  ^iveti. No
lioubt  (iiie iif  lite cbief
« tract  ill  lid  of  llip  Cii-cua
to  th«  Imilal RoRiaDB

bitut  htvf  lifcii tbc  Night  of  tliu  criiMliril  tiitibs

"^f  »n  uiil'orraiiate  driver  auioii^ tbo  Hlrngglinfi;

IwMifr  of  biif  fallen  linrscA  or  iiinli-r  tlie  wln't-l*  i<f

>  iBckidr  rlvtil. lu  spite  of  tbc»ci  dangers  some

ivett  to  win  mi  enormous  number  of  vloto-

'iil  Tb*  lUMiinmetit  of  Ibo  nuritj't  Dioi:l««('-*>c. a.d.

IMtrwonlt  that  ho  defeated  Scnrpno,  the  winner

•fSWflmecfc;  Poiup.  Mueclosort.tbf^  wiiuiprof '.1569;

'id  hjiup.  Kpnpbrixtitiit},  wIid  bu<l  won  l-W?  tinu-^.

biicleft  bini self,  wbeu  bo  ret  ireti  from  bis  profession

*Ulieajj,,,if  forty-two,  bwl  won  30(H)  races  of  W;;<!«,

**i>l  1*13  ffilji  more  tlian  I  wo  boraeti. Tbe  %  ictorioua

'""''S'*  receivwl  a  pri/*  of  trioiiey  ;  or  itt  mHue  cjisiw,

''  *  Hlive,  III!  wiHi  his  frcwloin. Tim priw  wan

'"^uu-filDWi  culb'A  tbe  hntf/^iim  ur  hnirifitn  itifta^tlnv,

Vnul  Per,Atq,h.  v.  5^^;  cf.  St.  Paul,  I  Cnr.  ix.tf4).

tbe  giw  of  tbo  prize wiui  known  a« tbe

'ta  (Suet.  Nero^  M), Tin-  «innrni  nf  iuvpor-

(j^'*ces.oo  wbicb  there  wa.*  heavy  betting,  some-

jT"**  received  euomious  sums  of  luouey  from  pa-

rjj» yhn bail backed  Ihem  (Jnv.  vii.  n:»,  *-M:i ;

iJh ^'"•"'-  '^^  =  ("apitiil.  Ver.  G). Martini  {x.  74,

»yVp*»tioiiB  one  named  Srorinis,  wbn,  in  tbe  reign

^*4iitiau,  wuu  uo  le^tt  than  tifty  pursea  of  ]*ii|il


fnti  t


in  one  hour's  racing.  M.  Rcioao  in  Xovcniber,  lt^8,
rcBil  before  the  Soci<^t(?  des  InRcriptions  in  Paris  a
pnjier  un  an  interesting  inscription  found  in  Rome,
which  recorded  I  bat  a  Mmiri^b  aurign  named
Cre«G«ns  bail  during  ten  yean^  (a.D.  11.VI24)  won
LSA^ilMt)  Rejit^rceA  with  four  horses  called  Clreiis,
Accppinii.  DelirntiiH,ainI  C'olynna.  t'ndcr  tbo  Kui-
pirr,  wealthy  Koman  citii!t.-U4  were  not  ashamed  to
act  tbc  part  of  aurigav,  v»t>ccially  after  Caligulft
and  Nero  had  itet  tbe  example.

Wth-r-Aorww,— The  horses  used  for  rnciug  pnr-
pnw-H  were  mostly  bred  in  Bi>aiu,  Sicily,  Mauri-
(iini:i,  northern  Greece,  and.  in  late  limes,  in  Cap-
pailiieiu.  XoexiM-nse  or  trouble  was  (tpnred  in  their
tiainiiig,  and  the  RinuaUK  were  careful  not  to  spoil
the  bonu.'  (in  the  way  the  nindern  English  racei  is
rnineil)  by  njiing  it  loo  Kooti.  At)  a  rule  the  Ho-
man  racer  was  not  broken  in  till  the  ajje  of  tbive,
nor  allowed  to  run  in  a  race  till  livo.  f'onse-
((neutly  Aimie  of  tbe  burses  won  a  Murpriwing  num-
lier  of  V  ietorics.  A  borwe  wbicb  had  won  lUO  rncea
uii»cjdk'drt'n/f/(rtr(«j';  in  the  iDKcriptioii  of  LHoclea
a  burse  cultettTnseuH  is  mentioned  an  the  winnerof
-l'^(  rneeH;  a  borst*  lielouging  tu  IlioelcH  btmHelf
was  aihitv^Kiriim.  Like  the  modem  Romans,  tbe
ancienlH  Heeni  to  have  disttgiired  tiieir  lioriws  by
brandiug  on  the  Hank  the  iiiilial  or  badge  of  tbe
owner;  which  i«  sIiovtu  on  wverjil  itiooaic  pnvo-
niuiitit.  HtallionH  wei-u  used,  anil  apparently  but
few  niarvs  were  trainttl  for  race^  AInii)*t  all  Ilie
uuuiuH  of  race-horwes  which  exist  lu  ntosaic  pictnrea
or  in  iuHcriptlouK  are  those  of  males.  8ee  Krted-
limtlvr, Di!  yotniiiihuii  Equorum  Vir(fit$i»m {KOuigi-
berg,  lt*75).

The  public  training-slablos  of  Rnuio  consit(t«il
of  iKfK  or  inorii  gronpii  of  buihltngs  in  Regio  IS  in
the  Campus  MiirliuK,  and  near  the  Circus  Flamin-
iiis  {vf  Jonlan,  '/"c/Aw/r.  f/rr  St'uft  Ittnn,  u.  H^vl).  In
187H,  in  ihe  village  of  Oned-Atmenia  in  Algeria,
MoiiiH  elaborate  inuHaie  pavements  were  fuund  in
Ibu  villa  of  i'oui[ieiahn»,  proronsnl  of  Africa  under
Mouorius,  who  ap|kear«  to  bavo  been  a  great  breeder
of  >biorisb  boi-w's  for  the  Clrcuti.  Perspective
views  of  the  training -stables  are  represented  on
these  mosnicfl,  and  other  pictures  show  the  i-acers
in  tbeir  stalls,  carefnlly  clothed  from  bead  to  foot.
Tbo  name  of  each  hoi-se  is  placed  by  it — e.  g.  Altus,
PnlleuliauuB,  EVlicatns,  Polydoxnf<,  i-lr.,  un<l  an
aurigti  named  Crejiconiint  in  aUn  drpicted.  Liirge
coloured  drawings  of  thene  by  M.  Martin  were  ex-
hibited in  Paris,  in  1878,  and  afterwards  publiahcd


CIRCUS


8M


CIRtS


by  tbo  Soo.  Arob^ol.  de  Coustautmc,  id  li^it.  Tbe
truiriiiig-8 tables  eicein  to  h&vc  boeii  ceutres  of  iti-
trtguo  aud  villainy  of  nil  kiuds:  bribes  w^regivcu,
and  boises  wore  ofteu  "  bucnswd."  Caligula,  wbo
spent  mucb  of  bU  timo  in  tbe  stables  of  Uis  favour-
ite,^'aW/o,  is  said  to  bavv  jtoiatnu'd  tin?  cleverest
ilrivei-fl  of  bis  rivals'  borafw.  Sue  Dio  Cit^.  lix.  6
mid  14.

Large  snuiit  of  money  wore  loAt  and  won  ou  tbo
rnocs  {»po>niit},  "  bcttiup,'*  Jnv.  xi.  'JOi,  witb  Mnyor'a
uote ;  Mart.  -Ej*.  xi.  1, 15).  Rouo-i-aidu  iOli^Ui)  \vcvt>
stdd  nrlth  li&Ts  of  t1i«  horae^  niid  iianien  of  tbo  dilv.
Kn;  and  those  irerc  nlso  given  in  tbo  advertise-
iuent«  of  tbe  games,  wbicb  were  )miiit<?d  in  bkrjj^
letters  on  conopicnons  wnllti:  exHm)iles  of  tlieao
bavR  hfvii  found  at  runi|ieii.  In  addition  to  tbe
cbarioiM  and  tbeir  drivent,  nieti  on  borsebnok  np-
jMtar  to  bave  galloped  witb  tbe  raoere,  exciting
tbein  witb  febouts:  after  tbe  race  tbesc  iubilntorf*,
tM  xXwy  vrero  eatlud,  ^oi'in  to  have  cnlbiil  out  tbe
iiauio  of  tbe  winner.  In  moiuc  com'h  tltciw  attond-
auttf  wore  on  foot  (t3(/r»f*r«).

In  early  times  only  four  cbarlota  ran  lu  OBch
ruco  (mimu«>.  cue  for  eocb  colour  (twc  below);  iu
later  times  eight  or  oven  ton  ebnriot«  start^tU  lo-
getber.  Tbp  starting  HJgual  wa**  given  by  the  pre-
siding magistrate,  m-Iio  waved  a  inuypii  (Liv.  viii.
40,9;  Jtlv.  1,6;  Miirt.  xii.'ii>,9);  and  hence  Jiivenul
(xi.  t9tl)  ealls  the  ciit^U!*  games  fpecUtcilo  iiuipfiae.
Suveti  laps  or  circuits  {c/rricttl'i}  of  tbe  sfiitM  a|t-
pear  In  bave  tievn  tbo  usual  length  of  each  mutut.
(See  Varro,  (tuotcd  by  Aid.  Uell.  iii.  10.)  On  one
occuaioii  Domitian  rediieod  tbe  nninbor  of  laps  to
five,  in  onter  to  get  li»  mitaun  int«  one  day.  In
early  times  very  few  race*  were  run  in  a  day  :
even  iu  The  time  of  lulius  Caesar  tbcy  did  uoC  usu-
ally exceeil  ten  or  twidvo.  Caligula  inoreaeoil  Ibo
uumber  to  tweuty,  or  on  rery  grand  occasiout)
tweutf-foiir;  but  iu  later  times  a  lung  auccceeion
of  raVM  waa  niu  tbt^ughotit  the  whole  day  from
flunriiiH  la  snuHet.

Intervals  between  ttet«  of  races  were  lillad  npby
exbibitiouM  of  rupe-dauei[ig,  tumbling,  and  fcat«
of  borHemansbip,  vi<ry  like  tbo»u  of  u  modern  cir-
cus. Keo  DKSULTOn.

Iu  nddiliou  to  these  races  ftud  games,  tbe  young
Komaus  sometimes  held  reviews  and  aasAolts  of
arms  {artnaturat)  in  tbo  Circus  Moximua;  these
were  sometimeti  ou  foot  Uirumtume  ptdfatrea)  and
•ometimes  ou  bcintebanlc  {rffUfstren).  One  variety
of  this  was  called  tbt^  I.uduM  Tni/u  (Tac.  Ann.  xi.
11 ;  Suet.  Anff.  41),  aud  ..Very,  7>.  Various  other  en-
tertiiiutuenla,  .-tuob  as  feaattt,  were  itomctinieti  given
in  the  Circus  (Stat.  AV/r.  i.  6,  d8};  or  money  wuh
tluug  among  u  crowd  iu  the  arena.  On  one  oera-
Hion  I'nibuH  plmiUil  and  stocked  an  artiliuinl  forest
with  wild  uniuiiiln  und  birda  iu  tbe  Circus  Muxi-
niUH.  and  Hnally  let  in  Ibu  people  to  kill  and  carry
off  what  tbey  could  {Vop.  PnJi.  I»t.

Tlio  /net iimfjf  were  ri>iijpaiii<*»  or  organizatjniis
of  ooutractoro  wliu  pi-uvided  lun-»iu(,  drivers,  and  all
other  requisites  for  the  gnnii^K.  'X\ivf(ftii>  Hysteui
wiut  not  developed  till  tbi-  linii.-  of  tht;  Knipin-;
under  tbe  Republic  a  few  ettizeiis  of  buigbtly  rank
provided  all  tbe  rei|ulsiieK.  Tbe  giver  of  Ibr  uu-
tt'rtaiument  (^fdit^r  fpivtaculyrHin)  only  found  the
money,  the  whole  busiueaa  being  managed  by  the
j'aetionea.  Each_/(ff//o  wa.K  diMtinguisbed  by  a  col-
onr,  wbicb  was  woni  by  tbe  tiurigtic  and  other  per-
formers ill  the  hiili.  At  first  tliens  witp  only  two
j'aftitmen,  ilistinguinliBd  by the  etdonrrt retl and


white,  rufthittn  and  alhtta  ;  next  blue  [rentUt)  ««
addeil,  pi'obnidy  in  tbe  lime  of  AllgUlltnf^;  uml  a
fourth,  giT-i-n  {pratiii'i)^  t-.jxww  in  soon  after  (.Iiii.
si.  I'.W  ;  aTi<lTcrtull./V»S)irfi!.'Jj. Lastly,  Domili^ii
added  piiiple  and  gold — jturjnireu*  rt  iiurutu*  /niu-
im»  ^8tlrt.  D'.'m.  7). Under  Ihe  laler  Eiupin-  raclj
j'tictut  eousisled  of  a  wifl  of  ftJ^/rtyjMw-.earef^illy  or
ganir^d  and  raulxMl  in  ciaascK  of  every  kind,  imrfa
tut  the  metbixlieal  and  bureaucratic  JJomauk  dp-
lighted  iu. At  tbo  licnd  of  cacb  waa  a /Mtionia
doiiiitiHs,  and under  biiu  were  employ^  slires,
and  artioauH  of  every  sort  required  for  the  wliok
mDuagemeut  of  the  ludi. Tbe  number  and  clnnet
ota/amilia  qnadrigaria  (a  division  nfaj'a(Cu')aT^
glveu  in  an  ancient  inscription  puldiebed  by  Om*
ter,  33*i-:i;J9. Tlie/anii7u»  eonsisia  of  iweuiy-fiTe
deciiri'Jiie* — that  is,  at  least  ^TiO  (leoph*.  who  at«
elassitied  as  follows :  uurigae,  affitatorrt,  and  quati-
rii/itrii,  drivors  of  four-boree  chariots;  Mnditorm
and  <»'/(vy>»(/i/<>rm,  grooms  and  bel[»erti;  aellariiv^A'
dlej-n;  *u(orM,  oobblere ;  «irvifMitore«,  tailors;  »inr~
^ritarii,  peorl -embroiderers; vtedici,  surgeoua;
magiUri  and  (/ort^'irM,  perhaps  truinersaud  lu4nic-
tors;  ria/^/TAt,  messengeni;  Ti/iVi.  farm-servaiitA  to
supply  fodder; (ejtt^jre*,  probably  the  men  who
pulled  Ibe  i-o{)Os  to  o|>en  the  doon  of  the  Mmrrw/
apariiorfs,  watcf-men:  tbeee  pn»bably  watered  ibe
dry  ureiin  to  prevent  elouds  of  dust  from  rieiug,tad
alstr  brought  wnter  to  refresh  the  men  nuil  borws-

Tbc  rivalry  between  the  different  eoloanof  Ibe
fauttuUH  and  tbe  heavy  betting  on  tbe  raOMoAan
led  to  scenes  of  riot  and  bloodshed. \8»x  FicnO')
Even  in  Rome,  faction  lights  frequently  took  pine**
towards  tbe  declining  period  of  the  Kmpiro,hit  it
was  not  till  aftor  tbe  trausfurenoo  of  tbe  EonM>
capital  to  Constautinoplo  that  thean  distotbiaoes
reached  tbeir  highest  pitch. In  tbo  sixth  ceaiuryi
the  great  circus  at  CouHtautinople  was  freaiDeuUS*
tbe  scene  of  the  most  hideous  slmighter,  and  oitoa«
uocasiou  iu  llie  reign  of  Junliiiiitn  the  luinnltn**
not  (iu]>pi-HX.'wd  Itll  itbtnil  30.O(X)  uf  the  noiera  lu*^
been  killMi  {if.ua  (iibUon,  Da-ling  mui  Full,  cip.  ll-l-
A  great  jtart  of  thij«  circus  is  still  well  pre»n-«^»
though  Hlrtppcd  of  all  it«  rich  luarhle  Imiiig"  u»^
coliimux.

For  the  variona  fetitlvals  that  were  celebnl**"
by  circus  gamett,  see  the  separate  articles  oo  tb*

CEREALL\,  CiVNSITAUA,  KqtIlIUA.FtXJKAllA.aOil  i*"*

der  Ltm.

For  further  tnfornialion  the  reader  shoiiUl  ***'^^—
8nltTertulli«u,/)*t.S/»«'Mfu/«;Paovinin8,i>ri>*'**
Cinxnuilnu  (Venice,  1600); Buleugetua.  D*  Ci
Jiiftmino,  printed  by  Gnieviua,  TArmmr.  Att.
ix-  (Lyons.  1W4);  Iliaueoni.  De^acriei'mf  ihi  O
(Home,  ITiAf) :  Uianohiui.  Circi  Mar.  JctHi-'jTuy
(Kome,  r-ftJc*) ;  Canina,  Rcma  Anttcn,  vol.  1.  iHo
lf^:W); Nibby.  tVro> (/Wt<*  di Oinualht (K'-W*^
18-i5);  Slagniu,  Origints  du  Thiatrt  (rori*.  1
Hodgkiii,  f^Urre  of'  Cajuiodurus  (  London,  I
and  article!)  iu  the  Ann.  Irut.Areh.  Hom.datl
IWj:*,  and  1870.

Cilia. A  iKwm  falwly  ascribed  to  Veigtl,
NiiuutiniLs printed  with  his  works. It  coii»»**^
of  .>tl  bfxiimeter  lines,  giving  an  aeeouut  of  •"'^
IreucberoiuH cundnot of  the Megartan pno*"**
Stylla  tiiwanls  her  father,  Xisiis,  and  In-r  irt'**'
foMuaiion  into  the  bird  Ciris. It  is  dcilir*ic*|  '**
tbo  sou  of  McfM-nlla.  and  draws  lurgidy  uyon  ^"^
gil's  verse,  eleven  lines  being  copied  ontriylil.*"''
eight  with  thn  chuuge  of  only  one  word. 01^"'
portions  sugge.il  Catullus  aud  occaaiouall}  Li*""


»^


CIRRHA


867


CISTA  FICORONIANA


tiiiR.  The  metrical  treatment  is  less  careful  than
Vergil's  own,  while  the  style  is  more  lively.  See
Kreuiien,  Prolegomena  in  Civin  (  Utrecht,  1882 ) ;
W'alz,  De  Carmine  Ciris  (Paris,  1881);  Sieoke,  De
Siso  ei  Sq/Ua  in  Ave*  Mutatta  (Berlin,  1884) ;  aud  R.
£tlis  ID  the  American  Journal  of  Pkilologtf,  vol.  viii.
p.3U9.

Cirrba  (Klppd). See  Crissaeus  Sinus.

Cimu. See  Coma.

Cirta  (Kipra),  later  Constantina.  Now  CoostaD-
tine;  a  city  of  the  Massylii  in  Niiiuidia,  fifty  Roman
miles  from  the  sea;  the  capital  of  Sypltax,  ami
of  Masinissa  and  his  successors.  Its  positiou  oq
a  height,  snrroaodcd  by  the  river  Ampsagas,  made
it  almost  impregnable,  as  the  Roraaus  found  in
the  Jugurthiue,  and  the  French  in  the  Algerian
wars.  It  was  restored  by  Constantine  the  Great,
iu  liouonr  of  whom  it  received  its  later  name.  A
Roman  bridge  and  the  remains  of  a  Roman  aque-
diict  still  interest  the  archieologist,  and  iu  1858  a
fine  statuette  of  a  Wingless  Victory  was  discovered
here.

Clsalpma  Gallia. See  Gallia.

Ciaiiun.  Alight,  open  carriage  with  two  wheels,
like  a  gig,  adapted  for  two  persona.  Its  form  is
Hculptared  on  the  monamental  column  at  Igel,
near  Treves  (see  illustration).  It  had  a  box  or
case,  probably  under  the  seat.  The  euia  were
quickly  drawn  by  mules  (ci»ja  volantta).  Cicero
iiiL-ntions  the  case  of  a  messenger  who  travelled
tifty-six.  miles  in  ten  hours  iu  such  vehicles,  which

were  kept  for  hire  at  the  sta-  _

tions  along  the  great  roads — a
proof  that  the  ancients  consid-
ered six  Romau  miles  per  hour
as  an  extraordinary  speed.  The
coudnctors  of  these  hired  gigs
were  called  ciaiarii,  and  were
subject  to  penalties  for  careless
or  dangerous  driving.  See  Cic.  Pro  Roac.  Amerin.
7;  Ulpian,  xiii.

Ciapadana  Oallla. Bee  Gallia.

Ciaaeua  (Kio-crcur).  A  king  in  Thrace,  and  father
of  Theano,  or,  according  to  othera  (Eurip.  Hee.  3),
of  Hecuba  (q.  v.),  who  is  hence  called  Cissels  (Kicr*

OTJl's)-

Ciaaia  (Ki<r<ria).  A  very  fertile  district  of  Susi-
ana,on  theChoaspes.  The  inhabitants, Cissii,  were
a  wild,  free  people,  resembling  the  Persians  in  their
iiiiinuers  (Herod,  iii.  91).

Cissua  (Kicrirdr).  A  town  of  Macedonia,  in  the
vicinity  of  Tbessaloulca,  which  contributed  to  the
ui^grandizement  of  that  city.

Cissybium  {kkto-v^iov).  A  large  rustic  cup  of
wikmI  with  one  or  two  handles  and  sometimes
adorned  with  carving.  (See  Theocr.  i.  27.)  The
nume  is  derived  from  xKreror,  and  probably  means
•'  inudo  of  ivy-wood."

Ciata,  Ciatella  (kiittt},  xitrrir).  (1)  Originally  a
wicker  basket  used  for  holding  vegetables  and
other  produce  (Plin.  //.  N.  xv.  CO),  and  of
either  square  or  cylindrical  shape.  (2)  A
ballot-liox,  into  which  the  voters  cast  their
tabeltae,  and  of  which  the  form  and  general
CiRU,  appearance  are  shown  iu  the  auuexed  illus-
bHkeL  *'^'i°i*  taken  from  a  coin  of  the  gens  Cas-
sia. It  is  to  be  carefully  distinguished  from
tbe  aitella,  the  urn  from  which  the  names  of  the


Clslata


tribes  or  centuries  were  drawn  by  lot.  (See  Co-
MiTiA.)  (3)  Any  box  or  casket,  usually  of  small
size,  and  intended  for  almost  any  purpose— e.  g.  a
book-box  (=:  capia),  a  jewel-case,  a  toilet-box.  Of
the  last-named  variety  of  ciata,  a  great  many  very
beautiful  specimens  have  been  found  of  basket-
work.  They  appear  to  have  been  used  largely
for  holding  hair-pins,  sponges,  small  mirrors,  and
scent- bottles.  Most  of  them  have  been  discov-
ered in  the  southern  part  of  Italy  (Magna  Grae-
cia) ;  fewer  in  Greece  proper  and  in  Etrnria.  The
metal  ciatae  (bronze  or  sil-
ver), on  the  other  hand,
come  almost  exclusively
from  Praeiiost^,  whore
they  were  produced  on  a
large  scale.  The  most
beautiful  of  tlieso  and
the  firat  to  be  discovered
( about  the  year  1737 )  is
the  celebrated  Ficoroni
tista,  now in the Museo

Kircheriano  at  Home.  In  1666,  Schoene  described
seventy  cistae  from  Praenest^  alone.  In  1882,  Fer-
nique  reported  the  number  as  having  reached  one
hundred.  (4)  The  name  ctatae  was  also  given  to
the  small  boxes  carried  iu  the  processions  at  the
Greek  festivals  of  Demeter  and  Dionysus,  and  con-
taining the  sacred  things  connected  with  the  wor-
ship of  the  deities.  (See  Catull.  Ixiv.  259.)  The
shape  was  sometimes  oblong;  oftener  cylindrical.
To  distinguish  these  from  the  common  ct«to«,  they
are  generally  called  ci$tae  mjfBtiaie.  See  Cistopho
RUB ;  Hysteria.

Ciata  Castellaniana.  Au  Etruscan  casket  dis-
covered by  Siguor  Castellani,  a  Roman  jeweller,
and  now  in  the  British  Museum.

Clsta  Flcoronlana.  The  most  celebrated  of  tbe
cistae,  or  jewel-caskets,  found  in  Italy.  It  was  dis-
covered by  an  Italian  scholar,  Ficoroni,  in  1745,


Cmla,  toilet-bAsket.


ClBta  FicoroulaUA.


CISTELLARU


8S8


CIVTTAS


Rt  Lngsno,  abont  five  niilee  from  PaleHlrina.  An
Eliftlisbraau  uffurvcl  liiru  a  ]arg«  sum  fur  it,  liiit  lift
preFetTod  U*  prusetit  it  to  tliu  Miimki  Kirtheriauo
of  the  Jwinit  Cullegtt  iii  Rftini>,  wLem  it  ir  still  pro-
BcrvtMl.  U  iit  cyliiitlriual  iu  bbapo,  about  fifty  ceu-
tiiiiutrvs  high  and  forty-two  in  diaiuettir,  and  bears
upon  iin  mmiowlini  convex  side  ropi'CAOiitatious  of
ttofiiv*  from  tliv  Htory  of  tbo  Argouniile.  The  ^mhh
o(  tb«  dniwiug  tiiid  tUe  fcesbuesa  aud  ftpirit  of  tbe
auiupoNition  tiuike  tbe  work  exce^diugly  iiUrac-
Cive.  Au  inscription  upon  it  gives  Ibe  uouie  of
Iba  4iirucr  aud  the  nriii^t :

PixMA  .  ItAnouriA FiUAi .  l>tEDir
NUVIOI I^JtUTtO« Ml»  .  ftOXAJ PlciD

Sec  O.  .Tnhii,  Di*  I-'icorOHUche  Cula  (lH5*i).

ClateUaria  A  play  of  Plaiitua,  of  wbicb  only
abont  one  half  boa  been  preserved.  Tbe  prolof^ne
contains  au  allusiou  to  tbe  tjecond  Punic  \Vni  ob
Ix-iuK  tftUl  iu  progreas.  A  goad  separate  eilitiou
is  tbiit  iif  BviioiHt  (Lyons,  11^63).

Ciatellatrix. A  liuly'a  uiaid  (Plant.  TVitt.  253).

Cifltema. See  I'utkus.

CiathenA  (KtaSqi'ti].  |l>  A  uiytbtcal  plain  men-
tiotifd  in  tbu  Promrtlieut  Vinctn»  of  Aegcliylnb  (v.
799)  an  tlin  abiido  of  llioGorgunH.  (*2)  A  town  on  tbo
ooaat  ofMynia. (;))  A  town  on  tbe  coast  of  Lycia.

CiatophSrua  (xnTTo^ujrat).  One  who  carried  tbe
citl't  in  rt'ligionn  procejiainiia.

CiBtoph5rua  (Ki<TTo(f>6(Ks).  A  t»rin  iipplifrd  to
oortain  Kilvvr  coins  Idnnv*!  in  Asia  Minor,  iti  ciHnw-
qu«uco  of  the  typu  wilb  wliirb  tbey  wetf  tin-
presned — a  Dimiyninc  nieta,  out  of  wbiob  a  serpent

Klides. Tiio  otbcr  »U\k  of

tbo  coin  bcarv  i  bu  uiuno  or
monugTHiu  of  ibo  city  of
Ihuo.  According  to  Dr.
Xmbnof,  t1)iit  coin  origi-
nalud  ill  Ephc«n4  nbortly
liefor«  B.C-  300,  ami  i(x  use
rapidly ext<Midwl  tlirongb-
oiit  tbo  i\  o  01  i  i>  i  n  n  8  of
Attains  I.  of  Porgiiinus.
Heucefortli  Iho  oistopbo-
rtiH  became  a  sort  of  Pnn-
Asintic  coin,  and  viaa  is-
sued iu  vast  ()imntiht>s  from  tunny  Asiatic  uitits.
See  yumitmatic  Chrotiiote  {ISiSS),  p.  ILW.

CltadeL Sco  Acnoi-ous ;  Arx  :  Castkixum.

CithaeroD  (Kt0aifyi!oi').  (I)  A  klitg  of  Fl.ataea  iu
Boeot  iii.  ir<eiuarkable  for  his  ivisdom.  By  bis  adv  iw,
Zens  protended  to  be  contracting  a  second  mur-
ringe  wlirtti  Hcri^  bad  qMmri'llfd  witb  and  left  bini.
Tbe  Bcbente  «npce«ded,  and  tbo  goddess  bccamt-
reconciled  to  ln-r  sponxi'  ( Pausan.  ix.  3).  This
tnonarcb  Is  saUI  to  bav4>  given  name  to  tbe  well-
kuowu  luoiuitaiH- range  tu  Itmnttin.  (3)  A  tofty
range  of  nionntainN,  stiparaling  Booolia  from  Me-
garifl  and  Attica.  It  was  aavrfd  to  Dionysim  and
the  Muses,  and  was  cetobratcd  for  Ibe  dinth  of
PentbeUB  (q.  v.)  arid  Anlacou  (q.  v.).  Hero  wa«
celebratod  the  festival  culled  Daediila  (q.  v.).

Citbttra  Uidapa).  Ctthazlata  (ict^a^icrr^c).  Koc
Ltka.

Cltharoeda. See  Ltra.
Citharoedos  (xiAi^Atlc). See  Lyka.

CldumiKirioi').  (1)  A  town  iu  Cyprus, 200  stadia
from  Salamis,  near  thti  nnniib  of  tbi*  T«^liits;  bcrt-
Clmon,  tbe  cclnliratctt  Atbetiian,  dii^d,  and  Zeiio,


iW.


<\>


>:■'


W^


:--;.^r'


Cliilci|>tiamB. (Und-i


j  the  founder  of  the  Stoic  scbool,  was  bora.

I  now  I^rnaca. (*2>  A  t4>w-n  in  Mftt:cdouia,iiurtIiit«it

;  of  IkiMH'-fl.

City  Edittona  of  Homer.  A  uamc  gtvcti  iij
Iloiueric  scbolunt  to  tbe  "  official"  ooplM  tif  tlie
Homeric  poems  pn-scrved  by  autbority,  anil  Uvta
u'bicb  private  copies  wore  made.  Au  edltkm
means  u  single  c<qty,  aud  tbeiti  were  seno  w-
called  "cily  "or"  civic  "e*litiou8 — tbe  MosMliirti*,
Siiiopic,  Cbiau,  Cyprian,  Argive,  Cretan,  and  Us-
biaii  (Aoolic).  Of  tbetwi  tbe  first  four  wen  loDic,
and  the  la»t  three  Aeolic.  Tboy  ore  «ai<l  by  mam
to  buvo  been  copied  from  tbe  recension  v(  t!tf
poems  made  by  tbe  comDiissiou  of  Pisistiatui  ap-
pointed to  rearrange  and  edit  Ibcni.  See  BlsLufi)',
Hiift.uf  ClaM.  Grtrk  litcra  tiirtf  (lBi»),  vol.  i. pp. 'JJ,
39,  and  3^;  aud  tbe  article  Homkrus.

Ciua  (Ki'or)-  An  nncieut  city  in  nitbynii,ai)  l
bay  uf  tbe  Proikinlis  called  CianiiH  Sinus,  ku
colon  ixed  by  tbe  ililesintut.  It  n-a.-^  destroTcil  h)
Pbilip  HI.,  king  of  Macedonia;  but  "vcat  idailt
by  Pt'UHiiut,  king  of  Uiibynia,  from  wbom  II  i^u
culled  Prusioa  ( Polyb.  x\  i.  il}  ).

Clvio  BditloiiB  of  Homer.  S««  Cin  Edi-
tions.

Clvil^  lua. See  Iva  CiviuE.

Civilia,  luurs.  A  powerful  Batavian,  Kbo
raJM^d  n  solition  against  the  Honinii  Statv  (Ai*
Gi>-70j  dniing  tbe  controversy  for  empire  Ifciwc*
Vitelline  and  Veapasiiiu,  bnt  wbo  was  BdiIIj"  "I*"
feuted  by  PeliliiisCtreali*.  His  end  is  not  known
Tuuitiis,  in  bis  Nialuriae  ( bhs.  iv.  and  v.),  bt»  f<ff-
uiubed  ns  with  interesting  aud  copious  dettill  >■'
this  long-ptotractud  contlicl.

CivIliB  Actio. See  AtTlo.

Clvia. A  titizctii. See  CiVITAa.

ClvItaA Tbe tecbuicnl l.ntin ivord  ta  tlie
right  of  citiKenslii[). Tliiswas  originally  pciM#sw^
at  Roui(\  by  the  imtricians  only. Tbe  plfb«M»
were  not  iidniittcil  to  nintre  it  at  nil  tintil  ihttiaB
of  Serrins  Tullins,  and not  to  full  civic  rigit*
until  fi.c.  3.17. In  ito  fulletit  comprebuoBinD  tbt
civUnt  ini^lndod : (1)  tbe  iut  tuffra^H,  or  ri|;tit  ^"
voting foi nuigistrales ; (2)  tbe  iux  Amionnsi  *>'
right  of  being  elected  to  a  ningistracy  ;  (3)  llw*"'
prvwcationit^  or  right  of  appeal  to  tbo  {>eD|tl«,  u'^
iu  later  l  imus  to  tbe  emperor,  agniust  the  seuWitr**
pai»ed  by  tungintrutes  alTecting  life  or  pro|>«fty  '
(4)  the  iu»  conHubii,vT  right  to  oontruct  alegsltD*""'
I'iage  ;  (&)  tbe  iui  commtrdi,  or  right  to  bolil  i»^*V
erty  in  tbe  Kouiau  conmiuulty. The  ekil»»  **^
oblaine<l  either  by  birth  froui  Koiuau  paivuta.  ***
by  tnauuiniiuiion  ls«e  ^IaNI'MIHsiu),  or  by  prMenC^*
tioji. The  right  i»f  presentation belonged  *^t^^'
nally  to  tbe  kings,  afterwards  to  the  popnl"'  ***"
somlilivs,  and parttcnltirly  to  the comiti*  hihut^j'
aud  luht  of  all  to  tho  eni|H'roni. The  ciri/»i«  w"'**
be lost by drminvtio capftit. ( Bee PKJIIKIT**'
Capitis.) TIik  acrarii,  so  calli-d,  had  an  iroptfrfr"*^"
ririlae,  vilbout tho ins  anffi-agii  and  i«»  hou^rm*"'
Outside  the  circle  of  Ibe  ciritat  stood  tin.'  »tiir«^
aud  I  he  foreigners,  or  pei-eyriMi. (See  PeiixobIK**'
The  Inller  inclurlr^d  :  (1)  slrangen  who  stood  in  P*
inlernntioiial  reinlious  witli  Kotue; (2)  the  allic*'
or  nacii.  among  wbom  tbe  f^tini  (q.  v.)  held  a  pn^'
ilogtHl  place ; (3)  tbo  deditidi,  or  tboae  who  )t^
longiMl  to  nations  conquered  in  war. See  U  k

Tbongb  tlie  Roman  citizeusbip  was  coiifrrreu
npou  all  tbe  free  inbuhitaute  uf  the  Kmptre  in  A.P-


CLABULARI3


869


CLAUDI0P0LI3


Clkbolan. (Pompsiftii  Patnting.)


312  by  tlio  emperor  Caracalla,  the  grades  of  it
were  uot  all  equalized,  uor  was  it  nntil  the  time
of  Jiistiuiau  that  avitat  and  Ubertaa  became  cod-
vertible  terms. See  Pouteia.

Clabolaiia  or  ClaTOlatls.  The  cur$u»  clabutaria
iu  the  Theodosiau  Code  and  iu  AmmiaiiuH  Marcel-
linus  (XX.  4)  deuot«8  the  syetem  of  military  trans-
port by  iiieaiiB  of
carritigea  and  ve-
hides.  lobannes
Lydua  derives  the
word  from  clnvue
(De  Menaibua,  i.  9).
If  we  may  trnst
the  text  of  Cod.
Theod.vi.29,2,$2,
clabuJare  is  the  name  of  a  waguu,  the  word  here
also  being  nsed  in  couoection  with  the  transport
service.  Hence  it  has  been  derived  &om  clavulae
in  the  aeose  of  rails.

Clampetia  or  Ziampetla.  A  town  iu  Bruttium,
deaerted  iu  Pliuy's  time.

Clandestiiia  PosaeBoio. See  Intbrdictuu.
Clania. (1)  A  river  of  Etruria,  now  the  Chiano,
formiug  two  small  lakes  near  Clnsium,  and  flow-
ing into  the  Tiber  east  of  Vnlsiuii. (2)  The  more
ancient  name  of  the  river  Liris  (q.  v.).
ClanluB. See  Liternus.
Clarigatla See  Fetiales.
Clania  {KXapos). A  small  town  on  the  Ionian
coast,  near  Colophoo,  with a  celebrated  temple
and  oracle  of  Apollo,  sumamed  Clnrius.
Claap. See  Fibula.
Claaaea. See  Comitia.

Clasalarli  ((Vi/3arai). Alariiies. SeeExKRCiTUS.

daaalcal  Philology. See  Philology.

Clas^ouin. The  signal  giveu  by  the  buciwa  or

horn  for  the  meeting  of  the  Comltia  Ceuturiata  at

Rome,  and  for  the  meeting  of  the  soldiers  in  camp,

especially  before  they  marched  out  to  battle. See

CORMU.

dasdteoa,  luuus.  ATrevirian  prefect  in  the
army  ofVitellins  (A.D.  69),  who  subsequently  joiued
the  Batavian  Civilia  in  his  resistance  to  the  Ro-
mans. See  CiriLis.

Claatldlum.  A  fortified  town  of  the  Anaiies,  iu
Gallia  Cispadaua,  uot  far  from  the  Padus  (Po).

Clatzl A  trellis  or  lattice  -  work  used  to  pro-
tect and  partially  cov-
er any  aperture,  as  a
window  or  door  (Uor.
A.P.47Z).

CbracUa. SeeCLO-

DIA.


Qatidia  0«iiB,both


O&thrl. (Clreiu  of  Cumolla.)


patrician  and  plebe-
iau.  The  patrician  Claudii  were  of  Sabiue  origin,
and  came  to  Borne  iu  B.C. 604,  when  they  were  re-
ceived amoog  the  patricians.  (See  Claudius  [1]).
Tbfy  were  noted  for  their  pride  and  haughtiness,
their  disdain  for  the  laws,  and  their  hatred  of  the
plebeians.  They  bore  various  snruames,  which  are
given  under  Claudius,  with  the  exception  of  those
with  the  cogoomen  Nero,  who  are  better  known
under  the  latter  name.  The  plebeian  Claudii  (Clo-
dii)  were  divided  into  several  families,  of  which  the
most  celebrated  was  that  of  Marcellus.


Claudia  Quinta.  A  Roman  matron,  and  not  a
Vestal  Virgin  as  is  frequently  stated.  Wbeu  the
vessel  conveying  the  image  of  Cybel6  from  Pessi-
nus  (B.C.  204)  to  Rome  had  stuck  fast  iu  a  shallow
at  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber,  the  soothsayer  an-
nonnced  that  only  a  chaste  woman  could  move  it.
Claudia,  who  had  been  accused  of  incoiitinency,
took  hold  of  the  rope,  and  the  vessel  forthwith
followed  her. See  Ovid,  faX.  iv.  305-330.

Claudianua,  Claudius.  A  Latin  poet,  born  at
Alexandria  in  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century
A.D.  In  A.D.  395,  he  came  to  Rome.  Here  he  won
the  favour  of  the  powerful  Vandal,  Stilicho,  uud
on  the  proposal  of  the  Senate  was  honoured  with
a  statue  by  the  emperors  Arcadius  and  Honoring.
The  inscription  on  this  statue  is  still  in  existence
(Mommseu,  Interiptionet  Beg^ii  NeapolHaniy  No.  6794).
His  patron  Stilicho  fell  iu  408,  and  Clandian,  ap-
parently, did  not  survive  him.  We  have  express
evidence  that  the  poet  was  uot  a  Christian.  He
was  familiar  with  Greek  and  Latin  literature,  and
had  considerable  poetical  gifts,  including  a  mas-
tery of  both  language  and  metre.  These  gifts
raise  him  far  above  the  crowd  of  the  later  Latin
poets,  although  the  effect  of  his  writing  is  marred
by  tasteless  rhetorical  ornament  and  exaggerated
flattery  of  great  men.  His  political  poems,  iu  spite
of  their  laudatory  colouring,  have  considerable  his-
torical value.  Most  of  them  are  written  in  praise
of  Honorins  and  of  Stilicho,  for  whom  he  had  a
veneration  as  sincere  as  was  bis  hatred  of  Ruflnos
and  Eutropius.  Against  the  latter  he  launched
a  number  of  invectives.  Besides  the  Raptut  Froaer-
pinae,  or  Bape  of  Pi'oterpine,  an  unfiuisbed  epic  iu
three  books,  iu  which  bis  descriptive  power  Is  very
brilliantly  displayed,  his  most  important  poems
are  :  (1)  De  IU,  IV.  VL  Coneulatu  HonoHx;  (2)  De
XupHia  Souorii  Feacennina;  (3)  Epithalamium  de
Xuptiia  H&norii  et  Mariae;  (4)  De  Bella  Gildonicof
(5)  De  Conaulata  StitielutHia;  (6)  De  Bella  PoHenHno;
(7)  Latia  Serenae,  Serena  being  Stilicho's  wife ;  (ti)
Eidytlia,  seveu  in  number;  (9)  Epigrammata;  Gi-
gantomadiia,  a  fragment.  He  also  wrote  epistles
in  verse,  a  series  of  minor  pieces,  narrative  and  de-
scriptive, and  letters  to  Serena,  and  miscellaneous
poems,  including  one  on  the  magnet  {Magnea).

The  Saptua  Froserjrinae  has  come  down  in  sepa-
rate MSS.,  of  which  the  best  are  two  Codices  Lau-
rentiani,  pFeser\'ed  in  the  Laurentine  Library  at
Florence.  These  are  of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth
oenturiee  respectively.  Others  are  at  Leydeu.  Of
the  remaining  poems  there  are  excerpts  (Excerpta
Lncensia)  from  a  lost  MS.,  uow  at  Ftoreuce;  and
others  (Excerpta  Gyraldina)  from  the  lost  Codex
Gyraldinus,  now  at  Leyden.  Good  MSS.  are  also
iu  the  Vatican  at  Rome  and  in  the  Arobrosian  Li-
brary at  Milan.  Editions  of  Claudianus  have  beeu
published  by  Pnlmann  (Antwerp,  1571),  J.  Scaliger
(Leyden,  1603),  Heinsius  (Leydeu,  IteO),  Gesner,
with  good  notes  (Leipzig,  1759),  Burmann  (Amster-
dam, 1760),  Konig  (Gotticgen,  1606),  and  a  critical
ed.of  the  text  by  Jeep  (Leipzig,  1676).  See  Hodg-
kin,  Claudianua,  the  Laat  af  the  Roman  Foets  (New-
castle, 1675).

Claudlopfilis  (KXaL'dioTToXK).  (l)AcityofBithyu-
la,  previously  called  Bithynium.  It  was  situated
above  Tium,  in  a  district  named  Salou^,  celebrated
for  its  excellen  t  pastures  and  a  cheese  much  esteemed
at  Rome.  UnderThcodosinsitwasmade  the  capital
of  the  province  Houorias. Many  years  after,  wo


Inam  fmm  Aiiiia  Comueii:!  )  i».  9<i7>  and  l^o  Diftco-
tiiiN  liv.  9>,  whu  dfM-rilHi  ir  as  tin*  iikinL  wcalihy
Biiil  tliiiiriHliiug  v'ny  of  (j^liilia,  tliiit  it  wan  alimwt
ti>1ally  tk-tttruyt^d  by  au  cartliiiuakt-.  niteiulMl  witli
TiiMt  InsH  uf  life,  rit  A  ciry  of  Cilicin  Trovlioa,
Itiit  oiMti^iicd  I>y  AmniiniinH  iiii«l  ltierorlc«  to  Itutn-
no.  It.  wiM  fouD<lr*l  by  Cliimiiu*,  the  Honiaii  ein-
purur,  and  vraa  flituntfU  hi  a  |daiii  W-tWDun  twn
nuiiiiiiictt  of  Mount  TanriiK.

CtandiuB.  Sen  Cuu-niA  fJESS.  (1)  Appirs
CLAiiiMH  SAnlvi'fi  Kfoili-kxhis.  a  Sabiiie,  a
imtivii  (tf  Kei^illiiiii.  uiid  in  littt  owu  couutry  called
Attuii  t'laiiHiis.  He  Iwlouyifd  (o  Ibe  i»n>-Huriiaii
|i«rty  iiiiioiiji  hiH  iicople.  aint  when  bis  advice  was
ilisrrgjinUril  and  war  broku  out  belweeu  the  two
iiatiMiiA,  hi-  li^d  a  larKi*  iiiiuiber  of  ftecedrn  to  Kouio
in.i'.  TifMi,  nbirro  bt*  natt  eitmlted  aiuutig  the  pntri-
v'uxus  nitd  r<M?t'ived  il  hir^jL'  K^atit  ot*  laud  beyoud
fbe  Atiio,  Ho  was  tUi>  finnidi*r  of  tli**  great  g«im
Claudia,  oiip  nf  tlie  iidbUwt  in  1ii>ui:tii  litKtury.  H<^
was  n  typical  ariHtoersI,  uud  bib  cuudui^t  ttiwaribi
the  pUd)fiiatiK  wiv^  tiiarkf^d  by  mi  uiucb  int^deraiic-u
and  NRVcrily  during;  bid  coiiHiilabip  (B.C.  41)5)  aa  to
l«ad  to  tliu  fuuioiia  hvcu^iuu  to  Ibc  Muiih  Sacrr  In
the  folliiwing  yvM.  fit  APfirs  ('LArDiua  SabI-
SVH  KKiiiI.I.KN.siA.  A  SOU  of  tbe  (neetHlin);,  (xiUMnI
in  lie.  471.  !!(»  was  famed  for  tbe  severity  of  his
luilitury  Uiscipliue.  which  hn  ininhed  to  sarh  ex-
trotueit  that  bis  soldiors  dfuerted  hiin.  Mavin^r  on
tlii»  at't'imut  boi'n  iuipeiU'htMl  by  thp  tribniies,  bo
coininitEed  suicide.  (Ilj  Gau's  Clai'dhjn  SABiNUs
Hkoillexws.  Abrotbrr  nf  thr  prrTpdiiiK,  and  oin?
of  tho  more  OHMleratc  of  tlio  patrici:ui8.  He  df-
fendtid  bis  brother  (f  I,  tbii  drcuiiivir,  \vhi:ii  tliitbtlti^r
yrm  iiopeavhcd.  (4i  AlTlfs  ('laijiiU's  CRASsrs  Sa-
Blsrs  RKutr.i.KNsis,  u.siiully  called  tho  »f>n  of  \u.  2,
but  potutiUly  iht.1  muw  person.  He  was  consul  In
B.O.  451,  ami  in  tlie  same  yi-ar  beeaiiio  ono  of  tbe
decenivirN  appointi-d  to  levinc  thv  laws.  (Spo  De-
CKMVlRl.)  lu  tbu  fuHowiug  year  he-  was  rcap|)oint-
ed,  but  bin  lyrunnuria  couduct  towanU  tiiv  ptubc-
iaiii>,  utui  CM|»L-clally  bis  relation  to  tbe  aft'air  of
Tirt^lnia,  leil  to  the  dowiifatl  of  the  deceiuvirati-.
(See  VimiiMA.)  B<Miig  impcarbrd  by  Vlr^iniuit,
hti  oitberuuuimitted  otiiridp  or  \\n*>  killed  iu  [irioon
Iwfore  bis  liial.  (b)  ApI'ICh  CLAt'Dlfs  C'AKCffi.  A
fojlioUH  Koinau,  ociiBor  iu  B.C.  Sl'ii.  Durijig  biit  term
of  office  lie  comniciictMl  tbu  Via  Appia  and  built
tbe  tina,l  Appian  a<iiitHlntt.  He  retained  tbe  cen-
aoDtblp  for  four  ycnm  beyoiid  tbo  time  allowiKl  by
law,  and  wan  twiec  consul  (B.C.  307  uud  2iM\),  iiiid
in  the  latter  year  ciirricd  on  war  against  the  Sam-
ntteN  and  KtniAcanR.  Ah  mi  old  man,  Applns  in-
duced tbo  ."Senate  to  reject  the  proposals  for  pea^v
made  by  t'inea«  uu  behalf  (if  Pyrrbnt*.  (.See  Pvu-
Rllt')^.)  He  wrw  tbo  lin<t  Koinan  writer  of  prone
and  vctmi.'  of  wbuin  we  bave.  any  recoixt,  bein};;  tbe
author  of  a  poem  (ncibie'i-t  iinkuowii),  and  of  a  le-
Ijal  trrallws  />r  l.'»iirpHlionihM«.  Willi  Cn.  FlavitiH,
be  publialied  uIku  a  calendar  of  the  retiginnf-  fettti-
vhIk.  and  letfin  aftwucn.  Acconling  to  (juintilian
(it.  16,  7),  be  was  the  firol  to  difdinnniwli  tbe  two
aonndsK and  Sin  writing.  (See  Kiii>rACi!«M.>  Mar-
tianuaCapelln  (uiyhtlmt  In*  net  tbt^fatdiinn  of  nniit-
tiug  tbw  Hue  i>f  the  character  Z.  {Sew  .Xi-riiARKT.)
Soo  MommBcn,  //inf.  of  A'omc.  i.  p.  432  ;  id.  Itiiminrhf
JVmAurjTAi,  vol.  i.  (Uerliu,  Ir7(>4):  and  the  tn?atie»e
of  Siebcrt  (CaJuwd,  1803).  In  bin  old  agir  lie  iH'came
blind,  a»  the  iiauiv  C'aeenH  implies,  lu  Rninan
ConslitLitioinil  history,  Appins  is  famous  lut  having
Bbolinbed  tho  lioiitationof  tbofull  right  of  cilixeu-


shiptoUtid-onrDeiv.  (6>  Appics  CLArnnisrAtTiFBX.
A  brother  of  the  prccwiiiig,  wbo  was  couanl  in  b,c.
*J(M,  and  t^>ok  part  in  tbe  Kintt  Funic  War.  c^mdiict-
nit;  a  eanipaigii  agaiiitft  the  Carthaginians*  in  Sicily.
(7)Pt'u:iiKR,aRomancoiisuUntheFirRl  PuuicWar.
When,  previous  to  a  naval  engagement  with  tho
CarthaginliniH,  the  person  who  bad  cbnrge  of  tlw
aacretl  fowU  told  bim  that  they  would  not  fit.
which  wan  eatcemi-d  a  bad  umun.  be  ordeied  tbriii
to  bo  thrown  into  tbe  tiea,  oxelaiuiitig.  "Tbrti  \et
tbeiu  dritik."  After  tbi^,  joining  battle  witli  tha
foe,  he  was  defeated  with  the  U*m  of  bi6  flml
Having  been  ruculleit  by  the  8enate,  h«  gare  ui.
other  specimen  of  the  haogbty  tem[)er  ol  Ibc
Claudiau  raco.  for,  on  being  directe^l  tu  uouiriatc
a  dictator,  be  jiurtiosely  named  his  owu  Wb/m'.  u
individual  of  tbe  lowei^t  rank  (Cic.  >'.  /'.  ii.  3i.  \Si
Xuito,  u  Koman  cuiihuI  in  the  .Second  I'uuic  W«r,
who,  in  oonjutiction  with  bin  oollfa}|(tie  l.irlnnS*'
linator,  defeated  HaHdrnbal  in  IJmliria,  on  llw
baiikMof  the  MetauniM(ij.  v.)-  (9)  APPJfsClal'WfS
PriA:UKR.  A  coiiHul  iu  B.C.  MS,  when  be  defr»lnl
the  Salawii,  an  Alpine  Inbe.  (Jn  bin  return,  iltf
Senate  refused  to  give  biin  a  triumph,  anil  wlKn
uiio  of  the  tribuuea  trieil  lu  ilrng  bim  fn'Si  hi*
chariot,  Ue  and  bis  daughter  Claudia,  a  VcstsL
walkeil  tuKeiher  to  the  Capitol.  He  wa«  UHm-
iii-law  to  Tib.  Crncchns,  and  acted  as  triomnr  fur
tho  division  of  the  pnblie  lands.  He  died  loon
after  ihe  death  of  Gracchus.  <1U>  TtH)-:inC»  Ntno,
father  of  the  emperor  TMicrlns.  Hi'  \<ai  ili-lia'
giiished  for  his  naval  ttkill  in  the  Alexauilrtiui  UV.
under  InliriH  Caesar.  At  a  subsequent  (trrtod  be
iuetled  a  medilioii  in  Campania  by  pnituMof;  t*
restore  the  [irojM-rty  of  those  who  bad  siitft-icdlu
till!  Civil  Wui-h.  Tbifl  Tumult,  Iiowovit,  wm  MM
qiiellt^d  by  tbe  arrival  of  Octavlflatia;  and  Tlli^ria*.

together  with  his  wifo  Livia,  t<w)k  refn;;e  iu  ffiril*
and  .\clmia  until  tbe  etitabliMbmcnt  tif  lhi>  ScfnoJ
Triumvirate  matle  it  safe  fur  bim  ton-'nr"'  i.-lii"!*
l.ivia  having  af^ur  this  engaged  (1)>  '^

OctavianiiB.TilieriQs  transferred  to  I i  '"«

ami  privileges  of  a  huKhaml  ^Tau.  Jmh.  v.  tl. iHl

TlBEKIfS  NKUO  CaESAK  (tEHMASiCCS,  lhe«IIM»«^
of  -ViigustUH,  and  son  of  the  preceding.  tS«^Tl'
BKIttfe.) (13j  TlUKRIl'rt  CLAlUltS f»IU**f»  .N^i

Caesar  GKHMASiCfa,  more  cummonly  knii*«  •*/
lti«  liiHtoi-ii-al  name  of  Claudius,  »iiece«d^  to  ti*
H'Ouivu  Empire  on  the  death  of  Caligtila.  H*  "*
the  second  boti  of  I>rnHm<  and  Autoui.i,  oi«I  o»"
HWincutly  gran il-iie| die w  to  Augu»tux-  WbfO  ik*
a>isassi nation  of  Caligula  was  uiaite  ktiovv.  tb<
lirst  impulse  of  tbo  court  parly  and  of  ll#  f"^
uigu  guards  was  to  mOMiAcre  all  who  bad  \*UU'-
ipated  in  the  munlor.  Several  perwii*  "'  ^*
lincliou,  who  ImpnidenMy  exposed  iIwihwIti*
became,  in  connwiuence.  tbe  victims  of  tlieir  T'lT-
This  violonco  nuhsided,  however,  upi>n  thWr  'li*-
eovi-ring  Claiidtiipt,  who  bad  cuiiceulcil  biiu!*'^"'
an  obwuie  eorner  of  Jlie  palace^  and  who,  l^eiBS
draggled  froui  his  biding-place,  throw  lilniin'
at  their  feet  in  The  utJuiMt  terror  and  biwoailit
tbem  to  spare  his  life.  Tbo  siddlera  m  tbe  pw"
acu  immediately  saluted  btui  emf»eror,  and  CIm*'
dius,  in  return,  set  the  first  example  of  pJiJ"*
tbe  army  for  the  imperial  dignity  by  a  Urp*
from  tbe  public  treuaury.  It  is  dlCOrult  te  a9M|0
auy  other  motive  for  the  choice  which  tb«  uOT
miidu  of  Cliiudiiiti  Itiao  that  which  the)  tliev
hflveM  pn>few('d,  "bis  rclationnbip  to  thn  "H**
fauiiiy  of  the  Caeaarti,'' Claudius,  who  vw  u"'


CLAUDIUS


Ml


CLAUDRTS  QUADmUAKU'S


,  bail  norer  ilmio  un.vlliinx  in  gtuti

B^iBplay  tliofto  quulilic-a  n  liich  ac-
Ipt  uflbn  Boltlivry.  1I«  lind  bceu
lid  ttw  tlovi'lopui«iit  uf  hm  riirtil-
iled  by  tii»  lioilily  iullnnitios;  ainl
ntjE^ren'  bU  coii)|>Uiiit9,  atul  Wcuuiv  ^
118  a  (KiUto  scholar  uuil  an  trloituviit  ^
riu  iivTcr  rnwovfretl  from  tlit"  fflwUi
ofBRVvre  trettt.nK'iit.  iiiiil  lit-  ri'liiinud
Ifuiilily  ntid  iivili»l«^ii(-4^  r>i'  Uin  rhild*
[  lilt*  rt!i(;ti  i»f  TilHTiiu*  Ii"  Kiive  liitii-
M  w<iiitim)ily,  aihL  coiisuled  liiuwlf
p'adatiun  by  the  Moiuily  which  it
it. Under  t'aligiiU  alM)  he  foiiitd


nr  iiaiiiral  itiib«cility,  liat  of  the  early  and  unlim-
ited iiidul^ciK^t!  of  suuMiiulity,


IT  CtemUu*. tUuit  m  U.u  \Btic-ui.)

St  In  m&litlaluiug  his  repiitntion  fm-
)d  he  Ba0ere<l  biiiisolf  tu  bemmo  the
f  pArasitea  aud  ibe  subject  of  Ihcir
fe.  The  excilemont  of  novelty,  on  Li*
%  to  the  throue,  prodiice<l  ctrortA  of

prndeuce  of  whicli  none  who  bad
IDWD  bini  believed  liini  tapabh- :  and
iholp  of  his  HMgii,  tun.  wv  lind  Jiidi-
efnl  eiinrtnient«  (KraHionully  iniulr.
,1  »eem  to  show  that  ho  wa<t  iiul  in
}1iAli  and  ineouipotent  aa  hi^toiiaiis
\y  rL-pre«.*nteil  hiui.  It  i»  must  pruh-
f.  that  the  futnily  \vhieh  cliaracter-
tt»  of  hi«  conduct  jvat  the  re^ii]!,  umI


ClamlitiH  embellished  Rome  vith  uiaiiy  ma([uifi-
i^rut  wi)rk!<;  be  uuide  Mauritania  a  lUitaau  prov-
iiire:  lii»  iu-rnie^  Iniijcht snccf^sHfiilly  a^'uiiiHt  the
(tiM-iimiiK  ;  and  lie  hiuaelf  (riuiiiphed  umciiilkcully
ill vict«irit-M  orcr the Britons,  and  ubtained,  to*
l^ether  nitb  im  iufunl  mm,  the  Mirnauie  of  Hritau-
iiiniiH. Itnt  in  other  reiipectH  be  was  M-holly  gov*
ernei)  by  wtirlhlctiN  favi>nrite<i,  and  f«]>eci»lly  by
bin  ouipreiM,  the  pruUiKAii*  niid  abandoix^il  Mewui-
liiia  (i|.  v.),  nrboM*  cruelly  aud  nipat-ity  wt'ru  a<i  un-
lionii(U-d  HA  brr  liventiousueM*. At  her  inatigatiun
il  viui  but  too  routtuoii  for  the  fiiii»t'ror  to  put  lu
iloalb,  on  falwe  chnrKeti  of  conKjdraey,  aoino  of  the
wraUhient  of  tbu  iioblcM,  ami  to  coutiHcate  tlieir
••htiiti'-",  with  tbt'  niom-y  arittiitj;  fr<nn  n-bich  she
openly  pamjiereil  her  iiiim«roiiti  pnniinoiint. When
th*'  career  of  iIiih  f^uUiy  woaiaii  w  iw  t^'nitiiiatcd,
Clandius  van  jijovenitd  for  a  tiiiir  by  Ium  frecdinan,
N'ar<'i?tHu«,  ami  I'alla^,  uiiolhfr  luannmittcd  ulare,
uiitit  bo  took  t4t  n-ifc  liis  own  aiere,  Agrippioa,
•laughter  of  (ii>rnianicii»,  a  woman  of  ^trollg  uatu*
lal abilities,  but of tiinatiable avarietr.  extreme
;niibiltrtii,  and  rcniorscU'wt  cruelty. Her  inttnenc«
■»rer  tbo  IVeble  euiperor  was  boundleiw. She  pre-
vailed on  bini  ut  last  to  set  naide  bis  owu  sod  Bri-
taiiiiiL'iiH,uud  tu  adopt  heroon.Doinitins  Abenobar-
buM,  by  l»-T  former  husband,  sivinn  him  the  name
by  \vbit.-b  be  la  beat  known.  Nero,  and  coiiBtitutitiK
liirii  liclr  lo  the  imiwrial  throne. Ctandiua  haviuf;
iifterward.i  uhown  a  dittpotilioii  tcr  rhauKC  the  suc-
cession ami  n'Htom  it  to  Hritannirim,  full  a  victim
To  the  ambition  of  Agiippiua,  who  cauaed  bini  to
l>e  poisoiKMl, A  dinli  of  miiMlirooms  wan  preparud
for  the  piirpoHv,  a  kind  of  food  of  wbiHi  the  em-
(teror  waa  kaowii  to  Xtc  t'njMreially  fond,  and  ibo
fffeettt  of  till! poison vvrtu  hastened by the pre-
temled  rrna-dit':*  adntiuiatered by  X«nopbuit.  the
pbyHic.inii of  the  )ialace. It  was  given  out  chat
Clainliuit  liad  ftuflLTed  fruin  indigoution,  which  his
babitiial  ginttoiiy  remlerf^l  ho  fiiNjuent  tbst  it  ex-
cited no  »iirprt!H' ;  and  liiK  death  waHConrealn^]  till
Doniit>n»  Xero  bud  m'cnrt'd tin;  giianlN,  and  bud
■  luit'tiy  taken  powtestiion  of  {Ik-  imperial  aiilbority.
(?lniidiii8die<l  in  tbcBiKly-foiirtbyearof  liiMagoand
the  fonrteentb  ofhia  rvtgii.  a.i>.  54. His  biugniphy
is  lobe  found  in  the  /JrrMof  Siirtmiiufi. Hcv  Ihiring-
(ionhl,  ITic  Tfatjfilif  nf  the  CatmtvH,  vol.  i.  (Loudon.
lAf'J). (13)  Maiwcs  AniKi-tts  l.'LAfims  Ounil-
ccs. A  Roman  cmpcpor,  who  leignwl  from  A.D.:2tjp
to  'J70. He  was  of  an  obscure  Illyrian  family,  but
won  dihtiuctiun  by  bi*i  brilliani  utilitory  service  au-
•Icr  DeciiiK,  Valerian,  aud  Gallienus,  »o  that  on  tbp
death  of  the  last  be  succeetled  to  the  iuiperial  of.
tice. As  emperor  be  won  iwti  great  vii:torie»,  d«-
fealiug  the  Aleuiauui  in  the  north  of  Italy,  :iiid  in
the  next  year  (A.D.  *2ti9}  tb<>  Coibft  in  Dartlania  at
Nai!tiitt. He  died  at  .Sinniiim  in  tbo  year  270,

Claudlua. See  <'i/>Dtis.

Claudius  Qaadrigatlas. See  QUADBiOARirs.


*  K->iijiiti  l^tiip.)


CLAUSTSDU

Clanatnun. A  rnst«nlug. 3e«  Ianva.
Clava  l^ofrnXov,  Kopvvri}. A  rlilb  t»r  nince. Tlie
Kb&|ie  of  the  club  is  soeu  in  wnrkii  of  iirt  relatiiij;

is  iiniiiilly  rep-
reiwuled  vUb  a
ulub.aiid  there-
for* callt.1]  /'III-

riypr(Oviil..l/rf.
x'v.  a*J,  2H4I.
H<Mu-t'  the  I'X-
prewion  Urrfuli
(\av»m  ciihfra-
Arrr  of  »n iin-

JKHUliblu lllldlT-

takingtMacrob.

Air.  V.  3,  ^  1(3 1.

The cbiti was

somctuucs  cur-
|J*rwn riod,  instead  4»f

the  walkiiig-
Aclc,  by  certniti  pliibnopheiii  att  »  mark  i>f  afloc-
Btiou.  Ill  H<i(iit.'riu  tiiDUft  tliu  cliib,  sbt>d  with
intn  or  imulu  itf  bruitK4>,  wtu  iimhI  :i.>t  a  iiinri'  in
figbtiug  {//.  tx.  l-ll);  nnd  iii  the  army  ufXriXfrt  thi!
Ait8yrian»  carrioil  w4kk1*.'u  cltibH  kiKtltwd  «iib  iruii
(Hurod.  vii.  63).  PiHiHtrntUM  bad  a  body-t^iiurfl
of  olab-beai-era  (mt/ji/yij^poi),  a*»  \x^»  iiivuiious  in
a  free  State  ibaii  dojav^o/ioi.  or  men  iirmvd  witb
spears  (Ilerod.  1.  'lOi.  TbfjiijtU  tlin  eltib  or  mace
was  not  nsital  iu  tbu  Greek  army,  it  \\t%n  n^ed  i>c-
caHiottally;  nnd  wo  tbtiM  rciu)  of  AiTiMltati  bopliteM
carryiiig  c\iibM  (X«ii  Hrtl.  \'\'\.  fi,  ^  ;>()),  On  th«  Col-
nmii  t^Tr^jau  tbu  club  a|>)wan(  us  tliti  weajiuu  uf
Huini!  auxiliary  luirburianti.

Amoii}5  the  RoniiuiH tbii  reoniitu  weni  taii|j^it
to  li(;ht  with  a  clnb  iurttcnd  of  a  sworcl,  n>;ain§t  n
diTuiniv  or  Htake  {palun)  set  \u  thogrfjtmtl  (Cic.^it.
lfiaml'58).
ClaTariucD. Hw  Clavls  ad  fiu.

Clavator,  A  autlvr  or  NulUter'tt  aerviiiil.  See
Cai.ik

ClavEger{l]  (Kopvi-^ff).  "Club-bearing."  An
ejiithi-l  of  Hcmrltr«,  who  ia  repiT-iteiiti'iI  with  a  oliib.
(2)  (KX*idoux°f  )•  "  Key- bearing."  An  epithet  gi%-pn
by  the  Rouiauti  to  latitia  na  tbn  god  of  doorK;  anil
by  Lbo  (treeka  to  Bros  iCtipid)  lui  bolcling  Iho  kry
to  boATts,  and  tu  Hecati5  as  the  kr^cper  of  the  koya
of  Uades.

Clavis  (kX(iV,  dim.  (tAnJimf).  A  key.  In  Ho-
niiT  the  K\tis  is  !*i>i  a  key  in  the  nicMlerii  meaning
of  tbo  word,  but  ratber  a  book  Oiuving  a  leathern
thong)  wbiiOi  paMi*eil  tlirongh  tlie  door  fixnn  the
outside  iliid  c-injjht  Ilm  boltn  |(;^i;ir),«o  ae  to  nboot


tmo  E{5iiI1aii  Kcjr. (VilkltiMm.!

Lb«in  bintH<  or  draw  them  back  on  retpiitt'd  [04.
xxi.  6,  4t>-50).  In  miuio  passage!*  of  Honior  the
n-oni  HignifieH  sjntply  a  bolt  {(M.  \.  44*^;  xxi  341;
L.  and  8,  ».  v.i.  In  counse  of  time  lock*  and  keya
nuro  made,  mnoh  tike  thotw  of  nnxbTn  timeft.
Locks  were  nacd  in  Egypt  at  an  early  [leriod,
and  were  originally  of  wood,  pnibably  like  tbowj
now  iiRcd  Ibere.  which  are  it|»enwl  l»y  a  key  fnr-
nUhed  with  unvHral  lixMd  pins,  ansnerliig  to  a
•iinihir  nnmbttr  thai  full  down  into  ihc  movable


Ce


CLAVIS

iDgtie,  fDto  wliich  the  key  is  inl
they  fasten  or  open  the  luck. At  a
we  And  iron  keys  in  Kgypt,  cuusiHting
tttraigliD  sbauk,  with three  or more
1*^^111,  like  The  one  tigiireil  in  pn'ce*lin;
The  earliest  mention  nl"  a  key,  like  onr  o'
roiild  \yv  taken  ont  of  the  lock,  Ih  in  t
Jndgtw  (iii.  '211,  35>.

Schliontann  fonnd  keyn  of  copper
ami  bnnize  in  the  n'rnaimt  of  tbe
citieti  in  tbe  Tniad.  Tbe  accom-
panying ent  ntprt>.'wntii  a  copper
key,  foninl  clone  by  tbo  so-ealled
Treasury  of  Priaiu  in  the  roins  at
lliBRarlik.

Tbe  cut  below  reprdaonts  a  ciiri-
ontt  bronze key.  with a  ring for
bUMpension,  found  in  the  ruins  of
Navnni  Ilium. "It  has  tbe  ahapr
of  ilie  Ho-ca11ed  f|uadmngnlar  im- ^
.-ig»'H  of  Ht-rniof*.  "ilh  an  .-iliar-like p
biuie  forming  ime [tifce with  tbe
body,  to  which  a  qnadraugubir  pi'ojcctii
on  the  baek.M'ilh  a  hole  corresponding  tt
bolt"(8cblii-ninnti.  //iimi,  pp.  li-A*,  tj'il  i.

Pliny  (//.  -V.  vii.  A  W)  abcribea  the
of  keys  ^l  Tbeodorus  of  Samoa;  and  tl
wrilent  s]>eak  of  Corian,  and  e«[>ecially
an  keys,  because  originally  niwlo  by  tha
monians.  We  team  fnmi  Aristophanes
Laconioii  key  )iad  t
(  Tpf  (t  'ynfi</>ini'F ),  prob
tbe  Egyiitiati  key  ligui
Kcy!<  are  uientionrd  ll
luH  ;ind  Kniipiden;  i
in  hirt  !t|M.'C<;h  on  the
KmttMlheneA,  siK'uks
shutting  the  door  and  I
key  with  her  lr^picX«i>><*(]
c.  4),  so  that  the  hnsbj
Abut  up  in  hia  cbutuli
mvluc  the  door  must
[iK:keil  from  the  onteid
Many  Roman  keys  I
found  much  like  our
l:irg*-r  onus  UHnally  of
till'  smaller  of  bmiiKe  ;
were  also  kfy^  made  of
gold  in  iiitn  in  later  ti
xides  these  there  was
vayfta,  a  key  or  houk.  1
pOHsed  through  a  bii
door-post,  and  raised  ll
or  bolta  of  tbe  look.
Kgyption  locks  dencri'
t  Herod,  iii  IfvS).  It  I
Ih'im!  a  liK-k  of  this  ki
the  niblwr  in  ApuleiiB
|tl)  opeuN,  by  pnaiHng
ttmHigb  the  \ut\v,ifua  d
Irmlar  fiiramcH  fmtrhut.
liry»t  both  of  bnniMJ
have  I>cen  found  wl
never  intended  to  turn,
being  square,  and  tliP
listing  of  fr«>ni  one  to
teeth,  rising  from  a  iM
an  acute  augle  lo
which  teeth  W4>nld  M^r
Bronw  K>j  to-ii..!  pose  of  elevating  iiegs,
iSchlifBians  I bgyptiaii  locks.


CLAVIS TKOCHI


863


CLAVUS  ANNALIS


The  street-door  was  asaalty  fusteaed  iDside  by
bolts  (pemtuli)  aud  a  bar  (aera),  but  it  also  bad  a
key  which  the  iatiitor  of  the  house  kept.  The  cut
given  below  represeiita  a  key  found  at  Pompeii,
aud  DOW  in  the  Huseum  of  Naples,  the  size  of
which  indicates  that  it  was  used  as  a  door-key.
The  tongue  with  au  eye  in  it,  which  projects  from
the  extremity  of  the  handle,  served  to  suspend  it
from  the  wrist  of  the  ianitor. The  rooms  of  the


Door-key  found  at  Pompeii.

house  were  also  opeued  inside  with  keys.  The
doors  often  had  locks  both  inside  aud  outside.
This  is  evident  from  Plant.  Moat.  ii.  1,  57,  where  a
Lacouian  key  is  mentioned  for  locking  the  door
from  the  outside,  compared  with  verse  78 —

"Clavlm  cedo  atquo  abl  intro  atque  obclude  oetlutn,
El  ego  bine  (I.  e.  fciris]  obcludun."

When  a  Roman  woman  first  entered  her  hus-
band's hoase,  the  keys  of  the  store-rooms  were
handed  to  her.  Hence  the  form  of  divorce,  iu  the
Twelve  Tables,  was  that  the  husband  took  away
the  keys  (clatft  ademitf  extgit,  Cic.  Pkil.  ii.  28,
69);  and  the  wife,  when  she  separated  from  the
hoshand,  sent  him  back  the  keys  (clarea  remmt,
Ambros.  Ep,  65).  But  the  keys  of  the  wine-
cellar  were  not  intrusted  to  the  wife,  and  Fa-
bius  Pictor  related  a  story  of  a  married  woman
bavLog  been  starved  to  death  by  bar  relatives  be-
cause she  picked  the  lock  of  the  closet  in  which
the  keys  of  the  wine-cellar  were  kept  (Pliu.  H.  iV.
liv.  i  89).

A  skeleton  key  was  known  as  cla.ti$  aduUera
iSall.  luif.  12).

ClaTis  troohi  (tXarifp).  A  crooked  stick  used
by  Greek  and  Roman  children  in  trundling  hoops
(Propert  iii.  14, 6). See  Thochus.

Clavua  (^Xor,  y6ii<f>os).  A  nail.  In  the  sub-
terranean chamber  at  Myceuae  (q.  v.),  supposed
to  be  the  treasury  of  Atreus,  a  view  of  which  is
given  in  Sir  W.  GelVs  Itinerary  of  Greece  (plate  vi.),
the  stones  of  which  the  cylindrical  dome  is  cou-
Btructed  are  perforated  by  regular  series  of  bronze
nails,  running  in  perpendicular  rows,  and  at  equal
distances,  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  the  vault.
It  is  supposed  that  they  served  to  attach  thiu
plates  of  the  same  metal  to  the  masonry,  as  a  coat-
ing for  the  interior  of  the  chamber ;  and  hence  it
i&  that  these  snbterraaeau  works,  which  served  for
primns  as  well  as  treasuries,  like  the  one  in  which
Daua^  is  said  to  have  been  confined,  were  called
by  the  poets  "brazen  chambers."  Two  of  these
nails  are  represented  in  the  annexed  illustration,
of  two  thirds  the  real  size ;  they  consist  of  68  parts
of  copper  to  12  of  tin.


Nails  of  this  description  were  termed  trabales
and  tahularet  by  tbe  Romans,  because  they  were
used,  in  building,  to  join  the  larger  beams  {traben)
together.  Hence  Horace  arms  Necessitas  with  a
nail  of  the  same  kind,  or  of  adamant,  wherewith
to  rivet,  as  it  were,  irrevocably  the  decrees  of
Fortune.  Thus,  too,  Atropos  is  represented  in  the
following  illustration,  taken  from  a  cup  found  at


BroBM  Nails  (Greek).


Atropos  drlrlDg  a  Nalt

Pemgia,  upon  which  the  story  of  Meleager  and  At-
alanta  is  embodied,  with  a  hammer  in  her  right
hand,  driving  a  nail  which  she  holds  against  the
wall  with  ber  left.

The  next  cut  represents  a  nnil  of  Roman  work-
manship, which  is  highly  ornamented  and  very  cu-
rious. Two  of  its  faces  are  given,  but  the  pattern
varies  on  each  of  the  four.


Ornamcnul  Nails. (Koinaa.)

It  is  difficult  to  say  to  what  use  this  nail  was
applied.  The  ornamented  bead  shows  that  it  was
never  intended  to  be  driven  by  the  hammer;  nor
would  any  part  but  the  mere  point,  which  alone  is
plain  aud  round,  have  been  inserted  iuto  any  extra-
neous material.  It  might  possibly  have  beeu  used
for  tbe  hair,  in  the  manner  represented  iu  the  illus-
tration under  AcL'S.

Bronze  nails  were  used  iu  ship-building,  and  to
oroament  doors,  as  exhibited  iu  those  of  the  Pan-
tbeou  at  Rome;  in  which  case  the  head  of  the
nail  was  called  bulla,  aud  richly  ornamented.  See
Bulla..

The  soles  of  the  Hhoes  worn  by  the  Komau  sol-
dier were  also  studded  with  uails,  thence  called
c/art  caligarii.  (See  Caliga.)  These  do  not  ap-
pear to  have  been  hobnails  for  the  purpose  of
making  the  sole  dtuable,  but  sharp-pointed  uues,
in  order  to  give  the  wearer  a  firmer  footing  on  the
ground.  The  meu  received  a  donative  for  the  pui^
pose  of  providing  themselves  with  these  necessaries,
which  was  thence  called  daviavHrn.

ClaTiiB  Ap"S1i«  At  Volsiuii,  in  Etruria,  a  nail
was  driven  every  year  iu  the  Temple  of  Nortiii,


CLAVUS  GUBERNACOU


S64


CLAVUS  LATUS-CLAVUS  ASGUSTTS


ue  Fortuim  of  KtniBcau  inytliolo^y,  iu  order  tu
keep  a  reckoning  of  tbe  veait*  ( Liv.  vh.  3).
This  cuHlitiii  was  iiititKliU'i'il  in  In  Rouie  I'ntii)
Etniria,  )>rnltalily  Viy  tlie  Taniniiis,  when  tliey
fiitiiiiletl  llio  Tuiiiplv  tif  ]ti|iitc>r  Optimum  Maxiiiiim.
All  ilDcient  law  t'liact'wl  that  a  imil  Nbt^mlil  Iw
ilriveii  ctkch  yvar  by  tbu  cliief  iiiu^ititriiUt  on  tbo
I<ir.s  tif  8t!)>Iuiiibui'  iiilu  tlie  Nidu  of  Ibc  Cf^tln  of
Iu|>it»r  on  t)ic-  C'lipitol.  \s  Wic  K<'iiiuiiri  tliiin  ko|il
ti  n-c-UouliiK  of  tlieir  ycnis,  wUeii  lelU'n*  %vitb  yut
scarcely  in  use,  thin  uuil  was  culled  dtiru9  nuualifi.
<Liv,  1.  c;  Ktfrtt,  |).  .'»ti,  M.).  This  jiraettoe  fell  into
ilMiitte,  but  was  aflervsiil'tU  r*nive«l,  imt  fur  tlie
]ii)r|K>M-  of  iiiAi'kiu)*  Ibe  year,  tint  fnmi  n  8ii[iei-«ti-
liontt  fenliug  thnt  any  great  ruliiiuily,  Bncli  a>t  u
jKifltileiicc,  would  hv  avurtnl  if  lliiH  t-ei-einony  was
|«rformni1  by  tb<:  sui)rente  iinigi.itr»le.  Hence  wo
read  of  a  dictator  being  iippoitttetl,  unite  tbiin  (mco,
for  tilt.'  Holt;  puriHwie  of  driving  in  the  uuil  {clavi
figriiiU  C'tvm,  Liv.  I.  c).

ClaniB  OubeniacOlL  Tbc  liniuUe  or  tiller  of
a  niddlT. Sec  GtBKHSAL'ULUM  ;  Navis.

ClaTtiB  LatuB— ClavuB  Angustus.  Tin*  cUirun
was  n  slripf  of  piir|»K'  colunr.  worn  by  the  H»ui;id8
iM  a  biidffe  of  tlitititictlun,  and  citbov  wwv\  to  the
^lnlT  or  woven  into  il,

Tbo  ].ATt:s  ci-AV't's  (bivad  Htripe)  waa, according
ta  tradition,  intmditi^cd  by  Tnllns  lloatillnfi  from
tbe  Ktniscans  (l'lin.i/..V.  ix.^  13ti).  It  was  tbe  dis-
tinctive badge  of  tbo  senatorial  order  (Ilor.  Sut.
i.6,  ^)t  and  tiuncc  it  is  nsvil  tn  Ki;;nify  ilio  senuto-
riiil  dignity.  In  dietiiiclioii  to  tlie  unguititi*  cfnni'
it  is  callwl  jturf/urti  tiuiior  (Jnv.  i.  lOtj),  and  (be
ganiieat  it  deeomtcil,  tnui'-n  itufirns  lUtat.ifih.  v. 2,
•ii>).  Fliny  a|H<ak!4  of  tbiH  diittiiicti ve  nse  lut  lale
(//.  iV.  xxxiii.  ^29);  yet  its  a.ssuni]>tiou  by  npriifcv,
tbo  fatlier  of  L.  Aelinti  Slilo  I'raeconiniis  (fchose
official  dress  nuay  bnve  included  the  antftieOu
eftiput),  was,  as  be  admits,  remarkable,  as  was  also
its  use  by  Hoiucu'ti  praetor  of  Fiiudt  (.Stir.  i.  5,  IWi),
Hilt  tberc  were  I'elaxntionsof  tlio  rostrictioii :  tbus
Angiifftii!«  wore  tb«  lunirn  luti  duvi  before  \w  as-
nuined  the  tiya  ririiij>,  n\it\  it  waa  aflerwanl  bis
ciiDlO'in  to  jH-rniit  the  moiu*  of  ft«iiatorH  to  wi^ar  it
and  attend  tlie  dlM'nbxioa.s  of  the  Seiialo  in  unler
tu  train  ibeni  in  public  affaint.  If  tbey  vrero  en-
tering on  a  military  career,  be  also  loado  tliem
luililary  tribuiieii  and  prcfectii.  Tbeso  youths  were
colled  Utt icfa r i f  {Savi.  A'i'j.'J}^,9A);  on  tbe  contrary.
trU"tH'i«  ang>ulUiiirin»  (Stict.  Otho,  101.  Wealing
the  httti4  fliir>rt9  wai  also  granted  by  the  etupei-or
;m  a  favour  to  the  tuum  of  kniglit'i,  a»  a  preliminary
«te|>  to  their  fUiliTing  Ibw  Senate;  if  tbey  ivliit-
<|iliHbed  or  well!  ili»appoiitted  in  tlieir  IiopeM,  liii-y
aHsnnn-d  Ibn  n>uj>i>.fuH  rlarua  (Snet.  !>»/>.  2),  hul
iitigbt  again  a«M«nine  tbc  latut  rtuntt,  like  PriHcnit
in  [lorae«  (Snt  ii.  7,  H*).  In  the  later  l^mpire  tUe
^'fifitfn  apiMtar  to  have  encroaclitd  on  tbo  rights  of
the  Senate  in  Ibin  ri'Mpcut,  and  Alexander  Soveriis
Wiis  only  able  to  iuaist  that  kniglita  nlioiiM  be
dixtiiigoisbwl  fnnii  wimlorM  by  the  i|nality  of  the
piir[de  employed  (Laiiiiirid.  Alex.  Sct.  27),  The
Senate  laid  anidu  the  I'lfm  cfortix  at  times  of
niouruiiig  (Liv.  tx.  7)  and  nAsumod  the  anffustUM
chtcu*  (IMo  Cass,  xxxviii.  14).

Tbc  ASCL'STi's  tXAVi'!*  (itarrow  stripe)  wm  n
badge  of  thr  equestrian  ortler  (Veil.  Patero.  ii.  8P,
2),  lint  1c«H  distinctively  so  tbaii  the  golden  ring
(Plin.  //.  N.  xxjtiii.  ^  20);  fur.  ;i«  we  shall  see  from
the  extant  workx  of  art,  it  was  alao  worn  by  or-


mUU,  Itifiistaf,  and  otbem  not  of  etpit^triuii  i
a:^  a  part  of  their  oeremoutal  drusH.

Form  — It  is  ngwed  that  tbe  eJtiri  were  p'
sTriiHtM  woven  in  lbf>  fabric  (Quint,  viii.  5,2
sewu  oil  il  {/Ji'j.  34,  2,2:1,  ^  I);  that  llif-y  w«n
ployed  tu  urnatnent  Ibe  tunic,  and  no  utber
lueiit;  that  tlie  ainjiutt'tt  i^urut  «>iiHitPttHl  ol
narrow  vertical  stripeti  falltug  fi-oin  each  alioi
down  the  front,  and.  as  appears  from  fre«c«ie«
down  the  back.  Hut  then:  ba?t  been  greBI
cnuion  concerning  tbc  form  of  tbo  latut  a
Home  contending  that  it  was  n  single  »tripe
tiiiig  down  tbo  centre  of  tbo  botmtn  of  the  t*.
(HHne  tbnt  tUure  were  two  stripes,  only  diH'
from  the  anffivtm  claru*  in  breailib,  am|>


AcputiM  ClK<nt> (Nlccollni.  Case  r  Mimumrnli  <h
Aimpi-M. Ill Anllteatro,  Uv 111)

running  down  the  hnek  (at  Murqnardt  tnniDti
Tbu  latter  \lax\-  in  niiw  generally  beld.altboai
IK  impOHsibk  to  eoiu'lnde  the  dison&sioD  by  ap)
ing  to  any  repreRoniatiou  of  a  senator  displa
this  ornametitiim,  na  it  wnn  not  tho  cnston
aucient  scnlptors  to  iinliL-alr  n  ilistiiiclton  ol
our  by  a  conventional  system  of  lines.

It  must  be  obserrcd  that  A//ru  r/nruA,  tingi
chitti*,  arc  oftei)  abbreviated  expl\>iuions  for  tv
luti  or  anffueti  chri.  Thus  I  iilins  Caesar  is  sai
have  worn  a  litt.ua i^itnx ml  uiaunt  (imitrmtuaiS
htl.  45).  Tiiat  tbe  anffuxtna  eliifiu  conaititeddf
8trii»e8  is  provwl  by  Qiiinlilian,  xi.'J,  iltS:  Cm'
r(tit>i  iua  turn  erit,  ita  eingatnr,  ut  luninte  firiffr
"CM  it'/m  sfmtta  pffifum.  jf/Hterioribua  att  ni
/'"f>fHfti  n»qitt  jxrvenuint  .  .  .  ut  ptirpurUu  nff*
xeetuhint^  lerl»  cum  eat.  Though  we  caoual  p"
to  thf  representation  uf  tiu /t/urji  wrartuglli*p
Me  liiid  ir.  fiet|uently  abown  tii  PomiK'ian  |iainli
\>(  iiiTHons  of  inferior  rank  who  are  in  ceiAUoi
drex:!!,  cfi]>ecial]y  camUti  and  other  alleodiitils
religious  rilmt,  «d<I
tu  II  intne.  Ill  a  W
painting  nl  Pamf
belonging  lo  th«  «
ship  of  the  godd
Eponn,  the  two
miUi  nud  a  iniui  k
ing  unilei  wear
ithffimtHJi  cJartii,
latter  may  b«  •
letecr  espeoil
adonie<)  for  a  0
val  of  the  goddi

.^npM^u.  a«vu« (Fmtn  l|tim  u  *•" '» I*""" '?''  ^
till*  CaUramtM.)  cr milk prrfutlD


CLAVUS  LATU3— CI^^VLTS  ANGCStUS


865


CLEMEN'S


N>tno  rito  itf  li«r  womLiii  (.Iniiaii  Mi'  Intt.  Artk.

The  anijuMtun  tlarua  pmbjibly  siirvivM  iu  tbe
Atzi  ail  the  daliimtic,  nbicli  vms  recuf^iiUed  \i*  au
rccle*iaftlica]  i;ai'l>  in  tbr  r»rli«i'  pint  ul'  tlii*  funrlli
ivDturv  (^Vitn  ^Iratri  [.,  ]i.  '^ti6,  Comb^lLsj,  ttiougb
tluivti  to  A.Li.  640  the  (hvi  uru  altrnya  rppre(uMi[e<l
as  Itlack,  Hocordiiig  lo  Marrinii  (  VfMiariuin  Cfiri*'
tMuum,  p.  Iv.).

Soma  writer*  niaiiitain  that  tlio  ilra^riug  bi-Iuff ,
repcvMiititii;  Ruuir  jH-rwHiilicd,  irlotlitMl  in  a  ruLu
call^  cyctta  (q.  V.I,  nIkuvm  tlit;  /altit  ciaciia  {uUing
iu  I  Itrvafl  ]Miii>Ir  stripe  iluwti  tlie  brraitt.

It  iv  triiu  tliitl  tbn  ^illgIlltl^  itniua  rlatUM)  in  gen-

rnlly  dbchI,  bill tln.4  Jo  iilwt  iriic  of  tbe  linguatnt

f_  cinr»»,  vbicb  cooft^soilly  coiimsIimI  nf  two  stniws  ;

n  luff  tLe  ciiiplo.vnieut  of  ibc  plnrat,  tali*  fhiri*,  in

.Hthktitg  ill  a  pa&»agp  of  Vonit,  wliicb  a\a»  iiiHisIs

t>ii  the  n'-scoiblauc^  of  the  two  gnrmcnts,  by  imiitg

tut  uti  il1u»|ratioT]  of  au  analogy  n  tunic,  in  nliicli

af  llii<  two  pieces  i  front  iiml  bock  )  one  has  the

j  t*ttt,  the  otbtr  the  ui»'jvgf{,fftirl. (JV'<»n,  »*  yn'*  tvni-

Ic/wi  IU  V9H  i7(J  [E.  8cbriUe,t«"«Va/<3rt*n*t(iV,  11/ «/-

Ifrro  pluf^ulit  tiit  fiMffiuttU  elftrU,  uitfra  Uui»,  utraque

I  fttrm  in  am  geuerf  mret,  atmLkjia  {  A.  /,.  ix.  79]. Cf.

jlor  frite  iiBcof  the  |>Un-a),Fc6tuB, i>. tMl)  n,'£i:  titnien

1  O'lt^Tfi pii/utiito  (I  hititudinecbjr^rum  liifefMifnr.QUiif

I  »tr74«-  It  tjienere  pirhime  appefUit'ir.) Afjai".  AiigHS-

I  ''I*,  among  olber  nfTcrtntioim  ornimplicily,  una*  rst

■  .  *-Atr(»  ner  fdito  nee  angunlo  (SiK't..'lt';/."H).  «  hit-h

\  u  C|liil(>  intiHIigible  if  Ibe  tmo  unminrntN  iliirrifd

^^\y ill  brraUlh,  but iimxplicalile on Ihi.' other

^'>'l>«*ilieHiR:  wUila  IfcitMlinn  (v.  h,  !>)  H|>fRkfiof  the


I  lAttia  Olarv*. (Pntn  «  lAJntlng  of  Rome  p«r-
■oniOKl )

*^l**  liowii  tbe  centre  of  the  liitiic  worn  by  iXw
^||^**tfl  of  the  Sun,  iiistituti'il  by  Klagabalim,  \x»  a
"••eiiicnaii  ciKtoiu.

^nthe  iiiiiic  wnA  vompniied  nf  a  ttout  piece  nml
*  **aclE  piecf  WWII  together,  the  pii-vtugi*  fiiiolrtl
ai»«>vt>  ftfim  Varro  gwa  to  fthow  thiit  thy  btti  <htri
^^tti  norii  down  the  baelt  iia  w*-ll iih  down thf

tf2''*'  ^"  "'I'P**'^  "''  ''■'"  ni'*y  '"'  cited  Viirru,
**"•  Vmip;*.  313,  Biicbeler:  quorum  riVrwM  tinjtie
•**n(fln/  ttinirite  cloro*.  which  n-fi:r»  to  to;;iis
"**le  nf  sneh  diaphaiioii."^  lualcriiil  that  the  rimi
*J*«hl  Ite  iren  throtigb  (hetn  at  the  tmck.  With
4'"  won*  intent  of  dinplaylng  thitt  mark  of  ili»-
tlliFiioii.  th^  W4>Hr»'r  nf  tbf  fnnim  htticlnria  is  to
that  it  may  fall )ow iQiiint.  xi.


3,  i:il)).  Pliuy  ubwrveA  that  in  his  time  II  was  bc-
t'omtng  a  fuffhion  to  weave  tlwi  tunim  Inti  riuei  of
n  uttiff  resenibliiig  'j,iij9<tp<t  {II.  A',  viii.  ^  193).  The
falae  «U-rivutioii  iiiititnd  from  FetttiiK  attovt?  I'nr  pnl-
timtit  as  applicfl  to  tunica  may  puwibly  iitdicale
that  the  breadth  of  the  UttuM  datuM  was  about  a
paluL

The  eqtitvalcnta  uaetl  in  the  Greek  writers  are :
etariit,  trrjftiiuV.  tufiirti  httirltirin,  tj  trKarvtrTjftot '
t'iniru  ait^tiatKhttia,  7  ttrtt^cKrrf^t '  tunim  anema
(Lainprid.  A/f^.  See.  Xi,  4|,  7  itcnj/ior:  tunica  eta-
ratii,  ij  {TTjfuiaTos. Hee  Tl'NlCA.

Tlie  chief  authorities  fur  tUe  tinbjcct  are  Ferra-
rhia,  />e  Ite  Ves^i^lriu  fPadim,  iri54);  niilwoiiiK,  De
lie  Vafiaria  Vetcrum  Pnif^ipue  tie  lAito  Ctttw  /.i-
bri  D'lft  (Antwerp.  Itl65);  Kemiriiis,  AnntivUi  ilg
Re  Vestiitriii  (Padua.  ltH>ll);  Miin|iiar<It,  Itim.  Pri-
tfitleben  (1H86},  pp.  :j4-l  foil.;  i«l.  TltJuU'rin  Eqnifum
Hum.  pp.  77,  w) ;  K.  Srhnize,  in  tthein.  Mug,  { 1875),
pp.  Vio  foil,  flct'  ftliMi  Hopr,  Tfu  Vo*tum^  of  the
Atteient*  (3d  ed.  lH75j ;  Knriiict,  l^  Onttumr.  //w-
titriqiu;  vol.  ii,  (liW).

Clay. Sf't'CRETA:  FKTiLfe.

ClasomSuae  iKA<i{'of>(Mi<}-  An  imporlatit  cit/
of  Attia  Minor,  atitt  mw  t»t*llie  twelve  Ionian  cities,
oil  the  imrtb  coa^t  of  the  Ionian  |»cnin8nlji.  upon
the  liiilf  of  Sinyruo.  U  wiu;  tlie  birthplace  nf
Atmxagorao,  and  wait  also  celvlirated  fur  it.s  tiMu-
plff*  of  Apollo,  AiieniiH,  and  CylveW.

Cleauder  [KKtavipot).  U) A  tyrant  ufGfla,  wlio
rcigiiuil  n.c.  5(M-41W  and  wo»  succeeded  by  hia
brothtT  llippoeratea.  wliom  Gelou  dcposcU  in  B.C.
491.  \'i\  A  Phrygian  alave,  thy  favourite  of  the
emjienir  ComiTMHlu*  (q-v.),  and  tnni  in  ]dece8  by
the  Kniinin  nmb  during  a  brt'iid-i'tot.

Cleaiitbes  (KXioyl^r^ci.  <1)  A  Greek  phibwopher,
»  nativu  of  Ashoh  in  \mi  Minor.  He  woa originally
a  boxer  (Diog.  Lacrt.  vii.  \(it*),  and  while  ulteud-
ing  at  Albeim  thu  leclurca  of  2cno.  Ihn  fuundt'r  of
ibe  Ktiiie  philoHophy,  gained  a  livelihood  at  night
by  carrying  water.  He  wni4  Zeiio'a  disciple  for
niuctocu  yeat>,  and  in  u.0.  *<^  itucceeded  him  08
head  of  the  .Stoic  Kcbool.  He  died  in  his  eiglity-
Arat  year  by  volautary  atarvation.  A  beautiful
Hymn  to  Zt'ie  iti  the  only  one  of  hia  writiiigb  that
bao  com«  dmMi  to  uh,  of  m  hieli  »  uo<h1  edition  ja
that  of  FearMoii  (London.  l!*iHf.  The  tiiloa  of  the
others  are  given  by  Diogcnea  Lnertiua  (vfi.  4).  i'2)
A  painter  of  Corinth.

Clearchus  (KXtapynt).  A  Spartan,  who  distin-
Kiiisl)cd  liimnrtf  in  several  Important  commands
during  the  latter  part  of  the  Peloponne-sian  War,
and  at  the  rtoae  of  it  persuaded  thu  Spartaua  to
«eud  him  aa  a  general  to  Thrace,  to  protect  the
Greeka  in  that'iuarter  ngainfet  thuTliraciane.  Hut
having  be^en  recalled  by  tbe  ephors,  and  rufutttng
In  oU>y  their  onlera,  he  waa  condemned  to  death.
Hu  tlwi-eu|Kiri  c>roMC«l  over  to  Cyrus,  collected
for  liiin  a  large  forctf  of  Greek  niercciiailes.  and
inarched  iritli  him  into  Up|M.T  Asia,  in  B.i:.  4U],  in
onlir  todellaoiii!  ItiH  brother  Artaxerxetf.  being  tbe
only  Greek  who  was  aware  of  tbe  priiitf'ti  real  ob-
ject. After  the  batllo  of  Cuiiaxa  ami  tin-  fl'-atli
of  Cyrns,  Clearclius  and  the  other  Gn-t-k  ginifi-aU
were  made  priHonen*  by  the  treaehery  of  Tisaa-
phemen,  and  were  put  lo  death.  Sco  Xeuopbon'a
An^ifftfiii,  bka,  i.  and  ii.

Clemena  /KXij^jjc).  i})  ^alUil  RoMANr«,  lo
difttiiigtiisli  him  from  Clemens  of  Alexandria.
One »if  the early  CUristians,  said by  Origen  to


CLEMENS


866


CLEOUENES


h\


have  b«en  the  friend  and  fellow-traveller  of  St.
Paul,  and  afterwards  bishop  of  Rome,  to  which
stutiou  he  was  chosen  a.d.  67,  or,  according  to
some,  A.D.  91.  He  was  the  author  of  an  epistle  to
the  church  of  Corinth.  Of  this  work,  the  only
uiauuscript  extant  was  in  the  British  Museum  tin-
til  1875,  when  Bryenuios  published  a  complete  MS.
of  1056  found  at  Coustautiuople ;  and  in  1676,
Cambridge  Uuivei-sity  got  possession  of  a  Syriac
MS.  of  the  year  1170.  Archbishop  Wake  printed
a  trauHlation  in  1705.  The  best  edition  of  the
original  ia  that  of  Lightfoot  (1869;  appendix
1877).  See  Cotterill,  Modern  Gritieum  (Edinb.
1884).  Clemens  is  supposed  to  have  died  at  Rome
about  the  close  of  the  Srst  century,  though  a  legend
of  the  ninth  century  makes  him  to  have  been  mar-
tyred in  the  Crimea  in  a.d.  102.  Besides  the  epis-
tle mentioned  above,  there  have  beau  ascribed  to
Clemens  two  Syriac  epistles  on  Virginity,  the  so-
called  Clementiuae  (" Recognitions "  and  "Homi-
lies"), and  several  letters;  but  these  may  all  be
regarded  as  spurioaa.  (2)  T.  Flavius,  a  Father
of  the  Church,  who  flourished  between  a.d.  190
and  317,  and  is  commonly  called  Alexakdrinus,
to  distinguish  him  from  Clemens  of  Rome.  He
is  supposed  by  some  to  have  been  a  native  of
Athens,  and  by  others  of  Alexandria,  but  of  bis
real  origin  very  littlo  is  known.  He  early  devot-
ed himself  to  study  in  the  schools  of  the  latter
city,  and  had  many  preceptors.  His  Hebrew  pre-
ceptor, whom  ho  calls  "the  Sicilian  bee,"  was  un-
questionably Pantaenus,  a  Jew  by  birth,  hot  of
Sicilian  extraction,  who  united  Grecian  with  sa-
cred learning,  and  was  attached  to  the  Stoic  phi-
losophy. Clemens  so  far  adopted  the  ideas  of  this
preceptor  as  to  espouse  the  moral  doctrine  of  the
StoicR.  In  other  respects  he  followed  the  Eclectic
method  of  philosophizing.  While  the  pagan  phi-
losophers pillaged  the  Christian  stores  to  enrich
the  Eclectic  system,  this  Christian  father,  on  the
contrary,  trausferred  the  Platonic,  Stoic,  and  Ori-
entul  dogmas  to  the  Christian  creed,  as  relics  of
ancient  tradition  originating  in  Divine  revelation.
His  most  distingnished  follower  was  Origen.

In  the  hope  of  recommending  Christiauity  to
his  catechumens,  Clemens  mode  a  large  collec-
tion of  ancient  wisdom,  under  the  name  of  Siro-
mata  (Sr/H»/ioTrir,  "  patchwork"),  nud  intended  to
denote  the  misoellaneous  nature  of  the  philosophi-
cal and  religious  topics  of  which  the  work  treats.
He  assigned  as  a  reason  for  the  undertaking,  that
much  truth  is  mixed  with  the  dogmas  of  philoso-
phers, or,  rather,  covered  and  concealed  in  their
writings,  like  the  kernel  within  its  shell.  This
work  is  of  great  valne,  as  it  contains  many  quo-
tations and  relates  many  facts  not  elsewhere  pre-
served. Besides  the  Stromata,  we  have  the  fol-
lowing works  of  Clemens  remaining :  (a)  Pro-
treptieon  (Aoyot  nporpeirrtitoc),  or  an  exhortation
to  the  Pagans;  (o)  Paedagogut  {Haibayiayot),  or
the  instructor;  (c)  the  fragments  of  a  treat-
ise on  the  nse  of  riches,,  entitled,  "  What  rich
man  sliall  be  saved  T"  The  works  of  Clemens
were  first  printed  in  Greek  only,  at  Florence,  in
1550.  Of  the  various  editions  with  Latin  ver-
sions, the  best  is  that  of  Archbishop  Potter,  2  vols.
(Oxford.  1715).  A  later  edition  is  that  of  Klotz
(Leipzig,  1634).  A  translation  will  be  found  iu
Clark's  AnU-Nieene  LUrrary  (1677-79).  See  Merk,
Clement  tion  Alexandria  (Leipzig,  1679);  and  Bigg,
Christian  PlaUmitU  (Bamptou  Lect.  1666).


Clementinaa. See  Cleuknb  (1),

ClttdUs  (KA^o^ir). See  Biton.

CleobnlUB  ( KX(oj3<n'Xor ).  One  of  the  Seven
S^es,  of  Lindas  in  Rhodes,  son  of  Evagoras,  lived
about  B.C.  560.  He  and  his  daughter,  CleobuJin^  or
Cleobnl^,  were  celebrated  for  thefr  skill  in  riddW
To  the  latter  is  ascribed  a  well-known  one  on  tbf
anbject  of  the  year :  "A  father  has  twelve  cbiUlren,
and  each  of  these  thirty  daughters,  on  one  Hide
white,  and  on  the  other  side  black,  and,  though  im-
mortal, they  all  die."  SeeAEXiOMA;  Se'vxk  Sahek

Cleombr5tua  (  KXf d/i^poror ).  (1)  A  king  i>r
Sparta,  who  succeeded  his  brother  Agesipolis  I.
He  was  defeated  by  Epaminondas  in  the  batUe  of
Lenctra,  and  lost  his  life  on  that  occasion,  (2|  A
son-in-law  of  Leonidas  II.,  king  of  Sparia,  nlio
usurped  the  kingdom  after  the  expulsion  of  thst
monarch,  but  was  soon  after  expelled  in  turn  and
sent  into  banishment.

CleomSdea  (KAco/i^dijr).  A  Greek  writer,  Mip-
posed  to  have  been  the  author  of  the  work  which
has  reached  us  entitled  KuKXiK^c  Ocwpuir  t&trtm^*
B(/3Xia  hvo,  or  Circnlar  Theory  of  the  Stars.  He
flonrished  in  the  socoud  century  a.d.  Ed.  by
Schmidt  (Leipzig,  \^i).

Cleomfines  (KXcofi^m/r).  (1)  King  of  Sparta,  as-
cended the  throne  B.c.  519.  At  the  beginaiog  of
his  reign  be  undertook  an  expedition  against  the
Argives,  defeated  them,  and  destroyed  a  large  num-
ber who  bad  takeu  refuge  iu  a  sacred  grove.  He
afterwards  drove  out  the  Pisistratidoe  from  Alhens-
This  is  the  same  Cleomenes  whom  Aristogoias  en-
deavoured, but  iu  vain,  to  involve  in  a  war  with
the  Persians.  He  afterwards  managed,  by  nodue
influence,  to  procure  an  oracular  response  from
Delphi,  pronouncing  bis  colleague  DemaratuB  ille-
gitimate, and  thus  obtained  his  deposition.  Becom-
ing alarmed,  subsequently,  lest  the  fraud  should
be  discovered,  Cleomenes  fled  secretly  to  Thessalr,
and  from  thence  passing  into  Arcadia,  he  begiu
to  stir  up  the  people  of  this  latter  country  against
Sparta.  TheLacedaemoniaus,  fearing  his intrigoes,
recalle<1  him,  but  he  died  soou  after  his  retnm,>iu
a  fit  of  insanity,  by  his  own  hand  (Herod,  v.  64 ;  v
49  foil.;  V.  65,  etc.).  (3)  Cleomenes  IL, succeeded
bis  brother  Agesipolis  II.  on  the  throne  of  Sparti,
B.C.  371.  The  power  of  his  country  was  then  on
the  decline,  and  he  possessed  not  the  requisite  tal-
ents to  restore  it  to  its  former  state.  He  reigiied
sixty  years  and  ten  months  without  haviug  done
anything  worthy  the  notice  of  posterity  (Paasan.  iii.
6).  (3)  Cleomenes  III.,  sou  of  Leouidas  II.,  ascend-
ed the  Spartan  throne  B.C.  236.  Dissatisfied  at  the
prevailing  manners  of  Sparta,  he  resolved  to  bring
about  a  reform,  and  to  restore  the  institutions  of
Lycnrgus,  after  the  example  of  Agia,  who  had  lost
his  life  in  a  similar  attempt.  Thinking  that  mi
would  furnish  the  best  opportunity  for  the  execu-
tion of  his  design,  he  led  his  forces  against  the
Acbaeaus,  who  were  commanded  by  Aratus,  ii>d
greatly  distinguished  himself.  Returniug  after
this  to  Sparta,  with  a  portion  of  his  army,  he  pot
to  death  the  Ephori,  made  a  new  divisiou  of  the
lands,  and  iutrodnced  again  the  old  Spartan  Hy»-
tem  of  education.  He  also  took  his  brother  Eacli-
das  as  his  colleagne  on  the  throne,  and  thus  for
the  first  and  only  time  the  Spartans  had  two  kiogi
of  the  same  family.  After  a  long,  and  ia  many  re-
spects successful,  series  of  opermtions  against  tb«
Acbaeaus  aud  Macedonians,  tbe  latter  of  whom


CLEON


867


CLEOPATRA


bml  beeu  oallecl  iu  by  Aratus  as  allies,  CteomeneB
iras  defeated  by  Antigouns  in  the  battle  of  Sel-
lasia  (B.C.  232),  aitd  imniV'
(liately  after  Bed  to  Ptol-
emy Euergetes  in  Egypt.
Tbie  inouarcb  treated  him
with  some  degree  of  gen-
eroaity,  but  his  Doccessor,
Ptolemy  Pbilopator,  a  weak
and  soapiciouB  pritioe,  soon
began  to  look  upon  Uim
with  an  evtt  eye,  and  at
lattt  kept  him  iu  confine-
ment. The  Spartan  mon-
arch, in  a  fit  of  despair,
ntifl  taking  advantage  of
the  temporary  absence  of
Ptolemy  from  bis  capital,
broke  forth  from  the  place
where  he  had  been  kept  iu
custody,  along  with  thir-
teeu  of  bis  friends,  and  en-
(leuvonred  to  aroiisa  the
iiibabitauts  in  the  cause
of  free<lom.  But,  finding
their  efforts  frnitless,  they
fell  by  tbeir  own  hands
(B.C.  220).  (4)  Au  Athe-
iiiau  sculptor,  who  prob-
ably fiuiirished  in  the  Au-  i  -^—
gu»tanAge.  The  celebrated  r-i?i,fi"'''
Venus  de'  Medici,  now  at
Florence,  is  perhajw  bis.  vbdui  de'  Hedici  or  cieom-
He  is  described  on  the  "»«■  (L'fflii Gallery, Flor-
]>ec1e8tal  )W  son  of  Ajiollo-  "■"■*■'
doriiH.  Tlie  "Germanicus"  of  the  Louvre  was  the
work  of  bis  sou,  who  bore  the  same  name.

CleoD  (KXcW).  An  Athenian,  the  son  of  a  tan-
nt* r,  and  said  himself  t-o  have  exercised  that  tratle.
Of  extraordinary  impudence  and  little  courage,
slow  in  the  tield,  but  forward  and  noisy  in  the  as-
sembly, corrupt,  but  boastful  of  integrity,  aud  sup-
poi-ted  by  a  coarse  but  ready  eloquence,  be  gained
sirch  coDsideratiou  by  flatteriug  the  lowi-r  orders
that  he  became  the  head  of  a  party.  By  an  cx-
tranrdiuary  train  of  circumstances  he  came  ofl' vic-
torious in  the  affair  of  Sphacteriu  {(\.  v.),  the  Atbe-
niiin  i>opulace  haviug  cbtMten  bim  one  of  their
generals.  £late<l  upon  this  with  the  idea  tliat  be
possessed  military  talents,  he  caused  himself  to  be
appointed  commander  of  au  expedition  into  Thrace.
He  was  slain  iu  a  battle  at  Auipbipolis  against
Brasidos,  the  Spartan  general,  B.c.  422.

It  is  probably  unfortunate  iu  the  interest  of  his-
torical truth  that  the  accounts  we  have  of  Cleon's
]»ersonaIity  exist  only  iu  the  writings  of  Tbucyd-
iden  and  a  partisan  pluy,  The  Knights,  of  Aris-
topliancA,  both  of  whom  were  violently  prejudiced
against  Cleon,  the  former  personally  and  the  latter
politically.  For  some  remarks  on  this  head,  see
the  history  of  Grote.

Clednae  (KXcwkat ).  (1)  An  ancient  town  in  Ar-
golis,  on  the  road  from  Corinth  to  Argos,  on  a  rivvr
i>f  the  same  name  flowing  into  the  Corinthian  Gulf.
Ill  its  neigh bourha<Kl  was  Nemoa,  whoi*e  Heracles
killed  the  lion,  which  is  accordingly  called  Cleo-
nncus  Leo  by  the  piHits.  (*2)  A  town  in  the  peniu-
Bula  Athoe  in  Chalcidic6. (3)  See  Hyampous.

Cleopatra  (KXcoirarpa  aud  KXiunrorpa).  (1)  A
daughter  of  Idas and  Marpessa,  and the wife


of  Meleager  (Horn.  11.  ii.  557).  (2)  The  wife  of
Philip  of  Hacedou,  whom  that  monarch  mar-
ried after  he  had  repudiated  Olympias.  After
the  death  of  Philip,  Olympias  compelled  her  to
destroy  herself  (Just.  ix.  7).  (3)  A  daughter  of
Philip  and  Olympias,  and  sister  to  Alexander  the
Great.  She  married  Alexander  of  Epiriis,  who  fell
iu  Italy  (Just.  ix.  6, 1).  After  the  death  of  Alex-
ander of  Macedon,  her  baud  was  sought  by  Per-
diccas  and  others  of  bis  geuerals,  but  she  was  put
to  death  by  Anttgonus.  (4)  A  daughter  of  Mitbri-
dates,  aud  tbe  wife  of  Tigranes  (Just,  xxxviii.  3).
(5)  A  (laughter  of  Autiocbus  III.  of  Syria.  She
married  Ptolemy  V.,  king  of  Egypt,  and  was  left
guardian  of  her  infant  son  Ptolemy  VI.,  but  she
died  soon  after  her  husband,  to  tbe  great  regret  of
her  subjects.  (6)  A  daughter  of  Ptolemy  Pbilome-
tor,  was  the  wife  of  three  kings  of  Syria,  and  the
mother  of  four — namely,  of  Autiochns  Dionysius,
by  her  first  husband,  Alexander  Balas;  of  Seleucua
V.  and  Autiocbus  VIII.,  by  Demetrius  Nioator ;  and,
lastly,  of  Antiochns  IX.,  sumamed  Cyzicenus,  by
AntiocbuB  Euergetes  or  Siiletes.  She  was  com-
pelled by  her  sou,  Autiocbus  VIII.,  to  driuk  the
poisou  which  she  had  prepared  fur  him,  b.c.  120.
(7)  The  most  famous  of  the  name  was  the  daugh-
ter of  Ptolemy  Auletes,  and  remarkable  for  her
beauty  aud  persoual  acoomplishments.  According
to  tbe  usage  of  the  Alexandrian  court,  she  married
ber  young  brother,  Ptolemy  XII.,  and  began  to
reign  with  bim  in  her  seventeenth  year.  Both  she
and  ber  husband,  being  minors,  were  placed  by  tbe
will  of  their  father  under  the  guardianship  of
Rome,  an  office  which  tbe  Senate  assigned  to
Poinpey.  An  iusurrectiou  breaking  out  iu  the
Egyptian  capital  soou  after  the  commencement  of
this  reign,  Cleopatra  was  compelled  to  yield  to  tbe
tide  of  popular  fury,  aud  to  flee  iuto  Syria,  where
she  sought  protection  iu  temporary  exile.  The
flight  of  this  princess,  though  mainly  arising  from
tbe  tumult  just  mentioned,  was  unquestionably
accelerated  by  the  designs  of  the  young  king  aud
bis  ambitious  ministers.  Their  object  became
manifest  when  Cleopatra,  after  a  few  months'  resi-
dence iu  Syria,  returned  towards  her  native  coun-
try' to  resume  her  seat  on  tbe  throne.  Ptolemy
prepared  to  oppose  her  by  force  of  arms,  aud  a
civil  war  would  inevitably  have  ensued,  bad  not
Cuesnr  at  that  very  juncture  sailed  to  the  coast  of
Egypt  in  pursuit  of  Pompey.  A  curious  interview
soou  took  i>lace  between  Cleopatra  and  the  Rumau
geueraL She  placed  herself  on  board  a  small  skifl',


»ri»n»rj4.


Cleopatn.  (  From  a  Composite  Photo-
gnph  of  tbe  Heads  od  four  Egyptian
CoiDs.  Reproduced  bj  pertnlssiun  Ttom
Uon-tnge's  Sffyplian  Ob<lUla.)


CLKOPATRA


966


CLHOPATftA


miller  thi*  protection  uf  ApollmlomK,  »  Sivlliaii
(tr«ek,  Rr>l  ruiil  from  llici  voasi  of  Syria.  n>at:lit->(l  tlio
harbour  uf  Alexaii<h'i»  in  uufuty.  iiihI  liniL  liiTHcli
caiivcYL-d  luikiiii  into  tlio  clintiil>er  of  the  Koiiiun
minuiauder  iu  tlie  funi]  uf  a  laijie  package  of  k^hIs.
The  Mtrata^friii  pntvoil  c<»nipl**k'!y  8Uccenifiil.  ('lei»-
pntni  wofi  now  in  hvi-  iweutit'di  yeur, Uislitii^iiiKtR'd
by  extriionliuiiry  penfjiml  cbiiniiv,  anil  nurr(iiiii<l«il
with  nil  tlip  j^'nt'en  ivhirh  j;tvH  to  thosi^  rliiirtiiH
their  ^^iit«Ht  pow«>r.  Her  voiiih  w»m  i^xtrenti^ly
Hwoet,  mill  tiho  Hpoke  h  vuriuly  of  laiigtuifi^H  with
projiriety  niiil  •■n^r.  Khc  4.'oiiM,  il  in  wiiil.  uHHitiiift
all  chitracttTH  at  will,  n-hioh  lill  nliku  Iter^inio  b«r.
and  tho  itiipnvwiuii  tliiil  vtah  iiinilo  by  Iil-l'  beauty
waif  cMinltniM^i  by  tliti  ruAciiiatini;
brlllittueyof  hcrooiivuniiatioii.  The
rtay  iiflvr  this  ninKuhir  meetiuj;.
(.^("ftflr  KumuioiU'*!  hi*fiin>  him  fbo
king,  ai  well  as*  th«  citi^t'iiM  uf  AIp\-
uiuli'iu,  and  mnilo  :imiii)£i>inHiil>t  toi'
the  roslorjition  of  pracr,  pioLMirinj;
Cleopatni,  at  tbi^  Anniti  liiiiL>.  \wr
sbarvof  thH  throiK'.  Porhiiiu«.  bow-
ever,  one  of  Pl«t(;niy'ft  tiiiuintvrs,  in
wboMt  liitrigniivg  spirit  nil  the  ditf-
invnfiiipn!!  of  thr.  conrt  hud  crlKiU'iti^d,
soon  slirrnl  up  a  second  rnvnlt.  upon
which  thi--  Alcxauiliiftn  War  wnn-
nicnc^^d,  ill  which  Ptoh-my  wm  df-
foatcd  atui  lt«l  his  life  by  dmwniiiK.
('ae«ar  now  proclninied  Chnxpiitni
(pieon  of  E^ypt ;  but  tthu  wiih  com-
pelled to  tftke  hiT  brothi-r,  tin*
younger  Pt-tdeniy,  who  wiut  only
ttleveii  years  idd,  an  her  husbjiiul
HDd  colleague  on  iho  tliroin'.  TIu>
Buuiftii  general  continued  fur  Bonic
time  at  her  court,  and  sho  bore
him  a  »on,  allied,  front  the  name
of  his  putative  father,  Caesiiriun,
Utiriug  the  six  ypant  which  imin«-
difttcly  follawiHl  theKC  events,  the
reign  of  Cleoiwitra  twyniB  iit»t  to
have  lio«n  dinturbed  by  iiisurret'-
tioH,  nor  to  liiiVK  iK-tMi  a.sHnile4l  by
foreign  war.  WIumi  her  hnktlier,  at
tbc  age  of  fointeen,  dvnuiudtMl  Iuh
share  in  tho  goverunivut, Cleopatra
paiaimed  biut,  an<l  rLMuuitied  Mdu
puanedsttr  of  the  regiit  anihorily.
The  ilitwenMionR  atnong  the  rival
leuders  who  divided  tli«»  jiower  of
CaCMirhad  iiodoubt  nearly  involvwl
her  iu  a  tonti^ot  with  both  [lartien;
but  the  dccitfivc  iiMue  of  tl)»  battle
of  Philippi  relieved  her  from  the
heetitatioD  uuder  whirh  wuiie  of  lier
weajtui"oa  appear  to  have  been  ado[»(ed,  aud  del^^r-
mined  her  inirlinatiniii*,  lu  wet)  as  bur  intereHtK.  in
favour  of  the  cominerorK.  To  atTord  her  an  ojipor-
tnuityofexplainiiig  her  conduct.  Antony  6i]aiiuoue<I
bertn  attend  him  in  Cilicia,  and  the  meetii));  which
she  gnve  him  on  ibe  river  Cyduim  Las  employed
the  pen,  not  only  of  the  hiHConaii,  but  of  the  prince
of  Eiigliidi  drauiutista.

The  artifleed  of  lhi*t  fascinating  priuwM,  m>w  in
her  twenly-dPventh  year,  j»o  far  jxiiiintd  upon  Antony
aa  not  only  to  divert  IHm  tlMiuf^titH  fnuii  liii*  origi-
nal pur{>oHe  of  subjecting  her  kingdcni  to  the  pay-
lueut  of  trihiitr,  but  entirely  to  lull  bin  ambiEioii
to  nloep,  aud  make  bim  iMioritfce  liiii  great  »t:ik.v  aa


a  candidate  for  tlie  empirr  of  the  world.  After  «
fniltleHM  atta^'k  upon  Ibe  territory  of  Palmyra.  Ii»
bntttetitid  to  forget  lim  disgrace  in  the  soctrty  of
the  Egyptian  iineeu,  piueing  several  mouths  at
Atexandrin  in  the  wildest  and  most  delirious  disai-
pntion.  The  death  of  his  wife,  and  hi«  enbf»ei|neut
marriage  with  Octav  ia,  delayed  for  a  time  the  eriHi»
which  his  nnguverned  pawitm*  were  preptnlng  fur
him.  Km.  though  be  bad  thUH  cxtriealexl  bimwlf
from  the  Kn:irea  of  Aloxaiidrin.his  iucUiiatloiui  M-^
soou  returned  to  that  unlucky  city;  for  we  tind
that  when  he  letl  Home  to  proceed  agaitist  ih".*
Parthians.  be  dcapatebed  in  advauco  bis  frieud
Fonteins  Capito  to  oouduct  Cleopattu  luto  Syruk


Cleopfttro. 4P*iotliif  on  8Ma  ttota  Uii  Vlllft  of  Hadrlua  umr  Trvgll.}


On  hi-t  return  from  this  dirigracefnl  campui;:!'.
\w  incurred  alill  dt-f>|M<r  diHhonour  liy  nnre  iiiiht
willingly  Kubraitling  Ut  Itnit  Iwuidag^'  wbirti  hM<
rondtnvd  him  Outiluuiptihlu  in  the  eyeH  uf  lui^l
his  fidlowum.

Passing  over  events  which  have  been  allndrd
iu  the  article  At'Ol'sTl'S  Caksar.  we  cnnie  l*i  !*!■♦*
|icrioii  tbtit  fidlowed  the  battio  of  Actinui,nt  k1i)<'  1'
the  (leserliou  ofCK-opatra  with  her  galleys  andii**^
ptimnit  of  her  hy  the  iuralnnU'il  Antony  Aiucr-<I
thi'  dcMtiny  of  the  Roman  Kuipirp  (BC.  :Wi. \ni*»»
Octuvijuiua  advanced  :igainrtt  Egypt,  and  Antanv"
liad  been  a  D4<oond  time  defi-aled  uiHler  the  walU^r
AlexBudriA,CleopatrusIiut  herself  up  with  a  few  »f'


CLEOPATRIS


CLIENTES


teiidaiits  aiitl  the  most  vahinble  pnrt  of  her  treas-
ures iu  a  strong  building  which  appears  to  have
l>een  intended  for  a  royal  sepulchre.  To  prevent  in-
trusion by  friend  or  enemy  she  caused  a  report  to  be
circulated  that  she  bad  retired  iuto  the  monument
to  pnt  herself  to  death.  Antony  resolved  to  follow
her  example,  and  threw  himself  upon  his  sword ;
bnt  being  informed,  before  he  expired,  that  Cleo-
patra was  still  living,  he  caused  himself  to  be  car-
rietl  into  her  presence,  and  breathed  his  last  iu  her
arms.  Octaviaiius,  after  this,  succeeded  in  getting
Cleopatra  iuto  his  power,  and  the  queen  at  first
hoped  to  subdue  him  by  her  attractions ;  bnt  find-
ing at  last  that  her  efforts  were  unavailing,  and
suspecting  that  her  life  was  spared  only  that  she
might  grace  the  conqueror's  triumph,  she  ende^l
her  days,  if  the  common  account  is  to  be  credited,
by  the  bite  of  an  asp;  though  some  ascribed  her
death  to  poison  administered  internnlly.  A  small
puncture  in  the  arm  wob  the  only  mark  of  violence
which  conld  be  detected  on  the  body  of  Cleopatra,
and  it  was  therefore  believed  that  she  had  procured
death  either  by  the  bite  of  a  venomous  reptile  or'
by  the  use  of  a  poisoned  bodkin.  She  died  iu  her
tbirty-niuth  year,  having  reigned  twenty-two  years
from  the  death  of  her  father.  Octavianns,  it  is  said,
though  deprived  by  this  act  of  snicideof  the  great-
est ornament  of  his  approaching  triumph,  gave
orders  that  she  should  have  a  magnificent  fuuei-nl,
and  that  her  body,  as  she  desiretl,  should  be  laid
by  that  of  Antony.  Her  two  children  by  Antony
were  reared  by  the  neglected  wife  Octavia.

The  name  of  Cleopatra  has  been  linked  hy  ro-
mance and  poetry  with  those  of  tbe  most  fasci-
nating women  the  world  has  seen — Helen  of  Troy,
Mary  Stuart,  and  Ninon  de  Lenclos— and  has  al-
ways exercised  a  powerful  influence  upon  the  imag-
ination of  men.  In  English  literature  the  genius
of  Shakespeare  and  of  Drydeu  has  made  her  story
the  tbeme  of  dramas;  white  the  resources  of  art
have  been  exhausted  to  produce  types  that  should
satisfy  tbe  eye  and  the  mind  of  the  critic.

Cleopatzia  (KXron-orptr).  Acity  of  Egypt,  at  the
hrati  of  the  Sinus  Arabicns  and  in  the  immediate
vicinity  of  Arsiuoe. See  Arsinoe.  ^

CleofltrStUB  (KXtatrrparot).  An  astronomer  of
Teiiedos,  who  is  said  to  have  introduced  the  famil-
iar Zodiac  signs.  He  flourished  about  tbe  year
B.C.500.

Clepaj^dra  (xXf^udpa).  A  water-cluck.  See
HoROLooitm.

Clerk. See  Scriba.

Cleraobl  (nXjipoixot). See  Clkiu'CHIa.

Clemcbla  (Kkifpovxla).  A  kind  of  Greek  col-
ony*  which  differed  from  the  ordinary  colonial
settlement  in  the  fact  that  the  settlers  i*emaiued
in  close  connection  with  their  mother-city.  The
Atbeuiau  cln^uchiae  are  the  only  onus  of  which  we
have  any  detailed  knowledge.  A  conquered  ter-
rit4»ry  was  divided  into  lots  of  land,  which  were
aasigued  to  the  poorer  citizens  as  clefuchi  or  "  hold-
ers of  lots."  The  original  inhabitants  would  be
differently  treatetl  acconling  to  circumstances.
Iu  mauy  cases  they  were  compelled  to  emigrate ;
Honietimes  the  men  were  killed  and  the  women
and  children  enslaved;  bnt  ordinarily  the  old
inhabitants  would  have  become  the  tenants  of
tbe  settlers,  and  take,  generally,  a  less  privileged
poattiou.  The  settlers  fonneil  a  separate  coni-
mnnity,  elected  their  own  offlciidn,  and  managed


their  local  affairs;  but  they  continued  to  be  Athe-
nian citizens,  with  all  the  rights  and  duties  of
their  position.  They  remaineil  under  the  author-
ity of  Athens,  and  were  obliged  to  repair  to  the
Athenian  courts  for  justice  in  all  important  mat-
ters. See  COLOJOA.

Clems  (jcX^pof)- See  Hekbs;  Inheritance.'

Cleta  (KXrfTa). See  Chakites.

Cleterea  (xXt^r^pfc)  or  Clettois  (xXijToprr).
Summoners ;  persons  who  at  Athens  were  wit-
nesses to  the  prosecutor  of  a  suit,  that  he  had
served  tbe  defendant  with  a  notice  of  the  action
brought  agaiust  him  and  of  the  day  on  which  it
would  be  necessary  for  btm  to  appear  for  the  first
examination  of  the  cose.  They  were  not,  there-
fore, conrt  officials,  bnt  only  agents  of  the  prose-
cutor, and  their  names  were  subscribed  to  his
declaration. See  Meier,  Alt  Vroceit,  pp.  212,  576.

Clibanarii. The  some  as  cataphracti  (q.  v.).

CUbSnus  (KXi)9avof).  A  covered  vessel  pierced
round  with  small  holes  and  used  for  baking  bread,
being  enveloped  in  hot  ashes  whose  warmth  pene-
trated the  holes  (Petrou.  35).

CUentSo. See  Cuentes.

CUentea  The  name  originally  applied  to  sucb
inhabitants  of  Rome  as  had  lost  or  given  up  tbe
citizenship  of  their  own  cities,  and  had  settled  iu
Roman  territory.  Here,  having  no  legal  rights,
they  wore  compelled,  in  order  to  secure  their  per-
sonal fivedom,  to  seek  the  protection  of  some
Roman  citizen,  a  term  which,  in  ancient  times,
conld  mean  only  a  patrician.  The  relation  thus
set  on  foot  was  called  clieHtela,  and  was  inherited
by  the  descendants  of  both  parties.  Accordingly
the  client  entered  into  the  family  of  his  patron
(patt-oHUB),  took  his  gentile  name,  and  was  admitted
to  take  part  iu  the  family  sacrifices. '  The  patron
made  over  to  him  a  piece  ot  land  as  a  means  of
support,  prot-ected  him  from  violence,  represeuted
him  at  law,  and  buried  him  after  his  death.  The
client,  on  his  part,  accompanied  bis  patron  abroad
and  ou  military  service,  gave  his  advice  in  -legal
and  domestic  mattere,  and  made  a 'contribution
from  his  property  if  his  patron  were  endowing  a
daughter,  or  had  to  be  ransomed  in  war  or  to  pay
a  fiue.  The  relation  between  patron  and  client
is  also  illuBtrated  by  the  fact  that  neither  party
conld  bring  an  action  against  the  other  in  a  conrt
of  law,  or  bear  witness  against  him,  or  vote  against
him,  or  appear  against  him  as  advocate.  A  man's
duty  to  bis  client  was  more  binding  than  his  duty
to  his  blood  relations,  and  any  violation  of  it  was
regarded  as  a  capital  offence.

When  Servius  Tullins  eicteuded  the  rights  of
citizenship  to  the  clients  as  well  as  to  the  ple-
beians, the  bond  between  patron  and  client  still
continuetl  in  force,  although  it  gradually  relaxed
with  the  course  of  time.  At  tbe  end  of  the  repub-
lican age  tbe  stata$  of  client,  iu  the  proper  sense
of  the  wonl,  hail  ceased  to  exist.  Under  the  Em-
pire the  elienteUi  was  a  mere  external  relation  be-
tween the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  great  and  thu
obscure.  It  involved  no  moral  obligation  ou  either
side,  but  was  based  merely  ou  tbe  vanity  of  the
one  party  and  the  necessity  of  the  other.  It  was
no  unusual  thing  to  find  persons  who  had  no  settled
means  of  subsistence  trying,  by  flattery  and  ser-
vile l)ehavionr,  to  win  the  favour  of  the  great.
Even philosophers  and  poets,  like Statins  and


CUHA


87ft


CUPEP9


MartiRl,  arc  fouud  iu  tbis  )>D«iiioii.  Tlie  client
piTiurnicd  certain  »erviCL-!»,  cnllvd  titi  bifl  pntnm  in
tbu  morning,  occumpaiiieit  biui  on  |Miblic  occaaionis
mid  wa»  in  triro  invited  t»  bin  table,  received  pres-
ents fruni  liiin,  aiu)  (if  he  could  K^t  it)  n  nettled
provinioo.  Instead  of  iii%'iting  tbeir  nuiU'?ixtnH
clients,  Lbe  ricli  would  oftuu  pivaonl  tbeui  wiib  a
Bruall  sum  of  nKinry  r;ilb'd  tjHtrlula.  T\iv  ivhbtiun
was  ontirnly  »  free  iinf,  and  Ciinld  l»p  dittwdvud  at.
pleasure  by  oiilinr  parly.

lu  the  republican  n^v  vbole  couiiuuuitiea,  and
«ven  provinces,  wliou  the.v  hnd  »iibuiitt«d  to  tbv
Koiuau  yoke,  wnnld  souiftinu'K  bocouie  cHuuts  of  n
»inj;lt!  patrunn9.  lu  tLiix  ciisu  tbe  patronn*  noutd
nsually  !■«  tbe  couipuTinf;  general.  Maiec'llufi,  fut-
iiistAnco,thecoiiquerortd'Syrncu»e.:it]dtiiH  descend-
ant!!, wen*  patrons  cf  Sicily.  The  pmclicul  ad-
vauLa;;eH  wtiirb  wer^  wrnrnd  to  a  ftnfijpi  roiii-
uiitiiily  tiy  tliis  )»en»:iMi>iit  r«*pn>HPiiljit.ion  ut  Ronw-
un-  (tUviiiuK.  Arvonliiigly  we  f^nil  tlmt,  iindttr  Tbe
Ktupire,  »ven  rilif»  wliicb  nlood  In  Itoriir-  in  no
rululiim  ul'depi*ndrii(!f,  mu-M  su*  ndonli-H  nnd  timtii-
eipia,  m>nictiiui)}i  M'lfrled  ii  pntiiman, TIil*  /Mitroitua


cnfiiou  with  Ibc  grentoHt  vnluitr  of  any  of  the
Lircok?.  This  CUuiiut  vriut  tbr  fntbc-r  of  tbe  cele-
brated Alcibiudoa  (q.  v.).  He  murried  Diuonuicli^,
tbe  dan^bter  of  UegB«Ii;8,  j^mudiMm  l«i  Agarbrt^,
tbe  dnuKbter  of  Olistbeiiea,  lyruut  of  Sicyou.  He
fell  At  tbe  battle  of  Coron«a.

CUnlcna  (xXiiriKor).  (I)  A  visiting  pliyiieian
wbo  HttetidiMl  bis  piitient  nt  the  Iwddiile  (Mart
ix.27).  (S*<*  MKDict'i*.)  (2)  An  nndortakertMart
i.  'ii ). Bi-O  Ve«PIUjO.

CUnfipoa  ixXu'oirovj). Tlie  foot  of  a  betttdeail.  _
&pe  LEcff.s

CliutOD,  lICNay  1-^"NFj*.  A  n-nLirkablr  Kng—^a
lisli  clnMHical  scholar,  boni  at  Gam.siutt  <Nortin|{-  ^^
bmnabiro)  in  I7r*\  Educult^d  ul  VVcotiniiibU'  Z^^
School  and  ut  Cbri»t  Church,  Oxford  riWJ)- b.^^
hUciwci)  nn  iinneunl  aptitude  for  the  study  of  ob
riicnl  literature  und  history,  ^hich  he  pursued  wil
little  iutvrrnptinn  ull  his  life,  though  he  tter^'cd  i
menitK'r  of  Parliatucut  for  Aldhorough  from  It*
to  l*2ti

IIJH  tifc-wiirk  WAK  tbr  eliit-idnliini  of  Greek  a. -^^1


wu»,  in  mieli  c«.v-«,  always  choMU.  fn.ui  ninonjt  .bo  ■  "^'^'''f"  ^''---''''ilog.v,  flini  hin  two  grral  prmlurlic^^


aenatora  or  rqniteg.  Hoe  Momnii^eu,  AbhaHtHiiHg
flftn*  dan  romuthe  (tnntrfckt  iind  dif  romiitcht'  V!ifntft
<in  Ilomiaehr  /''nr«'ili»iMi7c«KUt*rIin,  IHt»4-7y);  Mcl^^ti-
nsn,  Thi'  I'atriorchal  Tktorif  (Ltnnlon,  l*if>} ;  and
Mon-y,  Outline*  of  Unman  Lav  (New  Vork,  ISdif).

Clinui  (kAi'/wi).  I>itf rally  "n  Hlope"  or  "  in-
«liuAtion'';  a  term  iiHcd  in  I  he  inatbenialical
gefjgropliy  of  the  (JrcekH  with  rofervnce  to  iln"
iuolitmtion  uf  various  \nxT\fi  of  tbo  I'artb'd  Hurriicv


stand  upon  a  bawid  of  ouob  remarkably  pn>r>><i(j^
and  enduring  tH.-bolarship  thai  they  arc  nulilco/r
over  to  bo  Ktipei«tided  or  diHus«(l. The»e  ntv  t/r^
Fa^li Hi-llrnici : ft t'iril  and  l.ilerarg t'hronaf^y
of  Orrfpr,  4 voI«.  ( Ifr^i4-:M },  and the Ftuli If»-
tnani : a Civil  a>>H  Liln-arif Chronoluiftf  of  Rffme
anil  I'lwulanlinuiitf  front  Ihr  Drath  af  Amgtttug  t»
Ibr hnith  itf  flrrarliuM,  2  vols.  ( li^ta-Jil  ). Of  iho
fonnrir  work,  an  epitome  wa^  pnhlislied  in  1S30;
and  of  ilic  tivcund,  in  18ri4. Mr.  CUnton  dlcfl  *t


to  tbe  plnne  of  the  equator. Boforo  tbe  gl-ihnlar  |  vsvi^vn,  (October  24(11.  1853. Hi*  literarv  rtm^na
rta-ire  of  lbe  earth  was  known .t  wa»  supposed  I  ^,,^,  ^^,.,(^.j  „„^  published  by  Mr.  C.  K.  J.  fliJit»a
that  there  wns  a  general  idope  of  Uti  surface  Ironi  '  = .g^
Hontb  to  uorlb.  and  tlntt  wjw  called  xXifitt. Hut  as  '


tbe  science  of  mathemiitlcal  geognipby  ndvanc4;d.
tbe  wort!  was  applied  to  different  belts  of  the
«artb')i  stirfwe,  wliielt  were  det4*nTiincd  by  the
diftVreiit  length*  of  the  lotigottt  day  at  Ibf^ir  lines
of  deiiiiirealioii.  This  diviHinn  inl<t  elitnitlrs  wne
applifd  only  Ut  lite  northern  h<>tnisj>1ii.'re,  us  the
geogmphi'rs  had  no  pr;ic|ieal  knowledge  of  the
enrtb  wintli  of  tUe  eipiator.  Tbe  tcrtii  kXi^h  wii*
afleiwartU  applic<l  Co  (he  teni[ieratnre  of  these
belts;  bonce  tbe  lueAiiing  of  tbe  modern  woni
rlimate.

llipparehnH  (nlmnl  R.(*.  lOt)  Keeni4  to  linve  heon
the  lirst  who  ninde  use  of  this  divittioit ;  ht4  Hystem
iit  explaineil  at  leiigtb  hy  .Stmlmoi-  p-  l-lil.

Tho  wortl  ctima  is  found  only  in  tho  lat^T  Latin,
the  pure  !<Atiu  term  being  inetiitatio,  lirdinatio,  or
ftiTrrgtHtia.

Climax  (icXT^a^).  (1)  A  l.ndder  or  ^tairoiue.
(SeeUoMis;  Scalae.)  (2)  An  in.'itniment  of  tort-
ure. See  TOILHENTUM.

Cliinax  (KAi/ia£).  The  unmu  applied  to  the
we»teru  lerniiuation  of  the  Tauras  rnnge,  which
QXtetids  along  the  westeni  coast  of  tlib  ranipliylian
Gulf,  north  of  rbiiM>lis  in  Lyciu.  AleXikuder  made
A  niml  between  it  und  the  sea.

CUmbemuu. TIik  rnpital  of  tlie  Ausi^t  {q.  v.).

Clinias  (KXtiylav).  (1)  A  Pythagorean  pbilo«o-
pbcr  and  niui^iojitn.  AW  years  bvfure  the  Cbrislfiin
era.  (2>  An  At)ienian,said  by  HcrtKhituK  |viii.  17)
to  hove  been  tbe  bravest  of  his  coiitilryiueit  in  tbe
battle  fought  against  the  I'eniiau  tliwt  nt  Art«-
miRinm ;  nml  the  Atheninns  iire  Hnid  by  tin*  same
writer  t»  have  coiidnrled  tbeiusetves  on  titat  oc-


CUo  (KAciw).  TImi  Miim  who  presided  nwr
bUtory,  and  generally  reprcMDt^Ml  aa  holdlui  *
balf-opuned  roll.  The
invention  of  tho  citbu-
ra  was  ascribed  to  bor.
llnving  diuwn  on  her-
self tbe  auger  of  Aphro-
dite, by  tanultng  her
with  her  pnssion  for
Adiniis,  (Jlio  wiis  in-
spired by  tbe  RiMhles-s
with  l(»ve  for  Pieriit*.
t  he  sou  of  Miignex,  and
Imrv  bini  a  son  uatntHl
HyiicintbiiH  (  Ap«dlod.
i.  3,  '2  full. )  Her  name
is  tleiived  from  KAfioe
(Ionic  for  KKiot),  "glo*
ry,"** renown.'' elf, ,  l>»-
eanseshe  CdlebrnleA  I  he
gloriouH  actions  of  the
^ootl  and  the  bruve.

CUpeua  and  Clipeum

IdtnriV.  tTOKOi). (I)  The

Inrge  »hteld  nsi>it  l>y  the

(•leeks iind  tbeUonuins,

originally  of  circular  sha]>e,  baid  to  tiave  been  I

usi-d  hy  rroottts  and  Aerisius  of  Argoa  (Fausan-  ,

yf).  ^  )i>; ntnl therefore called iliprm*  JrgoU^^^^

Accurtliiig  lit  otlier  accounts,  however,  it  nai  *i*'

rived  fnuu  lbe  Kgyptinns  (Henn).  iv.  Irth.

One  of  lbe  earliest  extant  reprcMentatiau  <''
Greek  slii'-lds  is  to  be  fonnd  in  the  engraving  «*
a  sword- Idude  fonnd  nt  Mycenae,  represeJitinf  *


Clh),  til*  llutw  iif  Rmitirr (F
■  Siuan  Dmr  la  5«Mlia|


CLIPEL'9


CUHKt'S


k liotwfeu  mni  and  Honit  (Hclbi^,  HuutrhMiiir
i  p.  232).  It  will  bo  se«u  that  ftoiuv  of  the
men  cany  «bicUb>  rcMsniblliit;  a  tcntam,  otben
0lii«ldi)  whk'b  recall  the  oLiipe  of  ibc  Btwotiaii
sLU'ld,  and  that  tiach  form  cnwrs  ubuut  tbrei-
41iiart<:'r8  of  tbt-  pcrHoii,  uiul  is  purtl,*  sup|>orte<l  li.v
:«.  sCr&p  poBsiug  round  tb«  ithoaltlcrs.


Tbe  herofA  of  tbo  iHail  mrry  »  sbicld  wbicli  in
3aud  (iii.  347)  and  large  otiongb  to  covur  lbi>
rliol«  tuai)  (iv<^i0f>arrj.  iroA^cfiTijt;).  It  Is  cmn-
hy  sewing  together  circiilnr  piccoft  of  iiu-
oiMd  ox*bide.  varyiiig  in  number.  Tbeae  an
stTtrDgllirncd  oit  iKJch  HidcH  by  pl»lc<iuf  bronze,  the
oiilor  hidt'ii  buU  p1ate«  bciui;  nf  iininller  diaiiitiler,

fM<  tb»t  ou  the  (Mlgo  of  t\w  shield  b(>th  bidt*  and
Dieul  aro  tbitineHt  (//.  xx.  27ri>.
£aqieiloii*5  shivbl  18  for^*«d  of  jdntFN  nf  brniiicr.
|n  which  ox-h»di*«  ftiv  iillju'h»H\  on tlM«  tnsido  by
|[<>Mf<ii  rMs  or  bidib  (;jn,'3do()  riiiiiiing  nil  ntnnd  tbc
ciirii'. Ten  ctri:b'»  of  bronr-o  niii  ronnd  Ay:iini»-iii-
iiod'h  shield- AcIiUUih'  Rbiehl  in  coiDjHwtHl  iMitirr-
l.v  of  nitttal  ill  fivo  jtlnti-^^ — I  wo  of  bruiixi',  lm>  uf
W tin,  And  a  e^nlral  one  of  gold. The  Htriirtnre  itt
H liniiQil  tugctbt^r  by  n  mctnl  rlrii  [rStn-v^).  »bi<'b in
H ArhillM' Hbield if) triple. At the  centn?  of  the
H  flliield  1!^  a  metal  boss  {6fitf>aX6t). Agnniemnon's
H  ■bield  in  iiLudded  with  twt;nty  bottscii  uf  tin  and  a
H  efiilral  ouo  uftynHn*  i //.  xi,  'M).
H Wtirii  not  in  unc  tbi^  abielil  vrus  tnmpcmU'd  by
H  "■(*  raXn/Moi'.  wbteb  paitHetl  an>nud  the  brc-UHt,  the
^>liir|d  hanging  at  the  baek. (See  Hai-THIS.) The
l^ctiw  of  docormting  the  ^hiebl  bad  voiiiiuciicpd
''"ho  Homeric  Age  (H.  xi.  W).
Ill littfr  times  tbo  tthiobls  were  amoller,  nKti:i1l\
^roriog  the  warrior  frorn  Ibe  neck  to  tbt-  kmu-s
BwideM  the  cironlfir  or  Arglve  fthiehl.  nr
LUmtly  Hnd  meiilioutHl  unr  of  an  oval  sbiipc-
''■fa  astroug  rim  aud  ajtertures  in  ihi-  iniddJc  of


each  Ride  [Eurip.  /*A«riiiv«.  1386). This  in  knovn
aa  the  Uoeutiuu  ehteld.

The  shield  was  at  last  formed  entirely  ■>f  br«M
indy)(a\Kos),  and  a  sort  of  apron,  probably  uf
loattier  or  some  thick  material,  wa«  wimetimfU)
attached  to  it,  especially  when  one  did  not  wear
greaves  to  protect  his  legs.  The  simplest  ar-
rangi'meul  to  bold  the  tthiebl  conatnlcHl  of  two
Iiifll.t1  haiidlefl,  one  to  pass  the  nnn  tbruiigb  and
one  to  grofip  with  tliA  band;  but  tlie  hion^  elabo-
rate nrrangemeut  ia  tihown  in  the  IIInBtratioa  f^om
a  t«rra-cottA  vane  publixbcd  by  TinclibciD  (iv.  tab.
20}.  lu  it  the  broad  baud  that  niim  ncroM  the
shield  like  the  diameter  of  a  circle  is  of  metal,  the
tboug  about  the  edge  of  the  rim  of  leather  (vap-

At  tU4!  clofie  of  a  war  it  waa  rnslniuary  for  the
Grecktt  to  auitpeud  their  shields  in  the  lumpltm,
when  the  rropnoKft  wen*  t;tken  off.  in  order  lo  rcn-
iUt  them  iiiiserviceabk'  in  ca«o  of  any  midden  or
IKtjmliir  imllnvuk.  Stnnetimett  Hbieldtt  were  kept
til  a  fiiM*  (airypi),  (AriMl*)ph.  .tib.  o~i).

The  aa-iris  was  the  eharncterifttic  defonsiTe
Weapon  (on-Aiif)  of  the  heavy -aniieil  infantry  (on'K'f
rat)  during  Ibe  liiNturii-al  tiniei*  of  (Greece,  and  fs
oppo,-*eil  tr>  the  lighter  jtiXtij  and  yiftpov  ;  bence  wb
Hnd  the  word  nanU-  utwd  to  signify  a  liinly  of  irrXI-
Tu(  (Xen.  -inab.  i.  7,  fy  10).  It  wa.s  diwiinetively
a  Crivek  nliield,  and  thus  none  of  the.  Fln.stcni  {tco-
ple^  who  served  under  Xerxea  (Herod.  tU.  61  full.)
were  artned  witli  it.

The  K'lTiifiii  c/ijtrtiH  18  ti«cn  in  the  accompanylug
illnxtiatinn  from  the  L'olnmn  of  Tiajan.  According
to  Livy  ( i.  4'J ),  when  the  ccn-
answiis  iustinited  by  Servlna
Tnllind,  the  first  cinu  only
tiftcd  the  cUpenR,  and  the  oec*
ondwere  armed  with  the  «'•«.
ittm  (q.  v.);  but  after  the  Ita-
man  soldier  received  pay,  the
elipeuBWii»*diitcont(nned  alto-
gelher  for  (he  Sabine  tifulnm
(Liv.  viii.  8;  cf.  ix.  lH;  I'lnt.
Roiii.  21 :  Biod.  AWiif/.  xxiii.
It,  who  uHHcrta  that  iJie  origi-
inii  form  of  the  Uonian  shield
waH  Mr|Uni*e,  anil  tbnt  it  wn»
Nil  baei|nen  t  ly  changed
fur  tlint  of  the  TytTheaiane,
nbicb  was  voiind^

The  emblazoning  of  shields
with  devires  l<r^/iurn,  <rqfttla)
WON  naid  in  he  livrived  from
the  C'ariatiH  (Herud.  i.  171).
The  iH^aririgH  im  the  Mliicltla
of  the  heniiM  belore  Thebeii.
ti«  drtm-ri bLwl  by  Acftehyliiti  in
tin-  Serrn  tif/mnHt  Tbrhm,  ex-
liiliit  Ibn  development  uf  de*
rieea  in  poMt-Kouierie  limes.  Snnie  HhieUln,  like
Agameninou'A,  bear  flubjuelft  designed  to  stTike
terror;  tn  ihnt  of  Tydens  brnnzu  l>elU  arc  at-
taebcd  with  the  ftnme  object.  Other  hnbjecta  an*
purely  mythological  «ir  indicate  the  nwiiei^'s  un-
centry.  Thisenxtom  of  embbizoning  NhieIdH  in  tl-
Imttrated  on  a  very  beantifnl  gi*ni  trnm  the  an-
tii|iie,  ill  wliirb  the  (igim-  of  Viitory  is  n.'preseut-
cd  iuKi-ribitig  iipuu  a  tdi|ii-nii  the  name  or  merita  of
iHtm>e  deeruM-d  livro.

Kroin  the  hiMUirians  we  tiad [hiil  while  an  iu-
dividiml  ttctnietimes  adratled  atteiiiinn  by  an  lui-


aipcuN,  ItoiuM  ^Wd.
luilinnn  at Tra^iui.)


CLISTUENES


872


CLOACA


usuul  ilevice,  cities  inadu  wae  of  nonio  common
symbol  for  their  sIiieUlH  which  might  be  enttily
recognizable  by  their  friends :  thus  the  Lacedue-
mouians  naed  A,  the  Sicyoniaiis  2,  the  Tliebans
Heracles's  club — a  practice  of  which  the  enemy
sometimes  took  a  trencberoas  advantage  (Xen.
Hell.  iv.  4,10;  vii.50;  Pansan.  iv.  58,  5).

Each  Roman  soldier  also  had  his  own  name  and
a  mark  indicating  his  cohort  inscribed  npon  his
sliiuld,  In  onler  that  he  might  readily  find  his  own
when  the  order  was  given  to  unpile  arms  (Veget.
ii.  17),  and  sometimes  the  name  of  the  cum-
ninndcr  under  whom  he  fought  (Hirt.  Bell.  Alex.
5H).

Victorious  armies  sometimes  dedicated  their
own  shields  or  an  engraved  shield  of  gold  as  an
offering  in  a  temple  (Uei-od.  i.  92).  Por  decora-
tive purposes,  shields  in  metal  or  marble  were
often  sn8t>ended  from  the  roofs  of  porticoes  or  in
the  atria  of  private  houses.  See  M.  Albert  in  the
lievae  Arch^logique  (1881).

(3)  CupKL's  is  also  the  name  of  a  contrivance
for  rcgnlnting  the  temperature  of  the  vapour-bath.
See  Balneak.

ClistbSneB  (KX«i(r<9f  vi;r)-  (1)  A  tyraut  of  Sicyon,
who  in  B.C.  595  aided  tile  Amphictyoiis  in  the  Sa-
cred War  against  CJrra,  which  ended  in  the  de-
struction of  that  city.  He  was  a  resolute  enemy
of  the  Doriann,  and  in  that  spirit  waged  war  ou
Argos.  (See  Herod,  v.  67;  vi,  125;  Thuc.  i,  18).
(2)  An  Athenian,  the  sou  of  Megacles  and  Agaristii.
He  was  the  head  of  the  Alcmaeonid  family,  and
was  opposed  by  Isaguros  and  the  nobles;  but  by
the  support  of  the  people  reformed  the  constitu-
tion of  the  Stale  upon  a  democratic  basis.  His
changes  were  (1)  the  establishment  of  ten  instead
of  four  tribes,  and  the  division  into  demes  (see
DoHrs);  (2)  the  introtluction  of  ostracism  (see
Ostracismub);  (3)  the  revival  of  election  by  lot;
(4)  the  weakening  of  the  power  of  the  Heliastic
court  (see  Dicastk^).  In  spite  of  the  interference
of  the  Spartans  under  Cleomenes,  these  changes
were  finally  established  (B.c.  508).  Of  the  later
years  of  the  life  of  Clisthenes,  nothing  definite  is
known.  (Heroil.  v.  63-73 ;  and  vi.  131 ;  Arist.  \\0.
noX.20,2!,41.)

ClitarobuB  ( KXcirap;(or ).  A  Greek  historian,
son  of  the  historian  Dinon.  Ho  flourished  about
U.C.  300,  and  was  the  author  of  a  great  work,  in  at  I
least  twelve  books,  upon  Alexander  the  Great.  He
was  notoriously  untrustworthy,  and  lucliueil  to
believe  in  the  marvellous ;  his  style  was  turgid
and  highly  rhetorical;  but  his  narrative  was  so
interesting  that  be  was  the  most  popniar  of  all  the
writers  on  Alexander.  The  Romans  were  very
fond  of  his  book,  which  was  indeed  the  main  au-
thority for  the  narratives  of  Diotlorus,  Trogus
Pompeins,  and  Q.  Curtius.  A  uumhcr  of  fragments
of  it  still  survive.

CUtallatt  {KavSiiKia).  A  pair  of  panniers,  and
therefore  only  used  in  the  plural  number.  In  Italy
they  were  commonly  usetl  with  mules  or  asses,  but
in  other  countries  thoy  were  also  applied  to  horses,
of  which  an  instance  is  given  in  the  following  il-
lustration from  the  Column  of  Tr;\jau;  and  Plantns
figuratively  describes  a  man  upon  whose  shoulders
a  load  of  any  kind,  either  moral  or  physical,  is
charged  as  homo  cUtelJarins.

A  partifular  spot  in  the  city  of  Rome,  and  cer-
tain parts  of  the  Via  Plaminia,  which,  from  their


nndulatious  in  hill  and  valley,  were  thought  to  re-
semble the  flowing  line  of  a  pair  of  pauuiers,  weie
also  termed  Clit«IIae.


ClitellM. (Column  of  Trajan.)

Clitemiun  and  Clitemia.  A  town  of  the  Freo-
tani  in  the  territory  of  Larinnm.

Clitomfichua  (KXcini/uixor).  A  native  of  C.\f
thage.  In  his  early  years  he  acquire<l  a  foudm-vi
for  learuing,  which  induce«l  him  to  visit  (jreere  Tor
the  purpose  of  attending  the  schools  of  the  phi-
losophers. From  Iho  time  of  his  flrst  arrival  id
AtheuB  he  attached  himself  to  Carneades  (q.  v.),
and  coutinueil  his  disciple  until  his  death,  whcu
he  became  his  successor  in  the  academic  chair.
He  studied  with  great  industry  and  made  himself
master  of  the  systems  of  the  other  schools,  hnt
professed  the  doctriue  of  susiieDsion  of  assent,  ae  it
had  been  taught  by  his  master.  Cicero  n>lst(^
that  he  wrote  four  baodnMl  books  upon  philosophi-
cal subjects.  At  an  advanced  age  he  was  sfizfd
with  a  lethargy.  Recovering  in  some  measure  ifa«
use  of  his  faculties,  he  said,  *'  The  love  of  life  shall
deceive  me  uo  longer,"  and  laid  violent  hands  iiiwn
himself.  He  entered,  as  wo  have  said,  upon  ihf
office  of  preceptor  in  the  Academy  immedistfly
after  the  death  of  Carneades,  and  helil  it  thirty
years.  According  to  Cicero,  he  taught  that  there
is  no  certain  criterioa  by  which  to  Judge  of  the
truth  of  those  reports  which  we  receive  from  the
senses,  and  that,  therefore,  a  wise  man  will  either
wholly  suspend  his  assent,  or  decline  giving  a  per-
emptory opinion ;  but  that,  nevertheless,  men  are
strongly  impelled  by  nature  to  follow  probability.
His  moral  doctriue  established  a  natural  alliance
between  pleosnre  and  virtue.  He  was  a  profi^v^d
enemy  to  rhetoric,  aud  thought  that  no  place
should  be  allowed  in  society  to  so  daugerou?  an
art.

CUtor  {KKtirap)  or  Clitorium.  A  town  iu  the
north  of  Arcatlia  on  a  river  of  the  same  iiaux-.  s
tributary  of  the  Aroanins.  There  was  a  fonnUin
iu  the  neighbourhood,  the  waters  of  which  are  oaid
to  have  given  to  persons  who  drank  of  them  ;i  dt«-
like  for  wine  (Pausan.  viii.  4,31).

Clitamniu.  A  small  river  in  Unibria,  spriugiiift
from  a  beautiful  rock  in  a  grove  of  cyprt>ss-(n«4
where  was  a  sanctuary  of  the  god  ClitnmnoK.  auti
falling  into  the  Tiuia,  a  tributary  of  the  Tiber.

Clitas  (KX((Tor).  A  famlHnr  friend  and  A>»ti'r-
brother  of  Alexander,  who  had  saved  the  kin;:'*
life  iu  battle.  Alexander  killed  bim  with  a  jn^e-
lin  in  a  fit  of  inebriety,  l>ecause,  at  a  feast,  he  pre-
ferred the  actions  of  Philip  to  those  of  bis  son.
SeePlut.  J  ?er.  16,50-52.

Cloaoa  ivnovoiiot).  A  sewer,  or  drain.  Drains
for  the  removal  of  a  city's  sewage  are  of  very  grrst


CLOACA


87S


CLODIL'S  PL'LCIIER


Butiquity,  since  at  Niueveh  excavattons  show  a
%'ei'y  cuDiplete  s^stetn  of  sewers;  while  tbe  same  is
true  of  Athens,  wliere  the  remaiDa  of  the  aucieut
ilrains  have  heeii  carefully  described  Iiy  Ziller
[mttkril.  den  deutach.  /»*/.  »n  Athea  (1877),  pp.
117-119).

The  (sewers  of  ancient  Rome  were  much  admired
ii)  aucieot  times,  and  were  classed  by  Uiouysius  of
llalicaruassiiB  with  tbe  aqueducts  and  roads  as
llie  best  proof  of  tbe  greatness  and  uiagnificence
of  tbe  Roman  Empire  (iii.  67)  Many  of  the  Ro-
man cities  in  northern  Italy  and  in  Gaul  still  show
i'L>maius  of  similar  cloacae.

Tbe  chief  of  the  ancient  Roman  sewers  still  ex-
ii^tiug  IS  tbe  famous  Cloaca  Maxima,  running  fi*om
tbe  valley  of  the  Subura  at  the  foot  of  tbe  Carinae,
across  tbe  Forum  under  the  south  end  of  the  Ba-
silica Itilia,  where  it  is  exposed  to  view,  and  enter-
tug  the  river  Tiber,  near  the  Temple  of  Hercnles  in
the  Fornm  Boarium,  by  an  arch  of  peperiuo  shown
iu  the  illustration. The  original  dimensions  of


PreBent  Condition  of  tbe  Cloaca  Uozii


the  nrch  were  12  ft.  4  in.  in  height,  and  10  ft.  8  in.
ill  width,  bnt  one-third  of  its  height  is  now  choked
np  by  mud.

Another  sewer,  which  like  tbe  Cloaca  Maxima
is  still  in  use,  enters  the  Tiber  opposite  to  the
Insula  Tiberina.  Its  antiquity  is  very  great,  and
it  is  constructed  of  large  blocks  of  peperiuo  un-
c*wented.  In  tbe  quay  wall  not  far  from  tbe
nioutb  of  tbe  Cloaca  Maxima  may  bo  seen  two
smaller  arched  openings,  one  of  which  m  now
dry,  tbe  other  discbarges  the  waters  of  the  Aqua
Crabra.

M.  Agrippa,  during  bis  nedilesbip,  in  B.C  36,
showed  great  zeal  in  tbe  supervision  of  tbe  cloacae,
traversing  them  in  a  boat  and  cleansing  tbeni  at
his  own  expense  (Dio  Cass,  xiix  43).  He  con-
structed a  cloaca  t-o  drain  tbe  Campus  Martius,
which  was  connected  with  tbe  Tliermae  of  Agrippu
and  the  Aqua  Virgo,  This  was  discovered  under
Urban  VIII.,  and  is  at  present  in  use  under  tbe
name  of  the  Cbiavica  della  Rotonda.

Tbe  discoveries  made  at  various  times  show  that
the  network  of  smaller  drains  communicating  with
thew  main  cloacae  still  exists,  though  in  great  part
choked  up.  Brick  is  largely  used  in  their  con-
struction; sometimes  they  are  covered  in  with  a
barrel  vault,  sometimes  by  two  tiles  leaning
against  each  other,  sometimes  by  a  single  flag-
stone, but  in  some  cases  we  tiiid  a  primitive  ar-


rangement of  projecting  courses  of  stone  which
was  observed  in  tbe  drains  of  Athens.

The  expense  of  cleansing  and  repairing  these
cloacae  was,  of  course,  very  great,  aud  was  defrayed
partly  by  the  treasury  and  pai-tly  by  an  assess-
ment called  cioacarium.  Under  tbe  Republic  the
administration  of  the  sewers  was  intrusted  to  tbe
censors  and  aediles;  but  under  tbe  Empire  par-
ticular officers  were  appointed  for  that  puiiKtse,
cloaoarum  curatores,  mention  of  whom  is  found  iu
iuscriptioHS.  Under  the  Empire  condemned  crim-
inals were  employed  in  cleansing  the  cloacae.
(Plin.  Ep.  X.  44  [41].)  Tbeodoric  appointed  an
official  to  repair  the  drains,  a  striking  instance  of
the  esteem  iu  which  tbe  barbarians  held  Roman
civilizatiou.

On  tbe  legal  obligations  relnting  to  the  cloncne
at  Rome,  see  Schmidt,  Iiiterdicta  de  cloacis,  in
Zeitachrift  f.  gesch.  Rechtaiciat,  xv.  1,  pp.  51  foil. ;
aud  fur  further  details  as  to  the  Roman  cloacae,  see
Burn,  Jiome  and  the  Campagna ;  Middleton,  Jtome
in  1885  (ICI85);  id.  Itemaxm
of  Ancient  Jtome  (Loudon,
1H9-2).
Cioacarium. See Clo-

AC.\

Cloacina.  A  Roman  divin-
ity who  presided  over  sewers
(WoffCflf).  Moreproperiy,how-
ever,tbe  word  should  be  writ-
ten Cbiaciua  (from  cluo=.
pitrgo,  Plin,  XV.  29,  ^>),  being
so  called  because  at  tlie  end
of  tbe  war  with  the  Sabiues
tbe  Romans  purified  them-
selves In  the  vicinity  of  the
statue  of  Venus  with  myrtle
boughs  (Ptiuy,  1.  c).  Later,
tbe  similarity  of  spelling
caused  a  confusion  with
cloaca,  cloacina.  See  Lactant
i  20.
Cloak.  See  Abolla  ;  Amictl'S  ;  Lackrna  ;
Paenula; Pallium; Sagum.

CloanthuB.  One  of  tbe  companions  of  Aeneas,
from  whom  the  family  of  the  Cluentii  at  Rome
claimed  descent  (Verg.  Aen.  v.  122),

Clocka  See  IIorologium.
'  Clodia.  (1)  A  sister  of  Clodius  (q.  v.)  the  trib-
une, and  a  woman  of  the  most  abandoned  char-
acter. She  married  Q.  Metellus  Celcr,  and  was
suspected  of  having  poisoned  him.  She  is  suppoKed
to  have  been  the  Lesbia  to  whom  Catullus  wrote
so  many  of  bis  love  poems.  (See  Cati'I-LUS,  and
on  the  identity,  the  ingenious  conjecture  of  Dr.
A.  Gndeman,  on  Pint.  Cicero,  29,  iu  the  Amer.  Jour,
of  Philol.  vol.  xi.  no.  3.)  (2)  Tbe  younger  sister  of
the  preceding,  aud  equally  infamous  in  character.
She  married  Lncullus,  but  was  repudiated  by  him
for  her  scaudiilons  coudiict.

Clodia  LesE. See  Lkx.

ClodiuB  Albinua. See  At.m.vT'A

ClodliM  Fulcher,  PuDLit-s.  A  noted  Roman
demagogue,  the  enemy  of  Cicero.  He  first  appeiii-s
in  history  as  an  officer  of  Lncullus  in  Asm  (D.c.70).
In  tbe  following  year  be  accused  Catiline  of  extor-
tion in  Africa,  bnt  was  bribed  to  abandon  the  pros-
ecution. In  B.C.  62,  he  was  alleged  to  have  bad
an  intrigue  with  Ponipeia,  the  wife  of  lulius  Cue-


CLOELIA


374


CLYTAEMNESTRA


HUT,  tu  inout  wliotii  be  profaned  the  rites  of  the
Boua  Dea  by  eutering  the  bouae  of  Caesar  where
they  were  being  held ;  but  was  detected  by  Caesar's
mother,  and  subseqiieatly  tried  for  sacrilege,  bnt
escaped  couviction  by  lavish  bribery.  It  was  be-
cause of  this  affair  that  Caesar  divorceil  his  wife,
with  the  famons  remark  that  those  of  his  house-
hold must  be  above  aiispicioQ  (8uet.  lul.  74).  At
the  trial  Cloditis  bad  attempted  to  prove  au  alibi,
bnt  Cicero's  evideuce  showed  that  Clodius  was
with  him  in  Bonio  only  three  hours  before  he  pre-
tended to  have  been  at  loteramua.  In  order  to
revenge  himself  upon  Cicero,  Clodiiis  caused  him-
self to  be  adopted  into  a  plebeian  family,  that  he
might  obtain  the  formidable  power  of  a  tribune  of
the  plebs.  As  tribuue  in  56,  supported  by  the  tri-
nmvira  Caesar,  Pompey,  and  Crassns,  he  drove
Cicero  into  exile ;  but,  uotwithstauding  all  his  ef-
forts, he  was  uuable  to  prevent  the  recall  of  Cicero
in  the  following  year.  In  56,  Clodins  was  aedile,
and  attempted  to  bring  his  enemy,  T.  Annios  Milo,
to  trial.  Each  had  gladiators  in  bis  pay,  and  fre-
quent fights  took  place  in  the  streets  of  Rome  be-
tween the  two  parties.  At  the  time  when  Clodius
was  a  candidate  for  tbe  praetorship  and  Milo  for
the  consulship,  on  tbe  20th  of  Janaary,  B.C.  52,  on
tbe  Via  Appia,  near  Bovilloe,  an  affray  ensued  be-
tween tbeir  fottowers,  iu  which  Clodius  was  killed.
Tbe  mob  was  infuriated  at  the  death  of  its  favour-
ite; and  such  tumults  followed  at  the  burial  of
Clodins  that  Pompey  was  appointed  sole  consul
{cotmul  iine  coUega),  in  order  to  restore  order  to
tbe  State. See  Cicero;  Milo;  Pompeius.

Cloella.  A  Roman  virgin,  given  as  a  hostage  to
Porsenna.  According  to  the  old  Roman  legend,
wheu  Porsenna  and  the  Romans  made  a  peace  after
tbe  affair  of  Mucins  Scaevola  (q.  v.),  tbe  latter  peo-
ple gave  bostages  to  the  king — ten  youths  and  ten
maidens,  cbildrenof  noble  parents — as  a  pledge  that
they  would  truly  keep  tbe  peace  which  bad  been  pro-
claimed. Ithap[>eued,  asthecampoftheEtrnrians
was  near  the  Tiber,  that  Cloelia,  one  of  the  maid-
ens, escaped  with  her  companions  and  fled  to  the
brink  of  tbe  river;  and, as  the  Etmrians  pursued
them,  they  all  rushed  into  the  water  and  swam  in
safety  across  the  stream.  But  the  Romans,  jealous
of  their  reputation  for  good  foith,  sent  them  all
back  to  the  camp  of  Porseuua.  Not  to  be  ontdone
in  generosity,  the  monarch  gave  her  and  her  female
companions  their  freedom,  and  permitted  her  to
take  with  her  half  of  the  youths;  whereupon,  with
the  delicacy  of  a  Roman  maiden,  she  selected  those
only  who  were  of  tender  years.  Tbe  Romans
raised  au  equestrian  statue  iu  her  honour  on  tbe
highest  part  of  tbe  Via  Sacra  (Liv.  ii.  13).  There
is  another  story,  that  Tai*quiniu8  fell  upon  the  host-
ages as  they  were  conducted  into  tbe  Etrurian
camp,  and  with  the  exception  of  Valeria,  who  fled
back  to  tbe  city,  massacred  them  all  (PIin.xxx.iv.  13).

Klopea  Dlk6  or  Klopes  Graphs  (xXon^r  Siki;  or
ypa<p^).  The  action  for  theft  at  Athens  might  be
either  private  or  public,  and  in  tbe  former  casu
either  before  a  diaetetes  or  a  court,  probably  that
of  tbe  thesmothetae  (Meier,  AU.  Prooeaa,  p.  66,  with
Lipsius's  note  101).  The  various  modes  of  proce-
dure are  enumerated  by  Demosthenes  (e.  Aiidrot.  p.
601,  ^$26, 27).

CloHt. See  CuBicuLUM.

Clota  Aeatuaxium.  The  modem  Frith  of  Clyde
on  the  west«.'rn  coast  of  Scotland.


Clothing. See  for  (1)  Outer  garments,  Abolu,

AUCULA,  AMICTt'S,  BlRRUS,  BRACAK,  CAUPTR*,
CASTULA,  CeJTTO,  CHLAXTS,  COA  VK8T18,  CtTlL-
LUS,  CVCLAS,  DiPLOIS,  ENDROXIS,  EXOMIS,  FLAII-

MEU.M, .  Lacerna,  Lacinia,  Nebru,  Palla,  Pal-
LiCM,  Paludambstum,  Pkplum,  Rica,  Saoim.
SiNL'S,  Slffibulum,  Stntrksm,  Tsoilluv,  Toua,
Trecredipnum,  Tunica,  Umbo;  (3)  Unde^-g■^
ments,  Chirodota,  Cinoillvm,  Colobium,  Dal-

MATICA, EXPAPILLATlTtI, INDUSIUM, INTKRI'LA,

Paencla,  Recta,  Subucula,  Supparum,  Tunica;
(3)  Head-coverings,  Albooalercs,  Apex,  Caun-
TicA,  Calikndrum, Cacsia,  Cidaris,  Oaleri'n

MlTELLA, MITRA, OfFENDUE, PrTASCS, PlIJ.El'M.

Redihiculum,  Thbristrum,  Tiara,  Trn'tr*.
Vesica  ;  (4)  Coverings  fur  the  Feet,  Baxbak,  Cal-

CECS,CaUGA,  C0THURNC8,CRKPIDA,  DlABATHRt'M.

Endromis,  Fulhenta,  Galucar,  Ligula,  Mci^

LEL'6,  OBSTRAOCLUM,  PKRO,  PHAECASIDM,  SaXDA-
LIL'M,SOCCC8,SOLKA,TAI.ARIA,ZANCaA;  (5)Throit-

covering,  Focale  ;  (6)  Coverings  for  the  Anns  and
Hands,  DioiTALiA,  Mamica.

Clotho(KXu^w).  One  of  the  Fates ;  thespinuer
of  the  thread  of  destiny. See  Moerak.

Clouds  OF  Aristophanes. See  Nephelae.

Clown. See  Balatko  ;  Scurra.

Clnb. See  Clava.

Cluentius  HaUtua,  Aclus.  A  Romui  success-
fully defended  by  Cicero  (B.C.  66)  in  an  extaiil
oration  against  a  charge  of  poisoning.  (Cf.  Qaiut.
ii.  17,21).

Clupea  (called  by  the  Greek  writers  AspisV  X
town  of  Africa  Propria,  twenty-two  miles  east  of
Carthsge.  It  was  built  npou  a  promontory  which
was  shaped  like  a  shield.  Agathocles  (q.  v.)  seized
upon  this  place  when  he  landed  iu  Africa,  furtttinl
it,  and  gave  it,  from  the  shape  of  the  promontnr}'.
tbe  name  of  Aspis  ("a  shield"  in  Greek,  ssmf  a»
clupeus  iu  Latin).

Cliutnm.  Now  Chinsi;  a  town  of  £tmria,0D
the  banks  of  the  Clanis.  Its  more  ancient  OAmc
was  Camera.  The  Gauls  nuder  Brennus  besiege<l
it,  bnt  marched  to  Rome  without  taking  it.  It
was  at  Clusium  that  Porsenna  held  his  court ;  tod
near  this  city  he  erected  for  himself  the  spleodid
mausoleum  or  labyrinth  of  which  Pliny  has  trao»-
mitted  to  ns  a  description  on  the  anthority  nf
Varro. See  Labyrinthus.

Clusiiii.  A  surname  of  lanns,  whose  t<iDpI«
was  closed  {eliuum)  iu  peace.

Cl7mfo6  (KXv^m;).  (1)  A  daughter  of  Ocesans
and  Tethys,  who  married  lapetus,  by  whom  nhe
bad  Atlas,  Prometheus,  Menoetins,  and  Epiiof-
theus.  (2)  The  mother  of  Pbaethon.  (3)  A  feoisle
servant  of  Helen,  who  accompanied  her  in  het
flight  with  Paris.

ClTineiieldaa.  A  patronymic  given  to  Phs?-
thon's  sisters,  who  were  daughters  of  Clymen^.

Clytaenmeatra  (KXtmufunJirrpa).  A  dangbtrr
of  TylKla^u^  king  of  Sparta,  by  Leda.  She  wu
bom,  together  with  her  brother  Castor,  from  oot<
nf  the  eggs  which  her  mother  bronght  forth  tfUi
her  amour  with  Zens  under  tbe  form  of  a  swan.
She  married  Agamemnon,  king  of  Mycenae^  and
when  this  monarch  went  te  tbe  Trojan  War,  hf  left
his  wife  and  family,  and  all  his  affaire,  to  tbe  rare  t4
bis  relation  Aegistbns.  Bnt  the  latter  proved  un-
faithful to  his  trust,  corrupted  Clytaemnestr*,  and


CLYTIA


37fi


C0CALU8


amirped  the  tbroue.  Agamemnon,  on  bis  retnrn
borne,  was  murdered  by  bis  guilty  wife,  who  was
beiBelf  afterwards  slain,  along  with  Aegisthus,  by
Orestes,  son  of  the  deceased  munurcb.  For  a  more
detailed  acconnt,  see  the  articles  Agamemnon  and
Orestes.

Clytla  (KXin-m).  In  Greek  mythology  au  ocean
nymph,  beloved  by  the  Sun-god,  wbo  deserted  her.
She  was  changed  into  the  heliotrope,  a  flower  which
is  fupposed  always  to  turn  its  head  in  the  direction
of  the  son's  movement.

Cneph  (Ki'^<^)  or  Cnuphia  (Kvov^ic).  An  Egyp-
tian deity  regarded  as  the  creator  of  the  world.
and  represented  in  the  form  of  a  serpent.

Cnidiu  (Kviios).  A  town  and  promontory  of
Doris  in  Caria,  at  the  extremity  of  a  promontory
called  Triopium.  The  founder  of  the  place  is  said
to  have  been  Triopas.  From  him  it  received  at
first  the  name  of  Triopium,  which  at  a  later  period
was  confined  merely  to  the  promontory  on  which
it  stood  (Herod,  i.  174).  Aphrodite  was  the  chief
deity  of  the  place,  and  hail  three  temples  erected
to  her,  nnder  the  several  suruames  of  Doritis,
Acraea,  and  Euploea.  In  the  last  of  these  stood  a
celebrated  statue  of  the  goddess,  the  work  of  Prax-
iteles (Pansan.  i.  1 ;  Pliu.  xxxvi.  5).  Nicomedes  of
Bithynla  wished  to  purchase  this  admirable  pro-
duction of  the  chisel,  and  actually  ofiei*ed  to  liqui-
date the  debt  of  Cnidns,  which  was  very  consider-
able, if  the  citizens  would  cede  it  to  him  ;  but  they
refused  to  part  with  what  they  esteemed  the  glory
of  their  city  (Plin.  1.  c).  Off  Cnidns  took  place  in
B.C.394  a  famous  sea-fight  between  the  Athenians,
under  Conon,  and  the  Spartans,  under  Pisander,
in  which  the  former  were  victorious.  The  shores
of  Cnidus  furnished  in  ancient  times,  as  they  do
now,  a  great  abundance  of  fish.  The  wines  were
famous,  and  Tbeophrastus  speaks  of  the  Cuidian
onions  as  of  a  particular  species,  being  very  mild
and  not  occasioning  tears.  Cnidns  was  the  birth-
place of  the  famous  mathematician  and  astron-
omer Endoxns;  of  Agatharchidas,  Theopompus,
and  Ctesias.  Excavations  made  at  Cnidns  in  1857-
58  led  to  the  discovery  of  many  fine  marbles,  some
of  which  may  now  he  seen  in  the  British  Museum.

Cnoans  (Km*<rdr,  more  correct  than  Cnossi's,
Kiwra-or,  if  we  follow  the  language  of  coins ;  also
GNoaus).  The  royal  city  of  Crete,  ou  the  north-
em  coast,  at  a  small  distance  from  the  sea.
Its  earlier  name  was  Caeratas,  which  appellation
was  given  also  to  the  iucousiderahle  stream  that
flowed  beneath  its  walls.  It  was  indebted  to  Mi-
nos for  all  its  importance  and  splendonr.  That
monarch  is  said  to  have  divided  the  island  into
three  portions,  in  each  of  which  he  founded  a  large
city ;  and  fixing  bis  residence  at  Cnosus,  it  became
the  capital  of  the  kingdom.  It  was  here  that
Daedalus  (q.  v.)  cultivated  his  art  and  planned  the
celebrated  labyrinth.

Coa  Vratia,  also  Coa  (a.  pi.).  The  Coau  cloth
or  gamieDtfl,  mentioned  by  various  authors,  but
most  frequently  by  the  Latin  poets  of  the  Augus-
tanAge(e.g.Tibull.  ii.3,53;  4,29;  Propert. i. 2, 2 ;
ii.  1 ;  V.  (iv.)  2,  23 ;  Hor.  Carm.  iv.  13,  13 ;  5a*.  i.  2,
101).  From  their  expressions  we  learn  that  it  had
a  great  degree  of  transparency,  that  it  was  re-
markably fine,  that  it  was  chiefly  worn  by  women
of  loose  reputation,  and  that  it  was  sometimes
dyed  purple  (Hor.  Corn*.  1.  c.)  and  enriched  with
■tripes  of  gold. It  has  been  supposed  to  have


Coa  VMlla {Jfuf.  Borbon.  viil.  8.)

been  made  of  silk,  because  in  Cos  silk  was  spun
and  woven  at  an  early  period,  so  as  to  obtain  a
high  celebrity. See  Sericum.

Coactor.  A  name  applied  to  collectors  of  va-
rious sorts — e.g. to  the  servants  of  the  puhlicani
or  farmers  of  the  taxes,  who  collected  the  revenues
for  them  (Cic.  yVo  Hub.  Post.  11,  $  30) ;  also  to  those
who  collected  the  money  from  the  purchasers  of
things  sold  at  a  public  auction  (id.  Pro  Ciuent.  G4,
$  180).  The  father  of  Horace  was  a  coactor,  but
there  are  no  means  of  determining  to  which  class
he  belonged  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  6, 86 ;  Snet.  Fit.  Hot:).

Cobet,  Carel  Gabriel,  one  of  the  most  acute
of  modern  text-criticn  and  a  Hellenist  of  great
learning,  was  born  at  Paris,  November  28tb.  18i;J.
He  studied  at  Tlie  Hague  and  at  the  Uuiversity  of
Leyden  (1831-40),  and  showed  so  much  ability  as  a
philologist  and  student  of  classical  autiquity  that
in  1840  the  Dutch  government  sent  him  to  Italy
to  pursue  certain  archteological  investigations.  In
1844  he  was  admitted  to  the  doctorate  at  Leyden,
and  in  1846  became  professor.  Ho  died  October
26th,  1889.  His  publications  are  numerous  and  of
great  value,  especially  in  the  line  of  textual  criti-
cism, for  which  he  showed  great  originality,  sagac-
ity, and  insight.  They  are  as  follows :  Obaervalionn
Critioae  in  Platonis  t'omici  BeligitUm  (Amsterdam,
1840);  Oratio  de  Arte  Interpretandi  Grammatices  ft
Crifuxi — his  inaugural  address — (1847);  l*ravfaUo
Lectionum  de  Sittoria  VeUre  (1853);  Vartae  Lectiotm
quibut  Continentur  Obtervationea  Crilicaf  in  Scripton-if
Graeco$ (1864;  2d  ed.  1873);  an  edition  of  Hyperides
(1856);  of  Lysias  (Amsterdam,  1863);  of  Xeno-
phon's  Bellmica  (1862);  of  Diogenes  LJiertius,  in
the  Didot  ooUectiou  (Paris,  1850;  2d  ed.  1862);
Mitcellanea  Pkilohtfica  et  Critica  (1873) ;  itisceUanra
Critica  (1876);  Obiter rationes  Criticae  in  Diony$ii
ffalioamaseentu  Antiquitatet  Romanat  (1877);  and
Collectanea  Critica  (1878).  He  also  edited  for  many
years  the  philological  journal  Mnemonyne  (Biblio-
theca  Philologica  Batava),  published  at  Leyden.
See  Hartniann,  in  the  Bibtiogr.  Jahrbvch,  xii.  pp.  53
foil.  (Beriin,  1889);  klDeCarofo  Gabriele  Cofrf/ (Ber-
lin, 1890).

CocflluB  (KufcaXor).  A  mythical  king  of  Sicily,
who  kindly  received  Daedalus  (q.  v.)  on  bis  flight
from  Crete,  and  with  the  assistance  of  his  daugh-
ters put  Minos  to  death,  when  the  latter  came  ii-
pursnit  of  Daedalus.


Cocceius  lT«nfa. Sco  Nkrva.

CoccygiUB  i  ro  KoMitvytoy  nfjocl.  "Cnctoo-Monn-
taiit."  A  luuiitituiii  i>f  Argolis,  lictvreuii  Halicd  and
]U>rniiou£.  lU  |trevioii»i  niiuiu  was  Thoninx,  but
it  nifiiivoil  tlie  ap|i«IIatioii  of  Coooy;;iiis  from  the
cin:uii)>lnnc«  that  Zeus  waa  mctamorplioseii  tbere
iiitn  the  liini  railed  Coccyx  (Ko«i'f)  by  tbe  Orwkn.
Ou  tU  Hiimmit  was  a  temiile  aacrnd  to  that  gwl.
oiul  aiiotUor  of  Apollo  at  the  bu&e  (Pauaan.  ii.  36).

Cochd  (K«x'i)'  A  city  mi  tho  TlgiT«,  uear  Clc»-
ipli'vii.

Coclutum  Promontorlum.  A  proinoittor)'  of
Bnittiuiii  in  Lower  Ital.v.lielnw  ihc  SiiniMSt'.vhic'iiiit.
The  tnoileni  imiiie  is  Ca]iO  Stilo.  It  tiiarkcc)  tho
Kcpiirntiou  lK>tn-cDii  t)i«  loiiinii  uihI  8i<-iUan  seaa.

Cock-figbtiug S*'*>  r.Ar.i.rs;  Vk.sationrs.

Coclea  or  Cochlea  (K'>;(Xiaf).  viiit^h  pntperly
nif:iii!i  a  titiail,  wnn  alttu  ummI  t-»  nifjtiify  ulhur
ihiiigH  ufa  Kjiinil  fnrut.

(1)  A  Mrcw.  one  of  the  nicchanlcat  powers,  so
iiaiiK^d  rroni  itM  spiral  furiii,  which  rcwniblrs  tbo
worming  of  a  shell.  The  iiiitioxtvl  ilhistt'ntio:i  rep-
ffj^nta  a  i.'htth(*8-]iri'K.s,  tVniii  a  painr-iDg  on  the  wall
of  tbo  Clialcidioum  of  Cuuiacbia  at  Putnp«ii,  wbioli


j>«rHoii  cotit^I  gu  in  antl  out  without  »Riinlin|c  Uta
binU  an  op|Kirtuuit,v  of  Hyiui;  away,  rtobiiuldcr, .
bowuver,  rnaiiilaiiiit  Ibul  the  coclea  in  qiicttlion  nu
iinlhiiig  iiion;  than  a  portciilliit  {cataphractat  rui»cil
by  a  screw,  wbirb  iitterpretutiou  duusi  uot  appMr<
so  probable  uh  the  uue  given  above.  S««  Vami,i
It.  Ii.  iiib.^.

Coclftar  iKox^taf}tov  XiaTpiw).  A  kind  of  RpooD
wbiub  appeant  to  have  tenninuti^d  with  a  poiut
at  oik;  euil,  and  at  tbe  otbcr  wa^  broat]  unci  holluiir
Iik(!  our  own  Hpiion».  The  pointed  cud  was  u*ed
for  drawing  sttatld  (cccteae)  out  of  their  •tlioll^  antl,
catiii);  Ibcni,  u  lii-uoe  il  derived  ita  name ;  and  tli<
broaitor  part  fur  eating  egga,  etc.  Martial  men^
tioua  boti)  these  nsesadf  the  coclcar(xiT.  1*21):
Sum  cncl«w  bsblu  lec  ntn  mlau  alllbi  dtU


OodM,  or  ClatltMprMa (PampflM  I^lnllne  I

iti  worko<1  by  two  npri^bt  acrewn  (cocleae)  precisely
ill  the  aauie  iiianiier  as  our  own  liueii-pi-osses.  A
■i:n*\r  of  Ibe  luiniv  (lescriptioii  wait  al<Hi  used  in
oil  and  wine  prosHca.  The  tliri'ail  of  the  screw,
for  which  the  Latin  language  has  no  a|ipropiistc
tprm,  is  callml  wtf}lK6•^'Ktov  iti  Greek.

(*^l  A  tupinil  pinup  fi^r  rniKiiiK  water,  invented
by  Arcliiuii'de*,  friiiiv  ulioiu  il  liaa  aver  «ineo  been
callwl  tlif  ArcltiitKMleuii  Korew.  It  is  dfscrilK-tl  at
Iciiglb  by  Vltriiviui)  (x.  111.  A  pump  of  tliix  kiuit
wax  iDit-d  for  diMcbarging  tbft  bilge-wator  in  the
sbiji  of  llitrro.  which  woa  bniU  iiuder  the  diruc-
tioiisuf  ArcliiuitMb<.s.

(3)  A  ppcullar  kind  of  doar.  through  which  the
wild  beii4rM  piL^Acd  frnni  ttit^ir  dens  into  tbe  an-iiu
of  the  ttM)]diitbt'atn?.  It  coiisist«l  of  a  eircular
cage,  open  ou  one  sidt*  likn  a  lantern,  which
worked  upon  a  pivnt  and  withrii  a  Klietl.  like  the
nuiubiiicM  ui*.e4l  in  Ibo  convents  ntid  fuuurlling  hos-
pitnls  of  Italy,  termed  vott;  ho  t)iat  any  particular
btraat  coub!  W  removed  fnuii  Jl-o  den  into  the  are-
na inerely  by  turniiiK  it  itjund.  and  wilhoiil.  ihn
possibility  of  nu>re  than  one  itMraping  at  tb«  iuinn>
time;  and  therefore  it  'm  rccnnimended  by  Varro
as pecatiarly  ada]>ted for nii uvi;iry.  t!.o that u


Caolcftr<a.  ipooiu (.Vhmo  Bortimieo.)

Codear  waa  kIm  the  aamc  given  U>  a  mil
measure  like  onr  spoonful.  According  to  Stwoi'
nius  Faniiius,  it  was  |^  of  tbe  vi/otiiut.  ge«  Ivi-
Ojifi.  xvi.  36,  :i:  and  the  arliclu  I^igl'I^.

Coclearliiin  and  Coohlearium.  A  ]>tiioc  <rl)«»
soailn  \vere  fatteitiHl  for  the  tables  of  KoniaugpOT-
niands.

Coclea,  Pi'MLifH  IIoHATirs  (given  hy  Sipbuhr
an  miirciiK  H'vrntiiis).  A  Jtoinan  who.  at  tinrt  "it^
Sp.  Larliiii^  and  Tilus  Herniiniua,  and  llien  tio'*'
uppiMi-d  tlif  wholff  army  of  Poraenna  at  tiii-lw*!
of  ibu  Snblitiian  bridge,  M'liile  Iiia  coiiipaiiidlis  I*^
bind  hiui  were  cutting  otftbn  coniiuuitieatiiiD**itt>
tbe  other  sbure.  When  lite  briil^  was  dMtmr*^-
Codes,  after  uddrewiing  anburt  prayt^r  to  the  god  <*
tbo  Tilier,  leaped  into  tbe  stream,  an<l  itwanj  •er'**
in  aafety  nitli  bin  ormii.  An  a  mark  of  gmtitiU)'-
evcry  inUabitaiit.  while  famine  was  raginit 'i^"
tbe  city,  brought  him  all  the  pro  visions  he  cool"
stint  hiinstlf  of;  and  tbe  Slatn  aflerwanls  ™i>w
a  atatut*  in  hiin  and  gave  him  aa  ninclt  Uitd  **
be  could  pluitgli  iiMtiid  in  a  day  tLiv.  ii.  !(*)■  ^
Polybina  relates  lln*  ^tory,  Horatiae  defi-idl*"!  tl*
bridge  alone  from  the  lintt  and  then  pcriAb^' '"
thu  river.  Macaiilay's  spirited  ballad  on  tlief<i^
Jed  IK  familial-  to  all.

Cooossates.  A  people  in  Aquitania  In  GM^
rocntioncd  along  with  the  Tnrbelli.

Cocylium  fKofci'Xtw).  An  Aeolian  cityiiiMr**
wbi'M-  inbubitants  ar«  mentioneil  by  SeDDplmi)-

Coc^tUB  (Kaxitup,  "  Rivor  of  Wailing  "L  XP^'
VT  it)  KpiriiH,  a  tinl>utary  of  ihe  Acheron.  IJkot^'
Achcrun,  tbe  L'ocytus  w.is  Kuppo^fd  In  IwconnKtcl


i


CODANUS  SINUS


877


CODEX  ACCEPTI  ET  EXPENSI


irith  tbe  lower  world,  aod  hence  came  to  be  de-
scribed  as  a  river  in  the  lower  world. See  Hadks.

Codanua  Sinua.  One  of  the  Ancient  oames  of
the  Baltic.  Hela  (iii.  3,  6)  represents  it  as  fnll  of
large  and  small  islands,  the  largest  of  which  he
calls  Scandinavia ;  bo  also  Pliny  {iv.  13).

Codex,  dim.  CodldUua  ( the  older  form  being
eaudac:  Cato,  ap.  Front.  Epigt.  ad  M.  AnUm.  i.  2).
A.  word  originally  signifying  the  tmnk  or  stem  of
a  tree  (Vei^.  Georg.  ii.  30),  and  hence  need  to  desig-
nate anything  composed  of  pieces  of  wood.

(1)  A  log  of  wood,  attached  as  a  punishment  to
the  feet  of  slares,  which  they  dragged  with  tbeni,
and  on  which  they  also  eat  sometimes  (Plant.  Poe*.
T.  3, 39),

Ci)  Boats  on  the  Tiber,  which  may  originally
have  been  like  the  Indian  canoes,  or  were  con*
Btmcted  of  several  roughly  hewn  planks  nailed
together  in  a  rude  and  simple  manner,  were  called
ttartt  eaudicariae,  or  oodicariat,  or  caudtceae  (Feat.
p.  46  M. ;  Varr.,  Sail.  ap.  Non.  p.  535, 13 ;  Sen.  Brer.
ni.  13,  4).  The  snrname  of  Candex  given  to  Ap-
pius  Claudius  must  bo  traced  to  this  signification.
Ill  later  times  the  name  was  given  to  ships  em-
ployed in  transporting  the  corn  ftom  Ostia  to
Borne;  and  the  sailorsengaged  in  this  trafiSc,  called
mtidicarii  or  oodtcarii,  formed  a  corporation.

(3)  Tbe  name  of  codex  was  given  to  wooden  tab-
lets bound  together  and  lined  with  a  coat  of  wax,
for  tbe  purp<»e  of  writing  upon  them;  and  when,
at  a  later  age,  parchment  or  paper  or  other  materi-
als were  substituted  for  wood,  and  pnt  together  in
tbe  shape  of  a  book,  the  name  of  oodex  was  often
used  as  aynonymons  with  Hber,  or  book  (Cic.  Verr.
i.  46,  $  119),  It  was  the  name  more  particularly
given  to  an  aooouut-book  or  ledger,  codex  acoepti
ft  expen»i  (q.  ▼.)■  In  tbe  time  of  Cicero  we  And  it
also  applied  to  the  tablet  on  which  a  bill  was  writ-
ten. At  a  still  later  period,  during  the  time  of  tbe
emperors,  the  word  was  used  to  express  any  col-
lection of  laws  or  constitutions  of  the  emperors,
whether  made  by  private  iudividuals  or  by  public
autbority.  See  Codex  Orboorianus  ;  Codkx
Ii-sTisiANKus ;  Codex  Theodosianub.

Tbe  word  (Mdex  is  largely  used  by  scholars  of  the
MS.  editions  of  the  classics  that  are  preserved  in
the  libraries  of  Europe,  and  date  some  from  tbe
fifth  to  tbe  tenth  centuries  a.d.,  but  the  greater
nnmberfrom  the  thirteenth  to  the  fifteentli.  They
are  of  parchment  (folio  or  quarto  size),  usually
with  marginal  notes  written  by  other  hands  tliau
those  of  tbe  original  copyist  of  the  codex.  (See
LiBEK ;  Paleography  ;  Textuai.  Criticism.)
Tbey  are  named  (1)  after  i>ersous  wbo  once  owue<1
them,  as  the  Codex  Petavinus  of  Ovid,  named
after  one  Fetavias,  and  the  Codex  Vossiauus  of
the  same  classic,  after  Voss;  and  (S)  more  com-
niouly  after  tbe  places  where  tbey  are  kept.  Thus
there  are  in  England,  Codices  Britanuici  or  Lon-
dineusea  (British  Museum),  CodicesCautabrigienses
(Cambridge),  and  Codices  Oxouienses  (Oxford).
These  last  are  also  often  noted  as  Codices  Bodleiaui
(from  the  Bodleian  Library).  In  France,  one  tiiids
Codices  Parisini  (Paris),  Codices  Bliundifontani
(  FoQtainebleau  ),  Codices  Sangermanenses  ( St.
Germain),  Codices  Montepessulani  ( MontpelUer ),
rtc.  In  Holland,  there  are  Codices  Amsteloda-
uiiensea  (Amsterdam)  and  Codices  Leidenses  (Ley*
den  ) ;  in  Belgium,  Codices  Bruxelleuses  (  Brus-
sels) and  Codices  Blandiniani  (Blankenberg);  in


Denmark,  Codices  Haunienses  (Copenhagen) ;  in
Switzerland,  Cotlices  Benienses  (Berne),  Codices
Ba8ilieusea(B&]e),  Codices  Einsidlenses(EinHiedelu),
Codices  Sangallennes  (St-Oallen),  and  Tnricensea
(Ziirich);  in  Germany,  Codices  Argentoratcnses
(Strassburg),  Codices  Berolinenses  (Berlin), Codicea
Colonienaes  (Cologue),  Codices  Palatini  (Heidel-
berg), Codices  Fuldenses  (Fulda),  Codices  Car-
oliruhenses  ( Carlsruhe ),  Codices  Kegiomontanl
(Kouigaberg),  Codices  Guelferbytaui  (Wolfenbllt-
tel),  Codices  Monacenses  (Munich),  Codices  Lip-
siensea  (Leipzig ),  and  Codices  Vratislavienses
(Breslau),  etc. ;  in  Austria,  Codices  Vindobonenses
(Vienna)  and  Codicea  Bndcuses  (Buda) ;  in  Rus.siA,
Codices  Petropolitani  (St.  Petersburg) ;  in  Spain,
Codices  Matriteuses  (Madrid)  and  Codices  Tolo-
tanl  (Toledo).  lu  Italy,  the  terminology  is  va-
ried. The  great  collections  are  at  (1)  Florence,  in
the  Bibliotbeca  Laurentiaua  of  the  Church  of  Saa
Lorenzo,  comprising  MSS.  from  the  Public  Library
of  San  Marco  founded  by  Cosimo  de'  Medici,  and
from  the  collection  of  Peter  Leopold.  Hence  Flor-
entine codices  are  styled  variously,  Florentini,
Laureutiani,  8.  Marci,  Medicei,  and  Leopoldini
Laurentiani ;  (2)  Milan,  where  the  codices  are
called  either  Mediolanenses,  from  the  name  i>f  tbe
city,  or  Ambrosiani,  from  the  Ambrusian  Library;
(3)  Venice,  where  they  are  calletl  Veneti,  or  (from
the  Library  of  St.  Mark)  Veneti  Marciani,  or  simply
Marciani;  (4)  Turin,  Codices  Taurinenses;  (5)  Ve-
rona, Codices  Veronenses;  (6)  Home,  where  the
great  storehouse  is  the  Vatican  Library  (Biblio-
theoa  Vaticana),  enriched  by  MSS.  from  many
sources— e.  g.  from  Fulviua  Orsini,  from  Heidel-
berg, from  the  Library  of  Urbino,  etc.  Hence  th»
Codicea  Vaticani  often  receive  names  to  specify
more  particularly  their  original  aourcea,  as  Codices
Ursiniani,  Codicea  Palatini,  Codicea  Urbinates,  etc,
(7)  Naples,  where  tbe  codices  are  called  Neapol  itani,
or  (from  the  old  Bourbon  Library)  Borbouici.  A
complete  list  of  Latin  MSS.  dowu  to  tbe  seventh
century  is  given  by  Prof.  Hfibner,  in  bis  Grtmdrtss
z.  (ie9ckichte  u.  Eneycl.  der  Elasa.  Pkilologie  (Berlin,
1876).

The  diminutive  oodidllus  was  used  in  much  the-
aame  way  as  oodex.  Beapeoting  ita  meaning  la
connection  with  a  peraon'a  will,  see  TESTAMENTtJM.

Codex  Acceptl  et  Bxpenal  A  book  in  which
the  memoranda  of  income  and  outgo  hastily  jotted
dowu  in  the  adveraaria,  or  day-book,  were  carefully
posted  once  a  month.  It  undoubtedly  consisted
of  a  aeries  of  double  pages  (Plin.  B,  y.  ii,  $  23) —
one  debit  (acceptum),  the  other  credit  (ejcpeneum) ;
hence  the  book  is  sometimes  called  oodioee.  The
entries  were  made  in  a  certain  ordo,  which  is  much
iusiBte<l  on  as  being  of  the  essence  of  the  codex,  as
opposed  to  the  adveraaria  {Clcpro  Itoac.  Com.  ii.  6,
7).  Now  this  ordo  was  no  doubt  chronological,  tl>e
date  by  year  and  day  being  given,  but  if  it  wna
only  this,  it  could  be  regarded  as  little  else  than  a
fair  copy  of  the  advemaria.  So  we  must  supjiose
that  tbe  codex  was  somewhat  like  the  journal  of
modern  book-keepers.

The  codex  was  sufiBcient  for  tbe  ordinary  houae-
holder;  but  of  course  those  wbo  had  extuuRive
business  transactions — such  as  the  State,  raunici-
palities,  companies,  bankers— had  to  keep  ledgera
(rationea,  libri  ratioHum),  each  personal  or  nominal
account  being  called  ratio.  Private  individuals
too,  who  had  large  property,  had  often  to  keep
separate  books  for  different  beads  of  their  busineaa


CUUEX  UKEUOKUNL'S


S78


CODrCAfill


— e.g.  tho  ralt-Mihi-in,  wtiuti  wen;  urrutuits  of  iii-
VMtuieutJi  uiailn  uiid  dividRndH  rRcriviil.

For  other  i>otiit«,  snch  oa  thn  ivlatinii  of  Iron-

teriptieia  iiontiita  to  tliu  codex,  olid  the  JiiiportAtiec

the  hittor  ill  ftttahliMliing  d  lit-iTuI  <ibii)|ratiou,

LiTt'RiiAitL'M Orlkiatiu  niid tho ltt«niture

^t(*d  iiiidprthut  h<^>.-i<1.

Codex  OreEorianaa,  A  coUectiou  of  imperial
Buruau  couatitutious  ur  i;rt»ctuietit«  luade  by  ouc
Grf};;uriiitiu«, of  nhotii  iiutbiug  elite  in  known ;  ita
dnti.^  in  nut  eiirtiiir  lliaii  a.u.  31^,  aH  iL  coiitaitii-d  an
errmplum  rdirti  thorlrliani  fl  MnxitHiatii  of  th:it
yi'nr  {f'nll.  l^g.  Mtm.  ct  Hum.  vi.  4).  It  cottipritKil
unncluioiitsof  tho  iiui|>«rui-H  helViiMi  BupltmitiH  Hv-
verus  (aj>.  l*J5~*.Jll)  and  Utuclutinu  liiid  Sluxiiiiiaii
(A.P. '^^-atte),  aud  (lottoibly  even  sdiiil-  ivt  fur  back
itn  Hadriau  (a.I>.  117-1:M<).  It  waa  divided  into  hI
[eoat  thirty  buukn  —  the  books  t)eiu)(  BUbdiridwl
tiitti  "titles"  and  ''nibrlett,"  tho  topica  l>ein^  ar-
i:TinKi>d  after  tli«  order  of  tbp  Perpnnial  Kdict  of
SalviitN  IiilianiiH.

Codex  lustlnianeiia.  Tbo  motives  by  vfaich
the  cnii>cror  Justinian  waa  induced  to  cmlify  tlie
eonotnioutH  of  hiiimL-lf  aud  earlier  eDi|>croti)  were
tho  ttearcily  of  copied  of  the  Code  of  Theod(i»)ns,
and  the  coi)8«<|nei)t  divorgeuco  between  the  law
thiTR  laid  donii  and  that  actually  appUeil  in  the
■courlfl  (Cod.  i.  17,  2. 17V  Accnrdingly,  in  February,
A.i).  it'i.'i,  he  a|i[N>iiited  a  roniini^uin  of  rudiHea-
tion  of  loll  pi>r!4onH,  ninoiiK  them  liein<;Tnboiiiaiiu8,
who  jdaytMl  no  iinportaiit  a  piirt  in  the  leKinlattvo
work  of  the  next  few  yeunt,  and  \\  bo  |>erhu|>i«  hu^-
^ehte^l  Ut  IiIh  uiatd^r  hw  whole  suUeiue  of  \egu\  re-
forui.  Their  tnalriiuliotis  were  to  eoiupile  a  ttiiiKle
•CUile  out  of  thoite  of  (jrepmiiniiH,  Heruiu^eiiiiiiiUH,
And  TheodiMinn  It.,  and  the  iaiin-rial  conntitntiuiia
iMitfd  tiiiiee  the  enuvtnieut  of  the  UiAt,  whether  by
JufHinian  himself  or  hiti  prwlewfutoni.  They  were
authorized  tu  uniti  all  that  wha  unne4:e«siiry  or
8ti|>erilnouH  (e.g.  priMinbUwl,  to  ii*coiieilo  »tich  eii-
aeliiieitlA  Oh  weru  ineoii»iMteiLt  with  cue  uiiottier,
tuid.  where  convenience  r(^clni^ed,  to  combine  nnv-
eml  into  ou<*,  or  Co  make  an.v  nlleraliouK  iit  indi-
vidual conoCitulioiin  whit-li  they  itiiould  dt^em  ner-
owittry,  Tho  Miparutu  Imwm,  whether  teehiiiadl^
fdU-tn,  rctniftUt,  or  dccrttn,  wore  to  be  aiT;iu)jed  in
cliroiiolo^ieul  ordor  lUKliT^eijenc  titles:  and  eat' h.
no  far  tut  wait  |MHtiibt<%  iduiitiQcd  by  date  and  the
uniiie  of  the  priiiee  to  wliotn  it  oweil  its  enavtiuent.  |
The  Work  was  eiinipleted  in  A(iril,  a.i*.  b'£i,  and  I
wiui  |inMi)tlied  under  the  natiie  C'o«lev  IilstiuiaiieUB,
uith  force  of  law  from  thi>  Itith  of  tbat  month.
The  older  cottiRCH  aud  eim)ttitiitionti  wort*  ul  the
Haiue  tiuiQ  deprived  of  all  validity,  and  it  waMcveti
forbidden  to  appeal  l«  any  liye»  cited  in  (lie  writ-
ings of  the  juristj*  if  they  had  been  iueoi-jmnited.
even  in  a  niodilled  form,  in  the  ueur  code.

lu  the  interval  of  four  years  and  u  half  iM^lweeii
this  date and the couipletiou of  tho liistitiiteti  |
(}fovumber,  a.d.  r>:i3|,  Jmttinian  had  insned  a  larjje
uuuibcr  of  new  eoiiatitntions  of  his  own. Tbis  '■
«eenied  to  liim  to  ncwswiutie  a  revinion  uf  tlieCodei.  I
Accordingly  in  the  next  year  lie  ap(Hiinled  a  new  '
couiuiiiutiiiu,  ciMiKitttin^  uf  Triboiiiaiiuit,  liorotheiiH,
pnife^aoral  llerytmi,  and  three  other*,  for  this  por-
}Kitif. Within  a  few  months  iNovember,  A.D.  5iH)
the  orit;iualciH]e  and  the  con^titntioua  i«iiied  aftt-r  '
ita  eiinettneiit  were  deprive^I  of  all  authority  aud
wilhdmwn from rirculatioii,  their place bciu^
tukeu by the fVxVj- HeftrtHaf PravlecHuuia,  ur


Cmlex  which  ha:(  come  down  to  us.  In  this  Jtuitln-
iau's  own  cunstittitiuitit  wetv  itii:or}ior3ted.  an  well
06  many  others  which  the  earlier  code  had  not  «ni-
tained.  The  dniix  Uci>rU(ar  {'rartflioiti*  cousl*ti
of  twelve  bi>tkk»>,each  of  which  \»  divide<l  into  "ti
tlvN^  aud  "rubrics";  the  Hiugle  couMitntioiH  ta^
arranged  iiuder  their  wveral  titles  in  the  order  i^
time  aud  with  the  uamCH  of  the  e[UiH-r(.>rs  b>-  wlim
they  Were  rropeclively  umde.  and  their  datcK

The  cnucttuent«  in  tliiM  code  do  uot  go  TurtL
buck  than  thoeo  of  Hadrtau.  and  those  of  lii>  ii
mediate  iiuce«s«or»  are f.-w  in number. The  ^^
raii};«ment  correitponiU  tolerably  riotiely  with  tL)
of  the  Digest,  the  oeveu  parts  into  which  the  fifej
Woks  of  the  latter  are  distributed  ausweriu;; f,7
btKfkM  i.-ix.  of  the  cmIc;  but  the  matter  of  tlie  lost
three  booktt  of  the  coile  is  hardly  treated  of  iu  t)*^
UigCHt. S<-e  iNsTITl  TIOXICS,

Codex  Re»criptu«. See  Pauiii'^kst.

Codex  Theodosiainu.  lu  A.t>.  i^,  llipvdiuliu
El.,  wkofio  capital  was  Coustautiuople.  otinuniiin-
cated  to  tlie  l^uate  his  retHduttou  to  fona  ■  n«i-
pllatioii  of  the  general  cou»tifntiou!t  issued  f^
the  time  of  Cuiwtaiitiuu  \\.V.  'ifMy-'Xyj)  lo  hir»'*D
day.  id^r  the  uiotlel  of  the  Cuilices  Grcgoriaiiu*
and  Herniogoniauiu;  aud  appoiuled  a  riinuniMKU
of  a  lawyer  and  eight  Slate  ofliciaU  l«  eiccnw
the  seheiue.  Nothing,  however,  was  douD-  fit  Wl
jeara.  In  a.d.  4U5,  a  uu'w  eowuii»>iou  was  »p-
pointed,  pR-aidod  over,  like  the  earlier  one,  I'f  Aa-
titicbus,  ami  the  imjicrial  iuatruclioiui  were  xxfnX-
ed.  The  reioill  of  their  labours,  kuowu  u  tkl
I  Theodusiuu  Cude,  was  published  in  Febriao,*J^
A\V*,  with  statutory  force  from  Juiuary  1  lu  tk>
j  foUowing  year.

j  The  constitutions  are  nrmiiged  tu  obitniDlogin'
I  order,wnder''litle*t''aud"  rubrics." iusixtefukwk^
The  tint  live,  which  uoutaiu  utost  of  theeuaottoMiit
rulatiug  to  private  law,  are  iu  form  modsIM  ""
the  coiiimeuiaries  on  the  Edict.  Thr  niilli  '■"
the  eighth  books  consist  princi|Uilly  of  adiuiiiiBO'
tivo  and  constitution  at  onlinunces;  the  uiiitli  >^
criiuiiitti  law  ;  the  tenlli  and  eleventh  rcUlet'iiU
Uuaneiul  system,  aud  in  part  tu  procodiirr;  lb''
in-einh  lu  the  fifteenth,  to  the  coustitutioii  uJ
adniluistraiitui  of  towns  and  other  coritofatiuw.
and  the  sixteenth  c«>n1ain.s  the  conslitntiuiMn^i'''
deal  with  the  Church  uud  the  eoolestasliul  0*"^
iu  general.

Our  knowledge  of  this  code  fs  denv«l  (*•'''.'
from ineoniplele Mj».s.,  partly from rl»  cwW  *
Jiistiniaii,  and  partly  fnmi  au  epitome  of  ilc^''^
lenlH ill the ISreriariim ( q.  v.  ). The  vidw''''
oditiou  of  J.  Oolhofri'dus  (0  vols.  I.e>iici',  1'*
re-tHlitud by  Ritti-r,  Leipzig, I73t»-4.^|  •.'■
the  code  iu  its  c^miplete  form, except  the  n
books,  for  which  it  wa.i  necessary  to  use  i!
ome  Just  referred  to. This  is  also  the  i'-
the  edition  ui  this  code  coutaiiml  iu  the  /w  (.'»""
Antritmtuiinnenm  of  Dcrliu  (llfliti. Hut  Uif  ilf^''
ery  of  a  MiS.  of  the /{rrnartNm  At  Milau  11 :'
Clussins,  aud  of  a paliinpM-st  of  the  Tl>'
<'ode  at  Turin  by  Poyron,  lias  contribut^'i
both  to  tho  crilicul  knowledge  of  the  i>lli
of  I  hi.H  code,  aiid  ban  wlded  numentus  goiiiiii"' "  "
stttutions  to  the  llrat  live  books. e-specialty  Be^^*
llaeuel's  dijcoverivs  have  aiblinl  also  to  oitrki)"'"'
edge  of  the  later  IwHtks.  uud  bis  edition  of  tlif  ^
odoHiiin  Code  (1^2—14)  !••  the  latest  aud  tho  iMft-

Codicaxii. See  Codkx.


cooiaixcs


m


C0H0K3


{todicmu&  8w  CoDKX.
tpdormnaoa  8««  Da  hi  us.
9odon  |KMdo»-|.  A  bvU.  Sm  TixnxNABrurH.
bodnu  (KoJtpof).  TIi<<  ln«t  king  uF  AtbtMik  He
bii'od  tbti  ftC«ptrc  from  Iiih  lutUor  Moluiitbtib,
pi  waft  Tar  advau<:L-<l  iu  ycun  uhvu  »oiiil>  of  the
Ifiun  States  uuitetl  tbeir  furci-a  for  tliv  Jiivoaiou
LAtticii.  Tbe  Ouriau  uriiiy  uiuruboU  to  AtUous
n^U.T  eacainiietL  unUer  its  walls ;  mid  (hv  urticle
rBetpM  bod  OBBnnH)  tbeui  uf  ^uccvm,  provided

ejr  R|tartrrl  the  life  of  th(?  Atbciiiun  king.  A
iniliy  I>«)iibiuii.  imiue4l  ClmmiHiitiM.  diM'ltiHitl  tli(f
Iftwi^rof  t1i4>  oracle  to  tlii-  AtliLMiiiins,  iind  Cmlnis
lbD)vi-d  lo  devotv  hiiMM-lf  for  h\s  rouutry  in  a
piwr  Dot  niilikc  tbat  wliiob  iiniiiortaIizf<1  aiiiunt{
|(  HunuiiiH,  Al  u  luttT  date,  tin-  name  of  tliu  Dfcii.
If  wi-ut  oHi  at  lUc  j^ntv  dis^tuiM-*}  in  a  \viH»«lman'H
prli,  aud  fidliii]t{  iu  \\ith  twn  Ooriann,  kilU-d  out;
[Hli  liiit  1>ill,  and  wiih  ktUrd  l>y  tint  uila-r.  The
jUiniinua  Ibert-upuu  sent  u  bcrulU  to  t-luiui  tbe
riy  nf  ilieir  kifig.  mill  rh«  l)<irian  clitef«.  ilifiuing
IB  war  liopcti'HH,  withdri'M'  tbeir  torrett  tn^tit  Atli-
L  Aflt't  the  dfiitU  of  Todntx,  tbu  iH>bk*8,  diking
Imiitiigp,  {)vrb»|i«,  iiftlie  opp<irt unity  atTonlnl  by
|His|iut«:  bi^tWffn  \i\s  souk  arc  snid  to  biive  ubol-
^Uic  title  uf  Kint;,  untl  to  biive  litibittitniod  for
filial  of  Archoii.  Tbia  new  ufficv  vcas  to  Ix:  li<-ld
tt life, and  ibcn  lianHniittud  to  tlte  hou  of  tlif:  tb'-
pwiL  Tbo  first  of  ibi'HO  lieirditiiry  avclionjt  won
jMou,  mu  »f  Codrnn,  from  whom  the  thirteen  fol-
iti^'  arobniis  wore  coiled  Mpdoiitidiic,  as  being
lineal  dcftCeiidMiits. See  AltciloN.

(rd  KOtXa  r^i  Ei'^oiur,  "  Ibo  Hollowti  uf
[*).  The  weat4«rii  coast  of  Kiiboea.  Ih>Iuti>u
protooulorieft  CapUan^ia  and  Cbi-rmjiifMiiH.  very
i|;nt)iu  to  HbipK ; beru  n  pjirt  of  thu  l'er«iau

wan  wretked  BC.  4H0  (tltMinI.  viii.  U3).
Cob16  {Kntkt}). All  Allic  dcnic  a  littk  licj'utul
Mlliiian  Gnte  nt  Atbuiis. Clmon  and  Tbiicyd-
were  buri«4]  beru.

Coetsiyria  (KmXi)  ivpia,  "  Jlotlon  Syrin  ").  Tliu
gtrrn  to  the  grant  va)li\v  between  iIk^  tno
ipM  uf  Moinit  Iji'biiuon  (Lilmuuii  uud  Anti-Li-
iu*),Ui  the  Hontb  of  Syria,  bordL>rui({  upon  Fb<e-
Uuu  tbc  wobt  uud  I'ulustlue  ou  tbo  uoutli. In

V  «art  betwcvu  ibfl  Ptulvniivti  and  tb(r  Svleuvi-

I*,  tbo  uatuc  \vtia  applied  to  tbc  \\bolu  of  ibu

niWru  portiuu  of  Syrtu,  wbicb  becoiuv  aubjvct

tvme  tuut  lo  ib«  kings  of  Egypt.
C<i«UaL«x S^hKx.

Coellia. Ho*!  t'AEi.ius.

Coeloflaa  ^KoiKutraa). A  uiuuutaiu  iu  Slcvou

1^  Pblius.

'^us. In  Hnniiin  uiythutagy,  tbe  B|MMtfic  of

1^  Heisidentilird  witb  tbcGiwk  L*ranu8(q.v.).

CoeltlB  IKuiXip  ^l>l;^■).  Seo  CYM>5,-iK\IA.
poemptia  I'ropcrly  "a  joint  taking,''  »o  "a
''^t  inirtliiwc."  One  of  the  three  fornix  of  mar-
'(■'aniniig  tbe  Roniaiis.  It  wiih  fu*  called  from
*  Heltnn  of  u  pnrcbaMi  Hnpp'Meil  to  take  ]ilncc
^Nieurea»mn.  In  tbo  prewii*'!-  of  tivi*  wi(iM'!u>es
ipr»§,  or  bolder  of  tin-  Imbuire,  llie  Uride-
ttrnck  tbo  balanre  wiib  n  bmnze  coin,
tie  liAuilcd  to  tbo  futlior  or  giinnlinn  of  the
At  till'  name  ttmr  bo  oitked  licr  nbetbrr
Ivniild  be  Iii(«  ivift>,  unil  nbt-,  in  liun.  iihkpd  bini
her  bp  would  bo  ber  linibuud. S«i  Uatki-


Coena. See  Ckna.

Coenns  (Koii«r).  A  »uQ<in-Iaw  of  rnrtneuio,
and  one  of  tbe  ablest  generaU  of  Alexander  the
Uix-ni. He  died  on  tbe  Hypbasia,  H.c.  337.

Co8b  (Kvijv).  An  tiibabitaut  of  M)tyten6  who
dissuaded  DuriiiH  HystaHpit^  in  bitt  Hcytbian  ex|ift-
ditiou,  fmiu  brenkitig  np  biH  bridge  of  boats  over
(bo  UouuUe.  Dui'ini.  nia*le  biui  tyrant  of  Slitylentf.
On  tlie  oiirbiviik  of  ibe  Ionian  levuU  againtit  tbti
Persiaitti  i.H.c.  5*11),  be  wu.t  tttuued  to  dealb  by  the
people  of  Milyleii)*. Bee  l>AIlll'!(.

Coeua  (Kotos),  One  of  tbe  Titnim.  kou  of  Ura-
nus uml  Gara.  {^•e  'I'itanks.)  He  wuh  the  fatlier
«f  Leto  by  Pboeb*.

Cognati. fivv  CoG.VATio.

Cognatio.  Tbe  Lul  in  woni  for  relntiouttbip.
CoguatLo  iiiclnded  rflutUiiisbip  uu  both  tlie  fa-
tber'naud  uiotber'tt  8ide,  wbiiu  atjnaiio  implied  n-la-
tioiiabip  on  tbe  fatber'M  side  only.  (See  Kamilia.)
Aguatio  involved  legal  duties  and  riglit»,  nbile
eogimlio,  originally  al  least,  broiiglit  niib  it  only
tut>nil  obligariou-s.  f'ot/nati  to  the  itixtb  degree
bad  tbe  light  of  kiHstiig  t>arb  oilier  (tux  i^snili),  and
iiliKi  tbo  right  of  refoHing  to  appear  as  witueasos
agaiiiHt  each  ulbcr  in  a  rourt  of  la^r.  On  tbe
other  band,  eogtmli  were  forbidden  by  custoui,  at
Icuttt  ill  the  eui'lier  tiuii'M,  to  tiiliTtiiarry,  or  to  a|f
l>eur  iu  court  uguiuitt  t-acli  other  as  accutwrtt.
Wbeu  a  man  dietl,  his  wgNati  vnm  expected  to
put  oD  monrning  fur  him.  In  eonrM  of  time  the
cttguiiti  gradnally  aer)nired  the  t'tgbis  pl'0|»et-  to
atfuafi.  but  natuial  ridatioiisbip  did  not  win  fuU
recoguitiun  until  tbr  time  of  .hiMiuian,  by  w  biH»«
legitibition  the  rights  of  aj/im/i  were  abolisbetl.

Cognltor.  One  who  up|H'ured  in  the  Koiuau
eotirlH  of  law  to  condnet  uii  arlio  (q,  v.)  oti  behalf
of  aiiuf  IiiT. H"  wiLs  also  called  pivcuratvr.

Cognomen. See  Numek.

Cohereo. See  IIi£K>:s.

Cc^iora.  A  division  uf  the  Roman  artuy.  (Sue
IIXKiici'tiA).  In  tbo  republican  age  tbe  »o)-d  uas
e-8|»ecially  applietl  to  the  divinioini  coiitribnled  by
the  Italian  allies.  IJowii  to  B.C-i^,  when  tlte  Ital-
ians obtained  tbe  Koman  cilizeiiabip,  thoy  were
bonud  to  supply  ail  infiinlry  contingent  to  eaeh  of
ibo  two  consular  nrniie-*,  which  ronttiHtefl  of  twu
legions  apiece.  Tbi?)  contingent  iiniiibercd  in  all
10,000  infantry,  dividrnl  into :  [a)  iiO  cohQrIea  of  430
men  each,  eulled  cohorlea  aUnvg,  beciitnte  tu  ttnii*  of
battle  ibey  foiuiuil  the  witigx  {utae)  of  the  two
combiucd  legions;  \b)  four  eohoi-tet  exlraordiuariiu,
or  select  cohorts  of  4W  uu-ii  each.

Kroiu  about  tbe  liegimiiug  of  the  first  century
B.C.,  Ihtt  Kouiaii  legion,  averaging  400(>  men,  was
a!su  divided  into  ten  cohoiif*,  eneb  containing  three
manipali  or  eix  priidiriur.  In  tlie  iui[K'rial  timi-s,
the  auxiliary  tn.K)p»  osaigued  to  the  legiouh  slu-
tioned  in  llie  pi-oviiires  were  also  divi<bKl  into  cik
horts  (itthm-lm  iturihanae).  These  roburtft  cou-
taintMl  either '>0I>  umti  (;=r>  ernfuiirr^ ),  or  lIMKt  men
(=rIO  ccHfirrtdc).  Tb«\v  conttistetl  either  oiiliiely
of  itiftintry,  or  partly  of  cavalry  tH-*<0  infantry -|-I20
cavalry;  "(iO  iiiraMtry-(-240  cavalry).  Korlbe  com-
manders of  tbet«e  cnlioi-ts,  nee  PHAKFEtTl  s.  The
troopN  ntatioiiei)  in  Komn  »cre  alno  lunnbered  ac-
conliug  to  vohorls.  >  1}  The  ivbortra  practoriar,  orig*
iiiully  nine,  but  aftcrwardii  ten  iu  iiiiinlH^r,  which
formed  the  imjierial  Undy-gnnrd. Kacb  cohort  eon-


COIXACJK


380


CtHLTBUS


n«t«l  nf  1000  uiftD,  iiiclu<1iiij;  infantry  oiul  caviilr^-.
(  9*is  PraktokiaNI.  I  Till'  iiiHtinuinu  ul'  n  ImkI^v-
giiurtl  wiudiie  to  Aii^h^iliitt,  anil  w;iii>»(!evf1iii>iiieiit
ol'  t\iv ivhurd  jjroftoritt ,  t}r  iKxIy-gtiuiilof  tlm-  i'f)iiil>li-
caii  ^fnfnilfi.  It«  tttlu  elmwH  tlint  \t  xvnn  ns  oUl  lus
till!  liiim  \\Uun  t.hi;  ci>n&ilU  bore  ttie  nnitic  iif;/mr-
lovt-«.  TluH  cohort  prettoria  was  origiDfitly  formed
KXi'Iiifivcly  of  cavalry,  nininly  of  eijiitstrmn  rniik.
Bnl  towai-U;^  the  mid  of  the  ropnblicnn  n^i>,  xvlwn
pvery  indepeiideut  commander  liad  liis  own  t-ahm-a
j/raetoria,  it  was  made  np  piirtly  of  infinitiy,  ^'1'"
vfvK  mainly  VL*len*nH,  [mrily  uf  picked  civatry  of
(III)  ullios,  and  imrtly  of  Rtirium  njiiilcn,  who  iionally
(wrvfil  tlii'ir  tifaciiiinm.  or  lirat  .Vfar,  in  Ihia  way.
(*2i  Ttirci',  iiin)  in  latter  times  diitr.  eohorttJt  itrbanae,
ooiiHisling  uni'lj  of  UlOO  men,  wore  placed  under  tli*;
tniuiuMiid  of  the  prticfrflii^  tirhi.  Tiiey  huil  ^ejia*
nil*'  liarrncks,  but  ranked  below  tbe  body-gtmnl
and  ul>ovt'>  Llie  le}(ioiinneft.  {'.i)  Seven  cohorten  rigt-
Inm,  of  10IH>  men  eiieb,  were  under  the  coD>inaiid  of
the  prar/i-cUia  rigifiini.  TlirtH.'  funned  t1it>  ni};bt
police  atid  lire  bri};ade,  and  were  distrtbiiu^d
tbrotif^lioiil  the  city,  one  to  every  two  of  lite  fniir-
tei-n  rifjiniiet.  Stw  ViaiLK«.
Coinage. See  Monkia;  Ni-mismatics.

CoJacrfitae  (KoiXdirfirrfitJ.  A  linaiieiul  boiunl  iit
Atbeu)«,  wbosi-.  duty  it  uok  to  nilinini»tei  tlio  f'nud
arcrriinx  fmiii  ilie  (inos  Inknn  in  tbe  court*  of  Juh-
tirp.  It  Wiiji  itiis  fund  floni  wliieh  tliP  U(Htt.  of  the
public  immlH  iu  tite  I'rytam^nni  and  the  -sabiry  of
tliu  Helia*tta«  were  defrayed.  'I'be  iiann-  projeerly
luenuH  '*  coUcclora  of  linino,"  and  pertiapn  points
to  tbe  fact  Ibat  tlir  Imnis  of  the  vietinis  Harritircd
ou  certain  occasioni*  were  givrji  In  the  Cobicrotao
as  c«ntribniion»4  U>  ibe  meaU  in  ciue.ilion.

CoItlpiB. A  river  of  Paniiouia.

Colchis  (KoXjyi'r).  A  coinitry  of  Asia,  hnvitig
Dieria  on  the  east,  tlie  Kii\ii>e  on  tho  wti-st,  C'lmea-
t«ii»  Ol)  tbe  north,  ati<1  Aniieuiu  on  tbe  south.  Il  in
faiaoiiH  in  poetie  ]i-};i!tidH  uh  biiving  been  tbe  land
to  which  tlie  Artfonautic  (-xpvditiaii  was  directed
iu  qnest  of  tbt;  golden  fleei-e.  (Sec  ArikinaVtak-I
Jt  eorrt'HpoiidN  iiL  the  prehi-iit  day  to  what  in  rjillcd
Mingndia.  Tliu  lint'ii  niiiuafnetnrfid  hvn'  wtm  in
liigb  reptile,  and  was  made,  aceorditig  to  Ucrodo-
tiifi  (ii.  lLtD>,  after  tbe  uianuor  of  K);ypt.  Tbia
iipv<!ie.s  of  uiauufovture,  tugolbor  with  the  dark
couiplexion  and  ciiti|H>d  lockH  of  the  natives,  were
no  many  iirgnnteuta  with  tbe  ancients  to  provo
tlieiii  of  Kgyjitiuri  origin,  iudeiwudeiitly  of  otber
proofs  drawn,  affording  to  Hertnlotnn,  from  Ibeir
liiti^uAge  and  mode  of  life  (ii.  KM].

ColiastKuAi'ic).  A  |trouiontoryou  tbe  west  cunat
of  .\ttii-a,  ini-nty  Kladta  HOiilb  of  I'balernni,  witb  m
lempb'  id'  .\phn>ilit*<,  wbeie  some  uf  t\n^  I'ersiau
iibipM  wi-re  labt  aftt-r  llie  battle  of  Salaiii'is.

Coliseum. Sec  Ami'Iii rilKArRt'M.

Collar^  {iiyatoy,  <Xu(dc).  A  band  or  cbain  at-
tacbed  t<i  tbe  neck  {coU'iin)\  a  collar.  Dogs  witb
eollan  ore  fre<niontly  seen  in  ancient  nioniiments,
and  a  iiiowiic  at  Pompeii  rcpn-sents  a  watehHlog
witb  bis  collar  :ind  chain  attiu-hed.  Vjirro  Miyin
that  favni-dogK  ftbotdd  have  collart^  witb  pointud
uailiH  attacbed  to  tbem.to  protect  tbemagaiuHt  tlte
■ttat-kn  of  wolves  and  other  beasts.  Xeuophou
recomuiniKbi  that  tbe  collars  {iipaia}  of  biiuttug-
dogs  should  be  »oft  and  wide,  so  its  not  to  nib  the
bair.  I^arge  wootlen  collars  {kKkmh)  were  some-
times put  ou  miscbievoaa  dogs  (Aristopb.  Vnp.  WOT).


Platcfi  of  bronze  have  been  foiiuil,  ptwesci  viHi  t
hole  to  be  nnn|Hmdi!d  Ut  the  mdlnr,  coittAiuiii;;  ihn
iiaJtiCMofowii(.'|-sof  dogs.  See  tbeillnstratiotiainltf
('ATfi.NAliirs.

Iron  or  bronze  collars  were  platted  n>Miiil  ttw
neck!*  of  NbivcH  who  hail  ntletnpled  to  nm  airsv
(Flaui.  Cnpi.  ii.a.  107).  SometiuieM  a  plate  wiwat-
tavbed  to  the  collar.  contatuinK  the  name  :itiil  ad-
dress  of  the  master  and  otleriug  a  rcwanl  fur  Ifae
runaway  slarc. !iee  Hekvus.

CoUatla.  A  8abiuo  towu  In  Latiuni,  ni-itr  ibe
rlgiit  Iwnk  of  the  Auio,  taken  by  Turquiuiih  I'li*

til!*.

CoUatiDua.  L.  TAJtquixius.  Grandmnof  Araiw,
ehlur  bi-otber  of  Taniuinin.-*  PriitcuK.  Hfl  detivwl
liiH  surname  froni  Collutia,  where  be  reitiil^il,  uil
with  tlie  [irinuiiiality  of  wbieb  be  wm  IuvcbIwI
Colluliuns  wius  the  biutband  of  tbe  cclubmtcil  La-
cLvtia  til.  v.),  and  after  the  expnUlou  of  tbi*  Tar-
<{iiin»,  bo  uud  Hnitns  werv  elected  llic  Gnt  r<ja>
snl.«,  llin  i-tdatiouttbip,  however,  to  the  l'Ar<(Din
family  excitod  dt«trii»t>  and  when  a  Isw  w»
pas«ed  buuiiibiug  the  whole  TanitiiuiAn  Iwow  b*
wiuj  forced  to  lay  down  his  ollicfl  and  depatt  froiD
Itonui. lie  etitled  bis  days  at  Laviniinn  iLiv.i.fiP).

CoUatlo  Bononun. 8ec  Bonokl-m  CuLUtn.

CoUectaiii. Re<!  Trapkzitak.

Collegium.  The  general  term  in  Lstia  lur  u
association.  Tbe  word  was  applied  in  a  diBcnoi
sense  to  expreMH  the  mutual  rtdatiou  of  siicU  nig'
istrate»  ax  were  ruUfjtu.  Ucsidos  tbu  d'tU'jyi  ^
tbe  gn^at  priettthoods.  and  uf  tbo  tuagifttrsta' •(■
tendanta  (mcu  Ari'AruTOUES).  there  were  numwoW
associationn,  which,  although  not  united  \>j  w^
spccilically  religioua  objects,  had  a  religion*  f^''
tre  in  the  worship  of  wnno  deity  or  oibrr,  ^'kI'
weru  the  nnmerouK  aiUegia  of  arttsa4iii  \iip\Hf*^  "^
artlfifttm).  and  tbo  societies  existing  smoDg  tin
poor  for  providiug  ftiuemls,  which  firat  il|ip«
under  the  Kmpirc.  Tbo  political  cliib#i  (etJlt^ii
«whtfiiM)  were  osaoviatei)  in  tJio  witnthip  nM^*
Lares  Compitalea  (q.  v.),  and  won?,  indeed,  prov'ri-'
speaking,  eolltyui  romjiitnlimn,  or  "  MK.ktii«  "'
the  cro88-wiiys."  Tho  religions  JMH-ielii*  wri*.  •"
some  iii.slanet'H,  iMtabltsbcd  by  the  State  ft'f  'I"
perfornianco  of  certain  pDhlie  religiuu:*  scr^n'"'
in  other  eaw;s  ibt-y  were  formeil  by  pnviilf  i'"'''
vidual.H,  who  madf  it  their  business  to  kef(HJ|''^
shrines  of  particular  deities,  ofton  foreign,  al  ll"^'
own  exi>cii«>. Sto  Supautam;  U.sivKKHn**-

ColUciae  or  Colliqiiiae.  (1 )  Onttere  niwtc  w''J
coucavc  tiles  for  ciirryiii;;  wat-er  from  tliif  f'"''
(Vitrnv.  vi.  3|.  {'i)  Drains  in  tbo  ficMs  furdtftt"'
iug  wuier  iulo  the  ditches  (Culnui.  ii.  fl  ♦  3).

CoUIna  Porta.  (I)  Ou«  of  the  gatcfl  of  Ih>ni'  "o
the  Muns Q iiirioali*.  To  thi-i  gato  Uannibiil r*!-'  "F"
and  Ibn-n*  a  espeac  within  tbo  city  (Ovid.  F''*'' ''
871).  (2)  The  name  of  onr  of  tbe  four  rt^i^'"  ■^
wards  into  wUieb  Rome  was  divided  h)  Set""*
Tnlliiw.  Tbe  other  three  werf  Palatina.  Sulna"*
na,  and  Ksquilina  {Liv.  v.  41).

CoUyblstes  dcoXXtVJorr^c). 8o«  CoiXTVf*-

CoUJ^bus  (icdXXi-dof).  The  smallest  coppci  ^''1*
at  Athens  ;  the  fo«irlh  of  tbe  rbQlcu$  (q.  v.)  t'"'"
lybiiB  soL'ma  to  have  beon  a  common  u»i«p  '"'
small  money,  since  it  siguified  generaU v  "  cl"^^
ing  money,"  "  tbe  rate  of  exchange,"  and  euXXi***^
Ti)f,  "a  money-cbanger." ftw  TiiATi-yiiTAf-


COLLYRIUM


381


COLONIA  AGRIPPINA


Collyximn  (jcoXXi>/>u»>,  dimiDutive  of  icoWvpa,  "  a
roll").  (1)  In  medical  laugnage,  a  tent,  pessary,  or
siijipository,  made  of  mediciual  substaDces  aud  iii-
aert«d  iuto  the  orifices  of  the  body,  snch  as  the
uoBtrils  or  the  anna,  or  iuto  au  ulcer  (Gels.  t.  28).
(2)  A  liquid  eye-salve  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  5,  30).  Many
iustmctious  for  the  composition  of  these  meclicO'
ineuts  may  be  foimd  Id  Marcell.  Empir.  ti.

Collj^tiu  (KoXXvrtic).  Ademe  of  Attica  belong-
ing to  the  tribe  Aegeis,  aud  forming  cue  of  the  dis-
tricts into  which  the  city  of  Atheus  was  divided.
It  was  the  deme  of  Plato  the  philosopher.

Colobiain. See  Tunica.

Colon  (KttXoir).  "  A  limb.**  A  name  given  by  the
rbetoricianB  to  the  divisions  or  members  of  a  com-
position. Much  has  been  written  by  modern  crit-
ics of  the  alleged  "colometry,"  or  arrangement  into
periods  (koXo),  of  the  oratious  of  Demosthenes,  in
which  they  profess  to  see  a  rhythmical  rule  that
produces  an  harmonious  effect,  as  in  the  odes  of
Piudar;  though  the  determination  of  each  kwXov  is
very  arbitrary.  See  Blass  iu  the  Eheiniechea  Afn-
MiitH  for  1669,  p.  524,  and  his  Attiache  Beredaamkeit,
on  Demosthenes,  pp.  105  foil.  Also  Mahaffy's  ffist.
of  Claaa.  Greek  Lit.  vol.  i.  pp.  343-:t46  (1880).

Colonae  (Ki^uraO- A  small  town  in  the  Troad.

Colonia.  (1)  Greek.  In  Greece,  colonies  were
sometimes  founded  by  vanquished  peoples,  who
left  their  homes  to  escape  subjection  at  the  hand
of  a  foreign  enemy  ;  sometimes  as  a  sequel  to  civ-
il disorders ;  sometimes  to  f^t  rid  of  surplus  popu-
lation, and  thereby  to  avoid  internal  couvnlsioos.
Bat  in  most  oases  the  object  was  to  establish  aud
facilitate  relations  of  trade  with  foreign  countries.
If  a  Greek  city  was  sending  out  a  colony,  ou  ora-
cle (before  all  others  that  of  Delphi)  was  almost  in-
variably consulted.  Sometimes  certain  classes  of
citizens  were  called  upon  to  take  part  iu  the  en-
terprises; sometimes  one  son  was  ofaosen  by  lot
iroui  every  house  where  there  were  several  sous ;
and  strangers  expressing  a  desire  to  Join  were  ad-
mitted. A  person  of  distinction  was  selected  to
guide  the  emigrants  aud  make  the  necessary  ar-
rangemeuts.  It  waa  usual  to  honour  these  found-
en  of  colonies,  after  their  death,  as  heroes.  Some
of  the  sacred  fire  was  taken  from  the  public  hearth
in  the  Prytanenm,  and  the  fire  on  the  public  hearth
of  the  new  city  waa  kindled  thereat.  Aud,  jnst  as
each  individual  had  his  private  shrines,  so  the  new
community  malutained  the  worship  of  its  chief  do-
mestic deities,  the  colony  sending  embassies  and
votive  gifts  to  their  priucipal  festivals.

The  relation  between  colony  aud  mother- city
woH  viewed  as  one  of  mutual  affection.  Any  dif-
feroticcs  that  arose  were  made  up,  if  possible,  by
peaceful  meaus,  war  being  deemed  excusable  only
iu  cases  of  extreme  necessity.  The  charter  of
foondatiou  contained  general  provisions  for  the
arrangement  of  the  affairs  of  the  colony,  aud  also
some  special  enactments.  The  constitution  of  the
mother-city  was  usually  adopted  by  the  colony,
hut  the  new  city  remaiued  politically  indepen-
■Wut.  If  the  colony  sent  out  a  fresh  colony  on  its
on-u  aoGount,  the  mother-city  was  generally  con-
sulted, or  was  at  least  requested  to  furnish  a  lead-
er. The  kkripovxtn  formed  a  special  class  of  Greek
cuIoiiiBts.  (See  Clerucuia.)  The  trade  factories
ftet  lip  in  foreign  countries  (in  Egypt,  for  instance)
were  somewhat  different  from  the  ordinary  colo-


nies, the  members  retaining  the  right  of  domicile
iu  their  own  fatherlaud.

(S)  Rohan.  It  was  an  old  custom  in  Italy  to
send  out  colonies  for  the  purpose  of  securing  new
conquests.  The  Somans,  accordingly,  having  no
standing  army,  used  to  plant  bodies  of  their  own
citizens  in  conquered  towus  as  a  kind  of  garrison.
These  bodies  would  consist  partly  of  Roman  citi-
zens, usually  to  the  number  of  three  bundi-ed ;
partly  of  members  of  the  Latin  confederacy,  iu
larger  uumbers.  The  third  part  of  the  conquered
territory  was  handed  over  to  the  settlers.  The
coloniae  citium  Jtomanorum  (colonies  of  Roman
citizens)  were  specially  intended  to  secure  the  two
sea-coasts  of  Italy,  and  were  hence  called  coloniae
maritimae.  The  coloniae  J^itinM,  of  which  there
was  a  far  greater  number,  served  the  same  pur-
pose for  the  mainland.

The  duty  of  leading  the  colouists  and  founding
the  settlement  was  intrusted  to  a  commission  usu-
ally consisting  of  three  members,  and  elected  by
the  people.  These  men  continued  to  stand  iu  the
relation  of  patrous  {patroni)  to  the  colony  after  its
foundation.  The  colonists  entered  the  conquered
city  in  military  array,  preceded  by  banners,  and
the  foundation  was  celebrateil  with  special  solem-
nities. The  coloniae  were  free  from  taxes,  and
had  their  own  constitution,  a  copy  of  the  Romau,
electing  from  their  own  body  their  Senate  and
other  officers  of  State.  To  this  constitution  the
original  inhabitants  hud  to  submit.  The  coloniae
civium  Eomanomm  retained  the  Roman  citizen-
ship, and  were  free  from  military  service,  their
position  as  outposts  being  regarded  as  an  equiva-
lent. The  members  of  the  a^miae  Latinae  served
among  the  socii,  and  possessed  the  so-called  iut
Latinum.  (See  Latinitas.)  This  secured  to  them
the  right  of  acquiring  property  (eommercium)  and
settlement  iu  Rome,  and  under  certain  conditions
the  power  of  becoming  Roman  citizens;  though
in  coarse  of  time  these  rights  underwent  many
limitations.

From  the  time  of  the  Gracchi  the  colonies  lost
their  military  character.  Colonization  came  to
be  regarded  as  a  means  of  providing  for  the  poor-
est class  of  the  Roman  populace.  After  the  time
of  Sulla  it  was  adopted  as  a  way  of  granting  land
to  veteran  soldiers.  The  right  of  founding  colo-
nies was  taken  away  from  the  people  by  Caesar,
and  passed  iuto  the  hands  of  the  emperors,  who
used  it  (maiuly  iu  the  provinces)  for  the  exclusive
purpose  of  establishing  military  settlements,  part-
ly with  the  old  idea  of  securing  conquered  terri-
tory. It  was  only  in  exceptioual  coses  that  the
provincial  colonies  enjoyed  the  immunity  from
taxation  which  was  granted  to  those  in  Italy.

See  W.  Rosober,  Kohnien,  KohnialpoUUk,  und  Aits-
wandenmg  ( 1885  ) ;  Grote,  Hiau  of  Greece,  chapters
xxii.-xxvii.;  the  article  "Colonia"  by  Caillemer  in
Daramberg  and  Saglio's  Dictionnaire  des  Antiguites;
Zumpt,  Ueber  dm  Unteraclned  der  Beneanmffen,  Mwii-
dpiutn,  Colonia,  Prae/ecturu  (1640);  Mommseu,  Die
Stadtrechte  von  Ma/aca  ttnd  Salpenaa  (1855);  Mar.
quardt,  Ifandbucfi,  vol.  iv.  (1873).

Colonia  Agtipplna,  or  simply  Aorifpina.  The
moderu  Cologne  (Koln);  a  town  on  the  left  bank
of  the  Rhine.  There  are  medals  of  Colonia  Agrip-
pineusis,  aud  the  name  is  found  iu  inscriptiono.
The  place  was  originally  called  Oppidum  Ubiui-um
(Tao.  Ann.  i.  36),  and  was  the  chief  town  of  the
Uhii ;  hut  afterwards  Agrippiiia,  the  wife  of  Clau-


%


nnd  (UTi{*ht«r  of  Gcnnnuicu!^  vrho  vaa  boni
ut  Oppiiltim  Uliiiinitu  wliile  ber  latbcr  wiw  in  com-
mnntl  tliere,  pniviiiled  on  Cluiuliiiii  in  A.t>.  51  to
send  a  colony  of  veterans  tliittter.  Fnmi  thnt
time  the  plact*  wiu  c»1I<h\  nflor  licr  ninne.  Vittil-
liiu  wiM  ftt  Colngnri  wIkmi  the  anKlien  procliiininl
liiin  eniifM^ir  iSm-t.  VittU.  r?).

Coloiiuade. Sm  Poitncra.

ColdnuB  I  KoXwwit ).  A  dt'nie  of  Attica,  ten
Mtadia,  ur  u  littlu  inur^  tliftu  n  mile,  nurthut'st  of
Albvni*,  near  the  Araileniy  ;  celel>rnt«il  for  a  leinple
«f  HtiK«it]un,  a  gi-ove  of  the  KiinieiiideM,  tb«  i*hrine
•if  Oedipaf),  anti  as  the  InrtbpUvc  of  SophoclcH,  nho
tIfMi-rilM>a  it  in  biq  OiJijiut  Colont»a.

ColSphon  (KoXof^u)!').  A  city  of  Ionia,  norlh-
ntMt  iif  E|ihe!ini4.  It  wiit  fiumdMl  by  Antlnienion,
iMtn  uf  CmlruH.  uml  wu<!t  Hitufiti*<1  abuut  ino  inilt^h
frum  tbc  const,  itti  harbour,  ciiIIlhI  Nottiiiu,  bpini;
uunnvcti'il  with  tbu  city  by  umnnn  of  long  wiilbt.
ColopboD  vrdH  destroyed  by  Lysituacbus,  toKetbcr
with  Lt-'bedns.  in  order  to  bwcII  the  populatiou  of
tho  now  tonn  he  b.-ul  fnnnde<1  at  KphcniiK '.Punnnn.
i.  9).  Thy  L'ul»phiii>iiiii!i  are  sti^rniatiztii  Uy  sev-
eral niH'ient  wrilcr*  an  vwy  rffeniiiuitv  aiul  hixuri-
ons,  and  yet  Strulm  (uiyn  tbiit,  iil  mw  iwrind,  thii!
place  iHiEiwiviH'd  u  llunriHiiiiit;  navy,  and  t)i;it  ittt
cavalry  was  in  nuch  rvpntv  tbut  victory  followed
wliorever  they  were  employed.  Ileucc  anwo  the
pniverli  KoXo^uea  imriStvau,  "  tu  add  a  Colnphnnt-
uti**— i.  f.  to  put.  the  linisbin^  bund  to  an  affair.
The  M]lioliai*t  cm  FU(4>,  bowevf  r,  givt'^.i  another  ex-
planation of  Ibn  saying,  wbiob  ap|>eurs  ^onn'wbat
niurc  probable,  tbongb  its  anthurity  is  not  su  j^ood.
He  hlatc.H  thnt  tbo  Cotopbonianit  bad  the  rl(;iit  of
A  donble  vole  in  the  general  iiiwembly  of  tho  loni-
nnti,  nil  ac('t>nnr  of  the  >ei-vico  they  hatl  remlnrcd
tbi)  confederacy  by  indncing  the  city  of  Siuyrna  to
join  it.  Hence  they  wens  fRV|uently  cualded  (o
deeide  points  loft  nudcterniintil  from  a  parity  of
•MtS^agee.  It  arocie  fnnn  thin  old  nayiiig  that,  in
tho  early  perirxU  of  tint  art  of  priiitint;,  the  ac-
cottiit  wbiob  tbi>  printer  j^are  of  the  place  atnl
date  of  the  rdition.  being  the  lattt  tbin^  printed  at
tlie  einl  of  the  btiok,  wus  callwl  llie  (vl"f'fiott.  Tbi**
city  vtan  one  of  lite  pluccN  which  contended  for  the
birtb  of  Homer,  anil  n-ins  nu((ncMtionab]y  the  native
place  of  MimuemiHs  and  Ilvrmcijlanax.

Colores. Sv-v  rirTLKA,

Colosaae  (KoXoatrni'V  Once  an  importAiit  city
of  Gn'at  tMiry^ia,  on  the  river  Lyciiit,  biU  eo  re-
duced Hiibsetinently  that  it  might  ha%'e  been  for-
gtilten  but  fur  the  einatlo  wrltteu  to  it«  inhabitatit8
by  the  AjioHtlu  Panl.

ColCBseum. Hv^.  A^irHlTIIKATIlt'M.

ColOBSns  UoAotrtrop).  A  wonl  of  rare  nccur-
rouee  in  tbo  Attic  writent^  bnt  nwd  by  both
Oreekt*  and  ItoinaiiH  t-u  !ii]{nify  a  ulatne  larger
than  life  lAeftob.  Aijam.  40f>|,  and  thence  a  person
of  exlrannlinary  Htalnro  and  beauty  \fs  tennvd
eoloswro*  by  Siietouiiui  {_C<iliy.  35).  In  like  nian-
ntx  the  andiilectnral  ornantentfi  in  I  be  upper
storiM  of  hiftv  building)),  wlueh  n^nlre  to  tie
of  largo  diaiousioiiB  in  consequence  of  their  re-
utoteuewt.  are  termed  eototei&^lera  {KoXotrtriKuyrtpa,
Vitruv.  iii.  3).

Among  the  colossal  «ktatue)t  of  Orecce  the  luotit
celebrated,  according  to  rtioy,  wab  tile  broDXe  co>
loMus  at  Rbuilcti  by  Cbitix^s  (/j.  v.)  ofLindus,  a  pu-
pil of  Ly8lpiiua,wbo  gave  twelve  yeara  (it-C.  29Ji-


COLUM

2tM>)  to  casting  tho  fltatitc.  Ii«  height  i»  vutiamaif
f;ivcn  as  90  and  1^  feet.  Finy-«ix  yeam  after  its
erection  it  wmt  thrown  down  by  an  enrtbqaake
and  lay  in  rninti  until  a.i*.  lifCt,  when  tlie  Arabs
Hold  the  piecftt  to  a  Jew  of  Kdessa  for  old  nieta).
In  thin  one  ifilaiid  tber«  were  more  than  I'XIrol
Pliny  mentions  another  (treek  colown*  of  ApnII
the  work  of  Calami^,  which  co*>t  5410  talent#,  nm
wa«i  thirty  cubits  high,  in  the  city  of  A|K>[loiii.
whence  it  was  tratii^fcrrtKl  to  the  Capitol  b\  M.  Li]
ciillus:  andaUo  tliofio  of  Zetm  and  llerucles.  at  Tscti
rcntitin.liy  Lyjiippns,  To  the  list  of  i'liuy  lunst  Ipg
atldedtbc  mote  iin[iortaut  colossal  Jitatne<i<if  Plii<
iaH,  the  most  bonulifnl  of  wbioh  were  his  cliry«('
plinntiuo  statnca  of  ZeuEi,  at  Olyinpin  (more  Ih
forty  feet  hiKb,  i»eated),  and  of  Athene,  in  the
thcDon  at  Alliens;  tbo  Inrge-it  (more  than  iievi
ty  fe*'t  higb.  including  ihe  baw)  wttn  hi«  bp»»_j
Hiatae  commonly  cnll«d  Albeni^  Pnniiacboti.  ■>«  t  _
AcmiMilis.  Kt-e  ArnHxi:  nml  the  i))n)(trat)M«  f,
tbti  arlicle  Atiiknae,  p.  155.

Among  tho  work8  of  this  description  in.i«le  ex-
pressly by  or  fuv  the  KomauM,  those  moitt  fmineai.  I
ty  alluded  to  are  the  following:  (l\  A  »tata»  nf
[iipttrr  upon  the  Capitol,  made  by  onler  of  $p.
Carvilius,  from  the  arinoui  of  the  8aiunilc4,  yihkh
was  au  large  that  it  coubl  be  seen  from  (lie  AIInu
Moaiit.  (^)  A  bronze  statue  of  Apollo  at  tbr  Pil-
attne  I.ibran,',  to  wliieh  tlie  broiife  head  now  plv>
served  in  the  t^npitol  pnibably  bulongeil.  (^1  \
hronKO  statue  of  AugUHttiH  in  the  Koruui,  whitb
l»t»re  bis  name.  (■!)  The  coIokkuti  of  Nero,  wlikk
wnh  executed  by  Zenmloriif),  and  which  u  ijutitnl
by  Pliny  as  a  proof  that  the  ia«te  for  bronreatat-
iies  WW*  loRt.  fur  thiA  was  mlorniMl  with  guW  •"'I
silver.  Its  beigliT  was  III)  or  I'iU  feet  (Suet.  S'tr*.
Mt.  It  was  oviginally  placed  in  the  VMlilmlpn^
lbr^  Domini  Aniva,  but  wa»  afterwftr4!i«  runitved  ky
Vespasian  to  the  Via  8acrn,  and  Hadriau  ncn'o
moved  it  to  a  position  to  the  north  of  ihi'  C"in«-
seiim.  where  the  baaemeot  upon  which  ii  sIoihI  i*
sfill  to  bo  Mon;  from  it  the  contlgiions  niiipti-
theatre  is  supiM>i(cd  to  have  gniued  the  iiani' "f^
"Colo'isenni.''  Vespnaiau  lia<l  converti>il  it  iuW  »
Mlatue  of  the  ."^iin.  Twenty-four  elepbanla  *"f*
employed  by  Hadrian  to  remove  it,  when  lie"**
about  to  build  the  Temple  of  Veniw  nt  R-'iir
(8|»art.  //flrff.  19).  (5)  An  equestrian  stntni-  of  I**""
mitian,  of  bronite  gilt,  which  waa  placed  iu  •''
centre  of  the  Pomim:itat.  A'l'/r.  1. 1. 1).  3(W  I/*'^"
jellies,  Lvi  Cohi»r«  JncifM^  tt  Modtrnr*  (IK^"'
Torr,  Itbodn  iH  .im-itiit  fmrf  .\fodirn  Timm  (I^"  ■
and  the  ortlclat  CutCi:8^p.351,  and  Sevm  ^'^^

Colotes  (KoAftjTTjj).  (h  Au  Kpieun-a«  ttfU^f
»iicu«,  agaiiiitt  whom  PIntareb  wmte  two  trad*'  '
A  sculptor  of  Paros,  who  llourlshed  alioni  B-f  *^'
and  nstiisted  Pbidins  iu  making  tbe  cotugsnl  ip"
of  Zens  at  Olympia.

Colours. Se«  PicnjiiA.

Colum  (f)^^(!r,  ^diivioy).  A  strainer  orcolaiwl"'
used  tor  !ilniiniiig  wine,  milk,  oUve-od.  4n]^
jierfnnicM,  and  other  liquids.  8ucb  cida  wen'  ni**
of  hair,  broom,  or  rilsbes  (Verg.  Vetrnj.  ii.  HS,f^
X.71:  Colum.  i?./f.  tx.Io.xii.  17,  I9.."W».  Th«  <"•"
employv4l  for  utich  domestic  pnriKMr«,  as  ttnlB^il
wiue.  Were  ttowetimes  made  of  limui,  bnt  (te<ia"'''
ly  of  some  metal,  such  its  brouxe  or  silver.  S*''^
straliieiMre  often  represented  fu  Irrettkraie-psini'
lugs;  andaeveral  examples  of  elegant  silvcrstw"*


COLUMBAR

ere  of  Greek  workmanship  bftve  been  found  in  the  j

Crimea.

The  Romans  filled
tbe  otratner  with  ice
or  8D0W  (colum  Ntro-
liMiN)  in  onler  to  cool
anil  dilate  the  wine
at  the  same  time  tbnt
it  was  cleared.  Sev-
t'l-al  Etruscan  yascs
L.ive  been  discov*
t-ret],  in  wfaicli  tlie
)t)H)iit  cousists  of  a
strainer,  so  tbat  tbe
lii|uid  is  clarified  as
it  is  poured  out.

Ansouins  [Ep.  iv.
r>7)  uses tbe  word Colum,  strainer. {Mu$h>  Borban.)
cohm  to  denote  tbe  neusa,  ur  weel  for  snaring  fish,
^e  NAdSA.

Columbar.  A  kind  of  pillory,  iu  which  tbe
Lead  passed  through  a  bole,  like  the  boles  in  a
pigtion-bonse,  wbence  the  name  (Plant.  Bud.  iii.  6.

■ty).

Colmnbailtiiil  (irrpiorfpcaiy,  ■trtpiaTtpoTpot^tXov),
A  (love-cote  or  pigeoo-bouse.

Tbe  word  is  also  used  to  denote  the  following
objects,  which  derive  their  name  from  their  re-
st'inblance  to  a  dove-cote :

( 1 }  A  sepulchral  chamber.  The  word  was  met-
aphorically applied  to  a  subterraueau  vault  pro-
vided with  rows  of  small  niches,  lying  one  above
itie  other,  and  intended  for  tbe  reception  of  tbe
iiTus  containing  tbe  ashes  of  tbe  dead.  Tbese
large  burial-places  were  bnilt  by  rich  people  whose
freedraen  were  too  numerous  to  be  interred  in  the
family  burial-place.  They  were  also  erected  by
the  Caesars  for  their  slaves  and  freedmen.  Sev-
eral of  these  still  exist — for  instance,  that  of  Livia,
the  consort  of  Augustus,  wbo  built  one  for  her
freedmen  on  the  Appian  Way.  Common  burial-
places,  in  wbicb  a  uicbe  could  be  bespoken  before-


ColDmbariom. (Villa  Rufinl.)

hand,  were  sometimes  constructed  by  private  indi-
viduals on  speculation  for  people  who  were  too
poor  to  have  a  grave  of  their  own.  Columbaria
Were  usually  built  by  religious  or  mercantile  so-
cieties, or  by  burial  clubs  for  their  owu  members,
hi  such  cases  tbe  members  contributed  a  single
capital  iiayment  and  yearly  subscriptions,  wbicl)
gave  them  tbe  right  to  a  decent  burial  and  a
niche  iu  tbe  vault.  The  names  of  the  dead  wore
iri»cril>ed  on  marble  tablets  over  each  uicbe.  See
Lanciani,  Ancient  Home  in  the  Light  of  Secm^,Dia-
fotfriat.  pp.  139-133  (Boston,  1888).  ^^L

Each  of  tbe  niches  contained  a  pair  of  i^^Pnth


ft  COLUMELLA

tbe  names  of  tbe  persons  whose  ashes  they  con-
tained inscribed  over  them.  Tbe  use  of  tbe  word,
and  mode  of  occupation,  is  testified  iu  the  follow-
ing  inscription :

L.  Abucic 8  Hermes  in  hoc

ORDINE  AB  IMO  AD  8UMMUM

COLUMBARIA  IX. OLLAR XVIII.

81BI  POtiTERISQirt:  St'IS.

(2)  A  machine  used  to  raise  water  for  the  pur-
pose of  irrigation.  As  described  by  Vitruvius,  tbe
vents  through  which  the  water  was  conveyed  into
the  receiving  trough  were  termed  columbaria.
(See  Antlia.)  The  difference  between  tbat  rep-
reseutation  and  the  macbluo  now  under  considera-
tion consisted  in  tbe  following  points:  Tbe  wheel
of  the  latter  is  a  solid  one  {tympanum)  instead  of
ra«liated  {rota),  aud  was  worked  as  a  treadmill  by
men  who  stood  upon  platforms  projecting  from  the
fiat  sides  instead  of  being  turued  by  a  stream.
Between  tbe  intervals  of  each  platform  a  series  of
grooves  or  channels  {ivlujitbaria)  wore  formed  in
the  sides  of  the  tympanum,  through  which  tbe
water  taken  up  by  a  number  of  scoops  placed  on
tbe  outer  margin  of  the  wheel,  like  tbe  jars  iu  the
cut  referred  to,  was  conducted  into  a  wooden
trough  below.

(3)  Tbe  cavities  into  wbicb  the  extreme  ends  of
tbe  beams  upon  which  a  roof  is  supported  {tigno-
rum  cubilia),  and  which  are  represented  by  triglypbs
in  tbe  Doric  order,  were  termed  columbaria  by  the
Roman  architects ;  that  is,  while  they  remained
empty,  aud  until  filled  up  by  tbe  bea*!  of  the  beam.

(4)  Tbe  apertures  in  tbe  sides  of  a  vessel,  through
which  tbe  oars  passed  (Fest.  p.  169,  Milll.).

Columella,  L.  Ilmus  Moderatus.  A  Roman
writer,  born  at  Gades,  iu  the  reigu  of  Augustus  or
Tiberius,  and  a  coutemporary,  acconliug  to  bis
owu  account,  of  Seneca  and  Celsns.  The  elder
Pliny  also  frequeutiy  uutkea  mention  of  bim.  His
father,  Marcus  Columella,  ba<l  possessions  iu  tbe
province  of  Baetica.  The  sou  betook  himself  at
an  early  period  to  Rome,  where  he  passed  bis  life,
with  tbe  exception  of  a  few  journeys  to  Syria  aud
Cilicia.  Two  works  of  bis  remaiu :  one,  entitled
De  Be  Bustica,  in  twelve  books;  the  other,  De  Ar-
boi'ibhs.  This  last  mwle,  very  probably,  part  of  a
work  ou  agriculture,  in  four  books,  which  Colu-
mella bad  published  as  the  first  edition  of  that
which  we  now  have  iu  twelve  books.  Ou  this
supposition,  Cassiodorus  was  correct  in  saying  tbat
Columella  had  written  a  work  in  sixteen  books  on
rural  economy.  This  author  appears  to  have  been
but  little  read.  Among  the  ancieuts,  Pliny,  Ser-
vius,  Cassiodorus,  and  Isidorus  are  tbe  only  ones
wbo  cite  bim.  He  fell  iuto  almost  complete  neg-
lect after  Palladius  had  made  an  abridgmeut  of
his  work.  (See  Palladius.)  The  style  of  Colu-
mella is  pure  and  elegant;  if  any  reproach  can  be
made  against  him,  it  is  that  of  being  too  studied
in  his  lauguage  for  the  subject  of  which  he  treats.

Tbe  tenth  book,  wbicb  he  originally  intended  to
be  tbe  conclusion,  is  iu  verse  (dactylic  bexanietei-s),
and  is  a  sort  of  supplement  to  tbe  Gronjit-s  of  Ver-
gil, whose  style  Columella  imitates  with  consider-
able success.  It  treats  of  gardening.  The  eleventh
and  twelfth  books  were  subsequently  added  by
the  author,  as  not  having  exhausted  his  sultject.
The  best  MS.  of  Columella  is  the  Codex  Sanger-
manensis  of  the  ninth  century,  now  in  St.  Peters-
burg. The  Bea  Bustica  is  contained  in  the  cnlleo-


COLL'HEN


W4


COLPSnCA


tiritix  nf  the  Scriploirt  Itri  Iturliair,  nud  bas  bocD
t*L'|tiinit.'ly  fditcd  hy  Rom  (KlciiBbiirg.  179GI,  and
1»1(.  X.  ill  Wenisdorffi  I'oelatr  /.afiMi'  Min»ix9.  (Soe
Iliirlicnt,  De  Columeihe fita ft Scriptit  (NuiK'y,

Coiameu  (later  cilmkx).  Tlie  n>of  of  a  ImilU-
iiij;,  or  more  particulitrly  tbe  beaiu  iu  Ibf*  liiglicHt
jmrt  of  ib<j  slope  of  a  roof.

Colamna  (kiW.  trnXot).  A  coltium,  fiiiptoyid
iu  :irchitrctiirc  to  iniivpurt  tbc  enlAbiattiro  tiiid
nmf  of  iiti  ediHcc.  It  is  i'otupnsed  uf  tbreo  priiioi-
jiiil  part^:  thu  capital  (ro;rrfi(fivm),  tho  obnft  {tea-
j»i(«f),  an<I  tb<'  base  t^t'trat.  Tb«  column  \va*i,  niorc-
iiver,  roiiHtnutfii  in  tbiw  principal  styles  or  unltTs,
M(i;h  pi>«M;Miiij{  cbnroctcrUtio  funns  and  prupor-
tioiiM  nf  it*  own,  diBtihclivi)  of  tbc  order,  but  by
uii|)roreaf4inijiil  penuinH  niOHt  rvailily  dULiii-cittahfHl
by  tbe  dilfi^reiice  iu  tliu  capiUila.  (L)  DouKa,  ilie
Doric;  tbo  oldest,  iuu«t  8iibMautia1,  and  btiaviust  of
all,  wbicb  bas  no  base,  and  u  vi-ry  simple  capitnl.
(Seo  C'Ai'iTULiM.)  ('2}  loMCA,  tbe  Iodic ;  tbu ueit
Iu  ligbtDOss,  wtiicb  is  fnnii<ibcd  ^Titb  a  ba«e  ami
lias  its  capitul  (:I(>conited  witb  volutes.  (See  C'Al't-
TtLUM  )  (SlCoHl.vnuA.  titti  Cnriiitbian  ;  tlin  ligtit-
«at  of  all,  wliich  lia«  a  hutc  and  a  plinth  below  it,
and  a  ducp  capital  omainuntccl  with  t'oliiiBe.  (See
CaI'Itv'LI  .M.)  To  thciw  arv  ofu*n  adtlcil :  (4)  Tre-
iu.NU'A,  the  TuMCHU  ;  only  knowu  fruni  tbe  ai'cuniil
of  Vilnivius,  and  whiob  nearly  rcMJinbled  tbe  Ro-
man Doric;  aud  (&)  Comi'O^Ita,  tbo  CouipoHitc;
a  mixed  order,  formed  by  coinbinuig  tb«  votulea
uf  tbo  Ionic  witb  the  loliagu  of  tbe  C'oi-intbian.

Fi>;s.  i  and  2  give  instances  of  tbe  Dotiti  Htylo
from  tbe  temple  at  Paostura  aud  the  I^arthenon  at
Athuu9.  The  Doric  colnmuconBistsiA)  of  the  shaft.
which  iiicruattCH  in  diauietvr  almost  invinibly  up
ii)  ulidiit  »n«-<iiiarti'r  uf  iitt  height,  and  diiniiiisliMi
i«1iKlilly  uftfr  that  pi>int.  It  him  no  biuie,  bnt  reats
itnniHiliutcly  on  tbo  xtytobate.  It  in  Knrronnded
witb  twniicirciilur  Untingn,  uifuting  each  other  at
a  nbarp  angle.  TIii-mu  wurc  rbiHt-lhid  »itb  a  cedar-
wood  tool  after  titu  Kepunite  drumit  had  Imwu  [Hit
togt-tbcr.  (B)  Tbc  cujiilul.  ThJH  (-onmiKtH  of  tbruo
parta — (ti)  Iht*  h]/p«ilrachelion,  or  neck  uf  ilio  €S>1-
nniD,  a  ounttDuatioa  of  the  Hbuft,  but  soparatod  by


an  iodentalion  from  the  other  drutti.v  It  u  owW
at  tbe  to|)  than  at  tbc  bottom,  uml  is  geut-rallyut
uanietiled  withbevenil  puraUel  and  horizontal hkj[B
{b)  The  roAiHiM,  a  circular  utoulditig  ur  cusbinu,
which  widens  greatly  tovrnrda  tbe  top.  <f)  Tti*
tthax  or  abacnt,  a  oqnare  »I»b  t^npportinx  liio  irdii-
ti'uve  or  upittlyliou.  Tho  heitfbt  uf  the  ihifi  ~i
UHiiatly  !H  tii»*'K|  thuditilancv  between  tberolBnuLi
1^  tinioii,  the  diuiiieler  i>f  the  haxe  of  thd  rnlniin
The  urchilnive  ■)<  .1  tjiiudrangubu-  bean  of  aIdjv,
roocbiiig  from  piUar  to  pillar.  On  (his  tiKitu  rMli
tbu  I'riezu  {tttpkorua},  Mo  ciiUed  from  thtf  m^lofKi
which  aroadorued  with  8ciil|itnrL-«  in  rvlirf.  Tbw
metopes  are  wiaare  apaces  betworu  tbe  liigljpiii:
tbe  triglypha  are  surfaces  cut  into  thtro  mnrave
gmo*'i>8,  two  whole  grooves  in  the  eeuirr,  aiid  nwi
half  gnfuves  at  tbe  sideit.  One  is  placrti  omfuck
pillar,  ami  one  lii'twwn  each  pair  of  pillnra.  Tlw
i^iitabliilurH  lit  coinphtt«il  by  a  proJe4.'ttng  curvm'.
a  slab  crowned  wiib  u.HiiniilK  lieudiiig-oarN', i^
lower  surface  of  which  t.i  orn;imonled  with  sUijiitijt
corbels  {arayovtv,  mulali).

An  instance  is  givuu  in  Fig.  W  from  iho  tvupl* on
tbe  Ilifisus  at  Atbeua. TboM  ant  lof\iur  Ib^u  ilte


4 UdltllU.' d. ABUUlfiU.
b.  Tri|[ty[iti.i. «.  t'liKlu)^


(1)  rrm  tktf  TtnirU  M

lk>  ItlBIU,  AUmMl


I01UC  Ord>r


(It  rr»< lU  Mmii


0)  ■>»«.  Ik*  TmwI*  ■(


Dono  Ordor.


Doric,  their  beigbt  being  ^\-9\  UmM  the  diO'
eter  of  the  lower  part.  The  eiilargrmeut  "i^
Inn-er  part  is  also  IcHs  than  in  thu  |)<iri<-  oihsflO-
tbe  dii^tauoi*  between  each  rolnuin  giTAr--'  •'""'
eter»>^he  llntingM  (generatly 'J-1  in  imuil-
auf^^^^led  by  Biuall  tlat  huHW^w.  i  ^^
coli^^Biat)  a  bane,  couaistiug  of  a  aqiian  tl»>


COtUMNA


386


COtUMNA ROSTRATA


inXiw&os),  and  several  ciisliioD-like  gapportu  Hcp-
jiruttMl  hy  grooves.  Tlie  capital,  ngain,  is  mure  nr-
tiatically  developed.  The  neck,  instead  of  fliitings,
has  five  Itfuves  worked  iu  relief.  Tbe  echinus  is
very  snttfll  and  oriiameuteil  with  an  egg  pattern.
Over  it,-iHstead  of  the  abaeiu,  is  a  four-cornered
cuMhion  ending  before  and  behind  in  spiral  volutes,
siipl>orting  a  narrow  sqnare  tdab,  which  is  also
attorned  with  an  egg  pattern.  The  architrave  is
divided  into  three  bands,  projecting  one  above  the
other,  and  upon  it  rises,  in  an  nil  interrupted  sur-
face, tbe  frieze,  Mhirned  with  relieis  coutiiniuitsly
iildug  its  whole  length.  Finally,  the  cornice  is
roinposed  urditfereut  parts.

The  Corinthian  colnnin  is  shown  in  Fig.  4,  fmni
the  monument  of  Lysicrat^n  at  Athens.  The  base
and  shaft  are  identical  with  the  Ionic,  but  the
capital  takes  the  form  of  an  n)>en  calix  foiined
of  acanthus  leaves.  Above  this  is  aiioth«ir  M-t  of
Ifiiven,  from  between  whicli  grow  stttlks  with  sniall
h>ave*t,  rounded  into  the  form  of  volutes.  Oi>  this
ivMts  a  small  abacus  widening  (owanls  the  top,
and  on  this,  again,  the  eiitablatni-u,  which  is  bor-
mwe«l  from  the  Ionic  onler.  On  the  hntnau  tiguti's
employed  instead  of  colninns  to  supiKirt  the  entab-
lature, see  Atlas;  Canrpuori;  Cakyak.

The  Romans  adopted  the  Greek  styles  of  column,
hitt  not  always  iu  their  pure  form.  They  were
t'oodest  of  tbe  CortDthian,  which  they  labonred  to
enrich  with  new aud  often  excessive  ornamentation.
Fur  instauce,  they  crowned  the  Corinthian  capital
with  the  Ionic,  thus  forming  what  is  aUled  the
Roman  or  composite  capital.  Tbe  style  known  as
TUSCAK  is  a  degenerate  form  of  the  Doric.  Tbe
Tnscan  column  has  a  smooth  shaft,  in  height  7
diameters  of  the  lower  part,  and  tapering  up  to
Ibree-quarters  of  its  lower  dimensionH.  Its  base
CDHsist^t  of  two  parta— a  circular  plinl  )i  and  a  cnsh-
iuu  of  equal  height.  The  capital  is  fornitMl  of  throe
parts  of  eqoal  height.

In  other  styles,  tiM>,  the  Roniaiis  soinrtimeM
ailoptod  the  smooth  iiisteiul  of  the  tint'fd  stutn,
M,  for  instance,  in  the  Pantheon  (q.  v.).

This  most  beautiful  i>f  all  archit-tM^tural  supports
•iriginate^l  from  tbe  simplest  l>eginning>4.  A  few
ntning  jioles,  or  the  straight  trunks  of  trees,  stuck
into  tbe  ground,  in  order  to  support  a  cnws-pii^ce
fiira  thatch  of  boughs  or  straw  t^o  rest  upon,  formed
tlie  tirst  shaft  (ficapm)  of  a  column.  When  a  tile
urslab  of  wood  was  placed  under  the  bottom  of
the  trunk  to  form  a  foundation  and  prevent  the
shaft  from  siukiug  too  deeply  into  tlic  gnmnd,  the
tiret  notion  of  a  base  (»p%ra)  was  attained ;  and  a
"imilar  one,  place<l  on  its  tup,  to  affonl  u  brondur
surface  fur  the  cross-beam  or  architrave  to  rest
qpon,  furnished  tbe  tirst  capital.  Thus  these  sim-
pie  elements,  eIaborat«d  by  the  genius  and  indus-
try of  succeeding  ages,  produced  tbe  sevt-ral  dis-
tinctive properties  of  the  architectural  ordern.

One  point,  however,  is  to  be  constantly  borne  in
mind — that  the  column  of  ancient  architecture  aU
wjiyH  implies  a  real,  and  not  a  fictitious,  support;
for  neither  the  Q^oeks  nor  the  Ronmns,  until  the
artit  had  declined,  ever  made  use  of  columns  as  the
mmlfnis  do,  in  their  buildings,  as  a  HU|>er8uonM
unmnient,  or  mere  accessory  to  tliu  edificv,  but  as
s  main  and  essentially  constituent:  )M>rtion  of  the
fitbric,  which  would  immetUat^l}'  fall  to  pieces  if
tliey  were  removed  ;  and  that  tbe  abusi^ACpUcn-
tion  of  coupled,  clustered,  incaslruted^^^Lilded
«oliimuN,  etc.,  was  never  admitted  iu  (i^^Pnrchi-
13


lecture ;  for  the  chief  beauty  of  the  column  con-
sists iu  its  isolation,  by  means  of  which  it  presents
an  endless  variety  of  views  and  changes  of  scene,
with  every  movement  of  the  spectator,  whether
seen  in  rank  or  in  tile.  See  Mauch,  Die  Arekttekt.
Ordn.  der  (Iriech.,  Hifmer,  und  Neueren  Meitter  (5th  ed.
Berlin,  ItiGi);  Reber,  Geschichte  der  Baukungt  tn*  Al-
lerthum  (Leipzig,  ltJG6);  Fergusson,  Hiat.  of  Archi-
tecture, vol.  i.  CM  eil.  Boston,  18U3);  LUbke,  Hist,  of
Jrt,2  vols.  (Eug.  trans.,  N.  Y.  Id77).

Columna  Coohlia.  A  column  with  a  spiral  stair-
case rnuning  through
the  centre  so  as  to
furnish  t\  means  of  as-
cent to  the  top  (Victor,
Df  Refi.  Urb.  lioiu.  8
and  9).  These  were
usually  co/umna«  triutH-
phalfH,  surmounted  by
the  statue  of  the  [lenuin
iu  whorte  honour  the
column  was  erected.
Two  still  i-i-.main  at
Rome:  (1)  the  Column
of  Trajan  (hIiowu  iu
the  illustration), en>ct-
ed  by  ApoUodorus,  a.D.
104;  and  (2)  the  Col-
umn of  M.  Anrelins
AutouiunH.


m


Coliimna  Cochlta. (Oolumn  of
Tnijon  )


Columna  Rostrata.  A  colunm  adorned  with
the  beaks  {roati-a)  of  captured  ships,  original-
ly set  up  in  the  Roman  Forum  to  commem-
orate the  naval  victory  of  Onilins  (q.  v.)  over
the  Carthaginians  (n.c.  260).  This  monument
was  destroyed  by  lightning
during  the  interval  lietweeu
the  Scrtnid  and  Tbini  Punic
Wars.  A  new  column  was
erected  liy  the  emjieror  Clau-
tlinsand  an  iuscription  placed
upon  it.  Monnnsen  (Corp.  In-
mrript.  /All.  i.  40)  holds  that
cither  tlie  original  column
had  no  iiiKcription  at  all,  or
else  a  short  and  HJniple  one.
At  any  rate,  the  inscription
on  the  column  of  Chtudins,
part  of  which  was  excavated
in  1566  in  the  Forum,  is  not  a
copy  of  the  tirst  one,  as  many
of  the  verbal  forms  contained
ill  it  ure  too  antique,  while
others  are  too  Diuderu,  for
the  age  iu  which  it  professes
t«i  have  lM*n  written.  Thus,
the  form  c  is  ikwhI  fur  g;  -kt
fur  it;  ablatives  in  -D,  else-
where nnkuovvn  idivtntored,
aacaled) — all  of  whicli  ai-o  too  archaic;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  n  and  .M  at  the  end  of  wonls  are
nevfr  oinitled  iu  it,  and  in  or  KN  is  utied  for
KNIH).  A  imrtion  of  the  Columna  Rnxtrata  is  now
iu  the  Palazzo  dei  Coimervatori  on  the  Capitol  at
Rome.  See  Wordsworth,  Fraf/meiih  and  Speiimeuf
«/  Earifi  iMtin,  pp.  170,  412-414;  RitschI,  Inacriptio
quae  fertur  Columuae  lioalratae  DuiUa»ue  (Berlin,
i8.'>2);  Momniscu,  Corp.  Inacript.  Lai.  \.  195,  pp.
37-40;  and  Allen,  JiemnaiiU  of  Early  Latin,  pp.  67-
68.


Columns  Roetrala.  (R«fl-
turatioD  by  Canine  I


COLUMNA  TRIUUPHALIS


886


COLUMNAR HERCUUS


Calanma  TriumphaUs.  Single  culiimnfi  were
ereot«d  ^m  the  earliest  timea  to  coiumeinorate
persons  or  events.  Eiirly  Rniiian  examples  are
tboae  in  honour  of  C.  Maeiiins  and  P.  Minuciiis,
mentioned  by  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxiv.  $  31).  Of  a  later
date  is  the  marble  monolith  to  lulius  Caesar,  set
np  in  the  Fornm  after  his  death  (Suet.  lul.  85).

More  important,  as  well  on  account  of  tlieir  im-
posing size  as  of  tlieir  value  to  the  archfeulogist,
are  the  lofty  and  elaborate  columns  erected  in  im-
perial times.  The
finest  of  these
monuments  is  that
tlguTMl  iu  the  ar-
ticle Column A
CocHLiij,  and
\rhich  was  voted
by  the  Senate  in
honour  of  Trajan,
and  executed  by
Apollodorus  iu  a.  i>.
104.  The  column
Itself  i»  apparent-
ly of  the  Tuscan
oitier,  and  is  com-
posed of  huge
drams  of  while
marble,  pierced
within  so  as  to
form  a  spiral  stalr-
cane,  to  which
there  is  an  en-
trance in  the  ped-
estal. A  bas-relief
of  the  chief  epi-
sodes in  the  Da-
oiau  campaigns
winds  round  the
shaft.  Including
the  bronze  statue
of  the  emperor,  the
total  height  was
not  lean  than  130
feet.  ItHtillstuuds
in  tbo  Foro  Traia-
no  at  Rome.

The  same  mode
of  construction  is
found  in  the  An-
tonine  Column,
erected  in  honour
of  Marcus  Anrvlius
and  illustrating
his  victories  over
the  Marcomanni,
still  to  be  seeu  iu
the  Piazza  della
Colonna.  Much
less  admirable,  ar-
tistically, was  the
column  erected  by
Constantine  in  the
Forum  of  Constantinople.  It  was  erecte<I  oa  a
pillar  of  white  marble,  20  feet  in  height,  and  was
composed  of  ten  pieces  of  porphyry.  On  its  sum-
mit, 120  feet  from  the  earth,  was  a  colossal  bronze
statue  of  Apollo,  supposed  to  be  the  work  of  Phid-
ias. Afragnientof  this  structure  survives  at  Cnu-
stantinople  under  the  name  of  "the  Burnt  Pillar.**
Of  the  time  of  the  same  emperor  was  the  curious
Serpeutino  Column  nf  brass,  formed  of  the  twibtvd


ColQinn  of  K.  Aureltaa  Antonlnua


bodies  of  three  brazen  snakes,
whose  triple  heads  had  once
supported  the  golden  tripotl
which  the  victoi-s  at  Salainis
bad  consecrated  at  Delphi  in
commemoration  of  the  defeat
of  Xerxes.  This  pillar  stood
iu  the  Hippodrome.

Lat«Htof  all  was  the  Column
of  Theodosiua  II.,  figured  be-
low, whose  base  still  exists  at
Constantinople.

Colunmae  HerofiUa.  "The
Pillars  of  Hercules";  a  name
often  given  to  Calp6  and  Abyla,
or  the  heights  on  either  side
oftbeStraitsofOibraltar.  The
tradition  was  that  the  MinI-
iterranean  bad  no  outlet  in
this  quarter  until  Hercules
broke  through  the  mountain  s«pentiD«  Coionn  ot
barrier,  and thus  formed  the  ""

present  straits.  The  rocky  height  on  eitberside
of  the  opening  was  fabled  to  have  been  p]sc«<l
there  by  him  as  a  memorial  of  bis  achiftvemtrni,
and  as  marking  the  limits  of  his  wanderings  tow'
ards  the  west.  See  ABTI.A  ;  Calp&;  Medfrbra-
NE17M  MaRB.

The  name  Colnninae  Herculis  was  also  often  >]>-
plied  to  the  two  large  pyramidal  columns  wt  up
by  the  Phcenicians  in  their  voyages  as  laDtlmarlu


COLUMNAmUM


w


COMA


.rhirb  to  rreoj^Dize  (larik-iilur  fnoAta  on  Kiib-
ieiit  visild.  Tliww  I'illitDt  were  *<,*p*;clivoly
bat«d  to  tUe  I'hte-

^  0


bit  Hi'Tcult^  hikI
bfcarte,  u  pervuiii-
^  Ibr  8(111  mill  I  lie

El. iSt^Tiir.  (ifrm.
Tlio  acc(iriipiiu,v>
luati«ti<>ii  iKUikeii
|l  a  Tvriaii  I'ulii.

iDlumnariam. A

bii|Hip<*>il  til  ttii^'  lime
nliuK  Cdcfliit  niitiii


Af


lad  Jit.  xiii.  t).

Pdaa A  <li8tair. .Svr  Kt'st^

^flthoa  fKAnvAif)  and  CoUnthus  iKdXXav-
I.  A  nntivf  nf  LyrnititlJM  iit  K^y|it,  siipiKwod
^v*  livi'il  alM>ui  iln*  Wjfiiiiiiiit:  «.f  iho  (,ixth
Aiiry.  lie  wrote  u  jmhuh  in  mix  caiitiw,  ttii-
M  Ciltylfmi^  (KnAi/Awyucti).  iw  woll  »«  iilln-r
tbat  are  iiuw  luel.  He  i»  Iwlifved  hIwi,
Vitlioiit  any  j^icat  ik-Kn-r  of  cvriaiuly,  lo
n  ihi-  author  oC  a  poem,  in  ;(!W  vitm-«,
iklWanllie  title  of  TU  Rajft  "f  UeUn  (VMvrjt
■NY^j.  Tbih  [HH-tii  cuiiimeiices  u  itb  the  uiiptlaU
[F«1cua  and  Tliutis,  and  tli«  iioet  giK'tt  oit  to  ro-
pt  tbe  jiidgiQfliit  of  PariM,  llie  voyiigL.  rif  tlint
'in  tn  Sparta,  ami  the  ab<liictioii  of  Helen,
b  iaVf*  place  af^cr  the  firMt  iiitervion-.  Thirt
,  lorCnliitbiiA  niia  diHCovL-n»l  by  Curdinal  Hon-
MoD  along  with  tliat  uf  Qiiiniiiit  StuyiuiUMiH,  ami
In  Ik  foand  in  the  Didot  collection  edil«il  by
irtuul  I>Ubnvr.

<i[<>^7).  The  bair  of  tbc  bead.  Ikt^idvH
iral  term,  Ibere  are  vartuim  otlier  wnrds,
in  Gn>pk  and  Latin,  aij^nifyuig  \\\v  bair,
of  wbivb  aci|nirett  its  distinctive  lueanlii;;
MSM  pbyNical  projurty  of  tbe  bnir  iTwIf
I  (mm  ftonio  iwruliarity  in  tbe  nmde  nf  arraiij'-
fit,  tbe  principal  of  wbicb  are  hh  f.fllowd  :  ( t  )
»"^,  n  brad  of  bair  wbnii  r.Hn'fn)ly  dre««ed.
f  Xainj,  projKrly  tbe  niiuie  iif  a  bonw*  or  linn,  it*
P^  to  Ai;;iitfy  long,  Uowiiiji;  bnir. {?,)  ^ufif).  wlirn

Enilcly  lifted,  iuplicH tbe bair  of  tbe  heatl in
»^  "f  disorder  iuridfiil In  a  peiiiun under  a
P'  iif  fear. l4i  Wtntat,  from  tt/iicw  or  ittic<a,  tb(*
FWben  eomtied  anil  dre»»ed. (o|  Qfji'f.  a  neiiernl
fur  bair,  fntin  I  be  plnrnl  of  wbieli  tbe  Koutaim
ii»(>«  borro«e<l  Ibeir  wonl  inratt  —rpi^anrtt  and
are UMd in  tlie  same «iRn.>iH. f6)  Kopcrt]
),  from  (be  old  word  Kvp, ''  llie  bead."  sig-
pcrly  Ibe  bair  on  tbc  top  ***'  ''"'  bead;
Iteuce  B  particular  faabioii  of  arranging  the


V


AK«aiw ^Hr.liMli  uIAinlm  )


biilr  anKinjt  Ibe  liii't-k  mmien  wa«  t^^niied  xupirfi-
(iot't  oi',  when  worn  in  tbe  bauiv  Hlyb-  by  lb«  luvn.
il  n'lut  ilettiginitod  by  auotber  derivative  from  tbo
aanio  word,  Kftut^vXot.  Tu  produee  tbi»i  effucl  tbc
bair  wa«  dmnn  up  all  round  tbe  bead  from  tbo
front  and  bnt-k,  and  fastened  iu  a  bow  on  the  top,
nd  exeinplitird  in  tbe  two  preceding  bustM — one  id'
the  Aptillo  Belvedere,  tbe  other  of  ArU'Uii«— from
ibe  Rrilihb  Miisi-iun.

luHtead  of  a  liaiid,  ibu  (i^ople  of  Alliens  fa«let)ed
tbe  bow  viitb  an  orn»iuiouial  c1a«|i,  fashioned  like
a  grosiibopper,  to  dhow
that  they  v/vrv  aborigi-
iie«.  K/Mfifi/Xoc  iH  also
iHted  for  a  cap  of  net-
work. (Seo  Calantica.)
(T)  MuXAtit,  which  prop-
erly meunKWiK>],waHatfio
iiwd  forlliewbnrt.ronttd,
curly  bnir,  which  rewna-
1>I«>»  tbo  lleece  c)f  a  lamb,  ^"'''7

Hlleb IM in M*CU in NOIQO

of  tbevurlyOrmjk  (M!ulpt-

ures,  purticuliirly  iu tbo Hwaclea (Rriu«h  Umnnm.)

beads  of  Heracles,  one  »»f

which  isMubjoiued  fruni  a  apeciineii  iu  the  Briltfib

Mimenm.

(»)  Kfpat  was  a  (ireek  t*rm  u»ed  wb^rn  the
hair  wax  romlKtil  up  fpum  Ibe  tenipleR  on  each
Niile.tio  aa  to  givo  it  tbu  itppcaraneo  of  two  horut,
iw  i»  Ncou  In  tbc  heuda  uf  fauus  and  aalyrK,  aud  Iu
tbo  bunt  of  Zuna  on  the  ftiUowiitg  page.  ^9)  KiW-
foc,  n\oxf*^s,  ;(Xidu(,  the  bnir  which  falls  in  ring-
letn,  bltlier  natural  or  artificial,  nbicb  was  s4tmo-
tiiiiea  called  (tluorpL'jync  and  TrXuxafioc.  All  thusu
t^TuiH,  wbeu  Hirirtty  appropriHtcd,  wcm  to  dtwig-
iiHle  Ihat  aitignbtr  Htyle  of  eoifTurw  wldch  in  ol»-
MiTvaKln  in  l^lnui-aii  aiul  early  Greek  workN,  niid
eoniHioii  to  both  Mexofi,  rh  Ih  M-eii  in  the  caiita  from
Ibe  toinplo  of  AihcDi^  at  Aegiim  In  tbo  Urilish
Mii^uiini.

itct-idcs  tbc  gcuoric  coma,  tbe  Bomans  made  use
uf  ihtr  f*ilb»wiiig  IvriUK.  oxi>ri:.v»ive  of  «tuuo  liecuUar
ipiutiticH  in  tb<^  hair, or  particular  mmle  of  urranga-
ment:  (1)  CapiU>u,  according  tu  the  uld  elymolo-
gistH,  ifitaKt  twpitin  pxiHM.  Oi)  Criww,  the  hiur  when
earefiiUy  rirewied.  (3)  t'flwartM,  which  let  »nid,
though  witbtviii  much  probability,  to  be  counrctvd
with  Ctfnin,  tbe  hiiir  of  (lie  male  m^x,  IwHiatiHe  they
wore  it  Mhort,  wbfn-ax  tbe  womuii  diil^  not.  (4)
cincinHu;  KtKivvat,  the  hair  when  plaltAd  and
druifMd  in  cirub^ti.  like  the  bea<l
on  page  17  (n.v.  Acv»),  an  It  ia
still  wuru  by  tbc  wamou  of
Moladi  Gaictn  (Forniia«:<).  Mar-
tial terms  tbeae  ciivlox  aintli,
and  Cbiudian  orfxt,  (r>)  CirruA,
a  lock  of  curly  liair.  The  hx'ka
which  fell  over  the  forehead
were  termed  caprotiae  (irpo«i{-
fuov),  the  modern  "bang'*  or
"  friiigo" :  tbofW!  which  fell  from
the  temple!!  over  the  vnrK,  rtnljotf,
I(olh  the  anliaa  and  m/jroirfl*  are
nccuraU'ly  traci-d  in  tbe  Ogtire  of  Cupid  Iteiidliig
hit  how,  iu  (be  Hritifih  Musenni,  from  wbicb  tb«
accompanying  ilhiMlnttion  ih  taken.

All  ihu  (Jrvek  divinities  are  distinguished  by  a

characteristic  coiQ'nre,  modified  in  inline  rcspocta

as  tbo  art-a  pnigreaseil,  but  nearer  nlt^red  Id  char-

i  acter  from  tbc  original  model ;  so  that  any  iwrsoii


CnpM. (BrMub  Mu-
•eum]


COUA.


Mi


COMA


tiilpmbly  riHivenaitl  wiiU  tlic  worki  nf  Greek  art uushom ;  for  irp,  iw  well  ha  A|k»11u,
limy  uliiitmt  itivuri»lil,v  riH-o»rii2e  tlit  deity  rcpre- 1  periwtiml  yoiith.


•phUmI  frtiiti  iIiL>  iliKpuMitioii  of  tlir  Intir. We  pro-
oeiid  to  apevify  mmiiu  of  tliu  iihticipal  ones.


^u


'n


LIODl  HMd

(BrtlHb  UuMnm)


Zaos.
(TkIIcU.)


SR«(>la (British  Uu
Kum.)


Tliolicailof  t)u>  lion  18  tho  typi>npiin  vhicli  ttiAt
of  Zctia  iti  funiu'ii,  particnliirly  iu  the  dit-po^itioii
oftbe  hair,  whiidi  riHca  fi-nm  Ibe  forebcttd  nnd  t'»)l«
bnck  ill  loom  curia  ilowii  tbe
sidos of  tbot'iice, until  it  forms
a  jiincti^x)  with  the  brnril,
Tbis  is  made  clear  by  thr  two
preci'diiig  ilhiMtnitioiiH,  one
of  wliirli  itt  fniMi  :i  Hljttnii
(if  Xhiim  in  tlit<  Vutii'nu,  ntip-
ponrNl  to  bo  a  copy  of  I  tit!  Plli-
tliiiii  'Atixta ;  »u<l  tli»  otlii-r  U  .1
Iioi/h  lioiyl  fmin  the  Britinli
Hii-4eiirti.  Tlie  hilmk;  dir<|KiHi-
tion  of  the  hiiir  in  liken  ist:
preferred  in  nil  the  reiil  or
pretended  de»c<>hdiit)tM  from
ZeuK,  Hticli  itH  Ae»L-Td:ipui!i,
AteXHtidf^r,  ete

Plntfl  or  Sempid  huH  tUo
bnir  loiignr,  strai/rhter,  iiitil
lower  over  tlie  forchi-vul,  iu
onler  to  give  iK-verity  to  (ho
tui|H!i:l,  and  nitli  the  mudiut  on  liin  head,  its  repre*
Kciited  in  tU«i  Hl»>Vf>  di'iiwiiLg  fmin  the  Rrilitli  Mu-
ftenin.  Tli<^  rn>i>i1iiiH  i*  di-eomled  with  An  olivo
branch,  for  oil  won  usvd  in-
steul  of  vrine  In  ucrillcott
toPloto.

The  hair  of  Poiteidon
i«  cut  tjner  and  Kbur|H>r
tbnii  that  o(  Zuuit.  It
riseti  fmin  (be  forehi-tul.  nnd
Dieu  falU  down  In  Uakea,
M  if  well  in  lUf  tniinner
roprvw^nted  in  I  In-  iHT«m-
panyiiii;  head  from  the  Brit*
iith  MiiHt-nm.

ApoUu  Is  usiiftlty  n'prr-
oe  II  ted
with  the

Kfjta^vXat :  bnt  when  the  hair  ih
not  tie«l  op  on  the  Top  of  the
hentl  it  if*  always  IctiK  mid
tlowiiig  over  the  neek  anil
shonlders,  nsrepre«cntC4l  in  tlie
annexed  illtintration  from  n
very  benntifnl  niid  early  Greek
M^ulptun'  in  the  British  Mn-
Benin. Ilenw  lie  in  ealled  in-

imm.)  DionyHiiM  uIho  wuarM  bis  hair


Poeeldoa (Brttlsh  Mu
t^sin  )


III  the  niMliiru  ago  of  Greek  art,  HcnuM
short  eiirly  hiiir,  ah  represented  by  the  boN
the  left  baud  in  tbu  illustration  ImsIhw,  fr
statae  in  the  Vutican,  which  was  for  a  toa^
falsely  lutcribed  to  AJitinotls;  bat  in  very
Greek  wiirk»  he  U  rcpreseiiteil  with  braiiUd
in  the  BLrudeuu  style,  and  a  tbari>-pointcd  \
(see  the  right-hand  ilhislration,  from  an  alt
the  Museiim  of  the  Capitol  at  R«mie>,  wfe
is  termed  cn^iji^frwywir.


EtrMfiiui  HBima

(Ckp.  Uns.)


JIercule4  hu4  short,  crii'p  hair,  like  the  curb
tweeii  (bo  hums  of  n  bull,  the  hesMt  of  wbinb
nin)  forniffd  the  model  for  liis,  us  \h  exfiniilifis
the  subjoined  dniwiiif^fi,  one  being  the  head  b(
Knrnese  HercnluK,  tliii  other  that  of  a  bull,  fri
boH-nOiff  lit  Koine,  in  which  all  the  ebaracterii
of  Hercnti-H,  tin*  niiihII  head,  ihiek  nee k,  and
ticiiljir  form  uf  tbu  hair,  ure  strongly  preaerrei


FirnciMi  B«rcuW


IloiMl  iiT  KnU.


The  liBir  of  HeriJ  or  liiiio  is  parted  id  iIm  I
and  on  the  top  of  the  he«il  is  a  kiad  of  lUi
ealle<)  in  Liitin  roittna.  mul  in  Greek  tn^ttMrnf,
itd  i-eHeml>1aneu  to  a  kMii;:,  the  bniad  part  of  1
is  plnced  al»i>vi*  the  ff»ro-
head,  while  tlie  two  lashe»
aet  an  IhiikIs  to  eon  fine  Ibe
hiiir  on  the  side«  of  the
lieiitt  nnd  fiihU-n  tl  lieliind,
ill  the  innnncr  ri>prrspnte«l
ill  the  annexed  illiiHtnitioti
from  the  Ilritisb  Mii7«iim.

l'i»lla-s  is  rai-ely  seen  with-
out her  helmet;  but-  wlmn
portrayed  with  herbeail  un-
covered tlio  hair  is  tied  up
ill  a  knot  at  wine  dintanee
fnini  Ibe  l)i>nil,aiid  Ibeii  falls
fnun  tltf  band  in  long  paral-  „,,^  ,  ^.j,  ^^^^
lul  curU.  Mb  Mf  ■■!!


COMA


COMA


ApliM(lit6  mud  Arlrtnin  art  someliiiies  adoniitl

■ilb I1h>  KtipvttfSft ; Itiii Until tlivM! ttiriujliint

UMn  fnM|Ut*iilly  rr|>ri<wt'tit<*il  uith llicir  )i<iir

Ml  in  lite  )>iiii|>le  »ty]c  of  tln^  vouiii;  Grtrek

H»,  whose  liair  is  parted  lu  iVuul.  unit  c(iiitliu-tf<l

mul  to  tbe  buck,  m>  im  tu  coucejil  thu  ii])|N:r  |rurl

Flli**  can. It  ih  tlicii  lied  iu  u  pluiu  kiuii  at  tlit--

of  ttie  itfck,  or.  at  utlicr  timcti.  iIioukIi  It^Ht

[{aciitty.  at  tin?  top  nf  rh4>  livad;  both  ul'wlilcli

lilmia  Jtre  Tr*pn*M'iited  tii  Ibt^  two  illuHirutioiiB

ibjoiocd;  one.  that  on  ibi'  right,  Niob^,  and  the

from  n  b:i«-r«*ltHf  ai  ItitiuH,


t  miff  at  Rfwn(>


NtuM.


FkIm  bttir,  or  n  ig»,  (^rvdicri,  inifrxfr,  JCfl/uii  npoadi'

(tfBtaufMtMim,  vrer«)  abio  woni  by  tbn  p^opb;  of  iHitb
(ouBtriw  (Hart.  v.  6U;  xU.  23),  aud  uiucb  ciitv^ined

bfUHR).

9eT(inl  pawagc«  of  Lallci  Ul«r&tiirc  hlmvr  Lhc
foudust  uf  (b«  Roniui)  woiiioH  fur  blond  buir,  qiiaii-
titiisof  vxbich  Wei's  lii))>orted  fioru  Gertiiauy  to  be
made  up  iuto  n'if{B.  <t^*e  Jiiv.  vi.  I'JO  ;  Ovid,  J  A.
Id.  163.)  Heuco,  iu  aouic  of  (bu  HiatiivH,  tbe  biiir
*H Kilt,  reotaiiiK  of  wliicb  are  diMocniible  in  the
Veaiu  d«i  Uedioi  and  in  the  Aptdln  uf  ibe  Cap<
ital;  andbotb  sexeedved  tbeir  bnir  wbuii  i(  grew


I


Aeeutnt  Wi| (Vumuoi  at  Oblwb.)

njny  Mirly  tlnii-H  tli*-  Ritm.iu.'t  w<ir*  ibelr  hair
'""g,  M  WM  r«*ppr»«.'iitwl  in  Ihi-  (ilili'Ht  Hl:ttiii*R  diir-
"i|  tiK  nge  of  Vurn*.  aii<i  brticc  tlie  KoinatiH  of
'"*  .in2ii4ltin  Affo  dfMifrnatvd  tln'ir  jiiirt'i»tors  in-
^*iuii\  niftillati.  Hut  IlitM  fiiHhiun  tVu\  not  iii^^l
'"T  ibr  yror  I».C.  IIOO,  tw  HpiH-iint  by  tlin  rrumiit-
^K  »«rks  of  art.  Tlii»  noiiH-ii.  Ino,  diffwcd  llifir
''^raiih  sioiplicity,  at  loiitt  until  tbe  tinif  of  tb<*
*>iKrwn«.  ntid  prolisbly  iiiucb  iti  tbp>  siinic  ntylr  »s
ihauviyt  iir^.KKv;  but  at  the  Aiigiistnu  jM'riiwl  a  v;i.
rixtv  of  dilTvreut  Itcwl-dresaea  came  into  fitsbixn,


many  «if  wbicli  an-  drwTibeit  by  Ovid  Four  spcc-
ioifiis  of  diffureiil  pvriiMJH  arc  ((iveii  below.  Tbo
tir^t  head  on  the  left  ie]HVM-ntt>  Ortavia,  tUo  iiieuu
of  AiignstiiH,  front  tbe  MuM^ini  iu  the  Uapit^d  at
Itome;  tbo  iirxt,  Me(«<ijiliiiR,  tinii  wifo  of  tbo  om-
|H>rr»r  ClaiKliiix;  tbo  u»c  belo\r,  (>n  the  left,  8al>i-
ita,  Ibfi  vvifi'  of  Hadrian;  and  the  next,  I'lsutilla,
the  wife  of  L'aracalla,  wbtob  laat  three  we  fmtn  tbe
UritUb  Muaeuin.


(n


to


"»1


/


(1^  ncUTlft  (CaplloL  Muftt  l''^)  llemllna,  wifc  of
Clauilliis.  M)  Ssb'.cift.  wiffl  or  tluilrus  (l>  Hal.
tllU.  «rlfe ut  OkncalU. |Tb«  lul  Ituvt  nwn  th*

uramb  )iuMun.|

Both  cninitrii.'M  had  wtnie  pt^ciiliar  ctislomn  c-oii'
iK'L't«d  with  iht*  t;roM-tb  of  llieir  biiir  and  illiistra*
tive  of  their  moral  or  physieitl  condiliouR.  Tbe
Sparlautt  comUnl  and  drt-saei)  their  beads  >vilb  es-
pecial r»ru  u'ben  »l>niit  to  piicuuoter  nTiy  great
dauK<-')'.  >a  which  net  l^>onbti)fl  and  bi8  folloner*
were  dlsCovertMl  l»y  the  spien  of  XerxeM  befom  the
battle  of  Therniopyhu-.  Thu  miilora  of  both  ua-
tloiiH  fthavLMi  oQ'  their  biiir  after  an  ONiniie  fnnil
shipnn^k  or  oilu-r  limvy  enlamity  and  ilediefiiud
it  to  the  (imU.  Ill  the  earlier  nj;e«,  tbe  CJrcekK  uf
iMith  wxeM  cut  llieir  liair  t;lo»«  in  niouniiiij;;  but
Biibneqiiently  this  praeljce  was  more  cxeliiwvely
confined  to  tb«  Moitiei),  (he  men  leaving  theini
long  and  uitglecled,  a*t  was  the  custom  among  tbo
RotiiaiiH.

In  chiblhooil — that  l«.iipio  the  a[{e  of  puberty —
the  hair  of  the  ni.ile*i  wn«  jinffered  t<»  rtow  lon^
among  both  nation;*,  wbon  it  nut  clipped  and  ded-
icated tn  (,onie  river  or  deity,  from  tlteiice  failed
KavpoTfM<tios  Ivy  the  poeta,  and  therefore  to  eut
off  the  hair  luoanB  to  take  the  tutftt  ririth.  At  Ath-
ens tbi»  renmiony  -vtujsi  )ierfornieii  on  the  (bird  day
of  the  festival  Apataria>  which  ia  therefore  tcriuetl
Kiitipianr.

In  holli  eoniitrieK  the  Klt:veN  wen>  Khiived  na  a
niiirk  of  Horvitnde. Ou  barlient,  sre  T4>NHult,

Tbe  Vi<HtaI  Virginit  also  cut  their  hair  short  U|>ou
(dking  (heir  voum;  \v)iieb  rile  still  remains  in  the
Ronnku  (.'biii-eh.iii  whieh  all  nouu'ii  buwe  iheirbnir


OOMANA


390


coHrriA


cnt  olowB  npon  tnkiiiR  l(ic  vi>il.  '('tie  liiiir  wns  fii»t'
riHtl  ii]t  Tfilb  liair-piiiH  \aeu»  criunleji)  ami  rniiil»i
{pffttinc*),  whk-li  wo  tiiiil  iitiule  nf  IhixwikmI,  ivory,
»ihI  li>rtoi8rt-8lit')1.  Tlio  h:itr  wuh  alKnat  tiiiicft  TiiNt-
eii»l  with  baiulx^ifiVuycMR/A)  ufgnlil  iwt  nilli  jl*wI»,
liltA  tlie  Grttek  aTt<pavq.  An  to  n«t.x,  the  wf»m«.'ii
iiiH-il  In  M'i'Ar  rcf i<-j«/<j ,  HOtiietiitiL's  timtlu  of  ^oht
llti-t'ikils.  TIm:  wilrii  (Jiiv.ili.tiil)  hiu  bvt-ii  ex|>lALitc<l
t'Isewlirre,  nml  I  lie  '••ititntim,  iir  i-ntuHlirti,  cr  cuifatica
frnifs  f!i|i  witli  l:i]»[K.'t8  ccivfrilip  flii'  i'iu"s  ami  nilli
IwontringK  fur  tyiiijj:  iiinlfr  Iln'  chin.  N(miii«  m,ys
It  wiw  worn  by  n'iiii)<!ii  <nilv.  Vitr  other  fiiuttcni
it'lattfig  Ui  tin*  tufKli'N  i>f  iln'iwiiii;  t\w  huir.  eir.,  wr
Acus;  L)ui>k>ia;  Mitka;  PKerKs;  RKTicrLL'M.

ComftlM  ( Kiifxayal  r  1 }  A  cUy  orPoiit riD,  tiiiriininml
PnntiriirtodiNtiiiKiii'ol)  it  from  r.bcCfl]^[iit<li>el:ii)  city
of  the  \nan\e  nanu',  11  was  Hitiiatcrl  ro  lt}«  iiorlh-
eont  (if  Zi'la,  nml  not  far  from  the  aoiirt'c  of  tin*
Iris*.  Thi«  |»lac<'  vins  ciHrhrated  for  the  wonthiit
"f  tliii  ;:(h1(1cs»i  Md.  »npi>«>t*pil  to  aiiflwer  tti  ih**  IWI


ComJtiA.  Tlip  ]>o(Hihir  H-<)»«ni>t1i«8  of  t-l
iiiHiis,  Miiiinioiiptl  ami  |irf«itle<l  ovnr  hy  a  mayis\
ttui.  [ii  thi!  irouiilia  thcRornnii  jiAople  Ap^wiflrLtl  U
dUtrihniiMl  ii)io  itfi  pi>liiiciil  Ai^otiatm,  for  thi*  fMirl
|K>30  tif  deciding,  in  the  cxorctne  of  its  soverviKM
rights,  upon  the  buAinces  brought  bcXuro'  it  by  ih^
prfstding  ii)a>;)ftiratt.'.  The  coiuitia  lunst  hv  diflj
tiiifiuisho^l  from  the  conlioitet.  Th«  eoHlioHf»  weH
also  xiimnioneil  and  presided  ovrr  by  s  niagiatmlfl
hilt  thny  did  nut  assemble  in  their  divihioii^,  aiq
lhf<y  liail  nothinfr  to  do  hut  to  riM:«ive  the  oni^
laiiriicatioiiH  uf  th^  inu^i''trnl4*  In  all  its  &«vm
bill's  :it  Rome  the  jieopbi  rt-iiiaiinHl  slandiiif;.  'P"!
onjjlnnl  |diU'«  of  mottling  wajt  the  Cumilinm^ji
part  of  I  he  Koruiit.  Thero  wore  tlire«  kittds
coiiiitis,  vix. :

(1)  TlIK  COMITIA  CffUATA.  TIiIb  «M  tll«
^etnbly  of  the  pAtrleiAtis  in  their  thirty  rNri0^.«t'J^
ttntil  the  chanjje  of  the  constitution  nndvr  Sprrjqjj
Tiilliii^,  couslitiited  the  nliolo  populut  [Ittmanmt;


louaoftheWeM.  She  «»*.  likewise  reverwl  with  , ''"^'"^  *''*  ^"P'*'  I*''^'"  'I'^-.v  ^^^"T  """'""'"^I  hy^
isiMal  l...nm,n.  in  ih.-  Cappad.K-ian  Comana.  The  i  »''*'  '"''  "^,  '"''■rnf,  «  In.  hnHight  IWiire  ihem  .)««•.
priesthood  MiiivUrd  to  the  temple  w,w  an  nfflt-* »'^"*  '"  t.e  decided  Ay«  .>r  N... The  vohnRwu.

taken  tliMt  in  each  eiiria  by  h«»dH,  ari<l  lli«n>c^


IHWO  Hlavee  attaehe<l  to  llie  wrvict'  of  the  temple,
ami  moHl.  of  these  w«re  cimrrenaim.  Hence  it  wo»
rrinarkttl  that  tlie  eitizenn  were  f^tienilly  ndilictr^l
t^  pleatiiire,  and  lhi»  town  itself  wiw  Hiyb-i]  by  Bonie
"Little  Coiinrh."  i'i)  A  eiry  of  Cflppadociii,  cele-
hriit»'€l  tor  it*  temple  of  Artemih  Tiiniioa.

Comefl.  Ori^itiiillv  ii  fidlntv-travelli-r;  hcticf  it
lit  appliofl  to  the  nit'iiihei-x  uf  lhi>  retinne  of  o  niag-
istrtile  or  hij^h  olBtMal  st-iit  into  the  pnirinces  (ef.
Cir.  t'crr.  ii.  1(1.  •£3)^  ami  under  th»  nmperore  the
term  is  used  especially  of  thiuM^  aecomii-inyitij;  the
emperor  or  meDihern  of  hii*  t'timily.  Kmm  ihi.H  it
wna  a  iiatnral  tninsitinn  to  apjily  the  tt-nn  to  the
Cii>i]i'lieri  Renerally.  even  when  tiol  on  n  jnnriiey ;
nml  in  later  Latin  vre  timi  it  iis«d  of  the  iiolden«
of  the  varioiiM  State.  oOieet*.  About  the  lime  uf
Oiimtatitini'  it  bfe.nme  a  fegnlnr  hononviy  title,
whence  the  modern  «>M»/(Kronch  cumU),  includiiijt
various  jtnuieM,aiiHWi'rinp  to  xlivrtimilfs  onlintM yri-
mi,  terundi.  Irrlii.

The  imnieM  of  the  foMowinj;  officers  i-x|dHtti
themselves:  Cotiiea  Orientis  (of  wlioni  there  seem
to  have  been  two,  one  the  Hiiperior  of  tin-  mher),
eomea  Aegyptl,  euiiiOK  Rrilauniiu*,  eomes  Afi-tem-,
comes  Tv\  luilitariN,  coniei-  portimm,  contra  *tta-
buli.  ooiiiivH  doini-»lieonim  efinitinn.cumes  elihatia-
riu»,  i^omes  lint4>ii«  vcstiM  or  vcdtiiiiii  (utMtcrof  the
rtdies).  In  fiii'i  the  emperor  hiul  as  luuny  rontitf*
an  he  had  fniirtions

Comic  Art Se«  (>kafkiti  ;  Picthra  ;  Scilp-

TCRA.

Comiaaatio  (from  leifint  or  trufuifoi,  rominaari).
A  ilniikiii^;-lioiit  foUuiving  (br  rrn'i  if\.  v.),  and  fre
Umiiitty  prohiiigpd  into  (ho  nij-lil.  Food  was  p;ir-
titketi  of  diirinj;  the  rtuuitsaHit,  but  only  a.<(  a  ivl-
ihh  for  the  wine.  Of.  Plant.  Mout.  J.  4 ;  Pctron.  fw ;
Hnet.  Til.7.

Comhrin  (Kmii&fHui).  A  towu  in  Ihe  Mneedo-
niaii  dinlriel  of  Cnwsuica.

Comlninm.  A  fnn-n  In  ■Samniiim,  dehtmyetl  by
llic  RniiwiiiH  in  iJie  Anninitf  wiirtt Livv,  x.  H\.


by  virtne  of  the  Irrcmuiln  tif  iMpt-riu  ;  (r|  toilendp
i>n  iteelnntlioits  of  war,  nppealH.  tirnujaliaata  [wrt
AlHilTin).  itiid  Ihe  reroplion  of  forrtun  familir*
into  tlif  Ixwly  of  ttip  ]>atrieiHii«,  The  Servian  wn-
stitntion  Iruiififerreil  the  riftht  of  derhmne  nftgi**'
Bivewarand  Ihe  light  of  deeiiling  apfieaU  ti  ll"
Comitia  Centnriata,  n  hich.  I'min  thiH  linx^  oiivapt
replV(*oiit«.t<l  the  ]>(>iiph-,  now  eomposed  et  Iwtli
patricinof)  ami  piebi:i»n».  Afii>r  the  catabliiibamt
of  the  Kepiiblio,  the  Comitia  Cnriara  reUUinl  1^
right  (di  of  cotiferriiig.  on  the  pnt^ioAal  of  tlM  Sen-
ate, Ihe  iinperiiitn  on  the  nntgint ratcit  vlerl«il  bj
llteConiilia  tleiilnriata.nnd  on  the<lictnl<>rrWb(il
by  the  consuls;  {li)  of  confirming,  likcwiw  o«  tb«
proposal  of  the  SeiiHto.  the  altoratioitfl  in  Itieww*
Hfitiitioii  deeitled  upon  by  ibn  romitia  CVnt>iHit*>
ami  Trilmila.

The  exrinctioii  of  tlie  |K>lilicul  iliSerritr'  ^
tween  pairieioiis  and  plelirians  detttroynl  lhi^|>*'
lirie.'il  piMtllion  of  ttieCotiiitta  C'liriatn.amllli'BMl*
•tliniloir  of  Ihi'ir  rights  snrvivoil.  The  vatniAf
ilftcll*  hrcanni  an  iinn>ality,  ito  itinch  so  tlial.iB  t''
end,  the  pn-MriO'e  of  lhi<  thit'ly  /ir/ore«  rNrMtl  tiA
tlirer  allgll^^•  was  i^nfht-icnl  l^i  tfiiahle  lejtal  iii"^'
li<jnHlt»be  piiMM'd.  (Sec  Ll(-ri>lt.>t.)  Itiit  thvt'oMil'*
('nriaia  rirtaiiied  the  power*  alVecting  i  he  nsTpU*'
of  a  non-put  rieian  it  do  the  patHeian  onh  r  ■ -"I"
powcnt  attVfNtinu  the  proceeding  of  iin
peeially  in  ea^rn  where  the  iram^ition  of  :t  jm  . '
into  a  plelw-itiii  lainily  na»  concorneil,  K'i'l'''"'
of  the  exerrihe  of  thewe  fnnctioiit*  on  I  heir  p*'*
tmiy  tie  tracer!  ilo»*n  to  the  tiuperinl  ]>ertiHl,

r-f)  Tlir.  rr>MtiiA  CaUta  were  also  an  a«r'riii»lr
tif  the  patrician  enriae.  They  vrvtv  b«»  fdllr'!  i"*^
c«u.<>e  publicly  nntnuiiMinl  {rulnrvi.  The  ixiiili'l'**
prcftided,  and  the  I'nuelioiiH  uf  the  Awcnild>  v'**-
(fll  Co  inaiijcnrtite  the  tltimiiK's.  ibn  rrt  «u-itiniii><
luid  iiMh'ml  the  king  hiniHelf  iliiring  thu  i^
pi-lOMl.  |/«l  The  ifrlmlijlto  ntnTorUtn.  pTOVbtUlitlili
net  ol  itrrtMjitiut,  This  wjm*  the  formal  nrWa""'*
|K<rsoi>  puKMing  by  adopiioii  iuto  Hi>olh»-r  it^SH
from  the  iMvra  of  his  former  family.  jSm"  Al"^
Tin.) if)  Thi'  nililication  of  wilU  tnicr  n  )'Ctfr


COMITIA


391


COMITIA


but  tills  applies  only  to  an  early  period,  (d)  The
auDouiicemeut  of  the  calendar  of  festivals  uq  tbe
Aret  day  of  every  month.

(3)  CoMiTiA  ('ENTURIATA.  The  aHseiubly  of  tbe
whole  people,  patrician  as  well  as  plebeian,  ar-
ranged according  to  the  centuritu  establiabed  by
Servins  Tulliiis.  The  original  founder  of  the  Co-
niitia  Ceutnriata  transferred  to  them  certain  polit-
ieul  rigbt«  which  had  previously  been  exercised  by
the  Coioitia  Ciiriata.  It  was  not,  however,  nntil
the  foundation  of  the  Bepublio,  when  the  sovereign
jNtwer  in  the  State  was  transferred  to  the  body  of
citizens,  that  they  attained  their  real  political  ira-
I>ortaDce.  They  then  became  the  assembly  in
nhich  the  people,  collectively,  expressed  its  will.
The  ri};ht  iif  srimmouiiig  the  Coniitia  Centnriata
ori);iiially  belonged  to  the  king.  During  the  re-
pnblican  jieriod  it  belonged,  iu  its  full  extent,  to
tbe  coiisnls  and  the  dictator  alone.  The  other
magistrates  poBscseed  it  only  within  certain  limits.
Tlie  imterrex,  fur  instance^  could,  in  case  of  there
being  no  consuls,  snnimou  the  Comitia  Centnriata
to  hold  ail  election,  but  he  conid  summon  them  for
this  purpose  only.  The  ceuBors  could  call  them
together  only  for  the  holding  of  the  oentut  and  the
Iwitrum  ;  the  praetors,  it  may  Up  conjectured,  only
iu  the  case  of  capital  trials.  In  all  other  instattces
tbe  consent  of  the  consuls,  or  their  authorization,
was  indispensable.

The  duties  of  the  Comitia  Centnriata  during  the
republican  period  were  as  follows:  (a)  To  elect  the
higher  magistrates:  oousnls, censors,  and  praetors.
{b)  To  give  judgment  iu  all  the  capital  trials  in
which  appeal  to  the  people  was  permitted  from
the  Beiiteoceof  the  magistrate  sitting  in  judgment
This  popular  Jurisdiction  was  gradually  limited  to
political  trials,  common  offences  being  dealt  with
by  the  ordinary  commissions.  And  iu  the  later
repnblican  age  the  judicial  assemblies  of  the  Comi-
tia Ceuturiata  became,  iu  general,  rarer,  especially
after  the  formation  of  si>ecial  standing  commissions
iqnaestiomea  perpetuae)  for  the  trial  of  a  number
of  offences  regarded  as  political,  (c)  To  decide  on
declaring  a  war  of  aggression ;  this  on  the  proposal
of  the  consuls,  with  the  approval  of  the  Senate.
((0  To  iioas  laws  proposed  by  the  higher  magis-
tratex,  with  tbe  approval  of  the  Senate.  This  right
lost  much  of  its  value  after  b.c.  S@7,  when  the  legis-
lative powers  of  the  Comitia  Tribnta  were  mode
eqnal  to  those  of  the  Coniitia  Ceuturiata.  After
this  time  the  legislative  activity  of  toe  latter  as-
sembly gradually  diminished.

The  Comitia  Centnriata  were  originally  a  mili-
tary assembly,  and  the  citizens  accordingly,  in
ancient  times,  attended  them  iu  arms.  On  the
nipht  b4>fore  the  meeting,  the  magistrate  summon-
ing the  assembly  took  tbe  anspices  on  the  place  of
luet-ting,  the  Campus  Martins.  If  the  auspicen
were  favourable,  signals  were  given,  before  day-
break, from  tbe  waits  and  the  citadel  by  the  blow-
ing of  honiH,  snmmoutng  the  citizens  to  a  coniio.
The  presiding  magistrate  offered  a  sncriHce  and
repfated  a  solemn  prayer^aud  the  assembly  pro-
ceeded to  consider  the  business  which  ruquireil  its
decision.  Private  individuals  were  not  allowed  to
«peak,  except  with  the  consent  of  the  presiding
magistrate.  At  bis  command  the  armed  people  di-
viilc^l  themselves  into  (huir  cenluriae,  and  marchetl
in  this  order  to  the  Campus  Martins,  preceded  by
banners  and  headed  by  the  cavalry.  Arrived  at  the
Canipiia,  they  proceeded  to  the  voting,  the  president


having  again  put  the  proposal  to  the  people  in  the
form  of  a  question,  Velitit  iuheatU  QuiriteBf  ("Do
yon  wish  f  "  Do  you  command  f").  While  the  vot-
ing was  going  on,  a  red  flag  stood  on  the  laniculum.
The  eq«.ite»,  who  in  ancient  times  used  to  begin
the  battles  in  war,  opened  the  voting,  and  their  18
centuries  were  therefore  called  praerogativae.  The
result  of  their  vote  was  immediately  published,
and,  being  taken  as  an  omen  for  the  voters
who  were  to  follow,  was  usually  decisive.  Then
came  the  175  centuries  of  the  live  clatacB  of  infan-
try in  their  order.  Each  century  counted  as  cast-
ing one  vote ;  this  vote  was  decided  by  a  previous
voting  within  the  century,  which  was  at  first
open,  but  in  later  times  was  taken  by  ballot.  If
the  18  centuries  of  equites  and  the  80  centuries
of  the  first  class,  with  whom  went  tbe  3  ceuturies
of  mechanics  {ceaturiae  fahrum.),  were  unanimous,
the  question  was  decided,  as  there  would  he  a  ma-
jority of  100  ceuturies  to  93.  If  not,  the  voting
weut  on  until  one  side  secured  the  votes  of  at
least  97  ceuturies.  The  lower  clashes  only  voted  iu
the  rare  cases  where  the  votes  of  the  higher  oI<M««t
were  not.united.  The  proceedings  concluded  with
a  formal  announcement  of  the  result  on  the  part
of  the  presiding  magistrate,  and  the  dismissal  of
the  host.  If  no  result  was  arrived  at  by  sunset,  or  if
uufavjtfurable  omens  appeared  duriug  the  proceed-
ings, or  while  the  voting  was  going  on,  the  assembly
wax  a<^ourued  until  the  next  convenieut  ocoaaion.

This  fordi'^f  voting  gave  the  wealthier  citizens
a  decided  advantage  over  the  poorer,  aud  lent  an
aristocratic  character  to  the  Comitia  Ceuturiata.
In  the  third  ceutury  B.C.  a  change  was  iutroduced
in  the  interest  of  the  lower  cZomm.  Each  of  the
thirty-five  tribu*,  or  districts,  into  which  the  Ro-
man territory  w^  divided,  included  two  centuriae
oiiuniorea  and  teniorea  respectively.  (For  the  five
cloMtt,  see  ExERCiTCS.)  Thus  each  of  the  five
olaMe%  included  70  ceuturies,  making  350  centuries
in  all.  To  this  number  add  the  18  centuries  equi-
tum,  and  the  5  centuries  not  included  iu  the  prop-
ertied classes  —  namely,  2  of  fabri  (mechanics),  2
of  tuhicinta  (mnsiciaus),  aud  1  ot  proletarii  and
liherii  (the  very  poor  and  the  freedmen),  aud  the
whole  number  of  centuries  amounts  to  373.  The
ceuturies,  it  must  be  remembered,  had  by  this
time  quite  lost  their  military  character.  Under
this  arrangement  the  68  votes  of  the  tquitea  and
the  first  claMM  were  confronted  with  the  285  votes
of  the  rest.  Besides  this,  the  right  of  voting  first
was  taken  from  the  eqnitos  and  given  to  the  centu-
ria  praerogativa  choseu  by  lot  from  the  first  claaaif.
The  voting,  it  is  true,  was  still  takeu  in  the  order
of  the  clasBet,  but  the  cJa«ge»  were  seldom  unani-
mous as  in  former  times;  for  the  interests  of  the
tribns,  which  were  represented  in  each  clatHa  by
two  centuries  respectively,  wei-e  generaUjr^iver-
gent,  and  tbe  centuries  voted  in  the
tribe.  The  consequence  was  that  it  w|^  oft«n
essary— indeed,  perhaps  that  it  beci
at  least  at  elections — to  take  the  votes
clafiaea,

III  early  times  the  military  arraugement  was  suf-
ficient to  secure  the  maintenance  of  order.  But
after  its  disappearance  the  cla$te»  were  separatetl
aud  the  centnriae  kept  apart  by  wooden  barriers
{$aepta),  from  which  the  centuries  passed  over
briil^es  into-an  open  inner  space  called  ovile  (sheep-
f<ild).  On  the  position  of  tlie  Comitia  Ceuturiata
during  thv  imperial  agf,  see  lielow.


CUMl'I'U


;i92


COMITILTM


(4)  COHITIA  TaimrTA.  Tlii*  wa«  the  oolLitivo
aBUemhl)-  of  the  [MM»|>Ii'  jirraTijjitl  iicronHiis  to  tlit*
local  4)int.ril)iilioti  nf  triWn,  (Rco  TKiItl>. )  W'h«ii
tlio  tribmic«hip  <>f  liui  pUbn  wa*  (wtublishwl  (B.c.
494)  (tin  [ritiiiiM'8  wt^ru  »II(iuinI  tliv  rifrlir  itf  hiiiii-
irioniu(j  :iM«^ nil) lieu  nf  tlie  pUli^  in  its  trtlnrH  In  umi-
siilLTqiieBtintiMiitl'cctiiig  tl-s  iliti^rents.  Out  of  rhe^o
conntfils  of  tin-  /»/ci'»(«i«(i7ift  p(vbi»]  wert*  afl«rwiirtU
(u.c.  449]  fMriiK-<t  ilin  (.Vnuilio  TrlhiiU,  in  uliich
l-hv  patriciaut)  weru  rcpnvtriilvd  an  well  m  the
(ilflifiand;  but  flip  iilfljtiianu  bnd  tbw  propon-
«lvraiic*t,  lu  tl)i-.v  wf<rti  the  more  niinivn>an,  iitut  nij
llie  rotin^  <|iialiHcntiuti  wat  exactly  f^'tft  'Vv  •>
law  )>aitMM]  ill  li.c.  4-19,  ami  lin:Olv  ftitiii'-u Nil  'i^li,
i\\a  pltbiat'ita,ur  n'Kuhiltoimnf  tlit*  Ci>iiiitiu  Triliiitu.
wer«!il<?«luiv(l  lifiiiliii>;iijHtn  tb(Mvh(iIi'/>o/iMriJH.  Tlie
uoit!M>qncuc«f  wus  Ibul  tUitt  awteitibly.  ttidc  by  sitle
with  the  Ctiinttia  CeiiTiiriata,  hi-vumt>  i\w  ropre*
Neiitntivu  of  thu  |)upiilur  miprt-iuiiuy,  iiud,  iiiiLced,
\in  |»ro]K»r  and  ooiistitutitinnt  orK>ii>.  This  was
Bp«viatly  thu  rase  in  regard  tn  lt<KtsIation,  the
mom  »<i  us  it  wan  fitr  nimpti-r  to  Aitiuiuoii  the  jieif
pit)  by  tribttt  tUaii  by  cvntitrivti.

The  right  uf  Muiniiioiiing  thv  Cnmitin  Trllnitn
lay  chiplly,  though  not  i»xcbiMivt?ty.  witli  tliK  fri-
AiiNi.  Their  couxent  vm*  n*i;arde<l  hm  :)ii  iiiiUnpuu-
8Bbk>  coU4litioii,  if  aitolht-r  inagittnitu  ntrthoil  lo
iillutnoii  ur  preside  over  the  Uouiitta  Tnbiitn.  len-
til the  latter  year»  of  the  itepiildic,  the  nnseiubly
usnnlly  met  upon  the  (.'Apitol,  and  afti^twardft  ou
Che  CaDiimo  Martiim.  The  fuiirIiout>  of  the  C'otiii-
tia  Tribiils,  ^^nuliiully  ai-iiiiired,  wen-  \v<  foIUnvei:
ia)  The  eWiUioii  of  :i11  ibn  lo\vi*r  iii.ij^iHlraUiH,  ordi-
nary (a«  llie  lrihu«i  piebin,  IrihttNt  mililum,  aiHiilrit
plcbia,  aedHrti  rwrM/r*)  aud  Gxtraonliiiary,  under
tlio  presidency  [tartly  of  the  tribnnei>,  purtly  of  the
conaaU  or  praetont.  {b)  The  nominiLtinn  of  the
pantifej  masimus,  and  of  the  t-oiipted  mentbem  of
the  religioUN  cultrgta  of  the  poHltfirf^,  aaijarm^  and
rffiTiNrirt  NarrurifiN.  This  nuiuiuation  was  eanicd
out  Ijy  a  eummittce  of  M'veiiteeii  tiibi'K  cho»cn  by
lot.  ic)  To  ffivo  jndicial  decisiuna  in  ull  s,\\n^  in-
fltihilpd  by  tbo  tribiiiiRs  and  n(:sdiie4  of  the  [ilfhit,
foroAnnceN  aguinst  t)ie  plfhsnr  Uh  mpri'Ht^nt alive!*.
In  lutvr  (iin(!H  tliL'Ht-  nnitn  wpsn  mivHtJy  itiDtitnted
on  the  gronnd  of  bad  or  tltegal  ndniiniHtrntinn.
Thu  tribunen  and  a^diles  Imd,  in  rheoo  rosi-H,  the
power  of  inflicting  peL-nttiiiry  lincH  runging  up  to
a  birgM  amount.  {tl\  To  piuut  renolnliiniH  im  pro-
poi»aU  mnde  by  the  tribuneii  of  the  pMtt(  and  the
higher  magi8tral4!8  on  foreign  and  doiiier^iiu  nffairA
-on  the  concbjHnni  of  peace,  fnr  instanre,  or  the
making  of  trcHticn.  The>ir  power  wii>i  niniost  nn-
limiti'd,  and  the  more  important  beoanse,  uti-ictly
Hpeaking,  it  ivhi^  only  the  bigbt'r  mngiHtratej«  who
rei^uircd  tlie  BUlburi/.atiun  of  the  Senate.  Nor  hai)
the  Senute  niore  tbiui  (be  right  of  i|iiaNhinga  nieiiK-
ura  putned  wittionl  ilnr;  fi>rma1itieN

The  Coiuiua  Tiibiita  u-ere  Ttnnimonnl.  at  leoal
seventeen  days  before  the  nieeting,  by  the  iiiiu|de
proelaniatintj  of  a  herald  (pr^rra).  As  in  the  case  of
the  Oomilia  Contnnnlfv,  boHifiewH  otiild  neither  he
begun  norcinittnntKl  in  tlie  fare  of  ailvei*Ke  aitnpices.
Like  the  Comitia  Centariain,  too,  the  tribal  ofbtem-
Idy  met  at  daybreuk  and  contd  nol<  nit  beyond
anriMtt.  If  Nnnnuoued  by  ibe  triWnnex,  the  Coniitia
Tribnts  enuld  only  meet  in  the  eity,  or  wiltiiii  the
FflilinH  nf  a  mile  from  it.  The  nana]  plntm  of  a«-
Mmhly  wft«  the  Knnitn  or  the  Comitiinn  iq.  v.).  If
enmmone^t  by  other  anthonties,  tltp*  aaMembly  tnut
ODt«ide  the  city,  tH(Mt  ooinniouly  iu the  Cainpna


MnrliuH. The  procitedingH  i>penrd  willl  a  prtvi'
ntnieeoniiKtnied  bytiacrifiee. TliebnKineMi  iu  lian
watt  then  discnNitod  in  a  rontw  (t«ee  above,  p. 391  mi
and  the  prtipo»ta1  having  been  read  oal,  the  mei'i
iiig  wa.-*  ri'^Hcttc^l  to  arniuge  itiielf  according  t^
its  thirty-live  tribcui  id  tbeinc/Wn.or  wooden  fruw
Lots  went  drawn  to  decide  which  tribe  should  v»
first The  tril^e  on  which  thin  duty  fell  wa«  riilk_^
pritifipitim. The  n*Hiilt  of  thlA  lint  vote  was  pr~
clainieil,  and  tlie  other  tril>e«  then  proceeded
vote  KinudlAaeonnly,  not  MieceKnively. Tli«  roft
given by  riudi triW vveni then ainii>nnt'ed  in ^
order  deremiineil  by  lot. Finally,  tlio  guiieral
ttnlt  of  the  voting  van  made  known.

The  pn>|KHfer  of  a  niciu>nre  wuh  Itound  to  pnt  ftfi
proposal  intodno  form  ami  pnbliitb  tl  beforchii/i./.
When  n  measnn'  came  to  th*>  vote,  it  won  :irccpi(hff
or  I'ejectvd  as  a  whole.  It  In'canio  law  »» lira  ih^
presiding  mngtstrate  aiinonneed  that  it  had  )■«•>(
accepted.  Tberhiiraeter  nf  the  cotnitin  had  iH-sntr
to  decline  even  in  the  Iiitcr  (wi'iotl  of  the  Ue|niMic.
Even  the  citixeriH  of  Rome  took  but  little  purl  r»
tbein,  and  fhin  i^  Mtill  more  trni*  of  the  (fopalallon
of  Italy,  whn  had  received  the  lioinnn  cilizeii'hip
in  n.r.  H9.  The  Conntiu  Tribnia.  in  partkiliir.
tuinlc  gradually  int<i  a  mere  gatfacrlng  of  tlwcity
iinib,  HtrengiheiKHl  on  all  sides  by  the  ioBtii  of
corrupt  elements-  The  r<>i«iills  of  the  voting  rtm*
more  and  niun;  to  reprewcnl,  not  the  pnblic  intM-
e«t,  bnt  the  cllecta  of  direct  or  indirect  corniplio*-
Under  llie  Knipiix*  thn  Comitia  CautariaU  »''
Tributa  coiilinne*!  toexiat — in  ashailowy  fotni,ii
IK  tnie— down  In  the  Ihinl  t'entiiry  A.lt.  luliM
Caewu-  had  depri%-ed  them  of  the  right  of  drciillni:
ou  war  and  pence,  l/nder  AnguntuK  they  lorttl"
lK)w»r  of  juriKfliclion,  and,  practically,  the  [w^w
of  IcgiHlalion.  The  iiniN>riiil  meji«nreiiwere,iodf«I.
laid  befor*"  the  Coinitia  Tribnta  for  ratific4ti"i-
bnt  thin  wan  all;  and  under  the  HiiocuiiM>ra  of  Am
gnritiiH  even  thiw  prooceiling  Urcame  rarvr  8i'"*
the  lime  of  Vi^pasiuti,  the  oiniwnint.  at  iheir  ««••
Nion,  n-ceivcil  their  legiidativo  and  other  po**"
from  the  CVinilia  Tribntn;  b(it  thi"*,  like  ibeiwt,
wild  a  mere  forinality.  The  power  of  electiou  i™*
tbat  wUteh,  in  appearnnee  at  least,  unrvivedlo*'?*
est.  Angnst»8.  like  Inliim  Caenar,  atlnwMt  rt'
Coiuitia  t^'eiuuriata  to  conlirm  the  nomiDiitiftn  "•
two  cjiruliilalcs  for  the  i-onHnlxbip.  He  ilw*  k'"
to  Ibe  C'omitia  Centnriatu  and  Tribnia  thtf  po"*^
of  five  elpciion  to  half  the  other  niagistrjei»-~
lite  other  half  iHiing  tillwl  by  nouiineea  of  lii" •'*"'*
Tiberius  Iranaferreil  the  last  remnant  nf  fn*  cki"-
tive  piiwel-  to  the  Soimte,  whose  proposal  ("V*
innliiig  under  imperial  intlnence,  were  laid  bfliff
the  Coinitia  lor  ratiticatioii.  The  ruminlihetit^
atiitpiccs,  prayer,  nacriOce,  and  prorlnmnli"",  *"*
now  ihe  important  thingn.  and  the  meMiirrt  !"•■
[lOBed  were  cjirricd,  not  bv  regular  votiiij;,  b'^H
ncclaniatinn.  8p«  MontiOMMi,  liiimitehi'  Fon*^"^
0eu,  vol.  i. :  Rncker  and  Miiri(nardt,  liUm.  f>^
Iktimer,  vol.  il.,  pt.  i.,  pp.  :i5U-:t94,  and  I't  i'  "'*
1-196:  Lange,  U&m.  Allerlhamrr.  i.  IVII  '>
401;  ii.  41^t>A(;  and  tho  urlicU»s  Lkui -^  1  '
i^itiAK;  ],KXi  Pons.

Comitialia  Dies. See  DiKa

Comitium.  The  uanie  of  a  niunll  Bpnc«  m  K**"-
boiimled  on  the  north  by  the  Keiiatfi  Hoom  (^
CinuA),  and  on  the  south  l»y  the  Rostra  i^*-^
l>rtwn  to  the  BiToiid  cenlnrv  ivr,  it  wiw»  «t«t<l  ^
the  meeting!*  of  the  a^uieutbliett  and  of  the  «»'V


COMHAGENti


383


COMMERCE


of  law.  After  the  remoral  of  the  roBtra  it  became
part  of  the  Fomm. See  FoRUH.

Commagep^  (Kofiftay^v^).  The  Dortheastern-
mo8t  district  of  Syria,  lyiug  between  the  Taunia
BDd  the  Enphrates.  It  formed  a  part  of  the  king-
doDi  of  Syria,  after  the  fall  of  which  it  matutained
ita  iiidepeodence  UDder  a  race  of  tsiDgs,  the  family
of  the  Seleucidae,  and  was  not  united  to  the  Boman
Empire  nntil  the  reign  of  VespasiaD.

Commaiitaxii  (I)  Romaa  collections  of  his-
torical documents,  such  as  treaties,  decrees,  and
short  notices  of  important  events.  These  became
the  Boorces  from  which  many  of  the  Boman  his-
torians  drew  their  materials  in  treating  of  the
early  period.  Of  these  collections  may  be  noted
(a)  the  CoMMENTARii  Rboum,  professing  to  be  the
work  of  the  kings  themselves,  and  in  reality  con-
taining very  ancient  records ;  (6)  the  Comhentabu
AugGkuh,  kept  by  the  college  of  angurs;  (o)  the

COMMENTARU PONTIfICUH,  also Called AXNALBS

Maxihi,  containing  the  namesof  the  magistrates  for
each  year  and  a  record  of  all  memorable  events  from
the  days  of  the  kings  down  to  the  pontificate  of  P.
Mncias  Scaevola  (b.c.  133) ;  (d)  the  Commentarii
Magistratuum  (i  .e.  conaulum,  quaeatorvm,  censorum,
etc.),  records  of  the  transactions  of  individual  magis-
trates. The  greatest  part  of  these  records  perished
when  Rome  was  destroyed  by  the  Gauls  (B.C.  368),
thongh  ill  some  cases  copies  of  them  remained.  See
AxNALEs;  Fasti;  Libri  Lintei.  (2)  The  title  of
»  number  of  historical  and  legal  works  by  VavioDs
Roman  writers,  the  best  known  being  those  of
Cicem  (written  iuQreek  with  the  title  imonv^nara),
now  lost,  but  largely  nsed  by  Plutarch  In  his  life
of  Cicero;  the  Commentarii  de  Betlo  Gallico  and  the
Commtntarii  de  Bella  Ctvili  of  lulins  Caesar  (q.  v.) ;
aud  the  Cvmrnentarii  de  lure  Civili  of  the  jurist  Gains

Cq.v.).

CoqimentaritiB,  Commentazii  (  vm>^^/umi ).
Properly  notes  or  note-books.  Hence  the  word
ac(inire«  a  variety  of  meanings,  of  which  the  most
important  are  the  following :

(1)  Commentarii  domettid,  or  family  memorials,
the  records  of  events  interesting  to  the  members
of  particular  families.

(2)  The  "memoirs"  drawn  np  by  public  men  as
to  events  in  which  they  bad  taken  part. See  above.

(3)  Memoranda  kept  by  different  departments
of  the  public  service,  the  officials  in  charge  of
them  being  known  as  a  eommeittariia.

(4)  In  towns  a  register  kept  of  the  oflfloial  acts
of  the  mouicipal  authorities.  We  have  interest-
ing extracta  from  the  otHiintefitortt  of  Caer6  in  an
inscription  in  the  Husenm  at  Naples  (Wilmanns,
208:t).

(5)  Tlie  anofficial  record  of  recent  events  at
Rome,  sent  by  Caelins  to  Cicero  in  Cilicia,  is  called
by  him  commentarii  rerum  urbanarum  (Cic.  Ad
Fam,  viii.  2,  2).

(6)  The  record  of  the  daily  occurrences  at  conrt
kept  in  commentarii  diumi  (Suet.  Aug.  64),  a  kind
of  private  diary,  which  mnst  be  distinguished  from
the  formal  acta  and  also  from

(7)  Commentarii  principle,  the  register  of  the  em-
peror's official  decisions  (Plin.  Ep.  x.  106)  and  of
accnsatioiis  brought  before  him  (Suet.  Catig.  15).

(8)  Tacitns  once  (Ann.  xv.  74)  speaks  of  commen-
tarii $enatu»,  by  which  he  can  hardly  mean  any-
thing but  the  acta  senatue. See  Acta.

Ccmimantfttor  Cruqnianus. Sec  Chi-qi'il's.
13*


Commeroe.  (1)  Greek.  In  the  Homeric  poems
the  Greeks  are  not  represented  as  a  people  with  a
spontaneous  iucliuation  to  commerce.  Indeed,  the
position  of  the  oldest  Greek  cities,  far  away  from
the  sea,  snfficiently  shows  that  their  founders  can
have  had  no  idea  of  trade  as  a  means  of  getting
wealth.  Greek  navigation  in  ancient  times  was
almost  exclusivelysnbservient  to  war  and  piracy,  to
which  latter,  for  a  longtime,  no  stigma  was  attached
in  public  opinion.  And  the  trade  carried  on  with
Greece  by  the  Asiatics,  especially  the  Phceuicians,
who  then  ruled  the  Greek  seas,  can  hardly  have
been  very  active.  The  Greeks,  haviug  no  agricul-
tural or  industrial  produce  to  offer,  could  not  have
tempted  many  foreigners  to  deal  with  them.  Bnt
in  the  centuries  succeeding  the  Homeric  Age  the
commerce  of  Greece  was  revolutionized.

The  islands,  especially  Aegina  and  Euboea,  were
foremost  iu  commercial  undertakings ;  the  only  con-
tiuental  town  which  was  at  all  successful  in  this
way  being  Corinth,  which  was  favoured  by  its  in-
comparable position.  It  was  the  foundation  of
the  Hellenic  colonies  in  Asia  Minor  that  first  occa-
sioned the  free  development  of  Greek  trade.  The
exertions  of  the  louians  were  maiuly  instrumental
in  creating  two  things  indispensable  to  its  success
— namely,  commercial  activity,  excited  by  contact
with  the  ancient  industries  of  the  East,  and  a  mar-
itime power  in  the  proper  sense,  which  made  it
possible  to  onst  the  Phenicians  from  the  naval
supremacy  which  they  had  so  long  maintained.
Tbis  new  commercial  activity  necessitated  a  larg-
er use  of  the  precious  metals  and  the  establish-
ment of  a  gold  and  silver  coinage,  which  the  loni-
ans  were  the  firet  among  the  Greeks  to  adopt.
This  proved  a  powerful  stimulus  to  the  develop-
ment of  commerce,  or  rather  it  was  the  very  con-
dition of  its  exiBt«nce.  Miletus  took  the  first
place  among  the  trading  colonies.  The  influence
of  these  cities  upon  their  mother  country  was  so
strong  that  even  the  Dorians  gradually  lost  their
national  and  characteristic  dislike  of  trade  and
commerce,  and  threw  themselves  actively  into
their  pursuit.  Dowu  to  the  sixth  century  B.C.
Greek  commeroe  had  extended  itself  to  the  coasts
of  the  Mediterranean  and  the  inland  seas  connect-
ed with  it,  especially  towards  the  East.  It  was
not  until  a  later  time  that  Athens  joined  the  cir-
cle of  commercial  cities.  Even  in  Solon's  time
the  Athenians  had  lived  mainly  by  agriculture
and  cattle-breeding,  and  it  was  only  with  the
growth  of  the  democratic  constitution  that  their
commercial  intercoorse  with  the  other  cities  became
at  all  considerable.  The  Persian  Wars,  however,
aud  her  position  as  head  of  the  naval  confederacy,
raised  Athens  to  the  position  of  the  first  maritime
power  in  Greece.  Under  the  administration  of
Pericles  she  became  the  centre  of  all  Hellenic  ac-
tivity, not  only  in  art  and  science,  but  in  trade.
It  was  only  Corinth  and  Corcyra  whose  western
trade  enabled  them  to  maintain  a  prominent  posi-
tion by  the  side  of  Athens.  The  Greeks  of  Asia
Minor  completely  lost  their  commercial  position
after  tlieir  conquest  by  the  Persians.  The  naval
supremacy  of  Athens,  and  with  it  its  commerce,
were  completely  annihilated  by  the  Peloponnesiau
War.  It  was  a  loug  time  before  the  Athenians
succeeded  in  breaking  down  the  maritime  power
of  Sparta  which  that  war  had  established.  Hav-
ing done  so,  they  recovered,  but  only  for  a  short
time,  a  position  of  prominence  not  ut  all  equal


COMKERCB


894


COMUERCE


t


bftir  Tormi>r  ((opremiwy  hy  bpo.  The  victory
of  tltu  Miit:L-<liniiiiii  iK>wrr  entirely  tIcstruyL*0  tlit>
political  aiid  commercial  iinpon»nco  of  AtbtMiH,
wlioM  trudo  now  felt  behind  that  of  other  cities.
The  plMo  of  Atiienis  as  thr>  tirst  niiiritimu  iinrl
comixiercinl  pov»r,  was  tiikpn  hy  the  city  of
RhrHles,  fonmJwl  in  B.t:.  408.  Ry  tlio  seconil  half
of  tlio  fniirtli  ci'iitnry  B.C.  thn  trmle  of  RbwU-B  had
extended  itwlf  over  the  %Th»lc  known  world,  iind
ita  maritime  Iftw  wan  nnivppially  obscrvwl  until
a  uiiirb  Inter  iicrind.  After  tliu  deNtriiclion  of  Cor-
loth,  in  thn  niidilhi  4if  thtt  Ki^cimd  century  n.c,  tlio
tfllniid  of  DclfM  ttnJoyrKl  a  hriof  hut  hrilHatit  |tnriiH)
of  prosiwrtty.  Atuuiig  the  comracrcinl  i-'iti«tt  of
the  Gnivco-Maccdoniau  Koipiro,  Alexandria  lu
£j;ypt  took  the  first  place,  and  roso  iude«d  to  he
the  oentro  of  Kuropcau  and  Ka«teni  trudc.  It  was
Diaiuly  tl]ron};li  Alexandria  that  iutercoiirse  vnn
kept  up  between  Greece  and  the  Kudteiu  coun-
tries opeue<L  tip  by  the  corDpalguB  of  Alexauder
the  Great.

One  of  the  most  iinporUint  routes  followe^l  hy
Qrcoiuu  trnllic  wait  thiit  tetuling  to  tlie  Black
Sea,  the  cooHti*  of  whicli  wore  friii|;e<l  with  Greek
colonies.  Bi-sidei^  Kyzaiitiuni  and  8iiio]»^,  thi>
chi«'f  cumnierciul  ceiitn^-H  in  this  region  weiv  01-
hiii,  Faiilicupaenin,  rhiiu(i}{^i'<'^i  nnd  riiOAia,  from
vliicli  trade-roiiti's  peiietrated  far  into  the  har-
bariaii  eoiiiitries  of  ttie  interior.  Other  main
rontt>s  Ictl  by  Cliins  and  Ij^hUob  to  the  coasts  of
Asin  Miiiur  and  hy  tliir  Cydudi^s  ti>  that  part  of  the
Asiatic  confit  whoru  lay  I  lie  f^at  cities  of  Samos,
EphesiiB,  and  Mili'tiis.  Heuco  they  continued  to
Egypt  and  CyreinS,  hy  RIumIcs  and  Cyprus  and
the  coast  of  PlMeiiiria.  lint  in  travelling  to  thi-w
parts  fiijiii  the  Pwloponuesnn,  men  yeufrally  wtiled
by  way  ofrn^tc,  ivliich  laail  been  lon^  ccU-bratml
for  il^  iimritinio  (•im^rprJM^  RonntI  the  promiin-
t«rj- of  Mali-a,  the  suuthernmost  point  of  the  Telo-
poiinesiia,  and  by  Coivyra.  tliey  sailed  iiurtb-
wanl  to  tliti  cooets  of  ttie  Adriatic,  or  westwarti
to  Italy  and  Sicily.  Regulaf  traffic  beyond  Sicily
was  rendei-ed  iiupossihie  hy  the  Jealousy  of  the
CartbaKiuiaiis  and  Ktmscnns.  who  were  masters
of  the  commerce  in  thie  re^ioi],  and  whose  place
was  atYerwanls  taken  then<  hy  tint  Rinnans.  A
con.>(idt<ntlile  hind-tntfth;  w:ih  rarrierl  on  hy  the
roloniof)  witli  hurburianH  of  the  interior.  Itiil  in
Qrpeco  Proper  the  moniilainonH  nature  of  the
cotiniry  and  the  ahKi-iiee  of  naviptble  rivers  were
iinfavminihlu  to  coiiiniunicatiun  hy  laod,  und  Iho
latid-t  rartir  acironliujily  waa  entirely  tliniwn  into
the  sliado  hy  the  maritiiue  trade.  Ttiu  only  op-
portunity for  commerce  hy  land  ou  a  large  scale
woA  afforded  by  t.lie  gn^at  national  fcHtivalu,  %vhich
brought  tofjether  great  criiwdn  of  jHtopIn  from
every  part  of  (Ireece,  and  secured  theui  a  ruife  con-
dact.  (See  itlKRCilKIHlA.)  lit  Ibis  wuy  ifie^e  fes-
tivals exactly  corresponded  to  iho  triulu  fairs  of
iniHlcni  I:Inro|ie.

Tim  exports  of  Greece  couBisted  mainly  of  wine,
oil,  and manufactureil guoiln,  es^jceially pottery
and  metal  *vares. The  iniporta  juclnded  the  nec-
Muariea  of  life,  of  which Greece itself,  with ItM ,
dense  popiilati:ni),arlifirially  increased  hy  slavery,  I
did  not  pDiiiinre  a  Nulticient  quantity. The  staple  j
was  wheat,  which  was  imported in  large  qiianti- I
ties  from  the  noastn  iif  Ilm  Black  8cn,  Kgypt,  and
Sicily. Next  cainn  wooil  for  hi>u.<M.-H  and  for  ships,
nntl raw  inat4.*riaU  of  all bind  fur  mnnufactttrt^.
The  fureign manufaetures  imported  were  mut>tly


ohjeeta  of  luxury. Finally  we  sho?
the  largo  tiumher  of  impurtcd  slavo.

Comparthg  the  eirounistannes of  the aoeient
Greek  maritime  commerce  with  those  of  modem
trade,  we uiay  observe that the  ancients  were
mnrb ham]>ered hy  having  no  commi&sion  a^eii-
eiei^  and  no  sytitem  of  exchange. The  pmprietor
i>f  tlie  cargo  Baile<1  with  it,  or  sent  m  represento-
tivti  with  full  powers. Ko  transaction  was  car*
ridl  on  without  paytnetit  in  ready  money,  whirli
was  oftf;n  rendered  difllcnlt  by  the  nxislPiicu  of
difTereiit  syhtems of  coinage. With unciviHrrd
triliAA,  iiotnhly  Ihofte  on  the  Blork  Sea,  a  Kymem
of  barter  long uuiiiitaineil itself. A.h do  goods
c«MiId  be  bought  without  caah  paymeulit,  and  nwn
of  prtiperty  geuemlly  preferred  to  leurt  out  tlietr
capital  to  borrowers  at  high  iuterest.  a  system  of
bottomry was  extensively  developed in Grwic
maritime  tra<le. The  creditor  naually  look  ctrr,
in  lending  the  capital  iiece&tary  for  loading  (be
ship,  to  secure  a  lien  ou  the  slii|>  or  the  carg')— or
botli. With (bis  he  uuderttwk  the  rtnkK  of  tlie
busiuess,  charging  interest  at  a  very  high  ntA
generally  twenty  to  thirty  ])er  cent. Tlie  wriltM
eiiiilract  contained  other  specificniions  as  to  iht
ship  and  the  rate  of  iuterest,  for  the  bre.vb  of
which certain customary  penalties Wi-re 6tti.
These  had reference to the  deelination i>f  tlw
sliip and,  generally  spt^akiiig.  to the  rente  iwl
the time  to  bo  occupied; to  the  cbaracier  wrf
value  of  the  wares,  and  to  the  rt'poyioeut  ef  ihf
loan — tlio  latter  to  determine  whether  it  flioald
l>e  made  on  the  ship's  arriving  at  its  destiaitiao
or  on  its  ronini  Innne. In  the  first  ease  tlic  ewd-
itor  would  often  sail  with  the  ship,  if  he  hid  "»
representative  ou  the  siwt  or  at  the  jwrl  for  "hiA
she  was  boitint.

At  Athens,  and  no  doubt  it)  other  cities,  (be  in-
terests of  the  crwlitor  were  protected  hy  a  hItw*
cfwle  of  taws.  Fraudulent  appropriation  ef  •
deposit  was  punishable  with  death;  dilatoriiMM
in  payment  with  iiuprisouiuent.  The  eredit"'
was  allowed  to  seiao  not  only  the  oecority,  b"'
the  whole  property  »(  the  debtor.  lu  other  in-
spects Athenian  legislation  secured  Mveral  iHltM-
tages  t<i  traders.  Commercial  ease*  c»ni«  bpfcf*
the  law  oioirts  in  winter  only,  when  uaTigfttiM
was  iinpoHMihIe,  and  they  had  to  be  deciiled  vilb*
in  a  niontli,  In  onlinary  caaea  of  debt,  (far  rn^il'
or  could  only  sri/o  on  the  debtor's  projicrtr,  t""*
in  couunereiul  noMirs  ho  m-iw  liable  to  be  iuipfii-
oiiod  if  uoiuhiuinnd  to  payment.  In  other  m*''
tera  idieus  had  to  Ijc  rcpresrnte<l  in  court  by  » <'''
ixen ;  in  commercial  cases  they  eon  Id  appear  w
person.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  Tbo«iuofbe)«  W
S4'P  to  the  preparation  of  thrNw  oases.  The  tHw
was  carried  on  and  the  verdict  given  by  a  Bp«*^
Irlhnnal,  the  yinnToStKat  (<|.  v. ).  Merchants  w«*"
i:iisily  <ihlain  thf3  comtidorablc  privilege  of  eiMnP*
tion  fniiii  inilitary  service,  thongh  ihoy  werftB^
legally  entitled  to  it.

In  giuieriil,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Greek  SUI*^-
in  consideration  of  the  importunee  *if  troilr, »'"'
very  far  in  providing  for  its  inlerests.  Tbfj'l**'
their  best  to  secure  its  oafety  aud  indopenil«»'*
by  force  of  anus,  and  concluded  trealie.t  with  'be
same  cud  in  view.  This  is  especially  true  of  lb"**
agreement-s  which  regulated  the  legal  rolatioiitn
the  citiiteiis  of  any  two  States  in  their  inletrew**
wiUr  each  other,  and  preocrilMKl  the  forms  Ia  b*
uhnerved  by  the  citizens  of  oue  State  when  biiaS-


COMMERCE


895


CUMMISSUM


iDg  snits  agaiuHt  those  of  another.  The  institn-
tioii  of  wpoityoif  correspouding  to  that  of  the  raod-
eni  (Miusiils,  was  of  immeDse  beuefit  to  the  trading
commuuity.  The  Greek  goverDinents  did  a  great
deal  iu  the  way  of  cooBtructiiig  harbours,  wmv-
hoiises,  and  buildings  fur  exchange  in  the  neigh-
honrhood  of  the  harbours.  The  superintendence
of  the  harbour  traffic,  like  that  of  the  market  traf-
6c,  was  intrusted  to  special  goTemment  officials;
in  Athens,  for  instance,  to  the  ten  overseers  of  the
'Efiiroptop.  (See  AgoranoHI.)  The  Athenians
had  also  a  special  board,  called  furpotfofuu,  to  see
that  the  weights  and  measures  were  correct.  It
was  only  in  excoptinnal  cases  that  the  freedom  of
tra4le  was  interfered  with  by  monopolies,  nor  was
it  usual  to  lay  prohibitions  upon  imports.  Pro-
hibitions of  exportation  were,  however,  much  com-
moner. In  many  States,  as  e.  g.  in  Macedonia,  it
was  forbidden  to  export  building  materials,  espe-
cially wood  for  ship-building ;  and  no  grain  might
be  ex^iorted  from  Attica.  Again,  no  Athenian  mer-
chant was  permitted  to  carry  corn  to  any  harlwur
hut  that  of  Athens ;  no  citizen  or  resident  alien
could  lend  money  on  the  security  of  ships  carrying
corn  to  any  place  but  Athens.  Even  foreigners
who  came  with  com  into  the  harbour  of  Athens
were  compelled  to  deposit  two-thirds  of  it  for  sale
there.  To  pravent  excessive  profite  being  realized
in  the  com  trade,  it  was  made  a  capital  offence  for
any  private  citizen  to  buy  np  more  than  fifty  bush-
els at  a  time,  or  sell  it  at  a  profit  of  more  than  an
i>bolus  a  bushel.  The  corn  trade  was  under  the
Buperintendeuce  of  a  board  called  (riTo<ftv\aKts.  In
the  prevailing  activity  of  commerce,  the  tolls  on
exports  and  imports  were  a  plentiful  source  of
revenue  to  the  government. See  PoRTORiUM.

In  Greek  society,  petty  trading  was  thought  a
vulgar  and  sordid  pursuit,  and  was  left  to  the
poorer  citizens  and  resident  aliens  (fUroiKot).  In
Athens  the  class  of  resident  aliens  included  a  great
number  of  the  larger  dealers;  for  the  wealthier
and  more  respectable  citizens  liked  lending  their
capital  to  others  engageil  iu  trade  better  than  en-
gaging in  trade  themselves.

(*2)  Roman.  Id  Italy  an  active  commerce  was
early  carried  on  at  sea  by  the  Etruscans,  the  other
Italian  peoples  taking  only  a  passive  part  in  it.
Bot  Rome,  from  a  very  early  time,  became  the
commercial  centre  of  Central  Italy.  It  was  situ-
ated ou  a  river  deep  enough  to  admit  large  ves-
sels, the  upper  course  and  tributaries  of  which
were  also  navigable.  Its  position  was  mnoh  im-
proved by  the  harbour  at  the  colony  of  Ostia,  said
to  have  been  constructed  under  Ancus  Marcius.
Bo  long  as  the  Etruscans  and  Carthaginians  and
(as  in  later  times)  the  Greek  cities  of  sontbem
Italy  and  Sicily,  like  Tarentum  and  Syracuse,
ruled  the  sea,  the  maritime  power  and  commerce
of  Rome  were  restrict«<l  within  very  narrow  lim-
its. Even  as  late  as  the  middle  of  the  fourth  ceu-
tnry  B.c.  the  traffic  of  Rome  was  coutined  to  Sar-
dinia, Sicily,  and  Africa,  But  with  the  extension
of  the  Rttman  power,  Roman  commerce  assumed
wider  dimensious.  At  the  end  of  the  republican
period  Roman  ships  were  on  every  sea,  and  there
was  a  flourisUiog  interior  trade  in  Italy  and  all
the  provinces.  Wherever  there  was  a  navigable
river  it  was  need  fur  communication,  with  the  hap-
piest results.  After  the  Second  Punic  War,  Rome
gradually  acquired  the  character  of  a  great  com-
mercial city,  where  the  products  of  the  whole


world,  natural  and  indnstrial,  found  a  market.
The  most  considerable  import  was  com,  and  this
at  all  periods  of  Roman  history.  (See  Ankoma.)
The  chief  exports  of  Italy  were  wine  and  oil,  to
which  we  mnst  add,  after  the  development  of  Ital-
ian industry,  manufactured  goods.  The  tradiug-
harbonr  of  Rome  was  Puteoli  (Puzzuoli),  ou  the
Bay  of  Naples,  while  Oatia  was  nsed  mainly  by
corn-ships.  Petty  dealing  was  regarded  unfa-
vourably by  the  Romans,  as  by  the  Greeks;  but
trade  on  a  large  scale  was  thought  quite  respecta-
ble, though  in  older  times  members  of  the  Senate
were  not  allowed  to  engage  in  it.  Most  of  the
larger  undertakings  at  Rome  were  in  the  hands
of  joint-stock  companies  (see  Pubucani),  the  ex-
istence of  which  made  it  possible  for  small  capi-
talists to  share  in  the  profits  and  risks  of  com-
merce. It  was  iudeed  an  old  maxim  of  business
men  at  Rome  that  it  was  better  to  have  small
shares  in  a  number  of  speculations  than  to  specu-
late independently.  The  com  trade,  in  particular,
was  in  the  hands  of  these  companies.  The  govern-
ment allowed  them  to  transport  corn  from  Sar-
dinia, Sicily,  Spain,  Africa,  and  Egypt  to  Rome;
whole  fleets  of  vessels,  constructed  for  the  pur-
pose, being  appointed  to  this  service.  Foreign
trade  was  subjected  to  a  number  of  restrictious.
The  exportation  of  certain  products  was  abso-
lutely prohibited — for  instance,  iron,  whether  nn-
wronght  or  manufactured,  arms,  coin,  salt,  and
gold — and  duties  were  levied  on  all  imports.
There  were  also  uumerous  restrictions  on  trade
in  the  interior,  as  each  province  formed  a  unit  of
taxation,  in  which  toll  had  to  be  paid  on  entering
or  leaving  it.  Among  the  State  monopolies,  the
most  important  was  that  of  salt.

For  more  minute  details  regarding  ancient  com-
merce, see  Reinaud,  Jtelationt  Politiquts  tt  Commer-
cifllet  de  VEmpire  Bonuivn  avtc  VJne  OiieHlale  (Paris,
1863);  Lindsay,  A  Hist,  of  Merchant  Shipping  and
Ancient  Commercf,  4  vols.  (3d  eil.  London,  1883) ;  and
Lanciani,  Ancient  Rome  is  the  Light  of  Recent  Ditcov-
eiHet,  chap.  ix.  (Boston,  1868).

Cozumeroluin.  A  legal  relation  existing  be-
tween two  Italian  States,  according  to  which  the
citizens  of  each  hod  the  same  right  of  acquiring
property,  especially  landed  property,  in  tlie  terri-
tory of  the  other.  Coramercinm  also  iuclnded  the
powers  of  inheriting  legacies  and  contracting  ob-
ligations. See  CiviTAH.

CommiBfloria  Lex.  A  term  met  with  in  the
law  of  pledge  and  in  the  law  of  sale.  In  the
former  it  meant  the  agreement  between  pledger
and  pledgee  that  the  property  pledged  should  be
vested  absolutely  in  the  latter  unless  the  debt
which  it  secured  was  punctually  discharged  by
the  day  fixed  for  payment. See  Pjgnus.

In  the  law  of  sale,  lex  commiseoria  denotes  an
agreement  between  vendor  and  purchaser  that
the  former  shall  be  at  libert.y  to  rescind  the  con-
tract if  the  latter  does  not  perform  his  obligations
under  it  in  duo  manner  and  at  the  proper  time
{Dig.  18,3,1).  This  was  not  the  same  thing  as  a
conditional  sate ;  for  in  the  latter,  if  the  property
were  damaged  or  destroyed,  the  loss  would  fall  ou
the  vendor,  whereas  iu  our  case,  if  the  property
was  lost,  damaged,  or  destroyed,  the  loss  fell  on
the  purchaser.

Conuniaaum.  One  sense  of  this  word  is  that
of  "  forfeited,"  which  is  derived  from  the  sense  of


oomnrs


896


OOBfNEWA


imittere, "  to  attach  lepnl  pflVct  to," « (o
make  oporaiivf."  lleucc  properly  furleit*'*!  by  (Iik
comiiiK  into  etToct  of  a  ooodition  was  ^aitl  to  Vmi
rtM«iMiii»Kin.  a*  when  a  lex  lommUiioria  {q.  v.)  was
altocbeil  u>  a  luorttfage  (pignut).  Votnmitifia  hire'
ditaa  Is  mi  inberit^uce  furfcUcil  as  a  pt'tiiUty  (Cio.
rerr.  i.  10,  ^  *27),

Commiuft.  A  kiiifr  r>rtbe  Atrebntrs,  irbo  waa  ad-
vaiirt-d  to  that  dignity  by  Cae»ar.  He  wa«  Miit
by  CncMir  to  Itridtiii,  t>nl  wa»  caat  into  uhnitui  by
tlic  i)ativei«,  and  ti»t  rclcaaetl  till  tlicy  bad  been
drfrnlcd  by  Ciicaar.  ]ti  B.C.  52,  be  Jolued  Ibe  otber
OaiilN  ill  tlicir  great  revolt  ogalunt  the  Komans,
and  cofitiuned  ia  umfl  ovni  after  tbo  capture  of
Alo«JA  (I'Msiid.  Caee.  B.  (i.  \  ii).  7-'i3),

Commixtfo. See  C(>\pr8io.

Cominodatuin.  A  (;rutnitoiifi  binii  in  which
tbo  burrowiT  {ci>mniodalariun)  la  boiiiid  to  return
tbti  very  tbiuj;  luul,  aud  nut  au  equtvaleut.  It
tbiiH  dilVcnt  fr<>ni  mutunm  ((].  v.).

CommodlauuB.  A  Cbrit»tiau  Latin  poet,  vho
tlourlftbed  in  the  third  century  a.ix.  when  he  wrote
two  poeuis  (,/n»(r«ci«>iiM  in  acrostic  and  telestic
verse,  and  the  i.'armm  Jpologelicum),  hhowini;  a
prtisntly  lia»ed  partly  «tn  accent  and  jmrlly  on  bvI-
lubic  qiiarilily,  and  intcndt'd  l«  tit-  n'^iardf^d  an
liesamoten*.  Kbym«  iaalfiiiocvaAiotially  outployed.
Bttlb  jMM>mtt  are  aimed  agaiDfit  tbe  bcatbcu  aud  tbo
JewK. Kdition  by  Dontbait  (Vienoa.  18^).

Coinin&diia,  L.  AuitELit's  AntonIxls.  Tho
sou  and  ancceBBor  of  M.  Aiirelins  Antoninus,  who
ascended  tho  imperial  throne  a.d.  160.  The  rei^
of  this  prince  is  a  sreue  of  gnilt  and  misery,  which
the  bisli>riAU  is  glad  to  dismiss  with  brerit.v.  Ho
appears,  indiynl.  in  have  tnheriti>d  alt  the  vices  of
bis  mother,  Faustina:  and  his  fatlier,  iu  spleclins
him  fur  biA  succcsHor.  allowed  the  feelings  of  the
parent  t<t  triumph  over  the  witMlom  of  tlie  magis-
Iratn.  He  ha<l  a<'t'onipauicil  his  father  on  the  ex-
peditiounKntuNt  the  Mnrcouianni  and  the  Qiituli.  but
no  ihwner  waa  Aurelius  dead  thiui  his  sou  Iwcaute
mnxions  to  proceed  to  Kome.  aud  mkiu  concluded  a
hasty  and  diAgrnoefnl  peace  with  the  hntbariaus
whom  his  father  biul  been  on  the  point  uf  coraplele-
1y  subjupkliuK  when  be  was  cut  off  by  diM-ase.
NolwitlislauditiK  the  cart*  which  Aureltus  IiimI  be-
stowed on  his  etlucation,  ComtuoiIiiB  wiu  ipuonnit
to  an  extrt-me  degree,  has  iu^  neither  abilities  nor
inotinatioM  for  protiliug  by  tlie  i>ii|ernal  example
and  iustmcliou.  On  bis  relnrn  to  Home  he  s|ieetl-
ily  ftbotred  the  bia.t  of  bis  natural  disposition,  giv-
ing bimaelf  up  to  nnre«trtiined  tudnlgfnce  in  the
gro— Mt  vicp«.  That  be  mifrbt  do  so  without  im-
pedlaeut,  hv  tntnuted  all  power  to  Pcrennis  prac-
mtt  of  ll»e  Praetorian  Guard,  a  man  of  stem  and
cruel  temper,  who  waa  at  laat  slain  by  the  aoldicrs
for  his  severity.

A  ixmspiracy  aKninst  the  life  of  Commodiis  hav-
IDX  failed,  it  was  follownt  by  a  long  snceessioti  of
Jndtcinl  tnimler*  to  gratify  the  vengeance  of  the
eowanlly  and  vindictive  tyrant.  Ho  wa«  next
threatened  by  n  new  danger :  disntfoetion  had
spread  over  the  legions;  and  an  attempt  of  Ma-
temus,  n  private  soldier,  who  beaded  a  band  of
dr«*«Tten<  and  pnijecte*!  the  amaw^inntion  of  Com-
nioduH  dnring  the  cel^'Unnion  of  the  ftvltval  of
Cyl»el^,  was  so  ably  concrivp*!  that  it  must  have
lM<eu  snc4-e«»rnl  tnit  for  lb«  trMobM^  of  an  accom-
phr«<.  Itiit  tieittier  daty  nor  dMiger  oonid  draw
CommiHlits  iVout  the  sports  of  i^adlMon  or  Che
pleaaures  of  debauchery. f^leaiHler,  ft  Pbrygiau


CotntBOdua inHHiaibeChpl-
loltBa  Hvsanm,  Umbk.)


sIatc.  soon  siiceeeded  to  the  place  and  inHnencn
of  Percunis,  and  ftpr  t  hrec  years  the  Empire  groaned
beneath  his  cruelty  aud
rapacity. At Ictiglh a
new iusurrectiou bnrat
forth, vUich untbing
cuuld alliiy,  tbo prae-
torian cuvalry  being  de-
feated in  the  streets  by
tbt) populace,  nntil the
unworthy  favonrite  was,
by Ihc cmiwror's rtim-
utandjiIflivcrL'd  tolhoiu-
siirguuts. In  thu  mean-
time, Coin  mild  UN  was
indulging  his  base  tastes
and appelilea,  nut  only
by  gross  sousuality,  but
by  attempting  to rival
the  gladiators. Being  a
very  skilfnl  archer  and
of  great  personal  strength,  be  delighted  in  killing
wild  l>ea8l«  in  the  nmphithp»trc,and  thus  pn'tend-
ing  to  rival  the  prowessof  Herciilea. In  tiie  glftd>
ifltorial  contest*,  he  pnlilicly  engaged  no  often  tlut
he  wa.4  the  conqnemr  in  735  combalR. Though
luxurious  in  bis  dreds,  fre<)neutly  resoiting  to  tl»e
batbs  eight  time*)  in  the  day.  scattering  gold  dost
in  his  hair,  and,  from  the  foar  of  adoiittiug  the  ap-
proach of  a  raeor  iu  thu  baud  of  another,  singeing
off  hiB  beard,  be  waa  especially  proud  of  exbibiliunx
of  personal  strength,  and  frequently,  in  the  garl<
of  a  priest,  butchered  victims  with  hia  own  band*.
Among lite flatteries ttf the olise«ptiou8 Senate
none  pleased  him  more  than  the  vole  which  atylcd
him  tttfl  "  HercnleB  of  Kon>e,"  not  even  that  which
decreed  to  him  the  titles  of  Pins  and  Kelts,  or  whirli
offered  toalMttish  the  name  of  the  Kterual  City  nu'k.^
Hnlulitute  for  it the title  Colouia  Commodian
Aftor  thirteen  years  of  iiiimiligated  oppnisMou,  hi
favourite.  Marc  ia,  idtimately  Ijeranu"  the  iuntrnncrfc
by  which  the  Soman  worhl  waadelivcre<l  from  it
odion<i  nio-ster- She  discovered,  from  »ome  priTa'%
notes  of  (.'ouimo4)n<i,  that  herself,  l.aettin  the  pi
torian  praefect,and  EelpelnstbechaniberlaiH,  w&»«o
tui  the  list  devoted  to  death. A  conspiracy  was  i  m-
UK'^liiitely  forme^l,  Mareia  admini<ttenMl  poismi t^t
thecniperor,  and.  lest  the  measure  should  not  prove
fffeetnal,  the  dee<l  was  com]>letnI  l»y  stiffocalion,
iu  A.b.  I9i. The  life  of  Commodus  bos  comedown
to  us,  written  by  l^mpridina,  iu  the  Ilintoria  Jk-

Comneoa,  Axxa,  danghter  of  the  ByuntiBP
emperor  .Kiexins  I.  (Comnenns),  atid  anthor  of  wi
of  the  most  valuable  of  tbo  Byzantine  bistonM.
Sbe  waabom  L>ecember  Ist,  10S3,and  receivMslil^-
eral  edncation,  showing  at  an  early  age  a  fnti
fonduevs  for  literary  pnnsnile.  cumtuueil  wttb  &■>
intrigiiiiig  di^iHiHttioii,  which  found  much  lo  gnt-
ify  it  in  the  court  of  Constantinople.  PsilingW
induce  her  father  uu  his  death-bed  to  leave  tlir  iv^
l^rial  crown  to  ber.  sbe  set  ou  foot  a  connpin^?
to  destroy  the  lifeof  ber  brother  iohanne«,tli«t>*'
ful  heir  (Ul^X  but  her  husband.  Nicephont»  BrT'
enuins,  a  nobleman  of  the  conrt.  refosett  bi»  >*''
Her  brother  spared  her  life  and  only  tenipof«n'.'
deprived  her  of  her  property:  bat  she  rvtirrdCi""'
the  coart  and.  after  spending  snnie  time  in  hiltnfl*
col  e«)mp»tition,  entereii  a  convent,  whem  Bb^il'*"
iu  1 14?<  Her  life  of  lior  father,  in  eighteen  boakA
is  i'lal>orately  rhetorical  aud  always  eulogisttc- ri>t


it  m  of  mnoh  vnlne  to  tb«  historian  of  tbe  later
KuipirR.  Bir  Walter  Scott  itilmdnci-A  Iirf  in  a
mvniorattle  cbajiUr  of  Iiik  nuvnl,  Cfiunt  ttahrrt  i/f
/'aril.  Tlin  InikI  fiUtinii  uf  lirr  liiHtory  ih  llmt  u(
Scfaopnn  aud  KrilTi-ntrlii-id. '2  vuln.  (1K{!)-7H).  On
her  life  nnd  farther,  M>eO>tt<!r'ti  \rork,  Jnn«i  t'omnena,

Comoedla  tKuiiu^ia).  (DGrkek.  The  Greek
oomodv.  litto  ibeUrwk  triigeity  and  aatjric  dnimo,
bail  it«  origio  in  tbo  fe«tivuU  of  Dionyttus.  An  itf>
DMBe,  Kt»i»^iia.  or  tbe  sntig  of  tbo  Kitfto^,  inipliea,
it  ATDftc  fritin  the  unreetraiiied  eiiig^n^  and  jesting
common  in  tbo  xafioc,  or  nicny  ]iroce88ioii  nf  Dio-
nyniis.  Arconiing  Ut  tbe  truditiiio,  it  wm  tho
Doric  Inliabitaiils  of  M»};ara,  \r«U  known  for  tbftir
lore  of  fuu,  wlio  lirnt  worki'd  uji  lUfw  jnkfin  into
a  kiud  of  farce.  Tbo  inbubitauts  of  Mef^ura  iw-
cordiugly  booated  tbat  tbu*}-  u-en*  tbo  fuuudvi-n  uf
Gre«k  coniedjr,  Frooi  Meguni,  it  war  Hiipposod,
the  popular  faroe  fouud  itii  wuy  l^  tbi^  utbur  Do-
ri»D  coniiuun)tie«,  aud  one  8iisiirion  was  naid  to
baire  trauttv'nuted  it  u>  tbe  Attic  deme  of  Icnria
abunt  B.C.69O.  Nu  fnrlbfr  iufomiulion  l»  in  «xist-
enre  as  to  the  nainn?  uf  tbi*  Mfgiiriitn  or  Ihiriaii
tfapalar  comeily.  Tbe  liH-nl  lUtric  furc-e  wan  ^\e-
Kcioped  into  literary  fonn  in  Sicily  by  Kpicbar-
Pbtb  of  Cu8  (about  B.C.  540-45(1).  Tbitt  writer  guve
^4  Himic  trcatinetit  not  only  to  inytliology,  but  to
'  Mbjevts  taken  fioiu  reml  life.  TUe  conlomporary
uf  £|>icbarmn!i,  rbormuA  or  Pbonuia,  and  bta  pa-
pil  DluolDcbuK.  may  uIko  be  named  as  represonta-
Wreiiof  tbe  Dorian  comedy.

r  Tbe  Wgintiiugs  of  tbw  Attic  corat'dy,  like  Ibose
ff  tlw)  Attic  tntgedy,  aru  nwociateil  with  tbe  deiiii>
Af  Irario,  known  to  Imve  bf<;ii  tin*  cluKf  »ent  of  tltv
>mr»bip  of  DionyHne  in  Attira.  Not  only  Tbeitpib,
Ibc  fiitbcr  of  trngi'dy,  bnt  al«o  Cliiunidea  aud  Mug-
^•*  (abuul  B.C.  550),  wbrt,  if  Ibe  utory  ]n;iy  be  tnml-
*Ai  lirst  gave  a  more  arliHtit:  tonn  to  tlic  Mi'guriun
toiucdy,  iuLrodur-eil  by  8ii8uiioii,  wltl-  nulives  <if
IcHiia.  Comedy  did  not  berome,  in  the  proper
wtuw, a  part  of  literature  until  it  bud  futind  wel-
(otUe  ami  con^ideiatiou  at  Atbcns  in  tlie  lime  of
'!■«  PrreinD  Wars;  until  it«  form  bnd  beuu  mould*
*^  on  tbe  tlninbed  outline;*  of  tragedy;  and  until,
tuftUy,  it  had  received  from  tbe  Siale  tbe  eaiiio
'Wi^Jgnition  as  tragedy. See  Tkauukiua.

The  Oui  CuMKDV,  atf  It  WM  cnllfil,  bnd  ilH  ori-

itu  lu  jienional nbune. It  wan  Oratiw  ivlio limt

^^«  it itH  ]H?cnliar  politiral ebaruel4>r,  and  liitt

Oniiger  conli^inporary,  CnitinuM,  who turned it

"ilnly  or  fiehwively  in  thin  diroeltou. Tbe  nms-

J»r»  of  tbe  Old  Comedy  at«  iiKUully  held  to  be  C'ra-

^"Qh  aud  bid  yoiingLTuonlvrnporiirieti,  Knpolis  and

A^riMopbanea. It  attained  its  youth  in  the  time

*f  Peridrs  aud  ibu  Pebiponnesian  War — ttio  peri-

^*^wben  cbe  Atheuian  democracy  had  retiehed  its

I^Cbett  development. TtieHti  tltreo  luuMttirH  bail

pWijrrivaU — who  fell,  bowrvet,  on  tbn  whok-  b«-

P"'*th  tbi-ir  lorel— nmong  otii^rM  PbiTf-iateM,  Hwr-

"'iMvtiH.  Tele<'lide»,  Plirynicbmt,  AmBipHias,  Plato,

■"'1  Ttieoponipon.

A  good  idea  of  thn  cluiraclfriMiica  of  tbe  Old
*^edr  may  bff>  fonnrd  fnuii  tbe  olevKU  surviving
l^'^J^Bof  Aristoiibanra  (ij.  v.).  Tlio  (Iret-k  tragedy
"Wa  meaning  for  all  time;  but  the  Old  Comedy,
,  "x!  most  brillinnt  and  tttrikiug  productimi  of  all
[  AllifcHiiin  literature,  has  its  roots  in  Athenian  lilV,
^JdttoBMod  the  Atbonian  public  only.

[  from  tbe  very  flr^t  with  the  grotflnrjiip
I  Kbrard  aide  of  things,  it  w»»  the  sconrgo  of  all


vice,  folly,  and  weakness.  Tbe  social  life  of  Ath-
vUK,  fto  restless  and  yet  so  open,  offered  an  inex-
biuiHtible  Htore  of  material;  aud  the  comedian  \vaa
nlwaVM  «ure  of  a  witty,  laugbter-loving  public,  oil
whom  no  nlluittoii  was  lost.  Thn  tirst  aim  uf  tbe
Athenian  comedy  vjm,  no  doubt,  to  make  men
Inugb,  bur  Xh\n  waa  not  all.  Ittinuaib  it  there  lay
a  seriona  and  patriotic  motive.  Tbu  jioet.  who
vraft  Bccurcd  by  the  liccn&c  of  the  stage,  wi^bud  to
bring  to  light  aud  tarn  to  ridicule  tho  abuses  and
degeneraey  of  bis  time.  Tbe  Attic  comediane  are
nil  atlmirers  of  tbe  good  old  times,  and  according-
ly tbe  declared  enemies  of  tbe  social  innovations
which  were  begiimiug  to  make  tbeir  way — the
signs  ill  many  rAsns,  no  donbt,  of  :i]»pr<>ai'hiiig  d<v-
(■Hue.  It  was  nut,  buwever,  tbe  actual  phenome-
na of  lifo  wbicb  w^^e  nketebed  in  tbe  Old  Comedy.
Thu  latter  is  rt-ully  a  grutusque  aud  fantastic:  uari*
cature ;  tbo  ooloura  are  laid  ou  thick,  and  proprie-
ty, BB  we  moderua  uudt^mtaud  it,  \i  thrown  to  the
winds.  Theite  plays  ubound  in  coar»une&a  and  ob-
scenity of  the  broadeHt  kiud.  tlie  natural  survival
of  tbe  rude  lic«ut)«  allowed  at  the  I>iunyitiu4:  fe«ti-
vnl.  Tbe  choice  and  trentriivnt  of  tbe  subjects
slniw  tbe  same  tendency  to  the  grol4*M|ue  and  fan-
tastic. Furicy  and  caprice  i^ivhI  at  tbeir  will,  un-
checked by  any  rcgarrl  either  for  the  lawn  of  }><>et-
ieal  probiibility  or  for  adequacy  of  oceiision.  The
ac-(i<ni  ia  gencnilly  quite  simple,  sketebtMl  out  in  a
fuw  broad  slrokcH,  and  carried  out  hi  a  umtley  se-
ries of  touKcly  connected  scenes.  Tbe  langnagu  Is
utwaya  cboir«  and  tine,  never  leaving  the  forms  of
the  pnroKt  AltiiMstii  The  nietrns  admit  a  greater
fivfdiun  iitid  iMovenieut  than  those  of  tbe  tnig«!dy,

A  r-oitirdy,  like  a  tragedy,  consiHtcd  i»f  tbe  drn-
matic  dialogue,  written  mostly  in  iam)>ie  Menarii,
and  the  lyrical  cborns.  Tbe  division  of  the  dia-
loguf  int<i  nfiuXayat,  tircnrdfttuv.  and  t^vios,  and  of
the  40iorii»  intorrnpodoc  ami  ordcri/ui,  are  ihe  same
as  in  trageily.  Hut,  while  tbe  tragic  cborns  eon-
«iatcd  of  llfteen  ningerN,  there  were  twenty-four  iu
tbe  comic.  A  ptH.-n!iiLrity  of  the  comic  cborns  is
tbe  rrapdfiaait,  a  M^rice  of  tinea  entirely  nneouucct-
ed  with  tbe  plot,  in  which  the  poet,  tbtongb  the
mouth  of  tbe  cborns,  addresses  the  public  directly
about  bis  owu  concerns  oi-  upon  burning  qnea*
tlons  of  the  day.  ( 8co  rAitAUASiu.  )  Like  the
tragedies,  the  coini'diiMt  wdir  perfoniied  at  the
gri'Mt  festiviiU  of  Dionysus,  the  Dinnysiu  (q>  v.)  and
tbe  Ijifuuen  (q.  v.).  On  t>fl4.'h  occasion  five  {hjuI^i  com-
peted for  tbu  prize,  eacb  with  one  play.

For  u  6bi>rt  time,  but  a  short  time  only,  a  limi-
tation had  been  pnt  upon  the  absolute  freedom
with  which  the  pocte  of  tbo  Old  Comedy  lashed
tbe  shortcomiitgH  of  the  gOTcrniaent  and  its  chief
men.  Tbe  downfall  of  tbe  democracy,  however,
deprived  Ihum  of  thin  lib^nrty.  Tbe  disustrous  is-
mm  ol"  the  Pclojiomichian  War  had,  niorpover,
niiiuMl  the  Atbetiiau  Bnniices,  and  made  it  n«'(v.H.
Hary  to  give  up  tbe  expensive  chorus  and  with  it
the  iropdfiaint.  Thus  deprived  of  the  meuns  of
fxiMtvnce,  the  Old  Comedy  was  doomed  to  cxttuc-
tiun.  In  iii«  pbwe  cniue  what  was  culled  tbe  Mid-
dle CotiEJfV,  from  about  is.c.  400  to  'XM.  Tbia  was
a  uutdlllcatioi)  of  tbe  Old  Comedy,  with  a  charac-
ter corresponding  to  tbe  altered  circumstuuce  of
l.be  time.  Tbo  Middle  ConcuMly  was  in  no  wu.<hi
political;  it  avoid«>iI  iiU  (i|}eu  attack  im  individ-
uiilH,  niitl  runfiui><l  itM«lf  to  treating  the  typteat
fiuiUs  and  we»kiie>>»L's  of  mankind.  Ittt  main  line
wuA  biirlcs<ine  and  parody,  of  which the  objects


COMOEUIA


898


COMWTALIA


were  the  tragedies  and  tlie  mytliolugy  in  geoeral.
It  woB  also  severe  apon  the  lives  of  tbe  phil(»o-
pUers.  It  dealt  in  typical  cbamcteni,  such  as
bailies,  parasites,  aud  courtesans.  Tbe  writers  of
the  MidiUe  Comedy  were  very  prolific,  more  than
eight  buiulred  of  their  plays  having  snrvived  as
late  as  tbe  second  century  a.d.  The  most  cele-
brated of  them  were  Anttphanea  of  Athena  aud
Alexis  of  Thnrii;  next  to  these  came  EtihaloB,  and
Anaxandrides  of  Rhodes.

A  new  departure  is  signalized  by  the  dramas  of
what  is  called  the  Nkw  Cohudy.  In  these,  as  in
the  modern  society  drama,  life  was  represented  in
its  minutest  details.  Tbe  New  Comedy  offered  a
play  regularly  constructed  like  that  of  tragedy,
characterized  by  fine  humour,  aud  but  seldom
touching  on  public  life.  The  language  was  that
of  ordinary  society,  aud  tfae  plot  was  worked  out
in  a  connected  form  fi-om  tbe  beginning  to  tbe  d6-
nooemeut.  The  chief  art  of  the  poets  of  the  New
Comedy  lay  in  the  development  of  the  plot  and  the
faithful  portraiture  of  character.  The  stock  sub-
jects are  illicit  love  affairs ;  for  honest  women  lived
in  retirement,  aud  stories  of  honourable  love,  there-
fore, were  practically  excladed  fnim  the  stage.  Tbe
ordinary  characters  are  young  men  in  love,  fathers
of  the  good-natured  or  the  scolding  type,  canning
slaves,  panders,  parasites,  aud  bragging  officers.
Besides  the  dialogue  proper,  we  find  traces  of  parts
written  in  lyric  metres  for  the  higher  style  of  sing-
ing. These  were,  in  all  probability,  like  the  dia-
logue, performed  by  the  actors.

The  fate  of  the  New  resembles  that  of  tbe  Mid-
dle Comedy,  only  a  few  fragments  of  its  numerous
pieces  having  survived.  Of  some  of  them,  bow-
ever,  we  have  Latin  adaptations  by  Plaotiis  and
Terence.  Its  great«st  master  was  Menander,  be-
sides whom  should  be  mentioned  Diphilns,  Phile-
mon, Pbilippides,  Posidippus,  and  Apollodonis  of
Caryetiis.  The  New  Comedy  flourished  from  B.c.
330  till  far  into  the  third  century  a.d.

In  about  b.c.  300,  the  old  Dorian  farce  was  re-
viveil  in  a  literary  form  in  Southern  Italy  by
Rbiuthon,  tbe  creator  of  tbe  Bilarotragoedia  ('iXa-
porpayaiia).  The  HilaroU-agoedia  was  for  tbe  most
part  a  parody  of  tlie  tragic  stories.  It  is  also  called,
froto  \\»  creator, /u&u/a  Rhinthonioa.

(3)  Roman.  Like  the  Greeks,  the  Italian  peo-
ple bad  their  popular  dramatic  pieces — tbe  ver»H»
Fewsenuini^  for  instance,  which  were  at  firat  intro-
duced,in  B.C.  SUO.fi-om  Etruria,in  consequeuce  of  a
plt^ne,  to  appease  the  nrath  of  heaven.  (See  Fk-
SCKNNINI  Vekscs.)  From  this  combination  sprang
the  mfiira,  a  performance  consisting  of  Hute-playiiig,
mimicdance,  songs,  aud  dialogue.  Tbe  Alellanae  Fa-
bulae{q.  v.)  were  a  second  species  of  popular  Italian
comedy,  distinguished  from  others  by  having  cer-
tain fixed  or  stock  characters.  The  creator  of  the
regular  Italian  comedy  aud  tragedy  m-as  a  Oi'eek
named  Livius  Andronicns,  about  B.C.  240.  Like
the  Italian  tragedy,  the  Italian  comedy  was,  in
form  aud  contents,  an  imitation,  executed  with
more  or  less  freedom,  of  the  Greek,  It  was  the
New  Greek  Comedy  which  the  Romans  took  as
tlteir  wulel.  Ttiis  conie<ly,  which  represents
scenes  from  Greek  life,  was  culled  palliata,  after
tbe  Greek  pallium^  or  cloak.  Tbe  dramatic  aatHva
aud  tbe  Atellana,  which  afterwards  supplanted  the
safura  as  a  concluding  farce,  coutinned  to  exist
side  by  side.  The  Latin  comedy  was  brought  to
perfection  by  Plautus  and  Terence,  the  only  Ro-


man dramatists  from  whose  bauds  we  still  poameet
complete  plays.  We  shonld  also  mention  Nafrins
and  Eiinids  (both  of  whom  wrote  tragedies  as  well
as  comedies),  Caecilius,  and  Turpilius,  with  wbom,
towards  the  end  of  tbe  third  century  B.C.,  this  styls
of  composition  died  out.

About  the  middle  of  the  second  century  B.C.,  i
new  kind  of  comedy,  tite  fabnla  togata  (from  toga),
made  its  appearaucB.  The  form  of  it  waaatill  Greek,
but  the  life  and  the  characters  Italian.  The  toga-
ta was  represented  by  Ttttuius,  Atta,  and  Afraniiis,
who  were  accounted  masters  in  this  kiodof  writinj;.
At  the  Liegiuning  of  tbe  first  century  B.C.,  the  Atd-
lana  assumed  an  artistic  form  in  the  hands  of  Pom-
ponius  and  Novius;  and  some  fifty  years  later  lb«
mimus,  also  an  old  form  of  popular  farce,  was  simi-
larly handled  by  Laberius  and  Publilioa  Synia.
The  mtmuff  drove  all  the  other  varieties  of  couiedy
from  tbe  field,  and  held  ite  ground  until  late  in  ibe
imperial  period.  See  Fabvla;  Mimus;  Paxtu-
MIMUS ;  Batira.

The  Roman  comedy,  like  its  model,  the  New
Comedy  of  the  Greeks,  had  no  regular  chorus,  tbe
intervals  being  filled  up  by  performances  on  tbe
flute.  (See  Chorus.)  Tbe  play  consisted,  like
the  Roman  tragedy,  partly  of  passages  of  spoken
dialogue  (divertiia)  in  iauibic  trimeters,  partly  of
musical  sceires  called  cantioa. See  Canticum.

For  the  details  of  comic  acting  aud  a  bibliogra-
phy, see  Diiaha;  TUBATUUM.

Compenaatio.  A  legal  term  corTosponding  to
the  English  "set-off"  or  " ooonterelaim."  8«a
GaiuB,  iv.  64.

Comperendinatio.  The  technical  term  iu  Ro-
man law  for  the  postponement  of  a  trial  for  a  def-
iuite  time  by  consent  of  both  parties,  each  being
bound  to  appear.  It  is  to  be  distinguished  from
ampliatio,  which  seems  to  have  meant  an  indefiuite
postponement,  in  consequence  of  uucertainty  on
tbe  part  of  the  jury.

Compes  {wiii}).  (1)  A  fetter  or  shackle  for  the
ankles,  and  sometimes  so  constructed  as  to  deprive
the  prisoner  almost  wholly  of  the  power  of  walk-
ing. (2)  An  ornamental  anklet  worn  by  women.
See  Periscrlis.

Competitor. See  Ambitus.

CompXta. See  Compitalia.

Compitalia.  also  called  Ludi  Compitalicfl,  A
festival  celebrated  once  a  year  in  honour  of  tbe
two  Lares  Conipitales,  to  whom  sacrifices  were  of-
fered at  the  places  where  two  or  more  ways  met
(compita),  Dionysins  (iv.  14)  similarly  ascribes  its
origin  to  Servius  TuUius,  aud  describes  the  festival
as  it  was  celebrated  in  his  time.  He  relates  that
the  sacrifices  consisted  of  honey -cakes  {inXmrnt,
which  were  presented  by  the  inhabitants  of  earii
bouse,  and  that  the  persons  who  assisted  as  uliiis-
tering  servants  at  the  festival  were  not  frreniMt,
hut  slaves,  Iiecause  the  Lares  took  pleasure  in  tlie
service  of  slaves.  He  farther  adds  that  the  Com-
pitalia were  celebrated  a  few  ilays  after  tbe  Sstnr-
nalia  with  great  splendour,  and  that  the  bIst/soii
this  occasion  bad  full  liberty  given  them  to  do  wbit
they  pleased.  We  are  told  by  Macrobtus  {Saiitn.
i.  7, 34)  that  the  celebration  of  the  Compitalia  vA'<
restored  by  Tarquinius  Superbus,  n-ho  sacrificed
boys  to  Mania,  tbe  mother  of  the  Lares;  bat  this
practice  was  changed  after  ^li$.-«xpnlsioa  of  ih^
Tflrquius,  and  the  beads  of  garlic  and  poppia  ven
offered  instead  of  human  heiKls.


COMI'U'VIUM


OONCUlllNA


feL~


Tlie  perwiUB  vho  jmtthXnA  o\t>v  tlie  fi*altval  wire  '
the  magiflri  vitvrum.  Public  gamva  were  nddtnl  at
aonio  liiiK.'  iluriti);  tbe  r«|mbticiti)  purioil  to  ttiifl
fnitivul,  l>iit  WL'io  KuppirL-iHttKl  by  voiumutitl  of  tbe
Sciml«*  lu  D.C.  64.  Vi;t  tliat  the  fo^tiviil  itself  still
coutiiiued  to  be  observed,  tbougb  tlie  Klines  were
■bolU)i«l,  is  evideat  fram  Cicero  {ad  Jtt.  iii.  3).
Wbmi  liilius  Cav«ar  dtuolvpd  innAt  itf  the  roil<-piat
tbe  Lroiuiiitulin  iieoensnrily  fell  into  di!l^sl^  Aukiih-
Itia  restored  the  frstivnl  cm  iin  nminOy  now  ba**i(i,
not  rvviviiig  the  collrifia,  but  ftNHi^niii^  tliti  c]iiir|f<i
of  it  to  a  Denly  vitnHlittlted  net  ot'  matjinlii  vimrinn.
To  tlic  two  Lritm  Ciiiii|iila]eH  wiu  umv  uddi-d  tlit-
griius  AuifiuH  ^Orid,  Fant.  v.  145),  »itd  thi^  ru»tiv»}
was  olMh-rvcd  twice  in  tbe  year,  nti  iUiy  I  aiui
Aiignst  1.  At  at)  earlit-r  tiuio  the  Ci>Di|iitulia  Ix'-
Iiii)i;c4l  to  the  ftriati  t-vKc^pUt^e ;  that  is,  festivalB
wbicli  were  celebrat^stroii  days  appointed  niiiinnlly
1*7  the  iiiugi»trat««  or  pricsiii.  The  ilay  on  winch
tbU  festival  van  celebrattxl  Appears  to  hlive  Ueeii
alnuyn  in  tbe  wiuter.

Compluvium. See  DoUCS,  p,  &44.

Compiomissum. Ki-e  It:DEX;  Rkcepta  Actio.

Compsa. A  town  of  the  HIrpiui,  iu  t^amuium,
near  ih«  8oun:«8  of  tbe  AuHdua.

Comtun. Tlio  modpni  Cudio;  a  town  lu  GAltin

CiMiIpina,  at  tlii-  Miiitlieni  extremity  of  tlii''  wewt

(•ranch  of  the  Lnriirt  I-anTid  iLflgo  di  Comn). It

n  tLs  uri^iunlly  ;i  lou  ii  ul'  the  Iii»iil>riiirn  GunU,  nnd

»*Jij«eqn«nily  a  Rumau  culuii.v. It  woh  \h«  birtli-

pJttce  of  clie  younger  Pliuy  (Flinjr,  EpUt.  i.  3).

Comus  UCifiutl See  C'hobls;  C'omokdia.

Comna  (Ku^vX  TUo  ^ud  i>f  ffHtive  mirth  and
*>Jp*,";iire8eutedasft  wiu^ed  youth,  uiontiouedoidy

cbo  later  tjmcti  u(  auiifjtiity.

Concaedes.  A  barrieiide  tnadc  of  tri'>e«  and
plx&«i'd  iicrowi  tlic  ruad  to  hinder  tbe  u)ipi*uncb  of
.& Laustile  furoo  (Tuc.  Jnn.  i.  HO).

<7onoha  <€6yx^*  Ktry^ov).  Lli*rn»lly,  a  sco-shcU,
B.u«3  applied  to  it  vesiu^l  made  iu  the  foiiu  of  such  a
sl>*^U,  and  iisetl  fur  variouH  pnrpoite^ — e.  g.  lu*  salt-
c«?>Hur8,  fur  oila,  perfumes,  nnj^neniA,  eolnurM  fur
pL&lntert),  etc. A  liquid  meiiHure  wiw  nlitu  callinl

r<oM«Aa,Aiid  wiit>  of  tiAo  capaeitioii:  oii«=:.0412  pt«.

b^»g.;  the  other,  .USk)  ptti.

CoocUiariL 6e«  Aahf-skor.

ConcUlum. An  assembly  iu  general, (tonictiiiie^

VMed  in  a  loo^e  way  to  designate  the  crndlia  of  tlx)

OTiitJirieK  (Lit.  ji.  •>«),  iir  any  f^ntia. For  tbe  con-

tAlitm  plthit,  idue  CoMlTlA. The  word  also  denotes

tliB  iiMfiulilies  or  meetiugw  of  tonfedtirate  towns

^•rtialiijiiB.  at  which  eith<'r  their  deputies  almie,  ov

Wiyofllie  ctti/.eiiH  who  bad  time  and  iiiclinuttou.

"fttj  and Ihuit f(<rnied a r»rp^o^tnlIltlvo muscm-

^'y(Uv.  i.  50). We  tlnd  fret|tic:iit  truces  of  tlii*.

■^i  uidy  among  the  Italiau  nationtt,  l)Ut  alfio  in

die  Gtrvlt Suites ( ry Kotf6v ). (See Achaean

l-iUOi'E.) A»  the  Komaus  conquered  the  neigh-

BwJtiug  flijites  of  Italy,  it  was  a  regular  pnrt  of

*W|ir  pnlicy  to break up the  union  of  the  v»u-

^nwWd  triliM  by  forbidding  the  existence  of  Mueli

"*f*'Mi(Liv,viii.n,10). But  AtiguMtuH  unt  merely

iwwfcd  the  coitritiu  to  conliiuii)  where  tht^y  had

^^uihly  livuu  lield,  luit  instiUiled  tUeui  a1>to  iu

"^wr  iimvinces;  and  thiHreproHcntative  churiicter

J^riTpgnlwd. In  theory,  ihi-y  were  us»criutioiiH

for  the  worship  of  tbe  iiDjierial  Iioiihc. The

'dwt  ^'05  the  djp;yt«/Hvc»  or  tMCfjttot  prorhciae,


an  ofOclal  elected  aunnatly  by  the  depntieii  (/t^N)
from  the  most  iiupiirtant  towjist.  Tliii*  dignitary
WAS  nsnally  one  of  tbe  most  cmineut  ui>d  weallliy
of  the  provincials,  and  had  the  ininiediat-e  direc-
tion of  (he  fin»i>co^of  the  tetuple  and  Itii  fe^tivalll;
ut  »  later  time  be  bad  a  eertiiin  power  of  control
over  all  the  priesta  of  the  province.  After  the
C4mriltuni  had  taken  part  in  tli^  ndigious  festival,
it  met  again  for  thu  conduct  of  bnsinewi.  Its  lirst
duly  wad  to  ]nisa  tli«  mteount^  of  thn  expenditure
eonuiM^tcd  with  th<T  pmviucial  temple  to  Augntdus,
and  to  provide  for  the  miiiuteimuee  of  Ihn  wornhip
fitr  the  coming  year;  liul  Ibeu  it  whs  entitled  to
eritieiiiu  tlin  cuiiduet  of  tbn  governor,  and  eidior
vote  tbauks  to  tiiin  or  lay  a  complaint  before  the
emperor  ( ef.  iho  luscriplion  of  Torlgny,  edited
Ijy  Momnisen),  whicb  wan  frequently  followed  hy
hi»  aecusatton  (riin.  Epi»t.  vii.  K)  In  this  manner
some  control  was  exorcised  over  the  governor,  and
there  was  some  approach  to  tlin  crealion  of  a  rep-
rew.ntattve  Wdy.  See  Marqnardt,  liHai.  Slaalttreiic.
i.  503-AH5,  and  his  important  ejMiuy  in  the  JCphrm.
Eyigr.  (1S72),  pp.  200-214.

Coucio. See  CoNTtO.

CoDClav^.  A  separate  room  in  a  bnntto;  or  a
suite  I'f  rmmnt  that  could  be  locked  with  the  MUie
key. 8ie  Kent  p.  3^.  9,  MUll.

Concordia.  The  Latin  person tficat ion  of  con-
cord or  liJirmoiiy,cspe<'iiilIy  among  Homnn  citiw*ns.
tjbrinea  were  repe«te»lly  ereeti-^l  to  foneordia  dur-
ing the  ropiildiran  period  after  the  eefwatitui  of
civil  dissensions.  Tbe  i-arlieHt  was  dedirated  by
rainillus  in  B.C.  3ff7,  The  goddess  Conconlin  was
alHo  invokrd,  tngelher  with  Ihuuh,  Knlus,  ami  Pax,
at  the  raniily  feKlival  of  the  Catii'tia,  on  the  ItOth
(if  Miireli.  aiul,  with  Venns  and  Fortuna,  by  mar-
ried wonieu  on  llie  tst  u(  .April.  (Set*  MaxBS.)
Unrlng  tlie  irnpt'riul  period  Concordia  Augntiia
wan  worshippeil  as  the  protectreM  of  hartnouy,
especially  of  matriiuoiiiul  agreciQcnt,  iti  thu  eni-
pvror'b  household.

Concubinii  (iraAXo*^,  miXXam).  A  concubine.
(I)  OuRKK.  The  iroAAuXf;  or  naWaKis  occupied  at
Athens  a  kind  of  nnddle  rank  between  the  wife
and  the  harlot  (iratpa).  I^einostbenes  delines  the
position  of  cacl|  by  saying  that  Ihe  harlot  minis*
ters  to  pleasuie  only,  the  concnldno  serves,  while
the  wife  is  for  the  purpose  of  buaring  cbildrun  and
acting  iLs  lUo  faithful  stewiinl  of  hirr  btmbaiid'a
goods  (!■.  Xttin:  §  ItW,  p.  ]3H*>).  Thus  Antlphon
!>|)euks  of  the  TraAXnxi)  of  J'bitnneus  lut  following
him  to  thu  sact-ifice,  and  also  waiting  upon  him
and  bit*  guest  at  table.  If  her  person  nen;  violated
by  foro<;,  thu  same  penalty  was  exigible  from  the
nivii^heras  if  (he  offence  had  been  coinuiilted  npou
1111  Altie  imitniii ;  ami  a  man  snvprised  by  the
quusi-hiistiand  in  tho  act  of  criminal  tntereounie
with  his  TrnXXoKi^.  tuight  be  slain  by  him  on  the
'  s|>ot,aaiii  the  parallel  case.  (See  AdulteiuI'M.)  It
I  does  not,  however,  appear  very  clearly  from  what
:  political  claiwes  ronculnnes  were  chicHy  selcotcilf
as  coliahitiition  with  a  foreign  (^*Vt/)  woman  Wiis
otriclly  forbidden  by  law.  and  tlie  provisiona  made
I  by  the  8t:ite  for  virgintt  of  Attie  families  vinat,  in
,  uniift  oases,  have  prevente*!  their  hinking  to  this
eoudilion.  Soaietinies.  certainly,  wliviv  there  wei-e
Huverat  destitute  female  orplnilis,  this  nnglit  take
place,  as  tbe  ucxt  of  kiu  was  not  obliged  to  pro-
vide for  moro  than  one ;  and  we  umy  also  conceive
tbe  same  to  bavo  occurred  witb  respect  to  the


CONCCBINA


400


OONFUWO


(Iniigbtent  of  rflniilleM  lui  jmur  om  to  be  unublc  to
Hiiyiply  ailcnvry, Tlit'ilowry.  iu  fuel,  sueniB  to  Uavo

I  bc«n  H  ikciMivu  ciilcriuri  lui  to  wlictbet  tUo  l-uu-
beclinii  butxvutiu  a  uiii1l>  nu<l  a  ft-u)uk<  Atbcni&D,  iu  a

''state  i>f  c»li»bitutiuti,  aiuouuled  to  u  tnarriugc.  If
lilt  dowry  Ititil  b<M'ti  giviMi,  (br  cbiUl  v(  such  uiiiou
wiiubl  bti  i1li;gitiinaU':  if,  on  tht^  coutnir>',ibi.Utwry
hail  Ikuii  Kivi'u,  or  a  pn^ptn*  iu!ttmiuL*tit  I'XfvuUsl
ii)  :tckitowlf>il);iiK>nt  of  il-t  iwi-ipt,  1bi«  wutinni  wim
fully  i'iitir]<Ml  to  all  comjiik»1  riglittf.  It  itoen  nut
Ap|i(\ur  tliut  tU<>  rthivo  wlm  v,-.%n  tiiki-n  to  lu-r  diuh-
t«i*'s  bwl  ncqinri'il  luiy  polilioal  ri{;btH  in  coiisc-
qiicnoe ;  tbo  coiirnbJno  inciiltoiR'il  by  Aulipbon  is
treiiUnl  an  a  slavo  by  Uar  niuNU-r,  uiiil  uflcr  bis  ilvalb
uii<Irrg<H'jj  I)  Mirvik'  puiiisUiiiH-Mit.

('ij  KoMAV.  AiTDi-tliiig  to  an  old  cle5iiitlon,  nn
iiittniiri'it'il  witniai)  ^bn  colinbit«tl  witb  a  mou  woa
origiiii»llyt'4illc<i/i'7/<'j-or|«if/cjr(G«'tl.iv,a),  biitaft4?r-
w:ir(lK  by  tliu  oioro  iluL'eiit  Appvllution  of  roncubtiui
(IMg.  50,  IG,  lAi).  CoHi-iibiuatita  in  cohiibitntioii  ittliiT
ttau  marriage  Initwwn  firp  porsoiiHwbo  vcvi:  botb
uuuiurrifi],  or  between  mi  iiniii»rrit;il  frcn  man  unit
su  ancilln.  ]ii  tbo  oliltir  liniivt  Ibin  wiu  vi<Mvisl  tin
au  uAVni'o  lU'^u^rvin;;  piintAbnirnt  (Liv.  x.  Ill  ;  xxv.
fi);  lint  wlit'n  tbo  ])(iM.<)ibiHty  of  a  lasting  atfi'^ctiuii
betWHfit  punwtiiA  who  Imd  not mituAiou  canw  to

I  lie  reuO}|[niz<^4l,  the  cobiibitAtion  of  nn  nnuiarrictl

'  man  wilb  Uia  lih^'la  or  anrilla  (I'lunt.  Kpul.  ii'uA,
Sy,  W)  wiw  rcgfti'*i«l  without  cn-nsure.  Iti  Cicimi's
tinuM^Jf  Oral.i.  40.  |  Ir^)  the  name  of  concubiHa
irotild  Imvo  applied  to  a  wutnun  wlm  cobiibilinl
with  a  man  wlm  hail  not  [livnn-i'd  ht)^  wife;  but
this  Viae  not  couhiilrn'il  luwfiil  ci>ufrnbiniigi<  In
afi«r-timc^.  Tbo  I^>x  InliaOo  AiliilteiiiK  of  An^iitt-
tiiti  itn|MiM<4l  iu<vi-n*  |ionaItit'«  ou  mtnllrnufniitirt/itiig,
auti  •tHf/rnm  (q.  v.);  but  by  tbo  Le\  Inlin  uixl  I'apm
PupptwH  cvttcubiiMtujf  wai«  legalixiHl  nnd  cxetuplfd
froiu  the  poiiul  provisions  of  the  earlier  statutv
(i>ij).  tf&,  7,  -l,  I),  (bough  an  konetta  femiua  uho
'wifibvd  to  become  a  wiicMftiita  wae  not  ili8i>eu8ed
from  tbeiu  unless  nbe  made  an  expivxs  <lec]aratioit
of  bur  intention  or  trttittw  (Oig.  ib.  :t,  pr.).  Uiit  a
uian  who  alrt-aily  bad  hii  uxor  i-oubl  nut  havv  a
rxmnthiMH  at  ibit  nante  liuiu  {IHq.  51),  IB,  144),  nnr
aitpareuity  conid  a  niait  liave  luoro  than  one  con-
cttbimti  at  a  linto;  aud  widowora  who  olrcudy  had
children, and  did  not  wi&b  to  cootrsct  another  legal
luarna^o,  tuok  a  tviifufrinii,  ns  ne  soo  in  the  coao
of  Ve^pajuan  (Sii«t.  t'cajt.  3),  Autoaiuiu  Pius,  aud
M.  Anrptins.

Coamiinafiu  diffrntl  fmtn  lawful  ninrriiipvi  in
thrffo  e»porial  n-inports.  (t)  In  tbr  n-biiion  of  the
|iarltr»),  I  ben*  btdiig  UKtajfn'tift  marUali*  \Paut.  StnI.
Tfrr.  ii.  ifOi.  {'2)  In  l\\^  lowt  of  i-epuiatiou  to  the
woniau  if  kinif»tii.  Yet  Iberc  is  au  iuscription  iu
Fabreiti  (p.  337)  to  the  memory  of  Paulliauuis  by
Aemtlia  IViua,  roarHftiua  eiu»  ft  herf»,  which  sm-us
to  show  that  the  tenn  tomcubiia  wan  not  ou«  that
•  woDiau  iieod  be  oabanietl  of-  (3)  In  its  legal
offecta:  it  was  nul  a  uairiaKis  ami  tberefon*  the
rule*  ae  to  do*,  damaiio  proptir  mm^tia*,  doiatia  imtrr
rirum  tt  itiortm.  had  no  uppllcniiitn ;  uor  irerv  the
children  in  patria  fH>tt*ta>,  though  their  paternity
was  rec*»gni/rd :  ibey  conId  be  K'gilimatt'd.  aud
under  the  emiw-tori  were  entitled  to  maintenance,
cTiiD  IVoiu  the  legitioiAtc  efaildrvii  stV'r  the  father's
llaMll  (Vor.  1^,  V4,  ft);  also,  they  hwl  some  rights
of  sacc«saion  on  the  falhrr'n  dying  intwtate.

By  later  emiH-n^rs  ivmrubiimtrnx  was  discuuraged,
but  it  was  not  moile  gvueratiy  uulawful  uutil  (he
nlath  eeutury.  by  Ijeo  the  Pbllouipher.


Cohabitation  between  two  slavea  was  callc
contubenttHm,  a  name  idso  ttpplie«I  to  that  betwce
a  slave  and  a  free  porsoQ  iPaiil.  ii.  19,6).

Condalinm.  Atinger-riag  worn  oq  the  firaljoii
(xur^tjA^c)  of  tlio  foretinger  ll-'eitt.  n.  v.  rondyltm
PJaut.  TVfit.  iv.  3, 7,  and  ir>).

CoDdemnatla See  Actio;  Ii;i>kx  ;  Jrnia.

PlKHKItlKK,

Condictio. See  ACTIO.

Couditorium. SceKiNHs;  Skpilcbcm.

CondruaL A  (icrman  fH-'ople  iu  Unllia  BuIgM
tbo  de{ioiiidantH  of  the  'Freviri,  dwelUug  betn*
the  Lbtironcs  and  the  Treviri.

Conduotio. See  Locatio.

Condy  [kovSv). An  AHiatio  driuking - v*^mi^
Bometimra  tievd  by  the  Grccke,  made  of  ttilve-v-  ,^
gold. Acconliug  to  eome  authorilieti it  wai^ »/-
Perainu (Athen,  xi.  478  a),  occordiug  to  oLJters
iif  Cappadoriau  origin  (Pollux,  vi.  HG).

Confarreatio. Tbi)  form  of  marriage  uoed  by
the  jtatriiiiniji. Seo  SIaTRIMoXII'M.
Confectionory. See  I)t'lA?lA.
CoufiBcatio. See  runucATio;  Proscbiptio.
Confluentes. The  modern  Cobleitt/ ;  a  lona
in  GermaDy,  at  the  ronllncuee  of  the  Mowlh  u]A
the  Rhenns. There  wha  pr«>hably  uo  Rnmau  luvru

'  here,  however,  but  only  a  pontiugHitatiou  rt«(  dw
fiMrnta  on  tbo  great  Ilomoii  road ;  Hn<l  the  (►lar<*
was  not  made  n  raofrom  nt  fortresa  until  (he  uni*
century  A  D. Of  about  that  date  are  the  n-uiwne^

i  of  a  Roman  bridge  of  piles  discoveveil  iu  l"^,  wlicc-*

!  the  M(»wdle  wa»  unuisually  low.

'  Confnaio.  Properly  the  mixing  nf  1  iqiiiila,  nr  tlitf-^
fusing  of  metals  into  one  maM.  If  things  of  th^ES
same  or  of  difFeront kind  were  confused.  eitl»^ '^■'

,  by  the  consent of  both  owners  or  by iiecidKiiC^  *

^  the  compound  was  the  property  of  both.  If  tJ»-^^
rofi/a«io  was  cansed  by  one  wiibout  the  rnnmul  *>  "•

,  the  other,  the  con)|)ound  was  i mly  jinnt  pmpert  :^
iu  ease  the  things  wrm  tif  the  luirue  kind  aud  jie^KT^

'  hape  of  the  aain«  quality — as,  for  instanro,  wid^^p*

I  of  the  same  4)nality.  If  the  things  were  differem  "<«
so  that  the  eomjHJund  wss  a  new  tiling,  Ibis  «a». *

I  ease  nf  what,  by  modern  writers,  i*  c«lled  i^pm|5c?**»-
fio,  which the komau  writers expresMed by  t  V'ae

1  term  tttftum  aj^eciem  facrrc,  as  if  a  man  made  m-mml-
Bum  out  of  bis  own  wine  iuid  hii  neighbour's  boat-
ey. In  oueh  a  case  the  [lersou  who  eauMnl  the  rt^M-
/utio  iM-eaine  tbo  itwuer  tif  the  t.'t)mpunnd,  bat X**'
was  bound  l«>  make  gi>od  to  the  other  the  valuo  of
his  pro)»erty.

Commiiiio  applies  to  eoaea  such  as  mixiuc to*
gothcr  two  lieaps  of  corn ;  but  this  is  not  mu iu*
staueu  iu  which  either  purty  acquiree  {iroperty  hy
the  cwMmtjrfio. For  if  the  mixture  takes  (iIm^
ei(her  accidentally  or  witb  mutual  couswnt,  or  >>/
the  act  of  one  aloue,  iu  all  these  co^s  the  iiro|«r-
ty  of  each  person  continues  as  liefnn>,  for  ii>  >'<
these  eaaee  it  is  cAii*hle  of  separation. A  case  »i
eoMHKrfie  arises  when  »  nau*s  money  is  pat<l  trid>*
out  his  knowledge  aud  eoDseu(,  and  tbu  mo9tr},
wben  i^d,  is  so  mixed  with  uther  luuuoy  thst  ii
o«onot  be  reeoguixed;  other wif« it  remoitis  Uk*
property  of  the  persou  to  »  bom  it  belonged.

Twn  tbiufs,  the  property  of  two  per»>ins.  oiijEM
berome  so  united  as  Dot  tu  be  separable  witlwMt
iiyury  to  une  or  botb;  tu  this  ca^e,  the  uwtist  of
the  principal  thiug  heeanie  the  owner  of  the  M-


CONGIARIUH


401


CONON


oessory.  Tbns,  in  the  oaae  of  a  man  bnildiug  on
auotber  mau's  grouud,  tbe  building  belonged  to
tbe  owner  of  the  ground  {superJUntui  solo  cedit);
or  in  tbe  caae  of  a  tree  planted,  or  seed  sown  on
anotber  man's  ground,  tbe  rule  was  tbe  same.  If
a  man  wrote,  even  in  letters  of  gold,  on  another
mail's  parchment  or  paper,  tbe  whole  belonged  to
tbe  owner  of  tbe  parchment  or  paper ;  in  the  cose
of  a  picture  paioted  on  auotber  man's  canvas,  tbe
canvas  became  tbe  property  of  tbe  owner  of  the
pictnre.

But  in  all  these  cases  tbe  losing  party  was  en-
titled to  compeusation,  with  some  exceptions  as
to  cases  of  mala  fides.

CongJaiiiini  (sc.  rat;  from  congiut).  (1)  A  ves-
sel containing  a  congttu  (q.  v.).

(2)  In  the  early  times  of  the  Roman  Republic,
the  eomgivs  was  tbe  usual  measure  of  oil  or  wine
wbioh  was,  on  certain  occasions,  distributed  among
tbe  people ;  and  tbnseoR^riHm,  asQaintilian  says,
became  a  uame  for  tbe  gift  as  well  as  for  the  meas-
ure (eofigiarium  oommuHe  liberalUatia  alque  mensu-
rae,  vi.  3,  $  52).  It  does  not  follow  that  all  the  citi-
zeus  or  even  heads  of  families  received  a  cotigiiu
apiece.  Tbe  earliest  mention  of  a  distributiun  of
oil  is  in  B.C.  313,  when  two  Coruelii  Scipiones,  aft-er>
wards  called  Africauus  and  Cethegns,  in  their
aedilesbip  gave  a  certain  number  of  oon^ii  (the
numeral  has  dropped  out)  to  the  inhabitants  of
each  street  (Livy,  xxv.  2,  with  Madvig's  note).
LnoulluB  on  retomiug  from  his  Eastern  victories
distributed  more  than  100,000  casks  of  wine  to  tbe
people  (PUn.  B.  N.  xiv.  $  96).  The  name  congia-
rium  was  also  applied,  less  accurately,  to  presents
of  com  or  other  provisions.

Under  the  Empire  the  tranquillity  of  the  capi-
tal waa  ioBureU  by  a  gigantic  system  of  outdoor
relief  (see  Fbumrktariab  Leges),  supplemented
by  frequent  doles.  The  general  term  for  these
imperial  presents  is  largitio,  sometimes  (especially
oa  coins)  tiberaiitas.  Distributions  to  the  Boldiera
were  called  donaiira,  to  the  people  eongiaria ;  but
sometimes  the  former  also  are  called  eongiaria
(Cic.  Ad  Ait.  xvi.  8).  Tbe  sums  thus  spent  were  enor-
mons.  Hadrian's  congiarium  was  three  aurH  per
head  on  bis  proclamation  as  emperor,  aud  double
that  amount  on  bis  arrival  in  Rome;  Commodus
gave  725  denarii  to  each  citizen.  Mai-quardt  has
computed  tbe  imperial  eongiaria  at  an  average  of
$450,000  a  year  from  Inlius  Caesar  to  Claudius,
$1,500,000  a  year  from  Nero  to  Septimins  Severus ;
it  must  have  been,  however,  a  periodical  empty-
ing of  tbe  treasury  rather  than  a  continuous
drain.

Congiarium  was,  moreover,  used  to  designate
presenta  or  pensions  given  by  men  of  rank  to
their  friends,  clients,  or  depeud-
auta.  See  Snet.  Ittl.  37;  8eu.  De
Bret.  Fit.  8.  $  2.

Congliu.  A  Roman  liquid
meaanre  containing  six  sexturii
[Carm.  de  Pond.  72),  or  the  eighth
part  of  tbe  amphora.  It  was  equal
to  the  ;^ovB  of  the  Greeks,  about
5.76  pints.

There  is  a  congius  in  existence,
known  aa  tbe  Farnese  congius,  but
now  at  Dresden,  bearing  an  in-  ^_^__

•cription  which  states  that  it  was  ^  j,^^„

made  in  the  yearx.D.  75,  according cutlectlon.)


to  the  standard  measure  in  tbe  Capitol,  and  that  it
contaiued,  by  weight,  ten  pounds.  Tbis  congius  is
one  of  the  means  by  which  tbe  attempt  has  been
made  to  fix  tbe  weight  of  the  Roman  pound.  See
Libra.

Cato  tells  us  that  he  was  wont  to  give  to  each  of
bis  slaves  a  congius  of  wine  at  the  Saturnalia  and
the  Compitalia.  PHuy  relates,  among  other  ex-
amples of  hard  drinking,  that  Novellius  Torquatus
of  Mediolanum  obtained  a  cognomen  (trioongiua,
"a  nine-bottle  man")  by  drinking  three  cougii  of
wine  at  one  sitting  (S.  X.  xiv.  $  144).

Cojilmbilca.  A  town  of  Lusitaoia,  near  tbe
sea-coast,  on  tbe  river  Mnnda,  now  Coimbra  in
Portugal.

ConiBftlna  (KovitraKoc).  A  deity  worshipped  at
Athens  with  Priapus  (q.  v.)

Coimubiiim. See  Matrimonidm.

Conon  (Kavav).  (1)  A  distinguished  Athenian
commander,  and  one  of  tbe  generals  who  succeeded
Alcibiades  in  the  command  of  tbe  fleet  duiing  tbe
Peloponnesiau  War.  Having  eugaged  Callicrati-
dns,  the  Spartan  admiral,  he  lost  thirty  vessels,
and  was  compelled  to  take  shelter  in  tbe  harbour
of  Mytilen6,  where  he  was  blockaded  by  bis  oppo-
nent. Tbe  victory  gained  by  the  Atheuiaus  at  tbe
Arginusae  released  hiui  at  length  from  bis  situation.
Being  subsequently  appointed,  with  five  others,  to
the  command  of  a  powerful  fleet,  he  proceeded  to
the  Hellespont,  where  Lysander  had  charge  of  the
Lacedaemonian  squadron.  The  negligence  of  his
fellow-commauders,  the  result  of  overweening  con-
fidence in  their  own  streugth,  led  to  the  fatal  de-
feat at  Aegos  Potamos,  aud  the  whole  Athenian
fleet  was  taken,  except  nine  vessels  of  Couou's
division,  with  eight  of  which,  thiuking  that  the
war  was  now  desperate,  he  sailed  to  Salamis  in
the  island  of  Cyprus.  The  ninth  vessel  was  sent
to  Athens  with  the  tidings  of  the  defeat.  lu  Cy-
prus, Couou  reniaiued  at  tbe  court  of  Evagoras,
watching  for  an  opportunity  to  prove  of  service
to  bis  country.  Such  a  state  of  affairs  soon  pre-
sented itself.  The  Lacedaemonians,  having  no
more  rivals  in  Greece,  seutAgesiluUs  with  an  army
into  Asia  to  make  war  upon  tbe  Persian  king.
Conon  immediately  repaired  to  Phamabazus,  the
satrap  of  Lydia  and  louia,  aided  him  with  bis
counsels,  and  suggested  to  bini  tbe  idea  of  excit-
ing the  Thebans  and  other  Grecian  communities
against  Sparta,  so  as  to  compel  that  State  to  recall
AgesilaUs  from  tbe  East.  The  plan  was  approved
of  by  tbe  king  of  Persia,  and  Conon,  at  the  bead
of  a  Persian  fleet,  b.c.  394,  attacked  the  Spartan
admiral,  Pisauder,  near  Cnidus,  aud  defeated  him,
with  the  loss  of  the  greater  part  of  his  ships.
Lacedaemou  immediately  lost  the  control  of  the
sea,  and  her  power  in  Asia  Minor  ceased.  Couou
thereupon,  after  ravaging  the  coasts  of  Laconia,
returned  to  Attica,  rebuilt  tbe  city  walls  aa  well
aa  those  of  tbe  Piraeus,  with  means  which  had
been  furnished  by  Pbaruabazus,  aud  gave  on  this
occasion  a  pnblic  entertainment  to  all  the  Atbe-
niauB.  The  Lacedaemou iaus,  dispirited  by  tbe
success  of  Conon,  and  alarmed  at  the  re-establish-
ment of  tbe  Athenian  fortifications,  sent  Antalcidas
to  Tiribazus,  one  of  the  Persian  generals,  to  ne-
gotiate a  peace.  The  Athenians,  on  their  part,
deputed  Conon  and  some  others  to  oppose  this
attempt;  hut  Tiribazus  being  favourably  inoUued
towards  Siiarta,  aud  in  all  probability  jealous  of


CONOPEUU


Ml


CUNtjOLAI'lU


Pbanmltaztid,  iDipHsoned  Cimon,  tiiuler  tbe  pretext
that  tie  wite  eiKlvuvoiiring  to  excile  nii  iusiiiTertitiii
ill  Aeolis  ami  Ionia.  Tho  ppreinti  king,  however,
(linnpproved  uf  the  rotuliitt  of  the  Mitrap,  Atid
Cuiioti  WM  rfU'asocl.  Tin-  liitlor  lh«r«Mi]niii  rultinicd
to  the  islaiiii  of  CypriiH,  u  hen:  ht*  fell  »k-k  ainl  ilic-<l,
ahniit  B  c.  390.  Hi»(  reiiiaiiiti  wero  coDveycd  to
Athuim  (t'oru.  Nep.  Conoti ;  Xen.  ili«t.  Gr.  i.  4,  14);
ill.  ib.  ii.  l,t!l,otu.).  (2)  A  native  of  Stituoti,  itistiii-
gnitih«4l  ad  au  lutniuoineraud  gooiitctttciaii.  Xotifl
of  bis  vrorkB  have  rvacbed  n»;  he  is  itifiitiuiiud;
however,  hy  Arcbimedra,  Vergil,  St*necii,  uiid  oth-
ers. CotioD  lived  between  alxiiit  iWXI  and  ifliO  y«-iirs
before  our  ent.  ApolUMiitix,  in  tin*  fi»urlli  bouk  of
biti  Conic  iSerliotnt.  thiiikit  iliul  many  of  Coiiuti's
demountratious  might  he  iviidei'cd  more  conci.se.
He  u  u)i-utiunt.-d  ott  an  astioiiomer  by  one  of  iho
coiumuntatois  on  I'toleiny,  aii<l  Seuecn  {(^uatst.  Sat.
vti.3)  inforius  us  that  liu  liiwl  made  out  a  list  of
tbe  evlip.se8  of  tbe  sun  tbnt  had  liecn  vi»ihlit  in
Exypl.  Ho  is  mentioned  alsij  hy  Vergil  (Fchg.  iii.
40),  and  hy  C'atnllua  in  hia  translation  of  the  Greek
poem  nf  CalliniHolniH,  nn  the  Iresoes  of  Rerenic4^.
(3)  A  gnininnirian  eiMlonii/vd  hy  Fhntiiis  (q.  v.).

Couopeum  (irnivain-rioi',  from  kmcw^,  "  a  miM-
qnito").  A  uiOKi]nito-viirtuiu^i.  e.  u  covering
uiJide  lu  bit  exfMinded  over  hrds  »tid  cuitctM'M  to
keep  awaj  gnatM  and  otlter  tlyiiig  iniki>ctA.  These
onrtaiua  were  much  idumI  in  Egypt  (Isid.  th-ig.
xix.  5,  h),  and  hy  Komnn  lAtlie*  ntt  early  ns  Viir-
ro's  titoe.  (See  Vori-o.  li.  II.  ii,  10.)  The  conoprum
(whenoo  the  Fjigliiili  word  "canopy^)  wus  also
kaovrn  in  Latin  iis  cuhicularc.

Conquisitdrea  Rftcniitiog  licrgeants  who  were
employed  to  gi>  alHMit  the  conntr>',un1isling  or  ini-
prvsMitig  sohliers  for  the  Bomau  army.  See  Liv.
xxi.  II,  li:i:  Cic.  /Vw  ,Mi/. 'iS,  tj7.

Consan^aliiei Hi>o  Counatio.

CoDscrlpti. See  Senati  s.

CoUBCOiatiO. See  ArOTUK(X4IS; IXAUOfRATIO.

Consensus. See  OBIJGATtuNB^.

Consentes  Dii.  The  natiiH  whieli  the  Komans
fravetothn  twelve  H(i|>(->riorditttieA,or  Dii  Miiinriim
Qtmtiiitit.  Tho  best  derivation  of  the  nsiine  is  that
which  tnictis  it  to  the  participle  of  tho  ul>H»Ietti
verb  etniMO,  "to  a»lvi!M.'"or  "cohiisl*!,"  the  Dii  Con-
nenlun  iquan  Coiitrtiticntea)  iM-ing  lliey  who  fonneil
The  coancil  of  the  sky.  Kiiniim  bos  given  their
uames  iu  tho  two  foUowiug  lines:

lunti,  v«au,  (VrM,  I>i«iia.  Miu^nrft,  Vrani,  Uars.
Jlervuhiu,  lovi',  Neptiums,  Vulcuiaa,  Apolht

Tbe  coneeptinn  is,  however,  orijrjnalty  Etnucan
(MUller.  EtruMi:  ii  p.  ^1  foil.).  The  Bomatis  also
eullwl  them  Liii  (.'omplioro.  See  Aroob.  iii.  1^;
and  Cor**cn,  yachrirkl.  'i^l.

Cotiaentia.  Th<f  ebief  town  of  the  Bnittil,  on
the  river  Crutbis;  here  Alario  died.  It  is  now
C'oeeiiza.

Conseutiua,  rini.ir*.  A  Romnn  grammalicn!
writer,  who  ilouiished  in  the  fifth  rt'ntury  A, P.  anil
wn>io  two  grammatical  works:  (1)  An  Coutrnlii
tU  UnabnB  I'artihu*  fh-atinni»,  yomine  et  IVrftu;  and
(St)  Ar»  t'o»»fiitii  df  Hitrbtirunmi*  rl  Mrtapliuimi$.
Osanii  repkrdit  Conneiitiiis  as  a  (^anl,  from  the  iii-
tcniMl  evidence  of  thci>e  wiirks.  The  only  coniplefn
MS.  of  Coiiwiitiiis  is  one  at  Mniiiob  of  the  teiilh
century.  The  text  is  giveo  by  Kcil  iti  bis  Gram-
matiei  Latini,  v.  3cM.


made


Considius  Longna. See  Lonocts.

Consiliiun.  A  eunneil,  or  body  of  advisert.
.Siicb  couneils  were  cidled  in,  aueording  to  aih
eieut  Rinnan  eciHtom,  by  the  presiding  mngistrale
in  civil  atid  tTindnal  easea.  Even  in  the  family
tribunaU,  w  hitdi  decided  canes  afffctiiig  the  mem-
horsufthejTrtt*,  a  consilium  of  kinsfolk  was  thnnghl
neecasury.  The  ciistuni  was  that  tbe  pre^idiuj;
judge  honnd  himwlf  by  the  decision  of  hi*  freely
choften  fiOHnlium,  bnt  took  the  re8|K)aeibility  him-
self. The  expression  ctmitilium  wom  afters anlti
transferred  to  the  regular  jnrieii  of  the  coaftc
which  deciitetl  civil  and  criminal  cai>>es.  (See
C'KNTUMVlKi ;  lL"l>iCKfl.)  Tlie  emperorw,  too,  made
a  practice  of  inviting  a  cDuniltuin  uf  friends  to
sist.  tb*?in  in  their  jndieial  decisions.  After
time  of  Hadrian,  tho  menihurs  of  the  iui)>erial
HJlinin  or  ronfis/oriuiu  apfN-'ar  as  regnlarly  appoint-
ed and  salflrie^l  oflicers.  ihe  Consilinrii  AugustL
These  wei^o  generiilly,  though  not  PXiliiMVBly.s*-
lected  from  tbe  body  of  professional  jurists. See

CONSISTOHIUM.

ConaiBtotltim.  The  Boman  emperors,  follow-
ing an  ancient  practice  of  Roman  luagistratee,
consulted  their  friends  and  followers  {amict./ami-
littrtn.  comitea)  before  giving  jndicinl  decisions  in
ca^eM  of  importance.  The  fountium  prinripia.  or  jn-
diciut  council  tbns  instituted,  Iwcime  n  standing
hoily  iu  the  time  of  Hadrian  I'.Spart.  Ha^r.  ^.  IS},

The  council  was  compostMl  of  {teTxin^  of  the
greal(>st  eminence:  iHith  M-nntors  uf  the  bighcat
rank  ami  ineniherHof  ibe  onler  of  r^aife*  sat  in  it.

Tim  tenn  auititorium  yrimdjtu  ii  used  as  eqniva-
l^iit  to  tottnilium. It  was  not  a  grnrral  council  for
8tate  afl'uirx,  and  iit  not  to  he  confused  with  tbe
political  council  we  tind  certaiu  eui|)eroni  nmven-
ing. IlJf  functions  were  generally  confined  lu  le-
gal husinrNS. The  em|>erur  not  only  took  its  id-
viee re«]H:ct)ng his  judgments,  but also in alL_
matters  connected  with  legal  administration. I
was  strictly  consultative  in  character,  the  emp«!r
or not U'ing hound  in any  way  by  its opiiiiou J
Changes  were  made  iu  its  eouHtitittion  by  DiikIa-^
tian  and his  successors. Tbe  unlinar}'  niembci —
of  tht<  recoiuttituted  hwly,  which  is  knuwu  as  lib
roNm/unHMi  principin,  were  calltHl  com\ir»  ron«i«toi
ni ; they  were  divided  into  the  two  classes  eft's
illuatrea,  (tf)  tptftabiln Tbe  illustrrt  eousistrd  c^»
four  great  nftieerH  of  the  palace: viz.,  Ihe  fMeoC^
mifri  palatii,  the  muf/Mfero^noruui,  tbmiMM  <aer-«i
rum  larifiliuMum,  and the  comet  rri  priratar. T  lai
class  af  aprctahilra  was  a  larger  one;  iia  membc^n
are  genenilly  named  simply  eomifr*  antritlorim  mwm
Bt-sides  these  two  classes  of  ordinary  and  oel  i  %'0
memhen  of  tbe  consistorinm,  there  waa  a  elvHtf
of  extrsordioarj'  memhera.  called  rtiean^. Tta«r0
waa  also a  class  of  purely  huDorary  memb«rs.
The  ftinetiouM  of  tho  coii>tist4irinm M^m  to  baive
been  wider thou those  of  tbe  etiHier  eonnlitut^
since  it  acted  as  a  council  fur  advising  the  en»-
peror  in  general  matters  of  Statu.

Conaolatia  The  title  of  several  works  iu  R^
man  literHlure.  (1)  A  treatise  of  Cicvro.  now  lust,
written  after  the  death  of  his  danghtor  Tallia  iB-f*
45)  and  based  upon  Cranlor's  tn-alinr  ittpi  wir^f-
(See  raac. />t«|i.  i.(S;  tid  Atl.  x\\  14,3.)  The  fn*"
ments  of  this  work  are  to  be  f»»nnd  in  Hsitet  «a^
Kaywr's  IftxI.  xi.  71.  Se*  Schiilz.  /V  t  'iveromi*  ('***
BoUtitme  (lln^ifsn^ahl,  IHSO).  Cicero  is  suppoM*)  b?"
some  to  have  transcrilKd  a  porUou  at  Icut  af  lb"


Camttlatioiu  tbo  first  ntHlthinl  UiMluofihe  Tuteu-
Xamat  Diffutativnm,  i'i)  A  pmbiihly  it|iurlouH  vvurk
called  roDJiofufitf  (It/  t.irium  AntHntum  (U-  Mmlt  ItrHti
ymtni4  and  lucrUiiNl  liy  Sfulijr«?r  to  IVdo  Alltiiio-
\inu».  but  liy  uthent  lo  Oviil.  Tlivrc  vx\»t*  uo  t?art%
)tS.  n(  it,  nnii  ir.  Hritt  oppnant  in  tli*>  edilio  print'^px
of  Ovul.  A.u.  1471.  Ik-ncc  it  is  lifliftvod  tn  liti  tlif
work  «r»i>nie  Italian  »ctinlar  o(  tbc  tiftct^nlli  cfii-
tnry.  !^i  llmii>t.  fipii-rdioB  fh-nni  rum  f  'omntfitlarii*
(Leipzig.  IHItj;  and  »  )iiip<'r  by  Netllewbui  in  ibe
TniH'*ict,  of  Ihr  Oj/vni  I'hil.  Siw.  ^  I8KV-HU),  {W}  Ait
Marriam,  u  treatii-f  uf  ibu  ,voiiiiK«>r  HfinTti  (q.  v.).
wriftcu  by  Liiii  In  Mnrcin,  iIk*  dunglittir  i>r  Civinn-
tiim  CordnA.  on  Ibo  dvnlti  of  tier  luin.  S4-«  .Schin'
nvrer.. Senf m*0  Schri/I  <i>i  iiarria  \l\tif.  !*«).  (J)  A
tn>»iiw  wrilli'ii  in  prisvii  by  IJoi-tbiim  (q.  v.)nb*mt
tbe  yr!»r  A.l>.  524,  and  entit)od  Ih  Cnn^vhilione  Phi-
loMf/hioe.  It  in  partly  tii  tbo  form  of  :i  diiilo^ntf,
tthil  ia  inliTMiMTM-d  wiib  metrical  pieuuti  sfiur  tbu
(aabioii  Ufa  Mvnippraii  bnUre.

Cotutans.  Tbu  youngunt  of  tlio  three  aona
of  (Jutistniiliue  tbe  (jreat  nud  Knustu.  After  biH
(liber's  dealb  bo  rp<.-L-i%-ed  (a.d.  ;U7)  lui  bj»  sbaiv
of  tbe  Empire-,  lllyricnui,  Itnly,  ami  Africu.  Ilin
lorritory  wn^  iuvade<l  by  liis  btothtrr  Coii»luiitiiie,
*ho  wus  dot'eatvd  and  iihiiu  in  t)ii<  invnAion  (^W).
CondtaiiH  l)iH:ame  itnprfmi^  over  tbi-  u)ic>Ih  Wi-'Mli-rii
f.'ttipim,  bnt  the  wt^aknit-'u  and  pmtlii^ii-y  <>f  bin
fbarkuter  miutL'  biin  dfopiNvd  und  itinlikud  ho  tbat
in  3oU  liu  vfiiA  Hbiiti  by  tbu  trooptt  of  tbu  tiMiipi-r
Jkfagueuliua  {<\.  v.).

Coostantla. Tbo  n&nie  of  srveral  uitiea :  (1)  in
Cy^rna;  (2)  in  Phrrnirin:  {X)  in  Palestine;  (4)  in

Mesopotumiu;  (.5)  in  Kbn4>tiii.  nciv  Cuuttauz.

CoDAtantina. {V)  A  Runinn  princet»o,  daughter

nf C'Mi&tuiiliii«  ibc  Ort>at  and  n  ilu  uf  tUe  vtuperur

GaM.Une>. C^l  8ee  CiKTA.

Conatantioopfilis (K«*-<rra)>T/i>ov UoXis). Qve

Couatantinos.  (l)GAit:8Ft.AVir!tVALRRru8At.'-

J«m£UL»  ClaudH'S,  kuonii  an  The  Orput,  wtti  uf  iho

l'>ftiLS|>crt>rCvnalantiu(<Cbluru)taiitl  lU'lHiiaftj.  v. ),  wait

l»<"»mA.D  a72,atNiii»n(i,iiuily  ufUnciaMfulitfiTum-n.

WIjbii  Coutttaulinu's  futlier  wiib  iLs»ofiuli?d  in  tin-

^«>Ymi[ueut  by  Dioclvti;iD,  tbo  aon  wa»  retained  at

u-«>ijrt  a*  a  kju<l  of  b(>ala>;i?,  but  wits  (rcatvd  witb

le^rcaL  kimluras  at  lirttl.  and  wiis  alluwfd  several

«>|.»]ta>rtiiniliHii of  iliHtin};iiiH]iinf{ bimfwll'. Aftt^r

tliv  kbflicKliini  of  I)inrlt>rnin,  CmiKtantiiiH  and  <ia-

Ivriiu  W(>n>  uluvHlfil  to  tbu  nink  of  Aiiffimli,  wliile

twa  HpMr  (.'.K'tuint,  Sevpni*  and  Mjixiinin.  wire  rtp-

P^inted lo Hocond tbrm. CtiiinlaHtiiu- w:ih luit

falletl lo tbe ancci'rw.ion. I)iiicl*;liau, parlJal to

^^n^lniL  IitM  ftoii-iii-law,  had  b-fb  lliu  noiniiJMt>ii>n

'•'tlie  |flf„  mnv  (jfii-jtan,  t„  jIik  lattrr:  bimI  lb«  son

•*  ^'onstiuitins,  wbfMW  popnlarity  ami  tabmt*  bad

'*<iil«l  Ibe  Jealousy  of  UnleritiK,  and  \Ybf«ofb-pflrt-

'"•f  aUbongli flnnie*ttly  soheit^d by  his fatlier,

>!'*'  delaytMl  from  lime  Ui  time  tinder  tbe  most
"^obtini  pretfince»,  witb  difflcnlly  at  length  ol>-
t'ot-il  iwrniiwitm  to  jnin  bift  p:ireMt  in  tbo  Went,
*"'l  oDlyeKia|ird  tbe  mncliimilioim  of  th«  eniper-
''"  ''y  tmvplliiig  nitli  litN  iitituiKl  NpcfMl  until  Iib
J^^'iedlbe  Wfjitern  rn.mt  uf  (i»nl.  lb-  ranu>  junt
"J  <inie  to  Join  Ibe  Ilonian  Ift^JMns,  wliirb  ncni
.^it  III  Mi)  nmlt-r  Wit  fatber's  eofuiniiiid  to  Uril-
"'•  ill  Older  to  make  war  upon  tbo  L'HkKlontaim.
**iiig  snbdued  tbe  norllierii  bnrbnrinnH,  (.^on-
.."•Himi  rrtnriied  to  York  lEboraenni),  wboro  he
""■'*  ni  lhi>  month  of  July,  in  tbe  vear  :«»!. r.ale-


riiia,  suro  of  the  support  of  h'm  two  creattii««,  the
Cotfttars,  bud  wait<^d  iaipatlently  for  tli«  death  iif
lii»  colleugnti,  to  iinitu  tbe  whole  Roiinin  Ktopire
under  hi»  imlividual  dway.  Unt  tbt*  inmlerulion
and  justice  uf  CoustautiuH  li»d  remitted  blni  ili»
niorei  de>tr  tu  hiM  rtoldiers  front  tbe  contruat  t>f
lliBse  cjiialiliet*  with  tbe  ferocity  nf  bin  rival.  At
the  muni«nt  of  bin  di-atb,  tlm  lej^ionit  otatiotiud  at
Vutk,  OK  a  triUulo  of  ^ratitnrlH  and  iiti<Ttion  to  hia
memory,  and,  accimlinfi  tu  Home,  ur  bin  dying  re*
ijiieKl,  nuluted  bit  hon  (.'<ui»tant iiie  nilb  tbe  tirle
uf  CaCMir  and  dtHjuraled  bim  with  the  purple.
Whatever  retx^ntmeiit  tiuleriiu  full  ut  tbin,  hii
■MHin  pertelved  (by  flanj-er  of  engaging  in  a  i:ivil
v\ar.  An  the  eliU'st  of  Ibe  empernr*,  and  the  rep-
reMJiitativo  of  UioL-bMian,  he  recughiztHi  the  au-
thority of  tbe  colleiigne  illl|vo^ed  upon  him  by  the
legiuna.  He  HKHigurd  to  bim  lite  ndminislmtiiHi
uf  (iaul  and  Htilain,  but  gav4>  bim  only  Ibe  fuurtli
rank  amung  tbe  ruk-iH  of  ihu  Kuipire  with  tbu  ti-
tle of  l^aeitai'.

L'uder  this  official  appellation  CuiiMautinft  tul-
miui)ileiied  tbu  prefecture  of  Gaul  for  nix  years
(A.i>.  3U6-3l!iJ,  perhaps  the  iao«t  glorious,  and  eer-
talnly  tlie  most  Ttrtnomi,  period  of  biM  life.  Tbe
title  and  rank  of  Augnstim,  which  bin  suldterM  bad
c<uiferrud  tipon  CimstaDtiue,  hut  wliivb  (JalurinH
bad  not  allowed  him  to  retail),  tbe  latter  gave  to
.ScveruM.  one  of  birt  own  Caennra.  Tbi»  dignity  bud
bwn  rspccted  by  MaxeutiiiB,  sou  of  the  abdiciited
emi>erof  Maxiuiian.  the  fomit^r  iollengnf-  nf  Uio-
clctiuii.  Indignant  at  bin  4hHap[Huiilniptil,  Mux-
outiuH  eanned  biniKelf  tu  bu  proclaimeil  emin-ior
by  liie  artuy  ;  and.  tu  btreiiglbtsn  bit*  iiHiirpalion,  he
iudueed  bid  father  tu  leave  bia  retreat  and  rc-
4ume  tbe  imperial  title.  A  scene  of  cifiiteiitiim
fuUuwed.  Si'areely  imcallejed  in  tiie  aiuialH  of
Hume.  HeveruH  marebed  against  tlie  l»i>  uHurji'
er»;  but  wusftbanduued  by  bibtown  troops,  surivn-
d«rc<l,am]  waitHbiin.  Galerias  levied  a  great  army,
and  man'tted  into  Italy  ogflin^t  MaximJau  and
MaxwntiuM,  who,  diviuliiig  IiIh  power,  rerircd  t<i
tianl  und  endeavoari'tl  tii  pnicitre  the  #np)>ort  uf
C'onHtuutine.  Tlii^  p'llitie  etnef  did  not  consider
it  t:s|Htdieul  tt>  provoke  a  wnr  at  that  lime  and
for  uo  lietler  eance;  and,  (inleriiiM  having  with-
drawn from  Italy  aud  reliirni-d  to  tbe  Knst.  Miix-
imian  and  ilaxentina  rt^tnrneil  to  Rome.  To  aid
him  in  tbe  struggle,  Ibileriiis  conferred  the  title
of  emperor  on  hia  fric^iir]  [.icinius;  and  tbiiH  there
were  at  once  nix  pret^mlers  to  tbe  iKovereigiity  of
the  Knipirp^namely,  Galeiinst  and  Lieiiiius;  M«i-
tiniiin  mid  biit  non  MaxeniinH;  Maximin,  who  Und
Ihwii  nouiitiuled  {^lu^nar  byOnlertiiM;  nnd  C'uuaCUi-
tine,  tbe  Mm  and  nneei'ntor  of  ConHtaniiiiN.  Among
theMO  rivals  (.'(uintantluL'  pOH-seHned  a  decideil  hii-
periority  in  piudeiK'e  and  nbiHlieR,  both  military
and  political.  Tbe  harttb  temper  of  Maximian
Kortii  led  to  a  quarrel  lu'tweeu  bim  and  his  sou
Maxeutiu.s.  leaving  Uouie,  Uo  went  to  Gaul,  t<*
Countnntiite,  u'bo  had  Ivcomc  bis  (um-in-law  when
he  ami  bin  iMiri  were  endeavouring  tu  make  head
ngnimtt  GuK-rintt.  Hero  ulmi  Maximlan  foniid  bim-
Belf  disappointed  nf  that  power  wliih  be  »i  great-
ly loutjeil  to  ]iuMMeHH;  ami  baving  plotleit  agaiiiHt
<'oiiHlantiue,  wnn;  detitcted  and  put  to  ileatb.  Oa-
leriimdied  not  long  after  (311 1,  leaving  bl^  power  to
bndiviiled  between  hisCaesurs,  Maximin  and  Liein-
ina;  no  tliat  there  were  now  four  enniperiiors  for
the  Empire:  OmHiantiiie,  Maxenttos,  Maxiniiu,
ami  LiciniitH. Maxontimt  H|)rcdily  provoked  open


CONSTANTINUS


4M


CONSTANTINUS


iMMlililieN  n-itli  Coiidtantine,  who  marchtMl  at  tb«
beiul  ijf  a  intv  vrfiil  unuy  towftrdo  Ituiiio.

It  wan  while  Cuustautiiie  was  proceeding  no
tliis  mom«i)tA)uit  t<x|teilitinu  (Imt  lie  iniule  an  o{>ei)
And  {lublio  ileclnratiDii  in  favour  of  Cbristiniiity.
JUvfore  tlial  lime,  tlio  |i#r»eciitiiij»  exlioU  of  Diixrle-
tian  tmd  bctiii  itiiR'li  inilif^nted  by  tbu  forb^itrnnce
And  l<<i)i(!iii'y  of  Coiiataittius;  iiml  Coiistoiitiiie  uot
tmty  fiillon-'Hl  his  fatlx'r'n  exAmplc  in  being  merci-
ful til  tlie  ]»fniecutt>4l  ChriMiaUN,  bnt  uveii  ttbowcd
tb»iii  some  inarks  of  [lositive  fuvuiir. Very  con


the city by the Milriiui brid|r«.  wme pnseipt
tat«d  into  lite  Tiber,  where  ho  perished  (Octobeir-
27th,  3l-i).

ConstAntine  wna  received  at  Rome  with  acolk—
inatitins ;  Africa  »cknaw)«dgod  him,  lut  well  •■
IiJkly ;  and  un  edict  of  reUgioua  toleration,  issoed
at  Milan,  exieudtKl  the  ]ul%'autage«,  hitherto  en-
joyed by  GjuiI  utuiie,  lo  this  prvfocinre  also-  Af-
ter a  brief  ainy  at  Kouic.  duHiiK  which  he  rt-
Htored  to  the  Senate  their  authority,  dit^lwnded
the  Praetorian  Guard,  and  deatroyed  their  fortified


^i^i:


aidemble  numbers  of  them,  in  consequence,  flocked camp,  from  which  they  had  so  lonx  awed  the  cily
to  his  standard  and  swelled  the  rauksof  his  army,  i  and  given  mien  to  the  Erapirr,  CtmBtanlinn  pm-

i<Mided  to  Illyricntu  to  meet  LiciniuA,  with  whom
lie  hiul  formed  a  necret  league  before  marchtDg
aguinut  Maxenttna.  The  two  oioporors  met  at
Milan,  where  their  alliatiee  was  rotiliod  by  the
marriage  of  Lttrinius  to  Conslantine's  alster.  Dor-
iug  this  calm  iul«rview,  Coa&tantine  pmrailed
upon  Liciuiim  to  rv|»ea1  the  persecuting  edicts  of
Diocletian,  and  to  iune  a  new  one,  by  whirh
Christianity  woa  encouraged,  its  t(*achoni  wvrv
bouonreij,  and  its  adbcrreula  ailvanced  to  place*
of  tnist  and  iuHueuce  in  the  Stutc.  After  the
overthrow  of  Maxiiniu  by  Licinina,  and  his  death
at  Nicomcdia,  Constuntine  and  hia  bruthcr-iu-law
were  now  the  only  two  that  rcmalncil  of  the  sia
competitors  for  the  Kmpire ;  and  the  peace  be-
tween them,  which  had  aceuied  to  be  establiabed
on  no  Arm  a  basis,  was  soon  interrupted  by  a
dtrife  for  «o1e  supremacy.  In  the  tirat  war  (*.0.
31&)  Con^tantiue  wrcAted  Illyricum  fntm  bis  com-
petitor. After  an  interval  of  eight  yean  the  cou-
heir  peaoefnl,  orderly,  and  faithful  conduct,  oou-  t«et  was  renewed.  I.iciuins  wa^  betiteti  before
trastiug  moat  favourably  with  the  turbnlont  and :  Adrianople,  the  3*1  of  July,  333,  and  CouHtaiitine
dissolute  behaviour  of  those  who  formed  the  i  the  Great  was  reoognixcd  aa  sole  maaler  of  the
mnss  of  oomniou  annies,  won  his  entire  contldeuce.  I  Kinnan  world.


m


CatutMtiUaa  ftu4  Kvmt^


To  what  extent  this  le«l  Constantino  to  form  a
favourable  opinion  of  Christianity,  or  Inclined
him  lo  view  w*ith  t«toem  anrl  resjwct  the  tenets
which  hnd  produced  such  results,  raiiuot  1>e  aacor


The  M.<at  of  empire  was  now  tmtiKfiTnMl  to  By-
zaniiura  (q.  v.),  which  took  from  him  the  name  of
Constantinople.  Several  cilicrs  wen*  ittsued  for
the  suppression  of  idolatry;  and  the  chnrrhes  and


taiueil. How  far,  also,  his  avowe^l  ri'ovptiou  of  |  properly  rcBU>red  lo  the  Christiana,  of  which  they
Christianity  was  influeiioed  by  the  prud«uce  of had  been  deprived  during  the  laet  persecntiuD.


the  politician,  bow  far  by  the  conviction  of  the
convert,  it  is  iiuptuwible  to  determine.  Thi^  tic-
count^ofhis  divain  and  his  vision  ^see  LabarI'M),
which  uiiittnl  to  enforce  his  trust  in  Christianity,
bear  too  much  the  aspect  of  firtion,  or  of  having
been  tbu  illusive  cousM]iii;ncea  of  mental  anxiety,
bruodiug  iutensely  on  the  possible  results  of  a
great  religious  revolution,  to  be  woven  into  the
narrative  uf  sober  history. The  story  goee.  how-


A  reconstruction  of  the  Empire  was  erteclol  upon,
a  plan  entirely  new,  and  this  renovatcnl Kmpir
was pervude4l by  the  wurehip and the iiislitp— ■
lions  of  CbristiBoily. That  mnch  »if  the  jndicy
the  8tate«imau  was  mixed  up  with  this  patroo:


of  the  uuw  Tvligiuo  can  easily  Ite  imagined. Bl^i^

la* — ^


I


still,  it  would  b«  wrong  to  make  him,  as  aome  ha<
done,  a  mete  hypocrite  and  dissembler. The  si
of  his  religious  knowledge,  so  far  as  we  hare
over,  that  on  bi^  march  to  Rome,  either  at  Antnii means  of  Judging,  was  oertainly  very  laailcqua
iu  Gaul,  or  near  I  lie  Rhine,  or  at  Verona  in  Italy, and imperfect; bnt he  was well aware oft'
Conslautiuo  bubvUl  in  Cbo  sky  a  brilliant  cnistt characters  of  the  two  conflicting  religions.  Chi

with  the  inscri|iiiiiu  'Ev  nvry  riKa, "By  this  con- tiauity  and  Pa^nism,  and  the  purity  of  the  fi ir

qnerT*  and  that  uii  the  night  before  his  decisive mer conhl not  hut  have  made  Bome impresii ■
battle  with  Muxvutiua  a  vision  apjiearoil  to  him  in qjkwi  his  mind.

his  sleep,  bidding  him  inscribe  the  shiehls  of  his The private  oharaeter  of  Couatautiue  has  *Bai
soldiers  with  the  sacred  moungrani  of  the  name fered, in the eyea of postiTity, from his «t^
of  ChrisL This,  at  least,  is  certain,  that  Constau- treatment of  Crispus,  his  son by  bia first  w  mUt^
tiue caused the Cnisa to he  employed aa the  |  whom  he  had  made  the  jiartner  of  bis  Empire  aaJirf
imperial  standard,  and  ailvanccd  with  it  to  prnm- the commauder  of  his  armies. Crispns  wa» Bt
itwd  victory. Aftor  the  arinie*  of  Maxeutins,  led the  head  of  the  administration  in  Gniil.  wbero Ac
by  hiit  guuerabi,  had  sustaiuud  two  snoceeeive  de-  ,  gained the  Iktartx  i>f  (he  ftenple. In the  wjin
Gsats,  that  em)>eror  himaelf,  awakening  ftom  his  i  againxt  Liciuius  he bad  displayiMl singular taf-
•aoaiial and inactive life at Rome, advanced  '  euts,  and  had  secured  victory  to  the  anna  of  it»
■galnat  his  formidable assailant,  and mot him  i  father. But fbem tb»t moment a  strong  aaif


Dear  the  little  river  Cren>erA,  about  nine  nitlee
from  the  cii]-.  Maxentius  lost  the  day,  after
m  bloody  conflict,  and,  in  andeaTonring  to  enter


nnnatnral  jealooay  atitltd  every  paternal  feelinir
in  the  bosom  of  the  monarch.  He  detained  Cn>
pna  in  his  palace,  anrronnded  him  with  spies  aird


len,  nod  at  lungtli,  in  tbe  month  of  July,
Uereil  luDi  to  \mi  arrested  in  the  tiiidut  ul*  u
(retivnl,  to  be  carried  ufTto  Pola  in  Istria.
lere  pnt  to  denth.  A  ooastn  of  Cri!ipa9,  the
Ucinitia  and  Con^taii tine's  siAt<-r,  was  at
nw  time  sPiit,  witliont  tnai,  widntnt  ovt-n
tUMtioi],  to  tlip  Itlnck.  llin  inutbiir  iinplnriHl
1,  and  died  of  grief.  It  i«  fair,  however,  to
lat  Niebnlir  found  evidi^ucc  tt>  mipporl  tho
that  CrispDH  airitrd  at  »upplan(inf:  hit*  tV
Faiiara,  thu  daughter  of  Mnximinn,  the  wife
Btantiiie,  and  tho  inothcrnf  the  thrffl  princes
ucoeeded  him,  was  shortly  aft«r  nt\Atf*l  lu
fch  by  order  of  her  hntthatid  for  intidelity.
bo  followirij;  year  tlie  ooltibratvd  l'i>nncil  of
.  waa  belli,  iit  which  h«  op|M»t!tt!ut  the  Ariana,
liy  oil  |Hditicul  ^rniindtt  only,  an  Utini;  tht;
r  party;  for  jnut  Itefore  his  death  hori-reived
m  from  an  Ariau  bisUup,  Kiutohiua  of  Kico-

Btautino  died  at  the  age  of  Bixty-tbroe,  at
edifk,  Jnly  'ia<l,  337,  nftor  a  reimi  of  Ihirty-
UUS  fntfu  the  death  of  bin  father,  and  of
Ml  from  the  coiiqnent  of  tbe  Empire,  lie
iree  eons,  C'onfit-anltno,  CoiiMtant,  and  Con-
18,  among  whom  he  divided  lit^^  Km)>ir4-.
ret,  who  biMl  <}»nl,  Spuiii,  und  Hrtl^in  for
rtioii,  was  conquered  hy  Ihu  aniiioM  of  hi»
r  Couataua,  and  killed  in  Uie  twenly-Hflh
f  Ilia  age,  a.d.  340.  Mjignentins,  the  gov-
of  the  provhiceB  of  Khaetia,  tinirdcrL^d  Con*
iu  his  tH-d.  after  a  r«igu  of  thirteen  years ;
luatautiim.  tho  only  anrviving  hndher,  now
0  the  sole  emperor,  A.n.  '^>^,  ptitiiHlied  hiH
rt  mnnlerer,  and  gfive  way  to  cruelly  and
aion.  lie  viftited  Rome,  wliore  lie  enjoyed
mph,  ami  died  (3t)l)  in  hi^  mnrrh  ugainst
,  who  bwl  been  proclaimed  eoiijerur  by  bis
•n  at  PariN.

tbe  works  of  Enwhina  (Dt  I'ita  f'omitflatiaiX
M  (Ilk.  ID,  ICulro)du».  Anretin*  Vielor,  and
tnffftiriri  IWi-rcJ  (vi.  Ill):  a)i»o  ManHo'n  /-rftea
Nliflji  ij"*  fironM«ii ;  nurekhni'tlt,  Itir  /.c\t  Con-
«  den  GroHten  ;  and  Bmglie,  L'f.ifliiie  tt  I'Ktn-

['be  son  of  the  preceding,  See  aI>ove.  )3)
rpcr  who  hrut  biutnelf  piocluimud  euiiierui'
taiu  dnring  the  n-ign  of  Houoriiia  and  Ar-
,  in  jUD.  407,  reigning  for  four  years  and
ig  ptwaeaaion  of  (jaul  and  Spain,  nntil  de-
in  411  Uy  Conatantiii^^,  the  able  general  of
iua.  By  him  ConKtaiilitie  was  taken  prinoii-
Ticd  to  RaveniiH,  and  there  ]iiit  to  <l«iitb.
6  uanio  of  geveral  emperora  of  the  Kuhtcni
*. See  BVZANTINLM  iMPERIfM.

istanttua  fl)Cfax)iiU6,H<mof  Eiitropltin,aiid
of  Coastanttne  the  Ureat,  recoireil  at  Paris
'lenf  Caeaur,  which  be  obtniiicd  by  bis  victo-
Britain  and  (Jerninny.  He  lieotiine  the  col-
tofGalenna  on  the  alulinilion  of  Diocletian;
A«r  boaring  the  character  of  a  hnrnane  and
Dlent  prtoti4>,  he  died  at  York,  iiinl  hml  hift
T  bis  ancceasor.  A.O.  306.  ('J]  The  tliird  tton
uatantine  tbe  Oreot.  8oe  Cosstastisus.
i«  father  of  Julian  and.  Oallus.  waa  son  of
nnlina  by  Theodora,  aud  died  A.t>.  337.  (4^
iian  general,  who  marriif<l  I'lucidin,  the  ain-
HoDorimi.  and  was  proclaimed  em]Mror,  an
T  be  enjoyed  only  fteveii  months.  J(o  died,
nally  regmtted,  A.D.  4'Jl,  and  was  sncoeeded
itOQ  Valentiiiian  in  the  West.


ConstitatioQes.  Buactmeat«  of  tho  Rimniii
emiieron.  in  tho  exerciae  of  their  leglalative  au-
thority, which  bad  statntorj  force.  TUey  comprise
tbe  following  varieliea:

(1}  OnttioHf*,  by  which,  in  tho  earlier  imperial
perioil,  tlie  emperor  eiihinitted  a  "bill"  to  the
S<Mmte  (/«*(.  ii.  17,7).  They  vttv  regarde^l  as  law
apart  from  thettenatnHCouBulta,  by  which,  in  theory,
they  reufived  tbe  character  of  "  acta,"  and  aro  often
oiCfHl  aM  nucb  in  preference  to  the  latter.

{2)  Hdicla  or  edlctalea  coHStitiitionf,  general  niles
of  law  made  by  the  emperor  aft«r  iho  analogy  of
the  edict.8  of  tbe  republican  magiatrstes.

(3)  Jf(inda/A,  by  which  the  emperor  delegated  bli
authority  to  other  magi8trati>8,  siicb  as  legati,  prat-
tide*,  and  prttf/t^ii.

(4)  I}ecret<t  and  rt'cripta,  iKsned  by  the  emperor
iu  hi»  cajiaeity  oh  jirnetor,  judge,  or  duprerae  jiiris-
eoiwult.  ll]i  to  tlm  time  of  CuiistnnltrH'  they  were
by  far  tlie  conmioneHt  kind  of  eoiiHtitutin.  Denrela
were  detcrnunationsnf  MiiitM  by  the  em|keror  oitber
an  Bitting  in  a  conrt  of  first  instance  or  on  appeal
(Snet.  Aug.  T.1);  rf*cripla  {Tac.  Arin,  vi.  y)  were
proviKional  ilecisionn  on  the  ie^i  point  at  inane  (aa
to  whieh  hi<  had  bi-f'n  conaiilt«<l  by  a  mugiatrale
or  a  privale  iinlividiuil),  the  facte  being  left  to  bo
inipiircd  iiitr>,  mid  a  final  judgment  given,  by  an-
other magistrate  nr  iuiles.  Tei'bnically  rmripfs
were  of  two  kiii<l«:  epistolne  aud  vw&srrfpfiaaM  or
adHOtatioiie».  The  tirxt  are  indifpendent  n<plies  on
consultation  (IHg.  1.  4,  1,  1 ;  Ingt.  Hi.  'it),  A),  many
iasned  by  lliulrian,  Sevtrnis,  and  Caraoalla  liuing
extant  in  the  Digest.  Tbe  second  ore  brief  opin-
ions im  ca^cB  imbmitl^'d  to  the  emperor  by  petition,
and  written  at  tho  font  of  tbe  Jiitter;  tfaia  form
being  moot  commonly  cmploypd  in  answering  pri-
vate permnis  ('Pij 1,4,1,1;  ^W.  1,23, 6).

In  the  Ettfllern  Empire  a  puculiar  kind  of  re-
nc.ri]itM  ao<[nin>d  llie  name  of  '*  prngmntic  sanc-
tionn."  They  were  drawn  np  in  a  peniliar  and
itolemn  furni,  and  were  nmrti  highly  t.-ixed  than
others.  Zeno  n-Htricted  their  use  to  petitions  pre*
ferred  by  corpomtiotiM.

In  framing  eumititutLoiis  of  any  kind  the  rm-
peror  wan  aaaisled  by  the  cunncil  eallisl  connialo-
rium  ([|.  v.>..

Coiifttrfltam.  In  gcnerat,  any  flooring  made  of
plauks.  TbuH  cottatratim  narit,  "the  deck  of  a
ship"  {Petrou.  lUd):  eointvatHni  poittia,  "a  bridge-
way  "{Livy,  XXX.  10),  rt*:.

Conaualio. Sec  CoNSCS.

ConaiUarla.  Aterm  wJiicli.lhnmghont  thp  time
of  the  Roman  Republic,  Hignifii-H  a  person  who  baa
been  iiiviMtted  with  the  eoiiMulHlnp;  but  under  the
Empire  n  uiern  title  fur  the  Ingliur  cIumh  of  oflirera,
who  thereby  obtained  peruiiaaiun  to  have  the  in-
signia of  a  cotiHiil,  without  ever  having  actually
iKu^n  cnnsnls.  Hence  the  title  was  almost  equiv-
alent to  that  of  on  '■bunornry  consul"  <co»««J
honoratiuit;  Cod.Tlieod  vi.  tit.  19,  b.  1).  Tho  title
was  given  especially  to  generals,  as  formerly  per-
AouM  after  their  conmdshJp  had  usnally  undcitaken
the  comuiand  of  an  army  in  the  provinces,  Coh-
aula7'i»  gradually  be<:anke  tbn*  cslablished  name  for
those  intrusted  with  the  jiflnniiintratinn  of  imjierial
provinces.  During  tbe  ROfonil  t^enlniy  A.r».,tlie  title
caniulaiU  nlwayft  di;notea  a  governor  who  had  ac-
tually bnld  the  online  of  confuil  or  bail  received  tho
title  from  the  emperor  ;  but  by  the  fourth  century
It  had  betiomo  a  mere  title  of  a  porticnlar  ctoas  of


I


CONSUL

prrtvinctat  govprnnra.  Tlie  emp«mr  Hndrian  di-
vhUmI  Italy  iiil<i  Tour  iliiitiietti,  niiil  nrrr  cav.U  Im
pliit'iil  an  ulllriM-  wlui  likewiMt  liiiro  llii;  Litlv  of
niifXN/itm.  At  Cfiiifilaiitiiio|ili!  tlic  t'U\a  wsu*  given
14>  lUn  tjiiiHTiiitoiKluKta  <if  tin:  nqueriuctA  <a)N«Hf(irM
ntfrntrHM),  uho  iM^ni  to  liitvo  licitii  uiialogoiis  to  tbo
cMCn/orf-B  itquarHm  of  Koine.

ConstUea  (origiiinlly  Piiaki'uhes,  Tiraro*).  The
KiiriiHii  luituislTMtoH  to  wlinni  the  luiprenio  niillinr*
ity  utiM  tritiiTtrV-ri't^d  from  tlio  kitiKN,  aftc^r  tliP  i>x-
|MilBiuii  of  the  lutter  in  B.c.'ilO.  Tim  cotiHtilif  gave
lli«ir  iiftnie  1«  t\w  ycnr.  Tlipy  wern  oliM'tf-fl  by  tin*
Coinitiii  Coiitiirtnlii.  ami  ilnwii  Ut  n.r.  ^M\  from  lli(*
pAiriRiaiis  ouly.  Thn  legal  aj^p  at  wliteli  n  uian
tnit(lit  l>«  nlooU'tl  WM,  ill  tliD  time  iif  Cicero,  fui'ty-
llii^e.  I'tiH  time  of  eiilerio};  on  tlie  oRlcu  vanml
ill  the  early  |K<rio(l!i:  in  b.c,  i'i^i,  it  wad  IIximI  to
Jljirch  I&tli :  iu  153.  to  tho  litt  ufjitnuary,  The  ati-
ceflsioii  of  rtie  now  conanls  va»  attciKhxl  with  the
perform  11 II ctt  of  oertuiu  oerciiiMiiivH,  among  uliivh
may  l«c  nifiitioiir*!  n  pi-uctMsioii  of  ih«  citnsiita  to
iht>  C'uptt4il,  witli  lite  Sviial**,  ffJiilcx,  ntiil  other  ril-
izenit  of  poMilion,  an  piw-ort ;  mii  offering  rtf  while
biilln  lo  Iii)Mter,HiMl  the  i)tl«raiice  of  i«oletnii  vnwtt.

Th«coiiHi)ltt  Wfi-e  the  repreHeiilaliveAof  t\tf  royal
■nthnrily,  ami  coiiw(|nciilly  all  otiier  1111^18111* tcA
•wvrv  honixl  to  nhL\v  thcni,  with  tho  exception  of
Ihtf  tribiiiituk  of  the  ptrb^  auil  the  ilicl-ator.  Diiriiin;
tt  iliptatonliip  Ihvir  ptnvent  fell  into  al>eyaiire.  In
lli«  city  their  anthohly  n*as  liinile«l  by  the  riictit
of  H)i|wal  to  the  |H*ople  niiil  tliu  veto  <if  the  tri-
banes.  Biit  in  llie  nrniy,  an^]  ovrr  their  niihonIi>
tial4^,  tlM-y  ha<l  full  power  i)f  Iif»  uikI  death.  S*>me
of  their  oriijiiial  functions  paiweil  fn>m  them  in
cotiroe  of  tinii*.  Thus  in  B.c.  44-1,  the  buitiiie»)i  of
the  t-viians  was  inaile  over  ti>  the  censor*;  in  366,
the  rivil  joriMliction  within  the  eitr.  so  fur  a«  it
iitrliKli-d  llie  ri}£ht  of  |>erforming  ttm  orIh  of  ailop-
tion,  eniuiiei)Mttion,  and  liberntion  of  ftlaveM.  was
tniiiMferreil  to  the  pmetor*.  In  the  lield,  howuvor,
having  the  criminnt 'JitriMlictioii  in  tlu-ir  hamlti,
they  IiimI  also  the  right  of  deciding  in  eivil  eniH>a
affecting  the  soldteni.  In  the  geDernt  adiuiiii^lra-
tiou  of  public  biinines*  the  consnlit,  altfaou>;li  f<>r-
miilly  re^'ogniKrd  na  tlie  supreme  anthohty,  grad-
ually becnnte,  in  pniniiv,  di-]M*tiilent  iip^ni  the
6eiiat«  and  tliu  Coiuitia,  aa  they  hod  only  the  power
of  prepitring  the  n^aolntio1lh  pro|HmtMl  and  enrry-
ing  them  ont  if  accrp(«l.  Within  the  cily  their
poivers  wore  rirtiinlly  eonlliitHl  to  gammoning  the
t>>«MiMle  and  llin  (\>milia  and  prefiiling  over  their
mei>tiiigA.  They  iileto  nuiuinated  the  dietntoni,  and
condnelcil  the  eiret ions  and  legishiliou  (ii  Ihf  Coint-
lia  niul  the  levies  of  Boldier».  After  thrf  <)ffice  uf
dlAtalor  fell  into  alH'yuuce.  the  power  of  the  eon-
MiU  waa,  in  rawA  of  great  ilangrr.  inrreawMl  t^
dietjitorial  anlhority  by  a  iippi'ial  decree  of  the
Senate. See  foMtTl*.

All  eicwnlial  eharacterisllc  of  the  eonsMlarnffire
wa»  that  it  wnt>  r<dlegia1,  ninI  therefon*  if  one
ronoiil  ilicd  aiHitber  |  enlleil  roxvitf  mffrHms)  waa
linilM'dialely  elerteil.  Thi*  fw»t»i*/  »mfftHm»  had
abwdnlely  (be  jtaine  anthoriiy  a»  hia  c«dle«giie,  but
he  bad  lo  lay  liowu  Lin  ofHce  uith  htm  at  the  end
of  the  yoar  fur  irhtcb  the  two  hail  IhwiI  originnlly
elected.

The  |Kiw-er  of  the  two  eon«iiIii  Iwing  equal,  the
biisiiie'>w  waaditidMt  between  tliein.  In  llir  ad-
iniiti^tmtion  of  the  city  they  changinl  dalicji  every
mniiib,  the  wnioT  taking  tbc  tniiinlivr.  With  nv
gnnl  to  iheir  tiuignia — nniucly,  Ibo  foya  ttr^eterUt^


i


arUa  cmruUt,  and  twelrs  lietont  —  the  oit^inn
arr}ingi:iiie:it.  wajt  thai  thn  lictor«  walked  in
fnitit  of  (he  oflit-ialing  roiijiul,  while  thu  ott)>
er  wan  only  nitendiH)  by  an  afcemntm.  lu  latrr
timM  thu  cunUHii  wax  fur  the  Itctori  t4>  walk
before  the  ottlciating  coomt  and  b«biiid  iba
other.

In  the  field  enich  consul  eAfnmandcd  two  legions
with  tlioir  allied  tntops;  if  they  were  in  the  eaate
locality,  the  command  rliajig«<l  from  day  to  day.
The  qncHtion  of  the  BdniiniHtraiion  of  the  prnt-
inee*  lliey  either  wltleil  by  ooniu'nt,  or  left  it  to  be
decided  by  h't.  With  the  exIeiiMion  uf  tite  Kii)pin>
the  coiihuIh  beeanm  unable  to  undertake  the  wlide
burden  of  warfare,  and  the  pnietorN  were  called  in
to  aiuttsl.  The  provincejt  were  lliou  divided  iote
coumilar  and  praetorian ;  tliu  bnsineaa  of  aaei<^-
ment  b«^iug  left  lo  thu  Senate,  wbicb,  aft«.>r  Ike
year  VH,  wa8  bound  to  make  it  Wfore  the  eliwtioiM.
In  the  tirst  century  B.C.,  a  taw  of  Sulla  deprived  the
coiiMiU  of  au  ttseenlial  elemeut  of  their  authority,
the  military  laipmHiN  ;  for  it  enarletl  tbnt  Ibecmi*
hiiIr  ahonlil  fi|wiid  their  year  of  ofHc«*  in  Koine,  and
«>n]y  i-«<pair  to  the  pit»vincwi  and  awuuiv  Ibo  iM-
perimu  After  ila  conelnidon.

In  the  Civil  Wars  the  eoiiHnlnr  offie«  omnplelely
lurtl  it«  obt  po.tition,  aiitl  though  it  eoutinited  lo
exist  under  the  Kinpire,  it  bcrame,  pra*:tically,  uo
more  than  an  empty  title.  The  em|ieruni,  who
often  hell]  the  office  thrmAelvtw,  like  CacMar,  fer
Heverul  year«  lu  (tnccetwioo,  had  the  right  of  noaii-
iiating  the  candidates,  and  then^fore,  in  prmeti.'*,
Iiiul  the  etoctioii  in  their  own  band*,  It  Itecaae
iMual  to  nominate  noveral  pairs  of  consnls  fur  uu»
year,  so  as  to  confer  the  dt«tiuciioit  on  aa  mauy~
l»enHinfi  as  possible.  In  Hitch  caseA,  the  coneuli^^
who  came  in  on  January  I,  after  whom  the  yeM'^c^
was  named,  wtrrv  called  eon»9ln  vrHinarii,  ihenMr  —
0ula  tMffrcli  counting  aa  minaret,  t'nttl  the  ai)<ft^  —
die  of  the  first  c«utiiry  a.d..  it  wax  a  Hiteri,!]  dja.:^-
tiiiclion  to  hold  the  conttnUhip  for  a  whide  yn-amr  •
but  after  that  nn  castea  of  Ibis  teniire  uocnr.  S.  '■Ijl
time  the  iusigain  (oritameitia  comamlarim),  or  ht^wa-l
oniry  dintiiictious  of  the  office,  wcra  gi^-en,  in  cc^v
tain  degrees,  even  to  men  who  had  not  licen  coii«c:&la
.nt  all.  The  chief  duties  of  the  coumits  now  w^w
to  preMide  in  the  Senate  and  t«i  eooiluel  the  rrimj-
tial  triaU  in  which  it  hail  to  give  Judgment.  Rnt,
beMide«  tbi«,  certain  fuocltons  of  civil  juhmlicLion
weje  in  their  hnnda,  uotnbly  the  libemiion  %yf
^lareft,  the  provieioit  for  the  conily  gntnus  irbjcb
i)cciimMl  dnring  their  term  of  ofllee.  the  fe«>tal  eel-
fbrnliotie  in  honour  of  thv  eitipenvr.  and  the  lik'*.
After  the  seat  of  rin]dre  was  tmn^fernMl  to  Cen*
elanlinople,  ihe  consulate  watt,  lowardi  tlieenil  of
tlw  fnnrth  cenlnry.  divideil  iM'tween  tlie  two  rapt-
lal  ritieti.  Tlie  coiiflnlate  of  Ihe  Wenteni  ni|'iia'
came  to  an  end  tti  a.D.  S:t4,  Ibrit  »f  tlie  £j|»t<Tli  in
541.  Fnuii  that  lime  the  ent|wn>r  of  the  East  k<**
the  title  nf  ramimt  prrpclmui'.

Coiwtt*. A  Hoiuaii  deity,  llin  gial  .»f  nmnicl,  n^
his name  demileft. Htn  altar  wmn In the  firei>*
Maximns,  aud  was  always  covered,  cxifi*!  •■"  h'^
fe«tiral-day.  the  latb  of  AngiiM,  called  Culio'^'*^
Horse  and  chariot  races  were  celebrateil  i*"  ihi*j
occaaion;  ami  the  working-honten,  mido*.  aiiil*)"'
were  rmwne*! with  flowern  and  allowed  In  iv*'
Hence  Coumia  ban  pmliably  been  ronfonndfl  *"
Neptuna»  Ef|ni-«lri«. It  was  at  the  Con»nnIi»  '•»
I  be  ^btno  maidenif  were  carried  ulT  by  the  B"ei*>*j
See  CiRcrs.


CONTAMINATIO


W7


CUNTUMACIA


Contaminatia  A  tm'liiiicnl  trrm  fnr  th«  com-
binnliou  uf  the  pluU  of  iu*V(<i'iil  Grovk  [>1uys  in  a
ftiriglf  RiMnai)  dnuoa.  Tbi-s  wai  itoue  villi  coii-
tiilui-alilc  ingenuity  1>,T  botli  Pluiitus  niid  Tc^reuce,
Tliuif,  the  KjftdicHt  o{  Pluutus  ia  iiudoubtiMlly  h
•)in.-im«u  of  (Irttiuitlic  uuutamkuatiou  f^Ladenig,  in
tbe  ZriUtikrift  fur  dir  J Unl\  »miiKiii»€MiMft [  1641  ] ) ;
Bud  (be  Andria  luid  Eunttthm  uf  Terenoeare  excel-
It'iit  (•xnmplMi — ttit*  fiiriiit<r  coniltiniu);  tba  pIotH  iif
Mi-'Daudor'H  '.K^hpia  mid  iUpivdia,  titid  th«  Intti^r  Mir
plot«  uf  tb«  Miiii«  iHiet'H  K,vvoi-)^oi  auil  KnXa(.  SttC
Ilitif,  Qtiaf*ti9nf«  Ttrmtiaitae  (  Bunti,  1843);  and
Kaitip^',  LnnUpifle d.  7'rr.  Hud  ikre  Ortyino^rlHftlb^r-
Bladt,  18d4> ;  also  Llie  jirulogiio  tu  the  A  udria.  TIh*
tnly  itiwtAnce  uf  a  pU.v  made  np  of  (b«  plo.va  of
two  dtflTtTiriut  autbora  U  fuiiud  in  the  Adelpho«  of
Temiee,  wbtcli  is  )>a«ed  iiixiu  tbo  '.\Jlf\ifnti  uf  Me-
itanderand  tbe  2vifano6»^aKoi^ft  uf  biplidiiB.

Contain  aud  Contatl  (  Kom-otftopot  ).  Soldiers
arm«rtt  witb  tli«  long  pikt*  ealleil  wnlus  ( Vi<gtft.
Jf.r  iJi.O).

Contio  feiToiieonaly  bihiU  Cuncio).  A  vontrac-
Uoo  for  ronrrntia;  timt  in,  a  iiioi<tiiig,  or  coiirrHfu^.
IbbIihw  iiiodf  iif  spviikiiig  il  doiiolea  auy  popiilur
SMrttitily.i^rfiii  :(inoiig  iioii-KoiiianH,  and  any  apeecli
or  baraii}^tfi  mlilri'twcit  to  sncb  an  Aji»t*tubl,v  ;  li«iiro

PtbacimiiDuu  ythTOt-e  eontwncm  habere  meaoa  iud'iSi^v-
(riilly  "li>bold  a  meeting  "aud  "to  make  at4p(_^ech."
H'rittflii »i»cccbKJi are
alao MinicltmL*« called
eomtiomM. In  tbe  tecb-
aical  Btxime,  howerer,  a
ootttio  wiu  an  n.'taembly
vf tlic Komnu people
ooiivciiGdreKularlj'(;j^r
^•-^ireonrm)  by  a  loofiift-
ta-3ftt«  or  a  iia(itTd>)$  j>uh'
?«-*-•«. A  geueniliii  lli»"
Rwlrt by  virtue of  his
iVMjjrHMwroilldHlinimnii
li  I  M  tnH)p«  iM  oftt^n  AA  lit^ MitilMy  Coiitto. (Romno  coId.)
l»l«^»oU  to  btnir  what  be

ki>»4  lo  Miy  to  tbem  (adlocuth),  aud  what  he  aaid
l^«!Flbre  tbe  oMembled  arm;  was  pro  eontioHt  (Sail.

Coatomiatl. This  Italian  word ( Kreitcli  and

^iisIinIi  roiitorniale»)ht%ti  lieeu  iwrnLlly  uinployed  by

tiiiniKiiuttintii  to  dL-uciLi<  a  purtieiiliir  cIuhk  uf  cir-

*^ul)ir  iiivrtnllic  idrjcctfl  bi^aririK  vuriuus  devjucH  and

'♦"Keiiila,  wbirb  wore  isHnc^l.  tlioii^h  nut  for  ciffu-

lacitiuftspiirreiicy,  nnder  tliK  Itonmn  Empire. TLe

anrfeut  appellation  of  lhi>!*p  (ilijprin  in  not  known  ;

twir  modern nanip b«« liiyn derived from the

"iTvlfi  ^iu  Italian  roNforitn)  wbieh iiitirkM  buth  of

tlwjr  iii(|(>^,  in  iiicniM^ The  inftal  of  wliitdi  eoiilor-

"'•t'sii  ai>< rotnpowrd is co]*pfr,  wilb a oertiiiii

""•>i|i,t  of  alloy;  in  arm  tliL-y  aw,  jut  a  rule,  MuniC'

*''*t  laryi-r  than  llm  "  (iiiit  liniaa"  coiiii«(»r«/rr(ii)

"^  *hc  early  Enipin-,  but  Uicy  aro  much  Lbinucr

'J'*^ arc  i'hnrflclitriKcd  by  tbe  circular  depn-iwion

*''**»<ly  rvfi'rrud  to. Tbe  Rreatpr  nmnlicr  of  thcni

''"^•K'nt  on  boTb  »i<li*s  n  device  in  n-lit'C.  whu-h  in

K^lftrally  obtaini'd,  not  by  striking  friuii  a  <lie  (aw

"  Hi*  cane  nf  tbe  modal lionn),  but  by  pnweiw  of

^■'''B  from  a  mould.

•  litt  first  iiune  of  the  iroiitomiatea.  wbicli  are  all

. '^'wlrrn  origiU)  '"  a>wi|;iied  l»y  K<-klii-l  lo  i1h(

>>'»»•*  .if  CoHRtiintine  (A.n.  ftW  SirT).  iind  tliis  date

't»j»  Weu  pnii-tinally  aoreputd  by  the  nnmt  recent

^^H^^<^t)e«  ou  tbe  imbject. Tbeir  fabrication,  ac-


cording to  Sabatior,  ceased  under  Aotbeniiiia  (A.D.

4M-47V).

I'be  typos  or  devices  of  tbo  contoniintCR,  tlioof^h
ofliTiuj;  cousideruble  varieties,  may  be  coiioidLMx-d
to  Imve  reference  to  tbo  public  games  nnd  ^>ce-
tjicl»^«  in  tbe  Ciren*,  the  Odeum,  the  Stadium,  and
tbe  Anpbilheatre.  llie  legends  are  neaily  alwiiya
descriptive  of  tbe  types.  See  Robert,  £tudeiur  leM
.MMaiUonii  f'nntnyHiatrit  (Hiiihm'Ih,  ]^4:t2);  and  the
artii;I«  Ni'MIsmatics.

Coutiaotua. ?t-o  Oiii-iOATinNKA.
Contrebla. One  of  tbe  chief  tovDS  of  tbe  Col*
tiU'ri,  ill llinpflnia Tarracoiieusift,  soutbeosl of

BaragoNFdi.

Coutroveraia. 8oe  IrDKX.

Controveraiae.  A  (terieii  of  rompnsitions  on
legnl  .HuUjecU  tiy  tbe  eldi-r  Aene^'B,  originally  iq
ttin  bonki*.  The  (|ner>ti(.MiN  treated  are  bypulhelinjil
cuaus,  and  are  diM'ii!tM><l  by  nay  uf  prartii-«  fur
a4:tua]  coAtrit.  With  llie  tvn  \HHt\imiCintntrnrrriiiac
in  uuo  book  of  tuaaoriaf  (m;i'.  Di:ri^MATin),  tbo
whole  collecttuu  bcaiing  the  lille  Ottttmum  tt  likr-
torum  ^nte»tiae,  DicfaUmfn,  Cohirf».  Tlio  work  Ik  a
very  valnuLlo  aonree  of  Infiirmiiiion  ri'ganiiiitf  tlw
liistflry  of  rbi'torie  under  the  early  Enij>irf.  Of  the
original  ten  ttmiks  nf  tbe  eonlrorprmiae ,  ouly  tivo
(I..  II..  VII..  IX.,  X.)  bavr  Iweu  preserved.  Tlio
Gmiiovii  publiKbrd  nn  edition,  witli  notea  in  Lalia
(Amfitenlom,  IflTii!).  Recent  nitiral  editions  are
those  of  Kieis^Hug  (I^ipxlg,  i^%  uiul  H.  J.  MUller
(Prague,  \f^). S*-*'  Rkktorica.

CoiitubeTiialeBlirta-KijfaO. Origiunlly,meD  who

I  eerred  iii  (In?  Hiime  army  nnd  lived  in  tbe  name
teut.  It  is  deiived  fnmi  fabrnw  {ullerwanls  iabtr-
uarirfwmj,  "a  military  t'-nt."  Kaeb  tent  waa  ocrn<
piwi  by  t^'Usoldiersfrnw^Mftcrnrf/rjii,  with  a  snbordi-
nale  olttecr  at  their  beail,  w|in  \va«  called  deeanufy
and  iu  later  timen  capnt  tvntuhtrnii.

Ytmii);  IIi>nianM  irf  ilhistrioiiK  families  uvrd  to
KciHiiupauy  a  diMtiiiguisbed  general  lui  Mh  expedi-
tions or  lo  IiIh  pniviuce,  fnr  the  purpose  of  ^niniiig
niidi-r  his  HU|ienutt;iidunee  n  praetii-/i1  training  in
tbe  art  of  war  or  in  the.  adininiNlratinn  nf  public
alTuirs.  and  were,  like  BuldierH  living  in  the  same
tent,  caUtMl  his  eontHhcritatea  (Cic.  Pro  Ctiel.  'W.  VA).

lit  a  still  wider  een8e,tlic  nAm»  c«HluberHaU'«  nun
applied  to  penwns  connected  by  ties  nf  it^tiumte
frlii-udBbip  and  living  under  tbe  same  rnnf  (CIc.  Ad
Fam.  ix.'i) ;  and  Iiance  wbeii  a  free  niiin  aud  a  mIavv,
or  two  slavcH,  who  were  nnl  allowed  lo  routract  a
legal  luarriage,  livml  totrether  ufi  huMliand  and  wife,
tbey  werH  cnlli'^1  rtmfnhrrnulfjt,  and  ibiir  ronnDO-
tioii.  at)  well  All  tbeir  )>]neu  uf  reciidcuce,  etmfuAer-
NJlfni  iPeirou  r>~,  (i|.

Conuibemium (o-wrnji-ia). See  CoKCUmxA;

C'n.NTrBKKNALKS.

Contumacla.  The  Latin  term  for  distdiedieiieo
lo  the  rornniiiuds  of  a  niax'^tratc  or  judge ;  cape-
einlly.  abwnce  from  n  trial  without  aufficient  ex-
nuHP.  If  ihe  ucDiiHer  were  nlwent.  he  wn.H  ciuisiil-
pred  an  ilrnppinf*  Iuh  rliarget  (nee  TkhgiviirkaTHi),
whi(.-li  lif  »va«  not  allowed  to  n-iiew.  Tlie  nbHHtice
of  the  aeruHHd  was  taken  an  nn  adtiiinnion  n(  guilt.
In  a  civil  trial  tliu  i'iiii!>eipi<-n<'i-  v,n>t  iniiuediate
condemnation  ;  and  tbe  liko  whji  the  cum*  in  rriiti-
inal  trials  if  the  ncenmvl  fulled  to  appear  al  llie
appointed  time  or  on  Ibe  tar*!  tiny  of  iIm*  trial.  If
the  accused  saw  that  lii^  conilemiiation  wa^  ccp
lain,  it  was  ignite  connnnn  fnrliiin  to  rettrerBnd  io


CONTUS


40S


CORASStAB


OiTiuii. (Moanie  «l  rraetiMLe.)


CAWB  to  go  into  voliintary  exile — n  pro-

iiug  wUich  io  no  way  uillucuccd  the  furtlicr

ooarst]  of  tlio  pi-or-ei.MliiigR.

ContOB  (Koyrns),  (L)  A  polo  with  ji  poiuttid  iron
at  tlic  oiiil,  u»ud  aa  h  puut-pole  by  boatmen.  (2)
Aliiigt<  pikoaiich
u  tboM  carried
byliurbarian  sol>
diew  (Tac.  Wwl.
i.  44).

Conubium.
Tbo  coiilriictiitg
of  n  matriwtOHium
iNitHm,  or  vnlid
ninrringt',  witli  nil  it«  legnl  c(iittHH|iicncoii.  A«  such
a  marrirtgn  could  oiilylnko  placo  betweeu  pcrsous
of  ri|R»l  stittiiH,  tbn  pntrtoiniiH  and  tlie  gilvbciaus
had  iisu^h  for  a  long  tiino  a  itR)iunt.to  ctonM^iMin.  utiLil
n.c.  445,  whftii  lilt*  two  orders  werB  oqualiied  in  this
r«ttjk>ct. Soo  Matrimuml'm.

ConTfiua.0.  A  people  in  Aquitania,  near  tin:
Pyreiu'ea,  and  oq  both  Bidva  of  the  Garuttiim;  it
mixed  race,  which  had  wrvt-d  under  SiMtoriiiH.  :ttid
were  9<*ttlt'd  in  Ariiiitiinia  by  Foiiipfy.  Xt^jiTlhoir
cliief  U>wii,  Lii;riii)iiiuii,  wi>ro  th^  wnrtit  ballifi
called  A<[iiao  Cooviiiiarinii  (Hiigii6rt.'B).

ConveutioneoL Sei^  ObuuatioXKA.

Couventus. See  I'roviscia.

Convi-viumiaCvdrtnvnv). St-eCKSA;  SVMPOSHM.

Cooks  and  Cookery, See Ckna; Culina;

DlAKTETICA.

Codptatio.  The  elet'tiou  of  a  upw  nuimlHir  by
the  nii'iiibprM  of  .'i  rorporatiiin  (coUrffiHta)  to  Kiip-
ply  a  vui-aiiL  pliu:*-.  Anioiig  corporsit.ioiin  nliich
long  tilled  their  vaoancieK  in  tliig  way  may  bo  nF«ii-
ttoiied  the  collt^ge  *>f  |»uiitiliefK  and  aiigtint.  The
elect  ion  wa^  pnM-tnlud  by  ttio  iiotiiiiintioii  uf  n
prupur  caudidate  by  one  of  tliu  iiieuiliei-H,  anil  fol-
lowed by  his  iuaiigiiratioD. See  CoLLKtiiCM.

Copa.  A  Kluirt  poRm  of  thtrty-oight  lined  in
elegino  vente,  a>crib<;il  to  Vorjujil  by  ('harifdnft.  In
it  tlio  writer  invites  hix  friend  to  spend  rbe  heat(.*d
hoiim  of  the  day  in  a  rtttttic  arbonr.  wliere  wine,
frnit,  and  pleuHatit  eompany  await  tiiin  nnder  the
care  of  miuo  ho9t«8s  feopa),  who  is  descrilted  as
d»nrin;{  to  the  eantMintt  icrotala).  The  style  re-
(wniblnn  VergilV,  thongh  Ihn  lone  Ik  mnoh  mnre
"prightly.  Sew  llgen,  .-fnimarfrfranfiofrea  i'm  firyUH
ropam  (Halle.  IHiSO ) ;  lUH,  HMot-ia  Ursam,  Lnt
(Boun,  1876);  Kgli,  IWuAoVergiJ.  Oedichtt  (Leip-
Bif(t  \^^)\  aud  Leo's  edition  (llorliti,  \^\).

Copae  (K£trai>.  An  ancient  town  in  Boeotla.on
the  north  Hid<«  of  Ibo  lakt.'  CopalA,  which  derived
iia  natnrt  from  thiA  plare.

CopalCsiKwinirr  Xt'^vij}.  .\Iukein  Biteotia.fornied
ohiedy  by  the  river  Cepbiiwrin.  wIioao  waters  wert-
oonoeottMl  with  the  Kiibornn  Sea  by  Hevcrat  Hiibter-
raiMUin  chaniiel8,  rallMl  by  the  niodeni  4>nH'kit  katn-
rAtkrtt.  wliioli  were  not,  however, anfflcient  to  carry
oil'  the  waliTH,  CH|KK'ially  in  th«  tiprint;  when  the
Copato  plain  waM  tliKidod  by  the  m'u\>*.  In  the
tluw  of  Alexander  the  Great  an  cnornionit  tnnnel
was  out  throiiicli  the  rook  for  the  discharge  of  the
water.  (See  £ui<v'<AltirM.>  This  proTe4l  cflective
l]ntil  It  fell  into  rnins,  when  the  dintrict  »Kain  be-
came nuwhole4ome  and  tnanhy.  In  tf^,  how-
erer,  li  wa*  once  more  jiropi-rly  drained  by  a
Preitvh  company. The  iniHleni  name  of  tbo  lake


IB  Topolias ;  it«  Homeric  name,  Cepmmi  {Ai§ttf
Kt}<ftiiTlu  IL  V.709J.  Ita  eels  were  much  prizwJ  ia
aniii|iiity.

Copben  (Kbh^^c)  or  Copbaa  OCu^^rt-  T&tf
niiMlum  Cabnl ;  the  only  grand  tributary  rivfT
which  flows  into  (he  Iiiilns  from  the  went,  lu
own  principnl  tributary  is  the  Choa^pcH.

Cophluua [Ki}^ivos\. A lar^e wicker  1>a«kct,
made of willow Itrmichea. From Ari«tophaiiM
{At.  iniO)  It  would  sectn  that  it  waa  niied  bj-  the
Greeks  88  a basket  or  cagp for  birdit. The  Ro-
mans used  it  for  agricnllnral pnrpotteH ;  and  Co>
liimolln,  in  deHoribing  a  mi'lhod  of  proonriug  ear-
ly rucnmbers,  sayn  thnt  thvy  hIiouM be  sown  in
well-manured  soil,  krpt  in  a  cophiuiis,  so  that  IB
this  cai^e  we  have  Ui  eunsider  il  as  a  kind  of  port-
able  hot-lwd. .htvuuul (iii.  14),  when speaking
uf  the Jen-H,  uses the ex*
prejMiiou  ro^Aiiiw*  el  fot-
N  u  IN (a iriiM  of  hoy),  ftg-
nratively  to  designate their
high  degree  of  poverty. See
Coitnis.

Copia.  The  goddess  of
plculy  among  tli*'  K^miana,
ropretHMitcd  as  hearing  a  hoin
tilled  with  frnitA,  etc.  See
CoiiNL*  COPIAK.

Copia  (KotrtV).  (1)  A  sword
or  nciinetar.  curved  like  a
sickle  and  used  by  the  Thee-
Kalians  and  in  tlie  Kaxt  ( l^urip.
hUfctra,  i<t7 ;  Xen,  Cyrop.  ii.
I).  (*ii  A  knife  uacd  in  cut-
ting the  tle»h  of  iininmlK  in
sarrrficee  or  in  the  kitchen
(Pint.  Ayr.  2).

Copper See  Abs.

Coptoa  (KOTrriir).  A  city
of  I  Iin-Thi'baict>r  IfpperEgypt,
lying  a  liltio  to  the  cast  of
llie  Nile.some  diNtauce  l>elow
ThebcK.  Under  t  he  Plolcmies
it  occupied  an  important  com-
mercial |Hisiiion  In  1894  ex-
cavations ctnidunted  on  ita
silo  by  Mr.  Pelriu  brought  to  light  many  Ta]ai\>la
nmiaiuti  of  the  earliest  Egyptian  art,

Coquua. A  cook. See  Ckna  ;  Ciuna.

Cora.  An  ancient  town  in  l^^liniD,  in  the  \r«»l-
scian  Monnlains,  sontbeast  of  Vrlitrae.  It  is  t«<i'M
ealled  Cori,  and  eontnitis  an  ancient  temple  aaud
massive  polygonal  walla. See  p.  409,

Coraoeaimn  {KopauTiiTtovy.  A  very  strong  cfty
of  Ctliriii  ARpPFH,  on  the  borders  of  rainphvli**!
standing  upon  a  Nterp  rock,  and  pn«sesaing  a  ^**^
harbour.  It  w»k  tboonly  plat^oinCiliciathalolItsrH.
a  KncceKKful  nviistance  to  Alexander  the  Great.

CorallL  A  sarago  people  of  Sarmatia  EnropO^
who  inhabited  the  shores  of  the  Kuxiiie.  near  l-l>*
mouth  i>f  the  Danube  (Ovid,  font.  iv.S,  3T).

Coraaeiae  (Kopno-o-uii).  A  group  of  snisll  >«I-
and»  in  the  Icarian  Sea,  southwest  of  Icarla  Tbr,r
luUHt  not  he  oonfminded,  as  they  oAru  are,  ^H"
tlie  islands  Corseae  or  Corsiae,  off  the  loniaa  ro»»*i
ami  opponite  the  promontory  Am|ielofl,  in  Satix*
(Pliny, /f..Y.iv.  12. 23J.


tiiqita. (Niftaal


J


COKAX


109


COKCYUA


Temple  ai  Com  (Corl).


Coraz  (Kiipaf)-  A,  Sicilian  rbetorician,  who
floarisUed  aboat  B.C.  467,  and  wrote  the  earliest
work  on  tbe  art  of  rbetoric.  It  wan  entitled  Tc;^
(Cic.  De  Orat.  i.  20).

Corbla,  CorbtUa,  Corbicttla.  A  basket  <>f  very
peculiar  form  and  common  use  among  tbe  Ro-
maiiB,  both  for  agricnltiiral  aud  other  piirpoaeH.
It  waH  made  of  osiers  twisted  together,  nud  was
of  a  conical  or  pyramidal  shape  (yarr.  L.  L.  v.
139).  A  banket  answering  precisely  to  this  de-
Hcription,  both  in  form  and  material,  is  still  to
be  seen  tu  every-day  use  anioiig  the  Canipaiiiaii
peasantry,  which  is  called  in  tbe  lauguage  of  the
ciiiiutry  la  oorhella,  a  representation  of  which  is
iutrodaced  in  the  lower  portion  of  the  annexed  il-
Instration. The  hook  attached  tu  it  by  a  string


CortiU. (The  upper  ipecimen  from  k  drnwiiitc  nl  HerculaDeum  ;
tbe  lower  &  basket  uBed  by  Canipjiniti  iMiuwDlry  )

is  for  the  pnrpose  of  snspeniliiig  it  to  a  branch  of
tbe  tree  into  which  tbe  man  climbs  to  pick  hir*  or-
anges, lemons,  olives,  or  figs. Tliti  npper  portion


oftbe  illustration  (jRHcft{fd(?t£nwfaRo,tom.  ill.  tar.
29)  represents  a  Roman  farm,  in  which  a  farming
man,  in  theahapenf  adwartisb  satyr,  is  seen  with  a
pole  (cEo-iXXa)  across  bis  shoulder,  to  each  end  of
which  is  anspcoded  a  basket  resembling  in  every
respect  the  Campauian  corbella.  Like  the  calathu*,
which  it  somewhat  resembles  in  shape,  it  is  some-
times employed  as  a  distinguishing  emblem  of  Ceres.

Corlntae.  Merchantmen  of  the  larger  class,  so
called  because  they  hnug  ont  a  corbia  at  the  mast  head
for  a  sign  (Festus;  Nonius,  s.  v.).  They  were  also
termed  ONfrariae;  and  bencePlautos,  in  order  todes-
ignate  the  voracious  appetites  of  some  women,  says
corbitam  cibi  cometae pouutit  ( Cas.  i  v.  1,20).  The  mod-
ern corvette  gets  its  unme  from  tbe  corbita.

CorbtUo,  Cx.  DoMiTiL'S.  A  general  who  dis-
tinguished himself  by  his  campnigits  against  the
Germans  and  the  Partbiaift  in  the  rt'igus  of  Clau-
dius and  Nero.  To  uvoixl  tbe  death  destined  for
bini  by  the  orders  of  tbe  jealous  Nero,  he  com-
mitled  suicide  at  Ceuchreae,  a.D.  67.

Corofra  (lUpjeupa,  later  KiipKvpa).  An  islanil  in
the  Iniiiau  Sea,  olf  the  const  of  Epirns,  in  which
Homer  is  thought  to  have  placed  the  fabled  gar-
dens nf  AlcinoiiH.  (See  Scheria.)  It  is  said  to
have  been  first  known  under  tbe  name  of  Drepan^,
perhaps  from  its  similarity  of  sbaiie  to  a  scythe.
To  this  name  succeeded  that  of  Scberin,  always
uHfil  by  Hoincr,  and  by  which  it  was  possibly
known  in  his  timu.  From  the  Odytaey  we  loani
that  this  island  was  then  iuhabiti'd  by  Phaeacians,
a  |ieople  who,  even  at  that  early  pi'iiod,  hml  ac-
ipiired  considerable  skill  in  nautical  atfaira  and
piiHHessed  extensive  cimnnerctal  rtilationx,  since
they  trailed  with  the  Phcrnicinns,  and  alHo  with
Eubnea  and  other  conntrii-s  {Odfim.  \\.  vii.).

Corcyra  was  in  after-dayi^  the  principal  city  of
the  inland,  and  was  sitnafed  precisely  where  the
modern  town  of  Corfu  Htniids. Hcylax  speaks  of


I


CUbDAX

three  liiit)K>tii-s.  oiu*  «if  whirli  'm  A^ith'tM  a»  1m':mi-
liftil.  Ill  tlie  Mulilli*  Aip's,  till-  rilA(li-l  oUtsiiin-*!
the  tintiu'  (if  KofJL<<^cii,  (it»u  itf*  Iwit  fuiiinil  liUU  n)-
ci\«t»,  whk'h  iipiHilliiiimi  viii*!,  ill  jiHMTKH  uf  time,
»pi>lic(l  ti)  tti<*  whiilu  iHWii  aiul  tiiinlly  Id  the  inI-
uiiil  itrtflf.  Ifi'uci!  thp  nmilrtii  iimiu'  t>(  Oorfn.
whifh  in  but  a  cnrniption  of  llie  fniiuor.  TUc  f«l-
hiwiiig  ix  :i  Kki'tcU  uf  lli<>  liUtory  of  this  ittlniitL  lt«
(■nrlior  pciioilii  nru  eiivclopcil  in  Iho  niiRt  of  itticf-r-
luiiiiy  hihI  iMnijectiin;.  .\  i-ciloiiy  of  Colchiaiis  i»
nail)  to  hiivi'  M>ttlt-<1  there  aliont  i:H9  years  ht-foro
mir  iTJi-  III  jirocpPH  of  time,  t'orcym,  enriclM-d
iiiiil  »}:^niiHliXfHl  liy  iitt  uiiiriliiiic!  Hiipvrionty,  lie-
citiiie  Ilia-  of  the  nxMt  pnwprfiil  ti»tii>tiH  in  (>ri'«ct!
tThuc.  i.  If.  The  Corinlliiaiti*,  iiitiLer  f'hei>.iiTn-
U>«,  forineil  a  Ketilt<iii(>nl  hi-iv  in  B.r.  7*>^.  aiitl  415
3'eiint  afiorwHril.H  it  wtm  rn|itiirr(l  hy  A^nlhucIeR
<>!'  Syrtiriixc,  wliti  pivu  it  to  hin  Oiiil^htt-r  Lniirs-
»:i  ii[><iii  lu't-  iniiiTinjL^e  with  TyiThtin  uf  KpiriiH.
It  ntiH  iienijiii-il  by  tliL-  tiootrx  of  iUv  lllyiiari
«liifrii  Ti>iir:i,  iilmiit  tifly-oight  yours  after  its  wix-
itre  by  Agaihoch's,  but  wns  wir>ii  iifler  taken  from
her  by  th»  Rdiiiudk,  iiiidor  th<'  enimiil  (Jii.  Kl.iviiiK;
aii(l,  »ithoii);h  it  had  the  privib'({t>K  of  a  free  city,
it  rt-maiiied  iinihT  the  RnnmtiN  for  niiiny  ccntiirli'N.
In  tlie  lime  of  StialMi  it  wa^i  reilitcfHl  t«  entivinf
miiery.  8e«>8i*hiiii*ll'«  tn-atiw  Kork^riihrhe  Slmiira
il.i''t\mg,  |H(N)).  ['2)  All  itluiiil  ill  Ibr  Ailriatii-,  on
the  vniuit  of  lllyrioiini,  irniH'il  NiiiitA,  "  Ithnli  "  liii
(in'uk  MAftifii.!,  (■>  tliMtiiigiiiHli  it  fnuii  ihf  nloll^
(fb'bruteil  iMliiiid  of  Ihu  KUine  iiHliie.  It  Is  nuw
Cnrxulu  A|H<lliMiin«  nceonnts  for  the  epithet  juNt
mentioned  fniiu  IImi  dark  tuiiwes  of  wood  nitli
wliiiih  it  was  crowned.

Cordax  (KopAn().  An  itxtrmm-Iy  inihrvrnl  daiu-e
)te<;iili:ir  to  the  eontic  chiniw.  (Se*'  Cmiiifs;  Cci-
MitKDIA.)  The  ^{eHtnrcM,  and.  indued,  tb«!  t'otttiimen,
of  the  i-)ii>i-t'Ul:ii<  ivi>i-(<  Kucb  thai  even  IW  AtbtMit*
niiH  oittiHidi-ivd  it  jiisiiliablu  only  at  the  ft'Hlival  of
DirniVKiiM,  wlii-n  o%'i'i'y  one  was  allvntti-d  to  Im)  drniik
111  huiioitr  of  the  (;imI  :  for  if  an  Athenian  citiiieu
danced  tlir-  conlnx  KoUtr  and  iinuiaMkcd,  ht<  wn»
tuokeil  upon  iih  the  imonc  ahniiH-letiH  of  men  and
forfeited  abofri-ihi-r  bin  rlinnii^ter  for  n'ttpreln*
liility  ^Theophr.  I'tinrnrl.  i\).  v\riHliiphiiiifjt  liiiii-
ncLf,  wlio  did  Uoi  itmrfi  Kornjde  at  ^iidutint;  eoni-
nioii  decuney,  rIaiiiiH  koioi*  niiTi{  for  Imh  oiniHttii'ii
of  the  conlux  in  thn  Clutui-,  niid  for  the  num'  inoil-
i'nt  attire  of  hi^  uhurnn  tu  that  phiy.  AL-eortliiig  to
Atbi-inuiuK,  the  conlax  wom  a  Mirt  tif  t'Trii^tx'}^'''  ■*■'
iiiiitutlv»  dane^-.  in  nhieh  tlie  eborentiie  i-xpiviMed
Iho  wonU  of  the  koiij;  l>y  eoniic  ftcnticiilatioiix.
Kiieli  a  dauee  wa»  llir  byporcheiiii>  o\'  the  Sp;irtiLn
4«i<C(Xiicmi — btirtoon*.  wbimo  iH'cnlini'  niintii'  f{f»-
tnrefl  lu-cni  to  havo  formeil  tbi'  bimi>t  of  tli)>  DoHati
coinody,  whieh  pri^vaih'd  in  Mt'ijarit,  mid  whirh
])rohiib)y  was  the  piirenl  Mtoek,  not  only  of  tbi-  At-
lie,  toil  alMi  of  tbe  Sicilian  nnd  Iinlian  itnin'^ly,
Tho  chief  fcadirt'M  of  the  citnlax  aiv  proliahly  pre-
served in  the  Xeapolitnn  tiirunfelfa

Cordftba.  The  modem  Cordova;  oiu*  of  the
largest  eilie.t  in  Spniii.  and  the  capital  of  [(neli4'a.
on  the  t'i^bt  bank  of  the  Uaetiti.  It  iH-eaino  a  Ko-
mau  e^dnny  ti.c.  i'>i,  and  was  the  birtliphu-e  of  thr
two  .St'iH-caH  and  rtf  Kttcan.

CordudnA. Sit-  (ioitl»Ylt.VK.

Ck>rdufli.  Ai'i.i'ii  CiiKMirriL's  A  Roninii  writer
of  hiklory  uho,  under  Tiberiiiet,  in  A.li.  '£},  wao  ao-
oiiBwl  uf  trcnAon  fur  bavin}!  pmi-M.<d  llriiliiA.  ihr
slayer  of  Ciirwir.  iirul  for  styling  faxsiiiit  ■'  ih*'  bisi


(X)IUNTIIIAt.r»  ISTHWrs

4>f  llie  RoinanH"  (Tfie.  Ahh.  iv.:i4),  thoncb  the
cauMj  of  his  proMft-itlion  in  to  1m>  found  iu  so'
expre«8ionH  lIihI  ifiive  offenre  to  Sfianiid,  the  e
prnir's  powerfnl  ininiHler  (!^ii.  ad  Man:  xxii.
UtM^ides  liif*  hit^tory  bt>  :ip|»eant  lo  have  writlei
Work  on  pri»di<;ii;H  (.li/ntiruwdui.and  wa*i  favnnii
known  ax  a  pleader.  Sw  llcid,  De  t'ita  Sci-iplu.
A.  i'rrimHii  Ctinii  (Kehweiduitz.  I'*4lf,  and  Hath
fte  J.  Viemulio  Cortio  (Ehirput,  l4tX»>,

Xor^  (Kopt}}. ''  The  Maiden  ";  »  name  h;  xvU
PenM>phoii<^  in  often  ealled. 8m  Fi:Ri>Ki>iio\e.

Coreuiu  {Kopttrtrot). (It  A  lofty  mountaitr  ^  j^^
Ionia,  four  iiiilea  from Kphe(tn«.  with  a  places ^
the  Manic  nAint>  at  it«  font. (.'.!)  A  town  in  the  isL  ^^^
of  Ceojt.

Corfiuiiutt. The  chief  town  of  tba  Parlif^ii  lu
•Stiitinittni,etrui)g)y  fottifled,  and  inemorubte  us  iff,-
idace  vvhieli  the  llaliuiit<  in  the  Sooial  War  dm-
lined  to  lie  thr  new  cnpilal  of  Italy  in  plaee  nf
KiMiic,  on  which  aeeoiint  il  was  calletl  Italica.

CoitflXitlB i^vptnvf, &€[*^um/ia\dicTtjt). A  laO'
ni^r. The tanners  foniied  a  Euild at Roiae  lUf
■  itnet  from  the  Bhoetnukcrs. Snpe  Pint.  .Vwiaa,  17.

Corinna  iKoptwfa). A  pt^wUtsn  of  Tbebt-s  |fl.  KC,
i9**).  or.  iKi-'onliiij; to  others,  of  Tunap^i,  di«tm*

'  i:iiiHh"<l  for  ber  skill  in  lyric  ven>«,  and  reniarkabVt
tor  her  perAoiial  iittnnltoim. 8he  was  the  rivnl  of

I  I'iiMbir.  wlnli^  the  latt^^r  was  still  a  yonng  tnan;
aiid,  iii-<:oiiliii); to  Aoliaii,  she gainftl  the  vjrtory

I  over  hint  no  b-ss  than  five  times.  Hansjinias,  ia  hit
triivi'lH,  »>aw  at  Tanii^i*a  a  pietnre,  iu  whioh  Corin-

1  na  wait  iv|irosuut«rd  nn  binding  ht-r  IirimI  with  a  61-

)  let  of  viel'Ory,  whii:lj  kIh:  had  t;»ined  in  s  ooiitevL
with  Pindar. Ili-  Mnppos«^M  that  abe  was  Ims  iii-

idebted  f»r  this  vlrtory  to  the  exeellencf  of  hea
pu(*try  (ban  to  her  Boeotian  dialrul,  which  warn
moro  liiiuiliar  to  the  eai>i  of  Hw  juiIrm  »t  tb>
uainos,  and  otso  to  her  exlraontinary  bcaut,w
Corinna  aftorwanlA  assisted  the  yoniig  |KM<t  trit

I  her  odviei'.  It  is  related  of  her  that  she  rvcoi
inendLHl  him  to  uniainent  his  )>oeniH  with  lujtl  ^,.
eal  nurratiotiH;  hut  that  whet>  he  had  rnniiirir  ^.j
a  hymn,  in  Ihi'  timt  lix  verw.*  of  which  isltll  «?;»,  (,
taut)  .ihiioHt  the  »-hoIe  of  ibtt  Tlipban  inythotti^^jj

,  wa«  intrf»i\in-vd,  whe  Kiniltnl  and  saiil,  ''We  show/,/
MOW  with the band,  not with tln>  whoh* sae^"
(Viinsaii. ix.  '^ : Pint.  Iff  lilor.  Ath.). Sho  -w^
Mnrrinnii-d  "tin-  Fly"(Mi'»n).  a«  Krinnn  had  l»«Mn

,  ntyli'd  "llu*  lU'e."  The  pm>iiiK  of  Corinn*  *«-f'ft'
nil  in  the  Boi-ntiaii  or  Afolic  dialect. T<mi  liirJi-

I  of  lii-r  poetry,  however,  hna  Iteen  pn>M*i've<l  lo  al-
low of  our  forminjT  a  luife  jndjEimeut  of  bcr  i»lrfv
of  i-oiii|ioMition.  Thi^  fxlani  fr»j;nK>nts  rwft>r  ina«t-
ly  to  inytlndof;iral  Niibji^rlJi,  partieitlarly  tu  li«li»-
tni'.i  of  t)>«*  ItcMfitian  l*-p'nil!>,  Tbew>  reruoia*  uv
jjivi-n  by  IttTjjk  iit  bis  Portar.  I.jfrM  Onuci  (4th  *4

CoriuthiAcus  Isthmus  ('laBfiot  Kopi^ov)-  A"
iKthnuiM  Lici  wi-fii  till-  Saronientt  8inns  and  Corin*
tbiacns  HiiiiiM,  and  niiiliiit;;  thv  Peloputiutrst)*  I"
tliii  nnrlhrni  partn  of  tirM-ei*.  Ith  biiradlh,  is  I'"
nan-nwL'st  part,  won  leaH  than  six  inile«>  lor  f***
ipiite  five  inlbyi).  It  liiw  lately  Uf^b  brMi  •*«'
by  a  rattal.  Shi|m  wrn-  drawn,  by  nwuu  at  n**'
I'hincry.  from  one  ^ea  to  the  otlnr,  liesr  tt""
town  of  Seboenii«,  over  the  iinrrowMt  pun  <"
tliM  isthiiins,  nhieii  was  called  ^i'oXmi.  TIiI'
eunid  only  bu  aeeouiplished,  hu^^nvt-r,  vilti  tk'
Vf<«*d« nsnally  eniploynl in eumuieree,  or  mtb


"4,


f4


COKINTHIACUS  SINUS


411


COBtNTHUS


Xfft^i,  which  were  light  ships  of  war,  chiefly  used
by  the  Illyriaus  and  MnrtiUiniaiig.  The  tedioiis-
ness  and  expense  ntteniliii<r  ihla  process,  and  still
more  probably  the  difficulty  of  circnmnnrignting
the  Peloponuesiis,  led  to  frequeut  nttenipts,  at
variotie  periods,  for  effecting  a  Jinictiun  between
the  two  seas;  but  all  proved  equally  unsuccess-
ful. Demetrina  Poliorcetes  abandoned  the  enter-
prise, because  it  was  found  that  ttio  two  gulfs
were  not  on  the  same  level.  We  reatl  of  tbu
attempt  having  been  mode  before  his  time  by
Periander  and  Alexander,  and,  subsequently  to
Denietrtns,  by  Inlius  Caesar,  Caligula,  Nero,  and
Merodes  Atticns.  Din  Cnssius  tetls  nearly  the  same
Ktory  about  digging  through  the  iflthmiis  ns  that
which  is  related  to  travellers  at  this  day.  He
says  that  blootl  iasaed  from  the  ground;  that
groans  and  lamentations  were  heard,  and  terrible
apparitions  seen.  In  order  to  stimulate  the  per-
severance of  the  people,  Nero  took  a  spade  ntid
dug  himself  (Dio  Cass.  Ixiii.  16;  and  cf.  Suet.
Xer.  19).  Lucian  informs  ns,  that  Nero  was  said
to  have  liecn  deterred  from  procemling,  by  a  rep-
rpsentntion  made  to  him,  similar  to  that  which
Demetrius  received  respecting  the  unequal  levels
<if  Ilie  two  seas  (Pint.  Oe  Cleom.).  The  Isthmus
of  Corinth  derived  graat  celebrity  from  the  games
wliich  were  celebrated  there  every  five  years  in
honour  of  Palaemon  or  Mclicerta,  and  subsequent-
ly of  Poseidon  (Pansan.  i.  44).  These  contiuneil
ill  vogue  when  the  other  gymnastic  exercises  of
Greece  had  fallen  into  neglect  and  disuse ;  and  it
was  during  their  solemnization  that  the  indepen-
dence of  Greece  waa  proclaimed,  after  the  victory
of  Cyiioscephalne,  by  order  of  the  Roman  Senate
and  people  (Polyb.  xviii.  29;  Liv.  xxxiii.  3*^).  Af-
ter the  destroction  of  Corinth,  the  superinten-
dence of  the  Isthmian  Games  was  committed  to
the  SicyouiauB  by  the  Romans ;  on  its  restora-
tion, however,  by  lulins  Caesar,  the  presidency
of  the  games  again  reverted  to  the
Corinthian  settlers  (Pansan.  ii.  3). See

ISTHMIA.

CorinthlfloiiB  Siniia  ( KopivBtoKos
KoXiTos),  The  modern  Gnlf  of  Le-
paiito,  an  arm  of  the  sea  running
in  between  the  coast  of  Achaia  and
Sicyonia  to  the  smith,  and  that  of
Phocis,  L#ocris,  and  Aetolia  to  the  north.
The  gnlf  had  the  general  appellation
of  Corinthian  as  far  as  the  Isthmus,
but  it  waa  divided  into  smaller  bays,
the  names  of  which  were  sometimes
poetically  used  for  the  entire  gnlf.  Its
(liffereiit  names  were  the  Crissaeau,
C'lrrhnean,  Delphic,  Calydouian,  Rbiau,
ami  Halcyonian.

Coiintliian  Brass. See  Aks.

Cotiathian  Order  of  Architecture.
■Sec  AitcniTKCTURA ;  Capitiu'm  ;  Co-

r.IMVA.

Coriotbus (Kopivdof). A famous
(■itvof  Greece,  situated  on  the  isthmus
"f  llie  same  name. Commanding  by
''"[wsition  the  Ionian  and  the  Aegean
•*M,  ami  holding,  as  it  were,  the  keys
"f  the  Peloponnesus,  Corinth,  from  Ihe  pre-emi-
nent advantages  of  its  situation,  was  already  the
"^tt  of  opulence  and the arts,  while  the  rest
"f  'treece was  sunk in cnuipstrntive ohscuiity


and  barbarism.  Its  origin  is,  of  conrae,  obsouro ;
but  we  are  assured  that  it  already  existe<l  nu-
der  the  name  of  'Etftvpr)  before  the  siege  of  Troy.
According  to  the  assertions  of  the  Corinthians
themselves,  their  city  received  its  name  from
Corinthus,  the  son  of  Zeus;  but  Pansanlas  does
not  cretlit  this  popular  tradition,  and  cites  the
poet  Eumelus  to  show  that  the  appellation  waa
really  derived  from  Corinthus,  the  son  of  Mar-
athon (ii.  1).  Homer  certainty  employs  both
names  indiscriminately  (7/.  ii.  570 ;  xiii.  663).  Pan-
sanias  reports  that  the  descendants  nf  Sisyphns
reigned  at  Corinth  until  the  invasion  of  their  terri-
tory by  the  Dorians  and  the  Heraclidae,  when  Dori-
das  and  Hyanthidaa,  the  last  princes  of  this  race,
abdicated  tlio  crown  in  favour  of  Aletes,  a  de-
scendant of  Heracles,  whose  lineal  successors  re-
maineil  in  {KHisesKion  of  the  throne  of  Corinth  dur-
ing five  generations,  when  the  crown  passed  into
the  family  of  the  Bacchiadae,  so  named  from  Bac-
cbis,  the  son  of  Prnmnis,  who  retained  it  for  five
other  gt'iieratioiiB.  After  this  the  sovereign  power
was  transferred  to  annual  magistrates,  still  chos-
en, however,  from  the  line  of  the  Bacchiadae,  with
the  title  of  iTpxrrayfis.

The  oligaruhy  so  long  established  by  this  rich
and  ))n\verful  family  was  at  length  overthrown,
about  B.C.  629,  by  Cypselns,  who  banished  many
of  the  Corinthians,  depriving  others  of  their  pos-
sessions, and  putting  others  to  death  (Herod,  v.
92).  Among  those  who  lleil  fmm  his  persecution
WHS  Demaratns,  of  the  family  of  the  Bacchiadae,
who  settled  at  Tarqninii  in  Etrnrin,  and  whose
descendants  became  sovereigns  of  Rome.  The
reign  of  Cypselus  was  prosperous,  and  the  system
of  colonization,  which  had  previously  succeeded
so  well  in  the  settlements  of  Covcyra  ami  Syra-
cuse, was  actively  pursued  by  that  prince,  who
added  Ambracla,  Auactorinm,  and  Leucas  to  the
maritime  de|>eudencie8  of  the  Corinthians.


Corinth  ud  ^


Cypselus  was
Oh  the  death  of  ihi* '-»?-*■  "»- "
forty-fonrye*i».»rTr«incniC  i«
pH.-immelicbii»  ramm  "•  ~ii*  ''■


COKINTHUS


J 12


COmXTHDS


At  hh  il(!cva»cr  Ciiriiitli  rufcaiuttl  Uh
iiiilf|n-inltMtce,  v»Ui'ii  li  iii«ilerttt«  uriHtorfitcy  wiu*
t!Stiil)li!>li(Hl,  unt](-r  n  liieli  the  Ui'pnbliL'  eiijoyci)  it
ntittu  uf  trrLnqttillity  itiul  pi'oii|H'ri(y  ntHH|tiiLll<?<l  Uy
any  other  city  ofGrvoc*-.  We  ai-e  l«l»l  l»y  Tliiiuyil-
idnt  tliHl  tli<«  CiiriiitliiaiiH  u«re  the  tlrttt  tu  build
war-gnlleytt  or  trjiiuiies;  nm\  tiie  eartieMt  imval  uu-
};»<;iMi)eiit.  aci-untint;  lo  thu  Hniiie  hiHU>riiio,  wns
fought  l>y  their  llMit  atn\  tliat  nf  tho  Corcyreanit,
whu  liiul  hiiVM  ulienated  rrt>iii  Ihuir  tiiuthur-Statt*
by  the  cniolty  mid  iiii[kuli<;y  of  FeriaiiiltT.  'Thv
city  its  brlic'viMl  u*  have  biid  at  Cbia  time  a  popiiln-
(ioii  of  :)00,fHHI  wtitls.


Cola  or  Corlntti

Tilt!  lutfl  a(  painting  au<l  sciilpttirc.  more  e»pe-
oially  that  of  coAtiiin;  in  hrnnzc,  nttaiiM^l  to  the
'  bighent  porfeotioii  at  Corinth,  ntnl  rendered  this
city  till*  ornament  of  Greene,  until  it  was  atrlpped
by  thit  rnpmrity  nf  a  Rninan  general.  Such  was  the
bi>»uty  <»f  itM  vnfles,  that  the  tombs  in  whiob  they
had  IiwMi  di'i>«Mit(Ml  were  ransacked  by  the  Ro-
man coloniHtM  whom  Inliiui  Catwar  had  efltaltllMbed
Iburv  after  the  doMtritctiun  of  thu  city;  and  iliese,
being  traiiitportcd  to  Romn,  n-»re  purchased  at
enontiona  priuea See  Akm.

WheutbcAebueau  l/eAgiie(q.T.)heCRtno  involved
in  adefltrnetive  war  witli  the  KomanSfCoriuth  wa8
the  lust  hold  of  their  tottering  Republic:  and  boil
ita  uittzena  vrisely  aubmitt'ed  i\>  the  oSers  pro-
poiiiHl  by  the  victoriunii  Mete]lu«.  it  luigbt  have
been  preserved;  but  the  deputation  uf  that  gou-
eral  having  been  treated  with  iicuni  and  even  in-


ifiill-,  the  city  iKtramu  ex]NH4iMl  to  all  tbe  vmgMnn
of  ihe  lIouiANH  (Poljh.  xl.  4. 1). L.  Maiumiiu,  tlkc
cottHid,  nppimn-d  Wforc- iUs  walls  with  a  iiaitii-i-
onn  uriny,  niMl  iiflcr  defeating  tbe  Ai'haeaiiB  in  a
general engitgi-ineiit,  entered tbe  t4iwu,  now  left
wliluHit  defi'iico  and  dc»erie<l  by  tbe  greater  (art
of  the  itdial)itanttt. It  vrnH  then  given  np  to  jiIiiq-
tiar  and finally  net on tire; the  ualU  alwi  vtn
mxed  tn  I  be  groumi,  no  that  scarcely  a  vt^tij^  o(
thji'  oni'o  great  and  uubtr  eity  n^uiaiiied  (d.c  \W'.
rolybiiii*,  who  hhw iIh  de»triietioii,  ultimtcd  liiK
lie  hud tteeu  Ibe liticHt  paiiiltngN  kireued  utt  \\i*
gniiinil,  and the  Honian HoMiera UHlng  ttit-ui  ift
iKianl.i  for  dice  or  drivngbta. Pan»nntaA  rfjutrt*
(vii.  Hi]  that  all  tlie  men  were  pnl  Ui  the  emnrd.
tbo  (voiuen  and  etiildven  Mdd,  nnil  Ihe  ni»Ht  vxliia-
blc  stntneK  and  painting!*  renioveil  to  Rome, t^n^
MfMMtl^g.) Strabo  obm■r^-««  that  the  lnu>«t  wurlc»
uf  art  whieb  julorned  thtit  eupital  in  bi»»  linut  lu*^
come  from  Corinth, lie  likewise  Htatex  ibntCor*-^
luth remained for many  year* deserunl and  i»^*
niiiKj, liilius Caettiir,  however,  not long  btfor^^
liid  tieath,  Mcnt  a  unnieroiia  colony  thither.  I\^ "
nieaui*  of  which Corinth wn-s once more ralse«— l
from ite state of niin, and renamed Colonis^^
Inlia Corinthua. It wiM already a large au^^^
|K>|iulon8  city  aad the  ca]iita1  of  Aehniii,  wbe^^B)
St. Pnnl preached  tho Gospel them for  a  tv^^mT
and  six  moiitha  (Acts,  xviii.  11). It  ia  also  ev^^H-
dent that whcu visiteil by  PnntianiaM it  wa^^
thickly  ndorned  by  public  buildings  and  eiirictie-^=  d
wjlh nniHeroiiH  worka  of  art,  and  aa  latu  a*  ll — ^s  _
time  iif  llt'i'mrlen  nn  Itnd  it  alyled  the  meln^wL ^fl
of  Crpece. In  a  later  age  tbe  Venetians  nedv^^si m
the  plaec  fmni  a  Greek  emperor; Mobnmnicd  ^E  I
took  it  from  iIiimh  in  145?^;  Ibe  Venetians  rw*^  ■^-
ere<l  it  in liSiii},  ami fiirtitied tho  AcrocotioilM.  m»
again; hut  the  Tiirkti  t(N>k it  anew in  1715,  ik  •  xf
mtainwl  it  until  drivnu  fmm  the  rdoiKinnewiN iu
182:2. In  18&8,  Lt  wait  wholly  deatroyed  by  an  ear  &h-


\


^S^-


'J^;^


AMtem  CoTlnib iRmiamUimii


C0RI0LANU8


418


CORNELIA


qiiakr,  ainoe  which  time  it  baa  been  rebuilt  upon
A  nite  tiiree  tnilee  to  the  northeast.

An  important  feature  of  the  Bcenery  around  Cor-
inth waa  the  Acrocorinthiis,  a  mention  of  which
has  been  made  in  a  previous  article.  (See  ACRO-
CORINTHDS.)  On  the  sammit  of  tbia  hill  van
erected  a  temple  of  Aphrodite,  to  whom  the  whole
of  the  Acrocorinthus,  in  fact,  waa  sacred.  In  tiie
timoa  of  Corinthiau  opnlence  and  prosiierity,  it  is
Haid  that  the  shrine  of  the  guddetw  was  attended
by  no  less  than  one  thousand  female  slaves,  dedi-
cated to  her  service  as  conrt«8»nB.  These  priest-
esaea  of  ApfaroiUt^  coutrihut«(l  not  a  little  to  the
wealth  and  liixorj  of  the  city,  whence  arose  the
well-known  expression,  oi  vayrot  a»6p6s  tU  Kopiy-
Bov  itrr  6  jr\ms,  or,  as  Horace  expresses  it  {Epiat.
i.  17,  36),  "XoM  oHxvU  homini  coniingit  adire  CoHn-
thmm,"  ill  allusion  to  its  expensive  pleasures.

Corinth  was  famed  for  its  three  harbours — Le-
chacum,  on  the  Corinthian  Gnlf,  and  Cenchreae  and
Sclioeuus,  on  the  Saronio.  Near  this  last  was  the
Ai'oXxor,  where  vessels  were  transported  over  the
isthmns  by  machinery.  The  city  was  the  birth-
place of  the  painters  Ardicos,  Cleophantns,  and
CleiMithes ;  of  the  statesmen  Periander,  Phidon,
Philolatis,  and  Timoleon;  and  of  Arion,  who  in-
vented the  dithyramb.

See  Wagner,  Rerum  Corinthiacarum  Specimen
{Darmatadt,  1624);  Barth,  Corintkiorum  Cotnmerdi
et  Meroaturae  Huloriae  Particula  (Berlin,  1844);
and  E.  Cnrtius,  Peloponnaot,  vol.  ti.  p.  514  foil.

Corioluraa,  Gaius  Marcius.  A  distingnished
Homan  of  patrician  rank,  whose  story  forms  a
brilliant  legend  in  the  early  history  of  Rome.  Bis
name  at  first  was  Gains  Marcius,  bnt  having  con-
tribnte«1,  mainly  by  his  great  personal  valour,  to
the  capture  of  (^orioli,  and  the  defeat  of  a  Volscian
army,  assembled  for  ita  aid,  on  the  same  day,  he
receive<l  fur  this  gallant  exploit  the  surname  of
Coriolsiina.  Kot  long  after  this,  however,  dnring
a  scarcity  at  Borne,  he  opposed  the  distribution  of
a  supply  of  provisions,  in  part  sent  by  Gelon  of
Sicily,  and  advised  the  patricians  to  make  this  a
means  of  recovering  the  power  which  had  been
wrested  from  them  by  the  commons.  For  this  and
other  conduct  of  a  similar  nature,  he  was  tried  iu
the  Comitia  Tribnta  and  condemned  to  perpetual
banishment.  To  gratify  his  vindictive  spirit,  Corio-
launs  preseuted  himself  as  a  suppliant  to  Tullins
Aufidiiis,  the  leading  man  among  the  Volsci ;  wah
well  retHiived  by  him  and  the  whole  nation;  and,
WAT  being  decLired,  was  invested,  along  with  An-
lidins,  with  the  command  of  the  Volscian  forces.
By  bis  military  skill  and  renown  Coriolanas  at
nnoe  defeatml  and  appalled  the  Romans,  till,  hav-
ing taken  almost  all  their  snbject-cities,  he  ad-
vanced at  the  head  of  the  Yolscian  army  against
Rome  itself  and  encamped  only  five  miles  from  it,
at  the  Fossae  Cluiliae.  AU  was  terror  and  confu-
sion iu  the  Roman  capital.  Embassy  after  embas-
sy was  sent  to  Coriolanus,  to  entreat  him  to  spare
bis  country,  but  he  remained  inexorable,  and  would
grant  peace  only  on  condition  that  the  Romans
restormi  all  the  cities  and  lands  which  they  bad
taken  from  the  Volsci  and  gave  to  the  latter  the
freedom  of  Rome,  as  had  been  dune  in  the  case  of
the  Loitins.  After  all  otiter  means  of  concitiatinn
liatl  faileil,  a  number  of  Roman  matrons,  headed  by
tlie  mother  (Veturia)  and  the  wife  (Vohinniia)  of
Curiolanus,  proceeded  to  bis  tent,  where  their  lofty
remonstrances  were  more  powerful  than  the  arms  of


Rome  had  proved  ;  and  the  son,  after  a  hrl^  struf;-
gle  with  his  teeliugs,  yielded  to  their  request,  ex-
claiming at  the  same  time,  *' Oh,  mother,  thou  hast
saved  Rome,  bnt  destroyed  thy  son !"  The  Volscian
forces  were  then  withdrawn,  and  Rome  was  thus
saved,  by  feminine  infiuence  alone,  from  certain
capture.  On  returning  to  the  Volsoi  with  his  army,
Coriolanus,  according  to  one  account,  was  sum-
moned to  trial  for  bis  conduct,  and  was  slain  iu  a
tumult  during  the  hearing  of  the  cause,  a  faction
having  been  excited  against  him  by  TulUus  Anfld*
ius,  who  was  Jealous  of  his  renown  (Dion.  Hal.  Ant.
Rom.  viii.59).  According  to  another  statement,  he
lived  to  an  advanced  age  among  the  Volscian  |»eo*
pie,  often  towards  the  close  of  his  life  exclaiming,
"  How  miserable  is  the  state  of  an  old  man  in  ban-
ishment!" (Plut.  CwJof.;  Liv.ii.33folI.).  Niobuhr,
who  writes  the  name  Guaeus  Marcias,  on  wiiat  he
considers  goofl  authoiity,  indulges  in  some  acute
speculations  on  the  legend  of  Coriolanus.  He
thinks  that  )toetical  invention  has  here  most  thor-
oughly stifled  the  historical  hndilion.  He  regards
the  name  Coriolanus  as  of  the  same  kind  merely
with  such  appellations  as  CamerinuM,  Cullntinus,
Miigilinnus,  Vibninnus,  etc.,  which,  when  tiikeu
from  an  independent  town,  were  assumed  by  its
irp6$tvot,  when  from  a  tieitendent  one,  by  its  patnh
ntu.  The  capture  of  Curioli  belongs  merely,  in  his
opinion,  to  an  heroic  poem.  As  for  Coriolanus  liim-
self,  lie  thinks  that  be  merely  attended  the  Volscian
standard  as  leader  of  a  band  of  Roman  exiles.  The
story  of  Coriolanns  has  received  a  brilHaot  setting
from  the  genius  of  Shakespeare.

CorifiU.  AtAwu  iu  Latiuin,ctipital  of  the  Volsci,
from  the  capture  of  which,  in  B.c.  49S,  Gains  Mar-
cius obtained  the  surname  of  Coriolanus.  See
Coriolanus.

Corippua,  Flavius  Crbsconius.  An  African
scholar,  who  in  the  second  half  of  the  sixth  century
A.D.  composed  two  historical  epics — une  in  seven
hooks  (or  eight),  iu  celebration  of  the  Libyan  war
of  lobannes  Patricins  lIoka«ni$,  fire  de  BelH$  Libg-
cm);  and  the  other  on  the  exploits  of  lustinuH
(a.D.  Sav-STS),  in  four  books  (De  Laudibua  /MftNi).
The  latter  is  in  the  wont  manner  of  Byzantine  flat-
tery, bnt  is  written  in  a  flowing  style  and  in  imita-
tiou  of  good  models,  such  as  Vergil  and  Cluudian.
His  works  have  been  edited  by  I.  Bekker,  with
those  of  Merobaudes  (q.  v.),  iu  the  Corp.  Scriptorum
Bgzant.  (Bonn,  1836).  The  most  recent  text  is  that
of  Petschenig  (Beriin,  1886).  On  the  style  of  Co-
rippns,  see  the  monograph  by  Ainaun,  De  Corippo
Priorum  Poelarnm  Lat.  Imitatcre  (Oldenb.  1885).

CoxmAaa  [Kopftatra).  An  inland  town  of  Pam-
pbylia,  or  of  Pisidia,  taken  by  the  consul  Maiilius.

Com  Lawa. See  Frumkntariak  Lkoes.

Cornelia.  (I)  A  daughter  of  Scipio  Africanus
Maior,  and  mother  of  Tiberius  and  Gains  Gracchus.
Cornelia  occupies  a  high  rauk  for  the  purity  and  ex-
cellence of  her  private  character,  as  well  as  for  her
inascnline  tone  of  mind.  She  was  married  to  Sem-
pronius  Gracchus,  and  was  left  on  bis  death  with  a
family  of  twelvechildren,  the  care  of  whom  devolved
entirely  upon  herself.  Afterthelossof  her  husband,
her  hand  was  sought  by  Ptolemy  Pliilometor,  king
of  Egypt,  bnt  the  nfier  was  tleclined.  Plutarch
Hpeaka  in  high  terms  of  her  conduct  during  widow-
liood.  Having  lost  all  her  children  bnt  three — one
tlanghter,  who  was  married  to  Scipio  Africanus  the
younger,  and  two  sons,  Tilwrius  and  Gains  — abe


COUNELIA  GENS


414


OORNU  COPIAE


devoted  Iter  whole  time  to  the  education  of  these.
Valerius  MaximnH  relates  au  auecdoto  of  Cornelia,
which  has  often  been  cited.  A  Cainpanian  lady,
who  was  at  the  time  oti  a  visit  to  her,  having  dis-
played to  Cornelia  eonie  very  beantiful  oniumenta
which  she  poaseased,  desired  the  latter,  in  return,
to  exhibit  her  own.  The  Roman  mother  purposely
detained  her  in  oonvei'satioii  until  her  children  re-
turned from  wshool,  when,  pointing  to  them,  she
exclaimed,  "These  are  my  ornaments!"  (Haec  mr-
nameHta  mea  auvt,  Val.  Max.  4  tuit.).  Plutarch  in-
fonuB  us  that  some  persons  blame<1  Cornelia  for
the  rash  conduct  of  her  sons  in  after-life,  she
having  been  accnstomed  to  reproach  them  that
she  was  still  called  the  mother-in-law  of  Scipio,
not  the  mother  of  the  Oracchi  (Pint.  T.  Graceh,
6).  She  bore  the  untimely  death  of  her  sons
with  great  self-control,  and  a  statue  was  after-
wards erected  in  honour  of  her  by  the  Roman
people,  bearing  fur  an  inscription  the  words  "Cor-
nelia, mother  of  the  Gracchi"  (Plut.  C  Graceh.  4).
(2)  Daughter  of  Metellns  Scipio,  married  to  Pcim-
pey  after  the  death  of  her  first  husband,  Publins
Crassus.  She  was  remarkahle  for  the  variety  of
her  accomplishments  and  the  excellence  of  her
private  character.  Plutarch  makes  her  to  have
been  versed,  not  only  in  the  musical  art,  but  in
polite  literature,  in  geometry,  and  in  the  precepts
of  philosophy  (Pint.  Pomp.  55).  After  the  battle
of  Phai-saluH,  when  Pompey  joined  her  at  Mitylen^,
Cornelia,  with  tears,  ancribed  all  his  misfortunes  to
her  nriiou  with  hiiu,  alluding  at  the  same  time  to
the  unhappy  end  of  tier  first  hnsband,  Crassus,  in
his  ex|>editiou  against  the  Parthians.  (Cf.  Lucan,
viii.  88.)  She  was  also  a  witness,  from  her  galley,
of  the  murder  of  her  husband  on  the  shores  of
Egypt  (Pint.  Pomp.  79).  (3)  A  daughter  of  Cinna.
81ie  was  Inlins  Cnefiar's  second  wife,  and  mother  of
lulia,  tlio  wife  of  Pompey.  She  died  young.  PIu-
tarcli  says  it  had  been  the  custom  at  Rome  for  the
aged  women  to  have  funeral  panegyrics,  but  not
the  young.  Caesar  first  bmhe  through  this  custom
by  pronouncing  one  njmn  Cornelia  (Pint.  Caet.i).

Cornelia  Oena.  The  most  distingntshed  of  all
the  Roman  geiites.  All  its  great  families  belonged
to  the  patrician  order.  The  names  of  its  most  dis-
tinguished patrician  families  are  Cethegns,  Cinna,
CoBSUB, Dolabella. Lentulns, Scipio,  and  Snlla.  The
names  of  the  plebeian  families  are  Balbus  and
Gall  US.

Cornelia  Oreatilla. Sue  Oiikstilla.

ComeliuB  Nepos. Sec  Xepos.

ComlCoeii.  A  horn-blower  in  the  Roman  army
who  gave  the  signal  for  tlie  attack,  on  an  ox-horn
mounted  in  silver. See  CoRsr.

ComictUuin.  A  town  in  Liit-inm  in  the  moun-
tains  north  of  Tihnr,  ceh'brated  as  the  i-esidence
of  the  parents  of  Servins  Tullins.

ComlficluB.  (1)  Ql'INTUS,  a  contemporary  of
Cicero,  distingnished  for  talents  and  literary  ac-
quirements, who  attainc4l  to  some  of  the  highest
oflBces  in  the  State,  Catullus  and  Ovid  both  speak
of  his  poetic  abilities,  and  he  apjtears  to  have  been
the  friend  of  both.  CorniticiusdiHtinguished  him-
self as  propraetor  in  the  Illyrian  War,  and  also  as
governor  of  Syria  and  nfterwanla  of  Africa.  In
this  latter  province  he  espoused  the  cause  of  the
Senate  after  Caesar's  death,  and  received  and  gave
protection  to  those  who  had  beeu  proscrilted  by


the  Second Trinmvirute.  He  lostbi0life,howem.
while  contending  in  that  country  against  SextinK.
who  had  beeu  sent  against  him  by  OctavianuK
Some  scholars  make  this  Comiflcins  to  have  betu
the  author  of  the  rhetorical  treatise  to  Hersnnioft
comuiouly  ascribed  to  Cicero.  (See  Qniut.  iii.  1. 21.)
He  is  said  also  to  have  been  an  enemy  of  VergilV
bat  this  supposition  violates  cbrauolog;^',  since  ibf
poet  only  became  eminent  subsequent  to  the  dttr
when  Corniflcius  died.  (3)  LuciVS,  a  partiwu  of
Octavianus,  by  whom  he  was  appoiuted  to  acciiw
Brutus,  before  the  public  tribunal  at  Borne,  nf  tbf
assassination  of  Caesar  (Pint.  Brut.  37).  He  aftir-
wards  distinguished  himself,  as  one  of  Octavianao
lientenants,  by  a  masterly  retreat  in  Sicily  dnritif;
the  war  with  Sextus  Pompeius.  He  was  conMil,
B.C.  35.

Comlger.  "Horn -bearing."  A  snmamr  of
Bacchus  (Ovid,  F^t,  iii.  481),  and  of  lupiter  Aid-
mou,  who  was  worshipped  in  the  form  of  a  ram.

Comu.  A  wind  iustmment,  anciently  made  of
horn,  but  afterwards  of  brass  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  llTi
AccordingtoAthenaeus,  it  was  an  invention  of  il»
Etroscans.  Like  the  (aba,  it  differed  from  ttw
(tbia  in  being  a  larger  and  more  powerful  insini-
ment,  and  from  the  iuha  itself  in  being  carvfd
nearly  in  the  shape  of  a  C,  with  a  crosspiece  to
steady  the  iustrument  for  the  convenience  of  \\w
performer.  lu  Greek  it  is  called  <rrf>oyyvXi}  o-oA-
TTiyl.  It  bad  no  stopples  or  pings  to  adjust  tlie
scale  to  any  particnlar  mode;  the  entire  seritw  of
notes  was  produced  without  keys  or  holes,  by  tb«
modification  of  the  breath  and  of  the  lips  at  tbe
mouthpiece.  Probably,  from  the  description  given
of  it  in  the  poets,  it  was,  like  our  own  horn,  an  oc-
tave lower  than  the  trumpet.  The  c/aisioMm,  wliicb
originally  meant  a  signal,  rather  than  the  mnnical
itiBtrumeut  which  gave  the  signal,  was  ugusIIt
sounded  with  the  coruu.


CornoA. (BanhoUnL)

Cornu  also  signifies  the  end  of  the  Bailyaida  fsw
Navis),  a  part  of  the  helmet  in  which  the  crest  vsx
fixed  (see  Galka),  tbe  end  of  the  stick  on  wUieb
books  were  rolled  (see  Lisek),  a  part  of  a  bov. »
part  of  the  lyre,  and  the  wing  of  an  army. S«e

EXERCITUS.

Comu  Coplae,  or  as  one  word,  Conxncwpiae.  la-
ter Comacopia  (Ammian.  Marccll.  xxii. 9, i  1 ;  xxt-
a,  §3).  The  horn  of  fmitfnlneasand  abaudanw.nw<l
as  the  syniliol  of  plenty.  In  mythology  ther»  an-
two  different  tales  explaining  tbe  origin  of  (h<*
horn.  One  traces  it  to  the  horn  of  the  goat  Amtl-
thea,  which  suckled  Zeus.  The  horn  was  brokfo
off  and  filled  with  fruits  and  flowers,  and  was  aftf  ^
wants  placeil  by  Zens,  togt'tlior  with  the  gottt,  tmt*»f
the  stars. (See  Amalthka.) Another  legend  rr-


CORNUS


416


CORONA


lates  that  it  was  the  horn  of  the  riv«r-go<1  AcheloilB
(q.  v.),  which  was  wrenched  off  by  Heracles,  and
which  became  forthwith  a  horti  of  pleuty.  Later
mythologists  combined  the  two  tales,  and'  (vied  to
^xplaiD  bow  the  horu  of  Amalthea  became  the  horn
of  AcheloilH  (Apollod.  ii.  7,  $  5).  The  origin  of  this
syDiboI  may  perhaps  be  traced  in  the  use  of  the
horns  of  oxeu  or  goats  asdrinking-cnps;  heucetlie
pvToy,  or  drinkiDg-hom,  which  is  freqneiitly  con-
fonnded  with  the  horn  of  abundance  (Atben.  xi.
468  d,  497  c).

The  comncopia  constantly  appears  in  works  of
art,  especially  of  the  Roman  period,  as  the  syinliol
of  abnudance  associated  with  varions  deitieti,  ns
Fortnna,  Ceres,  etc. See  Copia.

Comna  (Kopcor).  A  town  in  the  western  part  ofr
Sardinia  (LWy,  xxiii.  40, 41).

ComntOB,  L.  Annaecs.  A  Greek  philosopher,
bom  at  Leptis  in  Africa,  who  lived  and  taught  at
Home  during  tbe  reign  of  Nero.  The  appellation
L.  Annaens  appears  to  indicate  a  client  or  freed*
man  of  the  Seneca  family.  His  tenets  were  those
of  the  Stoio  sect,  and  his  name  was  not  without
diHtinctiou  in  that  school  of  philosophy.  He  ex-
celled in  criticism  and  poetry;  but  his  principal
studies  were  of  a  philosophical  character.  His
merit  as  s  teacher  of  the  Stoic  doctrine  sufficient-
ly appears  from  his  having  been  the  preceptor  of
tbe  satirist  Persiiis.  Persitis,  dying  before  bis  mas-
ter, left  him  his  library,  with  a  considerable  sum
of  money ;  bnt  Coruntns  accepted  only  the  books,
and  gave  the  money  to  the  sisters  of  his  ]>npil.
Tbe  poet  Lucau  was  also  one  of  his  students.  Under
Nero,  Comutns  was  driven  into  exile  (A.D.  G8)  for  his
freedom  of  speech.  The  omi)eror  having  written
several  books  in  verse  on  tbeaffairBofSome,andhi8
flatterers  advising  him  to  continue  tbe  pocui,  tbe
honest  Stoic  had  the  conrnge  to  remark  that  be
doubted  whether  so  large  a  work  would  be  read;
and  when  it  was  urged  that  Chrysippiis  had  writ-
ten aa  much,  he  replied, "  His  writings  were  useful
to  mnnkiud."  After  so  unpardonable  an  oHence
against  imperial  vanity,  the  only  wonder  is  that
Comntus  escaped  with  his  life.  He  composed  some
tragedies,  and  a  large  number  of  other  works,  tbe
only  one  of  which  that  bas  come  down  to  us  is  the
"Theory  concerning  the  Nature  of  the  Gods"  (Ofw-
pia  irtpl  T^s  Tvy  QtSti/  ^vcrcoar),  oi*,  As  it  is  entitled
in  one  of  tbe  MSS.,  "  Concerning  Allegories  "  {Utpl
'AXkjjyopiav).  CornutuB,  in  fact,  in  this  production
seeks  to  explain  the  Greek  mythology  on  allegori-
cal and  physical  principles.  It  bas  been  edited  by
Lang  (Leipzig,  IBSl).  See  Jahu's  prolegomena  to
bis  Persius,  p.  viii.

Coroeboa  (Kopotffoe).  (1)  A  Phrygian,  tbe  son  of
Mygdon.  He  loved  Cassandra,  and  for  that  reason
fought  on  the  side  of  the  Trojans.  (2)  An  Elean,
who  gained  the  victory  in  tbe  stadium  at  tbe
Olympic  Games,  B.C.  776,  from  which  time  the
Olympiads  begin  to  be  reckoned. See  Calenda-

KICM.

Corolla. See  Corona.

CoroUaxinin.  A  present  consisting  of  a  garland
of  gold  or  silver  leaves,  given  to  successful  actors
and  performers  in  addition  to  other  honoraria.  It
thas  became  a  term  for  any  free  gift  whatever.

Corona  (irritfMvos).  A  crown;  that  is,  a  oircn-
lar  ornament  of  metal,  leaves,  or  fiowers,  worn  by
tbe  ancients  round  the  head  or  neck,  and  used  as


a  festive  as  well  as  funeral  decoration,  and  as
a  reward  of  talent,  military  or  uaval  prowess,
and  oivio  worth.  It  includes  tbe  synonyms,  fur
which  it  is  often  used  absolutely,  trTt(l>avj},  (rr<'-
*f>OT,  irrtiftdwfia,  corolla,  aertam,  "a  garland  or
wreath."

Tbe  use  of  crowns  ou  public  and  private  occa-
sions was  BO  general  in  antiquity  that  tbero  was  a
special  literature  ou  the  subject,  of  which  we  have
remains  in  Theopbrastns  (Bi»t.  Fl.  vi.  6),  Athe-
naeuB  (lib.  xv.),  Pliny  {H.  2f.  xxi.  $$  1-70,  xxii.
$$  4-13),  and  Pollux  (vi.  ]0<>-107).  At  Rome  Clau-
dius Saturniuus  wrote  a  book  De  Coronis  (TortuU.
De  Cor.  Mil.  7,  10, 12j.

Crowns  originally  consisted  of  wool  or  tbo  foli-
age of  trees,  especially  myrtle-twigs  or  ivy,  with
which  flowers  of  various  kinds  were  subsequently
interwoven.  Tbe  makers  and  sellers  of  these  gar-
lands or  orowuB  formed  a  distinct  trade,  and  were
called  in  Greece  (rrc^to/wXoKot  or  tm<f>a»oiroioif
and  in  Rome  coronarii  (Pliu.  xxi.  $$  54, 177).

The  fiowers  used  in  making  crowns  were  called
in  Greek  tni<ftavufuiTa,Sn  Latin  oormiameata.

The  foliage  and  flowers  were  sometimes  fast-
ened together  by  the  inner  bark  of  the  linden-
tree,  sncb  garlands  being  known  as  coronae  autileSf
also  nexae  and  twtae.  At  Athens,  the  flower-mar-
ket was  called  a!  pvppivai,  because  myrtle  {jivpros)
was  tbe  material  most  commonly  nseit  in  making
them.  Many  of  the  flower-girls  were  celebrated
in  antiquity,  esjiecially  tilycora  tbe  mistress  of
Pansias  (Pliu.  H.  N.  xxi.  $  4;  xxxv.  $  125).

At  Rome,  the  temple  of  the  Lares,  at  the  head
of  the  Via  Sacra,  was  most  frequented  by  tho
venders  of  garlands.  The  crowns  among  the  Ro-
mans wei*e  often  made  of  tbe  leaves  of  plants,  es-
pecially ivy,  myrtle,  and  parsley.  At  Athens,  the
violet'was  very  }H>pnlar,  but  both  the  Greeks  and
Romans  preferred  tbe  rose  to  any  other  flower,
calling  it  "tbo  king  of  flowers"  and  "the  rose  nf
tbe  loves."  (Bee  Acbill.  Tat.  ii.  1;  Anacr.  5.)
They  were  especially  used  for  convivial  crowns;
and  garlands  of  tbem  were  in  request  at  Rome
even  iu  tbe  winter,  so  that  they  were  grown  uuder
glass  (Mart.  iv.  22,  5;  xiii.  127),  and  wore  also  im-
ported from  Egypt  (Mart.  vi.  80).  As  luxnry  in-
creased, tbe  leaves  of  tho  narda»  or  spikenard
were  broogbt  from  India  for  crowns  (Mart.  xiii.
51;  Pliu.  H.  N.  xxi.  $  11).  Garlands  were  also
made  of  dried  flowera,  especially  of  niuaranth,
which,  when  moistened,  had  tbo  appearance  of
fresh  flowers,  so  that  garlands  of  it  were  called
oorona€  hibernae.  The  same  name  was  given  to
crowns  of  artificial  flowers  (Plin.  xxi.  $  5).  Some-
times they  were  made  of  a  thin  layer  of  metal  cov-
ered with  gold  or  silver,  and  called  coroUae  or  co-
rollaria  inaurata  or  inargentata.

The  corona  Etrvsca  was  made  of  pure  gold  in  tbe
form  of  leaves,  sometimes  set  with  gems,  and  ter^
minatiug  in  ribbons  {lemwisci)  of  the  same  metal.
It  was  held  by  a  slave  over  tbe  head  of  a  general
when  be  entered  Rome  iu  triumph  (Plin.  xxxiii.

Ml).

Crowns  adorned  with  such  pendent  ribbons
were  called  corowoe  lemni*cat€ie  (Serv.  ad  Verg.  Jen.
V.  269,  vi.  772).  The  leninisci  {XrffiviirKOi)  weru  first
made  of  wool,  atlonied  with  ribbons  (from  X^i>or,
"  wool,"  Fest.  p.  155,  M.),  afterwards  of  linden-bast,
and  subsequently  of  gold.  Cmwns  bo  adorned
were  tbe  highest  rewards  of  victors,  whence  Cice-
ro speaks  of  palma  lemnitcata,  where  paltna  means


CORONA


416


COKON'A


Corona  Rsdiata


A  viotury  or tlie higliettt  re^ranl {  Rmc  Am.  35,

100).

Coronae longae reseiubleil what  wo call fes-

ttMina,  and  were  employed  to  decorate  the  doors

tif  houses,  teuiples,  atiiphitbeatres,  etc.  (Ovid,  Fatt.

iv.  738).

The  corona  pactilU,  probably  the  enme  aa  the  co-
rona plectilU  of  Plantus  (Baock.  i.  1,  37),  corona  tor-

<a(Propert  iii.20, 18),plexa  (Lucret.  v.  1399),  aud  as

the  <rri<^vot  irXticroi  and  icvXioror  arttfiavoe  of  the

Qreeks,  was  made
of  flowers,  shrubs,
graas,  ivy,  wool,  or
any  flexible  material
twined  oi-twisted  ti>-
gether,  aud  there-
fore opposed  to  the
corona  autilia  do-
scribed  above.

Corona  radiata  was
one  assigued  to  the
gods  or  to  deifled
heroes,  and  hence
was  assumed  by  the
later  emperors  in
token  of  tlieirdiviu-

ity. They  may  be  soeu  on  many  of  the  imperial

coins.

Coronae  tonsae  were  made  of  leaves  only,  closely

-cut,  aa  for  inslaiice

of  the  olive  (Verg.

Jen.  V.  556).

Crowns  were  also

iimoug  the  RouiauH

the  highest  diHtiur-

tion awarded for

service  iu  war. Tlie

most coveted were

the  corona  triumpha'

lis  or  laurel  urowu  of

ageneral  in  triumph;

and  the  corona  obsi-

dionalia,  presented

to  a  general  by  the

army  which  he  liiul

saved  from  a  siege,

or  from  a  Bbauieful  capitnlatimi. This  was  wnvi-n

of  grass  gniwing  on  the  spot,  and called  corona

graminea. The  corona  myrtea,  or  ovoUb,  was  the

crown  of  bay  worn  by  the  general  who  celebrated

the  lesser  triumph  (oratio).


Coroua  Tiiumphalla (HedallioD
of  VeutldluB.)


Comnn  OtMldionallH.


Corona  CirioL


CoroDB  CastreDstB-


The  corona civiea  was of  oak  leaves,  and  was
awarded for saving n citizen's life in battli>.


This  HucnrtMl  for  its  possessor  certain  pririle^M,
as  freeiloni  from  taxes  for  himself,  his  father,  ud
paternal  grandfather.  The  golden  oonma  manJu,
with  embattled
ornaments,  was
given  for  the
storming  of  a
w  al  I ;  the  corona
castrentia  or  ralta-
riSf  also  of  gold,
and  ornamented
in  imitation  of
palisades,  to  the
soldier  who  first
climbed  the  wall
of  the  eueui  y's
*camp ;  the  corona
navalia,  with  nrna-
ments  represent-
ing the  beak  of
a  ship,  to  the  man
who  first  board-
ed a  ship.  Un-
der the  Empire,  the  garland  of  bay  was  reserved
exclnsively  for  the  emperor,  and  thnn  came  to  W
regarded  as  a  crown.
The  rayed  cromi.
the  tHV^HC  of  the  dei-
fied emperors,  was  oot
woru  by  the  emper-
ors of  the  firet  and
aeoond  ceotory  a.d.
Qolden  crowus  werf
originally  the  free
offerings  of  provin-
oials  and  allies  to
victorious  generals  for  the  celebration  of  ibrir
triumphs.  Rut  from  this  custom  there  amar),
1  even  in  republi-
can times,  the
habit  of  com-
;  pelling  a  contri-
bution of  money
(aurnm  coronari'
urn)  to  the  gov-
ernor of  the  prov-
ince. During
the  imperial  age
this  contribu-
tion was  on  exceptional  occasions  nffierrd  a->  <•
present  to  the  emjierors,  but  it  was  often  al^'
maiie  compulsory.

Among  the  Qreeks,  a  crown  {irri<ftapot)  was  ofl^n
an  I'nildem  of  office. At  Athens,  for  instsnrr.  a

crown  of  baj
was  wont  liy  lb*"
archons  in  »f-
fioe,  the  senatoi*

OSovXcVTOl), *0^

the  orators  whiW
speaking.  I'
was  also  the  em-
blem of  victory
at  the  games,
and  a  token  of
distinrtion  for
citirensofiofrit-
(See  THEATRU.M.)  Such  crowns  of  honour  wrn-
made  originally  of  olive  branches,  bnt  lal«r  of
gold.  The  honour  of  a  crown  could  Iw  cwuferrvd
by  the  people  or  the  Senate,  or  by  oorporati«»


Curona  Mural  la


Corona  Navalla


CORONATI  QUArrUOR


417


COifciSEN


and  forei^  States.  The  latter  would  often  pre-
sent a  crown  to  the  vbole  cummou wealth.  If  the
people  or  Senate  pretteiiteil  the  crown,  the  presen-
tntioD  took  place  in  the  great  assembly  or  in  the
Senate  -  house,  but  not  in  the  theatre  except  by
sptrcial  decree.  See  Garcke,  De  Boratii  Corollia
(Altcubnrg,  It^);  and  Oaremberg  and  Saglio,
Diciiomtiaire  de»  JHtiquit4>,  8.  v. "Corona";  and  on
faneral  crowns  the  article  Funus.

Coronatl  Qnattnor.  The  name  given  to  fonr
Christian  martyrs  (Carpopliorns,  Severos,  Sereria-
nnM,'Vict«rinas),ki]1e<I,  according  to  the  tradition,
by  having  crowns  with  sharp  nails  pressed  down
into  their  heads  (a.d.  304).  The  Catholic  Church
comnionioratea  their  martyrdom  on  November  S.
See  Erbeij,  iu  the  Zeit4chri/t  fiir  Kirchengeaekickte,
V.  466  (1882).

Coroii6  (Kofrnvi).  A  town  in  Messenia  on  the
west  side  of  the  Messeuian  Gulf,  founded  b.c.  371
by  the  Messenians,  after  their  rctarn  to  their  na-
ti%'e  country,  with  the  aasistanoe  of  the  Thebaus.

CoTonea  (Kofmvua).  A  town  in  Boeotia,  sonth-
west  of  Lake  CopaTs,  and  a  member  of  the  Boeo-
tian League.  (  See  BoKOTARCHBa ;  Boeotia.  )
Here  in  b.C.  447,  the  Boeotiaus  defeated  the  Athe-
niuuH ;  and  in  b.c.  394,  the  allied  Greeks  were  de-
feated by  Agesilatts  (q.  v.).

Coronia  (Kopavis).  (1)  Daughter  of  Phlegyas,
and  mother  by  Apollo  of  Aesculapius,  who  is  hence
calle«)  Coronides.  See  Aescuij^fiub.  (3)  Daugh-
ter of  Phoronens,  king  of  rhocis,  metamorphosed
by  Atbeu6  into  a  orow  wheu  pursued  by  Poseidon,

CoTMila  (Kopavit).  The  cornice  of  an  entabla-
tare.  The  pure  Latin  woi'd  is  corona  or  ooronix
(Vitmv.  V.  a,  3).

Corpna  IiuoilptlSnuiiL See  Epiukapuy.

Corpoa  Inria  ClvlliB.  The  name  given  since
the  sixteenth  century  to  the  great  collection  of
anthortties  on  Roman  law,  mode  by  the  lawyer
Tribonianus,  of  Sidd  iu  Piimphylia,  at  the  instance
of  the  KaHtern  emperor  Justinian  (a.d.  527-!>65).
To  this  collection  we  owe  the  preservation  of  the
treaaures  of  the  aucieut  Jurisprudence,  which  must
certainly  otherwise  have  been  lost.  The  Corpus
Ivria  consists  of  fonr  parts :

(1)  CoDRX  luariNiANBUS,  called  repetitae  prae-
Itctionit,  as  being  the  revised  edition  of  a  code  now
lost,  but  which  had  appeared  in  5S9.  This  was
published  in  534,  and  contains  in  twelve  books  the
imperial  law  {iut  principale),  or  the  canBtituttones
of  the  emperors  since  Hadrian.

{i)  Pani>&CTab,  or  Diorsta.  The  law  of  the
Jurists  (iiM  vetuH).  These,  published  a.d.  5^13,  are
extracts  from  the  works  of  thirty-nine  ancient  ju-
rists, arranged  iu  fifty  books,  according  to  subjects.

(3)  IN8T1TUT10NB8.  A  handbook  of  Jurispru-
dence, fouinled  mostly  upon  Gains,  and  published
iu  the  same  year.

(4)  KoVEiXAE  (co«»titutione«)f  or  supplementary
onliDauces  of  Justinian,  mostly  in  Greek.  These
are  preserved  only  in  private  collections  of  various
compass,  one  of  which,  the  Aalkenttcum  or  JAber
AuthenlicorMm,  was  reci>gnized  as  the  authorized
text,  and  gives  the  Greek  rescripts  iu  a  Latin  ver-
sion. The  best  modern  editioti  of  the  Corpus  Turin
Ctrilia  is  that  by  Mommseu,  Scholl,  nud  Kriiger
(Berliu,4thed.  l»4&-88).

Coxnus. One  indicted  jointly  with another
penon. See  Oblioationsh;  Recs.
n


Corrfgia.  (1)  A  shoe-string,  sometiniee  made  uf
dog-skin  (Plin.  H.  A',  sxx.  {  li.^).  (2)  A  whip-lasb
or  reiu  (Edict.  Dioclet.  p.  26>

CotbI  {Kvpvtoi).  (1)  The  inhabitants  of  Corsica.
(3)  The  inhabitants  of  part  of  northern  Sardinia,
who  came  originally  from  Coraica.

Corsica  An  island  of  the  Mediterranean,  called
by  the  Greeks  Kvpvos.  Its  inhabitants  were  styled
by  the  same  people  Kvpviot ;  by  the  Romans,  Corsi.
In  later  times  the  island  took  also  the  name  of
Corsis  (f)  Kopiris).  The  inhabitants  were  a  rude
race  of  mountaineers,  indebted  for  their  subsist-
ence more  to  the  produce  of  their  flocks  than  to
the  cultivation  of  the  soil.  Seneca,  who  was  ban-
ished to  this  quarter  in  the  reign  of  Clandiuci,
draws  a  very  unfavourable  picture  of  the  island  and
its  inhabitauts;  describing  the  former  as  rocky,
unproductive,  and  unhealthy,  and  the  latter  aa  the
worst  of  barbarians  (Seu.  De  Coii«ol.  ad  Ifelr.  c.  0,
8).  His  lines  upon  the  character  of  the  Corsicaus
are  still  remembered  by  them  with  resentment,
and  are  as  follows :

Prima  est  ulGiM-l  loi,  allcra  vtrcre  nipln,
Tenia  muatirl,  quarta  negare  dooo.

The  Corsi  appear  to  have  derived  their  origin  from
Ligurian  and  Iberiiin  (called  by  Seneca  Spanish)
tribes.  EuslathiuB  snys  that  a  Ligurian  woui*
an,  named  Corsa,  having  pnrsned  in  a  small  bont
a  bull  which  had  tiiken  to  the  water,  accidentally
discovered  the  island,  which  her  countrymen  named
aft«rher.  TbeRonianstook  the  island  fromCarthage
iu  B.C.  231,  and  subsequently  two  colonies  were
sent  to  it — one  by  Mariiis,  which  founded  Mariana,
and  another  by  Sulla,  ^vhicll  settled  on  the  site  of
Aleria.  Mautinornm  Oppidum,  iu  the  same  inland,
isDowBastia;  audUrcinium,  Ajaccio.  SeeJncobi,
Biatoire  G4»^ale  de  la  Corse  (Paris,  1835);  aiul
Gregorovius,  Cornea  (Stuttgart,  1854;  Eug.  trans.
Philadelphia,  1855).

Corslet. See  Arma  ;  Lokica  ;  Thorax.

CoiBOt^  (Ko/xrur^).  A  city  of  Mesopotamia  on
the  Euphrates,  which  Xenophon  found  already  de-
serted.

Corasezi.  VViliiklm  Paul,  a  gi-eat  clasHicuI  jihi-
lologist,  was  horn  at  Bremen  January  ZOtli,  1820.
From  lt^t9  to  1843  be  studied  philology  at  Berlin,
where  he  published  (1844)  Origiitet  I'oeniK  Homattaf.
lie  then  taught  for  two  years  in  Stettin,  and  iu  1846
became  an  adjunct,  and,  later,  full  professor  at
Pforta.  Iu  1866,  he  resigned  the  post  and  lived  at
Liohterfelde,  near  Berlin,  devoting  himself  rxrln-
sively  to  his  studies  until  his  deatli  in  1875.  His
chief  works  are:  Vebtn-  JH89prach€,VokalhmMH,  uttd
Betonang  der  lateinischeH  Spracke,  2  vols.  (Leipzig,
1858-59;  Sd  ed.  1868-70);  Kritiache  BeitrUge  zur
lateinitchen  FormeHlehre  (I^ipzig,  1863) ;  Sriti$ch«
yachtrSge  zur  lateinitcheu  Formenhhre  (Leipzig,
1866);  BeifrUge  zur  italitcken  Sprachkuade  (Leip-
zig, 1876);  besides  a  namber  of  ti-eati^es  on  old
Italian  dialects  iu  Knhn's  Zeitschrift  fiir  n-rglri'
chende  SprackforachuHg  ;  the  treatise  De  f'olevorutu
Lingaa  (Leipzig,  185H) ;  and  Vvher  die  Sprachc  der
Eiruaker  (2  vols.  Leipzig,  1874-75).  Among  the  re-
sults of  his  stay  at  Pforta  was  Alterthuwrr  uud
Kuaatdenkmdler  den  CiitervieHHer  Klontera  St.  Maries
uad  der  Landenachule  Pforta  (Halle,  1868).

Dr.  Corsseu's  great  work  is  his  Au»»prache,  than
which  no  more  memorable  publication  in  the  Held
of  Latin  scholarship  has  ever  appeared. Its  maNs<


CORTEX


4I»


COKVBANTICA


iiig  of  fiictH  is  a  uioiiiinieiit  of  scholarly  research ;
while  the  ncnteneBs  of  criticism,  aihI  the  master)'
of  detail  shovrii  in  the  iiae  to  which  thft  factH  arc
l)iit,  rank  Corsaen  with  the  greatest  scholars  of  all
time.  Not  equally  ouccessfnl  waa  his  attempt  to
solve  the  problems  of  Etnisoau  ethnology  nml  lan-
guage. So  great  was  Dr.  Corssen's  anthority  un
the  dialects  of  Italy  that  wlieii  the  first  vohiriie  of
his  Sprache  der  Etruaker  apiwared,  it  was  eutliusi-
atttically  accepted  as  definitely  clearing  up  the
mystery  that  even  Mliller  had  failed  to  illuminate ;
and  the  author  was  hailed  as  "  the  (X'dipuB  of  the
Etrnscan  Sphinx."  But  the  sober  second  judg-
ment of  HcholarN  did  not  confirm  this  verdict,  and
the  (Wcoiid*  vnlnnie  (which  appeared  soon  after
Coi'ssen's  death)  was  read  in  a  far  different  spirit.
In  fact,  though  the  work  is  laboriously  learned,
juid  bears  eveiywhere  the  marks  of  immense  re-
rtearch,  its  tlieoriea  fail  to  commend  themselves,
and  the  volumes  are  now  only  historically  inter-
eating. See  Etkl'ria.

Cortex  (i^XXoe).  A  cork  used  by  fishermen  to
Hoat  their  nets  (Aesch.  ChoSph.  506).

Cortina. (1)  A  caldron  used  for  boiling. (2)
The  lid  or  covering  over,  the  Delphic  tripod  (see
Oraculum;  TiuPU9),on  which  the
I>rie8t«s8  sat  in  giving resiwuses
(Verg.  JffM.  vi.  347). (3)  An  altar
iu  the  form  of  a  trijrad.

Cortona.  One  of  the  twelve
cities  of  Etniria,  and  very  ancient.
It  lies  northwest  of  Lake  Trasime-
nu8,  over  whicli  it  looks  from  an
ele%'atiou  of  some  2000  feet.  It  has
mighty  walls  of  Pelasgic  origin,  Delphic  Cortlni.
among  the  most  remarkable  in
Italy,  one  fi-agmeut  composed  of  enormous  blocks
being  120  feet  in  length.  The  city  is  said  to  have
been  founded  by  the  Umbri  (q.  v.),  from  whom  it
was  wrested  by  the  Etruscans.  After  liecomlng  a
Roman  possession  it  sank  into  insigniQcauce.  A
vast  number  of  most  interesting  Etrnscan  remains
have  been  found  here,  and  are  carefully  preserved
in  the  local  museum.  Roman  tradition  made  Cory-
thns,  the  father  of  Danlauus,  the  founder  of  the
town, and  Corythus  is  sometimes  given  as  its  early
uame.

Conmcaniua,  Tiberius.  Consul  b.u.  280,  with
V.  Valerius  Laevinns,  and  the  first  plebeian  who
was  created  Pontifes  Maximus,  as  well  as  the  firat
]H-rrjon  at  Rome  who  gave  regular  iuslruclion  in
law. See  Schrnder,  in  the  CivH'mt.  Mayaz'tH,  v,  187.

Corvitraa.  (I)  A  uame  given  to  M.  Valerius,
from  his  having  been  assisted  by  a  raven  (corvus)
while  engaged  in  combat  with  a  Gaul.  (Sec  Va-
LKiaua)  (2)  MESSALA,a  distinguished  Roman  in
the  Augustan  Age. See  Mkshala.

Corvuft  {Kopa^).  A  sort  of  crane,  used  by  Gains
Duilius  (q.  V.)  against  the  Carthaginian  fifct  in  llie
battle  funglit  oH"  Mylae  in  Sicily  (B.C. 260).  The  Ro-
mans, we  are  told,  being  unused  to  the  sea,  saw  that
their  only  clianco  of  victory  was  by  bringiug  a  sea-
fight  to  resemble  one  on  land.  For  this  purpose
they  invented  a  machine,  of  which  Polyhius  (i.  22)
has  left  a  minute  description.  In  the  fore  part  of
the  ship  a  round  pole  was  fixe<l  per)iendicnlarly,
twenty-fonr  feet  in  height  and  about  nine  inches
in  diameter ;  at  the  top  of  this  was  a  pivot,  upon
which  a  ladder  was  set,  thirty-six  feet  in  length


and  four  in  breadth.  The  ladder  tvaa  gnardtil  \n
I  crossbeams,  fastened  to  the  upright  |>ole  by  r  rin;:
I  of  wood,  which  turned  with  the  pivot  abotr.
j  Along  the  ladder  a  rope  wa.<4  passed,  one  eud  uf
I  which  took  hold  of  the  eortuf  by  means  of  a  riug
The  corcu9  itself  was  a  strong  piece  of  iron,  wiiL  a
.  spike  at  the  end,  which  was  raised  or  lowered  h\
I  drawing  in  or  letting  out  the  rope.  Wbeo  ui
enemy's  ship  drew  near,  the  machine  was  turoH
outward,  by  means  of  the  pivot,  iu  the  directiou  ol
the  assailant.  Another  part  of  the  machine,  which
Polyhius  has  not  clearly  described,  is  a  breastworL,
let  down  (as  it  would  seem)  fi-om  the  ladder,  ami
serving  as  a  bridge  on  which  to  board  the  eneuiy'i«
vessel.  By  means  of  these  cranes,  the  Carthngin-
ian  ships  were  either  broken  or  clueely  lucketl
with  the  Roman,  and  Dnilius  gafned  a  completr
victory. See  Polyb.  i.  22.

The  word  corru»  is  also  applied  to  various  kinds
of  grappling -hooks,  such  as  the  corrii«  demoiHor,
mentioned  by  Vitriivius  for  pulling  down  walKor
the  terrible  engine  spoken  of  by  Tacituo,  whicli.
being  fixed  on  the  walls  of  a  fortified  place,  aod
suddenly  let  down,  carried  off  one  of  the  besiegini;
party,  and  then,  by  a  tnni  of  the  machine,  put  bim
down  within  the  walls.  The  word  is  used  by  Cel-
sus  for  a  scalpel.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remirk
that  all  these  meanings  have  their  origin  iu  tb<-
supposed  resemblance  of  the  various  iustniiiwDta
to  the  beak  of  a  raven.

Corybantes  {Kopvfiavrtt).  The  miuistera  or
priests  of  Rhea  (q.  v.),  or  CyheW,  the  great  niotber
of  the  gods,  who  was  worshipped  in  Phrygia.  In
their  solemn  festivals  tbey  displayed  the  most  ex-
travagant fury  in  their  dances  in  armour,  as  well
as  iu  the  accompanying  music  of  flutes,  cymbals,
and  drums.  Hence  Kopvfiavritrftos  was  the  natuf
given  to  an  imaginary  disease,  iu  which  perwii''
folt  as  if  some  great  noise  were  rattliug  in  thdr
cars.  The  Corybantes  are  often  identified  with
the  Idaeau  Dactyli,  and  are  thus  said  to  have  been


Ooi7tMUit«i  and  CfbeM,  wtlb  Infhat


the  nurses  of  Zeus  when  he  was  suckled  by  the
goat  Amaltliea  iu  Crete.  See  CuRBTBs ;  Dacttu  :
Ualu  ;  Zkus.

CoT7bantloa(Kof>v)3avruca).  Afestival  and  mjy
teries  celebrated  at  Cuobsub  in  Crete,  iu  cominco)-
oration  of  one  Coryhas,  who,  iu  otHnmon  with  thr
Curetes  (q.  v.),  brought  np  Zens,  and  roiwNiled  biu


UORVBAi)


419


CORYTUS


ifrom  hia  father  CntiiMH  (q.  v.)iu  that  iHlitiiil.  Otlier
aci-^iiiits  say  tbat  th«  CuryhunteH,  nine  tti  niiuilHir,
iiidepeudeiit  of  tlie  CuivtVB,  saved  au<l  etlncat«d
ZetiH.  A  third  le^nd  states  Chat  Coryba^  wan  the
t'itther  uf  the  Cretan  Apollo  who  disputed  the  sov-
ei-eignty  of  the  iHlaod  with  Zeus.  But  to  which
ttf  them  three  traditions  the  festival  of  the  Corj-
bautica  owed  its  origin  is  iiucertaiu,  although  the
first,  which  was  current  in  Crete  itself,  woiub  to  be
best  entitleil  to  the  honour.  All  tbat  we  know  of
the  Corybantica  is,  that  the  i>erHou  to  be  initiated
was  seated  on  a  throue,  and  that  those  wh<i  iiiiti-
ateil  him  fonned  a  circle  and  danced  around  hiui.
This  part  of  the  solemnity  was  called  $p6yw<Tts  or
Spofitriuis.

Coij^bas  (Kopv^s).  The  son  of  liuioit  and
Cybel6,  who  introduced  the.  rites  of  the  mother
of  the  gods  into  Phrygia  from  the  island  of  Samo-
tbruce. Seti  CorvbaxtiCa;  Riira.

Coryda  {KapvKtai. A  nymph,  who  l>ecame  by
Apollo  the  mother  of  Lycorns,  or  Lyeorens,  and
fn>ui  whom  the  Corycian  rave  on  Mount  ParnaK- .
HUN  was  believed  to  have  derived  its  name. (See:
HaUHan.  x.  6,  5.) The  Mum^s  an-  Houielinifs  called  i
by  the  iKwts  Corycidus  Nyin)il)ae.

Corycldes.  A  name  applied  to  the  nymphs  i
who  were  supposed  to  inhabit  tin-  Coryciau  cave  i
on  Mount  Parnassus.  They  wei-e  tht;  danghttTN  uf  j
the  river-god  Plistus  (Ovid,  ilel.  i.  3*^;  A)k>]1.  Rh. !
ii.711). The  same  name  is  also  given  to  the  Muses.  I

Hf^'  CoHVCIA,  1

CoTj^cna  (Ku^uKOf).  (1)  A  promont^iry  of  Ionia,
stintheikst  of  the  southern  extremity  of  CliioH.  The
high  and  rugged  coast  in  this  ([uurter  harboured  at
oue  time  a  wild  and  daring  )Hipulatioii,  greatly  ad*  \
dieted  tu  piracy ;  and  who,  by  disguising  themselves
and  fi-e(|ueutiug  the  harbours  in  their  vicinity,  ob-
taine<l  private infonuiition  of  theoounR-iiml  fi-eigbt
of  any  merchant  vtMsel,  and  conciTled  m*'a.-«nre8  for
the  purpose  of  intercepting  it.  The  secrecy  with
which  their  intelligence  wa.*t  pnK-nr«-il  gave  risi^
to  the  proverb,  ToC  d  Up  6  KapVKains  rfxpoa^tro^
"This,  then,  the  Corycean  overheard,"  a  saying
that  waa  used  in  cases  where  any  caivfully  guarded
secret  bad  been  discovered.  Tlin  ancient  upjwlla'
tion  is  still  preserved  in  that  of  Kourko,  which
belongs  to  a  bold  headland  forming  the  extreme
point  of  the  Erythi^-un  t>^uinsula  towanls  SanioK
Pliay(0.A'.v.  $31)callHitCoryceuiuPromontorium.
i'i)  A  Binall  towu  of  Cilicia  Trachea,  nc4ir  the  ooii-
liues  of  Cilicia  Cam)>estns,  on  the  sea-coa.st,  and  to
the  eaat  of  Seleucia  Trachea.  It  appears  t4>  have
bt«u  a  fortress  of  gix^ul  strength,  and  a  mole  of
^ast  uubewu  rocks  is  currieil  across  the  bay  for
jibout  a  hundred  yards.  It  served  nt  one  lime  an
the  harbour  of  S«!leuciu,  and  was  tlien  a  phn-e  of
eousiderable  iniiiortance.  About  twenty  btailia  in-
land was  theCoryciau  cave  {KtDpvKtnv  ('vt(k>i;),  cele-
brated in  mythology  as  the  fabled  uIhxIi-  of  the
giant  Typhoons.  In  fact,  iininy  writerw.  n»  StralM>
n-ports,  placed  Arima  or  Arimi,  the  scene  of  Ty-
phoeo^storuieuts,  alluded  to  by  Homer,  in  C'ilicia,
while  othent  sought  it  in  Lydia,  ami  others  in
Cnnipantn.  (3)  A  naval  station  on  the  const  of
l.yeia.  alwnt  thirty  stadia  to  the  north  of  Olyni-
pnH.

Cor^oas  {KwpvKos).  A  large  leathern  sack,  lilletl
with  tlonr,  tig-grains,  or  sand,  hung  up  in  the  gym-
nasium, fur  the  athletes  tu  swing  to  ami  fro  by
striking  it,  whence  the  exercise  is  called  KupvKo-


^^I'a  or  KcapUKofio^ia
(Hesych.  s.  v.).  The
game  is  alluded  to  by
jPlautus  (liud.  iii.  4,  16).
I  From  this  game  came
the  proverbial  expres-
siou,  irpos  KtopvKov
yvpya(f<rdai  ( Uiug.
vii.  54),  uf  labour  iu
vain.

Coiyuibiu  ( Kopvp-
(ios).  A  particular
mode  of  wearing  the
hair  among  the  Greek
wuinen,  which  is  ex-
plained in the article

Coma. The  foUuwing  ^'"V^^'' '^"^f  ^*"*'  *'•
illustration,  taken  from

MillinKeuji-epresents  a  woman  whose  hair  isdressud
in  this  manner.  The  name  literally  means  a  buucb
of  ivy-berries,  and  was  first  applied  to  a  form  of
garland.


Corrinbu& (XillinK«D,  /Vinfurej  AnUquet,  {tl.  40.)

Coryphaoium  {Kopvtf>a<r lovX A  promontory  in
Messenia,  enclosing  the  harbour  of  Pylos  ou  the
north,  with  a  town  of
tliesameiuiuicu|K>nit.

COT^^US  ( Kopv-
Bof).  An  Italian  hero,
son  of  Inpiter,  lius-
baml  uf  Electra,  and
father  of  Dnrrlanus,  is
said  Ut  have  founded
CorythuN,  afterwards
called  CorUma  {*\.  v.).

Cor^tus  (Kwpvrot,
yapvTos).  A  bow-case.
It  was  Worn  suspeod-
ed  by  a  Indt  over  the
right  shoulder,  and
fiiM|ucntlv  held  the
arrows  ils  well  as  the  |
bow(SiI.Ilal.xv.773).
Oil  Itiis  account,  it  is
uftencun  founded  with
tlie/>/m*7/mor<iuiver. Corytus. (Mospo  Pio  Clememinai


COS


420


COTHt'KNUS


It  iH  generally  carried  by  the  armed  PerHians  who
are  represeuted  ou  the  Perse poli tan  boa-reliefs ;
and  iu  this,  as  iu  many  other  i-espects,  we  obserTe
the  agreement  between  them  and  the  European
nations  situated  to  the  uortli  of  the  Eiixiiie  Sea.

Cob  (Kur).  An  island  of  the  Aegean,  one
of  the  Sporadea,  west  of  the  promontory  of
Doris.  Its  more  ancient  names  were  Cea,  Staphy-
hiB,  Nymphaea,  and  Meropis,  of  which  the  lust  waM
the  most  common.  The  colonizing  of  this  island
must  have  taken  place  at  a  very  early  date,  since
Homer  makes  mention  of  it  as  a  populous  settle-
ment (11.  ii.  184).  The  inhabitants  were  of  Dorian
origiu,  and  closely  connected  with  the  Doric  colo-
nies on  the  mainland. Its  chief  city  was  Cos,  an-


CoiiiB  of  Cos.

oiently  called  Atitypalaea.  Strahn  remarks  that
the  city  of  Cos  was  not  large,  bnt  very  populous,
and  seen  to  great  advantage  by  those  who  oarae
thither  by  sea.  Without  the  walls  was  a  cele-
brated temple  of  Aesculapius,  enriched  with  many
admirable  works  of  art,  and  among  others,  two  fii-
moQs  paintings  of  Apelles,  the  Antigonna  and  Ajib-
rodit^  Auadyomen^.  The  latter  painting  was  ho
much  admired  that  Augustus  removed  it  t-o  Rome
and  cousecrated  it  to  luHus  Caesar;  and  in  con-
sideration of  the  loss  thus  inflicted  on  the  Coans,
he  is  said  to  have  remitted  a  tribute  of  one  hun-
dred talents  which  had  been  laid  on  them.  Be-
sides the  great  painter  just  mentioned,  Cos  could
boast  of  ranking  among  her  sons  the  first  physi-
cian of  antiquity,  Hippocrates.  The  soil  of  the  isl-
and was  very  productive,  especially  in  wine,  which
vied  with  those  of  Chios  and  Lesbos.  It  was  also
celebrated  for  its
parple  dye,  and  for
its  manufacture  of  a
species  of  trauspar-
eut  silk  stufl^. See

COA  VE8TI9.

Cob  ioKovrf).  A
whetstone  or  grind-
stone, the  latter  be-
ing shown  in  the
accompanying  illiiH-
tration  from  an  en-
graved gem,  repre-
senting Cnpidshar|)-
oniug  his  arrows.

Cosa,  CoBsa,  or  Coaae.  (1)  Now  Ansedonia;
an  ancient  city  of  Etruria  near  the  sen,  with  a  good
harbour,  called  Hercnlis  Portiis,  and  after  the  fall
of  Falerii  one  of  the  twelve  Etrnscan  cities.  The
ancient  towers  and  polygonal  walls,  IGOO  yards  in
circumference,  are  still  admirably  preserved,  (2)
A  town  in  Lucania  near  Thurii.


Coa.


Coamaa  (Kmr^dr).  An  Egyptian  priest,  oftea
called  Indopleustes  ('ivSoirXmoT^r)  from  bis  tot-
ages,  who  lived  about  a.d.  535.  In  his  yoath  b«
was  engaged  in  foreign  trade  and  visited  niao;
countries,  of  which  he  wrote  an  account  iu  tvtlre
books,  most  of  which  are  extant.  The  work  wu
styled  To7roypa<f>M  XpitmavtK^.  In  it  China  is  tim
nndeuiably  mentioned,  being  styled  Tii-mitia — tbt-
Persian  Ckinutan. Edition  by  Gallaudi  (1776).

Cosmetae  {itoiTfirjrai).  A  class  of  slaves  amoiif;
the  Romans,  whose  duty  it  was  to  dress  and  sdom
ladies  (.Juv.  vi.  476).  Some  writers  on  antiqaities
have  supposed  that  the  cosmetae  were  female
slaves,  but  the  passage  of  Juvenal  is  alone  sufti-
cient  to  refute  this  opinion ;  for  it  wa«  not  CDBtuui-
ary  for  female  slaves  to  take  off  their  tUQics  wbrn  a
punishment  was  to  be  iuflicted  upon  tbem.  There
was,  indeed,  a  class  of  female  slaves  who  were  em-
ployed for  the  same  purposes  as  the  cosmetae  ;  but
they  were  called  co$metriae,  a  name  which  Naerins
chose  as  the  title  for  one  of  his  comedies.

Cosmetea  (Koo-^uTnjr).  An  oflBcer  in  the  Atheui-
an  gymnasia  in  the  time  of  the  Romans.  Sw
Gymnasium.

Coametios. See  Ckrussa  ;  Fucus.

Coami  (xotrpiO.  The  ch  ief  magistrates  of  Crete.
See  Gkrusia.

Coaaaea  (Kmraaia).  A  district  on  the  eonfiites
of  Media  and  Persia,  inhabited  by  a  rude,  warlikf,
predatory  people,  the  Cossaei,  whom  the  Persitii
kings  never  subdued.  They  were  eonqnered  b\
Alexander  (B.c.  325-3!i4),  but  after  his  death  tbry
soon  regained  their  independence.

Coaaua,  Aulus  Corneuus.  A  Roman  coual
(D.C.  428)  who  kilted  in  single  combat  Lar  Tohmi-
nius,  king  of  Veii,  and  dedicated  his  spoils  to  Iii|>i-
ter  Feretrius,  this  being  the  second  of  the  three
instances  iu  which  the  apoHa  opima  were  won  (Liv.
iv.  19  and  20). See  Spolia  Opima.

Coaantiua.  A  Roman  architect  who'rebailt,  at
the  expense  of  Antiochns  Epipbanes,  the  temple
of  the  Olympian  Zeus  at  Athens,  about  B.C.  16^
See  Reber,  Hist,  of  Ancient  Jrt,  p.  249  (£ng.  trau^,
N.  Y.  1882).

Coatume. See  Clothino.

Coa^a  or  Coaayra.  Now  Pantellaria ;  a  smsU
island  in  the  Mediterranean  near  Malta.

Cotbon  (KatBwv).  The  artificial  inner  bsr-
bour  of  Carthage. See Cartiiago.

Cothumua,  or  more  correctly
CoTVKSUBiKoBopvos).  TheGreck
name  fur  a  high  shoe  or  buskin
with  several  sales.  It  covered
the  whole  foot,  and  rose  as  high
as  the  middle  of  the  leg.  It  was
made  so  as  to  fit  either  foot,  and
was  generally  fastened  iu  front
with  red  ntrapn.  Thecothurnna
was  properly  a  hnnting-boot,
bnt  Aeschylus  made  it  part  of
the  costume  of  his  tragic  actors
to  give  Iheni  a  stature  above  the
average.  At  the  same  time  the
hair  was  dressed  high  in  order
to  maintain  the  proportion  of
the  figure.  The  cothurnus  was
also  used  in  the  Roman  trag-
edy. (See  SOCCUS.  )  It  must
be  remembered  that  though  the
name Kodopvos is Greek, the


»eka  ik>  Qol  iiM  it  iif  iliH  triifpv  litMt,  whk'b
I.V  cull  oupi^at,  »r  iiion-  iiHiiiilly  ifiiiaTrjs,

iHbo. a  kin;;  M'  x\in  liuciaiiK,  w')ii>  wiih  cmii-
irwl  in  llir  rrij^  nl' Aiikd'^xin  1»>  I»*'"tiililiii.

!otta,  Ai'itr.ijus.  il)(<Airs.roUHiil  tt.c.7r>  with
taviiiK,  nu>  iHiiMif  till-  iiiont  ilisliugnihbfd  <■■'■
n  ul'  lim  tiiiK-,  ami  ir<  hitiiHliirotl  liy  Ciovro  a«
I  uF  ilic  ii|traki:ni  iu  llu-  irraliiu-n  />  Oi'dforr  uml
.Vaf  Mra  Ororum,  {:£)  Lvcnu.  jtrut'tor  in  D.v.  70,
en  b«  citrriiMl  tUo  coletirnivil  Uw  </nr  ^Ihiv/j'a
lArffl),  which  inl:rni*to<1  lli«  indicia  Iu  llit<  himi-
iris,  trqnileft,  Mnil  iriltiiiii  At-rnrii.

Cotta.  L.  AriiUNccLKiL'9.  One  uf  Cai'mu^H  ley-
s  ill  Uniil.  ntiti  |trriHlti«il  willi  Suliiiitm  in  llio  hu
k  pi:h1»  iifHiii  tlifiii  liy  Auibiiirix,  n.v.  M. 8rc

CottAboa  (K(iTrn;foff).  A  (itvrk  K*it)«  v<try  ikiimi-
tr  At  (liiukiii^-boutA.  Tlio  plnyur  liiyoii  ii  r4>i)rU,
ikI  ill  that  ]Mmjlti»ii  iHihI  Ut  throw  ii  feu  4lrn|M  i>r
t'inr,  ill  ibi  bifth  i*  vnrvn  an  (toKnihlt*,  at  ii  nmrk.
k-iClioiit  fi|iilUi*(;  any  of  tlit*  wine  The  initrk  wan
«k11««l  KOTTttflit'irt  anil  wan  n  hronxr  iT<ili|(>t  or  Mtiic«<r
irXwrrryf  1  oii  lh«'  t-nd  of  hii  upright  fimI  (pafifhtt) ;
hiid  it  wnn  :i  point  In  make  n  tMtiw-  whiMi  liilliiiK
t.  On  tiK*  Korraiiilitp  waa  fatiU-niMl  n  tiirh*  ininKr
>r  a  liiiftt  uf  Hrnni*8,  whirh  uiut  raUi'il  ^(ii'i^r,  and
wliicb  tlitt  ptaytT  biui  lo  hit  UrMl  »i(li  thf*  wine.
The  wiiia  WA«  r>n|>fM>M>il  lo  lunkr  a  winrid  lAont^)
l*otb  JL  liiltinK  the  li){nir  and  in  rHtlhi({  uftvrn-tirilH

ito  tbt' flaneur.  I'hiH.  nf  (•..tttHt-,  tftf-iilt)  inrre'iMM-d
(KmirnUj  uf  tlip  ^nntt'.


CotUbua |Vue  ftout  Omrw  >

TIhtv  waH  annlhrr  fiirtn  of  thf  ^iintr,  in  whivti

it'«  point  wiLM  In  make  tlit'  win«-  liit thf  H»iH-(!r

"!iil»  Qoittin^ in a larR*- vcswl of  wati'i- luul

"•"k  it. Tiw (^iinic  vvHH iitftyitl in a fhiiinlnT

""^  f«r  the  (iitrpiMW. Tin-  fonn  "f  tli*-  morn  wiih

'■"^nlftf,  to  pivo  every |iliiyBr (in eipial (■hnin'tf

""'Utioi;  <b«  innrk,  whirh  wan  |ihired  in  iht-  i-cn-

"* Th«  victor  ({Filerally  Twt-iv<*d  a  jtriirf  iij;rwHl

"pnn  iKfnnihniid. Tbr  (dnyoif*  nl-m  o»rtI  thr  K"mf

'■''»Hcinrr  Itit'ir  pJinrn-CB  of  «n«'f«*(i»  in  love, Tliry

"*l«-r»^l  ih«  nainr  uf  their  iK^hived  while  tlirtiwiiij*

'"i  Ine, A  !*nr(»e*tfnl  throw  gavt*  n  kih«I  "nien,

**  *l<uiicrea*fnl  unt"  n  I'lid  omen. A  (•<«iil  jihiver

Wiird  n|M,|,  l,i»  l,.ft  rlliow.  reinnined  finite  (|iiiet,

»ml  „^.j  „„|y  j,i^  rijjht  Imiid  Iu  lhr»iw  wtth. The

intavoaiiM- oritiiiiflllv  fptui  Hicily,  Itiil  litH-jtHH-  )>i>|»-

"'*r  Minninh  Ihe  n  hole  of  Ureece.  mid  win-eially

*^  AtliAua,  wbaro  to  pluy  well  wan  a  mark  of  nvfd


broediitg. It  did  not  g'*  ''"^  "^  faabiuii  until  iba
fourtli  cwutary  iifter  CbriaL

Vaiie-paintinK'*  r<-'|>rt««ntlDf;  the  tirbt  funu  of  the
Canit*  exist  iu  cuimiderahle  nnm)i«i>i,  one  of  tbetn
heiiij:  reproduced  in  the  ]trecedinjr  illuwtratnm.  An
RppanitiiH  for  ptayin);  Ihe  trottubiiH  wnt*  I'oinnl  Mttnv
yeant  a}>o  in  an  Ktrnwan  tomb  at  F'eniKia,  ulivrtt
it  ik  iiuu  preiuirve<l  in  th«  local  inuKenm.  8««4  Hel-
big,  ill  the  Mitlhril.  ttn  Ktujurl.  Iteulmth.  Archaol.
Intt.,  HiimiM-ist  .tbih.,  for  iew«,  i.  pp. -AW  f..||. and  2S4
full.  Alito  Iteckcr-tiull.  f''Anri(-{M.ii.p.36tJ,and  tba
Jnmtli  deJr  lu»t.,  for  t^U.  pp.  217  foil.

Cottlae  Alp«tt.  The  nitHleni  Mont  fil.tieni'vre,
generally,  lliittifsli  urrone<HiH]y,  HiippOfH-d  to  W  ihe
plMW  wlien-  llainiihal  croMm**)  int4>  Italy,  (l^e
AfJ'lW  I  Thi'V  took  their  imine  from  CottiuH,  a
kiiiK  »f  xevvral  Li^nrian  Irilien  in  the  Cuttlaii
Al])",  which  alm»  derivnl  their  imnn:  fntiu  biui.
lie  snljtnittiNl  to  Anguittiia.  who  granted  him  ibe
kuvei-eij^nty  over  twelve  of  thette  trtlies,  with
the  title  uf  praefeeln».  C'ottinn  thereupon  made
roudit  over  Ihe  AI|m,  and  erected  (B.C.  H)  nt  Se-
KiiMio  (Stisa)  a  trinutphnl  arch  In  bononr  of  Aii-
tfuntna,  extant  at  tht.*  preaent  day.  It  in  44  feet
in  height  and  :tO  in  width,  with  projecting  Cor-
inthian cidnnuiH at the  eunien* atid Hucrilicial

Heelieji  on  the  frieZuM.

Cottiaa. Ht:v  CnmaK  ALrea.

Cotton. See  CARKASua;  Ootwvi'iUM.

CottuB.  A  pant  with  100  hnndi,  stni  of  UrauiM
( Heaven)  and  (laeu  (Kartb). See  GiuANTKa. '

Cotyavum  (Korwifioc).  A  town  uf  Fhrygia,  Honth
of  I>oryliieuiii,  on  I  he-  Thymhrits  a  braneb  of  the
SaugariiiH.  HiiiihiN  says  that,  iireording  to  Home
ai-enniil!*,  it  wu*  Ihti  birlh|«lace  of  AeiMip  the  fnlni-
liKt.  AlL-Kaiidei-.  a  gmitinmriun  of  great  learning
and  a  voliiiulnuiiH  writer,  ua«  alno  a  native  of  (Jo-
tyuenin.  Ijitc  llyzantintr  writers  term  it  the  nic-
Inipolitt  ofl'hryKiu.

Cotj^la  m  Cotj^ltu  (mrrvXr},  Korvkot).  A  kind  of
enp,  with  regnni  to  whone  nbaiie  and  rapacity  tittle
linM  liecn  wiiiKfiutorily  determiniMl  (Horn.  Orf.  HT.

:tl-^i.

Cotyora  IKorvw^).  A  colony  uf  8liio|»<t  on  the
<  <'.i-«l  of  runlUN  PuleinuniuinN,  celebrated  lu  the
lai )'  where  lli«  KI.OtK)  Greukiiemluirked  for  Sinop^.
.S'-e  Xen.  Amth.  v.  r>.  4.

Cotya  (K»nT.v).  The  nauje  of  »everal  kingv  tif
[  hrHce.  Ovid,  during  bis  exile  at  Tomi,  nddress4*d
an  epifttle  to  one  nf  them. {Ex  font,  \i.\i.\

CotTttta  or  Cottytea  (Kotvttmi,  Korrvr^t).  A
feMivnl  \vlji<-h  WHA  uriginnlly  eelehrntod  by  the
KiloniaiiH  uf  Tliniee.  in  Iiunoiir  uf  a  gmldesfi  culled
Cotys  or  Cnlyllu  <Htnib.  x.  470)  It  wna  held  at
night,  and.  nccording  to  Htmbo,  n^Hlobled  the
fextiVHlh  uf  rlie  C'nbeiri  firj.  v.)  and  the  rhryginn
Cyltel^.  Hilt  t-hc  worship  uf  Cotyii.  together  with
!hf  fefttivfll  of  theCotyttia,  wan  iido]iteil  by  wveral
Gre«'k  Sratoi*.  chiefly  tboM  whieh  were  induced  by
their  commercial  intorent  to  nmintnin  friendly  ni-
hil Iuiih  with  Thrace.  The  prienta  of  the  goddew
were  fonnerly  Biipposed  lu  have  lw>me  the  nmne
•  >f  implnr :  hut  lUittmann  ha«  hIiuwii  tliHl  thie
•■pillion  iit  pndmldy  gnmudU-MK,  Her  feitttvalii  were
iiotnrioiiK  arnung  th<!  niieientH  for  ibe  dtasolnta
niiintier  ami  the  dehancherie^  with  wliirh  they
were  eelelimted  (Snidaa,  *.  ».  Korer;  Mor.  Kpvd.
xvii.  oti;  TIk'<kt.  vl.  4t>>.  Another  feMtival  of  tha
name  iiiuiw  Wtt6C<«leV>mted  in  Sicily  (Pint.  Provfrh.),


OOTTTTO


4n


CRASSrS


et^wSSsilis  tliiiJK  witli  cuktvi  atul  fniit  wrn-  car-
ried uUoiit.  wliii'h  any  pentuii  hit'l  n  riK^it  Ni  pluck
olf  if  he  nbow;  Itiit  we  have  no  jii«ii(i»Tt  Miut  rlii»
fe«ti\*al  wua  |K)llilt(!<l  nith  liny  of  the  lirtmltuiiM
imi('|.ii'*'H  \vhi<:b  rtisgrwutl  linn*  uf  Tliruc*!  ami
(rreflCB,  niili^HK  wii  n'fvr  flic  uDuHion  mimiIc  IivTIumw-
ritiiH  l«  (he  {?«lytlift,  to  llio  Sicilian  toNtival.  L'f.
Unltmaiiii'H  i«!tay,  "  L'tibor  die  Kotyttia  nnd  <li«^
Baptau,"  id  hi»i  .Vj/thologm,  vol.  ii.  i>.  ISK,

CotyttO  or  Cotya  (Hnrvrroi  or  Knn<vK  A  Kod-
tliws  wop§hi|iiK>*i  by  tlw  Thmciau*.  ami  aiipannirly
iileiitical  with  the  Phrygian  (.'yWI^.  H.-1-  wurnliiii
WIL8  iiilroducod  at  AlhouK  nitd  Corintli,  whi-rw  it
was  rrlobrat^Ml,  In  privaU*,  wirli  (rn-iil  iiulfwmy
atiil  licentionHiiuss.  Aee  Jiiv.  ii.  VH;  and  the  arti-
cle COTYTTIA.

Conoh- Sefl  LKfTTra.

CoTinarli. Soo  Covisi's,

Covlniu  i3r  Covinniu  iKt'ltic,  Miir«i»)-  A  kind
of  ear,  the  sjiokfs  itt'wliirli  wpn>  amicti  with  lon^
Hickles,  and  n-bi(-'b  wu.s  iihm)  an  a  wythiM'liariot
ehielly  by  tbo  aiK'i<^iit  llel^^iann  arnl  nrittinn.  Thi^
Romans  tl(y(i^nat<>d  by  llin  iianiR  oC  ntviHim  a  kiinl
nf  traveUin;;-rarriii);r,  whii-li  s(»-ni«  lu  liiivc  lii-«^u
CATHftMl  on  all  Midr-H  with  thi*.  'C<X(*4-[>ti(iM  uf  tlit;
rmiil.  It  had  no  tvnit  tVir  a  drtrur,  but  tvuft  cnii-
ducteil  by  tlir  travclhrr  hiniMilf,  who  nut  inMid'i-
(Mart  xii.  34).  Thm-  niufit  have  been  a  ffTfat  Hini-
ilarity  between  the  ]l4>l^taii  M!ytlie-i.-hariiit  mod  ilu-
Boauui  travolliug-carriago.iwi  the  nanir>  nf  the  one
waa  traiiaftirrcd  to  tbe  otlu^r;  and  wo  nmy  ii>iM«>h-
ably  conclude  tbat  the  Bttl^aii  vnr  whm  likewise
covered  on  all  aides  exc«|>t  the  front,  and  lliatit  vcim
occupied  by  one  man,  the  roriHtirius  only,  who  waa,
by  thu!  tttructurv  nf  Iuh  uiir.  Dnfbcirntly  pruhM-tivI.
The  covinarii  (the  wonl  iK'ctinn»riIy  in  TiumIhh)  wviii
to  have  coiistJInttMl  a  i-efjular  ami  diHtinut  part  nf
a  Rriti<4h  anny  I.T"*'-  -iffrin.  35,  'M). Sv:f  EtMKitCM.

Cradle. So«  Clnae.

Crastia  iKpnyat).  A  nnuiiilain  ronaiattllg  of
oiglit  8nniiiiit«,  bi'iiif*  a  continiiaiion  nfTannni  lo
the  weat,  and  forming  at  itn  extremity  the  mintb-
woHtom  promontory  of  Lycia.  At  il«  fmit  wiut  a
tonrn  of  tlti*  Kame  natnr  on  Ihi;  itr'a-Hhorc,  belvvt^en
Pydiia  and  PaCara.  I'aralU-l  tu  it,  nnrlh  ol'  tlie
ri%*rr  OlaiiniH,  wan  the  chain  of  Anlti-ra^ia.

CranaS  {Kftaydt})-  T(i«  inland  to  wliieh  Paiw
Hrst  carried  llelnn  from  PeluponneiinH.  IIh  Iik'uI-
ily  in  nncftrtaiii,  but  minir  identify  it  «  itli  (_'ythera.

Cranftus  (KtMimdc).  King  uf  Attica,  thoMin-in-
laiv  ami  HuroejsMor  of  Ci!crop:«.

CrauU  (k^Moi).  A  town  of  C«phaUenin  on  the
fwjntU  coiptt.

Cranon  ( kpnyMv)  or  Crannon  ( Kpatv»p].  A  ci ty
of  ThKfwaly  on  tlie  river  Oni-lieiiinis  MinlheaMt  of
Phantaluii.  Near  It  wax  a  fonulnin,  tlie  ualer  of
which  wa«  fablnl  t^i  naiui  witu*  when  mixed  with
itttio  that  the  heat  ri-maiiM-d  for  two  or  thro(>  dnya.

Crautoi  (  KfiiivTbi^i  \  A  ph'doiuipher  of  Stdi,
anntng  ttt«  pnpilH  of  XiMioerates.  lie.  3nfO.  ]U-  nat.
the  llrat  who  wrote  ennmieiitarJeH  on  the  worki*
nf  Pluto.  Crantor  waw  highly  celi.*)triir«Ml  for  the
purity  of  hi»  monil  doctrine,  a«  nmy  be-  iitfi-rrtMt
Hrom  the  prais^it  Itetlowe*!  by  the  nneicntit  ii|Hin
him.  Krora  one  of  hi*  worku,  llr^'t  U<vA>L'f.  Cieent
drww  largT*ly  in  writing  the  (bird  iMWik  of  the  7*mi>.
cH/oNae,  and  the  loNt  treat  ink  lie  Canaoiatiifur  ui\  the
iloatli  of  bin  dangblvr  Tnilin. Cf.  Cic.  Aend.  it.  4-1.

Craaalpea.  KcRlt-'a. Ciccro'a  aon-tn-law,  him-


band  to  Tnllia,  from  whom  he  wa«  ilfTMvM  tOnrt-
ly  after  llicir  marrijigt' in  n.C- Tifi.

Ciaasua.  il)  Uttirs  LiciXiC:i,  a  Routan  itn-
tiir  nnd  man  of  conMolar  rank.  In  n.c  119,  hc-
ing  only  tweiity-oiH>  ycai*)!  of  age.  he  made  Ills  dr-
tnit  in  ihe  Ftirnm.  in  a  pt-oiuH-ntion  agnluM  II
L'arlto.  Cicero  j*Hyn  that  lie  wa*  remarkable, (tven
at  tliiK  early  period,  for  hm  eandtnir  ami  liU  Rr»l
Irivi-  of  johiice.  t'nifwns  wae  lint  twenty -(h'Wn
yean*  old  wh«ii  his  elofjiienco  obtained  the  acquit-
tal of  bin  ndation,  tlie  Venial  Lieinia.  [WiiicfW
vuted  to  the  consulship  in  STt,  he  waM  the  ariihiiT
of  a  law  by  which  numbers  nf  the  nllie«,  «1ki
pnMte^l  fr>i'  Ronnin  eitixen<*,  were  m>nt  baek  t"  Ihnr
reH)H<elive  eitiea.  Tbia  law  iilieiiaTrnt  fn^rn  lilm
the  Hll'iK!tiot)a  of  the  principal  ItalianH.  tut  tlifti  Iw
wn«  regardeil  by  luime  a»  the  primary  em**  vt
the  Social  War.  \vhiv)i  broke  ont  three  yulr>^aAe^■
lluvin;;  Hither  Gaul  for  hi^  pn>vince,  (.'nvwH
freinl  the  eotiiitry  fnnn  the  robbens  that  iiiMwt
it,  and  for  this  wrvice  hod  tli**  weakmna  t<i  rUiui
Iritimpli.  The  Swrml«*  wf<n<  favoorabl«  to  lii)>  ui'-
|ilicalioi) ;  but  SeaevoUt,  the  other  con»iil,i>p|»i*«l
il,  on  the  gronnd  that  he  had  not  rotiqilrred
fiK'H  worthy  of  Ibe  Koiiiud  pi>opIe,  lYawuk  <«■•
diielfd  !iiniM-lf.  ill  oilier  ropecta,  miiIi  gr*-al  w»-
doni  in  liin  {•overnnienr.  and  not  only  did  ui it  re-
move from  around  him  the  son  of  CarlKi.  wh*
hail  come  iim  a  spy  on  his  conduct,  bill  even  plnml
him  by  Ids  »ide  on  the  tiibnnol,  and  did  nothia;;
uf  whti-h  the  other  waa  not  a  witness  Beirii:a|>-
[Hiititeil  eeiiMir  ni  'M,  lie  eaiiMed  the  M-boul  uf  Ik'
I.atiii  rlietotieians  to  lie  cIomnI,  reganling  then  i*
daiigerouH  iiiiiovatom  for  the  young.  (!ruuiiwteft
hanlly  any  tinitionn  belli  ml  htm,  and  lie  ili*'
while  ('ic)To  wat*  yet  in  bin  iKiyhood  :  but  Ml''
Hint  antlmr,  having  collrclod  the  opitiiurmof  lll»~'
»  bo  li:uS  bt^u'd  htm,  H]M>akM  with  a  minnle  audat*'
pamitly  jM-rfert  inlelligeiice  nf  hih  style  iif  cntt"
ry.  lie  wn«  whai  may  Im-  called  the  rnoul  >tni«'
mental  hpoaker  that  hat\  hithertrt  Ap|*oaml  if'^
Komni.  Though  not  without  force,  gravil.v.  *>»«'
dignity,  these  were  happily  blende>l  with  tlif  Timtt
insinuating  politcneax,  iirbanily,  iia^ie,  and  gmrty'
lie  waa  nniMler  of  the  lUfMt  pure  ami  nci-nnlr  la^
linage  and  of  iMrfcct  eb-jianc**  of  expr«*'«»iim,  Til**'
ont  any  aflertation  or  niiple;tNaiit  apiM'umwT  »•
previous  Mtinly.  dcjit  elcnrneHM  iif  InngukfEV  at^
tiiiguiNlH<d  all  hiH  haraiigncN ;  ami.  nliile  ilircanl'
iiig  on  topic*  nf  law  or  c'lnity,  he  (HtK^t-Mieil  an  "•"
exbautttible  fund  of  argument  and  illii«tf>ti^'
Some  iH-rsona  cinmidured  t'raH!iin>  a.t  only  «|"*'
to  Anioiiiii*!,  hi<4  givnt  coiiit>mpoiiiry  :  nlltcr*  i-n^
feTTi'd  him  as  the  more  perfKl  nnd  acronn»lnl>^
oniior.  The  moat  njilendid  of  all  tlw  eflurl"  •"
Craswos  was*  the  immediate  cause  of  bin  ilratl*-
which  hap)Mmed  in  It.c  fll,  a  Nliorl  urhtlu  lirfi'P''
the  commeiicenteiit  of  the  civil  wan*  of  M»K***
and  Snlhi,  and  a  feu  dnya  after  the  liiiM*  in  *lii^*
lie  i»  Hiippo!*c4l  tti  have  borne  hia  jwrl  in  tUi- di*-
logue  /V  Onitore.  The  couhiiI  Pliilip|tU!i  lia"!  '**^
elarcd,  in  one  of  the  mtAeniblicA  of  the  |>*oplPi  ('»»'
M>mo  other  lulvico  miutt  be  rcnortud  to,  •inc,  triC*
niuch  a  Senate  lu  then  existed,  he  euiild  n"  '"'*'''
er  dimct  the  .tlt'aire  of  the  government.  A  ■■■
Senate  being  imiiMMliately  mimnniutMl,  Cramn-*  *^
rntgiietl.  in  terms  of  the  moat  gbiwiiig  «Io<(ii'n«*-
ibe  comlnct  of  the  oonttiil.  who.  instead  of  nctii'r
as  the  |M))iltcaI  parent  and  guanlian  of  Ibe  Smai''*
8<mght  to  deprive  its  noMitliert*  of  their  ancieul  i"
heriiance  of  re«iKwt  and  dignity. Ueing  fiiflb''


CKASSl'S


4»


vn\^sv9


•iUitcnl  hy  uii  iitlviii|>t  xii  |||i>  ji»rl  itt*  IMinipiHift  I
t4>  f»ri3**  liiin  into  vutii|)liiiiir4>  witli  U'tit  iluMipM,  lie  I
^wertoal.  uii  tlih  i.H.-vattitiii,  tlif  ntntiMl  ffi'orl  nf  Itix
^iiiiiH  aiitl  8trfipj;lh  :  Unt  he  n'turiie^l  liotiu;  uitli
■•  |»ltriiiitic  fevtT,  tif  which  hf  tlitil  H«*veii  ihiya  al*-
ler.  TLi»  uniiicni  ^f  CrwHii»,  IoH.av.hI,  »«  it  wm..
by  his  bIiihmI  iiiiiiKHliatv  ilc:!!!),  iiiailt!  »  iltfji  Jm-
prvfvsion  n\i  hiit  ntiiiitrviiu-n ;  ^Ihi.  long  »flor-
vranU*.  wi<n'  wotit  tn  nqtulf  (tt  iht^  Soinitv-liuilM'  fur
tl»**  |>iir[HM«*  iiC  viuwiii^  thf  »\tol  whole  hi-  hn«l  laatt
ttotMl,  aixl  w  h«ru  hi'  IVll,  ^m  it  iiiity  l)o  »iiiil.  in  ilf-
Cniic»  i>f  Iht^  iM'ivilogiw  uf  bis  onler.  \'i)  Mmu-vh,
•rho  wiu*  pnivt<ir  B.C.  lOTt.  Kn  wiu«  Aiininiiif^l  hy
tiiK  frieiitls  Aki'^IhhI  ii»  ('AyiXnorof  t.  tM-ruiiHt\  ttccnnt-
Lnic  t(i  I'liiiy  (vii.  l'.l)>  hi.-  iiwur  lauKlii'it  •lining  the
whole  c> torse  iif  \m  life :  ur  lMM*autii.<,  mMTunliiij;  to
UnciliiiM,  h«'  liiii)jhi-4  Imii  mim<'  (Vh-  Itr  Fin.y.^O).
I'.i)  MAHi|>i  iJi  INIIPI,  t^alh'il  ihc  Ifii'h  (ttinn),  ihf
r^Mi  i>f  ilii:  [iri'fH^Hliiig.  anil  tli>'  nioHt  opiili-nr  Koiuhii
«»<  hia  ilay,  wiLt  of  n  imtiiciiiii  family.  an<l  tin'  hoii
uf  u  lunu  uf  <*oiiniilar  mtik.  lli^  fiitli'-i  ami  lin>lh-
er  (M.Ti»l)i?il  ill  the  |>iiini'ri)itiuiis  tt(  MuiiuH  iital  C-iit-
U»  whilL*  lir  vfOB  still  iiiiitf  y<Mii)K.  aittJ.  to  »vnii|  a
Aiiiiiltir  fale,  hi'  tiM>k  i\'fri[;f  in  Spaiu  until  ihi'iU-alli
of  L'iuiiii.  wlitii hi'  rftnnn'il  t"  llaly  ami  Hfivt^il

Itodft  ijallu.  CniKuHM  |ii-i)vmI  very  wrvirvahU*.  Ut
;iii>tcniiiuiittiihT  ill  ilicilrciMivu  ImiLiu  in.i'.  Kt)  tliat
pFiul'itiighl  ttrar  Rminh;  bill  nItcrnai-ilM,  iiinkiiig  tht*
BIohI  iitijiiHt  »ihI  ^Il|>lll.■joll^  iiMr  of  Siilln'H  pn'nCi'i(i>
fciuiis.  tli^it  IciMltT.  acronhn;^  (u  I'liitKn-'li,  guvi-
Vuu  <i|i  »iiil  iiL-vvr  i-iii^iln.M-il  him  a)caiu  in  any
f>tLV>lie  iitfuir.  The  glory  whii-li  wait  then  bexiii-
iiitiK  1o  atlftiil  u|H>ii  I*uiii|»ey,  though  ntill  yoiuiK
ami  only  n  itiiuiili'  OK'Hilier  of  thfl  entiitwirian  or-

Iih-r,  oxi-id'il  the  jealuuiiy  of  L'rtuisiiH.  anil.  t]pHii»ir~
io^  nr  riitiii^i;  tn  »n  •«<|tiulity  with  him  in  warliko
"^wraiioiiK.  he  l»et<Mik  l)tiik<u*ir  to  piililif  nffaini  at
lioiiK%  mid.  by  jmyiii^  court  Ui  the  |i«o|iU%  ilffr-inl-
tu^  the  linpcAche^l,  leiuliii);  niomty,  and  aiiliii}{
thuMwtio  were  canili(lii(«^«  for  olHre,  h«  alt.iiinctl
^  »n  indiifiict;  aliiioft  i^iiutl  lo  thai  nliirli  I'mti-
\<^y  kiMl  Mi:<)i>ifvil  liy  lii»  military  lurhirvniiriit*.
1'  nM  :U:  ihii  liar,  in  |mrtiL-iilai-.  tliiil  (,'ruHHiiH  itui-
■Irrvd  liliiitwlf  rx(rniiit;1y  )to|iii]ar.  llo  wum  not,
il  «r»mlil  iw»fiu,  a  very  i-Io(|ii».'iit  uponker,  yet  by
*^tre  lutil  n|i|ilivalioit  he  evtaitiially  ■.■xi.'f'cik'd  thosu
**ltiitii  iiMiuic  hail  iiiorii  bi;;li1y  fuvoureil.  WIkmi
P"iii|«'y.  or  (.'iMJWir.  or  C'irwro  declini'd  itpfnkin^  in
VliAlf  ttf  Auy  individual,  Ih>  ofti'ii  iir<w  and  nd-
'"cstwl  tho  caiiw  of  the  ai'ciiMHl.  BcHidoH  lhi>*
pminptupsw  to  aifl  tlir  niifordinnlr,  Imh  conrtfonN
*i"l  OMiciliaiiiig  drportmriit  uctpiinMl  for  him
"^"J  fiiendH,  atid  niiuh>  liiiii  very  |>o)inlHr  with
tlw  kiKev  oiders.  Tbvri,*  wa«  not  tt  K«io:iti,  liow-
<vet  liiimble,  whom  he  did  not.  salntf,  or  wbo««
Mlillaliiiii  he  did  nut  return  by  iiuiue.

The  gn-jit  defect,  however,  in  iho  charai-ter  of
'^'***a»  ivM  hitt  iuortliuatv  fondness  f<»r  wirallb;
""'.  alilioiijjh  he  coiild  not  strictly  be  ralh'd  an
"HTKiuBs  num.  BiTK"e  he  i»  stiid  (o  have  U-nt
^"^'^T  t^i  hi«  friends  without  deinauiliug  iiilor-
^l)y«  hv  allowed  Iht!  biv*'  tif  liclifA  to  t>xt'ri-iw)
'WrtiBotiiir  Hwny  over  hi^  aetioiiw,  and  It  |iii»v<^d
■'  1*4  thH  raniw  of  hU  ntihappy  i*nd.  I'liitareli
inform;,  na  lliat  bin  e«tutc  at  dr^t  did  not  ex-
^  threu  liiinduiil  talentA,  liiit  thai; aftcrwanit.

"ttuiitntdl  to  the  enoruioiii  aniu  of  t^'veii  t  hon-
?"'  one  hundred  loleota  (  ui^iirly  iW,.V'<l,OtX) ).
''**>  uiruia  by  which  he  atljiincd  to  IhisarH  unn*
■j^WKtil  by  the  itanie  writi-r,  and  Home  of  ihnm  ai-r
'"•gilliir  eimiijch. Oh.s<'rviiiy,  s*yH  Plutan^h,  how


llatdi'  (he  I'iiy  wuh  io  lintt,  ho  miulv  if  his  biiKind.ia
to  buy  hunAe«  Ibnl  wvrv  i>ii  lire  and  othrnt  that
joiui'd  iitmii  them;  and  he  iriniiiinMily  )•»(  tbeiii
al  a  low  pi-ite,  on  arvonnl  of  the  fear  and  ilintrriwt
of  rli4<  iiwiierM  about  tin*  rexntt.  A  band  of  bin
nlav«w  lhi*reit)M>i),  irtrulaily  or^ttiiizt^l  for  the  |>iii'-
piMie,  exei'l<-d  theiiiM-lst^a  tu  exlingiiiHh  the  llainet*.
and.  after  this  wha  done,  n-bnilt  »h:it  biid  been
de«troyet),  mid  in  thiit  wny  CrnHHiiH  grndiially  Im'-
eaine  llie  owner  of  a  large  [Million  of  Koine.  He
gained  largi-  hiiiiih  uIko  by  edncntioK  and  Ibcii
Helling  hlnvert.  I'bilarvb,  in  fjjcl,  legnnlH  tliiH  an
hiH  priiH'iiMil  Koiiroe  i»f  ii>v«tiiie.  With  ull  iImm
eager  gnw[iing  after  wi'sUli,  however,  Ci-uo»iif»  ap-
|M)iirM  to  have  been  no  mean  eohlier,  even  thougb
111'  dif*|d»yeil  All  few  of  the  iinalities  of  n  vominiMi-
der  ill  hiM  Parlhian  raiupnigu.  C'reiiti'd  praeloi'
ill  H.c.  T],  he  wmn  neiit  to  tertnlnalu  the  war  with
8paitaein^  Hu  aeeonlinfEly  mel,  defeatis)  him  in
Beveral  eiieodiilei-K.  and  at  lattl,  bi-ingtng  him  (o  a
duuioive  aetion.  ended  Iho  war  by  a  single  blow,
8|mrt4U'ii»  and  forty  tlionttaud  of  bin  followrm  be-
ing left!' on  the  n<'|d.  Not  veiitnring  t-u  dciniim)  a
Irinnipli  for  a  vietoi-yover  glmliatoni  and  «bivc«t,
he  eoiitented  litmself  wtlb  au  ovatiun.

In  7l^  CraoHiiFt  obtained  the  I'uimuUliip.  having
P(im)H'y  for  liiH  mlh'agiie.  At  a  pfnbfUN|iH'nt  jM-ri-
ml  wv  liiid  him  ini|dii-at4f4l  by  an  infonuer  in  Ibe
coiiHpimey  of  L'Mtiliiif.  but  lu-ipiiltud  by  uficluma-
tioii  the  inoniciit  thu  idiarge  uiu  heunl  by  the
tieuate.  We  now  eoiiie  to  iIil'  closing  sveue  in  llin
career  of  CrAwtitn.  When  Cneitiir,  on  rutnniiiig
from  hit  govenmieni  to  Milieit  tiie  cousnl!»hi]i,
foiiml  rnnipey  and  (.'rattntiii  at  variauce  (which
had  been  the  e:tm*  alwi  during  aluiont  all  the  time
lluil.  they  welv  eolleagnen  in  thu  roiiNuhir  oflire),
and  peiTciveil  that,  for  Ihe  furllieraiii-H  of  bin  own
ainhitioiiM  view,  tlie  aid  of  Uiei^e  two  iudividaaln
would  be  nefvleil  by  him  fur  oppoiting  the  iiillil>
cure  of  the  8«;ii»)e,  an  wt^ll  a»  that  of  Cicero,  Cato,
and  ('iitiilnH,  tin;  managed  to  nTiinitile  iImmu,  mid
Huon,  ill  eoiijiiuctiou  with  holh  of  them,  forniiHl  the
wi-11-kiiown  league  usually  nty led  the  (''imt  Trinni-
virai4^  (B.c.tiO),  wliioh  proved  «o  fatfll  to  the  IiImt-
lioft  of  the  Koiann  |ieo|ile.  liy  the  tenn»  of  ibiti
i^ompiu't  OrnMius  ubtnined  the  {tEovernineiit  of  Syr-
ia. In  llie  law  that  w:ih  juiMi-d  ivtativo  to  this  gov-
ertmieiit  of  Cniw^UH.  no  uieulion  wa.-*  indeed  made
of  any  war  in  il«  neighbourhood :  still  everyone
knew  thnt  ho  Inul  eonnertiNl  with  it  an  iiiiiiKsliat^
iiiVHaioii  of  Parthia  (R.c. .%)  riiilareh  even  slates
that  be  bail  lixeil  n|Hin  neither  Synu  nor  Puiihia
OH  the  liinitfi  of  blH  i-xpi'cied  good  fortune,  bill  iii-
t«udcd  t4t  peiietnitu  uv«u  to  Uaetria,  India,  and
the  shores  of  the  Eiwteni  Oceftii.  The  only  uio-
tive  to  this  meiuomble  and  niifortnoRte  aiidcrtak-
ing  wiu  the  rapaeions  live  of  wealth.

It  WHS  not,  however,  wiilmut  conelderable  op-
pohilioTi  from  the  people  and  ibi'  trilnineH  Itiat
CnutHim  WHH  allowed  to  pnieee«l  on  this  exi>edi-
tioii.  All  ibe  intliieiK'e  of  Ponipey  wa.i  iieeettMary
to  prevent  an  expreKhiou  of  luipiilar  wrath,  hir
1IO  good  was  expected  to  rexiill  fi\»t\  lowtililieH
flgalnHt  a  people  who  had  done  ibe  Kotuaiis  no
Injury,  and  who  were,  in  fuet,  ituMr  allien.  When
CnuutiiB,  moreover,  had  leaehed  ihe  gate  of  tho
eily,  (he  tribnne  Ateins  atteiiipte4l  to  stop  him
by  forco;  but,  failing  in  this,  he  inmiediately  pro-
r4MjdoiI  l4i  perform  a  religjoin^  een-niony  of  (he
moNt  appalling  natniv,  by  wliioli  be  devoled  the
ronmiander  hitntwlf  and  all  nliti Khonld fulhiw


CRATEK


4H


CEATER


ttim  on  thAt-iwrvlce  t<i  tin-  nratli  of  tlie  itifcr-
liiil  ^tH\n  tihil  B  xiK^rily  tk-HtniL-liou.  ftidtftuinyed,
liowi'ViM,  by  Alllioi'  rleniliioiuiiotiH  or  otneiis  (Cic.
fHf.  ti.  W).  CriMtiDH, t'niliarkiiiKitl  BnitKlitiiuin,))ro-
r»o4|itil  tnl4t  Asiii  Uy  iAiicmiotun  and  tlip  Helle«-
]i«iit,  A»  Ihi*  eiifiny  \vi*re  imt  pn>|ian»l  fur  iIuh
iinprovoki'd  invHMiiHi,  llii*  Kuiiiuiih  id<!|  with  no
n*«<istHiice.  At  fir!>t  Ctukhuk  ovcrrnii  lliv  grfatw
ynrt  of  Mi>.»c)|w>liiiiiiii;  iiinl,  IiihI  In*  liikitn  ndvaii-
fiigi'  nf  iIh-  riiil^U'rimttoti  into  wliicli  hirt  niiddrii
[i|>]»Tiiraii(-i!  Iiiid  tliniwu  the  riirl]iiuii».  In*  might,
wirli  llirt  nn'nti*t  pnae,  Imvi*  rxteiided  Iiih  ooii-
i|iifNt  to  lliiliyloiiin  ilaflf.  Hiil,  tlie  s<ei).siMi  being
fnr  tiilt'itiirt-d.  Iio  did  nut  tliink  it  px)HHluMit  to
lUtM-t't'd-  Oil  Hit*  coiitrMry,  having  If^ft  in  thw  lUf-
tVn^nt  towiiK  iind  sinni^IinldN  ii  ilt^^liKdiiiiciit  of
'tHN)  foot  Hiid  l(MHt  UiUtsf,  lii>  i-i!t,MmfKl  tnin  Syria
Hiid  took  itp  )im  wiiiliT  i|iiiirti-m  in  timt  pi-oriiinir.
Tlii'i  iTlrngmdH  movfiiu-iil  wii»  a  fatui  riTm'.  Hin
uct'ti|tiiliiHif<,  t4M),  during  tlic  wiiiti'r  wi-n;  highly
ri'ii«iirftbl)>,  liavlng  nioiv  «if  Ih*'  tnidrr  in  thcni
thiLii  ihc  ef^nnral.  Instead  of  improving  tlu-  dfn-
(.-i|iliiii'  of  rhe  stildiiM-H,  and  kt'cpiiig  tlioiu  in  ]tro]v
er  ox«ir^t(if,  he  tt|>cnt  hU  tinn^  in  miikitig  imjiiiry
ridativc  to  the  ivvt'iiocH  n{  tlif  cities,  iind  in
woigliing  the  treoKitrcs  whiidi  he  fonnd  in  the
T<-nijtl4«  of  Hi('ni]HiIiH.  In  Mir  Hiiring  thi;  Roniaii
roiiiniander  took  ihi-  \\r\<\,  on  the  fionlitT'i  of
Syria,  with  ttrvi^n  legion rt,  t'oiir  tlioiiKniid  hoi-Nir,
niid  iLii  I'qnat  iinnihcr  of  light  or  inrgnhir  troops.
Witli  l])i?t  fori'*'  hi^  i(gaii)  pAH<u'd  llio  K(i|dir»lt'H.
wIkmi  lif  wild  joiiM^d  Ity  on  Arntiiitn  chitf,  ivhoni
Pliil»rclt  fulU  Ariniuiu'f,  but  who  i»  ylM-whei-u
iiiiuied  AcbaruH  or  Alignrui^;  nnd  in  ihiK  barhii-
riiut,  owing  to  Iiih  kuowk'-dgi*  of  the  rooutry  nnd
bis  warm  und  frvciiieni  e\pn>8NionF«  of  nttachDient
to  thff  RoniaiiB,  (."raBsim  uufortunately  placed  the
ntniOKt  I'ontidi'Uf*?.  Tlu*  ivsnll  umy  easily  \n'  ftire-
Htvn.  (_'rat«ii«  int^unh'd  to  Itsvy  foltonr'il  the
conrMe  oT  rile  KnphraU>«t  till  he  Mhonhl  reach
the  point  n  htM-u  it  Hppn)jU:h4*N  iiearvttt  to  Seleii-
riii  iitiil  Ct^'Htphon,  tlie  capita]  of  lh«'  I'nrthiun
Koijorr :  litit  b«iiig  ditutimd<'d  fnun  tbiN  1>y  hin
cnit'ly  gnidi-,  and  directing  hi?*  ui;iri-b  fi<-i'OHtt  tin-
jdaiiin,  be  WAA  It'll  111  hint  Itito  a  nitndy  diiwrt,
wbiTc  hirt  army  vaA  attikcke<l  by  the  I^arttiian
foriM'H  nitder  StirenaK.  An  iiiio'iuat  euitfliet  en-
Bilwl.  The  »n\i  of  t'nwwns.  lieni  wirh  n  detach-
nioni  of  (Inllie  hoi-w-  to  i'i-)Md  the  I'ttrthian  cnvni-
ry,  hmt  Win  life  aft«-i  the  ino^t.  heroic  exerlioim;
and  h\n  hitc  mom  tlixl  i)i;i>l<'  known  to  hit*  father
liy  the  l>iirbflrianH  rat-rving  tiix  Iteiid  on  a  Hpi*nr.
CruaHiiH  liiniwlf.  md  long  afli'f.  b<!itig  (ontiielti-d
liy  his  own  ti-oiijw  to  niecl  Surenaf  iu  n  confer-!
rnce,  waft  tiviu-hennihly  whiiii  by  the  bttrl'iiriniiH,
nnd  hi«  bead  nitd  right  hiind  M>nt  to  tlie  I'lirthian
king,  OrmlpM,  who  iit  itaid  to  have  poiir<-il  ntnlt^'ii  i
gold  d4tsvn  the  dead  miin'ft  tbront.  snying.  in  nllii-
sioa  to  hin  avitrier,  "Salfl  tliy*elf  now  with  That
itf  whinh  in  life  thnn  werl  «o  gn-eily  !"  The  whole
low  of  the  Ri>tnnni4  in  thii*  diKHMtronK  rnmitaigii
was'ifl.nOO  killed  and  in.(HM>  tnken  pri«on.-rf*.  See
Pint.  Vni*».;  l»io  V.w>*.  \\.  K*  foil,;  and  tlie  nrltric
pAirrtiiA,

Crater  (Kpor^p;  lonlr  irpip^fi :  l.iit.  rraier  or  fm-
lera,  from  Ktpatwui."  to  nifx"l.  A  vetuicl  in  which
th«>  wine,  nceordnig  to  lh>>  eiintoin  of  the  nncieiilH, '
who  vrry  seldoia  drank  i)  iindilnted,  w»»  mixed  '
with  wat4'r.  and  fmin  which  the  eniw  were  lille<l.
la  the  llouMTic  Age  the  tnixtnn*  \\n»  always  mad?
iu  the  diiiing-r<«'ni by  herwldn or  yunug  men!


M  turn


Cnii«r


(Kovpot'i.  The  nse  of  the  VfwH-1  i«  MfftnienttT
from  the  expretLtloiis  m>  freqnent  in  Ilic  jHtri
Homer:  xpi^pn  Kff>aaatT$at  —\.  e.  otviw  ga'i
<F  KfiTjrijfit  fiiayttv:  viiniM  Kprjr^fta.  "  to  eiii(>l|  thn
crater";  Kpijrrffia  (miffnirfloi  {rratrra  0UH)ivt),*V>
place  lb«  ti1li*d  rmter  near  the  tahin";  Kp^pigtm
tTTiirritftrtTfiiii  nriTtnfi,  '"  to  till  the  cratCfK  tA  tlic
brim."  The  t-ratur,  in  tlif
Homeric  Agft.wao  gniflrall.T
of  Mirer,  wiaielimen  witli  n
gold  edge,  and  HouiftiiM
all  gold  or  gilt  It  nao&
n}>ou  a  trtfiod,  and  iu
nary  place  in  the
wna  in  the  most  !)•
able  part  of  the  ivmb,  al
tli«  fartbeat  end  from  tlic
.  B.  ■  .  ontrauoe,  nnd  near  ib«>  Mat
]>.  cxi)  "'  tiH  most  diHttUKiitined

among  the  gnests.  TIk
hIw  of  thf  crater  weina  to  bave  varitil  iHOunl-
iug  to  the  nnmbcr  of  gneaiA,  for  wher?  ibeir
nnniher  in  inrr«<a«ed  a  larger  crater  is  ask«<l  for.
It  uoiiid  iwein.at  leavt  nt  n  lat«r  period  {for  irt  \hf
HiHuerii'  jwinmH  we  tiiid  uo  traces  of  the  raMoml,
thut  thiVH  crattTH  were  flllwl  at  every  fe«
after  the  tabh-M  wen'  removed  Accordin);  (u$iii-
daM.  the  tirMl  wrh  drdicat^Ml  to  IldniMiM.  the  imviid
to  <'bariHin>i,  and  Ibe  thini  to  ZeiiH  Soler;  but
otherH  ualled  tliroi  by  diflerent  nameN :  ihnii  llw
tirnX.  or,  areonling  to  otlienn.  thi^  laal.  was  al*ud»-
ignat'ed  the  Kf>aTiff>  ayn^of  /iaiftoi'trt,  "  fh*"  cmtrf  o(
the  good  geuin*,"  it/jonj/j  iyitiat  and  p^rnrtirrtn'rw
fitraytirrpoy,  because  it  wae  the  cratet  froiu  «bHi
thernpw  were  tillwl  after  the  wanbini;  of  tlip  liwii*-
There  wrre  PjMifial  erali'rw  tiaiuwl  from  plaw^r.fr
Letthiaii,  Laconian,  Argive  (HenMl.  iv.  Kili\

Cratei-B  weiv  among  the  lin»t  thingH  on  iherm-
beltiahment  of  which  the  nnrient  artists  exerci^J
their  tnkill.  Homer  ineiilion»,  among  the  pnM*
pnipiwd  by  Arliiilej*,  n  beantiftiDy  «ronpIit»)lw
crater,  tire  work  of  the  ingenione  Sidoninus,  nliicb)
by  the  elegance  of  ittt  workmain^hip.  oiL<^ll«l  s"
otliHi-H  on  tlie  whole  earth.  In  tin*  ndgli  of  Crw*''^
king  of  Lydia.  the  hitnedafmoniaitit  wul  In  lt>*t
king  a  hrar.un  crater,  the  liordi<r  f>f  which  «m  ■"
over  omamentml  with  tignn-a  (^biAml,  aral  «l)if^
wnH  iif  Kiit-li  an  enonnooK  .lizc  thai  it  coiitaiaf^
:um  iiiiipborae.  Croemii*  tiimwlf  dedicated  tii  tl*
Dflpliic  g<Ml  two  huge  cniteri.  which  llif  IJclplii-
nnn  Iwlieved  to  be  the  work  of  ThroderiMef  8*"
III04*,  and  Hem4lotita  wax  tndnrod,  by  the  he$vij
of  their  worknmn.ship,  to  think  lli<-  nnnie. It***


^^^AAy


Cnit-r- (t>Muils,  Kimria,  i.  |i,  «xlt)

about  01.  STi  thni  ttie  Snminna  dedirated  »lxl*''
ents  (the  tenth  of  the  pniflld  mado  by  CoWnii*
hifl  voyage  to  Tarteiwnai  to  Iler^,  in  the  ship*"!
ftii  immense  brazen  crater,  the  border  of  vbidi


CRATEBUS


435


CKATINUS


was  adorned  with  projecting  heads  of  griffiua.
This  crater,  which  Herodotus  calls  Argive  (from
irfaich  we  muBt  infer  that  the  Argive  artists  were
celebrated  for  their  craters),  was  supported  by
three  colossal  brazen  statues,  seven  yards  high,
with  their  knees  closed  together.

The  namber  of  craters  dedicated  in  temples
seems  everywhere  to  have  been  very  great.  Liv-
ios  Andronicns,  iu  bis  Eqaua  Troianua,  represent-
ed Agamemnon  returning  from  Troy  with  no  less
than  3000  craters,  and  Cicero  says  that  Verres  car-
ried away  from  Syra-


'''  ^''M'IO'^V^  .'"W2


cuse  the  most  beauti*
fnl  brazen  craters,
which  most  probably
belonged  to  the  va-
rious temples  of  that
city.  But  craters
were  not  only  dedi-
cated to  the  gods  as
ana(kt!niata,\}Mi  were
used  on  varions  soN
emn  occasions  in
their  service.  In  sac-
rifices the  libation
was  always  taken
from  a  crater;  and
sailors,  before  they
set  out  on  their  jonr-
ney,  used  to  take  the
libation with cnps

Bn»t«  CHLier  from  Pompeii fro™ a crater and

(OrertwGlt.)  pour  it  into  the  sea.

The  name  crater  was

also  sometimes  used  as  synouymons  with  atTkLovj

nttila,  a  pail  iu  which  water  was  carried.

The  Romans  used  their  crater  or  cratera  for  the
same  purposes  for  which  it  was  used  in  Greece ;
bnt  the  most  elegant  specimens  were,  like  most
works  of  art,  made  by  Greeks. See  Caelatcra.

CratiSnia  (fLpartpot).  (1)  A  distinguished  gen-
eral of  Alezauder  the  Great,  on  whose  death  (B.C.
323)  he  received,  in  common  with  Antipater,  the
goveronient  of  Macedonia  and  Greece.  He  fell
in  a  battle  gainst  Enmenes,  in  321.  (2)  A  Greek
phj'sician,  who  attended  the  family  of  Atticus.

Crates  (Jipanjs).  (1)  A  celebrated  Athenian  poet
of  the  Old  Comedy,  who  began  to  flourish  B.C.  449.
(2)  Of  Thebes,  a  pupil  of  the  Cynic  Diogenes,  and
one  of  the  most  distinguished  of  the  Cynic  philos-
ophers, flourished  about  B.C.  320.  (See  Cynici.)  (3)
Of  MalliiB  in  Cilicia,  a  celebrated  grammarian,  who
fonnded  the  school  of  grammar  at  Pergamns,  and
wrote  a  commentary  on  the  Homeric  poems  (^op'
Smrutd)  in  opposition  to  Aristarchus.  In  B.C.  157,
he  was  sent  by  Attalus  to  Rome  as  an  ambassador,
where  be  was  the  first  to  introduce  the  study  of
grammar.  Besides  his  Homeric  studies,  Crates
wrote  commentaries  on  Enripides  and  Aristoph-
anes and  a  treatise  on  the  Attic  dialect  (Ilepl
'Arruc^r  ^uAiKTov).  See  Wachsmnth,  De  Cratete
Maifota  (Leipzig,  1860);  Susemihl,  Gescktchte  d.
ffrt«*.  Litt  in  dfr  Alexandr.  Zeit,  ii.  pp.  4-12  and
703;  Conze,  in  the  Berl.  Acad.  Sitzvngshcr,  (1884);
and  Consbrnch,  in  the  Commtsnt.  in  Bonorem  Stude^
vtnndi  (Strassbnrg,  1689).  Also  the  articles  Gram-
MATiCA ;  Philology.

- Crates  (rapaSs,  ydppov). A  hurdle,  used  by  the
ancieuts  in many  different  ways— especially,  as
among  ourselves,  for  agricultural  purposes. Thus
14*


textae  cratet  are  the  wattled  hurdles  of  which
sheep-folds  are  made  (Hor.  Epod.  ii.  45);  rimJiiMM
crates  are  bush-harrows  (Verg.  Georg.  i.  95,  104).
The  name  was  also  applied  to  any  wooden  frame
composed  of  bars  with  interstices  —  onr  "crate,"
"grate";  and  tbe  interstices  might  be  filled  up
with  mats  of  straw,  rushes,  or  fern  (Colnm.  xii.  15).
The  following  special  senses  may  be  noticed:

(1)  Cratet  were  used  by  the  country  people  upon
which  to  dry  figs,  grapes,  etc.,  in  the  rays  of  the
sun  ;  or  to  screen  growing  fruit  from  the  weather
(Colnm.  xii.  16) ;  or  for  spreading  manure  (Cat.  /f.
R.  10).  (2)  A  rack  for  provisions.  (3)  Among  mil-
itary terms  we  Rud  cratea  used  iu  forming  the  road-
way of  Caesar's  bridge  over  the  Rhine  (Cnes.  B.
G.iv.17);  for  parapets  or  breastworks ;  as  fascines
for  crossing  ditches ;  and  as  mantlets  or  wooden
screens  for  sheltering  the  advance  of  troops  under
cover  (Ammian.  Marcell.  xxi.  12).  From  the  plu-
f-ei,  which  were  employed  in  the  same  way,  they
diSered  only  in  being  without  the  covering  of  raw
hides.  (4)  By  the  besieged  they  were  used  joined
together  so  as  to  form  what  Vegetius  calls  n  metel-
la,  and  filled  with  stones ;  these  were  then  poised
between  two  of  the  battlements,  and  as  the  storm-
ing-party  approached  upon  tbe  ladders,  overturned
on  their  heads  (Veget.  Mil.  iv,  6).  (5)  In  poetry,
the  wicker-work  of  shields  is  so  called  (Verg.  Aen.
vii.  633).

(6)  A  capital  punishment  was  called  by  this  name,
whence  the  phrase  aub  crate  neoari.  The  criminal
was  either  thrown  into  a  pond  or  well  and  drowned
under  a  hurdle  (Tac.  Germ.  12),  or  crushed  by  tbe
weight  of  stones  heaped  upon  it  (Llv.  iv.  50).

Crathls  (KpaOic).  (1)  A  river  in  Achaia,  falling
iuto  the  sea  near  Aegoe.  (2)  A  river  in  Lower  Italy,
falling  into  the  sea  near  Sybaris.  Its  waters  were
fabled  to  dye  the  hair  blond  (Eurip.  Troad.  228).

Cratiolila  irapplov).  A  gridiron,  several  speci-
mens of  which  have  been  found  in  Pompeii.  In
Petrouius  (31  and  70)
the  craticula  is  of  sil-
ver and  brought  to
the  table  by  the  slaves
—  an  anticipation
of  the  modern  "silver
grill."

CratlctUuill (^Kpartvnjpiov).
Poll.  vi.  89.

Cratinna  (Kpartvos).  (1)  An  Athenian  comic  poet,
bom  in  B.C.  519.  It  was  not  till  Iste  in  life  that
he  directed  his  attention  to  comic  compositions.
Tbe  first  piece  of  bis  on  record  is  the  *ApxOiOxoi,
which  was  represented  about  B.C.  446,  at  which
time  he  was  in  his  seventy-first  year.  In  this
play,  according  to  Plutarch  [Cimon),  he  makes
mention  of  the  celebrated  Cimon,  who  had  died
the  preceding  year,  b.c.  449;  and  from  the  lan-
guage employed  by  the  poet  it  may  be  inferred
that  he  was  on  terms  of  close  intimacy  with  the
Athenian  general.  Soon  after  this,  comedy  be-
came so  licentious  and  virulent  in  its  personali-
ties that  the  magistracy  were  obliged  to  interfere.
A  decree  was  passed,  B.C.  440,  prohibiting  the  ex-
hibitions of  comedy ;  which  law  continued  in  force
only  during  that  year  and  the  two  following,  being
repealed  in  the  archooship  of  Euthynieues.  Three
victories  of  Cratinus  stand  recorded  after  the
recommencement  of  comic  performances.  With
the  Xtifia(afAfvoi  he  was  second,  B.C.  42o  (  Argum.


Bronze  Cralicul*  fh>m  Puetum
(Handle  restored).


An  andiron. See


CRATIPPUS


4S6


CBEnDA


lAarH.\  irbeo  tho  'AxapvtU  of  Arinfophanes  won  ^
the  prizv,  aiul  tho  thin!  ]Aace  was  wljtulKod  to
the  Nov^ivioi  of  EtijMilis,  111  tho  «nuyct;iliiig  yoiir
he  was  ujjaiu  Hi^iMjiiil  »ith  thu  Sdrvpoi,  uiul  Ai'i»-
tophanca  rigain  fimt  with  tho  ■lTrTr<ic  {.irguta.
JSquit.).  lu  a  parabaaia  of  thitt  play  thai  yoiiDg
rival  tuakea  uieutioa  of  Ciutiua*!;  where,  having
notteod  liig  former  socoeaaes,  ho  insinontc^,  uiidvr
tho  clonk  of  au  equivocal  piety,  that  tho  veteran
was  becoming  doting  and  snperaDDiiated.  Tbe
old  niaj],  now  in  hia  ninety-fiftli  year,  iudigunnt
at  this  insidious  attack,  i-xfrti'd  hitt  remaining
vigonr,  and  euniposed,  against  the  coDtestH  uf  tbe
appmar.hiiig  HenHiin,  a  (MimiMty  entitled  Xlvrit^,  or
The  Fiagottj  which  turned  upon  th«  at'ciiHntinnR
broagUt  agniuKt  him  by  AriHtophatiuji.  The  aged
dramatist  had  a  cuitifttot*!  triniiiph  (.-Irf^um.  Nab.).
Ue  ivoa  first;  while  hiti  humbled  antagonist  wan
vauqnlabod  alno  by  AmiMpaioM  \ritb  thu  Kiicyor,
though  the  play  of  AriHtophancn  wun  thn  favourit'O
jVhAm.  Notwithstauding  hia  noiorioiia  liit<uiper-
UDce,  Cmtinns  livc<l  to  an  extrnme  old  age,  dy-
ing B.C.  4'i'i,  in  his  nitinty -ftevcnth  year.  AriK>
topbanes  alUides  to  tho  cxoetiaes  of  Crotiuns  in  n
paaRage  of  th»  EquiteM  (v.  5i^  foil.).  In  tho  Par,
be  baninrotiKly  nscribps  tho  jovial  old  poet's  dvath
to  a  shock  on  seeing  a  cask  of  wine  staved  and
lout.  Cratinus  himnclf  made  nn  erniplu  of  nc-
kiiowU'dgiiig  ^\\f^  fuiliiig  (Scliol.  in  Par.  70iJ).  Hoi--
uvVj  also,  n[)<:iiK  »ii»  of  Inti  Eplrttli-H  (i.  19)  with  n
maxim  of  tlm  rniimdian'H,  in  duo  norordanc-tt  with
his  practice.  Tlio  titkti  of  thirty-4>i^lit  of  the
oomedioa  of  Craiinus  bnvo  boon  coUeictod.  JJiii
style  was  bold  aad  auimntcd  (IVrs.  i.  1^0,  aud
like  his  younger  brethrou,  Kupolis  and  Aristoph-
anes, he  fearteaaty  and  uiispariogly  directct]  bi-t
aatiro  agttinat  the  iniquitous  public  ollict-r  and  the
prodigiit«  of  private  life.  Thu  fruguiunts  of  Crnti-
iiiw  may  be  found  lu  Meineke,  Fragmntta  Coniiro-
rum  iiraroornm  (Berlin,  1*40).  (2)  There  wan  nlso
a  youi>ger  C'ratinuM,  a  poet  of  the  New  Comvdy  aud
oonteniponiry  of  Plato.

CratlppUB  (K/>urijrfro«).  A  Peripatetic  philrmo*
pb^T  III'  Milyteo)'*,  acroniiianii^d  Pomiicy  hi  hi))
fliglit  after  thi^  battle  nf  I'barsnlia.  B.C.  4H.  Ijc
afterwanls  settled  at  Alliens,  whvra  tbu  yming  M.
Cieero  was  his  pnpil  in  B.C.  44.  By  the  elder  Cic-
ero's InIIiicuco,  Crati|iptis  receivetl  the  gift  of  Ho-
iiian  cilizeiisbip  from  Cm'^ir.

Cratj^liu  (KpariXot)  A  Greek  philosopher,  and
disciple  of  ileniclitUH.  Arcordiiig  to  ArJMliitle
(Sfelayh.  i.  6),  Plato  attended  hiH  let-ttirex  in  hlK
youth.  Cratylus  is  oue  of  tliH  iutfrlocntnrB  lU
tlie  dialogue  of  Plato  calLod  after  bis  uniue.

CVemfira.  A  small  river  in  Elruha,  which  falls
into  th<'- Tiber  n  little  above  Rome;  niemitrable  fnr
the  death  of  tlie:{0(IFal>iL  in  B,C.477.  Here  also  Con-
staiitiiiti di^fttuted  Maxentias iu  A.T>. '.Wi. fcf>ee  Fabii

Cremua  (Kp^fivu).  A  strong  place  In  the  intcrioi
of  Fisiilia,  lying,  according  to  Ptolemy,  on  the  de-
clivity of  Taurus,  nearly  six  railos  north  of  Solga.
This  fortress  was  considered  by  the  ItnmaDs  to  he
uf  so  much  consequence  that  tlicy  v«tu.bti5bed  a
colony  hero.

Cremona.  A  city  of  Cisnlpinn  Gaul,  northeast
of  Placfiitia  and  a  little  nnrth  of  ilie  Pn.  Cretno-
lia  Htid  Ptaeenlia  were  both  sottled  by  Romati
colonies,  H.O.  219  (P«)lyb.  iii.  40).  After  the  defeat
on  the  Trebia,  we  find  the  consul  P.  Hcipio  retiring
to  Cremona  (Liv.  xxi.  ."jii),  aud  it  upitears  that  tbe


Rfimans  retained  the  place  tbrougbonl
of  tho  Second  Punic  War,  though  it  suifeitd  m
much during its coutinuanre, and afterwaidi
from  tho  attaeks  of  the  Guitl!ii,  ibat  it  waa  found
necessary  to  reeniit  its  population  by  a  fresh
ply  nf  colonistjt. Thu  colony,  being  tbus  rcri<
coutiuued  to  prasper  for  nearly  a  huudrod  and
ty  yoara;  wheo  tho  Civil  Wars,  which enaued  after
tho  death  of  Caesar,  materially  affected  ita  ioter
eats. Creuionn,  iinfortnuately,  espoused  tbeauie
of  Brutus,  anil  thus  incurred  tbe  vengoaoce  of  tbo
victorious  party. The  loss  of  its  territory,  wbieh
was  divided  among  tbe  vetenin  soldiera  of  Aaf[w>
tiiN,  is  well  known  fmm  tbe  line  of  Vergil  (^tUie^.
ix.  28),  whieh  in  nearly  repeated  by  Martial  (vjii.
55). The  elTi-ct  of  this  ealaniity  woubl  nef  ni,  haw-
ever,  to have  been  but  t'empurary ; and,  in  fut,
wu  learn  from  StralMi  that  Cremona  wa.-^  .tccouut-
cd  iu  his  time  ono  of  thu  moat  cuitsiderublc  l^ivat
in the n4irth uf  Italy. The civil won  irliidi
arose  during  tho  time  of  Otho  and  Vitcllins  wero
the  source  of  mu£h  acvcrer  affliction  to  this  eily
than liny  former evil,  as the fnte of  the  En-
piro  wati  mnrc  than  once  decided  between  hrp
uonteuiliiig  armies  in  its  immediate  rieinily. if-
t«r  the  ilefeat  of  Vit4>llius's  party  by  the  trw'ps
of  VtutpaHiuu,  ib  was  entered  by  thu  latter  [A.D.
R9\  and  expfmed  to  alt  the  bomirs  that  tirp,  iJw
Htvi>n1,  ami  n  nceiittoiis  soldiery  can  infliDl  ii|>ki
a  eity  taken  by  Htortii. The  conllagratiim  of  1I10
place  lasted  four  days. The hidlgnatioD  wbirii
this  event  exciieil  ihronghouL  Italy  bocrasttili*"
been  such  tliaC  Ve*pii»iiiu.  afi-uid  of  the  wlium  it
might  attach to bis  parly,  uaed  every  effurt  W
raiae  Cremona from its ruins by  recalling  1l>»
scattered inhubiuuts,  reconstructing tbr  puliJiP
edifices,  and  grautiDg  the  city  frcab  prinlegoa

Cremouia  lugum. f>-e  AhrKS.

Cremutlus  Cordus. See.  CpRi>t'8.

Crson  (K/Wwy).  (1)  King  of  Corinth,  and  btli^r
of  Crelleu  orGluuc*.  the  wife  of  loson.  (SeeCWC-
8A ;  Medea.)  (2)  The  brother  of  lounst^,  bkiIIi*^
and  wife  of  Oerii[tus.  (.See  Okuifus.)  He  s«r<B«l-
e<l  the  throne  of  Thelx's  after  Eleoele*  and  Poly-
nioes  tiiul  fallen  in  inntual  rombal,  and  gin  or-
ders that  the  body  of  tbe  latter  sboiihl  \>t>  A^
prived  of  funenil  rites,  on  wbieh  clrcanwliim*  ••
fouiHle><l  the  idot  of  tho  JntiffOHe  of  Soplwl**'
See  ANTinoxfe; Ktkocles; Polykices;  SbtW

.AflAtSST  TtlKltKS.

Creoph^luB  1  Kpiw^i'Xor)  of  Cbioa.  Chie  of  t^'
earliest  epic  pools,  and  said  to  have  bora  •*■*
friend  or  soD-lo-law  of  Homer  (Plat.  Itfp»b.(t0  C '<
Plot.  Ltfr.].  An  epic  poem  liaa  Iteen  sseril*!  *''
hiui,eTiiit1e4l  oijynXtor  Skufris  or  0<';yoXia.  lelalinf
tlie  ctuitest  of  Heracles  with  Enrytiu  for  ll«  »*^*
of  Iol(?.  aud  the  t%ipture  of  Oeehalia.

Creplda  ((c/i^mf  1,  also  called  Crepidflla  iP'a"'-
/'.vv.  iv.  a,  3).  A  kind  of  shoe  or  the  nutiirt  «
sanilals,  and  to  be  cm^io-
ert'd  aa  occapyin;:  ■  "'»«•
die  position  l)ctwefH  *
closed  l»4H»t  and  plain  ^'
dais. Originally  it  'P'

.M.,,M«.  iK..,i.iH.-,,..,*)  \*^rs  to  have  !>«?»  *"J
by  i»easauts,  having  »  ti't"
and  strong  sole,  often  stiubU*<l  with  nails  lef.  r\^-
ft.  A',  xxxvi.  $  127),  sometimes  titled  wiib  If*'''''
or  brn2en  plutes  callei]  Xlm  Kprfrrt^tt  (.llipcocr. 'f


J


CHEPITACULUM


427


CRETA


iM

1

^^^^'^W \ I ^ f'

kf^^^^B

mmryf^^:f>h

^i^

Galen,  xriii.  A.  p.  678,  ed.  Kuhn)  ;  and  we  are  tohl
that  Hagiion,  one  of  the  followers  of  Alexander,
had  gold  or  silver  nails  in  Ills  crepidae  (Atlien.
xii.  539  o).  It  sometimes  had  a  low  upper,
\Ytlh  eyes  (ansae)  through  which  straps  {obstra-
gitia,  t/uiyrcr),  which  were  at  tiuiea  adorned  with
jewels  or  dyed  with  purple,  were  passed,  fasteu-
iag  it  over  the  instep;  often  it  was  closed  at  the
back;  but  generally  the  upper  cousisted  of  a
series  of  large  loops  (also  called  aiMa«),  through

wliicli  the  fust-
etiiug  thong  or
thongs  were
passed.  This
kind  of  open
network  cover-
ing the  iust'ep
explains  the  ep-
ithet  ffoXuiTjifi-
bi£  (Lnciau,

CEUS.)  The  name  crepida  is  also  given  to  a  raised
sidewalk  or  causeway  for  foot-passengers  on  the
aide  of  a  sti-eet,  as  in  the  above  illustration.

Crepitaotilum. See  Sistrum.

Crepundiia  (ra  tnrapyava).  A  generic  term  fur
childreu'a  playthings,  such  as  rattles,  dolln,  toy
hatchets,  swords,  etc.  The  name  is  also  given  to
nlijects  of  a  similar  desoriptiou  tied  about  the
necks  of  children,  either  as  amulets  or  for  pur-
pones  of  identification
(Plant.  itfW.  Glor.  v.  6;
Cut.  iv.  1,  13;  Sud.  iv.
4;  Soph.  Oed.  Tgr.  103&).
fipecimeus  of  these  are
represented  as  worn  on
the  neck  of  a  child  in  a
statue  of  the  Museo  Fio-
Cletuentino, copied  in  the
accompanying  engraving
— viz.,a  balf-moon  {lunu-
la) on  the  top  of  the  right
shoulder ;  then  a  double
axe  (MciiricHla  anapca) ;
next  a  bucket  (titula  argenteola) ;  a  sort  of  flower,
not  raentioued ;  a  little  sword  (enriculua  aureolus) ;
a  little  baud  (manicula);  then  another  half-moon;
a  dolphin  (delphin),  etc. See  Auulktuv.

Creaphontes  {Kpetrtftovrjjs)-  A  son  of  Aristo-
machus,  who,  with  his  brothers  Temenus  and  Aris-
tomedns,  conquered  the  Peloponnesus.  This  was
tlie  famons  conquest  achieved  by  the  Heraclidae.
He  and  his  two  sous  were  subsequently  slaiu  by
the  Measenians. See  Aristodehus;  Heraclidae.

Creaaa.  "The  Cretan  woman";  a  term  used
by  Ovid  of  Ariadnd  (^m.  i.  7,  16)  and  of  Aerop^
(4.Xi.3a7).

Creatonla  (Kpijtrnuvui).  A  district  in  Macedonia
between  the  Axius  aad  the  Stryraon,  uear  Mount
Cercin^,  inhabited  by  the  Crestonaei,  a  Thracian
people ;  their  chief  town  was  Creston  or  Creston^,
founded  by  the  Pelasgians.

Creta  (KpTn);  in  Italian,  Candia;  in  Turkish,
Kirit).  One  of  the  largest  islands  of  the  Mediterra-
neau  Sea,  at  the  south  of  all  the  Cyclades.  Its
name  is  derived  by  some  from  the  Cnretes,  who  are
Raid  to  have  been  its  first  inhabitants;  by  others,
from  the  nymph  Cret^,  daughter  of  Hesperus;  aud


Cbtid  w)tb  CrepuodlB. (Uu-
aeo  Plo-Clemeotlno.)


by  others,  from  Cres,  a  son  of  Zens  aud  the  nymph
Idaeiv.  It  is  also  designated  among  the  poets
aud  mythological  writers  by  the  several  appel-
lations of  Aeria,  Dolich^,  Idaea,  aud  Telchinia.
According  to  Herodotus  (bk.  i.),  this  great  island
remained  in  the  possession  of  various  barbarous
natious  till  the  time  of  Minos  (q.T.),Bou  of  Euro-
pa,  who,  having  expelled  his  brother  Sarpedou,  bj^
came  the  sole  sovereign  of  the  country.  These
early  inhabitants  are  generally  supposed  to  be
the  Eteocretes  of  Homer  (Od.  xix.  173),  who  clearly
distinguishes  them  from  the  Grecian  colonists  sub-
sequently settled  there.

Minos,  according  to  the  concurrent  testimony
of  antiquit}',  first  gave  laws  to  the  Cretans,  aud,
having  conquered  the  pirates  who  infested  the
Aegean  Sea,  established  a  powerful  navy.  In  the
Trojan  War,  Idomeneus,  sovereign  of  Crete,  led  its
forces  to  the  war  in  eighty  vessels,  a  number  little
inferior  to  that  commanded  by  Agamemnon  him-
self. According  to  the  traditions  which  Vergil  has
followed,  Idomeneus  was  afterwards  driven  from
his  throne  by  faction,  iiud  compelled  to  sail  to
lapygia,  where  be  founded  the  town  of  Salemum.
At  this  period  the  island  appears  to  have  beeu  in-
habited by  a  mixed  population  of  Greeks  and  bar-
barians. Homer  enumerates  the  former  under  the
names  of  Acliaei,  Dorians,  snrnamed  Trichaices,
and  Pelasgi.  The  latter,  who  were  the  most  an-
cient, are  said  to  have  come  from  Thessaly,  under
the  conduct  of  Teutamus,  posterior  to  the  great
Pelasgio  emigration  into  ItAly.  The  Doriaus  are
reported  to  have  established  themselves  iu  Crete,
under  the  command  of  Altbemenes  of  Argos,  after
the  death  of  Codrns  and  the  foundation  of  Megara.
In  Crete  was  the  famous  labyrinth  whose  construc-
tion was  ascribed  to  Daedalus,  and  about  which
so  many  legends  cluster.  See  Ariadn^  ;  Daeda-
lus; Icarus;  Labyrinthus;  Minos;  Minotau-
Rus;  PasiphaA;  Thkseus.

After  the  Trojan  War  and  the  expulsion  of  Idom-
eneus, the  principal  cities  of  Crete  formed  them-
^ selves  into  several  republics,  for  the  most  pait
!  independent,  while  others  were  connected  by  fcd-
I  eral  ties.  These,  though  not  exempted  from  the
j  dissensions  which  so  universally  distracted  the
Grecian  States,  niHintained  for  a  long  time  a  con-
]  siderable  degree  nf  prosperity,  owing  to  the  good
system  of  laws  and  education  which  had  been  so
j  early  instituted  tliroughout  the  isAud  by  the  de-
crees of  Minos.  The  Cretan  code  was  supposed  by
many  of  the  best- informed  writers  of  antiquity  to
have  furnished  Lycurgus  with  the  model  of  his
most  salutary  regulations.  It  was  founded,  accord-
ing to  Ephorns,  cited  by  Strabo,  on  the  just  basis
of  liberty  and  an  equality  of  rights;  aud  its  great
aim  was  to  promote  social  harmony  and  peace  by
enforcing  temperance  aud  frugality.  On  this  prin-
ciple, the  Cretan  youths  were  divided  into  classes
called  Ageloe,  and  all  met  at  the  Audreia,  or  pub-
lic meats.  Like  the  Spartans,  they  were  early
trained  to  the  use  of  arms,  and  inured  to  sustain
the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold,  and  undergo  the
severest  exercise;  they  were  also  compelled  to
learn  their  letters  and  certain  pieces  of  music.
The  chief  magistrates,  called  Cosmi  (Kd<r/iOi),  were
ten  in  number  and  elected  annually.  The  Geron-
tes  conatitnted  the  council  of  the  nation,  and  were
selected  from  those  who  were  thought  worthy  of
holding  the  office  of  Cosnius.  There  was  also  an
equestrian  order,  who  were  bound  to  keep  horses


CRETA


4SB


CBIUEN


»l  ttifilr  own  pxpeiise.  Bnt  tboagb  tlie  Cretui
Innrs  rrxmnlikil  llio  SpurUn  iustitiitioua  in  so
many  Imptirtaur  jK>iii(-s,  thvre  were  some  strikiiig
ftAtun'fl  wtiict)  (lii^tiiigtiJNlii>il  th«  legiHlalivt^  ftiiici-
meuta  of  tbfl  two  conutrii^ii.  One  uf  tlieae  was  that
iht  tAcedaemuuiaiiR  n-cro  f^iibject  to  a  strict  agra-
rian law,  whi>rcaa  tbo  Crctaus  woro  under  uo  re-
Btraiut  as  to  the  acetiianlatiau  of  luouoycd  or  biiidcd
property;  auothcr,  that  the  Crelau  ropiiblics  nere
fur  the  inottt  part  <l«tu<K;rutLC,  wbereaa  Ibe  Spaitnii
irna  decidedly  ari-Htoeratic.  Herudntiitt  luforuie  ue
ibat  tbe  CretniiM  were  t1utem>(l  \>y  ttic  iinfitvuiir-
abl«  rviHponite  of  tbo  Pytbian  cimclo  from  ci)iilrib>
utiug  forces  to  tlio  Grei'iun  armnnifnt  iit>)temblMl
to  resist  tbe  Fersiant)  Ivii.  160).  In  the  Fi-btpoiiiH>>
BtAD  War  iiicideiitnl  mention  U  miiilo  of  Home  Cr(5-
tan  citi(*H  at  allied  witli  Athotm  or  Spnitu,  but  tliu
itlaod  doAM  not  ap]K^ur  to  have  r^spoiihrd  i-olloctivn-
ly  tbo  caiiso  of  either  of  the  belligcnnit  partiett.
Tbo  Cretan  noblien*  were  beld  in  grtvaC  estiinntion
as  light  troopM  ai>d  arcbers,  and  readily  off't-n^l
tbeir8erv-ici!s  for  biro  to8iH;h.Stiit<'!t,'wbetbi'rOrft(-'k
or  barhurion,  iw  ni^i-dfd  tlu-ni.  In  tbe  titn<^  of  Po-
lybitiH  Ibi)  Cretano  bad  mtioh  ilcyonenili'd  fnmi
tbcirancietit  cbnractcr,  for  be  chingejt  f  hfiti  r»>iieitt-
ndly  with  tbo  g:r(M8eMt  iniitnoralttv  and  Tb(^  most
batcfiil  viotrtt.  Wo  know  tiltto  with  vsliat  severity
they  are  repi"ov«d  by  St.  Paul,  in  tlie  words  of  cnii'
of  their  own  poetif,  Epimonidcs  (Ep.  Tit.  t.  I'i),
KpTTf  r  ori  ^Irtinrrait  Kaxh  0t}pta,  yaarifMi  affyai.

Tbe  chief  cities  of  Crete  were  Ciiown*,  CydonJa,
Gortyna.  and  Lyctns,  nil  of  wbirh  M*t.

The  Riimanft  dicl'iiot  interfere  with  tlin  nffairK
of  Crete  befrxre  the  war  wiOi  AniiochiiJ*,  wht^n  Q.
Fabiii!*  LaWo  rroaaed  over  into  tbo  JMlikiid  from
Ania  MiiMir,  utidi^r  pretence.  o{  claiintiiji;  curtain
Runian  riiptivea  who  were  ilelaiiietl  there.  Sev-
eral yoarn  uftwr,  tli«  island  was  iiiviuied  by  a  Ro-
man aniiy  cuniniaucled  by  M.  Aritouiiis,  under  tbo
prulMuce  that  tbe  Cretaus  ba<l  tecretly  fuvoured
Ibo  canau  of  Milbridutcs;  bnt  Floras  luort.'  caii-
Utdlj  »vow8  that  tbo  dc^ii^e  of  couqnest  vrm  tbe
real  luolive  nhieh  led  to  this  attack.  Tbe  enter-
prise,  bonever,  having  failed,  the  i<ubJugalioo  of
the  Intaud  vraa  not  ell«cti>d  till  Konie  yoans  later  by
Metolliis,  who,  from  bin  siiRceAH,  nht:iined  the  ngno-
meu  of  CretienR,  It  waw  then  (B.r;  fi7)  nnnexed  to
tbe  Roman  Kinpire,  »nd  foruitMl,  together  witb
CyroDaica,  one  i)f  itH  iinmtrnniH  pnivinoes,  being
governed  liy  tbo  nnmr  iirortmnnl.

Crete  fomirt  an  irregnlar  paralU-loj^riim,  of  which
tbe  western  nitlc  faeoH  Sicily,  ivliilc  the  eastern
looks  towanls  Cyprus;  un  tbe  nurtb  it  is  njifilied
by  tbe  Mflre  Creliciim,  and  on  tbe  sonib  by  the-
Libyan  Sea,  which  intervenes  between  Iho  island
aod  thti  opiMMkite  coast  of  Cyren<5.  )lonnt  Ida,
wbleb  Bnriiassea  all  the  other  snaimits  in  eleva-
tlou,  rises  in  tho  centre  of  tbe  inland  ;  its  bnae  oc-
capteo  a  ci re n inference  of  nearly  fitW  ntiidia.  To
the  west  it  is  connected  with  nnotber  rhitiii.  rnlled
the  Wbit«  Monntniiifl  CAevcn  oprf),  anil  to  the  cji^t
its  prulougation  forniH  tbe  ridge  nnriently  known
by  the  name  of  Dirtf^,  &i'e  Hock,  ffr^'M  (fJiitliiigeii,
1839);  Pashley,  Trareh  fn  Crete  (I'Ondon,  ia37):
Spratt,  RettKircke*  in  Crete,  'i  voU.  (Lomiou,  1865);
Edwardeo,  JMleru  from  Crete  (LoodoD,  liM7);  and
the  article  Gortyn.

Creta  (bc.  terra).  Cbalk  or  elay;  so  called  from
Ita  abundance  in  tbn  tslaiitl  of  Crete  (Creta),  and
BO  In  Greek  Kp^^Kr)  yi).  Tim  eretsi  proper  was
aiinply  cbalk  ;  rrrta  Kntrta  was  a  species  of  earth


found  near  Ervtria  ia  Enboea  and  awA  in  i
an  an  nsiriugeut;  crtta  Sarda  wb»  fnller's  I'srUi,
use^)  ill  cleaning  gnnueiit^  (soe  Fcu.LiO>;  rrrta  Ci-
mo/ia  wus  a  better  kind  of  tbe  sauie;  and  mtt
SeUnujiia  (from  Heliuns  in  Sicily)  fiimished  vomen
witb  one  i>f  thi-ir  niinieronn  face-powdefi.  (Sn
Ckkussa;  Ffcrs.)  Of  some  («|i«cii-8  of  creta,  i
sola  were  made,  on  which  nee  Fl(nii.B.  >'Tain  I
n  hiteuoBB  of  ctalk,  it  was  npokcn  of  tmpicAlljr
denoting  luck,  ciintraated  witb  carbo  (Penkr.j
witb  tbe  GoinnieufatorB).  The  feet  of  tilavu  (
pnseil  for  Mite  were  ebalke><l  (Jnv.  i.  Ill),  poasibly
to  aid  in  tnnking  them  if  they  escaiieil ;  h«Dt«
gt/ptali  prdet  in  Tibull.  ii.  3,  lUI.  The  word  rrtteli
i»  f>onie(iineB  applied  to  candidates  for  office,  fnnn
(he  wbii«  robea  Tiioy  vrora^oaiufuloli.  Bc«  Am-
bitus.

CreteuB  (Kpiptvt)  or  Cati«nB  iKarptvtt.  Vit>
son  of  Minoe  by  Pabiphae  or  Cki^,  and  father  uf
Altheiuciiea.

Cretheua  (KpjjStiis).  Rtm  of  Aeolim  and  EdhrU!,
husband  i>f  Tyro,  and  father  of  Ao«>n,  Phrre^.Aiuj'
tbaon.aud  tlip]M>]yto. Ho  wastbefoDiuleroflukiu.

Creusa  (K^Movcra).  (1}  A  daughter  of  Ctt«^
kinjj  of  Corinth,  and  wife  of  laeon.  She  receirid
front  Mi'dea,H»briiUd  presents.adiadeui  andsmtT,
bipiri  of  whieb  bad  been  prepattHl  with  nmRic  irt
and  A.iinriittNl  nilb  deatlly  ]ioiK4>nft.  On  urrAyioK
hei*ft<^!f  in  theA<^,  Hainra  bnrHt  forth  and  drAttujvd
her.  (.'r«on,  tbe  father  of  tbo  princnsn,  |>embMi  in
a  Hiniilor  way,  having  thrown  bimfclf  upon  tlie
body  of  hia  dying  dangbter,  and  lM*ing  an«-riranb
nnahle  to  extricate  himself  fioin  tbe  eoibnin  of
the  corpae  {Etnip.  ArAl.78l  foil.,  IIOG  foil.).  Acfofd-
ing  to  the  BcboliMt,  she  was  aim  ualled  Oluic^
(2)  Dangbter  of  Priain  and  Hecuba,  and  wifr  tff
.\eneas,  When  Troy  waa  snqiriKed  by  the  GfrfU
she  tied  in  thui  night  with  her  linsband.  Init  \\\ej
were  sepiiiiited  diiHrig  the  confusion,  nor  wv  ht
absence  obwjrved  until  tbo  othi-r  fugitives  iini'«i
at  tbe  spot  Hp]i(>iiite<l  fi)r  aHteinbling.  Acdm*  a
seound  time  entcn^d  the  biirning  city  in  qnwtof
bis  wife;  bnt  while  be  was  seeking  for  brrlhmiis^
every  qnsrtcr  of  Tmy,  CreUaa  upj>eiired  to  him  s*
a  deiHed  ])en«oniigr,  and  a))peiised  bis  ulnni)  ^y  in-
forming him  that  she  hati  been  adopted  by  t'vbel*
among  her  own  attendant  njinphs;  and  *hr  llifO
nrged  him  to  pnrsnu  bis  conrso  to  Italy,  with  •"
intimation  of  tbo  good  fortnnu  that  awail(4  hin*
in  that  tiiiul  (Vorg.  Ant.  ii.  b6ii  foil.).

Cribnun  (jtrfffKo-fn-).  A  aieve;  niad«  of  i«n"l»'
inent  perforated  w  i  tb  holes,  or  of  horac-hair.  IbirA"'
papyrns.  or  rushes  interwoven  bo  as  to  Iw  **^
terslices  botween  each  plat.  T!ie  Romaim  «f"*
their  flour  throngb  tw^o  kinds  of  sievea,  vJiM  '^
BI>ectiveIy  rxcitntoria  and  pollfiiana.  the  l»tl«f  *■"
which  gave  the  finest  Iboir.  lenued  potin.  Bie*"**
of  btvrse-hair  wen'  fimt  matlt^  by  tbr  (laalH;  iti***
i)f  lifioii  by  tbo
niwliet*  bv  tbe
Calo,  K.  h.  76, :{ ;  Pers.  iii.  lia>. See  p,  439.

Crimen.  A  legal  term  having  two  mraoing*  ^
ordinary  use:  (a)  a  pniii.thable  offenre:  aiMl{t)  '^
accusation  brooght  agninst  the  pcmou  hy  wbu*
tho  offoneo  is  committed.  In  the  first  nf  tb**
BPDses  crlinioa  were,  in  tbo  oldoKt  ^wriod  of  Koa**''
history,  regarded  as  wrongs  againnt  niliginn  *"•
tbo  gods,  and  their  punishment  as  an  Mpisn"*"
nfiered  t«  heaven  (Srrr.  ad  Verg.  Am.  t.  ftW)-  J'
tbe  Twelve  Tables  this  implieaiiuu  of  |irtut  !»•


ren'  iimt  ma<lH  l>y  the  IJsalH;  lli*"^

lo  Spaniards;  nml  of  popyrfl*  a***

Egyptians  <Pbn.  //.  A',  xviii.  ^'


CttlMlSUS


BrDate  Cribra  or  Sieres  IVoiii  Pomp«ll. (Orerbeclc)


with  religion  and  religious  sanctions  has  become
less  prominent,  and  we  find  a  distinction  between
offences  which  are  punished  by  a  solemn  tegisla-
ttve  act  of  the  State  and  offences  atoned  for  by  n
fine  paid  to  the  injured  person  in  satisfaction  of
hia  resentment,  as  tu  the  amount  of  which  the  par-
ties might  come  to  terms  (Fest.  s.  v.  taiio).  From
this  distiDctiou  arose  another,  of  more  scientific
value,  between  delicto  privata  and  crimina  publico
{Dig.  21,  1,  17,  18),  which  is  adhered  to  with  toler-
able consistency  in  the  writings  of  the  Jurists  and
the  later  law.  Delicta  privata,  or  deltcta  simply,
are  civil  offences,  or  what  we  call  '*  torta  " ;  crimina
pubtica  are  what  we  call  "  crinieN,"  offences  against
the  State  or  community,  the  subject  of  prosecution
before  a  criminal  tribunal.  But  occasionally  a  de-
lict is  spoken  of  as  a  crimen  (e.g.ez/ra/ur(t  crimen
riderif  Gains,  iii.  197 ;  Inst.  iv.  1,  7),  and  in  othpx
passages  (e.  g.  Dig.  4B,  19, 1)  a  person  who  commits
a  crime  is  said  deltnquere.  Crimes  punitshable  by
deatli,  loss  of  Ubertaa,  by  tnterdiclio  aquae  et  ignis,
or  deportatio  were  called  capttalia.

Ciimlsus  (Kpi/uiror)  or  ClimiMna  {Kpifiurtros).
A  river  in  the  west  of  Sicily  fulling  into  the  Hypsa;
»u  its  banks  Timolcou  defeated  the  Carthaginians,
B.C.  339.

Ciinagdraa  (Kpivayopas).  A  resident  of  Hity-
leu^  who  flourished  during  the  Augustan  Age.  He
is  the  author  of  some  fifty  epigrams  of  the  Greek
Anthology. (Jacobs,  Antk.  Grace,  pp.  876-878).

CiiBpns,  Flavius  Julius.  The  eldest  son  of
the  emperor  Constantiue  the  Great,  and  uamed  by
him  as  Caesar  in  a.d.  317.  He  is  tfaou)<;ht.  to  have
anptred  to  the  thrtuio,  for  in  :J24  his  father  caused
him  to  he  put  to  death. See  Constantinus,  p.  404.

CMssaeua  Sinus  (Kpimraios  xoXn-or).  An  arm
of  the  Sinus  Corinthiacus  on  the  nortliern  shore.
It  extends  into  the  country  of  Phocitt,  and  had  at
its  head  the  town  of  Crisba,  whence  it  took  its
nsme.  Its  modern  name  is  the  Gulf  of  Sulonit,
from  the  modern  city  of  Salona,  the  ancient  Ara-
phissa,  which  was  the  chief  town  of  the  Locri
Ozolae  and  lay  to  the  northeast  of  Delphi.

CziaU. See  Galea.

Czitae  (jtptraO-  Judges ;  a  name  applied  by
the  Greeks  to  any  i)er80u  who  did  not  judge  of  a
thinfj  as  Sneaoriir — i.  e.  according  to  positive  law —
l>Dt  i-utber  according  to  his  own  personal  sense  of
justice  and  equity  (Herod,  iii.  160).  Specifically,
the  name  was  applied  at  Athens  to  a  number  of


429  CROESUS

judges  chosen  by  ballot  from  a  body
of  selected  caodidatea  at  the  time
of  the  Dionysia  (q.  v.).  Their  office
was  to  judge  of  the  merit  of  the
different  choruses  and  dramatic
poems,  and  to  award  the  prizes  to
the  victors.  It  is  supposed  that
there  were  in  all  ten  xpirai — fire
for  comedy  and  five  for  tragedy.
See  Drama.

Critheia  {Vipi6r)U). The  reputed
mother  of  Homer. See  Homkrub.


Critias  (Kpinar)*  An  Athenian,
a  disciple  of  Socrates  and  Gorgias
of  Leontiui.  He  was  one  of  the
most  accomplished  men  of  hia  time,
and  waa  distinguished  as  a  poet  and
an  orator.  But  he  is  best  known
as  the  chief  of  the  Thirty  Tyrants
(q.T.),  in  defence  of  whose  cause  against  the  Lib-
erators he  fell  ill  B.C.  403.  He  was  the  author  of
several  tragedies.  Some  fragments  of  his  poems
have  survived,  the  longest  being  from  his  political
elegies.  He  seems  to  have  had  the  gift  of  eipres-
sion,  but  to  have  written  in  a  harsh  style.

Criton  (KptVaip).  A  rich  citizen  of  Athens  and
a  friend  and  disciple  of  Socrates.  He  made  ar-
rangements to  enable  Socrates  to  escape  from  prisou
just  before  his  death,  but  the  firmness  of  the  philos-
opher, who  refused  to  fly,  foiled  the  plan.  He  was
the  author  of  seventeen  philosophical  dialogues,
now  lost ;  and  a  dialogue  of  Plato  bears  his  name.

Crol^lna  (  Kpu^vkos ).  A
fashion  of  wearing  the  hair
drawu  up  into  a  knot  (Thuc.
i.  6),  as  shown  iu  the  accom*
panyiug  illustration.  See
Coma.

CrooodilopJUis ( KpoKoiltFi-
\tav  IlfiXtc). The  name  of  sev-
eral Egyptian  cities,  so  named crobylua. (Rich.)
from  the  local  worship  of  the
croco<1ile. See  Pliny,  H.  N.  v.  9;  and  the  second
article  ARSiNofe.

Crooota,  dim,  CrocottUa  (sc.  ve^tis).  A  light,
showy  garment  named  from  its  saffron  {crocua)
colour.  It  was  affected  chiefly  by  women  and  by
men  of  an  effeminate  character,  and  was  probably
worn  between  the  under  aud  upper  garments.

CrocuB  (KpoKor).  A  youth  who,  being  unable
to  obtain  the  object  of  his  affections,  the  nymph
Smilax,  pined  away,  and  was  changed  into  the
crocus,  or  saffron.  Smilax  herself  was  metamor-
phosed into  the  smilax,  or  bindweed  (Ovid,  Met,
iv.  283).

Croeaue  (Kpoio-or).  The  son  of  Alyattes,  king
of  Lydia,  and  bom  about  B.c.  ^0.  He  was  the
fifth  and  last  of  the  Mermuadoe,  a  family  which
began  to  roigu  with  Gyges,  who  dethroned  Candau-
les  (q.  v.).  According  to  the  account  of  Herodotus,
Croesus  was  the  son  of  Alyattes  by  a  Canan  moth-
er, and  bad  a  hnlf-brother,  named  Pantaleon,  the
offspring  of  au  Ionian  woman.  An  attempt  vas
made  by  a  private  foe  of  Croesus  to  hinder  his  ac-
cession tu  the  throne  and  to  place  the  kingdom  in
the  hands  of  Pantaleon  ;  but  the  plot  failed  (He-
rod, i.  92),  although  Stobaeus  informs  us  that  Croe-
sus, on  coming  to  the  throne,  divided  the  kingdom
with  his  brother. Plutarch  states  that  the  second


wife  uf  Alyulii;*,  wisliiug  to  remove  CnH;MUH,  Kavr  I  lug  aucoewlej  in  liis  objcot,  aud  runtlo  mainiiS-


otto  pf  tliu  vouUm  iti  lliu  ro.\»I  liiKU!ivli(i]<t  n  ilfmu  uf
ItoiKOii  to  ijnt  into  tbo  l»rfaii  win!  iiuiOe  for  Cmesim.
Tbi-  wuiiiiui  Liil'onufil  L'roL'auj*.  uiiil  nuvi*  tbe  imi-
hoiicd  l»r*udlotIieipieeirscliiltirei(:  uuil  tHie  |>ritice,
I'ut  of  grntiliiili',  lotisi'mittMl  nt  liflplii  a  ^oIi1i*n
imnge  of  IIhr  cook  lliivi;  niUitH  Iiigh.  CnwHii't  iis-
cemiwt  tlio  tliroiiff  on  tlii>  deatli  of  lim  failuT,  B.C.
560,  mid  iininiHlijilidj-  uiidnrtfiuk  tbe  Bubjii;;ntioii  of
tbe  Hreek  ccinimiiiiitirs  of  AhJ.-i  Minor  (tb(5  Aeoli-
ans.  TonintiN,  mid  Doriiitii^),  wlmiH^  disunited  H)at«
iiiid  abniiHt  ciiiiliiiiiiil  >vur»  witli  niii>  iiitotlier  reii*
diirfd  bis  Mmk  uti  viisy  our.  IIf  roiiL<>iit«.Ml  biriiHt-lf,
howiiviT,  »rii>r  n^diicin^  thnii  ii^neatb  bin  nwmv,
with  iut>rcly  iinpohiiig  an  nutiiiul  tribut*.',  imd  If  ft
thvii-  foi'ina  ofgovtruiuunt  uii:dtur4:d.  Whim  (biit
conquest  mis  etTcctod,  bo  tiirti«Ml  btH  tboii;;btH  (u
tho  i-oiiHlrurtion  nf  u  tloirt,  iittenrliiif*  to  iithu-k  tUv.


cunt  )iri-8uult4  tu  tbo  Oulpbie  aUriue,  be  nwlvnl
oil  o[tcii  boatilitiea  wttb  tbo  I'vrsiau*.  Tliv  irt
of  tbu  crafty  |iiie«tlii>iift  wLo  Diana^ccd  tbt  bb-
cbiiiery  of  the  omule  iit  Dtflidii  m  nuwben  mm
rlfiLrly  Hhowii  I  ban  in  the  liiKtory  of  Ibeir  tojil
iltijH-,  l)i(>  tnotiarrli  of  I.ydiik.  Hn  lind  Invikbeil
n{Mtn  tlirir  teni|ili>  tbo  iiiomI  KjtbMidid  itifu— no
i«]>lfiidii1,  ill  flirt,  tliHt  wi>  Nboiibl  Ut>  laniptHl  ta
HtiHjirr.t  Ilenxliiliin  of  t:xu^>;nrattoii  if  biin  luioiuot
wt^n^  not  c:iiiifiriiii-d  l>y  otluT  wrilcm — luid  tbit  n-
cipimits  of  tbin  lioiiiity,  in  Ihcir  turn,  piit  biiti  uiT
nilli  ;lii  Hiinnrr  uf  tliu  iiioaI  HitidinI  mnbtgiiitr
nlit'ii  ho  i^oiiHiiltotl  tboti  fur-faiiiMl  oracle  oii  ibe
subject  of  a  war  nitli  tbo  Pci-jitJiiis.  Tbo  rcBp«i*e
uf  A|)ollo  wn«,  tUat  if  Crot«iii4  lutide  war  niKiii  thlt
l^uoplu  "bo  vvinild  dt-stt'oy  n  great  Einpire";  and
tiie  aimwur  of  Aiii|>liinra(iH  (for  liiti  onwlo,  UMt,«u


ibbvida,  but  v.ivn  disttiiuded  fmiii  bi.t  ])ijr{K>m)  Ijy  .  uoiitiiilted  Uy  ibu  Lydian  king)  tcuded  to  the  mub
Bia.1  of  Prifn<S  (H<*ri>d.  i.  i").  TciTniu;^  his  uniic,  t-ft'cct  <llorod.  i.  W).  Tbe  vei-»e  iteelf,  coiitniuiinf
upon  tbiii,  a^uiiiHt  the  nmliuuB  of  Atiia  Minor,  bu  tlto  reopuuso  uf  tbe  onicle,  ia  giv(<n  liy  Di(Klunu
Kiittjr«led  all  tbr  t'oiintry  l^ing  (vi-nl  of  tbo  rivt^r  ,  ( l^crrpt.  vil.  f  ^),  and  ih  as  folbtwt^ :  KpoMror.
Hal>H,  I'xwpt  Cilicta  and  Lyciu;  and  tlu-u  applied  |  '\Xvv  flin^ns,  ittydiijv  o/ixi«'  «amXiJa<*,  "Crwim
biiUMjlf  tu  tbo  iitln  i>f  pence,  and  Ut  tW  pntroii;i;;i>  |  <ni  having  Gn>iMc<l  tUe  Ilulys,  will  du«itroya  gntt
(if  llio  Mcioiiucsuridof  lituralnre. llr  InH-amtt  tanit-il wnipirrt" — fh«  river  II.ilyB  Wing,  as  ulreailj  r»>


I'vr  bia  rU'bed  and  inuniJIecucn.  PtM'U  and  jibiloxu-
pburit  wcro  invited  to  bid  court,  ntid,  aumng  otb-
ors,  BoKiij.  tbe  Atbeniun,  iit  said  to  have  visitBil
bia  capital,  Smdis.  Hecu^lotun  rcLiitcs  tbt-,  cuuver-
tiatiou  wblob  tuok  plu(.'e  bt'twecn  tho  latter  atnl
CruvRiuon  thm  n«bjfL-t  of  huumti  ft^licity,  in  wLJcb
tho  Atbt.nii)iii  iiHiMidt'd  Ilie  Lyiliitn  niointrcU  Uy
tlint  lilll^i  valiio  wliii-li  lit*  att:i<-bHl  Ut  riclio^  aa  a
nifHtiH  of  tntp[iiitfH4  (lleiiid,  i.  ;tO),  and  by  bin  flay-
ing Ibat  iiu  mail  aliould  bt^  c;dl*'d  bapl^y  until  bis


niarktid,  tbu  boundary  of  bis  douiiniuno  lu  tbo
tiant.  Crui'biiti  tbwaglit  ibai  tho  tiiu|itrc  I  lias  m-
fcrrcd  to  waa  tliat  of  Cyrni* ;  the  iaaiiv,  btiwcTBr,
proved  it  to  be  hh  own.

Having  n^wenibled  a  uniuerunH  :uiiiy,  the  Lf<liaa
iinnnircb  4;ros»ed  tbo  IbilyH,  invadetl  the  tirridiif
of  Cyniit,  anil  a  battle  tuok  pbiee  in  the  ilixttielof
I'teriu,  but  wiibuiit  any  dt^oisirt*  nwult.  C'ru.'ciiB,
npuu  tbiK,  ibiiikiiig  bitt  fonrita  not  antHcieully  mi'
int-mnH,  man-bed  back  to  SanliH,  dit«baiidnl  b"
army,  I'oiieinting  entirely  of  utvreonarieM.  uuil  wt


(b-aib.

Not  long  oAor  tbia.  CroeiinH  had  the  mUfurtiino  foreneconrtoAnnLvixtif  Kgy]>t  andaUo  tullivLuv-
t<>  tiHMi  hilt  K011  AtjM.  ivbn  wuh  at^eidi'iitally  killed  :  daJMni'iiiiiiDs  detciiniiiing  tu  attack  1b«  I'eniuii
by  Adrastnx  (<|.  v.),  b-avirig  bitn  vvilb  only  a  dumb  \  ngiiiu  in  tlio  beginning  of  tbo  next  i>prlng,  Bui
cbibl  tut  hiA  h)-'ir;  bnt  tb<i  <b>ep  alllictioit  intu  I  Cyrnn  did  not  allow  bini  tiin«  to  eReci  tbia.  1U<'
which tbit Im* plunged liitii n-as dittji'ulli'd in  I  ing  disi'overed  that  it  vrnn  tbo  inteiiliou  t)f  tl>*


Lytliaii  king  lo  brvnk  np  hiii  ptf».enl  army,  b**
luurcbed  with  all  «ppod  into  Lydia,  liofniv  «  "'*
inerccnnry  ftirce  conld  bi-  asfw-iiibled,  deftaifiK'roo-
aitalwlio  IkkI  no  force  at  bin  rotnniand  but  liisL)"**

„  iaii  truvalry)  in  tbe  Ualllu  of  Tbyinbra,  »>hiil  him  up

biid  bwrii  reL-oinnifiidrd  by in  Sardin,  luiil  t«Hik  the  eily  ilwdf  after  a  tkip' "'
pbi  (  lIcriHl.  1.  r)3),  Im  ml- foiirU'en  days  and  in  the  fuiirt««uLh  roar  >*(  t^


•onie  degnie,  afler  two  years  of  nioiiriiing,  by  a
fOfUng  of  diKipiiet  mbitivi*  t<'  tbo  uloVL<iiiuii(a  of
CyrnH  ami  Ibe  ineri-aiting  power  itf  tbe  I'ei'HlnUH.
■\Vi.'*bing  to  f.irni  fiti  nlbniief  wiili  tlio  Greoka
<if  Eni-oji«  against  tbu  danger  nliirli  tbiMjaloned
biiii,  a  alep  n  liti^b
the  oracle  at  l>i-l-


LiieeduenioiiiHUH,
at  that  tittle  tliu
iiiofil  poworfnl  of
ihe  (ireciaii  eoin-
niuuitic»;  undliav-


dr««MHlbini»udt,rt»r ruign  of  Itinaoii  nf  Alyattos.

lliispnriHwOftotliu  ' With  Cnx'sna  fell tbo  Empire  of  th«  LyiliU^

HeriMJotna  relates  two  iit4>ries  connectctl  willi  'litf

event  -one  baviug  refcrenoo  to  llio  ditiub«'ii"'

Cn»e«ns,  who  spoke  for  tbo  fir^t  time  when  1»«*

a  a4>ldier  in  the  act  nf  killing  bis  futber.  nixl.^

tbo  vxrlamalioii  wbieb  he  nltered,  etaveil  In*  p**

t^nt'a  life,  tho  Mildit-r  being  igimrant  of  hie  nu^t

find  tbo  other  being  ati  fidluwa : Cr««'«iii*  \i*''^'t

hoou  made  priDoner,  a  pilo  was  erofiiiMl,  uii  d'"'^

bu  vraa  placed  In  order  to  Iw  bnrncd  :Uive. Sit'*

keeping  silence  for  a  long  lime,  tho  luyal  cai>>i*'

heaveil  a  deep  nigb.  innl  with  a  groitu  thri«  t^***

itnnnced  the  iianto  of  Sidoii. Cynist  tout  tuViH"

tbo  n-Mou  of  thin  o.t(-lainanoi),  and  Crw'^i*.**^

t-oiinidciuble  lUdiiy,  »c<|naitited  bini  with  llif  f"*

Vermilion  between  hiiiiMidf  and  Solon. Tbe  P'^

slaii  king,  rt^lenting  iiixtn  tbiH,  gave  iinkrt  f"

ClucHnH  to  bo  I-o)c^aMM1. But  tbe  fl4Ric»  bw

alremly  begnu  to  ascend  on  pverj  Mil«*

I I  .  *''«  Pil'-'  o'"'  "11  human aid  pn-twl  ">•

Im »»t|je|*IIMBBIlP'fca!SII  eHV-i-ltial. In this eiuergriiey CiM*"

l!n«M»  „,.  ih«  Pyn..  1*"'^"*^ eaniMlly  to Aih.IIo,  Uk  H  •*


J


CROMMYON


431


CROTONA


n-bom  lie  bad  lavished  ao  many  splendid  offerings.
Tljat  deity  heard  bis  prayer,  and  a  sudden  aod
heavy  fall  of  rain  extinguished  the  flames  (Herod.
i.  86  foil.).  Croesus,  after  this,  is  said  to  have  stood
high  in  the  favour  of  Cyrus,  wbo  profited  by  his  ad-
vice ou  several  Jmportaut  occasions;  and  Ctesias
declares  that  the  Persian  monarch  assigned  him
for  bis  residence  a  city  near  Ecbataua,  and  that  in
his  last  moments  he  recommended  Croesus  to  the
cara  of  bis  sou  aud  successor  Cambyses;  and  en-
treated tbe  Lydian,  ou  the  other  baud,  to  be  an
adviser  to  his  son.  Croesus  discbai^ed  this  duty
witli  so  much  fidelity  as  to  give  oftenoe  to  tbe  new
laouarch,  who  ordered  bim  to  be  put  to  death.
Happily  for  him,  those  who  were  charged  with  this
onler  hesitated  to  carry  it  into  execution ;  and
Cambysea,  soon  after,  having  regretted  his  precip-
itation, Croesus  was  again  brought  into  his  pres-
ence and  restored  to  his  foimer  favour.  Tbe  rest
of  bis  history  is  nnkuown.  As  be  was  advanced
iu  years,  he  could  not  have  long  survived  Cam<
byses  (Herod,  iii.  36  foil.).  The  wealth  of  Croesus
has  passed  into  a  proverb  iu  all  langnagee.  See
Ltdia.

Crommj^on  (Kpofifivuv)  or  Cromj^on  (Kpofivav).
A  town  in  Megaris,  ou  tbe  Sarotiio  Golf,  which
afterwards  belonged  to  Coriiitb.  It  is  celebrated
iu  mythology  on  account  of  its  wild  sow,  which
was  slain  by  Theseus  (q.  v.).

Ctonla  (r^  Kp6via).  A  festival  celebrated  in  Ath-
ens, and  also  at  Rhodes,  in  honour  of  C'ronns  (q.  v.).
Greek  writers  apply  the  same  name  to  tbe  Komau
Saturnalia  (q.  v.),  which  tbe  Cronia  seems  to  have
resembled.

Croniua  Mona  (Kpoviov  Spm).  A  mountain  in
Elis  near  Olympia,  with  a  teu.>pte  of  Cronus.

Cronus  {^6vos).  In  Qreek  mythology,  the
youngest  son  of  Uranus  aud  Qaea,  who  mutilated
and  overthrew  his  fa-
tber,and,  with  the  assist-
ance of  the  Titans,  made
bioiself  sovereigu  of  the
world.  He  took  his  sister
Rbea  to  w  ife,  and  became
by  her  father  of  Hestia,
Deiueter,  Her^,  Hades,
Poaeidon,  and  Zeus.  But
his  mother  prophesied
tbat  one  of  his  children
would  overthrow  him.
Henccordinglyswallow-
»1  them  all  except  Zens,
whom  Rhea  saved  by  a
stratagem.  (See  Zeus.)
Z«uB,  when  grown  up,
ebtametl  the  assistance
of  tbe  Ocean -uyniph
Tbetis  in  making  Cro-
nus disgorge  his  chil-
dren,and  tbeu,witb  the
Wlpofhiskiusfolk,ovor-
powered  Crouus  and  the
Titans.  According  to  Cnmus.  (Pompeian  I'amUDg.)
"Be  version  of  the  fable,

Croons  wae  Imprisoned  in  Tartarus  with  the  Ti-
taus ;  according  to  another,  he  was  reconciled  with
Zeus,  aud  reigned  with  Rhadamauthus  on  the  Isl-
ands of  tbe  Blessed.  Cronus  seems  originally  to
have  been  a  god  of  the  harvest ;  whence  it  hap-
pt^ns  tbat  in  many  parts  of  Greece  the  harvest


month  was  called  Crouion.  His  name  being  easi-
ly confused  with  that  of  Chronos(Xpdiror,  "Time"),
he  was  afterwards  erroneously  regarded  aa  the  god
of  time.  Iu  works  of  art  be  was  represented  as  an
old  uinu,  with  a  mantle  drawn  over  the  back  of  bis
head  aud  holding  a  sickle  in  his  hand.  The  Ro-
mans identified  him  with  Satomus,  their  god  of
sowing. See  Saturnus.

Cropbi  (KpSKfn).  A  mountain  of  Egypt,  between
Elephantine  and  Syeu6.  Between  this  mouutain
aud  another  called  Mnphi  were  tbe  sources  of  the
Nile,  according  to  a  statement  made  to  Herodotus
by  an  Egyptian  priest  at  Sais  (ii.  28).

Cropia  (Kpatitfla).  An  Attic  dome  belonging  to
the  tribe  Leoutis.

Crotftltim  (KpoToKov).  A  kind  of  castanet  or
rattle  used  by  dancers,  and  distinct  from  the  cym-
baluM  (q.  v.)  and  the  aUtrum  (q.  v.).  It  was  need
by  the  Egyptians,  and  specimens  of  all  these  in-
struments have  been  fouud  in  the  tombs  or  de-


Crotallstria. (SpOB.)

picted  ou  the  monnments.  Tbe  simplest  form
was  a  couple  of  shells  or  potsherds,  pierced  with
holes  and  strung  together;  but  brass  aud  wood
are  also  mentioned  as  materials  (Eurip.  Cj/cl.  304;
Mart.  xi.  16).  Women  wbo  danced  to  the  ornta-
lum  were  called  orotaliatriae  (Propei-t.  t.  8,  39).

CrotOna  or  Crotpn  (Kpormv).  Tbe  modem  Co-
trone.  A  powerful  city  of  Italy,  in  the  Brnttiornm
Ager,  on  the  coaut  of  tbe  Sinus  Tarentiuus.  Its
foundation  is  ascribed  to  Myscellns,  an  Achaean
leader,  soon  after  Sybaris  batl  been  colonized  by
a  party  of  the  same  nation,  which  was  about  B.C.
710.  According  to  some  traditions  the  origin  of
Crotoua  was  much  more  ancient,  and  it  Ih  said  to
derive  its  name  from  the  hero  Croton.  Tbo  resi-
dence of  Pythagoras  (q.  v.)  and  bis  most  distin-
guished followers  in  this  city,  together  with  the
overthrow  of  Sybaris  which  it  accomplished,  aud
the  exploits  of  Milo  (q.  v.)  and  of  several  other
Crot^Miian  victors  iu  the  Olympic  Games,  contrib-
uted iu  a  bigb  degree  to  raise  its  fame;  and, inconse-
quence, it  was  commonly  said  that  the  last  athlete
of  Crotona  was  the  first  of  the  other  Greeks.  This
city  was  also  celebrated  for  its  school  of  medicine,
aud  was  tbe  birthplace  of  Democedes,  who  long
enjoyed  tbe  reputation  of  being  the  first  physician
of  Greece.  About  B.C.  510,  Crotona  sent  an  army
of  100,000  men,  commauiled  by  the  athlete  Milo,
against  its  powerful  rival,  Sybaris  (q.  v.),  by  which
the  latter  city  was  destroyed.  The  i-emovnl  of  it«
rival,  however,  produced  an  euervating  effect  upon
Crotona.  As  a  proof  of  ihe  remarkable  obange  which
took  place  iu  the  warlike  spirit  of  this  people,  it  is
said  that,  on  their  being  subsequently  engaged  in


CKUCIFIXION


CRUX


hostilities  with  the  Locrians,  an  array  of  130,000
Crotoniatae  were  route<l  by  10,000  of  the  enemy  ou
the  banks  of  the  Sagras.  Siicb  vrwt,  iudeed,  the  loss
they  experienced  iti  tliis  battle  that,  aooording  to
Strabo,  their  city  henceforth  rapidly  (leclioed,  and
cunld  no  longer  maintain  the  rank  it  had  long
held  among  the  Italian  republics.  Diouyslus  the
Elder,  who  was  then  ainiiug  at  the  subversion  of
all  the  States  of  Magna  Oraecia,  having  surprised
the  citadel,  gained,  possession  of  the  town,  which,
however,  he  did  not  long  retain.  Crotona  was
finally  able  to  assert  its  independence  against  his
designs,  as  well  as  the  attacks  of  the  Bruttii ;  and
when  PyrrhiiB  invaded  Italy  it  was  still  a  con-
siderable city.  But  the  consequences  of  the  war
which  ensiwd  with  that  king  proved  so  ruinous  to
its  prosperity  that  above  one  half  of  Its  extent  he-
came  deserted.  Crotoua  was  then  occnpied  by  the
Bruttii,  with  tbo  exception  of  the  citadel,  in  wtrich
the  chief  inhabitants  had  tskeii  refuge ;  these,  be-
ing unable  to  defend  the  place  against  a  Cartha-
ginian force,  soon  after  surrendered,  and  were  al-
lowed to  withdraw  to  Locri.  Crotoua  eventually
fell  into  the  bands  of  the  Bumans,  in  B.C.  193,  and
a  colony  was  established  there.

Cmoifixlon. See  Crux.

Cmoia  Inveutio. See  Helena.

Cnunena  {ffaXaynov  or  fi^Xayriov).  A  leathern
ba^  slnng  round  the  neck  and  used  as  a  purse.
It  usually  hung  down  behind ;  hence  we  find  a
master  walking  behind  the  stave  who  carries  the
purse,  so  that  he  may  keep  an  eye  ou  it  (Plant.
P»eud.  i.  8,  37).

Cmppellarll  (Keltic).  A  word  used  by  the  Gauls
to  designate  a  class  of  gladiators  who  fought  in
complete  armour  (Lamprid.  Alex.  Ser.  56).  See
Cataphracti.

Craquios  (Jacques  dk  Crubque).  A  Flemish
scholar,  born  at  Messines,  near  Ypres,  about  the
middle  of  the  sixt-eeuth  century,  and  for  many
years  professor  of  the  classical  languages  at
Bruges,  lie  is  be^t  remcm1>ered  by  liis  elaborate
commentary  on  Horace,  which  first  appeared  at
Antwerp  in  157B.  A  second  and  improved  edition
was  issued  in  1611.  Tlie  value  of  this  eilition  lies
chiefly  iu  the  fact  that  it  gives  readings  from  four
MSS.,  known  as  the  Codices  Blandiuii,  that  were
then  preserved  in  the  Benedictine  monastery  of
Blaukenberg  (Mons  Blaiidinins),  and  that  were
sabsequeutly  destroyed,  possibly  in  the  sack  of
the  monastery  by  a  mob  in  15G6  <PaImer).  The
importance  of  one  of  these  MS3.,  known  to  Cru-
qnius  as  retuiitiiisimutt,  aud  now  styled  V,  is  very
great,  aud  the  same  thing  is  true  of  the  marginal
comments  which  it  contained  written  by  some
unknown  scholar,  who  is  usually  cited  (from  Cru-
quius)  as  the  Commentator  Cruquianns.  Besides
this  edition  of  Horace,  Cruquius  published  an  edi-
tion of  Cicero's  Oratio  pro  ^ihne  (Antwerp,  156if),
an  Encomium  Crbia  Bmgenti*,  and  sonte  niiscella-
iieoiis  Latin  verse.  See  Andi-6,  BibUotheca  Betgica,
B.  V.  "Crnqnios":  Jonlan,  De  Commentatore  Cru-
quiano  (Konigsberg,  1883) ;  and  Palmer,  Satires  of
Horace  (Introduction),  pp.  xxix.-xxxi.  (1883).

Cnuta.  A  Qgure  in  low  relief  as  distiugnished
from  one  in  high  relief,  which  was  catted  embleaa
(Cic.  fVrr.  it.  4,'^). See  Caelatura;  Kmblema.

CnutumeTiiiiii  or  Crustnmitun.  A  town  of  the
Sabines  in  the  vicinity  of  Fidenae,  and,  tike  Fi-


denae,  founded  by  a  colony  from  Alba.  Its  gnat
antiquity  is  attested  by  Vergil  {Jem.  vii.  6(29)  aud
by  Silias  Italicus  (viii.367).  Fi-om  Pliny  we  lesni
that  the  Crustumini  were  vanquished  by  RomuluH,
and  that  a  settlement  was  formed  in  their  terriUirT.
Their  city,  however,  was  not  finally  conquered  till
the  reign  of  the  elder  Tarquiu  (Liv.  i.  3tf).  Tlie
name  of  Crustnmini  Colles  appears  to  have  been
given  to  the  ridge  of  which  the  Mons  Sacer  funiied
a  part.  The  tribe  called  CrustDmiua  evidently  de-
rived its  name  from  this  ancient  city(Liv.  xhi.Ul.

CnuE  (trravpos,  o-koXo^).  The  cross ;  an  ioatrn-
ment  of  capital  pnuishment  nsed  from  a  veryeirly
period  in  the  East.

The  words  aravpoto  aud  (TKoKoniCtt  (more  nsaslly
avatrravpoa,  a»a<rKcXo7ri(ta)  are  applied  to  modes  of
execution  which  were  certainly  commou  amoug  tlie
Persians ;  and  it  is  probable  that  impalemeut.  is
well  as  actual  crucifixion,  was  thus  denoted.  It
has  been  doubted  whether  the  later  or  Rnman
method  of  crucifixion  was  practised  by  the  Pvr-
siauB ;  but  the  cose  of  Artayctes  ( Heixid.  ix.  1^)
seems  to  prove  that  nailing  to  a  tree  or  plank  was
not  unknown  to  theui.  It  was  the  usual  punish-
ment of  rebels — at  least  of  those  who  headed  re-
volt. Darius  iu  the  Behistnn  inscriptioD  boasts
that  he  had  "  crucified  "  the  leader  of  every  relKl-
lion  that  he  had  put  down,  giving  their  nauif^
(Sawlintion's  Hefodotas,  vol.  ii.  Appendix);  and  it
was  inflicted  ou  Inaroe,  the  champion  of  Egyptisu
liberty  (Thuc.  i.  110).  For  the  sake  of  ignomi-
ny, the  bodies  of  those  who  had  been  otherwiM
executed  were  sometimes  expusetl  on  a  ctvm  aflrr
death,  not  always  from  humanity.  Oroetes,  afl4'r
putting  Polycrates  to  death  in  some  horrible  way
which  Herodotus  refuses  to  describe,  crncified  the
corpse  (Herod,  iii.  i2i>).  We  find  Xerxes  thns  treat-
ing the  body  of  Leonidas,  no  doubt  as  a  rebel  (Hf-
rod.  vii.  338);  and  at  a  Inter  periotl  Ptolemy  Philtv
pntor  does  the  snme  to  Cleomenes  after  his  suioido
(Pint.  Cleom.  38).  According  to  a  strange  8ti>r>-  in
Pliny,  Tarqninina  Priscns  adopted  this  form  of  ptist-
humous  disgrace  to  check  the  frequency  of  suicide
amoug  the  citizens,  driven  to  despair  by  the  forced
labour  with  which  his  gigantic  building  o^ieratJoiu
wei-6  carried  ou  (H.  N.  xxxvi.  $  107).

Among  ancient  nations,  the  Carthagiuiaos  were
conspicuous  for  their  cruelty,  and  crucifixion  was
horribly  frequent  among  them ;  it  was  probably
through  their  example  that  it  was  subsequently
introduced  into  Sicily  aud  Italy.  It  was  the  osual
pnuishment  of  rebels,  aud,  as  is  well  known,  was
commonly  inflicted  on  uusucceaeful  generals  (Po-
lyb.  i.  11,  24,  79,  etc.).  In  the  war  with  their  mer-
conaries  and  African  subjects  which  followed  im-
mediately upon  the  conclusion  of  the  First  Punic
War,  the  atrocities  on  both  sides,  ghastly  enough
in  the  naiTative  of  Polybius,  have  been  seusatiou-
ally  exaggerated  in  Flaubert's  novel  Salammhi.

The  Greeks  were  honourably  distinguisbed  in
tlie  ancient  world  for  their  aversion  to  torture  and
mutilation  in  every  shape;  iiidee<l,  it  is  only  >u
qnite  recent  times  that  Christian  Europe  lias  at-
tained tlie  same  standard  of  refinement.  Iu  som«
ways  they  conld  be  cruel  enough,  aud  the  fre-
quency of  capital  punishments  showed  a  singnlar
disregard  of  human  life.  The  rage  of  faction  kd
to  massacres  like  that  of  Corcyra,  on  wbieb  Thn-
cydides  moralizes  in  a  well-known  passage  (ii>-
81  foil.).  Prisoners  of  war  were  put  to  death  iu
cold  blood-  the  Flataeane  by  the  Spartau (Thar.


CRUX


4S3


CRUX


iii.  68);  tlie  Atheniao  prisoners  after  Aego8i>otami
to  the  nomberof  3000  (Plut.^Ict&.  37  ;  Lytand.  13).
Tlie  AtbeDians  ordered  a  massacre  of  all  the  adult
males  iu  Mityleu6,  probably  as  many  as  6000  (Thuo.
iiL  36).

With  all  this,  however,  the  Qreeks  babitually  ab-
Btaiued  from  aggravating  their  exucutioas,  wheth-
er of  crimiuals  or  prisouers  of  war,  by  iusalt  aud
tortore;  and  they  especially  abhorred  outrages  ou
women  and  children.  This  side  of  the  Greek  char-
acter is  well  brought  ont  in  Mabaffy's  Social  Life
in  Greece;  see  especiuUy  pp.  238,  262  full.,  3d  ed.
It  was  so  from  the  earliest  historical  times.  The
tyrants  of  the  seventh  and  sixth  centuries  are  not
charged  with  any  atrocities  like  those  of  the  Vis-
cuiiLi  and  other  mediteval  despots  in  Italy ;  even
the  bull  of  Phalaris  (q.  v.)  is  now  explaiued  as  an  in-
strumeutof Pboauioian Moloch-worship.  Afewiso-
lated  acts  of  vengeauce  are  recorded  of  this  period,
only  however  iu  the  ontlying  parts  of  the  Grecian
world,  and  therefore  probably  due  to  the  conta-
gion of  barbariau  example.  During  the  struggles
at  Miletus  between  the  wealthy  citizens  and  the
commonalty,  the  latter  (who  were  called  VifrytBts)
wheu  victorious  collected  the  childreu  of  the  rich
upon  threshing-floors  and  bad  them  trampled  to
death  by  oxeu ;  the  rich,  having  in  turn  gaiued  the
upper  band,  burnt  in  pitch  (icarcirtrrMo-av :  of.  the
tuHica  moUita  of  Jnveual,  viii.  235;  Mart.  x.  2&)
all  whom  they  got  into  their  power,  aloug  with
their  obildreD  (Ueracl.  Pout.  ap.  Ath.  xii.  524  a).
This  story  belongs  probably  to  the  "two  genera-
tions" of  civil  strife  at  Miletus  recorded  by  He-
rodotus ;  but  no  snch  horrors  ore  mentioned  in
Greece  proper,  where  even  Helots  and  serfs  ranked
as  Helleues.  Pisistratus  and  his  sons  governed
according  to  the  laws  of  Solon,  and  even  the  pro-
ceedings which  arose  out  of  the  murder  of  Hippar-
chos  fall  short  of  the  cruelties  inflicted  on  regi-
cides in  quite  reoeut  times.  There  is,  in  fact,  no
evidence  that  cniciQxion,  impalement,  and  burning
alive  were  regarded  as  Greek  punishments,  at  least
where,  as  in  Hellas  itself,  there  was  no  contact
with  less  civilizeil  races.  It  was  the  same  with
mutilations  of  alt  kinds,  such  as  the  blinding  pre-
scribed by  the  laws  of  Locri  in  Italy  (Demoeth.  e.
Ilmoor.  p.  744,  $  140)  or  the  cutting  off  of  hands
aud  feet  as  practised  by  the  Persians  (Xen.  Jnab.
i.  9,  $  13).  The  cruellies  alluded  to  iu  Aesch.  Eum.
186-190,  including  impalement,  are  those  not  of
Greeks,  but  of  burbarians,  and  the  distinction  is
pointedly  drawn.  The  Greeks  distinguished  be-
tween revereuce  for  the  human  body,  for  which
they  had  a  passionate  admiration  as  shown  iu
their  athletic  exercises  and  their  works  of  art,  aud
revereuce  fur  human  life,  which  tbey  held  cheap
enough.  This  feeling  continued  unimpaired  as
long  OS  Greece  retained  her  freedom.

Iu  the  Macedonian  period  Greece  no  longer  en-
Joyett  this  happy  immunity;  as  a  mere  province
iu  a  larger  BeUenism,  it  was  influenced  by  lower
and  less  humane  races.  Alexander  himself  is  not
free  from  the  stain  of  cruelty,  as  is  shown  by  his
treatment  of  real  or  supposed  conspiracies  against
his  person  in  the  cases  of  Philotas  and  HermolaUs.
11)9  is  said  to  have  either  hanged  or  crucified  2000
Tyrisns;  ho  certainly  crucified  Musicauus,  the  Iu-
(lian  rajah  who  had  rebelled  after  beingreiusta  ted  iu
liis  dominioDs(Arrian,  JnaA.  vi.  17).  His  successors
improved  npon  his  example :  a  year  after  his  death
Penliccas  and  Enmenes  crucified  the  aged  Arisra-


thesof  Cappadocia  after  other  fortune  (Diod.xviil.
16);  Lysiuiachus  threatened  to  crucify  the  Cyre-
naic  philosopher  Theodoras,  though  an  ambassador,
but  did  uot  carry  ont  his  threat  (Cio.  7Wo.  i.  43,  $
102).  Nicooreon  of  Cyprus,  couteraporary  with  Alex-
ander, actually  pounded  the  philosopher  Anaxar-
chns  to  death  in  a  mortar  (Cic.  Tu»c.  it.  22,  $  52).  A
similar  story  is  told  of  au  older  philosopher,  Zcno
the  Eleatiu,  and  a  tyrant  of  his  native  city  (Cic.
1.  c.) ;  but  the  accounts  are  contradictory.  Nabis,
the  tyrant  of  Sparta,  used  as  an  engine  of  torture
a  figure  stndded  with  nails  resembling  the  Eiaeme
Jnngfrau  of  some  German  cities  (Polyb.  xiii.  7).
It  is  not  necesHary  to  pursue  the  records  of  this
period  any  further.  The  general  aversion  of  the
Greeks  to  degrading  punishments  was  not  under-
stood by  grammarians  who  lived  under  the  law  of
the  later  Roman  Empire,  nor  by  scholars  like  Lip-
sins  (De  Ci-uce,  1592),  in  whose  time  even  worse  hor-
rors were  peri>etrated.

The  Romans  were  natnrally  a  hard-hearted  peo-
ple, and  Livy  shows  considerable  audacity  in  say-
ing that  the  dismembering  of  Mettius  Fufetius
was  the  only  example  in  their  history  of  a  disre*
gard  of  the  laws  of  humauity ;  adding  that  tbey
might  boast  that  no  nation  had  employed  milder
punishments  (i.  28).  From  the  language  of  Cicero
(Pro  Bab.  Perd.  4,  $  13)  it  has  been  inferred  that
crucifixion  was  in  nse  in  the  regal  period.  But
the  words  of  the  old  law  point  rather  to  simple
hanging  (infelici  arboti  re$ie  autpendito,  Llv.  i.  26),
though  the  cross
was  no  doubt  called
arbor  infelix  iu  later
times.  Cicero,  who
is  at^uiug  against
the  revival oftheob-
soletelaw  of  perdu-
ellio  and  the  capital
punishment  of  cit-
izens in  any  shape,
is  speaking  rhetor-
ically thronghont :
heqnotesthe  formu-
la without  the  word
resle,  a  misleading
and  doubtless  inten-
tional omission,  aud
talks  vagnely  of  the
cross  (H  10,  It,  16)  and  of  the  detested  Tar-
Quin  (i  13).  No  historical  conclusions  can  be
drawn  from  a  speech  so  obviously  designed  to
confuse  the  questions  at  issue.  It  is  highly  prob-
able that  the  Romans  derived  this  punishment
from  the  Carthaginians;  at  least  no  mention  of  it
appears  to  occur  before  the  Second  Punic  War.
First  we  find  Hannibal  crucifying  a  gui<le  who
had  misled  bim  (Liv.  xxii.  13);  then  the  Romans
practise  it  on  slaves  and  deserters  (Liv.  xxii.  33;
XXX.  43,  $  13;  xxxiii.  36).  This  Inst  passage  de-
scribes a  revolt  among  the  slaves  in  Etniria,  n.c.
196 ;  the  riugleaden  are  scourged  and  crucified,
the  rest  given  up  to  their  masters  to  be  dealt  with
at  discretion.  The  enormous  increase  in  the  num-
bers of  slaves  under  the  later  Republic  height-
ened the  dread  of  a  rising  amoug  them,  and  the
Roniuii  system  became  more  and  more  one  of  nudis-
guisi-d  terrorism.  Two  desperate  rebellions  broke
out  iu  Sicily,  and  were  only  put  down  by  regu-
lar armies— the  first  in  B.c.  134-133,  the  second
lasting  four  years,  102-99. After  the  pacification


Arbor  iDfelix.  (Dkremb.  and  Sagllo.)


CHUX


4U


CRVPTA


by  (lie  praetor  M'.  Aqiiillius  itj  B.c.  39,  n  rp>fulii-
lion  w»»  dhuIp,  and  Mi'ictl.v  eiifon'i'il  hy  »iicrf»Kivt^
gnveriiora  of  the  isluix),  tlmt  in)  itlavo  nlmuld  Ih'
allowed  to  carry  a  wfttpon.  A  few  y&an  later,
thtf  prat-'tor  L,  Doniitiiia  rect!tive<l  n  iKitir  of  r**-
fiiiirkulil»  h\-m  om  a  ipr<>.t<eiit ;  he  iiu]iiire<l  wtio  Iniil
killi'tl  il,  »ii<l  lliii]ifi<;  tliiit  it  wuM  a  Hliive  eni{il»yt'it
ns  a  Klie]»)tP.rrl,  hc:  BUininnrifMl  th<<  niaii  before  titm
And  nitkcd  liiiu  bow  bo  hai)  contrived  to  destroy
it.  Tlic  sbeiihrrrd,  who  pxpeciod  a  rewnrd,  n"plic«i
that  U>L>  linil  kilU-d  it  with  u  bour-Biicnr  [rtmahtiio);
upon  wbich  Domititifi  at  once  ordered  him  to  be
cmuitted.  Clcei-o  tells  tbiw  (ttory  with  only  faint
rtiiiapliroval,  wliiln  he  dwells  coniplnceiitly  «mi  the
fiwt  Ibnt  Iheru  were  no  Hnirn  revultn  of  ilit>  mI»vvb
ill  Sicily  (Cic.  in  Fnt.  v.  :%  4,  ^  7,  H).  Wlnii  ilie
servile  war  uf  SpartiicnA  wna  at  luMt  i»iit  down  by
CmiMuti,  the  priiuiiiurs,  to  the  iniitiltcr  of  fiOOO
were  crucihed  hU  along  tlie  Apptun  Way,  between
Cupiia  iiud  Kutue  (App.  ti.  C.  i.  IHO).  The  power  of
mattt^rs  over  their  slavett  waa  at  this  perioil,  and
fur  flotne  time  later,  absolute :  even  the  g'Mid-tia-
iiired  Hornce  treats  an  a  joke  the  poHsiltility  uf
their  being  criicilled  fur  sliKlit  ollencen  (Sat.  i.  3,
BO  foil.).  The  find  trieawire  i»asBeil  in  their  fa-
Tonr  wjw  the  I*«'X  Pt'trmiia  (rj.  v.);  Hadrian  fnr-
batle  thuni  to  he  execitl^tl  without  the  NHOtinire
of  a  inagistrate;  AutoniiiiiM  Pi uh  ordered  that  the
murder  of  a  tilave  by  Ihm  maHter  Mlioiild  be  pnn-
irthL-d  aH  hmniuide.  Het^ulcH  nlaveM,  Lhn  pruvtnrialN
were  liable  In  erucitixiou  fur  the  greiit*-r  rrinieh,
such  us  mnidcr,  piracy  (Suet.  lul.  4\  briganda^f,
and  eapecially  for  revullj*  and  conopiracleR  The
ohstinacy  of  the  Jews  was  particidarly  exu«pcrat-
ing  to  the  RfHiiaiis,  and  llieir  repeated  rebellions
werw  followe*!  by  the  whidesale  iidliption  of  tliis
putiinliment ;  tliuw  VarnR(tlie  same  who  perished  in
Gormatiy)i:nicifnHl  iUHiO  at  once  (Jotteph.  Ant.  xvii.
10,  J  10);  GessiiiB  Floras  several  buudreds,  Includ-
ing Roman  citiKeua  of  Jewibli  birth  <id.  D.  I.  ii.  14,
(  9) ;  TitiiB  set  many  tbal  ''room  watt  wanting  for
the  croKst>*>,  ,iii)d  crKSHPH  for  the  biidieK'^  (id.  ib.  vi.
2H);  and  IJadiiati,  nftit  lliti  final  revolt,  61)0  a  day
fur  some  time.  L'tidvr  tbe  Empire  the  righl  of  the
eitit  Jiontanu*  was  no  lungt^r  reKpeete<l;  tbe  fintt
iiiBtauoe,  prnbalily,  of  tlie  crncitixion  uf  a  citizen
in  Rome  itself  is  ibat,  under  Galhn,  of  a  gnunlian
who  poisoned  his  ward  (.Siu-t.  Galb.  9).  AflerwnrdH
tbe  odious  distiuctiou  between  the  honmtwrrM  and
k*miliorea  wan  iutrodueed,  and  tbta  and  other  tor-
tures were  freely  inllieted  niKiii  the  lattiT.  espe-
cially fur  mniettaa  or  crimes  againnt  tbe  SIal«  or
tUti  |>erMou  of  the  emperor  (Paul.  Sunt,  t.  23,  I ;  Dig.
4d,  \%  tiLdrf>rtir»«i>).

The  mode  of  punishiuent  is  Itm  well  known  to
need  unich  description.  Seonri^iug.  liS  with  Kiv
luat)  capital  pnniithiunitM  in  genrnil.  iiMially  pre-
ceded it.  Three  kind»  of  ori»M4C's  were  in  eoniinon
dm:  tbe  orMX  comminia,  or  T  Rliape :  tbe  rrtij:  im*
nUwa.  with  a  pnijection  at  the  top,  to  wliicb  was
affixed  the  tUutut,  setting  fnrtb  tlie  crime  of  tbe
Hufferer  (tbin  was  i)ie  moKt  eomnion] ;  atid  the  ctvj
dtiCMitiia la,  i\i  the  nliape  of  anXi.8t.  Andrew's  crosn).
The  wonl  rrm  is  alm>  applied  to  I  be  single  stake
nsod  in  itupalement;  the  latter  proccoa  is  altaded
to  by  Seiieea  v\  two  piLMnges,  but,  as  he  Is  speak-
ing of  death  by  toniii-o  in  general,  It  muy  W
dunbte4l,  in  the  al»M'nw  of  direet  evidence,  wheth-
er ibis  was  a  Honian  onstniii  {Comb. ad  Marciam,^,
$  3.  where  criietllxion  with  tbe  head  downward  is
mentlonetl). Tbe  upright  post  is  (railed  alipr*,  the


transverse  beam  patibulum  ;  and  it  was  this,  rub-
er Mian  the  entire  insti-umeDti  which  tlie  rrimiiisl
carried  to  the  place  of  execntiou  (PIntit.  UMltU-i
1,  53,  and  <■/>.  Nun.  s.  t.  fMiiil'vlmm).  It  woe  iaipes-
sible  that  the  whole  widght  of  tbe  Irody  tbixild
rest  U|K)u  the  ntiilH;  heuct)  there  was  a  piece  of

wtK«l  projecting
fo>ni  the  fiifx-f  n
which  the  snffenf
SAt,  or  rntlier  nlk
(Tertull.  lujr  K*l.
i.  12 ;  cf.  Irrr.  sdi.
Van:  i.  12).  Tlit
expremion  aorfs  ri
tedfom  cruet,  in  tlv
famons  lltics  uf
Mtiecenas  ap.  Sen.
Kp. 101, prnbalijj


\>^


r


huibolom (Domnboii  SDd  Sigllo  ) "'"•"^ *"  thi*  wp-

port,  and  not,  m
Lipsins  tlioiight,  to  Inipaleuieut.  When  it  «u
wanting,  the  Itody  w,-»a  probably  suHtaiaftl  hjr
ropes;  the  combination  of  ropes  nith  nsiU  is
nH'uiioiied  by  Pliny  as  chumu  (II.  X.  xiriil.  ♦
4()). See  Ecrr.Kfa.

The  marlyrotogivs  cinitalii  acconiits  of  mil&rm
tiound  to  the  ornHS  without  the  nse  of  naik,  snJ
Ifft  to  die  of  hunger  and  esbandtinn ;  when  it  i»
ad<Icd  that  in  winie  iiistaiices  they  survived  iiiw
days^  WG  must  be  allowed  to  dislwHrre.  Tli*
criminal  was  stripped  of  hin  uhitheK — the  rli>tli
around  the  loins,  as  to  which  the  Cbrislinti  irndi-
lion  is  cotiKtant,  seetns  to  have  been  exerplinusl—
and  nHti.iDy  liointed  ou  to  the  eruss  arttT  it  liii>l
been  net  ilfi.  fioinetinies  he  was  stretcb>'tl  »\>on  it
on  rhe  ground,  and  then  liltc<i  with  it;  h"!  d>u
fornmr  niellioil  na»  th«  comuioner,  and  tieuee  Hi*
phrases  rmct  miffigert,  in  erMoe'in  itgtrti  or  tolJrr<,**-
cnr  oftener  than  cruci  affigerv.  The  well-limW»
Itreahing  of  tlie  legs  to  hasten  death  is  sllndi«l  '■'
by  PlanlUN  (I'vm.  iv.  2,  64)  and  Ciceru  {Vkil  xin-
12,  $  27).  Tlifi  dead  liiHly  wax  genernlly  Inft  lis'iS-
ing  on  the  crciss,  lo  h«  devonretl  by  binb  swl
bciists;  the  feet  were  but  little  raised  slwve  iJie
ground  [not.  as  i'l  most  pictures),  and  it  ^w*  ^^
out  of  tlie  pfoch  i.f  the  latter  (Hor.  £>.  i.  H«t<^i
Jnv.  lir.  77).  Sepuhntu  was  tberofoiv  fuibii!"!*".
and  a  soldier  set  to  watob  the  corpne  (I'elroii.  HI-
ll'Jl.  The  place  for  these  execnlion»  km  t^'^K'*
outside  the  v  stls  of  cities ;  at  Rome  it  vW  tW
Campus  KsiiiiiUrnts,  to  the  east  of  the  city,  pw*  "•
which  waw  aficrwunls  occupied  by  tbe  gaidea""'
MafffiiKH.

Witb  the  establiNhMieot  of  Ohnstianitf  U»  "^
socintions  connccteil  with  tbo  OroM  hsl  to  Its**""
Ittion,  tliongh  not  fnun  hninauity,  as  olbst-'!''"'
puiiislmients  were  retaine^l.  Coti»itanliiw  ••  *'"'
beginning  of  his  reign  hiul  sanctioned  it  i"  ***
cafe  of  slaves  and  frecdmcn,  but  later  bu  *^''
ished  it.

See  the  article  '♦Kreni:"  in  Krnns,  ff«i*"»J*f*"
pidfe  d.  Vhri»tUfUvn  AUerthum*  (IHtfS),  «h«""*V^


of  tbe  various  forms  of  tlie  cross  is  gtveit"


lbs


Morlillft.  tc  Signe  dt  ta  Croir  arant  Ir  (.'/•^•"''
Mijiwe(lJ*itli;  Fnida,  f'os  Krruj  tutd  ttif  /Trfsr'f*'*
mrnshin,  IH7S);  and  HiiKrhkc, />tfl  J/i(ff«  (M"'«'

Crypta(«,ii«Ti7).  Any  long,  uarniw  vault, el*^
dark  or  dimly  lighted.  Il  Is  used  In  three  ^^
senses:  (11  .V  Irinnel  fur  draining  purpodM.  C*
dark  vnnlted passage  in  any  bnilding,  nB  IW**


CRYPTIA


486


CTESIBICA  MAClllNA


the  oavea  iu  the  amphitheatre  or  behind  the  acena
of  a  theatre.  (3)  A  covered  corridor  above  ground,
dimly  lighted  in  sominer  for  the  sake  of  coolneHS,
and  very  comoiouly  attached  to  the  sides  of  an
open  colounade  (porticu*).  This  was  probably  the
species  of  crypta  kuowu  as  eryptoportiau. See

PORTICUS.

CxypUa  (itpvuTfia,  Kpxnrrla,  or  jcptflmj).  A  sys-
tem of  secret  police  adopted  by  the  Spartaus  in
order  to  nialutain  their  coutrol  over  tbe  Helots;
perhaps,  as  Grote  thinks,  over  tlie  Perioeci  also.
As  to  the  mail)  features  of  thia  system  there  is  iio
doubt.  We  leani  that  a  nuuiber  of  active  youug
Spartans  were  despatched  every  year  by  tbe  Epbors,
immediately  upon  tbeir  entry  into  office,  to  the
ilifferent  parts  of  the  country.  Tbey  were  to  post
themselves  as  secretly  as  possible  in  cooveuieut
places  from  which  to  explore  the  neighbourhood
and  to  make  observations.  If  tbey  found  anything
Bnspicious,  tbey  were  either  to  report  it  or  to  snp-
preas  it  themselves  on  the  spot  (Sohomano,  Antiq.
i.  195,  Eng.  trans.).  The  institution  served  not
iDerely  to  break  np  organization  and  to  check  tbe
possibility  of  an  outbreak  among  their  oppressed
aabjects,  but  as  a  useful  military  training  in  babits
of  endurance  suited  to  a  dominant  race.  On  tbe
latter  ground  it  is  proposed  b/ Plato  fur  his  ideal
Cretan  colony  in  the  Xaic«,  and  his  way  of  express-
in^  himself  HhowH  that  he  is  referring  to  a  Spartan
custom  really  existiug(i.t>33B;  vi.763B;  of.  Grote,
ii.  144  D.).  Tbe  eri/ptia  may  thus  be  conaidere«l  as
to  a  certain  extent  a  species  of  armed  police  force,
and  the  youug  meu  who  wei*e  ordered  to  undertake
it  appear  also  to  have  formed  a  special  corps  in  tbe
army;  at  least  we  read  of  a  commander  of  the
rrifptia  in  the  battle  of  Sellasia  (Pint.  Cletm.  28).
To  these  undoubted  facts  later  authors  added  some
curious  statements,  which  have  been  much  crit-
icised iu  recent  times.  Accordiug  to  Plutarch,  who
quotes  Aristotle  as  his  authority,  tbe  Ephors  every
year  declared  war  formally  against  the  Helots,  iu
order  that  they  might  be  killed  without  scruple;
and  tbey  further,  not  every  year  as  sometiuie^^
stated,  but  at  intervals  (fiiit  xp^vov),  sent  young
Spartans  anned  with  daggers  to  assassinate  such
of  the  Helots  as  were  thought  formidable  (Pint.
Lycurg.^),  The laognageof  Plutarch  issomewhat
loose.  In  one  sentence  be  states  that  the  young
men  went  out  into  tbe  roads  by  iiiglit  and  slew  all
whom  tbey  caught  {tovs  dXto-ico^'i'ovs),  implying
that  the  Helots  lived  under  a  sort  of  "curfew"
law,  which  conAned  them  to  their  houses  at  night
to  prevent  conspiracies;  in  the  uext  sentence  that
tbey  often  ranged  over  the  fields,  and  despatched
the  strongest  and  bravest  of  them.  The  latter
phrass,  however,  agrees  with  the  account  of  Hera-
clides  Pontlcus  that  they  killed  oo-ovr  &»  imTTfitiov
jf  (Fragm.  ii.  4  ap.  C.  MUller,  ii.  310).  Otfried  MUl-
ler,  whose  criticism  habitually  tends  to  soften  the
bantier  features  of  the  Spartan  institutions,  com-
bats tbe  notion  that  the  Helots  were  annnalfy
hnuted  down  and  de8troye<l  {Doriann,  iii.  3,  $  4);
and  Schomanu  calls  it  "an  exaggeration  which  is
really  too  absurd  to  deserve  serious  confutation  ^
{Antiq.  L  c).  Grote,  no  frieud  to  Sparta,  rejects
tbe  anunal  or  periodical  massacre  of  the  Helots
and  the  fornial  declaration  of  war  against  them,
which,  he  justly  observes,  *'  would  provoke  the
reaction  of  despair  rather  than  enforce  tranquil-
lity"; and  even  suggests  a  donbt  as  to  the  factof
Aristotle's  having  really  mode  the  statement  as-


cribed to  him  by  Plutarch,  on  the  ground  that  he
does  uot  mention  tbe  subject  in  his  PolHica,  where
be  speaks  at  some  length  both  of  the  Spartan  con-
stitution and  of  the  Helots. See  Helotaz.

Cryptoportloiu. See  Crypta.

Cteaiaa  (Kn;o-/ar).  A  Greek  historian,  born  ia
Cnidus  iu  Caria,  and  a  contemporary  of  Xenophou.
He  belonged  to  the  family  of  tbe  Asclepiadae  at
Cnidus.  In  B.c.  416,he  went  to  tbe  Persian  court,
and  became  private  physician  to  King  Artaxerxes
Mnemon.  In  this  capacity  he  accompanied  the
king  on  his  expedition  against  his  brother  Cyruii,
and  cured  him  of  the  wound  which  he  received  in
the  battle  of  Cuuaxa,  B.C.  401.  In  399,  he  returned
to  bis  native  city,  and  worked  up  the  valuable  ma-
terinl  which  he  had  collected  during  bis  residence
iu  Perttia,  partly  from  his  own  observation  and
partly  from  bis  study  of  the  royal  archives,  into  a
History  of  Persia  (Elrpo-iicd),  in  twenty-three  books.
The  work  was  written  iu  the  Ionic  dialect.  The
fii-st  six  books  treated  the  history  of  Assyria,  the
remaining  ones  that  of  Persia  from  tbe  earliest
times  to  events  within  his  own  experience.  Cte-
sins's  work  was  much  used  by  the  ancient  histi>-
rians,  though  he  was  censured  as  untrustworthy
and  indifferent  to  truth — a  charge  which  maybe
due  to  tbe  fact  that  he  followed  Persian  author-
ities, and  thus  often  differed,  to  the  disadvantage
of  tbe  Greeks,  from  tbe  version  of  facts  current
aumug  his  countrymen.  Only  fragments  and  ex-
tracts of  the  book  survive,  and  part  of  an  abridg-
ment in  PhottUB  {Cod.  72).  The  same  is  true  of  bis
'Ii'dtxa,  or  notices  of  the  researches  which  he  had
made  in  Persia  on  the  geography  and  productions
of  India.  See  Blum,  Herodot  und  Ctenat  (Heidel-
berg, 1636) ;  and  Oilmore,  Tht  FragmenU  of  the  Per-
Hca  of  Clesia»  (188S).

Cteaibloa  Machlna.  An  hydraolic  engine
named  after  its  inventor,  CteKibins  (q.  v.)  of  Alex-
andria. In  the  language  of  nxMlern  hydraulics  it
is  a  double- action  forcing  pump.  Vitruvius,  in
bis  description  (s.  10  [7]),  opeaks  of  it  as  designed
to  raise  water,  while  Ct«sibius's  pupil,  Hero  (Ptteu-
mat.  p.  180),  desoril>e9,  under  the  name  of  trlffyav,  a
machine  identical  in  principle,  but  of  improved
construction,  aud  says  that  it  was  used  as  a  6n--
engine  (tts  tovs  ifiirpija-fiois).  Indeed,  the  same
priuciple  has  been  employed  in  modern  fire-engines.
The  remains  of  such  a  o-itfmv  were  discovered  at
Castrum  Novum,  near  Civit^  Vcccliia,  in  1795,  hav-
iug  itrobably  served  to  supply  the  public  baths
with  water.

The  following  cut  illustrates  the  construction
of  Ctesibius's  invention  as  described  by  Yitruvius.
Two  cylinders  (modioli),  B  B,
are  connected  by  pipes  with
a  receiver  (catinua),  A,  which
is  closed  by  a  cowl  (paenula),
D.  In  each  cylinder  a  pis-
ton (embolus  maaculug),  C,  is
worked  by  means  of  its  rod
{regula).  In  the  bottom  of
each cylinder, and at the  ___

opening  of  each  pipe  iuto  the  cieaiblcBMacUlno.  (Rich.)
receiver,  is  a  movable  Hd  or
valve  (a««T<t),  which  only  opens  upwards.  The  bot-
toms of  the  cylinders  are  inserted  iuto  a  reservoir,
or  connected  with  it  by  pipes.  When  one  of  the
pistons  is  raised,  a  vacuum  is  produced  in  tbe  cyl-
inder, and  the  atmospheric  pressure  forces  a  stream


ClEStBlUa


4UtI


CLVACtUa


uf  water  \mb{  tlie  rntscU  valvo  into  the  cyliDtler.  [
W!ie>n  this  Kln-»iii  rtMM'H,  thn  valve  fiillji;  kiuI  if
tliH  |>i<itiin  ii  fun^tttl  iltiuti,  tl»<  niitHr  in  ilriveii  uitt
of  tliu  uyliuilur  tutu  iliu  pipo,  unit  piutt  the  vnlve
luto  (bn  tvceivur.aiul  rettiiuoti  tliuro  by  tbo  clusiii^
of  tlio  volvc.  Iftho  two  piotoua  ore  workrtl  ultur-
uatcly,  so  tbat  oui.'  ili^scemls  as  ttc  otljer  n»osr  a
cuuf  iuituiia  streuin  of  ^Tjlt«r  la  forceil  out  uf  tbe
to]>  of  tilt'  jmcnnla.

CtesibluB  iKTiiri{iias).  A  i):itiv«  of  Ascra  mid
coQti'inponiry  uf  Architiirili-H,  wliii  llouriNht?<]  iliir-
iiiK  tliu  rri)(iiM  iif  rtukiiiy  II.  iititt  Ptuk-iiiy  III.,  or
Wlvrttuii  B.C.  'iiiO  niid  124U.  Hu  wum  tlic  sun  uf  »
burUer,  and  for  soon;  time  exi-rtised  iit  Akxaiidria
the  caltiu^  of  bis  parent.  lliH  mocUaiiical  geuUiR,
liowuver,  Kooit  cutiitbd  liim  to  emerge  from  obscur-
ity, and  lin  berami*  kiin«-ii  nn  the  iiivcntor  of  sev-
eral very  iii^HiLiDiiH  nuitrivatineH  fiir  rnUiiif;  wntt>r,
etc.  Tlie  invfiiilioii  of  ilefnnjilraf,  or  water  rWlts,
is  alno  ascrilH^il  to  liiui.  (Cf.  VitriLvin.>i,  ix.  9.)  Ku
wrntK  a  Ixiok  on  livdraiitit:  luacltinfA,  which  im  now
lost. AunCr.Ki'svoiiA;  I'te-^ibiciMaciiixa;  Hoko-

Cteslpboa  fKTij<rn;!»5»»).  (1)  A  city  of  Asayria
on  ttic  oast  Itniik  of  tlio  Tigris,  tUreo  Roiuau  miltis
from  Seleiicia  on  tbo  west  bank.  It  first  became
an  ititportant  plat'e  iiiidt^r  the  Panbiaike.  wbode
kiii};ii  uHed  it  for  Nomn  tinu)  na,  a  winter  reaideuoc.
(it)  See  AKSt:niNKJ*;  Dkmustiikn'ks.

Cuba.  Ctuiina,  tuu\  Rumiua.  Tbreo  Roraan
divinirieH  wor«lii]ipc!d  iw  the  protectoi-^i  of  cliildren
iu  tU«t:L'adIoC{>Hitur).  I.ilintiiinH  of  luilU  weruuiatlB
iu  their  boinmr.  8ee  Aiitfiist.  Dr  Cir.  />«,  iv.  10;
Lactatit.  i. '.Ai.  UO.

Cubicularil  Slnvea  who  bad  cbar^^e  of  the
Blefpiiig  and  dwelling  rooius.  They  wore  coiii-
uiouly  divulcd  into  wattlies  {ntalionet)  for  day  and
i)i;;ht,  and  hIim)  into  deonneii  (OivHi, -UXU;  Snct.
iiomU.  17).  Under  the  later  enipemrs  the  cnbivu-
Inni  of  the  paliue  wero  callt-d  prafftositi  »acro
ciihirn/'f,  ami  wero  j>ersi)nn  of  liij;li  rank.

CublctUum  UHiinlly  int->an>iaH|flepiiig  nuddwcll-
iiig  nxnn  in  a  Itoiuaii  lionne,  hnt  ih  hIho  applied  to
tW  pavilion  or  box  in  wtiicli  th<>  HomiiTi  einp<>r<:)rs
VQi-oacct]8tnmedt(}wirueHt4  tbo  pnldic  gaui«4(Snet.
Km-.  12;  Plin.  Panrg.  r>l), St««  Cincl's.

CubYtu*  (ir^;(i's).  A  niPiiHiirB  n(  length  Ji^cd  by
t1i<^  Gnitik.H,  Roninnn,  ami  othrr  nntinnD,  was  4>ri;;-
inatly  the  Ir.ngth  of  the  Inini.in  iirin  from  the  elbow
to  tlir  wrisl.iii  Ui  Cliu^  lip  uf  tbo  iniddb;  hit^i-r ;  tlii'
liitler  woM  itM  Hi^nihcation  ainon);  tbo  Gnu>kH  and
RmnitiiN.  It  WHM  (iqiml  to  a  fi»ot  and  a  half;  and
tht-Tefore  the  Uonian  enbit  was  a  Hide  ]i>ht<,  and
tliu  l}r«i>k  cubit  a  Httlu  more,  than  a  foot  and  a
half  l^ngtish — tbo  rospccrivf  bmgtlitt  of  the  foot
iH-ing,  in  millimetres,  Greek  30H.3,  EnglihU  'JOi',
Honian  '295.7.  The  Greek  cubit  was,  mill iinet res
4(i'J.>l,  the  Roman  443.6.  The  cnbit  was  divided
by  tlie  Greeks  into  2  spans  ia-m&iifiai),  0  band-
breadtlis  {iroXnio-Tdi'),  and  24  Anger-breadths  (<lid«c-
Tu^at);  and  hy  lhi>  H<iiiiaiis  into  1^  fe«t,1>  brunlths
ipafmi\,  and  24  lluindi  -  breadths  {jxi/^rm}.  Sei<
HnltMcb.  Metvof.  pp.  2^,  02,  and  tables.

Cubna  [Kvdw).  A  dii>,  cube.  (Seu  Tesskka.)  A
cubic  foot  of  water  was  the  auiphovu  or  iiuadranlat,
tbc  priuL-ipal  liqnid  lueasnre. See  QuAi>iuNTAL.

CucnlluB.  (!)  A  fiiunul-Hlmpi^l  niU  of  pMp»r
used  by  tlio  Roman  ithop-kecpera  to  wrap  pow-
ileni,  drngn,  etc. — the  Euglish  "  Mi-cw  "  (Mart.  iii.


W*


2).  Ileuce  (2)  u  cowl,  intcndetl  to  bo  umnI
open  air,  and  l>o  bo  drawn  over  tbo  hnod  bi  |ii
it  from  thu  injnriM)  of  tlm  wtNttbrr.  instead  of «
hat  or  cup.  It  was  worn  by  t^av«IU•r».fibeplu>n)^
husbauduien,  and  bunters;  uuil  hy  soldlenoa  Mr-
vice  in  cold  climate's,  us  is  aeeu  on  Trujan'a  Colmun;
and  also  in  city  life,  even  by  (>ei-M>UB  of  dutlurttou
wbo  wished  to  go  abroad  witUoat  bcioj:  njougntnJ
(Jnv.  vi.  33U).  The  cowl  waa  aouietiuicsa  Mr[
garment  (Mart.  xiv.  132).  Occuiionully  it  ft
part  of  the  lafrrna  or  pae'm\
other  cloak,  which  was  Mtea
In.'  cHcuJfalH*  (Isid.  tfriy.  xix.tl
This  is  shown  in  the  (ignrB  niiuexcd,
from  a  relief  representing  a  travel-
ler leaving  bis  inn  {Ilullet.  SapJ.
lr>lS,  I),  In  either  eusi^  thtt  huwi
alight  be  worn  over  tin*  brad  or
thrown  buck  on  Ibe  shoulder.  Jbt
nse  of  the  cowl  and  also  of  tb*
cape,  which  served  the  saniu  par
pose,  wii.^  allowed  to  slaTos  by  ■
law  in  the  Coflex  Tbeodoftisniit.
<^?5""f  t^'r'w  Cowls  wvrv  im|K»rted  into  Italy
iromonintoiige  in  r  nince(>>aHli»K«
cucuZ/o,  Jnv.  viii.  145),  and  fniin  the  ciMintryiirtlic
Harduei  in  Illyrin.  '  Tbtme  from  tbu  bittur  iDCatity
weri.<  proliably  of  a  fkteuliar  fashion,  whlob  gin
origin  to  [be.  term  hurdofucuilu*.

Cudo  or  Cudoa  A  helmet  of  very  simple  fom,
tittiiig  clo-te  like  u  skiill-cap,  made  of
leattifr  nr  the  skins  of  wild  nMitiials(Sil.
Itnl.  viii.  41*3).  It  is  probably  to  Iks  iden-
tilied  with  thi?  Homeric  Korairv^  or  hel-
nitit  of  nioHiedew  {It.  i.  258),  described
ae  ('"^(iXoc,  "without  knobs  or  projec-
tions," and  ^o<^v,  "  without  plnme  or
liorst^-bai  r  cn-tit " ;  known  also  by  Gre«k  raprawDU-
lions  of  that  bom,  from  oui*  of  wbicb  iu  bronw  tbt
annexed  example  is  taken.

Culra»s. Hee  Lorica;  Tiiorax.

Ci^aolus  (Jaciji'1»  dk  Citjaa).  A  dtnlinguubt'
exponnder  of  the  Rinnan  law.  Hu  was  Imuu  »t
Toulouse  in  1522,  tho  mm  of  a  tanner,  and  after  ^
ing  edncatcd  in  tlic  law,  lectured  at  Oabon  >■>
l.'>54,  becoming  iu  I.hn  following  year  profiMiK '*
the  L'niveriiity  of  lionrgea.  Oom  this  Mat  ^
learning  he  was  called  to  Valence  in  1557,  n^
turning  to  Bonrges  iu  I57ti.  He  di*d  OcloW
4rh,  l&l>t).  Cnjacius  won  a  remarkuhle  repnl*"
tion  hy  bis  study  of  the  MSS.  of  the  Boinsli  Jo-
rislic  writings,  and  by  bis  brilliant  cnirndHli'^*
that  8crvt«l  to  r*movc  luuch  of  tbu  olwcorilj  tl'**
had  eiivelopiMl  the  nicer  questions  of  Runiiu  U*-
Tlieso  uniendariuhs  were  published  in  pari  in  Ih^
work  entitled  Ohnrrtatiuutim  tt  JCHKHdali0Hi»  i**'*
Xl'IlI — u  treatise  that  uontemporary  wril4!i»»tj''*!
opM  inromiHirabife.  He  also  piiblisbed  cditnui^'*'^
the  Inslitulc!*',  I'andects,  etc.,  of  JusliniMu,  >  1^'*
of  th«  Themhwiau  Cotle,  a  Greek  veraina  of  tb*
.liistiniaii  laws,  besides  cutnmeiititrics  on  tb(  t"***
sii^fui/isf's  Frtidorum,  and  on  «evct'ul  bonks  otio'
Deereluls.  His  0^*«tT<IrioH«•  Inclnded  a  wide  rw^
of  chwisical  reading  and  criticism,  so  Ihalbeu"*"
qiieutly  cited  by  phitologtsta  and  etitd«u|aof^
ancient  Uleratures  as  well  as  by  Jurists.

The  first  complete  cidlrction  of  the  writing*  *
Cujiidins  W!i«  tbo  edition  of  Fabrot.  lf>  vols  [V*f^
Itir**).  reprinted  at  Naples  ^175");  and  at  Vetw
and  Modena  in  11  vols.  tl7&^->«i). 8ca  SpftogM-


.  L'yiio  ilA-'


CULCITA


437


CULTER


bei^,  Cujacius und teine ZeitgenoBsen (Leipzig,
1822).
ColclttB. See  Lkctus.

Cnlex.  "The  Gnat."  A  poem  often  ascribed
to  Vergil,  who  is,  in  fact,  known  to  have  oompose<L
in  his  yonth  a  poem  with  that  title  (Stat.  Sittae,
ii.  7,  73;  Suet.  Fit.  Lucani.  p.  50,  ReiflF.).  The  in-
ternal evidence  is,  however,  agaiust  the  view  that
the  one  now  extant  is  the  original,  thongh  some
scholars  (as  Heyne  and  Hildebrandt)  have  sup-
posed it  to  be  the  same  with  later  interpohitious.
The  Culex  is  a  short  epic  of  414  hexameter  lines,
nhose  snbject  may  he  considered  as  partly  pastoral
and  partly  mock-heroic.  A  goatherd  leads  out  his
Socks  to  feed  npon  the  pastures  near  Mount  Cith-
aeron.  Having  fallen  asleep,  he  is  suddenly  roused
fruin  bis  slumbers  by  the  bite  of  a  gnat ;  aud,  while
awakeniug,  he  crushes  to  death  tbe  insect  which
had  inflicted  the  wound.  He  then  perceives  a  huge
seri>eiit  approaching,  which,  if  his  sleep  had  not
been  brokeu,  would  inevitably  have  destroyed  him.
The  shade  of  the  gnat  appears  to  the  goatherd  on
the  following  night,  and  reproaches  him  with  hav-
ing  occasioned  its  death  at  the  moment  when  it
bad  saved  his  life.  Tbe  insect  describes  all  that
it  had  seeu  in  the  iufemal  regions  during  its  wan-
derings, having  as  yet  obtained  no  fixed  habita-
tion, Next  day  the  goatherd  prepares  a  tomb,
in  order  to  procure  repose  for  the  ghost  of  his
benefactor,  and  celebrates  in  due  form  its  oh-
Beqnies.  See  Birt,  Hist.  Hexam.  Lat.  (Bonn,  1876) ;
R.  Ellis,  in  the  Jour,  of  Philology,  vol.  xvl.  p.
153;  and  Hildebrandt,  Studien  au/  d.  Geft.  d.  r6m.
Poene  und  Metril  (Leipzig,  1887).  The  text
is  included  in  Bibbeck's  edition  of  the  works  of
Vergil,  and  edited  by  Leo  (Berlin,  1691).

CnUna  (orrrtu'toi').  A  kitchen.  The  illnstratiou
represents  a  kitchen  stove  in  the  house  of  Pausa


at  Pompeii,  with  some

cooking  utensils  ui>on

it,  as  discovered  when

first  excavated — viz.,  a

strainer  (c(}Ium),akitch-

eu  knife  {culter  coqaina-

ria),  and  au  implement

for  dressing  eggs  (sup-  Kitchen  Siove. (House  ofPwiBa,

posed  apalare). See  Pompett.)

DOMUS,  p.  546.

Culpa. See  article  in  the  Appendix.

Culter,  dim.  CULTEIXUS  (fiaxaipa,  Koirle,  <rif>ayis),
A  knife  with  only  one  edge,  which  formed  a  straight
line,  the  blade  being  pointed  aud
its  back  curved. It  was  used  chief-
ly  for killing animals,  either in
hnnting,  in  tbe  slaughter-house,  or
at  the  altar. Tbe  minister,  or  at-
tendant on  tbe  priest,  is  called  cul-
trarius,  since  he  and  not  tbe  priest
Culiri. (From <iid the  actual killing. The  ao-
Tombetoneora  compauyiug  illustration is  taken
CuiirariuB-i ^^^^  q^^^^^  (Insoript.  vol.  ii.  p.  640,

no.  11).  The
name  culter  was
also  applied  to
razors,  pmning-
knives,  and
kitchen  knives.
That  in  these
cases  the  culter
was  different
from  those  above
represented , and
most  probably
smaller,  is  cer-
tain ;  since,
whenever  it  was Calmrlus (Bas-relief  Ttom  PompelL)


Kllchen  Utensils  rpom  Pompeii. (Orerbeck-J


CTLTRARIUS


ISS


CfNEIFORM


used  fur  nliaving  or  itomt'nlio  piirpfMi««,  it  wu  %!•
wa,vK  (liHtiiiiCiiinliM  I'mm  llie  unuiinnn  ctllter  by
noiuo.  o)i[thet,  as  cuUer  tvttwriMt,  culler  iv)ijainarl*.

Cultiatiua. See  Ct'LTKit.

CuIuUns.  A  catU  or  nip  of  eurtlwuwiire  nsed
Uy  lUu  jiontijicrt  fur  sncrificiu)  purpurea.

Comae. Sco  artlck'  iu  the  Appendix.

Ctmae,  CtmabiUa  {XiKvof,  (r«u<^.jl,  A  rmdliv.  It
has  been  ilsi>ii(;lit.  thiit  irniUli'w  ivirr  litllo  nurd  hy
tlicGreekf), 111  lrii>«t  iiit-udy
timeA;  oiiu'ePliiiti,  iiiapoH*
Kigo  oa  tlie  putting  of  in<
fuiitM  to  Hiecp,  tiiftiitifins
uiily  Kiuging  tlie  lullaby  and
rocking  ill  the  Arms  i^-t'i/-
vii.7yOJ>).  But  various  etlli-  Cmmr.  (MuaeamulBoaune-l
Aiittites  are  men  tioiiod.

Hern«leH,Bc<H>nliiiK  to  trxditioD,  wMcnMllod  in  hia
fattioi'fl  flhifid  (Tbeocr.  xxiv.4);  Dit^itysiiH  in  a  win*
nowiog-fau  (X/kvo*-,  rfliiN»i»),  wliicli  ar^iionlingly
was  borno  in  hiii  pr'irfKHiuriH ;  uIIiit  dvitit^s  in  tlii!
Mamr  mnnnnr.  1'lin  :u-k  nr  cradlf  in  trhich  cliil-
drun  were  pxpicmeil  in  atrruiffTKatjifj;  but  It  is  only
in  i-iiiiti'  Iut4>  iiiitlmrx  tlnit  wf*  lind  iTKdtftrjv  iiaaeittv,
'•t"  rock  tW  crudlo"(AeI.  //.  J.xi.  II).

In  thti  Uitniau  [HTiml  cnuiiee  were  refinlarly  nsed
(Pluiit.  7"rMr.  V.  1:5  iinil  i-lsewben-),  atul  wero  made
Vo  rttak.  Wt:  litid  u  frniale  atsre  called  cHnaria
(Grut.  Inii^i-iiit.  311, 7) ;  aud  a  male  slave.  «ii(i  |>er-
tiap8  in  tiuio  becniiie  the  cliild'd  paeHagopuM  {cu-
Humtn  m(/tor,  Mart.  xi.  39, 1).

Cunaxa  (Koi'yufa).  A  ttnmit  town  in  Babylonia,
on  the  Knpliratea,  Ciiiioua  for  the  bntllo  fought
litre  betwfen  I  lie  yauuKCi'  t-yrus  and  his  brother
Artaxerxf-.t  Mnenion,  in  whii-h  tlif  furnior  traa
killed  tn.c.  ^(H).  H1X1  A>'ABAt4ts:  AnxAXunxr-s ;
Cykus;  Xknophon.

Ctmctator.  "  The  dplayer."  A  nieknnme  piveii
to  Q.  I'nUiiw  MnxiiiniR  (q.  V.)  ln'caii«e  of  liis  puliiy
of  delay  iu  flir  Sccund  Punic  War.

Cuueifonn.  A  name  Riven  to  the  form  of  writ-
ing wliiwe  oharaoterd  resemble  a  wedge  (ciinruti.
'I'he  !'ifiic)i  eiiiiivaleiit  is  t^(e-A-clou  ;  tlie  German,
kfil/iirmiit ;  and  iu  Kii^rlish,  the  tennH  *'rijneatie"
anci  "annw-headed"  iir«  winiKtinieM  njwd  nn  nynn-
nym*.  Thin  specii^s  of  wrifiii};  wn«  einplttyetl  by
tb«  ancient  Akkadians,  l^bybiniaiiH.  AiuiyriaiiN,
AnueiiiiinH,  Klnniir»^,  iind  IVr»i»nt),  who  have  left
n%  n\tvc\ma\is **( it  11  pan  <'l)iy,iilone,  metal,  and  KlafW,
either  ni^rulded  [us  in  thr>  i^hiy)  or  eut  and  eltinellcd
(a«  iiptiii  the  otiier  itiibHtaueeit).  The  nne  of  the
enneififroi  chai-aeters  dales  fnun  a  period  n<>t  later
than  ll.c.  3.'4Hi.  aiHl  waft  eontiniied  until  11  eoutnry
or  so  nfl^T  the  beginning  of  the  Chn^tiaii  era.
The  oldtLHt  RiH'Ptmen  now  known  to  exist  i»  an  in-
Hcrtit'tion  upon  a  hit  of  porphyry  OHHi^jiied  (i>  the
lime  of  Sarjjoii  tt(  Agadtf.  The  lateat  f'xample  in
preiHTVed  III  Mnnich,  and  in  lu  lale  as  A.D.  8I>.

It  itt  only  in  the  iircM^nt  centnry  tliat  scholarH
Imvo  been  abbt  U>  dceipher  the  vnneatie  uharacterM,
ntid  to  interpret  Mitiofaetnrily  Ibe  inMTiptioiiit  that
contain  (hem.  Il  wns.  in  fact,  ni»riy  years  before
Miy  one  conceived  the  nntion  that  the  curioai*
arrow-litiadud  niarkn  on  the  vast  rniim  of  Perscpo.
lis  and  other  i>arta  of  PorHia  bad  anylliing  to  do
with  laD^u&Ke  at  all.  It  wa»  in  \(ylS  that  an  ink-
lil)K  of  the  Irntli  ftrMi  entered  the  mind  of  Garcia
do  Silva  Figneroai  an  aoibussudor  of  Philip  III.  uf


Spain. Xn  that  year  he  viAilcd  Prraci
coming  inibned  with  a  belief  that  the  urntvr-beiiild
wero  Honie  form  of  wiitinn,  hiul  a  portion  of  "ne
ii)M;riplion  copied. Tliin  he  carried  back  to  Eu-
roiw,  wliere  it  attracT«l the  ati«iitiou of  other
ftaranta. In  1))74,  the  French  traTcIler  Chnrdin,
after  visiling  Perswp^diB.  pnbli.theil  ctptea  of  Ihiee
Hetff  of  inik'ri|>lioiiH,  n  ilh  an  tu'ctmnt  of  tbe  cnrimiit
obaractetB  a»  obM<rvrd  by  hitn,  pmnoanriitf;  Ibeni
to  be  writiiig  mid  not  liier<igtypbit,  bnl  espn'iwiriK
hii  nonvictinii  ibot  no  one  wonld  ever  W  abb-  lo
dei-ijdiur them. More than a  centnry later  (iu
ITi^^l,  a  Fivncli  botaniBt  nnined  Michanx  sent  to
riiris  a  Hlciiie  whieh  be  hsd  found  at  Bagdati  cov-
ered with  enneifiirins. By  thitt  lime  the  enrio.sity  •
of  the  learned  had  become  awakened,  and  the  niyi^ —
tery  Bnrmuiiding  theii« ioHcriptionB  excited  tb^a
intereot  of  the  ablest  whelan  of  Europe,  who  {,'rad j
daily  accumulated  a  largo  number  of  s(»eciinrii»  o^  <
tile cnneifnnn,  as  other  travellers brought  bnrV"
from  the  Efltut  valuable  materials  for  sliiily. ^^
wa«i  long,  however,  before  anything  beyond  niet^m
conjci'tiire  wax  nllained:  and  many  varie«)  ni^^
omllictiiig  theories  were  put  ri)rward. The  rli
;u:l4>rH  were  Kaiil  to  be  only  fanciful  deiiigna  of  t
Oriental  arelntt'CtA  ami  devnid  urmiuiiiing. A
they  wi-re  cxphiinMl  (by  Witlr  of  RoKtoek)  r«
to  Ihri  work  of  many  gi-nenitioiis  «f  worniK. Ol
explniijcd  tliHtTL»H  the  writing  uf  ilie(iiiehre&. S
otbem  vieweil  Lht-m  as  rburnis,  CHbaliMtic  bignk _
aslTolngii-al  formuljp. I.iehlenslein  thought  i  "^^
he  had  fonnd  in  them  certain  pamuigeB  from 4;^
KorAii wiitten iu Kutlc. Kaempfer heMts«.^
whether  In  explain  them  as  Cbine«e  or  as  nut-m^ig,.
catioiifl  of  the  Hebrew. Other  icbolars  pnmnno«yrf
tbflm  Riinefi,  Oghams,  Old  Orwk,  or  Snmnritan.

Thi.^  tir»l  liglit  on  this  apparently  tueoliible  ptnb-
lent  watt  due  tv  (he  aeiitt*  re«earcbett  uf  Kante»
Niebnhr,  who,  witboiii  profewtiug  to  read  orinffr-
prel.  (he  inmcriplioiiH,  pnived  theexisteuCT  iii  ihrm
of  three  distinct  varielit>4t  of  cnneifurm  alphsfwl,
iuRtead  of  (be  single  one  that  ha<t  1>een  aMiaaM>d
before  bistime.  The  Ibreefohl  tn^cripliou."  at  Per-
sepulis  be  then  rightly  explained  ok  t rau»criptiaiu
of  (he  name  nin(t«;r  in  the  tbreo  alpbnlK;ts.  Tlii*
bi'illianl.  discovery  wiw  deveIop«'d  by  Tycb*«i  "f
ItoHtock  (I7iW)  niid  Mflnler  of  Copenbngcii  ilrWX
wlio*G  Ittlionnt  cleared  the  way  for  the  uiiignifirtil
success  c»f  Georg  Friedrieh  Grolefi-nd  Iq.  v.f,  »Ii'\
on  Si-ptemlK-rTtli,  IHCtt,  prej%ent»^d  U*  the  Ac«1t«.»
of  Goltiiigcn  the  flrat  cnD<>if(>mi  alphabet  uilb  il'
pliouetic  i'i)iiivalen(H.  It  m.^y  Iw  niMtvn'ed  11"'
thin  date  and  tueeling  are  dunltly  imixivtAnt  iutb*
history  of  ]aiiguagL'-»t»dy,  for  then  wa*  alsw  ft*"
Heiited  llu"  first  nmdiiig  of  the  Kgyptliii  Men*-
glyidiH  by  Hej  no.  Twenty  years  later,  f?t.  Mafli"
iU-inuii»tt rated  a  part  of  the  tiexioiinl  t*yBtrDi:  'i""
Btirnouf,  Lft»'<'en,  Westei^aani,  Beer,  Jae<|[i**.  WJ
finally  Hir  Henry  Kawliuson  fullowml,  iierli  v''"
bii  coutribntious  to^vardt^  a  more  perfect  hpiI*'^
standing  of  Ibe  characters  and  of  the  lMUg'"F''
whiob  they  embodied.  Rawlinson,  it  iii»5  '">  ^
marked,  was  the  lirst  to  read  and  publinh  Uic  l**'
or  more  lines  of  the  gn-at  Debistnu  inH'tipl'""'
(fti'M  the  Journal  of  tlir  .Ittiatie  Soeieli/  for  ltH<LI

Inscriptions  in  the  Pentian  enneiforia  »rt^  «-*"*'
ly  in  three  parallel  columns,  being  the  wnni- 1"^
translated  Into  tbreo  languages  and  ali'lut'"'^'
Persian,  Metlinn  ( alw  called  Scytbic  «f»l  ^'"
SuMuii).  and  Babyloulau  —  tbc>>e  bi:ing  tlic  >'>"*
gtcat  pcoplt-'-i  under  tbc  dtiiuiuiuu  of  tho  Adi"


CUNEIFORM


439


CUNEIFORM


BUck  ObellBlE  wilfa  Cuneirorm  liiBcriptiou& (Hritldti  Uuseum.)

menian  kings,  who  tbns  protnnlgated  tlieir  decrees
in  three  laiigaagea.

(1)  BabyloDian.  This  is  the  most  ancient  and
ronst  important  of  the  three  varieties  of  cuneifurm.
With  it  are  inscribed  tablets  and  cyliudera,  giving
a  vast  amoiiDt  of  iuforniation  oq  tmtory,  archte-
ology,  law,  goTerniDent,  and  mytliology.

(2)  Scytbic.  The  Scythic  cuneiform  is  never
found  alooe  (with  one  exception),  and  represents
an  alphabet  of  some  100  characters.  The  language
which  they  embody  is  an  Ugro-Fiuuic  dialect,  uf
which  little  as  yet  is  known.

(3)  Pentian.  The  Persian  cuneiform,  which  al-
ways stands  first  in  the  trilingual  inscriptions,  is
the  most  recent  of  the  three,  and  consists  of  some
44  characters.  It  is  characterized  by  an  oblique
stroke  which  divides  its  words,  and  the  wedges  of
which  it  is  composed  uever  cross  one  another.  The
langnage  of  the  Persian  caneiform  is  cognate  with
tbe  Avestan,  and  is  the  pareut  tougne  of  the  mod-
em Persian.  This  character  was  used  iu  tbe  peri-
od from  B.C.  570-370.  In  it  is  written  tbe  great
iuscription  of  Darius  Hystaspis  at  Bebistun,  con-
taining a  genealogical  record,  a  descriptioo  of  tbe
extent  of  liis  domiuious,  a  list  of  the  great  events

Finlu.

g-TT  -ITK  E^rt  mi  <  s^tT

Scylkk  oi  K*«  Bulu.

ET<T  -n<T  ^-T?  JH<


BabrlontaB.
Thi)  Nftmo  DarlQS  (DArjBTtB)  in  Cuneiform  Chantctcrs.


of  his  reign,  with  prayers  to
Ormuzd  and  the  spirits.  Most
of  thcseiuscnptiunshave  been
found  at  Persepolis  (q.  v.),  Be-
bistun, Naksh-i-Ruatam,  and
Haniadau.

Tbe  cuneiform  characters
were  origiually  pictures  of  the
objects  which  they  stood  for
(tdeographs},UketheEgyptian
hieroglyphics  and  the  earlier
chamcters  in  Chinese;  but  as
time  went  on  the  forms  were
modified  aud  simplified  so  as
to  lose  their  pictorial  charac-
ter, though  a  few  still  Suggest
the  primitive  design.

At  first  they  were  drawn  in
ontliae  on  a  vegetable  sub-
stance (likkuai),  but  a  little
later  on  clay,  to  tbe  difficulties
of  which  aredue  the  first  mod-
ification in  the  original  shapes
of  the  letters.  Tbe  subsequent
use  of  atone  and  metal  carried
this  miKlificattun  still  further.
Au  archaic  revival,  however,
set  in  during  theageof  Assur-
baui-pal,  when  it  became  cus-
tomary to  use  once  more  tbe
moat  ancient  characters.  The
signs,  origiually  ideographic,
became  subsequently  pfaouet-
10,  denoting  each  a  syllable.
Tbe  cuneiform  syllabary  con-
tains in  all  some  2000  signs— ideographic,  syllahiOf
or  purely  phouetic — being  sometiiues  used  iu  one
way  and  sometimes  iu  another.

Tbe  characters  were  inscribed  upon  stone,  glass,
and  metal  with  a  chisel;  and  upon  clay  with  a
sharp-pointed  stylus  having  three  nuequal  faces^
the  largest  for  tbe  outer  aud  thickest  wedges  of
tbe  letters,  the medium  -  sized  for  the medium


Archaic  CuD«lfbnn  Cliancl«r  for  "Fish."

strokes,  and  tbe  smallest  for  the  finer  lines.  Tbe
Babylouian  clay  tablets  or  "bricks"  are  iu  size
from  one  inch  npward,  pillow-shaped,  and  covered
with  characters  often  so  minute  as  to  be  diCBcult
to  read  without  a  magnifying  glass.  (See  illustra-
tion on  page  179. )  After  the  inscriptions  had
been  made,  the  tablet  was  dried  in  the  suu  aud
then  enclosed  in  a  case  on  which  the  inscription
was  duplicated.  These  are  styled  "case-tablets."
Tablets  were  also  used  by  tbe  Assyrians,  especiiilly
by  the  literary  classes;  but  tbe  roconls  of  this
people  were  very  often  carved  upon  tbe  stone  pan-
els of  their  palaces  aud  on  coloitsal  human-beaded
bntls.  Cuneiforms  have  been  found,  likewise,  on
amethyst,  jasper,  and  onyx.


CII3TEU8


440


CtrRATOR


BtBi.io«iiAPHT. — Tlie  bibliofjmpliy  of  the  mili-
jpct  in  vi'ty  ffxIciiBiv*'.  Tlic  fiil1(iuiit>;  Atuixhinl
works  arr  nt'ltTtoil  out  of  n  frrcat  iiuiiiIm't:  LaMHi!ii
Riitl  Wf^liTjjiuinl,  VrbrF  d'te  KeilinM'hriftvn  |]S15);
Hiiii^kn,  Oh  (hr  lll'ift  atiti  fieatad  Kindu  »/  Vertrpul-
ilan  Writing,  in  lln;  7Vu»«.  of  Ihi'  tluiful  Irunian  Si>-
tic.ty  (leW):  Knwliiiwm.  f'ommentar^  on  Ihe.  Cunei-
form Iniioriptiim»  nf  Itabtflon  ami  Jaai/ria  (18S0);
tJrotefeiul,  i*i>  Kfititnn'hriJ'ten  ann  /<^Ai>/i»»  (1864);
MiSiiant,  /fljimpfionji  Amt^rtpnnrn  (IK>y};  id.  />*
Ki^ritureit  Cun^iformM  (l-'*lH);  Ojipi^rl,  Im  Oi'andfi
Iimrripiion  dr  Khortahad  (IHJGG);  On  (iobim'tiii,
Trait/drn  Rvriturri  ('HntUformm  1 1864);  .S|ii<';ji'l,  /)i>
AIlprrKiirhrn  /xritinnrhriftnf  i2i\  t?«l,  IHHI);  Kwiilil.
tirHrhu-hllii'hf  Fiilfir  dirnrmiliiirhrH  Syrar/icn  (1K71);
SctbrnrtiT,  IJie  Atoiiffiiifh-titiliftloniHfhfn  KriUHK/'hrif-
tr»  (Irti'i);  If.  Smirli,  I'htwflif  t'nlurM  uf  Cujie-i/itrm
Character* {ISt  I)',  Hajc^,  J mtj/rutu  (irauimnr{Vfi'4)x
HmTiti,  A»t!triaH  IHt'tionarg  (1H71);  lloira,  M^Moirt<
any  CEeritHre  Vuttthforme  Aettp-irnntrili^rt);  Oiipert,
Let  Itiscriptiong  A»«ffi-irnnf*  (IHfiS);  Maiianf,  Recueil
H'Jljihahel*  (Irtrtf»);  r>i'liil1n',  /^*  iHnrriptiom  Slixln-
ritjurti  de  .ViiiiiT  r.l  dr  /ttthjifimr  (IH?9);  Tiiylor,  Thr
Jtpliabti  (IBKJ);  Aniianil  and  Sclieil,  Leif  Inncrip-
IJoNM  dc  Snlmanauar  II.  (IHWl;  HnuiiKiii,  t'laisificd
Li»t  of  ComjMutid  f'umi/nrm  Idtaffrapha  (I-S*<i));  [(<)-
zolil.  Thf  Tpli-fl-Amarnn  Tablm  (witli  antotypo  fnc-
«iiiiilei!)  (H92i;  jhhI  the  Atufffn/iIofjineJie  liibliothcJ:,
oilttivt  by  Dt^litzsuh  mitl  Pmil  lliiiipt.

Cuneu»((r^9»').  A  wt><lj:t!.  Fur  iUt  motapborical
uaeSffloe  ExKKciTUs ;  Tiiiiatri'm.

Cuikictllus  I  v7r<'tvfyftns,  vntipvyfia ).  A  miiib  or
unbiiMTfliii'Uii  ijasfi(ij:p,  ho  callt'tl  from  its  ro«cm-
blaiipp  to  llifi  burrowing  of  a  rabbit.

Tliv  word  in  Hpiiliud  to  imtunil  poHsages  ander-
grouud;  in  sulpbiir  luiiios;  to  ibc  dues  of  fur-
n[ic«i»;  to  Kcu'C'r*>;  and  lo  tUc  iiiHlrrgruiiiid  citikii-
iiols  of  nqiiediic1«.  Itnt  it  is  niONt  coiiiiuonly  xtf*vil
iui  n  luililary  tvclinicitl  tvTtu,  dimotui^  eiiher  Ibx
"mines"  of  bt(»k*j;or«  or  the  '*  euiiiil4'rniiut«  "  of
ilefeiidt're.  The  eiii-ltost  military  writer,  Aeticiis
TacliriiH,  j^ivc^^  full  ih^tails  iw  to  the  art  of  tiiiii-
iti^,  incliiiliiiK  lliiit  of  c-oiiiitt^riiiirif^* ;  utMl  tntutt  of
Ihe  tul«r  wrlfirn  have  copifil  or  nbnrlp'd  liis  ac-
count. AiiKiiig  tli«  nirioiii^  particiiitiiii  given  by
hiir)  iiro  thf^  introilitction  of  wiu^ps,  1)i-<')«,  uiril  Hmo1{rt
into  the  mino,  and  tlif  Nonndiii^  for  tninoo  by  lay-
iiift  lUts  ear  to  the  j{ri>iiiMl  uilh  a  bronze  nbii'Ul  be-
tween (  Pvliarr.  37).  .\iiothcr  remarkable  Html-
agom  iti  coinilei-Diining  in  deiKcriiied  by  Llvy
(xxiviii.  7)  at  the  Hiege  of  Anibmoin  by  tbo  Ro-
DinnH,  whrii  the  Auihniciol^  iiitrodiiccd  into  the
besiegen'  miiio  n  "atttik-pot"  of  bnniing  feathers.

Cup.  So*'  Cai-atiu's;  Calix;  Carciiksilm;
CuLUixt's;  C'VATHUs;  Cymkicm;  Pateka;  t'lii-
ala;  I'ucfUM  ;  SCAPHiirM;  Scvpiius.

Capa.  (i)  A  wfiodou  cook,  butt,  or  Imrral,  uaetl
like  the  hirtfeat  enrthea  \-«HHel,  th«  dolinm,  to  re-
wive  the  ffPHb  nmut  from  thip  wino-press  (torcuiar)
nrid  to  eoiitaiii  it  dnrin;j;  the  proei^wM  of  fermenta-
tion. The  cMipa  wn«  alwayn  «if  wo(hI  ;  the  dolium,
like  tim  amphom.  always  of  eartheiiwiirr.  Hence
of  the  detivativej*.  Fr.  rutf,  vnritr,  Kiij;.  roaprr,  fol-
low the  original  tjieaiiiiti;;  while  in  It.  cnppa,  Fr.
rvupf.T.ng.  r«;i,  il  in  rntxlilied.  Tim  infi-nor  wineH
weru  ilranii  for  drinking  fn>ni  the  rnim.  willinnt
liuiug  bottled  tn  amphorae:  whencn  i-iifMin  dr  I'Hjm
is  e^inivalcut  t4t  our  oxprosiioti  "from  the  wo<kL'*
(2)  Fart  of  an  o1iv«-preM. Bee  Thapeti'm.


Cupedoor  Cuppedo.  A  dainty,  tid-bit,artt»l>
icMcy  nt' any  kind.  Tli«  Roman  dealer!^  itj  rtinice
food  weru  culled  rupedinarii  and  bud  their  stalls
in  the  Fornm  Cup<;diniM  ( Vnrr.  L.  L.  v.  144J).

Cupido. Tbo  god  of  love. See  Ekos.

Cura.  The  pers'inifioatton  of  care.  Soe  Hygi-
nns/flfr'i?^.

Cura,  Curatela,  Ciuatlo.  See  Ccrator;  Ci<ra-
T0RS8.

Ourator.  Curaton  went  iierHon.4  appninlcd
cither  liy  law  or  by  the  mugiHtrntti  to  look  afUc
tbu  properly  of  certain  clutuiuM  of  jteople,  tind  lo
prt?venl  its  being  iM)imndvi-ed,  hecuinte  Ihey  wrn
iiuGt  or  unable  [o  pm|iei*ly  take  charge  of  il  tli*>iii-
stelvcB.  XboHc  closjieji  ar*  mainly  four:  niiiionuT
adutencentci  (i.  e.  pei'Mina  who  were  aui  iur'u  itii)
liHtwifM  the  npe  of  pnlxTty-  -twelv<?i  or  ft»iirt«ii
[OainM,  i.  lyti;  Jnnt.  i.  '.?i,  pr.]— nod  twenly-five
y^ant);  liinatics;  intenlict^^d  proiIignU;  and  a
tniMecltaneotiH  clasn,  the  ntra  of  which  was  nw-
HldiTnbly  later  in  origin.

Thr  ruru  of  minora  iit  to  b«  attribntod  tn  tin
fact  that  nlieu  a  yimn|r  |ierfton  who  was  mJ  iartf
Toai'hed  pultcrty,  and  rsrapiil  from  th«  mipervuioo
of  hift  guardian  iitce  Ti'Tr.t.A),  he  wan  regarded  u
having  attniited  hiH  full  stature,  iulcUcetnal  bo
lees  than  physical;  he  niigbt  marry  and  becoiDia
paterfamiliaH;  he  was  liable  to  uiililary  MrriWt
etititleil  to  vot«  ill  the  coDiitin,  and  cooipelcDt  W
hold  piihlir  oftlce;  and  he  liod  the  complete  xaa/*-
a^oment  of  bis  own  aH'airs.  But  it  was  fi^lt  ti>  Ik
a  nnvttor  of  necessity  t"  give  him  some  lepjil  I'f^
tecliori  iigaiiwt  designing  and  niMcnipubiiii  |»t-
Hniifi.  fur  Ic  Wejiine  clear  llmt  bin  indii^erRlifiii  ■ii'l
ignoranoo  of  hnsiueHB  would  IVeiiueijtly  lend  t»'lii«
being  ovcrreaehe<l ;  and  thii«  waH  dorte,  wilhont
interfering  with  Ihe  prinoi]>k'  that  fnlt  legiJ  »■
paeily  waw  atlained  with  puberty,  by  tJie  L«5
I'laetoria,  pttrtsod  certainly  iM'forr  u.(:.  1H3,  foriti*
mentioned  by  PlanMw  [l'«rud.  i.  3,  (»9(,  who  lUrf  i"
that  year.  This  statute  (which  appears  Xo  hi«
flr»tt  ewtablinlied  the  distinction  U-tweeii  mtiMfitf
and  full  age1  protected  mlnon  by  fi)ibjectiti|.'it>;
one  who  fnniilnlently  overreached  tliera  Ui  »  i«*
rfteiiim  pnhlitvtu  or  prowecution  (Cie. rf*  Og.'\\\.\^
$  (il},  eiilniting  a  pecuniary  Aiie  and  iurainiA  ■>■
convii^-lion  ;  and  after  the  introduction  of  fipf»ji't»"
nr#  by  the  pnu-tnr,  a  minor  who  wah  frainiuloi''.''
inilitcod  to  cntor  Into  a  eonlrnci  could  pniled  bim*
Relf  against  aclion  brongUt  thereon  bjr  plM<lii>S
the  exivplio  lenin  PUtrtoriae,  It  being  unlikny
that  ill  the  tacts  of  litis  Htringent  procednTv  U/
one  Mould  have  any  dealingtt  with  miiien  vli*'*
ever,  the  Htatnte  (Capitol.  Macr.  10  |  op|iArctitJ5
went  on  to  provide  that  iiiinora  who  wisiiwl  '"
contract  or  deal  with  other  persoun,  eapcrtally  *"
the  way  of  stipnlaliou  (I'ritwina.  viii.  4:  ivlii-'''
and  loan,  ohntild  \w  oompelbilile  to  rec«tre  a  en^
tor  on  their  appliimtinn,  by  wfaoae  awanl  to  th*
transaction  tli«  peujil  connetiaencea  of  Ibo  !■'
should  be  avoided.

The  principle  of  Iho  I^ex  Plaetona  trai  e«rf«"
still  fiirlUer  by  the  pmrtor,  who  by  meaun  pf  •»  *"'
tegraiH  ttHfit\itiu  prolected  ininoni  generally ag**"*
indiscn'tion  cniiKing  them  pmprietary  lom  jiM**"''
he  wunid  set  o^idc  IranHnctiong  into  wbleli  (^
had  etiten^d,  not  only  on  tbo  ground  of  fraiid,  l""'
on  a  consideration  of  all  the  circum»laiiort  of '*'*
cuMi.  prnvided  application  were  mode  to  him  wil''
ill  a  year  after  the  attainment  of  mi^laiSty.


CURATOR


441


CL'KATOKKS


The  Emperor  Marous  Anrelios  (Oftias,  Epit.  1, 6)
seenia  to  hare  extend«4l  tlni  Moope  of  the  cura  of
minora  by  providiiiK  tbnt  ii  itiiiior  might,  on  appli-
cation to  the  proper  magirttritte,  obtain  »  penna-
oent  oorator  to  look  generally  after  bis  property
and  aid  him  with  advioe.  The  principle  was  that
hfl  conld  not  be  compelled  to  have  a  general  cura-
tor onleae  he  pleatwd,  except  where  he  was  in-
rolved  iu  litigation ;  when  a  peraou  who  owed  him
money  wi^thed  to  discharge  bis  debt  and  obtain  a
releaae  (Dig.  17.4,7,2);  and  poasibly  where  he  had
(tiaregarded  the  adrice  given  to  him  by  his  gnard-
iaii,  oQ  reaching  puberty,  to  get  one  appointed  for
bim.  Bnt  apparently  most  minors  were  induced
by  the  conTen'tmice  of  tile  system  to  have  general
curators  to  assist  and  advise  them  (Ulpian,  Reg.
12,4;  DioCass.  lii.20).

The  oarators  of  minors  were  always  appointed
by  the  magistrate;  a  testamentary  appointment
iri  itself  was  void,  though  the  magistrate  would
usually  eonflnu  it  by  nominating  the  same  t>erBon
( fiMt.  i.  23,  1 ;  of.  Dio  Cassins,  zliv.  35 ) ;  and,  ac-
cording to  rule,  the  minor  had  to  apply  for  a  cnra-
tor  himself.  The  mmhim  whh  a  pnbtic  uiie,  and
conld  not  be  declined  except  on  speeillc  grounds,
csrefully  ennmerated  in  the  authorities  {Iniit.  i.  tit.
'£>) ;  many  curators  had  to  give  security  that  they
would  diligently  look  after  the  interests  intrusted
to  them ;  and  if  sn^peotetl  of  malversation  or  neg-
ligence, they  could  be  removed  by  the  magistrate,
and  in  oases  of  frand  were  liable  t^)  the  HHnpreti
crimftt,  a  quasi -criminal  prosecution  (  [m»i.  \.  tit.
26).

A  minor  was  fully  competent  to  perforin  legal
sct«,  snch  as  the  conveyance  of  property  or  the  mak-
ing of  contracts;  but  whether  such  legal  arts  had
tlinir  full  usual  effect  or  not  de|>euiled  on  whether
tbey  were  sanctioned  by  the  curator.  Both  alipii-
atiuns  and  contracts  were  prinui  /frri>  binding  on
him ;  batagaiost  both,  if  tliey  were  seriously  prfj-
ndictal,  or  the  oorator's  oonseusiis  had  not  been
given,  he  could  get  himself  in  integrum  mtilntun
by  the  magistrate  (Cod.  ii.  22, 3) ;  and  if  the  onrn-
tor  had  not  assented  tf>  a  contract,  he  could  nor
be  compelleil  to  dtsbnrse  anything  from  the  mi-
nor's property  in  disoliarge  of  it,  or  to  pay  costs  or
damages  of  actions  brought  in  respect  thereof  by
the  other  party.  But  a  series  of  imperial  euart-
meuts  (Cod.  T.  71, 10;  v.  37,  22)  placed  him  under
very  stringent  regulations  iu  respect  of  alienation
of  the  wanl's  property,  which  as  a  general  rule  wum
not  allowed  without  permission  from  a  magistrat*^.
If  a  minor  wished  to  give  himwif  in  adrogation
the  curator's  consent  was  necessary.

The  cura  of  furiosi  (lunatics  and  idiots)  and  iu-
t<>rdicted  prodigals  or  spendthrifts  originatt*<l  with
the  Twelve  Tables,  which  placed  /nrioni  under  the
cura  of  their  nearest  agnates,  or,  if  there  were  no
agnates,  of  their  gentiles.  Similarly  the  near  re-
lations of  a  priHfijfMa  might  petition  the  mi^^istratti
fur  his  interdiction  from  ttin  manageiuunt  of  his
nwn  affairs,  and  hi.t  subji^ctiou  to  the  ourii  uf  hix
nearest  agnates,  thongli  only  if  his  property  had
come  t.o  him  by  the  intestacy  of  his  own  father.
Ill  default  of  these  tegilimi  cHratorei,  one  would  bo
itppointed  for  snch  i>ert4ons  liy  tlie  lUiigi.Htrate
l^»(.  i.  23,  3).

In  the  time  of  Justttiiau  otiier  olasscH  of  {wrsons
Were  able  to  get  a  general  curator  by  application
to  the  magistrate,  especially  those  suffering  fn)ui
w«ak  health,  impaired  mental  farnlties,  or  bodily


in6rmity — e.  g.  the  deaf  and  dumb  {innt.  i.  23,  4).
Similarly  it  wonld  sometimes  happeu  that  an  ita-
pHbe$  wonld  have  a  curator  as  well  as  a  guardian
—G.  g.  if  there  was  litigation  between  himself  and
the  latter  (/a«f.  i.21,  3),  or  if  the  latter  was  unfit
or  temporarilv  unable  to  discharge  bin  duties  fib.
23,5).

It  will  appear  from  what  has  been  said  that  be-
tween a  guardian  and  a  curator  an  essential  dis-
tinction lies  iu  this,  that  the  latt>er  was  especially
intended  to  look  after  the  ward's  proprietary  in-
terests, whereas  the  former  was  penoHae,  non  rei
dalH».

The  word  citra  has  also  other  legal  applications :
(1)  cura  boHorum,  as  iu  the  case  of  the  goods  of  an
insolvent  debtor,  which  are  secured  for  the  benefit
of  hia  creditors;  (2)  cura  bonoi'um  et  rrntriii,  in  the
case  of  a  woman  being  pregnant  at  the  death  of
her  husband  ;  (3)  cura  hereditatia,  where  there  is  a
dispute  ns  to  who  is  the  krrea  of  a  person,  and  his
supposed  child  is  under  puberty ;  (4)  cura  keredi-
tatit  iacenti»,  the  charge  of  an  iuheritanoe  of  which
the  apparent  heir  baa  not  yet  declared  his  accept-
ance; (5)  cura  bonorum  ab$eHtiit,  in  the  case  of
projMrty  of  an  a1)8ent  person  who  had  appointed
'  no  manager  of  it.

Cnratdrea.  Pitblic  officers  of  various  kinds
under  the  Romnn  Empire,  several  of  whom  were
,  first  established  liy  Augustus  (Suet.  AMg.  37).  Tlie
I  most  important  oT  them  were  as  follows:

(1)  CL'KAT('>RIES  ALVRI et  RlPAUt-M  ET  CLOACA-

I  Ht'M,  wh<i  hail  the  cbargo  of  the  navigation  of  the

I  Tiber.

I  (2)  CiiRATORKe)  Annuxak,  who  purchased  corn
and  oil  for  the  State,  and  sold  it  again  at  a  small
price  among  the  poorer  citizens. They  were  also

I  callet)  eitratorea  emeitdi  frumeaU  ft  oM,  and  trtrStyat
and  tXaivyai.  Their  office  belonged  to  the  perno-
Italia  munera;  tliat  is,  it  did  not  require  any  ex-
penditure of  a  pfmon's  private  property,  but  the

I  cnratores  received  from  the  State  a  sufficient  sum

:  of  money  to  purchase  the  required  amount  (Dig.

1 50,  tit.  8,  a.  9,  $  ay

I (3)  Cl'ratorks  AQrARU.M. (See  Aquak  Ductus.)

(4)  CuRATORKS  Calrndarii,  who  had  the  care  iu
innnicipsl  towns  of  the  oaleadaria;  that  is,  the
books  which  contaiueil  the  names  of  the  persons
to  whom  public  money,  which  was  not  wanted  for
the  ordinary  expenses  of  the  towu,  was  lent  on  in-
terest. The  office  belonged  to  the  pertottalia  nm-
nera.

(5)  CUBATORKS  LuDORUM,  who  had  the  care  of
the  public  games  as  special  commissioneni.  Per-
sons of  rank  appear  to  have  been  usually  appointed
U>  this  office  (Tac.  Ann,  xi.  35;  xiii.  22;  Suet.  Ca-
Jiff,  27).

(6)  Ci'RATOKKx  Operum  Publicoru.m,  who  had
the  care  of  all  public  buildings,  such  as  the  thea-
tres, baths,  aqnctducts,  etc.,  and  agreed  with  the
contractors  for  all  necessary  repairs  to  tbem.  Their
duties  undur  the  Republic  were  discharged  by  the
oediles  and  the  ceiisors.

(7)  CURATORRS  Rkoionum,  who  had  the  care  of
the  fourteen  districts  into  which  Rome  wns  divid-
iMl.ntid  whose  duty  it  was  to  prevent  nil  disorder
and  extortion  iu  their  respective  districts.  This
office  was  first  instituted  by  Augustus  (8uot.  Aitg.
30).  There  wfre  nsnally  two  officers  of  this  kind
for  each  diHtriot.  Alexander  Severue,  however,
appears  to  have  appointed  only  one  for  eaoh ;  bnt
these  were  persons  of  consular  raoki  who  wen  to


CTTRcri.ro


44S


CPRtO


lijivtt  .inniiuiclioii  in  conjiiiir-tinii  vritli  the  prtuifer-
III*  ttrki  (Liini|iri«).  Alrx.  Srr.  ^I^Ii.

(H)  Ci'itAToKKs  K»{ii>riii.lCAK  (with  tlio  iiutni!  tif
tliM  vi>mii)iilii|y  atliltMl),  hIhii  ritlUrtl  togintar,  wlio
«(lniiniHt4*n;d  tliu  iuiiihil  jiroih-rFy  of  niiinii-i)ijit.
TIh'w  wiTo  ii|n«>inti:il  liy  thn  eiii|irn)n«.  rt|»iuii
vvrntc  i(  wjiarato  worlc,  Dr  Officio  i'uratori*  /Wyj/tA-
limr.

(l>)  ('(MUTCIHK8  TABrtAKl'M  PfBUCAKt'M.  llir«

iiiiiifintmt'fB  a|>jniinir«l  by  Tilwrim  in  a.i>.  Ift.  to
nnsint  in  kft^phi};  tliei  pattlii.'  [XTtinli.
(10) Ol?KAT<>KR»  VlARirM. 8«!  VlAB.

CiirouUo.  "Till'  (Jtixzlcr";  ii  cuiitolyof  PlrxitiKt
will)  a  rilriuliM'  (iliii,  uiiil  wriltni  lr>  riiliciilo  iIk'
ways  ol'  iMtriwitvM.  It  was  i-ninputiinl  latt-r  fli.i»
li.c.  tlRl.  It  in  iiiiIIl'l'dIiU;  aa  linviiix  a  nortnf  |Min)l>-
tmiii  (({.  V.)  ill  Ihu  fniirtli  trnl  (ai.-.  i.}.  An  mlition
ill  T-Atin  anil  Gormon  is  tbiic  ut'  Gitppcrt  (B«*rtiii.

Curee.  An  aiidrni  town  of  tli«  Sal>iM«'s,  cf I**-
brntetl  iv  tl»«  liirth|tluH:4!<  of  T.  Tatiiirt  nnil  N'litiin
Poiiipiliiio;  fnnii  tbls  town  the  Romans  nro  luiitl
to  hnvo  iliTivptl  the  iinnio  nf  Qiiirit*'i)  (i|.  v.).

Curetea  (Kovpijrff).  tn  ('icfiiii  tnylliology  the
CuiTti'S  wciv  tlriniKmltt  ni'iiKHl  nidi  vr(*»|Mtii<4  v(
hi'iiM.1,  to  wlitiin  thf  iicw-Imii'u  chilil  ZrtiH  nua  i:ulii-
inlrti^l  hy  liix  uiuthi-r  Khcu  tor  imitcotiuii  iiKalnnt
bis  InthRi'  Ci-outiH.  They  tlrowmii  the  i-rii-^t  of
till)  child  by  atrikiiig  thnir  six*ara  agiiitmt  Iht-ir
■hichU.  TtH>y  gave  their  niitiif  to  tlie  [irienl^  uf
tbo  Cn'tAii  );m)d«tM  Rhea  and  of  the  Idiicaii  /ciw,
who  iHTforintsl  noiity  warnluncert  m  the  fvatlvaU
of  thuModi'ittcK. So4«  CuRVnANTKS:  Riika;  Zvas.

Curetia.  (I)  A  iniiiu'  );iveii  t4i  I'irtf.  iw  lH>iii);
iho  iv«iil<<n(H>  of  the  (.'iirvtoN  \Ovid.  J/cf.  viii.
VM).  Soo  C'VIIKTKfl.  (^)  The  earlier  uainn  of  Ae-
loll».

Curia.  A  wonl  which  Kt^nitlcM  iHtih  »  divisioti
uf  i\\»  Koman  |m*i)|iK>  aiid  (he  idare  of  iwM'mbly  for
such  n  dtvimiuii.

tit  Earh  of  the  |hnH>  auoieiit  Roniiilian  tribe*.,
the  Knnitieii,  Titiivi,  and  l^nreiVK,  was  Mihdivided
into  tell  ctirift'',  •*»  thill  tlie  wbulo  k4Kly  of  the  |iojh
ujiiH  was  divldi>«t  iiiiii  thirty  curiaL*  {Ltv.  i.  V.i\  U
has  coniutoiily  Ikhhi  luiAprtoil  that  the  plcboinuB  hiul
BO  ouUHMlion  whatever  with  the  rnriiw,  nud  Ibal
ibe  olieutu  of  the  jtalriciHint  were  iiieuilM>nt  t>f  ihe
ootiae  only  in  a  pamtve  aetise.  Bnl  MnniiuM'n  han
■ddncixl  Htroog  reaaona  for  dc<uyiii){  the  imrely
imtHrian  cbftraoter  of  the  curiae  i  Kiim.  Fm-weit.  i.
14i>-|^ti,  an«l  am>|iiiu{;  the  view  of  Dtoayaioa  (Iv.
|:i;£i>ithM(  plebeintis  wf  it  aduuite«l.  In  ikc.  1109.
«(•  tiu«l  a  pU'lifian  electc<l  as  L'tiriu  Ma\inius.  and,
an-unliiii!  to  nil  atiahijiy.vlebttiMU  lausl  h^Veheen
ad]uttt4-«l  io  tht'  curiae  long  belbrv  one  of  thvni
conKl  Imv  found  hnhlitigtbe  higlwl  fn**  of  di};nily.
IHebeiatM  aUi  an*  n*tVMettMlM«Xi»linfr  and  vol.
iii|[MtW  iiy  M<le  with  itairMuw  b«Ctcv>  the  iuviitii-
timi  of  Ntiy  tiiher  than  (lie  Coiitilia  Cnriatii.  The
totlitit-tioiirvf  th**  f«MPtit»iisof  theruria«'  i*  noHhrfv
metilioiKHl  t»  a  M^Mltl  uf  the  divay  of  iIh-  (tHtriri-
ate,  AnntiM,  lire  ihiuy  lie(i*r»  who  re|>«<i^aeiti*n|  ihc
cfiriaw*,  mihI  tbeivAtn  aMut  1ut«  hmA  iba  right  of
wUBit  i)ten<,  ««ra  pW^t— ■.  T%«n>  ia  n«  rawoM
wbaievvr  m  lM>tie\-e  ibat  lb«  rtgbt of  making  wtlhi
ami  a>h>)«1i««n»  befocv  tlte  eariiia  waa  )imite<t  to  |m-
Uirianis  nw\  we  bliV*  ««»e  |w«Mli»-e  iii>4(Uice  of  a
fktelieiMi  atlopiini^  b«lto*  ibe  carta*'  lit  tl>«'  c«m>  uf
VhMldtii,  lletiee  lite  evUuio^Hi  ibcvtry  ••/  |Ik>  purely
pfttrietaii  ebar«4-iei  of  the  curiae  tH*iM  W  alMUi-


doneil.  Thure  is  no  hitturical  evMl«c»c«
n  hiMi  the  plflNMana  iK-iami*  nu-iiibeni  of  them,  hn
it  is  a  ri'nM>ii»ble  cunjcv-tnri'  llial  they  were  wlmit
trd  »t  tile  liiih:  of  therx|Mil))ion  of  the  kiii)f»,  nbri
ihnCoutiliaC'nrlntHliMt.  tlieir  )M>tilii-nl  power  by  thi
devflopiiurnt  of  llie  (.lomilia  CViitnriAtA  ( Mnuim
sen,  nui.  i.  'ijfl4l.  All  the  nienibeiw  nf  the  diflenni
>{en1e(«  Srhtiifjiii);  to  one  curia  were  called,  iu
rtpect  of  one  another.  ckHh/m.  Eftch  curia  ua  ^
corpomtioii  hail  ita  |>eciiliiir  tacra  (Fe»t.  pp.  IT~^
'^45),  mid  hrsidt'H  the  g,ni\n  of  the  8lnte  ibry  wd  ^
isliip|H*d  other  iliviiiitien  and  n  ith  [leriiliar  hi^M
null  i-rrrinnnirpi.  For  niicli  r<'li|;ioite  pnriNHieB  t-avi^i
ciiriu  had  itii  uwu  place  of  worship,  eallnl  riM«^,
which  lit  tintt  may  have  conlaitRMl  iiolliin);  hut  ^^
nlCar,  ufterwiirdx  a  xior/rtiiii.  and  linally  h  liuilitifiji
in  which  tito  ciiriales  aa.'itenihleil  fin-  the  purpoea  oM
disL'utwiiiK  political,  linaucial,  reli);ioud,  and  otber
uinttci-tt(Pnii).  l>iac.  pp.  ft^.04  :  ItionyK.  xLSiiVf,  1f„
retiKiuiis  iitfaim  of  each  ctiriu  were  (akeu  can  of
hy  a  priest,  CHrio,  who  wus  aMistisI  by  tuinltipr
called  b'liunen  Ctiriiilio.  (See  L'rimi.)  The  thirty
riitiafl  Iiiul  llieir  own  dintinrt  names,  which  ira
ttiiiti  t»  liavu  l)t^en  di^rivi-d  fn>ni  the  niinic*  of  ttip
Sahiiie  vvoineii  who  liad  lu'eii  carrieil  oft' hj' lb*
RomaiiM,  lhoiif(h  it  in  evidfiit  that  FMnne  ilfHt«t
their  uanieN  front  certain  iliMtriclx  or  fnim  ■iiriml
K|Hinyuioii)t  licrueti.  Few  of  ihciM'  inii»«'M  only  ut
known,  Mii-h  um  curia  Tilia,  Fuiit-in,  ('alnhnk,  I'nn-
oiiKix,  Kaplu,  VeliciiHiii.  Tifata  (Fiiiil.  Dim',  fpl^
:«i6;  Feat.  p.  174  ;  Liv.  i.  lH).  <>.  CillKrt  U»»  UtdjT
{(ifa<'b.  wwrf  Tapogi:  tier  Stndt  ttont  im  .tllrrlkim.i
voU.  Irt-y,  lijtjffi  )  wlvocateil.  with  iiuicli  iiigmnil*
and  leiiniinj;,  n  theory  that  the  ctuioe  nere  '•Mtil
oriffinAlly  upon  the  ;;riu|na1  rtcen|uiiii>ri  iif  lb*
»fvrn  hilU  of  the  St^pliinontinni  hy  triliesofiliffltl-
viit  oripti,  and  their  nitinuilc  fedeniliuii.

(J)C't'KiA  (£j(K<X«irrqp4oi>)i((ulao  uaeil  to  tleaipiBt"
the  place  in  which  the  Sfiiate  held  ilo  mertiiip'
From  thia  tbei-e  jrnuliially  arose  the  custom <>fcall-
iug  Um  Senate  it«elf  c«rid  in  Ihecoloniae  aiitlni"'
nicipia,  but  never  the  Senate  of  Roruo.  i^  "*^
(TRIOX  Tiie  official  residence  of  the  Salii.rbirli
WHS  di-dicateil  to  Xars,  wiw  tikcwitM  atylnl  <*"*
il'ic. /T/Jiri.  17;  I>iaay»,  xiv.  5;  Pint.  r««M/l.  J(V

The  history  and  mIc  of  the  Senate  •  hAiw  <t
Koiite  have  b«.'n  urnch  diwiti**cd.  Ilnilt  hy  Tolla*
HualtlinH  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  151-  XTHS),  t  lu<  fnria  H«»ili<
a  a*  bnriied  at  the  funeral  i>f  Clo<liiii>in.i.*.S!ti.  i^'
refOfive  re>itonition«i  hy  a  >M>n  of  Sulla  atul  lif  An-
f^iuiiM  Hre  rveorded  in  the  iiaiiieM  CV  Cunwlia'ii'l
('.  Inlia.  I'lider  Douiitian  the  C.  lulia  woftoji"*
n-hnilt.  A  ittill  lau-r  haiU1iiii:,ii>K'ri1ied  t"  l^'*'^
tilui.  haA  been  idcntitied  tvilh  the  prf«eut  clm^'''
of  S.  Adriatio  on  the  northeast  of  the  Fonuu  "
lit  of  lirick.  4>nianictiteil  with  stncco  and  hihH''^
See  Mithlleion.  jlaeicMf  H>*mt  in  ISSS ;  id.  i>'"W"**
of  Amcif^l  Ramf,  i |t|i.  £17,  ^S;  it.  139.

Cuilalea. Sor  Ci-ria.

Cuxlata  Comitia. See  CoMrriA.

CiuUtii  A  celebrmted  Albaii  faiuilr.  ViT^
bntlber*  of  thiii  family  fought  with  tlirrt'  llua""'
bntlbens  tlie  Homtii,  and  rxrrr  coiopicreil  l>f  ''''
Uklter.  lit  oMiJWMj itenee  of  Ibfir  defeiit  Ail*'*
c»ine  9n1v<'<'t  l«  Konte, See  ItitHArii'v.  |i^  ^'

Cano. The  )««>■»  wbo  aitNNl  at  the  bead'"  '

cwriN aud bad  |o tuanap» it*.  afTaifM,  Mprci«"J

tttimt  of  a  rrligKNu  uatore. In  Ibeir  attmiuiit'*'

t»oa  be  was aanMed  by  aMMlMT|iri«»i,  culled  Flar^"

.  CarialU. Aa  thnn  w«n  Uuity  mri*u,  the  iifio>" '


CUKIO


44H


CUKKUS


u(  ciiriuues  wag  likewise  thirty,  and  tb«y  formed  a
college  of  prieats,  wbiob  was  beaded  by  oue  of
thein  bearing  the  title  of  curio  maxitmu.  In  later
times  be  was  elected  by  the  people,  bat  originally
probably  by  co-optation.

Caiia  (1)  Gaivs,  pnietor  b.c.  121,  bnt  did  not
attain  to  the  couaulfibip.  Cicero  speaks  with  praise
of  his  orator}',  an  opinion  founded,  not  on  iwnwnal
knowledge,  hot  on  the  siieeches  he  ba<l  left.  (2)
r.  SCRiBONius,  couBiil  with  Gnaeiis  OctuviiiH,  b.c.
76.  On  returning  from  the  province  of  Mucmlonia,
he  triumphed  over  the  Dardani,  am  proconsnl,  B.C.
72.  Cicero  ofteu  mentions  him,  aad  in  his  Hrutun
(cap.49)ennmerateH  him  among  the  Romau  oratora,
along  with  Cotta  and  others.  (3)  C.  Scriboniub,
Mon  of  the  preceding,  a  tnrbnlent  and  unprinci-
pled man,  and  nn  active  partisan  of  Iiiiiim  Cuusar'a.
Being  deeply  involved  in  debt  when  tribune  of
the  plebs,  Caesar  gained  bim  over  by  paying  for
bin)  what  he  owed  {Pint.  Pomp.  58),  and  Cnrio  im-
mediately exerted  himself  with  great  vigour  in
his  behalf.  Caesar,  it  seems,  was  nnder  obliga-
tions to  fairo  before  this,  since  Cnrio  is  said  to  have
Haved  his  life  when  he  was  leaving  the  Senate-
hoiiite  after  the  debate  about  Catiliue's  accom-
plices, his  personal  safety  beiug  endangered  by  the
yoDog  men  who  stood  in  anus  around  the  build-
ing (Plat.  Caea.  H).  Plutarch  ascribes  Antony'x
narly  initiation  into  licentious  habits  to  his  ac-
qiiaiutAnce  with  Curio.  On  the  breaking  out  of
the  Civil  War,  Caesar,  after  having  poaseased  bini-
Helf  of  Rome,  sent  Curio  to  take  charge  of  Sicily.
The  latter  subHeqneutly  crossoil  over  from  this
ittland  into  Africa,  with  an  armed  force,  against
luba  and  the  ftillovrers  of  Pumpey,  bnt  was  de-
feated and  slain.

CozloaolitaB.  A  people  of  Gaul,  forming  part
of  the  Armorio  tribes.  Their  territory  lay  to  the
uortheaat  of  the  Veueti,  and  answers  to  what  is
now  tbe  territory  of  St.  Halo,  between  Dinaut  and
Lamballe,  in  the  department  CAtes^n-Nonl.

Cwltla.  A  name  given  to  Inno  and  said  to  be
derived  from  tbe  Sabine  cmHm,  "a  spear**  (Macmb.
8at»rn.  i.  9). See  QuiRlTKS.

CQZliim  {Kmpiov).  A  city  of  Cyprus,  on  the
untbem  coast,  or  rather,  according  to  the  an-
cients, at  the  commencement  of  the  western  shore,
at  a  small  distance  from  which,  to  the  southeast,
■here  is  a  cape  which  bears  the  name  of  Curias.
Ciirinm  is  aaid  to  bave  been  founded  by  an  Ai^give
colony,  and  it  was  one  of  the  nine  royal  citieK  of
CypniB. See  Cyphds.

Cnxliu  Dentatua,  Manil'a.  A  Roniait,  cele-
brated for  bis  warlike  achievements,  and  also  for
tbe  primitive  simplicity  of  his  nianners.  In  his
tint  consulship  (B.C.  890)  ho  triumphed  twice,
once  over  the  Saninites  and  then  over  the  Sabines,
and  in  this  same  year  also  be  obtained  an  ovation
for  bis  successes  against  the  Lucaniaus.  He  aft«r-
wards  (B.C.  375),  in  his  third  consolship,  trinmph-
hI  over  Pyrrhns  and  the  Saninites.  It  was  on  this
<K4^asion  that  the  Roman  people  flrat  saw  elephiints
Itnl  along  in  triumph  (Flor.  i.  lU ;  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  6 ;
Kiitrop.  ii.  14),  and  it  was  this  victory  that  drove
Hyirhns  from  Italy.  Tbe  simple  manners  of  this
distingalBbed  man  are  often  referred  to  by  the  Ro-
man writers.  When  the  ambassadors  of  tbe  8am-
nites  visited  his  cottage,  they  found  him,  accnnling
to  one  aeconnt,  Hitting  on  a  bench  by  tlie  lii'eside,


and  eating  out  of  a  wooden  bowl  (Val.  Max.  iv.-
3,  5),  and,  occunling  to  PlntAroh,  boiling  tamips^
On  their  attempting  to  bribe  him  with  a  large  sum
of  gold,  he  at  ouoe  rcjjeoted  tbeir  ofler,  exclaiming
that  a  man  who  conld  be  content  to  live  as  they
saw  him  living  had  no  ueetl  whatever  of  gold,
and  that  be  thought  it  more  glorious  to  conquer
the  jtoasessors  of  it  than  to  possess  it  himself.  His-
scanty  farm  and  bumble  eott-age,  moreover,  were
in  full  accordauoe  with  the  idea  which  Curius  had
formed  of  private  wealth;  for,aftersomany  achieve-'
meuts  ami  honours,  he  declared  that  citizep  a  (ler-
uiciouB  oue  who  did  not  find  eeveu  acres  (Jajpfro)
suffloieut  for  his  subsistence  (Pllu.  xviii.  3).  Ac-
cording to  Pliny,  DentatiiB  was  ao  named  because-
bom  with  teeth  (cum  deHtibifu){H.  ^.  vii.  15).

CoTOtrfiphos  {KovpoTpo^s).  "Nurse  of  chil-
dren." The  title  of  several  Qrt^ek  goddesses — for
instanctt,  Qaea — who  were  regarrleil  as  protectresses
of  youth.  Cf.  Hesiod,  Thtog.  450;  Macrob.  Saturn.
i.  10,19,30.

Curma,  dim.  CnzrlotUiim  (^>ui).  A  chariot,  a
car.  These  terms  appear  to  have  denoted  those
two-wheeled  vehicles  for  the  carriage  of  persons
which  were  open  overhead,  thus  diflferiug  from  the
oarpenium  (q.  v.),  and  closed  in  front,  iu  which  they
differed  from  the  eiMHm  (q.  v.).  Oue  of  the  most
essential  parts  in  tbe  coustrnctiou  of  tbe  cnrriis
was  the  S»tv$,  or  rim ;  and  it  is  aceonlingly  seen
in  all  the  chariots  which  are  represented  in  this
article.  Another  indupeosable  part  was  tbe  axle,
made  of  oak  {<f>Tiyi»os  S^av),  and  sometimes  also  of
ilex,  ash,  or  elm.  The  oars  of  Her^  and  Poseidon-
have  metallic  axles.  One  method  of  making  a
chariot  leas  liable  to  be  overturned  was  to  lengthen
ita  axle,  and  thus  to  widen  the  base  on  which  it
stood.  The  axle  was  firmly  fixed  under  the  Itody
of  the  chariot,  which,  in  reference  to  this  circum-
stance, was  called  imrpTtpia,  and  which  was  oft«ii
made  of  wicker-work,  enclosed  by  the  Avtv$.  Fat
(Xt'n-or)  and  pressed  olives  (amurea)  were  used  to-
gruase  the  axle.

The  wheels  {kvkKo,  rpoxoi,  rolae)  revolved  upon
the  axle,  aa  in  modem  carriages;  aud  they  were'
prevented  from  coming  off  by  the  insertion  of  piua
(fp^oXoi)  into  the  extremities  of  the  axle  (oKpa^o-
vla).  Pelops  obtained  bis  celebrated  victory  over
OenomaUa  through  the  artifice  of  Hippodamia,
who,  wishing  to  marrj'  Pelops,  persuaded  Myrtilns,
the  charioteer  of  his  adversary,  to  omit  inserting
one  of  the  linchpins  in  the  axle  of  his  car,  or  ti>
insert  one  of  wax.  She  thus  cansed  the  overthrow
and  death  of  her  Cuther,  OenomaUs,  and  then  mar-
t'uh\  the  conqueror  in  the  race.

Sir  W.  Gell  describee,  iu  the  following  terras,  the
wbiHtU  of  three  cars  which  were  found  at  Pompeii  :
"The  wheels  light,  auddiHhed  much  like  the  mod-
em, 4  feet  3  inches  diameter,  10  spokes,  a  little-
thicker  at  each  end."  These  cars  wore  probably
intended  for  the  purposes  of  common  life.  From
Xenophon  we  learn  that  tbe  wheels  were  made
stronger  when  they  were  intended  for  the  field  of
battle.  After  each  excursion  the  wheels  were  taken
off  tbe  chariot,  which  was  laid  on  a  shelf  or  reai*ed
against  a  wall,  and  they  were  put  on  again  when-
ov(!r  it  was  wanted  for  use.

'I'hf  parts  of  the  wheel  were  as  follows:

((()  The  nave  or  hub,  called  irKifftmj,  j^otviWr,
miHfioiHH.  The  last  two  terms  are  founded  on  tbe
resemblance  of  the  nave  to  a  mmlius  or  bushel.


CURUU8


444


crifitus


Till'  iiHVO  TCiu  KtreiiKtIiened  by  bring  iHriiDil  wjtli
ail  irou  riug,  oalltxl  ir\fitiyo6iTov.

(ft)  The  e|tnko)*.«ci'^/iai  (litemlly,'"  llii*  Ipjis"!,™*/".
Wu  linV(«  soi'it  (bill  Dn-  H^toVvs  xvhii<  Hoiiit'limt^ti  ti^ii
ID  iihiiiImt.  Ill  iithitr  iiiHtuiiofw  tUtiy  «(>i'it  i>ij(ht
<f(iVXa  nKTi'iKfifna),  Hlx,  at  four.  liiMtoml  of  Immii}*
tif  woimI,  tlir-  ttiK>krr<  i>f  Ibf  cliiinol  ut  Ihe  Siiii,  ci»ii-
Htnu-lii<l  by  IIt■|lIla•■.■4tM^,  \vi»rr  of  silvi-r  [rmiiitrum
rtrifrHtrUM  intUt).

<cf  T!ip  felly,  tnt.  Tliii  wua  uomtnouly  mntle
of  «iiu«>  ticxibli'  iiiKi  I'Inntic  wonil,  snrli  an  |M>plar
•ir  tin;  wild  ti^.  wliiitli  was  iiIhii  nnrd  fur  tlii«  rim  nf
tli(*('.Iinrint;  liriit  wns  applied  tiia^MiMt  iu  proibicinK
the  rt'iiiiiRili"  curvntnrp,  Thf  f*'Ily  wjio,  huwrvcr,
tMiirnMHMMt  nf  HCpHriittt  piiM'i'H,  calbul  iuth  (ii^iA<r).
llciii-v  t hr  oliMM'val ion  nf  I'ItH iirrh  i  luil .  hk  n
"  wlhrcl  n'vohfa,  firjft  uin-  ujw^  in  itt  tin-  liimbCHi
imiiit,  ami  tlivn  itiiotlirr."  ili'Hiiiil  uviiluiilly  iu-
tpodcd  to  revommcuil  that  a  wbtiol  Hboiild  eouaist
jif  fotir  pidcc*.

(ft)  Thw  tin*,  fvitruTpof,  cantliMti.  Homer  dr-
Mrribes  tlie  t'barint  nf  Hi>r^  na  Imviiii;  ii  tin'  of
bronr^  upon  a  golden  felly,  tliim  pliirtiig  tlin
Imnler  nif^liil  in  a  piwilinn  to  r*^hiNt  friolioti  niid
to  protwt  Ibc  sofltT.  The  tire  wa>i  ronununly  of
inni.

All  tlic  parlii  iio\^  riiinrii-ratful  sn^  hroii  in  an  nn-
4;ifiiitrlmn(il  pri'MTVtsI  in  ihn  Viitiniii.a  ri>prANftiita-
liuii  of  n'bidi  is  given  in  llir  followinj;  illiiNfratinii.


of  Ibf  yokr-borftfw  l(iytat  Tinrot)  wblfh  rnt);bl  liap-
jwii  to  lw>  disnblod.  Thi*  lioixe  m>  attJiotiM  ni»
I'lilled  vap'iofHtv.  When  l*iitrorIiiK  rctnruMl  tolial-
lli!  ill  the  I'hnriot  of  Arhilleh,  two  tuiiliortid  tiotnra,
XniithtiH  and  Hnlint*,  vren>  plared  under  lliv  ynlcr;
a  third,  rallrd  Pfd.-i4nH,  ami  mortal,  wA<t  adOL-^l  (tn
thi)  ri};ht  hand  ;  and,  having  I>eeii  shitu,  aaiual
coiiftmion,  until  the  driver  cut  the  bsruviu  \if
which  tliid  Ibint  bomi*  wim  fnatfiifNl  to  tli^clMriot.


t^


Comis. iViltrsn  I

This  chnriof,  wbieh  \n  in  wmie  ytivti*  rvalorrd,
nlao  shown  tliP  pole  (pi'^dt.  trtKo).  It  wan  Ihtiily
flie^l  «t.  i1«  lower  extn-inity  to  thi>  axle,  wbetlM*
the  lU'RtnirtionofPhaelbon'M  chariot  in  repre&i-ute<l
by  tile  eirunnrntauce  uf  the  ]Hi]e  and  axle  lioiiii;
l4)rii  ;uiiuidur  {Irmoitr  rerHttun  ajh).  At  the  other
end  (aKftoppirfiiitv)  the  pole  wtiA  attiicbed  (o  tbe
yuke.  >'il-her  hy  t»  pin  {ipdoXos),  as  hIiowii  in  tbe
cinirint  above  eii;craveil,  or  by  tbe  line  of  mtHt*  and
bauds. Sec  ICGl'M.

Ciirriagi'M  "ilb  two,  or  pveii  three,  |M»1eH  were
lined  by  Ihe  l.vdiaiiH.  The  (jivekN  and  RimiiiiiM.
on  the  iiMier  IinimI.  Mp]>H»r  never  lo  have  mwd  mon*
ttian  niiH  pole  iind  one  yoke,  and  Ihu  i-iiiTn*  llni'"
etiii»lrnct»Ml  "jw  eoinmnnty  ilruwn  by  two  horeec.
wliirh  wc-n^  nllaehi-^l  to  it  by  tlieir  neek^t,  niid
therefore  railed  Si(iry*s  tirrroi,  trvtuapir,  jfewiwi  t'lipn-
Um,  riftii  biinfffm.

If  a  Ihinl  liorw*  wiw  rHbh-il,  iirt  wn»  not  iiMfiv-
qnently  Ihe  vmt**-.  it  wam  fjiKiem-d  by  tiTieeM.  It
may  have  iHVit  inlcndn)  m  take  tbe  plncu  of  either


Ctirru*  vritti  Tbrw  ilono. (Cloxral)

(iinzrot bos  pnbliidted  two  drawiuga  of  cliatioti

»  itii  llin-e  hor»*«  fnno  Etrnw:an  vji««!8  id  tl»  wl-
leflion  at  Virnna,  The  iirtrov  vnprjopur  i«  yXuti
oij  the  ri^lit  of  Ibtr  tno  yoke-hor&t'».  We  alwob-
Borvp  tiiii-es  paAMtng  Wtwreii  tbe  two  (iifnyft.*«i
|tt'iK'j*eding  from  the  frord.  of  the  rharirtl  on  each
Hide  nf  the  middle  honic.  Thene  pndiably  oshitfei
in  attac-hing  tbe  third  or  extra  horse.

The  Lalm  iiniiio  for  a  chariot  and  pair  «»%■•
(See  Ilu:A.t  When  A  third  horw  wan  added, it «»
eiillr«I  Irigf ;  and,  by  the  aauie  anahtgt.a  tlarwt
(iiid  loin'  wrvA  called  qno^rl^;  In  Grwk,  rrr|Ma||it'>
or  r«(?jjtjr»rot.

Tbe  lior>>e«  were  eoinniouly  barueMw.*d  in  « ijtwJ-
ri^^ri  after  tile  mininer  nlreudy  repreiwnlMl,  thi*  l*o
Htninp^tt  honteH  l»eih^  placed  nnder  lite  y<d[r,ai>d
llir  tn<j  othem  fiinteiied  oh  eaeh  wd«*  by  iiiciwof
n>{N-.*.  ThiitiH  implied  in  llie  Um*  of  the  eftilbrl*
trtipa'tos  ^r  vttpa^iftfri,  and  /nuaHg  or  /■•urlw.  t"'
n  lit>n*e  sn  attaehed.  The  two  exterior  liofw**"*
lurtber  ilititiiijiiiiiihetl  fmiw  one  aiitttliei  a*lh»'tig*'t
ami  the  left  triK-e-honte.  In  a  cbnriut-nKv  <l^
atritwil  by  Sophot'IpH,  the  driver,  niiitiiiK  le  I"**
iIm'  goal,  wliieb  if*  on  hi»  left  hami.  re*tlr»iii»  ll"
iieaie>4t  linrKe.  and  givex  th»  n'itin  to  tlmt  wlii^
w;w  fartheat  from  it — viz.,  the  honwi  in  lr»*M(B
Ihe  rijiUl  band  (Ar(iii*-  fS'  riMic  atipatof  iinrori  I"
tlu'  HpU'iidid  tritiiii]di  of  AiigiiMtiiH  ufler  tin*  lKitt»
of  Aitinin,  Ihe  trai-e-horwea  ttf  hi«  ear  were  ri'l*""
by  two  of  bis  yoiuij;  releliom*.  Tibniiw  rwl'.**
HiietimillK  r<'tiitei.  Htninlerioic /tnaii  etfmt.  mill  Jl>^
Cflhlit  Arxtrrinii  /Uttiifi  rifuiK  A"  the  wiifltn  nf '■■
cieiit  art,  esprriiitiy  lielile  viittevt,  niMmiH)  in  Itpf*"
MMitnliniiK  <>r  i|iiiiilii;^te,  iinuieromt  ihkUimm  n**?
be  nlHMTVed  in  whirl)  the  I  wo  middle  lionM  (*
fittriM,  8*f("«  Kill  fl  fii'iretr  api(rr«it6t)  »(»  yot«  *■
grther  KM  ill  n  biga;  am),  ila  llie  two  lauml  •**
have  eol!(tr!'(X<irfjfl»'fi»  equally  with  the  yoke-liuW*
we  iii.-iv  jnvwune  thai  from  tbe  top  of  tbt***  P''*'
ere(b-«l  tbe  riiiKw  wliieb  were  liivl  Ut  ibe  rinti»f  •'*
ear,  and  by  whirli  I  be  tnu'e-horsen  aAAi^led  iinh»*
it.  The  HrKi  tignre  in  lite  following  ilbiMnlM'"
the  chni'iiit  of  Anrnm,  aa  pninteil  •m  a  vaw  feniiil  '
CAiioKa.  The  n-iim  of  the  two  middle  bi»p<»t'***
through  lings  at  Ihe  extn^inilien  of  the  ynke.  *'
the  piirlirnlnrn  whieh  hare  been  mentioned  •"
still  miin-di»tinetly  well  in  theMi-ond  ftgiin-,t»k''"
from  Ji  leiTii-eolta  at  Vienna.  It  n-presentsin"'"''
iot  uvLrrthrown  in  pnMing  the  goal  at  the  rkr«n*-


CURRU3


446


CURRUS


The  oharioteer  liftvtDg  faUeu  backwards,  tbe  pole
and  yoke  are  tbrowo  opwards  iuto  the  air ;  tbe
two  trace-boraes  bave  fallen  on  their  knees,  and
the  two  yoke-borBes  are  prauciiig  ou  their  hiucl-legs.
If  we  nifty  rely  on  tbe  evidence  of  niinieroiiB
works  of  art,  tbe  oomis  was  sometimes  drawn  by
fboT  horses  withoat  either  yoke  or  pole;  for  we


Camu  with  Four  Honea

see  two  of  them  direrging  to  the  right  hand  and
two  to  the  left,  as  in  the  beautiful  cameo  given
below,  which  represents  Apollo  Hnrronnded  by  tbe
signs  of  tbe  Eodiac.  If  the  ancients  really  drove  tbe
qoadriga  thus  harnessed,  we  can  only  snppose  tbe
charioteer  to  bave  checked  its  speed  by  pulling
up  the  horses  and  leaning  with  his  whole  body
backwards,  so  as  to  make  tbe  bottom  of  tbe  car  at
its  hindermoet  border  scrape  the  ground — an  act
and  an  attitade  which  seem  not  unfrequently  to
be  intended  iu  antique  representations.

The  onrms,  like  the  oiaiiim,  was  adapted  t>o  carry
two  persons,  and  on  this  account  wus  called  in
Greek  lU<ftpos.  One  of  tbe  two  was,  of  course,  the
driver.  He  was  called  rfvio^os,  becanse  he  held  the
reins,  and  his  companion  irapai^anjs,  from  going
by  bis  side  or  near  him.  Thongh  in  all  respects
superior,  tbe  napatffanjs  was  often  obliged  to  place
himself  behind  tbe  ^vio)(OS.  He  is  so  represented
in  the  biga  at  page  93,  and  in  the  Iliad  Acbillra
himaelf  stands  behind  his  charioteer  Autoniedon.


Poor-bone  Chariots  oa  G«ina (Berlin  Museum.)

On  the  other  band,  a  personage  of  the  highest  rank
may  drive  his  own  carriage,  and  then  an  inferior
may  be  his  iraptufianis,  as  when  Nest-or  conveys
Machaon  (irap  hi  Maxwv  ^ait'c),  and  Her^,  holding
the  reins  and  whip,  conveys  Athene,  who  is  in  full
armour.  In  such  cases  a  kindness,  or  even  a  com-
pliroeot,  was  conferred  by  tlie  driver  upon  Uim
whom  he  conveyed,  as  when  DionysiiiH,  tyrant  of
Sicily,  "himself  holding  the  reins,  made  Pbito  his
vapai^anis"  In  the  contest  wb  ich  has  been  alreatly
referred  to,  and  which  was  so  celebrated  iu  Greek
mythology,  OenomaUs  intrusts  the  reins  to  tlie
anfmlthful  Hyrtilns,  and  assumes  the  place  of  his
irafiai$arfis,  while  Pelops  himself  drives  with  Hippo-
damia  as  his  mpat&arti,  thus  houiioring  Iter  in  re*
torn  for  the  service  she  bad  bestowed.


Tbe  Persepolitau  sculptures,  ftud  the  innnmer*
able  paintings  discovered  in  Egyptian  tombs,  cou-
our  with  tbe  historical  writings  of  tbe  Old  Testa-
ment, and  with  the  testimony  of  other  ancient
authors,  in  showing  how  commonly  chariots  were
employed  on  tbe  field  of  battle  by  the  Egyptians,
the  Persinns,  and  other  Asiatic  nations. The  Greek

poetry  of  tbe  Heroio
Ages  proves  with
equal  certainty  the
early  prevalence  of
the  same  custom  iu
Greece.  The  apiv-
T^Fp — i.  e.  the  nobil-
ity, or  meu  of  rank
—  who  wore  com-
plete suits  of  ar<
niour,  all  took  their
chariots  with  tbeni,
and  in  an  engage-
ment placed  them-
selves in  front.  Such
were  the  ItnTiis,  or
cavalry  of  the  Ho-
meric period — the  precursors  of  those  who,  after
some  centnries,  adopted  the  less  expensive  and
ostentations  practice  of  riding  on  horseback,
but  who,  nevertheless,  in  consideration  of  their
wealth  and  station,  still  maintained  their  own
horses,  ratlier  to  aid  and  exhibit  themselves  in-
dividually on  the  field  than  to  act  as  members
of  a  compact  body.  In  Homer's  battles  we  tind
that  the  horseman  —  who,  for  the  purpose  of
using  his  weapons  and  iu  consequence  uf  the
weight  of  his  armour,  is  under  the  necessity  of
taking  the  place  of  wapatffanjs — ofleu  assails  or
challenges  a  distant  foe  from  the  chariot;  but
that,  when  he  encounters  bis  adversary  in  close
combat,  they  both  dismount, "  springing  from  their
chariots  to  tbe  ground,"  and  leaving  them  to  the
care  of  tbe  ^i'to;^ot.  So  likewise  Tnmus  iadescribed
by  Vergil,  Desiluit  Turnus  biiugis  ;  pedee  apparat  ire
Commiuuii.  As  soon  as  the  hero  bad  fluished  the
trial  of  bis  strength  with  bis  opponent,  he  returnetl
to  his  chariot,  one  of  the  chief  uses  of  which  was
to  i-escne  him  from  danger.  When  Antomedun  pre-
pares to  encounter  both  Hector  and  Aeneas,jiistly
fearing  tbe  result,  he  directs  bis  charioteer,  Alcim-
edon,  instead  of  driving  the  horses  to  any  distance,
to  keep  them  "  breathing  on  his  back,"  and  thus
to  enable  him  to  effect  his  escape  in  case  of  need.

These  chariots,  as  represented  on  bas-reliefs  and
fictile  vases,  were  exceedingly  light,  the  body  ofteu
consisting  of  little  besides  a  rim  fastened  to  the
bottom  and  to  the  axle.  Unless  such  had  been
realty  their  construction,  it  would  be  difficult  to
imagine  bow  so  great  a  multitude  of  chariots  conld
bave  been  transported  across  the  Aegean  Sea.  The
light  and  simple  construction  of  war-chariots  is
also  snpposmi  by  Vergil,  when  be  represents  them
OS  suspeude^l  with  all  kinds  of  armour  on  the  en-
trauce  to  the  temple  of  the  Lanrentiau  Picus.

We  have  alreatly  seen  that  it  was  not  unusual
iu  tlie  Homeric  battles  to  drive  three  horses,  ono
being  a  ■trapT)opos ;  in  a  single  instance,  that  uf  Hec-
tor, four  are  driven  together.  In  the  games,  the
use  of  this  number  of  horses  was,  perha|>s,  even
more  common  than  the  use  uf  two.  Tbe  form  of
tbe  chariot  was  the  same,  except  that  it  was  more
elogautly  decorated.  But  t)iu  highest  style  of  or-
nament was  reserved  to  ha  displayed  iu  the  quad-


CDRRUS


U6


cvKsm


VHM  hi  whicli  llio  Koniiio  (iciifrnltt  anil  oiiiiMmrK
r<)<l>*  wlit'ii  tln-v  lriiiiii|iliiMl.  Till'  Itinly  uf  tli»  tri-
iin>l>li.-il  rar  vmi.h  ct  liiii!rii:.il,  hm  wf  nj'rcu  mv:  iI  ri-|t-
ryHi-.iitril  nil  iiii'tliiU.  tt.  niut  t-iiriiOinl  witli  ){*''<'
(<{Miv»«  curruni  and  ivorv.  I'liir  iiiintwt  Hkill  of  Uit*
|>Hi)it4<r  ailil  I  In'  m-iil|it<ir  \\:in  iMl)|i1(*,^i>il  tu  iMilltllirc

Uh  liruiity  ami  hfOi-iMloiir.  Mon-  |iArti(^ulHi'1y  IIh-
exin-iiiiilt'^tiir till!  axlt'.tif  the  |n>l»',ftinl  of  tln',vt>k»!
wvro  liigl)l.v  nrnii^lil  in  tlio  fomi  uf  iiiiiiii:ils'  hemlH.
Wrraths  of  laiiivl  wm-o  ftoiiii^tinti'A  hung  roiiiiil  it
(vurtti$  lauriger),  unci  wem  nlsu  tixed  to  tho  1i«-iiiIh
of  tliu  four  8now-n'liit4'  liorMvt.  The  cnr  \riw  A^-
vMtil  rw  thiit  lio  who  triiiinphiyl  nii^lit  be  thi^
luiMt  ciHi^iiiciKiiiN  (lerNoii  in  t1)L>  [irocrts^iou,  and,  for
tilt'  HUiitc  rcatMili,  hr>  vfun  olilitrnl  (u  xtaiid  i'ITcI  (in
(MtiTN  nlmitiM  eburnat.  A  fini'iid,  iiuin-  «M|iiH'iiilly  a
«nii,  wilt  winiRtiliu^K  ('Airii^d  in  llu'  miiuo  uhHrii>t  Ity
binMidv.  \VlicnCJi'niitiiiicuitv4;lehii(t(>dbiH  triuriiiili.
tbu  car  wan  ''  hindcd  ''  with  livi^  of  Liri  L-hildiTii  in
mlditinn  to  )iiuitiL-ir.  Tin*  li'i(ini|ihul  cur  had,  in
peiicnti,  no  (inle,  tliv  lio)-»i'«  l^l■in^  \ts\  it.v  nifii  wlio
were  stationed  iit  tlieir  Iieadj..

The  clturitit  v»t*  nn  »(ti'il>iilH  imt  wilj,'  of  the
j^cls,  bnt  of  variitns  iin:i;;iiiiii'.v  biungi*,  Aneb  m*
Vicftiry.  rtfli'ii  mi  ri^iii*fHf tiled  on  <roiitK,  vn-si-M,  :iud
w^nlf^liirfK:  Ni^bt ;  nnd  Aumni,  wbont  ViTgil  iv|>-
n'M'iilfi  >ui  driving  citbor  two  Iidim-'.^  or  four,  in  rbitt
Af^rceiiiK  with  Ibc  ll^;nrc  iu  tbu  ilbiHlratiuiiH  on  ]>.
44.V  III  j{t>ni>ml,  tbu  [Kiotfl  are  nioie  B]>veit1u  its  t«>
thf  tiiitnlHjr  of  borwft  in  thiy  ehrtviotnof  tb«  dinlii.-**,
and  il  rurrly  cxctixifd  twii,  Injiiter,  as  tlm  falJM  r
of  the  jiiuli*.  <lrivt"*  four  while  horses  when  be  jjneH
urux-tl  \ntb  bix  TbiinderlHilt  U)  n>AiHt  the  ^ants;
Pliitii  iH  ilniwn  by  timr  bliiok  boi-Hiw.

Tb4*  L-bui-iolMiif  llljtiter  Hiid  nf  Mie  Silii  Itiv,  niuii'-
ovi>r,  imiiiNMl  on  uiu'iotu  vam-n  with  nhi^n  pt'ouiMMi-
\nii  fn>tn  the  eXllDUlitlM  <if  the  uxlc  (nr^foir  Sft/uij
vitimrfm  fttrrum).

TbeM'  Hii|M'r)iHrtini1chni'iot-.«  wen^dinwii  not  only
by  buim'K.  bill  by  «  ]iVvni  vi4ii»'ty  of  biiite  or  tinuK-
iiiary  lH-inf,'f  Thrn.  Mfdea  re^^eived  fioiii  ibo  Sim
A  car  Willi  winged  drnjionit.  Iniio  iw  drawn  by  )M'ii-
eockn.  Uinnn  by  ^fiiir*.  Vi-nns  by  dovt-K  or  Kwaim,
Minervu  by  owls  .Mcrenry  by  raiiiK,  iinil  AjhiUo  by
griffliis.  To  the  cut-  of  Biincbiit.  anil  ciniHeiiiieiilly
of  Arjinbic,  arc  yokeil  eeniiiitrH.  tinern,  and  lyiixe«.

C'bnriold  i'X('('iit<'<1  in  ti'mi-follii  (ijinuhif/ni-  firli-
Jt»if  ill  bm)i]!«.  or  in  niiirbb-.  an  exani|d«'  of  »bieh
IhhI  in  hIiuwu  in  Ibr  unnistil  illtinlinlioii  fruiii  uii


RIlPL |!taU  iMU  Bin  Tnilorn.!

3incicat  clinriol  in  ilio  Vatican,  trera  muouk  tbo  nitwt
bennliful  tininiuuuU  of  t(«ui[»les  nud  otber  iHiblii'
fdiltciw.

No  |>ilili«  word  !>i>nro(t  in  their  decoration,  and
I'liiiy  iufornih  n?t  Ibnl  moiik'  nl  Ibe  nioHr  fnun«nl


»rli«t«  Vi'iv  eiu|iluyod  n(HHi  tbein.
InKtaiiewi  they  were  designed  to  }i«r|)etuftt«  tin?
fnnie  of  thoNo  who  had  eoii<)nerud  in  the  cLaiiiH-
riirii.  A8  the  emblem  "f  a  iriory,  the  ifMutiriria  wiu
iMimclimeii  ad<»|tl4fd  by  tlu*  Koniaiis  (n  ^mci^  lti«  In-
iitiiphnl  arcb  by  lieiiig  idai-ed  on  it«  Huniliilt;  ind
even  ill  tbo  privaie  hoiiMi-H  of  frreul.  faniilivH. cliu-
ioiii  well*  dihiibiyed  nn  tbo  indicjilionti  of  rank  or
tbi'  i»<-nioriniH  of  cou(|iii-tit  ami  of  tniuti|ili.
CuTBlva  WritinK. Soc  Aij'Iubrt;  Pa:

KAI'IIV.

Cureor.  L.  Papirics.  See  pAPiiULa
Cnrsorea.  (1)  Slaves  n-boso  dtity  il  wu
l*efiiru  tbo  curriugeA  of  ibcir  maAiers,  for  iln
jtnrjmse  an  Dkod«rn  outrldorB.  They  were  n<4
during  the  times  of  tbo  Bepnblic.  biti  a|tpear  iv
baro  flrst  come  IdIo  fosbiou  in  t\ic  middle  urtbe
first  century  of  the  (.'hrintian  era.  Tbe  wunl  iw-
Moitn  wiin  mIhli  Ht>plied  to  all  KbiveM  «  Iimiii  llvir
inastertt  enilib>yi'd  in  euiryiiif;  b'tl*'r)>,  nii«»i|^,
eie.  [ii*.w  Ci'itsi  s  PrBi.K'i;ti.)  (2)  Kiiiinvtv  ill  Uw
fiMti-rucn,  or  i-oiii]M'riioi-N  in  the  chariot  imnv  ^
Critstis.

Ctmiw  {Hponat.  Tffoxot).  Foat-nu.<iufC.  bi  bi»
lorie  liuHM,  lit  the  rational  fivitirntit  of  tirwn.
itvvenil  mpveiti*  of  it  lind  fonia  into  T<^it>.  V*
may  didtingniDb  four  Korlit:  (a)  the  orutiutr  m
Himply  Upvftftt) :  {It}  tbe  diavkot',  {c)  tht>  t'jiittm
or  rmrior  Upoftoi;  (d)  Utt^  HoKi^it  Apii/ini  (orAwXijWi
)iro[mrox).  A  «M-anKi;  feature  iu  tliefle  rBipi^  "•••
ibat  ihuy  nerv  not  run  on  bonl  and  finu  gpAvtA
(Lncian,  .-tnachart.  37),  but  over  a  ddeplj-  tmtuM
tiiirfacff.

{a )  Tbe  ^rTa^i*oy  wkh  a  race  in  wbieli  the  riintirn
(oraitofttii'iftoi)  truveiNi^l  lUe  arena  in  a  ditwi  Iinr
{whence  it  was  cbIKmI  tii^i-s,  anafiirros)  fruni  tmf
9Xtn?mi(y  lo  Ibe  otber.  Tbtn  dinlarti^e,  w  SW'**'
ureil  by  Ibe.  0]yuii>ie  Htadium,  wbirli  Itei'MM  ill''
funeral  Ktundard,  wax  Mboul  i>O0  fwl..  Thf  atmIw
correNiiondH  to  oiir  "Mjirint,"  tu  whit'h  llin  ruiiur'
diH'M  tbe  whole  run  at  his  btgbesl  fi|>MHl.

{bi  The  ^'avXnr.  or  double  course  (|>riip«rt,v  =
double  pi|>e),re(|uired  that  tbo  ruunen  (fltovhtJI^
fun)  hIiouUI,  after  trnvvrsiug  ihc  Hiiiin  u  in  i^
ardliioy,  lliril  round  a  ptmt  («n/iimip(  mid  rilli  1»«^
til  tbfir  alJirting-poiiit.  Ilenee  it  vrn»  cnlM  V"
ixm  K<iitittt>i%'  {from  Ku/tw*}  ^^fti^Tti«).

ir)  Tbe  t<f>iinTia( itr  tinrias  did  not^aH  nji]jki '"'''
fr«uii  itH  name,  oignify  ii  lioi-tw-ruee,  Imt  h  nrn  m
8nl1iri(-it1  b^i^th  to  try  ihe  jMiwcr  of  a  borw.  it**
Hennatiu  -  Hliiouior,  PrirafaU.  p.  34G.)  Il  w»  '
teat  Iberefoiti  of  cnduniiiev  n»  Wfll  am  ii|WN),M"l
four  otadia  in  IriiKth  ;  Ibnt  is.  twiet.-  tbe  ^iaviM

(ffl  Tlie  lrneti'«t  of  (rtayiiij;  |Kiwer.  bowe*«r,»*
the  doA*x«ii  *"■  '""fi  nic«.  wlded  to  llio  Olji^"
GauKc  (ar('i»nling  to  PlulotitratUR.  l'Jjr««- )3) '*
Olyiiip.  I.V  The  It>i»^th  of  this  mcv  bao  IwrD"**"
ously  deaeribud  tuiMUVoUj  tweUe,  lw«lit>,ur  I"*""*
four  :>lnilia.  We  moy  Atippfwa  tbal  il  dittcfT'l'*'
tlilfeiviit  occtutioiit).

Coni]>tttltioii  ill  fuot-raeiu}{  wati  o|h'U  Id  ni"'"^
of  111!  af{eH,  whether  buys  (iraiStr)^  Hlripliiig*  ^T**
Mioi),  or  gron-ii  mon  (flEcdpcr),  Ouly  tbiM- wlx*'"'
longed  tu  tbo  ruime  oIasb,  as  reifanU  age  (^Xui*''"'^
wcn^  ponnitU-'d  to  compete  with  one  aiw'lh'**
Beuiom,  of  t'onrMe,  not  Wing  nilowLtl  te  H>t*'
agaiuMt  ibeir  jtinioiB. In  Aparta  oven  girlalM'

The  eouipetiton*.  being  too  iiuuieinat  to  cfliW**
all  logelber,  wor«'  enterrd  in  HUCCt-iwivo  gWl|*
{Tu^txtW lltnw who •■bonid form e:ieh groWp.  *


CURSUS  PUBLICUS


447


CUKSUS  PUBLICUS


well  as  tfae  order  in  'which  the  groups  rIioiiM  ruo,
being  determined  by  lot  {avyrax&'iyai  vjro  tov  kX^-
pov).  When  all  the  rd^fis  in  turn  had  mn,  the
victors  in  each  were  formed  into  one  pronp,  which
ran  a  final  heat  for  the  prize.

It  IB  doabtlesB  owing  to  their  want  of  instro-
meDt«  for  aoourately  uienfinriiig  small  portiotis  of
time  that  the  Greeks  have  left  ns  scarecly  itnr
means  of  compntiog  tfae  speed  wliich  foot-r»c«>rs
nttained  in  the  vaHous  kinds  of  rnnning.

For  some  special  forms  of  the  foot-race,  see  Lam-

PADCDKOMIA  and  STAPHYLODltOMIA.

Wu  have  very  lueagre  iiifomiution  regarding
f(M>t-rtu?iii};  as  practised  by  the  Romans.  Accord-
iug  to  Dionysins  of  Halicarnaiuius  (vii.  71,  73),  it
fomieil  part  of  the  Liidi  Mngni  from  the  time  of
their  institutiou.  He,  too,  tells  ns  that  the  rnn-
iiers  wore  the  aubligacMlum  round  their  loins.  In
tbe  Capitoline  Games  (Dio  Civw.  Ixvii.  8)  yonng
women,  after  the  Spartan  fashion,  took  part  in  the
competition.  Beyond  these  Hcauty  notices  and
vogue  references  to  rnnning  for  healthful  exercise
in  the  Campus  Martins,  very  little  has  been  handed
duwu  to  ns.  This  mnuiug  in  the  Campns  was  not
always  competitive.  That  it  was  sometimes  so,
liowever,  is  plain  from  Martial,  iv.  19.  For  chariot-
racing,  see  CiRCCs  and  Hippodromus.

Contu  PabUbno.  The  jiostal -service  of  the
Roman  Empire.

Pumia  under  Darius,  son  of  Hystospes,  affords
the  earliest  instance  of  a  national  postal-service.
Mention  is  indeed  made  (Libfrat.  Brer,  33)  of  a
class  called  sj^mnuioi  as  existing  in  the  most  an-
«ieut  times  among  the  Egyptians  for  the  convey*
ance  of  letters  by  land,  but  we  have  no  gronuds
for  thinking  that  a  postal-system  was  established
ill  Egypt  88  a  branch  of  the  administration.  In
the  Fcniiau  dominions,  however,  as  we  learn  from
Het-odotns  (iii.  !28;  vt.l05;  viii.9d),  horsemen,  sta-
tioned at  intervals  and  relieving  one  another,  con-
veyed tbe  imperial  will  in  all  directions  from  Snsa,
Echatana,  or  Babylon.  The  service  was  called  dy-
yapiiuiv,  and  the  couriers,  ^fyyapoi.  Messages  of
lesser  nrgenoy  were  carried  by  qfitpoSpofuu.  In
Oreece  there  are  no  evidence  of  any  snch  service,
at  least  upon  a  similar  scale,  for  the  htmerodromi
mentioned  by  Com.  Kepos  {Milt,  iv,  'i)  can  scarce-
ly have  been  a  permanent  iustttntion.  This  was
probably  dae  to  the  geographical  smallness  of
Greece ;  still  more,  however,  to  the  utter  absence
of  political  niiity  among  the  Greeks,  and  the  want
of  facilities  for  land  traffic,  in  contrast  with  the
easy  commnnicatious  by  sen.  But  the  vast  ex-
tent of  the  Roman  dominions,  and  the  centrali-
zatiou  of  imperial  functions  in  a  single  hand,
again  Auniahed  the  conditions  of  a  postal-service,
which  accordingly  arose  and  became  u  most  im-
portant instrument  of  State  administration.  The
practical  wisdom  of  tfae  Romans  had  from  the  he-
ginnlng  of  their  eonqnests  taught  them  to  make
nxMls  throughout  tbe  territories  which  they  sub-
<1ned,  whence  resulted  a  system  of  highways  con-
necting tbe  remotest  parts  of  the  Empire  with
Rnme.  These  not  only  facilitated  the  marching  of
tnMtpR,  but  served  tbe  general  purposes  of  trans-
port and  the  conveyance  of  intelligence,  forming,
as  they  did,  tbe  n)at«ria1  eonduiio  »iite  qna  moh  of
tlie  future  citrsM  publiCKt,  Within  the  last  cen-
tury of  the  Republic,  also,  certain  practices
hail  already  been  establislied,  by  which  the  de-
velopment of  the  pttstnl -service  was  laigely  con-


ditioned. We  now  proceed  to  give  some  nrrmint
of  these.

Under  the  Republic,  after  the  coiirjnest  of  Ita-
ly* government  officials  despatched  from  Rome  on
public  business  wt^re  empowered  to  impose  arbi-
trary requisitions  on  the  subject  Italians  (dediti-
eii)  to  supply  them  with  necessaries  for  travel-
ling. Among  the  Italian  allies  such  fiinctiouaries
usually  obtaineil  fnml,  lodging,  and  means  of.
transport  from  their  guest-friends  or  from  the
principal  {Mrsonages  in  the  friendly  States  which
they  visited.  But  when  the  Roman  domiuions  in-
cluded extra*Italian  provinces,  the  fine  distiuction
made  in  Italy  between  subjects  and  allies  {aocii)
was  in  tbe  provinces  neglected,  aud  the  provin-
cial allies  were  as  sumnmrily  requisitioned  by  a
legatut  as  were  the  provincial  subjects.  Senators
or  cltiz«us  employed  on  a  public  mission  abroad
received  from  the  Senate  a  mandate  {diploma)  re-
quiring subjects  and  allies  alike  to  supply  them
with  means  of  transport  and  other  necessaries  at
all  the  successive  ^tageH  of  their  jonrnuy.  This
in  tbe  natural  conrsi:  of  things  ted  to  grave  hard-
ships, and  conipIaiiit«  frequently  arose.  Rc-stric-
tive  enactments  became  necessary;  and  we  read
that  Cato  the  Elder,  when  praetor  in  Sardinia,  di-
minisbe<1  or  removed  I  lie  expenses  entailed  nimii
the  people  of  that  island  by  tbe  entertain  uient  of
tbe  praetors  otHciating  among  them  (Liv.  xxxii.
37).  It  is  doubtful,  however,  whether  Cato  issued
a  formal  edict,  or  whether  his  good  example  alone
operated  toward  the  relief  of  the  sufferers.

Among  the  various  embassies  which  thus  be-
came grounds  of  hardship  to  tbe  provincials  there
was  one  which  deserves  especial  notice.  This  was
called  libera  legatio,  being  a  sort  of  mission  from
which  all  State  employment  was  absent,  granted
as  a  favour  sometimes  to  distinguished  men,  last-
ing for  several  years,  aud  carrying  with  it  all  the
previonsly  mentioued  liabilities  on  tbe  part  of  the
provincials.  The  libera  legatio,  owing  to  the  in-
defluitenesH  of  the  privileges  it  conveyed,  became
a  fearful  cause  of  oppression.  A  law  was  oarrie<l
in  B.C.  63  by  Cicem  (Cic.  t>e  Leg.  iii.  H,  18)  restrict-
ing abuses  of  the-  (ibera  legatio  and  limiting  its  du-
ration to  one  yfar;  but  tilt;  reform  thus  effected  was
short-lived,  for  lulius  Caesar  (Cic.  Ad  Att.  xv.  11)
again  extended  the  term  of  a  libera  legntio  to  a  pos<
sible  five  years.

.  During  tbe  last  period  of  the  Republic  tbe  Sen-
ate had  frequent  occasions  for  communicating  in
despatches  with  their  generals  or  provincial  gov-
ernors, OS  well  as  with  allied  kings  and  States.
For  the  conveyance  of  such  despatches  the  an-
tliorities  employed  freedineii,  slaves,  or  n  certain
class  of  couriers  called  utratorei  (steraerf,  "  to  sad-
dle ").  A  class  of  mcssengei-s  also  existed  called
tahellarii.  For  pressing  messages  a  general  usual-
ly employed  mounted  men  detached  from  his  own
staff.  Tbe  puhlicani,  as  es{>ecially  interested  in
transmitting  and  receiving  intelligence  to  and
frotn  Rome,  had  a  special  class  of  talteilant,  whose
services, however,  were  often  bon-owod  by  the  mag-
istrates, or  by  the  negotiatoren,  speculators  in  corn
or  money,  who  were  in  constant  relations  with  the
provincial  governors  aud  with  the  pHblicam.  The
ships  of  the  allies  also  were  employed  for  tbe  nse
of  magistrates  engaged  abroad  on  public  business.
Thus  for  the  purposes  of  transport  and  the  con-
veyance of  intelligence  the  dealings  of  the  home
government  with  tbe  provincials  were  i-egulatod


cuKsus  ruBLicrs


448


cmrrics


nmnily  by  lliu  priiiciplo  timt  the  inciileutal  la-
bour uixl  ('X]><:iiHrs  nliDiilil  Itv  iHinii!  jLt  fur  il&  |hi^'
diblc  by  tbir  iMtU^r,  wUilu  tbu  iiiten.'st4  t<i  itv  nervLMl
werr  thMJW  uC  llie  guVLTumeiit  alone.

It  iiiity  rciiiiiiiiixl  for  tin"  Knipim  to  oriciiiiixc
and  ilt^vi'lop  l)it<  systHtii  wliicti  li:ul  Itt'eii  i-Kl:il>-
IihIicm]  luiiliT  Ibe  n<)viililicaii  n'tjimr.  Tht>  imiiu'tiKv
)Ulviiiitjif;c»  of  such  uii  or^ffiiiixatioit  as  :t  {lurliuii
of  tlin  iniprriul  iiiltiihiiKlnilinii  \vvrt>  miniuiutilly
i^bvioiiH.  Aii^itHtiiH  U(^ri>nlhi);ly  ii|i)HMii(4nl  iiiuuiit-
«l  cotirifm  {Htntinrni  iir  Bprriilulmtv)  l»i  l>«  L'tii-
ploytMl  aliuig  Mil)  )iHnui[iul  roml^i  (SiiL't.  Jug.  i\)).
TIiIh  impliL'M  thu  iiiHtitiiti»)i  of  HtntioiiM  {mut»'
limtf*},  itt  wbich  llipy  sbouM  relieve  ouo  aiiotlKT.
Hut  OH  tbis  arranyeiutfut  pruviUwl  ouly  for  the  j
couveyatico  of  intelli|j;eiice,  it  feiinimil  to  bo  siip-
pleiiieuted  l>y  a  tntnti'iMirt  tiyst<'m  for  tbo  couvt-y-
jiuce  of  money  or  oilier  valoablen  of  coni^itlerable
weight.  Tbo  noc<'»wty  of  coustniclinn  poslal-»ta-
tioiiH  cUKiunl.  Tbe  tiLiiions  were  calleil  maHnionf,
wbifli,  Urhij;  hiti^niltu)  fur  Kxlgilifrx,  lut  tbvir  tiantit
iiiilit!at4*»(,  woro  fiiniiNliiKl  itot  only  with  a  Miipply
for  tbt>  immediate  nanta  uf  man  Anil  bfiMt,  Ijtit
alDu  witb  tbo  accoiuiiHHlutiou  Niiitablu  for  travul-
luFH.  The  tntmt'iQueM  wlto  not  si*  iiiinierouji  aloii;;
A  rcml  as  tbo  mHttilionf*,  or  ebaii^itiK-MtAKUO-  In
uccordaiice  with  ivpiililiciwi  iirecedeiit  ilie  ex-
jiehiM-s  of  tbe  Iraiieiport  nnd  postal  ay^itiMu  ^cner-
ally  continued  to  f:iU  upon  itiu  coniuntiitios
lbroot;h  wHohh  tirritorieH  tbe  liue-H  of  stations
liiy.  TlH>y  ocoordingly  liml  to  pnividei  ootiduc-
torH,  ^uardti,  drivers,  t'»K»ltier  with  ltea«lH  of  bur-
den aud  ndliii^-Hloi'k,  on  i'e<;fipt  of  ttn^  iMiipemr'>4
onlcr  (riJj>/om<i ),  or  tltut  of  llii^  bend  of  the  pontnl
.\viit(>ni  (a  fuDCtiotmry  ilc.-4i({tiutt-il  in  Tntjnn'.i  time
an  nti  rrhiciitis),  wliu  wim  jir.uo.TfiWy  A  tVr«ilrnaii  of
tbe  einptTor.  .Silrb  ntirnitJis  fur  the  use  of  the
[mat  wero  isfiiiMl  i>cc:L.Hii»ially  by  tbe  conanl,  by
llio  prHcfect  of  tlio  priuitoriaiis,  or  by  tbo  g<iv«?iruor
of  a  province,  bnt  in  all  coses  only  witb  the  em>
pt^ror'5  siiecini  niithority.  Wbilo  tbe  docnuicnt
entitling;  to  iha  use  of  tlio  cnrtu^,  by  vircnc  of  be-
in;;  ntantp«it  »ith  tbe  emperor's  neal,  w.ia  called
dtjthma  (and  nilicr  namcti  which  will  hereafter  b«
referrud  U'),  tim  ri^bt  uf  iMiniii^  piratal-wnmintH
wiui,  ut  Icjwt  niiLil  a  late  period,  railed  rrfrlio.  TIih
expehHeH,  tiiorL-ovrr^  of  t'oimlnteting  nlationH  and
Btofking  llieni  with  uecv»l^al'i(•M  bad  to  be  boriio
by  tbe  iiei}j;kb'>iiriiig  eonimiiiiLtitw.  Aluug  tbo
line  of  one  ibiy'a  jonriiey  tliero  wuiv  nix  or  eigbt
HclM  uf  Klitbltw,  e»eb  of  w  bieb  liiid  lo  ruuitiluin  a
total  of  forty  beaitt.i,  iiiL-liiUin^  buntes,  mules,
naiWA,  et«'.  'I'lie  t'oiinnouiiieH  iiIho  wtTo  bound
to  fnrriiNli  nnil  matnlniu  the  tenrnti  and  to  ke«p
tliH  Hlidib'Ji  in  repair;  Mii-y  had  fiirtliHr  U>  wcnrH
lh<«  iti'rvii'iw  of  niiilt<l<-t>r<  imuUititm),  niiile-doetofH
(  ntiifomt^iri  I.  \vlHM<tivrii{hl»i  (oir/ww/uni ),  grooina
{hip[Hicomii,  mid  cundni'torH  or  ^fitanlH  (rehiralarti).
Kniin  (lu-ja-  heavy  bnnb-nN  NtTva  n-lifveil  the  ptii-
|>Ie  of  Italy,  and  ti>  commi-'ntonite  bi^i  net  ti  medal
wn^  ntntek  bearing  the  ioH<;nption  rcAJrn/a/mnr
thttiui  iiiniMga  (whvie  vrfiii'itlntift  =:  rwrffHi  intbUcant.
Trajan,  hon-ever,  re-:iiillii>i-i/(Ml  (I'lin.  £>;-  ^-  l^'J
tbe  ifksiie  of  poNliil-wiitTaiit»  in  Iinh'.  hut  retttrift'
ml  tlieio  to  etiMeK  in  wliieh  Iih  hiid  boMi  |M-nuinalIy
oonHulttM).  We  roHd  (Spurt,  f/mli'.  7]  that  Iliuliian
ttalnm  /-Mi-nitu  /tmyj/fiH  innHUtil,  riP  nmifiittrntuti  koi:
ON^re  graroffHliir.  Acconlin^  to  HirMi-bft-ld,  in  Inn
nntf^  Ut  thcMi  wordH,  ruiHuii  fitt  nli^  in  tn  SparlianuK
(•■intvalent  lo  CHtnuit  i-rAiruf(irii/j),  mul  the  rniidniNiK
livn  upon  tho  word  tlalum. Aerordint;  to  bi.-i  vievt.


tborefore,  tbe  meatiiuK  oi  tlio  whole  wnUutif  U
that  lIotlHau  made  the  pustol-iurrviee  tlimi|b-
oni  tho  Kuipiro  a  department  of  ibe  Sute  adntii-
mtration,  and  appointcil  tlxed  ^lutions,  ini[Ntriii-
tcnih'd  l»y  ((ovi«rninent  ollifialH,  in  nnlrr  lo  relitve
(be  munirijuit  rna^iKlriiteH  of  all  re-siKin^iliiHij- for
(hem.  l>t'.spi|t",  liowever,  tbeni!  uod  otlifr  r-ffinig
in  tbiM  diruetion,  it  wan  not  until  lb«  limr  ofSr]i-
liniiu-i  SoventH  (Spart.  Hrrer.  14 1  that  tlw  ex|i»'B»»
of  iLie  poHt  guiierHlly  ncro  made  rhnrirenblc  lo  lb(
tmpi-rial  IreaHory.  Bnt,  oven  when  thiN  had  lifru
done,  the  subjoeta  still  contiiint^l  to  miUVr,  t>i>rdiil
any  Biilisetpteiit  letcislaijori  maiorially  ulli:via[«  die
hiinlon  Willi  which  the  cur»u«  prewnsl  niton  iIkbi
Ditterence-ft  of  o]iiniori  exist  an  to  the  exatt  tiilutt
of  the  reforms  or  cliaiigcs  attribnt«i1  roBpeotirt'l)'
to  Nerva,  Trajan,  and  Ibe  others  aboTo  ni«iilioii(<i.
Humbert  says  we  mnnit  at  Iea«t  suppose,  im  lli»l«-
iiianu  doef,  tba*^  Nerva  entirely  remitteil,  ibmEli
only  tn  Italy,  tbo  oxpenses  of  the  sers'ice.sa  Ibit
the  Halnrit^  of  ollleials  on^agMl  in  it,  aa  well  u
thii  niMtiTial  coAt,  Iwcauie  aliko  ohargMbki  lit
the  tre^wiiry:  that  Tr.-^aii  eontenteii  biDwelf»ilk
nierety  checking  the  abiiiie  of  en^clia;  wbilo  UtAih'
au,  bottides  vxtendiu);  flic  ort^auixuliuii  of  tbep«l
tbiHJUKb  the  whole  Empire,  tuiittt  apparent !>' hifc
imp(K-M-d  the  char>;ea  of  it  upon  tbe  j(«cita ,-  lUiAn-
toninim  Pius  aftaiit,  like  Tr:^jau,  luiikiiii;  h  ttff
backwardH,  contined  tlic  conteiuplaled  rufiimi  taa
mere  reHlricttoii  of  expentte!*  and  of  tbe  ri|{bt  uf
iwiiiing  post  •  warranlH  ;  Ibat  !^»plinii(iA  Hi'vm*
o«>nipletely  reorganized  tbo  reAirntarium  mi**.
and  inipoMod  the  clmrfiesi  of  it,  in  Italy  and  Ih'
rcHt  of  tbo  Empire  alike,  upon  the /•£«•  ■!<««:
but  that  the  hwl  and  rmUcal  i-cft>rm  wnn  iu<«|«-
bte  of  iiiaiiitainint(  it.-ii'lf,  owinu  to  the  bar*l«ii">t
entailed  npon  tbr  tnuunry.  DioL-leiian,  CotiMio
line,  and  ilieir  HuocossorM  all  Mrovo  to  |*crffct  >li^
organizaiiou  of  the  post,  nnil  to  delino  exurlly
what  tbo  liabllitic-s  of  tbe  ciliett  in  re^anl  (a  it
6honld  l>i',  together  with  deteruiiuin^  tb«  t\»^*
tiou  who  should  have  the  erertin,  ur  riglii  »'
Krautitig  poAtnl  pormit«,  and  under  wluit  oirr*""'
hIjidcoh  they  m));ht  be  jiiotly  ;;ranted.

In  tbo  later  timen  of  the  Roman  Knipire  lltcp"'
liKcamo  un  ever-iitcn'Oniiig  bnrdeit  in  lljefilif*'
and  ttH  it  injiirml  tbt>m,  tii  tbe  Maine  dr(;iTe  it  ff"
parud  tbo  way  for  iltt  own  ruin.  NeverlbfJ***
treaty  ratitivd  between  Kome  and  PciiiiA  Hi  i-^
rrl}&(MetmiHler,  I^til.  p.3IJ0,  etl.  UunnluMinM  1^^'
uatives  of  tbe  fnmtier  provinces  of  iIk'  tn«'*'
pin;rt  tbe  Hitea  uf  tbe  [wslttl-aervice  to  itinl  fi"  b^
tween  them.  i4eeA.de  Kolbicbild,  flul.if  hf"'*
atw  lASttrev  dt-pnin  w*  Original  \  i'aris,  I'*731.

CurtiUB,  Okoko.  Oneof  the  most  d iM ingoi#h**
rl.-tHMii-iitlH  and  pbibdogiNlM  of  the  pn"Wii!  cM'^T'
Imrii  at  I.iilKiik,  April  ItJth,  l«iU.  He  piifVt»Jli»*
HludiuK  at  lionn  and  Htsrlin,  teacbing  for  a  ttoK  **
the  latter  place  and  at  Unv«b*n.  I"  '-'*'  fi"  "•'*
niwlo  Hri>lei*»or  Extraordiuariimof  I  ''"'

ojiy  at  PrnsCUe,  l»eeouiiU)(  in  IK'iI  V^^  .  ■  "*"

riu»,  From  I'myue  lie  «««  mlb-d  in  1S>4  l*»l'*'
chair  at  Kiel,  and  iu  irHU  to  Leipzig.  HciM  ***'
pust  itith,  iJSiS.

(.'iirliiiK  woM  tbe  IoaI  mid  one  ut  ibe  Knrilnl  "'
the  "  olil  wdiiiol  "  of  cbWHical  plitIob>KiM0,  lu^  ^'^,
midatod  in  tbetr  linnl  oxprcHMion  their  rtviinil"P'''^
virwH.  Ho  wan  aim)  pnifoiindly  Inunn-d  uiOt^^*
iiiid  in  tbtM  department  wrotua  ntinilMtr  of  iinai<bt^
iMirka:  tllc  tinr\-hiiii^eSrhul<irawnmaHk\\t&!i\'''^^
[vitcbed  itA  fifteenth  (ilertuanj  edition  iu  lit^  ^"


cuarrus


44»


CL'itTOUIA


I  Iwru  lmiislnr«d  into  KiikII&Ii  in  l)v.  W,  Siiiitli's

ni-i*  ill  KiiKluiiil.mid  rnniiM  llii'  hiuiiHof  I'nif.  MhiI-

In  H  tlrwk  tirammar  in  ttuH  roiintrv;  iilso  liin  Er~

IttiteruM^H (4) llit< fi)n>Kr>i II); (l^i:{,  :iil <*i). I'<75)

Kiij;.  trttiiH.  ilrfiO};  Uw  ttrumhiiife  der  Grifchi^^kfH

Ett/mulogie (]d5d; 5th ml. in cttllaboratiuit with

WindtiKl),  IHTlh,  trannlatnl  iiitu  Kitglisli  bv  Wil-

kitiM  anti  Ktigluml  |lH7.V-74i);  uinl  l>an  VrrhttM  ttrr

Oriadkurkrm  Hjtrafhr  (l^It-7U)  —  n vui.v  rliiliorMtt^

pifloeofn-ork — traiiKlatc^l  by  Witkins  anil  Ku^litnil

(If^),). Bf^iilcs  tbeM  in)|mrtatit  ])ii)ilicatinnA,  lie

mImo  put  fortli  a  trvatiiie  lie  .YniniiiNm  tiraeeorum

Formaliour  (lH4;i|;  lUr  SpriwhrrrgMrlfHUff  in  thrrm

rtrbattHisa  ear  klaMi^kcm  Fhihtlngir {\M':>);  Sprach-

rtTglrirkfudf ftritfii^ti  (wr  griftkinekm untl laleiw

Mi-fcra  (irammatii:  il^-UU; VhHotogxe  nnd  SprtH'htrit'

»rM»rka/t  (li^ii'Jl; Zar  CkraHoto^iv  Hrr  indo-grrmO'

•tarAm  Sprarh/orMihimg  (iSSt;  2<1  inI.  Irf?;*);  Zur

Kritik  der ufuealru SprarJi/omcJiuug 11^5); itn<]

tu  conJiiiii'liMii nrtih Bni^inniin,  U.  Mo,vur,  Kick,

WiiidiM-'li.  Hill)  oibi;rH,  Slndiru  mr  grifek.  mid  lal.

GrHmmatik,  IM  vole.  <14UH-T7). The  uintb  voIiiuk'

of  tlila  tteHcA  cuDtainn  Krn^inann'H  fiinious  (ra|M!t'

on  thu ustal  wxmnl,  nilh  wUiuli ltvi;ait  the  a-;-

);TPwtivt:>  {iroiiafranila  of  tli>>  uvw  hcIiohI  ai^ninHt  lli«

tWuni'swf  C'nrtin»*antl  Ins  |iivili'ci'n«*oi>i. Ttie  ut'w

ibeiirie^foriii  tlipunlyts't  i>f «  vijjomiisaltiu.'V  byCur-

tinHhiiD'wOf  in  IIih  AViOi'iiifiiMiiiii-il  alH>vi!,)ii  wliitili

lir  uiainliiinn  t)i<*  priit(-t|i]i- m' "  H|n}ra(lin(;1iari};rt''  in

adilitioii  to  iiivarialile  plionctic  law  and  tliu  itillii-

_ «»(.«!  «faiial«K>. i^'*'  I'lllLOLiKiY.) In  1^7^,  pnif.

CDttiiiH  ftiiintlfit  witli  Lnn;;i>.  Kil>ljt;ok.  aim)  LipMiuf

*"  )  hipsiytr  Sludittt  tw 17<m#m('A«h  I'hihiUtgir.

Cuitliu.  Mkttiib.  a  Knuinn  yontli,  wlio  ilt-vot-
wl  liiiu»elf,  fur  bin  coantry,  tu  tbc  Miuhm,  h.c.  3liU.
Arrnntin);  to  the  at-coiiiil  given  by  Livy  |vii.  C),
Ibf  t{mnm)  nt^ir  tbo  midillc  nftho  Koniiii,  in  cnn-
#f]Tti?iicc  eitb(*r  iif  ati  eiirtUifintke  nr  Homo  other
Ti<'1«i)l  cause,  lutuk  down  lo  an  iniinciiHi*  tieptli,
fcnniiig  a  vattt  ajHTtnn';  imr  coiilil the  Riilf  be

Kll«il  n|)  by  all  tb(>  cmrtb  which  c^iidd  \w  thninii
Ifai  it,  At  last  the  WHithjuiyerH  detdair'!  that,  if
Itte  Knnmnii  wiNh«^>d  llu;  cuniniuiiwrallh  tti  hui^vcr-
Italinjt,  tbi-y  initiit  devniti  to  tblM  ebiiMNi  what  inii-
Bilniffil  tbe  principal  tttreDgth  of  the  Konian  |h>4>.
piv-  CartiilH,  uD  bearing  the  answer,  demmiduU
•f  hii  cuuntrymen  whether  they  po'TU»ew*ed  uiiy-
tbin^Bo  valuable  OS  their  »rin»  and  eonrage.  They
jTMlilul  a  »ilent  assent  \n  the  qaestitm  put  ibein ;
*li«eii[mii,  having  arrayctl  IiiinHelf  in  full  armour
fxt  limuiited  lilH  linme,  Cartiim  [diiii]CiMl  into  the
P«hMui,ini(l  the  peiipte  l.brcw  aftiir  bini  tbeiroffer-
%i  ami  ipiantitieA  iif  tin-  fruits  of  rhe  earth.  Va-
''niuMiixlmuft(v.6.2)!>tuteH  that  the  earth  i-loxed
ln«HiIiflt«]y  rtvt'r  him.  JVivy,  however,  fijuruk*.  uf
•  lalie  rtccnpylug  the  spot,  called  Lftciw  Uiirtina.
""aimthcr  part  of  hiA  history  (I.  \2),  ho  inuntioua
"i'»»anie  lake  a*  existlitg  in  the  time  of  Romnliia,
*"'!  an  having  derived  ilo  nnme  from  MettiiH  Cnr-
L|>"\KSul]iue  in  the  army  ofTitiiN  Tatlntt.  In  all
•ility  it  ivaa  of  volcanic,  origin.  «iiH-f  the
kci-oiiniM  Npeak  of  itM  gmat  drpth.  and  was
^  Itfxidui-eil  merely  by  tbo  iniinilatinim  of  the
^l>*t.  Tuniutn)U8  Pritfciia  is  aaid  to  have  tilled
">'  <^it)  kke  at  the  lime  tbrit  be  dminml  tbu  whole
°l^'lii«i|i->(rie-t  itiid  uouBiruetvd  tbi^Clonea  Maxima.
I'oiMlily  he  may  bavo  been  aided  in  tbi»  by  aunt-
*^tnu»el  jtmihially  formed  thruiigb  the  baaiu  of
■" 'ike  itself.

Ruftt^  Qi'l.vTUH. A  Koinan  hiatoriaii


who  HonrtBhed  in  Ibe  lirst  cenlnry  of  (he  Chriitlian
era.  Xn  paiticnlar!*  of  Iiih  IiTh  are  kitown,  and  no
mention  im  U^  be  t'oniid  in  the  Itmnnii  writerA  that
can  be  positively  nifi'm-il  tu  liiin,  though  Hneloniua
mtintiottH  a  Q.  CnrliiiH  KiiI'iih  in  hitt  li»t  of  rhi'luri-
riana,  and  a  CiirtiiiH  RiifiiH  i*  named  hy  Tac^iinn
(.(nu.  x\.  ;il)  and  by  lln*  yoniigrr  Pliny  {Kpinl.  vii,
27).  Tho  ten  liookh  |//Mlor-mrMm  Alrsondri  Magni
LUiH  /h-ct-m)  that  be  wroti;  are  hrlifvcuil  to  bavn
been  coiiip09W;d  dnriiig  the  reign  of  ('laudina  ou
the  strength  of  a  pa*«*age  in  Ibe  work  itself  (x.  9,
'A'ti),  wbieh  seeing  to  rrfer  to  the  outbreak  at
Rnmo  on  the  ilea tb  of  Caligula,  to  which  the  ae-
oewioii  of  Clandintt  put  an  end.  (See  Bebulte^ia,
Itc  SeHecae  t^uaenlt.  Sat.  [Ittinii,  If<72|;  and  Berxcff
Df  rurtii  AetoU  [Heidelberg.  l-«tlO]j.

The  hialory  of  Alexander  (.bi>  Ornut  is  tnmlfld
in  a  rbetorieal  fonhion  with  little  hiiitorieal  lu-
Hi|f]il.  iiitnNlni'ing  n  tiniiilier  of  pielureru|iie  didaila
which  are  ti;roii)»ed  etfeetivoly  ;  and  iIil>  career  of
the  great  Miu-'eiluiiiaii  in  regatiled  uh  a  »ert«ii  uf
brilliant  and  romantic  udventimtft.  There  are  a
uumlfer  of  earefnily  tiniHlied  H|H9ocbe«  worked  into
the  niirrutiveaud  iniieh  Hententioutu  rcl1i.*clion.  The
style  i«  evidently  forintMl  oh  thai  of  Livy.  The
chief  luturoc  of  the  HMvriae  in  C'lilurcbuv  (q.  v.).
Uf  the  original  ten  bookH,  the  IJntt  two  are  ItnU
ami  tUeri'  an-  lactitiiw  in  the  others.  The  work
nitN  read  dining  the  Middle  Ages,  aliil  there  are
numerotr>«  MSS.^  the  old*Mtt  bi'itig  of  lli«  ninlh  cutt-
ttiry.  The  Hintoriue  wh<*  edited  liy  KriuiuiiiH  llolrt),
aiid  tlie  riivt  eonipleh^  cvltlion  is  that  of  Sualceu-
tiiirg  tl*>-lfl,  I7'J4|.  1^1*^1  editions,  with  iiotea,  ue
thiWM''  of  .SeliiiiiciliT  lOiitriiigeu.  IKKt),  MiltZoll  (Iter-
lin.  IH.4I1,  Zninpt  iHiunaniek.  14-]!^),  Vu<rel  (3d  ed.
Leipzig,  lc(8o),  Hchmldt  (I'ragne,  ISrV),  Dutuoii  (PariSf
l^b?):  Ukii.viii.nnd  ix.,vrith  Knglinh  notes,  by  Heit-
laud  and  Kaven  (Cambridge,  1H79).  There  la  a  lex-
icon to  Cnrtius  by  Richert  (2*i  od.  llanarer,  1980).
On  the  style. iwe  the  dL(Wprt»(ioiis  by  Krab  (lusterb,
l(*H»),Eg«r(Gie»»eti,  IHS.')).  Rani-lMMciiiingen,  1H(®);
iiud  for  a  guuoral  arconnt.  1>i>kwiii,  fttudr  »ur  Q.
Curir,9a  rUi,tt  w>n  ffi'nrrf  (Parim,  lrtH7).

CurflJls  MaglBtrBtna  Thi*  nam*?  gtvon  lo  n
class  of  iiiagifllrafic^  wliirh  ronfem-d  the  privilege
of  inting  the  Hft/o  rnrM/'m,  or  chair  of  slate.  This
was  anciently  iiintle  of  ivory,  or,  at  least,  adorned
wirli  it.  Tin*  niaglntrnli-a  who  enjoye^l  ibis  privS-
lege  were  the  ilictntor.  coimnis,  praetor,  ceni»ors,
iinHl  enriile  acdiles.  They  sat  on  thisobnir  in  their
tribiniuls  on  nil  stih^mn  oecasioiiH.  Those  com-
matidrr«  «'ho  tritirnplie<l  had  it  with  them  in  tlieir
(diarii>t-i.  Persons  wimse  ancestors,  or  theniselvefl,
Ititd  borne  any  curnle  otiice,  were  called  Hnhiln
and  bjul  the  iwn  imaginum.  They  who  wi-ri'  the
llrxt  of  tho  family  that  bad  ntisetl  themHetvea  to
any  cnrnh^  ofRce  were  rallefl  htn»iurn  nori,  ^^  neiv
men.^  As  regards  the  origin  of  the  term  rurHliy,
Featns  deiliices  it  from  cNrru*,"  a  chariot  ."and  aaya
that  "ourulti  uiagi»trat«s"  wen?  mi  enllotl  bccauM
borne  along  in  ebarlottt ;  but  see  Ql*i)[|tkii.

CustocLeas  Cuatodiae.  TIih  soldiertt  who  gtiard-
>m)  the  gaten  nf  a  camp. Hoe  C'ahtra;  ViGtUAK.

I  Ctistodia.  A  watching,  gniii-d,  or  rare  of  niiy-
,  thing;  hence  the  word  coinett  to  mean  (1)  cilMlody,
continement,  or  restraint  of  a  |»enu>n  ;  {'31  peiwilia
(tet  (iH  a  gnnnl  or  watch;  \'A)  Iho  place  where  a
,  gnunl  is  kept ;  |4|  a  prison,  or  place  trhcro  A  per-
I  son  is  guarded;  (■'i)  |>ersonb  ID  oouUuement  or  sub-
'  jed  lo  any  restraint.


CL'STOMS  DUTIES


460


CYAXAKES


OlUto^ia  rri  ik  n  toi-link'al  tcnn  for  the  cliurgo
wllioh  u  |i«rHoti  ttiiiK'rtakrs  ot  n  tiling  iiitnist'Hl  to
bim  by  aiiutbt^r,  ou  ucconiil  of  ivhicli  he  iit  liable
for  auy  ItuM  iliiu  to  bits  ttoln»  or  ch^jm. Soc  Cl'LPa.

Customs  Duties. Sue  PoRTufunc

Gustos  Urbis. See  Praefrctcs  Urbis.

CutiUae  Aquae. 8c<*  Aqi'ak  (1).

Cy&n6  (Kiiafi;).  A  Siuiliuti  nyuipli  niiil  ]ilii,viuut«:
uf  l*ont.'{>)ii>n^,  chuiigifl  itilo  a  foiiiitaiu  through
grief  at  ih«  lom  of  rhe  goihlesA.

Cyaneatt  (KtKiir«tii.  rni.  yiitrm).  Two  Ktiiall  rufcged
iftlaiids  aC  the  eiitnitice  of  the  Kuxitm  Sea,  and
fon-y  Htmlia  fr«in  thi'  iiiniith  of  tlie  TliracMau  B»is-
{inriiK.  A<'r«inliti;r  to  .Strahii,  one  v,t\n  iienr  tlie
KiiroiM*]!!]  th«  itlhur  riiMir  thf*  AMiatic  ni<lt>.  and  the
Hpiicv  IwtwHeu  tli^iii  ^vMx  ubiiut  twenty  ftladia.
Tburu  wuM  uiL  anui«ut  falili)  rctntivo  to  thoNo  iul-
andd,  tliuL  they  tluatvd  ubi>iit,  and  united  to  cmsh
to  pietMiM  vummiIb  u'bich  utIouL|iti-il  l«»  inum  thnnigli
the  Htraitsr. Pomp.  Mela,  ii.7i.  Plijiy^iv«w  tbi!  HStno
fable,  but  oiwiguti,  at  tbe  Mime  time,  tlin  line  canKO
of  tbe  leKend.  It  arose  from  ihoir  a]>|H:uriug,  like
all  other  objects,  to  move  towurda  or  froui  each  <ilh>
er  when  wwii  fnmi  a  ve^<4i'l  in  ruotton  itttelf.  Tbo
Argn.wi^arp  told  hy  Aimllouini^  RbndioH^ii.lIUl),  bad
ft  uarrow  eHra)in  in  pHJ^Miitj;  tbrouf^b,  and  lost  tbL-
eilremityof  biirsterii.  Pindar  »ays  that  tliey  wer«
altvo  Hinl  iiiuvrd  to  and  fro  innnt  Hwiftly  than  ttio
hlaHlH,  nntil  Ibn  nx)HHlition  of  tbe  ArgniiantH
hroiight  doath  upon  tlK>m  iPvlb.  Iv.  :t71  fnll.).  On
wbiob  paniuigc  the  w^boliant  r«inarUN  in  explana-
tion that  it  wii>)  decreed  by  tbe  FateH  they  Rlioiild
becouiLi  "rooted  to  the  diMjp "  whenever  a  vesMjt
■uceeedcd  iu  passing  tbroiigb  tbeiu — a  prediclimi
ftCcoMipli.ibeii  by  the  Argn.  Pbineus  Umi  directeii
laniiii  and  hin  eimipaiiinn!*  to  let  lly  a  ]>igeuti  wb*ni
tbey  Wert!  near  tlu-M  iHtantlt*,  telling  thettt  [but  if
till  bird  came  safely  llirnngb  tbti  Argo  inigbt  Ten-
turn  t<»  follow  lif*r.  They  obeyeil  tlip  dirvcttoutt  of
r.b«i  pi-ojibei  -  ]iriiiei*;  thn  pigeon  piitMiMl  throngti
ttafely  with  (be  loxi<  of  iti*  tail :  and  Ibcn  tbe  Argo-
nauts, ^va14.'hitlg  tbu  retiesitiim  of  the  rneka  and
aide«l  by  Hor6  ami  Allien^,  rowetl  vigortuisly  on
and  pamud  through  with  ihu  loss  of  a  part  of  [be
rudder  of  their  v«»iel. Sw*  ABiiUNAUTAE.

The  leriu  "Cyauoao"  (Koavffiii.  i.f.  "dark  blue"
or  "azure."  in  refeii-ed  by  tbe  KebuHa-stA  on  Kiirit>-
ideil  (.Vfrf.  "i]  to  the  cnlonr  of  lliinto  i-oeks.  In  the
description  of.HuHier,  however,  as  will  be  aeou
presently,  a  more  |)<»etic  turn  in  given  to  thonp|H^I-
lation.  To  tbe  tinine  Cyaiieae  is  freqnently  joined
that  of  "Syinpk'gadus"  (Si/^7rX»ry"ft<r).  i.  e.  "  tbe
Daslient,"  in  Hllii»i<in  to  their  HUppowtMl  eollifiluii
when  vosheU  atleuipteil  to  paa»  through.  Hunter
(CW.  xii  (iO  culls  ilieui  n^uycroi,  *'  Waiidereni."

CyauSS  (KvavO))  Daughter  of  Maeaudcr,
uiotber  of  CaunuH  and  of  Byblia.

Cy&uuB  (Kvai^s).  A  dnrkblne  subfltaaee  sup-
posed  t<i  be  blue  ^li^-el,  niprilionoi)  by  Homer  and
Hesiod  a8  fontiing  a  part  of  works  of  uietal — e.g.
on  Aganii'inniin'M  brt-astpfale  (II.  xi.  114]  and  on
the  (diield  of  Hrnuleft  (,s'r.  Kcr.  U'S)  The  house
of  AlctnoUn  had  s  cornice  or  frieze  of  xvavos  (()d.
vii.  KJ).  In  TheophrajttiiH  it  in  lapi«  lazuli  (f^pid.
'■il).  Sco  Merriam'ti  imle  on  Od.  vii.  87,  in  his
I'Saeaciana  uf  ll<m\er  (N.  V.  ItffW).

Cyftthua  {K\ni6oi\  A  GreHk  and  Roman  lif|uid
luesHniv,  containing  one  twelfth  of  tbe  itexlarinti


CfiXhi. (JTiun  ArftoMKwl


or  ,OH!25  of  a  pint  F.ugtiAb.  It  was,  in  later  limn  at
leant,  the  tneaiiure  of  the  eooiiuou  dniiktU|,'-);ti«
among  the  Rooiauis  who
borrowed  it  frtwi  llv
Grerkpf.  The  funu  tif  tlir
c,v:tthmt  uKed  nl  liuu]atlt
wa^  that  nf  a  t>niiill  ladle,
by  uicana  of  n  hicb  tbr  nint
was  conveyRiI  iiiUi  llie
drink  iug-cnptt  fn>Ri  iW
largb  vuttMcl  {Kpari^^)  In
which  it  waa  nilxi-d.

The  e^athuB  wn»  tbro-
cia,  ooQHideicd  with  rrlrr-
encc  to  (be  M-xtaiitu  wllir
unit;  hence  wehavrMxAiH
used  fora  ve#M'l  cnnlaiitioc
tbe  sixth  of  tbe  seiiuiiin.
or  two  cyatbi,7Marfr«iufur
inie  containing  tbroo  cyathi,  irirnt  for  fonrcyalK
(jwiurimj  for  live  eyatbi,  and  ho  on,

Cyax«res(Kin^fl^i)y).  (I>  A  king  of  the  Mnb*,
grandnun  of  Deiocem.  son  of  Phraortes,  and  fillitf
Iff  A»tyaguH.  He  was  a  prince  uf  violeui  dlan^
ter.  and  tbiK  trait  displayed  Itself  In  bi«  tMl-
ment  of  the  Seytiiiaiin,  a  lM>dy  of  wboiu  biwl  tikrti
ret'irge  in  biH  territories  in  conBcqoeuf*  of  b  Wt-
tioo.  He  received  them  kindly,  allowed  lbeiiiw<-
riemeiits,  and  even  went  ^o  far  as  to  iutnut  t-nar
cbiblren  to  theirran^  jii  nnler  to  have  ibrin  t»ii)Elil
Cite  8cytliiau  languagi^  and  a  finowledge  of  urb-
cry.  After  sotne  time  bad  elapwd,  thr  Seyltiia*
a4;cn»itoinrd  to  go  forth  to  the  cha8e,  ouil  to  I'riinr
back  to  the  king  some  of  the  game  obtsiirfd  ^J
tbe  bnut,  returned  one  day  with  empty  klUi&
Cyaxares  gave  vent  to  bis  teiup^ir  by  ppni^kinjc
tbcm  fievendy.  The  .Scythians,  indignant  ut  llii*
tn-alnn^nt,  which  they  kneu  to  be  nu»icrit»il,  re-
solved to  slay  one  of  ibe  cliildrcn  confided  to  ibeir
care,  and,  after  prejiiiring  the  He^h  like  th«  guat
tbey  had  bw-n  arcnuromw!  to  bring,  to  serve  it  up
hefuro  Cyaxares,  and  Wluku  tbcuiHelves  iiinwdl-
atWy  to  Alyaltes  ut  S.^rdis  (Humd.  i.  7a,74).  Tl»
cniel  revenge  succeeded  hut  Uw  well.  Cyax-irwdi^
mandeil  the  fugitives  from  King  Atyatte^,  aud  on
hin  refusal  a  war  ensued.  Tbi«  war  hwte«l  f<it  fl«
y«ar« ;  in  the  hixih. an  eclipse  of  i be  »iiu,  m  Iiicb  W
Iwen  prcdieted  byTbiUcs,  sejinrated  tbeofinteliibJX
armies  (B.C.  010).  Peace  wassoon  rpAlore^ithWPlli
the  mediation  u(  I.jibynelUH,  king  of  Bsbyloii.aa^
Sycnnesis.  king  nfCiliris (Herod,  i. 73 foil. )^  BvtcA-
otns  also  infunns  us  (i.  103)  that  C'yaxatvs  *utbf
tirst  who  tegnlarly  traiiieil  tbe  Asiatics  to  inili'*0
servieo;  dividing  the  tr<H)ps,  which  had  bwiiin'-
iMhdicil  promisenonsly  lM>fure  bis  lime.  in(«  'f*
iinct  r»nnpauiefe  of  lana»n),  arcbera,  and  csiihr-
The  bistoriau  then  adds  pan^ntbetirally,  "Ifc*
was  he  wbo  wagetl  war  with  Ibo  Lyilianv;  vWi>>
during  a  battle,  the  day  became  iiigbt."  Tbi*
parenthetical  remark  evidently  refers  to  tbf  i>*t^
going  lueouut  of  the  edipw.  We  am  ufxt  *■'
formed  that,  having  subdued  all  Asia  ibove  ^
river  Halys,  he  nmrcbed  wiib  all  that  were  on**
his  command  againirt  Nineveh,  resolving  to  »««(:'
the  death  of  his  father  by  the  deslruciion  iif  ll"*'
city.  After  he  bad  defeated  the  Assyriiiiu  )■«  ^
siege  to  the  city,  but  was  forced  to  raiw  it  bj  *  t"^"
den  invasion  r»f  bis  territories.  For  a  nnw^""*
.'krmy  of  ScythianH,  bended  by  Madyiu*.  miidf  no"*
rnption  into  Media,  defeated  bim  iii  a  pitcbrd  <>**'
lie,  and  brought  both  bim  and  nil  Upper  Asii"*^


CrBA£A


451


CYCLOPES


BnbjectioD  to  them  for  eiglit-aDd-twenty  years
(Herotl.  i.  103 foil.).  Theu,in  revenge  for  tLeir  gall-
ing iiDpoaUioDS  and  exactioiia,  Le  slew  tbeir  cblef-
taitis,  wheu  iutoxicated,  at  a  banquet  to  vbicli  be
ha<l  invited  tbein;  and,  expelling  the  rest,  recov*
ered  bis  former  power  and  possesaione.  After  tbts,
the  Medea  took  Nineveh  and  subdued  the  Aasyriau
proviuces,  all  except  the  Babylonians,  tboir  con-
federates in  the  war.  Cyaxares  died  after  having
roigned  forty  years  (B.c.  634-694),  inclndiug  tweu-
ty-eight  years  of  the  Scythian  domiDion.  (S)  Sou
of  Astyages,  succeeding  bis  father  at  the  age  of  for-
ty-uine  years.  Being  naturally  of  an  easy,  indo-
lent dispositiou  and  fond  of  Lis  aniusenients,  he
left  tbe  bunleu  of  military  affairs  and  the  care
of  the  government  to  Cyrus,  his  nephew  and  aou-
iu-law,  who  married  bis  ouly  daughter,  and  was,
therefore,  doubly  entitled  to  succeed  bim.

Cybaea.  A  merchant-ship  or  transport,  men-
tioned only  in  Cicero's  orations  against  Verres  (iv.
S,  $  17).  It  is  properly  an  adjective,  as  Cicero
speaks  of  narit  cgbaea,  and  describes  it  as  most
beautiful  and  riclily  adorned  like  a  trireme  (v.  17,
$  44).  The  word  perhaps  comes  Irom  the  Greek
Kvm},  a  kind  of  ship  mentioned  by  Hesychius.

CybeM  (Kv)3i7)3ii).  A  name  of  Cybel^,  used  by
the  poets  when  a  long  penult  is  required.  The
form  Cybell6  is  sometimes,  thoogh  with  less  pro-
priety, employed  for  a  similar  purpose. See  Riika.

Cyh6l6  (Kv^iXr}). See  Rhea.

Cyblaba  (ra  Kv^ttrrpa).  An  ancient  city  of
Asia  Minor,  lying  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Taurus,  in
the  part  of  Cappadocia  bordering  on  Cilicia.

Cyclftdes  (KvKXdHfs).  A  name  applied  by  the
ancient  Greeks  to  that  clusfer  (kvkXoc)  of  islands
which  encircled  Delos.  Strabo  says  that  the  Cy-
clades  were  at  first  only  twelve  in  number,  bat
were  afterwards  increased  to  fifteen.  These,  as
we  learn  from  Artemidorus,  were  Ceos,  Cythnos,
Seriphos,  Melos,  Siphnos,  Cimolos,  Prepesintbos,
Olearos,  Paros,  Kaxos,  Syros,  MycoutM,  Tenos,  Au-
dros,  and  Gyaros,  which  last,  however,  Strabo
himself  was  desirous  of  excluding,  from  its  being
a  mere  rock,  as  also  Prepesiiithoa  and  Olearos.

It  appears  from  the  Greek  historians  that  the
Cyclades  were  first  inhabited  by  the  Phoenicians,
CariauB,  and  Leleges,  whose  piratical  habits  ren-
dered them  formidable  to  the  cities  on  the  conti-
ueut  till  they  were  conquered  aud  finally  extir-
pated by  Minos  (Thno.  i.  4 ;  Herod,  i.  171).  These
islands  were  subsequently  occupied  for  a  short
time  by  Polycratcs,  tyrant  of  Samos,  and  the  Per-
sians; but  after  tbe  battle  of  Mycal6  (B.C.  479)
tb«y  became  dependent  on  the  Atheuiaus.

Cyclas  (jcifxAdt).  A  luxurious  robe,  of  a  circu-
lar form,  worn  by  Roman  women,  to  the  bottom
of  which  a  border  was  affixed,  inlaid  with  gold
(Propert.  iv.  [v.]  7, 40).  It  was  made  of  some  thin
material,  perhaps  muslin.  Alexander  Severus,  in
hilt  various  attempts  to  restrain  the  luxury  of  bis
age,  enacted  that  women  should  possess  only  one
cyclas  each,  and  that  it  should  not  be  adorned  with
more  than  six  unciae  of  gold  (Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.
41).  It  continued  to  be  a  dress  of  ceremony  in
the  fifth  century,  and  was  not  used  exclusively
by  women.  It  is  related,  among  other  instances
of  Caligula's  effeminacy,  that  he  sometimes  ap-
peared in  public  in  n  garment  of  this  description
(Tff^fldflliiji,  Suet.  Calig.  52).


CycUo  Foata  (Cvctici  Poetae).  A  name  given
by  tbe  ancient  granunariaus  to  a  class  of  miuor  po-
ets, who  selected,  for  the  subjects  of  their  produc-
tions, events  occurring  as  well  during  tbe  Trojan
War  as  before  aud  aft«r,  and  who,  in  treating  of
these  subjects,  confined  themselves  within  n  cer-
tain round  or  cycle  {kvkXos,  eirculu$)  of  fable.  In
order  to  understand  the  subject  more  fully,  we
must  observe  that  there  was  both  a  Mythic  and  a
Trojau  cycle.  The  fonner  of  these  embraced  the
whole  series  of  fable,  from  the  genealogies  of  tbe
gods  down  to  the  time  of  the  Trojan  War;  the
latter  comprised  tbe  fables  that  bad  refei-ence  to,
or  were  in  any  way  connected  with,  the  Trojan
War.  Of  the  first  class  were  Theogonies,  Cosmog-
onies, Titanoniachies,  and  the  like ;  of  the  second,
the  poems  of  Arctinus,  Lesches,  Agias,  Kuganimon,
Stosious,  and  others.  (See  Homeric  Question.)
At  a  later  period  the  term  cyclic  was  applied,  as  a
mark  of  contempt,  to  two  species  of  poems — one,
where  the  poet  confined  himself  to  a  trite  and
hackueyed  round  {kvkXos)  of  particulars  (cf.  Hor-
ace, Ars  Poet.  132);  the  other,  where,  from  an  ig-
norance of  the  true  nature  of  epic  poetry,  he  in-
dulged in  au  iuonlinate  and  tiresome  amount  of
detail,  going  back  to  the  remotest  begiuuiugs  of
a  subject.  The  most  celebrated  of  the  Cyclic  poems
were  the  Cypria  (q.  v.),  the  Aethiopia  (q.  v.)  of  Arc-
tinus, the  Little  IHad  ('iXiac  MiKpd)  of  Pausanias,
the  No%toi  (q.  v.)  of  Agias,  the  Telegonia  of  Eugam-
nion,  the  Batrachomyomachia  (q.  v.),  and  the  Mar-
gites  (q.  v.)  of  Pigres. See  HoMKKt'S.

All  that  remains  of  the  Cyclic  poets  is  some  six-
ty lines,  which  cau  be  found  in  the  appendix  to
Welckor's  Epi9cher  Cyclus  (Bonn,  1835),  aud  Dtiut-
zer,  FVag.  d.  Ep.  Poeste  (Cologne,  1840).  The  chief
ancient  authority  is  the  Ckre»tomatheia  of  Proclus
(q.  v.).  See  Mahafiy,  Hist,  of  Class.  Gk.  Lit.  vol.  i.
ch.  vi.  (1860),  aud  the  article  Epos  in  this  Diction-
ary. On  the  meaning  of  the  word  kvk\ik6s,  see  D.
B.  Muoro  tu  the  Journal  of  Sellenic  Studi^^  for  1863.

Cyclopean  Walls. See  Cyclopes.

Cyclopea  (KvKKoints).  A  fabnlons  race,  of  gi-
gantic size,  having  but  one  eye,  large  and  rouud,
placed  in  the  centre  of  their  forehead,  whence,  ac-
cor<liug  to  the  common  account,  their  name  nos
derived — from  kvkXos,  "  a  circular  opening,"  and
w^,  "  an  eye."  Homer  makes  Odysseus,  after  hav-
ing left  the  country  of  the  Lotus-eaters  (Lotopha-
gi),  to  have  sailed  on  westwanl,  aud  to  have  come
to  that  of  the  Cyclopes,  who  are  described  by  him
OS  a  rude  aud  lawless  race,  who  neither  planteit
nor  sowed,  but  whose  land  was  so  fertile  as  to  pro-
duce of  itself  wheat,  barley,  and  vines.  They  bad
no  social  institutions,  neither  assemblies  nor  laws,
but  dwelt  separately,  each  in  his  cave,  on  the  tops
of  lofty  mountains,  and  each,  without  regard  to
othera,  governed  his  own  wife  and  children.  Tbe
adveuture  of  Odysseus  with  Polyphemus,  one  of
this  race,  will  be  found  under  the  latter  title.
Nothing  is  said  by  Homer  respecting  the  size  of
the  Cycli>i)es  in  general,  but  every  etfort  is  nnide
to  give  an  exaggerated  idea  of  that  of  Polypbi-mus.
Hence  some  have  imagined  that,  according  to  the
Homeric  idea,  tbe  Cyclopes  were  not  in  general  of
such  huge  dimensions  or  cannibal  habits  as  the
poet  assigns  to  Polyphemus  himself;  for  the  lat-
ter does  not  appear  to  have  been  of  the  ordinary
Cyclops-race,  but  the  son  of  Poseidon  and  a  st-a-
nymplt ; and  he  is  also  saiil  to have  been  the


'  Tnawnry  of  Ainu

stTXHtgest  of  (lie  Cjolopos  (Od.  1. 70).  Later  pnot«,
lii)U'«v0r,  )(w<t  ito  tiini-  ill  Kii]i|i1.vtiig  whatever  t1ie
fnlilo  niitil«Ml  ill  thiH  r«i4|ioct,  mid  huiice  Vi^r^il  <U^-
M;rib«8  tliK  whulf  men  an  of  (ri|^itlic  stature  aihI
coiiiitnrpM  tticm  Ut  w>  many  liiH  fDreHt-trMtiK  (.ien.
in.O*)).  It  tit  not  n  littU;  ivniuikjiSlo  that  lUMttiot-
iu  till)  ilcAcriptioit  »f  the  Cyi>lti)H<n  in  gniiemt,  nor
iif  IVlyiiliPUids  in  imrticulur,  in  tliero  nuy  imtice
takoii  »if  rlieir  iM-iug  oup-oyc*! ;  yet  in  the  acconiit
of  the  Mln(lii>j:[of  the  liitttT,  it  st^cniM  to  be  assumed
HH  n  thing  Well  kutiwii.  Wo  may  liencf,  perhups,
iritV'r  thnt  Mitmrr  followi<'d  the  u»)nil  ilerivAtton.

8iich  it  lli»  lli)iii«>rtc  ncmttnt  <if  the  Oyelopett.
Ill  IIpnitMl,f>ii  (lie  nthor  lilltul  tThrog.  139  full,),  vtp
liave  whHt  Hp|K'ni-»  to  he  Ih«  earlier  U'gi'iit)  rw-
BlK'titing  llic«i^  fulvli'il  lioiiigs,  AcirciimHiance  which
way  temi  to  Hbun-  thnt  the  Oi/jTMry  w»8  vumpiuwil
by  a  piM't  Inter  thiiii  Flenioil,  itnil  not  by  the  anthi>r
of  the  Hiad. In  the  Theiujony  of  ItesLixl  the  Cy-
tflo|iOH  are  only  three  iu  tinnihcr — BrontcM,  SleropoH,
AUtl  ArgrH. They  are  the  hodk  uf  IVniitiH  anil  (ineji
{Caelns  and  Terra),  and  iheir  (.'mploynieut  ia  to
forge  the  IbimUerholta  for  Zena. Thry  are  Hntil
to  bo  tn  every  other  mspeot  like  ((«»Is,  exeeptinx
the  one  single  eye jn  the  middle  of  their  fun^
beads,  A  circuuiBtHUce  from  whirli  llctiiud  also,  like
Homer,  detlncf^s  their  general name (  TTirvg.  1 14
foil.). In  the  inilividiial  iinnieH  (civen  by  HkhIoiI
^ve  have  evidently  the germ  uf  the  winde  fatde.
Thii  Cycltipi*t*  are  the  energies  of  tlm  »ky  —  the
thunder,  tlir  ligliluiiig,  and  the  nipid  nian-U  of  thn
Uller  (Bronleji,  fruiii  (ipoiT^,  "thumlfr"; i^I«ro-
|ic»,  fruin  cfT»j>os^,  "the  liglilnitig"; Argeis  fmra
dfiyrit.  "  mpiil "). In  nc-
oonlnnce  w  iih  this  idea
\ht>  term KucXw^  iCjr-
O/o/u)  itjielf  nioy  I»e  re-
garded as  u  Dimple,  not
a eiiiniHtnnd tenn,  of
the  Hanie  clwtH  with  ftw-

nAo^;  and  the  ntird
kmtXoc  bring  the  root,
we  may  make  the  t'y-
elojien  to  W  "  the  Whirl-
prw,"  or.  to  d  e  A  i  g  II  a  t  e
Ibem  by  a  I^liu  Dame,
f'oirHH.

When  the  Ibniider,
X\w  ligbtiiiDg,  and  Ibo
damr  hn«l  been  ruuvert-
etl  by  pi>elry  into  oiir-
eycil  KiBi)l»,  and  hM'al*
isptl  iu  the  neighbour-


biHMl  of  volraiiou,  it
voti  an  eiwy  proeeii  k
convert  tlinu  Inle
BmUb8,theaattiiintil*t)f
Hepbuesliih  <Cid)ini.  0.
inJrlem.AdMl;  Verf.
fiwrj.  iv,  173;  ^rR.viii.
4K(u\\.),  AAtbeyvrre
now  arti!it«t  In  one  liaft.
it  gave  no  ftnrpriaf  lii
liiid  Ihfni  eiigageitiii
tank  iMlapIrd  tii  ibfir
lillge  strength — iiane-
ly.  (hat  of  rvariojE  ihp
innMivu  wnlltiofnfjut.
for  whirh  piitptM6lW5
wen*  bruiigbl  by  Piw-
etafl  from  Lyela  (Scbol.  ad  Enrip.  ftrf$t^i
llorioe,  l4to,  ibe  iiiune  "C*yrloi>ean"  is  applied  la
lilts  HpeeioH  of  arcliil«eliii-t\  jiiht,  an  in  tiennan^
lliii  reiuniiiH  of  aiieient  Honiun  walla  are  |Kiyu-
liiHy  called  "  RlesH^nMiauer"  and  "ToilVUnuiKf.'
One  theory  nifcrs  the  naiiio  Cyclops  to  the  etifB-
Ihi'  hnildicigH  «oiintriicte«L  by  the  r«tii»gi,  of  vblrh
we  liiivi!  NO  remarkablu  a  Niiocinicu  iu  vh»i  ■•
called  the  Treaniiry  of  Atretia,  at  Myceuie.  i'na
the  foriu  of  those  buildings,  roMinblliig  wiibiaaM-
lowcoue  or  beeliive,  and  the  n^iind  oprnini;  attlir
top,  the  individunU  who  coiiKtrnct<H)  tlirtii  uf
thonght  to  have  derived  their  iip|M>llatiriii.  {(-'^
Oell's  Arffciu,  p.  34.)  Thotte  who  make  Ifi«m  t"
have  dwelt  In  8icily  blond  nu  'dd  tniditi««  '>lh
one  of  more  recent  diiie.  This  l»»t  pntlwt'lj  (o^
its  rJfte  when  Aetna  and  tli*'  l.lpari  Ijiland*  avn
aligned  tn  Hephaestus,  by  the  popular  Wliefo'
the  day,  as  his  workshops  ;  which  conid  only  hx*
hnp|M.'iied  when  Aetua  bad  become  better  kimw^t
and  Mount  MoschyUia,  iu  the  Ule  of  LeuinM.hi'
d'OHed  to  be  vidcanie.

A  few  remarks  may  littingly  be  adde^I  h'"'
on  the  Mibjeet  of  the  Cycli>|H-aQ  archilM'i'i'*'
This  style  of  bnildiiig  is  frr^piently  al1u<Tf*l  ■<■  ^5
the  nticieut  writern.  in  fact,  every  arrUil^w™^
work  of  exinoidinnry  tnagntliide.  to  thpfWCfl"""
of  whii-h  bnniiin  liibonr  ap|H>arHd  inadrqitalc**
ascrilNMl  to  ibe  Cycdo]w«  (Knrip. //)h,  in  J«Al3t:
id.  IJrrr.  Far.  la;  id.  Tloatl  lOH;  Stmb  r3:S«
Jlrrr.  Fir.  906;  Stat.  Thrh.  iv.  IM ;  r.-in«ri  ir  *)
The  gimeral  character  of  the  Cyclopean  fltvl''*
iinuictiNU  bloeka  of  etotie,  wiiboiit  r«'mvnt,  lit"*"


cyetopMa  l^amM  at  Caacbeia*.


CYCLOPS


453


CVLLAKL'S


iipoQ  eaob  utber,  sonietimes  irregalarly  and  witb
Hinaller  stones  tiltiDg  op  the  intenticea,  sometiaies
ill  regiiUr  and  horizontal  rows. The  Cyclopean
fityle  is  conimouly  divided  into  four  eras. The
tiisfc,  or  oldest,  is  that  employed  at  Tiryns  and  My-
cenae, consisting  of  blocks  of  various  sises,  some
of  them  very  large,  the  interstices  of  which  are,
or  were  ouce,  filled  np  witb  small  stones. The
second  era  is  marked  by  polygonal  stones,  which
iiavertbelesa  fit  into  eaob  other  with  great  nicety.
Specimens  exist  at  Delphi,  Inlis,  and  at  Cosa  in
Etraria. lu  this  style  there  are  no  courses. The  j
thint  era  appears  iu  the  Phocian  cities,  and  in
Kome  of  Doeotia  and  Argolis.  It  is  distinguished  by
the  work  being  made  in  courses,  and  by  the  stones, '
though  of  unequal  size,  being  of  the  same  height. '
The  fourth  and  youngest  style  preHents  horizontal '
coursfw  of  masonry,  nut  always  of  the  same  height,
bnt  formed  of  stones  which  are  all  rectangular.  '
This  style  is  chiefly  confined  to  Attica. The  most
reiisonable  opinion  relative  to  the  Cyclopean  walls
of  antiquity  is  that  which  ascribes  their  erection
to  the  ancient  Pelasgi  (q.  v.). See  Beber,  Hiatori/
»/  Ancirmt  Art,  pp.  178-194  (Eng.  trans.  N.  Y.  1882) ;  [
and  W.  Gell,  Walh  of  Ancient  Greece.

Cyolo|M  (Ki/xXw^).  The  title  of  a  play  of  Enrip- '
ide-H,  which  is  remarkable  as  being  the  only  nn-
doubted  specimen  left  to  ns  of  a  Satyrio  drama
(q.  v.). The  prologue  is  spoken  by  Sileuns. He
ami  his  Satyrs  are  in  seatch  of  Diooysns,  who  has
been  carried  into  the  western  seas  by  pirates.
Otlyssens  appears,  and  bis  well-known  adventure
with  the  Cyclopes  foniis  the  rest  of  the  plot,  the
story  given  in  the  Odjf&v^  being  closely  followed. ,
The  play  is  little  read,  and  has  been  seldom  edited ;
apart  from  the  other  works  of  Euripides,  though
there  is  a  good  rocent  edition  with  English  notes'
by  W.  Long  (Oxford,  1891). Slielley  has  rendered
the  CydopB  into  English  with  a  few  omissions.  I
There  are  no  imitations. See  Mahaffy,^Mf.  of\
C/0«.  Ok.  LiL  vol.  i.  pp.  377-379  (American  ed.).

Cycniu  (KvK»«f,  "Swan"). (1)  The  son  of  |
Ares  and  Pelopia,  who  threw  himself  in  the  way  r
of  Heracles  iu  Trachis,  when  the  hero  was  on  his
way  to  Ceyx. According  to  another  story,  Hera-
cles was  sent  against  Cycnns  by  Apollo,  because  he  i
lay  iu  wait  for  the  processions  on  their  road  to
Delphi. In  the  contest  between  them,  as  described  I
by  Hesiod  in  his  Shield  of  Seractes,  Ares  stood  by  .
the  Bide  of  his  sou,  while  Heracles  was  supported  '
by  Athen6  and  his  faithful  lolatls. Heracles  slew  '
Cyciius  and  even  wounded  Ares,  when  the  latter
attempted  t^o  avenge  the  fall  of  his  sou. Cycnus
was  buried  with  all  due  honours  by  his  father-in-
law  Ceyx,  but  Apollo  destroyed  the  tomb  by  an
ionudation  of  the  river  Anaams. There  was  a  son
of  Ares  and  Pyrend  who  bore  the  same  name,  and
be  too  was  said  to  have  fallen  in  combat  against
Heracles. Ares  attempted  to  aveuge  his  son,  when
Zens,  by  a  flash  of  lightniug,  separated  his  angry
children. After  his  death,  so  ran  the  story,  Cyc-
nnii  was  changed  by  his  fiftther  into  a  swan.

(2)  The  son  of  Poseidon  and  Calyc^.  He  was
exiKMed  by  his  mother  on  the  sea-shore  and  found
by  some  fishermen,  who  named  him  Cycnus  be-
caose  they  saw  a  swan  flying  round  him.  He  was
iDvaloerabte  and  of  gigantic  strength  and  stature ;
hii  head  (or,  according  to  another  account,  his
whole  body)  was  as  white  as  snow.  He  became
king  of  Colonae  in  the  Troad,  and  was  twice  mar-


ried. A  slanderous  utterance  of  his  second  wife
.stnng  him  to  fury  against  the  children  of  his  first
wife,  so  that  he  threw  them  into  the  sea  in  a  chest.
They  were  cast  up  alive  on  the  island  of  Teiiedos,
where  Teues  was  king.  At  a  later  time  Cycnus  re-
pented of  his  deed,  sought  fur  his  son,  and  marched
with  him  to  the  aid  of  the  Trojans  against  the
Greeks.  They  prevented  the  Greeks  from  landing;
but  both  were  at  last  slain  by  Achilles,  who  stran-
gled the  invulnerable  Cycnus  witb  his  own  helmet-
strap. He  was  changed  by  Poseidon  into  a  swan.

Cydiaa  (Kviias).  A  painter,  born  in  the  island
of  Cythuu8,oueof  the  Cyclades,  and  who  flourished
B.C  360.  Hortensins,  the  orator,  purchased  his
painting  of  the  Argonauts  for  144,000  sesterces
(nearly  $5H00).  This  same  work  was  afterwards
transferred  by  Agrippa  to  the  portico  of  Neptune
(Plin.  H.  N.  XXXV.  40).

Cydipp^  ( Kviimrij ).  The  heroine  of  a  very
popular  Greek  love-story,  which  was  treated  by
CallimachuH  in  a  \HMsm  now  unfortunately  tost.
The  later  Greek  prose  romances  were  founded
upou  this  version.  Cydipp^  was  the  daughter  of
a  well-born  Athenian.  It  happened  that  she  and
Acontius,  a  youth  from  the  island  of  Ceos,  who  was
iu  love  with  her,  bad  come  at  the  same  time  to  a
festival  of  Artemis  at  Delos.  Cydipp^  was  sitting
in  the  temple  of  Artemis  when  Acoutiua  threw  at
her  feet  an  apple  on  which  was  written,  "I  swear
by  the  sanctuary  of  Artemis  that  I  will  wed  Acon-
tius." Cydipp^  took  np  the  apple  and  read  the
words  alond,  then  threw  it  fh>m  her  and  took  no
notice  of  Acontius  and  his  addresses.  After  this
her  father  wished  on  several  occasions  to  give  her
iu  marriage,  but  she  always  fell  ill  before  the  wed-
ding. The  father  consulted  the  Delphic  oracle,
which  revealed  to  him  that  the  illuess  of  his
daughter  was  due  to  the  wrath  of  Artemis,  by
whose  shrine  she  had  sworn  and  broken  her  oath.
He  accordingly  gave  ber  to  Acontius  in  marriage.

Cydnoa  (Kudvor).  Ariverof CilieiaCampestris,
rising  in  the  Taurus  and  flowing  through  the  midst
of  the  city  of  Tarsus.  It  was  celebrated  for  the
coldness  of  its  waters,  in  bathing  in  which  Alex-
ander the  Great  nearly  lost  his  life  (Plut.  Alex.  19).

Cydonia  (Kvdwvta).  One  of  the  chief  cities  of
Crete,  situated  on  the  northwest  coast,  derived  its
name  from  the  Cydoues,  a  Cretan  race,  placed  by
Homer  in  the  western  part  of  the  island.  Cydonia
was  the  plnce  from  which  quinces  {Oydottia  mala)
were  first  brought  to  Italy;  and  its  inhabitants
were  among  the  best  Cretan  archers.

Cylindma  (xiXivipos).  (1)  A  roller  for  level-
ling the  ground  in  agricultural  and  other  operations
(Verg.Oeorg.  1.178;
Vitruv.x.6).  Un-
like those  of  mod-
ern times.itdidnot
revolve  but  was
simply  dragged
upon  the  ground.
(2)AprecionsBtone
cut  or  ground  in
a  cylindrical  form
(Juv.ii.61).

Cyllx. See  Caux.

CyU&nu  (  KvXXapof  ).  A  henntifnl  Centaur,
killed  At  the  wedding -feast  of  PirithoUs  (q.  v.).
The  horse  of  Castor  was  likewise  called  Cyllaras.


Cylindrua  or  Itollcr. (Rtch.


CltLliNlt


4M


CVNKIiETU'A


CyUeu6  (Ki/XX^iiij).  fli  Tlio  highrst  moimtiin
ill  till;  Ht'loiiuiiiiiuiuH,  oil  tin*  frontti-rH  iif  Aroadia
uiifl  Auliaiu,  HHcn^d  tu  Ih-rrties,  wbi>  liml  a  t<!tn|tl(t
uu  tli»  HUiuniil,  WAS  Maid  to  have  bemi  born  Ilii-n>.
ftiid  was  lieiico  culled  Cylleniuft.  (*i)  A  Benpnri
town  of  Klis.

CyUeuiuB  (KvXXijrioc).  Au  epithet  appIiiHl  to
IhTiiie.H,  from  biR  b»viu({  been  bom  on  Mount  Cyl-

It'lK-,

Cylon  (KvXup).  Ad  Athouian  of  noble  family
wb'j  formed  llic  plan  of  mitking  himself  tyrant  of
Albcns  (B.O.  GI3).  At  tlio  time  of  the  Olympic
Gaines,  be  seized  the  Acropolis,  wbere  he  waa  soon
ftfler  floHvly  Ifeedi-gtsl  by  th(»  nrclious.  Beinj[  at
la^t  ilrNtitiitf  nf  food,  lie  uiid  Ills  fiitli>wt*r8  onpita-


Oymbium  ( Kvttdlov,  Kvt^iuv,  tvitfiij  r.  A  Mntl)
rni>,  lint  ronnd,  )int  long  and  witliont  hti>i(tf«
Thry  wnre  nsod  an  ilriiikinK-rnpt>,  and  aUn  oa  lo-
dli'K  for  dipping  out  wini-  ffom  Ibi*  mixer.  Vari-
oim  nniKrialii  worn  (>nipl»yi>d  in  tbeir  ooiislrnriiM,
Hticb  OS  ail  vor,  clay,  and  cliryAOprsMe.  Tli«  uaut*
is  dwrived  fhjni  «V^>],  "  a  bo«t,"  wiUi  wbicb  ewn-
|>orv  our  "  Imltcr-boat,''  **»ancc-lK>Bt,"  etc.

CjTn*  (Kw/i'j).  Tbf  largwit  of  the  Aeolian  eitim
of  Ai^in  Minor,  upon  the  coatit  nf  Anotin.  on  a  baf
limned  aflttr  it  Cuina«ii8  (alno  F.lnitirii;)}  SiniM.  It
wii«  the  niotlHir-cily  of  Cninnv  in  Cniupaiiin

CymothoS  (ku/iodiii^).  Ouc  of  the  Xt-trtiln,
r<>pre«enfiMl  by  Vergil  a»  otMisting  tbf  Trnjuu,
n-itb  Triton,  after  the  storm  with  which  AooIiuk


hittfd,  iiflrr  rfceiviiig  a  proniinp  fnmi  the  arolioii  „t  the  request  of  Inno.  bad  nftlicted  the  fl««t(Jn.
MLVgjuduft.  one  tt(  tbi?  AlciimiMmldoe,  that  tlmir  livwi i.  US).

would  bo  |.par«l.  lu  violation  of  thiH  promi«..  CynaeglruB  (Kt/>m>i^).  An  Atl^nian,  wl*-
howevor,  thoy  were  all  put  to  death,  some  being  ,  \yrskteA  for  his  courage.  He  was  broi  ht^r  to  llie  iw«
even  mmilered  at  the  altar  ot  tht«  Eumirmdos.  For  ,  A<*chvlns.  Aftpr  lb*-  l«itll«  of  Marathon  (bc.4»i
this  sacrilege,  ibc  Alcinuoonidae  yrcui  trii«l  by  the  h^  pnwneil  the  living  P.nsianft  to  their  shii».  »wl
nobles  and  biinislied  (B.C.  uiWi  or  595),  at  the  insti- '  seij^cd  one  of  their  vewwU  with  hi>4  right  bawl.
gHtion  of  Sulou.  Tliefiimily  reliretl  toPhoeisandiwbicli  wh«  immediately  sev«r«l  bv  tli**  enrtBj,
rernainod  exiles  from  Athens  until  the  time  of  Ly-  I'pn,,  ,i,i«  jj^.  stjjicd  ihc  vessel  with  'hi?  left  liud.
cPTgiUi  (B.C.  fttSO). See  Au;MAr.o.vii>AK.  autl  when  he  had  lost  that  fttfio  he  Rtill  ke|rt  lii*

Cynui  (KvtM).  In  architecturer  an  ogee,  a  Travo>  I  hold  with  his  teeth.  Herodoins  (vi,  114)  vatnUs
sliaped  niOTilding,  consisting  of  two  rnrvea,  tlir  one  relates  that  he  seized  one  of  the  Peraiao  TMHb
concave  and  the  other  convex.  There  wore  two  by  the  stern,  aud  had  his  hand  cnt  ntf  with  ad  ur
fdltns — the  rifma  itc/«.  which  \v:w  eoncave  above  Tlii' mom  detailed  aceonnt  Is  given  by  JostlDj''-^^
and  eouvex  Imlnw,  and  the  ri/mit  rrcerna,  which
wiiH  convex  above  and  concave  below.  The  di-
minutive ci/malium  ur  cumatittm  (Kv^arinf)  is  the
morecomuiiMi  name.  Theorlgiiial  formof  theejfnta-
tium  was,  however,  ft  ttiuiplo  hollow,  the  t^rttto.

Cymba  (etvp^rj).


Cynaetba  ^Ki'wiitfn}.  A  town  of  ArDadia,oo  ttir
river  I'ruthis,  near  the  northern  borders,  and  wtw
distance  to  the  northwest  of  Cyllen/.  It  hod  Wo
united  to  the  Achaean  I^eagne,  but  w*as  lielrajtd
to  the  Aetoliaus  in  thr  Sircial  Wnr.  ThiKvM*'-
Literally  "  n  hollow."  wns  n felted  by  some  exiles,  who. on  llieir  ivtnni  lo  iWf


native  city,  formed  a  plot  for  admit  ting  tlH-rnrD;
within  ita  wbIIh. The  AetoUaim,  aceordingly.tui*'


aronll  boat,  probably  made  originally  from  the  hoi
low  of  ft  isv>\  nsed  nil  rivers  and  lakes,  etc.,  espe

dally  by  fiabermen. Pliny  ascriltes  ita  inveution  jog  crossed  into  Achoia  with  a  connidemWefitft*.

to  the  Phicnioians  (Pllii.  IJ.  .V.  vil.  2(W). The  poets  ndvauced  to  Cyunethn  and  easily  acaled  the  inlb:

give  the  name  of  cumha  to  Cbaroi.*»  hi»t  {Verg.  tUcy  then  sacked  the  town  und  destroyed  mm;"'

Jew.  vi.303). See  ChaimjN.  y]^^.  inhabitants,  not  sparing  even  tb(«w  to  wl""**

CymbSlum  («i!l^«Anir). A  mtinicHl  inxtruiiieiit  treachery  they  were indebted fur their  w>««*^

in  the  shape  of  two  bulf  globes,  wbii-b  wore  lirUI  ptdybius  observes  that  the  calamity  whicli  ili^

one  in  each  hand  by  the  (jerfornuT  nod  played  by  overwhelmed  the  Cynuelhiaus  wnt  Cfms-ideml  k^

being  Btnick  against  each  other. The  w<>nlt.sorlg-  many  aa  a  just pnnishnient  for  their  unttfliillT


iiKilly  Greek,  beiug  derived
from  Kvftlios,  "a  hollow."
In  Greek  it  bus  Kevenil
other  significHtioiiH,  us  the
erine  of  a  helmet ;  it  is  also
uwd  for  iififiiicin,  the  veiwel
of  piirilicutitin  |>hiL'ed  iil
the  iUhit  of  u  hoiisv  when-
ilieru  bad  iMieu  n  death.
Ik'-sides  this,  it  id  otleu  em-
ployed metopluirirally  loi-
an  empty,  uitipiy  perxon,  as
TiheriiiH  nalleil  Apion the


C)-inbsll«ir|ji.


depraved  atid  iuimoral  life.

Cysaii^  (Kvi><ii^).C7nit(Ki/*'n),nrCyiuui|Ki^*«>

Tin-  half-sisterof  Ab'xniidcr  the  Great,  dmiglii*"'^
Piiilip  by  Andaln.an  lilyriau  woman,  Sbrnijiin'^
lierconsiu,  Amy iita*,  and  oil  Alexander's  ii««tb»«*
to  Ai:iiii,  intending  t«)  many  her  daughter  Curydif*
i«i  Arvliidaens;  but  Penliccus,  who  couttolWif"
|-bidiieiiK,  ti-nriiig  this  projerl,hnd  her  pal  loilrtllB
(L>i<,Hl.Nic.  xix.  15).

Cjmagetlca.  A  poi>ni  on  the  eh:is4<.  wriliei' "*
I.ntin  liy  liiuttiiiM  (q.  v. )  lowardn  Ibe  rlifl  oi  t^'
AugFislan  Age.  and  exiviting  in  un  im)>erfeel  •'■''■
It lruc4>H  lite  development  of  the  ehase  fnm ''"


gruniinurian  cgmbnlum  iNtiit-  ^

di.  lu  the  mciliieVKl  Latin  it  is  niM^d  for  a  ohurcb  earliest  ngcs.  and  goes  on  lo  describe  the  cli** 'j"
or  convent  liell  and  Mimetina-s  for  the  dome  of  a  nv\f.  giving  ali»o  an  arennnt  of  the  different  kn"**
cbtircU.  of  dogs  and  hnrnes,  wilh digrrnsioiis  on  tsrifl*

The  cymbal  was  nsnally  nia<le  in  the  form  of  theincn.  The  technical  details  are  rareOdljrKiv^'
two  half  globes,  either  running  oil'  towards  »  hut  tin'  p'K'Iii  bus  no  very  gn-at  merit.  TVp*"
point. so  as  Ui  Iw  graspetl  by  the  whide  hand,  or  of  the  ptM>tn  still  existing  eonhistHof.Tlw;  twxunf"'
with  a  handle.  It.  was  poininniily  itf  bron/*,  but  lines  and  five  fragments  of  lines.  The  wwn'' ti"*
soinelimes  of  baser  uiaterial,  to  wbicb  AriBto|(ba-  was  chosen  by  the  biter  jKiet  Nemo^ianu*  iilx^"
nes  nllndes.  Ah  with  the  rrotafart.  (lie  perfonu-  1  A.l>.  '^75),  of  which  we  have  the  Uret  4lte  II"*
ent  were  iisunUy  wnnien  and  were  known  as  ejfsi-  (  hexameters  >,  partly  in  imitation  of  Cull'on*'*
(fi/i>ff-iac. See  ('rotai.um  ;  Sistbum.  '  (q.  v."|. The  ptwins  of  both  Omtttna  and  N>e»*


CYNESri


ins


CYPKIA


I1U8  were  edited  tnj;ettier  by  Stem  (Halle,  18^),
by  Haupt  (JjBiftzig,  1936),  and  by  Schetikl  (Prague,
lf!85).  See  Birt,  Htat.  ffexam.  Lat  p.  57.  A  treutiae
of  XenophoD,  iu  profie,  on  the  chase  i»  entitled
KucTyerueoff. See  Oppianus.

Cynaaii  (Kwijo-ioO  or  Cynetas.  A  people,  ac-
•oonliiig  to  Herodotus,  dwelliog  in  the  extreme
west  of  Europe,  beyond  the  Kelts,  apparently  iu
fipain.

Cynld  (KvvtKoi).  A  name  given  to  the  follow-
•era  of  Antistheues  who  fonoded  a  distinct  school
of  pbiloftophy  at  Athens  about  B.C.  380.  Antis-
tlienes  had  been  a  pupil  of  Socrates,  and,  like  that
phi1(»opher,  he  taught  that  speculative  philosophy
vfMi  nnprofitable,  and  should  be  supplanted  by  the
practical  ethical  teaching  whose  end  is  a  moral
and  tranquil  life.  In  this  respect  the  Cynic  School
was  like  the  Stoic,  but  differed  in  defiuing  virtue
to  be  extreme  simplicity  in  living.  This  simplicity
the  followers  of  Antisthenes  pushed  so  far  as  to
violat«  the  most  elementary  notions  of  cleanliness
And  even  decency,  and  to  plunge  into  the  most
frantic  excesses  of  austerity,  wearing  filthy  cloth-
ing, eating  raw  meat,  and  treating  all  who  ap-
proached them  with  insulting  rudeness.  Hence
the  name  KvviKoit  "  dog-like,"  was  applied  to  them
in  its  literal  meaning,  from  their  snarling  insolence,
though  the  name  probably  originated  Aum  the  Oym-
nosinm  Cynosarges  (q.  v.),  in  which  Antisthenes  first
tanght  The  most  fanions  of  the  Cynics,  Diogenes
of  Sinop^,  accepted  the  name  Kvay  with  a  sort  of
pride,  and  was  pleased  to  be  styled  "  Diogenes  the
Dog,"  saying,  however,  that  he  did  not,  like  other
dogs,  bite  bis  enemies,  but  only  his  friends  and  for
their  own  good.  Besides  Antisthenes  and  Diog-
*n»f8,  the  best  known  Cynics  were  Crates  of  Tbebee
(Diog.  Laert.  vi.  86),  Hipparchia  and  her  brother
Mutrooles,  Monimns  of  Syracuse,  Menippns  of  Si-
nop^,  whom  Luoian  describes  as  "  one  of  the  an-
cient dogs  who  harks  a  great  deal "  (Bis  Accus.  33) ;
-and  ftt  Borne,  Demetrius,  the  friend  of  Seneca,
Ofuomaiis  of  Gadara,  and  Demonax  of  Cyprus.
Cynicism  became  ultimately  merged  in  Stoicism.

See  Ueberweg,  Biat  of  Philos.  vol.  i.  pp.  9*2-94
(Eng.  trans.  N.  Y.  1872) ;  Mnllach,  Frag.  PhHoao-
phorum  GraecorHtH,  vol.  ii.  pp.  261-395;  Diog.
Laert.  vi.;  and  the  articles  Antibthp-nrs ;  Dk-
MONAX;  DiooKTTBs;  Mekipfus.

CyniBoa  (Kuvi'trico).  A  daughter  of  Arohidamus,
king  of  Sparta,  who  was  the  first  woman  that  ever
turned  her  atteutiou  to  the  training  of  steeds,  and
the  first  that  obtained  a  prize  at  the  Olympic
-Games  (Fausan.  iii.  8).

Cyno  (Ktmu).  The  wife  of  a  herdsman,  and  the
one  who  nurtured  and  brought  np  Cyrus  the  Great,
when  exposed  in  infancy  (Herod,  i.  110).  Her
name  in  the  Median  language  was  Spaco,  accord-
ing to  Herodotus,  who  makes  Cyno  the  Greek
translation  of  it,  from  icvav,  "  a  dog,"  and  adds  that
it  signified  in  tlie  Median  tongue  a  female  dog.

CynooepbflU  (KwoKiiftaKot).  A  nation  of  India,
who  were  said  to  have  the  heads  of  dogs,  whence
their  name  (Ct-esias,  Ind.  33 ;  Aul.  Qell.  ix.  4).  Dio-
dornsSicnluB  speaks  of  tbem  as  resembling  human
beings  of  deformed  visage  and  as  sending  forth
human  mntterings.  It  has  been  generally  sup-
posed that  the  Cynocephali  of  antiquity  were
nothing  more  than  a  species  of  large  ape  or  ba-
boon. Heeren,  however  {Ideen,  i.  2,  p.  6tiU),  thinks
thAt  Cteaias  refers,  in  fact,  to  the  Pariahs,  or  lowest


caste  of  Hindoos;  and  that  the  appellation  of
Cynocephali  is  a  figurative  allusion  to  their  de-
graded state.  The  name  is  also  applied  to  the
baboons  revered  by  the  ancient  Egyptians,  Thotb,
the  god  of  science,  is  often  represented  as  dog-
headed,  and  so  Anubis  (q.  v.).

CynosargeB  {Kvv6<rapy€s).  A  place  in  the  sub-
urbs of  Athens,  where  the  school  of  the  Cyuics  was
held.  (See  Ctkici.)  It  derived  its  name  from  a
white  dog  (kvuv  apy6s),  which,  when  Diomus  was
sacrificing  to  Heracles,  snatched  ^way  part  of  the
victim.  It  was  adorned  with  several  temples.
The  most  remarkable  thing  in  it,  however,  was  the
Gymnasium,  where  all  strangers,  who  had  but  one
parent  an  Athenian,  had  to  perform  their  exer^
cises,  because  Heracles,  to  whom  it  was  conse-
crated, had  a  mortal  for  his  mother  and  was  not
properly  one  of  the  immortals.  Cynosarges  is  sup-
posed to  have  been  situated  at  the  foot  of  Mount
AncheemuB.

CynosoophSIae  (Kvvhs  Kr^aXat,  i.  e.  "Dog^
Heads)."  Two  hills  near  Sootnssa  in  Thessaly,
where  the  Thebans  defeated  the  Pheraeans  (B.C.
364)  and  where  Flaminlnus  gained  his  celebrated
victory  over  Philip  of  Macedonia,  B.c.  197.

CynoMema  (Kwir  £$/mi,  1.  e.  "  Dog's  Tomb ").
A  promontory  in  the  Thracian  Chersourans  near
Madytus,  so  called  because  it  was  supposed  to  he
the  tomb  of  Hecuba,  who  had  been  previously
changed  into  a  dog. See  Hecuba.

CyxKMtixa  {%.vvoirovpd).  (1)  A  nymph  of  Ida  in
Crete,  one  of  the  nurses  of  Zeus,  and  afterwards
changed  into  a  coastellation.  (2)  A  promontory
of  Attica,  formed  by  the  range  of  Pentelious.  (3)
A  promontory  of  Attioa,  facing  the  northeastern
extremity  of  Salamis.  It  is  mentioned  iu  the  ora-
cle delivered  to  the  Athenians  prior  to  the  battle
of  Salamis  (Herod,  viii.  76).

Cynthia  (Kw0ia).  A  surname  of  Artemis,  from
Monnt  Cynthns,  in  the  island  of  Deloe,  where  she
was  bom.

Cynthua  (Kw0os).  A  mountain  of  Delos,  oele-
hroted  OS  the  birthplace  of  Apollo  and  Artemis,
who  were  hence  called  Cynthins  and  Cynthia  re-
spectively.

CynTula  {Kvvovpia).  A  district  on  the  frontiers
of  Argolis  and  Laconia,  for  the  possession  of  which
the  Argives  and  Spartans  carried  on  frequent  wars,
and  which  the  Spartans  at  length  obtained  about
B.C.  550.

Cynua  (Kurac).  The  chief  seaport  iu  the  terri-
tory of  the  Locri  Opnntii.  According  to  some  an-
cient traditions,  it  had  long  been  the  residence  of
Deucalion  and  Pyrrha;  the  latter  was  even  said  to
have  been  interred  here  (Strab.  ix.  p.  425).

Cyparlasia  (Hvirapta-fria).  A  town  in  Messenia,
on  the  western  coast,  ou  a  promontory  and  bay  of
the  same  name.

CypaxlBSua  (Kvn-apio-o-or).  (1)  Son  of  Telephns,
who,  baring  inadvertently  killed  his  favorite  stag,
was  seized  with  immoderate  grief  and  metamor-
phosed into  a  cypress.  (2)  A  small  town  in  Pbo-
cis  on  Pamassns,  near  Delphi.

Cyptia  (KviTpia).  A  poem  in  early  days  ascribed
to  Homer,  but  denied  to  him  by  Herodotus  (ii.  117).
Later,  its  author  is  variously  gi\'en  as  Stasiuns  or
Hegesias.  It  detailed  the  causes  of  the  Trojan
War,  and  served  as  a  sort  of  introduction  to  the
Hiad. See  Cycuc  Poets;  Homercs.


CrPRP8


486


CTPRDS


rKiV^r)-  A  largi^  iftlaml  nf  tlm  Mnli-  '
torranpnii,  Hontli  nf  C'iliriit  aiitl  wvhI  of  H.vri»,
ideiitiral,  ftt  Icaflt  in  part,  wirh  llio  Hdtrmv  hit-
Urn,  which  iwomtt  to  l>o  itH  oldfMit  kiunvii  iiniue ;
bnt  ll  appears  to  be  Komctiines  incliutotl  in  rlie
namo  Capbt-iir,  a  title  that  properly  Uelnugg  u>
Cr<9i«  with  other  ixlniiilH  ami  C4>ast  Ib»i1»  «ettto(l
by  tbo  C'nplitnriiti.  Otlier  unciciit  uaintw  tif  Cy-
prus, most  of  ilieni  poetical,  iirc  At>riii,  AeroHa,  Ara>
iiiaiitiH,  Auiatliiisia,  Aphnxli^ia,  A|ilio1ia,  Colliiiia,
Cdnutis,  Cr,vpu>8,  M(?IriU,  Opliiiiiut,  Mariiria,  Pa*
plioM,  Splii'ki-ia.  Tint  ilcHvatitni  nf  tlit>  iiuiiih  io
iiiitcirtuin,  but  tli4^  principal  atilhorilie^,  uiicioitt
am)  lUiMlorii.rurur  it  tu  tlm  llvUmw  kopher  or  gviihrr,
tbo  nuuioora  tr«o:  Honiviiiin'H,  without  a<t«4|uutc
ruiiMMi,  ootim-ctiii^  it  with  fupr^MUHK.  Another  tler-
Iviitluii  Ib  fniiu  cuiirum,  "copjicr,"  foniiurly  fotinil
ill  th**  iftlaiiii ;  litit  the  ;(ijAKnt  KiiTputt  or  hm  c^prium
probably  took  iu  iifiiue  from  the  island,  uot  lUe
iHliiiKl  from  the  molitl.

Cyprus  is  fHrkoiiMl  by  8tnibo  (or  Tiiiiaeiia,
iffboiii  )i«  folhin-s)  to  \wi  the  Ibinl  iit  ext^tiitof  Ibc
Medi(4<rratieuu  iHlnH.  lu  shiiiHj  wax  aptly  cum-
pareiL  by  tlie  anci4>titM  to  tbu  oiitepr«>a4l  iikiii  of  an
ox, or  to  tliu  t]i!4!C4:iif  a  alit«i).  Itsttxlretm-  luIl^tll,
fr<)m  C'apf  AcnmoM  (now  (?apo  Aruimuti  ur  Ept-
pbanio)  ou  the  wont  to  t)u'  prcmmntory  Dinarefiitii
(dow  St.  Andrea)  ou  tbo  t-ant,  in  about  140  niilcA :
iUi  greatest  breadth,  from  (?romniyon  (iion-  Cunim-
«iti)  on  tbo  north  to  Cupt?  Curi««  (now  t'lipt'  Gatto),
on.  the  south,  about  m) ;  its  widlli  vitryin);  );n^ntly,
tbo  long  atrip  that  etuis  at  Dinareitiiin  lii-ing  v»ry
narrow  and  HCnrrely  more  than  \0  niiU'H  ncnws  a4
airy  ]>oiiit.  Off  Diintretunt  nn.;  M<v*rr:tl  niiiaLl  inl-
uhU  cnllt'tl  Kleide^  (Keys).  The  r<Nist  in  i*rovided
wltli  iiumi't'otis  UtiyM;  bnt  tli«  harlK^m  arc-  now
mcro  mihlntf^adnt,  tliuiigh  the  n>niiiiii.-(  of  anclinit
arliUcial  harbor  uioIch  aro  to  be  neon  at  ttuveral
placed  (as  New  Pa|ihu»,  Soli.etc).

From  CrontmyuD  to  Dinarctnm,  along  and  quite
near  thu  coatit..  cxtemla  a  nmiintoinoiKi  chaiti,  of
-wliicb  tho  bighcKt  iioaks  nro  liiitTitvcnto  (3*240  ft.),
Peiit«4laclylon  (OliHl  ft.).  *»*1  *''l'»»'  C^'*!**  ft-^  Tho
prim-ipnl  mtigi'M,  bowc^vor,  anr  in  thi*  ivi'nt  and
Moutbw«8t,  tho  higlimt  point  buiii^  Moniit  Olynipnrf
(TrodoM  or  TriKidoN,  GTiiK)  ft.],  iK'urly  midway  be-
tween Ciirinm  on  the  HOiith  conat  Aud  Soil  on  lhe>
north,  from  the  top  of  which  a  view  of  tho  whole
island  can  be  obtaiiifd.  Next  in  height  is  Mount
Adelpht  (MoHcliera,  ^)^S0  ft.),  a  few  miles  to  the
eaAt ;  still  farther  ^Hili\,  a  hill  (1370  ft.)  whoite  au-
cietit  name  is  unknown ;  aod  still  farther  east
again,  Mount  8antaCroce  (Stavros,  3300  (t.).  The
cliHJii  extendi*  ui'arly  to  FiuiiHgoiiH(u  lAiumocboft-
toa,  CouHLaiUia-Halamiit),  with  fn<iin«iit.  Hpnra  to
tho  8bi>n);  iind  ttpurs  alftu  oxtond  from  OlynnpUH
radially  to  the  uortb,  west,  and  »onth.  livtweuu
the  two  ranges  is  a  vast  plain,  now  called  tbo  ilvn-
fidnria,  whone  principal  river  is  the  Pidiafi(Pii:lHrti»i.
emptying  into  tho  eea  near  8nlamit«.  The  Mi-mhoh-
ria  to-day  in  oii«  vaat  grain -field,  iuterspenwd


iivvi


Copper  Procoosolar  Csia  tt  Cyvraa.


with  inHigiitliRant  villages.  Tlie  islanR  foroH?^  ^Ij
jibonndi'd  in  riiTt-H  aiul  limlwr,  of  wliioli  it  im  tJB  «)vJ
rnoi>tly  dt^iiudcd,  tlioiijiitli  iIh*  khiu-nb,  olivi-.  c;.
orange,  dnto-palni,  b'lnim,  m-rlarint-A,  u|irii*oU,  ^i^  '
and  others  united  tu  The  climate  tlonrish.  ^^'it4
grape-vines  still  grow  to  an  iromeuitc  tiize.  W'tnr
of  various  aorta,  is  abnudant ;  the  be«t  and  iiium
fumons  being  the  Comnmnderin  wiue,  mi  uatim!
from  txa  ori};inal  producei's,  the  Knight*  uf  iit.
John,  at  ColoH^i.  Formerly  Cypnis  yieldwl  tn  m
legion  in  fertility,  pnMtiicing  an  abnndaurc  of
grain,  wjim.  nil,  and  fritits.  At  the  projier  wjiwn
the  hillH  and  nncuUivatfd  plaim*  are  rnr^irlM
with  ftucmouoa,  raiiniienliiiM'it.  crocus*'*.  Iiyueiniltf,
ttquillw,  and  a  great  variety  of  other  How* r»,  wiwci-
ulty  those  with  bulbous  roota.  One  anrieui  epi-
thet of  Cyprus  is  tiiu)lii]s.  Bnt  agriculture,  alone
with  irrigation  and  druinaK*',  Ik  much  uegWclMl-
Snlt  lake-A,  or  "  Sallu^s."  exi»t  near  Lamacji,  lh»«
aiicteiii  Citium,  funiishing  now.ns  in  the  time«cv^
Pliny,  vattt  8nppliea  of  huU  fnr  bom?  conftiiiti|itii'»'Bt
and  eX]M>rt.iilii)n.  theioilr  coaling  the  Hni-f»c«>v  tti
Monimer  beat  evapontlett  the  water.  Tlif^  vliiii»t
in  Hi  ill  DiHt  of  the  aiu-itiit  wiirito  fotorr.

Although  iliu  names  of  NptH-ial  tii»|nriHns  hit^
mmie  <lr>wn  to  lis,  we  piwwcM  no  ancient  n(«<:i.^»*
treatise  or  history  of  tho  inland,  but  are  deitei«lc«^»t
for  lufurniatiou  anciently  current  n|H}n  the  fu~*5-
qneut  mention  in  the  Greek  and  Koman  cIomIc:?^^
with  brief  notices  in  the  Inter  histortanii.  The
art)  bcMt  rollecled  in  Kngt^l's  monograph  A'jppr
(IVrlin.  IHl).

The I'iirliest inhahitanta have geuemlly
Miippost'd  to  be  Pha'uieians,  and  it  is  true  thai  C-
PhfiMiician lan);nago  nnaiiu-it  its  hold  in  or
part~H  of  CypntN  as  late  hm  anywhere.  eoateiu[ior
ity,  of  conrae.  wiDh  the  Greek,  the  Lyciau  tloe«ll>'),
and  hitiT  with  the  Latin. The  CypriolM,  how-
ever, spoke  a  langttago  peenliar  to  tbeinaelv**,  m»
was  long  ago  evident  from  the  M;att«r«d  glaw*-*
proscrvii)  by  tho  gramnmrians  aud  lexictt^raiiherBr
aud  OM  han  lately  been  further  and  iwnti  concla-
flively  »}town  by  the  recent  discovery  and  decipbfT-
raent  r»f  initcriptions  In  the  peculiar  Cyjiriote ctiar-
ncter. This  language  was  essentially  Greek:  ari*i
tho  Greek  of  CypiUH  to-day  fnibractw  many  pefU-
liaritioa  of  Ua  own. The  legemlary  hero  of Cypnia
was  Cinyros,  who  i«  said  to  have  oome  to  the  t*J'
and  at  the  time  of  tho  U'ginning  of  the  TpifUi
Wnr. Without  going  Into  the  matter  of  llK'ltg*
enO.it  may  be  said  that  Greek  inscriptions  .J  !!»•
"Cinyradae"  (the  priestly  caate  of  Old  Pui-In^
etc.)  have  1>«eD  found  iu  the  ialanU  witbiu  tbeltft
twenty  yeaTM.

Thtfi  chief  religifui  of  the  i.nlanil  waa  notuiuiMtT
till!  \r<fn*Ui|>  of  VenUH;  but  with  few  excepUoo*
(as  o.  g.  Zeu8  Labraniiw,  intrtHltir*-!!  near  Aaiaito*
from  Caria  I  the  religion  and  deities  vern  itif*^
duced  fmm  Pho-nicia,  and  thus  indire<itly  fif«wi*»*
farther  Ea«t — ^with,  however,  sonif  Gns-k  unw'i^**
tion.  Aphrodite,  A(K))lo,  llercult^f(,  and  Ollx^  ^''
ties  nsually  called  Greek  or  Komau  vetv  thn»  \^'
troduwHl,  the  Greek  and  Phtpiiician  naniM  *"
some  of  I  hem  up)>«ariiig  now  aud  then  on  Uie  MU"^
bilingual  inKeripiion.  AphriKlili}  hod  her  rpl<l>*^
of  **  Pnphian  "  nut  only  at  Papbos.  where  hfr  nf*
iticluded  uU  the  extravagaiicienof  Mylittattl  1^''^'
Ion.  hot  at  the  other  aaata  of  her  wor»hi|) — G*<\p^
Dali.  Ceryiiia.  etc  Apollo  Flylateo,  who  I't^^  *
temple  at  Curium,  la  calUil  by  ihnt  name  aodi
by  hia  Phu^niciau  name  of  Ri-Hheph  Mical  t9^


CVMtUS


457


CYfkLS


liiliiie;ual  itiwriiitioii  fnuiiil  u(  I>sli.  A  totiipiv  to
E»iliuiiiuiii<U()ai'tti  i:=AoM(ilikttiii))-llrrcHlcr>),  a  PImi.'-
ui«:iuii  (luHy  iiiiii-li  like  tliv  Urnik  PttlHemon  iind
ibe  Kotimii  FortumuuH,  umir  the  .SiitiiiuH  at  I^rna-
c»,  h»A  fiiriii»bt.Hl  u  iiuuilter  or  PhuMiiriaii  iiitHTit>-
tioita  of  tba  fourtli  cculiiry  BX. ;  nhili*  a  ifiniilc
W  ArteiuU  Paniliii,  uluoe  at  tiaiid,  hiut  ruruJAlied  a
fijw  Grftck  itiKrrii>tiui)s  »tid  an  innneiue  iiniuber  of
TBluuble  terra-coua  remalutt.


Tf  rr«  ciHta  Vaj«  rrom  riUam.  loarrtbid
KhUtae. (IH  C'wuiiU  )


ColMKkl  Uftte  UfOd  (torn  Cyprus. (IH  CcmmIb.  |


Asiili'  fr«nn  the  mythlcnl  rrigii  of  Cinynm  over
"j*  wbulc  Ulnml,  tlie  territorj*,  no  fiir  as  vcv  knnw,
"Whnilieii  iiji  into  u  iiiiriilii-r  of  kinKdoiiw,  w1min«
*wtail«l  iijfltitry  hint  w«H-iiiy]i  )M>riNlir<t.  A  <Iy-
■^Wlj-  iif  Fhtrniriiiii  kiii^n  nilnl  iivrr  Cithuii,  Wa-
''OiO,  aiitl  TntiiiUMiiH  ill  llir  tiftb  and  fimrtli  <M'itLii-
"••  S-C.  tSalumiH.  Hiiid  to  hiivf  been  f{iuiidofI  lij
T^WWr,  ttod  by  liim  iiHined  oflor  his  iiutivo  cKy.
nditaiiwii  Urrvk  kiiij;i»  (it  the  maw  period.  Pn-
P*Und  its  dyuuAiy  of  the  Cinyriidae,  who  wvm
*•*  tu  linvc  eateoded  their  power  over  AwalbDs
"wTcertain  other  ]>art8.  Soli  atid  Cythren  irnced
'*"' origin  to  the  Alheuiaiis;  Lnpethus  and  tVry-
'"' to  a  Uicv(la»iiioiiiau  colony  under  Hraxander  ,
■*l  ou  ArhaHiin  nne  under  Cepbeiif*;  Curium  to  i

"'  ArgivfM.  A  town  Afiinri,  wIiomi  Hlte  m  not  |
'•'"wn, inlaid  to  h«ve  been  colmdzed  tiy  (bo  Dry- |
"Pwnit;  Kett.papboti  by  Afjaiieuor.  Tbe  promon- i
'"''y  AvjiiaiMi  in  ttnbl  lu  have  itA  nniue  from  Iho  hero
J*,.  't»e  TriiJHii  War.  Old  I'ophoa,  Amnthiis,  uud  i
Y*""'!!  wero  funnded  by  tbe  Pbcciiiciiiiis;  and  of  |

W, t'iiiiim  (with  Diili  and  Tamassus)  eeeran  to'
i»rif  retained  lis  Ph<vni<Mini  chiirHrter  with  less '
'^ificKtioii  than  tbe  olbttrs.  f'arpgfwia  Keoais  I
7*1  tn  hnve  hud  a  PhiiMiiijiiin  nrt^iii.  Artiide*  of  '
^nitfbui  iiiauufaelnrc — bronze,  gold,  hilver,  ihiT- i
16*


tery,  etc. — hiiv«
been  found  iu
iihtiodaiice  all
over  the  island.

A  « i  d  «  from
these  Hcatleivd
data,  we  know
that  Tbotbiuea
III.  of  K^.VI.l
(cir.  B.C.  I.VMi)
cominered  Cy-  I
pniH ;  beltu  of
Tyro  WM  at  ooe
timo  ita  tnaater;
ten  kitigdouii),
iiieliiditit;  Soli,
Cbylri,  Ciiriinn,
La|H>lliiiH,  Cery-
nia,  Nf"  Paphiw,
Hariiiin.ldallnDi,
Citinui.iindAnia'
Fbnn.  t»enC  their  onbrnitMiou  to  the  Ansyrian  E»ar-
hiiddoti  (cir.  H.c  >flW);  SsirRcm  put  tlie  iiilaiid  to
Iribnie  (fir.  BC.7U7):  Ajiries  iPhani'di  Hoplini)
nf  Kyyiii  defeatvit  oouie  Cyprian  nintiaix'hH  near
Ciritiin.Hiid  retitniedbiiinH  laiU-n  wjtb  tbeirHpoiU;
Ai(ia»*i8of  Kgypt  overran  the  iHtanil  and  pnt  it  to
tribute,  but  the  Cyprian  ru]er»  Joined  Cntnbyaea
tbe  Pcrslftn  against  the  moil  ofAniflitia.  The  kin}{
of  AnnithiiN  revolted  from  tbo  Perttinns  in  tfa<!  time
of  Durins,  and  tbe  lotiKest  recunl  eictnnt  in  tbe
Cypriote  eharncter  comineniorat^a  ono  of  the  side
issriew  of  this  Hlrngsle.  In  nc.  4T7,  the  AlbiMiLins
iiiid  r<He«daifUioniaint  (roininered  part  nf  Cyprus
friini  Ilif  Pomians;  and  a  «ar  reunited  in  whieb
the  fireeks,  with  tlie  Tyriaij-t  and  Ejjyptians  lui
iillieM,  wen*  on  ime  nidf,  aiid  tUn  IVmiatis  on  tbe
other.  The  power  of  Alexander  the  fJreat  wan
both  frit  niid  betpi-d  in  Cypnts,  alter  whii'li,  under
tln!  Ptoleiiiieo,  followed  warn  and  ilonbtfill  Hover-
eigoty,  till  IVmetrinji  Pidinrertes  euuipieitti  the
IslBUd  (elr.  nc.  :iOtt).  AbonI,  li.r.  ■il'fi,  I't«]eniy  Soler
took  the  isUind,  after  Mhieh  it  renmined  under
Kfcypt  till  eonqnereil  by  tbe  Knmanfi.

I.iteratnre  nnil  Mie  arts  tloiirtshett  in  Cyprus
evpo  fn>ni  n  very  early  periml,  a«  ivitnoss  tlio  "  Cy-
pria  Carniiiia,"  by  finiiie  attrilmted  to  Homer.  Ci-
liiitn  wan  the  birtliplat-*-  nf  Zeno.  It  in  fi»reiRT)  to
tin;  prtwcnt  artiele  to  lrin'e  liie  IiiHtory  nf  the  island
dnrini;  Ihr  Komiu  rnb',  the  AraliH,  llm  ilnkednnis
of  the  C'roNadi'-s,  Kirhiinl  of  Kriglarnl.  \hv  I.nj-ig-
uanft,tbo  Turka,  and  the  iveriit  occn])ation  by  tbe
Kuglisb.  It^  geographical  position  in.tde  it  tbe
lifid  for  the  exhibition  of  the  arts,  deeds,  and  cults
of  various  natinDs;  and  ita  romatDS^os  bronglii  to
light  in  tbo  exploratioDs  of  the  last  twonty-ilra


Taw,  wHI»  nifi>ni'iin  liiKi'ri|i(>riD  linriii  on  ih«  day.


CYPRUS


U8


CTRENAIGA


ive  giVeti  m  cleepcr  tnsi);lit  into  the  ancieni  ]  works  accomplisbcd  lmin>;  the  fnrther  exnrnTf^
lift)  ami  i>ccup«tionti  ami  uttaiiuiieiitM  or  it«  Knc(%»- uf  the  silo  of  tlio  grvatur  Ivinjili*  of  Vbqqs  at  ^ijd
. _..__.  _ ,1. _  ■.  , >. ... .. Poping  and  ^„„„  i^,-j,„  „j„.r.jji,,„y  ,„,}jr  Saijuni^

For  aiitborit'iBs,  mnnii^  itmiiy,  mh<  Kti|;ul,  Kjipr^


•ivo  p«o))les  ami  inu-sU-rn  t)uii  ic  bad  bcou  thought
pOMiibLc  bithert«i  to  Altttiii,  uiiil  iioootu«iutto<l  the
rewrltiii};  a(  tlu'  priiiciital  chupUTs  in  tbo  bUtor>
of  itt)Qi«til  nrt.  i-'rom  tht*  tiitit'  uf  I'ococko,  whn,
nearly  tbnw  cvntnripN  u^o.  tiuuJo  lii«  fatiinii!*  tlis'
uiverioK  of  Fbo^ntiMiin  itittcriptioitB  (cliiiilly  about
Citiiiii)),  ilowti  to  ibt'  Koifliitb  Dcciiiiatioti,  ^<^lltt«^«ll
ttDtl  piirlinl  <.«xplttri>tioim  liuve  bci.M)  iiiiitlc,  Tbv
discvvtry,  iu  tlie  tin*!  Imll'  of  thin  otMittiry,  of  in-
lcrilttioT>»  ill  u  cbunittiM-  bilbvrto  [iiikii<nvii,  ami
Ibeir  <U!(-.i|ih><riiient,  frmii  \>*7'.\  uiiwaixl,  bitM  fur-
uisbcil  tiiitMt  valuable  cliiftf  to  tbr  tiiHtury  of  rf)lg>
ious  ill  (.'y]iniN  and  lb«  traiiKferoiicc  of  dciiic**
thitber  froiu  tbo  Knot,  besides  ninny  uiiiiot  bi»tori-
onl  iimttt^rN  and  a,  vtbtt  addition  to  tb»  knowledge
nf  Greek  dinlfcfH.  Tlio  cbarnrii-rtf  nro  Hvllnbic,
with  pcuiiliar  laws  of  writitij;,  mul  the  lati^^age


above  referred  to;  Di  CtwuuliL,  fyfirun  (New  Vorfr
and  [^Ddori,  I87ti);  K.  H.  Lang,  CyjirNjr,  ntc  (Lom-
dnu,  1878).  The  Hteratare  in  periodicals  and  miiwr
voIqiucs  ig  very  extensive.

CypBfila  (TO  kui^fXu).  (I)  A  town  In  Aniuli>
ou  tbi.t  fi'uiiti^rs  of  Lacouia.  (2)  A  (own  ju  Thrncc
nn  !b»'  Ilebrns  uiid  the  Kguatia  Via.

Cypafilus  (Kv^Xot).  A  tyraur  of  CoriDtb,B.c
iXu>-i>'iIt,  h4t  ii»uied  becaiifw  when  a  child  b«  wv
cniiueHb'd  from  tlii^  Bacchiadaa  (the  Dorio  nobilJtj
of  Coi'iulb)  by  hitf  mother  in  a  chftt  <rf^iXir).  Uv
wan  Hiictieetlud  in  ibe  tyranny  by  lii^  m>ii  P»>riiiiidrt.

Kyrbeia  (xvpfint). See  .Ax(tSKS.

Cyreuaica  (^  Ku/MjFaia). A  conutry  of  Afrie*.


Greek.  Sonio  bnitdredH  cif  tbew  inscriptions  are  eaat  of  the  Syrtis  Minor  and  west  of  Mumiarico.  It
now  known  (tlm  nio?*t  of  tlifni  funnd  by  Di  Ctwio-  ,  corrf.'spoinl«  with  the  inwlern  Burca.  CyrenskawiA.
la) — some  hilitianal  (FlKuniviuii  aiiU  Cyin-iotB)  and coiisidertHl  by  tb«  Grtfoks  aa  a  sort  uf  trnrsttikV


lanidJMe. Tbia  was  partly  owing  bi  the  fiiir*'  of
nntrnxt,  an  all  the  rMt  of  the  African  ciiivd  alooiiK


C«tiu  or  Cymtf.  bcanaf  U»  ncmj  SilphiUB  Flui


some  digrapbic  ( <iio«k  and  Cypriot*  ).  The  dc-
olpherment  is  a  briltiant  r^cortl — Ucorge  Smith,  of
England, diltcorering  the  k«y  iua  bilingual  inscrip-
tion now  in  ihc  Briti:i>h  Mnmcniu;  K.  II.Liiug  sliinil-
taneoiisly  and  ind^'pendontly  ))ruviug  the  iucut-
rMtnotis  nf  certain  previous  att«ntpts  by  othei-^ :
after  which  Samnel  Dir4;b  made  a<ldilional  |irog-
rvaa:  and  roinplt-t^*  insciiptinns  were  first  rea*!
siunitlaneurisly  and  indupviidentiv  by  Jnetuti  i^ie*
gismniid  ami  \V.  Di'ci'ku  of  StraMAltnrg.  M.  SL-hinidl
of  Ji*nn.  luid  I.  H.  Hall  of  Now  York,  siticu  which
time  many  \vriit>m  have  contribnted  loxicographie
and  dialectic  additions.

The  discoveries  by  explurattun  and  excavation
have  been  chiedy  made  (though  tbt>  work  of  oibL-nt
ia  not  iucoimiikniblu  )  by  L.  1*.  di  i'«Nnula,  whilu
U.  S.  CoiiBiil  ut  t-ypriis,  from  IBftlJ  to  ltf?7.  His
work  cuvert'd  nearly  all  parts  of  tha  island,  dia-
uovering  the  sites  r>f  niaiyy  auctLMit  cities,  and  ruins
nf  othPFH  wbo.>u<  atirient.  iilentity  is  not  yet  known,
iHwides  many  teniplm,  iii'cropoles,  ancient  aque-  the  Mediterranean,  from  Cartbagp  to  the  Nile. -wr.
ducts,  ami  otlH<r  rvuaiiiH,  iivcliidiiig  over  ^00  in>  a  barren,  sandy  waxte,  and  partly  Iu  the  actuti'
scriptious.in  AMyrian, Cypriote,  PlMpnir.ian,(Jrcek,  fertility  of  Cyreiiaira  itself.  It  was  Fxtnnielj
and  Latin.  Tho  gmattvit  number  (  many  thou-  well  watered,  and  the  hibabilanls,  aeeanlin^  t»
saudn)  and  uioitt  important  of  the  objeetA  diseuv-  '  Huro«lotna  (iv.  1^).  employed  eight  months  iu  eol-
I'rvd  utv  dfjKiHited  in  tlu*  Mt^tropiditaii  Mnsenin  of  leeting  tbe  piudiuliouH  uf  the  laud  ;  tb<'  maritime
Art  in  New  Yorii,  thongh  uiatiy  foiniit  their  way  to  I  plat^-H  first  yieUlAi)  Ibeirfniils.  then  the  sc4-<iiid  m
Kuropoan  muscuuiM  aud  private  e<:^ct[ou(i. Tbo  '  gion,  which  they  vailed  the  billet,  luid  livilly  i\«m>

of  tlie  bighe^f  juirt  iaUiiil-
One  of  the.  ebJof  lutitfsl
pTtMlnctionH  of  Vytaaic*
■watt  an  hi-rb  rallnl  ti/^
uiH,  a  kind  of  lawrpiti*"
or  ussufceliila.  U  wvlil-
teuing  for  rxltlu,  rcMJW
ing  tliejr  flntb  alao  teni''*
and  waft  a  iisefal  ftpMM'
for  man.  From  itsjoif*'
too,  when  kupsdcd  wf"
<'lay,a  poworfnlantiyp*'*
wasobtaine-d. Tlioiilr''''

atataary,  potter^',  temi-vottas,  gluss,  gold,  silver,  ;  um  formed  u  gmat  nrliolo  of  trade,  and  at  fUm*
aud  gems  are  a  (iiii(|nn  and  nnrivallutl  collrution,  thu  composition  ab«ive  mentioned  sold  for  '^
and  their  value  for  tho  study  of  Fbnmician  and  weight  in  !«i1ver.  It  in  for  this  reason  tb*(  i*'*
Greek  arriijeology.  art,  and  history  iippears  in  silphinm  ajtiwared  always  on  the  medils  sf ''f '
their  niieeusing  iu»e  in  tbo  learned  pnblieations  of  reutf.  Its  calture  was  iiegleut«d,  linwoTsr,  *^
all  e*miilrie».  Sine**  the  nccnpntion  of  Cyprus  by  the  Uoinans  beenme  masters  of  tbc^  cwiufrjiW
the  English,  of  born  have  excavated  and  explored,  paslnrogo  was  more  attended  to.  Cyrenal'*  '**
but  by  uo  means  on  tbe  same  i^cale,  the  principal  '  cjiUod Peutapoli^  from its having live  clU»»  "'


CrpHan  S»rr*t>hii«ini  —  Romnn P^rlo^


CYRENAICI


469


CYROPAEDIA


note  tu  it — Cyreu6,  Aninoti,  Apollouiaf  Ptoleniais,
Bereuic^,  and  Teucbira.  All  of  these  exist  at  the
preMDt  day  nuder  the  furm  of  towns  or  villages.
Sm  Ctrkn£.

CjxvnaSd  {KvpTivaatoi).  A  sect  uf  pliilosopben
who  followed  the  doctrines  uf  Aristippiis  (q.  v.),
and  whose  name  was  derived  from  their  founder's
having  been  a  uative  of  Cyren^,  and  from  their
school  having  been  established  in  this  place.
Aristippas  made  tbe  aummum  bonum  aud  the  rc'Xor
of  man  to  consist  in  enjoyment,  accompanied  by
good  taste  and  freetlom  of  mind,  t6  jcporcii'  xai  fii)
^a<r$ai  ^dovav  Spurrov,  ov  t6  h^  xpr^trBm.  (Diog.
Laert.  ii.75).  Happiness,  said  the  Cyrenaics,  con-
sists, nut  in  tranquillity  or  indolence,  bnt  in  a
pleaniug  agitation  of  the  mind  or  in  active  enjoy-
mout.  Pleasure  {ii?iovTi)  is  the  ultimate  object  of
human  pursuit;  it  is  only  in  subserviency  to  this
that  fame,  frieudahip,  and  even  virtue  are  to  bo  de-
Hir«1.  All  crimes  are  venial,  because  never  com-
niitted  except  throngh  the  iQimediat«  impulse  of
pasxiou.  Nothing  is  just  or  unjust  by  nature,  but
by  custom  and  law.  The  business  of  philosophy  is
to  regulate  the  senses  in  that  manner  n-hicb  will
render  them  most  productive  of  pleasure.  Since,
then,  pleasure  is  to  be  derived,  not  from  the  past
or  the  future,  but  the  present,  a  wine  man  will
take  care  tu  enjoy  the  present  hour,  and  will  be
iudifferent  to  life  or  death.  Such  w^ere  the  tenets
of  tbe  Cyrenaic  School.  The  short  duration  of
tbiM  sect  was  owing,  in  part,  to  the  remote  dis-
tance of  CyreniS  from  Greece,  the  chief  seat  of
learning  and  philosophy;  in  part  to  the  nubound-
eil  latitude  which  these  philosoidiers  allowed  them-
selves in  practice  as  well  as  opinion ;  aud  Hunlly
to  the  rise  of  tbe  Epicurean  School,  which  taught
the  doctrine  of  pleasure  in  a  more  philosophical
form.  Tbe  Cyrenaic  teaching  that  pleasure  is  the
only  gootl  was  developed  in  a  eurions  way  by  He-
gesias  (q.  v.),  who  argned  that  as  pleasure  is  the
only  g<MMl,  iiud  that  as,  by  reason  of  the  uncertain-
ties of  life,  an  existence  of  pure  pleasure  is  impos-
sible of  attainment  by  man,  the  true  philosopher
will  not  seek  to  live,  but  will  end  his  life  by  sui-
cide. He  therefore  preached  the  doctrine  of  self-
destmctioD.  See  Wendt,  De  PhUowphia  Cifrenaica
(Gottiugen,  1841);  Von  Stein,  De  Philoaophia  Cy-
renaica  (Qottiugeu,  1855);  and  Ueberweg,  Hitt.  of
PhilM.  vol.  i.  pp.  95-98  {Eug.  trans.  N.  Y.  1872).

Cyren^  (Kvprjvr}).  (1)  Danghttir  of  Hypseus,
mother  of  Aristoens  by  Apollo,  aud  carried  by  the
god  from  Mount  Petiou  to  Libya,  where  the  city
of  Cyreu^  derived  its  nume  from  her.  (2)  An  im-
imrtant  (Jreek  city  in  the  north  of  Africa,  lying
between  Alexandria  and  Carthage.  It  was  found-
ed by  Battus  (B.c.  Sll),  who  l&d  a  colony  from  the
inland  of  Thera,  and  he  and  his  descendants  ruled
over  the  city  for  eight  generations.  It  stood  eigh-
ty stadia  (eight  geographical  miles)  from  the  const,
"u  tbe  edge  of  the  upper  of  two  terraces  of  table-
laud,  at  the  height  of  1800  feet  above  the  sea,  iu
one  of  the  flnest  situations  in  the  world.  At  a
later  time  Cyren^  became  subject  to  the  Egyptian
Ptolemies,  and  was  eventually  funned,  with  the
ifilaad  of  Crete,  into  a  Roman  province.  Tbe  ruins
of  ihe  city  of  Cyrend  are  very  extensive.  It  was  the
birthplace  of  Carneailes,  Calliraachns,  Eratosthe-
nes, and  Aristippus.  Theterritory  of  Cyren^,  called
Cyrenalca,  incliulod  also  the  Greek  cities  of  Barca,
Teochira,  Hesperides,  and  Apollonia,  the  port  of


Cyren^.  Under  the  Ptolemies,  Hesperides  became
Berenice,  Teucbira  was  called  Arsinoe,  and  Barca
was  entirely  eclipsed  by  its  port,  which  was  raised
into  a  city  under  the  name  of  Ptoleniais. See  Cy-

RENAICA.

Cyreaohttta. See  Cyropolis.

Cyzlacna  of  Anoona. See  RbnaiS8A>'ck.

CyrilluB  (KupiXXor).  (1)  A  bishop  of  Jerusalem,
A.D.  351-:{86,  aud  a  firm  opponent  of  the  Arians,
by  whose  influence  he  was  banished  three  times
from  Jerusalem.  His  works  are  not  numerous.
The  most  important  are  lectures  to  catechnmeus,
etc.,  aud  a  letter  to  tbe  emperor  Constantius,  giv-
ing an  account  of  a  luminous  cross  which  ap<
peared  at  Jerusalem  in  351.  The  best  editions  are
by  Milles  (Oxford,  1703),  Toutt^  (Paris,  1720),  and
Keischl  aud  Kupp  (1845-60).  There  is  an  EngUsli
translation  of  his  works  ia  the  Oxford  lAbrartf  of
the  Fathern,  vol.  iii.  {ISiS).  See  also  the  works  by
Gounet  (1876)  and  Marquardt  (1882).  (2)  Bishop
of  Alexaudria,  a.u.  412-444,  of  which  city  be  was
a  native.  He  was  fond  of  power,  and  was  of  a
remarkably  polemical  spirit.  He  persecuted  the
Jews,  whom  he  exx>etled  from  Alexandria ;  aud  af-
ter a  long  protracted  stniggle  he  procured  the  de-
position of  Nestorius,  bishop  of  Constantinople.
He  was  the  author  of  a  large  number  of  works,
many  of  which  are  extant;  but  in  a  literary  view
they  are  almost  worthless.  Tbe  best  edition  is
still  that  of  Aubert,  fi  vols.  (Paris,  1638).  See
Newman's  Historical  Sketcka,  vol.  ii. ;  Hefele'n
History  of  the  CouucHh,  vol.  ii.;  and  Kopallik,
Cyril  roH  Jicjcandria  (Mainz,  1881).

KyrioB  (Kvptm).  A  lord  or  guardian  ;  a  person
charged  with  tbe  protection  of  such  members  of  a
family  as  were  regarded  as  incapable  of  protecting
themselves.  Tbe  early  law  of  all  countries  takes  no-
tice of  families  only;  in  other  wonls,  it  only  takes
notice  of  persons  exercising  pafria  poteatns.  Attic
law,  therefore,  sulwrdinates  a  woman  to  her  bloo*]-
relations ;  though  relieved  from  her  paren  t's  au  thoi*-
ity  by  his  death,  she  continues  subject  through  life
to  her  nearest  male  relations  as  guardians  (Maine,
Andent  Law,  p.  152  foil.).  During  marriage,  of  course,
her  hnsbaud  was  her  xvptos;  but  when  this  rehi-
tion  was  terminated  by  death  or  divorce,  she  ac-
quired no  more  freetlom  than  before,  but  returned
to  the  guardianship  of  her  own  family.  The  term
Kvpu>t  is  applied  to  males  only  during  minority  ;
the  Kvpios  of  such  was  first,  of  course,  the  father,
secondly  the  guardian  appointed  by  his  will,
thirdly  the  nearest  male  relative.  In  cases  of
a^luption,  the  natural  father  remained  no  longer
the  Kvpios  of  the  ailuptee. See  Adoptio;  Epitro-

POS; KAK0SI8.

Cymns  (Kvpvas).  The  Greek  name  of  the  islaufl
of  Corsica,  from  which  is  derived  tbe  adjective
Cymeus,  used  by  the  Latin  poets.

Cyropaedia  {Kvpov  Tlatbtia).  A  8)>ecie8  of  his-
torical romance  in  eight  hooks  by  Xeuophon,  pro-
fessing to  give  an  account  of  the  early  years  of
Cyrus  the  Great,  but  in  reality  setting  forth  an
ideal  system  of  kingly  government.  Some  have
considered  tbe  Cyropaedia  as  a  criticism  of  the
first  two  books  of  Plato's  Republic,  on  which  see
Aulns  Gellins.  xiv.  3.  It  is  the  longest  and  most
ambitious  of  all  tbe  works  of  Xenophon,  and  is  in-
teresting as  containing  in  the  form  of  an  episode
the  earliest  specimen  of  a  love-romance — the  sto-


CYROPOLES


iGO


CYRUS


ry  of  tlie  love  of  Abra4lAtnB  and  Paiilliea.  Tlie  laHt
chapter  of  the  work  in  probably  spurious.  (Soe
Mahaffy,  Hiat.  of  Clag».  Ok.  Lit.  ii.  pp.  280-282.)
Good  editions  are  those  of  nieiteiibacb  and  Hert-
lein  (1874);  and  Holden  (IriSO).

CyropdIlB  {Kvpowokis).  A  large  city  of  Asia,  on
the  banks  of  the  laxartes,  foanded  by  Cynis.  It
wad  also  called  Cyreacbata.  Alexander  destroyed
it,  and  built  in  its  stead  a  city,  called  by  the  Ro-
man geographers  Alexaudrea  Ultima,  by  the  Greeks,
'A\t$aySp€ia  *Ea-xaTT],  of  which  the  Latin  is  a  trans-
lation.

CynrlieatIo6  {KvppT}tmKri).  The  name  given  un-
der the  8elencidae  to  a  province  of  Syria,  lying
between  ConimagentS  on  the  north  and  the  plain
of  Antiocb  on  the  south.

Cyrrhna  {K.ippos).  (1)  A  city  of  Macedonia  in
the  viciuity  of  Pella.  (2)  A  city  of  Syria,  the  cap-
ital of  a  district  named  after  it,  Cyrrhestica.  It
derived  Its  name  from  the  Macedonian  Cyrrhns. '

Cyrua  (Kvposj  in  Persian,  Kurua),  (1)  A  cele-
brated conqueror,  and  the  founder  of  the  Persian  '
Empire,  He  comes  forth  in  a  line  of  monarchs
who  ruled  in  Snsiana.  According  to  Herodotus,
he  was  the  son  of  Mandani,  dangbt«r  of  Astyages,
king  of  the  Medes.  The  father  of  Cyrns  was  the
Persian  Cambysea.  It  having  been  foretold  that
Handani's  son  would  become  the  lord  of  all  Asia,
Astyages  attempted  to  destroy  the  infant,  and  de-
livered it  to  HarpaguB,  bis  attendant,  to  kill.  Har-
pagus,  however,  fearing  the  anger  of  Mandnni,
gave  the  child  to  a  herdsman,  one  MItradates,
who  reared  the  young  Cyrus  as  his  own  son,  under
the  name  of  Agradates.  When  ten  years  of  age,
the  true  parentage  of  the  boy  was  accidentally
discovered  by  Astyages,  who,  after  punishing  Har-
pagus  with  great  barbarity,  sent  Cyrus  to  his  par-
ents in  Persia.  When  the  yonng  prince  grew  np,
be  beaded  a  revolt  against  Astyages,  who  had  be-
come unpopular  by  bis  tyranny,  and  dffeateil  him
In  battle  {b.c.  &59).  The  Medes  then  accepted  Cy-
rus as  their  king.

He  had  not  been  long  seated  on  the  throne
when  his  dominions  were  invaded  by  Croesus,
king  of  Lydia,  the  issue  of  which  contest  was  so
fatal  to  the  latter.  (See  Croksus.)  The  con-
quest of  Lydia  established  the  Persian  monarchy
on  a  Urm  foundatiou,  and  Cyms  was  now  called
awiiy  to  the  Roat  by  vast  designs  and  by  the
threats  of  a  distant  and  formidable  enemy.  Bab-
ylon still  remained  an  independent  city  in  the
heart  of  his  empire,  and  to  reduce  it  was  his  first
and  most  pressing  care.  On  another  side  be  was
tempted  by  the  wealth  and  weakness  of  Egypt,
while  his  northern  frontier  was  disturbed  and  en-
dangered by  the  fierce  barbarians  who  ranged
over  the  plains  that  stretch  from  the  skirts  of  the
Indian  Caucasus  to  the  Caspian.  Until  these  last
should  be  subdued  or  humbled  his  Eastern  prov-
inces could  never  enjuy  peace  or  safety.  These
objects  demanded  bis  own  presence  ;  the  subjuga-
tion of  the  Asiatic  Greeks,  as  a  less  urgent  and  less
difficult  enterprise,  he  committed  to  his  lieuten-
ants. While  the  latter,  therefore,  were  executing
his  commands  in  the  West,  he  was  himself  enlarg-
ing and  strengthening  his  power  in  the  East.  Af-
ter completing  the  subjugation  of  the  nations  west
of  the  Enphrates,  he  marched  upon  Babylon  (q.  v.),
which  be  took.  The  account  of  this  conquest,  as
described  by  Herodotus,  is  given in  the  article


Uyrua ( f Bsargadae. )


Babylox.  Recent  archieological  discoveriea,  bow-
ever,  tend  to  discredit  his  narrative.  A  tablrt-
inscription  found  at  Babylon  states  that  CyrnA,
''king  of  Elam,"  took  Sippara  ani^Babylon  "with-
out fighting."  This  took  place  in  B.c.  53ft.  Ser
Sayce,  Freak  Light  from  the  Ancient  Monumemta
(Loudon,  1863) ;  and  his  Introduction  to  Etra,  .V<r-
hemiah,  and  Esther  (2d  ed.  London,  1887).

Cyrus  enjoyed  no  long  interval  of  repose.  The
protection  which  he  afforded  to  the  Jews  was  prub-

ablyoonnec ted  with
his  designs  upon
Kgypt,  *>"t  he  nev-
er foond  leisure  to
carry  them  into  ef-
fect. Soon  aft«r  the
fall  of  Babylon  b«
undertook  an  expe-
dition against  one
of  the  nations  on
the  eastern  side  of
the  Caspian.  Ac-
cording to  Herodo-
tus, it  waa  the  Mas-
sugetae,  a  nomadic
horde  which  bad
driven  the  Scythi-
ans before  them
.  towards  the  We«t ;
and,  after  gaining  a
victory  over  tbeni
by  stratagem,  b*-
was  defeated  in  a
I  great  battle  and
slain.  The  event  is
the  same  in  the  nar-
rative of  Cteitias;  but  the  people  against  whom
Cyrus  marched  are  called  the  Derbicee,  and  their
army  is  strengthened  by  troops  and  elephants  fur-
nished by  Indian  allies;  while  the  death  of  Cyms
is  speedily  avenged  by  one  of  his  vassals,  Antur-
ges,  king  of  the  Sacae,  who  gains  a  decisive  victo-
ry over  the  Derbices,  and  annexes  their  land  to  the
Persian  Empire.  Cyrus  died  in  B.c.  529.  His  son
and  successor,  Cambyses,  had  been  made  by  him
king  of  Babylon  three  years  before.  Cyms  was
one  of  the  greatest  Asiatics  who  ever  lived;  an*!
with  the  exception  of  Egypt,  the  greater  part  of
the  Old  World  was  under  his  rule  at  the  tim«  of
his  death.  His  capitals  were  Ecbatana  and  Sosa :
and  his  tomb  exists  to-day  at  Murgab,  near  Pasar-
godoe,

(2)  Commonly  called  "the  Younger,"  to  disliu-
guisb  him  from  the  preceding,  was  the  second  of
the  four  sons  of  Darius  Nothus  and  Parysatia.  Ac-
cording to  the  customs  of  the  monarchy,  his  elder
brother  Artaxerxes  was  the  legitimate  heir-appar-
ent ;  but  Cyms  was  the  first  son  born  to  Dariaa  af-
ter his  accession  to  the  throne,  and  he  was  al«i
his  mother's  favourite.  She  bail  enconraged  him
to  hope  that,  OS  Xerxes,  through  the  iufluenf?«  nf
Atossa,  hwl  been  preferred  to  bis  elder  brothei.
who  was  born  while  their  father  was  yet  in  a  pri-
vate station,  so  she  should  be  able  to  persuade  Da-
rius to  set  aside  Artaxerxes  and  declare  Cyms  bin
successor.  In  the  meanwhile  be  was  tore«te<l
with  the  government  of  the  western  provinces.
This  appointment  be  seems  from  the  Srst  to  have
considered  as  a  step  to  the  throne.  He  had,  bow-
ever,  sagacity  and  coiimge  enough  to  peroeire
that,  should  he  be  disapp4iinted  in  bis  flist  vxfne-


CYHUS


461


CYTHEHIS


tations,  the  co-operatiou  of  the  Greeks  might  Btill
Pliable  biin  to  force  bis  way  to  the  throue.  It  was
with  this  view  that  he  zealously  embraced  the  side
of  Sparta  iu  her  straggle  with  Athene,  both  as  the
power  which  be  found  in  the  miwt  prosperous  coii-
ditioD  and  as  that  which  was  most  capable  of  fur-
thering bis  designs.  According  to  Plutarch  (Ar-
tax.  2),  Cyrus  went  to  attend  his  father's  sick-bed
with  sanguine  hopes  that  bis  mother  had  accom-
plished her  purpose,  and  that  he  was  sent  for
to  receive  the  crown.  On  his  arrival  at  court,
however,  he  saw  himself  disappointeil  in  his  ex-
pectations, and  found  that  he  had  oiity  come  to
witness  his  father's  death  aud  bis  brother's  ac-
cession to  the  throne.  He  accompanied  Artax-
erxes,  whom  the  Greeks  distinguished  by  the
epithet  of  Mnemon,  to  Pasargadae,  where  the
Persian  kings  went  through  certain  mystic  cere-
monies of  iuangnratiuu,  and  Tissaphernes  took
this  opportnuity  of  charging  Cyrns  with  a  design
against  bis  life.  It  would  seem,  from  Pliitarcli's
acconnt,  that  one  of  the  officiating  j>rietits  was
Rubomed  to  support  the  charge,  though  it  is  by
no  means  certain  that  it  was  unfounded,  Artax-
erxes  was  convinced  of  its  truth,  and  determined
on  putting  bis  brother  to  death ;  and  Cyrus  was
only  saved  by  the  passionate  entreaties  of  Pary-
satis,  iu  whose  arms  he  had  sought  refuge  from  the
executioner.  On  this  occasion  Artaxerxes  suffered
her  to  overpower  both  the  suspicions  suggested
by  Tissapbemes  and  the  jealonsy  which  the  teni-
per  and  situation  of  Cyms  might  reasonably  have
excited.  He  not  only  pardoned  his  brother,  but
permitted  him  to  return  to  his  government.  Cyrus
felt  himself  not  obliged,  but  humbled,  by  bis  rival's
clemency ;  and  the  danger  he  had  escaped  only
Mtrengthened  his  resolution  to  make  himself,  as
soon  as  possible,  independent  of  the  power  to
which  he  owed  his  life.

Immediately  after  his  return  to  Sardia,  he  be-
gan to  make  preparations  for  the  execution  of  his
designs.  The  cliief  difficulty  was  to  keep  them
concealed  from  Artaxerxes  until  they  were  f^lly
matured ;  for  though  his  mother,  who  was  proba-
bly from  the  beginning  acquainted  with  bis  pur-
}K>se,  was  at  court,  always  ready  to  put  the  moat
favourable  construction  on  bis  conduct,  yet  Tissa-
pbemes was  at  hand  to  watch  it  with  malignant
attention  and  to  send  the  earliest  information  of
any  suspicious  movement  to  the  king.  Cyrus,
however,  devised  a  variety  of  pretexts  to  blind
Tissaphernea  and  the  court,  while  he  collected  an
army  for  the  expedition  which  he  was  meditating.
His  main  object  was  to  raise  as  strong  a  body  of
Greek  troops  as  he  could,  for  it  was  only  with  such
aid  that  be  oonld  hope  to  overpower  an  adversary
who  had  the  whole  force  of  the  Empire  at  his  com-
mand ;  and  he  knew  enough  of  the  Greeks  to  be-
lieve that  their  superiority  over  bis  countrymen,
iu  skill  and  courage,  was  snfflcient  to  compensate
fur  almost  any  inequality  of  numbers.

In  the  spriug  of  b.C.  401,  Cyrns  began  hia  march
from  Sardis.  His  whole  Grecian  force,  a  part  of
which  Joined  him  on  tbe  route,  amounted  to  11,-
000  heavy  infantry  and  about  3000  targeteers.  His
barbarian  troops  were  100,000  strong.  After  di-
recting bis  line  of  march  through  tbe  whole  ex-
tent of  Asia  Minor,  he  entered  the  Babylonian  ter-
ritory; and  it  was  not  until  he  reached  the  plalu
of  Cnnaxa,  between  sixty  and  seventy  miles  from
Babylon,  that  ho  became  certain  of  his  brother's


intention  to  hazard  an  engagement.  Artaxerxes
met  him  in  this  spot  at  tbe  head  of  an  army  of
900,000  men.  If  we  may  believe  Plutarch,  the
Persian  monarch  had  continued  t-o  waver  almost
to  the  last  between  the  alternatives  of  fight-
tug  aud  retreating,  and  was  only  diverted  from
adopting  the  latter  course  by  the  energetic  re-
monstrances of  Tiribazus.  In  the  battle  which
ensued  the  Greeks  soon  routed  the  barbarians  oji-
posed  to  tbeni,  bnt  committed  an  error  iu  pursu-
ing them  too  fur ;  and  Cyrus  was  compelled,  in  or-
der to  avoid  being  surrounded  by  the  rest  of  the
king's  army,  to  make  an  attack  upon  the  centre,
where  his  brother  le<1  in  person.  He  routed  the
royal  boily-gnard,  and  being  hurried  away  by  the
violence  of  his  feelings  the  momeut  he  espied  the
king,  he  engaged  with  him,  but  was  himself
wounded  aud  slain  by  a  common  soldier.  Had
Ctearchns  acted  in  conformity  with  tbe  directions
of  Cyrus,  and  led  his  division  against  the  king's
centre,  instead  of  being  drawn  off  into  pursuit  of
the  flying  enemy,  tbe  victory  must  have  belonged
to  Cyrus.  According  to  the  Persian  custom  of
treating  slain  reliels,  the  head  aud  right  hand  of
Cyrus  were  cut  off  aud  brought  to  the  king,  who
is  said  himself  to  have  seized  tbe  bead  by
the  hair  and  to  have  held  it  up  as  a  proof  of
bis  victory  to  tbe  view  of  tbe  surrounding  crowd.
Thus  ended  the  expedition  of  Cyrus.  The  Greeks,
after  the  battle,  began  to  negotiate  with  the
king  through  Tissapherues,  who  offered  to  lead
them  home.  He  treacherously  violated  bis  word,
however;  and  having,  by  an  act  of  per&dy,
obtaiued  possession  of  the  persons  of  the  Greek
commauders,  he  sent  them  up  to  tbe  king  at
Babylon,  where  they  were  all  put  to  death.  The
Greeks  were  not,  however,  disconraged,  though  at
a  great  distance  from  their  country  aud  surround-
ed on  every  side  by  a  powerful  enemy.  They  im-
mediately chose  new  commauders,  in  tbe  numlier  of
whom  was  Xeuophon,  who  has  given  an  account
of  their  celebrated  retreat. See  Anabasib.

Cyrus  {ILvpos).  A  large  river  of  Asia,  rising  iu
I  Iberia  and  falling  iuto  the  Caspiau ;  now  the  Kur.
I  This  river  waters  the  great  valley  of  Cteorgia,  and
,  is  increased  by  the  Aragui ;  the  lora,  probably  the
Iberus  of  the  ancients;  and  tbe  Alasau,  which  is
their  Alazo.

Cyta  (Kura).  A  city  of  Colchis,  in  the  interior  of
the  country,  near  the  river  Phasis,  and  northeast  of
Tyndaris.  It  was  the  birthplace  of  Medea.  The
inhabitants,  like  the  Colchians  generally,  were
famed  for  their  acquaintance  with  poisonous  herbs
and  magic  rites.  Scylax  calls  the  place  Mal^
(MoXrr).  Medea  was  called  Cytaeis  from  this  her
native  city.

Cythera(KtJi9r}/Hi).  The  modem  Cerigo ;  au  island
off  the  southeast  point  of  Laconia,  with  a  town  of
the  same  name  iu  the  interior,  the  harbour  of  which
was  called  Scaudea.  It  was  colonized  at  an  early
'  time  by  the  Phoenicians,  who  introduced  the  wor-
ship of  Aphrodite  (q.  v.)  into  the  island,  for  which
it  was  celebrated.  This  goddess  was  hence  cnllefl
Cytheraea,  Cytherels;  and  according  to  souie  tra-
ditions, it  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  this  island
that  she  first  rose  from  the  foam  of  tbe  sea.

CytherlA.  A  celebrated  courtesan  at  Borne,  the
mistress  of  M.  Antonius,  aud  afterwards  of  the  poet
Gallus,  the  friend  of  Vergil,  who  in  the  Tenth  Ec-
logue »peuks  of  her  a»i  Lycori^.


CYTBNUS


49!


U


CyttanOB  (KvBwot).  The  modem  Thermia;  an
ieland  in  the  Aegaean  Sea,  ooe  of  the  Cycladee

Cytliilnin  (Kvritnov).  The  moat  important  of  the
fonr  cities  of  Dom  in  Greece.  According  to  Thncyd-
ides  ( iii.  95 ),  it  was  situated  to  the  west  of  Par-
iiaunB,  and  on  the  borders  of  the  Locri  Ozolae.

CytOTnm  (Kvrapov).  A  city  of  Paphlagouia,  on
the  cuaat  between  the  promontory  Carambin  and
Amastrie.  It  was  a  Greek  town  of  great  antiquity,
since  Homer  alludes  to  it  (/Lit.  853),  ami  it  is  thought
to  have  been  founded  by  a  colony  of  Milesians.  Ac-
cording to  Strabo,  it  had  been  a  port  of  the  inhab>
ttanta  of  Sinop^.  In  its  vicinity  was  a  mountain,
named  Cytorus,  which  produced  a  beautifully
veined  Bx>eciea  of  liox-tree  (Catull.  iv.  13;  Verg.
Georg.  ii,  437). It  is  now  Kidros.

Cyzlcenna  Nwmmna. 8ei* C^'zici's; Elkc-

TRUM.

Cyzicfiniu  Oectu. Soe  Domus,  p.  546.

CyxXons  (KvC»or).  (1)  An  island  off  t  be  northern
coast  of  Mysta,  nearly  triangular  iu  shape,  and  about
five  hundred  stadia  iu  circuit.  Its  base  was  turned
towards  the  Propontis,  while  the  vertex  advanceil
so  closely  to  the  continent  that  it  was  easy  to  con-
nect it  by  a  double  bridge,  which,  as  Pliny  relates,
was  done  by  Alexander.  Scylax,  however,  says
that  it  was  always  a  peninsula,  and  his  authority
is  followed  by  Mannert,  who  is  of  opinion  that  the
inhabitants  may,  after  the  time  of  Scylax,  have
separated  it  from  the  maiulaud  by  it  ranal  or  ditch,
for  pnrposes  of  security.  It  is  certainly  a  penin-
sula at  the  present  day,  and  there  are  no  indica-


tions whatever  of  the  bridges  mentioned  by  Pliny
and  others.  (2)  A  celebrated  city  of  Mysia.on  the
island  of  the  same  name,  situated  partly  iu  the  plain
which  extended  to  the  bridges  conuectiog  the  isl-
and with  the  continent,  and  partly  on  the  alt^  of
Mount  Arcton  Oros.  Its  first  foundation  was  as-
cribed to  a  colony  of  Pelasgi  from  Tbessaly,  nnder
the  conduct  of  Cyzicris,  son  of  Apollo.  In  process
of  time  the  Pelasgi  were  expelled  by  the  Tyirhcni,
and  tliese  agaiu  made  way  for  the  Milesians,  whti
are  generally  looked  upon  by  tbe  Greeks  as  tb^
real  settlers,  to  whom  the  fonudatiou  of  Cyaicas  ia
to  be  attributed.  Cyzicns  became,  in  process  of
time,  a  flourishing  commercial  city,  and  was  at  tbe
height  of  its  prosperity  when,  through  tbe  means
of  the  kiugs  of  Pergamus,  it  secured  the  favour  ami
protection  of  Rome.  Florus  si^eaks  of  its  beauty
and  opulence.  The  Cyzioeue  commouwealtb  rC'
sembled  those  of  Rhodes,  Marseilles,  and  Carthage.
The  Romans,  in  acknowledgment  of  tbe  bravery
and  fidelity  displayed  by  the  Cyziceuiaus  when
besieged  by  Mithridates  (B.C.  75),  granted  to  tbem
their  independence  and  greatly  enlarged  their  ter-
ritory. Under  the  emperors,  Cyzicns  coutinaed  to
prosper,  and  iu  the  time  of  the  Byzantine  away  it
was  the  metropolis  of  tbe  Hellespontine  proviuee.
CyztcuB  gave  birtli  to  several  bistoriaoa,  philos-
ophers, and  other  writers.  The  coins  of  this  place,
called  KtfCtKi}vot  frrar^pcr,  were  so  beautiful  as  to
be  deemed  a  miracle  of  art.  (See  Eiactrcu.)
Persephou^  was  worshipped  as  the  chief  deity  of
the  place,  and  the  inhabitants  had  a  legend  among
them  that  their  city  was  given  by  Zens  tothiagod-
dess  as  a  portion  of  her  dowry.


D,  as  a  symbol.

In  Qrekk.— a  =  a  tribns of  Elis  (Arch.  Zeit.  1880,
!>.  57),  HtKifios,  biKatrnjs,  fiovXor  {C  I.  G,  3104),  lii}/iov
(  C.  L  G.  2383,  *.  B.  A.  =  ■^■q^ttT^iaTi  /SovX^t,  bi^ov).

A  =  10  iu  the  old  decimal  system  of  Greek  nu-
merntion,  AA  =  30,  AAAr=30;  iu  the  alphabetic
8ystem  =  4;  rh  A  (C.  1.  f;.2059)  =  Ti  Tiraproy.

In  Latin,  —  D  =  Decimu8,  decurio,  December,
decessit,  deciuiaiiun,  decretnni,  dedit,  defnnctns,
denarius,  designatns,  deus,  Dinnn,  dies,  diguus,  di-
vus,  dixit,  dominns,  douavit,  dnuuivir,  etc.,  etc.

D-D  =  dare  debebit,  doa  Dia,  dedit  dedicavit,
douuni  dedit,  dis  deae,  donius  divina.

DD  =  devotl.

D-l)-l)=dntnm  ch>crfto  decurionnm,  deo  douum
dedit,  di>iio  dedit  dfdicavit.

D*D*D*D  ^datnm  de  decretodecurionum  douum
dst  dicat  dedicat.

D*A  =  defuuclus  annomni,  disceus  aqniliferum.

D-B-8  ^diis  bonis  sacrum.

D-C=:decre(o  onnscriptonin),  decnriunum  con-
Bulto,  decurio  rivilati».

D-C'S=:dc  conscrijitornm  (cotiHiIii,collegii)  sen-
ten  ti  a.

D'D-I)-D-L-M  =  douum  dnt  dirat  dedicat  libens
nierito.

DDD-NNN  =  domi»i  nostri  tres.

D'D-E^dare  dsmnas  esto.

D-D-L-D*D-D;=  dedit  dedicavit  loco  datodecre-
tn  decnrionnm.

n-D'O^diis  deabns  omnibus.


D-D-P-PP  =  decreto  decnrionnm  pecnnia  pab-
lica  posuerunt.

D'D-V-L-L*M=dono  dedit  votuai  laetoi  libeiu
meritii.

D'F=:darc  fucere,  ilefunctns,  dulciasimas  filiar.

D-I'M  =deus  invictna  Mithi-as.

D'L  :=  dedit  libens,  dens  Liber,  die  Lnnae.

D-M  =deH  magna,  deum  mater,  decnrio  roonici-
pii,  duvotae  memoriae,  diis  Manibns,  divino  nian-
datn,  dolus  mains.

D'0  =  dari  oportet.

D-O'M  =deo  optinio  nisximo.

D-P=de  proprio  dens  patrius,  diis  parentibna,
douum  poBuit.

D*P'Er=devotuB  pietati  eins.

D-P'P  =  dii  Penates  pnblici,de  pecnnia  pablica.

D-P-S  =  de  pagi  sententia,  de  pecunia  sua,  de
proprio  sua

D-P-S'F'D  =:  de  pecunia  sua  factum  dedit.

P'Q  =  decurio  quaestor.

I)-Q-A  :=dc  qua  agitnr.

DQLSTTL=dic  qai  legis:  sit  tiW  terra  le-
vis.

DRP  =:diguHni  re  publico.

D-S=de  sno,  dens  sanctns,  dens  Saturuua.  di-
sceus signifernm.

D-S-K*C  =  de  Buo  faciendum  cnravit.

D-S-F*D-D  =  de  sua  pecuuia  douo  dedit,

D-S-R  =  de  sue  restitnit.

D-S-SFC  =de  senatus  sententia  fiuiendnB  ru-
rnvit.


DAAB


463


UAEDALA


D'S-V'L  i^de  Buo  vivas  libens.

D-T  :=duni  tftxat,  de  thesaaro.

DT'S^rdia  te  fwrveiit.

D-V-V'A-8'P-P=dannivir  viJB  aedibas  saoris
publiois  prooarandid.

D  =  500,  formed  by  halving  (D,  the  EtniKcmi
symbol  fw  1000.

Daaa  (Atioi). See  Dahar.

Daoia  (Aojcui),  as  a  Roman  province,  lay  between
the  Danube  and  the  Car|>athian  Mountains,  and
comprehended  the  modem  TnuiBylvania,  Walla-
chia,  Moldavia,  and  part  of  H  angary.  The  Daci
were  of  the  eauie  race  and  spoke  the  same  language
as  the  Cretae,  and  axe  therefore  nsnally  said  to  be  of
Thracian  origin.  They  were  a  brave  and  warlike
people.  In  the  reign  of  Domiiian  they  became  so
formidable  noder  their  king,  Decebalns,  that  the
Bomans  were  obliged  to  purchase  a  peace  of  them
by  the  payment  of  trlbnte.  Trajan  delivered  the
Empire  from  this  disgrace.  He  crossed  the  Dan-
ube, and  after  a  war  of  five  years  (a.D.  101-106)
conquered  the  conntry,  and  made  it  a  Komao  prov-
ince. At  a  later  period  Dacia  was  invaded  by  the
<]!oths ;  and  aa  Aarelian  considered  it  more  prudent
to  make  the  Danube  the  boandnry  of  the  Empire,
be  resigned  Dacia  to  the  barbarians,  removed  the
Roman  inhabitants  to  Moesia,  and  gave  the  name
of  Dacia  (Anreliant)  to  that  part  of  the  province
along  the  Danube  where  they  were  settled.

Dacfona.  A  surname  of  the  emperor  Tmjau,
from  bis  conrtuest  of  Dacia. See  Tkaianus.

Dacier,  Anne  LEFJbVRK,  a  fumuus  French  trans-
lator of  the  classics,  was  boru  at  Saumur  about
IGM.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Tauneguy  Lef^vre,
a  Huguenot  scholar  of  some  note.  Ou  her  father's
death,  and  when  in  her  eighteenth  year,  she  went
to  Paris,  where  she  soon  after  published  an  edition
of  Callimachus,  which  secured  for  her  a  place  among
the  editors  of  the  Delphin  Edition  (q.  v.)  of  the
classics,  for  which  she  prepared  notes  ou  Floras,
Dictys  Creteusis,  Aurelius  Victor,  and  Entropitis.
lu  1681  appeared  her  prose  version  of  Anacrenn
and  Sappho,  followed  by  similar  trauslations  of
Terence,  selected  plays  of  Plautiis  and  Aristoph-
anes, the  Iliad  (1711),  and  the  OdysMjf  (1716).  It
ia  by  these  translations  that  she  will  be  longest
remembered,  as  she  brought  to  the  work  much
spirit  and  enthusiasm,  combined  witli  a  good  share
of  literary  insight,  so  that  her  renderings  are  still
cited  by  modern  scholars.  In  her  versions  of  Ho-
mer especially,  her  direct,  simple,  and  often  home-
ly language  is  admirably  fitted  to  express  the  orig-
inal. In  defence  of  Homer  against  La  Motte,  she
wrote  a  treatise  Deg  Catt$e»  de  la  Cotruption  dc  Ja
<ioit  (1714).

Mile.  Lefevre  married  in  1683  M,  Xudri  Dacier,
who  subsequently  becamo  secretary  of  the  French
Academy,  and  was  bimsolf  a  man  of  much  erudi-
tion hat  little  talent,  so  that  he  was  wittily  de-
scribed as  utt  groa  mulet  charge  de  tout  Je  bagage  de
Cantiquit^.  Both  husband  and  wife  received  pon-
Kious  (torn  the  king.  Mme.  Dacier  died  at  the
Ivcnvre,  where  her  husband  was  librarian,  August
17,  1720.  See  Sainte-Bcuve,  Causeriet  de  Luitdi,
and  Burette's  Sloge  aur  Mme.  Dacier.

Daotj^U  (AoKTtfXoi).  FabnlouB  beings,  to  whom
the  discovery  of  iron,  and  of  the  art  of  working
it  b;  means  of  fire,  was  ascribed.  Mount  Ida,  in
Phrygia.  Is  said  to  have  been  the  original  seat  of
tbe  Dactyll,  whence  they  are  usually  called  Idaean


Daclyllotheos.

(Pompeh. )


(*IdauH)  Dactyli.  In  Phrygia  they  were  couneoted
with  the  worship  of  Rbea,  or  Cybel^.  They  are
sometimes  confounded  or  ideutifled  with  the  Cure-
tes,  Corybantes,  and  Cabeiri  (q.  v.). See  Bhba.

The  name  AdmrvXot  ("  Fingers  ")  is  variously  ex-
plained from  their  number  being  five  or  teu,  or
because  they  dwelt  at  the  foot  (cV  daJcrvXoir)  of
Mount  Ida.  The  original  number  seems  t-o  have
been  three  —  i.  e.  Kelmis  {KtXfiis)  the  Smelter,
Damnamenens  (^furafuvtvO  the  Hammer,  and
Acnion  ('Ak/mwi')  the  Anvil.  This  number  was  ^•
t«rwards  inoreased  to  five,  then  to  ten,  to  fifty-
two,  and  finally  to  one  baudred.  See  Lobeck,  Ag-
laopkoHM,  1166  foil. ;  PoUax,  ii.  4 ;  Diod.  v.  64.

DaotyUotheoa  ( dajcrvXio^io; ).  A  case  or  box
whero  rings  were  kept.  Sucb  a  ring-case  has  been
recognized  In  a  round  ivory  box  found  at  Pompeii
(Mu8.  Both.  ix.  pi.  xiv.  8),  From  the  centre  of  the
lid  projects  a  vertical  stick,  on  which  the  rings
might  be  slid  when  the  wearer  took  them  off  at  his
toilet.  The  same  pnrpose  may  have  been  served
by  a  bronze  stand  which  was  found  at  Talese.  It
consists  of  a  rod  resting  on  three  feet.  Down  the
rod  may  be  slid  a  ring  furnished  with
catches  to  bold  it  steady,  to  one  uf
which  is  attached  a  vertical  oval
ring  broken  at  the  top  so  as  to  admit
of  rings  or  other  articles  of  jewellery
being  slid  upon  it.  The  name  was  also
applied  to  a  cabinet  or  collection  of
jewels,  as  to  which  we  learn  ftom
Pliny  {H.  N.  xxxvti.  $  11)  that  Scaurus,  the  step-
sou  of  Sulla,  was  the  first  person  at  Kome  who
had  a  collection  of  this  kind,  aad  that  his  was
the  only  one  till  Pompey  brought  to  Rome  the  col-
lection of  Mithridates,  which  he  placed  in  the
Capitol.

Daotj^Ioa  ( daxrvXoc ).  A  Greek  measure,  an-
swering to  the  Roman  digitus,  each  signifying  "a
finger-breadth"  and  being  the  sixteenth  part  of  a
foot. See  Pes.

Dadnohoa  (d^Cxor).  A  torofa-boarer.  A  name
applied  to  the  person  who,  on  the  fifth  day  of  the
Eleusinian  Mysteries,  led  the  initiated,  toroh  in
baud,  to  the  temple  of  Demeter,  in  memory  of  her
wanderings  with  a  lighted  torch  in  search  of  Per-
sephone (q.  T.). See  Elbusinia  ;  Mystkria.

DaodUa  (rd  Aai'SoXo).  (1)  A  town  of  Caria,  near
the  coufiues  of  Lycia  and  on  the  northern  shore  of
the  Glanous  Sinus.  It  was  said  to  have  derived
its  name  from  Daedalus,  who,  being  stung  by  a
snake  on  crossing  the  small  river  Ninos,  died  and
was  buried  here.  (3)  A  mountain,  in  the  vicinity
of  the  city  of  the  same  name  and  ou  the  oonfiuetf
of  Lycin.

Daedflla,  Daedalea  (da/doXa,  daidoXcta).  (1)  A
term  applied  to  the  earliest  iconic  representations
of  the  gods  ronghly  hewn  out  of  wood  ( iiyakua
fvXov,  Pansan.  ix.  3, 2).  From  a  very  early  period
stones  and  trees  received  divine  bononrs  (Lucian,
Paeud&m.  30),  Thus  Artemis  Sotera  at  Boiae  was  a
myrtle  (Pansan.  iii.  32, 12) ;  the  Paphian  Aphrodite,
a  conical  stone.  The  effigy  of  the  god,  down  to
the  latest  times,  was  placed  in  a  tree.  The  imme-
diate predecessor,  however,  of  the  daHaXov  was  a
squared  beam  or  flat  board,  which,  like  the  pillar,
was  probably  draped  and  decorated.  (See  Daeda-
lus.) (2)  A  peculiar  festirat  held  by  the  Boeotians
in  honour  of  Her^.  The  goddeas  bad,  according  to
the  story,  once  quamlM  with  Zeus  and  hidden


Iionuiir  utj  Mount  Cithaerou. Her  bimbaud  then
itpruu^l  Lbu  report  tliat  be  was  gvtiig  to  iQarr>'  nn-
tilhvr  wil'u,  uud  lind  an  imago  of  oak-wood  deekcil
out  iu  bmlul  ulliru  uud  carried  over  Citbaeruii  on
acboriul  witb  u  imiueroiifi  traiu  amid  the  aiiiging  '
of  uuirriR>(e  b>'iutiit. lii-n^,  in  ber  jaalouity,  throw  ]
bcmclf  U]iaii  bvr  i»u[iputw4l  rivals  but,  ou  di»cov-er>  {
ing  tbu  trick,  ix'cuiicilt-d  benwll',  witb  biugbler.  t^i  i
ZeuH,  u>ok  Iter  nvtil  oti  tbe  cbiiriot,  ami  foiiiiilod  ilit> ,
feHtivat  ill  tnvuiory  of  Ibe  incident. Tbu  feaHt  wah  ,
C4ilfbrutiMl  fvery m)%'hii yt-JU-H  hy tbf I'lata«at]»<  ■
aloui*  anil  calbnl  (bu  Littlo  Daixiahi. niit  t<v«rv
sixltctb  ;t>ai'  all  tbe  c-itie»  uf  ihe  Itouotiaii  fuiliLTu-
tiuii  kept  it  IU)  lbt>  Great  Daudnla. At  thv  Litclu
Da«^lula,  guided  \*y  tbu  tuite  i>l'  a  biixl,  tbfy  <ix«d  ,
ou  a  tn-o  iu  a  ^trtivi-  of  oakn  aud  cul  u  tlgui-o  out
of  tt,  wbirb  they  flnwiwd  in  bridal  attiro  and  ttiok,
t»  ill  niarriiiiic  pnKrt'fsiuii.  u*  the  lop  of  C'itbavruii.
Here  Ibey  ort'envl  a  >{"'"■  '" i^t'im  and  a  cow  to
Ki'T^,  »nd  burni-*L  tbe  inia;;^  wirti  tbu  otluriii);. At '
thu  Great  Diinbila  tbo  iniiig4*8  made  at-  tbe  Littb^
Daeilala  wrrv  distribute* I  by  lot  aiiiotig  ttu^  critic^^
of  tbe  IliM'otiun  confedcrHi-y,  and  ibeNimu  prucveil-
iu^H  were  Iben  reprnti^d  irintitau.  ix.  'X  I,  etc.).

DaedJUus  (Jt<ud[iXof ,  ''viiuuiti|(  artilioer").  The
inytbical  (tiivk  roitrcsontative  i>f  all  baudiwork,
M[>ecially  of  Attic  and  Cretan  art.  As  such  he  was
nonbipiicd  by  tbe  arLiKt^'guitdK,  ««p«oially  iu  Atti*
oa.  He  ia  said  to  hnve  been  tbesimof  tb«  Atlieuian
Metiou,  sou  of  Kupalanma  ^Ibe  rea4ly- banded},  aud
gruid«ou  of  £rovbth«a». He was itiippoMd to


haTc  bc«n  tbt>  Aral  arttrt  who  rrpmeabed  tbe  hu-
man Agiire  with  op»u  ayva,  and  feel  mmI  mow  in
motion,  B«-«idc«  being  an  «\c«l)«ni  arvhitret.  b**
wa«  MiUI  to  hav«  inveute*!  many  ioiplemeai»^
ibe  *xe.  for  instancfs  the  awt,  ai>d  tbe  l»e%'«l.  Hl«
own  nenhew  Talus  ^!K«i  of  his  ^Uter  IVn1i»>  ap-
pewtd  Uknlf lo  aarpaM  him  in rmiliurwt  and


originality.  Tbe  invention  of  the  «aw.  wbich  la
copied  from  ibe  jawlmne  of  a  nnakp,  of  tbe  iHiilt>i'*i
wbe«l,  of  tbe  tiirniug-latbt*,  of  tbe  axe.of  tliP  pliiml>-
line,  ofgluefoftbeginil^f,  aatl  of  other  tbiugHof  this
kind,  was  attributed  to  him.  Daudalun  nan  no /«)•
oii»  of  bin)  that  be  tltniw  biin  from  IIh;  Arm]ioli»;
and,  being  detected  in  tin*  m-t  of  Iniryiiig  the  Iiwly,
was  coiMletniieil  by  tbe  Ainopugim,  and  Ikil  to
Cit-to  to  Kin^  Miaoti.  Hen%  anmiig  oU)er  ihingg,
be  inajlu  tlid  bibyritilb  at  Gooaua  for  ibe  Mino-
taur. (8co  I.AIIYIUNTUCK.)  He  and  bin  sou  Icarai
Wurt!  tlieiUhelvcM  coutilied  in  it,  lK-A:HUi»e  be  hai
};iv<.'nAriiulnd  1(1.  V.)  tbe  clue  with  which  Hbe  f^mAeA
TheacuN  tbrongb  tbe  luaxc  llui  Ibe  fatbt^r  and
son  succeeded  iu  eacapiug,  and  tied  over  tlio  nu
u(xm  wings  of  wnx  fealbetsi  uuule  by  Daedalus.
Icarutt,  bowevei*,  uppronehed  t4ia  near  to  tbe  mo,
no  that  thu  wax  melted,  and  he  fell  Into  tti«  Mi
and  waa  drowited.  Tlie  era  wait  railed  uft«r  buB
tbe  learian,  aud  tbe  inland  uii  wbirb  biN  ImmIv  wu
tbniwii  tip  and  biiried  by  HerarlcH  whm  callnl  Ira-
ria.  DnedaliiM  went  tt>  CainicuH  in  Kirily,  to  Kiiif
C'ocalu^i,  ^vhoMedHughttT  lovt^  biiu  for  bis  art,  awl
ttlew  Minoa,  who  came  in  pntKuil  of  biin.  H«  aai
KUp|H>8ed  to  have  diud  iu  Sicily,  wheie  buildiilf^
attributed  to  bini  were  ahown  in  many  plac««,M
alao  III  Sardinia,  Kgypt,  and  Italy,  partictilAtlf  at
Cutnac.  In  Greece  a  intniber  of  ancient  wonleii
inmgt^  were  supposed  to  \*e  hie  work — in  |iarticii*
lar  a  tttattie  of  Heracles  at  Thehe«,  which  Daedala*
wat«aaid  to  have  made  ingratitude  for  tbe  burial  of
IcariiH,  Decides  Icani!>,  Dae<laln»  bad  a  Aecoud
son,  lapyx.  naid  lo  1h>  tbe  fminder  of  llw  Iipy-
gee. Sie  P,\Ki)At.A.

Daemon  {iaifiw).  Orlglually  a  teiu  a^
plie*!  to  deity  in  p^neral,  uianife«led  iti  lU  m-
tive  relation  lo  hninaii  life,  without  cprtsul
reference  to  any  ningle  divine  peraauality.  &*'
as  early  aa  HeniiMl  the  daeutouedapptmra**"!''
onlinaleit  or  M^rvaniM  of  the  higher  g<KU.  He
gives  the  name  especially  t4i  the  spiriitt  of  ^
pMt  age  of  gold,  wbo  an>  apjKiiuled  to  vstcb
DTer  loeu  and  guard  them.  Iu  laler  linxi.
too,  the  daemones  were  regai'ded  «h  IwiDp  in-
termediate between  the  gods  and  matilEiiul*
forming,  aa  it  were,  the  retinue  of  tlio  |«1*.
reprewulinK  their  powers  iu  activity, aoil '■**
tmstetl  with  tbe  fultilment  of  tlieir  tar«w*
fiitictintia.  Thin  wax  the  relation,  to  tnko  >"
iuttliince,  which  Hit*  Sntym  and  Sileni  lion  f'
Diony.4nN.  Hut  the  |H)pnlar  Itelief  ratic^  ^
regard  to  tbeM*  deitieM.

Anoibrrkiud  of  ilaeinoiicitare  tliow  atUt^l^
lo  iudividuat  men,  att-euiling  them,  lik«  1^
Konian  ffrMiiia  {i{.  r.),  from  birth  lo  deatb  I"
later  timea  two  attentlaut  diu-Jiioiiea  wrlV*
aamed  for  every  one;  but  thlA  feeling;  *"
not  nuivenol,  both  good  aud  evil  being  "^
garded  as  eonuiaiing  at  different  tUnea  ft""*
the  HUD*  dai-inou.  The  good  spirit  wbop*'
mntl  pr«$pority  and  presided  o\er  viw?*'*
( a  sort  of  Ueilenle  brownie  or  Kohhi  G«*""
fellow)  was  called  Agatbodaeuou  (u)f«W*'

On  the  famons  ilaemoa  of  Socrmtea,  aee  tltf  *'*

liek>  S4^H"StATVL


See  PCGIO;  SlCJU

DahM  (S^atV  A  gnttt  Seythlan  pf^pl^  t^*"'
H  y.  ri.  19\  who  I«I  a  nomadic  life  over  a  f^
««teiit  r.f  rxMintry,  on the  SMt of  the  C»*l^'


DALMATIA


M6


DAVASO(78


(jrrcauio  (ffbich  »tilL  bears  tbo  naine  uC  Dngb-
a),  ou  tbu  banks  or  tb»  Murgutt,  Ibu  Oxu^
eveu  tbu  lasartes.  Some  of  tbem  tivrvud  an
ilry  ikuil  as  ucbers  iiuder  Dariua  CoiluumiiuLLH
AIuxaii(l«r.


tbe  tireat,  wboui  lir  niirvivocl. His  chief  work  wi
a  universal  liiHlory  iu  114  buoke,  of  which  oaly
ftiw  fntgiiK'tita  rcniitin. Hv  ttivo  wrote  an  eutobiog-
ra|iby,  a  lift*  of  AatftiDtnt,  a  ]x\'v  «>f  Hemd,  and  n<>ui«
jtbiluaopbical  triirkn. Ttiv  HiaiKlunl  vitiltuti  nf  his
fi-M^iuvnlM  in  lltat  nf  Oi'utli  <l.t;ijiKi>;,  li^H;  suppl.

Datnosolua  i^aniia-tiot).  A  ifhiluMMpher,  a  nt-
ratwl  fioiu  LibirniiaViVi  ib.rnopih"i';v  ili«  TUiiiw'  *'^'^  "'"  l'"f'i'wt-^"*-  H«  olhiiih^ii.  .^l  lii*.  Hlii.lie«  iia-
ka).am!friim«a'.-k  Ill.vria.m  th*- MUith  by  tli»i /'''»*.-\'"""''"'»V*'.!^'""''''^''''."''*'  i-»"M»]>'t«'';li«">
o  (Drino),  tbtiM  ncitrly  L-urivhiiiiiiilnt)'  ti>  I  be  nnxl-
Dalmalia. Tbu  cupital  wuh  Dahiiitiinni  or  [>■>]-


almatja  (AaX^iaria) or  Delnutia.  A  pari  nf  tbo
itry  alun};  the  eastcni  coast  of  I  be  Adriatic  i*vn.
|ib>«l  iiiuUt  the  genrral  natiiL'  of  lllyrirniu.  and


nm,  from  which  tb«  t-omitry  dt-iivcd  \tn  name.
Dextniottt  iui|xfrtaiit  l-own  wnn  Sii)oiiii,lb«-  tvt>i-
e  of  Dincletlau.  The  DaltuatiiiiiM  wt-n;  a  bravo
warlike  jwople  auit  Kave  much  truLibb;  to  the
au0.  Iu  B.C.  U^,  tlieiruwnutiy  watt  ovtirnni  by
elfilluH,  whfi  uwiumtNl,  in  ciMiMMiutiiicc,  the  itiir-
ft  DaliuaticiM,  but  thry  eimtiiiiiiHl  indf]>MHlent
te  UoQiauH.  In  B.C.  ^,  tlii>y  n-ent  defeated  by
iaa  PoUiu,  of  whuMo  Dalruatit;  lriuni]>b  lIorAt'e
ka;  Unt  it  wan  uut  till  ihi;  yenr  -^i  Ihiit  they
)  fioally  tinbdufd  by  StatiliuH  Tannm.  Thry
part  iu  the  Kteat  I'iiuiiunian  revolt  inider  their
ir  Bato;  but  after  u  thtet;  yeaiV  war  were
a  reduced  tu  subjecliuu  by  TilieriuH,  in  a.d.  U.

Almatifca  or  DelmatXca (duX/iariic^,  ^t\^mTlKt'^^.
\u\f  with  Innj;  sK'fvej)  ( Iwd.  '>riv.  six.  W,  0 ),
Hli)v(^d  at  Itotiie  in  the  hi'cond  epnlitry  A.Ti  It
tnuile  btttb  with  and  witlmiit  ]iMr|tle  Htiipi-H,
Vas  MtQiiMinnM  »f  wuul  aud  HuiiiBLimeH  of  oltk.
CLAVI'M  LATtrft; TCNICA.

almatiua  A  nephew  of  ('ouNtantinc  the  On^at.
was  invmtod  by  tbi^  emperor  wiib  the  titk<
H|M',  and  eoiumauded  ngaiust  tbe  0»ths  in
|(j^  tl^i-mb.iiii^  und  UixH'ee.  Dainiatins  fell
t  tnmuU  of  biH  own  Holdient,  a.d.  3^,  b^on^^hl
It  by  ibc  intrigtiea  of  OuiiHtantiuH,  after  the
(fa  nlTnnstantiiie  (Zosini.  ii  'J9  full.).
*llT»n4ntnm gee  DaiJMaTIa.

lamlUa (  A(i- J —
lit) or Bous .'
it). A small
(fl  iu  Uitbynia.

lb© obore nf

Tbraeiaii  Bo»j-
tis  north  of
ftlMd«>ii ;  celf-
by  trail  i-
tbo  land-

•place of I"
)V,|  afirr bur
miiruttnativu
Oabtifer.
Aaraaratna-

*  l>KHAIlATUa

Elamasceuua,

"c«V  huiloricaL

*  p1iit>»<jphicul
W  who livwl

ll)«  Anfi^iHtitn
*■  His  namt*  is
**^eil  from  that

kii  birthplace,
**»«cu(!.  He
W  la tDtimale

■Ml of HertKl


at  Atbeim  under  Miirinnit.  iMidorit!),  sod  Zi-nodntnii,
Aceordiug  to  nouie.  In-  wim  ihe  MK-c«tu>iii'  of  Isido*
niH.  U  is  certain,  however,  that  ho  W[u>  the  taut
profe«tur  of  Neo- i'lattiniHni  ut  Albenn.  lie  up-
(learH  t4>  have  b«-en  u  im»o  nf  i-xeelKMit  Judgment^
and  lo  litive  had  u  utrnii^  atlaelimeiit  for  the
Huienreti,  partinilarly  matliematirs.  He  wrote  n
work  entitled  'Atrnplai  kui  Ai><r(ii'  rrrpJ  rii-  Upoirutv
'AftX^'f^  "  l^"*blfi  and  8tdiiti<>u»  coiieeniing  the  Ori*
gin  of  TJiingH."  Of  thin  only  two  fragmeiilM  ro>
main— one  iiretu-rvMl  by  PboiiuM,  which  formtt  a
biugraphicul  flkotch  of  Inidortis  of  liaxu  :  the  oth-
er treating  nrpi  rttnnjrav.  "Of  wbac  hao  been  pro-
ereated."  The  roniainjt  of  thin  work  were  cilitetl,
with  a  valuable  pn>fiu-e,  by  .1.  Kopp  (Frankfort,
lHiS\.  A  Venetian  M8.  contains  an  oneditod  work
of  his,  entilleil  '.\irbfiim  Kai  .\viTtts  ttc  nW  nXuTwi'ol-
llupfiivifiTfy, '^  l^tyu\>t»  and  S<duttoii!t  ndative  In  the
PurnieiildeB  i>f  Plato."

Damaacua  i^nfiaerKot'.  in  Hebrew,  rtanimesek ;
in  Arabie,  Uiinesbk-es-HUani)-  One  of  ihe  princi-
pal I'ities  of  byria,  in  what  was  called  Coel^S-Syrio,
a  few  uilleH  to  lite  east  of  Antilibanus,  whoro  the
chain  begins  to  turn  off  to  the  southeast,  uuder
tlie  uaiit'L*  of  Cannel.  It  is  beautifotly  situatetl
in  an  exteutiive  and  pleasant  plAiii.  and  watered
by  a  river  called  by  the  Greeks  IJanlin6  or  Chry-
oori-boas.  "tlio  gulden  stream,"  now  Hunida.  The
hibljctt)  imnie  of  this  stream  wan  Abana.  I>a-
miiHVUH  iH  Kiipposed  to  have  bi'en  ftiniided  by  Uic,
tbo  eblettt  fwni  nf  Arani  (Oen.  x,  "£.]). Ilowuver  this


0lg^^^^


**b


S<Htill Wall <)[ l>iUrrUlHU4.


lUMASIfrL'S


niii^v  1h>,  i(  vxiHlril  ill  till,'  time  uf  Alintltain.  aiiit
may  be  it-vkoUP*!  uiictif  Hit*  ni*M>l  iiiieifiil  vi(k>«  of
8.vh}i.  It  wiiH  o«iii<|i)ore4l  bv  David  rJ  Sam  %-iii.tlt,
bill  fiTvd  ilocir  Trout  tlitr  Jpnttili  yoke  in  llio  lime
orSolojiiuii  (I  Kings,  xi.  'JUi  lull.),  and  bfcamv  llic
acAt  uf  a  iifu  |)riiii'i|>HlMy,  u  liich  ofci-ii  hiirtMHeil
tbp  kill^lt■JlUA  uf  bulb  Jiubtb  nrnt  Uinv).  It  ttOvr-
wurdu it'll,  iu  MK-cttuiion,  nutlt>r  tbf  puwerof  lii«  At^-
syrlniis  uiid  thr  IVrainud,  and  mtino  rrum  lbr>  lntt«r
iuld  the  Imiidn  of  the  ■Sfleiu-idiu).  IrnitiitM-UM,  buw-
«vcr,  dill  lint  tlonrinb  iiiin-b  tiiiilvr  titu  Orvek  ily-
nasly,  ii«  it  liad  whilo  lifld  by  tlm  K'P'iaim.  TUf
S^'lfticidui'  iH>glc(;lcd  tliv  (>liiut-,  iind  WmIowciI  itll
ikoir  favour  on  tlif  uew  citieB  t-Ki-b-d  by  Ilium  in
titr  tinrtbcin  |>nrlM  of  Hyi'ia ;  imW  \\«rv,  iu»  diiiibl,
Uo»  thr  ivamm  uliy  ttii*  later  <)rfvk  and  Human
tt'i'itoni  t>ny  m>  litlli-  of  the  i-ity  itti-ir.  Ibontfb  llicy
arr  all  hiiid  in  Ihvir  praiiMss  of  ttt<-  adjacfut  cauii-
Iry.  Duniu«tcuti  whn  ifvized  by  ibv  Koiiiuiim  iu  th"
war  »f  roinpey  with  Ti>trani'«,  B,c.  W,  but  still
rontinnvd.  u»  itudiT  thf  (ireck  dynaHly,  a  oodj-
lutrutivi'ly  nii important  jilm-t!  until  thr  time  of
DiiHdvtiiiii.  Thit  t'iiipvrt>r,  fi'tflin^  tht^  n»c-iwiity
v(  a  ttliiMi^ly  fortilWd  rily  in  ibitt  i|narter,  a»  a
d<S|>6l  for  mimitttniH  uf  wnr  »iid  n  military  |i«Ht
a;|atiifit  the  rivqiiciit  inroiMU  ol'  chf  Sarii<-cn»,  m?-
loctcd  Damascuit  for  ihr  |>ni']io»c  Kveryttiin^
waa  done,  ucconliiiKly,  to  8tn<ii|;(lhcn  tht>  pluot> ;
extunaive  inngazineH  wt-it'  nl'^i  <-HtablislK*d,  ntid
HkcnlM!  numproiia  witrkHhopft  fnr  the  ^treparatiuti
t»f  wi'a)K>iiit  of  vinT.  It  in  not  nnlikcly  tlint  thti
high  ri'iiiitatioii  to  which  Damiiorim  id'ti-rnnrda
Attained  for  it.t  nninnravtnro  of  nword-bladcH  iiud
utlKT  works  til  Hltffl.  may  have  bad  il-tt  llntt  fonn-
dationK  Inid  by  tins  ari'antfrmont  »u  the  part  of
Di'M.'lelinii.  Tht*  nty  uuntiiiiiral  from  l.liiH  tiiiid  to
\m:  a  tlouri»faing  placp.  In  tbi*  wvcnlh  oenturj'  it
fvll  iiitu  rhv  hamUof  thi'SararttiiK.iiiid  whs  for  snine
lim^  after  tUi»  the  «<*-»it  of  ihi^  rjdifs.  Uh  pn^sprr-
ity,  loo,  iTJiuaiiiwl  nnini|iain-d.  nim-r  Ibi-  niut**  f»f
(he  iirilictpul  i'linivauH  to  &Ii-t-ra  hijk  llin>iit:Ii  il.  ll
■waKKnrki'd  by  Taniprlaiic,  and  tinally  bixairir  Hiib-
Jei't  to  I  Ik-  TnrkH.


The  Hreat  Muw|nv  nf  Daiuaiteiw  hIiII  Bbotrs  tmvi-H
of  tb)'  (;nM'«'n-IIom»n  urobitecliir*'.  Hfo  Wuk-b,
Jttluiutlitlm  Jhimnti.  Iiin»trntar ;  and  AddtMm,
/>nHoi'>'-ioi  iiiui  I'lilmi/ra.

DaroaalppaB,  I.KtMirs.  <1)  A  Konmii  piwltir,
B.C.  81,  an  adlienait  of  Mai-iuit,  and  iitit  tu  dcntli
by  onler  of  HxiWn  (Sail.  t\il.  M.  32).  (3)  A  con-
totnporary  of  Cii't-ro.  ulio  moniionit  him  uh  a  lovor
4)f  i)tatn4'4»,  and  s|H-akhot'  piirchaMiiig  a  gnnloii  fltmi
PamiwiipiHis.  lb;  io  probably  ttie  Hsiitc  person  Hit
tlia  Danm»ippnN  tldiruled  by  Hornet'  {Sal.  ii.  3,  Ifi,
04).  It  nppi^nrr)  from  llol'acc  that  D.iiiiaAlppns  had
b*>('otni<  liatikrn]d.  in  coiiM-iinence  id'  ^\)ii<'h  hi-  iii'
tendwl  to  piil  an  end  to  bimiu-lf ;  bnt  be  waj»  pn*-
vfiilnd  by  thr  .Stoic  Hl^ftiriintt,  and  thru  tiinind
i}t«>ir  hiliiM'If.  or  at  li-aitt  :il1V<-tvd  to  he  one.


DAMOCLES


Damaataa  (t^fioimji-)  of  HigAom.  A  Gtwk  Vk-
loriaii.  and  a  coultMii|H>i'ary  of  llorodotus  and  Hd-
Ihiiioub  uf  LfMbofi. Hi«  workv  arc  luit.

DamnonlL  111  Or  DchnuNii  or  Dl'MXi'i^u,  »
powerful  |kt'uple  in  lhi:>  •M>Hthii'i."4t  of  Britniii,  in-
habitiii};  (.'oniwall.  Ilf von^liirf*,  and  tbv  wi-nlMii
part  of  Soim'i->«et«hire,  from  whoni  wnn  pitlW  tb«
promontory  Uainitoniiim,  nimt  Oiriniiin  (('.  Limniy,
ill  Cornwall.  (^>Or  DAMVii.a  piM>pl''  in  North  Bril-
aiii,  iiiliabiiinK  pariMtif  rffrth.  Arg.vlf',  Stirliag,  nad
Diimbarloii  tthiii>».

DamDnm.  A  Latin  ifim  which  si^iftM  Ian
or  li^ur>  of  any  kind;  but  tu  Il«  |Mrticulnr  m-imt
lueaufl  losa  or  injury  which  a  pttntou  ban  sot-
tained  in  his  proptTiy.  Damnum  in  thtit  |Mutie-
iilur  ttontw  may  iiiebidt*  Iww  uf  gain  ivhb'h  a  per-
Hou  in  pmvnutfHl  fioin  renliziiig  \tmfrum  ermtat^
u»  well  ati  lona  of  lu-lu^illy  iictjiiiml  pro)>frty  (rfca-
NMm  rMrrjrfHKi.  The  cauw*  of  daninnm  ar^  riiher
chanci\  aut-iilenl  {cniua).  or  nclit  or  omitiwioits  nf
reuaonablx  human  Itoiugn  for  whirh  t hoy  air  Ih-IiI
to  lut  i-i-KjMMiMibhv  Ah  a  ride  no  liability  mm
out  of  IriHM  or  injury  t*t  projM*rty  canw-fl  hv  »rti-
di'iit.  /'nbi*  mfilHH  or  rwlpo — i.  r.  wilfttl  ur  oifli-
giMtt  niitvi'otidnrt  oti  thu  part  of  the  prnnm  c»n
mitling  dantniuu — Is,  u!*  a  nilr,  nectvumry  in  iin^rf
lu  i-oiiHiilntr  liability  ;  but  in  rxrvpiional  L-aMii
Imtmiii  may  be  liable,  although  neither  rfolw  m^
lni  nor  calim  can  be  imputed  to  hito.  A  wroiigfU
not  by  nhii'li  ibimnnni  \h  ranivcd  uinj'  br  vilbrr  u
indcpniKb-iit  delict,  or  the  breach  ufiMinir  »|«)cUI
duty  to  whieli  a  ]»rnton  has  Ihscouk*  «nlywl  «•*
bn'judi  of  ttontnu't.  The  liability  to  make  i^Midl
lo.s-s  which  aiMitht-r  ha^  AiiRiin-«l  iit  prt\r*taTr  itth
nam.  A  pi-iM>ii  liable  for  damages  im,  ho  a  nK
boniiil  In  pni:  the  iiijiii'^rd  party  iu  Iho  aaine  ]kmI*
tioii  as  he  would  havL-  Im>i>ii  in  if  Ihi*  art  by  wluGb
tlw  damage  wa**  done  bad  not  Imh-h  comniitt^
llv  mny  aUo  be  siilijerl  tu  a  peualty.

Danmain  Infectum.  A  tvrai  iiseil  in  B«mii>
law  to  denote  dnuiiign  not  uctnatly  done,  but  ip*
prelicndinl  on  wt'ouiil  <tf  the  dangeroni  ronilittiui
i>\'  neiglilionrtiig  piojwrty.  If  proceeding*  i>ettn«*
taken  Itet'on*  damage  bad  biM<»  done,  ihn  injan*'
party  had  no  nrlioii  ftir  daniagris  KillMcqtircitlTl
it,  e.  g,  a  niiiioiiN  Iioum-  {artieji  ruinoiuif)  M\  *^
diuiiagnd  a  lieigblHHir  iN'fore  a  rantin  liad  iMTflilf
rii:ii>di-d,  all  tlie  light  thai  t)ie  daiii.ignl  \kVi'>
\vm\  »:ut  to  retain  tlh*  nnilcrialit  thai  Itiii  fa""'
i>ii  bif.  land  [liitj.  :19,  2,  A.  7,  ^  2.  Hk.  Oaiiiii  it^*^
that  a  |>arty  who  appreheDdcMl  damagr  n':eb>
have  rceoiiFfto  to  a  Irgin  aetht  lu  nnter  lo  pTwl<*^
hiniM'lf,  but  that  the  ttipulatio  dtimni  iv/f-'' P*^
vided  by  the  praetor  in  his  edict  for  iin«b  •»"*
was  always  sought  as  being  the  uion"  conrrRtr"*
n'lni-dy  (rjaiiis,  iv.  3U

Damo  (iiu;*«).  A  daughter  of  PytbagoMi  »»*
Tbeano,  to  »  bom  l*>-thHgnni)i  iotrostt'd  bia 'f^*'
ingN,  mid  forbjule  her  to  give  Iheiri  toany''*''
Thin  ronimand  hIipi  Ktrietly  observed,  atlli(>U|;lt  *■"'
nan  in  extreimr  |Kiverty  and  received  tnau.f  i^'
<ini-!«t><  to  m-\\  iheiii  (Diog.  I.nJ-rl.  viii.  42).

Damdclea  (ia^mtXTc).  A  Rynujiiaau.  w**'**"
compauiiiiiH  and  datl«rci'«  of  the  elder  nianf**"^
Oiiinoclcs  baring  extolled  the  great  felicity  ^f"'
onysiiis  on  account  of  hla  wealth  and  i>owtrtt>i'
tyrant  invited  liiiu  to  try  what  libi  liapi^twM  i**'*
ly  WHS,  and  plaotnl  him  at  a  inngitiOeont  baai*^
in  the  niiiUt  of  wliioh  DamiK'M  sair  a  wlf"
MHord  itUSjK'udt^l  over  bin  hemi  by  a  single  lu"*'


UAMOX


467


DANAPEKIS


liair — a  biglit  wbicb  quickly  dispelled  all  liis  Tis-
iitiid  of  bappineBH.  Tbe  Htury  is  alluded  to  by
Horace  {Carm.  in.  1.  17)  ami  by  PerBittH(ii.  40).

Damon  (Adfuay).  (1)  A  Pytbagorean  pbilosopher
of  Syracuse,  united  by  ties  of  the  firnient  friend-
nlii]!  to  Phintias  (not  Pythias,  as  the  name  is  com-
iiioiily  given),  nnotber  Pytbagoreau,  of  the  same
city.  Dionysins,  tbe  tyrant,  haviug  coudemoed
Pbiutias  to  death  for  conspiring  against  him,  the
latter  begged  that  leave  might  be  allowed  bim  to
go  for  a  short  period  to  a  neigblMinring  place.  Id
order  to  arrauge  some  family  affairs,  and  offered
to  leave  one  of  his  friends  in  the  bands  of  Diony-
Hins  as  a  pledge  for  bis  return  by  an  appointed
time,  and  who  would  be  willing,  in  case  Phintias
broke  his  word,  to  die  iu  his  stead.  Dionysins,
sceptical  as  to  tbe  existeuce  of  such  friendship,
and  prompted  by  curiosity,  asBente<1  to  the  ar-
rangement, and  Damon  took  tbe  place  of  Pbiu-
tias. The  day  appointed  for  the  return  of  tbe
Iatt«r  arrived,  and  public  expectation  was  highly
excited  as  to  the  probable  issne  of  this  singular
affair.  Tbe  day  drew  to  a  close;  uo  Pbiutias
came;  and  Damon  was  in  the  act  of  being  led  to
exe-cutiou,  when,  of  a  sudden,  the  absent  friend,
nho  had  been  detained  by  unforeseeu  and  un-
avoidable obstacles,  presented  himself  to  the  eyes
of  tbe  admiring  crowd  and  saved  tbe  life  of  Da-
inoo.  Dionysins  was  so  much  struck  by  this  in-
Hiance  of  true  attachment  that  be  pardoned  Pbiu-
ti.-is,  and  entreated  tbe  two  to  allow  hira  to  share
tlieir  friendship  (Val.  Max.  ir.  7;  Pint.  Dr  Amic.
Mult).  (2)  An  Athenian  sophist,  tbe  teacher  of
Pericles  and  perhaps  of  Socrates  (Diog.  Laert.  ii.  19).

Damopblla  ( Aa/io^iXi; ).  A  poetess  of  Lesbos,
intimate  with  Sappho.  She  competed  a  hymn  on
tlie  worship  of  tbe  Pergaean  Artemis  (Pbilostrat.
nt.  ApoUon.  i.^).

DamoilA  (dofKMTui).  Tbe  escort  or  retinne  of
tb«  Spartan  kings  in  time  of  war  (Xen.  Hep.  Lac.
xiii.  I).

DamoxSniu  {^apo^tvot).  A  boxer  of  Syracuse,
excluded  from  the  Nemean  Games  for  killing  his
opponent  in  a  pugilistic  encounter.  The  name  of
tiie  latter  was  Creugas;  and  tbe  two  competitors,
after  having  consumed  the  entire  day  in  boxing,
agreed  each  to  receive  from  the  other  a  blow  with-
out ^inching.  Creugas  first  struck  Damoxeuus  on
tbe  bead,  and  then  Damoxeuus,  with  his  fingers
imfairly  stretched  out,  struck  Crengas  on  the  side ;
•lud  snch,  observes  Fausauias,  was  the  hardness  of
liis  nails  and  the  violence  of  the  blow  that  his  band
|iierced  tbe  side,  seized  on  tbe  bowels,  and,  drawing
tbem  outward,  cansed  iostaut  death  to  Creugas.  A
tine  piece  of  sculpture  has  come  down  to  us  with
this  for  its  subject  (Pnusan.  viii.  40).

Dana  (Aaim).  A  great  city  of  Cappadocia,  prob-
ably the  same  as  the  later  Tyana  (q.  v.)  (Xen.  Anab.
i.2,20).

Oanlii  {i\aymj).  (1)  Tbe  daughter  of  Acrisins,
kiugof  Argos,  by  Enrydic^,  daughter  of  Lacedae-
uion.  Acrisins  inquired  of  tbe  oracle  abont  a  son ;
and  the  god  replied  that  be  would  himself  have  no
male  issue,  but  that  bis  daughter  would  bear  a
M>u,  whose  hand  wonld  deprive  him  of  life.  Fear-
ing the  accomplishment  of  this  prediction,  he
framed  a  bracen  subterraneau  chamber,  in  which
be  shut  up  bis  danghter  and  her  nnrse,  in  order
that  she  might never  become  a  mother. (Tbe


Latin  itoets  call  the  place  of  confinement  a  brazen
tower.)  But  Zeus  had  seen  and  loved  tbe  maitleu ;
and,  under  tbe  form  of  a  golden  shower,  he  poured
through  tbe  roof  into  her  bosom.  Dauai)  became,
in  consequence,  tbe  mother  of  a  son,  whom  she  and
her  nurse  reared  in  secrecy  until  be  had  attained
bis  fourth  year.  Acrisins  then  chanced  to  bear
tbe  voice  of  tbe  child  at  play.  He  brought  out
bis  daughter  and  her  nurse,  and,  putting  the  latter
instantly  to  death,  drew  Danae  privately,  with  her
child,  to  tbe  altar  of  Hercean  Zeus,  where  be  made
her  answer  ou  oath  whose  was  ber  son.  She  re-
plied that  he  was  the  offspring  of  Zeus.  Her  father
gave  no  credit  to  ber  protestatious.  Euclosing  her
and  tbe  boy  in  a  coffer,  he  cast  tbem  into  the  sea,
at  the  mercy  of  the  winds  and  waves,  a  oircnm-
stauce  which  has  afforded  a  subject  for  a  beantiful
lyric  by  tbe  poet  Simonides.  The  coffer  was  car-
ried to  the  little  island  of  Seriphns,  where  a  person
named  Dictys  drew  it  out  in  his  nets  (Hiicrva) ',  aud,
freeing  Dnnae  and  Perseus  from  their  confinement,
treateil  tbem  with  the  greatest  kindness.  Poly-
dectes,  tbe  brother  of  Dictys,  reigned  over  tbe  isl-
and. He  fell  in  love  with  DanaS;  but  her  son
Pei'seus,  who  was  now  grown  up,  was  an  iuvinoible
obstacle  in  his  way.  He  had,  therefore,  recourse
to  artifice  to  deliver  himself  of  his  presence ;  and,
feigning  that  he  was  about  to  become  a  suitor  to
Hippodamia,  the  daughter  of  Oenomafis,  be  man-
aged to  send  Perseus,  who  had  bound  himself  by
a  rash  promise,  in  quest  of  the  head  of  the  Gorgon
Medusa,  which  he  pretended  that  he  wished  for
a  bridal  gift.  When  Perseus  bad  succeeded,  by
the  aid  of  Hprmes,  in 'slaying  tbe  Oorgon,  be  pm-
ccedetl  to  Seriphns,  where  he  found  that  his  moth-
er and  Dictys  bad  been  obliged  to  fly  to  the  pro-
tection of  tbe  altar  from  tbe  violence  of  Polydectes.
He  immediately  went  to  tbe  royal  residence ;  and
when,  at  his  desire,  Polydectes  had  summoned
thither  all  the  people  to  see  the  head  of  the  Oor-
gon, it  was  displayed,  and  each  became  a  atone  of
the  form  and  position  which  he  exhibited  at  the
moment  of  the  trausfonnation.  Having  estab-
lished Dictys  as  king  of  Seriphus,  Perseus  returned
with  bis  mother  to  Argns;  aud,  not  finding  Acrisins
there,  proceeded  to  Lartssa  in  Thessaly,  whither
the  latt«r  had  retired  through  fear  of  tbe  fulfil-
ment of  tbe  oracle.  Here  he  inadvertently  killed
Acrisins. See  AcRisius;  PBRSEUS.

There  was  a  legend  iu  Italy  that  Ardea,  the  cap-
ital of  tbe  Rntnlians,  had  been  founded  by  Danaii
(Verg.  Am.  vii.  372,  410).  It  was  probably  caused
by  the  similarity  of  sound  in  Dana^  and  Daunia.
DannuB  is  the  father  of  Tumna.

Dan^  (Aciyaoi)-  A  name  originally  belonging
to  tbe  Argivea,  as  being,  according  to  the  common
opinion,  the  subjects  of  DanaUs  (q.  v.).  In  conse-
quence, however,  of  the  warlike  character  of  the
race,  aud  the  high  renown  acquired  by  them.  Ho-
mer uses  the  name  Danal  as  a  general  appellation
for  the  Greeks,  when  that  of  Hellenes  was  still
confined  t-o  a  narrower  range. See  Dakavs.

DanaXdas  (Aai>at8rr).  Tbe  fifty  daughters  of
Donaiis. See  Danaus.

DanSla  (rd  Aavaka).  A  city  in  the  territory  of
tbe  Troiui,  in  tbe  northeast  of  Galatia,  notable  in
tbe  history  of  tbe  Mithridatic  War  as  the  place
where  Luonllus  resigned  the  command  to  Poropey.

Danapttzla  (also  Danapub).  Another  name  for
the  Borysthenes,  first  mentioned  in  an  anonymous


DANASTRIS


468


DAPHXEPHOKIA


Pcrijilnii  of  thc>  KiixiiiA  H^ta.  It  in  tiuw  ilit>  Vuie-
por.  A  liltlti  itbovu  iiA  iiiuiitli  tlib  river  wUleun
into  A  kind  of  lake  or  inikrBli.  t-Alltul  Liuau,  iulit
whtoii  ttie  Uo^,  iho  uiicit'iit  ilyimuitt  or  Ili>j;ue,  uiiv
•>f  the  jiriiicipul  triliiitnries  uf  tliu  l>uicper,  (lis-
cbarses  it#clf. St-e  Koiivstiiexks.

Donastria. Sec  Danamtl's.

Duiastna.  Anntlirr  nnmc  of  tlio  Tyraa  or  D1l)f^•
fitcr.  It  iii  c:i]U'iI  Daii.'iHliit^  liy  Aiiiiiiiaiiii>i  Miircp]'
litiita  (  x\xi.  3),  mill  I>uiiu8t['ifj  by  CniiHtiUittiie
Piir|il)yi-')}!i'iiilii».  It  ]'iHt>))  fniiii  a  InkH  aniiil  tlu^
Cnrputtiiau  MiumtjiiriN  iti  Giilici:!,  iitii)  finittirA  ii)li>
tln!  Ularlt  Sun  afl«r  n  c<mrs«  tif  ulout  six  Imiidrtul
iiiiloM.  The  iDiitio  Tyras  (Ti>(>nf)  occnrB  hi  Ptt^k'my.
SlrulK),  Sti-plmiius  of  liyziml.iiKii,  and  Scyiiiiuis  of
Cltiod.  I[et-(>(tt>liifl  g'lwn  lli<;  Ionic  form  Til^/Jiyt  (He-
rwl.  Iv. oil.

DanaUs  (Ant-aurl.  A  Min  of  K^-liis  ami  Ant'lti-
tuM*,  ikiiil  l)r<>tiuT  of  A4^>;y]»t)i(t.  \M\ih  ni^sigMv<\  tlx'
cotititiy  iif  LiliYit  tt)  DaiiaUH,  wliilu  to  Acgypttiit  lie
guvi'  Arabia.  At^jiyjitiw  coiuhutciI  tho  country  *»f
ibv  Mf)ani|M)iUv<  aii<l  iiiimml  it  tnnn  liiiiiseU.  Ily
luuiiy  wivi'H  lit'  Uei'utnv  the  fatlu'r  of  iifly  i^uiiti.
Daiiiiiift  Iiad  by  sevcrnt  wivL-s  uii  ciiniil  nunilier  uf
dauglitcra.  Di!we>u»iou  uriiiing  between  liim  mut
the  iMDt)  of  At'gy|itii»,  tbuy  uiiiivd  at  ilepriviiig
lilio  of  lii»  kingdom ;  dtid,  lonriug  their  violence,
he  built,  with  the  aid  of  Athviii*,  a  Hfty-oanMl  veo-
flelt  the  Ant  th»t  vvvr  vtum  luadu,  iu  which  he  cm-
barkfnl  with  liiii  daiightiTs  and  dt'd  over  the  sea.
Ho  Qrst  liiuilcd  uii  the  i»le  of  lihotlet*,  whtre  he
sot  it]i  II  MlalU0  of  tlw  Lindiuii  Altit'u^;  hut',  ]it>t
oaring  to  r«maiu  Iu  that  bilaml,  he  |m)ri>Hdt*d  to
ArgotL,  where  (ivlauor,  who  ut  that  lime  rule<l  over
the  Country,  chtH>rfii)ly  reiiigue4l  th«  goveniiueiit
to  thi'  »lniug(^r  who  had  brought  thitlirr  rivilt-
leation  nnd  the  nrlM.  The  ]H;oph'  touk  t\w  iiani(>
uf  thiMr  IH'W  niounnrh.  and  wcru  L-alhnI  Danai
(^Mim).  Tbc  country  uf  Argtiet  bt-ing  at  thim
time  extremely  dcDcJcut  Iu  pure  aud  whtdeMimc
vati^r  ( see  Inacuis  ),  Oauails  aeuc  forth  his
daughters  in  iincst  of  some.  A«  Amywoit^,  oue
of  theni,  was  engagml  in  the  search,  she  was  res-
cui-d  by  Fofwidon  from  the  int<*ndet]  violence  of  n
salyr,  aud  tlio  god  mvcalc*!  to  her  a  fouutaia
called  aftvr  her  name  ami  the  mo«t  famous  nmoug


iriND

m


joined  Dpim  them  to  alay  in  the  night  thnr
suspecting  bridegroutua.  All  but  Hyp«nuuMtn
obeyed  the  cruel  ordei-H  of  thuir  father;  ami  enl-
tiiig  off  tbo  heads  of  their  huAbaudN.  the.vdim^
them  into  Lcrria,  aud  buried  their  hiwIicA  witk  all
due  rites  outside  of  the  town.  At  the  comuijuid
of  Zeus,  Herniee  nud  AtheuO  purified  ibcui  frooi
the  guilt  of  their  deed.  Hypenuucftira  hud  i;^
Lyiiceua  f<»r  the  delicate  rrgani  which  lie
shown  to  hi>r  niodraty.  Her  father,  at  fir»t,  i
anger  at  her  dinobedieiite,  put  her  into  cIom  cob-
liuvment.  Keluiilitig,  however,  after  Miuie  timp,
he  gave  his  coTiiurnt  to  her  iniion  with  Lyaccm,
and  proclaimed  gyniiiiuitic  giimt-tt,  in  which  thf
victors  wore  to  receive  his  other  danghtere  as  ibe
priies.  It  was  saiil.  however,  that  the  crime  uf  tin
DauaTdeei  did  not  pawt  without  dnc  punAhnieatlD
the  lower  world,  when*  they  wore  condemoed  I0
draw  water  fiU'ever  with  [icrforBted  vrswk.

Dauciiig. Sec  Saliatio.

Oanublus. See  Is^teh.

Dapbnae  (Saipvai).  A  citir  of  Egypt,  aboni  ni-
(ecn  niili-8  from  Pehisium,  on  the  route  to  lf«n-
[diis.  Th*Te  was  always  n  strong  garriwio  in  iJui
(tlni-ii  t<ikfH-p  in  check  (he  Arubiausand  ihi-Hjnu*
.Muiiy  Jfws  Helitc^l  here  after  the  de«truclioa  o(
.liTusali-m.

Dapha^  {Am^n]>  (I)  The  tlanghter  of  tbeiirn-
giHl  Pencuh,  iu  Thc(f«a)y,  jinnined  by  ApoUu,  vi>*
wofi  charmed  by  her  iM'auty ;  but  aa  »he  w»  on
the  point  of  being  orertaken  by  him.  iilie  prtyol
for  aid,  and  was  mctaworphosetl  iutu  a  launl4m
(dfH^Fff).  which  became  iu  couHequencethcfarvutiM
tree  of  Apollo, (9)  See  MaNTu.

Daplm6  (Ad^i^).  A  heantifnl  opot,  five  nila
south  of  Autirtch  in  Syria,  to  which  it  fomifd  »
sort  of  park  or  pleasure  ganleu.  It  a  a«  eclel>rai'J
for  the  grove  and  temple  dedicated  to  AjMtllo.  ttttr
wa«  a  Banctnary  with  the  right  of  anylnn  wbkl
became  famous,  and  to  which  pilgrims  rMort^
in  great  numbers,  waking  It  a  scene  of  perptO)''
vice.  Se<'  tho  description  Id  Oiblmii'd  IhelMt^i
Fall,  chap.  xxiv.  Hence  IM/thniri  morf  bectfi*
proverbial.

Daptmephfuia  if^i^rrf^>op\a).  A  fi«tiril  tti^
the  stmamti  thai  conlrihuliMl  t*»  fonu  the  Leniae*  i  braletl  cverj'  ninth  year  at  Tb^bea  iu  hoooUf  n'
an  lake  or  man^h-  The  soiin  of  Acgyptus  came  |  Apollo,  sumamcd  Umenius  or  tiulaxins.  ItsD'*'
now  to  Argoliri  anil  entn>aTe<I  their  uncle  to  bury  |  was  derived  from  the  laurel  bmnchM  (0ddMi)
past  enmity  iu  oblivion,  and  to  give  them  their:  which  wen.*  carried  l»y  thoKe  who  took  part  mil'
couaiti!^  in  marriage.  Dsiiafhf,  retaiuing  a  perfect  \  celebratiou.  A  full  »c4?onnt  of  the  fe&tiral  iifi^
recidleeliou  of  the  i)i)uric»  Ihcy  hod  done  him  aud  I  en  by  Proclot^  {rkrr»tt,mat)t.  \\.  II).  At  on«  Ititf
dit>tni!tlfu1  of  their  promises,  eooMOled  to  be«t«w  '  all  the  Anoliautt  of  Ani^  and  (he  ai^oceot  dioiri^n,
u|M>u  them  his  danghtf^DK,  whom  he  divided  among  at  the  command  of  an  oracle,  laid  niegp  to  TlieliA
them  by  lot;  but  on  the  Mctlding - ilay  he  anuetl  which  wa»  at  the  name  time  aitnckril  by  itic  F^
the  bauda  of  tbo  bridra  with  daggeta,  and  bD'  j  taigtaps  and  ravagnl  the  neighUmriug  cavnii?-

But  when  the  day  carae  on  wbicb  M^
parties  bad  to  celebrate  a  fchtiril  ft
Apollo,  a  truce  wan  coucludml,  w^  <"'
the  day  of  the  ftwltval  1  hey  wcut  «'>'>
hutrel-boofha  lo  the  temple  uf  tl"  P^'
Bat  Polemataa,  tbe  general  uf  tli«  1^
Claaa.  had  a  viklon  Iu  which  hr  •>*  *
yoang  tnau  who  preaented  lohiuia**"''
pl«4«  aoiC  of  armour,  and  who  »i»A*  ^^
vow  to  iustitute  a  festival,  to  l>^  "^
brBle<l  every  ninth  year,  iu  hotto'"  "^
Apollo,  at  which  the  Thcbaius  *>'''
iMOvl-lioiighif  in  their  hand?,  vcn- '"
f»  to  bta  tcmpl«. Whcu,  on  the  tbi'^


DAPHNI8


469


DAKICUS


day  after  this  vision,  botb  parties  again  were  en-
gaged in  cluse  oumbat,  Polematas  gaiued  tiie  vic-
tory. He  uow  fMlfilIe<1  his  promise,  aud  himself
walked  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  in  the  manner
prescribed  by  the  heitig  he  had  seen  in  his  vision;
and  ever  since  that  time,  coutinnes  Proclas,  this
Cfwtom  has  been  strictly  observetl.

Dapbnls  (Ad0c(f).  A  Sicilian  shepherd,  son  of
Hennes  by  a  nymph,  aud  taught  by  Pan  to  play
oil  the  flute.  He  was  reganled  as  the  inventor  of
bucolic  poetry.  A  Naiad,  t-o  whom  he  proved
fnitbless,  pnni8he<l  him  with  hliudness,  where-
upon bis  father  Hermes  translated  him  to  heaven.
See  the  Fifth  Eclogue  of  Vergil,  20-80.

Daphniu  {^<p»ovs).  A  town  of  the*Locr)  Opun-
tii,  aitnated  on  the  sencoast,  at  the  mouth  of  a  river
lit' the  same  name,  near  the  frontiers  of  the  Kpic-
ueiuiiUivn  Locri.  Into  the  river  Daphnus  the  bo<ly
of  HeHifHl  was  thrown  after  his  murder. See  He-

i»IOl>t'S.

Oar&dns  (iiapaSos)  or  Dai&m{^dpas).  A  river  of
Africa,  rising  to  the  northwest  of  the  Pains  Nigri-
tes,  on  Mount  Maudras,  and  falling  into  the  At-
lautic  to  tlie  north  of  the  promontory  Arsinarium.
It  is  supposed  to  be  the  same  with  the  Senegal.

Dardanarii.  Monopolists  at  Rome  who  pur-
chased and  held  grain  in  order  to  sell  it  at  a  high
price.  They  were  liable  to  severe  punishment  un-
der the  Empire.  See  Plin.  i/.  K.  zxx.  $  9 ;  Dig.
47,  11.  6.

DardXni  (AdpJWoi).  A  people  in  Upper  Moesia,
occupying  part  of  Illyricum.

Dardania  (Aapdavta).  (1)  A  district  of  the  Troad,
lyuig  along  the  HelleHpout,  southwest  of  Abydos,
and  iidjacent  to  the  territory  of  Ilium.  Its  i>eopIe
(Danlaiii)  appear  in  the  Trojan  War,  nnder  Aeueas,
ill  close  alliance  with  the  Trojans,  with  whose
name  their  own  is  often  interchanged,  especially
by  the  Roman  poets.  (2)  A  city  in  this  district.
See  Dasdanus  (2).

Dardftnla  or  Dardaniuzn.  A  promontory  of
Troas,  south  of  Ahydiis,  near  which  was  situated
the  city  of  Dardanum.  The  Hellespont  here  be-
gins to  contract.

DardSnuB  (Aapdavoc).  (I)  The  son  of  Zens  and
Electra,  the  mythical  ancestor  of  the  Trojans,  and
throngh  tbem  of  the  Bomaue.  The  Greek  tradi-
tiuus  usually  maile  him  a  king  in  Arcadia,  from
wbence  he  emigrated  first  to  Sumotbrace,  and  after-
wards to  Asia,  where  he  received  a  tract  of  land
from  King  Teucer,  on  which  be  built  the  town  of
Dardania.  His  grandson  Tros  removed  to  Troy
the  Palladium,  which  had  belonged  to  his  grand-
father. Accoiding  to  the  Italian  traditions,  Dar-
danus  was  the  son  of  Cory  thus,  an  Etniscan  prince
of  Corythns  (Cortona) ;  and,  as  iu  the  Greek  tradi-
tion, be  afterwards  emigrated  to  Phrygia.  (*2)  Also
Dakdanum  (AdpSavov),  a  Greek  city  in  the  Troad
on  the  Hellespont,  twelve  Roman  miles  from  Ilinm,
hnilt  by  Aeolian  colonists,  at  some  distance  front
ilie  site  of  the  ancient  city  Dardania.  From  Dar-
danum arose  the  name  of  the  Castles  of  the  Dar-
danelles, after  which  the  Hellespont  is  now  called.

Dares  (Aapi}r)>  (1)  A  Trojan  priest,  menttoneil
by  Homer  (II.  v.  9).  It  is  alisnrdly  pretended,  by
some  of  the  ancient  writers,  that  he  wrote  an  Iliad,
or  history  of  the  Trojan  War,  in  prose;  and  Aelian
(Tar.  fiiflf.  xi.  2)  assures  us  that  it  still  existed  iu
hii  day,  without  telling  ns,  however,  whether  he


himself  had  read  it  or  not.  There  can,  of  course,  be
no  donbt  that  Aelian  was  deceive<l,  and  that  the
work  which  he  took  for  the  productiou  of  Dares
was  the  composition  of  some  sophist  of  a  much
later  age.  However  this  may  be,  the  Iliad  of
which  Aelian  speaks  no  longer  exists;  bat  we
have  a  Latin  work  remaining,  written  iu  prose,
which  was  for  some  time  regarded  as  a  translation
from  the  Greek  original,  and  was  ascribed  to  Cor-
nelias Nepos,  though  abounding  with  absurdities
aud  solecisms.  It  is  entitled  Hinlorta  Excidii
Troiae,  or  De  ExcUOo  IVotoe.  It  professes  to  be
dedicated  to  the  historian  Sallust.

This  work, together  with  that  of  Dictys  Cretensis
(q.  V.)  forms  the  original  source  of  a  famous  romance
of  chivalry,  which  met  with  extraordinary  success
during  the  Middle  Ages,  and  in  the  centuries  im-
mediately subsequent  to  the  invention  of  printing.
These  works  of  Dares  and  Dictys  having  fallen
into  the  hands  of  a  Sicilian  name<l  Guide  delle  Co-
louno,  a  native  of  Messina,  and  a  celebrated  lawyer
and  poet  of  the  thirteenth  century,  he  conceived
the  idea  of  giving  them  that  romantic  air  which
would  harmonize  with  the  spirit  of  bis  age,  when
chivalry  hatl  acquired  its  greatest  lustre.  Ho
consequently  interpolated  the  narratives  of  the
pretended  poets  of  Phrygia  and  Crete  with  various
adventures,  suited  to  the  taste  of  the  time,  such  as
tournaments,  challenges,  aud  single  combats.  His
work  having  met  with  considerable  success,  be
composed,  iu  Latia  prose,  a  romance  of  the  war  of
Troy,  into  which  he  also  introduceil  the  war  of  the
Seven  against  Thebes  aud  the  expedition  of  the
Argonauts.  He  confounds  together  history  and
mythology,  Greek  aud  Oriental  manners;  his  he-
roes are  acquainted  with  alchemy  and  astronomy,
and  come  into  conflict  with  dragons,  griffins,  and
other  fabnious  monsters.  His  romance  was  trans-
lated into  almost  every  European  language,  aud
excited  a  general  enthusiasm.  Hence  the  desire
which  at  that  time  seized  the  g:reat  families  of
Europe  of  claiming  descent  ftt)m  one  of  the  heroes
of  Trojan  story ;  aud  hence  the  eagerness,  on  the
part  of  the  monks,  to  compose  genealogies  consist-
ing of  Greek  and  Roman  names  which  had  some
analogy  with  the  names  of  the  sovereign  princeH
of  the  Middle  Ages.  This  same  work  of  Dares
Fhrygins  was  the  source  whence  Conrad  of  WUrz-
burg,  ill  the  latter  half  of  the  thirteenth  century,
derived  the  materials  of  the  poem  which  he  com-
posed iu  like  manner  on  the  war  of  Troy.

The  oldest  MS.  of  the  Hutoria  de  Excidio  Troiar
is  one  at  Paris,  of  the  ninth  century,  and  other
MSS.  are  those  of  St.  Gall,  Bern,  Bamberg,  and  Vi-
enna. The  work  is  at  least  as  early  as  Isidorns,
who  mentions  It  (Orig.  i.  41).  The  best  edition  is
that  by  Meister  (Leipzig,  1873).  See  Meister,  De
Daretis  Phrj/g.,  etc.  (Breslan,  1871) ;  Dunger's  treat-
ise in  the  Programme  of  the  Vitztbum  GyDinasiura
(Dresden,  1669);  and  Korting,  Diclya  und  Daren
(Halle,  1874).  On  the  language,  see  the  Index
Latinitatis,  in  Meister's  edition.

(2)  One  of  the  companions  of  Aeneas,  celebrated
as  A  pugilist,  though  conquered  iu  the  funeral
games  of  Anchises  by  the  aged  Entellns  (Verg.
Aen.  V.  369  foil.).  This  Dares,  or  a  Trojau  of  the
same  name,  was  slain  by  Tumus  iu  Italy  (Aen.  xn.
363).

Daxiciu  (trrarrip  haptiKot).  A  daric;  the  gold
coin  which  coustitnteil  for  centuries,  until  the  time
of  Alexander  the  Great,  the  nmin  part  of  the  coin-


opw  «f  AKtft  oiMicr  P«*rHiau  iloinjnlaii.  Gold  daria;*
arv  lu  \iv  I'otititl  ill  all  ^rcat  mii-ienmR;  tlioir  type
18  on  tliu  obvemp  ii  cr»wiiti<I  urclior  kno<>ltti};,  on  tJio
revono  a  iDL^ru  nule  iiicnMo;  tlu-ir  wni)!;lit  in  slioiit
130  grutnft,  aikI  llifir  iiitriiiiiiio  value  iiboiit  $5.40  of
oiir  monry.  In  :UhiKii>u  N»  lliair  type  thoy  were
Mtmvtimus  caIUmI  rw^orni;  wIiimhvj  tlw  iwiying  of
Age^ilttiU  (Phtt.  A-ir/t.  ir>)  tli»t  tio  b»<l  hi>vu  tirivon
from  A«ia  l»y  3i\*X1t)  arcliera,  wlieti  Ihh  rvwtU  wiis
the  rc«iilt  of  Persian  briltrry  »t  Athpii*i  .tit<lTlieb<!8.
Tlie  (iriH<kH  ciHiiit>ci>;<l  tlu<  wnnt  Aaf»i«nc  wUb
the  tiiiiuo  of  Darius  Hysta«|ii)<,  to  wbuin  they  nt-
Iribnted  ttir  tint  ii!«ue  of  th«f«  cciitis.  TliU  (Ivrivi^
Won.  however,  is  wrtninly  nriiiiif<nin.  Not  <nily  is
Ifaero  fimall  ]ilc9tif^«n  hi  hdiiihI  between  tho  iiaum  of
tbv  coin  autl  that  of  tho  ktn^  in  Ibfir  Pornian
fomiA.  btit  wc  l«ani  frwrn  tbo  lUiok  of  E«ra  (ii.  GO;
viit.27)  Lhat<)aric4wt<rv  in  cirt^iibilioii  in  Pulcstiiit!
in  tbu  liinu  <if  CyniM;  and  M.  Ii«-rt.iti  h:*K  fnniHl  tbv
xviini  darikii  on  a  tabbit  of  the  it"ij,'n  of  NabtmiibiH,
wtiiuU  iH  Klill  earliet  {  TVunx.  .SW.  Hibl.  Arch.  IH83-
18t*4,  p.  tf7;  cl".  Hvad,  Huttoria  SHiiinnim,  p.  liJH).
Of  ooiirae  in  the  oaHCi  just  ciUK],  t-bim^b  wc  bavo  a
complete  proof  of  tbo  great  uiitii|iiity  of  tliu  wnni
daric,  ne  canoot  bo  iturc  wbutliiT  a  fixcil  wfii;bt
of  gold  or  a  coin  is  intvudtMl.  The  probubility  in
that  tb»  uations  of  tbu  KDpbrat«f(  valley  diil  not
colli  iDoiiey  until  Ibpy  ha^l  con<|n<>itML  Lytlia  and
Ionia  in  the  timo  of  Cyrna.  JLlariiis,  llttrodotiix
tellR  ua,  iNsned  gold  coin  of  great  tinenosi*  (llenxl.
iv.  Ili6);  and  this  may  have  caiisul  the  Oroeka  to
mppoM  lb;it  be  lA^iied  the  «arli«Bt  Persian  cotna.
Tbe  abun<l:ince  of  the  darics  in  circniation  in  Asia
Minor  in  the  dayx  of  Xerxea  is  f^hown  by  the  noil-
known  story  of  PytliiiiH  tlie  T^ydian  (Herwl.  vii.  2?),
wlio  poHWMMt'il  lour  ntillions  of  them.


Oold  Dane,  ucliml  aie. |8nU«b  Uuhojil)


Rltrer  Darte.  >cbi»I  bHw iBrlttih  Husffiim.)

BoBideB  th«  gold  dnrics  iheru  circulated  silver
voiiiR  of  I  he  aaiue  Hhit]»e  mid  bearing  tbu  Hanio  d«-
vico  of  Iho  art'IiHr;  ibeM'  w^re  t'oiinnoidy  known
AA  the  triy\os  orsliHkt'l.  lint  wftv  Moiiiftim^n  t4>nni'd
silver  darics  (Plnr.  I'iwm,  IM).  Tliet»«  were  of  tbe
value  of  about  ^I'lT.

'DASiaai^aptioe;  Pitm. /(jrvi/r«f«).  tUSitrnamed
HvsTAsi'is  (or  fton  of  Kyttta-tiw^t,  a  satrap  of  Per-
Nin,  bom  it.c.  54h.  ;ind  belonging  to  tbe  n>yal  line
of  tho  Achnemenid'-H.  IliN  falbi'r  Kyittaapes  had
been  governor  of  tbe  province  of  Persia.  Seven
noblemen  of  tlur  higheasl.  rank,  among  whom  wax
Dnrins,  conspired  to  detbmno  tho  Magian  Smenlii*
('!■  v.),  wlm  bu<l  iiKtirpwl  lint  cronn  itfter  ibo  de^th
of  CainbytHw,  »nd.  having  ai'-complivibed  llieir  ol><
Ject.  (B.C.  ^il),  reftolvM)  ibat  oni4  of  tht;ir  nninWr
should  reign  in  hia  alead. Acuonliiig  to  Henwlotiih


(iii.64).  they  agreed  ro  meet  at  early  dawn  intlv
HUburbs  of  tho  capital,  and  that  he  of  their  uu»-
ber  wbn»o  honw  should  tirst  tuMKb  at  llie  rising  of
the  snu  Hbonhl  poasoat  the  kitigilom.  If  we  Iwliar*
tho  historian,  who  gives  two  aocotintti  of  the  ntti-
ter,  Darina  obtaincil  tbe  emwii  ilinnigh  ati  artful
onitrivanco  on  the  part  of  lii<t  gnmni.  It  i»  nntp
probiihlo,  bowcviir,  that-,  in  nomteqaence  of  llLiT^
lalionitbip  to  the  royal  line,  hi»  election  to  Iho
thnnio  wan  the  uuauiiituua  aut  of  tlit!  uttiot  om-
Hpiniturs.  It  is  oertain,  tudoed,  that  tliey  mrrivil
for  themselves  privilegiia  which  tended  at  IcotfllJ
make  thorn  independent  of  the  monarch,  and  oiyh
to  keep  him  dejieudvut  upon  tbem.  One  d(  llcir
nuinl>cr  ih  st^A.  to  liave  fonuully  stipulated  fur  »b-
(Hiliito  exemption  from  the  loyal  authority,  ni  llir
conilition  on  which  h«  witbdrvw  bis  claim  lutlie
cr^iwii;  and  the  ruat  aoijtiire*!  the  right  of  bocw
Ui  [Imkiug'H  jienion  ut.  all  MeiuHins,  wiiliotitadiiiig
his  luave,  and  bnnnd  him  to  Hid(>ct  bit  wives  pv
cUi)«ively  from  their  fauiilien.  How  far  the  pawRf
of  Darius,  though  riominully  deH)>o|ir,  wan  mll>
liuIitl^d  by  these  privileges  of  bis  unbleo,  ma;  hi
aecn  from  aii  occurreuce  which  took  place  in  llir
early  part  of  bis  reign,  iu  the  case  of  Intapliemn,
who  bail  been  one  of  tbo  partnem  in  IIjp  ratf
spiracy.  lie  revenged  himself,  it  is  tmo.  ftitvt
outrage  comniitl<>d  by  this  iiidivjdnal,  by  pnitia*
bim  to  dentil ;  bnt  l>efore  he  veiitartul  to  takr  ihi*
(dep,  he  tlionght  It  iieceiwary  to  iwnnd  rlie  oltff
four,  anil  to  jwi-rlnii)  whether  they  wniiW  tnilt"
common. naiitte  with  Ihe  otTeuder.

Nuvertbi-lcfut,  I>Ariii:<i  wns  the  greatest  anil  rami
powerful  king  i  hat  over  lilU-d  the  tbninc  uf  Paw*-
C'yi'U.4  and  ('unibyMCH  boil  iMiiipicnsI  umiMM:  l**-
riuK  wan  tbe  true  founder  of  Hut  Persian  State.  Tbr
doniiiiious  of  h\»  predoeetM^ira  were  a  mafiiofroan-
tries  only  ntiited  by  tUii'ir  HubjtH-tion  In  ibe  vMol
aeoiututiii  ruler,  which  uxpn>A;ttHl  iiwITby  aiUiln*
ry  and  irn-gntar  cxotrtioiiH.  Darius  lirxt  tx-giDiml
tliemintounetupiru,  of  wbich  every  iiit'nil)«jfeil't*
place  and  knew  itn  fuuctioua.  Ills  renliti  sirrtcb"'
fhjin  tbe  Aegean  to  tbe  Indus,  from  tbe  st«ppi«*f
Scythia  to  the  Cataracts  of  tbe  Nile,  lie  JirMtnl
IhiH  vast  Iraet  into  twenty  MntrnpieM  or  [irui'li>f«*>
ftiid  preferibtHl  the  tiibntt«  which  ea4'b  wwKip*?
t<i  the  roynl  treasury,  and  tbe  pn))K>riion  in  whi^''
they  wore  to  supply  proviHion.-(  for  tlie  anaf  i?*'
for  the  kiiig'.<i  honscbotd.  A  higbway,  cm  «lii(><
diMtjincM*  wenr  n.'gubtrly  marked  and  »|i4tJ"*'
building-*  plaortl  t«  receive  all  who  inivdM  '"
tbo  king*!!  uamo.  conneotml  tbo  weaiern  coa»i  ■i''
tbe  aeat  of  government :  and  nloug  thianwIW'
iern  tniined  to  extrm^rdinary  »pced  transold'''
thf king's nieseagee. 8e« C'citeCT Pt'WJCf*:

PKriHM.

Darius,  in  the  very  beginning  of  his  miipi,  ■w*'*'
tate<l  an  exitedition  against  the  .Srylhiam*!"*'"*'*
their  inciimions  for  all  time  In  come  by  p  ulnUiT
display  of  tbe  power  and  ii'sonixTa  of  th"  IVfV""
Kmpiro.  His  march,  however,  was  delajiM  I'?"
rebellion  which  broke  nut  at  llabybm.  'fb'*'^
cient  capital  of  Assyria  had  U-en  seerelty  pn'P*'^
ing  for  revolt  itnriiig  tbe  troubles  tlial  iMl''''*'^
tbe  fall  of  Smerdiit,  aud  for  nearly  two  ye*™''
detied  tbe  iiower  of  Parina.  At  length  tli**''*|!
egy  of  iCopyrn.x,  »  noble  Persian,  »lw  tannii^
bis  persim  and  his  power  to  the  intermt  of '*'*
inakter,  is  said  to  have  opened  its  ^»U*  ("  ^^
(tiirca  H.c.51f().  When  be  was  fnwd  from  ili«*  '*'*
he  !>et  out  for  the  Scythian  war  ( n.c.  513  or  S"^**


DARIL'3


471


DARIUS


Hock'Cnl  Tomb  of  Dtrlua.

Tbe  whole  militai;  force  of  tbe  Empire  waa  pQt
ill  motion,  and  the  oumbers  of  the  army  are
rated  at  seven  or  eight  hundred  thousand  men.
This  expedition  of  Darioa  into  Scythia  has  g;iveii
rise  to  considerable  disonsaion.  The  first  point  in-
volved is  to  ascertain  how  far  the  Persian  monarch
peuetrated  into  tbe  country.  According  to  Herod-
otus (  It.  S3 ),  he  crossed  the  Thracian  Bosporus,
marched  throngh  Thrace,  passed  the  Danube  on  a
bridge  of  boats,  and  then  pursued  a  Scytliian  di-
visiou  as  far  as  tbe  Tanais.  Having  crossed  rhis
river,  he  traversed  the  territories  of  the  Saiirorna-
tae  as  far  as  the  Bndini,  whose  city  he  buriiHd.
Beyond  the  Budini  he  entered  upon  a  vast  desert,
and  reached  the  river  Oarus,  where  he  remained
some  considerable  time,  erecting  forts  npon  its
bauks.  Finding  that  the  Scythians  had  disap-
peared, he  left  these  works  only  half  finished,  turned
his  course  to  the  westward,  and,  advancing  by
rapid  marches,  entered  Scytliia,  where  he  fell  in
with  two  of  the  divisions  of  the  enemy.  Pursuing
these,  he  traversed  the  territories  of  the  Melanch-
laeui,  Androphagi,  and  Neuri,  without  being  able
to  bring  them  to  an  engagement.  Provisions  fail-
iDg,  he  was  eventually  compelled  to  recross  the
Danabe  (see  HiSTiAEUS),  glad  to  have  saveil  a  small
(wrtion  of  bis  once  numerous  army.  According  to
other  accounts  (Strab.  305),  Darius  only  came  as
far  as  the  sandy  tract  between  the  Danube  and  the
Tynis,  in  the  present  Bessarabia,  where,  in  after-
days,  An  tigon  as  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Scyth-
ians, with  his  whole  army.

Another  expedition  undertaken  by  command  of
Darius  was  an  invasion  of  India  (Herod,  iv.  44),
the  date,  however,  being  donbtfnl.  In  this  titfair
he  was  more  successful,  and  conquered  a  part  of
the  Punjab ;  not,  however,  the  whole  country,  a«
Bonie  modern  writers  erroneously  represent.

Sometime  after  this,  Miletus  having  revolted,  and
Aristagoras,  its  niler,  having  solicited  aid  from  the
Athenians  for  tbe  purpose  of  enabling  it  to  main-


tain its  independence,  they  sent  twenty
ships,  to  which  the  Eretrians  added  five
more,  in  order  to  requite  a  kindness
previously  received  from  tbe  Milesians.
Aristagoras,  upon  the  arrival  of  this
fleet,  resolved  to  make  an  expedition
against  Sardis,  the  residence  of  the  Per-
sian satrap.  Accordingly,  landing  at
Ephesns,  the  ooufederates  marched  in-
land, took  Sardis,  and  drove  tbe  gov-
ernor into  tbe  citadel.  Most  of  the
bouses  in  Sardis  were  made  of  reeds,
and  even  those  that  were  built  of  brick
were  roofed  with  reeds.  One  of  these
was  set  on  lii-e  by  a  soldier,  and  imme-
diately the  flames  spread  from  house  to
house  and  consumed  the  whole  city.
The  light  of  tbe  couHagration  showing
to  tbeOreeks  tbe  great  numbers  of  tbeir
opponents,  who  were  beginning  to  rally,
being  constrained  by  necessity  to  defend
themselves,  as  tbeir  retreat  was  out  off
by  the  river  Pactolus,  tbe  former  retired
through  fear  aud  regained  tbeir  ships
(B.C.  501).  Upon  the  receipt  of  this  en-
telligeuce,  Dnrius,  having  called  for  a
bow,  put  nn  arrow  into  it,  and  shot  it
into  the  air,  with  these  words,  "Grant,
O  Ood,  that  I  may  be  able  to  revenge
myself  upon  the  Athenians."  After  he
had  thus  spoken,  be  comniaude<l  one  of  his  at-
tendants thrice  every  time  dinner  was  set  before
him,  to  exclaim,  "Master!  remember  the  Athe-
nians." Mardnniiis,  tbe  king's  son-in-law,  was  in-
trusted with  the  care  of  the  war.  After  crossing
the  Hellespont,  he  marched  down  through  Thrace,
but,  in  endeavouring  to  double  Mount  Athos,  he  lost
300  vessels  and,  it  is  said,  more  than  30,000  men
(B.C.  493).  After  this  he  was  attacked  in  the  night  by
tbe  Brygi,  who  killed  many  of  his  men  and  wound-
ed Mardonins  himself.  He  suoceetled,  however,  in
defeating  and  reducing  theui  to  subjection,  but
his  army  was  ho  weakened  by  tbeee  circumstances
that  he  was  compelled  to  return  iugloriousty  to
Asia.  Darins,  only  animated  by  this  loss,  sent  a
more  considerable  force,  under  the  command  of
Datis  and  Artapbernes,  with  onlers  to  sack  the
cities  of  Athens  aud  Kn'tna,  aud  to  send  to  him  all
the  surviving  inhabitants  in  fetters.  The  Persians
took  tbe  isle  of  Naxos  and  the  city  of  Eretria  in
Enboea,  but  were  defeated  with  great  slaughter  by
the  Athenians  and  Plataeans  under  tbe  celebrated
Miltiadesat Marathon  (b.c. 490).  Their deetwasalso
completely  unsuccessful  in  an  attempt  to  surprise
Athens  after  the  battle.  (See  Miltiades;  Mara-
thon.) The  anger  of  Darius  wiui  doubly  inflamed

against  Athens

»--™. ■*•  ^ -^  , >--.„ ^y  *^^o  result  at
ll!T!^^T^'-T£<K<TT^^ Marathon; and

he  resolved  that
the  insolent  peo-
ple, who  bad  in-
va<le<l  his  territo-
ries, violated  the
persons  of  bis
messengers,  and
put  his  generals  to  a  shuuiBful  flight,  should  feel
the  whole  weight  of  his  arm.

The  preparations  he  now  set  on  foot  were  on  a
vast  scale  and  demanded  a  longer  time.  For  three
years  all  Asia  was  kept  in  a  continual  stir;  in  the


(SSDxm)


Cuneirorm  and  Hl<^mg1ypblcal  Pormti
of  ■■  iinriiis."'


DARtTTS

fourtli,  however,  Duriim  was  (1iKtruct«4l  by  other
'ClUiaeA — by  a  qiiarn:!  Wtwt^li  Itta  two  hi>iis  rv^xrrt-
JliK  ibt)  Miccewtioti  lo  tlii<  Ihmiiv,  aixl  by  an  IiiMir-
ivi-tuiii  ill  Kitypt.  In  th»  follnwin):  yuar,  bttfMD'
ho  hnd  endeil  his  proparotiuiis  it>;aiiJ.Ht  Kgyjit  nnd
AtticR.  hft  ilieil,  tiiul  Xcrxtii  (q.  v.^  iisc^aitli^d  tho
tJirunp,  in  b.c.  4ci6.  Dnrius  bad  rciniie*!  for  tLirry-
sJx  yunnt,  Kis  iiiciniiry  wiw  nln-nyt^  lii'ltl  iu  vciif  rft-
tion  by  llio  Pt<i'Ktatit>  itiiH  thi^  nlli[>rn»tibiis  comjire-
h(Mi<Ii><l  uixtt^r  hix  nnity,  whom  b«  governed  with
iiiiicb  wi)4thitn  iitiil  mtHtt-Talion.

(2)  The  wcutul  of  the  tiiituo  wan  fityU><1  ^Qjfos.
SeI'Ol■nr^:  Cvms  (2).

(3)  TLt'  tbiniipl'llu'iiame.aml  tht»laMt  IthiKof  Pt-r-
HJA,  waH  FMiti  of  Anutiiie»t.  n'bti  hatl  Tor  bin  fntJirrOiil  lut-
tiH'8,<>tt«  of  th»)«oii)«ul'l>uriiiHUcbut).  Hh  trne  iiaiiii>
wiiHCo4loiiiuiiiiits,  iiiiiJ  be  bndfbefure  coiuiug  ti>  tbu
throne,  ncqiiiretl  eome  roptitntiou  for  (il'ixditiiI  i^oiir-
agc,  chiefly  through  uti  oxpbiit  nhlcb  be  bad  per-
foriuetl  iuoiiiiofthe  expeilitious  H^uiiiHt  the  Cwlil-
ttianit,  niieii  he  uccepteil  h  csbiilleiiK^*  from  one  of
their  Mluutiwl  vvnrrinrK,  iinil  hIpw  hiiii  in  hiiiglc
combat.  Tbu  i>iiimii*1i  Buj^kih  (,<[.  v.)  niiHHil  lijiii  to
Iho  throiio,  not  Mil  tiita-b,  btitvcver,  nit  tbiH  ai'L-niint,
HH  bt'cauae  tlii'y  hud  ]>rt>vi(>ii!(ly  bM>ii  IViuiiilN,  and
b«caufio,  pnrbu,iwt,  Iburu  w»»  no  oltuT  pi-iiii:«t  uf  llii*
bhiod  on  whuwti  Ki''^*il"di!  lie  could  »«f*')y  tt-Iy.
CoiloumiiniiK,  npuii  bis  acoiHttiou  (n.'i*.  XiG),  yvUWh
took  place  about  llii-  liiin--  wlieii  Plijlip  of  Maordrjii
ilied.attsiinied  tbc  nami'  ufDiirtUH.  He  mouii  diwov-
ered  that  Uajjoas,  who  may  hare  intended  iit  length
toM^izc  the  tbrntie  biDis<-ir,i)e.sijrii(id  that  be  should
share  tlie  fale  of  hia  la^t  two  predecessors.  A  cap
of  pnisui)  tiad  boon  pr4>parti]  for  bim.  Bnt,  hariiig
tletected  the  pbit^  lie  called  Hn;'oa»  into  bis  pred-
ciici)  and  compelbid  biui  to  drink  the  deadly
ilraii},'ht.

'I'be  reign  of  Darius  Cudoiuauou«  was  eurly  ilis-
tiirbed  by  the  inviutiun  of  Alexander.  The  Pei-Hian
inoimn.-h,  however,  did  not  take  the  coiuuiiind  of  Iiih
foruH.'^  nitlil  after  tht«  battle  of  the  Graiiicui<  had
Imh-u  roii^lit  (^Xii),  and  Alexander  had  lulvunfud  as
far  aaCilicia.  Hu  then  pmceeiled  to  nutol  tliL-  in-
vader, iu  all  the  pomp  of  royalty,  hut  n-ilhati  army
ill  fitted  to  couli'iid  nKuiiidt  Mieli  an  anlti|^oiiit«t.
fieoolving  to  hazard  au  encoaiitPr.i-iuitniry  (o  (h«
advlcaof  hiB(trt*ek  alli4'fi,  Dariiu<;n};aKe<l  In  the  bat-
tle of  ItmuH,  but  WAH  e(iin|H>lUMl  to  tleo  from  tbo  field
with  MO  mtich  pruripitaiinn  an  tn  leave  ludiiud  him
llio  bow,  ttbield,  nod  rnyul  mantle  (:)^t:t).  1114  vamp
M-uK  pbinilerml,  and  liin  inotber,  wife^  and  ehildren
fell  into  the  handt*  itt  the  comineror.  In  vain,  af-
ter tbin,  di<l  ParinH  MMpplicnte  fcir  tenio*  of  i>eacc
Ali^xandei-  ivent  on  in  hi^  ejtnrcv  of  virtovy  ;  and  in
Ik  M^Ttind  pilebed  battle  at  <>angauiela.  rtniinioiily
ckDihI  the  battle  of  Arbnla  (q.  v.),  DuritlH  again
foti({ht,  and  again  was  oomiM^lIed  to  tloe  (IVJl).  Mitt
|ilun  wn»  now  to  advance  iuto  Media,  lay  waut-e  the
country  throngh  wliicli  he  passed,  and  acek  rofnge
flnnlly  on  the  oth^r  sirle  of  tlie  Osns,  where  be
ho|M>d  that  the  conqnoror  wonhl  be  content  to  leave
liim  numolffttod.  Alexander  allowed  four  ntontli^
to  elapiM)  before  he  H):nin  ml  out  in  puntuit  of  Thx-
riiin.  He  then  Hdvaneml  by  forced  iiinri*be!!t  in  pur-
unit  uf  him,  and  U*ariiod  eventually  that  tlie  mon-
arch  waH  a  priaoiier  iu  the  bundu  of  Bensuit  [q.  v.l,
one  of  hiH  own  satraps.  A  stilt  more  active  pur-
suit u<iw  commented,  aud  tim  unhappy  king,  re-
fusing to  proceed  any  ftirtlier.  was  left  mortally
wniiiided  iit  uobnriot,  wbilu  BetwiiH  aud  bisaccom-
piicea  took to  tlight,  uccoiiiipunieil  by  tiW  borw.


Pnrius  expttMl  before  Alexander  saw  hiui  (bc
XIO).

Alexander  onlenid  hia  body  to  be  buried  in  the
Hepniebre  of  bi8  anceetunt  with  rttyal  ins^nificcDM,
took  f barge  of  the  education  of  biH  cliildren.Md
inarrictl  bis  daughter  (Phlt..l/*j-.;  Arriau, /,>;).  J(.)i

(4)  The  eldest  son  of  ArtAxerxes  Mnntnon,  put  a
deatbforcon»piringagaiDat  Ilia  fat In<r^Plul..(rfar.]L

Dart. See  lUtfTA ;  Iauulum  j  Pilum  ;  Tmni :

THAOt'LA.

Daaaaretil  i^trtrapTfnoi),  DsBsaritae  f  Aairra-
fHTOi),  "I'  Dassaretae  (^virap^ai).  A  peiiplij  in
Greek  Hl^Tia  on  the  borders  of  Miicuhinia;  tluir
chief  town  wan  LychtiidiiH,  uu  a  hill,  on  thf  rimtli
Hiilu  of  the  liikti  Lyehnitirt,  which  wo*  to  calliid
jiflur  the  tuwu.

DatHmes  (Anru'/iijr).  A  distinguished  Puniau
gtMirral,  a  Carian  by  birth,  and  Hutrnp  of  Cilvrii
under  Aiiaxerxes  II.  (Mnemnn).  but  wliu  revoltad
against  the  king.  He  dofentpil  the  geuemls  vbo
were  M>nt  agairmt  hiiii,  bnt  wan  at  lengtb  mwuii*
Qttted.  B.C.  '.ifi2.  CoriiHlitiH  NeiKw,  who  bns  wrill-
ten  his  life,  callN  him  the  brnveHt  and  ninct  1I1I4
of  nil  burltanau  geucnils,  after  Hamilrar  and  Iliui-
niliiil.

Datatim  Lndgre. See  PtiJi.

Datetae  (^itrrfrai).  DiHtrihutont  or  liqniditcll^
empbiyetl  iu  the  winding  ■i|>  of  u  partneriiliip  C<HH
cerii  when  a  dittagreemeut  exinted  ninnng  thr  palfr
tiBiK,  The  datetae  were  nftually  cbuKeu  liy  b»t  fiWD
amniig  fhe  public  diaetttat  (q.  v.).

Datis  titans).  A  Mede  who  oounuanded,  aloof
Willi  .^rLapburnes,  the  Pt-r»iaii  army  that  wwd^
feiited  a1 Slariitliiui,  n.r.  4'.KI  <  Herod.  vi.Ml.

DatoT.  Tliu  Attendant  who,  during  tbr  pisu
of  ball,  ijivki'd  up  the  balls  that  frit,  or  »iii>plirf
new  hulls  to  the  players  (Plant.  Twrr.  it  X^'^
See  Pi  LA,

Datum  (Afm«.)  or  Datoa  f  J^^irot).  A  Tlirwiai
town  on  tlje  Hirymonic  (iiilf,  subject  to  SftM^
Ilia,  with  gidd  iuIdch  in  Mount  I'nngaciu  in  tbc
noigbl»oiiiliood,  wlience  came  the  pnnerli.  a*'P»-
tiini  of  good  thinga"  [lleri>d.  ix.  75).

DanUs  [.^<ivX(v)  or  Daulla  QnuXiaV  An  niKi*^
town  in  I'hocis.  Mitnutvd  on  a  lofly  hill,  ceh-lmud
in  mythidogy  as  tlie  rf«idnnce  of  the  Tliia<  iau  kin?
TereiiH,  auil  iw  itii*  wi-ne  of  |ln>  tragic  flt<ir>' trf  flB*
Uumda  ami  PnR-in^.  Hence  DAi'l.lAti  in  the  nam
(if  liolb  Prm-ur'  and  Philomela  (q.  v.).

Dauiila. Sire  ArCLlA.

DaxmUB  {^avvot).  {\)  Httn  nf  Lycaon  and  \«^^^
or  of  lupyx  and  Peucetlus,  with  whom  ho  wlllf'
iu  Apulia  and  divided  it  into  three  jmrtc  iUISpO
of  Pilnmuun  and  I>HHa<s  huHlNtud  of  V«i)illi.ni*<'
ancestor  of  Tuning  (q.  v.).

Days. See  Oiks.

Dea  Dia.  Au  early  Roman  goddess,  protol''?
identical  with  Area  Lurentia  and  worsllippi^ ''^
the  I'rutn'i  Arvale*  (q.  v.(. See  KoMi'LUt.

Dead,  B<ioK  ok  ttib.  A  famoaa  fuupraiy**^
of  the  anuietit  KgyptiauH,  consisting  of  pt*!**
and  exorcisms  inlendetl  for  the  benefit  of  tba*'^
on  lis  joiiniuy  through  Ameuti  (Hades).  Soefc'*'
iug  its  purpose,  portioim  of  it  weiv  plaocd  '**''
the  miiiiHuy  when  euUimbml.  Nearly  oiw  Wf"'
all  llni  Kgyptiau  pajiyri  now  in  existonf  c"*'*'^
of  co)ni-s  of  tbia  work,  and  fnirii  tliem  a  pwJ  "^*
of  the  whole  has  hren  coiuitmcted  by  Navill'^'^


DEALBATOK£S


173


DECEH PKIMI


Das  Ae9^ti$4^e  Todtenbueh  tUr  XVIH  Ua  XX  Dg-
nattie  {Berlin,  ltiti6)i  See,  also,  an  iuteresting  re-
view of  this  work  by  Miss  Edwards  in  the  Jcademy
(London)  ibr  September  lOih,  1887.

Dealbatdres.  Worknieu  mentioaed  in  the
Codex  of  Justinian  (x.  64, 1),  who  appear  to  have
been  simply  whitewashers,  and  not,  as  some  have
Mipposed,  workmen  employed  to  oover  walls  with
a  coating  of  white  cement  or  stucco.  Dealbare  is
to  cover  the  walls  with  lime-^vash  (eatce  ex  a^a
tiquida  dealbentur,  Vitrnv.  vii.  4,  3).

Death. See  Thanatos.

DeMtor. See  Obuoationes.

Decadarohia  or  Decarchla  iSfKaiapxia,  dcxop-
)(ia).  Acouucilorgovorumeutof  ten.  (1)  In  Tbes-
Hftly,  established  by  Philip  on  bis  conquest  of  tbat
eooDtry  and  the  overthrow  of  its  tyi'ants  in  B.c.  353,
aOFflr  a  defeat  in  the  previons  year  (Demoetb.  I'kil.
ii.  p.  71,  (  23).  (3)  Introduced  by  Lysander  at  the
close  of  the  Peloponuesian  War,  and  established  iu
many  Oreek  cities  by  the  Lacetlaemouians,  who  in-
tttuted  to  it  the  whole  governntent  of  the  State  tin-
der the  direction  of  a  Spartan  banuost.  It  always
consisted  of  the  loading  members  of  the  arititocrat-
ic  party  (Xen.  Hell.  vi.  3,  $  8).  The  form  litKaioft-
xia  is  osed  by  Demosthenes  of  the  Tbessaliau  in-
BtitntioD,  and  &€Kapx"^  byXenophou  and  Isoorates
of  the  Lacedaemonian.

Deoadnohi  ( df caftovxo*  )■  The  members  of  a
Conncil  of  Ten,  who  succeeded  the  Thirty  Tyrants
in  the  supreme  power  at  Athens,  b.c.  403.  They
were  chosen  ^m  the  ten  tribes,  one  from  each ;  two
nf  the  Thirty,  if  not  more,  were  among  them,  and,
like  the  Thirty,  they  relied  on  Spartan  assistance
against  Tbrosybnlus  and  the  exiles.  Tliey  re-
mained masters  of  Athens  till  the  party  of  Tbra-
Bybnlns  obtained  possession  of  the  city  and  the  de-
mocracy was  restored;  and,  like  the  Thirty,  were
excepted  from  the  amnesty,  but  allowed  to  retire
into  banishment. See  Thirty  Tyrants.

Deoanua  (Fr.  doj/en,  Eng.  dean).  The  head  of
ten  men.  The  word  does  not  seem  to  occur  before
the  time  of  Constantiue,  and  then,  except  in  its
ecclesiastical  use,  only  in  the  Eastern  Empire.  It
perhaps  took  the  place  of  the  classical  decurio  at  a
time  when  the  latter  word  had  acquired  its  special
meaning  tn  the  colonies  and  muuicipia.  We  may
ilietingnisb  three  senses.

(1)  A  petty  ofiBcer  commanding  a  contuberHium
of  ten  men  (Modestos,  $  9),

(2)  Officials  at  the  conrt  of  Constantinople,  but
of  no  higher  than  menial  rank  (Cod.  Tkeod.  vi.  12).
St.  Chrysostom  instances  the  vnapxos  (^praefec-
tut  praetorio)  and  tttxayos  as  at  oppoeit«  ends  of
the  social  scale.  Like  other  officialet,  they  were
under  the  orders  of  the  magiater  offidorum.

(3)  The  members  of  a  guild  or  confraternity  at
Constantinople,  charged  with  the  bnrial  of  the
dead  (Cod.  Inst.  i.  2,  4  and  9).  The  institution
appears  to  be  a  distinctly  Christian  one,  and  to
hare  organised  what  had  been  previously  a  mat-
ter of  casual  charity — the  decent  burial  of  the
poor.

DooapJUi*. See  Palarstina.

Dvoaprott  (lifiimpvn-oi).  In  the  Qreek-speak-
ing  cities  of  the  Boman  Empire  a  committee  of
ten,  or  more  rarely  of  twenty  (tlKovairpttrtu,  ico-
Mproti),  was  chosen  from  among  the  decnriones  or
provincial  senators,  and  charged  with  the  collec-


tion of  the  taxes,  for  which  they  were  made  re*
sponsible.  These  decaproti  are  to  be  distinguished
from  the  decern  primi  (q.  v.)  in  Borne  and  the  Ital-
Ihu  muuicipia,  who  were  honorary  representatives
uf  their  curia,  but  uot  magistrates.

Decaamua  (Stuavtios)  Bribery ;  strictly  mean-
ing a  systematic  bribery  by  division  into  sets  of
ten.  There  were  two  actions  for  briliery  at  Ath-
ens—one, called  dcKotr/iov  ypa<^^,  lay  against  the
person  who  gave  the  bribe;  and  the  other,  called
dMptop  or  iatpoioKlat  ypatftrf,  against  the  persou
who  received  it  (Pollux,  viii.  42).  These  actions-
applied  to  the  bribery  of  citizebs  in  the  pnblio
assemblies  of  the  people,  of  the  Helinea  or  any
of  the  courts  of  justice,  of  the  povXij,  and  of  the
public  advocates  (mmjyopoi}.  Demosthenes,  in-
deed, says  tbat  orators  were  forbidden  by  the
law,  not  merely  to  abstain  from  receiving  giftft
for  the  injury  of  the  State,  but  even  to  receive
any  present  at  all.

Actions  for  bribery  were  under  the  jurisdiction
of  the  thesmotbetae.  The  punishment  on  con-
viction was  death  (Isocr.  De  Pace,  $  60)  or  pay-
ment of  teu  times  the  value  of  the  gift  received
(Diuarch.  c.  Demoath.  $  60).  An  additional  pun-
ishment (irpoirrifajna)  might  be  inflicted  by  the
court ;  as  in  the  case  of  Demosthenes,  who  wa»
not  only  fined  fifty  talents,  but  thrown  into  pris-
on (Pint.  Demoatk.  26).

Soca«tyioa. See  Tkmplum.

DecfiU  {itKon}). See  Decuma.

Deoflbfttna.  A  celebrated  king  of  the  Daciaus,
to  whom  Domltian  paid  an  annual  tribute.  He
was  defeated  by  Tn^an,  and  put  an  end  to  his-
owu  life,  whereupon  Dacia  became  a  Bomnu  prov-
ince, A.D.  106  (Suet.  Dom.  6). See  Dacia.

Decelea  (ActcAfui).  A  deme  of  Attica,  north-
west of  Athens,  on  the  borders  of  Boeotia,  near
the  sources  of  the  Cephissns,  seized  and  fortified
by  the  Spartans  in  the  Peloponuesian  War.

DecempAda.  The  standard  Boman  unit  in
measuring  land.  It  was  a  pole  ten  feet  in  length
used  by  the  agrimenaorea  (q.  T.),  who  were  thence
called  decempedatorea. See  Cic.  PkU.  xiii.  18,  $  37.

Decern  Fzlmi.  (1)  The  First  Teu  of  the  Boman
Senate  were  originally  the  heads  of  the  decurie»
into  which  the  Senate  of  one  hundred  was  divid-
ed. They  took  the  office  of  interrex  by  turns,  and
are  mentioned  in  tbat  capacity  at  the  first  inter-
regnum, on  the  death  of  Bomulns  (Llv.  i,  17 ;  cf.
Dionys.  ii.  57).  When  subsequently  the  represen-
tatives of  the  Titles  and  Luceres  were  admitted
into  the  Senate,  the  Bamnea  with  their  Decern
Primi  retained  for  some  time  their  precedence
over  the  other  two  tribes  and  gave  their  votes
first  (Plut.  Num.  3;  Dionys.  ii.  56;  iii.  1).  The
first  iu  rank  among  them  was  the  priaofpi  «eiia(tM,
who  was  appointed  by  the  king,  and  was  at  the'
same  time  cuatoa  urbia  (Dionys.  ii.  13;  I.  Lydus,
De  Mena.  i.  19).  In  the  early  republican  period
the  Decern  Primi  seem  to  have  been  the  oonsniars.
of  the  greater  honaea  in  order  of  seniority,  then
those  of  the  lesser  houses.

When  the  censors  acquired  the  power  of  nomi-
nating the  senators  from  among  qualified  persons,,
the  Decern  Primi  were  simply  the  first  ten  named
by  them ;  this  choice  was  usually  exercised  accord-
ing to  merit,  and  a  man  who  was  generally  ao-
knowledgiMl  as  the  first  Boman  of  his  time  was  lol-


I>£CEMKK.MI!>


474


DI'Xl^MVIKt


ernMy  rcrtuin  tn  liooorae  iirincrfi*  tmialnii  Jiml  In
retuin  tbir  dignity  for  Hfu.  VsleritLs  t'urvun,  lln-
twn  Faliii  Maxinii,  Riitliauns  ami  CLiiielAtor,  I-..
AcnitlitiH  Fuiilliis,  anil  the  tiro  Africani.  all  M.-etii
tu  hnvv  fiijiiywl  tlUK  liniimir.  Tlie  ceiisont  wen*
ul'tHii  panJal  am)  |iaHHii)iiat«'  in  Mih  pxfrvisH  of
Tlii'ir  ahiiiMt  irt'PHiii>itfiil)1f^  autlinrity ;  liut  evi>n
till'  iiK'iiiurulik-  <jiiuiTi>l  b«twtwii  T.ivliiM  Haliiiatnr
jtiiil  OaiHliiia  Xvru  iliil  ntit  prevent  tli<>ir  K'^'''^K
ttu-  tii'Mt  place  iti  tlic  KiiiiHtc  to  l-'alilitH  Cimrtator
<Liv.  xxix.  :t7,  ^  1).

[ii  In  uiuuicipul  ftcnatoi  ire  constantly  6nd  a
coiuuilttee,  Kvuvrally  of  ten,  HuniL-tiiueH  uf  a  gn>at-
cr  or  leju  nniubvr,  cboaeu  (appnrontly  by  the  dncu-
rinnn  thrmiw'lvpK!  nut  of  the  Inrgor  hocly.  in  Italy
tliiK  institution  can  he  traced  very  fur  tiack  ;  tre
liiid  it  in  l^ntiiini  n*  early  aa  tbo  ^^lMlt  Latin  War
nf  u.(.  :t4n  (I,iv.  viii.  3,  $8).

(.1)  Wliort'Ycr  there  wtM  nn  ortio,  Roniun  i>r^iuii-
xatioD  M>r-niK  tn  hare  involviHl  Ilit<  aiipointnitMil
of  Ion,  or  8on)i>tim«>«  h\x,  priini.  Dvlnw  tlu-  m-ua-
toriiiii  rank  w«  find  tlieni  ununni;  appahtorfii,  lirto-
re;  ami  pran-imrM  ;  in  priently  rollegwi  ('^  /.  /,.  vi.
2010) ;  and  aiuou^  tin*  dAtmfutivi  or  body^guiird*  of
tho  lutvr  Empire  {('wl  Theod.  vj.  24).

Decenuemis  (dtjc^p^f). Bee  Navis

Decemviri  (1)  Ten  c>on)mJ8«ioncT«  appoint«il
(B.C.  4.'>1)  to  frame  a  code  of  law*  for  the  liouiao.
Sl-ate  at  u.  tliae  nhen  the  feuds  between  the  patri-l
«)aii8  ami  pleli/'iuus  were  i'oritinniii)jr  nitli  nriabatc^d
aniriioKlty.  Occasionally  one  of  lln'  coiwoIk  fw-
voureil  lht»  ]debvianti,  and  ]ir()poM-d  Mtnnr  uiiti^a-
Cion  of  tbo  liiirdHbips  nndt^r  which  llic^  vmvii  la-
b*HirinK.  or  8oni<!  ini'n?a*H'  of  ibi-ir  privilflyiiw,  but
fjciiurally  willi  little  snctuHH.  The  Agrariau  Law,
bnin^hl  forwanl  by  HpnritiN  Ciissiiii,  conlinned  to
be  tl»'  niatii  di-tiiaiid  nf  tbi'  coninioMtt  and  their  niip-
IMirtfTW.  bnt  itv-t  paiwaEP  wii»,  nn  nvt-ry  occasioti,
«>iiliL>r  directly  or  indirectly  (irevfiit^'d.  At  laot
tbt<  ctiincnoiis  l»ec-aDto  couviu'i'itd  that  tbey  nt'ud
liop4>  for  no  cont]iIf'tc  redrens  of  urtcvauL-ea  tiiiti)
tbi*y  Hbonld  liavc  [ircviniiAly  woiirrd  tliv  <>ntablit«h-
metit  of  Hontf  ronHtittilional  |>rintnplf,  from  whirb
-W|nal  jnttticv  would,  of  noRVKsity  and  from  it^  very
natun>,  euninal*!.  Accordingly,  (laiiiti  TercntilliiM
Hama,  one  of  the  tribnacn,  ptiipoMNi  a  law  (Dx.
4f>2}  for  a  reform  of  the  exinlini;  stiiic  of  thin^H.
]|8  jiiirport  was  that  ten  conimitwionerH  »hc>nld  b*;
•obiweti,  live  by  the  patricJaciit  and  five  by  the  plo-
beiao».  lo  dra«r  up  a  ooiifttitulion,  wbieb  Hlioidd
detint'  all  pointtf  nf  conKtitntional,  civil,  and  critu-
IdaI  law;  and  should  thuM  detenalne,  itn  juhI  and
fixed  priDciplett,  .ill  the  political,  social,  and  civil
n<hilion<i  of  jdl  ordci'Hof  the  Komiin  prople.  Aft<T
fnnrh  oppottition  on  the  part  ol'  tin-  jMilricianfi,  the
law  was  pa*»e4l,  and  three  cuninvifiNi oners  wer«  at
Jeiif^th  Heiit  to  firecce,  tn  cnlloet  fmui  the  Grecian
States  encli  iiotn'L<>N  tif  their  laws  and  cunittitnliouH
1M  might  be  nervicwible  to  the  Ktmianh.  After  the
«b«encv  of  a  ye<iir  they  retnrned  ;  aii<)  the  plebeians,
flndinK  it  i<<  vain  to  im«iHt  upon  Ave  of  their  own
body  forming  part  of  the  revinwcrs*  of  the  la*vs.
yielded  the  point,  and  ten  of  tlie  luoAldiHtiiijtnitihed
of  the  piitrtciari  mid  Ncnatorial  body  were  cbo»en
lo  form  an  entirely  \\v\v  and  complete  rode  of  laws
by  which  the  S(at«  dbuuhl  be  Koverned,  They
were  named  Jttvnnriri,  "the  ten  men"  (/Jercwi-
riri  l^giimt  .Scrib*ndif\  and  diiritif;  their  odice
they  Were  to  Hnperaeile  every  other  nnt|{iatrate.
Knob in hiK tnni  waa lo  udiuiniitlcr tbo  gov-


erunicnt  for  a  day,  or.  According  lo  ulfaen,)
acrcral  dayi^till  they  ^boidd  complete  their  I
ittlative  lalwurs.  After  the  cart-fnl  delilwrstiAi
of  n  few  months,  the  revolt  wan  laid  beftirti  the
people  in  the  fnnn  uf  ten  lAble«>,  fnlty  writtei}  m\.
and  exhibited  in  a  conHpininiiH  place  wbpre  all
ini^bt  read  thent.  VariDiiH  anu<lKlui<nt«  werr  pru-
poMed,  atid  thn  ten  tablMiaiJsin  laid  Itefnre  tlirS'U-
ate,  the  curiae,  and  the  oenturieM,  and,  baviox  re-
L-nived  the  itauction  of  both  onlcni  of  the  Stnte,
wertr  riM^ognizeil  an  tin;  very  fonnlain  of  Lhclavt,
public  and  private.  The  Di-c^emvira  bailcoinliicUNl
niattcnt  ho  much  Ut  Iht;  f>ali«(Action  of  tike  cum-
innnity  that  when,  at  tlic  expiration  of  their  y«u.
they  rc{)ncste>il  a  renewal  of  their  office,  "ii  iIki
ground  that  tbcy  had  still  two  more  table* t<if<>ini
ill  ruxler  to  complete  their  tflAk,  an  election  of  mm
Decemvirs  waa  onlered.  iStw  Twelve  Tasub.)
The  patrician  Appins  L'laiidins,  who  took  th<i  Iom)*
ing  part  in  the  whole  affair,  was  nominated  tepir-
Kide  over  this  election.  He  acted  tn  concert  with
the  plelielanH,  h,v  receiving  votes  for  pleltriui  rin-
didatcH.  and  for  himself  likenine,  thougli  it  hul
been  declared  contrary  to  law  that  any  fitti«tiaiuiiT
Hlionid  l>e  re-i>lucle<1  immediately  after  holding  nf
lice.  By  dint  of  iutrigne,  however,  Applni  wmh^
elected,  and  along  with  him  tiino  others,  half  nr
whom  were  patrieian>,  half  plelieUna.

The  new  c-ummiiMiou  soon  nbowed  itself  rrn
ditl'ercnt  fnim  (he  tirttt.  Kucb  of  the  Dwi-riKtln
had  twelve  lietom.  whereas  the  previoiw  eonnni*'
Hion  bad  the  lictorx  only  by  turns,  and  a  Minilf
afCfnrhtt  or  officer  jireceded  each  of  the  reel-  Tbt
lictont,  too,  now  bore  amid  the  faMcett  the  fniiniit*
able  axti,  the  enihbnn  of  jnilgmenl  on  liTr  aid
detail),  winch  the  couhuIh,  wince  the  liaie  of  Vilr-
riuH  Pnblicola,  had  bi'eu  obtigtst  (o  Iny  aside  iltiring
their  continuance  in  the  city.  The  Oi-criurin
wenied  retsolved  to  change  the  govori)n»#*il  «f
Konnt  into  a  coniidcte  oligarchy,  coiiHistiii);  of  ten.
who4e  power  should  be  absolute  in  evi<r)lbill|t>
They  luMnmed  the  right  of  unperseilmg  all  vAtt
magiHtracioa;  and,  al  llie  eonclnf>iou  of  tlieif^
ond  year,  they  nbowcd  no  intention  of  rMi|i>i"|
their  ofHccH  <ir  of  up]>iunlitig  thoir  wiucow**.
MaltcrH  biid  nearly  n*aehed  a  cri^ia  when  t  *tf
ariiHe,  the  HjibincH  and  the  Aeiint  basing  uuil**)
their  force**  and  iMriiig  deniroiiH  of  availing  iheiB-
aelvi\s  nf  the  dt-itracted  dtate  of  Konie.  '11*  D*"
cemvira  afwi-nibltMl  the  .Senate,  obtitiued  it*  w
Ibority  to  ratite  an  nmiy,  at  the  head  of  whi«)it!i'J
pbkced  three  of  their  numlM>r,  ami  »eut  it  iffMai
llm  %ibine«.  Another  wax  rained  atnl  sent  n0'fi'^
the  Aequi,  while  Appitnt  Claiiiltus  n-inaiiH^t  ><
Konie  tit  provide  for  the  Mifety  of  the  city  ■mil'*
Ibr  maiutenHiiee  «)f  ihe  jMnver  of  the  DeetWTin
Itnth  iLrmieH  were  defeated,  and  n'tire<l  iinirpci*
the  rily,diMfatiKfieiI  rather  than  diMComllted.  Tb"
occuned  the  aftair  of  Virgtniu.  and  Ihe  dcctwiita'
power  \saH  at  an  end.  Sec  Cl-\fDifS(4);  VlKiil)"*!
I.iv.  iii.:n»  foil. ;  nnd  yhmin\at^Uf  Jii»t.o/  B*mt,^-
i.  pp.:i4r>-:t7l  iKng.  transi.).

(2)  There  w.tc  nU>  military  deocmvlri;  (H»I**
vnriouH  cmergencicH,  decemviri  were  ctttW'  **
nniiiftge  and  regulate  cerlaiu  affair*,  nflerlfc'*"**
manner  tu*  boards  of  connniNNionem  are  iiov  *^
pointed.  Tbn»  there  wen*  deofniviri  forcoa'l*''
ing  iu>1oniejt;  decemviri  who  oHicinted  aAJudg**'"
litigated  matter*  under  the  praetor;  dreenivtnl'"
dividing  Ihe  lamlH  among  the  veteran  •oldicni'^
cemviri  lo  prvpare  an<l  preside  at  fooata  in  bou**'


DECEKNALIA


47b


UECOCTOK


of  the  godfl ;  docenivirl  to  take  care  of  tbe  aacri-
fices  (Decemriri  Sacris  FaciuHdia)  and  to  guard  the
Sibylliue  Bookti.  With  reganl  to  the  last  of  these,
however,  it  must  be  observed  that  the  immber,
after  having  been  originally  two,  and  then  in-
creased to  ten,  was  subsequently  still  further  in-
creased to  fifteen  and  sixteen.

Decezmalla  or  Deoexmia.  A  festival  celebrated
with  games  every  ten  years  by  the  Roman  emperors.
This  festival  owed  it>s  origin  to  the  fact  that  Augns-
tiin  refused  the  supreme  power  when  it  was  offered
to  him  for  life,  and  would  only  consent  to  accept
it  for  ten  years;  and  when  thfise  expired,  for  an-
other period  of  ten  years;  and  so  on  to  the  end
of  his  life.  The  memory  of  this  comedy,  as  Oib-
1>on  has  called  it,  was  preserveil  to  the  last  ages
of  the  Empire  by  the  festival  of  the  Decennalia,
which  was  solemnized  by  sabsequent  emperors
every  t«nth  year  of  their  reign,  although  they  had
received  the  impfrinm  fur  life,  and  not  for  the
limited  period  of  ten  years  (Dio  Cass.  liii.  16;  liv.
12;  lviii.24;  Ixxvi.  1).

Decetla.  The  modern  D^size;  a  city  of  the
Aedui,  in  Gallia  Lugdunensis,  on  an  island  in  the
Liger  (Loire). See  Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  33.

Dttoidlna  Saxa. Bee  Sax  a.

Dedmatio.  The  selection,  by  lot,  of  every  tenth
man  for  capital  pnnishment,  when  any  number  of
soldiers  in  the  Roman  army  had  been  guilty  of
certain  military  oifenoes — 'Usually  cowardice,  loss
of  standards  in  action,  or  mutiny.  This  pnuish-
meut  is  not  often  mentioned  in  the  early  times  of
the  Republio;  but  the  case  of  the  oonsnl  Appius
Claudius  and  his  mutinous  army  (b.c.  471)  is  re-
corded both  by  Livy  (ii.  59)  and  Dionysiiis  (ix.  50) ;
the  latter  speaks  of  it  as  oustomary  {warpiot)  for
the  offences  named.  Polybius  notices  it  as  usual
when  troops  had  giveu  way  to  panic ;  the  remain-
der were  punished  by  having  rations  of  barley  in-
stead of  wheat  served  out  to  them,  and  by  being
made  to  lodge  ontside  the  camp  (vi.  36).  When,
however,  Crassns  employed  decimation  in  the  ser-
vile war  of  Spartacns,  he  is  described  as  having
revived  an  ancient  punishment  which  had  long
fallen  into  disuse  ( Plut.  CroM.  10 ).  In  the  Civil
Wars  it  once  more  became  common,  and  was  re-
tained under  the  Empire  (Suet.  Gaib.  13).  Some-
times only  the  twentieth  man  was  punished  {vice-
timatio),  or  the  hundredth  {cfnteaimatio)  (Capitol.
Macr.  12).

Deolmattu. See  Quinquatrcs.

Deoioa,  (1)  PuBuus  Dicciue  Mus,  a  celebrated
Roman  consul,  who,  after  many  glortons  exploits,
devoted  himself  to  the  Hanes  for  the  safety  of  his
country  in  a  battle  against  the  Latins,  b.c.  337.
His  son,  Dcwius,  imitated  his  example,  and  devoted
himself  in  like  manner  in  his  fourth  consulshi)),
when  fighting  against  the  GanLs  and  the  Sam-
nites  at  Sentinum,  b.c.  290.  His  grandson  is  said
ttt  have  done  the  same  in  the  war  against  Pyr-
HiRs  and  the  Tareutioes,  B.c.  280  (Liv.  vii.  21
foil. ;  id.  vili.  10 ;  Val.  Max.  v.  6).  <2)  Gaius  Mes-
Hiis  Qt'i?rru8  Traianus.  A  native  of  Pannonia,
«e«t  by  the  emperor  Philip  to  put  down  a  sedi-
tion in  Moesia.  Instead  of  obeying  his  master's
command,  he  assnmed  the  imperial  pnrple.  His
disaffected  troops,  it  is  said,  forced  him  to  this  step.
The  emperor  immediately  marched  against  him,
and  a  battle  was  fought  near  Verona,  which  tonni-


nated  successfully  for  Decius,  and  Philip  was  either
slain  in  the  cuntlict  or  put  to  death  after  he  fell
into  the  oouqaeror's  power.  This  took  place  a.d.
349,  audfromtbisperiodlsdated  the  commencement
of  the  reign  of  Decius.  It  was  one  of  short  dura-
tion, about  two  years.  During  this  time,  however,
he  proved  a  very  cruel  persecutor  of  the  Christians.
He  greatly  signalized  himself  against  the  Persians,
but  was  slain  in  an  action  with  the  Qoths,  who
had  invaded  his  dominions.  In  advancing  upon
them  he  was,  with  the  greater  part  of  his  troops,
entangled  in  a  moraas,  where,  being  surrounded  by
the  enemy,  be  perished  nuder  a  shower  of  darts,
A.D.  251,  aged  fifty  years.  See  Victor,  De  Cae».  29 ;
Entrop.  ix.  4 ;  Eiiseh.  SUt.  Eoelet.  vi.  39,  et«, ;  Zo-
nar.  xii.  19,  20.

Declamaldo.  A  term  which  came  into  use  first
in  Cicero's  time  (Bru^  90,  310)  for  the  rhetorical
exercises  employed  in  the  training  of  orators.
These  were  of  two  kinds :  (a)  auiuoriae;  (b)  contro-
rfrsiof.  The  former  were  based  upon  some  his-
torical or  legendary  theme,  and  the  pnpil  was  re-
quired to  treat  some  problem  arising  thence,  as,
for  instance,  whether  Sulla  should  have  resigned
his  dictatorship  (Jur.  i.  16)  or  Cato  have  com-
mitted suicide  (Pers.  iii.  45).  These  were  regard-
ed as  suitable  for  beginners,  as  not  requiring  any
wide  or  minute  knowledge  of  law  (Tac.  Dial.  35).
The  latter  dealt  with  legal  questions,  and  took
the  form  of  the  discussion  of  an  imaginary  case,
Huch  as  might  arise  in  the  conrts.  Marcus  Sene-
ca (q.  v.),  the  father  of  the  philosopher,  has  left
seven  examples  of  swuoriae,  thirty-five  of  con'ro-
rersiof,  as  well  as  ten  books  of  excerpta  controver-
niaruM,  which  contain  many  interesting  specimens
of  the  kind  of  questions  thns  treated.  The  prac-
tice had  at  first  a  real  value,  and  Cicero  repre-
sents himself  as  continuing  it  for  a  great  part  of
his  life  (Thm.  i.  4, 7),  although  in  his  later  years  he
prefeiTed  philosophical  topics.  But,  with  the  de-
cline of  free  speech,  the  exercise  sank  into  a  mere
occasion  for  display.  The  themes  were  hackneyed
or  extravagant,  the  language  affected  and  full  of
strained  antithesis  and  epigram  (Qnintil.  viii.  3,
76 ;  5,  14,  etc.) ;  and  what  ehonld  have  been  a
preparation  for  real  life  became  an  end  in  Itself.
The  rage  for  declamation  was  at  its  height  during
the  first  century  of  the  Empire.  Qnintilian's  so-
ber sense  did  much  to  check  it;  and  though  the
practice  did  not  wholly  die  out  of  the  schools,  it
seems  to  have  been  confined  within  more  reason-
able limits.  (Cf.  fiernhardy,  B&m.  Lit.  $  53;  Pa-
tron. 1-3 ;  and  MavoWs  notes  on  Juv.  i.  16 ;  vii.  150-
170.)

Deoootor.  A  bankrupt ;  a  term  used  in  popu-
lar language  to  signify  any  spendthrift.  The  Ro-
mans were  a  fnigal  people,  and  spendthrifts  were
not  only  condemned  by  pnblio  opinion  (CatuU.  xli.
4 ;  Cic.  Cat.  ii.  3,  5)  but  punished  by  the  censors
with  the  nota  cennoria,  which  carried  with  it  cer-
tain legal  disabilities.  By  the  Lex  Roscta  (b.c.
67)  a  certain  place  in  the  theatre  was  assigned  to
spendthrifts  (Cio.  Phil.  ii.  18).  According  to  Spar-
tianuH,  Hadrian  ordered  that  spendthrifts  should
be  flogged  ignonitnionsly  (oatomidiari)  in  the  am-
phitheatre and  turned  out  (Spart.  Hadr.  18).
The  Roman  law  against  persons  who  would  not
pay  borrowed  money  was  very  severe  and  is  ex-
plained under  Kexum.  Its  severity,  however,
was  mitigated  by  the  bonorum  cM«to  (q.  v.). By


U£IAN1IIA


III  tliii  iK'Xt  yt'iir,  A. P.  3tV>,  Valontiiiiuii  cxtriMlfd
tbf  oftico  of  «lcfeiiN.»r  to  nil  iMirl-H  nf  bin  Kiiipirr,  in-
clixliniic  Ititl.v.  but  with  mmm  (JiiitigL*N  tii  its  cnti-
ntiliiliiui.  Kacb  riritim  ari)itiM'«)  tlio  right  iif
ch(H>fitii({  H  tlorciiMir  rinni  ilM  niuAt  einiiK'Ht  niid
iDde)ifi)itoii[.  citizc-iin,  who  wL-itt  bomirt  lo  wr*«'
the  office  in  a  iin'(M;ril>e«l  onler.

Tho  <'l(H!tiou  of  a  (Ivfeniwr  wiu  uindtf  by  ibo
wbolo  ciritoJi ;  tUt^  cboico  of  the  towiiithip  bad  to
be  cniiHrmod  by  (bo  em|}eror  or  hitt  deputy.  At
firwt  a  d(<rt'iiaor  ht^ld  ofticv  for  livi>  yeans  but  tht<
l«nii  wa«  reduced  by  JuBtiliiaii  to  two  yenns.  The
(initrrUuii  of  the  iiihabilKiiiit  of  bis  diNtnct  fmiii
opitrrMMiuii  nf  all  kinds,  and  f«t)CH-i:il1y  froiti  that
of  ibe  iiiipcTiul  goveriiur  uiid  lucjil  unlburilieH,
waft  ulwityN  coiifiidett-d  to  b<!  the  iiiuin  ubji-ct  of
a  di-IViiMir  viviiaTiH.  Moivuvur  il  woo  bin  biiHiuebM
to  preTeiit  tho  taxMi  bi-iiig  iiiu*ti>  lou  biink'UHuiiiti.
For  the  {>iir|K>»e  uf  pr<J«M:ciitiiig  upituMsOTn,  he  bud
fVee  nooow  to  tho  court  of  the  govt-nior,  and,  if
netMWMiry,  be  oonid  briug  hiit  coiiipliiintti  apiUiHt
tlie  governor  or  other  nItieiiilH  twfore  (he  eiiijit^ivtr
or  iniuiitterH  of  t.)it>  iiiiperinl  govifrumeitt.  The  de-
fciiAor  iietvd  oh  judge  iti  eivil  <rjwe«  uf  iiiitior  ini-
portattve;  bin  JiiiiMlii'tion  wait  lirxt  limited  by  Jhh-
tiiiiait  tu  tlfty  nalidi.  atnl  aftcrwuidti  p\tv!ided  by
tbat  eiiipi'rur  lu  ibiH-'c  bundled  noUdi.  He  had
tbe  right  of  iippoiuling  guardiaiiff  and  of  legiHter-
iug  luany  I'oruml  prucce^Uuga.  In  rotik  In*  bjul
prereileure  of  niagintratea.

Dei'aiiira  I  AijioftiiKi  or  ^mtifjn).  The  dany^b-
t*T  of  Allbiiea  and  Oeneui*.  and  niBter  of  Mcleager.
ArheioilN  and  llenu'leM  bt>tli  loved  Deianim,  and
fought  for  tbe  |HisM<wiioii  of  ber.  Heraeliw  waa  I
vieloriouti,  and  >«lie  becauic  bit*  wife.  Sbe  waa  tho
nnwjlling  caiiM  of  ber  huHbnud'ri  deiitb,  by  pro-
aeiitin^'  him  uilb  Ibe  {mtHoui'd  Mhirt  which  the
Cviiiaur  NriwuH  i4|.  v.)  gave  bi'i-.  lu  deopair,  «h«
put  ail  end  tu  ber  uwu  life. For  dirtuils,  hw  Hkr-

Deldamia  l  AijXiofuia).  Daughter  of  Lyeoniediw,
iu  tbv  island  of  Seyms.  Whru  Arbille*  viiin  cuii-
ccab<d  there  in  luuidfirK  ntlire.  nhr  lHH--anie  by
liiui  tbe  mother  of  Pyrrlms  or  Neoptoleiniu. See

Ai.'ll]l.l.KS.

Delect!  BffusSv^  Actio.  At  Rome,  if  any  person
threw  or  pn<ire<)  itnylbiiig  from  the  mom  of  a  bouse
iipoti  a  pliiee  couitnonly  freipietited  by  pctjpte,  and
thereby  eauMeil  ilainage,  th>*  pnietor'«  eilict  gave
tbe  injnntil  party  an  uctioii  ngitioKt  the  occupant
of  the  bondo  or  part  of  tbe  lioiiKe  from  witich  tbe
thing  bnd  b«H*ii  thrown  or  ponrwl.  Tht*r«»  waH  tbe
aiinie  liability  on  nrvotint  of  n  ibing  wbioh  had
been  Hncpenibil  fi-oiii  u  i'liildini:.  aud  which  by  its

fall  ihjnn*d  | pie,  m*  for  a  tiling  nbicb  hod  bvtui

ai*tiiidly  tliniwii.

Deigma  {A«i-y^).  A  piirlicuUr  plaeo  in  th«  H-
raruM.  a«  vtrll  Hn  in  tbe  harboiim  of  iilhrr  StAtpjl,
where  iiiercliiiiitH  ex|>OM.il  mmipleti  of  llmir  giMMU
for  sale  illnrpornit.  i*.  v.  i/r^ycA. :  INdlux,  \x.  'M;
Arisloph.  /.'(/.  ICiM.  The  wiiiiple>i  ibeniflelve«  were
■Ifto  oalle*J  H^itimatn  (I'liit.  Itrmtffh 'iS)^

X>«iliaa  Oraph^  ^il<iXi'(ir  y^<^i}). 8«>o  AyritA-

TKIASI  OUAPtt^

I>eV6oea  <.l7<nKric).  First  king  of  Media,  who
after  thf  Mfvlr*  had  thmwn  off  lb*'ftn|irvinueyuf  ibe
AwyrtaiiKHMgiieil  B.C. Tll^ioti.  lie  built  tbeeity  of
EriNiiaita,  nbich  he  made  tbe  ro>  itl  re^idenee.  He
wo*  xneeei'ded  by  his  wm  I'liraortea  ^Itrrml,  I.  Kii.


ueuA

Deionldea  (AijuwiArjv).  Miletois  *uii  uf  DdvnA
liy  Ap'dlo.

DeiotJiraa  ( Sriwroftot ).  A  letrurcb  of  ii»inU»,
who  adbereil  to  tbe  Koniaiis  iu  their  want  a^UMt
MitliridiileM,  anil  wiis  rewarded  1\v  the  8oital(<  itilb
tbe  title  of  king.  In  tbe  Civil  War  Itu  Mn\  «i(b
Poin{M)y,  and  vaut  pn-nent  at  tbe  battle  ut  ?!«»».
lia,  B.('.  48.  He  ih  mnenibeivd  ua  having  Iwrndc^
fended  by  ri»r«-ni  Iwfore  Ciieaar  (  b,c.45|.  in  flip  h.iiw
of  I  he  bttcer  at  Uouie,  iu  the  itjieecb  ( Pro  Hf^  tkin-
lain)  Htill  extant.  Tbe  charge  against  Deiniiiu*
wiw  of  nttcnipting  to  luunlcr  Caevar.

DeiphdbA  (  ^Ttpa^  >. The 8ibyl  at  Ciuw.

diiitgliter  of  ((JaQcns, See  StiiVLL.a.

Detphfibua  {^jjitpoSos).  Sun  of  PHaiu  tod  Ikc-
ulju,  who  married  Heli-ii  aftor  the  death  of  l^u^
ii/.  xii.94). On  the  etiptnre  of  Troy  by  tb«  GrMb

ho  wiu  hIiiiu  and  fearfully  nianglei)  bv  MenrUBn,

Deipnon  (dt(nvo»). H«e  Cksa.

Delatlo  Non^bllft.  In  Itouian  i-ntnni:*!  {ip^-mI-
lilt'  (be  tirst  step  wn»  to  apply  to  Ibe  prattnr  In  al-
low the  ac4-R5iition  to  be  mado  (  po*tularr\.lhe  wtl
fomiilly  to  arraign  the  defendant  tuttmm  ift/m*].
Tlie  judge  tnight  hinuelf  take  the  iniriativA  mi
ili'c-lHre  biH  readineiix  lo  receive  a  uominU  4tUti*!
IbiH,  however,  in  iiieutionr«l  aniong  the  oppMii'n
pmneedingH  of  Verrwi  {Cie.  in  Vrrr.  \i.  38,  (  04;  it.
IU,  ^  -101.

The  poftutalio  and  nemtiti*  delatto  occur  umI
fi-cipieiitly  in  pruMuntiuni)  of  niagintratia  Bail  |in»-
viiieial  guveruont  for  iniHcontlnoi  in  offlos. fio

KKI'KTtSUAK.

De1atore&  A  term  origiuDlly  appli««l  to  ilw*
who  gave  notice  to  tho  oDIeioln  of  the  In-Miity"'
niniieyn  that  hniU>ei'onie  due  toihetrriLtiiry.  Itt(il>-
wiiuently  rec4Mved  a  wider  applicalion.  A  ^«'«^
was  not  quite  ideuttcol  with  oar  "  informri";  d'
lenn  eorerwl  (wo  elaa«e« — one  coiiHsling  o(tl»o»
whit  tb^niselvett  ueteil  ao  pnmocntoni,  the  rtb*"^
tboi^e  who  (tiniply  gave  inforinntion,  Tlie  lojCt*'*"
tioii  uf  Aiigiuttn«  gave  the  lir^t  Alinniln^  to  ■!>•'
habit  of  delation  by  granting  pecuniary  ttffsH'
to  tlione  who  sectire^t  the  oouvirtinli  of  nffrrnkf*
against  his  lawi*  relating  to  marridge  ^Toc  J**-
iii.  28).  Tbe  Lex  Inlia  i(r  mnirafalr,  by  rfiiiiil^'<t
the  »oceew»ftiI  proitcentor  with  a  fonrtk  i«tit  "(
tbe  cMtate  of  Ibe  condemned  iTac.  .tn».  if >  9>>>
gave  a  fatal  eueou  rage  men  t  to  thiii  claw;  lu'  *''
tboiigti  Tiberint«  ap|>eara  to  have  cndcnv<.Mif»<l "
tir*»t  Ut  check  the  practice,  it  becitac  ibinnK  !"•
reigti  a  veritable  scourge ;  aud  aa  hi*  ttufin"'*
temper  develop^Ml.  be  ai'liially  enconrageil  t^"""
Ciiligtila  at  the  beginning  of  hlfi  reign  s^foril  i'
(fi'/(iruHliii)i  uniTt  Aab^re  (8uet.  Catif/.  ih\,iuiS*l^
ixMluced  the  rvwanls  of  fbiwe  who  prowiriTt*^  "^
fenders  against  tbe  Pnpian  taw  to  the  legiil  fntt^'*
pnrt.  Titus  severely  piiui»he«l  Ibrm;  Thtniili*'!*'
drvt  follnwetl  his  example,  but  mmmi  provrd  re^'T
to  n«e  them  an  the  lonitt  of  bis  tyraiuiimi  );rr«''
They  were  again  banisbe<t  byTiajnn  iriiii. /'••*'■
S4l,  aud  deniiniu'rtl  by  a  resciipl  of  Ctnisiw''"*
{Cttd.  \.  tl.  it).  But  Ihc  ne4il  of  thin  couitut  <^
prewtion  provea  what  a  stauding  evil  lhi>  cb^
must  have  been  tn  tbe  Stat«.  8ee  Maynr*  D'^'*
on  Jiiveual,  i.  'Xi-3H.  iv.  4H.  x.  71);  and  lh#  arti')^
M.IIFSTAS.

Delectus. See  Exutarvs.
Delia  (ret  ^Xiai. Tlie  uMM  of  fatanU  *^
gnmes  celebrated  at  tlir  rrnil  ■■rinTili^^  jii  Hiri'*'


HtUCTl'M


i»


DKU>8


of  Dt-liiM  {t\.  v.).  till'  puiitro  iif  iiri  am|tliii'tyuiiy.  b>'  ibe  Hliockft  of  an  faitlniim]!!'.  TIiIh.  Iinn-nrer,
bicb  the  CyoluUtrH  nml  the  iioigltliuuriug  lutti-  ia  tiuiitnuliuted  by  Tliticyiliili'i)  oiul  l-EermlutUK,
oil  tbt*  c«a«t»  iKOoiiged  (Hum.  Ut/mii.  in  A/wlL  nliu  rc|Mirt  tlmt  a  itUofk  watt  Mt  tlivrv  befora  Ibe
etc.) TbiH  aoipbictyuiiy  boviuh  origtiiiilly  to lVIo)K»iuoHiau  Wiir  iTbiic.  ii.  tf ;  ilortKl.  vi.  i>'').

been  iii6titnt«<l  dimply  lor  ihc  |>iir)Hi»i.<  of  re- DcIua  wb»  vrlebniU-il ns  tbo uatal islaud of

'119  wori»liip  in  tbe  ciitiiriioii  tuutctiury  of  Apol- Apollo anil Art«nii8,  and tli«  KoleniuitteB wilb

~i«  0tat  xoTfMfoi  of  tbe  Iouiau)t,  who  was  be- wbicb  tbe  festivaltt  of  these  (l«ilies  were  observed

1  m  havi^  Immmi  burn  at  I>loi!t. Tlie  Delia,  as there  u«ver  failed  to  attract  large  cruwdtt  from  tbo

|aaira fn»ni thn Hynm tn  Apollo,  biu)  t>xiHted neighbouring  islaiulH  anil  the  ronlini'nt. Annnig

T^r^'  early  linn*H,  anil  wer**  nelehrute^i  evt^ry Ihn  seven  woiidcni  of  the  worid  Vk-w*  an  attar  at

yiMr  (Pollux,  viii.  104),  and an  Boeckh  8np- iMlutt  which  wait made  of  the  boms  of  anitnalti.

vrilb  great probability,  oit tbo  Hiztb  ainl Tradition i-vport-ed that it was rinn<truct*.H) by

tb  days  of  Tbarg<iliun,  tlit>  birtbilayH  of  Apol- Apollo  with  I  lie  hornii  of  deer  killed  iit  htniting  by

d  ArteiniH. The  nienit>en<  of  (he  auiphioty- hiH  Kifter  Arti^uii.t. Pliitartdi  sayn  be  saw  11,  and  he

ftsaembled on tlieete oct*a4)oii!t {i^upow) in niMrakn  of  tin;  wonderful  inteilucing  of  the  hont*

Id long ganneutii,  with their  wive* and of  whirb  il  wiw  niadc.no  cement  nor  bond  of  any

ren,  to  vrorahip  ilie  god  with  gyianiu«tic  and kind  being  employt-d  tu  hold  it  together, I'oi-

ileal  contcttis,  ehoi-UHes,  and  dan(.-e«. That  the tioUB  of  this  nitac  are  Itleutitlud  by  arcbsolugltita

iiiiaUH  tiHik  p»rt  in  theiu*  twdoinniti*-!*  at  a  very in  tbc  M-atter^d  bhtcka  of  niarhto  lately  found  in

ty  perioil  18  evident  tn>ni  tlie  Deliiuttai*  (after the  Mo-called  Hull  of  tbe UulU.  to  the  eaut  of  tho

~  .  called ^iVfHti) mentioned in tin* laws  of great  temple,  ond  naintMl  from  its  "  taurine '^  cap-

(Athun.  vi.  p. '234). The  sacn'd  vetwel  (dtw itaU roprearntiug n-eninhnnt bulls. Tho  Albe-

^  moreover,  wbiuh llu;y  »tent to Delos every uians  were  conimandeii  by  an  oracle,  in tbe  riino

^,  was  f«»id  to  be  tbe  same  whieh  Thewiin  hail of  Fisistratn*,  to  purify  Delns,  whieb  lliey  ilid  by

Bt  after  bia  return from Crete. Tlie  DeliuiiH, eaiiMing tbe  dead  iMmlieH  wbirh bad  been  ljiirie<l

CHng  tbe  cetebrntion  of  thew  Moleninilii-K,  per- there  to  be  taken  up  ami  removrd  fnim  all  plaeea

fUitd  the  oltlce  of  cooka  for  those  who  vtaite<l within  view  of  the  temple. In  tbe  Kixth  year  of

^ir  inland,  whence  they  were  called  *KA«o8vrai tbc  Feloponnesian  War,  Ibey,  by  the  advice  of  nu

oracle,  ptiri6cd  it  anew  by  rarrying  all  tbe  deiid
bodies  to  the  nctgbtxniring  t»lan<l  of  Rbeiinoa,
where  they  woru  iiiterreil.  After  having  done
thin,  in  order  to  prevent  its  being  pollnteil  in  tbo
timu  to  couie,  they  publtehiHl  an  edict  tbnt  fur  the
future  no  penMm  should  he  wilfen^d  to  die,  nor  any
woman  to  be  hrmight  to  IxhI,  in  the  iHlanrl,  but
that,  when  death  or  parturition  npprooebed,  th^y
should  be  curried  over  iiilo  Kbeniiei^  In  itieuiury
of  thin  piiriticatioii.it  in  said,  the  Alheniaun  innLi-
Inted  atudemn  ipiinquenuiul  festival.  See  Deija.
Wlu-n  (Ih;  Pei-^fiau  armumeut,  under  Dutis  and
nearly  in  tbo  centre  of  the  CyehuleM  U\.  v.).  ArtapherncM,  v,ika  uiakiug  ilH  way  thiungb  thu
kin  ittluud  wait  called  alito  Asteriii.  I'eluKgiu.  (jrceiiiri  ialnndn.  the  iuhabitautH  of  Ueloe  left  their
tliuiiydia.  Lagia,  I'yrinlJH,  Scythins,  Mydia,  und  rich  temple,  with  ita  treaMuren,  to  tlie  pmtectionof
■igin.  It  was  name*!  (iJrtygia  fnim  SfiTv$,  "a  ita  tutelary  deilien,  and  fleiS  to  Teno«.  Tim  fame
iil."aod  I^agta  fmm  Xfiyc^c,  "a  hare,"  the  island  of  tbe  sanetnary,  IniwevRr,  staved  it  from  spoliation.
'\y  alM>uinling  with  both  tlipue  creatures.  The  PerctinnN  bad  heard  thai  Deloa  waA  the  birth-
aeconut,  according  lo  Stndio,  it  wa«  not  plare  of  two  ibnties  who  corro8|Hmded  t<t  thone
lu  have  dogs  at  Di'los  because  they  >vtin  held  tlm  for*'niost  rank  ifi  tlieir  ov-ti  n-iii:^-
kMn>yn)  the  (inailu  and
■vnw  Tbe  name  ]>elo«
"to  oDiimiuuly  derived
Mi  dqXar,  "munifcHt,"  In
Dusian  tn  the  inland  hav-
tg  iLuntetl  under  the  ruir-
m  of  tlm  itejk  until  made
I  i|>Vear  and  stand  lirm
r(>nli:T(»f  I'oMvidon.  Th>H
'^  iloue  for  tbe  pur{>oite
((•cL-iviug  Letu,  wbo  wat*
tlie  ore  of  deltrory,  and
And  no  wij'Ima  on
tArth,  Mer6  having
I&3  it  by  au  oath  uoi
'i*criTeber;  but  an  {N)|of<
')>»titDe  was  floating  be-
'k  tbo  waters,  it  waM
from  the  obligation.
IU«d  in  ita  place,  it
itjiiaed,  according  to
ilarbeliaf.to  remainio
Mcven  tn  lie  unmoved


Uhen.  iv.  p.  17:t)

eliotum. See  CRtUBN.

eUam  (A^Xiov).  A  t^iwii  im  the  coast  of  Boeo-
,  in  tbe  territory  of  Tanagra,  near  the  Attic
Dtier,  imiued  :ifter  a  temple  of  Apollo  siniilnr
lltat  »t  DeloB. Here the  AtheniuUH  were  il«.

Mi  by  the  Boeotianfi.  n.r.  424.

VlioB  (.^ij^ior)  ami  Delia  (Ar;Xia). Sunianiea
'Ajwllo  and  Artemis  riMipectively,  from  tbe  Jal-
liif  DeloH  (q.  v.).

[Z>eloa  (AfjXor). An  inland  of  the  Aegean,  hiIu-


OELtt

acBkt  f  I


©fc-


TlusUc


I'Un  or  liekia,  rituwiut!  Exc«v^iiuiii. (IBMLj


DELOS


490


DEl-PJtT


lon^^Stem^tim  aim  and  niooii.  ThU  compiiriiMiii
was  i>n)liul>ty  Miitij^fitrtiil  lo  tlit-ni  )>y  witiip  (ii-<*fik

Wbl> wirtlll^l) U*  HUVf  till)  l«!lll[llo. If  W(<  Ul»y  L-lWtt'

lilt;  trndiltoii  ulitcli  wax  riirrent  in  tlio  iln.VH  of
Horxidotua,  Ik-los  rceriveil  llie  hidluwt  lionunro
from  Dalis.  He  n-ould  not  ^iiAtr  lii.t  sliijM  to  tdiicli
rliL*  tuic-red  Bborc,  but  kept  them  ni  tbe  inland  of
Kbciiaea.  Hv  »lsu  &oiit  a  licrulil  to  ivcnll  tbr  l^o-
Iwiis  <n'bu  biid  tied  to  Tcriod,  and  iirt'tTrd  sniTilini'
to  llie  tiod,  ill  whicb  ItoU  talelii^s  of  fnilikiiimiFM-
are  siiid  to  have  be^-ii  cuiiaiimrd  (  !Ei>n"l.  vi.  it*  .,
After  llie  Ter-
sinii  War,  iIr*
AthKlll.'tllN v•^•  .^__

rnblitiliHd III /  L'^'S^ff  I -ffl
Deloit  tbu  (reaK-
11  ry of tlio

Greeks, ond  Cblmil  ItelusL

oitlvFL-d  I  bat  nil

iiiifliiijitfl  ri'biliro  to  tl»e  couffUt^niry  <ihuuld  !»•
hebl  (ben?  ( Tbuc.  i.  IW).  lu  the  it'iith  year  of
the  Pt'loponurtsiaii  Wht,  not  bviiijt  ^iitiHtiiMl  n'itb
tb»  piiriticatiDiis  whirb  Ihu  iHland  bjul  Uitbcrtn
iindergniip,  tbry  reiiiovMl  iU  iMitirH  |H)|»ibilinii  to
Adruniytliittii,  wbt-i-M  lb«y  obtuirwd  ii  tsPtllement
from  thu  Pi'Diiau  miLi'h[>  I'buniucf^t  ( Thiic.  v.  I  }.
Hem  iiiuiiy  of  IbeKb  uiifurtuiint*;  DelintiH  were
itfterwjinU  tieat-beroiiHly  luitnEnn*)!  by  order  of
Aifawjt,  nil  ulUner  of  Tifwiipbrnii-s  (  TtlllP.  viii.
IlH).  Finally,  bowuver,  tbu  Alln-niiiiiK  nwtciFRd
tbiiHu  that  siirrived  to  their  couuiry  iifrrr  tb<*  bnt-
tle  of  Aropbipolifl,  as  tbt^y  coiiHidvrvd  tbiU  tbeir  ill
•(icw*t  in  tbi?  war  procewJod  from  the  augur  of  tbe
gml  01)  account  of  tbeir  cnndnvt  towards  this  iiu-
f»r(i)tinl«  penpb>  iTbun.  v.  ^i|.  Strnbo  wyH  thn(
Dftos  becatnft  a  pbir^  of  ^jrent  roiiiltierctnl  iui)>ur-
tiMice  after  tlii;  df«trtn;tion  of  Coriiitb.  na  the  luer-
cbftiitt*  wbo  boil  frtqiieiited  that  city  tbt'U  with-
ilitfw  to  tliih  IHland,  which  alTtinleil  };riMil  fucilitit'M
for  lyirryiiijx  on  tradi>  on  nrcount  of  ibe  conven-
lunctiuf  itapon.atidLtMadvniitaxeouHxitnatioi]  with
nsftjwct  ti>  thi)  Coasts  of  (Jree<-u  and  Asia  Minor,  an
WiOl  tm  fnnn  thic  great  concuiit-si;  of  |i4H»pl4  who  re-
fiorietl  thither  ul  stated  liiuott.  It  wa»  alw>  vory
fainoUH  for  i\»  broiiM?.  Tbe  Ucunjiii^  enperially
favotired  Cb«  intr^rejila  of  the  JJrliaii^,  thongli
tbey  bad  conceded  to  the  AtheiilanH  the  sov-
ei-iM|£iity  of  the  inbiiid  nod  the  ailitiitiiHtrutioii  of
tbt^<  temple  (I'tdyU.  xxx.  18^.  Hut  on  tbe  ncen-
jtalion  of  AihfiiH  by  the  geiiernlK  of  Mitliridaten,
tbey  laittled  troopj*  in  DeloK  itnd  coniniittetl  tbe
j^reutest  ilc'VastHtiohH  there  in  roiiwqiienee  of  the
iuhabitaiitH  refii»itig  tu  oHponsu  their  canwi  {u.c.
87).  Aftfcr  tbirt  calamity  it  n-inuinwd  in  ati  impov-
^riaheil  anil  de««rt<Hl  state.  The  town  of  I>elu»
wt\»  Hltuuied  nt  tbe  foot  of  Mount  (.'yuthna,  in  a
j>)iLin  wsten^d  hy  thei  little  rivt^-r  InopiiM,  and  liy  a
take  call<Hl  'rrochi)eidi.i8  by  Tiu*<i<rniH  and  Hrnxl-
olns.  KemaiinH  of  the  givat  leMt^de  of  A)k>11o,  of
tbe  temple  uf  Ll-Io,  a  theatre,  n  private  boiiHe,  niul
of  several  p>ortic(K>M  an>  ninon^  tW  »iilii|iiitTei4  Ibot
are  now  vlalblc.  Sinue  1K77,  M.  Koniolle  and  otli-
vT»,  on  bebnif  of  the  Fi-enL-b  An-hieological  IiiHti-
tnt«,  have  prvjseciite<t  very  exteuHive  iiivi*lij;atiuu«
ou  the  site  of  the  town.  See  8ail)iur,  llinl.  de  I'liiie
rff  Jt^lo$,in  the  ^t^»l.  lie  r.l/virfi'mrc  f/r*  lniicripUoTi»

iii.37l>:  am)  It Ilt>.  latiillefflr  Ih'lon  (rari^i.  IH7H).

Delos,  r4tNt'i<:hKUACV  uf.  A  leagiut  enlere<l  into
by  tbe  Cireek  Staten  ntider  the  hegemony  of  Athena
lu  B.C.  47^,  with  the  pritiisry  object  of  defending
Onwce  agftltiBt  the  dcdigu-t  of  Peraia. The  league


uhtaincd  itM  iiiuite  fmni  lii*-  fiiet  ibatTTBrnj
laltvex  nf  till*  8iati*H  rom}H>tiiig  il  met  iiervalinkllf
III'  the  inland  of  DrbiM,  in  the  letiiple  of  A)ki1ltiiiK|
ArteiMin.  Kavh  8tiite  eontribnied  at  it*  iijitinD
either  nhips  or  money  arcortling  to  the  aMovtuH-iil
propotwd  by  Arijitidirs  hi-  v.i,  re[irc»eiitin|Z  Albnn*
niid  rntitletl  by  the  acMeuibbx)  delegates.  The  fintt
tuttieifMinent  nni<>mite<l  t4i  HV)  (alentK.nr  nlmtir  fii),-
OOO.  The  rontribntioitH  were  colleclnl  aiifl  MtiiilD>
i«tiT<Ml  by  otHc«r(!i  calle^l  Helleuot-amiaiL*  m- v.i.

Delphi  (A<X<;^tH).  A  Hinall  hut  important  till
of  riiociH  in  OrtM:>ee,  ititnntvd  on  the  aoiitlietii  «i<)t
of  Monut  PariiaHHUH  mid  bnill  in  tbe  fonn  o(ia
aiiipbilhcatrc.  Justin  uxiv.  6|iuiys  thatithadH
wallr*.  bnt  wna  defended  by  it«  pnicipioM.  ?»»•
Mnni»  (X.  5)  calU  it  itJXk.  which  iHwins  Lo  lufii;
that  it  wHfi  -wnlled  like  other  ciLiea.  In  eiriiir
tiinei  it  was,  |K>rba(ie,  like  Olyinpin.  defended  li;
the  sanctity  of  its  oracle  and  tbe  proMUiM  of
it«  god.  Tbe«e  being  fuoiid  inmidicienl  tpalM
pn>t4M;tioii  againnt  tbe  entei-priEww  of  tbepmtei.
il  WH«  probably  f*>rtifle(i  and  Vtecnme  i  rrpilir
eity  after  Ihe  pii'datory  itienniionit  of  tbi*  I'hiici-
aoK,  Tlie  «»1Ib  niay,  howuver,  be  ciM<val  «iii
the  foniidalioti  of  Ihe  city  itnelf:  their  bi]fli  ■"-
tiqiiity  in  not  disproved  by  the  iiiw  uf  uortirm
tbe  cuustrnction,  tVir  &ome  of  ihe  Kgypliou  \ifn-
tulds  ore  btiilt  in  a  »iniilar  manner.

The  more  amieiat  itame  of  l>el|ibi  wi»  P)*tliit
from  tbe  berpent  Pytlmn,  as  in  coniuiulil;  M>p-
|>oHe<l.  which  Man  ^aid  to  have  t>eeu  hbiin  by  A(><>t-
lo  (Apollfxl.  liihliiilli.  i.  4.  :t).  Whence  the  uaw
Delphi  it.iidf  wji.-*  derived  we  nn»  not  infonaM.
Sonn>  nialtK  the  eily  to  have  riHTt^ived  thto  ii>w
from  IlflphiiM,  a  mtn  of  Apollo.  Olbetn  (Wat*
the  n]>pell»lioii  fnmi  Ibi;  Gi-cek  o^<Xif.ii>.  '  IrrlV
ren,"  brcaiiWT ApoJlo and \m bt-  '■'*

were  both  wornbipiK-d  there,  each  ■  _ ■ "'

tbe  Hnnimif.s  of  Piiniit.'i.HiiN  Kai^red  t*i  him,  'llwin*
tbnr  of  the  tlyniti  to  .^|H>lbt  ftectiot  tti  pun  nntW
womI  Delphi,  in  making  A|>ollo  tninxfunu  limvU
into  a  dtilpbiu  4d«X(/>if — v.  494).  Honic  »D]iiia«>l
that  the  name  wa^  intended  to  desigtiAl«  tli!l|«1i>
its  tUe  ccutitt  or  navel  of  the  earth.

A  nbort  sketch  of  the  hiaiory  of  ihit  most  ctk-'
bruted  oracle  and  tempk^  will  not  be  oiii  Lt(pi>C'
Though  not  8o  nncioni  ita  Uodoua  (t|  v  I,  it  ii  ««>*
di-nt  that  the  fame  of  Ihe  I)e)]ihie  Hhrine  IiihI  Iw"
eHlJitdiHhetl  at  a  very  farl>  period,  fmm  the  id^'uimo
made  of  it  by  Honiei'  uiid  Ihe  aeconnti*  *ii)t'^
by  PauHaniait  and  Slriibo.  The  Homeric  Hvm"  <"
Apollo  informs  ti!«  (lU)!  iVdl.)  that,  whcu  t)K  Py-
thian goil  wa«  eslabli.sbing  hisi  oraele  at  lkt\\<i'^
be  ln-Iield  im  tbe  nt-a  a  luerebant'xbip  I'min  i'tr^'-
tliif.  lie  direct imI  tol.'riswi.  and  np|HiintiHl  iheforrlX"'
crH  the  (wrvanl?)  of  his  newly  eAtatdu^be*!  Mufin
nry.  near  which  tbey  tietlled.  When  Him  it'"?
iM  Htripped  of  the  Inngtiagc  of  poetry,  it  can  *.■«'?
iiicnn  that  n  Cri'taii  colony  founded  lb*  fo*
pie  and  omcle  of  Delphi.  Strabo  TvytorU  i!i»i  ''
wiiM  Hi  fimt  cotmnltod  only  by  the  ncigblx'Uf^^
SIjiU'h;  bill  ihnt  after  i(«  fame  became  iiior*  wi''''
ly  i«pie;id,  foreign  priiires  and  nntiotid  e»ff^
MMigbt  ivnpoiiMM  from  ibe  Kacreil  iri|*iMl,  >**
loaded  the  altar  of  the  goil  with  rich  |ir(«r«<>
and  costly  offeriDgs  ^4^0).  PanuiiiioM  al»m  ttit
the  inm-t  ancient  temple  of  A|>ulto  at  DrliiUi***
formed,  according  to  Bome,  out  of  bmnclKa  *•
bay,  and  that  tbeae  hraucliea  were  cut  ftvoi  U*
tree  that  wa»  at  Teotp^f.  The  form  of  tblx  unJ^
reaeiublcd  that  of  a  Cf^ft^i^e. After  meiiiinbififi*


DELI'HI


«1


DELI'lll


till  »iid  A  tliinl  t4;in|ile— the  one  rniMxi,  ns  tlio  »nt»,  or  abont  ^11,000,000  (eC  PiutMn.  x.  9).  At
id,  Uj-  lt(H-8  from  mix  aiM  tviii;^,  nnd  n  stilt  later  ptriod,  LV))ili)  berame  oxiMWi'd  to  a
It  by  A)M>llo  to  the  H,vpt^rl>oiTiai)8,  niiH  tlie  otir  f<imit<l.ilt1t'  .'ittark  from  »  \ui'fs,v  bmly  of  UhiiU,
built  iif  tirAMo — lit*  hiIiIn  tliat  I"  tblH  8iicct>e<lfd  a  T)p»di>i)  Ity  tticir  kiiii;;,  Brt?iititi».  Tbvso  biirburi-
I  rill  aiiil  iiiuri'  stately  eiliticH  of  p«t>»ui.*,  ervflenl  by  aiis,  baviiig  ftirt-cd  ilie  detltvx  of  Mutiiit  (X'tii,  ]hmi-
D  arcbittri^lft  iiaiiifd  Tn>)ib<>iiJiis  and  A^jftnrfilfM  Hi-ttMHl  tbt!iiiH4>lvr^  iiT  Ibtt  tHnijtle  and  rniitMickod
kiiHan.  X.  M-  Ht^ri>  ncni  dciM)>«i|«>il  tbt<  nuuijxh-  il-t  tr<>M»<riiv».  Tlte  biutiy  wliicli  tbt^y  nbttniMHl  on
I  prcAfiita  of  GjgfK  and  Midas,  AlyatK-s  and  Iblii  oceaaiuii  if  (ttal^nl  to  have  Wen  iimiii'iiM' ;
senna  (lU-rod.  i.  14,  51),  at*  well  as  iU'wm'  of  the  flud  Ibis  iboy  lutisl  ba%*e  Riicccfded  in  n*Di<>viii^
iritis,  Hpluctu4',  and  Sieelints,  each  prim*  and  to  tbcii-  own  (imiitry,  niiiie  Vfv  aiv  told  tlmt.  on
an  faaviu);  tbrlr  Aepunitv  rhH|>vl  ur  treHaiir^'  for  ibc  capturi^  i>f  TuliiAa.  a  utiy  uf  (iaiil,  by  xhv  Ko-
trcceptiou  of  tbenu  offiTiii)^,  witli  nn  iuM.'ri|)-  mart  general  Ua«|>io.  a  (pvnl  part  of  thf  l>el|ibir
I  nt.teetiiijK  rbi*  naiueof  tbr  doiinraiitl  iho  ratiiw  i<(>inU  no^  fniiud  (hrrc.  Panfanias,  hnwevtT,  n-
]ic^  ^ifU  This  t«iuidt'  bavtiig  buon  act-ideiitnl-  Iikl«(i  that  the  iiniilit  ttift  with  gront  ditotitt'ra  In
el»^tr«»ywl  by  flr**  in  B.C.  MM,  tbi-  AiniihiclyniiK  tlicir  nttompl  on  Itclpbi,  and  nvt*'  totally  diBConi-
ilprt4M>k  to  tinitd  anotlinr  f»ir  iUh  mini  of  tlirit>  file^l  tltmii^h  tbi*  minitidoriN  intiTvcntton  of  Ihe
ndrtxl  tal**ntri,  of  ivhicb  llit-  lV]|tbi)iiiK  witi*  to  ^oil  (x.  '£i\  i>f.  Polyb.  i.  li,  h;  ii.  30,  6).  Snlla  Is
y  one  lonrth.  Tbf  reniAindi^r  of  ibv  ninonnt  in  altto  )>aid  to  hnvi!  ri>l>bml  this  t4M]ipl«  nit  well  as
Id  tn  have  Imnmi  oUtaiutHl  by  rnutnbiilionM  fn>iti  thoitc  of  Ut)  mpin  and  Kpiilatinin.  StnilHt  HAMireA
e  different  (■iti<>t  ami  iiHti<tii.<i.  Aniiu>i!4.  kin^  nf  u»  that  in  bin  ttiiiti  ihc  ttttnpli*  v,nn  (•milly  im-
{vpt,  furnished  a  tboiiNumt  tab:iilN  of  rlrrlmnt.  povrriftlit^d,  all  tb«  olferiii)£H  4>f  any  vuluc  havinjt
It;  Alcinaeouidnf.  a  wcaltby  Athenian  family,  l»roii  ROccfwivcly  roniowd.  TIi«  rMi|H'mr  Nci-ocar-
i>lc  (Iw  ooatrnct,  Riid  agnsed  to  ooiwtnict rlcd  ott',  ntwordlug  to  PaiiMauias  {x.  7),  Ove  hnn-

difd  t>tatii«K  of  brauzo  at  ou«>
time.  CotifitatiDuo  the  Great,
howerur,  proved  n  more  fatal
unnmy  to  Delphi  than  fithvr
Snltn  cr  NVm.  Up  renmved  th«
fwicred  tri|MMln  to  ndorri  Ihp  llip-
ftddromc  of  bin  uqw  rily,  vvhrre,
togctlii^r  Willi  Ibc  Ajwdlo,  tb(^
KlntuoN  of  till?  Hi>licuiiinii  MiiHea,
and  a  cidvbratt^d  ntatiie  of  I'an,
tbi^y  were  oxlant  wlicn  Siizauien
wnktc  bin  luHtory  (Gibbon, /frc/iA^
and  t'nli.  vh.x\ii.\.  Aniotitf  thcHC,
)riptH)»  na»)h(-  faiiionNOuc  wliitdi
Ihn (ili-i;kH.  liflL-i* tlir buttle iif

I'lataca,  found  \n  ilic  i-aiuii  of
Manloninft.  The  Urazrn  L'olanin
which  Knpport4?<l  tbiK  tripwt  is
still  to  tH3  M't*ii  at  Const  nil  tino-
.  pie.  3e«  I  be  illustration  on  p.
I  386.

The  siwC  whence  issnrd  th«
prophflic  vapour  whirl)  inaplred
tlif>  prii>fili'iw  waK  tisid  to  Ira  (bo
e(II6i*«>  of  Poriiit^  Ntonr>,  hnt  afNTwanlit  liber-  cpnlml  pi>int  (ij^f^MiXiit)  of  tb<>  <>Ni'tli,  thin  having
ily  onbitituted  Parian  niurtilu  for  tln"  fn>iit,  a  ]  lM«en  ]>rov*'d  by  Zi'us  binieclf,  who  d*--H]>atchvd
ircnmstance  whicb  is  said  to  havit  addf<l  roll- i  two  cagb*  from  nppodili' <|iiurloi-«  of  ibe  hoaveus,
id«mldy  to  Ihoir  ttiHnf^nce  at  Dolpiti  dlt-rnd.  it.  (  which  tbrrc  mivunntciX'd  each  oibiT  (Pausau.  x.
<^',  ▼.  68).  Aceordinf;  to  Htralm  iind  PanHa-  Hi).  Tho  Oiit]>hnlu«  was  inaikcd  by  a  stout!  in
idw,(h«  architect  wa!<  KpinlbaniH.  a  Corinthian,  tbt^  Nha|M!  t>f  bulf  ao  egg.  Strabo  re]H>rt4i  that
Tlw  vut  riob«H  art^timnlaipd  in  thin  t^nnph-  led the  >;ol«li>M  tripod  was  placod  over  tbi^  mouth  of

thu  cave,  whoncti proceedtsl  llio  exhalation,  and
which waa of tj^'^al depth. On this inat the
S  »itli  a  vit'W  of  licrnrin^  IVlpbi  and  ita  In-av  '  Pythia,  who.  having  oanj:ht  the  inspiration,  pro-
which, at Hfro«lo|nH atllmiA, wcrt' iM-tter  '  noniicrd  h«r  oracli-n  in  exlem[Hirt!  piotw  or  vvnv  ;
Xivn  to  biiii  than  the  Mmtftitt  of  bis  own  |)al- 1  if tho fonni*r,  it  was imniudialidy vtfrsified by
- The  mitrrpriM*,  howt'v<>r,  failt'd,  owitiff.  ns  it  ,  fbr  port  always  iAnipb>ycd  for  Ihat  ]iiiii>ose. The
H  htporttHl by  tbo  Pt^tphiaus,  to  tint manifest  .  orarlc  it>«*lf  it  said to  have  l^cen  discovi-rvd  Ity
*t|in«ititMi  of  till'  deity,  who  terrifu'd  the  barba-  ,  aci'idiMit. Stunc );oatM having slrayrd to ihr
I'**  and  burli^l dt^tniction  on their  s<'attiTf<l  '  inoitlh  of  the  cnveni,  wer«  snddeiily  M*i/.iMl wilh
^IjilIliTiwI.  \-iii.  :17). Many  years  snhse((»icnt  to  I  roiivnlsioiih  ; lhos«  likewiw  by  whom  tbcy  wi^re
'*  nmi,  il\t\  t4>lnpl(^  fell  into  the  hatulM  of  the  ,  found  in  this  sitnalioii  having  bc«-ii  ulTt-cieii  iti  a
x*ciaii)),  bontled  by  Philonielns,  who  did  not  scrn- similar  tivniiner,  the  cirrnin<t»nrc  w««  ilt-ciiied  sii-
"  tnappntpriat*  itf»  riiihos  fo  (he  payment  of  his peniatnml  atid  tin'  cave  prononnci'd  iho  seat  of
■"T"!  in ibn  war  he  was then  w»^iig  against iiropbery  (Paiisftii.  x.  fi;  Vint.  He  ftrtir.  I>r/.it.A33).
Iriiw The I'hocinns  are said to have pinn- '  Kailhtpiakes  have  h»igsiiireobliu>rat(Ml  Ibecbasin.
■d  the  temple  during  this  contest  of  gold  ntid The  pHi^fttcM  ronld  only  hf.  consulted  on  cRrlain
**r to the euorrnons ainutint of 10.000 tab  '  duvs. The  smifon  of  in(|Ulr>' was  thu  spring,  ilnr-
l«


Vtm  of  iMtpfat  knd  Uoant  I'snuaniL


^«ntt,  sfl«r  having  force<l tb6« pa.ss of  Tber-
ffVShf,  to  send  n  jMirlinn  of  bis  army  into  Pho-


DKLPHI


484


DELPniNI


s\


— *f.'5'*


f •  At


0  c lphTi


iL


- ' i


^^•


^^ J' I, a « *


r ;: 0 E L p"  H


n  e


'"*«^,


P(ljtUMH|p*jii


?^


Plu  flf  Mpbl  Id  l«n.


ing  tlie  tnnnth  Bnninm  (Tint  Qwu$1,  Gmer.).  Sao-
riOooft  an<l  ottior  crr^'mnnicn  wore  to  be  perftirmed
by  those  who  Koiifrlit  .in  uiintTrr  fn>m  tlin  otwclu
bcforp  tbpy  rotilil  Ik<  mlmiltrd  intn  tlw  sanctnary.

Tim  niiwi  n>tiiiirka1)lc  "f  tlm  Pythian  rc«poii»P8
iitr\  tliMH«  Nthii-h  Hernil<itu»«  nTtinU  an  having  hn^ii
dniiveretl  tii  the  Atlii^niuiitt  hofriru  th«  iiiviutioii  of
XurXM  (vii.  14t>):  to  Croevna  (i.  47);  \o  Lyrargus
(i.  ^%)'.  to  (rlant!iiH  tho  Sjiartaii  (vi.  ^i).  One  i«l>
ativo  lo  Af{<^iliiiiN  i»  vitt-tl  t,v  PaoMknias  (iii.  1^),
There  was.  however,  u.i  it  iipfH-uw.  nn  djftlciilly  in
hril>iu;{  aitU  ntherwiw^  iutliiuiiciiig  ihv  Pythia  hrr-
Keif,  a«  history  preiiciils  iia  with  tteveral  inntanwrt
of  Ibis  iiU]M)<«ture.  ThiiK  \xt  are  told  that  the  Alc-
miu^ntiidae  Knj^grHtml  mi  one  oocaKinn  onch  an*
swers  a*  acc<inl<Mt  with  their  iiolilicul  iU'4ipi«i
(Herod.  V,  rt3.  [W).  Cleoini*ne»,  Itiiij;  itf  S|iarta,
nlwt  priTVaiIrd  on  tlie  prieftUiw  to  aver  that  his  col-
l«Kg!ie  DfiunrntiiH  vti%  ineptininl*'.  On  the  4li»-
oovery,  however,  of  thin  insrhinalimi,  the  Pythia
was  reiiiovoil  from  lirr  office  (Ifenxl.  vi.  CO).  Del-
phi derivvil  furlbcr  orlvhriiy  from  its  hein^  the
place  whvru  the  Ainphietyonic  Coanril  held  one
of  Ibvir  uaMomhIiea,  and  also  from  the  tritlittition
of  the  games  whivh  that  \>o*\y  enrahlishcul  after
ihe  tacceaefiil  teruiinatiou  of  tbe  CritHueait  War.
8m  Ampiiicttonb*.

Tlipmt4-ori>t^lphi  iDorcnpiedhy  tbt'tniMlemhutn-
let  of  Kn.'«lH.  ThiTf  dIiII  exist  at  Delpbi  »  piirt  of
Ih*!  wall  ofchr  (.Tfnl  tfinplenfApoIhi  with  ooliiniutt
and  MtefK*.  a  fni^iiiriit  of  a  rnriooM  inarhle  sphinx.
Che  "Coliimu  of  the  N'Mxiang"  \«ith  an  inacriplion,
u  small  part  of  the  thrntre.  a  carefully  constnicted
toDib,  reniatii*  of  lb4>  8toa  of  the  Atheuiniis.  and
Boiiie  other  remnants  of  the  ancient  bnitdinKH.
For  inniiy  intfr*«tiiig  iletaiU  regardlnc  Delphi
and  the  irraeli-,  sro  A.  Momm*^ii,  Ifelfihtkit  (Leip-
Bij:.  IrfTf^).  and  Borich^-Ixvlerri,  Itiititirr  ttr  la  lUri-
ndfioH  i/rtNx  V Antitiuilf,  vol.  iii.  ilParin,  l.>%N)l:  and
on  Lbe  ttmi|tto,  a  valnabU)  jiajier  by  Prof.  Middlelou


in  the  Jounmt  af  Heltenie  Stv^lft^  vol.  ilt.  p|».fi^
322. See  also  the  article  OlcACiLfM.

Dfitphlca,  80  weMM.  A  table  of  bronze  or  ant-
bit*,  Hud  made  in  imitation  of  the  tripod.  It  •"•»
iiwd  at  drtukiug- boutt  and  alao
for  onianiontol  purposes  (Mart.
xii.  tJHi.

Delphic  Oracle.  See  Delphi  ;
Oraci'I.im  ;  Pttiiia.

DelphXcua  (A«>(^iicoc).  A  sor-
iiattie  of  A]>ollo,  from  hia  s«nctnnr3r
attd  (vorHhip  at  Delphi  (q.  t.).

Dclphin  BditloD  of  the  Latin
ebitwic,-^.  A  nuuie  (jivett  to  an  edi-
tion of  the  cla.'liKio  antbont,  pre-
pared by  thirty -nine  eminent  Mbolai»  of  U*
time  for  the  uae  of  the  Dnnphiu  iIVlphiiiMi  uf
France,  the  «on  of  Ijonis  XIV.  The  oriin»»l  '^'
itors  of  the  vrhole  were  Bonsttot  and  lliict.  tJl>
Danphin's  tutors.  The  whole  rdition  f^oiioi*!**^
sixty-four  qnarto  volnmeti,  and  appeared  «t  ii>f^
vaU  from  HJ74  to  17:».  Tin-  titte-paffp*  bevt^
vfohIh,  "Ad  Umiiii  Seretiiaaimi  DclphluL"  Tl"
edilon  mw  bl  to  expurgate  all  potMasw  tliM*^
peared  to  them  nbjecliuualde.  and  caniMi  '^
proeeaa  to  absnnl  lengths^  ao  that  ad  unm  I^
phimi  has  pftGBod  into  a  pbnue  lo  denote  tUiuj*
tbitig  baa  beeo  mncb  Ehiwillrrixw-
For  some  onriona  detail*  i»  *^
heail  8«<e  lauonam,  IHoHtf*^  ^
XIX'  SiicU',  a.  r.  "Ad  U.ii»  >*'
phiiii."

D«]phiikl  or  Delpfaloea.  1^
dulphiiiH,  wTi-n  in  niim)»T,  yln^
on  thu  miitt  of  ibc  oimia  '^
ClBCCS.)  Thxir  object  «M  *•
K>v*^  notice  uftbp  nuiuber«"f  wn*

IVIpbiDl. trrom'* "••""*  »*»« «"»»" *»•'•'*'  '*'  ^
BMr*it4>r.i run  tn  eaeh  rac«. Scvmi  eunnM


DELPHINIA


48S


DEMETER


runiitl  the  apina  constituted  a  single  race ;  and,
cousequeutly,  oue  of  these  dolphins  was  put  up
at  one  end  of  the  oonrse  apou  the  completion  of
each  circuit,  and  an  egg  (ora  carrieulorum)  at  the
iither,  in  order  that  there  might  be  no  mistake  or
dispute.  The  flgnre  of  a  dolphin  was  selected  in
honour  of  Neptune;  the  egg,  in  honour  of  Castor
and  Pollux.

Delphlnia  (ra  lit\<t>ivia).  A  festival  of  the  same
expiatory  character  as  the  Apollonia,  which  was
celebrated  in  various  towns  of  Greece,  in  honour
of  Apollo,  siimamed  Delphinius,  who  was  consid-
creil  by  the  louiaus  as  their  B€&s  irarp^ot.  The
name  of  tlie  god,  as  well  as  that  of  his  festival,
mnst  be  derived  from  the  belief  of  the  ancients
that  in  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  Munychion
(probably  identical  with  the  Aeginetan  Delphini-
us) Apollo  came  through  the  defile  of  Parnassus  to
Delptii  and  began  the  battle  with  Delphyn^.  As
he  thns  assumed  the  character  of  a  wrathful  god,
it  was  thought  necessary  to  appease  him,  and  the
Delphinia  accordingly  were  celebrated  at  Athens,
US  well  as  at  other  places  where  his  worship  hjul
bi-en  adopted,  on  the  sixth  of  Munychion.  At  AtheuH
seven  boys  and  seven  girls  carried  nlive-hranches,
Imiind  with  white  wool  (called  the  iKtrtjpia),  into
the  Delpfaininm  (Pint.  Thea.  18).

Delphi*  (dcX^i'r).  A  mass  of  lead  pointed  with
bronze  or  iron,  perhaps  in  the  shape  of  a  dolphin,
lined  for  sinking  an  enemy's  ship  (Aristoph.  Eq.  759 ;
Thiic.  vii.  41).  In  action,  the  delphis  was  hauled
upfroni  the  deck  to  the  poiutof  a  yard-arm,  which
was  swuiig  ronud  by  braces  till  over  the  hostile
<1ock;  the  ninchiue  was  then  instantly  let  fall,  af-
ter which  it  was  again  drawn  up  and  deposite*!  on
board.  The  v^ts  Sf\<fnvo<f>6poi  were  probably  only
of  the  transport  class  (6\Kad(r),  as  swift  (raxtlai)
triremes  would  have  been  Impeded  by  the  great
weight.

Delphus  (AcX^r).  A  son  of  Apollo  and  Celae-
no,  who,  according  to  oue  account,  was  the  fonnd-
er  of  Delphi  (Pansan.  x.  6).

Delta. See  Aeoypti's.

Delilbmiii. See  Templum.

Demades  (Ai;;/fidi;r).  An  Athenian  orator,  who
belonged  to  the  Macedonian  party,  uud  was  a  bit-
ter enemy  of  Demosthenes.  He  was  put  to  death
by  Antipater  In  B.C.  318.  Deinades  was  a  man
vithout  principle,  but  a  vigorous  and  briUiaut
orator,  always  speaking  esteuiporaneously,  and
with  such  freshness  and  force  as  to  rival  Demos-
thenes himself.  A  long  fragment  of  an  oration
(Ilfpi  &w8fKafTlat)  boara  the  name  of  Demades,
but  is  probably  spurious.

DemaratUB  [/^ftdparos).  (1)  The  son  and  suc-
c«HBor  of  Ariston  on  the  throne  of  Sparta,  B.C.  516.
He  was  deposed,  through  the  iutrignes  of  Cleome-
iies,  his  colleague,  on  the  ground  of  his  being  il-
lef;itimate.  After  his  deposition  he  was  chosen
and  held  the  office  of  magistrate ;  but  being  in-
sultingly derided  on  one  occasion  by  Leotychides,
who  bad  been  appointed  king  iu  his  stead,  he
crossed  over  into  Asia  to  Darius,  who  received
him  honourably  and  presented  him  with  lands
>D<1  cities  (Herod,  vi.  65, 70).  He  enabled  Xerxes
■obeeqnently  to  obtain  the  nomination  to  the  em-
pire, iu  preference  to  his  older  brother  Artabazar-
n^s,byiaggesting  to  him  an  argument,  the  Justice
of  which  was  acknowledged  by  Darius  (Herod,  vii.


'3).  We  find  him  after  this,  though  au  exile  from
his  country,  yet  sending  the  first  intelligence  to
Sparta  of  the  designs  of  Xerxes  against  Greece.
He  accompanied  that  monarch  on  hisexpedition,
frankly  praised  the  discipline  of  the  Greeks,  and
especially  that  of  the  Spartans;  and  befont  the
battle  of  Thermopylae  explained  to  him  some  of
the  warlike  cnstoios  of  the  last-mentioned  people.
We  learn  also  that  he  advised  Xerxes  to  seize,
with  his  fleet,  the  island  of  Cythera,  off  the
coast  of  Loconio,  from  which  he  might  continual-
ly ravage  the  shores  of  that  country.  The  mon-
arch did  not  adopt  his  snggestion,  but  still  al-
ways regarded  the  exile  Spartau  as  a  friend, -and
treateil  him  accordingly,  (ii)  A  rich  citizen  of
Corinth,  of  the  family  of  the  Bacchiadae.  When
Cypselus  had  usurped  the  sovereign  power  of  Cor-
inth, Demaratus,  with  all  his  family,  migrated  to
Italy,  and  settled  at  Tnrqninii,  658  years  before
Christ.  Commerce  hod  not  been  deemed  disrepu-
table among  the  Corinthian  nobility;  and  as  a
merchant,  therefore,  Demaratus  had  formed  ties
of  friendship  at  this  place.  He  brought  great
wealth  with  him.  The  sculptors  Encheir  and  En-
graramus,  and  Cleopbantns  the  painter,  were  said
to  have  accompauied  him,  and  along  with  the
fine  arts  of  Greece  he  taught  (so  the  popular  ac-
count said)  alphabetic  writing  to  the  Etrurians.
His  SOD  called  Liionmo  went  afterwards  to  Borne,
and  became  king  there  under  the  name  of  Tar-
([uinius  Priscus  (Liv.  i.  34  foil.).  (3)  A  Corinthian,
in  the  time  of  Philip  and  his  sou  Alesauder.  He
had  connections  of  hospitality  with  the  royal  fam-
ily of  Macedon,  and,  having  paid  a  visit  to  Philip,
succeeded  iu  reconciling  that  monarch  to  his  son.
After  Alexander  bad  overthrown  the  Persian  Em-
pire, Demaratus,  though  advanced  iu  years,  made
a  voyage  to  the  east  in  order  to  see  the  conquer-
or, and,  when  he  beheld  biro,  exclaimed,  "What
a  pleasure  have  those  Greeks  missed,  who  died
without  seeing  Alexander  seated  on  the  throne  of
Darius!"  He  died  soon  after,  mid  was  honoured
with  a  magnificent  funeral  (Pint.  Alex.  37, 56).

Demarclii  (H^fmpxoi)-  The  presidents  of  the
demes  {Srjfiot)  in  Attica,  said  to  have  been  first  ap-
pointed by  ClistheiicR  when  he  abolished  the  vav-
Kpapoi.  (See  Nauckaria.)  They  were  probably
elected  by  vote  and  not  by  lot.  Their  duties  were
variooB  and  important.  Thus  they  convened  meet-
ings of  the  demotae,  and  took  the  votes  upon  all
questions  uudcr  consideration  ;  they  had  the  cus-
tody of  the  Xrf^iapxiKitv  ypapLftartloy,  or  book  in
which  the  members  of  the  deme  were  enrolled
(Demostb.  c.  Euhul.  p.  1317,  $  60) ;  and  they  luwle
and  kept  a  register  of  the  landed  estates  (xtapia)  iu
their  districts,  whether  belougliig  to  individuals  or
tho  corporate  property  of  the  deme. See  Demus.

Demena. See  Curator.

Demenanm. See  Srrvus.

Dementia. See  Curator.

Demetae  (^ripiJTai).  A  people  of  Britain,  in  the
southwestern  part  of  what  is  now  Wales.  Their
chief  town  was  Maridunnm,  now  Caermartheu
CPtol.  ii.  3,  23).

Demeter  {Aijprinjp).  The  danghter  of  Cronus
and  Shea.  Her  name  signifies  Mother  Eaith,
meaning  that  she  was  goddess  of  agriculture  and
of  the  civilization  based  upon  it.  Her  children
were:  by  losion,  a  son  Plutns,  the  god  of  riches.


OF.UETKK


iM


UeUETBlL'S


m


rml  by  lior  brotliifr  ZfMiN,  a  il.iugltti>r  rKrwphon<^.  .  kiiowlMlgo  of  agiionlturc  ami  nlbn*  liluirin^  ar.  ^
Kound  Dciuvtur  ami  tliiti  iliiii^lil(>r  i.vmtn>  Iict  ooiiipiiiiyiiig  it—tiie  *t'ttli>inent  of  lixtNl  pljHMt  af
wufvliip  nud  cbe  fnblos  i-i-4i)tccthii;  lier.  Hades  cAr-  al>o<io,  civil  uitlvr,  aud  iredluck.  Tlius  DuaMtt
Tied  ufl'  IVrseplioiK^.  atiil  Uoiiif  tor  roamed  fur  iLiiic  i  wau  wonliippetl  as  tlie  godde^  of  kgrlenilunj
iluyH  uvor  ibo  cartli  duelling  Imr,  till  on  tlio  t«utb  fuundf^r  of  law,  ontor,  and  e8|MH>ially  of  nun
day  Hlt«  IcaroMl  tbc  tratb  from  th*^  aU-»t>tf>iii^  Bnu.  lu  all  plaoM  wbore  Greeks  dwelt,  tier  tUaj|;ht<
Sbo  wa«  angry  with  Zuii^  for  pennittiii';  tlie  act  j  lug  ii»iiaUy  aMociat«d  with  her.  (Sw  Ta
of  vit)|Duc«;  visitoil  Ol.viiipiis,  and  wamUired  about  ,  PHoniAJ  Tbt>  most  ancient  seaU  of  ber  wo
among  nM*ti  lu  ibe  form  of  an  old  wniimii  niulei*  wero  Attitms  and  KI«U8if(,  where  tbe  Rliariaii  plili
tliH  ttaiiic  of  Doo,  or  tb«  S'^t^ker,  (ill  at  Ii>ngth,  at  wa8  solemnly  plongbtnl  evvry  year  in  nu'tiiuiyaf
KlftiHiti,  ill  Allit'ii,  sUf  was  kindly  ruot>ivm1  :tt  (lie  tbo  iinl  wiwiug  of  wliwit.  Sim  wum  alau  miieb
lioiDM)  of  King  CVlviD*,  uud  foitml  comfort  iii  t«!nd-  worHbippod  in  Sicily,  whicli  fmui  lU*  f«rtilitf  wh
jng  bis  iiRwly  born  bom  DiMtiuphnttii.  tSiirpriMid  i  aocouiit«d  otiti  of  Iter  favoiirit*^  pl»cu»  oT  khi
by  Uii*  luutlier  in  the  acb  o(  trying  io  make  tlie  j  ^Sou  EijcuSIXIa.) As  tlic  gnditt^m  of  furliUtyJ

niel4^r  watt  in  many  regiuiii  uamxIT

^,_  . r^'v,.,^^^  with  Pofcwiilon,  the  g'Nl  of  ferilll

war«r.  This  was  pnriioiilarty  tLei
in  Arcndi:).  where  PiMiioidon  wu  r»-
ganle<l  as  tlir  father  of  PiTH^pbooi
Shv  was  alw  joined  with  Piitajn^
tbo  goil  of  wino;  aud  ka  niotlicr  of
PertKtpboDif  atid  gmhk-M  of  ibvMrlli.
to  n  bich  not  ouly  th4>  !Hi<<ti,  l>ol  ibf
dua<l  arc  couimitt^Ml.  kIip  id  coniiKlnl
with  thi*  lower  worlil  iitMler  llifuw
of  Clilbonia.  In  lafi^r  limM  shi>  VM
ofleii  L'otifuMMl  with  Gai-a  autl  Bbu
or  <.\vbpl<!.  He»idc«  fmit  ami  liontj-
combs,  tlic  oow  and  the  mv  wcnof*
fercil  to  her,  both  aa  erablems  of  pn-
diirlivity.  Her  nttribntos  are  pnKM
and  cars  of  corn  (al^o  a  ftyraWl  of
fniitfitliiew),  a  haftket  of  (tuU.kA*
little  pig.  Other  vnihloms  bad  a  »7*^
tif  nigniiicani^e  —  o.  g,  tlifl  torfh. wJ
Ilii>  NtTpfiit,  na  living  in  tb<!  («i(ti'
and  ns  HynilKdixiiig  a  reiipval  ofll^
by  nhedding  ila  skin.  Tlie  HonuO'
iijeiilitled  bt*r  Willi  lliiMr  owti  (.VlM
(q.v.i.

DemeUia  ( Aifntjrpia  ).  An  onniul
fi'Kliviil  whirh  tlio  Ath«Misii.i,  tii  >^<^
307,  tijiirltntirfl  ill  liononr  of  Dftwiri"*
I'oliorcutcji,  who,  together  nitli  hn  '»■
ther  Aiitigonns,  waa  coDBccr^tnt  W'
dor  the  tirlo  of  "wivionr  g^xl."  H  ***
cclebralcd  every  year  In  tin*  in"""*
of  Miinyetiion,  tbe  namp  of  wliirli.  «*
well  US  that  of  tbe  day  on  vrliich  ili»
festival  Wiis  held,  was  eliamfml  H''*'
Demetrion  and  Dcmi'lrian.  A  \*vt*
inini»ti'red  at  lln-ir  altan*.  anil  om-
dnotvd  tbe  itolomu  procewiou  a(»l  t"'
uncrillfcs  anil  game-s  with  wlitnli  '•••
festival  was  cplebniU-d  (Died.  8ic.  "
46;  Pint.  Dfmclr.  10,  4(i)  To  liM"*'
tbe  new  god  still  mon*.  the  Al'i'H**"'
at  tbe  name  lime  chniigeil  llic  t^»^
of  tbo  f^wtival  of  tho  Dtotiysla  into  tli.it  "f  U^"'"
tria,  aM  tim  young  prlnee  waa  fond  of  beiiringt'"'''
self  com  prm-d  to  Oionyttiii

Demetriaa  (AtftAifrfUik).  A  town  hi  lUgw^"
in  Theaaaly,  on  the  innermiist  nnftu^rs  ot  Oif^'
giisneati  Gnlf.  founded by  iVmelriiiii  Pulion^rW'.


A


Ss


y-^i


v*^^


7,


\


2^4^


Demcier. fMaral  Faiatisf  Irom  PoidimII.)

child  traniorta!  by  imtting  it  into  tbe  fire,  oho  re-
vealeil  her  deity,  and  OHn»ed  a  leniple  to  bo  bnilt
lu  her,  ill  which  nhe  gave  henwlf  np  |o  ber  grief.
In  bur  wrath  »bu  made  the  earth  barren,  so  that
mankind  were  threatened  with  deatructiou  by
faiuiue,  as  sbo  did  not  allow  tbe  fntU  of  the  earlli
fo  spring  np  again  nntti  her  dangbter  was  allowed
to spend  two  thinla  of  tbe  year  with her. On


niid  pi^iplcd  by  tho  iiibabitiints  of  Ii«U*-ii*  au-l'**
hor  return  to  Olympns  .he  left  the  gift,  of  corn,  «'"■'■"" "'l">fi  t««nfl  Its  po«ition  w«»  ,.kI.  li-l'
of  ftgiicnltni*.  and  «f  her  holv  tnvsterie.  wilb  !  "'"  "'>'«*  ^^  '•*«  '"^^  J^*""'!'  "^  «='<-'^I'>"  "f'\
bor  h(^t.  a«  a  token  of  gratefnl  fecoHection.  She  "'«  *'"'*^'^  ^'"^'^  "^  Uvp^f*^  the  other  two  l«i'«
srnt  TriplolemiiA  Hie  Kletminiiiii  round  tbu  world  ^'"lalel-.  and  Corinth  (Uv.  xxxii.  STj.
uu  her  cbariot,  ilrawn  by  MurjiflntM,  to  diffiiso  tbe DemetiluB  (Arf^i^r^MOf). (1)  A  son  of  Anti^***


UEMKTRIUS


485


DEMETRIUS


and  ^tratouicd,  Bumamed  Poliorcetes  {JIoKtopKTjTTis),
"  besieger  of  cities,"  from  hia  talents  as  au  eogi-
ueer  and  bis  i>ecn1iar  skill  in  coiiductitig  sieges,
etipecially  by  the  aid  of  machines  aud  engines
eithei-  invented  or  improved  by  himself. At  the
age  of  twenty-two  he  was  sent  by  his  father  against
Ptnlemy  (B.c.  31S),  who  had  invaded  Syria. He  was
ilefeateil  near  Oaza,  but  Bocni  repaired  his  loss  by
a  victory  over  one  of  the  generals  of  the  enemy.
He  afterwards  sailed  with  a  fleet  of  350  ships  to
Athens,  and  i-estored  the  AtheniaDS  to  liberty,  by
freeing  them  from  the  power  of  Cassander  and
Ptolemy and  expelling  the  garrison  which  was
stationed  there  nnder  Demetrius  Fhalerens. The
gratitude  of  the  Athenians  to  their  deliverer  passed
all  bonuds,  bnt  Demetrins  was  soon  summoned  by
his  father  to  leave  the  flattery  of  their  orators  in
order  to  resume  the  combined  duties  of  an  admiral
and  an  engineer  in  the  rednctiou  of  Cyprus. After
a  alight  engagement  with  MeuelsHs,  the  brother
of  Ptolemy,  he  laid  siege  to  Salaniis,  the  ancient
capital  of  that  island. The  occnrrenees  of  this
siege  occupy  a  prominent  place  in  history,  not  so
much  on  account  of  the  determined  resintauce  op-
l>osed  to  the  assailants  and  the  great  importance
attached  to  its  issne  by  the  heads  of  the  belliger-
ent parties,  as  for  a  new  species  of  warlike  engine
invented  by  Demetrins,  and  first  employed  by  bim
agaiust  the  city  of  Salarais. Tlie  iustnimeut  in
qaestiou  was  called  an  iKitroKis,  or  "  town-taker,"
and  waa  an  immense  tower,  consisting  of  nine  sto-
ries, gradually  diminishing  as  they  rose  in  altitude,
iind  affording  accommodation  for  a  large  number  of
anued  men,  who  thence  discharged  all  sorts  of  mis-
siles against  the  ramparts  of  the  enemy. Ptolemy,
dreading  the  fiiU  of  Salarais,  wbicb  would  pave  the
way,  as  he  easily  foresaw,  for  the  entire  conquest
of  Cyprus,  had  already  made  formidable  prepara-
tioua  for  compelling  Demetrius  to  raise  the  siege.
A  memorable  sea-tight  ensued,  in  which  the  rnler
of  Egypt  was  completely  defeated,  with  the  loss
of  nearly  all  his  fleet  and  30,000  prisoners. An
invasion  of  Egypt  by  Antigonus  then  took  place,
but  ended  disgracefully ;  and  Demetrius  was  scut
to  reduce  the  Khodians,  who  persisted  in  remain-
ing allies  of  Ptolemy. The  operations  of  Deme-
trins before  Rhodes,  aud  the  resolute  defence  of
the  place  by  the  inhabitants,  present  perhaps  the
most  remarkable  example  of  skill  and  heroism  that
it*  to  be  found  in  the  annals  of  ancient  warfare.
The  tXiiroKis  employed  on this  occasion  greatly
exceeded  the  one  that  waa  used  in  the  siege  of
Salaniis. Its  towers  were  150  feet  high ;  it  was
Hupported  on  eight  enormous  wheels,  aud  propelled
by  the  labour  of  3400  men. After  a  siege  of  a
whole  year,  however,  the  enterprise  was abau*
doned,  a  treaty  was  concluded  with  the  Rhodians,
and  Demetrins,  at  the  request  of  the  Athenians,
who  were  now  again  snbjected  to  the  Macedonians,
proceeded  to  rescue  Greece  from  the  power  of  Cas-
sander. In  this  he  was  so  successful  that  he  ulti-
mate!]: spread  the  terror  of  his  arms  over  the  whole
of  that  country. The  object  of  Antigonus  and
his  son  was  now  to  effect  the  final  subjugation  of
Macedonia,  Egypt,  and  the  East. The  confederacy
of  Seleneus,  Ptolemy,  Lysimachns,  and  Cassander
was  therefore  renewed,  with  the  view  of  crushing
these  auibitions  schemes,  and  in  the  battle  of  Ipsns
they  aacceeded  in  effecting  their  object. Antigo-
nus fell  iti  the  conflict,  ami  Demetrius,  after  a  pre-
cipitate flight  of  200  miles,  regained  his  fleet  with


only  a  small  remnant  of  his  once  powerful  host.
Sailing  soon  after  to  Atliens,  he  received  informa-
tion from  the  fickle  inhabitants  that  they  had  re-
solved to  admit  no  kiug  within  their  city ;  upon
which,  finding  that  all  Greece  had  now  submittoil
to  the  influence  of  Cassander,  he  made  a  descent
on  the  coast  at  Corinth  for  the  mere  purpose  of
plunder  and  revenge,  and  afterwards  committed
similar  ravages  along  the  whole  coast  of  Thrace,
Fortune,  however,  soon  smiled  again.  Seleucus,
Jealous  of  the  power  of  Lysimachns,  whose  terri-
tories now  extended  to  the  Syrian  borders,  resolved
to  streugtbeu  bis  own  dominions  by  forming  an
alliance  with  the  family  of  Demetrius,  which  was
still  possesseil  of  considerable  claims  and  interests.
He  therefore  made  proposals  for,  aud  obtained  in
niatTiage,  Stratonic^,  the  daughter  of  his  former
rival.  The  i>ower  of  Demetrius  again  became  for-
midable, an  alliance  with  Ptolemy,  who  gave  him
his  daughter  Ptolem^s  in  maniage,  having  also
added  to  its  increase.  He  compelled  the  Athenians
to  open  their  gates  and  receive  a  garrison;  and
having  generously  forgiven  their  previous  fickle-
uess,  he  turned  Ills  attention  to  Macedonia,  and
embracing  an  opportunity  of  interfering  in  the
affairs  of  that  country,  which  was  afforded  by  dis-
sensions between  tbe  two  sons  of  Cassander,  he  cut
off  Alexander,  one  of  the  two  princes,  and  made
himself  master  of  the  throne.  His  restless  ambi-
tion now  projected  new  conquests  in  Europe  and
Asia.  Turning  his  arms  against  Pyrrhus,  he  drove
him  from  Thessaly,  and  then  marched  to  Thebes,
which  he  took  by  assault.  About  the  same  time
also  he  built  the  city  of  Demetrius  ou  the  Pagasaean
Gulf;  and,  in  order  to  increase  his  uuval  power,
formed  a  matrimonial  nnion  with  the  daughter  of
Agathocles,  tyrant  of  Sicily.  His  fleet  at  length
amounted  to  500  galleys;  while  his  land  forces  ex-
ceeded considerably  100,000  men,  of  which  more
than  12.000  were  cavalry. This  formidable  power


Coin  of  DemetriuB  roUorccle&

excited  the  alarm  of  Lysimachus  aud  Ptolemy;  the
latter  advanced  against  Greece  with  his  fleet,  while
the  former,  with  Pyrrhus  his  ally,  made  a  land  at-
tack on  Macedon  in  two  difierent  points  at  once.
DemetriuB  took  the  field  with  his  usual  alacrity,
but  when  he  approached  the  position  of  Pyrrhus
the  greater  part  of  bis  troops  deserted  him  aud  he
was  compelled  to  flee.  Leaving  Macedon  a  prey
to  Lysimachus  aud  Pyrrhus,  Demetrius  passed  over
into  Asia  Miuor  with  a  body  of  bis  best  troops,  re-
solved to  assail  bis  adversary  In  tbe  most  vulner-
able quarter.  The  enterprise  was  at  first  attended
with  tbe  most  brilliant  success.  In  a  short  time,
however,  a  chuck  was  imposed  on  his  cai'eer  by
Agathocles,  the  son  of  Lysimachus,  and  Demetrius
was  coni{)el]ed  to  apply  for  protection  to  bis  aged
son-in-law  Selenons.  The  latter  yielded  to  his
solicitations  only  so  far  as  to  grant  bim  permission
to  spend  two  inontbs  within  bis  temtory;  and  was
subsequently  induced  by  his  courtiers  to  rid  him-


DEMETRIUS


486


DEMETRIUS


self  of  so  dangerous  a  gaest,by  sending  bim  a  pris-
oner to  a  strong  fortress  on  the  Syrian  coast,  abont
sixty  miles  south  of  Autioch.  A  sufficient  revenue
was  allowed  hint  for  his  sapport,  and  he  was  per-
mitted to  indulge  in  the  chase  and  other  exercises,
always,  however,  under  the  eye  of  his  keepers.  At
last,  giving  up  all  active  pursuits,  he  died  (B.C.  383)
at  tlie  end  of  three  years.  The  age  of  Demetrius  at
the  time  of  hisdeatU  was6fly-four.  His  posterity
enjoyed  the  throne  of  Macedou  in  oontinned  snoces-
siou  down  to  Perses,  when  the  Roman  conquest  took
place.  SeetbelifeofDemetriosbyPlntarcb.  (2)$ou
of  Aiitigonus  Ooiiatas,  and  graudson  of  Demetrius
Folioroetes,8ucceeded  his  father,  B.C. 339.  He  made
war  on  tlie  Aetolians  and  the  Achaeans,  and  was
successful  agaiust  both,  especially  the  latter,  whom
he  defeated,  although  under  the  command  of  Ara-
tns.  He  had  distinguished  himself^  before  coming
to  the  throne,  by  driving  Alexander  of  Epirus  out
of  Macedonia,  and  by  stripping  bim  of  bis  own
dominions.  He  reigned  t«n  years,  and  was  suc-
ceeded by  Antigonns  Doson.  (3)  Son  of  Philip
III.,  of  Macedonia,  an  excellent  prince,  greatly  be*
loved  by  his  countrymen,  aud  sent  by  his  father
as  a  hostage  to  Borne,  wbeiu  be  also  made  many
frlenda  He  was  subsequently  liberated,  and  not
long  after  paid  a  second  visit  to  the  capital  of  Ita-
ly as  an  ambassador  from  Philip,  on  which  occasion
he  obtained  favourable  terms  for  his  father,  when
the  latter  was  complained  of  to  the  Rumao  Senate  by
the  cities  of  Qreece.  Betnrning  home  loaded  with
murks  of  distinction  from  the  Romans,  and  hon-
cured  by  the  Macedonians  themselves,  who  re<
garded  bim  as  the  liberator  of  their  country,  he
excited  the  Jealousy  of  his  own  father  and  the
envy  and  hatred  of  bis  brother  Purses.  The  latter
eventually  accused  him  of  aspiring  to  the  crown,
and  of  carrying  on,  for  this  pnrpose,  a  secret  cor-
respondence with  the  Romans.  Philip,  lending
too  credulous  an  ear  to  the  charge,  put  his  son  De-
metrius to  death,  and  only  discovered  when  too
late  the  utter  falsity  of  the  accusation  (Liv.  xxxiii.
30;  xxxix.  ^  foil.:  xl.  5,  84,  54  foil.).  (4)  A  Syr-
ian, called  SoTER  (Scunjp),  or  "the  Preserver,"
the  sou  of  Seleucus  Philopator,  and  sent  by  his
father,  at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  as  a  hostage
to  Rome.  He  was  living  there  in  this  condition
fvheu  his  father  dieil  of  poison,  B.c.  176.  His
nude  Antiochns  Rplphanes  thereupon  usurped  the
throne,  and  was  succeeded  by  Antiochns  Eupa-
tor.  Demetrius,  meanwhile,  having  in  vain  en-
deavoured to  interest  tho  Seuat-e  in  his  behalf,
Sfwretly  escaped  from  Rome,  through  the  advice  of
PiilybiuB  tho  historian,  and,  finding  a  party  in
Syria  ready  to  support  his  claims,  defeated  aud  put
to  death  Eupator,  and  ascended  the  throne.  He
was  subsequently  acknowledged  as  king  by  the
Romans.  After  this,  be  freed  the  Babylonians  from
the  tyranny  of  Timarchus  and  Heraclides,  and  was
honoured  for  this  service  with  the  title  of  Suter.
At  a  subsequent  period  he  sent  his  generals  Kica-
noraud  Bacchides  into  ludaea,  at  tbo  solicitation
of  Alcimns,  the  high-priest,  who  had  usurped  that
office  with  the  aid  of  Eiipntor.  These  two  com-
manders ravaged  the  country,  aud  Bacchides  de- 1
feated  and  slew  the  celebrated  Judas  Maccabaeus.
Demetrius  at  last  became  so  hated  by  his  own  |
subjects,  and  an  object  of  so  much  dislike,  if  not  of  |
fear,  to  the  ueigbbounng  princes,  that  they  advo-
cated tho  claims  of  Alexander  Bala«,  and  be  fell  in
battle  against  this  competitor  for  the  crown  after


having  reigned  twelve  years  (from  B.C.  IG2  to  b.c.
150).  His  death  was  avenged,  however,  by  bin  mhi
and  successor  Demetrius  Nicator  (Just,  xxxiv.  3.
XXXV.  1).  (5)  Son  of  the  preceding,  aud  saruamnl
Nicator  (Nucoru/i),  or  "  the  Conqueror."  He  drotre
outAlexanderBalas,with  the  aid  of  Ptolemy  Pbilo-
metor,  who  had  given  him  his  daughter  Cleopatn
in  marriage,  though  she  was  already  the  wife  of
Balas.  He  asceuded  the  throne  B.c.  146,  but  noou
abandoned  himself  to  a  life  of  indolence  and  ilt^
bauohery.  leaving  the  reins  of  government  in  tbf"
hands  of  Lastbeues,  his  favourite,  au  unprincipled
and  violent  mau.  The  disgust  to  which  his  con-
duct gave  rise  induced  Tryphon,  who  bad  heta
governor  of  Autioch  under  Balas,  to  rovolt,  and
place  upon  the  throne  Antiochns  Dionysins,  bod  of
Balas  aud  Cleopatra,  a  child  only  four  yeanofagf.
A  battle  ensued,  in  which  Demetrins  was  defeated,
and  Antiochns,  now  receiving  the  gnniome  of
Tbeos,  was  cotTdncted  by  the  victors  to  Aotiorh
and  proclaimed  king  of  Syria.  He  reigned,  how-
ever, only  in  name.  The  actual  monarch  was  Trr*
phon,  who  put  him  to  death  at  the  end  of  about
two  years  aud  oansed  himself  to  be  proclaimed  in
bis  stead.  Demetrius,  meanwhile,  held  his  court
at  Seleucio.  Thinking  that  the  crimes  of  Try-
phon would  soon  make  him  universally  det««t(^
he  turned  his  arms  in  a  differeut  direction  ami
marohed  agaiust  the  Parthians,  in  the  hope  that,
if  he  roturued  victorious,  he  would  be  enabled  the
more  easily  to  rid  himself  of  his  Syrian  autagiHiisi.
After  some  successes,  however,  he  was  entrspprd
and  made  prisoner  by  the  Parthian  mouarcfa  Uith-
ridates,  aud  his  army  was  attacked  and  cut  to
pieces.  His  captivity  among  the  Partbiaus  wm
au  honourable  one,  aud  Mithridates  mode  hioi  es-
pouse his  daughter  Rhodognua.  The  iut«lligeii«'
of  this  marriage  so  exasperated  Cleopatra  that  sbr
gave  her  hand  to  Autiochns  Sidetes,  her  brolhfr-
in-law,  who  thereupon  asceuded  the  throne.  Sid«>-
tea  having  been  slain  in  a  bottle  with  the  ParthisQ*
after  a  reign  of  several  years,  Demetrius  racapnl
from  the  hands  of  Mithridates  and  resniried  lb«
throne.  His  subjects,  however,  unable  any  loDg^^
to  endure  his  pride  aud  cruelty,  requestetl  fron
Ptolemy  Pbyscon  a  king  of  the  race  of  the  Srlrn-
cidae  to  govern  them.  Ptolemy  sent  Alflxaad«r
Zubinas.  Demetrius,  driven  out  by  the  SyrisnA,
came  to  Pt'Olemais,  whore  Cleopatra,  his  first  wifr,
then  held  sway,  but  the  gatos  were  shut  agaioM
him.  He  then  took  refuge  in  Tyre,  but  was  put  to
death  by  the  governor  (B.C.  135).  Zubinas  revom-
pensed  the  Tyrians  fur  this  act  by  peniiittinu
them  to  live  according  to  their  own  laws,  aud  fniiu
this  period  commences  what  is  calle^l  by  chrooolo-
giftts  the  erti  of  the  independence  of  Tyre,  which
was  still  sul>sisting  at  the  lime  of  the  Ctiuucii  of
Chalcetlon,  574  years  aftor  this  event  (Joseph-  Jft-
fud.  xiii.  9, 13, 17 ;  Just,  xxxvi.  1,  xxxix.  1).  ifi)  Sll^
named  Eukarruh  (EeKatpot),  **the  Seasonabk  "  or
"  Fortunate,"  was  the  fourth  son  of  Antiochns  Gry-
pus.  He  was  proclaimed  king  at  I>iMua8CiM,»iid,io
conjunction  with  his  bmther  Philip,  lu  whom  a  psti
of  Syria  remaiued  faillifnl,droveout  AutiochiM  En-
sebes  from  that  country,  comiwlling  him  to  takf  ref-
uge among  the  Parthians.  The  two  brolbers  (bra
divided  Syria  between  them,  Autioch  being  tb«  c«|>-
ital  of  Philip  and  Damascus  that  of  DeiDctritu-
The  latter  afterwards  marched  to  the  aid  of  tbt
Jews,  who  hnd  rovolted  from  their  king,  Alexosder
lauuens. He  was  recalled,  however,  to  his  o«n


DElfETBIUS


487


DEHIURGI


dotninioDB  by  the  uews  of  an  ifiTarion  on  the  part
of  his  own  brother  Philip. He  took  Autioch,  and
besieged  Philip  in  Beroea;  hnt  the  Intter  being  as-
sisted bj  the  Partbianii  and  the  Arabiaos,  Deme-
trins  was  besieged  in  his  owu  camp  and  at  length
taken  piisoaer. He  was  broaght  to  the  king  of
Parthia,  who  treated  him  with  great  distiootion
and  sent  bini  ioto  Upper  Asia. He  reigned  a  little
over  six  years. (7)  Pkpaoohends,  a  medical  writ-
4>r,  who  floQrished  dnriDg  the  reigu  of  Michael  VXII.
<Pttlaeologns). By  the  order  of  this  mooarch,  he
wrote  a  work  on  the  gout  {Iltpi  nodaypac). We
bare  two  treatises  niider  his  name,  but  it  is  ex-
tremely doubtful  whether  he  was  indeed  their  au-
thor. The  first  is  on  the  art  of  training  falcons;
the  second,  on  the  mode  of  breaking  and  training
xlogH. (8)  PHALERKU8 (^oXi^prvs),  a  native  of
Phalemm  in  Attica,  and  the  last  of  the  more  dis-
tiuguisfaed  oraton  of  Greece. He  was  the  son  of
A  person  who  had  been  slave  to  Timotheos  and
Conon. Bnt,  though  bom  in  tbis  low  coudition,
he  soon  made  himself  disttngnished  by  his  tal-
ents, and  was  already  a  conspicuons  individual
in  the  public  assemblies  when  Autipater  became
master  of  Athens,  for  he  was  obliged  to  save  him-
self by  flight  from  the  vengeance  of  the  Macedo-
nian party. He  was  compelled  to  quit  the  city  a
second  time  when  Polysperchon  took  possession
of  it  through  his  son. Subsequently  named  by
Cassander  as  governor  of  Athens  (B.a  317),  he  so
gained  the  affections  of  bis  countrymen  that,  dur-
ing the  six  years  in  which  he  filled  this  office,  they
are  said  to  have  raised  to  him  three  hundred  and
sixty  statues. Athenaeua,  however,  ou  the  author-
ity of  Duris,  a  Samian  writer,  reproaches  him  with
liixnrioiiB  and  expensive habits,  while  he pre-
scribed, at  the  same  time,  frugality  to  his  fellow-
citizens  and  fixed  limits  for  their  expenditures.
After  the  death  of  his  protector,  Demetrius  was
driven  from  Athens  by  Antigouns  and  Demetrius
Poliorcetes  (B.c.  306). The  {>eople  of  that  city,  al-
-wavA  fickle,  overthrew  the  uumerous  statues  they
bad  erected  to  bim,  althongh  he  had  been  their
benefactor  and  idol,  and  even  condemned  him  to
deatb. Demetrius,  upon  this,  retired  to  the  court
4if  Alexandria,  where  be  lived  upwards  of  twenty
years. It  is  generally  supposed  that  he  was  the
individual  who  gave  Ptolemy  the  advice  to  found
the  Museum  and  the  famous  Library. This  prince
«onsuIted  bim  also  as  to  the  choice  of  a  successor.
Demetrius  was  iu  favour  of  the  monarch's  eldest
«on,  but  the  king  eventually  decided  for  the  son
whom  be  hod  by  his  second  wife  Berenice. Wheu
Ptolemy  II.,  therefore,  came  to  the  throne,  he  re-
venged himself  on  the  unlucky  couDsellor  by  exil-
ing him  to  a  distant  province  in  Upper  Kgypt,
"where  Demetrius  put  an  end  to  his  own  life  by  the
bite  of  an  asp  (B.C.28S). Cicero  describes  Deme-
trius as  a  polished,  sweet,  and  graceful  speaker,
but  deficient  in  energy  and  power. Plutarch  cites
his  treatise  "  On  Socrates,"  which  appears  to  have
contained also  a life  of  Aristides. The  works
of  Demetrius  are  lost. There  exists,  it  is  true,
under  his  name  a  treatise  on  elocution  (Utpi  'Ep^v-
»tiai),  a  work  full  of  ingenious  observations ;  but
critics  agree  in  making  it  of  later  origin. Besides
the  treatise  on  elocution,  there  exists  a  small  work
on  the  apophthegms  of  the  Seven  Sages,  which
Stnbsens  has  inserted  in  his  third  discourse,  as
bt-iof;  the  production  of  Demetrius  Phalereus. (9)
Of  Suninm ;  a  Cynic  philosopher,  who  flourished  at


Corinth  in  the  first  century.  During  the  reign  of
Caligula  he  taught  philosophy  nt  Rome,  whene  he
obtained  the  highest  reputation  for  wisdom  and
virtue.  He  was  banished  from  Borne  in  the  time
of  Nero  for  his  free  censure  of  public  manners.
Af^r  the  death  of  tbis  emperor  he  returned  to
Rome,  bnt  the  boldness  of  his  language  soon  of-
fended Vespasian  aud  again  subjected  him  to  the
punishment  of  exile.  ApoUouius,  with  whom  he
had  formed  a  friendship,  prevailed  on  Titus  to
recall  bim;  but  under  Domitian  he  withdrew  to
Puteoli.  Seneca,  who  was  acquainted  with  him,
speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  his  masculine  elo-
quence, sound  judgment,  iutrepid  fortitude,  and
inflexible  integrity  (Sen.  De  Vit.  Beat.  25).

Deminutio  Caj^tia.  Diminntion  of  civil  rights
and  legal  capacity.  A  term  by  which  the  Bo-
mans  denoted  degradation  to  an  inferior  civil
condition,  through  the  loss  of  the  rights  of  free-
dom, citizenship,  or  family.  The  extreme  form  of
it,  deminutio  capitia  maxima,  was  entailed  by  the
loss  of  freedom,  which  involved  the  loss  of  all  oth-
er rights.  This  would  occur  if  a  Roman  citizen
were  taken  prisoner  in  war,  or  given  up  to  the  en-
emy for  having  violated  the  sanctity  of  an  ambas-
sador or  concluding  a  treaty  not  approved  of  by
the  people.  Or  again  if  he  was  sold  into  slavery,
whether  by  the  State  for  refusing  military  service,
or  for  declining  to  state  the  amount  of  his  property
at  the  census,  or  by  his  creditors  for  debt.  If  a
prisoner  of  war  returned  home,  or  if  the  enemy
refused  to  accept  him  when  given  up  to  them,  his
former  civil  rights  were  restored.  The  interme-
diate stage,  OeminntUf  oapitia  media  or  minor,  con-
sisted in  loss  of  civil  rights  consequent  on  becom-
ing a  citizen  of  another  State,  or  on  a  decree  of
exile  confirmed  by  the  people,  or  (in  imperial  times)
ou  deportation.  Bestoration  of  the  civil  status  was
possible  if  the  foreign  citizenship  were  given  up,
or  if  the  decree  of  exile  were  cancelled.  The  low-
est grade  {deminutio  capitie  minima)  was  the  loss
of  hitherto  existing  family  rights  by  emancipa-
tion (which  involved  leaving  the  family),  adoj>>
tion,  or  (if  a  girl)  by  marriage. See  Caput.

Demlopr&ta  (ijjfuoTrpara).  Property  confiscated
at  Athens  and  sold  by  public  auction.  The  confis-
cation of  property  was  one  of  the  most  common
sources  of  revenue  in  many  Greek  States;  and
Aristophanes  (Tesp.  669;  Eq.  103)  mentions  the
dij/uoirpora  as  a  separate  branch  of  the  public
revenue  at  Athens.  A  chapter  of  Boeckh's  Pii6-
lic  Economy  is  devoted  to  this  subject  (book  iii.  ch.
14).  These  sales  were  under  the  direction  of  the
poletae  (q.  v.),  who  presented  their  reports  to  the
people  in  the  first  assembly  of  each  piytany  (Poll
viii.  95) ;  they  also  set  up  lists  of  thjiuowpara
(probably  after  the  sale)  upon  tablets  of  stone  in
the  Acropolis,  at  Eleusis,  and  elsewhere.  Several
fragments  of  such  lists  are  preserved  in  inscrip-
tions; one  of  the  most  important,  throwing  light
on  the  prices  realized  by  the  poletae,  is  discussed
in  Boeckh-FrHnkel  (ii.  129  foil.).  On  hrjiuotrpcera  iu
general,  see  Boeckh-Friinkel,  Index,  s.  t.  "Gllter."

DemltiTgi  {irifuovpyatf.  A  general  term  among
the  Greeks  for  tradesmen,  among  whom  they  in-
cluded artists  and  physicians.  In  old  times  they
formed,  nt  Athens,  the  third  order,  the  other  two
being  the  Enpatridae  and  Georoori  ( see  these
names).  In  some  States,  Deminrgi  was  the  name
of  the  public  officials: in  the  Achaean  League,


DKvrus


4S8


DEMOCRITUW


fut  iiiHGSSrtfce  t«>t]  Deniiiir];!  were  among  the
higlicHt  ofHcere  of  th<^  confvdtirucy.

Demitu  {Hiffuot).  Tlu-  pulilic  «x(M:iitioitor  at
AtluMitt,  a  slave,  wbo  was  tlii'  wi-rvAiit  uf  thuEluven.
For  imftsriMiccH,  Act)  Okmoaii,  IIrxoeka,  aiid  Tor-

MKNTCM.

Demooedea  (A^f^Ki^d^r).  A  cok-UmtMl  pliysi-
viaii  uf  C'ruttf[ji»  {Herud.  iii.  I'iU).  Itf  imK-tlsoil
miHliciiio  Hiicc'esttivcly  nt  AtK'""-  Atlic-iis.  nod  Sn-
nio5. Hv  vniM  taken priiioiLvr hy  tliu Puniiantt,

ill  B.C.  .VA!,  iirill  Wii»  will  tn  SllMii  t"  the  innrl
of  Diiriiis.  M»rf*  lii*  ■cquiml  |;rt<]il  n-piilntinn  liy
ciiriDK  IIk)  kjii;;>  fuiit  ntiit  llif  l>n>aMt  of  the  qrieiMi
Atfwuiii.  N'otM'ilhHtutiitiiiK  hU  hoiioiini  al  llit*  Pvr-
Miiin  iroitrt  hr.  \vaM  hIwuvk  ilf>r>miiiH  of  i-L-hirtitrig  to
hiK  iiativL*  t-otnitr,v,  antl  in  onlt-r  to  rtft-ut  IhiM,  hL-
{■nwiiml  liy  iiiraiiM  of  At^mMi  that  hv  ithoiiM  Iht
KTiil  with  BotiiL'  tioUlfM  to  fxphin?  thi^  cnant  of
(Irt'j'co  anil  to  ascortitin  in  what  part«  it  iiiii;ht  lie
tnnst  8in;ci*»«fiiny  nttarktMl,  At  Tarcutnm  he  e»-
<!a|ie<1,  nnil  svttleil  at;  Crotonn,  when?  ho  iruirrieil
thi^  4)anghl«r  of  the  fanidiii*  wrestler  Milo.

Demooli&rea  (.l^^a^upfjr).  An  Arbeiiiao,  the
won  of  Iht)  KJrtter  of  Deaiomtljenefl,  nnil  wi-ll  known
■H  an  uralor.  U|ioii  the  restoration  of  the  ilomoc-
nicy  hy  IX-nii'trinn  Poliorcetfl*  in  n.c.  31)6,  I>fnu>-
churvH  wam  at  the  hrail  of  the  |M>|>iilar  party  for
Burvml  yrarn.  He  h'd  oratroiiH  otiil  an  I'lahorato
biiit<iry  of  hill  own  linirpi,  urily  fra}(;tneiitN  nS  wliirh
mniuiii.  Stv*  tin*  eiwuiy  fiy  Droysr-a  in  (he  Xril-
tvhri/l  /Hr  tiif  Altertbum*ici4in^n§cha/t  {ltf36),  xx.
Bllll  xxi.

DemocrXtes  fA7(ioKpaT-ffv).  A  Pythiigoreaii  phi-
toHttpber  of  who<ir  lilV  iiothini;  in  known,  Init  who
in  rt'UitfnilteriMl  ait  the  author  of  the  so-ralteil
"Githleu  Maxims"  (yrw/uit  xfnf<ra<).  n  nninltvr  of
Dioral  BJiyings  in  tho  Ionia  tlialeoi.  They  are
priiit*-d  in  Orrlti*d  Optuc.  (iraec.  frt.  SrMl»nt,(1/ei\t'

Demooratla  (  HfitiOKparia,  "sovcreigrtity  of  the
people  "),  The  Greek  temi  for  the  fomi  of  cOQ!(ti-
talinti  in  which  all  cttir.en!«  hatl  the  right  of  tak-
ing part  in  the  Kovi>niineril.  Thin  t'i;;ht  w»8  not
alwayK  ahfioliitely  et|M:il.  Si»nietiniPM  rla8M.>i#  were
fornuNl  on  a  propi-rly  ()naliti<-aliiin  antl  rivil  riirlil:^
oonferreil  accordingly  (  wi-  Timik'Ratia  ):  hnr  no
cla«»>  iu  this  Cft-M)  nut*  ahMilntoly  ext-liitled  frotu  a
•baru  in  thu  (;;ovcruuient,  and  it  wau  puH-sible  to  rise
from  one  cla^^  U*  anoihur.  Sonntlinieit  proviHion
wa»  made  by  taw  10  prevent  any  peraoun  takiu);
(Mrt  in  tbe  adniitiiittratJon  but  sueh  oa  bad  proved
(boir  worth  and  capacity,  lu  the  ab«<nce  of  bncli
limiiatiuufi  the  deuiocrary,  as  Plato  in  hia  llepmbtie
and  Ar'wtutte  iu  hii^  /'o/ifo'M  oliM-rvnl,  wion  degen-
erated into  a  inoli-froveninient  io)fXot(»nin)  or  ile-
vel<i|H-<)  into  a  dc^jiotiunt.

Demociitns  iAi7^(>K/Kror).  A  celebrated  philos-
oph'.'r.  boni  at  Ahdera.  almnt  it.c.  494  or  4W,  but
ace4>rdiiig  to  iwtne.  n.c.  4*0  or  4(!tl.  His  father  was
a  man  of  uohle  family  and  of  great  wentth.  and
eontrihnte«l  largely  l^iwunls  the  entertainment  of
the  army  of  Xerxr«  on  hin  rrlnrn  t*)  Aioa.  As  a
reward  for  tliin  wrviiv  ilie  Peniuii  monareh  matle
biin  and  tbo  other  AlMleHles  rich  pn-M?nta  and  left
among  them  M>veral  Cbaldaean  Magi.  l)einiH-ri-
tut,  acconling  to  Diogenet  Lal-rtiuii,  waD  iiiKtrnet-
ad  by  tlie*t«  in  a*'tronomy  and  theology.  After  the
death  of  bia  father  be  dt>temihiMl  to  travel  iu
search  of  wiwloui,  and  devoted  to  thia  purpuM*  tbe  I


portion  which  fell  to  htm,  araountlBg  to  oue
drcd  talenl.((. He  is  said  to  have  vi^ite*]  Egy|  -^
and  Ethiopia,  Iho  Peniuu  Magi,  and,  accordin);  cl^
some,  even  tbe  Uyuiuo8ophiijt«  of  India. Wht-i^j
er,  in  the  courtte  of  his  tniveU,  he  visited  AtbfK:^
or  slndie^l  ntider  Auaxagorns  ia  iinrtM'tain. TIk-  j^
can U* little  donht,  however,  that iliirtng  mi^^
part  of  hia  life  In'  wtti  inHirueieil  in  the  P>tliit^^-^
rean  tenolM.and  particularly  that  he  waaadiM:it»i^
■if  I^ncippiu  (i|.  v.). After  a  loog  eourei.'  of  yea^i,
thn.H  H{teui  in  travelling,  Denit^crituf)  rctuructl (^
AUIeva.  richly  ntored  with  the  trt^OMiirix*  of  pbiltM.
opby,  hilt  deMitntu  even  of  the  uecewarj'  meniu
of  (tnlMlNteiicn. His brother Daranslft, lixntve/^
received  him  kindly  and  lil>erally  supplieil  nil  bii
wanttv. Arcordiitg  to  the  law  of  Alalem,  wlii«icr 1
hIioiiUI  wa4t(-  luM  palritiuiny  abonld tie  depriiej
of  the  riteti  of  hnriol. DeinoeritUK^  desiriUjf  td
avoid tbiit  diaglac4^  gave public lecture!  (o  tbe
peojdt:,  cbiedy  from  hitt  larger  SuUntrfior,  tbe  Bott
vHlnahli:  of  hiH  writinga; in  n*tiiru lie  rpoei*«4
fiinii  bih  licnrera  iiiany  valuable  pre«eut«  aiidoib-
er  tetttinioniea  of  i^e<4)>eet.  which  relieved  bim  fn*D
all  apprehenaion  of  Hiltfering  public  ceiwiire  »  a
f^l'endtlirift.

Di'mornlni*,  hy  hi;*  learning  and  wtwiotn,  and
e«]HH'lally  by  his  iici|iiaiiilancv  with  natural  pha-
numena.  nc<|nired  great  fame  and  excited  nitiA
admiiation  antong  the  ignorant  Abderites.  Br
giving  pnrvioutt  noticen  of  iinex|>ected  clianiMin
the  »eathi.-r,  and  b>  oilier  artifices,  he  biHl  llitiJ-
droHH  lo  make  Iheni  bcOieve  that  be  fiosMiMed  t
power  of  preilielitig  fniiire  events;  and  lliryivt
only  hieked  uj>ou  him  as  wuuetliing  iimn-  thu
morlrtl.  but  even  propo!»«Hl  to  invest  liini  tvilU  tJi»
direction  of  their  pnblie  alfaim.  Fruni  ineliM-
tiun  and  habit,  however,  he  preferred  a  wntm-
plative  to  au  active  life,  and  therefore  dfcllixd
thtrtM.-  publit>  boiioura  and  pasned  the  reuiaudct'"
hii<  days  in  solitude.  It  i»  Haid  that  from  thii  li**
he  upeiit  bin  days  anil  nights  iu  ravemo  an«l*epol-
ebrea:  ami  some  even  relate  I  hat,  in  nrdertaW
mitrt'  perfectly  master  of  liiN  intelle^tnal  facnIlM«.
he  bliiidiHl  himaelf  by  nteaiia  of  a  biiruin)(-f^>'a
The  Htory,  however,  i»  utterly  iiien-dilile,  li^f*  ll"*
wiilem  who  meiiliou  it  afflrm  tbiit  DemMtii**
employed  hi»t  li'iKiiru  in  writing  buokn  and  in  di*'
Ni'i-iiiig  tliii  luidieti  of  auiutala,  iieilhet  of  wb"*
could  well  have  l»een  elfeclod  withont  eyet-  S"
iff  greater  creilit  due  to  the  talc  that  I>eaiaai«>*
a|R*nt  Win  leisnre  bouris  in  chemical  rvtmrnrcbta  »tut
the  philoiMipher'B  stone— the  dream  of  a  later  tf*'-
or  lo  the  story  of  bis  convenMttioo  with  Hil'l**''
rates,  groiuidwl  npitn  letters  which  are  said  t«  ba**
passeii  l>etween  the  father  of  mediciutt  anil  tl*
people  of  Abdera  011  the  niipposed  madnflM  *
DemitrritUH,  )>nt  whiidi  are  evidently  hpuriooa.  >■*
only  reiisoiiahle  conrhihion  that  can  l>e  drawn  lV<>oi
Iheae  and  otU«r  tftlca  is  that  Dcuiocritns  wwaP*"
of  litfly  gviiiutt  and  pcuotrating  judgiii«Dt,«bAl'f
a  long  cfinrse  of  study  and  obsorvalion,  becaw **
eminent  master  of  s)>eenbitivo  and  phywul  *'''
enee  ;  the  natural  coiisetinence  of  winch  w»»  *^'*'*
liko  Roger  Bacon  in  a  later  period,  ho  a.«iniiii»*^
and  imposed  npon  his  ignorant  ami  t'lctn'''"*
eonntryinen.  Peironius  n^latea  that  hr  *«  f"'
fi-rtty  aetinainte-i  with  the  virtues  of  herbs,  pl**^
and  Atones,  and  that  he  •>|K>nt  hi«  life  in  tatki'i
ex|wrimentH  n)M)n  nntaral  b<Klie«.

DtiUiocritus  Ita.*^  been  couimouly  known  n""^
tho  appellation  of  "  The  l^aughing  Phll««wp'"'


DEMOCRITDS


4tt9


DEMOPOIETOS


DomocriUis. (Naples  MUHeum.)

and  it  is  gravely  related  by  Soneca  (De  Ira,  ii.  10;
De  TYanq.  15)  tbat  he  uever  appeared  in  public
nitltimt  expressing  his  contempt  of  the  fullies  of
maukiud  by  laughter.  Thus  much,  in  fact,  may  be
easily  believed :  that  a  man  so  snperior  to  the  gen-
erality  of  his  cou temporaries,  and  whose  lot  it  was
to  live  among  a  race  of  nieu  who  were  stupid  to  a
proverb,  might  frequently  treat  their  follies  with
ridicule  and  contempt.  Accordingly,  we  Bud  that
among  bis  fellow -citizens  he  liml  the  name  of
TtXaa-ivos,  or  "  the  mocker"  (cf.  Juv.  x.  33,  34).

Dumocritns  appears  to  have  been  in  his  morals
chaste  and  temperate,  and  his  sobriety  was  re-
paid by  a  healthy  old  age.  He  lived  and  enjoyed
the  use  of  his  faculties  to  the  term  of  a  hundred
years,  and  at  last  died  through  mere  decay.

Deiiiocritus  expanded  tho  atomic  theory  of  his
master  l*ncippuB  (q.  v.),  to  support  the  truth  of
which  be  maintained  the  impossibility  of  division
ad  infiHitum;  and,  from  the  difficulty  of  assigning  a
conimeu cement  of  time,  he  argued  the  eteruity  of
existiug  nature,  of  void  apace,  and  of  motion.  Ue
suppotied  the  atoms,  originally  similar,  to  be  en-
dowed with  certain  properties,  such  as  impenetra-
bility and  a  density  proi>ortioDat«  to  their  volume.
He  referred  every  active  and  passive  affection  to
mution,  caused  by  impact,  limited  by  the  princi-
ple lie  assumed,  that  like  can  only  act  on  like.  Ho
drew  a  distinction  between  primary  motion  and
secondary ;  impulse  and  reaction ;  from  a  combi-
nation of  which  be  produced  rotary  motion.  Here-
iu  cousists  the  law  of  necessity,  by  which  nil  things
iu  nature  are  ruled.  From  the  endless  multiplic-
ity of  falling  atoms  have  resulted  the  worlds  which
we  heboid,  with  all  the  properties  of  immensity,
resemblance,  and  dissimilitude  which  belong  to
them.  The  soul  oonsists  (such  is  his  doctrine)  of
globular  atoms  of  fire,  which  impart  movement  to
the  body.  Maintainiog  his  atomic  theory  through-
out, Democritus  introduced  the  hypothesis  of  im-
agea  (<£d«Xa),  a  species  of  emanation  from  external
objectn,  which  make  an  impression  on  our  senses,
and  from  the  influence  of  which  he  dednced  sensa-
tion {a'i<r$7}tns)  and  thought  (vorftris).  He  diatin-
guishetl  between  a  mde,  imperfect,  and  therefore
faltte  perception  and  a  true  one.  In  the  same
manner,  consistently  with  his  theory,  lie  account-
ed for  the  popular  notions  of  the  Deity ;  partly
16*


through  our  incapacity  to  understand  fully  the
pbeuomeua  of  which  we  are  witnesses,  and  part-
ly from  the  impressions  communicated  by  certain
beings  (ciduXa)  of  enormous  stature  and  resem-
bling the  human  figure  which  inhabit  the  air.
To  these  he  ascribed  dreams  and  the  causes  of
divination.  He  carried  his  theory  into  practi-
cal philosophy  also,  laying  down  that  happiness
consisted  in  an  equability  of  temperament  [tiiBv-
fiia),  whence  he  deduced  his  moral  principles
and  prudential  maxims.  It  was  from  Democritus
that  Epicurus  (q.  v.)  borrowed  the  priucipal  feat
ures  of  his  philosophy.  The  fragments  of  De
mocritus  have  been  collected  and  published  by
Mullach  (Berlin,  1843),  with  notes.  See  Ueber
weg,  Bittory  of  Pbiloaophy  (Eng.  tr^ns.,  N.  Y
1872),  vol.  i.  pp.  67-71 ;  and  the  dissertation  by
R.  Johnson,  Der  Sennalismus  dea  Dentokrit  (Planeu,
1868).

DemodScuB  (^fioboKot).  (1)  A  blind  musician
at  the  court  of  AlcinoUs,  who  sang  in  the  presence
ofOdy88eus(Hom.  Orf.viii.44;  P\ut.  De  Mus.).  (3)
A  Trojan  chief,  who  came  with  Aeneas  into  Italy,
where  he  was  killed  (Verg.  Aen.  x.  413).

Demoleon  (^futKiav).  (1)  A  Centaur,  killed  liy
Theseas  at  the  nuptials  of  PiritboUs  (Ovid,  Met.
zii.  356).  (2)  A  sou  of  Autenor,  killed  by  Achilles
(Hom.  n.  XX.  395).

Demon. See  Daemon.

Demonax  (Ai^ftuva^.  A  philosopher  of  the  sec-
ond century  B.C.,  who  endeavoured  to  revive  the
philosophy  of  the  Cyuio  School.  Born  in  Cyprus,
he  went  to  Athens,  where  be  became  very  popular,
so  that  people  vied  with  one  another  in  presenting
him  with  food,  aud  even  the  young  children  gave
him  great  qnantitios  of  fruit.  Much  less  austere
than  Diogenes  (q.  v.),  whom  be  took  as  his  philo-
sophic model,  he  nevertheless  rebuked  vice  un-
sparingly, and  was  charged  with  neglecting  the
Eleusinian  Mysteries,  to  which  he  replied :  "  If  the
mysteries  are  bad,  no  one  should  be  initiated ;  and
if  they  are  good,  they  ought  to  be  open  to  every
one."  He  was  a  friend  of  Epictetus,  who  once  re-
buked him  for  not  marrying,  but  was  silenced  by
Demonax,  who  said,  "Very  well;  give  me  one  of
yonr  daughters  for  a  wife" — Epictetus  being  him-
self a  bachelor.  Demonax  lived  to  be  nearly  a
hundred,  aud  on  his  death  was  buried  with  great
magnificence.  See  the  Demonax  of  Luciaii,  iu
which  the  character  of  the  philosopher  is  painted
iu  glowing  colours.

Demoneai  Inaiilae  (Aij^dm^o-ot).  A  group  of
islands  in  the  Propoutis  (Sea  of  Marmora)  belong-
ing to  Bitbyuin.  Thechief  of  these  were  Pityodes
and  Chalcitis,  also  calleil  Demonesns.

Demophlliis  (A^/iot^tXor).  (1)  An  Athenian  poet
of  tho  Now  Comedy,  from  whose  'Ovayor  Plautus
took  his  Aainaria.  (2)  A  Pythagorean  philosopher
who  wrote  a  work  called  hiov  Q€pdirfia,  of  which
a  selection  is  extant  under  the  name  of  rvaoft-tKa
'Ofioia>fjLara,  w-hich  has  been  edited  by  Orelli  (Lwiii-
zig,  1819).  Of  the  life  of  Demophitus  no  particu-
lars are  known.

Demophoon  ( ^^ftot^dwf )  or  Sem&phon.  ( 1 )
See  Elkl'sixia. (2)  See  Phyllis.

DemopoietOB  {^TjfiojroirfToe).  A  newly  made  or
naturalized  citizeu  at  Athens.  See  Deniosth.  o.
Sif/jA.  i.  p.  1125,  $78.


DEMOSII


490


DEMOSTHENES


Demosii  {Sr}ft6tritH).  Public  slavcH  at  Athens,
boitijlit  liy  tlio  StAlo.  The  most  numoroUA  class
wviv  vUv  To^tWai  nr  Zjcv^ch.  a  furc«  of  police,  Also
caU«4  £Tfu<r(Vtoi,  fr<>iu  rho  first  nrgauizcr  of  the
Bcrvlco  (I'oll,  viii.  131-132).  Their  duly  was  topre-
serro  onler  iu  the  assembly,  courts,  public  places.
ami  public  works.  They  were  at  Unit  euciiiupetl
in  t«iits  ill  tlie  Agnrn,  ami  nfl^rnanlh  reuinved  tn
the  Arenpflgns.  Cert-aiii  nf  them  n'ci-e  in  prrHiiiinl
altomlnnce  on  oniciiiU.  The  corps  ilatt^il  from  the
_v*iit  of  Salainis,  wliiui  3(Xt  w«Te  Unji^ht ;  tli«y  wnro
later  iucreaaed  to  llWHi  [AihIoc,  Jft  I'av.  5,7  ;  Acsch.

Executioners,  torturere,  etc.,  wltclher  police  or
not,  were  aW  slaves  (Poll.  viii.  71).  DcinosU  wei*
^o  employed  in  the  rrnnAiity,  in  subonUniitu
plncw  in  iho  aMCQibly  aud  conrts,  oa  chrriciii^-
clerks  {avny paifn is)— tbeir  amoQAbility  to  tortint<
making  them  especially  serviceable  for  snch  Unties.
The  Stat*  undertook  their  trainiuK.

lu  the  mint  were  shire  M-arknicii,as  also  iu  tha
loiues.  Exceptionally^  as  at  Argtniisae.  dcmosii
rowed  in  the  giilleyw. Si-e  Sbkvih  PuuucfS.

DeuiOBtb&Bes  [  Arjfunrdivrjt).  (1)  A  celebrated
Albeiiiiu)  oriitor,  a  iiAtive  of  the  demn  uf  Pauauia,
in  the  tribe  Pnudionis.  Hts  father,  Demostlienes,
was  a  citizen  of  rank  and  opulence,  and  the  pro-
prietor of  a  maaafaotory  of  anus;  not  a  common
blacksmith,  as  the  language  of  Juvenal  (x.  130)
would  lead  ds  to  believe.  The  sou  vraA  bom  nbout-
B.C.  3d^  and  lost  his  father  at  the  early  age  of  u-v-
eu  yeantt  ivheu  he  was  left  to  the  care  of  hii^  moth-
er, Cle«)bulf^.  Till'  gnanliaim  lo  whom  hiK  futtihr
liad  iiitriDttud  the  ailministration  uf  u  lurgK  pn>|i-
erty  pruviug  fuithl^tw  to  their  c-har^io  and  waMting
a  largu  portioit  of  liin  pntrimuny,  thi>  orator's  early
stiidifrt  were  s^rionnly  hamptrriMl  by  the  wfint  of
suJlicient  means,  to  say  nothing  of  thi"  driieiile
statu  uf  his  own  benlth.  When  IVmoMthnnes  wa.s
Noiuc  Mtxteuii  yenrK  uf  agn  his  cnnu:«ily  wuw  at-
tracted by  a  trial  In  whlcli  CalllAtrntiis  pleaded
and  won  a  cause  of  cans[rlr>rable  itn]»ortiinco.  The
eloquence  whicli  gained,  and  the  applause  which
followed,  his  sncce-ss  so  intlamod  the  ambition  of
the  young  Alhenian  that  be  determined  to  devote
himself  thenceforward  to  the  iis^iduous  study  of
oratory.  Ke  cho^e  Isaeos  as  his  master  rather
than  Isocrales;  ftrnn  Plulo,  also,  he  imbibed  nmch
nf  the  richness  and  the  grandeur  wliich  chstracter-
ize  the  writings  of  that  ]>liil<)ftn]d)er.  At  the  age
of  seventeen  he  appeiircd  befun*  the  rtinrts  and
pronounced  agaiiinl  liiii  f:iithlt'H.s  gnafitian»,  ami
against  a  debtor  to  his  father's  estate,  tlve  ora-
tionn,  which  were  crowned  with  complete  siicccm.
These  discuurscH,  in  all  pntbabiUly,  had  reoeivetl
the  fuiiAbing  touch  from  1ha«us,  under  wboni  D<^
nuisthenes  coultiuietl  lo  study  for  the  space  of  four
yearo  afltir  he  had  reaciieil  his  majority.

An  o|H>ning  )*o  sin.-(-e«Hfnl  ein^HiUIened  the  young
orator  lo  speak  before  the  people  in  the  AAMMiibly  :
but,  when  he  uiiule  the  ntt<nii)>t.  bin  feeble  and
stammering  vuice.  his  inUMniplcd  rcitpiration.  his
ungniecful  gesiurcA,  und  his  ill-arranged  iteritxls,
brought  U{K)u  him  gvnentl  ndicnle.  Heturning
home  in  tbe  utmoftt  distress,  lie  was  enconiagrd  by
the  kindnefts  of  the  uelor  Siityrns,  who,  having  re-
quested Penioslhenes  to  re)H'Ht  some  passage  frotn
u  tlratnatie  poet,  pi-onounced  the  sann*  e.\truet  after
bini  with  so  much  correctntww  of  eminciation  anil
in  a  manner  M>  Irne  to  nature  that  il  appeared  to
tbe  young  orator  to  be  qnilu  a  different  passage.


Convinced,  thcrenpon,  how  nincli  grjM-e  An*)  j*r-
Miasivo  power  a  proper  enunciation  atnl  iitanticr
mid  to  tho  beat  oration,  he  rvMdved  to  <-nmH:itlii
dellciencies  of  his  yoiitb,  and  A4.HrunipliKli)-il  thii
with  a  z«al  and  ]>erseverance  whiab  lia%'e  iiund
into  a  proverb.  To  free  hiniKlf  fruiu  sianniivrtiig
he  spoke  with  pobble!i  In  his  mnuth.  a  <itory  mt-
ing  on  the  anf.bority  of  Demrtrins  Phalerens. Irii
contemporary  ll  nUo  appears  that  Iw  was  Qiiili^
ti>  articulate  olearty  the  letter  R;  but  he  vu-
quislied  that  dtfllenlty  most  perfectly,  fur  C'u»n
!<ay.H  ttiHt  he  rjetvitalione  frcinnt  hI  ftlcHitfimt  Aift-
rfl.  He  removetl  the  disloKion  of  fe»tnre,t  wbieh
accompanied  his  utteranco  by  wntrbiiig  ihn  uurr-
nn-nta  of  his  eonntenauce  in  a  mirnu';  and  a  utbni
sword  was  sn.sponde>d  over  his  lert  shoulder  while
he  was  declaiming  in  private,  to  preveitl  *'■■  '"■■"■
iibnve  the  level  of  the  right.  That  lil«  en
might  be  lond  and  fall  of  emphasis  he  li'  ,.'.:
ran  tip  the  steepest  and  most  nncven  walks,  an  at-
erciso  by  wliieh  his  voice  acipiired  both  foror  ind
energy;  and  on  the  sca-sbnre,  when  tbe  waveewrf
violently  agitated,  he  declaimed  aloud,  to  arraMxni
himself  to  the  nois**  and  tnnmlt  of  a  public  iwMir
bly.  He  construrttNl  a  snbterninran  study,  i«l*^
he  would  often  stay  for  two  or  thrwt  mouthi  (»■
getbcr.  shaving  <nie  side  uf  his  beotl,  that  in  am
lie  should  wish  to  go  abroad  tbe  sbame  of  ap|■■^
ing  in  that  condition  might  keep  him  witbio^  In
this  solitary  retreat,  by  the  light  of  his  Imw)'.!"'
is  said  to  have  copied  and  recopied.ten  tiBK>  a'
least,  the  Diiitious  Bcaltercl  thr<>iighont  tti<^  I"
tory  uf  Thneydide-H.  for  tbe  pnriiusr  of  tii(»u|i)it.\:
bis  own  style  aftfr  so  pnr*!  a  model.

Whatever  may  be  the  Initb  of  tlirjte  Btorif*.  T''-
itiitHthenes  gut  crtMlil  fur  tli<^  roost  indtfatlpU*
Inltonr  in  the  acquisition  of  his  art.  His  oniiMk
at  a  sniiwquent  ]H!riod  of  his  career,  nttemptd^fc
ridicule  this  exlrnonlinary  indnstry,  by  nnuiiHn
that  iill  his  arguninnln  ''snielled  uf  ihn  Ibid|^^JM
they  eagerly  embraeed  the  opportunity  ofduilk
him  the  potueAsiini  of  natural  Tuleulit  ThliMl^
cism  of  I>cmostheu«B  seems  lo  have  re»te4  rfwil)
on  his  knowu  reliiclance  to  speak  w  itiiuni  ptifion-
tiuit.  The  fact  is,  tlint  tUnngh  lie  cuiitd  «acrt  ihr
talent  of  extempurnneons  speaking,  he  sfDid<-<l
rather  than  sinight  »nch  ocra.sions.  |»«rt)y  ft""
deference  lo  bis  aiulienco  and  partly  front  »ffi^
hinnling  (he  i>oHStbility  of  a  failure-  Plaliuvk
however,  wliu  (nenUnns  this  reliictanc«  afiknti*'
nir, HiM'akfi  at  the  same  time  of  the  great  nwtii of
hia  extemporaneous  ett'nsiona.

Demoftihcneu  reappeared  in  public  at  tfa«sff*"'
twenty-five  yeara,  and  prononnecd  two  uratM
against  Leptiiies.  the  author  of  a  law  vbt<4i  i>>-
posed  on  every  citizm  of  Athens,  except  th#  J"^
srendants  of  Harmodiiis  and  Aristogiton,  the  ttf-
cise  of  certain  burdensome  fnnclimia.  Tli'-  »^"*"'
of  thitse  discourses,  entitled  "Of  IntraniiltirV  '
regarded  »•  ona  of  his  happiest  efforls.  After  ll''*-
be  became  inneh  eugagetl  in  the  bnsiuris  nf  >l>'
b:ir,  and  these  pn>fes8ionul  labonn>.  n<ld«l  i"  '•'*
scanty  )Kirliun  of  his  tvstrlmony  n  bich  lu'hvli^
covered  from  hi» guardians,  a|tpear  tu  hasefoi^'''
his  only  meauh  of  support.  Unt,  whal^Tcr  "".'
have>  bran  the  dislinciion  ami  ttw  ailra»l'K<^
which  Demutttheues  acquired  by  his  prMllf  ''
the  liar,  his  prinripnl  glorj-  is  derived  fti>in  Ii'*?"'
lilieal  diKeonisea.  Al  the  i>eri<Kl  when  lirfcp**''^
in  public  atl'airs  tbe  State  was  a  n«*w  *'"*
Public  spirit  was  at  the  lowest  ebb;  tb«hi**^


nEMOSTHESES


Ml


DEHUSTHENES


bority;  tbc  anMierity  of  porly  muniicrH
to  the  iaroadii  of  luxury,  aolivity  to
mill  iirubityto  vt-imlity.  Of  tlw  virht*'-*
ivri<lifren'nisilKMltotUeAlti(-niai)HlittK<
leliuierit,  rarrirtl  uliiiuttt  tu  eiilliuAi»»tu,
itivt!  soil.  On  tlie  HtJKiite^it  i>Ot;iuf[uli
If  imlrjuliiiim  was  aiiro  todUpluy  itnvlf;
|i>  (liiflBPtitimt^nt,  iLu  |MH>pltf  of  Alliens
^ll•ltl<•  iifniAkhig  HtrenuotiH  eflbrt^  fur
^ou  uf  tlieir  fivviloiu.  tio  oilts  und«r'
ih&n  DeiQOStboues  tbe  art  of  exciting


r=?^s-


\Si


laottkctini. iVutiOifl  Milium  Rome)

(  alive  thitt  ciitliusiuam.  His  penetro-
wl  him  cniiily  to  divine  the  iinjbiiioiiii
Iiilip  "f  Mncednn  fmni  tli«  very  ontwt
trcli'ii  np«nittnnit,  and  Iih  rfNolviHl  t4i
bom.  Hmwhtdn  pnUlii:  c-areer,  iiidpitd,
keolijpct  ill  view, and  tbul  wanwarwiib
or  the  upacM  of  funrttMrn  yiiitnt  tbtt  nioii-
tbc  Ath(.^ninn  oratur  L-oritinii»lly  in  bin
ery  olti^Tiipt  pixired  iiuaMiiiiii)^  to  vor-
lidiililu  an  mlv-ersary.  Tbe^w  fnnrteen
inimpdintt'ly  prei'edcd  tbc  fall  nf
Dia,coi)atitai4i  tbi*  briKbL«'8t  pnriuil  in


tbe  biKtory  nf  DBniodtbonca.  And  yet  liis  coDrage
was  politioal  nttliiM'  tbnu  iuili[ury.  Ai  Chaci-onvs
(D.c.ayf't  bo  lied  fiuin  tbo  bold  of  battle,  tbongb  in
tbo  Athenian  u««eiiibly  iiu  private  apprebeiisinns
could  obcok  biaolo<|ucncc  or  iudnence  biR  oondnrt.
But,  tbim^b  overpowered  in  tbe  contest  with  tlie
eueuty  of  Atbeniao  independence,  be  received  after
1ii»  defeat  tbe  uiiwt  bonourable  rec>oin|>en»e  wbirb,
in  nri"i>r<ianro  with  Grecian  cnKlonm,  a  (iratHful
Ccmiiiry  rnnld  IhmiIow,  AtlieiiK  ilecfeed  bim  ll
crowD  of  gobl.  Tlie  rennrd  v. oh  nppoM-d  by
At'«cbine*  (<).  v.).  Tbt?  combat  of  Ld'Kjiienco  nbicli
orosD  botwcon  tbe  two  uratore  attravted  to  Aibriii*
on  intniciiKu  coucoiimu  uf  Kiwclators.  Dtiuwwtbcni'a
trinnipbed,nnd  bis  antagonist,  not  bavin;;  nM^eivrd
the  fifth  part  of  tbe  vote*,  vtiat,  in  coufonnity  with
the  existing;  law,  couiiwlled  to  tftire  into  exile.  A
sbort  time  after  ibiti  apleudid  victory  lX'niofliLciie4
waa  eo!nlrnin»d  for  bavin^  8nfl'fi-ed  liiniiself  to  be
bribed  by  Harpaluf,  a  Min-edintian  governor,  w  bo,
drt>admi;  the  aiigerof  Alexander,  liad  conie  to  Alb-
enB  to  bid«  tbeH-  tbe  IVnit  of  bi»  extortion  and
mpine,  and  bad  barxoini-d  wilb  ihe  ]topiilnr  lend-
erB  of  the  liny  for  tbe  protection  of  i\n-  Kirjuiblic.
Di-mi^ttbeiieM,  liaviii((  enca^MHl  from  imjMisiHUneut,
Hed  to  Avgitm  {B.C.  ;t'i4),  ivbencv  be  conld  bcbold
tbe  eborcH  of  bis  belove<l  country,  and  carucsily
and  eofwtaiitly  protexled  IiIk  iininffiioc  After  llw
death  of  Alexander  he  nan  remtored,  and  bin  entry
into  AtbctiM  wnt*  marked  by  every  demonstration
of  joy,  A  new  bMigiie  was  foiined  ninotig  tbo
Grecian  t-itiea  agninttt  tbe  MHctHlnninnH,  and  De-
ntoatbeneH  waj*  tbe  mouI  of  it.  lint  tin'  confederacy
wa*  broken  u}i  by  Anlipatcr,  and  tbe  ib-alb  of  tbe
orator  was  decreed.  Ho  retired,  tberenpon,  from
Atbeim  to  tbe  isliiiid  of  Cnlaiiriii,  ttff  the  cuast  of
Ar^olin.  and,  beiDf^  hIiII  punned  by  tbu  »ftteUiti'8
of  Autipater,  terminated  bin  life  tbcro  by  poiiton.
Id  Ibc  teinplu  nf  fotuiidnn,  at  tbe  age  of  abont
ttixty  years,  D.c.  £J2.

Ceforo  tite  time  of  Deinostlienes  Ibere  existed
three  (tiHtincl  Htylca  nf  eloipteiice:  ibat  of  Lyslas,
mibl  and  ]>er«uasive,  ubieb  r)iitelly  (niftnged  tlie
HttenLiou  iind  won  tbo  aiweni  of  an  niidit>nce;  Ibat
nf  TbncydidfM,  bold  and  aniniHttil,  nbicb  iiwuk-
oned  tbe  feelingH  and  po\*Mifnlly  forced  cDiivjetion
ou  tbe  ininil:  wbile  tbal  of  iHocnitcK  nai*,  us  it
were,  a  LunibinatJon  of  tbo  two  former.  Dcmoa-
tbeiie.s  can  nciueely  be  said  to  have  odopted  any
individimt  as  a  model,  althongb  be  bestowed  M)
luiicb  uutirin^  labour  on  tbe  bistorion  of  the  Pelo>
poutiefian  War.  lie  rather  ctilleil  all  Ibnt  was
vnlnabln  from  the  vniinns  Htyles  of  liiif  grejit
pri'deccHNirH,  wnrkiufi;  tlieni  up  anil  bleuiling
tbuui  into  one  barmoniouH  wbole.  In  (bu  gen-
eral Mtniclniii  of  many  of  tiin  oenteuceH  be  retwim-
blea  TbucydideH,  but  In  Nlnipler  and  nmre  pi-mpln-
noiia  and  bt^tter  ralcnlatcd  to  be  i)uirkly  coni-
prebeiided  by  an  andience.  On  the  other  band,
bis  clearueatt  in  nurnition  and  bin  elegaiu-r  lun)
purity  of  diction  remind  tbe  reader  nf  Lynift**.
Itnt  tbe  argnnientative  part*  of  tbe  Bpeecbes  of
I^yniaa  are  oneii  ilefleient  in  vigour:  wlieread  car-
neHtne«H,|Kiwer,  zi-nl,  rapidity,  and  passion,  atl  ex-
euiplibed  in  plain,  uiit^niJinieiitpd  jiin^inigc  and
a  Nlrain  of  clone,  liMKincKH-like  iraMinin);.  arc  tbe
disiiiictivo  cbanicteriHlicn  of  Dt-nKolliciicH.  Tbe
general  tone  of  Iiim  oratory,  iinlei-d.  mot  admirnltly
adapted  to  an  Atbenian  aiiOieiu<4-,  conslilii1i-d  hh  it
was  of  tbooe  who(*e  babits  of  life  were  niecbanical.
and  of  thfiflr  nliotn  nmbillon  or  tasto  bud  ted  to


DEMOSTHENES


492


UEMUSTIIEV


fho  cnltirntiou  of  literature.  TIih  fomivr  were
CHptivatMl  liy  titrtuig  ^mKl  HCiiRe,  tir^ed  wilti  ina»-
online  force  and  iuuxtiu^iiiHlmblL'  8i>irit,  anil  bj'
tiiu  forcibLu  A|iplieAtiim  of  plain  tniilis;  nhilu
there  was  euuU|j;h  of  >!rat.-«  ati<)  vsriely  lo  pleOMC
mnn^  leaiiittd  »ii<)  fiiatidiuus  auditum.  Aualber
Tcrj-  n'ltiiirkablu  esc^lleuce  u(  DmmmtlieiieH  is  tin-
oollonitinii  of  Inn  wiinls.  Thv  iirrnn^t'iiinnt  of  nen-
teiiouM  ill  wu^h  n  iiiaiiner  tlint  their  fiiib'ii(^)'«  nhiiiiUl
be  bamiuuiuim,  »iiil  u>  it  c^rtaiu  i1e({ree  rbyiliiuioal,
WAfl  1  Klud,v  much  in  vo^iiu  amou;;  thi-  gruttt  imuh
tvm  o(  UrLHiiiiii  oouipoAiliuii. B<-o  Colon.

Tbi>  <|iii'.sliuii  bos  ufioii  been  tuitwd  us  to  tho
•ecTi't  of  iLe  tuiiccvNi  of  DciiiuMLciiett.  TUt^  tiiii-
veraal  np|tn>bat.iuii  will  u|i|K-urthe  aiore  extruor<li-
uary  to  a  reudei-  who  for  tlll^  lirKt  tinu*  pt^rudes  ibu
onitioii!^  ThL>y  dn  not.  t^xbiblt  ati,v  nf  Hint  d<H'liL-
itmliriti  oil  uUiih  IntMtitly  hatigH  tb«  fame  tif  so
iiiiiiiy  iiHiiimiilM  to  t'loqiieiK'o.  Tlu*re  apfiean*  iio
dbt>p  ri-lli>i'tioii  to  imlicate  a  inure  titan  ontinary
penetration,  orniiy  pliiloiuipblrtil  reninrks  to  prove
tlio  itxiviil  of  liiti  a<.'i)niiiiilaii(^e  nitb  the  f^'^"'-  tuor-
al  nriient  uf  Iun  countr.v.  Ho  aflVrvtM  in>  Ifiiriihiic;
be  niJUN  at  no  rltiKancM.-;  hu  wukr)  iiu  ijlariiig  ornn-
inents;  \ni  nirely  tunrhcH  the  lieart.  with  a  K«>ft  i>r
melting  appi^il,  and  wlieii  he  diii>i),  it.  i»  only  with
Rii  cffvct  ill  which  a  third'Hite  H|«aker  uviiihl  havh
Hiiipamed  litiii.  Me  had  no  wit,  no  biinionr,  n»  vi-
vacity, iti  unr  iiei'itptAiiet*  uf  tlie««  Icnntt.  The
secret  of  Iuh  |H>wer  i»  Hiiiipic,  fur  il  lira  tiwientiany
in  tbiK,  tliat  hiH  politit-al  prineipleH  were  inlerwov-
cii  with  bin  very  «>pirit;  they  were  not  a»»nnied  to
Hcrve  an  interenled  purport,  to  be  laid  ft^idu  nlit^n
lii>  doM-ende<i  from  the  Itema  niid  n-niinicd  when
he  »H>iight  to  accotnpliftbnn  olyect,  bnl  weredec|>ly
8e:vled  til  Ill's  bt.-art  and  emanalwl  from  it«  pro-
foiindeet  deptbfi.  The  more  his  ctiiiiitry  wiw  en-
vironed by  daugers,  the  uiore  slendy  wba  bin  reso-
lution. Nothing  ever  iiiipaire<l  rltr-  truth  and  in-
tegrity of  his  feelio);!!  or  weakeinril  his  grnerouB
conviction.  It  nn^  his  nuitevintnig  hrmness,  bid
iliadain  of  all  coiiipnnnitKi,  Ihat  madi.'  him  the  firHi
(if  HtateHTnuii  and  nratoi-M;  III  tliiH  lay  the  HiiliHlaiirR
of  hiH  power.thu  ])rlinary  fuundiilion  of  Imh  sniHiri*
oriiy;  tbr  nMt  wiw  merely  iwconilury.  The  mya-
titry  of  hifi  inlluonru,  then,  lay  in  hxu  licuexty  ;  nnd
it  in  ihiM  that  gave  warmth  luid  U>ne  l^i  Iiih  [Vel-
in}{K,  eiirrgy  tu  his  luuKnuKe,  and  on  iuipi't.-Hstuii
lu  liirt  manner  bcfure  wbiclt  every  impntutioii  of
iiiKhicuriiy  mnst  have  immediately  Tanicsheil.  We
may  tbiw  perceive  the  meaiiiiig  of  i>e«ioBthciie(*
liimself.  when,  to  one  who  ^skeil  1iim  what  was  ihe
tlnit  roqniaite  in  an  orator,  hu  merely  replied,  '■  iV-
liverj- "  (  IvoKptfTis)',  and  %vheii  luikcd  what  were
rUe  seeoml  nml  third  r(Miiiii«it*iK, gave  Ihe  name  an-
swer »«  at  fip»t  iPliit.  fit.  X.  i^at.).  Hid  meaning
vrtvi  Ibin:  a  lifek-Mi  manner  im  tlH>  part  i>f  n  ptiblir
Kpenker  kUowk  that  tuH  own  f<-r!ingn  nrr  not  en-
liHWtl  ill  the  eause  wbieh  he  in  .-ulvneatiitg,  and  it
is  idli>  fur  him,  Ihertifore,  to  M^fk  lo  nnike  eon-
verCA  of  utben  when  be  bui  failed  in  milking  one
v(  biinwlf.  On  the  other  band,  when  (lie  time  of
voice,  tho  gecttiire,  the  look,  the  whole  manner  of
the  orator,  display  the  powerfnl  feelings  thai  ogi-
toto  bim,  his  emotion  is  commnoicated  to  bis  hisar-
vn(,aiid  HDccess  is  inevitable.  Cr.Qiiiuti].in*f.  Or.
xi.  'A  init.

Of  the  orations  we  bav«  sixty -one  (half  of
them  spnriouK),  and  fifty -mix  IntruiliirtionK,  or
irpooijuia  A7f47yof)4(«i.  lu  confining  onrM>lven  to
tile  elassilicatiou  adopltnl  by  tbe  ancient  rliDtori-


elans,  we  may  aminge  all  thescrtn

one  of  three  bea*U. (1.)  IX-libermlJ

(Xriyoi  iTVftjiovXtvTuctH},  treating  of  politiral  topw.
and  delivered  either  bufore  tbe  Senate  nr  ilie  w-
Bt-mbly  of  the  pe<iple.  (IL)  Jndicial  8pe«bni(io>oi
^■xiiyiicDi),  having  for  their  object  acrnsation  or  itf-
fence.  (III.'}  Htiiilied  or  set  siicecbesfkiiyiM  ivtiiit-
TiKoi),  iutemkMl  to  censure  or  praiiw.

Seventeen  of  the  oraliiUiR  of  liemontlieiiei  be-
long to  tbe  tirat  of  thcHe  elawiva.  furt.^  -two  U  tlM
aueood,  and  two  t4i  the  third.

Of  the  Mventoeu  diwrounws  which  eompoM  tlie
fine  cluHH,  tlve  treat  uf  various  eubjrcla  rmmected
with  the  Republic,  and  twelve  of  the  quan»4K
between  tltv  Htatc  aud  Philip.  Our  limiu  allav
ati  exauiination  of  only  u  few  of  Ibese  llisi  ur
tnoMt  iin[iortnnt  In  their  <-h»ract«r.  Of  IIh^  twrJvr
)i:iraTigne«  that  inrn  niM»n  the  qnarreU  I'f  ibf
Kepiihlit  with  Philip,  the  lirst  was  (>nni»nncHi
in  B.C.  •tSl ;  the  lu'cond,  third,  ami  fonrtli  to  tc.
M9;  tbe  liflh  in  B.C.  347;  the  mxth  in  B.c  :H6;
tbe  seventh  in  B.C.  344 ;  tbe  etgltib  in  ac.  30;
the  ninth  in  B.c.  343:  tbe  tenth  and  etovnilli  ia
B.C.  341 ;  and  tlu>  twelfth  in  Bx.  340.  Tbe  orier
herti  given  is  that  of  Uiooysiua  of  Halicanu*-
sns,  hut  no  nmntiw'Hpt  and  no  editiuiiH  aWrrf
it.  The  niuiiiiKrnptM  give  I  be  Fintt,  8«'»miiiiI,  TmiIJi.
and  Kli-venlh  I'liilippiett  of  Dion^itiUH  by  uuuie.Kul
regard  liin  liflh  as  forming  Ihe  eoneliiHion  ti(  tbe
Hrst.  They  give  th*t  title  of  Bt-oond,  TbinI,  ud
rirst  Otyiilhiact«  to  Iuh  Second.  Third,  aad  FonrllL
The  remaining  foiir(8ixtb.  Eighth.  Ninth, T"flftli)
have  llie  ftdbiwiiig  title!*:  "  Of  Peace."  "  Ofllilo-
niwns,"  "Of  the  Clier.-Mineaun,"  and  "On  tin?  U-tlff
of  Philip."  We  shall  now  speak  of  them  in  chrono-
logical order.  The  (I  and  2)  tlpftt  ^ikitnraf  iaytt
ir/i«TQr,  Ihe  First  Philippic.  Demosthenes  tit-wei-
Iwrts  his  fellow-citlzcus  to  prosM-iitc  the  war  wilk
tbe  great^-ft  vigour  agaiti!«t  Philip.  This  m-wwefc
had,  alter  tbe  defeat  of  the  PIkk  iaiiit,  ■swni««| «
threatening  atliliide.  iis  if  wishing  U>  etisWitfc
himself  in  Ibeir  eoniiiry.  The  diwtMin*  wc  nn
now  conNiileriiig  bua  Iwen  divided  into  t«v>i  |4lrt^
which,  nrcoriling  to  Dionysins  of  HalicjirtiM"'*.
were  proiionneed  al  dilfen-nt  time* :  Iml  ikl»
opinion  ia  contradirlrd  by  most  critics.  (3>i*l
'0\vv6uiK>is  A,  R,  r— The  three  Olyulhises  TlwT
objt^Tl  is  lo  Ntimtilale  the  Atbeniuuo  to  micww
OlyiilboH  and  prevent  ita  falling  inio  th*-  Ii*n*]'
of' Philip.  (B)  nrpi  rijt  ttpriyi}t,  "Of  the  Vr*"'
Philip  having  obtained  a  seat  in  the  cnniK'Jlwf''"
AmpbtetyoiiH,  iJemosthetn's  ailvinpt  liix  roiiDtn-
io*u  to  preserve  the  iiemf  wiib  ibin  prince.  LI-
banins  thiukH  that  Ibi-n  ilinronn't*,  though  vriin»
by  Demoslbenw,  was  never  deliven'd.  M«!*t"
scholars  are,  however,  of  a  di(lVr*'n|.  npiiiUm-  "f
Kara  ♦iXi'inroi'  Xd-yor  It,  llie  fU-eonil  Pliilipiii'.',  1"**^
nunureil  aftt-r  th*"  n'tiii-u  of  Deiniwlbeiir*  fn>ni  die
PelopiHine«nK,  wben?  be  bad  negotiated  a  jipiw*'^
tween  Sparta  and  Measenia.  (r^)  n#fii  t^< 'AX«r
(Tnv.  "Of  Hiiloiii'siis,''  or,  rather,  of  a  letlrr  «
Philip's,  by  wbieb  he  makes  a  prewiit  tu  llw  Atl"-
niaiis  of  tho  island  of  Ha1one«tia,  vliicli  hr  !>"
taken  from  the  ]>irates,  and  doniands  of  lli«  A''*"
niaim  tu  blmre  wiih  tbem  the  office  of  pn)*f*>i"?
thp  seas.  Demostbcoes  atreunonsly  opiaiscs •* •*"
suiting  nn  offer;  it  is,  bowt^ver,  fur  fNnn  orrtsi"
whether  he  ever  pmiionnced  Rnrli  a  di*CP"rw  •
this.  Libiinitis  says  that  tbe  aneienl  cnll**  '"'
crilwd  it  to  ll'-gej.ippnt*,  tbe  frit-tid  of  iMmtn****
tiea. Sttirlas  and the  htithor  of  Ihe  Ktifmalo^i'*


DEMOSTHENES


493


DEMOSTHENES


Magnum  agree  with  him.  (9)  II«p(  tS>v  i»  Xcppoin?-  i
<r^  npayfianov,  7  6  ntpi  AumtiStavs,  "  Of  the  events
ill'  the  ChereonesuB,  or  of  Diupithee."  That  gen-
«ra],  sent  at  the  head  of  a  colouy  into  the  ChorHO-  j
iiesiis,  had  committed  hostiUlies  against  the  cit-y
of  Canlia,  the  only  one  which  Philip  hud  reserved
for  himself  iu  the  conditious  of  peace.  Diopithes
hnil  even  made  an  inroad  iuto  Macedonia.  Philip
iDsidted  on  bis  being  punished.  Demosthenes  nn-
dvrtakes  in  this  oration  to  justify  the  conduct  of
tlic  Athenian  commander.  (10)  Kara  ^tXimrov  Xo-
Tor  r,  the  Third  Philippic.  The  progress  which
Philip  had  made  la  Thrace,  where  he  was  prepar-
iiiK  to  lay  siege  to  the  cities  of  Periiithus  and  By-
ziiDtiiim,  form  the  snbjeot  of  ibis  harangue.  (11)
Kara  ^tXimrov  Xoyoy  A,  the  Fourth  Philippic,  pro-
iKinnced  at  the  time  when  Philip  had  raised  the
Miege  of  Perinthus,  in  order  to  fall  upon  Byzanti-
um. Valckenaer  (Or.  De  Phil.  p.  250),  Wolf  {Ad
I^t.  Proleg.  p.  Iz.),  aud  Bekker  du  not  ackuowl-
eilge  this  as  a  production  of  Demostheues.  (1*2)
'0  irpht  TTfv  tirurraiXffv  ♦iXiinro«  \6yos,  "  On  the  Let-
ter of  Philip."  The  letter  of  the  king,  to  which
this  harangue  refers,  still  exists.  It  contains  many
complaints,  bnt  no  declaration  of  war.  Taylor,
Seiske,  Valckenaer,  and  Bekker  consider  this  let-
ter to  be  spurions.

We  come  now  to  the  second  class  of  the  orations
of  Demosthenes,  namely,  those  of  a  judicial  nature ;
aud  here  a  distinction  must  be  made  between  those
which  refer  to  affairs  connected  wilh  the  State  and
those  which  relate  to  individual  interests:  in  the
former  case,  the  procedure  was  called  Kcmfyopia;  in
tlie  second,  diKi; — words  which  may  be  translated
by  "accusation"  and  "pleadings." Of  the  first
Hpocies  we  hare  twelve  harangues  remaining,  the
iiiottt  important  one  of  which is  that  entitled
Ilrpt  Srft^oyov,  "On the  Crown." Demosthenes
)i:iil been twice crowned in the theatre  dur-
ing; the Dionysiac  festival : the  first  time  after
the  expulsion  of  the  Macedonian  garrisons  from
the  ^land of  Knboea,  and  again  after  tlie  alli-
ance with the  Tliebans. In  the  year  B.c.  338,
Ctesipbou,  who  was  then  president  of  tlie  Senate,
had  a  decree  passed  by  this  body  that,  if  the  people
approved,  Demosthenes  shonld  be  crowned  at  the
approBchiitg  Dionysiiu:  festival,  in  the  public  thea-
tre, as  a  recompense  for  the  disinterested  manner
in  which  he  bad  filled  various  offices,  and  for  tlie
services  which  be  had  never  for  a  moment  ceased
to  render  the  St«te. This  matter  had  to  be  con-
finned  by  a  ^(/)urpa,  or  deci-ee  of  the  people ;  but,
befnre  it  was  bronght  before  them,  Aeschines  pre-
sented himself  as  the  accuser  of  Ctesiphon. He
charged  him  with  having  violated  the  laws  in  pi-o-
posiug  to  crown  a  public  functionary  before  the  lat-
ter had  given  an  account  of  the  manner  in  which
lie  had  discharged  bis  office;  and  to  crown  him,
too,  in  the  theatre,  instead  of  the  senate-house  or
the  Pnyx,  where  this  oonld  alone  be  done  ;  finally,
in  having  alleged  what  was  false,  for  the  purpose
of  favouring  Demosthenes. He  concluded  by  de-
manding that  a  fine  of  fifty  tiilents  be  imposed
nimii  Ctesiphon. The  matter  reninined  for  some
time  {lending,  in  consequence  of  the  troubles  that
followed  the  battle  of  Chaerouea. When,  how-
ever, the  inflaence  of  the  Macedonian  party  hml,
tbmngfa  the  exertions  of  Antipater,  gaiued  the  as-
cendency in  Athens,  Aeschines  believed  it  to  be  a
favonrable  moment  for  the  revival  of  bis  accnsa-
tioD. It  was  bronght  forward,  therefore,  again,


in  B.C.  330,  or  eight  years  after  the  proposition  of
Ctesiphon  had  been  made.  Aeschines  thereupon  ^1
pronounced  his  famous  harangue,  to  which  De-  1
mostbenes  replied.  This  speech  of  Demosthenes
is  regarded,  aud  justly  so,  not  only  as  his  mas-  \
terpiece,  bnt  as  the  most  perfect  specimen  that  ^
eloquence  has  ever  produced.  It  is  said  that  after
this  discourse  Demosthenes  no  longer  appeared  as
a  public  speaker.  Ulpian,  iu  bis  commentary'  on
the  oratiou  De  Corona,  relates  an  anecdote  which
has  been  often  cited.  Demosthenes  is  endeav-
ouring to  fix  the  charge  of  bribery  on  Aeschi-
nes, whom  ho  represents  as  corrupted  by  Philip
and  by  Alexander,  aud  conseqnently  their  hire-
ling and  not  their  friend  or  guest.  Of  this  as-
seriiion  he  declares  his  willingness  to  submit  the
truth  to  the  judgment  of  the  assembly.  "  I  call
thee,"  says  the  orator,  "  the  hireling,  first  of  Phil-
ip aud  now  of  Alexander;  and  all  these  who  are
here  present  agree  in  opinion  with  me.  If  thon
disbelievest  it,  ask  them  the  question ;  but  no,  I
will  ask  them  myself.  Athenians,  does  Aeschines
appear  to  you  in  the  light  of  a  hireling  or  a  friend
of  Alexander's  f"  In  putting  this  question,  Demos-
thenes purposely  commits  a  fault  of  accentuation  :
he  places  the  accent  improperly  on  the  antepenal-
tima,  instead  of  the  last  syllable,  of  [uir6a>T6s — in
the  words  of  Ulpian,  ixay  i^apffapifrtv — in  order
tn  draw  the  attention  of  the  people  from  the  ques-
tion to  the  pronunciation.  This  had  the  desired
effect :  the  accurate  ears  of  the  Atheuians  were
struck  with  the  mistake;  to  correct  it,  they  called
out  fua-Bmros,  fua-Oaros,  "a  hireling!  a  hireling!"
from  every  part  of  tlie  assembly.  Pretending  to
receive  the  word  as  the  expression  of  their  sen-
tiraeute  on  the  guilt  of  Aeschines,  he  cried  out,
'*  Dost  thon  bear  what  they  say  f"

The  simple  pleadings  (diVat)  relative  to  matters
of  private  ioterest,  eoustitute  the  second  class  of
judicial  actions.  Of  these  we  have  thirty  remain-
ing, which  are  as  follows:  (1)  Discourses  having
relation  to  the  proceedings  instituted  by  Demos-
thenes against  his  guardians.  They  are  five  in
number:  of  these,  two  are  against  Aphobns,  and
two  against  Ouetor,  his  brother.  (3)  Adyot  napa-
ypaffiiKoi,  or,  as  Cicero  {De  Invent.  1,  8)  calls
them,  constituUonee  tran$lativae.  We  have  seven
discourses  of  this  class  from  the  pen  of  Demos-
thenes, viz.:  against  Zenotliemis,  against  Apatn-
rius,  against  Lacritns,  against  Plionuion,  against
Pantaenetns.  against  Nansimachus,  and  Xenopi-
thaea.  (3)  Discourses  relative  to  the  rights  of
succession  and  to  questions  of  dower.  These
are  four  in  number:  against  MacariAtus,  against
Leochares,  agaiust  Spndias,  against  Boeotus  for
his  mother's  dowry.  (4)  Disconrees  in  mat-
ters of  commerce  aud  of  debt.  These  are  three
iu  number:  against  Calippns,  against  Nicoslra-
tus,  against  Timothens.  (5)  Actions  for  indem-
nity aud  for  damages  {^Xo^tj,  aUia).  The  dis-
courses under  this  head  are  five  in  number:
against  Boeotns,  against  Olympiodoms,  against
Couou,  against  Dionysiodonis,  against  Callicles.
(6)  Actions  for  peijnry :  two  discourses  against
Stepbanns,  and  one  against  Euergus  and  Mnesibu-
lus.  (7)  Three  discourses  on  the  subject  of  the
avTiioa-it  (q.  v.),  or  exchange  of  estates.  The  dis-
courses under  thin  hea<1  are  the  following:  iigninst
Phoenippns,  against  Polycles,  and  resjiectiug  the
crown  of  the  trierarchia.  It  is  unnecessary  to
speak  of  each  of  these  thirty  pleadings; a  few


OEMOSTnENES


494


IIKHUTIC  WKITINU


remarka  on  f>otue  nf  tleui  iitnst  ^iifflce.  The  five  I  also  the  thrvc  vuliiiULt*  of  AttnutatiomrM  iHlrrfmm
(liscoiiiises  wliii'h  Dcmnatliene^  iiruuoiniced  ajjaiufttj  of  Diialort'  lOxfunl,  t^4'J).  Tlitt  rttitut  yriirrjHvt
hU  guuriliikiis  ctMitiiiii  ralniible  <t«>t.iiU  r*;HpecLiii|;  I  r)«mu«thtii)e«»'ii«  tluit  i»f  AliltiA<Veuioe,l5(Uk  Qoml
Ills  yonlli,  liM  ffirtuiie,  niu)  tlie  Alti«iiiaii  lawnt.  I  e4)ilioii8  iif  i)ii<  vartmiK  ornlioii!*  uiili  uote*Ar«u
AjthubuR.  otitt  nf  tlit^  (^iiurdiHiin,  whh  roiidennirtl  |  ritllmv!!):  I)e  Voruna.  T  K.  AmuM  (Lnuilnu,  IdW),
ti>  [Kiy  Demcwtheiicfi  tliu  ipitut  of  t<«ii  lalitulH.  Il  I  H<>liiit>»  (Loiitluii,  IH7if,  Drukc  (LoikIoii,  IHtilil,giBi>
iliie»4  not  ajiiMMii'  wiu'tlu'i'  \\c  brouj^ltt  tbw  two  j  cos  tOxforct,  lrf73),  vitntuiitinjt:  uIm>  tliu  iiroliwu  nf
otlier  t;iiiinltatui  tu  triul  ur  unl.  Tlii;.<w  ilUcutii-m's  ,  AitH-liiiii'M,  D'Oii<:t<  ((-'liinign,  \><4a\,  ItluM  (Lnjuig,
liuvt'  MJinu  rvikmililiiucu  tu  tlintte  of  Imit-iift,  lii^  I81K^);  /><■  Fa/fia  £^</<iriiiHi-,  riliillrlo  {Louilott,  tr^4t;
mii#t<-i'.  Tilt-*  wapayftaiftfi  t'ur  rUoniiiu  ngaiii8t  Apul-
Itxlurtis  tiu.H  fiiniinlieU  occaaiou lor  a  repnincli  to


the  tiH^niory  uf  I'cuiuHtlivUtfK.  \V»  arc  ti>l<l  hy
Pliitiirrli  tliiit  DfiiinMttifitt^tf  ''wrolu  iin  oration  for
ApollndoniA,  liy  ^^  liicii  ]ic  onrrit-^f  lib  ciiiiMt  nguiiiitt
llie  ({fiii'rul  Tiniotlit'iiK,  tu  un  aclion  for<li'l>t  to  tlio
Itiiltlir  ti-eiuii)r,Y  :  JUS  iilsn  t]io»v  othf  ns  agaiiimt  rimr-
tuio  tinil  ^ti^pliHtiiis,  vvliicti  furtuLil  a  jiiHt  excrptiou
nguiiist  IiiH  phitrnt-lcr.  For  he  ootiipoAcd  likcwtae
tbu'oriitioii  uliit'li  I'liMiinio  liwl  piuiiotiiiciMl  ngniiiHt
A]Mfll<Mloiii»i>.  Tlii;*,  Itii-rt^tore,  witH  like  fniiiibliing
|Ur>  uiicniii-8  nitU  n-rApoii.s  out  uf  tbo  tuiiiie  sliop."

Thv  diiwoursi'  df^iitiiKt  Mnritrlnlu^.  n'^^jtei'tiiit;  llio
iiacoei»6toti  of  ]Iii}[iiin»,  js  iitteri'Hliri^  rn>iii  tbc  vir-
oiiniBtuiicu  of  our  li!»viii;i  tbr  lU'fiMice  of  Mauarta-
tns  by  lHni*tir>,  uixl  fmui  our  Iwing  tbus  able  to
compuru  tbu  pupil  wiib  bit  foriuer  Ruibter.  It
mmaini)  to  sp«!aU  of  l.b«  tbtnl  daw  of  Denioslbo-
uea'o  uititiotits  tbr  Xo-yoi  tutdttimKol,  "  utiidied  or
Ml  BiR'vcbtf*/'  Wr  bavc  only  two  rfitiiiiiiiujf,  aiul
tlitwc,  v*ry  probably,  art-  spnrioiiM.  The  ohm.  rVt-
r<i<^u>(  Xrlyoc,  ia  A  oology  on  tbc  Atbuuituiti  wlm  had
l>t>riMh<.-d  at  C'Uiu'rone«;  the  otber,  (^Karimif  Atiyor,
is  writteu  lu  praise  of  tUe  buauty  of  tbe  yoiuig
Kpiomtva

Tbi-re  arv  also  «ix  letters  ascribed  to  Oemostbe-
lira;  Jive  of  them  are  iuUlre«sed  to  the  people  of
Albi-'nft, All,  however,  are  ("ornnriL's.

(Jood  MANrMCHUTM  ul'  Deuio&Lbeues  are  mre,
but  several  of  tbcm  nr«  as  ohi  o-s  the  eleventh
iwutury,  Bud  niont  of  ibem  routaiii  a  very  lorRe
porltou,  if  uot  tbe  wlioU*.  of  (be  exiaiit  works.
In  111),  tb«re  am  muiu!  170  MSS.  Tliey  are  di-
vidwl  by  e<iitor»  into  ttin-o  Kro'ip**-  "*"  which  ibe
first  19  btiadrd  by  a  Co«l»'x  ParisinnH  ).S  ()r  2)  of
the  tenth  or  itli;vfiitli  reiitiiry,  iliHtiugni>!iu(1  by
retiinrkAtdc  otiiiftAioiiH  in  l\u^  ti-xt ;  the  fli'eond  1m
lu-ad<id  by  a  Manriaiiti**  Vfiit-tiiA  (F^  nnrl  anotbt-r
Codex  Fnrisinus  iy).  both  of  the  eleventh  centu-
ry;  tbe  thtril  by  a  Co'lex  Slouucousis  (A),  uUo
of  (be  cltrvtiiith  c4-utiiry,  dietin^uUheJ  by  curions
sliupHticaiioati  of  tinrd  paHwi^e^.  Eilitors  nre  not
entirely  agreed  as  tti  the  voliie  of  8  or  2,  some
luntiitaiiiiug  that  it  givi-s  the  tuitluuitir  text,  oth-
en)  believtM^  that  it  (•ivivi  an  rditinu  by  ii-clevcr
hehidar.  Tbi'ttchoHa  on  I>cnnisibeiii*R  nre^  iuferior,
tint  lM't4l  beinj;  iIiomi'  in  (.'.  MtilU'r  (Furtf,  1r.4t>— 17)


CoHtra  I^iii'mcm,  IWat»ou  (Luiidou.  \^A),  RiaK
(IrtMidon,  iJic^O).  and  eApcoinlly  Kuudya  (Caiiilrndic,
li?tK>i;  In  Muliaut,  Hulnics  iHutlniBuul.  (Lutiiliin,
ise-^l;  of  tlir  0/yM//it(i*^.\Vilkins  I  London.  l-WiiT.
K.Arnold  (IxhhUmi,  l;rflT);  of  Ibe  /*ftt/»;i;>ir«.  IWop
(l-<jndou,  1)?1>S),  T.  k.  Arnold  (L«m<b»ii,  IHftttJ,  W*
tcriiiiitin  (IHlli.'i);  of  tbe  First  IMiilippto,  Qnatkin
iKelnUut^t,  (London.  1883);  Jrfr.  77morr«(m,rk-.,
Waylc  (Cntnb.  IWKl);  collrcltnnH  of  .Sr («•*  /'rimk
(h-utioti»,  PunnN^)  (  LomJon,  l^^TiS ),  t^ud>«  ami
Piilry,  in  2  ptH.,  1>  onitioint  (Cuinb.  IrTi-ToL  Kilb
Kreitcli  notes.  Weil  (.Paris,  1H77).  See  fil»>i  Ifcukr
and  Sauppt<'s  Omlvrrn  Attid,  C^  voU.  or  diki  Imjib
quarto  (IKiO);  llekker.  10  vi.U.  wiib  imlirw  iili-
fonl,  IKdct);  Dobooii  with  varioniiu  notes  (Uwdiiii,
]w.W);  and  Jebb  (I^ndoii,  liit$2\.  XJsvM  i»  Milth-
ell'fj  Index  iJrarrHatit,  3  vols.  (Londiui.  It^):  m4
Wevtermanu'n  tli-vrhicite  d.  ItrraivumMl  ihSjto
in  be  ctmiuifnded  for  u  gcueml  e<uinj»eelii«  IW
bet>t  trausbitiou  into  Kut;lo»b  in  thai  tit'  Knuutdf
in  u  \o\a.  (Ixtndoii.  li^r>2''63).

(3}  An  Atbeuiau  gi>nerfll,8on  of  Alcialhen».«l<»
oblaineil  considenible  reputation  during  a  (Wt
of  the  Pelopt>ntiC6iuu  War.  When  tbe  Spftrt""
niouarcb  A^ia  made  an  inroad  into  Attica,  Denio*-
tbeiieo,  on  hia  part,  harsAneil  tbe  roast*  of  tb*
Peloponnesus,  and  Hpized  upon  am)  fortitlrd  Uif  Ik**
suniuu  Pylo9.  This  led  to  the  affair  of  SiibiKtwu
(q.  T.),  iu  which  be  had  a  couspjcouna,  or,  nriM.
the  principal  share.  He  was  aflerwanU  fin
with  an  nminnient  to  the  rflief  of  Niemn  befirt*
Synicuse;  Init,  by  bis  precipitAle  measurta  tlR'"-
broiijflit  defeat  iiiKin  biniwlf  and  the  ('oiik<<ii)^i(
ruin  of  tho  wh«>]»  vx[H:dili»n.  Dtiiiu.itlK'ucf  *-•'
Nii'iaH  were  both  put  lo  ib-atli  while  iu  ytf"^
untwilbntandinK  tbo  undeavonrM  of  tbe  S)i»rini
eonttaaiidur  (JylippiiH  to  Kave  ibidr  livet;.  At'"'!'*
t^T  atu^nniit,  alhuled  to  by  Plutartl),  niAkes  l!>^
to  h.ive  been  stoned  to  death  ('Jliuc.  ir.  3  MU
Plot.  -Vic).

(3)  A  Greek  iibyelcion,  a  disciple  of  Ales«i>^
Philaletbes,  who  obtained  the  same  siimanw  «*
bis  master  —  namely,  Philaletbes,  or  "Li^^tt  -i
Truth."  He  flwnrished  alwmt  the  corarorotr"'"'*
of  our  era,  anil  tnrned  his  attuiitlon  parlirDliHX
|i)  <]iM>]iH(<H  of  Ihe  eye.  We  have  Kiimc  inf.f"**
n-nniining  4»f  Iiih  wi'itiiigH  an  tlua  Rnbjw:!.  "K""
iippeur  to  have  foinwd  part  of  a  work  ofleiitJKd


L


and  S'-hoUti  iiniitit  in  /JfwuwfA.  (Oxford,  1851). On

tho MSS.  ftee  VonielV  I'rolctjuMvna  Vritica  to tiiei  |  by  (*aleu,  Oribatitus,  and  Ai'liu^.
edition  (IlulU'.  IKiC-ST).  Demotic Writing. A eui^ive form  of  ik*

BlULlftUttAfitv.  -  For  the  life  of  Deniufltbeneii,  '  K;;yptian  !in.'ion)yphic  writing  in  u«?  (Vo»  <•*
ihtj  reu4ler  is  referred  t*>  Sohlift'r's  iVm<?«/A«'nt>*  iiNil  sixth  century  B.C.  lo  the  Ibiid  eentnr)"  a>  '*
wine i!ci*<'J*l e«l. Berlin. li^i);  ami  foranexbanslivo  wa»  rarely  nsed  on  tin-  poblie  mouuiueut*, ll^"?"
literary  rritiriHin.  to  BIjiHVh  AlitHrhe  IScrrthamkrit  it  is  found  on  tin?  Rosetta  Stone  (ij.r.1;  hui  *•"
lliV*!)). Butelwr'H Itilmihu-li'm tu Ihr .Sfurfy  of

Ihm't»lh,Hfiii  (Umdon.lv^l)  and  RrfKlrllib'n  (JH??)  f t.  nfl  IHT  tt  f  P^  e-y**""^^-^*ti/^''

areowful. ii^aUoCrum^t, Ur»Id^MMurnUj,,h,m \*^  l«?-^^'*  *  V ' ^  —

rfChHjHriu-r  Politii/iiv  df  JMittotlhi'Ht^  (  1^71). 'J'be 4-i#.*j<i|<jJ  ^*  t tJ. '^Of*

standard  text.s  are  those  of  Bekker(l8tili)aDd  of  L. /^  f^:«>rrrV-'»*'*^'''*'^^^'  ' '  *

Din<Iurr  (Leip.  ltJ7ri;  rev.  by  BlasAi. F»r  cnticai 4-.- n •! i  <: ,  «,  ^  i

sindy  of  DemoBthenea,  the  Apparatus  Critioiis,  of h^^ I  7| '>/»  |.»  J-J^  '*'  *-61 "'  "/*  **
Schiifer  iu  6  vols,  (Loudou,  V^)  is  valuable,  as  ani  Uemonr  wrinni^ \Vwnri  liMcnpnoB  j


DEHUS


49&


DENS


largely  employed  for  docnmeots,  contracts,  etc.,
aud  occasioually  in  religions  formulas.  See  Hie-
roglyphics.

Demna  (d^^c).  A  word  which  origiDally  de-
noted a  district  or  country.  Then,  because  in  the
early  days  the  lower  classes  lived  in  the  country
and  the  nobles  in  the  city,  it  received  the  meaning
of  commons  or  common  people.  A  third  nse,  like-
wise derived  from  the  original  signification,  is  seen
in  its  application  to  the  local  divisions,  or  town-
ships as  it  were,  of  Attica.

A  certain  number  of  these  H^fuuy  or  demes,  were
included  in  each  of  the  ten  trilies  established  by
Clisthenea  to  replace  the  foar  old  Ionic,  tribes.
Their  exact  number  at  that  time  is  not  positively
known,  though  it  is  supposed  by  some,  from  a  state-
ment of  Herodotus  (v.  69),  to  have  been  one  hun-
dretl.  lu  the  tliird  century  before  Christ,  at  all
events,  tbey  numbered  one  hundred  and  seveuty-
fonr  (Strab.  is..  396).  The  names  of  one  hundred
and  forty-tive  of  these  are  known  to  us  from  iu-
K^riptious.  If,  however,  we  consider  the  division
of  some  demes  into  KaOvwfpdtv  and  vnivtpdtvt  &ud
of  others  between  two  different  tribes,  this  svim  is
iucreased  to  one  hundred  and  fifty-six  {Milchhoe-
fer,  Unterauchungen  iiber  die  Demenordaung  des
Klriethenta,  pp.  S-10;  C.  /.  ^.  iii.  index).  The  names
were  derived  in  part  from  places,  as  iu  the  case  of
Acharnae,  Rhamnns,  etc.,  and  in  part  from  the
founders  of  the  demes,  as  in  the  case  of  Ercbia  and
of  Daedalidae  (Aristot.  Athen.  Polit.  21).  The  larg-
est deme,  according  to  Thncydides,  was  Acharnae,
which  in  the  Feloponuesian  War  was  able  to  fur-
nish three  thousand  heavily  armed  troops  (Thuc.
ii.  19, 20).

At  the  time  of  his  reforms  Clisthenes  admitted
many  resident  aliens  and  even  slaves  to  citizen-
ship (Aristot.  Polif.  3,  2),  and  to  this  fact  is  due
that  alteration  fn  the  official  designation  of  citi-
zens which  he  also  introduced  (Aristot.  Atken.  Polit.
21).  They  were  no  longer  designated  by  the  fa-
ther's name  only,  but  also  by  the  name  of  the  deme
to  which  they  belonged.  The  demes  now  became
the  centres  of  the  local  administrative  power,
and  are  said  by  Aristotle  to  have  taken  the  place
of  the  naucraries  (Athen.  Polit.  21).  Each  deme
had  its  register  of  citizens,  its  own  property,
its  own  meetings  and  religious  observances,  and
its  own  demarch.  This  officer  made  out  the  lists
of  the  dcme's  property,  kept  in  his  possession  the
lexiarchic  register,  or  register  of  qualified  citizens,
and  convened  the  demesmen  at  will  (Harpocration,
e.  V.  ^^fiapxos ).  At  these  meetings  the  public
business  of  the  deme  was  transacted,  such  as  the
leasing  of  property,  the  election  of  officers,  the  re-
viniuu  of  tbu  lexinrchic  register,  and  the  enrolment
of  new  members.

When  a  man  was  first  admitted  to  citizenship
he  had  the  right  to  choose  his  own  tribe  and  deme,
bnt  otherwise  a  man  belonged  to  the  same  deme
as  bis  natural  or  adoptive  father.  The  legitimate
children  of  citizens  cunid  be  enrolled  on  attaining
their  majority  at  the  age  of  pighteen,  and  adoi»ted
children,  whenever  presented  by  their  adoptive  fa-
thers. The  enrolment  took  place  in  the  presence
of  the  assembled  demesmen.  If  any  member  ques-
tioned the  candidate's  eligibility  the  matter  was
settled  by  a  majority  vote  of  those  present  (De-
mosth.  Eubul.  1318).  IHegal  registration,  however,
Was  not  uncommon,  and  certain  demes,  as  Pota-
iDUs  for  example,  were  notorious  for  this  abuse


(Harpocration,  B.  v.  norapos ',  Demosth.  Leoch.  1091).
To  counteract  this  evil  an  official  investigation  of
those  inscribed  in  the  register,  called  diapsephieis
(Harpocration,  s.  v.  Aui^^^io-tr),  was  held  at  vari-
ons  times  by  the  deme.  A  similar  examination
was  also  held  if,  by  any  chance,  the  lexiarchio
registers  were  lost  or  destroyed  (Demosth.  Eabul.
1306).  If  any  one  in  the  course  of  this  inquiry
was  disfranchised  by  vote  of  the  demesmen,  he
bod  the  right  of  appeal  to  the  courts.  If  the  de-
cision of  the  deme  were  sustained  he  was  sold  as
a  slave  and  his  property  was  confiscated.  But
were  he  successful  in  his  suit  his  name  was  re-
stored to  the  register  of  the  deme  (Isaeua,  12 ;  Ar-
gum.  ad  DenoBtheni$  Euhul.  1298).

A  man  was  not  obliged  to  reside  within  the
limits  of  the  deme  of  which  be  was  a  member.
But  he  could  only  hold  property  in  another  deme
upon  payment  to  the  demarch  of  a  tax,  called
eyKTTiTtKov.  This  tax,  however,  was  sometimes  re-
mitted by  the  demes  in  the  case  of  individuals  to
whom  they  desired  to  grant  special  privileges  or
honours  (C./.  J.  11.589).

Denaiino.  A  Roman  silver  coin,  so  called  be-
cause it  originally  contained  10  aettes.  In  later
times  it  =  16  asaes  =:  4  sestertii  ^  j^  of  an  aureus.
Its  original  weight  was  4.55  gr.  (=  between  $0.18
and  $0.20) ;  from  B.C.  217  to  Nero,  3.90  (about  $0.14) ;
after  Nero's  time  3.41  gr.,  the  amount  of  pure  sil-
ver being  so  reduced  that  it  was  M-orth  only  about
$0.12. Its value subsequently  sank  more and


DoDKrU,  OGlual  size. (British  Musoum.)

more,  until  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  century
A.D.  it  was  worth  only  $0.06.  When  at  the  end  of
the  third  century  Diocletian  introduced  a  new  sil-
ver coin  of  full  value  according  to  the  Neroniun
standard  (the  so-called  argenteua),  the  name  denar-
ius was  transferred  to  a  small  copper  coin.  See
Numismatics.

Dendrophfirl  A  Roman  collegium  or  corpora-
tion of  carpenters,  frequently  mentioned  in  inscrip-
tions in  imperial  times.  They  formed  originally  a
religious  corporation,  carrying  the  sacred  tree  in  the
worship  of  the  Magna  Mater  {collegium  devdropho'
rum  Matris  magnae)^  and  were  under  the  Qninde-
cimviri.  See  inscriptions  quoted  by  Marqnardt,
Earn.  Staatarerw.  iii.  pp.  356, 3y0.

Denlcales  Ferlae. See  Funi's,  p.  699.

Dena  (oftovt)-  A.  tooth.  (1)  Artificial  teeth
were  made  and  used  by  the  ancients,  as  may  be
seen  from  several  passages  in  the  cloxHic  writers.

'  Cicero  {De  i€(/i6M9,ii.24)  quotes  a  very  old  sumptu-
ary law  forbidding  gold  to  be  placed  iu  the  tomb
with  the  Imdy,  but  especially  excepting  the  gold

I  used  in  fastening  the  artffioial  teeth. Little  is


J


DKNSKLK'i'AK


4!Mi


HEI'O.SlTinU


kiionti  of  till'  ilcgrec  uf  itkill  attainp<l  by  nnriont
tU>iili!i(r>.  Murtiul  (i.  7'A)  opeaks  uf  oiic  A«};lf<  rh
pruviiJvd  with  tceih  "uf  purcljow^l  lioru's  iiiul
ivory"  (f/mifilii  .  .  .  iinptiM  ustibui  Indicaquir  rornu).

{"£)  Tlio  U'dril  drH»  in  iiIm>  hum)  tif  a  m)iiili(}r  of
lioiiitvfl  olijifciU,  Hticli  as  I  lie  lliiku  t>(  aii  aiiobor
(Vttrf;.  AiTH.  vi.  3);  tU«  )>jtr1)  of  ii  hiiiiliiiK-Npeur
{Qnit.  Cifnttyci.  U)H};  tlm  proii);  of  the  hnplvitit-ut
(iHlk-<t  /iffo  (1^.  v.);  of  iho  ploiii^liithan'  (Varr.  L.  L.
V.  litTj);  till)  tootb  of  n  r»k«  or  liarniw  {irpv.s,  octHi,
roaff-MMt);  tliu  U>otti  of  a  luiw  (Ovid,  ^Urt.  \iii.'<i4ti);
tlip  wiirtlH  of  a  key  (Tibiill.  i.  2,  IH);  ih«  lionk  of
a  KiMit  (Sidon.  Curm.  ii.  397);  th«  cog  of  n  wliwl
(Vilrnv.  X.  5);  and  iKieticiilly  of  u  prniiiug-hook
(d«i«  riirTNn  ■S«/«r»i,  Vcrg.  Geortj.  i^.  IWi).

(3)  Dkns  I)KN8US  is  tlio  iiatiie  given  to  a  flnc-
toutUed  conih  (Tibiill.i.d.ti!^),  n  bpociuii^n  of  whtcli,


Ouufi  Oeoiu«,ur  C4iuU. tRlcli.j

pxacily  liko  tliose  in  use  to-day,  io  givt-u  In  tlie
alttivi;  j|]ii-(Iralinii  of  oik;  found  in  a  Knntiili  touib.

Denseletae  or  Dentheletae  { :^v$r\KifTe»).  A
Tiiraoinn  tiibo  liiviiig  on  tin;  Hat'Diun  between  the
Sir.vnion  and  Neasus  (Plin.  IJ.  .V.  iv.  U).

Deotaid  <VAv/i(t).  Thi*  tttnirv-btnini  of  a  plongl)
to  wliioli  iliu  Kliure  (I'l/iNfT)  wati  iittaebe^t  [C'olnm.
ii.  %  -lA). Sfi'  Ahatrcm,

Deutarp&ga  ['f^owaypa). A  furocpa for  drawing
ti.'«it  Ii  ( Varr.  ap.  Non.  s.  \\.  v.).
Dentatus,  ilANiiia  Cl'Ihus. See  Cumua  Dbx-

TATl'!*.

DentlcaiuB.  A  "dentil"  in  arcbiltict»n>  (Vi-
tmv.  iii.  5,  II). DentEla  rtc  atnull  s<|iuira  blocka


rH>Dricull. (Toin|il«  ot  Xt\oafmu  nl  Tcoc)

with  intentires  between  tbem.  used  in  the  eiitab-
biliini  n(  roliininar  arcbit**c.lure,

DeuUdQcum.  A  deDtist's  furcc[>s  (Cael.Aun>I,
Tarfi.\\.A\. '

Dentlftlciutn  (  aiovroTpififUi,  atkurrnvfiTfy^  ).
Pt-ntifricc  or  t<Hith-powdor  appears  fo  have  benn
(•kilfiilly  prepai-til  and  p;oncriilty  iim*d  among  tbe
Koniaim.  A  v.nridty  of  !)u1i4liinc4'4,  Mnch  as  thei
boni'ii,  liootit,  and  liornn  of  cei'taiii  aninialit,  crabs,
egg- HbtdN,  and  tbf  .sliulU  of  tbti  oyHliM*  and  tbi>
ninrvx,  con8titi)tt:(l  the  baein  of  tbe  pr«|>anition.
Hax'iiig  b«cn  previon»iy  bnnied,  and  ftonieliinuK
mixi'i!  with  honey,  they  wei-e  loUnceil  to  a  fine
powder.  TUongh  fancy  anil  itupei-atitioD  ofleii
directed  the  choice  of  tbe»e  in^t-edient«,  titc  addi-
tion of  aatringonts,  aaob  as  luyrrb,  nr  of  nitre  and


Ddpaa tO^'uixB.  A'rurM)


hartshorn  ground  in  a  niw  ^tate,  indla
enee  whicli  waa  ibe  resnlt  of  experience,  1
lion  being  not  only  to  clean  the  teeth  and  taraadct
tliom  whit«,  but  n1iw>  to  fix  them  whi-u  loon,  ti
Mtmngthr^ii  the  gnnw,  and  (o  awttiagp  liioihulK
(Pliii.  H.  S.  xxviii.  fyii  17«,  I7fl;  xx\i.  (  117;  uiii.
$(  (i5,7it;  Sciib.  l.urg.  Comp.  &9).

DentlBts. Sc4<  Ukns;  MkCiiccs.

Deo  (A^Mi.  Another  name  for  Dcmcter:  limn
her  dunghler  Fersephon^  ia  called  by  tbe  pairo-
n.vniie  DeoVit  and  Deoiufi  (Callim.  Fiiif.  4U).

Deo'fnd  (AijiutV)}). St^m  Oko.

DepaatAcfroc),  Aciipwiib  two  handle*,  freqtwil-
ly  mentioned  by  Homer.  It  seems  to  have  Wd
a  generic  term,  like  ironjptoir.  U  wna  onml  in  lil'i-
tiona^and  vas  n^stially  of  gold  (//.  xxiii.  I9fi,ixtr.
285.  e!c.(  bnt  later  of  carlhenware.  The  U-nn  i*
applied  to  tbo
golden  bowl  or
boat  in  which  tbe
snn  Itoitt^d  hook
from  weoc  lo  eodt
during  tlie  night
(Slesich.  /v.  e
Iti<rgk|.  Aft  a
npec^illc  term  it
wax  probably  ap-
plied lo  eupn  of  a
howl  -  like  Hliiipr,  and  in  Ihrrcfore  ideiitifi<'<l  by
Panofka  and  DciiniH  with  the  fonu  giren  id  itw
above  ilUmtralirin.

Tlio  wonl  is  frequently  nHed  In  Homer  villi  llic
epithet  ap<ii\K\-vtX\ov  ill.  i.  &M),  wbirh  liofl  ^*to
rise  to  ninrh  discnssion.  It  wa».  however,  pnla-
biy  :i  iloiible-enp,  with  a  hortom  half-way  0|',  liko
a  dice-box.  That  this  waa  the  form  of  ibr  nijia
inferred  from  a  pasKage  of  Arislolle  i^/i^l.  Ji. li-
•10),  where  he  descrilwti  the  cella  of  l»e<»  a«  having
tw<»  openiiiga  divide«l  by  a  tioor.  like  tbe  dfi^ii^
iTfXXa. No  s|H>(.-inien  is  known  to  exist.

DepoDtani  Senea.  A  name  giwn  ut  Ranw  14
liiL-u  «ixly  yu:in*  of  age,  hence  called  »rse^trH.
because  they  were  freed  from  tbe  ohIigatioD  ft
Voting  in  the  Konian  rnmitia;  that  is,  of  papn^i
0%cr  The  bridges  ipontra'i  which  led  into  tbe«H]M
wbeie  tlio  voting  took  jdaii-.  (See  fViMmA.I  Ttt*
is  the  mast  probable  explanation  of  t  lie  vcarA ',  toi
if  is  doubtful  whether  men  of  nixty  }fju%  of  «S«
were  ahsolntcly  deprived  of  the  frunehi**.  Iboofi
this  wna  the  case  if  wv  accept  lilerally  I  he  ulattpeot
that  tliey  were  thinst  back  from  voting,  *f«''
da'ici>Art/i/«r  (Feat.  pp.  7&,  3M  M.).  S<inie  aiwif"'
writeresnpposed  that  the  name  rfejwiifrtnibwlftJ''^
eiue  to  a  barbaroas  cnstoni  of  aniitjnily.  lb»i  a*"
of  nixty  yeiim  of  age  were  thrown  down  fnun''''
jMtn*  MuhlifiuK  into  the  Tiber,  bnt  this  iDUTpJtt**
ItoD  wfl«  ixipndialed  by  Varro  and  VerriuB  l>'(»'
II.  cc. ;  Varr.  ap.  Non.  p.  ,523;  Cic,  Ilote.  Jm-  ^
imi;  Ovid, /Vm/.  V.G28;  Macrob.i.S;  Plut.9«*»^
Itom.  32).

Deportatio.  Hnnisbtnent  to  n  specified  Iwililf'
generally  an  islniid.  This  form  of  exile  watil^
vised  nndet-  tbe  early  Roman  emt>eitH«.  U  >""
v(dved  loss  of  civil  rights,  and  generally  akv "
property. See  ExsiUtld.

Depoaltum.  A  real  contract  which  rnvniiiO*''
one  man  inlriiMling  a  ntovahle  thing  to  mMH^^
to  keep  until  it  is  deniantU><l  back,  lUid  Kilh"*'
any  ruward fur  the Inmble  of  kn*ping  li. 'H''


DEBBS


497


DESULTOR


party  wlio  makes  tbe  deponfum  is  oatled  deponent
or  depoeitor,  and  be  who  receives  tbe  tbing  is  called
depositariuM.  Tbe  maJD  object  of  a  depoaitam  is  to
beuetit  the  deponent  and  nut  tbe  depositariua.  Ac-
cordingly tbe  d^tontarius  has,  as  a  rule,  no  right
to  make  use  of  tbe  thjog  deposited,  tbe  cootract
by  which  one  person  lends  a  thing  to  another  for
bis  gratuitous  use  being  commodatum  and  not  de-
posiCuio.  Tbe  deponent  is  benefited  by  the  deposi-
tuin  without  being  obliged  to  give  anything  in  re-
turn. If  money  is  promised  to  a  person  for  taking
care  of  a  thing,  the  contract  is  looatio  conductio
and  notdepositnm.  If  anything  else  except  money
is  promised,  the  contract  is  one  of  the  innominati
contractu*.

The  depoeitaHua  is  bound  on  demand  to  restore
tbe  thing  deposited  to  tbe  deponent,  or  to  the  per-
son to  whom  the  deponene  baa  ordered  it  to  be  re-
stored. If  be  cannot  restore  it,  or  cannot  restore
it  uninjured,  he  is  liable,  should  such  loss  or  injury
be  dne  to  his  wilful  misconduct  (doI««),  or  to  gross
negligence  {culpa  lata),  ^hich  is  eqnivalent  to
wilful  misconduct;  hut  he  is  not  Uable  on  account
of  ordinary  negligence  (culpa  levia),  except  under
special  cironmstaooes,  as  that  he  has  agreed  to
undertake  snch  liability  or  has  benefited  in  some
way  by  the  contract.  The  remedy  by  which  tbe
deponent  could  enforce  these  obligations  is  the
actio  depotiii  directa.

Roman  law  recognized  an  irregular  kind  of  de-
posit, whtob  consisto  in  depositing  "  fungible "
things,  snch  as  money,  with  another  person,  on  the
anderstanding  that  an  eqnal  quantity  of  things
of  the  same  kind  shall  be  restored  and  not  the
identical  things  deposited,  as  in  an  ordinary  de-
po8it.  In  this  case  tbe  depotilariua  has  the  use  of
tlie  things  deposited,  tbe  property  in  them  passing
to  him ;  conseqoeDtly  he  is  subject  to  ail  risk  of
loss.  This  transaction  ia  distinguished  from  a
loan  {mutuum)  by  tbe  fact  that  it  is  entered  into
in  the  interest  of  the  person  who  makes  over  the
things,  and  nbt  in  that  of  the  person  who  receives
them.

DerbA  (^tp0Tf).  A  town  in  Lycaonia  on  the
frontiers  of  Isauria  (Pausan.  iv.  15,  $  4).

Darblces  {^tpfiiKts).  A  nation  of  Upper  Asia,
whom  Ptolemy  places  iu  Margiana,  where  tbe
Oxns,  according  to  him,  empties  into  the  Caspian  j
bnt  Strabo  in  Hyrcania,  and  others  on  the  south-
ern and  western  shores  of  the  Caspian  (Aeliau,
r.  B.  iv.  1).

DeroStis  or  DercSto  i^pKtrU  or  Arfnecro),  also
called  Atahqatis. A  Syrian  goddess  (Died.  Sic.

il.  4).  She  of-
feuded  Aphro-
dite, who  in
consequence  in-
spired her  with
loveforayontb,
to  whom  she
bore  a  daugh-
ter, Semiramis;
hilt  ashamed  of  her  frailty,  she  killed  the  youth,
exposed  ber  child  in  a  desert,  and  threw  herself
into  a  lake  near  Ascalon.  Her  child  was  fed  by
doves,  and  she  herself  was  changed  into  a  fish.
Tbe  Syrians  thereupon  worshipped  ber  as  a  god-
dess. The  npper  part  of  the  statue  represented  a
beantifnl  woman,  while  the  lower  part  terminated
in  the  tail  of  a  fish. She  appears  to  be  connected


fisbgod  on  Oems. (Brtllsh  Uuseum.)


with  the  fish-god  Dagon  mentioned  in  the  Old  Tes-
tament as  a  deity  of  the  Philistines.

DeroyUldaa  (ArpfcuXXi'dar).  A  Spartan  who  in
B.C.  399  took  command  of  the  army  levie«l  for  the
defence  of  the  Asiatic  Greeks  against  Persia.  He
compelled  Tissapbemes  and  Pbamabazns  to  sue
for  peace,  but  in  396  resigned  the  command  to
Agesilatis  (q.  v.).

DoxmatifkOD  [itppartKov,  so.  dpyvptov).  "  Hide-
money";  that  is,  the  money  paid  into  the  treas-
ury at  Athens  from  the  sale  of  the  hides  of  victiniH
slain  at  the  festivals  (App.Tiii.,  vol.  ii.pp.  100-103;
C.  I.  A,  ii.  741  A).

Dertona  (Afpr&va).  Tbe  modern  Tortnna;  an
important  town  in  Lignria  on  tbe  road  from  Genua
(Genoa)  to  Placeutia  (Ptol.  iii.  1,  35).

Dertosa  (Ac^mo-a).  Now  Tortosa;  a  city  of  the
Ilei-caones  iu  Spain,  situated  on  tbe  Iberns,  a  short
distance  above  its  moutb.  Here  was  a  bridge  over
the  river,  and  along  this  route  led  the  main  mili-
tary road  to  the  southern  parts  of  Spain  and  the
colonies  established  there  (Mela,  ii.  6).

Desertor.  In  the  military  language  of  the  Ro-
mans, a  deserter.  Those  who  deseited  in  time  of
l>eace  were  punished  by  reduction  to  the  ranks
{graduB  deiectio),  corporal  chastisement,  fines,  or
iguomiuions  dismissal  from  tbe  service  (mittio  iff-
Hominiota).  Those  who  left  the  standards  iu  time
of  war  were  usually  punished  with  death.  The
trauB/itgae,  or  deserters  to  the  enemy,  when  taken,
were  sometimes  deprived  of  their  bands  or  feet
(Liv.  xxvi.  lij),  hut  generally  were  put  to  doath.
In  imperial  times  tbey  were  exposed  to  wild
beasts.

Designator. See  Funus;  Theatrum.

DeaignatUB  Constii See  Consul.

Deak. See  ScKraiuu.

Deamoterion  {Btaparijptov). See  Carcer.

Despatobea. See  Curbus  Publicus.

Despoona  (^ttmotya).  "The  mistress";  a  title
given  to  Aphrodite,  to  Demeter,  and  especially  to
Persephone  who  was  worshipped  nnder  this  name
in  Arcadia  (Plat  De  Leg.  796  R).

DeqKHudonautae  (StOTrovfriovavrai). See  He-

LOTAB.

Dessert  See  Ceka,  pp.  311  and  314.
Deaultor  (affojSon/f,  nrra^anjs).  A  word  literal-
ly meaning  "one  who  leaps  off,"  and  applied  to  a
person  wlio  rode  several
horses  or  chariots,  leaping
from  one  to  the  other.  As
early  as  the  Homeric  times,
we  find  tbe  description  of  a
man  who  keejM  four  horses
abreast  at  full  gallop,  and
leaps  from  one  to  another,
amidst  a  crowd  of  admiring
spectators  (//.  xv.  679-664).
In  the  games  of  the  Roman
circus  this  sport  was  also
very  popular.  The  Roman
desnltor  generally  rode  only  two  horses  at  the  siime
time,  sitting  on  them  without  a  saddle  nnd  vault-
ing upon  either  of  them  at  his  pleasure  (Isid.  Orig.
xviii.  39).  He  wore  a  bat  or  cap  made  of  felt.  The
taste  for  these  exercises  was  carried  to  ao  great  an
extent  that  young  men  of  the  highest  rank  not
only  drove  bigae  and  qnaitrigae  in  the  circus,  bnt


DesuUor. (Bas-reller  at
Verona.)


.A


DEUCAUON


198


PEVEKRA


exliibiUid  tliesu  ft^ntH  nf  ImrtwitiiiuHliip  (8ni*l'.  ^^l.
'JS).  Auiuiig  utter  imtiiHiH  tltiM  M|K'citt(i  of  eqncMtri-
nn  ilfixtvritj-  wiut  ni>p)ii-il  to  lliu  jnirpiwoH  uf  nnr.
Livy  iDeiitious  a  iruop  uf  honu  in  ttio  N'atuidiau
nmiy,  in  whkb  l'iu-Ii  fiolilivr  was  siipplieU  with
two  liorsos,  and,  in  the  beat  uf  batllL-  niid  whon
cind  m  aruioiir,  would  leap  wUb  the  grente&t  catie
niift  I'l'lerii.v  fmui  Mint  wliitb  xvas  weuricd  or  disa-
blvd  upuu  the  back  of  the  Iiui-se  wbich  was  atill
tiuuiHl  au<l  ft^bh  {xxiit.  29).

The  fiillowing illiintratiou  shnws  three  fi>;nn'M
of  desiilUirca — nno  from  a  bnitize  bimp,  publisbfit


3^


-j^-.


o


'^


ilvl.


IVsnltoTM. (From  an  Andout  t^mp  anil  Coiiuii)

by  RurtoH  (Arttiche  Lucrrue  HepoUrali,  l.  24),  the
orhen  n-iiin  coius.

Deucalion  {^tvKit\!w).  Thoeon  of  PntniPtbttus
and  Clyiiieiif^,  or  of  Pmtnftlheufl  ninl  Paudoni,  anil
floniotiniir.H  cnllud  Ibn  fnlbcr  {Tlnu'.  i.  8  f,  eoiiif-
tiiiiv-s  tlin  bnilber  of  llullmi,  tbo  reputed  foiindiM-
tt(  tliu  Clnrrk  natiuii.  Ills  borne  wan  Tbctwaly,
fnim  vs'liicli.  accordiiig  to  geueral  tTaditiun,  lie  wa«
driven  Ut  Vnrnatmns  by  ft  gruat  (Ulnpo  (Apollml.  i.
7,  2),  «  hicli,  Uowover,  according  to  Aristotle  [Metc-
orol.  i.  14)  occurred  bctn'ccn  Dndinm  ami  tbi;  Aclie-
lotis.  Tli«  Grw'k  ]eg<-'iid  renpi-cting  tliin  mcniornLile
event  in  iih  ftillvwn:  Pciicaliitii  woh  ninrrii-d  to
PyrrliB,  Mm  tlnughtor  of  ICpimiithnio  aiitl  I'audura.
Wbt-ii  ZfMiB  iKmigiMHl  to  (U'»ti"ny  tbn  brazni  race  of
intMi  1)11  Hcrount  of  tbrir  iiiipif  ty,  Denr»ltnii,  liy  ttie
ndvit-L<  of  Ilia  fiitber.  mnilr"  liiiiiHelfau  nrk  (Xdpva^),
and,  ptiitiiig  pvut  i!>ions  into  it,  entert^d  it  with  hi^
wifu  I'yrrbn.  Zcntt  tlien  poured  rain  fioin  beaveii
ami  iuuiMtat<Ht  llu^  greater  jmrt  of  Oruece,  wj  tbut
all  the  ptx>p)t>,  fxt'<*pt  a  few  wbi>  escaped  to  tbo
lofty  niouiitaiiiK,  pcriabod  in  (In-  wnrt-B.  At  the
Kaiiit)  liuie,  tli«  ui'iiiiilain»  "f  Tlieoaaly  were  burst
tbronglt  by  tbt)  IIimmI,  and  all  Or«ec«  iritbont  the
Ititbniiu^,  aA  well  a«  .ill  Miu  PchiponnrsuH.  were
uverlliiwvtl.  Dcuralion  iviw  carried  along  (lie  wu
in  bi«  nrk  for  nine  days  and  nighla,  until  be
rt'iicbfd  Mount  I'liriioKttns.  By  this  tinio  ibe  rain
bad  cea.«c«l,  and.  leaving  bis  nrk,  bo  sacrilicod  to
Zeus  tbe  Hight-girer  { *vfiot ),  wlio  sent  Hvrmes,
desiring  bint  to  jwk  what,  be  wnnld.  His  request
was  to  have  tin*  Mrlb  repb-ninliod  with  men.  By
tbe  dire<rt)tin  of  Zt^ntj,  tbcrcii[>on,  lie  and  bis  wife
flung  Mtoiivs  behind  tlienirnnd  tliotHi'  wliicb  Denco-
Uou  cant  bccsinu men,  and  thiuie  thrown  by  Pjt-


rlia  woniLMi ;  trom  wbicli  cironmstaDCO  i
derivtHl  tbe  name  fur  "  pe*>ple"  (Xooc)
"n  stono*'  (Apollod.  i.7.:!i.

This  narrative  reetrieta  tbo  geoenU  delnge  t«
Orwcf!)  prtiper,  perhaps  originally  to  Theawlj;
and  it  moftt  incoDgnion«ly  reprew'uta  otbert  u
baring  ci»caped  as  well  a«  IH'acAUou;  whils  u
tbe  same  time,  it  intimatoq  that  he  and  liibvifc
ainuo  bad  Uc«n  preserved  in  tbe  catMtropta.
Thu  ci  run  instance  uf  tbe  ark  is  tbongbt  by  wow
to  be  bormwud  from  tbB  Miwaic  accunnt,  uiJ  («
bavo  Ijceii  leann-i]  al  Atexandna.  for  we  elsewbete
find  tbe  dove  nottcud.  "Tbe  niytboIogiBl*),"iojfi
Phitarch,  "infornt  us  that  a  dove  let  fly  ont  oftlw
ark  WAS  to  Ueiiealiou  a  »)gii  of  bad  weattierlfit
ciiino  in  again,  of  giKwl  we-atber  if  it  flotr  turjy"
(Pint.  JJ€  Sullfrt.  An.).  Tbe  saci  itice  aurl  tbe  rtp-
))earauce  of  liermea  likewim;  strongly  remiuil  a»of
S'oab.  (See,  also,  tbe  article  Ai'AMtA.I  Ttie  Litiu
writePM  take  a  diftereiit  view  nf  tlie  diilngp.  Ao-
eortliiig  to  tlieni  it  overspre4id  tb»  whole  ituth,
aitd  all  animal  UTh  perisbinl  except  IK'ucahnu  and
I'jrrh;!,  whom  Ovid,  wbti  gives  a  very  {KM>ti<;ilac-
ciinnt  of  this  great  entaHtn>phe,  convevt  in  a  Muill
boat  Ui  tb't  snmtnit  of  PamaMinH;  while  mben
luuku  Aetna  or  Atluvs  llm  ntountHiii  which  yidilnl
thcni  H  refuge  (  Oviil,  }trt  i.  '2:a  foIL ;  Hjs.  fti*.
15:i;  Serv.  ail  Verg.  Krhff.  vi.  41  X  Accxinling  Is
Ovid  Ihcy  ponsultt^d  tlw?  anriont  oi-acle  nf  ThrtW
rL'spectiug  tbe  restoration  of  mankiud.and  rwcivri
tbo  foUiiwiug  rcspouso:  "Depart  f^nn  tl*r  Uds,
veil  yonr  beads,  loosoD  your  girdled  vostmeDlt, asd
cast  bebiiid  you  tbe  great  bones  nf  yonr  paroBt"
(.Vet.  i.  3^1  foil.).  They  were  at  first  bonroiHiimk
at  snob  an  act  of  impiety,  but  at  length  DsncaliM
understood  the  wonls  of  tbo  oracle  its  iDfrrrinKts
tbe  earth,  tbe  common  mother  of  all.  Ratimialifr'
iug  tnytliologisls  maks  tbe  story  an  alli'f^u'y  ii
wbieh  Heucaiioii  represents  water  (as  if  from  ^UL
and  Pyrrlia,  lire  {wip).  The  meaning  of  tb«  trK<9Hl
will  then  hit,  that  when  tbe  pfla»agc  lliiungb  «lii<k
tbe  Peneiui  carries  ofl'  the  waters  that  rau  tul«>l>*
vate  of  Tbe«s»ly.  which  is  on  all  side*  sbol  In  ^J
lofty  ntountains,  bail  iK-en  closrul  by  some  acci<l'i>tt
tlicy  ovcillowed  the  whole  of  its  surface,  tilt  lb*
action  of  subterranean  lire  openetl  a  way  fi*r  !!*"'•
.\cvortling  to  this  view  of  tbe  snbjcct,  tlifii,  lb"
deluge  of  Priicalion  was  merely  a  local  oo^;  '"^
it  was  nut  until  the  time  of  Ptolemy  PhibuVll''"*-
when  tbo  Hebrew  Scriptnrra  bccniuc  known  w  'I*
Greeks,  that  sontc  features  borrowed  from  lb''  '^*'
versal  di-bige  of  Xtmb  wcio  iuoor|ioratcd  iuio'l*
story  of  the  TbeNsaliun  llcmd.  See  Harcoiifl,  ('*''
triuv  uf  the  Jirluffe  (London.  lK*iH);  fiuycf, />^
/.iifht  from  the  Attdrttt  Montimrntu  (l^>iid«D,  1^'*
Motais,  Lr  DUvgc  Bibliqitf  (Paris.  l!*ff  (.

Deanx.  Kleven  ounces,  rdeven  tw<>intisi>f '"*'
n*  (<|.  v.),  not  n?prescntetl  Xty  a  ctiin ;  or  ek**"
twelfibs  of  anything  (Varr. /*  L.  ».  178;  Cie.O'''
CIS.  li,  17).

Deva.  (I)  Now  Cbcstur;  the  iirineipal  tn«*
of  Ibe  C'oriiii  in  llritniii,  on  tbe  !jet«-ta  (I>r*i.  ^
iininUerof  Uonnin  remains  are  to  be  sCvtJ  «l  P***"
ter,  preservetl  In  tbe 4jrosvenor  Must.Min)>  (?}J'''T
the  Dee;  an  estuary  in  Hcotland.on  whicli  *1"^
the  town  Dovauna,  near  the  mmU^ni  Al)enb-(^u-

Deverbltmj. See  DiVEnBiCJi.

Deverra.  One  of  tlio  three  goddcssM  **''
sbipjied  by  tbe  Itolians  as  pcottvting  new-'*''
cliildren  against  The  miacbieviius  iiitruston  ufiv


DET£RS0R1UM


499


DIAETETAE


god  SilvaDDB  (q.  v.).  Tlie  two  divinitiea  who  joined
withDevurrain  tbisfunctiou  were  lutercidouaand
PicamuuB. See  August.  De  Civ.  Dei,  vi.  9.

Devenoiium. See  Caupona.

Dflvotlo.  A  Roaian  religious  ceremony,  by  vtr-
tiie  of  which  a  general  whose  ariuy  wus  in  dis-
tress offered  np  as  an  atonement  to  the  gods  be-
low, and  a  means  of  averting  their  wrath,  the
army,  city,  and  land  of  the  enemy ;  or  some  soldier
iu  the  Roman  array;  or  even  himself,  as  was  the
fcase  with  the  Decii.  (See  Decius.)  The  general,
stauding  on  a  spear  and  with  veiled  head,  repeated
a  solemn  fornmla  dictated  to  him  by  the  Pontifex.
If  the  city  and  land  of  the  enemy  were  offered,  the
gods  were  solemnly  invited  to  bum  the  laud  or
city.  (See  Evocatio.)  Tlie  fate  of  the  devoted
person  was  left  iu  the  bauds  of  the  gods.  If  he
survived,  an  image  at  least  seven  feet  high  was
buried  iu  the  ground  aud  a  bloody  sacrifice  offered
over  it;  he  was  meanwhile  held  incapable  in  fut-
are  of  perforining  any  other  religious  rite,  either
on  his  own  behalf  or  on  tliat  of  the  State.

2>e3cippuB  (Ac'liinror).  (1)  P.  Herennius,  a
Greek  historian  and  rhetoriciau,  boru  iu  Attica
iu  the  third  century  A.i>.  He  held  high  office  in
Athens,  aud  iu  the  year  262,  when  the  Qoths  in-
vaded Greece,  distinguished  himself  against  them.
He  died  about  a.d.  280.  Photius  gives  some  ac-
count of  three  historical  works  by  Dexippus — a
bitttury  of  Macedonia  from  the  time  of  Alexander
the  Great ;  a  general  chronological  history  from
the  earliest  times  down  to  the  year  a.d.  26d  ;  aud,
finally,  an  account  of  the  wars  with  the  Gotha  in
which  Dexippus  had  himself  fought.  The  frag-
ments of  these  worlds,  which  are  fairly  numerous,
are  included  in  the  collection  of  8criptore»  Hiato-
riae  Bj/zantinae.  (2)  A  student  of  the  philosopher
lambliobus,  who  wrote  (about  a.d.  'XiO)  a  commen-
tary on  the  Categories  of  Aristotle  in  the  form  of  a
dialogue,  which  is  edited  by  Speugel  (Munich,  1B59).

Dextaua.  Ten  ounces,  ten  twelfths  of  tbe  a$
(q.  v.),  not  represented  by  a  coin ;  or  ten  twelfths
of  anything  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  172 ;  Suet.  Ner.  32).

Dextralti  and  Dez-
trocheilmn  (from  dex-
ter and  x*''p>  "*'''8
hand").  Late  Latin
words,  signifying  a
bracelet. SeeARMiLLA.


Diaotla  (^uutpia).  A  mouutainoua  district  in
the  northeast  of  Attioa,  including  the  plain  of
Marathon. See  Attica.

Diadfima  (dmdi;fta).  The  white  fillet  round  the
brow  which  was  the  emblem  of  sovereignty  fhim
the  time  of  Alexander  tbe  Great.  Caesar  refused
it  when  offered  him  by  Antonius,  aud  it  was  not.


Dla  (A<a).  The
daughter  of  Dioueus
and  wife  of  Ixion  (q.
v.),  by  whom  (or,  ac-
conliug  to  others,  by
Zeus)  she  became  the
mother  of  PirithoUs  I>«xtra]«,  (From  a  Pompelan
(q.v.).  F^i^i'i^gi

Dla  (Am). The  ancient  name  of  Masos  (q.  v.).

Diabatetia  (dta^or^pia).  A  sacrifice  offered  t-o
Zens  and  Athene  l>y  the  Spartau  kings  on  passing
tlie  frontier  of  Loconia  iu  command  of  an  army
(Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  13,  $  2  foil.).  If  the  victims  were
unfavourable  they  disbanded  the  army  and  re-
tnmed  home  (Thuc.  v.  54,  55,  116).  We  also  find
hta^toTTfpM  offered  by  a  Roman  general  in  x'ossing
a  swollen  river  (Pint.  Lututl.  24).

Diabathron  (iia^aSpov). A  Greek  slipper.

Diablintea. A  branch  of  the  Aulerci  (q.v.).


DiademA  on  Heads  otSeleacaB  II.,  King  ol  Syria
(led  hand  flfi"'^)-  snd  ot  Ptolemaens  II.,  King
of  ^Kjpt  (right  bond  figure).  (Coins  in  Brit-
ish HuBeum.)

in  conseqnence,  worn  by  the  Roman  emperors,  ex-
cept in  a  few  cases.  But  when  the  sent  of  gov-
ernment was  removed  to  Byzantinm,  Constantino
adopted  the  Greek  emblem  of  royalty  (Aurel.  Vicr.
41).

Before  the  diadem  was  worn  by  the  Roman  em-
perors as  a  symbol  of  sovereignty,  it  was  used  ns
a  head-dress  by  Roman  women  (Isid.  Orig.  xix.  31).

Diaddchi  ("  Successors,"  from  dtadf'xofuii-)  A
name  given  to  the  successors  of  Alexander  the
Great.

Dladfiaeifl  (dtadoo-cir)- See  Dianomae.

Diadamenianna  or  Dladomfinna,  M.  Opeliuh.
A  son  of  the  Roman  emperor  Macrlnus,  who  be-
stowed upon  him  in  a.d.  217  the  titles  of  Caesar,
Princeps  luventntis,  Imperator,  and  Augustus.  Af-
ter the  victory  of  Elagabalns,he  was  sent  to  Arta-
banns,  king  of  the  Parthians,  and  was  murdered
at  about  tbe  same  date  as  that  of  bis  father's  death.
Diadumenianus  is  said  by  Lampridins  to  have  been
a  most  marvellously  beautiful  child,  so  that  tbe
biographer  compares  bis  face  to  a  heavenly  star;
but  if  so,  the  coins  on  which  his  likeness  appears
do  him  a  sad  injustice.

Diaeta  (di'aira). See  DoMUS,  p.  546.

Diaetetae  (StatTtrraC).  Public  arbitrators  at
Athens,  to  whom  the  parties  in  a  private  suit
might  apply  if  they  wished  to  avoid  a  trial  be-
fore the  Heliatttae  (q.  v.).  For  this  object  a  con-
siderable number  of  citizens  of  advanced  age  were
nominated.  They  received  no  salary,  hut  a  fee  of
a  drachma  from  each  party  and  as  much  from  the
complainant  for  every  adjournment.  In  case  of
misconduct  they  could  be  called  to  account.  The
diaetetae  were  assigned  to  the  parties  by  lot  by  the
magistrate  who  (according  to  the  character  of  the
case)  would  have  presided  in  tbe  court  of  the  He-
liaea.  To  this  magistrate  (in  case  tbe  parties  did
not  appeal  to  the  Heliaea  against  it),  the  diaetetes
handed  in  the  sentence  he  had  delivered  as  the
result  of  his  investigation,  to  have  it  signed  antl
published  and  thus  made  legal.  The  name  of
diaetetae  was  also  given  to  private  arbitrators
nametl  by  agreement  between  the  parties,  on  the
understanding  that  their  decision  was  to  be  ac-
cej>ted  without  appeal.

See  Pevrot,  E»sai  aur  le  Ifroii  Public  d'JIhine*
(1869);  and  Thalheim,  Kechlaalterth.  pp.  98,  99
(1884).


UIAETETICA


WO


niAETETICA


:


Diaetetloa  {fitainynKi)).  One  of  tlie  (trinripiil
ItraiM'livN  iiiUi  wliict)  llif  nnrioiita  divitlt'd  llie  art
and  M'it'ncu  of  niedtritiL'.  Tlio  wunl  is  durivi^l
fmtu  iiatra,  wbk'L  nivdiit  niuvli  tiiv  lUiDio  ii»  »iir
ivani  (liut.  It  is  i1ut)lK-<t  by  C>'lsii«  {Dv  Mettu.
i'nu'f.  lib.  }.)  U>  fii^ijly  thiit  part  of  riii'tlicme
wliirh  onres  <1i»oa«es  hy  lurutis  of  rfKiint>i)  and
«li«'t.  Taken  titrictly  in  lliin  Heu«*,  it  woiiM  vor-
pi-j*pnriil  very  nearly  wiili  itn-  in<Klurn  "diplflics,''
anil  Ihif)  i»  the  iiii'iiiiti)^  wliirli  it  uh^uys  betm  in
tlin  uarlicr  nitMliral  wiilrni.

Ill  later  tiiiii)>t  till-  ismnii'.  pool  Xioonittchns  (^.  1,
30  M.  ajt.  All),  vii-  p.  291  c|  iuirotlncii'H  «  cook  wli(».
ttniMiiK  biH  utltor  q  nautical  ions,  iniplioM  tbat  \iv  u
a  iiliysii-ian ;  bnt  no  atlenCton  set-nis  t«  Iiiivl-  b*en
paid  111  oatiiij;  a»  n  bmiu-h  of  inctlicino  W'furi)  tbe
iImIvi  n(  IlipiKiumtt's.  Huiuer  ^pp^t^i«elltH  MacliAun,
wbo  hill)  bi-fn  woiiimIi-^I  in  lUe  fibunlilcr  by  an  ar-
row (//.  xt.  W7)  anil  forced  to  quit  tlie  6eld.  U5
lakiii)'  a  ilniiiKbt  ooni]K>4fd  iif  wine,  j^onl'N-milk
cb(*i-Hi>,  itnd  tlniir,  ubii'h  probnbly  no  )snr}((^on  in
luior  iMiM-K  »oiild  bavf>  pnvM-nln'd  in  Nnrli  n  ram*.
(lippoornti'H  M>fniH  tn  t;biini  fur  hininidf  t.b«  I'lvdit
of  Iwiiiff  l)n^  llfMt  piTHtiu  w  ho  liiul  ntiiitiiHl  lli'm  anb-
JiM't,  and  HAYM  Ibat  "lln<  aii<-irnl»  bad  nrittiin
nolhiiift  nil  il  ivortb  nit;utiunin}!**  <  A'r  lint.  I'irJ.in
Slurb.  .IruL  ^  I,  v«il.  li.  p.  3(>,  iil.  Ktlbn).  Aiiiong
tlio  vorkA  forming;  ttif-  Ilippncntrio  cnlli'ctiint,
t)icr«  ari«  funr  thnt  bear  npnn  iIiim  Hiibjeor,  of
which,  Iiow(.*ver,  only  one  {x\i.  tbut  jiiM  qnotpd)
is  coniiidei'fit  tt>  be  nndonbtL'dly  ||;euiiiiii>.  Jt
would  lie  ont  of  idnee  h^tvi  to  nll«nipt  nnytbiii^
liko  A  oompb'te  nrroitnt  of  the  opinions  of  tbe
JincicniA  ott  Ibis  point,  no  that  in  thitt  ni'ti«-'le  only
florb  iiarticnlnrs  an*  mentionn)  as  niny  bt*  mippiMnl
Ui  hnTe  MiiDo  inl4<n>»t  for  ibo  rlx>u<irn)  ri'Uilrr.

Ill  tbii  norkH  of  Hippi»rnil4't(  anil  Iuh  KneeivMon
ftlniiwi  1)11  Uw  arliclivt  of  fiMtil  nwi\  by  tbv  riiici«<nlM
mrv  nii^tilioinMl,  luid  tbfir  rual  or  ttiipiiuwd  pnipfr-
tlr«  dir^u«Mil,  MinintimiM)  qnito  n»  funcifully  a«  by
Burton  in  lii«  Jmalomii  ff  StfUiMckttltf.  In  BKinii*  rt>-
■prcl!«  tbi\v  np|>«'Ar  to  have  lK>cn  niitcli  Iom  deli-
CJtlv  I  ban  ilio  iiiu4lern»,  lu  wv  llnd  I  be  tli^  of  tbc
fox,  tbo  Aofi,  tbe  bor»r.  and  ibu  aiw  !t)Kikeu  of  as
common  artit-lc*  of  fiK*d.  Bwf  nnd  mutton  wero
of  conrKO  citton,  bnl  tli**  meat  nh^t  ^ir^iifrally  >■■*-
tvcuteil  WM  i>ork  i.*i'v  ()ri)ra«.  I'ott.  Mrti.  i.  p.  &M6.
Druenther;;).  A  morbid  la«t«  for  litininn  tb^li  ap-
pears to  havi«  \>tfn  aerretly  indnlg^l  in  ibr  time  of
Xfm>cratr«  (tlmt  contnt>  a.D  );  rto  that  the  nnnat-
ami  pnictii'«<  nnj«  forbidden  by  an  imperial  e«lict,
nhieb  drrrre  wtvem  to  illujilratp  Ibr  "ulruiijjr  and
revtdliug  snectlote."  ik»  Mihitau  cnlU  it.  of  ibr  wild
cry  tliut.  iu  a  tiwr  of  Hirarrity  nmoiinling  to  fam-
itir,  assailMl  the  ear»  of  Ibi*  i.<m(N'r«»r  .lllnln^, "  l-'ix
tbe  tariff  for  bnmati  ttMb"  t/ioN^  f^rrttmm  tnrmi  km-
mmfitr,  ZiMint,  vi,  tU.

With  w»i»nl  to  Ihe  sttvnKth  or  quality  of  ibe
wtiw  dnmk  by  |Ik>  anett^ntn,  rev  Mi.ty  arrive  at
Mmn*lhln)[  Itke  verlAinty  fhmt  tbe  fart  thai  Cimv
lilft  Anndi:t(iii«  nieiiltou»  it  kh  M>nielbiDi[  extraor-
dinarY  that  .Iwlrjdadrs  ut  Komc  in  tbe  tir*t  i>eu-
tury  ftr.  «uitelimi»<  ttnleiMl  his  patients  to  lionble
and  treble  ibe  (inantlty  of  wine,  (ill  at  laat  UWjJt
4r»nk  half  wine  and  half  nnter  (  /v  Vtri.  Chrmt.
il,  •.!.,  ^W*.  Fri»ni  thiw  il  api«rari  that  >«iiH>wa»
nuiimoitly  dl1nte>l  with  Ave  or  ktN.  ttmea  ita  <|uail-
tUy  of  «i%ier,  ni(*roer»ie'.  al-o  iu  i>artimlar  NMW
rrT*<mmend9  wine  l»  he  nuiLMl  with  MivqwU  ^IM»>
Illy  of  water,  and  Oab'M  appiovw  nf  tlia  |k|«fp«r-
lino. ArconUnp  to  HippocnlM.  tb»  pTOfMiniQtMi


ill  which  wino  ami  water  nlntnld  br  mivl  Ingrth-
er  vary  acconling  (o  Ihu  st-aaon  of  tbe  jriir;  Tt
inHtaiicf,  hi  anmmor  the  whie  should  he  m<u[  ili-
luted,  in  winter  tbe  Ien»t  ho.  In  otti*  place  ibt
palient  »ft>>r  jiruat  lAtigne  is  reAommendtil  to  ti't
hininelf  dniuk  oiu'e  or  twiC'O,  in  wbirll  puiMi};"  it
brui  bueii  dotihti'd  wbotbcr  actnal  inroxiralion  is
nuianli  or  only  the  "drinkiiiE  fivi?ly  and  to  cliew-
fiiliH'w,"  in  wliitdi  wnw  the  name  word  id  hkc-iI  Iiy
9t.  .lidni  (ii.  10}  and  the  Septna^int  itjen.  xliii.3l;
Cant.  V.  1 ;  .-iod  imr)iH|H  Gun.  ix.  31).

ExerciseK  of  \arinit»«  kiudft  niid  bathing  are  aWi
utiicb  iiiMifltcd  on  by  tlio  writers  ou  di«t  and  ttp-
iiivn,  but  tor  further  iwrticnlars  oq  these  mibjccU
t  be  uriiclea  BaL-NKAK  and  OVMNAiJiUM  roni^t  ttr  ton-
siilteil.  It  may,  however,  be  addeil  that  tb^-halk
conbl  not  hare  been  very  common,  at  toa5t  iu  pn-
rate  fttinrlles,  in  the  time  of  llippormtoe,  m  lis
nays  that  "  there  are  few  bonseo  in  which  ibo  ntv*
ivuuiry  ronveiiienres  are  to  he  found"  (lie  Bat.ViA
ill  ^forb.  Ariit.  $  Iri).

AiintliHr  very  favourite  ]iraetir4>  with  itf  m*
cieidM,  both  an  a  prevenrive  of  rficklie<is  nciil  n*  *
n-OK-dy,  waH  the  taking  of  an  emelic  fnmi  liirt'  1"
time.  In  one  of  Ihe  trealiiWN  of  the  Hi|ipix-r»IJi!
collection  the  niiknonn  author  |-cconni)cn<l»  it
iwo  i>r  Ibrt^  liuu'K  »  mouth.  CVlsiis  conHittri*  It
more  bouoHcial  in  tbe  winter  than  iu  the  «niriiier
[Ih  Mrdic.  i.  :i,  p.  2^1.  and  days  that  tlioj*  wli.'  take
an  emetic  twieo  a  month  bad  better  do  (ui  mi  (vo
sneees^iivo  days  than  oueo  a  fortnight.  In  llv  fir^
eentiiry  B  c.  this  pracdce  was  so  comnmnly  i'li*""'!
thnt  iVscIepiailes  rejected  tbe  nsc  of  etuelin  alt^
frether. See  Plin.  i/.  .V.  xxvi.  $  17.

It  was  the  cnstoin  nmnnj:  the  Romans  to  lohf
an  emerir  immediately  lK>fnn>  their  mrsK  i"  ^
der  to  prepare  themselves  1o  eat  more  pleiitiMlfi;
and  a^rain  ttoon  after,  so  ah  to  avoid  nay  iiijotT
from  lepletitM).  CitN^m,  iu  h\n  acronut  nntiPitiT
that  CaeAar  siH-nt  with  him  at  his  hoiino  In  tb*
country  {.id  Jit.  xiii.  5Ul,  says,  *■  Aecubnil.  V"
tc^r  nKehnt  (Ae  ipas  mrditalimg  «n  ^Mr(t>i.  lliU|iM't
eilit  et  bibit  d9(tff  et  iucnnile";  aud  this  has  I'f
some  pcntons  ht«n  omsiderert  a  swrt  of  ew»p*l"
meat  paid  by  (.'aesnr  to  hi«  hi>st.  u  it  intivatvl*
resolulinn  to  |ki«s  Tbe  day  cheerfully  and  to  *•'
and  drink  fn-rly.  He  is  represented  rw  U^'W
done  the  same  thing  when  he  was  entertaiwl  l"?
Kingl>eiotam«lCie.  pro  I>eiol.7.  f  91).  Tlwgl"*'
ton  Vilellini*  is  said  to  have  pretwrved  lii«  »*"
life  by  i-oOAtaot  emetica,  while  he  de«tToy«I  ■"
liis  cumpniiions  who  did  tiol  osr  the  some  ihtw*"'
lion  :  S4>  thai  one  of  theai.  who  was  prevmlnl  <'y
illneM  from  dining  with  him  for  n  few  daft. ''**■
"  I  nhonld  certainly  hare  been  deai!  if  I  tioA  n"*
fallen  sick"  >I»io  Cass.  Ixv.  •»].  It  might  irid>  I*
said,  in  the  strong  tangna^  of  Seneca,  l'omm»t,  '•
f^lamt  ;  rdmml,  mt  rvmumt  iConii  od  Hctr.  0,  4  10;  "-
Dt  Pnrid.  3,  f  11:  £iK9G.  4  31).  By  *.»".«»*
praciM«  was  thought  mt  cflW-tnnl  for  stietii:theD)')K
llie  eim»iittntioi)  that  it  was  tbe  constant  rritini^''
of  all  thr  mlhlrtof.  or  pmfemed  wirstlerK,  Inil'i'*'
fcr  tlw  pnblie  allows,  in  onler  to  make  tlo-m  mv^
rablHfk.  €MM«.bowever.  warns  his  nra4lep>:ifl;s)»''
lb«  too  fr«qit#i>t  use  ofemelieM  withont  Di-eMsi'^
aud  Merely  for  luxury  aud  ;:IiittooT.  and  sathU**'
■•  MM  who  baa  any  regard  for  bis  heattb  i^
wislwv  to  live  to  ohi  age  onght  tt>  mnk«  it  a  <Uil5
rtwtkw.  S«#  SAalTeU.  Kmkr  nHtf  Ktllrr  Is  JO*
Rmt  (Bvrlia.  lEVQt;  and  tbe  arriclca  ATUUtTU!
Ckva:  Mmtcuta,;  Ticrrs;  Vixch.


DIAGORAS


501


DIALECTS


Diac&vs  (Atoydpar).  (1)  A  native  of  the  islaDd
of  Meloa  and  a  follower  of  Detnoci-ittts.  Haviu);
l)eeu  sold  as  a  captive  in  his  yotitb,  be  waa  ve-
deemed  by  IJemocritns  and  trained  up  iu  the  stndy
of  pliilosopby.  He  attached  himself  also  to  lyric
poetry  and  waa  mncU  dtBtingnished  fur  bis  suc-
cess. His  name,  however,  has  been  transmitted
to  posterity  as  that  of  an  avowed  advocate  for  the
rejection  of  all  reli^pons  belief.  It  is  expressly
asserted  by  ancient  writers  that  when,  in  a  par-
ticular instance,  lie  saw  a  i>erjured  person  escape
poiiishmeDt,  he  publicly  declared  his  disbelief  of
Divine  Providence,  and  from  that  time  spoke  of
the  gfids  aud  all  religions  ceremonies  with  ridicule
and  contempt.  He  even  attempted  to  lay  open  the
saored  Mysteries,  writing  two  books  on  the  snbjeet,
called  tpvyuH.  Apriceatlastwasset  upon  his  bead,
and  he  fled  to  Corinth,  where  he  died.  He  lived
Abont  416  years  before  Christ  (Cic.  N.  Z>.  i.  33 ;  iii.
37;  Vat.  Max.  i.  1,  $  7).  (2)  An  athlete  of  Bhodes,
who  gainefl  the  prize  iu  pugiligni  at  the  Olympic
Games,  B.C.  464.  His  victory  was  celebrated  by  Pin-
dar iu  an  ode  which  is  still  extant  (Olymp.  vii.),
and  which  is  said  to  have  been  inscribed  in  golden
letters  in  the  temple  of  the  Lindian  Atben6  at
Rhodes.  According  to  Pindar,  be  twice  obtained
the  victory  iu  the  games  of  Rhodes,  four  times  at
the  Isthmian,  and  was  succeasfnl  also  at  the  Ne-
mean  and  otlier  contests.  Aulus  GelHns  (iii,  15)
iufunuB  ns  that  he  saw  his  three  sons  crowned  on
the  same  day  at  the  Olympic  Games  and  expired
through  joy.

Diagrftpbeis  (6taypa(f>fls). Seu  ElSPHORA.

DialectB,  A  dialect,  in  the  usual  acceptance  of
the  word,  is  a  form  of  speech  used  by  a  limited
number  of  people,  or  within  a  limited  region,  and
differinfT  frum  the  language  of  the  main  branch  of
the  race  by  reason  of  local  nsnges  dne  to  separation
and  special  conditions.  The  term  also  denotes  any
of  the  divisions  of  a  linguistic  family.  It  some-
times happens  that  those  who  nse  a  particular  dia-
lect of  a  language  come  to  be  politically  the  most
powerful  branch,  with  greater  wealth,  refinement,
aud  literary  cultivatiou.  Their  dialect  thou  nlti-
nintely  becomes  the  standard  form  of  the  language,
while  the  other  variations  of  it  sink  to  a  subordi-
nate position,  and  are  then  spoken  of  as  dialectfi,
and  the  first,  which  was  originally  of  no  more
authority,  is  accepted  as  the  normal  form  of  speech.
Tbns,  Latin  became  the  groat  standard  language
nf  Italy,  while  its  sister  languages,  Umbrian  and
Owan,  sank  to  the  position  of  dialects.  Tbns,  too,
ill  England,  the  so-called  Middle  Guglish,  being
spoken  iu  that  part  of  the  country  where  the  two
great  nniversities  were  situated,  and  being  used
by  the  early  writers  of  the  country,  gradnally  be-
came the  tongue  of  the  educated  all  over  England
and  the  literary  form  of  speech,  while  the  Kortbern
English  aud  the  Sonthern  English  ceased  to  be
'lieard  except  iu  the  mouths  of  the  nnedncated.  In
Greek,  the  finest  productions  of  literature  were,
on  the  whole,  those  of  the  Ionic  Greeks,  so  that
|a  form  of  the  Ionic  dialect  (Attio)  became  the
.standard  with  which  all  others  were  compared,
though  the  Doric  and  Aeolic,  being  used  by  many
ifaniouB  writers,  never  became,  like  Lowland  Scotch
or  the  Snaxex  speech  in  England,  discredited  and
vulgar.  Dialectic  differences  when  peri>etuat«U
and  intensified  by  contiuned  separation  and  lack
of  intercourse  between  the  peoples  who  nse  them


at  last  develop  into  different  languages.  See  Ikdo-
European  Lanouagks.

I.  Gkekk  Dialkcts.— The  three  main  divisions  of
the  dialects  of  Greece  are  usually  said  to  bo  the  Aeo-
lic, Ionic,  and  Doric.  The  exact  lines  of  division
are,  however,  obscure,  for  one  dialect  often  borrows
from  another  when  spoken  by  contiguous  peoples.
It  must  be  remembered,  also,  that  the  racial  divi-
sions of  the  Greeks  do  not  always  coincide  with
the  dialectic  divisions;  that  there  were  hundreds
of  minor  dialects  of  which  no  account  can  be  tak-
en here ;  and  that  these  dialects  shaded  off  one
into  the  other  by  almost  imperceptible  gradations.
Scholars  differ  most  as  to  what  dialects  are  to  be
called  Aeolic,  some  I'estricting  the  name  to  the
Lesbian  and  Asiatic.  Brugmann  classes  Northwest
Greek  (of  Phocis,  Locris,  Aetnlia,  Acarnania,  Phthi-
otis,  aud  Epirus),  Elean,  Arcadian -Cyprian,  and
Pampby]ianasseparatediulect8(Comj>.&Vani.i.p.6).

A.  Aeouc. — The  Aeolic  dialect  was  spoken  in
Macedonia,  North  Thessaly,  Boeotia,  Arcadia  (T),
Elis,  Cyprus,  aud  the  northern  part  of  Asiatic  Hel-
las. Our  knowledge  of  the  Z«8fri(>-^eofic  comes  part-
ly from  inscriptions  aud  partly  from  the  fragments
of  Alcaens  and  Sappho  quoted  by  tbo  grammarians
and  others,  and  from  the  statements  of  the  grani-
nmrians  themselves.  Three  of  its  inscriptions  are
of  great  importance — one  found  at  Mityleu^  re-
cording the  return  of  certain  exiles  in  the  time  of
Alexander  the  Great  (C.  /.  G.  2166),  one  found  at
Pordoselena  (C.  /.  G.  2166  c),  and  a  third  found  at
Eresus  (edited  by  Couze  and  Sauppe).  The  chief
peculiarities  of  the  Aeolic  dialect  ai-e  (1)  a  stroug
tendency  to  barytone  pronunciation  (e.g.  cro^r,
ffvfios,  *A;^tXXf  vf ,  for  (ro(f>6s,  0vfx6s,  *A;i[iXXf  uc) ;  (2)  the
retention  of  thedigamma(q.  v.);  (3)  the  loss  of  the
dual ;  a  second  singular  ending  -trOa  in  verbs  (e.  g.
txtia-da)^  (4)  a  third  plural  ending  in -to-i;  (5)  f  ap-
pears B8  o-d;  (6)  the  absence  of  the  rough  breath-
ing. Its  geueral  character  was  ligbtuess  and
rapidity  of  utterance;  the  Aeolic  jioetH  abound  in
anapaests  aud  dactyls.  The  Athenians  regaitled
the  Lesbian  language  as  somewhat  barbaric  (Plat.
Ptotag.  341  C).  The  Thesaalian  ■  Aeolic,  which  is
known  to  ns  by  a  few  inscriptions  only,  is  a  sort  of
bridge  between  the  Lesbinu  aud  the  Boeotian  (Cul-
litz),  doubling  the  liquids,  changingo  to  o,  and  using
nn  infinitive  iu  -fttv.  The  Boeotian- Aeolic  is  known
from  inscriptions  and  from  the  fragments  of  Co-
rinna,  though  in  these  it  is  mixed  with  Ionic  forms,
as  is  also  true  of  the  Boeotian  passages  in  the
Acharnian*  of  Aristophanes.  The  Boeotian- Aeolic
differed  from  the  Lesbian  chiefly  in  the  following
particulars:  (1)  In  not  throwing  back  the  accent;
(2)  in  a  fondness  for  aspiration ;  (3)  in  retaining  r
or  S  where  the  Lesbian  changes  it  to  o- ;  (4)  in  using
di  for  tri^C',  (5)  in  allowing  the  nncontracted
-ao  and  -awv  to  stand  ;  (6)  iu  using  snch  genitives
as  tfiovs,  Ttovt,  for  which  the  Lesbian  has  tfu$fv,
a-i&tv,  (See  Beermau  in  Curtins's  Studiai,  ix.  p.  85.)
The  Elean-Aeolio  is  known  from  several  inscrip-
tions, such  as  the  bronze  plnte  found  at  Olyinpiu
by  Gell  (C.  /.  G.  11)  and  the  inscription  of  Danio-
crates  (Kirchboff  in  the  Archaeol.  Zeit.  i&iG).  The
ArcadUtn-AcoUc  is  nearer  tfl  the  Doric  than  to  the
Lesbian  in  its  forms.  It  has  -av  for  the  gen.  sing.
masc.  of  a-nouns,  -oi  ns  a  dative  (or  locative)  sing,
of  o-nouns,  i»  for  cir  aud  f'v,  and  -rot  as  a  third  sing,
middle  ending  (e.  g.  ytvrfTot).  (See  Schrader  iu
Curtius's  Studien,  x.  pp.  273-280.)  The  Cypiian  dia-
lect  is  probably  at  the  bottom  Arcadian- Aeolic


DIALECTS


fiOS


DIALECTS


(Herod,  vii.  90 ;  Pansan.  viii.  5, 2) — a  theory  strength-
ened by  the  study  of  the  Cypriote  itiscriptions  by
Birch,  Deecke,  Siegisiiiond,  Hall,  Voigt,  and  others.
See  Cypkus.

B.  Doric. — The  Doric  dialect  was  naed  in  Doris,
ArgoB,  Lacouia,  Messeuia,  Crete,  Sicily,  Lower  Italy
(Magna  Graecia),  and  the  southern  part  of  Asiatic
Hellas.  Ahrens  recognizes  two  tyi»es — the  sererer
Doric  (spoken  in  Lacouia,  Crete,  Cyren^,  and  Mag-
na Qraecia);  and  the  milder  Doric,  influenced  by
Aeolic  or  Ionic  usage  [spoken  in  Argolis,  Messenia,
Megara,  northern  Greece,  Asia  Minor,  and  Sicily).
It  was  used  by  the  bucolic  poets  (Theocritus,  Biou,
Aloschns),  and  by  Pindar,  Alcmau,  and  others.  Its
principal  features  are  (I)  a  tendency  to  ase  a  for  i;
and  for  a>;  (2)  the  nse  of  -fteg  (for  -fuv)  as  a  first
plural  verbal  ending ;  (3)  the  nse  of  -in-i  aa  a  third
plural  ending;  (4)  a  strong  tendency  to  oxytones
(e.  g.  tKiyaVy  a.v6pwF0i,  irailits,  for  tKryov,  3»6p«airoi,
irald(s);  (5)  the  use  of  the  digamma,  which  it  re-
tained, longer  than  did  any  other  Greek  dialect;
(6)  peculiarities  of  contraction,  snch  as  i;  for  rt,  a
for  ov  (Jjt  for  tU,  ^fuy  for  fa-fttv);  C?)  the  shorten-
ing of  long  fluid  syllables,  usually  when  the  length
is  due  to  a  compensation  for  the  loss  of  a  consonant
(e.  g.  irdr  for  v6d'S,  Xryer  for  Xryctr,  tIktiv  for  ri-
KTtiiff  etc.) ;  (8)  a  free  use  of  assimilation.  There
are  many  important  inscriptions  in  Doric  Greek.
Chief  among  them  are  the  famous  Tables  of  Hera-
olea,  found  in  the  bed  of  the  rirer  Cavone  in  1732
and  1735,  and  now  partly  in  the  Museo  Nazionale
at  Naples  and  partly  in  the  British  Mnsenm.  An-
other (in  the  Metaenian- Doric)  was  found  at  An-
dania,  and  though  of  late  date  (b.c.  95 1)  is  valuable
for  its  fulness  and  for  some  of  the  forms  it  exhib-
its. The  Megarian-Dorio  is  known  from  inscrip-
tions at  Byzantium;  the  Corinthian  from  inscrip-
tions of  Corcyra  and  Syracuse,  both  colonies  of
Corinth ;  the  Locrian  from  the  bronze  tablet  fonnd
at  Oeanthia,  and  datiug  from  the  fourth  century
D.C. ;  the  Cretan  from  treaty-tablets  and  others
found  in  Crete  (see  Gortyn)  and  among  the  ruins
of  the  Temple  of  Dionysus  on  the  island  of  Teoe.
The  general  character  of  the  Doric  speech  was
slowness,  deliberation,  and  fulness  of  sound,  with
the  irXartiaa-fios  which  the  Dorians  shared  with  the
Boeotians.

C.  Ionic. — The  character  of  the  Ionic  dialect,  in
its  several  subdivisions,  gives  striking  evidence  of
its  long-continued  employment  in  literature.  Its
smoothness  and  harmony,  its  rich  and  full  vowel-
eystem,  its  variety  and  plasticity,  all  mark  it  out
aa  eminently  fitted  for  noble  and  expressive  utter-
ance in  both  prose  and  verse.  It  was  used  by  the
Greeks  of  Attica  and  Ionia  and  in  most  of  the  isl-
ands of  the  Aegean  Sea.  Under  this  head  we  may
consider  (1)  the  Old  Ionic  (Epic),  (2)  the  New  Ionic,
(3)  the  Attic,  and  (4)  the  Common  Dialect  (New  At-
tic).

The  Old  I»aic  or  Epic  dialect  is  the  Ionic  of  the
poems  of  Homer.  Strictly  speaking  it  was  not  a
genuine,  popular  form  of  speech  in  common  use,
but  a  mixed  dialect,  developed  by  the  poets  for
artistic  purposes.  Its  base  is  doubtless  the  spok-
en language  of  the  district  in  which  the  Iliad  and
Odifatey  were  composed  ;  but  interwoven  with  this
are  forms  and  usages  partly  borrowed  from  other
dialectic  sources  and  partly  modified  by  poetic  li-
cense. Thus  there  is  a  strong  Aeolic  element  in
Homer,  dne  perhaps  in  part  to  the  Aeolic  affinities
of  the  lonians  of  Smyrna,  but  cherished  also  be-


cause of  the  exigencies  of  the  dactylic  hexameter.
Every  page  of  the  Homeric  poetry  shows  a  {m^dI-
iar  multiplicity  of  forms  of  the  same  word.  Thus
we  find  mrov  and  ismHo,  ftdxjjt  and  fidxsvi,  twtv
<rt  and  tvtvt,  ifpmu  and  fipattrn:  in  the  proDoaot
e/iou,  €fuv,  iftt6tv,  and  ifieto,  Sfifus,  and  rffitie.  The
augment  is  used  or  disused  at  pleasure,  forms  are
contracted  or  not,  diphthongs  are  shortened  before
succeeding  vowels,  the  metrical  value  of  vowela
varies,  both  hiatus  and  elision  are  freely  used — is
a  word,  the  widest  license  prevails  and  stamps  ibe
dialect  as  one  established  for  the  convenience  of
poets  and  not  for  the  ooramon  use  of  men.  **  The
polish  of  the  style,  the  artistic  perfection  of  the
composition,  and  the  elaborate  natore  of  tlie  syn-
tax point  back  to  a  long  series  of  years  of  devel-
opment, during  which  poets  and  schools  of  poets
composed  and  passed  on  by  oral  trailitiou  many
lays  .  .  .  which  in  course  of  time  grew  into  more
complete  epic  poems.  Forms  of  speech  had  not
theu  been  fixed  by  the  general  use  of  writing ;  the
poet  willingly  adopted  any  of  the  floating  (onoi
in  common  use  around  him,  or  caught  and  pre-
served for  his  purpose  those  older  forms  b«-
qneathed  by  past  generations:  so  that  in  this
way  we  have  an  explanation  of  the  remarkable
&ct  that  in  Homeric  Greek  there  are  forms  in  om
of  such  different  ages — archaisms,  as  we  might
say,  by  the  side  of  modernisms"  (Merry).  Some
of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Epic  language,  how-
ever, which  were  at  one  time  ascribed  to  the  li-
cense of  the  poet,  are  now  properly  recognized  a»
the  usage  of  the  oldest  Greek.  The  most  inter-
esting of  these  is  the  effiect  produced  by  the  ear-
lier existence  of  a  spirant,  no  longer  written,
upon  the  quantity  of  a  preceding  syllable.  This
lost  letter  is  sometimes  j  and  sometimes  <r — e.  g.
$«6t  Cy)a>r,  tts  SKa  {<r)a\To,  ?ri  y&p  (a')<;i[a)'.  Tlie
same  is  true  of  the  digamma,  to  which,  indeed,
as  late  as  the  time  of  I.  Bekker  all  snch  cases  were
ascribed.  Real  examples  of  the  influence  of  the
digamma  in  making  position  or  in  preventing  eli-
sion are  <fti\a  Ftiftara  liv<rt»,  ovm  di)  fouctoflk,  iirttn
fdva$. See  Diqamma.

This  complex  and  conventional  dialect  fonnded
upon  an  Ionic  base  was  disseminated  thmngbont
all  Greece  by  the  rhapsodes,  or  public  reciters,  vho
chanted  the  epics  at  the  great  public  assemblies
and  festivals.  Its  forms  and  expressions  colour
the  compositions  of  authors  of  very  different  mp*
and  various  styles.  It  forms  the  basis  of  tbe  ly-
ric langnage  of  Stesichoms  and  Pindar ;  it  per-
vades the  prose  of  Herodotus ;  and  it  tinges  tlie
style  of  the  early  Attic  dramatuts  with  a  distinct-
ly epic  hue. See  Epob.

The  Xcw  Tonic  dialect  is  found  in  tbe  writinjri
of  the  iambic  elegiac  poets  Archilochns,  Callinait.
and  Mimnermus,  and  in  the  prose  of  Herodotns  and
Hippocrates.  This  dialect  has  the  following  dis-
tinctive pecnliarities :  (1)  the  retention  oftbeear^
lier  K  for  ir  in  interrogative  and  relative  words  le.
g.  KoTof,  ^Koo-or);  (2)  the  interchange  of  «t  anil  m
with  the  simple  vowels  (e.  g.  tipofuu,  ^tror.  bat
fu^av,  dc'£«> ;  and  fttnhmvt  oBtnfta,  etc.) ;  (3)  tbe  con-
traction of  oTf  into  «  (e.  g.  fiacrai,  itnrmtras) ;  (4)  tbf
use  of  Tji  for  ti  (e.  g.  fiairiXtfu)) ;  (5)  crasis  (e.  g.  wr^f.
2)XXot) ;  {6)  the  disnse  of  tbe  appended  v ;  (7)  tbe
nse  of  -arat,  -aro  for  -imu,  ~vto  whenever  these  are
added  directly  to  the  tense-stem  (e.  g,  mrUeam.  n-
Biarai) ;  (B)  the  genitive  plural  in  -«»v  for  the  Ho-
meric -ativ  and  Attio  •»¥.


DIALECTS


SOS


DIALOGUS


The  Jitic  dialect  is  probably  a  modification  of
tbe  Iodic  (ipokeu  before  the  fouiidiug  of  the  Ionic
colonies.  It  ia  to  the  studoDt  of  literature  tbe
moat  important  of  all  the  fornm  of  Greek,  since  it
was  osed  by  Thucydides,  Aeschylus,  Xenopbon,
Plato,  Sophocles,  Euripides,  Aristophanes,  Lysias,
Isocrates,  Demosthenes,  Aeschines,  and  many  oth-
ers of  geuiuB  scarcely  inferior  to  them.  Attic  oc-
CQpies  a  middle  ground  between  the  harsher  Doric
and  the  softer  Ionic,  and  was  thus  fitted  to  be
the  coromoD  speech  of  all  cultivated  Greeks,  and
is  now  used  as  the  standard  of  comparison  in  the
study  of  the  Hellenic  tongue.  Literary  Attic  is
divided  into  Old  and  New,  the  point  of  division
being  approximately  the  beginning  of  the  Pelo-
ponnesian  War  (B.C.  431).  The  differences  between
the  Old  and  the  New  are  slight,  and  seem  to  point
to  a  gradual  adoption  in  literature  of  popular  forms.
Tbe  Old  Ionic  is  seen  in  Thucydides  and  the  tra-
gedians ;  both  the  Old  and  the  New  are  noticeable
in  Plato;  while  tbe  comic  -writers  and  tbe  orators
show  the  nsages  of  the  New.  It  is  in  the  New  At-
tic that  the  Greek  language  reached  the  zenith  of
its  grace,  expressiveness,  and  symmetry,  combining
at  once  the  trtftvonjs  of  the  Doric  with  the  x^P'^
of  the  Ionic  speech.

The  general  utie  of  the  Attic  gradually  led  to  its
corruption,  so  that  we  find  a  modified  form  of  it
developed  by  the  time  of  Alexander,  which  is
known  as  the  Common  dialect  (7  koii^  iiaKfieros).
It  was  used  by  the  Greek  writers  of  later  times,  such
as  Aristotle,  Polybias,  Plutarch,  Pansanias,  Babri-
ns,  and  Lncian — writers,  however,  who  exhibit
very  difierent  degrees  of  divergence  from  the  At-
tic standard  of  parity.

The  rise  of  the  Alexandrian  School  (q.  v.)  of  critics
and  grammarians  did  much  to  check  the  tendency
toliugnistio  corruption  in  literature;  but  the  pop-
ular speech,  continually  receiving  additions  from
foreign  sources  and  especially  from  the  East,  ulti-
mately developed  into  a  distinct  idiom  which  is
known  as  Bellenisttc  Greek,  and  which  is  the  basis
of  tbe  diction  of  the  New  Testament  and  also
of  the  Septuagint.  The  variations  from  earlier
standards  exhibited  in  this  form  of  speech  are
rather  to  be  seen  in  the  vooabnlary  than  in  the
syntax ;  but  the  following  come  under  the  latter
head :  (1)  a  confusion  in  the  nse  of  moods  (e.  g.  mi
with  the  present  indicative,  Srav  with  the  past  in-
dicative) ;  (2)  a  oonstrnctlon  of  cases  unknown  in
Attic  (e.  g.  yrveirdm  with  the  accusative,  n-pocr^vfii'
with  tbe  dative);  (3)  a  gradnal  disuse  of  tbe  opta-
tive mood,  for  which  tbe  subjunctive  is  substi-
tuted.

The  cormption  of  the  spoken  language  went  on
continuonsly,  moeh  as  in  tbe  case  of  the  Latin.
For  centuries  literature  still  struggled  to  preserve
tbe  nsages  of  Attic  or  at  least  of  the  Koivfi  6taKtK-
ros,  but  at  last  this  attempt  ended,  and  the  popn-
lar  speeeb  became  also  the  language  of  literature,
bfing  first  so  used  by  Theodnrus  Ptochopmdro-
mns,  a  monk  of  Constantinople,  abont  A.D.  IIGO.
From  this  date  begins  the  history  of  modern
Greek.

BreuoGRAPHr. — ^The  first  scientific  treatment  of
the  Greek  dialects  is  found  in  tbe  work  of  Ahrens,
i>  Graeoae  Linguae  IHaUctia,2  vols.  (Berlin,  1839-
1943).  Many  of  his  views  require  mo<lification,
however,  owing  to  more  recent  investigations.
Much  valuable  material  will  be  found  in  Cnrtins's
Studien  tur  griechiKhen  und  lat^nttchen  Gramma-


tik,  10  vols.  (Leipzig,  1666-78);  and  Merxdorfs
Sprackwissenach.  Jbhandl.  (Leipzig,  1874).  For  the
Homeric  dialect  see  La  Roche'i*  edition  of  the
Iliad  (Berlin,  1670);  D.  B.  Monro's  Grammar  of  the
ffomeric  Dialect  (Oxford,  1882);  and  Seymour's  In-
troduction to  the  Homeric  Language  (Boston,  1885).
Examples  are  given  by  Cauer  in  his  Delectua  (Leip-
zig, 1883) ;  Meister,  Die  grieehiachen  Diald^  (Gott.
18^-89);  and  by  Hoffmann,  Die  grieehisckeu  Dia-
lekte  (Gott.  1891).  See  also  Botsacq,  Lea  Dialecte*
Dorien$  (Paris,  1891);  and  Smyth,  Gi-eek  Dialecta,
part  i.  Ionic  (Oxford,  1894).  For  Hellenistic  and  vul-
gar Greek  see  Winer's  Grammar,  part  ii.  pp.  69-128,
ed.  Moulton ;  MuUach,  Grammatik  der  griechiacken
Fulgaraprache  {Berlin,  185G};  and  Sophocles,  Glot-
aari/  of  Later  and  Bjfzantine  Greek  (Boston,  1870).

II.  Itauak  D1ALKCT8.— -The  dialects  spoken  in
Italy  in  ancient  times  and  surely  traceable  to  an
Aryan  stock  may  be  roughly  divided  into  two
main  groups — the  Umbro-Sabellian  and  the  Latin-
Faliscau.  Their  general  relations  and  divisions
are  indicated  in  the  diagram  given  under  Itaua,
p.  692.  Of  the  Umbro-Sabellian  group,  the  princi-
pal dialects  are  the  Umbrian  and  the  Oscan.  See
Osci;  Uhbria.

The  Latin  and  the  Faliscau  are  so  closely  allied
that  tbe  Faliscan  may  be  roughly  regarded  as  only
a  rustio  variation  of  the  Latin.  It  was  nsed  by
tbe  people  of  Falerii,  a  city  situated  within  Etrn-
rian  territory,  and  probably  one  of  the  twelve  con-
federated cities  of  tbe  Etmscan  League.  That  the
lauguage  of  the  Faliaci  was  not  Etrnscau  or  cog-
nate with  Etruscan  was  noticed  by  the  ancients
(e.  g.  Strabo,  t.  p.  266 ;  Dionys.  Hal.  i.  21 ;  Cato  ap.
Pliny,  H.  N.  iii.  5,  $  1),  and  inscriptions  found  in
the  present  century  have  confirmed  its  close  affin-
ity with  Old  Latin.  Thus  the  Falisci  used  the
Latin  R  instead  of  the  Etruscan  and  Umhro-Sabel-
lian  character  q,  and  possessed  also  tbe  Old  Latin  Z.
Tbe  principal  phonetic  peculiarity  distinguishing
tbe  Faliscan  from  the  Latin  is  the  representation
of  an  original  bh  medial  by/,  as  in  lofertaa  for  Uber-
tM.  See  Deecke,  Die  Faliaker  (Strassburg,  188r>);
and  Conway's  Italic  Dialects  (annonnced  in  1894).

Latin  was  originally  spoken  only  in  tbe  plain
of  Latium  (q.  v.),  and  seems  not  to  have  developed
any  subordinate  dialects.  For  its  colloquial  and
rustio  forms  and  usages,  see  Sermo  Plrbbius.  The
beat  grammars  of  the  lauguage  are  those  of  Koby
(2  vols.,  Oxford,  1881);  KHhner,  JuafUhrliche
Grammatik  (2  vols.  Hanover,  1877-78);  Stolz  and
Schmalz  in  Iwan  Milller's  Handbuch  da-  klaaaiachen
Alterthumatciaaenackaft,  vol.  ii.  (Nonllingen,  1885);
and  Gilderaleeve,  revised  by  Lodge  (N.  T.  1894).

Besides  the  Latin^Faliscan  and  the  Unibro-Sa-
beliian,  Greek  was  spoken  in  the  Greek  cities  of
Bonthern  Italy  (Magna  Graecin),  Keltic  by  the  Gaul-
ish peoples  in  the  north,  Etrnscan  by  the  inhabi-
tants of  Etrurla,  and  at  one  time  in  Campania  and
tbe  plain  of  tbe  Eridanus  (Po);  while  at  an  early
period,  in  tbe  extreme  southeast,  inscriptions  show
tbe  existence  of  a  language  whose  affinities  have
not  yet  been  wholly  determined,  but  which  is  nsu-
ally  styled  Messapian  or  lapygian,  and  regarded
as  coguate  with  the  language  of  the  Vencti  in  the
northeast  of  Italy.  For  these  dialects,  see  the
articles  Cbltak  ;  Etruria;  Mrssapia;  Veneti.

Diilla  Flamen. See  Flames.

Dialfigua  (fiidXoyor).  A  dialogue.  As  a  form
of  literary  composition,  apart  from  its  purely  dro-


ntlllic  ilni>,  till*  i1iiiln(;iti<  |»1aye  ni)  itii|>ortnttt  {■»''(  i"
tli*»  liislory  of  (Jnrck  iiinl  Romiiii  icttriw.  The  viv-
t<ltK-iM  luiil  )>iin);;i'ncy  of  rnpiil  qiioHtiiin  ttiiil  tt>.]i\y
n<'rf  fully  «iipri*<':t«tpil  )iy  clio(>.irlit>«t  writers.  Tlir'
Ilriiticrin  |i<M«niH  abiinnil  tii  pnwuigi-it  niioHr  gn-iil
ilritiimtie  fiirct!  is  i\iw  W  tlic  iim>  uf  tliiH  f4>rtii.
HfrodiitiiB  contiiiiinlly  iMiipluyfi  it  to  givn  pxcdi-
rt;!!t(|iieiii'iMtittd  life*  lo  littt  tiarnitive:  mid  tbiBi(ttt'ii(>
"Vpii  of  Tlniry<li(U'8,  iu  wliow  history  UK-  sn-cnllod
Mi'linii  ilialo^iio  at  ltii>  c\imv  of  tLe  fifth  bciok,  tlie
(Iiwl"KiU'  nf  Arcliirlamns  with  tin-  Plutat'UUB  (ii.
*  1-74),  ami  »f  tli»'  Aintinicioi  IhpniM  iirHl  the  Acar-
natiirtii  tti>I<linnj  of  nffnitiotlKjuet)  {iii,  113)  jire  Btrik-
iti;;  t-xHiiiplrH.  Tlw  nn-iit  iKiimhinlv  oC  thv  (IrHiiiu
liiiiMt  liiivi-  Ij(^>ii  il  tUrt'ct  hIiiiiuIiih  t<»  the  iiau  of
the  ilinlogiie  hi  (^rtiMt^  litt^rntiiit- ;  »o  that  it  is  not
Kiirpri^inff  (n  find  Pinto  fin|iluyirig  it  in  hi**  |ihitu>
»'i]ihicnl  wrilin;j».  thii»t  folhiwitiji  th*"  t-xaiiipJe  of
Aluxiitiiuiiim  of 'IVtcs  fiiiil  Xeiio  of  E\va  (cf  Muhiifly,
//m/.  o/  CtaM-  iik.  Lit.  ii.  pp.  17)»-174  ).  In  this
way  the  philonnphicil  ar^iiiient  is  workftl  ont  fii
Ii  moat  iittnicltve  f(>mi,t.hi.*  nttnck  nitil  tl«ffiico  (^x•
cilo  n  livt'ly  iiitcrt-Ht,  iiiitl  thr  nrndt-r  iH  artfully
made  lu  uccwpt  th»  iriiLh  of  (lit*  (li>ctritii«  by  wit-
DeMing,  lis  it  Were,  tlH?  ullor  ovurtliruw  of  ilA  an-
MtttaitUL  Tltei^/WtNia.  orclinrootor-paiiitiug,  ofthc
diahiifiU's  of  i'lftto  bjis  never  liwri  ttnrpiwwd.evon
l»y  tho  grwiftwt  dr«Minti«W.  Tho  enl)tl«i»t  tonche*
lire  Iktu  jjivunwith  wdmh-rfiil  d^ftiiC66,and  a  whole
)L!.illi-ry  of  portntita  i"  prfni-iitfd  to  ni»  aj»  varifd,  u
lU'liciiIi'Iy  drawn,  and  :u»  lifi'-liku  am  tho>t<^  of  Ell-
ripidt'jt.  of  MtiliPiv.or  of  Slmk»]K'Jirt^.  In  Mtum  of
tliriti,  hovM-W'iT  (u.  g.  the  PuiTHeniiiifi,  frulaijoraa,
and  Sifmpoitium ),  thi>  arttHtic  iiiiHtake  has  boL>n
niadu  of  rt<pnrtiiif{  the  convcrsnliori  in  t\io  urafio
obt'uiuti:  and  in  these  the  snstnined  indirectueati
of  eon>trnctii>i),  the  cmwdcd  Infiiiitives,  and  thu
ahsiinlity  of  tiiippoaiiig  one  uinn  to  rejient  fruui
nietniiry  the  wholu  of  an  iiitricnte  dialoK<>^>  git^'utly
dintinJMh  the  plensnre  of  the  reader.

Thw  diitlo^ui'a  of  Aristntlo  am  very  different
fnrni  thridM  of  rifili>,  aud  am  probaiily  u  revenniun
to  tbo  models  iif  Ali'Mimx^iiilH  and  Zen<»,  TIu'  fonn
is  8lill  iit<iiiiii:dly  tliiit  of  u  ronvt^rMalioii,  Unl,  in
favt  ihvdirvthiHm  iijf^tiarM  only  in  the  introdnrUiry
parts,  and  after  the  nrgiinieut  W  oxnv.  undi:r  full
hejidwuy  it  beconiex  an  almost  iinl*rokt*ti  niono-
lof{uo>  The  cell  voi-siitianul  protmiiam  In.  theri-fon*,
rather  a  devict}  toHeeure  the  attention  of  the  rentier,
than  All  eafteutiat  pari  of  i he  nork  lu  u  wIloIq  ;  and
thi-  ^^ojrwra  in  fonMpiritiiMisly  ubwnt.

Sucli  of  tbii  phiioHophiiMl  and  rhetorical  writ*
iuj$)i  of  Cicero  an  uclo)tt  the  form  of  tlie  dialn^ne
art;  decidexlly  Aiiatot^linn  rather  than  I'lnlmiie  in
tlicir  arrniiffonietit  and  in  their  liM^k  of  dmnnitic
ilbitity.  Such  ure  tbe  treatises  Dv:  Sfnrclutr,  Iir
.-JmM-ifin,  tlio  /trMfNif,  the  Tuerulaitne  lUitputulwHet,
iLit'  Itr  Onitore,  nnd  the  ih  Iteifthficn.

Th«  Mi'ealh-d  UiaUHji  of  L,  AnnaenB  Benern
I  iJiatoijotH'H  f.il'fi  j-ii.)  -tri  i\w  name  from  Ike  fre-
i|Uent  inirodiiction  of  n  M>eoiid  Mjteaker  u-ilh  the
H'ordA  ifi'/uix,  iitijiiil,  ilkrt  alit/utM,  ete..  hnl  they  are
ill  no  true  HenHe  of  th(*  word  diiilojinrs  tit  nil.

In  Lntiii  Lituraliin*  the  titln  lJiAlx>Gt.'ti  is  given
y»ir  rjt*yllrMCe  tu  u  work  of  Tacitnn  (  DiahffUt  dts
Of'ufoW&NM),  a  <;onvi!r>4alion  between  »  nnmber  of
literary  celehiitiett  of  the  time  of  Vi>iK|>aK)an,  who
in  it  iliscuMi  the  decay  uf  oratory  nnder  th«  Kin>
pirc.  The  .Hlyle  ithows  that  the  dialo^ne  was  coni-
puttcft  at  the  time  when  the  writer  wait  in  llio
Ciceronian  period  of  bis  Biudles  and  wm  eudeavour-


itif;  t')  iniitjito  the  dielion  of  tliat  f>:Tea(  nis«t«^^
Mencu  it  ditfei-H  in  ninny  nwpecis  from  (be  Ut^J
1'avit4^>aii  comiMinitionH,  ho  tbat  »otii<'  critics  fr«>||,
the  time  of  Lip»inshare  even  miHjHX'tMl  its  nuth^^it.
tieity;  hiitin  ulrtter  of  Pliny  lix  lO/iiaddrewril  f„
'I'acitus  is  fonint  an  eviileut  allusion  to  the  IHulotrii,^
even  did  not  a  carefnl  sindyof  the  piece  itself  yiWd
nntllcient  evidence  of  th«  antljorship. See  Vitin-
kttnfr,  rtitertHehuHffeit  fiber  dfn  liialotfug  dn  TantMi
(Cologne,  IVvO)  I  and  Ke«l,  i'trwm  IhatotiM  Tirtu
JAirribi  J'o99it  (Czeruowitz,  let^l  ). K4iiliotii)  a»
tboHC  of  Ritt«r  (Donii,  1H51I).  Miobaclis  <Le>|'i>K.
ISM),  Putwr  Uona,  IW7).Aiidre*Bn  (TyeipEnr.  limn,
Biihi-wns  (Leipjsig,  J»WI).  Pelvrson  (OxfonI,  li^l.
KiMiiiett(KoM[4ni,  1894),  and  OudeiuantBoKtoti,  IWt
Dlamaxtyila  (Siaftaprvpla). Sec  Asacihph.

DiamaatigosiB  (  Ruiiunrriyaiais  |.  A  ftolemniljr
perfornied  at  Sparta  at  the  festival  of  ArleuiiiO-
thiu  (Piui.-^an.  iii.  16,  $  6).  Tlit;  cereiuitiiy  wutlliM-
tjpartuii  youths  (ci^f^oO  woro  fteonrKul  ou  tti«  uc-
caaiou  »l  the  aUar  of  ArtctniK.  by  pt>rauiiH  apixiul-
mI  for  the  pnrpoMc,  until  their  blood  tinvheil  f^nb
and  covered  the  atlur.  The  M.-oiir};iii^  itwlfvu
prectHlu<t  by  a  preparation  by  which  th<Me  \iliolu
tended  to  undergo  tlie  din tn(i»lig'i»is  tried  to  barddi
tlieniM-dvcH  against  its  pains.  Pattaanias  deH^rJlM
the  origin  of  thu  wor<liip  of  .Artemis  Ortliia, '<'<!
of  the  diainastig'Mts,  iu  the  following  nisiicr:  .V
woixleii  statne  of  Arttiuiis,  w  hirh  Orwftie*  hnl
brought  from  Tanrin,  waa  found  in  a  hn>h  KA»
tmlMwns  and  Alopecns,  the  sons  of  Irlms.  Tin"  i»»
niuu  were  immediately  sirtx-k  mn^l  nt  the  6ii;lit«f
it.  Tbc  Limnaenns  and  the  iitlmbitanlB  ofottivr
neiglilMjiiring  places  then  offenil  saeriU)"*^  N' tto
godde«6;  but  a  <[narrel  ensued  among  thtni.  >"
which  (wveral  iudtvidtinls  wen?  killed  at  tlir  olW
of  ArtdiuiB,  who  now  deniauiled  utoiiemeiit  ftwlfc*
pollntion  uf  hvz  sniictnary.  From  benoefiinli.lto-
luau  victims  wore  selcctud  by  lot  and  nffrrn)  ^
Artemis,  until  Lyourgiis  introilured  the  winireiiq!
of  yoniig  uieii  at  her  altur  iia  u  subslittile  In  t»>>'
man  Maurificej*.

Thu  diiimnHtigosis,  uceonlhiK  to  ibis  Acroo"'*
was  11  xnlfHlitnte  for  liumuii  Hurrince,  and  l-yt'^'
ftUH  made  il  attjo  srtrve  (lis  piirjMMws  of  eilocntiflTi,
iu  so  far  iw  he  iiiaile  it  a  part  of  the  syntwiu  "f
haideuing  the  Spurtuii  youths  aguinst  Iwdl!)'  ^''
ferings  (Pint.  Ljfc.  Id).

Diana  <  from  the  root  of  rfiei).  An  numot  It^'
iau  deity,  whose  name  is  the  fcroiulue  oouuteri'''^
of  laiiuN  (originally  Uianus).  She  was  tbr  gedil""
of  (lie  moon;  of  the  open  air  and  open  ntuttUJ
with  it»  mnunlaiiiH,  fon>Hin,  K[inngH,and  bnwkf;"
the  ehnse;  and  of  rliildbirtb,  Mine«  the  uhhid  **^
Lelieved  to  foster  gmwtb  (Cie.  .V.  D.  ii.  XH  •"
tbe  latter  capacity  she,  like  Inini,  Inm-  tlw  *c*»i
title  of  Luciiia.  Thus  hrr  altnbulcH  wnnjakit**
lluMie  tif  the  Greek  Artemis,  nnd  in  the  oonr**
lime  she  was  completely  identifiuil  niih  lift  *"*
with  llwut^,  who  rrsenibled  her.  The  ni«ist  cti*"
bnitctl  shriiiH  of  Diana  was  at  Arieia  'q.  vhi"*
grxive  (iM'iiiii«),  from  which  she  was  someiiiiiM  *>>>^
ply  calle<l  NcuiorpUHiN  <PHn.  //.  jV,  six.  nSlV  Th*
was  on  thu  hankN  of  the  modern  |ak«  of  >''■''>
which  was  styled  llto  mtrmr  of  Diana,  lleroa***
deity  n&mnl  Virbinst  (Ovid,  Fa«t.  vi.  7.V5t  was****
thippe^L  with  her,  a  god  of  tbe  fore<t|  and  tbtdl*'^
He  was  iu  later  times  idenlilied  with  Hil»poIJ*"^
the  risen  favonritcof  Artemis,  and  I  h*.'  ithle*t  irt**"
uf  tbo  sanctuary  {Ker  AVMorc-jurJM,  Stivt.  f'nltjl-SA^


ti


DIANIUH


SOS


DICAEARCHUS


Dlmiu.


He  wMsaid  to  have  originated  the  castom  of  giving
the  priest's  office  to  a  niuaway  slave,  viho  hroke
off  a  brautih  frout  a  particnlar  tree  iu  the  precincts
and  slew  his  predecessor  iu  office  in  single  combat.
In  coQseqiieuoe  of  this  niiirderous  custom  the
Greeks  compared  Diana  of  Aricia  with  the  Tanric
Artemis,  and  a  fable
arose  that  Orestes
had  brought  the  im-
age of  that  goddess
into  the  grove.  Di-
ana was  chiefly  wor-
shipped by  women,
who  prajed  to  her
for  happiuess  iu  mar-
riage or  childbirth.
The  moat  important
temple  of  Diaua  at
Rome  was  on  the
Aveiitiue,fonudedby
Servius  Tullius  as
the  sanctuary  of  the
Latiu  coufederacy,
On  the  day  of  its
funudation  (August
13)  tlie slaves  had  a
holiday.  This  Diaua
was  completely  ideutified  with  the  sister  of  Apollo,
and  worshipped  simply  as  Artemis  at  the  Secular
Games.  (See  LuDi.)  A  sign  of  the  original  differ-
etice,  however,  remained.  Cows  were  offered  to  the
Diana  of  the  Aveutine,  and  her  temple  adorned
with  cows',  not  with  stags',  bonis,  but  it  was  the
doe  whicb  was  sacred  to  Artemis. See  Artkhis.

Dlrnilnm,  The  modem  Denia;  a  town  in  His-
pania  Tarraeoneusis  on  a  promoutury  of  the  same
name  (now  Cape  S.  Martin)  founded  by  the  Mas-
ailians.  Here  stood  a  celebrated  temple  of  Diaua,
from  which  the  town  derived  its  iiaine  (Pliu.
a.X.m.5,11).

DianSmae  (diavofial)  or  Dlad6Beis  {iiaioant).
Public  doles  to  the  Athenian  [>eople,  resembliug
tbe  Roman  eongiartum.  To  these  belong  the  free
distributions  of  corn  (Aristoph.  Venp.  715  foil.),  the
cierHchxat,  the  revenues  from  the  miues,  and  the
tfaeoric  fund. See  Theoricox.

Diapaepfalala  (dia^</»o-tr)-  Apolitical  institu-
tion at  Athens,  the  object  of  which  was  to  prevent
aliens,  or  such  as  were  the  oflspring  of  an  unlawful
marriage,  from  assuming  the  rights  of  citizens.  Aa
Dsurpations  of  this  kind  were  not  uncommon  at
Athens  (Pint.  Pencl.  :i7),  various  measures  hatl  been
adopted  againnt  them ;  bnt,  as  none  of  them  had
the  desireil  etfect,  a  new  method,  the  d(ai^^</>uriE,
was  devisetl,  acconling  to  which  the  trial  ojf  spu-
rious citizens  was  to  be  held  by  the  demotae  with-
in whose  denie  intruders  iiraptyypaTrrot)  were  siis-
pect«d  to  exist;  for  if  each  deme  separately  was
kept  clear  of  intruders,  the  whole  body  of  citizens
would  naturally  feel  the  benefit.  Every  deme,
therefore,  obtained  the  right  or  duty  at  certain
times  to  revise  its  lexiarchic  registers,  and  to  ascer-
tain whether  any  bad  entered  their  names  who
had  no  claims  to  the  rights  of  citizens.  Tho  assem-
bly of  the  demotae,  iu  which  these  investigations
tfmk  place,  was  held  under  the  presidency  of  the
demarch  or  some  senator  belonging  to  the  deme.
When  the  demotae  were  assembled,  an  oath  was
administered  to  them,  iu  which  they  promised  to
judge  impattially. The  president  then  read  out


the  names  of  the  demotae  from  the  register,  askin|f
the  opinion  of  the  assembly  (Siat^ipiCftrBat)  re-
specting each  individual,  whether  they  thought
him  a  true  and  legitimate  citizen  or  not.  Any  one
then  had  the  right  to  say  what  be  thought  or  knew
of  the  person  in  question,  and  when  any  one  waa
impeached  a  regular  trial  took  place  (Demosth.
c.  Euhul.  p.  1301,  $  9).  If  a  person  was  found
guilty  of  having  usurped  the  rights  of  a  cit-
izen {air<yi^(fti(f<r0ai),  his  name  was  struck  fronk
the  lexiarchic  register,  and  he  himself  was  de-
graded to  the  rank  of  an  alien.  But  if  he  did  not
acquiesce  in  the  verdict,  but  appealed  to  the  great
conrts  of  justice  at  Athens,  a  heavier  punishment
awaited  him  if  he  was  found  guilty  there  also ;
for  he  was  then  sold  as  a  slave,  and  his  property
was  confiscated  by  the  State  (Dion.  Hal.  De  Uaeo^
c.  16,  and  the  fragment  of  the  speech  pro  BuphtUto^
there  preserved).

If  by  any  accident  the  lexiarchic  regiatera  had
been  lost  or  destroyed,  a  careful  scrutiny  of  the
same  nature  as  that  described  above,  and  likewise
called  dui^nji^o-tr,  took  place,  iu  order  to  prevent
any  spurious  citizen  from  having  his  name  entered
in  the  new  registers. See  Demu&

The  oldest  known  dur^i^o'is  occurred  in  b.c.
445(Plut.  PenW.-T?;  Schol.  Aristoph  VeapA.Q.).

Dlarinm.  A  day's  allowance  for  Roman  staves
or  soldiers. See  Srrvus.

Diary. See  Commentarius;  Epurmkris.

Dixaia  (rd  Aidcria).  A  great  festival  celebrated
at  Athens,  without  the  walls  of  the  city,  iu  honour
of  Zeus,  sumame<l  MciXij^ior.  The  whole  people
took  part  in  it,  and  the  wealthier  citizens  offered
victims  (ic/)<ia),  while  the  poorer  classes  burned
such  incense  as  their  conutry  furnished  (6vftara
(vix^pia).  The  Diosia  took  place  in  the  latter
half  of  the  month  of  Anlbesterion,  with  feast-
ing, and  was,  like  most  other  festivals,  accom-
panied by  a  fair.  The  etymology  of  ^idvta  given
by  most  of  the  ancient  grammarians  (from  Aior  and
uo-ij)  is  false;  the  name  is  a  mere  derivative  from
Atoc,  as  'AiroXXwvia  from  'AiroXXuv.

Diastyins  (duurrvXor). See  Tbmpluh.

Diatreta  (sc.  ra%a).  Cnps  of  glass  mentioned  by
Martial  (xii.70,9)  of  an  egg-shape,  and  hence  could
not  be  put  dowu,  but  must  be  emptied  at  a  draught.
See  ViTRL'M.

Diauloa  (di'auXoc). See  CuRfit's.

Diazoma  (dui^iupi). See  Subuoaculum.

Diazomttta  (duiC<*>fun-a).  The  brond  jiossages  ia
the  Greek  theatre,  which  horizontally  divided  the
successive  rows  of  seats  into  two  or  three  flights.
The  Latin  equivalent  is  praccinctio  (q.  v.).  See
Theatrum.

Dioaea  (Aiicat'a).  A  town  iu  Thrace  on  Lake
Bistonis  (Herod,  vii.  109).

Dicaearehia. See  Pl'troli.

Dicaearcbus  {^utaiapxos).  (I)  A  native  of  Mes-
saua  in  Sicily.  He  was  a  scholar  of  Aristotle's^
and  is  called  a  Peripatetic  philosopher  by  Cicero
(De  Ojf.  ii.  5);  bnt,  though  he  wrote  some  works  on
philosophical  subject-s,  he  seems  to  have  devoted
his  attention  principally  to  geography  and  statis-
tics. His  chief  philoKopliical  work  was  two  dia-
Inguea  on  the  soul,  each  divided  iuto  three  books,
oue  dialogue  (Koptv^taxot)  being  snpposed  to  have
l)een  held  at  Corinth,  the  other  at  Mitylen^  (Aco--


UICASTERION


liICASTES


ffuucoi)-  III  tlieAo  h<-  argiml  ai;aiti.><t  tlie  cxistonoe  nf
iho  doril.  Tlie  Kf*'"'*^*  iK«rforniiiiire,  howevir,  of
DI<^M«»roliii(i  wiu*  a  trttuliiM'lui  llir  K^'oKraph.v,  |n»li-
tioH,  uikI  iiianiii>rs  itT  (irt'ei-i',  uliicli  hr  caWvxl  Bf'of
'KXXuioi,  "The  Lifv  i»f  Itn'fOf."  a  tillc  itiiiliitod  l»y
VarroliiliiA  Vita  t'opyli  liinwani.  All  t)ioi(liilon<i)>1i-
jcal  wrUii];(M<if  DicaeurcliiiBan-loKt.  llisgt'ugniiih-
ical  work*  Iiiivt*  itliapwl  tlic  saiiu'  Iftlt',  extupt  n  tVw
fhi^ineiila.  Wfl  liAV*>  rctnaiiihi);  uiM>  Ininiln-^l  iiiid
tifty  verw-rt  or  tiifl  'AFayjwH^i)  r^t  'KXXnfloi,  «r  "  l>f»-
«cn|iti(>ii  of  (Ji¥coei"  writt«ji  in  iamhic  trinii'tt'rft;
mill  iiIm)  iwtt  t'rajjiiieiitM  of  iIk'  Hi'^x 'f^AaA<'(,  one
coiil^iiiiiif;  a  (U^^M^ription  itf  Kmotia  ami  Atlica,
aitd  niiothi-r  an  iH-ntiinl  of  Mount  I'olioti.  Dicae-
arobiiTtV  iiiii|ts  were  fscttint  in  \\n-  titiif  of  t'icero
{Ep.  aH  .\tt  vi.  i).  Ciforo  wn«  vory  IoihJ  of  tho
writing  (if  LHcnoarctiitH,  nn<1  n|»(>»k«  of  him  in
terms  of  wnmt  ailminittnii  {Ad  Atl-  ii.'J).  In  one
of  the  uxinnt  frngnionlK  Itiracairhiin  qiirttcs  Posi-
dipjiiiH,  tHid  must  thfrofort;  Imvo  lM!cn  nhvo  in  b.c.
8*^.  Tht»ri*  isnti  »'ililiiiM«>f  rln-  friij;in*MitHi»f  Dicac-
■jrrliiirt  Ity  Kiilir  (niinnntadt.  I'^Aii.

Dicaaterion  {AixnoT^^ior).  A  wont  whicli  iudi-
■tful'i's  IktIIi  till*  »ggrf^iit«  jn4lg<*.«  lliat  kiK  in  ronrt
and  the  phict*  ilM'IC  in  which  thi*y  })eld  thi'ii'  fiit<
tiujf!!.  For  an  arconut  of  the  fnrratT.  the  rradcr  is
referred  t«  the  article  Jikastk;':  witli  rewj»c«t  to
the  tatter,  our  inlonniition  is  very  iiii|H'rfe<rt.  In
Uw  earlitir  a^es  then-  were  five  r<'lobrHt«-d  places
At  Athonq  eel  aparl  for  the  eittinfis  of  the  judges
who  ha>d  co^piizaiirc  of  itie  j;raver  tinuM'n  in  which
the  lutHi  of  huninn  life  wan  Hvt'iii;iMl  on-xpialed  —
TU.,  rh<*  Arwi»|iii;;ilen  uiid  the  Epht'lat*.  Tlii-w
ji1ac«8  Wore  on  the  Areopngnx;  in  tltv  Palladinni,
A  anctod  place  in  the  sniitlieiistvrn  p:tr1  of  the  fily  ;
in  I  lie  l>etpliininm,  a  place  luicrcd  to  ihe  Dolpliiaii
Apollo  in  the  *ainp  district ;  in  the  Prytaneiini,  the
ancient  sacred  hearth  of  tlie  Stiiir,  ii>  Ihu  iiorili*
eant  of  the  Acropolis:  and  tiiiiil1>  iit  I'hn-utloor
PhivatiyH  in  the  Piraeus,  at  the  inlet  >if  j£i>a  (^H■ho-
taanu^.lnfiff.  i.  4<ii5.  En^.  tnius. :  and  the  in^nt  pas-
«nf;c  in  LVnitwt  li.  i\  Ahfton:  p[K  (»41-fll6l.  The  »n-
tiiptity  of  thf!4e  lattt  four  ih  ttullirteully  viiiirlitii  for
by  the  archaic  charactt>r  tif  tlie  division  of  the
ttAtlM'M  that  Wfiv  nppnipriatiHl  to  each:  in  the  lii-nt
v«  ant  told  that  a^'cidental  di-atliM  wviv  diM-uiwieti ,
in  the  Aormid.  Iioniicidett  confi-sMed,  but  jiiMliliMl :
in  the  tbiit)  therr  vtvxv  ipiaKt-tnuli*  of  inanimate
tbingM,  which,  by  fulling  and  the  like,  had  oucu-
■lolled  a  lo9A  of  hutnnn  life  (i»ee  Al*^Ycuu?(  L'lK^K
iu  the  fuurth.  boiniciilcH  who  bad  rvtunuil  fnnu
'Cxile  and  coniiuitliMl  a  IVi<hIi  niaindau^htir  ut<n>
appointed  to  )>e  trie*!.  With  rvupect  to  tb«He  an-
cient inntilntiouH,  of  vrliich  little  uKire  tbaii  Ihe
uaniertMnaiufd  when  the  btstoricaln^oconiuieneed.
■twill  )w  snttivicut  to  olK«ervu  that  in  acronlance
with  the  ancient  tli'cek  feeling  renpi-i^tin^  hoini-
■eiiliv — xii.  that  it  involved  een-iuonial  (M^llntioit  in
all  cases,  irresjM'clive  of  the  deRTfe  of  criminality  —
tbe  ptirsidin^  j'ld^'e  was  invariably  tho  king  nr-
c1ki(i,  the  Athenian  irJ"  aacivrHm  ;  and  that  the
placf*  in  which  IIm"  trials  wen-  held  were  open
Cu  the  f3t.y,  to  avoid  the  conlaniiualion  which  the
judftcM  might  incur  by  being  under  the  sntiie  roof
with  a  innnlervr  (Antiph.  rfe  i'aetl.  Urr.  i  II;  cf.
Pitnxor  DiKKi.

Thr  Ileliaea  properly  so  callvil,  ainl  probably,
also,  the  niHJority  of  Ibr  HellaMlic  conrts,  werp  nit-
natcd  in  tlir  ARora;  other*  in  various  [wria  of  the
«ity.  The  statement  that  there  weit>  not  nior*
tliau  ten  of  tbeoe  i»  pnduibly  erruueoitM. Beaidra


'tha  Hcliaefl,  the  Qrat  in  niimbon  and  impcntanc^.
tlie  followitiff  ari)  nani^d :  tlie  Parabytiou  titap^.
Hverrnt,),  iti  wliirh  llie  KIcven  pre»«ided,  and  whio'^^
\h  naid  to  Inivc  receive*!  it^  name  fnun  itJt  pnmliov
in  a  remote  <|iiart«r  of  the  city;  the  Uica«t4>rioa  uf
Meti<^lMiti,or}Ietichni(,  and  that  of  CalleaHtT^Kdvl.
Xfitift.  probably  named  after  their  bnildert; tlie
Grpcu  (Vinrt  (Bar^nvuivv)  and  ibe  Rnd  Court  (+au>^
Kioiv),  tbo  Middle  Court  (Mftroy),  the  fin*aterCoufi
(M(ij^or),  the  New  Court  {Katvnv),  tbo  Triungnlw
Court  (Tfjiywirof),  and  the  Dicastorion  ut  th«  liiilr
place  of  Lycna  (riri  Ai-ku),  probably  near  tlie  Ly-
ceum wilhoitt  the  city |iicii»t4>rluA  near  Ihc  wkUi
and  ill  tlie  nitreet  of  the  HemioKlypbi  ore  oifu-
tioned  with  no  farther  indication  of  their  ■■me.
The  (Jdoiim.  tot),  a  hnihiiiij;  en^cttMl  by  Pcrlokaind
property  destined  for  musical perrominncM,  «ai
used  for  the  Nittiugn  of  ItcliaKitc  conrta;  anil  i^
proliahly,  wen;  other  |>lac4.'a  of  which  no  oimtion
i(t  found. The  dica^tit  nnt  upon  womleu  ItrttcbM,
whicli  were  cftvcred  with  rngAor  initttingf^lUiV
and  there  were  eleratioii*'  or  tribnucH  i^rnMnt\
ujion  n  hich  the  anta)£oniNt  iidTm-ateH  stiKHl  during
their  addroHM  to  the  court. The  «|iaee  tiocapisd
by  the  |ieraona  engaged  in  the  trial  waa  pnteeled
l>y  a  railing  (d/iu^croi)  from  the  intriitioit  nf  ib^
bystandeni;  hut in  canses  which  bon>  uimii  th«
violation  of  the  Myt-teries,  a  fnrthcr  space  of  flrty
feet  all  round  wn«  eucloaed  by  a  roi>p,  and  tbo  a*^
cnrity  of  thtB  barrier  KonrantefMl  by  tbe  ppeiwwe
of  the  public  »]ave4. See  Dkmusii,

Dlcaatea  (d*itfl<rT^«).  In  ii*t  bmadeat  a^oept*-
lion  a  judge,  bat  iinni*  |mrlicnlaily  deimtius  the
Atbeniau  functionary  of  the  democratic  |>eriod,
coinuionly  rendered  ••  jiirj-ruiin,''  Kieepi,bo«*"re'«
iu  the  circumatauco  that  they  neru  8t«oni"«<^
and  truly"  to  discharge  the  dntiea  iritnaM  ta
thi-ni,  there  was  littk*  resemblance  I»etwaeB  «
Attic  dicasterion  and  an  Kugli^h  jury-  A>  '^
tiugniMbed  from  tbe  di^Itict  judges  (ni  uirnt^l*^
duutrnu,  betcer  known  liy  thfjr  later  nanir  ofoi
TiTTafiOKovTa),  and  from  the  N'anlodicae  or  'y*^C*
in  cnuiiiiercial  i-uhhh,  thi*  dicaMtai-  are  frvtiiwitlf
MtyV-d  HeiiBAtAM,  and  their  conrts  the  Uelii*^
tvourtto.  Tin-  name  comew  from  ^uiia,  a  «*"
which,  like  oYopii,  deuotvt*  iHtth  the  uaaeintrljr  a*^
the  place  in  which  it  waa  held :  and  the  ctnirtflf
tbe  Ileliaea,  aa  tbe  most  atrinigly  manned  and  tV
Hrst  in  dignity,  being  taken  as  a  reprewntaliH""
the  rest,  liolh  nawett  were  n9e4l  imliucrimin*''!?-
Their  juriwlictton  extended  to  niutteni  nfcetj
kind  uilhont  exception.  In  private  eaaM»  H  ■
highly  prultable  that  they  acted  oriciually  ■
jiidg«-ft  of  tbe  »eeond  inHlance — i.  e.  of  api»e«l;  l""*
in  public  niatlcTv  they  acted  am  ibr  primary!*'
sole  judicial  niitbority.  Tbo  HeliaKtae  were  P^
tnteil  by  Sdoii.  but  u  bnt  wan  tbi-ir  original  nfl*'
Iwr  and  how  they  wrnr  nomiuate«l  at  first  wo  i*
not  knnnr.  At  the  time  when  democmcy  naafi'lT
developeil.  when  the  causes  even  of  the  buIi^
allieH  werv  bmiigbt  In-fore  the  Athenian  O""!*
there  were  tUtOtl  dieaMj«  or  He1ia«t«.  PJK)  fori**
trilie.  eltOMMi  by  lot.  PrMvimisly  tbe  onmbfr***"
Dot  have  been  verj-  small;  and  dnnsioiw  of'**
whole  iMxly  into  Herlinna.  snch  aa  we  find  •'*•'*
wanU.niay  without  hesitation  be  awoimed  lob*"
existed  iu  tbe  earlier  tiroen  also.  The  ballot  l(^
itmnf,  (irutAqpOMP  ra  ftuntrr^pui.  OrmoMtb.  c.  KfVf  ^
1 144,  #  17  ;  aoiuetimes  alao  irXijpnv'e.  after  tbe  •"•*"
Ojty  of  "manning"  a  ship,  c.  Timt^rr.  p,7^. ♦"*
waA  coiiducte«t  aiinoally  by  tbe  nine  afcbom;  *^


DICASTES


607


dik£


cording  to  some  anthorities  their  secretary  (ypafi-
ftartvf)  made  tbe  tenth.

The  lota  were  drawn,  and  the  penoiia  choeeo
were  sworn,  iu  the  earlier  ages  at  a  place  called
Ardettiis,  witbont  the  city,  on  tbe  banks  of  the
Ilissns;  but  in  after-times  at  some  other  spot,  of
which  we  are  not  informed.  The  formnla  of  tbe
Heliastio  oath,  preserved  in  Demosthenes  ( c.
Timocr.  p.  746,  $(  149-151),  passed  nntil  lately  as
geouine,  and  was  accepted  as  such  by  Scbomann
in  his  early  writings  {Att.  Prooew,  etc.)  as  well  as
by  other  recent  scholars.  Tbe  first  hint  that,  like
most  of  the  documenta  embodied  in  the  Demosthe-
nic speeches,  it  was  the  patchwork  of  a  late  graui-
tnariaii,  seems  to  have  been  given  by  Schouann
in  his  Aniiq»itie9  (1655);  and  the  point  was  com-
pletely proved  in  a  special  dissertation  by  Wee-
termann  iu  1859.  The  whole  nnmber  of  6000
Heliaats  was  divided  into  ten  sections  of  500
«ach,  so  that  1000  remained  over,  iu  order,  when
neceeeory,  to  serve  for  tbe  tilling  of  vacancies  in
the  sections.  These  sections,  as  well  as  the  places
of  meeting,  were  called  Dicasteria,  and  in  each
«ectiou  members  of  all  the  tribes  were  mingled  to-
^ther.  Each  Heliost  received,  as  a  certificate  of
his  appointment,  a  bronze  tablet  (n-tvaKwi',  aiifiQo-
Xov)  with  bis  name  and  the  number  or  letter  of  the
flection  to  which  he  belonged  (from  A  to  K).  Three
of  theee  trvfi^oKa  have  been  found,  inscribed  as
follows:  B.  ANTIXAPMOS  AAMn[TPEYS],  A.AIO-
AQPOZ  *PEA[PPI02],  E.  AEINIAZ  AAAIEYS:  and
bear  besides  representations  of  owls  and  Gorgon
beads,  and  otber  devices  symbolic  of  the  Atfaeolan
people  (Boeokb,  C.  /.  6.  nos.  207-209).

As  often  as  courts  were  to  be  held  tbe  Heliastoe
assembled  in  the  Agora,  and  the  courts  in  which
«ach  section  had  to  sit  for  the  day  were  there  as-
signed by  the  Thesmotlietae  by  lot.  But  it  did
not  happen  always,  or  in  every  salt,  tliat  whole
sections  sat;  on  the  contrary,  sometimes  oases
were  tried  only  by  parts  of  a  section,  sometimes
by  several  sections  combined,  according  to  the  im-
portance of  the  issues.  Provision,  however,  was
made  that  the  number  should  be  always  an  uneven
one,  in  order  to  avoid  an  equality  of  the  votes ;
and  if  we  find  the  number  of  300  or  2000  dicasts
nieiitioned,  we  are  to  assume  that  the  rxinnd  num-
bers only  are  given  instead  of  201  or  2001.  For
examples  of  the  actual  figures,  we  have  iu  Demos-
thenes a  court  of  1001  dicasts  taken  from  two  sec-
tions (duatmjfii'ou'  dvotir  iU  Sva  xoi  xiKiovs  i^^d>ur-
fu¥w,  c.  Timoer.  p.  702,  (  9) ;  and  one  of  1501  from
three  sections  in  Lex  Seguer.  s.  v.  ijXuu'a.  Tlie  usual
nnmber  in  the  Heliaea  appears  to  have  been  501.

For  tbe  trial  of  certain  classes  of  oases  Heliastae
of  a  peculiar  qualification  were  required ;  as,  for
instance,  in  the  case  of  profaners  of  tlie  Mysteries,
when  the  initiat«d  only  were  allowed  to  judge;
and  in  that  of  military  ofienders,  who  were  left  to
tbe  justice  of  those  only  whose  comrades  they
wpre,  or  shonld  have  been  at  tbe  time  when  the
offriuce  was  alleged  to  hare  been  committed.  After
this  ballot  on  the  day  of  the  trial  each  member  of
tbe  section  reoeive<1  a  stafi*  with  tbe  colour  and
number  of  tbe  court  in  which  be  had  to  sit;  this
might  serve  both  as  a  ticket  to  procnre  admittance
and  also  to  distinguish  him  from  any  loiterer  who
might  endeavour  clandestinely  to  obtain  a  seat
after  business  bad  begun.  That  the  dicoste  were
not  sworn  afresh  before  every  case  seems  certain' —
the  oath  nriginnlly  taken  at  tbe  annual  election


sufficed.  The  legal  age  of  the  Heliastae  was  at
least  thirty,  and  uf  course  the  full  franchise  (cVm-
fila)  was  another  condition  of  eligibility.  No  per-
quisite was  ever  more  jealously  guarded.  For  an
atimoa  to  attempt  to  earn  tbe  dicast's  fee  was  a
capital  offence,  and  a  case  is  meutiouod  in  which
this  law  was  actually  carried  out  (Demoeth.  c.  Mid.
p.  573,  $  183).  It  would  appear  that  they  were  only
balloted  for  from  among  those  who  voluntarily  of-
fered themselves;  we  have  no  information  on  this
point,  bat  after  the  custom  of  payment  was  intro-
dnced  there  would  be  no  lack  of  candidates.

This  payment  {fu<r66f  ducatrrucov,  more  usually
r^  dtKaarutop)  is  said  to  have  been  first  instituted
by  Pericles.  It  is  generally  supposed  from  Aria-
tophaues  ( Nub.  663 ),  who  makes  Strepsiades  say
that  with  tbe  first  obolus  he  ever  received  as  a
dicast  he  bought  a  toy  for  his  son,  that  it  was  at
first  only  one  obolus.  It  increased  rapidly  under
tbe  inflnenoe  of  the  demagogues  (Aristot.  op.  Sohol.
Aristoph.  Frap.  683;  Schol.  Han.  140;  Poll.  viii.
113;  Hesych.  a.  v.  ducaarutov;  Said.  s.  v.  ^Xtaarai).
Three  oboli  or  the  triobolon  (rpt«/3oXov)  occurs  as
early  as  b.c.  425  in  the  comedies  of  Aristophanes,
and  is  afterwards  mentioued  frequently  (Aristoph-
£9.51,255;  FMp.  300, 663, 684).  The  paymeut  was
mode  at  the  end  of  the  day's  work  by  the  ColaorB'
tae  (q.  v. ),  in  exchange  for  the  staff  {^icnjpia)  and
ticket  ( avftffoKov  )  with  which,  aa  we  have  seen,
each  dicast  was  already  provided  on  entering  the
conrt  (Schol.  ad  Aristoph.  Plul.  877 ;  Suid.  a.  v.  fiax-
Ttipia ;  Poll.  vlii.  16).  Xo  doubt  the  staves  only
were  given  up,  to  be  redistributed  on  another  trial;
the  bronze  irvfi^cXa  merely  shown,  and  retained
by  the  dicast,  as  they  were  inscribed  with  bia
name  and  bad  to  serve  him  thronghont  the  year;
unless  we  are  to  suppose  that  two  different  kinds
of  trvfiffoka  were  used.

DtcasUbcm  (diKatnriKop). See  Dicastks.

Dice. See  Ala  ;  Talus  ;  Tessera.

DlkA  (Ai'jci}).  The  i>er8onification  of  Justice.  In
Greek  mythology  she  is  tbe  daughter  of  Zeus  and
Themis,  and  sister  of  Eunomia  (Order)  and  Eiren^
(Peace).  She  is  represeuted  as  one  of  the  Horse;
as  the  attendant  aud  adviser  {jraptltpos,  ^vvfipot)
of  her  father;  and  as  the  avenger  of  wrong  who
smites  tbe  wicked  with  the  sword  forged  for  her
by  Aesa.  In  this  last  character  she  resembles  tbe
Eriunyes,  though,  unlike  tbem,  she  not  only  pun-
ishes wrong  but  rewards  virtue.

Diktf  (dtKij).  A  term  of  Attic  law  which  signi-
fies generally  any  proceedings  at  law  by  one  party
directly  or  mediately  againat  others.  The  object
of  all  such  actions  is  to  protect  tbe  body  politic,  or
one  or  more  of  its  individual  members,  from  injury
and  aggression — a  distinction  whi<^  baa  in  most
countries  suggested  the  division  of  all  causes  into
two  great  classes,  tbe  public  and  the  private,  and
assigned  to  each  its  peculiar  form  and  treatment.
At  Athens  the  first  of  these  was  implied  by  the
t«rms  pnblic  dUat  or  ay&wts,  or  still  more  pecu-
liarly by  ypa<l>ai',  causes  of  tbe  otber  class  were
termed  private  8Uta  or  ayawts,  or  simply  dUai  in
its  limited  senae.  There  is  a  still  further  subdivi-
sion of  ypatftai  into  irffioaiat  and  iditu,  of  which  the
former  is  somewhat  analogous  to  impeachments
for  offences  directly  against  the  State ;  the  latter  to
criminal  prosecutions,  in  wliicb  the  State  appears
as  a  party  mediately  injured  in  tbe  violence  or  oth-
er wrong  done  to  individual  citizens. It  will  be


DIK^


608


DIKfi


obOTiTcd  thnt  caitce  fr«<(iicutly  nritw  whicli,  with
xalhnDco  to  the  wrong  complHinoil  of,  may  with
ei\na]  propriety  I>o  liruii){hl  before  a  court  in  the
(uTni  of  the  y(Ht<itTf  hioL  uivntioufAl,  or  in  that  of  an
onliDiiry  JtiVij ;  and  ntidvi  tbeiw*  L'ireiimoUtic^fit  the
InWB  of  Athens  gave  the  protwrulor  an  ainple
utioice  of  methuil»  to  viuilicutt;  hiit  rights  by  pri-
riito  or  piihlJc  pn>ree(Iiiif;ft.  nitK-h  in  thv  nnmo  way
ott  »  |il}iiiiliff  ill  iiKMleni  tinier  tniiy,  (ar  the  iwme
nflttiire,  prefer  uii  iiidiclnierit  for  nMMiitIt  or  brtii);
hi«  civil  fiction  for  tr(*tipaN«  on  the  ponutn.  It
will  Ih)  iiotfiwrtry  lo  ninntion  »*«iie  i»f  the  priucipal
ilislinrtiooH  iti  the  trvMtnienl  ufoaiiMf^s  of  thu  two
){l'i*«l  (UattiieH  nimvw  n>i'iiiioiu'<I  liefont  pro(rM.'<1in}£
to  (Um'UM)  tbit  foruiH  atul  truittmunt  of  ih»  priTiile
hiwsuil.

Ill  a  iUrj.  only  th«  poreou  wbosc  righte  wore  nl-
Ifjlcd  to  ho  atfoctrcd,  or  the  legal  protector  {Kvptot)
of  Hucli  pfrstHi,  if  u  minor  ur  olhi-rwiac  iiiCApnhle
of  app(^ariii>;  sho  iuir,  wna  peituillL-d  lo  inetitiitc
ttu  aotion  an  ptiiiiitit)*;  in  pnbliv  ciiiihcs,  with  tb<!
exception  of  some  few  in  which  the  perton  injnrwl
or  bin  family  w^ru  i>eciiliiirly  honud  and  iuU^n-it-
ed  to  ui'l,  any  fnw  clliznn,  and  xonietiinp^,  wh(.Mi
tbo  Hlaii>  vfUA  direotly  nttnrlteil,  ahuoNt  any  alien,
was  empowered  to  do  bo.  In  all  privatn  rauMiM,
eXc«pt  Iboiw  of  <^i)Xt7r,  ftini»nf,  and  i^ipi'trtets,
thv  priially  or  utbrr  ttribjrct  of  eont«»tion  wa«  ox-
olu»ivi>ly  recoveretl  by  tbr  plaintifl';  while  lu  most
others  tb«i  Slat«  atone,  ur  jointly  with  the  pro(»e-
outor,  prutitcd  by  the  }M*ennuiry  piiiiiHiiment  of  the  |
oO'eitder.  The  court  fe<'s.  vailed  iTfii.>rar<ui.  were
paid  ill  private  but  not  in  pnblio  cniiiwii;  and  a
pablic  pnwHHMit-or  who  com  promised  the  a(*tion
with  tho  defendant  was  in  mont  cane*  pnnidbed
by  a  line  of  n  thouiutnd  dmehmaa  and  n  mmlifieii
diAfniiic-hiiMfnieiit,  irhile  there  was  no  legal  Itnped-
iuieut  at  any  iMiriml  of  a  privat*^  lawsnit  to  the
r«e«inctltutiou  of  the  litigant  purties  <Meier,  Alt.
/VfMY",  p.  163t.

Tho  pruri^Hlings  in  tho  iS4«i|  were  cointnwiwsl  by
a  ftiimmoii!)  to  the  defendant  {wpotrKXtjiTis)  (a  a|t-
pear  on  u  certain  day  before*  the  proper  luagis-
trafe  \ti<raywy4vr\  and  there  answer  the  charges
prefemtl  agaiiiTit  him  lArlstoph.  .Viik  l*il  I.  Tbi»
snnininiis  was  often  ^-rved  by  the  plaiiititt'in  per-
son, acronipanie*!  by  one  or  two  witnesses  (see
Clktkkics),  whose  uatties  were  endowed  upon  the
declaration  (XtJu  or  ^yttkrifia).  If  there  werr  an
inmifflrient  Mcrvire  of  the  finninini)!),  the  lawmiit
was  8t>)ed  awp^trKXrjTos  and  di^iiiifuii'il  by  the
niagiatrate  (Hesyob.).  Krtmt  the  elrcniuAtance  of
the  same  oOloer  nho  conducted  the  tmic^trtc  be-
ing also  iieccsaarlly  preeeul  ac  thu  trial,  and  as
ther«  were  Wsidrs  dirt  u^/ami  iamt^paitt)  and
festivals  dnring  which  uoue,  or  only  some  spe-
cial causes  conid  be  cotiia)enoc<),  the  power  of
tbe  plaintiff  in  selectin);  his  time  waR.  of  connw,
in  aoiue  degreo  limited  :  and  of  M>veral  caams,  we
know  that  ibe  time  for  their  iiislilniion  waa  par-
ticularized by  Uw  (Arii^toph.  .Vh6.  WW)  There
weiv  also  occasionii  upon  which  a  personal  arrest
of  the  party  proceeded  ajpainst  took  ibe  place  of,
or  at  all  eveufs  was  simullaneoms  with,  the  ser-
vice of  the  snnimouH;  as,  for  instance,  when  Ibe
plaintiff  doubte«l  n-liether  snch  jiarty  wonld  not
leave  the  c«>tintry  to  avoid  anHWcring  the  »e-
tion ;  and  acconlingly  we  and  that  In  lonch  caseai
(Deuoslb.  c.  7.f»otk.  p.  ^90,  i  29;  r.  AHttof.  i.  p.  j
TSSt  (  60)  an  Athenian  plaintitf  might  compel  a  |
fiarai^tMr  to  ac«oni|Miny  him  to  tbe  )Mdeiuareh'a  of- 1


lice,  and  there  priHltice  lutil  for  bis  ap]>eanince,«r,
failing  to  do  8<i,  i-nbnitt  to  remain  in  etultKlrttli
the  trial.  The  word  Kortyyviiv  is  pecnliftrljr  nar<d
of  (bis  proceediiifi:.  Itelneen  the  tterviea  of  lb
Mtiuiniiins  and  up)M-anince  of  the  parties  befDnl
maKi»trat4.%  it  i»  very  probable  that  tbe  Uw]
MrilHMl  the  intervention  of  a  |»eriotl  of  tire  itj*
(.Meiei,  Alt.  I'roivmk,  p,  5«0).  If  liolh  parlift  ip-
peiired,  the  proc*-edingK  conimence*l  by  tbe  jilim-
tilV  potting  in  bis  declaration,  and  nt  the  «M
time  depositing  Imm  ^bare  of  tlie  conrt-  (ee%  trpvra-
frln),  th*'.  iioii-paynieni  of  whirb  was  a  CiUl  ob-
jection U>  the  further  pnigreM*  of  a  raiue  (iUt-
thiae,  tie  tad.  Jtk,  p,  *^>1  ].  1  hcMs  vcr*  Ter;  tli-
Hin^  in  anionnt.  If  the  ynhject  of  liligiuiuii  vu
rnti'dat  Icki  than  100  drachmae,  nothing  wn>|MUd:
if  at  morn  than  lOU  drachmae  and  le»«  thftu  UUI
dnicbmne,  3  drachmae  was  a  snttlcient  depoAit.iwI
6o  on  in  pr«>portion.  The  deposits  luring  nu(le,it
became  the  duty  of  the  mogiHtrate,  if  no  nmiiilfrt
objection  appeared  on  tho  fnce  of  the  dci-lamlioat
to  canne  it  to  W  writte'U  out  on  a  tablet.  noA  ri-
jKHicd  for  the  inKfiertiun  of  the  pnblic  on  Ibr  wall
or  othiT  placet  that  aervml  a»  tho  couMt  lint  nfUl
court  (Meier,  Att.  ProcrMM,  p.  GOSi.

The  magistrate  then  appointed  a  day  (vt  >^
Inrtber  proceedings  of  the  aoacrisia  (i).  v.\  '"hicli
waa  done  by  drawing  lots  fur  the  priority  Id  ttm
tbers  was  a  plurality  of  cnnses  idBtilQt«d  i(  ^
same  time:  uuil  to  this  proceeding  Ibe  pbrv*
Xii^X'"""'  "»«')»'•  whieh  generally  denotes  to  Mnj!
an  action,  is  to  be  primarily  attributed,  tf  tl*
plalnttif  failml  toapiK-arat  tbe  nnacnsimlbf  ftoii.
of  connw,  fell  to  tbe  groniid ;  if  the  drfeiMlnL
made  default,  judgment  poKseil  a^inst  bim  iMri-
er,  JU.  iVoNM,  p.  8-2^ I.  Both  parties,  biiscrrf,
received  an  official  snmmous  belbro  tlirir  iw"'*
appeamncn  won  made  the  ^^and  of  either  n«4lt.
An  aftidavit  might  at  this,  as  well  as  at  ollwt  K
rioiU  of  the  aetion,  be  made  in  behalf  of  a  pfnrt*
unable  to  attend  upon  the  given  day,  itid  tlia
would,  if  allowed,  have  the  etVect  of  poi^tpuniilC
further  proceedings  (vntfuxria);  it  miclil,  bo*'
ever,  be  eombatetl  by  a  couuler-aJlldavit  tn  l^
cD'cct  that  tbe  alleged  reasou  wa«  nufoanilsda<
otherwise  insuttlcieDt  {ofOtmwuoiria) i  and  a  qi***
(ion  woald  arise  upon  this  point,  the  decisioB^
which,  when  adverse  to  tbe  defendant.  wonWiW*
der  biro  liable  to  the  penalty  of  eontniuary  iP*-
moHlh.  f.  Olymp.  p.  1174,  f  iKt).  Tbe  plaiiittJf  *•"
in  tbiH  cjise  KSid  t'prifufv  <*X(i*>;  the  defentlaiil.iiT
ftf}¥  af^Xflf.  Siofi*  being  the  word  omitliM  in  bow
pbraae*.  If  tlie  eanse  were  prituarily  bruo^bil''
fore  an  ompiro  (duunrr^r).  the  nnacrisis  *■•  ***
dncted  by  him :  in  cases  of  appeal  it  was  dispea*"
with  as  nunecessary.  Tbe  anacrisia  bcgaa  vHA
the  stHdavit  nf  tbe  plaintifT  (r^MMfimrta).  ibm  ^'
loneil  tbe  answer  nf  tbe  defendant  liivrw^MnB"
avrtypo^) (am  ANTlilRAPHft),  ttion  the  partirspn*-
doenl  their  nepeetive  witoeaBMi,  luul  reduced  Uk^'
ovldenoe  to  writing,  and  put  in  origiaaU,  »r  ■»'
Ibontleated  eopiea.  of  all  the  records,  dsed*.'*'
ooulracts  that  might  be  useful  iu  establltU*f
their  euae.  an  well  «»  neraoRtiida  of  oSen  "^
requisitions  then  made  by  cither  side  (sp*^
(rdck  Tbe  whole  of  th«  docnmeitis  were  thfBiU
Iheraase  took  a  (tlraigblforwanl  coarse  (rvAvtU^
eneloNMl  on  Ibe  last  day  of  the  ttnucrisis  in  K'*
ket  u\((««t,  which  wok  Mealed  and  inlrtisted  \»^
custody  of  tbe  preeiding  magistrate  till  it ««"  P"**
dnccd  and  opeD«4  at  the  trial. Onring  Uw  inl't'


dik£


60S


DICTATOR


Tal  no  »1t«ration  in  Its  contents  was  permitted,
And  accordingly  evidenoe  that  had  beeu  discov-
ered after  the  anaemia  wub  not  prodacible  at  the
trial  (Demosth.  e,  Boeot.  i.  p.  999,  $  18).  In  some
canses,  the  trial  before  the  dicasts  was  by  law  ap-
pointed to  come  on  within  a  given  time ;  in  snch
as  were  not  provided  for  by  snch  regnlations,  we
may  snppoee  that  it  wonld  principally  depend
npon  the  leienre  of  the  magistrate.  The  parties,
however,  might  defer  the  day  (Kvpia)  by  mutnal
consent  (Demoetli.  «.  Phaen.  p.  104S,  $  12).  Upon
the  conrt  being  assembled  the  magistrat«  called
on  the  cause  (Platner,  Procc»»  vad  Kiagen,  i.  183),
and  the  plaintiff  opened  his  case.  At  the  com-
mencemeut  of  the  speech  the  proper  officer  {6  ifft'
vittfj)  filled  the  clepsydra  with  water.  As  long  as
the  water  flowed,  from  this  vessel  the  orator  was
permitted  to  speak ;  if,  however,  evidence  was
to  be  read  by  the  officer  of  the  court  or  a  law  re-
cited the  water  wnB  stopped  till  the  speaker  re-
commenced. The  quantity  of  water,  or,  in  other
words,  the  length  of  the  speeches,  was  not  by  any
means  the  same  in  all  causes :  in  the  speech  against
Macartatns,  and  elsewhere,  one  amphora  only  was
deemed  safficieiit ;  eleven  are  mentioned  in  the  im-
peachment of  Aeachines  for  misconduct  in  big  em-
bassy. In  some  few  cases,  ns  those  of  KoicaKrir,  ac-
cording to  Harpocration,  no  limit  was  prescribed.
The  speeches  were  sometimes  iutemipted  by  the
cry  Kora^,  "go  down"— in  effect,  "cease  sjieak-
iog" — from  the  dioasts,  which  placed  the  advo-
cate in  a  serions  dilemma ;  fur  if  after  this  he
still  persisted  in  his  address,  he  conld  hardly  fail
to  offend  those  who  bade  him  stop ;  if  he  obeyed
tbe  order,  it  might  be  found,  after  the  votes  bad
been  taken,  that  it  had  emanated  from  a  minori-
ty of  tbe  dicasts  (Aristoph.  Veitp.  980).  After  the
Hiieecbes  of  the  advocates,  which  were  in  general
two  on  each  side,  and  the  incidental  reading  of
the  documentary  and  other  evidence,  the  dicasts
proceeded  to  give  their  judgment  by  ballot. See

PSEPHOS.

When  the  principal  point  at  issne  was  decided
in  favour  of  the  plaintiff,  there  followed,  in  the
case  of  a  dt'tn}  rtfu;n7,  a  farther  discnssiou  as  to  the
amount  of  damages,  or  penalty,  which  tbe  defend-
ant should  pay.  (See  Tihbha.)  If  the  penalty
was  already  prescribed  by  law,  the  suit  was  de-
scribed as  ArifiTjTot,  not  requiring  assessment  (De-
mosth. c.  Mid.  p.  543,  (  90).  The  method  of  vot-
ing upon  this  question  seems  to  have  varied,  in
that  the  dicasts  used  a  small  tablet  instead  of  a
ballot-ball,  upon  which  those  that  approved  of
the  heavier  penalty  drew  a  long  line,  tbe  others  a
short  one  (Aristoph.  Vetp.  167).  Upon  judgment
being  given  in  a  private  suit,  the  Atheuian  law
left  its  execution  very  much  iu  the  bauds  of  the
snccessfiil  party,  who  was  empowered  to  seize  the
movablss  of  his  antagonist  aa  a  pledge  for  the
payment  of  the  money  or  institute  an  action  of
rjectmeut  (t^ovXrfi)  against  the  refractory  debtor.
Tbe  jadgroeut  of  a  court  of  dicasts  was  in  general
decisive  (Hkij  aifrtmXTjs) ;  but  npon  certain  occa-
sions, as,  for  instance,  when  a  gross  case  of  per-
jury or  conspiracy  could  be  proved  by  the  unsuc-
cessful party  to  have  operated  to  his  disadvantage,
the  cause,  upon  the  conviction  of  such  conspirators
or  witnoBses,  might  be  commenced  de  voro.  In  ad-
dition to  which,  the  party  against  whom  judgment
has  passed  by  default  had  the  power  to  revive  tlio
cause,  npon  proving  that  liis  non-uppearauco  in


court  was  unavoidable  (Platner.ProtvH  and  ElagcHf
i.  396) ;  this,  however,  was  to  bo  exercised  within
two  mouths  after  the  original  judgment.  If  the
parties  were  willing  to  refer  the  matter  to  an  um-
pire (duuTiTn^r),  it  was  iu  the  power  of  the  magis-
trate to  transfer  the  proceedings  as  they  stood  to
that  officer;  and  iu  the  same  way,  if  the  diaetetes
considered  the  matter  in  hand  too  high  for  him,  he
might  refer  it  to  the  ttirayvytvs,  to  be  brought  by
him  before  an  Heliastie  conrt.  The  whole  of  the
proceedings  before  the  diaetetes  were  analogous
to  those  before  the  dicasts  and  bore  equally  the
name  of  Itiiaj ;  but  it  seems  that  the  phrase  dimka-
X'i»  T^  /i^  octroy  is  peculiarly  applied  to  the  revi-
val of  a  cause  before  the  umpire  in  which  judg-
ment bad  passed  by  default.

The  following  are  the  principal  actions,  both
pnbiic  and  private,  which  we  read  of  iu  the  Greek
writers,  and  which  are  briefly  defined  in  this  Dic-
tionary under  their  several  bends :

^KTj  or  Tpatf}ff  —  'Aytmpyiov :  'Aypatftiov :  *Aypa-
fftov  fAtraXXov :  Auctar :  'AXvyt'ou :  'Awryuy^ :  'Avau-
ftaxiov :  Aydpmrodur^ov  :  'Apiipair6duy :  Atrar^trtwe
Tou  dijfutv :  Aiftopfi^s  '•  'AiroXf  I'V'wr :  'Airorrifiiltivs :
Airof^jj<rtegs  '•  Atrpotrrniriav  '■  Apyias  :  'Apyvpt'ov  :
'Ao'rjScmff:  'Atrrpartiat :  AirroitoKlat:  Bf/So^wtar:
BuuW :  Bkafijfs'.  BovXtwrrur:  KaKtjyopias:  Kaxo-
Xoyias  :  KaKuattat :  Koxorcjifvwv :  KApmv :  KoroXv-
ertatt  roy  Jt^/tov :  KaratrKtm^s :  KXoir^r :  StKovpov  :
^tiXias  '  Atvpidif :  ^apo^tvias  :  'Eyyvrje  '■  'EpotKiov  i
'Kmrpajpapx^lptiTor :  Eirtrpoir^r  :  *E^aya»y^r  :  'E^ai-
picttos :  E(ouXt;c  :  'Apmyijt '.  Sipynov  :  'Eraipij-
iTfus  :  'ItpoavXiat :  'Ywo/SoX^c :  'Yfiptms '  Atiirouap-
Tvpiov '  Atiirovavriov  i  Aturoorpariov :  Attwara^tov :
MurBov  ■  Murditrtms  oucov  :  Motx^ias  '■  tiofuvparos
tiM<jiBopas :  OUiat  '•  HapetKorad^Kfjs :  Tlapavotas  '■  Ha-
pavopMy:  Ilaptarpta-^iae :  Haptiaypaift^fi  ^appd-
Kw :  ^vov :  4»par  ot^ovoiir  icat  ptSfffupivrit :  ^ffo-
pas  T&»  *\tv6ipi»v '.  npoaytoyiat :  Upodotrias  '■  Upo-
etatfmpdf :  Il^ucor  :  S'evdcyypa^^r  :  f^tviokXifTtias :
ifrvtiopapTvpiay  I  'PrfTOpiKii :  ^Kvpia  i  Zi'rov  :  Svko-
i^i^ior :  £v/i^oXai'o>v  or  XwAjkuv  irapa^dirtMs '
Tpavparos  *k  wpovoiac :  Tvpawiiot.  See  Dicastes  ;
Judicial  Procedurb;  and  for  the  Roman  ac-
tions. Actio.

Dicrfl^u  (diKpoTos). See  Navis.

Dictaena. See  Dict£.

Diotamnnm  Promontorium.  See  Dictyn-
KAEL'M  Promontorium.

Dictator.  The  Latin  term  fur  a  magistrate  ap-
puinte<1  fur  special  emergencies,  after  anspiccs
duly  taken  by  the  consuls  on  the  commission  of
the  Senate.  The  dictator  was  never  appointed
for  more  than  six  mouths.  The  first  instance  of
the  appointment  occurred  iu  B.C.  501.  The  dic-
tator was  usually,  though  not  always,  chosen  from
the  number  of  contvtarea,  or  men  who  had  held  the
office  of  consnU  No  plebeian  was  elected  before
B.C.  356.  He  was  always  nominated  for  a  particu-
lar or  si>ecified  purpose,  on  the  fulfilment  of  wjiich
he  laid  down  his  office.  Hecombiu<>d  the  supreme
judicial  with  tbe  supreme  military  power,  and
there  was,  originally,  no  appeal  against  his  pro-
ceedings, even  the  veto  of  the  tribunes  being  pow-
erless against  him.  He  was  free  from  responsibil-
ity  for  bis  acts,  and  could  therefore  not  b«  catted
to  account  on  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office,
the  case  of  Camiltus,  who  was  so  impeached,  Wing
very  peculiar,  (See  Becker,  Itom.  Alterth.  ii.  pt.  2,
p.  17'i.) That  the  dictator  wns  free  from  subsequent


DlCTfi


&10


DIDO


Httack  16  expressly  stated  by  Dion.  Hal.  (v.  70,Tii.
56),  Appian  (B.  C.  ii.  23),  and  others.  His  insignia
were  the  gella  curulia  and  the  toga  praetexta,  and  be
was  attended  by  tweuty-four  lictors,  who  represent-
ed the  lictors  of  two  cunsnla,  and  who  even  Id  the
city  bore  axes  in  their  bundles  of  rods,  as  a  sign  of
nnlitoited  power  of  life  and  death.  His  assistant
was  the  magi»t€r  equitum  (master  of  the  hoi'se),  who
was  bonud  absolutely  to  obey  his  commands,  and
whom  he  ba4l  to  uomluate  immediately  after  his
own  election.  The  original  fuuctioii  of  the  dic-
tator was  military ;  but  after  B.c.  363  a  dictator
was  occasionally  chosen,  in  the  absence  of  the  con-
sols, for  other  purposes  than  dealing  with  external
danger  or  internal  troubles — especially  to  hold  the
games  or  religions  festivities.  The  office  g^nulual-
ly  passed  out  of  use,  though  not  legally  abolished.
The  last  military  dict-ator  was  appointed  in  b.c.
206,  the  last  absolutely  in  B.C.  302.  The  dictator-
ships of  Sulla  and  Caesar  who  was  named  perpet-
ual dictator  not  long  before  his  death,  were  anti-
republican  and  unconatitutioiial.  After  Caesar
had  been  murdered,  in  b.c.  44,  the  office  was  abol-
ished forever  by  a  law  of  Marcus  Antouius.  See
Mommsen,  Rdmitche  Staatarecht,  ii.  133-173;  Beck-
er, BSm.  Alterth.  ii.  pt.  S,  p.  150  foil.

Dict^  (AiKTi}).  A  mountain  in  the  east  of  Crete,
where  Zeus  is  said  to  have  been  reared.  Hence
he  bore  the  surname  Dictuous.  Tlie  Roman  poets
frequently  employ  the  adjective  Dictaensassyuotiy-
mnnswith  Creticns.

Diotioiiariea. See  GLOSSAmCM ;  Lexicon.

Diotynzia  (Aixrvvva  or  Aiiervya).  A  surname
of  both  Britomartis  aud  Artemis,  two  divinities
who  were  subsequently  identified.  The  name  is
connected  with  SiKTvov,  "  a  hnnting-uet,"  aud  was
borne  by  Britomartis  and  by  Artemis  as  goddesses
of  the  ohase  (Herod,  iii.  59). See  Artkhis  ;  Brito-

UAKTIS.

Diotynnaeuin  or  Dictamntim  Promontorium.
A  promontory  on  the  northern  coant  of  Crete,  tow-
ards the  northwest.  This  promontory,  answering
to  the  Fsacum  Promoutorinm  of  Ptolemy,  forms
the  termination  of  a  chain  called  Tityrus  by  Stru-
bo.  On  its  summit  was  placed  a  celebrated  tem-
ple of  the  nymph  Britomartis  or  Dictynua  (Diod.
Sic.  V.  76). SeeDiCTYNNA.

Diotynnia  (ra  ^ucrvvifta).  A  festival  with  sac-
rificos,  celebrate<l  at  Cydonia  in  Crete,  in  honour
of  Artemis,  surnauied  Aixrvvva,  from  Hktvov,  "a
hunter's  net"  (Diod.  Sic.  v.  76).  Particulars  re-
specting its  celebration  are  not  known.  Artemis
Ai'itTuwa  was  also  worshipped  at  Sparta  (Pansau.
iii.  13,  $  7)  and  at  AinbrvHOs  in  Phocis  (Pansau.
X.  36,  i  3).

DlctyB  l^KTvs),  called  Cretens18.  A  Cretan,
said  to  have  accompanied  Idomenens  to  the  Tmjau
War,  and  to  have  written  a  history  of  that  contest.
This  work  {Ephemeris  Belli  Troiani\  according  to
the  account  that  bos  cume  down  to  us,  was  discov-
ered iu  the  reign  of  Nero,  in  a  tomb  near  Cnossus,
which  was  laid  opeit  by  au  earthquake.  It  was
asserted  to  have  been  written  in  Pbtcnician  on
bark,  and  translated  into  Greek  by  one  Eupraxides
or  Kiipraxis.  We  have  a  pretended  Latin  version
by  one  C.  Septimius,  who  probably  lived  in  the
time  of  the  emperor  Diocletian.  The  work  nf  Sep-
tiniius  contains  the  first  Hvc  bookH,  with  an  abridg-
meut  of  the  renminder. This  work  is  a  part  cf  the


fictitious  literatoro  that  sprang  up  iu  the  first  etn-
tury  of  the  Christian  era,  and,  thongh  worthlrw
except  as  a  literary  curiosity,  it  was  an  imjrartaut
source  of  the  romances  of  the  Middle  Ages.  (See
Dares).  Oood  editions  are  those  of  Dederich
(Bonn,  1833-37),  aud  Meister  (Leipzig,  187<2).  Sr^
Dnuger,  Dietgn  -  SeptimiHS :  Uber  die  urtpriiiigUvkf
Ahfa»»ung  und  die  Quellen  der  Epkemerin  (Dresdi-ii,
1878).

DldaKalia  (dtdao-xaXia).  (1)  The  perfomisDcv
of  a  drama.  (2)  The  pieces  brought  furwunt  f»r
performance  at  a  dramatic  entertainment.  (i)k
board  hung  up  iu  the  theatre,  with  short  uotie«^
OB  to  the  time  and  place  of  the  contest,  the  cuni-
petiug  poets,  their  plays  and  other  successee,  per-
haps also  the  choregi,  and  the  most  celebnilf^l
actors.  These  documents,  so  important  for  ttip
history  of  the  drama,  nere  first  collected  and  ar-
ranged by  Aristotle,  whose  example  was  foilone<t
by  the  Alexandrian  scholats  Callimachna,  Aris-
tophanes of  Byzantium,  and  others.  From  tbfr«
writings,  also  called  didatcaliae,  but  now  unforlii-
nately  lost,  come  the  scanty  notices  preserved  l>y
grammarians  and  scholiasts  upon  the  particidar
tragedies  and  comedies.  Following  the  example
of  the  Greeks,  the  Romans  provided  tho  dramas  «>f
their  owu  poets  with  dida»ealiae,  as  fur  ioBtanre
those  attached  to  the  comedies  of  Terence  and  the
Stichut  of  Plautua.

Dldins  Salvins  Inlliiiiis.  A  Roman  nlio
bought  the  Roman  Empire  from  the  praetoriuii
guards,  when  they  put  up  the  Empire  for  sale  after
the  death  of  Pertinax,  a.d.  193.  The  price  paid  w:im
35,000  sesterces  ($1000)  to  each  soldier.  After  rei^i-
ing  for  two  mouths  (March  26  to  June  1),  he  wha
murdered  by  the  soldiers  wliih*  Severus  was  marcli-
ing  against  the  city.  His  life  was  written  by  Siwi-
tianus.

Dido  (Aidw),  also  called  Elibsa,  the  rvpiiti-<I
founder  of  Carthage.  She  was  a  daughter  of
a  Tynan  king,  Belus,  Agenor,  or  Mutgo,  and  «i>^
ter  of  Pygmalion,  who  succeeded  to  the  croim
after  the  death  of  his  father.  Dido  was  mar-
ried to  her  wealthy  uncle,  Acerbaa  or  SichavU",
who  was  murdered  by  Pygmalion.  Upon  tbii^
Dido  secretly  sailed  from  Tyre  with  his  treasiire>.
accompanied  by  some  noble  Tyrians,  and  paMr«l
over  to  Africa.  Here  she  purchased  as  much  Isixl
as  might  be  enclosed  with  the  hide  uf  a  bull.
but  she  ordered  the  hide  to  be  cat  up  into  tbf
thinnest  possible  Btrii>8,  and  with  them  she  mi-
rounded  a  spot  ou  which  she  built  a  citmlel  calle<l
Byrsa  (from  fivptra,  "  linll's-hide*').  Around  thi«
furt  the  city  of  Carthage  arose  and  soon  bersni'
a  powerful  and  flourishing  place.  The  nrigli-
bouriug  king,  Hiarbas,  jealous  of  the  prosperit.T
of  the  new  city,  demanded  the  hand  of  Dido  iu
marriage,  threatening  Carthage  with  war  iu  cue
of  refusal.  Dido  had  vowed  eternal  lidelity  to  ber
late  husband ;  but  seeing  that  the  Carthaginians
expected  her  to  comply  with  the  demands  of  ilisr-
bas,  she  pretended  to  yield  to  their  wishes,  n"!
under  pretence  of  soothing  the  raaues  of  Acerba*
by  expiatory  sacrifices  she  erected  a  funeral  pil<'-
on  which  she  stabbed  herself  in  presence  of  Iht
people.  After  her  death  she  was  worshipped  b)
the  Carthaginians  as  a  divinity.  Vergil  has  in-
serted in  his  Aeneid  the  legend  of  Dido,  with  vi-
rions modifications.  Acconling  to  the  comnioo
chronology,  there  was  au  interval  of  mere  ibati


DIDKACHMON


611


DIES


300  yean  between  tbe  capture  of  Troy  (B.C.  1184)
and  tbe  foiindatiou  nf  Carthage  (B.C.  B53);  but
Vergil,  neTertfaele«8,  makes  Dido  a  contemporary
of  Aeneas,  with  whom  she  falls  in  love  on  his  ar-
rival in  Africa.  When  Aeneas  hastened  to  seek
the  new  home  which  the  gods  bad  promised  him,
Pido,  in  despair,  destroyed  herself  ou  a  funeral
pile.  She  was  worshipped  at  Carthage  and  may
be  identified  with  Inuo  Caelestis,  tbe  Roman  rep-
resentative of  the  Phcenician  Astart^.  See  Verg.
Aen.  bks.  i.-iv.  and  vi. ;  and  tbe  article  Akneas.

Didracbmon  (didpaxftoy). See  Drachma.

THdfmA  (rd  Ai'dv/ia). See  Branchidab.

Didjhnna  {^ivfios).  A  famous  grammarian,  tbe
BOD  of  a  seller  of  fish  at  Alexandria,  who  was  born
in  the  consnlship  of  Antouins  and  Cicero,  B.C.  63,
aod  flonrished  ia  tbe  reign  of  Augustus.  Macro-
bias  calls  him  the  greatest  grammariau  of  bts  own
or  any  other  time  (Satunn.  v.  18,9).  According  to
Athenaeus  (iv.  139),  he  published  3500  volumes,  and
had  written  so  much  that  be  was  called  "the  for-
getter  of  books  "  (j3i|3Xu)\atfar),  for  be  often  himself
forgot  what  he  had  written ;  aud  also  "  the  man
with  brazen  bowels"  (xaXKtprtpot),  from  his  un-
wearied industry.  He  wrot-e,  among  other  things,
commentaries  on  Hesiod,  Homer,  Pindar,  Baccby-
lides,  Aeschylus,  Sophocles,  Euripides,  Cratinus,
Eupolis,Aristophanes,  Menander,Antiphon,  Inaeus,
Hyperides,  Aescbines,  Demosthenes,  and  Tbucyd-
idea;  onion;  and  also  on  the  plays  of  Phryuicbus;
seTersI  treatises  against  luba,  king  of  Manretania ;
a  book  on  the  cormption  of  style;  and  a  great
nnmber  of  historical  and  antiquarian  treatises.
The  most  imi>ortant  production  of  Didymns  was
faia  very  learned  treatise  ou  tbe  edition  of  Homer
by  Aristarohns  (q.  v.),  parts  of  which  are  pre-
served in  the  Venetian  scholia  ou  Homer.  His  lex-
ical works,  in  fact,  were  the  source  of  innumerable
lexica,  scfaolia,  etc.  The  collection  of  proverbs  ex-
tant nnder  tbe  name  of  Zenobius  was  partly  taken
from  a  previous  collection  made  by  Didymus.  The
fngmeutB  of  Didymus  may  be  found  in  tbe  collec-
tion by  H.  Schmidt  (Leipzig,  1854).  See  the  ac-
connt  of  Didymus  in  Wilnniowilz,  Eurip.  Heracfn,
i.  157-168;  and  Susemihl,  (ie$chickte  d.  grieck.  Lit.
ii.  195-210,668  foil.  (1893). Bee  Didascaija  ;  Scho-

LIUH.

DlaliBnbacb,  Lorgnz.  A  celebrated  German
philologist,  bom  at  Ostheim,  in  the  Grand  Duchy
of  Hesse,  July  S9th,  1806.  He  studied  theology  and
philology  at  Giessen,  and  after  travelling  exten-
sively, was  settled  as  pastor  and  librarian  at  Solme-
I>aabacb,  and  in  1848  at  Frankfort-on-tbe-Main.
Here,  from  1865  until  1876,  be  was  the  second
librarian  to  tbe  city.  A  writer  and  scholar  of
ninch  versatility,  he  produced  a  large  number  of
works  in  general  literature,  inclndiug  verse  and
proee  fiction,  besides  the  famous  books  on  lin-
guistic topics  whereby  he  will  be  longest  remem-
bered. These  are  Celtioa,  3  vols.  (1840) ;  Verglei-
chende*  Worterhuch  der  Oolhischen  Spraehe,  2  voIh.
(1846-51);  OlottariHin  iMtino- German icum  Mediate
ri  Infinae  Jetatia  (1857),  being  a  supplement  to
the  great  work  of  Ducange  (q.v.);  and  Origines
EuTopoe,  2  vols.  (1874),  completed  by  WUloker  in
1885.  Diefenbach  died  at  Darmstadt,  March  28,
1883.

Diengyfiaii  {,^ttyyvf}trit). See  Enoye.

Die*. Tbe  ancients  distinguished  (1)  diea  civiltt


(vvx^fttifpof),  the  time  in  which  the  Hun  apparent-
ly completed  a  course  around  the  earth,  inclndiug
thus  both  night  and  day;  and  (2)  diee  naturalis  or
the  time  between  tbe  rising  aud  the  setting  of
the  sun.  Tbe  civil  day  began  with  tbe  Athenians
at  the  setting  of  tbe  sun ;  with  the  Romans  (as
with  tbe  Egyptians  and  Hipparclins)  at  midnight;
with  tbe  Babylonians  at  the  rising  of  the  snu,
and  with  tbe  Umbriaos  at  mid-day  (Macrob.  dat-
ura, i.  3;  Gell.  iii.2).

At  tbe  time  of  the  Homeric  poems,  the  natural
day  was  divided  into  three  parts  (//.  xxl.  111).
The  first,  called  ^t»s,  began  with  sunrise  aud  com-
prehended tbe  whole  space  of  time  during  which
light  seemed  to  be  increasing — i.  e.  till  mid-day
(II.  viii.  66,  ix.  84;  Od.  ix.  56).  Tbe  second  part
was  called  fUtrov  ^fiap  or  mid-day,  during  which
tbe  sun  was  thought  to  stand  still  (Hermios,  ad
Plat.  Phaedr.  p.  342).  Tbe  third  part  bore  tbe  name
of  Stikr]  or  dficXov  ^itap  (Od.  xvii.  606;  cf.  Butt-
mau's  Lexilog,  ii.  u.  95),  which  derived  its  name
from  the  increased  warmth  of  tbe  atmosphere.
Tbe  last  part  of  the  dviXi;  was  sometimes  desig-
nated by  the  words  troTi  ttnttfta  or  /SovXvrur  {Od.
xvii.  191;  //.xvi.779).

The  first  and  last  of  tbe  divisions  made  at  the
time  of  Homer  were  afterwards  subdivided  into
two  parte.  Tbe  earlier  part  of  the  morning  was
termed  itpwt  or  trp^  r^r  ^/w'par;  the  later — i.  e.
from  9  or  10  till  noon — it\rfdovoiis  r^s  ayopae  or
irtpt  ir^ijBovaay  ayop&v.  The  p4<rov  ^fiap  of  Homer
was  afterwards  expressed  by  fttfrtjft^pta,  pdaov
T}fUpas,  or  piirq  fffiipa,  and  comprehended,  as  l>e-
fore,  the  middle  of  the  day,  when  tbe  sun  seemed
neither  to  rise  nor  to  decline.  The  two  parts  of
tbe  afternoon  were  called  StiXrj  rrpattj  or  irpmia,
and  dfiXi}  o^i'f}  or  3^ia.  This  division  continued
to  be  observed  down  to  the  latest  period  of  Grecian
history,  though  another  more  accurate  division,  aud
one  more  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  common  life,
was  introduced  at  an  early  period ;  for  Anaximan-
der,  or  according  to  others,  Anaximenes,  is  said  to
have  made  the  Greeks  acquainted  with  the  use
of  tbe  Babylonian  chronometer  or  sundial  (called
ir6Xos  or  iapoXoytov,  sometimes  with  the  epithet
aKio&ripiKov  or  ffXiapdyltpov),  by  moans  of  which  tbe
natural  day  was  divided  into  twelve  equal  spaces
of  time.  These  spaces  were,  of  course,  longer  or
shorter  according  to  the  varions  sessons  of  tbe
year.  The  name  hours  (Sapai),  however,  did  not
come  into  general  use  till  a  very  late  {leriod,  and
I  the  difference  between  natural  and  equinoctial
I  hours  was  first  observed  by  the  Alexandriau  astrou-
I  omers. .See  Pollux,  Onom.  i.  68.

During  the  early  ages  of  the  history  of  Rome^
tbe  natural  phenomena  of  increasing  light  and
darkness  formed  with  the  Romans,  as  with  the
Greeks,  the  standard  of  division,  as  we  see  from
tbe  vague  expressions  in  Censorinus  {De  Die  JS'at.
24).  In  the  Twelve  Tables  only  the  rising  aud  tbe
setting  of  the  sun  aud  mid-day  {meridiet)  were
mentioned  ae  tbe  parts  into  which  the  day  was
then  divided.  Varro  (L.  L.  vi.  4,  5)  and  Isidnrus
{(hrig.  V.  30  aud  31)  lilEewise  distinguished  three
parts  of  the  day — viz.  mane,  meridie$,  and  siiprema,
sc.  lempettas,  after  which  no  assembly  could  be  held
ID  the  Forum.

But  Aie  division  of  tbe  day  most  generally  ob-
served by  tbe  Romans  was  that  into  ttmpu»  ante-
meridiannm  and  pomeridxamtrn,  tbe  meridien  itself
being  roiiHidered  only  as  a  point  at  which  the  one


DIKS


&ri


DICAXniA


viiilwl  anil  tlip  niltcT  coTnineiicfd.  A^  it  wn«  of  im-
|mrl»Dc**  that  lliis  iiioiiirMit  ftlioiilcl  )k<  kiinw-ti,  an
officer  (m'v.  AixKSsi)  uf  tlit-  nutMils  «]ii*  dirci-Ii'il
(t»  |tnivl)>iiii  till-  tiiiit'  iif  iuu1-i1h\,  wIicii  fnnu  (Li-
IJiiria  lir  suVi  llie  huh  MluiKliti^  liulwfcii  tliM  Kostm
niid  ilio  ClritoooHf.'uJft.  Till.'  (livif^iiin  of  tliu  dny  into
t  WflveoiiUMl  siinc*-*!,  nliicb,  here  o«  in  t-Jrwce,  wert-
shorter  in  ninU-r  tliun  in  Miiuimor,  wn>t  adupteil  at
tbe  time  niit^u  nrtiticinl  nieaim  of  uieHMtiriii^  tiiuv
were  intrndiici-d  iiiiiiiii){  tlie  ItoDinuK  In^iii  (ireece.
Tliis  wtv(  aboiil.  Mil-  >i.-ar  u.c.  tid3,  n  lien  L.  P(i}iinus
Ciirwir,  before  tbe  war  with  ryrrliu*,  Iiroiiffht  to
Koine  nil  itiHlninietit  calltnl  whtrium  horaloyiHiH,
or  Hiinply  uotarium  (I'laiil.  ap.  titllium,  iii.  li,  ^5;
Plin.//.  .V  vit.^yiy).  liiRC.'2ti:i,M.Vii1*'niisMe»-
(uila  brciuglit  oin-  u  liirli  lie  li»d  tjikeii  at  llie  (inptiire
of  Cuttua;  niiil  nltliouKli  tliiH  wan  inuitrrt'et,  having
b(;eu  tiOimtnii-ted  for  a  plm-n  4'  fnrlhfir  notitli  llinii
Botiii',  it  wnK  ill  iirtC!  for  VO  yrarn  Ijefon*  the  error
van  iliHvovnivd.  In  n.c.  UVl,  llifs  oeiiMir  Q.  Mim-iiiM
PhiU[ij)nfl  hud  a  nioiYi  exact  Aiiiidia]  i^oiihrTucted :
but  the  thiio  vian  Atill  unknown  in  chiiidy  weathnr.
Scipio  Nawii'a,  therefore,  erceted  in  u.c.  159  a  pub-
lic elppsycJra,  which  indicated  the  hniirft  of  the
■night  as  well  an  of  [lie  day  (Ceiiwir.c.'iS).  Bi-fnre
tho  erection  of  a  elopMydi-n  it  whs  enslomnrj'  ft>r
one  of  the  unUordiiinte  ofDcera  of  tlio  praetor  to
prwluiui  the  third,  aixth.and  uiiiili  boni-d;  which
ahons  Hint  the  day  vsks,  like  the  iiiglit,  divtde^l
into  four  parts,  eju'h  conftiHliiig  of  three  liuura.  In
dully  life  niiiurritiu  tertiiH  were  in  une  to  denote
tht*  ilifTeriUit  partM  of  the  day,  nioMtl>  4if  a  k*"''*'"*!
and  boiuenhut  viifj"*-'  nlianu-ter.  iCf.  Varr.  /.,  L.
vi.4-7;  fierviiij,  4III  JcM.  ii.'itirt;  iii. 567;  Uid.Oriij.
V.  :i\ .  ^^2.) Set-,  also,  the  article  Huroiagii'm.

All  the  dayn  of  the  year  wen*,  aeconling  to  dif-
ferent |)oiiitn  of  virw.ilividtxt  hy  tin;  Itoniiin;!  into
diiferi'Dt  claMM'!!.  l-'or  the  pnrpotw  of  the  ndniinift-
tration  of  justice  unil  of  hnhling  ftswinbllei!  of  the
I>«o|de  all  the  dayit  were  divide^I  into  tlitt  J'tiMti,
die*  nfj'aitti,  ami  Wir*  partly /dufi,  piirtly  wc/a«fi.

1.  lHt»  fiinti,  ill  the  wider  JWiiMe,  were  days  on
whirli  le-;a1  and  political  biittintw*  eonid  Iw  law-
fnlly  traiwacted. They  were  divided  into:

(fl)  DicfJ'niiU.  in  the  narnmiT  BonwMnarkrd  with
F  in  the  eitlendiirH.  On  these  le}j;nl  buHineiM  eoiild
be  coudnnlcd  (Ovid,  Faut.  \,  48,/(i4/ii«  vrit  /ht  quem
leyp  hi^bit  agi;  Yarr.L.  L.\i.^,<fu'ii  /a»fi  per  quuii
prafloiibui  oniNid  m-Jl'fi  nHt piaculo  Hcrl/ari),  Th»
word  is  derived  by  th'J  ancients  from /nn ;  but,
although  tbe  root  is  undoubtedly  the  aauie,  the
more  iiiinie-diate  vonouctiou  i»  with/<n«.

(frj l/ire  comitiiiirn,  days  on  whirli  nu'ctliiKa  of
the  [ifople  eoiild  leually  bu  held,  and  on  which,  if
thf^re n-;iN  nn  iiifelin};  ciiiiv«iied,  eourlH  could  be'
0[wiied  (Maerob.  Stilunt.  i.  Hi),  \

TheM<  days  aro  marked  C  in  the  citoudar.  i

!i.  />iVfi  tiefauli  were  dayn  on  Hrhieh  no  le^al  or,
political  busiucwi  cuuld  be  dune  (Varr.  L.  L.  vi.lHi),  ,
Thette  are  agidu  divided  into  two  qnit«  dlMinctt
ela«a4-M :  .

(fi)  l>ie«  Htfa*li  or  frriati,  on  which  no  bnsineu
conid  bo  done  b«L-aii»e  the  day  wan  sacred  to  some  |
festival.  Tlipw  are  tnarkcd  N'  in  the  caleudarR.
This  sign  wan  commonly  interpreteil  urfaatun  parlr
or  HffnHltHi  priucipio,  and  w.-in  ex|d»iiied  to  niuaii
ihiit  the  day  w;ui  one  during  tba  e.irtier  jinrl  of
which  no  bnmiifvw  rnnhl  Imi  dour.  Kiit  )ft)mniM-ii
{fhronoL  p  ii-2(>;  C.  /.  /,.  i.  ;Utti|  Hliowcd  that  tbia
viuw  wjui  ipiitR  untenable,  and  exjdainii  llie  fti;:ii
to  tw,  like  M'  when neeil  ma  an  abbieviatiun  for


I


Manilla.  »  nnnlitloation  t»f  the  archaic  H  ml
Blrnkew  (iV).

(A)  IHm  frlit/ioni  or  ritiiwi,  fwnielinie*  calWotn,
niHikwd  in  tbo  culeudara  by  K.  Tliei*  were  ow-
Iticky  dnyi4,  which  had  t>een  declai'vd  to  Im  atieb
by  a  decree  of  the  .Sematc  in  eonfte<{nence  af  aom
diMUiter  whioh  had  taken  place  ni»on  tliein.  All
the  iiit-K  pottridHaHt  were  included  under  tbl«  btal
^i.  e.  the  days  after  the  Kalends,  the  Koues,
t  he  Idea—  Ijeeauae  these  were  Ivclicred  to  bun
eBpeciftlly  unfortunate  (Ovid.  Fa«l.  i.  M),  fiOt
the.se  days  it  waa  nut  only  unlawful  to  trii
any  ]efia\  or  political  busineu,  but  it  was  dIh
lucky  to  heju^n  anjr  atfair  of  impnitnnor.  Ct  OtH
iv. »,  h.

3.  Dayn  partly /nnii  and  partly  not,  Inrhtdiaf;:

(fl)  Die*  iNlereiKJ,  ntarkfHl  in  the  ealeadan  bjr
KN,  for  rMdolfTciiii  Imito  boiuf;  an  archaic  fonunf
in,  lot  in  rniiupfrator).  On  theiie  ilayd  a  victim  «ii
Hacrifired  in  the  uioniing  and  the  rjta  offend  ia
the  nvening.  Itetweoii  tlic  aocrillce  and  tbeo&r
iuK  the  day  wiui/iMfa« ;  Iteforo  tho  former  anil  itut
th«  latter  it  waa  ue/iutlu*  (Varr.  /..  L-  vi.:tl ;  Ortil,
Fant.  i. «).

{h)  JHtv  Jim,  thrtNs  in  number.  To  two  of  IliM.
March  34  and  May  34.  ara  preBxed  the  letUn
Q.  li.  C  F. — J.  e.  quando  rcr  {iarrorum)  rt»iii(i*r«'.
/ut.  These  days  were,  even  in  ancirnt  tim».«»-
fUHcd  with  tho  Rr^i/ugium — i.  e.  Keliruar)  84—
and  the  letters  were  wnrnfily  inlerpn-Uvl  fwiA
rrr  immtui  fntjil.  To  the  tbilil.  .Tune  ir».  it  fCh
fixed  (j.  ST.  D.  V. — i.  e.  qiKiNdo  Mtnru»  drlatunfV,
on  thit)  day  the  teniplo  of  Vriita  wiw  iMilramlj
cleaniietl  by  the  Vestal-*,  and  the  fihh  rurrieJ  i"!
or  lhn>wn  into  the  Tiber  lOvid,  /-Vi*!.  vi. "UTk, ■•
other  bimine»s  being  peiniilt4^d  on  ihitiday.

Mouimtien  {^C.  I.  L.  i.  p.  UTti)  c-alcnlateti  tliil  ll»*
year  contained  4r>  dtfw /iiufi,  liM  dif»  eowiillaW ♦*
die*  Hcfaslt  or  frriati,  67  diet  rtligioti^  S  Ha  imttrat^^
nod  'i  ditJi  fin\.

Another  division  of  the  days  of  the  yeorini"
R  purely  rcMsioni  character,  with  which  Mt"i»"T
the  former  division  to  a  crrt-iin  extent  coineiW
in  a  city  ao  doniiuatefl  by  rtditpous  scnil'l"  **
Roiuc :

I .  IHn  feali,  on  which  the  gnda  were  IwDooff**
by  (n)  ancri/n'ci,  (b)  epular,  (o)  Ittdi,  {A)ftrim.  ^
KkkIae.

y.  />i«po/Mii, ortlinary  warkiug-day&

'<i.  Jtiet  iiiterct'j.  of  a  uiixed  charuflter,

For  the  NcNUtNAK,  see  the  article  «itb  ili*
title.

Dtesplter. See  Iij'ITICH.

Diet. See  DlAHTKTlCA.

DiSareatlo. See  UlvuitflfM.

DiganunA  (iiynfi^).  A  name  giveu  li.c  IP***
QiariftiDtof  the  tin^t  century  to  Van,  the  sisllil'*'*'
of  tjie  early  Greek  nlphaWl,  but  which  iu  ^^"^
F-i(?at  had  ceaocd  to  In-  ukchI  and  won  kiiovn  wf
by  inscriptions.  The  digaunna  ("donbin  |t*°*^
gota  it«  name  from  ita  furtn  Ir  or  f.  1»  •""^
na«  originally  Honiething  like  that  of  Kng&* J^i
Ita  form  iu  the  liieralte  Kgyptian  waN>;  in  ^
ancient  Phtvuiciau.  t1 :  the  tt^inare  Hebrew.*-  ^
IM  found  iu  Peiopuniieainn  iniKTiplion»  M  htf  **
the  aixtb  century  U.L-.,bnt  it  had  diHapiiraml  ^i""
the  limit  or  Eaaleni  Urcek  alphabet  hftott  ^'*
middle  vf  the  seventh  eeiilnry  b.c^  being  t»HW"
only  as  a  nnnienil  =0.  fVoni  Ihr  Ohnlr Iili»l>  "^
Western  ii)|dKibet  il  w»«  transmituil  t<»  Italy.'*'


PIGENTIA


618


DIHACHAEKI


tainiDg  its  poeitioD  as  tbe  sixth  letter,  but  aoquir-
iug  tti«  soand  of  F,  a  labio-dentsl  frioative.  See
Alphabkt.

Tbat  ita  infioence  remained  after  it  ceased  to  be
written,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in  the  Homeric
poems  it  prevents  elision  where  a  final  vowel  stands
before  a  word  which  originally  bad  the  digamma
(e.  g.  <l>ika  ftiiiora  bvtra).  (See  DlALKCTS.)  Too
iiinch  was  made  of  this  fact  at  one  time,  and  Mr.
Payne  Knight  even  pnblished  a  text  of  Homer
with  the  digamma  restored,  a  part<  of  this  text
l>etng  reprinted  in  tbis  conntry  by  Dr.  Charles
Anthon  in  his  edition  of  tbe  Iliad.  Bnt  more  re-
cent scholarship  shows  that  many  of  the  supposed
Instances  are  not  those  of  words  that  originally
were  digammated,  bnt  which  rather  once  had  an
initial  spirant,  *  oTJ^6,g.tte  Ska  (a)  ^ro:  m  yap
(tr)  <xo»> See  Hadley's  fmays,  pp.  56-80  (1873).

Words  which  finally  lost  tbe  digamma  in  Greek
still  often  show  it  in  the  cognate  languages — e.  g.
oucost  iMLviotu;  o&or,  I>at.cisHm;  oir  (if  is),  Lat.
ovia;  prfywiu,  hat  frango ;  fpyw,  Eiig.  work.  In
Laconian  it  frequently  became  /3 — e.  g.  jSoivac  for
fawa^y  ^ipyov  for  f4pyoVy  etc.

The  word  biyaima  is  not  found  earlier  than  the
first  ceutnry  A.D.,  when  it  occurs  in  the  gram-
marians. Dionysins  of  Halioaruassns  describes  it,
bnt  gives  it  no  name  (i.20).  Terentiauus  Maurus
calls  it  liiyaftfios  littera  (163  K).  Maorobius  uses
tbe  word  atyai^um  (sc.  oTOtxctov)  (2>«  Vera.  vi.  13).
Quintilian  (i.  7, 27)  calls  it  Aeolica  KUera  (cf.  i.  4, 7),
bat  it  is  not  foaud  in  tbe  later  Lesbian  inscrip-
tions, and  in  Aloaens  and  Sappho  it  is  represented
by  /3  before  p  (e.  g.  ppaxo?  for  tbe  Homeric  pdKos=z
FpoKta).  See  Monro,  Homeric  Grammar  (1882) ;  and
King  and  Cookson,  i*rtifoiplM  of  Sound  and  In-
ttfxiom,  pp.  166-171  (Oxford,  1888),

IMgantia.  The  modern  Licenza;  a  small  stream
in  Ijatium,  beautifully  cool  and  clear,  flowing  into
tbe  Anio,  through  the  Sabine  farm  of  Horace.

ZHgesta. See  Corpcs  Iukis Civius; Fan-

DKCTAS.

Plgltalin. See  Manica.
XH^tu. See  Pks.

Dl!^>Olia  (ra  AiitniXui,  AiZirArta,  or  j^iroXui).  A
f««tival  celebrated  in  Athens  on  tbe  14th  Sciro-
phoriou  (Jane  to  July)  to  Zens  (Aristoph.  Pax,  420)
]U)  the  protector  of  the  city.  It  was  also  called
Bnphonia,  from  the  sacrifice  of  an  ox  connected
with  it.  A  labonring  ox  was  led  to  the  altar  of
Zens  tu  the  Acropolis,  which  was  strewn  with
wheat  and  barley.  As  soon  as  the  ox  touched  the
consecrated  grun  he  was  punished  by  a  blow  on
the  neck  firom  an  axe,  delivered  by  a  priest  of  a
]»arttcDlar  family,  who  instantly  threw  away  the
axe  and  took  to  flight.  In  his  absence  the  axe
was  brought  to  Judgment  in  the  Prytanenm,  and
coudemued,  as  a  thing  polluted  by  murder,  to  be
thrown  into  tbe  sea.  To  kill  a  labouring  ox,  tbe
trusty  helper  of  man,  was  rigidly  forbidden  by
rustom.  In  the  exceptional  sacrifice  of  one  at  this
festival  the  ancient  custom  may  be  regarded  as  on
the  one  hand  excusing  the  slaugbter,  and  on  the
4>tbeT  insisting  that  it  was,  Devertheless,  equivalent
to  a  mnrder.
J>UcM. See  Moles.

Z>ileotiM. The  levying  of  soldiers  for  military
Mcrvicfl  among  the  Romans. In  tbe  republican
age  all  the  citizens  who  were  liable  to  service
17


assembled  in  the  Capitol  on  the  day  previously  an-
nounced by  the  consuls  in  their  edictum,  or  proc-
lamatiou.  The  twenty-four  tribuni  miHtum  were
first  divided  among  the  four  legions  to  be  levied.
Tben  one  of  tbe  tribes  was  chosen  by  lot,  and  tbe
presence  of  the  citizens  ascertained  by  calling  the
names  according  to  tbe  lists  of  the  several  tril^es.
Tbe  calling  was  ^ways  opened  with  names  of
good  omen.  (See  Omen.)  If  a  man  did  not  ap-
pear he  wonld  be  punished,  according  to  oircum-
stances,  by  a  fine,  confiscation  of  property,  corporal
punishment,  even  by  being  sold  into  sla^'ery.  Fonr
men  of  equal  age  and  bodily  capacity  were  ordered
to  come  forward,  and  were  distributed  among  the
fonr  legions ;  then  another  four,  and  so  on,  so  that
each  legion  got  men  of  eqnal  quality.  As  the  proceed-
ing was  the  same  with  the  other  tribes,  each  legion
had  a  quarter  of  the  levy  for  each  tribe.  No  one
man  had  exemption  {vacatio)  from  service  unless
he  was  over  forty-six  years  of  age,  or  had  served
the  number  of  campaigns  prescribed  by  law — twen-
ty in  the  infantry,  ten  in  the  cavalry^^r  held  a  city
office  or  priesthood,  or  had  a  temporary  or  perpet-
ual dispensation  granted  on  account  of  speciid
business  of  State.  In  ancient  times  the  levy  of
the  cavalry  followed  that  of  tbe  infantry,  in  later
times  it  preceded  it.  On  the  oath  taken  after  tbe
lexy,  soe  Sacrahentith.

About  tbe  year  B.C.  100,  Marius  procured  the  ad-
mission of  the  oapite  centi,  or  classes  withant  prop-
erty, to  military  service.  (See  Proletarii.)  After
this  the  legions  were  chiefly  made  up  out  of  this
class  by  enlistment;  and  though  the  liability  to
common  military  service  still  existed  for  all  cit-
izens, the  wealthy  citizens  strove  to  relieve  them-
selves of  it,  the  more  so  as  after  Marius  the  time
of  service  was  extended  from  twenty  campaigns
to  twenty  years.  In  B.C.  89,  Boman  citizenship
was  extended  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  Italy,  and
all,  therefore,  became  liable  to  service.  The  levies
were,  in  consequence,  not  held  exclusively  in  Rome,
but  in  all  Italy  by  conquintoret.  These  officials,
though  they  continued  to  use  tbe  official  lists  of
qualified  persons,  assomed  more  and  more  the  char-
acter of  recruiting  officers.  They  were  raady  to
grant  the  racatio,  or  exemption,  for  money  or  fa-
vour, and  anxious  to  get  hold  of  volnuteers  by
holding  out  promises.  The  legal  liability  to  mili-
tary service  continued  to  exist  in  imperial  times,
bnt  after  the  time  of  Augustus  it  was  only  enforood
in  regard  to  the  garrison  at  Rome  and  on  occa-
sions of  special  necessity.  The  army  had  become
a  stauding  one,  and  even  outside  of  Italy,  except
when  a  special  levy  of  new  legions  was  made,  ttie
vacancies  caused  by  the  departure  of  the  soldierv
who  had  served  their  time  were  filled  up  by  vol-
unteers. The  levy  was  carried  out  by  imperial
commissioners  (ditectatore$),  whose  bosiuess  it  was
to  test  the  qualificatious  of  the  recruits.  These
were,  Roman  citizenship— for  only  citizens  were
allowed  to  serve,  whether  in  the  legions  or  in  the
guard  and  other  garrison  cohorts  of  Rome  {ookortea
urhanae) — physical  capacity,  and  a  certain  height,
the  average  of  which  was  5  feet  10  incites  under
the  Empire.  For  the  repnblican  age  we  liave  no
information  on  this  point. See  Exercitcs.

Dlmftoliatt  {StpAxai).  Macedonian  cavalry,  who
also  fought  on  foot  when  ordered.  See  Pollux,  L
132.

Dimachaoxl  (difiaxaipoi). See  Oladiatorbs.


ItfMINTTIO  CAPITIS


fil4


DTOCLETUS,  EDICT  OF


Dlminutjo  Capitis. Scm  DKMrMTro  t'Aprxis.

DiiiarchuB  {Stivtip^ov).  One  of  the  tcu  Greek
oriil^ra,  fi)r  thv  expluiiatiou  of  vljoae  onitiunti
ItnqKKriitiiHi  ronijiilei)  li'm  lexicon.  (Set*  Canon
Ar.KXANniUNrs.)  IIw  min  a  Conntliinn  Ity  liirth.
liilt  Acttl4>(l  al  Atlioiiii  ami  becnmn  iiitiiiiiitti  uilli
TlicoplirastUH  mul  Di'tiit'tTiiDt  PliaI«r»iiH.  l)i«in>-
Hiu3  of  IlalicariiiiKKiitt  tixos  hio  birlli  nt  »■('.  :{r>l.
The  time  iff  liiu  biybest  retml4»tjt»h  wiw  iift,iT  flt«
tleiilli  of  Aleiamlt-r.  when  l>i-iiiostht'iics  uiiil  udn^r
(jroat  onilori*  wi^rt-  dead  or  Wnisliwl.  Ho  secius  to
have  mad(«  a  liviii};  by  xvritiii^c  npfcrhcK  for  tlmHc
who  wer«  in  ijL't^d  nl"  tlioiii.  Ilaviug  iiUvay*  Uvcn
a  frieitil  tu  tbe  iiriHdwmtic  party.  h«  was  involved
iu  a  fbaruK  of  i-oii»[)irucy  ujpiiiist  tlu*  d^morracy
and  witlidrKW  t«»  CbalciM  in  Kiibtwa.  Iti*  was  al-
luwed  to  return  t«  Atben*  after  an  abscnctt  of  flf-
t«et)  y«ar(^  On  Ida  nmval,  DiiiarchiiM  bnlg'sl  wjtb
one  I'roxeiiMPt,  ait  AtlMMiian,  u  friend  of  tiin,  wbo,  j
however,  if  tliu'  story  be  true,  rtibbed  tby  iibl  nmu
•>f  bis  moiiey.  DitiiirdnM  bronglit  an  uctioiii
agaiudt  bint,  and,  for  Ou'  gmttime  in  Lis  life^iuadu
)ii8  app<'arHii(-i>  ia  a  ennrt  of  jni«tico.  Tbe  charge
n^aiiiHt  rroxMiuH,  wbicti  U  drawn  np  witb  a  kind
af  lef^al  formality,  in  prertervt-d  by  DionyHinut  of  Hal-
icartiaHsoH.  Of  llio  nunH'ronHoralioii«of  DiiiHrcliim,


iKirii  ,)annary  .1*1,  lH(t&.  was  a  clufwicnl  Bcholu-uftoiif
t;niini-nire.  IliwnlIu1>oratR4l  nitb  bin  brrillieiutd
i'.  It.  HiiMt*  n)Mi'it  llio  Thimiitrini  Urarrar  L'tnguMKA
Stephaiiim  (9  vid«.  Parin,  IH:iI-65);  and  paUtinlwl,
independently,  critical  i>diliuu«  uf  X»iin|ifat»n,  Die-
doriia  Sionhiti,  PauHauian,  Pulybinx.  Di»  CiMiqi,
Zonaraa,  IIosit>d,Knripid(W,aud  tbe  Hi'i'triri  f'.mtti
}finorf»,  bceiiles  a  work  on  tbe  cbrononnti'liy  of
John  Malela8,  etc. iU  ilietl  Scp(«tnb<;rOtl),  1'<I.

Dlndymeu6  (SiuSvfvjv^). Rvr  DiNKVMrs.

Dindjjl'maa  {^yivfiofi  or  Dliidj^a.  f  1)  A  nirnm-
lAiu  iu  Pbi-ygia  on  tbn  fr»>iilier;t  of  Gabtix,  ii^v
till.'  touu  PntwiniiH,  suorwl  t<t  rylwto,  tbr  motlKTiir
the  Kudti,  who  U  lieiice  caUctl  Dindyinrin^.  (S)  A
njuuntnin  in  Mysia,  near  Cyziouit,  ulmi  ucnol  I"
Cybcle. Sec  Ruka.

Diuia.  A  town  of  Gallia  Xarbonemln,  ai>il  Ike-
capital  of  the  Hoilioniici, It  i»  DOW  Digut>.

DinocrStos  {  StivoKparTit ).  A  very  oete1ir>Ud
Mnci-^donian  iirrbitect^,  who  offered  to  cat  Mo»nt
AthikH  into  a  -ttatnn  of  Alexatxler.  iS<M  kniA)
That  niuiiart'h  took  blin  lo  Ef^ypt-,  and  emiiln^
him  in  several  wiirkw  of  art.  Ploleniy  PliiUiel-
phna  direuted  bim  Ut  conHtrnct  a  tcmpU  fur  hit
((iioen,  Ar^inoe,  aflvr  brr  dt^atb; and  tlie  intrti-


only  lbroereniain,BiHltboHe«r«  not  entitled  to  any  1  'io"  was  ^^  have  tbe  coiling  of  lodcttton«  ami  tV
very  high  praiw;. One  uf  them  isajiininst  Demos-'  el  atne  of  iron,  iu  order  that  the  latter  might  ■nwi'


tboiicji,  tuncbing  tbe  att'aii'  of  Ilarpaliist.  Tbe  Uvnt
MSS.  of  DtnarcbiiK  are  tbe  Codex  Cri|>siaiiaH  and
the  Codex  OxouienHin.  Tbo  extant  oratioua  of  Vu
iiarvhiKf  are  found  in  tbe  UHual  collections  of  the  At-
tic oratont,  08peeially  Baiter  and  Sanppu'a  Oratortt
Atiici ;  and  an  edition  by  Tbalheini  (19t^) ;  olab-
or»t«  oouiuicntary  by  Miitzuer  {liU'i).

Dindoif.  (1)  Kakl  Wu^iiEiJa.  A  celubrat*'d  Hel-
lenist, sou  of  Uottlieb  luiiMiitiuel  Diiidorf,  nrnl  iM^rii
Jannary  *id,  18i.i2,  at  Leipzig,  when?  hifi  fathnr  was
Profeeaor  of  Oriental  LaiigUBgeit  in  the  ('uiverAity.
TbitTB  the  yonng  Dindorf  pnrHnrd  bi«  own  studies
in  rliwMitnl  pbilolngy  mnler  Gottfried  Hermann
aud  C.  D.  Beck.  In  IHiTT,  1ir  rereiveil  a  call  to  tbe
L'uiventiiy  of  Bi-rlin,  wliicb  be  dwlineiii.  hut  in  tbe
following  year  aewpti-*!  the  titU'  of  Prnfosunr  Ex-
IraonliuuriuM  ai  L*«:ipzig.  Thi.s  br  bcti]  until  l>^),
when  ho  roaigii^I  it  >"  order  to  devote  hiuiHelf  en- <'itizen  dnriug  the  festivals  t«  pay  for  his  Mai  ><»


tirely  to  reMmreh.  For  fifty  years  be  foiitiinied  lo
labour  in  the  lino  of  Greek  and  eti|»ec;ially  ujkhi  the
dramatic  poetr>*  of  Grecee,  and  bin  eoiilributions
are  of  tbe  very  greatest  vnlae  to  modern  scholar-
ship, ile  die<t  August  Ut,  lUrSi.

The  most  important  works  of  Diudorfs  long  and
pnxlurtivi'  bibours  are  vols,  vii.-xiil.  of  the  great
Invcrni7.7.i-Ilci'k  edition  of  Arigt-opUaue«  (IftiO-JUl;
»  KTpanite  edition  of  Aritittophaiies,  with  note»
and  Hcholia  (1H:{.V:1!))  ;  of  A<>Hi'hyluM  (1841-ftH;  of
Enripldefi  [1KU-ii.t) ;  an  annot^tli'd  edition  of  8opb-
oclea  (IH32~:W>);  a  becond  volume  of  scbolin  U*
Sophocles,  edited  by  Elnial^y  (l!^/^);  an  edition
of  DeniostbcneH,  with  noted  ninl  HCholia  (1846-r>l);
a  work  on  tbo  uictTeti  of  Acttcbylnt.,  Sopliocles,
Euripide-s,  and  AriAtopbikueH  (1^2);  lexicooN  to
t^phoclett  and  AoscbyliLs  (18rj-7*i);  a  text  of  H*h
luer  (1855-riti);  the  KchoHa  to  tbe  (MgKtetf  (IBm).
and  to  the  Iliad  [1H7.'>-TT).  In  rolbilioration  with
llaMe  and  bis  brother,  Lndu-ig  Dindorf,  be  rslii-tMl
the  rAMawm*  Graecaf  Linijuae  of  StepUnnun  {IKU-
K).  Sm  Bnruian,  (iettcku'hlt^  dtr  vlatn,  pkilofogir
(Munich,  1883),  pp.  8t)l-870.

(i)  Lrt>wio  Ai'flusT,  brother  of  the  proccding,


to  l)e  Husptiuded  iu  tbe  air.  Tbo  death  of  tb^
artist  tiiuiKelf  frustrated  tbe  niidi?rtttkiiig  (FliS'
17.  .V,  xxxi  V,  A'2). See  EFllE.st*s,  j).  099.

DitioaUfitua  i  ^tyoarparot).  A  famous  mitlK-
tiHitiiiiiii  td' lljti  PlaEonic  school,  the  brolbrr  of
MuuecbarL'tt,  iind  a  iliwiple  of  Plato.  FutMlis{
tbe  KtepH  of  btH  brother,  who  aiupUOed  tlie  ttir-
or>*  of  conic  aL^ctious,  Dinoatxatna  is  said  to  ban
niiido  many  matheiuatieal  discovori(>a ;  hut  ba  i*
partietiltirly  distingiiixbed  ns  the  invi'Otur  of  lb*
t/nadratrij;  thongh  there  is  some  reason  furosenb-
iiig  the  original  invention  of  this  curve  to  IlipfiiV
of  Elea  {Pntclu*,  Commeitt.  in  KucU  ii.  4).

Dlo. 8ee  Dion.

DiobJSloD  0tci>BoKw\  A  small  coin  of  two  aba!*
(jicft  Dit\ciiMA),  which  was  given  to  each  Atbaii'**


tbe  theatre,  whence  the  gift  waa  called  h*m&A»*
{  Xeu  n^U.  i.  7,  «  a;  Aristot,  Vol.  ii.  7.  $  10).  I"
PluntuH  the  ailjeiTtive  diohnlariii  nigiiili(4  an]rlfci'<K
very  elu-ap  or  mean,  like  "  tupitenuy  "  iu  Eii|{tiib.

Diocaesarea  i  Aioxino-dprin  )  (  more  aticisnU?
8f.pi>iu>ius  [Zfnt^ptt])  iu  Galitaea  was  a  dm'^
place  until  IIerode«  Autipoa  mntle  it  thit  capu^
of  Gnliluea,  under  the  name  of  Diocoesarca.

DiocIJia  iiknK\ia\.  A  town  of  DalniatiA.  tl"*
birthplace,  according  to  some,  of  the  eini-eruf  D"'"
ek-liau  (Aurel.  Viet.  AT/ii/.M).

Dlocletiaii,  Edict  ov.  Au  e<ticl  pnhli*h<vl  >■.<
tho  eniperur  Diocletian  about  a.d.  30:t,  •lin^'*^
thoHO  engaged  in  tbo  sale  of  provisions  not  to"'
Cued  certain  fixed  prices  in  timus  of  Acarcitr.  ''
is  preserved  in  an  inacriptiou  jn  Greek  a&il  U^"
on  the  outer  wall  of  tho  veila  of  n  temple  at  Stn-
louioea  (Ebki-hissar)  in  Coria.  It  state*  tbf  ^^
of  many  varieties  of  fn^visions,  and  these  itifci*
UH  of  their  relative  value  at  tho  time.  The  p«»"
virtioiiH  specified  include  not  only  the  iWin*'?
food  i>f  the  piwjde,  but  alao  a  nnniber  of  irtic)'*
of  luxury. ThuM  mention  is  made  of  »evDral  M**'*


DIOCLETIANOPOLIS


515


DI0CLETIANU8


of  honey,  of  hams,  sausages,  salt  aud  fresh-water
fish,  asparagns  and  beans,  aud  even  pemae  Mena-
puxu  (Westpbalian  hams).  At  the  time  when  the
edict  was  published  the  denariut  was  obvioasty
much  reduced  iu  value,  that  coin  appearing  as
the  equivalent  of  a  single  oyster.  The  inscrip-
tion was  first  copied  by  Sherard  in  1709 ;  it  has
been  elaborately  edited  by  M.  Waddingtou,  with
new  fragments  and  a  commentary,  1864 ;  and  by
Mommsen  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Corpus  In-
tcripttoHum  Latinarum.  Portions  of  the  Greek
copy  and  the  Latin  preamble  were  found  at  Fla-
taea  in  1888-89  during  the  ezploratioos  of  the
American  Sohool  of  Classical  Archseology.  In
1890,  during  the  excavations  of  the  British  School
of  Archseology,  several  hundred  lines  of  the  Greek
version  of  the  decree  were  discovered  at  Megalop-
olis, inclndiug  a  list  of  pigments  with  their  prices.

DiocletianopfiUa  {^toKXijnapoviroKis).  A  city  of
Thrace,  so  called  iu  honour  of  Diocletian.  Its  site
is  not  known. See  Ckletruh.

Diooletiftniu,  Oaius  Valkrius  Iovius.  A  cele-
brated Koman  emperor,  bom  of  an  obscure  family
in  Dalmatia  at  the  town  of  Dioclea,  from  which
he  derived  bis  first  name,  which  was  probably  Do-
ctes,  afterwards  lengthened  to  the  more  harmoni-
ous Greek  form  of  Diocles,  aud  at  length,  after  his
accession  to  the  Empire,  to  the  Roman  form  of
DiocletianuB.  He  likewise,  on  this  occasion,  as-
sumed the  patrician  name  of  Valerius.  Some,
however,  make  him  to  have  been  born  at  Salona.
His  birth -year  is  also  diflferently  given.  The
common  account  says  a.D.  245,  but  other  state-
ments make  him  ten  years  older.  He  was  first  a
common  soldier,  and  by  merit  and  saocess  gradu-
ally rose  to  rank,  serving  in  Ganl  aud  in  Moesia
under  Probns,  and  being  present  at  the  campaign
against  the  Persians  when  Carus  perished  in  so
mysterious  a  manner.  He  commanded  the  house-
hold or  imperial  body-guard  when  young  Numeri-
anna,  the  sod  of  Cams,  was  secretly  put  to  death
by  Aper,  his  father-in-law,  while  travelling  in  a  lit-
ter oo  accoaut  of  illness,  on  the  return  of  the  army
from  Persia.  The  death  of  Numerianns  being  dis-
rovered,  after  several  days,  by  the  soldiers  near
Chaloedon,  they  arrested  Aper  and  proclaimed
Diocletiau  emperor,  who,  addressing  the  army
from  his  tribunal  in  the  camp,  protested  bis  in-
nocence of  the  death  of  Numerianns,  and  then,
upbraiding  Aper  for  the  crime,  plunged  his  sword
into  his  body.  Diocletian  made  bis  solemn  entry
ioto  Nieoniedia  in  September,  a.d.  384,  and  after-
wards chose  this  town  for  his  favourite  residence.
Carinns,  the  other  son  of  Cams,  having  collected
a  force  to  oppose  Diocletiau,  the  two  armies  met
at  Margum  in  Moesia,  where  the  soldiers  of  Cari-
nns had  the  advantage  at  first,  bnt  Carinus  himself
having  been  slain  by  one  of  his  own  officers,  both
armies  joined  in  acknowledging  Diocletian  emper-
or, A.D.  286.  Diocletian  was  generous  after  his  vic-
tory,  and,  contrary  to  the  common  practice,  there
were  no  executions,  proscriptions,  or  confiscations
of  property.  He  even  retained  most  of  the  offi-
cer* of  Carinns  in  their  places.  Diocletian,  on
aaanming  the  Imperial  power,  found  the  Empire
assailed  in  various  quarters,  bnt  his  talents  and
energy  soon  succeeded  in  counteracting  these
evils.  In  the  year  386,  he  chose  his  old  friend
^laximian,  a  brave,  but  rude  and  uncultivated
noldicr,  as  his  colleague,  and  it  is  to  the  credit


of  both  that  the  latter  contiuued  ever  after  faith-
ful to  Diocletian  and  willing  to  follow  his  advice.
Maximian  was  stationed  iu  Gaul,  and  on  the  Ger-
man frontier,  to  repel  invasiou ;  Diocletiau  re-
sided chiefly  iu  the  East,  to  watch  the  Persians,
though  he  appears  to  have  visited  Rome  in  the
early  part  of  his  reign.  After  the  lapse  of  a  few
years  Diocletiau  thought  it  necessary,  in  conse-
quence of  invasions  and  revolts  in  difierant  parts
of  the  Empire,  to  increase  the  number  of  bis  col-
leagues. On  the  1st  of  March,  293,  or,  according
to  some,  291,  he  appointed  Galenns  a  CaeRar,  and
Maximian,  at  the  sumu  time,  adopted,  on  bis  part,


Co\d  of  Dtocletiuu.


Constantins  Chloms.  The  two  Caesars  repudiat-
ed their  respective  wives ;  Galerius  married  Vale-
ria, Diocletian's  daughter,  and  Constantins  mar-
ried Theodora,  daughter  of  Maximian.  The  two
Caesars  remained  subordinate  to  the  two  Augusti,
though  each  of  the  four  was  intrusted  with  the  ad-
miniatratiou  of  a  part  of  the  Empire.  Diocletiau
kept  to  himself  Asia  aud  Egypt ;  Maximian  had
Italy  and  Africa ;  Galerins,  Thrace  and  Illyricnm  ;
and  Constantins,  Gaul  and  Spain.  But  It  was
rather  an  administrative  than  a  political  division.
At  the  head  of  the  edicts  of  each  prince  were  put
the  names  of  all  four,  beginning  with  tbat  of  Dio-
cletiau. Diocletiau  resorted  to  this  arrangement
probably  as  much  for  reasons  of  internal  as  of
external  policy.  By  fixing  opon  three  colleagues,
one  in  each  of  the  great  divisions  of  the  Empire,
each  having  bis  army,  and  all  mutually  checking
one  another,  Diocletian  put  a  stop  to  military  In-
solence aud  anarchy,  thongh  another  danger  re-
mained— tbat  of  ilispntes  and  wars  between  the
varions  sharers  of  the  imperial  power.

The  new  Caesars  Justified  Diocletian's  especta-
tiouB.  Sticcessfut  wars  were  waged  In  different
quarters  of  the  Empire;  and  though  Galerius  at
first  met  with  a  defeat  from  Narses,  king  of
Persia,  yet,  iu  the  following  year,  he  gave  the
Persians  a  terrible  overthrow.  Narses  sued  for
peace,  which  was  granted  by  Diocletiau,  on  con-
dition of  the  Persians  giving  up  all  the  territory
oo  the  right  or  western  bank  of  the  Tigris.  This
peace  was  concluded  in  297,  and  lasted  forty  years.
At  the  same  time  Diocletiau  marched  into  Egypt
against  AchiUaeus,  whom  he  besieged  in  Alexan-
dria, which  he  took  after  a  siege  of  eight  montlis,
when  the  usurper  and  his  chief  adherents  were
put  to  death.  Diocletiau  is  said  to  have  behaved
on  this  occasion  with  unusual  sternness,  several
towns  of  Egypt,  among  others  Bnsiris  and  Coptos,
being  destroyed.  For  several  years  after  this  the
Empire  enjoyed  repose,  and  Diocletiau  and  his
colleagoes  were  chiefly  employed  in  framing  laws
and  administrative  regnlations  and  in  coustrnct-
ing  forts  on  the  frontiers.  Diocletian  kept  a  splen-
did court  at  Nicomedia,  which  town  he  embellished
with  numerous  structures.  He,  or  rather  Maxim-
iau  by  bis  order,  caused  the  magnificent  Thermae


i)iou>Rua


bin


UIODOffL'S


nt  Route  to  lie  hnilt,  the  rcmaiUB  of  xrliich  still
War  I.tUMTlr linn's  tmiiw,  and  which  ooiitnitie<d,  be-
Hiilos  tho  bathH,  a  libnuy,  »  unueiim,  and  other  m-
tnlilislinipnt^.

hi  Fehnmry,  3(K1,  Dioclptlaii  iitsneil  an  nlict
agninsl;  tlio  ChrimtiAiiB,  onlf^rinK  thfir  cliiirclirn)
to  b«  nizet],  their  biHik»  to  bn  bnniiil,  »ih1  »)]
CIinAtianH  tu  Im<  ilJHtniKiu'tl  fnmi  fiflirfft  rivil  or
inilitAry  —  with  oiIht  iiiMialtion,  <^Xi>lll>liTO,  liiiw-
uvor,  tir  death.  Varioiiu  (;auHO»  huve  bix^u  aasigiied
for  thiu  meMare.  It  in  knonu  thai  Galeriiis  bud
atwuyibeen  ba«eil«  tothBChriHtiiiiis,  while  Dioclo-
tiuii  lind  oiw>tiljr  fuvdiiivt)  iheni,  and  bad  uiuploycd
tlii>tu  111  hU  uruiieH  and  iibnut  bitt  |i«niun  ;  and  llu-
ttL<biiiB  it|iviikH  uf  the  priMptTity.  »ecnnty,  aud  |im-
tticlion  wbiuh  they  eiijuytHl  imdcr  liiti  reif;"-  They
bad  phiircheH  iti  ti\n»t  n-nvn*.  and  inioat  Niconiediii,
in  iiartitMiliir,  riiHl^-r  thp  vi>ry  eye  of  the  *tmi*r»>r.
JiiHt  before  tlio  tidict  xr»»  iwtiiwd,  Galflriiitt  bad  n?-
paii'ed  tu  Nic(mtt*dia  to  iiidncu  Diooletian  to  pro-
»L-ribe  the  Chri«tians.  Hi-  filled  tbo  PiniwrorV
mind  with  K'pnrtA  of  cotiHpirnciva  and  mMlition»,
Hiid,  aideil  hy  the  arCilici's  of  thv  beiitbeii  )ii  imt-
huiid,  wiui  at  liut  iiiicc«<tMftiI.  The  bjirbai'jtio
that  followed  upon  the  iiwniDf;  of  tbe  cilJet  above
referrod  to  ore  beyond  belief.  Mnlicions  inge-
nuity vraa  raokod  to  the  utmost  to  devise  tort-
arwi  for  the  pet-BPcutcd  follower*  of  Jeeus.  For
tbe  space  of  ten  years  did  thiti  pfTReotition  race
with  Mriirrirly  intlij{at«f>il  born^nt;  and  such  mul-
titudes were  ninjiwicnHl  in  all  parts  of  tbe  Em-
pire that  nt  Imhi  tb*'  iiiipi-nal  nmrdKn'rH  veulnred
|u  ei-ecl  a  triiniiiibid  cnliiiiiii,  In'itring  thu  barba-
rously lioastfiil,  yet  fiilMe  inHcri|>liuH,  that  tbey
biul  oxtinj^iiiithed  the  CbrLalian  name  and  ini^wr-
Mtitiou  an<l  realun^d  tbe  worxliip  of  the  gixis  to
itH  former  purity  oiid  Mplendour.  Thin  waH  thft
la^t  perwuMitiuii  iimlvr  Ihe  Koinau  Kinpire.

In  Nuvi'iiibt-r,  ^i:J,  Diouleliaii  repiiin-d  to  Rtmio,
wbirnt  lie  and  Mnxtiniaii  enJitM-d  the  lionoiir  of  a
triiiuiph,  followed  by  festive  umiiefi.  This  was  tlin
iMit  triaDi[ib  that  Koine  saw.  The  popnlaee  of
that  eity  compbiincd  of  the  tM^niinmy  of  Diivletian
on  that  oroaMion,  ami  noolli'iidiMl  liim  liy  tbeir  gibes
and  sjircasniK  (but  Iih  Ipft  Roriu<  nbruplty,  in  the
month  of  DfcitmbiT.  In  very  roJd  wejitlirr.  A  long
illofuu)  miHUrd,  ivliit-h  cinifiiied  liini  nl  Nironiedin;
and  winii  afl^T  liis  rwrovnry  bis  wits  vtHJrml  by
OnleriuH,  nbo  perNiiadrd  aiul  HbnoHt  forei-d  bini  l«
abdinat*.  Aroording  to  others,  however,  Piotrb*.
tian  did  mi  flpontant'ouftly.  S4-Miiig  off  for  Halo.
na,  iu  Uahuatia,  be  budt  hjin&«lf,  near  Ihin  place,
an  cxteuaivo  palace  by  the  sea-shoi-e,  in  which  he
lived  for  the  rest  of  bis  life,  respected  by  the  oth-
er em[ieroni,  without  cares  and  without  regi^et.
At  the  snme  time  that  DicH-letinn  abdicated  nt
N'icoaiedia,  Mnximinn,  arconlicig  to  an  ngreement
lietween  Ibeni,  ])erfi>mu'd  a  Niniilar  ceremony  at
Milan.  Maxiuiiiin  n<tiret1  to  liirt  neat  in  LiieniitA;
but,  not  lii'ing  endowed  with  the  rirmnt-wt  of  Dio-
ctetian,  be  tne«I  Houie  time  after  to  reeover  hi^
funuor  jiower,  anil  wrote  to  blf  old  colleagcie  to
induce  liiui  to  do  the  Kiime.  "Were  yon  but  to
come  lo  fialona,''  amiwered  Ditfcleiiau,  "and  see
the  vegetabtett  which  I  niiHe  in  nty  gnnlen  with
luy  onu  Lands,  you  wonid  no  longer  talk  To  mc
of  empire."  Diocletian  died  May  1.^13.  See  tbe
•(ndiri  by  rriMJM  (li*i>i)  and  M«mmi  { 1W6).

Dlodoma  (AioiWfior).  (1)  An  liiHtorinn,  snr-
nanied  SlcCxi'^,  becanHr  bom  lit  Agyriiim  in  8icily,
and  tbo  contemporary-  of  lulinn  Ciwdur  and  Augus-


tus, Uiir  principal  data  for  the  events  of  hii  life
are  derived  fnnn  his  own  work.  In  early  lifv  ht
travelletl  into  Atia,  .\fi'ica,nnd  Europe,  anil  no  tit
return  r«t.abltHbed  himself  at  Rome,  wliera  hnptiU-
liiilied  a  general  history,  in  forty  iMwks,  under  lb«
^  title  of  HifiKioBi'jKij  'loTttpucii,  or  HiHtnrical  Utinry.
I  Tu  tills  labour  lie  devoteil  thirty  years  of  bia  UA;
j  The  history  conipndiendeil  a  period  of  IIW  yoti%
I  boRlflM  Ibo  time  pii>ceding  tlie  Trojan  Wu.  awl
I  was  curled  down  to  tbu  end  of  CaMar's  Gallic
war.  Uia  work  wan  written  after  the  dealli  of
,  Caesar.  Tbo  firat  six  books  were  devoleit  to  tbe
fabnlou«  history  anterior  to  tbo  war  of  Tmy,  atid
'  of  tliette  tbe  threo  farmer  to  tbe  atitiquitieo  of  U^
I  bar i an  Stat«s,  tbe  thix'c  latter  lo  the  ai-cLm)«0
of  the  OreekH.  But  llm  historian,  tliungb  tnatiiiic
of  the  fabulous  history  of  tbe  barbarianii  in  lh«
,  linst  lbre«  books,  enters  into  an  account  i>r  Ibilr
mannei-H  and  UKages,  and  oarriei*  down  th«t  liivlccy
of  these  nations  to  a  point  of  time  piv4erier  to  lb<
TiMJan  War.  Thus,  in  the  first  lKH)k  lie  Ktvrt  t
skvtub  of  Egyptian  history  from  the  reigiiof  Meoa
to  Atmisls.  In  tbo  eleven  following  book*  bftd^
lulls  the  diftereut  ovent«  which  bappei)«d  b*>
twecn  tbe  Trojan  War  and  tbe  death  of  Alexiiuiv
I  ho  Groat;  while  tbe  rcniaiuingtwenty-lbreabonb
contain  tbe  history  of  tbo  world  down  to  lltf
Gallic  War  and  tbe  conquest  of  Britain.  We  tu»
only  a  small  pail  remaining  of  this  vast  couifila-
tion — nanioly,  tbe  firwt  five  books;  then  rnnn  lb*
eleventh  to  tbe  twentieth,  both  iuclinnfe;  wd.
Bnally,  fiHgments  of  the  other  bu<iks  fmm  ibesiilb
to  the  tenth  inclusive,  and  also  of  tbe  last  t«rriii;.
These  reacutnl  portiouMweowe  UiEuHtdiiuH;  toJvhii
MalatasiGeorgiuH  Syncelliw,  and  other  writer* of  tbf
Ljower  £ni|>ire,  who  have  cited  thein  iu  llw  wan"
of  their  uw»  works;  but,  above  all,  to  the  ftatbnr>
of  tlie  "  Extrarts  iwspcrting  Emba^sicH"  lunl  nf  tir
"  KxtractM  n-wpefting  VirlncH  and  Vicr*."  Wrniw
indebted  aim*  for  a  part  of  ihum  to  the  |iftiriaKb
I'botius,  who  has  jntu-rted  in  bin  .VyrioAiMoa  A*
tracts  from  several  of  tbo  books,  from  llie  tliiri](>
linit  t-o  the  thirty-third,  aud  from  the  thirly-ililb
to  the  tliirty-eiglitb  and  fortieth.  ImixirUul  •*•
dition.H  have  also  been  taade  from  M68.  in  tbe  Vat-
ican Library.

A  great,  advantage  {Kisseseed  by  Diodimuv^*'
niiPHt  of  the  ancient,  bihtorians  is  his  lndicatiii|tb'
nntiM  of  time,  though  it  must  Ih*  ackntmledjnl  •>
the  Hami*.  time  that  liis  chronology  offeni  eccwioi^'
dinicuUicH  and  oft«n  m-icrtlA  i'<lni'lng.  Diwloni*.
who  wrote  at  Uonie,  and  at  a  period  u'hen  tbeil*-
minion  of  tinit  city  extended  over  tbe  grealef  pi''
of  tbe  oivil|7A<d  world,  arnuigca  his  aarrstirt  >>
anonrdancc  with  tbe  Roman  calendar  and  oounltf
fa$ii;  but  he  frequently  odds  the  name*  irf***
Atboniari  archons  who  were  eont«inporBueuua>

With  regard  t4i  the  bistorical  value  of  the  «<f*
Itself  and  tbe  nieritN  of  the  author,  the  m«il  virf-
ing  oinnions  buvit  1>bau  entertained  by  opdfo
wrttei-H.  Tlie  principal  fault  of  Diodnnia  PHaul"
have  been  the  too  great  extent  of  hi*  vt>rk.  !■
was  not  possible  fur  any  man  living  in  the  tliu«'>f
AugUBtus  To  writ-e  an  unexcepliunnbln  ina«f**l
hi»toiy.  It  is  not,  then,  a  matter  of  anrpnMr  Ibrt
Dioilorns,  wlio  does  not  apjieju"  to  have  been  a  «••
of  9tiiH?t'iorabilitiej».Mbonld  have  fallen  intoantt*
berof  itarticiilar  errors  and  should  h.-ive  pimped  f<A
nuK'b  i-eliance  on  aiitburities  aonielimet  ffti  fmn
trustworthy.  Wherever  he  itpeaks  from  bi«  o*"
observation  be  may,  perba{i«,  generally  be  irUnl


DIOIXJTDS


617


UIOGEN£S


npon;  bnt  when  he  is  ctimpiliog  from  the  writings
tif  others  he  has  shown  little  jndgmeDt  in  the  selec-
tion. The  literary  style  of  Diotlorus,  though  tiot
veryiinre  or  elegant,  ie  sufficiently  perspicaons  an^l
presents  but  few  difficulties,  except  where  the  MSS.
are  defective,  as  is  frequently  the  case.  The  best
editions  of  Diodoms  are  those  ofWesseliog  (1746),
L.  Dindorf  (1867-68),  and  Bekker  (1853-54).  (!!)  A
native  of  Caria,  and  a  disciple  of  the  Megario
School.  He  was  a  great  adept  in  that  species  of
▼erbal  combat  which  prevailed  among  the  philos-
ophers of  bis  sect.  It  is  said  that  a  question  was
pm|toaed  to  him  in  the  presence  of  Ptolemy  Soter
by  ^tilpo,  one  of  his  fraternity,  which  be  required
time  to  answer,  and  on  this  account  he  was  ridi-
cnled  by  Ptolemy  and  denominated  "Chronns'*
(Kpovof).  Mortified  at  this  defeat,  he  wrote  a  book
on  the  qnestion,  bat  nevertheless  died  of  vexation.
He  is  the  repnted  anthor  of  the  fomous  sophism
against  motion :  "  If  any  body  be  moved,  it  is
moved  either  in  tbe  place  where  it  is  or  in  a  place
where  it  is  not,  for  nothing  can  act  or  suffer  where
it  is  not,  and  therefore  there  is  no  such  thing  as
motion.'*  Diodorus  was  rewarded  for  this  dis-
covery; for,  having  dislocated  his  shoulder,  the
surgeon  who  was  seut  for  kept  him  for  some  time
in  tortnre,  while  he  proved  from  the  philoso-
pher'a  own  mode  of  reasoning  that  the  bone  conld
not  have  moved  out  of  its  place.  (3)  A  Peripa-
tetic philosopher,  with  whom  the  uninterrupted
snccession  of  the  Peripatetic  School  terminated.
He  was  a  native  of  Tyre  and  a  pnpil  of  Critolafts.
Heution  is  often  made  of  him  in  the  seleotiona  of
Stobaene  and  also  in  tbe  works  of  Cicero.  The
sovereign  good,  according  to  Diodorus,  waa  to  live
in  a  becoming  manner,  free  from  toil  and  care,  ri
aitox^^as  KaX  KoXuff  ^,  or,  vaeore  omni  molestUi
cam  kontatatef  as  Cicero  expresses  it  (^ooii.  ii.  42).
(4)  An  orator  and  epigrammatic  poet,  a  native  of
Sardis.  He  was  samamed  Zonae  iZ»vas).  He
fonght  ill  Asia  and  waa  contemporaneous  with
Hithridates  the  Great,  against  whom  he  was
charged  with  conspiring.  He  defended  himself
8D9cesBfnlly.  Nine  of  bis  epigrams  remain.  (5)
Another  native  of  Sardis,  who  wrote  bistorical
works,  odes,  and  epigrams.  Strabo  speaks  of  him
as  aabseqnent  to  the  former  and  a  contemporary
and  fHeiid  of  his  own.  We  have  one  of  his  epi-
grams remaining.

Dioddtus  (AuiSoTor).  A  Stoic  philosopher,  and
teaclier  of  Cicero,  in  whose  bonse  he  died  B.C.  59
(Gio.Bnif.90;  Ad  Att.  ii.QO;  7^cv.39}.

Diogfoea  (Acoy^vf^ff).  (1)  A  celebrated  Cynic
pbiloeopher  of  Sinop^.  His  father,  Icesias,  a  bank-
er, was  convicted  of  debaslug  the  public  coin,
and  waa  obliged  to  leave  the  country;  or,  accord-
ing to  another  accouuc,  his  father  and  himself
were  charged  with  this  offence,  and  the  former
waa  thrown  into  prison,  while  the  son  escaped
and  went  to  Athens.  Here  he  attached  himself,
as  a  disciple,  to  Antistheues,  who  was  at  the  bead
of  the  Cynics.  Antistheues  at  first  refused  to  ad-
mit him  into  his  honse  and  even  struck  bim  with
a  stick.  Diogenes  calmly  bore  the  rebuke  and
aaid,  "Strike  me,  Antistheues,  bnt  you  will  never
find  a  stick  sufficiently  hard  to  remove  me  from
your  presence,  while  you  speak  anything  worth
bearing."  The  philosopher  was  so  much  pleased
with  this  reply  that  he  at  once  admitteil  him
among  his  scholars. Diogenes  fully  adopte<l  the


prinoiples  and  oharaoter  of  his  master.  Benounc-
ing  every  other  object  of  ambition,  he  deter-
mined to  distingaish  himself  by  Ma  contempt  of
riches  and  houonrs  and  by  his  iuvectives  against
luxury.  He  wore  a  coarse  cloak,  carried  a  wallet
and  a  staff,  made  the  porticoes  and  other  pnblio
places  his  habitation,  and  depended  upon  casual
contributions  fur  his  daily  bread.  A  friend  whom
he  had  desired  to  procure  him  a  cell  not  executing
his  order  so  soon  as  was  expected,  he  took  up  his
abode  in  a  wi6oT,  or  lai^  vessel,  in  the  Metroum.
It  is  probable,  however,  that  this  waa  only  a  tem-
porary expression  of  indignation  and  contempt,
and  tbat  he  did  not  make  it  the  settled  place  of
his  residence.  This  famous  "tub"  is  indeed  cele-
brated by  Juvenal;  it  is  also  ridiculed  by  Luciau
and  meutioned  by  Seneca.  But  no  notice  is  taken
of  BO  singular  a  circumstance  by  other  ancient
writers  who  have  mentioned  this  philosopher.  It
cannot  be  doubted,  however,  that  Diogenes  prac-
tised the  most  hardy  self-coutrol  and  the  most
rigid  abstinence— exposing  himself  to  the  ntmost
extremes  of  heat  and  cold  and  living  upon  the
simplest  diet,  casually  supplied  by  the  hand  of
charity.  In  his  old  age,  sailing  to  Aegina,  he  was
taken  by  pirates  and  carried  to  Crete,  where  he
was  exposed  to  sale  iu  the  public  market.  When
the  anotioueer  asked  bim  what  he  conld  do,  he
said,  "  I  can  govern  men ;  therefore  sell  me  to  one
who  wants  a  master."  Xeniades,  a  wealthy  Corin-
thian, happening  at  that  instant  to  pass  by,  was
stmek  with  the  singularity  of  his  reply  and  pur-
chased him.  On  their  arrival  at  Corinth,  Xeniailea
gave  him  his  freedom  and  committed  to  him  the
education  of  his  obildren  aud  the  direction  of  bis
domestic  concerns.  Diogenes  executed  this  trust
with  BO  much  judgment  and  fidelity  that  Xeniades
used  to  say  that  the  gods  had  seut  a  good  genins
to  his  bouse.  Dniiug  his  residence  at  Corinth,  the
interview  between  him  and  Alexander  is  said  to
have  taken  place.  Plntaivh  relates  that  Alexan-
der, when  at  Corinth,  receiving  the  congratulations
of  all  ranks  un  being  appointed  to  command  tin-
army  of  the  Greeks  against  the  Porsiaus,  miseed
Diogenes  among  the  number,  with  whose  character
he  was  not  nnacqnainted.  Curious  to  see  one  who
had  given  so  signal  an  instance  of  bis  haughty  in-
dependence of  spirit,  Alexander  went  in  search  of
bim  and  found  him  Bitting  in  his  tub  in  the  sun.
"  I  am  Alexauder  the  Great,"  said  the  monarch.
"  And  I  am  Diogenes  tbe  Cynic,"  replied  the  philos-
opher. Alexander  then  requested  that  he  would
inform  bim  what  service  he  could  render  him.
"Stand  frvm  between  me  and  the  sun,"  said  the
Cynic.  Alexander,  struck  with  the  reply,  said  to
h^  friends,  who  were  ridiculing  the  whimsical  sin-
gularity of  the  philoBopfaer,  "  If  I  were  not  Alex-
ander, I  shonld  wish  to  be  Diogenes."  This  story
is  too  good  to  be  omitted,  bnt  there  are  seveiiil
circumstances  which  in  some  degree  diminish  its
credibility.  It  supposes  Diogenes  to  have  lived
in  his  tub  at  Corinth,  whereas  it  is  certain  that  he
lived  there  in  the  house  of  Xeniades,  and  that,  if
he  had  ever  dwelt  in  a  tub,  lie  left  it  l>ehind  him
at  Athens.  Alexander,  moreover,  was  at  this  time
scarcely  twenty  years  old,  and  conld  not  call  him-
Bclf  Alexander  the  Great,  for  he  did  not  receive  tbiH
title  till  his  Persian  aud  Indian  expedition,  after
which  he  never  returned  to  Grerce;  yet  the  whole
transaction  represents  him  as  elated  witb  the  pride
of  conquest. Diogenes  probably  was  visited  by


DIOGENES


518


niOMEHES


'lexaud^.  wlieu  the  lattiT  IWd  tht^  gnnom)  mutein-
hly  t>f  flic  (ircvkd  at  Cmititli,  iiiiil  wna  nnviwiX  liy
bim  with  rudcQcsa  atid  iiinivility,  which  iqaj  have
^V43U  riH?  to  tlio  whole  Aiory.  Tho  philosnpbcr  at
this  timn  would  have  been  about  Bovoiity  ycnra  of

Viinoii«accoDnt«nrc  giveu  concerning  tlvc  mon-
nor  nnd  tinieof  bisdoath. Ir  m-ciija  unxtt  i>robii1*Io

that  ho  died  a(  Cor-
inth, of  mere  de-
(:»>',  in  the  tiineti-

Pthyi'nrnf  lii»»Kf*
and  ill  lhi>  114th
Olymniuit.  A  col-
nnui  of  Parian
m»rble,  U;rmii>ut'
iiiR  in  tho  li^iire
ofadoii.wiu)  ruined
.  over  hiM  t  o  tu  b.
His  frllow-towns-
mi'U  of  tSiito})/  a1»n
t^n■ct«d  briiKet)
Ktntue«  in  iiiemory

ofihu|d)i1i>ftn|)hor.

Uk.ii.r..-- 1.1  uu.  n.iiot  or 'TmIk"  (Prom  Dtog'MirM  Irft  bc-
«  rrafjinoiii  of*  L«bd|i  ib  ib«  Briiisdi  bind  bini  no  ava-
*"""""'■'  t<-ni«fphih»oid'iy.

Aftt;!'  thu  exoiuplo  of  liiit  school,  hi-  wiih  muni  ut-
teiitive  to  prni'tical  than  to  theon<liciit  witidont.
Seo  Heriuuuu.iTiir  Gt«<^l\ivltte  and  Krifikihn  tHogtaett
<  Hfilbrouii,  ItMKI),  and  the  Article  Cvxici.

(^)  A  native  of  Apollonia  in  Crete,  n  ho  wn^  5  pu-
pil uf  AuuximeQC6  and  contemporary  with  Annxa^-
onis.  Schleienuucher,  however,  kfllrnis.  froia  tlic
iutenjal  evidence  of  tbo  fraKi"^^<>tA  of  the  two
philutHipUent,  tb:kt  Dii^Keuen  prevedud  AiiuxiiKoruH.
Hnt  Diu)>eni^ii  nii;{lit  have  written  bcfitre  Annxa^-
•>rnB  and  yet  have  been  htH  jnnior.  us  we  kiH>w
wait  the  i-oHc  with  lOmpediwIes.  Uiogf^nes  followed
AnuxinuMif-A  in  making  air  the  printnl  element  of
j<ll  tbiugfi;  hnt  he  rarrieil  bi!>  viows  furbltcr,  and
rrffurdeil  tint  iEniv«nM^  um  l^niiin);  fnim  an  intelli*
gent  priiiL-ipU-,  by  wbicli  it  was  at  once  vlviOtMl
and  urdurt-d.  a  ratiotml  an  well  ah  WMiNitive  houI,
htit  Htiil  withont  recogiiixiiig  any  diMLinrlimi  btv
tween  matter  and  uiiiid.  Diogunoa  nrote  several
book*)  on  Cosmology  (Ilrpi  4>i>o-(uc).

(3>  Laektu's,  80  callMl  from  his  native  city,
Laei't6  io  Cilicia.  lie  wrot^-'  the  Wvnh  of  the  philo»-
ophers(<>tXuao^<  BioO.iu  t«u  booko.whicb  areBti])
•-■xtant.  The  period  when  he  lived  is  not  exactly
known,  hut  it  Js  Bup]K)st^d  to  bitvo  been  during  the
ivigiiH  of  Soptimtus  SeveruB  and  Carociilla.  Diog-
enes itt  thoii};ht  to  buve  belonged  to  the  Epicurean
8i'hoi)l.  He  ilivideH  ull  the  Greek  jdiiloruiphent  inti»
two  c-liiswtt:  llioxe  of  the  Ii>iiie  and  lliotHt  of  the
Italic  Hchool.  \Av  derives  the  fi rat  from  Anaximuu-
der,  the  second  fmiu  Fy tbagoras.  After  Korratej*,  ]n_'
tliviitenthe  Ion  inn  phtloaoplieiTt)ntothrFM>*branrlieit:
{»)  I'latoniut  theAcadeniii!tt,dDVLn  toClitoiuaclitiH;
(fi|  the  t'yiiics,  down  to  ChrysipjinH;  (c)  Arist^tl)^
ami  Tht'opbraMtiM.  The  serifs  of  Italio  plnto»-
(iphcnt  conHidtH, after  PyitiagornM,  of  the  following:
Ti^bmgeH,  XeuophaiiPB,  Paruieni<leM,  Keiio  of  KU*n,
LeucippiiH,  IJemoerituu,  and  others  tlowii  to  t^pim-
riis.  The  lirat  Huveu  books  are  ilevoted  t*»  th«
Ionic  phi1o»ophura;  tbii  la^t  three  treat  of  the
Italic  Hcbwd.

The  work  of  Diogenes  is  a  crude  e<»utnbntinn
towjirtis  the  history  of  philiwopby.  It  conl^ina  n
brief  account  of  the  1ive«,  dDcciiue«,  and  sayings


of  miMtpomons  whahave1N^pn^ttlllMl  pbilmmpi
iinil  though the  author  in  rvidcntly  a  muni  uii
penion  for  the  tJUik  nhleh  ho  impuaed  npon  hi
tudf,  and  hiin  fihown  very  little  Jtiflginent  and  >k^
eriminntion  in  the  execution  of  ir,  yet  the  bwt!
extretucly  useful  fta  &  collection  of  furl*,  wliirh
could  not  hrtvo  learned  from  any  other  qnar%^
nnd  i*  entertaining  aa  a  aort  of  pot-pourri  on f^^'
subject. The  article  on  EpicnniA  ia  rnliiablcs^  ^ ,
f(nitaining  oume  original  tetters of  that  jiht/^'
opher,  which  comprise  a  fairly  eatisfactory  rpit<j|tif.
of  Lite  Kpicun*iui  dm-triues  and  air  \«'ry  uwfnl  in
the  reailcra  of  Lncretiua. The \w.fA  i^ilioiu  «/
Diogenea  are  Ihiow  of  HUbner  (Leipzig,  IftJMff
and  Cohet  (Paris,  IHAO).

Dlogeniautis  <AioyrpftaKMr)-  A  Greek  cnun-
marian  of  IIiMucletL.  About  the  midille  of  ttwiK*
ond  century  a.i>.  bo  made  nxtmrt>t,  In  five  boob,
from  the  great  collection  i>f  glo»nrj»rompilcd  alwnl
a  century  before  by  PiunphiluK.  Thi'j«t  rxlmclt
form  the  fonndatinn  of  Iho  lexicon  of  Hmcbmi
(r).  v.).  A  iMdIectton  of  pnivrrliK  made  by  bim  \»
preserved  in  an  abridged  form. Set-  LEXii:n!c.

Diomedeae  InsiUae  (<^Lo^4d«tai  retrod.  Five
Hnmll  iitlnnda  in  the  Adriatic  8ca,  north  of  lite
promontory  Gnrgnnnm  in  Apulia,  uaniMl  aftirDio-
medes.  (^^e  Diomkdiu.)  The  largest  uf  thiaf;
railed  Diomedea  lunula  orTrimeruM  (Trcmili).m
the  place  whither  Iu1ia,  the  daughter  of  Aagtutai^
wa.H  exiled  (Tac.  ^nn.  iv.71).

DlomSdea  (AwMii^-jr).  (l)Tbe  sonofTydMiw'
DeTpy16.  He  wun  king  of  AetoliA,  and  oihi  uf  tlix
bmvotit  of  the  Grecian  chiefs  in  the  Trojan  Wst,
ranking  next  t4>  Achillea  and  Aiax.  Homer foptv-
sents  him  as  one  of  the  favourites  of  AtM''
Among  his  exploits,  it  is  recnrtlexl  of  him  tlial  bf
eiigagi'd  in  single  combat  with  HtK^toraiid  AriifU:
that  he  wounded  Ares.  Aeucas,  ami  Aphrodite ;  so'l
that,  ill  conuurt  with  OdytM«us,  ho  carried  off 'b*
homi-H  of  Kbt-'Hiis  and  the  palladium,  and  Nccnrfl
till!  arrows  of  Pliil*K:t«tc».  Diomedes  wa*i  drfrti™
of  the  Hlfcction  of  his  wife  Ai'Kial^  Ihroogb  tb'
wrath  and  veiigi-unt'o  of  AphtuUil^,  by  wbiw  '■'
tliiunce,  during  bin  absence  at  Ibo  war,Bbe  liadi'''
come  attached  to  Cyllabarus,  tlie  son  of  8th*a»ki*'
Diomcdes  was  so  nflticted  at  tba  estrangeneet  of
A«gLal<^  that  be  abandoned  tireeee  and  seitlotl*t
the  head  of  a  colony  in  Magna  Qmccia,  wktifh*
founded  a  city,  to  which  he  gave  the  name*
Argyripa,  and  married  a  daughter  of  Dmhi*
prince  of  the  country.  In  the  pnigrcas  of  hi«"r
age  to  Italy,  Diotuedes  was  ehipwrecketl  on  tW
part  of  the  Lii>yan  cooat  which  wmk  niiiler  tbe4<n5
of  l-ycns,  who  seized  aiul  coufiiu'd  him.  H*  *■*
however,  liberHt«<tbyCallirrbf>6,  the  tyrant'>dui|(l>'
ter,  who  Wcame  »o  fund  of  him  that  nixio  bis  n"*
ting  the  Afm-ai)  shores  she  put  lieRH'lf  to  drtlfc
Diomcdes.  ncconliug  to  one  account,  died  lu  IW
at  a  very  ndvanccil  age;  while  another  l<p«"
niakcN  bim  to  have  been  Blain  by  bis  father-in^**
Daiinus.  His  companions  were  »o  much  afiicK"
by  biH  death  that  they  were  chauged  into  Uri*
A'lTgil,  however,  makes  this  tr»usfonn»iioi)  oftdt**
in  d»t«,  and  to  have  taken  place  during  llic  hfr
time  of  Diom«V>»  {Aen.  xi.  i^Til.  Ho  seems  1^  h*'*
follon-e<l  the  tnulilion  reconled  by  Ovid  (V*'-*!*'
457).  that  Aguon,  one  of  Diomedes's  cfunpanioui  *
his  voyugt"  fniin  Tniy,  Insnileft  ApliDHliK'  witbw"-
leiii|)tnous  liiiigtiage,  and  ibat  the  goddeoSf  in  I^
vcuge,  trausfonued not only Agiioii,  bat  touj


DIOMOSIA


6id


DION


others  of  Diomedea's  foUowen  into  birds.  (See
DiOMKDKAB  IN8ULAS.)  (2)  A  king  of  tbo  Bistoues,
in  Tlirace,  sou  of  Ares  »ud  Cyren^.  His  mares
fod  on  hnmao  flesh.  Heracles  sailed  to  this  quar-
ter, having  beeu  ordered,  as  his  eighth  labour,  to
bring  these  marea  to  Mycenae.  The  hero  over-
«;ame  the  grooms  of  Diomedeaand  led  the  mares  to
the  sea.  The  Bistones  pursned  with  arms.  Her-
acles, leaving  tbe  mares  in  charge  of  Abdenu,oae
«if  his  companions,  went  to  engage  the  foe.  Mean-
time tbe  mares  tore  tbeir  keeper  to  pieces;  and
tbe  hero,  having  defeated  the  Bistones  and  slain
Dioniedes,  bnilt  m  city  by  the  tomb  of  Abderus,
which  be  called  Abdera  after  him.  Heracles
briHight  tbe  marea  to  Enrystheiis,  who  turned
them  loose,  and  they  strayed  to  Mount  Olyropns,
where  tbey  were  destroyed  by  the  wild  beasts
(Apollod.  il.  5,  8).  Anotber  accouut  makes  Hera-
cles to  have  given  Dioniedes  to  be  ilevoared  by  his
own  marea,  and  Enrystbeus  to  have  consecrated
them  to  Her£  (Diod.  Sic.  iv.  15).  (3)  A  Roman
grammarian  of  the  foarth  century  A.D.,  whose
work,  entitled  Ar»  OramMatioa,  has  come  down
Co  us  in  three  books.  It  is  taken  from  the  same
sonroes  as  the  contemporary  work  by  Charisius
(q.  T.),  and  is  chiefly  Talnable  for  the  notices  on
literary  history  contained  in  the  third  book  and
taken  from  tbe  De  Poeii*  of  Suetonius.  Tbe  beet
text  of  Diomedes  is  that  in  Keil,  Qramwuttici  LaAni
(L  296).  On  bis  Latinity  see  tbe  treatise  of
Paooker  (Berlin,  1883).

DlomcMdA  (diu/uMTui). See  Aktouosia.

Dion  (Aiwir).  (1)  An  inhabitant  of  Syracuse,  who
became  a  disciple  of  Plato^  invited  to  tbe  court  of
Syracuse  by  the  elder  Dlonysins.  He  was  nearly
connected  with  Dionyaius  by  having  married  his
daughter,  and  because  his  sister  was  one  of  his
wives;  and  hewasalso  much  esteemed bybim,so  as
to  be  employed  on  several  embassies.  At  the  acces-
sion of  tbe  younger  Dtooysius,  Plato  was  again,  at
Dion's  request,  invited  to  Syracuse.  (See  Plato.)
In  onler,  however,  to  counteract  his  influence,  tbe
conrtiers  obtained  the  recall  of  Fhilistos,  a  man
notorious  for  his  adherence  to  arbitrary  principles.
This  {action  determined  to  supplant  Dion,  and
availed  themselves  of  a  real  or  snpposititions  letter
to  fix  on  him  the  charge  of  treason.  Dion,  pre*
eluded  from  defence,  was  transported  to  Italy,  and
from  thence  proceeded  to  Greece,  where  he  was
received  with  great  honour.  Dionysios  became
Jealous  of  bis  popularity  in  Greece,  especially  at
Athens,  stopped  bis  remittances,  oonflscated  bis
estates,  aud  compelled  bis  wife,  who  had  been  left
at  Syracuse  as  an  hostage,  to  marry  another  per-
son. Dion,  incensed  at  this  treatment,  determined
to  expel  the  tyrant.  Plato  resisted  his  intentions ;
bat,  encouraged  by  other  friends,  be  assembled  a
body  of  troops,  and  with  a  small  force  sailed  to
Sicily,  took  advantage  of  the  absence  of  Dionyai-
us in  Italj',  and  freed  the  people  from  bis  eontroL
Dionysius  returned ;  but,  after  some  conflicts,  was
enmpelled  to  escape  to  Italy.  Tbe  austere  and
phtloeopbic  manners  of  Dion,  however,  soon  lost
him  the  favour  of  bis  countrymen,  and  he  was
supplanted  by  Heraclides,  a  Syracusan  exile,  aud
(ibliged  to  make  his  retreat  to  Leontini.  He  af-
terwards regained  tbe  ascendency  and  caused
Heraclides  to  be  assassinated,  which  robbed  him
«ver  after  of  his  peace  of  mind.  An  Athenian,  an
intimate  friend,  formed  a  conspiracy  against  his


life,  and  Dion  was  assassinated  in  tbe  fifty-fifth
year  of  his  age,  B.C.  354  ( Diod.  Sic.  xvi.  6  foil. ;
Plut.  Dion. ;  Com.  Nep.  Dion).

(2)Dio  Cassius  CoccKiAMUs,  SOU  of  Cassius  Apro-
niauus,  a  Boman  senator,  born  a.d.  155,  at  Nicaea,
in  Bitbynia.  His  true  name  was  Cassius,  but  be
assumed  the  other  two  names,  as  being  descended
on  the  mother's  side  from  Dion  Chrysostom.  Thus,
though  he  was  on  his  mother's  side  of  Greek  de-
scent, and  though,  in  his  writings,  he  adopted
the  prevailing  language — Greek — of  his  native
proviuoe,  he  must  be  considered  as  a  Roman.
Dio  Cassius  passed  the  greater  part  of  his  life  in
public  employinenta.  He  was  a  senator  under
Commodns  and  governor  of  Smyrna  after  the
death  of  Septimius  Severus ;  aud  afterwards  con-
sul, as  also  proconsul  in  Africa  and  Paouonia.
Alexander  Severus  entertained  the  highest  esteem
for  him,  aud  made  him  consul  for  the  secoud  time,
with  himself,  though  the  Praetorian  Guards,  irri-
tated against  him  on  accouut  of  his  severity,  had
demanded  his  life.  When  advanced  in  years
(about  A.D.  229)i  Iio  returned  to  his  native  oouotry.
Dio  published  a  Roman  history,  in  eighty  hooks,
the  fruit  of  his  researches  and  labours  for  tbe
apace  of  twenty-two  years.  It  embraced  a  period  of
983  years,  extending  from  tbe  arrival  of  Aeneas  in
Italy,  and  the  subsequent  founding  of  Borne,  to
Aj>.  239.  Down  to  the  time  of  lulius  Caesar,  be
only  gives  a  summary  of  events ;  after  this,  be  en-
ters somewhat  more  Into  details;  and  from  the
time  of  Commodns  be  is  very  circumstantial  in  re*
latiug  what  passed  under  his  own  eyes.  We  have
fragments  remaining  of  the  fijrst  thirty-six  books ;
but  there  is  a  considerable  portion  of  the  thirty-
fifth  book,  on  the  war  of  Luonllos  against  Mith-
ridatee,  and  of  the  thirty-sixth,  on  tbe  war  with
tbe  piratea  and  the  expedition  of  Pompey  against
the  king  of  Poutus.  Tbe  books  that  follow,  to  tbe
fifty-fourth  inclusive,  are  nearly  all  entire :  they
comprehend  a  period  from  B.C.  65  to  B.a  12,  or
from  tbe  eastern  campaign  of  Pompey  and  the
death  of  Mithridates  to  the  death  of  Agrippa.  Tbe
fifty-fifth  book  has  a  considerable  gap  in  it.  The
fifty-sixth  to  the  sixtieth,  both  included,  which
comprehend  the  period  ftom  A.D.  9  to  a.d.  54,  are
complete,  aud  contain  tbe  events  from  the  defeat
of  Varus  in  Germany  to  the  death  of  Claudius.
Of  the  following  twenty  books  we  have  only  frag-
ments aud  the  meagre  abridgment  of  Xiphilinns.
The  eightioth  or  last  book  comprehends  tbe  period
from  A.D.  222  to  a.d.  229,  in  tbe  reign  of  Alexander
Severus.  Tbe  abridgment  of  Xipbiltnus,  as  now
extant,  commences  with  tbe  thirty-fifth  and  con-
tinues to  tbe  end  of  tbe  eightieth  book.  It  is  a
very  indifferent  performance,  aud  was  made  by
order  of  tbe  emperor  Michael  VII.,  Parapinaces.
The  abbreviator,  Xiphilinns,  was  a  monk  of  tbe
eleventh  century.

The  fragment's  of  the  first  thirty-six  books,  as
now  collected,  are  of  four  kinds:  (a)  Fragmknta
VAI.E8IANA,  such  US  wcre  dispersed  throughout  va-
rious writers,  scholiasts,  granimariaus,  lexicog-
raphers, etc.,  and  were  collected  by  Henri  de  Valois.
(6)  Fbaohrnta  Pbirksciana,  comprising  large
extracts,  found  in  tbe  section  entitled  "Of  Vir-
tues and  VicfM,"  in  the  great  collection  or  porta-
tive library  compiled  by  ortier  of  Constantine
VII.,  Porphyrogenitns.  Tbe  manuscript  of  this
belonged  to  Peiresc.  (o)  The  fragments  of  the
first  thirty-four  books,  preserved  in  tbe  second


OrONAEA


h»i


DION  y  SI  A


nectiuu  of  th«.'  name  work  of  CMii!t(niitiiieV,  fii-
litluil  ''Of  KiiibnnHie^." TIi(*mi>  urn  kni>wii  iiiiilHr

(Jlt<  nulliu fif  KltAdMKNTA tritMMAVA,  Ili^C'nllHH  tllf

mau iiNcri jtt  cuiitAiniiiK  tlmni  wila  fixiiiil  in  8inil)'
by  Ftilviit  Ontitit.  {il)  ExcKitrrA  VaticaSa,  l»y
Mhi,  n'biub  coiitAtii  fni^iKiitA  nf  Ixmkit  i.-xxxv.
nud  I\i.-)xxx.  To  tluwo  are  ixliltxt  tlw.  frnjipiKMitK
ufuii  Liiikiiiiwn  coiitiiiuat<iruri>it»,  wliicli  fr<>  (lnvrii
to  I  ho  tinio  (if  ('iinntuiitliir.  OlKcr  Irnj^iiirtitA
fnim  Dio  holonjcliig  chlotly  to  tlie  rtn»r  tliirly-
(Ivo  books  w«)ro  foiinil  by  Mnl  iu  two  Vatican
MSS.,  which  contain  n  collcctiou  miulo  by  Maxt-
mns  FlaniiJcs.  The  tiinvftla  of  Zutmnui  also  oou-
toti)  nuincroiiti  cstrnctA  from  Dion.

Dio  hoa  taken  Tbiioydides  for  bis  moflpl;  l>nt
the  imitntor  is  comp-imble  with  his  uriitirml  uoiMirr
in  aTmn]rf.Miiciit  anil  the  ilialribiUitui  of  matcrialn
nor  in  suiiiuhipssnf  view  and  Ju8t  anil  accnrnte  rr»-
S(»iiirii;,  Hi«  styln  is  j;ptmrally  cleuiv,  H-bflni  thero
n|>|».*ari4  to  be  liocurnipttoii  of  tJie  text,  though  full
of  LiitiuiHUiM.  Histlilit^ttmro  iHuii<iue»tionubl<>,  niitl,
from  liiHO)>i>orttniiti<?s,  t)o  Wiis  n-i>ll  m^ijiinintt-^l  with
cbo  uiri'itiiiHtiiiiiWHof  tlio  Knipiru  <1iiriii^  th^^  jicriml
for  wbiuh  iic  iH  11  cotit-tiiuiMintry  iiiitlmrity;  ainl,  iii-
deetl,  we  ut»y  atwiffn  a  liii^b  viiLiu^  tn  bis  bixtory  of
tli«  wholo  period  front  ttio  tiinrt  of  Ant;ii^tiiN  to  hift
own  agiv  Nor  U  Iii.h  work  without  vnltio  for  thu
onrlirr  iieriixtn  of  Koninu  hi*tory,  in  wliiob,  tbuiish
ha  bivt  fjilirn  into  errors,  IJko  al!  tlif  (trf'pk  uml
Koinau  wriK^rti  who  hnvn  bniidltsl  th«  HAiito  ob-
scTiro  aiibjofit,  ho  still  «'iinbli'«  nn  to  corr<M?t  soinr
erroneonti  iitatuinentM  of  Livy  and  Dionyniii!*.  Thr
b«8t  mlitioim  aro  tlioNu  of  Fabriciin.  conipb^t^-d  by
]^•imar,  2  voK  ( HiMiiK  imi  1 ;  of  Hturit,  8  volil.
(Loipzijj.  lrt-i4-25);  of  Bi'kkpr  (184*»);  uml  esjiLM-ial-
ly  of  L.  Diiidorf(rt'vi8Pd  by  Mclbpr.  IHW  foil.).  Thf
9mull  Tauebiiitz  edition,  4  vole.  ItJmo,  contaiUB  all
tho  frafi^nii-iitn.

Ct)  .SonuiniM  CHttY-itxsTflMiTB,  or  tho  Oiildnn-
nioiitlgoil,  on  aoroiint  nf  ttiu  liiiauty  orhJA^tyle,  wua
m  imlivi^  of  Prniui  in  IVitbynia,  horrt  aliont  a.d.  50.
He  wa>t  n  aopbiat  and  Stoic.  Ht-inj;  In  Bjcytit  wlfcn
VcrtpMian,  who  bad  Ik-imi  iin»daimwl  iMn|w.'n»r  by
^bin  own  army,  canio  tboro,  hn  wom  riin9nlt''d  by
ihiit  princit  on  tho  proper  coni-)w  lo  bi>  ailojit-
ed  nivdiT  tho  ciroiimaluticos.  Dion  IumI  t-Iro  i>un-
iluiir  to  adviAo  him  to  rrvHtorc  the  Kopublic.  Af-
terwanls  lie  rtwided  for  yoars  at  Ronii^,  till,  onn
of  hi»  friendn  baviii)^  (^ii^fnged  in  a  coiD^pirary
Ot^ainat  Domitian,  Dion,  tenrin>;  f*tr  biiUM'lf,  Ilml
to  what  is  now  Moldavia,  whore  ho  rcinainM  till
the  tyrantV  dcuth,  labourioK  f'"*  ^'^  siibsieitenci'
with  Ium  [>wii  hariilM.  Donillian  having;  b<«pn  n»-
iuuMinul«<d.  tlio  Ic^iooH  i[iiBrteivd  on  tbp  Dniinbo
wore  nbuui;  to  rL»vo)t,  when  Dinii  got  upon  nn  nl-
tAr  and  hamti^nod  tbeni  so  t^fl'ectnally  thai  tlir>y
Hnbtnitted  to  the  decinion  of  thu  S^'ii.atr.  Dioti
Wfw  in  liijfh  fnvijur  witli  Norvu  anil  Tnvjnti,  nud
wbun  tho  lattiT  triniapbcd  nfWr  Iuh  Unciait  vic-
dtrivtt  the  orator  sat  in  tlw  emperor*!*  car  in  the
pixHiMHsion.  Ho  n'lumwl  t^i  Birbynia,  where  ho
Hpemt  the  remainder  of  IiIh  life.  A<ii>nnation8
i>f  pi><-iiI:i(ion  and  iroaMin  wore  broiit;bt  nf^inAt  i
bim,  bnt  rejucted  U8  frivotons.  He  dicM)  at  an  '
lulvauced  a^;i*,  but  it  it  not  known  in  wlmt  y^ar.  '
Wu  huvu  eif{hty  orationfi  nttribnt^'d  to  lilui.  wliicb
una  very  nttatly  written  in  pure  Attic  Oi-et-k,  hnl
um  not  of  nnich  inlrinciic  vabif.  The  best;  eili-
tionn  are  tbow  nf  Ri'iftke,  'i  voh.  (Leiptig,  17841;
Emi>»'r  il'*^-*);  and  L.  Diiidinf  ilKiT*.

Dionaea  lAivpata). Sik^  Diun^


Di5il4  (Aiatf?).  A  femnle  Titan.  Io%-ih|  by  j
by  whom  mIil'  iMTanie  ibe  imtChurofAphnHlitif,!
1<4  linnr«  called  Diunaea  and  ttninetiniee  avbb  Dm-
n^.  Ilencn  Cacttar  in  eallMl  Diouaens  CiMir,  It-
ranM!  1ii>  ctaimiHl  descent  frum  Veiiiia  4Apbrodilf>.

DionyBia  {ra  Siovvrrta).  A  velebmttOB  in  liooonr
of  DionyNUii  n\.  v.),  which  was  held  lo  AllieitaltiA
Mperial  wrriett  of  festivaln.  namely

(1)  Tile  OscnoruoKiA.fnpiKised  to  ham  tfcea  lii-
HtitutfMl  byXhesetisuu  his  retnrti  fmm  Cii*le.  TMb
vftiA  oelebrft[.'il  in  the  mnnt.Ii  of  Pyaiii»|«io«  ((Vii*.
l>erloNovemlM-r),wben  tlM?urapt«iiwen«n|ie.  Uwsn
8o  called  fmin  the  shoolnof  vinn  (Jir;^oi(wilhpT>|i'n
on  them,  which  were  Imnie  tn  a  ract*  fnim  ilif  h'Hi-
ple  of  Dionysii!)  in  Limnoo,  a  ftontbi-rn  iiid)iirt>i>r
.\tliena,  lo  the  "wnrtnarj-  of  Allien*^  Hcinw,  intk»
harbour  town  t>f  Pbali-rnm.  Tiit*  Ixjuren  and  nin-
riers  were  twenty  ymillM  {/(jlj^^w*)  of  nuble  At»t«ni
whose  pareiil-H  were  nlill  living,  two  Iwing  rtunn
from  each  of  tho  ten  triltes.  The  victor  rv»iTBl
a  goblet  G4mtaii)in){  a  drink  miule  of  winit,  c)wfWi
meal,  and  honey,  and  nn  Imnomiy  yiaw  in  lb!
proceiwitni  which  followed  the  ruee.  Thi»  (kw»
ston,  in  which  a  choruu  of  sinner*  was  prtealrf
by  two  youths  in  woniau'a  clotliiiifj,  niarvhwl  fti«
the  temple  of  Athentf  to  that  of  DioiiyRU*.  Tlw
fc«tivnl  wftH  coiicbided  by  a  KU-^rifice  and  n  ^^
qnet.

(3)  The  9MALt.RR  (ri  fUKp^,  or  nvKTtc  DiOitvwi.
ThiKfefMt  wiM  held  in  the  mouth  of  Poscidean(D»-
ccinlier  to  .fannnr)*).  at  tlio  first  tasting  of  tin  u"*
wine.  It  waj*  ceU'britted,  with  wnub  mde  nn'Cri-
ment,  thnnigbont  the  varionw  country  dintrictfc
Till)  meml>en(  of  fhe  diffcmnt  tribe*  tlrst  wrnt  in
mdomn  proecaoiotifi  to  the  altar  of  the  jjod.oa  whWfc
a  gnat  wan  offered  in  saerilioc.  Thi-  (tacriUco  ««•
fullowed  by  feaMtin^^  and  revelry,  with  almndMW
of  JMtttnt;  anil  m*Hikery  and  dramatic  iiniimvtA*
tioiiB.  Out  of  tbuae  were  developwl  the  clmuea*
of  the  regular  drama  (s*'e  DraMa),  for  in  tlw  b""*
prosperonii  villnm-s,  pieces — in  m'»«tcA*c*  tlioswo'
as  had  boi-ii  played  at  Hie  nrtian  Diouyni*— ■*'
pi-rformed  by  itinerant  trou|H'»  itf  H*'tor«.  Theft**'"
val  biHtr'il  noTimiluyn,  one  of  itKc:bief  featiimbnffK
the  A«rfdi»«mii«.  or  baK-dauce.  The  point  of  th'*
w]hHtodtiiK>«<  Of]  oiH^Ieg,  withonC  falling,  npunddfi
hajipi  of  indaled  leather,  {ikv  AsCOU*.  >  Tbc'.^^'-
HarvoMtbonio  (m-  Vvnst  of  Threwbing-lJoontV  *•*
relehrattxl  at  AtheriH  and  in  I  be  oouutry  in  lb''
nauie  inoulli  to  Demetcr  and  rersepbou*  lataa-
mon.

(3)  Tho  Lknaka  (Aoynm),  or  Fewtt  of  Vat».  Tlii*
wiut  held  at  Athens  in  the  month  of  OaineliiHi  (Jw>*
ary  tn  Kebniary), at  the  Lenaeiin,  t liuoldtMtand inW*
%'euenildi(  .snnetnary  of  DionyHUH  in  thecitjr.  Af"'
a  great  bftmpi«t,  for  which  tho  meat  wan  ppividi*
»t  the  pnblin  i:xi>cii!m>,  the  citinnm  wuot  in  pi*""*
nioti  tbnKij;h  the  city,  with  tho  naual  jrMiR};*'''
mockery,  to  attcnil  the  repriMontation  of  Iheli'S'
iMlioH  anil  coineilirM  ut  the  ihuatm.

("4)  Tho  AsTllKSTKliiA.  Celebrated  forthrwiUj*
in  AntbcBterion  (Kelimary  to  Marehi  On  Uin""'
day  ( nt^4ytii,  or  o]i«iiing  of  caakii)  the  cnnkt  'f*
lirwt  n]u>n(Ml.  and  masters  and  wrvantft  alike  t**i«"
tho  nnw  wine.  On  the  »econd  (Xfi#v,  or  Vvati  ••
Bcakeni),  a  ]iriblie  banquet  was  held,  at  whifh  '
Imaker  of  lu-w  nine  wiw  luit  by  eitoh  gne'if.  T»*
wan  drunk  with  riiihuHia.>im,  tn  the  smiud  of  tti>iii~
pets.  The  incwt  iinpoi-taot  eervmmiy.  Iiowev^r.**
the  marrinye  of  t tic  ItoHiliasa,  or  wife  of  the  ApcI»""
RaHllniiR,  with Dionyiurt,  the Baailiaaa  boliig  f»


DioxrsiA


521


DIONYSIA


garded  M  lepresenting  the  oonntry.  The  ceremony
took  place  in  the  older  of  the  two  temples  in  the
Lenaean,  which  was  never  opened  except  on  this
oocaaion.  The  last  day  was  called  Xvrpot,  or  the
Feast  of  Pots,  becaase  on  this  day  thny  made  of-
ferings of  cooked  pulse  in  pots  to  Hermes,  as  guide
of  the  dead,  and  to  the  souls  of  the  departed,  espe-
cially those  who  had  perished  in  the  flood  of  Den-
calion.

(fi)  The  OBBAT  URBAN  DiONYSIA  (ra  fiiyaka).
This  festival  was  held  at  Athens  fur  six  days  iu  the
mouth  of  Elapheboliou  (March  toApiil)  with  great
«ploadoor,aDd  atteuded  by  mnltitndes  from  the  sur-
n>uoiliDg  country  aud  other  parts  of  Greece.  A  sol-
emn processioD  was  formed,  representing  a  train  of
Dionysiac  reTellers.  Choruses  of  boys  saug  dithy-
rambs, and  An  old  wooden  statue  of  Diooysus,  wor-
shipped as  the  liberator  of  the  laud  from  the  bondage
of  winter,  was  borne  &om  the  Lenaenni  to  a  small
temple  in  the  ueigbbourfaood  of  the  Acropolis  and
back  again.  The  glory  of  this  festival  was  the
performance  of  the  new  tragedies,  comediesi  aud
satyrtc  dramas,  which  took  place,  with  lavish  ex-
penditure, on  three  consecutive  days.  Id  conae-
qneuce  of  the  immense  number  of  citizens  and
strangers  assembled,  it  was  found  convenient  to
take  one  of  these  six  days  for  conferricg  public
distinctions  on  meritorious  persons,  as  in  the  case
of  the  presentatiou  of  the  golden  crown  to  Demos-
thenes.

The  Dionysia  were  celebrated  at  Borne  under
the  name  of  Bacchanaua  The  circamstanoes
of  their  introduction  are  given  in  detail  by  Livy,
<xxxix.  &-19).  According  to  his  account,  a  Oreek
pri^t  bronght  iuto  Etruria  the  secret  nightly  cele-
bration of  this  worship.  It  was  not  ouly  accom-
pauied  by  all  manner  of  licentious  excesses,  but
was  also  made  the  occasion  for  planning  the  most
revolting  crimes — pegnry,  forgery,  false  accusa-
tions, poisoning,  and  assassinatioh.  From  Etruria
the  contagion  spread  to  Bome.  According  to
Livy,  at  first  the  rites  were  comparatively  iuno-
•cent.  Women  only  were  initiated,  and  that  by
day,  three  times  in  the  year,  and  the  priesthood
was  held  by  matrons  in  turn.  It  is  quite  possible
that  in  this  statement  Livy  has  in  view  the  wor-
ship of  Stimnla  or  Simila,  an  early  Italian  deity,
afterwards  identified  with  Semel^,  whence  Ovid
(fotl.  vi.  503-515)  regards  her  rites  as  of  a  Baccha-
nalian character.  Possibly  Vergil  is  thinking  of
the  same  when  ( Aen.  vii.  385 )  be  speaks  of  the
JIacchic  rites  as  existing  in  Italy  in  the  time  of
Aeneas.  In  any  case  it  is  hardly  conceivable  that
the  corrupt  Etruscan  cnlt  should  have  so  much
■changed  its  character  in  passing  into  Bome  as
Livy's  account  would  require  us  to  believe.  He
goes  on  to  tell  how  a  certain  Paonllia  Aonia,  a
<^ampanian  priestess,  claiming  to  be  acting  under
the  inspiration  of  the  gods,  changed  the  whole
character  of  the  worship.  She  was  the  first  to
admit  men,  by  initiating  her  own  sons ;  she  altered
the  time  of  celebration  from  the  day  to  the  night,
And  held  initiations  five  times  every  month  in-
stead of  three  times  a  year.  The  promiscuous  ad-
mission of  men  aud  women  and  the  license  of
night  opened  the  way  to  all  manner  of  debanohery
and  crime.  The  most  horrible  immoralities  were
practised,  the  wildest  frenzy  indulged  in.  Men
fluug  themselves  about  as  if  possessed,  and  uttered
frantic  prophecies;  women  dressed  as  Baocbauals,
with  dishevelled  locks,  ran  down  to  the  Tiber  and
17*


plunged  into  the  water  torches  which,  composed
of  a  mixtore  of  sulphur  aud  lime,  were  not  extin-
guished in  the  waves.  The  initiated  were  a  vast
num1>er,  including  many  of  high  birth,  both  men
and  women.  To  secnre  the  complete  subjugation
of  the  votaries  a  rule  was  made  that  none  should
be  admitted  who  were  not  under  twenty  years  of
age,  a  time  at  which  the  judgment  is  weak  and
the  passions  strong.  For  some  time,  although  the
existence  of  these  rites  was  generally  known,  not
only  by  report,  but  also  by  the  clanging  of  cym-
bals aud  the  bowlings  of  the  devotees  by  night,
their  real  nature  was  not  suspected.  But  in  B.C.
166,  the  lewd  and  criminal  character  of  the  meet-
ings was  bronght  to  the  knowledge  of  the  consuls.
P.  Aebutius,  the  orphan  of  a  Roman  knight,  bad
been  left  by  the  death  of  his  guardians  to  the
charge  of  his  mother  Duronia  and  his  stepfather
Semproniua  Rutilns.  The  latter  had  embezzled
his  property,  aud  in  order  to  escape  punishment
desired  either  to  make  away  with  the  yonth  or  to
get  him  wholly  into  his  power.  Duronia,  who
was  entirely  devoted  to  her  husband,  determined
to  avail  herself  of  the  Bacchanalia  for  the  corrup-
tion or  destruction  of  her  son.  She  informed  hitn
that  at  a  time  when  he  was  ill  she  had  vowed
that  he  should  l>e  initiated  into  the  Bacchic  rites
if  he  recovered,  and  that  now  was  the  time  to  dis-
charge the  vow.  Aebutins,  taking  the  matter
lightly,  mentioned  it  to  a  freedwomau,  Htspala
Feoenia,  with  whom  he  had  a  liataon;  but  she,  iu
the  utmost  terror  and  distress,  warned  him  of  the
dangers  that  he  was  incurring — she,  when  still  a
slave,  had  accompanied  her  mistress  to  the  orgies,
and  bad  seen  the  vile  practices  of  the  votaries.
Aebutius,  returning  to  bis  mother,  refused  to  be
initiated,  without  disclosing  his  reasons.  She,  in
a  fnry,  drove  him  from  the  house.  He  took  refuge
with  his  fisther's  sister,  and  at  her  advice  laid  the
whole  facts  of  the  case  before  the  consuls.  His-
pala  was  induced  by  them  to  confess  all  that  she
knew.  The  Senate  was  consulted  and  full  powers
given  to  the  consuls  to  investigate  the  matter.
Prompt  measures  were  taken  to  secure  evidence
and  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  guilty.  The  in-
quiry led  to  the  belief  that  more  than  7000  men
and  women  were  implicated  in  the  affair.  Those
who  were  merely  initiated,  and  had  taken  the  oath
binding  them  to  every  kind  of  crime  and  lewdness,
were  punished  with  imprisonment ;  those  against
whom  actual  guilt  was  fonud — and  these,  we  are
told,  were  the  majority — received  capital  punish-
ment. The  women  for  the  most  part  were  handed
over  to  their  relations,  or  to  those  who  were  re-
sponsible for  them,  for  private  execution ;  the  rest
were  put  to  death  in  pnblic.

One  of  the  most  ancient  aud  precious  records  of
the  old  Latin  language  preserved  to  us  is  the  bronze
tablet,  commonly  called  the  Srnatus  Consultuh
DB  BacchanalIbus,  ooutainiug  the  letter  in  which
the  consuls  communicated  to  the  magistrates  in
agro  Tenrano  (Tirioli,  in  the  country  of  the  Bruttii)
part  ( as  Mommsen  thinks )  of  the  decree  of  the
Senate  passed  on  this  occasion  (cf.  Mommsen,  C.  I.
L.  i.  196;  Ritschl,  P  L.  M.  E.  tab.  xviii.;  Allen's
Early  Latin,  pp.  28-31  [Boston,  1880] ;  and  Cortese,
Z^tini  Berwonia  Vatnatiorit  Exempla,  p.  9  [  Turin,
1892]).  Doubtless  it  is  ouly  a  specimen  of  many
which  mutatis  mutandit  were  sent  throughout
Italy.  The  Bacchanalia  are  rigidly  prohibited:
if  any  one,  Boman,  Latin,  or  ally,  considers  himself


OIO>n'SIACA


M2


DIONYSIUS


nnder  n  reliftiniiK  obli^atiiui  baainal  habcrr,  be  can
only  do  w  by  olituiiiiiig  pnrmitwiun  fnnii  tliu  prar-
tor  urfruNiiH,  cuiiflniioil  l>y  u  vuUi  of  lliu  Si-tial4j  iu
wbich  not  Irwt  lliati  uiiu  buuilml  buvu  taken  |iart.
No  priest,  ptvAideu  t,  or  common  piinw  in  allnwod,  nor
any  kind  of  coinuiuu  vow.  Not  uiurv  thau  two  ox-'ii
or  three  womou  (Qvo  iu  all)  may  celebrate  the  rites,
oxoe|it  by  Bpuclal  pemiiewioo.  Tbe«o  rvgiilalioiiH
were  cftiriLHi  out  witb  uutiiiicbiiiKrigoor.appareut-
ly  not  witlimit  tbe  u»c of  iiiililaiy  force  (Cic.  De Leg.
it.  15,37);  but  ii  was  some  yeiu^  before  the  Uocoha-
Dalinti  rlt«ei  wero  completely  extiii^iiisbed  in  soutb-
em  Itn1y(Liv.  xxxix.  41,  xl.lO).  The  Libenilia(q.  v.)
TVfXi-  of  »n  entirely  iUfiVrent  cban)cl«r.  Tbi*  bnuiy.*!
tiiblet  nientinued  alxfve  is  now  preserved  at  Viwnuil.

Dionyalioa  (AtoKvo-Miitu).  An  epic  poem,  iu  forty-
oight  btKikti,  by  tbe  CbriHtiuu  Giv4<k  povt  Xouuuh,
of  PnnupoliHin  E{*>'pt,daritif;  tbo  tlftb  centary  a.i>.
8e«  NdXNLtJ.

Dionysius  iMovixnos).  (!)  The  Elukk,  a  ccle-
brntt'd  tyrant  of  .Synuiiiw.',  miwd  t^i  tbiit  Iiijib  raitk
from  tb»  ntnlion  of  li  simple  cili/t*ii,  wtut  bom  in
that  city,  li-C  4:tO.  He  wim  aon-in-liiw  to  Hf.rnioc-
rutem,  who,  biiviiiK  Im'oii  bnuiitbed  by  au  advente
party,  iittrmptt'd  to  rctnru  by  force  of  arms  ami
wan  killed  ill  tbe  iLction.  l>ionyitiu»  wu9  ilaii-
gerously  wonnib-d,  btit  \w  rcotivvrrd  und  wiis  uf-
terwanU  recalled.  In  time  bo  cAti^d  bimself
to  bu  nominntcd  one  of  th^  ^cuemls.  nnil.  iiniler
preteuco  of  raising  a  force  sntficieiit  to  tpsist
tbe  Carthagininns.  obtained  ii  decriM;  for  recniling
all  tbe  exiles,  to  whom  he  Riive  nrnm.  Iteing  sent
to  tbe  relief  of  Gelo,  tben  Wsieged  by  tlio  Ciirtha-
giniana,  be  effected  nothing  ngiiiuHt  tlie  enrtiiy,
pretending  Unit  ho  waa  not  dccoinbrtl  by  tbe  other
oomniandent;  and  biH  friends  NUggevtvd  ibnt,  in
onler  to  aave  the  Slate,  the  tiapretue  power  ought
to  bo  conlided  U*  ono  tnnn,  reminding  the  people
of  the  tiiuea  of  Geloii,  who  bad  di'fuated  the  Car-
tbagiuiaOB.  Tbo  General  AwHembly  therefore  pni-
olaimed  DionyMiita  nnpreniu  ebief  of  tbe  Kepublie
•boat  lUC  -lOTj,  svben  lie  waa  tweuty-llvu  yearn  of
age.  Ue  incrtmHed  the  pay  of  tbe  HoldierN,  unliHtrd
new  OUCH,  and,  under  prct<'nce  of  a  eouHpiniey
Againat  lilfi  person,  forinml  u  gnnnl  of  merei^naricji.
He  then  proc^wiled  to  tlie  relief  of  Gela,  bnt  failed
in  the  aimck  on  Ibt^  t'lirthaginion  camp;  be,  how-
ever, i>enetrat«d  xnU*  tbo  town,  the  iTibabitunta  of
ivhirb  be  afUiMud  to  leave  it  quietly  ii)  the  night
under  tbo  escort  of  his  troopH.  On  bia  retreat  he
{nrsaadcd  tbiise  of  Camarina  to  do  ttie  Hanie.  Tbia
raianl  ttUHpicion  among  liis  tni'OpH,  and  »  party  of
boTKenieu,  riding  on  before  tbe  n.-at,  raidicd,  on  their
arrival  at  Bynicnne,  an  iuKurrt^ciiou  against  Piony-
aiutt,  plunilerf^d  bin  liotLsi',  and  troatwl  bla  wife  ao
cruelly  that  »ibe  died  iu  conauqnence.  Dioayaiua,
with  a  cluateii  body,  follonreil  close  aft«r,  *et  lire
to  ibe  gale  of  Acmdlna,  forced  bin  way  into  the
city,  put  to  death  tbo  IcadcrH  of  the  revolt,  and
reinniit«i  nndiiiputed  poMc«Hor  of  tbo  Aiiprt'me
povrei.  Tbo  Carthitginiana,  twing  atllietcil  by  a
peatileuce,  maile  projKisaN  of  peace,  which  were
accepted  by  DinnyHins,  aiid  he  then  applied  lilin-
self  to  fortifying  Syracnse,  and  eHp#*ciiilly  tbe  iiU
and  of  Ortygia,  which  he  made  bi*  Mronnbidd,  and
whirb  be  peopled  entirely  with  bii4  trnt^ly  partinann
and  mercenaries,  by  the  aid  of  w  lioni  be  put  down
several  revolts.  After  r>;<lueitig  the  towns  of  Leon-
tini,  Catana,  and  Naxun,  he  engage<l  iu  a  new  war
with  Cartbage,  in  wbiob lie met  with  tlm  uio»L


brilliant  HuecRfwi.  umking  himself  raawtiTr  of  nuR>rr>
ouHtuwnH  ill  Sicily,ai)d  becoming  evfiutually  fcamt
both  in  Italy  and  (Sicily.  In  onler  to  raine  raooey,
liu  allied  Iiittuwlf  with  the  IllyrianH,  and  propof<r<l
to  tbom  tbe  joint  plniider  of  the  temple  of  D«<l|il]t:
the  outcrpriHe,  however,  failed.  Ho  tbeu  plamlervtl
several  teni|)left,  saeb  aa  tbnt  of  I'ersepbuu^  .it  !»-
cri ;  and  ua  be  sailed  bock  with  the  plunder,  wiiii
a  lair  wind,  ho,  boiug  a  humouiist  iu  bis  way.ob-
served  to  his  ft'ieuda,  "You  ae«  how  the  Immortal
goda  favour  sacrilege."  Having  carried  off  a  gold'
en  Euautle  from  a  alatne  ol'  /Ceus,  conaecratml  liy
Gt^loii  out  of  the  Hpoila  of  tbe  C'arthaKiniaiu,  bo
rep1iu-«d  it  by  a  woollen  garment,  aayiug  that  thio
WU8  better  auitod  to  tbe  viciasitadea of  tbe  aeaauai.
lie  a1»o  took  away  a  golden  beard  from  Aewnb-
piitH,  observing  that  it  was  not  becomiDg  for  tb<;
son  of  a  iHjaniless  father  lApotlo)  to  make  a  di»-
play  of  liiH  own  Iward.  He  likewise  appn>priat«l
to  bimnetf  Ibe  silver  tabloa  and  golden  vaMawl
crowna  in  the  templea,  aaying  tltat  he  n-ontd  nub
U94!  of  the  bounty  of  thogod«  (Cic.  A'.  />.  lii.  IU).  Np
made  a doi»c4>nt  with  a  tieet  on  tbe  coaat  of  Btmrii.
and  plnuderod  the  tc'tiiple  at  Caor^  or  Agjlta  of
10(10  taleutH,  With  Ibittie  n-Mnimea  he  was  pn-
pariug  himnelf  fi>r  a  new  exi>edirion  to  Italy,  wlieo
a  fresh  Cartliagintan  amiainent  landed  in  Sieilj.
H.C.  '.tKI,  and  defejiteil  t>iony»iuf>,  whose  brottifr
Lt^ptlne«  IVII  in  the  battle.  A  peiu-e  fonow(!d,«r
wiiirh  L'arlbngo  dictated  the  conditions.

This  |>eace  lasted  fourteen  years,  during  whick
Dionysiua  remained  the  nudistnrbed  niler  of  Syr»-
case  and  one  half  of  Sicily,  with  part  of  notttlwrt
Italy.  He  sent  cnlonien  to  the  eonst4  of  tb<*  Adri-
atic, and  his  deot^  navignt^-d  both  twan.  Twin  bo
sent  OMistaiicc  tohiaold  ally,  Sparta:  oner  ugniiiit
the  AlUenianr>,B.c.Ct74,  and  again  in  3t?Jafter  lilt?  1*1-
tlaof  Lenctni,  when  the  Spartans  were  banl  prewpil
by  KpaminoikdaM.  Meantime  the  court  of  l>iouy>
sins  wiut  frequentetl  by  many  diittingnifthcd  ntoi.
]>lii1oNi>pber^  and  poeta,  Plato  is  aaid  to  have  liwii
nmong  the  fonner,  lieing  invil*'d  by  Dion  (ip  v. Ml"
l>rtirber-iti-lawi>f  Dlonyninit ;  but  tbo  philosnplrr'*
de-t^l lunations  agtiinut  tyranny  led  to  hi»  brini;  vot
away  fnnn  Hyrnense.  Tbe  (loetii  farod  littlo  '«'-
tor,  .iH  Dionyaiua  hinutelf  aspired  to  poetirnl  faur,
for  which,  howOTor,  ho  wiw  not  ao  well  qualiUol
aa  for  {Mlitical  ancocaa.  Those  who  did  not  [iniM*
his  vcr»iea  were  in  danger  of  being  Wl  to  pri»oii.
Oionybiua  twioo  aent  some  of  his  poems  to  I«ti^
cited  at  the  Olympic  Games,  bnt  tl»jr  werB  hwrf
by  the  nasembly.  He  wu  mom  sacoocafnl  at  Ath-
ena. A  tragedy  of  Xixn  nbtainod  tbo  prize,  atiJ  tlie
newH  of  hlH  8iicc«88  alnioHt  turned  his  bnilu.  He
had  Just  concluded  n  A««h  truce  with  iht^  rarib**
gininna,  after  having  niado  an  unHUecr-wfiil  att'wk
on  Lilybaeuni,  at  tbe  oxpiratUui  of  tbe  fourlfM
yean*'  peace;  and  be  now  gave  liims«lf  up  to  »»•
joicings  and  foaittiuga  for  bia  ptielieal  triimclk-
In  a  dcbanch  with  his  friendi*  he  att*  owl  drwk
so  ir)temi>6rately  that  he  fell  seuaelcvMi,  aud  k**
after  died,  B.C.  IU??,  in  tbo  sixtytbinl  yeai  "flit"
age,  having  been  tyrant  of  Syraoase  for  ilurtv-
eight  years.  Diony»in!(,hla  elder  aon  byI>ori«,»«-
ceedetl  bini  in  the  sovereignty.

Dionysius  was  a  elever  atateamau  aud  gweraUy
snecessfnl  in  bis  undertakings.  Ilo  did  much  to
strengthen  and  extend  the  power  of  Syraciwei »"''
it  wiwt  proliably  owing  to  liim  thai  all  Sicily  dtil
not  fall  into  the  bandH  of  the  CnrtbagiuiiUi*.  1'
was  nnacnipulouM,  rapaciouHj  aud  vindiclitn:  but


DIONTSIUS


628


DIONYSIUS


Beveral  of  the  stories  related  of  his  cruelty  and
saapicions  temper  appear  improbable,  or  at  least
exaggerated.  An  account  of  the  fanions  prisoQ,  or
'*£ar  of  Dionyaios,"  will  be  fouud  nnder  the  title
Lautumiae.

(2)  The  second  of  the  came,  styled  The  Youno-
BR,  was  son  of  Dionysins  I.  by  Doris.  His  fa-
ther, whom  he  sacoeeded,  had  left  the  State  in  a
prosperons  condition,  bat  yonng  Dionysins  had
neither  his  abilities  nor  his  prndence  and  expe-
rienee.  He  followed  at  first  the  advice  of  Dion,
who,  although  a  Tepnblican  in  principle,  had  re-
mained &itbfhl  to  bis  father,  and  who  now  en-
deavoared  to  direct  the  iuezperienoed  son  for  the
good  of  his  country.  For  this  parpose  Dion  in-
vited his  friend  Plato  to  Syracose,  about  B.C.  364.
Dionysins  received  the  philosopher  with  great  n>-
spect,  and,  in  deference  to  his  advice,  reformed  for
a  while  his  loose  habits  and  the  manners  of  his
court.  But  a  faction,  headed  by  Philistna,  who
had  always  been  a  supporter  of  the  tyranny  of  the
elder  Dionysins,  succeeded  in  prejudicing  the  son
against  both  Dion  and  Plato.  Dion  was  exiled,
under  pretence  that  he  had  written  privately  to
the  Seuate  of  Carthage  for  the  purpose  of  con-
cluding a  peace.  Plato  nrgently  demanded  of  Di-
onysins the  recall  of  Dion,  and  not  being  able  to
obtain  it,  he  left  Syracuse,  after  which  Dionysins
gave  himself  np  to  debauchery  withont  restraint.
Dion,  meanwhile,  was  travelling  throngh  Greece,
where  bis  character  gained  him  numerous  friends.
Dionysins,  moved  by  jealousy,  confiscated  his  prop-
erty and  obliged  his  wife  to  marry  another.  Upon
this,  Diou  collected  a  small  force  at  Zacynthns,
with  which  he  sailed  for  Sicily  and  entered  Syra-
cuse without  resistance.  Dionysins  retired  to  the
citadel  in  Ortygia,  and  after  some  resistance,  in
which  Philistns,  his  best  supporter,  was  taken  pris-
oner and  put  to  death,  he  quitted  Syracuse  by  sea
and  retired  to  IjiHsri,  the  country  of  bis  mother,
where  he  bad  connections  and  friends.  Dion  hav-
ing been  treacherously  murdered,  several  tyrants
succeeded  each  other  in  Syracnse,  until  Dionysius
himself  came  and  retook  it  about  B.C.  346.  In-
stead, however,  of  profiting  by  his  ten  years'
exile,  he  ha<l  grown  worse.  Having,  during  the
interval  of  his  absence  from  Syracnse,  usurped  the
supreme  power  in  Locri,  be  had  committed  many
atrocities,  had  pnt  to  death  several  citizens  and
abused  their  wives  and  daughters.  Upon  bis  return
to  SyrAense,  his  cruelty  and  profligacy  drove  away
a  great  number  of  people,  who  emigrated  to  various
parts  of  Italy  aud  Greece,  while  others  joined  Hice-
tas,  tyrant  of  Leontioi  and  a  former  friend  of  Dion.
The  latter  sent  messengers  to  Corinth  to  request
assistance  against  Dionysius.  The  Corinthians  ap-
point«d  Timoleon  leader  of  the  oxi>edition.  This
commander  landed  in  Sicily,  b.g.  344,  ent«red
Syracuse,  and  soon  after  obliged  Dionysius  to  sur-
render. Dionysius  was  sent  to  Corinth,  where  he
spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  the  company  of
actors  and  low  women.  Some  say  that  at  one  time
be  kept  a  school.  Several  repartees  are  related  of
him,  in  answer  to  those  who  taunted  him  opon  his
altered  fortunes,  which  are  not  destitute  of  wit  or
wisdom  (Pint.  i>ioM;  Died.  Sic,  xvi.  5  foil.).

(3)  DioxTSiUB  Thkax,  a  celebrated  Greek  gmm-
marian,  a  native  of  Byzantium,  or  perhaps  of  Alex-
andria (Snidas).  Coming  to  Rome  about  B.C.  80,
he  engBge<l  iu  teaching  rhetoric  and  grammar.
Of  numerous  manuals,  commentaries,  etc.,  that  he


published,  one  entitled  Tixvrj  TpamutrtK^  has  come
down  to  ns,  and  is  of  very  great  importance,  as  it
became  the  basis  for  all  subsequent  grammars,  and
for  many  centuries  was  a  standard  text-book,  either
iu  the  original  or  in  Latin  translations.  From  it,
throngh  the  Latin  equivalents,  came  the  technical
terms  of  modem  grammar,  such  as  "case"  (ctuus,
irratrw),  "plnral"  (jalttralia,  irXTj&wriKos),  "singu-
lar" ($ingulari9,  ivtit6t),  "nominative''  (nomtRaft-
viM,  oyoiuurriKTi),  etc.  In  the  fourth  century  the
hook  was  translated  Into  Armenian,  and  this  ver-
sion, which  contains  five  more  chapters  than  the
Greek  M6S.,  has  given  a  definitive  text  of  the
whole.  It  is  to  be  found  in  Bekker's  .^neodofa.
Graeca  (Berlin,  1821),  but  especially  iu  the  recent
edition  by  Uhlig  (Leipzig,  1884).  A  French  trans-
lation is  given  in  Cirbted,  Mimcirea  et  DisaertatioM
flur  lea  AntiquUA  Nationales  et  ^U-angiret  (Paris,
1B24).  On  Dionysius  see  Grafeuhan,  Oeackickte  d.
Class.  Pkil  i.  p.  402  foil.  (Bonn,  1850);  Lersch,  Spraok-
philoaopkie  Her  Alten,  i.  p.  64  foil.  (Leipzig,  1841);
Steinthal,  Oeschickte  der  SprachtoigBenaoka/t,  2d  ed.
(Berlin,  1891);  Sayce,  Science  of  Language,  Intro-
duction; Htibschmann,Ca«iMl«Are,pp.  15fo)I.;  Sni-
das, s.  V.  ^loywrios ;  and  the  article  Gramuatica.

(4)  Haucarnassrnsis  or  Halicaknasseus,  an
historian  and  critic,  born  at  Halicamassns  in  the
first  century  B.C.  We  know  nothing  of  his  history
beyond  what  he  has  told  ns  himself.  He  states
that  he  came  to  Italy  at  the  termination  of  the
civil  war  between  Angnstns  and  Antony  (b.c.  29),
and  that  he  spent  the  following  two-and-twenty
years  at  Rome  in  learning  the  Latin  language
and  in  collecting  materials  for  his  history.  He
died  at  Rome,  B.C.  7.  The  principal  work  of  Dio-
nysins is  his  work  on  Roman  antiquities  (Pafutueff
'Apxa^o^oyia),  which  commenced  with  the  early
history  of  the  people  of  Italy  and  terminated  with
the  Iwgirining  of  the  First  Punic  War,  B.c.  265.
It  originally  consisted  of  twenty  hooks,  of  which
the  first  ten  remain  entire.  The  eleventh  breaks
ofif  in  the  year  B.c.  312,  bnt  several  fragments
of  the  latter  half  of  the  history  are  preserved  iu
the  collection  of  Constantine  PorphjTogeuitus,  and
to  these  a  valuable  addition  was  made  in  1816,
by  Mai,  from  an  old  MS.  Besides,  the  first  three
books  of  Appian  were  founded  entirely  upon  Diony-
sins, and  Plutarch's  biography  of  Camillns  must
also  be  considered  as  a  compilation  mostly  taken
from  the  Antiquitatet  Bomanae,  so  that  perhaps,
upon  the  whole,  we  have  not  lost  mnch  of  his
work.  The  intention  of  the  author  in  writing  his
history  was  to  give  the  Greeks  a  more  accurat«
and  favourable  idea  than  they  hod  hitherto  enter-
tained of  the  Roman  people  and  its  civilization,
for  it  had  always  fretted  the  Easterns  to  have  been
conquered  by  a  race  of  mere  "barbarians,"  The  .
work  is  founded  upon  a  very  carefnl  and  thorough
study  of  anthorities,  and  is  one  of  our  chief  sources
of  information  upon  ancient  Roman  history  in  its
internal  and  external  development.  Good  editions
of  the  A»tiquUafee  are  those  of  Reiske,  6  vols.  (Leip-
zig, 1774-76),  Schwartz  (Leipzig,  1877),  and  Jacoby
2  vols.  (1885--88).  The  first  edition  in  the  original
Greek  was  that  of  R.  Stephanns  (Paris,  1546).

Dionysins  also  wrote  a  treatise  on  rhetoric  (Tixvrf
PTjTopiKrj)]  criticisms  (Juv  ^Apxaiatv  KptiTts)  on  the
style  of  Thucydides.  Lysias,  Isocrntes,  Isaeos,  Diuar-
cbus,  Plato,  and  Demosthenes ;  a  treatise  on  the  ar-
rangement of  words  (Ilfpi  :£vp$ifrta>s  'Ovoftaratv)',
and  some  other  short  essays. The  first  complete


after  six  niDnibif.  Zetia  aocorilliiKly  s«weil  ita>
in  his  ttii>;li  I  ill  ri|H)  fur  birth,  luiil  tlien  gnT|  ■
ov«r  to  Ino,  tliB  (iialar  nf  Semel^.  (Hue  ATtHViA]
Aflor  lit>r  <)<>Htli  IlenneH  tnok  tbt>  l>o;  Id  Uif
iiymphn  of  Mmiiit  Nysn,  or  ncconliii^  to  anotlifr
vt^ntioii,  in  ihv  HynAfs  of  I)*Mlotin,  who  bniaglitlitni
U))  anil  hid  him  in  a  cavu  Jiwny  from  tbo  Mnfjttaf
Hiirt^.  It  rntiiHiI.  W  iuirertaiiicil  wburw  Uounl  Nna
wuM  originiilly  ftiippnwMl  to  1>r. In  Inter  tiniMlbp


edition  of  the  entire  irurkii  of  DiunyHiiis  wiut  that
nf  Bylbnr^  (Fraukforl,  I.V4H;  n>|iritit<;tl  at  I^eipzij;,
ItiBI).  Mort>  n*i!t>nl.  t-ilitorn  of  the  rhetorical  workH
are  ijrna  (PiiriH,  l^itit  and  \V<>sieniiiiiin.

(5)  The  author  of  a  (ii-eek  )ti>eni  iti  \lr*fi  hoxnme-
tcfrt,  enl  illrd  T^t  Vijt  oUtwufyifs  il*ptr)ytj<Tit,  "  A  Dn-
M'ription  of  tliu  Hnt>itahl»  World,"  It  ut  ii»l  clcar-
Ij'  aHCprlaiiiril  wlieru  bu  wan  lH>i-n.  Tlii'  pi'uliabi]-
itj  iM,  liMwm'cr,  that  ho  wiw  u  tialivc  of  (Miarux  in

SiiAJaiia.  It  lA  iiu(>4!rr»in.B)Ho,  vvhrii  Ik*  ttoiiritthed  ; '  iinnic  wa.^  irunHf<*TTtMl  to  many  plAcon  vlicTe  ilu
ho  heloDgod,  Itftwcver,  wcordiiig  to  the  gonprnlivino  wiut  oultivstcrt,  not  only  in  Gr«co,  l-nt  io
opinion,  to  tho  latter  part  of  thi'  third  or  the  be- !  Aaia,  India,  and  Africa.  When  grown  np,  IHonjr.
giuiiiug  of  the  fourth  eeittiiry  a.i>,  Ho  dtjHvod  sns  is  represented  as  plantiug  tho  vine,  and  wio>
from  bis  poem  tho  sunintiie  of  Pt^riegetes.  Tbia  dering  tUroivgh  tho  wide  world  to  spread  liii  vor-
prodiiotiou  of  bis  baa  little  merit  pe  a  work  of  '  ship  among  lueo,  with  his  wiiie-fliiBh«d  traiD  (A^-
iniagiuatioii  and  but  feeble  interc^iit  for  tbe  geog- ,  tror) — bin  unntea  and  other  uyiupbs,  Satytv,8ilcni.
mpber.  The  coninteiitar>',  however,  of  Eiist-atliiuB  I  and  siniiliir  woifdland  deities.  Whoever  welfmei
upon  it  possesBCB  some  value  from  tbe  niiscel]a-|  tiim  kindly,  like  Icarins  iu  Attica  oad  Osmn  ta
noons  Itiforniatiriti  whinh  in  scattered  thnxighont.  i  Aetob'u,  received  tbe  gift  of  wine ;  but  thoM  wlin
There  are  two  I.,atin  traiisliitionsof  tbe  pi>eiii — oii»  n'sirtl^-d  him  were  terribly  piniished.  A  wtwUsp-
by  Rnfus  Feotiis  AvienuK  {(|.  v.)  and  the  other  by  riux  nf  fables  is  »it{>»retitly  IuuhmI  upon  the  tn><1itiaD
I'riwciiiiiUB  (q.  v.).  Tbe  la.-tt  and  Iwst  editloti  of  the  that  in  many  plaees,  where  a  serious  religiuns  ril-
JWir^fHtM  it)  that  uf  Bcruhiirdy  (Leipzig,  ltfJ8 ),!  ual  exi:*t<Ml,  tbe  ili.-«tnlut«  worship  iifDiouj-«is»"l
ill  the  lirnt  vulniuc  of  liitt  Ueograplii  lirutri  Attaorra.

(6)  A  Cbiislian  writer,  called  AreopagIta,  from


Ills  baving  been  u  member  of  tbe  court  of  Areo-
pugtiH  at  Atliouii.  lie  wua  converted  to  L'lm;»tion-
ity  by  St.  Faul'd  preitehitig  (Acts,  xvii.  ;t4|.  He  in
reported  to  have  l»et.*n  I  he  tirnt  bi»h«p  of  Athene,
being  appointed  to  Ibiit  olllee  by  tbe  apostlr-  Paul,
and  to  have  snffei-eil  iinirlynioin  undir  nrunttian.
His  fiindHmetiTa!  thought  isrbeubsolnle  Iruiiscund-
ence  of  God.  During  the  Middle  Ages  n  gn>at  riiiui-
Imr  of  writings  were  oirculiited  iindn-  bin  name,
and  were  collected  together  and  printed  at  Co-
logiio ill 1&36,  and snliAeijnently  at  Antwerp in


with  a  vigonjUN  resistance. See  LvciTBOI^fl;  MlSlf-
ADAR  ; PbNTIIKUS; PlH)ETC8.

This  worship  soon  pnwted  from  the  raainl»i»l"f
Greece  to  tbe  wine-grctwhig  islands,  and  tloaridiwl
pre-eminently  at  Nnios.  Here  it  wa«,  aocordinjt  t"
the  story,  tliat  the  g(Ml  wedded  Ariadn^  (q,  r.)  in
the  islands  a  fable  was  current  that  be  fell  in  >itli
some  Tyrrhenian  pinites,  who  took  htm  U>  tlfif
ship  and  put  him  in  elinins.  But  his  feilrnffll
off,  thes4iils  and  the  mast  were  wrestheil  witb  vioi
and  ivy,  tbe  gml  was  changed  into  a  lion,  whil"
tbo  seamen  threw  themselrea  madly  into  lbs  <m
and  were  turned  into  dolphins. In  forms  fliiol*


!t"i34  and  at  Paris  in  ltt46.  'J'liey  linve  now,  fur  a  this  tbe  worship  of  Dionysus  paired  i»t«  E^P*
long  time,  been  deemed  spiirtons,  nllhougfa  scliul-  [  and  far  into  Asia.  Hence  aroHe  a  fable,  fottixl'*!
an  diDi^r  in  reHpuet  to  tbe  times  and  antborst  of  ,  on  the  story  of  Alexander's  campaigns,  tli>t  U"
the  fabrication.  The  most  probable  reftsoning.  ■  god  passed  vietorionsly  through  Kgypt,  Syria-s"^
huweviT,  tixi-H  them  at  tbe  end  of  tbe  fonrth  cen- ,  India  as  far  us  the  Qnnges,  with  liiti  army  of  Sit'^'*
tury. Tbe  slandnrd  text  is  that  of  Conterius.  nv  [Satyrs,  and  iuspired  women,  thu  Maenade^or  B**-


printed  by  tbeAhh^Migne.  Trails,  by  Farker(li'94V
Sea  Hiirnai'k's  liuymrnifrMrhirhtr,  vol.  ii.,  and  tbe
MlniHes  by  Niftiseyur  (IHtiiM  and  Schneider  (ISK4).

(7)  Sin-named  KxJGf t:*.  or  "tbo  Little.^  uii  ac-
conut  of  the  smalhieMS  uf  bis  stature,  a  Hcytbian
ntoiik  tif  the  sixth  century,  who  became  au  abbnt
at  Koine.  Ca«iio<loriis,  who  was  bis  intimate  frieml,
ttpetiks  highly  of  bts  learning  and  character.  At
the  iTKiueat  of  Stephen,  binliop  of  Saloua,  he  drevr
up  a  body  of  canons  entitled  Collectio  «liv  Codar
C'anoMMm  A'eW«i«ji(irorKm,  etc.,  translated  from  tbe
Greek,  containing  tbe  finit  Itfty  apostoltcal  rations,
as  they  are  called,  witb  tbiwite  nf  the  cntniriln  of
Xice,(>niintaiitint>ple,rbalceiloii,Sanlis,nud  includ-
ing 1%  canons  uf  certain  Africuu  nmncils.  He  af-
terwards drew  up  a  cullectinn  of  tho  decretals,  To
him  some  ascrilie  the  niiMle  of  computing  the  time
ofKaater,  and  of  dating  from  the  birth  of  Christ.

(S)  Of  Colophon,  au  artist,  conlemjKirary  with
Polygnotns,  wlmm  be  imitated.  Aristotle  describes
him  na  a  realist  in  the  treatment  of  bis  subjects.

<9)  Dioxvsifs  Cato. See  Catk.  p.  Wi.

DioD^soa  (Aiwwtroc  or  Atowiroi'). The  god  of
luxiirinnt  fertility,  cs|MMMiilly  as  displayed  by  the extinction  ;  bnt  be  retnroed  again  fW^m  obatun'f'
vine;  nnd  therefore  tlie  god  of  wine. His  natire orroeo  from  the  dead,  to  new  life  aodaottTitf '°


uhantes,  carrying  their  wands  (Bvftao*)  crews'^
witb  vineH  and  ivy.  Having  thns  ponslninrtlsll
the  world  to  tbe  recngniti<m  of  his  deity, ami  t»'*
tug  witb  Heraeles,  assiifted  tbe  gotls,  in  tlie  fu>B>
of  a  lion,  to  victory  in  their  war  with  lb*  Oiw*
he  wiw  taken  to  Olyuipns,  vrherv.  in  HoNMfi  "*
does  nut  ap)>L'ar.  Fntm  Olyinpim  be  diwcwfr  ^
tbe  lower  world,  whenoe  he  Itrings  hii  nwl**''
who  is  worshipped  with  him  under  the  name"'
Tbyon6  ('■  the  wild  one  "),  as  Lem  wm  with  aH'"
aud  Artemis.  From  bis  mother  he  is  i-alleil  Ttiy^
neuf*,  A  name  which,  wilh  others  of  similar  W***
ing,  anch  as  Bacchus,  Bromios,  Eaios,  and  lai*li**
points  to  a  worship  founded  ui»on  a  ilifferMil  *••**
ception  nf  his  nature.

In  the  myth  with  which  we  have  tieen  hlthirW
eonci^nuMl,  the  giwl  apgrnnrN  m.iinly  in  tbe  cKu***
tor  aud  HurroDiidtngH  of  joy  nnd  triumph.  Uut)"
thn  god  of  the  earth,  DinnyAiis  iMdoitgs  liki"  P**^
sephon<f,  to  tho  world  below  as  well  lu  l<*  the *'"''
above.  ITie  death  of  vcgetalioD  iu  wint«r  «■*
reprewnted  as  tho  Hight  of  the  gml  luto  bi*''^
from  tho  sentence  of  his  enemies,  or  oven  »» ^'"


place, according  to  ttie  nsual  tradition,  waa Thebes,
where  lie  was  Itorn  to  Zuns  by  Semel<^  (cj.  v.),  the
tlnughter  of  Cadmus. Scmeli^  was  destroyeid  by


(he  lightning  of  her  lover,  uud  the  child  was  boru Demeter. Iu  hiu  childhood  fae  wai  toro  to  (<i>**'


this  ooDneettou  fae  was  oaUml  Zuj^iis  ("  Ind'  >"
pioroa")  and  n'prrs«nted  as  a  son  of  Zens  »ai»^
dftughior  Perae|)bon^,  or  somelimns  of  Zew  *>"'


DIONYSUS


525


DIOPHANTL'S


Dionyuu  ud  Lion. (Cbonglo  HoDumeDt  of  LjralcratM.)

by  tbe  Titans,  at  the  command  of  the  jealons  Her^.
Bat  every  third  year,  after  spending  the  interval
in  the  lower  world,  he  is  bom  anew.  According
to  the  Orphic  story,  Atben6  brought  her  son'H  heart
to  Zens,  who  gave  it  to  Semel^  or  swallowed  it
himself,  whereupon  the  Theban  or  younger  Diony-
Baa  was  boru.  Tbe  grave  of  Dionysns  was  shown
at  Delphi  in  the  inmost  shrine  of  the  Temple  of
Apollo.  Secret  offerings  were  brongbt  thither,
while  the  women  who  were  celebrating  tbe  feast
awakened  Licnites ;  in  other  words,  invoked  the
□ew-bom  god  cradled  in  a  winnowing-fau  ou  the
neighhonriiig  monntain  of  Pamassns.  Festivals
of  this  kind,  in  celebration  of  the  extinction  and
resurrection  of  the  deity,  were  held  by  women  and
girls  only,  amid  the  mountains  at  night,  every
third  year,  abont  the  time  of  the  afaorteat  day.
The  rites,  intended  to  express  the  excess  of  grief
and  joy  at  the  death  and  reappearance  of  the  god,
were  wild  even  to  savagery,  and  the  women  who
perforated  them  were  hence  known  by  the  expres-
sive named  of  Bacchae,  Maenads,  and  Thyiades.
Tbey  wandered  throngh  woods  and  mouotaius,
their  flying  locka  crowned  with  ivy  or  snakee,
brandishing  wands  and  toruhes,  to  the  hollow
sounds  of  tbe  drnm  and  the  shrill  notes  of  the
flute,  with  wild  dances  aud  insane  cries  and  Jnbi-
lation.  The  victims  of  tbe  sacrifice — oxen,  goats,
even  fawns  and  roes  from  the  forest — were  killed,
torn  in  pieces,  aud  eaten  raw,  in  imitation  of  the
treatment  of  Zagreoa  by  the  Titans.  Thrace  and
Macedonia  and  Asiatic  Greece  were  the  scene  of
the  wildest  orgies ;  indeed,  Thrace  seems  to  be  the
country  of  their  birth.  In  Asiatic  Greece,  it  should
be  added,  the  worship  of  Diooysus-Zagrene  came
to  be  associated  with  the  equally  wild  rites  of
Bbea  (Cybel^)  and  Atys  and  Sabns  or  Sabazius
(q.  v.).  In  Greece  proper  the  chief  seats  of  these
were  Pamaasns,  with  Delphi  and  its  neighbour-
hood, Boeotia,  Argos,  and  Laconia,  and  in  Boeotia
and  Laconia  especially  the  monntains  Cithaeron
aud  TaygetuB.  They  were  also  known  in  Naxos,
Crete,  and  other  islands.  They  seem  to  have  been
Duknown  in  Attica,  though  Dionysus  was  wor-
shipped at  the  Eleusinian  Mysteries,  with  Per-
sephone and  Demeter,  nnder  the  name  of  lacchoa,  as
brother  or  bridegroom  of  Persephon^.  (See  Mys-
TKKIA.)  Bat  the  Attic  cycle  of  national  festivals
ID  honour  of  Dionysus  represents  the  idea  of  the
ancient  aud  simple  Hellenic  worship,  with  its
merry  nsages.  Here  Dionysus  is  the  god  who
gives  increase  and  Inxnriance  to  vineyard  and
tree. For  he  is  a  kindly  aud  gentle  power,  ten-i-


ble  only  to  his  enemies,  and  troru  for
joy  and  blessing  to  mankind.  His
gifts  bring  strength  and  healiug  to
the  body,  gladuesa  aud  forgetfulness
of  care  to  tbe  mind,  whence  he  was
called  LyaeuB,  or  the  loosener  of  care.
They  are  ennobling  in  their  effects,
for  they  require  tending,  and  thus
keep  men  employed  indiligeut  labonr;
they  bring  them  together  in  merry
meetings,  and  inspire  ttient  to  music
and  poetry.  Thus  it  is  to  the  wor-
ship of  Dionysus  that  the  dithyramb
and  the  drama  owe  their  origin  and
development.  In  this  way  Diony-
sus is  closely  related,  not  only  to
Demeter,  Aphrodit-^,  Eros,  the  Graces,
and  tbe  Muses,  but  to  Apollo,  because
he  inspires  meu  to  prophesy.

The  most  anoient  representatiou  of  Dionysus
consists  of  wooden  images  with  the  ifxiXXos  (mtm-
brum  tfirile)  as  the  symbol  of  generative  power.
In  works  of  art  he  is  sometimes  represented  as  the
ancieut  Indian  Dionysus,  the  conqueror  of  the
East.  In  this  character  he  appears,  as  in  the  Vat-
ican statue  incorrectly  called  Sardauapalus,  of
high  stature,  with  a  Inxnriaot  wealth  of  hair  ou
bead  and  cliiu.  Sometimes  again,  as  in  numerous
statues  which  have  survived,  be  is  a  youth  of  HofC
and  feminine  shape,  with  a  dreamy  expression,  his
loug,  clustering  hair  coufiued  by  a  fillet  or  crown
of  ivy,  generally  naked,  or  with  a  fawn  or  panther
skin  thrown  lightly  over  him.  He  is  either  repos-
ing or  leaning  idly  back  with  the  Bvpaos,  grapes,
or  a  oup  in  his  hand.  Often,  too,  he  is  surrouiuleit
by  the  FauuB  of  his  retinue,  Maenads,  Satyrs,  Sile-
ui,  Centaurs,  etc.,  or  by  Nymphs,  Muses,  Cupids—
indeed,  in  the  greatest  possible  uumber  aud  variety
of  situations.  Besides  the  vine,  ivy,  and  rose,  the
panther,  lion,  lynx,  ox,  goat,  aud  dolphin  weru  sa-
cred to  him.  His  usual  sacrifices  were  the  ox  and
the  goat.

Ou  the  Italian  god  Liber,  afterwards  ideutified
by  the  Romans  with  Dionysus,  see  Liber.

Diophantua  (Aiot^in-or).  A  miithematiciau  of
Alexaudria,  who,  according  to  the  most  received
opinion,was  contemporary  with  the  emperor  Julian.
This  opinion  is  founded  upou  a  passage  of  Ahulfii-
raj,  an  Arabian  author  of  the  thirteenth  century.
He  names,  among  the  contemporaries  of  the  em-
peror Julian,  Diopbantes  (for  Diophantua)  as  tbe
author  of  a  celebrated  work  on  algebra  and  arith-
metic ;  and  he  is  thought  to  have  derived  his  in-
formation from  an  Arabic  commentator  on  Dio.
pbantus,  Mubammed  a1  Boztani,  who  flourished
abont  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century.  The  rep-
ntation  of  Diophantua  was  so  great  among  the  an-
cients that  they  ranked  him  with  Pythagoras  and
Euclid.  From  bis  epitaph  in  the  Anthology  tbe
following  particulars  of  bis  life  have  been  collect-
ed :  that  he  was  married  when  thirty-three  years
old,  and  had  a  son  five  yoara  after;  that  tbe  sou
died  at  tbe  age  of  forty-two,  and  that  Diopbantes
did  not  survive  him  above  four  years ;  whence  it
appears  that  Diophaotns  was  eigbty-fuur  yeara
old  when  he  died.  Diophantns  wrote  a  work
entitled  'Apt$tupriica,  in  thirteen  books,  of  which
only  six  remain.  It  would  seem  that  in  the  fif-
teenth, and  even  at  the  beginning  of  the  seven-
teenth, century  all  the  thirteen  books  still  exist-
ed. Tbe  arithmetic  of  Diophantns  ia  not  merely


important  for  tlie  stndy  of  tlie  history  of  niatlie-
luaticft,  but  IB  itit(>ivi>(iiii|;  also  to  tlii;  Jimflit^uiati'
oiaii  liitoself  fitirii  iln  fiiniUliii)];  him  %vitli  luuii-
noiu  luutliodr)  for  tlie  rejoin  I  ion  of  nualylical
[>n)1)lcni8.  We  6111I  in  it,  moreover,  lite  lintt  tnu-t.i
uf  that  branch  of  t1i«-  cxuct  vciriices  called  algf-
bra.  There  uxIMm  iilso  u  necmiil  work  of  Dinpliaii-
tns,  on  Vol^goa  S*tmb(r»  {litp\  nuXfyvyaiv  ' .\pt6fii>v).
lit!  himtiolf  oiteti  a  third,  nmler  tbo  title  of  llu^ia-
fmrn,  or  CoroUarif$.  A  (foud  eclilioti  of  Diopliaii-
tus  is  fitill  that  of  Feniiut  (TouIousa,  Ili7UJ.  It  is
ba«Ml  u]Hin  thiLt  of  Mt>7.ii'iac  (Paviti,  ll>'il),  witli  a<l-
ilitions.  A  valiuibk'  iranslatiun  of  lite  Arithme('\ra
into  li«iniaii  was  piib!i»ht:d  by  OttoSchiilz  (licrlin,
lf!22).  Tb*'  UtMt  edition  of  tlw  text  is  by  Tannery
(Loipzig, !««).

Ou  the  8o-ca11ef1  Diophantlue  Aiialysttt,  sec-
Euler'd  A\t/ebra,  pt.  ii.  The  reader  id  referred  to
Heath'tt  Diophantot  of  Alexandria  (l*c*5|.

Dioplthea  (^iMr<idi}f).  (1)  Ad  absurd  character
At  Athens,  half  fanntie  and  half  iinpost-or,  who
traded  in  oraolen  and  was  the  butt  of  the  comic
poet*  (Aristoplt.  Trup.  380;  ^rp*,  96S,sclio].).  {2)  Aii
Athenian  gt-ncral,  fatlicrof  the  poet  Mennnder^seut
out  to  tlicThraci»n  Chor*one»ng,  about  li.C.  S44,  at
the  head  nf  a  bo<ly  of  Athenian  colonii^ts  {kKtjpov-
Xot)-  Becoming  iuvtdvvd  in  disputes  with  the  C&r>
diaoH,  who  had  the  Rtippnrt  of  Philip  of  MAoedttn,
the  latter  Hent  a  letter  of  re nionti trainee  to  Athens.
DinpithcH  was  impeached  by  the  Miioedouiau  party
among  the  AthcuiaiiA,  but  waa  ably  defended  by
Di.-moetbouca  in  tbo  oration,  still  oxlaut,  "Ou  the
Chorsonesns "  (B,c.341>,  ho  that  ho  wan  i>erni{tted
TO  retain  his  command.  StibHcqnentty  he  engaged
iu  a  military  expediiiuu  AgaluHt  Pbilipi  with  muob
spirit,  null  sncccfta  (Diod.  xvi.  75;  Ariatot.  Bhet.  11.
9,11).

DioBCorldes  (AioiTKopiitjt),  A  Greek  physioian
ami  niau  of  science.  He  tionri^lied  about  the
iniildle  of  ihe  flrat  century  a.d  ,  and  was  the  au-
thor of  a  work  Ite  ilatiiia  MaUca  {ntpt'XXrfs  'larpf
Ktjsi  in  ftve  books.  For  neai'ly  1700  years  this  b<tok
was  the  chief  arttliorily  for  sMiiIentt*  of  botany  and
the  sciunue  of  In-aling.  Two  short  essays  ou  spe-
cifics against  vs;;vtab]>ti  and  animal  poisons  (Jlexi-
pharmaca  and  THariaca)  are  apjiended  to  it  as  the
sixth  and  seventh  books;  but  Umm'  are  probably
fniin  the  bund  nf  a  l:it«ir  Dioscorid(>:s  of  Alnxandria.
A  work  on  family  medicine  is  also  attributed  to
falm,  but  ia  not  genuine.  The  Materia  Jfertioa  has
iMwn  edited  by  Spr«ugol  (lct:i9-30).

DioBcorldis  IiiiiUa  (iitotrKnpi?hvv  vrjirnt,  Ptol.),
or  Dloacorfda  i^uKTKnpi^a).  An  iNlnnd  Hitiint^d  at
rlie  HouLb  of  the  entrance  of  the  Arabian  Gulf  and
now  called  Socotra  (Ptol,  viit.'JB).

DioBoiirl  (i^i6<TKovpot — i.  c.  sons  of  Zeus).  The
borM'-tamer  ('nstor  (KdoTBp)aiid  PolydencesinoXi/-
firvKtjt,  Pollux),  tUti  niaAierof  the  art  of  boxing.  In
Homer  they  are  rt^privwnted  ns  the  soiitiof  Leda  and
Tyndareoa,and  callfd  in  GonseqDonoeTviiilaridae  ;
as  dying  ill  the  timu  bt^iwoen  the  rape  of  Mtdi'U  and
IhuTrojan  War,  and  1)8  buried  in  Lac«da«^mnn.  But
even  ander  the  e:irtb  tln*y  wrre  alive.  Honoured
l>y  Zens,  (bey  ltve<l  and  died  on  allernak'  iIavh
and  enjoyeil  the  prerogatives  of  gwlbead.  In  the
Int^T  stJii-j'  soraptiines  bi>tb.  Ronietimes  only  Poly-
dpnreA  is  the  dpHcendanC  of  Zens.  (See  Lkoa.)
They  undertook  an  expedition  to  Attica,  where  they
Mt  fVoe  their  sixt^-r  Hulen  whom  Theeens  bad  car-
ried off. They  tuuk  part  iu  the  expeditiou  of  the


Argonauts. (See  Amycus;  AROONArTAS.)

who  bad  been  bifru  mortal,  fell  iu  a  eunlMtl

Idas  Hiid  LyDcens,  the  sons  of  tbeir  patenuil  on-
ek'  Apbaretis,  The  light  arose,  accordiay  to  oh
Version,  in  a  fjuaiTel  over  Mime  cattle  whieti  the;
bad  carried  ofl';  according  to  auolber,  it  nasaboDi
the  rape  of  two  danghters  of  another  uncle  Leocip-
pns,  Pboob6  and  liiliiTrn,  who  were  betrotbcd  lo
the  sons  of  Apharcns.  On  his  brother's  Aeaih.
Polydvneoe,  the  iimnortal  Blio  of  Zens,  jimyed  h'u
father  to  let  bim  die,  too.  Zeua  prmiittwl  bin
to  s{K!ud  altertiately  one  day  among  the  g\H)s  iiia
peers,  the  other  iu  the  lower  world  M-lth  hit  Iw-
lovtiil  bnither.  Acconling  to  another  titory,  Zrii».
in  rewanl  for  th«ir  brotbtfrly  love,  sut  ibenj  iu  Ibe
sky  as  tbt!  coriHtHllation  Gemioi,  or  tbo  tueniili;
and  evening  star.  They  are  the  ideal  ttj-w  of
bravery  and  di-xturity  in  tight.  Thus  tliey  »re
the  turvlary  go«lH  of  warlike  youth,  often  uluriog
iu  their  contests,  anil  bouuured  as  the  tDTAnUm
uf  military  dane«s  and  meludiea.  The  ancif^l  eTtD-
Irtj)  of  the  twin  gods  at  Lacedacmon  was  Iwopw-
iillel  beams  (Aokowi),  joined  by  erusa-pieves,  vliich
the  .Spartans  took  with  them  to  war.  They  wcB
worshipped  at  Spart-a  and  Olympia  wiih  llm-
elfts  and  other  hei-oeiS.  At  Athens,  too,  they  wm
honoured  us  goils  under  the  name  of 'Araxd.  At
soa,  as  in  wnr,  they  lend  their  aid  to  men.  Tli«
8torm-to«eed  mariner  sees  tbo  sign  of  their  leiiffi-
cent  presence  in  the  flame  at  the  mast-bond  <llor.
Carm.  i.  3).  He  prays  and  vows  to  Ihcm  llm  »«■
rifice  nf  a  wbito  lamb,  and  tbo  st^rm  soon  etm^
l8ee  Helena.)  The  rites  of  bottplulity  ore  aha
under  their  protection.  They  are  generallr  rcittt-
8uut«d  with  tboir  horse«  Xauthus  and  Cyllnru*!*'
ill  the  celebrated  colossal  group  of  the  Caiiipiflo(;li<'
in  Rome.  Tlieir  characteristic  emblem  ii  sii  otil
helmet  crowiierl  witb  a  star.


[>lo«cur1  (CMtnr  aad  rnttuxi. (Froni  t  Cixa
ID  tbe  Brillab  Uuvc-am.)

Tim  vorshtp  of  Castor  and  Pollux  wasfroB***
ly  times  r.iirrent  among  the  tribes  of  Il»lr.  "^
enjoyed  especial  honours  in  Tnwnlum  unci  B'W*
III  the  latter  city  a  oonsidcrablH  temple  vwl''""
to  them  ncjir  the  Pornm  (b.c.  4W)  in  gmtitnde  fc«
their  appearance  and  lissistanco  at  the  b»ttle«  •*
Lake  Kegilhis  twelve  years  before.  In  this  '•'"'"'
ing,  generally  called  simply  tbe  Temple  cf  C»**'
the  Senate  often  In-ld  il.s  sittings.  U  waiinl'*''
ho«<nir.  toil,  that  tafler  B.C.  «05)  the  wdemn  W«^i«*
of  the  Roman  rquHn  wa*  b^-ld  ou  the  I.Mhof  Jiiv'
Tbe  names  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  like  Hial  efB*
ctiles,  were  often  In  use  as  faniilinr  exi'lnlivrt."*'
the  name  of  Citstor  was  invoked  by  womui*  <^'^
(Aul.  Cell.  xi.  6),  since  xoan  hod  caused  hU  iM*
HoiJi  weri!  wotwbipped  as  gods  of  tbe  sea,  psfl"*'
buly  in  Ostia.  the  hnrlMtnr  town  of  Rome.  TVir
image  Is  to  be  soeu  stamped  on  tbe  reverse  o't"*
oldest  Roman  silver  coins. See  NrMiRMATic*.

Dloaonrla  (Aiotrxoi'pia  or  ^otrxoitptia,  C.  '•  ^
1*44).  Festivals  oelwbrated  iu  varion*  part*  ^
Greece iu honour of  tbe Dioscuri,  ibe  iitf^


DIOSCURIAS


627


DIRIBITORES


CMtor  ftud  Polydences  (Pollux).  The  Spartan
Dioworia,  meotioned  by  Pansaoiaa  (it.  37,  $  1).
Were  celebrated  with  sacrifices,  rejoicJDgs,  and
drioking.  At  Cyren^  the  Dioacari  were  likewise
hoDoared  with  a  great  festival  (Schol.  od  Pind,
Pytk.  V.  €S9).  The  Atheuian  festival  of  the  Dios-
can  baa  been  mentioned  under  Anakeia,  wbeie
tbey  were  worshipped  under  the  name  of  "Ayar
Kit.  Their  worship  was  very  generally  adopt-
ed in  Greece,  especially  in  the  Dorio  and  Achaean
States  (Pansan.  x.  33,  3 ;  36,  3),  as  we  conclnde
from  the  great  nnmber  of  temples  dedicated  to
tbem ;  bat  scarcely  anything  is  known  respecting
the  manner  in  which  their  festivals  were  cele-
brated.

The  festival  of  the  Dioscuri  was  celebrated  at
Rome  with  great  splendour  on  the  Ides  of
Quiuctilis,  the  15th  of  July,  the  day  on  which
tbey  were  believed  to  have  assisted  the  Romans
against  the  Latins  in  the  battle  of  the  Lake  Re-
gillns.  On  this  occasion  the  elites,  who  regard-
ed ibe  Dioscuri  as  their  patrons,  went  in  a  mag-
nificent procession,  crowned  with  olive  ohaplets
and  wearing  their  state  drees,  the  trahea,  from
tbe  Temple  of  Mars  outside  the  city,  through  the
main  streets,  across  the  Fornm,  and  by  the  an-
cient temple  of  the  Diosonri  (Dionys.  vl.  13).  See
EguiTBS.

Dloaotulaa  (^too-KotppMir).  A  maritime  town  of
Colchis  at  the  month  of  the  small  river  Charus.
It  was  afterwards  called  Sebastopolis,  and  was,
in  the  earliest  ages,  tbe  port  most  frequented  in
Colchis  by  distant  as  well  as  neighbonring  nations
speaking  diffisrent  langnages — a  circumstance  that
siill  distinguishes  Iskuriah,  which  name  is  only  a
corruption  of  the  ancient  one.

DiDq>iU[la  (AtocnroXtr).  (1)  Magna,  a  famous
city  of  Egypt,  (See  Thbbae.)  (2)  Parva,  a  city
of  Egypt,  west  of  Tentyra,  and  on  the  western  side
of  the  Kile.  It  was  the  capital  of  the  nome  Dios-
polites.

Diota  (8i'«rop).  A  vessel  with  two  "ears"  (ira)
or  handles,  and  often  used  as  synonymous  with
amphora,  though  equally  applicable  to
any  vessel  with  two  handles.  See  Am-
phora.

Diovia. See  Idpitbr.

DiphUna  (Alitor).  A  poet  of  the
new  Attic  comedy,  a  native  of  Sinop^,
and  coutemporary  of  Menandor.  He  is
eapposed  to  have  written  someone  bun-  Diota.  (Na-
dred  pieces,  of  which  we  have  tbe  titles  **'"  **""■'
and  fragments  of  abont  fifty.  Tbe  Caaina  and  Bu-
dena  of  Plantus  are  modelled  ou  two  plays  of  Di-
pbilus ;  and  Terence  has  adopted  some  scenes  from
one  of  them  (the  2vvaim$v^a-KovTtt)  in  his  Adelpkoe.
Diphilns  took  his  subjects  both  from  common  life
and  from  mythology.  Most  of  the  passages  that
have  been  preserved  relate  to  matters  of  cookery,
the  longest  being  one  of  forty-one  lines.  Both  the
jndgments  pawed  on  htm  in  antiquity  and  his  re-
maining fragments  jnstify  ns  in  recognizing  him
as  one  of  the  most  gifted  poets  of  his  t^.  These
fn^ments  are  collected  in  Meineke,  i.  pp.  445-457 ;
iv.  pp.  375-430.

Z>^>lixoa  (iifppot). See  CnitROS ;  Sella.

I>fphth&^  iliitf)6tpa).  A  leathern  oloak  worn
in  Qreece  by  workmen  and  rustics.  See  Arlstoph.
A'Mhe$,  72.


Diplax  (diff-Xof ). A  double  cloak.  SeePALUuu.

DiploXa  (durXotr). See  Palijuh.

Diploma  (diVX»/ia).  (1)  A  sort  of  passport,  con-
sisting of  two  leaves  (whence  the  name  originated),
which  was  given  to  a  messenger  or  other  person
travelling  upon  public  business,  in  order  that  he
might  readily  obtain  everything  necessary  on  his
journey,  without  delay  or  hindrance  (Cic.  Fam.  vi.
12;  Plin,  Ep.  x.  31;  Capitol.  Pert  1).  See  Cur-
SU6  PuBUCUS.  (2)  A  document  drawn  up  by  a
chief- magistrate,  which  conferred  some  particular
privilege  upon  the  person  to  whom  it  was  given
(Snet.  Nero,  12).

Diplomatics. See  PAUiEOGRAPnT.

Dlpoenna  (AtVou'Of).  A  Greek  sculptor,  bom
in  Crete,  who  flourished  in  Argos  and  Sicyon  abont
B.C.  560.  In  conjnuctiou  with  bis  countryman
Scyllis  he  founded  an  iuflnential  school  of  sculpt-
ure in  the  Peloponnesus  of  the  Daedalian  style.
See  Daedala  ;  Statuaria  Abs.

Dipolla. See  Dupolia.

DiptSroa  (Sinrrpor).  An  arohitectnral  term  used
of  a  temple  with  a  double  row  of  columns.  See
Trmflum.

Dlptfclia  (di'ffTvxo).  Two  writing-tablets  fast-
ened at  the  back  by  wires  upon  which,  as  upon
hinges,  they  opened  and  shut.  Tbey  were  also
known  as  pugillareti.  When  three  or
more  tablets  are  Joined  they  are  called
triptycha  or  polyptyoha.  For  further
details  see  Tabula.

The  DiptVcha  CoN8mARiA,ftequent-
ly  mentioned  in  tbe  later  times  of  the
Empire,  were  made  of  ivory,  and  were
presented  by  the  consuls  to  the  emperor
and  to  their  Mends  on  the  day  on  which  Dtptrchoa
they  entered  upon  their  office.  Other  i,e*S^
magistrates,  such  as  the  quaestors,  also
distributed  diptycha  on  the  same  occasion  (Sym-
mach.  Ep.  il.  HI).  These  diptycha  contained  the
portraits  and  names  of  the  consuls,  with  other  rep-
resentations in  bas-relief.  Several  of  these  dipty-
cha are  still  extant — sixty-one  in  all,  according
to  Marqnardt — the  earliest  bearing  tbe  dat«  of
A.D.  406  and  the  latest  of  541.

Dlrae.  (1)  A  name  of  the  Fariae.  See  Erinyes  ;
FuBiAS. (2)  See  Cato,  Yalbrius.

DircA  (^ipKTi).  The  wife  of  Lyons,  wbo  married
her  after  divorcing  his  former  wife  Autiop6.  Dirc£
treated  Antiop6  with  great  cruelty ;  and  accord-
ingly, when  Amphiou  and  Zethus,  the  sons  of  An-
tiop^  by  Zens,  obtained  possession  of  Thebes,  they
took  a  sigual  veugeance  upon  Dirc&  They  tied
her  to  a  wild  bull,  which  dragged  her  abont  till
she  perished.  They  then  threw  her  body  into  a
fountain  near  Thebes,  which  was  benoeforth  called
the  fountain  of  Dirc^.  (See  AntiopI:.)  The  ad-
jective Dircaeus  is  frequently  used  as  equivalent
to  Boeoticns.

Dir*  or  Der6  (A«ip^,  called  by  Ptolemy  Aijp^).  A
promontory  of  Africa  over  against  tbe  coast  of
Arabia,  and  at  the  narrowest  part  of  the  Sinus
Arabicus  or  Red  Sea.  From  its  appearance  as  it
stretcl  ed  along  the  coast,  it  received  the  appella-
tion o.  Dir6  (Afipij)  or  "  tbe  neck."  The  modem
name  is  Bab-el-Mandeb.

Dirlbltorea.  Officers  who,  at  the  Roman  elec-
tions, divided  the  votes  when  taken  out  of  the  oiataHf


DISCORDIA


SVt


DITimUMttCS


elvnoiuo  whicL,  had  (lie  minority.
Pin.  15.


See


Discordia.  TIiq  Ruman  goddew  of  strife.  See
Kkis.

ZMscuB  (dicTJcof).  (1)  A  circular  plate  ur  quoit
uf  tituiiu,  iniu,  or  brnnzA  muiltt  fur  tlirowiug  to  n
diHtauoe  an  a  foat  of  Ktrviigth  or  itkill.  Of  this
gamu  (HtrKo^aXia)  it  \h  Bnf&e'i.«nt  U*  tuty  that  it  was
idouticat  with  our  "  putLiug  llii;  KliDt."  S^b  Od^n-
«ey,  viii.  18ti~-'20O.  A  very  ct:1»bi-at(»i  rf:presciitu-
tiuu  iu  art  is  tliu  DincotHiliiH  uf  the  .scu1()t«>r  Mymii,
wliose  ]>uwoi'ful  purtnijal  uf  thu  Iniliul  attitiidv
of  tbe  tUrotVLT  batt  buuti  pnti«^d  by  uriticx  fnitii
the  Ciiiic  of  (juintiliau.  (Cf.  (jiiintil.  ii.  13,  jt  Itl.)
Many  nf  tb»  copii's  of  tbe  original  vary  tbo  poriC
tiu  \in  tn  represent  the  atlileto'H  huad  as  uuC  turucd
aHiiIu,  and  this  is  tlie  ciuo  with  the  famoutt  statue
iu  the  VaticAi).  The  uiohI  correct  reproduction  U
that  uow  ill  jMitMieJiiaicui  of  Prince  Lnucelotti,  and
kept  in  h'w  private  IxMl-cImiiiber  in  the  Pnlaiuco
XiWioelutti,  Rumu. (3)  A  dish  or  p1at«.


Dlieu  Tlirawtr. (TaUcan.)

Slah. See  Lanx  ;  Patina.

Dla  Pater  (/>irM  Pater,  '*  Futbur  Dlven  "  or  Tbe
Rich).  The  ntlerof  tbe  world  below,  wurubippet]
by  tbe  RuiuuiiB  ua  the  goil  n-bo  iTorn^MponOed  tu  tbe
Greek  Pluto  (q.  v.).  His  worship,  like  Lb»t  nf  Pm-
•erpina,  waa  first  iutrodacod  iu  the  early  dayn  of


tbe  Republic,  at  the  comuiuud  of  ilin  8ibyllti#
UookH.  D\»  Patrr  bad  a  cba|>el  liear  thr  altar  df
SatiiruuK,  and  a  Hubtcrraneau  altar  on  thi;  Canipnv
MartiUB  iu  coniiuou  with  l-*raM>rpina.  Tfii«  «u
only  oiK'uwl  whou,aa  at  the  Sc«ular  Garuei,aicn-
lioeM  n-ere  olieretl  to  both.  Tbe  victiuu  ofEsfcd
tlina  were  black  auiiuals.

DiapetiaaCor.  A  ate  ward  iu  tfao  Soman  eiiy
hoiii>cbold,  wbo  had  tbe  charge  of  tbe  ocooanuaait
made  tbe  payinL<uts(C'ic.  Jff.  xi.  I :  Jiiv.  j.i^l;  Mxrt.
V.  42).  The  di6i>eufuitor  woa  usually,  perbapt  tl-
ways,  a  slave.  If  there  waa  a  procurator  iu  lb«
biiunte,  tbe  dbtpeiisaUir  was  iiuder  him  and  Mint
Miuipty  iia  cuahier.  Thus  we  read  iu  PctnuiCk
(UiJ)  that  the  procurator  nK-eived  the  rrnta.  whik
tbn  ilisjieiiaator  paid  out  ttte  tnnriey  in  thr  nlritmi.
If  there  wu«  a  dinpeURator  on  the  conutry  Mtnlr.
he  WON  nearly  the  wuue  na  tbe  riUicun  (ftif.  L  \6,
IG6).  Tin;  inip*irial  procurutonis  diHchargcd  im-
purtiiiiL  liiitii-H,  not  only  at  the  <»>urt  bnl  ia
Kunin  and  the  proviucca  jPlin.  ^.  A*.  Tii.  f  iS9|.
How  YuUiublu  wita  the  appuinlnieiit  ninj  lie  mto
from  the  fact  that  Othu  cxtorlt^il  :i  uiillion  M-
terces  froDi  a  slaw  whom  be  bad  recoiuiiie»d«i]  I*
Galba  for  tbe  oSlcc  ofdiapeuaator  (i^uet.  OfA.  6).

Diaaeu.  Geokg  Lcdolf,  a  Ourman  rlAMical
scholiir,  wu:t  born  near  Gutlidgeii,  I>f4-Rinbei  I'tik,
17^4.  He  studie<l  philology  and  philosophy  it  tbv
univendty  of  bia  native  city  (lbU4-Ir*0!t),  aud  mi
long  after  riTeiTing  bis  degree  waa  Diwls  Pto-
femnr  KxtraonliuariuH  at  the  L'nivemtf  of  Mir-
burg,  aoou  retiiriiing,  however,  ro  take  tbe  vanf
office  ut  Gottingen,  whore  iu  18)7  he  ItecMOw  Fn-
feNHor  Orclitiarina.  Besidea  two  valuable  tmli*M
—  fJf  TrmparibHt  rt  Afodit  I'erbi  Oraeci  (GolL  IW?)
and  Ifn  PhitoiHiphia  in  Xaiophonti*  rfe  Somte  ('**•
mentariin  TrinlUa  (Marburg,  iHVi) — be  pnbliAliid
valnable.  editions  of  Pindar  (lr<3(i},  Tiballii»Hi^l>F
aud  of  the  Oratiim  on  the  CrotcH  of  DuuttMlLenn
{1837).  His  minor  writ iiigi«(  A'/«)H«/nl.Mit J  drHlt<4(
ScAri/Irn)  appeareil  in  IHIIU  after  his  dralli,  wlncli
acciirretl  September  HtH,  1831.

Dlatafl. See  COLL'S ;  Frsi'M-

Dltbyrambus  iTIi^t'pn^^flc).  A  hymn  BriD^ '(
tbe  fcMtivalti  of  Uiouysua  to  llie  aceoHi[UH'ini"'t
of  a  Huto  UDd  a  dance  round  tbe  altar.  (St-o  I'l*^
MYMA.)  Tbe  bymu  celebrated  the  sulferintri '"^
actions  of  tbe  god  in  a  style  corrcspouding  m  i'*'
paasiouate  cbai-acter  of  hie  wombip.  Iu  tbe  c*'*^
of  time  it  developed  iuto  a  dt»iiuct  kiutl  of  Di**^
lyric  poetry.  It  waa  iu  Corinth  that  it  Ant  r^
oeived  anytbiug  tike  a  detiuite  artistic  fortii. '<*■'
tbia  at  Ibe  haiuls  of  Ariuu,  n ho  wax  ihen^'^
crt-dittiii  by  ihe  ancients  with  ita  actitid  in«'"'
tioii.  The  truth  probably  is  that  be  ww  t'"
first  who  ilivided  the  festal  wtng  of  Ibe  (Ik'''
into  strophe  and  auttstrophe,  an  amuig'it"''''
from  whiub  trogerly  to<ik  its  riac.  (Sea  Tji*'"^'^*
DIA.  )  Dithyraujba  were  sung  at  Athena  i*'**
in  (he  year — at  the  Great  Diouysla  iu  tlw  fffV^
ami  lit  tbe  Lcuara  in  tbe  begiuulug  of  nikt^
The  chorus  oouatHted  of  tifty  |H>rsmts,  uba  it*^'
iu  a  circle  round  the  altar.  The  dithyramb***
further  developed  by  Lasua  of  Heruiion^,  lUa  1}'"^
|H>et  and  uiUBiciao  who  live<l  about  ll.C>  ^  *^
the  court  of  tbe  Puiatratidac.  By  acveral  im^
vatioii^  iu  muaio  aud  rhythm,  cspeciall)  ^7  *
stronger  aud  more  coiuplete  iuntnimeiitati'iu,  ll><*
artist  gave  it  gn-ater  variety  and  a  rotuw  »tro\il
ebanicter. He  iiitiu  iutrutlucet)  tlit.>  pnxe  cOHtlitt


DITTOGRAPHY


629


DIVORTIUM


for  the  best  dithyramb,  aod  apparently  abolished
the  antistropbical  diviaiou  ;  at  least  this  is  not
found  iu  the  diChyrambB  of  bis  pupil  Pindar.  With
LasDS  and  Pindar,  Simonides  and  Bacchylidea  may
be  uamed  as  among  the  foremost  dithyrambio
poets  of  their  time.  At  the  ditbyramhic  contests
the  poets  of  the  difieieut  tribes  contended  for
the  prize.  Each  had  its  ohoms,  brilliantly  fitted
out  at  great  expense  by  tbe  richer  citizens.  Be-
sides the  honour  of  the  victory  the  poet  received
a  tripod;  tbe  chuma,  and  the  people  which  it
represented,  an  ox  for  the  sacrificial  feast.  These
performances  were  very  popular  for  a  long  time ;
but,  as  the  new  tendency  developed  itself,  voices
of  authority  made  themselves  heard,  condemning
them  as  involving  a  serions  degeneracy  in  art.
There  is,  in  fact,  no  donbt  that  in  tbe  form  which
it  assumed  after  the  time  of  the  Peloponuesian
War  the  dithyramb  did  violence  to  the  older  taste.
More  and  more  it  lost  the  loner  unity  and  beau-
tiful proportion  which  that  feeling  required,  A
coDtiuuouB  and  rapid  change  of  rhythm  and  mode
was  accompanied  by  an  extraordinary  boldness  of
diction,  iu  keeping  with  the  wild  character  of  tbe
composition.  In  the  bands  of  inferior  poets  this
often  passed  into  turgidity  and  bombast,  if  not
into  mere  nonsense.  Solo  pieces  were  inserted  to
relieve  the  chomses,  the  text  was  gradually  sub-
ordinated to  the  music,  and  the  dithyramb  was
thus  gradually  transformed  into  a  kind  of  opera.
Though  the  subjects  of  the  poems  had  long  ceased
to  be  taken  exclusively  from  the  cycle  of  Dionysi-
ae  myths,  they  were  never,  of  course,  entirely  out
of  harmouy  with  the  lyrical  spirit  of  the  dithy-
ramb.

There  was  a  very  considerable  nnmber  of  dithy-
rambic  poets.  The  best  known  are  Melauippides
(q,  v.)  of  Melos  (about  b.c.  415),  who  is  geuerally
held  responsible  for  the  degeneracy  of  the  dithy-
ramb and  the  excess  of  instrumental  music;  bis
disciple  Fhiloxenus  of  Cytbera,  who  died  iu  380;
Timutheus  of  Miletus,  who  died  iu  357,  and  his
contemporaries  Polyidns  and  Telestes.  Of  the
whole  literature  we  possess  nothing  but  frag-
meuta. See  Chorus;  Musica.

Dittograpby.  The  name  given  to  a  clerical  er-
ror frequently  found  iu  M8S.  It  consists  in  writ-
ing twice  what  should  properly  be  written  only
once.  Thus  iu  the  best  HS.  (2)  of  the  FaU.  Leg,
of  DemostheuM,  we  find  ' Api<TTod>Siv  ical  6  'Apttrro-
irffuts  for  KnjtT'i^hut'  Koi  6  'Apurroirjiios.  One  of  the
Bcboliasta  on  Horace  Carm.  i.  37,  19  doubles  two
syllables,  writing  laboraborabas  for  laborabtu.  A
very  extraordinary  instance  is  found  in  the  Co-
dex PuteolanuB  of  Livy,  which  in  xxvii.  11, 11,  has
dediatent  et  tug  liberum  eMdem  deditaent  et  tut  liberum
eotdem  dediwent  et  tut  liberum  eoadem  dediaaent  —  a
proof  of  how  mechanically  the  scribes  [wrformed
their  work. See  Textual  Criticism.

Dinm  (Auw).  (1)  An  important  town  in  Mace-
donia on  the  Thermaic  Golf  (Thnc.  iv.  28).  (2)  A
promontory  on  the  northern  coast  of  Crete  where
tbe  island  has  its  greatest  breadth  (PtoL  iii.  17,
7).

Dins  Fidina. See  Sancus.

DiTaxWnm. Dialogue. See  Dialogus.

DireracMltim. A  wayside  ion. See  Caupona.

Divloa  The  leader  of  ttie  Helvetians  in  the
var  against  L.  Caasins  in  B.c  107. He  was  at  tbe


head  of  the  embassy  sent  to  Inlius  Caesar,  nearly
fifty  years  later,  B.C.  56,  when  be  was  preparing  to
attack  the  Helvetians  (Caes.  B.  G.  i.  13).

Dlvlnatlo  (prevision  of  the  future).  (1)  In  gen-
eral the  word  is  applied  to  all  prophecy  or  fore-
telling in  the  simplest  sense  of  the  word.  Among
the  Romans,  prophecy  was  based,  not  on  inspira-
tion, as  with  the  Greeks,  but  on  the  observation
of  definite  signs,  such  as  the  omen  (or  voice),  the
prodigies  aud  the  auspices  taken  note  of  by  the
augui-s.  (See  Augur.)  Tbe  science  of  the  ha-
mspices  (or  the  foretelling  of  eveuts  from  the  in-
spection of  the  carcases  of  sacrificial  victims)  was
a  later  importation  firom  Etruria.  The  ancient
Romans  were  not  familiar  with  the  diviuatio  from
aorte»  or  lots,  which  was  common  in  many  parts
of  Italy.  The  Sibylline  Books  threw  no  light  on
futnre  events.  (See  Sibylla.)  Towards  the  end
of  the  republican  period  the  sciences  of  the  au-
gurs aud  haruapices  lost  their  significance,  and  the
Greek  oracles,  in  the  varions  forms  of  their  craft,
with  the  Chaldaeau  astrology,  came  into  vogne»
and  carried  the  fashion  in  tbe  society  of  tbe  Empire.
On  divination  among  the  Greeks  see  Mantiks.

(3)  In  the  language  of  Roman  law,  divinatU>
meant  the  legal  inquiry  for  deciding  who,  among
many  advocates  proposing  themselves,  was  the  fit-
test to  undertake  a  prosecution,  aud  also  the
speeches  by  which  the  various  advocates  tried  to
make  good  their  competency  fur  the  task.  Thus
Cicero's  oration  called  Ditinatio  in  Caeoilium  was
pronounced  by  him  against  Q.  Caecilius  Niger,  a
sham  accuaer  of  Yerres,  who  claimed  the  right  to
prosecute,  bnt  who  would  have  played  into  the
bauds  of  the  accused.

DlTuor. See  Ahbitus.

Divltiftotta.  An  Aedoan  noble  and  brother  of
Dumuorix  (q.  v.).  He  was  a  warm  adherent  of  the
Romans  and  of  Caesar,  who,  iu  consideration  of
his  entreaties,  pardoned  the  treason  of  Dnmnorix
iu  B.C.  58  (Caes.  B.  G.  i.  3, 16-20).  He  is  meutioned
by  Cicero  (De  Div.  i.  41)  as  a  Druid.

DlTodnnxm  {Aimoiovpov).  Tbe  modern  Metz ;
subsequently  Mediomatrici,  and  stiU  later  Metis  or
Mettis,  the  capital  of  the  Mediomatrici  in  Gallia
Belgica  (Ptol.  ii.  9, 12).

DiT&ia. See  Cadurci.

DiTortiTim.  Divorce.  (1)  Grksk.  The  term
for  this  act  was  awokti^is  or  an-on-f/i^fnc,  the  former
denoting  the  act  of  a  wife  leaving  her  husbaud,
and  the  latter  that  of  a  husbaud  dismissing  his  wife
(DemoBth.  o.  Onet.  i.  p.  865,  $4  J  c-  ^eaer.  p.  1:162,  ^
52, 1365,  $  59).  The  only  Greek  States  respecting
whose  laws  of  divorce  we  have  any  knowledge  are
Athens  and  Sparta.  In  both  States  tbe  law  per-
mitted either  husband  or  wife  to  call  for  and  efl'ect
a  divorce,  though  it  was  much  easier  for  a  husband
to  get  rid  of  his  wife  than  for  a  wife  to  escape
from  her  husband.  At  Sparta,  it  aeema,  a  man
might  dismiss  his  wife  if  she  bore  him  no  issue;
the  recorded  instances,  however,  are  those  of  kings,
and  private  iuolioation  was  sacrificed  to  State  pol-
icy (Herod,  v.  39;  vi.  61).  The  law  at  Athens  al-
lowed a  man  to  divorce  his  wife  without  ceremony,
simply  by  bis  act  of  sending  her  out  of  his  house
(cWc/urffu*.  mroir«>ff«ti.),  upon  which  she  returned
to  the  guardianship  of  her  nearest  male  relation.
(See  Kyriob.)  The  husband  was  then  bound  to
return  the  dowry  which  she  had  brought  him,  or


DIVORTIL'M


DIVOKTlirM


in  pay  tier  intereet  at  tbe  rnt«i  of  nine  obols  jHir
iiiiuA  per  month — Ir*  per  cent.  )>cr  aitmitn  ;  and  in
iiilditiou  to  thifl  to  provide  alimony  (o-iroc).  A
IiiisUiiod  thus  difttntuiDK  liio  wife  iisiiaUy  did  m>,
flu  luiglit  be  expect(«d,  irt  tln^  preaonco  of  witoewes
(Lys.  c.  Atcib.  i.  (  2S}.  Wliut  bcuama  of  tbe  ohil-
ilren  in  wn^^h  a  cane  in  not  mentioticd,  btit  it  is
pmttaJtlo  tlint  iliey  ri'miiiued  widi  the  fatlier.
AdultHry  on  llie  purl  of  the  wife  com  polled  her  hti»-
liAiid  til  divomn  livr,  or  hiiDScir  incur  tbe  penally
of  atiniia  (L«i.v  ap.  Uumoiitli.  r.  S'eaer.  p.  1371,  J  i*7).
WliiMi,  nil  tim  oihcr  hand,  a  wife  wifthed  to  leave
lior  huttbund,  iflmlli  juirtii^K  a;|;rcL>d  npon  a  divorce
no  further  procpfdings  W(Tb  requiri'd :  niiitii:il
rnnsent  wa*  »nflici<'nt  to  dissolve  a  iimrriayi'.  If
the  hntdifiiid  objected,  she  was  ubli^it'd  t(»  api^>ear
in  p»n(oii  li(>foi>>  thi>  arch»n,  and  hIuIli  in  writing
the  t^rmiiidK  of  hi>r  apjdicatjon  (Pint.  Alcib.  Vi).
SliK  hful  to  rundiit-t  her  case  cpittv  uluue,  for,  as  who
waa  in  linr  hanhBiid'ti  power  Mutll  jiidji^mfut  was
givtL-n,  no  onr  had  a  nglit  t^i  cninu  forward  as  her
advocat4i.  It  him  Xtvvu  uiaiutaiued  that  ahc  oouhl
bo  repn>Aetilf>d  by  her  Kvpiav,  but  tbe  uotorioos
ease  of  AlcibJades  and  his  ill-iii!ied  n-iff  Hippnret^,
ill  Ihf  pafwage  just  cited,  leaver  littlo  ibtnht.  that
she  conld  not.  Tlio  aotitm  tliiis  brought  Ity  a
woman  wns  calli*d  «wrAti^<»r  81V7.  Ib^r  riRlit  to
a.  separation  would  ih-pcud  on  tin;  tn^atmiMit  nhe
had  rrreiviHl  (nrr  KaKOKIs);  but  of  tho  nntnrn  of
thf^  an-hiinV  jiirtisdictiuti  \ti!  know  but  little.  The
hnKband'H  Io.s.4  of  freedom  (i.  o.  by  bncoinitig  a  pria-
oner  of  war  and  being  »old  into  nlavery)  Ia  incn-
(loood  aa  affording  an  absolute  claim  to  a  divorce.

(2)  Human.  The  word  riiporlium  siguifled  gcn-
«rally  a  separation  ;  and,  ia  a  special  t«eu&c,  a  di-
Toroe  or  dis«olntion  of  marriage.  Several  aiitbori*
tiAS  (Q0II.  iv.  3;  Dionya.  ii.  2.^)  atato  that  divorce
vaa  oiikDovTti  at  Kouie  iu  early  timea,  and  that
the  first  instance  of  divorce  occurred  in  b.c.  333,
when  Sp.  Carvilius  Ruga  pnt  away  bin  wife  on  the
gronnd  of  barrenness.  It  is  said  ttml  the  act  of
Carvilins  whm  generally  di>iappn>ved  of  (Vul.  Mux.
ii.  l~l).  It  is  pmbahlo  that  divorce  on  account  of
the  nii(«coiiduct  of  tbu  wife  waa  iu  inw  from  a  very
early  |M>riod  ;  Init  tim  case  of  CarviliuK  Rnga  may
liavo  been  the  beginning  of  the  lax  nyatem  of  di-
vorce which  prevailed  loivardtt  the  end  of  the  CrcG
Republic  and  under  the  Empire.

The  luarringe  by  which  the  huHbaiid  acniilrcd
mantt/t  over  bis  wiff,iia  well  as  tht^  Inter  free  mar-
riage, wns  dlHSoliible;  hut  the  marriage  of  a  fio'
mm,  which  was  i4o]«^mni/ed  hy  nmfarrcatio,  could
never  ander  any  circuiuatancea  be  severed.  See
Matrimumcm.

A  correRponding  fnrni  to  that  by  wliii-]i  a  mar-
riage had  lieeu  crvaled  wa.-*  nw^d  for  ilij^aolving  it:
tlinn  a  marriage  entered  into  by  eoti/arrralio  was
put  an  L-nd  to  by  a  similar  ceremony,  called  diffar-
rcntio  (Ke«tiis,  ».  v.  diffarr.).  If  a  wife  had  passed
into  the  ijinMU4  of  her  husband  by  i.H}emjttio,  shi?
could  only  be  relea«ied  by  a  remaHcipatio,  which,
acconliug  to  fbduit,  the-  hURband  conld  be  com-
pelled to  rxecut«  (i.  1.17).  Those  formal  restric-
li(>n8  on  the  right  of  divon-u  di^appearml  under
the  fri'o  form  of  marriiige,  wliioh  diil  not  bring
the  wifn  i»  muHum  I'tri.  The  theory  on  which
Roman  marriage  was  baacil  admitted  tbe  utmost
fxcility  of  divorce:  the  consent  ami  eoujiign)  nf-
ffction  of  the  jtarlles  were  regarded  an  IIk-  essen*
tial  i>art  of  a  marriage,  nnd  tliiA  nffectio  tmtritulit
wa«  necetteory  for  the  oontinuanoe  as  well  as  for


tbo  creation  of  a  marriage.  AceordlngTjr,  I
party  might  declare  his  or  her  contieut  Ui  dii
the  connection.  No  Judicial  decree  and  do  iotir-
ferenco  of  any  public  authority  was  necewary  to
dissolve  tbe  marriage,  A  divorce  whicli  ra
brought  about  by  one  party  niuounctag  the  mr
riagc  and  imt  by  mntual  consent  won  called  ■  n-
pudiuM.  It  waa  costouiary  for  one  who  rcnoaneed
a  marriage  to  aend  a  distinct  notice  or  decloritiMi
of  iutentiou  to  the  other  party,  and  it  was  doaUed
in  the  time  of  Cicero  whether  the  Bimplofutof
either  party  marrying  again  without  any  imcli  di»-
ticc  baviDg  been  given  wan  Buffictent  to  conAlitnle
a  divorce  (Cic.  Orat.  i.  40).  Tbo  ceremony  of  hrealt-
iiig  the  nuptifitfM  tahulat,  or  of  taking  i1k>  li<>yHof
liu\  h<ni!4e  from  the  nonmn  and  turning  her  oat  of
d<.iora,  was  probably  considered  to  be  an  act  of
itself  siguilieuiit  enough;  but  the  geoeral  pnt-
tice  wfts  apparently  to  deliver  a  written  oattee,
and  perhaps  to  attsigii  a  n-asou.  By  tke  Let
Inlin  de  odMlleriia  it  watt  required  that  a  rejtMJM*
should  be  executed  in  the  presence  of  bcven  *it-
nessds.  Roman  citizens  of  the  age  of  puberty  (/V<
sxiv,  'i,  0).  Thin  preventeil  nn  adnlterewfroni  Ki-
ting up  ttiH  pretnnrnnrn  rtpudtum  as  ai)  exctiMfnr
her  conduct. See  ADn.TKKiliM.

Not  only  the  wife  herself,  but  also  bar  Uthat^it
film  wut«  under  liiii  powrr,  miglit  disMolve  lbs  UV-
ringe.  This  right  of  a  paLerfaroiliaa  WM  nuile
practically  iiictlVctual  by  a  duoroc  uf  the  eitip
Marcns.  Tonanbt  the  latter  jittrt  of  the  Bcp
and  under  the  Kmpiro,  divorces  tM^coiuo  very  flu*
mon.  Cu.  I'ompeins  divorced  bis  wife  Maciifur
alleged  adultery,  and  his  conduct  wu  spiimTCl
(Uic.  Ad  Alt.  i.  lii,  IS)  \  and  Cicero  speakaiidita
viii,  7)  of  Paulla  Valeria  as  being  rea<ly  to  leml
husband  on  his  return  from  his  province  a-ilh|
tice  of  divorce.  Cicero  himself  divnrv^  hisi
Tereutia  after  living  with  her  for  thirty  ycans^
married  a  young  woman  whom  be  alao  diva
Cato  the  Vonnger  divorced  bis  wife  Manii«,ilMt
his  friend  Hortonsius  might  marr)*  her  and  bare
children  hy  her;  for  thin  is  tin-  true  meanJagof
die  story  (J'liit.  Cat.  Min.  25).  Waoeonas  put  »<riy
his  wife  Tcrcntia  so  <ift«n  that  tbe  Rouioo  nB
said  that  he  bad  been  a  hundred  timefi  manicoi
aitd  alwiiys  to  the-  same  woman;  Scmpniniu*  ^
phns  divorced  his  wife  boeanse  she  bad  oner  Ik*"
t.o  the  public  games  without  bis  knowledge-  Sa-
eea  declared  That  there  were  women  at  Rotnf 'l*
reckoned  the  ycirw  by  tbeir  hn.sbauds  ratlwth*"
by  the  consuls.  Juvenal  mentions  on*  wbo  hw
bad  eight  linsbands  in  live  ycarsi  and  Tortiilli*"
sums  up  the  prevailing  practices  epigramntan^"'
iu  the  tienteuce,  "The  fruit  of  marriage  isilivflfw
(Apol  G).  Hy  the  Lex  Papia  Ptippaea  a  freed**-
lui  who  hud  marrieil  her  patron  M-ns  [iivreit'"
fntm  divorcing  licrwdf  (fXi/.  xxiv.  2,  IDwwt***
capable  of  m,irryiag  any  one  else.  From  an  •■rlj'
time  peualtie«  were  impowd  o»  tlioee  whwrii'M*'*
without  good  cause,  and  alao  on  those  who  bj  tl>^
conduct  made  a  divorce  Decoonary.

A  mau  was  punished  by  iiola  rrR«ono,  a  wMU"
by  loss  of  do*  <ii,  v.).  There  was  the  re (otii"  *•*•*
proptrr  meree  when  the  divorce  wa»  cauw-d  bttw
fiiiiU  of  lh«  wife,  iind  also  the  retrntta  proptfttH^
ruK  which  waM  the  right  of  the  hnnband  lo  dwln**
;»n  ailditionul  lunount  id'  don  in  case  Ihrre  *<"
ehiblruu  of  the  marriage.  The  free  right  of  di-
vorce was  not  takfu  away  by  the  early  Chrifttiw
emperors,  but  iln  exercise  except  on  grouoilsd^


DITLLUS


681


DODEBLEIN


fined  by  stetate  was  eeverely  pnnished.  JiistiuiaD
weut  farther  than  his  predeceuors  in  limittDg  the
legal  grounds  of  diroroe.  He  even  pauished  di-
Toroe  hy  matual  conaeut  nnless  the  object  of  the
parties  waa  t«  live  a  life  of  ohaatity  {Dig.  34,  2;
Cod.  Tkeod.  ill.  16 ;  Cod.  v.  17).  See  Lecky,  Hist,  of
European  Moralt,  ii.  pp.  304-308;  Wiichter,  Ueher
£kt9ckeidungen  btii  dsn  SSmerm ;  Bader,  La  Fem-me
Romaine  (Paris,  1677);  Friedlaoder,  ^tttngetchiekU
Romt,  ch.  T.  (6th  ed.  Leipzig,  1686);  Baecker,  Le
Droit  d«  la  Femme  dana  P Antiquity  {lii80).

DiyUtu  (Ai'vXXor).  An  Athenian,  the  author  of
a  history  of  Greece  and  Sicily,  in  twenty-six  or
twenly-Beven  books;  and  also  of  a  work  on  drink-
ing-bouts (Zv/in-otrioKa)*  His  date  is  nncertain,  bnt
be  probably  flonrisbed  in  the  first  oeatary  B.C.
(Died.  xvi.  14, 76,  etc.).

Dobema  i^6&ifpot).  A  town  in  Paeonia  in  Mace-
donia, east  of  the  river  Eohedonis  (Thuc.  ii.  98).

Dobree.  Peter  Paul,  an  English  scholar  of
eminence,  bom  in  the  island  of  Gnemsey  of
French  ancestry,  in  176S.  He  studied  under  Por-
snti  at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and  on  the
death  of  that  distingnished  Hellenist  undertook
to  edit  his  unpublished  papers,  which  had  come
into  the  possession  of  Trinity  College.  In  1820,
appeared  the  Plntiu  of  Aristophanes  with  Porsou's
notes;  and  in  1622,  the  Lexicon  of  Photius.  In
the  same  year,  Dobree  was  made  Begins  Professor
of  Greek.  On  his  death  in  1825,  he  left  an  edition
of  Demosthenes  in  MS.,  which  was  edited  and  pub-
lished by  his  successor.

Dokttua  {t&  ddffova,  from  Sofcor,  "  a  beam  ").  An
ancient  ^mboUcal  representation  of  the  Dioscuri
(Castor  and  Polydeuces)  at  Sparta.  It  consisted
of  two  upright  beams  with  others  laid  across
them  transversely  (Pint.  De  Amor.  Fratr.).  This
mde  symbol  of  fraternal  unity  evidently  points  to
a  very  remote  age,  in  which  scarcely  any  attempts
in  Kulptnre  can  have  been  made.  At  a  later  time,
when  works  of  art  were  introdnced  into  all  the
Hpheres  of  ordinary  life,  this  rude  and  ancieut  ob-
ject of  worship,  like  many  others  of  ita  kind,  was
not  superseded  by  a  more  appropriate  symbol.
The  DioBcori  were  worshipped  as  gods  of  war,  and
we  know  that  their  images  accompanied  the  Spar-
tan kings  whenever  they  took  the  field  against  hu
enemy.  Bnt  when  in  the  year  B.C.  504  the  two
kings,  during  their  invasion  of  Attica,  failed  in
their  undertaking  on  account  of  their  secret  en-
mity towards  each  other,  it  was  decreed  at  Sparta
that  in  future  only  one  king  should  command  the
army,  and  in  couseqnence  should  be  accompanied
by  only  one  of  the  images  of  the  Dioscuri  (He-
rod. V.  75).  It  is  not  improbable  that  these  images,
accompanying  tbe  kings  into  the  field,  were  the
ancient  Hoxava,  which  were  now  di^ointed,  bo  that
one  half  of  tbe  symbol  remained  at  Sparta,  while
tbe  other  was  taken  into  the  field  by  one  of  the
kings. See  Dakdala  ;  Dioscuri.

Dokdmacia  (dojci^o-m).  The  name  used  at  Ath-
eus  to  denote  the  process  of  ascertaining  the  capac-
ity of  the  citizens  for  the  exercise  of  public  rights
•ad  duties.  If,  for  instance,  a  young  citizen  was
to  be  admitted  among  the  Ephebi  (q.  v.),  he  was
examined  in  an  assembly  of  his  district  to  find
ont  whether  he  was  descended  on  both  sides  from
Athenian  citizena,  and  whether  he  poesessed  the
physical  capacity  for  military  service. All  offi-


cials, too^-even  the  members  of  the  Senate — had
to  submit  to  an  examination  before  entering  upon
their  office.  Tbe  purpose  of  this  was  to  ascertain,
not  their  actual  capacity  for  the  poet,  which  was
presnpposed  in  all  candidates,  but  their  descent
from  Athenian  citizens,  their  life  and  character,
and  (in  the  case  of  some  offices  which  involved
the  admiuistration  of  large  sums)  even  the  amount
of  their  property.  The  examination  was  carried
on  in  public  bj  tbe  archons  in  the  presence  of  the
Senate,  and  any  one  present  had  the  right  to  raise
objections.  If  such  objections  were  held  to  be
valid  the  candidate  was  rejected ;  bnt  he  had  the
right  to  appeal  to  the  decision  of  a  court,  which
would  take  cognizance  of  the  matter  in  judicial
form.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  were  accepted,
any  one  who  thought  his  claims  insufficient  had
the  right  of  instituting  judicial  proceedings  agninst
him.  If  the  decision  was  adverse  he  would  lose
his  office,  and  was  further  liable  to  punishment
varying  accoitling  to  the  offence  charged  against
him — which  might  be,  for  iuBtauoe,that  of  unlaw-
fully assuming  the  rights  of  a  citizen.  A  speaker
in  a  public  assembly  might  thus  be  brought  before
a  court  by  any  citizen,  for  no  one  not  possessed  of
the  full  right  of  citizenship  could  legally  address
the  people.  Tbe  question  might  thus  be  raised
whether  the  orator  were  not  actually  atimoi,  or
gnilty  of  au  offence  which  involved  atimia  (q.  v.).

Docimla  (Aoict/iia)  and  Doolmenm  (Aoxi/iftov).
A  town  of  Phrygia  near  Synnada  and  famed  for
the  marble  quarries  in  its  vicinity.

Vooton. See  Cbirurgia;  Mbdicina;  Med-

ICUS.

Dootos.  A  title  given  by  the  Roman  writers
to  various  poets,  especially  to  Pacuvius  (Hor.  Epitt.
ii.  1, 56)  and  Catullus  (Ovid,  Amor,  iii.  9, 62 ;  Mart,
viti.  73,  8).  It  is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  of
"accomplished,"  "polished."  Cf.  Hor.  Odet,  i.  1,
29,  where  it  is  applied  to  poets  in  general,  as  being
taught  by  the  Muses.

DSdarlaln,  Ludwiq,  a  great  classical  scholar
and  teacher,  was  bom  at  Jena,  December  19th,  1791.
He  began  his  higher  studies  at  Pforta  when  sixteen
years  of  age,  contiuuing  them  under  Thiersch  at
Munich,  nnder  Krenzer  and  Voss  at  Heidelberg,
and  under  Boeckh,  Buttuiann,  and  Wolf  at  Berlin.
He  reached  the  doctorate  at  Erlangen  in  1813,  and
in  1815  was  called  to  the  chair  of  philosophy  at
Bern,  transferring  himself  in  1819  to  Erlangen,  with
the  titles  of  Professor  of  Philosophy  and  Director
of  the  Philological  Seminary  in  the  University,
and  Rector  of  tbe  Gymnasium.  At  Erlangen  be
remained  until  his  death,  November  9th,  1863.  His
publications  comprise  editions  of  Tacitus  (Halle,
1847) ;  Horace  ( Epi»tle$,  Leipzig,  1856-66 ;  Satires^
1860);  and  the  Jliad  (Leipzig,  1863-64);  besides
the  following  works,  some  of  tbem  of  enduring
value:  Ixttein.  Sgnonifme  und  Etymologien,  6  vols.
(Leipzig,  1826-38);  Lat.  Wortbildung  (Leipzig,
1838);  Handbuch  d.  lat.  Sj/nonymik  (Leipzig,  1839-
49);  Handlfueh  d.  lat.  Etymologie  (Leipzig,  1841);
Reden  und  Autsatze  (Frankfort,  1860)  ;  Homeri»chea
Glo»aarium,Z  vols.  (Erlangen,  1850-58) ;  and  a  Ger-
man Anthology — Deutache  Miutenammlung  (1840).

Dwlerlein  was  fully  as  remarkable  as  a  teacher
as  for  his  scholarship,  and  appears  to  have  made
upon  his  hearers  a  profound  and  ineffaceable  im-
pression. To  great  acuteness  and  unfailing  tact
he  added  an  enthusiasm,  energy,  and  vigour  that


DO DONA


US


DOUW£LL  VASE


carried  at  ouce  himuilf  atid  Iiin  ti«arerfl  away.
Thontnghty  imbuetl  with  tlie  very  gvciim  or  aii>
Hi|aJty,  the  great  mast^irs  uf  classical  literature
were  to  him  aot  auhjvctd  of  Htudy  but,  att  hv  liiiu-
««lt' irnlled  tliein, ''iutiaiat«  autl  cUertsbed  IVieuda/'
and  inUi  all  »  bo  hstenod  to  bim  bu  Inspired  much
of  bJH  own  piuwiuuate  Kenl.  An  uutiriug  wurker,
nHJntr  every  niiiniiiig  suiiti  after  inidnigbt  t<>  {ptir-
%ne  bis  reiwaruhes,  he  lt*l't  Itphiju)  him  hoth  in  bin
wortu  aud  iu  Ihf^  lUKtiiitrieti  uf  his  |iii|iil)4  thtt  llgure
of  a  great  and  irtij^n-ssivo  j>erHoualiiy.

Doddna  (Aa>^a>fv).  (1)  A  ciddtrut^d  city  and
Oracle  of  KjiiriDt,  wlioM5  uxiu't  positioti  has  only  of
luto  Wen  asrtfrtniiiiMl.  We  am  nut  aiwJHted  here  by
any  accurate  iincM;nt  traveller  liku  Faiisauiatt,  nor
buTO  VTfi  any  itineraries  or  faithful  mt-asnreutentH
of  di8tani:(M(  to  guide  lis;  all  is  vngiie  and  indell-
mt«.  Dionytihift  of  tlalicartia«»n«  placed  it  lour
days' joiirtii-y  from  Rnthrotiim  and  two  from  Ain-
\tncia(Antiq  Hom.i.d).  It  i«  iinivenuilly  allowed
that  the  t«inp1e  »(  DiHlnna  owed  its  origiti  to  the
PcliUfgi  at  a  |N.-riod  much  anterior  to  the  Trojan
War;  itince  many  writers  n-prewiit  it  at  uxialiiig
in  tbo  tiiuu  of  Drucidinu,  and  even  of  luaebiiN
(Arach.  Pntm.  Viuvt.  67*J ).  Heroi]utnH  dlMtiiictly
«tateatfaat  it  was  the  moot  ancient  Dracle  of  Greece,
and  repreaentH  the  Felaegi  aa  conenlting  it  on  vari-
OUB  oecaHions  (ii.  i>'i).  ileuoe  the  title  uf  "  Pelo^gie  "
asaigoed  to  Zens  (<>  wbnm  the  temple  was  dedi-
cated (Iliad,  xvi.  333).  Of  the  exiBleuce,  however,
of  another  oracle  in  Thvtwaly  of  the  same  name  no
doubt  can  be  oiit»rlaiiied ;  and  tu  tbJH  the  prayer
of  AchillBH,  in  Huuiur,  probably  liml  ri-f«r«nce.
Setting  asido  tbe  fubleM  which  HcnHbitimbaK  trauM-
uitteil  to  ua,  aud  to  which  be  «viduu(ly  attui:htMl
no  belief,  bis  report  of  tlie  affinity  whifb  exiHt«d
betwi«eu  the  hervico  of  thiM  ttMnple  uihI  that  of
Thi'lM'tt  in  Egypt  im  detiurviug  of  atientioit.  It  ap*
peani  ftuni  tliir)  authur  thai  in  biti  time  IbisHervice
of  the  tcinnple  wait  perfuruied  by  wuniuti ;  and  be
ban  rt-eord^'d  the  narues  of  the  three  prit\Ai4^As(«
who  ulBi'lated  wlum  ho  visited  Uodoua  ( il.  55).
Btrabo,  however,  aaaerts  that  these  dutiea  were
originally  allotted  to  men,  from  the  circumstaiieo
of  Homer's  mentiin  of  tbo  8elli  as  bi?iug  att^ndatit
upon  the  gmU.  7'he  term  Sclli  was  crtnaidered  by
inany  ancient  wrii«T8  to  refer  to  a  poople  of  Polas-
gio  origin  (Boph.  Trach.  v.  imo  foil.;  Aristot.  Me-
irorol.  1,  in.

Tliti  resiM»n«(»a  of  the  oracle  were  originalty  do-
livereil  from  the  NAi^rcd  oak  or  tiench  (ipijyAs)  (Soph.
TVrtffc.  V.  173).  The  god  revealed  hiM  mcMMige  in  the
rastliugof  the  loaves,  and  the  privAls  interpreted  ita
meaning.  Ita  ropnlatton  wan  at  tirnt  confined  to  the
inhabitant!!  of  Epirus,  Acarnauia,  Aetolia^  and  the
weMt«rn  parts  of  Greece  (I'atiiutn.  vii.  HI ),  bnt  ittt
fame  wiMt  afterwards  exteiideil  over  the  whole  of
that  couDlry,  and  even  to  Aniu,  as  wit  kno\r  that
oti  one  ocoaAiou  the  oracle  wait  cJinMilted  by  Croe-
sas  (Hnrod,  i.  Vi).  The  BoeotiaoK  were  Ibe  only
people  who  receivtwl  thft  prophetic  aiiawem  fmm
the  mouth  of  men  ;  to  all  other  natioOH  they  were
alwayH  commiiuica(4.-d  by  the  prieHtesAes  of  tbd
tompte.  The  r«>aii'in  i>f  this  exception  in  stateil  at
length  by  Stralxt  (401),  on  the  aiitbority  of  Epho-
niR.  Dodonn  was  tbo  first  ntatioit  iu  GrtMKio  to
which  the  ofleringn  of  the  llypcrborean.i  wen>  de-
apat-obwl,  acconiing  to  llenMlolns;  they  arrived
there  from  the  Adriatic,  and  were  thetH^e  ]taH»ed
on  to  the  Mallac  Gulf  (iv.  3;i).  Among  the  several
offeritigii  presented  to  tho  temple  by  Tarions  ua-


,sinck  J

I  often


by  Dlo- !
ftCOOMl 1


tions,one  dedicated  liy  the  Corcyreana  la  paftka-
larly  noticed.  It  wan  a  brazen  llgore  pbiMd  OTcr
a  oaIdn>n  of  the  uime  metal ;  this  Btatue  held  in  iU
hand  a  whip,  the  lash  of  which  ouualstvd  of  throe
cbatua,  each  haviug  an  aatrugatua  faateued  to  llie
end  of  it;  these,  when  agitat«d  by  the  wind,  sinck
the  caldron  and  produced  ao  contiuued  a
that  41X1  vibrations  coidd  be  counted  befi
ceased.  Hence  arowe  the  various  pruverlts  ol
Dodoncan  caUlron  and  the  Coreyman  la«b.  Ifo-
□ander,  in  one  of  his  plays,  compared  an  old  niins'a
chatter  to  the  eudle«<ii  sound  of  this  kettle  (jr«-
Plant/.  Ueliq.  cd.  Meineke,  p.  127).

We  hear  of  the  oracle  of  Dodona  at  the  time  of
the  Persian  inva>iou  (Hen)d.  ix.iRt);  aud  again  in
the  reign  of  Agesilaiits  who  couMilttHl  it  pttivioiihlir
to  his  expedition  into  Asia. It  is  staled  by  Dio-
doruH  Sicnlus  (xiv.  13)  that  Lysunder  was  acooaal
opctily  of  having  ofienil  t*i  bribe  tho  prii
The  oracle  which  wanted  the  MoloastanAIexi
of  bis  fate  in  well  known  from  Livy  (viiu
From  Demosthenes  we  learn  that  tho  an s wen  de-
livered from  time  to  tinm  lo  the  Atbeniann  wen
laid  up  in  tlie  public  arcbiven,  aud  bo  himself  Ap-
peaU  to  their  testimony  on unjro  than  one  ucu-
Mioii. At  length,  during  the  Social  War,  Dodvu
was,  according  to  Polybius  (ir.  ff7), almost  eutirtJf
destroyed  in  an  irruption  of  tho  Aelotians,  aadcr
their  lewlcr  [lorimachiis,  then  at  war  with  Eptnit.
Il  is  probable  thut  tho  temple  of  Dodoua  never  r»>
covered  from  this  di»ust4-r,  as  iu Strabo's  lim
there was  Jjcart'ely  any  trace  left  of  the  oracH
bnt  the  town  niioil  still  have  exisied,  as  it  is  rata*
lioiHul  liy  Hiurochui  among  tho  cities  of  Epirm  In
the  Heveutli  century,  and  we  hoar  uf  a  btsltopof
Dnduna  in  the  council  of  Kphesus. All  aocoanu
seem  to  agn^o  that  Dodona  dtood  either  ou  the■)^
c-livity  or  at thu foot  of  an eU-vatr«l muiioUlD
called  TonniniH  or  I'uuiarua. Hence  llie  teniiTo-
;  muri,  HUppuHe<]  to  be  a  coutracliuu for  Tonuniri
I  (To>io/K)i5/M)t),  or  gaardiaus  of  Tomarns,  which  «"■•
,  givoD  to  the  prieata  of  the  t'ClDple. The  site  uf  I*^
dona  was  at  one  time  supposed  to  be  D«ar  Jmi**
in Epinie,  bat  recent  explorations  in  tbe  vtll'jr
of  Dramisins  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Olytzika  b><*
I  bi'^iught  to  light  many  dwlicatfiry  inscriptioDi  «>
Zeus  Kalos  and  Dinn6,  with  other  evideticofttbit
make this  the  prubalilo  sito  of  the  orsch). See
Leake.  Norihrrn  Greerr,  vols.  i.  aud  iv. ;  llie  J*w
ArrJi/ulotfiqur  for  It^,  pp.  329,397;  andCanfMO"^
Doiiuntf  rt  nes  Ruinpn  <1K78). (2)  A  city  and  oncio
of  TbCMiaty. It  baa  given  rise  to  much  eaaO^
veray  whether  Homer  (//.  ii.  750)  refers  to  tiW
the  city  of  Epims,  and  the  acboliaBta  aud  oonnrid*
tatitrs  are  divided  iu  their  opinions.

Dodonaeua  (Aa9<avatos). A  sorDAine  of  Z«a*
froiu  Dirdona. See  Humor,  //.  xvi.  233.

Dodonldes  (AwSwi-tdrs).  Tbo  priaatCMei  vb'^
gave  oraclea  in  tho  temple  of  Zeus  la  DodoD&  ^

I  DODONX.

Dodrana  Nino  twetflbs  or  tbt^e  fourth*  ^  •
Roman  a>;  three  founha.  Hence  tho  phn«**'^
ex  dotlraiile  was  used  of  aii  hoir  to  three  fasrt^
of  an  estate. See  As.

Dodwell  Vaae. A  small  Greek  vate  corttf^

with  a  lid  and  found  at  Corinth. The  Dtl  •''"*]?

the  representation  of  a  boar-hnut  and  \»  Idmh^^

with  names. The  body  of  tbo  vase  is  ornauw*'*'^

^  with  figures  of  animals. It^  pattern  sliowi  trt^*^

;  of  Phu^uiciau  intlucnoc. Tbo  Dodwell  vase  U  o**"


DOG-DAYS


583


DOMICILIUM


ID  the  Old  Pinacothek  at  Mnnicfa.  See  Zahn,
Besekreibung  der  Galerie  hemalter  Vasm  dtnr  kiinig'
iicken  bayeri»i^un
JSammlung  (Maoioh,
1H54);  Lau  and
Krell,  Die  gTiedii9ok-
«■  Fawn,  etc.  (Leip-
zig, 1877);  and  the
article  Tab.

Dog- days.  See
Caniculares  Ddes.

Dogmatitcl  {6ay-
fionxoi).  See  M  B-
SICIMA.

Dog&  SeeCAHXB.


Dodwell  Tu& (MDDlob.)


Dolabella.  The  oame  of  a  celebrated  patrician
family  of  the  Cornelia  gens.  Thone  most  deaerring
of  notice  are :  (1)  Cn.  Cornelius  Dolabella,  con-
sul B.C.  81,  whom  the  yonng  lulias  Caesar  accused
in  the  year  77  of  extortion  in  his  province.  (2)  Cn,
Cornelius  Dolabella,  praetor  nrhanas  b.c.  61.
With  Verres  as  bis  legate  he  plundered  bis  prov-
ince in  Cilicia,  and  upon  his  retam  was  accused,
betrayed  by  Verres,  and  condemned.  (3)  P.  COH-
NRUUS  Dolabella,  the  son-in-law  of  Cicero,  whose
daughter  Tnllia  he  married  in  B.C.  51.  He  was  one
of  the  most  profligate  men  of  his  age,  and  hie  con-
duct caused  Cicero  great  uoeasiness.  On  the  break-
ing out  of  the  Civil  War  he  Joined  Caesar,  and
fought  on  his  side  at  the  battle  of  Pharsalia  (b.c.
46),  and  was  raised  by  bim  to  the  consulship  in  44.
He  afterwards  received  from  Antony  the  province
of  Sj'ria.  On  his  way  to  bis  proviuce  he  plundered
the  cities  of  Greece  and  Asia  Minor,  iu  consequence
of  which  the  Senate  sent  against  him  Caseins,  who
took  Caesarea,  in  which  Dolabella  had  taken  ref-
uge. That  he  might  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  his
enemies  he  committed  suicide,  b.c.  43.

Dolabra,  dim.  Dolabella  (o-^Ai;,  cr^t'oy).  A
tool  consisting  of  a  long  handle  and  a  donble  head,
which  terminated  on  one  side  in  a  sharp  blade,  the
edge  of  which  ran  parallel  to  the  handle  (while  the


DoUbne. (Biamner,  Techtulogie.)

blade  of  the  a»cia  was  at  right  angles  to  the  handle),
and  on  the  other  side  in  a  pick,  which  was  usually
carved  {/alx).  In  this  form  it  was  used  for  hew-
ing wood,  for  pruning  where  the  prnning-book  was
not  strong  enough,  for  making  stockades,  and  for
breaking  down  ramparts  and  waits.  It  was  oon-
seqaently  a  tool  familiar  to  the  Roman  soldier,  as
maybe  seen  in  the  accompanying  illustration  (fig.
b)  from  Trajan's  Column.  For  the  purpose,  how-
ever, of  excavating  or  breaking  up  the  earth  (Pal-
lad,  ii.  1  and  3 ;  iii.  31),  a  dolabra  with  a  straighter


pick  appears  to  have  been  usedj  as  is  shown  iu
fig.  a,  from  a  relief  on  a  tomb.  Of  a  similar
form  is  fig.  c,  which  represents  the  dolabra  used
by  masons  (luid.  Orig.  xix.  19,  11).  The  hatchet
need  at  sacrifices  and  by  butchers  was  also  called
dolabra.

DoUch^  (AoXt^i^X  (1)  A  town  of  Thessaly  iu  the
Perrbaebian  district,  to  the  southeast  of  Azorus.
Here  the  Roman  consul  Q.  Marcius  Philippna  re-
ceived a  deputation  from  the  Achaean  League,  at
the  head  of  which  was  Polybins,  who  accompanied
the  Roman  army  in  their  singular  and  perilous
march  through  the  defiles  of  Olympus  tuto  Pieria
(Liv.  xlii.  53 ;  id.  xliv.  2).  (2)  A  town  of  Syria,  sit-
uated in  the  district  Eupbratensis  and  northwest
of  Zeugma.

DoUchoa  (doXij^or). See  Cursub;  Stadium,

Dolium  (iri&os).  A  large  jar  of  earthenware  into
which  new  wine  was  placed  to  ferment.  Many  of
them  were  large  enongh  to  hold  a  man,  and  were
shaped  like  a  huge  caldron  with  globular  bodies
and  wide  months.  Diogenes  (q.  v.)  the  Cynic  took
up  his  abode  in  adolinm  (not  in  a  tub,  as  popularly
said),  and  in  some  ancient  works  of  art  he  is  de-
picted as  lolling  iu  one  of  these  vessels  during  his
celebrated  interview  with  Alexander  the  Great.
See  Diog.  Lagrt.  vi.  23 ;  Sen.  Ep.  90, 14.

DOUA  CURTA  were  urinals  placed  in  the  narrow
streets  between  the  houses  for  the  convenience  of
those  who  passed  by  (Lncret.  iv.  1026  j  Macrob.  iii.
16,  $  15 ;  Snet.  Veap.  23).

Dolia  were  also  nsed  as  coffins.  In  the  Crimen,
near  Sebastopol,  sixteen  iridoi  were  discovered,
four  feet  four  inches  high,  and  two  feet  two  inches
in  diameter.

Makers  of  dolia  were  known  as  doliarii.

DoliuB  (AdX(or).  A  slave  of  Fenelop^  who,  with
his  six  sons,  welcomed  Odysseus  home  and  joined
him  agaiust  the  suitors  {Odga.  xxiv.  496).

Dolls. See  Pupa.

Dole  (ioKav).  (1)  A  weapon  consisting  of  a  long
staff  with  a  short  iron  point  (Verg.  J«i.  vii.  664).
(2)  A  secret  poniard  or  dagger  inserted  in  a  walk-
ing-stick (Plot.  Tib.  Gracck.  10;  Snet.  Claud.  13,
Domit.  17)  or  a  whip  [IHg.9,  2,  52).  (3)  A  small
topsail  of  a  ship.

Dolonci  (AdXoyKot).  A  people  of  Thrace  (Herod.
vi.  34).

DoldpM  (AAoirrr).  A  powerful  people  in
Thessaly,  who  dwelt  on  the  Enipens  and  fought
before  Troy.  At  a  later  time  they  dwelt  at  the
foot  of  Mount  Pindns;  and  their  country,  called
Dolopia,  was  reckoned  part  of  Epirus  (Henxl.  vii.
132).

Dolua  Mains. See  Culpa.

Domestitoi. See  Praetoriani.

DomioUlnm.  A  term  of  Roman  law,  signifying
a  man's  permanent  home.  The  following  is  the
well-known  definition  of  domicilium  given  in  the
Corpua  luria  (Cod.  x.  40,  7):  "In  eo  loco  singulos
habere  domicilium  non  ambigitur,  nbt  qnis  larem
rerumque  ao  fortuuarum  suarnm  snmmam  conati-
tuit,  node  rursus  non  eit  diseessnrus,  si  nihil  avo-
cet,  nude  cnm  profectus  est  peregrinari  videtur,
quo  si  rediit  peregrinari  iam  deetitlt."  In  a  pas-
sage of  the  Digeat  a  man's  home  is  thus  defined
(Dig.  1.  16,  203):  *'Sed  de  ea  re  constitotum  esse
(respondit)  earn  domum  unicnique  nostrum  debere


DOMINIUH


SS4


IX)MITIAXUS


Bxistimori,  ubi  qulsque  sedea  et  tabulas  baberct
Baartiuuiiie  reruni  cotiittitutiiinera  fecieset/'  A  iiiao
Dcqnirei)  iloiuicilium  by  maklug  a  iilace  his  resi-
dence and  intending  to  ronmin  iti  it  pennaneiicly
{animUM  Huitttndi).  DoinicUinm  was  lost  by  iibnii-
dotiUMJDt,  and  thequtfstion  of  tli«exiHtoiivu  of  duui-
Lci)<^  wtis  treftted  an  one  of  fact  to  bo  determined
by  the  circiiniMtaiiccd  »f  u(u.-b  ca«e.

The  (Hiucepttou  uf  doiuiuilti  btut  far  more  impor-
tant oojtflc<|Ui-ncf((  ill  niodvru  tiyHU:iiiH  of  biw  timn
111  auciont;  it  itt  llit>  funudation  of  a  braiicb  of
wbut  IK  KoinL-timcit  cjilkd  privuto  iutorniitioanl
biw,  but  more  correctly  tb«  cwilliot  of  biw*.

Dodinlum.  Dominium  or  rcrum  dominium  eig-
DiHoB  owucreUip  of  property,  and  dominu*  ia  tbo
owner.  Vroprieian  Is  froqncutly  vmoA  as  BU  uqulv-
aI«ot  to  domimxiw ;  and  when  owuvroblp  Ik  diittiiL-
gnisbed  frt^rn  ttunt  fructus,  tbe  word  proprician  ia
preferrtHl  to  domiiilxn  r8  an  expreaaioii  fur  owner-
ship. Tlie  tonn  domimutH  or  tiomimum  legUimum
is,  Hiriotly  Hi>ejtking,  coiitiubd  to  ownership  w  iure
Qniritiam — i.  e.  to  civil  ownenbip — and  doee  not
iuclude  owuersbip  in  boitin — i.  e.  praotorion  own-
crtitiip.

Uwiicmliip  is  not  defined  by  Roman  legal  writ-
en,  but  tbu  ffviivrul  Qotiiiu  im|dicd  in  tbe  ttTiu  in
dear.  It  itt  a  rigbt  which,  Hiibjeut  to  cert&in  le-
gal limitatiunH,  entitles  a  perran  to  exercise  full
cuutrol  over  a  cor|)orcnl  tbiii};  to  tbe  excliutioii  of
■11  other  persond.  Ownursliip  c-unnot,  however,
b«  dwliiied  by  eniimi'riitinjj  all  tbo  p^iwers  which
may  ha  tncidcntnt  to  it,  a«  tbe  iu$  uU-Hdi,  frucNdi,
poifittendi,  dinftttniudi,  nitice  owigerHbip  may  exist
iiotwttluiliknditig  rbat  ono  or  niort^  of  tbu8v  powcre
i»  detached  from  it.  A  thing  tuuy  be  c<inuidei-ed
to  iMilong  to  a  p^'i'wiii  ivIiOHe  {wwora  over  it  are
very  miiull  cnrlHilwl ;  hfiieo  uriiieit  the  diflSriiHy
of  ditfiiiiug  oiviifi-sbip.  Tbe  Ihnitatioua  to  which
owin?i-*)liip  in  KiiMiiiu  la%v  is  sabject  are  «-')Ib*ir  gen-
eral or  Bpeciul.  Tbo  former  are  iuipOMcd  for  tbe
purpose  of  (•uforciug  tbo  pn.*cept  n>  iilrre  tuo  ut
alifhtim  noi*  latdtin :  tlicy  pi'evunt  ownent  from  fm>
iisiitg  their  i>owers  aa  to  iujitre  ai^oininf(  owuem
ur  tbe  pnbliv  gcut}ru]ly.  Special  limitations  on
uwtierMhip  iiriKH  by  pttmnnit  »i'(]nirin|i[  rights  over
Iiro|»erty  owned  by  Hi>mfl  one  eliw.  For  iiiHtatice,
tbe  owner  may  ht;  bound  to  allow  to  another  per-
aou  a  certain  iim>  or  enjoyment  of  the  thing  of
wbicl)  bu  in  dominua,  or  to  abMtniii  from  doing
certain  actit  on  or  to  lu.t  projH^t-ty  and  lor  (b«v
benctit  of  Hutue  utLii^r  {H-i-non.  Thr  only  righfs
of  tbisi  kiml  n^coguized  by  Homan  law  an;  wrrfi-
tuii,emph!/leH»it!,  auprrficiea,  pigttun  :  sucb  riglita  are
called  JMi-rt  ill  re  aii^Hn  ;  they  are  piotcetcd,  like
domininm,  by  actions  in  rtm :  their  nntiirc  is  aiorc
fully  explained  under  the  head  of  SenviTt'S.  Owu-
emhip  iH  in  its  nature  aingle  and  entire;  conse-
qui-titly  the  niime  thing  cannot  beloDg  to  several
■eparate  ownrrH,  but  fMrvrral  persons  may  be  Joint
domiui  or  uniiere  of  one  thing.

DoroIaaB.  A  inaiiter,  owner.  Tlie  woni  waH
applied  ait  a  title  of  n-spcet  to  a  anpt-rior  in  rank
orKtntioii.  ThiiH  tlie  head  of  a  fiimily  was  bowb-
titne*  called  domium  by  tlie  free  members  of  bie
Ikroily  oa  well  n«  by  bi4  nlaves.  Tbe  title  atdomi-
nut  came  to  be  nacril>«Ml  to  tbe  omporor.  The  his-
tory of  Ibis  HM)  of  the  word,  which  correeiiondH
with  changes  in  the  character  of  the  emiteror,  in
briefly  im  follows:  Angnntnti  refused  to  be  calleil
tfoHiinua  (Suet.  Aag.  5:1,  with  Puck's  note),  as  did


alfto  Tiberias  (Saet.  Tib.  27) ;  and  CallgnU  wi
drat  emperor  who  allowed  himself  to  bo
by  the  title  (Victor.  C'iie«. 3).  Domitiauclaitnetltbe
titles  of  /Vu*  ft  DomSnua  (Dio  Cass.  Ixii.  VA},  Tlfr
jiii)  only  wisbeid  to  be  ealleil  phnctipn  (Plin.
$^2,  G;t,«<).  Pliny  in  bis  letters  alwoys
Tn^aii  as  tlominua,  bnt  in  doing  so  be  does  not  in-
tend to  make  use  of  an  ofbcial  title.  ArMtnu^linl
ap]>earson  itnpeiial  intmumeiits  in  the  reign  of  Sfp-
timiiis  Sevenis.  Aurclian  tlrst  a«loptcd  tbe  tillo
IfrHH  ft  DomiHw)  on  bis  eoina.  Diocletian  allovcO
himself  to  be  publicly  addressed  aadomintia,  Tnat
tbo  fourth  century  tbo  emperors  freely  ascribe  ttwi
title  to  themselves.  Tbe  reason  why  the  eoi1i«
emperotB  objected  to  being  styled  dwwinwa  is  to  b«
found  in  the  fact  that  they  still  kept  np  a  pretend-
of  republican  equality.  Kow  the  word  domii
a  Roman,  like  dtiraunis  to  a  Greek,  meaus  a
in  relation  to  slaves,  or  (iwlitically)  a  tyrant,
pOHMtHHor  of  arbitrary  {tower  (Sail.  Ttiff.^\.  LsIm,
when  the  imprriul  )iuwer  had  become  hedged  kImqi
by  pruccdetit  and  tradition,  the  emperor  wilUtl|^f
accepted  the  title  as  his  dne.

The  word  rfomiNuir,  besides  retaining  its  fiiO
force  08  a  term  of  gieat  dignity,  underwent  •  ftf-
therdevelopmetit  asasocial  title.  In  fiiiel  <'l*t4.
'il,  it  is  applied  by  tbe  emperor  to  bis  pfelwiu
guesta  as  au  ordinary  title  of  coiirt-eey.  In  Usrt
vi.S!^,  it  la  equivalent  to  "Mister."  It  is  iMd  bjr
Ovid  (Jm.  iii.7.  11)  :ih  a  t«riii  of  ntfeellon.  In  tU
niiHlprii  languages  it  has  ii<'veb>{M^d  throngh  tin
Low  Latin  rorniM  dQiunut,  dnmna,  donnHa,  domik-
rrlln  into  Ibu  Portuguese  dom,  Span.  do»,  dttAa,  fr.
damr,  madamr {mm  doiHHa},demoisvllr,  miA  OUYvf'
liiih  don. S«e  Peck's  note  to  Suet.  Jujf,  hH.

Domitia.  (I)  LKrTDA,  aunt  of  Xero.  accuwd  of
mogic  and  put  to  death  (A.it.  54)  tbnmgU  ihe  in-
trigncB  of  Agrippina.  who  waa  Jealous  of  hn  ln-
Hiienco  over  Nero  (Tnc.  .<<««.  xii.  64  foil.)-  (•)
1>0MIT1LLA,  wifi)  of  Venpasian,  who  bod  liv  fc*
Titus  and  Domitian  and  a  daughter  named  1>«*>
itiOa.  She  had  been  tbe  mistroas  of  »  Kon"
knight  and  passed  for  a  freedwoman ;  bat  i**
was  declared  of  free  birtli  on  having  been  ■*•
kiiowleilgi^d  by  her  father  Flavins  Liberftlis*"*
held  tbo  situation  of  scribe  to  one  of  tbe  i|i»w*
torn.  Hbe  died  before  Vespasian  catue  ta  Um
throno  (Huet.  Venp.  a).  (3)  LosgTSA,  dangbW
of  the  r»mons  Corbulo,  tbe  geueral  of  Neru.  ^''
nianied  Aelius  Lamin,  bnt  was  eedueed  by  Itoml-
lidu  niid,  after  tbe  birth  of  a  danghter,  puWic'.f
raised  to  the  throne.  Hardly,  however,  Ii**!  *'*
emperor  elevated  her  to  the  station  of  .^Ufiut''
when  bin  jealnimy  was  abinoed  by  curlaiu  f»ft""
iiirities  U*  wliicb  she  admitted  the  pftulowi'**
Paris,  so  that  lie  drove  her  froni  tbo  paloee.  Ti*
aacendency  which  she  had  acqnired,  howeTff.
over  till*  virions  emperor  was  too  strong  i*  "*
thus  .^uddtitity  dlKHiUvcd,  and  sbe  wm  ncalW  ^
her  former  station.  Domitia  was  oonDeraed.  it  ^
thuugbt,  iu  the  conspiracy  by  which  the  raip'***
bwt  his  life.  She  died  during  the  tviga  of  Ti^j*"*"
(Suet.  Dim.  3).

Domltiaima,  Titus  FiJi%nC8.  Tbe  tecanA  '•"^
of  Vespasian,  born  at  Rome  a.i>.  hi.  Ve»I«***^
well  aware  of  bis  natDml  disposilicm,  repowl  (^3
conlidence  in  him  during  hi»  whole  rrigu.  Po<"  "^
tian,  however,  acc<impanie<l  his  father  aa<l  ''
brother  Titus  iu  their  triumph  at  the  ulowtof  ^li
Jewish  War. Upon  the  death of  Vespasiu  ^


DUMITIANUS


&3&


DOMITIUS  CORBULO


endeaTonred  to  foment  troables  in  the  Empire
and  share  the  sDccesaion  with  Titus.  The  latter,
howeTer,  forgave  bim,  treated  him  with  great
kiDdnesa,  aud  made  him  his  colleague  in  the  con>
snlship,  always  declaring  to  him  that  he  intended
him  for  his  successor.  Domitian  is  accused  of
hastening  the  death  of  Titos  by  poison — a  charge,
howeTer,  not  warranted  by  the  circnmstauces  of
Titus's  death.  The  begianing  of  his  reign  was
marked  by  moderation  and  a  display  of  justice
borderiog  npon  severity.  His  a£fected  great  zeal
for  the  reformation  of  public  morals,  and  punished
with  death  several  persons  guilty  of  adultery  as
well  aa  some  vestals  who  had  broken  their  vows.
He  completed  several  splendid  buildings  begun
by  Titus — among  others  an  odeHta,  or  theatre  for
musical  performances.  The  uiost  important  event
of  bis  reign  was  the  conquest  of  Britain  by  Agrico-
la,  but  Domitian  grew  jealous  of  that  great  com-
mander's reputation  and  recalled  him  to  Bome.
His  suspicions  temper  and  his  pusillanimity  made
him  afraid  of  every  man  who  was  distiuguished
eitber  by  birth  and  ooonections  or  by  merit  aud
popularity,  and  he  mercilessly  sacrificed  many  to
his  fears,  wbile  his  avarice  led  him  to  put  to
death  a  number  of  wealthy  persons  for  the  sake
of  their  property.  The  usual  pretext  for  these
murders  was  the  charge  of  conspiracy  or  trea-
son, and  thus  a  numerous  race  of  informers  was
created  and  maintained  by  this  system  of  spolia-
tion. His  omelty  was  united  to  a  deep  dissimula-
tion, and  ID  this  particular  he  resembled  Tiberius
rather  thau  Calignla  or  Nero.  He  either  put  to
death  or  drove  away  from  Rome  the  philosophers
aud  men  of  letters ;  Epictetus  was  one  of  the  ex-
ileil.  He  found,  however,  some  flatterers  among
the  poets,  such  as  Martial,  Silius  Italicns,  and  Sta*
tiuB.  The  latter  dedicated  to  him  his  Thebatt  and
AtAUleu  and  commemorated  the  eveuts  of  his
reign  in  bis  Silvae.  But,  in  reality,  the  reign  of
Domitian  was  other  than  favourable  to  the  Ko-
mau  arms,  except  iu  Britain.  In  Moesia  and  Da- 1
cia,  in  Oermauy  and  Pauuouia,  his  armies  were
defeated  and  whole  provinces  lost  (Tao.  Agric
41).  Domitian  him-
self went  twice  into
Moesia  to  oppose  the
Dacians,  but,  after
several  defeats,  con-
cluded a  disgraoefhl
peace  with  their  king
Decebalus,  whom  he
acknowledged  as
sovereign,  and  to
whom  be  agreed  to
pay  tribute,  which
VM  afterwanls  dia-
continned  by  Trajan.
Yet  Domitian  mode
a  pompous  report  of
his  victories  to  the
Seuate  and  assumed
the  honours  of  a  tri-
umph. Iu  the  same

manner  he  triumphed  over  the  Cotti  and  the  Sar-
tnatiaos,  which  made  Pliny  the  Younger  say  that
the  triumphs  of  Domitian  were  always  evidence
of  some  advantages  gained  by  the  enemies  of
Kotne.  In  a.d.  %,  Domitian  assumed  the  consul-
ship for  the  seventeenth  time,  together  with  Fla-
vius  Clemens,  who  had  married  Domitilla,  a  relo-


DomltlaiL (Cameo  la  Ftrls )


tive  of  the  emperor.  In  that  year  a  persecution
of  the  Christiaus  is  recorded  iu  the  history  of  the
Church,  but  it  seems  that  it  was  not  directed
particularly  against  them,  but  against  the  Jews,
with  whom  the  Christians  were  often  confounded
by  the  Romans.  Flavins  Clemens  and  his  wife
were  among  the  victims.  In  the  following  year,
A.D.  96,  a  couspiracy  was  formed  against  Domi-
tiau  among  the  oflScers  of  his  guards  and  several
of  his  intimate  friends,  aud  bis  wife,  the  infamous
Domitilla,  herself  is  said  to  have  participated  in
it.  The  immediate  cause  of  it  was  his  iuoreostng
suspicion,  which  threatened  the  life  of  every  one
around  bim,  and  which  is  said  to  have  been  stim-
ulated by  the  predictions  of  astrologers  and  sooth-
sayers, whom  he  was  very  ready  to  consult.  He
was  killed  in  his  apartments  by  several  of  the
conspirators,  after  struggling  with  them  for  some
time,  in  his  forty-fifth  year  and  in  the  fifteenth  of
his  reigo.  On  the  news  of  his  death  the  Senate
assembled  and  elected  M.  Cocceius  Nerva  emperor.
The  character  of  Domitiau  is  represented  by  all
ancient  historians  in  the  darkest  colours,  as  being
a  compoulu)  of  timidity  and  cruelty,  of  dissimula-
tion and  arrogance,  of  self-indulgence  and  stern
severity  towanis  others.  He  gave  himself  up  to
every  excess  and  plunged  into  the  most  degrading
vices.  Conceiving  at  last  the  idea  of  arrogating
divine  honours  to  himself,  he  assumed  the  titles
of  Lord  and  God  and  claimed  to  be  a  son  of
Minerva.  Soon  after  he  bad  succeeded  to  the
government  he  indulged  iu  that  love  of  soli-
tude which  pride  and  fear  combined  to  render  in
a  very  short  time  the  most  confirmed  of  all  his
habits.  In  the  beginning  of  bis  reign,  says  his
biographer,  he  accustomed  himself  to  spend  sev-
eral hours  every  day  in  the  strictest  privacy,  em-
ployed frequently  in  nothing  else  than  in  catching
flies  and  piercing  them  with  a  sharp  instrument.
Hence  the  well-known  remark  made  by  Vibius
Crispus,  who,  when  asked  whether  there  was  any
one  with  the  emperor,  replied.  "  No,  not  even  a  fly."
Domitiau  took  a  delight  in  inspiring  others  with
terror,  and  Dio  Cassius  tells  of  a  singular  banquet,
to  which  he  invited  the  principal  members  of  the
Senate  aud  equestrian  order,  where  everything
wore  the  appearance  of  an  intended  execution.
He  once  even  convened  the  Senate  to  determine
in  wbat  way  a  large  turbot  should  be  cooked,
whether  whole  or  divided  (Juv.  iv.).  The  Senate,
after  his  death,  issued  a  decree  tbnt  bis  namu
should  be  struck  out  of  the  Roman  annals  and
obliterated  from  every  public  monument.  His
career  is  sketched  in  detail  by  Imboff  (1657).

Domltia  Gens.  A  celebrated  plebeiau  family,
divided  into  two  branches — that  of  the  Calvini  and
that  of  tbe  Ahenobarbi.  The  Calvini  attained  to
the  consular  office  B.C.  331,  and  the  Ahenobarbi  in
B.C.  191.  The  latter,  at  length,  in  the  person  of
Nero,  became  invested  with  imperial  power;  but
with  this  emperor  perished  tbe  male  line  of  tlio
Domitii.  Domitian  belonged  to  this  family  only
through  his  mother  Domitia.

Domitla  Lex. See  Lex.

DomitiUa. See  Domitia.

Domitius  Aier. See  Afer.

Domitlaa  Ahenobarbua. See  Ahexobarbub.

Domitiua  Calvlima. See  Calvincs.

Domltitis  CorbUo. See  Cordulo.


DOMtTIUS  MAKSU3


636


DOUL'S


DomitluB  Marsua. S«e  MA.itsUit.

DomltlUB  Ulplauus. See  I'ijtanus.

Donma,  IruA  I'ia.  A  native  uf  Kiucsa,  of  low
birtli,  but  iimrritHl  to  the  Kouiuii  ttmptil*ur  Septiin-
iiis  Serertis  (a.i>.  17:'>),  by  wboai  olio  htul  CttmcaUii
anil  Gttt-ii.  i^liii  wiut  n  womiui  uf  iiiiich  intelltctiinl
IKMviT  ami  1m)|Ii  political  aud  litemry  ubility,  liav-
iiig  j-n-at  iiiriiu-nce  over  licr  husbaud,  iift«r  whow
deaih  mIiu  n'as  iiitrtiNU-<1  by  (^arac&Ua  witli  ih'K
ciHiiluct  of  stat«  biisiiivtuf  of  tbo  fintt  iniiiortaucp.
When  CantcaUa  Tvns  put  to  dmitb  by  MacritiiiK
(A  i>.  'ill)  6bti  was  at  Ant  tr«nU^  with  luiich  am-
ftideration;  bnt  having  oxcilcd  tbct  8nt*iHcioii  of
Mocriiin.'s  she  was  battisbdl  from  Aiitioeb,  aitd  8o<iii
afi«r  ended  faer  own  life  by  voluDtary  sUnratinn


.-<';,


^


^t


RamalL


/j


Inllft  rta  Dotnu. iTailcaa  UiiBanm-l

(a.D.  217).  She  \n  dfMrribfMl  a»  a  woman  of  tnnoh
lieaiity  bnt  of  Incxw  morale:  and  in  aceUMcd  by
SparliaiiuH,  Aun>liuN  V'ivliir.Kutrojiins^And  Oraiiius
i»f  having  niuii)tain<-d  an  iiicvstuouA  iiitcrcoursu
wiiJi  I'nntcaUa,  i^o  that  eiho  was  piipnlarly  kuowu
at  Ah^xandna  ua  "  loeatita.''  Diu  Cajwius,  liuwcvor,
bercouteuiporary,doe«iiot  men tiou  this  scaudaloutt
iitor^'.  Inlin  wan  ibti  great-aiiut  of  Elagabalus  and
of  Alrxaodt-T  S<>veru8.

Domus  ((Mxt'u,  oiKtftris,  oiK^Ttiptov,  n  dwcUing-
liDiisc;  Mucoc.  fjeiivrHlly  a  room;  in  Homer  aud  th«
tra;j^vdiaiiH,  So/tos,  hut  uinri'  nsinilly  iu  the  plural
a»  a  dn-ellini^-honw). A  lioimo.

I.  PKK-lll!*niKic. — On«  H]M]cial  fiirm  of  but  »p-
f>earH  to  have  iH.'en  commonly  nwd  hy  many <li  ffinreut
racoAof  men  at  an  early  ttta>;p  of  t]iiMrdi:V(ihipui»nt.
ThltiwuausmallcirculuriitructuremadtiofbranchoD
4if  tretiit  stuck  into  the  ground  In  a  ciirlo,  ai»d  then
bttiit  inwards  till  thi^ir  endK  luot  and  wore  tied  t^^-
]{cthcr  at  the  top.  This  nide  friuuo-work  was  th<M»
Jilled  in  by  wattled  work  woveu  in  and  out,  and  the
wlioU*  wa»  daubed  over  with  teuipert'd  mndorclay.
Th«  but  of  Achilles,  tbalched  with  ruithe.H  (i/.xxiv.
450),  was  probably  a  dwtdlirij;  of  this  Bort,

In  hiiitoric  time>H  a  Hiir^'ival  of  tluR  ancient  eW-
<'iilar  fr>mi  of  honse  pxistt^'d  in  the  form  of  the  Pry-
taiK^nm  iu  Atheita  aud  oltwwhere,  and  also  in  the


Atbouian  dnXat,  whifh  was  built  in  the  newer j
of  Atbeuaaaau  adjunct,  in  a  more  convenient )
tiou  for  the  use  of  the  I'rytane«.  The  Tholaa  wm
a  round  hnildinfE  with  a  coniita)  roof,  and  ttint
have  had  aome  resemblance  U>  the  K<imnn  Triniilc
t>f  Vesta,  tn  wliirh  the  Harne  name  nun  frequenLly
appltpd.  The  origitial  Ttmple  of  Veista  w an  n  rnDul
but  fomifd  with  wattl»-wi>rk  of  osiers  lOvid,  A«L
vi.!261  full.;  Fiuit.  p.S50  M.).

Kven  darinf;  tlie  imperial  period  in  Rome  mr
or  ini)ro  wattled  but-K  were  preoervvd  tn  ueiiKiiy
uf  tliu  primitive  dwellings  of  it«  found*ni.  Onr
otf  these,  which  stood  at  the  weetcrn  angle  of  thr
Palatine  Hill,  was  known  aa  Ibv  Cava  StmuU
(Dinnys,  i.  79);  it  was  twic*  bnrnwl  and  re|taii«d
during  the  reign  of  AngiiBtiis  (Dio  Caas.xlciii.43,
anil  liv.  yU).  The  'i'ngurinni  Fautitnii  is  probalily
anntlnir  mime  for  the  luime  thing.  Another  bat,
aUo  called  aft«r  Romulua,  appi-an  to  have  bm
prearrved  un  tho
Capttolinn  Hill
(Vitrtjv.  ii.  1  ;  Sen.
Contr.  I.  fi).

A  carefal  n;pro-
aeulation  of  this
early  fcrm  of  house,
M  a0e>d  )iy  the  pro-
faistoric  Latin  race,
exists  in  the  small
sepulchral  "liniifto-
nriiH,''  wliloli  are
foutnl  In  liionsider-

abl«  iinmbtTB  in  the  e-arly  cemi'teriea  of  cectnl
Iraly  and  elsewhere.  TlieHe  cnrinna  pieces  of  ar-
chaic pnttery  have  small  mnvable  doom  fixed  vith
a  wiMxlen  peg.  See  VJrt'bnw,  fUr  italiniarltn  •«(
iicalMcheH  iTdKA-CrraeN  (Berlin,  1884).

L'liring  the  uiauy  oentuncs  whicb  elapsed  l*fiii»
the  oommencemiuit  nf  the  Iiistnrir  periud  nf  Rtww,
a  state  of  society  eii»lod  very  different  fnnn  tbrt
with  wliiidi  GriHik  litt^ratnre  lias  innde  iiHfaiuilitt
luhtejul  uf  large  rit  }v%  a  ntitnlHT  uf  f.inid  I.  hifiblj  ff'
titieit  towns  or  villages  were  ruled  in  au  autornUo
way  by  some  chieHaiu  of  senti-OKenlal  lul)il%
who  lived  iuastyloof  mneb  Inxtiry  and  «[tlcfl<liMi'>
surrounded  by  a  group  of  follnwers,  very  mack
like  thweof  amediwval  feudal  lord.  At  tlu<p«'|
iwriod,  wealth  and  splendour,  which  in  liWoW
times  were  devoted  to  the  more  pnblic  niiMoftlif
agora,  the  council  chamlter.and  tbo  leinplflaoflli'
gods,  were  lavished  im  the  palace  of  the  rbieC  h
is  this  periwl  that  is  celebrated  iu  the  lloK)^'
poems  whicb,  there  Is  every  rcaaou  to  lieli«"^
give  us  a  faithful,  if  highly  coloured,  pictiin  »
tbtt  magulhceuoe  which  adunicd  the  dvcHinp"'
wealthy  chiefs,  such  as  Akinolls  auit,  in  a  It**^
degree,  Oilyswus.  The  rt.*ceui  discoveries  nuwl*  ^7
Dr.  Scltliematin  aud  Dr.  IWJrpfeld,  within  tl»  "*•■
sive  walls  of  Tiryns  (the  Tipvfi:  Tttxtotam  irf  W"^
mer),  have  for  tlie  tlrst  time  shown  us  that  tb*
stately  ami  richly  decorated  palaofw  (if  lb«  Mf*'
Hfjl  were  ni»t  wholly  the  oflspring  of  a  poel'»  ttf^f'
See  TiRYNS.

II.  TlIR  HOMRRIC  PaWCE  or  OOYSSBCti.— Tw*
palace  of  Odyniwu-i,  aa  depielod  in  the  Orfy***|^
may  be  taken  as  representing  llie  Hoiuerio  1«*^3l
II  has  been  most  clearly  described  by  FroCUi
ner,  of  whose  valnable  pajier  in  the  QtiarUfif
rietr  (Januarj',  1886)  what  follows  under  thi>  '
is  practically  a  summary.

Tho  Homeric  house  codHUtMl  of  tfarM  Imii


DOMUS


537


DOHUS


ovX^,  the  fore-oonrt ;  d£/ia  or  fuyapov,  the  ball  of
the  men  ;  and  BaXaftos,  called  in  later  times  yvvat-
xoiyiTw,  the  apartiuentB  of  the  womeii.  The  hoitae
was  eutered  by  masHive  foldiog-doors  {Bvpai  diKXi-
8(c),  and  ou  either  aide  were  stoue  seats  (iipai).
The  doors  led  IdIo  thb  avXi),  or  open  court-yard,
which  was  used  as  a  kiud  ofNfarm  -  yard.  Ou
either  side  and  behiud  were  chambers  (^oXo/iot)
used  for  Tarions  purposes,  such  as  grinding  the
com  (Od.  XX.  105),  and  sometimes  for  sleeping  in
(Od.  xix.  48).  Zn  one  comer  of  the  court  was  the
06Xos,  a  circular  building.  lu  the  midst  of  the
court  was  the  altar  of  Ztit  ipKtios.  In  the  court
were  two  colouuafles  or  porticoes,  each  called  at-
Oowra,  one  ou  either  side  right  and  left  of  the
court-yard  (aldovaa  avX^r),  and  the  other  oppo8it«
the  entrance  to  the  court-yard  and  along  the  fnuit
of  the  Sufta  or  ftiyapov.  The  latter  is  often  con-
sidered as  part  of  the  irpddopir,  so  that  aWowra
and  trpodofios  are  often  used  as  synonymons
terms.  Crossing  the  atSovtra,  the  visitor  passed
into  the  fUyapav  or  d«fMi,  where  the  chiefs  lived.
At  either  end  of  the  lUyapw  was  a  door,  one  lend-


c

7

1

6  9"*%

• B *

6

«!•  « •  "

1 0 9Z ^ o 1

10


10


nJsoe  of  OdjaBenft. OrouDd.pIuL (GftrdDer)


A.  niXn,  fbre-conrt

a.  Alur  of  Z«M  /fiKtior.

b.  CdAo;.

B.  Mfiio  or /it^apov,  tnen'a  hall.

C.  9n\atto%,  womra'i  oaX\.

1.  tipai  ita\iitt.

2.  aUtvvira,  npiAofiOt,

3.  0^a.


4.  AovpodoKii.
a. ni\i¥iK  i>v66%.
fi- Xnavot  oiiot.

5.  »i.pa.
8.  !ipe«9vpri.

7.  tXifiof.^

8.  \aif>n-
9.  9. OuXatioi.

10,  la lipai.


ing  into  the  court-yard  through  the  atBovtra,  an<l
the  other  into  the  women's  apartments,  the  ^ciXa-
fiot,  properly  so  called.  In  front  of  either  dooi-
was  a  threshold  {ov66s),  probably  raised.  The
thresliold  in  front  of  the  door  into  the  uiyapav
was  made  of  ash-wood,  and  the  threshold  in  front
of  the  door  into  the  women's  apartments  was  of
stoue,  \aivos  oi>66s  (Od.  xx.258),  a  distinction  which
is  most  important  for  understanding  tlie  combat
between  Odysseus  and  the  suitors.  By  the  ashen
threshold  was  the  iovpofSoKtf,  or  spear-stand,  close
to  one  of  the  pillars  (Od.  i.  138).  The  fiiyapov  waa
of  great  size,  lu  the  palace  of  Odysseus  the  three
hundred  suitors  of  Penelope  fensted  in  it.  Its
height  was  that  of  the  house  itself,  and  its  roof
was  supported  by  lofty  pillars  (xA'fs).  Iu  the  up-
per part  of  the  fuyapov  was  the  iv^apa,  or  heartli,
where  tlio  food  was  cooked  (Od.  xx.  123),  and  the
smoke  escaped  through  a  hole  in  the  roof,  as  in
the  old  Roman  atrium.  Besides  the  two  princi-
pal doors  of  the  fUyapov  already  mentioned,  there
was  a  third,  or  posteru-door,  called  6p<rodvpij,  the
position  of  which  Jum  givSn  rise  to  much  dispute.
It  should,  however,  probably  be  placed,  for  the
reasons  given  by  Ganlner  and  Jebb,  on  the  aide
of  the  fuyapop,  as  showu  in  the  plan  (Plan,  6),
leading  into  the  Xjtvprj  (Od.  xxii.  198,  137),  or  oar-
'  row  passage  which  gave  accems  to  the  women's
I  apartments  from  the  out«r  court-yard,  thns  avoid-
'  ing  the  necessity  of  passing  through  the  pAyt^tov
,  (Plan,  8).

The  women's  rooms,  or  daXo/ior,  properly  so
called,  also  styled  p4yapa  ywaiK&y  {Od.  xxii.  151),
were  immediately  l>ehind  the  fuyapov  ou  the
grouud-floor,  directly  commnuicating  with  the
latter  by  a  door.  This  is  clear  from  the  whole
narrative  in  the  Odgaaey  of  the  combat  between
Otlyssens  and  the  suitors.  The  passages  proving
this  have  been  critically  examined  by  Prof  Jebb
in  the  essay  quoted  below.  (Cf.  Od.  xvii.  506,  xx.
389,  etc. ;  see  also  iv.  718.)  Here  the  women  sat
engaged  iu  weaving  aud  domestic  occupations.
Here  was  the  nuptial  chamber,  with  the  mar-
riage-bed made  by  Odysseus  with  his  own  hands
,  (Od.  xxiii.  193,  3%).  The  ordinary  sleeping  aud
other  moms  of  the  women  were  in  the  upper
story  (inrtpitiov),  which  was  reached  by  a  ladder,
itXt^  (Od.  xxi.  5;  cf.  Od.  ii.  358,  iv.  760;  It.  ii.
514,  xvi.  184 ;  Eustath.  ad  Od.  i.  328,  p.  1430,  53).
'  Hence  we  find  Penelope,  after  sleepiug  with  Odys-
seus in  the  nuptial  chamber,  ascending  with  her
liaiidmaids  into  the  upper  chamber  (  Od.  xxiii.
364).  It  is  therefore  a  mistake  on  the  part  of
some  modern  writers  to  describe  the  women's
ro«iiDs  as  situated  ouly  in  the  upper  story,  lu
the  women's  rooms  w»s  the  armory  (SdKapMs  oir-
Xftiv.  cf.  Od.  xxii.  140,  151-156),  aud  the  treasury
at  the  further  extremity  (^oXa^ior  Zaxaros),  with
;  a  high  roof  (Od.  xxi.  8).  Iu  the  women's  part  of
!  the  bouse  there  was  also  an  open  court,  iu  which
I  grew  an  olive-tree  in  the  palace  of  Odysseus  (Off.
xxiii.  190).

For  further  details  regarding  the  Homeric  bouse,
reference  may  be  made  to  Gardner,  Journ.  of  Hel-
lenic SUidiea,  iii.  p.  364  foil.;  Jebb,  ib.  vii.  p.  170
foil. ;  Durpfeld,  in  Schliemann's  Tirytm  (Loudon,
1866);  Wiuckler,  Die  WohnhaHMr  der  HeUenen
(Berlin,  1868);  Pi-otodikos,  De  Aedibun  Boma-ido
( Leipzig,  1877 ) ;  Rnmpf,  De  Aedibva  Homnici*
(Giessen,  1884).  Valuable  accounts  of  the  archi-
tecture and  other  arts  of  the  Homeric  period  are


/


^


IMJMUS


ftlW


DOMirs


I^VuU  hy  Ileltitr.  Dnm  kiitnni»'he  Epvn  (ICTtl),  and
by 0i)clilii>]7., l)iv  htintrriiihcR llraticn (Leipzig,

III.  The  later  Orkkk  Huusk.— TIio dtvcoverioft
of  rMeni  venm  hnvu  nlionu  tlint  bricks  made  nf
niibakrd  day  vttnu*  vury  HXleiiHtvtily  u»eil  itowii  t<>
qiitto  liit<>  rinit'H  r<ir  tbti  priTatt)  liifiiiieiii  i>t'  the
<}reckti,  Htid  tliiit  in  one  rensou  why  v\Mti\i)ei*  uf
Hellenic  domeHtiu  Architecture  are  no  very  vnrc.
Burnt  tiriekH  wtrra  first  itilrtKliicctl  liy  tlic  lioiu»ii»
<BlUmiii:r,  Tevhnal.  «.  Trrminol.,  ftc.  ii.  p.  11>.  Till
quite  n-ci*uily  very  iVw  riMnains  of  (trtwk  houwis
■werv  known  to  eiist.  The  fxciiviiiiniift,  howyvtT,
mode  ill  the  Crrook  city  of  Nuiiknititi  in  ttie  K};y]>-
tiau  Delta  during  1hk4--<()  h\  MenMnt.  Flitidvi-K
Fetrie  and  F.nx.'st  GnnhxT  ha^e  liront;bt  to  light
renuuuh  of  u  \»rgv  nnmbt-r  of  Grvfk  tttrt;ft»«  und
liontHw,  nil  btiilr.  of  Hiiti-
di'ie4]  brick, ciKitrd  nidi
imintcil  Htutx-o.  The  iic-
compnuying  f  i  g  n  r  e
phnvs  piirt  of  Mr.  Vv-
trie>  diM:ovpru'»:  A  i»
a  single  Iiouhc  forming
a  cmupleto  innii/ff,  an
the  Romans  would  cull
it;  it  cun^imta  of  nix
rooni»,  with  whaC  Avan
probably  a  tintull  <xu-
tml  oimi)  conrt.  B  li
ap|M>ar  to  be  »ibop8.
In thiiM  (ireok  city  thi>


llftD  or  «  Cnwk  HouM  Bt  Vm-
knUiH  Id  EciiL

C  C  are  narrow  Htmeta.


fltrefltH  M^eiii  all  to  be  very  nmruiv,  atid  tliu  iaauiar
are  mi«tly  very  small^in  niwuy  cases,  tike  the
tigiirfil  exaiuple,  coojtistiug  of  one  bouse  only.
Though  but  very  scanty  reoiailis  were  found  of  the
iiii)»akud-brick  waits,  yet  in  a  fon-  placefi  pntcbps
4ir  painted  otiicco  ou  Ibo  exterior  were  found  in
'itu.  Thongb  walla  of  this  sort  wonld  last  very
well  HO  long  OH  they  wore  roofed  over  and  pro-
(ect^>d  by  tb^tir  ciMitlng  of  hard  stncco,  yet  wlion
ODce  they  bad  futlun  into  a  ruined  stJtl^  tbe  pm-
ceea  of  decay  would  1>n  rapid  and  compbit^*,  even
ill  Egypt,  ntid  of  eounw  inucli  more  so  in  a  uiorc
rainy  eliuiate.

Tbe  other  nioro  important  «xflinpl«B  of  Orcpk
<loiDestic  ttrchittintiiro  wbli'li  Imvt-  ytit  Ukcu  djn-
4?4»vert'd  are  «()ine  houfles  in  the  PiraeUb,  tbe  foun-
*lalicinBof  «bieb  were  oxpoAed  in  le*M  during  tin*
laying  ont  of  a  new  street  by  the  luiuiicipality.
<See  Dr.  Dorpfetd,  in  Miltheit.  it.  dfuheh.  ilrch^ial.
Jtmt.  in  Atlien,  vol.  is.  «o.  3,  iet*4.)  The  fignrr
sbowH  a  rtKlurtion  made  from  Dr.  Dorpfeld's  jdati.

On  (he  BniitIn>aHt  and  southwest  sides  the  blot^k
(acoa  upon  utriwtit; It  apiwarH  to bA  »  double


^


X


*«»»


<Hin  nr  ti  Grci'k  Home  dlKOTcnd  ta  Uk  Plrutna


bouse,  thongli  thia  in  not  (luite  eertuin,  o«o>^  to
the  iiupoMiibility  of  nM'crlaiiiing  iIm-  iMHtilinimaf
all  Ibo  doora.  On  tbe  uortbwrsi  nide  reuiaiiu  wm
foniid  of  a  large  o})eD  peristyle,  apparently  il^rinj
fixini  tbe  nvXtj  of  the  rarlier  Ueltenic  idaii;  nodrr
the  cov«re<l  porliciiti  of  Uiitt  cbuHler  au  atl«r  w
foinid,  probiihly  dtnltcated  to  Z«ns  Herkeio*.  Oi
the  8ontlii-u«t  side  the  hoinwi  was  entered  tlirooffc
a  lung  shallow  (Mirch,  with  two  columnN.  in  which
Htood  anotluT  altar,  pmbabty  that  of  Apollu  Afji-
ciiH.  Thi.s  lK^^(:h  led  itito  a  aiuall  open  court,  itr
rounded  on  three  (*id«*  by  a  covered  walk  imaa
pttrticH9).  The  pavement  of  thin  wan  laid  so  Mta
drain  into  an  open  gully,  tbrongb  which  tlw  ntn*
water  futcape*!  into  a  drain.  In  one  rnrner  <>f  lk«
court  waa  a  well,  and  ou  tbe  other  side  a  atonti  cit-
tern for  storing  water;  a  s*econd  eisteni  stood  ip
ibo  room  mljoining  the  o|K;n  court  ou  tbe  aetlb-
VKut,  .Some  remains  of  paviug  were  foaDd,itii
indicated  oD  tbe  plan.  In  one  room  it  vAtMuUiA
Htone  Hags;  in  another  of  a  sort  of  nide  umm^
fnnnied  of  |»«bb1eH  set  in  concrete.  On  tbe  Miib*
wMDt  (fide  Br«  some  rooms  which  were  eotared  ilt-
r&ctly  from  the  street ,  ttieee  nmy  bave  beeu  sbcpi
or  public  offices.  Trooea  of  a  staircase  leading  to
au  np[H:r  floor  were  found  at  one  end  of  IbemuB
with  tbe  flagging  pavement.  This  block  tntat
MTv»,  without  eonnting  the  large  peristyle^  about
140  feet  by  75  feet.  Tbe  clear  o|ieu  space  of  tbi
peristyle  waM  about  G8  feet  wide;  it«  other  dlmrD-
siou  was  not  di^^overed.  It  is  posalblo  that  tlii»
block  may  have  been  all  part  of  the  itame  boMr-
onc  portion  being  tbefwSjMUvinr.  oriueu'»parttSl»!
the  rest  the  yuvaiKUfirtr,  or  women's  part.*~

During  tbe  mofit  tlonriithing  period  of  Greece  1^
private  houses  appear  to  have  been  small  and  tin-
pie  iu  design;  splendour  of  materlftb  and  em*
luent  were  reserved  for  tbe  temples  of  the  p^
and  the  pnldtr  butldingn,  ancb  as  tbe  Agora  u4
tliH  gn^at  crrmi/,  nbivh  in  .\tliens  mpecMiilljr  1
trilinted  ho  largely  to  the  arrhitevtiirnl
CE<ni:e  of  tbe  city.  The  front  of  the  bonw  1
the  Ntrui^t  w)i.4  not  large,  as  tbe  apai-tmeu(«  ex-
tended rather  in  the  directiim  of  ltd  depth  tliU*'
its  widtli.  Iu  towiiK  tbe  boUKKN  were  often  Iwill
side  by  side,  with  party  wulU  Wtween  {ifiontf*
niKim).  The  exterior  wail  was  plain  and  oftrt
oiivered  with  pla-ster  or  stnec-o.  Sometiinm,  tf  1>
Taiiagrn,  tbe  exterior  wa*  oilonied  with  wh»t  w*
pi-obably  terra -cotta,  ('Diooearch.  p.  945,  Yn\tt1
Plntjircli  flays  that  Pliwion's  boose  wasom4»fpt-
ed  with  pbites  of  brcuiro  (Pint.  I'hoc.  I8p  Uol"A»«l
clay,  an  wo  have  almady  shown,  was  used  frr  ll*
wjiIIh;  lliUH  it  wan  ca^y  for  llie  Plntacaui  tekrvsk
thriuigh  tbe  party  walls  of  their  bouws,  so  ■»  t*
eomiiiuuioate  with  ciicb  other.  For  tbesMDO'**'
(ton  tbe  burglift  was  called  rotxtopCxot,  beeas*  ^
found  it  easier  to  obtain  an  entrance  into  btmm
by  brcakiug  tbrongh  the  soft  walla  tbau  hj  U*
door  or  windows  ^Plat.  /V  Lty.  Kil  El.

Foreigners  were  specially  stmck  by  ibr  atu
apivenrance  of  tbe  private  bouses  of  Atheo*  id  iW
time  of  Perii'lea,  as  strongly  contrasting  with  *'"
wplendonr  of  the  public  buiblings  (Thoc.  it  U-^V
"A  Htningirr."  says  Dicaearcbua,  "might  ik'ul''
u|»oa  a  budden  view  whether  this  were  really  th*
city  of  Athens,"  so  mean  were  ihe  bonsM  so'
crooked  and  narrow  ttie  streets.  It  was  net  U^
tbe  tliUL^.of  Dcmohtbencs  tbal  good  boiiSM  bec*B
to  be  built  iu  Athens.

In  alt  canes  tbe  country  botuea  must  have  bctft


DOHCS


589


DOHCJS


DiQoh  tioer  bnildingB  than  those  in  the  old  cities,
where  atreeta  were  uarrow  and  sites  often  Tery
cramped  (Isocr.  Areop.  i  20).  Thucydides  (ii.  14)
speaks  of  the  prefereuce  of  the  AtbeniaDS  for  houses
in  the  country. See  Villa.

Tlie  plan  and  whole  arrangement  of  town  and
country  honses  would  naturally  be  ubsolntely  dif-
ferent, and  it  is  nureaaonable  to  sappose  that  one
fixed  type  of  house  was  used  by  the  Greeks.  Ex-
isting remains  show  us  that  the  Roman  honses  had
as  many  varieties  of  plan  as  we  have  now,  and  yet
niaity  arch»olo(^8ts  have  written  as  if  there  was
one  stereotyped  plan  of  lionse  used  in  clansical
times.  The  somewhat  pedantic  language  of  Vi-
imviiiB  (vi.  7, 10) on  the  subject  has  tended  to  snp-
IKirt  the  belief  in  the  existence  of  one  fixed  type
n(  Oreek  honse,  but  at  his  date,  in  the  reign  of
Angustus,  arcbfeology  was  practically  an  unknown
science,  and  it  may  reasonably  be  suggested  that
the  so-called  Greek  plan  of  Vitriiviiisdoes  not  rep-
resent the  domestic  architecture  of ^  the  bygone
days  when  the  Greeks  were  an  independent  race,
lint  rather  YitrDvins's  private  notioli,  as  a  practis-
ing architect,  of  a  honse  to  beybuilt  for  some
wealthy  Roman  in  the  revived  psendo-HeUeuio
style  which  began  to  be  popular  in  the  reigns  of
the  early  emperors  of  Rome.

Nevertheless,  many  of  Vitruvius's  statemeuta
may  be  of  great  nse  in  ilhistrating  difSonlt  pas-
sages iu  older  Greek  writers,  which  treat  of  some
details  in  the  Hellenic  house,  especially  when  the
description  is  oompaiM  with  some  of  the  exist-
ing Roman  dwellings,  which  are  evidently  design-
ed to  some  extent  after  a  real  or  supposed  Greek
model.  •

Greek  honses  had  three  principal  features  iu
common.  First,  there  wereoueortwoopeu  conrte,
Hurroanded  by  the  various  rooms.  Secondly,  iu  a
Greek  family  the  women  lived  in  private  apart-
ments allott-ed  to  their  respective  use.  Hence  the
lionse  was  always  divided  into  two  distinct  por-
tions, already  mentioned — the  An^fonitJs  (avipw
ymr),  or  men's  apartments,  and  theOynaeconitis
iyvpauctavim),  or  women's  apartments.  Thirdly,
the  Gynaeconitis  was,  as  a  general  rule,  in  larger
housee  behind  the  Andronitis,  and  on  the  same
floor  as  the  latter  Much  difficulty  haa  been  oc-
casioned in  the  arrangement  of  a  Greek  honse  by
the  statement  of  Vitmvins  (vi.  7[10j)  that  the
principal  entrance  led  at  once  into  the  Gynae-
conitis, and  that  the  Andronitis  therefore  was  be-
hind the  women's  rooms,  or  rather,  if  we  construe
liis  words  strictly,  by  their  side.  But  snch  an  ar-
rangement is  alike  iuconsisteut  with  the  careful
state  of  seclusion  in  which  the  Greek  women  were
kept,  and  also  with  the  positive  statements  of  the
writers  of  the  period.  It  is  very  likely  that  Vitm-
vins misnnderstofHl  to  some  extent  the  deacriptions
given  by  his  Greek  authorities,  and  has  aaaigued
to  the  Gynaeconitis  the  arrangement  of  the  An-
dronitis.

The  plan  below  of  the  ground-floor  of  a  Greek
house  of  the  larger  size,  with  two  conrts  or  peri-
styles, is  taken,  with  slight  alterations,  from  Gnhl
and  Koner.  It  is  of  course  conjectural,  but  it  wilt
serve  for  the  probable  arraugements  (for  further
we  cannot  go)  of  the  Greek  house  at  the  period  we
are  speaking  of.  Other  plans,  differing  very  much
fram  this,  have  been  given  by  several  modem
writers;  but  this  appears  on  the  whole  the  most
consistent  with  the  ancient  authorities. In  smaller


Flan  of  41  Greek  House. [Oahl  and  Kooer.)

A.  EDtnuice-bell.

B.  Portstyleof  tbe  AndroDltiB.

a.  Allar  ot  Ztin  ipKiioT.

C.  Andron,  ordlDing'beJL

b.  iaria.

K.  PerlstjleortbeOyiueooiiltls.

H.  Roomeof  the  AndronlUfl.

F.  Perhaps  sanctnories  or  the  0«oi  ariiffioi  and  ffco)  warpiai,

D.  ThahtmoB.

E.  Ampbithalamofl.

0.  Rooms  of  the  GynaecoDltla,  tor  working  In  wool  and  other
purpoees.

1.  Ruoma  of  the  Andronttls,  and  in  some  houses  perbapi  abopa
opening  to  the  street.

1.  npiiofiot,  and  Ikrther  hack,  street-door,  aS\ti»t  0ipa.

3.  Door  between  the  men's  and  women's  rooms,  /liaovXot  or

ltiTai>\i>t  Oapa.

3.  Garden  door,  Kitraia  0i)pa,


houses  the  Gynaeconitis  was  much  more  limited,
having  no  open  court,  and  iu  some  cases  was  re-
strict^ to  the  upper  story.

Some  other  matters  connected  with  a  Greek
honse  require  notice.

(1)  Upper  Stories. — When  there  was  an  upper
story  {viTip^ov,  iiTJpts),  it  seldom  extended  over  the
whole  space  occupied  by  the  lower  story.  The
principal  nse  of  the  npper  story  was  for  the  sleep-
ing apartments,  both  of  the  family  and  of  the
staves.  Houses  rarely  had  more  than  two  stories  ,*
but  ill  later  times  we  find  iu  the  larger  towns  men-
tion of  houses  with  three  stories  (rpurTiyq,  Arte-
mid.  iv.  46;  Acts,  xx.  8,  9).  The  access  to  the
npper  floor  aeenia  to  have  been  aometinies  by  staira
(ara)3al9/ioi)  on  the  outside  of  the  honse,  leading  up
fh>ni  the  street,  as  was  the  case  at  Borne  (Aristot.
Oec.  ii.  5,  p.  1347,  5).  The  npper  atory  was  some-
times let,  or  used  for  lodging  gaeats  (Antii>ti.  Z>«
Venef.  ^  14).  But  in  some  large  houses  there  were
rooms  set  apart  for  the  reception  of  guests  (^rvutrer)
on  the  ground-floor.


DOMCS


M«


ooMns


Portions  of  [he  upper  story  snmetinips  projectetl
lieyoiul  [ho  walls  of  the  li>wer  part,  luiiniiig  bat-
0011)08  or  verandas  [wpvtioXai,  ytiantodiafutm,  Pul*
Ids,  i.  HI),  tike  tbe  Koinun  matHiaua.

Ci)  lioo/ti. — TliB  RjufH  were  ni'iicnilly  tlM.iiTiiI  it
wiiH  cnntninary  Ut  walk  alMint  ii{Hm  tliiMti,  an  cm
the  Hiilaria  at  RimiH  |L>'m.  atlr.  Simntt.  ^  II;  Aris-
toph.  l,i/niatr.  ^tfJ],  or  to  paiw  from  oiin  hoiiNM  to  iin-
Othor  |T>(!niiNirh.  r.  Andrut.  p.liOi),  ^  51{].  But  liiffh-
pitched  i-oiifn  wtin;  nltto  iiwrd,  f!Gv»-n«l  with  lilffl
(tifinfios,  l^illiix,  i.  HI).

(3)  Iftwrti.^Vitr  pRrticiilara,  fiee  LanHa  anil  Cla-
Vis.  In  tlie  iitUtriur  of  the  huiiMti  the  p]ui»?  iif
doom  wiM  Moiiictiliirfl  MippDcd  by  citrtniTiH  {vapn-
iriratTfuira,  iraftitKaXi'titturu) ,  wluph  alfto  Iiiing  be-
tween tlio  pillnrs  of  tlio  perisfyle.  Tbi?y  were
either  pliiin,  ilyed,  or  einhrtiideriHl  (Pollux,  x.  -12;
Tbeophr.  !>).


And  thnl  the  Hniokt*  eMcnpcd  through  an  opnoing
ill  the  n>uf;  but  it  in  nut  eiwy  to  iiiu)er«lai>il  bor
this  cuitld  Im!  the  (■«»«■  whrii  tlierr  wuk  mi  uppir
fititry.  The  Kinrvofttixtf  incntintii!*!  by  tlemilatw
(viii.  137)  M-as  not  really  u  ehiniiiey,  but  oolf
ail  opening  in  the  roof,  lint  tho  Kiimi  of  Ari»-
tophancw  (  l>4/).  143)  wjeini*  to  have  lnwn  really
a  nhiniiiuy,  as  it  ia  described  by  the  Schuliut  va
rbi>  paswipi  as  pipe-shajied  { <r«iA7co«idi7t).  In
any  caac,  the  chimney  seenift  to  bavo  liv«o  VMi
only  in  tbe  kitcben  (onranov,  Alexis  cij».  AtheD.ix.
1».  :Wfl  h).

f7)  tirroration, — The  iltXM>rati«nB  of  I  be  iulcriur
w«m  vi-ry  pliun  at  the  periwi  to  vbicb  our  ile*
soriptlou  referx.  Tbe  tluora  were  mei-t>  pliuter.  At
a  Inte  jwriwl  coloured  )4t«ii«K  were  ntted  (Flin.  H.  .V
XEXvi.  ij  lt<4).  Miitiaics  are  tlrst  lueiitioued  a»  iu-
troducod under Ibe kiugs of Per|j;aniu». Tlu


.^te.^fe>i


^^%.t


V .V!


^W\^^.i:-


AaU  of  Onwk  Home. |Voo  Falkv.)


(4)  Triiii^iri.— The  principal  openingii  for  the
Mlmitwiou  of  li^ht  and  air  were  in  the  uiirovered
ppriHtyle  and  perhaps  Jn  the  roofed  ]inrt  of  the
pcrmtylei  but  it  if*  iucot-rect  to  snppoBe  that  the
bouses  hod  Qo  windows  (Bvpi^tt),  or  at  leant  none
overlooking  the  hireet.  They  ap^war  to  have  ln*ti
cbietly  in  the  upper  stury.  aoil  in  ancient  workn
of  art  women  are  repn-sented  liNiking  out  uf  them
(Ariittoph.  J7iM«i.7t*T.  iV<7i<rfl.  1*61).

(&)  i'rtrim. — Tlie-sf  went  railed  awiymroi,  h^o-
Ihu  or  Kcmpuvfs-  Their  {HiRttJon  In  tioirbere  ex-
prewfly  indicated,  but  they  were  probably,  a«  in
Roman  lioutieA  (see  buluw  ),  lu  pi-oxiniity  to  tbe
kitchen.

(0)  Hrttfiitif.— Artitit'iat  warmth  was  proonred  by
Ultle  }Mirtable  strives  (cVj^u/mii,  i(T)^api&ts)  or  chaf-
ing-dishes (ovdpunu).  (S«eFucL'8.i  Itisoftou  Kiip-
poxed  that  tbe  chimney  wax  altogether  unknown.


walls,  np  to  the  fourth  oentary  B.C.,  seem  to  ttfre
be«ii  only  wliitewa«hed.  Tlie  fimt  inntairr*  ot
painting  (hem  ix  that  of  .\lribiatleA  (Anduf.  /•
Ali^ib.  ^  17) — an  innovation  that  inrt  wilb  coani-
ernble  opposition  (Xen.  J/^m.  iii.^,  $  10;  OnM>U>
"i).  rialo  nieiitiitiiH  Iho  painting  of  tlie  nalUof
hom*i!»  a**  ti  mark  of  u  Tpt<^»Mro  waku  {i(7»«*.  "■
373  A),  nicw  alliifiioMR  provo  thai  tlm  \>netm
WON  not  unc4itnnion  in  the  time  of  Plato  ai^i  Xcu^
phon.  \\'k^  have  also  inentiou  of  painted  crilinp
at  the  Haiu«  period,  and  »(  a  later  period  ibis  «^
of  decoration  became  general.

(H)  l^ttinff  uitrf  J'riee  of  H»tiAt'«,—Then  *»  «
great  deal  of  fipeeulatiou  in  the  bnilding  and  M-
ting  of  hoiisttt  at  Athens  (Xen.  O^wa,  iii.l)'  ^
diHtinctlon  wa«  made  at  Athens  l>otwei>ti  tbe  oUia-
whiuti  wafl  a  dwetliug-boni^e  for  a  Htnglr*  (ntnnji
and  the  (rvvotxia,  wbicb  was  adupteit  to  hold  my-


DOUUS


Ml


I>UMUS


rauiiliiM — llk»  the  Roman  in»Hla.  Thn  IcMlg-
Dg-hoaiH.'«  wer«  let  uiosily  to  foreigners  wbo  cawi*
to  Athffiift  on  bnsiriess,  and  t*Mpt^'«Mul]y  to  tlio  ^rroi-
KtH,  whom  ibe  law  did  not  allow  to  acquire  real
jtropcTty,  wid  vbo  tbereftiro  could  not  purebneu
lioases  of  tlieir  own.  Pa^ion,  1b«  bauker,  bad  a
lodging  •boiiM  valned  at  100  niiuos  (DeinoMh.  e.
Strph.  i.  t»,  lllU,  ^  'ifi.  Tmo  cuuDttug-bouBeii  are
ineiilfontHi  Ity  Ituif  iih  (lie  Uagm.  Her.  A  44)  an  j'ield-
iiig  a  rvlurti  of  rather  iiiun;  IliAii  ^  |ier  cent.  iul«r-
~Bt  on  llie  iiiirobaU'inoiiA)'.  But  tbift  iirubalily  woh
Del)  Wlow  tbe  average.  'Vhv  Kituunur  HeiMOii  wuu
at  profilable  for  the  letting  of  liou»e8,  when
haotB  and  olbitr  viHiton  Docked  to  AthvnH.
retJt  was  coniniouly  paid  by  lliu  inontb.
Jgi II g- bonnes  were  frt^|ni*iilly  taken  on  it|HM:ulu-
~ton  by  pcffouJi  caIIcmI  vai-KXTjpoi  or  trra6itov\ai
(Amnion..  Harpocnit.),  wbo  made  a  profit  by  under-
tting  tbeni,  and  nnmotimpH  for  not  very  rvpnUihIo
irpotHW  (IsMina,  />  /'At/orf.  Iltr.  ^  11)).  lltH'ckb
i  HO  aconniit  from  the  nncient  wriu>ifi  of
§ot  h<niM->i  at  Athenn,  wbii-h  M>em  to  have
r«TDa)l.  Tboy  varied  fn>ni  3  minna  (tM)
'  tntiiaa  (fsiino),  according  to  their  siKt?,  fiiliia-
,  and  condition,  from  30  to  M  tniniis  ((i.^44)  to
0^  being  an  onliiinry  price  (Otw-okh,  Pabl.  t'eon.
r^Mcnji,  pp.  65,  141  ;  .Sfit(l/iiA<iH#ft.i.p.  84).
For  further  details  regnnling  the  Greek  hon^e,
the  i-nniineiitAtors  on  Vitriivius;  Sebueidi-r,
H.  rtri  A>a.  jtfrtn. ;  Hirt,  We  T^hre  tier  OthUafU.
"i/fJ-'^;  Stinglttz,  Archiioh  d.  Ha»knnBt,  vol.  ii.
lS,  pp.  150-lo9;  Kraiiso,  Dfinokratfs.  p.  4A^  foil. :
Inckler,  Ifit  U'tfhtihiiuta-  drr  ffrllmrn  (llerlin,
H);  Betker-Ooll.  Chnrilln,  ii.  p.  lOTi  foil.;  Her-
nn-Hliininnr,  tiriech,  Pr'trataU.  p.  143  foil. ;  (iiihl
Kont-r,  LebeH  d.  (3iirch.  ii.  JiSm,  p.  95  full.,  &th
;  Lnlfiiix,  r.\4rrhilrrfure  rJr«^w  (lHH!fl,
[IV.  TilP  Roman  Hot^SE. — TlioearliootdwellingH
Frhn  I<atin!(  on  the  Palatine  Hill  were  [U'obably
»ru  hut.'*  of  n)nd-<l(inbed  oaiora,  like  the  but  of
Ditniluit,  which  ^^at  pritwrved  aa  n  stu-red  ivliu  fur
Kity  ceiiturim.  After  the  burning  of  Kooie  hy  Lbe
Ilia,  the  city  waa  rehuilt  in  Iiaate,  with  verj-  nsir-
»tn*ets  and  on  no  regular  plan  ( Liv.  t.  5.5  ).
en  tbi^  honnen  of  the  rii'tieHt  eilixenx  were  Muiall
of  inevpenBivn  nmteriuht,  Mtiob  aa  uiilninit
k  or  imfi  brown  tufa.  No  exiunpb-M  of  fired
ckii  mtv  known  iu  Ronivu  huildingH  till  the  tiuie
of  Itilins  CaeHar;  mid  (he  reiuarka  of  VitruviiM
aeoiii  U»  refer  wholly  tu  crude  or  hun-dned  brickn,
of  whicrb  uo  exninpira  in  Ituuie  hare  Hnrvivtxl  to
duru  tiiucA.  Down  to  tbe  lieginuiiiK  of  tbe  loitt
Dtury  of  the  Repuhlic,  Koniansof  rank  contiuned
live  in  atiiall  houi^ea.  In  h.C-  P'!5,  the  r«n«orH
dpmI  LepidoH,  the  augur,  beeanne  he  paid  60f)0
I  (about  $d50)  for  his  house  rent  (Veil.  Pa-
.11.101;  and  Sulla,  when  a  young  man,  {uiid  only
Aest«ree»  for  hia  moiua  on  the  gnmnd-lloor,
'wfaUo  a  fipedninu  in  (Ii«  up{ter  part  of  tiie  Haum
JtooM  paid  only  2000  seatoircns  or  $60  (Plul.  Sail.

Tbe  earliest  regulation  wo  And  rcagwcting  hnnwH

.  Uw  of  the  T^relve  Tables  that  eneh  ImUding

tmlil  bo  separated  from  niiorluT  by  a  spiiee  of  yj

et  ealled  amhitu»  {¥eM.  pp.  5, 11,  M.). Hnt  this

rlineiit waa  disn'ganled,  and wan ngain  en-

ed hy Nero when ho ivhiiilt tbe rity  (Tiic.

,  XT,  43; see  beh>w), Aa  Ronm  iiicn'nM-d in

t(nn,  the  honwN  wi*ru  rniniHl  in  licii^lit. The

vtti,  in which the lower ami middle clafcM^s

ed,  ^vaa  a  building  of  aevcral  stories,  let  out  iu


|tpn1at(


data  ur  aeparute  momit  to  diffen'tit  familied  or  per-
ftous.  The  if(*fftusor<J('dr«  jfrtrti/ac,  ou  the  contrary,
was  a  iwparate  house,  tn  later  liiuea  a  ])aluee,  usu-
ally ^Ytlh  only  one  story  above  the  gruuud>i)oor,
tbe  ahmle  uf  (he  rtuh  and  great,  and  inliabitetl  for
tbe  iu<Mt  part  by  u  nitigte  fuudl.v  ;  though,  a»iu  the
r^iao  of  the  palnzzi  in  luoderu  Homo,  [larta  of  tbeiu.
ebiwcially  at  the  hack  or  top  of  the  domu«,  were
Minietiniea  rented  (Plant.  TVJn.  I.  %  l.S?  ;  Suet.  Xrr.
44,  nMl.7).  In  tbe  general  deacription  of  a  Ro-
niaii  boiKU)  our  retuarka  apply  ouly  lo  the  dofnav,
pi-o[>erly  ho  called,  aa  the  ifwuta  waa  built  oii  an
eulirely  diffenMit  plan.

Tbe  inari^  iHdefiiie<l  by  Feattis(p.lll,H,)to  he
a  building  not  joined  by  exiuimou  walla  with  neigfa>
bourtug  bonsCH,  bnt  HUn-oniMled  by  a  alreet,  twi  that
it  aloud  like  an  inland  HurnuKiiled  hy  rivera  or  the
aea.  It  was  thns.  as  bait  liecn  said,  very  nnu-h  like
one  of  the  lorge  hotels  in  nHidem  cities,  with  otie
or  more  courts,  nnd  bounded  on  all  nidea  iiy  nlrMta,
like  the  louvre  Hotel  at  PariK.  The  gnMind-Qoor
waa  iiHually  rented  for  shi)p»  (/rrfrrrnor),  and  tbe
upper  storict  in  Hats  or  (U'pnra(«  rooiuH,  a»  in  cou-
linenlal  and  Anieriran  citieK  at  the  preM-nt  day.
Snrb  an  inniila,  eonluining  varioua  tvneiiiei)l«  and
iihopft,iH  the  honao  of  Paniia  at  Poin|H>ii,  deflcrilied
below.  Tbe  nnniher  ofin^ulae  nt  Rome  naturally
I'Xeeeded  that  of  the  domut :  and  accoiiiingly  we
tlnd  iu  the  yolUiti,  which  wa»  compiled  iK'tweea
A.i>.  '^U  and  357,  that  there  were  at  Rome  44,171
inMulae  und  1?^  domut  {.Marqiiardt,  .S7rtflf*rerir.  ii.
p.  I^).  Tn  the  snuie  efft-ct  giiutoniiin,  in  describ-
ing the  Hre  at  Rome  iimler  Nero,  npejiks  of  the
''inniietihc  tinniber"  of  jii»h/((«^  that  were  blinied,
in  adrlition  to  the  palacea  [domufi)  of  the  iinbli^
(Suet.  Svr.  38).  Becker  and  iwimc  other  wi-ilers
erroueously  suppose  that  a  single  Hoor  or  a  M>|tn-
rate  room  in  such  a  house  was  alao  called  innnla,
hnt  the  proper  uutue  for  such  a  aeparato  loilgtng
WHS  ceaotufiiiH  lUecker-Goll,  tiallttt,  ii.  p.  221).

It  waa  apparently  ueuol  for  an  inoula  tu  have
beeii  builton  speculation,  and  let  hy  the  proprietor
to  ditl'erent  {tvenpatita  (Plut.  daw.  2;  Mart.  iv.  37^
Hence  tbe  storicM  or  Hi*piirale  irHiniH  werp  called
tvnacula  vtrritoria  (Suet.  FilrU.  7;  Jiiv.  iii.  ttM)  or
conduvta.  Cie«ro  bad  some  sliopH,  whinh  be  let  (Cic.
Jd  Att.  xiv.  9).  The  rout  [prnitio)  at  Rome  was  coii'
Hiderable.evco  for  a  tulserable  garret  (.Tuv.  iii.  Ifi6,
2t2&).  Poor  persDUH  iu  tbe  tiiuc  of  lulius  Caesar
appear  to  liave  paid  2IM)0  sesterces  [$^10  or  iH!})  aa
the  D8unl  reut  (Snet.  t'urs.  38).  Cnelius  wa«  said
to  have  paid  30,000  HCstercea  (about  $IVO0)  for  the
rent  of  »  tldnl  door  in  lbs  innulu  of  P.  Clmlina,
though  Cicero  snya  the  null  riMit  was  ouly  one
thin]  nf  thin  Hiitu  (Caet.  7, 17).  T\m  imgnlani  were
not  the  occiipautH  of  the  ittMittae,  hut  the  agents
who  hml  rhitrgc  uf  tlie  iitatilae  »nd  collected  the
r<'ul«.  Tlit>y  wore  aim)  oalled  promralore*  inmi*
inrnm.  Tbe  in&ula  appears  to  have  been  uauied
sfler  the  (Htrson  to  whom  it  belongi'd.  TIiiim  we
tiiid  in  inscriptioim  the  inaula  Jrriauo  roUiatm,
ibe  tntuia  Sertoriajta.  et<^.  (Ondh,  43:i4).

The  upper  stories  nnd  the  separate  roomft  of  tbo
tHxula  were,  as  we  have  alreiuly  Roid.  called  eena-
cuia.  This  woni  pmperly  stgnitles  rooms  to  dine
III  ;  but  af^er  it  bi>c-nnie  the  fiiAbioii  to  dine  in  tbe
upper  Jiart  of  the  honHc,  all  tbe  rooms  ubovo  the
gmnml-thior  were  rjillrd  rmnruUt  (Ynrr.  L.  L.  Y,
162).  There  were  ditlerL-nL  llights  of  stairs  con-
iK'Cliug  tbe  upper  stones  with  the  hiwer  part  of
tbe  bouse,  dr  we  Ihid  lo  be  the  case  in boiisea  at


Pfiini>eii.  Sometitncs  tbn  elaira  lind  no  coDiieclioii
with  tli«  lower  part  of  tli«  hoti8«,  Imt  nMCtnitliM)  iit
oiicv  from  tbd  strHet  (Liv.xxsix.  14,12;  xxi.  fj^i,  3).
As  tlio  ilitltiroiit  HloritiH  could  uot  nil  l>o  li(Eht4><I
friim  (>|»t)iitiig»  in  tliu  rouf,  am  iu  tbo  thmtui,  tli«.v
liml  tvilll^nT^  louklti^  out  liitu  tlic  Mtrvvt  { L-iv.  i.
41,  xxir.  21).  They  alno  had  Roniutinins  bittcoiiieH,
vinportiHl  l)y  Ijnirkt'ts,  jtrojectitiK  ililo  tlm  sirwl,
fnini  which  nii  (Hri'tipunt  conlcl  ybuko  hntidH  with
hi)*  next-tlrtor  or  opi»i>»ito  imighlKmr  (MHtt.  i.  f^).
Tht'W  bnloi>ni<.'>a wiTUtfullod  matniana,uui\  th(!sfiiin*
iiuiiift  WHM  nlno  givt>n  1o  tbu  nturiirM  which  projocti^l
f)V4-r  IhoHr  bflotv.iiM  wo  mh'  in  Mtiiin  old  houMtit  iti
Kiif;l:uid  (Krst.  p.  134,  22,  M. ;  I»id.  xv.:i,  1 1 ;  Vlrmv.
V.  1,2).  PnijtM'tiiig  Htoiii'M  wore  forbiddvii  in  A.t>.
3G8  to  boeroctM  in  Kotiif^CAmniian.  Mnmfll.  xxvii.
U,  H)  OD  occonut  of  the  uarrowncstt  of  the  Htr«ots,
and  irore  again  forbidden  by  the  cmiHTora  lloiio-
riufl  and Theodosiiis unless  there  w.i6  an  open  npncc,
in  some  coaee  of  ten,  iii  othera  of  fiftecu  foot,  clear
of  any  adjacent  building  (Cod.  lutt.  viii.  10,  11 ).
Snch  a  projecting  story  la  seeo  In  some  of  the  Pom-
jwian  hoiiaea.


UKcnlftDam,  or  ITtOwtinjt  Story. (OrerlMsok,  Pompeii.  \

We  nml  nienttoDof  a  hoiiae  three  Kt^rit<M  high  in
B.C.  213  (Lir.  ssi.  62,  3);  and  Marlift]  rnuMiilKnil
the  third  story,  where  he  livrd,  as  very  high.  If
n«  were  to  estimate  the  boight  of  the  Kuuiun
houses  by  tbe  way  in  which  they  are  spokou  of  by
the  anoieut  writers,  we  should  probably  nwti^ii  lo
them  too  many  storicH;  for  the  honses,  as  Kiied-
liinder  obm'rves,  very  likely  appeared  bitiher  than
Ibey  really  wuiv  in  rnnsefiiieuce  of  the  uarrow-
□esi  of  the  jtirtM.'t«.  We  have  no  exprew  meu-
tloi)  of  any  lionses  tnon«  than  four  KtoriHH  high ;
but  from  various  rircnnxNtaiiceM  w«  may  infer
that  Duuii)  of  tbo  houiws  ut  Konie  had  a  larger
numbwr  of  storten  than  oriK  expn^iutly  mcutioned.
Thus  Augustus  limited  the  heif^ht  of  LoiiEtes  to
■uveuty  feet,  which  impli'PS  that  tli'py  had  been
built  still  bigher,  and  Cicvm  descrilrcs  tbe  hotiaes
M  hoisted  up  and  nnsiwindv^l  in  thi-  a'lv  (Leg.  Jgr.
ii.  35,  tf6>.  See  Fricdliiudvr,  SitUwjach,  Rotm.  i.  p.
5  foil.

Tli«  bunsfHi  let  for  hire  were  iu  Eoiu«,aa  in  modem


ritieHal  llie  present  day^bailly  built  by  sitfctdalork
The  np]i«r  Kl-uries  were  of  wood  \tubutata,  oonlijrM-
t'tonm)  and  t'rciinently  fell  down,  n  liilti  their  nwlU'
rial  made  tbt-m  niuro  liable  to  linvi.  whtcb  worr
very  freqnent  in  ICome.  Ciitnlhirt  s)»euka  iniuicai*
ly  of  tbi]  advautogea  of  a  bejiKar,  wb<>  had  nulhins
to  fear  fnmi  fire  or  I  bo  fall  of  hous«t.  The  retnna
from  honne  property  in  Kome  w«!ro  large,  bntptn-
ple  feared  lo  ittvtwt  iu  it  on  ai-count  of  fire«  (GelL
XV.  1).  Tbe  inundations  of  tbo  Til»er  nUo  raaW
the  fall  of  houAoa.  For  further  detailM,  «»)  YntA-
liindor,  j,  i>.  ^t  fidl.

It  wait  not,  however,  till  the  rei|nt  of  Xrro  lliat
a  complete  reform  was  effectoil  in  the  arntir(c>
ment  and  vouittnicliuu  of  tbe  bouHes  and  xtnvi*
i>f  Kotne.  \Vn>  had  a  new  and  (elaborate  UuiIiIiim;
Act  drawn  up,  which  required  tiro-proof  lualcriali.
such  as  pijteritto,  a  bard  volconic'sEoue,  to  be  twd
for  the  external  walls  of  bouM*-  Ho  also  enatl-
od  that  each  building  should  have  separate  wolli
aud  a  epaco  (ambttH*)  left  oi>en  all  ronnd  it.  A«  t
means  of  eocape  aud  Msistauce  in  the  case  of  fliv
he  hisd  oaosed  arcades  or  oolounatlrs  to  be  built  it
bis  own  exiwuse  iu  fmnl  of  the  \HMulat.  Iu  Tn-
Jan's  reigu  the  limit  nf  boif;hl  for  street  bouM
was  fixod  at  sixty  feet  (Aurel.  Vict.  K/rir.  13|.  Ths
emperors  Autouiuus  aud  Verua  again  made  an  m-

^dinnnce  about  the  space  to  be  left  rouud  tbe  i«M-

Wae(X>i^.  viii.  *i,  14).

Wo  now  turn  to  the  history  and  constrnclirtnof
the  DOMl'B,  or  mansion  of  the  threat  and  weallbjr*
It  was  not  till  tbe  last  century  of  the  Republic.
when  wealth  bad  been  actpiired  by  Kuniiuesia  b
the  Kast,  tJtat  houMw  of  any  itpleudonr  began  V>
be  built ;  but  it  then  became  the  fashion  uot  trnlj
to  build  houtiea  of  an  immeusa  aize,  but  to  vlotn
tbcni  with  marble  colntunn, paitttings, BtatBe«.iiiii
costly  workH  »if  art.  Tlioy  covered  a  targe  space,
most  of  tbo  nmniH  being  nn  the  ground -tJooT.
Tbe  spacious  ahia  and  prrisitilia,  bring  u|irti  lo
the  sky,  did  not  permit  au  upper  story,  wbirkif
it  exiat<Ml,  must  have  been  confined  to  the  •id*
of  the  building,  and  wnild  not  bavo  been  vriy
high,  as  otherwise  it  would  have  darkened  lb*
abia  and  prriht^lia.  Those  splendid  makSioM
were  erected  for  the  nin»*t  part  on  \\it  bills  oA
aUing  tbo  nlnpiw  of  tbe  Palatine,  on  tbe  side  dm^
the  Fiimin,  which  wsh  the  favonriln  qoartor  Us
tbo  K4»niau  noblcM.  In  Inter  tiuu-jt  the  rnrtMa
palaces  of  the  cmpcrora  swallowed  up  almotl  (Ik
whole  of  this  alto.

The  house  of  tbe  orator  L.  Crasans  on  (he  Ptift-
line,  built  nliorit  B.C.  99,  waa  the  first  whirb  )aA
marble  rolnnuis.  For  tbin,  CrMKns  ws*  •fvrti'lf
blamed,  and  the  ntern  republican  M.  Rnituntiici*
named  him  tbe"  Palatine.  Vennw,"  Thin  hnu»p***
vahied  at  6,000,000  seatcrv«s  (about  |d40,(¥Wi:  but
Pltuy  sayti  that  it  yielded  iu  magniBcruce  to  f*'
linnse  of  (j.  C'atulns  on  tlie  name  hill,  uud  «>*
much  inferior  to  that  of  C.  A()uilinA  uu  thcTitfi-
ntil.  Tbe  house  of  Catulns  had  a  fine  cokmitt*
(porlicut),  adorned  with  tbe  spoils  of  tbe  Cint'^
War.  It  was  near  the  house  of  Cicero,  as  s  I*'"
tinn  nf  tbe  colonnade  was  destroyed  wbi-n  (^liKlio*
rnzcd  the  bouse  of  Cicero  (Val.  Max.  vi 3,  f  U

In  B.r.  78,  M.  Ixipidns,  for  the  first  lis*  •"
Home,  tisrd  thu  rich  Numidian  marble  not  <>"'f
for  columns,  bnt  cvon  for  the  threabolds  of  1^
doors:  yet  the  fashion  of  buildiug  magviUMti^
lionses  inereasod  so  rapidly  that  the  bouse  <•(  1/*
piiluH,  whioh  in his  consulship  was  tbe  6r>t  !■


DOHUS


&i8


UOMUS


Rome,  wu  tliirty-dve  yeais  laier  eclipsed  by  a
baudred  others. LncallnB  was  especially  cele-
brated for  the  magnificetice  of  his  booses. The
Bomaos  were  exceedingly  food  of  marble  for  the
decoration  of  their  abodes. Au  advance  iu  costly
magnrficeDce  was  made  by  the  se<1ile  M.  Aemilins
Scaams  iu  the  middle  of  the  first  century  B.c.
He  pnrch&sed  the  house  of  L.  Crassus  and  greatly
enlarged  it. He  introduced,  as  the  supports  of
Ms  atrium,  columns of  the  black  '^Lucullean"
marble  no  less  than  thirty-eight  feet  iu  height,
and  of  which  the  weight  was  so  great  that  he  had
to  provide  security  for  an  indemnity  iu  case  of
injury  that  might  be  done  to  the  main  sewers
while  these  immense  blocks  of  marble  were  be-
ing  carted  through  the  streets  (Plia.  H.  N.  xxxvi.
$  5  foil.). Tbis  house  was  sold  to  Clodiua  for
nearly  15,000,000  sesterces  (about  $600,000)  — a
price, says Pliuy,  worthy of  the madness of
kings. Tbis  is  the  highest  price  recorded  in  the
time  of  the  Bepnblic  for  a  house. The  consul
Hessalla  bought  the  bouse  of  Autronius  for  3,-
400,000  sesterces  (abont  $140,000),  and  Cicero  the  I
house  of  Crassas  (not  L.  Crassus,  the  orator)  for
3,500,000  sesterces  (about  $140,000)  (Cio.  Ad  AU.  i.  \
13, 6,  with  Tyrrell's  note ;  Ad  Fam.  t.  6). Cioero's
house  was  ou  the  lower  slope  of  the  Palatine  tow- '
ards  the  Ssgia,  the  official  residence  of  lulius '
Caesar  as  Poutifex  Maximns,  whom  Cicero  calls
his  neighbour  (Ad  Fam.  v.  6,  Ad  AtL  xiii.  45).  These  |
houses  will  serve  as  samples  of  the  value  of  the
mansions  of  the  nobles  during  the  Bepublic. 8al-
Inst  Bi>eaks  of  them  as  like  cities  in  size  {Cat.  IS),  and  |
Seneca  describes  them  in  the  same  terms  nnder  the  >
Empire  {Ep.  90,  43),  when  the  imperial  palaces  be- 1
came  still  more  magnificent. Many  of  tbem,  like
the  houses  of  SsUust  and  Maecenas,  described  be- 1
low,  were  surrounded  by  gardens. The  rich  ho- '
ble,  we  are  told,  was  not  content  unless  he  had  a  |
nu  in  urbe  (Mart.  xii.  57,  21),  and  the  extensive  j
pleasure  -  gronnda  are  alluded  to  in  other  pas-
sages.

Aocordtog  to  Titmvias,  the  principal  parts  of
a  Soman  house  were:  (1)  Ve»^ulwn,  (S)  0«t>t(M,
(3)  AiHum,  (4)  AUte,  (5)  TabHnnm,  (6)  Faucet,  (7)
PmaJyInim.  The  parts  of  a  bouse  which  were
considered  of  less  importance,  and  of  which  the
arrangement  differed  in  different  houses,  were :
(1)  Cubkmin,  (2)  Triclinia,  (3)  Owi,  (4)  Exedrae,  (5)
Piitawtheea,  (6)  BihlioUuca,  (7)  Balineum,  (8)  Cm-
liiia,  (9)  Cenaeulaf  (10)  Lararium  or  Saararium,
Ul)  Diaetae,  (12)  Solaria,  (13)  Cfltac.  We  shall
speak  of  each  in  order.

(1)  resft&wlinii.— There  has  been  much  dispute
respecting  the  exact  signification  of  this  word,
which  has  arisen  from  the  different  meanings  at-
tached to  it  at  different  periods  of  history  and  iu
different  kinds  of  honses.  In  the  palaces  of  the
nobles  the  veatibnlmm  was  a  vacant  space  before
the  bouse,  forming  a  oourti-yard  or  entrance-court,
surroanded  on  three  sides  by  the  house,  and  open
on  the  fonrth  to  the  street.  The  two  wings  rau
out  beyond  the  facade  of  the  building,  and  the
door  was  in  the  third  side  opposite  the  street.  In
fwime  booses  the  projecting  sides  were  occnpied  by
ftbops  opening  into  the  street.  In  the  ve$tibulum
the  clients  assembled,  till  the  door  was  opened,  to
pay  their  respects  {aalutatio)  to  "Che  master  of  the
bonse,  so  that  they  might  not  be  left  standing
either  in  the  street  or  within  the  house  (Qell.
xvt.  5,  $(  3,6;  vegtibulumj  ^uod  est  ant«  domwm,


Varr.  L.  L.  vii.  61 ;  Macrob.  vi.  8,  $  15).  Hence
ill  the  smaller  houses  in  Kome  and  the  muuicipat
towns,  there  was  either  no  vntxbulum^  su  that  the
door  opened  straight  upou  the  street,  or  the  vea-
tihuluni  was  simply  indicated  by  the  door  standing
back  a  few  feet  from  the  street,  as  in  many  of  t-lic
houses  at  Pompeii.  Sometimes  there  were  8te|>s
from  the  street  leading  up  t-o  the  veaiibulum  (Sen.
Ep.  84).  In  the  houses  of  the  nobility  the  veaHhu-
Inm  was  adorned  with  statues,  arms, -and  other  tro-
phies (Plin.  H.  N.  XXXV.  J  7).  Public  buildings  also
bad  veatibula,  as  the  curia  or  senate-house  (Liv.  i.
48,  ii.  48),  and  various  temjdes  (Liv.  Ep.  86).

(2)  Oatium. — The  oalium  was  the  entrance  to  the
house,  and  is  constantly  naed  as  synonymous  with
ianua  and  forea,  "  the  door."  But  oatium  properly
signified  the  small  vacant  spaee-before  the  wnwa,
whence  Plautus  {Ptra.  v.  1,  6)  says  ante  oatium  et
ianuam.  Here  stood  the  antae  (q.  v.),  two  posts  or
pillars  flauking  the  doorway.  Oo  the  threshold
the  word  iSa/r«  was  frequently  wrought  in  mo-
saic, as  we  see  iu  the  Pompeian  houses;  and  over
the  threshold  there  sometimes  hung  a  cage  con-
taining a  magpie  or  a  parrot,  taught  to  greet  those
who  entered  (Petron.  28  ;  Mart.  vii.  87,6;  ziv.  76).
Over  the  door  a  few  words  of  good  omen  were
sometimes  written,  such  as  nihil  intret  mali  (Orelli-
Henz.  Inacr.  7287),  or  depreoatio  incendiorum  (Flin.
H.  N.  xxviii.  $  20).  Sometimes  the  house  was  in-
dicated by  a  sign  over  the  door,  as  in  medieval
times.  Thus  we  are  told  that  Augustus  was  bom
ad  Capita  Bubula  (Suet.  Aug.  5),  and  Domitian,  ad
Malum  Punicun  (Suet.  jDom.  1).  The  street-door
itself  is  fully  described  under  Ianua.

Whether  the  street-door  opened  into  a  ball  or
directly  into  the  atrium  baa  been  a  subject  of  dis-
pute. YitruviuB  mentions  no  entrance  -  hall  in  a
Roman  house;  bnt  there  are  reasons  for  believing
there  must  have  been  an  entrance-ball  in  the  pal-
aces of  the  nobility,  as  behind  the  door  there  was
a  small  room  {cella)  for  the  house-porter  (fiatiariu*
or  iatijfor),  and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  this
was  in  the  atrium  (Petron.  28),  especially  as  a  dog
was  kept  by  his  side,  chained  to  the  wall,  with  a
written  warning  Cate  Canem  (Plant.  Moat.  Hi.  1!^
169).  Sometimes  a  dog  was  painted  on  the  wall
(Petron.  29)  or  wronght  iu  mosaic  on  the  pave-
ment, as  we  find  in  the  House  of  the  Tragic  Poet
at  Pompeii.  (See  illost.  p.  296.)  At  the  end  of  the
hall,  which  seems  to  liave  been  called  oatium,  there
was  no  inner  door,  as  Becker  describes,  but  the  en-
trance to  the  atrium  was  closed  by  a  curtain  (velum),
which  was  drawn  aside  by  the  nsher  when  he  ad-
mitted strangers  to  an  interview  (Lamprid.  Altx.
Sev.  5,  Heliog.  14  ;  Sen.  Ep.  20).  The  entrance-ball
was  small,  so  that  a  person  in  the  atrium  could
look  through  it  at  those  walking  in  the  street
(Suet.  Calig.  41).

(3)  Atrium. — The  first  point  to  be  determiued  in
connection  with  the  atrium,  upon  which  the  whole
disposition  of  a  Roman  house  dopeuds,  is  whether
the  atrium  and  the  cavum  aedium  orjMVQedium  de-
note two  separate  courts  or  one  and  tJie  same.
Some  modern  wipers  maintain  that  they  wert-
distinct  courts,  and  accordingly  place  three  courts
iu  a  Roman  house — first  the  a/rium,  then  the  carsm
aedium  in  the  centre,  and  lastly  the  periatglium  in
the  rear.  But  this  view  cannot  be  maintained ;
it  is  rejected  by  the  best  modem  anthorities ;  it  is
tn  direct  opposition  to  the  statements  of  Varro  (L.
L.  V,  161)  and  Vitrnvins  (vi.  3  and  8),  who  rait


m»ni«tifu«8  the  chiur  room  of  the  hoiiao  ofrium  nod
soiutftimi^K  carum  aedtum  ;  and  it  \n  coiitnultctcti
by  tbu  fuct  tbnt  no  Iiuuhcs  ui  Poiupvit  liave  yut
bvou  diiicovcri^d  cont-iiiiiiiiti  more  tbnri  two  noiirt«
— URiui'ly,  tbe  titriuw  nud  the  ptfrMffliitm,  We.  may
Iborofuiu  coiR'tUile  tliat  tlie  alriuvt  niid  tlie  catum
aedium  denoto  tbe  bume  t*ooiii,  tbe  utily  diflr<.'i~wiicu
petbajw  Ueiii);  tbat  carnm  anlium  hidii'Hled  tjri<;i-
tially  tbe  oiH-ii  pari,  and  nfi-iiiiii  Ibn  niitirB  arna ;
but  in  ^iMU'rid  tbe  two  wiuil.s  ant  iiwd  :ih  H^iiony-
nioU9.  Thu  atrtMHt  or  varmu  aeilimn  \\nn  a  Lar^i.'
mom  or  cnnrt  nHifLtl  over,  wilb  lln;  i-xccplioii  t»f
an  vpeiiiiit;  i3i  Uic  ccutre,  calUsl  tvmpluvintii,  tow-
urdit  u'liith  ibe  ninf  Hbitiml  i^n  .ih  to  tbntw  thii
niii>M'Ht>^r  into  a  ci^tnm  in  tbo  tloor,  U-nrHtd  im-
^fHriiiiK  (Varr.  l.r. ,  Fi-sl.  ]>.  Itlf',  M. ;  I.h*.  xliii.  Kl,
6;  Plant.  Jtujih.  v  I,  56).  Tlio  water  from  tbo  iwi-
j)f(frintH  tlovrcd  iiilo  a  wull  [putciia)  uuiler  ground;
for  before  tbo  coiiatructiou  of  the  n«|Uoiiiicta  Ibe
Boiuaiifl  ncro  dctwnilt'UC  iip^iu  vreWn  for  tbidr  Hup-
ply  of  water.  Tbo  word  im^*/iirint»,  Uowover,  in
nomttimfa  era|)Ioyi-d  in  a  wiiler  m;u8«  to  denote
tbe  wbule  niicovered  itpuce  iu  tbo  fttrium^  and
tben^fore  Ibt^  opening  in  tbe  top  oh  \r>.-\\  um  Ibu
ciHlerii  at  the  Imltom  (Cio.  Act.  iu  I'err.  i.  '■£i,  l>],
wf  til  the  notu  of  Piwtuilo-Aiieoii.  p.  177,  Or.).  O'm-
pltirittm  ill  libe  inaniier  is  HometiinfM  UHe<l  in  tb»
tuiuie  u  iilu  »i)fiiilii:iitioit  us  ctjuivuleiit  to  imf/Iarium
(Suet.  .Itt^.  'M}.  Tbo  t^mplurtMm  v%'ns  »>oiiietinu-«
covered  with  buiiKiitK".  <^  i^  pri>t<^otion  »t;iiinHt  thu
■uu  <Ovii).  ^ttl.  x.59f)>.  Th(^  bn-adth  of  cbf  tfi»;;/u-
rium.  acconlin^  to  Vitruviioi.  wnn  not  loss  Ibau  a
<|uitrltfr  nor  K^'alt^r  than  ti  tbinl  of  tlio  br^ailtb  of
tbt  atrtHNi;  il«  k'ligtIiivjiH  In  the  ftsmc  proportion
acfionlinji  to  Ibe  lenjrflHlf  the  alrittm.

VitriivinH  (vi.H)  ilij4liMgni»bi'w  Hw  kiiwUof  nirifl
or  f«ra  ttrtHttm,  wlikb  w«ro  culled  by  tbf  following
names:

(u)  rH*rrJNiViriii.  In  tills  (lie  roof  wRd  supported
by  four  Iwnini*.  fnw»iin(;  t^acli  olbiTjit  rishl  uti^lus,
Ibe  incluile^l  Kpiice  foimint;  tbe  vomplHrium.  Thin
kiud  of  atrium  was  the  moKt  unciviit  uf  all.

(b)  Tclratljfltim.  Thin  was  uf  the  mime  fumi  .ik
iliu  pivcediti^;,  t'xcrpt  thai  the  inniii  UtMiins  of  tbi.-
roof  were  supported  by  pillurs,  placed  at  tbe  four
Mlglesof  tb<>  iiuplMrtMrn.

(r)  Vorinthinm  wuy  un  tbe  suuiu  priuciple  ta  tbt-


tutraatyle,  ouly  tbal  titnre  were  a  greater  irnnber
of  pillars  aruuiid  tb»  implucimm,  ou  wbich  tlw
beams  of  tbo  roof  n'Mted.

(d)  D'mpluviatitiH  bad  Ita  roof  ttloping  the  con-
trary way  to  tbo  comptHi^tim,  BO  that  the  wnlcrfoll
outside  tbe  bonao  instead  uf  being  uarrird  into  lbs
impluviuMf  aud  was  carried  off  by  gnl  term.

{r)  TesfudiMfttHm  nan  rontitnicteil  ill  tbe  sanfr
way  aM  the  diMpluriatutn,  but  it  was  i-oolVyl  all  ovit
and  bud  no  Komplucium.  We  aro  nut  iufomtfJ,
ho%vever,  bow  light  was  atlitiittad  lolo  an  atrium
of  Ihiti  kind.

Tbe  atrium,  a.i  we  liuvu  alroiMly  seuil.  vaa  «ft|Et-
iiully  tbt;  only  loom  of  tbo  house,  wirving  ad  i^l*
tiug-rtiom,  iHilnioiii,  nnil  kitcbeii,  nbicL  It  |»rul>>
ably  eniiliunt'd  to  do  ninioi);  the  Inivrri'lafiwii  mi-it
in  later  tinioB  (Serv.  ad  A'erg.  Aen.  i.7aij.  ix.  W«).
Hei«  was  tbe  foma,  or  hearib,  «bicb  si-rvrd  (wt
only  for  eooking,  but  fti>m  iIh  nacrvd  rliuriM-lwr  wm
ubcil  altio  foi-  tliB  rueeptuclc  of  the  Lun^  or  Pi»M-
tea  that  were  voiitetimeA  kept  in  littin  cnplMMtUi
near  tbe  hearth  (Plaui.  Jm/.  ii.  IH.  15:  Tibnll.  i.Ki,
■A*;  Jiiv.  viii.  110;  reiroii.SO).  Tbo  Lar,  or  tulr
Inry  god  of  the  boiiiM),  Htoml  elonv  to  th<^  itniraaee
t>i'litrifl  the  tloor  leadini*  into  the  alrium  {Ovid,  f^-
i.  I'Mi  foil.) ;  and  we  liiid  bint  »o  plmrml  io  Mtnw  of
the  Pom|>eiftii  boiiiMw.  Near  the  sacred  dam*  tb*
meniberx  of  the  family  look  tbe  common  iMal,aiid
the  HAme  custom  ronliniie*]  in  tbu  ctMtntry  evcil  tn
the  time  of  AiiguMtiia  (Moi-  Sat.  il.  n,  lV>  fol).).  la
the  ii(r-ticiM  tbe  nnuiter  of  tbe  bons4>  kept  bit  ana
(q.  v.),  or  monoy-cbettl,  wbieh  wiu.  fiisteiied  Ui  tA»

tloor. Hei-e  Bt*Mnl  the  nuptial  bed  i! "'«'

against  tbe  back  wal],oppo«il«  Ibe  •-  't""

atrium,  whence  it  wiw  nlno  calleil  /-■-.-  ^  ■•'
lOoU.  xvj.  9).  Here  nat  the  mislrosa  of  tbfi  boUK
Hpiuiting  and  weaving  with  her  maids  (Liri  '"•
9).  Hero  idl  vinitA  woro  |>aid  and  herv  ihr  pui^'"
nwcived  hirt  cli«ut«  (Hor.  Ep.i.b^'A^).  Hon-  the
corjiw  wiia  placed  before  it  was  nu^teil  xut  to
bnriol.  ( Sf«  FcTftre, )  Httn^  iu  tlw  alar,  wen
placed  the  waxeu  ima^inei  (q.  v.)  of  Uie  anoMtDB
of  tbo  boiiM!.

Hilt  OH  wealth  iuoreaaeil,  anil  numcrons  eliotiit
raino  to  wiiit  U])ou  tboir  pntrou,  new  rooms  wrtc
biulr,  and  tbe  nbinm  ceased  to  \k  tlie  only  nxm
fot  tbe  family. A  kitcheu  (ealiRH)  wua  tundi;  f^


(


DOHUS


645


DOMUS


cooking ;  tlie  Larea  were  placed  in  n  special  lara-
rium;  the  meals  were  taken  in  the  upper  story,
heoce  called  oenaculum;  tbe  master  aud  mistress
slept  in  a  separate  oubieulum.  As  the  atrium  now
became  the  reception-room,  it  was  fitted  np  among
tbe  wealthy  with  mnoh  splendonr  and  magnifi-
cence for  the  reception  of  their  clients.  The  open-
ing in  the  roof  was  enlarged  for  the  admission

of  more  light,  and
was  supported  by
pillars  frequently
made  of  costly
marble.  Between
the  pillars  and
along  tbe  walls,
statnes  and  other
works  of  art  were
placed  (Cic.  Var.
i.  23,  61).  In  the
middle  of  the  im-
pltttnumwasa  mar-
ble fountain,  with
jets  of  water,  fre-
qneiitly  adorned
with  reliefs,  of
which  manybean-
tifnl  specimens
have  been  fonnd
at  Pompeii.  Near
the  fountain,
where  tbe  heai-th
I  formerly  stood,
bh  waaamnrbletable,
g  called  cariibulum
^ (q-T.).  The  atrium,

0  however,  still  eon-
s  tinned,  as  in  an-
^  oient  times,  to  be
i  the  chief  room  of

^  09  the  honse,  and  it
I  S  was  not  only  tbe
5  J  room  for  tbe  reoep-
£ '^  tion  of  guests,  but
%-  its  primitive  char-
a  acter  was  preserv-

1  ed  by  its  retaining
A  the  symbolical

nnptta1conc1i(Hor.
Ep.\A,S7),  the  tm-
agwet  of  the  an-
cestors, and  the
instruments  for
weaving  and  spin-
d ning.

J  Theroomswhich

opened  ont  of  tbe
atrium  were  light-
ed only  throogh
the  oompluvium,  as
I  there  wore  no  win-
J  dows,  as  a  general
r  n  1  e,  upon  the
ground- fioor.
(4)  Aloe,  wings,  were  two  small  quadrangular
ap«rtment8  or  recesses  on  the  left  and  right  sides
of  tbe  atrimR  (Vitmv.  vi.  4),  but  at  ite  farther  end
aud  open  to  the  atrium,  as  we  see  in  the  Pompeian
honses.  Here  tbe  imaginea  were  kept  in  the  houses
of  tbe  nobles.  But  as  tbe  alae  were  really  a  part
of  the  atrium,  the  imaginea  were  frequently  de-
scribed  as  standing  in  tbe  atrium  (Juv.  viii.  19  foil. ;
18


^1


PUn.ff.A^.xxiv.$6;  Ovid, JVm*. i. 591 ;  Marquardt,
Privatl.  p.  235).

(!>)  Tablinum  was  in  all  probability  a  recess  or
room  at  tbe  farther  end  of  tbe  atrium  opposite  tbe
door  leading  iuto  tbe  ball,  and  was  regarded  as
part  of  the  atHum.  It  contained  the  family  records
and  archives  (Vitrav.  vi.  4  and  8).  It  appears,  from
the  houses  of  Pompeii,  to  have  been  separated  not
by  a  door,  but  simply  by  a  curtain  or  velum,  while
it  had  a  door  at  the  back  leading  into  theperisty-
Hum.  Marqnardt  supposes  that  the  tablinum  was
originally  an  alcove  made  of  wood  (whence  its
name)  built  at  tbe  back  of  the  atrium,  in  which
meals  were  taken  during  tbe  summer,  and  was
afterwards  Joined  to  tbe  atrium  by  breaking
through  tbe  walls  of  the  latter.

With  tbe  tablinum  tbe  Roman  honse  appears  to
have  originally  ceased,  tbe  sleeping-rooms  being
arranged  on  the  upper  fioor.  But  when  the  atrium
and  its  surrounding  rooms  were  used  for  tbe  recep-
tion of  clients  and  other  public  visitors,  it  became
necessary  to  increase  tbe  size  of  the  honse,  and  tbe
following  rooms  were  accordingly  added:

(6)  Fauces  was  a  passage  by  tbe  side  of  tbe  ta-
blinum, which  passed  from  tbe  atrium  to  the  peri-
stylium,  or  open  court,  as  we  see  in  tbe  Pompeian
bouses.  We  mnst  not  suppose,  however,  that  the
plural  indicates  two  passages  (Vitrnv.  vi.  4).

(7)  PeiHstjflium  was  in  its  general  form  like  tbe
atrium,  but  it  was  one  third  greater  in  breadth,
measured  transversely,  than  iu  length  (Vitruv.  vi.
4) ;  bnt  we  do  not  find  these  proportions  preserved
iu  tbe  Pompeian  bouses.  It  was  a  court  open  to
the  sky  in  tbe  middle;  tbe  open  part,  wbicb  was
surrounded  by  columns,  bad  a  fountain  iu  tbe  cen-
tre, and  was  planted  with  flowers,  shrubs,  aud
trees  forming  a  i;jrt^rium.  Tbe  atrium  and  peri'
stj/Uum  were  tbe  two  important  parts  of  a  Roman
bouse.

Tbe  arrangement  of  the  rooms  leading  out  of
the  peristj/lium,  vh'ich  are  next  to  be  noticed,  va-
ried, as  has  been  remarked,  according  to  tbe  taste
and  circumstances  of  tbe  owner.  It  is  therefore
impossible  to  assign  to  tbeni  any  regular  place  in
the  house.

(a)  Cu&icula,  bed-chambers,  appear  to  have  been
usually  small.  There  were  separate  cuHcula  for
the  day  and  night  (cKfricuIa  diurna  et  noctuma,
Plin.  Ep.  i.  3) ;  tbe  latter  were  also  called  dormito~
ria,  and  were  mostly  on  tbe  upper  floor  {id.  v.  6,
21).  Vitruvius  (vi.  7)  recommends  that  they  should
face  the  east  for  the  benefit  of  the  rising  sun.
They  sometimes  bad  a  small  ante-room,  which  was
called  by  the  Greek  name  of  npoKotrav,  In  which
the  eubiculariua,  or  valet,  probably  slept  (Plin.  Ep.
il.  17,  2.3).  Iu  some  of  the  Pompeian  bouses  we
find  a  recess  in  which  the  bed  was  placed.  This
recess  was  called  zotheca  q^othecula.

(6)  Triclinia,  dining-rooms,  are  treated  of  ia  a.
separate  article. See  Tricluuiim-

(o)  Oeci,  from  the  Greek  ohcos,  were  spacious
balls  or  saloons  borrowed  from  tbe  Greeks,  and
were  fivqnently  used  as  triclinia.  (Cf.  Plin.  H.  X.
xxzvi.  (  184.)  They  were  to  have  the  same  pro-
portions as  triclinia,  hut  were  to  be  more  spacious
on  account  of  having  columns,  which  triclinia  had
not  (Vitmv.  vi.  5).  Vitruvius  mentions  four  kinds
of  oeci :

~  (a)  The  Tetraatyle,  which  needs  no  further  de-
scription. Four  enlnmns  supported  tbe  roof.

iff) Tbe  Corintkian,  which  possessed  only  one


DOUUS


Mlj


IK>HU3


TOW  of  Miioail^  Biipportiug  the  srchitrare  (fpi'tfy*
Him),  eernfM  (comnit),  uihI  a  vutilt«<I  roof.

(c)  Tho  Kgnpiwn,  wliicb  was  mow  nplundiil
and  more  like  a  biMiltcu  tliuii  a  CunnUiiRn  tricll-
nittm.  In  tlio  £K.V|iti]iii  ofCMn,  tlie  j)illHntKiiii|Hrrti!tI
a  gttllery  with  pavcmI  lluur,  wbicli  lurmeil  a  nulk
round  tliv  u|mt-tmcut ;  antt  ii|h)I1  theiie  iiilltLnt
otiit^ni  wor«  pla<:i-<l,  »  fuiirth  part  lu»8  Ju  bei^liC
ttiMii  the  low«r,  vvhicli  miritxiiided  tbo  roof.  Itv-
ture»n  ttio  iipgwr  eoliiuiiiii  winiluws  wore  ioMrte^l.

((/)  The  Cyfioe-ffe  (Ky^4«»j»'vtl  ttpiware  in  the  tiino
of  Vitruviim  tn  liave  bct-ti  M*l<l»m  nsvtl  in  Itiilr.
These  worn  nu*ant  for  siiminer  mac,  l(K>kin|r  n>  tlio
ntirtti,  unit  if  |>iM(Hil>le  fai'ijiu  ^artlvnx,  to  nlijcli
they  oiwiied  by  foldiug-ilrtont.  Pliny  liad  oevt  of
thia  kind  in  Ins  villa.

(f)  Extdrae,  wbicli  appear  to  have  been  iu  funu
tnnch  tho  lamo  as  Cho  o<ri,  for  Vitrnviua  [  vi.  It)
spraka  of  the  cxtdnw  iu  connection  with  oeci  ^mt-
drati,  were  rooms  for  cunvorsation  and  tbo  other
pur|Hi(tca  of  society  (Cic.  Ite  .V«(.  Dcor,  i.  6,  16).
Tbf y  served  tho  Mime  purpose  aa  the  ctrtvftYif  in  the
Tbcrnujio  und  Oynniuaia.  which  wvre  oupii circular
rooms  with  nvutu  fur  jdiiloMiphera  and  otltera  li>
converse  iu. S«>(>  Balxeak.

(/•  ff-  A)  Pinacothtcti,  Jiibliofheca,  aod  Salitieum
(fi«o  Ualneae),  are  treatiHl  of  iu  »eparat«  uiticles.

(8)  CultHa,  thti  kitchen. — The  food  was  original-
ly cooked  in  the  atrium,  us  has  l>«eu  already  stated^
bat  the  progrena  of  retlticuienti  ut'tcrwardn  led  to
the  nae  of  another  part  uf  the  house  for  this  pur-
po««.  Iu  the  kitcUeu  of  Pnnsji'H  houne.  of  whiuli
a  nwlonition  in  jfi^'en  behiw,  ii  hIovu  for  Htt^wK  and
fiiuiilar  preparationii  waa  fnuiid,  vory  niurb  tiki.*
the  charuoal  Htoven  luted  in  tbe  preHi'ut  day.  lie-
fore  it  lii<  a  knil«,  a  Btminer,  and  a  kitnl  uf  fryiiig-
piOU  with  fitur  spherical  cavtIieH,  lu  if  It  wc-ro  DicJtut
to  cook  ogga.


85;  cf.  Plant.  C*m  ir.  4, '24;  Suet.  TO. !»;  Ajml.
Mvt.  i.  «.  17,  p.  15).  In  many  of  the  Pompriiti
hontK'8  we  find  the  Jalriiia  contiguous  to  the  kitcb-
eu,  as  is  ahowu  in  tho  auuosod  out  from  tho  tiuaw


W^


Cullu  and  I^Urtnn  In  the  Hodh  nf  SbUiicL
t^rmpe\anll,  p.  107.  [


¥M,l


CallBB,  or  Rikti«m  la  Pxasa'a  Book

In  tbis  kitobeu,  aa  well  as  in  many  others  at
Pompeii,  there  arc  paintiugs  of  the  LareA  anil  Pe-
natvt),  to  whuiu  tho  hearth  in  the  atrium  war*  ha.
cnxl,  and  under  nhoee  care  the  kitchen  was  uIho
phued  {Arnob.  ii.  ST).  In  the  countr>-  the  meals
wera  taken  in  the  kitchen,  as  they  were  iu  ancient
timeft  iu  tbo  utrium  iColnin,  i.  H).  TIih  kitchen  was
in  tho  buck  part  of  the  liuuKe,  and  in  connection
with  it  waa  the  jM*fnH>ini,  tir  bake-honae,  where
Iirea<l  wa»  baked  at  lutine  (Varr.  ap.  Xon.  p.  .S5,  \H);
but  after  ».€.  1"1  tliiTe  were  pnldic  bakr- bonnes
iu  Rome.  (See  Pihtok.)  In  PonijM-ii  havt^  iHjen
found  sinks  uf  hitcbena,  called  coHflariu  (Varr.  ap,
Non.  p.  544,  20)  or  cor/aiHae  fu«oriii  (Pallad.  /f.  R.  \.
■J7).

In  cb>M)  and  inconvt-nient  pmxihiity  to  tbo
kitchen  waa  tbo  talriua,  or  priry,  iu  order  that  a
common  drain  migbt  carry  olf  thv  contentn  of  Iwth
to  the  cloaca  or  public  aower  (Varr.  1.  c;  Coluni.  x.


of  Salliint.  On  the  right  are  two  amall  aiebt^
which  art!  the  kitchen  Mtnvu.  On  tlifl  left  b  H
orcbtMt  rvccHs,  which  in  the  lalrtHa.  At  the  botteo
ia  the  month  of  a  pifw  supplyiug  it  with  water.

(9)  Venncula,  or  rooms  iu  the  upper  storio*
have  been  alreu<ty  explained.

(in)  LtirariHm  or  ^'aoj-nrJiini.  — Tlie  Lars  tf
P^iiniiti'H  were  originally  placwl  near  tho  heartli  of
the  hoiiHe  in  lb»  nirium,  but  when  the  latl
eanie  only  a  reception-nMini  they  were  feuii
a  Kpei'ial  cha|i«t,  culltMt  /.arariaioi  ILamprid.
.Sfi'.  29,  31)  or  Sacrariuni  (C*t.  ad  Fam.  xiii.  2),  in
which  litatucN  of  other  divtnitirj<<  were  alao
Such  a  clmjiel  is  found  in  the  perulglium  of:
of  tbe  Pomjioian  huuaCH.

(11)  Hiitria  does  not  denote  any  partieiilu'kiad
of  room,  but  la  a  wnnl  borrowwl  from  the  OnA
iSiatra)  to  signify  a  room  uMd  for  any  of  tb«  |w
|KiM.>H  of  life  (Plin.  £p.  ii.  17.  V2).  TIiua  it  At^oUl
a  hed'Chniuber  iPlin.  Kp.  vi.  ll>,  14>,  a  diuiug-nott
(tSiduii.  A]>t>ll.  £p.  ii.  2),  a  snuimer-bousc  or  »  roMD
iu  a  garden  (Pliu.  £^.  ii.  17.  W;  Diy.  7,1,^^1;
Orell[,/a«or.  4373,  etc.).  It  is  ulso  the  coll«iiw
uomo  uf  a  set  of  chamhers.  Thus  Pliny  qv*^*
(ff.  .V.  V.  6,  31)  of  two  tiiaetae,  in  one  ttf  whirl)  net*
four  bed-obamlierH  and  in  ODutber  tbnw,

(IS)  Solarium,  literally  a  place  for  baaklDf  in
llm  HiMi,  denott'H  a  terrace  »n  the  flat  roof  of  *
ItiiMif,  fre^ineiitly  niteU  by  the  Komans,  oa  U  ili"
tho  va»<i-  ill  Italy  and  the  Ka«t  (Itiid>  xr'3, 11;
I'tunt.  J/iV. /;/(«-.  ii.  3,  l»9;  ii.4,*i5;  Buet.  na»<  H"!-
In  the  lime  of  the  enii>erors  thoAe  «(t/«rtd<i(i  (^
tops  of  btntses  were  turned  irtio  gardnM.  «li'<^
contained  oven  fruit^trve*  and  tinh-ponda  (SeiLfr
132).  .S'imewbnt  Himtlar  were  the  w/ifHa  Imill  ''^
Noro  on  the  eoloiinadca  in  front  of  the  JmmWw'
^omua  (Simt.  AV.  Ifii.  8<mjotiines  ibe  spfdna  »""
covered  by  a  roof  (Orelli,  Inner,  3417),

(13)  CcUae  nrfrofBwt, /awifwirr*  or /Bisdwni*.
tbe  amall  lH-ilnH>uis  of  the  ttlavue,  w«rv  nssall}'
Hitunted  in  the  upper  story,  aa  iu  the  tuwis  o^
Paiiaa  at  Pompeii,  or  In  the  back  of  the  boiub
with  the  exception  of  the  cW/aof  tl>u  bi>Uiw.pott«t,
which  naturally  wax  clo«e  to  the  front  donr  (CA'
lum.  t.6;  Cic.  i'ki/.  ii.*;7,H7:  Hor.  ^mi/.  i.  H,  »<>,

t'eUa  alsodeuoteil  tho  store-mom,  of  which  tlwit


DOMUS


w


POUUS


ere  severml,  Iwu-iog  variuus  uames,  ooconliog  to
etr  conteuta.  Of  theBO  ao  account  i«  given  nudor
n.i.A  I

Cellan  nndergroaad  and  vaulted  are  rarely
Wtiotiod  (hj/po^ea  concama-atioHetqvr.  Vitruv.
.  {,**]  11  )f  ttioagb  several  liiivu  be«ii  futind  at
tmpi'ii.

V.  Soars  ExifiTiNO  Hkmajnsof  Roman  UDUt»e8.
The  nldeat  retuaiiiH  of  ti  liouse  in  Uoiiie  are  tbose
Cbt*  Rvgia^wbiob  wastbo  residence  of  tbeVouti-
t  Maxtniim  and  built  on  the  site  uf  tli«  bmisA  nr-
pied  by  Niiina.  It  hUkhI  at  tbe  ifontlifiuit  liniit»
the  Forum,  adjoining  the  Hotim  of  tbe  Veutal
rgiiia.  (^Sue  Dio  Ciuw.  xlili.  -t*/,  xliv.  17;  C!«tl.
.  C)  Anolbcr  Iiouihi  wbicb  Jh  uIhu  of  iiit«n»t
rua  its  vurly  datu  iti  tbnt  kiiowit  aM  "tbt>  Hoinwi
Livia"  or  "of  GvrtuunJi-uH,"  nbicti  in  built  in  a


gether,  with  inuob  imaller  (csmtm  than  wen  iiwd
uudf  r  tbe  later  Ktnpire.

Oil  tbu  upper  tlnor  a  long  paaaage,  Appraacbed
by  tbc  ataircaac  D,  divides  tbe  hoaae  into  two
parts.  J  K  L  M  aecm  to  be  small  batb-rooum.
N  N  are  abopa  with  do  cnuiniiirii cation  wiib  tbe
lioii&e.  facing  a  pnblic  dtreut,  O  O.  At  P  are  re-
mains of  a  very  aiicieut  tufa  baildlDg.  Q  ia  n
piitcina,  wliicb  9e«ms  partly  to  bave  ttiippticd  tbo
lioiiHe  witb  wat«r.  A  uiiiiiber  of  iuEicribed  lead
pi{mH  vrerp-  Ibuud,  bub  tliene  wire  of  later  date
tbaii  tliH  btuiHu  itM'lf;  n'at«r  wan  laiil  on  to  tbo
upper  an  wvU  an  to  tbu  groinid  tlnore.

In  1H74,  reiuxiris  of  a  very  intcfresting  house  of
the  time  of  Aiiguatiia  wert^  found  mi  tlii'  F.>Hiiiilinn
Hill,  not  far  from  tbe  Hanilica  of  8.  Muriu  Muggi-
oix*. From  ilit  position  un  tbo  line  of  Um  Sorviou


Uow  ill  tbo  uortlnrivt trill  purl  of  tbe  Falaliriu  j  wall  and  ayi/er,  it  biui  \}ccu  called  "tbu  Hou«e  of
U.  That  it  ift  probnbty  not  later  in  date  tbau  '  Maecenas."  nbo  lived  iD  ttmt  quarter,  where  ho
&  time  of  Anguhtns  is  shown  by  the  construe-  convertwl  the  pnblic  bnriul-ground  into  a  largo
m  of  tt«  walls,  which  are  fonuod  of  concrete  |  pari*  (Ilor.  Sal.  i.  H,  14).  One  fine  room  of  tbU
»d  with  very  ueat  opuf  nlivulatum  of  tufa,  uo  bniiw,  etill  well  preserved,  is  of  especial  iuterost.
ick  being  used.  Ttie  iignre  below  dhows  its  It  appears  to  have  1>een  a  sort  of  greenbouso
%Df  which,  owing  to  tbe  irregularity  of  tbe  site,  for  plant-ii  and  Howera,  and  in  a  large  vaultetl
at  two  differeut  levels,  tbe  tiuiall  rooui8  grouped  cbamlicr,  with  a  KCtnicircular  apse  at  one  end.
aud  the  staircase  F  being  at  a  much  bigbttr  level  All  round  tho  walls  are  tiftn  of  bigli  steps  once
mn  tbe  larger  rooms  by  the  <i/n'itui :  lliestaimD lined  wich marble,  iiitt-nded to form  atands  for


ul  fbiin  the  utrium  up  t4t  tbe  bigber  lt<Hir  behind,
le  main  oiitraitc«  is  at  B,  approa^^bisd  down  a
ort  flight  of  steim.  C  C  are  |MMlustala  for  a
ttuo  and  an  aliar;  E  £  are  bedrooms;  O  in  a
Tr*fw  crypta-porlicun,  nliiub  brauuliea  out  of  i],
other  dark  pasMage,  fntmiug  bidden  commuui-
UoD8  nitb  differvot  buildiugH  on  tbia  part  of
e  Pulatiue.  A  iaa  tbird  vaulted  paa<tage  which
ids  to  Caligala'a  palace;  this  ia  poaaibly  ibo
itb  by  wbicb  Caligula's  mnnlerers  c(<ca|KM.l  when
ey  liid  tbemttelvctt  in  tbe  bonne  tif  Gvrmanicus
ooeph.  Jnt.  lud.  x'tiL.  I,  2 ;  6nct.  Cnlig.  58).

Tbe  iiuiotingK  in  ttie  principal  roooiA  of  this
mee  are  among  tbe  flneet  examples  of  Roman
all  deciirntion  that  still  exist.  See  Reuier,  Lee
tintmrvn  liu  PalaHn,

The  floors  are  formed  of  marble  mosaic  in  sim-
b geometrical patt«nia,  very  neatly  btted  to-


f'Ua  of  d>«  •a-«lled  RcHUe  of  Llvu.


P.JMaUB.


G  Cn-pirt-Portlriiii
q.  PiKiM.


mwa  of  tlower-pots — armnged  exactly  «a  in  a
modem  cniiRervatory.  Prof.  Mubr  I  Jiull,  In»t.
Arch,  for  tK75  )  bos  poiut«d  out  that  tbe  culti-
vation of  shrubs  nud  flnwcra  in  this  way  was
largely  prnctieod  by  the  Boroans.  On  each  side
of  tbe  hall  are  mx  recesses,  decorated  with  paint-
ings of  garden  scenes,  with  fountains  among  the
flowers,  treated  in  a  skilfully  deceptive  way,  ao  a*
to  look  as  if  each  recess  were  a  window  opuuiug
upon  a  real  garden.  The  light  was  adniitt^'d
only  thriiugb  openings  in  the  barre1>vuiilt  of  tbo
hall,  on  wbirh  were  paiiittngfi  »f  Mimitar  floral
subjects — a  remarkable  exAmpIo  of  tlm  tbi^atriral
soene-piiinterV  style  of  «lcconitiou  whicli  was  pop-
ular among  the  Konmnji.

Tbe  Uoufte  nf  Sallust,  tbe  historian,  wan  one  of
the  tiiHwt  bouttes  lu  Koine.  It  bad,  like  the  House
of  Maecenas,  ext4>iiitLvo  gardens,  whence  tbo  nwi-
denet*  waa  frequently  called  Horti  Sal-
limtiaui.  So  large  wore  tbe  g;iidL'iia
that  the  enii>«ror  Aurelian,  wbn  piv-
ferred  living  tlif^re  to  tbe  PaUtine.
erected  iu  them  a  colonnade  l(H>ll
pactn  long,  in  nliicli  bo  took  borsu
exerciite.  Part  (»f  Diis  hmiw  still  cx-
iKta  in  the  niirrnw  vulluy  between  llio
Pincian  and  Qniriiial  Hiltii,  near  tlm
Porta  Collina  in  Ibe  Servian  wall.
Tbe  following  tignre  shows  tbe  plan
of  the  existing  remains,  wbicb  will
be  soi>u  destroyed  by  tbe  filling  up  of
tbu  valley  where  the  buitdiug  i^tanda
to  make  now  bonlcvarda — a  riiost  ae-
rious  losM.  The  circular  part  A  is  a
liifty  domed  ball ;  B  B  is  a  biiU>ony-
like  gallery,  snpporteil  on  corbels,
which  runs  round  tb^  ontNido  of  tbe
main  bnildlng,  at  a  height  uf  about
forty  feet  above  the  ground;  C  is  a
fine  vanltecl  room,  with  two  storica
over  it :  D  D  is  a  retaining  wall,  built
against  the  scarped  face  of  the  cliff
to  keep  tbe  onimbling  tufa  roek  froni
decay ;  E  K  im  mouiH  in  four  or  five


J  K  1.  U tUlh-moffli.

N  N.  Fbop*

O  O.  Blrwi


i^


DOMDS


Ot>tB  Cou«T-M«r«


M8


DOMUa


nw


|TM>t  htc  It


?*? i»  »»  y  *»  y  fritwt


fl04iH  Of  SHllast  in  Kam«.

stories,  flnoie  with  concrete  and  ntbrrs  with  wooden
Uoon;  F  arc  wiiiditig  niorble-IiixKl  Rtaira,  with
liioNnic  laiifliiiK!*,  wliich  Itn]  lu  (he  tn[iuf  thu  LoiiFte
aiid  tho  rooiuti  on  thc>  Iii^Ikt  IwiO  of  the  bill.  TIiIh
lurt  is  ittill  about  Huvctiry  fuct  high.  U  is  another
iiiar)>lt>-lhied  MtaircaNu,  A  grvnt  piirt  of  tho  lioiioe
isRtill  iiiioxcjiviit-eil.  The  date  of  the  eriming  por-
tion id  of  the  lirat  coiitiiry  a.Ik,  nnd  i«  evidently
part  of  ndtlitioiiM  mud«  by  the  early  fmpenirt.  In
the  siztt'ciith  coiitiiry  an  iininuiiHo  quantity  of  val-
uah\o  miirhleH,  inclii'ling  ningnilictiiil  cohunnit  of
Oric'JiCal  alabatit«r  ninl  Nnmiiliun  stone,  nere  fuiiiid
in  thu  ruhiN  of  Ballu-tt'H  hoiiHC  atid  nsod  to  decorate
sorernl  of  the  churches  of  Rome.

VI.  r<jMPKiAN  HousEi*. — Though  of  cotine  less
mngnilieent  than  the  paiacrji  of  Home,  tlio  honses
of  Pomppii,  fn>m  their  exccptioiintly  perfect  ntiite
of  prcHorvatioii,  nro  of  mpeciiil  vidiic  in;  pxnnipl«R
of  Roinui)  domt'Htlc  iirohltnotiin*,  nt)d  have  the  ad-
viiiitngv  of  iR'ing  ill  mof-t  rjmcs  nf  'ktmwii  date.
Few  are  oUler  than  the  ChriHtian  cni.  mid  none  of
coiitise  arc  later  timu  a.o.  79,  wIm-u  the  city  was
overnhelniL'd  liy  the  eruption  of  V«itnvinn.  Tlit-
existing  remnlii-t  Hhuw  iis,  a«  a  rule,  only  the
groiiiid-lloor  of  onch  hoiisH.-;  and  it  »iiuiild  \m  it»-
infiinbcrLMl  that  a  n(imbi>r  of  tbe  hvnt  rooniH — nft-
peuiaDy,  there  i«  reas<Mi  t»(  belwve,  Hiu  bedrooms
aud  the  wouiou'a  apartuieiit* — were  uu  tho  upper
floors,  The  presence  of  stairs  in  apitaretitly  utt
the  houses  proves  that  CDe-storied  buildings  were
practically  uukuovvu  in  Pompeii ;  the  few  frag-
nienti  of  the  npper  Ht4)ry  whioh  have  Iieeii  found
Blaudiitg  show  that,  in  some  eaaee  at  leaat,  the


npper  part  of  tho  hnnae  w»«  partly  cowrtmcted  of
w<mh],  am)  was  arranged  so  as  to  project  Itoyoad
IIh!  line  of  the  lower  htory,  very  like  the  half-tiro-
beri'd  hnuHPH  nf  Knglandiind  Frmtice  in  ibcftftraotb
and  nixleeiith  eeurnrii>H.

In  one  rc«pect  Ihu  Pompeiau  arrangetsent  r^
seuibled  that  of  niediteval  aud  tnodern  Italy;  tlt*h
is,  tlie  street-front  on  the  gronnd-tloor,  even  cm
large  aud  baudsome  booses,  was  usually  occupi
by  n  row  of  shops. In  some  oases  these  shop«  hi
no  doorway  or  passage  comma nicating  with  t
maiu  house,  aud  wer^*  probably  renteil  by  tht-  on-
er to  independent  tradi'-ntiiien  ;  iu  others  the  sbo
could )>e entered fmrn the house,  and in tli
oaaet  we  may  supivoAe  that  the  sho|i«  wem  lu
aged  by  the  slavoH  or  clients  of  the  house-owner

The  acootiipanying  plan  shows  a  fiuiall
to  which  is  joined  the  residence  of  it*  o
forroiug  a  funatl hlook


independent  of  the  ad*
juining  larger  house.
(1)  All  o]M)u  archway,  in
whicli  a  wooden  shop-
friMit  wflji  lilted;  the
thresliold  of  this  open-
ing is  ndmtexl  lo  receive
the  wooflen  i>nrtition,
part  of  which  washinged
so  as  to  form  a  narrow
door;  the  upper  part
would  l>e  closed  ut  night


-ifl''


PlttB  oC  Ronat  with  iituf


by  flap-^hntters  hinged  at  the  top.  an  arntngeuMt
vi-ry  like  that  of  a  modem  Oriental  Imxaar.  Thl*
method  of  confitrnrting  itbop-fronts  was  V4'rj  ow-
mon,  not  only  in  Pompeii,  but  iu  Rome  atnlelv-
where.  The  presence  of  a  shop  appeam  al  w  ft> » Inl*
indicaled  by  ibis  long  grooved  sill,  with  uiaikirf
the  hinged  door  on  one  side.  A  large  Dumber  of
examples  Htill  exiHl  iu  Rome.  Tim  L-idiapsd  ooot-
ter  (2)  iH  formed  of  poucreto  and  brick  rtwwcO;
lu  it  arw  inserted  a  row  of  amphorae,  aitpswatly
for  the  rect-ptioii  of  hot  fooil  or  drink  of  «w
kind.  At  onw  end  id  a  charcoal  atoye  (3>;  5,6*w
Hie  ditnng-rooui  and  store-rtKim  of  tho  siiopk*P"
t-r;  4  is  the  staircase  leading  to  the  sleeping  •)»'^'
ments.  The  whole  forms  a  cooiptete  lutuse  Kf^ C"
amiUleat  type.

Tile  two  illiislrntiouR  aniiexed  FBprBSeot l« ••■
ii'a  of  bouses  at  Pompeii. The  first  is  the  «lf^


-J


Atrluta  ol  lti«  Oatm  ul  Utw  guuntor. |Pom)Mil.)


DOM  us


M9


DOMVS


ot'  what  18  usually  called  the  "  House  of  the  Quaes-
tor." The  view  is  takeu  uear  the  eDtrauce-hall
facing  the  tablinum,  through  which  the  colunius
of  the  peristyle  aud  the  gardeu  are  seen.  This
atrium,  which  is  a  specimen  of  what  Vitruvius
culls  the  Corinthian,  is  sarrouuded  by  various
rooms,  and  is  beautifully  paiuted  with  arabesqne
designs  upon  red  aud  yellow  grouuds.

The  next  illustration  repi-eseuts  the  atrium  of
what  is  usually  called  the  "  House  of  Ceres." In


Alrium  or  the  Houm  of  Cere& (Reetontlon.]

the  centre  is  the  impluvtum;  and,  as  there  are  do
pillars  around  the  impluvtum,  this  atrium  must  be-
long to  the  kind  called  by  Vitruvius  the  "  Tuscan."
The  three  following  plans  are  good  typical  ex-
amples of  the  best  class  of  houses  in  Pompeii.
The  first  is  popularly  known  as  "  the  Honse  of
the  Tragic  Poet."


HoDM  Of  the  Tngic  VotH. ^

Like  most  of  the  other  houaes  at  Pompeii,  it  had
uo  veitibulum  according  to  the  meaning  which  we

have  attached  to
the  word.  The  os-
Hum,  or  eutrance-
hall,  which  is  six
feet  wide,  is  near-
ly thirty  long  —  a
length  occasioned
by  the  shops  on
each  side.  Near
the  street-do'or
there  is  a  figure  of


FonpeUn  l|i


a  large  fierce  dog  worked  in  mosaic  on  the  pave,
nieut,  aud  tieueath  it  is  written  Cave  Canem,  as  here
showu.  The  two  large  rooms  on  each  side  of  the  ves-
tibule appear  from  the  large  openiugs  in  front  of
them  to  have  heeu  shops;  they  communicate  with
the  entrance-hall,  aud  were  therefore  probably  oc-
cupied by  the  master  of  the  house.  The  atrium  is
alMut  twenty-eight  fout  in  length  aud  twenty  iu
breadth ;  its  tmp/writixt  is  uear  the  centre  of  the
room,  aud  its  floor  is  paved  with  white  testerae,
spotted  with  black.  On  the  left-hand  comer  of
the  atrium  is  a  small  |x>oni  (marked  1  iu  plan),
perhaps  the  cella  of  the  oBtiaiius,  with  a  staircase
leading  to  the  upper  rooms.  On  each  side  of  the
atrium  are  chambers  for  Vie  use  of  the  family  or
intended  for  the  receptiou  of  guests,  who  were
entitled  to  claim  hospitality.  When  a  house  did
not  possess  a  hospitium  (q.  v.),  or  rooms  expressly
for  the  receptiou  of  guests,  they  appear  to  have
been  lodged  in  rooms  attached  to  the  atrium.  At
the  farther  end  of  the  atrium  is  the  tablinumf  with
the  faucet,  or  passage,  at  the  side,  leading  into
the  perittylium,  with  Doric  columns  aud  gardeu
(viridarium).  The  large  room  on  the  right  of  the
peristyle  is  the  triclinium ;  beside  it  is  the  kitch-
eu,  with  a  latrina.

The  second  illustration  contains  the  ground-
plan  of  an  innla  surrounded  by  shops,  which  be-
longed to  the  owner  and  were  let  by  him.  The
house  itself,  which  is  usually  called  the  "  House
of  Pausa,"  evidently  belonged  to  one  of  the  princi-
pal men  of  Pompeii. Including  the  garden,  which


Groand-plan  ol  an  iDeuIa.  known  m  lh»  TToni«  nf  Fshm.


D0MU9


660


DOM  US


1^


rJ^


IB  a  tliird  or  tlie  whole  lengtli^  it  is  about  300  ft*ct
long  Biiil  100  n-idn.

A.  (Mittm,  or  ontrnnce-hntl,  paved  with  nimialr.
B.  TiiBcau  atrium.  I.  Impluvfum.  C.  Cbamhera
ou  each  sido  of  the  atrium,  pi-obably  for  tho  recep-
tion of  guefiU.  D.  Jlo.  E.  TtibUnum,  nbieh  is
opt'ii  lo  the  pt-riitlgliitm,  so  that  tlit;  whole  It-ogtb
of  tlic  huiitte  t'ould  ht>  ttceu  at  oiic«;  lint  ns  thore
in  a  pniwane  {/aucts),  F.  beside  it,  tliy  robNimiK
uiiglit  prolialily  be  closed  at  the  pleasure  vf  the
owriiT.  C.  CliainWre  by  llie_/lfiwoM  and  UibUutita.
of  which  the  om*  in  nnn-rtatn.  G.  J'tt'tilifliuiH.  D.
RiH-tfttHea  in  (li«  j>(T(>(yfi«ni.  C.  Cnbirtita  by  (In;
»id«  of  ilu' p^Tij)fi/(i»Mi.  K.  ri'iV/irtiimt,  L.  Occu»,
and  by  it^  ^ido  lluMft  is  a  panMigo  k'udinj;  from  thu
jtfri«tt/tinm  to  th«  gitnliMi.  M.  Back  door  (poati-
rum  mtinm)  lo  tbt*  Htruet.  K.  t'ulina.  H.  Ber-
vanlN'  liall,  with  a  back
door  to  tho  fltrcei.  R  .
Portico  of  two  storic»,
wbtvh  proves  tlmt  the
honsc  had  an  n  p  p  o  r
floor.  The  sitp  of  the
staircaMc,  howpvcr,  i»
unknown,  thoitgh  it  i»
thonghl.  (heru  in  oo^ino
iuflicutiiiii  of  inn*  in  tbu
puwaj^  M.  Q.  The  par-
don. R.  Ei'MTvoir  fur
BUppIying  a  tank,  H.

Tlie  pi'ccfding  ruoniB
beloii>{e<l  exclusively  to
Pansa'H^ou  se  ;  bnt
tht-rti  were  a  good  many
apartEuenta  besideK  in
the  ingiita,  which  were
not  ill  hJK  oenipBliou:
(1.  t?ix  »hopA  It^t  out  to
tenniitA,  Ttiose  on  the
right  and  left  hand  cor-
iient  wrt^  bakrrh'  shnjui,
whifh\nnt»iued  luillB,
ovetiK,  etc.,  at  b.  The
one  oil  th«  right  at>-
p«lirt(  to  bavu  boen  a
largo  odtabliahtnent,  ah
ituuiituiiiK  many  ruouiK.
e.  Two  houACB  of  a  very
nieait  ctatHi,  having  for*
murly  an  upiM^r  »torj-.
On  thti  other  Hide  aro
two  houses  Qiucb
larger,  d.

VU.  GRNKBAL  DKTAlLft  OF  RoMAN  rttn'SKS.—
(1)  WaU». — The  wall  ( jwjr-ii*i  iu  earlier  tiniM  waa
made  of  some  eaiiily  worked  stone,  ttnch  an  tufa  or
peiH-riuu  ill  largo  aquare  blocks;  or  fur  the  ln>Kl
liuuBCB  uubiirnt  brick  waa  used.  In  tho  tinni  of
Angnstiu  cotierete  begnii  to  be  the  ebiof  Imildhtg
miliaria),  and  later  kiln-drifid  bricks.  The  in-
ner walla  vetm  tirigiiially  whitewiished  |»c©  De-
ALBATOHK8),  (lod  later  wei-e  covi-n>d  with  Btnceo
(opuH  nlharium).  Thp  piniii  surface  of  the  walhi
wa«  broken  by  <tiiadmngnlnr  panidn,  called  abaci
<PliD.  ff.  A'.  SMiii.  f  i5i»;  xxxv.  ($  3,  32).  (See,
h1»o,  ARACUe.)  Ill  the  second  coutnry  h.c.,  the
practice  van  iiitnHlnced  from  Oreeco  of  [lainiiug
thwKi  panels  with  an  vndleas  variety  of  figures.
landMApOA,  biiildingM,  gnnlens,  etc.,  of  which  we
have  nnnioroiis  examples  in  tlie  cxistthg  remains
of  bouses  in  Rome  and  PoiuiieJi. Sco  Pictcba.


Ill  addition  lo  painting,  other  niatboda  of  deco-
rntion  ware  intAd :  in  Rome  oHpeclally  the  clwf
way  of  ornamenting  tho  rooinR  of  tbu  beat  hoam
wa«  by  lining  tlio  walls  with  Nlabn  of  cavti  i
bte,  muuhlod  into  a  skirting  below  and  a  dH
above.  Great  mngnitlcence  of  efTri-t  ww
duc4!d  by  t,lie  i^ktlfnl  a<lmixtnre  of  marblni^  nf  dif-
ferent rich  colonns  the  moulded  part  boing  iwiil'
1y  of  a  deuper  tint  than  the  Hat  aurfaoea.  lu  tbr
mottt  careful  work  thoMi  marble  liniuga  wen<  FmI-
enetl  to  th»  walla  by  bnni/o  cluinpH,  hut  numof-
ti'u  the  slabs  wt-ni  simply  attuchcd  by  n  iliiek  hnl-
tling  of  cement  behind  them  |&.*n.  Hp.yiG,^  4i.

Aiiothi^r  very  rich  method  of  decoratiou  vm
the  application  of  &tucco  reliefs  coricbcd  viih
gold  ami  ootoura.  A  third  systeo),  applied  alw
to  vaulta,  waa  to  encmat  ihe  walla  with  moMUci,


■'Vj^SwfSjfti


3|«clnien  of  DecoTmUre  WolIpkliiLlng  M  Pocnpell. (Rdter.l


chiefly  madt^  of  glus  tamrae  of  the  rao«t  Inrllinl
jewel-like  colonre. See  MfslvvM  Orca

In  fact,  splendour  nf  effect  and  a  brilliaol  '»'*'
hte  wi>ro^ho  rharactorisiioB  of  Roman  liiinw-tlMA-
ration  tmw  tho  Augnstaii  era  down  to  lai^rilnM-

{'2}  A'ot'/fl.— Tlie  roofii  (iMta)  of  Roman  hoa^
were  in  the  oldotfi  tltuea  covered  with  ■tn'''
Next  came  the  nse  of  shingles  for  the  nnfini  f^
lionse«.  which  ooutlnned  down  to  the  tinwo^*^
war  with  Pyrrhns  (Plin.  U.  X.  x\l  $  36).  SoW"
i^neiitly  clay  tilow,  called  it^ntae  and  imirJoif  *"'
lientedrd  the  sliingletj.  Tho  roofi  of  bouiM  "^
Boinetimea  tlal.  but  they  were  also  gabled  (jk^*'
ia)  like  nnwtem  bonsos.  Three  wero  of  two  kil^W
the  tetta  pecJtuaia,  aloping  two  ways,  and  lie  (■*•
tr»tHfiinalo,  sloping  fonr  ways  ( Feiit.  p.  213.111
Both  kitnU  of  roofn  wvtv  d'tt^luriala — thali*,*'"?'
iug  towards  the  street— 4ttd  the  boneca  had  snM^


DOMCS


Ml


IK)ML'S


Boof  IB  FcrtetrW  of  Um  Uwim  of  C.  ViImim, (Onrtwck.)

ui  ambUns,  or  vacant  space  of  i^  feet,  to  re-
the  ratu-water  niniiiiig  off  tti«  ruofit.  The
iin^  tritves  of  roofs  wore  c-allnl  sut/ifruutlae.
giibltfil  roofs  rose  to  n  {mint  valleil  /aiitiffium
.).  For  the  most  mafjnilk-eni  iMiiMin^  siinti
iiue  of  tLe  iiii|ierinl  jiiilnctvt,  thi>  rootii  were
with  tile«  made  ofvliitc  miirblp,  nr  even
brooxo  tile*)  ]>lat«4l  wiili  n^old. For  fiirtlier

B  Tr.GL-I-A.

iToerv.— TliB  dix>r  (<«o/iim)  of  a  room  was

>m  boarded  (Btrata  nolo  labulnta,  Stat  Sih.  1.

),  excojtt  In  tbe  npiwr  KtwricH. Tbc  iloor  on

ground-floor  was  nsniilly  of  iftoue,  and,  in  the

I  of  common  lionM«,  cniiKi»t<.'d  of  ntnall  piccoft

%MKt  brick,  tiles,  etc.  (r«irf«-a«<»,  opttt  nirfpro-

),  beaten  donu  IpaviUt)  witli  a  ratniner  {Jivlu-

,  wbence the word  parimcnittm became the

BFal  name  fur  a  floor  (Plin.  fl.  y.  Mxvi.  $  IHS

t). 8nni«tinif>it  ibn  lliMire  wt-ru  paved  with  tbiii

B <if  rinbly- cnlotiri'd inarbli^A,  bmilglit fmm

rtbeni  Africa,  Arabia,  or  Greece  (Tibul],  HL  3,

;  8c'u.  Ep 86,  6; Pullud.  i.  U),  and Htilt  more

[nontl>'  M*itb  moiuiiex  {opua  muaivam). See  Pa*

strx'.v  and  Mrsn-tiM  Oris.

FCuui'  and  otbir  paits  of  Italy,  owin^  to  the

idcrfiil (ilreii};th of  the  possolana,  the upper

of  honM»  were very frequently uindo cif

irete past in one great ninb nii tpnipontry

ing,  fixed  at  the  n^cpiin-d level. TbiH hf-l

mip  compact  mnw,  likt!  a  pii!C»  of  Holid  tttunc.

Ihis,  moniitc  and  other  paviiij{  waa  laid,  an  tm

irrnnnd-fliMini.

1(4)  ftilinffn. — Ceilingfl were vory commonly

picimdar  or  "Imi-rtil'*  vanllR (camarae),  duci>-

Red with Hlncco irliHr*, nioMaicH.  or painting.

Sn'  C'amara.) The exiradoi  of  the \-.-inlt nna

llnl  in level wirb concrete to fonn the flnnr

tte. Wooden ccitinga  and tiat ronen>(tt  cril-

ft  wf  re  ducoraled  in  the  aame  way. One  coin-

Htmotbod  of  ceiling  dreonition,  appliml  both  to

Itk  and  concrete  or  to  wooden  cisiliiigK,  wati  to

Mti  the  whole  area  int<i u'nnniber  of  diM^ply

■k  paneU,  like pitn or lakrK (lactts,  laruvar),

Mkb  th(>y  w*Ti^  ealliMl  lamnaria  or lariuearia.

tu  were  richly  nmamented,  cither  by  fttiicco

Uff  ^U  and  coloured,  or,  in  the  caae  of  woodi'U

Hogii,  by  inlaid  work  of  ivory,  elx»ny,  or  other

Mlouft  iual«rial(i  aa  well  a«  by  paintings. In  a

rB«v« the "coffers"  were covered with eri-

»d  brooM  platee,  thickly  ^It.


(S)  JVirndtitra.  —  The  Roman  buases  had  few
windowt)  (frurntraf).  The  atrium  ami  peritlglium
Wfre  li^hli-d^  aH  wo  have  *een,  from  alwvu,  and
Ihr  Hinullcr  rmmin  leading  out  of  theiu  (generally
lU'riveil  their  light  fnini  them  and  nut  from
windowf)  looking  into  t)m  Ntreet.  The  r«>onM
only  on  the  upper  ittnrief;  {mme«la)  seem  to  bavt^
Iwen  nsunlly  ligbtod  by  windowit,  and  looked
out  upon  the  ntreet  oa  well  aa  the  inner  conrta.
Hence  they  are  frequently  mentioned  by  the  an-
cient wriiers  il-ivy,  i.  41,  xxlv.  ai ;  llor.  Cuna.
i.  ar,;  Propert  v  [v.],  7,  10;  Juv.  iii.  WO),  fn
Pompeii,  in  like  manner,  the  t^nnd-tloor  rooms
were  mostly  lightttl  IViuu  the  tuner  courta,  m*
that  fen  loni^r  winiltiw*  oldened  on  th<*  street.
There  In  an  exception  tn  Ihifi  in  the  "  House  of
the  Tragic  Peer,"  nhicb  fiait  nix  windows  on  the
{ground- lt(H>r.  Even  in  thia  caae,  however,  the
windoWN  are  not  near  the  j^ronml,  aa  in  a  mod-
em huiiite.  but  arn  aix  feet  nix  inejifw  above  the
foot -pavement,  which  in  rnii<ed  one  fiiot  mv«u
iuehes  above  the  centre  of  tbc  street.  The  win-
dows ure  ttmull,  being  hardly  thnie  feet  by  two;
and  at  the  Hide  there  H  a  wooden  frame,  in  which
the  window  or  shutter  might  be  moved  backwards
or  forwards. The  lower  jiart  of  the  wall  is  occa-


I-


^


3


I'oaipMan  Feantn  or  Wtndotr. (OnrtiMk.)

pied  by  a  row  of  red  panels  fnnr  feet  and  a  half
high.  Thfi  fdllowiug  lllnstration  reprewnts  part
nf  the  wall,  with  the  apertures  for  windows  above
it,  OS  it  appearH  fn»m  the  street.  The  tiling  tiiK>n
Ibe  wall  in  tniHlern,  and  is  only  plaofsl  there  to
preserve  it  frum  the  weather.


l'oro|ieU.

There  has  been  much  dEseuaaiou  whether  glau
windows  were  known  to  the  aucieuts;  hut  in  tbo
ftxcavalions  at  Pnnipeii  niany  fmgments  of  flat
glaMM  have  been  discovert'd,  and  in  the  {rjndarium
of  the  public  batbs  a  brouxe  lattice  was  found


DOML'S


5&2


DONATIO  INTER  VISUM  ET  UXOREM


witli  m)nic  of  tbo  pnam  etiU  iiiM'rtMl  tii  tint  fruiiic
(OflJ,  i'ampriiina,  i.  p.  99).  (8c«  VlTKf.M.)  BvkhU-m
);1iii«i,  ullier  trHiiHpHrviit  eiilwiljiiici-H  vmtv  aIhu  iiih-i1,
kUuti  lui  bilu,  llin  lapiK  tprcalaru  i>f  Pliny.  WJu-
tlowM  luadti  of  tfaiM  wore  caltL'd  npeoutaria  {Sea.  Ep.

((>)  />(wr*,— Tbe  gnhjccl  of  dnors,  with  thvir  locks
ftnJ  keys,  is  tli(*one*ed  nrnlt-r  jANUAitUft  Clavis.  It
i»ntil}-  uewasjirj*  to  luentiuu  bere  tliat  ruauy  of  tbo
rooms  in  Itomaii  bous««  bad  no  ito«>r»,  but  only  cur-
tains, vtta,  antatta,  ttmtonet  (Sen.  £p.  H);  Pliii.  £p.
ii.  17  ;  Pt5tron.  7  ;  Lamprid.  Jlrjc,  S<v.  4,  Heliog.  M).
8oiii«4tiint«,  wben'ttierp  were  ilonrn,  curtains  were
aiNo  ilrawii  ai^niKs  thcni. 8e**  Vki.im.

(7)  TTre  Hratint)  of  Houwii. — Tbu  riMtuw  wero  beat-
od  in  niut4!r  in  ditlVrt'iit  nayn.  Thu  i'Mbicnlu,  ti-i-
elinia,  and  otbi-r  rouiuH  wbteb  wore  intundetl  fur
winter  ii«i\  wore  built  in  tliAt  part  of  tbe  bouM?
Dpou  wbiob  tbe  6un  rtUoue  iuii»C :  atid  in  the  mild
climnte  of  Italy  tblt  fteqnmtly  enabled  tbeni  tu
dispense  witb  any  nrtltlcial  mode  of  warmiug  the
rooms.  Knutiis  ex|K>ice4l  tn  the  huh  iu  tins  way
weru  sometimes  called  hfliummini  (I'lin.  Up.  ii.  17,
20 ;  IMff,  ti,  '4,  17  ).  Tbe  rmtnis  were  occasionally
beated  by  hot  air,  which  was  introduced  by  means
of  plp*^s  fntm  a  furnace  iKilow  <P!in.  Ep.  ii.  17,  v,
ti,  •£4  :  tk^n.  kp.  IHJ),  but  laoru  freijtienlly  in  earlier
timed  by  |)od;ubtti  furuacea  or  braziers  {foculi),  iu


ai:t  foil.;  Miiniimrdt,  Priratl.  pp.  20H  foil.; f;ti\
and  Kntier,  pp.  46'J  fult.,5tb  ed. ;  Hirl,  Urmfh.d.  Umag.
A'ltRH/,  iii.  pii.267  foil. ;  Krrynwicin,  H'tut.uf  Arrk.  i-iiji,
Ilti:!  full. ; Hnni.  AVmr,  pp.  Ixvii.  full. ;  KrirdlSudfj-,
SHtmgttih.  i.  pp.  i.  foil.,  pp.  '^i  foil. ;  M^uard.  /.a  />
/VJit*  de»  Ancient  (Paris,  1H^>-?SJ) ;  Ziinipt,  Vftfr  die
boiilichr  A'rHrtc'fclHNy  des  rom-  ll'ohmhantf*  iBerlim,
1i;44):  MuzoifitLe  l'ataijids^cauru«(X'aT\»,\^^).  Ai-
though  a  large  niintbernf  well-illnstrat^l  warksuo
Poinpteii  havo  been  recently  pnbli^bed,  they  ltai»
l>y  no  meaas  superseded  the  earlier  nneA,whict|
Hcritw  a  gtv^t  deal  that  is  now  lost;  tht'«  u
cially  the  case  with 8ir  William  OeH's  valul
SUntpKuina  (London,  1H24|;  and  Kerond  part  (Ldd-
duii,  Xi^Xi). Tlie  objeettt  diNUOwred  flrv>  well  illu-
tnitud  by  PlMtoIexi,  lUai  Mmiko  UitrhOMiiHt  il^&l^^).
Uyor'n  litt'tM  nf  Fomjmi  (LnnUon,  IWlTl  is  a  «ffl-
vetiieiit  hiinil-b<M>k. Niccutini  and  uttten,  Z^  Cmt
di  rumprii  (Naples.  I;!&4-84)i  is  a  valuable  work,
which  >;iveH  recuiil  diMoveriea. A  very  flptfodiil-
ly  illustruted  work  is  the  liecueil  riM  Peiutum.tli' ,
de  Pomp^i  (Paris 1H70-77). See  also  Zshn.  ftt
»rUiinMtei%  Ornamrnir  fiM«  Pomptyi  ^Berlin,  IA27-!di;
Masois  and  Gan,  Leu  lininr*  At  I'omp^'i  tl*arii(.l**-
38);  IVniite,  yVandtjrmUlde  uun  Pompfj't  fBerliD.M
date) ; Prei^nlui,  Lf*  It^ratiotu  <f«  Pompii  (Lviptig,
IrtTrf);  Mnu's  Mlitioii  of  Over  beck's  Vomprji  \\jn}f-
zig,  ld84) ;  and  Nineu,  Pomprjahitckt  Stwiin  ll«i{>*


'UM4»(M9^'raCti«i»  V3L£>US9  v»i':f  ^ .


r.^;V9:r£iC5*>?:i^?y>',-!.;^>''VM^


m


pBamriimi


Rniaie  Brajtlera  tVom  PcnapcH. tOwrbeok.l


wbieb  charcoal  waa  burned.  (See  Kooi-'S.)  The
ctiminitfi.  however,  was  a  fixed  slove,  in  which
wood  apiiears  to  have  hoen  imnally  banicd  (Suet.
rUtH.  H ;  Hor.  Sat.  i.  5,  91 ;  F.p.  i,  H,  10 ;  Cio.  Jd
Faut.  Tii.  10 ;  Sidou.  ApoU.  Ep,  ii.  "2).  It  has  beeu
a  sul»ji<ct  of  iniich  dispute  antong  modem  writ'Crs
whether  thi*  Roiuuns  biul  chimneys  for  carrying;
oft'  the  Hiuoke,  except  iu  the  balhs  and  kitchens.
Front  niJitiy  paMui^tw  in  uiieieiit  writers  it  certain-
ly  apiietipi  that  moms  UHii:dly  hud  no  cbimtieys,
but  that  the  sunike  vMcajHtd  Ihn>n;;b  the  windows,
doom,  and  opvuiugti  Iu  the  roof  (Vitinv.  vli.  3,  4);
but  chimney.^  do  not  appear  to  have  been  entirely
unkuowu  to  the  ancients,  as  some  hare  been  found
in  tho  ruius  of  anciLMit  buildtnKH.  and  it  is  impoo-
Blblo  to  believe  that  auioni;  h  Inxurioua  people
like  the  ItiinuHis  iti  imi>erial  times,  tbcy  wt>ru  uu-
acfinoititiul  with  the  use  nf  chimiu>yH.

(8)  The  tcairr  mipply  of  a  ^oimI  K<un:in  huitHe  wjim
very  cumpLeto;  iu  towns  ttut  main  UHually  ran  un-
der the  pavement  iu  the  middle  uf  llie  street,  anil
from  it  "  rising  maius"  branched  off  to  the  houses
right  and  left,  and  often  were  carrietl  to  the  up-
per siortes,  where  a  cistern  snppUed  the  fouutaiu-
JetM  {mlientta)  aad  other  puriHMwa  below.  For
fiirther  details  ou  the  water -supply,  lue  AgUAK

VVCTIB.

VUL  BiBUOOKAPHY.— lieuker-GoU,  Galtiu,  ii.  pp.


zig,  ivrt).  Reference  may  be  made  to  th^  ntm-
sive  bibliography  at  the  end  of  the  arliele  Ti'UU'UI
Lu  this  Uiotiunary.  Middletuii,iu  Ui*  A mriml  K>mi
in  laSA',  and  Kemttinn  of  Ancient  Itumr  ( l/iadfi,
l*^^)*  gived  some  accoaut  of  oxisllug  huaxa  ■■
Koine.

DomoA  Atirea. 8*>e  Palatum.

Donatio  Inter  Vinun  et  Uxorem.  Bt  thr-  &>
man  law, during  marriagf!.  nnither  husband norHt'e
could,  as  a  general  rule,  make  a  gift  of  anytbiiijCt'*
one  another.  This  rule  would,  liowuTer,»idjrs|ifly
where  there  was  do  convcmlio  in  maNiiBi;  forinfiM
a  case  the  rule  of  law  would  ho  uaneocnariri  b^
cause  a  gift  between  husbnnd  anil  wife  wonldb'
legally  impossible.  The  reason  for  thin  ni[i>  «■*
said  to  lie  the  preservation  of  tho  marring  Kb'
tion  ill  itA  jiiirily,  as  a  mntract  sobsJatlng  by  affif*
liiiii,  mid  net  niniiitaintMl  by  purchoMi  or  liy  ji(^
from  utio  party  to  the  other.  The  rea^Mii  wyinw*
singular  one,  but  it  is  that  which  is  given  by  ihfl
Koinan  writers.  It  has  uppar«^uliy  a  tacit  nfa-
eticii  to  the  powiir  of  tlivoice,  and  appcani  likria
implied  ivconmiendatlon  of  it  when  the  em^np^
affection  ceits*^.  Ponationes  of  thli  kind  «««»
however,  valid  when  then*  were  certain  coiindin-
tions,  tt£  nutrtu  cauna,  dirorlii  eai»»(i,  »tifi  iiws««l'-
ttmdi  gratia. By  oertaiu  imperial  const itnlioo*)*


DONATIO  HOBTIS  CAUSA


668


DORIS


woman  eonid  mftke  gift*  to  ker  hosbaDd  in  order
to  qnalify  him  for  oerUiu  houoara.  It  must  be
remembered  that  wheu  there  was  iio  oonventio  in
ma»um,  a  wife  retaiued  all  her  rights  of  property
which  she  did  Dot  unrreoder  ou  her  marriage  (see
Dos),  and  she  might,  dnring  the  marriage,  hold
property  qaite  distinct  from  her  husband.  It  was
a  coDsequoDce  of  this  rale  as  to  gifts  between  hus-
band and  wife  that  every  legal  form  by  which  the
gift  was  affected  to  be  transferred,  as  mancipatio,
cemOftm&traditio,  conveyed  no  ownership;  stipu-
latiooa  were  not  binding,  and  acoeptilationet  were
DO  release. See  Matrimonium.

Donatio  Mortla  Canaa.  There  were  in  Roman
taw  three  kinds  of  donatio  wtorHt  causa :  (1)  When
a  man,  under  no  present  apprehension  of  danger,
bot  moved  solely  by  a  consideration  of  bnman  mor-
tality, makes  a  gift  to  another.  (3)  When  a  man,
being  in  immediate  danger,  makes  a  gift  to  another
ia  such  a  manner  that  the  thing  immediately  be-
comes the  property  of  the  donee.  (3)  When  a  man,
QDder  the  like  circnmstances,  gives  a  thing  in  snch
a  manner  that  it  shall  become  the  property  of  the
donee  in  case  the  giver  dies.  Every  person  could
receive  anch  a  gift  who  was  capable  of  receiving  a
legacy.

It  appears,  then,  that  there  were  several  forms
of  gift  called  donatio  mortis  eauga;  bnt  the  third
■eems  the  only  proper  one,  and  that  of  which  men-
tion is  chiefly  made,  for  it  was  a  rule  of  law  that  a
donation  of  this  kind  was  not  perfected  unless
death  followed,  and  it  was  revocable  by  the  donor.
A  thing  given  absolutely  could  hardly  be  a  donatio
mortia  cauta,  for  this  donatio  had  a  condition  at-
tached to  it — namely,  the  death  of  the  donor  and
the  survivorahip  of  the  donee.  The  thing  might
be  a  thing  capable  of  tiadUio,  or  delivery,  or  it  might
be  a  promise  of  a  snm  of  money  to  be  paid  after
the  death  of  the  testator.  It  would  appear  as  if
the  law  about  anch  donations  was  not  ftee  from
difficulty.  They  were  finally  assimilated  to  legft-
cifls  in  all  respects  by  Justinian,  though  this  bad
been  done  in  some  particnlars  before  his  time.
Still  they  differed  in  some  respects  from  legacies,
for  anch  a  donation  could  take  effect  though  there
was  no  heres;  and  a  filius  familias,  who  could  not
make  a  will,  might,  with  his  father's  consent,  make
a  donatio  mortis  eauaa.

Donatio  Propter  Nnptlaa  signifies  in  Boman
law  that  which  is  giveu  by  a  husband  or  by  any
other  person  to  a  woman  on  the  occasion  of  her
marriage,  whether  it  be  by  way  of  secority  for  her
dowry  or  for  her  support  during  the  marriage  or
widowhood.  Justinian  requii-ed  this  donatio  when-
ever the  wife  brought  a  dowry ;  and  it  was  enacted
that  it  shonld  be  equal  in  amount  to  the  dowry,  aud
sbonld  be  increased  when  the  dowry  was  increased.
Such  a  gift  was  the  property  of  the  wife,  but  it
was  managed  by  the  husband,  and  he  was  bound
to  apply  it  to  its  proper  purposes;  bnt  he  could
not  alienate  It,  even  with  the  consent  of  the  wife
{Cod.  V.  3). See  Matriuoniuh.

Zkmati'TOin.  A  present  of  money  made  to  Roman
Boldiera.  In  the  republican  age  donatives  were  dis-
tribat«d  on  the  occasion  of  a  triumph,  the  expense
being  defrayed  out  of  the  money  raisiMl  by  selling
the  spoil.  Under  the  Empire  it  was  nsual  for  the
emperor  to  grant  a  donativum  on  his  accession.  Ti-
berius on  this  occasion  made  a  present  of  some
$3,750,000  to  the  army ;  and  the  sum  increased  in
18*


later  reigns.  After  the  time  of  Clandins  it  became
the  fashion  for  the  emperor  to  purchase  the  favour
of  the  praetorians  by  a  special  largess.  Bee  Con-
giarium;  Praetoriani.

Donatoa.  (1)Abuu8.  A  celebrated  grammarian,
born  in  the  fourth  century  of  onr  era,  about  a.d.
333.  He  was  preceptor  to  St.  Jerome,  who  speaks
with  great  approbation  of  his  talents  and  of  the
manner  in  which  he  explained  the  comedies  of
Terence.  Independently  of  his  commentaries  ou
Vergil  and  Terence,  Donatns  composed  a  treatise
(Ars  Donati  Grammattci  Urhis  Bomae)  in  two  parts.
In  one  {Jr$  Minor)  be  treats  of  the  eight  parts  of
speech  only,  and  in  the  other  (Ars  Maior),  deals
with  grammar  more  elaborately.  This  work  was
highly  esteemed  and  so  much  used  in  the  Middle
Ages  that  the  word  donat  (Chaucer)  became  the
generic  term  for  a  grammar.  The  commentary  oo
Vergil  appears  to  have  been  worthy  neither  of  the
author  commented  on  nor  of  the  repatation  of  the
grammarian  to  whom  it  is  ascribed,  if  we  may
judge  from  the  coutemptnons  allusions  made  to  it
by  Servius ;  but  of  it  only  the  preface  and  the  in-
troduction (enarrrationes)  are  now  extant,  besides
quotations  given  in  Servius.  The  commentary  on
Terence,  however,  is  extremely  valuable,  though
we  have  it  in  a  form  different  from  that  which
it  originally  possessed.  The  chief  MS.  of  the
commentaries  of  Donatns  is  one  at  Paris  of  the
eleventh  century.  The  editio  princeps  appeared
at  Borne  in  1472.  The  text  of  the  Ars  is  contained
in  Keil's  Orammatici  LaUni,  vol.  iv.  (Leipzig,  1656-
1880).  See  Gfiifeoban,  Oeschichte  d.  cUut,  Philologie,
iv.  107 ;  J.  Becker,  De  Donati  in  Terentium  Commen-
tario  (Mayeuce,  1870);  and  Rosenstock,  De  Donato,
etc.  (Konigsberg,  1686).  (S)  Not  to  be  confounded
with  the  preceding  is  Tiberius  Claudius  Dona-
Tus,  who  wrote  Interpretationes  ou  the  Aeneid,  prob-
ably in  the  fourth  century.  Of  the  author,  noth-
ing is  known.  The  work,  which  is  preceded  by  a
short  epistle,  was  first  published  at  Naples  in  1535,
and  is  included  in  the  editions  of  Vergil  by  Fabri-
cios  (Basle,  1561),  and  Lucius  (Basle,  1613).  See  Rib-
beck's  Prolegomena  to  Vergil,  1% ;  aud  Burkas,  De
Ti.  Claud.  Donati  in  Aen.  Commentarto  (Jena,  18d9).
(3)  A  bishop  of  Numidia,  in  the  foui*th  century.
Acconling  to  some  writers  he  was  the  founder
of  the  sect  of  Douatists,  which  grew  out  of  a
schism  produced  by  the  election  of  a  bishop  of  Car-
thage. He  was  deposed  and  excommnuicated  in
con  iicils  held  at  Rome  and  at  Aries  in  the  years  a.d.
313  and  314,  but  was  for  some  time  after  supported
by  a  party  at  home. His  end  is  unknown.

Donnaa  (A^vuo-a)  or  Donnaia  (Aovouiria).  One
of  the  smaller  Sporades  in  the  Aegaean  Sea  near
NaxoB.  It  produced  green  marble,  whence  Vet^l
calls  the  island  tfiridis.  Under  the  Roman  em-
perors it  was  used  as  a  place  of  bonisbment.

Doon. See  Ianua.

Dora  (r&  S&pa),  Doma,  Donun,  called  Dor  in
the  Old  Testament.  The  most  southerly  town  of
PbcBuicia  on  the  coast,  on  a  kind  of  peninsula  at
the  foot  of  Mount  CarmeL

Dorian  HexapoUa. See  Doris,  p.  554.

Doric  Dlaloot. See  Dialkcts.

Doria  (Awptr).  (1)  Daughter  of  Oceanue  and
Thetis,  wife  of  her  brother  IVereus,  and  mother  of
the  Nereides. The  Latin  poets  sometimes  use  the


name  of  thU  diviiiit^v  for  the  nea  itnulf.  (3)  One
of  ttie  Nercidcit,  daught-cr  of  tlin  pnicediug.

Doiia  i&mptt).  (I)  A  Kuiall  uiiil  iiiorintuinous
comilrj  ill  Greece, formerly  uulled  DryopU,  boitiid-
ud  by  TLtfsaaly  od  the  iiortli,  by  Ai-tolia  on  tlie
wtwt,  by  L^hjHb  on  the  Huutli,  Aitd  by  Fbiicis  uii
ihe  eiML  It  contained  fuiir  lowus  — Huiini.  Clti-
iiiunt,  Erinens,  and  I'iiidiis  —  vrhich  fuiuied  the
Dorian  tetrapolis.  Tbe^e  Uin-no  never  attained
aux  cariHeqiii'noe ;  but  fbo  country  is  of  iDii>or-
tanc4<  a«  the  home  of  the  Duriuu^i  {Atapult],  uue
of  the  great  Hcllenio  rac«»,  who  conquwred  Pelu-
imiiiieHUH.  It  wan  related  that  Ae-j;iuiiiiB,  king  of
the  Dorians,  hait  been  ilrtvuo  from  hi«  duiuinioUH  by
the  Lapitba«,  but  wasreiiietatetl  by  Heracles;  that
tlio  children  of  Horaclott  hence  took  refuge  in  thin
land  wben  Lhey  bad  beiMi  expelled  from  ttie  Pclu-
poiineftut);  and  that  it  vt  an  to  n^^Urre  them  to  their
rtgbta  that  the  DoriatiH  invaded  the  Fuhipomicctuti.
Accordingly,  the  conquest  of  Pel  1410 nnedus  by  the
Dorinutt  is  usually  called  tho  fietiim  of  tbo  lier-
ucHdae.  (See  nKitACMUAB.)  The  Dorians  were
dividod  into  three  triW^:  the  llylleix,  Panipbyli,
itud  Dyinane«.  They  n-uru  the  ruling clu?<MthrtHi(;b-
out  the  PelojtoiineoUH  :  the  old  inhabitants  were  re-
duced u>  !iluvery,  or  became  Bubjeut&  of  the  DoriHiut
under  tho  namt^  of  Purioeci  (n»pioutfn).  (2)  A  dis-
trict in  Asin  Minor  cotiBisting  of  tho  Dorian  aettle-
ment«  ou  the  coiut  of  Cnrin  aud  tho  neigbbotiriug
lAlandtt.  Six  of  these  ton-us  fomned  a  league,  called
the  "Dorian  noxapolis,'' consisting  of  Liudus,Ia1y-
Hu«,  and  Caminis  in  the  island  of  Itli<Mlc>e,  the  isl-
and of  Cos,  and  Cuidus  aud  Iialicarua«eus  on  the
mainlaud.

Doiiaous  (Aopt'iTKor).  A  town  in  Thmc«  at  the
mouth  of  the  Htdiruit,  in  the  iniilst  of  uu  extauHive
jtliiin  of  ibu  Mtnie  uunus,  where  Xiirxes  ruview«d
hiH  vut  fonH\s  ^Herod.  TJi.  S6,  etc.)-

Dorium  {^ptov}-  A  town  of  Messenia,  where
ThamyriM  the  muttictan  challenged  the  Mowt  to
a  trial  of  skill.  Fauwinias  (iv.  3^i)  uolicua  this  an-
eluut  town,  uf  which  be  saw  tho  ruins  near  a  fi>uu-
taiu  niuued  Achaio.

Doimitorium  {dioftariov).  A  bed-cliaiuber,  usu-
ally small  aud  sparely  forniabod  (PLiu.  II.  A',  xxx.
17). SooDuMCii.


Pormltorlam. fFrom  iIm  TriIosq  V«ifll>

X>oron  (Hupay). A  kAnd-breadtli. See  Pes.

Dorpon  {iofmov). See  Ckna,  p.  310.

Dorao,  C.  Fabii^h.  A  Romau,  who.  according  to
tbe  old  It'gend,  when  Kouie  was  in  tbe  poMCMioD
of  ihe  Gauls,  issued  fn>ui  the  Capitol,  which  was
Uieu  bcMioged,  t«i  go  and  offer  ou  tbe  Monn  Qujrina-
lia  a  stat«d  sacrifice  enjoined  on  the  Fnbian  bouse.
In  tbo  Oabian  cincture,  aiid  bearing  the  nacreil  res-
sets  in  his  bands,  be  des4.-ended  from  tbeCHiHtol  and
jtassml  thnuigh  the  enemy  without  iH'trayiug  tbe


least  signs  of  fear.  Wbeu  be  had  finished  bi»  mt-
rilice,  be  ruturued  to  tbe  Capitol  UDOiolested  hj
the  foe,  who  were  astouitthed  at  his  b<^B«aa  MOi
did  not  obstiuot  his  passage  or  moLeat  biftMcriltt
(Liv.  V.  4ti|.

DoTua  l^i>pos).  X  son  of  Hell«n,  and  tbe  rojlb*
icul  anctwtorof  the  Dorians  (Diod.  iv.  60).

I>ory  iiopv). A  spear. Bvn  Hasta.

Dorylaeum  (AopCXaiov).  A  towu  in  Pbrjgia
EpiiTtetun,  on  tho  river  Thymbt-ia,  with  wm
butbs,  nbieb  are  used  at  the  preseut  day.

Dorypb&l  {Rotnitpopoi). See  AlKKCKXAJtU.

Dob. a  dowry. See  Maikimumi'M.

Doaitheua  (  SaxriBtot  \.  A  graitiuiartaQ  «t»
tliiiiriglit^d  towanis  the  end  of  the  fourth  cenlsry
A.ix  He  wrote  a  Laliu  grammar  for  Greek  U)jh
with  a  literal  Greek  translation,  which  was  u«t
fully  completed.  With  this  waa  bound  up  (vbeUh
er  by  Doaitheua  biuiself  is  uuc«rtaiu)  a  miscellsoy
nf  very  voriotiH  contents  by  another  autbor.  Thii
cnnipriacB  11  j  auecdol«e  of  the  emperor  llndrias;
i'ij  fables  of  Aeaop;  (3)  an  iuiiK>rtant  chapter  on
jurisprudeiicr;  (4)  mythological  storica  from  Hy-
giuiis;  (5)  an  abridgment  of  the  Iliad:  16)  sn  it-
ten'^ting  collection  of  words  uud  phrases  fu4i
iinlcuary  eonverentioii,  styled  'yipfuitftifurra.  1\>*
Latin  grammar  bos  tbe  Greek  traualatioo  iiiwf1(4
in  the  Lutin  text,  thus :  Jr»  rixt^  gramm4tlit*
ypapfioTiKri  ftt  itrriv  «et>Alid  yirSM-it.  Tbe  Lobs
til  tbe  text  of  a  grammar  uuw  toet,  DosilliMi
luakiog  only  the  Greek  traualation.  A  lepMili
edition  of  the  grammar  is  that  of  Keil  illtlle.
Ir^Wt-Tl).  Other  parts  of  tbe  work  are  edit««l  Ity
Bockiiig  (Bonn,  1832),  and  Keil.  (rrammnfici  l4liM.
vii.424.  See  Hiigen. /ip  i>on7Ar)  Mafjittri  ^tfi-
ntnlur  (Hotinn  (Kerne,  |fC7) ;  and  Scbduomaim,  iM
Lejeicographui  Antiquia  (Bonn,  IHtStty.

DoBOD.  A  surname  of  Autignn^is  til.,  becaiiwl'
pntinisetl  and  twv^r  perfnnnml;  fl^aiai^.  "sbi'iuts
give";  i.  e.  always  iiniuiiNiug. Sue  ANTIGONCS.

DosBennuB,  Fajiius.  A  Romau  comic  postisd
writer  of  Atellau  tables,  who  enjoyed  somenpotk-
tion  as  a  popular  dramatist.  Seneca  makHuet-
ticm  of  the  iriHcription  on  bis  t«unb.  which  ni  **
follows:  Btmitr*  rttitte-j  «t  sopkuim  ItotteKmi  ftf*
(Sen.  ^p.Uxxix.C).

Dosaetuiua.  One  nf  the  stock  charaot«n  ^
tb(^  At^'llauae  Fnbnloe,  and  rvpireenting  lbs  tTF*"
cat  slmqMT,  doltorr.  Si-p  Vel.  Longus  in  lbeC»»-
maliri  latiiii  (ed.  Keilj,Tii.  79,  4;  aiul  MonnicB'
Cnlerilai.  Dial.  lift

DosBuariua  or  Dorstuuriiu.  A  name  i^vf*  ^
any  aiiiuial  carrying  bunluus  on  its  Itack  (Vsrr.JL
It.  ii.  t)  and  lU).  It  carried  its  load  eitln-r  by  mri"
of  pauuicm  (clUcltut)  or  the  pack-aaddlcs  (upM'b


<Oi4unaB  of  ni««4asiaK  I


whence  we  read  of  etjuu$  nagmariMt.  Henoe  cMM
the  German  ^am-pfeid  aud  tbe  English  m^]^V'
hone.


DOUL08


566


DRAKENBORCH


Doitlos  (doCXoff). A  siBve. See  Skrvus.

Drabesoiu  {^paff^trxos).  A  town  in  the  district
Edouis  in  Macedonia,  on  tbe  Strymon.

Draoibitutt  (Apdxoyoy).  A  town  and  promontory
iu  the  island  Icaiia.

Draohnui  (dpoxfu?)*  The  name  of  a  weight  and
of  a  denomination  of  coin  among  the  Greeks.  As
weight  and  as  coin  it  was  the  hundredth  part  of
the  mina,  and  was  divided  into  six  leaser  units
called  d^oXoi.  The  ancients  (Etym.  Mag.  s.  T.  6$t-
XuTKor)  connected  the  word  with  dpatrtro/iat,  "I
graap,"  and  ipayixa,  "a  handful,"  and  supposed
that  a  drachni  was  originally  the  valne  in  silver
of  a  baudfnl  of  six  ofioKoi,  or  wedge-shaped  pieces
of  metal,  which  circulated  as  money.  It  is,  how-
ever, very  donbtfal  if  this  derivation  is  not  a  mere
fancy;  it  is  far  more  probable  that  dpaxtitf,  like
dofMutor,  is  connected  with  tbe  Persian  word  darag,
''  a  part," since  tbe  weight  of  the  drachma  seems  to
be  derived  by  division  of  tbe  miiui,  rather  than  the
weight  of  tbe  mina  to  be  produced  by  mnltiplica-
tion  of  the  drachma.

Tbe  ordinary  denominations  of  Greek  coins  were :
fur  gold,  tbe  didrachma  (double  drachma),  drachma,
liemi- drachma,  and  smaller  divisions;  for  silver,
the  same,  with  tbe  addition  of  the  tetra-drachma,
and  occasionally  of  the  decadrachma.  Tbe  weight
of  the  drachma  varied  according  to  the  standard  to
which  it  belonged;  the  heaviest  drachma  was  tbe
Aeginetan  of  96  grains,  worth  in  sUver  rather  more


AagineUo  nncfamk,  Mtaal  tin. (British  HDMom.)

than  twenty-five  cents  of  our  money ;  it  was  called
at  Athens  iraxt'ia  d^a^^ii  (Pollux,  ix.  76).  TbeAthe-
niftn  diaohius  weighed  bnt  67.5  grains,  and  the  Co-


Attlo  Dnchms:  Ute,  uUial  site. (Britlib  Hweatn.)

rinthiao  only  45  grains,  value  about  twelve  cents.
The  sign  for  drachma  in  Attic  inscriptions  is  K  As
tbe  Romans  reckoned  in  sesterces,  so  the  Greeks
generally  reckoned  by  drachmae ;  and  wben  a  sum
is  mentioned  in  the  Attic  writers,  without  any  speo-
ificatioo  of  the  nnit,  drachmae  are  usually  meant.
fiee  NuHiBHATics ;  Pondeka.

Dtvgo. 8ee  Caldaridh  ;  Siona  BIiutaria.

Draoo  (Apdnty).  A  very  celebrated  Athenian
legislator,  wbo  floorished  abont  B.C.  6S1.  Snidas
tells  as  that  be  brought  forward  his  code  of  laws
0tai*oO  in  this  year,  and  that  be  was  then  an  old
man.  Aristotle  (Pol.  ii./n.)  says  that  Draco  adapted
his  laws  to  the  existing  constitution,  and  that  they
contained  notbiiig  particular  beyond  the  severity
of  tbeir  penalties.  The  slightest  theft  was  pun-
ished capitally,  as  well  as  tbe  most  atrocious  mur-
der ;  and  Demades  remarked  of  bis  laws  that  they


were  written  with  blood,  and  nnt  with  ink  (Plat.
SoloH,  17).  Draco,  however,  deserves  credit  as
tbe  first  who  introdnced  written  laws  at  Athens;
and  it  is  probable  that  he  improved  the  criminal
courts  by  bis  transfer  of  oases  of  bloodshed  from
the  arohon  to  the  ephetae,  since  before  his  time
the  archons  had  a  right  of  settling  all  cases  arbi-
trarily and  without  apiwal — a  right  whieb  tbey
enjoyed  iu  other  cases  until  Solon's  time.  It  ap-
pears that  there  were  some  offences  which  he  did
not  pnniitb  with  death  ;  for  instance,  loes  of  civil
rights  was  tbe  punishment  of  attempting  to  alter
oneof  hislawB  (Demosth.o.  ^rfftoor.  p.714,  Bekker).
Draco  was  an  arcbon  (Pausan.  ix.  36, 8),  and,  con-
seqnently,  an  Eupatrid;  it  is  not,  therefore,  to  be
supposed  that  his  object  was  to  favonr  the  lower
orders,  though  his  code  seems  to  have  tended  to
abridge  the  power  of  the  nobles.  The  Athenians,
it  is  said,  could  not  endure  the  rigour  of  bis  laws,
and  the  legislator  himself  was  obliged  to  withdraw
to  the  island  of  Aegina.  Here  be  is  said  by  Snidas
to  have  been  suffocated  in  the  theatre  beneath  the
nnmber  of  cloaks  and  garments  which  tbe  people
of  the  island,  according  to  tbe  usual  mode  of  ex-
pressing approbation  among  the  Greeks,  showered
upon  him. He  was  buried  iu  tlie  theatre.

DracontiQB,  Blobsius  Aehiuus.  A  Latin  poet
who  lived  and  practised  as  an  advocate  at  Car-
thage towards  tbe  end  of  tbe  fifth  century  A.D.  He
was  a  man  of  real  poetic  gifts  and  considerable
reading,  but  his  style  is  spoiled  by  rhetorical  ex-
aggeration and  false  taste.  His  surviving  works
are:  (1)  A  number  of  short  epics  upon  subjects
taken  from  the  old  mythology  and  school-room
rhetoric  (e.  g.  Hyias,  Baptus  Helenae,  Deliberativa
^ohiIIi«,etc.).  (2)  An  apologetic  poem  (Satiafactio)
addressed  in  the  form  of  an  elegy  to  Onnthamund,
king  of  the  Vandals  (a-D.  484-496),  whose  wrath
he  had  excited  by  writing  a  panegyric  on  a  foreign
prince.  (3)  A  Chiistian  didactic  poem  {De  Laudi-
but  Dei  or  HeacaBmeron)  in  three  books.  This
is  a  fairly  poetical  treatment  of  the  story  of  the
Creation.  (4)  Two  tpitkatamia  In  hexameters,
composed  in  early  youth.  (5)  Several  distichs
De  Origint  Boaarum  and  De  Mentibtu.  He  is
probably  tbe  author,  also,  of  971  bexametei-s,
entitled  Ore*ti$  Tragoedia,  attributed  during  the
Middle  Ages  to  Horace  or  Lncan.  The  editiQ  prin-
ceps  of  the  complete  works  of  Dnicontius  is  that
of  Arevalo  (Rome,  1791 ).  Earlier  editions  give  only
the  Satiafactio  and  the  Hexaihneron.  The  minor
poems  of  Draeoutins  have  been  edited  by  Dubn
(Leipzig,  1873).  Editions  of  tbe  OreaUa  Tragoedia
are  those  of  Miihly  (Leipzig,  1866)  and  Scheiikl
(Prague,  1867).  See,  also,  fiossherg,  De  Dracontio
(Gottingen,  1880).

Drakenborch,  Arnold,  a  distingnisbed  Dutch
classical  scholar,  was  bom  at  Utrecht,  January  1st,
1684.  He  studied  at  both  Utrecht  and  Leyden,  re-
ceiving the  degree  in  law  in  1706.  His  attention,
however,  had  been  very  strongly  attracted  to  tbe
study  of  orohsDology  and  history,  and  in  1704  he  hod
already  won  much  commendation  by  his  treatise
De  PraefeeHa  Vrbia,  dealing  with  tbe  city  govern-
ment of  Rome.  In  1716,  he  became  Professor  of
History  and  Eloquence  at  the  university  of  his  na-
tive town,  sncceeiUng  Bnrmann,  who  had  accepted  a
call  to  Leyden.  This  post  he  held  until  his  death,
which  occurred  on  January  16tb,  1748.  Besides  tbe
treatise  De  Praefeetia,  mentioned  above,  of  which  a


DRAMA


566


DRAMA


tbinl  edition  npi^enrtMl  at  Uuyrenthin  17^,Druken-
buruli  itiiblisbiMl  u  diaHertAtioii  oti  the  advantages
t«>  bo  tlert^'^ed  IVoui  ctuMiLcal  study  (17If>)r  an  edition
of  Stilus  Italiciift  (I'titwbt,  1717),  and  bis  magnum
opna,  Bu  edition  of  Livy  iu  seven  voltini«&  (Amst«r-
dutn,  17^5'?— ll>).  Tiiin  wurk  is  still  ofl«ii  cit«d  itml
oontaiiis  iiiiicb  vuluablv  lUHterial,  Miuugb  lourrfil
by  a  lu<'k  nl'itHliniLf!  iiiMtliiMl,  ho  tbat  8<Ti]>io  MalTt<i
itveu  nuid  <]'f  it  lliul  "  tli«  uuly  tUlii|{  tliat  gavu  it
value  wum  tht*  hi^b  priue  at  wbicb  it  wmt  Huld.''
A  portrait  of  Drakuiiborvb  in  ^iveii  at  tbu  euui-
itiviiciniiiitit  of  tbi-  limt  v«liuu«  of  Uis  Livy.

Drama  <Apu>ta)-  In  Athkn:!  ibe  |)ra<liiL-tiuu  of
liluytt  wan  a  Statu  aCTair,  not  a  ptivuti?  iiudt-ilak-
iiig.  It  fonnotl  a  great  pni't  of  tbe  reliKiuriH  fusti-
val  of  tliv  DioDydio,  in  wbicb  tbu  ilratiiii  took  its
riao  (see  UluNYttU);  mid  it  w:i«  only  sit  tbe  GrBatwr
Uiuiiyfiia  tbat  {>itH;4^ii  itoiild  hp  {wrfortiKKl  during;
tbe  author*))  lifetinu'.  Tbu  jMrftiniiaiieiM  litstidi]
tlirm*  il»y»  ami  took  tbv  form  of  inu^icu)  cuiilcxtH,
tbecomptttttorH  Win);  tbriHt  traf{iu  piK-t:*,  with  llK-ir
tetralugit's,  and  tiw  t^oinlu  ihwIm,  witb  uiio  |iit;ct;
oaoli.  Tbu  atilhurity  hUo  Mi|ieriiit4.-iided  tbu  m  holu
WAS  tho  arcbnn,  to  wtiom  tlio  poets  bad  t(i  bring
their  playn  for  reading  niid  apply  for  n  ohoriiit.  If
tbe  pieci-A  were  accoptoil  and  tlio  chonifl  granted,
tbo  cilizous  who  were  liable  for  tbe  ckortyia  nn<
dert^>ok  at  tlu'ir  own  coat  to  {»rai'ti»e  and  forninh
for  th<>ni  one  clionis  each.  (See  LiTrRciA.)  TIih
poets  who*u  plays  were  accepted  rec«ivpd  a  rt-wanl
from  tbo  .State.  TUc  State  also  Biipplir-d  thu  ragn-
lar  niiniber  of  actors,  and  inadv  proviHiiin  for  thv
matiitenatH'e  of  onler  ilarlng  the  perforiDaricea.
At  the  end  of  the  |w>rforiniui<^e  a  certain  niinilier
of  penwEis  {nsnally  llvv)  wvtv  chosen  by  lot  from  a
ouuiniLttuo  (irywradf'roi)  iioniiiiitU'd  1»y  tbe  Senate
to  awanl  tho  prizen,  ami  boniid  by  tM>louiii  oath  to
give  their  jndj^tnent  on  tbu  playn,  the  <<h(»rffri\  and
tbe  actOFM.  The  [>oet  who  won  the  llrst  prize  was
prweiit«4t  with  a  crown  in  the  prcRence  of  tbo  as-
Mtnbled  mnltttude — the  tiigbe^C  distiuution  that
could  be  oonferrt'd  on  a  drantatic  anthor  at  Atb-
•MWt.  The  victorions  chureijuA  nlHo  ruL-eivod  a  r^rown,
with  tbe  permiKHion  to  dedicate  a  votive  otli-rtiig
to  Diouyana.  This  wiw  genumlly  a  tripod,  wliich
vraa  set  np  either  in  the  tbcatro  or  in  thL'  t«tii-
ple  of  the  ilnity  or  in  tho  Street  of  Tripods,  »o
named  fnun  thif«  t- on  ton  k,  an  inacriptjou  being  put
ou  tt  nvonliiig  thn  ttvunt,  a.n  in  tbat  of  Paitofka,
J/hmt  Ulacan,  pi.  1.  (Kritinb  MnHeuni):  AKa^mr
<i>iVa  ^vXij :  YXavKtav  KoKot.  Tbe  nctitrs  in  the  auo>
cesMfii!  ]ilay  w-ceivwl  pHzea  of  money,  1)6-
Bldett  tht>  Honal  honoraria.

Vrx'Xtx  the  time  of  Sopho^'Iom  the  actorf'
in  a  play  were  three  in  laitnber.  1'hey  had
to  reprr«ent  all  the  partH,  thoHO  of  women
incladed.  This  involved  changing  tbeir
coatnuic  fteveral  tiniea  dnriiig  tbe  x^rform-
aiicc.  Tbe  three  actors  were  diBtingnislied
as  protagoniMtti,  dtuteragonittfi*,  »nd  frilri>
ffonitim,  according  to  tbe  imiHirianee  irf
their  partH,  If  the  piei.'i>  i-efinirud  a  fuuith
actor,  wbifli  wim*  Helihuii  ibe  i-asc,  rbe
chorrgun  ha*l  to  providu  «aie.  The  vhttrt-f/Hs
Lail  alao  to  see  lo  tbe  poaitioo  and  (Mitiip-
tneiit  of  the  tni)t«  soton.

Ill  earlier  tim«A  it  ie  poeaibh'  that  the
pemoDB  engaged  in  Ihc  n'pnwntation  ilid
not  make  a  liuhinewi  of  chuir  art,  but  i>er-
formod  grattiitonNly.  aM  the  poeta  down  to
tbo  time  of  Sophocles  appeared  npon  tbo


lin«to_


stage.  But  tbe  dramatic  art  gradoalty  becam
a  prafesaioM  requiring  careful  preparstioo,
winning  general  respect  for  ita  nicnibcrs  a»
iptts.  The  chief  rtrquireuients  for  the  proft
were  distiiictnefM  and  correctneaa  of  pronnneb-
tion,  e^peoiully  iu  declamatory  paaaagcK^  and  so
iHMisual  power  of  memory,  an  tljeru  waa  uo  pronpt-
er  in  a  t*nM>k  thpiitre.  An  utrtor  had  alMi  lo  Im
thoroughly  trained  in  Hluging,  uiulodraiualic  ac-
tion, dancing,  and  play  of  gvHtnre.  The  iHtler  vit
c.-tpeciHlly  nctH'HHary,  us  the  uac  of  innAk^  prvcludrd
liny  fat'ial  ux]iri'Midou.  The  actors  were  acconlin|cl*
(dried  nilii  uxAignL-d  lo  the  ]>octi!  by  lot ;  yot

gfiicrally  had hiit sjiecial prulaguuiMl,  on

{HM-iitiar  gifta  ho  kept  bia  eye  iu  writing  ihettn-
nialie  piecoa.

The  Athenian  tragwliet*  began  to  be  known  all
over  tho  lielleuic  world  wi  early  iik  tbo  tini«  of
AeschyltiR.  The  tirst  city  ontaide  of  Attica  Ifcit
bad  a  theatre  waa  Syracuae,  where  AoscIi^Im
brnngbt  out  some  of  hia  owu  playa.  Scenic  »ii-
tcMta  8i>on  began  to  form  part  of  the  religions  frati-
vala  in  various  Greek  cities,  and  were  *-elehral«t
in  lionour  i>f  other  deitieit  lH>jtideK  Dionyaiu.  It
w;ui  a  habit  of  Alexander  the  Great  lit  celebrata
jtlmoHt  every  eonsidcrublo  event  u  ilti  dramatic
exhibit  ionf,  ami  after  him  tlila  became  the  rrgnlir
ciiFttom.  A  conaiderable  increaae  in  Ibe  uniuW
of  nctoi-s  was  one  con&e()ucuco  of  tbo  new  deiMoil.
The  octora  called  tbemaelvcs  arti»t«  of  DionfMii,
and  in  tbe  larger  cities  ihey  formed  iienuaQnit
societies  (<rvvotioO  with  special  privilegea,  iotlaiK
ing  exemption  front  military  service  and  wwnnt;
in  peraon  and  property.  Tbeae  companiea  bad  a
n>gu1ar  organization,  pre«lde<l  over  by  a  pilMt  uf
thuir  patrun-gud  Diouyi^uK,  annually  elcrled  fn>n
among  their  members.  A  ti-easurer  and  oftcrn
completed  tbe  staff.  At  the  lime  of  tbo  fettiffel*
tbe  aocietieji  aent  out  Ibeir  iiiembera  in  gruu}H<<f
three  acton*,  with  a  manager  and  a  tintc-plaj'tft
to  tbo  difleront  cities.  This  buMiicM  wasMpod'
ally  lively  in  Ionia  and  oo  tbe  Bnsine,  1bp«<<cie>
tieK  of  Tmih  btHiig  the  roost  distiuguislied.  Tb>
Minne  arrangement-  wa«  lulopled  in  Italy,  awl  e*m-
tinm^'d  to  oxi«t  under  the  Roman  Kmpire.

The  univeraal  employnn'ot  of  uuo>k«i  wa«  »  !••
murkuble  peculiarity  of  uti'tnnte.  (S<^  PkrmiM-)
[t  initiirally  exchnled  all  play  of  feature,  but  the
uuMks  correnpondetl  lo  the  generut  lypeM  of  rlla^
acier.  aa  well  as  to  tbe  (i]iccial  type*  indicnb'^l  ^J
the  re^iuircmcuts  of  the pUy. Cerulu  oodtcu-


DRAMA


bS2


DRAUA


tionalities  were  observed  in  the  eolonr  of  tbe  hair.
Ooddesses  and  young  persons  had  light  hair;  gods
and  persoDB  of  riper  age,  darlc  brown ;  aged  per-
sons, white;  and  the  deities  of  the  lower  world,
black.  The  height  of  the  masks  and  top -knots
varied  with  tbe  age  of  the  actors  and  tbe  parts
they  took.  Lucian  ridicales  the  "cbeet-paddings
and  stomach  -  paddings "  of  the  tragic  actors  (De
Salt.  27).  Their  statare  was  considerably  height-
ened in  tragedies  by  the  high  boot  (see  CoTHUB-
HUs),  and  the  defects  in  proportion  corrected  by
padding  and  the  use  of  a  kind  of  gloves.  The
conventionalities  of  costume,  probably  as  fixed  by


(1)  Haalc  or  Perrcui  witb  Cap  or  Darkness. (2)  Fompefui  Huk.

Aesohylne,  maintained  themselves  as  long  asOreek
tragedies  were  performed  at  alL  Men  and  women
of  high  rank  wore  on  the  stage  a  variegated  or
richly  embroidered  long-sleeved  x"''**^  reaching  to
the  feet,  and  fastened  with  a  girdle  as  high  as  the
breast.  The  upper  garment,  whether  ifiarunr  or
xXa/Jvr,  was  long  and  splendid,  and  often  embroi-
dered witb  gold.  Kings  and  qneens  bad  a  pnrple
train  and  a  white  Iftainov  with  a  pnrple  border;
eoothsayers,  a  netted  upper  garment  reaching  to
the  feet.  Persons  in  misfortune,  especially  fngi-
tivee,  appeared  in  soiled  garments  of  gray,  green,
or  bine; black  was  the  symbol of  mourning.


Soothsayers  always  wore  a  woollen  garment  of
network;  shepbei^s,  a  short  leathern  tunic;  while
each  of  tbe  gods  had  some  distingoisbing  mark,
as  tbe  bow  for  Apollo,  tbe  caducous  for  Hermes,
the  aeg^  for  Atben6.  So  with  tbe  well-known
heroes:  Heracles  bore  a  clnb;  Perseus,  tbe  cap  of
darkness.  Kin^  wore  a  crown,  and  carried  a
sceptre.  Warriors  appeared  in  complete  armour.
Old  men  bore  a  staff  with  a  curved  handle,  intro-
doced  by  Sophocles.  Messengers  who  brought
good  news  were  crowned  with  olive  or  laurel.
Myrtle  crowns  denoted  festivity.  Foreigners  wore
some  one  special  badge,  as  a  Persian  turban  for
Darins  (Aescb.  Pen.  661).  From  the
time  of  Enripides,  heroes  in  misfortune
(e.  g.  Telephus  and  Pbitoctetee)  were
sometimes  dressed  iu  rags.

In  the  Satyric  Drama  tbe  costumes

of  the  heroic  characters  resembled  in

all  essentials  what  tbey  wore  in  the

tragedies,  altbongb,  to  suit  tbe  greater

liveliness  of  the  action,  tbe  j(T^y  ^as

shorter  and  the  boot  lower. In  the

Old  Comedy  tbe  costumes  were  taken

as  nearly  as  possible  from  actual  life,

but  in  the  Middle  and  New  Comedy

tbey  were  conventional.  Tbe  men  wore

a  white  coat;  youths,  a  purple  one;

slaves,  a  motley,witb  mantle  to  match;

cooks,  an  nubleached  dooble  mantle;

peasants,  a  fur  or  shaggy  coat,  with

wallet  and  staff;  panders,  a  coloured

coat  and motley  oveigarment. Old

women appeared in sky-blue  or  dark  yellow;

priestesses and maidens,  in white; courtesans,

in  motley  colours,  and  so  on. Red  bair  marked

a  roguish  slave;  beards  were  not  given  to  youths

or  old  men. The  eyebrows  were  strongly  marked

and  highly  characteristic. When  drawn  up,  they

denoted  pride  or  impudence. A  touchy  old  man

bad  one  eyebrow  drawn  up  and  one  down. The

members  of  tbe  choms  were  masked  and  dressed

in  a  costume  corresponding  to  the  part  assigned

them  by  the  poet. (On  their  dress  in  the  Satyric

Drama,  see  Satyric  Drama.) The  cboms  of  the

comedy  caricatured  the  ordinary  dress  of  the  tra^o


Comedy  Sc«n«L (PftlnUng  from  Pompeii.)


OBAM.V


&b»


DRU1D.1E


rlinrutk  Snmriimm  thi<y  rrpn.v<^til4*il  animals,  am
ill  Llie  Fruifn  niul  liirtla  of  AriAUtpliniiMi.  In  tlin
t'rogu  thi-y  wore  ti);lil  ilrBHiMW  of  frog-nolmir,  ami
niiLMkH  wIlIi  a  mouth  wide  (t|>t!n  ;  in  tlie  liirda,  Inrxe
btMLkM.  Iiiiu(:liu8  of  fuarb^-TH,  coiuliH,  aud  so  ou,  to
imitult?  piirti<:ular  birils.

('2)  Uoman.  Dramatiu  p<:rfumiuu('(rH  in  Rotiiv,
iia  ill  (irvei'i-,  foniiud  a  iiaH  of  tliu  iitmal  jiuMii:
fi*fitiral8,  wtitiilier  exueptionul  or  ordinary,  and
wt-ro  (wt  on  foot  by  tiie  wjdilif-s  and  pnintnra.  (Sen
Li.iil.)  A  privntti  iiulividnal,  however,  if  ho  wcrp
Kiviti);  a  festival  nr  celebrating  n  funeral,  would
have  tfacatriral  rei>rB»<'iiI«tionn  on  Iiik  own  ac-
coitiit.  Tlio  giver  of  thu  fe«tival  hinxl  :i  tnmiKi  of
phiynnt  iarrji,  the  dirertor  of  whirh  (dttminus  grr'
gii>)  buoght  a  p^J^y  fnnu  a  poi't  nt  Iiih  own  rii^k.  If
Uiu  pirru  »fUiit  faihini  L1k'  niauagvr  iV4riMV*>d  no
coin|icn«Athtn.  HnT  AfUtr  itn  ptrrforitiiiiu-i';  the  piepo
benanie  his  property,  to  be  utu^d  at  fiiinro  roprvH^n-
lationH  for  liix  owu  protlt.  lu  th«  liiiiL-  of  C'lcvro,
when  it  was  foaliiouablo  to  i-evivo  thi!  worka  of
oldt^r  iiiasiorrt,  tltc  gvlt-ction  of  ttiiitiiLflu  piccoa  wiw
gvni'rally  left  to  the  ilireiitor.  The  Roman**  did
ti<»t,  liku  tho  Greeks,  limit  the  nnmUer  uf  actunt  to
throe,  hut  varii'd  it  arcording  to  the  m'|tiiitimeuttt
of  tlin  pliiy.  Woiimn'H  part^  were  oriKinnlly  playetl
by  mi-n,  ok  in  Grwfe  Woiiipo  fir>*t  aptM'jirpd  in
tiiiiiivii,  aud  Hot  tilt  v&ry  laie  ttii)(*ti  in  coini-(lie«.
Tbu  aclora  wuru  tiotmlly  fr«edm»ii  or  NlavoH,  wli4>m
(hvir  iiiaHtem  sent  out  lo  bu  educated,  acid  then
ItinMl  th«>iii  out  to  the  <lirectort>  of  iht^  tUu-atren.
The  profeMtoit  wa«i  tecbnicully  branded  with  m-
/amia,  uor  nutt  itn  Irgul  position  ever  ostktiiiiiin.v
allercHl.  Thti  tuxiial  staiitliiig  of  uctoiK  wuh,  linw-
evtr,  iinprovt-il  llirotigh  iht^  inlbieirt^eiof  ('tre«k  Mii-
nitiori  ;  and  gift'ed  artistH  liku  ttii^  loittiMliaii  KoH-
ctiiM,  »nd  AeHopuK,  tlio  tnigedtiin,  in  Cieent'ti  time,
•iijoycd  lh«  friendship  of  tlio  IwHt  niien  in  Home,
The  iiiHtanro  of  thcM)  two  iih*ii  inny  ithow  what.
prolilH  could  be  iniiite  by  a  giKKl  uetor.  Kon«inft
rvL'eited,  for  ev<<ry  diiy  tliut  he  phiytil,  817&.  untl
niiule  lilt  Hiiniial  iiiconiu  uf  M>ino  ;it2],(M1il).  AeM'>piiM,
in  Hpittf  of  hiH  greut  oxtraTuguiJcii.  left  |><>'J,oU(i  nt
bin  death.  Ui}sid«!i<>  tho  regnlnr  honorar'ta,  aetors,
if  thought  to  deinTve  it,  received  other  iin<l  volnn-
larj-  preMtnt«  from  the  giver  of  tlio  perforuiuiiee.
Tfn^ne  often  took  the  fomiof  finely  wrongbt  ci'ownii
«)f  silver  or  gold  work.  Mankn  were  not  worn  until
Itimcidft  made  their  uhv  general.  Before  his  time
ui:liin<  1i;m1  nHioui-Hti  to  fiiixe  hair  of  dillervut  col-
uiirH  and  ]>iiiiit  for  tbv  fai,*e.  Vonng  ineti  wore
lilack  wi^tt:  slHv«.-H,rud  oue«;  old  men,  whir.4'  oneH.
Tlie  coMtnme  in  general  wati  modelled  on  tfiut  of
actual  life,  Greek  or  Komaii^  bnt  panmiteH  wen?
oouveotionally  repreaentod  in  black  or  gray  (Pol-
lux, iv,  14y).  Aft  early  as  the  later  years  of  the  K«-
public,  a  great  increase  took  place  in  the  Hplendonr
of  the  costnnies  and  the  general  maguillL-eiiei:  of
the  perfonuuiiue.  lu  tragedy,  particularly,  a  now
efliH't  wttH  atlaitied  by  intiHKiiig  ihe  actont  iu  great
niimWrM  on  the  Htnge.

KiBUfM'.iEAPllv.— For  the  hixt-oricat  development
of  the  dnima,  we  riioitVH;  CuM<.i»:i>lA ;  MiMU»;
Satiua;  TltKsns;  TkaOokoia.  For  the  theatre
and  the  itetting  of  playn,  m-v-  Tiikatki:m.  For  the
uelom,  Hcu  lIlHTRio.  For  thealrical  euKtnniiMt,  Mre
(HLAMYS;  IIlMAllOK;  PHItSdNA  ;  TiNICA.  Ynv
the  great  dramatic  wrUers  of  (irMKie.  see  AilscilV'
Lus;  AinsToniANKH ;  t'KATiNiH;  Eunji-is;  Kr-
uii-[lir.s;  Sop|i*»c"l.KH.  For  the  great  Itoman  wht-
era, Mie  Knmls;  Liviib(Asi»rosicu8);  I'laitus;


Seheca  :  TKBKXTtfH.  Valnable  wtirka  on  thf^ib.
jeei  of  I  he  ancient  ilrnma  are  tlm  foJIowinf;:  \i\\i-
M-liell,  The  Athfniau  Stage  (Eug.  tr.  Lundnii,  Iifiiij;
WiLlford,  ItafJbook  of  Ike  (Irtrk  Drawta  (Loti<ki|i,
IH06) ;  DoiiahlMun,  Thr  Theatre  wf  the  Grrrin  .Hlli  ri.
LiMidoii,  IrfTB) ;  Itrrgk,  (Iricck.  LitemlmrgnuiiickU,
viij.  iii.  (Utrrlin,  1**1>;  Bt-rnhardy,  GrmnJriu  i.
i/rivck.  LiHeratur,  vol.  ii.  pt.  ii.  (Halle,  lyHlll ;  Srlnrr
I  {it>r,l>a»Mti»rhe  nmrfMrrt(rn(\Veimar,IKiri);  Kkii.
(irMekirtilf  df*  I>ranniM,  voU.  i.-iii.  (I>si}4ig.  14Q;
ll.iiglj,  Thr  AUic  Tbmtrf  (0\fonI,  IHsO).
Drancae. 8ee  Zauanuabi.

Dranglaiia  ( ^puyyuu'i} ).  A  part  of  .^i^aw,
boniiiled  by  Gc'ilronta,  Cntmania,  Arschcwia,  aiM
Aria.  It  noinerimeM  f<itnied  a  w<{i3ra<e  •lotTSp),
but  watt  inoru  UHually  unit4>d  lu  the  KitnpNi
either  of  Arachiwia  or  of  Gedrowia  or  of  Aria,  h
tim  north  of  the  eoiintr>'  dwelt  the  Dnii^. »
w.-irlikti  j»eiople,  from  whom  tlie  province  derivt4
ila  imme.  The  Ariaapno  inhabited  the  wultKra
part  of  the  proviuce,  which  waa  Iniuwu  for  ilB|ir<>-
diictiun  uf  tin.

Dravua.  The  mmlern  Drare;  n  trihiiiary  of
thr-  Unnnbe,  flowing  through  N'ortcnm  anil  Vmv»-
Ilia,  aiul  after  receiving  the  Murioa  (Uuhr)  fill-
ing into  the  Dann1>e  cant  of  Munta  (Kweck).

Orapflnum  (A^i'iravor).  A  Miekle,  (I)A1m>DRC-
PANA  (r<i  Spi-nava\  more  rarely  DKKPJl>i'6{TnHill'il.
a  }«-aport  town  in  the  nortliweat  corner  ofSkllv,
founded  by  the  Ctirthagiiiiand.  It  ■»»»  Wrr  th*l
AnchiHea  diei),  according  to  Vergil.  (2)  Alw'  t>lt-
VAsk,  a  lonii  ill  hithyuia.the  birthplace  of  Heltu*
{(].  v. I,  inottior  of  CoiiHtahlilio  fho  (>t1^al.  iu  vbwr
honour  it  wii<t  calloil  llelenopidis  and  mudi*  an  ili»-
portatit  place. (3)  The  nnuieiitliainc  of  C'vnjn-

Dress. See  C1.0TIIING,

Dnientia.  The  tn^Hleni  Durunco;  a  larg»  imI
rapid  liver  in  Gallia  NarboiieUNia,  rifting  in  11^^
Alpi,  and  flowing  into  the  Rhone  uear  K'<«i»
lAviguoii). See  Aumui.  MoMella,  479.

Dniga, See  Mki>icin'a.

Druldae  and  Druldva.  The  prinata  of  reUliMi
among  the  ancient  Gaiila  and  Briluui.  BrlUU><
at;tionling  to  r&v«ar  (/'.  0.  vi.  lit  and  14l,  »w  ^
grrat  (tchixd  of  tho  Dniidn,  and  their  t'hi«f  wUlr-
meiit  waa  in  the  ialarul  called  Sloua  by  Tsrita*.
n«iw  Aughwey.  To  this  islaiul  the  uative«of  (iAtl
and  (iennany,  who  wi>hed  to  be  thoroughly  vtnnl
in  the  iiiyMieries  of  Uniidiaip,  rettorted  toctunpM^
their  ^tudif^.

Caewir'a  account  of  the  Drnida  la  aa  fiillw«-
*'Tliey  attend  l«  divine  wonthip.  perfonti  jiuWlc
and  private  nacriliccaf  and  ex|K>unil  mallen  of  i**
ligion.  A  great  nnmb«r  of  youtha  an*  |;athrn^
ritiiud  th»in  for  the  nake  r>f  education,  atnl  ihrj
enjoy  the  liighrat  honour  tii  the  nation  ;  f'T  nW"
ly  nil  public  and  private  (piarrrla  come  iimler  lb*ir
jnrindiction ;  and  when  any  crime  has  I'C^ii  f"*"
mitttMl,whon  a  murder  has  been  perpetrated,  "Ikk
a  rotitrovefKy  ari»te«  altout  8  legacy  or  abiioi  Utnt-
niarks,  they  are  the  judges  too.  They  fix  rr«»rt»
and  ptiiiisliimeiita;  and  should  any  one.  whrilwl*
private  individual  or  a  public  man,  dL9olN?jr  tk**|
docrous,  then  they  exclude  him  from  tha  •o"
tiocM.  This  is  with  them  the  severeM  pHniAbnM>-
Tho  persona  who  are  thus  laid  under  intetJirt
are  regarded  an  imploUK  and  wicked:  rvml«l5
recoils  from  Ihem,  and  NbniiH  their  •oriety  W*
cunveraatiun,  lest he ahould be it^jnivd  bf  >**


Inri-

m  ]


rmciDAE


530


DRL'SILLA


ciatint;  with tbem. Tliry  PAiiiiot nbtnin leg:!! '

i1ri>A!i  n  lit>n  t)u>y  iink  fur  it,  iii>r  »ri'  tliey  lulinit-
1(h1  to  any  hniioiinitilp  nttirp.  All  tlir-v  DniidH
bavp  oiip  rhi«>r,  nito  Hiijityfi  lint  tiiipniiiit!  uiilliurity
0[nniif*Kt  tlieui.  When  he  ilifH,  h«  ih  Hi)cr.4*(Mli>il  by
tlint  nirmlHir  of  tliu  nrtirr  who  ih  numt  i)nimuit*til
miionjjHt  tlvR  olhcrH,  if  thrn;  1h>  Aity  Huch  etiiigle
iiiiHviiliial ;  if,  huwt-vi>r,  tlirnt  aru  nrvom!  turn
«c)na11y  iti^tiiiieiiiKhiMl,  thn  mtrcciuufr  in  «le<:tt.-tl  by
rhf  riniltU.  .Siini«5tiim«  ilii-y  *vei»  go  to  wsirl
aliont  [his  tmytreuincy.  At  n  cprlJiiii  tinio  of  rlic  |
\vM\  thy  DroitU  itH»vin1ito  itii  ihu  torrimiy  of  tli»«
raniutcA,  wtich  is  btlicvtd  to  bo  the  cfiitrp  of  oil
Cuul,  lit  ft  sacred  place.  To  that  spot  imi  ^ath-
rrrtl  frocD  everywlicn?  all  ihrntoua  that  liave  t[nar-
ivU,  and  tbcMe  oUidr  l»y  tlieir  jiKlgiiientd  atKl  <Ie-
crei-«.  It  is  lielievud  that  thi«  instiliiltim  wa»
fniincled  tn  Britain,  and  tlit^uce  trari8pl»nt«-d  into
Gaul  Evfii  tm^%a«IiiyH,  l\\tm>  who  wl»h  to  l)fl-
conie  HUH*  intitimtrly  a^-qdiniit^'d  with  thti  insti-
tnrioti  i^piiprally  g'l  l»  Ftititiit  for  ioHtniflioQ.  I

"  The  I>niid!i  take  iiu  part  in  wnrturi* ;  nor  do
they  i»ay  tsxcH  like  thv  reeil  of  tUv  jicoplc ;  tliey
are  rX6inpt  from  military  mtvico,  and  fVom  all
public  hiirdon*.  Attnu^tfd  by  aucb  rewards,  many
come  to  be  inedrncti»d  of  their  own  choicp,  uhile
oth«ni  are  Bcnt  by  their  pareuti*.  Thoy  art"  tv-
jmrlwl  to  If^ani  in  Ibe  spU*wI  n  great  number  of
vvnw;  no  Hint  nome  remain  thet-e  twpniy  yearn.
Tliey  think  it  nti  nnlan-fnt  thing  to  onmiit  ibcii-
lore  to  writing,  th-ntgli  in  tho  oth«T  pnlilie  and
private  affnim  of  iifo  they  froc|uently  D>ake  uhc
of  tbtf  fir»Tk  alphalift.

•' Bryoiid  all  tliingx  they  aiv  desirouK  to  inspire
ft  Wlii'f  that  itien'H  sonla  do  not  perinb,  liilt  ttanil*
migrate  after  death  from  one  iiuUvidilul  to  auuth-
er;  nnd  they  huld  that  pooplo  arc  thereby  tnost
nlrungly  ineitud  to  bravery,  lui  Iho  foar  of  death  m
thnii  dej«tn>yrd.  Deaidee,  they  bcltl  a  groat  many  I
diHcounea  about  the  Ktar»  arid  tbcir  motion,  alKnit.
the  flize  of  the  world  and  of  varions  conntneft,  '
about  the  iiatiiro  of  tliingti,  about  the  power  and
ndght  of  the  immortal  ]{0(1m:  and  tbi^y  iiiotruet
thr  yonlhs  in  thi>Nn  Kiibjwriii."

Stnne  fnrlbcr  dftaiU  are  given  by  Pliny  tlio  El-
der in  bin  Hitloria  Xalnralia  (xxix.  t>'i,  1 ;  xxiv.  12. '
I  :  XXX.  4,  I).  Itesiilen  Uieir  prieBlly  eharactor,  the  [
Dniidit  api>eur  l4>  have  practised  mA]i;ic,  mid  to  i
have  Itcen  tlioronKbly  verseil  in  bofnny  and  In  |
other  M.-ieuet^.  The  oak  was  especially  Miered
auionn;  them,  and  in  oakgrovee  they  performwl
their  rites.  The  mistletoe  waa  partitnlarly  rnver-
euccd,  and  I^iiiy  tellx  nn  that  it  wax  removed  from
tbe  tree  hy  n  Dniid  rlolhe^l  in  wliit4>,  who  eat  it
with  a  golden  knife  and  gave  it  to  a  Merotid  Urn*
id  al«o  in  white,  whit,  Htiindin^  on  the  ground,  re-
reived  it.  Pliny  fiirthf.r  H]»>;aksuf  a  diHttngnitthing
badge,  "the  ner)"'"'''*  *^Eg'"  woiii  by  the  Draids,
and  formed  by  thn  p»tiH»iuiuii  Mpittlo  of  a  great
niimlier  of  iH-i-]iKnt«  twined  together  and  gath-
aml  by  moonlight.  It  wan  woru  in  tbe  buMMti
and  waa  regarded  a^  ii  p<^werfal  laliHinan.  The
Mcouut  of  Pliny  refers  Ut  the  Itrnidw  of  Ganl,
but  there  is  uo  reason  for  suppoHitig  that  llit<r«
exi«lc4l  any  cvwcntial  diftercnce  betw4<en  the  L>ru-
idiKin  of  Gaul  and  that  nf  Britain  hh  deHrriboil  by
CacMU*.  Mr.  Whitley  8toke«  HRwrt«  that  the  I>ru-
ida  of  Ireland  were  nf  lenn  i m [Hirtaui.'e,  roriuing
Dnt  a  prie«itty  rlatw,  bnt  Himply  a  upociea  of  wiz-
ardn  and  HootliMkyem.

Tbe  DmltU,  by  reason  of  their  great  inflnence


with  the  T>enple,  were  n  rauHe  of  cntitiuual  tronbls
to  the  Knman  eontineitirit,  kee]tiiig  iiltve  the  nation-
al uNptralioim  and  enronraging  rebellion.  Hence,
tlieoni[)ernrC'lnndiii«forninllyrofiiw<l  tbc]irivilego
(irpranlining  Drnidieal  rile«,  lUid  when  Snetoitiuii
PuidinnN  defeated  the  Itrit4ms  on  the  ihluud  of
Mima  <  .AngleMt-y )  tlMi  Hacnnl  grovea  were  de-
Hlroyvd.  Yirt  on  the  Continent,  Druidlsm  oon-
titiiiuil  to  have  followera  down  In  tbe  flnul  orer*
throw  of  paganUm.

Scholars  at  tbe  pix<aent  day  are  extremely  eon-
aervative  in  making  any  genenil  Kliii<*mentM  re-
garding the  DntidA,  and  nearly  all  the  tdaboralo
thenriea  that  wt-re  formerly  held  are  ik'w  i-eganled
ON  niiHafe.  Even  the  view  that  thi>  bnge  Ntrnv
tnrew  of  (tinne  fomiil  iu  Keltic  conntrien  were  Drn-
idieal alinnt.  or  mark  the  seiila  o(  Dniidionl  wor-
ship, is  no  longer  accepted.  Thesti-calii-d  Dniidical
li'inplt-M  at  Avebnry  and  Slonehenge  in  England,
and  at  Cariiar  in  rnnice,  wer^  very  poNtibly  not
Druidical  at  all;  fiiice  similar  Mrtirtiin*it  have
been  found  in  Si-aiidinavia  and  other  jiarlx  of  En-
rop!  where  Drnidinm  never  exixled.  Ileganling
tin-  ftvmology  of  the  name  Draiil  nothing  certain
can  bi<  alleged.  Among  the  tentative  and  Inuli-
tioiiiiL  explanations  arc>  the  following:  friMn  the
Keliii!rferM."an  oak";  the  OhHJortnan  drii[AiH,'*a
madter";  the  Saxon  ttrif,  "a  magipion";  the  lrii.h
rirmi,  *'a  «a*?rwl  i»-i>M»n.  or  priest'*;  am)  in  the  Kel-
tie  compare  itrronjul,  *' a  prophet"  (De  Chiniac).
The  fild  etymology  from  fipit  in  nbiturd.  The  fem-
inine fonn  of  the  Latini»*4l  Ihuida  in  Pfuian(l.!nn-
prid.  Alc£^  Xrr.  6(l>  or  />rNi«i  (Vo|).  Atircl  41 1.  The
Greek  mawnline  form  ia  ^vtfitjs  (Arietoph.  Fr.  'M).

tiw  Pelhiiitier,  Hi'tmrf  den  Vfltm  iParia,  ITTll;
Davis,  ^tflholopfi  nnd  Hifrn  of  thr  tirUinh  Draidt
(London,  IHOlt] ,  Pirtet,  Itu  Cyltr  Hen  Cabirra  ches
lof  Ancient  /r/aii4/fl(-(fteneva.  It*'.f4);  HiggitiH,  i'rHia
tJr*itlit{LoiHlou,l>^'i&);  T]tif}TTy,  Hialoircdca  Oauloit
{Paris,  li*JH);  Iteynaud,  I'r  f'AVJ'  rf*"  '«  tiaule>
(Paris,  180ftl;  Barth,  I'rOer  die  Drniiirn  der  Kelten
(Ertangeii,  IC'^');  Scarth. /fffrfMiii  ItritaiH  (London,
l*W);  Rby8,Ccmoff«i(ArNrfom(L«tidon,li*!«*).  Bu-
Htdeji  CoeMar  and  Plitiy,  Hcatteriiig  noticpH  of  the
DrnidH  arM  fonnd  in  C!i<t«>rn  {Tie  Dirinatioae),  1)10-
doniH  BicubiM,  HtralK>,  Pom|M>uins  Mela,  Tacittm,
Lm-aii,  Lum]tridiui4,  Vopitwna,  AuHouiuH  {Prafmo~
reM\  Atuinianua  Murcelliuus,  Origeu,  and  ClemcDs
AlfxamlrinuB.

Drum. Hee  Tympani'M.

Druailla.  (1)  Livia.  The  wife  of  AufrnntaB  Cae-
sar. See  Livia.  (2)  Livia,  a  daughter  of  (ieniian-
tcuB  antL  Agrippina,  boni  ut  Angnsta  Trevirormti
(I'r^voN)  A.l>.  1^.  siie  wao  far  from  inU{;ri(ing  the
excellent  tpialil  ies  of  ber  mother.  Her  own  brother
Calignla  M^luced  bor,  aitd  then  gave  lier  in  mar-
riag«*,  at  the  age  nf  Heventeen,  to  Lucius  CasHiits
lyoiigtiino,  a  man  of  cmii^nlar  rank.  t^ubiM^{;netitly,
however,  he  Um\i  her  away  from  her  huMband  and
livi'd  with  her  aa  bin  own  wife.  This  cmiiiec-
tion  tuMted  nittil  the  death  of  DnmilLa,  a.I>.  38,  and
at  her  decease  Callgala  abaiidoneil  bim»elf  to  thu
moat  extravagant  Morrow.  Divine  hoiionra  weru
rendered  to  her  memory,  iind  medals  were  atriick
in  bcr  honour  with  the  title  of  Angiiata.  SIio
was  twenty-three  yejirs  of  ago  at  the  time  of  licr
death  (.Snet.  C'{t}ig.  "H).  Dio  Casdintt  calls  tbe
name  of  her  hrnibAtid  Marcus  Lepidus,  dilTeriDg  in
thin  frmii  Siiet^iniui*.  Ho  may  possibly  refer  to  a
second  huMbaud,  who  may  have  been  given  her,  for


DRusns


S60


Dums


■(I,  R  ehort  tiiDV  Ixifore  licr  itralli  (Din
CsM.  lix.  3f.  (!!>  A  ilaiiKliter  of  Auripim,  king  nf
ludMU,  roinarkat)lft  Tor  liir  Ix^aiiiy.  Shn  woa  at
ftlMt  afliauccd  to  EpipImnoR,  tuin  of  Aii[l<*chiift,
king  of  Coiuuiftgou6.  But,  on  h\»  declluin^  to  Niiti-
mit  to  tbo  rite  of  circuinciaiou  and  become  a  .lew,
tlic  rasmagu  wan  broken  off.  She  wan  thi'u  givcu
to  Azuui),  king  of  KuieAO.  Not  Idu);  after,  Itovr-
ercr,  DrumillareDomjced  tUeroligion  oflierfatbers,
aliaiHloiied  her  biisbauci,  and  osiK>iiHe«l  AntontiiB
Folix,  a  froedniau  of  the  etuixror  Clniidiiie,  and
brother  to  Pallas,  tbe  freeduiati  of  N'ero.  I'hir*  in
ttio  Felix  who  vna  governor  of  liiduxa  and  in  int'ii-
tioiied  in  iiu't  AirtA  of  the  ApoHll^i.  Uriisilla  v/ixh
with  Fulix  at  Uaeiuitvn  when  81.  Paul  appeared
lieforu  the  latter.  Hhe  hail  u  son  by  her  second
liiisbatMl,  named  A^rippa.  who  )>cHMbed  in  the
eruption  of  Vesuvius  vrhiclk  took  phtce  duriug  the
reipi  of  Titiw  {Joseph.  Ant.  /n(/.  xix.  9).

Diuitt*.  (I)  C1.AUUIU6  Nkho,  ttou  of  Ttb«rlU8
Claudiim  Nero  and  of  Livia,  wkh  born  B.c  'JS.  Ha
•erTMl  early  in  the  army,  and  wa*  M'ot.  in  B.C.  17.
with  his  brother  TiberiiiM,  »i;iiin8t  the  Kbacti  and
th»  Viihlelici,  wlio  hm\  niixli*  an  irnijvtion  into
Italy.  He  defeat4.'it  the  invHib^m,  pursued  tbem
itcroM  tbi^  Alptt,  auil  reduced  their  country.  Hor-
ace h>U(  celebnitwl  Ibis  victory  in  tme  of  hiit  liueKl
(ideH(iv.4).  Drusuh  man'ied  AaWiiia  Miuur,  claugh-
ter  of  Antony  and  OctaTiii,  by  whom  be  had  tier-
naaitioiiB  and  C1audin<t,  afternunlM  emperor,  and
Livia  or  Livilla.  In  B.C.  14,  bt^iuf;  sent  to  quell  an
iuaiirrcetion  in  Gaul,  be  Hiicceeded  by  hiK  coneilia-
tory  adilfPSA.  In  the  fullowini;  year  he  attaekeil
the  Oemianis  and,  carrying  tbo  war  lK>yond  the
Rliinv.  he  obtainod  a  wries  of  victoriea  over  thoSi-
caiubri,Cberuaui,Catti,  andTe»eteri,andadvauc«d

AS  far  ajt  the  Viitnrgifi
(\Vea«r\  for  wbicli
tb  o  Se  u  a  te  lioato  w  ed
ou  bini  and  his  pott- '
terity  the  anruamo
of  Gerinauicus.  Iti
U.l\  9,  DrUHils  vros
niad»  consul.  He
wua  mion  after  sent
by  A  II  K  n  H  t  n  H
B}(ainHt  the  Oer-
niana,  rriMuuMl  the
ViMiirxiSi  ttiid  ad-
vancei]  UN  furiiM  the
Albiit  (Elbe).  Hi.-
iui[HMeila  uioilunile
I  ti'ibult^on  the  Frist-
,  aiift,  which,  being  af-
terwards ag);ravat-
ed  by  bif)HnreeMior».
caiiEied  H  revolt  in
the  n*ign  of  Til»eri-
na  (Tar.  .-inn.  iv.T'J).
Re  MHiMed  »  canal
to  ltd  ent,  for  the
piirjMiMe  of  iniiling
the  libiiift  to  tbe
YaMol,  whirb  wax
known  longaft^rby
tbe  uaiue  of  Koaau
Dmai.  Dmsuft  did
not  croaa  the  Albi»,
bnt  reiireil  t«>warfl»
tbe  Rbino,  Before
be  rcachod  thatriv-


-'^V


r->


BlaltM  of  [tt«ai»  ttam
CUratbBClLj


INHUpSll  .


er,  he  <1i*37at  tlie  ajEe  of  thirty,  in  c<ni9fHiii(>nn.u
it  was  reported,  of  his  honte  falliug  upon  biiit  ud
fnu^tnriiig  his  leg  (Livy,  Kpil.  I4U>.  Tiberius,  wko
waaaent  for  in  ha8te,  and  fouuil  his  bnttbur  exjitr-
tug,  acconipanietl  liia  1>oi1y  to  Konie,  where  lira  fn*
iiorul  wan  performed  witit  tbe  grvaleat  sokiuoitj.
Hoth  Augustus  and  Tibprins  delivered  oraliAM  in
biH  praise.  Drusuo  watt  much  regretted  by  botblW
aituy  and  tbe  Romans  in  general,  who  bad  ftnied
great  exi>e4!tatioiiN  fnnii  bin  maidy  and  Keiiifnw
character,  i'2)  The  son  of  the  eniiHTor  Til^rine
by  Vi|iHaniiL,  daughter  of  Agitppa.  HeAvrvisl  nitli
diKtinctioii  in  Paiitinnia  and  Hlyrirnm,  ami  wm
couHitl  with  bin  fjither,  a.p.  *^1.  In  a  (jnorrel  witli
tlio  imperial  fuvouriui  BetauuH,  be  gave  tbe  liiur
a  blow  in  tbo  £ace.  Seianus,  m  revenue,  neduffd
bie  wife  Livia  or  LJvilla,  daughter  of  Drasustlit
elder  and  of  Antouta;  aud  tbe  guilty  pair  ilHruf-
ed  Drn»as  by  poJewn,  which  wa»  aduiinietcRiJ  t>j
tlie  enuiicli  Lygilua.  The  crime  remained  afectn
for  eight  years,  wlien  it  Wiut  dise/ivervd  after  Uw
dftatb  of  Seianufi,  and  Livia  waa  put  to  death  (Tk.
.-Jkn.  i.  *M,  etc.;  iv.  3  full.).  (3)  Caeear,  tan  tS
(JeriuanieuA  and  Agrippitia,  and  brother  of 'Sin
Caesar  and  Caligula.  He  tuiirricil  AuniiliH  [..riiidi,
wlio  was  iuiluceil  by  Seianus  to  betray  lier  iW'
band.  L>elu(1t-d  biiui^lf  by  the  arU  of  that  «ril
niluititur,  be  con^pirtNl  againnt  tbe  life  of  his  l>rotb-
er,  Nero  Caeaur,  and  was  st-arved  tn  denib  by  onUf
of  Tiberius  (Tao.  .^as.ivGO).  (4>  M.  Linca  Sm
T.IVtAK  Leuks.
DryAdea  (Apvad<r). Wood*oyiiiphB. See  Vn*

PIIVH.

Dryaa  lAfivas).  Father  of  tbe  Thraciiii  kiflg
Lycnrgim  (<|.  v.),  who  ih  hence  called  Ih-yaatiiln.

Dryinaea(;^pv^(n>orDryniaa(t^u^f>  A  ton
in  PbiiciM.  ;i  Hi  lie  south  of  the  Cephissits.

DrymuB.  (1)  See  Dutmaca.  (V)  A  strong  plMC
in  Atticii.oti  tbe  frontiers  of  Boeotio.

Drymuaaa  (A^vpnOo-cra).  An  Island  olT  tWcoMl
of  luuia,  opposite  Clazumenae  <Tliur.  viii.31).

Drydp^  (^voVT}).  Tlie  danghteruf  Kinr:  Di
anil  beloved  by  Apc»1lo,  who,  in  order  to  get  pti
flioii  of  ber,  cbaugi'd  binine]f  into  a  tortoise.  UiT*
op^  ttKik  tbe  creature  iuto  lier  lap,  wbeniaposil
became  a  serpent.  This  sudden  transforniAlieii
frightened  away  tbe  compauions  of  I>ryop^,  d>n*
leaving  her  alone  with  tbe  god,  who  then  tteeom-
plisbe^i  Ills  par)Kiso.  Soon  after  i>hc  marrieil  An-
draeaion,  but  l»ecauie  by  Apollo  tbe  twilbfc  *■'
Ampbissua,  whi»  fonndeit  the  town  of  Oeta  uA
built  there  a  »hriue  to  bis  father-  Drrop/  nwat
loHt  carried  nlT  by  the  wnod^nymphs  and  bccav
one  of  thi^m. See  Ovid,  i/r(.  ix.33t.

DryOpes  (  ^piturtt ).  A  FeloHgin  pea|ilii(  *^
dnelt  lir«t  in  Tbemaly,  fnun  tbe  S|>ert1ifus  In  Pit
iiftwtiiH,  and  aftrrwanls  in  Doris,  wbicb  wu  ralM
frtun  tbem  Uryopis.  Driven  out  of  Dorit  by  ibf
Dorians.  Ihey  migratei]  to  other  ennulric*.  an<l  ■*'
tied  in  Peloponneens,  Eiiboea,aDd  Aaia  Utoor.  Sm
Herod,  viii.  31.

Dryoi>»  (SfMvtn^).  Tbe  son  of  tbe  rlvcr-god  Spw-
oUeus.  He  was  the  father  of  DryopfS  {t\.  v.)aiKitb'
reputed  anre«li>r  of  the  Dryopcs  (q.v.).

Dryoa  Ceph&lae  ( S^wt  Kc<^MtXai  )■  A  nan**
pass  t>f  Mount  Citbaeroii  in  Boeolla,  betnvtn  Atb-
ens  and  Plutaea«.

Dubia.  Tbe  modem  l>onb«,  a  river  lu  Ganl,  ri*-
iug  lu  Muua  luiaaiiui  (Jnra),  Uowiug  past  VeaoaliB


UliHJb

COMl I


(tuiHMv«iD).  »n(l  fulling  into  tlin  Arur  ti^^tnivt  iifiir
nltilliMiiim  (C'li&UtiiH). CufH»r  {It.  (I.  i.  3H)  calls
it  Aliliinsdnbin  accoriliiig  to  many  M8ti.

Dubrls  Portos.  The  iniHlitrci  Dnvnr;  a  iira]>«rt
town  i)f  llie  Cniilii  in  Hrituiii ;  Iirn!  mm  a  fortrexn
f^n^ft^d  by  the  RiimanK  ngainHt  the  Suxoii  {linttcs.
It  ii)  mrnttuni^d  in  botli  tlin  Ititirrarium  and  the
Jiotititt,

k  Du  Cange,  Ciiarlks  OtTRK.txK.  SiKfR.  One
^m  the  iiiuat  fiiuiotm  nf  i'tvucli  Mjliutart,  iKirti  at
Aluienx,  l>>ccrii)ier  l^th,  IGIU.  He  adoiil«il  ttte  jirn-
feiuiioD  of  a  puHiaiDcutary  advocate  in  Parttt,  lint
paweil  Ihe  Rreater  ]wrt  of  his  liff  in  atiidy.  having
n  Tvniarkatily  vcrnatilc  ami  reti^ntivH  miiirl.  Ho
ii4  uelj  known  by  his  wnrlcs  on  ltyeaiitiiii>  lii^tury,
aihI  {irp-emini'iitly  hy  bis  gmat  GIniiHarium  atl
Hcriptorrii  ^/rdifle  ft  fnfimae  Latinitntin — a  ln*n!turt.'-
hon»e  »f  valnahlu  infimnntion  rrganling  nu-iliu-val
l^lin.  It  itrnt  aii)>(>AiT<l  in  thnMi  fitlio  volinnnA  at
Parift  in  11578,  and  waft  fii)lMui()ni'nrIy  greatly  oii-
Iftrged  hy  the  n«;u(>dlctinfA  of  St.  Manr  to  aix  vol-
vme*  (Paris.  17X1 -36),  to  vcbieh  fonr  inoro  volnntiw
were  addcMl  hy  tb«  Benedictine  Cbarpontier  (I'fifil.
A  new  Million  appeat-cd  in  Mvcn  volnmos  hy  G.  A
Hrnsohel  (Paris,  1^40-46),  to  whioh  Diefenbard
addiMl  Hiip]>li>mrntJi  (  Frankfort,  I8r>7  and  I«67  ).
atill  anotbtT  edition  was  hcgmi  in  l-^T  t<>  cimisiNt
of  ten  vohitueH.  Benidtw  thin  invahuibln  Iciicoii,
Du  Cangp  put  fcirlb  a  Glimiiarium  ad  Sirriplurri
Mnliae  el  /pi/wof  Grarritatiii  (Paii«,  16Mf*);  ffinlaria
i'yzaa(in«i|PariK,l6H0);  tbc  .JknaJh  ofZonuras.  wiib
liat«a  (Paris,  10t<(>);  and  Chyonicoti  /'(HcA^fr  (Paris.
16U0).  8«c  Fttngere,  Entai  sur  la  Pie  el  les  Ouvrage*
4f  I>Hc«H9«  (Paris,  ISjti).

Dticas,  MicUAKL  {MtxaffX  A  Aovxor).  A  Dyznn-
tioe  bistoriao  who  held  otHce  nnder  tht>  last  of  tbo
tireuk  emperors,  CoiistAUtiac  Xlfl.  On  tbe  capt-
are  of  Constautlnoplft  hy  the  Tnrkn  (A.i>.  1453),  be
«0ca|>od  to  I.rf«hofl.  where  he  wrote  n  hintory  of  tbe
period  from  thn  liuio  of  Jnlm  VI.,  Palat'oloKUK  (a.d.
1355).  to  tbt^  capture  of  LenliDK  by  tbn  Turko  {14l^-3».
TbuD^h  written  in  biirbaroii^  t'irt'nk,  thi^  blatory  ih
oleor  and  iiuparlial  and  of  (Httmiderablc  valiiu.  The
beat  edition  ia  that  of  Uekker  (Botiii,  1K)4).  wliicU
^u  appended  to  it  an  enrly  Italian  truualntion,

LDucenarll Tbn  tminc*  i>f  varions  i>fti<;erw  and
agif«trat«fl  in  tbo  imperial  jwritHl,  uf  wbuui  the
pritici{>al  irere  an  foUowH  :

tl)  The  imporial  provuratorea,  who  received  a
aal&ry  of  SUO  seatcrtia  {  DIo  Caas.  liii.  15).  We
rrad  of  crntenarii,  etc.,  aa  well  as  of  ducenarli.
(8e«  Capitol,  rerl.  'i ;  Orelli,  Intaijit.  No.  i)4G,»

(i)  A  cliias  or  dM-nrin  uf  indices,  flrat  eslahlinbed
hy  An^atua.  Thiiy  were  (*o  railed  IwwiUKe  tbeir
]>ro|H>rty,  aa  vahiftd  in  the  cetisna,  only  amomited
to  *iiiO  Heatcrtia.  and  t\usy  tried  can»eB  of  HUiall  ini-
porttkuce  (Snel.  Aug.  32).

(3)  Officers  who  vuuimaud'ed  two  centiirios,  and

bo  held  the  (»amo  rankiiA  thopri'mi  hantati  iti  tbt>
Bcicnt  legion  (Vegl^t.  ii.  8).

'  (4)  The  iu|ierial  houftcbold  trooiM,  who  wore
huder  the  auihority  of  the  magiwifr  offidorum  {i'od.
i.  tit,  31 ;  xii.  til. '■£(»).

In  the  third  iwitnry  A.l».  and  lat^r,  the  title  ia
often  applied  in  ini<enption»<  l*t  protrvtorr*  A«gu»ii
and  to  many  ofHeialK  of  efjiieptriiin  nkwV.,  v»  prat-
/ffti  Ityionitm.  prar/fcU  rfAirn/"mm.  ini/teratori  a
wmHiu.  In  thene  caaea  it  ajipeunt  to  (leimt«  Tlii>
nmk  ma  wetll  aa  the  oalary  of  tliu  uflleial,  and  if^
I  nsed  without  the  addition  of  another  title


Th.  Momni«>n  in  Kpht-m.  /./nV/rajtAuu,  r.  121-137).
Tim  office  of  a  ilncenarius  In  iluiVHtiria  or  ducena.

Ducetiiu  [^ivKtTiosU  A  Kieilian  chief  who  uar-
ried  on  a  war  with  the  Greek  a  uf  that  island  in  tlin
middla  of  tlm  lifth  coiilnry  B.C.  I>?ffal«d  hy  lUu
Symunanna,  he  aurreiidureil  and  was  exiled  to  Cor-
inth. Hnhaeqneiitly  returning  to  .Sicily,  he  fonud-
wl  there  thecity  of  Calact^,  and  died  bx.  <l4i)(UJod.
xi.and  xii.).

Diiella. Qre  Uncia.

DuenoB  laacriptlon.  The  name  commonly
given  tn  a  very  inte.n*Mttnf{  in»crip(ion  founil  at
Kiinin  near  llii:  Qiiirinal  in  IH80.  It  in  iuHcrihcd
n|Hin  three  nmall  earthen  pntK  eonue<ited  together,
and  in  written  from  riglit  lu  left.  It  rvads  ua  ful-
IoWh:  IoVKI  hAT  l>KlV()t*  QOI  MED  MITaT  NEl  TED
KSl»i  C<)h:H1S  VtltCO  MKU  A»rKI>  NUlHi  OPE  TOITK-
HIAI I'ACAKl vols. ItVKNfM  MKI>  fKI/ltli  V.Ti  MANUM

EiNOM  nxENots'K  MKD  MAAit  8TATOD.  Tliia,  ren-
dered into  eliuwtieal  fonms  ia  prohubly  ttt  bo  reail
tlina:  Jovi,  SatHrno  divii  i/ui  (^ni  i/uix)  mr  millet,
nf  It  rndi*  (  =  in  te)  romin  virga  ail  a»l  nini  Ojti  7'w(e-
aiae  parari  rin.  Durnua  tnr /rcil  in  .Vannm  :  rnim
drr  uttHt  iKC  Mano  ataln — i-  e.  "  If  any  one  hringw  me
to  tlie  gods  lupiter  and  Balurn,  let  not  any  maiden
Ih<  kiinl  to  tbt>r,  unleaa  ihoti  aholt  ofier  a  aaoriAco
to  Opn  Tiite«i».  DiiciuiB  made  me  for  an  offering
lo  tbn  Duad  (MuuuH);  therefore,  on  the  uintlt  day,
act  mo  for  tbe  uffering  to  the  Dead."

Important  peeuliaritieaofthisinacriptioo,  which
HOcuiH  tl)  be  at  least  as  early  as  B.C.  300,  are  the  use
of  ij  before  o,  the  ei  for  f,  and  the  dr  nsed  to  r«p-
rewent  the  sound  of  rf)f=j.  See  Pre4«i**I,  in  the  Au-
naH  d*ll'  IniflitHlo,yu.  I&H;  RHcljfller,  in  the  lihrin.
MHiifum,  xxxvi.  arjf*  foil.;  Schneider,  Ihnifi'UirHtu
lU{l'\rnrHni  ErirMjila,  i.  19  (I^ipzig,  IHHilil;  Jimlnti  iti
//^rwfj',  xvi,  ijyS-GO;  Corteiae, /.aO'wi  A>riJi«ni*  l'fiH~
gfiarin  Kirmpta  (Turin,  1893);  and  for  a  fiie-Himile,
the  article  Ki*iGKAl'iiY  in  thitt  Dictionary.  Kotea
on  the  1^'xc  are  given  hy  Schtioider  in  the  work
cited  alMtve.

DuiUa  Lex. 8ee  Lkx.

Dulllan  Colninn. Sec  Cou^mna  Rostrata.

DuiliuB  NepoB,  GAira.  A  Koman  rorn«nl,  the
firftt  who  obtained  a  victory  over  tbe  naval  power
uf  Carlhagr,  B.C.  'iGO.  After  bis  colleague,  Cu.
Corn.  Scipio.  had  been  taken  at  aea  by  tbe  Car-
thaginlaiia  in  the  First  I'nnic  War.  DniliiiK  pnt-
ceedcd,  with  a  newly  Iniilt  Koman  fleet,  to  SiKiIy,
ID  qneat  of  tbe  enemy,  whom  be  met  near  tb«  Li-
pari  I^lnndx;  and,  br  meanx  of  grappling-irunH,  ho
connected  the  sIiIeih  of  tbe  rartbaginiaiiH  with  his
own  that  the  i-otiti-Nt  bixame  a  mirt  of  bind-fighl.
My  thin  iitnixpecteii  nutnn-nvre  be  took  eighty  and
deintroyed  tliirt4iMi  of  tbe  Carthaginian  tieet  and
obtained  a  naval  trinmph,  the  tirat  over  enjoyed
at  Rome.  There  were  some  niedaU  stnirk  iu
coinnieiLiorarion  of  this  victory,  and  a  column
was  erected  on  the  ocieasion.  Tbii*  colnmn  ^called
Cidamna  Eoatrnta,  b^'caufie  adorned  with  beaks  of
ships)  was,  OS  Livy  informs  (is,  strinrk  down  hy
ligbtiiing  dnring  the  interval  l)elweeti  the  wcond
and  third  Pimic  wars- See  Comm.va  Rostiiata.

Dulcia.  {.'oiifectionery,  sweetuieats,  "  candy."
A  genenil  nami;  ajtplied  to  nwecta  made  with  botieyi
tu*  dintiiignisbed  from  paatry,  or  sweet  disbea  made
with  meal,  fruit,  milk. etc.  See  Latuprid  Etagab.
•/7  anil  :i'v* ;  and  the  articles  Diaktktica  ;  PiaToa.

DuIcUrli See  Pistuk.


DL'UilUINI  MB

DttlgfbmL  A  iwoplo  iu  Orronny,  ilwelling  on
tbc  right  Imtikof  till*  Weseril'tul.  ii.  11, 17).

Dullchiam  (^ovXi'xtor)- See  Ecuinaues.

Duiiui6rix.  A  chieftain  of  Mic  Ae<liii.  ami  broth-
er of  DtvitificiiH.  Hi}  wiH  aD  cuctny  tif  lliu  KoinitU!),
and  v»9  [>iit  to  denth  by  Csmm'ii  order,  B.C.  M
(t'lUM.  It.  a.  i.  :i).

Dungeon. Sec  Cakckr.

Duaium. Hi'v  DtiitonuOES.

Duod€cim  Bcripta  (kv^m,  Utayfiaftfuvfior :  io  late
Otvok  To^Xa).  A  uHiuo  of  riiixiMl  cliaiit-e  nud  skill,
wlikL  uiudt  Lave  been  enlistanti.'tlly  the  same  m
our  backgaimnoQ.  The  follnwinR  point*  of  iden-
tity may  bo  recanted  us  rstahlisliiMl ;  The  game
wa»i  ]ilay«?d  on  a  hourd  of  twplvti  dniiblr!  lines  with
(IfU'OM  white  »iid  Itfte^ii  hUck  men;  tlin  thrnw)>
were  coimr^il  an  we  count  rhc.in;  *'  lilnin"  (^fi;yfc)
might  Im)  captured ;  the  piccuti  { wliethcr  they
started  fn>m  home  or  not}  had  to  bo  broaght
home ;  and  tLie  winner  vraa  ho  who  llrst  ck-ared
off*  WiH  men.  On  the  other  h.iud,  tbcre  were  tbrco
dice  instead  nf  two  (ate  Teiwera},  and  iC  ia  im-
pnwtiblu  to  aay  n'bere  ttiu  men  started  or  bow
blots  taken  up  re>eut«red.  In  the  initial  position
the  pieces  may  have  stood  in  three  rows  of  five  or
6vo  rows  of  three,  and  either  iji  the  player'**  own
table  Willi  a.  view  U>  the  dntihle  Journey  or  iti  tbe
opponent's  table  with  a  view  to  the  jtinntey  home.
With  the  three  dice  the  picoes  wciuhl  soon  be  scat-
tered, and  thus  a  lens  artitlcinl  nrrungemcut  than
our  own  nuiy  l>c  thou};lit  pnibiible.  The  phrase
oiruTBitiiTi  odor  in  .A.gachia9  may  hcmu  to  favour  the
notion  that  they  were  played  oat  and  home.  The
boanl  was  aiia$  (!»•«•  ABACt^"*),  more  generally  ta-
hMJOf  or  from  its  rained  riiu  alreun,  alvrolmi ;  llie
men  i^ijtfiot,  ttihuti ;  thu  Hittnvtion  at  any  point  of
the  game,  6iirtt ;  to  move,  ntfrVai,  rfflrr  .■  to  retract
a  move,  ayauSivm,  rfWiovrr.  In  a  fragment  of  Cic-
ero (tip.  Xon.  p.  170,  s.  V.  Jirripta)  we  find:  Jtaque
tihi  concnio,  qHoit  in  rfiiwrfmrn  mcripUs  tolemuH,  «t
calculum  mfmiw,  »i  tr  rWiVm'ks  lUtti  pontUet.  This
privilei^e  is  more  likely  to  bare  been  of  the  uat-
uro  of  odds  gnmted  by  a  superior  player  than  a
regular  rule  of  the  game.

The  classical  Greek  writers  mostly  use  kv|3oi,  n;-
dfC'itv,  of  games  into  which  skill  entered  aa  well
as  of  mere  dicing.  That  kv^<io  was  a  game  of
skill  as  well  aa  ubunc«  is  clear  frooi  Plato  {Hep,  x.
604  C,  I'kucdr.  274  U)  and  from  a  story  tuld  by
Plutarch  (Jrfar.  17);  cf.  Ter.  Aatl/ih.  iv.  7,  21.
Ovid  allndBs  to  the  Dnmlecim  Scripta  {J.  A.  iii.
^V-364}  among  games  wbicli  lovers  are  to  play  to-
gether; others  aiij  latrnncuU  ('S57-'3i^,  ^l-'Jl&i},
and  **go-baug  ''(itt>&-3Gti).  Martial  includes  among
bis  miHlcHt  wants  tabulamijMe  calcutottqae  (ii.  48).
The  celebrates!  juriaconsalt  P.  Mucins  Bcaevola  was


Boftnl  fof  Dnodecltn
Scrlpte. (Rkb)


DUO  Vlk[

discussed  by  many  scholnrs.  but  until  lately  was
never  rendered  intellijjible.  The  problem  baa  been
solved  iudependeutly  by  M,  Hecq  dn  Fi>uqui^m,iu
UiaJfHxdeM  JaWesx,  und  Dr.  H.  Jackaun,  in  the  Eng-
lish Jottrnal  of  Pkitoloyif  ;  on  tW  few  points  when
theydittered,  Dr.  Jai'kson  bus  since  given  iu  hisad-
liurem^e  tii  M.  IWci|  de  Foiiqui^rvH'B  couuluaious.

Mont  than  a  lnindn;d  ancit--nt  boards,  wrving  for
six  diffcront  gainer,  had  ticen  fouuil  in  Kome  akme
dowu to 1?^ (Marquardl,  Pri-
niH.  i^SH) ;  but  only  a  siugle  ex-
aniple shows the twelve Hoes.
This  is  of  uMU-ble,  bears  a  Cbrrs-
tiaii  itiscription,  aod  is  of  very
rude  workmaQsliip  and  iltiteralQ
si>eUiug. It  has  l>eeu  eogravpil
by  CJnil^T  (.Voii. i'hr.  p. b»I  <,
B«K-q  de  Fonqui^re-H  (p.  ;1&I).  anil
in  a  simplilied  form, omitting  tbe
inscription,  by  Kicli. This  is  to
all  intents  and  pnrpoaea  a  back-
gammon board, exhibiting' Ibn
four  litilf  tables  of  six  lineft  each.
Meution  is  matte  of  boards  and  men  of  costly  ma-
terials or  of  peculiar  uonstmction. Iu  Petroulu
(33)  Trimaleliio  idays  on a  luMinl of  ter«-btutb-
wood,  with  dice  of  cr>'stal,  aud  with  gold  and  sil-
ver denarii  for  Mack  and  white  men. Pliny  (ff.X
xxxvii.  f  t3j  has  an  absunlly  rhetorical  aecoiiot  uf
ihu  spleiHlonm  of  an  a/reH«  ItiMorim^,  in  gold  swl
jewels,  borne  in  Pora[»ey*s  third  triumph,  B.C.  61;
in the  centre  of  it  wns  a  golden  mw»u  of  ihirt}'
pounds'  weight'. The  emperor  Claudius  bad  h»
carriage  ticte<l  with  a  board  which  could  not  op-
set,  in  urder  to  play  wbeu  travelling  (.Suet.  CI01U.
33). The  lahuta  tHtoria  described  by  Martial  (xir.
17)  was  also  specially  ndnptcd  for  two  rtifferpdl
games,  probably  on  opiwsite  sides. The  ftnrt  lis*
refers  to  the  Dnodecim  Scripta;  the  *»Tonil,  moif-
elled  on  acoiiplelof Ovid(7VMt.ii.47T-l7?0,t»'l)'i
game  of  draughts  itnlritnculf),  in  which  the  iilnjff
left  with  but  one  man  i<i  bound  to  lose  to  Inn  vp-
pouent who bus  two. See Becq  de Fouqnt^TM^
Jrux  da  A  Meien»,  Ud  nt  (1973).  pp.  357-383 ;  H.  Jwk-
son,  in  ^oura.  0/  VKHot.  rii.  2:]C-!243; ManinHrdl.
I'ritatl.  834-y3H;  anil  Falkeucr,  Caste*  Anatnt  nU
OrUntat  (I'dOi).

Duodjiciin  Tabulaium  Lex.  See  DecBVrui:
TWKI.VK  Tabuj*.

Duo  VirL  "  The  two  meu  " ;  a  uanw  applied  )<>
various  niagiHtTatc<s  and  couimiaKioners  at  Itoaw
and  in  the  cotmiiae  and  muwicipii.  Tbe  form<Jir«a-
fir,  "one  of  tbe  two  men,"  in  naeil  in  the  srnitnliT
<Llv.  ii.  43,!),  etc.);  it  is  doubtful  whrlherrfsPHnn
should  ever  bo  used  in  the  plural. Some  e<Ut«n


print  it  so,  but  in  the  MSS,  aud  iDscriplioii*  «t
famed  for  his  skill  at  Duodecim  Scriptn(Clo.<l«  Or.  \  generally  find  only  iiriri;  in  C.  I.  LA.  liatiwrlisw


I.  &U,  $  217).  Quiutiliau  ( li.  3)  further  tells  the
■tor>'  that  Scaevolu,  after  losing  a  game,  accurately
recalled  all  tbu  throws  and  the  way  that  each  bad
Iteen  playt'd  ;  pointing  out  tbe  move  where  he  had
made  a  mistake,  nuiL  verifying  his  owu  recollec-
tions by  tboae  of  bis  oppouent.  This  is  cited  aa
an  example  of  memory  and  logical  sequence  (orrfc).
None  of  the  above  passages  shed  much  light  on
the  details  of  the  game.  Onr  knowledge  of  them
l«  mostly  gained  from  mn  epigram  of  Agathias
{Auth.  I'al.  ix.  483;  aUo  in  Bninvk,  Janl.  iii.  GO)
on  a  case  nf  nperial  ill-luck  which  befell  the  em-
peror Zeuo  (A.O.  474-491). This  epigraui  baa  lieoo


Huo  riri,  and  also  duo  rtrfrf.  C.  /.  U  vi.3732i;  liirt
there  seems  to  be  no  epigrapbic  authority  («
duttmtiri.  That  Cicero  knew  only  im  rfri,  q<4
rriMmWri,  is  shown  by  Kp.  Fam.  viii.  13.  3.  TiM
most  important  of  thcae  "oommisaioos  of  tut*
wore  the  following:

il)  Pfo  viKi  IvHi  DicCKDO,  the  bigfaeet  niap»-
trates  in  th*-  municipal  towns.

(3)  Dro  viiu  SackOki'M,  to  whocn  was  at  ftm
intnisteil  tbe  charge  of  the  SibylHoe  BocAs(4>v-)
(ef.  Liv,  iii.  10, 7).  The  comraiseion  waaaftervank
made  to  consist  of  ten  tLiv.  vi.  37, 13;  4!^3),  aad
subsequently,  probably  by  Sulta,  of  flftMU.


DUPLARII


5<8


DYSPONnrsi


(Ut  Duo  \1iu  SA\AL¥Ji,  all  extraordinary  cciii-
L  mieaiuu  spjiuiuted  fur  tlie  {)iir[Hise  of  t'Qiiiitpiii^  ur
[  repairing  a  floet  iMuiiiniHriii, /jf»M..Vf«jaijir.  ii.  &(»).

<4| DL'O  VIKI AEDI DEDICANDAR,  elecli^d by  the

j  |HHi|ilu  for tb(! purpiine  uf  iWdicjitiii^  m.  temple.

[  Tli«  dut.v  woA  always  {lerritriufU  liy  uiki  nf  the  tiro

>  uuly,  Olid  tbd  electiuii  of  a  Mccund  wuniH  to  have

beeu  due  aulcly  to  tlie  dciiirc  uf  tbo  Kunmiis  U>  liavp

tTru  culteuf^uea in  each tuit|{iRtnu;y (  Liv.  viU  2^,

■  xxii.  ^,  XXXV.  41  ). Thtf  duo  viri  aedi tM'atultte.

vlio  Kuve  out  th»  contract  for  tlie  ercctlou  of  it

trmple,  were  not  iieofHsiinly  th<^  ftniuo  lu  tbose  wbo

|^d«dicat«i  it  (<?(.  I.iv.  xxii.:a  witb  sxiii.  Vl,7t,al-

ibiMiffh  Ibt'y  frcqiii'titly  wen-.

(5) liVtl VIKI Vlltt KXTRA I'UHKM nilUANDIK

'  wen)  afficvrx  under  tbt<  lUMlilvN,  fir^t  iiientioiioil  in

1  ilie  Lex  lulis  MiintcipHliN,  and  piiNsJIily  tbcri'fnrti

inetitutud by Cnowir. Tlicy witt aholisbrd liy

L-AugilBtuA  nlifu [be  vnratortt  tiarum  wnw  tiiKti-

tut«d<Dio.Hv. -JC).

(Gf  UL'O  VUU PElU>LeiXIUMS. (Sot: Hkhdcex-

(7)  Ptjo  vim  (3L'iN<tt'i:NNALE&,  lite  ceiiNura  iii
I  the  iniiuicipiit.

Duplarii  or  Duplicaril. SnVlicnt  \rho  rttci-ivcd,

on  acc^iuiit  of  Mioir  Kood <'oi]iliM-t,  diiiiMo  allow-

ftuce  (dmpiiria  dbaria},  mui  jHThaiw  in  mtniv  rnm.^

double  pay  likewise  (V«rr.  L.  L.  v.  0«1 ;  LJv.  ii.  50,

I  xxiv.  47  i  Oielli.  lannipt.  X<».  3r»3rj). Tim  fomm  an-

I'^uplicariim  (Or.  353:1),  dupIic««iWH«  (i1i.3ri34),  (/MjWfiri*

|'<Ve>5et.  il.  7),  itHplariun  (f  >r.  CiKJl).

Dnpondfns  or  Dupondiom.  A  coin  of  two
'  AsM!«,  fitriirk  uflrr  lIic  nMlnction  of  Lbe  n-ei|;l)t  of
I  tb«  QJ.  (Hvr  As.)  It  WHfi  in  iimp  ntidi-r  tlm  Kiiipiiv,
[  vben  it  XT  an  tin-  ut-i^^ht  of  balfmi  ninirr  (Mnnjiiiirrlt,
jiUKM.  Staatntnt.  ii.  pp.  H,  II).  Aa  tliu  RoirtiuiH  up-
llilled  tbe  uncial  division  of  tbfl  om  to  tb«  fixd,  Jh-

rtrnritHm also signified two  feet (Cotiiui.  ill.  15,
2).

Dura  (ra  ^vpa).  (Vi  A  town  in  Mt'MijMitinnia
I  on  ibo  EupIiruU'Jt,  foundtnl  by  tliu  MtK-cdoniiitirt.
I  It  wii-t  alMO  Atyl<Ml  NiCAN'Ortlii  and  Ki'KupL'.^  lAui-
t  nuaii,  Mun*.  xxiii.  &].  (i)  A  fortitiod  pliiuu  in  Aa-
f  iyri«  uii  tlio  TlsrlB  (PolyU  v.  SS).  Il  U  «tiU  culled
'iWr.

Daranius.  A  river  in  Aquitnniit,  near  tUts  I>or-
ilafriitt  ( Aiiutn.  J/oi»'/fd,4IU).  It  i-nlerfl  thi;  (tiironi-
im  (tjnnniiie)  on  tbn  rixbl  I'Htik  ni^nr  IVirduaiix.

Dtuia  i^ovpiat).  The  iinnie  of  two  Hninll  rivorn
in  Italy,  o<iiv  tli«  Doru  Itnliiu  muX  rim  Don*  Ripa-
Ha,  both  riftiiit;  iu  tlia  A\\tn  and  implying  into  tbe

I  Fwlim  (Po)  (Plio.  H.  .V.  iii.  16).

I>nrlB  (Sovpit).  A  ftnniian  writer  of  bintOTy  who
flniin!^b<*il  aliont  lt.C- :if>4).  He  mmh  a  dcHOfiulaiit
of  AlribiadeN,and  at  one  titof  nun  lynint  of  Sadiok.

'  Only  fnif^niBulA  now  rnniuin  of  htH  hinU>rica]  wiit-
iofpi,  which  wore  a«  fullown:  (I)  A  liintitry  of  Gr^'i'r'c
(\l  T^»  'KAAn^otw*  'ItTTopla),  from  B.r.  370  to  nx.
2^1 ;  (?)  Ilr^i Aya&oKkia Itrroptai  ;  (3)  Zo/uWa^oi ;

'  (4)  lltpi  'Ei'^HviOnv  Kai  Xot^oicXi'nvr; (5)  Ilfpi  No/toiv;

'  (ft)  n#pi  'Aytiipuif,  (7)  n«(ii  Zityypaifiiae ',  (H)  lUfi'i  Tn-
pttn^K^t;  [0|  MpbKti.  'DiH  frnjfnientfl  were  collected
by  Halleniau  <Utrecbt,  1H41).


Doriiu  (ilaiptoT).  Tbe  nHxIern  Donro;  one  of
tli«  ebiof  iiv«ni  of  Hpaiii,  near Nuuiautiu,  and

(lowing  into  tho  Atlantic.

Z>urobrlTae.  (1)  A  town  nf  theCantii  in  Uritnin,
now  Hocbcater.  (2)  A  British  town  iiortb  of  ihc
TbanR-4,  by  MOin«  ideutitled  with  GoilmaJichtM-
t«r.

DnrooaaaeB  (<-n1lcd  also  Dkocae  and  Fani^m
|)Ki!uLM).  A  city  of  tbe  EhumviceB,  in  Oultin
I.iigihineiiaiH,  Honthwest  of  Littvtin  (Pari?).  In  itit
viriiiity  was  the  principal  rt-xfdi-nif!  «f  tlie  DruldN
ill  fJanI  (Caes,  Ii.  G.  vi.  13).  Tbe  itjnileni  iiiuno  iM
Drt'ux.

Durocortonun.  Tbe  mmlem  Rbf'iuiei;  the  cap-
ital of  iiliii  Ri-iiil  rn  Gallia  Bi-I^ica,  subitetinuiitly
called  Keiiil  i(!hch.  ft.  <i.  vi.  A-\).

Duronia.  A  town  in  Banniiiim,  in  Italy,  west
of  Ibe  L'aridint;  piiNHUH  (l<iv.  x.  ?£)).

Dorotrlgeo.  A  \)(n*\>\ti  iu  Rritaln,  Iu  Doraet-
ahire  and  tbu  wcitt  uf  SoiuerMlabirt<;  their  chief
town  waa  Duniuui  lDurcbeiit«r).

DoroTeraum  or  Danremum.  Tbe  modern  C'an-
t^Tbnry;  a  town  of  llie  Canlii  in  Hritaiii,  aftcr-
warilH  <-)tIled  Ciiiilitiiria.

Duamvli. Si*  Dvt}  ViHi.

DtlX. >5fe  PlOVINCIA.

Drard&nea  or  OedSnea  {OiKivi)s\.  A  gn>at  river
of  India  ((j.  L'nit.  viii.^),  possibly  to  bo  UlentlScil
witb  tbe  Bruhmaputru,

Dymaa  {.^iJ^ac).  Fatbfr  of  Hecuba  (//(o4,  xvL
71H),  who  is  lieiice  railed  Tiyniantis.

Dyiu^  (^iJpr))  or  Dymae  (^t)>iui).  A  town  in  the
vveHt  of  Achaiu,  near  tbe  coa«t ;  tiu«  uf  ibe  twelve
Acliitenii  triwns  (llenKl.  i,  14A].

Djraa  (At'pat:)^  A  river  of  TIieaMly,  twenty
stadia  lieyoml  the  Spercbius,  wild  to  have  spning
from  tbe  ground  in  <»rder  to  nmist  lleraclua  wIhiii
bunting  on  Oeta  <Mero<l.  vli.  1119).

Dyrrhachiuin  {^xjpftnxinvX  The  mixlem  Dnrnz-
ao,fornii'r!y  ijill<-d  Kl'ITiAMNI.'Sl'Kjri'flo^i'Of);  a  town
in  (iret^k  \\\\  lia,  on  a  pi:iiiiiNulu  in  Ibe  Adriatic  Aea.
It  was  fonnded  Uy  the  Corcyivana  anil  received  the
iiaini>of  RpidaniiHiK:  hiitHUtcc  tbe  Uoiiiiiiia  re^ard-
t^\  tliJM  nanir>  as  one  of  bad  ometi,  reiiiiniliiif;  tbem
of  (f<j»triatN,tboy  changed  it  into  Dyrrbachiinn.  It
wiui  the  usual  place  of  landing  for  piTHons  who
croMu>d  over  from  IlniiidiHinni,  and  was  to  that
town  what  Calais  i«  to  Dover.  Mere  coninKnieitd
tlie  great  Via  Egiialia.  The  place  wuh  one  of  inneh
coutiiiereo.Bo  tbatCatnlliiH  (xxxvl.  15)  calls  it  laht-r-
iin  HndrUtt,  "tbe  shop  of  the  Adrtalle.'^  During
tile  Civil  Wars  it  wqh  tU«  lieadi|narlersof  Poni|Miy,
who  kept  bis  military  stores  here.  Iu  a.u.  345  it
was  dvHlroye<L  by  au  eurtbqiiake.

Dysonun  i^^vaatpov),  A  gold-producing  iDniiii-
tHiti  111  M.tcedoniA  liotween  Chalcidic6  and  Odo-
[iiaulie<^  (Kerod.  v.  17).

Dyapontium  {^vtrisuvriov).  A  town  of  Plnatis
in  Klin,  uf  great  ntitiqaity,  uortli  of  tbe  Alpbcns.
It  was  deoiruyetl  by  tbe  Sleuus  in  their  war  with
tbe  Pisutu*). Se4!  Paiisttu.  vi.  2S.


6tM


ECBATANA


B;  as  a  Rymbol.

In  GRKEK.— £-e=finKov/)iMC  6eoU  (C.  I.  G.  IM,

EE  =:  tix^»  iiToiqtrtv.

E  =  5,  TO  E  =  TO  nifiinov  (C.  /.  0. 8579).

H  ^fifiipat  iiifitpwy}.

I.v  Latin. — E^eius,  (b)orc8,  Mt,  vvocatos,  ei-

K-A-E:=v(|uea  alae  cinsflem.
K-M:=os  monttti.
K'M'V^egregiat"  ineraoriMO  vlr.
EOn-Q  ^oi  ossn  hisiic  qiilwtc&Dt.
E*R-P=e  ro  ptiblica.

E-S-C-R-C^e  ftonatUB  ooiMiilto  reSoivtidiiin  cn-
nrit.

E-S-KS'F-L^oi  nine  fratiile  »na  fncere  licelo.
£-T>K  =  ex  teMriimuiitii  ft*cit.
E'V-S^ex  vuio  HUiM^'pto.

Zlar-iinss. See  Inai'RIH.

«pnkoii  (if  by  Vcr);!!  ua  )>ro<l iLL-«<t  only  in  ludia,  but
by  IlorodotUM  nicntiutied  u»  uuc  of  ilit-  nrtidi^s  of
triiiiitit  i>nid  hy  tlie  Elliio|iliiD»  tu  tliu  kiiij;  nf  Ptr-
piu  (Vprg.  tlcorg.  ii  H7 ;  IlurtKl.  iii.  97).  Hy  tbo
Miicietil.'^  it  was  freqiieiitly  iuluid  witL  ivory  be-
cautHi  uf  tlio  cutitrsHt  of  tlie  colon  re.

Bblaua. A  )>1hcii  in Hil>«niiii  mentioned  by

I'lob-iiiy  uikI  iilinitilit^d  wltb  ttitiHilt*  of  Dirliliii.

Bboracum  iir  Bburacum  ('E^npaKor).  'r\t<i
iiiii«h*rii  York;  li  inwii  of  thr  Iti'igniitrs  in  Bht*
itiii,  wbich,  hiivitiy;  briMi  nuidr  .a  Koiiimii  Hliitinri  by
Agi'icoln,  Iwi'iimc  tlji>  cLief  Kumnit  KuttltMii'Ptit  in
tbfl  isliiiiil.  It  wiw  both  u  niuuk'ipiiiin  uiiU  a  c<il-
iniy,  an<1  was  tbo  rebidt-nso  of  tbo  lioiuau  oiuptrorfi
wliKii  tbt'y  visiti!*!  Brituin.  liorv  the  cniiverors
SojititiiiiiH  6(!iverris  and  Coiiotaiitiua  Chlurtm  Uiud,
Many  Rniuii.li  reiii.iiiis  Htill  exist  nt  York,  atld  In
itH  viciitity  nri^  {Kirtinris  <if  Ruiiinn  tvallK.  A  tiiitii-
bcr  of  iiii)Mir(niit  tiiNrriittiotiH  biive  al»a  been  foinirl
]ien>,  bcftidnr)  iirCirli-H  uf  t^liixs,  nieliil,  niul  HtonL*.
Tbo  iiaiue  Kbtvniciiin  in.  tbc  Latiuizctl  fonii  of  tbt^
Urjcisb  Caoi'-EvTHiio.  He-*  Eutru)).  viii.  It);  Jo-
Acripl.  Orell.  VJO;  Spart.  Sever.  19;  Aim-LVict.  Df
r,ifj>.UO;  and  Kninc,  York  (18W).

EbudxQ  nr  Hebudae.  Thv  niodcni  HobrldcM;
iMbiiMls  in  Uw"  WcsttTii  Ocean  nft'  Ltritaiii  (I'liiiy,
il.  y.iv.'.lO;  S*din.'2^I|.  Kivf  iirn  iiMuie«l  liy  I'lol-
vtuy,  two  bi-iriji;  ciillt^d  Hbiidat-,  am]  tlie  olbere  Ma-
JeUH,  Kpidiuiii,  anil  Kicina.

Bbm. Ivory. Hec  Klkpuab.

SbuTonea.  A  Oommn  iwople,  wbo  ornii]»cd  (ho
KbiiHt  :iii(l  Fwltle^t  in  OiilTia  Kfly^ca,  botwpcn  Ibo
KJiiuf  iin<l  llie  Mona  (Maiut). :^u  L'ac«.  It.  O.  ii.  4.

Eburovicea. Hwi  Aclkrci.

EbuBus.  Tb)>  nKHlcrii  Iviza;  tbe  larKent  of  Ibo
rilynniu'  InMilaL*.  off  tbe  vofil  ciijutt  of  8pain.

EcbatAna  tra  'KicSaraya;  fltib.  Jfturthai.  (1)
Tlie  ciipitjil  »!'  M^dia,  nitiialrd,  nrronlilii;  to  I)io-
doniH  (Ii.  1^1,  alioiit  twelve  AiiuUa  fr»ni  Mttiini
OroDtcfl.  Tbi)  gRttniiict  orthography  of  tbti  ironl
nppcjini  to  bo  Agbatfliia  ( 'AyHariwa),  a  form  eni*
ployod  by  Ctcbia^. Ecbaiaiia,  boiug  iu  a  liigb


aiaos  MK
igaidi^H


and  moniitalnoiiA  cmiiiitry,  vaa  a  fnronrit«  i
dt*n('u  of  the  IVntiaii  kin)^  ditriD^  «tiuiniiT,  nhn
tli»  lieut  nf  Sum  was  almoirt  infiiipportable.  Tbc
Parthian  kiiip^  aloo,  at  a  latvr  ]»uTind,  retired  !•■
it  in  tb»  8unim«r  to  avulil  tbo  excewive  but  nf
<.'t<>8iphon.  According  to  Herodnt-ns  |i98),  Eoba-
tana  wa«  built  n«ar  tbe  clou;  of  tbu  eJKlitb  criiltn^
B.C.  by  DuTiH-cH,  tbe  fonitdcr  nf  tb»  Mndtau  inm-
nrchy.  TIte  Rwitk  of  Jiiditb  ( i- 2  )  awiignii  tlw
bnitLliiiff  of  tbis  city,  or,  rather,  tbe  ereetiaB  of
111  citadel,  to  Arj'baxad,  in  tbe  twelfth  year  nf
the  ri'iKii  of  Xi'bnchndne7zar.  king  of  Awjri*.
Sonic  writfiM  make  Arpbaxad  the  snine  with  IM*-
CM,  while  othtrfK  identify  bim  with  Pbraort«s,  the
Bou  of  thf  latter,  who  might  have  repaired  the  ciij
or  cIm4>  mado  Minu^  additiotiA  to  it.

ItfnidiPtOH  furninhi'M  nn  with  no  bint  wbeoce  <i«
may  iiifr't-  tbi'  rt^'l:tUvu  pnttition  of  Rrbatana  nn  tbe
niup  iif  Media.  HiM  dtwcriplton  uf  thn  furtnuitf
citiidel,  however,  in  particular.  "Thy  M«Hlfa-"bc
remarks,  "in  oliediunc*!  lu  their  kintf^n  comiiuail.
built  thr>»o  spacious  and  niatu^ive  fortiricalmuituow
called  Ecbatana,  circle  niiliiii  circb-,  accunlitig  to
the  following  plan  :  eacli  inner  circle  overtopi  iti
unter  neiKhlmur  by  tbo  beifclit  of  tbe  bottleneBk
aloiw.  This  wna  efli-cted  partly  by  the  natarerf
tbti  grnnnd,  a  conit^l  bill,  and  partly  by  tbe  baiU-
iii^  itM'ir.  Tli»  number  of  tbe  ciroloB  vas  BavvB;
wilLiu  tbi>  innt^ruiost  were  bnill  tbe  palace  wai
the  treasury.  Tbo  cirrnmfiTHnce  of  tbe  on
wall  and  of  Chr!  t-ity  of  Athens  may  be  ngafdd
nearly  i'i[iial.  Tbe  battlements  of  the  firat
aro  wlnli-;  of  the  HCf-otul.  black;  of  the  thini,
scarlet;  of  LIhi  foiirtb,  a/iire. ;  of  the  Ht^h,  oranfn
All  these  art-  brilliantly  cobtnre<1  witb  dilfcn-nt
paints.  Jtiit  tliD  baltlemontA  of  the  sixth  eirrb
are  gilventd  over,  whil*?  tboM  of  tbe  serenlb  an
Kill.  Demces  cooatnicted  tbesc  wbIIii  arouitd  bii
p.ilafe  for  his  own  pemoual  aupBty ;  but  lie  nr-
«le.re<l  tbe  people  to  erect  their  bouMcti  in  a  cittU
aronnd  the  outer  wall"  (i,  96  foll.i.  The  Orifli-
talfl,  bnn-evpr,  accordiiis;  to  DiiMloros  Sicnlu.
claimed  a  far  nini-e  ancient  origin  for  Eriit-
tana.  Crrwias  not  only  dmcrilies  it  as  lb«ratdtal
of  the  firot  Mcdiiin  monarchy,  fiuinded  by  ArliaMft
bnt  aa  existing  prior  to  tbe  era  of  the  fumol  mA
fabulond  SemiranitH.  who  is  said  to  bnve  vtvitrd
Ecbntuua  in  the  conntc  of  bi-r  niyal  jonnifyo  Ami
to  have  bnilt  there  a  raa^ilii-cnt  |Mtlarr.  Sk*
alsn,  iritb  iromense  labour  and  ex|M'UM',  mtn^
diiccd  abiiiitlauce  of  exoelleut  trater  into  tbe  ril;
liy  [»r>rforating  the  ailjaceut  Moant  Oronte«.  m**
fijruiiii;r  a  tn))nel,fift.e«ii  feet  broad  and  furiy  Cm*
litt:h,  rliri>n^b  whirl)  she  oonveyed  a  htke-«ln!iBl
(Dind.  Sic.  ii.  I3j.  Tlie  palnce  Klotid  Im<1»w  iIm
citatli'I.  Its  tih'M  were  of  silver  and  ttfi  ('a('>t*l^
en  labia  tn  res.  and  wnlnt*c<itinpi  of  gold  awl  silrf.
TliU  metal  the  8«dencid»o  coined  Inio  moi»*y,
amoinilinK  lo  tbe  snm  of  4(MKi  ta1eitttt,or$4,rkl.0(KL

EdMituiia  was  taken  by  C>  ma  in  B.r  MS,  aad
remaiutMl  a  .splendid  rity  under  the  PenuKii  •«aT,
tbe  great  kinj-  K(M.Mnling  at  tbtM  ]dace  ilie  two  bet'
t<wt  moiithitof  theyear.  Tin-.  Ma<-edi)otan  CiiniiMl
did  not  prove  destructive  to  Ecbatana, u>t  it  ba^t"
I  liu  royal  palace  at  P«r«4timlis. Alesaudurdepwittfl


ECCLESIA


566


ECCLESIA


Id  Eobatauathe  treasures  tAkea  from  Persepolis  and
Pasai^ada,  aod  one  uf  the  lost  acts  of  bis  life  was  a
royal  visit  to  the  Median  capital.  Although  uot
eqaallj  favoured  by  the  Seleucidae,  it  still  retained
the  traces  of  its  former  grandeur;  aud  Polybius
has  left  on  record  a  descriptiou  of  its  state  auder
Antiocbns  the  Great,  which  shows  that  Ecbataua
wu  still  a  splendid  city,  tbongh  it  had  been  de-
spoiled of  niauy  of  itn  more  costly  decorations
(Fulyb.  X.  frag.  4).  When  the  Seleucidae  were
driven  from  Upper  Asia,  Ecbatana  became  the  fa-
vourite summer  residence  of  the  Arsacidae,  aud  at
tbe  close  of  the  first  century  it  still  continued  to
be  the  Parthian  capital  (Tac.  Ann.  xt.  31).  When
the  Persians,  under  tbe  house  of  Sassan,  a.d.  238,
recovered  the  dominion  of  Upper  Asia,  Ecbatana
continued  to  be  a  favourite  and  secure  place  of
residence.  The  natural  bulwarks  of  Mount  Za-
gros  were  never  forced  by  the  Roman  legions.
Consequently,  as  we  learn  front  Ammiaiius  Mar-
cellinus,  near  the  close  of  the  fourth  century  Ecba-
tana continued  to  be  a  strongly  fortified  city.  See
O.  Rawlinson's  Berodotua,  vol.  1.  p.  226  (1875);  aud
on  the  site,  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  in  tbe  Jtmmal  of
the  Royal  Geog.  Societi/  for  1841.

(2)  A  town  of  Syria,  in  Galilaea  Inferior,  at  the
foot  of  Monnt  Carmel.  Here  Cambyses  (q.  v.)  gave
himself  a  mortal  wound  as  he  was  mounting  his
horse,  and  thus  fulfilled  the  oracle  which  had
warned  him  to  beware  of  Ecbatana  (Herod,  iii.  64).

BcdeBla  (tKK\Tftrla).  The  assembly  of  the  peo-
ple, which  in  Greek  cities  had  the  power  of  final
decision  in  public  affairs.

(1)  At  Athkms  every  citizen  in  possession  of
foU  civic  rights  was  entitled  to  take  part  in  it
from  his  twentieth  year  npwards.  In  early  times
one  eoclesia  met  regularly  once  a  year  in  each  of
the  ten  prylpanies  of  the  Senate  (see  BouiJi);  in
later  times  four,  making  forty  annually.  Special
assemblies  might  also  be  called  on  occasion.  The
place  of  meeting  was  in  early  times  the  market-
place, in  later  times  a  special  locality,  called  the
Pnyx ;  but  generally  the  theatre,  after  a  perma-
nent theatre  had  been  erected.  To  summon  the
assembly  was  tbe  duty  of  the  Prytanes,  who  did
so  by  pablishing  the  notice  of  proceedings.  There
was  a  special  anthority,  a  board  of  six  Lexiarchi
(\j}^iapxoi)  with  thirty  assistants,  whose  business
it  was  to  keep  unauthorized  persons  ont  of  the  as-
sembly. The  members  on  their  appearance  were
each  presented  with  a  ticket,  on  exhibiting  which,
after  the  conclusion  of  the  meeting,  they  received
a  payment  of  an  obolua  (abont  three  cents),  in  later
times  of  three  obols.  After  a  solemn  prayer  and
sacrifice  the  president  (imirranjr)  communicated
to  the  meeting  the  subjects  of  discussion.  If  there
were  a  previous  resolution  of  the  Senate  for  dis-
cnssion,  he  put  the  question  whether  the  people
woald  adopt  it  or  proceed  to  discuss  it.  lu  the
debat«s  every  citizen  bod  the  right  of  addressing
the  meeting,  but  no  one  could  speak  more  than
once.  Before  doing  so  he  put  a  crown  of  myrtle
ou  bis  head.  The  president  (but  no  one  else)  had
tbe  right  of  interrupting  a  speaker.  If  his  behav-
itmr  were  nnseemly,  the  president  could  cat  short
his  harangne,  expel  him  from  the  rostrum  and  from
the  meeting,  and  inflict  upon  him  a  fine  not  ex-
tweding  500  drachmae  (|83).  Cases  of  graver  mis-
conduct had  to  be  referred  to  tbe  Senate  or  Assem-
bly for  ponisbment.  Any  citizen  conid  move  an
amendment  or  oonnter-proposal,  which  be  handed


in  writing  to  the  presiding  irpvravtta.  Tbe  presi-
dent had  to  decide  whether  it  shonld  be  put  to
vote.  This  conld  be  prevented,  not  only  by  tbe
mere  declaration  of  the  presideut  that  it  was  ille-
gal, bnt  by  any  one  present  who  bound  himself  ou
oath  to  prosecute  tbe  proposer  for  illegality.  The
speaker  might  also  retract  bis  proposaL  The
votes  were  taken  by  show  of  hands.  (See  Chiro
TONtA.)  The  voting  was  never  secret,  unless  the
question  affectetl  some  one's  personal  interest,  a»
in  the  case  of  ostracism.  In  such  cases  a  majority
of  at  leaat  6000  votes  was  necessary.  Tbe  resolu-
tion {y^t^uTfia)  was  announced  by  the  president^
and  a  record  of  it  taken,  which  was  deposited  in
the  archives,  and  often  publicly  exhibited  on  tables
of  stone  or  bronze.  After  the  conclnsion  of  busi-
ness, the  president,  through  bis  herald,  dismissed
the  people.  If  no  final  result  was  arrived  at,  or  if
the  business  was  interrupted  by  a  sign  fWim  heav-
en, such  as  a  storm  os  a  shower  of  rain,  the  meet-
ing was  adjourned.  Certain  classes  of  business
were  assigned  to  tbe  ordinary  assemblies.

The  functions  of  tbe  ecclesia  were :

fa)  To  take  part  in  legislation.  At  the  first
regular  assembly  in  the  year  the  presideut  asked
the  question  whether  the  people  thought  any  alter-
ation necessary  in  tbe  existing  laws.  If  the  an-
swer were  in  tbe  affirmative,  the  proposals  for
alteration  were  brought  forward,  and  in  tbe  third
regular  assembly  a  legislative  commission  was  ap-
pointed from  among  the  members  of  the  Heliaea
or  jury  for  the  current  year.  (See  Heuaea.)  The
members  of  this  commission  were  called  uoftoQirai.
Tbe  question  between  the  old  laws  and  the  new
proposals  was  then  decided  by  a  quasi -judicial
process  under  the  presidency  of  the  6*<riJu>$tTat,
the  proposers  of  the  new  law  appearing  as  prose-
cutors, and  advocates,  appointed  by  the  people,
coming  forward  to  defend  tbe  old  one.  If  the
verdict  were  in  favour  of  tbe  new  law,  the  latter
had  the  same  authority  as  a  resolutiou  of  the  ec-
clesia. The  whole  proceeding  was  called  "  voting
(imxtiporovta)  upon  the  laws."  In  the  decadence
of  the  democracy  the  custom  grew  up  of  bringing
legislative  proposals  before  the  people,  and  having
them  decided  at  any  time  that  pleased  tbe  pro-
poser.

(b)  Election  of  officials.  (See  Pbobol&.)  This
only  affected,  of  coarse,  the  officials  who  were
elected  by  show  of  hands,  as  the  strategi  and  min-
isters of  finance,  not  those  chosen  by  lot.  In  the
first  ecclesia  of  every  prytauy  the  archou  askeil
the  question  whether  tbe  existing  miuist«rs  were
to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  office  or  not,  aud  those
who  failed  to  commend  themselves  were  deposed.

(c)  Tbe  banishment  of  citizens  by  ostracism.
See  OsTRACiSMUs.

(d)  Judicial  functions  in  certain  exceptional
cases  only.  (See  Eisanoeua.)  Sometimes,  if  of-
fences came  to  its  knowledge,  tbe  people  would
appoint  a  special  commission  of  inquiry,  or  put
the  inquiry  into  the  bands  of  the  Areopagus  ur
the  Senate.  Offences  committed  against  officials
or  against  private  individuals  were  also  at  times
brought  before  the  assembly,  to  obtain  from  it  a
declaration  that  it  did,  or  did  not,  think  the  case
one  which  called  for  a  judicial  process.  Such  a
declaration,  though  not  binding  on  tbe  judge,  al-
ways carried  with  it  a  certain  influence.

I (e)  In  legal co-operation  with  the  Senate  tbe
1  ecclesia  had  the  final  decision  in  all  matters  affect-


EOCLESIAZLSAE

iiijif  ibo  sapretne  itituroHiH  of  tltu  .'^tat*'.  u  wxr,
|NiJu:c,ulliaiit-«H,  treaties,  lite  re)(ulutioii  of  the  &rtuy
and  uuvy,  tiiiaucc,  luaiiii,  trilniteft,  dntieH,  |troliibi-
lioii  of  L-xportMor  inijioru,  the  iiitrudiictiouof  iiew
rtjIifTjoiiM  ril4>H  mill  rK>M(iviil<t,  tlu>  an.inliiifc  of  liou-
otir»  and  ruwuntH,  iitul  thu  cKiufurring  of  tke  citi-
7.*Mislii|>.

{tf)  At  Sparta  all  the  8partLBta«,  or  citizens  iu
|Ht)MeMtit»ii  of  frill  civiu  ri);lilf>,  witn;  militlml  l-o  taki-
|iart  ill  tlMMl«lilH?r»lion8uf  tlio  AhmmiiUIv  fruin  llieir
tliirlintli  year  unuanU.  The  AMmMiihI,v  wait  tiim-
voktMl  utii:u  n  niniith  nt  tb»  fitll  iuumu  hy  tlit*  kiii^jK,
aiktl  hitcr  by  the  eithnra  as  w<>ll.  Aftor  n.c.  600  it
met  in  ii  MperinL  luiildiDg  in  lh«  lUArket-pLici'  ut
ii\tart»,  lite  Sv)ii»,  thn  metubers  standiug,  nut  »it>
linff,  un  in  thu  Athenian  ecc)<-ai».  It«  hnBiiifMS
waa  to  accept  or  reject  proixiflaU  turtle  by  the  yi-
povtria  ur  Senate,  I  See  OKltrsiA.  I  It  uiude  itA
will  known  by  nr<*l;irn;ttiiiii,  ur,  in  (bnibtriil  cases,
by  Hcpumtioiii  of  Ibi-  jjiiiiit'«  into  tlifltrenr  plact's.
The  ri|;hl  of  bringin*;  forwunl  pntptifuilH  and
6peukiiit{  ill  the  (lobntiwbeliiiigi-4  only  lit  I  he  king?,
the  nieuibenof  the  (ieriifii;i,  and  tlin  ephors  ;  in  nil
other  ca6ea  special  ennttunt  whh  ri:qnir4:ii.  Tin*
functimiM  of  the  Am^enibly  were  thf  <;It«;tton  of  the
ofllciiiltt  ami  »enatoiif  to  di^cide  fin  tbinbtfnl  laM-s)
on  llie  reKul  n^nccvA^ion,  on  war  ami  iteaci-,  tr>'uli(-.<t,
le|,'iMlHiioii,  iinil  ulher  matters  alVeL'tin^  the  Srat«.

EccleBiazfiaae  {  EKKX7(rinCninTnn.  "  Tlie  Women
in  4.'Oitnril."  A  comeity  of  AriKl*ipbaoii8  (iL-  v.),  tii
whicli  the  Atlieniaii  women  are  n^iiresteuted  m  get-
ting  into  the  KcrtcNiu  in  the  gniso  of  men  uu<l
altering  the  Coimtitntion.  This  play  ooutaiUH  the
longent  wor«l  in  tbe  (.Jreek  langnage,  au  extrftoixli-
Mai7  cnniponiml  of  169  lottem  and  77  syllabli's,
covering  »ix  venw^Ji  of  thw  play  (1169-UT-l).

Ecoleti  (tKK\r}r<ti).  Tho  name  of  an  u«uH.'inhly
in  Hpartn  of  wbU-h  little  is  known.  U  is  nieii-
(iuneil  only  by  Xenopliou  {Hrll.  ii.  4,  (  '.^  et  al.).

Bodlons  (cKdiKcp).  Tbe  nnme  of  on  offloor  In
ninny  of  the  towns  of  A^ia  Minor  mider  the  Koman
dominion.  The  wrtrd  i.<<  traiiNlated  in  the  ancient
glosaaries  by  mifnilQr,  "  agent  "  or  ''  attorney."  The
endicus  was  the  iigeiit  of  a  rity  in  ilm  foriMgn  buai-
iiPHH  and  [tsrelfttitnm  with  the  rentral  govern nieiit,
and  espeoially  in  proMet^iiting  Ittt  cUini^^  ugajimt'
«l«btorH.  Iu  Cicero's  time  tbe  office  aeeiua  to  have
benn  occaainnal  and  Honietbing  like  that  of  an  am-
basnndur.  Under  the  Kiupirc  it  wot*  pliiecd  on  a
permanent  footing  ( Plln.  £>.  x.  Ill ).  Tbe  De-
fensor Civitalis  (^I'V.)  of  the  later  Empire  waa
alw>  called  tm^Ktn  in  Greek,

Bkd&Bia  (rxdotrit). See  ("ENUS.

Ekecheitia  (tKrx*ipia).  The  "trace  of  Gtxl"
(literally,  "hitlding  of  hand»"),  obacrved  in  Greece
at  the  great  IVstiviils  which  were  vibit^nl  by  «trau-
ger« — ^e.  g.  tlie  national  ganieis  and  the  Klensiuia
in  Atticn.  This  peace  was  proclaimed  by  liemhlH
thnmglioui  (in'eee,  to  decure  tbe  visitors  to  the
gameK  freedom  in  puMing  bnckwanln  and  for-
wanlH  and  ttectirity  dtiiing  tlie  f«vtliv»l.  In  (he
eiMe  (if  Ibt'  KleiiHinia  the  truce  liiMted  one  and  a
half  nionib  and  ten  days.  8ee  Oell.  i.  25,  8  ;  and
Ibi'  aitk-lr  Elkl'sinia,

Bcbelldae  ('Ej^cXiAaO*  A  denie  of  Attira,  eaat
of  Miinychia,  named  after  a  heru  Echelns.

Bch^muB  i'K^fnot).  A  king  of  Arcadia,  who
slew,  in  Hinglt^  eombat.  Ilyllns,  the  Kon  of  |It'r»c1e»,
dnriog  tbe  Dorian  inrnsion  of  the  Petoponneens.


ECHO

A.i  a  rPKnIt  of  tbe  combat,  the  Hemelidao  (<|.  r.)
were  obliged  to  promiite  not  to  rt'jient  Ihfir  al-
teinpt  on  the  IVlo|Kmiinsiiii  for  fifty  yearn  (Horod.
is.  S«). Siw  HvLLfs.

Bchfttus  t'ExfTfif).  A  king  of  Rpirtifi  wbnw
danghter  MntojHS  or  AmphinAa  yiebleil  to  thi^  nulin-
itationn  of  her  lover  Aechmmlicin*.  Aa  a  piiniih>
tnent,  kkthetns  blinded  ber  and  cauaed  AecbniudiciM
to  be  ciistrnted  (Oi/^u.  xviti.^;  xx\.  308).

Echidna  ("Ej^idi^i ).  A  monster  and  roldtet  Lii
Greek  legembi,  i<nlf  maiden,  half  Mnaku,  tbedsngli-
ter  of  Cliry»ui4)r  ami  i^'allirrho^,  ur,  (u.-contiiif;  l«
anothi*r  at^rry,  of  TartiLrn«  and  (jaea.  IltT  li^jiae
wiM  the  conutry  of  tlte  Arinii  in  L'ilicia,  wtieivntie
brniight  forth  to  Typhoi^UH  a  unmlH^r  of  tnotiHten,
Cerbrrngjihe  Cliimaera,  Sphinx.  Sty  I  la,  the  •(cr|i«nl
of  Lerna,  Iho  Ncmean  liuii,  tbe  vnltnre  tluit  ili--
vonred  the  liver  of  Promelhcu*.  ete.  (S«  Tt-
ritoKi'S.)  Shu  wa.H  Harpriiteil  in  her  ftlt;ep  an^l
<laiii  by  Argiia.  See  Ileroil.  iv.  8-lM,  and  th«iifti-
cl'-  Akuus.

Eobinftdea  ('E;(mjA«c  riiaot).  A  gnnip  of  sDiall
i-ilandit  At  the  mouth  of  tbu  Acbeloiin  Wlon^itii:  w
.^carnunia,  auid  to  li.ivo  been  formed  by  the  klla-
Tiid  deposits  of  the  AcheloliK.  They  ap|i(>ar  tu
have  ilerived  thoir  name  from  tlii*ii-  rejM'iuMaiiri;
Ut  the  «''AiNMJf,  or  aea-nrchin.  The  largntit  ufllMts
iKlandu  n  an  innned  Diilichitini,  and  Wlonged  to  tl»
kingdom  of  (>dy!wcnH,  who  is  hence  oalied  Dull-
chilis. See  Herod,  ii.  10.

Echinus  If'j^ivnr).  The  be^lgchog  or  Bea^urthis,
and  hence  a  name  for  things  having  a  Bimilsr
HhaiK!.  (1)  A  |)or,  piteber,  or  salteellar  (Hnr.  jiii
t.  H,  117).  i'i)  Tbe  caeket,  probably  of  a  eyliii-
drical  nhapc,  in  which  documents  were  seaW  np
between  tbe  afOKfiiiTit  and  the  trial.  (X)  Id  Dotie
iircbitecttire,  (he  ovolo  or  convex  part  of  tllP  cap-
ital immediately  beneath  the  nbacns  [Vttriir.  It.
3  and  7).

Echinus  (*Ex<>vr>. A  town  fii  Tliesanly  m  tbe
Miiliac  Gulf,  said  U>  liave  derived  it«  naiM
Eehioii,  wlur  sprang  fruui  the  dmgou^s  teelb.
ErmoN.

Echiausaa. Soo  Cimolus.

Echion  ('Ex/mi-).  (D  One  of  the  boroe«  «i»
sprang  from  the  dragon'a  teeth  &own  by  CiiilRia».
{See  Si'ARTl.)  He  wa«  tlie  baaband  of  .\gav<S  am)  f»-
tber  of  Peutheua,  who  is  hence  cullul  Krinuniik-k
(2)  Son  of  Hermes  and  Antianira;  look  f»tt  m
the  CalydoiilMii  hunt  urnl  iu  tbe  ex(H!'4Ution  of  iba
Argonani*.  (3)  A  di»tingntBbe<I  Greek  painter  wb»
floiiiiHh«!d  aUont  B.C.  i'tli.  Onp*»f  bitt  pictMn«.re|>-
roaentiiig  8cn)ininn»  ]iUH.Hing  frtim  the  ittate  of  ■
bandniaid  to  that  of  a  ijinMin,  iti  »np|H>8ed  by  uttnr
to  bo  the  original  of  the  picture  ktiown  as  ll>*
Aldobrandiui  Marriage  discuvcre^l  at  Home  in  td06
and  now  iu  the  Vatican.  See  Woltmanu  and  WoctT'
mann,  ffitl.  of  Painting,  1.  p.  tlo  (ItJtiO).

Eohioniua.  An  epithet  applied  to  tlw  eitjT  of
Th«?Wf*  lis  founded  by  tbe  aid  of  Evliioa  (Oridi
.Urt.  iii.:ni).

Echo  ('M;y«>).  A  daughter  of  Al^r  sod  (hua
who  ehielly  resided  in  tbe  vicinity  of  tbe  Cephia-
itna.  She  wam  once  one  of  Here's  attendant*;  hot
having  offended  that  goddeas  by  her  dM-epti
flhe  waa  deprived,  in  a  great  mea«nre,li>  her  "f
power  of  Hpeeeh.  H*-Tf  declared  that  in  fill
fthe  ^bonld  b.iv-e  bitt  little  um;  of  ber  tonga*,
immediately  she  lost  all  power  of  doing  any


1  tbe

1


'ECHOICl  V£KStJS


fi67


EGULEUS


tban  to  lepeat  the  soaudB  wbieh  Bh«  beard.  Soho
bftppeniog  to  see  tbe  beantifal  youth  Nftroiune,
became  deeply  enamoDred  of  him.  Bat,  her  love
boiog  slighted,  she  pitied  away  till  uothing  re-
maiued  of  her  bat  her  voice  and  booea.  The  for-
mer still  exists,  the  latter  were  couverted  into
stooe  (Ovid,  Mtt.  iii.  341  foil.).

Boholci  Versus  also  called  Seix>entInL  A
name  given  to  verses  iu  which  the  first  words  of  the
hexameter  are  repeated  as  the  second  half  of  tbe
following  pentameter.  The  name  is  also  given  to
palindromes, in  which  the  line  reads  the  same  both
backwards  and  forwards.  These  trifles  were  com-
posed by  both  tbe  Greeks  and  the  Romans.  Mar-
tial speaks  slightingly  of  them  (carmen  tapinum,
ii.  86). The  following  will  serve  as  illnstrations :

(lUlbel,  Bpigr.  Or.  1134)

Ronu  tlU  lubllo  iDotlbaa  Ibtl  smor.

(Sidoa  EpiaL  iz.li.)
N«mo  te  cedli,  murorum  b1  decat  omen.

(  JnMoI.  LoL  335.)

Iu  the  following,  tbe  distich  read  backwards,  word
by  word,  gives  a  second  distich :

Praeclpltl  modo  quod  docnrrit  tnunlte  flntnen
Tempon  coDmiDpUlm  lun  clto  deBolat.

(8idoD.^j>ul  IX.  14}

These  verses  were  also  styled  atutlyfici  vertua  and
rtdproci  temtt.  Fnrther  examples  will  be  found
in  Apoll.  Sid.  {E^t,  viii.  11),  Venantius  Fortnna-
tus,  Sednlina,  and  among  the  PoeUie  LaHni  Minorea
(iv. 260-267).  See Friedlanderon  Martial ii.66;  and
for  other  metrical  whims,  the  articles  Abecrdarii
Vkrsus  ;  AcROsncHA ;  Cento  ;  Htunus  ;  Leoni-
Ni  Versus  ;  Sotadici  Yehsus.

BclectiCcl  (ckXfktikoO-  Aname  given  to  those  an-
cient stndents  of  philosophy  who,  from  the  existing
pbilosopbical  beliefs,  tried  to  select  (iicXrytiv)  tbe
doctrines  that  seemed  to  them  most  reasonable,
and  ont  of  these  constmcted  a  new  system.  (Cf. .
Diog.  LaCrt.  prooem.  31.)  The  name  was  first  gen-
erally nsed  in  the  first  oentnry  b.c.  Stoicism  and
Epicnreanism  had  made  tbe  search  for  pare  truth
Biibordinate  to  the  attainment  of  practical  virtue
and  happiness;  Skepticism  had  denied  that  pure
truth  was  possible  to  discover;  Eolecticism  sought
to  reach  by  selection  the  highest  possible  degree
of  probability,  in  the  despair  of  attaining  to  what
is  absolutely  true.  Id  Greek  philosophy,  the  best
known  Eclectics  were  the  Stoics  Panaetius  (B.C.
150)  aud  PusidoniuB  (B.C.  75);  the  New  Academic,
Carneadee  (B.C.  155),  aud  Philo  of  Larissa  (b.c.  75).
Among  the  Romans,  Cicero,  whose  cast  of  mind
made  him  always  doubtfbl  and  uncertain  of  his
own  attitude,  was  thoroughly  eclectic,  uniting  the
Peripatetic,  Stoic,  and  New  Academic  doctrines,
and  seeking  the  probable  {itlMd  probabile).  The
same  general  line  was  followed  by  Varro,  and  in  th«
next  century  tbe  Stoic  Seneca  propounded  a  philo*
aophioal  system  largely  based  upon  eolecticism.

In  the  latest  Greek  philosophy  appears  an  eoleo-
tio  system  consisting  of  a  compromise  between  tbe
Neo-Pythagoreans  and  the  varions  Platonic  sects.
Still  another  school  is  that  of  Philo  Indaeus  (q.  v.),
who  at  Alexandria,  iu  the  first  ofmtnry  A.D.,  inter-
Itreted  the  Old  Testament  allegorically,  and  endeav-
oured to  harmonize  it  with  selected  doctrines  of
Greek  philosophy.  Neo-Platonism  (q.  v.),  the  last
prodnct  of  Greek  specnlation,  was  also  a  fusion  of
Greek  philosophy  with  Oriental  religion. Its  chief


representatives  were  Plotinns(A.D. 230),  Porpbyrius
(A.D.  275),  lamblicbus  (a.d.  300),  and  Proclos  (a.d.
450).  Tbe  desire  of  this  school  was  to  attain  right
relations  between  God  and  man ;  it  was  tberefcNM
religious.

See  Ueberweg,  Hitt.  of  Philoti^hg,  vol.  i.  pp.  217-
221  (Eiig.  trans.  N.  Y.  1873) ;  Mayor,  A  Sketch  of  An-
cient Pkilotopky,  pp.  212  foil.  (Cambridge,  1681);
Ritter,  Uitt,  of  Jncient  Philoaopky,  vol.  iv.,  first  part
(Eog.  trauB.  Oxford,  1838-46);  Zeller,  Bitt.ofEcUc-
ftcMm  tK  Gk.  Pkilosophy  (Eug.  tr.  London,  1882);
Levin,  Let^urea  on  tht  Philotopky  of  Cicero  (London,
1871);  Hirtzel,  Untereuchungen  t.  Cioero'g  pkiloBt^H.
Si^r^flen  (1677-83);  aud  the  article  Philosophia.
Cicero'B  Aoademica  should  be  read,  as  also  bis  liu-
oHlanae  (bk.  iv.)  and  his  De  Natura  Deorum.

Eologne  {ecloga,  cxXoy^).  A  selected  piece  of
writing.  Properly  a  poem  taken  out  of  a  larger
collection,  and  so  applied,  at  tbe  time  of  tbe  Ro-
man Empire,  to  a  short  poem,  as  an  idyl  or  satire.
The  term  was  especially  applied  to  tbe  pastoral
poeniB  of  Vergil  aud Calpumins  SicuIub. See

BUCOUCA.

EkmartTxia  (eKftaprvpia).  Tbe  deposition  of  a
witness,  who,  by  reason  of  absence  abroad  or  ill-
ness, was  unable  to  atteud  iu  court.  His  state-
ment was  taken  down  in  writing,  iu  the  presence
of  persons  expressly  appointed  to  receive  it,  and
afterwards,  upon  their  swearing  to  its  identity,
was  read  as  evidence  in  tbe  cause.  They  were
said  naprvptiv  r^v  iKpapTvpiav :  the  absent  wit-
ness, tKfMiprvpftv :  tbe  party  who  procured  the  ev-
idence, tKfuxpTvpiav  irouitr$ai.  It  was  considered
as  the  testimony  of  the  deponent  himself,  not
that  of  tbe  certifying  witnesses,  and  therefore  did
not  come  within  tbe  description  of  hearsay  evi-
deuce,  which  (except  the  declaration  of  a  deceased
person)  was  not  admissible  at  Athens.  (See  Ako-
EN  Martyrbin.)  The  dejranent  (like  any  other
witness)  was  liable  to  an  action  for  false  testimo-
ny if  the  contents  of  tbe  deposition  were  untrue,
unless  he  could  show  that  it  was  incorrectly  tak-
en down  or  forged,  in  which  case  the  certifying
witnesses  would  be  liable.  An  tKftaprvpia  was  al-
lowed to  a  witness  about  to  start  on  a  Journey,  if
he  could  not  conveniently  watt  (leaens.  Or.  3  [Pyr-
rAiM],  $  20).  Tbe  form  of  tKpaprvpia,  or  what  pur-
ports to  be  such,  occurs  in  Demostb.  c.  Lacrit.  p.
929,  $  20 ;  934,  $  34.

Boplifira  {tKiftopa). See  Fun  us.

Eotenes  ("Ejenivts).  A  people  who,  according  to
PansaniaB,  first  inhabited  the  territory  of  Thebes,
iu  Boeotia.  Ogyges  (q.  v.)  is  said  to  have  been
their  first  king.  They  were  exterminated  by  a
plague,  and  succeeded  by  tiie  Hyantes.  See  Pan-
san.  ix.  5.

'Botfpam  (fxrvtrot),  properly  an  adjective,
"formed  in  a  mould"  {nnros, forma), ot  "wrought
in  high  relief,"  thus  distinguished  from  avdyXv^r,
"in  low  relief."  Heuce  (1)  the  noun  ectypuh,  a
caat  in  plaster  or  terra-cotta,  which  presents  the
objects  in  relief  (Plin.  H.N.  xxxv.  J  152).  The
accompanying  examples,  on  tbe  following  page,
are  from  a  terra-cotta  and  mould  iu  tbe  British
Museum.  (2)  Kctypa  gemma  (Sen.  J3m.  iii.  38)  or
scalptura  (Plin.  ff,  N.  xxxvii.  $  173),  au  engraved
stone  out  in  relief,  now  called  a  cameo.  See  Cae-
latura;  Gemma.

BoQlena^  or,  less  correctly,  Bquuleiua An  in-


tLSa
Keifpgtri. lUmtiili  MtiHutH.)

HtmnKtnt  of  tortnn^  coinmniily  iimhI  at  Rome  in

extrac'tiiit;  ovideucf  from  sluves. II  wiis  a  wooden

boriH-,  lu  tlio  immc  iinplios,  oti  n-lnrli  the  sufferer

WOH  niuuutod  ami  tbou  litretclte^l  or  rackixl  with

woighiM  or  v"'!e.V8  (.Sen.  Ep.  67.  ^  'M. Rich  IB.  v.)

tblukn  that  the  iitllictiuu  coii»>u4lt*il  in  Wing  itriihxl

on  A  sharj)  point,  tks  in  iTn{)Rlflni«nt — a  fomi  of

I'rueltj nut nukiiuwn in n^ceiit

tiine^,  of  which  be  jjiwn  a  npfci-

men. Vi<iry  1ittl»  in  rwiilly  ktiitvrn

uIkiiU  thiH  iinil rlit^  olhiir  enginr-ii

of  torturo  aniuni;  tliu  (ireekn  aud

Komaiis. Cic<irit  ttny^  that  blavea

ftcouHeil of  nninlvr might expect

the  fcaleQK  at  iho  trial,  tht;  cmjc  ou

conviction  {I'm  Hit.  21,  f  57  ;  22,  $

00). Scntca  nientions  a*  the  nsual

moUea  uf  u*nt\n,  Jtdiculat,  lalaria,

fcir/riif,  nnd  iffiti*  (/*■  /m,  lii.  19,  $

1). Rich  «ii|t]>o»PM  the  criminal  tn

have  bv<!n  ninde  to  nit  ii[>i>ii  u  xtiiirii

point  with  \v«ighlH  attiirhol  l»  hin

armsand  1r>{;M,  lut  Hhownin  thn  illun-

tration  h«iv  given,  n-Etn-Mt'iitiitm  an

luittruMient  of  torliirv  formerly  nited

atMirandula  in  Italy  aiid,cni'hins-

ly  enoogb,  called "thtt  colt"  {U  i\ivatrtto). Sw

Ckux;  Fii>iL-fLA;  Flauklllm;  Tohmkntum.

Edeasa  ("E^tvira).  (1)  Aim  called  Antlncliia
CallirrbiM-  (OI«l  Tent.  Ur),  a  very  ancient  city  in
the  nnrtli  iif  Mt-mi'putiunia,  tli«  ca|iital  of  OHroi^n^,
and  thn  M<at  <»f  ail  tt)tlf|>cnd«fit;  kirij^dom  fmm  B.C.
137  t»>  A.u.  aifi.  (8t*r  AwiARrs.)  Here  Carsralhi
w&M  niiirdmfl.A.n.lilT.  In  ChriMlian  times,  Edc»ta
JiuM  ciiltdtrateil  for  ita  sehiwda  of  theology.  {2)  A
city  of  MavedoiiiH,  once  the  capiilal  aud  the  burial-
plaee  of  the  kings  (Pint.  P^rrh.  2ft).

Edetani  or  Sedetflui.  A  people  in  niapania
Tarracoui-iifiis,  uawt  of  Ibts  CVitiheri  iLlv.  xxiv.  20).
They  iwiwftMiMMl  tlio  celetirntod  cItteK  of  C'aeHaran-
gntttn  (Sarugawth),  Sagutitnni  (Mitrviudro),  aittl  Va-
leolia  (Vulrncia).

Edfou  (Xidlu);  in  Egyptian,  Teb;  in  CoptiL-,
Ath6;  i;atled  also  APOLLlxon'rus  Magna.  A  town
of  Upper  K),'ypt  on  the  left  hnnli  of  the  Nile.  It
wan  founded  by  Ptolemy  IV.  (I'bilop&tor)  in  the
third  ceutnr>-  before  Chrifit,  and  is  fainon»  for  the
remains  of  two  temples,  the  larger  of  which  is  Ibe
beat  prener^'ed  of  any  iu  Egypt.  An  illitstration
of  It  Lit  given  on  page  '2t}.  Itn  length  in  451  feet,
BDd  tbe  hreaiKb  of  its  fagnde.  2.VJ  f**et.  It  is  eii-
tereil  by  a  ){»t4;way  fiO  feet  in  height  between  two


Sup(<iMic]  rorra

of  K.rilUus


EDICri'H  Til  KODORICI


immenM'  truncated  pylooA  115  feri  high.  ib«  trbult
sun'tice  Iteing  envenni  with  (wulplurfH  and  itiM-ri|i-
tions  in  Itas-relief.  See  Marielt**,  MonatafuU  a/
Vfiprr  Egypt  (  Ip(77  ) ;  Lepmnn,  iJenkmaIrr  bki
Atgypim  umri  Jeihioptn  (l8«»-60);  and  Bmj^li,
BrmtHTichte.

Ediotoiu.  Tbe  Roman  term  for  any  written
aunonnt-ement  made  by  a  magistrate  to  tbe  ]««-
pie.  An  n/JWirin  Vfas  Hometinie»  temporarj'  uuly—
M»,  e.  g.,  tbu  aunouucenit^ntH  of  tbe  public  itwun-
bliesorgnmen;  Hometime.s  it  eontiiinnl  |MTniiiii<>iit
euaclmenlA  —as,  for  iuslnnco,  the  vdicta  of  Llir  tru-
•ors  againHt  luxnry.  Tbe  name  was  OBt>frUlly
applied  to  tbe  proolnmations  itMne>il  bv  joilicitl
fnnctionari<^  on  aannming  oltice,  and  »tatiu<:  tlw
principles  nr  rnloH  which  tbey  iultindiNl  to  fidloir
la  the  exercise  of  tbt'ir  antltnrity.  Ttie  oOrla  of
the  «B<liles  relative  In  the  nmrkelM  belong  t<i  Ibit
claas.  One  kind  of  filirlum  was  specialty  impor-
tant in  its  Irearing  npon  Roman  law,  tlieMrrm
of  the  praetor.  In  bin  rrft'efMM  tbe  pnivtor  Unl
down  the  rules  nbioh  be  would  observe  in  xr-
ranging  the  pruoeetlings  of  tfat»  regular  rovria
and  of  bis  voluntary  Jnriwliction,  ami  in  ttctid-
ing  ca«es  which  did  not  appear  t«  l»c  corrrfd  ty
tbe  written  nnuctnietitti  of  the  Twelve  TaUIrs  "t
later  legiiilntiiin.  Tbtwn  tdicia,  written  un  wtMl,
at4nie,  or  hrmize,  were  iu  narly  times  ]>ablii)i'd
only  a»  weuMiou  reqiiiriH),  but  iu  later  tinin  ibv
praeturH  regularly  pruinulguted  tbem  on  entr-nni
upon  their  ollico.  Tbey  prevented  the  ftw^ttiu-
tion  uf  tbe  low,  and  ulhiweil  the  onactmeni*  of
the  Twelve  Tttblect  to  adapt  Ibemselvra  iu  ul-
urul  dcvetupuieut  to  tbe  cbunging  cin.'iiuivlAi'cn
of  civic  life  aud  intercourse.  It  is  true  tbst  lb»
edk'la  had  un  force  beyond  tbe  praetnrs  yrar  of
oflSce,  bnt,  as  every  new  praetor  observed  wbt
was  found  in  tbe  edutta  of  his  pret)ec«aa»n,  i
permanent  nucleus  of  constantly  repeated  rvktt
called  tiiictum  ptrpctuiim  ('^  continnous  edict"))  «*>*
fuvtued  in  course  of  time.  Thi.s  Iwcame,  f^r  lb*
later  periml.a  rccognizvtl  source  of  cni«tomar;l**<
side  by  si«le  with  ibn  legrt  pr«\»er.  At  IfH^^-
miller  Hatlriiiu,  tlie  maw  uf  cdk-ta  wot  rediiml  I"
t^Vhtein  by  SjilviuB  Inlianim,  and  receive*!  ib*^  fi«w
of  l;iw  at  the  imperial  command.  TIub  Ixxlj"^
law  incUidi^  the  accepted  edicta  of  tbe  pr^irtoff-
hauuti  and  the  other  praetors  otlmiuiaterinj;  U«  ■>
the  province*,  of  the  proconsuls,  propraeiuni,  w"l
it^diles.  It  was  culled  ttUdtiM  ptrpttium,  iui  yrtt-
tori  urn  f  or  i««  honorarinm — t\w  lall«:r  liecauw  i**
unthors  Iiiul  held  public  otHres  [^tiouatm).  Oti  tU"
collection  the  Corpun  Imrh  ofJuKliiiian  Is  In  p***
]>art  fouudeil.  Tbe  enip«.Tor  iiud  imperial  (HnriM
iiM  prarfn'tim  Hrhi  and  praf/rvtut  praetorio,  bj«l»*
Ihc  riglit  of  issuing  nlnrla. See  (.'OHFt^s  ICBIS.

Edictom  TheodoricL  The  firxt  eotleetiou  d
law  that  was  mmle  after  iIk-  downfall  of  tlw  B*"
man  power  in  Italy.  It  was  prftmnlgwteil  bj'  Vi*^'
OfVoric,  k  ing  of  the  Ostn'gotliB,  probaldy  oii  hi»  ^i'''
to  Rome  in  A.D. '>0().  thoiigb  Mime  nnthuritt^^
the  date  aft^r  fiOG.  It  consists  of  IM  cbapl^nil^
sides  a  prologue  and  epilogue),  parta  of  whifblMf
be  traced  to  tbe  Code  and  Novollae  of  Tben'lo*'"'
IL,  to  tbo  Codicee  Oregoriaiiua  and  llermocv'i"'*'
us,  aud  to  tbe  SentcntUu  of  Panlns;  and,  tlnx)^'''*
was  donbtleaa  drawn  up  by  Roman  writer*, 'b*
original  aonreea  are  more  ditillgnred  and  sItrM
than  iu  any  other  compilation.  Tliough  ili''  '^
trogothio  kingdom  waa  in  point  of  (act  quite  bKK*


EDITIO  PRINCEPS


669


EDITIO PSINCEPS


pendent  of  the  Eastern  Roman  Empire,  in  coDBti-
tntionBl  theory  it  was  couHidered  part  of  it,  the
king  representing  the  Caesar,  and  his  army  being
reclioucKl  a  portion  of  the  emperor's  forces ;  conse-
qaently  the  Roraau  law  was  still  held  binding  in
Italy,  for  the  barbarisQ  invaders  no  less  than  for
the  old  inhabitants.  Hence  the  Edict  of  Theodo-
ric,  BO  far  as  it  went,  was  intended  as  law  for  both
oationalittes;  bnt  where  it  had  made  no  change
iu  the  Gothic  rules,  the  latter  were  still  applied  to
the  barbarians,  while  the  Roman  law  was  to  pre-
vail for  the  RoDians  in  those  cases  to  which  the
Edict  was  not  applicable.  After  Narses  had  again
united  Italy  to  the  empire  nf  Justinian,  the  lat-
ter's  legJBlatioD  was  established  in  Italy  (a.d.
554),  and  the  Edict  of  Theodorio  had  uo  longer
any  authority.

This  edict  was  first  printed  in  the  edition  of
Cassiodonis  by  Xivellins  (Paris,  1579),  and  there
is  an  edition  by  G.  F.  Rbon  (Halle,  ltjl6).  Cf.  also
Ton  Gluden,  Da$  rSmiatiie  lUckt  tm  oBtgothUchen
Reich  (1843);  Hfinel,  £«s  Rom.  Vitig.  (1347);  and
RodorflT,  RSm.  Bechtsgeachichte,  i.  288,  303.  Hodg-
kin,  IMjf  and  her  Jntadera,  iii.  p.  343,  gives  the
prologne  and  epilogne  and  an  analysis  of  the  oon-
teat«  of  the  Edict.

Editio  Prinoapa.  A  name  given  to  the  first
printed  edition  of  any  classical  antbor.  The  ediHo
primcepa  often  has  a  special  value  to  text^crftics
ID  thnt  its  text  is  sometimeH  derived  from  a  MS.
that  has  since  l>een  lost.  The  oldest  printed  edi-
tion  of  any  classic  is  that  of  the  De  Officiia  of  Cic-
ero, which  appeared  at  Mainz  in  14fi5.  Soon  after
the  invention  of  printing  (abont  1440),  the  great
publishing  houses  of  Aldus  Manutins  (sou  and
grandBon,  1449-1597)  in  Venice,  of  Qianta  in  Flor-
ence, and  others  in  Switzerland,  Germany,  France,
and  the  Low  Countries,  sent  ont  printed  copies  of
the  ancient  texts  with  commentaries  and  gram-
luiinj,  as  well  as  Latin  translations  of  Greek  aa-
thoFB,  thus  aiding  in  the  revival  of  letters  known
as  the  Renaissance.  Many  of  the  ediiUmes  principe*
are  not  dated ;  sometimes  the  date  is  given  in  a
chronogram  (see  Chronogram)  iu  the  pt-eface.
(See  Hilsou,  Chronograms  [Loudon,  1882],  and  id.
CkronogramB  Continued  [London,  1883]).  The  place
of  publication  is  nsnally  iu  its  ancient  or  mediieval
Latin  form,  bnt  sometimes  in  Greek  (as  Enetiai  for
Yen  ice),  and  rarely  in  Slavonic  (a8Biiezieh,Mnezik,
or  Mletka,  for  the  same  place).  For  the  benefit  of
the  student,  the  following  list  is  given, comprising
ibe  names  oftenest  found  on  the  title-pngea  of  early
editions:  Argentoratum  (Strassburg);  Augusta  or
Augusta ViNDRLicuftUM (Augsburg);  fiA8iLicA(Ba-
sel,  BAle);  Bipontum  (Deux  Pouts,  Zweibrticken);
BuxoNiA  (Bologna);  Cadomuk  (Caen);  Caksar-
AUGU8TA  (SaragosBa) ;  CantabrTga  (Cambridge);
CORUMA  (Croustadt) ;  Dortrachum  (Dort,  Doi'd-
recbt);  Eboracum  (York);  ElkutheiiopOlib  or
Frahcatilla  (Freystadt);  Gratianopous  (Gre-
uoble);  Hafnia  or  Haunia  (Copenhagen);  IIala
(Halle);  HehbipOlis  (WUrzburg);  Holhia  (Stock-
liolml;  InsCla  or  Insular  (Lille);  Ispaus  (Se-
ville); LkodIcum  (Lifege) ;  LiPSiA  (Leipzig) ;  Luo-
dCnuu  (Lyons);  Lugdunum  BATAVORt;M(Leyden);
Lutrha  (Paris);  Massiua  (MarBeilles);  Matiscu
(Macon);  Mrdiolanum  (Milan);  MoguntiXcuh
(Mainz,  Mayence) ;  MONS  RRGAU8(Mondovi);  Mua-
sTpons  or  PoNTiMUSSUU  (Pont-Jh-MnsHon);  Neapu-
U8  (Naples);  Nkapous  Casimiriani  (Nenstadt);
OknTpoks { Innsbruck); OubTpo, UlyssIpo,  or


ULYSSiPdus  (Lisbon);  Oxonia  (Oxford);  Pktro-
POLis  (St.  Petersburg) ;  Probatopolis  (Schafflian-
seu);  Regiomontium  (Konigsberg);  Rotohagus.
(Ronen);  Sarum (Salisbury);  TARVi8iUM(TreviBo);
TouRNACUH  (Tonruai);  Traikotum,  Traiectum
Rhrni,  or  Ultraiectuh  (Utrecht);  Trecae  or
CivTtas  ThicassOna  (Troyes);  Tridentuh  (Trent);
TurOni  or  Cabsahodunuu  (Tonrs);  Venktia  or
Enetiai  (Venice).  See  Deschauips,  Diationnaire  dtt
Oiographie  a  VVtage  d%  Libraire  (Paris,  1870).

Greek  type  (very  imperfect)  was  first  used  in
the  edition  of  the  De  Officii$  mentioned  above.
The  first  edition  of  a  work  in  Greek  minusculea
was  an  edition  of  the  grammar  of  Lascaris  by
Paravinns  (Milan,  1476X  Iu  1494  the  Antkologia
Graeea  of  Lascaris  appeared  at  Florence,  printed
wholly  in  Greek  capitals.  The  first  edition  of  it
classical  Greek  author  is  thnt  of  the  Jdyls  of  The-
ocritus (L-xviii.),  with  the  Worka  and  Dayt  of  He-
siod,  which  was  pubfished  iu  1481.

The  following  list  of  the  most  famous  of  tbe
editionea  principes  is  taken  from  Gudeman's  vala-
able  SyllabM  on  the  Bi$tory  of  Claeaieal  Phtlologp
(Boston,  1892):

greek.
1481.  Theocritus  (bks.  i.-xvtii.),  together  with  He-

siod,  Works  and  Day».
1488.  Homer  (ed.  Chalcondylas ). (Valla's  Latia

transl.  of  the  Jliad  was  prints  as  early  aa

1474.)

1495.  Hesiod,  Opera  omnia  (Aldus).
1495-96.  Aristotle  (Aldus).

1496.  Euripides,  Medea,  Bippolytusy  Jlce$tit,  An-

dromachd  (I.  Lascariu);  Apollonios  (Lasca-
ris); Lnciao  (Florence).
1496.  Aristophanes  (except  Lt/Mstrata  and  TheemO'
phoriaxuBae),  Opera  omnia  (Basle,  1532).

1499.  Aratos  (in  ^stroHoMJ  Vett.  ap.  Aldum).

1500.  Callimacfaos,  ^ynia«  (Lascaris).

1502.  Herodotus,  Tbucydides,  Sophocles  (Aldi).
1603.  Euripides,  Opera  (except  £^cfra, edit,  by  Vio-
torins  [1545],  from  Cod.Laurent.  xxxli.S).

1513.  Plato,  Oratt.  Att.  [  Hyperides,  papyrus  discov-

ered 1847] ;  Pindar  (together  with  Callim.,
Dionys.  Perieg.,  Lycophron)  (Aldus).

1514.  Athenaens  (Aldus).

1516.  Xeuophon  (except  AgeeilaUe,  Apologia,  ll6poc

[lunta]);  Opera  omnia,  1525,  ap.  Aldum  ^

Strabo (transl.  printed  in  Rome,  1470);

Pansanias.
1516.  Aeschylns  (Aldus).
1530.  Polybins  (by  Vincent.  Opsopocus,  t.  e.  Koch).

Latin  transl.  by  NIc.  Perrotto  (bks.  i.-v.),

printed  1473.
1533.  Diogenes  LaSrtins  (Froben,  Basle).
1539.  Diodoms  (bks.  xvi.-xx.). Latin  transl.  (bks.

i.-v.)  by  Poggio,  1472.
1544.  Josephus  (Basle).
1546.  Dio  Cassins  (R.  Stephanas).
1551.  Appian.
1572.  Plutarch  (H.  Stepbauus). Latin  transl.  by

CampanuB  (1471).

LATIN.

1465.  CiceTo,D«02?ict't«(Mainz);  Lactantins(Rome).

1469.  Caesar,  Vergi),  Livy,  Lucan,  Apuleius,  Gelliua

(Rome).

1470.  Persius,  Juvenal,  Livy,  Martial,  Qnintilian

(Rome);  Tacitus,  Juvenal,  SalJust,  Hoimofr
(Venice);  Terence  (Strassburg).

1471.  Ovid  (Rome  and  Bonn);  Neirae  (Venice).


EDONI


670


EDDOATION


1473.  PlaiitUH  (O.  McriilH),  Cntiiltas,  TibulIiiB,  Pro*

pertiiis,  SlaliuM  (Vetjioa).
147:i.  LiicreiitDt  (Brescia).

1474.  Vulcritis  Flaocus  (Bonn).

1475.  Sfiiccii's  Prowi  Wurks.
14(<I.  tSoiiecii'd  Tragediert  {Fermra).
14t6.  I'liiiy  tbo  Vouiiger  (Veulee)i
1491::'.  Clcvroiiin  Opera  ODinin.
\hHl  VfllpiitH  PittercnliiB(ttMle).

Mllu.liMjKAl'llY. — Soc  Saxf,  On<nniw/trt?ii  (1775-
ITtH'l;  liclivreiyor,  ITamlhurh  ti.  daKn.  liihJiofinipftir
(If*,10-34)j  Haili,  ltrjtrrtarinm  ItiblmyrnphicHm,  4
voIh.  (1838);  Hoiriimiir  fjejcicait  Itifilivgrapkienm,  fur
Orpt^k  aiilliors  i>i)ly,3  voIk.  (1832);  Uniiiot,  Manuel
lilt  I.ibraire  (l^^ftA));  Kgger,  Hiittoirr  tin  Litre  (Paria,
iiodnlo);  liimchoi,  Tke  Printrtt  Hook  (liieT);  8otlie-
by,  Pritiviyia  Tt/poffrajthica  {1^5^^}',  Bcrjean,  Early
lYmirrt'  MiirkH  (18G6) ;  Silvorttn;,  Marquet  Typo-
grophU/ne^  (1867) ;  Bmnet,  fomtrtwartnocji  Xtk-etsaim
A  »n  iUbliopkih  (1872);  L«?^raii(l,  Bihlwgraphie
HtUtmqne  (1?^'>);  Uawkitw.  F'xral  Bookii  Bwrf  Print-
rrnnf  the  Fi/t^fnlh  rv»(N)-j/(X.Y.  188.|);  HiitiijiIirfyH,
//iw  nf  /Afl  Arl  of  PrUiting  (1807);  ihe  vnliialile
mo  I  nigral  ill,  n.  v.  *'Tyi>oj;rapliy,"  in  llie  Knvyclo-
p<niin  Ilriirtttjiica,  hy  J.  II.  HeaaeU,  vol.  ixiii.  pp.
€8I-t!97:  Hiul  llt«  nrticlcw  Lexicon;  Libeii;  Ma-
KUTirs;  STEPHANrs.  in  this  Uictiuimiy.

Bdoni  {'HJurai)  or  Cdoaea  {'Hiiavtt).  A
TliratUu  people,  bctwe«u  tlie  Nestas  aud  tlio
8lr>umii,  celebrated  fur  tbeir  oigiaatic  wonibip  ot
Bacchus;  nbi>nce  EdoiiiK  in  tbe  Latin  i>ueis  »ig-
nitli'S  n  fi-ninln  Bjicch»iial,  and  KdoiiUK  U  iiiunI  iui
eqiiivtUciit  t<j  Tbracioii.i.

Education.  (V|  Grkrk.  The  Dorianii  of  Crete
anil  gparlii  fiillnwiMl  n  p<>('uli:ir  1iiir>  in  the  mattRr
<tf  educntion.  Thrnnghont  OTTM-re  EPiiernlly  tUti
State  left  it  to  privat«  eflbii,  Uiit  in  Spartu  and
Crrtr  it  ratine  iiiidrr  the  dinir.t  8n|Hirvii*i(Hi  of  the
conitiiiinily.  At  8i>arta,  an  Hnnii  an  a  rhild  w»h
litirn,  a  coninitKNton  of  the  phlrm  tif  iIh  trihi;  had  to
(IcciOe  \v)iethi;r  it  dhonld  Xh:  rearei)  oroxpotutd.  If
it  wna  weiikly  or  dcforrac<l  it  iraa  expoacd  in  a
dolilo  of  Moniit  TaygctiiB.  Till  his  sevi^iith  year
a  boy  was  left  to  the  care  of  his  pnreiita.  After
this  tlte  aatHov'fios,  or  ofHcor  presiding  over  the
whole  department  of  editcnlinn.  wioigniH]  hini  to  a
division  of  children  of  the  tuimr.  agi;  calUMl  »  ^aia.
fieveral  of  snob  jioiai  together  forinml  a  troop  or  7\i)
(Dor.  tXa).  Eacb  d^va  was  BUiK-riiitondiHl  by  a  ;3nv-
ayit,  each  iXr;  by  an  l\apx^t.  Both  theiH!  ollict<rK
Keru  eU'Uted  from  among  the  mnnt  promiHlng  nf
tbe  growD-np  yonlhs,  and  wore  bounil  tii  luMtruct
the  cbildrui)  iu  their  exercises.  The  exereisos
wrrt"  ciiltulated  to  »nit  tho  various  nges  of  the
children,  and  consittted  in  rtmuing,  leaping,  wret«t-
liug,  tbrowlng  tbe  h\hmt  and  the  dittcus,  as  n-ell  aa
]i)  a  nmnUcT  of  dancei*,  particularly  the  war  dance
or  itvpptxi  (<|.  v.).  The  dancing  wiiB  under  thecoii-
Ht-ant  aniK^riitlendence  of  tbe  irniAojfOfior  and  Ove
tit&ia'tot  under  bim.  Tbe  diitcipllne  woh  gtMierally
«iirfct<'d  to  hlrengthening  or  hanleniiig  the  hotly.
Thi!  bovH  went  bamfoot  and  linrf^lieadeiil,  with  hair
<.-(ir.  Hhiirl,  and  in  light  ch>thing.  Fri>iii  their
iwt'lflh  yi-nr  (hey  wore  nothing  bnt  an  i»p|»er  gar-
ment, wliirli  hiid  to  \%H  the  wlioh;  y<*ar.  They
cSept  in  a  cotinnon  n>oni  wlthunt  a  niof,  mi  a  litter
of  hay  or  Ntritw,  and  fnnn  their  tifteenth  year  on
niNbeH  or  n-t'dn.  Their  fiMwl  was  rxln-mely  niniple,
and  not  Riiltteirnt  to  Hatinfy  biitiger.  A  l>oy  who
did  not  want  to  Un  Iicuigry  had  to  ateal ;  if  lie  did


tbifl  eleverly  he  iras  praised,  and  pnninheil  if ^  _
tected.  Every  year  the  boyK  had  to  nndvrjo  I
dogging  at  the  altar  of  Artetnia  Orthia,  lu  a  ttnl
of  tiieir  power  to  enduro  bodily  pain.  Thry  were
whipi>ed  till  the  blooil  flowed,  and  doctnod  il«4l»-
griice  to  nliow  any  iiigti  of  auflering.  fSoe  Buuo-
xiKEs;  DiAMAsnoositt.)  Reading  and  writiog  wen
left  to  private  iiiRtmctont ;  but  uiuaic.and  clionl
Hinging  in  parttcnlar,  funuetl  a  ])art  of  ilic  nynlar
diHctpIinu.  The  understanding  waa  atMtimM)  to  bf
foniiMl  by  daily  life  in  pnblic  aud  the  eoiiTi-nalioH
of  the  men,  to  which  tbe  boya  were  adtntllwL
Kvery  Hpartaii  boy  looked  up  Ut  bis  senioniubii
inKtrnctorH  and  ttnperioTv,  the  conae^jnctirr  Itrin;
that  in  Spattit  tbe  yonng  1»ehave<l  to  thrit  cMm
with  more-  Duidenty  and  resfR>ut  (ban  iu  anvellirr
Greek  city.  Besides  Ihis.  every  man  choM  a  luj
or  youth  as  liin  favourite,  lie  was  bound  To  wl
tbe  l>oy  an  example  of  nil  manly  cxcellencf.  »imJ
waif  reganled  aa  roBpon^ihle  ami  pani^'baMrfnrliit
deUtiqucncieti.  ThtB  ptiblic  dlncatinn  and  llw
]>erfom»»ncc  of  the  regular  exercisea,  nmler  11*
ttn[K-rinti>ndetico  i>f  the  ;3(diaiM,  laateil  till  xhr  llli^
tieth  year.  In  the  eighteenth  year  the  )n>.v  fti-fi
into  till*  vlawt  of  yonUiM.  From  Hie  Iweutietb
year,  wlnen  milititry  MTVire  pro^rer  lM*gan,  te  tlie
(binieth,  the  yonth  wa^  rjtlled  an  ttfn}»  or  ipS;r.
He  wiiH  not  regarded  as  a  man  or  allowed  to  i(-
tcnd  the  public  aMerably-  tilt  bis  thirtieth  year.

The  girls  had  an  eitncation  in  mii^ic  ainl  pm*
nastic  exercises  similar  to  that  of  the  Imita,  mil
at  tbe  public  games  and  cuntenta  each  sex  wu  trjl-
tiessof  tbe  pcrformanceH  of  the  other.  The  pjV
dreas  wiut  extremely  simple,  conaistiug  of  ailerr»-
leaa  tnnic  reaching  not  ipiite  down  to  the  knM
and  opiMi  at  the  Nidea.  In  tliiii,  however,  thm
waH  nnrhing  which  tnterfertul  with  raoflrMlf  tad
propriety  of  bebavionr.

In  Crete  the  ayntem  orednealion  wan  gnncnilf
Kimllar  to  that  of  .Sparta.  Hut  tho  public  tiiitii>c
did  not  l»cgin  till  tbr  Nevvnttr^nth  year,  nhcDtbr
iKiyn  of  tho  same  uge  juintil  thenmrlvea  freely  ictn
divttiions  called  oytXni,  each  led  by  Mme  ixAik
youth,  whose  father  was  called  liytXaras  bdiI  da-
dertook  the  Kni>erviNion  of  the  gatoca  aad  «itt-
eiftes.  It  is  probnble  that  tbe  young  men  mniititf^
in  tliiH  orgnnixatitui  till  their  tweuty-seTeotbyfif,
when  thp  law  roini>rnt'd  them  to  marry.

At  Athens,  iiB  iu  fJn-ece  gcnenilly,  tlte  falbrr<l*-
c'uh-i\  whflluir  the  ehild  should  \k  reared  iir  rt-
jHtm-d.  TliD  lattor  altf-nnitivr  aooniH  to  hnvr  Iwa
tint  Hcldoiu  adopted,  Cfi[)ecia)ly  when  the  chilil  «>*
a  girl.  If  tlio  educarion  of  a  cbild  wan  once  fttrif
coininenccd  the  parents  bad  no  power  to  put  H
o«t  of  the  way.  At  tho  birth  of  a  Iwy  lb*  A"**
of  the  house  was  adorned  with  a  biuneh  ef  flli"!
at  tho  birth  of  a  girl,  with  wool.  On  the  ftrih  «
seventh  day  after  birth  the  cbild  nndvrnvot  »n-
ligiona  dedication  at  the  festival  of  the  Amiilii'lw-
luia  ("rniining  nunid"!.  It  waa  toni-li^l  williln-
s(rnnieiitft  of  piiritiration,  aud  carried  Mcvenl  DDR*
round  the  hiiming  hearth.  On  the  tentb  'M
ranie  the  feativat  of  naming  the  ebild.  witli  Ufti-
flce  and  eiitertaiumont,  when  the  father  irknx*^
cdgi'd  it  a«  legitimate.  To  tbe  end  of  ihc  ui'i
year  Hie  hoy*  and  girls  wore  brought  np  tegcth"
under  female  supervision,  bot  after  this  the  ten*
were  edncated  iipart.  The  girl's  life  wa»  »liii»'
entirely  confined  to  her  home:  she  was  bfonRW
np  under  the  snp4^riutendenrv  of  women  and  wi'*
hardly anything which can Ih)  called profllabl'


EDUCATION


671


KOrCATEOK


innlrnctitH). Tbe  1>ny  nas  lintidcil  over  to  *  ilore
otitcr  llinu  liiinrwlf  vallfd  naiSaywyat. It  waa  IIh;
(ilftv«*i4  (Iiilv  to  wslcli  (h*?  buy'ft  tmtwartl  tichuvimir,
and  to  Attend bini,  until liiH  boylnKHt  wna  i>vi<r,
vrhoiicTer  be  w«iit  uut,  eH|K<cia1];t'  to  tbi>  m^IiduI  aixt
the  gymna«tnui. Tbe  Uwr  itioitu  aoiiiu  |in>vi8ioii
for  tbe proper  ednc&tipti  of  bovM. Thvy  obliged
-•very  cittzeu  to  have  his  sou  iuatriictttl  in  iiiimic,
kyninastics.  and  tbe  elemeuts  of  lL-tt<T»  (ypdfifiara)
^-i.  c.  writiujt.  readiuy,  ami  aritbutelio. Tliey  fur-
■iber  ubli^fd  the  pareiittt  to  teocli  their  Imys  noiue
IfHiititnbte  tnule.  id  ca»e  they  were  uuable  lo  leave
thHtii  a  property  sntticient  to  maintnin  them  iiidc-
pftiMlutit. If  they  failwl  in  this,  they  forfeit*"d  bH
ftaiiii to  Hiippnrt fmm tbe cbiblreii in  old  n){i!.
Biit  with  Hchoolfi  and  tluMrnirnnKementn  th<>  Slule
fid  not  concern  itwlf. Thoi»choids  went  rnlimly  in
rivato  lumd^,  though  thi^y  wrrv  nndrr  Ihi-  eye  of
be  police. The  rleiuenlary  inKtniclion  wan  givou
the  ypafifumrrrni,  or tcftflhern of  l«ttorH,  thfi
ieocber  writing  and  thA  HcholarN  ropyiiig. The
t«xi-lM>okft  f«w  reading  wcro  nujfltly  [>ocm(i,  eitpo-
cially  Biich  as  were  calculated  to  hHvo  an  inUnenco
on the formatioij of  character. Tho Homeric
poemB  were  the  favourite  rcading-lK>ok,  but  Hoeiod,
Tbaofcnifl,  and  others  wt^re  aUn  adniittL'd. CoUec*
tioRB  of  suitable  poMui^ies  from  the  ]^^)ets  were  early
made  for  the  Iniy^  to  copy,  b-ani  by  heart,  and  ro-
peat  nload. Tho  higher  inHtrnctton  given  by  tbp
ypaftitaTtK6t  wu  aUtn  of  thii)  literary  rhantctt^r.
K MathenmticB wore Introduced tnlo  tb«  ttcbool
fcarrienliim  tut  early  as  tbo  liftb  century,  drawing
■not  till  tbe  middle  of  tbe  fourth  century  B.C. In-
fttrnctioii  in  mnsic  proper  began  abont  the  thir-
teenth  year. The  profound moral iufluenco  nt-
hribnted  to  niuiiiu  in  Greek  niitirtiiity  made  thlfl  nrt
B&  essential  ]Mirt  of  eilncatioii. It  brought  wttb
mL  naturally,  an ac'inniutatice with IhM maitter*
Biecen of  Oreek poetry. Tiie inHtntmiPHt MHwt
practit«t>il  was  the  lyre,  frutn  jIh  aiiilAbleneMM  an  nu
•ccf>inpanimeitt to  »ong. Tbe f]nt«  wad  hehl  in
lew  e«t«t>m. 8*^  Mcsica.
The  aim  of  education  was  anppo««d  to  1>e  the

rntiouiuu!*  development  of  mitid  and  body  alike,
itnirtion  in  gyniuaiiticii  vraa  conseiineiitly  ro-
fcardtsd  as  no  lean  cMcntial  than  in  munie,  mid  be-
gan at  nlHint  the  Mamc  ngc.  It  was  ciiiTted  on  in
tbe  Vfi^m<rrpa  under  the  irni^orpi^ui,  who  were,
like  the  ypaitfAtrriKoi,  prlvat4>,  not  public,  infttmot-
ora.  Tbe  boys  began  Ibeir  gyniiiiaHttCH  in  the
palacAtnt,  and  eonipU^tt>d  them  in  the  gymnanta
aader  the  i4upertnlendeiu:e  of  the  yvfj.yti<TTai.  Tbe
t^rjSm,  iu  (fartirulnr,  or  1m>vh  between  Mixtoeu  and
oiueteeii.prartifteil  their  exerciHCH  iu  tbe  gymnasia,
tin.  In  tbeir  twentieth  year,  they  were  considered
capable  of  beiiring  arms  nud  employed  on  frontier
oervice.  At  tbiit  point  they  became  iLnbtc  to  en-
linlment  for  foreign  Kcrvire,  and  obtained  the  right
of  att«ndiiig  the  meeting  of  the  public  aaseinhl^r.
TownrdH  the  end  of  tbe  flfth  <:etitury  B.C.  the  claaa
Bf  fratfHtrrai,  or  profcsHors  of  iiractical  etbication,
Bri*M''  These  gave  tbe  young  men  an  opportunity
of  extending  IbL-ir  wluration  by  altemling  let-titn*
ill  rhetoric  and  pbiloMtpIiy,  but  the  high  fees
ohargcd  by  the  sophists  bud  the  etlect  of  reslrtct-
iug  this  im^tmction  to  the  sous  of  tbe  wealthy.
^  (S)  K4>MAN.  Among  the  Koniuus  the  father  wnn
^m.%  when  tbe  newborn  i.'bild  was  laid  before  him,
either  to  expose  it,  or  to  take  it  up  as  n  oign  that
he  mount  to  rear  it.  lie  hml  atoo  the  right  of  Mail-
ing bis  ohildrsu  or  putting  thoiu  lo  death U  wiu


<  not  till  the  lieginning  of  the  third  centory  a.iil
that  the  exporgtire  of  children  waa  legally  account-
ed murder,  nor  did  the  e%il  practice  cciwe  even
then.  If  the  child  was  f  o  I»e  n<.ired,  it  niiH  niimed,
if  a  boy,  on  tbe  ninth  day  afrer  hirlli,  if  a  girl,  on
the  eigbtb.  The  day  was  called  tlien  tu^tricvM,  or
dayofparilicatiDu.  A  ftacrllice  in  the  lioiiNe,:ircoiit.
panied  Willi  a  fcont.gavc  to  the  child'n  life  a  n-lig-
iona  dedication.  A  box  with  ati  auuilct  «  as  bnng
round  t he i-liild'n  neck  nsaprutt-utionugaiiiKt  niiigir^
(See  AMfLKM-M;  \iVLLA.)  OtHcial  Tutta  of  binha
were  not  publitthcd  until  the  second  century  after

'  ChriKt.  In  earlier  timeH,  in  tbe  case  of  boys,  ibe
name  whh  not  forninlly  ronlinne<1  until  the  aMtiimp-
tiou  of  tlie  fojra  viiilin.  Tbe  rbild's  physical  and
nionil  e«lnealiou  wah,  in  old  timeii,  n'gnlarly  givvii
ai  homo  nudiT  the  NUiH^riiitendenee  of  llie  parents,
L-hielly  (he  inollu-r.  Tbr  tvnining  wiih  strict,  and
aimed  at  tiiakii.ig  the  ebildrnu  ntrong  and  healthy,
religious,  oliwlieut  to  the  lawR,  temperate,  niiMlent
iu  speeeh  and  action,  strictly  siibniiiwivr  to  their
superiors,  well-beha\'iHl,  virtnoas,  intelligeul,  niti]
self-rclinnt.  The  girls  were  Innght  by  their  nioib-
tMv  to  spill  niid  weave. The  boys  wore  instnieted

'  by  their  fathers  in  ploughing,  .sowing,  rca]iitig,  rid-

I  ing,  swimming,  boxing,  and  fencing ;  in  the  kiion i<
edgn  iierewiflry  for  bnusebold  mauagemeitt ;  io
n-niling,  writing,  and  conuting:  nnd  in  the  laiva
nl'  the  connlry.  The  KomaUN  did  nut,  like  the
(ireckH,  lay  sln^wi  on  gymniiNtieH.  but  only  enrried
pl>ysical  exercises  to  the  ]K>iiit  necetwiiry  for  iiiili>
tary  service.  The  contests  and  exerciM'ii  look  pl.-M-e
in  the  CainpQB  Martins,  which,  down  Io  the  time

I  of  the  Empire,  was  the  favourite  arena  of  tlie
}'outhii. The  State  took  as  little  care  of  niental  aa

I  of  pliynioa)  education. If  a  uian  could  not  educate

I  Uis  childi-en  liluit»ell'.  he  sent  iliem  to  u  master.
From  an  early  tinif  thet-e  werp  elementary  teuch-
er>i  { littrralinTJi }  at  K«iine,  eitrreKjmndiiig  to  tlie
Greek  ypo^^ioritrroi.  Thes**  were  sometimes  slaves,
whotaught  iutheii- masters'  h4>useit for  their  benvtit.
Sometimes  they  were  fueedinen,  who  gave  instruc-
iLOti  oilher  In  familiefi  or  in  scluMd^t  {ifhofa  <>r  litftus)
of  tbeir  own.  They  receivetl  tln-irsulury  monthly,
but  oinly  for  eight  months  iu  ihe  year — no  in-
Atruction  boitig  given  between  June  and  NoTctn-
Iwr.  Boys  and  girls  were  Innglit  togelhrr.  Tlie
eleroeritary  instniction  included  i-i>ailing.  uritiug,
and  nrithmelic;  arithmetic  being,  ait  among  tim
Greeks,  prnctisi'd  by  coiniting  on  tin*  litigei-)*.  lii
Inter  times  gronn-np  boys  h-unieil  arttliuietic  with
n  si>ccial  mflHter  Irtilctilalm),  who  wan  paid  at  a
higher  rate  than  tho  littrratur.  Willi  the  duodeci-
mal syntcni  iu  line  arilhmi-lic  was  rcgunied  as  very
difficult.  (See  Mathkmatica.)  The  leaitlng-livt-
sons  included  luarning  the  Twelve  Tables  Vty  heart.
After  tbe  Sw;oiid  Piniic  War  it  ]t*cam<«  UKunI,  at
And  ill  single  fauiilieH,  and  aftervvMnlH  inorr-  nod
more  genentlly,  to  employ  a  litterator,  or  ttrnmnta-
licH»,  to  tcMcb  Greek.  The  chief  ob^ment  in  thtn  in-
struction was  tlie  ex|d»natioifo'^Greek  poets,alH>ve
all  of  Homer,  whose  writings  became  a  N-lnwd^
1wMik  among  tbe  Romans  as  among  the  (trt^eks.
At  the  same  time  higher  inslrrietion  was  given  in
Latin  as  well,  the  text-books  Iwing  the  Latin  Odnr-
tftf  of  Li  vi UN  Andronicns,  tho  works  of  Terence,  and
in  later  tiines  of  Vergil,  Horace,  and  other*  The
ex|>ositiini  of  tlxwe  authors  gave  an  op|HU-tnnity
of  cnnimnnieating  a  variety  of  infi>mintioii.  Girla
n-fW.  eiltiealed  on  tbe  same  lines.  The  highest
point  in  Kuman  cilucatton  was  attAined  by  tbe


KUUCAT[OS


67S


EDCCM'ION


•viKiuIa  o(  the  rbeturioiuiiH,  wliich  caiiiu  iulo  ex-
ititeiice  Itefore  tlic  cikI  uf  llm  r(*|iiiltlii'»ri  Hgo.  Iti
fliuSL*  Hcliiiuls,  an  ill  tbiir«u  uf  tUe  (/rt/inMO/JL-i,  Greek
wua  lit  tiinl  tbi?  only  l»ii>;uii;^4:  tuii^lit.  Hiuco  tlie
Liiiti^  ^\b»l)  Grtrvk  liteiiiciiru  liet'nnie  tii»  liigbvst
i'(tiii.'j)tiniiAl  Htniidiinl,  httyn,  anil  soiiietinics  RtrlK,
\VHrf>  tunjflit.  Un-nlc  fnmi  tl^pir  enrliritt  yt'iirs.  Tbry
wtirf  put  into  tlin  'mtiilH  iif  ii  l.irt'fh  pafftagoffii-  or
H  Grci'k  I'ftnnle  mIilvh,  :iihI  It-nriiPil  tUn  Hrst  riwli-
iimiitn  fmiii  finrok  HchiHiliiiuMtt^rH.  An  tint  rarif;»
(iF  Ktilijttctji  wtilrtieil  mi  n»  111  iiic]ii<]e,  among  otliiT
tliiiigH,  iiiiinU;  hihI  gituiiittti'.v,  muni  itiiportaiK:!'  <'-am<^
til  lit)  iLlburliMil  t<t  ru-lHiliiMtic  (Mliirnriciii.  TUin  t«n-
(liintiy  wjiM  NtrtMigthciii^l  liy  the.  liici-niiM'il  iltiiiiaii<l
fur  Gix't-k  ciiUiir«  wliicU  luaniffxlcd  itNelf  iiimUt
tlie  Eii))>ir<;  tlirongb>.>at  tin-  loD^tli  aud  brundtli
lit'  tbo  Wi>Kterii  jiraviucoH. Edtiuittiou  wna  can  iei]

out oil HtlictfM- liuCS »S tlte old ».VHtCUL of  ItMlllL--

tminiii^  difiniijirarei),  mninly  owiiit;  ti>  tbe  i)itfu>
sioit  of  ttii  elTi'iiiiiKittf  reHuuiuent  and  tlie  |jareiitH'
lialiit  uf  [iiittiii};  tlieir  cliildrRii  into  tlie  liaudii  uf
Orwk  sluvps.

Tilt*  ordiiinry  ecliu^ational  noiirw  j^enerulty  eou*
elude)!  with  »  hoy'n  nixt^jciilh  «r  w»v«-iit«fiit!i  year,
tliougli  I'liulorlcul  iiiNtruutiou  wuh  MOiiLirt)ni«it  coti-
ticiiiiHl  far  beyond  tliUi  litiiil ;  unJ  lowardH  the
fnd  of  tilt)  icimldioiin  ugy  yotiug  moii  of  iiilcl-
loctiml  itmbition  wonlil  often  go  to  Or«ccv  to  eu-
largf  tbeir  splierc  of  ciiUiint.

Oil  tliv  t7ib  of  Muirh.  the  festival  of  tliu  Liber-
nlia,  boy*  who  IiimI  reached  lb«  age  of  piiberly,  or
thoir  Cft*jfiitli  vfitr,  tiMik  oft,  in  tbp  ]ir»*8enu«  of  the
LareH,  thfjr  butlti  iiud  t'>i/n  pnteft.rla,  or  [>iir|dL^-
«dg«d  toga,  and  ptit  cm  \hv  iiiiHd»riu<d  ttitja  virilin.
TUtiy  wera  tlu'ti,  u^^^r  a  bacrifu-u  ut  b»uu<,  taken
by  tb^iir  futbern  or  giinrdiniii«,  jKrcoinpHiiiLHl  by
friunds  Jinil  tvlnlioim,  to  tliir  Fontiii  and  enrolled
iu  the  liota  <if  citixtMiM.  Thu  Wyn  M-i-rc  from  this
time,  ill  tbL<!  cyoA  of  Ibo  law,  uipublo  of  luitniugi-,
biiuiid  to  DLilitary  scrrico,  mid,  in  fiut,  bail  now
oiilered  upon  tbvir  tiruciKittm,  nhicli  wiia  ii-gtirdiHL
06  the  \init  stage  of  iMliication. See  'rimH:iNIL:M.

Aftur  the  tintu  of  Vespatiiuu  the  higher  public
iuMtniutlun  began  to  1>t'  a  niatt«r  of  inipeiiul  coti-
cfm.  \'e»pasiau  paid  away  the  suui  of  $42r>U  uu-
tiiially  ti>  the  Latin  acid  Greek  rlietoiiciaiiH  in
Kotiic.  Hailriau  foiitulHiI  Ih*:*  Alhenueiitn,  the  firitt
known  publir  tiiHCitiilioii  for  Ihf  higlnr fdnratioii,
Willi  Kalarifd  l4.'arlii'r«.  (8e*;,  AmBNAKt^M.)  After
bin  tiuio  pbiloMtpbei-M,  ilieturieiHiiH,  and  gruiuiiia-
riaua  were  publicly  appoiiil^d  to  lecture  in  all  the
larger  cities  of  the  Kmpire.  Tboy  woi-e  uiaiut-uiu-
&[  partly  at  the  exiiense  of  the  rea|>ecttvu  comuiti-
Dities,  partly  by  the  eiuperors,  ami  enjoyed  in  otl
cases  uerlaiii  iiuiiinnitiea  conferred  by  the  Htate,

(ajTiiK  HiuHKK  EiJL'fATiUN. — lu  the  days  of  thc
Roman  Kinpiru  tberu  exiHlcd  ut  Allifiix  ami  winie
of  the  otbi-r Greek  citlun  what  c-bmuly  corrpspondwl
lo  tho  uinverftitiea  of  miHleni  tinieK.  AtlieiiH  ha<I
always  been  what  Perielufi  oallifd  "the  hcIiouI  of
Greece:"  and  in  the  early  ceiituriiJM  of  thu  Chria-
ttan  era  it  contaiue^t  an  orguntKed  facility  {;(o^u[,
fTvvavaia,  dyiXt})  of  accoinpliBlied  profc«cir(i,  who
lectured  to  a  body  of  Ktndentit  ilniwn  from  evurj-
qnarlvr  of  llie  cirilii^tMl  world.  The  univentity  at
Atlifim  WH«  grailually  foruiMl  an  tha  remilt  of  two
previouHly  f'xiHting  iiiHritntioiiH — the  Kphehi  (■i/>i;-
(Stot)  and  tli*"  nrbditU  of  tim  pbilonoplieni  and  iwjph-
istn.  Tbe  Kpliebi,  or  fn>e  Atlieiiinn  yonths,  were
ill  early  timc»  enrolled  a»  a  body  primarily  intended
for  the  dofonoe  of  the  Slate. Tliey  wew  educated


both  physically  and  mentally, and  ibey  formeillbr
uneleus  of  wliut  afterwanln  trecuun?  the  ■rtwUut
bitdy  uf  the  nuiversity.  Two  changes  in  tlw  i-oo-
stitntion  of  ibe  Kphebi  prepared  the  M-ay  fi>rtltHt
traiipfforuiatioii  fi'oin  a  iinuHi-niililary  )MMly  ioloa
iiiiiverHily.  TbeiiH  rhnngHM  were  (1)  tbt*  nrglicl
of  tliH  prineiple  of  ronipuLnory  eiimlliaeiit,  unt  (9)
the  fact  that  niemlierHliip  Reaped  to  bo  cotifiued
Id  Alhenian.H  or  e\'eii  Ui  (ireeka  alnnc.

Tlietie  rhiiiige«  left  a  l>ody  uf  young  mru.orgBn-
i7A*d  and  regularly  onrolled,  freu  tu  follow  •ueb  k
roiirse  of  training  om  buHt  united  tbeu  iDclttiatiow
and  capiu-ilicH,  and  n?a*ly  lo  liu  tuniiMl  to  any  Uh
of  Htiidy  that  had  tLie  advocacy  of  brilliaDl,  FOtr-
ge^tic,  and  piijnilnr  men.  The  fK^hnoln  of  the  plii-
I  loMtpbers  aupphed  the  intliienee  nrcwcurj'  fiir
completing  tin?  change  from  a  military  evlivffvto
'  a  great  uiitvcrsity,

' Four  Bcboolft  of  philosophy  had,  aiiioo  the

of  the  Macedonian  warH,  bet'ii  tloiiri>«biiigat  Al

Theae  were  the  Academic  or  Platonic  8cImkiI,

Peri]iat4'tir  or  Arif«ti>te1iiin  Sehool.  llie  Stoic  Sclmol,

Olid  tlio  Epicurean. Kach  of  tbew*  orbtioU  fnai

tlio  liino  of  itN  fouiidatiun  bad  receictMl  an  nulaw-

meiiti sulUcietit to maintain nud periMitiui'  It

Plato  (q.  V.)  bwl  pnreliitM'd  a  auiall  gardeu  twit

tho  Eloasiuiau  Way,  in  the  grove  of  Aeailfm*.  f"*

SOOOdracbiuaa. Hiu  pliilo8opbic«occc«8or»,XMw-

rat«it  and  Poleniou,  eonliiiQcd  to  teacb  in  ibr  tuat

8[K»t;  their  wealthy  pupilsand  other  frieiiibiuflesni-

ing  added  to  ibe  grouiidt^  and  tM-qiu-atlird  imfikiePt

fiiudH  for  the  iiinp]H>rt  of  the  pbiliwopber,  and  Ikt*

practically  eud^iwed  an  academic  cbait  (^t^Mt).

Later  v^e  find  that  the  endowuienc  of  This  cbit

bad  8o  increased  that  its  annual  income  was  7H*

aaret. In like manner  Aritttotle  ( (|-  v.  I  Irft  M

tiia Buccenbor,  Tbt'ophra8lii».  Ibe valuablf  |inf-

crty  nuar  the  IliMMiHj and  TbeuphraMlilfl,  in  UM

will  whose  text  has  come  down  to  ns  tu  UiojjHiM

Lai=rtiiia  (v.  'i,  U),  coni]ilete<l  ibe  itennHiiiiit  tu-

dowmeiit  of  the  Peripatetic  chair. S<i  K|«ciiiw

left  biH  property  in  the  Ceramicm*  to  1k>  the  unci**

of  an  endowment  for  liis  «cbo4il  (Diog- La»'it>**

10),  and  the  Stoicfl  were  probably  in  like  luaim*

made  independent. Aronud  tbc»e  foiiri«b«>I*<rf

philoaopby  wbtcb,  being  endowed,  taught  grit**

iloimly.  a  uinllitudv  of  tea4.tbeni  of  rln*torlc,  cnV*

mar,  litentlnre,  logic,  phydico,  and malliMn****

clustered,  and  many  chaira  were  endowwl  b>  lfc»

Koiiian  viui>eror8. The  world  vooQ  learned  to  lliiuk

I  of  AtlieuB  UM  a  great  soat  of  learning  and  cidl

I  brilliant  and  itmowued. Htndeuta  dockfft  u

I  from  every  ijuarter  of  the  world. It  upii***'*

I  hove  been  uece-ssary  to  become  enmlled  anioi'g  t**

I  Fphelii,  but  the  acbolare  (wleclcd  for  iIwimn'Ii'*

their  own  instrnctora,  and  atteudeil  »nrb  ItHin'*

'  ON  they  i:tuuw>. Tlif  numlier  uf  tbeae  AtodeiiB

^  canm  t'liormoiiH. TbeopliraatitK  atona  lectll

aa  many  art  two  tboOMund  men. Tba  reeofdii

I  IbB  uanit«  of  many  foruigu  Hiudenta,  Min«of

,  being  of  the  Semitic  race. Thu  moat  notnl*

of  Kome  bod  ntudird  ut  thtei  univer»ilr,  of  »^*

C'it:ero,  Ovid,  and Horace  ore perhaps  Ibe  "*■*

brilliant  Dames. The  cuatoDia  of  Ihr  iiiiH»(»«V

j  may  bo  gathered  from  a  peniHol  of  the  vrntk*  •■

j  Aniu-i  GfilliiiB,  Libanins  <a.i>.  :114>,  and  PbibHtrMA

authorof  the  »««  2o^<rri»'*A  l>.4&01, Fromtli**

I  Monrcea  we  lenni that  matriciilatiou took  piw*

|eorly  in  the  year;  that  the  htmleuta  wi>r*  a  J*""

■  (rpilifaf) likfi  that  of  thu  nndergndnale*  Bt  "<*

lEugUati  universitioa; thai  they  panned  otlilt^


EDUCATION


678


EOEBIA


eporta  vith  nacfa  ardonr;  that  at  tbe  tbeatre  a
special  gallery  Tras  reserved  for  tbeni ;  that  cer-
tificates of  attfludauce  at  the  conraes  nf  lectures
were  required;  that  tbey  were  under  the  general
direction  of  a  president  {Koa-fafr^s) ;  that  fees  were
exacted  in  the  shape  of  an  aunual  cootribntion  to
the  iiniTersity  library;  that  breaches  of  discipline
were  punished,  as  at  Oxford,  by  Bnes;  that  the
relation  between  student  and  professor  was  very
close,  so  that  for  a  student  to  cease  to  take  a  coDrae
was  very  cutting;  and  that  the  stndente  them-
selves "tooted"  for  the  professors.  "Most  of  the
yonng  entiinBiasts  for  learning,"  says  Gregory  Nan-
zianzen,  "  become  mere  partisans  of  their  profess-
ors. They  are  all  auxiety  to  get  their  andiences
larger  aud  their  fees  increased.  This  they  carry
to  portentous  lengths.  Tbey  post  themselves  over
the  city  at  the  beginning  of  tbe  year;  as  each  new
coiuer  disembarks  he  falls  into  their  hands;  they
carry  him  off  at  once  to  the  house  of  some  country-
man  or  friend  who  is  best  at  trnmpeting  tbe  praises
of  his  own  professor"  (Libanius,!.  13).

Private  tutors  ((ftiXaxit)  were  often  employed.
They  looked  over  the  students'  notes,  "coached"
them  on  tbe  subjects  in  which  they  were  most  in-
terested, and  helped  tbem  at  their  exercises.  At
the  end  of  the  year,  there  seems  to  have  been  an
examination  (iaiufiatrta).

Freebmen  appear  to  have  been  subject  to  a  sort
of  hazing  (rcXcrai)*  ^^g**'^*  ^^  ^  funeral  address
over  his  friend  Basil,  recalls  some  of  the  memories
of  their  sport  with  freshmen.  We  flud  one  of  the
professors,  Proaeresins,  asking  his  class  not  to  haze
a  new  atndeot,  Eunapins,  because  of  liis  feeble
health.  Sometimes  the  inferior  o£Bcers  of  the  nui-
versity  were  subjected  to  similar  annoyances,  and
Libauiiis  tells  of  one  of  the  tutors  who  was  tossed
iu  a  blanket,  an  exercise  known  to  the  Romans  as
tagatio.

Many  of  the  ooinoidences  between  ancient  and
modem  university  life  are  interesting.  The  fol-
lowing is  s  quotatiou  from  Libanins,  who  gives
an  account  of  how  bis  olassea  conducted  them-
selves:

"  I  send  my  proctor  to  summon  the  stiident«  to
my  lecture,  but  tbey  are  in  no  mood  to  hurry,
though  they  ought  to  be.  They  stay  outside  to
fling  songs  which  we  have  all  heard  till  we  are
tired,  or  else  amuse  themselves  with  foolish  mer-
riment and  jesting.  This  they  do  until  tbe  lecture
has  actually  begun.  Then  they  come  in  and  keep
wbispering  to  one  another,  to  the  annoyance  of
tbe  real  students,  about  the  races,  or  actresses,  or
opera-dancers;  or  about  some  contest  either  past
or  fntare."  And  be  adds,  very  natvely,  "  I  had  a
very  different  class  of  students  once.  Perhaps
some  one  may  say  that  the  fault  ia  mine,  and  that
my  lectures  are  not  as  good  as  they  used  to  be ;
hut  some  of  my  best  students  now  do  not  think
so;  they  declare  solemnly  that  I  now  qnite  sur-
pass myself;  and  that  while  my  lectures  were
always  admirable,  there  is  moi-e  in  them  now  than
there  ever  was  before"  (i.  199).

Schools  of  philosophy  and  letters  simiUr  to
those  at  Athens  sprang  up  at  other  great  cities  iu
the  later  Roman  Empire  —  at  Constantinople,  at
Rhodes,  at  Scepsis  in  the  Tmad,  Massitia  (Mar-
seilles), Tarsus,  and  especially  at  Alexandria,  which
last  city  was  definitely  designed  by  tbe  Ptolemies
to  be  a  centre  of  scientiBo  research  and  investiga-
tion, to  which  end  they  gave  it  a  magnificent  li-


brary (see  Bibuotheca),  handsome  buildings,  aud
ample  endowments.

BiBUOORAPHT.— See  Compayrtf,  Btatoiy  of  Pac'
dagogy  (Eng.  trans.  Boston,  1886);  GiHsberger,
Erzickung  und  Unterrickt  im  kltunscheit  AUerthum
(  WUrzburg,  1664-80 ) ;  Eckstein,  Lattinisclur  und
ffriechiBcker  UHterricht  (Leipzig,  18W) ;  K.  Schmidt,
Getcliickte  der  Pddagogik,  vol.  i.  3d  ed.  (Cothen,
ld73);  W.  A.  Sclimidt,  (Jeachichte  der  Deak-  und
Gtaubmafreihat,  pp.  404-448  (Berlin,  1847);  Ma-
haffy.  Old  Greek  Edmoation  (Loudon,  1683);  Ciipes,
Univerritjf  Life  in  Anaent  Athens  (Loudon,  1874);
Dittenberger,  De  Ephehie  Atticia  (Gottingen,  1663) ;
Dnmont,  £Mai  «ur  VEpkebie  Attique  (Paris,  1876);
Portelette,  VEphibie  en  Gric€  in  L'lnatruetion  Pub-
liqiu  for  December,  1878;  Becker-GoU,  Chariclea,
ii.  pp.  19  foil.;  Goll's  excursns  on  Becker's  Gallus,
n.  pp.  61-114 ;  Marquardt,  Pritatleben,  pp.  80  foil. ;
Soalfetd,  Der  Helleniemut  in  Latium  (WolfeubUttel,
1883);  Davidson's  Aristotle,  in  the  "Great  Educa-
tore'  Series"  (N.Y.  1892);  Baumeister, /)eiiAnwd7er
des  klastischen  Alterthums,  vo\.ii\.,  a.  v.  "Schuleu";
aud  iu  this  Dictionary  the  articles  Alexandrian
School;  Athenaeum;  Geooraphica;  Grammat-
ica;  Gymnasium;  Liberalrs  Artes;  Logistica;
Luous  LiTTERARius;  Philosophica  ;  Rhetorica;
Schola;  Sophistes.

Eedm  (ra  ?f dm). See  Matrihoniuh.

EStion  {'Htritoy).  King  of  the  Hypoplaoian
Thebd,  in  Cilieia,  aud  father  of  Audroniach^,  the
wife  of  Hector. See  ANDitoMACHii.

Efflglea. See  Imagines.

Effiractor  irotxtipvxott  effractarius). A  burglar.

As  the  name  ro(;(upvxoc  implies,  the  Greek  burg-
lar sought  to  effect  »u  entrance  through  the  wall
of  a  house,  rather  than  through  the  doors  or  win-
dows. (See  DoMUS,  p.  538.)  In  Attic  law  l^e  was
reckoned  among  the  KaKovfrym  whose  crimes  were
capital  (Demosth.  c  Lacrit.  p.  940,  $  47);  the  snm-
mary  processes  called  airayttyi;  and  ((ftrjyrjtrig  were
available  against  him;  he  is  often  coupled  with
the  \oiro6vr7fe  (e.  g.  Aristoph.  Plut.  165),  both  of-
fences being  hedged  iu  Mith  sjiecial  penalties  be-
cause they  were  so  easy  to  commit.  The  midnight
terrors  of  a  rich  miser  behind  his  flimsy  walls  are
amnsingly  depicted  by  Luciau  {Gall.  p.  748,  Reitz).
See  Klopes  Dik^.

The  Romans  did  not  shrink  ttom  capital  punish-
ments, at  least  nuder  the  Empire ;  and  yet  the
crime  of  ejjfractio  was  not  visited  with  death,  as
among  the  Greeks.  Their  houses  were  better  bnilt
than  those  of  the  Greeks,  aod  thus  they  did  not
legislate  under  the  iriflneuce  of  panic.  The  pen-
alty was  hard  labour  for  life  (opus  perpetvum),  and
for  burglary  by  night,  in  the  mines  (poena  metalli).
Tbe  trial  was  before  the  j>ro<j/ec(ir«  vigitvm,  or  chief
of  police  (Sidon.  Apollin.  Ep.  ix.  7 ;  Dig.  1, 15, 1).

Bgexla.  A  Roman  goddess  of  fountains,  who  was
also  a  goddess  uf  birth,  and  poasessed  the  gift  of
prophecy.  It  was  from  her  fountain,  iu  the  sacred
enclosure  of  tbe  Camenae,  before  the  Porta  Capena
in  Rome,  that  the  Vestal  Virgins  brought  the  water
necessary  for  the  baths  and  purifications  of  their
o£Sce.  There  was  another  fountain  of  Egeria  in
the  precincts  of  Diaua  at  Aricia.  In  Roman  leg-
end, Egeria  was  the  consort  and  counsellor  of  King
Xnma,  who  used  to  meet  her  in  a  grotto  in  the
precincts  of  the  Camenae.  After  the  death  of  her
lover  she  fled  to  the  shrine  of  tbe  Arician  Diana,
by  whom,  as  her  wailings  disturbed  the  worship,


EGESTA


£74


EISPUORA


sbp  was  chanffed  into  the  fotiiitain  wlilcfa  liore  her
iiRiiiP.  Miim<*(l  wntnpn  n-or8)ii[i{ioU  httr  at  Rome
OK  u  gfxIilcKH  iifchildliirtli.

Bgeata. Sec  JS>:uKtfTA.

Bgnatia.  A  town  in  Apuli»  on  the  cnaxt  of
Ituly.  It  wart  c(ili;liruU.-<l  for  il-B  niiranilniiH  itt.iinH
or  nltAr,  whirli  of  iltwlf  »el  on  fiiv  frankitjcrrnw
ami  wntHl — It  imiUigy  \Yliicb  nffunleil  atuuMfmcttl
t(i  niiriic'u  and  lii»  friL-iuU,  vrht*  liHikwl  u\nm  it  sis
u  nn-n)  trick  iSal.  I.  v.9tf),  KK'ifltio  was  siiiiattfd
uu  clic  liigh-road  fnuii  Rome  tn  llriimlt^ium,  wbi«li
from  l^guatia  ru  Uniurlisiiiin  Itnn^  the  nnmo  of  the
Vin  Kgiiatio.  Tlic  continuation  of  tliii*  rosfl  on
tbu  other  siilc  of  lite  Adrintic  from  Dyrrhiu-btnm
to  B.TZBntiiim  also  horr  tho  tinmf  of  Viu  K^ialiii.
It  WW  the  great  niilitnry  rond  iK'twcfti  Italy  und
theKast,  Cnmiuenriiig  iit  DyrrliEicIiiiim,  it  iiassrd
by  I.ychiiirfiis.  Heniclfrt,  LynovnItH.  EdeKiui,  Thot*-
mIiiiiU'u,  AniphipoUA,  Phllippi,  nnd  trnvorMing  thn
wliok'iif  Thrace.  tiiiallyrt'EK-licd  Byzunlinm.  Egnu-
tiB  h  ualled  (Jnatia  in  Hunkco  by  a  |M>)»nlQr  coii-
truc'tluii  likL^  iba&  which  gives  iia  ''Frisco''  for
nil  Fniuoiaeo.

BgnatiL AKoinnn  fAmilyofSntnniticoniciQ-  U)

KLULs  K(;XAni  (*.  A  leader  of  the  Samnitea  iu
the  Third  Snninite  War.  IIh  fell  in  Nattle  against
tlw  Konittnn  in  n.r. a»o.  (y)  KURirs  Eosatiits.  A
generul  of  tht>  ttalinn  nlliun  in  tho  Sorial  War.  who
was  kiUetl:  in  battle,  B.c.  Ha.  (3)  M.  EoNATirs
Bt'Pr>i.  A  liomaii  of  »oino  note  who  watt  iumIiIo
iu  S.L'.  20,  and  iinu^ti)!'  iu  the  follon  iiiji;  yi'ur,  Hav-
ing; i'4>uS|>irrd  againHt  AngimtnH,  hit  wan  juit  tn
doHlh  in  B.C.  IS.  (4)  P.  EuvAnLS  Cklf.r.  A  Stoic
pbilutiophcr,  the  teacher  of  Uarea  Koranos  (q.  v.),
who  WRs  the  rhief  witness  ngnin.st  his  nppgbc
pn|Ml  nrheti  accnseil  of  treason  uuiler  Nero.  See
Juv.  tii.  116,  with  Mayoi^s  uoto.

Egypt See  AEOTPTL'8.

Elcoat^  (fiKDOT))).  A  cnstonit  dnty  of  oiio-tweii<
tiotb  (Ave  percent.)  upon  all  oommnditico exported
or  iinporu^l  by  eea  in  the  Sliiu*s  of  the  allice  sub-
ji^ot  to  Athens.  This  tax  vrtm  tir»t  itnpoMd  in
B.C.  413—413.  in  the  place  of  the  direct  tribute
(0o/>o()  which  hail  up  to  this  time  been  i*aid  by
the  snbjeut  allirH  ;  antl  the  change  wofi  made  with
the  hope  of  raising  a  greater  revenue  (Thuc.  vii.
881.  This  lax,  like  so  many  others,  was  fnnnc<l,
and  the  farioent  of  it  were  called  ((Voo-roXuym.

ddothea  lEtdotff'a).  A  seu-guddesa,  daughter
of  ProtcuH  (q.  v.),  the  old  mau  of  the  sea  (Hum.
Oil.  iv.  366).

Eidyllla. .See  iPYLurM.

Elualedeln  Poema.  A  name  given  to  tbe  ex-
t«n.-«ive  fragments  of  two  luicolio  iK>em!(  in  Latin
of  unknown  anthon^hip,  conlaineil  in  a  M$.  of  (he
tenth  cculury  found  at  Eiiiximleln.  One  has  forty-
nine  hexumetera  and  the  other  Ihirty-uinc.  The
flrst  is  a  poetical  contest  and  the  second  a  dia-
logne.  The  last  line  of  tbe  second  poem  is  that
of  Verg.  Ed.  iv.  10.  Both  poems  praise  Nero  in  a
Ailsome  vein.  For  criticism  see  Btlcheler  in  the
Bheiu.  AVmtfnm,  xxvi.  *Ztr>;  and  Peiper  in  the  pref-
ace Ui  hi«  Smrrar  Tfaff.  KUppl.  (Brt^lait.  IH70).  Tli*
Style  resemhltts  that  of  Calpnmins  ii\.v.\

IQtOli  ('HTwvl.  A  town  in  Tlirnce,  at  the  month
of  the  Slrymon,  twenly-five  stadia  fVnm  Ampbipo-
lis,  of  whtcb  It  was  tbe  barbour  (Thnc.  Iv.  10S).

Biren  or  Iren  (ftpif,  V^r).  Tbe  Ibinl  doss  of
Sl>»rtat)  youth  with  rvgard  to  age,  Ui«  seni-e  being:


wo'tSet  (aged  7-I8U  juWlprntt  {Iti-^),  !^i  (9»-39V
Tbe  last  were  distingniabcd  again  sa  v^wtuumi
or  at^mputf  according  a«  they  were  near  tbe  bi-
er or  upper  limit  (Plut.  iyf.  I7j.  Tbe  buy*  ud
youths  formiug  a  fiova  or  tX«  chonc  as  their  Inadn
(dovwyut)  tho  wisest  and  hraveat  of  the  ^hi
(Plut.  ih. ;  Son.  Uep.  Lac,  \\.  U).  These  Itadm
excepted,  the  i^KUfc  luirtook  with  tboir  oUent/
the  couim^iti  ratal  (avtip^'ia).  See  UUtler,  Zht-iaii,
ii.  'A\h  :  Giltjert,  SlaatBatterlh.  1.  pp.  68,  71 ;  awl  tlw
article  Kdccation;  on  the  form  of  tbe  wcnl,«M
Kuliu's  Ztiltchy.  viii.  G^j ;  I'kitol.  x.  431 ;  and  Curt
*(Mrf.  iv.  1,  116.
EiiCn6  [Elpifvi)).  See  Invjitu
SireaiSD^  Uip4(rio»vi). See  PYANKl*stA.

Eisagogeia  {tta<r*<ayt\t).  In  Attic  law,  atrnn
which  denotes  (1)  tiie  name  of  any  ordiuuiy  tii«t
istnites  to  whom  application  was  made  for  tin
pnr]K)se  of  briuging  a  caae  (tiVoyfifl  into  the
proper  court;  and  {"2.)  particular  Dingitlnua,
prtdiftbly  ten  in  number,  chosen  by  lot  to  07
{fio-ifydc)  ftouie  anrts  of  i^i^voi  fitxtu.  See  Eum-
soi  DiKAl ;  and  the  Corp.  Intcript,  Or.  i.:r,33.

Etsangelia  (tivayytXla).  Properly,  an  amn>iii«»>
ment  made  in  preiieuce  of  a  legal  authotitv.  li
Attio  jiirisprndeuce  it  was  n  npecial  fumi  of  pnt^
tic  prottccntiiiu,  institutrd  eM[ieciAlly  fur  uSeacM
which  ap|Hrarcd  tu  iuHict  injury,  dirvctly  or  intl-
ructly,  npiin  the  State,  but  which  it  was  intpncti-
cahli!  to  prutHTUte  under  Itie  regular  and  ct»loiiiai7
procc-dnrc.  Thn  accusation  was  put  into  viiiiof
and  hauded  iu  to  the  Senate;  if  tho  gcnsl*-  i*
coived  it  the  accused  was  arresteil,  or  hod  i»p«
three  peraons  to  stand  surety  for  him.  But  ifik*
charge  were  one  of  treasoti  or  on  attack  upon  tb«
coubtitntioD  this  woe  iint  allowed.  If  tbe  roliig
on  the  guilt  or  iniiocence  of  tl»e  accnscd  wfnts-
favouraiile.  the  Senate  il«elf  fixed  tbe  peiiallfiH^
poaiug  it  fell  sliort  of  tbe  amount  which  lay  nitita
itM  comiteieuee  <500  drachmae,  or  $f<i).  If  uot.tW
Senate  referred  tbe  caae  at  oiicu  to  one  of  the  eaotu
of  the  Heliaea.  or  even  to  the  <KicXi;<rui.flr  Amm-
bly,  to  which  the  proseentor  might,  indeed,  fct«
appltctl  ft^mi  the  lirst.  If  the  ecrlwa  decidtJ  to
take  up  the  case,  the  Ant  thiug  it  did  nas  t^iX
the  peualty  in  cose  there  were  uo  legal  provi»i«*
on  this  point.  It  then  either  entered  on  tbr  if
vestigutton  and  decided  the  case  or  hauded  it  ovrr
to  a  court  of  law.  The  name  (i<ra-yy«AiA  wtu  ■!*■>
given  to  tbe  prosecution  of  judgos  in  «tBt»(attit'
li-ct  of  their  duties,  and  to  certain  charges  Isilp^
Wfore  tlie  arrhous^tmmely,  charges  Mgniostf^'l'
dreii  f4ir  ill-treatment  of  jtareutH,  against  biulapi^
for  ill-treatmeot  of  beircRsee,  aud  a^foinst  gasr^t'
ans  for  ill-treatoieut  of  their  worda. See  AkIOK-

Eiaiteria  (tlo-ir^pui,  so.  Upa).  Sacriflcfs  o^tm
»t  Achen.H,  up<ni  entrance  into  office;  accardliif  "*
Snidas  (k.  T.I  n|K>u  the  fint  day  of  the  non  ;'<'''•
which  in  ctm5iet{uenc«  wan  kept  iia  a  linliilsy.  ^
sides  the  higher  magiMraCes,  the  Senate  vttti*
tiatrrifna  through  one  of  its  membera  choBrii  fct
the  purpose  (Demoetb.  c.  Mid.  p.  5^.  4  11'>
When  an  embaM^  sot  ont,  at  least  nu  iht  m^J
important  oecaeions,  tbe  Senate  and  pnad  '
magistrateo  offered  oVtr^pui  fur  it«  soreeV  '
dined  together.  Tho  f {1x17^141  on  going  •■**
offiw  (He»ych.t  :m)  Icrs  well  attested  {Sebfti^*'
Jtarmhlifs,  p.  306).

Eisph&ra  (ttV^)Ml). An  {ncome-tax,  lovir^  ""'l


ELAEA


67fi


ELAOABALUS


in  extraordioary  cases.  It  was  based  on  the  So-
louian  division  of  classes  iuto  PattacoHonudimnij
SipjKi»,  Zeugitae,  aiid  Tkeia,  the  last  of  wbom
were  not  taxed  at  all.  The  taxable  capital  was
estimated  at  twelve  times  a  mau's  net  income
as  estimated  by  himself.  In  the  case  of  the  Pett-
taeonmnedimni,  with  a  minimum  income  of  600
drachmae  and  minimum  capital  of  6000  drachmae
(  =  1  talent,  or  $1080),  the  whole  property  was
treated  as  taxable  capital  (n'/uj/ui).  In  the  case
of  the  Hippeii  (300-3600  drachmae],  five  aixths  in
that  of  the  Zeugiku  (150-mOO  drachmae),  five
ninths,  or  1000  drachmae.  The  first  instance  of
the  levy  of  an  eiephora  occurred  in  B.C.  43ti.  In
B.C.  376  another  metho^l  of  levying  it  was  iutro-
dnced  under  the  arohon  Nausinicus.  According
to  this,  the  taxable  capital  of  the  bigbest  class
was  fixed  at  one  fifth  of  the  whole  property.  The
resident  aliens  (fUrotKoi),  as  well  as  the  citizens,
were  liable  to  pay  the  eiaphora.  On  the  method
of  collecting  it,  see  Stmhoriae.

Znaea  ('EXaui).  An  ancient  city  on  the  coast
of  Aeolis  in  Asia  Minor,  which  at  oue  time  served
aa  the  harbour  of  Pergamns.  The  gnlf  on  which
it  stood  was  named  after  it  Siuns  Elaiticns.

IQaeotheaitun  ((Keuo6i<riov).  The  oiling-room
in  a  set  of  baths,  where  the  oils  and  unguents
were  kept,  and  to  which  the  bather  retired  to  be
robbed  and  anointed.  In  large  establishmenta  a
separate  chamber  was  appropriated  for  this  pur-
poee,  adjoining  the  frigidarium,  or  cold  chamber
(Vitrnv.  v.  11,  2). See  Balneas.

filaeoB  or  Etona  ('EXcuoSr  or  'EXcoCr).  A  town
on  the  southeast  point  of  the  Thracian  Cbersonesos,
with  a  harbour  and  an  keroum  of  Ptotesilalis.  See
Herod,  vi.  140.

XOagabUna.  (1)  Elaqabal,  a  deity  among  the
Pbcenicians.  This  deity,  according  to  Capitolinus
(Jfaer.  9)  aud  Anrelius  Victor,  was  the  Sun.  Lam-
pridins,  however,  fluctnates  between  the  Snn  and
Inpiter,  while  Spartianna  (Caracall.  11)  leaves
it  uncertain.  The  orthography  of  the  name  is
also  disputed,  some  writing  it  Elagabal,  others
Eleagabal  and  Alagabal.  Herodian  gives  us  an
accurate  description  of  the  form  under  which
this  deity  was  worshipped  ( v.  3,  10  foil. ) ;
he  also  informs  us  that  by  this  appellation
the  San  was  meant,  and  that  the  deity  in
qaeetion  was  revered  not  only  by  the  Syr-
ians, but  that  the  native  satraps  and  bar-
barian kings  were  accustomed  to  send  splen-
did presents  to  his  shrine.  According  to
Herodian,  the  god  Elagabalus  was  worshipped
under  the  form  of  a  large  black  stoue,  round
below  and  terminating  above  in  a  point  —
in  other  words,  of  a  conical  shape.  This  de-
scription is  confirmed  by  the  medals  of  Emesa,
the  principal  seat  of  his  worship,  on  which
the  conical  stoue  is  represented.  So  also,  on  the
medals  of  Antoniuos  Pins,  struck  in  this  same
city,  an  eagle  appears  perched  on  a  cone,
Tbe  same  thing  appears  on  medals  of  Cara-
calla,  and  on  one  an  eagle  with  expanded
wings  stands  before  a  conical  stone  in  the
middle  of  a  hexastyle  temple.  (3)  M.  Au-
RELIU8  AntonTnub,  a  Roman  emperor.  He
was  the  grandson  of  Maesa,  sister  to  the  em-
press Inlia,  the  wife  of  Septimius  Severus.
Maesa  had  two  daughters,  Soaemias  or  Se-
miamira,  the  mother  of  the  subject  of  this  ar-


Ebgabtloa (Bast  tn  tb«  Cspltol,  Boms.)

tide,  aud  Mammaea,  mother  of  Alexander  Seve-
rus. The  true  name  of  Elagabalus  was  Varins
Avitus  Bassianns,  and  he  was  reported  to  have
been  the  illegitimate  son  of  Caraoalla.  He  was
bom  at  Antioch,  a.d.  204.  Maesa  took  care  of
his  infancy,  and  placed  him,  when  five  years  of
age,  in  the  temple  of  the  Snn  at  Emesa,  to  be  ed-
ucated as  a  priest ;  aud  through  her  influence  be
was  made,  -  while  yet  a  boy,  high-prieet  of  the
Sun.  That  divinity  was  called  in  Syria  Elagabal,
whence  the  young  Varins  assumed  the  name  of
Elagabalus.  After  tbe  death  of  Caracalla  and  tbe
elevation  of  Hacrinns,  tbe  latter  having  incurred .
by  bis  severity  the  dislike  of  tbe  soldiers,  Maesa
availed  herself  of  this  feeling  to  induce  the  offi-
cers to  rise  in  favour  of  her  grandson,  wbom  she
presented  to  them  as  tbe  son  of  the  murdered  Car-
acalla. Elagabalus,  who  was  then  iu  his  fifteenth
year,  was  proclaimed  emperor  by  the  legion  sta-
tioned at  Emesa.  Having  put  himself  at  their
bead,  he  was  attacked  by  Macrinns,  who  at  first
had  the  advantage;  but  he  and  his  mother  Soae-
mias, with  great  spirit,  brought  the  soldiers  again
to  the  charge  and  defeated  Macrinus,  who  wtis
overtaken  in  bis  flight  and  pnt  to  death,  a.d.  318.
Elagabalus,  having  entered  Antioch,  wrote  a  letter
to  the  Senate,  professing  to  take  for  his  model  Mar*
cus  Aurelins  Antoninus,  a  name  revered  at  Rome ;
and  he  also  assumed  that  emperor^s  name.  The
Senate  acknowledged  him,  aud  be  set  out  for  Rome,
but  delayed  for  several  mouths  on  bis  way  amid  fes-
tivities and  amusemeuts,  and  at  last  stopped  at
Nicomedia  for  tbe  winter.  In  the  following  year  he
arrived  at  Some  and  began  a  career  of  debauchery,
extravagance,  and  cruelty  which  lasted  tbe  re-
maining three  years  of  his  reign,  aud  tbe  disgust-
ing details  of  which  are  given  by  Lampridius,  Hero>
dian,  and  Dio  Cassias.  He  surrounded  himself
with  gladiators,  actors,  and  other  base  favourites,,
who  made  an  unworthy  use  of  their  influence.
He  married  several  wives,  among  others  a  Ves*


1a\.  TIi«  imitrriiil  paliirt?  liL't-aiiir  n  flr<-ni'  of  de-
Imuk-Ii  and  i>]»lmj  |>r<mtiliitiuti.  Klagal>aliis,  Ucing
jitlnrltcd  tn  tliu  ^iiiHTHtirioiitt  ufllie  Ka«t.  raised  n
ririii))]uoii  Ihi'PnIiilinc-  HIH  UitL*;  HxrimiHod  whotw
}i»iiitf  bo  boii-,  ami  plimrlei'cd  tlit*  tuuiplc.^  of  llt<!
ItoiuftD  gods  t«  enrich  IiIh  ov.u.  He  )iiit  to  (l«ath
many  Mnalont,  iiiid  fstnljlialicd  a  ncnale  of  woin-
4*n,  miller  tlie  i>rff>i<k-it(>y  of  liin  uiotlu-r.  SoaeiniMa,
wliicli  bndy  deiiidvd  :ill  ((ueHliontii  ruliiLivt;  to  vnnn-
t-'ti's  dnuuwH,  and  to  vikirH,  prpcetlt'iin*,  iihi]  atiiiiHc-
iiiontK.  lT<!nnrc  Iiih  |H)nrihra]  vent  oa  lii^li-prifAiul'
llie  Sim,  witli  u  rirli  tiarn  (in  Iiim  licud.  IIi.h  grnnil-
ni»llii>r  ltliu>fin,  mh^iii^  Iijh  foMvt  tluinj^lil.  i»f  oittu'il-
iatriij;  tlie  lIutiinnH  liy  a»N(M'ialiiif(  nitli  him,  lui
i.'iluHar,  IiIh  ytttiii^rr  roiiirin,  Ali'Xaiidrr  i^irvi'riiM,
»]w  MM>ii  l)i!caiiii)  ti  favonritt*  witlj  tin*  jhnijiIi!.
Klii^atiiiliiH,  wild  liait  ridiHCMitvd  to  ttir  awKiriH-
tioii,  Ubiranio  aftcmanlM  Jfabum  of  Ium  rouhiii  and
niMliiNl  to  deprive  iiitii  or  hin  liutiuui-D.  but  In-
could  not  (tlitaii)  the  cuu<M!Ut  of  the  S«uatf.  IIih
next  measure  v-&»  to  npt'cad  the  rcptirt  i»f  Alexan-
lUVit  death,  vrhich  protliiuctl  an  inKurrcetion  aiiiuii};
tlio  praetorians;  nii<1  K)a^aL>aliiH,  haviug  nrpaiivd
to  (ln^  ramp  to  cuii'll  the  niiuiny,  was  miir<iLM>;d,
tnpither  with  his  niotlirr  and  hia  favourites,  and
liiH  lioily  waH  thMiun  into  tlie  TiImt,  a.». '222.  He
waB  NUiTeeiled  by  Alexander  Severiia.  Ela^faba-
Irtw  wiiH  i)i>;lit«H-ti  yeai^  of  age  at  ibo  time  i>f  lii»>
death,  iiiul  bad  reiijintd  three  yean,  nine  iiiojiIIih.
and  four  days  (Laiiiprid.  Eiagah.  ;  HL-rodiati,  v.  'A
foil. ;  Dio  Cass.  Ixxviii.  AX  foil. ;  Ixiix.  1  foU.).

Claptaebolia  {i'Ka^j}sia\in).  Tht^  preatcat  f««li-
vat  in  tlit:^  town  of  Hyanipohs  in  I'ltocia,  and  culu-
bi-attd  in  hononr  of  ArU>mi».  in  eomnipninratiun,
it  i»  luiid,  of  a  victory  wliicli  its  inhabitants  liail
gaine^l  over  the  Thewaliaii^t,  who  had  ravaged  the
€uiiutry  and  reduced  tlii;  PbuciaiiH  in  the  ueigb-
boiirliood  of  the  to^vn  nearly  to  tlie  la«it  exlreni;-
ty  (I'hit.  l>f  Mai.  I'irl.  p.  iiU  H  ;  Paiisan.  x.  ;15,  $  4),
The  only  pnrliiMilar  which  wm  know  of  ila  cidfi-
bratiiin  in,  that  a  peviiliar  kind  of  raku  (Ant^n;)
watt  inadt.'  on  tbu  occasion  <Atln.'u.  xv.  p.  64ti  e>.
TlioMc  cake,'*  wei'e,  on  their  name  iutJieate»,  i»roba-
hly  made  in  thv  shape  uf  a  stag  or  a  deer  aud  of-
fered to  the  goddess.

ElapbeboUon  (  EAa(^i7;9oXcuij).  The  ninllr  raniitfa
of  Uiu  Altii:  year,  uOHWcring  to  tbL*  la.'<tt  of  March
and  the  early  part  of  April. Sec  CAt.ENi)AiitL:u.

Elftra  ('KXiipci).  Tho  dangbtcr  of  Orcboim^txis
or  MiriyUN,  and  niolbor  byZvnuof  tliegiautTitynn.
Tliioiigb  ft-ur  of  Ilur<5,  Zens  concealed  bcr  under
ib«  eiuth  (Apollod.  i.  4,  1).

Blatea  ('EXirrfin).  <l)  A  town  Id  PUocts  (Pau-
mn.  X.  'M,  $  1),  Httuated  near  tlie  Cepliisaus  hi  a
fertile  viilley,  which  was  an  important  paas  from
Thrxnaly  to  iJtteotia.  {'2}  A  town  in  Ptiloogiotis  in
Thntuialy,  near  Goiini.  {'S)  Or  KlatrI'U,  u  town  lu
KpintN,  »<'ar  the  (»oart:uM  ttf  the  Cocyttu.

EUtus  ('KAarofl.  One  of  tbu  Lapitbae,  and
fathirr  of  PolypIieiniiH  aud  of  Caeuetia,  vrbo  in
hence  called  Kliitcio-s.

Elaver.  The  unHlern  AlHr^r  ;  n  river  in  Aqiilto-
iii»,a  tribniiiry  uf  the  Ligor  {Loire).

Elea. Sff  Veua.

Eleatlc  SohooL See  PmLOsoi'iuA.

Bleotra  ( 'HA/ifT;>o  ).  (Il  Om^  of  the  Oceanidea,
wife  (if  Atliw,  and  molher  i»f  Danlamis  by  Zens
(Ovid,  Fast.  iv.  31).  (2)  A  daughter  of  Atlaa  and
Pkiun^,  and  one  of  tbu  Pleiadtw. (Seo  PuilADBS.)


■  nur-
«l,^^


I'A)  One  of  lliA  danghlerii  of  Agamemnon  ti\.r.\.
\'\n*u  the  iniinb-rnf  JM-r  father.  afL«r  bin  relnrtifniB
I'roy,  Klectra  reticiied  bet  hrtitlwr
OrxMlo*,  tbeu i|nitc young.  {n«
the  fury  of  Aegi»tbn»,  by  deapKlrb-
ing  him  to  tho  court  of  lier  ■nick'
titropbioa,  kiug  of  Phocia. Vatr
Oreetes  formed  the  Mell-knovuai-
raebmeiit  for  bis  roit!viu  PjImIo,
wbieb,  ill  tbn  end,  li^d  to  tlie  aiu-
riage  of  Elitctni  with  tlial  ji
Ateordiiig  to  inio  account,  K
had  pri'vioutily  been  coaiiirllpil,'
Acgirtlhus,  to  lH.-coute  the  nrifcflf*
ELi*rtn.  Myceiieaii  riihtic,  who,  hnvlu^  »■

gardeil  her  meiely  aa  a  nucwi  iniit
foiifidt^l  to  btm  by  the  gotht,  restored  bcr  luOiw-
t*'!i  on  ilir^  rcinrii  of  that  prince  lo  Myeeiiac  uil
«»a  liiH  aeceAHion  to  the  thn>ne  of  bin  antvtnni
Llectm  iKieame,  by  Pyladrs,  tlio  mother  of  t«u
win»,  8ti-opUiuH  and  Siedon.  Her  atory  ba«  frinnrf
the  basis  of  ihroo  extaut  plays,  the  CAiw^Jori  of
Aeacliylus,  and  the  AVecfrrt  of  .S«>pbocleaanii  Eurij*-
ides. Sffe  r>r<FJ4TRS,

Elecuidea  ZnaQJae. See  Ekidaxu^.

Electnun  {ip^t^poc  or  ifXtirrpw).  Lciwint  lu>
maiiilained  {  Vrher  dit  MtlatU  im  dm  S^jpt-l*-
nrliri/tt'H,  Appendix)  that  ibe  early  (im-k  ito^
wufl  to  employ  the  m&svulint^  form  when  lit  loil-
tnrc  of  guhl  auil  silrcr  waa  intended;  th«  n^dler
form  when  the  mineral  which  we  call  aiiiWrwM
meant.  U  ia  likely  that  the  OrecltH  wrrr  »^
quainted  in  very  early  timea  wilb-tbe  use  Urn-
her,  tnide  hi  Ibis  mineral  having  taken  place  in
prvdiistorie  daya  between  North  and  South  KnrnrT'
Tlii'y  nni»l  alno  have  l>ei«u  early  arqtmiiilMl  vilh
tho  com|HMinded  nietiil,  Kince  gold  alike  ia  Aa*
anil  Euvi>]H!  ia  commonly  found  mixed  with  til^-
Which  of  the  two  Huh«lanc^a,  theroforer  wftsBi*^
rallrd  eleclriiin  in  a  mailer  <|uit«  opvn  to  dispute
Tlu'y  will  be  .spoken  of  in  turn.

(1)  Amukr. Beads  of  anilier  were  found  m  tti0
royal  tombs  at  Myt-enae,  and  chemiral  iiiial)">'*
(Scliliemann,  Tirtfns,  p.  :t7lt)  has  proved  (Hal  iii»*
amber  came  from the  Baltic  and  not  frrtoi  (I**
where. Similar  beads  have  altto  boi<n  fouml  intl"*
very  early  t^imba  at  Talysn«  in  Rboilwi. At  ali"*"
periml  amber  i»  mentioned  in  the  fWjiMrjf  (x'-***»
xviit.S9&)  vus  »  ntatcrial  of  necklac«.'«. In  on*  <*
IbetKj  pa^KUgea  tbo  necklace  t«  a{Kiken  ofaanniot-'
port  from  Pbmnicta. It  is  alao  utalwl  (iv.73)  ih**-
the  walla  of  the  palace  of  Mcnelalla  were  adotw**"
with  amber,  aa  well  as  with  gold,  silver, and  ivoT\"  —
Tho  author  of  tbo  Shu-Id  of  Hrraclrt,  a«rnl»e'l'
Heaioil,  opeaks  of  that  shield  (Uliau  adorned  «i<"
electmni,  in  which  caae,  bowever,  the  meUl  w*3^
be  meant. In  Sonth Italy  amlier  wm  xmtA  ' ^
the  archaic  periwl  aa  a  material for  ataiwlt**"
and  reliefo;  many  Bi>pcinu"ii8  of  Ibis  kind  uf  ^'""'^
arti  in  tbt^  RntiHli MiiMMim. It  xr.  pmbalile  1^**
the  umtH-r  of  early  Oreece  wu.h  imported  !it 'l*^
Pbo-niciauM  who  aaileil n>nnd the  coast  U>  I^***
north  of  Kiir«i[*e,eiipetially  in  view  of  tlH»  fft'H'^**
after  the HoHu-ric  Age  amber  dJhapprarrJ  fc*"*'
Greek  tombs,  and  docs  not  again  tignre  tiidi' *""
man  times,  when  a  regular  trado  with  (h*  W*^'*
coaat  had  sprung  np.

(2)  MiXKji  (i(»U)  AND  SiLVKH.  Tlie  pailifrf**'"
tain  mention  of  this  mixed  met«I  »^  pWf^
(rather  ^XficT^r)  is  in  Sophoobw'a  jBffjww-l'*'


ELECTRYON


577


ELEPHANTINE


vhere  the  Babstance  is  said  to  come  from  Sardis;
fur  Sardis  by  the  Pactolus  was  uoted  in  Hnttqiiity
4UI  the  place  wbeuce  came  tbe  river-gold,  mixed
wfaen  fonud  with  a  considerable  percentage  of  sil-
ver. Herodotus,  however,  speaking  of  tUis  same
Sardian  nietal  iu  connection  with  the  donarin  of
<;roesna  to  Delphi  (i.  50),  calls  it  white  gold,  XtvK^s
Xpva-os.  Pliny  remarks  {H.N.  xxxiii.  $  60}  that
j;uld  is  invariably  found  mixed  witb  silver  (which
is  true),  and  that  when  tbe  proportion  of  silver
reaches  a  fifth  tbe  metal  is  called  electnim.  He
adds  that  electrum  was  made  by  art  as  well  as
fuuud.

This  white  gold  or  electrum  is  used  on  the
evrord-bladea  found  at  Mycenae  for  purposes  of
inlayiug.  In  later  times  it  was  used,  as  being  a
harder  material  tbau  gold,  for  objects  in  which
burdness  was  desirable.  By  far  tbe  most  impor-
tant use  to  which  it  was  put  was  as  a  material  for
■coioB.

Iu  tbe  seventh  century  B.C.,  or  possibly  late  in
tlie  eighth,  the  kings  of  Lydia  began  to  issue
etaniped  money  of  electrum,  using  probably  the
nietal  in  its  natural  state,  and  the  maritime  cities
«f  tbe  Asiatic  coast  and  of  Enboea  adopted  the
idea. (See  Pondera.) For  some  time,  until  silver


Earl;  Rlectrnm  Stater,  proboblT  stnick  at  Uilatiu
before  ko.  633. (BrttlHO  MuBcum.)

was  first  minted  at  Aegina,  all  the  coinage  of  the
world  consisted  of  stamped  pellets  of  electrum,
tboiigh  no  donbt  nnstamped  bars  of  gold  and  silver
«ironlated  with  them.  It  is  observed  by  Mr.  Head
<.ViiinisiHa(ic  Chronicle,  1875,  p.  254),  in  his  account
of  early  electmm  coins,  that  the  mixed  metal  had
two  advantages  over  pure  gold  in  circulation :  (1)
it  was  more  durable;  (2)  the  proportionate  value
-of  gold  to  silver  being  13^  to  1  (Herodotus  says  13),
and  electmm  being  of  three-fourths  tbe  value  of
gold,  each  coin  of  electmm  would  pass  as  the
equivalent  often  silver  bars  of  equal  weight.

CroesDB  is  believed  to  have  first  introduced  into
Asia  coined  money  of  gold  and  silver  in  place  of
«lectrum. See  Numismatics.

Zilaotxi^on  ( ^UXncrpvav ).  Son  of  Perseus  and
Andromeda,  and  father  of  Alcmen^,  the  wife  of
Amphitryon. See  Amphitryon.

Slectiyontf  {'HXticrpvinn}).  A  patronymic  given
to  Alcmeu^,  dangbter  of  Electryon.

Tn«»gia  (cXrycioy,  a  distich  consisting  of  an  hex-
ameter line  followed  by  a  pentameter;  tben  iu
the  plural,  a  collection  of  snch  disticbs,  and  hence
Atytia).  The  general  term  in  Greek  for  any  poem
written  in  tbe  elegiac  metre,  a  combination  of  the
-ilactylic  hexameter  and  pentameter  in  a  couplet.
The  word  tXtyos  is  probably  not  Greek,  hut  bor-
rowed from  the  Lydiaus,  and  means  a  plaintive
melody  accompanied  by  the  flute.  How  it  hap-
pened that  tbe  woi-d  was  applied  to  elegiac  poetry,
the  earliest  representatives  of  which  by  no  means
-(■unfined  It  to  mouruful  subjects,  is  doubtful.  It
may  be  that  the  term  was  obosen  only  in  reference
ti>  the  musical  setting,  the  elegy  having  originally
bt-en  accompanied  by  the  flute.  Like  the  eiiic,  tbe
13


elegy  was  a  production  of  the  lonians  of  Asia  M  inor.
(See  Epos.)  Its  dialect  was  the  same  as  that  of
the  epos,  and  its  metre  only  a  variation  of  the
epic  metre,  the  ]>entameter  being  no  more  thou  an
abbreviatiou  of  tbe  hexameter.  The  elegy  marks
the  first  transition  from  tbe  epic  to  lyric  proper.
Tbe  earliest  representatives  of  the  elegy,  Callinns
of  Ephesns  (about  B.c.  700)  and  Tyrtaeus  of  Apbid-
nae  in  Attica  (about  b.c.  600),  gave  it  a  decidedly
warlike  and  political  direction,  and  so  did  Solon
(B.C.  640-559)  in  his  earlier  poems,  tbongb  his  later
elegies  have  mostly  a  contemplative  character.
Tbe  elegies  of  Theoguis  of  Mcgara  (about  B.c.  540),
though  gnomic  and  erotic,  are  essentially  political.
The  first  typical  representative  of  the  erotic  elegy
was  Mimnernms  of  Colophon,  an  elder  contemporary
of  Solon.  The  elegy  of  mourning  or  sorrow  was
brought  to  perfection  by  Siraonides  (q.v.)  of  Ceos
(died  B.G.  4^).  After  him  tbe  emotional  element
predominated.  Antimnchus  of  Colophon  (about  B.c.
400)  gave  the  elegy  a  learned  tinge,  and  was  thus
the  prototyi>e  of  tbe  elegiac  poets  of  Alexandria,
Phanocles,  Philetas  of  Cos,  Henuesianax  of  Colo-
phon, Bnd  Callimachua  (q.  v.)  of  Cyren^,  the  master
of  them  all.  The  subject  of  the  Alexandrian  elegy
is  sometimes  the  passion  of  love,  with  its  pains
and  pleasures,  treated  through  tbe  medium  of
images  and  similes  taken  from  mythology ;  some-
times learned  narrative  of  fable  and  history,  from
which  personal  emotion  is  absent.

This  type  of  elegy,  with  its  lenmed  and  obscure
manner,  was  taken  up  and  imitated  at  Rome  tow-
ards the  end  of  tbe  Bepublic.  The  Romans  soon
easily  surpassed  their  Greek  raaBtcrs  both  in
warmth  and  sincerity  of  feeling  and  in  finish  of
style.  Tbe  elegies  of  Catnllus  are  among  their
earliest  attempts;  but  in  the  Augustan  Age,  in
the  bands  of  Cornelius  Gallos,  Propei:tiu6,  Tibul-
Ins,  and  Ovid,  tbe  elegiac  style  was  entirely  ajipro-
priated  by  Latin  literature.  Ovid,  iu  his  Faati,
showed  how  a  learned  subject  could  be  treated  in
this  metre.  From  his  time  onward  the  elegiac
metre  was  constantly  employed,  and  was  used  even
in  schools  for  practice  in  style.  In  the  later  liter-
ature it  was  applied,  like  the  epic  metre,  to  every
possible  subject,  as,  for  instance,  by  Rutilius  Nama-
tianus  in  tbe  description  of  bis  return  from  Rome
to  Gaul  (a.d.  416).  In  the  sixth  century  a.d.  the
poet  Maximianus,  born  in  Etroria  at  the  beginning
of  that  century,  is  a  late  instance  of  a  genuine  ele-
giac poet.

On  the  elegy,  see  an  article  by  O.  Crnsins  in  the
Wochenschrift  Jiir  klatt.  Phil,  for  m85 ;  Eichner,  De
Poetarum  Lat.  Diatichu  (Breslan,  1866);  Prien,
Sjfmmetrie  und  Sesponsion  der  rSm.  Elegit  (Liibeckf
1H67);  Madvig  iu  his  Adrertaria,  ii.  110;  and
Gruppe,  Die  iSm.  Elegie,  ed.  by  Schulze  (Berlin,
1884).

XUenchus.  A  large  drop  car-ring  consisting  of
a  single  pearl ;  also  of^en  worn  as  a  bangle  (Plin.
H.N.  ii.  56;  Juv.  vi.  459). See  Inauris.

Eleoa  (*EXcor).  An  Athenian  deity  personify-
ing pity  (Paosan.  i.  17,  $  1).

Elephantine  CEX«0amyi;  tnjtrot).  An  island  in
the  Nile,  witb  a  city  of  the  same  name,  opposite  to
Syenc,  and  seven  stadia  below  tbe  Little  Cataract.
It  was  the  frontier  station  of  Egypt  towards  Ethio-
pia, and  was  strongly  garrisoned  under  the  Per-
sians and  the  Romans  (Ptol.  iv.  5, }  70).  The  orig-
inal name  of  the  island  wns  Ebo — Kb  being  in  tbe


KLEIMIANTIS


678


ELErsIXIA


laii^iAf;*^  of  bHToglyjilitcs  symbolical  of  ihv  eV-
ftliiint  Hint  nf  ivory,  Hitc  wh-s  a  ti*iii|iln  nf  CnuphiB
iiiid  here  iiIho  it  Nilometpr.  Many  tmporlmit  in-
(KTiptidtiM  liAVi-  lH>eit  fiiniid  lirn-:  eiikI  until  l*i'i
(wIk-u  th«y  wvTK  tl«!(ttroyc»l  by  lliu  governor)  tliert'
existiHl  tht;  niiiiH  o(  iliu  teniiik  niiil  of  n  gmtiitv
gHleway  nf  ilu;  time  of  Aluxnntler  III.  See  Ma-
riotU",  .V/iirii/mcMtB  tif  I'ftitcr  t^i/ppt  {1H77}:  A.  B.
E(1vTui(l»,  .4  Thuu»uHii  MUrt  up  the  SHc  (1^7).

Elephantla  CTJi.ttftamis).  The  anthor  of  erotic
:iijil  iiiikHr*.Mit  IxittkH,  (jeiiorully  Hii[)|inM-iI  to  Iiilv*^
lieeii  It  wouiQU,  but  of  whose  perMiiiality  nothing
i«  kitowii. 8«e  Mart.  xii.  4't,  4 ;  8n«t  775. 4X

ElApbaa  <i\i<pas,  rbttr:  flfphoHlut,  poet.,  Verg.
fitunj.  iii.  'SH;  .l^-ii,  iii.  4(»4.  vi.  r<H>|.  Afrip«i»  ivorj-
'vrnn  known  lo  tb<>  itucif'Dt.t,  throngh  rhn'ntciaii
tnulp,  long  lH.*|V)n:  %\w  i-h-phnnt.  Acrtirilin^iy,  parly
writers — HotiiiT,  H^tiiiwl,  Piinlnr — niHMik  nf  the
iaiiE(<rinl  oiily.  HKnulnlitH,  iiiiliMMl,  niia  nvvitr^  nf
iut  origin  liv.  I'll:  Plin.  U.  S.  viji.  fy  7).  but  tb«
Orrok»  generally  only  Wvam<>  acqitaiiitctl  with  tlic
Btiiiunl  frotn  tlic  MaciMloniau  expc4lttiouH  into  Amih,
Che  KoniatiA  from  the  Hrrivjil  of  Pyrrhtis  in  Ituly.
Both  word*— fX«^r.  (friir  — poswibly  contain  the
Egyptiitn  fjb," Ivory. elephant"
[  Sc  h  ritder,  Ltnguitl.  hi^ttar.
/iir!tr*.  :Hr  HaHdriggvnch.  i.  71  .
Tim  use  of  ivnry  in  the  man-
rifiK-riire  of  Hin:ill  olijfcts  nf  iiw
iir  onininfanl,  uihI  for  |inrp(tHt>N
of  <l«co  rat  iuti,  in  earljfsl  in
Kgypt  niicl  Assyria.  Thrn"  have
boon  funnd,  for  inittnniM-,  caHta-
oetH,  stirk-hoiiilleM,  hillH  anil
beftK.  comb!',  llntcR,  sc<;plrr»,
caitketx^,  Atatnt-ttoii,  niatlo  of  th«-
tiisk,  and  many  (Iif1(*r<'nr  arti-
L'les  of  I'nniitnre  inlaid  witli  it.
In  }lnnipr,  lit^sides  it»  einploy-
nieiil  wliMTi  carved  in  nmHH.  il
inreft^rri'd  (oincnnnectioii  with
wall.-',  donrK,  hnme88,  etc.,  and
viOH  then  probably  nltarhird  in  plntont  by  nails  Ic
It  metal  or  wooileii  (^^mnnd.  Iti  later  timt-s  lniv
inlaying  was  revtiti-d  lo,  and  ahnoNt  rtvi-ry  kind  of
funiiiiirL',  Bfl  bi'df.  ttofas,  throm^o,  carriages  «ven,
cnriclicd  with  th**  pivpioim  material.

Anuiiig  ohjeet^  not  eiiiinieriLtcd  above  may  he
meiUioni>(l  nmNkn  and  wntii)g-tablet«.  The  latter
(fiiXrot,  libri  rlrphantini).  w  ith  two,  three,  or  more
IwivcH  {tiiptifrini,  triptgcha,  ptntap-
It/rha.  >*tc.),  w«rf  either  entirely,
nr  had  tlit-ir  covers  inily,  of  ivorj-.
Those  extant  oi-o  eliielly  of  the
later  Honiaii  age.  They  ant  of  two
clitMises,  cotmHlarin  nnd  ecelesianiivi .
di.stingni!«he4l  by  the  subjects  of
thu  carvings  nn  their  cuvcii*.  the
former  being  tignres  of  coiisoIh  ut
the  pompa  rirrcflci'*,  iw/j«>einwrii,  eti'.,
while  ihe  hilter  tire  of  a  ilibliial
natiin*  ( Miiller,  Jrih.  ft.  Kuttxt,
^  Itl'i,  n.  :t).  Tbey  Men:  pi<eHenli-iI
To  offlceni  antl  digiittarie*  to  coiti-
nietnoraie  their  appointment, ^^.-o

DlI'TTCJIA.

Forfnriher  infonnalion  BeoH.  Blllmner,  TV-eAwof,
u.  TVi-wiit**/.  rf.  (retreric,  etc.,  ii.  3fi|-ii75,  when*  thei-e
ia  n  foil  bibliography;  and  of.  the  article  CilftVti-

XLKI-IIAN-nNA,


Elepbenor  C'EX#<^ijwtfy> ).  The  vm  of  CUI. nkiii
.iiiil  Mi-I.'iniitiie,  and  prinee  of  the  AbrtUt«4.  Uc  WM
one  of  the  ^nitors  of  Helen,  and  led  a  funr  aj^lntt
Troy.  Ijt'fore  which  city  he  w»i»  Klaiii  tiy  A);eii--ir.

Eleuainifi  (rn  '^\tv*ripia).  A  title  chietlj  4|i-
plit.-d  to  a  festival  held  liy  the  Alheniiuis  iii  ibo
nntnnni,  iti  hoiunir  of  Denieier,  Penrpbon^,  lod
Iitcehii^,  conMBting  of  wu-rilirew,  proccsnttun*,  luil
CMrtiiin  myttical  ceremoiiieH.  It  waa  mie  of  tltc
intwt  iuiiMirtanC  fejttivals  of  Ort-ece.

The  uiylhtcal  origin  of  the  KlcUftinU  b  coo*
taiue<l  in  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Demelcr.  «ld(li
t-elU  bow  Penwplioni*,  while  gothering  flowra,
wo*,  with  the  connivance  of  Zcii«,  carried  off  Itji
the  god  of  the  lower  world,  Ifadcf)  or  roly<b|;iiirn
(the  great  receiver);  and  how  hor  inotlicr  iMuc-
ter,  daughter  of  Rtien,  (wan-hing  diHtniclrdly  for
hi!r  child,  is  advirwHl  by  llecatl^  to  consnlt  He)!**,
who  mvn  nil  tliingn;  imd  how  Heliua  in  pity  tells
her  thai  Zeun  has  gninled  to  Hiiilei*  to  rsfiy  off
hur  daughter  t<i  l»e  his  wife.  Korthwith  \}mw\n
L-ltiiuges  hei-helf  iuto  an  old  Wdiiiati :  nnd  lu  sW
wnndera  forth  disconsolate  through  the  wiiHil  rIm
cornea  to  Klensia,  and  Bits  down  ou  tlw  cberrlM*
stone  by  a  well.  The  dangblen  of  CeleiiN  ll*
king  of  Elennis,  come  to  the  well  to  draw  w«lrt.
They  bring  her  to  their  home,  wbero  Mrtniiin.
wife  of  Celeiia,  gitea  liT  (be  htlesl  Iwmi  i:Wl'l,  C*»-
mopbiKiu,  to  utir»e.  Kut  l>einf(fr  i«  dtill  Wwnl
down  will)  grief;  aliu  sits  dignified  but  oil^nit  iit
hui-  room,  till  the  Je«ta  and  railler>'  of  lamW.  Il«
rtervaiit-ritaid,  at  last  make  her  smile.  Slw  rut-
m-nlH  to  take  food  atid  drink,  bnt  will  lii^(  d"
wine,  only  a  mixture  (xuxrvf)  of  water  with  \M-
ley-meal  and  mint  Days  go  on,  ami  llw  tUW
L>emopluiun  thrives  beyond  wh.it  mortal  cliil'
was  wont,  for  a  goddeiw  was  his  unne;  *\n  i»*d
to  anoint  him  daily  with  ambrosia  ond  plawlii"
in  the  rtro  by  night,  lint  a  little  mor*  liine  W'l
the  child  would  have  lieen  iiniHorlMl,  wlwti  oo'
night  Melnnira  kaw  the  nurse  pinoe  him  in  III'
tim  and  cried  alond  with  terror.  Then  llii"  BUf*"
of  DenieUT  bla/i-d  forth,  and  the  agwl  nnrw  Imw*"
fumed  henwdf  into  the  g<idiU-s»,  ttdd  who  she  «■*•
what  »lir  hiul  iutundiil  to  do.  and  how  th*t  tb*
llltle  failh  of  the  mother  had  tohbod  thorliiM"
immwluliiy,  and  tiunlly  hade  the  people  «fKJw
sis  to  eicct  a  temple  for  her  on  the  hill  altov*'  ib'^
fonntain,  when  ithe  her»elf  wnnld  prewriW  il*
Rervires  they  mimt  perft)rni  in  nnler  to  gain  her
favour.  They  diil  w),  and  Demcter  dwrlt  ihtn:'-
fthnnning  all  stworiiition  «ith  the  other  p><l»  *"**
had  been  pnrlies  to  Ihe  carrying  off  of  licf  ihiip*"
ter.  Fur  u  year  Demeter  d«eU  then? — a  )''*
(if  want,  for  nothing  grew;  and  the  Iiinns»  n«^
wonbl  have  perishwl,  had  not  ZeOB  agrrcl  1^*
iVi-tM^-pIiLMK?  should  retnru.  Gladly  did  rDrwH'"'
in*  ol>.>y  the  summons  nf  Hermes;  lint  Mii'ir*  l**^
*iiaded  her  to  eat  a  ]M>megrnnnte  see*!  lief"**  *'**'
left,  and  that  prevent»«l  her  Kla>Hng  awnt  ff**"
liini  for  a  wholn  year.  Bo  Penwphon*^  lytB™**
and  gtvitt  in  the  joy  nf  Dtolhcr  anil  dungtiler,  '^
wliii-ii  the.  fiiilhfitl  Hecat*^  Hymttathives.  R'*'*  *f
then  di'iit  down  liy  Zi-nn  Ihi  her  daughter  «i''t  y*
feels  the  reconciliation.  The  corn  cornea  "I'  **
abiiitdance  in  the  Karinn  plain;  Uemeter  rrl"'"*
to  Olympus  to  dwed  Arilli  the  gods,  and  pnwt'''*
tn  Celenti  and  to  his  nous  Triptnlemns,  Dv*!*
and  Enniolpiis  the  soletnnitiea  and  divine  ser*i<*
that  wen-  in  fittnrv  time  to  he  paid  hrr ;  ■••'
hence the fainouH Elensiiiian 5Iy»trrie»  w*l»  *


ELEUSINIA


579


ELEUSINIA


direct  appointment  of  the  great  goddess  Dotneter
herself.

Sncb  wna  tbe  story  of  the  origin  of  the  myste-
ries  ;  but  how  tbe  mysteries  came  to  be  Atheuiau
dejH-nds  on  another  story,  which  concerns  tbe  un-
ion of  Elensis  with  Athens.  Erecbtbeus  warred
with  tbe  Kleasiniaiis  (Pansau.  i.  38,  3),  who  were
beeped  by  one  Enniolpiis,  a  Tbracian,  son  of  Posei-
don (ApoUod.  iii.  14, 4)  and  founder  of  the  mysteries
(Lncian,  Demon.  34).  Tbe  difficnlties  connected
with  tbe  exact  birthplace  and  genealogical  position
of  Eumolpns  (see  Roscher,  Lexikon  der  MythoL  s.  v.
Eumolptu)  we  may  pass  over,  remembering  that  he
is,  according  to  this  legend,  a  foreigner  (Pint.  De
£x«ifto,p.607, 10).  Elensis  was  conquered,  and  to
the  Athenians  fell  the  political  headship,  bnt  to
the  family  of  Enmolpns  and  the  daughters  of  the
Eteusinian  king  Celeus  was  assigned  the  bigb-
prieethood  {Upo^vria)  of  the  Elensinian  worship.
The  other  family  which  held  a  pciestbootl  in  the
mysteries,  the  Kerykex,  were  said  to  have  been  de-
scended from  Keryx,  the  sou  of  Enmolpns ;  though
the  family  itself  considered  its  ancestors  to  have
been  Hermes  and  Aglauros,  daughter  of  Ei'ecb-
tbeuB,  and  so  genuine  Athenians  (Pansan.  i.  38, 3).

Mysteries  were  celebrated  in  honour  of  Demeter,
Persephone,  and  Dionysus  in  Asia  Minor  (e.  g.  at
Cyzicus) ;  in  Egypt  on  Lake  Mareotis  (Strab.  xvii.
p.  800) ;  in  Sicily  at  Gela  and  elsewhere  (Herod,  vii.
1&3 ;  Diod.  Sic.  v. 77) ;  in  Boeotia  at  Plataea  (Herod,
ix.  en,  65, 101) ;  in  many  parts  of  Arcadia  (Pansan.
ii.  14.  1 ;  viii.  15, 1);  and  in  Messttnia  at  Andania
(Pansan.  iv.  1,  5).  But  tbe  most  splendid  and  im-
portant of  all  tbe  Elensinia  were  those  of  Attica,
which  may  be  regarded  as  having  consisted  of  two
parts:  (1)  the  Lesser  Mysteries  at  Agrae,  and  (2)
the  Greater  Mysteries  at  Elensis.

(1)  The  Lesser  Mysteries  at  Aorae  (rd  iv
'Aypait).  These  were  held  in  the  spring  at  Agrae,
a  place  on  tbe  lliaaos,  sontheast  of  the  AcropoUs.


There  is  no  donbt  that  they  were  held  in  the  month
Anthesterion,  when  there  were  the  first  signs  of
returuing  vegetation  jnst  after  field-work  began
(C.  /.  G.  103,  I.  20).  Tbe  exact  date  cannot  be
fixed,  bnt  Mommsen's  suggestion  is  most  pi'uba-
ble,  that  the  chief  day  was  tbe  SOtb,  the  same  day
of  the  mouth  as  tbe  Greater  Mysteries  wevo  held
on  in  Boedromiou,  to  which  tbe  Lesser  Mystcriea
bad  many  points  of  similarity,  even  in  matterH
connected  with  the  calendar  —  e.  g.  the  same
length  of  Ibe  mystery  truce  (C.  /.  O.  71).  Momm-
seu  supposes  that  tbe  19t.b  was  a  day  of  prepara-
tion, and  the  20th  and  21st  the  special  mystery
days.  These  Lesser  Mysteries  were  considered  an
a  prelude  to  the  Greater  (Schol.  on  Aristoph.  Plut.
d45),beiug  on  a  much  smaller  scale;  hut  initiation
in  the  Lesser  was  generally  required  before  tbe  can-
didate could  present  himself  for  initiation  into  the
Greater  (Plat.  Gorg.  497  C).  The  mysteries  at  Agran
consisted  probably  to  a  large  extent  of  purifications,
for  which  tbe  water  of  tbe  Ilissns  was  much  used
(Polyaen.  v.  17).  They  were  held  more  especially
in  honour  of  Persepbon^,  called  Fberrephatta  here,
than  of  Demeter  (Schol.  on  AristApb.  Pint.  845).
It  appears  that  the  carrying  off  of  Persephou^
was  the  most  important  representation  in  these
mysteries.  Again  we  hear  that  at  Agrae  the  fate
of  Dionysus  was  ponrtrayed  (fiifirifia  t&v  irtpt  roi'
Aiowo-oi',  Stepb.  Byzant.  s.  v.  'Aypai).  The  death
of  Dionysus-Zagreus  took  place  ou  tbe  13th  of
Anthesterion,  the  day  on  which  the  festival  of  tbe
Cbytri  was  held  (see  Diontsia);  so  perhaps  on
the  ninth  day  after,  the  31st  (for  funeral  rites  on
the  ninth  day  after  death,  tbe  ivara,  see  Aescb.
Cteaiph.  $  225),  the  funeral  ceremony  may  have
been  held  and  bis  violent  death  related  in  a
drama.  A  great  many,  especially  strangers,  were
initiated  into  these  mysteries  who  did  not  pro-
ceed to  initiation  into  the  regular  Eteusinia;  the
legend,  too,  said  it  was  for  tbe  purpose  of  initiat-


Tnitlitlon  of  Henusles. (Tam  Tnm  Putleapaeam.)


ELEL'SINIA


EiiK  Ilorni'lt;!*,  who  \Tas  a  stranger  and  nccording
m  llit^  priuii(i\e  regalalious  could  nut  bii  iiiilint-
e<l  iiitu  ihu  KleuMiiia,  that  tliCHt*  l.e»»er  Mysu-riL-n
werr  entaliUithed  (Scbol.  on  Ariatopb.  t'lnt.  64'*.
1013).

( a )  The  Gbkatkii  Mystkmiks  at  Elcitsis.
Two  rliiys  HTP  rtxcil  l»y  dt>ltiiiti>  vvideiicc  —  viz.  tbe
Iljth  Itni'dromioti  foi-  tlm'AXnit  fiverat  (PolyiiPii,
III.  II,  II ;  De  ahtr.  .4th.  'M'J  Ihi.),  and  tbe  2<'t1i  for
llu!  lacchns  day  (Ditt.  Cam.  lU,  /'A«r.  2H  ).  TIip
lixirg  of  otlinr  dnyr<  d^pviida  oti  coiijcctiint,  Ititt
<':in  he  dutiTniitird  ^vitti  h  coiisidrtillilr  dcgtrf  uf
certainly.  A  moiitli  bi-turi*  thu  iiiidilU!  tif  IbfiHli-n-
iiiiuii — I.e.  Ilin  middle*  of  McrBgeitiiJciii — tlic  (nrtur-
^txfkopot  lifted  to  niiitoiiiice  the  uiysttTV  tnico  to
tite  iieigld>ouriug  Slutcs  [Ae»ch.  Fain.  L^.  ^  13:1),
mi  net  to  give  thu  tirmiigors  time  to  innko  all  nr-
raugvnioiila  ut-cessary  for  a  visit  to  Athens.  Uiir-
iiig  tho  luttcr  portion  of  tbi>«  month  ttip  mtary
who  iittetided  to  be  initiated  nsed  tit  l>etake  him-
self to  aouie  |irivol)>  m;in  who  had  gout?  ilirnii[;Ii
all  the  grndefl  of  iniliiitinn,  wiu*  exaniineil  by  liim
OS  to  liiti  freediini  fnHii  Bin,  received  iusirnction  am
to  what  iMiiiticnlioiiH  nnU  ofTeringa  were  n«H-ossury
Ut  gnin  the  favtMir  of  tlie  go'ldeiueti,  nud  nnbtuiitt'd
tUa  ai'lnal  otfiiriugH  foi*  hit*  iiiApectiun  and  apjU'ov-
nt.  Tlii.«  inutrDelur  was  tbe  fivirraywyur.  Hv
eert'ilifd  to  ilie  lljfiuphatit  tbe  tltne«sof  tbe  appli-
CAnt  and  iittrodiiced  biiu,  tht8  proci.*ed)ug  being
apimrcnily  culled  a-viirtt<ns.  Sinoei-w  devotees  ap-
\*ear  to  liiivo  fiiMted  for  nine  days  (r.f.  Horn,  //jifnii,
/Vw.  47).  from  tbe  13tb  to  theSlut — i.  e.  at4i  notliiiig
(loriiig  the  day,  taking  whatever  fau<l  ihvy  did
take  betw<H.'ri  sininct  ami  sunriM*,  like  tbe  Mcibom-
edantt  during  Riinmdiiti ;  and  vniarieb  gi'm-rally
iip)ienr  to  hav«'  ;tl)st:i'iii«d  front  dona.'^tie  blrdti,  linh,
[Httnogninalrft.  a|iph>ft,  nnd  beAnH(I'ur|ibyr.  Jhnt.  iv.
lt>t.  On  tbe  IJlti  of  UoiMi-tiitiion  the  formal  )ii<!<eni-
blftge  [  iiyvfifiiit,  lleayrh.  s.  v.)  v.-a^  held  of  tliotw
eitlretiB  and  Plrangci-H  \tIio  intended  to  take  part
iu  tbe  mysteries^lbtuigh  tbJN  aiWL-inlilitgf  does  imt
apivenr  to  have  been  absolut^^ty  eK<^i-iiriii],  iil  h-jiKt
in  Into  tinie«  (C. /.  G.5a:i)-  At  tho  beginning  of
the  I'jtli,  in  the  eveniug  (tbe  day  i«  n-ckont-d  fr.mi
sitnaet  to  snntict),  Chabriat*'!)  distribution  of  wiiiv

10  IbeiRMiple  in  liouoiir  of  bi^t  \ictoryat  NaxtiH  used
lu  take  plaei^  (Pint.  I'bor,  r>);  aiid  the  next  niorn>
ing  btigan  the  first  formal  net  of  the  ft'.<>tival — \iz.
tlie  irpopptjiTir  or  *AX(i8f  fxinrrm.  A  proelamation
w»H  luadu  by  the  ArcLuii  UaMilens  (I'oll.  viii.  90)
and  by  the  iiiero|>hant  and  Dadilebut  in  tho  8lon
Hoccild  (Schol.  oil  ArUloph.  ^ai».  3l>iM.  for  tlie  deitart-
iii-u  of  all  atrangurs  and  nil  innrdeivrs;  and  tlicii
tho  onlerfor  pnrilication  given,"  Ye  my^tae,  to  tlie
ai'at"  Thn  "sea"  irati  eHiini'tinieH  the  PinietiMlPlnl.
rhot:  !^),  tlinngli  probably  only  in  lirae  of  Attica
Iwing  4KienpiiMl  l>y  L-nraiie*;  but  geniM-ally  itio  'Pfi-
roi,  two  Halt  «itr»>auis  ou  the  Sacred  Road,  onr  dedi-
eatod  to  Demetcr,  the  oilier  to  Con?,  wliieh  coo-
taiuBil  IUIl  that  tbe  priests  alone  were  allowed  to
CAt  (Fansaii.  i.  3^.  1 ;  He^tyeb.  s.  v.).  Tlie  next  day,
the  17lh.  saerttieet)  {'upfla)  were  offered  for  the
wfui.v  of  tbe  Slate  by  the  Arclion  Daailens  and  the
f'irifirXirrai  In  the  Eleusioinni  at  Atbene>;  and  at  all

^  ihc^sc  f.neritlcC8  tbe  &ta)poii>(  forvign  Stales  iHi'tii  to
have  liiken  part  (Kurip.  Sujipl.  l~:i).  Tins  night  of
the  lH(h  may  have  lieen  8)M!nt  by  tbi>  vvry  d«vout
111  «lei'|)ing  in  tli(>  Temple  nf  AeMcuUpius.  south-
wc«t  of  the  Acrnpoliii,or  in  the  laccheuni  4B«>cckb
nu  C.  I.  fi.  4H1).  nlM»  called  the  Temple  of  DeniLter.  i

11  woa  junt  w  hero  the  n>ad  from  rbe  Fimt^us  rDteh-'d  .


At  he-UN  fPuuKan.  i.2,4)  Tliu  early  morning  of  Ibu
day  till  about  9  a.m.  wok  devoted  to  nrdinar>  lion-
McitH,  iiM  we  lind  deeret-a  iaaiufl  hrarin^;  Ihnt  ditt
[  Momin?MMi,  11)1.  95,  '££t,  226).  Aflcr  this  \ioai  the
Kpidaiiria  was  celebrated  in  tbe  Temple  of  Dmumm
or  laechiis  and  iu  the  Temjde  of  Ae««aUplni.  It
wad,  as  lias  been  seen,  a  supplementary  soerifiM  lot
thosi.>  who  canie  late,  and  legend  said  it  wa^iuili-
tiited  for  tbe  sake  of  Aesentapins,  who  binuMlf
mine  ^Mv  for  the  mytteries.  iKaibtless,  howrTfr
the  tliougbt  really  lay  in  thii4,  that  AeHcoUpm
was  snpjKJwd  by  bi»*  wondrous  skill  to  havn  nii««l
ngHin  Incrbiis  froiti  Ihi*  dfnd,  and  tbt;  ft^tival  i>tiib-
ably  wum  iiiriir)vtrai4f«l  in  tbe  Klenninla  uhiii  tlir
w'iirt«ljip  of  Kpiilaiirnfi  WeiiUK-'  coiiiiccrtid  wjib  tlui
of  AthHUs  (Ht'Kxl.  V.  82).  Meanwhile  tlteiv  wen
lieing  brought  from  Elensis  certain  religions  nb-
Jocts— playthings,  it  was  aaid.of  theebild  liceliu
— Ix)ue  [avrpayiikot),  top  [frrpuiiiKot),  ball  (<r^«ii^\
apples  (^^Xit),  tamlHMirine  (fjti^oc).  lookiiif-gliN
(?irojrTpoc},  fleece  (itokos),  fan  OiiKvov'),  and  sDoh  lite,
as  is  leaniod  from  Clement  of  Alexandria  trrotnjt
p.  ir>,  eil.  Potter;  ef.  Loberk,  A^laoyh.  701.  7«i|
Phalli  wore  perhajM  also  earriiMl  among  thf«  my*,
tical  objuet.H  (i*uu  PllALLra);  bnt  wo  muut  n-mcBc
ber  that  tbe  Mtaine  of  lucehiis,  as  we  sliall  w,
which  was  caniwl  in  procession  to  Elvnuis  cnlht
li^tli,  was  not  kept  at  EleiUiis  during  tlir  yi-ar,  bvt
at  Athens,  having  been  brought  hack,  eoioe  dijr
Hhortly  aftvr  the  conclusion  of  the  mysterin;  f»t
tht«re  \\\M  no  Iiu'chenm  at  Kleiisis  ( Uuniumi
p.  2f>:i).  The  Athenian  Eplinhi  met  this  eonvoral
the  Ti'Uiple  of  Keho  (evidence  from  inncri|iI4«i*  m
Moamisen,  p.  252>,  and  conveyiMl  it  to  Atbrni  Ir/
nightfall.  In  thu  early  murniug  of  the  I9ib,tlieni
were  oceasionally  decrees  paswsl.  In  the  fivreoorti
t  he  laec'htiK  [trocession  starU'd  from  t  hn  Elt-iittininni
ami  proeeedtni  tn  the  larcbeiim,  wherf  they  fi(H  !''•
atatneoflnccbnsi  perbaiiHthendi'tinltt^lyiiig*"""'
the  procession  in  the  bnildingas.>4igi)ed  for  thai  j-nt*
post'(Pansan.  i. 2,  4);  and  liien  pa»-my  Ilitmi^titliP
L'ennuieus  (Scbnl.  on  AriKtopb.  Uou.  SlftM  left  AlIifM
by  the  Sacred  Gate  ( Pint.  SuU.  \ \ ),  prii'«(- and  jw*-
ple  crowned  with  myrtle  and  ivy,  the  rich  Wirt
till  tbfi  time  of  llin  ora(«»r  Lycnrgim  ndiaft  in***
riagivHfScliol.  on  AriKtopb. /'/m'.IMU J.  Theetaturt^
laechiiM  was  probnidy  that  of  n  fair  rhild  eromita
with  nijTtle  and  hnbling  a  tondi.  bciire  ralW
tftnaifiopat  dirn;pin  Aristophanes  (  A'oii.:U2l.  Thft*
were  many  cerenionie*  to  t»e  perfornipd  nu  lliepW'
cession  passed  along  the  Sncred  Way  to  ElMUt^'
ceremonies  which  bad  to  Iw  given  up  dnrinfl  I"*
Peloponnesiaii  AVar.  while  Attica  waa  itiv«W  ^
the  Peloponnesiana  (Pint.  Aleth.  M}.  One  ««*«
(»f  the  prm-ession  n'pairetl  tu  the  Cephi8«n»  •"*
tiMtk  batbs  therein,  aiiflllier  to  tlie  bath  hyAn*""*'
ciitiis's  Htutiie  near  the  tomb  of  Scims  tbe  W)^-
Hayer,  who  eauin  fmni  Dodona  to  KleDsis  to >>>'*'*
the  Kleubinians  in  the  war  agftiust  KrvebtliMU  &■>"
was  slain.  The  Fhytalidaa  aavrilleed  to  rbjula"
ill  Laciadae,  where  lay  a  temple  to  the  ManTOinf
('.\X«nt  Demeler.  and  to  Cor#,  with  wb""**  wi>f»l>*r
that  of  Athcn^  and  Poseidon  was  joined  vPa"*'**
i.  37. 2).  At  the  palace  of  Crocoa.  th^  Ciuc.->ii''«^
perhaps  bonnd  small  liamlsof  snflmn  ihn>a>l  nta"'
the  right  wri«l  and  right  foot  of  each  niyH**  ^'^
Phot.  H.  V.  iLfiOKoit\,  which  waa  ooiwidnred  aaa  I'**"
teetioii  from  tbe  evil  eye.

UccaMionally  dnring  tbe  pntceasinn  tboni«^"^*^
of  tlioeML'  who  took  part  iu  it  indulged  in  flMt*"*'
gilK>s  at  one  another,  a  procretling  called  t^^"*^


ELEUSINIA


661


ELEUSINIA


ftos,  the  origin  of  which  title  is  unknown,  bnt  ia
generally  associated  w  i  th  the  liridge  over  the  Cephia-
sns  (Strab.  ix.  400).  Chants  in  honour  of  lacchiis
were  snug  constantly  dnrtng  the  procession,  which
swelled  louder  as  when,  near  midnight,  lacchns
arrived  at  Elenaia  amid  the  blnze  of  torches  (Soph.
Oed.  Col.  1045).  That  the  processiou  did  not  arrive
till  late  at  night  is  plain  from  the  spleudid  chorus
in  the  Ion  (1076  foil.),  which  sings  of  the  torches
and  of  the  moon  aud  stars  dancing  in  heaven  at  the
sight.  The  jonmey  from  Athens  to  Elensts  is  real-
ly only  four  hours  long,  bat  the  various  ceremonies
performed  daring  the  course  of  the  procession  ex-
tended it  to  three  or  four  times  its  normal  length.
On  the  next  morning  certain  sncrifices  were  per-
formed, consisting  probably  in  part  of  swine,  to
Denieter  (gchol.  on  Aristoph.  Paj;,  374).  An  in-
scription in  Mommsen,  p.  257,  orders  sacrifices  to
be  made  by  the  Upotrotoi  to  Hermes  Enagoiiius,  the
Graces,  Aiiemis,  and  certain  heroes,  Telesidrorous
and  Triptolemns.  It  is  not  known  what  these
sacrifices  were  at  Eleusis",  at  Andania  they  were,
besides  others,  a  sheep  to  Persephon6  and  a  sow
to  Demeter.  In  later  times  the  Ephebi  made  sup-
plementary sacrifices  of  cattle.  Tbe  bulls  were
brought  unbound  to  the  altar,  and  tbe  Ephebi
struggled  with  them  to  hold  them  as  they  were '
being  sacrificed.  '

The  23(1  and  23d  were  the  ftvtmfptwriBis  ^fiipoi,  \
and  tlie  ceremonies  celebrated  thereon  were  ira»-  \
Fux^dcr. During  the  evening  of  the  22d  was  prob- 1
ably  what  was  called  XQ/in-ddiw  i)(i4pay  which  con- .
aisted  of  a  symbol of  search after  Cor6  with
torches  (Lactant  Inat.  i.  21),  performed  principal- !
ly  by  and  for  the  less  highly  initiated,  who  con- '
duct«d  the  search  crowned  with  myrtle,  wearing  I
a  fawn-skin,  and  holding  a  wand,  the  mystagogues
of  tbe  several  initiates  taking  part  in  the  search
— the  whole  proceeding  being  perhaps  an  inter*
Inde  in  the  story  of  Demeter  and  Cor^,  which  ap-
pears to  have  been  represented  in  the  temple  on  I
this  night. After  it,  came  with  much  ceremonial  i
the  partaking  of  the  kvmoiv,  a  mixtnre  of  mint, '
barley -meal,  and water. This  was a  oardiual ,
feature  in  the  ceremony,  being,  if  we  may  so  say,  a
participation  in  the  Elensinian  sacrament. It  was
in  remembrance  of  Demeter  being  refreshed  after
her  long  wandering  and  frnitlesa  search. There-
after followed  what  was  called  the  napahoms  rwv
If  pity  (Suidas,  8.  T. ): certain  relics  and  amulets
were  giveu  to  the  votary  to  touch  or  kiss  or  even
taHte,  the  votary  repeating,  as  the  priest  tendered
biui  theobject-s  with  a  regular  question  (Arnob.
Jrfr.  Genteg,  v,  26 ),  a  formula  ( vvvSrjfui ),  given  by
Clement  of  Alexandria  (ProfrtTif.  p.  18). It  appears
that  some  kind  of  memento  uf  this  ceremony  was
given  by  the  priest  to  the  votaries,  which  a  sincere
believer  need  to  keep  in  a  linen  cloth  (Apnl.  Jpol.
p.  140). Tbe  actual  Upa  themselves  were  kept  in
a  chest  (rcXi'n^r  tyKVfiava  fivvTt&a  Ktim^v,  Noimus,
Diomyt.  ix.  127 )  bound  with  purple  ribbons,  and
consisted  among  others  of  sesame  cakes  of  par-
ticular shapes,  pomegranates,  salt,  ferules,  ivy,
poppy-seeds,  (juiuces,  etc.  (Clem.  Alex.  Protrept.
p.  19):  the  uninitiated  were  not  allowed  to  see
these  "even  from  tbe  housetop"  (Callim. f ^mn  to
Crrcn,  4).

Not  very  different  appear  to  have  been  the  cere-
monies of  tbe  23d.  There  were  many  wand-bear-
era  bnt  few  bacchants,  as  the  superintendents  of
the  mysteries  used  to  say  (Plato,  Phaed.  69  C),  aud


it  was  for  these  latter,  the  more  highly  initiated
niystae  of  at  least  a  year's  standing,  generally
called  cVonrat,  that  the  ceremonies  of  the  23d  were
held,  and  they  were  the  highest  and  greatest.
Here,  too,  was  probably  a  napaliotrtr  rmv  ttp&v,
the  sacramental  wortls  used  in  receiving  which
being  ex  rvpiravov  tffHtyov,  ix  Kvft^Aov  ttriov,
(Ktpvot^pfftra,  wri  t6v  jraorAv  inrtSvov.  All  this
undoubtedly  points  to  the  Phrygian  worship  of
Sabazins,  which  was  introduced  by  the  Orphlcn
into  the  Elensinian  mysteries.  On  the  afternoon
of  the  23d  was  held  that  portion  of  the  feast  which
was  called  7rX^pax°'^^  (Athen.  x.  p.  496)  or  ir\T)pox°t
(Poll.  X.  74),  a  sacrifice  t-o  the  dead.  The  n^Xjjpoxo^
was  a  broad-bottomed  earthen  jar,  aud  two  such
were  used  in  the  ceremony,  one  filled  with  wine
and  the  other  with  water,  the  contents  of  tbe  one
thrown  to  the  east  and  of  the  other  to  the  west,
while  mystic  words  (v<  Kvt)  were  spoken.  This
sacrifice  formed  a  fitting  conclusiou  to  the  myste-
ries in  the  special  sense,  the  pvarrfptaTiitt  ^fitpat.
It  ended  with  a  x'^iptrt  to  the  dead,  which  conclu-
sion was  called  irpoxaipTjTTfpia  (Harpocr.  161, 9).

The  next  morning,  the  24th,  oconrred  perhaps
the  ^akXtfTvs,  also  called  rvimu,  a  sort  of  sham
fight,  enjoined,  it  seems,  in  the  Homeric  hymn
(267  foil.).  There  was  a  similar  contest,  called
Xil9o3oXui,  at  tbe  festival  of  Damia  and  Auxesia  at
Troezen  (cf.  Pausau.  ii.  32, 2).  On  this  same  morn-
ing and  afternoon  were  the  ayStvts  trraStaKoi
They  were  called  Eleusinia  or  Demetria,  and  the
prize  was  some  barley  grown  on  tbe  Rarian  Plain
(Schol.  on  Pind.  01.  ix.  150,  166).  There  is  no  rea-
son to  suppose  that  these  games  were  not  annual
(see  Hermann,  Gottead.  Alterth.  (  55,  39).  lu  early
times  these  games  probably  lasted  two  days;  bnt
in  later  times,  on  the  25tb,  the  theatrical  repre-
sentations of  the  Atovvo-of  Tixvirai  were  held,  and
we  have  some  inscriptions  referring  tu  the  sacri-
fices ofiered  by  this  guild.  As  time  went  on,  the
S6th  and  27tb  appear  to  have  been  devoted  ti>
such  theatrical  exhibitions  (Rangab^,  813, 6),  held
perhaps  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  visitors  in
the  country.  The  people  do  not  appear  to  have
returned  to  Athens  in  a  regular  procession,  though
Lenonnanttbinkstbe^did,  and  that  the  yr^fpicr^of
and  the  irXjjfioxorj  were  incidents  in  tliat  return
jonrney.  The  mystery  truce  lasted  till  the  middle
of  Pyanepsion  (C.  /.  G.  71).

(3)  Ths  I^KSTS  ANB  Priestesses,  (a)  The  most
important  priest  was  the  Hiefophant  ('Upo^nvnjr).
In  lists  of  the  Elensinian  priests  he  is  put  fii*Kt
(C./. 6.164,190).  Hewasnouiinatedforlife(Pansan.
ii.  14, 1)  fi-om  the  Eleusiniau  family  of  the  Euuinl-
pidae,  and  was  generally  an  elderly  man  aud  bound
to  a  life  of  strict  chastity.  There  was  only  one  Hiero-
phant  at  a  time,  and  his  name  was  never  mentioned
(Lncian,  Lexipk.  10),  though  in  late  inscriptions  wu
find  the  Roman  gentile  name  bnt  not  the  praeuo-
men  or  the  cognomen  given  (C.  /.  G.  187).  His  prin-
cipal duty  was,  clothed  in  an  Oriental  style,  with
a  long  robe  and  a  turban  {ffTp6<fuoi>),  as  his  name
indicates,  to  show  and  explain  the  sacred  synibnia
and  figures — perhaps  in  a  kind  of  cliaut  or  recita-
tive, as  he  was  required  to  have  a  good  voice  (cf.
Pint.  J/CT6.22;  Epictet.  iii.  21,  J  16).  (6)  The  Da-
duchu8  (fipioSxof)  or  torch-bearer  was  inferior  to
the  Hierophant,  and  of  llie  same  rank  with  the
Keryx  ( C.  I.  G.  IPS,  compared  with  188).  Originally
he  was  descended  from  the  Elensinian  Triptolemns
(Xeu.  £re».  vi,3,6);  but  abont  B.C.  380  this  family


EixrsiNU


M3


KLEUSlKtA


•dfe^l  out,  nit<l  tUe  LycoinitliM*,  tlip  family  to  wliicti
TlitMiiiett<H'le»  Wluiigtsl,  wlikli  ctflcbmlotl  n  lociil
worship  o(  DeiiichT  at  I'lilyae  full  of  OrpliJR  doc-
triiieo  jiiul  coruDioiiiefi,  itucoei^iled  to  itiM  iliMlticbin
(act)  B(.H!ckh  uii  C  I.  tl.  i.  ]».  441  f.).  Il  in  iiiict^r-
tain  wlititlicr  lUe  iiaim^  of  tliv  Da4liiL-liUH  was
aai^rfd.  H)8  lii<ad-ilrei>«i  was  Oiietita),  a^  nru  iimy
iufvi-  from  a  Pei>iai)  soldier  lutstakiiig  a  DaduchuH
for  a  king  (Pint.  Jritt.  &>.  His  luaiu  duty  wam  To
bold  tilt:  toroli  at  tlm  sucriliccs,  an  bis  utrnte  itidi-
CAb:fl;  but  bo  aban'd  witti  Hit*  lIiero|ibaul  acvemL
fuiLcliuus,  reciting  imrtioiw  of  tbe  ritnni,  tukiug
part  iu  ci.'rtaln  ]iiiviflcati<>iis  itt  tlic  ttpofiprjai^.
and  eveu  la  tbu  fxbibitioti  of  tbu  luyHtvrivs  (Hiiid.
a.  V.  haiov)(*'t  )■  For  Ibt'm;  two  [iiit^lM,  tbu  Hiero-
|iliniit  and  llm  llAdiichuM,  who  1)^1  ti>  Ui<  in«ti
of  tried  NAiit'tily.  iheit;  wa«  a  regular  ci>iitii>cni-
tioii  on  tlifir  L-ii[i?riii){  ottico.  1 1  wan  tbu  rVXor
T^t  t'fTQTTTtias,  and  woa  caU'pd  dva^fttriv  Koi  trrtft-
fMraty  iitlB'trn,  becnuse  lliu  aigu  of  it  cutmiMtrd  in
pliiriiiguu  tUt^  bead  of  tlie  uew  priust  (Ui-  diudcin
of  piirplr  and  tbe  vrreath  of  myrtle  whkb  Ibey
Wore  perniHiiditly.  (c)  Tbe  A'cryj  or  Hieruh'iyx
(K^,>vf,  'Uj>oKii(}vi).  At^ninliiiK  to  Klensiiuftu  tradi-
tion. tbwKerykes  Irnci'd  their  oripii  liiick  toKeryx,
a  yainigcr  boo  of  Enmolpiifl;  tint  tln'y  f  lleIl)ftelvc^
coHHidtM'cd  tbeir  niicestorH  to  lie  Ib^niies  mul  one
of  I  be  daugbt'TsofCtn'ropH — AglannMAccordinKto
Puii»aiiiji8  (i.  *t*^.  3),  P»iulroH08  act^unliof;  to  Polltis
(Tiii.  lu3.l.  His  dutieit  wcm  cbi«l1y  to  proclaim  si-
lenre  at  tbo  Bamliws  (P.dl.  iv.  91).  (d)  Tbrt  f^i-
b(*Hiin»iAiiri  Satfi^).  In  curly  titiH-ft  bet  iviutCKrlaiiily
nprii')4i  (('./.  oSl  a, 39};  be  iafieuiTally  mentioned
ill  coriiectioii  wilU  tbe  utiier  thme  pri^sta,  but  not
alwiiyH.  No  t'liniily  Inid  t'Hp<.-iri4l  olAiiii  to  this
prieettbood.  Hi.-*  iinniiMLs  well  as  f  bat  i>f  Ilie  Keryx,
was  probably  not  siifred.  Tbr-  fonr  Klen»iiiiari
prtenttf  were  iiinnng  tboAv  wlm  wen-  iittiititaiiied
in  tbe  Prytnneiiin  —  wt^rr  arip^iroi,  ak  they  were
callud  (C.7.  <!.  1^3  foil.),  (i)  'J'lie  nirrophat\li»
(Ufitt^avTii).  There  wub  oriKinnlly  otily  one  »t  &
lime;  eUe  Itehmged  to  Keiiieter  (('.  /^.  Cr.  434,  2 ),  and
ber  unMie  wa»  Hupie.l ;  but  a  new  one  waa  added
when  lladi'ian'n  wife  Sabina  wai)  deified  as  tbe
yonuger  Di-myter  (iU.  4yr),  I(t73),  Perbaps  at  this
tiuie  or  ufterwaiiU  the
prtetfteiuvB  caniM  lo  be
mitltiplieib  (S^e  tbe
Scbol.  on  S<ipli.  fM-  r«^
683).  They  lived  »  life
of  perfeit  i:liHslity  dui^
iiig  tlifir  tcmiTO  of  of-
fice, tbtnigh  tbey  iiii;;ht
have  Iwen  uiartietl  pre-
viontdy.  It  is  nncertaiu
to  what  fa  mi  ly  the
original  Hienipbunlifi
of  IVnii'tiT  lit*bnii;ed  ;
thnt  of  tbe  younger  be-
bm^^ed  to  a  bntneh  of
rlin  LycoinidaC'.  Tbe
diitien  of  the  Hieni-
pbantin  correspondeil  to
tlHwe  iif  the  Hlenodnint.  B*;."»iii'«i>  l'.'^';"  ,  (^Mt  from
PoIInx  (1.  14)  appears  ur  77  i
to  coll  tbc«o  priestesses

wfio^avTtitt,  OTid  perhaps  they  were  also  railed
lti\i<nrat  (llesyoli.  B.  v.).  (/)  FrmaU  iorvh-hrarrr,
^6ovx'}<Ta{ra  {CI.G.  1535).  fj)  Prifnle^K  ('Ufina).
She  was  not  bieronyniouB,  but  eponyinouH.  Tlioac
pricatcMea  belonged  to  the  fatally  of  tbe  Pbillldae.


Tb<!ir  duties  coiresponded  in  all  prftbabilitir  wit!
those  of  tbe  Kplbotuino.  (,  A  i  Tbe  SpnudojAoh
(SirovSotJ^poi)  were  sent  ont  to  the  adjoiiiiiijEcixiti-
try  a  month  before  the  ceremony  |o  aDnonncr  Ibe
trnce  fttr  Ibe  mysteries  (Ai»K'b.  FaU.  Lr*/.  ^  \JRl
Tliey  lH!hnige<l  lo  lh<^  fauiilien  of  the  Eiuluneal
and  KerykeH.  (i)  Miuar  office*:  (1)  i^JtfMfff
ro'iv  6to'nr  {  Inner,  in  MDmmtten,  p.  'J27 ),  pcrlap
IjeUingLiig  Iu  I  be  Kleniiininin  of  the  city.  (i>
vfif}avos,  whom  lbviyi-hin.sdewribe»  a*  AyviffTfc  r«*
'EXft^trtfiW.  He  pmbably  tiiipi-l-tut ended  tlKaJUtJ*
livrrrtu.  (tt)  laK)(ayoy6t  anil  Kovftryrpittttas,  fcmalr
nnnK4i  attending  on  ihe  child  laccbus  (Fo1L1.3&|l
(4)  Perbaju  the  isaiiic  may  lie  aaid  of  tbe  daiifiim,
Imlit  i.Hvery  aiicertain.  It  is  known  tliat  Puvplw-
n^  wan  originally  called  Doeira  in  the  F.lcii'iiiiiu
wofMhip.  (5)  UpavXjit  lib.  1^,  e.  I;^)  was  probatilr
the  head  of  the  vftv^ioi  and  vii¥ifTpihft  (Pull.i.Sl,
a  (lortof  rboir.  (6)\Vbo(br  n-fla-nyrir  anrl  lke«i^
^upoi  were,  beyond  what  can  l>e  inferrwl  fmm  tlwir
uaiueif,  cannot  lie  determined.  I^euonnant  ujfttW
vavayriv  Vivrv  inlrniniliute  l>etwe«-n  tbe  uiuiiti^r*
and  the  iniliales.  Though  not  birictly  o  pnr<.
yet  as  exercising  an  ioiiiortnat  fnnclion  in  tin
mysteries,  (_;)  the  my$Utgog'\  (fivo-royvyoi)  ii*;  ^
nieiitioned  here.  They  bod  to  be  tiieu  wlioluJ
p»-'^»ed  ibrougb  all  tbe  grades  of  initiaiiuii.  Th<5
were  probably  binder  tbe  cognizance  of  tbo  KuW,
in  a  manner  liceneed.  Prior  to  prtwiititijc  htm-
rtelf  lor  initiation,  eacb  votary  had  to  pUtrhiioelf
under  tbe  gnidanoe  of  one  of  ihe-se  inynliigi^imi
and  get  inpttriiction  from  liiin  as  to  tbe  iiavnt
puriliciiiioiitt  and  cenmionietit  bo  wna  lo  perforai-
li  wuA  only  by  tbe  candeMitiew^  of  inystafCogAr*
that  unworthy  applicantH  ever  got  admiiwoi)  \o
the  niybCcries.  After  dnc  t-xauiuintioii,  if  tk
mystagogiiu  wu^  ^atiltt)l-ll.  be  pn-seoli-il  tite  1]*-
plicant  or  n*tnriicd  bitt  name  to  I  ho  Arction  Bttfi-
li-tiK  or  hilt  nmtHlniKK.  This  uas  called  trvvwrn
If  n  ]iiy»t:igogiiu  conht  not  ^ay  what  punlicJitM}
Hacriflcf-i  were  recpiired  lor  a  »|H'eial  eaudidiU'.f**
coiii-w'  was  bud  to  (A-)  rin  EnyeUn  ('^^^^7y^»'.  *'"'
.iplieai's  to  have  Wen  »'leet*'d  by  tlie  pwipJc  ^WB
the  Eiinxdpidac  or  Kerykes,  and  wbo^e  bosiDOi*''
wat<  U\  divide  sncb  ililbcnlt  ca»e«  uul  gciierallT
to  give  n-tpunita  on  Kleur>iniau  eccleaiaatlcal  !>*■
There  were  many  bo^tk^  »if  the  iiiynlerte*  (cf.  Lrm*"
mnnt,  Voatemp.  Urr.  iLXxvii.  tf71)  which  were  iu*
tended  to  have  been  strictly  kept  fr»m  Ihe  "S'f'
ittated.  and  which  api>ear  to  have  cnntoinr*!  n***
only  what  ritual  was  to  l»e  iwrfonnwl  in  van"'**
caM-s.  but  also,  ]>erbapa,  the  nllegorirul  atwi  ^l^*'
bolical  interprctBtiontt  of  some  of  the  nirtl>*-  ^**
Gitlen,  viii.  18I,ed.  Kubn;  l.r>\n-vV,  Agta»ft)t  IH

The  pricBta  <«f  tbe  inynleriew,  cwpocially  lli»K<*"
niolpidae,  appear  to  have  bad  a  HiK-ciol  e«le*i***'*
ciil  court  (Jf/jfl  ytpovaia)  for  trying  »»ffenCfS  "f'*^
piety,  in  connection  with  llie  fe»>lival.  whlcli  roa*'
tbey  conducted  according  to  Quwritten  lawsf'^i'^
memortnl  antiquity  (Ly».  in  Jwdvc.f  10^ Tup
eeute  before  this  conrt  was  called  SutufdrAa  i
F.v^tiKmias. Their  pniiii*bnient«,  aeeordiu|tl<'*'»'*^
leuier  (D.  and  S.,  ».  v.  J^pfrrio).  were  ^triflly  "''*'
tons— excJutsion  from  the  niy!*terie<t.depriviiiioi>*'
title  i»f  initiiile.  and  *.ncli like. The  ear*  »'*^
exfomnnntiealion  were  moHt  w>Ieinn — pri»t»  *"
prieHle«M>H,  tnniing  to  tbe  wtjtl,  nlteri**!  tlie  w""^
of  ini]>n!cation  and  fchook  their  garnicolft  til- !""'■'
in Andw.  ^  51i. it  may  be  Ibat  thi»  c(«irt  **?
the  only  Iribiinal  for  caaes  of  what  wi-  ni*,'  ^
heterodoxy,  impiety  consisting  in  th*  iterfcni'*'"*


ELEUSINIA


688


ELEUSINIA


-of  rites  coutrary  to  tbe  traditional  one  and  to  that
held  by  tUe  priests ;  while  other  kinds  of  proced-
iire,  snperadded  to  the  religious  iuvestigatioD  aud
■coudemoatioD,  were  adopted  iu  accordance  with
■ordinary  criminal  law  in  cases  of  impiety,  which
consisted  of  disorder  and  vulgar  profanity.  These
«haTges  were  brought  before  the  Senate  of  Fire
Hniidred  sitting  in  the  Eleusiuium  of  the  city  on
tlie  day  after  the  mysteriea  (Andoc.  De  Myat.  $  111).
The  penalty  was  death  (Thnc.  vi.  61  flu.)  or  ban-
islimeut  (Andoo.  $  15),  with  confiscation  of  goods
(C.  I.  A.  i.  277),  for  pro&natiou  of  the  mysteries.
The  accnser,  if  he  did  not  get  the  fifth  part  of  the
votes,  suffered  a  kind  of  artfjtia  (Andoc.  $  33) — i.  e.
was  deprived  of  the  right  to  enter  the  temples
Aud  fined  the  usual  1000  drachmas.  Many  shrank
from  themselres  bringing  the  accusation,  and  used
to  inform  the  Archon  Basileus  of  the  profanation
tliey  had  observed,  and  if  he  thoaght  it  serious  he
uiade  the  accusation  oflScially.

(4)  Civil  Functionariiw  connbcted  with  the
Festival.  The  chief  civil  superintendence  of  the
festival  was  intrusted  to  the  Archon  Basileiis,  who
was  assisted  by  four  tmfttXrjrai,  elected  by  the  peo-
ple, two  from  the  people  generally  and  one  each
fioni  tlie  families  of  the  Euinolpidae  and  Kerykes
^Aristot.  ap.  Harpocr.  p.  US).  The  Archon  gener-
jilly  appeal's  to  have  appointed  an  assistant  (irapf
dpos).  The  duties  of  the  Archon  and  his  assistant
were  to  sacrifice  and  pray  for  the  prosperity  of  the
people,  both  at  Athens  and  Eleosis,  aud  to  have
general  police  supervision  over  the  whole  solem-
nity (Lys.  c.  Andoc.  $  4).  The  «in;i<\i7rai  had  also
«uch  duties  as  looking  after  the  sacrifices,  testing
the  offeriugs  of  the  votaries,  classifying  and  mar-
.HhalUug  the  difierent  grades  of  initiates,  managing
certain  moneys,  etc.,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the
similar  duties  attaching  to  the  officials  of  this  name
at  Aiidauia.  As  to  the  finances  of  the  festival  gen-
erally, accortling  to  C  /.  G.  71  H,  29,  three  Uptmoioi
had  the  administration  of  them.

(5)  The  Ixitiates.  Originally  only  Atbeuiaus
were  admitted;  legend  said  that  Heracles  and  the
Dioscuri  (Pint.  Thes.  33)  had  to  be  atlopted  prior
to  initiation;  but  later  all  Qreek-speakiug  people
who  were  not  murderers  were  admissible  to  be  in-
itiated (Isocr.  Paneg.  $  42).  Barbarians  were  ex-
cluded (Lncian,  Se^th.  8);  but  it  was  not  at  all
necessary  to  be  an  Athenian  citizen.  Womeu
■(AriHtid.  Elena,  vol.  i.  p.  257,  Jebb),  and  even  i>er-
haps  slaves  (Theophilns,  Fi\  i.,  vol.  ii,  p.  473,  Kock),
were  admissible.  Children  were  admitted  to  the
first  grade  only;  but  among  the  children  bronght
to  Elensis  one  was  picked  out  for  special  initiation,
and  "  to  appease  the  divinity  by  a  more  exact  per-
formance "  of  the  ceremonies  required  (Porpbyr.
Abut.  ir.  5).  The  boy  or  girl  had  to  be  an  Atheni-
an of  high  birth  (Bekk.  Anted.  204),  perhaps  of  the
Mpecial  family  of  the  Lycomidae,  Euniolpidae,  or
the  like;  and  was  probably  initiated  standing  on
tlie  steps  of  the  altar,  while  the  rest  stood  afar
4iir.  The  parents  of  the  child  bad  to  make  exteu-
Hive  offerings  and  pay  a  large  fee.  Originally  ad-
mission was  free  for  all  initiates ;  but  by  virtue  of
a  law  passed  by  the  orator  Aristogiton,  each  initi-
ate i>aid  a  fee  to  the  public  treasury  (I^enormaut,
Contemp.  Review,  xxxvili.  p.  123).

The  ordinary  proceeding  was  for  the  initiate  to
receive  his  first  introductiou  as  a  child  aud  after-
wards the  higher  grades  as  a  man.  The  whole  cy-
«le  of  the  mysteries  waa  a  trieterU,  tuid  could  be


gone  through  in  two  j-ears;  even  the  Homeric
hymn  ext-euds  the  whole  legend  beyond  a  year;
and  when  tlie  Orphic  theology  blended  lacchns-
Zagreus  into  the  story,  the  regular  course  of  two
years  came  to  be  adopted.  There  is  a  high  prob-
ability that  the  first -year  votaries  at  Eleusis
viewed  a  drama  representing  the  usual  story  of
Demeter  and  Cor6,  while  the  second-year  vota-
ries were  shown  the  whole  legend  of  Zagreus ;
and  as  to  the  whole  course  of  the  actual  myste-
ries, there  is  a  possibility  that  the  following  ar-
rangement was  that  adopted,  though  it  must  be
remembered  that  it  is  little  more  than  conjecture
and  given  for  what  it  is  worth :

(a)  First  Spring  at  Agrae — the  votaries  mourn
for  Cord  ravished  by  Hades.

(6)  First  Autumn  at  Elensis  —  monming  with
Demeter  for  the  loss  of  her  daughter,  and  exhi-
bition of  the  ordinary  legend.

(c)  Second  Spring  at  Agrae — the  murder  of  Za-
greus and  his  heart  being  given  to  Cor6  (who  here
seems  to  take  the  place  of  Semeld),  and  conception
of  lacchns.

(d)  Second  Autumn  at  Elensis— rebirth  of  lac-
chus,  who  is  carried  iu  procession  to  Demeter  at
Elensis,  and  there  the  votaries  sympathize  iu  the
joy  of  the  earth-goddess,  who  once  more  has  her
child  aud  grandchild  about  her.

That  there  were  different  grades  of  initiates
hardly  needs  proof:  the  fivtrrat  were  those  who
had  received  any  degree  of  initiation,  the  (Vonrai
or  t(f>opot  the  second-year  votaries.  Suidas  (s.  v.
iironrat)  Bays  so  explicitly.  (Cf.  Harpocr.  s.  v.
twamrivKOTtav,  and  Pint.  Demetr.  26.)  There  were
mystic  ceremonies  for  both  these  classes  of  initi-
ates, one  on  each  of  the  two  days,  22d  and  23d.
While  any  one  introduced  by  a  mystagogue  could
get  admission  to  the  ceremonies  of  the  first  year,
the  fiVTjvit,  the  cVonma  or  ttro^ffla  could  only  be
seen  by  those  who  got  a  ticket  from  the  S^ioiij^ot.
A  ticket  of  that  kind  has  been  discovered  marked
AAA  and  En04',  with  the  symbols  of  an  ear  of
corn  aud  a  poppy.  What  those  ceremonies  were
is  the  most  important  and  interesting  point  in  our
subject,  but  the  seal  of  silence  which  was  laid  on
the  votaries  has  not  been  broken.  This  secrecy
was  mcmt  strenuously  enjoined  and  most  rigorous-
ly enforced,  as  we  have  seen.  The  prosecution  of
Aloibiades  for  holding  a  travesty  of  the  mysteries
in  his  own  house  and  Audocides's  speech  on  the
subject  are  well  known.  Aeschylus  is  said  to
have  divalged  the  mysteries  in  styling  Artemis  a
daughter  of  Demeter  (Herod,  ii.  156 ;  Pausau.  viii.
37,  6)  aud  in  other  matters  (Aristot.  Nic.  Etk.  iii.
1,  17),  and  to  have  only  barely  escaped  death.
Diagoraa  of  Helos  (Diod.  xiii.  6)  was  banished
from  Athens  and  a  price  set  on  his  head  for  hav-
ing divulged  the  mysteries.  It  was  the  prevail-
ing belief  of  antiquity  that  he  who  was  guilty  of
divnlging  the  mysteries  was  snre  to  bring  down
diviue  veugeanoe  on  himself  and  those  associated
with  him(Hnr.  Carm.  iii.  2, 26).

(6)  The  Cekkmonies  in  the  Temple.  They
were  performed  in  the  temple  of  the  two  goddesses
at  Eleusis,  a  building  reckoned  one  of  the  greatest
masterpieces  of  the  Pericleau  Age.  Ictinus  super-
intended the  whole.  Coroebus  built  the  lower
story,  with  four  rows  of  columns  which  divided
the  interior  space.  On  his  death  Metagenes  took
up  the  work  aud  added  an  upper  story,  and  Xen-
oi-les  built  a  cupola  roof  with  an  opening  (dn-a(oi')


lu  ihe  miilillrtforthe  light  (Pint.  Prnil.  13;  Vitrnv.  mire  nud  misr.  trampling  oiio  nnotbcr  ■loRit,Bn4
Tii.  Prvl*.  H  ilJ.  I")'  The  (llmenaioiK*  uf  tlie  wlioli-  liiuldled  tojjeilicr,  aliiilins  ever  in  evils  ihTiiitsb
bnlMiiig  wuru  9£t  fvet  Ky  )7!\  tl)i>  nu'nKiirenicitt:  <if  fvnr  of  tlratli  nntl  <lis)>«liof  iii  ilii)  gimd  ihiunt
tbe  rella  beiiitf  IT't  frrt  tiy  I7fl.  The  ttniplc  hail  yonder"  (Tlirniifit.  in  Slob.  Scrm.  cx%.  *t).  Ui-
iiit  iiillnrH  In  tlio  fiiv><l<^  I'll  ()i<^  iircliitect  Ptiilon,  ciuii  {Cnlai/l.  'i'ii  rt^iin*tft'Ut8  n  in3u  haviDg  ra-
in ibu  ttino  of  Di*U]utriut(  uf  Plialeniiii,  built  a  ]»ru-  iPTvtX  Huilt'M  iiud  got  iutu  tbo  dtuk  mnking  hi*
uatiK  u-itb  twelvr  pillarH.  Tlic  teiiipb'  Mtuoil  innitlfi  oompanion  if  nbat  vm  reprowtitixl  at  EkiiftiiVi
a  lHr);(>  eiicloNiirc,  wbicli  wan  ikitpniaubml  by  a  pro-  not  likv  ibis.  C'lntirliau'a  dot*criptioii  [Ik  StfL
pylaunni,  r.Iii:fn!bpiti(f  yetnnotbcr  prttpyljuiniu  li>a<l-  /*r(>»/<rj>.  iult.)  is  siifflcieutly  lerriblt!;  and
in^  tn  till- ti^inplc.  IiiHiile  tLitieuclosnre  LtiiKiniintit  Ibat  rbetoric  Lcnnnnaut  fnnvie»  bti  cun  infcr
bn:<  fixi^il  the  pusitidir  t>f  the  ayiXatrrBt  irirpa,  wliere  i  tlie  votaries,  uiiitiufc  auxinusly  outftitir  the
Ufinet«r  was  8»iil  to  bavo  re^U'il  in  ber  wauilcr- 1  io£,e»avT(beKliDinierof  tbelis;bteiUiit«)'iui'tlii
iii^N  att  ibc-  roL-k  where  ttie  great  ntntiieuf  IVnieter  :  the  iinatay:  thvu  was  heanl  the  noise  of  the
Aclu-n.  now  at  CiiiHbriilge,  BttHHl — i.  o.  on  Ihw  asi^i  |  ruliuiis  for  the  play,  [be  »bnira  Mere  thrown  optn,
nftbntirKt  pmpylae^itn  I'bute  to:i  wi'II,  ivhicli  h^alHo  '  iiinl  tb>i>  iJadiHrbuH  apiwared  with  liiiThm  iti  bift
identities  iim  Cullirboriim.  (^n  the  npnirraca  r^r  lianilH,  afiil  l.bi>  ttfatuu  of  Di!Uielur  wiia  Heeii  in  gor-
'ApXaiQ^oyiKfis'¥.Ttu(>iat(or  lr<ri.1,  ttnd  M.  Blavetto  iu  geoiis  veHtniunts  and  brilliantly  liffbled  up.  Il  is
ftullrlin  fti-  Currrnitofiilance.  UrUfniqne,\V\'\.  [1(S*M],  more  probable  that  the  «bolo  perrnniijiiic*  twik
pp.254  foil.).  Till--  ti-mple  of  lutiiiiiH,  tbonj^h  built  place  iiotJUe  tbeteoiple.  Btttllmtrtguri'HufiLci^vdB
nn  tbo  nite  of  an  iiMer  and  ftiualler  one,  must  be  were  inlroiluced  is  certain,  whiob  tlilloU  uoi^ek*-
distinjjuished  from  the  uiont  ancient  temjOe  wbicb  ly  (d^w^r^t,  Tbeiuist.  Or.  xvi.  "AM,  ed.  Diinl.l  *
Hidoil  niure  to  tbe  north,  occupying  a  plalforni  tbe  stuf>c ;  but  tbc  ini.if;es  were  LucuiuplrtOi
wbiob  overlooked  tbo  well  CnUicbonim  aud  the  l  simple  bat  overoborged  witb  rtrsnge  atm'

ayiXaiTTos  rrirpa,  exactly  on  the  8]>ot

wheiB tbe flomHric  hyitm {'J^'.'i)  or-  \^

ders  it  to  be  Iniilt- 'I'ln*  f^eiit  temple

of  ietintiH  w»H  calle<l  by  the  nitiMentN

ttvfTTiKfts tnftvs  (Slnib.  ix.  IlSTi),  and

tbe  inner  porliou  r«\«mipiov  or  apn-

KTopov  or  fu'yapov  (cf.  LolM-ck,  AgUiopk .

59).

Tbc  c«;remony  was  danbtlefu  dra-
matic. "  Dl-o  and  Cortf,"  Rays  Clcraont
of  Alexandria  (/'rrt(rf;»f,  p.  Vi\,"  bnvo
become  a  Diy^tiedranin.  Klcuaiit  illns-
tratt-s  by  tbe  U^ht  of  the  torches  of
tbe  Dadiichiis  tbo  carrying  off  of  Corrf,
the  wandering  Jonntcys  and  grief  of
Deo."  Tbo  cereiDouy,  then,  was  dra-
itttic,  Aelius  Aristides  (Kleits.  i. '^B)
iks,  "'Whei-e  else  do  I  be  reeiti;l*i  of
^be niimitives chant forth greater  in«i  «r  tb«  Thmple  EmJomw  al  Ktewu

marvels,  or  does  the  ceremonial  (ri  ^cmMptribob».  ,.a.  mm-rprr.t»(,rf.  B.grMUrpfW^OBi.  C.  le^rpwlN:
diKdfUva)  involvo  a  gruat^-T  aflrigbt-  P.  GrtMt  T«tnt>ln  of  ili«  Ur&tcrlM,  wittt  porttco  of  iniDMi  iHSR.  xS^'^kU'
moiit (^cffXnft,*). or  does the siK-C- J>'«^^wtBlCTioroliI><.l«apteii«rLXlTOa).wiUiBliliinp«fll"-»

,  . i  '*  ,  1, 1 . . '  partly  MWB  out  or  iMnKK.

taclo  match  more  fully  what  the  ear


hears  f  The  tlnuua  eoll^»ist<:d  of  fl^iwfirvn  and  X*-
yafi4vu,  tbc  former  being  much  tb«  more  ittii>ortant.
for  the  ancient  religiouH  wonhip  addreased  itaelf
more  to  the  eye  than  to  tlie  ear.  There  were
hymns  and  ehaittti  (Pnutian.  ix.  ^.  2),  upeeeliet  and
exhortation)*  (pijirns,  mipayytXpirn ),  recitals  of
myths  (ttvO^y  t^iffini),  aitil  wailing  for  tlie  toKS  of
Pcrwphoni^  (Procbia  on  Plat.  I'oUt.  p.  m4).  There
uere  kinds  of  dancing  or  rbytliinien)  movemenCM
by  IboHo  (lerforiniiig  tbe  c<;reinoijy  (Lueiau,  I>rSatt,
l&l,  clashing  of  cymbals  (Veil.  i.  4,  1),  smlden
chnngon  from  light  to  darknew*  ( l)io  Chrys.  xii.
3K7),  "  t<iil*<Mne  wanderingB  nnd  daiiffiToiia  pas-
sages throiigb  Iho  glnoni,  hnt  the  end  in  not  yet,
and  then  before  tlif  end  nil  kiiidn  of  temtr,  Hhiver-
iiig  and  (pinking.  KwoHiinjf  and  rtni.axenient,  ivhen
Huddrnly  a  wondron;*  light  tbiflit-H  forth  to  the
wornbipp^T,  and  pun*,  regions  and  riieiidowfl  rec^'ive
bitn;  there  are  cbant»>,  voiceN,  and  dances  solemn
u'luila  ami  holy  imagea;  and  amongst  these  tbe
votary  now  jwrfected  is  fref^d  at  last  and  is  n'-
leased.  he  wanilers  to  and  frt»  wifb  a  crown  nn  his
beail.  joiniug  in  the  worHliip  and  in  tbe  company
of  pure  and  lifily  men  :  and  he  "ees  the  uiilnitiafed
aud  niipurified  crowd  *i(  the  living  in  the  thick


lljey  wen^  ever  in  motion  and  represented  in  ■  'M*
niul  murky  light.  To  be  mom  precise,  i be  ra;**
drama  of  Dcnmter  and  Cor6  was  unfoldwl  u  I'"''
niy-«tae,  the  tirsE-ycar  initiates :  but  ihn  rjiopU'
were  fibown  a  representation  of  what  Clempurf^'l'
"  the  niyKteries  of  tbe  dragon."  which  in  Ih*-  «'*''^
of  ZoUH  uniting  himoelf  with  Pervcpboo^  iwlW
Itrirao :  cf.  PhilnnopkHm€»n,  viii.  p.  IIS,  «I  Mill***
iu  tlio  form  of  a  (Wi-rpenl,  and  th«  wh"b'  tal' "'
IiK-ebuH-JCagreuM  was  pndiably  tohl  I  CImm.  AI^-
I'rofrept.  pp.  13-15;  Tntiau,  Or.  ad  Unerw.  \^  1*
ed.  Migiie]:  and  Lenormant,  p.  426).  Tlien*  "'^
shown  to  the  cpoptae  a  reprcseutatiun,  symlwlK*'
probably  of  crealion,  in  which  we  hear  ^R"**'
Prnvp.  Erang,  iii.  12)  that  tbe  Hieropbtml  n*''' '"
assume  the  part  of  the  Creator,  the  lla«bichii»  *li*
nf  the  suTi,  tho  nltar-prieftt  that  of  thi-  tneeii.'"''
the  llierokeryx  that  of  llerme*.  Again,  "tin- '*^
the  most  (Hilemu.  and  tho  mwt  wond'-riat  «' '
tho  iiray^in  "  waM  ithown — the  ear  of  nmi  cut  i"  P"'
feet  slilliii'sn;  tbn  blailc  nfcnrn  ^y^l^Mlliw^l.  *"-'''*
told,  tbe  great  and  perfect  ray  of  light  i*"'"^
from  tho  luexprettdible  Oue.  whatever  that  n>t«'"-
or  rather,  perhaps,  it  waa  the  symbol  of  lifc^
cntttug  down  beiug  death.


ELEUSINIA


&S&


ELEUSIS


This  may  lead  ns  to  vrhat  is  to  be  said  in  oon-
cliuioD  on  the  moral  and  religions  import  of  the
fnyatehes.  If  we  choose  to  regard  them  iii  a  cold,
UQ-religioQB  way,  we  cau  say  that  they  were  a
■somewhat  melodramatic  performance,  splendid  no
■doabt,  fall  of  what  Lobeok  calls  fireworks  (pgro-
technia),  tiut  a  mere  theatrical  display.  That  there
were  connections  between  the  mysteries  and  the
theatre  (the  Hierophauts  are  said  to  have  borrowed
•costume  from  the  dramas  of  Aeschylus,  Atheu.  i.  p.
iS,  if  the  reverse  is  not  rather  the  case)  need  not
■surprise  os;  aud  that  modern  archsologists  pro-
fess to  find  in  the  temple  of  Eleusis  evidences  of
machinery  by  which  the  spectacle  was  worked
■{Preller  in  Panly,  iii.  89 ;  Leitormaut,  p.  415)  is  only
natnral ;  for  there  undoubtedly  was  a  spectacle,  a
religious  spectacle.  But  anything  moral  or  relig-
ious may  be  made  ridiculous  if  one  chooses  to  re-
^rd  it  from  the  lower  plane  of  the  intellect  alone,
aud  does  not  take  into  account  the  subjective  con-
-dilioa  of  the  moral  worker  or  the  religious  wor-
shipper. The  nuiversal  voice  of  the  great  names
of  pagan  antiquity,  from  tlie  Homeric  hymn  down
to  the  writers  of  the  late  Roman  Empire,  attest  to
tlie  wonderfully  soothing  effect  the  mysteries  had
on  the  religious  emotions,  aud  what  glad  hopes
they  inspired  of  good  fortune  in  the  world  to  come.
A'eque  fofum,  says  Cicero  {De  Leg.  11. 14, 36),  cum  lac-
titia  Vivendi  rationtm  oocefHmiM,  aed  etiam  cam  »pe
meliore  moriendi.  For  the  object  aimed  at  was
TBther,  not  that  the  initiate  should  be  taught  any-
thing that  would  appeal  merely  to  his  intellect,
but  should  be  moved  and  have  his  higher  impulses
•stirred.  "The  light  of  the  sun  is  bright  for  the
initiated  alone,'*  sing  the  chorus  of  mystae  in  the
itttHoe  (454).  Not  but  that  there  were  many  scenes
and  symbols  of  a  somewhat  coarse  nature— phallic
rites,  itptH  yofioi,  such  as  those  represented  by  the
Hierophant  aud  Hierophantis,  which  portrayed
perhaps  the  unions  of  Zeus  aud  Demeter,  Zens  aud
Peraephou^  and  which  entered  iuto  the  higher
worship,  but  which  are  probably  grossly  exagger-
ated by  the  Cbristiau  writers,  who  did  not  take
iuto  consideration  their  symbolical  meauiug.  The
truths,  however,  which  these  and  other  symbolical
perfurmauces  contained  were  known  ouly  to  the
Hierophant,  aud  explained  by  him  to  those  whom
he  thought  fit  to  bear  them.  Even  the  cVoirrat
ouly  knew  part  of  the  mystio  secrets,  yv&vai
Ti  rav  atropp^uu  (Sopatros,  Distinct.  Quaett.  p.
131).  The  multitude  of  woi-shippers  took  it
all  on  faith,  but,  as  Mahaffy  finely  remarks,
"even  the  coarsest  features  were  hallowed  and
•ennobled  by  the  spirit  of  the  celebrants,  whose
reverence  blinded  their  eyes  while  it  lifted  up
their  hearts."  ^

The  Elensiuian  Mysteries  lasted  for  more  than
five  centuries  after  Greece  became  a  Roman  prov-
ince. As  late  as  the  time  of  tlie  emperor  Julian
liiey  still  eujoyed  a  considerable  portion  of  their
(irimeval  sanctity,  aud  were  held  in  the  highest
«steem  by  the  Neo- Platonic  philosophers.  The
4:dict  of  Valentinian  aud  Valens  agaiust  secret
worships  did  not  extend  to  the  Eleusinia,  the
prefect  of  Achaea,  Pretextatus,  having  repre-
feuted  that  the  life  of  the  Greeks  would  be  bar-
reu  and  comfortless  without  the  mysteries.  The
Hierophant  who  initiated  Maximns  and  Euna-
pins  in  the  fourth  century  was  the  last  Eumolpid.
Subsequently  Mlthraio  worship  was  blended  with
the  Elensinian ;  but  the  mysteries  did  not  finally
19*


perish  till  the  destmction  of  Eleusis  by  Alaric  in
bis  iuTnsion  of  Greece,  A.D.  ^6.

For  further  discussion  ou  the  mysteries,  see
Cabeiria;  Mysteria;  Orphica.  The  principal
works  to  consult  on  the  Eleusinia  are :  St.  Croix,
Rickerehet  aur  lea  Mjfstirea;  Creuzer,  Sj/mboUkf  iv.
33  foil.;  Lobeck,  Aglaophamu$,  especially  pp.  a-
228 ;  K.  O.  Mttller,  Kleine  SchH/ten,  ii.  243-311  (a  re-
print of  his  article  "  Eleusinia"  iu  Eracb  and  Grii-
ber);  Petersen  in  Ersch  aud  Grfiber,  xxviii.  219
foil.,  especially  3&2-269,  in  the  second  volume  of
the  article  "Griecheulaud";  \A.  Der  Geheim^  Gottea-
dimat;  Guigniaut,  M^/noirea  aur  lea  Myath-ea  de
Cerea  et  de  Froaerpine  iu  the  M4moirea  de  VAca-
dimie  dea  Inacr.  xxi. ;  Preller  in  Pauly,  art.  *'  Eleu-
sinia," aud  "Griechische  Mythologie,"  i.  64^-^353;
id.  Mythologie  {187S-75) ;  Hormauu,  Gotteadietiatliche
AlterthUmer,  $$  35, 55 ;  Maury,  Religiona  de  la  Grice,
ii.  pp.  297-381;  Schomann,  Griechische  AlterthUmerf
ii.  380-402;  August  Mommsen,  Heortologie  der
Atkener,  62-75,  222-869 ;  Boumeistcr,  Denkmdler,  s.
vv. "  Eleusinia  " aud  "  Eleusis ";  Lenormant,  Motto-
grapkie  de  la  Voie  Sacr^  £leunnienne  (1864),  aud
"The  Eleusinian  Mysteries"  in  the  Contemporarjf
Review,  xxxvii.  and  xxxviil.  (May,  July,  and  Sep-
tember, 1880) ;  and  Sanppe,  Die  Myaterienimchrift
von  Andania.

Zaenaia  or  Eleualn  {'EXtvtris,  'EXcvo-u-).  (1)  An
ancient  city  of  Boeotia,  which  stood,  accordiug  to
tradition,  uear  Copae  and  the  Lake  Copats,  and
was,  together  with  another  aucieut  city,  named
Athenae,  iuundated  by  the  waters  of  that  lake.
Stephauus  of  Byzantium  reports  that  when  Cra-
tes drained  the  waters  which  had  overepread  the
plains  the  city  of  Athenae  became  visible  (s.  v.
'A^vat).  (3)  A  city  of  Attica,  equidistant  from
Megara  and  the  Piraeus,  and  famed  for  the  cele-
bration of  the  mysteries  of  Demeter.  Accordiug
to  some  writers  it  derived  its  name  from  a  hero,
whom  some  affirmed  to  be  the  sou  of  Hermes  but
others  of  Ogyges  (Pansan.  i,  38).  Its  origin  is  cer-
tainly of  the  highest  autiquity,  as  it  appears  to
have  already  existed  iu  the  time  of  Cecrops,  but
we  are  not  informed  by  whom,  or  at  what  period,
the  worship  of  Demeter  was  introduced  there.
Ensebius  places  the  building  of  the  first  temple
in  the  reign  of  Fandion;  but,  according  to  other
authors,  it  is  more  ancient.  Celens  is  said  to
have  been  king  of  Elensis  when  Demeter  first  ar-
rived there. See  Eleusinia.

At  one  periofi  Eleusis  was  powerful  enough  to
contend  with  Athens  for  the  sovereignty  of  Attic*.
This  was  in  the  time  of  Eumolpns.  The  contro-
versy was  ended  by  a  treaty,  wherein  it  was  stip-
ulated that  Elensis  should  yield  to  the  control
of  Athens,  bnt  that  the  sacred  rites  of  Demeter
should  be  celebrated  at  the  former  city.  Demeter
aud  Triptolemus  were  both  worshipped  here  with
pecnliar  solemnity,  and  heve  also  was  shown  the
RariuB  Campus,  where  Demeter  was  said  to  have
first  sown  corn  (Pansan.  i.  38).  The  temple  of
Elensis  was  burned  by  the  Persian  army  in  the
invasion  of  Attica  (Herod,  ix.  65),  but  was  rebuilt,
under  the  administmtion  of  Pericles,  by  Ictiuns,
the  architect  of  the  Parthenon  (Plut.  Periclea).
This  magnificent  structure  was  entirely  destroyed
by  Alaric  in  the  year  a.d.396.  Elensis,  though  so
considerable  and  importaut  a  place,  was  classed
among  the  Attic  demes  and  belonged  to  the  tribe
Hippothoontis.  The  colossal  statue  of  the  Eleu-
sinian Demeter,  the  work  of  Phidias,  after  having


ELEITHEIUA


686


ELIMEA


BnfTereil  many  mntilivtionp*,  wiw  tiikm  to  KiinlntKl
by  Dr.  Clnrkp  ami  Mr.  Oripiw  hi  lr*01,  and  now
KtuiKin  ill  Iho  vc«ti)iiilii  uf  llic  Uiiivi-riiily  Liliniry
at  Cainliriilgti.  Thr  tfiii|tlc  ittwll"  \T'ui(  cinan'i)  liy
Sir  Wlllimii  Ctell,  and  tuiporttiiii  PXCAvationK  hiivi*
Iwen  nmdu  by  the  Greek  Archaeologicnl  Society
siiioe  lr!*H7.

Eleutheiia  (rh  /\tv0ipia).  The  feast  of  liberty ;
a  festival  whicli  thfiOree.kn,  after  the  battle  of  Pla-
l3iea(B.c.t73K  institiit*-*!  in  Iinnnnrof  ZetiHEIeiitho-
riii8(ib<9  ilclivcnir).  It  watt  iiireii<Ie<l  nnt  nu-rfty  to
Ive  a  token  of  their  gmritndo  Ut  lUu  gnt\,  but  aJRo  as
a  boDil  of  union  ainoii^  rhcinsolroA;  for,  in  an  a»-
ficmbly  of  all  the  Greeks,  Arifttiiloa  carrim]  a  lU'creo
that  (telegntcB  from  all  the  Greek  Stat^A  dhoutdaA-
Bemble  every  year  at  Plntnea  for  the  celebratioQ  of
tilt)  Elenthcria.  The  town  itself  wan  at  the  hhiqu
tiiue  deolnred  mcnnl  and  inviolable,  aa  lon^  as  Its
ottizenB  offered  tbo  annual  ftaeritlees  wliirh  were
then  instituted  ou  behalf  of  Greece.  Every  Rfth
year  thcnc  ftolemnitieti  were  cetebmtetl  with  roii*
testa  {ayitv  Tuy'E\iv6tpiutv)  in  wliicb  tln>  victors
were  rewarded  with  cbaideis.  The  aiiniLa)  .wtem-
nlty  at  Plaiaea,  wbicU  continued  to  be  •>bserved
down  to  the  time  of  PIntarch  (Aritt.  19  and  2\),  was
U  follows :  On  the  sixteentli  of  the  month  of  Ma*;-
niBcterioti,  a  iirocessiou,  led  by  a  lrnni|M!ter,  who
blew  the  Higiial  for  battle,  luarcbeil  .it  rliiybreak
tbriMigh  tlie  lui'ildle  or  the  town.  It  was  fultowt^d
by  wagona  loatled  with  myrtle- buiiflbs  and  cbnp-
leta,  by  a  black  bull,  and  by  free  youths  who  carried
the  vensels  coutainlng  the  libations  for  the  dead.
No  slave  was  permitted  to  mini(it(>r  on  this  occauion.
At  the  end  of  this  procession  followed  tho  arcliou
of  Plataea,  who  was  not  allowed  at  any  other  time
daring  his  office  to  tonch  a  weapon  ur  to  wear  acy
other  bnt  white  gannents,  now  wearing  a  puride
tonic  nnd  with  a  swonl  in  bis  hand,  and  a\»o  l»ear*
ing  an  um,  kept  for  this  Mileninity  in  the  public
uchivea  (ypa/*fMiTfx^fXiwioc>.  When  ilie  procewion
came  to  the  place  where  the  Gn-ektt  who  bait  fallen
at  Plataea  were  buried,  the  archon  first  washed
and  anointed  the  totnbHtone«,  aud  then  led  the
hnll  to  a  pyn^  and  sacrillcedit,  praying  to  Zeiia
ktid  HeniiL's  Chthouius,  and  inviting  the  bravo
men  who  had  falleti  in  the  d« fence  of  their  conn-
try  to  take  part  in  the  ban{|uet  prel>aro<l  for  thcDi.
fhv  Time,  iit.  5;^.

Elentheria  was  a1»o  the  name  of  a  festival  cole-
brate<l  in  iSamos,  in  honour  of  Eros.

Bleutheriua  ( *EX«vtf»>or ).  "The  Deliverer."
An  ipithet  appliod  to  Zeus. Sti«  Elkutiikria.

Eleuthema  ('^tv0fpva\.  An  iniportaut  eily
of  Crete  OIL  the  northwestom  olope  of  Monnt  Ida,
and  traditioually  foiind*^]  by  the  Ctiretes.  l)io
C'assins  {ixxvi.  1)  tells  a  story  of  how  a  breach
was  made  in  its  towars  by  the  nt*«  of  viiM-yjii',  at
the  lime  when  the  city  was  taken  by  C^.  Mctellun
Creticns.  In  aixl<^>nth  contnry  MSfj.  the  ftucieul
mills  of  the  place  are  spoken  of  an  enormous,  but
of  tliem  few  vestiges  now  remain.

Slenthfiro-CllToea.  A  nam^  givun  to  those  of
the  Cllictana  who  bad  IImJ  to  the  tnoiuitaiiis  when
the  Greek  settlera  establislied  tbt-niwlves  in  that
coantry.  Tic  nppellalinn.  which  moans  "Free
Ciltciaus,"  has  referance  to  their  independent  mode
pf  life.  The  Greckn,  however,  connt>cte<l  a  fiiblo
with  this.  Aeconling  to  them,  when  Myrina.
ipiwn  of  tl>e  Ania/ons,  was  extending  her  oon-
qoests  over  Asia  Minor,  the  C'ilicians  were  the  only


people  that  volnntarily  surrendered  Co  lin,  uj
hence  tbey  were  allowed  to  rvtnin  their  frnJom
iDiod.  8io.  iii.  5.')).  Cicero  came  in  cotitacl  ailli
them  daring  his  government  in  Cilicia  andpaniil-
ty  brought  them  under  the  Roman  sway,  bal  Ibrgr
a^oiin  nftHr  bi^c.inie  tiA  (rre  and  independent  uervr
(.Irf  t'ani.w.  i;  .tJ  ,rt/.  V.2t)).

Eleuthdro-Laconea.  A  title  conferred  byie-
gnstUB  on  a  considHrable  part  of  the  Laceuiau  &*■
tinn,OJ)nsisting  ofHnveral  uiarlttmo  towns, (bribe
/x>al  which  the  iubabiianu  had  early  lectifM  is
favour  of  the  Komans.  Eufranchjsenient  Bndiitb*
ex  privileges  accompanied  the  title  ( Paowi.  tii.
21).

EleutheropaUa  Cf-JitvBtttonaXit').  Aeityr-fPil-
esliue,  sixteen  Koniau  miles  northeast  from  .\*rii-
lon,  and  twenty  miles  sonthweat  from  .lenimlrBi.
Its  earlier  name  was  Betbogabris  ( Rairoy<ii,'j/M;.  In
the  days  of  Ensebins  and  Jerome,  however,  il  w»
an  important  and  Honrishing  city.  In  modtn
Latin,  Eleutheropolis  is  the  name  givan  to  IW-
sljidil  in  Hiingary.and  to  Freibourg  aud  fVeitiU^

Bleuthfinaa  i'iiXrO0tpot).  A  river  fonuiug  Uift
boinidary  l>ctwM-n  Syria  aud  PhecDicia.

EUeutbo  C^tvdv).  A  sumamtr  of  Ilitbyis.  frma
her  foiniwjf  it'k0tiv),  when  invoked,  to  the  till  of
women  in  labour  (Pind.  Ol.  \\.  72).

Eleven,  The. 8ce  Il£Ni>HKa.

Elgin  Marbles.  A  colleetion  of  ancient  ttv^V'
tiirufl  bnmglit  fiom  Greece  to  England  by  llii."  t*ri
of  Elgin,  in  ISVi,  while  he  was  Briti'h  amlt»w*i'T
to  the  Porte.  On  the  strength  of  a  tinniin  fr<«
tlio  Sultan  authorizing  Lord  Elgin  to  ruoiioF,
measure,  and  remove  certain  stnneo  and  itncnp*
tloiis  from  the  Arlieiiian  acropolis,  his  agrutstoolc
possession  of  these  marbles,  which  are  mkl  telntP
cost  the  ambassador  nearly  £7.'mM)().  lit  IHICitrr
were  actpiircd  by  the  British  )Ins4^nm  for  £Xi.W'''.
and  are  now  the  property  of  the  Britinh  tmUoOf
though  a  bitter  controversy  ha.t  from  that  limf  t*
this  be-nn  waged  sponulically,  both  as  to  lliesili^
tic  value  of  tlie  statues  and  as  to  the  propriety  "^
their  removal  from  Greece.  The  chief  inwW»
fornieil  a  part  of  the  Parthenon,  aud  were  ptwbsNy
desigiieil  by  Phidias  and  execntwl  nnderhtsii"^
tion  They  are  nminly  i«tatuca  from  the  jwllnw'*
and  metoi>e».  togftber  with  ri  large  portieo  oft!*-
frieze  of  the  re/Ja.  In  addition,  Ihere  are  slwHS"
nn*«  from  the  Erecblbeum  and  from  tin? Tempi" "■
Nik<5  Aptcroa.  See  Ellis,  AV^ia  MnrMrt  (L..ml'«^»-
l'*47j ;  Xewton,  in  the  Cuntrntit  of  tkr  Bhli**  V<»-
<rHm,  EUjin Kwm (London,  It^i-eSC Midi**'''**


Enc  |rw'».^2r


.iHcirnt  M»rliU»  iu  (treat  Sritaiit
Kennell,  Cambridge.  |K«!);  and  the  article  ATH
NAE. On the  IMiidian  theory  of  their  origl
an  article  by  W  W.  Story  iu  ^JdrJtinioif*  Jf«^
for  Decemlmr,  187;i.

EUici  (*HA*i«itoi"l. A  name  given  ("  lUe*'t"
of  philiMiopliy  .-«tabli»hed  tiy  Phaedo  of  KlimPi'^
LaiTt.  ii.  106). It  was  institnteH]  aft+r  the  SortsC
model  by  Phaedo  of  Elis,  and was  rontiuee't
Pllstanns^an  Elian,  aud  aft«rwanls  by  MetiedM
of  Eretria.

EUdna. A  Hiiniame  of  lupit^r  at  Rocnh
ciHttf  he  was  invoked  to  send  down  liglitw*"*
(Ovid,  t-'uMt.  iii.;K!S;  and  cf.  Li%-y,  i.aO>.

Elimberrum  or  Climberrum. A  town  of  i**^
Aiim;i  in  Ai|iiitania  (Mela.  iii. '2|.

BUmia  OcXi>ri4i)  or  Etimlotia  OE^*M>^**(^ I


ELIS


687


BUS


district  of  Macedonia,  on  the  frontiers  of  Epirtts
and  Thessaly,  originally  belonging  to  Illyria.  Its
inbabitants,  the  Eltmaei,  were  Epirota  (Arrian,
Juab.  i.  7,  $  5).

Ells  ('HXir ;  Doric,  'aX(c).  A  district  of  the  Pelo-
pounesns,  lying  weitt  of  Arcadia.  At  tbe  perio<l  of
tbe  Peloponnesian  War  tUe  name  of  Elis  was  applied
to  tbe  wbole  of  tbat  northweiitern  portion  of  tbe
peuinsnbi  situated  between  the  rivers  Larissus  and
Neda  which  sen'ed  to  separate  it  from  Acbaea  and
Messenia.  Bnt  in  earlier  times  this  tract  of  country
was  divided  into  several  districts  or  priocipatities,
each  occupied  by  a  separate  clau  or  people,  of  whom
the  Caocones  were  probably  the  most  ancient,  so
that  Strabo  affirms  that,  according  to  some  authors,
the  wbole  of  Elis  once  bore  the  name  of  Cancoiiia.
Before  the  siege  of  Troy,  the  Epei,  an  Elean  tribe,
are  said  to  hare  been  greatly  reduced  by  their
wars  with  Heracles,  who  conquered  Augeaa  their
king,  and  the  Fylians  coinmaiided  by  Nestor.  They
Bubsequently,  however,  acquired  a  great  accession
of  strength  by  tbe  iuflux  of  a  large  colony  from
Aetolia,  under  the  conduct  of  Oxylus,  aud  their
Dombers  were  further  increased  by  a  consider-
able detachment  of  tlie  Dorians  and  Heraclidae.
Iphitna,  descended  from  Oxylus,  and  a  contem-
porary of  Lycurgus,  re-established  tbe  Olympic
Games,  which,  though  institotetl,  as  it  was  said,
by  Heracles,  had  been  interrupted  for  several
years  (Fausan.  t.  4).  The  Pisatae,  having  remain-
ed masters  of  Olympia  from  the  first  celebration
of  the  festival,  long  disputed  its  possession  with
the  Eleans,  but  tbey  were  finally  conquered,  when
tbe  temple  aud  the  presideucy  of  the  games  fell
into  tbe  hands  of  their  rivals.  Tbe  preponderance
obtained  by  tbe  latter  is  chiefly  attributable  to  tbe
assistance  tbey  derived  from  Sparta,  in  retnm  for
the  aid  afforded  to  tbat  State  in  the  Meseeuian
War.  Pnmi  this  .period  w«  ma,j  ikrte  tbe  ascend-
ency of  Elis  over  all  the  other  surrounding  dis-
tricts hitherto  independent.  It  now  comprised
not  only  the  conntry  of  tbe  Epei  aud  Cancones,
which  might  be  termed  Elis  Proper,  bnt  the  ter-
ritories of  Pisa  and  Olympia,  forming  tbe  aucieut
kingdom  of  Pelopa,  and  the  whole  of  Tripbylia.

Tbe  troops  of  Elis  were  present  in  all  tbe  en-
gagements fought  agaioBt  the  Persians,  and  in
tbe  Peloponnesian  War  zealously  adhered  to  the
Spartan  confederacy,  until  the  conclusion  of  the
treaty  after  the  battle  of  Ampbipolis,  when  an


open  rupture  took  place  between  this  people
aud  the  Lacedaemonians,  in  consequence  of  pro-
tection aud  countenance  afforded  by  the  latter  to
the  iuhabitants  of  I^praeom,  who  had  revolted
from  them  (Tbuc.  v.  31).  Such  was  tbe  reseut-
nient  of  tbe  Eleans  on  this  occasion  that  tliey  ini-
liosed  a  heavy  fine  on  the  Lacedaemonians,  and
prohibited  their  taking  pait  in  the  Olympic
Games.  They  also  mode  war  upon  Sparta,  in
conjunction  with  the  Mantineans,  Argives,  and
Athenians ;  and  it  was  not  till  after  tbe  uusnc-
oessful  battle  of  Mantinea  that  this  confederacy
was  dissolved  (Thuo.  v.  81).  The  Lacedaemoni-
aus,  on  the  other  baud,  aveuged  those  injuries  by
frequent  iuonrsions  into  the  territory  of  Elis,  tbe
fertility  of  which  presented  an  alluring  prospect
of  booty  to  an  invading  army.  They  were  beaten,
however,  at  Olympia  under  the  command  of  Agis
(Pausau.v.4);  and  again  repulsed  before  tbe  city
of  Elis,  whither  they  had  advoiuced  under  Pausa-
nias  (Diod.  Sic.  xiv.  17).  At  length  the  Eleans,
wearied  with  the  continual  incnrsious  to  which
their  conntry  was  exposed,  since  it  fhrnished  en-
tire subsistence  to  the  array  of  the  enemy,  gladly
sued  for  peace.  Not  long  after,  however,  we  find
them  again  in  arms,  together  with  the  Boeotians
aud  Argives,  against  Sparta  (Xen.  Hist.  Gr.  vit.  2).
At  the  battle  of  Mantinea  they  once  more  fought
under  the  Spartan  banners,  jealousy  of  the  rising
ascendency  obtained  by  the  Thebans  having  led
them  to  abandon  their  interests  (id.  vii,  5,  1).
Paosauias  writes  that  when  Philip  acqnired  the
dominion  of  Greece  tbe  Eleans,  who  had  suffered
uinch  from  civil  dissensions,  joined  tbe  Macedoni-
an alliance,  but  refused  to  fight  against  the  Athe-
nians and  Thebans  at  Cfaaeronea,  and  on  the  death
of  Alexauder  tbey  united  their  arms  with  those  of
the  other  confederates,  who  carried  on  the  war  of
Lamia  against  Antipater  and  tbe  other  command-
ers of  the  Maoedouian  forces.  Some  years  after,
Aristotinms,  sou  of  Damaretns,  through  the  as-
sistance of  Autigonus  Qonatas,  usurped  tbe  sov-
ereignty of  Elis;  bnt  a  conspiracy  having  been
formed  against  him  he  was  slain  at  the  altar  of
Zeus  Soter,  whither  he  had  fied  for  refuge  (Pau-
sau.  v.  4,  5).  During  tbe  Social  War  the  Eleans
were  the  firmest  allies  of  the  Aetolians  In  tbe  Pelo-
ponnesus ;  and  though  tbey  were  on  more  than
one  occasion  basely  deserted  by  that  people,  and
sustained  heavy  losses  in  the  field  as  well  as  from


Coins  of  Ells  with  Efflglcs  of  Zena


I


Ihe  devastation  or  their  territory  ami  the  ca|ttnre
of  their  towiiH,  Ihvy  cuulil  uot  be  induced  to  tie-
sett  their  cuuMe  and  join  the  Achaean  heagat.
Tbeae  events,  described  hy  Pvlybins,  are  the  lant
ill  which  (he  Eleaua  are  inentiuiiud  ao  au  tiideiieii-
■tiMtt  }it>(>]ile ;  fur,  though  they  ilo  not  appfar  to
havn  takeu  any  part  in  tliu  Arhat^'im  AVar,  they
were  included  with  the  rust  of  the  PoU>jK>iiii«sii»
til  the  t;(!iienil  docrtw  by  which  tho  whole  of
lirctHse  waH  aiinexod  to  the  Koiiian  Kuipirv.  Klict
wait  by  far  thu  moat  fcrtili'  and  ]H<|»tilutm  district
of  ttic  l\*lo|Kiiinetm8,  and  Ha  iiihabitantti  are  de-
Hcrihed  as  fond  of  agriculture  and  rural  pursuits
(IVlyh.  iT.Taj.

Klis  was  divided  into  tiirei^dinlrirt'* — EIi»  Prop-
er, or  "  Holhiw  Klin"  ifi  KwXf/ 'HX(tJ,  Ptwilif.,  and
Triphylia.  Tlie  lint  of  thew!  occupied  tlie  uorlh-
fvrii  Keutiun  of  tlif*  coniitrj'  and  hatt  uhvady  been
alliidei]  t-o;  the  F)i>contl,  or  PiitatiM,  whm  that  part
of  the  Klcan  len'iUtry  through  which  thiwed  Ihu
AljiUuuM  after  its  jniictioii  %vilh  (lie  KrynmnlliUH.
ll.  diM-ivcd  its  luiiiif  fntin  thi^  city  of  Piki;  the
thini.nr  Triphylia,  fitrined  the  Hoiiihern  divi»(ton.

C-J)  The  capital  of  Klif*,  8ilnate<l  on  the  Penena,
at  the  diiitance  of  V2{)  (ttadiu  from  the  se-a.  It  was,
like  Dinny  other  towns  of  Greece,  at  lirnt  cotnposod
of  aevoral  detached  villni^H,  which,  l»eing  united  of-
*er  thp  Persian  War.  formed  oiic  couAidcrahlo  city.
It  always,  however,  ri'inaiiiwl  without  walls,  as  it
wom  diM^ntrd  hacred  and  nniler  the  imintHliat-e  pt^-
ti-ction  <if  the  giwl  wUiiMf  iVnlival  wan  there  Kidi-.iii-
ijtzed.  Eletieo,  in  early  liineA,  n:eeonliiig  to  Epho-
ruM,  thoso  troops  which  were  obliged  to  iravurRe
this  coDUtry  delivered  up  their  arum  ou  ouieriu^
it  and  received  thoio  again  upon  qutttiog  the
frontier.  But  this  piiiuitive  stotc  of  thiu^ft  wa«
not  of  long  duration,  fur  we  suhseqoetitly  find  the
Klean  territory  aa  little  ri'Ki>ected  an  any  other
Oivciuu  State  by  the  powem  at  war  with  that  re-
public. Still  the  peace  and  traQquiUity  thus  en-
joyed for  a  lime  by  the  EIratm,  together  with  the
Vast  conronmM*  of  pertuunt  attracted  by  the  Ulyiii-
|iie  Gawog,  greatly  contributed  to  the  pr»iii|H)rity
aud  opulence  of  their  city. &ec  Olymi'Ia.

Bllso. See  AtJSO.

SUasa. 8ee  Diuu.

Ellopia  ('EXXon-i'a).  (1)  A  dlatrict  in  the  north
of  Euboea,  near  the  promoutory  Ceuaeiini,  with  a
luwii  of  the  same  nnme.  The  whole  inland  of
Eitboeu  ii)  tRUiietime^i  calle<t  EHopia.  (H)  An  an-
cient name  of  the  diMtHet  alMint  DiHlona  in  Epiriifi.

EUotia  or  Hellotla  (rh  AXcdrid  or  AXuna).  A
festival  willi  u  torch-race  celebrated  at  Corinth  in
liooonr  of  Atlieu^  aa  a  goddess  of  fire  (Athen.  XT.
p.  (>78  a,  b).

A  festival  of  ihi-  Hame  name  wan  celebrated  in
Crete  iu  honour  of  KiiroiMi.  The  fXAoin't,  from
which  the  festival  derived  its  natiie,  waa.  acoortI>
iug  to  SeleucuH  (njt.  Athen.  1.  c.i,  n  myrlli*  giirlaiid
twenty  cubita  in  circinnferenoi',  whieti  wan  carried
nlinnt  ia  the  |iruccs&ion  at  tho  festival  of  the  El-
lotin.

Ellychulcun  (eXXixfioi'). 8e«  Lccerna.

XUmBley.  Pktkk.  Ad  Eugliafa  classical  i^cholar,
born  ill  177Ci  Ho  wa«  educated  at  Weatoiiuster
Si^IhwI  and  at  Mer|4»ii  College,  Oifonl.  receiving  his
Bachelor's  degree  in  I79-I.  He  took  onlers  in  179^,
but  inheritinpafortnnefromanunrle.  he  decided  to
devote  himeelf  to  literary  studieti  and  to  Greek  lit-


erature iu  particular.  Dnring  a  proUtigeO  nA-
deuce  iu  Edinburgh  ho  oontribntod  many  pi^ea
ou  claostcal  topics  to  the  KdiHtturgh  Rf\-\etz.  h
|HIB  he  viftitt'^l  Italy  in  st-arch  of  clauical  MJt^,
and  apent  llir>  winter  of  I^^IH  in  reaenrcbea  it  ibe
Laiireiitiiin  Library  at  Florence.  In  the  folb«.
in^  >ear  ho  did  good  work  in  deciphering  sow
of  the  {trnpyri  found  in  Herculaueum.  aMi»lin|;Sii
Uiunphry  Uavy.  In  ltft!3  he  was  lunde  PriMi|Fil
of  St.  Atbau'd  Hall  ond  t'uuiden  ProfcMor  of  Ad-
cieiit  Hifitory  iu  tho  Univcraity  of  Oifbid.  He
died  at  Oxford.  March  tilb,  It*^.

Elmsley  is  betil  known  by  bis  critical  eJitiina
of  the  Jtve»ti»,  AHdrostpda,  liarchite,  £lectnt,Hfn-
rhiinr,  !ind  Mrdra  of  Euripides;  of  the  tkdtptt
TiiraniiHn  and  Itedipu*  Volon^us  of  SophoelM;  ud
of  the  Arhat-MiaHn  of  Arislophanos  (l^)i.  H»  aha
edited  Thucydiiles, See  Elm»lriana  Critiet  ilOTl-

Elogiuxn.  An  inscription  on  tomlM,  deen.  in-
ngeM  of  aneeHtorn,  votive  tablets,  etc.  Muij  «f
thewtelogia  {tXtytla)  are  preaerved  tonsftamHe
p<HleAtalH  of  the  statues  with  which  Anfn»tu>
adorntnl  the  colonnade^)  of  the  t«utple  of  Man  tl
the  Foruui  (Hon  CVjrm.  iv.  H,  1^)  and  fiom  tlrt
Arratae  in  librane^.  They  are  of  some  bisluntil
valne,  though  not  always  representing  odgiul
sources  of  information.  For  specimens,  we  Ibt
Corp.  In»cript,  Lat.  i.  pp.  '^77,  2HI,  nnd  WitmiiiiM
PI».  622  foil.;  als4>  the  Pofine  Lat.  Mium*t  :ei
Ktihrens  ),  v.  396,  For  tlw  etymology  of  tli'  word
rltifiium  ttee  Cnrtitis's  KMnr  .SfArift*T»,  ii-iCSMh*!)"
rig,  18)^);  and  for  dii«ciiN.si*tn,  Hihhr«lH<inior,  Ik
Libra  de  Virta  Itlniitribiia  f>W«  /fomar  (Kefliu.l'^W

EIon£  ('nXw**!!)-  A  town  nf  the  Perrhaetrl.  in
Thcji.'udy,  aflerwanls  railed  Lituond.

Elpenor  ('EXir^ywp).  One  of  the  compaitinu
of  Odysseus,  who  were  metaioorp hosed  by  Qird
iiiio  swine  and  aftcrwarda  back  into  hkii.  lif
tuxicHted  with  wine.  Elpenor  oue  day,  while  »i^\'
on  Click's  roof,  fell  and  broke  his  neck  (fM.  x-QSA

Elpituc£  ('EXirtpUtf}.  A  daughter  of  Ulllia^
nianicd  U»  L■allia^  (PIut./Vr.  10). Sec  CuiON.

Eltiaatea  A  people  in  Atpiiiania  in  ttir  inte-
rior of  the  country  (Caes.  It.fi.ui.l^f.  TlM»ircU«f
to\vu  wuK  KliiMi,  now  Knse.

Elymael See  KlvmaT^i.

Elymaia CEXvfum). Adlutrict of Susiaua.wlii'^
dcnviMt  it«  nanm  from  the  Elyninoi  or  EUnrit  *
warlike  nud predatory  i«H>ple  U'tol.  vi.  .1.  *  5k-
They  wimw  aUo  found  in  the  niontitaina  of  Uie^*
Medio,  and  were  pr»d>ably  among  the  most  ancy—*
inhabitants  of  tlw  country  north  of  the  h**<i  *^^_
the  Peraiiin  flulf. ]ii  the  Old  Tci»Umeu(.biui>*
is  calksl  Elani.

Blymi See  Elvmus.

Elj^mus  ("EXv^or).  A  uatnral  mw  otAuAt^
and  brother  of  Kryx  ;  one  of  the  Trojausifbifl-'
fVom  Ti-oy  to  Sicily.  With  the  aiil  of  Aenewtli-
biiilt  the  towns  of  Aegeata  and  Elyni^.  TVTr
jans  who  settled  in  that  part  of  SicUy  culled  ll
selves  Elymi.  after  Elymiis.

EI^bU  Campl  lELVsit^M.'HAvo-inv  xtWl-
abode  of  the  bbu^Med  in  another  world,  whrrp  '
enjoyed  all  tuannci  of  the  purest  pleasure*
the  HoiiRTie  mythology  iIm'  Elysiaii  Field*  Uy
the  weMtern  nutrgin  of  the  earth,  by  tbi'Stre*" -^
Oceaniis,  and  to  them  the  mortal  n'lalive*  "if  *  ^
king  of  the  goiU  were  transported,  wiIInhU  t**!**'*


ELYSIUM


5B9


EMESA


of  death,  to  enjoy^  an  immortality  of  bliss  {Od.  it.
563  foil.)-  In  tbe  time  of  Hesiod,  the  Etyslun  Plains
bad  become  tbe  Islm  of  the  Blesned  (/iaicdpcAv  injaoi)
in  the  Western  Ocean  (pp.  et  D.  171).  Pindar,  wbo
baa  left  a  glowing  description  of  Elysinm,  appears
t«  rednce  the  number  of  these  happy  islands  to  one
( Oh  ii.  129).  At  a  later  day  a  change  of  religious  ideas
ensued,  brongbt  aboat  by  the  increase  of  geograph-
ical knowledge, and  Elysinm  was  moved  down  to  tbe
lower  world  as  the  place  of  reward  for  tbe  good.
The  Vergilian  conception  respecting  Elysium  made
it  a  region  blessed  with  perpetual  spring,  clothed
with  cootinnal  verdure,  beautifnl  with  flowers,
8ha4led  by  pleasant  groves,  and  refreshed  by  never-
failing  fountains.  Here  the  righteous  Hred  in  per-
feet  felicity,  communing  with  each  other,  bathed
in  a  flood  of  light  proceeding  from  their  own  sun,
and  with  tbe  sky  at  eve  lighted  ap  by  their  own
conatellations  ■  toUmqne  »»ttmy  ««a  gidera  nomnt
iy^Tg.Aen,  Ti.&41).  Their  employments  below  re-
sembled those  on  earth,  and  whatever  had  greatly
engaged  their  attention  iu  the  upper  world  con-
tinned  to  be  a  source  of  iunocent  enjoyment  in  the
world  below  (Verg.  Aen.  vi.  653). See  Hades.

myahun. See  Elysh  Cahpi.

Bmanoipatio.  The  formal  liberation  of  a  sou
from  the  control  (iRaaiM)  of  his  father.  If  tbe  son
were  sold  three  tiroes  over  all  the  rights  of  his
father  came  to  an  end.  If  then  a  father  wished
to  make  a  son  his  own  master  («Hf  iiiHs),  he  made
him  over  three  times  by  mattcipafio  or  a  fictitious
sale  to  a  third  person.  Tbe  third  person  emanci-
pated bim  the  first  and  second  time,  so  that  he
came  again  into  tbe  control  of  his  father.  After
purchasing  him  a  third  time  be  either  emancipat-
ed him  himself,  and  thus  became  his  patronu$,  or
he  aold  him  back  to  the  father,  to  whom  be  now
stood,  not  iu  the  relation  of  a  son,  but  in  mancipto,
so  that  the  father  could  liberate  him  without  more
a4lo.  In  this  case  tlie  father  remained  patronu$  of
the  son.  The  emancipated  son  did  not,  as  in  the
case  of  adoption  (see  Adoptio),  pass  into  the  patrta
poteaUiM  of  another,  and  therefore  retained  his  fa-
ther's family  name;  but  he  lost  bis  right  to  in-
herit in  default  of  a  will. See  Manus.

Bnunaor. A  soldier  who  exceeds  his  furlough.

BmatUa  CH/ia^ta).  A  district  of  Macedonia,
between  tbe  Haliacraon  and  the  Axjns.  The  poets
frequently  give  the  name  of  Ematbia  to  tbe  whole
of  Macedonia,  and  sometimes  even  to  the  neigb-
bonriug  Thesaaly.

BmathXdM  ('H^A'fifr).  Tbe  nine  daughters  of
Fiems,  king  of  Ematbia. See  Fibridrs.

Bmathion  ('Hpi^tMy).  Son  of  Eos  and  Titho-
nas,  brother  of  Memnon,  from  whom  he  seized  the
govemtuent  of  the  Ethiopians.  He  was  slain  by
Heracles  when  travelling  in  search  of  tbe  golden
apples  of  tbe  Hesperides. See  Hes.  Theog,  965.

limbaa  {ifi$as).  This  is  sometimes  used  as  a
generic  term  for  a  closed  boot,  so  called  because
one's  foot  "got  into"  (ffi^iptiw)  it,  and  it  was  not
merely  fastened  to  tbe  foot  like  a  sandal.  But  at
Athens  ift^at  had  a  special  signification ;  it  was  a
cheap  acrt  of  boot  first  mannfactured  in  Thrace,
and  in  kind  like  low  KoBopvoi  (Poll.  vii.  85),  closed-
in  boots  with  rectangular  soles,  often  wooden.
These  tft^its  were  worn  by  men  (Aristoph.  Eecl.
47)  and  by  the  poorer  classes  (id.  Ve«p.  1157).

EmbatSa  (ififfartia). In  Attic  law  this  word


(like  the  corresponding  English  one,  fslry)  was
used  to  denote  a  formal  taking  possession  of  real
property.  Thus,  when  a  son  entered  upon  the
land  left  him  by  bis  father,  he  was  said  iii^axtvtiv,
or  ^SlCtiy  fit  ri  irarp&a,  aud  thereupon  he  became
teited,  or  possessed  of  his  inheritance.  If  any  one
disturbed  bim  in  the  enjoyment  of  this  property,
with  an  intention  to  dispute  the  title,  he  might
maintain  an  action  of  ejectment,  f^ovXijr  iUr).  Be-
fore entry  he  could  not  maintain  snob  action.
'EfovX^  is  from  cftXXfU',  an  old  word  signifying  to
eject.  The  snppoeed  ejectment,  for  which  the
action  was  brought,  was  a  mere  formality.  The
defendant,  after  tbe  plaintifi's  entry,  came  and
turned  bim  off,  iSfyytv  (x  r^e  y^c.  This  proceeding
(called  i^ayvyff)  took  place  quietly  and  in  tbe
presenoe  of  witnesses ;  the  defendant  then  became
a  wrong-doer,  and  the  plaintiff  was  in  a  condition
to  try  tbe  right. See  Exoules  Dik£.

Bmblema  (?ft/3Xi}fui),  Emblemfita.  (1)  Emhle-
mata  were  metal  ornaments,  such  as  masks,  busts,
medallions,  figures  of  men  and  animals,  wrought
in  relief  aud  artificially  attached  by  soldering  or
riveting  to  tbe  interior  or  exterior  of  metal  bowls,
vases,  cups,  etc.  (Cic,  in  Verr.  iv.  22).  Such  orna-
ments were  sometimes  made  of  gold  aud  silver,
and  had  an  artistic  and  pecuniary  value  even
when  detached  from  tbe  objects  to  which  they
belonged.  Tbns,  the  plunderer  Verres  took  es-
pecial care  to  wrench  off  emblemata  from  vases
and  cups.  Emblemata  must  be  distingnisbed  from
metal  ornaments  in  relief  (such  as  those  produced
in  repouss^,  which  formed  an  integral  part  of
the  vase  itself:  tbe  essence  of  the  emblema  was
that  it  could  be  detached,  if  necessary,  from  the
vase  which  it  ornamented.  Many  of  tbe  metal
masks,  figures, dishes,  etc.,  in  modern  museums  are
doubtless  emblemata  which  have  been  broken  off
from  vases.

Cruatae  were  metal  rase -ornaments  similar  to
emblemata.  Tbe  cruatae  were  made  by  artisans
called  crutiarii.

(2)  The  word  emblema  is  also  used  to  signify  in-
laid work  (Cic.  Brut.  79).  This  usage  is,  however,
rare ;  and  as  a  general  rule  when  the  words  embJe-
ma,  emblemata  occur  in  tbe  ancieut  authors  and  in
modem  archaeological  treatises,  the  metal  orna-
ments described  above  are  designated. See  Cau-

LATUHA.

BmbolXma  (*E/i^dXi^).  A  city  of  the  Paropa-
misadae  in  Northern  India,  near  the  fortress  of
Aomos  (Q.  Curt.  viii.  12,  $  1).

EmboUnm  (ififioKutv).  An  interlude  recited  or
sang  between  tbe  acts  of  a  play  by  an  actress,
hence  styled  emboliaria  (Plin.  Ii.  N.  vii.  49).

Ztmbfilnm  (fft^oKov).  Tbe  beak  of  a  ship.  See
Navis;  Bobtruu.

Eznerlta  Augusta.  A  town  of  Lusitania,  below
Norba  Caesurea,  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  Anas
(Gnadiana). It  is  now  Merida^

BmerXtt  Roman  soldiers  who  were  discharged
from  militarydntyCVal.  Max.  vi.  1,10;  Ovid,  Trw*.
iv.  8,  21),  having  served  tbe  full  time  required  by
law — viz.,  twenty  years  for  the  legionaries  and
sixteen  for  the  praetorians  (Tac.  Ann,  i.  76;  Dio.
Cass.  Iv.  23).

BmSaa  or  Thnisaa  ('E^itrcra).  A  city  of  Syria
on  the  east  bank  of  the  Orontes,  the  native  city
of  Inlia  Domna,  Elagabalns  (q.  v.),  and  of  Alexan-


EMETICS  5W

■dcr  Seveiiis. U  was  t\w  winw  of  tUf  dfoistrc
battle  U'tn-ccu  Aurvliaii  iiutl  Zfuobin  (a.U.  'J73).

EmetiCB. See  DiAKTmCA.

Smisoarinm  \  ifnira^urX  Tbe  name  given  to  nii
aitiliL'ijil  cliunucl  by  whicli  an  outlet  itt  furrurd  tu
CAiTj  ulf  any  stagaiiut  btHljr  nl'  water  (Clc.  Jd  /'um.
xvt.  IH).  liiGreeco,  In  ibi^early  tiiDoiof  theMinyao
of  OrcboitK>ntis,  wr  6tid  tbcnnlnral  cbnnucl«(i'u(a*
rrfMnit  «a  tbt'y  nrc  now  rntled)  wliicb  carry  off  tbe
wul(>rs  of  tbe  [locotian  Ccpbiseits  tbmugb  Lake
CojMiii  to  tbe  wn  Aii|tp)enietite<l  l>y  tiro  iirtiticiat
entimnrln  or  tiiiiii**]^.  Tlte  longer  of  the  ttvo,  con-
iiecthi^  lbi>  Inke  wtlb  tbe  lower  counw  of  tbe
0|ibi»MitH,  iM  nearly  fiinr  ni'ilt^  in  ]i>n^I]i,  arconliiig
til  I'VirrhUaiuuior,  anil  wilb  abutit  twi-nly  ptiijwn-
ilknhir  Kbafttt  aiiuk  into  it,  »>uiu<i  uf  wbicli  ai-v  froiii
UW  to  l.'rf)  rv«t  in  (l«i>tU.  Tb«  itecoutl  tiiniivl,  niiicli
aborloi-,  niiiles  tbe  lakes  Cot)niN  nuil  Hylica,  run-
iiliii;  nuiler  tbe  Aeraejibian  I'Iniu  at  do  ^reat  dcptb,
■nil  ii  likewiw  proviileU  witb  abatis.  Uolb  tiin-
nelii  nnil  MboflH  nr»  non-  choked  up,  but  can  still
Im  tnn'LHl.  Tbe  natural  katar^lhra  1>eiuK  iusuftl'
civil  t  to  i-nn*y  olV  tbe  waters  of  I  be  C'epbi-^iK,  luncb
uf  wbat  wan  itiire  fertile  all n vial  luiul  in  now  tnnieil
U)  ft  swamp  nnil  awailH  llii-  t>fViirtH  of  imidern  elt-
lerpiiite.  An  nliorlive  utti^iiipt  tu  clear  luit  tbeM
tunncia  was  niiub-  by  an  en({inei-r  nanu-il  C'i'ateH
ntnler  tbp  onlrn*  i>f  AU-xiinder  ibe  On'at  (Sirab.  ix,
p.  407),  and  it  wtin  unniuinced  in  l^'^'i  tliat  (be  re-
dlnnintinn  of  Lake  t^'opaiK  waa  again  to  bu  al-
t4<inpted.

llercKlotuK  duaoribca  wilh  marked  iutemit  tbe
tnnnet  uf  Kniialiiiiis  at  Sjitnos,  by  vblcb  a  Bn|ip]y
of  fh'sb  H'aier  nos  introitinccd  into  tbe  city,  and
gtvi'i*  it  llie  rtmt  place  Jinionji  the  "  three  fji-eatest
wiii'kt  of  the  (ireckit,"  tbu  othem  bcinj;  tbe  niolc  in
(lie  harbour  of  Siiiiios  and  the  Ileraenm  or  teni]tle
of  IIel-<(  (lil.l)(>).  Tlii-ite  works  nniinet<tionnbly  dale
A'oin  the  Tyranny  uf  i'olycnilcs.  llie  must  llouiisb-
hig  pi'i'lod  of  8nntiM,  wliivh  ended  iibont  n.c.ri*2:i,

III  Itiily  tbe  Klrnsenus  were  tin*  (init  gn^at  itiU8>
lem  th  the  art  4if  tnniielling,  and  the  KoniaoH
leurni'd  II  from  thnni.  The  Cloaca  Maxiniu  itself
h  i[nitn  HM  uniih  an  oniiwuiiy  uh  a  bewt-r.  druin-
Inu  the  Fntiiui  nnd  the  Velnbiuni,  which  pre-
vlonniy  wore  MWaaiptt. i.  See  Cloaca.  ) Diit  tlii-


EUPEDUCLES


^r4^h


BmtiMLriiinL


ried  oiit. Tbe  inime<llflte  moutb  of  the  luiin^l  vm
at  some  distAni'O  fruiu  the  luarKiu  of  the  bike.
npiH'-r  I'ud  of  the  tuiiud  itself  runttittto  of  u  spl
did  arobn'&y  of  ibe  Doric  order,  nineteen  firet  bijj
and  nine  wide,  formed  out  of  large  blockfofjtoi
roMiflbling  in  conHtniotion  tbe  work»  of  lb*  CIl
diiiu  aijneilnct. Tbo  month tbntugh  vrliii-h  I
waters  iHscI]arge<l  tbemselvus  iut<^i  Ibe  LilU  '
ntore  simple  ami  U  re|>re«entetl  iu  th«  pr
illaatratioij.

The  niodcni  work  of  Prince  Torlonia  (Irtfi-l^
in  uu  exttfnniou  and  eiilHrgutiivul  of  tbe  Utiiud  I
('tuiiditm.

Emmella  it'ftfU^tta). The  (vriDnii  and  i
ilanci>  of  the  chonw  in  tho  Orvck  tnige<ly<
CnoRls;  TltAfioKDlA.

Enuuentdae  ('Eftfuyitfai).  A  noble  fnniilrl
Aui-i)^eiitiiiii  riainiing descent  fmni  Polyui(T>('t-<
Of  tln»  family  wwt  AenMiihtmuH,  nlitM«  mhi^T


gnntoHt  Itmnun  emitMarinm  is  that  of  Lake  Fu- '  ron  and  XenurrAtoA,  are  celebrated  by  PlnJar


olliun.  lulluN  CjieAiir  is  said  to  have  first  con-
onlvtfd  tbe  Idea  of  ibis  stnitendons  undertaking
(Knot,  Jul.  41),  which  wtw  cariiefl  into  eflfert  by  the
«tKiperor  Cliiudiiifl  (T»i'.  .4iti«.  xii.  57}.  The  length
of  llin  einiiwiiry,  wbicb  lie«  nearly  in  a  direct  line
from  the  lake  |o  Hie  river  Liris  (Garigllano),  is
IV^Xi  Kiigliwli  fert.or  thrive  niilen  all  bnt  f^)  ynnU.
The  iiitinbrr  of  workmen  employed  was  3(),0I>II,  and
Ibw  Unit*  ufunpted  in  the  work  eleveu  yearn  IC>net.
i'lauit.  Uti).  Tor  nnnv  tluti  ii  mile  tlie  tunnel  is
nairlKil  iinili<r  n  iinMintain,  of  wbicb  Hip  liigbest
pnil  I*  IIKHl  feel  nbove  Ibe  level  of  the  bike,  and
ibrongh  a  ntratnmof  n>oky  fornmiion  ku  hard  that
Itvitry llieh  re(|nlliHl to  be wmked  by the  chisel.


victors  in  the  games.

Emmenoi  DUcai  (j'^/oiyw  HUai). A  name  g\*
in  Altic  law  to  those  snjta  that  were  not  alio*
to  be  iieuding  for  more  than  n  month. Ma>H
these  were  snita  rfK|Mx^ting  roniinercc  or  Riili(<l«|
wliich  delay  wunid  lie  e«{)ecially  injniious-

Emodi  MontM  (ra  'H/unda  Sprf).  Ptft  of  *
chain  of  monntuiiiM  in  Asia.  That  part  of  t^
chain  which  Alexander  crossed  in  ord«r  t'OinTxl*'
Uiictriana  wan  called  I^arojfAmisua;  tbe  morrM*'-
erly  continuation  of  tho  mngo  was  t«raird  Ktiiol>
Moiiteti;  and  its  still  farther  roiitinoati>iu.tvc<><"
tbe  Eastern  Ocean,  was  styled  Imalls. See  iM*^'*-

Tho  leiMAlnliig  pnrfliHi  riniN  ihroiigb  a  cofter  soil,  Empeddoles  rE^n-fAocX^r).  A  niitiv«  of  Agn
llitl  niiicb  below  Ibe  Irvcl  of  lh>>  earth,  nnd  ingt'otnin  in  Hicily,  who  fliuirtsliei]  nbotil  R£ '^
vaulted  with  brtek.  iVriN-ndlcnlar  shafts  {itatri)  <  lie  was  ditiliiigiiisbeil  not  only  as  a  pbilotafhV-
■tv  Ktnik  Hi  varloiiM  dltititni'os  luto  Ibe  tunnel,  and  but  bIao  for  his  knowledge  of  natural  hlMtfty*^
«  iHimlii>r  uf  lateral  upenings  (pHnictiU],  Bouie  of  '  me<liciue,  and  an  a  jioet  nnd  Ktatramao.  Alt«rib»
wbleh  Kepnrtilii  tbeuiM'tvi**  int4>  two  brani-hes,  one  '  death  of  his  father  Meto,  who  wiu  n  wMlthr  r:t-
•Imivii  tbe  other,  nrn  likewise  directed  into  it,  the ;  iiten  of  Agrig«utnui,  be  acquired  great  urcijEb'
hiWeofal  nn  e|i>\Ktlon  of  live  feet  from  Ibe  I>otTom.  ]  among  hi*)  fellow-citi/«-«s  liy  CApotunng  |li«  1*'^"
Tbriingb  thoM  ibe  niaterinls  oxoarnlvd  were  car-julnr  party  and favouring democratic  nwwBr**


EMPEDOCLES


Ml


EMPHYTEUSIS


His  consequence  in  ttie  State  became  at  leugtk  bo  |
great  that  he  ventured  to  assume  several  of  the
(listiDctiong  of  royalty,  particularly  a  purple  robe,
a  golden  girdle,  a  Delphic  crowu,  aud  a  train  of
atteudants.  The  skill  which  he  possessed  in  med-
iciue  aud  natural  philosophy  enabled  him  to  per-
foiiu  many  wouders,  which  he  passed  upon  the  eu-
]ier&titiou8  aud  credulous  multitude  fur  miracloH.
He  pceteuded  to  drive  away  uoxioua  wiuds  from
his  country  aud  thereby  put  a  stop  to  epidemic
diseases.  He  is  said  to  have  checked,  by  the
power  of  music,  the  madness  of  s  youug  man
who  was  threatening  his  enemy  with  iustaut
•death ;  to  have  restored  a  woraau  to  life  who
had  lain  breathless  thirty  days ;  and  to  have  done
many  other  things,  equally  astouisfaing,  after  the
manner  of  Pythagoras.  Ou  accouut  of  all  this  he
was  an  object  of  universal  admiration.  Besides
medical  skill  Empedocles  possessed  poetical  tal-
ents. The  fraguieuts  of  his  verses  are  Hcattered
throughout  the  ancient  writers;  and  Fabricing  is
of  opinion  that  he  was  the  real  author  of  those
aucieut  fragmeuts  which  bear  the  name  of  the
"  Golden  Verses  uf  Pythagoras,"  aud  may  be  fouud
printed  at  the  end  of  Guttlin^s  edition  of  Hesiod.
His  principal  works  were  a  didactic  poem  on  Nat-
nre  lntpt  *v<rt»v),  and  another  entitled  KaSapfiot,
wh  ich  seems  to  bare  recommended  virtuous  conduct
as  a  means  of  averting  disease.  Oorgias  of  I^eon-
tiui,  the  welUkuowu  orator,  known  as  "  the  Nihil-
ist," was  his  pnpil,  whence  it  may  seem  reasona-
ble to  infer  that  Empedocles  was  no  iuconsiderable
master  of  the  art  of  eloquence.  According  to  the
^»mmon  account  he  threw  himself  into  the  burn-
ing cratOT  of  Aetna,  in  order  that  the  manner  of
bis  death  might  not  be  known,  aud  that  he  might
afterwards  pass  for  a  god ;  bat  the  secret  was  dis-
covered by  means  of  one  of  his  brazen  sandals,
which  was  thrown  out  from  the  mountain  iu  a
subsequent  eruptiou  of  the  volcano.  This  story
is  rejected,  however,  as  fictitious  by  Strabo  aud
other  writers.  According  to  Aristotle  be  died  at
sixty  years  of  age.

His  views  in  philosophy  are  variously  given.
By  some  he  is  called  a  Pythagorean,  in  couse*
-quenee  of  a  resemblance  of  doctrine  iu  a  few  uu-
eeeential  points.  But  the  principles  of  his  theory
evidently  show  tbut  he  belongs  to  the  Eteatic
-School.  Empedocles  taught  that  originally  All
was  one,  a  God  eternal  aud  at  rest ;  a  sphere  and
a  mixture  (at^ipov,  ftiyfta),  without  a  vacuum,  in
which  the  elements  of  things  were  held  togetlier
in  niidistinguishable  confusion  by  love  ((^iXi'a),  the
primal  force  which  nuites  the  like  to  like.  In  a
portion  of  this  whole,  however,  or,  as  he  ex-
preseea  it,  iu  the  members  of  the  Deity,  strife
iytatosX  the  force  which  binds  like  to  unlike,  pi-e-
vjiiled,  and  gave  the  elements  a  tendency  to  sepa-
rate themselves,  whereby  the  first  became  percep-
tible as  such,  although  the  separation  was  not  so
complete  but  that  each  contained  portions  of  the
others.  Hence  arose  the  multiplicity  of  things.
By  the  vivifyiug  conuteractiou  of  love,  organic
life  was  produced,  not,  however,  so  perfect  aud
so  fnll  of  design  as  it  now  appears;  but,  at  fli-st,
single  limbs,  then  Irregular  combinatious,  till  ul-
timately they  received  their  present  acUustments
and  perfection.  But,  as  the  forces  of  love  and
hate  are  constantly  actiug  upon  each  other  for
generation  or  destruction,  the  present  condition
«f  things  cauuot  persist  forever,  and  the  world


which,  properly,  is  not  the  All,  but  only  the  or-
dered part  of  it,  will  again  be  reduced  to  a  cha-
otic unity,  out  of  which  a  new  system  will  be
formed,  and  so  on  forever.  There  is  no  real  de-
struction of  anything,  but  only  a  change  of  com-
binations.

Of  the  elements  (which  be  seems  to  have  been
the  first  to  describe  as  four  distiuct  species  of  mat-
ter), fire,  as  the  rarest  and  most  powerful,  ho  held
to  be  the  chief,  and,  consoijueutly,  the  soul  of  all
seutieut  and  intellectual  beiugs  which  issue  from
the  central  fire,  or  soul  of  the  world.  The  soul
migrates  through  animal  and  vegetable  bodies  iu
atonement  for  some  guilt  committed  iu  its  nnem-
bodied  state  when  it  is  a  daemon,  of  which  he  sup-
posed that  au  iufiuite  number  existed.  The  seat
of  a  daemon,  when  in  a  human  body,  is  the  blood.
Closely  counected  with  this  view  of  the  objects  of
knowledge  was  his  theory  of  human  knowledge.
Iu  the  impure  separatiou  of  the  elements  it  is
only  the  predominant  one  that  the  senses  can
apprehend ;  and,  consequently,  though  man  can
kuow  all  the  elemeuts  of  the  whole  singly,  he  is
unable  to  see  them  in  their  perfect  unity,  wherein
consists  their  truth.  Empedocles  therefore  rejects
the  testimony  of  the  seuses,  and  maiutaius  that
pure  intellect  alone  can  arrive  at  a  knowledge  of
the  truth.  This  is  the  attribute  of  the  Deity,  for
mau  cannot  overlook  the  work  of  love  in  all  its
extent ;  aud  the  true  unity  is  open  only  to  itself.
Hence  he  was  led  to  distinguish  between  the  world
as  presented  to  our  senses  (jtotr^t  alvBrfrot)  and  its
type,  the  intellectual  world  (xoo-^r  vatfrat).  Lucre-
tins,  who  praises  Empedocles  highly  even  while  crit-
icising his  philosophy,  appears  to  have  taken  him
as  a  model.  (Cf.Lucret.i.716foll.)  The  fragmeuts
of  Empedocles  have  been  published,  with  a  com-
mentary, bv  Sturz  (1H05);  by  Peyron  (1810);
Karsteu  (1838);  Stein  (185Si);  and  Bergk  (2d  ed.
Leipzig,  1866).  Good  monographs  are  those  by
Lommatach  (1830);  Reynaud  (1848);  Hollenberg,
Empedoclea  (Berlin,  1853) ;  Gladisch,  Empedoclet
und  die  Aegyptcr  (Leipzig,  1868) ;  aud  Wiunefeld,
Die  Philo$opkie  dea  Empedoclea  (Rastatt,  1862).

Bmporor. See  Imperator.

Bmphruii  (iftiffpovpoi).  From  tftpovpa,  the  name
given  to  the  body  of  Spartan  citizens  anil  Perioect
duriug  the  period  in  which  they  were  liable  to  mil-
itary service  (Xen.  Rep.  Lao.  &,  $  7).  This  period
lasted  to  the  fortieth  year  from  manhood  (d^'  jj^tis)
— that  is  to  say,  to  the  sixtieth  year  from  birth ;
aud  duriug  this  time  a  mau  could  not  go  out  of
the  country  without  permission  from  the  authori-
ties.

The  only  exemption  was  fur  the  father  of  three
ROUS,  who  became  atftpovpos  (Aclian,  V.  H.  vi.  6).
The  word  (ftpovpd,  as  Schumauu  observes,  is  char-
acteristic of  Spartan  modes  of  thought ;  all  La-
conia  was  a  camp,  the  Spartiatae  a  garrison.

Bmphytaiutia  ( c/K^vrcuo-tc,  lit.  "  an  implant-
ing"). A  perpetual  and  "  real"  right  in  agricul-
tural land  which  belongs  to  another  person,  en-
titling the  emphjfteuta  to  cultivate  it  practically
as  thoDgh  it  were  his  own,  on  condition  of  paying
a  fixed  rent  {penaio,  canon)  to  the  domimua,  or  own-
er, somewhat  after  the  nature  of  the  English  "  fee-
farm"  rent  ("  feodifirma,"  Magna  Carta,  c.  37).

The  origiu  of  emphyteusis  is  traceable  to  the
agri  vectiffalea,  first  distinctly  meutioued  about  the
time  of  Hadriau — large  tracts  of  grazing  laud  Id


EMPIKICI


EN'DEIXIS


Italy,  Iwloii^iii;  to  th«  ^tat«,  rdipion*  cariHira-
tlotih  (e.  g.  Ilie  Vcptnl  VirgiuB),  or  tlio  Kinaller  ciri-
Uitit  amX  MUHicipin,  but  licUl  iitnl  ctijoytil  l>y  pi'i-
viite  persons  niibjrt^t  to  th^^  payini'iit  of  a  fierpetiinl
reitt  rertigat),  or  let  otil  ti[i«ii  very  long  Iciuv*.
TliM  riitlirM  of  Hitch  ot-ciipu'i-K,  lit  lintt  piin*,ly  eoii-
trnctrinl,  ncfiuirtMl  a  "rrnl"  vhuraclpr.  ■tinlogoiiK
to  tlijtt  of  gt!tiniii(>  on'ueriibip.  from  tho  praettr,
vtho  |iroli-<>i«(l  tliolr  po&4<?88ion  {IHg.  '£,  t<,  15.  i)  by
interdicts  ouil  by  n  ntiiiti  actio  in  rrm  (aelio  rtcii-
galin),  nvailititc  even  aKaiiift  (be  Icwtor  when  nnn-
imyuH'iit  of  ivtit  mis  iii)t  nllegiMl  (Din.  vi.  3,  I,  3}.
Au  aildttioii  hn*l  tbiis  l>e<-n  nta«Ie  to  tlut  rwru  in  re
a/iffiHiof  Rimiaii  law  :  llie  riglil  wiw  HlwiiabI*'  Imth
inffT  rirtwi  ami  by  will,  ami  ile»ci"mlt'<l  to  tbo  tcii-
aiit'ti  li«ii'>t  oil  tiiH  iiitHHijury,  tliough  at  that  ticte  it
bud  not  u4.-( I II i ri'd  a  HpeL-ific  uauio.

EmplrTcL See  Medicina.

Emplecton  (*fin\tKTav). See  Ml'RUS,

Emporiae  Ch/^iTopiat)  or  Emporiam  CEinroptov,
'Kftiropttovt.  Tito  inodi^ni  Artiimrios;  n  town  of
tbo  Indi);iites  in  IIJHpanin  TnrrnconeiioiN,  ne»r  tlm
ryteni<<'s,  t^itnatrd  tni  tliti  river  CludiAiniN,  found-
ed by  tlu^  Phoi:aciinM  fnitii  JlaiViilitt  (Livy,  xxi.tW).

Bxnporinm  (rn  tftrrofHOf),  A  place  for  wbolosale
Inulo  ill  comiuoditie*  carritMl  by  sea.  The  iwinie
i»  »ouietiinivi  Applitrd  lo  a  tteuimrt  town,  but  it
prui>erly  M^nitiivt  only  a  particular  place  in  such  a
town.  The  wonl  is  derived  from  tfivopas,  which
Rignities  In  Hotiicr  n  person  who  sails  as  a  passen-
ger iu  a  ship  belonging  to  another  person  [Oti.  ii.
;1I9,  xxiv.  ^1);  but  in  later  writers  it  denotes  the
merchant  who  rnrrles  on  coQinterce  with  fon-igu
cotiiitrtes.  and  difTt^rs  frotii  itd^Xor,  the  retail  deal-
er, who  pnrchaiwH  his  goods  from  the  tfiirofiaf  nnd
retailn  them  in  tin*  niiirket- place  iV\At.  I'rottig.
'il'-i  C).  Tlie  ifiti|H»rinin  at  Athens  was  under  the
inspection  of  eertaiu  oftlfttm,  who  were  nli-rted  «n-
Ulially  {imfuXijrai  toC  ifiiroplnv).  See  F.PIMBLK-
TAB.

Emptf  et  VendXti Actio.  Tbo  RtiniaD  Heller ha^l
uu  nrtin  iinilili,  and  the  buyer  an  nctit*  rntpti,  fJ  re-
cover daniu^es  for  breach  of  the  iliuies  iiupiiMid  by
the  contract  nf  Aule  upon  tho  other  party.  Rnlli
ate  tiftioHtu  dirrttitr,  and  belong  to  tbo  clatu  of
reTDC«)icM  known  as  honae  /idti  ii(rfki'u  i^UaiuH,  iv.
m;  Jti»l.  iv.6.28}.

Bmptio. .Se«  BoxoniTM  E>[ftio.

Emptio  et  Venditio.  In  Honiaii  law  tho  con-
tract of  buying  and  •telling  cniniists  in  the  buyur
agreeing  to  give  a  certain  niiiu  of  money  to  the
•ellcr,  Hiul  the  seller  agreeing  to  give  to  tho  buyer
souie  certain  thing  for  his  money.  AfUir  the
agi-eeiiient  is  made  the  bnyor  is  honud  to  pay  his
money,  even  if  tiie  thing  which  is  the  object  of
purchase  t«huuld  be  accidi-ntally  de«troyeil  Irefore
it  18  delivered;  and  the  seller  uiiist  deliver  the
tbiug  with  all  itn  intorniediato  incn-aae.  The  emII-
er  miiRl  alM>giiaraui«eagood  title  lo  the  ptirchoM^
(lee  Evicnu\  and  he  uinst  also  gnarantoe  that
the  thing  has  no  cnncealeil  defects,  and  that  it  lias
all  the  goofl  <|iialitieif  which  he  (the  (>ellt>rj  attriU-
nt«»  to  it.  It  was  with  a  view  to  check  frauds  iu
Mies,  and  f>«pectally  in  the  sales  of  slaves,  that  the
sollrr  wa«  obliged,  by  the  edict  of  the  ciirnle  aedilea
(see  Kdictcm),  to  inform  the  bnyer  of  the  defects
of  any  slave  offered  for  sale :  Qui  manapia  rrn-
rfnaf,  (vr/iurra /<uW<ii) t  rtntorra  i/hihI  mitrbi  ritiitjuf,
oto. Iu  rofareuce  to  this  part  of  the  law,  in  adUi- 1


Entarpa. (Rteti


tioD  to  tlie  n^nal  action  ari»ting  from  the  MiilluU
the  hnyvr  hud  agatiist  the  M*ller.  acrordin^  tuih*
circiiiiistauce)*,  an  nt-titt  rx  ntipultilti,  rnrii^toni,
and  i/uanli  miuorit.  Horace,  in  the  bt'giuiiiii|;(i(
the  M-cond  epistle  of  the  second  boiik,  alliidn  lo
the  precautions  to  be  taken  by  the  hayer  au<l  tlw
•teller  of  a  slave.

Empiiaa  ('Kfinwaa).  A  monstroiM  ipf^trf,
wliirli  was  believed  by  tho  Greeks  to  devimr  liti*
man  l>eiiigs.  Il  wua  Mid  to  be  wnl  by  HicnU
and  to  aasiitno  vurioiu  «hapeHj  being  HOinelimn
knowu  as  'UtHtKoXq,  'OpotrxtXit,  "Donkey-fixitfiL*
<8ee  Aristopb.  /fus.  293;  E<ycl.  IDSti;.  By  »<mie  it
wan  identified  with  UecatiS  bcrtelf. See  Lavui;

MuRUOI.VCKA.

Eaarepbdrus  ('Erafi70ofMfV  Son  of  Hippncwo.
Ho  was  a  piiHsinnute  ailmirer  of  Helen  whrii  *br
was  still  very  yttinig,  so  that  Tyudareua  tutnwini
her  to  the  care  of  Thcseas. Bee  Hei^na.

Enoaxpa  ( tyKopna ).  Fe^ltoons  of  fratt  an'l
flowen,  employed  as  a  decorative  oniaaieut  Iu
Mciilptiirt«  or  paiiiliiig
( Vitniv.  iv.  1,  7  ),  as
Hhown  by  tlie  example,
from  a  Roman  sepulchral
moiinraent.

EnoauatXkA  ( ryitov-
o-rucif ).  The  art  of
painliug  by  burning  ia
the  colours. See  PiCT-

UltA.

EnceUdua  (EyKcXadof).  Sou  uf  Tartara* and
Giiea,  and  one  of  the  hondrwl  -  armed  j^iiii*
who  made  war  upon  the  gods,  llo  was  killnl  l>;
Zens,  who  buried  him  uudor  Moaat  Aetoa. !^

OlflAXTES.

Encomboma  [iyK6fi(iv>^).  An  article  of  Gn<k
attire — viz.  a  sort  of  apron  tied  round  the  ImmIj  io  *
knot  {wh«iiC4t  tbo  name  arose),  aud
worn  by  nlavct  to  keep  the  tuoic
clean  (Lougus.  11. 33),  by  yontig  girU
(  Varr.  op.  N'oii.  a.  v.  p.  543 ),  and
aliMJ  on  the  comic  stage  (lul.  Polhix,
iv.  18).  Both  of  these  latter  n^^a
are  exemplified  by  the  atmexed  lig-
nre  of  a  yonng  woman  playing  on
the  double  pipe«,  from  a  marble
lins-relief  representing  asceue  from
some  play.

Encomion  (cyxco/uorX  Originally
the  song  sung  by  the  chorus  at  the
xu/iMC.  or  feiital  proce«siou,  beht  at
tho  great  untioiial  gnmra  iit  hoiumr
of  the  victor,  either  ou  the  day  of  his  victory  "f**
itBannivenwirj-.  The  word  came  afterward*  loilfr-
uoto  auy  song  written  in  cclebratiou  of  ilWIO"
gniitbed  iwrsoiut,  aud  in  later  limes  any  »p«»kf  "f
written  panegyric  whatever.

Endoia  ('Ei^^rr).  Danghter  of  Chiron  wJ  d«
NaiiMl  Chariclo,  wife  of  Aeacoa,  mother  of  W'**
himI  Telamou  (Fiud.  .Vem.  v.  21).

Bitdeuda  itvtti^i)-  A  term  in  Atliriiian ;<in*-
prudriice,  ilennting  a  prosecution  m  twl"''*''*
eases — as,  for  instance,  ogoiiist  tbo  rrytanea.  if  iW
refused  to  put  a  iinentinn  to  the  vote  in  the  gi«»*
oaaembly.  It  waa  especially  emplo.vwl  ■k*'w*
persons  who,  nlthougta  lying  under  afi*»«i  I'"*
Hiimcil  to  claim  a  tbare  in  civic  rights,  as  (pa'*'*"'
la*'ly)  by  instituting  prosecuttous  or  app«n"t


ENDOEUS


598


ENNIUS


See  Apa-


speatking,  and  Toting  in  the  assembly.
ooot.

Bndoeiu  CEvJtoioc).  An  Athenian  sculptor  wlio
floarisbed  aboat  the  year  B.C.  560,  though  tradition
made  bim  the  stDilent  of  Daedalus  and  to  have
tied  with  faiin  from  Crete.  A  statae  of  Athen^  by
him  was  removed  by  Aagnstas  Caesar  from  Tegeu
to  Rome  (Faasan.  i.  96,  $  5).

BndrAmia  {ivbpofiit).  {1)  A  boot  of  leather  or
feltf  rising  as  far  as  tbe  calf  or  above
it  and  fitting  close  to  tbe  foot.  In
f^nt  it  was  open  and  fastened  with
Btrapa.  It  was  specially  adapted  for
Jonmeys  or  banting,  and  consequently
appears  often  in  repre-
sentations of  Artemis
and  of  tlie  Erinyes.
Ranaera  in  rac^,  too,
often  wore  it  (Sidon.
Apollin.  Carm.  ii.  400).
(if)  In  Roman  tiroes
endromi$  was  nsed  for
a  thick  woollen  rug

(Teitnll.  Pall.  4),  some-

times  in  the  palaestra (rromft
thrown  over  the  body ^"Jt!!?^
,  after violent exercise
(Jnv.  vi.  246),  bnt  also  nsed  by  the
"**°TrSu""'"'  ^^u""^^" classes  as a  protection
against  cold  and  rain  (Mart.  iv.  19,
xiv.  126;  cf  Jnv.  iiL  102).

Undymlon  ('Epdu/iuuv).  lu  Greek  mythology,
tbe  beautiful  son  of  Aethlius  (or,  according  to
another  story,  of  Zens)  and  Calyc^,  (laughter  of
Aeolus,  king  of  £liB,  father  of  Epens,  Aetolus,  and
Paepn,  tbe  first  of  whom  won  the  government  of
the  country  by  conquering  in  a  race  which  his
father  bad  set  on  foot.  He  was  lov^iLby  Selen^,
the  moon-goddess,  by  whom  he  had  fifty  daughters.
They  were  supposed  to  symbolize  the  fifty  lunar
months  which  intervened  betweeu  the  Olympic
Games.  His  grave  was  st  Olympia.  Another  story
made  him  a  shepherd  or  hunter  on  Mount  Latmos
in  Caria.  Zens  bestowed  on  him  eternal  youth
and  eternal  life  in  tbe  form  of  unbroken  slumber.
Seleu^  desceuded  every  night  from  heaven  to  visit
and  embrace  tbe  beautiful  sleeper  in  his  grotto.
The  usual  story,  however,  makes  8elen6  to  have
thrown  hiui  iuto  a  sleep  so  that  she  might  kiss  and
caress  him  without  bis  knowledge.  A  beautiful
statue  in  the  British  Museum  represents  Eudym-
jon,  and  the  legend  inspired  Keats  to  write  one
of  tbe  moat  exquisite  poems  in  English  literature.

Bnaohjta  ( ivixvpa ).  A  word  denoting  the
goods,  nsually  movables,  handed  over  to  a  creditor
as  security — as,  for  example,  bronze,  slaves,  horses,
etc.  It  was  forbidden  to  pledge  weapons  aiul
agricultural  implements  (Aristopb.  Plut.  450 ;  Diod.
i.79),  or  slaves  already  mortgaged  to  a  creditor.  If
the  money  advanced  was  not  paid  back  by  the
time  specified,  the  security  psssed  into  the  posses-
sion of  the  creditor  (Demosth.  c.  Aphob.  ii.  p.  841,
M8).

Tbe  right  of  taking  property  in  pledge  is  stipu-
lated in  some  inscriptions  for  breach  of  contract
(C.  /.  A.  ii.  No8. 565, 11 ;  600, 36).  No  seizure  of  this
sort  conld  take  place  during  several  of  the  relig-
toos  festivals  of  the  Athenians,  such  as  the  Diony-
sia,  the  Lenaea.  the  Tliaigelia,  etc.  (Att.  Proceat,  ed.
Ldpaius,  p.  338,  n.  393).


Bnt^i  iiyyvy)). See  Praes.

Bngyeida  {fyyvtfais). See  Matrimoniuh.

Hagfxaaa.  ('Eyyvof).  A  town  in  the  interior  of
Sicily,  possessing  a  celebrated  temple  of  the  great
mother  of  the  gods  (Diod.  Sic.  iv.  79 ;  Cic.  Verr.  iv.
44 ;  V.  72).

Bmpena ('Eyifrrvc)*  0) AriverlnThessaIy,rising
in  Mount  Othrys,  receiving  the  Apidanus,  near
PbarsalDs,and  flowing  Into  the  Peueus(Ovid,  Met.
i.  579).  Poseidon  assumed  tbe  form  of  the  god  of
this  river  in  order  to  obtain  possession  of  Tyro,
who  was  in  love  with  Enipeus.  She  became  by
Poseidou  tbe  mother  of  Pelias  and  Neleus.  (2)  A
small  river  in  Pisatis  (Elis)  flowing  into  tbe  Al-
pfaeus.

Bzma  ("Eiva)  or  Henna.  An  ancient  town  of
tbe  Sicall  in  Sicily,  on  tbe  road  from  Catana  to
Agrigentum,  said  to  be  the  centra  of  the  island
(ofitftakis  iuciXias).  It  was  surrounded  by  fertile
plains,  which  bore  large  crops  of  wheat ;  it  was
one  of  tbe  chief  seats  of  tbe  worship  of  Demeter ;
and,  according  to  later  tradition,  it  was  in  aflnwery
meadow  near  this  place  that  Pluto  carried  off  Per-
sephon6.

Bnnaetaxia  (  imnurnpls  ). See  C alendabiuu.

Bnnlta  (fivora). See  Funub.

Bnnea  Hodoi  ("Ewia  'OdoO-  A  spot  in  Thrace,
near  which  the  city  of  Ampfaipolis  was  founded.
It  appears  to  have  derived  its  name,  which  means
"  the  Nine  Ways,"  from  the  number  of  roads  which
met  here  from  different  parts  of  Thrace  and  Mace-
dou.  It  was  here,  accortliug  to  Herodotus  (vii.
114),  that  Xerxes  and  his  army  crossed  the  Stry-
mon  on  bridges,  after  having  offered  a  sacrifice  of
white  horses  to  that  river  and  buried  alive  nine
youths  and  niue  maidens.

Bnnliu.  (l)QuiNTUB,the"fatb6rofBomanpoe-
try,"  was  bom  at  Rudiae  in  Calabria,  b.c.  239.  He
served  iu  the  Second  Punic  War  and  held  the  post
of  centurion  in  Sardinia,  whence  he  was  brought
to  Rome  by  Cato,  B.c.  204.  We  have  no  ground
for  attributing  to  Cato  any  approciation  of  Enuius^a
poetical  gifts;  be  was  no  doubt  attracted  by  hia
vigour  and  practical  capacity.  Established  at
Rome,  Ennins  gained  a  livelihood  by  giviug  ia-
Btmction  iu  the  Qreek  language  and  by  trsnslat-
ing  Greek  plays  for  the  Romau  stage.  His  taleuta
soon  broogbt  him  recognition.  Among  those  who
houonred  bim  with  their  friendship  was  the  great
AfricauuB,  beside  whose  tomb  the  poet's  bust  is
said  to  have  been  placed.  In  B.C.  189,  he  accom-
panied tbe  consul  M.  Fulvius  Nobilior  iuto  his
province  of  Aetolia,  expressly  to  record  bis  ex-
ploits. In  grateful  recollection  of  this  service  the
sou  of  Fulvius  iu  B.C.  184,  with  tbe
approval  of  the  people,  assigned
him  a  lot  among  the  frtuntrtri  co-
loniae  deducendat,  thus  constituting
bim  a  Roman  citizeu.  To  this  be
alludes  iu  the  last  book  of  bis  An-
naUa  with  justifiable  pride,  A'os
tnmu'  RomaKXy  qui  fuifnut  ante  Ru-
dini.  His  honours  did  not,  how-
ever, bring  him  wealth.  Cicero  re-
lates that  his  old  age  was  passed
in  poverty,  but  he  did  not  allow
this  to  cloud  his  genial  temper.
^SS:^,Tomb  He  is  said  to  have  keenly  en-
orittescipios)  joyed  the pleasures of  convivial


CNNIU3


&H


ENHIUS


(iit«rcoiir«6,  and  died  of  na  attack  uf  the  gont  at
tho  ago  of  soveuty  (B.c.  169).

Euiiinfl  n-n»areuiark.il>1.vprfilific  writer,  and  left
tiDtouclii'd  few  dcprtrtmcntB  tif  poelical  coinposi-
tiiiu,  Hu  pru)ia1tl,v  ilid  not  ctnuiueur*'  his  literary'
nireer  till  luidillL'  lifr.  and  lit^  I'trtniiily  L-uiitinned
it  till  tlto  tini(>  ofltiii  (Icalli  {C'w.  tirHt.lf*).  In  tho
abmucL'  of  cciiain  duta  for  iletcrniiniiig  tbc  cbron-
ologicat  order  of  liis  writings,  it  will  tio  best  to
euiimcrttt«  tbciii  iu  the  onler  of  tbeir  importance.
Kifi  ebief  work  was  tbe  At\tialf9,  au  epio  chronicle
of  Koinaii  history  and  le^nd  from  the  timu  of
Aeiieaa  to  bis  own  day.  in  eighteen  huokw,  written
iu  tiexaineter  vense.  Tb«  firitt  iwolve  hooks  foniied
a  ci>niierti-d  ]mm-iii.  and  may  bavL<  liecii  publinbetl
t(ij(.MluTli.r.  172  {vf.  Aiil.  fJi'lI.  xvii.  21,  43),  though
Teiifful  IhinltH  thu  »  hulo  work  was  iasned  in  snc-
ceHHive  parfsof  iliret'h<Kika  oaeh.  Of  this  renowij-
Cil  work,  «o  jnally  rt-lobrated  in  atitiijnity,  which
gained  for  'its  author  the  title  of  "the  Komau  Ho-
luer,"  KUIUriciit  frngiiieiits  still  reinaiu.  to  enable
u«  tu  approt-lute  the  qualities  of  bis  genius,  and  to
deplore  the  loss  of  historienl  and  lik-mry  material
which  it  contained.  The  llrst  book  seems  to  have
bpen  the  most  prwticul,  and  is  natnrally  the  most
often  qnoted.  The  longest  paniiagfu^  we  pnaaoaaare
the  llream  of  Ilia  and  tlm  AiittpicpB  of  Roranlns
and  Renins,  about  ti^n  linvs  vnch.  Th«  second  oiid
third  books  contintivd  thiO  regal  jerioil  to  its  clow, '
bnt  ara  ulnioHt  eiitir^Iy  lost  to  iin.  In  all  thcftL-  the
]i(H^t  lojulii  a  fn>«  um:  of  Hnprriintiiral  ntanhincry.
Ttiefourth.tlfth,  and  sixth  hookA began  ihij  JNunh^M
propur  ond  carried  tbo  history  of  the  Kepuhlic  '
donn  to  tbe  cotiiiiie»>t  uf  Italy  and  tlio  war  with  \
Pyri  bus ;  of  these  w«  possesi*  n  few  hhort  bnt  strik- ,
ing  fraguients.  In  the  third  tria«l  the  Cniiic  Wars  I
were  dencribed — the  tirst  briedy,  an  having  bemi  j
already  treated  by  Kaeviiis  (fur  wboae  nide  Satnr-
niau  verse  Kunius  shous  mnch  contempt);  the
second,  in  which  he  himself  had  been  an  actor,  at
gTi^ater  It-tigth  niul  not  withimt  mythological  eni-
ht'lli^hniout.  The  thirteenth  book  began  with  a
fresh  exordiniUi  tin  also  did  the  silteeuth,  which  ,
headeil  the  closing  norien  and  hrou^lil  the  histor^i-
down  to  n.c.  IHI  at  h:a^t,  if  not  somewhat  later.
The  poem  gained  imniodiale  popnlurity.  It  itt  rc-
conleil  that  large  cruwd.-^  attended  itci  pnblic  reci-
tation, aud  Vergil  in  Haid  to  hnvo  "intrmlnccd
many  line*  into  the  Amrid  with  the  view  of  pleaa-
luga  people  devoted  to  Kmmn"  {popttlua  Ennianuit).
Ila  high  twtimation  continued  far  into  tint  times
of  the  Empire,  an  we  know  fn>m  abnndant  evi-
dence. It  ia  not  until  Macrobins  that  we  find  it
falling  into  neglect.

Kext  ill  importnncv  to  tbe  Jfii)ci/e« come  tbc  lrag>
odies.  Thewwori)  fn*e  iinilatioiisofCIreek dramas,
generally  those  of  Knhpides,  tbongh  a  few  recall
by  their  titles  the  works  of  Aescbyhm  and  Soph-
ocles. The  list  if)  thus  niren  by  Kibheck :  JeJiilla,
JckiUr$  (from  AriHlarebns),  Aiar,  Atcumrna,  Alrxon-
iter,  Atidiirmm'ht'  Atfhmnhtii*.  Aitdnfmnia,  Ath<tm.av,
Crnphintfr^,  ErtchlhrNn,  KHmrtiififn,  Ufctoris  Lutra
\*yi  LM9tra),  HtcHba,  [ffhigfia,  .V^Weii  AlhenienitiK,  ^ff-
dea  Exttf,  Mraalippa,  Srntra,  Phoenix,  Telawo,  Tt^U'
phut,  Tkyvtittii.  Tbvir  oiHipoMitioii  extvudi>d  o\ur
the  whole  period  of  bin  literary  life,  B.C.  2«4-lfiQ,
in  which  latter  year  the  Thyrate*  waa  written.  It
has  been  doubted  whether  Euuias  nsed  the  chorns.
If  not,  Hucb  a  play  as  the  EKmtnitlet,  where  the
cboru!!  in  the  chief  character,  would  have  bad  to
be  eulirvly  ivcasl;  aud,  bfAidcM,  the  criiicisma  of


the.Jr«  Poetica  preaoppooe  a  Koman  tragiccioroL
The  reservation  of  the  orcheatra  for  tbe  •"■niton'
sratH  would,  of  conrae,  make  choral  evulittiota
iiopossible;  but  with  this  exception  th*''  {ituyt  of
Euuins  were  closely  modidletl  oi>  their  (<iT<rk  otig-
iuals.  The  mognilotinence  of  their  style  ami  Llmr
moral  grandeur  made  thorn  special  favoHritutvitli
tilt'  pnblic.  Cicero  gives  them  high  praiw.aiHlil
is  to  him  that  we  ore  indebted  for  the  gre»t«t  fan
uf  thu  scanty  fragmcnta  that  reoiniu.  A  yrarUtUi,
entitled  Sahinat  (Rape  of  the  Sabine  Wouivui,  ku
been  attributed  to  Euniua  by  Vahlen  from  s  \abr
(»age  of  InMus  Victor,  and  there  its  some  grov&dfm
conjirctnring  that  the  Jmbracia  watt  a  dniniaof  tb
tuiniv  claSH,  celebrating  the  dt^vdM  of  Fnlviiia

There  al«o  reuiaiu,  bi'sidea  thtt  til)e«,  Mnue  iutig*
uificaiit  traces  of  two  coniodies  by  hiui — CvjNuicaffl
and  I'ancraliatta.  But  hiH  bent  of  mind  vm  w-
suited  for  comedy,  aud  he  is  mentioned  by  Volmclta
Sedigitus  only  antiifuitatia  causa/

EnniuB  nas  addicted  to  philo»ophioal  ■ptco-
Intions.  His  convictioua  oacilhited  'letvMii  lb*
mystic  doctriues  of  PythagorOH  and  Ibe  iireprttii»
of  Kiibf tneniK.  Both  found  expression  in  liin  norht.
In  tli«  Aitfialt9  he  mentioned  tiiat  tbi^  wml  nf  IIv-
nit^r  niigraltid  into  liisown.  In  thi>  Kitk^drm».i
diNfmit  jirt*4;nrsor  of  the  Dt  Serum  XttNrii,  wriltcb
in  trochaic  Irtranieters,  h«  cxphiiiiL'il  thetcDBltuf
PythugomnniMni.  In  tbc  Euhemet-ut  iL-rraneontj
Hiippom*d  by  Kunir  to  liave  Ihhmi  n  pitiM-  ndTi>kc
udopti^d  the  mythologic  theory  of  that  fiaperflciil
writer.  It  in  probable  that  both  ihe«c  works  fotw^
part  of  the  four  (or  six)  l»ooka  of  Sa/«ra«^i.  o.  iw»-
cellaneoaa  poems  in  various  metres.  To  tliew,  »1».
belonged  the  Sota,  niomionod  by  Varro;  IbeW*-
trcpticua,  ot  "Art  of  Life";  the  Ufd^pha^rtv*.*
trL-atise  on  gastronomies,  I>aaed  on  ihut  of.^rrb*-
btratuii  of  (ieU;  and  a  few  epigraui»t,  tlifl  nMi*
celebrated  of  which  were  tbe  e[»iiaphs  on  Afrtei*
Tjus  and  on  himself.

Ennius  was  Hlled  with  a  jtrond  and  nollo
coiisciouitneas. He  i^ntered  Kome  (I)  a&  a  ur
ury  of  culture  and  frt-e-thought :  and  (3)  u
st>ciiitor  of  ancient  tradition. He  gave  to
lit^ratiiFc  an  impulse  it  never  quite  lost Iu  nMt-
ly  every  field  he  letl  the  van. To  Iiini,  more  ikW
t.o  any  one,  tt  owes  its  predominant  tone  of  mi''"
directness  and  moral  strength. In  InmGreelciilt'
ure,  grafted  on  an  Os<-an  or  Mcsaaidan  stock.w*"
billed  with  Koman  patriotism  to  form  for  tbe  fir*^
time  that  special  intellectual  ty|>e,enthu«iasiic'"'''
disciplined, imitative yet independent,  Ih'llwi*^
ill  source  but  in  dcvclopni'mt  itit«nsely  aational-t
which  wc  cjiii trace  all  (hniugh  tlw  mibiwpH*'*'
ronrse  of  Romnn  letters,  ami  moat  oousptriMia4>~
in  their  iK'Ht  und  most  illiwlrious  repitwentin''**"
In  formal  |K>Ii*ib  be  was  no  doubt  dclieirnt;  fei  ^"^
is  often  itiiiluU-d  by  later  writers,  and  by  noic*' *^
happier  effect  than  Vergil.

liiui.n  KJKAi'iiY. — The  earliest  eiliHon  of  liiift^t^"
uienls  w«5  in  the  Pragm.  I'oet,  Vel.  Lni,  •  SA  «**"
pAflso  Congr'to,  etc.  (Henr.  Stephanas,  Pari*,  I5ft#  ^'
Far  more  complH*  was  the  e«)ition  of  llicioujni***
Columna  (Naplea,  1&90),  repriiiteil  wjih  IheeBHO*^
I  i<ins  and  onnmentarles  of  M.  A.  I>vhriii«  as^  0-  *
Vosa  by  F.  Heatielius  of  RotI<*tMttin  ( AttuleH*****
171*7 1.

Tbe  best  modem  nlilion  of  tbe  wholf  nf  Brt*'"
Is  that  of  J  Vahlen  (Leiittig,  l*«l. Hei»»I»*'^
eluded  In  WortUwortb's  Fra^mrut*  hhJ  •'^P****'T|
0/  Karijf  latin  iOxfor.1.  l(?74),  aud  la  U  Mftll*'*


i


ENNIUS


695


ENYO


Enn.  Carm.  Beliquiae,  accedunt  Cn.  Jfaevi  Belli  PonJci
qutu  auperiunt  (St.  Petersburg,  1885).

lu  the  year  1595,  FauluB  Merula  poblinhed  at
Ley deD  an  edition  of  the  Jnnalet,  which,  among
other  alteratiouB,  iuoluded  additional  fragmeuts
said  to  come  from  a  H8.  treatise  lie  Contineittia
Fett.  Poetarum  ad  Traianum  Prindpem,  by  L.  Calpar-
niiia  Piflo.  This  MS.  has  never  appeared,  and  its
Tery  existence  iH  Huspeoted.  Merula's  edition  was
repriutedwith  revisions  by  E.Span  gen  berg  (Leipzig,
18-25).  Cf.  Hoob,  De  Enn.  Ann.  Fr.  a  Panto  Mentla
Audi*  (Bonn,  1839).  and  J.  Lawicki,  De  Fraude  P.
MeruUu  (Bonn,  1858).  Books  VU.-IX.  (Pnuic
Want)  have  been  treated  by  T.  Uiig,  Distertaito
Inaug,  (Bonn,  1852);  Book  I.  by  H.  Ilberg  (Bonn,
1853).

The  tragic  fragments  by  H.  A.  Debrtus,  in  bis
Sjfntagma  Tra^oediae  Latinae  I.  (Antwerp,  1593),  re-
printed at  Paris  iu  1607  and  1619;  also  in  the  Col'
lectanea  Vett.  Tragg.  of  P.  Scrirerius  (Leyden,  1630).
The  fragment  of  the  Medea,  including  additions  to
those  given  by  Ueasel  and  Merula,  with  a  disserta-
tion ou  Eomau  tragedy,  by  H.  Planck  (Gottingeu,
1807 ).  Also  in  Analecta  Crit.  Poesis  Bom.  Sen,  Kelig.
Itlustrantia,  by  F.  Osaun  (Berlin,  1816).  A  critical
edition  of  his  dramatic  fragmunts,  published  by
F.  H.  Bothe,  in  Poet.  Seen.  Lat.  (Halberstadt,  1821-
1823;  lieipzig,  1840).  Also  iu  Bibbeck's  Scaenicae
JSom.  PoStis  J^agmenta,  3  vols.  (Leipzig,  1852-55).

Other  £niiiau  fragments  are  given  in  Enn.  CottH.
ed.  P.  Burmaun;  in  tho  Anthol.  Vett.  Lat.  Epigr.
et  Poem.  (Amsterdam,  1759).  Of  this  an  eularged
edition  was  published  by  H.  Meyer  (Leipcig,  1835).
The  Hedgphagetica  fragments  were  collected  by
J.C.WeTiisdorfintbePoeta«£af.  3/i»orM,  vols,  i.-v,
part  i.  (Altenbarg,  1780-88);  vol.  v.  2,3-6  (Helm-
stadt,  1791-99).  The  ancient  authorities  for  the
poet's  life  and  writings  are  given  by  Hessel,  8pan-
genl>erg,  and  Teuffel  (Bom.  Lit.  vol.  i. ;  Eng.  edit.
London,  1891).  Specisd  discussions  in  VaUlen,  Die
Annalen  dee  Enniua  (Berlin,  1886);  H.  Jordan,
Quaeat.EnH.  (Konigsberg,  1885).  For  general  crit-
icisms of  his  style  and  genius,  see  Patin,  £tudea
Mur  la  Poieie  Latine,  vol.  ii.  (Paris,  1869) ;  Sellar,  B.
Poets  of  Bepublic,  vol.  i.  (Oxford,  1881).

(3)  A  granimariau  of  whose  personality  nothing
is  known,  but  who  is  mentioned  by  Snetouius  as
being  probably  the  author  of  a  work  on  letters,
syllablee,  and  metres,  usually  ascribed  to  the  poet
Ennius  (Suet.  Gram.  1).  To  him  is  perhaps  to  be
credited  the  introduction  of  shorthand  writing  at
Rome.  SeeW.Deeckeinthe£A0ti».  3fH<0tim,xxxvi.
577 ;  and  the  article  Notas.

Bnnodlua,  Magnus  Feux.  A  Latin  rhetori-
cian and  poet.  He  was  bom  about  A.D.  473  in
the  Bonth  of  Gaul,  aud  died  in  531  as  bishop  of
Pavia.  Among  other  works,  be  wrote  between
504  and  508  an  extremely  fnlsome  panegyric  on
Tbeodorio  the  Great  and  a  biography  of  £pi-
phanius,  his  predecessor  in  the  see.  Both  these
writings  have  a  valne  for  the  historian.  Besides
these  we  have  a  collection  of  twenty-eight  mod-
el speeches  (Dietionea),  some  of  which  were  really
delivered;  nine  books  of  letters  (297  in  number)
and  two  of  poems,  sacred  aud  secular.  The  first
book  of  poems  contains  longer,  the  second  shorter
and  occasioual  pieces.  Both  show  a  certain  com-
mand of  form,  aud  treat  of  journeys,  marriages,  etc.
Tho  panegyric  ou  Tbeodoric  has  been  translated
into  German  by  Fertig  in  his  work  Ennodiut  vnd
teine  Zeit  (vols.  i.  aud  ii.  Passau,  1855;  vol.  iii.


Lsndshut,  1858). A  good  edition  of  Ennodiua  is
that  of  Vogel  (Berlin,  1885),  after  Hartel  (Vienna,

1882).

Bnoiklou  Dikti  (cWxtov  di'ici}).  An  action
brought  to  recover  the  rents  withheld  from  the
owner  during  the  period  of  his  being  kept  out  of
possession.  If  the  property  recovered  were  not  a
house,  but  laud  (in  the  more  confined  sense  of  the
word),  the  action  for  the  rents  and  profits  was
called  xapirov  diKij.

Bnomotla  (ivoafioria).  A  subordinate  division
of  the  \6)(os  in  the  Spartan  army.  See  LocHOS ;
Mora.

Baaigna. See  Signum  ;  Vexillvm.

Bnaia. See  Gladius.

Bntablatore. See  Intabulamkntum.

Bntftais  (?i<Ta<nr),  called  by  Vitruvius  adiectio.
An  architectural  term  applied  to  the  swelling  in  a
column  from  the  lower  end  to  a  certain  point,  af-
ter which  a  diminution  takes  place  to  the  hypo-
trachelium,  which  forms  part  of  the  capital.  In
some  ancient  columns,  as  at  Assos,  the  entasis  is
much  exaggerated;  in  others,  as  at  Corinth,  it  is
entirely  absent.


EntwlA (Prom  Dorle  Colamus  at  FkettumJ


Examples  of  the  absence  and  presence  of  enta-
sis are  represented  in  the  illustration :  from  the
great  temple  at  Paestum  (to  left),  from  a  later
building  iu  the  same  city  (to  right).

Bntella  ('EweXXa).  A  town  of  the  Sicani  in
the  int«rior  of  the  island  of  Sicily,  on  the  west
side,  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Entellns,  one
of  the  companions  of  the  Trojan  Acestes.

Bntollnit.  A  Sicilian  who,  though  advanced  iu
years,  entered  the  lists  against  the  Trojan  Dares
and  conquered  him  in  a  pugilistic  encounter  (Verg.
Aen.  V.  387  foil.).

Bnyalina  ('EyvoXtoc), "  The  Warlike,"  frequently
occurs  iu  the  Jliad  (never  in  the  Odj/stey)  as  au  ep-
ithet of  Ares.  At  a  later  time  Enyalius  aud  Ares
were  distinguished  as  twu  diflerent  gods  of  war.
The  name  is  e%-ideutly  derived  from  Euyo  (q.  v.).

Bafo  (Ewa).  The  daughter  of  Phorcys  and
Ceto,  according  to  Hesiod  {The^tg.  273).  She  was
a  war-goddess  and  oue  of  the  companions  of  Ares,
and  answers  to  the  Bellona  of  the  Bomans. Some


EOKA


EPANr.ELU


ijiylliologUts  niako  licr  tbo  sut«r,  others  thfl  wife,
vt  Arcs. See  Uellona.

Bora. See  Akora.

Bordaea  ('Eopdain  niul  'KopAi'n).  A  diatrict  aiid
town  ill  Norlli«efitt;rii  Mui:i.*douitt,  pwiiileJ  by  the
Eunlat^i  iT'Iiuo.  ii.99).

Boa  ('Hwt).  The  Greek  nikme  of  Aurora  (q.  v.),
tliR  (imiilf^s  of  inuniUif;,  wlh^iice  the  epithet  Eout
is  Rppiii'd  to  nil  tlie  fiiHteni  parts  of  tbu  worlil
(Ovitl,  /VtJif.  iii.  41)6).  8lie  was  tbo  danghtor  uf
Hyiwrioii  ami  Thin  or  Eiiryphasiin.  At  the  clottc
of  each  oiyht  i^lio  ar<iM.<  from  the  eoiich  of  her  con-
sorcTiiboiiitE)  an<l,tlmtvti  on  »  churiot  hy  thuHteeilii
Lampns  niitl  rhHt.'t4>ii,  atwemled  to  heavaii  from
the  river  Ocean  iia  tu  aniiuiinee  the  cuniiui;  uf  tbo
snii  to  go«lH  aiul  tnurialit.  lit  Huitiur  Kho  nccotii-
pstuiea  the  suu  im  \i'\»  roiirst-.  and  iu  the  tragic
poets  is  iileiilititid  with  Heiiii^ra  or  the  Day.  For
her  relations  with  Ce>|)haltis,  Orion,  and  Titboanti,
aee  the  respeetivc  articles.  Uy  the  IilnC  named  iiho
bad  Mcmnou ;  nnil  by  Aittracuti,  iiUe  hod  ZepUyruti,
Boreod,  Xotnfl,  and  neepernit.

Bpammondaa  i'E.ira^mi'uvlias).  A  Theban  stitCea-
tujin  and  KoUlier,  ndii  ><>t'  Polymiiiit,  and  in  whoM
praise,  for  both  tahinlH  und  rectitude,  there  is  »  re-
itiarlcable  conc»nviic<!  nf  ancient  nritera.  Ne)>oi!i
observes  that  IwfnrD  Kpoininondiut  wun  \uini  and
after  his  death  Thob«i  wuh  nlwayH  in  Muhjection  to
sniiie  utber  power;  whiln  be  din^cti^l  bur  ccitincilii
she  wati  at  the  head  t>f  (iruecu.  IIIm  piiblii:  life  ex-
lends  from  the  restoration  of  democracy  by  i'elo-
pidas  Aud  the  otbor  exileis,  ii.c.  :t79,to  tlie  battle  of
Mantinea,  B.C.  30S.  In  the  conspirnoy  by  which  that
rovolntion  n-oa effected  betook  no  part,bnt  thence-
forward  ho  became  the  prime  moTer  nf  the  Thehnn
State.  His  policy  was  first  <lirectfd  to  assert  the
right  and  to  secure  the  power  to  Tholiee  of  con-
trutling  the  other  cities  nf  Boootia,  several  of  nhich
olaitiied  to  be  independent.  In  this  rnuse  ho  ven-
tured to  en^{;e  hiit  country,  KiugUvhaiuWI,  in  war
with  Ihe  Spartans,  who  inarcbed  into  Iloeotia,  n.c
371,  with  a  force  superior  t«>  any  which  could  be
brought  apiinst  them.  TboThobnu  generals  vvere
ilividfd  in  opinion  whether  a  battlo  should  be
riskeil,  for  to  vucuuuter  the  Loeedaemouiaua  with
tofertor  numWm  wafl  imivorsally  oBteemetl  hope-
less. Epaminondas  prevultud  upuu  his  cuUeagues
to  venture  It,  and  devised  on  thin  oecaKioti  a  new
method  of  attack.  Inst«>a4l  of  joining  battle  along
the  whole  line  he  concentrated  an  overwht^hning
force  on  one  i>oint,  directing  tlie  wojkker  part  of
bis  line  to  keep  back.  The  Spartan  right  being
broken  aud  their  king  slain,  the  rest  of  the  army
found  it  uecesMiry  to  abandon  the  field.  This
uennirabli!  battle  was  fought  at  Lenctra  |~B.c.  371).
The  moral  eSeet  of  it  was  niiich  more  important
Khan  the  mere  loss  iutlicted  upon  ;Spnrta,  for  it
VTcrthrew  the  prescriptive  superiority  in  unns
claimed  by  that  State  ever  since  its  ivfonuation
by  Lycnrgiw,

This  brilliant  vnceeKs  led  Epamiuoudoe  to  the
aecood  object  nf  hU  jHtlii^y,  tbo  overthrow  of  the
Bopremacy  of  Sparta  and  the  substitution  of
Thebes  aa  the  leader  of  Greece  in  Ihe  democratic
iuterest.  In  Ihia  hope  a  Theban  army,  nnder  his
command,  marched  into  the  Feloponnesns  early  in
the  winter,  B.C.  IIGl),  and,  iu  conjunction  with  the
Eleann,  An'udians.  aud  Ai'givps,  invaded  and  laid
wnntc  a  large  |mrt  of  Lacouia.  Xunibers  of  the
Helots  took  that  opportunity  to  shake  off  a  most


oppressive  fdavery ;  and  KpauiinnndaH  tiinok  i
deadly  blow  at  the  power  M'  Sparta  by  tutiUiili-
ing  thetiti'  deKcendanls  of  the  old  MessettiMiH  on
Mount  Ilhoin^  iu  MetuM^niu,  as  au  iudepeu^MM
Slate,  and  inviting  their  oouutrymen,  Kst
through  Italy  and  Sicily,  to  return  to  theiium
patrimony.  Numbers  otieyed  the  calL  Tlusnw^
orable  eveut  is  known  in  bibtory  as  the  retaniirf
thcMesseniaus,  and  twohaudred  years  had  clii[sel
since  their  expulsion.  In  n.c.  3G6,  EpaniiDondM
again  led  an  army  iuto  the  Peloiranneenn;  but, tut
fulfilling  the  expectations  of  the  people,  be  «u
disgraced  aud,  according  to  Diodoms  (xn*.  71),wm
ortlered  to  serve  in  the  ranks.  Id  that  caitacll;
hu  i(t  ttttid  to  havH  tuLvtKl  the  array  in  Tbtuutaly  wlwn
entangled  in  dnngirs  which  thrpatcuMt  it  (rttliib-
struL-iion,  being  rfH)uinHl  by  the  general  vuicB  to
UHHunie  the  command.  Ha  \h  not  again  heaidofto
a  public  eupaeity  till  n.r.  'JSfi,  whun  he  was  mt
to  sup|Hirl  thv  dcniocnitic  interest  iu  Achais,Sid
by  his  moderation  and  judgnu-ut  bronglil  tkll
whole  confederation  owr  to  the  Theban  alliilM
withoDt  bloodshe<l  or  bRuihhnient.  It  kmd  le-
came  plain,  however,  that  a  mere  change  nf  inu-
ters — Thebesinsteadof  Spartn^woiildheofnosir
vice  to  the  tircciau  Stales.  Achnia  lintt,  thru  £lia,
then  Mantinea  nnd  a  greflt{Mirt  of  Arcadia.  Ktunttd
to  the  Lacedaemonian  allinuco.  To  check  Uill
defection,  Epaminondas  led  an  anuy  iuto  thelVlo-
IKiinieiiiiB  for  the  fourth  time,  iu  B.c.^UlS.  Juiordlif
the  Argives,  MessoniuuH,  and  ]iart  of  the  ArciditM,
he  enteral  Ijieonia  and  eudeavoared  to  Mke
Sparta  by  surprise ;  but  the  vigitanec  nf  Agmtlaiit
just  frustrated  bis  scheme.  Epamioandao  dxti
nnirched  agntust  Mantinea,  near  which  wu  fsiKbi
the  celebrntoil  battle  in  which  he  fell.  Tb«  •■»-
position  of  his  tronps  on  this  occasion  wu  aa  ib-
provenient  on  that  by  which  ho  had  gained  tW
battle  of  Lenclm,  and  would  have  had  lbs  um
decisive  success,  but  that,  in  the  rritical  niitmnt,
when  the  Lacedaemonian  line  was  jnst  bnikm,
he  received  a  mortnl  wound,  saUl  to  have  bMi>i>*
tlicted  by  Gryllns,  the  son  of  Xenophou.  Tll'•'^l^
ban  army  was  paralytod  by  tbls  oiisfortoue;  uulk-
iiig  waa  doue  to  prollt  by  a  victory  whieh  »i^
bare  been  made  certaiu  ;  and  this  battle,  ouwbtdi
the  ex|iectatiou  of  all  Qreeoe  waited,  led  to  soi**
portant  rcsalt.

Whether  Epamtnoudas  could  mnch  loug«c  to"
upheld  Thebes  in  the  ratik  to  which  he  hadn**
her  is  VL'ry  donbtfnl;  without  liitn  she  fell  iloiit*
to  her  formt>r  obnciirity.  His  character  is  cprtiio-
ly  one  of  the  noblest  recorded  in  Greek  hiMoiT-
His  private  life  was  mond  and  refined,  his|»til»lic
oonduct  uniuHuenced  by  peraoual  Bmbllion  of  ^*^
personal  hatred,  lie  was  a  oiuccre  lover  "^l***
couutry ;  and  if,  in  his  scbenies  for  her  siK
nient,  ho  was  indifTereDtto  the  injury  dour !»
members  of  the  Grecian  family,  thJH  is  a  fsttll
which.  pcrhiii>e,  uo  Greek  stntesroan  exceirt  Ai
tides  was  fn^<.  His  life  was  written  in  LJliu
Cornelius  Nepos;  and  in  recent  tiuies  in  iirtJBi
by  Baucb  ( 1«M )  and  Ponitow  (  ISTO ).  S«  s»
Sanker,  Spttrtan  and  7%r6an  Stijyraitacie$  |Lao<l<'
li?77).  '

Epangelia  {tTrayytXin). If  a  citiieoa  of  Atb^
had  incurred  urifitii,  the  privilege  of  takinit
or  speaking  in  the  public  assembly  was  fflifri'
(See  Atimia.) but  as  it  sometimes  uiigbl  lti|
that  a  person,  though  not  formally  deelsrtd
had  committed  such  crimes  si  wnnld,  on  i


EPAPHRODITUS


697


£FUESIAE  LITTERAE


tioiir  drav  upon  him  this  puDishment,  it  was,  of
coarse,  desirable  that  such  iodiTidoaU,  like  real
irtfUHi  shoold  be  excluded  from  the  exercise  of  the
rights  of  citizens.  Whenever,  therefore,  sncb  a
|>ersou  Tentored  to  speak  in  the  aBsembly,  any
Atlienian  citizen  had  the  right  to  come  forward  in
the  assembly  itself  and  demand  of  bim  to  establish
hie  right  to  speak  by  a  trial  or  examination  of  his
conduct  {ioKifMaa-ia  rov  $iov),  and  this  demand,  de-
uonucement,  or  threat  vas  called  tway/rXia  or
*wayyt\ia  ioKiftatrias.  The  Impeached  individual
was  then  compelled  to  desist  from  speaking,  and
to  snbmit  to  a  scmtiny  into  his  conduct  and  if  be
was  convicted  a  fonnal  declaration  of  vn/ua  fol-
lowed.

Bpaphro^tna  (EwatPpoStros).  (1)  A  freedman
and  favourite  of  the  emperor  Nero,  whom  he  as-
sisted in  oommittittg  suicide.  He  was  himself  put
to  death  by  Domitian.  The  philosopher  Epictetus
(q.  v.)  wasbisfi-eedmau. (3)  M.  MEmus. A  Greek


Sphebl  {f^^i).  The  Atheuiau  name  for  youths
over  the  age  of  eighteen.  The  completiou  of  a  boy's
eighteenth  year  was  the  occasion  of  a  festival,  at
which  the  f^^/Sor  made  a  drink-offeriug  to  Hera-
cles and  eotertained  bis  friends  with  wine.  His
hair,  hitherto  worn  long,  was  cnt,  and  the  locks
dedicated  ta  Apollo.  For  the  two  following  years
the  ephebi  wexo  mainly  employed  in  gymnastic  ex<
ercises,  and  after  that  time  the  proper  civic  €<f)ri~
0tia  commenced.  After  an  examination  (doKtftatria)
to  test  the  gennineness  of  tlieir  civic  descent  and
their  physical  capacity,  the  ephebi  were  entered
on  the  list  of  their  tribe,  presented  to  the  people
assembled  in  the  theatre,  armed  with  spear  and
shield,  and  taken  to  the  sanctnary  of  Agraulos  at
the  foot  of  the  citadel,  where  they  bonnd  them-
selves by  a  solemn  oath  to  the  service  and  de-
fence of  their  country.  For  the  next  two  years
they  served  as  guards  on  the  fhtntier.  After  the
completion  of  their  twentieth  year  they  were  ad-


grammartan  of  Chaeronea,  the  slave  and  snbse- '  mitted  to  the  meetings  of  the  assembly  and  em-
qnently  the  freedmau  of  Modeettis,  Koman  prefect '  ployed^n  foreign  service.  Their  dress  was  the
of  Egypt.  He  resided  at  Rome  under  Nero,  and  X^o0f  and  the  iriratros.  See  Dittenberger,  De
died  there  about  a.d.95.  He  was  the  author  of  Emkbit  AtiicU  (Gott.  1863);  Dnmont,  Etaai  aur
several  oommentaries  and  grammatical  works.  jjrcpWWe  .^Hi^ae  (Paris,  1876);  Portelette, X'^pA^Me
n»K«v„.  I'xr  ^  \  k  -„„  „*  <»»„=  «^A  T^e«  Grioe  iu  VlntirucHon  Publique  for  December,
Bp*fAua  (  E,ra^O- A  son  of  Zeus  t^ndyr;  ^^  the  article  Education,  p.  570.

This  mythological  personage  is  the  instrument  oy  *  '  '^

which  Greciau  myth  derived  the  rulers  of  more  Bphegeda  (ei^vyijo-w).  See  ApagogS.
ancient  countries  ih)m  its  own  gods  and  princes.  BphaniSils  (r^ij/wpir).  An  aoconnt  book;  also
Epsphos,  according  to  the  legend,  was  Iwra  in  a  diary.  See  Comhentarius.
Egypt,  and  married  Memphis,  the  daughter  of  the  Bpheala  (tA  "E^Vui).  A  great  gathering  of  loni-
Nile,  by  whom  he  had  a  daughter  named  Libya.  3^^  ^t  Ephesus,  the  ancient  capital  of  the  lonians
Tlie  same  fable  made  him  the  founder  of  the  city  Jq  ^j^  jj  y,^  i,eid  every  year,  and  had,  like  all
of  Memphis  (Aesch.  Prom.  Vinct.  850  foil. ;  Herod,  pani^^tu,  a  twofold  character— that  of  a  bond
ii.  153).  Libyahoie  to  Poseidon  Agenor.thefather  of  political  union  among  the  Greeks  of  the  Ionian
of  Cadmus  and  Enropa,  and  also  Belns,  who  had  ^^^^  ^j  ^jj^j  (,f  ^  common  worship  of  the  Ephe-
by  another  daughter  of  the  Nile,  named  Anchiuoe,  gj^n  j^rtomis.  Thnoydides  compares  it  (iii.  104)  to
two  sons,  DanaHs  and  Aegyptns  (Apollod.  ii.  1, 4).  ^_^^  ancient  Delia  (q.  v.).  Respecting  the  particu-
^^  '^-  lars  of  its  celebration,  we  only  know  that  it  took

Epaxfti  (cVapiToi).  A  corps  of  picked  troops  in  p)ace  at  night  and  was  accompanied  with  much
Arcadia,  which  was  formal  to  preserve  the  iude- '  mirth  and  feasting,  and  that  mystical  sacrifice
pendence  of  the  Arcadian  towns,  when  they  be-  were  offered  to  the  Ephesian  goddess  (Tfano.  1.  c, ;
came  united  as  one  State  after  the  defeat  of  the  Dion.  Hal.  Anliq.  £om.  iv.  25).  That  games  and
Spartans  at  Leuctra.  They  were  5000  in  number,  contests  formed  likewise  a  chief  part  of  the  solem-
aiid  were  paid  by  the  State.  Cf.  Hesych.  b.  v.  ina-  '.  nities  is  clear  from  Hesyohins  (s.  v.),  who  calls  the
po^Toi :  Tliirlwall.  v.  90.  Epheaia  au  dyitp  inv^aviis. The  drunken  revelry

Bpaulia  (cmtvXia). See  Matrimoniuh.  described  in  the  love-tale  of  Achilles  Tatius  (books

BpelCB»«ioO. ApeopleofElis. See  Bus. I  vL-viii.)j8  not  mentioned  by  these  authors. See
Bpetlam  (*EirtTu»'). A  town  of  the  Lissii  iu


Dalmatia  with  a  good  harbour  (Plin.  H.  N.  iii.  25).


From the  manner  in  which  Thncydidea and
Strabo  speak  of  the  Ephesia,  it  seems  that  it  was


Bpennaoti  or  Bpennaotae  (cVevvcucroi,  tirtvvaK-  [  only  a  panegyris  of  a  part  of  the  lonians,  perhaps
TaO-  A  class  of  citizens  at  Sparta  who  are  said  to  ,  of  those  who  lived  in  Ephesus  itself  and  its  vi-
liave  been  theof&pringof  slaves  and  the  widows  of  Icinity.


Simrtan  citizens.  Tbeopompns  tells  us  (Atheu.  vi.
p.  271  c)  that  iu  the  Messenian  War,  in  consequence
of  the  groat  losses  which  the  Spartans  sustained,
they  married  the  widows  of  those  who  were  slain
to  Helots,  and  that  these  Helots  were  admitted  to
the  citizenship  under  the  name  of  intvvtucm. See

PAnTBENIAE.

Bpftna  CEmdr).  (1)  Son  of  Panopeus  and
builder  of  the  Trojan  horse.  Bee  Iliad,  xxiii.  665.
(2)  Sou  of  Endymlon,  king  of  Elis.  From  him  the
Ep«i  derived  their  name.

Bphabenin  (c^3<iov).  A  spaoious  apartment
in  the  Greek  gymnaeinm,  where  the  youths  per-
foruietl  their  exereises  in  the  presence  of  their
masters  (Vitniv.  v.  11 ;  Strab.  t.  4,  7).  See  Ephk-
Bi;  Gymnasium.


Bpheaiae  Littflrae  ('Ei^o-ia  ypofijxaTa).  Mystic
words  engraved  on  the  crown,  the  girdle,  and  the
feet  of  the  Ephesian  Artemis  (Eiistath.  ad  Hom.  Od.
p.  1864).  When  prououuced,  they  were  regarded
as  a  charm  (Menand.  ap.  Suid.  s.  v.  aXtfi^op/uiKa
=fr.  860  M.).  Written  copies,  apparently  on  strips
of  parchment  like  the  Jewish  phylacteries,  were
worn  as  amulets  (Athen.  xii.  548  c.=zfr.  15  M.).
They  cured  diseases,  charmed  away  evil  spirits,
and  gave  victory  in  coutests  of  various  kinds.
They  are  among  the  vtpUpya,  or  "  cnrious  arts,"
of  Acts,  xix.  19,  where  see  the  commentators,  and
cf.  Conybeare  and  Howson,  St.  Paul,  ii.  13  (first
edition,  London,  1652).  The  charms  and  amulets
of  Alexander  of  Tralles  (q.  v.),  a  physician  of  the
sixth  ceutary,  seem  to  have  been  a  survival  of  the


£rilES[AN  TALES


698


EPHEtiOS


T^tria  ypafifiora,  tboiij;b  he  nas  almnst  certniiily
a  Cbiidtiau  nod  cuijiioys  Hebrew  ns  well  tu  Greek
m.vatical  ex|ireM)ii)iiR. Se*  Ami'LKTI'M.

Epbesian  Talei. Htfv  Sovkix  axd  Romancra.

Ephfisis  (!<f>tait).  Alt  npiieal  To  the  Athenian
a>ui<>tiil>l,v  from  tbc  dcciittOTi  of  tlic  jtiihlio  arUitru-
tuFH  {BiairtjTai  (tXi/pwrm)  of  the  Sijfiaratt  or  of  the
niu)>btrnteA, See  Pollux,  viii.  f^,  63.

EptaSniA  ('Ei^ftnif).  A  city  uf  Ionia,  near  tho
nioiith  of  tli«  rivi>r  Cayster,  cnllot)  by  PUiiy  (//.  .V.
T.*JVI)  altmrum  lumrn  Jatav.  Mythology  oiuigliB.  an
itH  fouixlerK,  Hpheiitis,  the  sou  of  tbe  rivur  CayHter,
aiMl  CrvKsiis  (Kf^of),  n  iiatn'e  of  ike  H>il  (Pauuin.
Tii.  'i),  Atuttiit^r  necuiiut  makes  it  to  have  been
ttetlle^t  by  Epbr>fliiBi,  one  uf  tbe  Auiuzuiim  (Htcph.
Byraiit.  R,  V. ;  Kipmol.  Mitg.  s.  v.).  Acconllug  to
a  third  irotUtiou.  tbe  place  owed  its  oriKia  to  the
Amazons.  If  we  follow  tbe  better  authority  of
Strabo,  we  will  find  «  wUletnent  to  bmve  bean


BrooM  Gala  of  Eplieaus.

dm  maile  in  thin  qnarter  by  tliv  Corians  and  Le-
legCH.  AndrodnH,  tb»  •uui  nf  CndniN,  came  Bnlww-
qaontly  with  a  bi»dy  oflnniHii  cnlniiiNtH  (Pntnuin.
vi\.  2).  He  prntt'ctt'd  the  nativt-H  who  had  oettlnl
froiu  devotion  alront  Ibe  Temple  of  Artemitt  and
incorporated  them  with  bin  followrnt,  bnt  ex-
p«dlfd  those  who  inbahitf-d  the  (own  above,  which
the  Cnrlaiia  and  Lpb'Krjt  bad  biiill  on  Mount  Prion
<Piin»au.  1.  c).  Pliny  ennnonati-M  iilbrr  nanicH  fitr
the  city,  atich  aB  AIop'^,  Slorg^w,  Ortygia,  Ptelea,
Sanioruia,  Smyrna,  Trachea,  «tc.

Lysiniaehns,  wishiiig  to  protect  EphcAtts  fri»m
the  iuniidations  t"  which  it  wns  yearly  vxpoFied  by
the  overtlnwinpi  tif  tbu  f'nvHt^r,  bnilt  a  city  upon
tbe  mountain  and  Mnrniiind«Ml  it  with  walla.  The
inbabitaiita  wrro  lunvillitig  to  remove  into  thitt,
but  a  heavy  rain  falling,  and  LysiiDachus  (tt4t]tping
tbe  dniluM  ami  flooding  Ihi-ir  burii^H,  tht>y  were
glad  to  exchange.  The  port  of  Kpht-Hushad  origi-
nally a  wide  moulb,  bnt  foul  with  the  lund  lodging
in  it  from  the  Cayster.  Attaluu  Pbibidflpbnn  and
bia  arcbitvct  weru  of  opinion  that  if  ihe  untrnnce
were  contracted,  it  would  become  dce|>er  and  in
time  be  capable  of  receiving  shipttofliurden,  Bnt
the  sliniB,  which  ba«l  Wfor©  been  moved  by  the
tlnx  and  rcdnx  of  the  tide  and  carried  off,  being
stopped,  the  whole  baitin,  quite  to  tbe  uioaih,  watt
reuderwl  »ball(»w.  Tbe  situation,  however,  waa
so  advantageous  as  to  ovcrbiUaDce  Uio  iucou-
vetiteucea  attending  the  port.  The  town  in-
ereued  daily,  and  under  the  Romans  was  con-
sidered tbe  cbi<'f  emporium  of  Asia  this  side  of
Taams.  In  the  arrangement  of  tbe  provincen  nn-
der  tbe  Easlem  emperors  it  became  tbv  capital
of  the  province  of  Aaia.  Towards  the  eml  of  the
eleventh  century  EpheJim*  erperienc^'il  the  name
fate  as  Smyrna  (q.  v.).  A  Turkish  pirate,  iniiueil
Tangripanos,  settled  here;  but  the  Orerk  admiral,
I'lnuiies  Ducas, defeate<1  him  in  a  bloody  Iwttle  and
panned  tbc  6y1ng  Tnrkn  up  the  Mseonder  to  Po-


'  lybotnm.  In  I30C,  it  was  atnon^  the  plaoMwhifli
snlfcred  from  thp  cx-ictimis  of  the  Graitd  XhiU
Roger  ;  and  two  ycant  aft«r  it  snnvtHlRrMl  ti*  iIm
nnltau  Saysan,  who,  to  prevent  fnlure  iiwamfr
tionti.  remavc«l  most  of  the  inbaMlanta  In  Tyrii*'
uni,  where  they  were  mai<Hiere<il.  In  the  coo-
llicla  which  deoulatetl  Aaia  Minor  at  a  sobsfeqaat
period,  Epheaus  wa«  ngaiu  a  suRcrcr.  and  ibetit;
became  at  length  reduced  to  a  heap  of  rnltis.

Ephesus  was  famed  for  ita  splendid  temple  ff
Artemis  or  Uiaua.  The  statue  of  the  goddcw  «u
regarded  with  pecnliar  veneration  and  was  Iw-
lieved  by  tbe  )Mople  to  have  fallen  frotn  the  •kiia.
It  was  never  changed,  thongb  the  temple  bwl  lieni
more  than  once  restored.  TUih  rude  obj«'t  iifiih-
meval  wombip  woh  a  hli»ck  of  wikmI,  itaid  by  anoM
to  l>e  of  li«fK:b  or  elm,  by  otbera  cedar,  ebon;,  vr
vine,  and  attewting  ita  very  great  aQtiquily  U\  lb«
foftbion  in  which  it  bud  been  formed.  It  wascairtd
into  the  similitude  of  Art^'uiis,  not  as  ibegnMefal
hunlrcas,  but  an  allegorical  llgure  which  we  tmj
t-'ull  the  gfHldesa  of  nature,  with  tuauy  bmsl^
and  tbe  tower  parts  formed  into  an  Hennaiwiflit-
ue. grotesqiielyorimnien led, and  discovering llwfnl
beneath.  (8ee  illustration  on  p.  137).  It  waifnt*
gtH>usly  apparelled,  the  verit  «niliri>id«tvd  with  •«•
blenis  and  symbolical  devices,  and  to  praveut  iti
tottering  a  barof  metal  was  placed  nndureaebluBd.
A  veil  or  curtain,  which  wax  drawn  up  ftoa  tin
tifjor  to  the  ceiling,  hid  it  from  view,  riccpt  wbOl
nenice  wan  in  progrens  in  iho  temple.  This  W-
ago  was  pni-ar-rved  till  the  lator  agoB  in  a  ihiisli
ou  the  embeltiiibmcnt  of  which  mines  of  vesllk
were  couNumed.  The  pricits  of  Artemis  safftffd
emasculation,  and  virgins  were  devoletl  to  iari»-
lablc  chastity.  They  were  eligible  only  foimtbt
Huperior  ranks,  and  enjoyed  a  (;reat  rovenoevlli
I>rlvi)ege8,  the  eventual  abuae  of  which  iudoMd
Augustus  to  restrict  tbem.

The  reputation  ami  tbe  riches  nf  tbrir  pn^Je*
had  mnde  tbe  Epbesiaus.UaMimuH  nf  pniviilln^ftt
her  a  maguiticent  temple. .The  furtnnate  diKn»-
ery  of  marble in Mount Prion gavo  Ibem  ne*
vigour. TliecilicHof  Asiacontributeil  targi-lr.aad
Croei>Ufl  defrayed  the  expotu«  of  many  of  lli«a>l-
nmns. Tbe  spot  clioecn  for  it  was  a  maish,  uhmiI
likely  to  prcseni'u  the  structure  free  fiom  gB|«»iii
uninjured  by  earthqnakes. The  fonndalinn  »*•
made  with  charcoal  rammed  down  and  with  IIko*
The batte consumed imineu»e  t|nantilies  of  <■■''
ble. Tbe  eilificu  waa  erected  on  a  baaement  aitliwa
steps. The  architects  were  Cbersipbron  »f  l*"**
and  his  S4in  Metageneit  (B-C.  Ml  ( ;  ai»l  their  ptw  r»*
continntHl  by  Demetrins.  a  priest  of  Artenii";  ^'**
tbc  whole  was  completed  by  Dapbui*  of  MtUtraW**
a  citizen  of  Epheaus,  the building hsvinp  n^**'
pie<i  220  years. It  was  the  tirst  Hitecimen  nf 't**v
Ionic  style  in  which  tbe  dntoil  oduuin  and  rti-it^
with  volutes  were  iutmdnced. Tbe  whole  leiij:**|
of  the  temple  was  425  feet,  and  tbe  breailtli  ^  '
with  127  columns  of  the  Ionic  nnler  and  of  Tan***
marble,  each  of  a  single  shaft  and  sixty  fert  hif^'
The**  were  donations  from kings,  according  *
Pliny  (/?.  -V.  xxxvi.  14 ),  but  Ibero  i»  rtMois •*
doubt  the  correctnesa  of  tbe  text  where  thi»  s***"
tion  is  made. Of  then  columns  thirty-sii  **''*
carved  ;  and  one  of  them,  perhaps  as  •  rood«l'  ''*
Soopas, The  temple  bad  a  double  row  of  eoliB**
tifteeu  on  either  side  :  bnt  Vitmrius  baa  ^^
termined  if  it  had  a  roof,  probably  over  ibe  *^
only. The  ftdding-doors  or  gates  bad  ben''*'


EFHESUS


599


EPHETAE


tinned  four  years  in  gtne,  and  vera  made  of  cy-
press wood,  which  had  been  treasDred  up  for  four
generations^  highly  polished.  These  were  found
by  Mntianus  as  fresh  and  as  beautiful  400  years  af-
ter as  when  new.  The  ceiling  was  of  oedar ;  and
the  steps  for  ascending  the  roof  were  of  the  single
stem  of  a  vine.

The  dimensions  of  this  great  temple  excite  ideas
of  uncommon  grandeur  from  their  massiveness;
but  the  notices  of  its  iuternal  oruament  increase
one's  admiration.  It  was  the'  repository  in  which
the  great  artists  of  antiquity  dedicated  their  most
perfect  works  to  posterity.  Praxiteles  and  his  son
Cephisodoros  adorned  the  shrine;  Scopas  contrib-
uted a  statue  of  Hecate ;  Timaret^,  the  daughter
of  MicoD,  the  first  recorded  female  artist,  finished
a  picture  of  the  goddess,  the  most  ancient  in
£phesus;  and  Parrhasius  and  Apelles  employed
their  skill  to  embellish  the  walls.  The  excellence
of  these  performances  may  be  supposed  to  have
been  proportionate  to  their  price;  and  a  picture
of  Alexander  grasping  a  thanderbolt,  by  the  lat-
ter, was  added  to  the  snperb  collection  at  the  ex-
pense of  twenty  talents  of  gold.  This  deecriptiou,
however,  applies  chiefly  to  the  temple  as  it  was  re-
built, after  the  earlier  temple  had  been  partially
bnmed  (perhaps  the  roof  of  timber  only),  by  Heros-
tratuB,  who  chose  that  method  to  ensure  to  him-
self an  immortal  name,  on  the  very  night  that
Alexander  the  Great  was  bom.  Twenty  years  af-
ter, that  magnificent  prince,  dnring  his  expedition
against  Persia,  ofiered  to  appropriate  his  spoils  to
the  restoration  of  it  if  tbe  Ephesians  would  con-
sent to  allow  him  the  sole  honour  and  would  place
his  name  on  the  temple.  They  declined  the  pro-
posal, however,  with  the  flattering  remark  that  it
was  not  right  for  one  deity  to  erect  a  temple  to
another;  national  vanity  was,  however,  the  real
ground  of  their  refusal.  The  arohitect  who  saper-
intended  tbe  erection  of  the  new  edifice  was  Diuo-
crates,  of  whose  aid  Alexander  afterwards  availed
himself  in  building  Alexandria  (Vitmv.  ii.  praef^ ;
P\at.  Alex.  72;  Pliu.  H.  N.  yu.  37  \  Solin.  40).  The
extreme  sanctity  of  the  temple  inspired  universal
awe  and  reverence ;  and  it  was  for  many  ages  a  re-
pository of  foreign  and  domestic  treasure.  There
property,  whether  public  or  private,  was  secure
amid  all  revolutions.  The  conduct  of  Xerxes  was
an  example  to  subsequent  conquerors,  and  the  im-
piety of  sacrilege  was  not  suffered  by  the  Ephesi-
an  goddess ;  but  Nero  deviated  from  this  rule  in
removing  many  costly  offerings  and  images  and  an
immense  quantity  of  silver  and  gold.  It  was  again
plundered  by  the  Goths  fVom  beyond  tbe  Danube
in  tbe  time  of  Gallienus  —  a  party  under  Raspa
crossing  the  Hellespont  and  ravaging  the  conntry
until  compelled  to  retreat,  when  they  carried  off
a  prodigious  booty.

Tbe  destruction  of  so  illnstrions  an  edifice  de-
served to  have  been  carefully  recorded  by  contem-
porary historians.  We  may  conjecture  that  it  fol-
lowed the  trinmph  of  Christianity.  The  Ephesian
refonners,  when  authorized  by  the  imperial  edicts,
rejoiced  in  the  opportunity  of  insulting  Artemis,
and  deemed  it  piety  to  demolish  the  very  min  of
her  habitation.  When,  under  the  ansptoes  of  Gon-
stantine  and  Theodoeius,  churches  were  erected,
tbe  pi4pui  temples  were  despoiled  of  their  orna-
ments or  accommodated  to  other  worehip.  The
immense  dome  of  Saint  Sophia  now  rises  from
the  columns  of  green  Jasper  which  were  originally


placed  in  the  Temple  of  Artemis,  and  were  taken
down  and  brought  to  Constantinople  by  order
of  Justinian.  Two  pillars  in  the  great  church  at
Pisa  were  also  transported  thence.  The  very  site
of  this  stupendous  and  celebrated  edifice  was  long
undetermined,  bnt  in  1869  was  discovered  by  Mr.
J.  T.  Wood — an  Englishman  who  found  a  clue  to
its  situation  in  two  letters  from  Antoninus  Pius  to
the  Epbesiaus  (a.o,  145-150) ;  in  another  letter  from
Hadrian,  dated  September  27th,  a.d.  120 ;  and  in
an  iuftcription  which  prescribed  the  order  of  tbe
processions  to  tbe  temple.  Excavations  continued
until  1874  have  greatly  added  to  our  knowledge  of
the  temple.  See  Falkner,  Epkeatu  and  the  Temple  of
Diana  (1868) ;  Wood,  Dieooverie*  at  Ephettu  (1877);
attdFergnsson,2%«  Temple  of  Diana  at  Ephe»UB{18H3\

Bphttsna,  Seven Sleepers of. See  Seven
Sleepers  of  Ephesus.

Bphtftae  (c^'nu).  A  judicial  court  of  high  an-
tiquity at  Athens,  consisting  of  fifty -one  jadgea
elected  from  the  noblest  Athenian  families.  It
gave  decisions  in  cases  of  murder  at  five  different
places,  differing  accordlug  to  the  character  of  the
case.  If  the  crime  had  a  religious  character,  the
Arcbon  Basilens  presided.  (See  Archon.)  Solon
did  not  abolish  this  court,  bnt  handed  over  to  the
newly  orgauizeil  Areopagus  (q.  v.)  its  most  impor-
tant functions — the  power  of  deciding  cases  of  in-
tentional murder,  poisoning,  malicious  wounding,
arson,  and  the  like.  Tbe  nearest  relations  of  the
murdered  person  were  bound  by  religious  sanction
to  avenge  his  blood.  At  the  funeral,  and  after
that  in  the  market-place,  they  nttered  a  solemu
denunciation,  which  bade  the  mnrderor  keep  away
from  all  public  places,  assemblies,  and  sanctuaries,
and  to  appear  before  the  court.  The  Archou  Basi-
lens, after  the  charge  had  been  announced  and  re-
ceived, repeated  this  denunciation.  The  prelimi-
nary investigation,  and  determination  of  the  place
where  tbe  court  was  to  be  held,  followed  at  three
appointed  times  in  three  successive  months.  Tbe
case  was  not  finally  dealt  with  till  the  fourth
month.  On  tbe  first  two  days  of  the  final  trial
the  two  parties,  after  solemnly  taking  au  oatfa,
conducted  their  case  in  person.  On  the  third  day
judgment  was  given,  in  case  the  accused  had  not
gone  into  voluntary  exile.  If  he  had,  his  property
was  confiscated,  bnt  he  was  pursued  no  further.
Intentional  murder  was  punished  with  death,  ma-
licious wounding  with  exile;  the  man's  property
was  confiscated  in  both  cases.  In  the  court  of
Areopagus  if  tbe  votes  of  the  judges  were  equal
the  accused  was  acquitted.  If  the  homicide  were
legally  allowed  (as,  for  instance,  that  of  an  adul-
terer) or  legally  innocent  (as  in  self-defence),  the
case  was  investigated  iu  the  Delphinium,  a  sanc-
tuary of  the  Delphic  Apollo;  and  only  a  religions
purification  was  exacted.  Cases  of  uuintentional
homicide,  murder  of  an  alien,  and  instigation  to
murder,  were  taken  at  the  Palladium,  a  sanctuary
of  Pallas.  Instigation  to  murder  was  pnnished
with  banishment  and  confiscation  of  property,  tho
murder  of  an  alien  with  banishment,  uuinteutioual
murder  with  banishment  until  the  kinsmen  of  the
murdered  person  gave  permission  to  the  slayer  to
return.  In  the  time  of  Demosthenes  it  would
seem  that  the  cases  which  nsed  to  be  heard  at  the
Delphinium  and  Palladium  were  handed  over  to  the
Heliastae.  Thas  the  Ephetae  had  only  two  courts
left  them — that  in  Phroatto,  a  place  in  tbe  Piraeus,


KHHULTES


600


EPIBATAl.


near  tli*  Ma,  and  the  PrylaTiPiim.  Tlie  former  had
uiily  Ut  jiid^u  iu  the  rare  t'veut  uC  a  ii«r**oii  liaii-
i8Ji4*il  IVir  uuinttMitioiial  hooiicide  beiug  charged
with  ititt-iitioual  iiiiirdcr.  An  he  uiglit  itot  set
fiMil  uti  Uiid,  he  was  benrd  stiiudiiig  iu  a  ahiii,  and
iri'i'mid  ):iiilr.v  was  iMiuished  nitli  hniiishnieut  fur
life.  At  the  Pr.\l»iii'iiia  a  regular  court  was  held
oil  ioaDiitiate  oUJe^-ts  uiid  aiiimnU  which  Iiail  Wen
the  cause  of  death  lu  a  hiiiiiaii  Iwiug.  8eti  Ap-
8YCHo\'  Hike;  and  the  works  hy  Ltiiigr,  Die
ICpheteu  tiMit  der  Arrojmg  vor  Salnn;  and  Philiiipi,
tfrr  Armpag  nntl  dif  Ejthrttu.

Ephlaltes  ('K4/>iaAn]c).  (1)  Oti«  of  tho  Aloadao
1/f.  V.  :*<>!,  8ef  Aloel's.  (S)  a  Malinii,  w  Iin  in
B.C. -I^f,  when  Li-nutdiiH  was  defviidiuji  the  pass  uf
Theniiujtylue,  guiiled  a  bndy  uf  Petsiaiis  over  the
inuiiutaiii  jtnth,  and  thu»  euahled  them  to  fall  oit
Ihu  rear  uf  the  (^reek^  |J)  All  AthcDian  stales-
lliuii,  n  friend  and  i>arti<jau  uf  Penc-leo,  whom  lie
tiAnUttil  in  rarrj-ing  hiH  political  mimnnn^M.  Ht*
witH  inHtriini<>iilnl  in  ahridgittg  tbu  [t(iw«rH  iif  the
Arp4i]iagnB  —  a  niHOHiire  uHMuilf^d  liy  Aeschylua  iu
hiH  KnmmidrM.  EjihialteM  tliUH  iu.idt<  hiitiaelf  so
(ihnnxiiniH  to  Ihu  ariiitooratic  party  llmt  his  cue*
niirit  had  him  aaKaoHtiiDttKl,  prubably  in  the  \ear
B.C.  4SG.

ZJphippXum  (r't^iWiof  or  ttptiranov).  A  aaddlc-
chilh  ov  pad.  The  stiddlo  with  a  "tree''  was  un-
known till  the  fiMirth  century,  although  the  pack-
(Muldle  Ne(<m.H  tti  itv  of  much  earlier  occurrcuct*.

In  the  ahsciico  ofntirrups  (later  Htaffae,htafiide»,
eto. ).  which  arc  not  nieutioued  till  the  ouiperor
Maiiricius  (a.i>.  60^)^  th»-ru  were  several  ways  «f
inouiiliiig — n4  jiiinping  with  or  wilhuut  the  aid  (»f
a  lance-shaft,  with  the  a>i«intftiiee  of  otliors  {a»a}i<f
Xtin),  or  from  atcpw  (Cwa^oB^ix)-  The  lft«t  wer«  set
up,  according  to  Pltitari.-U,  along  the  main  roada
by  C.  Gracchuii.  Or,  th«  home  w:i«  (aiighl  to  kneel
at  tb*}  word  uf  coutinatid  ^Sil.  Ilal.  x.  4r)5),

III  more  nncieiiL  art  tho  hortte  ia  represented
riddpu  ban.--ha«kei1.  Later,  aaddle-elothfi,  often
double  or  with  pads  beueath,  and  fastened  with
ui)L<  Ui  thr«t>  girths,  appear  with  iucrea^ing  frti-
<|iieuey.  The  moat  elaborate  trappings  of  thin
kind  arc  seeu  ou  Scythian  autiquities  of  the  fourth
century  B.c.

The  use  of  trappings  w^aa  originally  rognnled
oa  ell'emiitate  by  the  Runiaun  (Yarro  ou  Cato,  I)e
Lib.  /I'rfMc),  but  they  weiv  iiiwd
to  poiuptt.  Their  (l'Br«topiu(>nt
may  U«  seen  by  a  coitipariHon  of
the  esamph'H  appt'uring  on  the
cnluninH  of  Trajan,  Antouinua,  and
TlLcodoiiiiih.  On  tho  tjrat  and  m.-c-
oiid.  and  in  the  et^uetitriau  ntatue  Er><'PPl<i'a.  (Coin
uf  M.  Anielins.  are  to  be  seen  <>' Ul>ioi»u«.)
clothfl  alone,  and  luida  QDing  up  the  huUow  of  the
horse's  back  with  iind  without  clothft.  It  ik  only
ou  the  Tlieodosian  Column  that  the  true  suildle,
with  a  how  l>«liiud  and  before,  upiicani  for  the  tirst
time.  The  new  uunie  imUa  uuw  vuipluwizes  the
new  fashion.

Eph6rl  (ri^oyjoi, ''overseers").  A  bourtl  of  five
meinbei'v  at  .Sparta,  elected  anunally  froui  all  the
citlEUlis.  It  id  aaid  to  have  l>een  ettlabliHhed  by
Lyenrgns  or  King  Tlieopoiapus  (  b.c.  770).  The
original  iuteiitiiui  wax  that  it  Mhoutd  give  decii^ionH
iu  prlval«  uiallenm  aud  reprettrnl  the  abseut  kiugn
in  certain  of  their  duties  ["apccially  in  tbeetuperiu-
tendcnce  of  the  oflicials  and  of  public  dit»cipltuc.


But  thwlr  cirrle  of  authority  gi-3ilrinliy  widtwtl,
till  il  came  to  mean  a  niiperiutfudenrp  nvfi  IW
whole  com  won  wealth,  incltidiiig  the  kings.  Tlw
epboi-8  liad  Ihu  right  of  mining  ohjt*cli»niia|^itrt
their  actious,  calling  thrui,  like  othor  nfBcii]»,U
account  for  their  conduct,  puiiialiing  thrm  nillt
liuea  and  reprimandu,  anil  even  proKcrnting  tbrn
before  the  Senate,  and  threatening  Ihrni  with  ik>
position  aud  death.  They  were  the  only  citj«n
who  wpro  not  obliged  to  rise  iu  the  kitig^  pfo-
mice,  a  fiu^t  which  given  a  good  idea  of  the  KlattTB
pi>hition  of  the  two  p.irtie«.  Bvaido^  the  diitjr  rf
oppoHiiig  everything  which  they  thought  lArtnt
to  the  lawn  and  iutt^re^ts  of  .Sparta,  they  Itatl  frvB
early  timcH  the  right  of  ainumoning  the  ilrliiMn*
tive  and  IvginUltve  nHsenihlifd.  (he  Vipot^ia  ud
'¥.KK\i}iria,  to  make  projMmalH  to  them,  and  lakrltrt
lead  ill  procct'dinga  left  Ijh  their  niBiia>,nriiMiit.
Two  of  them  regularly  accomI^1uied  the  Itiajpton
their  (-ampaigua.  It  is  probable  alao  thai  tkiT
had  the  snperiut«udcDCO  of  the  public  trruwr*.
In  their  capacity  of  protectors  i)f  the  puhlte  dii-
cipline  thoir  authority  extetuted  Itself  to  tht  ai-
nuteal  detaiU  of  private  life.  In  regard  in  tbrllt-
hilH  and  riMJotH:!  it  was  Mill  mure  almolute.  ilTfi
im  a  jjn-iotVMM  they  could  paea  sentence  of  dMll
without  trial.  <  .See  Pkriori:'!.  j  Ou  iupomiit
iK'caainna  a  majority  of  their  votos  was  t^hIrJ.
At  the  end  of  their  annual  office,  ou  which  thty
entered  nt  Iho  bogiuuing  of  the  8paHati  yetftfit
the  time  of  the  autuuiual  e<|uiuos.  ihey  wetvNaU*
to  be  called  to  accouut  by  tlieir  siicceaoon.  Tfe
year  was  dated  by  the  uAioo  of  tho  first  epbertffi
the  hoard.

Eph&nia  ("K^opor).  Of  Cymae  in  AcoUa,  » e^
I'tbraieil  lireek  historian^  a  conteni)Mirury  of  Pbil-
ip  and  Alexander,  flouHnhed  about  B.r.  MlV  lie
wrote  a  tiuiverMul  hiatory  ('laroptai),  iu  lliirtj"
books,  the  fimt  that  wna  attempted  io  Gteecf.
It  covers  a  (teriud  of  7.Vt  yvartt,  from  the  letuni  "f
the  lleraclidae  to  B.C.  341.  Of  this  history  DioJ*
rns  .Siculns  made  an  extennive  ii»e.  The  noik,
however.has  peri.shed,  with  the-  excepliou  ofafcw
fraj;meut«,  which  may  be  found  in  Milller's  Si*-
toricorunt  GntevorHtn  Fragmritta  (Paris,  1^^1-73)

Bpbj^  CE<t>if>a).  (1)  The  ancient  name  uf  Co^
iutli;  whence  Ephyreius  is  uimmI  hh  rtpiiv^kal  to
Coriiuhiau.  See  Cokinthls.  fJ)  A  town  iiiTb**-
Huly,  uflerwanlM  called  Cniiion.  (3)  A  lova  in
Epirnt.,  aflcrwHrd*  called  Cirhynia.

Bpibitae  {i'm^arat).  Marines  appointed  to 4^
feud  the  veaaols  in  the  Athcutaii  navy,  and  rotir^
ly  distinct  from  the  rowers  as  well  as  fnun  tl»*
laud  Mddiers,  each  04  hopHtae,  iwltasiii,  aitd  ca'*"
airy  (Xeii./M/.i.  2.  J7;  v.  I,  ^  U).  It  npiwara  tha*
the  ordinary  uum)>cr  of  epihatne  on  txtard  &  lH~
rvmo  was  ten,  though  iu  Thncydidew  vi.  42  w*  6*'*'
7(W  epihalae  fur  u  licet  nf  ItKI  shipii,  (tixly  of  whi**^'
Mere  equippwl  in  the  ordinary  way  aud  fortj  b***
troopw  ou  board.  In  cunneijuence  of  tho  uoml*"''
of  heavy-anued  men  ««  too  KnraXoyav  ou  tli«  cip**
ditioii,  the  Atheuiaiia  appear  to  have  rcduodtb'
nunilwT  of  regular  epibatau  fnnn  ten  to  seven.

Tho  epibutae  were  usually  taken  from  IkitTl*^
tes,  or  fourth  class  of  Athenian  ciliiwus  (Thnc-  ^
42) ;  but  on  oue  occasion,  in  a  M*a»on  of  exla'cd'''
nary  danger,  the  citizens  of  t  ho  higher  chuus  *'*^*
coinpelled  to  serve  as  epihatae  (Tliuc.  \iii.  JMt-

The  term  ia  num^times  also  applie^l  hy  ibr  f^
luau  writers  to  lite  mariues  {liitt.  £<ll.  Jl*i-^^'


^  EPIBLEMA


601


EPICLEHUti


Jiell.  Afrio,  63);  though  these  are  more  usaally
called  claagiarii  milit«g.

Bpiblema  (cVi^X^/ia). See  Paluum;  Tunica.

SpibJSl^  (tiri&oXTi).  A  flue  imposed  by  a  inagia-
trate  ou  any  official,  or  official  body,  for  a  misde-
meanor.  TLe  varions  magistrates  at  Atbeiis  had,
each  in  his  own  department,  a  summary  penal  ju-
risdiction— i.  e.  for  certain  offences  they  might  in-
flict a  pecuniary  mulct  or  fine,  not  exceeding  a
fixed  amount ;  if  the  otfender  deserved  further
punishment,  it  was  tlieir  dnty  U)  bring  bim  before
a  jadicial  tribunal,  the  magistrate  proposing  the
penalty.  Thns,  in  case  of  injury  done  to  orphans
and  heiresses,  or  of  misconduct  at  the  great  Dio-
nysia,  the  archon  might  fine  the  parties;  the  gen-
erals could  6ne  a  phylarch  for  disobedience ;  the
same  power  belonged  to  the  rttxoiroioi  (Aesch.  e.
Ctet.  $  27).  If  the  person  fined  would  not  submit
to  it,  tbe  magistrate  had  to  lay  the  case  before  a
court  (Lya.  pro  Milit.  $  11);  that  was  always  re-
qnired  when  a  demnrch  imposed  a  fine  {C.  /.  J.
ii.  573  b).  The  amount  of  the  fine  (jikos)  which
the  individual  magistrate  might  inflict,  we  do  not
know ;  the  Senate  of  Five  Hundred  was  compe-
tent to  fine  to  tbe  extent  of  500  drachmas.

These  iirtfioXal  are  to  be  distinguished  from  the
penalties  awarded  by  a  jury  or  court  of  law  (rt^iij-
fuira)  upon  a  formal  prosecution,  and  from  the  fine
of  a  thousand  drachmas,  which  the  accuser  in  a
public  action  incurred  when  he  dropped  bis  accu-
sation or  failed  to  obtain  a  fifth  part  of  the  votes,
or  when  a  citizen  refused  to  obey  the  summons  to
appear  a«  a  witness  in  court :  in  all  these  cases  the
magistrates  had  no  discretionary  power.

Bpicast^  (EntKatm}).  Commonly  called  locast^
(q.  v.). See  Odi/88.  li.  271.

Epicepbesla  C^rnKtcfnjaia).  A  deme  of  Attica
belonging  to  the  tribe  Oeneia.

Epicbarmua  (Ewixapfios).  The  first  Greek  com-
ic writer  of  whom  we  have  any  definite  acconut.
He  waa  a  Syracusan,  either  by  birth  or  emigra-
tion (Theocr.  Epig.  17).  Some  wnters  make  bim
a  native  of  the  island  of  Cos,  but  all  agree  that  he
passed  his  life  at  Syracuse.  It  was  about  B.C.
500,  thirty-five  years  after  Thespis  began  to  ex-
hibit, eleven  years  after  the  commencement  of
Pbr^'uichuB,  and  just  before  tbe  appearance  of
Aeschylus  as  a  tragedian,  that  Epicharmus  pro-
duced the  first  comedy  properly  so  called.  Before
him,  this  department  of  the  drama  was  little  more
than  a  series  of  licentious  songs  and  sarcastic  ep-
isodes, without  plot,  connection,  or  consistency.
(See  Couoedia;  Drama.)  He  gave  to  each  exhi-
bition coutinuity,  and  converted  the  loose  inter-
locutions iuto  regular  dialogue  (Aristot  Poet  v.  5).
The  subjects  of  his  Doric  comedies,  as  we  may  infer
from  the  extant  titles  of  thirty-five  uf  them,  were
partly  parodies  of  mythological  subjects,  and,  as
such,  not  very  difi'ureiit  from  the  dialogue  of  the  sa-
tyricdran)a,and  partly  political,  and  in  this  respect
may  have  furnished  a  model  for  the  dialogue  of
the  Athenian  comedy.  (See  Rhinthonica  Fabu-
LA.)  Tragedy  had,  some  years  before  the  era  of
Epicbarmus,  begun  to  assume  its  dignified  charac-
ter. The  woes  of  heroes  and  tbe  majesty  of  the
gods  had,  under  Phrynicus,  become  its  favourite
themes.  The  Sicilian  poet  seems  to  liave  been
struck  with  the  idea  of  exciting  the  mirth  of  his
audience  by  tbe  exhibition  of  some  ludicrous  mat-
ter dressed  up  iu  all  the  grave  solemnity  of  the


newly  iuveuted  art.  Discarding,  therefore,  the
low  drolleries  and  scurrilous  invectives  of  the
ancient  KoifUfdia,  he  opened  a  novel  and  less  ob-
jectionable source  of  amusement  by  composing  a
set  of  burlesque  dramas  .upon  the  usual  tragic  sub-
jects. They  succeeded,  and  tbe  turn  thus  given
to  comedy  long  continued;  so  that  when  it  once
more  retunied  to  personality  and  satire,  as  it  af-
terwards did,  tragedy  aud  tragic  poets  were  the
constant  objects  of  its  parody  and  ridicule.  The
great  changes  thus  effected  by  Epichamms  justly
entitled  him  to  be  called  tbe  Inventor  of  Comedy
(Theocr.  Spig.  17),  though  it  is  probable  that  Phor-
mis  or  Pbormus  preceded  bim  by  a  few  01ympiu<ls
(Aristot.  Poet.  iii.  5).  But  bis  merits  do  not  rest
here :  he  was  distinguished  for  elegance  of  compo-
sition as  well  as  originality  of  conception.  Deme-
trius Pbalereus  says  that  Fpicharmus  excelled  in
tbe  choice  and  collocatiou  of  epithets,  on  which
account  the  name  of  'Emxapfuos  was  given  to  his
kind  of  style,  makiug  it  proverbial  for  elegance
and  beauty.  So  many  were  his  dramatic  excel-
lences that  Plato  terms  him  the  king  of  comio
writers,  aud  in  a  later  age  and  foreign  country
Plantns  chose  him  as  his  model  (Hor.  Epiat.  ii.  1.
58)  and  is  thought  to  have  borrowed  from  him  the
plot  of  the  MenaecKmi.  The  parasite  who  figures
so  greatly  in  the  plays  of  tbe  New  Comedy  and  in
those  of  Plautus  waa  first  brought  npon  the  stage
by  Epicbarmus.

The  plays  of  Eplcbannas,  to  judge  from  the
fragments  still  left  us,  abounded  in  apophthegms,
little  consistent  with  the  ideas  we  might  oth-
erwise have  entertained  of  their  nature  from  our
knowledge  of  the  buffooneries  whence  his  com-
edy sprang  and  of  the  writings  of  Aristophanes,
his  partially  extaut  successor.  Epicbarmus,  bow-
ever,  was  a  philosopher  aud  a  Pythagorean  (Diog.
Laert.  viii.  78).  We  find  Epicbarmus  still  com-
posing comedies  b.c.  485  (Suidas,  s.  v.  'Ewlx.),  and
again  during  the  reign  of  Hiero,  b.c.  477.  He
died  at  the  age  of  ninety  or  uinety-seven  years.
Epicharmus  is  said  by  some  authorities  to  have
added  the  letters  $,  17,  ^,  «  to  the  Greek  alphabet,
bnt  inscriptions  show  that  these  characters  were
in  use  at  Miletus  half  a  century  before  his  reputed
birth.  See  Clermont-Ganneau,  Origine  des  Carac-
tirea  ComplAnentaires  de  VJlphabet  Grec  in  tbe  M^
lanoea  Graux  (Paris,  1884).  See  also  Lorenz,  leben
und  Schriften  dea  Epicharmug  (1864);  Klein,  Gri/i-
chiachea  u.  romiachea  Drama  (1865);  and  Donaldson's
Theatre  of  the  Qreeka,  pp.  187-88  (8th  ed,  1875).

Bplohelrotonla  {ittixfipvrov'ta). See  Ecclesia.

Bplohyata  itmxvcris).  A  wine-jug  with  a  nar-
row neck  aud  small  lip  and  with  a  handle  (Meuaud.
Fr.  490  M.);  usually
of  metal — i.  e.  silver
among  the  luxurious,
bronze  where  sim-
plicity was  studied.
Among  the  Romaus
it  took  the  place  of
the  earlier  guttua,  a
narrow-necked  cruet
without  a  handle
(VaiT.  L.  L.  V.  124) ;  aud  glass  became  the  favourite
material. It  was  not  unlike  a  modem  claret-jug.

SpicleruB  (f iri«tXi7pof,  also  t'mKXtjptns  and  TyxX^-
pos).  The  name  giveu  to  the  daughter  or  daugh-
ters of  an  Athenian  citizen  who  had  no  sou,  or


Epichrsls. (Rich.)


EPICN'EMIOn  LOCRI


602


EPICVKTl'^


wTiwe  sous  ba<t  di^d  leaviug  no  male  iestie.  Tbe
eirUK'}poi  vnm  iiul,  in  our  eeiist?  of  tlie  wonl,  an
"  lieirt'H.4,"  l>iit  nitlier  u  |M>rKiiii  wliu  wpiit  with  tlie
eataln.  Thi^  Iwir  w.-w  eiilier  the  {ter^Dii  to  wlmni
litT  tallier  IvmI  tUvimiA  the  propc-rtv  ou  cuatlitioii
of  marrjiiiK  lier,  orlit^rwiii  or  nous.  It  was  ilwined
nil  o1)j<-cl  of  ii)i|>ortaui;u  ut  AtUviiH  to  prvacrvo  tlit.-
orcor.  TliJH  waft  fflVcWd,  wliuru  a  uiiiti  Ufld  iiu
child,  liy  ailojiiioii  ((iVfTMi'i^tric);  if  bu  Imd  uu  A^ina
or  f;niiidM>ii!t,  Imt  a  daughter,  he  iui}{lit  licquvath
hiH  )>ru]>cri.v  to  any  jwraou,  but  the  duvisiie  vam
oldigtil  to  marry  lier;  on  the  other  hutul,  if  be
dteil  iiiteHtatu,  b<.-i'  tienreitt  ri*lalive  tniglit  I'lnini
h<-r  ill  iiiurnn(>«^>,  and  the  inhoiitanco  was  tmnH-
liiiltfd  tbroti^li  her  Co  a  grandson.  >vb<>  was,  wbfti
of  full  iigp,  adoi>UMl  iiit4>  the  nint«niul  gruudfa-
tber's  fivniily  (Ittae.  I'ttrrk.  (  T3).  Such  uii  i!|Mcle-
riis  might  bv  clniiiKMl  in  niarrlagt!  by  her  fathi^r's
brothRrif,  or  in  default  of  «ucb  by  tlicir  bohh  or  by
tbo  ttoDN  i>f  ht'r  fatlior^H  aistcrs,  or  by  her  fathcr'o
(luclioo.  If  tin;  daughter  was  ]ioor  i&ija-fra),  tbi*
iiearcdt  of  kin  wiu  bitiiiid  by  hitr  i-ithrr  to  luarry
Uer  hiius4>lf  or  to  portion  h«r,  tht*  law  tixing  a  nlid-
iug  fioalo  fur  thr>  diAorcut  clumeo  of  tli<-  ceuau« —
«.  g.  601)  dnic-bmaa.  if  bi*  be  of  tho  highest  claiw,
etc. If  tbfn^  won-  sovoral  in  llie  aaniu  dogn-^  of


rvive<l  the  nickuame  aaKtatjMttot  (Plat.  Com.  Prtik
4  Mviueke).  (-^1  Of  Aitihracia;  :ui  Aihvuiau  wrlta
of  ihn  Middlp  Comedy  (Aeliaii,  .V  J.  xij.  lOl

Epictetus  {'Hvitcr^ot).  All  i-rniuent  St«ic  phi-
loNopher,  bom  iu  ■  aerWle  coitdiliuu  at  Hi<-n| '
ill  Phrygia,  almiit  A.D.  50.  Tb«  iiuiiii^i  of  bis)
cutb  are  luikuonu  ;  ueitbcr  do  we  kuuw  Lo«
C8D1C  to  bo  brought  to  Bonio.  But  lu  that  citjht
vran  for  Aumt- tlmoaiilAve  to  Kpaphrotlitar  afne^
lunii  uf  Nero,  wbu  boil  bot<ii  one  uf  hiH  lN>«Iy-i;tii4
Au  aiiecilot«  rL'lalu<l  by  Origuu,  nbtch  illadnta
the  fiirlitiide  of  EitictcliiK,  would  altio  show,  if  it
wen;  true,  that  K|iapbn>(litiift  was  a  most  end
tnaatitr.  Kpicl^tua,  when  biit  inatit^'r  wa«  t«tAliii|
bin  k>g  one  day,  HUiilcd  audijuit-llyMiid,"  Yon  rill
brtuik  it";  aud  wh^ri  lie  did  hruak  it,  onlj  o<)-
(M'r\-<.'d, "  Did  I  not  t«ll  yoiL  that  >oii  woulddoaor
It  U  uoc  known  how  or  when  K|Hvtetii8  maaafBl
to  effect  liJK  frcMMbfin.  but  he  could  not  bivebnt
still  a  Klikvn  when  he  U-ft  Rome  in  coriwqaenoet^
au  edict  agaiimt  philo!M>|>bere.  Tliu  cr«nt.  tfaf
only  Olio  ii)  bis  life  the  date  of  which  cao  If  ■•■
)dgiie4l,  toi>k  place,  as  hat  been  said,  in  tbr  jrur
A.D.  f^,  being  tliD  eighth  ycai  of  I>ftiiiitiai>'*  retja
Kpictetiis  tbtfn  rulire«l  to  NicoiioliN  in  EpinKitii
it  tH  a  qurittion  whether  be  ever  relnnicil  to  IbuK
ooiiMingtiinily,  eac-h  of  iIrmu bud  1o  eoiitribntu  i  The  chief  gnmnd  for  believiug  that  he  itid  is  t


their  nharo  ^1^p6t  fxJpov). V[tmi  tba  iieai-eat  rela- ,
tiva  making  bit)  clajni  befojio  the  arcbon.  public
notice  wa«  given  of  the  claim:  ir  wa»  written  on
the  travit.  and  ivad  out  iu  the  following  aasoiubly
i  Poll.  viii.  95 ),  aud  at  a  later  day  the  hetald  put


titat«tnieul  of  Spartiaiina  {  Haiir.  16),  tlmt  E[)i^
tetQsliveil  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  theciii|itl«
Iludrian:  while  it  is  agreed,  ou  the  other  hioi
that  there  is  no  goo<t  evidence  of  any  of  liis  <}»
(;oiir»e8  having  been  delivered  at  Kouie,  bol  tliil


the  riiiestioi)  iX  ns  aii<^i.tr(ifrt'iv  rj  vapaKorafiaXXttv  ,  they  contain  fruqnent  meiitioit  of  Nieo|H>li». Tku


^vAfTot.  If  no  one  n]>]>eare<1  to  dispute  tbe  claim,
the  nrcbnu  ndjuilged  the  heiress  to  hiiii;  if  other
i-liiiuiuiit«  iijipeai'ed,  the  aruhoti  iiiKliliited  au  atia-
krisis,  and  »  coiirt  waa  held  for  {lie  dertMiuii  of  the
right,  which  wna  determined  acoonling  to  the
Atbeniau  law  nf  cotiMaiiguiiiity.


urgiiment,  however,  is  hardly  itufticieuf  t«  o^f-
Ihntw  the  exprcM  tetttiuiony  of  HiMtrtiauus  Uu
not  known  when  hedicfl.  Suidnssaysthnt  hFllviJ
till  the  ri'igiinf  MHfcus  Aurvlins,  yet  tbr  aiillwrtlj
of  AnUiH  GelliuH  ill  Ktrong  on  the  other  Bidi*.  Uft
writing  dnriiig Ibi- reigu  of  tbn  flrat  AnIiDiiW'


I-'vt>n when  a  wnmaii  wnH  already  married,  her  ,  speakn  of  KpiL-tetim,  in  two  plaeos,  oa  being  J(*^
hu.-^hiiiid  wiiM  obliged  to  give  bor  np  to  »  man  with (..Vrtcf.  AH.  ii.  16;  xvii.  19).

u  bettor  title ;  and  mi-ii  MimutiiiieH  put  away  their  Kpictutun  leil  a  life  of  exemplarj*  coiitcotjvtot
furiiiur  »iv(»  ill  oiiler  to  marry  hi-ire>s.>iC8  ( Isoe.  \  »iLmpliciL.\ ,  and  virtue,  pracliNing  in  all  partittiisO
I'urrh.  $  (i4).  Kveii  after  tbu  deciKioti  of  tlio  court
hutl  hccu  given  in  favour  of  one  ehuniant,  any
other  person  who  could  nbow  a  better  title  might
biing  an  action  agninst  the  husband  ninl  claim
the  heiress  { [Deraosth.]  c.  Uticart.  ji.  lOM,  $  lii ).
The  liwit  uf  time  for  iuakii}g  anch  a  cloiu  la  iiut
known.

The  estate  never  pawed  tato  tbe  ikoesession  of


Ibu  uioruIit>  whieh  Ite  taught.  He  livnl  fot  >
lung  while  iu  a  Muall  hut,  with  no  other  fiirDil«>*
tlniu  a  lipd  nnd  n  lamp,  and  wiibout  an  attemliBt:
iiitlil  be  lteue%'i)lently  Hdnpte4i  a  child  vboli  *
friend  lintl  iM'en  compel  leil  by  povcity  t«  txpi*
and  bireil  n  nurse  for  its  sake.  A  teacher  of  Ik
Stoic  pbiloKo]diT,  be  waa  the  chief  of  tho«  "^
lived  during  tb»  ]M-.n(Ml  of  tbe  Koman  Koapin-  H>*


the  husband  of  Ihc  heiress  (Isae.  CirtfM  5  311;  their  '  Ursoiis  wtire  princtpnlly,  if  luit  Milely.  diiwle*  '•
sou  when  of  fidl  age  was  adopted  into  bis  uat«ni»I  pmctical  morality.  His  favoiirile  mavUii. audtb*'
grandfatbi'r'«  family  (IttU!.  I'tjrrh.  if  I'i)  nntl  took  into  which  he  rcaolvi^d  all  practical  motalilT,**
ptw-seiMiion  «if  the  enlate.  Ho  then  bncanie  his '"  bear  and  forl»ear,"d»'#';^oi' xnl  nrrf^oi'.  He  •pf**"
niolbiT'H  legal  protector  (xOptoi).  aod  was  iKUind  to  !  to  have  diftei~od  from  the  Htoiea  oii  the  fulj^tcl  o'
tind  ber  muintenance.  If  there  were  irore  ttons,
thoy  bhared  ihc  projicrty  equally.  There  were
epicleri  at  Mitylem*  and  Pbocia.  With  the  Lyciuua
daughters  only  could  inherit.

EplcnemidU  Locri. Sec  Lockis.

Epic  Poetry. Soe,  Epos.


suiflide.  Wo  arc  told  by  Arrian,  in  hix  Pirta***"
the  Ifitcouraes,  that  he  waa  a  powerful  W'l  '*
spiring  lecturer;  and,  according  to  Orig«ii  ir. '^-^
7.  ad  init.),  bis  style  was  snperlor  to  that  of  Pto"
It  is  a  proof  of  the  eHtimatiuo  in  which  Epirtf**
wan  held,  that,  on  his  death,  hi;*  lamp  wa*  P"*'
cbiuud  by  some  aapirant after  pbtloBOpli}^  m'"


Epicrfitaa  Ci:mKpimis). Ml  An  Athenian  who  :  eager  than  wiae  for  \¥Mu  dmibmaM,  ifr  nrer  l^**


helped  to  expel  the  Thirty  Tyranlti  (q.  v.).  I..ater,
iHMiig  iseiit  ou  a  uii»»siuu  to  King  Artnxerxeit  of
Persia,  he  wan  accused  of  ivceiving  a  bribe  from
that  monarch,  Though  uci|uitled  of  tlii^  charge,  I
ho  wtxa  uCtftwauU  convictMl  of  a  similar  offence
a»d  esoapt^d  dcaib  by  lligbt.  Ue  is  ridiculed  U\  i
the  comic  ]MH-*ti  fur  bi»  large  bcaid.  whence  he  re- ,


Though  it  ia  tiaid  by  ijuidaa  thai  E|ii(l'*"'
wrote  uiiicb,  there  la  good  rrOAun  to  ivl"'"'
that  be  himself  wrote  nutblug.  His  ^<rf(^
were  takeu  down  liy  his  pupil  Arriau.  »»J  1""
lisbrd  after  his  deAtb  iu  eight  lHN>kn.  of  wlm-ti '""'
inmnin.  The  same  Arriau  compiled  tlir  '■
dioi  or  "niauiial,"  au  abstract  of  tbe  it—


EPICURUS


603


EPICURUS


hia  master,  and  wrote  a  life  of  Epictetna,  which  is
lost.  Some  fragments  have  been  preserved,  bow-
ever,  by  8tobaeii8.  Simplicias  has  also  left  a  com-
lueiitary  on  bis  doctrine  in  the  Eclectic  manner.
Tbe  best  edition  of  the  remains  of  Epiotetns  is
still  that  of  Schweighaoser,  5  vols.  (Leipzig,  1800).
The  text  and  a  Latin  translation  by  DUbiier  (1840)
may  be  recomuieoded.  Tbe  best  Euglisb  transla-
tions are  those  of  Higginson,  with  a  sketch  of
Epictetne  (Boston,  1865);  Long  (London,  1877);
and  RoUeatou  (1881).  See  the  popular  work  of
Canon  Fiurar,  Seekera  after  Ood  (1863).

Bpicnnu  CEirucovpor ).  A.  celebrated  philoso-
pher, bom  ill  the  year  b.c.  341,  in  the  island  of
Sanios,  whiKber  bis  father  had  gone  from  Athens,
in  tiie  year  B.c.  353,  among  2000  colonists  then
sent  oat  by  the  Athenians.  Yet  he  was  au  Athe-
uitiii  by  right,  belonging  to  tbe  derae  Qargettas
and  to  the  tribe  Aegets.  His  father  Neocles  is
said  to  bare  beeu  a  school-master,  and  his  mother
Cbaeristrsta  to  have  practised  arte  of  magic,  in
which  it  was  afterwards  made  a  charge  against
Epicnrns  that,  when  he  was  yoang,  he  assisted
lier  (Diog.  Laert.  x.  4).  Having  pawed  his  early
years  in  Samoa  and  Teos,  be  went  to  Athens  at  tbe
age  of  eighteen.  He  had  began  to  stady  philoso-
phy when  only  fourteen,  from  a  desire,  which  the
teachers  to  whom  he  had  applied  had  failed  to
satisfy,  of  nnderstauding  Hesiod's  description  of
chaos.  In  Samos  he  is  said  to  have  received  les-
sons from  Fampbilns,  a  follower  of  Plato  (Cio.  N.
li.  \.  26).  On  the  occasion  of  this  bis  first  visit  to
Athens,  Epionms  stayed  there  for  a  very  short
time.  He  left  it  iu  consequence  of  the  nieasnres
taken  by  Perdiccas  after  the  death  of  Alexander
tbe  Great,  and  went  to  Colophon  to  join  his  father.
Iu  B.C.  310,  be  weut  to  Mitylen^,  where  he  set  up  a
school.  Staying  only  one  year  at  this  latter  place,
ho  next  proceeded  to  Lampeacus,  where  he  tanght
for  four  years.  He  retarned  to  Athens  in  the  year
B.C.  306,  and  now  founded  tbe  school  which  ever
after  was  named  from  him  the  Epicurean.  He
purchased  a  garden  (K^iroi  'Eirticot'pou)  for  eighty
niiuae  (aboot  $1460),  wherein  he  might  live  with
\m  disciples  and  deliver  his  lecflires,  and  hence-
forth remained  in  Athens,  with  the  excoptiou  only
of  two  or  three  visits  to. his  friends  in  Asia  Minor,
uutil  bis  death,  from  stone  in  the  bladder,  b.c  270.
He  was  in  his  seventy-second  year  when  be  died,
and  he  bad  then  beeu  settled  in  Athens  as  a  teach-
er fi>r  thirty-six  years.

Epicnnia  is  said  by  Diogenes  Laertina  (x.  9)  to


him,  spread  such  gossip  as  that  Epicurus  used
to  vomit  twice  a  day  after  a  surfeit  and  that  har-
lots were  inmates  of  tbe  garden.  (See  LeuntiI'm.)
Au  inscription  over  tbe  gate  of  the  garden  told
him  who  might  be  disposed  to  enter  that  barley-
cakes  and  water  would  be  the  fare  provided  fur
bim  (Sen.  Ep.  31);  aud  such  was  tbe  chastity  of
Epicurus  that  one  of  his  principal  opponente,
Chrysippus,  endeavoured  to  account  for  it,  so  as
to  deuy  him  any  merit,  by  saying  that  he  was
withont  passions  (Stob.  Serm.  117).  Epicurus  re-
mained unmarried,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able
to  prosecute  philosophy  without  Interruptiou.  His
most  attached  friends  and  pupils  were  Heruiachus
of  Mitylend,  whom  he  appointed  by  will  to  suc-
ceed him  as  master  of  the  school ;  Metrodoi-us,
who  wrote  several  books  iu  defence  of  his  system  ;
and  PolyaenuB.  Epicurus's  three  brothers,  Neocles,
Chaeredeuiiis,  and  Aristobulus,  also  followed  his
philosophy,  as  also  one  of  bis  servants,  Mys,  whom
at  bis  death  he  mode  free.  Besides  the  garden  in
Athens,  from  which  the  followers  of  Epicurus,  in
succeeding  time,  came  to  be  named  "  tbe  philoso-
phers of  tbe  garden  "  fjuv.  Sat.  xiii.  122 ;  xiv.  319),
Epicurus  possessed  a  bouse  in  Melit^,  a  village
near  Athens,  to  which  he  used  often  to  retire  with
his  friends.  On  bis  death  he  left  this  bouse,  to-
gether with  tbe  garden,  to  Hermacbus,  as  head  uf
the  school,  to  be  left  by  him  again  to  whosoever
might  be  his  sucvssor. See  Education.

In  physics  Epicurus  trod  pretty  closely  in  tbe
footsteps  of  Deuiucritus;  so  much  so,  iudeed,  that
he  was  accused  of  taking  his  atomic  cosmology
from  that  philosopher  without  ackuowledgment.
He  made  very  few,  and  these  unimportant,  altern-
tiona  According  to  Epicurus,  as  also  to  Democri-
tus  and  Leucippus  before  him,  tbe  univeiite  con-
sists of  two  parts,  matter  (a-w^a)  and  splice,  or
vacuum  (to  Ktvov),  in  which  matter  exists  aud
moves;  aud  all  matter,  of  every  kind  and  form,
is  reducible  to  certain  iudivisible  particles  or
atoms  {JtrofiOL),  which  are  eternal.  These  atoms,
moving,  according  to  a  natural  tendency,  straight
downward,  and  also  obliquely,  have  thereby  come
to  form  the  different  bodies  which  are  found  iu
the  world,  and  which  differ  iu  kind,  and  shape,
according  as  the  atoms  are  differeutly  placed  iu
respect  to  one  another.  It  is  clear  that,  in  this
system,  a  preator  is  dispensed  with ;  and  iudeed
Epicurus,  here  again  following  Democritus,  set
abont  to  prove,  iu  an  o  priori  way,  that  this  crea-
tor could  not  exist,  inasmuch  as  nothing  could
out  of  nothing,  any  more  than  it  could  ut-


bave  had  so  many  pupils  that  even  whole  "'*' jT  ImC"

could  not  contain  them. Hearers  came  to  him tCTly  perish  and  becoming  nothing. The  atoms


from  distant  places;  and  while  men  often  desert-
ed other  schools  to  Join  that  of  Epicurus,  thei:*
were  only  two  instances,  at  most,  of  Epicnrns  be-


have existed  always,  and  always  will  exist ;  aud
all  the  various  physical  phenomena  are  brought
about,  fi'om  time  to  time,  by  their  various  motions.


ing  deserted  for  any  other  teacher.  Epicurus  and  i  The  soul  itself  Is  made  of  a  finer  aud  more  subtle
his  pupils  lived  together  in  the  garden  of  which  I  kind  of  atoms,  which,  when  the  body  dies  and  de-
we  have  spoken,  in  a  state  of  friendship,  which,  \  cays,  separate  and  are  dissipated.  The  various
as  it  is  usually  represented,  conld  not  be  sur- 1  processes  of  sense  are  explained  on  the  principles
passed  —  abstaining  from  putting  their  property  ,  of  materialism. From  the  snrfaces  of  all  objects


together  and  enjoying  it  iu  common  for  the  quaint
yet  significant  reason  that  such  a  plan  implied  mu-
tual distrust.  The  friendship  subsisting  between
Epicnrns  and  bis  pupils  is  commemorated  by  Cic-
ero (De  Fin.  i.  JW). In  this  garden,  too,  they  lived


continually  flow  thin,  filmy  images  of  things  (cidw-
Xa),  which,  by  impact  on  the  organism,  cause  the
phenomena  of  vision,  heariug,  etc.

It  remains  to  si>eak  of  the  Epicurean  system  of
ethics. Setting  out  with  the  two  facts  that  man


in  the  most  frugal  and  decorous  manner,  though  it  is  susceptible  of  pleasure  and  pain  and  that  he
was  the  delight  of  the  euemies  of  Epicurus  to  rep-  seeks  tha  one  aud  avoids  the  other,  Epicurus  de-
resent  it  differently,  and  though  Timocrates,  who :  dared  that  it  is  a  man's  duty  to  endeavour  to
had  onoe been his pupil and had abandoned  I  increase  to  the  utmost  his  pleasures  and  diminish


EPICUKL'3


fi04


EPICURUS


tn  tlie  ntmost  bit  pains — choosing  tbat  which
teiiUH  to  pluasaro  rather  than  that  which  tctiils  to
jwip,  unt\  Ibat  n-Licb  tends  to  ii  (;reftt<?r  plpjumre
or  to  a  leitser  pniii  riither  thnii  tliiit  which  tends
respijctiroly  to  »  letuwr  plfRsurc  or  »  givAtcr  palu.
Hu  umhI  thiT  tt-rms  pitiiwnro  ntitl  pain  in  thi^  most
coinprehenKivu  iv»y,iw  iiiclmling  pli>.-isure»uil  poiu
of  hi>th  niiittl  and  hody  ;  niul  i;»tvcmtMl  tho  ph'aN-
nn^x  and  paiiiflof  the  mind  a«  iiicomparnhly  grpat-
iT  tbno  thoso  of  (bt*  body.  Tho  higboHt  ploaauro,
tbi?n,  is  peace  of  uiiud  {arapa^ia,  acavia),  and  tbin
conies  from  <ftp6injtrtt  or  the  nbility  to  di-cido  what
line  of  conduct  will  best  eecnro  true  happiness.
Death,  he  sivys,  is  not  to  be  feared,  for  "  where  we
are,  death  is  not ;  and  where  death  is,  we  are  not.


^.


fri


EpIenniiL (Bftnneisler.^

The  periutl  at  which  KpiciirtiH  iipetMid  hisuchmd
was  pfcnliarly  favoiimble.  In  pUoo  of  the  sim-
plicity of  the  Socratic  doctrine^  nothing  now  ns
tDalned  but  the  Hnbtkty  and  atfeotatiou  of  tJto-
ioism,  the  nuuatnml  severity  of  the  Cynics,  or  the
debasing  doctrine  of  indulgence  taught  and  prac-
tised by  the  followers  of  Ahstippiis.  The  luxQri-
ons  rcHncTDcnt  which  now  prevailed  iu  Athens,
while  it  retidrred  eviM-y  rigid  sclreme  (if  philoso-
phy. iM  V(v\]  iM  all  gr(>ti8iiu8s  of  manners,  unpupn-
lar,  inclined  tbo  yoiniger  citizeuK  u>  liHteii  to  a  pre-
ceptor who  smootbi-d  the  stem  aud  wrinkled  brow
nf  philosopbyj  and,  under  the  notion  of  condiictitig
his  follower  to  enjoyment  in  the  bowLT  uf  tnui-
qaillity,  led  them  nnawures  into  the  path  of  mo4l-
eratlon  and  virtue.  Heuco  the  popularity  of  bi^
school.  It  cannot  be  denied,  however,  that  from
tliu  time  when  this  philosopher  appeared  to  the
prevent  d:iy,  an  nuintcrrnpted  course  of  censure
haH  fallen  upon  Iuh  meimiry ;  so  thnt  the  nnnm  of
Ilia  sect  Inis  almoHt  become  a  pniverbial  expres-
Hion  for  everything  corrupt  in  principle  and  infa-
mous iu  cbiiracter.  The  cbiirges  broiii;lit.  nfinirist
Epicnru.H  arc  that  be  HuperKCtUd  all  religions  prin-
ciplfH  by  diMmiKsing  the  gods  from  the  rare  of  the
wurld  :  tbat  if  bu  aeknoivl<-dg<-d  Ibcir  extsUnico,  it
was  only  in  conformity  to  jKipnlar  pn'jiidinc,  dlnce,
iiccording  to  bis  system,  nothing  cxihis  in  nature
hut  material  atoms;  ttmt  he  showed  great  in-
solence and  vanity  in  the  disrespect  with  which


he  treated  the  memory  of  former  pbilcnwpbcrsuri
tlte  ehariicters  ami  |M>pions  of  bis  coutMiiponum;
.nnd  tbat  both  be  and  his  ilisciples  were  «dthctf<l
to  the  >jr<w««it  »<'n»iiality.

With  respect  to  the  lirst  charge,  it  certsialf  id-
mitH  of  no  n^futatiou.  The  doctrine  ofGpiamii
concerning  natanr  militated  directly  ngmimt  tfap
agency  uf  u  Supremo  Ht*ing  in  tlic  rornistinu  wid
government  of  the  world,  and  blA  miscouri'ji
',  with  res[>ect  to  nicchauical  motion  and  the  i
of  divine  happiness  led  him  to  divest  th«  L>eitf|
M>me  of  his  primary  attributes.  It  is  not  irw,
however,  tbat  be  entirely  denied  the  exiMeun
of  superior  powers.  Cicero  charges  him  nitb  it-
coiisibteucy  iu  having  written  boobs  couc«niiflt
jiiely  and  the  reverence  due  to  tfae  K'^U  lul
in  niiiintnininc  (hat  the  gniU  ought  to  Iw  imr-
(tliipjivd.  ubili^  bt>  aiMert«-d  that,  thrr  luul  w
concern  in  human  aflalra.  That  tlierc  wu  so
iuconaiftt'ency  ici  this  is  obvious^  Hut  Kfiienrai
profettscd  that  the  universal  prevalence  of  tlit
ideas  of  gods  was  sufficient  to  prove  tbat  ibqr
existed  ;  and,  thinking  it  necessary  to  ilerive  iIm)
ideas,  like  all  other  ideas,  froni  aeusatioM,  bpin-
aginwl  thnt  the  goils  were  beings  of  hunuiii  hm
and  mnile  known  to  men  by  the  cnstomnr^  mn-
nations.  He  b>elieved  tbat  tlMw  goils  netv  H»-
lial  and  supremely  happy,  living  iu  the  iultf^
mundane  spaces  (jtrraKovftta)  iu  a  »tate  ef  <|iitii
and  nuHhlliiig  not  with  the  aOaini  of  the  wnrld.
He  contended  that  they  wore  to  be  wurRliiiiH
on  acconut  of  the  exr*flleuce  of  their  niitutr.  md
not  bccanse  they  could  <lo  men  either  good  or  bim
(Cic.  y.  D.  i.  41 ;  Sen.  Btm.  iv.  lt»).

The  Epicurean  school  was  carried  nn,  after  Htf-
mitcbus,  by  Pidystralns  uiitl  many  otlieTS,C()DCfrh-
ing  whom  nothing  is  known;  ami  the  doctriof*
which  Kpicunts  bad  taught  undfrwrut  fe«  bhx1>
fications.  When  introduced  iinmng  the  Rnnis*
these  iloctrincH,  though  very  unieh  npiiOBnl  il
first,  were  yet  adopted  by  many  di^IiDgaiMiM
men.  as  Lncrotins,  Atticus,  and  Horsce.  Vvit
the  emperors,  Pliny  the  Younger  aitd  Lnciin  "^
.Siiinosata  were  noted  Kpicnreaus. See  U'Otf-

TIUS.

Our  chief  sonrccs  of  information  r««peoline  i^
doctrines  of  Epicurus  are  tbo  tenth  hook  of  Pi^
enes  Lacrtins  and  the  )>o«id  of  Lucrctiiit, /*  **
rum  yalura.  Information  is  also  run>i»hHl  ^
the  wrtlinga  of  Cicero,  e«jiecially  the  Ik  >'t»J**
and  the  Ik  -Vd/tirrt  Ih-orHtii ;  by  thi»»e  ol^i"'*-
and  by  the  treatise  of  Plutarch,  "Agaiu*i  C*''"'
tes."  Epicnros,  according  to  iJiogene^  U'rliu*
was  a  more  voluminous  writer  than  any  oihi-ir"'
losopher,  luiviug  written  ns  many  as  dOO  viJoiw*-
in  all  of  which  lie  is  said  to  have  stiidioufdy  >*"*"'
ed  making  ipintations.  All  that  now  rcBUtiii* "^
his  works  are  the  letters  contained  in  lbs  !•**'
book  of  Diogenes  Lai'rtioa  and  purls  of  l"«l^'
of  his  treatise  cm  Xatnro(nfp(  *i'(7**)fi.wliicl'W*'*'
discovered  at  Heienlanenm.  The  Lust  wppf  C'J^
liHlifd  at  I.eip>?ig  in  IHI8.  being  edited  Ii>  iVl''-
furlhfr  fragmciitH  will  be  found  in  the  M<di  v*^"
ume  of  the  HrrttiL  foil,  t'ollectio  Allern.of*^*^'*
the  tir»t  part  appeared  at  Naples  in  l(<tt>.  A  rf^'''
cal  cilitinu  of  the  tii-st  two  letters  wan  :  ■
Sflineider  (Leipzig.  1^13),  See  Latigr'o  '■■
rir*  ^falfriaU^lmMl)  (Iserlohii.  li^Otfl;  Tn-t"
c  r/rpieiirpUmo  (Florence.  liuTT);  Zeller,  /
of  the  Stoicf,  Epifurranv,  and  Slrptim  tY.i>^
i**eO)j Wnllnce, /v>i<^urraiiidin  (16}:>(H;  wtm- *:-''''


EPICVDE8


60f


EPIGRAMHA


by  Gizycki  (Halle,  1879)  aud  Kreibig  (Vienua,  1885) ;
and  the  article  Philosophia.

BploJ'dea  (ErnKviris).  A  CarthBgioian  of  Sicil-
ian origin  who  served  with  his  brother  Hippocra-
tes, nnder  Hannibal,  with  much  distinction.  He
was  the  leader  of  the  Punic  party  in  Syracuse  after
the  murder  of  the  tyrant  HierouymiiB,  aud  defended
that  city  against  the  Roman  general  Marcellua.

Bpidamima ('Efl-ida/ivDcX See  Dyrruacbiuh.

Bpidanrla  (ra  'Entiavpta).  A  festival  at  Athens
in  honour  of  AescuIapiuB  (q.  v.)* See  Mysteria.

Bpldannui  ('Efri'davpoc).  (1)  A  town  in  Ai:goliH
oil  the  SaroDtc  Gnlf,  forming,  with  its  territory
Epidanria,  a  district  independent  of  Argos,  and
was  not  included  in  Argolis  till  the  time  of  t)ie
Romans.  It  was  the  chief  seat  of  the  worsbip  of
AescnlapiuB,  whose  temple  was  situated  about  five
miles  from  the  town.  Ou  the  iuscriptions  lately
foniid  there,  see  Gardner,  Hew  Chapters  in  Gre^
History,  ch.  xii.  (1892).  (2)  Styled  LiMERA,  u  town
ill  Laconia,  on  the  east  coast,  said  to  have  been
founded  by  Epidaums  in  Argolis.

Epldeipnis  (tiriStiirvU).  A  second  course  at
dinner. See  Ciena.

Spidelimn ('Etrtd^Xtoi'),  Atownonthesontheast-
eni  coast  of  Laconia  with  a  templeof  Apollo  wbich
contained  an  image  of  the  god,  said  to  have  been
cast  into  the  sea  at  Delos  aud  to  have  drifted  ashore
at  Epidelium. See  Cartins,  Pelop.  ii.  298  (1852).

Bpldlcna  (f  iri'ducos).  An  heiress.  See  Epiclerus.

Bpldlcaa.  A  play  of  Plautns  (q.  t.)  written
after  B.C.  195,  with  a  somewhat  complex  plot  and
rather  dnll.  Eilitions  by  Jacob  (LUbeck,  1635),  Qep-
pert  (Berlin,  1865),  and  Gray  .Cambridge,  1893).

EpJdimn.  (1)  Oue  of  the  Ebudae  Itisulae,  sup-
posed to  be  the  same  with  the  modern  Ila.  (3)  A
promontory  of  Caledonia,  corresponding  to  the
southern  extremity  of  the  peninsula  of  Cantire.

Epldfiaela  (<Vi&So-«ir)'  Volantarycontribations,
eitber  in  money,  anns,  or  ships,  which  were  made
by  the  Athenian  citizens  in  order  to  meet  the  ex-
traordinary demands  of  the  State.  When  the  ex-
penses of  the  State  were  greater  than  its  revenue,
it  was  nsoal  for  the  prytanes  to  summon  au  assem-
bly of  the  people,  and  after  explaining  the  necessi-
ties of  the  State,  to  call  opou  the  citizens  to  con-
tribute according  to  their  means.  Those  who
wfre  willing  to  contribute  then  rose  aud  meutioued
what  they  wonid  give,  while  those  who  were  un-
willing to  give  anything  remained  silent  or  retired
privately  frum  the  assembly.  The  names  of  those
who  had  promised  to  contribute,  together  with
the  amount  of  their  contributions,  were  written
on  tablets,  which  were  placed  before  the  statues
of  tlie  Eponymi,  where  they  remained  till  paid.

These  iniiatrtn,  or  volautary  contributions,  were
frequently  very  large.  Sometimes  the  more
wealthy  citizens  voluntarily  undertook  a  trier-
.Trchy,  or  the  expenses  of  equipping  a  trireme
(  Deinoetb.  c.  Mid.  p.  566,  $  161).  We  read  that
I'asiou  funiished  1000  shields,  together  with  five
triremes,  which  he  equipped  at  his  own  expense
(Demosth.  c.  Steph.  I  p.  1137,  $  85).  The  liberality
of  Demosthenes  himself  was  especially  noteworthy;
:ind  his  acts  of  munificence  were  recorded  in  the
decree  by  which  a  crown  was  voted  to  him.

Epifiamla  (itrtyofiia).  The  right  of  contracting
a  valid  marriage,  with  all  its  legal  consequences.


It  was  possessed  only  by  citizens  of  the  same  State :
aliens  could  ocqnire  it  only  by  special  legal  au-
thorization— t.  e.  a  decree  of  the  popular  assembly.
At  Athens  even  the  metoeei,  or  resident  alieus,  were
excluded  &om  it. Cf.  the  article  CONUBltiM.

BplcSnea  (Eiriyi»i}t).  (1)  Of  Sicyon,  said  to
have  been  the  oldest  writer  of  tragedy,  aud  to  have
preceded  even  Thespis.  (2)  Au  Athenian  poet  of
the  Middle  Comedy  who  flourished  about  B.C.  360.

Bplgfinl  CEiriyovot,  "desceudants").  The  sons
of  the  Grecian  heroes  who  were  killed  in  the  First
Thehan  War.  (See  Polynicks.)  The  War  of  the
Epigoni  is  famous  in  ancient  history.  It  was
uudertaken  ten  years  after  the  first.  The  sons  of
those  who  had  perished  in  the  first  war  resolved
to  avenge  the  death  of  their  fathers.  The  god,
when  cousnited,  promised  them  victory  if  led  by
Alcmaeon,  the  sod  of  Amphiaratis.  Alcmaeon  ac-
cordingly took  the  command.  Another  account,
however,  given  by  Pausanias  (ix.  9, 2),  makes  Tber-
sander,  son  of  Polynices,  to  have  been  at  the  head
of  the  expedition.  The  other  leaders  were  Ampbi-
lochus,  brother  of  Alcmaeon ;  Aegialeus,  sou  of
Adrastns;  Diomedes,  of  Tydens;  Promachus,  of
Parthenopaeus ;  Sthenelus,  of  Capaneus;  aud  Eu-
rypyluB, of  Mecistens.  The  Argives  were  assisted  by
the  MesseniauB,  Arcadians,  Corintbiaus,  and  Mega-
rians.  The  Thebans  obtained  aid  from  the  neigh-
bonriug  States.  The  invaders  ravaged  the  villages
about  Thebes.  A  battle  eusned,  in  which  Laoda-
mas,  the  son  of  Etoocles,  slew  Aegialeus,  and  fell
himself  by  the  spear  of  Alcmaeon.  Tbe  Thebans
then  fled ;  and,  by  the  advice  of  Tiresias,  they  se-
cretly left  their  city,  which  was  entered  and  plun-
dered by  the  Argives,  and  Thersander  was  placed
on  the  throne.

With  the  exception  of  the  events  of  the  Trojan
War  aud  tbe  return  of  the  Greeks,  nothing  was  so
closely  connected  with  the  Iliad  and  Odysseif  as
the  War  of  the  Argives  against  Thebes,  since  many
of  the  principal  heroes  of  Greece,  particularly  Dio-
medes aud  Sthenelus,  wcro  themselves  among  the
conquerors  of  Thebes,  and  their  fathers  before
them,  a  bolder  and  wilder  race,  hnd  fought  on  the
same  spot,  in  a  contest  which,  although  unattend-
ed with  victory,  was  Btill  far  from  iiiglorions.
Hence,  also,  reputed  Homeric  poems  on  the  subject
of  this  war  were  extant,  which  perhaps  really  bore
a  great  affinity  to  the  Homeric  time  and  school.
The  seooud  part  of  the  Thebaxa,  which  related  to
the  exploits  of  tbe  Epigoni,  was,  according  to
Pausanias  (ix.  9,  2),  ascribed  by  some  to  Homer
hiniBelf.  The  Epigoni  was  still  commonly  ascribed
to  Homer  in  tbe  time  of  Herodotus  (iv,  32). See

HOMEBUS.

Bplgranuna  (tiriypafina).  Properly  au  inscrip-
tion, such  as  was  often  written  upon  a  tomb,  a
votive  offering,  a  present,  a  work  of  art,  and  tbe
like,  to  describe  its  character.  Inscriptions  of
this  sort  were  from  early  tiroes  put  into  metrical
form,  and  the  writer  generally  tried  to  combine
good  sense  and  spirit  iu  tbeu.  They  were  gen-
erally, thongh  not  always,  written  iu  the  eh'giac
metre.

The  greatest  master  of  Greek  epigram  was  Simon-
idea  of  Ceos,  the  author  of  almost  all  the  sepulchral
inscriptious  ou  the  warriors  who  fell  in  the  Persian
Wars.  His  lines  are  remarkable  for  repose,  clear-
ness, and  force,  both  of  thought  aud  expression.
Fictitious  inscriptions  were  often  written,  contain-


F.rtr.iuMMA


«06


KPItJKACIIV


ill);  l>n<?f  critifi'tniBi  on  rrlfltniteil  men— a«  poets,
|iliiluHO|ibnnt,  urtiKtw — niul  rht-ir  pnnliirlitturt.  Tho
form  of  t]ie  epigrntii  wiw  al.to  iXM-ti  in  pinltoily  in
coL)ci»e  and  poirittsl  lan^un^o  tli»  rkvcr  tik-iu  or
tbe  piuuing  mootU  of  ihu  vrriter,  oftfii  with  n  titi^'e
of  wit  tir  sAlin.'.  Tlic  otciuioiiiil  r|)if;riini  wan  a
very  favourite  form  of  coiniiostition  wiili  Die  Alfx-
aiidriau  pucts,  and  renminett  no  ilowti  tu  tliti  lateftt
titnes.  8aiite  %rrit4;r8,  luilecU,  flt*vutt.'il  tUt^iuaKlves
eiitirfly  to  it.  Many  «>f  tbi*  choicext  i^in^of  Gr^ek
Itttrntun'  are  u>  In*  ronnd  in  llie  epifiruinti.  The
f)iigr:itiitn.ittHl(i  nw^^  ottiff  niftrpx  l)i>HideH  tlit>  e\e~
^iac,  4*H|H!ci»lly  the  i:itnl>ic.  in  tHtcr  titiit>H  inurH
complex  and  alnuwl  lyriral  iiienitnrfK  wen*  eiu-
(iluyed.  Tln>  {in-i-k  Ant hi>loj(y  liitx  pn-wrvod  wiinc
4500  i-[Mgrunitt,  of  tin-  j;rriilc«t  vurifty  in  whjU-iUh,
ami  fruui  tliu  Littid  of  innrr  than  300  {loctN.  |S«.t
AXTUnu-tCiV.)  Amoni;  tbi'*i-  un.'  fuuiid  >ion)»of  tlie
iuu»t  celebrated  names  of  anciii'nt  ami  nf  later
time-t.  A  (p-cnt  unniber  of  opigniius  aii*  also  fonnd
in  iiiBcriptions.

Of  all  tlie  Cifpfk  varieties  of  lyric  poetry,  t\w
fpismni  WM  rarliejit  welcome*!  at  R^me.  It  lived
oit  ill  an  unintrrrnpted  e x i-stenrti  from  Euniim  till
Ibe  lati-Mt,  linii-.v,  being  ninploynl  ttometimcN  for  in-
NCriptions  Moinulinii:?i  for  ottur  anil  tiii<«'tdliui(MiMK
pnr[K>MrM.  In  tUe  tiiHt  application,  fbu  cpt^jraiu
van  UAcd  itft^^r  Enniiiii  on  Acpulcliral  nioniinientH,
uleiiails,  workit  of  art,  etc.  In  the  ilrst  ucninry
B.C.  rpigram*  were  written  by  i'onipiliim.  Q.  Ln-
tatiiiR  C'ntnlus,  Vnrro  Ataeinns,  Licinins  Calvmt.
and  by  otbers  to  whom  erotic  ver8<'«  are  aorribcd.
3Iany  of  ihr  short  poi-ins  of  Catnlbm  aro  truly
cpiKnininiiitif,  and  in  tlie  wrond  bnlf  of  the  first
century  a.d.  Martial  liamlli'il  tUo  (-[liftrMtii  in  vn-
rioiiR  fiiniiM  and  \>  itii  tbn  power  of  a  muster.
AnguntiiM  riur«ar,  Pedo,  Cornilitia,  Sulpiria,  ami
Gaetnlinn  also  wrote  fipigniiiis.  Atr^oniiiH  bus  »ev-
ernl  c-xuui[ileB.  W'v  aleto  biivu  u  cxiltuctioii  of  cpi-
f>:rani4  by  Luxurlns  in  the  oixth  eeniniy  a.  u.
Many  sneli  pucDiH  nro  preserved  in  iiLsenptions,
besides  A  KTi'al  iiuiuber  in  maunscript,  wbicli  in
modern  liuu-B  have  beeu  colU^cted  into  a  Latin  An-
tbolo;;y.  In  ila  la*it  form  of  develojmient,  the  epi-
.f:ran)  li;'iin'.'i  largely  in  tlie  writing*  nf  ujo<lerii
I<aliiiiHl>4 — tlut  nuwt  Niipcejwfnl  of  whom  in  thi«  de-
partment wero  B*mlii),  Scaligi-r,  Bnrlianan,  More.
Hlro/i(,SaiiuaziiriR<t,Mi'^l.incbtlHiii,Pon4on.and  Lan-
dor.  Scttlij^er,  in  tlie  third  luKik  of  Iun  VorUcit,
cla.4«itlcfl  thv  epigram  ncvording  to  its  jHi»»os»iuii  of
m«7  (adulatory  epigriiDil. /<*'  (vindictive  t-pigrnuiV
Ml  (witty  epigrnm),  anddwhiw — with  a  fifth  cIum
corobiniiig  two  or  more  of  these  ci>m|ioiiems.  An
excellent  epigrammatic  deiiniiioii  nf  the  epigram
in  th«  following  of  nnknuwn  aiithorsbip:

"Omne  f>[ilj;fiiinii)n  Mil  iu-ibir  niiin «ll  ncnlfuo  lUI ,
SIM  siu  mella;  *it  M  corimrU  cxlftal.'*

This  has  been  cleverly  parapbratwd  in  EugliHh  an
fullovK :

"Th«  r|uiUlU»  rant  tn  n  Iwj  tb&l  we  meet.
In  on  r|i](|rvim  iii'srr  eliouM  Ikll:
Tb"  l>i>ilf  Oifttjlit  cilw.iV4  tie  liuk  nml  WMt,
Aud  *  Mltig  <bould  ba  left  Id  IU  UU."

A  French  writer,  Lebnin,  bns  lefl  the  follnwiiig
epigrDitiniotie  comparidon  of  iho  merits  uf  CatuUua

and  M.-iriiiil :

■■Pkr  AM  intiU  4ds  Mnnial  nous  •uri'r't,
Mft'S  U  tLoMW  ■  n  moDnttitgl)-.
n«  r^plfnuniiM  il  n'avMil  que  IVapnl;
t'atolli*  (#i]1  ra  «iit  tuut  Itf  t[«ul«. "

BiBUonitArilY, — A  collection  of  (Ircek  epigrams


of  the  earlier  tsort  ran  Im  made  fmm  lli'' '
mentioned  nnder  nriGRAlMiv :  and  tlwi  Taria
editions  of  the  Aiithologieii  should  be  cun«iltnl—
6.  g.  that  nf  Iloieitoiiade,  Jacobii,  and  Dilbun  in  Di-
dot'f^  lliltiiolhtrii  Si'riptuyum  flratpornm :  M<i  tb
Ant/wloifia  iMt'tmt  of  Kiette  (Tenbucr  series)  amt
Mulirentt  (18<s:t).  Sw  also  Corrocns.  Dt  Ttrio  lf>
/Viri(if(4  Ornrre  QhoiI  Kpigramma  IHiitMr  <UM);
C>jttiiniii»,  Iff  Confide ti do  Epigrammate  |l(kti>;  T
GulliiH,  />r  EpUframmate  (1641);  Vavawur.  I*f  Bfi-
fframfuatp  Lilrrr  (IGlnQy^  Heiimann,  jN/An/uyifl  Idilim
(1721);  Fayiille,  Dirtionnain  iT tJpiffrnmmn  {i^^lT);
Booth,  Kpiyrami',  .-iNcient  and  .\JoHcrH  {\^lih^}■.  mil
Doild,  Epi4jramtuatiislji  of  Mnliantl  «mi  Mt4nv
Timtti,  yd  cd.  (1W5).  wbiob  la.'*t  coi)t»in*(  a  liiUiu^'-
rapliy  of  the  subject.  A  tmmtirr  of  metrtral  >vrw»
ru  KuxtiKti  of  the  best  Ure«k  epii^rama  in  tMil)liibi<d
by  Ik-ll  (Loudon,  lt^>|,  nnd  n  very  gotMl  MflcctlMi,
with  intrcNluctlon,  Gr^-k  test,  traiulalion,  md
nolpK,  is  that  of  Miiekitil  (London,  lH0-2>.  t^Itnl-
Ut,  Amnrautb  and  Atphotiet  (liSHl).

Eplgrapheia  {tmypatfHU). &e«  EtsPtioK^.

Epigraphy.  Knitn  /irtypa<^(iK=iNiKribm.  A
worti  conventionally  u»cd  to  dencribc  the  icieiifific
Ktudy  of  inscription!!.  In  it«  n-ide«t  wuk  il  W
refereuce  to  all  iurturiptioiiB,  iuoliidtug  niirl*«"
graved  on  riugii,  or  stamiwil  on  coins,  lainiw,jNt^
viuvN,  and  other  Hrticles  of  use  or  omonicKi;  '*<>l
mnre  Htrii^lly  it  ndatiw  Ici  the  liiiitnrical  iii*cttp'
titniK  carved  njion  hIuIw  of  Mone  (i.  e.  Iupi<Ut7  ifl-
Rcriplions),  or  niMtn  platen  of  bronze  mnl  «tfc<
tnrtal.  CluHHit-al  pbilology  and  archu-iilojif  «*"
Hu  ineHtinuibledcbt  to  Ihu  Htndy  of  the  inM-n|iiw>*
that  have  been  prewrvcd  t<f  ii«  from  tlie  Gnat
and  Kinnan  world,  and  to  tbo  inscriptioui  of  ItMiv
two  gn'nt  centrcK  of  civilization  tluN  Abort  ik«l^
niUHt  be  contined.  (For  otln^r  i-pigraphlr  iTnuis)>
Noe  tbearlicle^iA-SSYRIA;  B.vBYL0SIa;  Clseif**"
iNscRimoss;  iliEiiiHiLYriucs:  Pf.rsh.  h'"*i»-
aciiptions  on  coiuf),tM.'e  tbc  article  Nr>ll--^MATti%)

I.  Ci REEK  —The  inscriptions  of  ancient  On**
ai-e  moro  vnliiaUle  than  those  of  Home,  f'>r  tk*
twofold  reason  that  tbey  date  tniicb  fnrtlnrbKk
iu  point  of  time,  ami  liecanse,  being  n*iially  rtfi"
on  nifirble,  ibey  bavo  more  generally  mr*!*"^
the  rnVHgeji  of  lime  than  the  bronr^**  plmiw  '"i"
(doyed  l»y  the  Romans,  wliich  were  eilliermrl"^
by  varions  conflagrations  that  coitHiinirtl  ttif  l"it'''''
ingH  where  they  were  ston-d,  or  el**  wci*  oiirr>«l
off  by  invading  armies  to  be-  made  over  min  roi"*
There  are.  however,  some  inacribt-d  Oierk  inl'l'**
nf  bronrx'  still  Bnr\'iving.  ns  well  oa  thin  plslw"'
lead  nnirked  with  inwripf  ions.  (See  ibe  JrrA*»^f
Zrifamj  for  lf*77,  p.  IIW;  and  id.  for  IffJf.  p.TI ;  Kru".
Klrmrnta  Kpifft:  'Trfuvvir',  p.  1(W  ;  and  Rnberl".''"*'
Kpiijrapha,  pp.  234-242.)  One  of  the  Grw-V  1'"^''
platcjt  iH  reprcBcuted  on  tho  next  page  Ii  nti'tw*
^lart  of  a  lrej»ty  between  Oeanihea  and  Clt-tlci""

ImmeDse  numbers  of  inscription*  ncn  iwf  "P'"
ftiiritftit  time*,  in  all  pnblio  bntlitiiigii.  in  tM»i'''^
and  theatres,  and  by  the  side  of  tlir  yn-ai  f^"**
Delplii  and  Olympia  abonuded  in  ibem;  wliii'^"*
Piirtbniiiiii  nnd  Arro|Milis  :it  AtlienH.  the  HcfV*^"'
ar  8annm,  tbt^  Arl«>inisiinn  fit  CpbesuH.  iiiul.  m  ^•*'*'
all  the  iinjiortnnt  snoemarifj*.  w^r^  tn-ai  st""*"
bou«eaof  iitticriptions  reciinliiig  IawH,d<-cr«^tf'*'
ties, gifts,  Arbitrations, and  other  ineniorAhli-i'Trtit*
of  political  and  religions  lifo.  In  nil,  ^bh-S^^*
aucient  Greek  inmcriptions  nre  know  n  to  wlio!*'*'

A  brief  ncconnt  of  tbo  Greek  alpbidMt  i*  iri""


EPIGRAPUV


(i07


EPIGKAPUY


Aol:•To^^l<VAo^'TAA^Arc£v/^f^'TA+E^lfcAEoAAAiAiHA^E^il
Alvy^o|v:fy^^,y|/^l^lf/vo<:7b^^TA^o^|^/fAlKA^/K«>ivA<»r.7E

^owf^I»^^^<A|;A/^f^AEo^'^tKArAl>A^'£io|TolvA  onh^
Mio/^ior'o+/^Er<>Fo7i^v/AM):Aif^frAfoiirtoir/£"ertAtr'o^£i

JtA^6'i£Ki^''olAN'«£AlfolAfiev^jpyv^.AAeio/T><ICP/M'^lA/^|*;A»^

KiT?L-IO^riS+^^^'^-^'*Ev>^ArltO  + tyvto;:^  i  nA


Bronze  Treat;  Tablet  (band  at  Oeanthea. (WoodhoDM  Collectfon.)


nnder  the  title  Alphabrt,  to  which  reference  may
be  made.  The  alphabet  itself  is  fonnd  in  iiiacrip-
tione  in  the  Bo-oalled  "  abecedaria,"  of  which  one
of  the  moet  interesting  is  the  "Formello  Alphabet,**
found  at  Formello  near  Veit,  in  Italy,  in  1682  by
Prince  Chigi,  and  of  which  a  representation  is
given  below. It  is  the  only  ubecedariam  in  exist-

The  Fonnello  Alphabet.

enee  which  contaiiia  the  archaic  Greek  forms  of
every  one  of  the  twenty -two  Pbcenician  letters
arranged  precisely  in  the  accepted  Semitic  order.
(Cf.  I^berts,  Greek  Epigraphy,  p.  20.)  It  also  en-
ablea  ns  to  determine  the  alphabetic  position  and
the  form  of  the  Greek  letter  which  represents  the
MH  (»Wa)— i.e.  F5.  (See Kirchhoff,  Studim  zur  Oe-
tchichie dea grieehitchen A }phabet9y pp.  134  foil.).  Oth-
er ab«cedaria  are  the  "Alphabet  of  Caer^,"on  a  black
vaee  found  in  1836  by  Galassi  at  Cervetri  (Kirch-
hoflf,  pp.  134  foil.) ;  the  "  Alphabet  of  Colle,"  fonnd
painted  on  a  tomb  near  Sienna  in  1698;  the  "Ce-
polla  Alphabet,'*  fonnd  near  Basta  in  Calabria  by
Lni{p  Cepolla  in  1805  (Kirchhoff,  p.  157) ;  the  "  Co-
rinthian Alphabet  "(incomplete),  on  a  pieceof  pot-
tery from  Corinth  (Kirchhoff, p.  103);  and  the  "Ionic
Alphabet,"  from  a  fragment  of  a  marble  stel^  found
by  Newton  at  Calymna  (Rol)eri.8,p.  19).

Tbe  nsnal  form  for  the  Greek  inscribed  marbles
was  the  aryjXij,  a  slab  from  three  t»  five  feet  high
and  from  three  to  fonr  inches  iu  tbickneRS,  slightly
tapering  to  the  top,  which  was  plain  or  ornamented
with  a  slight  moulding.  Another  form  of  marble
was  the  0tt/ioc,  or  alt-ar,  sqnare  or  circular.  There
are  also  pillars  [Kiovts),  sarcophi^i,  statue  -  bases,
and  even  the  walls  of  the  cellae  of  temples  (C.  /.  G,
2905) .  Letters  cut  on  walls  and  or^Xai  were  picked
ont  in  bine  or  red  pigment.

The  oldest  Greek  inscriptions  yet  discovered  are
from  the  island  of  Thera  (Santorin)  in  the  Aegean,
which  are  mortuary  records,  and  are  by  someschol-
ai-B  dat«d  as  far  back  as  the  tenth  century  B.C.  The
oldest,  however,  to  which  a  definite  date  can  be
awigned  are  funnd  cut  on  the  knee  of  a  colossal
ntatne  at  Abn  Simbel  in  Egypt  jjt  taTAO"!
by  Greek  mercenaries  iu  the  ser-  PiOTA|A^J
vice  of  Psammetiebns,  king  of  3  ^  nl^
£gypt,  and  hence  dating  from  1  \  "  I  H
tbe  end  of  the  seventh  or  the  loKription  rvnm  a
beginning  of  the  sixth  ceutnry  f^^^  ;/ /j,^°°^«
B.C. Next  in  order  come  the -Einijarot  Uai<i.


inscriptions  upon  the  bases  of  the  statues  set
along  the  Sacred  Way  leading  to  the  Temple  of
Apollo  at  Branchidae  near  Miletus,  and  assigned
to  the  sixth  century  B.c.  An  inscription  found
by  Newton  at  Halicamassns,  and  known  as  th»
"Lygdamis  Inscription,"  is  of  the  time  of  Herod-
otus ( B.C.  453 ),  and  is  important  as  exl]ibiting
the  Ionic  alphabet  iu  almost  exactly  the  form  iu
which  it  was  legally  adopted  at  Athens,  fifty  yeara
later.  A  fac-simile  of  this  is  given  by  Roberts  in
his  Greek  Epigraphy,  p.  175.  (See,  also,  Newton  and
Pnllan,  ^Mfori^I  Discoveries  at  BalioamatavB,  etc.,
pp.23  foil.).  A  very  interesting  Greek  inscription
is  that  npon  the  trophy  set  np  at  Delphi  by  the'
Greeks  to  commemorate  the  Persian  defeat  at
Plataea,  and  now  in  the  Hippodrome  at  Constanti-
nople, whither  it  was  bronght  by  Constantiue. See

CULUMNA.

Greek  inscriptions  may  be  conveniently  gronped
nnder  the  following  heads :  (1)  Historical  and  Po-
litical i^fnjiftlafiaTa,  vofiot,  treaties,  records  of  awards,
and  arbitrations  between  rival  cities,  letters  from
kings  and  other  rulers,  public  accounts,  lists  of
treasures,  and  laudatory  inscriptions  iu  honour  of
individuals);  (2)  Keligious  (litnals,  laws  relating
to  priests,  calendars  of  sacrifices,  rules  of  angnry>
etc. ;  prayers  and  imprecations,  leases  of  saci-eil
lands,  oracles,  etc.);  (3)  Private  (dedications  and
honourary  inscriptions,  epitaphs,  sepulchral  in-
scriptions, boundary  stones  of  mortgaged  lands,,
inscriptions  on  statues,  etc.).  The  finest  collec-
tions of  Greek  inscribed  marbles  are  those  at  Ath-
ens, Loudon  (British  Museum),  Paris  (Louvre )r
Smyrna,  Constantinople,  and  Oxford.

II.  Roman. — Tbe  oldest  Latin  inscriptions  do
not  date  from  an  earlier  periiHl  than  the  beginning
of  the  third  century  B.C.  The  oldest  of  all  is  prob-
ably the  so-called  "Fibula  Praenestina,"  a  gold
olasp  found  at  Proenestd  in  18^6,  with  a  short  in-
scription written  from  right  tx)  left.  Next  in  poiat
of  time  comes  the  celebrated  "Duenos  Inscrip-
tion" (f[.  v.),  written  (also  from  right  to  left)  ou
three  earthen  pots,  figured  on  p.  608,  and  called  llio
"  Vascula  Dresseliana,"  from  the  archaeologist,  Dr.
Dressel.

Other  Latin  inscriptions  of  great  historical  and
linguistic  interest  are  those  on  the  tombs  «f  the
Scipios,  now  in  the  Vatican  Library,  and  otiier
tituH  tepulcrale*,  the  Carmen  Arvale  (see  Fratres
Arvales),  the  Senatus  Consnltum  de  Baccbanalt-
bns  (see  Diontsia,  p.  ."iSl),  and  a  number  of  leges,
such  as  the  Lex  Acilia  Repetondanim  (C  I.  L.
198);  Lex  Lnci  Lncerini  on  a  stone  fonnd  at
Luceria  (C.  /.  Z.  ix.  782),  the  Lex  Lnci  Spoletiui
found  at  Spoletum  in  1876  (Coriese,  Latini  Sa--
monie  Vetuat.  Exempla,  p.  11),  the  Lex  Antunia  Ru-
brica  (C.  /.  L.  204),  the  Lex  Salpeiisaua nnd  tbe


^^^^^P  El'IOKArHY  008

Xex  MAla^ltntia  from  Spain  (C.  T  T..  ii.  19(13, 19&4). r
«lc.  (I


KIMGUAI'HV


(-«


%l,V5<Aii^


.?^^W°^


Koiitaii  iiiscrlpttuiia  urf,  ns  a  mle,  of  ii  much
mori;  IViruml  cliai'notc-r  thau  tbo  Greek,  ami  uru
cxpn'Mtuil  ill  ri-;;iilnc  conventional  ffimiulne,  wjtlt
alibrevtatMl  dvaijjnntious  of  Btatiia  for  freemen.
sluvea,  cliildreij,  frecdnieu,  Rml  all  tUo  dignities
Biiil  riiiictktiift  of  otllciul,  milirnry,  mid  Kac«nlotal
life.  Fornmliiic,  aUit,  aru  t\\v-  \v\ii\\  iiitttTiptiiMis  of
all  kiiidit — lliu  nortct,  itrayers,  iletl)i':itory  M(>ntfticeM,
and  Qxe^cralioiia — tliiia  exumplifyiiig  Mm  iiH'lliod-
ical  and  ordt-rly  character  of  tlit)  Rmnan  mind.
TLe  nioitt  ini)K>rtnnt  of  tlio  epi^raplitc  al>1irevia-
liuuH  aru  fsivt-n  in  thin  Dictionary  nnder  Cbc  difl'er-
eut  l«t(«ra  i)f  tlin  alplialwt.  Infunual  3  tiB<T))iti()i)8,
eB{>et:ially  tlie  graffiti  itcratcbed  n|ton  tbc  watlH  and
clsenbcre,  arc  likevvi^u^  nitnierouK  nntl  vahiable,
and  bavc  a  literature  of  tbciniwn.  See  Giiakfiti.
1'bL'  finest  collectiium  of  Kunnin  inrK-riptinns  arn  at
Kttuiu  (Vatican,  Capitoline  Miiim-iiiii,  otc),  Xapleet
(Miiaeo  Nazinnahf^,  Londnn  ( BritiMli  Mnsenoi),
Paria  (Louvrr).  Vifiiiiia,  and  Mnnich.

BesUles  tin*  Latin  inHcriprinnM  |»n>|i«r,  of  wliivb
anine  70.000  ar«  now  kuuwn,  tln-iw  iire  dialectic
inM'ri|>ti»n!(  in  Oticau  and  I'lnlirian,  and  %imw  (>0(JO
in  EiniNcan.  See  KTiti'KU;  OtMji ;  TaBULa  Ba.v-
tina:  Taullae  Ioi'vixak;  L'mbiua.

III.  HisTOKY  t»K  Ki'iuKAi'iiv.  —  TliO  aucionta
tlit;nis4^1vea  fully  iccognized  the  biuturical  value
of  itiMmptiunK,  »o  tbal  botb  (.)i~ator8  and  historians
»Hitiiuially  cite  theiu  a«  evidence.  {See  Deniosth.
lif  Fat*a  J^at.i^;  Aeiwbin. /«Oe»."5;  ]Ien>d.  iv.
>«;  V.  M;  vii.  2ifc<;  ix.  61 ;  Thueyd.  v  18;  and  of.
Enrip.  SHppl.  12ir2  foil.).  Ri^Kulur  collectiotm  of
Greek  tnuTiptloiiH  \\»r*'  ninde  by  I'liilui-biirri!!  (n.c.
'MU),  PoleuK)  (heaeu  called  tmjXnKinras),  Arixtode-
nnit*.  and  othi-nt.  Cicero,  Livy.  Fliny  tbn  Elder,
and  Snetoninit  uHeu  cit«  important  )u»cripliunH.
An  koou  a.i  the  revival  of  leaminK  began  after  the
duwurall  of  the  Houian  Empire,  the  atndy  of  epi-
graphy commeiici-d — first  of  tbu  Latiu  remaiuR  by
aeholara  like  I'oggjo  Braccioliui  and  Signorili  in
the  fonrtei'nth  centurj-,  and  then  of  both  Oreek
and  Latin  by  Cynacusof  Atienim,  who  cnpunl  great
nniubers  of  moininiental  in.icriptitnis,  in  nliieh  he
nos  followed  by  Marcanova,  Fi>lii-e  Felieiano,  Fer-
rarino,  Marino  8aniid<i,  and  utliui'H  iti  the  Hftt-cntb
ceninry.  The  lir«t.  printt-tl  e4dlectiona  were  pnb-
lioUed  by  Sprwli  (Ravenna,  l-W»).  IVulinger  (Angs-
bnrg.  lK(>9),  Hnttieh  (Mayenee,  i:£iO\.  and  Alber-
tini  (Riunp,  1531).  Early  corpora  intcriptioKHtn  are
tbo»«  of  Aptannfi  (Ingolsladt.  \XU),  Gniter  (!««:
r»-cHiil«4l  by  Graevtns,  17UT),  Gndiiix  {ml.  by  HeMiei,


17311,  Reinesins  (1682),  Fabreiti  {1509).  Mm
(ir^),  Matlei  (IT-ID),  Rud  I>ouati  (176:V-~o).
therH;  eolluctioud,  however,  were  many  innccurait-
ly  L-opied  in^eriptlone  and  many  aciuitl  fi>r;^ifnflt
and  faUilicattODi^,  »o  that  only  after  critical  *.iu(ly
aiiiL  acute  invest igutiou  conld  they  be  u»«d  kii^i
nAfery.  The  sifting  of  the  inscriptions  by  Mnllni,
MHriiii,  and  othera  with  a  vievr  lo  the  dftwuuit
n|'  fitlisehood  and  to  »u!ientilie  research,  laid  itw
foninbtioiia  of  critical  epigraphy.  In  Iffii*,  Orvlti
(i).  V.)  publitihed  two  vt>linne»  of  R4:iinaii  iuKrip-
tiona  etnboilying  the  rc&eaivbeFi  of  Maritii  and  otb-
era,  and  in  the  Mtnie  year  Angn^t  Hoeokh  pabliilinl
the  liDit  volume  of  the  t'orput  Iit^cfiptioittim  Gn«'
itirum,  Biibsoquently  angmenttd  l)y  other  volmnM
and  by  the  lnl>ouri4  of  Fninz  and  Kircbhuff.  Tbi
pnlilication  of  tliesc  workt  flxird  lUe  iiiethmlnof
epigrnphy  ;  and  from  this  time  on.  niimeTuu»i*|ii-
graphints  have  devoted  thctnselvcu  to  the  Mwiir
of  iuscriptionb  and  to  tbc  working  up  in  tnaniK
grapliA  of  the  rcsalta  obtainL'd  in  llieir  invoNj(»-
tionu.  The  great  Corpu»  fntcripfionun*  f^aiimirwm
wan  projected  an  early  as  173d  by  Mafft'i,  but  wm
oiiC  actually  begun  until  the  uurk  had  been  tikes
np  by  the  Royal  Academy  nf  8cienCR4  of  Bfrliu.
Ttie  first  volume  {timer ipUontt  jHiuiMintlmiftUC.
Cannrii  Mortem)  ap^toared  in  18U^,  couiAtniui;  slv
the  Fnali  ('nntulam  and  indie>M.  Up  to  16S6,  fif-
teen volnnte«  bad  api^eared  under  the  editatiltip
nf  Monmnten,  Ylenzen,  I>e  RiMxi,  Hijbner.  Bttwhi
Zangemeister,  WilnnmiiM,  Hirachfeld,  Deaa«n,  a»d
ntlierv.  Tbo  arrange  men  t  adopted  is  the  gcognfib-
ical.

Of  late,  great  attention  to  the  Atady  of  Itnctip
tiouH  has  been  given  by  etndentn  of  the  di»lcctA
eapucially  the  dialect*  of  Greece.  a«  the  infurn*
tion  which  the  epigraphie  remains  Bfford  is  mncb
nniru  reliable  thau  that  derived  from  litfrtitiir*
with  ita  conventional  and  fre<iuoutIy  artificial  Un-
gunge. See  Dialects.

IV.  BiBUiaiHAJ'HY.— Slaudanl  works  on  Greek
epigraphy  are  the  following :  Frani,  E1t»t^
Kintftaphirrn  Oraenu  (I840i;  Keil, -*ii«/(*lii  f-p'
graphini  (IcWJ);  Reinach,  IVoir^  (r£>*ar«J*»
ihrrijHe  {  Pari«,  ISSo);  Hicks,  J/amta/  i»/  'J"*^
lliAtoriml  UKriplioM  (Oxford,  It^W);  HobeM*. /►
Irmiiiclian  to  Grtrk  Kpigi'apky  (CambriUpe.  I*^
Inipiirtant  collet-tionit  of  Greek  luBcriplJoni  •»
tlio  CorpUA  InsciipliuttHMi  Graerarum,  4  voIkiIw'-
lr*77);  the  Corpim  In§criptionHm  J/hcfrrM«,  3  to!*
(1873-trJ};  Irfbas,  Vo^a^e  Ardt^logiquf  m  Oiinl
en  Jtie  AtiHturr,  «  vola.  ( PuriM,  Irtl7):  Keil  Jifl-
lo^e  tn»n-iplionum  tiorolif^rum  I  I^ipzii.'-  -'''
Kaibel.  Kpi^ravtmala  Graivit  rx  LapitUhu-  •  <
(llcrlin,  1H76);  liaiigublS,  .^nfifirW^  Hrlirt»l'»^  '
vols.  (Aihemt,  1K42-55);  K.»«.  Iiti,rriptiunt*  ^f**
Prt lief r«*i mar  iCambridgc.  lt<2o);  Hoebl.  Im*p<'*
luAiriptivHHM  Grai'v.  Jm/ iV/nJaMJMarnm tlletltti.  1^'
Hicka  and  Newtou,  CollevtioH  of  Jnr.  Gi.  /i»*^'_
in  Ibe  Jirititk  Jfuarum,  3  parts  (Oxfonl,  l^*-^-'-'
Cnmanudvs,  'ATTiie7«  ^Emyfunpai  'Evri-fi^u-  ^^"*'
QMS,  IrffU;  Dittpulierger,  SifUHtff  /*«ri/rto**"*
Grufcarum  (ljei]»zig,  18^1 ;  and  wilb  eajwcial  i"'
©reucti  to  the  dialert.H,  Caner,  nflrclu*  htf*^"'
Hum  OVafi-arBiH,  etc.  (Leipzig.  If^MS);  Oullil«.Si"*'
luHii  drr  griediigciuit  Jhalrkt  -  lK»rkf{fl<n,  i '''^
(Giiltingeu.  l«4-fl6) ;  Larfeld,  S],U,t^  (n.-nfW-
MNRi  iioeotieai'um  I'opulaifm  JHateetiun  F^
(Berlin.  IHj-3)  :  Roebl.  tntf^ript.  iiraer.
prnetrr  AlliaiM  iu  HMi«vi  /fcyk-r^  (Herlin.  1^'
man,  Itif  gritciiUt^en  D'HiUkte  (Giittini^n,  i  ~


EPIHELETAE


609


EPIPHANEA


4he  Ungnage  of  the  Oreek  inacnptioDB  see  especial-
ly MeisterhauB,  Grammalik  der  attiachen  iMchriften
^Berliu,  1885);  Meister,  Die  griechUcken  IHaUkte
<G6tting6n,  1882-89);  aud  the  bibliography  giveo
in  the  article  Diaijbctb.  Other  valuable  supple-
meutory  readiog  will  be  found  in  the  following:
Hinrichs,  the  article  "GriecUisohe  Epigraphik"  in
I.MUller'B  Handbudi;  Newton,  Es»ays  on  Art  and
Archaeology  (London,  1880);  Newton  and  Pallan,
HUtory  of  Di$eoveries  at  Halioumasnta,  etc.,  2  toIb.
^London,  1862) ;  the  article  by  Egger,  Det  Collec-
tiong  det  jHScHptioMi  Greequw,  iu  the  Journal  dea
.Sarantg  for  1871 ;  and  Westermaun  in  Pauly's  BmI-
JEncyclopSdie,  8.  t.  '*  InscriptionB."

Standard  works  ou  Roman  epigraphy  are  the  fol-
Jon-iiig:  Cagnat,  Conn  ^^pigraphie  Latine  (2d  ed.


in  the  docks;  and  the  ten  commisBioDera  of  tha
Emporium,  whose  duty  it  was  to  enforce  the  laws
relative  to  duties  and  commerce.  For  the  com-
miBBioners  of  the  revenue,  eee  Tahus.

Eptmenldea  (Evifitvi&Tjs).  A  Cretan,  ooutem-
porary  with  Solon,  and  bom  iu  the  year  b.g.  659,
at  PhaestuB,  iu  the  island  of  Crete,  according  to
some  accounts,  or  at  Cnoaus  according  to  others.
Many  marvellons  tales  are  related  of  him.  It  is
said  that,  going  by  his  father's  order  in  search  of
a  sheep,  he  laid  himself  down  in  a  cave,  where  be
fell  asleep  and  slept  for  fifty  years,  ou  which  legend
Goethe  has  written  a  poem.  He  then  made  his  ap-
pearance  among  his  fellow-citizens  with  long  hair
and  a  flowing  beard,  and  with  a  knowledge  of
niefliciue  and  natural  history  which  then  appear*


PariB,1890);^gbert,7M(ro(J./o5(*niyo/iai./«»orip-  edmore  than  human. Another  story  told  of  this


tiona  (N.  Y.  1895) ;  Bone,  Anleitung  zum  Lesfv,  Erg&H-
zen,  nitd  Datiren  rSmiacher  Insdn-^ftm  (Trfeves,  1881) ;
Blaiich^re,  Bist.  de  VEpigraphie  Somaine  (Fans,
1887);  the  article  "Roniische  Epigraphik"  iu  I.

iKlilller'B  Sandhuch  ;  and  that  by  E.  Hilbner  iu  the
Ehcgclopaedia  Britannica,  s.  v.  "  luscriptioDB,"  vol.
xiii.  pp.  r>24-i:i3. Valuable  collections  of  Latin  in-

.scriptions  are  the  Corput  InacripHonum  Latinarum,
15  voIb.  (Berlin,  1863  foil.);  Morcelli,  Lexicon  Epi-

_graphicum  (Patina,  1819);  Zeil,  Handhueh  der  rH-
miachcH  Epigraphik,  2  vols.  ( Heidelberg,  1650-52 ) ;
Ritschl,  Pritoae  Latinitaiis  itoHumenia  Epigraphiea,
with  5  supplements  (Berlin.  1862);  HUbner,  .Bz-

■empla  Scripturae  Epigraphicae  LaHnae  (Berlin,
18--^);  and  for  general  and  couveuieut  use,  the
two  following;  Wilmauns,  Exempla  InacripHonum
Latinarum,  2  vols.  (Berliu,  1873);  and  DesBau,  In-
acriptionea  Latinae  Seleotae,  vol.  i.  (Berlin,  1892).
A  good  selection  of  Latin  inscriptions,  with  an
introduction  and  commentary,  is  that  of  Words-
worth, Fragmenta  and  Spedmena  of  Early  Latin
(Oxford,  1874),  coutaiuing  also  literary  remains.
Elementary  is  the  work  of  F.  D.  Allen,  Bemnanta
of  Earlg  Latin  (Boston,  1884).  A  short  and  couveu-
ieut collection,  showing  the  forms  of  the  letters,
is  that  of  Cortese,  Latini  Sermonia  VetaaUoria  Ex-
empla  Selecta  (Turin,  1892).  For  very  early  and
dialectic  Latiu,  see  Schneider,  Dialectorum  Itali-
carum  Aevi  Vetuatioria  Exempla  Selecta  (Leipzig,
18)36);  and  for  Etniscan,  Oscau,  and  Umbrian,
Mi>mmseu,  Die  Vnteriialiache  IHaUkte  (Leipzig,
1850);  Fahretti,  Corpm  Inaorip.  Italioarum  Ah-
UgHitoria  Aevi,  and  its  supplsments  (Turin,  1867,
ltf7i-77);  and  the  bibliography  given  iu  the  arti-
cles Etruria  ;  Osci ;  Umbria.  Christian  inscrip-
tions are  collected  by  De  Rossi  (see  Catacuhbae);
by  Le  Blaut,  Inacriptiona  Chr^tiennea  de  la  Gaule,  2
vols.  (Paris,  1657-65) ;  and  by  Hlibner,  InaeripHonea
hritanniae  Chriatianae  (Berlin,  1876),  and  id.  In-
«cript.  Hiapauiae  Chriat.  (Berlin,  1871).  See,  also,
Le  Blant,  V^pigraphie  Chr^tienne  en  Gaule  et  dana
FAfrique  ( Paris,  1890 ).  General  supplementary
rendiug  will  be  found  in  Cnrtius's  Studien  (Leipzig,
1H68-78);  in  Hiibuer's  Orundriaa  zu  Vorleaungen
uher  die  lateiniaehe  Grammatik  {2d  ed.  Berlin,  1880) ;
and  the  Dixionario  Epigrafico  di  AntickitH  Bomane
(R<.me,  1886  foil.).

IIpiinflletatt(f  TTifMXiTrai, "  overseers").  The  name
given  at  Athens  to  commissionerB  nominated  as
uvcaflion  might  require  for  the  superintendence  of
departments.  Some  of  these  commissioners  were
regularly  elected  every  year — as  e.  g.  the  ten  epi-
meletae  of  the  wharves,  who  were  rosponsible  for
the  care  of  the  ships  of  war  and  equipments  stored
30


Cretan  was  that  he  had  the  power  of  sending
his  Boul  out  of  his  body  and  recalling  it  at  pleae-
nre;  that  he  had  familiar  iuterconrse  with  the
gods,  and  possessed  the  power  of  prophecy.  The
event  of  his  life  by  which  he  is  best  known  was
his  visit  to  Athens  at  the  request  of  the  inhabi-
tants, ill  order  to  pave  the  way  for  the  legislation
of  Solon  by  purifications  and  propitiatory  saon-
flces.  These  rites  were  intended,  according  to  the
spirit  of  the  age,  to  allay  the  feuds  and  party
dissensions  which  prevailed  there ;  and,  although
what  he  enjoined  was  mostly  of  a  religious  nature
(for  instance,  the  sacrifice  of  a  human  victim,  the
consecration  of  a  temple  to  the  Eumenides,  and  of
two  altars  to  Hybris  and  Anaidea,  the  two  evil
lowers  which  were  exerting  their  influence  on
the  Athenians),  there  can  be  little  ttouht  that  his
object  was  political,  and  that  Solon's  couBtitntion
would  hardly  have  been  accepted  had  it  not  been
recommended  and  sanctioned  by  some  person  who,
like  Epimenides,  claimed  from  men  little  less  than
the  veneration  due  to  a  superior  being.  The  Athe-
nians wished  to  reward  Epimeuides  with  wealth
and  public  honours,  but  he  refused  to  accept  any
remuneration,  and  demanded  only  a  branch  of  the
sacred  olive-tree  and  a  decree  of  perpetaal  friend-
ship between  Athens  and  his  native  city.  Epime-
uides is  said  to  have  lived,  after  his  return  to
Crete,  to  the  age  of  157  years.  Other  accounts
give  bis  age  as  nearly  330  years.  Divine  houonrs
were  paid  him  by  the  Cretans  after  his  death.

Epimeuides  composed  a  theogouy  and  other
poems  concerning  religious  mysteries.  He  wrote
also  a  iKwm  on  the  Argonantio  Expedition,  and
other  works,  which  are  entii-ely  lost.  His  trea-
tise on  oracles  and  rospouBes,  mentioned  by  St.  Je-
rome, is  said  to  have  been  the  work  from  which
St.  Paul  quotes  iu  the  epistle  to  Titus  (i.  12).  See
Diog.  Laert.  1. 109 ;  Val.  Max.  vii  i.  13.  See  the  mon-
ograph by  SchulteSB,  De  Epimenide  Crete  (Vienna,
1877).

Bpimetheua  ( 'Ejntirt$ivs  ).  "  Afterthought."
Brother  of  Prometheus  and  husband  of  Pandora.
See  Pandora  ;  Prometheus.

Bpimethla.  A  patronymic  of  Pyrrha,  the  daugh-
ter of  EpiraetheuB  (Ovid,  Met,  i.  390).

Eplniklon  (imviKuw).  A  prize  hymn,  such  as
the  odes  of  Pindar  (q.  v,),  sung  by  the  chorus  in
honour  of  the  victors  at  the  great  uational  games.

Bplphanfia  ('En-i^wcta).  (1)  A  town  of  Cilicia
Campestris,  southeast  of  Anazarbus,  and  situated
on  the  small  river  Carsus,  near  the  range  of  Mount
AmanuB  (Plin.  H.  X  v.  37). (2)  A  city  of  Syria,  on


EPrPHANES


«I0


thHOrontM.bflovr  Apiimon.  Its  Oriental  nml  trup
nnnn-  uji»  llainnlh,  juul  it  wan  rcck<nie<I  by  the
pcojile  of  ihu  Eiist  i»uc  nf  tbc  most  amjinificMit
citU-H  \n  tbc  world.  ImviiiK  J»eeii  foiimlcil,  im  tlicy
imn^iuet),  by  Hiimttli.  uno  of  the  Hona  of  Ciuiaan.
Alliisloti  U  iiviiii,'ntl>-  made  to  llaniaib  in  the  Old
Ti'ftraoiviit.  (Cf.Crtri).x.ie;  2  8aui.  viii.D;  2  Kint^x,
xlviii.  34.)  Its  nnmc  wan  cbuiienl  tn  K[ii|ibniii!U,
In  boiuiui-  tif  Antioobiis  KpipbaiicH.

Epiph&cea  CEmfftav^tf. A.  tiiinionii>i  of  Anti-
ocbtin  IV.  ttnd  Aiilioohiis  XI.,  klugn  *.f  Sj-rin.

Bplphaiiine  {'tVii^dwof  J. A  bisbop  of  Salainis
In  Cyprus,  iu  the  fourth  ctiiiiiry. I|e  k-oa  bum
ofJowi»b  parciitH,  near  ElL'iitbfrai>oUti,  in  Pab-K-
tiiie,  aliout  AD.  S20,  and  appt-am  to  have  been  eiln-
cate«l  ill  Kjr.vpl,  where  be  inibib«>d  the  principle*
of  the  GDOsticM. At  length  he  U'fl  tliotn,  siu],  be-
coniin}; an .inct-tir. ralnmed to Pal*»itiiii> nnd
adoptvd  the  disctptiiiK  of  3t,  Ililarlon,  tbu  funndLT
of  luDnacbifiui  in  tbuc  country. Eprphanin»  vrvct-
ed  a  monaster}'  near  the  place  of  his  birth,  over
which  bt!  presided  till  he  TfannoatJe  bishop  of  Sals-
mi« in  ;i67. Ker«  hp  reniainrd about  thirty-nix
years,  and  ciini|H»*ed  must  of  bin  writingH. In  ;J9I
he  eoinmcnurd  n  conlroverny  with  John,  bishop  of
Jenisdlein,  nrlarivo  to  llm  I'lat^nie  din-triiiesof  tbf
learned  and  lalmrionH  Origen,  afc-aiiiMt  which ht-
wrote  and  proa«']ied  uiib  implacaMo  bitterness.
John favoured Origcn's views,  but Eiiiphanius
ftiund  in  TbeopbiUni,  the  violent  bUbop  nf  Alexan-
dria, a  worthy  coadjnrnr,  who,  in  399,  coiivrned  a
fouui'i]  and  coudciKiivd  all  the  work«  of  Orifieii.
EpiphuninshiinftelfthenratldlacuiineilinCypnni,
A.D.  401,  and  reiteratcil  tbiM  rondeiuiintiou. After-
wanlM, hi' (■nibr<)ileil bimself with the i^iiipreKH
En«tr»xia;  fur  on  the  occasion  of  hpr  anking  him
lo  pray  for  the  young  ThouloMiiitu,  who  wus  dan-
geroiiKly  ill.  bn  rtplied  thnt  her  son shoiild  live
provided »1ib woidd (linaAUtv the Jefeuders of
Origen. To  thiit  prr-Rnmptuon»  messago  the  cni-
pre88  indignantly  lui-wored  that  ber  son  "a  life  wni»
not  iu  the  power  of  Epipbanin.t,  whose  prayon
wore  nnablo  to  save  ttml  of  bis  own  archdeacon
who  bad  rtcemly  dird. After  IbuB  vaiidy  endeav-
onring  to  graiil'y  bin  wclaiian  animoiiity.  he  re-
solved TO  return  to  Cyprus;  but  he  died  at  sea  on
ibo  iiasMge,  A.n.  4(i:t. Tb« principal  works of
Epiphaniiw  are:  (I)  nai'a^n>'. or uTreatlau  on  Her-
efticB— that  i»,  iwcniiiir  setts  (a't^ftrus). This  ia  the
most  imiwrtaiit  of  bi«  writings  and  treats  of  eighty
feeta,  fmni  the  time  of  Adam  to  (be  latter  port  of
the  fourth coutury. (8)  'A*'Uj[#ArtAn.'o.(ric.  or  au
Epitome  of  the  Pauarioti. {'I } Ayicvfuaniy,  or  a
Dtscouneoii  Cbe  Kutth,  explaining  the  doctriae  of
the  Triuity,  Resnrrectiuu,  etc. (4)  A  treatise  ou
the  ancient  weights,  lueuiureH,  and  coins  of  the
JeWH. St.  Jerome  adniireit  H)>iphauiuK  fur  lii>t  skill
iu  the  Hebrew,  Syiiae.  Egyptian,  Greek,  and  Latin
UnguagcH,  oud  styles  him  "Pcntaglottns"  (ii,w^i.
yXaome%  or  the  Five-tongued. His  writings  arc
of  great  value,  a»  containing  nnnierons  citations
from  curious  works  which  aro  no  longer  extant.
See  the  monograph  by  LijMtns  (VienuH,  IHai).
Bplp61ae  i"ETi-ijri>Xar). See  SvnAcrsAE.
EplrretUtini. See  Beda.

Epiraa  {'Hntipot),  A  conutry  to  the  west  of
Thi'Hcialj,  lying  along  the  .\drinrie.  The  Greek
term,  which  answers  (o  The  English  woni  main-
/wiirf.  apiwars  to  have  \tmn  npplie*)  at  n  very  eoT-
ly  period  to  that  uorthwextern  portion  uf  Grtece.


EPIBUS


whirh  issitnoted  between  the  chain  of  Piuilatoil
the  lunifln  Gulf  aud  between  the  Cerannlau  Moo-
tains  nutl  the  river  Achelulls — thi«  naine  Imm
probably  used  l<»  distingnish  it  frtun  lli«  Ut|t,
IM>puIow«.  and  wealiby  i>»|jiiHl  of  Coreyra,  «biA
lay  i>ppoHit«  lo  the  coast,  li  B]tpear»  thst.  iu  my
anrient  times,  Acamaiiia  was  also  luclmlwl  in  lb
tenn,  and  in  that  c:n»e  the  name  must  have  beto
used  ill  opposition  to  all  the  iabrnds  lying  skng
the  coast  (Horn.  Ott.  x'lV.  XDO),

Th.i  inhabitants  of  Kpims  were  scarcclr  roN«nl.
ered  Ht-llenic. The  popniafion  in  early  |[nii>' M
tjeen  P.-lasgic. The  oracle  at  Podonawak  aisii<i«
called  PelsHgic,  and  many  naine-t  of  plfc.>«(  id  Epi-
niNwereAlNolwnieby  tbePelitsgic  cities  of  iIn><ii>-
I»osi(c  e«>aMt  of  Italy. But  irruptions  of  Ulyhaii*
hail  barharizetl  the  whole  nation  ;  and  tlioiij;li  ilt-
mdotiis  speaks  of  Thesprotiu  as  u  part  of  R-rilu.
bo  refi-rs  rather  to  ila  old  c^imlition,  whi-n  it  wsc
a  celebrated  seat  of  the  PeJasgians,  than  t«  lU
state  nt  the  lime  wlien  be  wrote  bis  hislerT. Iii
their  nimb'  of  cutting  the  hair,  in  their  v<M,\me,
and  tti  their  Inngnnge,  the  Epiroles  trsembM  tb«
Mace<IoniiU)H.  who  were  an Illyrian raw. "ITiw
ponipus,  c:ite«l  by  .Strabo.  dividUl  the  iribalHUsU
ofEpirnsintofourteendiffereut  trilies.of  whiclitk
in<.»t  renowned  were  the  Cbaoriians,  Tb^sproliaDK
and  Molossians. The  Mnlossians  e)aimet|  tlWMt
fn>niMoluNsus,HonofNeoptolen)usandAt)dR»iKWL
Tnulitiou  reported  that  tbu  sou  of  Aeliitlei,  y«9-
tolenins  or  Pyrrhus,  as  be  is  tUso  oailed,  hllTlsf
enwweil  from  Tbessaly  into  Epirnii  on  Iiis  trnni
from  the  sing«  of 'I'n\v,  was  )n<lnccd,  by  the  »<lrio'
of  an  orarle,  to  settle  in  the  latter  ci>Mntrv.  sbmv
having  8ubjiigate<l  a  rousidernblo  extern' uftvm-
tory,  be  transinitted  bis  newly  forine<l  kiMjjdoiD  '•
I  Molo.<tsns.  hiH  s<in  by  AndromaebiS  from  «bm  bi*
subjcnts  derived  the  name  of  MohiKsi,

The  history  of  Moloe^in  is  iuvidvnl  in  giwil  ek-
Bcurity  until  the  period  of  the  IVrnian  intuww.
when  the  u;iuie  of  Admctns,  king  of  th«  Nwlswi.
oconrs  from  the  cirpumstanee  of  his  having  c*"-
enMody  afTunled  shelter  to  TheniisIiH-b<vi  wtim  1"
exile  and piirsued  J»y  his  eneinie^,  althonfth  tli"
infliiettce of  that  celebrateil  stntestnan  hail  !*»■
vioiisly  been  exerted"  against biin  in  Homt  aij*"
tlalioiis  which  he  liwl  eari-ied  on  nt  AtlieDitrnoe'
i.  in*j). Adniptns  wa*  succeeded  by  bis  ton  TIntrT-
I  bus  or  Tlmrymbfts,  who  apiienrs  tn  have  lioii  »
I  minor  towanls  the  beginning  of  the IVIc>pf>iiii'^
sinn  War,  when  we  find  bis  subjects  B»islin^  •'''
Ambraoiols  in  their  invasion  of  Ae^niania Tbr
ryba-i  is  repremmtrd  by  Pliitaix^b  </'yrr*.)a««  "'*
and  able  uiuuart-b,  and  us  eucoiinigiug  »r\mtt  w^
literature. His  succcaaor  is  nut  known;  b«l«aii*
yearn  after,  we  hear  of  a  prince  called  Alceiw  •'*
was  dethrone<l  by  bis  snhjerfs  bitt  re^torrd  l-r  I''"
OHyi«iu«  tif  i^yracnse  (Pansan.  i.  II), Neopt<'.Vii">»-
bis  sou,  itfigned  bnt  for  a  sliort  time  and  k-fl  •'•'
crown  to  his  tuothor  Arybae,  together  witli  t^"
care  of  his children. .\Ie&Huder,  the  elriwl  •''
these,  sncrettded  bis  uncle,  aud  was  tlie  Hn-t  »"'"
ereigii  of  EpJniB  who  niisnl ibe  chanictM  ""^
fame  of  tb/it.  rouiitry  among  fon>ign  nations  by  bi>
faleiifs  nnd  v.itour. His  sister  Olvmpias  M  b^
married  to  Piiili|j  of  Mawdon  b«*forc  hi»  acww*""
to  the  throne  of  Epinm,  and  the  frieiid»hip  '^ 1
cemented  Wtweeu  the  two  munarrhii  *  ■«  *)ill  "^'
thitr  Ntnuigtbeiied  by  the  union  of  Alexandrf*'*^
CliKtpatra,  tbc  dnngbter  of  Philip. It  wm  ^^
iug  (be  cclebratiou  of  their  unptials  it  ti0^


EPIRUS  NOVA


611


EPISTOLA


that  the  king  of  MaceAoD  was  assassinated.  Alex-
ander of  Epirns  seems  to  have  been  an  ambitious
prince,  desirous  of  conquest  and  renown.  There
is  good  reason  for  believing  that  be  united  tbe
ChaoniaDB,TheBprotiaas,aiid  otbev  Epirotic  claua,
together  with  the  Molossians,  under  bis  sway,  as
we  6ud  tbe  title  of  king  of  Epirtis  firat  assumed
by  him  (Diod.  Sic.  xvi.  72).  Having  been  applied
t-o  by  tJie  Tarentines  to  aid  thom  against  the  at'
tacks  of  the  Lneani  and  Bruttii,  he  eagerly  seized
this  oppoTtnuity  of  adding  to  bis  fame  and  enlarg-
ing his  dominions.  He  therefore  crossed  over  into
Italy  with  a  considerable  force,  and,  bad  be  been
properly  seconded  by  the  Tarentines  and  tbe  oth-
er colonies  of  Magna  Oraecia,  tbe  barbariaus,  af-
ter being  defeated  in  several  engagements,  most
have  been  conquered.  But  Alexander,  being  left
to  bis  own  resources  and  exertions,  was  at  length
snrroQuded  by  the  enemy  and  slain  (b.c.  326)
near  Pandosia  in  tbe  Bmttian  territory  (Tjvy,
viiL  34).  On  the  death  of  Alexander  the  crown
devolved  on  bis  cousin  Aeacides,  the  son  of  Ary-
baa,  the  former  king,  of  whom  little  is  known,  ex-
cept that,  having  raised  an  army  to  assist  Olym-
pias  against  Cassauder,  bis  soldiers  mutinied  aud
deposed  him  ;  not  long  after,  however,  be  appears
to  have  been  reinstated.  His  brother  Alcetas,  who
succeeded  him,  was  engaged  iu  a  war  with  Cas-
Sander,  which  proved  disastrous;  for,  being  de-
feated, bis  dominions  were  overrun  by  the  forces
of  his  victorious  enemy,  and  be  himself  was  put
to  death  by  his  rebellions  subjects.  The  name  of
Pyrrhus,  who  now  ascended  the  throne,  gives  to
tbe  history  of  Epirus  an  importance  it  never
would  otherwise  have  possessed.  (See  Ptrrhus.)
Alexander,  tbe  eldest  son  of  Pyrrhus,  sncceeiled
his  father,  whom  he  sought  to  emulate  by  at-
tempting afiresU  the  conquest  of  Macedon.  On
this  occasion  Antigonus  Gonatas  was  again  van-
quished and  driven  from  his  dominions.  Bnt  De-
metrius, his  son,  having  raised  another  army,  at-
tacked Alexander  and  presently  compelled  him  to
evacuat'O  the  Macedonian  territory  (Just.  xxvi.  3).
At  the  expiration  of  two  other  insignificant  reigns,
tbe  royal  line  of  the  Aeacidae  becoming  extinct,
the  Epirots  determined  to  ^opt  a  republican
form  of  government,  which  prevailed  until  the
subjugation  of  Macedon  by  the  Romans.  Hav-
ing been  accused  of  favouring  Persens  iu  the  last
Macedonian  War,  they  became  tbe  objects  of  the
bitterest  vengeance  of  the  Bomans,  who  treated
them  with  unusual  severity.  Aemilins  Panllus  de-
stroyed seventy  of  their  towns  and  sold  150,000  of
tbe  inhabitants  into  slavery.  Epirus,  having  loat
its  independence,  was  then  auuexed  as  a  province
to  the  Roman  Empire.  See  Merleker,  Daratellung
dea  Laitdet  ttnd  der  Bencohner  von  Epeiroa  (Konigs-
berg,  1841);  AndBowen,Atho»fThea6als,  and  Epirus
(Loudon,  1852).

Bptnu  Nova. See  Illymcuh.

Bpi«c«psls  {iiritrKtjy^ts). See  Marttria.

Bpiflcdpl  (cirio-Kon'ot).  Inspectors  or  commis-
sioners, who  were  sometimes  sent  by  the  Atheni-
ans to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  subject  States  (C
I.A.i.  9, 10).  Tlie  episcopi  exercised  civil  author-
ity, and  perhaps  judged  on  tbe  spot  small  causes
where  Athenians  were  concerned.  The  episcopns
in  Aristophanes  carries  two  ballot-boxes  (icddw,  Ar.
1033,  1053).  From  the  same  source  we  learn  that
these  episcopi  received  a  salary  at  the  cost  of  tbe


State  to  which  they  were  seut,  and  that  they  were
appointed  by  lot.

EpiatAtaa  («Vt<rr(fn7r). See  Boui£.

Epiatfila  (e'lrurroA^).  A  letter,  written  upon
paper  for  transmission  to  an  absent  person,  as  dis-
tinguished from  one  written  upon  waxed  tablets
(Cic. ;  Caes. ;  Tac. ;  Mart.  Ep.  xiv.  11,  chartae  epieto-
tarea.)  The  annexed  illustration  represente  a  letter


Sealed  Lttttsr. (PonpeiKD  PaiDtlng.)


folded  and  sealed,  with  ita  direction,  as  represented
by  a  painting  on  the  walls  of  a  house  at  Pompeii,
in  which  it  is  accompanied  by  various  implements
employed  for  writing,  both  on  paper  and  wax.  It
is  engraved  in  the  Mtu.  Borb.  xiv.  tav.  a  and  b,
1853,  where  the  address  npon  it  is  thus  deciphered :
Marco  Lucrktio  Flamisi  Martis  Dxcurioni
POMPBI.— "To  Marcns  Lucretius,  Priest  of  Mars,
Decorion,  Pompeii."  (See  Writing  amd  Writing
Matkrials.)  Letters  usually  had  prefixed  to  tbem
the  name  of  the  sender  and  the  person  addi-essed,
aud  were  not  signed  at  the  end.  The  following
are  some  of  the  nsnal  forma:  Cicero  Varroni
(Cicero  to  Varro) ;  Cicero  Dolabrllae  8.  (Cicero
to  Dolabella,  greeting);  Cicero  Planco  S.  D.
(Cicero  to  Plancns  gives  greeting);  Cicero  Imp.
Fiasco  (Cicero,  the  commander,  to  Plancns);
Cicero  D.  Bruto  S.  P.  D.  (Cicero  to  Decimns
Brntns  gives  a  hearty  greeting);  Cicero  Trrem-
TiAE  Suae  (Cicero  to  his  Terentia).  S.  stands  for
aalutem;  S,  D.  aalutem  dicit;  and  S.  P.  D.  for  aalu-
tem  plurimam  dicit.  Formulas  of  courtesy  that
often  begin  letters  are  the  following:  S.  V.  B.  E.
(si  vales,  bene  est) ;  S.  V.  B.  £.  E.  V.  (n  raJes  bene
est;  ego  valeo) ;  8.  V.  E.  Q.  V,  B.  E.  E.  Q.  V.  (»i  vo»
exercituaque  valetia  bene  eat;  ego  quoqiui  raleo),  etc.
Phrases  of  courtesy  or  alfection  at  the  end  of  a
letter  are  the  following:  Vale. — Cum  et  raleaa. —
Da  opei-am  ut  valeaa. — Fac  ut  diUgetttisaime  te  iptum
euatodiaa, — Cura  ut  raleaa  et  m«,  ut  amaa,  ama. —
Cttra  ut  valeaa  et  noa  amea  et  tibi  perauadeaa  te  a  me
fraterne  amari, —  Vale  et  noa  dilige. — Bene  vale  et  me
dilige. — Fae  raleaa  m*que  anea. — Tu,  ut  inatituisti,
me  dUigaa  rogo,  proprieque  tuum  eaae  tibi  perauadeaa.
—  Fae  valeaa  meque  mutuo  diUgaa. — Etiam  aigue
etiam  vale.

The  date  and  place,  if  written  at  all,  are  given
at  the  end  of  tbe  letter.  Thus :  Data  pr.  Kal.  Mai.
BruHdiaiL—Hoe  ex  Nicia,  etc.

The  epistle  plays  an  important  part  in  ancient
as  in  modem  literature,  though  in  classical  Greek
literature  the  numbev  of  genuine  letters  is  small.
The  collection  attributed  to  Plato,  tbongh  highly
interesting  and  regarded  by  Orote  as  authentic,  is
rejected  by  recent  scholarcdiip ;  and  so  the  lettei's
ascribed  to  Demosthenes,  to  Aeschines,  aud  to  Xeu-
ophon.  Tbe  nine  that  bear  the  name  of  Isocrates
are  nuiversally  accepted  as  his.  (See  Isockai'es.)
Three  letters  of  Epicurus  are  preserved  by  Diog-
enes Laertius.  Specimens  of  the  official  epistle
are  to  be  seen  in  the  oration  of  Demosthenes  on
the  crown.  Much  valuable  information  on  the
history  of  tbe  times  is  gathered  from  the  later
Greek  letters  of  Gregory  Nanzianzenns,  Basil,
Chrysostom,  and  other  ecclesiastical  writers.

Letter  writing  was  from  an  early  period  cultl-


vateA  among  ttiit  Rnniniib,  niiil  liolli  official  ami
perttonat  letters  of  eminent  men  »outi  bv^au  to  l»e
pollucttNl,  Hucb  as  the  letters  of  the  elder  Cato  to
lits  fioii,aii(l  orO)ni«li&  toCGrnccIiitM.  At  n  Inter
[XTioil,  tlii»«*  iif  CtU!9ar,  BrritiiN,  niiil  rH|>i.Tially  f>(
Ciofro,  wei^n  |>re*ervcil-  M<)«t  of  the  Koiniiii  let-
i^rn  reinniMitig  to  iih  are  not  ttie  genuiii«  private
corre9|M>ii<leno(!  of  tlieir  ntitliors,  brit  wore  from  the
fti'Nt  written  nilti  nu  eye  to  piiblicntioti,  like  the
|>rii;K>!*^  '■'■■'I  Holf-coii.fciotiN  e^iistles  of  the  younger
I'lliiy.  Tlie  most  valnnble  c«ri-e»pouilci)cc  ever
Iire»er%c*l  is  tbnt  of  Cicero,  wbonc  Itttem  to  the
nunitH^r  nf  utfiirly  one  tlionsand  were  pnlilistieil  Ity
liift  umatiiiuiiKiK.Tiro  (q.v.).  The^purc  the  familiar
elTtiKi.ms  of  the  onitor.  written  wttti  tio  view  to
pitbliriitiiiii,  aiwl  iire  invahiahle  for  tbA  light  they
tlirow  upon  th<^  personality  of  the  writer  and  the
hisltiry  ofltiH  tiiiif*. St'e  Cli'KKii.

Kxani|>lvs  of  letters  in  liiTtluriutl  works  are  ttiOHC
in  Antipater,  Quadrigiirintt.  und  especially  in  Sal-
Inst.  The  epistolary'  form  was  also  uiwd  hy  tbo
Jurists  for  ttieir  irtponta  oti  questJous  of  law;  by
a<.'lii>lars  for  their  learned  di^cnssious  (e.  g.  Vcnin«
Fliicnit),  LnctAntmn,  etc.);  by  pbysicinn»  for  iiied-
icnl  expoffitiimA  <e.  g.  MnreelluB  EiupiricnA  noil
OrilMiHJiia);  and  by  (he  rhetoricians  of  the  impe-
rial age  as  a  fi)rni  of  ntyliatic  excrciiw.  (See  Teuf-
fel,  tiitl.  0/  Itoai.  IM.,  Eng.  trantt.,  i.  pp.  73-7(1).
Next  to  the  lettem  of  Circm,  tbtwe  of  Fliiiy  the
Voniiger  are  must  read.  Other  important  letter-
writerij  are  SvDCca.  Froulo,  8yinmachus,  Sidouin^,
and  «till  later  Salvianna,  tinriciiis.  Knuodint,  Lac-
tantiiis.  Ambrose,  Jerome,  Aiignstine.  and  Cassio-
(loriu.  S|>ecimens  of  Vergil's  corres|>ondeuco  are
l^ven  by  Macrobiub  (i.  'iA,  11).

The  poetical  epistle  was  cultivated  as  early  aa
H.C.  146  by  Sp.  Muiumins,  who.  when  in  camp  be-
fore Corinth, addressed  satirical  letten  in  verse  to
fri«n(U  at  Rome  (<.'ic.  Ad  Atl.  xiit.  d,  4).  Several  of
the  aatlreA  of  Lneitins  were  coniptMcd  in  the  form
«f  lettern,  and  the  jKiera  of  Cattillitit  to  MiinliiiH
{6ti  A)  ia  iu  the  epiMtolary  fonii.  The  iiumI  nttc-
cessfiil  ill  thi«  deportment  of  literature  were  Hor-
ace in  bi»  two  Itooks  of  Epialolae  and  Ovid  in  the
ima^inaiy  lo  ve-let ten (i/rrmdr«)  and  iu  bisowngcu-
niue  lamentations  from  exile(7'n.(tiii  and  the  Kpitto-
lar  ej  I'onto).  Statins,  Auaonius,  and  Claudiannv
are  later  exaniplen  of  the  [Mtetieal  epiHiolognipher.

Korged  lellem  are  fn^i|tienth'  found  in  (.alio
literutun*.  Innlitnees  are  the  J^ptKlMlaf  itf<liviHalrw
profittwedly  from  Hip|MKrrNteM  to  Maeeeua8,and  the
celebrat<-d  fourteen  lettent  which  fonn  the  alleged
conTMpuudrncc  between  Seneca  and  St.  Paul,  which
were,  |iowi<v<;r,  accepted  oa  genuine  by  St.  Jerome
{De  rir.  Iltuat.  U).  and  by  St.  Augnntine  i  Epitt.  IW).
Ou  tliese  aee  Klenrj-.  St.  Va*\et  .St^n^ur  (Paris.  IH531;
X.igbtfiiot,  St.  I'akt'K  KjiiMt,  to-*lie  fkilippiant,  ]i.  SCO
4L<iiidon,  lHfw4>;  and  Anl>ertin,  St'nrqMr  rl  St.  /'nu/
<Pari!S  1H«9).

BlBUOORAPiiT.  —  See  Koberia.  Hiit.  of  LtlUr
Writing  (1843):  Grotc,  PUto  and  ikr  ether  C<m-
patiioHf  0/  Socratn,  ii.  pp.  tiO  ftdl. :  Czwalina.  fV
EptMtHlarHm  Actt^rumqtK;  tte.  Fidf  ct  Jwloritalv
(Honu,  ltfil\;  Nisiird.  Sotr*  *«r  /«  Lrttm  th  Citron
(Pjtrifi,  lf*i»;  and  Tyrreir«  ititnHlncliini  to  bis
«ditioD  of  the  Correditondt'nre  of  Cicvru  ( 1493).  The
(Ireek  epiatotographeninre  ndliTtiMl  by  Hercher  in
bis  Epiatulo^rapki  Orae<i  (Paris.  \^:i);  and  on  the
Latin  rhetorical  letter  writeia  nee  Halni'#  Jlk€iore$
lalini,  pp.  447  foil,  and  ^•^.  On  the  epistle  in  Go-
tiOUtaCO  >'OVKt^  AXI»  RoMAXTES.


EpiatOla. See  CoxsTmrnoifKS.
EpiatSlena  (/rritrroXri'f). The  vloe-aduinl  cf
(he  Spnrtaii  llfct  who  t(M)k  command  la  eiKtf
the  di:«iibtlity  of  the  admiral  ipavapxat). SwXn.
HelUm  1.1,23;  PoUilx.  J.  9G.

Eplstomlum  ((Vxmi^un').  The  oock  of  a  wMer-
pi|)c,  or  of  any  veMel  containing  liquids  t<i  b*
drawn  olf  in  tninll  j— .

I  qitantities wlieu  ,  iTlL

I  n'<piired (Vitniv.

I  is.  H.  11). Tlieil-

i  hKstration repre-

j  fcntN  au original

'  bronze  water-cock

1  found  ftt Pom- Ep«^„„  ,r  Br«.». ,P««i«i.

]>CI1.

EplBtyUtim  (VirunxXiorl.  The  orcbitraw,  nt
I  lower  memlx>r  of  nn  entablaloro.oonsiatiDg  alone
I  or  several  beams  (in  tlie  Parthenon,  three),  rwtiiig
'  upon  the  capitala. Its  fmirlioo  ia  t»  bind  Ibeo^-


EptKjrtrniD. {Thnc  HnrUca  tt  pomr»H>

umns  of  tbe  pcripteroi  Into  a  whole,  and  to  i^
tribute  the  weight  of  the  anperstmcture  (II"*-
Prrift.  13).  The  iiame  ia  sotuetimes  giveii  to  il»
M  liolc  entablature.

Epitaphium  U'lrn-o^^or)  or  Xlpitaplutu  {iv^
<fuos  Xi'iyof). A  funeral  oration. See  Ffitn-

Epitaplu. See  Titvlls.

Eptthalaminm  (tA  tm&akapun-  fuXot).  A  tuto-
rial Aong.  (Sec  M.4TRINOMVM.)  In  Greek,SapFliA
AniirriHMi,  Stoaicbonis,  and  Pindar  compoeiJ  pw"*
of  tbi»  kind,  of  which,  however,  only  fiagitr"'*
Kmain.  We  have  thrve  epUbalaniia  of  Citall"*'
of  which  that  on  tbe  marriage  of  Peleusand  W'*
is  one  of  the  meet  splendid  in  all  litcraiore.  "
the  imperial  age,  fitalina,  Ansoiiinn,  riaii4i*i>"^
Pauliuus  of  Nid;i,  Siilnnius  ApolUuariiii,  DnKdnti'*
EunnliuH,  Luxorius.  VenaiiliuM  Foritiuara*  w'**'
[KwiiiKof  ilioBamo  class  ihac  haveanrriTCtl.  Tl>^
of  AusoniuK  and  Lnxoriua  ore  Vergiliaa  rrtii*
(See  Cexto.)  a  collection  of  Latin  cpithil»»^
may  be  found  in  WerosdorTs  i'oriae  l^tiut  ^'tfr*-
ir.  pt.ii.  46S.

Bpitiinim  {Jwirtftia).  Tbe  full  poaaeadnavft*^
priviU'^(■4,  tlie  opposite  of  aftmia  {().  v.)

Bpttdm^.  The  name  given  to  eeii-ral  *>**°*"
raents  by  variouft  Romnn  antlion*  Tbe  iu***  ""'
portaut  are  il)  Au  abridgment  of  LiTy**  h'*"^
C4unm«nly  called  Frmtrkar  iT.  Liri  P0ri$At  ^
MiMM  Lihrorumy (See  Unrs.) (3)  A  abort  bilt^


EPITRIERABCHEMAT03 DIK^


613


EPOS


of  the  Romnn  emperors  down  to  Tbeodoains  I.  and
ascribed  to  Anreliiis  Victor  (q.  v.).  (3)  The  Epi-
tome IliadU,  a  Bchool-hook  of  1070  hexnraetera,
n-hich  contains  a  snmniary  of  the  story  of  the
Itiad.  This  work,  whose  aatbor  was  naknown,
was  mnch  read  during  the  Middle  Ages,  being
sometimes  styled  Homenis  and  sometimes  (by  a
cnrioiiB  error)  Pindams  Thebsnns.  Bergk  (PkiJo-
logu9,  xiv.  p.  184)  conjectnres  that  the  writer  was
the  Atticns  mentioned  by  PerBins  (i .  SO).  The  text
will  be  found  in  Wemsdorf  b  Poetae  tat.  Minorca,
iv.  pp.  617-752 ;  and  has  been  edited  by  Weytingh
(Leyden  and  Amsterdam,  1809)  and  Plessis  (Paris,
1885).  The  poem  is  now  ascribed  to  Silins  Italiciis
(q.  V.)-  See  Verrea,  De  Stlii  Pnnioorum  et  Italid
IliadU  Lat.  Quaationes  Grammatioae  et  Metricae
(MUnster,  1888).  (4)  Tlie  EpitofM  luliani,  a  collec-
tion of  imperial  oonatitutionea,  made  between  a.d.
535  and  555.

Bpitrierarotaemiltoa Dlk6  (iiriTpt^papxVH'OTat

bUri), See  TKIERABCinA.

BpitrSpea  Oraphtf  (imrpoinit  ypa<pr}).  A  salt
bronght  against  a  gnardian  for  neglect  or  abnse
of  his  ward. See  Epitropus;  Kakosros  Dik£.

BpitrApos  (imrpowot).  Literally,  a  person  to
whose  charge  anything  is  iutriiatecl  (Herod,  iii.
63) ;  bnt  more  Bpeeifically  a  term  of  Attic  law  de-
noting tbe  gnardian  of  orphan  children.  There
were  two  kinds  of  ririrptnrM:  (1)  those  appointed
by  the  will  of  the  deceased  father,  vsoally  relatives
of  tbe  ofaildien;  and  (S)  in  tbe  absence  of  a  will
the  next  of  kin,  corresponding  to  the  Boman  tu-
tore*  legitifni,  the  arehon  deciding  who  were  best
entitled  to  the  charge,  and  giving  them  tbe  au-
thority to  act  as  guardians  (Poll.  viii.  89;  Lys.
De  Ariatoph.  Bon.  (  9).  If  there  were  no  relatives
to  undertake  the  office,  the  arehon  selected  gnard-
iaue  from  the  whole  body  of  tbe  citizens.  The
legal  number  of  guardians  is  not  known.  The
duties  of  an  iirirpoirot  included  the  maintenance
{rpo^il),  edocation  {irtuliw),  and  protection  of  the
ward,  the  assertion  of  his  rights,  the  management
of  bis  property,  and  provision  for  tbe  widow  of  the
deceased  if  she  remained  in  the  house  of  her  late
buabaiid.  Tbe  gnardiauship  expired  when  the
ward  reached  his  eighteenth  year.

Bpodon  («ir^i>)  or  Bp5doa  {itr^hot).  A  name
applied  by  grammarians  to  any  poem  in  which  a
long  and  a  short  line  are  combined,  especially  an
iambic  trimeter  and  dimeter.  The  so-called  Epodes
of  Horace  were  by  him  styled  simply  Iambi  {Epod,
xiv.  7).  See  Beck,  De  Vera  Epodon  Horat.  Indole
(Troppan,  1873) ;  and  the  article  Uoratids.

Bpomla  (cVwp'r). See  Tunica.

SpAna.  From  «pii<  =  fCK9  or  equua.  A  Roman
goddess  presiding  over  horses.  Paintings  and  stat-
ues of  her  were  frequently  placed  in  stables.

Sponia  (c'lrwita). See  TsLOS.

Bponjhuiu  {iwvvvfiot).  Properly  the  person
after  whom  anything  is  named.  This  was  in  vo-
rions  Oreek  States  the  nnoflScial  title  of  the  mag-
latrates  after  whom  (in  default  of  a  generally  re-
ceived standard  of  chronology)  the  year  was  desig-
nated. In  Atbeni  this  would  be  the  first  arehon,
in  Sparta  tbe  first  ephor,  in  Argos  the  priestess  of
Her4.  When  the  ephebi,  at  Athens,  were  enrolled
in  the  list  of  tbe  citizens  who  cunld  be  called  ont
f(»r  military  service,  the  name  of  the  first  arehon
of  tbe  year  was  attached. And  wheu  the  citizens


of  various  ages  were  aammoned  to  military  aer-
vice,areference  was  made  to  the  Arehon  Eponyninsr
nnder  whom  they  had  been  originally  enrolled.
The  ancient  heroes,  who  gave  their  name  to  the
ten  tribes  of  Clistbeneii,  and  the  heroes  worshipped
by  tbe  demes,  were  also  called  eponymi.  The
statues  of  the  former  were  in  the  market-place,
and  it  was  near  them  tbat  official  notices  were
pnt  np. See  Calendariuu.

Bpopens  (^^wwirtCs).  Son  of  Poseidon  and  C»-
nac^,  tbe  daughter  of  Aeolus,  brother  of  Aloens.
He  mig^ted  from  Tbessaly  to  Sicyon,  where  he
became  king.  He  was  killed  by  Lycns  for  the
sake  of  Antiop^,  who,  it  was  alle^d,  was  by  him
mother  of  Zetbus.

Bpoptae  (c'lronrai). See  Elkusinia.

Bporedia.  Tbe  modem  Ivrea,  a  town  in  Gallia
Cisalpina,  on  tbe  Duria,  in  the  territory  of  the  Sa-
lassi,  colonized  by  the  Romans,  b.c.  100,  to  serve  as
a  bulwark  against  the  neighbouring  Alpine  tribes.

ZIpoa  iSiros).  (1)  Grsex. — Many  indications
point  to  the  fact  that  the  oldest  poetry  of  the
Greeks  was  connected  with  the  worship  of  the
goda,  and  that  religious  poetry  of  a  mystical
kind  was  composed  by  the  priests  of  the  Thra-
ciane,  a  mnsical  and  poetical  people,  and  dif-
fused in  old  times  throngh  Northern  Greece.  Tbe
worship  of  the  Muses  was  thus  derived  ftom  the
Tfaracians,  who  in  later  times  had  disappeared
iVom  Greece  Proper;  and  accordingly  the  oldest
bards  whose  names  are  known  to  the  Greeks —
OrpheuB,  Mnsaens,  Enmolpus,  Tliamyris — are  sitp-
poeed  to  hare  been  Thracians  also.  The  current
ideas  of  the  nature  and  action  of  the  gods  tendc»d
more  and  more  to  take  the  form  of  poetical  myths
respecting  their  birtb,  actions,  and  sufferings.
Hence,  these  compositions,  of  which  an  idea  may
l>e  derived  from  some  of  the  so-called  Homeric
Hymns,  gradually  assumed  an  epic  character.  In
course  of  time  the  epic  writers  threw  off  their
connection  with  religion,  and  struck  out  on  inde-
pendent lines.  Confining  themselves  no  longer
to  the  myths  about  the  goda,  they  celebrate<l
the  heroic  deeds  both  of  mythical  antiquity  and
of  the  immediate  past.  Thus,  in  the  Homeric  de-
scriptions of  the  epic  age,  while  the  bards  Pheniins
and  Demodocns  appear  as  favourites  of  the  godH,
to  whom  they  are  indebte^l  for  the  gift  of  song,
they  are  not  attached  to  any  particular  worship.
The  subjects  of  their  song  are  not  only  stories
about  the  gods,  such  as  the  loves  of  Ares  and  Aph-
rodite, bnt  the  events  of  recent  times,  the  conquest
of  Troy  by  means  of  the  wooden  horse,  and  the
tragic  return  of  the  Achoeaus  from  Troy.  Sing-
ers like  these,  appearing  at  public  festivals,  and  at
the  tables  of  princetr,  to  entertain  the  guests  ^riih
their  lays,  must  have  existed  early  in  Greece
Proper.  It  was,  however,  the  Ionian  Greeks  of  Asia
Minor  who  first  fully  developed  tbe  capacities  of
epic  poetry.  By  long  practice,  extending  probably
throngh  centuries,  a  gradual  progress  was  proba-
bly effected  from  abort  lays  to  long  epic  narratives ;
and  at  the  same  time  a  tradition  delivered  from
master  to  scholar  handed  on  and  perfected  the
outer  form  of  style  and  metre.  Thus,  about  B.C.
900,  epio  poetry  was  bronght  to  Its  highest  perfec-
tion by  the  genius  of  Homer,  the  reputed  author
of  the  Iliad  and  Odya$ejf.  After  Homer  it  sank,
never  to  rise  again,  from  tbe  height  to  which  he
had  raised  it. See  Homerus.


It  i^  true  Hint  iu  tbc  following  c^ntiirieit  a  eeritm
of  epics,  more  dr  less  coniprDlipii-jivt*.  wcw  com-
{wned  1)y  )H>«t(t  of  tlic  Ionic  itchool  in  cIom  itiiita-
tion  of  the  8t,vle  iitul  uic<tr«>  of  Ilntnor.  Ilut  not
utiH  of  ilifin  Hiicvtittdcol  ill  cumiiit;  eveu  witlitii
aiuoHiirablu  ilistiiuce  uf  tbetr  grt.ukt  luatiter.  Tliu
ravniirito  topirs  of  these  writers  vrert^  8ucli  faUlcM
as  u'l-ved  either  to  iiitriMluce,  or  to  extiMid  and  coti-
liuiie.  tbc  Kiitd  and  Odi/$K!if.  Tbey  were  cnlled
Cyclic  Poets  perbape  becausu  tbo  luost  ini]iortJiut  of
tboir  workfi  were  nftcrirnrdB  put  togutber  witli  Ibo
Ifiint  and  OHt^nnvij  ii]  an  epic  cyclic,  or  circle  of  ]ny».
Tbu  Cyprian  poiMns  (ra  Kl'itfxm),  of  StnHiiius  of  8a-
laniiti  iu  Cypriia  (B.C.  77<i),  furauil  tUt-'  iiitnKluclion
to  tlu-  IVuut.  TbasM  t'nibrai.'«d  tbi*  Iiisloiy  i>f  tlm
pt>riiHl  bcrwi'L'ii  ibn  iiiarriagt*  uf  Peknu  ajid  ibu
4>pt^lling  of  tbt!  Iliad.  At  ubout  tbu  Mmc  tiiuLt
Arctimis  of  Mtlt-'tiiH  coniiKisfd  bi»  .-l(//iio;>ii(  in  live
bookw.  TbiH  piK'tii  Kturtcd  ln>iu  the  i-ouulusioii  of
l.lir  Uiinl,  iiitil  di-iici-ibeil  Ibv  dt-ntb  of  Acbillcs,  and
of  till.'  Ktbiupiiiii  piiiR'ci  Meiuiioii,  ibtf  contest  for
tlie  ariits  of  Aobilkv^.  and  tUu  suicide  of  Ains.  The
J/rntrHclioH  uf  ttinm,  by  tlie  S4iiue  uiilUur.  was  id
two  books.  Hr  wny  of  Niipplenifot  to  llu'  llonierit;
Iliad,  Lewlii's  nf  Mityleu^,  eitbfr  iilioiil  B  C  '(H  or
064,  wrottj  »  I.mlr  Iliad,  in  four  bookn.  Tbtn  oni-
bracinl  tbt<  t-orit(!t<t  for  tbu  urnix  of  Ac1itll»>i^  tbK
Apjtrarniiitc  of  Nro]itoltMniiif  und  I'bilocteUw,  and
ibv  rnptiini  of  Ibt.-  city.  Tbi;  tratiHilion  from  tbu
Hind  Cu  (be  (Mitniirii  wan,  f(trnii'il  by  tbr  tivn  biMrkn
of  NfitTTfii  i  Thr  Ilthirn  of  thr  Ilrnir/i),  wril.tf^u  by
AgiuA  of  Trocznn.  Thi^  y'rli^innia,  by  Kiignmmon
of  Cyreii*^  taboiit  57li|,  coiitiuued  tUo  f)dt/»»rff.  Tbia
was  in  two  books,  embracing  the  history  of  Odya-
Bi-ns  from  the  hiirial  of  tlio  snitora  until  bis  dcatb
at  tbu  bands  of  Iva  »nii  'IVdoi^onUB.  Tlicso  poems
and  tboAu  of  tbe  otber  cyelicB  were,  afte^r  Uoiuur,
ibf  tMMircea  from  wbicb  tbe  later  lyric  and  dra-
lualiL*  poi'tii  dit'w  most  of  ibetr  Jiifonuatiuii.  But
only fm>;nieiit« uf Ibem  roioaiii. Set)  Cvcuc

I'OKTS.

A  new  direct  inn  wnii  (;iven  to  epvo  poetry  in
Greece  Pr<KiM>r  by  tbe  didactir  »iid  ^'(!Uealogical
|KM)in.'«  of  Hi-ifiod  of  A^crn.  about  a  liuiulrL-d  yeunt
after  Homer.  Hettimt  wha  the  foitiidel'  ofa  scbiiol,
the  pnKluctiou»  of  ^^  liieli  were  oflvn  iitlriboleil  to
liiiii  aji  tbojte  of  the  lunic  lH^bool  were  to  Hoiner.
One  of  tbMu^  disciples  of  Hesiod  was  KnmeluN  of
Corinth  (about  it.c.  750),  of  thi<  uublo  family  of  the
Bacc'biadae.  Unt  liis  pi>en)K,  Hke  those  of  tbo  rest,
ore  loiit. 8tM  HidUulil's.

Tbe  most  notable  reprfM'ntiitives  of  mytbicnl
epic  poetry  in  tbe  fidlowinji  ceninrieh  are  I'isjiiider
of  CandniM  (abmit  B.i:',  tMO),  nn<l  rnnyaiiin  of  Hiili-
rariiiiMiiiHtduriit^  tbe  llntt  half  of  the  fifth  t-entury).
In  tlio  Ruuniid  half  <if  the  fiflli  eenttiiy  CiioeriluK  of
8umoH  wrote  a  I'trgtia  on  tbe  Pei'»ian  Wan,  tbe
tirftt  attempt  in  Creece  at  an  biatoiJeal  epic.  Hiii
younger  conteuiiM^rury,  Autitnacbim  of  <.'M|n]dioii,
uJMt  intnick  out  n  new  line  iu  lits  leai-neil  ThrhaU,
the  pn'i'urK'ir  «iid  mitdol  of  tbe  later  epic  of  Alex-
nndrin.  The  Alcxaiidrinns  laid  jirreat  (itreett  on
learning  and  artistic  execntion  in  detail,  but  nem-
ally  roitfined  themwlves  to  ]M>etn9  of  Jew  niagnt-
luilu.  Tbe  rhief  la'prunenlaliveh  of  fbe  Alexiiii-
driun  Bcbout  are  Callimai-hnH  (about  n  r.  2r«lh.
RbianiiM,  Eopborion,  and  Apolloniiis  uf  Rliwlux.
Tbe  liiMt  inade  u  futile  attempt  to  rettini  to  the
simplicity  of  Homer.  Hi»  Argnnatitica  w,  wilb
the  exception  id'  tlie  Hnnierie  poeniM,  llie  only
Greek  epii:  which  bos  aurvived  fi-oui tbe  aute-


Cbrifltian  era.  Iu  tbt*  200  years  Iwlwtwu  1W
fouitti  and  ttixtb  ct^ntnries  a.I>.,  ibe  invtiiical  vpto
is  repn>afnted  by  (^itiutns  8n)yrnaet1i^NonllIl^Cal•
lu(hn»,TryphuMlornK  MusotMiD,  and  the  a[H.K-Ty|ilu]
Orpbeiia.  Nonnns,  Collutbiiii,  and  TryphioJoinii
yivXM  Kgyptiuna.  Nuunni^  and  Mosiu-ub,  aluM
among  tbeae  writers,  bare  any  claim  tii  dittLac*
tioii.  1'be  lal(^ut  of  Nonnns  i«  genuine,  but  arnUt*
vipllned;  Mnsacns  knows  how  to  tb row  a  elm
into  bis  treatment  of  a  narrow  subject.  Tbenlnb
Aeries  i«  closed  by  tbe  lUaca  of  Josnnca  Tz«tic«)«
learned  but  tjutteletfa  ecboUr  of  tbe  twelfth  tm-
tnry  a.i>. See  TzrrXKS.

Aa  Humor  »»»  tbo  tuaitter  of  tbe  iD;tbical,ta
He«iud  was  tbe  uianteruf  the  didaelic  epir.  Afin
binii  lliiH  dnpurtnient  of  [itietry  vcau  best  r«pr«MDl-
ed  by  XonophaiieK  of  Colopb<in.  Pamieuidi*  rf
Elea,  and  Kuipi>d<Kdeii  of  A^'rijjentium,  in  tbetutti
aud  Jifibcentnrtenn.i?.  Iu  the  Aiexaudrina  peni)4,
didactic  iM>etry  wax  much  taken  up,  and  uaiiilof*^
upon  the  KU.*atest  pusnible  Variety  of  ailliJFCta.
But  none  of  its  n'pti'«eulati%'c«  succeeded  in  wril-
iii}r  more  tbau  poetic  prose,  or  in  bandtlnt:  tbrir
infmetflble  material  with  the  niiuit«ry  wbicli  Vit-
^11  allows  in  bis  Georges.  Tbe  periiMi  pttNlam)
lbi>  UHtruuoniieal  epic  of  Aratun  of  l^iryiiik  inlnnt
i^.c.  tf7.'>).  and  two  medical  pueniA  by  NicntitW 'if
I  ('ob)pbou  (almut  ICiO).  L'nder  tbe  Kouuin  Kiu|>irv
I  moif  dutnclio  poetry  waa  produced  by  tire  Uiwk
'  writeni.  Mnximiin  and  tbu  Mt-cMlled  Jjaudk*
M'lXJte  on  astrology.  DiunyiiiiiH  Perieget«  un  tvf-
'  rapby,  Oppian  on  auKbng.  and  uu  tniltator  xftV
piun  on  bunting.  Tlie  Alexandrian  |>i'rioi1  ilio
proilnred  didactic  ]>ornt8  in  iambic  8eiisrii,Bft.r.ff..
several  on  g(H)grapby  Iwartng  Ibe  naumof  Okw-
archns  and  ScyninuH.  which  Ktill  survire.

(2)  fioMAN.  —  Tbo  Komnne  iHNWtibly  had  Mns*
of  an  epic  cbamcltir  from  tbe  earliest  tiwMl  ^
them  were  ma>\\  forgotten. They  bail,  lKnn>»«f.i
cerlniii  iiitinence  on  tbc  later  and  cotnpBTltiTily
artilifial  literature,  for  bulb  Livins  AmlroBicDlis
IiIh  IrHUMlAtiou  of  tbe  fAfyivry,  iiinl  Nuevloc  in  lll>
I'Huir  M'af,  wn>te  in  tlu*  Iratlitiuiia)  Italian  B)iM
tbc  rtriiiii  Haturniiiiii. Nflevius was,  it  l«  Itufc '
naliiMial  i>oet,  and  m>  was  Iiih  i^nereMior  HiiuiunI'i'I
tbe  latter  employed  the  lirr«k  bejutuii-ter  nieti*-
iiiBlead  of  Ibe  nidr  Hatiirnian. To  follow  Ihrc*'
ample  of  Enniiu,  mid  celebrate  tbe  acbievwiici»t*
of  their  connirjmeu  in  tlw  form  of  the  (»rwk  epi""'
WPS  Ibe  ambition  of  several  put-l*  before  ill' f***
of  the  Kepnblic. A  sucpdwiou  of  poetA,  a»  HuMi*'*'  i
tbe tru^'l■lliau Attiiin,  and Kurtua  werv tbo  a>*'
thor»  of  poetical  annals. Here  it  i«  proi«r  al*^
to  mention  Cicero'a  cpioa  on  Mann*  and  on  '**'^
<t\vn  cuu'^nUbip,  bt^aidea tbe ]hm*ui of  Terenti**^
Vuriu  of  A  tax  (Ati«?innsi  on  Cnc«mr's  war  withi**
StH]nHni {  ltd  I  urn St^Hattimm ). Latin epio  *^
Greek  inytbirul  siibjinrtM  He«ui  t<t  bave  liefH  rare *■
tbe  rcpuldicaii  age. At  teusl  we  know  of  itiily
few  t  run  slat  ions,  ott  that  uf  tbe  IHad  by  Malta*''
and  Kinnine  Craaona,  and  of  tbe  Cy/n-ta  t>y  Lae'^''
nns. Toward  tbo  end  of  tbe  repiildican  »f^  ^
waa  a  favonrite  form  of  literary  activity  n>  *r* ,
in free imitation of tbe learned Alexaiidria»»2
Vami  of  Alax.  fur  example,  followed  Ap"' '■'■'"• *  ^
HbtMleH  in  IiIh  JrfjoHuulira  :  utbuns  lik*'  .

Ciniiu  aud  tbe  omtur  Licininn  C'alvnR,  i-^-
tbf Klmrter  epicw so nmcb in favour  with *
Alexandrians. Ouly  one  example iu  Ihu  ity
is completely preserved, the tjnasl epitb*l«"*'
um 0»iv.  ,1  of  Catulhifi. This ia  tb«  ool.f ^^


-  w

5


EPOS


616


EQUARIUS


ample  we  poueM  of  tbe  iiarrative  epic  of  the  Re-
public.

But  in  the  Augnstau  Age  both  kiods  of  epic,  the
injtbio  and  tbe  hisionoal,  are  represeuted  by  a
number  of  poets.  Variua  Bufus,  Rabirtiis,  Corue-
liu»  SeveniB,  aud  Fedo  AlbiuoTauiia  treated  cou-
tempoiarj'  history  in  the  epio  atyle ;  Doniittns
MarsuB  and  Maoer  turned  their  attention  to  tbe
jiiythology.  The  Aentid  of  Vergil,  the  iioblext
inonuuient  of  Soman  epic  poetry,  combines  both
characters.  Of  all  the  epic  productions  of  this
Age,  the  only  ones  which  are  preserved  intact  are
tlie  Aeneid,  a  panegyric  ou  Uessala,  which  found
ir»  way  into  the  poems  of  Tibullns,  and  perhaps
two  poems,  the  Culex  and  Ciri»,  both  often  attrib-
uted to  Vergil. See  Vergiuus.

In  the  first  century  a.i>.  we  have  several  exam-
ples of  tbe  historical  epic:  the  Pkanalia  of  Lu-
can,  the  Punica  of  Silius  Italicus,  a  BtliuM  Civile
iu  the  satirical  romance  of  Petronios,  and  an
anonymous  panegyric  on  Calparnlus  Piso,  who
was  executed  for  couspiracy  under  Nero,  a.i>.  65.
Tbe  heroic  style  is  repi-eseoted  by  the  Argonautica
4>f  Valerins  Flaccus,  and  tbe  Theba'it  and  Achillria
of  Statins,  to  which  we  may  add  the  metrical  epit-
ome of  the  Uiad  by  the  so-called  Pindarua  Theba-
niiB.  The  politico -historical  poems  of  tbe  suc-
ueeding  centnries,  by  Poblius  Porfiriiis  Optatianas
in  tbe  fourth  century,  Clandianns,  Merobaudes,  6i-
iloniuB  Apolliuaris  in  tbe  fifth,  Priscian,  Corippns,
aud  Venautius  Fortunatas  in  tbe  sixth,  are  en-
tirely panegyric  iu  character,  and  intended  to  do
hwmage  to  the  emperor  or  men  of  iuAuenoe.  Of
all  these  poets,  Clandianus  is  the  most  important.
He  aud  Dracontius  (towards  the  end  of  the  fifth
-century)  are  among  the  last  who  take  their  sub-
jects from  mythology.

Didactic  poetry,  which  suited  the  serious  charac-
ter of  the  RomauB,  was  early  represented  at  Rome.
In  this  the  Romans  were  in  many  waya  superior
to  tbe  Greeks.  Appias  Claudius  Caeous  and  the
elder  Cato  were  antbors  of  gnomic  poetry.  £u-
nioB,  tbe  tragedian  Attiua,  and  aeveral  of  his  con-
temporaries wrote  didactic  pieces ;  tbe  satires  of
Lncilins  and  Varro  were  also  iu  part  didactic.  It
was,  however,  not  till  the  end  of  the  republican
period  that  tbe  inflnence  of  Greek  literature  gave
predominance  to  the  Greek  epic  form.  It  was  then
adopted  by  Varro  of  Atax,  by  M.  Cicero,  and  above
all  by  Lncretins,  whose  philosophical  poem  De
Jtrrvm  Katura  is  the  only  didactic  poem  of  this
period  that  bas  been  preserved  intact,  as  it  is
■one  of  tbe  most  splendid  monuments  of  Roman
geuins.  In  the  Augnstan  Age  many  writers  were
active  in  this  field.  Valglns  Rnfiis  aud  Aemilins
Hacer  followed  closely  in  the  steps  of  the  Alexan-
drians. Orattiua  wrote  a  poem  on  hnuting,  a  part
of  which  still  survives ;  Manilins,  an  astronomical
poem  which  survives  entire.  Bat  the  Gtorgict  of
Vergil  throw  all  similar  work,  Greek  or  Latin,  into
the  shade.  Ovid  employs  the  epic  metre  in  his
MetamorpkoKt  and  Halieittica,  tbe  elegiac  iu  bis
Fatti.

In  tbe  first  century  a.d.  Germanicus  trauslatefl
Aratus.  Columella  wrote  a  poem  on  gardening  ;
an  unknown  author  (often  called  Lncilins),  the
Attntt.  The  third  century  produced  the  medical
jtoem  of  Sammonicns  Serenns,  and  that  of  Nemesi-
anns  on  bunting.  Iu  the  fourth  we  have  Ausoui-
ns,  much  of  whose  work  is  didactic ;  Palladins  ou
agrienltnre ;  an  adaptation  of  Aratna  and  of  Dio-


nyaius  Feriegetes  by  Avieuus,  with  a  description
of  tbe  aea-coasts  of  the  known  world  in  iambics ;
iu  the  fifth,  besides  some  of  Claudiauus's  pieces,  a
description  by  Rutilius  Namatianus  in  elegiacs  of
his  return  home.  Tlie  book  of  Dionyains  Feriege-
tes was  adapted  by  Priscian  iu  the  sixth  century.
A  collection  of  proverbs,  bearing  the  name  of  Cato,
belongs  to  tbe  fourth  century.  In  most  of  these
compositions  tbe  metrical  form  is  a  mere  set  ofif;
and  in  tbe  school  verses  of  tbe  grammarians,  as
iu  those  by  Terentianus  Maurus  on  metres,  and  iu
those  by  an  anonymous  author  uu  rhetorical  figures,
and  on  weights  and  measures,  there  ia  no  pretence
of  poetry  at  all.

See  Lang,  Homer  and  the  Epic  (London,  1893);
Haube,  De  (JarmimbuB  Epicia  SaeeuH  Augusti  (Bres-
lau,  1870);  id.  Die  Epea  dee  ailb.  Zeitaltert,  etc.
(Fraustadt,  16i^);  and  an  article  by  Wiuckelmann
in  Jabn's  Aivliiv,  11.  &5tj.  On  tbe  language  of  Ro-
man epio  poetry,  see  Kone,  Sprackgebrauch  d.  rSm.
Epiker  (MUuster,  1840).

Epolfinea  (Masters  of  the  Feast).  The  oflBce  of
rpufo  at  Rome  was  created  B.C.  196  to  relieve  the
Foutificea.  It  was,  from  tbe  first,  open  to  plebe-
ians, and  could  be  held  with  the  great  offices  of
State.  Tbe  first  duty  of  the  epulones  was  to  pro-
vide the  banquets  (epulum)  of  tbe  Capitoline  dei-
ties. (See  Lectisterniuh.)  In  later  times  they
bad  also  to  provide  for  and  superintend  the  public
entertainment  (epulae)  of  tbe  people,  when  tbe
Senate  dined  ou  the  Capitol. Such  eutertaiumeuts


Epulo  ua  RoniAii  Coin.

were  always  provided  at  tbe  games  given  by  private
individuals,  or  by  tbe  State,  ou  occasions  of  relig-
ions festivals,  dedications  of  temples,  nssamptiona
of  office,  triumphs,  funerals,  birthdays  in  tbe  im-
perial household,  aud  tbe  like.  The  Collegium
Epulonum  consisted  originally  of  three  members
(tret  riri  epulonee)  and  afterwards  of  seven  {geplem
tiri  epulonee),  a  name  which  it  retained  even  nft«r
Caesar  had  raised  tbe  number  to  ten.  Its  exiat-
enoe  can  be  traced  down  to  the  end  of  tbe  fourth
century.  In  tbe  illnstration  given  above  from  a
Roman  denarius,  an  epulo  is  shown  engaged  in
preparing  the  conch  for  the  epulum  Iovi$.

BptUmn. See  Epulones;  Lectisteknium.

Bpytitdea.  A  patronymic  given  to  Peripbas,
the  son  of  Epytns  and  the  companion  of  Asca-
nius  (Verg.  Aen,  v.  547).

Bquazina.  A
boise-doctor  (Val.
Max.  ix.  15,  2).
Tbe  illustrntiou
from  a  Roman
baa -relief  discov-
ered in  southern
France  shows  a
veteriuary  snr-
geon  bleeding  a  i
horse.  E<iuuius (Ricb.>


EQUEiJTKK


6ie


EQUITES


Squester  ("iTnrior).  A  title  given  to  uovcral
dritieii,  but  especially  to  Pirs<;idau  ntid  Neptune.
vtho  lin»t  created  the  hone,  and  iti  whose  honour,
thcrefuro,  bortw-racea  were  held  (I'ansnD.  v.  Ih,  4 ;
Livy.  i.  y).

Hqaestrian  Ring. See  Irft  Axuu  Almiei.

Bqulria  or  Equiiria.  A  fvstivnl  i>M|Hiili«Iied  at
Rouio  liy  Romnlos  in  houotu  uf  Man,  \vbi;ii  horso-
rac^s  and  jijauieN  wer«  exhibited  iu  the  Campus
Martitis.  It  took  place  ou  the  27th  of  Fchraar>'
(Yarr.  L.  Z.  v.  3;  Ovid,  Fast.  ii.  65^).

BqtiXteB  (horseoieu  or  kiilKhtff).  The  rquittn
were  iiriginiiUy  a  teal  division  of  (ho  Roman
nriny.  At  tlie  lipxiiming  iit'  the  kingly  period
they  wen*  callwl  CnlerpH,  and  tlit'ir  nninber  is  wvid
to  have  been  3'>0,  clionen  in  ei\\ml  part*  from  the
three  trilH>H  of  the  Ranuieti,  Tili(*ei,  and  Lncores,
(8ee  TlilBUs.)  A  hiuidri-d  formed  a  rcnturia,  each
cmturia  heiug  tianiud  after  the  Irihti  from  which
It  wait  taken.  Thirty  iiiado  a  turma,  ami  (en  wrrv
DDder  the  coumaud  of  a  ilrvHi-io  {ij.  v.),  while  the
whole  corps  was  coaiinaQded  by  the  trihuHua  ft^lr-
rwrn.  DnrioR  the  cniir»e  of  the  kiugly  perio«l  the
body  of  equites  was  increased  to  gixiecn  cenln-
rUte,  and  tht*  constitution  of  .Serviua  TnUins  Hnat-
ly  rai8e<l  it  t«  eishteen,  When  the  twelve  new
c«utnriea  were  furumd,  consisting  of  the  richest
persons  in  the  8latf,  whoiw  income  exceedefl  that
of  Iho  fintt  cluNH  in  the  cnnsnn,  the  corx*}*  of  «_>i|ititeB
lo«t  the  exrhiaively  putrieian  rhnrai^ti^r  n]iii:h  liml
hitherto  difltiiiguifihL-d  it.  At  Ihn  Ranie  linu^  ila
military  importance  was  dhniuiahcd^aa  it  no  long-
er formed  the  tirst  rank,  hnt  took  np  a  position  on
Che  wings  of  the  phnlans.  (Sec  Exekcitls.)  The
eqnites,  however,  rt'lained  both  iu  the  State  and
in  the  artuy  their  pernonal  prestige.  In  the  Cumi-
tia  ihey  voted  tlrst,  and  in  tt^Hturitie  of  their  own.
They  were  the  most  di^ttiuguished  troops  in  the
aniiy.  No  other  soUlieii*  were  in  a  position  (o
keep  two  IiorMjs  ami  a  ({room  apie^^e,  a  coHtly  In^c-
ury,  ulthonyli  they  recfivod  an  allnwance  for  the
purchafie  and  keep  of  their  borwe.  After  the  iii-
trotluction  of  the  pay  system  they  reecived  three
timet  as  nmrh  us  the  ordinary  troopH;  on  oeca-
aioti  of  a  triumph  thix>e  times  iho  ordinary  Hhare
of  buoiy ;  and  at  tUe  fuundatlnu  of  a  colony  a
much  larger  allotmeut  than  the  ordinary  colo-
uUt.  The  l-tMiO  f^iiiU-t  tquo  publico,  or  eiiiiileH
whose  lioi-ses  were  pnrcbased  and  kepfc  by  the
State,  were  chosen  every  five  yeani,  at  the  ceustiH.
The  election  watt  carried  out  in  the  ivpublican
period  ori);iually  hy  lh«  couitnls,  but  in  later
tiaies  by  the  i^euMonj.  After  the  ^n«rnil  ceiions
was  completcil,  lUe  ceiisura  proceeded  to  review
the  equiteti  [rrconHitio).  They  were  arraiigeil  ac-
cording tu  their  tribes,  and  each  of  them,  leading
his  horse  by  thu  hand,  paittied  before  the  trilnnml
of  the  censors  in  the  Forum.  All  who  hail  sen'ed
their  lime,  and  who  wt?re  physically  incnpacitat-
e<l,  received  their  ilixchargt*.  If  an  er)nes  were
Jndged  unworthy  of  his  jMibition,  he  was  dismissed
ivith  the  words,  "Sell  ,vtmr  Imrte''  {  f'rmie:  rtfHHm).
If  there  were  nothing  agaiimt  liim,  he  was  passed
uU  with  the  wiinls  Tniiiav  r*iMHm  ("  l^ad  your  horse
past").  The  vacaacie.'i  were  then  tilled  np  with
suitable  camlidales,  and  the  nvw  list  (nUrnm  rt/ui-
tHm)  read  aloud.  In  later  tiim-s  the  c<iHcs  whose
uauie  was  tirst  read  out  was  called  jthncrps  iurti'
tmtit. 8ee  Pkinckpe^

Daring  tbeir  time  of  aervice  (between  the  ages


of  17  and  4G)  the  eqniles  were  bound  t«  serve  ia  a
iinmber  of  campai;iiii«  not  eseeciling  ten.  Wlim
their  service  expired,  they  pa^seil  nilo  the  tirvltra-
Aorinl  class.  The  Henai-ora  alone  aiuouK  the  ei)ailm
Were,  in  earht^r  times,  allowed  to  keep  their  rfwi
pnhliniJi,  tlii'ir  itatiip  on  the  roll,  and  their  nglituM
equitea  unimpaired.  Knt  of  Ihin  privilej^e  tbem-
atont  weredeprivnl  in  the  time  of  I  he  Gracchi.  Tli»


C«'


R«(i«*M«lat)oil  of  iho  C^remoof  nf  Tra&mrvetio  aa  BnuM
ODMrul  Colaa <}i|MKh«iin  f

uuinher  of  the  rtjuiU'n  ettuu  puhtieti  remained  lb*
same,  aauoaddiliun  was  made  lotheHiimcx|M.ii<]«4
hy  the  State  on  the  hontes.  Young  men  of  property
sometimes  served  on  their  own  borwfl  (f^uo  frtra-
tit)  without  any  fhare  in  the  political  privil*^
of  the  e(|nitea.  AfU-r  the  Second  Punic  Ww  ibe
body  of  equilea  gradually  hwt  it«  miliiarv  p"rt-
tion,  and  linully  ccaacd  to  I'xlst  a«  a  special  trvNip.
In  tlie  tir»t  century  U.C.  the  meaibcrs  of  tfao  iviRr*-
triaii  veHlfiriap  only  scrvwl  iu  the  roAor*  prarlvri*
of  the  geueml,  or  in  the  capacity  of  iniliiao' trf-
buuM  and  ^raefrcti  of  cohorta.

The  wealthy  elaaa,  who  wore  in  pOMewimi  of
the  largo  capital  which  enabled  them  to  lmlI«^
take  the  farming  of  the  public  revenues,  aiul  alW'
couseiiucutly  had  the  opportunity  of  fnrKlunf
themselves  still  further,  had  long  cnjoy*.d  a  rerr
intlueutial  position.  In  ilc.  123  the  Uj^  indicuti*
of  GaiusGracchna  transferred  to  the  po«(stwnDr«4
the  equestrian  census  (400,000  seBtertii.  or  about
$17,<KK>j  the  right  to  nit  on  Jnriea,  which  luul  pre-
viously bfloiii^ed  excliinively  to  memltern  of  Ibe
Senate.  Thua  an  t>rtl<i  fqueitry.  or  lhir<l  nnW,
standing  between  the  Senate  and  the  ponplr.  wa*
loruicd,  which  began  to  play  an  important  pdil
in  puliticb.  Im  raenihers  were  called  e«iuile»«'»««
if  they  were  not  enrolled  in  the  vcutMriat  w/til*".
The  contests  between  the  Senate  and  the  dinitM
for  the  exolnsive  right  to  sit  on  the  jiirirs  c*«-
tinned  with  varying  fortunes  until  the  end  of  ib*
Repillilio,  Augustus  allnweil  the  otAo  r^itt»lfr  t»
continue  iu  exJHtenco  aa  a  ehiSiK  in  |«>«.»fMiou  uf  »
certain  income;  but  the  old  tiftcal  aud  jixllciil
Hyslem  cunu:  to  an  end,  and  thu  oi-tio  avcotdiagl^
lost  all  itH  former  im}M)rtauco.  On  the  other  bawl,
the  eqnites  proper  rose  into  a  {tututiim  of  unit
comtidenitiou.  They  were  divide<l  into  %i\  tar-
mac, headed  by  an  imperial  prince  as  pritwrp*  **•
vcttlMtia.  Trne,  they  had  no  furtbec  utatMbug  «»
a  cori»oration  ;  hnt  the  emjieror  employwl  IIkb>
iu  a  variety  of  cooAdenlinl  pi<«t>!<.  The  lill^
eqMeH  f'jHO  publico  was  nece-wuiry  for  the  atlaiU'


EQUULEUS


617


ERASMUS


meut  of  the  office  of  military  tribnnOf  aod  for  a
number  of  the  most  importaut  military  posts.
The  power  of  cooferriug  or  witbdrawiug  the  title
canie  at  length  to  rest  with  the  emperor  alone.
The  review  of  the  eqnttes,  which  used  to  take
place  every  five  years,  now  became  a  mere  cere-
niouy,  and  was  nuited  byAngnsttis  with  the  an-
cient annual  parade  (trantveetio)  of  the  15th  of
July.  The  eqnites,  in  full  nniform,  rode  through
the  Fonim  to  the  Capitol,  past  the  Temple  of  Mars
or  Honoe.

After  the  transference  of  the  seat  of  goverument
to  Constantinople,  the  turmat  eguitum  sank  into
the  position  of  a  city  corporation,  standing  be-
tween the  Senate  aud  the  gnilds,  and  in  posses-
sion of  special  privileges.  The  insignia  of  the
equitee  were  a  gold  ring  and  a  narrow  purple  bor-
der on  the  tunic.  (See  Clavus  Angustus;  Ius
Ancu  Acrei;  Tuwica.)  At  the  irantvectio  they
wore  the  trabeOf  a  mantle  adorned  wtl.h  pnrple
etripes,  and  crowns  of  olive.  After  B.C.  07  the  first
fourteen  rows  in  the  theatre  were  assigned  to  them.

See  Znmpt,  Ueher  die  HmiBchen  Bitter,  etc.  (Ber-
lin, 1840);  Marqiiardt,  Eistoriae  E^itum  Bomano'
mm  (Berlin,  1840);  Mommseu,  Bifm.  Staatsrecht,  iii.
476-569;  and  the  paragraph  on  the  ouraua  hono-
ram  under  HoNORBS.

Bqunleoa See  Egclbus.

Eqniu  October. See  Paulla.

Eqntia  Tatlcna.  A  town  of  Samnium,  on  the
Appian  Way,  distant,  according  to  the  itineraries,
twenty-two  Roman  miles  from  Cluvia,  which  is  it-
self ten  miles  northeast  of  Beneventtim.  The  term
Tuticus  is  Oscan,  equivalent  to  the  Latin  magHua.
Much  discussion  has  arisen  among  geographei-s  as
to  the  precise  situation  of  this  place.  The  branch
of  the  Appian  Way  on  which  Equus  Tnticus  stood
mns  nearly  parallel  with  that  which  Horace  seems
to  have  followed  in  his  well-known  journey  to
Bmndisinm.  Horace,  in  speaking  (according  to
the  scholiasts)  of  Eqnua  Tuticus,  alludes  to  the
unmanageable  nature  of  the  name  in  verse,  Man-
ffHri  oj^ndulo,  quod  verau  dicere  nan  est  {Sat.  i.  5, 87).
Mfideru  Bcholars  do  not  think  Eqnus  Taticas  to
have  been  the  town  in  question,  but  it  waa  certain-
ly on  the  road  from  Rome  to  Bmndisium  (Cio.  Ad
Ait.  vi.  1, 1),  and  no  more  likely  place  has  been  sng-
gestefl  as  the  one  that  Horace  had  in  mind.  See
Palmer  ad  toe

Erae  (Kpai).  A  small  but  strong  seaport  town
on  the  coast  of  Ionia  north  of  Teos  Crhno.  viit.  19).

Erftna  (*Epaya).  (1)  A  town  on  Monnt  Amanus,
the  chief  seat  of  the  Eleiitberocilices  in  the  time
of  Cicero  (Ad  Fam.  xv.  4). (2)  A  town  of  Messeuia.

XSrSnoB  {tpavos,  Lat.  cena  collaticia).  The  Greek
term  for  an  organized  club  or  society,  for  the  pur-
poses of  feasting  and  amusement,  whose  members
were  called  ipavKrrai.  Sometimes  it  would  be
formed  in  connection  with  the  worship  of  particu-
lar deities.  Sometimes,  again,  the  object  of  an
tpawos  would  be  motnal  assistance  by  advances  of
money.  The  government  encouraged  these  cinbe,
because  their  corporate  character  made  it  easier  to
settle  with  expedition  any  legal  proceedings  aris-
ing ont  of  their  affairs.  Trials  of  this  kind,  for
refnsal  to  pay  snbsoriptions,  or  to  repay  loans,  had
to  be  settled  within  a  month.  See  Becker-Gull,
CharUeUa,  u.  pp.296  foil.

Erasinna  (Epa&hMtc). The  chief  river  in  Argo-

20*


lis,  rising  in  Lake  Stymphalos,  and,  after  dis-
appearing under  the  earth,  flowing  through  the
Leniaeau  Marsh  into  the  Argolic  Gulf.

BraaiatrStuB  ('Epaa-iWporot).  A  physician  of
Talis,  in  the  island  of  Ceos,  and  grandson  of  Aris-
totle by  a  dsDgbter  of  this  philosopher.  After
having  frequented  the  schools  of  Chrysippus,  Me-
trodorus,  aud  Theophraetns,  he  passed  some  time
at  the  court  of  Seleocns  Nicator,  where  he  gained
great  repntatiou  by  discovering  the  secret  mal-
ady which  preyed  upon  the  young  Antiochus,  the
son  of  the  king,  who  was  in  love  with  his  step-
mother. Queen  Stratonic^  (Appian.  Bell.  Sjfr.  59).
It  was  at  Alexandria,  however,  that  he  principally
practised.  At  last  he  refused  altogether  to  vivit
the  sick,  and  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  study
of  anatomy.  The  branches  of  this  study  which
are  indebted  to  him  for  new  discoveries  are,  among
others,  the  doctrine  of  the  functions  of  the  brain
and  that  of  the  nervous  system.  He  immoi-talized
himself  by  the  discovery  of  the  viae  lacteae;  and
he  would  seem  to  have  come  very  near  to  that  of
the  circulation  of  the  blood.  Comparative  anatomy
furnished  him  with  the  means  of  describing  the
brain  much  better  than  had  ever  been  done  before
him.  He  also  distingnished  and  gave  names  to
the  auricles  of  the  heart  (Galen,  De  Dogm.  Hipp.
et  Plat  viL;  De  JJtu  Part.  viii. ;  De  Admimttr.
Anat.  vii. ;  An  SanguiBf  etc.).  A  singnliir  doc-
trine of  Erasistratus  is  that  of  the  mtvfui,  or  the
spiritual  substance  which,  according  to  hini,  fills
the  arteries,  which  we  inhale  in  respiration,  which
from  the  lungs  makes  ita  way  into  the  arteries,
and  then  becomes  the  vital  principle  of  the  human
system.  As  long  as  this  spirit  moves  about  in  the
arteries,  and  ihe  blood  in  the  veins,  man  enjoys
health ;  but  when,  from  some  cause  or  other,  the
veins  become  contracted,  the  blood  then  spreads
into  the  arteries  and  becomes  the  sonrce  of  mala-
dies; it  produces  fever  when  it  enters  into  some
noble  part  or  into  the  great  artery,  aud  inflamma-
tions when  it  is  found  in  the  less  noble  parts  or  iu
the  extremities  of  the  arteries.  Erasistratus  re-
jected entirely  bloo<l-Iettiiig,aa  well  as  cathartics;
he  supplied  their  place  with  dieting,  tepid  bath-
ing, vomiting,  and  exercise.  In  general,  he  was
attached  to  simple  remedies;  he  recognized  what
was  subsequentJy  termed  idio9gncra«^,  or  the  pe-
culiar constitution  of  diflferent  individuals,  which
makes  the  same  remedy  act  differently  on  different
persons.  A  few  fragments  of  the  writings  of  Era-
sistratus have  been  preserved  by  Galen.

Brasmiu,  Desidrrics  (the  psendo  -  classical
form  of  Gkert  Gekrt's),  was  boru  at  Rotterdam,
October  27,  1466  or  1467,  of  illegitimate  birth.
His  father  is  the  hero  of  Charles  Reade's  remark-
able historical  novel.  The  Clmater  and  the  Hearth.
Erasmus  aa  a  child  stndied  at  Gonda,  Utrecht,
and  finally  under  Alexander  Hegins  at  Deventer.
When  older  he  lived  snccessively  at  Bois-le-Duc,
the  Attgustinian  College  at  Delft,  and  at  the  Col-
lege Montaigu  in  Paris,  of  which  latter  reaideaee
he  says  in  his  Colhquia,  "From  it  1  carried  away
nothing  but  a  body  infected  by  disease  and  a  pleu-
tifnl  supply  of  vermin."  About  1487  he  was  or-
dained priest  by  the  Bishop  of  Utrecht.  Being
in  great  need  of  money  he  took  pupils,  and  with
one  of  these,  Lord  Mounljoy,  he  visited  England  in
1497,  spending  some  time  at  Oxford  and  making
the  acquaintance  of  such  distinguished  English-


EELISMUS


dis


ERASMUS


ueu  08  Culet,  tirucyu,  Latiuior,  and  Linncre,  auA  of-
lerwaMa  ot'Warb&m  uuil  Sir  Ttomas  Moru.  From
14if9  to  1:k>G  be  travelled  exteiisirely,  visiting  Panis
Orl^aits,  St  OiiilVs,  Louvaiii,  aud  OntMels,  wlirre
iu  1504  ti(>(Ii<livt>rf(la  I.Htiu(iriliiMi  licfiirv  tlii:' Arcli-
diiko  Pbilip.  Iu  1^X3  lit-'  »g:iiii  vinited  Kiigluiid.
wtiei'L'  Iw  entered  )iiuiM.<lf  at  Cambriilj^f  fur  tb(!<
B.D.  and  D.D.  degrue*.  tbv  lirat  of  wlik-b  be  soon
t'CCvtved.  Iu  tbe  »iiue  year  lie  travclk'd  in  Italy
uud  rt'ocivcd  a  papal  diepcusatioii  ulluwing  hiui  tn
lay  ankle  Ibe  prietitly  dreso.  In  Venice  be  mot  tliv
Kreat  HcUulam  Meninras,  Aluxamler,  Daptiita  Eg-
naiiiift.  uiid  tbc-  otbers  \vb'>Bi>  irurks  vrcK  tbvu  is-
Huinj^  from  tbe  pressed  uf  A1du».  In  Padua  h«  hv-
cntni)  tutor  In  tb»  ii:ilijral  Hon  of  JiiriiuM  IV.  uf
Scottanil.  KraMiiUK  riMnuiii«'d  in  Italy  until  l')09,
recoivod  every  wlien"  witb  niark>t  of  great  diatiuc-
tiuti,  baviiig  by  Ibin  tiuii>  won  a  rL-piitnlion  fur
brilliant  wbobirMbip,  urn]  in  April  of  tbat  ycur  iv-
vihittd  EiiglmHl,  wliei*  be  bceauie  tbe  Ruest  of
More  at  Loniiun,  uud  by  tbe  luUiieuce  of  Uisbop
yiaber  of  Koebeater  was  ap]?tiiuteil  Lady  Margaret
Frofetuior  of  Diviuity  aud  Kevins  Keucter  uf  Greek
in  tbe  University  of  Cainbriiljje,  at  uliicb  sent  of
learrilM^  tbe  ntndy  of  Greek  was  tlieu  of  reeeut  in-
troduction.

Knmnina  liail  luyWj  by  liiH  wrltinKN,  bis  orations,
niid  by  tbii  furce  of  a  lauxt  attntrtivo  ^icrsoniility,
nttainm)  t»  a  groat  repntatiiiii  among  (bl^  accoin-
plialiitd  and  Irarni'd  iiion  uf  Kumpe.  PreMUiitn
flo^^  rd  ill  Upon  biui,  uuil  froiu  tbis  time  to  tbe  end
of  bin  Hfe  be  lived  in  ease  and  npuleuce.  Arcb-
lii&hnp  Wurbani  sent  biin  large  sums  of  niniicy
mid  seotircd  birn  a  jiension  of  a  biuidreil  rrnwns.
A  like  pension  was  granteil  biiii  by  Lonl  Moitnt-
joy.  Oftent  of  uburob  prcfprment  were  made  to
liim  in  mauy  cfuintrieB;  tlie  Diiko  of  Uitvaria  of-
fereil  bini  a  cbair  in  the  nen-  University  of  Iiigol-
fltuilt  with  IK)  duties  attached;  Lcmvain  uflTered
llilii  a  [in;fi'Ksnr>liip  witb  the  degree  of  D.D. ;  tbe
AuHtrian  nrrhiliikn  FiTiliiiaiid  pminiHCNl  him  a
fienaiuu  i)f  400  flnriuH  if  lie  would  uiily  take  up
Ids  reuideuco  iu  Vienna;  Pupo  L'louieut  VII.  iteut
him  SOC  llorinpi;  I'ojyo  Adrian  VL  \vi»bL>d  to  give
him  a  doiLucry;  nnd  Kiug  Kruucis  I.  juiiied  witb
the  Biftbop  of  Bayeux  iu  a  vain  ett'ort  to  secure
ErasmiM  for  France.  Preseut«  of  wiue  from  bi&
uumeroua  admirers  and  of  sweetmeats  froui  tbe
unns  of  Cologne  readied  Itiui  coiiCtuiinlly

In  ir>i:t  F.i-fiMUitiH  IvCt  Eutjlarul,  and  being  poa*
«es6ed  of  a  lYtstlnHH  d[H[HiHit.ioa,  aggrnvateil  by  a
nervous  disorder,  be  travulled  ftuui  pluce  to  plac«
upon  tbe  Contiuunt;  and  after  several  yeiintof  al-
nioat  incessant  Jourueying  back  and  foiib  bo  iiiadie
Ids  boiue  at  Bai^le,  to  wbicb  ha  had  tint  been  at-
tracted by  tbe  fame  of  its  pres«  aud  of  tbe  dt»-
tlDgtiiabed  men  whom  be  inct  there,  among  them
ZwiugU  ilie  reformer,  Hans  H(dbKin  tbe  artist,
and  Ibf)  circle  nf  ndjtiinng  HludeiitM  who  cl[]rttere<il
about  KraNnniK,  Aueb  aft  Iteittiis  Rbenaniis,  bi»>  liiog*
rapbur.  ^apidus,  Oucolampadius.  Btwr,  Mycouins,
and  Glureanus.

In  15'^  ho  Hcttlcil  pcrniatiently  in  Basle,  and
tbeiv  boeaiue  the  general  4-ditor  of  Froben's  preas,
which,  during  tbe  eight  yt^ars  of  Erasmus's  luso-
citttiuu  with  it,  took  the  lt'u<l  of  all  the  presses  iu
Europe,  both  in  the  value  uf  tbe  works  which  is-
sued from  it  niid  iu  the  excellence  uf  its  tyim-
graE>bical  execution.  Iu  these  works  Eninmiis
had  an  iiuportaiit  share  as  rranHJutor  aud  editor,
litit  his  part  can  nut  b«  readily  diaVn!UtUt«^d  £imu  j


tboso  of  bis  uamemus  associate.  Tbe  prefam
and  deilicaliona  were  always  of  bis  oompMiUtia:
Besides  the  great  Ulmnr  of  these  dutira  he  fuuiiil
time  to  write  a  large  number  of  pamphlet*,  often
l>olfniic,  and  to  carry  on  a  currc^pondeiKie  tiat
soinelimcs  cuiu)>el]e<l  hiiu  to  write  forty  lettm  tii
a  single  day.  "  I  receive  fluily,"  be  i«>'s,  "  Irtun
from  remote  parts,  from  kings,  princes,  prvUta,
atid  learaed  men,  aud  even  from  jienous  of  irboti
esiHtenoe  I  was  ignoraut."

TIh'  religious  disturbancea  tu  Switzerbuiil,  ud
tb<^  death  of  Frobou,  led  bim  iu  15'J9  to  reaoTr  to
Freiburg,  where  be  resided  for  six  years,  ntnnt-
iug  in  153.'>  to  Baale.  The  new  jwpe,  Paul  IIL,
nuudua(v4  hEin  to  a  deanery  with  an  iucoinr  ot
l.'iOO  ducats  and  hinted  at  a  cjirdinare  hat  for  bim.
Au  attack  of  dysentery,  however,  carried  bini  off
July  1'.^,  \j^,  in  bis  aixty-nintb  year.

Eraamus  wam  a  man  uf  a  siugularly  retined  dikI
amiable  cbaructer — witty,  judicious,  aud  uf>;n-«i
erudition,  coupled  witb  a  gift  of  literary  cxitnt-
sioD  rareeveu  in  so  elegant  a  scholar.  AJoucsuoBf
tbe  learned  men  uf  hitt  time  he  exhibits  a  "iwcct
rvas(Hiablt<ue.Hs"  and  a  frpeilom  fn>m  bigotry,  nlb-
er  llieotngiL'al  or  jibilologtcal,  tli-it  ts  perhipa  liift
uioHt  striking  characteristic.  WhilA  criticuing.
often  with  inimitable  wit  ami  satirti,  tbe  tbrologi-
eal  wju*riorit  of  his  own  Church,  be  exhibit*  litllr
sympathy  with  tbe  Prolcstant  cbampioita  Tbe
cuarsenesM  and  vulgarity  of  Luther's  controvcniil
writings  were  m|fecially  offensive  t4>  him  :  sail  bt
disliked  the  unfavourable  induonce  of  teligivu
{wleniics  upon  the  development  of  literalniv.  lb
stands,  in  fiu!t,  as  "  the  supreme  type  of  caltiTilal
common  •!»*»»«  applied  to  biiinan  ntfaira,aBdiw
uuin  of  letters  has  ever  attained  to  anylbiag  tf-
proacbiug  the  inBuenoe  wielded  by  ErasiuDs  du-
ijig  bis  own  ceuturj-.  ...  Ho  owmI  bis  powlion
to  the  woudorfid  range  of  his  activity,  to  hi«  »■
touisliingproductlveue6s,tothe  bmulthaudnail?
of  Ids  views,  and  to  the  delightful  r|ualiliMof  *il.
humour,  and  unfailing  vivacity  wbioh  diBlliipii*l>
all  bis  work"  {Hume  Brown).  As  a  clasH)<]i«l,kt
Htuuds  between  the  strict  linmauistM  of  the  Laltn
Reuuissance  on  tbe  one  band  and  the  (IrseciflH
acholai~K  who  ftdlow  bim.  As  I'atliMui  putait,l>*
is  a  mean  between  Politian  and  Joseph  Sotlip''
He  wan,  in  fact,  rather  a  great  man  of  letters  tttu
a  great  scholar.  He  knew  little  or  uolhlngof  tltf
true  principle*  of  text  criticism,  he  wiw  not  Mni|H*
lousty  accunkli*,  anil  bis  Greek  learning  wis  wn
imtieritocl.  Judged  by  a  comparison  witli  tbi-cl*
sic  miKlels,  bis  Latin  eveu  is  at  tiniCM  almost luutat'
ouit.  But  this  is  only  a  narrow  view.  Tbf  Lt^
ity  of  Krottuius  bad  iiualitiw)  alHt%e  thoso  of  vrt*
corrcctneM  aud  juirity.  It  was  witb  hiui  *  livi>^
aud  a  sjioken  tongne,  rich,  plastic,  nalutal.  "^
full  of  virile  force,  aud  not  like  the  Latiu  of  Bmb-
Ito  and  Sonluleto — a  mere  echo,  a  cold  aud  HMm*
iniitatton.

The  [wrsomil  appeArnnce  of  Erasmas  is  tbni<l'*
scrtbod  by  bis  disciple,  Beotua  Bbenauu:  "I*
fttattire  not  tall,  but  not  noticeably  shwi :  in  H'
ure  well  built  and  graceful;  of  an  extreUKly<I«t''
cate  con»titntlau,  sensitive  to  the  t)Iigbl«et  ehu^
of  clhiiate.  food,  or  drink. .  .  .  Hia  complexioo  •»*
fair;  light  blue  eyes  and  yellowish  hair.  Th*ig*
bis  voice  was  weak,  bia  etinuciatiou  wm  difltiiK'!
tlie  expression  of  bis  face  wu  (-hc^rfol:  hit  vtt"
uer  and  conversation  wtre  poliabed,  aSiblo,  •'>'
even  cbarming."


ERATO


619


ERATOSTHENES


Of  his  nnmerous  works,  the  following  are  of  es-
l>ocial  importance  to  the  classical  student :  the
Adagia  or  Adoffiomm  Chiliadea,  a  niannal  of  the
wit  and  wisdom  of  the  ancient  world  with  a  fine-
ly executed  commentary  (Ist  ed.  Paris,  1500 ;  en-
larged eds.  1515  and  1536) ;  an  edition  of  the  Greek
Testament  with  a  new  Latin  version  and  notes,
the  text  of  which  became  the  starting-point  of
modern  exegetical  science  (Basle,  1316;  later  edi-
tions iu  1519, 1522, 1527, 1535) ;  Cioeronianua,  a  sat-
ire on  the  pedantic  imitations  of  Cicero  by  the
Italian  school  of  Latiuists ;  and  the  Colloquia,  his
most  famous  work,  of  which  the  first  edition
appeared  in  1519  and  was  afterwards  greatly  en-
larged. It  consists  of  a  series  of  familiar  dia-
lugties  in  Latin  on  a  great  rariety  of  topics — so-
cial, religious,  and  political — and  marked  by  wit,
fancy,  and  a  brilliant  audacity  of  treatment. .

The  first  complete  edition  of  the  works  of  Eras-
mus appeared  in  9  vols,  at  Basle  in  1540 ;  the  stand-
ard edition  is  that  of  Le  Clerc  in  10  vols.  (Lyons,
1703-06).  To  the  Basle  edition  is  prefixed  a  me-
moir of  Erasmus  by  Beatns  Bhenanus,  and  his  life
has  been  written  at  length  by  Kuiglit  (Cambridge,
1726);  Jortin,  2  vols.  (London,  1748);  Buriguy
(Paris.  1752);  MUUer  (Hambarg,  1828);  Stichart
{Leipzig,  1870);  Drammoud,2  vols.  (London,  1873);
Feiigfere  (Pans,  1874);  Pennington  (London,  1875);
and  i'Yuude  (Loudon,  1894).  See  also  Nisard  in  his
Eiude»  aur  la  BenaUaanoe  (Paris,  1855);  Seebohm,
Oxford  Beformera  (2d  ed.  London,  18f^);  Milmao,
fMaya  (Loudon,  1870) ;  and  Pokel,  Philolog.  Schrifi-
sMlerUnican  (Leipzig,  1883).

Brftto  CEporw).  One  of
the  Muses,  who  presided  over
lyric,  tender,  and  amorous
]K>etry.  She  is  said  to  have
invented  also  hymns  to  the
gtidBf  and  to  have  presided
likewise  over  pautomimio
dancing.  She  is  represented
«a  crowned  with  roses  and
myrtle,  and  holding  a  lyre  in
her  band. Bee  Mcsab.

EratoathSnea  CEporoo-^*-
yr}s ).  A  distinguished  con-
temporary of  Archimedes,
bom  at  Cyren6,  B.c.  276.  He
possessed  a  variety  of  tal-
ents seldom  united  iu  the
«anie  individual.  His  math-
«matioal,  astronomical,  and
geographical  labours  are'
those  which  have  rescued  his
uaniB  from  oblivion,  though
he  was,  besides,  famous  for  Emta

bis athletic  prowess. The

Alexandrian  school  of  Bcieuces,  which  flourisbcd
under  the  first  Ptolemies,  had  already  produced
Timochares  and  Aristyllus;  and  Eratosthenes  bad
not  only  the  advantages  luHeing  from  the  iustru-
meuts  aud  observations  of  his  predecessors,  but
the  great  Alexandrian  library,  which  probably
contained  all  the  Phcenician,  Chaldaic,  Egyptian,
and  Greek  learning  of  the  time,  was  intrusted  to
his  snperintendence  by  the  third  Ptolemy  (Eoerge-
tes),  who  had  invited  him  to  Alexandria.

The  only  work  attributed  to  Eratosthenes  which
has  comedown  to  us  entire  is  entitled  Karaorcpur-
^MH,  and  is  merely  a  catalogue  of  the  names  of


forty-four  constellations,  and  the  situations  in  eaoh
constellation  of  the  principal  stars,  of  which  ha
enumerates  nearly  five  hundred,  but  without  one
reference  to  astronomical  nieasuremenL  We  find
Hipparchus  quoted  in  it,  aud  raeution  made  of  the
motion  of  the  pole,  that  of  the  polar  star  having
beeu  recognized  by  Pytheas.  These  circumstances,
taken  iu  conjnuction  with  the  vagueness  of  the
descriptions,  render  its  geuniueness  extremely
doubtful.

If  Eratosthenes  be  really  the  anthor  of  the  Kora-
OTtpttTfioi,  it  must  hare  been  composed  merely  as  a
vade  mecum,  for*we  fiud  him  engaged  iu  astronomi-
cal researches  far  more  exact  and  more  worthy  of
his  genius.  By  his  observations  he  determined
that  the  distance  between  the  tropics,  that  is,  twice
the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  was  -^  of  an  entire
circumference,  or  47°  42'  39",  which  makes  the  ob-
liquity to  be  23°  51'  19.5",  nearly  the  same  as  that
supposed  by  Hipparchus  and  Ptolemy.  As  the
means  of  observation  were  at  that  time  very  im-
perfect, the  iiistraments  divided  only  to  intervals
of  10',  and  as  corrections  for  the  greater  refractioa
at  the  winter  solstice,  for  the  diameter  of  the  solar
disc,  etc.,  were  then  unknown,  we  must  regard  this
conclusion  as  highly  creditable  to  Eratosthenes.
His  next  achievement  was  to  measure  the  circum-
ference of  the  earth.  He  knew  that  at  Syen^  the
snn  was  vertical  at  noon  in  the  saramer  solstice;
while  at  Alexandria,  at  the  same  moment,  it  woh
below  the  zenith  by  the  fiftieth  part  of  a  circnm-
ference:  the  two  places  are  nearly  on  the  same
meridian  (error  2°).  Neglectiug  the  solar  parallax,
be  concluded  that  the  distance  from  Alexandria  to
Syend  is  the  fiftieth  part  of  the  circumference  of
the  earth ;  this  distance  be  estimated  at  five  tbon-
sand  stadia,  which  gives  twe.  hnndred  aud  fifty
thousand  stadia  for  the  circumference.  Thus  Era-
tosthenes has  the  merit  of  pointiug  ont  a  method
for  fiading  the  circumference  of  the  earth.  But
his  data  were  not  suffioieutly  exact,  nor  had  he  the
means  of  measuring  the  distance  from  Alexandria
to  Syeu€  with  snfflcient  precision.

Eratosthenes  has  been  called  a  poet,  aud  Scaliger,
in  his  commentary  ou  Mauilius,  gives  some  frag-
ments of  a  poem  attributed  to  him,  entitled  'Epfifjs,
oueofwbichisadescriptioo  of  the  terrestrial  zones.
It  is  not  improbable  that  these  are  authentic.

That  Eratosthenes  was  an  excellent  geometrician
we  can  not  doubt,  from  bis  still  extant  solutiou  of
the  problem  of  two  mean  proportionals,  preserved
by  Theon,  and  a  lost  treatise  quoted  by  Pappus,
De  Locia  ad  Medietatea.

Eratosthenes  appears  to  have  been  one  of  the
first  who  attempted  to  form  a  system  of  geography.
His  work  on  this  subject,  entitled  rcmypa^ticd  {Ge-
ograpbica),  was  divided  into  three  books.  The
first  contained  a  history  of  geography,  a  critical
notice  of  the  authorities  used  by  him,  and  the  ele-
ments of  physicnl  geography.  The  secoud  book
treated  of  macheniatical  geography.  The  third
contained  the  political  or  historical  geography  of
the  then  known  worid.  The  whole  work  was  ac-
conipauied  with  a  map.

Eratostheues  also  busied  himself  with  chrouol-
o£y»  <^i)d  suggested  the  Julian  calendar,  in  which
every  fourth  year  has  366  days.  Some  remarks  on
his  Greek  chronology  will  be  found  iu  Clinton's
Faati  Bellenici  (vol.  1.  pp.  3,  408) ;  and  on  his  list
of  Thebau  kings,  iu  Rask's  work  on  the  ancient
Egyptian  chronology  (Altona,  1830).


F.KBF.SSU3


ERECHTHEIM


Till


'lu'  ^irojwrtic*  of  nnmlicni  altmi-tfil  the  ntti^n-
lion  <if  j>liiloMi]»l)or8  from  llio  earlitrttt  perioil,  niii)
Eraliiatlu-ries  also  i1iRliii);ui)!>li«i1  hiniM-lf  in  tliiH
braiitb.  He  wrote  a  work  on  the  OiipHcatinn  of
tUo  cube — Kt'^of  Sin)<aaut<rfi6t — which  w«  only
know  by  a  itktitch  that  EiitlnxiiB  han  given  of  il,  in
hi»  treatitw  ou  the  Sphctv  ami  CyUuiler  of  Anrhi-
inedcs.  Eratofithciipff  rompom^d,  n1«o,  another  work
JH  this  depRitmoni,  enlitleil  Kilcnctyuf,  or  "the
Sieve,"  the  oliji-ct  of  which  wns  to  separate  prime
froro  oompoAtte  nnitil>ers.  Eratosthenes  arrived  ut
thp  age  of  eifjlityyeftrt,  nml  tbo».bpoomiiip  weary
of  life.dird  liy  volnnUry»tarvat.irfh  fti.c.ldfi).  The
Wat  edition»oftbeKuT4j(rr(piir>iM<are>thatof  Srhan-
Itndi,  with  notfw  by  Heyiir  fOotlinfrt'ii,  ITWi),  and
ibnt  of  Mattbiiiv,  in  bin  Anitiis  (Fnirikfiirt,  1817).


Arcording  to  the  Ilonioric  notion,  Erebus  U^  be*
tweeii  llie  earth  and  Hades,  benoatb  tb^  lattfrof
which  was  Tart  aniR.  It  waa  then-fore  nut  .-in  abode
uf  the  departed,  bnt  roorely  a  paxMiige  fmm  Lbe  op-
per  to  the  lower  world.  Oriental  iicbolars  derite
tbo  name  Erebus  from  the  Hebrew  'errb,  ovtoing

ExechtbAlIa  ('Epcj^^tV). Thn  well  of  alt  water
in  the  Ai-r(i]Mdia  at  Atlieua  (A|Ki1]od.  iii.  14.  W See

EltK'.'UTUEUAI.

Brecbthfttim  (^fH^6tior).  Tbe  original  Msct-
nary  of  tbo  tutelary  deitiw  of  Atlicne,  Atbw^
Poliiu  (Ihu  gmldcs*  of  tbe  city),  Poeeidoti.  eixt
Erecbthens.  It  was  situated  on  tbe  Acrajiolift,
Tbe  old  temple,  said  to  have  been  built  by  Errcb-
I  beiii4,  WHH  bnnird  by  tbe  Persians  i  n  B.C.  4^.  Tlw
Tbe  fragments  of  Eratit<ithenes  have  been  ooUerteil  '  re^t-oration  was  {lerhaps  Wgn  n  oh  far  back  m  tbe
liy  Benibardy  in  hie  work  Kralmthcttira  (Berlin,  time  of  Pericles,  but,  acconling  to  tbe  testitnotiy
1S23).  snd  the  poetical  remaiDS  separately  by  HiU  of  au  inscription  preserved  iu  tbe  British  Muwom
ler  (LetpzijE;.  I'^'i).  See,  alao,  Berger,  Die  gevtfra-  ,  was  still  nnfioisbed  in  -lOK.  The  new  temple  *rat,
fthtMrhrn  ri-ti^mrrffe  rff^  £ra(oj«(Aenf«  (Leipzig,  It^).  I  even  in  antiijutty,  admired aa  one uf  tbe  maH

ErbesBUB('E^37ff<T<i().  A
strongly  fnrlitifd  town  of
Sicily,  norllicast  of  Agri-
geutniii,  which  the  K<»muns
made  their  princijiul  place
of  arm»  iu  thu  oifgn  of  the
Iast<D)cnlic>n<Mlcity.  It.  wait
»04»n  after  deslruyed  (Polyb.
i.  IP  J.

Erobia  ('Ej^i^tta).  Oneof
tbe  denies  of  Atticit.aMd  b<---
lon^ii)^  to  tbe  Iribe  Acgel'H.
Its  )iof<itioD  has  not  been
pusUively  ascertaiuect.  This
was  tbe  native  denius  of
Xenophou  and  iHOcratca.
See  Young,  Enhia  :  a  Dcme

Ercta  or  Eret6  (Elfjxrr},
Eiurrri).  Areniarknble  iso-
lated Qiountiiin  on  tite
nortbwesttiin  coast  v(  ffic-
ily  near  Pnuonnuit.  Its
height  is  1950  fvet.  hschief
celebrity  was  gntued  in  the
First  Paulc  War.  towards
tbo  close  uf  which  llauiil-

car  Harvn  (4.  v.)  shut  himself  with  bis  array  into
this  uaturul  furtresH,  luul  niiiintaiued  himself  there


-•^«^


,_•*


RivloniMttD  of  Ibt  Erectiibcaiii  from  lbe  Nortbcnsi. (Rcbor.}


sgaiuat  all  the  efforts  of  the  Booiaus  to  dislodge


Wautifnl  aiid  perfect  works  of  tbe  Attie-lMJe
style.  It  was  sirty-fivn  feet  longood  oewljlbirtr
six  bniad,  and  m-sm  divided  into  two  awiQ  p*rte
Euteritig  tbrungb  the  eaatern  porlir'^
of  MIX  Ionic  pillam,  one  came  lole  1^
cflln  of  Atlien*  PoHan,  with  an  imij,*
of  the  goddess,  and  a  lamp  lluit  *■*
nlwnys  kept  bnniing.  To  tb«  •J'^
W.1II  at  tbe  back  was  atta«l>ed  ibe
Krechtlieiim  proper.  Here  were  thn*
nltarti,  one  romnion  to  Powidon  end
Krcchlbenx,  thn  other  to  Hepbsai'M
and  the  hero  Dnles.  Cnuneete'  vi'^
this,  by  tbn'e  dfKirs,  was  a  umall  fftll
ehaniltor.  wirh  seven  half-O'lunioe
hiiu,  for  nearly  three  years. See  Pul^b.  I.  5t),  57;  Imlorning the  western  wall,  and  three  wiwfcj**


tlcmut  Ercu.


Diiwl.  Sic.  sxiii.  *iO.

ET£biia('£p«^or>.  fl>  A  deity  of  the  lower  world,
sprniiK  frnm  Chaos.  From  Lini  tiud  bis  sister  Xyx
(iJigbt)  came  Aether  and  iho  Day  (H>c.&[od,  Thfoi/.
123  foil.).  {'2|  A  dark  and  gloomy  region  in  tbe
lower  world,  where  all  is  dreary  aud  cbc«rlcse.


betww'n  them.  This  cbaroUer  was  approaebeil
tbnirigli  n  ball  attached  to  tbe  ni>rt<i  side  of
the  temple,  ad  on  I  I'd  uiih  seven  lonir  colaron"'"
front,  and  one  on  each  side,  lender  this  w>"  *
cleft  in  the  rinrk.  said  to  have  l>e«»n  made  bj  tb*
stroke  of  Poseidon's  trident  during  bis  cusw^


ERECHTHEL'S


621


EEGASTCLUM


with  Athene  for  the  posaeasion  of  the  Acropolis.
Corresponding  to  this  ou  the  south  side  was  a  smaU
hall,  supported  iiot  by  pillars,  but  by  caryatides.
This  was  called  the  Hall  of  Cor^,  and  it  probably
contained  the  tomb  of  Cecrops.  From  it  a  step
led  down  to  a  court,  once  walled  roiiud,  in  which
were  the  Faudroseuni  (see  Pandrosos),  the  sacred
olive-tree  of  Atheu^,aud  the  altar  of  Zeus  Herkeios.
Ou  the  east  side,  in  front  of  the  temple  of  Athene
Poliaa,  stood  the  altar  on  which  the  great  hecatomb
was  offered  at  the  Fanatheiiaea.  See  plan  under
Acropolis.

ErechthenB  fEpcx^rvr).  A  mythical  king  of
Athens.  Accoiding  to  Homer  (_Il.  ii.  547,  etc.;
Odjftn.  Tii.  81),  he  was  the  son  of  Earth  by  He-
phaestus, and  was  reared  by  Athene.  Like  that
of  Cecrops,  half  of  his  form  was  that  of  a  suake —
4k  sign  that  he  was  one  of  the  aborigines.  Athene
pnt  the  child  in  a  chest,  which  she  gave  to  the
■danghters  of  Cecrops — Agraulos,  Hersd,  and  Paii-
dnwoe — to  take  care  of,  forbidding  them  at  the
same  time  to  open  it  (Hygin.  Foet.  Attr.  ii.  13).
The  first  two  disobeyed,  and  in  tenor  at  the
jwrpent -shaped  child  (or,  according  to  another  ver-
«ioii,  the  snake  that  snrroonded  the  child),  they
went  mad,  and  threw  themselves  from  the  rooks
-of  the  Acropolis.  Another  account  made  the  ser-
pent kill  thetu.  KrechtheuB  drove  out  Ampbic-
tyon,aiid  got  poasessioD  of  the  kingdom.  He  then
«BtahliBhed  the  worship  of  Athen^,  and  boilt  to
ber,  as  goddess  of  the  city  (IloXuir),  a  temple,
Bamed  after  him  the  £rechtheum.  Here  he  wns
afterwards  himself  worshipped  with  Atheuf;  and
Poseidon.  He  was  also  the  founder  of  the  Pana-
thenaie  festival.  He  was  said  to  have  invented
the  fonr-wheeled  chariot,  aud  to  have  been  taken
up  to  heaven  for  this  by  Zeiis,  and  set  in  the  sky
as  the  coQBtellatioa  of  the  Charioteer.  His  daugh-
ters were  Orithyia  and  Procris.  (See  Boreas;
Cbphalus.)  Originally  identified  with  Erichtho-
NiuSjhe  was  iu  later  times  distinguished  from  him,
and  was  regarded  as  his  grandson,  aud  as  son  of
Pandion  aud  Zeaxipp^.  His  twin  -  brother  was
Butes,  bis  sisters  Procu^  mid  Philomela.  The
priestly  office  fell  to  Botes,  while  Erechthens  as-
hamed the  functions  of  royalty.  By  Praxithea,
the  daughter  of  Cephissna,  he  was  father  of  the
second  Cecrops  (see  Pandion,  2),  of  Motion  (see
Daedalus),  of  Crettsa  (see  los),  as  well  as  of  Proto-
genia.  Pandora,  and  Chthonia.  Wheu  Athens  was
bard  pressed  by  the  ElensioiaDS  under  Eiimolpus,
the  oracle  promised  him  the  victory  if  he  would
sacri  Ace  one  of  bis  daughters.  He  choae  the  young-
est, Chthonia ;  but  Protogenia  and  Pandora,  whn
bad  made  a  tow  with  their  sister  to  die  with  her,
volnotarily  shared  her  fate.  Erechtbeus  couqoer-
e«l  his  enemies  and  slew  Eumolpus,  but  was  after-
wards destroyed  by  the  trideot  of  his  enemy's  fa-
ther, Poseidon.  The  myth  of  Erechtbeus  has  sug-
t(ested  the  subject  for  Swinborne's  tragedy  £recA-
theut  (London,  1676).

Bieobtbldea.  A  name  given  to  the  Athenians
from  their  king  Erechtbeus  (Ovid,  Met.  vii.  430).

ZSrearaa  or  BrSatu  (on  coius  the  name  is  always
written  *E^«o-or).  A  city  of  Lesbos,  situated  ou  a
hill  at  a  distance  of  twenty-eight  stadia  from  Cape
Sigriuni.  It  derives  celebrity  from  having  given
birth  to  Theophraatus.  Phanias,  another  disciple
of  the  great  Stagirite,  was  likewise  a  uative  of
Ihis  place. According  to  Archestratus,  quoted  by


I  Atbenaens,  Eressus  was  famous  for  the  excellence
'  of  its  wheateu  flour.

I Bretiia  ('Epirpia). (1)  A  towu  of  the  island  of
Euhoea,  situated on the coast  of  the  Enripua
southeast  of  Cbolcis. It  was  said  by  some to
have  been  founded  by  a  colony  from  Triphylia  in
Peloponnesus ;  by  others  its  origin  was  ascribed
j  to  a  party  of  Athenians  belonging  to  the  deme
'  of  Eretria. The  latter  opinion  is  far  more  proba-
ble, as  this  city  was  doubtless  of  Ionic  origin  (He-
rod, viii.  46). We  learn  from  Strabo  that  Eretria
was  formerly  called  Melanels  and  Arotria,  and  that
at  an  early  period  it  had  attained  to  a  consider-
able degree  of  prosperity  and  power. The  Ere-
trians  conquered  the  islands  of  Ceos,  Teos,  Tenos,
and  others;  aud  iu  their  festival  of  Artemis,  which
was  celebrated  with  great  splendour,  three  thou-
sand soldiers  on  foot,  with  six  hundred  cavalry
and  sixty  chariots,  were  often  eaft>loyed  to  attend
the  procession  (of.  Livy,  xxxv.  38). Eretria,  at  this
period,  was  frequently  engaged  in  war  with  Chal-
ets, and  Thucydides  reports  (i.  15)  that  on  one  oc-
casion most  of  tbe  Grecian  States  t-ook  part  in  the
contest. The  assistance  wliicb  Eretria  then  re-
ceived ftom  the  Milesians  induced  that  city  to  co>
operate  with  the  Atlienians  in  sending  a  fleet  and
troops  to  the  snpport  of  the  loniaus,  who  had  re-
volted froxR  Pei-eia  nt  the  instigation  of  Aristago-
ras  (Herod,  v.  d9),  by  which  measure  it  became
exposed,  in  conjunction  with  Athens,  to  the  ven-
I  geance  of  Darius. That  monarch  accordingly  gave
I  orden  to  his  commanders,  Datis  and  Artaphei-nes,
to  Bubdae  both  Eretria  and  Athens  and  bring  the
I  inhabitants  captive  before  him. Eretria  was  taken
I  after  six  days'  siege,  and  the  captive  inhabitants
j  brought  to  Asia. Darius  treated  tbe  prisoners  kind-
ly, and  settled  them  in  the  diatrict  of  Cissia  (Herod.
I  vi.  119). Eretria  recovered  from  the  effects  of  this
disaster  and  was  rebuilt  soon  after. We  find  it
I  mentioned  by  Thucydides,  towards  tbe  close  of
;  his  history  (viii.  94),  as  revolting  from  Athens  ou
tbe  approach  of  a  Spartan  fleet  under  Hegesandri-
\  das,  and  mainly  contributing  to  tbe  success  ob-
I  tained  by  that  commander. After  the  death  of
I  Alexander,  this  city  surrendered to  Ptolemy,  a
I  general  iu  the  service  of  Antigonus ;  and  iu  the
I  Macedonian  War,  to  the  combined  fleets  of  tbe
,  Romans,  the  Rhodians,  aud  Attains  (Livy,  xxxii.
16). It  was  sul>sequently  declared  free  by  order
of  the  Roman  Senate  (Polyh.  xviii.  28  foil.). This
place,  as  we  learn  from  Athenaeus,  was  noted  for
tlie  excellence  of  its  flour  aud  bread. At  one
time  it  possessed  a  distinguished  school  of  philos-
ophy and  dialectics. The  rnins  of  Eretria  are  still
to  be  observed  close  to  a  headland  which  lies  op-
posite to  the  mouth  of  tbe  Asopus  in  Boeotia. (2)
A  deme  of  Attica. (3)  A  town  of  Thmsaly,  near
Pharsalus,  and  l>etweeu  that  cicy  and  Pherae.

Brtttnm.  A  towu  of  tbe  Sabioes,  north  of  No-
mentuiu  aud  northeast  of  Fideuae,  aud  at  no  great
distance  from  the  Tiber.  Its  name  frequently  oc-
curs in  the  Roman  historians.  The  antiquity  of
the  place  is  attested  by  Vergil  (vii.  711).  It  was
subsequently  the  scene  of  many  a  contest  between
the  Romans  and  Sabiiiea,  leagued  with  the  Etrns-
cans  (Livy,  iii.29).

CrgaattUum,  A  pnsou  and  place  of  correction
attached  to  the  farms  and  couiitry-villas  of  the
Romans,  iu  which  those  of  the  slave  familia  who
were  kept  iu  fetters  {compediti,  neri,  rincH)  were


HCUTIIONIUS


6-'i


EROS


l(>il(;e(1  iitid  inatio  to  work  in  irons;  whereas  the
re»l,  whii  wcro  not  ciiuincil,  were  proviiled  with
JtL'parato  ncrummodatiou  {ixlUir.  fontahfcnia)  in
other  (Kitts  of  the  entahlishiiif iii  (ColcitiifU.  I.  ti.  3 ;
of.  9. 16;  Apu],  ApoK  p.  462;  Bnit,  in  Cic/'iim.  xi.
131.

Eriohtboaius  CEptx^""^"^^-  (^^  ^'*"  **^  Dartla-
nils  (.■leo  i)AiiDA.\rniau<l  Baiea.  H«  was  Ihc  father
offrvs. (S)  Tho  same  as  Erechthcus  !<[.  v.).

Ericius.  "A  heilRehou"  —  i.  e.  a  luilitAry  en-
gine full  of  fiharp  strikes,  which  wat)  pluceil  hy  the
gatti  of  the  caiDp  tu  prevent  tb»  uppruacU  uf  the
euemy  (Coea.  If.  ('.  iii.  67).

Eriotissa  i'Epucovtraa),  One  of  the  Ltpari  lal-
aud«,  now  Varctisa. See  Aeuliak  1>sulak.

Brid^ua  (Hpiiavat),  A  river-god,  ob  the  battks
of  whusu  river  nmher  was  fi>niid  (llesiiHl,  Thwg.
3381.  !□  later  (iuieti  tlit^  £ridauua  wns  supposed
to  ho  the  unnie  .is  the  F*ndii»  (Po),  hi'rjiii»*e  amber
was  foand  i\%  iu  nuintli.  IIiMine  Ihi;  Eltwtridea  Iii-
snlae,  or  "  Amiter  Idlandn,"  are  pIntH'd  .it  tli»  tiioiith
of  the  Po,  and  tiere  riiutiLhnii  w:im  HiippiMt-d  to  have
falleD  wheu  tttriick  hy  thr  lighliiiu^;  ufZvua.

Erlefina  (H^iyoKv).  (I)  Thediiii};hl«^ref Icanus.
Her  father  having  been  imif^ht  hy  BacehuH  the
oulture  of  the  gra|M>,  and  having  made  wiue,  gave
of  it  to  Home  sbcpherds,  who,  thtnkiug  ihomaelvea
poitioue<t  hy  the  drauglit,  killtMl  him.  Wheu  they
CBDte  to  their  sensen.  they  hiiried  him;  and  his
daughter  Erigum5.  being  giiideil  to  the  ttpot  by
her  father's  faithful  hound  Macra,  hanged  licrHelf
through  grief  ( Apullml.  iii.  14.  7  :  llyg.  Fah.  13l.>).
ZeUB  translate*!  the  father  and  daughter,  nioiig
with  the  faithful  Miiera,  (<»  the  akiex ;  Icariiiii  be-
CMiie  i3<K)f«ut, und  Krigoiie,  Virgo  ;  whilt*  the  hound
waa  cbauge<l,  avconling  to  Hygii(U«,  iu|4j  /Vorj/on  ;
hut.  aceonling  to  the  scholiimt  on  (ivntmnictis,  into
the  CflMi"  .V»iiir,  wliieh  is  therefnre  styled  by  Ovid
{FuMt.  iv.  939)  ("anig  Jvtiriux.  (2)  The  daughter  of
Aeglsthtia  and  Clytaemtiestra,  and  mother  of  Peu-
thihi!)  by  Orciites  iPausaii.  ii.  18, 5).

Erinna  {'Hfiivyn).  (1)  A  pot'irw, and  the  fnMid
nf  Sappho.  She  flonririhnd  about  the  year  h.v.  HIO.
AU  that  i^  known  of  her  is  contained  in  the  follow-
ing words  of  Kustatbius  {iid  11.  ii.  p.  3^):  "Kritiua
was  born  in  LeBbo*,  or  in  Khodea,  or  in  Teos.  or  in
Tiloa,  the  little  island  near  Cuidns.  She  was  a
poetess,  and  wrote  a  poem  called  'the  Dif^taff'
CWkattanf)  in  the  Aeolic  and  iKiric  diitlert;  it  cou-
sisted  of  300  hexameter  lines.  She  wns  the  friend
of  Sappho,  and  diiMl  unmarried.  It  was  thought
that  her  verses  rivallexl  those  of  Homer.  She
was  only  nineteen  years  of  age  wheu  Hhe  die<l.'^
Chained  by  her  tuother  to  the  sptnuiug- wheel,
Erinna  Imd  aa  yet  known  the  chanu  of  existence
in  imagination  aloue.  She  probably  exptesse^l  in
bur  poem  the  restle^  nud  aapiring  thoughte  which
crowded  on  her  youthful  mind  aa  tthe  pursued  her
mouotonons  work.  We  possess  at  the  present  day
only  four  lines  by  Eriuna;  for  though  three  epi*
graius  aM-rilx-d  to  her  are  given  hy  Schneidewin  in
ht4  DrUrtuu  I'ttr'iig  fitarintf  Eleffi4tcae  (Gtittiiigen,
Id^t,  two  at  least  are  nut  genuine.  (2)  A  |K>eteM
mentioned  by  Eunebiu^  under  the  yeui  n.c.  354.
•This  appears  to  bo  the  suuie  pcnmn  who  is  Hpokeu
of  by  Pliny  (//.  .V.  xxxiv.  ^  8),  u»  having  celebmled
Myro  in  he-r  p4K>uis.  Ko  fragments  of  her  poetry
remuin.uud  her  very  existence  has  beeu  que«tioaed.

XMnj^ea  I'ErMvwr). See  EnMKViDKS.


I  Bripb^I^  ('F^itftC^).  lu  Greek  niiftlinloRf,».
ter  «if  .\dr;iBtiis  and  wife  of  Aniphiaraii*  (i|,  v.L
Brilied  with  a  necklace  by  Polynices.  hhe  prcvjilfi
ou  her  huitbiuid  to  inke  purt  in  thi*  nar  '>i  tli-
Seven  Bgaiuitt  Thebes,  in  which  he  uu>t  hiailnttl.
In  reveuge  for  this  she  was  tihtin  by  her  «oa  AIl-
uioeou  (ij.  r.j. See  SevEX  against  Tuzbu.

Erls  CKpit).  The  Oreek  name  for  the  goddoi
of  Discord,  aiater  of  Ares.  See  Paris;  Tboux
Wah.

Enieetl.  ( I )  Jchiaxx  ArcfST.  A  distlnpu«bo4
pliilohigi»4t  auil  theohrgian  of  the  last  eeuiury.lMrfi
at  Ti^niKtiidl,  in  tiermany,  AugUht  4th,  17(IT.  H'
studied  aL  Pforta,  Wittenlierg,  and  Lcipr.lg.  aod  tu
1731  beeaine  co-rector  with  (Liesuer  of  ihr  Thona*
School  iu  Leipzig,  sncceediug  Uesuer  a«  nytorb
1734.  In  1742  he  was  called  to  the  L'uiveiwiyrf
Leipzig  as  Professor  Extmonlinarius  of  Claa^
Literatnre,  and  became  Professor  Onlinariii*  rf
Rheloriu  iu  1756. He  died  Septeuiber  Ulb,  IT^L

Eniesti  aud  Ins  cidteaguo  Uesner  t<i.  v.)  aivi»'
gardetl  as  the  founders  of  the  mmlera  Genan
school  of  aucieut  literatnre.  Hy  their  breaililiiif
view,  sound  iliseipliuc,  and  coutngioiiK  eutbnsiun.
they  stimulated  their  pupils  to  those  laboiin  UM
resulted  iu  trausferriog  to  Germany  the  suprwaMf
in  letters  long  held  by  the  univepiities  of  H"llti»<.

Ernesti's  principal  works  (besides  a  oiulriiiHk
of  pamphlets,  pr<>grammat4,  etc.)  are  the  fi>II"«-
iug:  Initia  Docirinae  Solidioru  (17;«ti;  laitiu  Sk*"
lorica  (1730);  editimis  of  Xenophon's  }iem»rl^k^^i
(1737);  Suel(jniuM(174H(;  Taritus(175S};  tbe/'taiA
of  Aristophanes  (1754);  Homer  (U'lO-ftil;  (allun-
achus(l7<jl);  Polybius  (17&1I;  of  llie  (>N.ifi>'saf
Corradus;  the  Greek  lexicon  of  iledencBsi  i'*
liihliothcca  Ltttina  of  Kubricius  (atdiuisbrd);  ilw
.Irvhurvloyta  Ltttrniria  (1768);  and  lUralint  7«-
neUium  tie  ParticuUa  (17G9).  Uis  best  wurV,  bo«-
ever,  is  the  edition  of  Cicero,  In  5  vols  (1737 -Si
to  which  is  addo^l  the  valuable  ('lavis  tiemniwM
((>tb  I'd,  Halle.  1831).  His  Latin  oratioti.%  nliHt
won  for  him  the  name  of  "the  German  ('ic«*m'
are  collected  under  the  title  Opuscuta  OftlfH^ftU
rd.  1767 ;  snppl.  vol.  171H).  Hia  pUiloIogicol  tw-
tiscs  werp  puhlisheil  as  npatcuia  PhiUl0tiM  i*
Crilii-a  (1764;  '2dvd.  ITTGi.  See  Bnr«iaii,  Rf^riK**
d.  rianM.  PhiloJ.  pp.  400-104  (Mnuicb,  18H3).

(2)  J<iiiANN  CiiRi."mAX  GomjEB,  a  nephew  rf
the  preceding,  was  born  at  Amstadt  in  ITM;  and
stuilte4  at  Leydon,  where  he  became  Vrafemor^
Philosophy  in  I7ftj.  and  of  Ubetoric  in  WJS.  Ho  'li«*
in  the  lost-uaioed  year  (Jane  Sib).  He  editMiW
fables  of  Aeeop  in  Greek  (1781);  Tlehychiiixl*^)'
Suidas(l?86);  the  i^iatca  of  Sil,  Italicos  (1791-9^;
and  also  put  forth  a  fx-jiron  Trrhnoh>*/Uu  firaer*'^
WArti»ruar(17i»r>);  a  Usicom  TerJtnaiogiar  flom*»»'^
Ithetorieae  (1797);  iuxdCietro'»G«iMlttiidKinil{\^^
1802).

Eroantheia  (ra  ^poavSna).  A  feativol  •'(  wkocb.
celebrated  in  the  Petoponneeaa  iu  the  sjiriug  »*•<"
( Phot.  icj-.  p.  96 ;  Hesych-a.  v.).

BroBatia  The  technic-al  term  for  Ibedblfi^
tion  of  water  from  the  aqueducts  at  Bome.  Sn
AgrAEDfcTva.

Ero«  ('KfMit). The god of  love  among  il>'

I  Greek)*. His  name  does  not  ocrur  iu  Homcf ;  hot

in  Hesiod  (  Theog.  IW  full.i he  is  the  fMirest  of  t^

deitie<^  who  subdues  the  hearts  of  both  gedi  u^

men. He  in  bi>m  from  Chaoa  at  the  saioe  tlBV  ■»

!  the  Earth  and  Tartams,  and  is  the  conmd*  ^


EROS


623


ERYSICHTHON


Aphrodite  from  the  moment  of  her  birth.  Hesiod
coDCeives  Eros  not  merely  as  the  god  of  sensual
loTc,  but  &t(  a  power  which  forms  the  world  by
inner  nnion  of  the  separated  elements — an  idea
very  prevaleut  in  antiquity,  especially  among  the
philosophers.  According  to  the  later  and  com-
moner notion,  Eros  was  the  youngest  of  the  gods,
generally  the  son  of  Aphrodite  by  Ares  or  Hermes,
always  a  child,  thonghtless  and  capricious.  He  is
as  irresistible  as  fair,  and  has  no  pity  even  for  bis
own  mother.  Zens,  the  father  of  gods  and  men,
arms  him  with  golden  wings,  and  with  bow  and
nuerrtug  arrows,  or  bnrning  torches.  Anteros,  the
god  of  mutual  love,  is  his  brother,  and  bis  com-
panions are  Pothos  and  Himeros,  the  peraonifica-
tioDs  of  longing  and  desire,  with  Peitho  (Persnar
sion),  the  Muses,  and  the  Graces.  In  later  times
be  is  surroimded  by  a  crowd  of  similar  beings,
Erotes  or  Loves.  (For  the  later  legend  of  Eros
and  Psyche,  see  Psychol)

One  of  the  chief  and  oldest  seats  of  his  worship
was  Tbespiae  in  Boeotia.  Here  was  his  most
ancient  image,  a  rough,  unhewn  stone.  His  festi-
val, the  Erotia  or  Erotidia,  continued  till  the  time
of  the  Soman  Empire  to  be  celebrated  every  fifth
year  with  mnch  ceremony,  accompanied  by  gym-
sastio  and  mnaical  contests.  Besides  this  be  re-
ceived special  honour  and  worship  in  the  gymna-
sia, wheie  hia  statne  generally  stood  near  those  of


Elrot. (Rome,  C^iltottDs  Uawnm.}

Hermes  and  Heracles.  In  the  gymnasia,  Eros  was
the  person ification  of  devoted  friendship  and  love
between  youths  and  men ;  the  friendship  whicli
proved  itself  active  and  helpful  in  battle  and  bold
adventure.  This  was  the  reason  why  the  Spar-
tana  and  Cretans  sacrificed  to  Eros  before  a  battle,
and  the  sacred  band  of  yoaths  at  Thebes  was  dedi-
cated to  him ;  why  a  festival  of  freedom  {'EXtvBi-
fiut)  was  held  at  Samos  in  his  honour,  as  the  god
who  bonnd  men  and  yonths  together  in  the  strug-
gle for  honour  and  freedom ;  and  why  at  Athens


he  was  worshipped  as  the  liberator  of  the  city,  in
memory  of  Hamiodtiis  and  Aristogiton  (q.  v.).

In  works  of  art  Eros  was  usually  represented  as
a  beantifnl  boy,  close  ujiou  the  age  of  youth.  In
later  times  he  also  appears  as  a  child  with  the  at-
tribntes  of  a  bow  and  arrows,  or  burning  torches,
and  in  a  great  variety  of  situations.  The  most
celebrated  statues  of  this  god  were  by  Lysippus,
Scopas,  and  Praxiteles  whose  Eros  at  TheKpiae
was  reganled  as  a  masterpiece,  and  nusiirpasaable.
The  famous  torso  in  the  Vatican,  in  which  the  god
wears  a  dreamy,  lovulurn  air,  iupopularly.but  prob-
ably erroneously,  traced  to  au  original  by  Praxiteles.
The  Eros  trying  his  bow,  in  the  Capitoline  Museum
at  Rome,  is  supposed  to  be  the  copy  of  a  work  by
Lysippus  (see  illustration).  The  Roman  god  Amor
or  Capido  was  a  mere  adaptatiou  of  the  Greek  Eros,
and  was  never  held  in  great  esteem.  AntKros  was
the  brother  of  Eros  and  punished  those  who  did  not
requite  the  love  of  others  (Ovid,  Met.  liii.  750).

Brotla  or  BTOtidia(  'Eptyna  or  *Ep<urtdui ).  The
most  solemn  of  all  the  festivals  celebrated  in  the
Boeotian  town  of  Thespiae.  It  took  place  every
fifth  year,  and  in  honour  of  Eros,  the  principal  di-
vinity of  the  Thespians.  Respecting  the  particu-
lars nothing  is  known,  except  that  it  was  solem-
nized with  contests  in  music  and  gymnastics  (Plut.
Amat.  1;  Pansau.  ix.  31,  $  3;  Athen.  xiii.  p.  561).
At  this  festival  married  oonples  ma<le  up  any  quar-
rels they  might  have.  The  worship  of  Eros  seems
to  have  been  early  established  at  Thespiae,  where
the  ancient  symbolic  representation  of  the  god — a
rude  stone — was  long  looked  npou  with  reverence
(Fausan.  ix.  27,  $  1). See  Eko8.

Brotio  Uteratnre. See  Eleou  ;  Novels  and
Romances;  Pbiafkia.
Zbrbepbotia  or  Braepborla  (J^pjf^ipia  or  ip<ni~

<f>6pta). See  AltRHEPHORIA.

Xirs^  or  HeraA. See  Cecrops  ;  Erechtheus.

Bryclna  ('Epuicti^).  A  surname  of  Aphrodite
from  Mount  Eryx  in  Sicily,  where  she  had  a  tem*
pie.  The  Eryciniau  Aphrodite  appeai-s  to  have
been  the  same  with  the  Phaeuician  Aetart^,  whose
worship  was  brought  over  by  the  latter  people,
and  a  temple  erected  to  her  on  Mount  Eryx.  In
confirmation  of  this,  we  learn  from  Diodoms  Sicu-
lus  that  the  Carthaginians  reveretl  the  Eryciniau
Aphrodite  equally  as  mnch  as  did  the  natives  them-
selves (Diod.  Sic.  iv.  83).

Erymanthian  Boar. See  Heracles.

SrymanthOB  C^pipioydos).  (1)A  mountain-
chain  in  the  northwest  angle  of  Arcadia,  celebrated
in  fable  as  the  haunt  of  the  savage  boar  destroyed
by  Heracles  (ApoUod.  ii.  5. 3 ;  Pausan.  viii.  24 ;  Ho
mer,  Od.  vi.  103).  ApoUonins  places  the  Eryman-
thian  monster  in  the  wilds  of  Mount  Lampea ;  but
this  mountain  was  that  part  of  the  chain  where
the  river  Erymauthus  took  its  rise.  (3)  A  river  of
Arcadia,  descending  from  the  mountain  of  the  same
name,  and  flowing  near  the  town  of  Psophis.  After
receiving  another  small  stream,  called  the  Aroa-
uins,  it  joins  the  Alphens  on  the  borders  of  Elis.
The  modem  name  of  the  Erymauthus  is  the  Do-
gana.

Bryalohthoii  CEpwrixStov).  "Render  of  the
earth."  The  sou  of  the  Thessalian  king  Triopas,
who  cnt  down  trees  in  a  grove  sacred  to  Demeter,
for  which  he  was  punished  by  the  goddess  with  a
fearfhl  hunger,  that  caused  him  to  devour  his  own


EBVTUIA


an


PXTEOCLES


HuhIi  (Ovid,  JTirf.Tiii.  738;  CaUim.  ^ymn.  in  i>nB.
34  foil.).

Erythia  ['EpCdtm).  (1)  One  nf  tlie  Heaperides
■(»|.  v.).  i'it  Tbe  (Ijiiighti.'rr  <if  (Jfryon  (ij.  v.),  wbii
Kut  ber  iiani«  frum  the  Jslaiiil  near  tbe  cuaKt  of
IliMpniiia.  wliert*  bor  fntUer  Hvoil  ^  Hettiotl,  Thenij.
aiNI;  rannfin.  X.  17.5).

Eij^thiae  (l^i>v&(tm\  Ooe  of  Iho  twelve  cUic«
of  Touin,  siliiHted  near  the  cna«t  o|)po»ttu  CtnoH
(HertMl.  i.  14V).  Its  foiiiiclcr  watt  ttatd  to  have  lH>en
Kryilini)*,  t\w  sou  uf  Ithadjimantlniii.  who  estab-


makes  AoueaB  to  have  fottn(1«l  the  ternplc.  Tin-
town  WiiM  d«stroyL>d  by  thi-  C.nrthiiiniiia»»  in  ili^
time  of  I'yiihuK,  wha  \\  short  time  i>ri'vionj  Lid
tnken  it  by  atonu,  and  tho  tabnliitanu  w^ir
rvuiuvfMl  to  Urepotmm  (DJud.  xxil.  14.  xxiii  'Ji
It  (tiioii.  linwex'er,  ivvivod,  oniitg  to  the  celcl--
rity  uf  tli*>  otljiu'cut  tt'nipl«.  lu  llie  Fir»t  rtuiie
War  it  fell  into  thp  bauds  of  tbt>  Btimaiifr.  but  wu
8ur{>risvd  by  Bari'ne,  the  CarthagiuittU  couunui-
tXtt,  and  thi^  iiibnbiUlita  who  escu}!**)  the  «Imi|Ii-
t*r  \v«rn  agatu  removed  to  I>rei>aiiuni  (Diod.  hit.


lisiiedbimBelfberewithabmlyufCrvtanfl.Carlaiis/*'**- '^''^  r''*^«  "^*'«r  recovered from  thi»  lilow;


and  LyoiauB.  At  n  hiler  ix^riod  vmuv  Ciifpti!*,  aou
of  l!iMlrntt,  ^vitbaii  loiijnii  roloity,  whcilfi.'  the  city  ta
flouitrtitnes  callwl  CNOl*ol't'.i,is>  (Kyairoi^oXic).  The
city  did  not  lie  exactly  on  lberoa«t,  but  soiiih  Utile
dihiaiiep  iiilniid.  iind  had  a  harbour  on  thi-  cooHt
naiiipil  Cinsns  (Livy.  xxxvi.4:tL  ErylhraL-  wan  fa-
mous as  the  R'sideiice  of  tiiie  of  the  SibyU  at  an
early  period,  and  in  the  tiirie  of  Alexander  we  litul
uiiothor  tniikin;^  her  appeaiance  liere,  with  Sliuihir
clainia  to  iititpiralion. iiee  Sibvlla.

Erythraaum  MarS  (i^  ipvBfia  SaKantra),  A  nnniw
applied  tu  the  whule  nceati  by  theOivekR.extendinj;
froiu  the  coast  of  Kthiopia  to  the  ishind  of  Tapro-
batia,  when  their  geoKtapbical  kiiovrh-dKe  of  India
waa  in  its  tnfaiu-y.  They  believed  the  name  to  l»e
deriveil  fi-oni  that  of  Erythra**.  an  ancient  nionarch
who  reiji^uetl  nlonfi  these  coaHtH,  aud  UMM-rted  that
his  ^^rave  wum  to  he  fiiinnl  in  ohl-  of  thn  ndjaeriit
itlnnds  (f'lirtiiiM,  viii.'.>,  14).  Aftenriircls,  when  the
CreidcN  li-ariicd  thi*  exiHtcnre  nf  nn  liiiliaii  Ocean,
the  term  was  applieil  m^n-ly  to  the  sen  lielnw  Ara-
liiii,aiLd  to  the  Arabian  and  Persian  Cintfit.  In  thii«
l»l.t<-r  Hi'iiKe  KtruW  nxoH  tin-  name.  Herodoluit
ftdUjwD  the  ohl  acceplatiun  uf  the  word,  according
tit  the  opinion  prevaknl  in  his  af>e.  The  apiwlla-
tioii  was  pndmUly  derived  from  Eilom  I  K^aii  ),
whiMMH  di-'Acnndanta  werr  called  IdnaiaeariB,  and  iit-
haUlted  tho  uortbern  ]»arr!t  of  Arabia.  Tliey  navi-
gated upon  the  Red  Sen  and  Persian  Oiilf.and  alM*
upon  the  luiHuii  Ocean;  and  the  Oiit-ntal  mime
Elton)  Aitfnifyiiig  ivrf,  the  aeaof  the  Idiiniaeani*  waA
called  the  Reil  Sea  nnd  the  Eryrliraean  Sea  ('Kfjv-
^^u  duXiiifo-a),  uf  wLieh  the  Latin  Man-  Ituhrum  i»
a  tmu»latiou.

Etyx('Kpuf).  AsonofBnIrannd  Aplirodit<^.  who.
relying  upon  bis  htrength,  challenged  all  titrauKers
to  light  with  bini  in  llie  eouibai  of  ihe  eaesttis.
Heracles  aecepted  bis  elin1len;;e  at'tci-  iriany  had
yielded  to  bis  sui»orior  dexterity,  atid  Eryx  vran
killed  in  the  combat,  and  iMiried  on  tliM  unmntjiin
■wberv  he  had  built  u  temple  to  Aphrodite  (Verg.
yftfw.  V.  4<)il.

Bryx  i'¥^v^).  A  monuUiu  of  Sicily,  at  the  weat-
em  extremity  of  the  i^tlaiid.  and  near  the  city  of
Drepaunni.  It  was  fabled  lobaveu'ceived  tt.inanie
from  Eryx,  who  was  bnk'ied  there.  On  itn  Mimniit
stood  a  faninus  tentjdo  of  Aphrodite  Kryeinn,  and
ou  the  western  declivity  wa»  sitnated  the  town  of
Eryx,  the  appn^ach  to  which  from  the  plain  wa«
roeky  nad  diftlcnlt.  At  the  distance  of  thirty  sta-
dia stood  the  harbour  of  the  same  name  rPidyb.  i.
K;  Diod.  xxiv.  I ;  Cic.  in  Vtr.  ii.  r*i.  The  Phmni-
cians  were  iiuwt  probably  the  fonndcrd  of  the
place  and  altwi  of  lb»  tpinple,  and  the  Eryeinian
Aphrwlit*  appcant  to  be  identilb'd  with  the  As-
tartd  of  the  latter  people.  The  imtive  iiiUabit-
nnts  in  this  qnarter  were  called  Elymi.  and  Eryx
is  i«aid  by  (*oinc  to  have  been  their  king, Vtrgil


the  aaiirtity  of  the  temple  drew,  tnd«ed.  oev  in.
habitanifi  amiind,  bnt  the  city  wna  tttfver  rebnill.
No  traces  of  tlui  leiuple  remain  nt  the  present  d«y

EachAra  u'fr;^d;ia), A  heorth. Seo  rocr*.
Enqiiiliiiua  Mona See  Ku.ma.
Esaedaiil. See  Esskiji'M.
Baaed6uea. A  {leople  of  Sannatia  Auatica,  t»
the  east  of  the  Paltia  Matrntis.

EaaAdtun,  i-urely  Eaafida,  Kaid  to  bv  a  Keltif
wold.  The  niuiie  of  a  chariot  n^etl,  «>A|MW)illf  in
war,  by  the  Urttoiia,  Oaubt,  and  Belgae,  piflu|i
also  by  the  GermanH  rVei;g.  Gtar$.  iil.  204;  Sen.
ad  he).

Aecordinjt  to  the  accoaot  givea  by  CmmiIII-O.
iv.  :t5)  the  niethml  of  using  the  caM^luai  la  the
ancient  British  army  was  very  »imilar  to  ihc
practico  of  tUt<  Greektt  in  the  heroic  a(p!«,aa  <l^
sciilH'd  in  the  article  CTRRt'^.  I'he  prineipil  i\i-
fereiife  seeniH  to  have  b«en  that  the  nwtednm  ku
strovger  and  more  nolid  than  the  ftt'^^ti— llut  II
was  o|K!ii  befi>m  ioNtead  of  bi^hiod ;  bi>uci>  tlM
driver  wail  able  t^i  rrin  alony;  tb*  [Mile  {lie  tfm*at
liriUinnc  ej-ritlrt,  Jnv,  iv.  125)  and  ttjcu  to  rttctal
with  the  great.r.<<t  Hpee^l  into  the  tMxIy  nfttwciri
which  lu;  dnive  with  extraonlinary  strirtiicu  aixl
skill.  From  the  extremity  nf  the  polv  bf  tbrt*
his  missiles,  tsapeeially  the  valein  (Tab  Flacc.  J'*
ffOH.  vi.  J*3).  It  appears  alM>  that  ibe«e  can  ««n
purposely  mode  as  noisy  as  pmisible,  ]m>l>aMy  V
tlic  creaking  and  elau^ng  of  the  wheels  (Tac.  Jfnb
:io;  Ci.ind.  Eftigr.  4);  and  that  this  waa  drtK*  !•
order  to  strike  dismay  into  the  enemy.  TIhmI''''"
ern  of  these  chariots  were  called  in  Latin  f»»aUiyi
CCaes.  /(.  ti.  iv.  'U).  Tacitus  (.4r;ric,  W)  elwr«t
tliac  the  driver  of  the  car  rankei]  aUfve  Iim  AkIii-
iug  com pauioi),  which  was  the  ruvetw  of  Ihelttwk

The  ctviediim  was  ailopled  for  ptir|io«M<  oltM-
venieneo  and  luxury  annot};  the  linmaub  (PlPf  tt
ii.  1,  76 ;  Cio.  Ad  Jit.  vi.  1 ;  Ovid,  Am.  ii.  16,  *^
Cicero  (Phil.  ii.  24,  f  r)H)  inentiotnt  the  naftofiltiT
Antunina  as  u  piece  of  effeminacy  disi;raMfnl  lo*
trihnne  of  the  people:  hat  in  tho  time  of  J"'""*
it  seems  to  have  become  common  {Fr  4f,  fl>*'^
As  uwmI  by  tbo  Romans  tho  esisi^dnm  hiul  do  ml
for  the  driver;  tho  traveller  drove  hiiuftflf  (t*^*''-
1.  c),  antl  always,  it  wonid  seem,  with  a  pa'f  **
horwa,  whcreaa  with  the  rinnm  the  uninUr  *^'>-
ried.  The  etwedum.  like  the  risium,  appHi^  <"
have  Ih'i'u  kept  for  hire  at  the  poat-liooics  i*  *•*'
ttuiis  (Mait X.  1(14). See  M^Nsia

Baaui.  A  peoi>lc  in  Gaol,  vest  of  the  Se^iuio*
(Cues.  i>'.  fi.  v.  24).

Et«&clea  <'ETfu4cX^trV  A  son  of  Oedipus  an'l  ^^
c.vtta.  After  hi«  father's  flight  it  wa«  aitrw^  ^
tween  him  and  his  brother  Polynient  tlut  tlj"
should  both  share  the  kingilom  and  rel^  itM-


natoly.  each  a  year.  Ei*oclc»,  by  right  of  Minori-
ty, first  iiM^riidtMl  the  tbrotic;  but  after  the  iu-ui
year  of  bin  reigu  hud  ex|nrod  bo  rofnscd  tu  glvu
op  Ibe  crowu  to  his  brother  according  to  thuir
tnutaal  a|jTMmrii(.  Polyaicos,  resulving  to  \iuu-
ish  BO  grtMH  a  vlolatiou  of  a  »oleitiu  eiigiigeiiK-iit,
fled  to  the  court  of  AdrastuH,  king  itf  Argua,  wht-rc
he  monieil  Argiu,  tbt»  daught4^^  of  that  inouart-h  ;
utl  hariiij;  pn<v»il«il  upou  AdmMiitt  to  CKpoutM*
his  catiMt,  the  latter  tiiifl*Mlook  what  watt  ibniomi-
bftted  the  First  Thcbaii  War. tw<Mily*Bt'vt*u  yean*.  ■»
I  mill,  before  the  Trojan  on»^.  Adrastun  iMurt'hi*«l
f^aiuBl  Theben  with  an  army,  of  which  hf  took
be  cuinmaml,  having  with  hint  twvtMi  (roh-brattil
AhlL-fii,  Tydeii»,  AniphianniH,  Capaimi-tin,  Piirtlrciio-
fiis,  Hipi»omodou,  KlfitcIiiH,  mm  of  IphiH,  and
PolyniceR.  The  TbobauM  who  espouitud  the  cauitr
of  EtROcIefl  were  MelanipptiH  and  tHaiartiH,  houh  of
AiitncMis,  Po],v'phouti-a,  Mugai-cim,  Lodthcucit,  and
Hy|M?rbiu8.  All  the  Argive  K-adors,  with  the  ex-
ception of  Aflrastiis,  full  before  Tbe-lw«,  Etcocles
alao  beiog  olain  in  Hiugle  couibnt  witli  Potyuices.
Ten  yoarB  after  tbe  coucluslou  of  thin  war  arose
that  of  tbe  Epjgotii,  or  the  sous  uf  tbe  nhiiii  cbief-
taiiiti  uf  ArgoH,  who  took  up  amis  lo  avengv  thr
death  of  their  sinw.  (Swf"  Kplfinxi.)  I.iMtM  uf  tbe
sevirn  Argive  roninnindem  are  givmi  by  AeMcbyhiH
in  hi)«  Hrrrn  affaimHt  TT\ebrii,  by  Kuri|»idea  in  h'm
Fhttrwitmae  and  Suppiiff  :  and  by  Sophocles  tu  bis
Ortitpmi  ColoncMi.  Tbiy  all  iignM-,  cxce)it  that  in
the  Pkoinignar  the  name  of  Adnuttnti  i»  substituted
Mbr  that  of  Kteocloa. See  Seven  aoalnst  Thebes.

^  Xitedclaa  /EtVokXdO.  One  of  the  sevea  chiefK
of  the  army  of  Adraatas,  in  bin  expedition  agaiiiMl-
ThebcH.  He  waa  killvd  by  Megoreus,  Cb»  wu  of
Creon.  under  (he  walU  of  Thelmi  (Apollod.  iii.  6).

See  SRVEX  AOAINHT  'HlKBES.

Etesiae  ('Enjtriai  twtnoi,  Herod,  vi.  140). The

ian  Winds,  derived frdui  trot,  "year,"  Bigrii-

ftoy  jK<rio<lical  wiiiih*.  luit  in<iri''  itartictilarly

northerly  winibi  which  bUtw  tn  the  Aegean  for

;y  day*  from  the  ritdng  of  the  dog-Htar.

Btmria  or  Tascia  iTvftptjvia,  Jvptrrjin).  A  conn-
of  Italy  once  iuhnbitod  by  the  fMHiido  kunwn
Aa  the  Etruscnns  (Tnsci).  It  lay  west  of  tbo  river
Tiber  and  tbe  Apennines,  cxteuding  to  lie  aca,
and  iucluding  tbo  valley  of  the  Aruo.  When  au-
thentic history  beein»,  the  Etniftcans,  iu  addition
to  this  trrritory,  held  also  tbe  valley  of  ihe  PaduH
(Etrnria  Circumpndana)  and  a  further  atrip  tuinih
of  the  Tiber  (Ktniria  CainpnuiamO.  From  thi*
former  territorj-  they  were  {•n>wdfd  south  waol  by
tbe  Oanls  (9teoCET.TAK).iind  from  the  latter  the  Ro-
maui  subBeqiiently  drove  them.  Elruria  Proper
waa  a  confederation  of  twelve  .States  or  cities  tHim-
decim  poputi  JCtruritir).  of  which  no  conipleto  list
hju  reached  ua,  though  it  is  fairly  certain  that  the
fnllowing  towiid  were  eleren  of  the  twelve :  Teii,
Caer*.  Taniuinii.  Clnsiatu,  Cortona,  Penisia,  Vol-
ninii,  Vulci,  Vetnlonia.  Volntemw,  and  Artx^tium.
The  twelfth  was  tn  all  prt>ljHbit]ty  either  Falerii,
Populouiu,  or  Rnsellae.  Of  the  nortbcm  league,
tbo  following  were  important  towns :  FeUiua
(Bonouia),  Mantna,  Ravi'una,  Cbiavcnnn,  and  11a-
tria  or  Hmlria,  which  given  lis  nnnnt  tu  Ilir  Ha-
driaticaui  Mare,  lu  the  Muilh,  Capua  and  Kola
were  rich  and  jiowerful  cities.  Likr  Etntriu  Proj*-
er,  tbe  uortheru  league  was  oue  of  twelro  Stateet.

ErnxoixMiY. — The  earliest  tradittoiio  to  which
we  now  have  accesa  make  the  Ktruriaus  a  Lydian


people  (Herml.  i.  fl4,  106,  ITll.  But  this  theory,
which  was  carefully  ooiiriidered  by  I^iouysius  of
Hal  icon  latutUM  in  bis  work  on  the  origins  of  Konio,
apiteHrA  to  rest  niH>u  no  convincing  oviilunce.  Dio-
tiyoius  notes  that  it  is  not  nientioucd  by  Xau-
tbus,  tbe  histoiiiHi  of  Lydia,  and  rtnius  up  thi'  n;-
f>ults  of  bixown  iiiveatigalJouabyMiying  that  "the
KtniAcanB  do  not  rcMimble  any  other  people  either
iu  laugunge  or  iu  manners."  Thi»  conchisiun  is
intcrc«ting,  for  Dionyniun  had  given  nmch  thought
and  time  to  tbo  consideratinn  of  the  qnesltou,  and
is  eaid  to  have  written  a  work  on  the  Etniscaiiti  in
twenty  books,  during  tbe  reign  of  Angnstus.  when
there  was  n  wirt  of  Etrurian  revival,  in  which  ev-
eryUtlng  Ktrusran  wnn  the  fashion.  The  ideult-
flcatlon  of  thii  EtntM-uiib  with  tbo  Lydiaus  wjui
very  likely  due  to  a  coufuaiou  uf  the  Lydiau
Tappfffiai  With  tbe  name  Tvjimfvoi  or  Tvpprji^w,  ap-
plied to  the  Etriucans  by  the  Ureeks.  (Cf.  He-
siod,  Thro-f.  1U15:  Ovid.  Mel.  itt.  577  foil. ;  Plin.  H.
y.  iii.  IU;  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  *24;  aud  see  Mommsen,
liial.  of  Rome,  bk.  i.  cU.  ix.)  The  cunfusiou  naa
easier  beoanae  of  the  maritime  prowees  of  both
people*  and  their  piratical  practices  iHerod.  vl.
29;  8trab.  319).

Mfxleni  tnve-ttigatont  have  not  lieen  deterriMl
by  the  ill  sitceew  of  ItionvHidH  fniin  atleiiipting  to
solve  the  problem  of  the  clbuDlogii'ul  albuitieJt  of
tbe  EtrmwanH;  but  no  delitiite  and  generally  ao
cepteil  conclnpiouM  have  yel  been  reached.  For
purjioses  «)f  inve.>itigatiun  there  have  been  cfillvct-
ed  some  6(Wt  or  uiore  KtnuM'iiu  iiincripliouti,  the
rharaetero  reHemhling  Pelasgian  or  early  (irf>ek.
There  arc  also  vast  collecUoDS  of  their  pottery,


Vap  01  Andvat  Rlniria.


ETRL'RU


&M


ETKL'KiA


bronzes,  jeweU,  ami  otlior  worki*  of  Titscnn  art.
KilTecn  biliuguul  i[iH*ri}»tii>ii>i  ytvti  ttonif  fiirtlKT
aiil  ou  ibc  ftido  uf  tliu  langun^H,  1>ut  less  than  nut*
iii>){bt  siip|M>8«,  for  ilioy  consist  nuly  of  pixtiier
iiAiue^.  The  lougt-st  iii(nTi|»ti»Mi  yet  discovcreil  is
ibai  foiiiiil  at  Perugia  in  Ivm,  coitsistiiig  uf  fWty-
8ix  lineit.  ill  red,  iipuu  two  sidet  of  n  block  of  Htoiie
(the  "Cippus  Pertmitiii*").  Tbi^se  records  are  lu
tbe  maiu  mdrtiinry  renmU  lalcoii  from  tonibv,
walls,  or  tbo  InbvU  and  s^'uIh  of  nmrliiury  tiicbtw,
or  iittll  ofteiier  paitidMl  i][H>ti  urns  or  cut  into
ftarcophagi.  Tlipy  nxiially  j;ivti  tU«  itaino,  par-
Ptiluge,  ajjc,  and niiik of  th« decoawd, wilb a


wbicb  it  bad  been  irrapped  were  corercd  miHh
writt^Mi  cbaracterv.  Tbt!«e,  whuD  tizatuUiKl  in
lHf)7  by  Brii):scb  Faaba,  were  pruiionnccd  by  hin
to  be  Ktbiopii-.  In  ltf77  Sir  Kicbanl  Burl<m  ei.
plaiuc<l  lijcni  hh  N»batb*raii.  ll  remuiui-d  foi  Ptnt.
Xrnll  \o  prove  tbul  the  cbaraci«r&  art  KtrnMiia,
and  tbut  tbc  wordit  wbich  ibey  eu)l>ody  uv
ill  tbc4-'xi!iiinf'ii)Kcriptioti«of  Ktrnria.  They
ill  fact,  a  htMtk,  of  wliich  tli«  t«xt  origiually
sitited  of  tnelvo  vulumns.  More  tbaii  two  bni
lines  are  iiitaet,  incbidiitfr  tbe  butt  para|{ra(i
tbe  book.  Tbu  niiiiiiniy  iimnnd  wblcb  tbc  Umd
baiidii  were  wrappeil  in  tlial  of  ii  woiiuui,  aiiil  tlie


'ifttta, ,

i


^utiu;
D«dia I


words  may  be  given  from  Pauli :

Ihq llrft

bull) fix.

•uthliMiw iim-nlrliNi

injar pllkr  {cippui).

aino*


eiaa.. ma.

pal* intt.

Mikh ilBDKhlf  r.

Iiaini ft  nrcdniDii.

CTll  (cv»rj girt.  •iMlirAiloa.


Kllkr
lit


I  ma ML

lure. dAl.

liirr* dediL

I  area lubuK.


liftt  of  tliti  4it)itTVH  tb»t  h<>  bfUl. The  iiKWt  iioKmI  I  KJIdiii^  on  tlie  face  aiid  sliuiiblci-it  provra  it  to  br-
ill vestigat  ions of tbe <irigjii8 and affiiiitivM of  I  long  to  I  he  Greek  ur  Roniaii  jferiod. Now,asKtni»-
tbc  Ktrnscaus  have  bc^en  those  of  K.  O.  Mliller, can  wan  still  »poken  and  rend  in  the  tint  ceutiu;
wbo«e  dis*oitation  on  tbe  subject  iu  two  volnniee  ,  A.n.,  it  is  easy  lo  see  how  an  ElrnKan  book
<Ureslaii,  11*3*1;  'M  eel.  Stuttgart,  1^77) received biive  found  its  way  to  Kgypt,  when  both  E
a  prizu  from  tbe  Acoilcmy  of  Sciences  at  Berlin.  |  and  K^'pt  were  parts  of  the  fAiuc  Enipirv
and  VVilhclm  Coraeeii  (fi.  v.),  who  also  pilblisbwl fow  words  of  tbc  b«M>k  that  bail  l»een  idcntiflwJ
two  cinborato  voliiuies  (Leipzig,  lt^'1-75). Later'  1K>3  make  it  probable  Ihnt  it  is  one  of  tbr  woi-
works  are  those  of  Decokeand  Pauli.  religioini,  Kenii-niHgi<^al  warkM  for  which  the  tim-

By  tbew  scbolani  some  progress  has  lievu  made  '  coita  wert?eelebr»tcd.  With  thn  niat«rial  Unainij
t<iwanlN  a  kmiwletlgu  uf  the  |i«riiliaritieN  of  thr>  and  ionipari!M>n  utlorded  by  tbe  euulinuon  bit
EtrnM_'an  latignage.  BejuiilL-M  priipnr  naaieH,  nonie  of  this  btiok.  Ibe  problem  of  ibn  EtniMau  laagu^
2(10  other  words  have  beun  deeipberwl,  amiMig  seem*  likely  to  be  bronght  nt  least  itMiMitnMi
theui  a  number  of  nnnienils,  Ineliidiug  the  tintt  near  to  a  Mitisfactory  solution.  The  trauacrlptiali
lix  digits,  the  coniiiion  wonla  denoting  rolatiou-  awl  phologrnplm  of  the  text,  with  au  accvmitcf
ships,  and  several  verbul  furnis.  An  a  matter  of  Prof  KriU's  discovery,  were  pnbUaIie<l  by  tlii?  lis-
general interest,  tbe folluwing lint of  Ktntscun  '  |H-rful  .Xcailcmy  of  Vietma  in  1*^2  (Z>ir  £>'(rii«tii>'Ji'»

Jf«mi(H('iorf<'M rfw  Agramtr  S'attQnal-Miftum'l  !«.
also,  an  article  by  Prof.  Sayco  iu  the  fortai^Hf
Jttfirw  fur  FL'liriiar>-,  1H93.

['ntil  lately  pIiilido>;iHt}4  werv  in  thit  main  ilivlil-
ed  into  two  great  camps  on  thf  <inoslioii  of  ihf  ra-
ciai  and  Uiignistic  affinities  of  tbo  KlruwaiiH-rtw
ttct  tif  Rcbolora  holding  to  tbc  tbcorj-  of  a  S^tniiii*
origin  and  the  otbiT  to  that  of  an  Aryan.  i6w
Kelationsbip  Is  eipressed  by  separate  words  (as  Iniwi •  KrnopEAN  LANOt-*«Es.t  But  the  wnal
above),  or  [more  commonly)  by  suffixes :  thus,  Jh-  failnro  of  Dr.  Corssen  to  establish  tbe  Aryan  ti;-
Usa,  "  wife  of  Aul^,"  Thcprina,  "  wife  of  Thi-pri,"'  ptithesia  has  to  some  extent  simpHtit'd  the  pntl*-
etc.  Other  lingiiislie  facta  that  haw  been  satiafac* .  lem.  and  tbe  controversy  is  now  carried  on  orrr
fnrily  i-atabltxbed  regarding  tbe  Etruacun  tongne  '  tbi^  .Semitic  theory  and  the  ITgro-Altaie,  thii  Itft
are  them! :  tbe  existence  of  gender,  the  use  of  «n-  !  having  been  %-cry  ingeniously,  thoagb  not  oanTill^
clitics,  Ihu  genitive  singular  iu  •«,  tbe  dative  in  ing1y,Het  forth  by  Pr.  Isaac  Taylor  in  liisf/rtMit
■ti  or  -Mi,  tbe  absence  of  distinction  between  tbo  i  Rtarttrchca  (Lundon,  1^4),  There  are  many  coiMi-
nominative  and  accusative  iu  nouna,  and  the  for-  den  ecu  that  make  tbe  Semitic  bypothesit  Mcn
niation  of  a  pliirai  in  -r  or  •^  plauNiblo. There  are  Semitic  pecnliariltcs  Ines-

The  Egyptian  nionuineuts  speak  of  a  people  able  iu  the  languid — ».  g.  tbe  reiliiplicatiofl  «t
called  Tnrsha  as  taking  pari  nith  the  Sardinians,  consonants,  the  omiMlon  of  short  T0Q-elii,BD<1tlM
Tencri,  and  other  people  from  the  coasts  of  "  the  i  retrognulc  writing.  The  religion  of  ihc  EtriwcsM
Jfortb"  in  an  invjwiun  of  Egypt  about  R.f.  IdlNI;  |  was  a  species  of  mysticism  like  that  uf  (be  i^niitM
bnt  tbe TnrKbai'aii  not  bf!:dt<linLtely  ideiitilieil  with  of  Carthage;  their  ruling  class  was  a  prieatluK''
(lieTyrrlwiiianjiany  more  ibaucan  tbHTyrrht-nians  !  and  their  theology  a  system  of  casnist^,  aswUi
with  tbe  Etruwans.  Support  is  givun  to  tbe  Lyd-  j  the  Jews;  while  their  rites  were  gloomy  anil  Ii*
ian  bypiitlu-sis  by  the  discovery  made  in  I8>^  by  i  rible,  like  tliiMM*  of  the  Pbieiiiciaiiit.  Again,  I^
two  FreiR'b  sctiulars,  who  found  in  the  islanil  uf  i  nrt  puwu^ssiw  the  peculiar  rigidity,  the  convcnliC*
Lemnos  u  »epulclirnl  monument  with  Iwu  Elrux-  |  ality.  and  tbe  lack  ufexprcaeion  that  mark  ibran
can  iiiBcriplious,  thungh  of  a  dialectic  character.  :  and  arcbit^'cturc  «f  the  Asiatic  Semites.  Fiiiallr*
Nuw.TbHcydides  states  that  Lemnos  was  inhabited  their  jthysical  cbaracteristicN  wen*  Semitic  in  IW
by  Tyrrhi'iii.-to  that  in  the  finding  of  these  inscrip-  !  the  Etruscnus  depicted  themselves  upon  tl*"'
tiuns  Paidi  twes  eviilence  itf  The  idt-niity  n(  the  monuments  ns  short,  thickset,  with  lar^  *•*'•
two  |ienples,  8ee  Bn^nl  in  tliH  SuIIcHh  de  for-  and  clumsy  limbs  (cf.  V'erg.  ^cor^.  ii.  llHl.sii^''*
rc*/foiTrf« n«  HrUertiquc,  vol.  X.  (IHHBJ;  and  Psnli,  ,  aqniline  nose  that  is  one  of  the  nio5t  noliwa^'*
Eine  rorgricrkitrhc  Inachrtfi  von  LfrtRHitM  (T.^ipzig,  ,  pecniiarities  of  the  Semitic  ]>eoples.  Hat  "'•''*
l***ti).  j  these  coincidences  are  striking,  they  am  noto^'

An  interesting  discovery  was  made  in  IHSl  by  closive,  sinl  iierba|M)  the  most  reasouabls  vk*  ■*
Pixif.  Krall  of  Vienna.  About  1B.MJ,  a  mummy  was  |  That  of  Mlltler,  who  regards  tbe  EtrnMrans  ■•  »•
tleiHtwited  In  tbc  Mnseum  of  Agram  by  an  Anstrian  Asiatic  lum-Aryau  people  iuienninglnl  with  ArT*
traveller  who  bad  bronght  it  from  Egypt.  When  an  elements  derived  from  tbe  tribes  nrhicb  l**f
DUlvlled,  it waa  fnnnd thai the linen cloths in  ,  gradually  con<)uered  and  sniHiiied. Their  Mtivrtt


I
I


boaie  io  Italy  wu  oo  tliA  PihIiih,  aud  as  lute  im
L.ivy's  lime  the  pt!o|)i«  of  tlie  Itlmettiin  Alpn  Hpoke
a  <lialec[  of  Ktruocnu  (Livy,  v.  XI ;  riin.  U.  .V.  iii.
tW;  Justin,  xx.  5;  and  Uborzincr,  i  lieti  [\^^]).
The  theory  of  a  bliMtdiug  of  twu  races,  or  ruthor
of  the  grafliDg  of  ai>  Aryan  bmocb  upou  a  mod-
Aryan  tttock,  wonid  acconiit  for  the  two  inaiu
featon^  that  presviit  tlii^iiiselves  in  the  EtriiH-
can  problem  —  Mm  fact  that,  in  llio  itinin,  Dih
EtniscAns  liav«  iiuthlng  in  i-onunnn  with  ttieir
Qeiglibtiunt  of  Italy,  and  tliu  additional  fact  that
ttietr  lauguage  doea  accni  ti>  uhow  9ome  slight
trocea  of  Aryan  iuUuonco — ^  about  as  much,  for
iuatauce,  aa  that  of  the  Ilrititth  Kelta  lelt  ufKin
ch«  dialect  of  their  Teutonic  couquorora.  Thlti
hjj»nthe«i(t  i«  at  least  reaaouaLile,  uuleeis  we  are
willing  to  accept  the  couchiHiou  of  tho  scholars
who  disparagiitgly  regard  the  Etriiacau  people
and  the  Etniaran  language  aa  am'  genrris,  repre-
seDtiug  a  race  and  a  itpeech  that  have  bect^me  i*z-
tiuct.

Coueatabile  aud  othcrH  hold  that  the  Ktruriau
]»e«plc  cuutaiued  two  dtatiuct  vleai«uts — the  one


(jfficerif  of  Couaiil,  Iai|>«rator,  aud  Ui(-lMti>i-.  The
official  iimigiiia  afterward*  u«ed  in  Konie  —  the
purple  rubL',  tli«!  prattt»xtu,  thn  liotoro  aud  fasces,
the  inlla  cHfnlii.  uiid  the  apparilorrt—Wf-ro  tlvnved
fi-oni  Etniritt.  The  niprusentutivc!*  of  the  tnnlve
towus  met  at  the  temple  of  Voltumua  at  a  place
not  now  known  (cf.  Llvy,  iv. '23).  ])ook»  of  laws
existed  iu  uccortlance  withi^vblch  thr!  internal  af-
fairs of  the  State  were  managed  (Lihri  lH'ieipliHae\
as  well  as  the  religious  rites  atid  Iho  division  nf
the  people. (See  FeKtus,s.  v.  HUtittlfa).

That  the  civilijiatiou  of  the  Etruscann  was  a
highly  develojied  one  i*  shown  by  Ihc  little  that
we  know  of  their  social  laws  ns  well  us  by  the  ovi-
dences  of  their  wealtJi,  l(ixnrj~,  and  power.  The
position  of  womeu  was  a  high  oue^  the  wife  was
the  social  e<]nal  of  the  husband,  as  is  shown  bj
the  sepulthral  bonoun  paid  her,  and  by  the  plot'
ures  of  domestic  life  ponrtrayed  ou  the  sarcophagi
aud  the  vases.  For  a  lung  time  the  Etruscans
ranked  as  one  of  (lie  three  gn-nt  naval  powers
uf  the  Mediterranean.  They  are  known,  also,  to
have  been  familiar  with  the  ecieucce,  (o  have  been


EIruKuiB. (Panting  tttjta  Cserl)


I


aafive  and  serrile,  the  other  foreign  and  occnpy- 1
iug  the  relation  nf  lordship.  Caer6  and  Cortona
are  Hiid  to  have  been  Pelitsfjic  ciities  before  they  '
XTt-ro  possessed  by  the  F.trMsciins ;  and  eertain  in-
acriptioiis  once  rlastted  a^  Elmsean  are  now  iis-
cribe<l  to  the  nioru  ancient  PuhiAgi  (<i- v.).  Llvy
states  that  the  dialect  of  Hiu  Ktrnrlaus  nho  iu-
:»|jitc<l  the  towns  dillert^l  from  that  of  the  Etru-
iatiHof  the  country  dii^TiiitM.  A;:ain,ns  Dr.  Taylor
p«jiiitK  nut,  the  riipid  destruction  nf  (he  Etnirian
|H>\vt-r  in  Campnrjia  and  in  the  valley  of  the  Padus
■nakea  it  probable  that  it  was  u  dnuiiiiion  of  con-
^luest  rathfr  than  of  cnlonizaUon,  ;uid  tbut  the
Jiaaeria,t>r  Etruscans  pniper,  wero  a  ruling  aristoC'
mcy.  of  high  t-ulture  ami  grt;at  nbilily,  but  few  in
iionibur.  All  this  is,  in  the  maiu,corrub(jratlveof
MiUler'o  vie%v.

GovrBNMKNTAJiD  CiNiLiZATioN.^ — The  EtniHan
giiveriiiuenc  was  a  federal  league  uf  the  twelve
cities  already  mentioned,  each  ruled  by  magtslrates
auuually  elected  from  a  class  of  jiriestly  nobles  of
beri'ditnry  rank.  These  magistrates  bore  the  titles
Laucbini>  (  Lnennio ),  Partsv»ua  (  Porseua),  and
Mamuncb,  roughly  corresponding  to  the  Roman


skilled  Id  mining,  metallurgy,  astronomy,  and
medicine,  while  their  knowledge  of  engineering
was  conspicuous  in  the  maHsive  walls  of  their
cities,  huill  nf  huge  blocks,  pcrferlly  fitted  wilhont
eenieiit.  ami  In  thftlr  roads,  tnunels,  and  chain bxTeil
ttjntbs.

In  art  and  art-manufactnres,  the  Etruscan*
stand  very  high.  Their  jewellery,  which  is  in  pat-
terns formed  by  soldering  on  uiuate  grains  of  gold,
excites  a4lmlration,  while  their  bronze-work,  coln-
tiiie.  and  mirrors  are  of  very  fine  workmanship.
Vast  mtmbers  of  painted  vases,  fouud  chiefly  io
tombs,  iHissemt  both  an  hist-orical  and  au  artisllo
value. SeeFtrni.K;  Var.

The  religion  of  tho  Etniscaua  played  a  most  Im-
portant part  in  their  lives,  since  tbey  were  pro-
verbially  dovoted  to  the  exercises  of  their  faitb^
and  wc  have,  in  fact,  alrvady  noted  that  their  very
form  of  government  ■was  largely  a  system  of  sacer*
dotalism.  Hence  Liry  describes  the  nation  as
(irna  ante  omne*  alias  drtiita  TelitfionibMa  (t.  1 ;  see
alsn  i.  Rfi  and  v,  15);  the  early  Fathers  of  the
Christian  Church  denounced  Etruria  as  gi-Hrtrixet
mater  avprrslitivnia ;  and  DionvKiuH  even  went  so


^


woBonp  iifmncli  pnwprrily
to  the  city  in  w^cii  by  tbc
storinstliHl  IiuvfIm^u  iniiia-
niittiHl  to  UN  n(  Ilic  itia^if-
tvoiicu  of  tlie  Tnrqalua,  ud
uiore  forcibly  bj*  tbe  vi«t-
uetw  of  the  eiigiuferiu^
works  coD6tTUcte«l  at  tb&t
tiiuf,  Bucb  as  tbe  Clukci
Miixima,  tbe  CapitoUiif
tviuple,  aud  the  SerTiiu

Wall. S*W  CUJACA-

Evfu  after  the  PximUion
of  tb«  ViugH  fniin  Hittat,
Etruria  wa»  olill  lb«  gnsi-
pft  iiiilitatry  (tower  ia  Italy,
Miiil  fi>r  a  tciiiiiry  the  yooBjj
Kupubtic  of  Uoinv  taxcil  ill
itH  cucr};)t!<a  tii  resiatitit.' tbr
niuglv  TiiBcau  8tat«  uf  Veii.
wboite  people  iu  B.C.  4T"bc-
Icmlly  siK'ceMlcd  id  raptnt'
iiig  ibi>  Inuiciilnm.  r>i)hu;
lb»  perioil  fruni  ii.c.&IOl<
[K«bar.)  -174,  tbe EtrascauK  Airiiti

witL  llivGrceksaudCanlu-
giiii«us  the  control  of  tbe  M«liternuiesii,exp«liiii|t
tho  Greek  cnlouints  from  Conica  (BX.  oJd),  an  m1-
811(1  nbicb  tbey  Htill  beUI  iu  453.  In  d.c.S&iIh-j'
attacked  the  GreckH  in  Cumae,  but  iu  474,  Him
of  Syracuse,  in  a  great  navnl  battle  foiiglit  DiTtbc
CaiDiwiiiau  coast,  broke  their  iiavnl  jKiwft,  lud
won  a  victoiy  nrbich  ib  celebrate*!  by  Piudur  in  w


EtruKU  CuMl  kti  the  Vniley  of  lb«  Muui.

far  aH  to  ilerive  tbe  name  TiHfeH»  ftom  Bvairnoot  ^
thHri/tr.  Thtsir  sepulclinil  monunieut*  itbow  theui
In  have  I- ntur tallied  n  belief  iu  a  future  life;  while
Vnm>,  Cicoro,  ond  ilartlauutt  Capella  nil  Bpeak  of
the  important  p.-irt  whirb  dlviuatiuii  playt^d  in
tbcir  daily  life — tliuir  atfair^  of  StAt'.',  even,  l>eing
regulated  by  lianiKpic-es  uiul  angnnt. Tlie  deifies

of  Greece  nnd  Rome  appear  in  (heir  uiylliology  |  extant  ode  (Piflh.  i.  7S).  Iu  414,  however,  a  com-
{e.  g.  Ani  {[atiUM),  M»ri9  {Mare>,  Nelhuiut  (Neptii-  tiiigcut  of  tbeir  Etruscan  ahi pa  wat  seut  to  udtbi'
iiunV  Uni  (Iiino),  Artinut'it  (Artenii»),  Velch  (Vuk-a- |  Athenians  in  their  ill-fated  uxpeditton  »i^iii«l
iiimllfbediden  wlmui  there  are  a  uniuber  of  native  I  Sicily.  Frcra  this  lime  tbe  iwwer  of  Etnu«
gorU,  Hticli  ao  FiilluuH,  Tlniu,  Turins,  Tliesau,  au- 1  rapidly  declined.  In  Cnnipaniii.  Iho  On-«'k!<  of
oweriug  roughly  t4>  KucebiiB.  luptter,  Mri-onry,  and  Onnia«,  aided  by  the  BaiuuiteH,  rouiiMl  tbe  £iii»-
Aun)ra.  Tbe  Sun  aud  Mf>oii  figure  a*,  Xlsil  atid  can  forces,  mid  the  Bauinites  oiirried  Capua  lij
Lula.  Other  god*.  »cme  of  «  houi  are  occasionally  ;  storm  ;  nliile  iu  the  north  of  Italy  the  GonU  »«cp*
nu'Ulioned  by  the  Koinati  writvrf*,  are  Mauitta  and  f  down  from  the  AIi>k.  aud,  after  uvcrwhetuniij:  oitT
Mauin,  king  aud  qtieen  of  the  lower  world,  Xortiu  \  »l*ter  city,  cruiMrd  the  Apeuuiuefi  aud  uiajlc  ^^*"
^Fortunn).  into  tbe  dooi  of  who!*e  temple  at  Volhjnii


nails  (c^iri  utinnleM}  were  drivt'u  to  m.irk  ibe  suo-
cessive  yearn,  Sunitriiiiiu'',  tbe  goil  of  uighl,  Vor-
taiuuufl,  tbe  giMl  o(  Autoniu,  aud  tbe  iio-
veiiHilns,  a  rolU>rtive name  of  all the  gods
who  burled  lb(iiub-rlKi1t«.

H18T0RV. — Varru  nrcurda  a  tradition  that
the  Klniwiin  Htalo  waa  Ibandetl  in  tbt*  year
I1.C.  1044,  aii4l  tbe  Kuuiau  legeuils  rcjtreeeut
the  EtniHcaiiM  iks  u  iniwcrful  and  wealthy
lieople  at  the  time  when  Ki.Mue  watt  founded.
Later,  liut  Atill  diiriug  the  early  years  of
Rome,  Etruria  lignres  in  history  as  a  gretut
naval  power,  allied  wiCii  Cnrthnge  agaiiint
the  GTeeks,nuil  biiving  kiiigH  of  it.t  own  nieu
dominant  over  the  RuumnK.  hh  Ihu  Kouian
bistoriaus  theuiKelven  nduiit  in  reconling
the  legeud  of  tbc  migration  of  the  Tai-quius
from  Tarquitiii  to  Kmue,  and  the  Mwuy  of
the  Tarqitiuian  dynasty.  Au  Etruiicau  cem-
etery bat*  lK'4tu  discovered  on  tbe  Es(|niliue
at  Home;  l)ie  (''aelian  Hill  beuis  the  iiunie
of  an  EtniMMiu  chief,  Caeles  Vibenna,  while
ouo  of  the  oldest  quarters  of  the  city  m>ar
Ibo  Pnlntiiie  Itoro  tbe  name  Vicus  Tusrus.
<8o«  Mi>miii!*en,  i.  4.  \».  80 ;  id.  9,  p.  174  of  tbe
American  i-d.:  cf.al*M>VaiT.  /..  I.,  v. iff).  Tluit
tbe  |H-riiid  of  Etru&can  duniiuation  at  Konie


way  into  the  heart  of  Elniria.  Tbe  rich  Etruw:"
city  of  Melpuui  fell  iu  ».c.  XtC,  and  not  many  yew*
later,  attacked  by  the  Buiuauif  uu  tl)«  airtitk,  tti«


-ryr


ftoatheni  prnvinco  tiubiuittcil  lo  thu  Lntin  anus
(B.C.351).  lD311,tlieKomaiii)cr(MU«U  tbe  houodary
fortDod  by  tb«  CiminJan  Forest,  in  spit«  of  several
Riicce«sive  defeaU  BaMaioed  b^  tbem  at  the  bauds
of  the  £tmseaii8,  aud  n-ou  a  decisi^'e  victory  in  the
year  383  at  tlie  Vadimouiun  Lake.  Tnniutnii  nl>
most  icamediately  f<eU;  und  iu  2rt(>  Volatt^rrae,  the
f^real  uorUierii  fortress  of  tlie  EtrUMrnus,  liavioR
Hnccniiiltetl,  llie  louf;  AtniKKlo  ended  witli  tbe  com-
|det«  trinmph  of  Ihe  Roman  artnw.

Tlioii^fa  runriaereil,  (he  EtriiKC.iti  cities  appear
to  have  beeti  trvated  n^ith  mildne^H  and  cotutidera-
tion,  aud  to  have  Aiistaiiied  towaril»  Rome  the  posi-
tion of  allies  rather  ihau  Huhjucrfi.  la  the  S«cou<I
I'lioic  War  they  fumlKbetl  AUpiilieA  tu  the  Koniaii
fleet,  and  later  they  were  actually  admitted  tu  tbe
Koman  ftaaclUae  <b.c.  iSi).  iiutue  of  the  grcatedt
names  iu  tbe  later  histor}-  of  the  Komau  State  are
tbfl  aamea  of  men  of  EtniHonn  tineattie.  ['oiiipeiu»
Magniia  (Pompii),  MnM-emu,  aud  the  family  of  Coe*
cilia  wefB  atiioiif;  the>M-;  and  nnder  the  eni|r«ror8
many  other  diAtinfrnitkhtd  men  rIiow  in  their  lin-
eage Itiiisbip  with  the  noble  familteH  of  Elrnrio.
In  fart,  aa  ittated  above,  during  ttif^  An^nfttnii
age  an  Etruscan  fml  generally  prevailml  iil  Konie,
like  onr  Angloiiiania  of  t<>-day  or  the  Oallomania
uf  IH.06-7O:  and  EtrtiBcan  ancestry  was  a  thing  to
be  pronrt  of.

Tbe  debt  of  Rome  to  licr  Etrniwati  neighbours
haa  been  varionsly  rcgatxIeAl.  In  the  Latin  lati-
gnage,  apart  from  a  comparatively  few  terron  nf
religion,  angiiry,  and  warfare,  there  aru  no  rital
tmcet  of  Eirnrian  iiitlnenuu.  To  tbe  RnnionH,  the
Elruttcana  were  alwnyH  an  alii^ii  nice  (Cic.  >*.  />.  ii.
4:  Plant.  Cure.  IfiO),  with  whom,  indeed,  Ihcy  trad-
ed and  foiight,  and  irlioMe  divination  they  eiii-
ployKtl ;  yet  they  never  owntMl  kiimhiti  with  them,
hat  rather  let  tliem  hold  the  Hame  rehititiii  tnwnnlH
Rome  aa  did  the  Carlhagiiiiann,  with  whom  the
Lttlina  olaci  fonght  aint  tiuded.  Vet  the  H\ray  of
the  Etruacan  kiuga  at  Rnme  did  mid  much  to  the
Homan  ceremonial  and  the  ueutgea  of  Uoniau  life.
To  Etmria  are  due  the  inHignia  of  ofllce,  the  fasces,
the  cnrnle  chair;  and  to  the  Ksme  Ktiurce  Rome
owed  the  cimnt,  the  gliuliatoriul  Hhonrn,  the  riiren,
Ilio  triumph,  the  early  monetary  Rystem,  the  rudi-
ments of  military  science,  the  kiiovrledge  of  ungii-
rr,  the  tihicinrtt,  Ihi:  lituvM,  and  the  art  of  buiUling
6nl>stantial  hnnM'^,  aiiueiliictN,  and  M'wrrrL

BimJOGRAPirv.— S:«  K.  O.  Mulh-r,  IHr  Etrnskvr,
2<l  e<I.  (Stuttgart,  1H77);  Lt-pMinii, /ptiirn/ifiuRrfl  Um-
brintr  rl  Oaoie  (Leipzig,  I'l^l);  CoiTwi'ii,  t'rfcer  die-
Sprachc  tttr  Etruilvr  (Leipzig,  1874-75);  Deecke,
tV»r#M»  wrf  die  Sprackf  dtr  Jitrmiker  ( Stuttgart,
11*75);  id.  Etrufki9che  Fonehuu^tn  (ltf7&-76);  Isaac
Taylor,  £/ri«jicflii  ItewarcbejuLuDdon,  IH7I) ;  Motnm-
aeu,  Uttterilaluiche  Itiahkle  (Leipzig,  1B4II);  id.  Hi»K
of  Itomf,  l>k.  i.  ch.  0;  Panli.  Etrunkiseke  •Sttidien  ;
id.  In4e)iri/tt-tt  Xoriielriiiikiffhen  Jlpluihct9  (Leipzig,
l-S'^'oK  Dennis,  Cilut  n/id  Cemetrrirn  uf  F.truria
iLniKlon,  lH7f*i;  Rochetre,  Lfrturm  ou  Anr^ml  Art,
cb.  iv.  (Loudon,  IH54);  Gray,  Binlorft  of  £truria
(London,  lti43);  tlte  Earl  of  Crawfortl,  EtrvMcan
JnnrripUnna  ( Lomluu,  It^T'i);  Oberziucr,  /  iirfi
(Rome.  Id03);  Ellis,  The  A&iatie  AiH»iU*»  of  the  Old
JtotJaaa  (London,  1H70 1;  'u\.  Etruttrnu  yumnaU  (Imxx-
dun,  l^S):  id.  .SOiirrni  of  the  Etruacan  and  JiaMqnt
/^ivjrwiirml'ondnn,  lr!86t;  ami  Htiggi-.  Itrr  Vraprtin^
Aer  Etrunkrr  (Christiania,  lH@(i).  Kur  tlie  Etruscan
inscriptions  aeo  Fahretti's  Corput  Jnacr.  Jtal.  nm\
.f  auli's  Corp.  tn*cr,  Etrntc  (now  appearing).


Etymologlciim  Magnum.  The  oldest  Greek
lexicon  in  existcuec,  dating  probably  from  the
tenth  century  aj>.,  and  by  aa  uukuowu  author.
It  professes  to  give  tbe  roots  uf  the  words  con-
tained iu  it.  Tbe  proposed  etymologies  ore  <ifteu
mere  guesses,  hut  tbe  work  is  hiBtorically  valuable
as  embodying  a  great  number  of  tradilions  and
notices  uf  tbe  meauings  of  unusual  words.  There
are  nuMiern  editions  by  Schiffer  (Leipzig.  1H16>,
Sturz  (Etjftnohfficum  (iudittuHtn)  (Leipzig,  1(J18),  and
C)aiftr<it.l  (Oxfiird,  1849). 8e<'  Lrxicon.

Etymolosy. See  PhiIjology.

Buandroa  {KCavfipo?). See  Evaxdrr.

Huboea  (ESQoui).  Now  Negro|Kint;  the  largest
island  uf  the  Aegiu>an  iSea.  lying  along  the  coasts
of  Attica,  Bneotia.  and  the  southern  part  of  Thes-
saly,  fn>m  which  countries  it  is  separated  by  the
Eul>oeaT)  Sea,  callMl  the  Enripns  in  its  narrowest
part.  Its  early  name  waa  Maciiis.  Enboea  is
I  about  ninety  miles  in  length ;  its  extreme  breadth
is  thirty  mites,  but  in  the  narrowest  part  it  is  only
fdui'  miles  itcroHs.  Throughout  the  length  of  tbe
island  runs  a  lofly  range  of  moiiutainM,  which  rise
in  one  part  as  high  as  72G(i  feet  abuve  tbe  aea.  It
contains,  nevertheless,  many  fertile  pliiins,  and  was
celebrated  in  antiquity  for  the  exccUeuce  of  itM
pasturage  and  com-tleida.  According  to  the  an-
cients it  was  ouce  uniteil  to  Bocotia,  from  which  it
waa  separateil  by  an  eaithquake.  In  Homer  {II.
ii.  53f>}  the  inhabitants  are  called  Abantes,  and  are
repreneuted  aa  taking  i>urt  in  the  i*x|iedi tion  against
Troy.  Iu  the  nurtlieni  part  <>f  Knlniea  dwelt  the
Histiaei,  fniui  whom  that  part  of  the  island  wiis
called  Hititiaea  ;  beliMV  IheJte  were  the  Ellnpii,  who
gave  the  uauie  uf  EUopia  In  tliv  district,  extending
iiH  far  as  Aegao  aud  ('tTinthits;  and  in  the  south
wi-ru  th»  Dryopeii.  Thn  rrntre  of  the  island  was
iiiliabtti*d  ehielly  by  InnijinH.  It  was  in  this  part
uf  Eubi>ea  that  IbL^  AllieiitauN  planted  the  roluuies
nf  Cbalcis  and  Eretria,  which  worn  the  two  most
important  cities  in  tlie  island.  After  the  Pertiiun
\V.ir8  Kiilmea  become  subject  to  the  Atheuians,
who  attached  much  )m|>orianco  to  its  jMisaustiiou ;
and  e(Hwe<nient!y  Pericles  made  great  oxertious  to
suIkIuc  it,  when  it  revolted  iu  B.C.  445.  Under  the
H4>niana  EnWwa  formed  part  of  the  proviuce  of
Achaen. .Si:«  Kursiuu,  Tu^Mnjr.xon  Euhoitt  (1859).

Eubolcus,  "  beU>]igiiig  tu  Kiihitea."  An  epithet
applied  to  Ciiraao,  because  that  city  was  built  by  u
culuuy  from  Cbalcis,  a  town  of  Eubuea  (Uvid,  Fa»t.
iv.  'i57  ;  Verg.  Atn.  vi.  V,  ix.  710).

EubtilTdea  (Etia«uX(J)i)f ).  A  native  of  inU'ttts
and  .snreessor  of  Euclid  in  the  Megaric  school.
He  was  a  strong  opponent  of  Aristotle,  and  seized
everj-  op|Mirtunity  of  ceuKuring  bis  writings  and
calumniating  bin  character.  lie  introduced  new
subtleties  into  tho  art  of  dispntatinn,  several  of
which,  thungb  iifU;n  mentiunrd  as  proof  of  great
ingeiiniry,  deserve  »iily  tn  be  remembered  as  ex-
amples nf  ogrcgions  trifling.  Of  these  sophistical
uiodas  of  reosoniug,  called  by  Arislotl>u  "Eristio
syllogisuis."  a  few  oxam|iIes  may  snfliee.  (1)  TUtt
Lyitfg.  lf,whci)  you  speak  the  truth,  you  Hny,  yuii
'  lie,  you  lie:  hut  yon  say  yon  lio  when  you  upeak
tbe  truth;  therefore,  in  speaking  tbe  truth,  yuu
lie.  ("2)  The  Occult.  Do  yon  know  your  father  f
Yes.  Do  you  know  this  man  who  is  veiled!  Ho.
Then  you  do  not  know  yimr  I'utbfT,  for  it  is  your
father  who  ia  veilwl.  (3)  Eiertra.  Elect ra,  Ihe
daughter  of  Agnmemuou,  knew  her  brother  and


U


iltd  not  Tiuow  biDi ;  (the  ktif w  Ort'tttea  to  be  !ior
linitlier,  hut  ehe  did  nut  kuuw  tliul  jivntun  tu  1)^
Iiei  brother  who  was  coiivuniiiig  niih  her.  {4)
.Von'/M.  la  one  fifcniu  a  heitjif  Nu.  Tiro  grains  f
No.  Tluve  grniiiHt  Nu.  Uu  uu,  odtiiiig  one  by
ocie ;  mill  if  i>ne  (p^iii  lie  imt  a  henp,  it  will  be
impoftsiblii  tn  sa^  what  iiiinilH-r  of  i^mins  nink<>  a
huttj).  (5)  r*r  Harued.  Voii  huve  whiit  yon  liavf
not  IobI  :  yon  Iiave  iiul  Umi  horiiM ;  thtircfore  yon
hiire  horns.  In  «och  liigli  re]>utr  wlth  thrsu  iinil>-
bleji  thut  CUry»t|»)iiiM  wrote  aix  liuoks  on  thi;  tint
of  Ihoiu  ;  anil  PbilutuH  of  Cos  dieil  ut'  uoMHunip-
tion  which  he  coiitrnnfeil  in  the  close  tttudy  wliith
he  heslo^Ye(l  ii|>un  them  (Diog.  Loert..  i.  111).

Bubnlua  (Ki'^uvXut).  (I)  A  formldahlu  oppuutut
of  iX-iuDMtLi'Ufs  at  Athtus.  Ci)  A  comic  jkhiI  of
Athi^nN,  boru  iu  the  deiuc  of  Atanica.  Ho  exbih-
llud  about  u.c.  375.  EubuhiPi  stood  ou  the  debuta-
blt*  j;n)iuid  between  the  Old  iinil  Middle  Coii)f>(ly;
and  to  judge  from  the  fragmeiita  iu  Atlieaaeus,  who
ijiiotei^  inure  than  fifty  oT  hin  c<miedii-H  hy  name,  he
iniiht  bare  written  plays  of  both  ttorls.  He  ihiui-
[iom:i1,  in  all,  104  citinvdiv.'*.  The  reniaiuH  wall  he
found  in  Meiiieke's /Vnj^HicMta  VomMrcfc.x.'p}}.^^^
367andiii.  i.p.'ilXJ-;?:-^.

Buobeir  O^vxtiy)-  (1)  A  painter  related,  nK  was
aatd,  to  DatHlaliiK,  and  who,  ucconling  to  Theo-
pbratttus  (dfi,  Pliny,  //.  Xvii.5C),  iiitnxliHied  paint-
ing into  Greece.  The  name,  in  truths  however,  w
merely  a  figiirutive  one  for  a  akilfal  m-tiat  i^u-
erally  (rf;^«»p,  "skilfnl,"  "dexterous*').  (2)  A
inmlelter,  styLed  also  KuciltKUS  (  Pantutn.  vi.  4.  2),
and  one  uf  tbo  most  ancient.  IJi<  and  Engrorn-
mns  are  haicI  to  have  acconipanieil  OeinaratQi  in
his  9i]{bt  from  Corinth  to  Ktniria.  Hero  again
both  namiii  are  Hgiirntivo.  ('i)  An  Athenian
Hculptor.  He  made  a  »tatne  of  Ilenn^^s,  which
waa  placed  at  Pbeuea  (Pau»an.  riti.  14.  T).  Pliny
raukti  him  among  tb(.>»e  artiste  wbu  e:LcelIed  in
forming  bnizL'u  statiieii  of  coinbaLantH  ut  the  i>ul>-
|ic  games,  armed  uicn,  bitntHiiiQii,  etc.

Ztucleia  (ffxXftn).  A  festival  celebrated  at  Cor-
inth in  hononr  of  Artemis.  It  ta  meulLoned  only
by  Xenophoa  {UeJl.  iv.  4,  }  3),  aud  no  particulars
are  known  ubont  it.

Buctidea  (tltKAcidfc).  |1)  A  natlre  of  Megara,
founder  of  tli"  Mi*garic,  or  Eristic  sect.  Endowed
by  nature  with  a  snhtlo  and  ^w  net  rating  geniim,
be  early  appllt^l  hiniAidf  to  the  Mndy  of  philoMin
phy.  The  writings  of  P.irmtnidfs  first  taught
him  the  art  of  disputation.  Hearing  of  the  fame
of  Sucrfttea,  Euclid  deterniiued  to  attoiid  apon  his
InstrnetiotiB,  and  for  this  pnqioau  removed  from
Megaru  to  Athens.  Here  he  long  remained  a  con-
Mtant  hearer  and  zealous  disotple  of  the  moral  phi-
loHopltcr;  and  when,  in  consequenco  of  the  en-
mity which  snbsistfd  bctweeu  the  Athenians  and
MegarpaHH.  a  ilecrce  was  pasaeil  liy  the  fonnHr  that
any  inhabitant  of  Megara  ^^ho  Hlionid  lie  !i«en  iu
AtheuH  tibould  forfeit  bin  life,  be  frequeutly  eame
to  AtbeUB  by  night,  from  the  dist-anco  of  abont
twenty  miles,  concealed  in  a  long  female  cloak
and  veil,  to  risit  his  master  {Ant.  Gell.Tii.  10).  Not
lindiiig  his  propensity  to  di^pntation  sufllciently
gratided  in  the  trauqrul  luetbod  of  philosophizing
adopted  by  Socrates,  be  freniuently  engaged  iu  the
buninuMs  and  the  diKpntt^n  irf  the  civil  courts.  Snc-
rat<"(t,whodeBpi»*tl  fon^iiwie  eoiiTe«iiA,expreA)M'(1  some
dissatisfaction  with  his  pupil  for  indulging  a  fund-
ii(MH  lav  controversy  ^Diog.  LourL  li.  31>>. This  cir-


1

ID  «  I


cnmstauce  probably  proved  the  occasion  of  a  cep-
aration  betwt-cn  Kuclid  and  his  uia«tt>r;  for  «e
(ind  biin,  alter  this  time,  at  the  head  of  a  sclioot  in
Megara  (Diog.  Laert.  iii.  0),  in  which  hin  chief  ra-
ploymenl  was  to  teach  the  art  of  disputation.  IV-
bateH  wpiij  eoiidnet*fd  with  so  mueh  vebetntiict
among  hi.i  pnpiU  that  Tiuion  said  of  Euclid  tlul
be  b.id  carrit'd  the  madness  of  cunt«uliuu  freta
AtliKim  to  Sfegara.  That  be  was,  however,  capi-
bk*  uf  eomtuaiiding  hiit  temper  appears  fmiu  bit
reply  to  bis  brother,  who.  in  a  qnarret.  had  Mid,
"Let  mo  iM-rish  if  I  be  not  revenged  ou  yoa"
"  And  let  mr  pei'lsb."  rctnrued  Euclid.  "  if  1  du  uot
subdue  your  resentment  by  forbearauce  and  mike
yon  love  mo  as  much  as  ever."

In  iirgument  Kuclid  was  aveme  t<i  tlw  analng-
ical  method  of  reasoning,  and  judged  that  legiti-
mate iirgnment  consiHtH  in  dedttcJitg  fuir  coiiclii-
sioti-t  fnmi  acknnwk-dged  premises.  He  held  tblt
then',  in  one  NUpreiiic  guiMl,  nbicb  bo  ealtuil  by  tlw
dilTtTi-iit  uaineN  of  Intelligeucc,  Providence,  Oifd;
and  lliat  evil,  considered  as  an  opposite  prilKt[4a
to  tbc  HovereigiL  gfwd,  has  no  exiatenoe.  Tbe  >d-
premc  good,  according  to  Cicero,  he  defineil  tube
that  which  is  always  tbe  same.  In  this  doctriof,
in  which  ho  followed  the  snlitlety  of  Parmeuidtf
rather  than  the  simplicity  of  Soerales,  he  Meiw  to
have  considered  good  nbfttrHctly  as  restding  iti
the  Deity,  and  to  fanvo  maintained  that  all  thiit^
which  exist  are  good  by  their  participation  of
iinii  good,  and,  coiiFUM{iiently,  that  there  is,  tii
natiiri)  of  things,  no  real  evil.  It  ia  said
whcu  Euclid  was  asked  bis  opinion  cotieei
the  gods,  be  rcidiwl.  "I  know  nothing  nwro
thorn  than  tibis:  that  they  hate  inqaisitiro  pn-
eons."

{i)  A  celebrated  mathematician  of  Alexaadrii.
considered  by  some  to  have  been  a  natirr  of  that
city,  though  the  more  received  opinion  makes  dr
place  of  his  birth  to  have  been  unknown.  UeUoV
ished  B.C.  'i80.  iu  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  I<agili,aiit
was  jirofessor  of  mathematics  in  the  capita)  of
Egypt,  His  Boholara  were  uumerons,  and  anois
them  was  Ptolemy  himself.  It  is  related  that  tbe
monan:h  having  inquired  of  Euclid  if  there  *«'
Dut  some  mMlo  of  learning  uiatbematics  less  bar
barous  and  requiring  leas  aiteutlou  than  the  a\
uary  one,  Euclid,  though  otherwise  of  an  alTj
disposition,  dryly  auswered  that  there  wa.i  "w
royal  road  to  geometry  "  f^^  ru«i  fia^AiKfit  arpr
wov  iTpAf  yifitfurpiav).  Etlclid  was  the  tiro!  pPlWi
who  eHtablisbtvi  a  mathenmtical  »chi>ol  at  Ai^-
andria,  and  it  existed  aud  maintained  its  repnit-
tiou  tilt  the  Mohammedan  oomjuoat  of  Eg>pi
Many  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  {tun'
iiiutbeniatics  ha^i  been  discovered  by  Thal^s.  f,!^
tlmgoros,  and  other  pmlecessorv  of  Euclid :  but "
him  is  duo  the  merit  of  having  given  a  tystcaiitit
form  to  the  science,  especially  to  that  part  ef  it
which  relotcfl  to  geometry.  He  likewise  ttndit^
tbe  cognate  sciences  of  Astronomy  and  OpiiM*
Aud,  ac^!ording  to  Proclns,  be  was  tbe  aatbor  '"f
"Elements"  (2to(x<'«>»  "Data"  (AfJo^w),  "A"
Introduction  to  Harmouy"  {Eltrayuyf)  '.\Mtmt*t(i<
"I'haeiiDmeua"  (♦tucb/if  ra  >,  "Optics"  ^  Offru*).
*'  Catoptrics  "  ( Kimnrrpiirti),  *'  Ou  the  l»i  vision  of  thf
Scale"  (KoTttroti^  Kayiiroi),  aud  other  work*  n»"
lost.  His  most  ralnihle  work,  '*  The  Elenu-mao'
Geometry,'' in  thirteen  liooks,  with  two  aibbiiwtsl
books  by  Hypsiclea,  has  been  ivpoatctlly  public  *
—tbe  lirst  edition  at  Ventoe  (14^  in  a  Latin


bar


EUCTEUON


631


Kl'UEMEKUfi


latiau  from  tlip  Arabic.  The  first  Grc«k  Uxt  ap-
peurctl  ut  Biwlt;  iu  laiVH.  TUk  edition  of  Peyrard
U  utuuug  tliu  bt-Ht.  It  appc-nretl  at  ParU  in  l?l-l~
16-1?^,  in  ;t  vula.  TliiH  i-ilitiuti  is  nccoutimnied  with
a  (luiitile  tnuiftUtioii—out.'  in  Latiu  and  the  other
ia  French.  M.  Peyntrd  coutmlttKL  a  nianii»chpt  of
tbe  lAttcr  part  of  the  ninth  century,  which  had
beloog«<l  to  the  Vatican  libmry,  nnd  uraa  at  that
time  in  thv  Fn-ncli  CHpital.  By  the  aid  of  thia  hv
vtM  enabled  to  till  vurioun  lavunae,  and  to  re-
MlaUli^li  rarionn  piuwnf^w  uhicli  hiid  boon  nlterpxl
in  all  tb«  ulhnr  nianaiKrriplH  and  iu  nil  the  nlitionH
tinteriur  Iu  his  own.  Thu  bL-«t  rt'Ci<rit  vflitjna  ih
that  of  Heiberij,  3  voU.  il*T3-8ri).  Tho  only  Eng-
lish edition  of  all  the  workfi  aacribi'd  to  Hiiclid
is  that  of  Orogory  (Oifonl,  I7ua).  .S-e  DodfEHon,
Kuriiii  and  hit  ifoderm  Iiira!»{\rf4\i);  ALltiiau,  O'rwJt
(iromvlrg  from  Tkales  to  Euci\<i  (IHrtt);  and  Ball,
^horl  Hint,  iij  MQthcmaiics^  pp.  48-GJ  (Itt^t?).

Euctemoa  [^vktt\^v>v\.  (II  A  Greek  astronotuor.
(Sec  Mkton.)  (S)  a  rhctorioinn  mentioned  by  the
ehler  Sciieca,  who  has  preserved  some  quotations
fn>ni  his  works  I. Con  rror.iii.l?,*20;  iv.fft;  v.  30, 34).

Eudemus  (ECfl7^')f>.  A  native  of  Rlioilex  and
noted  aa  a  peripatetic  philosopher  and  diiwtple  of
Arutotle,  nuuty  of  whoito  works  he  edited.  One
of  thuso  bears  thv  name  of  Eiidcnius  ('H^ixa  EM^-
^*a\  iu  avY'CU  iMioka,  pntbably  a  rvct^n«ion  of  all
Aristotle's  ethical  lectures  orranfiod  by  Kndenius.
See  Gell.  xlii.  5,  and  the  article  Akihtotelk^.

Eudocia  (Et'doxi'a).  (1)  A  Roman  euipreas,  wife
to  Thfodosiuft  the  Yonnger.  MXvtV  original  name
waa  Atlienalis  and  she  was  the  daughter  of  I^on-
tiiift,  an  Athenian  pliihHiopher;  hut  on  her  mar-
nage  she  ombr&cod  Cbrltttiauity.  nnd  ri^eeived  tho
baptismal  uatue  of  Eudocia.  Stio  wag  u  woman
of  beauty  and  taleuL  She  vereilied  several  books
of  the  Old  Testament,  and  wrote  several  pnca-
phraaes  on  some  of  the  Jewish  propheto;  but  bo-
oAmfl  suspected  by  her  htubaud  of  conjugal  intt-
deliiy,and,l)oingdegraded,Htie  was  allowed  to  seek
a  refuge  iu  tlie  Holy  Land.  lU're  »the  devoted
bentelf  to  religions  studies,  but  tlie  jt'iihiuHy  of  her
HUdpicious  hui<buad  Htill  pnrsuftl  her,  and  haviug
learned  that  two  priests,  wliuni  Hhu  had  chu*M!n
iM  the  couipantuits  of  her  exile,  were  accustomed
to  pay  lier  fref|nuut  visit*  aud  were  loadeil  by  her
with  prettents,  TheodoMUS  sent  Hattirninns,  une  of
tliD  otltcera  of  bis  conn,  to  Jerusalem,  who  put  to
<!eath  the  two  prie^l^t  without  even  the  fornmllty
of  a  trial.  Irritated  at  thiH  new  insult,  Kuihieta
eaased  8iituruiuui«  to  1>e  slniu — a  detttl  mom  likely
(o  darken  than  avenge  her  iiinoc-ence.  The  eui-
l>6ror  coutentetl  biuiM^lf  with  depriving  her  of  all
the  badges  of  her  rank,  and  reducing  her  to  the
Conditions  of  a  private  individual,  i^hc  lived
^vrenly  years  after  this  event,  In  the  bltterent
)i«Ditenoe,aDd  died  at  the  age  of  slxty-Mveu  years,

b  A.IX  4O0.

Ttic  principal  work  ascril>cd  by  aume  (o  Eiido-
*ia  ia  Uomerocrnlra  COftrjpoKtvriia),  or  a  life  of  the
iavionr,  in  344:t  hexameters,  formed  from  ventcs
ikUii  bemistivhs  selected  fmm  the  poems  of  Homer.
(See  Cbntii.)  Others,  however,  make  Pelagius, sur-
lumed  Palricins,  who  lived  in  the  fifth  century,  its
anttior.  Eudocia  left,  also,  a  poem  on  the  mnrt>t-
dain  of  Cyprian.  The  best  edition  of  the  Ilomero-
rrntra  IS  that  of  Teucher  (Leipzig,  ITU*^).  ('£)
TliM  Voiiuger,  daughter  of  the  precwUng  aud uf

Itcotlostus  11.,  married  Vulcutiniau 111. Afii-r


the  oBsaaaiuatiou  of  her  husband  by  PetroDius
Maximum,  she  was  obliged  to  marry  the  usurper.
Eudocia,  out  of  indignation  aud  revuuge,  ualled
in  Genseric,  king  of  the  VaiiUaU,  who  eame  to
Italy,  plundered  Home,  and  carried  Kiidueia  with
him  to  Africa.  Some  yoars  ofterwanls  she  was
M!nt  back  to  Coustantiuoplu,  where  she  died,  A.l>.
AGi.  (S)  The  widnw  of  Constautiiie  Ducat*,  mar-
ried to  Roinuuus  Diogenett,  un  uDieer  of  diKtiuc-
tiou,  A.O.  lilt)8,  and  UNHiieiated  him  with  her  upon
the  throne.  Threo  years  after,  Michael,  her  mm,  hy
nieaus  uf  a  revolt,  was  proelaiuivil  fnijieitir,  and
caused  his  niullier  to  be  slmt  up  iu  a  convent,
where  she  spent  the  rest  of  her  life.  She  led  a
treatise  on  the  genealogies  of  the  gods  and  heroes,
which  displays  an  extensive  acquaintance  with  the
sul>je«t.  It  is  printed  In  ViUoison's  Aufcdota  Grae-
ca  (Venice,  I7f^l).

Sudoxus  {K&io^ot).  A  celebrated  astrouomer
and  geometrician  of  Ciiidns,  who  tluuriHhttd  B.C.:t>36.
He  studied  at  Alhous  and  iu  Egypt,  bnl  probably
spout  oomu  of  bis  time  at  his  native  place,  where
he  had  an  observatory.  He  is  naid  to  have  1>een
the  first  who  taught  in  Greece  the  motions  of  tho
planets.  His  works  ore  lost  (Ben.  ^much/.  A'af.  vii.
3;  Vitniv.  ii.  9  ;  PHu.  H.  S.  it.  47).

EuergStae  (Elipyirat).  A  {leople  of  Up|rer  Asia,
whone  true  name  was  Ariaspue,  TbeCireeks  ealU*il
them  Euergetae,  or  benefactors,  translating  the
Persian  appellation  which  was  added  to  their
name.  This  title  they  ore  ssid  to  have  received
iu  return  for  niicconr  afforded  to  the  army  of  Cy>
rus,  when  it  was  KutToring,  la  these  regions,  from
cold  and  hunger  (Curt,  vii.  3).

Euei^Stas  ( KvtfjyiTrji}.  A  suniame,  siguifying
Itenefaftor,  given  to  Ptolemy  III.  aud  IV.of  Egypt,
as  also  to  some  kings  of  Syria,  runtiis,  etc.

EugamoD  {Eirydnatv)  Of  Bagaininon.  One  of
the  Cyclic  poets,  a  native  of  Cyroni$,  who  tlour-
ished  about  bc. 568.  He  wrote  a  coutiuuatlon  of
the  Odj/itKr!/,  in  two  btmks,  with  the  title  Trlcyouia
{TijKtynvia),  ftud  giving  an  iWTonnt  of  the  events
from  tho  tight  with  the  suitors  to  the  death  of
Odysseus.  ThosTibstanceof  the  [Kietii  is  pi-eserved
in  the  (i'/tcM/owo/Akof  Proclus. See  Ctci.ic  Fokt.-*.

Euganel  A  peo])Ie  who  formerly  inhabited
Venetia,  on  the  Adriutit  8ea,  aud  were  driven  tow-
ards the  Alpa  and  the  Lacus  Beuacu.s  by  the  He-
ueti  or  Venotl  (Livy,  i.  I).

BugeniuB  (Eiy<vnoc).  (I)  A  general  who  opposed
DiiHjh^tiaii  in  A.D.  '2911,  but  vvim  slain  the  very  saute
day  at  the  gates  uf  Antiueh,  while  attempting  to
make  himself  nmster  of  that  city.  ('2}  A  usurper
in  the  reign  ofTheutlosiiis  Che  Great,  of  Gallic  ex-
traction, A.D.  3y2.  Ho  WHS  defentod,  taken  pris-
oner, anil  put  bi  mleath,  after  haviug  held  power
for  two  years  (Zusim.  iv.  54  foil.).

Eugubiue  Tables. Sec  Tabl'lae  latrviNAB.

EuhemAms  (K^^^upoc).  A  uati  ve  of  Messena,  a»
i«  generally  •*ii].p(wed,  though  jK-rhaps  of  Mt.-)Munu.
Being  sent  on  a  voyage  of  discovery  by  Cassnndcr,
king  of  Maevdou,  about  n.c.  31A,  he  came,  as  he  him-
self iia»ei-te<1,  to  un  islumd  callisl  Pauchaea,  in  the
capital  of  which,  Piinnra,  lie  fuunrl  h  temple  of  the
Triphyliau  Zeus,  where  st*KHl  a  coliKnn  inseribed
with  \\.  register  of  the  birtlis  aud  ileaths  uf  many
nf  the  gods.  vVmoug  the»e  ht<  specitied  L'rauus,
bis  sunn  Pun  and  Cronos,  and  his  daughters  Khea
iiiid  Dcmeter ; as  ulso  ^eus,  Herd,  and  Poseidou,


i


wbo  wtro  Ibe  offBimiig  of  Cronos.  AccoriHngly,
tile  desiKti  (if  Eiilit.-tiiL-rua  van  to  ttliun*,  by  iiivegti-

gating  tboir  actions  ami  recDMin^;  the  jilucea  of
tboir  birtlia  and  burials,  tbat  ibo  niytbulogical
(leitk-H  were  mere  mortal  men,  ratst'il  to  tbe  rank
of  gniln  on  lu'connt  of  the  beiietlls  which  they
hnil  runfttrreil  iipcin  niniikiml.  Eunius  tmuvlated
this  tt«]el)mteil  work  nf  Riibemenia,  Tvhioh  was  eu-
tltlwl  'Utta  '\vaypacl)tj.  Tbe  triinsl.ition,  as  well  as
the  original  wnrk,  csCfjttiiiK  sonit'  fragments,  is


Cflebriited  library  that  ranv  to  W  a  rivnl  cvnifa
tbAl  uf  Alt'xiiTiilria. !h'i«  PkrgamI'U.

Eumenia  (illfu'viia),  A  city  of  Phrygia,  t>or1h
of  PcUae,  nhich  probably  iloriTed  U»  name  fnn
Ennieiie;!,  king  Df  Pcrganms. 8tepb.  Byz.  m.  v.  Hi-

fiii'tia.

EhunenMes  (EL'fui>tdrt),  also  called  Eiuxfn
I'Epurvte),  and  by  tbe  KoiuanH  Furiae  or  DIibm.
Originally  a  peraoniticntiou  of  eiintca  pranoaiusil


liifil ;  but  ninny  |iArtiRiiljirfi  concerniug  Enheme-  upon  a  gnilty  criminal.  Tbe  uatuc  Krinya,  whirl;
nis  and  tho  itUject  of  bi»  hiHtiiry  are  meutioueil  in  tbe  more  ancient  one,  woa  derivtMl  by  tbe  GrwU
ill  a  fragmpnt  iif  Diudi)niH  Sirutux,  preserved  by from  tbe  verb  tpiv<i>  or  ffltvtHun.  "  I  bunt  dottii,"«


Enwbin^.  8oniA  qnotatioiifi  bare  aUn  l>e«n  Havt?>il
by  St.  AngiiAtiuo,  and  otboru  have  been  uiado  by
Lactantiuft  in  his  treatifto  De  Falm  HetigioKr  <i.  11).
This  work  was  undoubtedly  a  covert  attach  on  tb<^
ustablisbeil  religion  of  the  Greeks.

Eulua  (EC^tot).  A  snnianio  of  Bacchus,  given
hiu.  according  to  the  poets,  by  Zens,  whom  be
Wait  aiding  in  tbe  contest  wilb  the  j^fiauts.  Zeus
wiM  M>  delighted  with  his  valuur  tbat  lie  called
out  to  bim,  Ey  vli,  "'Well  done.  O  bou!''  Others
kuppoM  it  to  have  originateil  from  a  cry  of  tbe
Baccbaiites.  Et^i. Of  Lnchni.  on  LncreL  v.  743.

Eulaena  (EAntof,  O.  T.  Ulai).  A  riVRr  in  Suri-
Bnn,  rising  in  Great  Media,  parting  east  of  Suiia,
and  falling  into  the  bcml  uf  tbe  Pcrt^iau  Gulf.

Xhuaaeus  (ECtiawt).  The  faithful  swineberd  of
OdyH.'44-UM,  who  gave  his  master  a  fiiendly  welcome


■'  persecute,''  or  from  Ibo  Arradtau  word  §pm^,
"I  am  angry";  ih>  tlint  the  Krinye*  were  cjtber
tbe  angry  goddesnes,  or  the  goddcsiH  who  bniii  or
Hean;h  for  tbe  crtmina).  'i'bn  nnmn  Enmanidta,
which  signi lieK  "  the  well  •meaning,"  or  ^'aoodwtl
goJdoHMs,''  ill  a  more  enpbemtam,  becaose  ptopip
ilrcotled  to  call  theso  fcarfbl  goddewea  by  tlwir
n*al  n;imn ;  and  it  waa  said  to  bavr  lieen  first  girai
them  ufU'r  tbu  aci(uittiU  of  OrvNlcH  by  tbe  omrtof
tbe  Arf>opagn4,  wb«u  Ib«  anger  of  tbo  Erinyes  bud
become  soiitbed.  It  was  by  a  nimilar  eupbrmiiB
tbat  at  Athens  the  Erlnyea  were  called  o-r^mil  A«.
or  the  KevortMl  Goddoasoa.

In  tbo  sense  of  "cnrtw"  or  "cursM,"  tbe  ir«nl
Erinys  or  Erinyes  is  often  u»ed  in  tbe  Hoai«^
poems,  and  Aeschylus  calls  tbe  Eumenidm  Apm,
tbat  is.cnrsea.  Accordiug  to  the  Homerio  twUnu,
tbe  Erinyes,  whom  the  poet  conoelvea  SB  tlifltiuel


on  bit*  roiuru  home  in  tbo  gniso  of  a  beggar,  and ''fiiRs,  «rp reckoned  among  tbone  wbn  tidubit
allied  bim  in  tbe  slougbter  of  tbo  auitom  (Udtfaa. Erebno,  where they  rfwt  nntil some  cttrec  pro-


IV.  4t)"2,  etc.). See  ODvasEUs.

Bumelua  (Ki7firfXor|.  1 1)  A  son  of  Admetus,  king
of  I'bcrae  in  Tbessaly,  by  Alcestis.  daugbtwr  of  Pe-
Ua)^,  and  who  married  Ipbtbiui^,  tbeHJsterof  IVncl-
op^,  lie  went  to  the  Tmjnu  War,  and  ba^l  tbe
lieet««t  horses  in  Ihf  Greciiin  army.  He  diiitin-
gnishtid  liinisflf  in  the  funeral  gamins  of  Patnxdns
{11  ii.  7H,  7r»a  foil.).  (3)  Son  of  Ainpliilytfw  and
one  of  tbe  Corinthian  lino  termed  Batch J ml iu*.  He
was  tbo  anthur  of  a  hit)(ory  nf  Corintb  in  hiTiiic
vcnseiPauBJin.  ii.  U.  Eninehnt  joineil  Arcbias  wboti
tbe  InttiT  went  to  fnnnd  SyraoiiHo.

EumSnea  (K^fuf^v).  (ll  Of  Cardia,  ecrve^l  a^
private  itecretary  to  Philip  and  A]t.-xander:  and
on  the  di^atb  of  tbii  latter  (h.c.  :[£))  obtained  the
gmverumeutof  CappwUvia,  I'nphbigonio.  and  Pon-
tuH.  Kumcuus  allied  biinnolf  witb  IVrdiccaa,  and
carried  on  wnr  for  bim  in  A^ia  )Iini»r  against  An-
tipater  and  Craterus.  On  the  death  of  Perdiecas
in  Egypt,  Aotigu'imn  employed  the  whole  force  of
tbe  Macedonian  nrmy  to  rrusb  Enmeni's.  Notwitb*
standing  the  nnmeiical  inferiority  of  his  forces,
Eunienes  maintained  bis  gnnitnl  agaiuMt  bin  ene-


nonnced  njion  a  crimiiinl  caiU  tbem  In  lifdaild  I
tivlty.  Tbe  rrinn»  which  Ibey  pnnisb  ft«  <Jb-
obodionce  towards  parenta,  violation  of  iberupff*
dno  to  old  age,  |Hirjtiry,  murder,  vtolatioo  o(  tktf
liLWs  of  ho.spitality,  nnd  improjier  conduct  loniiHU
snppliantN.  Tbe  notion  wbicli  is  tbe  fiMimlmiou
of  tbe  iM'llef  in  tbe  Ennicnides  «eenis  to  W  tbst  >
parent's  cnr»c  takes  from  tilm  upon  wboiu  it  i*
]>miiounced  all  peace  of  mimi,  destroys  the  htffi'
nvm  of  bis  family,  and  prevents  bis  being  MmmI
with  children.  As  the  Ennienbles  not , only  pm-
isbed  crimes  after  death,  but  during  life  md  fsrth.
Tliey  ivere  reganled  also  as  giHldffS9«s  of  fate,  "his
togcilier  Willi  Zeus  and  tbe  Muerae  or  Psmc,  W
audi  men  a«  \ver«  diKimed  to  suffer  into  luisrry  wd
misfortiined.  In  tbe  same  capacity  tbey  al«»  f^
vent*'d  man  fmm  obtaining  t<>o  miirb  kiiovilfriljt
of  the  futtire.  Kouier  d«»os  not  intfiilion  Any  |H^
ticular  names  for  tbe  Erinyes,  nor  di>e»i  be  aerw  <•
know  of  any  definite  nnmber.  Hi-Mif-I,  vrli»ii
likewise  silent  upon  these  points,  calls  tlie  ErtnfM
tbe  daughters  of  Gaea,  who  conceived  tbem  iitd""
drops  of  blood  tbat  fell  upon  ber  from  lbeIio«lT«f
LTrannM.  Epimenides  called  tbem  the  ilanjtlil'''
of  Crnnu.H  and  Ennnym<^,  and  !«istersof  tbe  Mornr!


mieti  f(ir  *iiniH  years.till  Uo  w.is  Miirn^iubtred  by  tbe -.  ^ _ _ _..,., ,  _ _._

soldiery  lo  Antigonus,  by  whom  be  wau  put  to  '  Ae.«cliyln.H  cnllH  tbem  tbe  daughters  itf  Si^bl;  a*'
death.  :Ut>.  He  was  a  great  gvncval  nnd  stateK-  tivi^phorleH,  mf  Sriit<i<«  iP.irkne.'XKi  nnd  Giiea.  In '^
msn,  iind  bad  be  been  a  native  Maccdtniian  wontd  On-ck  trag^-iliamf,  with  whom  (e.g.  in  the  Kwmr**^
prtdiably  have  occupied  a  more  important  poKition  of  AirtcbyltiHi  the  number  of  tbtise  gmbleMwa  b  b"^
among  the  successors  of  Alexander.  (2)1.,  king  of  limited  to  a  few,  no  partienlRr  name  of  any  »*•
Pergaoium,  who  reipicd  B.c,  203-C41.  and  v  us  tbo  I  Erinys  i-i  yet  mentioned,  but  Ibey  ap|»w  in  ^
HuecesBorof  his  nnrle  Pbilelaerup).  (Ii)  II.,  king  of  '  same  capacity,  and  as  tbo  avengers  of  the  •«••
Pergannim,  who  ivigued  n.c.  137-l.'>!),  and  w:ui  tbe  '  crimes,  as  before.  They  are  flometimes  idwiliM
smi  anti  .miri-e!uuir  uf  Allaltis  I.  He  iulitrited  fnnu  wilb  tbe  Poenoe.  though  their  sphere  of  wtioP  '*
bin  pK'decpwMor  tbe  friendHbip  and  allinnc4<  of  the  widerthnn  tbat  nf  tbe  Poenne.  From  tlwirbiit'''"-
KomauH,  wbicb  ha  ttMik  tbo  utiuost  pains  to  culti-  down  and  persecuting  tbe  accarsod  criniinsl.J^'*'
vate.  Pergamum  became  ander  his  rttio  a  gn-nt  rbylus  rails  tbem  vvycr  or  <t'»i7y<ridfr.  No  pTs^-
and  tfourisbing  city,  in  which  be  foundeil tbat no  sacrifice,  ftud  do  tears  can  move  ihem,  vrpf*"


EUMENIDES


633


EUNOMIUS


icct  the  object  of  their  persecution;  and  when
they  fear  leet  the  criminal  ehoiild  escape  them,
they  call  in  the  aaBiataoce  of  Dik6,  with  whom
they  are  closely  connected,  the  maintenance  of
strict  justice  being
their  only  object.
Tbe  Erinyes  were
more  ancient  divini-
ties tfann  tbe  Olym-
pian gods,  and  ytere
therefore  not  onder
tbe  rnle  of  Zens,
thoagh  they  houonr-
ed  and  esteemed  bini;
and  they  dwelt  in  the
deep  darkness  of  Tar-
tarus, dreaded  by
gods  and  men.  Their
appearance  is  de-
scriljed  by  Aeschylus
as  Gorgo-like,  their
bodies  covered  witli
black,  serpents
twined  in  their  hair,
and  blood  dripping
from  their  eyes ;  En-
ripides  and  other
later  poets  describe  EQmenldM.  (Proni  iPaloied  Vue.)
them  OS  winged  be-
ings. The  appearance  they  have  in  Aeschylus
was  more  or  less  retained  by  tbe  poets  of  later
times:  bnt  they  gradually  assumed  the  character
of  goddesses  who  punished  crimes  after  death,  and
seldom  appeared  ou  earth.  On  tbe  stage,  however,
and  in  works  of  art,  their  fearful  appearance  was
greatly  softened  down,  for  they  were  represented
as  maidens  of  a  grave  and  solemn  mien,  in  the
richly  attorned  attire  of  hnutresses,  with  a  band
of  serpents  aronnd  their  heads,  and  serpents  or
torches  in  their  hands.  With  later  writers,  though
not  always,  the  number  of  Enmenides  is  limited  to
three,  and  their  names  are  TisiPHdN^,  Alecto,
and  Mkoaera.  At  Athens  there  were  statues  of
only  two.  The  sacrifices  which  were  oflered  to
them  consisted  of  black  sheep  and  inj^HikM — i.  e.
a  drink  of  honey  mixed  with  water.  Among  the
objects  sacred  to  them  we  hear  of  white  turtle-
doves and  the  narcissus.  They  were  worshipped
at  Athens,  where  tbey  had  a  sanctuary  and  a
grotto  near  the  Areopagus ;  their  statues,  however,
had  nothing  formidable,  and  a  festival,  Knmenidin,
was  there  celebrated  in  their  houonr.  Another
sanctuary,  with  a  grove  which  no  one  was  allowed
to  enter,  existeil  at  Colonns.  Under  the  name  of
Mayi'ai,  they  were  worshipped  at  Megalopolis.

Zhunenldefl  (Eufww'dvr).  A  play  of  Aeschylus
(q.  v.),  the  tliird  of  the  great  Orestean  trilogy.  It
represents  Orestes  pursued  by  the  Furies  to  Athens,
where  he  is  tried  by  the  Areopagus  for  the  murder
of  his  mother.  Ctytaemnestra,  and  acquitted  by  the
casting  vote  of  Athene,  so  that  in  his  person  the  fam-
ily cnrse  comes  to  an  end.  For  a  critical  discussion
of  the  play  see  K.  0.  MUller's  Eumenidei,  £rig.  trans.
(Cambridge,  1835).  Separate  editions,  with  English
verse  translation  aud  notes  by  Drake  (London,
1853) ;  and  Paley  (London,  \mi).  See  also  Ruse,
Greek  Dramas,  vol.  ii.  (London,  187*2);  and  on  the
story  of  the  play,  tbe artiiiles  Okestes;  Pelo-

PIOAK.

Bnmenidla  (Ev^vt'dcui). A  festival  in  houonr  of


the  Enmenides.  It  was  observed  once  a  year  witli
sacrifices  and  libations.  At  Athens  none  bnt  free-
boru  citizens  were  allowed  to  participate  in  the
solemnity,  and  of  these  none  but  such  as  were  of
known  virtue  and  integrity. See  Eumenides.

Bumenitui.  A  Roman  rhetorician  of  Angnsto-
dunum  (Autun)  in  Ganl  who  flourished  about  a.d.
290.  Fonr  orations  of  his  are  preserved — one  on
the  restoration  of  the  school  at  Antnn  by  Constan-
tius  ChloruB,  delivered  in  a.d.  296  or  297,  aud  three
panegyrics.  Text  by  Biihrens  (Leipzig,  1874).  See
Seeck  in  Jahn's  JahrhUchfr,  cxxxvii.  713;  Kilian,
Der  PaMgyriat  Eumeniua  (Mtlnnerstadt,  1869)^
Sachs,  De  Quattuor  Panegyricig,  etc.  (Halle,  1685);
and  the  article  Paneqyricus.

ZttimoIpXdae  ( Ev^uiXn-tdat )-  The  most  distin-
guished and  venerable  among  the  priestly  families
in  Attica,  believed  to  be  tbe  descendants  of  the
Thractan  bard  Enniolpns,  the  introducer  of  the
Elensinian  mysteries  into  Attica  (Dlod.  Sic.  i.  39 ;.
Apollod.  iii.  15,  $  4.)  Tbe  ltpo(f>aim]s  was  always  a
member  of  the  family  of  the  Eumolpidae,  as  Eu-
molpus  himself  was  believed  to  have  been  the  first
bieropbant  (Hesych. s.  v.  EvftoKirliat',  Tac.  Htet  \v.
83).  For  the  judical  powers  of  tbe  Eumolpidae,
see  the  article  Eleusinia,  p.  582.

Bmuolpua  {EdftoKiros).  In  Greek  mythology,,
the  son  of  Poseidon  aud  Chion^,  the  daughter  of
Boreas  aud  Orithyia.  After  bis  birth  he  was
thrown  by  his  mother  into  tbe  sea,  but  his  father
rescued  him  aud  brought  him  to  Aetbiopia,  to  his
danghter  Beutbesicyni6.  When  he  was  grown  up,
Endius,  tbe  husband  of  Beutbesicymd,  gave  him
one  of  his  dangbters  in  marriage,  but  he  desired
the  other  as  well,  and  was  accordingly  banished,
and  came  with  his  son  Ismarus  or  Immaradns  to
the  Thracian  king  Tegyrius  in  Boeotia.  As  suc-
cessor to  this  king  he  marched  to  tbe  assistance  of
his  friends  tbe  Eleusinians  against  the  Athenian
Erecbthens,  bnt  was  slain  with  his  son.  (See
Ekbcutueus.)  According  to  another  story,  Imma-
radns and  Erechtheus  both  fell,  and  the  contend-
ing parties  agreed  that  the  Eleusinians  should
submit  to  the  Athenians,  bnt  should  retain  tbe  ex-
clusive superintendence  of  the  mysteries  of  Elenais,
of  which  Eumolpus  was  accounted  the  founder
(Thucyd.  ii.  15 ;  Isocrat.  PaHatk.  78).  He  was  alsa
spoken  of  as  a  writer  of  consecrational  hymns,  and
as  having  discovered  tbe  art  of  cnltivatlng  tbd'
vines  and  trees  in  general.  The  Eumolpidae,  his
descendants,  were  the  hereditary  priests  of  tbo'
Eleusiuian  ritual. See  Elecsinia.

BiuiapiOa  (Evvairtos).  A  Greek  rhetorician,  bom
at  Sardis  in  a.d.  347.  In  405  he  wrote  biographies
of  twenty-three  older  aud  contemporary  philoso-
phers and  sophists.  In  spite  of  its  had  style  and
its  superficiality,  this  book  is  our  chief  authority
for  the  history  of  the  Neo-Platonism  of  that  age.
There  is  an  edition  by  Boissonado  (Amst.  1833).
We  have  also  several  fragmenis  of  bis  continuation
of  the  obrouicle  of  Herennins  Dexippus.  This
continuation,  in  fonrteeu  books,  covered  the  pe-
riod  from  a.d.  268  to  404,  aud  was  much  UKed  by
Zosimus. See  DrxippcS.

Eunens  {ESytjos).  A  sou  of  lason  aud  Hypstpyl^.
See  Hypsipyle  ;  Iasom.

Bunomia  (Euvo^i'a). See  Horas.
EaQOmins  (Evvofntos). The leader  of  an  ex-
treme sect  of  Arious  (Eunomians)  in  the  fourth


EL'NUCHL'S


C34


EL-PHORIOX


wnlury  a.Ij,  IU-  «h»  l>uru  at  Daooni  iti  Ca]i]>a(io-
cia,  (Hid  wnn  well  kiiuwu  an  (Ito  ptipil  and  iiMN>ciate
«f  Ai'tiiia{ii.  v.)«t  Alesaudria.  Hy  tl«-*  tmiipoi-t  of
KiidoxiiiM,  he  becAiuc  Bialiop  of  (',\zicua  (a.o.  'M'M).
Itiit  suoti  itllcr  rfsiffUtfd  tbu  u|itscii|ial  otflci^  tu  Iw'
I'^tlilt*  tilt'  )f>iidf<r  of  it  piLiiy.  Tlic  coiilpssioii  nf
fnilU  nil  it'll  in  :tKl  li«  Hi'iit  tu  Tltciiila^iim  Ibc  Grrnt
\V]i)i  i-vJuctLHl  nud  lie  ti[iHiit  a  imtiiher  of  years  t\»
uii  railuiii  MntirBtaiiin,  lllyncuiii,  Mitettii),  and  t^lsi--
wlierc,  until  iit  liij^t.  he  vcan  )ii-.i-uiitted  to  rrtiini  to
liJA  untivo  plnco  to  »|M)nd  tin;  nniiHiiidrr  of  lim  life.
Hi'  died  at  Dauura  tilMiut  tin-  yuai-  itlM.  Muitt  of
hh  ivurks  have  biteii  lost,  on  iiig  to  tin;  fnnt  that
tl1l^i^  dcMlrnctiou  was  ordt^rod  by  varioiiei  lni|)drln1
edicts.  We  btJII  (>ossc«4,  liotvevor,  Iii*  Exposltlou
of  l*"iuib  and  Iiis 'AiroAoyTTotdt,  writtcu  in  defL-uoo
of  his  doctrines.

The  toa<.>biiig«  of  KiinouiiuB  vtqtv  by  Iiik  fol-
lowtTs  aet  even  alMive  the  Scriptures.  Tlipy  rep-
resent an  extreme  type  of  Arianisra,  in  denying
lint  only  tbo  equality  <if  tbu  Son  uilb  the  Vather,
Imt  even  any  similarity  {6ftoiaTT}t).  See  Klose,  (?c-
Kchichtr  uuil  l^hrr  dm  KHnitmiHM  {KUA,  183:t}.

Eunuchua  (rvpovxot). Aenuiicb. See  iiKR\T?s.

Eunuchus-  A  pt.iy  of  Terence  biued  npon  the
Evvtii'XfH  of  Mennitder  and  the  koXti^  of  the  same
wriltrr.  Jt  i»  one  of  tlu-  livelii'nt  of  the  Teirntian
comedies,  and  obtained  an  exreptioiml  eiiixefls  diir-
iiiR  the  poet's  lifetime.  II.  wan  fir»t  produced  in
D.C.  161,  die  Huxnv  year  a»  the  Phormh.  Tbe  Evhu-
ehun  b:iM  been  imitated  in  modern  tiniett  in  the
Hdlamirn  of  Sir  Charles  Sedley,  in  />  .Vmf/  of
Brueyft.  and  iu  VEunttqav  of  FoDtulne.  It  i^  edited
(with  thu  -Iwrfrin)  by  Papillou  (LoiidaQ,  1877).

Suntu  {T.vvavi).  A  Sicilian  jiiKgler  and  Blnve,
n  native  of  Apamea  iu  Syria,  He  was  tbo  loader
of  ibu  Sicilian  slaves  iu  the  .Servile  War  («.c.  134-
i:Ja)  (Livy,  EpU.  xlv.).  He  was  defeated  hy  the
<-otisiil  p.  Hupiliim,  aud  died  ia  pn«i>nnt  Morgaittia
(KloniN  iii.  IM  ;  Pint.  «i*//.  36).

Enpallum  (EiVnAioc)  or  Eupollam  (}t.\muXiw).  A
town  of  iho  Loeri  Oitolae,  north  of  Naupaotna.

Bupatotitun  or  Bupatorla  (fLvirarnpinv  or  EiVa-
To/ji«>.  (It  A  town  of  PiJiitiis,  at  the  continence  of
the  LyciiH  and  Iris.  It  was  begun  by  Mithridates
nndt*r  the  name  Enpntoria,  and  received  from  Pom-
|H<y,  who  fiui^bf^  it,  tbu  title  of  Magnopolitt.  (*j)
A  town  in  the  northwcstorn  part  of  the  Tanrlc
Oliemniienns,  ou  the  SitHKi  CarciniteM.  It  waa
founded  by  one  of  the  genernto  of  MithridateA.

Enpatrldae  (Kifrnrpr/ta*).  The  luembers  chf  the
nneietil  noblr  fiiniili<.-M  of  Aftica.  After  the  aboli-
tion of  royal  jntwer  they  foiiud  tbemBelves  in  ex-
Himive  ]Hm!(eiwion  of  political  rights,  and  diHlin-
giiiahud  from  the  Ti^amopat  or  ngrirnlturiAts,  and
llie  .Aijfiiovy-xyoi  or  meebnnies.  The  constitntiou  of
Solon  deprived  them  of  thin  privilege.  Hut  their
lauded  pro|iertj"  and  tbe  priestly  dignitieH  which
they  lind  pofwe^Bed  of  €>ld  assured  llieifi  a  rertain
liitlnenre  for  n  eoni>iderable  time. Sw  Suloniak

CoNSTlTL'TlilS.

Bupbaea  (Eu^oije).  A  piiiu-e  who  siirereded
Aiiilri>cte>>  on  the  throne  of  MvKseuJa,  aixl  in  hts
TL'igii  the  tir^t  Messeniau  war  hcgnti.  Ho  died  B.C.
7:«J{Pa'.iHnn,  iv.S.fi).

Eupbemlun  nud  AutlphrSals. See  Piiii.oL^

Euphemua  (KLt^iMOE)-  ^»n  I'f  Poseidon  and
Eiirvpa,  daii^bliT  of  Tilyin*.  hiiftbaud  of  Laouomi^,


tbe  (li^lur  of  Heraek-a.  Hin  father  coufri
him  (hu  gilt  of  moving  no  swiftly  <iv<-r  iJit''
that  his  fcL-L  remaineil  di*\.  He  miim  oricitillTt
one  of  the  Miiiyae  of  PanojioiiH  in  Phot-iK.  lint  tf-
terwards  settled  ou  the  promontory  of  Toenaniii
ill  Ivaeoiiiu,  and  took  part  in  the  Calydonian  haat
and  the  expedition  of  tbe  Argonaut*.  Wbrit  IV
Argonauts  came  to  thu  lake  of  TfitoQ,  Triton  gan
KiiniolpUM  a  c1o«l  of  earth,  anil  Medea  propbnicd
that  if  he  threw  this  into  the  entraoce  of  tbe  low-
er world  at  Taenanim,  his  dcticendants  of  thr  teulli
gciieratiun  would  1w  uioHtent  of  Libya.  Ttie  nkdj
however,  waa  lost  in  tbe  ii^land  of  Thers,
clfMOAMdanta  wero  conipellivl  to  hold  p
of  tbiK  inland,  from  which  at  length,  in  tbe
cutecnth  generation,  Battus  cam<^  forth  and  foasii-
e<l  Cyruu6  In  Libya.  See  ApoUou.  Rbod.  h.  5t9:
Hygiu.  Fah.  14 ;  Herod.  It.  KiO.

Euphorbtts  (B;if<^i/>3of).  A  Trojan,  son  of  Piin-
thofiw.  ti-nowned  for  hix  valour.  He  wuunttnl  V*-
trocltiii,  and  was  liilled  by  Menelnittt  ( /^  xvii.
6U).  Pansaiiias  relates  fii.  17)  thai  in  thr  fmpi'
of  Herf^,  near  Mycenae,  a  votive  shield  w  ftlKivv.
(Miid  to  be  that  of  Euphorhns,  sub|>ended  thf'tvt^
Menelatl8.  Pythagoras,  who  m.iiut»ined  tlie  trn»»-
migration  of  souls,  declared  that,  in  the  tinvf '4
the  Trojan  AVar,  his  m)u1  had  animated  the  IwJf
of  Knphorbns ;  and  as  a  proof  of  the  truth  <>f  lili
Rfwertion,  he  is  Mid  to  have  gone  into  tbe  twnfl*
where  the  efbield  watt  hanging,  and  to  have  n'cojE-
uized  aud  taken  it  down  (Hur.  f'<irm.  i.  S^.  HI

Eapboilon  (E^i^piW).  (I)  A  tragic  poet  df  Atli-
etiN.  son  of  AeMcbylus.  He  coni|uered  four  titne*
with  postbumuiis  trage<lie«  of  his  fatber'A  o>>uipo-
sition,  aud  altto  wrote  ttevei-ul  dramas  hitiikcU.  Ote
of  his  victories  is  commeuioroted  iu  the  nrictiniHil
to  the  Medm  of  Euripides,  where  we  arr  toW  ihal
Eupbution  was  fint,  Sophocles  second,  aud  Eunp-
ides  third  with  the  Metira,  B.C.  431.  t^l  Au  cfit
and  epigraiuiuatic  p(H-t.  boi-n  at  Chalvis  Iu  EnlioM.
D.C.  Si7G,  and  who  iK-cam*'  lihrarinn  to  Aini«l«»
the  Great.  Hi?  wrote  various  jmnmuk,  folitled  0*-
fiiotf,  AUjraniier,  Ariuv,  Apollodorni,  etc  Hit  Jf«^
m/jtia  or  Mifcrllauirii  {Ma^ovia  ij  htcmtoI  •a»t«ll-
loctiou,  iu  liveUookH,of  faJdesandhihlone^rclftllrt
to  Attica,  It  very  Icarnwl  work,  but  rivalling  iii  •I*-
scurity  the  ra«»nndrnaf  Lycopbron.  ThetiAlilxMik
bore  the  title  of  Chiliad  (\tXtnr),  cither  bccaii*  H
consisted  of  a  thousand  verses,  or  l^ecaoM.'  ii  con-
taiued  the  aucieut  ornoles  that  referral  to  a  period
of  a  thousand  yeans  Pcrhnpa,  hnwevrr,  t»rh  o(
the  Ave  books  cotit«iti»d  a  thousand  vcrtcs,  (vftiw
passage  of  Snidas  respecting  this  writer  is  tomt-
what  ubfrcure  aud  defective,  and  Kudocta.  i^i  t^
"G.iltlen  of  Violent,"  speaks  of  a  fifth  Chiliii«i,ti>-
titled  tltpi  Xpi/ff^i*-,  "  Of  Oracles."  gninliliao  rec-
onuneuda  the  rnading  of  this  jioet,  and  Vefj.'il  M
said  to  have  esteemed  hta  productions  very  bigklf
A  piuwuLgR  in  the  tenth  eclogue  iv.  50  folDiud*
ri-uiiirk  made  by  Servius  (Jrf  Eelog.  vi.  73i  fciW
led  Heync  to  atlppoM  that  C.  Cf>ruelini»GiilliH.tk
friend  of  Vergil,  had  Iranshited  Enphori'^ii  ii'W
liottu  vei-se.  This  [(oel  was  one  of  the  fBV.tonW
nutNors  of  the  emperor  Tiberin*.  one  of  those  wIk*
he  imitated,  and  whose  hunts  \w  placed  in  h\i  ti*
bniry.  The  fragments  of  Kuphonou  nerp  cnlM-
eil  and  published  by  Meineke  in  his  work  I**  t*"
pUrioHif  rktilr.  Vita  r(  Sf^riplit  fli^aSl.  ao4  m  •»•
Analerta  JUrandniw  (Berlin. 1S43).  Sei! alw K<»i'k,
Fivg.  Com.  Urate.  (l^Wdl. The  aaioiin  of  tn\^


EUPHRASOK


686


EUKIPIDES


riou  witb  Nicta  or  Nicaen,  tlie  wife  nf  King  Alrx-
antlrin  nf  EiilH>pa,  are  <>rtcn  nltudfd  tn  in  tb<-  pontiiH
of  tlie  Greek  Antholo);v. S*'c  Brnnr.k,  Jiirt(.  \«1.  ii.

i.p.  3,  a:\.

Enptu-aoor  {Ev<f>pavatp}.  A  distiDgiiiiibpfl  »tnt-
uarj  uiid  |>aii>tor.  He  wns  a  native  of  Conmh.lmt
practistsl  his  art  at  Athoiift  alroiit  u.c.  iCIti  (Qniiit.
xii.  10.  «j  I'liii.  U.  jV.  XXXV.  t).  Of  one  of  his
works,  a  beautiful  Hittiii);  Puri».  v:e  bnvv  {irnh-
ably  o  copy  in  the  Museo  I'lo-Clenientiiio.  (lis
bp«i  piittitio^  were  preoerrod  in  a  porch  In  tlio
C»raniiL'n«.

Buphrates  (Et-i^panjr). (1)  A  uative  of  Oreiis
in KiiIkm'Ii  ntid  n  diwiple  iif  Plato. Ho  tiiii(l«ul
AtheiiH  for  tlie  cimrl.  of  Penlicvaii,  king  of  Mac*--
donia,  willi  whom  hi*  became  a  favoiirite. Aftor
tbe death nf  tbiK  tnoiiari.-lj bu returiKxl to bia
-Aouotry,  and  lii-ndrd  a  parly  HguiiiMt  Pliilip,  thf
^BtTuiMsor  of  Pi-nlicaiH  aud futlK-r  uf  AU-iutiidtr.
^Bpiiig  nIiuI  up,  bowuvur,  vrithiti  thii  kuIU  of  Orc-
Bi,  bi-  put  an  end  tu  bia  owu  life. ArconliiiH;  lu
Kmio,  he  WAA  kille<l  by  order  of  Parmoaio. cii  A
Stoic  philosopher  mid  uative  of  Alexandria,  who
SnnriKbed  ii>  the  second  century. He  was  a  frii;nd
of  th«  philosopher  Apolloniiw  of  Tyana,  wlio  intro-
duced hiiD  to  Vespasian. Pliny  (be  Ymiujifr  (ftl/jw/.
i.  10)  speaks  hinMy  of  hin  characttT, Wln-n  Im
foonil  bi^  strfaif^lli  worn  out  by  <liiit*nH<^  imd  oUI  Hj^e.
Bd  Ttdnntatily  piil  a  iHirtml  to  Iiih  Ufi:  liv  drinking
Bainlotrk,  having lirel,  for  hohu;  uukiiuwu ivuttuu,
oluAiiMHl  )H'riuif)etinn  fn>m  tlin  vmp<Tor  Hudriim.

Buphrates  if.ixftfuiTTji). Ooe  of  the  largest  aud

bMt-kiiowo  rivers  of  Aaia. The  l^^upUrates  riaea

uoar  Arz^,  the  tnodflrn Erxerouin. Uh  soarce  i«

among  uioonfainH,  wbtcb  Htnilin  inakiM  to he  n

part  of  thu  uimb  northern  Iiraiivh  of  Taurus. At

first  it  id  a  very  iocousidemVile  f4lreniu,aiHl  tlownt  («>

the  w<«t,nutU,eurouDt«rinK  the  nionntainrt  of  Cap*

padocta,  it  turns  to  th«  »nnlh,  and,  aftcv  thming  a

short  distaure,  n^ct^ivra  ii.'*  Hoitthi^rn  ann,  a  lar^e

river  coming  from  the  irnHt  and  riHtng  in  the  wnilb-

vtn  declivity  of  the  ranse  of  Mount  Ararat. TIiIh

WHitheru  arm  of  the  Knphrates  ia  the  ArsaninK,  nc-

Hbnliug  to  Mauuort,  and  ih  the  rivtT  whieb  the

^0,(KMI  cfOMed  in  their  retreat  iA»ab.  iv.  ^>,  and

of  wUioh  ineiitioD  i»  made  by  Pliny  in  refen'ueo

lo  tb«  campaigns  of  Corbnlo. The  Enphrati;<i,  by

i!iis  acceasiou  of  waters,  l>cooniiuB  a  very  InrRe,

Mreani,  doaceuds rapidly in a bending course.

nearly  weat-HoutbweHt to  the  vicinity  of  8anio-

tgita. The  range  of  AniiinuH  hero  preventing  iln

farther  progrew  iu  this  diroeliun,  it  turua  off  to

the  M)Dtheii«t,  a  Course  whivh it  next puntneN,

with  w>iue  variation,  until  it  r(Mu.-bei>  Cir<;e!iinui.

To  the  south  of  tbii  place  it  enters  thu  iminensu

Klftius  of  Scnnar.  but  ia  forced  to  run  a^iiln  to  the

Btatlieiut  oiitl  approach  thu  Tigris. The  naiuu  of

th«8e  riverw  finally  take<t  place  near  Coinu. The

river  form«d  by  their  .innciion  U  called  .Shnt>nl-

Arab,  or  River  of  Arabia. It  ban  thrr'O  principal

u«mth^i  l>eaidot)  a  ftniall  outlet. The  wholi*  length

■kf  the  EnphratoH,  including  the  8hat-al-Arab,  iti

H7OO  miles. Itn  name  Ih  the  (trcek form  of  the

original  appellation  Phnit,  which  signlttc!*  frrtttfnl

or  fertilizing. The  Oriental name is  sonit-liriit*«

written Purutb.  iv*  in  (.ten.  ii.  14.  !■'>,  IH,  and

ill.  i.  4. The  Persian  form  is  r/ratu;  Syriac,

hrtit : Arabic.  tWat. On the condition and

i)Kif{mpby  of  the  Eiiphrateii,  sec  AiuDworth.  Tkt

fM-pkratr*  Krptd'hi'wn  (lel8l*).


Buphrosj^^  iy.i^pmrvvi). One  of  ilie  Cbarilos

or  (JraeeN. Sre  t'llAKITR-t.

BupSlls  ( trvoXir)  A  writer  of  the  Olil  Comedy,
who  wua  iMirn  at  Athens  about  the  year  li.c.  44*1.
He  was  iberefore  a  eonteinporary  of  Ari*ttoplianeA,
who.  in  all  proliability,  wa>  born  a  year  or  two
aftiT.  Kii|>oltb  \h  suppost'tl  to  have  cxbibjleil
playii  tot  the  tirnt  time  in  D.C.  4'iD.  In  D.r.  4'-2r>  he
wo-t  third  with  bi»  Nini^>;viai,  when  rratinns  was
seconti  ami  Aristophanes  tirNt.  In  ii.c.  4'il  ho
bniught  out  bin  Mn^ixut  and  Lis  KiJXaxrr.  and
hi*  \vTij\vKns  and  ^ KtrrpurtvToi  the  followjug  year
(Scbol.  on  AriHl«>ph.  Sah.  5.W,  .'iOa ;  Schol.  on  Aris-
tifph.  Pnc.  HtKl).  The  titles  of  more  than  twenty
of  his  comedies  have  l>ecu  collected.  A  I'fw  frag-
nient.*«  remain.  Knpolis  was  a  Indd  aud  severe
w»ti]  i."!  on  ibo  vicew  of  his  day  anil  city.  Persiiia
( i.  VIA)  terms  him  irutun  (cf.  Hor.  Sal.  1.  4.  I
foil..).  Iti  the  Mnpixnc  he  attacked  Hyperlmlus
{ Arist^ivb. -Viifc.  r>51  ) :  In  the  AimiXvKas  be  ridi-
rtiled  the  haudsoutc  pnnenitiast  of  that  name;  iu
the  'Am-^oTfLrroi  In-  la«hed  tho  itsoless  and  coward-
ly citizens  of  Athens,  aud  denonnced  Melanthna
a^  an  epicure.  In  the  Ouirrat  he  inveighed  against
the  effeminacy  of  his  countrymen.  In  his  .Vwe-
daiftairtt  he  Htwailed  C'imon.  HcciiHing  him,  among
other  chnrgcH,  of  an  nnpnlriutic  bias  lowurdM  ev-
erything Spariini.  {See  Plut.  Ctm.  Iti,  who  says
that  this  play  had  u  great  intlucnce  on  the  public
feeling.)  AriHtophanes  sectiiN  to  have  been  on  bad
terms  with  Kuprilis,  whom  he  charges  with  hav-
ing pillnged  the  materials  for  liis  Mapotar  from
the  'Iirn-^E  (.Vm1>i'«,051  foH.).  and  with  making  ncur-
rilous  jokes  on  his  prematun.-  batdnetHi  (.Schol.  Mi
ynb.  d'A'i).  Enpotis  appeurv  to  b»ve  Iteeii  a  wnrni
adtiiitiM'  of  PerirlcN  u»  a  slaleMman  aiul  a  man,  as
it  wan  retiNonable  that  snnh  a  conitHliau  Klionid  lie,
if  it  be  true  that  he  owed  bis  niirehtruined  lirense
uf  ii|ievi'h  to  the  ]i:itronuge  of  that  uek'bruted  stalen-
niaii.  His  death  waa  generally  a»crib(^<l  to  the
viMigeailco  of  Alcihiuden,  whom  be  had  lampooned,
probably  Iu  the  Ilinmii  (Cle.  Jd  All.  vi.  1).  By  his
oriicrs,  according  to  thu  common  nccuunt,  Kupolia
was  thrown  overboard  during  the  passage  of  the
Athenian  anuamerit  to  i^ieily  (B.C.  41.^).  t'ic<'ro,
however,catt8thiKstory  a  popular  error;  since  Kni-
tosthene-H,  the  Alexandrian  librarian,  bad  shown
that  several  come4lieN  wern  rom]mswl  by  Kupolia
SOUK!  limn  after  thr  date  aHfliguetl  to  this  psendo-
a--uui8si nation.  Hik  tomb,  ton,  according  to  Paii-
MiniaH,  wtt.>4  eriTtf;d  on  tlie  ttank»  of  the  AmipilN  by
thti  SicyotiiauK,  which  niakcM  it  nuiitt  probable  that
thU  wa»  the  place  of  bis  dcatb.  Ttio  fnigmniT))  of
Gupolis  will  be  found  iu  Metuckc's  i'taantaita  Com.
Onue.  i.  i»p.  104^146;  aud  ii.  pp.  43G-b7i»  (llerlln,
1.^9-47) ;  and  ore  separately  edited  by  ifnukel
(Leipzig,  lB'.i9).  A  Latin  translation  of  them  will
be  found  in  Botbe,  Frug.  Com.  Grace.  {Paris,  I800).

Bupompua  ( Kriro^fror ).  A  Greuk  painter,  a
iia,live  uf  Sicyon,  who  flourished  about  li.c.  400.
He  wnM  thu  founder  of  the  ^icyonian  Hcbocd  of
painting,  which  laid  great  emphanis  on  profea-
Nional  knowledge  (Plin.  //.  X.  xxw.  75).

Buiipldea  iEipimirjt).  (\)  A  celebratol  Athe-
nian tragtr  poet,  sou  of  Mnesarchns  and  CILto.  Ho
was  boru  li.c.  4W.  in  Halauii.-*,  on  tho  very  day  of
the  Greoiati  victory  near  that  island.  His  mother,
Clito,  had  been  Kent  over  to  8alamis,  witb  tlie  oth-
er Athenian  women,  when  Attieo  was  given  up  to
the  invading  nnur  of  Xerxes;  and  the  name  of  tho


EURll'lUE^


cae


eurh'IDIls


poet,  niiii-h  is  forniftl  likw  a  patrouymic  from  ilie
Kiiri)iii»,  tlic  iw:ohouritiL-  lint  succcAsful  ri>«idtai)ce
to  tbe  ruwiaii  navy,  sbows  that  the  tninds  of  hi*
parents  vfKtv  fnlt  of  tbc  i^tirrliifj;  «vtfiitit  iif  rliat
onotnentnitf)  criKJ^.  Artotojilituitrtt  ri<i>i'itt«4l1.v  tm-
jmtt'ft  iiiwiiiiie«»of  oxlrarlioti.lijT  tlic  motlit'r'MSHle,
l«>  Enripitlex  {  ThriiHioj>h .  'X-^^,  4^5;  Jrkttrn.  478;
A'^Mi'/.  17  ;  7ffl«(i<',f<40).  He  axwrla  tlial  sin."  wns  »ii
b4;rlwH*tlLT;  ami,  accortting  to  Aiitii»  (iclliiis  (xv.
^),  Tli(M)plirn«tti.s  coiitirntH  ttiu  cumeiliairH  iiistniia-
tioiis.  Whatever  one  or  both  of  liin  pareuts  might
origiually  tinve  been,  the  c<iwily  education  TChich
tbo  young  Eiiripitlca  ixtcciveil  itiipUes  a  certain
dogre«  of  wcniih  and  cousofincnce  uii  tben  at  least
posseesed  by  bis  family.  Tbo  pupil  of  Anaxu^urafl,
Protagoras,  aud  FrtMlienn  (au  iustructor  famous
for  the  extravagant  t«rnu  which  he  deiaaittlod  fur
his  lewHinK%  ci>nlil  not  have  beeit  tlic  mu  of  pvr-
h«>ii5  at  that  time  very  iriejiii  ur  poor.  It  i»  iiiuNt
jitiibable,  therefore,  that  biH  father  wan  a  man  of


.-fS-^k


S\


KYPin'^H^


EuriphlpsL (^'Bpl«>  UDHam.]

property,  and  made  a  m/eaJliaHce.  In  early  lifo
tro  are  told  that  hin  father  uiade  Euripides  direct
Uis  atteutioii  chti^fly  to  Kymiuuitic  cxert^isc-s,  and
that,  ill  bU  seventeenth  yrar^  hi^  wan  crowned  in
the  Elensiiiiau  and  Tliosean  <>onU>«ti)  {Anl.  Gelt.
XT.  20).  Even  at  tbi.-^  early  a^c  he  in  Haid  to  havo
attetupted  dramatic  coinpusition.  He  »»L>ma  oIho
to  have  cultivated  a  itatiuitl  taAto  for  paiutiug,
and  aomo  of  his  pictures  M-ere  long  aherwanla
preserved  at  Megara.  At  length,  Quitting  the
gyumwtium,  he  appli»l  hiuiNclf  to  philosophy  and
lileratnro.  Under  the  celebrated  rhetorician  Prodi-
cus,on«  of  tho  inittrtictor*  of  IVrieleK,  he  acipiired
that  oratorical  Kkill  for  wLich  bi«  dramas  are  bo
remarkably  distinguiKhetl.  Qniutiliari,  in  compar-
ing Soplioclea  wilh  Enripiile*,  strongly  i-econi-
neuds  the  latter  t«>  the  young  pleader  as  an
excellent  model.  Cicero,  Ut*,  was  a  grcjit  admirer
of  Enripidi^.  From  Atiaxngurus,  Ktiripidrs  im-
bibotl  thone  philosophical  uutiuiis  which  are  occa-


MAiially  bronght  fonrard  in  bis  »urbs,  attd
which  icferencu  may  be  ninilr  to  the  moimgmffc '
of  I'armoutler,  tCnrijiide  tt  Anaiagorr  iPariLliOS).
Here,  to<»,  IVrielt"!  vrcut  his  fellow-.4i>cipIe.  Witb
Kucrate«,  who  hw)  stndie4l  under  the  «atne  tnuter,
Enripideit  was  on  terms  of  the  clomst  inttmiay,
and  from  him  he  derived  those  maxims  m>  f^H|aea^
ly  intnrvroven  into  bis  dramas  that  Socrates  wm
HtiHpcfited  of  largely  asaistlng  the  tragedian  in  tlwii
ooDi  position.

Euripides  began  his  public  career  as  a  dnimlie
writer  in  ».c.  4r>5,  the  twcuty-tiftli  year  of  liiAi^e.
On  t1ii$  occasion  be  was  the  tbirti  wilh  a  pUj
called  the  I'MadeJi.  In  u.c.441,  be  won  tbe  p^f^
In  u.o.  4:*1,  he  was  third  with  the  -l/rtTrti,  the  Fh-
litrMex,  iho  Dicty»,  and  the  TAaiilar,  a  Mljn'c
dmma.  His  competitors  were  Enphorion  aind
S<jphocIes,  Tie  wiw  first  with  the  flip/Mlifiut.t.c.
42B,  thp  ycnr  of  his  muster's  (Anaxugonui'sl  ilcalb;
second,  K.c.  415,  with  the  Alrsandrr  (or  Pant>.  tbt
raltiniMri,  the  Trvjadr^,  and  tbe  i>ii!fphu§,a  salyrie
drama.  It  was  in  this  contest  that  Xen<K-}ca  »«
(init  (Aelian.  T.  H.  ii.  rf).  Two  year»  after  Uiii
the  Atbeiiiaus  susttiiued  the  total  luaB  of  tlirir
nntiaraeut  before  Syraense.  In  his  uarration  vf
tbt»  disaster,  PlnLirch  gives  an  anecdote  (.VirUi)
wbivh,  if  true,  liears  a  splendid  testimony  («  Ibt
high  reputation  which  Euripides  then  enjorrd
Tho^n  among  the  captives,  he  tells  us,  wlm  coaH
repeat  any  portion  of  that  poet's  ivorki>  ircn
treated  with  kindness,  and  even  wt  at  litwrty
The  e.imo  author  also  informs  ns  that  KanpidM
honoured  tho  sohliora  who  bad  fallen  in  that  »vp
with  a  funeral  poem,  two  tines  of  whieh  ht  bu
preservei].  Tbe  Androneda  was  exhibited  it.{'.4U;
tbe  Oretlcn,  ac.  4W.

Soon  after  this  time  the  poet  r«iired  into  Vai^
nesia.  and  from  thence  into  Macetlnnia,  to  Ibenmrt
of  .\rrliHlatis.  As  in  the  cas<'  of  .Aeschyhiit,  itvOHV
lives  for  tluN  .self-exile  an>  olMcure  and  nnocitiin.
Wi<  know,  iudeod,  that  Athens  was  by  do  tntU*
I  be  most  favounihle  residence  fur  ilisl  iu)<utA)>cd  lit-
erary merit.  Kfport,tfio,  pronounced  Eiiripi*ici'ii»-
ha]ipy  in  his  own  fauiilr.  His  first  wife,  M(-Iii»,  lio
divorced  fin- adultery  ;  and  in  Ins  second.  C'birril^
he  was  not  ntore  fortunate.  To  the  poi'i's  nnhsp-
piness  in  liis  matrinionial  cnnnectionn  Arlytopfavt^
refers  in  his  Un»ae  (ll>4o  foil.).  E?ivy  and  riiiiiiy
among  his  fellow-citizens,  intldetity  aitd  dorenue
rexatious  at  home,  would  prove  powerful  \w\>*»-
ments  to  the  jioet  to  accept  th«  invitation*  of
Arcbelniis.  Perhaps,  too,  a  prosooation  in  witicb
he  heonmc  involveil,  on  a  chargv  of  tmpletrt
grounded  upon  a  lino  in  the  Hippolytns  (Ariatx^
Uhet.  iii.  15),  might  havo  had  some  share  to  pt**
dncicig  this  dutorminntion  to  qnit  .\thetw;  "**
ought  wo  to  omit  tbat^  in  all  likelihood.  hU  pullt*
ical  Hcntimentti  may  haw  vx|H>sed  him  to  eonitniil
dtiuger.  In  Maceilouia  he  is  said  to  hsve  wrill">
a  play  in  honour  of  ArchelaUs,  and  to  haro  iti-
Hcribed  it  with  his  pati-ou's  name,  wbo  i«i»»  •"
mucb  pte^'ise<l  with  the  manners  ami  ability  '^
hia  gnest  as  to  appoiut  him  one  of  his  niinnl''"'
He  composed  in  this  same  country  alM>  «>iitn  ethrr
dramatic  pieeea,  in  one  of  whieb  (thf  Barckv\^
seems  to  have  been  inttpired  by  the  wild  wwH
of  the  land  to  which  he  had  come.  No  fiirlliei
l>articnlars  are  recorded  of  Euripides,  except  i  fc*
apocryphal  anecdot««  and  aptipbthegnt*.  Hi*
death  is  said  to  have  been,  like  that  of  Aewli)'!"^
of  an  extninnlinary  kind. Either  from  rliaot#or


EL'KIPIOES


£L*R1!-XDES


Dialice  the  aged  dramatist  waa  cxpoaod,  according

to  the  oomiuoD  occoaiir,  to  ihu  attack  of  auinc

fcrociuiu  LouudH,  aiul  was  li.v  thciti  50  dreadfally

■Dandled  ua  lo  expire  soou  afterwardit,  in  b\»  aev-

enly>fiftb  year. This  story,  Iiowever,  \s  clearly  a

fabrication,  for  ArigtofihaneH,  in  tbe  /fAit<i«',  would

■brLaiiily  bavti  alliMed  lo  tlit.^  manner  uf  liiH  deatli

VUd  thert)  Weu  any  tiling  rcuiarkaitle  ill  it. Ht*died

n.c.  -fX;  iCliiitou,  Fiuil.  UfUen.  i.  ^1). Tlie  Atbeniaiis

fiitrrated  ArcliulaliH  to  itrud  Mio  body  to  iLi^  poet's

iiAttvc  city  for  iutermeul. The  riMiueat  was  refuMMl,

tiiid,  with  cTcry  deiiiouetratlun  of  griuf  autl  respect,

Kuripidee  was  buried  at  Fella. A  cutiutapb,  how-

_eveT,  waserecteil  to  h\»  iiieuior^*  ut  Atbcnit.

,  We  bnre  Hnmn  eiiltiii]jt;  Hayings  of  fjophnvloa  cou>
riling  EaripiileM,  altbuiigb  tliu  fonner  wax  «o  void
all  tbe  jtKtluuMy  of  an  nrliHt  that  he  uioiirtie^t
vet  the  death  of  hie  riTal:  and,  iu  a  piec«  which
be  mliorlly  after  brought  u)M>it  the  stage,  did  not
allow  his  actors  tlu!  oniaaieiit  of  a  garlaud.  The
jeering  attacks  of  ArixtophancH  ani  well  known,
bat  have  nol  alwayn  been  pi-(i[K>rly  estimated  and
iitidenitMKl.  Aristotle,  too.  brings  fiirward  many
important  caui»e«  for  blame:  utid  wbi^a  he  chIU  En-
npides"  the  most  tragic  of  poets  "(/Vf.  xiii.  10),  he
by  DO  means  atwrilH't*  txt  him  the  greatest  perfection
ill  tbe  tragic  art  generally;  but  lie  alludes,  by
this  pbnMe,  to  tbe  effect  which  is  prmliiced  by  his
dramatic catHtrophcti.  In  Enripide^we  no  lunger
lind  the  eMCuce  of  ancient  traKcdy  pure  and  1111-
niixed;  Its  cbaraeusristic  fealnri-s  are  already
jtartly  effaced.  Thew!  conttiste*!  prinuipaily  in  the
irlca  of  destiny  which  ^^)gIUl  in  tbeui,  in  ideal  rep-
reeentation,  and  the  itniKtrtnnoe  of  the  chorus.
TXiv  iilea  of  destiny  had,  iudeeil,  come  down  to  him
from  his  predeceasors  aa  bis  inheritance,  and  a
lielicf  in  it  is  inculcated  by  htui,  according  to
H^e  cnstoui  of  the  trsgiHlians;  lint  still,  in  Enrip-
flet,  destiny  is  seldnui  considered  mi  tlte  invisible
spirit  of  all  poetry,  the  fundamental  Lliougbt  oT
the  tiragic  world.  On  the  other  hand,  he  derived
it  from  the  regions  of  inanity,  and,  in  his  writ*
tugs,  inevitable  necessity  often  degenerates  into
■tte  caprice  of  chance.  Hence  he  can  no  longer
■Irect  it  to  ita  proper  aiin^nnniely,  that  of  ele-
vating, by  ilA  contrast,  the  moral  freo-n-tU  of  roan.
Very  few  of  his  dramas  depend  on  a  constant  co[u>
bat  against  the  dictates  of  dcHtiuy,  or  an  e«Lual]y
heroici  nubjeelion  to  tliem.  Kin  men,  in  general,
inffer.  iM-caiise  they  inniit,  and  not  htfcanse  tlu'y  are
willing.  Tbe  contrasted  snboiilination  of  idi-a,
lufttuuMs  of  character  and  passion,  which  in  Suph-
oclca,  aa  well  oa  iu  tbe  graphic  art  of  tbu  (ireeks,
^Kt,  ftod  observed  iu  this  order,  are  in  him  exactly
^bvenad.  In  fail  plays  paaaion  is  the  most  power-
Hal:  bia  secondary  care  is  for  character;  and  if
tbcftc  endeavonrs  leave  bim  snlJicient  n}oni,  he
seeks  now  and  then  to  bring  in  Rrentne&s  and  ilig-

fcty,  hut  more  rretpiently  amiability.  Euripides
IS,  acconliuK  to  the  dorlriue  of  Aristotle  (Poet.
XV.  7.  xxvi.  Jl),  rre<|aenlly  reprp>M'rit«d  his  [ler-
aonaguM  us  )>ad  wilbont  any  tu'i-t-Mnity — for  exam-
ple, MenelailH  in  tbe  Ornitr*.  More  iwiiiecially,  it
is  by  uu  means  his  object  to  represenl  tbe  race  of
horoes  us  pre-euiineut  above  ttie  pn.-8eiit  race  by
tfaa^r  mighty  stature.  biU  he  rather  takes  pains  to
mi  ap  the  chasm  between  bis  conienipnrnrii'.H  imd
rfae  olden  time,  and  reveal  the  goils  niul  lii^nM-t  of
tbe  other  aide  in  their  nndntss.  This  is  wbal
Sophocles  meant  when  he  said  that  he  bintaulf
repreeenlcd  men as  they  should be,  Euripides  aa


they  were.  It  seema  to  be  a  design  of  Euripkba
always  to  remind  his  spectators,  "  Stie,  these  Winga
were  nieu  ;  they  hod  just  such  weaknesses,  and
acted  from  exactly  the  same  motives  aa  yonrselves,
and  as  the  meanest  among  you  do(>s."  In  other
iTords.  Euripides  is  the  lirat  of  the  realists  among
the  Greeks.

In  lii»>  dramas  the  chorus  is  genernlty  au  nn-
ensontial  ornament,  its  sougs  are  often  nitotiethcr
episodica],  witboni  reference  to  the  action,  Tbe  an-
cient comic  writers  enjoyed  tho  privilege  of  some-
times tuakiug  (be  choniis  a<ldreas  the  audience  iu
their  own  name,  thin  being  called  a  Pnralmsis.
Although  it  by  no  means  belongs  to  tragedy,  yet
Enripiiles, according  to  the  testimony  of  lidins  Pol-
lux, ofleuomph>yed  it, and  no  far  forgot  himself  in  it
that  in  the  liuuoijfs  he  inuile  the  chorus,  cntiKistiug
uf  women,  use  graininatical  forms  which  behmged
to  the  masculine  gender  iilone.  In  the  muMr  of
tlu'accomiianiiiiciits  he  adopted  all  the  innovations
ofwlBchTimolbeus(fi.v.)  was  the  author,  and  selecl-
ed  those  m(^asures  which  are  inoft  suitable  to  the
sensuous  nature  of  liis  poetry.  He  acted  in  a  sim-
ilar way  njt  regarded  prosody;  the  constrnclion  of
his  venw5  is  rather  florid,  and  apprcjacbos  irregular-
ity. He  strives  after  effect  in  a  degree  which  fan
not  be  concedtKl  even  to  a  dramatic  poet.  Thna,
for  example,  he  seldom  lets  uiiy  opportunity  escape
of  having  his  personnges  Hciz«-d  with  fsudden  and
gninuillcM)  temir;  his  old  men  alwayn  roui|ilain
of  the  inlirniities  of  old  age,  and  are  particularly
given  to  mount,  with  tottering  knees,  the  ascent
from  the  orchestra  to  the  stage,  which  frequently
rt'prosculed  tbe  declivity  of  a  mountain,  while  they
lament  their  wrf'tche<lne«».  His  tdyect  throngh-
uiit  it*  emotion,  f<>r  the  sake  of  which  he  uot
only  ofl'ciids  against  ancient  decorum,  but  sacrlflcea
the  symmetry  of  his  plays.  He  likes  to  redin-e
hishenws  tuustatuof  lieggar>';  make^them  sutTer
hunger  and  want;  and  brings  theni  tin  the  stage
with  all  Ibe  external  signi^  of  indigmiee,  c-overed
with  ragt«,  as  Aristoplmnejs  ho  hMinoiironsly  throws
ill  his  teeth  in  the  Jchamiana  (4U^-4if*).

Euripides,  aa  already  stated,  had  studied  philos-
ophy, and  prided  himself  upon  bis  familiarity  with
philosophical  doctrine.  Hence,  as  contrasted  with
his  two  dramatic  predecessors,  Aesehylns  niid
Sojihurles,  bis  rationalistic  meilnxl  of  Irentmciit
neeuitMl  to  his  undieuces  startling  and  almost  iiu-
piiuiK.  Kis  allegorical  iuterprctatious  innst  often
have  had  a  Havour  of  sacrilege  about  them,  nud
the  whole  spirit  and  temper  of  his  plays  were  au
embodiment  of  the  *'  higher  criticistu  "  of  the  day.
The  Atheiiiaus  were  prone  to  identify  the  senti-
meuts  of  his  characters  with  those  of  the  author
himself  It  is  related  of  him  that  ho  made  Heller-
ophoncomeon  the  stage  with  a  panegyric  on  riches,
in  which  he  preferred  llieni  before  every  domestic
joy;  and  Kaid,  at  lost,  "  If  Aphrodite  (who  had  tbe
epithet  of  '  golden')  shone  like  gold,  ohe  would  in-
deed deserve  the  love  uf  meu  "  (Sen.  Kpisi.  1  \^).  Tbe
audience,  enraged  at  this,  raised  a  p^roat  tumult,
and  were  proceeding  to  stone  the  orator  as  well  aa
the  poet.  Euripides,  on  this,  nisht-d  forward  and
exclaimed,  ■'Wait  patiently  till  the  end;  In-  will
fare  accordingly,"  Thus.  also,  be  is  wtid  t«  bavo
t^xciued  liimsetf  a^aini^t  the  acciisatiort  that  hia
Ixion  spoke  too  aLiominnbly  and  bhisplieinously,
by  replying  that,  in  return,  hi-  had  not  concluded
the  piece  without  making  liini  revolve  on  the
whcul. Wc  has  also  great  command  of  thai  soph*


EURIPIDES


689


FXJUl'IDES


istry  of  llio  piwsions  n-tiicb  gircs  tilings  only  one
upjicaniniv.  Tbe  fullawitig  vene  (Hippol.^S)  is
nutorioiis  for  its  uxprewiioB  of  what  cunists  call
m«ntal  i-eserration :

"Ujr  tongnB  look  ui  oatb,  bat  my  diuI  Ii  quwwo."

In  tbe  conucction  iti  nrhiuh  tliis  vono  is  spoken,
it  iii&y  iudeed  Iw  jiiatitied,  as  far  aa  rcg^nrds  the
rMMOn  for  irhirh  Aristopttanea  riiliciilva  it  in  so
raauy  wuy* ;  Itiic  still  tliu  funiitila  tn  pcrMii'iotm  »u
Bocoiint  iif  tUu  turn  wbitli  imiy  1>e  ^iveo  it.  Au-
otber  iientinit^iit  of  Enripiiles  {FhoeitiM.  &34),  "  It  i«
wortb  wbile  commlitiug  iiyustice  for  th«  ^ako  of
empire;  in  odior  thlugs  it  is  proper  to  be  jnst,"
WM  coutiuuaily  in  tbe  month  of  L'acsni*,  iu  order
to  tuako  a  wrong  application  of  it  i,$iict.  fMl.'M).
Seductive  euticemeufs  to  tbe  enjoyment  ofsenHnal
love  were  anotUor  article  of  nccnantiou  nj^uitist
Euripides  aiuoug  the  aucieuts.  Thus,  fur  exauiplc,
Hccubn,  in  order  tn  iiiritt^  AgitniMronnii  tii  piini-ih
Polyninestor,  reminds  liim  of  the  jttyn  Ciui!K#idni
bS4l  afTonlm.1  him  ;  who,  hnving  lie«<n  tuhon  in  wur,
was  hi-^  shtve,  ac«cin1iiig  tn  Ibf)  law  t>f  tlie  bi<roir
ajfrs:  sh"  is  willing  to  piirchiwf  rrvcngn  f»(r  a
ninnlcrpd  non  by  rctuitenting  lo  and  nitifying  tin;
degradHtinii  <if  a  ilauglili-r  xrlnt  la  nttll  iiltvp.  This
poet  wan  tbo  lirsb  to  tak»  for  the  principal  Kiibject
of  a  drnnift  the  vviUl  psfuion  of  a  Sl<->de»  or  the  ini-
natural  love  of  a  Phaedra,  an,  otherwise,  it  may
be  easily  nnderatootl,  from  tlio  maniiprs  fif  the
ancients,  why  love,  which  anit^ing  them  was  far
Icfw  nniioh]e<l  by  dolioat«  feelings,  played  merely  a
Bnbordinnte  part  in  their  earlier  trngedit-s.  Xot-
withiitandin;;  the  impnrtanre  intpartml  to  ffimnln
cliamctent,  Imi  brings  unt  a  innltitiuli*  of  snyiiigs
concerning  the  weaktHTHseit  of  tbu  fcnialo  wx  and
tbeftii{>en<irilyof  men,  IU  well  aiiagri-jitdenldrawn
from  his  own  experienre  in  ilonie-slii!  relaliotis.  A
cutting  Haying,  as  well  lU  an  i>pignim,  of  Soph-
twlea  havi'  l>een  handed  down  to  uh  by  AthfiiauHH,
in  which  lie  explninn  the  prt'tendc-il  batix'd  of  Eu-
ripides for  wrnnen  by  supposing  that  be  butl  tljo
opportunity  td'  li.-anitng  tbelr  frailty  through  hi»
own  nnhaliowL-d  desires.

That  iiidfiKMident  freedom  in  the  luetbrwl  of
treating  the  HHiry,  wliich  was  one  f>f  tlit*  priv-
ilege* of  [lie  tragic  art,  frequently,  in  Eiiripideiii,
became  eaprii'e,  It  in  well  known  that  tlie  fiible8
of  Hyginu*,  which  differ  no  innt-h  fnnn  tln»  rela-
tion)* of  other  writfi-H,  are  partly  extracted  from
biti  pluya.  Ar  he  often  ovcrtnruit*!  what  had  hith-
erto been  well  known  and  generally  i-eceived,  bo
wa»  obliged  to  use  pndKgilea,  in  which  ho  aii-
uouneea  the  sitnation  of  uffnir-tncconlingtohis  ac-
ceptation, and  tnnke^  known  tbe  courme  of  oveiitH.
{Compare  the  amazing  scene  in  Arif*tophane«,/?aN(ie.
1IT7  foil.,  and  PorjMHi'n  explatiation  of  the  employ-
ment of  KLicli  pndognes  by  Enri{ddt>i4,  Praetrft,  i'h
Ettrip.  p.  8  full.)-  These  ]tri>lngne-H  nuike  the  begin-
tlingM  of  the  playa  of  Enripidet*  niont>t<>notiH,  a&d
prmliice  the  appc^ninco  of  dclieiency  of  art.

The  style  of  Eiirii«ide9  is,  on  the  whole,  not  »nf-
Hciently  compressed,  and  it  has*  neither  the  dignity
and  energy  of  Acsebyliis  n«r  the  ehnsto  grace  nf
Sophocles.  In  hi?  eipressiout  he  frequently  aims
at  the  eitraor<Unary  and  ulrange,  and,  on  the  otber
band,  loses  himrwdf  in  •-oninn>niilace.  For  these
rensons,  as  w>fll  im  ou  account  of  his  almo«c  ludi-
crous delinenf  ion  of  many  cbnraot eristic  pecnliari-
lies  (snrli  as  the  (-liiuisy  deiM»rlntent  of  Puntheno  in
K  Hemale  garb,  when  befooleil  by  Baeehns  £  liatckae.


'i**i  full.],  or  the  greeilinesH  nf  Heracles  [.f (o(«(u,7(M
f<dl.],  and  bin  buiHtentUM  demandtt  on  the  h«[iitil-
ily  of  AdnielUH),  Enripides  was  a  fon-runnrr  uf  ibn
Kew  Coiuitly.  Munauder,  iu  fact,  cxpn-mcd  sd-
mirution  fur  him,  and  deeUred  hiuiwlf  to  \x  lii«
scholar;  and  tliere  is  a  fragment  of  Pbilemim,fiill
of  ejctravagant  otliuirntiun  of  bbu.  "  If  the  ilnwl,'
he  says,  or  makes  oue of  his  penionnges  say,*' millf
poAsessed  sensation,  as  souie  ctuppow,  I  iroolil  luur
myself  iu  order  to  see  Euripides."

Of  the  r2ll  drani:iH  wbit-b  KuripideM  is  mid  tnhave
MMnpoKeil,  w(<  have  remaining  in  their  rom|itfte
form  nnly  Higbt^'en  tragedien  :uid  uneiuityrir  pirn.
The  following  an>  tbe  tilleH  and  subjects:  (H^
'Vjiiifirj,  llrrula.  The  aoerifii-f  of  Pnlyxenn,  wbiM
the  (ii-cL-kH  iuimolatu  to  the  sbatlc  of  Achilles  ui
tb<<  vengeance  which  Heeuba,  dunldy  nnfitdui
in  having  been  reduced  to  cnptivity  aud  depi
of  her  obildren,  takes  npon  Polymnestor.  tbe
derer  of  her  sou  Polydoms,  form  Oih  tnbject  of  ilu»
trngedy.  The  scene  is  laid  in  the  (irecisn  csmp
in  tbe  Thracian  Cbersonesns.  The  shailn  nf  Po!y-
dorns,  whose  body  remains  wiihont  tlm  ritw  of
nepnlture,  has  the  prologue  assigned  it.  Ennim
and  L.  Attino,  and  in  Diodorn  times  Knuiniii«,liive
rraiislatt^t  tliiq  play  into  Latin  vei»ie.  fJ)  'OpSrr^.
Omlrn.  Tim  s<;en»  nf  this  play  is  laid  at  Arpi^
ttie  Hoventbd.iy  after  the  murder  of  (My  tocmiKstn.
Ir  is  on  ihit  day  that,  tbe  ]>enpl«.  in  fnll  uBemtilT,
arc  to  sit  in  Judgment  npon  Orestes  and  EWlri.
The  only  hope  of  the  accuse^l  is  in  Menplalti.  "b*
has  just  arrived;  but  this  chief,  who  swjwlly
aims  at  the  succession,  stirs  np  the  peoptr  In
private  to  prononitre  senteuee  of  coudenuiaiKin
against  the  parricitles.  The  seritenee  in  srronl-
ingly  pronounced,  but  the  exetutioo  nf  it  in  t'ft
to  the  culprits  theniivelves.  They  rnedilnle  liking
vengtiance  by  slaying  Helen;  but  this  princcn  i*
savetl  by  the  intervention  of  ApoDo,  who  Uttnp
about  a  doubl«  marriage*  by  tiuitiug  OrcMM  «ilt
Herniion*^,  the  daughter  of  Helen,  and  Elecrr*'»itli
PyladcH.  8<)nte coniineutatoni  think  that  thrrrtf*
ognize  the  portrait  of  Sooratea  in  that  of  ilir  *im-
pie  aud  virtuous  citizcu  who,  in  the  assenhlf  of
the  people,  undertakes  the  defence  of  Ormtes^  ttU
idiiy  is  nseribed  by  some  to  Euripides  the  Xonopt,
ni'phew  of  the  fonner.  (3)  ^mvliraot,  Hhnfttutr-
Tlif  subject  of  this  piece  is  the  di-ath  of  Etrwl**
and  Polynicea.  The  ehoniB  is  romiMised  of  }M»$
Phn-nician  women,  sent,  according  |j»  ibe  en»l*i
established  by  Agenor,  to  tlie  city  ■  if  Thebes,  in  ot-
dcr  to  be  coHM-ir rated  to  tbe  service  of  tlw»  ir»pi'
nt  IJetidii.  The  prologue  ta  asAigue4l  to  lors^ta.
The  sidtject  of  the  fAoenfsMe  is  thai  also  <■(  di»
Tlf-fntin  of  Suneca.  Statins  has  Hkewiv*  imiUlMt
it  ill  bis  epic  poetn.  1,4)  M^d«ia,  iMm.  Tk«
vengeance  taken  by  Medea  on  the  migi^ef«l
Ia8<m,  to  whom  she  has  sacriliced  all.  and  vln
on  his  arrival  nt  Corinth,  abandons  ber  fcc  *
h»yal  bride,  forms  the  .■tnbject  <if  this  tragtAy.
What  constitutes  the  principal  charm  of  tbe  i"!*.'
is  the  simplicity  and  cleameas  of  tbe  actiuu.  f^
the  force  and  natural  cast  of  tbe  character*.  Tb»
oxposition  of  tbe  plot  is  miule  in  a  monidii<n<<  (•)
the  nurse:  the  ghoms  is  composwl  of  Ooiintliiss
women.  U  is  assorted  that  Euripides  gave  ioil«
wnrlil  two  editions  of  Ibis  trngetly,  and  ihsf.  Ii
the  first,  tbe  cliildreu  of  M«Mlea  vrtvf  pnt  l«i  «'•*•
by  the  Corinthians,  while  iu  tbe  Kcond,  whirlil""*
eume  down  to  u»,  it  is  their  niothrr  ben>elf  ■•••
slays them. According to this byyoiliotA.  tltf


EURIPIDES


639


EUKIPIDES


1376th  Tene  and  those  immediately  foIIoTring,  in
which  Hedea  says  that  she  w  ill  impose  on  Corinth,
contemptnously  styled  by  her  the  land  of  Sisyphna,
an  expiatory  festival  for  this  crime,  bave  been  re-
tained by  mistake  in  the  revisiun  in  which  tliey
shonid  have  disappeared.  Medea  has  no  expiation
to  demand  of  the  Corinthians,  if  they  are  not  gailty
of  the  mnrderof  heraoaa.  Aeliau  informs  us(r.ff.
V.  81)  that  the  Corinthians  prevailed  npon  Enrip-
ides  to  alter  the  tradition  in  qnestiou.  According  to
others,  they  pnrcbuaed  this  compliance  for  the  sum
of  6Te  talents.  (5)  'lirTroXvror  urt(f>awo(ft6pOT,  Bip-
polgtU9  Coronifer,  "Hippolytna  Crowned."  The
sobjeot  of  this  tragedy  is  the  same  with  that  which
Racine  has  taken  for  the  basis  of  his  PMdre,  a  snb*
jeet  eminently  tragical.  It  presents  to  onr  view  a
weak  woman,  the  victim  of  the  resentment  of  Aph-
rodite, who  has  inspired  her  with  a  criminal  pas-
sion. Au  object  of  bonyr  to  him  whom  she  loves,
and  not  daring  to  reveal  her  own  shame,  she  dies,
after  having  compelled  Th^ens,  by  her  misrepre-
sentations, to  become  the  <lestmyer  of  his  own  son.
The  title  of  this  trageily  is  probably  derived  from
the  crown  which  Hippolytos  offers  to  Artemis.
Enripides  at  first  gave  it  the  name  of  'ImniXirrof
KoXvirrdfttvos.  He  afterwards  retonched  it,  and,
changing  the  catastrophe  and  tbe  title, reproduced
it  in  the  year  that  Pericles  died.  It  gained  the
prize  over  the  pieces  of  lophon  and  Ion,  which
had  a)rapeted  with  it  in  the  contest.  It  is  some-
times cited  under  tbe  title  of  tbe  Pluudra,  and  tbe
celebrated  chef-d'oeovre  of  Racine  is  an  imitation
of  it,  as  is  also  tbe  tragedy  of  Seneca.  {6)*AXki7(7tw,
Alee9ti9.  Tbe  subject  of  this  tragedy  is  moral  and
-affecting.  It  is  a  wife  who  dies  for  the  sake  of  pro-
longing her  hosband's  existence.  Its  object  is  to
show  that  coQJQgal  affection  and  an  observance  of
the  rites  of  hospitality  are  not  suffered  to  go  without
their  reward,  Heracles,  whom  Admetns  hod  kindly
received  while  nnfortnnate,  having  learned  that  Al-
cestis,  the  wife  of  tbe  monarch,  had  consummated
her  moomfnl  sacrifice,  seeks  her  in  tbe  shades,  and
restores  her  to  her  husband.  The  play,  by  reason  of
its  happy  ending,  is  hardly  to  be  considered  a  trag-
edy, but  more  of  a  tragi-comedy.  The  story  of  Al-
cestis  has  iuspireda  number  of  flnepoems  in  English
literature, notably  Balamtion'8  Adventure,  by  Robert
Browning.  Others  who  have  treated  tbe  same  theme
are  William  Morris,  W.  8.  Landor,  Palgrave,  Mrs.He-
nmuH,  and  W.  M.  W.  Call.  (7)  'Avipofidx^,  ^  ndromachA
Tbe  death  of  tbe  son  of  Achilles,  whom  Orestes  slays,
after  having  carried  off  from  bim  Henniont^,  forms
the  subject  of  tbe  piece.  Tbe  scene  is  laid  in  The-
tidium,  a  city  of  Tbessaly,  near  Pbarsalus.  Some
have  asserted  that  the  aim  of  Euripides  in  writ-
ing this  tragedy  was  to  render  odious  the  law  of
the  Athenians  which  permitted  bigamy.  (8)  'U4-
Ttdrr,  Supplioea,  "Tho  Suppliants."  The  scene  of
this  tragedy  is  laid  in  front  of  the  temple  of  Deme-
ter  at  Elensia,  whither  the  Argive  women,  whose
husbands  have  perished  before  Thebes,  have  fol-
lowed their  king  AdrastuB,in  the  hope  of  persuading
Theseus  to  take  up  arms  in  their  behalf,  and  obtain
the  rit«6  of  sepulture  for  their  dead,  whose  bodies
were  withheld  by  the  Thebana  Thesens  yields  to
their  request  and  promises  his  assistance.  In  ex-
hibiting this  play  In  the  fourteenth  year  of  the
Pelopouuesian  War,  Enripides  wished,  it  is  said,
to  detach  the  Argires  from  tbe  Spartan  cause.
His  attempt,  however,  failed,  and  the  treaty  was
signed  by  which  Mantinea  was  sacrificed  to  the


ambition  of  Lacedaemon.  (9)  'l<t>iytv€ia  ^  tv  AvkiHty
Iphigenia  in  AuMe,  "  Iphigenia  at  Aulis.**  The  sab-
Ject  of  this  tragedy  is  tbe  intended  sacrifice  of  Iph-
igenia, and  her  rescue  by  Artemis,  who  substitutes
another  victim.  It  is  the  only  one  of  the  plays  of
Euripides  that  has  no  prologue,  fur  i  t  is  well  known
that  the  Rhe9H»y  which  also  lacks  it,  had  one  former-
ly. (10)  'Xf^tyivtui  17  iv  Tavpoir,  Iphigenia  in  TauriSf
"Iphigenia  among  the  Tauri."  The  daughter  of
Agamemuon,  rescued  by  Artemis  from  tbe  knife  of
the  sacri  Gcer,  and  transported  to  Tauris,  there  serves
the  goddess  as  a  priestess  in  ber  temple.  OrMtesbns
been  cast  on  the  inhospitable  shores  of  this  country^
along  with  his  friend  Pylades,  and  by  the  laws  of
theTauritheymust  be  sacrificed  to  Artemis.  Recog-
nized by  his  sister  at  the  fatal  moment,  Orestes  con-
ducts her  back  to  their  common  country.  A  mono-
logue by  Iphigenia  occupies  the  place  of  a  prologue
and  exposition.  Tbe  scene  where  Iphigenia  and  her
brother  became  known  to  each  otber  is  of  a  deep  and
touching  interest ;  nevertheless,  Oni^ond  de  la
Touche  is  said,  in  this  respect,  to  have  anrpassed
his  model.  (11)  Tpmaiis,  Troadea,  "The  Trojau
women."  The  action  of  this  piece  is  prior  to
that  of  the  Hecnbn.  The  scene  is  laid  in  the
Grecian  camp,  under  the  walls  of  Troy,  which  has
&llen  into  the  bauds  of  the  foe.  A  body  of  female
captives  have  been  distributed  by  lot  among  the
victors.  Agamemnon  has  reserved  Cassandra  for
himself;  Polyxena  has  been  immolated  to  the
manes  of  Achilles;  Andromache  has  fallen  to  Ne-
optolemus,  Hecuba  to  Odysseus.  The  object  of
tbe  poet  is  to  show  us  in  Hecnba  a  mother  bowed
down  by  misfortune.  Tbe  Greeks  destroy  Asty-
anax,  and  his  mangled  body  is  brought  in  to  the
mother  of  Hector,  his  own  parent  being  by  thia
time  carried  away  in  the  train  of  Neoptolemns.
Ilium  is  then  given  as  a  prey  to  tbe  flames.  Thia
succession  of  horrors  passes  in  moumful  review
before  the  eyes  of  the  spectator ;  yet  there  is  no
nnity  of  action  to  constitute  a  subject  for  the-
piece,  and  consequently  the  play  has  no  denoue-
ment. Poseidon  appears  in  the  prologue.  Seneca
and  M.  de  Ghateaubrun  have  imitated  this  trag-
edy. (12)  Bojcxai,  Bacckae,  "The  female  Baccfaan»-
lians,"  sometimes  quoted  as  the  Pentheus,  for  Eu-
ripides seldom  names  his  plays  after  the  chorus.
The  arrival  of  Bacchus  at  Thebes  and  the  death
of  Peutheas,  who  is  torn  in  pieces  by  his  moth-
er and  sister  form  the  subject  of  this  drama^
in  which  Bacchns  opens  the  scene  and  makea
himself  kuown  to  the  spectators.  The  Bawhae  ia
regarded  by  Jebb  as  "in  its  own  kind,  by  far  tbe
most  splendid  work  of  Euripides  that  we  possess.*^
It  is  a  succession  of  rich  paintings,  of  tragic  sitna-
ations,  of  brilliant  verses,  unique  among  existing
Greek  plays  in  piotnresqne  splendour.  Tbe  spec-
tacle which  this  tragedy  presented  must  have  lieen
at  once  imposing  and  well  calculated  to  keep  alivo
curiosity.  Some  have  held  that  tbe  play  is  a  re-
cantation by  the  poet  of  his  former  irreligious  sen-
timents; but  on  this  see  Tyrrell  in  tbe  introduc-
tion to  his  edition  of  the  Bacchae  (1893).  It  is
related  that  the  Bacehae  was  performed  before-
Orodes  and  his  conri,  when  the  actor  sustaining
the  part  of  Agave  gave  a  hideous  reality  to  the
action  by  holding  up  the  bloody  bead  of  the  Ro-
man general  Crassns,  just  slain  in  battle  by  the
Parthian  warriors  of  tbe  king  (Mommaen,  Hiat.
of  Some,  iv.  p.  436).  (13)  'HpoxXeidai.  Beraelidas.
The  descendants  of  Heracles,  persecuted  by  En-


EURIPIDES


MO


EURIPIDES


rysllieim,  Bve  Tor  rcfugo  to  Athens,  iiml  iinplurr
llic  proluvliou  of  lliat  city.  Tliu  Atlu-iimiiM  Icml
ail),  auil  KiiiystbeiiK  bei^Mtiies  [)il-  victim  uf  tlie
ventjoaijce  lie  vt&a  about  bringing  iipou  thviii.
IuIhUh.  nil  oM  coriipstiinii  uf  Herncles.  explains  tUe
siiltject  tn  the  spectators.  Tlitf  pnet  monagea  to
iiiipnrt  uii  nir  of  ^rt^at  iiiterrat  to  tho  piec«.  (14)
'KXf  117,  Ilflrna.  TIip  Hoeiin  is  Iniit  tu  Kjfypt,  wbwrc
MviiehiiiH,  lifter  llii>  ili>Htniclinii  nf  Trnv,  fiuds
HcliMr,  » lit)  hail  licen  ilctaiiird  tlicMvi  by  Prtiteiin,
](iii^  uf  thitt  roiiiitry.  when  Pni-in  nii^hri]  tn  <-<)n-
vcy  hirr  1(1  Hiliiii.  The  iictioii  pilHwN  at  the  iNli;
ol*  I'liania.  whiire  I'hviH-lyinutiiin,  tbn  noii  ami  ititi:-
c«*iH)r  nf  Pnttcus,  ko«pH  Jlclcn  in  custody  M'iih
llii*  viinr  nf  espousing  her.  8hc  cmpIoyM  a  Btrnt-
»K''"'  i'l  (tnlur  to  cMonpo  from  his  ]tovcr.  Tbo  (I«-
iMiiii>rii<>ut  iif  ibis  piece  rescniblea  that  of  tbo  //lAi-
i/rnia  in  Tanriit,  (iri>'lwir,  /oji.  Ion, sou  of  Ap«>l)n
Mul  Cn'tisa,  lUiij^liter  of  Brcrbtbons,  kinj;  of
Alhrnn,  Ijom  been  bronght  ii;>  niiiotig  the  prieHt.s  nt
JX-lplii.  Tliff  (Iiwign  nf  Api>lb>  is  to  iiiiike  him  prnw
fur  thu  M4>ii  of  XulbiiN,  wlio  biiM  tii.-irric-il  Crullsii.
The  iotorefit  of  the  phiy  ciHiHiHtK  iti  tbo  (bxiblr
<luii|;er  wbicb  CreUsa  uml  lou  rini,  the  former  of
being  Hiniu  by  lou  anil  tbo  latter  of  perishing  by
lU«  pniHon  prepared  for  him  V»y  a  ni<>ther  who  is
ipiorunt  nf  his  l>eiiiK  her  sou.  The  piny,  bow-
ever,  is  eomen-bnt  vomplicat^d,  aiii)  ba$  need  of
a  long  exposition,  which  is  nssigtie^l  to  Hermes.
Tbv  ttreno  is  Inici  at  thu  eiilmnce  of  A(Hitlo'8  tem-
ple in  Dflphi,  a  place  exprewsly  cbnuen  in  order  to
givo  to  the  ApectAcIe  an  air  of  pomp  and  enlemni-
ty.  A  ruligioys  ^tftie,  fuH  of  griLvity  and  sofLaesc,
IHTvados  thu  xUfAlu  piece.  There  in  much  resum-
idanue  bvtirdRt  Ibin  tragedy  and  tbo  Athaltr  of
KiitiuG-.  (16)  'HpsJcX^r  fimvafitynf,  Hcrenlrit  fureux.
After  hnving  killed,  ii;  bitt  frenzy,  his  wife  and
ohihlrun,  Heracles  proceeds  to  nnbttiit  himself  to
certain  expiatory  ceremo(iie»,  nnd  to  seek  repose
at  Athens.  Amphitryon  appearM  iu  the  ]irologiic :
the  sc*?ne  in  l.iid  nt  ThwlWH.  (17)  'HXiicrpa.  Klrclra.
The  subject  of  this  play  ha«  been  trcutwl  also  by
Aem-.bybiK  ntnl  .Sophuelen,  bnt  by  each  in  his  i>ec)il'
iur  w»y.  Euripides  traiiafora  the  scouo  from  tbo
palace  of  .Aegistbns  t«  tbo  country  near  Argos :
ihe  exposition  of  the  play  is  made  by  a  cnltivator,
to  whom  Kleetrn  has  been  comiudled  to  give  Iier
liand,  but  who  Iiaa  taken  no  advantage  of  this,  but
has  reapected  in  hev  The  dnnghter  of  a  royal  line.
<Ii^)  'P^tror.  Ithesua.  A  subjiict  derived  from  the
t<-uih  book  of  the  Jfind.  Some  able  critics  bnvo
tried  tn  prove  that  this  piece  was  never  written  by
Enrtpides. — ^at'diov,  Fhacthon.  Of  thia  play  we
bavu  about  eighty  verses  remaining.  ClynieniS,
the  mother  of  Fbaetbon,  is  the  wife  of  Mero[)n,
king  of  the  EtbiopiaDO,  and  PbaiJtbou  parses  for
the  (Min  of  this  prince.  The  yonng  man,  having
cimceived  Mime  doiihtJi  respecting  his  origin,  ad-
ilresses  biniself  to  the  Hnn.  The  catastrophe,
which  cost  htm  his  life,  is  well  knttwii.  In  the
tragedy  uf  Knripidcs,  the  body  of  her  son  is
brought  tu  C'lymemS,  at  the  very  moment  when
UenipK  is  occupied  with  the  ta.sk  uf  prucnring
for  him  a  bride. — ^aviirj.  Danai'.  Of  tliis  play  wc
have  the  cnnmienccment  alone,  unless  the  itixty-
live  rerscs,  which  commonly  piiHs  for  a  part  of  tiie
proli^TUp^  nrc  to  be  considered  ns  thu  production  of
«fnie  imitator,

A  protluction  deserring  un|K^cial  mention  is
the  satyric  drama  entitled  Cjfetopn  {KvkXu^}.  The
«tury  is  drnwn  from  the  OH^nc^. The  snbject


iM  OilyftseuH  depriving  Polyphemus  of  bii
after  having  intoxicated  him  with  vtiiie.  Iti  (
to  connect  with  the  story  a  chorus  of  satyn,lbe
poet  siijipoaes  that  SilenoH,  aud  bin  Mrtw,  the
satyrs,  in  seeking  over  everj'  sea  for  liacchH,
whom  pirates  have  carriei)  away,  ba.vp  betii  alij^
wrecked  on  the  roast  of  Sicily,  where  tbey  I
fallen  into  the  liaiulsof  rolyphemiw.  TlieCyd
has  made  slaves  of  them,  and  lias  eoMipeltcl  tbdl
to  tend  bis  sheeji.  OdvHSiMiH,  having  I)i>cn  cMtM
thu  same  eoa»t,  and  having  lM*en,  in  like  Tnanocr,
made  cajitivi;  by  PulyphemiiH,  linds  in  tliew.  nalin

I  u  willing  band  of  aoconiplicex. I'hrx  h-jigU4>  itilii

^  him  against  their  mnAler,  lint  their  exivivuve  c»it-
nnlice  roiulers  them  very  nselejis  auxiliaries  TIk;

I  prnlit,  however,  by  his  victory,  and  emlituk  willi
him. See  Cvcu>i's;  Satyiuc  Diusia.

I  Of  the  numerous  incomplete  I'enminsof  Eiiri|<tdM
that  hiive  reaobeil  ns,  some  notice  mnat  bo  lAkes.

1  In  l-^,  papyri  discoverwi  by  Mr.  Petiie  At  W
(rurob  iu  Egypt  uerc  found  tn  contain  fniginctli
of  n  bwt  play  of  Euripides — the  Jnlioft^.  Tlww
fragments  are  n^pnHlnreil  and  edited  by  Muhaff
in  Th«  Flinder$  Petrie  Papyri  (Dublin,  1^1).

The  ancient  writen  cite  also  a  poem  of  Eiiri]ii-
de-9,  'En'iiciidriof,  "  yuucral  Hymn,"  on  the  deslli  uf
Nicius  and  Domostheues,  as  well  ju  of  the  Dtlxr
.Athenians  who  perished  iu  the  disnstruns  rx)icili-
tion  against  Syracuse.  We  poMCiiw  aUu  tvoepe
grams  of  Eiiripidoe,  each  eousisting  of  four  rcEfs,
one  of  whitdi  has  l>een  preserved  iu  the  Antbolty
and  the  other  in  Atheiiaeus.  There  have.  1
come  dowD  to  us  live  letters,  Hserilied  to  Kun
and  written  with  admirable  jMiritr  and  Binifi
of  stylo.  There  arc  al.s'i  many  fnigment^  frum  iIk
lost  plays  of  Eiiripideascatt4>rcdamougihenriiiitp
of  antiiiuity.  Of  these  frugtnentN  Xnnck  nillpcl^
U17,some,howevcr.beingofdonbtfnl  aiiibenLicitji.
The  best  kimwu  of  the  lost  [days  are  ibt-  MArvm-
tda,  Betierophon,  CretfthoHtet,  f'rreArAnu,  Utdiff.
and  TelrjthvM.

The  iH)pidarity  of  EnripideB  was  ver^  gmi  >■
antiquity,  an  in  mmlvni  tinim,  im  is  sbowtl  h|tttt
number  of  ancient  scholai^i  who  wrote  coataKit*
taries  on  bU  works  —  among  tbem  Iwing  [hcic-
arubuH,  Callimacbus,  Arislojdiautfa  of  itynntioa.
Callislrutus,  and  especially  Didyaiua.  Aa  inacttr-
tioti  ut  Tegea  shows  that  his  plays  were  rrpmtt>Dl(ii
as  tnte  Oft  the  second  century  B.C.,  winning  tictoriff
at  Alliens,  iJeljihi,  nnd  Dodona  (liuHftin  ift  (V-
rctpottdanee  flelUuiqtie.  January-April,  leWJi.  At
Ititme,  Enri]»ideH  was  translated  ami  «dupt«4  llf
Eiinius  and  by  Pacn^-ina.  Jo  Ibe  fonrth  eeaturjr
A.D.  u  curiutis  cento,  the  Xpioroc  ntitrx^nv  il'lin*l»*
fatima),  of  3610  \-erBeB,  wjui  made  frwm  1faepl»y»
of  Euripides.  (Sec  Cknto.)  Lat^r,  l>anrr.  •'ho
mentions  neither  Aeschylus  uor  Soplii^clcN  (itiiv*
Euripiilea;  and  from  thu  sixteenth  ceutnr>  lo  itf^
proseut  time  lie  has  Iteen  a  jiopnlar  fAvount»,r''~
lug  inspiration  to  many  imitaiorB  in  Fnucb.l^i'?*
linh.  anil  (icrman.

UiBLioGiLAniY. — Few  olaaaical  authora  ir»  •«*
fully  reproseiited  by  M8S.  as  is  Enripidrau  ^oa^T
every  European  library  of  importance  auil  i-f  s"?
age  contains  at  least  one.  though  uo  Mnglc  V^'
contains  all  the  plays.  The  thi-^-c  ploy*  ofKW*'
found  are  the  Heruba,  Ore«ie».  and  /'A«T»(«»<w,<»*i''<
to  the  fact  that  tbese  three  were  much  n«^  ^
the  BchiHibi  under  the  Eastern  Emv'^*"  ^"'  ""'*
plays,  Hecuba,  Onutri,  PkorniJuMe,  .'  ''

dea,  JloetlUf  Anilrnmneh^,  Trotid^n.  .  *^


EUBtPUS


641


EUROPA


kuuvrn  in  two  "familiea'*  —  oue  represented  by
(be  Codices  Vaticauus,  HaQiiieiisis,  Parisimis,  and
two  Marciani  Veueti,  aud  the  second  (au  inferior
family)  by  later  M6S.  of  the  thirteeuth  aud  four-
teenth centuheri:  The  MSS.  of  the  first  family
lueutioued  are  the  oldest  that  we  have,  but  are
not  earlier  than  the  twelfth  century.  The  great
majority  of  the  copies  are  very  poor.  The  only
MSS.  containing  all  the  uiu^  plays  nientioued
above  are  the  Codex  VaticauuB  and  the  Codex
Haunieusis;  but  of  the  former  some  pages  are
missing,  while  of  the  latter  the  text  is  in  places
so  corrupt  as  to  be  of  little  use.  The  remaining
ten  plays  are  found  in  only  two  MSS. — the  Pala-
tinns  (in  the  Vatican)  and  Flurentiiins  11. — both
of  the  fourteenth  century.  Three  plays  (the  Hele-
aa,  Herculea  Furent,  and  Electro)  are  found  ouly  in
the  Codex  Florentinus  21.  A  palimpsest  of  the  fifth
or  sixth  century  contains  a  part  of  the  Phaethon,
aud  of  this  play  an  interesting  "  reconstr notion  "
made  by  Ooethe  will  be  found  in  vol.  xxxiii.
pp.  22-43  of  the  1840  edition  of  his  works.  The
extant  scholia  on  Euripides  are  from  the  nine  se-
lect plays  ouly.  The  best  complete  edition  of  the
acholia  is  that  of  W.  Dindorf,  in  four  vols.  (1863).

The  nlitiojjrtitoep*  of  Euripides  is  that  of  J.  Las-
caris  (Florence,  1496),  but  contains  only  the  Medea,
Hippolgtutf  Aloettis,  aud  AndroTHuchi.  The  Aldiue
e<lition  by  Musurns  (Venice,  1503)  coutains  all  the
plays  except  the  Elecira,  which  was  first  published
by  P.  Victorius  (1&45).  The  first  edition  of  any  crit-
ical value  is  that  by  Valckenaer  in  his  Pkoenistae
(1755),  and  in  his  Diatribe  in  Euripidi*  Perditomm
Dramalum  Seltquiat  (1767),  attacking  the  autheu-
ticiry  of  the  Rheaua.  The  best  criticism  of  the
ifxt  has  been  done  by  Person  (1797),  Elmsley
<ldl3),  G.  Hermann  (1838),  Badham  (1851),  and
N.'iitck  (1885).  Recent  complete  editions  are  those
»f  W.  Dindorf  (in  bis  Poetae  Soenici,  5th  ed.  1870),
Ki  rcbhoff  (1867),  and  Faley  (2d  ed.  1872),  with  com-
mentary. Of  separate  plays,  the  following  edi-
tions deserve  special  mention  :  of  the  Bacchae  by
R.  Y.  Tyrrell  (1892),  by  Paley  (1877),  aud  by  Sandys
(1880);  of  the  Alee»ti$  by  Earle  (1894),  Jerram,
(1884) ;  of  the  Hecuba  by  Paley  (1877);  of  the  Her-
culea  Furent  by  Hutchinson  and  Gray  (1878),  aud
by  Paley  (1883) ;  of  the  TroadM  by  TyrreU  (1882) ;
of  the  Uippolytu»  by  Arnold  after  Witzsohel  (1853),
Mahaffy  aud  Bury  (1861),  and  by  Berthold  (1880);
of  the  Medea  by  Verrall  (1881);  of  the  Orestes  by
Paley  (1879);  of  the  Andromaehi  by  Pflngk  aud
Klotz,  with  Latin  notes  (1858) ;  of  the  Phoeniet^
by  Paley  (1879) ;  of  the  Ion  by  BadhaiH  (1879),  Ver-
rall (1890);  of  tbe  iphigenia  in  Aulide  by  Pflngk
and  Klotc  (1860) ;  of  the  IphigMia  in  Tauria  by  Jer-
ram (1884)  and  England  (1886);  of  the  Heraclidae
by  Beck  (1881) ;  aud  of  the  Helena  by  Jerram  (1881).
Prose  trauslatiou  by  Coleridge  (Loudon,  1885).  See
Mahaffy,  Introduction  to  the  StHdg  of  Euripidee  (Lou-
don, 1879).

(2)  A  nephew  of  the  preceding  (Suid.  s.  v.;
Bockh,  De  Trag.  Graec.  xiv.  aud  xviii.),  commonly
i4t  J  led  Euripides  Junior.  He  was  a  dramatic  poet,
like  bis  uncle,  and  exhibited,  besides  his  owu  com-
IKMitious,  several  plays  of  the  latter,  then  dead ;
oue  of  these  gained  the  prize.  Bockh  and  others
euspect  that  he  reproduced  the  Iphigenia  in  Aulia,
noil  perhaps  the  Palamedes.  To  this  Euripides  is
ascribed,  by  Suidas,  an  edition  of  Homer.

Bnrlpna  ( EUpiimt ).  ( 1 )  Any  part  of  the  sea
where  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide  were  remarkably
21


violent,  is  the  name  especially  of  the  narrow  strait
which  separates  Euboea  from  Boeotia.  At  Chalcis
there  was  a  bridge  over  the  Euripus  uniting  Eu-
boea with  the  mainland. (2)  See  Amphitheatrum.

BnroiM  ( Evpminj ).  A  danghter  of  Agenor
(called  by  some  Phoenix),  kiugof  Phmuioia.  Zens,
becoming  enamoured  of  her,  according  to  the  old
legend,  changed  himself  into  a  beautiful  white
bull,  and  approached  her,  "  breathing  saffron  from
his  mouth,"  as  she  Was  gathering  flowers  with  her
companions  in  a  mead  near  the  seashore.  Europa,
delighted  with  the  tameuess  and  beauty  of  the
auimal,  caressed  him,  crowned  him  with  flowers,
and  at  length  ventured  to  mount  on  his  back.
The  disguised  god  immediately  made  off  with  his
burden,  plunged  into  the  sea,  and  swam  with  Eu-
ropa to  the  island  of  Crete,  landiug  not  far  from
Grortyna.  Here  he  resumed  his  own  form,  and  be-
neath a  plane-tree  soothed  and  caressed  the  trem-
bling maiden.  The  offspring  of  their  union  were
Minos,  Rliadauiaiithns,  and  Sarpedon.  Asterius,
king  of  Crete,  subsequently  married  Europa,  aud
reared  her  sons  (ApoUod.  iit.  1 ;  Hes.  and  Bacchyl.
ap.  Schot.  ad  II.  xii.  292;  Ovid,  Met.  ii.  833  foil. ;
Fast.  V.  605).

Bnropa  (Evpnmj).  One  of  the  three  main  divi-
sions of  the  ancient  world.  With  the  northern
parts  of  it  tbe  ancients  were  very  slightly  ac-
quaiuted  —  viz.,  what  are  now  Prussia,  Sweden,
Denmark,  Norway,  and  Russia.  They  applied  to
this  quarter  the  general  name  of  Scandinavia,  and
thought  it  consisted  of  a  number  of  islands.  From
the  Portuguese  Cape  to  the  Urul  Monntains,  the
length  of  moderu  Europe  may  be  reckoned  at  about
3300  miles,  and  from  Cape  Noid  to  Cape  Matapan,
about  2350.

The  etymologies  given  for  tbe  name  Europa
are  numerous :  (1)  from  tbe  maiden  Europa  (q.  v.) ;
(2)  from  Enms,  the  southeast  wind ;  (3)  from  fvpvs
aud  &i^,  applied  to  the  continent  as  distinguished
from  the  islands,  and  hence  =  "  Broad  Land,"  an
explanation  favoured  by  Hermann;  and  (4)  from
tbe  Semitic  erebh,  "darkness,"  i.e.  "the  land  of
the  setting  sun,"  or  "  land  of  the  West."

As  regards  the  progress  of  geographical  dis-
covery, it  may  be  remarked  that  the  earliest  no-
tices of  Europe  are  in  the  writings  of  the  Greeks,
who  iuhabited  the  southeastern  corner  of  tbe
continent.  From  this  country  the  geographical
knowledge  of  Europe  extended  by  degrees  to  the
west  aud  north.  Homer  was  acquaiuted  with  the
countries  round  the  Aegean  Sea.  He  had  also  a
fairly  accurate  general  notion  respecting  those
which  lie  on  the  south  coast  of  the  Black  Sea ;  but
what  he  says  about  tbe  countries  west  of  Greece,
on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  is  a  mixture
of  fable  and  truth,  in  which  the  fabulous  part  pre-
vails. It  would  seem  that,  in  his  age,  these  seas
were  not  yet  visited  by  bis  couutr>'nien,  and  that
he  obtained  his  knowledge  fh>m  the  Phcenlciana,
who  had  probably  for  some  time  sailed  to  these
regions,  but  who,  according  to  the  common  i>olicy
of  trading  nations,  spread  abroad  false  accounts
of  these  unknown  countries,  in  order  to  deter  other
nations  from  following  their  track,  and  participat-
ing iu  the  advantages  of  this  distant  commerce.
It  is  probable,  also,  that  the  Phoenicians  long  ex-
cluded tlie  Greeks  from  the  navigation  of  the  Med-
iterranean ;  for  when  the  latter  began  to  form  set-
tlements beyoud  their  native  country,  they  first


£UROPA


Gt2


ECRYDICE


occiii>Ie(l  tho  slinres  of  tbe  Aegean,  nud  ftflernardti
tfacMH;  of  ttie  Black  Sen.  A»  The  European  sborvn
of  ibis  liwt-meiitiuiied  sea  were  not  roiy  well
atla[>te4l  fur  ngriciilttire,  itieir  e^rly  settlements
nerc  iQotttly  im  tim  Aiiiatio  coiists,  and.  coiiHe-
qti«ntly,  Httlu  adtlitiiiu  wua  niaili!  Ii,v  tIieM«  rnloniRN
to  l)i«  g(!<><£raiiliioal  kiioniMl^tf  nf  Ritri>[i(^  Hut
tl)t>  nnvj^ttiuu  uf  tUi-'  Plja'iiiuiuriH  \rnH  rliockeil  in
the  nu4l<Ilii  of  tlie  (tixtli  cuntury  lM>fnr«  riirint,  ap-
luilY'lilIy  Weuiiat  of  tllflir  miltJHfjtttion  by  tUa  Vvr-
:tians.  About  tbis  titim',  ttlxo.  lltu  CnH^kn  bL^^1l  tn
form  seltlemeulA  in  tbe  Huutbein  piirlH  of  Italy  ami
on  the  iHlaml  of  Sicily,  iiiid  tu  nuviiiiute  rhi;  Mcdi-
tenuneaei  Seu  to  its  full  extent,  Accordinnly.  we
liml  tlmt  iu  tlm  time  of  MeroilotiiK  {it.c. -l-'dJ)  not
only  tlip  cotintriiM  du  cjuili  Hide  nf  the  Meditemv-
neiin,  and  th«  norlln'm  ohorpM  iif  tU«'  Klack  Sf'ii,
wort'  known  to  tliH  (in'ekn,  but  IIiilI,  fidlnniii};^  tbo
tnirk  iif  thn  PIin-nicianH,  tbry  vrnturrd  tci'iinwttbip
FilbirM  of  HcrcnlcM,  ami  tu  haiI  at*  far  ilk  tlir  Chm-
HitorldrH,  or  Tin  ItilanilH,  by  \vbii:b  namo  tbi;  Scilly
Ih\k»  ami  a  putt  of  ('oniwall  iiinHt  hv  uiiiIt^n<tiMNl.
It  iH  even  reported  that  tioino  of  tboir  navigaiuiM
•utiled  through  tbe  English  Channel  and  enteivd
the  North  .S^'ii,  ami  in«rhiipH  evtm  the  Baltie.  (See
Antichan,  f.f*  (ira»dii  t'ni/atfe»  de  Itr'courfrlet  dtf
AntieHH  [Paris,  lrfi>l  ]).  TIiuh  ii  conBiderable  part
of  tho  raastw  of  KiLro|n>  wan  )li«covered,  wliile
tliu  in  t«'rior  n^miiinrd  Hliimst  unknown.  When
tbo  RniiiaiiH  brjjun  thitir  mnnimrnti),  thi^  deficiency
nan  partly  nni>plL<nl.  Tim  nimitM'Mt  of  Italy  was
fnllowMl  by  that  of  Spain  and  tho  ftoitthern  parta
of  GnnI,  mid.  not  long  nftemnnlM,  Sicily,  IJrcfCf,
anil  Mncwinnia  were  addwl.  L'aesnr  conqnvrcd
Gnnl  and  the  conntri<'8  west  of  tUo  Klnne,  together
with  thediHtrietH  lying  between  tho  different  arms
by  which  that  river  enters  the  sea.  Iliit  two  ex-
]>editiaua  into  Britain  mode  kuown  also,  in  some
measure,  tbe  nature  nf  that  island  and  the  I'bnrac-
ter  nf  ita  inhahicniita.  (See  Bieitannia.)  ThUH,
in  ttm  fourHe  of  littk  niuri^  than  two  huudred
yrars.  T.b«  inlflrinr  <if  all  thow!  wninlries  waa  ex-
jdored.  the  slmrtH  of  which  had  hten  previon*ly
known.  In  the  meantime,  nothing  watt  luUled  to
tbe  kimwk'dgo  of  rlii>  uoaatii,  the  CnMiks  haviug
lunt  their  spirit  of  discovery  liy  sea,  and  thu  Ito-
nmuB  uot  being  inclined  to  navuS  ciilvrpritie.  After
the  estabUdhuieiit  of  imperial  power  at  Kunie,  tho
<.■^nqut^st&  of  the  Honians  weut  ou  at  a  uuich  slower
ral«,  ami  the  WtindarieM  of  th^  Bmptre  anou  be-
fame  ^tl.itiouary.  Tbia  eireuniatanee  moat  be
attributed  chiefly  to  the  nature  of  tho  conutries
which  wern  rontignous  to  tlioHe  lumiidariea.  The
regioii.s  m>rthof  the  DaunlM;  arc  uuMtly  pUius,  and
at  that  lium  were  inhabited  only  by  wundi-ring
tribeit,  who  could  not  be  aultjecletl  to  a  regular
goveruiueut.  Such,  at  lea^t,  are  the  cunutrie!!  ex-
tending between  tbu  Car|iatbian  Monutaina  and  1
tbu  Klock  Sea,  an<]  therefore  the  ennquefti  of  l)aci.i  |
by  Trajan  was  of  abort  continuance  and  npeedily  j
abandoned.  The  conntriea  between  the  Alps  and  |
the  Ditnube  were  smhmi  added  to  lli«  Kntpirc;  Itut '
aa  the  nationi*  wlio  tnhabit<>d  tbe  traetH  north  of
lliat  river  bad  imt  given  np  »  nommlic  life,  thoy  '
w»-re  enabled  to  elude  tbe  Itomnti  yoke.  (S*e  t)En- 1
MAMA.)  The  most  ini|iortant  addi  t  ion  tn  the  Empire '
and  to  gfwgraphical  knowkMlgu  was  the  eon<|ue«t
of  Britain  during  tbe  first  centurj-  after  Chrint,  to  ■
which,  in  the  following  century,  the  (WMitb  of  .Scot-
bnid  wnxadrled.  Xotbingrteerns  to  have  beengiiined  i
aftcrwanU. The  geography  of  Pt^dviny  contains  a|


'  eoiLsiderahle  number  iif  nntniw  of  naUow*,  plarn,
'  and  rivuni  in  tliiwc  eountricH  which  wen'  not  nab-
jected  to  the  Konmna.  Probably  they  wrn  ub>
tained  from  nativtw  and  fruui  Ilomaii  tradt-nviM
bad  ventured  to  penetrate  tieyond  the  bouQiUriM
of  the  Empire.  But  these  brief  uotirea  an  ttrj
vague,  and  in  most  coMs  it  is  very  diBlcolt  taif-
termine  what  places  and  persons  are  iodical«L
Soe  OkockaI'iua.
Gnropua  {Eipuirot). 8«e  Riiaqak  ;  Tttamsiij.

Etirota*  {Kiipmrac).  Tht)  chief  ri  wr  in  Lucotiit,
<in  which  .S]>arta  atCMxl,  rises  iu  Mount  lloniim,  in
Arcailia,  and  dows  iuto  the  Laconiui  Galf  (TfaM.
li.  i:m

Btinu(£vjjor)-  Thoeaeit  wind, properly tbeeM-
iioutbea»t  (Honi.  //.  ii.  145).  ,^^^

Euryllus  [EvfiifoXnt). 1 1 )  One  nf  the  Argoii^B
nud  aUo  of  tin*  Epigoni  (q.  v.). (^)  A  Tnijna,H^
of  OpbeltiriH,  ami  one  nf  the  followun  of  ,\miiw
Vergil  h»M  immortalized  the  tuwcparable  friciHlahip
iNitw(M>n  him  and  NIhui^. See  Nl^i'H.

ButybStea  (  Eipi-tiarjjs  )■  The  herald  of  Oil;i-
nouA,  whom  hu  followed  to  Troj  (Horn.  It.  L  319,
etc.),

Suryb&tua  (  KvpCtiaToi; ).  An  Kpheaiau,  vkM
CroeMin  iM-'Ut  with  a  large  sum  of  money  to  iba
PeloponuesUH  tn  hire  mercenaries  for  him  in  bit
war  with  Cyru».  He.  however,  deserted  to  C*-
nis,  and  betrayed  the  whole  matter  to  him-  U
vonHeqnence  of  tliiH  treaebery  hia  name  \i$mfi
into  a  proverb  among  the  Greekii  (Aeaoli.  h  I'lit.

4:i).

Eurybia  {EipvUla).  Danghter  uf  PontM  ami
(iaca,  aiul  mother  of  Astraeua,  Pullaff,  atid  lVnc»
(lle.-ii^Ml.  neog.:X7b).

Ihu7biadeB(Ei>ji'3iodi}s).  A  Spartan, oobuwu^
er  of  the  comlnned  Grecian  fleet  at  tbe  btttk*
<jf  Art«iutBinni  and  Sabuijis.  Allhtmgb  SpartaacBl
only  ten  ahipii,  be  waa  apiminlBcl  tu  this  ttfiak
by  the  deairu  of  the  atliea,  who  rvfuMifd  In  uWf  t»
Athenian  (HenxL  viii.3). Se«  TllEMlfiTiX'Lis^

Euryclfia  [KvpvKXtia). The  daughter  of  Oit*,aiMl
purchaaed  by  Laertes  of  Ithaca. She  rtauwl  Tt-
lemacbus,  aud  when  Odyiwena  retnmed  hniiir,  Kfr-
ogiiized  him in his  heggar'.s  dimgnise  bj  •  acir
{itfliiitfi.  xix.:t>:^,etr.). See  0i>VM8Ktnt.

Eurydlc^  t  Kvpi'Siinj ). (1)  Tlie  wife  of  Orjiliem.
who,  wliiiti tteifting hefon;  Arisinens  <*'aa  luitna
by  u  »er{ieut  In  tbe  graa<t  and  ilied  of  the  vouml'
Her  diseonaulale  husbaud  detoriuiniMl  to  dHrrrd
to  tbu  lower  world,  to  endeavour  tn  priM^Biv  hrW
n'-Hloralion  to  life. Ptuto  nud  Ponypbond  ti«triw<l
to  bis  prayer;  and  Enrydic^  waa  Allowed  to  tr—
turn,  ou  the  cxprras  conditiou  that  Oqtheoa  iha«I<'
uot  look  hack  upon  her  till  they  bail  arrived  tr*-
the  regions  of  day. Fearing  that  she  mtghl  *^^^
I«e  following  him,  tbe  anxUnm huKband  kwl***
back  and  thereby  Io«r  her. (See  OKi-itcrji.! *?"*
The  wife  fif  Amyntas.  king  uf  Macrd^mia  jJatiii**
vii.  4,  5). She  bad,  by  her  husband  Alexat"!'*"'
Petrdiccaa ami Philip,  and one  danj*bt*r  oiIIl-"*
Euryouf,  who  was  marritMl  t«> Pttdvmy  Alnnic*-
A  criminal  infatuation  for  ber  daughter's  iia^~
band,  to  wbuui she offered her  baud  ar.d  tl»*
kiugdotu,  made her couttpire ogulnst  Aiupt*^
who  maat  have  fallen  a  victim  to  her  m^^Vr
had not Enryon(<  discovered it. Amywlai  fr*^
gave  her. Alexamler  a»ceude4l  the  IbmiK'  >"'"'
bis  father's  death,  and  iwrisbeil  bj-  lb«  wMo^


EURYDICti


Hermes,  Eurydic^,  and  Orpheua. (VilU  Atbani.)

of  liiB  mother.  Perdiccas,  who  succeeded  him,
shared  his  fate;  bat  Philip,  who  was  the  uext  in
snccessioD,  secured  himself  agaiust  all  attempts
from  his  mother,  aud  ascended  the  tbroue  with
peace  aud  universal  satitifactiou.  Eurydic6  fled
to  Iphicrates,  the  Atbeuiau  general,  for  protec-
tioD.  The  manner  of  her  death  is  unknown.  (3)
A  daughter  of  Autipater,  and  the  wife  of  Ptolemy
I.  of  Egypt,  by  whom  she  bad  several  children.
After  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great  she  pro-
ceeded to  Alexandria  for  the  purpose  of  rejoining
her  busbaud,  and  brought  with  bar  Berenice,
her  niece,  who  proved  the  soarce  of  all  ber  mis-
fortunes; for  Berenice  inspired  Ptolemy  with  so
strong  a  pnssion  that  he  took  ber  as  his  second
wife,  and  ellowetl  himself  to  be  controlled  by  her
inflaence  (Pint.  Pyrr.  4).  Eurydic^  and  her  children
retireil  to  the  court  of  Seleucns,  king  of  Syria.
Oue  of  her  daughters  subsequently  married  Agath-
ocles,  son  of  Lysimachas;  and  another,  Deme-
triuB  Poliorcetes.  Ptolemy  Ceraunus,  the  eldest
of  her  sons,  seized  upon  the  kingdom  of  Mace-
donia. Eurydic^  followed  him  to  that  conutry,
and  contributed  to  conciliate  the  minds  of  the
Macedonians  towards  bim,  through  the  respect
which  they  ent«rtaioed  for  the  memory  of  her
father  Antipater.  Ptolemy  Cerannus  having  been
stain,  B.C.  280,  iu  a  battle  against  the  Gauls,  Mace-
donia was  delivered  up  to  the  ravages  of  these  bar-
barians, and  Enrydic6  fled  for  protection  to  the  city
of  Cassandrea.  In  order  to  attach  the  inhabitants
more  strongly  to  her  interests,  she  gave  them  their
freedom  ;  and  they,  through  gratitude,  established
a  festival  called  after  ber,  Enrydicea.  The  rest  of
her  history  is  not  known.  (4)  A  daughter  of  Amyu-
tas  and  Cynan6.  Her  previous  name  was  Adea,
afterwards  changed  to  Eurydic^.  She  married
ArrhidaeuB,  the  half-brother  of  Alexander,  and  for
some  time,  through  the  aid  of  Cassander,  defended
Macedonia  against  Polyspercbon  aud  Olympias.
Having  been  forsaken, at  length,  by  faerown  troops,


643  EURYPYLUS

she  fell  into  the  bauds  of  Olympias.  to-
gether with  ber  husband.  Both  were
put  to  death  by  that  queen  (Justin,
xiv.  5).

Ihiiyl&chnB  {Evpvkojfps).  A  compan-
ion of  Odysseus,  and  the  only  oue  that
escaped  from  the  house  of  Circ6  when
his  friends  were  metamorphosed  into
swine  (Hom.  Od.  x.  203,  xi.  23,  etc.).

BnTymfidon  CEvpvfiibav).  Son  of
Tbnclee,  au  Athenian  general  in  the
Peloponuesian  War  (Thnc.  iii.SO,  81, 85).

Zhuymfidoo  {E,vpv(U^iav).  A  smiiU
river  in  Pampbylia,  celebrated  fur  the
victory  which  Cimon  gained  over  the
Persians  on  its  banks  (b.c.  469).

SuzymlSnae  {^vpviuvai).  A  town
of  Magnesia  in  Tbessaly,  east  of  Ossa
(Livy,  xxxix.  25).

Xturj^ui  (Evpvfior).  Father  of  the
seer  Telemus,  who  is  hence  called  Eury-
mides  (Odjrss.  ix.  509).

Xhuyndiiid  (Eiipviw^).  Daughter
of  Oceanus,  and  mother  of  Leucotboe
(Apollod.  i.  2.  2).  By  Zeus  she  became
the  mother  of  the  Charites  or  of  Aro-
pns  (Hes.  TKeog.  908).  Enrj-nom^  is
also  a  surname  of  Artemis  at  Pbi-
galea  in  Arcadia,  where  she  was  represented  as  a
mermaid.

Euzj^phon  (Evfiv^uv).  A  Cnidian  physician,  a
contemporary  of  Hippocrates,  but  probably  older
in  years,  since  be  is  deemed  the  author  of  the  Cni-
dian aphorisms  (Kw'duu  Vv»ftai)  which  are  qnoted
by  Hippocrates.

Zhiij^pOD  (Evpviruv),  otherwise  called  Euiytlon
(Eypurt'wif).  Grandson  of  Procles.  He  was  the
third  king  of  that  house  at  Sparta,  and  thence-
forward gave  it  the  name  of  Enrypontidae,

Borypyiiu  {'E.vpvirvKot).  (1)  Son  of  Enaemon,
and  leader  of  a  bo<!y  of  troops  before  Troy.  (2)
Sou  of  Poseidon  and  Astypalaea,  king  of  Cos,
killed  by  Heracles.  (3)  Son  of  Poseidon  and  Asty-
pataea,  king  of  the  Meropes  of  Cos.  He  was  slain
by  Heracles,  wbo  bad  been  driven  on  to  the  coast
on  his  return  from  Troy.  The  struggle  was  a  hard
one.  but  Heracles  was  assisted  by  Zens.  The  daugh-
ter of  Enrypy  Ins,  Chalciop^,  became  motherofThes-
salus  by  Heracles.  (4)  Son  of  Telephus  and  A«ty-
och6.  Astyocb6,  bribed  by  her  brother  PHam  with
the  present  of  a  golden  vine,  persuaded  Eurypylns
to  bring  the  last  succour  to  the  Trojans  shortly
before  the  fall  of  the  city.  After  performing  deeds
of  bravery,  he  fell  by  the  hand  of  Neoptolemns.  '
(5)  Sou  of  Enaemon,  king  of  Ormenium  in  Thes-
saly,  one  of  the  suitors  of  Helen.  He  was  among
the  bravest  of  the  Greek  heroes  who  fought  before
Troy,  and  of  his  own  accord  ofi'ered  to  engage  Hec-
tor in  single  combat.  In  the  later  story  be  ap-
pears in  connection  with  the  worship  of  Dionysug.
At  the  division  of  the  Trojan  spoil  he  received  an^
image  of  Dionysus,  made  by  Hephaestus  and  pre-
sented to  Dardanus.  This  had  been  kept  in  a
chest  as  a  Palladium.  When  Enrypylns  opened
the  chest  and  beheld  the  image  he  fell  into  a  mad-
ness. The  Delphic  oracle  promised  that  he  should
be  healed  if  be  dedicated  the  image  in  a  spot
where  men  offered  barbaric  sacriflces. According-


EL':J£  Bit's


1>  lie  dvilicHttnl  it  at  Aroi-  iu  Acbaea,  wIjL-re  aii
DireriujL;  ol'  lb):  tliiuttt  youth  aiiil  fairest  virgiu  was
niatle  nuuiialty  tu  Arteiiii».  The  bkiody  act  woa
ftltulLslied.  ttud  the  aiildur  Nen'ire  of  DIou^siih  iu-
ln>duc4.<d  iu  its  jilai-e.

EurytSceB  (ECiu'triixfjc).


i


ia  Miid,  however,  l*»  have  rained  some  ohjcctii
the  words  ''cou^iilMtatitial  with  the  Fathi
a^tplicd  to  the  Sou  in  the  Xiceiie  cr««d.  Hi*  inti-
macy with  hlH  uaraeMike  En»el>til».  bieliop  of  Ni«iv
medinf  who  ojieuly  esixxnusl  lliv  cana»  of  Aria».)r>)
him  also  to  favour  the  Nnnie,  and  tt>  une  hi*  ii>8a-


«-.,»-«*-.  ,.-vK'--"«'Mr' Th«"  pinti  of  1  he  Tela-  ...  ^ ,  , . .

n.oui«u  Aio«  ami  Te,niH«,».  An  Athenian  tradition  l'"-^  ''^^■"'  jl>e"n.|..r«r  forll.rpuri»o«e  of  re.,«ialmg
nmd«  him  and  hi*,  l.mther  Phih.en«  to  hav,.  Kiven  ■^""^"'  "'"  *^^"r;*''  '"  ^l-^"*'"^' "/J^^*  op^tim
uj.  to  Atheu.  the  iMaud  of  S»lami«  in  r«t.u-u  fur  |  ^-f  AlhanaH.UM.  The  P^^tj-  J^"  «»^^  h^.f""^
llie ri];htM of Atheuiau citizeuAbip ( Fausau. i.  I


BnryathKnes  (f.vftwrBty^tU  A  son  of  Ariatode-
uin»,  who  reigned  conjointly  with  bis  twin-brother
Frocle*  at  Sparta.  It  was  not  known  wliirh  of
the  two  wiw  Iwni  first;  the  mother,  who  wIhIiciI
|o  set*  both  her  8onM  raiset)  on  the  throne,  rt>rri.kptl
to  declare  it ;  and  tliny  wore  both  »]>pointcd  kiiij^M
of  8E>arta by  onler  of  \hv>  oracle  of  I)cl]>lii,  lie.


biniMlf  WL-ru  called  EtLsebiaus,  from  theii  Icailir
KusfbiiiH  of  Niconiedia.  aud  they  seem  Uj  kavi
uct«d  ill  a  great  degree  through  lioatiltty  tvwinli
Athauaaiii.4  aud  his  sMppurter»,  iui  they  did  u»l.  u
yet,  openly  advocate  the  tdiji-ctiotiahle  tcuetv  of
Arins,  who  hiid  hiniiwlf  ap|Hin*ntly  nubmitlpd  U
the  decrees  of  thp  Coiinril  of  \tei*,  Hntifliius  v»
deputed  by  the  Council  of  Tyre  to  di<fend  befun
CoiiHtantine  tht>  judgment  which  it  hud  puml
..,,,. . . ■ - ,  . .  , acaiuMt  Athauaaina. Tlie  part which  be  look  ii

1102 Aft*-r  the  d«ath  of  tJie tw.. luothen,,  the ,i,j„  contn,v..niy  caused  bin.  to  W  »llgn.atii«4 1.
Lace<Iaen,on.ai.«,  who  knew  not  to  what  family ,„  ah,,,.,  though  it  appears  thai  be  fully  aibaill«t


iliA  right  of  HAuiority  and  sncccasion  belonged,
permitted  two  ktug)^  to  Bit  on  the  throne,  one  of
each  family.  The  dewwndanta  of  EnryKtheiies
were  called  EurysthcDidoe,  and  those  of  Procles,
Pioclidae.  It  was  inconsUtfiUt  with  the  Uwh  of
Sparta  for  tn-o  kings  of  the  snme  family  to  aacend
the  throne  together,  yet  that  law  waa  HomettnirM
violated  by  oppretwinn  and  tyranny.  Knry»theiirH
had  a  son  called  AgiH,  ubo  Kueervded  him.  llin
dcHcendantA  were  called  Agidae.  There  Hat  on  tlin
tlirui>e  of  Sparta  tliirty-one  kings  of  the  family  of
Eiiryfitheries,  and  ouly  twenty-four  of  the  I'roclidae.
The  former  were  the  more  illaotrious  [Uoroil.  iv.
147.  vi.0:2;  Punsan.  lii.  1).

Btuyatbeaa  {¥:.vfivadtvs)-  Son  of  Sthenelue  ami
Nicipp^.  (Sec  pKasKL's.)  He  was  king  of  Myce-
nae, aud  through  the  cunning  of  Her€  got  ]>ower
over  }Ieraclea,  and  imposed  n|H)n  him  the  cele-
brated twelve  lahour».  In  pursuing  the  children
of  Flernclee,  and  alt«nipling  to  bring  about  by
force  their  expulsion  from  Altim,  he  waa  defeateil
aud  alain  in  hia  llight  by  Hyllua. Ste  UrhLva.

EurjHlL  A.  patronymic  of  lole,  daughter  of
Eniytufl  (Ov  id,  Met.  ix.  3i»5).

Bnrjh^B  {V.vpi/Tot}-  A  nkilled  iiicber  who  was
king  of  04felialia,  aud  father  of  lobS.  See  Hkk-
Ari.F.s.  p.  7iH


the  divinity  oft'hriid.  He  was,  bowevei,nttwiIliD8
to  believe  liim  nvpatfiiot  or  "  co-eternal "  witli  tbe
Father,  lie  wns  mnch  in  favour  with  CmHUK-
tine,  \rith  whom  he  maintainrd  a  rorrps[MHMlt>nR'.
Me  died  eoon  after  hii  imperial  patrwu,  in  339  or

Ensebtaa  wan  one  of  thn  most  learned
of  hia  time.  He  ha*I  nwul  all  aorta  of  Ureufcl
thors,  whether  philoi*npher.i,  hiiitimanisor  Uitimi,
of  Egypt,  Phiruiria,  Ania,  Kumitp,  and  AfHca.  All
btH  studieA  were  dlrerUMl  towania  tha  rcligim
which  he  profeiiAcd,  and  If  he  cultivated  cliroool-
ogy,  it  wftH  with  the  view  of  edtablisbinc  nn  a
solid  basia  the  conOdouce  to  whieh  the  bii^l-iric*!
bonks  of  the  Old  Teatanieut  pre«eiit  a  cliitn.  tl«
exhihitexl  the  fniita  of  hia  rvaearehea  io  a  ChtM-
icle.  or  lTiiivor»al  History  (Uairnttlairri  ^IwnfitaiAi-
vided  into  twob^koks.  In  Ihediatofthme.toahiik
be  gave  the  name  of  "Chronograpby"  (X/wrwr
'^I'ci),  be  relalea  the  origin  and  the  history  Mill
nations  and  empirea,  from  therrealion  of  IhewcfU
di>wn  to  A.lf.tt'i^.  In  this  lirft  jKirlion  of  the^ott
Euacbins  intriHluced  extracta  from  various  birtnn-
oal  writen*  whow  pro<tuctions  arw  now  Wt,  »ntb
aa  Alexander  Folylii^lor.  IterosuH,  Amydeuns,  ^>-
nethn,  etc. The  iiecond  jxirt,  entitled  " Ctiroair«l


Canon  ^  (X^wit««  Kuj-ao'),  ewnaialed  of  <iyiirhnwii»-
tic  tabloM,  giving,  by  perimUof  ten  yeart  eaeh,lW
EuaebiUB  (KiVt^mr). (l)PAMrillLl. One  of  the nameaofsovereiguH.andthe  principal  evenMRMrA
nfit  dijitingaishe^l  cf  the  i-arHi'r(Mirii4tian  writers, had  taken  pliu-e,  from  the  call  of  Abmhani  i  li'~


'iO]7).  In  rompiliug  Ihia  part  of  hia  IxlKiim  Ki"^
bins  availed  himself  of  the  Cbrunogrjpby  nf  ^^'
tiis lulins  Africanaa,  which  be inoerted  •In"'*


niofit

tho  frieud  of  Coustantine,  Itorn  in  Fale^tine,  pr^ib-
ably  at  Caenuirea,  alK>nt  a,i>. 'JtJ4.  He  ]>ursned  bis
«lndie«at  Autiocli.and  is  believed  ito  have  received

holy  onlera  from  Agapiua,  liiRhop  of  Caosarea.  I  entire  in  bin  Canon,  completing  it  by  ibe  uJ"^
After  having  Ih-^mi  onlained  preiiby  ter,  he  set  np  a  '  Mauvtho,  loaepbna,  and  other  historian*.  Thi* '"
school  iu  hifi  native  city,  and  formcil  an  intimate  '  eontloned  also  to  hia  nwu  tluiea.  We  poMOv  *
nrqnaiuCanec  with  I'amphilun,  bishop  of  riicHarra, '  Latin  Iraualation  of  this  chronicle,  made  lo^^
who  Kuffered  martynlom  under  (ialeriiia,  a.u.  .'109, '  Jerome  ;  it  is  not-,  bownver,  a  simple  vcndan,  fia**
and  iu  Qieninr>'  of  whose  fVieudahip  he  added  to '  this  father  ctmtinued  the  dates  down  tA  tli«  T**'
liin  name  the  term  I'amphUi — i.  e,  (the  friend)  of  '  37H,  and  mada  several  ehange«  also  in  i)i0  ^
Pamphilus.  Aft^-r  the  martyrdom  of  ]m  friend  be  ,  part  of  the  work.  Tlie  Gruek  te«t  it*»lf  i»  l<^'
removed  tn  Tyre,  nod  ihein-R  to  Kgyjtt,  where  he  and  thnngli  Georglus  SyncclUiH  hoA  inwrted  «•■*•'
himself  was  iniprisniied.  On  hia  return  from  fmumciita ''f  itlu  hiaCbrouicle.  and  Kuswliiii*  b'"
Egypt,  he  sucrfrdpil  Agapiux  iu  the  mw  i>f  Caeaa-  self  baa  done  the  aame  in  hi»  I'rarparauf  Er**-
rea,  a.u.  lll.'i.  In  iH>muion  with  luany  other  bish-  i  getira,  the  remembrance  of  rbis  original  trti  ■**
«)ps  of  Palestine,  he  at  dr»t  ntponxMl  the  rauw  of  so  far  lost,  that  doubla  began  to  i>e  eiiteKJU""^
Arlna;  hut  at  ihc  Council  of  Nice,  in  :ti^.  where  wlietlmr  that  of  the  first  bonk  had  ever  ei^"'
the  empr>rt>r  Constantine  assigned  to  Eusebius  the  some  oritira  lieing  per»nad«^l  that  Kuitftiin' *'-^
oRlce  of  opening  the  seMiou  of  the  assembly,  the!  written  no  other  chronological  work  I-  •
cipintons  of  tlie  heresiarch  were  condemned. Hej  Canon. Joseph  Scaliger,  however,  utui'


EUSEBIUS


645


EUSTATHIUS


reconatnict  the  first  book  of  the  work,  by  uniting
all  the  fragments  scattered  throngboat  the  writ-
ings of  the  various  authors  to  whom  allusion  hns
beeu  made.  The  whole  subject  ban  at  length  been
cleared  up  in  later  times,  and  all  nncertaiuty  on  tliid
Xwint  has  been  pnt  completely  tu  rest  since  1793,
when  an  Armenian  of  Constantinople,  named  Geor*
gins  lohannio,  discoTered  an  Armenian  translation
of  the  entire  work.  The  first  book  of  the  Chronicle
of  Euaebins,  with  which  we  are  made  acquainted
through  the  medium  nf  this  translation,  is  preced-
ed by  a  preface,  in  which  the  author  gives  an  ac-
count of  the  plan  and  difficalty  of  bis  undertaking.
It  18  divided  Into  forty-eigbt  chapters,  of  which
the  first  twenty-two  embrace  the  chronology  of
the  Chaldaeans,  Assyrians,  Modes,  Lydians,  Per-
sians, Hebrews,  and  Egyptians,  comprehending
under  the  latter  head  the  dynasty  of  the  Pt^ilemies.
The  remaining  chapters,  from  the  twenty-third  to
the  forty-eighth,  are  devoted  to  the  chronology  of
the  Greeks  and  Bomans,  down  to  the  time  of  lu-
lius  Caesar.

Ensebins  was  also  the  author  of  au  Ecclesiasti-
cal History  ('ExicXi^crtaOTuci;  'laropia),  in  ten  book?,
from  the  origin  of  Christianity  down  to  a.d.  ^4,
a  year  which  immediately  preceded  the  triumph
of  the  Catholic  church  over  Arianism.  This  his-
tory was  translated  into  Latin  by  Rafinus,  a  priest
of  Aqntlea,  iu  tbe  fourth  century,  who  made,  how-
ever, retrenchments  as  well  as  additions,  and  added
a  supplement  in  two  books,  which  extends  to  tbe
death  of  Theodoeins  the  Great.

The  other  works  of  Ensebins  which  have  relation
to  the  departmeut  of  ecclesiastical  history  are  the
following :  (1)  Ilcpt  t&v  iv  naXaiarivjf  tAaprvpjjiray-
ravy  "  Of  those  who  suffered  martyidoni  in  Pales-
tine." Tlie  period  referred  to  is  the  i>eraecntion  of
Dioclesian  and  Maxitnin,  from  303  to  309.  (2)  \6yos
TptaKovratTiipiKos,  "  Thirty-year  Discourse,"  i.  e.  au
eloge  on  Constantiue,  pronounced  in  the  thirtieth
year  of  his  reign,  a.d.  335.  (3)  Uipi  rov  tara  0<di>
Biov  roC  Majcapiov  KwycrravriVou  rov  Bao-iXco*r.  A
life  of  Constautiue,  iu  four  books.  (4)  Tuv  'Apxoiav
MapTvptiv  Zwaywy^t  "A  Collection  of  Ancient  Mar-
tyrs." This  work  is  lost,  but  many  fragmente  have
been  preserved  by  the  legendary  writers  of  snbse-
qneut  ages.  (5)  A  life  of  Pamphilus,of  which  there
remains  a  solitary  fragment.  (6)  12<pi  t&»  Kara  Ain-
4i6povt  Kaipois  iv  £ua(f>6pots  IloXttriy  *A0KTiirayruv
'A-yi'ttv  MapTvpttWf  "  Of  the  holy  martyrs  that  have
contended  for  the  faith  at  various  times  and  in  va-
rious places."  Another  work  of  Ensebins  forms  the
principal  one  of  bis  theological  writings.  This  is
his  (7)  KiayyfXtK^v  'Aim6ti$§tas  Upotrapaa-Ktv^,  or
Praepcratio  Evangelica.  This  work,  though  its  sub-
ject is  one  entirely  sacred  in  its  nature,  yet  con-
tains a  great  nninber  of  valuable  notices  respecting
the  mythology  of  the  pagan  nations,  and  the  phi-
losophy of  the  Greeks  in  particular.  We  find  in  it,
also,  numerous  passages  taken  from  more  than  four
hundred  profane  writers,  and  in  this  list  are  many
whose  productions  are  now  lost.  The  Praepara-
tio  Evaitgtiica  is  addressed  to  Theodotus,  bishop
of  Laodicea,  and  is  divided  into  fifteen  books.  To
prepare  his  readers  for  a  demonstration  of  evan-
gelical trntbs  by  reasons  purely  philosophical,
auil,  by  collecting  together  a  mass  of  citations
drawn  from  profane  authors,  to  show  how  far  (tu-
pt^rior  Christianity  i»  to  all  the  systems  of  tbe
pagan  world— such  is  theobject  of  Ensebins  in  tbe
work  nnder  consideration. In  tbe  first  six  books


!he  proves  the  futility  of  tbe  heathen  doctrines;
I  the  nine  following  ones  develop  the  motives  which
'  have  induced  the  followers  of  Christianity  to  pre-
fer to  them  tbe  Jewish  system  of  theology  as  con-
'  tained  in  the  0I<1  Tesrunieiit.  One  must  not  omit
another  work  of  Ensebius,  entitled  (6)  Tltpl  t&v
I  ToiriKtfi'  'Ofofuirtov  iv  t^  9**9  rpa<t>^,  "  Of  the  places
I  mentioned  iu  the  sacred  writings."  It  was  iu  two
books.  The  second  book,  which  treats  of  Pales-
tine, bas  alone  reached  us;  we  have  it  in  Greek,
and  also  in  a  Latin  version  by  St.  Jerome.  Still
another  work  of  Eusebius,  (9)  Ofo^dvcui,  iu  four
books,  was  discovered  in  16^  by  Tuttam  in  iin
Italian  monastery.  Editions  of  tbe  work  on  chro-
nology are  that  of  Scaliger  (Leyden,  1659),  and  that
of  Mai  and  Zohrtib  (Milan,  1318).  The  best  edi-
tions of  the  Eccliisinstical  History  are  that  of  H.
Stephens  (Paris,  1544),  reprinted  with  the  Latin
version  of  ChriHtopborson,  at  Geneva,  1612;  thiit
of  Heiuichen  (Leipzig,  1827);  Burton  (Oxford,
lS3fl;  reprinted  with  an  introduction  by  W.  Bright,
1872);  and  tbnt  of  Migne  in  the  Patrologia  Oraeco-
Latina,  vols,  xix.-xxiv.  (1857-66).  The  life  of  Con-
stantiue accompanies  the  first  of  these.  Tbe  last
edition  of  the  entire  work  of  EuBehins  is  that  of
Dindorf,  in  4  vols.  (Leipzig,  1867-71),  nnflnisbed.
There  is  a  translation  of  Ensebins  in  Clark's
Theological  Library.  See  Schaff,  ChHrck  Hittory
(ii.  872-9).  (3)  A  native  of  Emesu,  snnianied  Pit-
tXcus,  slain  in  554  by  order  of  the  emperor  Galliis,
and  to  whom  Ammianns  Marcellinus  (xiv.  7)  gives
the  title  of  eoiici(a(ii«  orator.  (3)  A  native  of  Myn-
dns,  in  Caria,  a  contemporary  of  the  preceding.
Ennapiiis  makes  mention  of  hlra  in  the  life  of
Maximus ;  and,  according  to  Wy  ttenbach,  he  is  tbe
same  with  a  third  Eusebius,  of  whom  Stobaens  has
left  us  two  fragments.

Bnstatlilus  (Eucrrdtftor).  (1)  An  archbishop  of
Tbessalontca,  who  flourished  in  the  twelfth  ceu-
tury  nnder  tbe  emperors  Manuel,  Alexius,  and
Andronicus  Comnenus.  He  is  celebrated  for  his
erudition  as  a  grammarian,  and  is  especially  known
as  a  commentator  on  Homer  and  Dionysius  the
geographer.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  in  tlie
former  of  these  commentaries  {UaptK&oKai)  be  is
largely  indebted  to  tfie  Deipnosopkintae  of  Atlie-
naeus.  The  commentary  of  Enstatbine  was  united
to  the  edition  of  Homer  which  appeared  at  Rome
(1542-50)  in  3  vols.,  and  was  reprinted  at  Baalo
(1560),  also  in  3  vols.  The  best  edition  is  the  Leip-
zig one  of  1635-30,  6  vols.,  by  G.  Stallbanni;  fur
that  of  Politns,  undertaken  in  17;tO,  with  a  Latin
version,  was  uever  finished.  The  three  volumes
of  it  which  appeared  at  Florence  (1730-35)  extend
only  to  the  end  of  the  fifth  book  of  the  lUad.
MtUler  and  Banmgarten-Crnsins  have  performed  a
valuable  service  for  tbe  student,  in  publishing  ex-
tracts from  Enstatbius  along  with  the  text  of  tbe
Iliad  and  Odgtaeg.  The  commentary  on  Dionysius
is  lees  valuable,  from  the  scant)'  natnre,  most  prob-
ably, of  tbe  materials  employed.  A  commentary  on
Piudar  is  lost,  with  tbe  exception  of  the  Prooenti-
Htn,  which  has  been  editeil  by  Schneidewin  (Got-
tingen,  1837).  Some  letters  of  the  arclibisbop
are  to  be  found  iu  the  public  librarien  of  Europe,
of  which  a  part  was  e<lited  by  Tafel  in  lff3Q.
Eustatbins  died  abont  the  year  1194.  (3)  A  na-
tive of  Egypt,  called  by  some  ErMATiiics,  nnd
styled  in  one  manuscript  Uparovo^iXio-tripos  xai
p,iyas  x'^P^<'*i*^^°it  "  Protonobilissimos  and  great
archivist." He  was  tbe  author  of  a  romance,  en-


eaSTRATIlTS


fan


Erxwrs  wjNTus


tillwl,  Tu  Kaff  'Yafxivtv  xa't  'YtTfUfiai'  A^Hitta,  "  ITyh-
Tiiiiie  fttid  Hysinitiiiis."  U  i»  n  lifeles*  jierformaiioif.
Tlio  -work  tiii«  Weti  twicn  imljIiBlietl  — tir«l  ut  Piviis
(UUi^l,  with  tho  vcr»io»,  »imI  ntider  the  rnrp,  of
Gniilmin,  ami  npnJn  Uy  Tciichtr  ( I-cijizig,  I71W  >.
Tliin  liiiit  cduUiiis  inen'ly  tin-  ivxt  and  tbe  vereiuii
of  (jniiliDin,  nitUoiit  eitlior  (treluct?  ur  notes.  <3)
All  aiirient  Jiirisr.  called  Ei'stathu'B  Roman'ITs.
who  wroto  n  work  culled  'Ywri/ii^^o  nnd  nnotbcr
<  n*i>(  'Yn-oStiXou ).  Tbe  uo-cnllwl  rractiat  is  not
hi*.

Eustxatiua  iEutrrpano^).  A  late  coomientator
on  Aristotle.  He  lived  Almtit  ttx'  begiiiiiing  of  tliP
tvclfth  century,  as  nn;tri>politaii  of  Nicaca  under
the  emperor  Alexi»  C«>mneniiH.  Tn*n  of  his  work»
nro  lion-  extant  in  a  fragmentary  condition — (1)  a
comnirntary  on  the  secotid  hook  of  tbe  Jualtitiea;
nnd  (2)  a  eouinientary  on  the  Kthint  Siromachea  —
this  liv«l  tx'ing  in  part  the  work  of  other  iicholnra.
In  the  Middle  Ages  these  commentarir»  n-ere  luncli
read  ill  the  Latin  version  of  Rid»ert  of  Liucolu.

EuBt^loB  (iStm-Xos). Re«  TRMPLfM.

Euterp^  {Eiiripm}].  One  of  thw  Miises.  She
prrMJdt^i  iiver  niutiic,  and  ift  generally  repreaeiited
aa  holdinm;  tn-o  tlutes.  To  her
was  aMeribed  by  the  poets  the
invention  i>f  the  tragic  chorus.
Tlie  imnie  means  "  the  well-de-
lifthting  one," from  tv, " «ell,"
and  TtpTTia.  '*to  delight." See

MCSAK

ButbycrStea  (t:v6vKfnin}s).
A  acniptor  of  Sicyon,  sou  and
pnpil  of  Lysippnfi,  Dunrished
ahnnt  li.c.ytK).  lie  was  i>ecul-
iarly  happy  in  tbe  proportions
of  his  stfltnes.  Those  of  Her-
acles and  Alexander  were  in
general  e-steeni.  arid  particn-
lorly  one  of  Medeii,  which  was
home  nn  a  rhnriot  by  four
horaea  (Plin.  ff.  X.  xxxiv.8).

Euthydemua  ( Ei-flyiS^/ior ). /;^igBj_^;^I3

A  HUphist of  Chios,  who,  with ^— " — " ^^  "*"'

hiu  brother  DiauvwMlorus,  mi-  Emcniii'tlipMiisPdf l.j-r

Krat.-d  to  Thurii  iu  Italy. He I^^ih.iSn  '

gives  its  name  to  one  of  tbe

dialogues  of  Plato,  iu  which  the  philosophical  pre-

teusious  of  Ealhydetuns  and  his  brother  are  rldi-

oulecl.

Enthj^a  {fC3vfn}  and  lin  lofe  fJrwk  only)  Bu-
thyn4  (iCSuyt}).  A  H(>ttb>nnmt  of  nceoiint.  At
AtlifiiH  »n  ollieiiilN  were  hound  to  gtv«  au  accoitnt
of  tbrir  adiiiioistnilion  at  Ihv  cml  of  their  term  of
oflice.  This  itcctnint  wax  mndercd  to  the  Xoytarai,
nssisteil  hy  Inn  tC-Bvum,  or  special  unditors.  (See
LtHimTAKj  Within  a  i>eri(>d  uf  Uiirty  days  after
the  term  of  ofMce  had  come  to  an  oml,  these  fnnc-
tionartes  issaed,  to  all  whom  it  might  concern,  a
pntdic  notice  to  lay  before  them  any  complaint*
they  might  have  to  make  against  the  retiring
officials.  In  case  such  com]>laint8  were  ma<lo,  tbe
mattnr  was  brongtt  to  on  issue  by  legal  procedure.
No  ofllcial  was  nlloned  to  leave  the  country,  or
lake  any  measure  aflfeetitiK  his  projierty,  or  take
another  ollice,  before  hi*)  account  was  given,  8ei'.
the  law  cited  in  Andotv  x.39;  Boeekh.  I'uhlie  Econ.
i.pp. 'J54  foil.

Butooiua  (EiTUKioc)- A  native  of  iVscalon  of


about  A.l>.  560.  He  is  known  for  his  romnieatatie*
tin  ApolhiMius  of  Feri^a,  the  geouietriciau,  aud  Ar-
chimedes, foui- of  which  have  been  preserved.

Eutrapeiua  ( EirpawrXos ).  "  Ready  -  winM."
Tlie  iiic-kii:iiiie  of  a  Komau  knight.  F'ruui'i  Vo
LL'.MSi(.'s,  who  was  the  boon  companion  of  Antonjr
ill  his  debauches.  His  mistress,  Cytheris,  calleil
after  him  Volumuia,  was  given  bj  him  to  Amoor
(Cie.  Jd  Att.  IV.  8. 1 :  Hor.  EpSat.  i.  W.  31)

ButrAais  (Etkptjatt).  A  small  town  iu  Boeetia
between  Thespiae  and  Phitaea  with  a  temple  ami
oracle  of  Apollo,  who  had  therein  the  name  Eatrr-
sitM. It  was  said  to  have  once  Wen  the  luiiw<^

Zethns  and  Ampliiou  (Horn. //.  ii.  50*2).

Butroplua.  (II  A  Latin  historian  of  tbe  foortb
century.  He  Uon*  arms  under  Julian  iu  his«i|>r-
diiion  against  the  Parthiaus,  as  he  himself  infom
ns  (X.  10),  and  is  thonght  to  have  rtsfu  to  ariialiK
rial  rank.  Snidas  makes  him  of  ftaltan  orifis,
while  some  modem  writers,  on  the  othrr  hand,  nl-
vatKe  the  hypotlieiiiH  that  \w  was  a  nativn  uf  (iinl,
and  waM  iH<rI)a{w  identical  with  the  Kutntplitsto
whom  Mniii>  of  rlie  lotrers  of  AymmacbiM  arf  ad-
dressed. Tlie  maiiuseripts  give  him  the  title  of
Vir  CI.,  which  may  stand  for  either  Vir  Cisnio-
mns  or  Vir  Cooiinlaris,  but  which  in  either  ifDje
Indicates  uu  ndvauccment  to  some  of  the  bigtietl
olBccs  in  the  State.  Ho  wrote  several  worfcn,  of
which  the  only  one  remaining  ts  an  nhridjE-
menC  of  Koman  history  ( J^rri'iartwrn  ah  VrU
Comtita),  iu  ten  books,  tt  is  a  brief  and  di;
outline,  without  either  elegance  or  urusniMt,
yta  i-onlaiuing  certain  facts  which  arc  dovIkit
irliw  metitioued.  The  work  cDmmence«  with  il»
fonnduiiiui  of  the  city,  aud  is  carried  on  to  tbe
death  of  .lovitiu,  a.i>.  ^M.  At  tlio  close  of  tbi*
work  Kntropius  announces  his  intention  oftwa-
tiruiing  the  narrative  in  a  more  elevated  M>*k>.  is-
usnnich  as  he  will  have  to  treat  of  great  penmi-
«gtr»  still  living.  It  doea  uot  appear  that  be  ever
ritrried  this  plan  into  execution.  The  best  «di-
t  iou[«  are  those  of  tiif>9»e  (Halle,  1813),  Hartel  ^B«^
liti,  1^3). and  of  Proysen  (Derlin,  lefTe).  Tbir*  ii
:i  lexicon  to  Kntropins  by  Gichort  (Breslaii.  ISIV
On  hitt  style  see  Born,  THf  Spraihgehrnurk  de*  f"fr*-
piiip^,  pt.  i.  (Halle  in  Austria,  1'^).  pt.  ti.  iLail>srb.
1889),  The  tircvinHnm  was  translated  into  iitrrk
by  one  Patviiiiiis,  whose  veraion  is  still  in  jKTvsI
part  extant,  mnl  in  edited  In  Droysen'ii  edition  of
Gutropius.  8po  Duneker,  De  f  antaJo  Eutrvfil  /■-
terprtte  (Grelffenherg.  lf*?0).  See,  also,  Himi«U
MiscKLLA.  Ci)  A  eunuch  and  minister  of  tbr*a-
jwror  Arcadius.  who  rose  by  iufamous  practieai
from  the  lowest  condition  to  tbe  hight>$t  luuk
of  opulence  and  jMiwer.  He  was  ptuhably  a  vtr
tire  of  Asia,  was  made  chanitierlain  to  ibe  (^b*
peror  in  tbe  year  a.d.  7S^,  nufl,  nftnr  tbe  fall  of
RufintiH,  Hiiee«i'df<d  that  mini>tti>r  in  the  oorAdMKW
of  his  master,  and  rose  to  nnlimit«l  authority.  B*
was  Bveu  crvateil  ronnnl,  »  diKgraet<  to  Roidp  DCVir
before  equalled.  Au  tmiult  ofTernl  to  thii  MnpTM*
was  the  cuusu  of  his  ovcrtliniw  ;  uud  be  was  wnl
iutu  iwriiettial  exile  at  Cypnis.  He  was  tatn
afterwards,  however,  brought  bark  on  anothM
charge  ;  atid  after  beiug  condenined,  was  brhcaA-
ed  in  39<)  (Zosiro.  v  10, 1?,  ote.).

Bntychldea  (EL-nj^idifc) A  sculptor  ofKc.TCOt
a  pupil  of  LysippiiR. He  Bonrished  in  B^c.  3(W-

Enxinns  Pontua. S(>e  Pi*vrL'S  £rxnn:a>


ETADNE


647


EXAGOGES  GRAPHfi


BTadn6  {Evdbtnj).  A  daughter  of  Ipbia  or  Ipbi-
ctes  of  Argoa,  who  slighted  the  addresses  of  Apol-
lo, and  married  Capaneas  (q.  v.),  one  of  the  seven
chiefs  who  went  against  Thebes.  When  her  hus-
baud  had  been  struck  with  thunder  by  Zeus  for
his  blasphemies  aud  impiety,  and  hia  ashes  had  been
separated  from  those  of  the  rest  of  the  Argives,  she
threw  herself  on  bis  burning  pile  and  perished  in
the  flames  (Verg.  Aen.  y\.  447 ;  Stat.  Theb.  xii.  800).

BvagGnu  (Ewryopar)-  King  of  Salamis,  in  Cy-
prus, from  about  b.c.  410  to  374.  He  was  assisted
by  the  Athenians  in  his  wars  against  the  Persians
<Xen.  Hell.  ii.  1,  ^  29).  There  is  extant  an  oratiou
of  Isocrates  iu  praise  of  Evagoras  aud  addressed
to  his  son  Nicocles,  who  sncceeded  him.

Branda-  {ECavipoe,  "  the  good  man  ").  A  figure
in  Latin  mythology.  He  was  said  to  be  the  son
of  Hermes  and  an  Arcadian  nymph  (Pausan.  viii.
43,  (  2 ;  Pint.  Qaaeat.  Bom.  53).  Sixty  years  before
the  Trojan  War  he  led  a  Pelasgian  colouy  to  Lati-
amfi-om  Pallantiumin  Arcadia,  and  founded  a  city,
Pallantium,  near  the  Tiber,  on  the  hill  which  was
an«rwards  named  after  it  the  Palatine.  Further
it  was  said  that  he  taught  the  rude  inhabitauts  of
the  country  writing,  music,  and  other  arts;  and
introduced  from  Arcadia  the  worship  of  certain
godH,  in  particular  of  Pan,  whom  the  Italians
called  Fauuus,  with  the  festival  of  the  Luperca-
lia  (q.  v.),  which  was  held  in  his  honour.  Evan-
der  was  worshipped  at  Rome  among  the  heroes  of
the  country  (see  Imdigetes),  and  had  an  altar  on
the  Aventine  Hill.  But  the  whole  story  is  evi-
dently an  invention  of  Greek  scholars,  who  de-
rived the  Lupercalia  from  the  Arcadian  Lycaea.
The  name  EUavlipot  is  perhaps  a  trauslatioii  uf  the
Italian  Faunns,  while  Carmeuta,  his  mother,  is  an
ancient  Italian  goddess ;  but  on  this,  see  Nettlesbip,
Lectures  and  Euays,  pp.  50  foil.

Pallas,  the  sou  of  Evander,  is  in  like  manner  a
creation  of  the  poets.  In  Vergil  he  marches,  at
the  commaod  of  bis  father,  to  assist  Aeneas,  and
falls  in  single  combat  with  Tumns.  (See  Verg.
Arn,  viii.  575.)  Evauder  had  also  two  daughters,
Rom4  aud  Dyna.

Brarcboa  {ESapxos).  A  river  of  Asia  Minor,
flowing  into  the  Euxine,  to  the  southeast  of  Siuo-
pe.  It  formed  the  ancient  boundary  between
Paphlagonia  and  Cappadocia.

Brentus. See  Bonus  Eventcs.

ETeona  (Ej^foc).  (1)  A  river  of  Aetolia,  rising
in  Mount  Oeta,  and  flowing  iuto  the  sea,  130  sta-
dia west  of  Autirrhinm.  It  derived  its  name  fnim
Evenufl,  the  father  of  Marpessa,  who  was  carried
off  by  Idas,  the  son  of  Apharens ;  aud  Evenns,  be-
ing unable  to  overtake  the  latter,  threw  himself
into  the  river,  which  was  henceforth  called  after
him.  (2)  A  river  of  Mysin,  falling  into  the  Sinus
Elalticus  near  Pitan^.

BvertictUnm.  A
fishing-net  wbicb,
as  appears  from
the  annexed  illus-
tration, did  not
differ  from  our
own.  See  Varr.
S.  H.  iii.  17. 7.

Bvictia  Iu  Ro-
man law  erincere  means  generally  to  deprive  a
person  of  a  thing  or  right,  of  which  be  is  iu  the


Ererricnlam. (Fruco  In  the  Palace  of
Titus,  Rone.]


enjoymeut,  by  legal  process ;  but  the  commonest
case  of  evictio  is  that  of  the  contract  of  sale.
( See  Ehptio  et  Venditio.  )  The  vendor  not  be-
ing hound  to  make  the  purchaser  owner  of  the
thing  sold  {Dig.  xix.  1.  11.  2),  things  were  often
bought  and  sold  which  did  not  belong  to  the  ven-
dor; and  as  the  latter  could  give  no  better  title
thaa  he  had  himself,  the  purchaser  was  liable  to
be  deprived  of  the  rea  vendita  (i.  e.  "evicted")  by
the  lawful  owner.  Originally  there  seems  to  have
been  no  obligation  on  the  vendor  to  compensate
on  such  eviction,  except  in  sales  by  mancipation,
when  the  vendor  was  bound  to  return  double  the
price  to  the  purchaser,  in  such  an  event  (Paul.
Sent.  rec.  2.  17.  3) ;  bnt  in  ordiuary  sales  it  seems
to  have  become  nsual  for  the  purchaser  to  stipu-
late from  the  vendor  for  a  penal  sum  of  twice  the
amount  of  the  purchase-money  {stipulatio  duplae),
if  deprived  of  the  property  by  any  one  with  a  bet-
ter title.  Eventually  it  became  a  general  rule  of
law  that  if  the  purchaser  was  "evicted"  by  legal
process,  the  vendor  mast  indemnify  him  (Dig.  xxi.
3.1).

Ihrioa. See  Dionvsub;  Euius.

Bvooiti  (those  who  are  summoued  or  called
out).  The  term  applied  iu  the  Roman  army  to
soldiers  who  bad  served  their
time  and  obtained  their  dis-
missal, but  who,  upon  the  gen-
eral summoning  them  by  name,
returned  to  the  service  ou  con-
dition of  receiving  certain  priv-
ileges. These  were,  exemption
from  all  service  except  in  battle,
a  rank  aud  pay  equal  to  those
of  the  centurions,  and  prospect
of  advancement.  The  enlist-
ment of  evocali  was  especially
oommouinthecivilwars.  Some-  Evocatu..  (Rich.)
times  they  were  distributed  iu  the  legion,  some-
times they  formed  a  special  and  select  troop,  di-
vided into  ceaturiae.  We  sometimes  find  them,  in
isolated  instances, nnder  the  early  Empire.  On  the
diffierence  between  them  aud  the  reterani,  see  Ve-
TERANi.  They  are  represented  on  sepulchral  mon-
uments with  the  viue-rod  (ritis)  in  one  baud,  a
sword  on  the  left  side  {parazonium),  and  a  roll  of
paper,  indicating,  perhaps,  their  carte  of  discharge,
in  the  other;  as  shown  by  the  above  illustration,
from  a  sepulchral  marble,  which  also  bears  the  in-
scription AuR  .  luLiASUS  .  EVOK.  See  Cic.  Fam.
iii.  6 ;  Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  65 ;  B.C.  i.  17.

Bvocatlo  (calling  out).  The  term  for  the  sol-
emn summons  given  to  the  tntelary  gods  of  a  I>e-
sieged  city  to  leave  it,  and  to  migrate  to  Rome.
(See  Macrob.  Sat  iii.  9.)  The  Romans  always
vowed,  at  the  same  time,  to  bnild  them  a  temple
at  Rome.  An  example  of  a  deity  "evoked"  in
this  way  was  Inno  Regina,  who  was  origioally
worshipped  at  Veii,  but  afterwards  had  a  temple
in  Rome  ou  the  Aventine.

Bzagfa  or  Hexagia  {f$ayia). See  Pondera.

Bxagog6  (.i(ayuyri).  An  ejectment  to  test  the
right  to  proi»erty. See  ExoL'LEfi  Dike.

Bxagogea  Orapb^  (tfayory^r  ypa<pf)).  Au  ac-
tion which,  it  is  claimed,  might  be  instituted
against  one  who,  acting  as  Kvputs  of  an  Athenian
woman,  married  ber  to  a  foreigner  in  a  foreign
land  {Alt.  Proceta,  ed,  Lipsius,  p.  443  foil.).  Our  in-
formation couceruiug  this  suit  is  very  scanty.


EXAIRESEOS  DIK^


648


KXEGETEH


Bxaires^os  Dik^  (t$ai^ftrrafr  diV^,  n\m  diftaip*-
<T*<os  fiinc")!.  Au  action  ltTi>nglit  nt  AtheiiH  to  rp-
ciivfi-  ilaniH^^es  for  the  nltcmiit  in  ili'|irivf  tli«f
]iluiutiir  nf  hiH  nlavci ;  tiul  wlim  ihr  ilrfniilHiit
clninu'd  prcijiorLy  in  lli«  wlnvo,  but  whrn  lift  iL-weri-
eii  liini  tu  V  a  froeman.  As  tho  con^liciou  of  hIuv-
ery  nt  AthciiA  incapacitatotl  a  mair  from  taking
BDV  legal  stpp  in  liis  own  person,  if  a  rc]Mite<i  slave
wished  to  rwoverliis  riclits  as  n  freeninn,  ho  coaUl
only  ilo  \t  Uy  tbe  assistunco  of  «in*  tvUo  was  hini-
scilf  a  frpetnan.  ami  who  w:ik  oaitl  i^atpt'taBat  or
dttHUpt'iffSat  aifrhv  lit  t\€v6tf)iav  {hyB-  c.  f'nuc/.  ^  10),
in  tihvrlntrnt  rindimrr.

Exazneu. Se«:  LiBKA.

Bxampaeus  ('E|(i^fraiDr)>  A  fonntain  which,
acfoniiiij;  to  >I»timIoIii>»  (iv.  52),  IIowh  into  the  Hy-
paniSfWbert)  tliti  rivor  !»  fonr  iluys' journey  from  the
sea,  xntl  renders  bitlcr  ilm  vvateni  that  before  wttru
BWeft.

Exaactoratlo. So«  £xehcitc»;  Mihsiu.

Exauguratio.  TIih  act  nf  talcing  nwiiy  fn»m  a
p1a<'<)  nr  thinj;  tll(^  aaored  oliiti*aot<-i'  wlitoli  it  lind
receivwl  Uy  vttiHguratiu,  cohtevrut'w,  or  dedicnlio.
That  such  an  act  was  (wrfoniiwl  hy  the  an^urs,
.-uid  never  without  cousHltiiig  tlje  pleasure  of  tho
gmls  by  »ii</NrfNHi,  ia  implieil  in  the  naiuo  itaelf
iLiv.  i.  IV^;  DtonvH.  Hal.  Antiti.  liom.  iii.  |).  16*^}.
Temples,  <"I'at*'^p  "'"*  otlitr  consecrated  plncea,  aa
\v«ll  a5i  pricsta,  wi;re  KnnsidtTfd  as  belonging  to
tliKg«Mls.  Nei  ro]i.<M;rratP(l  jilarr  wliatt;vi'r c^nild  Iw
Aiupliiyori  for  any  profaitt^  pnrpoHi*,  or  ilwlii'ralfd  tn
any  other  divinity  than  that  to  which  ir  urigt-
unlly  belonged,  without  Iwiug  previonsly  exangu-
raleii ;  and  priests  could  not  givu  np  their  aucrod
funrtinuR;,  nor  conid  a  vestal  virgin,  after  ihv>  ex-
piration of  her  tLirty  yenrs  of  service,  enter  into
niatrimony,  without  tirst  nmlergoing  tho  proc«»8
ot'i-xangiiriitio  (Gellina,  Ti.(vii.)  7,4).

Exceptio. Sec  Actio.

Bxcubiae. Sec  Castiu.

Excubltorea.  A  nonl  which  ]>roperIy  means
watrhineu  or  sentinels  of  any  kiriil  iCIiu^k  R.  (r.  vti.
Ii^ljltiit  iit  more  particnlarly  given  to  the  Huldiers  of
tbe  cohort  who  guarded  tbe  palace  of  tbn  Roiaan
r>iu]H9ror  (Suet.  .SVi*.  ri;  f>lh.C).  Their  conunand-
iug  oQioer  was  called  trifmnutt  cxcubiUjr  (Sm-t.
Cluaii.  i2).  When  the  cmpcior  went  to  an  entvr-
tainuent  at  the  honw:  of  another  itvimon,  tho  ex-
oubilon^a  appear  to  have  accompanied  him,  aud
to  hiivQ  kept  guiirii  as  in  bia  own  palace  (Snut.
Otk.  iu

Excubitoriuni.  A  watch-house,  atation-hoiiM,
or  barracks  for  Kuniaii  Huldiers  or  pttlico  (P.  Vict.
Sub  itetj.  Vrb.  Hum.  ad  liu.  l,  n»  to  which  see  the
articles  Castka  ;  ExcLuiTOKEs ;  Vhiilks.  \  very
intRreating  eJEcnbitoriiim  — that  of  the  seventh
battalion  of  city  jHtlictf — wim  discovere<l  at  Rome  .
ill  \''*&*,  near  the  church  of  t^  Crtwgoiio.  It  wan
originally  a  privato  bouMO,  rmiled  for  thit  uee  of  a
bmly  of  police,  anil  so  occupied  for  many  yearx.
Tlie  arehaeologicat  and  liii4t<orira]  tnlervat  of  this
bailding  lies  in  the  fact  that  tint  policemen,  wbeii
ofTduty,  had  aiiini^etl  thenisetveN  by  writing  on  the
walls,  tbna  leaving  us  a  very  vivid  ptcinrc  of  the
daily  rontino  of  an  ancient  policenmn's  life,  ntid  |
also  of  his  sentiments.  exprcs!»e<l  in  language  that
l«  always  direct  and  plain,  uml  freqneiitjy  profane.  I
See  ihe  essay  by  Henzeo  in  the  Annafi  ittlV  /i»*li-
Info  for  IBfiS ;  Prof.  Lanciani's  Ancii'nt  Homr  in  t^  i


IJffht  <)/  lirctnt  DiHCoerrifii.  ch.  vtii.  iRoston,  IW);
Kocella.  />  Itint'risiotie  veH"  EaaibHarif*  delta  FII'*
(oorh-  df'  Hgili  (Rome.  It^r,  Middlcum,  AraofM
of  Anrirnt  /fniitr,  ii.  pp.  2fiT-:2A<>  ^London,  l?W>;  aaj
the  arlici*'  GRArriTJ.

Execation. S«e  Iki.NORCM  Empoio.

Bxfidra  (i^iipa).  An  alcove,  or  Hemi-cirealxr
»xtrii.sion  of  tho  colonmnle  in  a  Grt>rk  gjoituuinis.
It  wan  fnniihbrd  with  mcuIs  on  which  tlic  pliiloMi-
jihuiti  UHually  nat  to  talk  with  Ibctr  diKvipln  iCif.
A"./).  1.6).  In  private  honscs  the  rjtAra  wm  j
room  JMtendod  for  conversation,  tittM  with  ■
l3ench  running  around  the  wall. See  GrM.VA9itii.

Bxegetea  ((fTyn^c)-  An  expnnntler,  iutrrprrtrr,
is  nscd  both  in  an  onlinary  and  an  Ddicinl  wiiir.
A  loral  gnitle  <>r  rircrpar  is  sn  styled  (P:iiih:iii.  i  41.
^  S);  AvKchintw,  ridiculing  n«'nii>Htbt-ue(i  for  Irit
conduct  on  the  embasi«y,  calls  Iiini  the  i^Tf^V  "^
Iho  abmiril  slurit-s  witli  which  hr.  regaled  liio  Dfl-
leagnept  {Aesch.  /*c  FaU.  Leg.  ^  40),  Mom  nsiiaUy.
however,  I  hu  word  was  applied  to  any  iuierpr^-trrof
laws,  wlicllicr  sacred  orsccniar.  bnt  especially  ibc
former  (fe'fym.  Mag.  s,  v.),  as  tbo  KupatrhlKe  i,<i.  r.J.
Among  the  t^iipalriils,  again,  tbe  Enninlpiilor  if\.
V.)  were  <f  TyfTTui  of  a  s)>erial  clans  of  sacred  Uw»,
thoiw,  namely,  relating  to  tbe  Elenbiuiaii  ui)»l»>
ri^s;  ihviie.  laws  wem  nnwrttten,  and  of  innurisn-
rial  atiti<|nity  (  [LyK.]  r.  Andoc.  4  l'*)-  But  itillt
n;gaid  lo  the  wrilti-n  and  civil  laws  of  Atbeiisin
dcnnicriitic  ii[nc?i,  the  notion  of  siTvcral  granuflori*
ans  that  Ibore  woa  a  claas  of  i^jjyrjrai  orexpmmU
ersof  rhem,answe'ring  t^  tbe  li^mnn  jiiriMoawlI*.
is  niitcuablc,  and  indeed  no  longer  held ;  tbe  ii-
Icnco  of  tho  orators  is  Antficient  proof  that  iintiieli
persons  (>xi»tetl  (Huhnken  on  Timaeus.  Lti.  Viti.
s.  v.).  In  Athenian  courts,  l»oth  the  dicoAts  m\
the  pre^i'Ung  judges  acted  wirliont  the  ^nidante
of  trained  lawyers,  and  re.iuirrd  tbe  lows  wtiieb
they  adtuinifltered  to  be  inlelligildn  to  plain  vm.
At  the  same  time,  the  couHPrvatiNm  of  aitciriit  n-
llgioti  involved  a  fri'<pient  apiieal  to  espflrtu  la
purely  ceremonial  matters.  Thus,  the  guilt  «' a
iioniioidu  and  fliv  pnuishiuetit  of  it  were  to  W  (k*
tenniucd  by  tliw  law-courts;  but  if  tin*  hoiuiwi*
were  pn>ved  accidental  or  Jnstinnble.  the-  rrnan-
nial  expiation,  the  reoouciliatluii  with  tlie  rell-
lives  of  the  deeeased,  and  tbe  dlspoeal  of  ill*
corpse-  retnaiued  iis  the  province  *>{  i^rjyirai

In  itit  oDicial  8ense,  the  exegetae  were  a  Ikuudnf
three  persons,  to  whom  applioAtioti  might  W  ntA"
in  inatterti  rtdating  to  sacred  law;  they  wercslUo
Ije  Eiipiirridn,  ani!  one  of  them  necessarily  a  tnfin-
ber  of  the  family  of  the  Kumolpidac.  The  mviie
of  their  appoiiitmcut  is  not  known;  and  tl»oi<)(*'
tiou  whether  tbcy  took  cogni/^uce  of  all  Ap|«^*
fbim  private  persons  like  thfwte  taentioned  »ho^tt
or  only  of  public  matters,  is  u|h'ii  to  !u>nie  lUwM.
They  attended  in  the  asaenibly  of  the  i<e<ipk'.  »uJ
interprete4l  tbe  ittMnjfiiat,  or  sign*  I'roui  bfavrn;
they  hail  thns  tbe  power  of  stojtping  ttte  bumixw
in  hattd,  eorrttspondiug  to  the  irhnumliatia  fi(  i^
Hoinan  augurs.  But  we  may  Ire  sure  tlu>r.  the
4lennK:raliu  Athenians  would  not  allow  nii  aim"
lute  or  irrp!4i>f>ii9ible  veto  to  these  or  ouy  •'''•*
otDRiaN:  th^'ir  action,  like  that  of  an  Cpi*>«t^
who  rcfu8c<l  to  pot  the  question  to  tlw  vate.  *«
no  doubt  liable  to  tiopeachiQcnt :  iu  prarli""  i'  '"*
probable  that  only  a  shower  or  other  nntnwtak*"
Wh  )ihenomcnnu  was  allowed  to  bn-ak  np  tin»
meeting,  so that  their  duty  would  be  lunwlf  »


EXERCITL'S


649


EXERCITUS


furinal  oue  (Pull.  viii.  124, 18d ;  Etym.  Mag.  s.  t.  ;
Buhukea  oa  Timaetis ;  Mttller  ou  Aescli.  Euimh.
pp.  162  foil.;  Sclioinauu,  Antiq.  i.  429,  £.  T. ;  Oit-
bert,  $taat$alterth.  i.  360).

SaEerdttDS  {arpanst  arpaTtvfta).  A  body-of  men
orgaoizad  aud  arraed  for  the  defence  of  the  State ;
■au  anoy-

I.  Orkek.  The  most  military  people  amongthe
'Greeka  were  the  Spartans,  whose  whole  life  was
■spent  in  the  practice  of  martial  exercises,  so  that
■even  the  meals  shared  in  common  by  all  f^  Spar-
tan citizens  {tnitrtrtTia)  were  arranged  with  refer-
■eiice  to  military  service.  (See  Syssitia.)  With
them  the  dnty  of  actual  service  began  with  the
twentieth  year,  and  did  not  end  until  their  capacity
for  that  service  ceased  to  exist.  After  their  six-
tieth year,  however,  all  Spartan  soldiers  wera  ex-
«mpt  from  foreign  duty.  In  the  Lacedaemonian
Army,  the  heavy-armed  troops  (^Xtrot)  were  origi-
nally all  citizens,  but  as  early  as  the  Persian  Wars,
the  perioechi  served  side  hy  side  with  the  native
£partauB,  though  in  separate  divisions  (Xoxot).
The  Helots  who  accompanied  the  troops  served  as
Atteudauta  ( vTratrjruml )  to  the  hoplites,  and  as
light-armed  troops  in  battle.  (See  Helotae;
Hypaspistai.  )  A  picked  body  of  men  ( Iwvtls }
■was  formed  itom  among  the  hoplites,  and  served
as  a  special  body-guard  to  the  kings.  They  were
■300  in  number,  and  were  all  active,  powerful  young
men  under  thirty  years  of  age,  selected  and  com-
manded by  three  officers,  known  as  iwrraypirat.
The  imrcir,  as  the  name  implies,  mnst  have  been
■originally  horsemen,  but  were  no  longer  so  in  the
time  of  the  Persian  Wars  (Herod. viii.  1S4).  A
■corps  of  light  iufautry  was  formed  in  the  district
-of  Sciritis,  and  was  hence  called  Sciritae,  the  es-
pecial duty  assigned  to  ^em  being  the  ontpoet
service  of  the  camp,  reconnoitring  on  the  march,
■and  in  battle  the  support  of  the  left  wing.  From
the  end  of  the  fifth  century  b.c.,  the  Spartan  army
was  divided  into  six  morae  (ftopai),  each  command-
«d  by  a  mikiftapxat  (Xen.  Lac.  11. 4).  As  the  num-
ber of  Spartan  citizens  decreased,  these  nltimately
■comiweed  merely  the  cadre  of  the  mora,  which  were
bronght  up  to  their  full  complement  by  the  addi-
tion of  perioechi ;  though  the  officers  were  always
Spartans,  as  were  the  members  of  the  royal  staff.
£ach  mora  was  divided  into  four  (or  five)  com-
panies (Xoxoi).  The  cavalry  played  only  an  unim-
portant part  in  the  Spartan  army.  (See  Hipfkib.)
In  time  of  war  the  ephors  (see  Ephori)  command-
ed the  veteran  troops.  In  early  times  the  kings
divided  the  supreme  command  between  them,  but
after  B.c.  512,  only  oue  commanded,  unless  more
than  one  general  was  needed  from  the  oircum-
ataiices  of  the  case.  The  Spartans  maintained  a
fleet  iu  which  Helots  served  as  marines  aud  oars-
men. In  cases  of  great  necftssity  these  were  some-
times transferred  to  the  army  to  serve  as  hoplites,
in  which  case  they  received  their  freedom,  aud
were  then  known  as  Moda/iwdrir.  The  fleet  was
-commanded  by  mvopx"^  °^  admirals.

At  Athens  every  freeboru  man  was  liable  to
inititsry  service,  the  only  exceptions  being  the
holders  of  public  offices,  aud,  iu  early  times,  the
very  lowest  class  of  citizens.  Every  youth  on
teaching  bis  eighteenth  year  (c^/Soc)  served  for
ten  years,  most  frequently  ou  the  frontier,  during
which  time  bis  military  education  was  completed,
though  he  was  then  liable  to  serve  at  any  time  up
to  his  sixtieth  year.  In  time  of  war  the  Assent-
SI*


bly  fixed  the  unmber  of  men  required  for  duty :  iu
extreme  oases  a  levie  en  matte  (jravorparid)  was  re-
sorted to.  Ten  generals  (trrpanjyoi)  were  elected
by  the  people  annually,  and  it  was  their  duty  to
levy  the  tToops  and  organize  them  in  such  a  way
that  the  men  of  each  tribe  (tftvXff)  were  commanded
by  the  same  officer  {ip^Xapxoi).  These  phylarchs,
as  welt  as  the  taxiarchs  (Ta^iapjfoi),  or  captaius  of
companies,  were  elected  by  the  people.  This  levy
served  as  hoplites,  while  the  men  of  the  lowest
class  (Bifrts)  were  some-
times used  as  light-armeil
troops  ( ircXrturrai ),  aud
sometimes  with  tlie  fleet.
As  the  age  of  military
service  extended  from
the  eighteenth  to  the  six-
tieth year,  there  were
thus  forty-two  classes  of
age,  and  every  man  was
mustered  iu  a  list  (xaru-
\oyot)  under  the  name
of  the  Archon  Eponymus
under  whom  he  first
reached  the  military  age
(Sobfimauu,  Antig.  Greece,
Eng.  trans,  p.  42:) ;  but  ef.
Aristotle,  Polit.  Atk.  $  53,
with  Kenyon's  note).  The
men  of  the  first  two  classes
who  served  on  the  fron-
tier wereeaUad.Kfpi'iroXoi.
After  the  twentieth  year
they  could  be  sent  on  for-
eign service.  The  army
contained  ten  battalions
(rd£»r),  sometimes  called
ifn/kai,  of  which  the  sub-
divisions were  called  Xo-
xot.  The  troops  were
sometimes  equipped  with
the  aid  of  the  resident
aliens  (jtiroixoi)  of  Attica,
and  in  earlier  times  by
the  contingents  contrib-
uted by  the  allies.  From
the  time  of  Pericles  ou,  the  cavalry  received  pay
amounting  to  some  four  obols,  or  about  $0.12  a
day,  with  an  atlowauce  for  the  borsemau's  attend-
ant. On  the  cavalry,  see  Hippbis.

In  most  of  the  other  Greek  States  the  hoplites,
consisting  of  wealthy  citizens,  fonned  the  main
strength  of  the  army,  and  generally  helped  to  turn
the  scale  iu  engagements  iu  which  the  light-armed
troops  and  the  cavalry  played  a  subordinate  part.
They  fought  in  the  0dXay£  (q.  v.),  iu  closely  serried
lines  eight  deep.  The  flower  of  the  troops  were
stationed  ou  the  right  wing  as  the  post  of  honour,
to  advauce  to  meet  the  foe  amid  the  singing  of  the
paean.  When  at  a  distauce  of  about  200  yards,  at
the  signal  of  a  tnimpet,  they  raised  the  battle-cry
(dXoXa)  aud  charged  either  at  a  run  or  at  quick
step.  It  was  only  the  Spartans  who  slowly  ad-
vanced at  an  even  pace  and  to  the  sound  of  flutes.
A  request  for  i>ennissiou  to  bury  the  dead  was  the
formal  admiasiou  of  defeat.  The  enduring  token
of  victory  was  a  trophy  composed  of  the  armour
captured  from  the  defeated  side.  It  was  usual  to
join  battle  on  ground  which  was  suitable  for  the
phalanx.  The  Peloponnesiaii  War  was  the  meuus
o£  introducing  many  innovations,  iucladiug  the


I  t^^[WApl  trp  Kur oT


tMly  QrMk  Soldier.
(SteUof  Aristion.)


KXKKCITUS


060


EXEBCrrtJS


furmAltou  of  a  regular  fnrco  of  liglit  infantry,
caIImI  irfXrtumu  Iq.  v.).  Still  more  <U>cisiro  in  rliti
tniiit^fnniiBlion  of  the  geiicml  Hyiit«ni  nf  Grei^k
wnrfiiff  wuM  tliu  famniiH  rt'truat  <if  tlir  Timi  Ttioti-
wiiid,  till*  DrHt  iinimriuitt  tm*i-cuimry  tinny  tiiiioti}:
the  GrevkH  wUicti  trivd  to  niiiku  llm  (ilitilniix  o(
h»[ilit(M  Atiit  tlio>  ;;;r<Miittl  bcttfc,  mid  to  ntilizc  ut
tlie  aaino  tiniu  tlie  Hj^ht  iuruulry,  nr  pcltast^,  and
the  yvftyriTts  (spoariiiyu,  Uuwijmmi,  oihI  nUugers).
Iltliicrates,  the  tint  diatinjifittAlioil  jt;etieral  of  mer-
cenary troojw,  intrwluctMl  a  lit;bt«r  oi|iii|>meut  by
Nubittitutin}!  a  siiiiill  niXr^  for  the  heavy  ahieltl,
ntlopthig  n  liin^^r  swonl  and  Hpear,  ligbter  aboea,
luid  a  linen  corslet.

Ill  the  cotifHe  of  the  fourth  centriry  D.c.  (he  arrny
oomiKitH>d  of  civiliaiiM  (lavo  way  more  and  nioitf  to
the  iiK'rceiiary  anny.  which,  by  iN  ijitimato  kiituvl-
e<1}*o  of  the  iittu  of  \th  wvUpotiti,  i;aiui.'4l  an  inniiouhe
wlvantiiKt^innGtiial  wnt.  AnimportAnt  novelty  was
tbe  obliriav  battle-ordvr,  thn  dincovcry  of  Kpitml-
nondas  i*!.  v.i.  In  thiii  the  (^>at  mortit  and  Htrength
of  the  hoplftvf  n-ivt  drawn  it|i  in  uouKidernblo  depth
on  one  of  tbt>  two  win;;H,  u-itbotit  any  fximiMJon
of  the  front.  The  ho|>lit«8  coiih)  thim  maki^i  u  vtg-
oroiia  attaok  on  tlio  contro  of  iho  enemy'w  winff,
vbilo  the  true  centra  and  the  otbnr  win;;  of  the  hh-
aailniit-4  wore  bbhl  in  reserve,  with  n  view  to  atl-
vanving  Irtt+'ir  to  f  rush  itio  i-nr.iny.

The  Mat'«ilt>niaii  iiu^rbud  ofwarfHrc,  inveitteil  by
Kiii^  PliiHpi  n.and  bis  son  Alexander  the  Great,  wan
biiMMlupon  the  Cireek  military  organization  MlapttKl
toMaoodobioiin^qairemcnt^  Fort  his  |>nr)[«<>f>e,  that
organizatiou  was  duly  developed,  and  thu  ditfcreut
parts  of  the  army,  the  infantry  and  cavalry,  light
aud  henvy-armed  troops,  military  levien,  allied  and
merceuary  troops,  were  hlendefl  together  into  n
far  freer  aud  more  effective  Hy«tt4?m  Iban  the  Greeks
ever  attained  in  their  art  of  war.  In  point  of
ntimlHTH  the  stronge-st  rorapowent  part  of  the  Ma-
ce^bniian  army,  a**  elinewhero,  was  the  heavy  and
light  iufiintrv.  Tb«  former  oonsistod  of  the  5T<(e-
Tatftoi,  u  body  nf  Murciidiiiaim  of  (rt^  but  not  nnhle
origin,  com'Niionilin^  Uv  tho  Cinttik  hopHtea,  though
not  HO  hoavil.v  arnu-d.  IJko  tb(^<  hoplitna,  they
fotighl.  in  a  phalanx,  but  thi»  wat  geni'mlly  di!CiN^r
than  tbcirH,  ht'iuj,'  itiji^tit  and  afttirwanlH  ftlxtt^cn
men  do*ip.  They  foruitid  nix  ro^^ir,  forres|vnndiug
to  the  nnmljer  of  the  districts  of  Macedonia,  each
of  which  waa  roprc«entc<)  by  one  ra^ts-  (8*0  fur-
ther under  Phalanx.)  The  MracnrKrrm'  were  the
ettnivaleiit  of  tho  Hellenic  pnltatt^,  and  wcru  a
Btanding  corjw  of  'MXH)  men.  Beaides  iheiM)  there
were  Btroug  conttngeuta  of  other  kinds  of  light
infantry,  eaptfcially  speanuen  and  arcbera.  Whilo
in  the  fire«k  annie-a  the  nnniher  of  the  cavalry  bail
ulwayH  Iteei)  rtnmll,  they  formed  nearly  onu>Kixll)
of  the  whole  army  wlikli  Alt^xuiider  tniok  wit  It  him
on  hia  Ahinlir  expivlitioii,  and  oonsiHtiMl  of  :in  etpial
iiunihor  of  light  and  iieavy  cavalry.  (See  further
tinder  HiPfEis.  (  The,  central  point  in  the  gn<at
battles  of  Alexander  wan  the  phalanx  ;  on  tbe  right
of  thlM  were  placed  tbe  vwamrifTTai,  the  heavy  and
light  Maeciloniaa  cavalry,  tlic  Hpeamien,  and  arch-
era  :  on  the  left,  tim  Ttiraeiaa  ]>t-Uast!i,  tho  Hellenic
contingent  of  cavalry,  witli  the  Thessalian  cavalry,
an<l  light  troopM,  liorHoinen.  and  archers.  The  two
wiugB  werw  rrekonitti  fixmi  the  centre  of  the  pha-
lanx, tbe  right  being  nmially  rewrre^l  for  the  at-
tack.and  led  by  the  king.  The  tight  troops  began
the  ntl-ack,  which  wh>*  supported  by  the  heavy
Mftceduuian  cavalry,  followed  by  tbe  vwamiartti.


Tho  heavy  infantry  c^ame  np  in  delarb
ktiep  tlie  line  ntibniken,  anil  formed  aa
battle-array.  Tluin  the  main  attJiek  waanadeK
tho  heavy  cavalry,  ami  no  long^r.aa  with  tbeolhrr
Cireektt,  by  the  phalanx.  On  tbe  contrary,  the
phalanx  fomied  tbe  solid  centre  nf  the  whole  uwj
— n  centre  which  it  waa  impouilile  for  Iher'Hemf
to  break,  and  which  was  itJtelf  irresistible  in  tX-
tnck.  Under  the  snccessors  of  Alexander,  the  pin-
laux  wfw,  however,  regarded  as  strengtheiiinK  tba
whole  army  aud  lengthening  the  forniatiou,  rntlifr
thau  as  a  factor  of  oflentive  operations.  Tbe  Imi-
tle  was  deeide4l  by  tbe  wings,  whirb  were  rna-
|)oHe«l  of  cavalry — nn«  wing  lieing  deiiriner]  fiirllw
attack  while  the  other  rem.iined  on  the  defeotii^c.
The  light  infantry  and  the  elepbautA  which  vtn
nuw  brought  into  noe  were  bmnglit  to  licflrisw-
casiou  doinaudeil,  but  tverc  chiefly  used  in  UMk
ing  tho  preparatory  niorcnientn  of  ihe  aCUokitg
wing,  very  much,  in  fact,  as  cavalry  is  iiwd  ia  tb*
ntodem  Oennnn  taetles.

During  the  thlrtl  century  B.i'.,  the  caTalrjf<lf-
clined  in  ini|iortanco  and  hence  in  iinrolieR,  wliQt
tbe  heavy -armed  infantry,  with  ihe  foniiitI»lil<
iT(if}itr(ra,  twenty-four  feet  long,  lw*ame  nioivtirf
more  effective.  Tho  phalanx  was  now  iimhI  in  irt-
tat^king,  and  its  onset  nsnally  deeided  (lie  Utile
III  Chat  century,  mercenary  ariuius  becsioe  nfj
cotiiinou,  and  at  laMi  Greifk  military  scieuceyidiht
to  (bat  of  Ihn  RomauH  mainly  liecaiise  Ihe  t«tit*
cf  the  phalanx  were  ill-suited  to  a  banil-lo-tund
ougagenient. B««  Loctios  :  Moita  :  PiiaLasL

II.  KoMAN.— Down  to  the  year  Il.c.  I'M.  irli«a
the  people,  alarmexl  by  the  advance  o(  the  foml-
tlable  C'imbri,  kept  O.  MariiiK  in  the  cousnlntf  Ec
live  yeare  in  disregard  of  the  Constitution,  tli«  Bo-
mau  army  hod  been  nothing  more  thau  a  niitilit
of  citirotis,  the  body  of  the  free  biirgMses  in  irm*.
as  established  by  8ervins  Tnllina.  (See  ('OMITU
fK.NTiHiATA.l  The  wbolc  population  vtu  iWr'nUA
into  live  classes.  The  Brst  class  was  dividwl  I"*-
tweco  cavalry  {equilfs)  aud  infantry  I pr^ilr»i,»tA
all  lire  classes  iuto  iMwiurr^  and  ArnJorcM,  Ibe  foriB'
being  employed  for  active  servico  in  the  fialil.tn'
the  latter  for  tho  defeuro  nf  the  city.  Evei>'  ri*f-
zen  from  his  i^ventMmth  to  bin  fnrty-flftb  orfifti-
etb  year  was  liable  to  aervice  iinle&H  he  belonged
to  tho  loweAt  class  (prolettirii\  or  bail  Blitt^jr
»«rveil  iu  tweuty  euupaigns  on  foot  or  iu  tea  f^*-
paigii.1  a«  a  cavalryman.  Tho  oailitary  Ui»y  "^
by  tribes,  and  was  modo  iu  A  general  assenihty  oT
citizens  at  the  Capitol  or  on  the  Campns  SUM'**-
an  c<|nat  timuber  of  men  being  taken  from  enrli  trib^
(See  DiLKtTt  s.)  Tbe  regular  levy  was  HTiOO  trwi#"»
and  n.tWU  innioreM,  a  toUil  of  'i5,.S0l)  men.  TIp*
were  formed  into  fonr  legions  of  42&(>  *ir  IWW  "*■
lacll,  and  a  body  of  1600  cavalry.  Tbe  rwit  •'
the  rtH*niil«  formeil  a  rcBervo  to  HUpply  tbi'  !<••
sustained  by  the  legions.  There  were  geoenl'T
two  consnlnr  nnnies,  each  of  two  legiont,  brsi>\t*
oonliugeiits  of  tbe  allies  of  equal  lutatilrj  ••'
doable  cavalry  strength,  as  tlie  native  Roinao***-
airy  was  inferior,  and  preferr«l  always  t"  1?'"
dismounted.  A  legion  wa*  nimle  up  as  fflll<""»'
lUtXI  retitcit  (light-armed  rtkirtnisher*.  alw  c»lW
areeiiii,  rorai-ii,  and  /cr*-ithirti ),  IWl  Aav(«''.  l**
pitHciitei,  600  rrirtfti,  and  300  r^Mtfe^.  The  kiaUn.
firifciyr*,  and  triarii  were  each  divided  i»w  "■
miiHipMli,  or  companies,  and  nu  equal  niuiil*r  *
relUcn  were  allachwi  l«  each.  The  hnttAri  lO^
,  priuripra  formed  reapeclivcly  the  flrnt  awl  «c«l»


EXERCITUS


651


EXERCITUS


lin«,  aud  were  armed  with  spears  {ha8t^^e)•,  the  tri-
arii  were  the  reserve,  and  carried  the  pilum,  a  short
iitnl  very  heavy  spear,  which  they  hurled  iuto  the
ranks  of  the  euemy  ituDiediately  before  closing
with  them  in  a  hand-to-haud  struggle  with  the
swonl  (gladiuB).


Roman  Soldiers. (Column  of  TnO^H-)

Each  manipulM  was  commauded  by  a  centnriou
(certturio),  having  a  second  centnriou  for  his  liea-
tenaut.  The  first  ceuturioti  of  the  first  mampulus
of  the  triarii,  who  was  known  as  primua  pilut,  in
the  absence  of  a  snperior  officer,  tooit  command  of
the  whole  legion.  Tlie  chief  command  of  the  le-
gion was  held  in  turn  by  the  six  military  tribunes
(tribuni  militum),  each  of  whom  commanded  for  two
months  at  a  time;  bnt  after  the  first  civil  wars,
a  single  officer  (hgatua)  permanently  directed
each  legion,  having  the  military  tribunes  as  his
staff.

The  protractexl  wars  with  Pyrrhusaud  Carthage
led  to  the  firat  important  change  io  the  constitu-
tion of  the  army.  From  this  time,  the  practice  of
giving  the  soldiers  regular  pay  was  established,
and  paved  the  way  for  the  establishment  of  a  reg-
ular army,  which  took  place,  as  noted  above,  in
thecousnlshipof  MariU8,froni  which
time  the  enlisted  man  was  a  profes-
sional soldier,  serving  continuously
in  the  army  for  twenty  years.  The
legiou  now  consisted  of  6000  troops,
divided  into  ten  cohorts  of  600  men
each,  uniformly  armed  with  the  pi-
lum. The  place  of  the  telitea  was
supplied  by  foreign  mercenaries,
bowmen  (sagittarii)  I'nmi  Crete,  jav-
eliu-men  (iocufatorM)  from  Muure-
tauia,  and  sliugers  (fundttores)  from
the  Baleares.  The  cavalry  was  also
chiefly  foreign,  with  a  few  Roman
fquitea  in  special  posts  of  honour.
The  general  had  a  body-guard
( praetoriani )  of  some  5000  men,
with  high  pay  and  special  priv-
ileges. At  this  time  the  silver  eagle
was  adopted  as  the  standard  (see
Signum;  Vexilluh),  and  was  car-
ried by  the  first  century  of  the  first
cohort. There  were  also  aaxiliary


troops  of  varying  number  divided  into  cohortea,
aud  consisting  of  both  infantry  and  cavalry,

Under  Caesar  the  legion  consisted  nominally  of
about  5000  men,  though  actually  of  less.  According
to  Rilstow  it  was  divided  iuto  ten  cohorts  of  300  or
360  men  each  ;  each  cohort  into  three  maniples  of
100  to  120  men  each ;  aud  each  maniple  into  two
centni-ies  of  50  to  60  men  each.  In  battle  the  ten
cohorts  were  regularly  drawn  np  as  in  the  follow*
ing  figure,  which  represents  the  acie$  triplex  of
Caesar :

*  s  J  i>»' __ 5  '*<-.(-f»

CZZ2 iZZ: ZZZl aX7'f>rima  acies.

^m CZ71 Z^2  secnuda  acies.

^Z; CZZl ZZZi  tertia  acies.

The  cavalry,  divided  into  turmae,  or  squadrons,
and  commanded  by  a  decurio,  was  nsnally  stationed
on  both  wings ;  bnt  at  Pharsalas  on  only  one;  while
at  Bibract^  it  was  held  in  the  rear.  The  defensive
order  of  battle  was  the  hollow  square  {orbit),  which
corresponds  with  the  formation  on  the  march  called
agmen  quadratum.  The  general  term  for  the  army
on  the  march  isopmen;  in  battle  order.acies.  When
the  signal  for  the  march  was  given,  the  extraordi'
narii  (q.  v.)  with  the  allies  of  the  right  wing  moved
first,  then  the  legions,  aud  last  the  allies  of  the
left  wing  with  part  of  the  cavalry  who  were  said
elaudtre  agmen  or  oogere  agmen.  An  army  march-
ing in  close  order  was  called  agmen  iuatum  or
agmen  pilatum.  The  van  is  ^mtini  agmen;  the
centre,  flwdtMm  agmen;  the  rear,eztremMm  or  trotM-
simum  agmen.  The  formation  called  agmen  quadra-
tum, shown  below,  was  adopted  when  a  sudden
attack  was  expected.  The  baggage  was  then  place<l
within  the  lines.

The  commander-in-chief  was  called  dax  or  im-
perator;  the  commanders  of  the  legions,  legati;
the  staff  of  the  legions  were  the  tribuni  militum;
the  orderlies  aud  aides,  contubernalea  or  comitea
practori;  the  paymaster  and  quartermaster-gen-
eral, quaestor.  In  case  there  were  not  suCBcient
legates,  the  quaestor  also  commanded  the  le-
giou.

Under  Augustus  the  completion  of  the  Roman
standing  army  was  carried  out,  and  twenty-five


lgm«D  QudraWm. (AotooliM  CoIsbil)


hXKKCITL'a


G53


EXODU


i<';;i»us  weri-  iiiiiiutiiino<t  throiij^liont  ILe  Empire;.
bcni<lt-n  llic  I'ravtonaii  (.iiiani.  I'lulcrTrajnii  tbere
were  ibiriy  IvgioiiK;  under  Hoplimiua  Severn^,
iliirty'fliree.  At  Oiim  time  ilie  uiiiiif>  Ir^alun  va*-
cliiingril  lo  prar/ectuK,  tlti>  lii»l  coluiri  vruh  doubleil
in  Htrfiigllt  ic<tkor§  MHUarin),  and  tim  itiitiimuni
alruiijftli  of  tlie  logioti  wa»  fixed  nt  610U  infaiilry
iiml  7St>  cavalry. S*^  LROia.

irndor  t]i«  Kepiililic  ainl  tlie  enrly  Kmpitt>.  tijc
iiiilitnf^  drill  wnsvi-ry  m'vcrc,  conqtriftiiig  ruiiiiiug,
jumping,  nTPstliii)(.  Awiniuiiiig  (bulli  imkL>d  niitl
ill  full  arinuiir),  iH^iflcK  drill,  the  ittw  of  liitrciicli-
ing  tools,  and  Ioiik  iii»i-ch>i'N  nt  the  rulu  of  lotir
luilta  por  bonr,  with  a  lond  of  fnmi  :t5  to  HU  Ihs.
TIiiH  vftm  Te*imti'd  not  only  from  n>cnnt(t  but  from
vi'ttrraitfi  as  well.  Tlio  c(]uipmcnl  of  the  Holdier
woB  very  heavy.  Tli«  wagons  triiiit<|K>rtcd  tht*
);i*liera1  huggtu^e  (imjM-iiimrnl'i)  and  tht.'  IihiIh:  yot
t<ni-Ii  Moldii^r,  bcnidcji  hiaKliiuld.  Iiflnnit,  bn>Hstplut4>,
pHum,  anil  ttwonl,  watt  u1)li{;i-<l  lo  i-nrry  corn  tor
M'VPiiloen  dnvH,  t4tnki'«  for  tlio  paliHndo  uf  the
camp,  and  intrenching  tools  (Vcgct.  i.  11>).

Ill  tlio  time  of  Polybins  the  regular  pay  of  a  sol-
dier of  the  Ic^on  was  about  $U.(I7  per  diem  \\  of  a
tiritari99),  tlint  of  a  ceuturioDr  ^>.14  :  nnd  that  of  n
cavalrymnii.^O.'idO.  Ca««ar  fixeil  the  pay  of  a  wddier
at  ^'•£>  dfti'trii  (aboot  $45)  pvranutim.  Under  Doroi-
tian  it  mtuh  rsiwil  to  :{0t)  dt-nnrii  (ttiO).  Otil  of  this
tbu  (toldier  paid  for  bitt  ttntbes  and  aixoutrcnienlH
(Tac.  Amt.  i.  Uj.  The  only  suiMirior  officer's  pay
thnt  is  known  ia  tbut  of  tlie  tribunus  fi'/iunia,  in
tilt!  third  century  a.d.,  when  it  was  '^5,U00  sesterces
(lltMX)).  On  the  pay  aud  other  ttervice  conditions
uf  the  Frnetcirtau  Gnard.  sec  PitAKTuiiiAM.

TLe  reftnlar  food  of  the  Roman  soldier  was  wheat
made  into  a  kind  of  porridge  (puU  )or  bread  (po-
ii'ii),  and  occasioutLlIy  meat  nnd  vegetiihles  (tetfumi-
mi).  Vinegar  was  alluned  the  snldieni  for  the
4lriiik  called  poura  ( i).  v.  >.  Prnr).sionx  were  also
oflbn  gathered  liy  foruging,  in  whirh  rnHU  tliey
nalnrnlly  dHppnili'd  on  t]i4<  mddii'r'M  lin^k.  For  the
runimlN  of  military  Hi*rvic-e,  mtu  the  articled  t-'oRO-
na;  Ovatio;  Tru'mpuch.

Military  piiniHlumMitft  iveiv  of  variunnfM>rln,  com-
priniiig  (a)  whipptiig  {cuBtigatio);  {it)  a  tine  (jfiiii-
fltarin  mutta);  (r)  loss  of  raiik  {miiiliae  mutalta) :
id)  druitiming  out  of  camp  {i^nofniaioia  nti«irfo :  cf.
the  iKieuil.  Ca«H.  Itfll.  ,^/r.  54,  4);  {r)  the  Mnbstitti-
tion  I  if  barley  for  wbcul  in  tlieir  rnlion.H;  (/)  deui*
inalion  (nee  l)KCi.MATh>};  (y}  ili'iith,  which  runld
b«  indicted  only  by  the  eoiiHnl  ninU>r  tin-  K^piiblir.
aud  by  the  i-mpcrot'  or  frffatuit  nndrr  llir  Kmpin-.

On  IiIh  boiioiiruble  di»i-b:irgi-  [btitiiula  mixno),  the
(Mrhlifi*  ii-L't-ived  rilbiT  bind  or  a  pi'eMciil  of  money,
rauging  from  3iXX)  denarii  (  ^'*)i) )  tc  50(W  denaiii
($100*1).  A  discharge  for  physical  diKHbility  or
aicknest  wnn  called  vaitMaria  mi»)tio.

Iii»t.li_»GHAlMlv.  — An  extensive  biblingrapliy  on
theVireek  army  will  tic  fonnd  in  the  article  ''Pie
grit'fhiini'lien  Kriegmalterlhiimer"  iu  Inan  Miiller^s
Ilauilbitrb  ilrr  kltttiiiachpn  AUrrthutnatriKmevtchtip,
iv.  pp.  l^i&-S:tl  (  IH.-^ ).  Good  ii|HH:ial  workM  are
Rli!4low  and  K»>chly,  Gmrhirlitr  iir«  gritchmhrn
KririjinrfiirH»  (18ri:2):  Knpkc,  Krirt/iwttcn  iltr  ilrie-
rhrit  in  heroUrhfti  Zriftilttr :  nnd  Droysen,  CnterBU'
fimugiti  iititr  Alexander  det  (irotKnn  JIctrvn:ten  und
Ktv^tifiihrimff  (lls^).

On  the  military  orgauizatioii  of  Rome,  a  vast
bibliography  isi  collected  by  SeUiller  in  Iwnn  Mlll-
It-r**  Itandh»rh,\\A.  u.  The  following  works  will  lie
fuuud  HM:fiil:  Lnuge,  i/fCtoi'tfl  MulaUowww  IM  Mi-


litant IinmiiM(trHm  (1lf^l>):  KHstow, //renrMTN  bM
Krif^*j"uhrm\g  CiUatt.  2d  eil.  (l:*a);  3u<\.ma.Cm-
Mr'*  Armjt  lli^ci'^);  LIndenscbmidt. /hr  Tratklnt
Hetrajfnunif  de»  r&mi9*'hf»  I/rrir*  trdhrmd  der  A'sivr-
:eit  ( I8rt2i ;  Von  (Kiler,  tUMtri  'jnUipthtr  A'rti^il'W);
Hartnng,  Kiimhrhf  Juxiliitrh-uppm  ili<tt-7r>i;  lUJ
BiHtcln^-LMclercq,  luittihtlivtiii  Hvtnaimrtt.yt.i^-llfHi*^
On  Ihe  arms,  etpiipment, etc.,  of  the  «uhlif-rD.ire
Aiima;  Cauga;Cupf.i's;  Fi'N'[>a;  GAiJtA:Uutrti's
Hasta  ;  LoRiCA ;  Oiiika  ;  PiLrM  ;  Sc itth.  Uu
the  ditfemnt  brancbcn  of  the  service.  ne%-  f^tr
FiNWToriEs;  Iaci'I^atokkk;  Mkkc'kxaiui:

TUHIA.M  : 8AUITTAKII : VfI.ITK!*. Oil Ibc  \VlWi

of  encitnipmeiit,  see  Castha. On  the  fnuttinut*f
the  general,  see  Imi'KRATOK

Bzetastae  [i^tTaarai).  Special  comuii*wnm
sunt  out  by  tbu  Athenian  |MtopIe  t^i  inveAti»at«a*t
luatterK  that  might  claim  attention.  Thtin  wf  bid
mention  of  exulasUe  being  apiHiinli>4l  loawftUiu
nlielher  there  were  fts  many  niercetiariefi  m  ib^
generals  reimrted.  It  api>ears  tu  have  l)««iiiiiiiu>
common  plan  for  the  commanders,  like  the  KkmIi
offlcialaof  the  Second  Empire,  who  receiveiliiayftf
troops,  to  report  a  greater  nouber  than  thr^  ]»*-
scMwd,  in  order  to  receive  the  pay  themseltc*;  in
which  case  they  wore  said  "to  draw  pay  fur  cap-
ty  places  in  the  mercenary  force"  (Avsvb.  e.  (^
^  14(»).  Tlie  commissioners,  however,  irbu  »«■
sent  to  make  inquiries  into  the  matter,  often  il-
biwed  themselves  to  be  bribetl  (Aescli.  e.  7)Mir*t
MIS;  De  F.L.^\rJ).

Another  kind  of  oxetastne  in  itbown  by  interim
lions  to  have  existed  at  Athens  for  a  short  litwW
the  early  part  nf  the  tliini  century  B.C.  Tliey  «««'
auilil^int  of  accounts,  and  are  mrnlionni  At,  ri/A-
ing  tUc  expenses  of  itftvphismata  (i.  e.  of  rrootdixf
thi>m)  and  of  the  erection  of  slatnes  (f.  l.A.i  tW-
29f^,  'MX)).  In  this  senw  of  anilitjiTv  of  pnMie  K-
coiiutK  the  name  occni-red  in  some  oiber  Gmfc
8tat4*»

Exherea. Se«  IIerks.

SjcJtiibeudum,  Actio  ad.  A  proeturiaa  h^iw
in  priHOHum  iln*l.  'i\.  a,  iUk  iistially  of  a  prfli>i
uuiy  cltaractcr.  by  which  a  plaintiff  who  w**  »
able  to  pursne  bis  right  by  legal  process  ttilltM*
the  prudtiction  of  u  thing,  coald  enforce  sarb  pf*-
dnetioii  npon  any  pcnuin  who  was  ab|i>  tu  aink'tl
{Dig.  \.  4,2);  and  il  wiu  immateriiil  wbellift  (hs>
jivmon  was  owner,  iir  had  civil  or  merely  iulif>l
posMeKsion,  of  thif  thing  in  f^netttion  (/)i|r- ib.3<  1^
O'l-  had  fraudulently  parKsl  with  the  \wmtm\v*^
it(/>i9.ib.  &,!;>):  biitJt  \va.>«  csHcniial  that  thf  plain-
tiff (tbould  have  a.pecniiiary  or  pru))rietal7  inl*n*'
in  the  proiUictimi,  or  Wse  tiie  AOtiitn  wouhlufll  I''
(Wy.  lb.  i;t).

Bxiliuin. i^-t;  ExsiLifM.

Exitoria  or  £pexodia  (V^tnjptn,  twt^uii.  Sk*
rificcH  otTored  by  gciH-nilM  before  they  sel  <«il  •"
an  cxiM'dition  (Ximi,  .IniiA.  vi.  5,  (  2).  Thf  prii>»-
pal  object  wuH  to  discover  fmm  Ilir  acntnijiwiji'?
signs  the  favourable  or  nnfavonrable  issne  "f  tl"
undertaking  on  which  they  vrerc  abont  tu  cal't'

Bxodia,  {t^ntiut,  from  c^  and  oAnc).  Amnfisf
interludes  in  verse,  iiifH>rted  by  the  Roiu*i»  '^^
other  plfiys.  but  cbielly  in  the  AtcUauae  lUvy.^i''
2).  It  in  dil^ienlt  to  aurertain  the  reai  cba»eti*<^
the  exoflin;  but  fmm  the  words  of  l.ivr  wrortil
infer  thnt,  iiltbongh  distinct  from  the  AwllW*
they  wen-  closi-ly  eonnectml  with  ihoni,  aoJ  M"*


EXUUIS


658


EXSILIUM


performed  aloue.  Hence  Juvenal  speaks  of  tlie  txo-
dittm  AttUanae  {Sat  vi.71),  and  SuetonitiB  {lib.  45)
aodiumAtellanicum.  Tliey  were,  like  tbuAleltauae
themaelveH,  played  by  yoiingaiid  well-boru  Romaus,
and  not  by  tbe  professional  actors.  Tbe  exodia
have  geuemlly  been  considered  as  sboil;  comedies
or  farces  wbicb  were  performed  after  tbe  Atella-
nae — an  opinion  founded  upon  the  vogue  and  in-
correct sttttemeut  of  the  Scholiast  ou  Juvenal  {Sat
iii.  174).  But  the  words  of  Livy,  exodia  con$erta^
/abeUiSfSeem  rather  to  indicate  interludes,  which, ;
however,  must  not  be  understood  as  if  tbey  ba4l  |
been  played  between  the  acts  of  tbe  Atellanae,  j
which  would  suggest  a  false  idea  of  the  Atellauae
themselves ;  but  as  several  Atellauae  were  per- ;
formed  ou  the  same  day,  it  is  probable  that  tbe  j
exodia  were  played  between  them.  This  suppoei- 1
tion  is  also  BU)>ported  by  the  etymology  of  the  |
word  itself,  which  signifies  something  f^  6liov,  ex-,
tra  riom,  or  something  not  belonging  to  the  main  '
subject,  and  thus  is  synonymous  with  itnurobiov.  i
The  play,  as  well  as  its  name  of  exodinm,  seems  to  ;
have  beeu  introdnoed  among  the  Romans  from
Italian  Greece;  but  after  its  introduction  it  ap- 1
pears  to  have  become  very  popular  among  the  Bo-  i
inans,  and  continued  to  be  playe<t  down  to  a  very  i
late  period  (Suet.  Domit  10).  i

Zbcomis  {i^ufiis).  (1)  A  particniar  kind  of
Greek  tunic,  afterwards  adopted  by  the  Romans,  i
without  sleeves,  very  short  («u68frtc&i),  and  en-{
tirely  open  down  the  right  8i<le,
BO  that,  when  put  on,  the  right
shoulder  (£fu>r),  as  well  as  tbe
arm  and  breast,  were  left  ex-
posed (Aul.  Gell.  vii.  \-i.  1).
Heuce,  the  person  wealing  it
was  styled  expapillatiu.  It  was
the  usual  dress  of  persons  em-
ployed in  active  and  laborious
occupations,  such  as  slaves,  rus-
tics, artisans,  and  huntsmen;
hence,  in  works  of  art,  it  is
frequently  worn  by  Vulcan,
Charon,  Daedalus,  and  Ama-
zons, all  of  whom  pursued  a
life  of  toil  nr  industry.  (2)  The  same  uame  was
given  to  the  pallium  ((].  v.),  when  worn  so  as  to
present  the  same  appearance  (Poll.  vii.  48).

BxoBtia  ((^ttorpa).  (1)  Que  of  the  many  machines
used  in  the  theatres  of  the  auciente.  Its  introduc-
tion was  ascribed  to  Aeschylus.  In  order  to  rep-
resent a  scene  in  an  interior,  a  movable  chamber
corresponding  to  the  size  of  any  of  the  three  doors
was  devised,  which  was  wheeled  out  (fKKVKXTjfia)
or  poshed  out  (rfvorpa)  (Poll.  iv.  128;  Schol.  ad
Aristoph.  Ackam.  375 ).  Donaldson  thinks  the
(fttOT/M  was  used  to  exhibit  the  interior  of  an  up-
per chamber;  this  would  find  support  in  the  late
meaning  of  the  word,  "  balcony."  A  special  use  of
both  machines  was  to  exhibit  to  the  eyes  of  the
spectators  the  results  or  consequences  of  such  acts,
as  murder  or  suicide,  as  could  not  be  permitted  to
take  place  in  the  proBcenium,  and  were  therefore
described  as  having  occurred  behind  tbe  scena.
See  Donaldson,  Theatre  of  the  Greeke,  ed.  7,  p.  '236
foil. ;  C.  O.  MUller,  Eumen.  p.  103,  Kleine  Schriften,
i.  p.  524;  and  Alb.  MUller,  BUhnenalterth.  pp.  142-
144,  where  there  is  a  full  discussion  of  the  passages
where  tbe  contrivance  is  mentioned.

(2)  The  name  exottra  was  also  applied  to  a  pecul-


Exomla (Rich.)


iarkiiid  of  bridge,  which  wus  tbrowu  from  a  tower
of  the  besiegers  upon  tbe  walls  of  a  besieged  town,
and  across  which  the  assaitauts  marched  to  attack
those  of  the  besieged  who  were  stationed  ou  the
ramparts  to  defend  the  town  (Polyb.  ii.  6, 8).

Ezotdea  Dlk^  {t^ovXrjt  bUr}).  An  action  umler
the  Attic  law,  for  ejectment,  resorted  to  by  a  plain-
tiff when  his  title  to  the  property  in  question  was
so  much  better  than  the  defendant's  as  to  be  in-
disputable. Thus  a  son  or  other  male  descendant
(also  a  son  adopted  during  the  testator's  lifetime)
might  enter  (see  Emba'I'BIa),  and  become  possessed
of  tbe  estate  immediately  after  the  owner's  death
(Isae.  Pgrrh.  $  61).  Such  an  heir  made  a  foiTual
entry  upon  the  laud, and  thereby  became  "seised"
or  poss^sed  of  it ;  then  the  adverse  claimant  came
and  tnnied  him  off  (Demosth.  c  Leoch.  p.  1090,  $  :{2).
This  proceeding  took  place  quietly  aud  in  the
presence  of  witnesses  (Isae.  P^rh.  $  22) ;  and  then
the  heir  might  bring  against  him  an  action  for
ejectment.

These  proceedings  by  entry,  ouster,  etc.,  were  a
relic  of  ancient  times,  when,  before  regular  proc-
esses were  invented,  parties  adopted  a  ruder  meth-
od and  took  the  law  into  their  own  hands.  There
was  then  an  actual  oust«r,  accompanied  often  with
violence  and  breach  of  the  peace,  for  which  tha
persou  in  the  wrong  was  not  only  responsible  to
tbe  party  injured,  but  was  also  punishable  as  a
public  offender.  Afterwards,  in  the  course  of
civilization,  violent  remedies  became  useless  aud
were  discontiuued ;  yet  the  ceremony  of  Section
was  still  kept  np  as  a  form  of  law,  being  deemed
by  lawyers  a  necessary  foundation  of  the  subse-
quent legal  process.  Thus  at  Rome,  iu  the  earlier
times,  one  party  used  to  summon  the  other  by  the
words  ex  iure  te  manum  coRtertum  toco,  to  go  with
him  to  the  land  iu  dispute,  and  (iu  the  presence  of
the  praetor  and  others)  torn  him  out  by  force.
Afterwards  this  was  changed  into  the  symbolical
act  of  breaking  a  clod  of  earth  upon  the  land,  l>y
which  tlie  person  who  broke  intimated  that  he
claimed  a  right  to  deal  with  the  land  as  he
pleased.

Eacpediti.  A  uame  giveu  to  light-armed  troops
as  opposed  to  impediti;  or  to  any  "flying  column"
organized  for  rapid  marching. See  Exercitus.

Bzploratorea. Scouts. See  ExEuaTUS.

Bxaequiae See  Funus.

Tiyrillnm  (^vyij).  (1)  GREEK.  Among  the
Greeks,  exile  was  the  legal  punishment  for  homi-
cide (see  Ephetae),  and  for  sundry  other  oflences,
such  as  wounding  with  intent  to  kill,  the  murder
of  a  nou- citizen  for  impiety  (dtrc'/Scui);  aud  was
often  voluntary  ou  the  part  of  those  who  wished
to  avoid  some  other  form  of  puuishnieut.  It  was
also,  at  times,  a  political  measure,  adopted  espe-
cially in  times  of  civil  disturbance,  and  might
carry  with  it  artfua  and  loss  of  i>roperty,  except
in  the  case  of  ostracism. (See  Ostkacismub.)

(2)  Roman.  Among  the  Romans  there  was,
originally,  no  such  thing  as  a  direct  expnlsiou
from  the  city  (Cic.  Pro  Caec.  34);  but  a  man
might  be  cut  off  from  tire  aud  water,  the  symbol
of  civic  communion,  which  of  course  practically
forced  him  to  leave  the  country.  This  iiiterdictio
aquae  et  igni»  was  originally  inflicted  by  the  Co-
mitia  Centuriata,  aud  later  by  the  permanent
judicial  commissious  appointed  to  try  certain  se-
rious offences,  as,  for  iustauce,  treason,  arson,  aud


EXSUPEiaNTlL'S


6M


FADER


p»{H'>]tiiig,  III  uiuHi  of  tlii>  capital  cliiirt^o  the  ao-
oniM'd  wait  always  free  to  auLici|>ute  an  UDfavutir-
able  vurriict,  or  the  interdivtio  /ir/Hiir  et  if/Hi*.  Iiy
witlHlnivriiig  into  vnliiiiiary  exilt<;  for  exile  nns
orlgirinlly  coiio)>)v'im1  UDt  lu^  a  piiiiiKhnient,  but  at  a
meatitt  uf  4.'«ca|iiu};  iHini«bDicut  (C'ic.  /'iv  Dom.'JA),
ami  we  bear  of  the  tun  fjtiilamii  (cf.  St-bweglor,
Itomi*ch£  (ipuchiclite,  i.  \t.  ■i.'tH).  Vitliitilary  fxilf,  aa
boint;  a  coitfttsMini)  of  guilt,  waa  ri-giilurly  cuuHnncU
liy  n  plubiwitiiiii ;  ami  vrbt^ii  Ibv  tfxib-  wiut  recallml,
tbe  ilHcrt'H  waM  ai»o  aimiiElnl  by  b-ginlutivH  act.
Jntt'rdirlia  sooiii»t  to  bavc  bcrii  |)niimrily  reganled
M  ctcariiig  tbe  StAte  funu  auy  guilt  that  might
have  bevii  iiictirn>d  in  Hhj  vycv*  of  tUo  gods  by  let-
ting tbe  rrlminal  go  nitjniiiiiibeiL.  Ttie  cxstUum  |
iovolved  in  tli«  lesser  deminulio  capitit  {^.  v.),  or  i
loss  of  oltizonsbi]>,  if  the  baiiintipd  )>erHon  Iwcuue  ,
citixeii  of  .iiiotbcr  >St-uttt;  or  if  the  p<H)p1e  ileclnred  i
the  biiiiishtiiiMit  to  Ih*  tlt'Hurvvd  ;  or  if  the  intrrdictio
atfuaf  ei  igfiiM  was  pnmuuiicrd  after  be  bail  gniii*
iiit4i  exilo.  It  was  only  in  very  seriotiM  catten  tbiit
»  luaii'H  iirujierty  wan  aUo  cuutUfatiHl.  Rfal  baii-
isbinoiit  wait  llrsit  indictiHl  uniU-r  tli4>  Empire.  See
DitroHTATio;  ISTEnwtTio:  Urlecatio.  I

Exauperautiui;  Illiu.h.  A  Komuii  hiatorifln  of
tbe  fiui rill  or  tit'tb  century  a.h..  wlio  wrot«  a  iiiotio-
grnpli  /V  .Uiirii.  I^jniii.  «r  .Vrforii  Betlia  VirHihuM,  |
pri'wrvt'd  ill  a  MS.  of  Snllnnl  nt  Poi-is  nud  diitiug
from  tbe  eleventh  eentiiry  The  treatise  is  lurge-
ly  drawn  from  the  tngurtha  nnd  ffiitorittc,  and
ouulniua  a  luimber  of  absurd  bistdricitl  emii-g,  siicli  I


a»roiifiMinding  the  elder  with  the  yi>utiger  Marin.
It  wns  Iniit  nlileil  b>  Bntsiau  (ZUrieb,  1«tiH).

Bxtlapex (  ^naroaicoims,  o-n-XoYJ^^otrKOiroc  X A
diviner  wlin  pr<>fe»«<ed  i*>  int«'rprut  the  wilt  i>r  tbr


FX(i«p'-jt (Villa  Hort^tinw  t

gods,  and  to  predict  the  future,  by  iniipftcting  lb*
entratU  of  viL-iinia  Hlaiu  at  the  altar  (C'ic.  £M«.  ii.
18). SeeAuutrR;  Divinatiu;  HAUirspKX.

Bxtraordiniuii  (/mXt'croi).  Picked  Mjldienwl
about  tbiR  pi^mivii  of  the  fronHnl  in  tbe  Kmnan  am?
( Polyh.  vi.  28).  From  fbem  a  H|wciat  boAy-
gnard.  kuown  as  tbe  ablecli,  vera  takeu.  Tb»
exlraordiuarii  coudistiMl  of  nboat  a  tbinl  efthe
cavalry  and  a  fifth  of  the  iulantry  of  Ibr  allie*—
i.  c.  for  a  Icgiou  of  4500  meo,  there  were  but  IMi>
extraordiDorii.  (See  KxeBciTt'd.)  The  itumUr
of  the  ablKti  is  uoi  koonu.


F,  M  «  •xtnbol.

F:=fabri,  facluiit  (fecit.  fec«n:nt,  fact  nndniii.fac-
inn),  fnAMtH,  feliciter,  fvrioo,  fldelis,  tllins  (tbe  most
fit^rjiient),  Hitfti,  llninen,  FlaviuA,  Fortnnn,  fuuctll»'

F-C  =  faciendum  curavit.

K-C'P^fnlgnr  Condi tuiu  publico

FD  FrzAliae  dnlcitwimae  feverunt.

KD-S^fecenmt  de  huo.

r'D'S-&'C^ruciuiiduni  de  ttenatiia  neuteiilia  cii-
rnvennit.

F-F=:fL>lix  fidelis,  filins  fecit,  iiHcas  frtitneuiari-
118  Flavia  felix  itiront,  tideli»),  hc.  k-gio

F-K-F  =  liUo  karissiiuo  feoH.

Fl  =  Heri  ititwit.

F'M-F=:tilio  mater  fecit,  filins  inatri  fecit.

FP— fllii»  priaaimo,  iilio  ptwuit,  tintuon  per|»e-
tniirt,  Fortnna  Praeuestiua,  fruiueutnm  pnblicuiUi
fuiiitM  jiriblicnin.

FI*'M-F  =  IIUi  pjitri  uiereutl  fi-cenmt.

FPP^fniter  piuM  po.anil.

i'S  =li1io  8tiu,  fecit  8ibi,  Fortnnoc  Micrntu.

FSET6LL-PQ  E=fecit  sibi  et  snis  liberti*
Ubertatus  pivit^-riMiue  eorum.

Fsa  =  finut  tinpra  ttcripti  (ac,  a).

F-V^  L^ffiiiiiliii  vjllae  Lncnllauae.

F-V-P  =  Bliao  vivtw  poenit.

FabAiia  or  FaiAnia.  A  tiinatl  river  iu  Italy,  tu
tlie  Sabiiie  territory,  between  Heat<^  aud  CarM.

Fabataritun.  A  vchhoI  in  which  a  kind  of  beau
•imp  (jtnl*  /ahtUfti,  Mnrrob.  i.  It!  iiied.)  wiui  prolui-
bly  twrvo*!  (Lantprid.  Heliog.  !Sf).

Fabattta,  CALPtH-Mia  The  groiidfalber  of
Calpunita,  wife  of  Hliny  thf'  Vouugrr,  who  ml-
dre«ted  to  btiu  it  iininlH'rof  letters.  In  a.d.  IU  he
was acouftod of  cotuplicily iu tbe adulipiy  aud


ntagir  of  Lepiilu,  wife  nf  C.  Ca.viiuM,  but  earapnl
by  an  appeal  tn  Xeru  (Tac.  .Inn.  xvi.  HK.

FabattiB,  L.  Koscira.  A  lieiitrnaut  of  Canar,
who  went  over  to  Pompey  iu  the  Civil  Wots,  Ul<l
was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Mutiuu  (ax.  411).

Faber  irtKrav).  Tbe  name  giveu  iudiKniiil-
nalely  to  auy  artisau  or  utecbauic  who  work*  in
hard  materinbt,  8ueh  a»  wood,  alone,  ruetal,  vlr-
iti  conlradiminotiou  to  one  who  mouhU  or  UHidrb
iti  Koft  MulwtatiC'eH,  like  wai  or  clay,  who  ivceivfii
tbe  appellation  of  pla«tf».  It  itt,  cuuffei]neiilU',  v-
coiu[iaiiied  in  uiotit  caacA  by  a  descriptive  epjlbrt
whirlt  deteriniiie8  the  calling  of  the  wurkiiian  al-
luded to;  B»  faher  tignariti»,  a  curpenlcr;  /»^
/rrrarin*,  a  hlaoksmilh;  fahtr  nrrit  or  orntnai.
tHttrniitri;  rbvriM,  a  worker  iu  bruiizr.  inarbJe,  t»i
Ivory;  and  ao  (»ii.  The  Greek  temi  has  neC^uit*
so  extvusive  a  uicauliig  a»  the  Latin  ai>e,  \<in*t
rarely  applied  l-o  a  worker  in  uiptal,  wbo  iia>«rt-
prewily  calletl  j^nXxcvc  or  mUtfptCt,  tliou^b  Mt»
pasMLgei^  occur  where  it  i«  an  n»ed.  Tbe  Meom-
pauyiug  illuHtratiou  Fopreaeute  a  earjwuter'aikvl'i


Oinwnier>t  Shop, (Frvn  •  («(ail*g  ftmad  «i


FABIA


655


FABIDS


from  a  paintiug  fouud  at  Hercalaueiim,1n  which
tilt)  workmeu  are  repreatiiited  uuder  the  form  of
(reiiii,  according  to  the  couveutioual  treatnieat  of
the  ancient  schools,  for  subjects  of  this  nature,
ill  which  scenes  of  ordiuary  life  are  depicted.  The
fabri  attached  to  the  army  were  uud«r  the  com-
uiaud  of  a  special  offlcer  {praefectu*  fabroruJH)
<Cae8.AC.i.84).

Fabla.  A  vestal  virgin,  sister  to  Terentia,
Cicero's  wife.  9be  was  accused  of  criminal  inter-
4!oarae  with  Catiliue,  and  brought  to  trial  in  con-
■sequence,  but  was  defended  by  Cicero  and  ac-
quitted.

Fabia  Oena.  A  numerous  and  powerful  pa-
trician honse  of  ancient  Rome,  which  became  snb-
Uivtdofl  into  several  families  or  branches,  distin-
^nisbed  by  their  respective  coguomiua,  such  as
Fabii  Maximi,  Fabil  Ambnsti,  Fabii  Tibulani,  etc.
Ptiuy  (H,  N.  xviit.  f  3)  says  that  the  name  of  this
liunse  arose  from  the  circumstance  of  its  founders
having  excelled  in  the  culture  of  the  bean  (/aba),  the
early  Roniaus  baviug  been  remarkable  for  their  at-
tachment to  agricultural  pureiiits.  The  Fabii  are
aaid,  by  the  onlinary  authorities,  to  have  been  of
.Sabine  origiu,  and  to  have  settled  on  the  Quirinal
from  the  time  of  the  earliest  Roman  kings.  After
the  expnlsiou  of  the  Tarqiiiuii,  tbe  Fabian,  as  one
of  the  older  houses,  exerciKed  oonsiderahle  influ-
ence ill  the  Senate.  Caeso  Fabius,  being  quaestor
with  L.  Valerius,  impeached  Sparius  Cassias  in
B.C.  4U6,  and  had  him  executed.  It  has  been  noted
us  a  remarkable  fact,  that,  fur  seven  consecutive
yeara  from  that  time,  one  of  the  two  anuual  con-
snlahipa  was  filled  by  three  brothers  Fabii  in  rota-
tion. One  of  tbe  tUree  brothers,  Q.  Fabius  Vibii-
liiniiB,  fell  in  battle  against  tbe  Veientes  in  the
year  B.C.  479.  In  tbe  followiug  year,  under  the
couBuInhip  of  Caeso  Fabius  and  Titus  Virginius,
tbe  whole  house  of  the  Fabii  proposed  to  leave
Rome,  and  settle  ou  the  borders  of  the  territory  of
Y«ii,  in  order  to  take  the  war  against  the  Veientes
entirely  into  their  own  hands.  After  performing
Molenin  sacrifices,  they  left  Rome  in  a  body,  muster'
iug  three  hundred  and  six  patricians,  besides  their
families,  clieuts,  and  freedmen,  and  encamped  on
the  banks  of  tlie  Ci*emera  in  sight  of  Veii.  There
tbey  fortified  tbeniselves,  and  maintained  for  near-
ly two  years  a  harassiug  warfare  agaiust  the  Vei-
tiutes  and  otber  people  of  Etruria.  At  last,  in  otie
of  their  predatory  iocursioue  (b.c.  477),  they  fell  into
iin  ambuscade,  and,  flghtiug  desperately,  were  all
exteriuiuated  (Livy,  ii.  48  foil.).  Dionysiua  of  Hali-
caruassus  (ix.  19}  gives  also  another  account  of  this
disaster,  which  he  cunsiders  less  credible.  Accord-
ing to  this  latter  form  of  the  legend,  the  three  hun-
dred and  six  Fabii  set  off  for  Rome,  in  order  to  offer
up  a  sacrifice  in  tbe  chapel  of  their  bouse.  As  they
went  to  perform  a  pious  ceremony,  they  proceeded
without  anus  or  warlike  array.  The  Etnirians,
Jiowever,  knowing  tbeir  road,  placed  troops  in  am-
Itiish,  and,  falling  ou  the  Fabii,  cut  them  to  pieces.
It  it*  said  that  one  only  of  tbe  Fabii  escaped  this
iiiofutocre,  having  been  left  quite  yoinig  nt  Rome
iLivy,  ii.  50;  Dion.  Hal.  ix.^*^).  His  name  was  Q.
Kabius  Vibulainis,  aud  be  became  the  ancestor  of
all  the  subsequent  Fabii.  He  was  repeatedly
•Consul,  and  was  afterwards  one  of  the  Decemviri
with  Appius  Claudius  for  two  consecutive  years,
in  which  office  he  disgraced  himself  by  bis  cou-
Jiivance  at  tbe  oppressions  of  his  colleague,  M'hich


caused  tbe  fall  of  the  decemvirate.  See  Dbczm-
viw;  Fabii.

FaUaa.  (1)  M.  Ambustus,  consul  in  B.C.  360,
aud  agaiu  several  times  after.  He  fought  againnr.
(be  Hemici  and  the  Tarquiuiaus,  and  left  several
sous.  (8)  Q.  Hazihus  Ruluanus,  son  of  the  pre-
ceding, attacked  and  defeated  the  Bamuites,  B.c.
324,  in  the  absence  and  agaiust  the  orders  of  bis
commanding  offlcer,  the  Dictator  Papirins,  who
would  have  brought  him  to  pnulsbmeut  fur  diso-
bedience, but  was  prevented  by  the  intercession
of  the  soldiers  and  the  people.  This  Fabius  was
five  times  consul,  aud  dictator  twice.  He  tri-
umphed over  the  Samuites,  Marsi,  Gauls,  and  Etru-
rians. His  son,  Q.  Fabius  Gurges,  was  thrice  con-
sul, and  was  grandfather  of  Q.  Fabius  Maximus
Verrucosus,  one  of  tbe  moat  celebrated  geuerals
of  Rome.  (3)  Q.  MaxIhus  VerrucOsos,  the  cele-
brated opponent  of  Haunibal.  He  is  said  to  have
been  called  Vernioosus  from  a  wart  on  his  lip,  ver-
ruca being  the  Latin  name  for  "a  wart."  In  his
firat  consulship  he  triumphed  over  the  Lignrians.
After  the  victory  of  Hannibal  at  Lake  Trasimeniu
(B.C-  217),  he  woa  named  prodiotator  by  the  uuani-
mous  voice  of  the  people,  and  was  intrusted  with
the  preservation  of  tbe  Republic.  The  system
which  he  adopted  to  check  the  advance  of  Han-
nibal is  well  known.  By  a  succession  of  skilful
movements,  marches,  and  couutermai-ches,  always
choosing  good  defensive  positious,  he  harassed  his
autagoiiist,  who  could  never  draw  him  into  places
favourable  for  his  attack,  while  Fabius  watched
every  opportuuity  of  availing  himself  of  any  error
or  neglect  on  the  part  of  the  Carthaginians.  This
mode  of  warfare,  which  was  new  to  the  Romans,
acquired  for  Fabius  the  name  of  Cunctator  or
"  delayer,"  and  was  censured  by  tbe  young,  the
rash,  and  tbe  ignorant ;  but  it  was  probably  the
means  of  saving  Rome  from  ruin.  Hinucius,  who
shared  with  Fabius  tbe  command  of  the  army,
having  imprudently  engaged  Hannibal,  was  saved
from  total  destruction  by  the  timely  assistauce
of  the  dictator.  In  the  following  year,  however,
B.C.  216,  Fabius  being  recalled  to  Rome,  the  com-
mand of  the  army  was  intrusted  to  tbe  consul
Terentius  Varro,  who  rushed  imprudently  to  but-
tle, and  the  defeat  ut  Cauuae  made  manifest  tbe
wisdom  of  tbe  dictator's  previous  caution.  Fabius
was  chosen  consul  the  next  year,  aud  was  again
employed  in  keepiug  Haunibal  in  check.  In  B.c.
'JIO,  being  consul  for  the  fiith  time,  he  retook  Tar-
entum  by  stratagem,  after  which  he  narrowly  es-
ca|ied  being  caught  himself  in  a  snare  by  Hauni-
bal near  Metapontum  (Livy,  xxvii.  15  foil.).  When,
some  years  after,  the  question  was  discussed  iu
the  Senate,  of  aendiiig  Scipio  with  an  army  into
Africa,  Fabius  npposeil  it,  saying  that  Italy  ought
first  to  be  rid  of  Haunibal.  Fabius  died  some
time  after  at  a  very  advanced  age.

(4)  His  son,  called  likewise  QuiSTUS  Fabius
HaxTmus,  who  bail  also  been  consul,  died  before  bim.
(6)  His  graiidsoti  QuiNTUS  Fabiub  MaxThi's  Srrvi-
LIANU8,  being  proconsul,  fought  agititmt  Viriathua
in  Spain,  and  concluded  with  liiin  an  honourable
peace  (Livy,  Eptt.  M).  He  was  ttfterwarda  cousul
repeatedly,  and  also  ceusor.  He  wrote  annals,
which  are  quoted  by  MocrobiuN  (Sat.  i.  16).  (6)  His
brother  by  adoption,  Quintub  Kabil's  MaxIhl'S
AEMILlANt'H,  the  sou  of  Aemilius  PanliiK  (Livy,
xlv.  41),  was  consul  B.c.  144,  and  was  tbe  father  of
Fabius,  culled  (7)  AtXOBttOOlcus,  who  subdued  not


FABIUS


6oti


FABRICA


im\s  ihc  Allolirogen,  biu  a,\»o  the  pi'ople  uf  Bonth-
crn  ObiiI,  wliich  be  roiliioeil  to  a  Koniaii  pmv-
iiieo,  called  fi-om  that  Iijup  Provincin.  yi'lXTts
KAnll_*^>  Maj:TM(.>,  a  graiid^nii  of  F»bittK  Maximns
Serviliniius,  served  iu  Spain  niHler  Iiilins  Ciiesar^
anil  waa  mmle  consul  ii.c.  44.  IVo  of  liis  wiirn
or  nrphewH  wrre  con«tiU  in  Hnccivision  iiiidtT  An-
KiiMtiDa.  Tlieni  was  alhn  n  Kubiii^  ocinstil  iitiiler  'I'i-
lirriiix.  pjiiiviiiiiiN  nii<l  ntlifrH  liav«  nxkoiieil  tliiit
during  ii  ihtiixI  ttf  iilmnt  flvo  (viitiirit^A,  from  tliA
~  Ani«  of  tlie  tirst  Fabins  wbu  jh  luouttouod  aa  cuii-
Dl  to  tbo  roign  of  Tiberius,  forty -eiglit  coiinul-
abips,  flcvon  dictAtorftbips,  eight  ccniior«blp«,  soven
aiignrsbips,  bMidM  the  ofHceo  of  iiiuiter  of  the
bone  nud  military  tribune  with  cniisnlar  power,
ware  tllled  by  iiulividuals  of  the  Fabinn  house.
It  conld  alBo  lioast  of  tliirteeii  triuinpbn  nnd  two
ovBtions.  (4)  PiUTfjit,  bom  abmit  h.c.  'iM,  the  first
Roiiinn  wbd  wrot*^  ait  luBhtric:)!  a^'roiiiit  of  his
cotiiitry  in  fireok.  Thin  hiHtoriaii,  oiUfld  by  Livy
»itljttotitm  anliifNitfiittiii,  apprara  to  have  bMii  ill
qnalificd  for  the  htUour  lie  hiul  undertaken,  «jlher
ill  point  of  judgment,  Jidtility,  or  ifscui-ch ;  and  to
hlx  cartfleMiiuKH,  mui'o  than  own  to  the  hiss  of
monniueuttt,  may  bu  atci'ihiit«rd  much  of  tbtj  iiucer-
tiiinty  which  to  thiti  day  bLiug-t  over  tho  early  ages
of  Koinnii  hlxtury.  FabiiiK  lived  iu  the  lime  of  tbe
Second  I'lmio  War.  His  family  ^et^eivell  its  oog-
nometi  from  GniiiH  Fubins.  who,  baviuj^  re^tidwl  In
Ktniria  and  thert'  actpiinHl  some  knowUHl;»«  of
the  Hti«  arts,  jMiiilfMl  wilh  ligui'eH  (lie  tempi*!  of
Sains,  in  the  year  n.c.  30:{.  Tbe  bivt^iriaii  was
gmud«nn  of  Ibo  painter,  lie  Mirved  in  the  Second
Punic  War,  and  wa«  pn-iwnc  at  the  hattio  of  Tras-
imeinifl.  After  the  d«'fent  at  Canuoe  bo  watt  tieiit
by  The  8enat«  to  ititinire  from  the  oracle  at  Delphi
what  would  l>e  the  issue  of  tlie  war,  and  to  learn
by  what  supplications  the  wrath  of  the  goiln  might
be  appeased,  llifl  annals  cnniQieneuiI  with  the  age
of  Aeneait,  anil  bmngbt  chiw*n  flii«  mlatinn  of  I{«>man
aft'nirt  to  the  anthor'it  own  lime — tliat  is,  to  Ibe
end  of  the  Second  Punie  War.  We  are  infoniiMl
by  DionyisinH  of  HaltcurnaiMnH  that,  for  the  great
proportion  of  the  events  which  preceded  biH  own
age.  Fabiiis  Piclor  bad  no  Iietter  nnttiority  than
tradition.  He  probably  thought  that  if  he  had
coiifmed  bimitelf  to  what  vrns  certain  io  tlio»e  eiirly
times,  his  history  would  have  l>e<x>ine  dry,  inAipid,
ami  iucomplete.  This  may  have  iiidneed  him  to
adopt  tbe  mytbti  whioh  the  Greek  hiKto^rianit  ha<l
iuveuted  oouoeming  the  origin  of  Kome,  iin<l  to
insert  whatever  he  found  in  fntnjly  traditions,
however  cantnidicU>ry  or  iincertuiii.  Dionysiiis
ban  also  given  ninny  examples  of  Pictor's  iinprobo-
hlu  uatrativeM.  bis  tncousisteQcies,  bis  uegligence
iu  inveatigatiug  the  triilb  of  what  he  relates  as
CiCU,  and  biH  inaccuracy  iu  chronology.  Iu  par-
ticalar.  a«  we  are  tuld  by  Plutarch  iu  his  life  of
Komulus,  Fabius  fullowod  an  obscare  Greek  au*
tbor,  l>ioeh-s,  iu  biq  account  of  the  foundation  of
Kome,  and  fi-nm  tlti»  source  have  flowed  all  the
stories  coneerning  Marx,  the  V««Ia1,  the  Wolf,  Boiu*
ulnsanil  R*'muH,elr.  P(dybiuH,wliotIoiirished8liort-
ly  after  tlioHe  tiuteti,  aud  was  at  pains  to  inform
hitnflelf  accurate>tyeoncemiug  all  the  events  of  the
Second  Punic  War,  apologizes  on  one  occasion  for
qooling  FabiuM  uh  an  authority.  Livy  quotes  him
eight  liiueH.  Tbe  ringments  are  given  by  II.  Peter
iu  Win  Hilt.  IttllitiHtttr,  i.b,  U'9.  .Seealmi  Scbwegler,
JNimiafltr  <if9rliicktt,  i.  41'J:  Monitii<H'n,  KiimiBvhe
J'oracJbMMjrro.  ti,  *^D; II.  XitiHeu iu  tbe  IthciHiMckea


M linen m,  xxii.  565;  Uarleu,  Oe  Fahiit  rt  .JaAtiii
HeriiM  Horn,  Scriploribnn  (  Ronu,  18S:i  );  C.  Fet«t,
Zar  Kritik  d  Quflim  d.  iill.  riim.  (irMcJiirlile  iHalk,
|r^9) ;  Heydenreicb,  Fabiun  Victor  und  Zinsi^Fni-
bitrg,  Ir^H);  and  the  article  Ll%ncii,
Fablea. See  Novels  a.no  K<iuances.

Fabrsteria.  The  mixleni  Falvntcrn;  a  7<)b-
fiai)  town  in  I^jilinin,  on  the  right  bank  of  tV
Trorim,  Hul>seqncutly  colonized  by  the  Komaiu.

Fabrdttl,  RArrArLK  A  ilt«tingni<<hi_*«l  Italiu
archacologiHt,  born  at  Urhino  iu  Unibria  iu  WK
He  Aliidietl  law  at  Cagli  tiinl  in  his  native  eitf.
whore  he  took  tbo  doctor's  degree?  at  the  agr  it
eigbteeu.  He  soon  after  attriicted  the  iKitiee  rf
Canliual  Loi-euzo  Imperinii,  by  whose  inditviioeW
woM  employed  in  important  pnlitieal  uegvtiattMi*
in  Spain,  wbere  be  acted  as  treasurer  aud  latent
aiiditnr  to  the  Papal  legation  at  Ma«lrid.  retnaiuini;
there  for  thirteen  years.  Returning  to  Rome,  b»
bei^^anie  ii  Judge,  and  th<*ii  an  auditor  of  legation  at
Urhino.  Having  always  had  a  strong  predilectimt
ftir  aiitiiiuariaii  studiiw.ho  now.by  the  invitatiuiinf
Canliual  (.^nrpegna.  found  an  op|K>rtuiiity  of  in»i»-
ciitiug  Miem  ut  bin  leisure.  Taking  up  ln«  c«i>
deuce  iu  Konm,  he  began  tbe  urchaeologksal  in-
vestlgationN  that  have  made  bis  iiiune  menionlile,
by  »  most  minute  study  of  tbe  tojiugraiiliy  ihhL
ruius  rf  the  Cam]tagna,  s[iendiiig  day  after  tlayia
solitary  expeditions  on  his  horse  Alarco  P(i!>\uf
which  be  baa  written  pleasantly  as  beiug  an  antiRiI
with  a  keen  scent  fur  buritxl  inoniinieut*.

tn  l&'^ll,  Fahndti  published  his  rint  iiuperUat
work,  entitlril  hr  A^ui*  rt  Aquar  Itttrlibiu  \iltt\t
Rontae — a  treatis*!  wliich  cleanxl  np  many  «t«cnre
points  iu  the  tnpiigmphy  of  Laiiiim,  and  whitb  b
printed  in  the  Thmaarun  of  Gmevius  i  iv,  Wl\-
Other  treatises  of  bis  are  that  He  f'ol-mna  Tttini
.Si/nt(i(;m4j(I{omc.l6)^);  aud  tbe  Itmcrijttiumum.Mi
qaarutn  Hrpticalio  (Rome.  m99>.  Tbe  former  *"it-
tains  an  explanation  alao  of  tbe  fatuous  Iliac  T»I»I».
a  hao-relief  now  in  the  Capitol,  and  repreaeiiUof
«cene«  in  the  Trojan  War.  Both  the*c  «"*fk*
tln-ftw  much  Ugbt  on  Romau  archaeology,  aud  »«
eH|H>ciuUy  imtKirtaut  lor  their  recognition  of  tlr
ciunpaniiivti  nietbod  of  studying  cpigrapbio  le-
maint*.  Fabretti  became  involved  in  a  cocitfv
vun*y  with  Grouovius  (q.  v.)  ragardiug  the  niwr-
pretation  by  the  former  of  a  passage  in  Lirv.  to'
tbe  two  Acbotare  aitaailed  each  other  in  tbe  »liuaii<'
Vocabulary  of  contemporary  Ncholar^ihip.  Fitbretit
styliug  Grouovina  ffrMNweriwa  or  "grnutci,"' «M
GrunoviuH  returtiug  by  calling  FabretU /okr  r»»-
lirna.

Fabretti  died  in  January,  I70l>,  having  l»#«u  I'«
a  number  of  years  keeper  of  tbe  archives  of  U"
Cuatello  8.  Augelo.  under  luuoccut  XU.— •«  «*"
of  great  renpotiMibility.

Fabrl  Tbe  mechanics,  carpenters,  smillifcHf-.
iu  tbe  Roman  army,  .\fter  tbe  end  of  the  i»f*)»-
lican  ago  they  foniied  an  indepeiideul  corin  '"
every  army,  and  were  employed  e^peeially  i"  *^
restoration  of  bridges,  siege  and  defence  wofk*.
artilleiy,  ete.  They  were  under  the  cwumuifl  ^
the  prarffctHK  /abruM,  or  chief  engineer,  wli«  '*■*
cbaHcn  by  the  generaMii-chief,  anil  «o»  iinni""-
atcly  respouoible  to  dim.

FabrTca.  ^>  offidna.  A  general  naiM  tM  tl"
workshop  of  a  mechanic,  especially  of  a  C«ip**^
(Luui-et.  iv.  513)  nr  cabinet-maker.


FABRICIUS


667


FAELI3


Pnbtlehu.  (1)  Gaius,  earnamed  LuscTnl'S.  A
Bonian,  coDsnl  for  the  first  time  in  the  year  B.C.  383,
nbeii  he  trinmphed  over  the  Boii  and  Etrariaiis.
After  the  defeat  of  the  Romaus,  under  the  oonsnl
Laeviims,  by  FyTrfans  (b.c.  281 ),  Fabrioiua  vaa  sent,
by  the  Senate  as  legate  to  the  king,  to  treat  for
the  rauaom  of  the  prisouers,  or,  according  to  others,
to  propose  terms  of  peace.  Fyrrhns  is  said  to  liare
endeavonred  to  bribe  him  by  large  offers,  which
Fabrioins,  poor  ae  he  was,  rejected  with  scorn,  to
the  great  admiration  of  the  king.  Fabricius  being
again  consul,  b.c.  879,  was  sent  against  Pyrrhas,
who  was  then  encamped  near  Tarentam.  The
pbysician  of  the  king  is  said  to  have  come  secretly
to  the  Roman  camp,  and  to  have  promised  Fa-
bricius to  poison  his  master  for  a  bribe.  The  con-
sul, indignant  at  this,  had  him  put  in  fetters  and
sent  back  to  Fyrrhns,  ou  whom  this  instance  of
Roman  integrity  made  a  strong  impression.  Fyr-
rhns soon  ^ter  sailed  for  Sicily,  whither  fae  was
called  by  the  Syracuaans,  then  hard  pressed  by  the
Carthaginians.  Fabricins,  having  defeated  the
Samnites,  Lncanians,  and  Brnttii,  who  had  joined
Pyrrhns  against  Rome,  triumphed  over  these  na-
tions. Fyrrhus,  afterwards  returning  to  Italy,  waa
finally  defeated  and  driven  away  by  M'.  Cnrins
Deutatns,  B.C,  S76.  Two  years  after,  Fabricins
being  consul  for  the  third  time,  witli  Clandius
Ciuua  for  his  collei4;ne,  ambassadors  came  from
King  Ptolemy  of  Egypt  to  contract  an  alliance
with  Rome.  Several  instances  are  related  of  the
extreme  frugality  and  simplicity  which  marked
the  mauue'rs  of  Fabricins.  When  censor,  he  dis-
missed from  the  Senate  P.  Cornelias  Rnfinns,  who
had  been  twice  consul,  and  had  also  held  the  dic-
tatorship, because  be  had  in  his  posaessioo  ten
pounds'  weight  of  silver  plate.  Fabricins  died
poor,  and  the  Senate  was  obliged  to  make  provi-
siou  for  his  daughters  (Pint.  Pjfrrk.),  and  in  order
to  show  the  greatest  possible  respect  for  his  mem-
ory he  was  interred  within  the  Pomoertnm,  though
the  law  forbade  such  bnrials.  (2)  Lucius.  A  cura-
tor riarant,  B.C.  62,  who  built  the  Pons  Fabricius
between  the  city  and  the  Insnla  Tibertna  (q.  v.).

Fabriclna,  Ioaknes  Albertus  (Johann  Albbht
Faber).  a  celebrated  bibliographer,  bom  at  Leip-
zig, November  11, 16^.  He  studied  at  Leipzig  and
Qnedliuburg,  taking  the  degi-ees  in  philosophy,  and
afterwards  pursuing  medicine  and  theology.  At
Quedlinbnrg,  two  books  that  he  found  in  the
library  of  Samnel  Schmidt  (Bartbuiss's  Advertaria
and  MorboflPs  Poli/kistor)  gave  him  the  sugges-
tions that  led  to  the  preparation  of  bis  two  great
works,  the  Biblioihtca  Latina  and  the  still  more
important  Bibliothtca  Graeea.  The  first  appeared
at  Hamburg  in  1607,  and  was  revised  and  emended
by  Ernest!  in  three  volumes  (Leipzig,  1773).  Its
secondary  title  explains  its  scope :  yotitia  Aueto-
rum  Veterum  LatinoruM  Quorumcmmque  Scripta  ad
Xo»  Venerunt.  The  divisions  adopted  in  this  com-
pilation are,  (1)  The  writers  preceding  the  age  of
Tiberius;  (2)  The  writers  from  Tiberius  to  the  An-
tonines ;  (3)  The  writers  (torn  the  Antonines  to  the
decay  of  the  langnage ;  (4)  The  fragments  from  old
authors,  with  chapters  on  the  early  Christian  lit-
eratnre.  The  Bibliotheea  Graeea  is  further  styled
Sotitia  Scriptorum  Veterum  GraecoruM  Quomm-
eumque  MoHUmenta  Integra  aut  Fragmenta  Edita
Extant,  turn  Plerorumqae  e  Manuteript.  aa  Deperdi-
ti».  This  work,  which  has  been  styled  moztmiu
antiqmae  eruditiontK  thetaurut,  is  in  fourteen  quarto


volumes,  appearing  at  Hambnrg  at  intervals  from
1705  to  1728,  and  subsequently  revised  by  Harles
(Hambni^,  1790).  Its  divisions  are  marked  ofi*  by
Homer,  Plato,  Christ,  Constautine,  and  by  the
capture  of  Constantinople  in  14&3,  with  a  sixth
section  devoted  to  canon  law,  medicine,  and  jnris-
prudeuoe.  Besides  these  two  great  compilations,
Fabricins,  who  was  a  most  voluminous  writer,  put
forth  126  other  works,  some  of  them,  however,  be-
ing books  that  be  edited  only,  and  none  of  them  of
auy  especial  interest  to  the  classical  student.

Fabricius  held  at  different  times  the  posts  of
librarian  and  Professor  of  Rhetoric  and  Ethics
(1699),  and  Rector  of  the  School  of  St.  John  at
Hambnig.  He  declined  chairs  at  Oreifswald  (1701)
and  Wittenberg.  He  died  at  Haiubui^,  April  30,
1736.  The  details  of  his  life  are  given  by  his  son-
in-law,  Reimar,  in  his  work  De  Vita  et  Seripti*  J.
A.  Fabrioii  Commentarius  (Hamburg,  1767).

FalnlUa.  Mechanics'  tools  of  every  deacriptiou
(Hor.  Epiet.  ii.  1. 116).

Fabttla  Mlleala. See  Novels  and  Rohamces.

FabUa  PalUita,  Togita,  etc. See  Comoedia.

I^bttla  RfalntbonXba. See  Rhikthon.

Fabttlae  Parottiinae. See  Phaedrus.

Facoiolati,  Jacopo.  A  famons  Italian  lexicog-
rapher and  stylist,  born  at  Toriggia  in  1682.  He
studied  at  Padua,  and  iu  the  university  of  that
city  was  made  Professor  of  Logic  and  Regent  of
the  Schools,  continuing  this  connection  for  forty-
five  years.  After  putting  forth  several  new  edi-
tions of  existing  books,  such  as  the  TJ^aarK*
dceronianiu  of  Nizolins,  and  the  polyglot  vocabu-
lary iu  seven  languages  of  Calepino,  he  began  his
magnificent  work,  the  Totitu  Latinitatit  Z«rjoon,
the  first  volume  of  which  appeared  at  Padna  in
1771.  Of  this  splendid  piodnction  it  has  been  said
that  the  whole  body  of  Latinity,  if  lost,  might  be
restored  from  this  great  lexicon.  It  is,  iu  fact,  the
source  of  all  the  Latin  lexicons  now  in  use,  and  Is
an  imperishable  inonnment  to  the  learning,  indus-
try, and  Judgment  of  its  chief  author.  In  its  pt«p-
aration,  Facclolati  was  ably  assisted  by  his  pupil,
Egidio  Foroellini  (q.  v.),  who  had  also  aided  iu  the
Calepine  vocabulary,  and  to  whom  is  said  to  be
due  the  suggestion  of  the  new  lexicon  itself  The
fourth  and  last  volume  appeared  in  1771,  after  the
death  of  both  the  editors.  Subsequent  editions
are  the  English  one  in  two  vols.  (London,  1826),
and  that  of  De  Vit  (lSQ^-87).  Facciolati  was  a
writer  of  extnmely  elegant  Latin,  and  a  number
of  his  letters  have  been  published.  His  reputation
in  his  own  lifetime  was  very  great,  so  that  he  re-
ceived most  flattering  offers  from  the  other  uni-
versities of  Europe,  all  of  which  he  declined.  Ha
died  at  Padua  in  1769.  His  life  has  been  written
by  Ferrari  (1799)  and  Qeanari  (1618).  See  the  arti-
cle Lexicon.

Faoatlae. Bee  Jests.

FactidnflB  AnrigaTiun. See  Circus,  p.  356.

Factor.  The  player  who  threw  the  ball  on  re-
ceiving it  from  the  dator  in  the  game  of  ball  spoken
of  ae  datatim  ludere. See  Ptm.

Faotoitom.  An  oil-press,  so  called  from  the
facior,  who  pressed  the  olives  (Cat.  B.  .A.  64, 1 ;  66,
1).  The  name /actum  was  given  to  the  oil  pressed
out  at  one  making  (Varr.  B.  B.  i.  24, 3X

Faelia  (atXovpot  or  alAovpos,  "  wi^-tail "). The


y\ESUL.\E


608


FAUL'M


oat,  ati  auiiiial  (lomeaticftteU  by  the  Egrpitaim  an
early  ns  iLe  ttiirlucntb  ceulury  B.C.,  iinil  by  tbuiu
regaiileU  m  a  nacroU  nuiuial,  so  tbat  it  was  n  ea|ii-


A^K'^


VAsclut  Rinrptlau  Call. (PulDling  ftom  tfae  Moninanui


tal  oltViicc  to  kill  one  (Diod,  Sic-  1.83). Tbe  cnt

typitied  to  llicin  tbu  liitiar  gtNldesa  Paslil,  aud  was

fruqiiuiitly (.-iiilmluH'tl utiil sout to Uubodtis for

biiiiul. {Soe  Bl'Oastis.) Tbe  varly  Grt>eka  aud  Ho- the  plaia.

luniisdo  uut  appeal-  to  bnv<^  duiuMticated  tUe

«at  iw  we  have  duiii*,  but  iustvnd  employtKl  m

Bpecioeof  weasel  (yaXi;,  muttcla),  or  thn  wliile-

lireostei)  marton  i/ae!in/oi«a). S*«  llebii,  Ktih

iurpfianzrn nnii  HaunlKit^r.  (laHt  ed. \-i:\.  by

ScliradiT,  IrtMJ;  ami  Hoti^btoii'd  Satnral  Hit-

(orjrw/(Af.-/nricM/j*,pi».  40-50.  CutMlir^t  ai>|tear

ill  literatiiro  as  hiiiiso  nil  inialN  abutit  tbt;  fourth

ccutnry  A.n.,  but  even  &s  liitrr  a»  tbc  Middle

Agp^  tlH-y  were  comparatively  rare  and  co«tly.

FaeatUae.  Tbu  modrni  Ficaolo;  a  city  of
£triiria,  aittiat«d  on  a  bill  three  miles  imrtb-
4-ast  of  Flui-euce.  It  was  tbe  liMidquart4*ni  of
Catiline's  uriny  iCie.  Vat.  iii,  6).

Fala  or  Plia]a.  (ll  A  wundnn  ntnicture,
4»f  coueidomblc  bci|;lit,  imod  in  oiugiit,  from
wbiob  ujisflilps  were  tbruwn  (Kest.  p.  8p,  12;
Kniiiiifi  np.  Nuu.  p.  114,  7).  (2)  Pliabie  aiv
itifiirlotifd  by  Jnveital  (vi.  5!KI)  witb  tbe
oifwMMKic-  ilcljittimiriim  ill  tbe  circiia.  Heuce
ibvy  arc  nupiwhcd  by  »uiiil>  wftlers  to  be
coliiiuua  on  ibu  tpina  of  tbc  cireiiit,  nupport-
lug  tbo  ova,  an  similar  cuIuiuiia  iiup)M»rtcd
thediilfibiuit.  (Stw  CiHCt'tt.)  Uiit  Surviutt  (ad
Verg.  Jen.  ix.  705)  aaya  they  wore  t«we:>  <ia
wbiub  UgbtH  tuok  pliic«,  erecte<l  betwevu  tbe
fHri/tUH  auil  the  metae  ;  aud  t1»tfy  wei*e  prob*  '^^
ably  movable  towen  iiaed  in  tbe  abam  tigbta
oflbe  «ireu«.

Palacrfn^  or  FalHcriniun.  A  Sabine  town
between  Aftrtiliiui  ;iinl  Ki'ijil^.  It  was  tbe  birlb-
jduee  of  tlie  empenir  Vi-fipjutiiiH.

Falarica. (1)  A  pt^rtiliar  kind  of  Bjii^r  intended
to  be  diHebnrged  um  a  luimtile  fi-uin  the  band,  and
vmphiyrd  in  warfare  im  wuJl  aa  the  L-baM^  (Verg;.
Am.  ix,  70r»; hivy,  xxxiv.  14: (Jrat.  I'l/nr^.  Mi).
It  is  dencribod  as  a  tninHilu  of  tlio  largi-Ht  dinit'.u-
HioQs  CNoD.  a.  v.),  with  an  iiniueuse  iron  bead  and
atfting  wooden  ahaft,  weighted  near  the  top  by  a
circular  Diaas  of  ieiul  (Isidor.  Orig.  xviii.',  H),  ux-
aetly  aa  rt^prpwnted  by  the  annexed  iiguru,  from
an ancient monu-
ment publittluHl  by
AUtorp  (  />f  UoMtU
VeterHtn,  p. IW ).


dable  description  {Livy.ni.  6).  It  was  cbiedyi
ployed  in  siegeA,  and  diHvharged  with  prudigtflj
violence,  by  tbe  aMintatice  of  oiacbiuery  { Luean,
vi.  196 ),  from  a  lofty  wooileu  tower.

FalcMsnia,  Proba. See  P&OBA.

FalctlU. Sfe  Fai.x.

Faleria. A  town  of  Picenoio,  southwest  of  Fir-
uiuui,  now  Falleroni  (Pliny,  ff.-V.  ill.  13^

Faleril  or  Paleritun.  A  iowu  iu  Etruria,  nitu-
at«d  on  A  beixht  near  Moaut  Soractt^joriKioall;  •
Pelaagic  town,  but  afterwards  one  of  the  twelw
Ktruacau  ctttea.  Ita  inbabitanta  wore  called  Fk
liaci,  and  were  regarded  by  mauy  a*  of  tbr  miik
race  a.1  the  Aeijui,  ub(*neu  wh  flud  them  of\n
railed  Aetpii  KaliHri.  At'ter  a  loni;;  atnigglc  «ilk
Home,  the  KaliaoauH  ivvult«d  a^ain  at  tbe  e\omvi
the  First  Puuio  War  (D.C.  241),  wbeu  tbe  RooiiM
dr«tniycil  tbuir  city.  A  new  town  vaa  built  m
The  wbito  cows  of  Falerii  F-ere  va1tM<l


Fal*rica


Auutber  aiR'ciuieii  of  very  similar  character  in  ex-
hibtU'd  onii  M-pnlrhml  ni:ii'hle  ilifK-ovored  at  Aqni-
lela,  piddifthftl  1>y  Itertolt.  {2)  A  lui^wile  invented
by  tbe  |»eopk'  of  Sannntuni,  Hiniilar  iu  ninny  re-
apecta  to  tb«  ]>reeediiig,  but  of  a  alill  mure  formi-


at  Rome  for  aacrificen. There  Alill  remain  i

of  a  theatre,  fonim.  piicina,  gate,  etc.,  of  BmHK'  I

L-cnatniciiuu,  aud  a  number  of  tombs.

Falemus  Ag«r.  A  dbtrict  iu  tbe  oortii  ^
Campania,  extvndiiig  fnun  the  Maasic  hillatothe
river  VulturniiB.  It  priwlnced  90Uie  of  tbe  fiUMt
wine  in  Italy,  which  wn^  rt-ckuneil  only  aecuDd  v>
the  wine  of  Sctla. Si-e  Visra.

FallaoL Ser  Dialxcts;  Faijcrii.

Faliacns. hee  Gkatthij.

FalaariuB. See  Kaxscu.

Falanm.  The  crime  of  falaum  i»  not  defined  ^y
H«)mau  legal  writent,  but  it  conAi^ttnl  of  kI*  "f
fraud  which  were  injnriuua  lo  ^/irfw /»«Mia>,  soch
ajt  for>>ur>',  conuterfeiting  money,  and  {letvcrtiuS
tbe  nouriMi  of  justice  by  fraud  and  p«'rjurj.  Tbe
oldest  tcgislatirc  provisions  at  Koun*  a|faifi*t  Of
acts  of  this  description  are  tboae  of  tbi>  T«'l'*
Tables,  to  the  eA'eet  that  a  persou  who  gan  (i^
teetimony  ahould  be  thrown from Ihe  TariMHAH


FALSUH


669


FALX


Rook  (G«n.  xxi.  53),  and  tbat  a  judge  who  took  a
bribe  should  be  liable  to  capital  puDiabment  (Gell.
xxi.  7);  bat  there  were  trials  for  false  testinioDy
before  the  euactmeut  of  the  Twelve  Tables  (Livy,
iii.  24, 35,  29;  iv.  SI).  The  next  legislation  in  fnl-
snni,  so  far  as  is  known,  wiis  contained  in  one  of
the  Leges  Conieliae  passed  in  tlie  time  of  the
dictator  Snlla,  which  was  divided,  according  to
Cicero,  into  two  heads,  the  Lex  Testamentaria  and
the  Lex  Nnuiaria  (Ferr,  it  1,  42),  with  reference
to  the  two  species  of  the  crime  the  statute  was  di-
rected against.  Panlns,  who  gives  its  provisions,
«utitle8  it  Lex  Cornelia  Testamentaria ;  it  is  also
known  by  the  more  general  title  Lex  Cornelia  de
Falsis.

The  Lex  Cornelia  appears  to  have  included  only
two  specific  kinds  of  Cslsum :  (1)  forgery  and  sop-
pression  of  wills,  and  (2)  adulteration  of  the  coin-
age.

An  offence  against  either  branch  of  this  law  was
a  crimen  publicum,  and  was  under  the  cognizance
of  a  standing  quoMtio.  The  punishment  of  falsnm
under  the  law  (at  least  when  Paalus  wrote)  was
dtportatio  in  intulam  (see  Drportatio)  for  the
'*  honestiores,"  and  the  mines,  crucifixion,  or  other
degrading  punishment  for  tho  "  humitiores."  In
place  of  deportatio  in  infulam  the  punishment,  ac-
cording to  the  statute  itself,  was  probably  the  old
form  of  banishment,  known  as  tj^nf*  et  aquae  inter-
dictio  (q.  v.).  The  property  of  a  convicted  person
was  confiscated.

The  penalty  of  the  Lex  Cornelia  was  extended
by  piecemeal  legislation  to  cases  not  comprised  in
the  lex,bnt  all  of  a  similar  kind.  Tliis  supplement-
ary law  is  sometimes  referred  in  legal  treatises  to
the  Lex  Cornelia,  as  if  It  had  been  an  original  part
of  that  law.  The  instrnmeut  fabricated  or  falsi-
fied might  be  either  public  or  private,  as  e.  g.  a
rescript  or  edict  of  the  emperor,  an  account  book,
or  an  iustrument  of  sale.

Persons  guilty  of  falsifying  docnmenta  are  called
faltarii.  As  a  precaution  against  snch  persons,  it
was  ouacted  in  the  time  of  Nero  that  tabulae  or
written  contracts  should  be  pierced  with  holes  and
a  triple  thread  passed  through  the  holes,  in  oddi-
tiou  to  the  signature  (Suet.  Xer.  c.  17;  Paul.  v.
£>,  6).  In  the  time  of  Nero  it  was  also  provided
that  the  first  two  part«  (cerae)  of  a  will  should
have  ouly  the  testator's  signatnre,  and  the  remain-
ing one  those  of  the  witnesses.  Likewise,  in  order
to  prevent  fraud,  it  was  enacted  under  the  emperor
Claudius  that  a  person  who  was  employed  by  a
testator  to  write  a  will  should  be  liable  to  the  pen-
alty of  the  Lex  Cornelia  if  he  inscribed  a  legacy  to
himself,  although  he  did  so  at  the  dictation  of  the
t«stator (Cod. ix.  23, 3;  Suetonius, Ner.  17,attrihutes
this  law  to  Nero).  The  I^x  de  Foists  was  further
ext«nded  to  fraudulent  assumptions  of  names  and
rank,  and  to  false  pretences,  as  in  the  case  of  a
contract  to  sell  a  thing  to  a  person,  when  the  ven-
dor had  already  contracted  to  sell  the  same  thing  to
some  one  else.  The  crimen  fain  was  also  made  to
include  perjury,  the  corruption  of  Jndges,  and  other
kindred  offences.  By  a  senatnsconsnltum  in  the
fourteenth  year  of  Tiberius,  the  peualties  of  the
law  wero  extended  to  those  who  for  money  un-
dertook to  maintain  causes,  or  to  procure  testi-
mony; and  by  a  seuatnsconauUnm  pnssed  some-
what earlier,  conspiracies  for  the  ruin  of  inno-
cent persons  were  comprised  within  the  limits  of
the  law.


According  to  Paulus  (v.  25, 1),  the  refusal  to  ac-
cept in  payment  genuine  coin  stamped  with  the
head  of  the  priuceps  was  on  the  same  footing  as
the  adulteration  of  the  coinage,  though  in  this
case  the  element  of  fraud  seems  wanting.  The  use
of  false  measures  and  weights  was  punished  as
falsuni.  It  appears  from  numerous  passages  in  the
Roman  writers  that  the  crime  of  falsum  in  its  dif-
ferent forms  was  very  common,  and  especially  in
the  case  of  wills.  See  Rein,  Dae  Criminalrecht  der
SSmer,  p.  774,  etc

Faltonla,  Pboba. See  Proba.

Tmlx,  dim.  FalciUa  {Apm},  dptwavop,  dim.  iptird-
vtov).  A  sickle;  a  scythe;  a  pruning -knife  or
prnuing-hfKjk  ;  a  bill ;  a  falchion ;  a  halhert.

As  cutter  denotod  a  knife  with  one  straight  edge,
"faix"  signified  any  similar  instrument,  the  sin-
gle edge  of  which  was  curved  {Bpfmvov  tiixaftiris ;
yan^as  iptiratmrf  eurvae  f aloes ;  curvamine /aide
ahttutej  adunoa  falce).  By  additional  epithets  the
various  usee  of  the  falx  wera  indicated,  and  its  cor-
responding varieties  in  form  and  size.  Thus  the
sickle,  because  it  was  used  by  reapers,  was  called
falx  meeaoria  ;  the  scythe,  which  was  employed  in
mowing  hay,  was  called /alx /oenarta  ;  the  pnm-
iug-knife  and  the  bill,  on  account  of  their  use  in
dressing  vines,  as  well  as  in  hedging  and  in  cut-
ting ofi'the  shoots  and  branches  of  ti'ees,  were  dis-
tinguished by  the  appellatiou  ot  falx  puiatoi-ia,  vi-
nitona,  arhorarxAj  or  silvaiioa,  or  by  the  dimiuu-
tive/alcula.


Filz.

The  illustration  is  taken  from  a  MS.  of  Colu-
mella, and  explains  his  description  of  the  various
parts  of  the  falx  vinxtoria.  (See  Culter.)  After
the  removal  of  a  branch  by  the  pruuing-hook,  it
was  often  smoothed,  as  in  modern  gardening,  by
tho  chisel.  (See  Dolabra.)  The  edge  of  the  fulx
was  often  toothed  or  serrated  {Sfuniy  Kopxapotovra  ;
denticulata).  The  indispensable  process  of  sharp-
ening these  iustrnmentfl  (ipmjv  xapaaaifitvai,  3p-
mfv  tvKaiiinj  »to0jjyia)  was  eflected  by  whetstones,
which  the  Romans  obtained  from  Crete  and  other
distant  places,  with  the  addition  of  oil  or  water,
which  the  mower  (foenieex)  carried  in  a  horn  upon
his  thigh.

Numerous  as  were  the  uses  to  which  the  falx
was  applied  in  agriculture  and  horticulture,  its
employment  in  battle  was  almost  equally  varied,
thongh  not  so  frequent.  The  Qeloni  were  noted  for
its  use.  It  was  the  weapon  with  which  Zeus  wound-
ed Typhon  ^  with  which  Heracles  slew  the  Lemae-
an  Hydra ;  and  with  which  Hermes  cut  off  the  head
of  Argus  {falcato  en$e;  htapen  C^Uenida).  Perseus,
having  received  the  same  weapon  from  Heruies,
or,  according  to  other  authorities,  from  Hephaes-
tus, used  it  to  decapitate  Medusa  and  to  slay  the
sea-mouster.  Hence,  it  may  be  concluded  that  tho
falchion  was  a  weapon  of  the  most  remote  antiq-
uity;  that  it  was  girt  like adaggernpou  the  waist;
that  it  was  held  in  the  hand  by  a  short  hilt;  and
that,  as  it  was,  in  fact,  a  dagger  or  sharp-jioiuted


KAMI  LI  A


litio


FARNESE UEKCtTLES


blailo,  nilti  a  [iroptr  I'ulx  pitijcctiiii;  from  oiioxiiU-.
it  svaa  tbrust  into  the  llesb  up  to  tbU  Intural  rur-
vature.

Tbe  weapon  n-btcb  bAAjnst  been  deacribeil,  wben
attachi?(L  tn  tbu  eud  of  a  pi*lt.%  wonttl  asantuu  tbc
ftii'tn  ntiil  lif  iipplicjtliln  tn  :i1l  the  pnrpOHiN*  n(  tli>p
niMliifval  halhfni.  .Stiirh  luriHt  bnve  l>fpii  the  ob-
aercH /alnili  iisutl  by  thu  Runiuim  at  tbn  sifj^R  nf
Amlirttcia.  SoiiiotituL-H  th<<  irun  bniul  waH  hh  large?
aa  to  bu  faaltMH*il,  iuHload  uf  tb<;  nitn'tt  hiad,  Ui  n
wooden  beam,  and  n-nrkcd  by  m«n  under  a  inludo
(q.v.>.

Lastly,  the  AMyHaiiK,  the  PonianK,  the  M^de»,
pd  the  Syrinna  in  Aiiia,  and  the  (Innlr)  and  Brit-
DB  in  Kuro|>e  (nms  C'ovisrs),  made  tbcuiselrca  for-
midable on  the  lit'ld  nf  battle  by  the  wse  of  char-
iots with  HOjthe-t  fixeil  at  ri^ht  angles  {tit  irXtiytov}
t«  thu  axte  and  turntMl  dnwnvrnnl,  or  iiiM>rted  par-
aUoI  to  tbo  oxlo  into  the  folly  of  tbc  uheel,  ho  an
to  roTolve,  when  the  chariot  \\m  put  in  motion,
with  more  than  thrico  tlii^  velocity  of  the  cliariut
ititelf ;  atul  MiiiiPtitncs  nlfui  pnijiTtiiif^  from  the  vx-
tiwmitica  of  [bn  axlr. gtw  Ct'ltRCfl.

Famllia.  Tito  t^tin  nnin^.  fni-  a  lionwhold  com-
mniilty.onnKtHring  of  fbti  maat^rof  the  lioiiHe  {pO'
ttr /ami till »),  bid  wtfu  {matfi- /amiJiai-),  his  mjiih  mid
onmaiTicd  daughters  (,ff^ii  and  fHae  fuMiliati},  tba
wivi'-a,  sous,  and  nnniorrled  daiit;btcr«  of  tbo  eoiio,
and  the  slaves.  All  tbo  otliur  mviitherA  uf  the  fam-
ily were  anbjecc  to  tb*  aiitliority  uf  tlio  j«iW/flint-
ti<u.  (For  the  power  of  ibe  hnalmnd  over  bis  wife,
see  KIam-'m.)  Iu  virtue  of  Uis  piLt«>rtial  aiitluirily
{falria  poU^t(ui),t\\a  iMiterftimituin  had  abKoIiito  iin-
tfaority  over  hifl  cbildreti.  K«  migbt,  if  he  \ik*i\,
expotw  them,  «c>ll  tbeni,  or  kill  them.  Tliexiit  riKUtx,
u  UAttiiers  were  gradnally  Hofteiiml,  were  mon>  and
more  rarely  eitfoiced;  hut  they  legally  came  ti)  an
end  only  when  the  falber  died,  liwt  hiti  citizeiinbip,
or  of  bi!(  own  will  fieeil  hia  son  from  hiH  anthor-
iiy.  (8eo  EMANXirxTlo. )  They  could,  however,
be  trnuKferrcd  to  another  person  if  the  son  were
adoptt^d.  or  the  dangbtcr  married.  A  son,  if  of
fnll  ago.  wan  not  iu  any  way  interfered  with  by
the  jmtrin  /mfMliu  in  tlie  exercise  of  bis  civil
righttt.  Hnt  in  thm  exercise  uf  his  legal  rlght^i
OS  an  individnal,  he  wiu  dependent  always  on  hia
fiitbcr.  He  conld,  for  iiintancCf  own  no  property;
but  all  that  be  ut-i]nired  wa»,  iu  the  eye  of  the
law,  ut  tbu  uiclnHivu  diHpoHuI  of  hiH  father.  TIih
pater  /amil ins  abino  had  the  right  of  making  tVtu-
positionsof  tbefniiiiiy  pit»i>erty  by  ioorlgage,Bal»,or
wilL .St-c  McLennan,  The  I'atrianhal  7Aeory(lti86).

Family  Namea 8i-e  N'omrn.

Famdai  LIbelU. See  Lihelll's.

FauatXoL Sec  FANtsi.

Famnia.  AMiniitruian  woman  who  entortMueil
Marius  when  be  came  to  Minmrnan  in  hm  flight
tB.c  tV),  bocanse  tbongh  formerly  be  had  prtK
uonnceil  lier  gnilty  of  adultery,  ho  bad  compelletl
her  huHband  Tutiuin<i  to  reotoro  bor  dowry  (Val.
Mai.  viii.  •,',  ^  ai.

FanniuB  Caepio.  A  Roman  who  oouspired
with  Miii-«;iia  aijainst  Augnstuu  (b.c.  32),  and  was
put  to  death.

FanniuB  Qaadrltus. i^tv  Qi'ADRATtm.

Fauuiua  Stiabo,  C.  Aaon-in-law  <»f  C.  Latdiaii
BipicuH  (q.  v.),  introdneed  by  Cicero  an  rt  speaker
III  his  De  HepuUka  and  bis  Laeliu»  (De  Jmicilia).


Fannin.  Any  locality  coiutecratMl  by  ibe  jhid-
lifl's — a  word  derived  by  the  uncienta  (mm  fan,
Wcanne  the  ponliJife%  in  tarratido /ati  mml  Jlmrm
(V.irr.  L.  L.vi.  o4',  Teat.  pp.  S;!  tl3).  1 1  %i  as  a  cou-
»ecr»te4l  spot,  whether  a  bnihling  was  erected
upon  it  or  not.  The  .roiinecnitcd  placn*  ui  tW
Konim,  where  the  conebea  of  the  goilH  nere  plaM
in  the  l0vliiifernium  ((|.  v.),  were  almo  called  fnna,  id
reference  to  which  Ibe  pbnute/(tj>o  nintrrr  wui  umJ
(Kent.  p.  ;i61 ).  Kvcii  II  tree  ntrnck  by  ]i{;hlnib;e
wfw  ib^nied  a /iiNMjn  ( Kcjit.  p.  9!!).  KverytliiU);
nut  cuMMMTi(ti;il — that  IK,  not  »  faniim  —  traa  nm-
aidered  pm/aimm  ;  nud  n  rm /auatim  uiighl.  in  m-
conlanco  with  the  pontiticot  law.  l)e  again  [bbiIb
into  a  rt»  pro/ana  by  certain  ceremonieti  (Mnenb.
I  .sVif.  iii.  11,4).

^'aniifict, properlyspcaking  peraatu  betoaging la

'  a  faunm,  were  more  8|>eoitirnlty  prwato  of  tlwp4-

I  dewH  of  Coninnii  in  Cappaibieia,  whose  wonibipwa

I  introilnc-ed  into  Rome  under  the  name  of  Bt'lloB.

I  They  iHrfornied  the  worabip  with  wild  aad  fno-

tic  ritcjn,  wbrure  the  woni  J'saalirHn  obtailieil  iU

secQiidiiry  meaning,  and  boa  pAMied into  nui

'  languages They  were  also  culled  Dcllvnitru

•  ad  llor.  Sat.  ii.  3,  '2'£i). In  celebrating  llie  frtii

^  of  the  guddevM  tbey  marched  through  the  city  ii

dark  clothed,  with  wild  criee,  blowing  tniiii|wti^

l>fjiting  cymbalo  nud  drama,  aud  In  the  teHipWin-

dieting  wounds  npou  themaelves,  the  blood  fMU

which  Ibey  {Kinred  out  as  an  offurlug  to  tb«]:tMl-

dcfw  (Tihnll.  i.  0.  43  foil. ;  Hor.  Sal.  ii  :(.  223;  Joi.

vi.  r>II ;  Mart.  xi.  84,  3,  xii.  57,  11;  Lucan,  t..T65;

Lamprid.  Commod.  9). Fanaiici  was  iilao  the  tuoe

given  to  the  pricftHof  Ifiiii  {f.  I.  L.  vi.  n.'2S34>uiiit

C'ybcU  (Jiiv.  Ii.  liW;  Pnuleut.  Prri«t.  x.  106II.

Fanum  Fortunae.  TTie  nintleru  Faoo;  a  I««ii
in  Uinhria  at  tbe  month  of  tbe  MetAOnu,  vid>  >
celelH-nled  temple  of  FortUD*.  whence  tlw  towiitlf-
rivcil  iiM  iiHnie.

Farce. See  Co«of,i>u  ;  BmNTHosi  Satiw.

Fai^ma. See  Fabari^.

Farmers  of  PnbUo  Taxes.  See  ruBtiCAXi;
Tkl«jnak.

Farming. See  Aoricultura.

Fameae  Bull.  A  remarkable  mnnnlillili' itrwi?
of  Kt-itoary  liy  the  Rh<Hliiiii  iicntptoi-s  A[H>llm)i'M
and  TunrictcuH,  representing  the  mnn  of  Aiili"|)'
hindiiig  Din;/i  to  a  wild  bnll.  (For  tlir  «tury*«e
ANTtftPK ;  Dincl^..)  This  gnnip  waa  iVniad  at  R"*»
ill  the  Tlierninu  of  Cunu:altH  in  a  luully  niutiUi'^
condition,  and  waa  roKtoreil  under  Ihc  mipernviu
of  Michael  Angelo  nud,  later,  by  the  MiUucm  tetif"
tor  Uinnobi.  The  boldneas  and  life  of  the  jC**'!'
origtnnlly  carved  fnnii  a  Hiiiglo  block  of  oiariik
are  unrivalled  by  any  similar  work.  It  in  rBjiir-
Dented  in  the  illiiHtration  on  page  eC.  The  p«"
rcKtored  an-  the  head  of  the  bidl,  the  wbnl»  "f
A>itio{M^  (except  the  feelk,  the  upper  part*  ofOirc'i
and  all  nf  ZetbniH  and  Ampbioti  except  ou'  lo*^
and  line  leg.  Tiui  grunp  in  now  ia  the  Huho  X^
zionale  n£  Naples.

Famese  Bercolea.  A  oolowal  htntue  executnl
by  Olycon  of  AtbeuB,  and  repreMuting  HerailM
clutbed  iu  n  Ituu'a  akin  atid  resting  on  bin  1>*K*
rlub,  while  iu  bis  right  band  he  boldti  the  ilm*
golden  applea  of  tbe  He4t>eride«.  Tlie4tatiie,  wlttrb
iR  now  in  Tlie  Mnse<»  Xar.iunnle  at  Naple-t,  wom  foaud
at  Rome  iu  the  Thermae  of  Caracalla  in  l&tu.  It
then  lacked  tbe  lega  and  Ihe  letX  hand,  whioli  wtn


FAKREUU


S6i


FASCINUM


Testored  by  Delia  Porta  after  a  model  iu  terra  cotta
by  Michael  Augelo.  Twenty  years  later  tbe  orig-
ioal  legs  were  foaud  in  a  well  three  miles  from  the
place  whence  the  statae  itaelf  was  taken.  Tbe
work  is  evidently  of  a  comparatively  late  period,
and  shows  a  tendency  to  ex^geration  iu  tbe  over-
atrained  effort  to  express  mascular  strength,  which
led  Thackeray  to  characterize  it  as  a  "  damsy,
caricatured  porter."  It  is  reprodaced  in  the  illos-
tration  on  page  703.

FarrenoL See  Matrihoniuh.

Faa. See  Fasti  ;  lus.

Faaoea.  The  Latin  name  for  a  bundle  of  rods,
tied  together  by  a  red  strap,  and  enclosing  an  axe,
with  its  bead  ontaiiie.  Tbe  fasces  were  originally
tbe  emblem  of  tbe  king's  absolute  authority  over
lifu  and  limb,  and  as  such  passed  over  to  the  high
magistrates  of  the  Bepnblic.  In  the  city,  however,
tbe  latter  had  to  remove  the  axe  and  to  lower  the
rods  iu  the  presence  of  the  popular  assembly  aa
the  sovereigu  power.  The  lowering  of  the  fasces
was  also  the  form  in  which  the  lower  officials  sa-
luted the  higher.  Tbe  king  was  preceded  by  lio-
tors  bearing  twelve  fasces,  and  so  were  the  consols
and  procoDSuIs.  Tbe  proconsuls,  however,  were,
since  the  time  of  Augustus,  only  allowed  this  nam*
ber  if  they  had  actually  been  coneuls  previously.
Tbe  dictator  had  twenty-fonr  fasces,  as  represent-
ing the  two  cousnls,  and  his  magister  equitum  had
six.  Six  was  also  the  nnmber  allotted  to  tbe  pro-
consuls and  propraetors  outside  the  cHy,  and  in
tbe  imperial  age  to  those  proconsuls  who  had
prorinoes  iu  virtue  of  their  having  held  tbe  prae-

torsbip.  The  prae-
tors of  the  city  bad
two,  tbe  imperial  le-
gates administering
piu*ticnlar  provinces
had  five  fasces.  One
was  allotted  to  tbe
Jiamm  Dinlia  and
(from  or  after  b.c.  43)
to  tbe  Vestal  Vii^ns.
Fasces  crowned  with
bay  were,  in  the  re-
publican age,  the  fn-
tignia  of  an  officer
who  was  sainted  aa
Imperator.  Dnriug
tbe  imperial  age,  this
title  waa  conferred
on  tbe  emperor  at  his
accession,  and  soon  confined  exclusively  to  him.
The  emperor  was  accordingly  preceded  by  twelve
/a«ee«  laureati.  The  lioton  held  their  fasces  over
tbe  left  shoulder;  bnt  at  funerals,  the  fasces  of
a  deceased  magistrate,  and  his  anus,  were  carried
reversed  behind  tbe  bier.

The  fasces  appear  to  have  been  in  later  times
made  of  birch  {betulla,  Pliny,  H.  N.  xvi.  $  75),  bnt
earlier  of  tbe  twigs  of  the  elm  (Plaut.  J»b.  ii.  3,
74 ;  iii.  2, 39).  Tbey  are  said  to  have  been  derived
from  Vetiilonia,  a  city  of  Etrnria  (Sil.  ItaL  viii.
4^;  cf.  Livy,  i.  8);  bnt  for  this  there  is  no  roal
authority  (of.  Scbwegler,  Som.  Ge»ch.  i.  278,  581,
671).

The  next  illnatratiou,  taken  from  the  consular
roius  of  C.  Norbauna,  contaioa,  in  addition  to  the
fasces,  the  one  a  $piea  and  caduoeu$,  and  the  other
a  prora,  caduceua,  and  tpica.


Ltctor  with  FucM.  {From  r
tMU-relier  la  the  Museum  of
Verona.)


FUela  Worn  by  Womeo.
(Rich.)


FaBcn  on  Comolar  Oolna.

Fasda,  dim.  Faacl&la  (ratvia,  on-ddrir/ior).  Any
long,  narrow  strip  of  cloth  employed  as  a  bandage.
(1)  A  band  worn  roond  the  bead  aa  an  ensign  of
royalty  (Suet.  /Kr.79).  (2)  A  band  worn  by  wom-
eu  round  the  ohest  for
tbe  improvoment  of  the
figure  (Terent.  Eun.  ii.
3,23;  Propert.  v.  9,49;
Ovid,  A.  A.  iii.  276,  622).
See  Stbophiuh.  (8)  A
band  worn  ronnd  the  legs
and  shins,  a  kind  of  stock-
ing ;  hence  called  fatdae
eruralet  {Dig.  xxxiv.  2, 25)
and(i&iaIf*(8uet..^Hjr.82).  That  such  bandages  also
covered  the  feet  is  clear  from  the  epithet  oS  fasciae
pedulea{Dig.xxxiy.ij26).  CiceroreproachedClodius
with  effeminate  habits  for  wearing  purple  fasciae
upon  his  feet,  and  tbe  calantica,  a  woman's  orna-
ment, upon  his  bead  {De  Har,S«itp.  21,  (  44 ;  Fragm.
Or.  in  Clod,  et  Cur. ;  cf.  Non.  p.  537).  Afterwards
fa$dae  encrafn  became  common  even
with  tbe  male  sex  (Hor.  ^t.  il.  3,  255;
Val.  Max.  vi.  2,  $  7).  White  fasciae,  worn
by  men  (Val.  Max.  1.  c),  were  a  sign  of
extraordinary  reflueiuent  in  drees;  tbe
mode  of  cleaning  them  waa  by  rubbing
them  with  a  white,  tenacious  earth,  re-
sembling our  pipe-ulay  (Cic.  Ad  Att.  ii.  3).
.™,  W  '^^^  aaoking  of  tlie  bed  on  which
SwwidiiDg-  the  mattress  rested  (Mart.  v.  62,  xi v.  159).
^•j**^  (5)  Fasciae  were  also  the  swaddling-
Pftinting.)  clothes  in  which  infants  were  wrapped
(Plant  3Vt(0.  T.  13).  (6)  In  architecture,
any  long,  flat  sur-
face of  wood,  stone,
or  marble,  such  as
the  baud  which  di-
vides tbe  arohitrave
from  tbe  ftieze  in
the  Doric  order,  and
tbe  surfaces  into
which  tbe  archi-
trave itself  is  di-
vided in  tbe  Ionic
and Corinthian

5,  10). See  EP18TY-  ^ MTeoo.)

UUH.

Fuolniun.  Eucbautment  by  tbe  evil  eye,  words,
or  cries,  exereiaed  on  persons  (especially  children),
animals,  aud  things,  as,  for  instance,  on  a  piece  of
ground.  The  word  was  also  applied  to  tbe  coun-
ter-charm, by  which  it  was  supposed  that  the  en-
cliantment  could  be  averted,  or  even  turned  against
the  enchanter.  Amuleta  of  various  kinds  were  em-
ployed aa  counter  -  cbarma.  They  were  anppoaed
either  to  procure  the  protection  of  a  particular  dei-
ty, or  to  send  the  enchanter  mad  by  meana  of  ter-
rible, ridiculous,  or  obscene  objects. The  name


Fasela,


ftwciniim  wiws  thus  specially  ojipltpil  t^  lli*  phaUut
(q.  v,)f  or  effigy  of  the  mole  organ  of  geitenition.
wbioh  wait  the  fav«iirito  cnmit^r-chnrm  of  tli«
Romans.  An  imngu  of  tliin  rasoiiium  vtm  con-
laiued  in  llie  l>ull»  worn  .in  an  nrniilut  l>f  oliil-
iIkii,  Aiiil  watt  u1m>  put  Liiidi^r  tbu  tlmriol.  of  a  gnu-
oral  at  liJN  triiiuipli,  as  a  protootion  agaiiiHt  envy.

S«B  AML'LKTCM.

FaaoInuB.  An  enrly  Latin  divinity  idcutical
with  MntiiiMis  «ir  TiitiuinH  <<].  v.).  He  wns  wor-
Bhipjied  as  thti  author  of  Morc«ry  and  evil  «|iiritr<,
ami  his  oyinUol  was  th«  /tmcinHm.  8e*  AmI'I-K-
Tl'M  ; FArtCISCMJ POALLUe; PRIAITS.  I

Fas^ua  (^(iirijAof)-  A  liglit  iHtat  or  nk\(f,  made
of  wicker- work,  pit|tyriiM,  or  even  of  bttk«d  oarth
(Jlctiti;  Jnv.  XV.  127).  mid  naid  in  linvw  ruc*«iv«d  iIh  '
name  from  the/ttorfuH  or  kitliiAy-lHiiii,  brt-auM  of
a  rL-^iubljiiice  in  aha^i^^.  If  wan  of  vorioiiH  tiiM'H,
aiitl  iiaed  with  or  witltout  Hnilm  {Clo.Jd  Att,  i.  13;
8«rv.  ad  Vcrg.  (irorg.  iv.  2^).

Fasti,  sc.  tlirn.  Properly  speaklnji.  the  Roman
cutirt'days,  on  nrliich  the  pmelor  wns  allonred  to
give  hi8jiid(r7iientit  in  tli«  Hoti;niu  forinnla  Do  Uifo
Adtiivo,  ami  ^fiiendly  to  art  in  hin  jniliciiil  rapa<'i-
ty.  TliH  itani«  whn  ftirlh^r  uppliml  to  Che  dayit  on
whirh  it  wah  lAwfiil  ijnf)  to  Ktinimort  i\w  awemUly
auil  thn  Si-nato  [dir»  romitialrn}',  for  theae  days
Dii'rht  he  uiM-d  OH  rourt-dAyi4  in  raNc  thf)  aanetobly
did  not  nuttt ;  whilu  nu  tUrii/a»ti  pni|H'r  no  mrt^tin^
nf  tlw.  ntmitia  could  taku  placu.  Tho  op[iiiNtir  of
diftftuti  were  tho  rfi«  HffaKti,  or  days  on  which  on
accoiinr  of  pnrirtcatious,  holidays, /trirt^-,  aud  on
other  religions  gnmiHU,  tliv  ronrtti  could  not  flit,
nor  the  Coiuitia  assemhl«,  (See  Fkhiaf.)  The  ditt
rtligUni  were  nlao  connl4>d  as  ttffaati.  Besides  tlic
3S-4a  rfie*  fatti  proper,  the  1^8-194  r?*m  t'Cmiti^ln,
IIm  4d-5(>  dit«  nefonli,  aud  oTt-oQ  ditit  rfligioni,  t-l)«ru
wore  8  dirx  fuM-cisf,  which  were  uf/o$li  in  thutnorn-
Ing  and  evening  heoaitM)  of  certain  sncrltlcea  which
took  pTace  then,  lint  fn^ti  for  the  renniining  Uonrs.
Thurt^  Were  bIho  'A  HifMfituti  (split  dayH).  which  were
ntfn»tt  until  tln^  conclusion  4tf  a  particnlar  proceod-
injc — e.  \r.  the  n^novnl  of  the  ftweepin^tt  from  the
Templuof  Vesta  on  June  l.'Vtli,  Vml  fanfx  aftrrwards.

Till)  division  of  dny-s  inlt»yn«ti  and  jtrofetlif  or
lltilid»>M  and  workdays,  only  itflVcted  private  life,
though  many  die*  nr/aati,  as/rriae,  would  be  iden-
tical with  die»fa%ti.

The  list  of  the  dittfanH  was  of  immeDse  iinpor-
tanco  as  aflTecting  legal  prococdingo,  and  indeed
all  pnlillu  life.  For  a  long  time  it  wan  in  the
hands  of  the  pontifieta,  and  was  thus  only  arcenai-
hie  to  the  patriciann;  hut  at  laat  0>.c.  :104)  Gnaons
Flavins  pnlilislied  it  and  initili*  it  genuniUy  acces-
dible.  Thin  lier.  called  niinply  FaHti,  van  the  ori-
gin of  tliH  Roman  calendar,  nhieh  bnro  the  same
name.  In  this  calendar  tho  days  of  the  yejir  are
divided  into  weeks  of  eight  duys  pach,  indtcatM
by  tho  letters  A  to  H.  Eacli  diiy  has  marks  Indi-
cating its  number  in  the  month,  its  legal  Hignill-
conco  {V^fattuty  "S  ■=. nefaatHt,  C  ^comtltu/ii,  EN
=:t PI tcrcMH).  The  festivals,  sacrifices,  aud  ifames
0(!ciitriiig  on  it  are  also  atlded,  as  well  aa  notices
of  historical  occurrences,  the  rising  and  setting  of
the  stars,  and  other  niatl«ni.  No  trace  remains  of
any  calendar  previona  it*  Caexar;  lint  wveral  eal-
eiidan  oompasod  after  CaMiar's  n-form  hnve  been
preserved.  Ovid's  Faatt  is  a  ptwiical  explanation
of  the  Roman  feHtivnlMiif  the  tirwt  *'\x  ninulhH.  We
have  alao  many  fraguieuts  of  caicndam,  painted  or  '


ca».iiioejKiM^r


engrnveil  on  stone,  belonging  to  Rome  and  otb«r
Italian  cities;  for  it  wiu)  common  to  put  up  cnlni'
dam  of  this  kind  in  piiblio  places,  templrn,  aii<1
private  honsrs.  There  are  two  coniplete  calfu-
dnrv  in  existenee — one  an  ofHrial  list  writtm  bi
FuriuH  DionyMius  Philoealus  in  A.b.  3.V4,  the  oU»r
u  Chrislian  v^ntiou  of  the  official  caleudur,  made
by  Pulemjns  Silvias  in  a.d.  *4m.  Sec  C'-iLKsrw-
Riuu :  UtES.

The  word  fasti  waa  further  applied  to  the  u-
nital  lists  of  the  triumphs,  high  officials,  cuuhIi,
dictatvra,  ccnsurs,  and  prieats.  Tbrar  listn  nr»
oii]|(iii(illy,  like  the  other  faati,  made  out  by  ilw
jMitifijtcM.  Some  frogmeaU  of  them  have  hu-
vived,  among  which  may  be  tnenitoned  the  Fkiii
Capitolini,  mi  called  from  the  Roman  Capitol,
where  they  arc  now  preoerved.  Thej*  vc^xv  wiif-
inally,  in  K.c.  :t6-30,  engravetl  on  the  mnriile  vtll
of  the  Regia,  or  nitlcial  rcHidenoo  of  the  Vaw^ki
Maximim,  and  afterwards  voutinneU  6ret  la  t.C.
1*2,  and  aflei'wunls  to  A.n,  \X

Fasti  HeUenXci  and  Faati  Romiliii.  See  ('l»-
TON.  Hknby  Fynks.

Faatlgitim  (acn)t.  nrrv^Ki).  Literally,  a  ilvp*;
in  architecture,  a  pediment.  The  triangle  vbick
Murinountq  eacli  end  of  a  .^^

ivctaugular  hiiilding.  ntid
which,  in  (Aei,  repreaentu
the  gable  end  of  the  roof.
(See  Antae.}  It  is  com-
posed of  the  cornice  of
tlie  en  tahlalure  which
furniK  itK  base,  the  two
converging  cornices  at
tlie  sides,  and  tho  tj/mpa'
num  or  Dat  surface  en-
closed by  them,  m>  called
from  ita  rcaeniblancc  to  a
three -corQored  laiulMnrine  (Vitniv,  iij.  3,  ir.6;
Cic.  dt  Oral.  iij.  46.  i  180;  Livy.  xl.  2).  TliUflat
surface  waa  generally  ornamented  with  Kulctir*;
originally,  in  the  early  temples  of  Zeiuu  with  a  ^at-
|ile  eaglu  an  a  symbol  of  the  god,  an  inatanre  af
which  is  aftonled  by  tho  coin  repnisenled  iu  Ul#
uliove  illustration  (  Bcgor,  Hpifil.  AhUaj.  f.  6),
whence  the  (ireek  name  (ttrnr,  which  was  at  int
applietl  to  the  ti/mpamMm  ant)  afterwarda  In  tb*
whole  )MM)inient,  and  in  after-times  with  eUborsts
sculptures  in  high  relief.  8ee  AntefiXa;  Tn-
PLUM.

The  dwelling-hoiisca  of  the  Romans  might  baw
sloping  roofa,  but  ornamontal  gables  were  iwt  al-
lowed;  hence,  when  the  word  is  applifnl  to  the",
it  is  not  in  its  strictly  technical  sense,  but  •Inif-
natee  the  roof  simply,  and  is  to  be  undenlMHluf
nno  which  rises  to  a  ridge  as  itistiognialietl  fniBis
tiat  one  (Cic.  ad.  V-  fr.  iii.  1,  4,  M4  ;  Vetg.  Jrs.Till
■191),  Among  other  divine  honoum.  the  Rcksssi
decrvcil  to  Caesnr  tho  liberty  of  erecliti)*  a  fwlifi-
nin  to  his  house  (Pint.  Caej.Hl  :  nee  ArititTUni'll)-'
lliat  is,  a  p4>rtico  and  ]>«dimeiit  towards  Uia  atffSl
like  that  of  a  temple. S*)v  DoMt:a.

Fatnm.  See  Fohtvsa;  Mor&ar;  KBUtt:
Tyciie.

FatQus,  Fatual Seo  Karxua^  Taw**

Fauces. Sen  DoMt't^

Fauna,  Faula,  or  Fatna.  A  goddess  of  tb*  Ut-
ivn.  Areonliiig  totheold  Roman  legend«»by  wli»ei«
all  tho  Italian  deities  were  originally  inortaU,  th*


Fuilgium. |l''r«fn  ■  «>«■


4


FAUNALIA


FAUSTINA


was  the  daaghter  of  Pioos,  and  the  sister  and  wife
of  Faunae.  One  account  makes  her  to  have  never
left  her  bower,  or  let  herself  be  seen  of  men ;  and  to
have  been  deified  for  this  reason,  becoming  identical
with  the  Bona  Dea,  and  no  man  being  allowed  to
enter  her  temple  (Macrob.  i.  12).  According  to  an-
other tradition,  she  was  not  only  remarkable  for
her  modesty,  but  also  for  her  extensive  and  va-
ried knowledge.  Having,  however,  on  one  occa-
Hiou,  made  free  with  the  contents  of  a  Jar  of  wine,
she  was  beaten  to  death  by  her  husband  with
myrtle  -  twigs.  Repenting,  however,  soon  after
of  the  deed,  he  bestowed  on  her  divine  honours.
Hence,  in  the  celebration  of  her  sacred  rites,  myr-
tle-boughs were  carefully  excluded ;  nor  was  any
wine  allowed  to  be  brought,  under  that  name,  into
her  temple;  but  it  was  called  "honey,''  aud  the
vessel  containing  it  also  was  termed  mellariumy
''honey-Jar"  (cf.  Macrob.  i.  1*2).  Fauna  is  said
to  have  giveu  oracles  fi-om  her  temple  after  death,
which  circomstauce,  according  to  some,  affonis  an
etymology  for  the  name  Fatna  or  Fatuella,  which
was  ofteu  home  by  her  (from  Jari,  "  to  declare  ").
There  can  be  little  donbt  that  Fauna  ia  identical
not  only  with  the  Bona  Dea,  but  with  Terra,  Tel-
Ins,  and  Ops — in  other  words,  with  the  Earth  per-
sonified (Macrob.  1.  c). See  Faunus.

Fatuialia.  Festivals  at  Rome  in  honour  of  Fau-
nus. They  were  celebrated  on  the  13tb  of  Febru-
ary, or  the  Ides  of  the  mouth.  On  this  same  day
ocenrred  the  alanghter  of  the  Fabii  (Ovid,  Fa«t.  ii.
193  foil.).  There  was  another  festival  of  the  same
name,  which  was  celebrated  on  the  Nones  of  De-
cember (Hor.  Carm.  iii.  IB).

FannnB  or  Fataoa.  "The  well-wisher"  (from
/arere\  or  perhaps  "  the  speaker "  (from  /ari).
(On  the  etymology  of  the  word  see  Nettlesbip,
Ledum  and  Enatfa,  pp.  50-54).  Oue  of  the  old-
est and  most  popular  Romau  deities,  who  was
identified  with  the  Greek  Pan  on  account  of
the  similarity  of  their  attributes.  (See  Pax.)
Aa  a  good  spirit  of  the  forest,  plains,  and  fields,
he  gave  frnitfuluess  to  the  cattle,  and  was  heuce
called  lunus.  With  all  this  he  waa  also  a  god  of
prophecy,  called  by  the  name  of  Fatuus,  with
oraclM  in  the  sacred  groves  of  Tibur,  around  the
well  Albuuea,  aud  ou  the  Aveutine.  The
responses  were  said  to  have  been  giveu  in
Satumiao  veree.  (Cf.  Vairo,  L.  L.  vii.  36.)
Faunus  revealed  the  future  in  dreams  and
strange  voices,  communicated  to  his  Tota-
ries  while  sleeping  in  his  precincts  upon  the
fleeces  of  sacrificed  lambs.  A  goddess  of  like
attributes,  called  Fauua  and  Fatna,  was  asso-
ciated in  his  worship.  She  was  regarded
sometimes  as  bis  wife,  sometimes  as  hia
sister.  (See  Bona  Dra.)  Just  aa  Pan  was
accompanied  by  the  noyiVcoi,  or  little  Pans,
so  the  existence  of  many  Fauni  was  as-
sumed besides  the  chief  Fauuus.  They
were  imagined  as  merry,  capricious  beings,  and
in  (larticular  as  mischievous  goblins  who  caused
uightmares.  In  fable  Faunns  appears  as  au  old
king  of  Lfttinm,  son  of  Ficus,  and  grandson  of
Satumns,  father  of  Latinus  by  the  nymph  Mfr-
rica.  After  his  death  he  is  raised  to  the  posi-
tion of  a  tntelary  deity  of  the  land,  for  hts  mauy
services  to  agrioultnre  and  cattle-breeding.  Two
festivals,  called  Fannalia,  were  celebrated  in  hia
honour— oue  on  the  13th  of  February,  iu  the  tem-


Faonaa. (Gori,  Gem.  AnL  FUtr  vol.  i.  pi.  H.)

pie  on  the  islaud  in  the  Tiber,  the  other  on  the  5th
of  December,  when  the  peasants  brought  him  rustic
offerings  and  amused  themselves  with  dancing.

Fausta.  (1)  Corneua,  daughter  of  Sulla,  and
married  to  Milo,  the  partisan  of  Cicero.  She  dis-
graced herself  by  a  criminal  affair  with  the  histo-
rian Sallust  (Hor.  Sat  i.  2,  41 ;  Schol.  Cruq.  et  Acr.
od  loc.).  (2)  Flavia,  the  daughter  of  Maximian,
and  wife  of  Constautine  the  Great.  When  her
father  wished  her  to  Join  him  in  a  plot  for  assas-
sinating her  husband,  she  disclosed  the  whole
affair  to  the  latter.  After  exercising  the  most
complete  ascendency  over  the  mind  of  her  hus-
band, she  was  eventually  put  to  death  by  him,  on
his  discovering  the  falsity  of  a  charge  which  she
had  made  against  Crispus,  the  son  of  Ccuistantine
by  a  previous  marriage  (Eutrop.  x.  2,  4;  Victor.

Epit.  40,  41). See  CONSTANTINDa.

FanstlDa.  (1)  Annia  Galebu,  daughter  of
Auuius  Verua,  prefect  of  Rome.  She  married  An-
toninus Pius  before  his  adoption  by  Hadriau,  aud
died  in  the  third  year  of  her  husband's  reign,  thirty-
six  years  of  age  (a.d.  141).  She  wae  notorious  for  her
licentiousness,  yet  her  husband  appeared  blind  to
her  frailties,  and  after  her  death  even  accorded  unto
her  divine  honours. Her  efiSgy  appears  on  a  large


Ftuni&K  n  Mater  CaBtroram.

number  of  meilats  (Dio  Cass.  xvii.  30;  Capitol.
Anton.  P.  3).  (2)  Annia,  or  the  Younger,  daughter
of  the  preceding,  married  her  cousin  Marcus  An-
relius,  and  died  a.d.  176,  in  a  village  of  Cappsdo-
cia,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Tauriis,  on  her  hnsbaud's
return  from  Syria.  She  is  represented  by  Dio  Cas-
sius  andCapitolinus  as  even  more  profligate  in  her
conduct  than  her  mother;  and  yet  Marcus,  in  his
Meditationa  (i.  17),  extols  her  obedience,  simplici-
ty, aud  affection. Her  daughter  Lncilla  married


FAUSTITA3


tiH


FEHIKALIA


Liiciiitt  Voriifi,  wlimii  Mniciif)  Am^Iiiis  R»«oottited
M-itli  liiin  ill  tbc  Empire,  nuil  Imr  kdu  CoiuQiodus
MucccKtlod  Ills  (albcr  aa  eiu|>eror  {C&iiitol.  St.Atirtl.
6. 19,  Sfi).

FaaatStaa.  A  ((odtlesH  anicDf;  tho  Koiiiana.  bu[>-
pu^d  to  presiik'  uver  cnttle  aiiil  tliu  jiriMluctious
of  the  WMoutt  geniimlly.  FuiiMiitua  is  probably
eqitivslcot  to  the  FtUdtoa  Tempvriim  of  the  Ru-
luai)  tiiiHlals  (Ilor.  Cann.  iv.  5,  1)^),

FaoBtiUuA.  The  name  ortlio  Rhejilierd  who,  iu
the  okl  Kitiiiaii  I«<;iE(.-ii(i,  t'oiuiil  Koinulun  ami  Kctiiiiii
beiiif;  aiickltHl  by  tlio  nbe-wott^  aiiil  who  touk  botb
the  cUlUIrt-u  to  hU  boiue  aiiil  brought  thotu  ni>.
See  HusiLLVs.

Faventia.  Now  Fseiiza;  n  town  in  Gallia
Cioalpiit:!,  on  Ibc  river  Aitemo  aud  tbv  Via  Ac-
milia.  It  vrntt  celobraluil  Tor  it«  mauufacture  of
Uncus  (Pliny,  //.  .V.  xix.  \).

FavoniUB. See  ZBravitrs.

FavonluB,  Marcus.  Ah  imitator  of  Cato  Uti-
eenaitt,  whoso  cbaracter  uud  comluct  he  copied  so
closely  as  to  receive  the  nickiiaiiie  of  *'  Cato'M  ape.*'
He  Beeuio  to  have  hud  aomc  al>ilily  aa  au  orator,
bnt  no  HjteciiucQH  of  bici  Apeecbes  have  deAoeudtMl
to  DB.  He  wa«!  put  to  death  by  OcluviauuB  after
the  battle  of  Pliilipiii  in  B.u.  4'^.  See  Val.  Max.  vi.
S.}7;  Plnt.Caf.  ,Wtw.  aa,  46;  id, /*&«i).  60, 67  ;  id.
Brul.  \'i,:U;  id. Cm*.  41

FavorlnuB  (<^a^a>pll'oc>.  A  native  uf  Aro]at6  in
Cinn}f  who  lived  at  Rome  duriiLf;  tli«  reixiiH  of
Trqjau  and  Hndniui,  and  eiijnyed  n  high  dejjn^e
of  cuuHideration.  Hi'  in  aaid  to  have  been  burn  an
bonniiplirodite  or  n  eunuch,  yet  waa  once  charged
with  adultery  by  a  Rotuau  of  rank;  tto  that  be
aflerwardd  used  tu  boaeit  of  three  thiiij;!i — thot
bciii];  a  euniteb,  be  had  bei;ii  ueeuHi-d  of  mlultery;
thnt  tbun^jli  a  (iuul,  he  both  urole  and  B|K>ke
Greek;  aud  thnt  though  he  had  given  oltence  to
llip  empenir.  h<>  atill  lived.  He  wrote  uuiueroiis
works,  bttt  no  pnrt  of  tliuni  has  reaobeil  us  except
a  few  fnigmentM  in  StubacuH.  AuIdh  Gellius,  bow-
ever,  bait  prcHerved  for  u^  eonie  of  bJH  dimtertatioiiis
in  n  Latin  dii«w  (.VoW.  Att.  xii.  1 ;  xiv.  I.  2  ;  xvii.
10).  UelliuH,  iu  fni't,  ivgnrdnd  him  with  great  ad-
miration, atid  ill  his  XurtfE  Atlirtir  playd  Bimwell
in  ti  niiUl  wiiy  Iu  KHYoriiuia*M  .IuIiiinuii.  Favo-
rinuH  loved  to  write  on  to])icH  nut  of  the  ltjuiuhui
path,  aud  more  or  Ivhb  wbiineical;  he  composed,
for  example,  a  eulogy  on  Tbereites,  ahothor  oii
quartan  t'evci',  etc.  Itavinjr  bad  (he  mirtfortuue  to
offend  the  euipcror  Hndrini]i,  bis  atatues,  which  the
Alheniaii!«  bad  raittcd  t<»  liiui,  were  thrown  dnwii
by  that  same  people.  Hi-  beijneatlKMl  bi«  library
mud  nmiiNioii  nt  Kinnn  tu  Herod'Ps  Atticiis.  Favo-
rttiUH  wax  a  rtieiul  of  Pltit.-iiidi,  wlni  dfdicnted  a
work  to  bint.  For  further  piirliniilarH  i-elating  to
(hia  iudividaal,  consult  PUilustratuH  {fil.SoyhiMt.
i.S,  l),aud  Liictau  (A'uiiiieA.";  liemon.  l'2foll  >,  aud
Prof.  Nettlcflhip'B  ^>uper  on  Aulne  Getllns  iu  his
lectura  and  Esaaya^ctc.  (1885).

Fax  (fffayvs).  A  torch.  The  deseriptious  of
piH«t8  and  iiiytbologi»t*,  and  the  works  of  ancient
art,  represent  the  tonb  as  carried  by  Diaua,
Cere*,  Belloua,  Hymen,  Phoapborus,  by  women  in
bacebaualiuu  proceHMionti,  and,  in  au  iuverte<t
[HUtitinn,  by  Sleeji  uiid  DeaTb.  In  anrient  mar
IiIm  the  tort-b  iipiHiarM  to  be  formed  of  wuiHlen
ataves  or  twiga,  either  lioimd  by  a  ropo  drawn'
round  tbeiu  la  a  spiral  fonn,  or  sarrouuded  by


circular  banda  at  equal  diifttancei).  The  tuaide  of
the  torch  way  he  supiH>»ed  to  have  beeo  fillMJ
with  flax,  tow,  or  other  vegetable  tihrea,
the  whole  being  abiiudantly  iuipreg-
iioted  with  pitch,  roMin,  wax,  nil,  aud
other  inllauiuuible  siib^lance?.  A»  The
principal  U!.e  of  torrben  wan  i»i  give
light  t"  thcww  who  \rt'ut  abroad  after
auuiu't,  the  portion  of  the  Koiuan  day
immediately  ttncceediug  anuaet  wb«
calletl  /ax  or  prima  /as  (Cell,  iii.  2,  f^  iW
MI;  Machtb.  Sal.  i.  3,  $  8b  The  torch  l"^"' J^
was  one  of  the  necessaiy  accompaiii-
luentK  and  ftvmbola  of  nnininge.  See  MatruW-
NUM.

Feaat  Daya. See  DiRs;  Femiar.

Featber-beda. Sec  LEcrrs.

Febria.  Thu  goddcM,  or  rather  the  «ve«M,i»(
fever  (Val.  Max.  ii.  5, 6;  Cic.  X  D.  iii.  85).  8lw  twl
three  t5arictiLari«a  at  Rome.

Febnialia.  A  feuat  at  Home  of  purification  tni
atoui.-ment,  in  tbc  mouth  of  February  ;  it  oontiowl
for  twelve  daytt  The  mouth  of  February,  wbidi,
together  wilb  Junuary,  waa  wided  by  Nuuia  to  tbr
ten  moutb.H  constituting  the  year  of  Kouialiv, de-
rived itH  name  from  thid  general  expiatory  fuiifU,
the  people  Iteing  then  purtHed  (febrmali )  frtitu  tbe
Bins  of  the  whole  year  (Ovid./'Vn'.  li.  19)-

February. See  Cai.i^miaKIUN.

Februum. Sec  Lcfkrcaua.

Febnius.  An  ancient  Italiau  diviuity.tn  mhva
tbt^  month  of  February  waa  eacreiL  The  atm  it
eoiiiiected  with  /e6ruar«  <to  purify). See  Fuki>

At.lA.

Fecialea. See  Fkjialks.

FelicYtaa.  Tho  persoiiitication  of  good  fotinne
aiDoug  the  liomauft.  She  was  worshipi>eil  in  vul-
out)  isanctuaric-s  in  Rome,  her  attributed  bciiifi  dw
cornucopia  and  the  bcrahl's  staff. Sec  FAl'9TtTA^

Felia. Htm  Faeus.

Felix,  Anto.vii;».  I^rocorator  of  Jodaea,  io  tiir
reigits  of  Cinndtus  and  Hem.  He  indur«d  DrasilU.
wile  of  Azizns,  king  of  Kiueaa,  to  leave  fa«r  tiiu-
baud :  aud  she  veus  still  living  w*ith  Felix  in  k^f-
flO,  when  St.  Paul  preached  l>efore  him  "  of  right-
eouune^^,  temptiraiice,  anil  judgment  tocotse.'*  H«
was  n'ralled  in  a.d.  t{2.

Felix,  Mixrcirs. See  Mtxucitrs  Fkux.

FelaXna.  The  aucieut  capital  of  Norlbeni Ktn-
riu,  afterwants  known  an  Uonouia  (lbdogiiat,>
uaiiie  given  to  it  by  the  Roniunit  afliM  they  bi^
con<iuei-e4l  the  Boii  (B.c.  1^1;,  the  Boil  linviuK  ukto
the  place  fiom  the  EtntHcanH  (Livy,  xxxiii.:i7.fULl
Here  Octaviauuv,  Autoiiy,  and  Lupidiis  arraugtd
the  tenuH  of  till-  Second  TriumviratL-  iSuct.  .l«f'
9(>).  See  Uiirtou,  Etruican  Jiotogua  (lcJ76)  I'lift
the  Luijdre  the  city  waa  Bouietlnn-s  I  In-  chww-unf
ideiice  of  the  emperors.  Iu  the  Middle  AgM  it  bt-
came  a  place  of  great  impoixaucc.

Femioalia.  A  garment  worn  iu  wini»  by  Au-
gustus Caesar,  who  was  very  snusovpiilde  to  c«W
(Suet.  Jriy.  &i).  Caaaubou  anp)K>MV)  thnn  to  baw
been  bauda  or  filleta  (see  Facjcia)  wouud  iboal
tbc  tbighe ;  they  are  more  probably  to  be  ideuti
fte<l  with  the  bravat,  and  may  be  Iteat  iraaalatnl
"draa-en*-"  The»e  are  mentioned  niidor  the  aaair
trtptftt]f)iiia  an  worn  by  the  Roman  bonenWQ  lAni-
an,  Tad.  p.  14,  eil  Blaucanl).


FEK£STELLA


665


FEKCULUM


FenerteUa.  A  scholarly  Roman  historiau,  n-ho
lived  in  the  time  of  Augustus.  The  elder  Pliny
places  his  death  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  Fene-
stella  wrote  an  historical  work  entitled  Annalet,
from  which  Asconius  Fedianus  has  derived  many
uiaterials  in  his  commentaries  on  Cicero's  Orations.
Of  this  work  only  fragments  remain.  Another
prodaction,  De  Saoerdotiit  et  Magistratibua  SomattO'
rum,  is  sometimes  attribnted  to  him,  bat  incorrect-
ly,  since  it  is  from  th^pen  of  Fioccbi  (Floccns),  a
uative  of  Florence,  and  was  written  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  fonrteenth  century.  Fenestella
was  seventy  years  old  at  the  time  of  his  death.
The  fragments  of  Feuestella's  Annalet  are  collected
by  H.  Peter,  But.  Frag.  272.  See  the  treatises  by
Mercklin,  De  F«He»tella  Hiatorioo  et  Poeia  (Dorpat,
1844),  and  Poetb,  De  Fenettella  Hittoriarum  Scrip-
tare,  etc.  {Bouti,18A9).

Fenestra.  (1)  A  window.  (See  Domus,  pp.  540,
551.) 0i)  A  loopliole  iu  a  tower  from  which  arrows


Windowa  Id  the  Hoase  of  the  Tnglc  Poet
(Pompeii.)

and  other  missiles  were  discharged  (Caes.  B.  C.  ii.
9).  (3)  A  hole  pierced  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear  for
holding  ornaments  (Jiiv.  i.  104). See  Inauris.

Fezml  A  savage  people,  reckoned  by  Tacitus
( Germ.  46)  as  distinct  from  the  natives  of  Qerma-
nia.  They  probably  dwelt  in  the  eastern  part  of
what  is  now  Prussia,  and  were  the  same  as  the
modem  Finns. Ptolemy  calls  theiu  4(Woi.

Fenoa  (roxor).  Interest  on  money.  (1}  Greek.
In  Greece  the  rate  of  interest  on  invested  capital
waa  not  restricted  by  law,  but  was  left  entirely
to  arrangement  between  the  parties  concerned
( Lys.  c.  Theomn.  u  18).  The  average  rate,  com-
pared with  that  usually  given  at  the  present  day,
was  very  high,  far  higher  than  the  rent  either  of
houses  nr  land.  This  is  partly  explained  by  tlie
proportionately  greater  scarcity  of  ready  money,
and  by  the  fact  that  it  was  difflcntt  to  accumulate
a  large  amount  of  capital.

In  the  time  of  Demosthenes,  12  per  cent,  was  re-
garded as  a  rather  low  rate  of  interest,  and  higher
rates,  up  to  18  per  cent.,  were  quite  common.  In
bottomry  (to  vovtikov  davtta-fui)  the  ordinary  rate
of  interest  at  Athens  was  20  per  cent.  In  the
event  of  failure  iu  the  payment  of  interest  due,
compound  interest  was  charged.  In  the  compnta-
tion  of  interest  two  different  methods  were  em-
ployed. It  was  usual  to  specify  either  the  sum  to
be  paid  by  the  month  on  every  roiua  (eqnal  in  in-
trinsic value  of  silver  to  about  $16.50),  or  tlie  frac-
tion of  the  principal  which  was  annually  paid  n.s
interest.  Capital  therefore  was  said  to  he  invest-
ed at  a  drachma,  if  for  every  mina  (100  drachmae)
there  was  paid  interest  at  the  rate  of  one  drachma
— i.  e.  I  per  cent,  monthly,  and  consequently  12
per  cent,  per  annum. Or  again,  if  12^  per  cent.


yearly  interest  was  to  be  paid,  the  capital  was
said  to  be  invested  at  "one  eighth.'^  In  most
cases  the  interest  appears  to  have  been  paid
monthly,  and  on  the  last  day  of  the  month  ;  but
payment  by  the  year  was  not  nnknown.  In  bot-
tomry the  interest  whs  according  to  the  terms  of
the  contract.

(2)  Roman.  At  Rome,  as  at  Athens,  the  rate  of
interest  was  originally  unrestricted,  and  it  was  not
until  after  hard  straggles  that,  by  the  laws  of  the
Twelve  Tables,  a  regular  yearly  rate  of  interest  at
one  twelfth  of  the  capital,  or  6^  per  cent.,  was  es-
tablished. But  tins  and  subsequent  legal  limita-
tions were  all  the  less  effectual  for  putting  down
usury,  because  they  were  valid  in  the  case  of  Ro-
man citizens  only,  and  not  in  that  of  foreigners.
Usury  was  accordingly  practised  nuder  the  name
of  foreigners  up  to  the  end  of  the  second  century
B.C.,  wheu  the  laws  against  it  were  extended  so  as
to  include  aliens.  Through  intercourse  with  Asia
and  Greece,  a  change  in  the  payment  of  interest  was
gradually  introduced,  which  in  the  first  half  of  the
first  century  B.c.  was  generally  adopted.  Capital
was  no  longer  lent  by  the  year,  but  by  the  month,
and  monthly  interest  was  paid  oi]  the  first  day  of
each  month;  notice  of  intention  to  call  in  the  loan
was  given  on  the  Ides  (the  13th  or  15tb  day  of  the
month),  and  reimbursement  took  place  on  the  first
day  (Kalends)  of  the  following  niotith.  The  regular
rate  of  interest  with  this  reckoning  was  1  per  cent,
monthly,  or  12  per  cent,  per  annum.  The  accumu-
lation of  large  fortunes  in  Rome  at  the  end  of  the
Republic  considerably  lessened  the  rate  of  interest
on  safe  investments.  The  chief  field  for  usury  was
then  the  provinces,  whose  inhabitants  were  com*
pelled  by  the  exorbitant  imposts  to  be  continually
raising  loans  at  any  price.  The  custom,  long  per-
mitted, of  adding  the  year's  unpaid  interest  to  the
principal  was  first  forbidden  by  the  later  Roman
law.  Justinian  permanently  fixed  the  rate  of  in-
terest in  ordinary  investments  at  6  per  cent.,  in
commercial  enterpriHes  at  6  per  cent.,  and  in  bot-
tomry, in  which  it  had  previously  been  nulimited
on  account  of  tbe  risk  incurred  by  the  stock  on
long  voyages,  at  12  per  cent.

Feralia.  The  last  day  of  the  Roman  festival
called  the  Parentalia. See  Manes;  Parentaua.

Fercttlam  (from  fero).  A  term  applied  to  any
kind  of  tray  or  platform  used  for  carrying  any-
thing. Thus  it  is  used  to  signify  the  tray  or  frame


Roman  eoldlen  canylDg  on  a  feratlum  tbe  Golden
C&ndlcatick. (Arch  of  Tilus.)


F£K£NTAKU


666


FESCEXXISA


ott  which  several  dishes  were  brought  in  at  ouco
at  Oiiiiier  (Petrou.  'Jit) :  and  hence  fitculu  came  tu
mean  the  uuiiiher  ul'  courses  at  dinner,  and  even
the  diahea  themselven  (Suet.  Aug.  7-1;  8erv.  ii<^
Vei^.  Aeu.  i.  637  ;  Juv.  L  ^,  vtiih  ]^f  oi'^s  nottii  aad
thu  Articlm  Crna,  p.  313).

Thu  rerouhiiu  wiw  iiImo  n»pd  far  rarrj-ing  the  im-
nges  uf  ttie  gods  in  thu  in'oceHMiuti  r>f  thu  circus
(Suet.  lul.  'i*},  the  anheA  uf  the  duad  in  a  fHitvml
(Sitot.  Catiff.  15),  and  thu  H|K>ilA  in  u  triumph  (Sutt.
IhI.  37  ;  Livy,  i.  ID);  in  all  which  cum-ii  it  uppean
to  have  l>eeu  curried  im  the  shoulderit  ur  iu  the
hands  of  men.  Thin  is  Mbim-ii  iu  the  ill  us  t  ration
frum  (ho  Arch  of  Tttiis.  where  Koiiian  noldieni  are
currying  oit  n  fervuliiiii  the  Oolden  Cundlestick.
The  tnriHt  tlhtstrinuH  captives  w«re  noDietinwB
l^^lacml  on  a  fercuhim  in  a  trinmphr  iti  t*n\rc  that
they  might  be  better  seen  (Sen.  Hero.  Oet.  110),

Fereutaril. See  Exkhcitus,  p.6r>0.

Pereatinum.  (1)  A  town  uf  Ktrurin,  Hiath  of
Volwnii,  birthplace  of  the  eni^Htrnr  Otho.  (2)  An
ancient  town  of  the  Meruici  iu  LntinEii.  iioathwest
of  An.'ignii^  eolotiizeil  by  the  Rouiuns  in  the  8«c>
«iud  Punic  War.

Ferentum. 8ee  PoREXTrM.

FeretriuB.  A  Huriiame  of  lupiter,  di<rtvud  from
/ffire,  '■  to  mtrikit  "  j  fur  jierauntt  who  took  an  oath
called  U])'aii  liipitvr  tu  Htrike  them  if  Ibey  Hwore
falsely  a-n  they  ntnick  the  victim  whivb  they  sac-
rtficud.  Olhtin*  derived  it  from  /erre,  because
people  dudiculed  (ferebant)  to  hiui  the  »imlia
oftima.  Hee  Feat.  s.  h.  v. ;  Llvv,  i.  10;  Proi»ert.  iv.
10, 4f,.

Pervtram  i<fiip<Tpa»). A  bier. Sec  Ftn«t'8.

Feriae.  Holidays  at  Rome,  dedicalcd  to  the
worahip  of  Noiim  dully.  A  diiitiocttuu  wua  drawu
iietwpeu  frrini-  pnralat,  or  boliday»  observed  by
gentM,  familii^H,  and  iudividiutis,  am\  ftr'iae  publi'
«««,  or  public  liolidays.  Puldic  holidays  wei-e  ei-
ther rtxed  or  movable,  or  occaiioual.  The  lixeil
holidays  i/eriac  slativar)  were  forty-five  in  nnm-
her,  and  were  celebrated  every  year  ou  u  detitiite
day  Qud  registennl  anoordingly  in  the  calendar.
The  movable  ItoUdayn  t/a-iac  conr^Uirae)  wore
also  annual,  but  wen;  held  on  cimngtng  dayN,  and
hud  therefore  to  ha  announcL-d  beforehand  by  rlie
ouUsuI»,  or  in  their  ubnunce  by  tlio  piiiotor.  The
«cca»ioiial  holidayH  (imperalirat)  wcio  cou:imaiidc<[
ou  special  itccaitionei  by  ihc  autUoritieii  with  the
coiiMjnt  of  ihu  poQtiJices.  8nch  were,  for  iu-
ataoce,  the  iiitppUc*itiontM,  a  solemn  tfen'icu  to  the
gods  to  celebrate  a  victory  or  the  like.  One  of  the
priucipal  movable  fe^tivaU  wh»  the  Frkiak  LaTi-
NAE.  Thifl  was  originally  a  celebration  by  thcLjitin
Tucv  held  on  tlie  Albaii  Mount  in  liountir  of  Inpit4!c
Latians.  It  wat  HubNei|uoully  tntiitifonncil  by
'rnn^uininiH  SuperbuH  into  a  fi:>«tival  of  the  Latin
Leagne.  Ita  uu>Mt  notable  ceremou}' eouaisted  iu
the  iiauritlce  of  white  bulU,  a  portion  of  whcKie
llush  was  distributed  to  each  of  the  cities  of  the
League  represented  at  the  sacrifice.  If  any  city
did  nut  receive  its  portion,  or  if  any  other  point  iu
the  ceremonial  was  omitted,  the  whole  sacrifice
had  to  be  i-ei»eoted.  Originally  it  la>ted  one  day,
but  afterwards  was  extende<l  (o  four.  It  wa»
then  cidebnited  iu  part  on  the  AUmn  Mount  by  the
Roman  cuuhuIk,  iu  presence  of  all  the  ntagifitrateii;
and  in  part  4ui  (he  Roman  Capitol,  a  race  being  in-
cluded in  the  perfurmaucc. It  was  announced  by


«


'  the  consuls  immediately  aftvr  their  asHumptiou  of

I  office,  uor  did  they  leave  Romu  for  their  pruvincM

until  they  had  celebrated  it. The  dale  tlu-rrfan

depended  ou  that  of  the  aa»uuipIiou  of  officer  iij

thu  higher  magistrntes-

The  Fkriak  SkmkntTvab  or  SKMKKrfxA  Dm,
were  kept  at  Rome  in  thi>  time  nf  thC'  sowing  of
the  lields,  for  the  ptir|MMH>  of  praying  to  Tellus  and
Ceres  for  a  good  crop.  It  wha  tixf«l  by  the  potiii-
fices,  aud  lawted  for  only  one  flay  i  Vuit.  L.  L.  vi.  Siii.

The  FimtLAK  Vi.VDKMiAi.ES  (Ang.a^-Oct.  l&rwvm
the  vintnge  festival.

The  Fehiak  AkstTvae  ur  Fkriak  Mem^u*  iJnnp
34-Aug.  1)  were  the  "  summer  vacation  "  w  hen  tiuh-
ionuble  Ronums  went  out  of  town  (Get).  ii.  loi.

Feriar  Praecihaxeae  were  probably  only  ilsvi
of  jireparation  for  the  regular  feriae  (Gell.iv.liji

Periae  Iiatinae. See  Feumr.

Peronia.  An  old  Italian  goddess,  Af  {$•!
origin,  but  nlM>  much  wolithipiied  in  Etmrta.
neeniA  originally  Iu  have  been  rvgardeil  in
same  Jight  ai^  Flora,  Libera,  ami  Veuna.  Ttw
Greeks  called  her  a  goddeaa  of  Dowerv;  ou  ana*
dbe  is  represented  as  a  girl  in  the  bloom  of  yooth.
with  flnwem  in  her  hair.  9\iv  wa»  also  worsliippfd
as  the  giKldw8«  of  emauoipaliou  from  nlavrry.  Sht
Iiad  ti  very  celebnited  shrine  at  the  ftiot  of  Mount
Somft(^  in  Einiria,  where  the  whole  neighlwor-
liiM)d  oHed  to  bring  her  rich  votive  offerings  iii«t
the  lii-MtfruitH  nf  tin*  tiehl.  The  annual  feeti>.iU
ser\'ed  as  fairs,  such  was  the  crowd  of  |>eop1i-  «bu
llockml  to  them.  The  mythical  king  Hernia*  nr
Kndns  of  I'menesW  was  regarded  am  her  sou.  He
lm«l  three  livw,  and  had  to  be  slain  three  ttntwl)?
Evauder  in  cousequeuoe  {Xor^.Aen.  viiL0l>4»

Fernitn. Iron. Sm  Metallitm.

Fesoemiiiui,  kc.  cartnina.  One  of  thn  pBrllwt
kind)^  iif  IliiHun  ptM-tr>'.  nhich  cunsiRted  uf  niJ*
and  jocoji*:  vtTM'M,  or  rather  dialugnr.t  in  extnoiwr*
verwett  (Livy,  vii.  ai,  in  which  the  merry  cwiutrj-
folks  a».<iailod  and  ridiculed  one  another  *  Hot
Epi»t.  ii.  1, 145t.  This  amusement  tteems  tirigiittll;
to  have  L>een  peculiar  to  country  people,  but  il
was  also  intriMluced  inin  the  towns  of  Italy  aihI  aI
Rome,  where  it  is  found  meulionctl  as  otic  of  lliiM
iu  which  yuuDg  [»«ople  indulged  at  we^lJuigi
(ticrv.  ad  Aril.  vii.  fiSn;  Heurca,  Controt,  21,  Jf«i
113;  Plin.  //.  .V.  xv.  22).  Th«-iv  ar^  ratlur  fwWe
sptbcimeuA  of  rbew  in  the  four  poems  b>  Cliniltu
t)e  SupUin  Uonorii  AngaiHi  el  Maria*:  The  Yttixo-
nina  were  one  of  the  |M>pubir  annistMiients  at  vin-
ous fuBtivats,  aud  ou  many  other  occasions,  bn
especially  after  the  harvest  was  uvrr.

After  their  introduction  into  the  towiti  tlirf
seem  to  have  lost  much  of  their  unginsl  mrti*
character,  aud  perhaps  were  wudifieil  by  llie  in-
nueuce  of  Greek  rrfinemt-nt  (see  Verg  ttwfj-  "-
:i8r>,  etc. ;  TibuU.  ii.  1.56;  Catull.  Ixi  1^7);  ili«?
remained,  however,  in  «>  far  thu  same  as  to  be  at
alt  times  irregular  and  mostly  ertemiwrs  dugfnvl
verses,  usually  in  the  Satumian  metre,  thnogh  ibt
specimens  which  are  preserved  are  in  trochsin
and  the  cretic  is  called  pfn  Fe»ctmminif  by  !>»'-
medes,  p.  479  (Keil).  Simiettmes,  however,  rf***
fesofHsini  were  also  written  a»  satire*  uptni  I*'-
sous  (Macnd».  Sitt.  ii.  4,  21).  Tlmt  thew  rsiU«nc»
had  no  mulicious  <>haraoter,  and  were  not  mieiHW
to  Iinri  or  injure,  may  be  inferred  fnun  thetiiraii-
stance  that  oue  person  often  called  Di»on  sniilliM
to  auswer  and  retort iu  a  similar  strain. Tbc


FESCENNrUM


667


FETIALES


Fescennioa  are  asserted  by  Festus  (s.  h.  t.)  to  have
beea  iotrodnoed  among  the  Romans  &om  Ecrnria,
and  to  bare  derired  thoir  name  from  Feaoenaia,  a
toTrn  of  that  ooantry.  But,  iu  the  first  place,  Fes-
cenuia  was  not  an  Etmscan,  bat  a  Falisoau  town,
and,  in  the  secood,  this  kind  of  amnsenient  was  at
all  times  so  popular  in  Italy  that  it  can  scarcely  be
considered  as  pecnliar  to  any  partionlar  place.
The  derivation  of  a  name  of  this  kind  f^m  that
of  some  partionlar  place  was  formerly  a  favourite
cnstom,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  derivatiou  of  oaeri-
monia  from  Gaer€.  Festns  gives  an  alternative
derivatiou  (tomfMoinum,  either  becanse  they  were
thoagbt  to  be  a  protection  against  sorcerers  and
witches,  or  because  fascinum  {phallu$),  the  symbol
of  fertility,  had  in  early  times,  or  in  rural  districts,
been  connected  with  the  amuMmeots  of  the  fes-
cennina.  This  etymology  is  £»r  more  probable.
Teuffel  (Bom.  lAt.  $  5)  attempts  to  combine  the
two,  suggesting  that  fescennia  may  have  dmived
its  name  from  fatcinHm.  Nettleship  {Joum.  Pkil.
xi.  190)  plausibly  assumes  a  q^bstantive /efoettniu,
"  a  cbarmer,"  from/oa,  "  saying'*;  hence /etcenntfii
would  be  "the  verses  used  by  charmers."  See
HUller,  Die  Etruaker,  il.  296 ;  Zell,  Ferimtchriften,
ii.  121 ;  Broman,  De  Vernbtu  Feaoenninia  (Upsala,
1%S);  Consen,Ortfffn««i'oMM,etc.,  124;  Rossbacb,
Die  rSmiache  Ehs  (1853);  Nettleship,  Leaturet  and
Eaaaga,  pp.  60  foil.  (Oxford,  1885);  and  the  arti-
cles Matriuokiuu;  Satcba.

Feaoannlnm  or  Fescennia.  A  town  of  the
Faliaci  in  Etruria,  and  consequently,  like  Falerii,
of  Pelasgic  origin.  (See  Falehu).  From  this  town
the  Romans  are  said  to  have  derived  the  Fescen-
nina  carmina  (q.  v.).

Festi  Dies. See  Dies  ;  Feriae.

Festivals See  Dies  ;  Fsriae.

Festooa.  Properly  any  stem,  stalk,  or  straw  of
grain,  or  blade  of  grass  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  31,  $  38).  In
two  xiassagesit  is  generally  explained  asa  synonym
of  the  praetor's  rod  (rtndicto)  laid  upon  the  slave's
buad  in  tiiaiiBniM«u>  (Plant.  Mil.  Glor.  iv,  1,  15;
I^rs.  V.  175).  But  Gonington  on  the  latter  passage
has  pointed  out  that  the  ordinary  use  of  ftatuca
wonld  suit  tlietie  two  places  equally  well ;  so  tbat,
after  all,  the  traditional  rendering  may  be  a  mis-
take. Plutarch  says  that  one  of  the  lictors  threw
stubble  (icdp^or)  ou  the  manumitted  slave  (Z>«
Ser.  JVttin.  Vind.  p.  550  B) ;  and  the  words  tictor
iactat  seem  to  imply  something  of  this  kind  rath-
er tban  touching  with  a  staff.  Possibly  both
ceremonies  accompanied  the  act  of  manumission,
the  praetor  applying  the  tindiota  with  bis  own
hand,  the  Uctor  throwing  the  stubble. See  Hah-

UHIS8IO.

Fasttu.  (1)  Sbxtub  Pohpkius.  A  grammarian,
sapposed  to  have  lived  before  the  third  centnry
A.D.  He  made  an  abridgment,  in  alphabetical
order,  of  the  large  work  of  Verrius  Flaccus  (q.  v.),
on  the  signification  of  words  {De  Verborum  SigHi-
j(ca(H) — a  rich  storehouse  of  most  important  in-
formation on  Roman  antiquities  and  early  Latin.
This  abridgment  bas  been  divided  by  editors  into
twenty  books,  each  of  which  contains  a  letter.
Festns  bas  passed  over  in  silence  those  words
which  Verrius  bad  declared  obsolete,  and  he  in-
tended, it  would  seem,  to  have  treated  of  them  in
a  separate  work.  Sometimes  he  does  not  coincide
iu  the  opinions  of  Verrius  (e.  g.  on  rnonatrnm),  and
on  these  occasions  he  gives  his  own  views  of  the


subject  matter.  The  abridgment  of  Festus  is  one
of  the  most  useful  books  that  we  possess ;  it  has  ex-
perienced, however,  in  some  respects,  an  unhappy
fate.  It  existed  entire  down  to  the  eighth  centn-
ry, when  one  PanlWame&id  (commonly  quoted  as
Paulus  Diaconns)  conceived  the  idea  of  making  a
small  and  meagre  extract  from  it.  This  compi-
lation, dedicated  to  Charlemagne,  henceforward
supplanted  the  original  work  in  the  libraries  of
the  day,  and  the  latter  was  so  far  lost  to  modern
times  that  but  a  single  manuscript  copy  (Codex
Famesinns,  now  in  Naples)  of  it  was  fonnd,  and
this  an  imperfect  one,  commencing  with  the  letter
M.  It  was  brought  from  Illyria,  and  was  first
copied  as  a  whole  by  Politian  in  1485.  The  first
edition  of  the  epitome  of  Paulus  was  printed  by
ZarotuB  (Milan,  1471).  Paulas  and  Festna  were
printed  together  at  Milan  (1510),  and  at  Venice
by  Aldus  Manutius  (1513).  More  valuable  is  the
edition  by  Agostino  (Venice,  1559-60),  with  its
collation  of  the  Famese  MS.  The  edition  of  Jo-
seph Scaliger  (1565)  contains  many  acute  emen-
dations, as  does  that  of  Fnlvius  Ursinns  (Rome,
1581).  The  best  editions  are  those  of  Dacier  (Paris,
1681);  Egger  (ParU,  1838);  K.  O.  Milller  (Leipzig,
1639;  2d  ed.  1880);  Thewrewk  de  Ponor  (Pesth,
1891).  See  the  excellent  paper  ou  Verrius  Flac-
cus by  Nettleship,  Leeturea  and  Etaaya  ( Oxford,
1685) ;  also  Hoffmaun,  De  Feati  *  De  Ferbomm  Sig-
ni/toafa'  Quaeaiionea  (Konigsberg,  1886);  Bngge,
Attlatein  bei  Featua  u.  Paulna  iu  the  Neue  Jahrh.
fur  Philol.  H.  PSdagoffikf  105.  91 ;  and  the  article
Lexicon.  (2)  Porcius,  governor  of  Indaea  after
Felix,  whom  the  Jews  solicited  to  condemn  St.
PanI  or  to  order  him  np  to  Jerusalem.  The  apos-
tle's appeal  to  Caesar  (the  emperor  Nero)  frustrated
the  intentions  of  both  Festns  and  the  Jews  (Acta,
xxT.  Ifoll.).  (3)  KuFius,  or  Rtn^ue.  Tbeauthorof
an  abridgment  of  Roman  history  {Breviarium  Serum
Oeaiarum  Fopuli  Bomani)  based  upon  Eutropius
and  Florns,  and  written  about  a.d.  369.  .  It  is
dedicated  to  the  emperor  Valens.  Editions  are
those  by  Forster  (Vienna,  1874),  and  Wagener
(Pragne,  1886).  See  also  Jacobi,  De  Feati  Breriarii
Foutibua  (Bonn,  1874),  and  Mommsen,  C.I.L.  vi.
537.

Fetlilea.  A  collegium  (Livy,xzxvi.  3)  of  Roman
priests  who  acted  as  the  guardians  of  the  public
faith.  It  was  their  province,  when  any  dispute
arcme  with  a  foreign  State,  to  demand  satisfaction,
to  determine  the  circumstances  under  which  hos-
tilities might  be  commeuced,  to  perform  tlie  vari-
ous rites  attendant  ou  the  solemn  declaration  of
war,  and  to  preside  at  the  formal  ratification  of
peace.  These  functions  are  briefly  but  compre-
hensively defined  by  Varro  (£.  L.  v.  86,  ed.  MHllerX
to  which  may  be  added  tlie  old  law  quoted  by
Cicero  (De  Leg.  ii.  9, 31) :  Foedervh,  pacis,  belu,

INDVTIARVM  ORATORE8  rmALCS  rVDlCKSQVK  8VN-

To  (IV8  N08CVKT0,  Madvig) ;  bklla  disckptanto.
Dionysins  ( ii.  73)  and  Livy  (i.  32)  detail  nt  con-
siderable length  the  ceremonies  observed  by  the
Romans  in  the  earlier  ages,  when  tbey  felt  them-
selves aggrieved  by  a  tieigfabonring  people.  It
appears  that  when  an  injury  had  been  sustained,
four  fetiales  (Varr.  ap.  Non.)  were  deputed  to
seek  redress,  who  again  elected  one  of  tbeir  num-
ber to  act  as  their  representative.  This  individual
was  styled  the  pater  patratua  populi  Romani.  They
were  dressed  in  the  garb  of  priests,  and  a  wreath  of
sacred  herbs  gathered  within  the  enclosure  of  the


FETIALES


UdS


FACTIL^


li


li'tlMlta. (KIcb.  I


C»|Mtoliiie  Hill  (rerhrnar,  »a9miHo),  wm  bom*'  hf-
for  tbuni  by  one  of  tln:ir  iiniiibrr,  who  v.m  lience
cnlli'd  Verbeuarins  ( Plliiy,  //.  -V.  xxii.  ^  &).  TI1118
«qni|k[te4l,  at.  Want  tnn  uf
lln'ir  iiiimlu'r  unicewleti  to
tb«  i-ntiliijt-ti  uflliL- offending
tribe,  nlirre  tbey  baited  and
tbt>  Pater  Pul  mtuii  uddroucd
a  {uu.Yttr  to  Iu|)iter,  ealliiis
tlie  ){ih1  to  w  it  tioas,  vith
beavy  iiiiprecutiouB,  tbat  hi«
cDoivlaiuw  were  wt'l]  fouud-
ed  ami  bin  deinaiidK  nuisoii-
abl*^.  Hv  Ibei)  crtiWH'd  Mie
b<rrtl«i',  iiiul  the  uiiiip  form
wiiH  re[>«ut«d  iti  nearly  the
eamc  words  to  the  tirttt  native  of  the  mi\  whom
hv  uij^lit  chaDcu  to  meet :  agaiii  a  third  time
tiJ  tilt  Hcntiiiu!  or  any  t'ttizeii  whom  he  oucoiid-
tered  at  titu  i;tito  of  tliu  chief  town;  and  a  fourth
liino  lo  the  inat^Lstrulfn  in  the  Forum  in  pres-
ence of  the  |K>i>|>le.  If  A  sntlflfactory  nnener  irns
uol  retnrtied  within  thirty  days,  aftvr  iinhlii-ly
dcHverin)^  a  fMti^inn  renuiiciatioii — in  ivhicli  the
gotU  <:el«<4lia),  terrerttrini,  antl  itifenuil  were  in-
voked— of  what  might  bo  ex|iert»Hl  to  follow,  he
returned  U>  Rouie^  niul,  acciinii>»iiied  Ity  the  iv»lo(
tbe  feliiileK,  made  a  report  of  bin  nii««iou  to  the
Senate.  If  the  )>ea}>le  (Livy.  x.  45),  ast  well  as  the
Senate,  decided  for  war,  the  J'airr  ratratns  again
Bel  forth  to  th«  bordnr  of  th^  hostile  territory,  wid
Iniuinhe4)  n  spear  tippM  with  iron,  or  charred  nt
the  extremity  and  Kmeaivd  M-ith  blwtcl  (embtetnatie
donbtlewi  of  I'lro  and  Klnti^hter)  acrowt  the  bonn-
ttary,  prononnctnjj;  at  the  Hiinie  time  a  wtlemti  decla-
riilion  of  wnr.  The  demand  lor  redretM  and  the
[iroctantalhiti  uf  Iionlititien  were  alike  termcil  r/tiri-
gntio,  whirli  wont  llie  KomniiH  in  Inter  tinieii  ex<
pluiiied  by  clarr  rr/;(7*Tf  (Pliny.  1.  c. ;  Serv.  ltd  Verg.
Atn.  ix.  r>:t,  X.  U  ;  ef.  Livy.  viii.  14,  5).  When  the
Kumau9  bad  to  carry  on  wars  Wyond  the  mea,  this
proceeding  wqk  ineonveriicnt.  Menee  a  eharact«r-
istie  device  wax  adopl«Ml.  They  traiiefcrred  a  piece
of  land  in  th«  C'irciM  Khimtniiii*  ton  prisoner  taken
frt»ni  thu  enemy,  and  m-.t  np  on  thitt  before  the  Tem-
ple iif  Itellonn  a  coliinni,  which  was  accounted  as
standing  on  hostile  teiTitury  (Serr.  I.  c.)-

Several  of  the  fominlac  employed  on  these  occa-
Bions  have  been  preserved  by  Livy  (1.  24,  32j  and
Anlu!*  Gellins  (xvi.  4),  forming  n  ^wrtion  of  the  Ins
Felinle  by  which  the  cnllcgo  watt  regtitnte<l.  The
eervices  of  the  fetialed  wont  considi-rt'd  ubcoltitely
esKeritin)  iu  concluding  a  treaty  (Livy,  ix.  5) ;  and
we  read  that  at  the  termination  i>f  (he  ^tcond  Pn-
uic  Wnr  fetiales  were  aeni  over  to  Africa,  who  car-
ried witli  Ihi'iii  their  own  rrrfteaac  and  their  own
Hint  Klorie?*  for  smiting  the  victitn.  Here  also  the
chief  was  termed  Pater  Patratus  (Livy,  xxx.  4-T).

Thu  institntion  of  (he«e  priests  wa«  ascribed  by
tradition,  in  coinmou  with  other  matters  connect*
rd  with  religion,  to  Xntna  (Ttionya.  il.  71);  and  al-
though Livy  (i.  :t3)  ftpeakH  u«  if  ho  attiibnleil  their
iutrodnction  to  Ancnii  ilurtiiii«,  yet  in  an  earlier
chapter  it.  24)  be  .«tippo»es  them  to  have  exiated  iu
the  rvigu  of  UoslilioK.  Little  mention  in  miulo  of
the  fetia]ea  aft«r  the  timo  of  the  Second  Pnnic
War,  though  the  rolleffium  is  known  to  have  ex-
isted as  late  as  the  second  centnrr  a.d.

The  unmberof  thefetiak'H  canimt  i)e  ti*certaiiie<l
with  certainty,  bnt  Varn)  ijuote*!  Uy  Xoniiu  (xii.
43}  slates  tbat  it  amouut«d  to  twenty;  of  whom


,  N'iebnhr  HuppowM  ten  were  elected  fnmi  the  !

ne*  and  ten  from  the  TitienseH. Thvy  were  1
,  nally  M->leeled  from  the  uiotit  noble  fuDiilica:  their

oUlce  laxlud  for  life  (Uiouvs.  li.  72) ;  and  il  oeeiM
I  probable  that  vacancies  were  tilled  np  tiy  tlwotl-
I  lege  {coGptatiout}  nutil  the  paaMing  of  the  Lex  Di>-

mitia,  when  in  coiumon  with  rooHt  other  prietfi
'  they  wnnld  be  nnminat«<l  in  the  ('omitin  TribalL
I  Thin,  however,  is  nowhere  expreHxly  slated.

The  etyimdogy  of  fctiaUM  is  nnctu'taiu. Vstr*

(/y.  /..  v.riA)  would  conned  it  with  j!dM«  and /unfM;
I  Fi-MtiiH  with  ferio  or/acjo  ;  but  it  is  uiore  pft>balily
j  euuneetod  with  fatrri  and  the  Oacau  /ij(iitiii,so  tli^t

friialfM  would  =:  oratttns,  "speakers." Tbe  Bpell-

inff/ecialfM  in  iucoiTert.

The  explanation  given  by  Livy  Ci-24J  ot  llwun.

gin  iif  the  title  Pater  PatratriH  is  aatisfactory  :  F*-

trr  I*atralV9  ad  juBJurandum  patrandiim,  id  nl,  M»-

ciend«m  Jit  fordtin.
PeTttf,  Uoi>oi:tts  OK. Sec  Febrjs.
PfbrenuB. A  nmalt  stream  of  Latinm,  mtmiuK

into  the  Liris,  and  fonning  1>eforo  its  jaDctlon  t

small  JHluml. This  island  belonged  to  Ctcero,as4

was  his  birthplace.

Fib&la  (TTfpti^). A  clasp  for  foAtening

meuts,  ix-Hcmldiug our  brooches  or  safety-


FibulH. (Bniitb  Mosesm.)

(Livy.  xxvli.  19).  It  eousisted  of  a  1uk))i  uil
a  needle,  sotnctimes  elastic,  sontetimes  tixeil  I7
a  joint.  Some  fibulae  were  in  the  sbapo  "f
buckle*.

FlbtUa  Praenestlna.  SeePxAKNEsn.vKBKitoai.

FictiD^  (irAooTtK^,  Ktfiafutv).  A  word  appliwJ  l«
anythiug  made  of  earth  or  chiy ;  potter^'  I>
Greek  the  sjieciul  wonl  for  monlding  in  »ft  »■■
teriaU,  itKdtrata,  with  it-s  d^rivalives  liKvtfM.
iri.aarr}t,  wXnariitT},  was  gradually  applied  iialf  Ui
clay,  In  which  seuie  the  words  plaate*  and  ;/*»■
U<^  passed  into  Latin. Then,  as  clay  played  ua

important  part  in  the

prcpnration of  works FT  | [ I A

in  brouKe,  the  uso  of |  |  LJ ^^

these  wunls  was  ex-
tended to  ractat,  anil
still  further  to  statu-
ary in  stone  and  mar


3


Bnck  Panns. iKirlti


ble.  The  Lntin  eqnivnlent  of  irXiiiriTt*  \*  f*P'
which  originally  was  applied  only  to  the  monW-
ing  of  soft  stntfe,  but  la-ter  was  used  for  slatasn
of  all  kiiHls  OS  opposed  to  pingo:  iu  thin  extrixl-
e<l  Msnse  we  have  alsojiclor  %nA  figntrtttuui,  Iml  It*
usual  application  of fictw  iscontinetl  10  inodflhiMI
iu  clay,  jiutt  a»  firtor,  figtiniu,  figntaa  refer  utily  l»
work  in  day.  The  original  term  for  cUy  ti  «(!••
(tot,  whence  tbe  forms  xrpu^f uc.  Kwpafitvm,  Mc.,  ap-
plied not  merely  to  the  potter,  but  broadly  wany
worker  in  clay.  Krom  mfKnt  (applied  !•»  the  cla,^
of  the  bricklayer,  and  aUo  to  that  of  the  pntli*)
we  have  mjXovpywt,  mjXofr^dAw,  corr^|M)nilinj[  W


tli«  firietiL'Al  iiH«  uf  luluut  ;  vthvrtn^,  liowwur,  ur-
jfil/d  ^lnlMl1^Uih^  rU\,.)f»ytAi>r  =  clA,T  wiCbont  wf-

ereti€«* to itH jtlikiitir llttet*,  y^ xcpu^iV  :=  tvrra or

The  Hiiii[ilt-flt,  mill  nt  t\m  (taiiie  tttim  one  4>r  t\i«
oldest,  l)r»iivties  uf  the  )iriiu(-val  art  of  working
In  clay  U  tliu  manufacture  of  brickn  (lafrrm,  nXiy-
6tut  »uil  tiled  [ttyalae,  xipa/iat).  the  iuvciirinti  of
which  {ttt  Athctia)  wait  ascrib«l  by  the  Urt'pks  to
tliu  iiiytbital  pcrMonag<:*i  EtiryahiN  aiul  Hyi>erbiil8
(Pliii.  H.  .v.  vti.  194),  Htul  to  TiUiim,  the  iifphaw  of
DaeilaliiK.  So  far  as  bncktt  wvre  iitvid  at  all.  thoir
ii9t<  was  pitiKrrally  routiticit  lo  prtratc  biitbljti^^s;
)iikI  Grt>«ki!i  mikI  K"iimiii«  for  ai;fM  t.'iii|t]uyo<l  only
Unbaked  or  8iiti>drii-«l  brick».  Hrirkn  bakt-d  in  |]i(>
kitii  eaiiit'  into  um'  at  a  later  tliitv.  Tbo  lirst  to
Biupl'iy  thttiii  extrtisivcly  wert>  thi!  KouiauA,  prob-
Ably  at  tile  period  when  thu  |Mjpiitutioii  of  the  city
Iviidorwl  it  iieccMory  to  btiiltl
{■•iiisi^HofMrvcraltttoriefliWhich
di'iiiaiHltdl  »  iiioru  Hulid  iiia>
Irriiil.  Ill  iiii[iurial  times  siich
brickH  wvTv  thv  ctrtnnwn  ma-
li'rJHl  for  privnii;  ami  public
biitldingH.  The  walln  wero
built  of  them,  and  then  ovur-
laid  with  stucco  or  marble.
[Iiiitditig  with  baked  bricks
t?xtei)dod  from  Kotne  into
Greece,  and,  goaemlly  npeak-
in^E.whtmnM'r  the  Romans  car-
lif'dthvirarniHlhtty  tiitrodncoil

^  tbttir  excvptioiiul  aptitude  for

rwDiw  or  Bakod  cur  making  excellent  brkkM.
wlUi  nMkefH  «UiBt>  Bricks  which  presented  flat
t^'^*^'  FinrfacM,  to  be  need  for  walls

or  pavfimenta,  were  made  of  the  most  varied  di-
Bieusioiis,  bnt  were  for  the  moat  pjtrt  tbiiiuer  than
EHirs.  Beai<leii  tbcau,  there  wure  alao  ri>inid<.-4
Ifficks  fur  building  dwarf  cohiinus,  and  for  the
ijouBtrnctlon  of  circular  walls.  For  the  Aasyriau
kiid  Babyloniau  bricka,  nee  (he  orliclea  A8»YlilA ;
Babyluma:  Cl'mkii'okm.

All  that  wh  know  of  the  Greek  method  of  brick-
luaking  in  that  the  earthy  clay  (nt)Xtit)  wan  carved
[lilt  with  tniwelH  (dfnti)  and  lutd  iu  would;  it  waa
inuiateued  with  water  and  kneaded  with  thi;  feet,
but  it  is  nucenain  whet  her  Ihtr  bricks  were  uioddlcd
by  Imiid  or  pruiwcd  ihUj  a  nniuld.  Tlot  Komana
Wore  careful  in  the  Hclectiwii  of  clay ;  they  reJMit-
ad  sandy  or  atony  clay,  both  ou  accouut  of  the
irciglit  aiid  liability  to  damp ;  a  wliitiHb  clay  waa
ptefemMl  [ft-rra  albidn,  rrflona},  or  elrie  a  n>diliNh
clay  (/'afrri'm),  or  the  Hofter  kind  of  nandy  lonin  (an-
iuto  tnaaculuK).  Thu  H|H-ciiil  tiiiit>H  for  brick-inak-
ing  wero  spring  or  aiitnnin. :  after  buktng  it  was
liBiial  to  leave  thu  brickM  for  aoaie  tiuie  to  <ivy.
Vitrnviua  recomuieiidfl  the  use  of  thoi»e  which  are
two  yeara  old  and  thurongUly  dry;  and  quotes  a
law  of  Utica,  onlaiiiiug  tliat  bricks  for  walls  inuat
be  five  yeara  old.  The  clay  was  carefully  puri-
fltHl.  iluniped,  and  mixed  with  chup])ed  Ktraw;  it
iraa  then  either  formed  by  llie  hand  or  pivitaed  iti
ik  would,  aud  set  to  dry  in  the  »un.  Iiiwunu  paitaof
S|>niii  and  Asia  Minor  bricks  are  aaid  to  have  been
uiade  MO  light  that  tbcy  would  not  sink  iu  water.

K'*'be  nsual  eiza  of  bricks  in  Greece  was  5  paluia
ire  {mvTuittpa)  for  public,  and  4  palms  square
(jtidmpa)  for  private  biiildiugs;  in  Rome  the
lilEe  imnaity  adopted  was  the  yivot  SviiOf,  1^  Ku-
I  foul  Utng  by  1  foot  broot)  {tenquipedalea). Pal-


TIM  Root tiMrtko  oi  neMTto,
Rona.  I


ladius  n!(.-onitiiend«  bricks  of  'J  Uomuu  feet  long
ibijttttalea)  by  I  foot  broftd  and  4  inches  high.  In
later  limes  there  Monis  to  have  becu  no  dullnite
rule  as  to  size.

For  niofi.,  Hat  tilee  were  chiefly  used,  which
were  provided  with
a  raiseil  rim  ou  both
of  their  loitgerrtidfiff,
and  were  s"  formed
that  the  upper  fit-
ted iuto  the  lower.
C'oiica^-e  tilea  also
were  HfR'd  limbm,
«nX  vff  r  r}p)  of  th<*
foriii  of  II  hatf-cyl-
iuilcr.  which  covered  the  adjuiiiiug  tnlgea  of  the
Hat  tilea.  The  htwc-st  row  waa  romuionly  fln-
imhcd  off  with  ornamental  inonlding.  Kmm  the
!^ame  material  as  bricks  wcn<  also  made  pipes  for
cmiveying  water  for  Bewrns,  and  for  wnnii  air;
Iho  section  ill  the  first  two  ca^es  wn^  nnunl.iii  tliQ
lant  (tqiiare. See  Dalnkak  ;  IIVTocAVSTiM.

pottery  in  it»  pmper  wi-iiw,  (he  inaiiufnctnre
of  ul<'ii>*il».  in  very  old.  The  potter's  whvel  wan
known  even  befon-  Homer'n  time  (/f.  xviii.  fMt)),
and  waM  prtdmbly  derived  by  the  fJreek-t  fniin
Egy]>t.  (Slm-  AF.dvmrs,  p.  2fj.)  foriiith  and  Ath-
ens, where  the  iifi;i;bl>oiiriiig  promontory  of  Cotias
furnished  nil  inexhaustible  supply  of  Hne  potter's
clay,  were,  iu  fact,  the  headquarters  of  the  manii-
faclnre  of  Greek  pottery .V  Next  came  Aegioa,  Sa-
mos,  Laceitaemoii,  and  other  places  in  Greece  it-
nelf,  which  alwayn  remaineil  the  principal  neat  of
thiH  iimiiiifacinre,  i*apecially  in  the  form  of  vuaes
of  painted  clay.  Th^He  viere  pxporl«d  in  largo
iiiimberH  to  thu  counlritfs  on  tb*^  ML'diterraneaii
and  Black  Amom.  The  high  eHtiniatioii  in  nlui-b
Grnek,  and  i>M{>ecially  Attic,  pottery  wan  h<dd  in
pnivrnl  by  the  nunu;rutis  viiacs  which  liave  bcni
discorercfl  in  tombs,  cbii-Hy  iu  Italy.  Moreover,
Uiey  represent  almo«t  every  period. The  uxcel-


Ctay  Q'l^rrr irrotn  ■  Ublft  «  Bwlia)

leiice  of  the  workniauKbip  lies  in  the  material,
which  is  very  flue,  and  (irepared  with  the  utmost
rare:  ahio  in  the  execution  and  in  the  baking.  Its
thiuneNH  iiK  well  lut  the  Ininliii'HH  of  its  Midcs,  even
ill  ykkhhIm  of  large  dimt<nNiitnM,  ustonishes  experts
in  Mdcb  mallerK.  The  KhajK-n  are  mostly  i>n«lnced
by  the  potter'M  wheel,  but  also  by  hand  in  the  case
of  vcMudfi  too  largr  to  be  couvenieutly  jdnced  on
the  wlmd;  for  example,  the  largest  wine -jam.
The  pndiiJiloric  pottery  fioni  Myo(>nae,  the  Troad,
and  other  Hellenic  sites,  wa«i  also  made  by  hand.
Whereas  amall  ve»Mel>t  wero  nmdn  of  a  ningle
piece,  in  the  coae  uf  large  ouej,  the body,  hau-


F1CT1L4


«70


FICTILE


TU«  sump. (RlrdL)

dies,  feet,  mud  neck  wore  fusliiuiied  Hpparately,
ftod  then  uutte<l.  Tlicy  ivrre  tirst  ilrii^d  in  the
(inn,  tben  twice  baked,  before  and  lifter  the  pajut-
ing.  The  colours  are  iin  te-K4  iidmimble  tliiiu  i\m
worUrnaiiKliip.  T3uf  clay  nlmwH  a  beinitifiil  bti^lit
rfdili^h  yellow,  which  ih  pru(liiu«id  by  th«  iulditioii
of  colouring  rnattur,  :inil  in  aliu)  further  inlfUNiliud
hy  a  thill  coating  uf  glaze.  Thu  hlat'k  rolour,
which  ofttMi  vtrrgcH  upon  grceu  aiwl  in  uf  a  liriU-
iaut  Icistrr,  18  then  appliml.  Kidivr  (I)  thi)  du-
•i^u  NtaudH  out  black  a^aiuKL  the  bright  back-
gruutid,  or  (2)  the  tlgurcs  appear  in  wd  mi  a  black
grouud,  tlio  former  beiug  the  earlier  method.  Oth-
er CDlvur«,  eapocially  white  or  dnrk-red,  were  ap-
plied after  the  blaek  Rlaxe  hod  been  biirued  iutu
ike  clay  by  tlie  second  bakttig.  and  scrreil  as  a
leH»  lii>iting  a()nrnmei]t.  In
later  tiiuea  ycllorr,  greeu,
bUie,  brown,  aud  gold  were
alto  uiwd.

In  the  C8RB  of  vA«e«  with
black  tigurvs,  the  vase  waa
firiit  turned  oil  the  i\'heel,
aud,  ill  order  to  give  it  a
surface  of  deeper  red,  clay
fiuely  ground  and  mixed
ArcbueTwewiibOwlBQiui  with  wacer  to the consist-

Z^irV^Z^L:,  ««=y "f  "^»«'.  technically
7V(ira  I  known as *^»<)ip.'*  wan ap-

plied hy  a  bruith  or  oihfir-
wise  while  it  waa  etill  revolviiig.  The  outline
uf  the  design  was  next  roughly  Nkotehed.  eith«-r
with  a  point  or  in  ligbt-rud  ochre  with  a  bru»h.
Tim  vaw  was  then  dried  in  the  «iiu,  and  again
put  un  the  wheel,  and  the  glare,  tluely  powdered
and  mixc4l  witli  water,  wb»  applied  to  it  witli  a
bruah  aa  it  revolvetl.  The  vase  was  then,  in  some
eoaea,  fired  fur  the  Rni  time  in  the  kiln  in  order
to  provide  a  HmfKith,  almost  non-alwurbeiit  surface
for  the  ufie  of  the  painter.  The  painter  then  put
uu  the  bluck-t^naiuol  tigures  and  ornament*  with  a
bmsb. After  the  tiriug  of  the  enamel,  the  details


were  drawn in  hy  inciHcd lineff,  cutting  tbrosgli
the  enamel  down  to  the  clay  body  of  the  »a«.

In  vases  with  rviX  figures,  iumead  uf  the  fi(-
un*H  being  pninted  in  black,  the  ground
onvured  with  black  enamel  and  the  llgnrei  j
•bowing  the  glazed  red  ''«lip"  which  cor
whole  Twe.  This  method  produced  a  gnat  u>
tistic  advance  in  the  bcanty  of  the  fignrcs,  lli«
details  and  inner  lines  of  which  could  l>e  ev-
ented with  freedom  and  cmae  by  bmsli  •  atrlciJ
Iiue&,  instead  of  by  the  laborions  procew  of  cnt-
ting  incised  lines  tbrougb  the  very  hard  Uack  n-
amel.

Lastly,  the  form  deaervea  great  pmiae.  Tlit
vasea  of  the  beet  period  present  the  moat  ta^trfnl
elegance  of  form,  tbat  is  at  once  One  and  «tn«g.
and  the  most  delicate  proiiurtion  of  the  wm*
parts  to  each  other  and  to  tho  whole,  witbrnHia-
terft-ring  with  their  practical  ntility.  It  na§\
nntil  tho  times  when  taste  had  begnn  to  iU
orate  that  the  Ca^hion  was  introduced  of  givii^


ARbaic  tirtiik  V'un i, Bircb  I


C^erfnUUiB  Vah ^Boiitbl.  s|  iDclieM;  (must  dJUBMr.Ut

IDCbes. VotcM

clay  ware,  by  means  of  monldii,  all  kind*  of  gio-
te»(ine  forms  of  men  and  heanla,  and  of  funii^liiof
them  with  plaatic,  aa  well  aa  painted,  umaniMiia-
tion.

The  technique  of  ancient  iHittery  is  UliwmW
bv  the  follnwiug  fignrwi.  Thu  lin*t  reprwent*  »
jMittvr  seated  in  front  of  an  oven,  froio  whiflh  fc»
takes  nllli  a  stick  a  small  vaao  which  bai  b*M
newly  glazed,  while  two  other  vesaeli  are  itaJ«lli»P
to  dry  on  an  oven,  the  door  nf  which  ii  dovA-
The  remaining  (jgores,  frr>m  n  tablet  at  Ib-ili*'
explain  themselves.


rr


nrwok  Potur  at  Tork. tlMmriat


FICTILE


671


FICTILE


Among  the  votive  tablets  in  tlie  Louvre  there
are  two  from  Corinth.  The  first  of  these  represents
an  early  Greek  type  of  kilD,  which  is  domed  over,
and  has  a  space  for  the  fuel  on  one  side  and  a
door  in  the  side  of  the  upper  chamber,  through
which  the  pottery  could  be  pat  in  and  withdrawn.
The  second  sbowa  a  potter  applying  painted  bands
while  the  vessel  revolves  on  the  wheel.

The  ovens  (xd/uvoi,  fomaee9)  for  baking  vases
seem  to  have  diifered  very  little  from  those  of  the
present  day.  The  remains  of  sach  ovens,  dating
from  a  late  Roman  period,  have  been  fonnd  in  Grer*
many,  France,  England,  and  Italy.  The  most  per-
fect, perhaps,  was  that  fonnd  in  1861,  at  the  little
Roman  colouia  situated  between  the  villages  of


PDUcr  it  Work. (Bwlla  tablet)

Heddemfaeim  and  Prannheim  near  Frankfort;  it
has  now  been  destroyed  by  the  owner  of  the  prop-
erty on  which  it  was  foand,  but  an  excellent  set
of  plans  were  drawn  np  before  its  destruction,  by
Donner,  and  published  in  the  JntMli  delV  Inet.  1682
(TaT.  U  3-6).

The  following  illustrations  are  from  paintings
on  a  number  of  mvaxts,  or  small  clay  tablets,  found
at  Penteskapbia  near  Corinth  in  1679,  and  now  in
the  Mnsenm  at  Berlin.  They  date  from  the  sixth
century  B.C.

In  the  preceding  cut,  the  potter  is  seated  beside
bis  wheel,  which  be  turns  with  one  hand,  while
with  the  other  he  applies  ornament  either  with


Exterior  of  FumKce. (Berlin  ta.b1et.)

a  bmsh  or  stick ;  if  the  ornament  was  engraved
alone,  this  would  have  to  be  done  while  the  clay
waa  still  moist ;  if  painted,  the  vase  would  be  first
dried  in  the  air.

The  Romans,  with  whom,  as  early  as  the  time
cf  the  second  king,  Numa,  a  guild  {coUt^ium)  of
{wttters  existed,  neither  hod  vessels  of  painted
clay  amongst  their  household  goods,  nor  did  they
employ  it  for  the  ornamentation  of  their  graves.
In  earlier  times  at  least,  they  used  only  coarse  and
entirely  unornamented  ware.  They  imported  ar-
tistically executed  vases  from  their  neighbours,
the  Etruscans.  In  the  last  hundred  years  of  the
Republic,  OS  well  as  in  the  first  hundred  years


after  Christ,  the  chief  place  for  the  mannfucture
of  the  red  crockery  generally  used  in  households
was Arretinm  (Pliny,  H.  X.  xixv.  160 ;  Mart.  i.  54, 6,
xiv.  98;  Dennis,  Etruria,  ii.  335).  The  ware  of
this  place  was  dlstiu-
guished  by  a  coral-red
colour,  and  was  gener-
ally furnished  with  glaze
and  delicate  reliefti ;  in
fact,  ornamentation  in
relief  was  widely  em-
ployed in  later  Roman
pottery.  Very  much  val-
ued was  the  domestio
ware,  called  rasa  Samia,
which  was  an  imitation
of  the  earlier  pottery
brought  from  the  island
ofSamoB.  It  was  formed
of  fine,  red-coloured  clay,
baked  very  hard,  of  thin
make,  and  very  delicate
workmanship.  It  was
glazed  and  generally  adorned  with  reliefs,  and
served  especially  for  the  table  use  of  respectable
people  who  could  not  afford  silver.

While  this  fine  ware  was  made  hy  hand,  the
manufacture  of  ordinary  pottery,  as  well  as  of
bricks  and  pipes,  especially  under  the  Empire,
formed  an  important  industry  among  capitalists.


Interior  of  FumuMb (Beilfn

tftblet.)


DrlDking-bowI  ud  Dlsb  of  aar. (Pompel).)

who,  on  finding  good  clay  on  their  estates,  built
potteries  and  tile-works,  and  either  worked  them
on  their  own  account  through  slaves,  or  had  them
carried  on  by  lessees.  The  emperor  himself,  after
the  time  of  Tiberius,  and  the  members  of  the  im-
perial family,  especially  the  wonieu,  pursued  a
similar  trade,  as  is  shown  by  the  trade -mark
which,  according  to  Roman  custom,  was  borne  by
clay  manufactures.

The  production  of  large  statues  of  clay,  apart
from  the  purpose  of  modelling,  belongs  amongst
the  Greeks  to  the  early  times.  It  continued  much
longer  amongst  the  Italians,  especially  amongst
the  Etruscans,  who  fnruished  tbe  temples  at  Rome
with  clay  images  of  the  godsibefore  the  victorious
campaigns  in  tbe  East  brought  marble  and  bronze
productions  of  Greek  art  to  Rome.  On  the  other
hand,  throughout  the  whole  of  antiquity,  the  man-
ufacture of  small  clay  figures  of  very  various  kinds,
for  the  decoration  of  dwellings  and  graves,  and  for
playthings  for  children,  etc.,  was  most  extensively
practised.  They  were  generally  made  in  moulds,
and  after  baking  were  decorated  with  a  coating
uf  colour.  Tbe  excellence  which  Greek  art  at-
tained in  this  department,  as  in  others,  is  shown
by  the  "figurines"  discovered  at  Tanagra  in  and
after  1874.  Very  important,  too,  was  tbe  manu-
facture of  clay  reliefs,  partly  with  figured  repre-


FICTION


S73


riGULUS


A


>",/


Etnueui  Sanophafiia  of  Tcm-OatU  from  Caori. (I^nm.!


HPtilAtiou  mid  [tartly  witlt  oralM^sqiie  patt«niH,  fi>r
tin*  ciubelliHlimcfit  of  coluiiriis,  wjniluivK,  ctiniicuM,
Alid  also  uf  tumbhtonea  and  sar€up]];ij|n.

Tlie  render  in  rRt'errnl  Tar  further  fli^tails  ami
illiiBtrntions  Ui  iIip  urticle  Var,  iiixl  In  the  follnw-
iiiX  wnrkn:  Kraiixf,  Jngnologir  (IHM);  Hlilnitii>r,
TecknoUtgir  und  Terminntogif,  ate,  viil.  ii.;  Kin:]i,
Higlory  of  AndcHi  Polttrif  (2d  wl.  Irf73);  J:icqtin-
inart,  Ilintnry  of  the  Ceramic  Art  (Erig.  truiiH.  lo73|;
Kckult.  Thutt^yttrtR  aufi  Tanagra  (1H7H);  Juiiiikke,
GruNdriat  drf  Kriamik  (lM7y^);  Hettzvu,  Catalogue
de*  J''iffurinfa  AntiiiUfn  de  Terre  Cnite  du  Mua^  du
Icvrrt  ilr^-fSi;  Kekuli^.  IHe  Aviiken  IWracotten
(18yO);  i«i.  />!>  TfrracotUn  ron  SivilifH  (1884);  Uii-
nioDt'  iititl  Clinplain,  (Vrnini^iMr*  (18i^);  Pnttit-r,
Im  Slatwette*  df  TrrreCuUe*  dam  VAnUqitii4{itmy,
and  KnWrt,  Z41  0^aiNi//N«- «]?^2).

Fiction. See  NovKlj*  asi>  Huhancbs.

Flculea  or  Ficulnea.  An  uncii-ui  tuwii  of  tbo
fiubiiiR-H.  east  t>f  Fidetiae  (Livy.  f.  3??).

Fldefusaoi. A  surt'Iy. See  1ntkkce«8IO.

Fideoae.  Sometiuieti  Fidrna  (Ca»tffl  Giubilru),
an  anoii'iit  tonri  in  ibi;  land  of  l\\v  Halitiicv,  live
milvH  tmrttiHiiNt  of  Rom^,  Hlliinteid  <ni  a  sti>4*p  hill
lietni'reii  tbe  Tiber  and  llie  Antu.  It  if*  unid  to
tiavt!'  be>en  coiM|ii«<nHl  and  colon i7.e<l  by  Konitilnn;
bnl  it  wan  iirubtibly  colonizi'd  by  tin*  KlniMcan
Veii,  with  wbicU  city  it  is  fonnd  in  clos«  alliam-L',
It  frcqnenlly  rt>voIl«*l,  ami  wah  ns  frcqiw-ntly  lakt'ii
by  tbD  ItoiuaiiH.  lx»  last  revolt  wuk  in  B.C.  438,
and  in  lli«  follutvinj;  jear  it  wan  deslroyMl  by  tlie
Konians,  bot  waa  nftem'artla  reluiilt.

Fldentta.  A  town  in  C'lsaljiiiie  Oaal,  od  the
Via  Aetiiilia,  bviw<;vn  Pnniin  and  Daceiitia.  Here
Snllii's  generals  defeate>it  Carl«*,  B.C.  83-

Fidepromlaoor. Sil-  Iktrrcka.sio.

Fides.  Till'  string  of  a  lyre  or  harp.  See
LviiA,

Fldea.  The  Romau  person ificat ion  nf  hononr  iu
tbi'  ketipiDg  of  won!  or  oatb.  An  Fides  Piiblica,  or
Hononr  of  the  People,  t\i\%  goilde«M  had  a  t«niple  '
on  the  Capitol,  foinided  by  King  Nnniii,  to  which
the  FlamineK  PialiR,  Martialis,  and  QDintialin  rode
in  a  cover»d  chiiriot  ol:  the  tir>t  of  October.  Al  .
the  itacrilire  they  bad  their  right  hatuU  nrapjK-d  ,


11  |i  Ui  the  tiiigein  with  whil«  bands.  The  liifMiH
of  th<)  covered  chariot  wh*  that  honour  could  BOt
l»e  too  carefully  pro  lee  led ;  of  the  covered  ri|bl
linud,  that  the  right  bond,  the  scat  of  buov.
nhonld  lie  kept  pore  and  holy.  The  goddsM  «ii
rejirewnted  with  outstretched  right  tvaod  audi
while  veil.  Her  attributca  were  earn  of  com  tai
frnitii,  joined  handM,  and  n  turtle-dove.

FidicOla.  or  plural  FidiotUae.  An  Instniiicn
of  torture,  eoitttisting  of  a  nnntber  of  striDg*  iSttr*
Txh.&l,  CaHg.  33).  Like  the  tculc%$  and  Hw  b«1
am  rack,  it  tttretehed  the  lltuW  until  the  joi<it>
were diMlot-nteil (Manpiardt, /Viral/.  ieO)i 8«

t'RlX; Eci'l.KfBf  TuRMKNTLa.

FldiuB. See  8ancl'8.

Flducia.  If  a  |>er»oii  traiiftferred  his  pn<i^r
to  rtiKitber  ou  condttiun  that  it  ahonhl  be  mtaR^
to  him,  thift  coutraet  wai*  called  Jidmc*n,  *nA  tli»
person  to  whom  the  property  wa*  «•>  ininiif*rrrf
woH  (laid  fiduciam  accipert.  A  tnan  iin;:lil  ininrf*
his  properly  to  another  for  the  anke  of  grefticri^
curity  in  tiniH  of  danger,  or  for  other  KiifllclcBt  na-
Boti.  The  eontrart  of  Ihlncia  or  i»ttrtnm  AdooM
also  exJKled  In  the  r.ihe  of  pignna,  and  Jit  IbecMi
ofmnnt'ipation.  (Sw  KmancipatIO.)  Tlteiofrfi**
iUeir  niiglit  be  an  object  of  tiducia.  Tlte  tnuC*
naK  lionnd  to  discbaigi'  bis  triiat  by  rw-toiiri^  UN
tiling;  if  he  did  not,  bo  waft  liable  to  ait  acmpi*-
liar  or /(fitriand,  which  wua  an  avtio  frwoo/ ^Utv
if  tlio  tru.ste«  was  condemned  iu  the  aclimt.  ibt
consequence  v.a»  in/amia.

Ffduciaila  Actio. S«e  riDVClA.
Fife. See  Tibia.
Flelina  Ars. 8«e  FlcTtl^
Flgjilns. .SiH-  FlfTlLK.

FigUluB,  P. NioiiMCh.  A  Pythagorean  pbilnio-
pber  of  high  rApntaiiiiii,  who  iloiiriMhetl  akoatiiitr
years  n.c.  He  waa  ho  c4>lehralMl  on  acrooul  of
bin  knowledge  that  GelUiu  doew  not  he«il*l«  i*
pmiioiinee  him,  nest  to  Varro,  the  Mio*t  U-ainwlo'
the  Konianit.  Mutbotnatieal  and  pbyhical  lavMti'
gatioiiH  appear  to  have  occupied  a  larys  ihanof
bia  att4-Miiion ;  and  Hncb  was  bis  Came  a*  au  aMnl*
oger  that  it  wa»  generally  l>elieTtfd.  in  later  lim*
at  least,  that  be  had  predicted  ia  the  iumI  huus*


FIGURES


«78


FIRHUM


blguous  terms  the  future  greatuess  of  Octaviaiius
OD  beariug  the  aDDouuctitueDt  of  liia  birtb.  lu
tbe  Eusebian  Cbrouicle  be  ia  styled  "  Pytbaguricus
et  Hagos."  He,  moreover,  possessed  considerable
influence  in  political  affairs  during  tbe  last  strug-
gles of  tbe  Repnblic ;  was  one  of  tbe  senators  se-
lected by  Cicero  to  take  down  tbe  depositions  and
examinations  of  tbe  witnesBes  wbo  gave  evidence
with  regard  to  Catiline's  conspiracy,  B.c.  63;  was
praetor  in  B.C.  59;  took  an  active  part  iu  tbe  civil
war  on  tbe  side  of  Ponipey ;  was  compelled  in  con-
sequence by  Caesar  to  live  abroad,  and  died  lu
«xile  B.C.  44.  A  letter  of  consolation  addressed  to
bim  by  Cicero  {Ad  Fam.  iv.  13)  is  extant.

AuluB  Grellius,  who  entertained  tbe  strongest  ad-
miration for  tbe  talents  and  acquirements  of  Figu-
1ns,  says  that  bis  works  were  little  studied,  and  were
■of  no  practical  value,  iu  consequence  of  tbe  sub-
tlety and  obscurity  by  which  they  were  character-
ize<I ;  but  tbe  quotations  addnced  by  him  (xix.  14)
aa  specimens  scarcely  bear  ont  tbe  charge,  when
we  consider  the  natnre  of  tbe  subject.  Tbe  names
of  the  following  pieces  have  been  preserved :  Dt
Spkaera  Barbariea  et  Graeoaittca,  I>«  AnimalibuB,
I)€  ExHt,  De  Auguriis,  De  Ventis,  and  Cammentarii
GrammaHei  in  at  least  twenty-four  hooks.  The
fragments  which  have  survived  have  been  care-
fully collected  and  illustrated  by  Rntgersins  in
bis  Variae  Leotionu,  iii.  16  (Leyden,  1618).  See
Hertz,  De  NigitUi  Studiis  atque  Operibut  (Berlin,
1845);  Klein,  i>0  Vita  Mgidii  (Bonn,  1861);  Brey-
«ig.  De  Ififfidii  Figuli  FragmenHe  (Beriin,  1854);  and
Eohrig,  De  Ntgid.  Flgulo  (Cohurg,  1887).

Fignzla)  Carmen  dk. See  Carmkh.

FUellbt  Francesco. See  Philklpuus.

FUluafamilias. See  Familia.

Fimbria,  C.  Fi^vius.  (1)  A  jurist  and  an  ora-
tor, consul  B.C.  104  (Cic.  pro  Piano.  5 ;  21 ;  Brut.  34 ;
45).  (2)  Son  of  tbe  preceding,  and  one  of  the  most
violent  partisans  of  Marius  and  Cinna  during  the
civil  war  witb  Sulla.  In  B.c.  86  he  was  sent  into
Asia  as  legate  of  Valerius  Flaocus,  whom  be  in-
duced the  soldiers  to  put  to  death.  He  then  car-
ried on  war  against  Mithridates ;  but  in  84  he  was
attacked  by  Sulla,  and  being  deserted  by  his
troops,  put  an  eud  to  bis  life  (Livy,  Epit.  32).

Flmlniae  {Bwravoi;  in  grammarians  also  xpoa-
<roi).  Tassels;  a  fringe.  Wben  tbe  weaver  had
tiuisbed  any  garment  on  the  loom  (see  Tela),  tbe
ibrums,  i.e.  the  extremities  of  the  threads  of  the
warp,  hung  in  a  row  at  the  bottom.  In  this  state
they  were  frequently  left,  being  considered  orna-
mental. Often  also,  to  prevent  them  from  ravel-
ling, and  to  give  a  still  more  artificial  and  orna-
mental appearance,  they  were  separated  into  ban-
dies, each  of  which  was  twisted,  and  tied  in  one  or
more  knots.  The  tfamms  were  thus,  by  a  very
simple  process,  transformed  into  a  row  of  tassels.
Tbe  linen  shirts  fouud  in  Egyptian  tombs  some-
times show  this  ornament  along  their  lower  edge,
and  illustrate,  in  a  very  interesting  manner,  tbe
dencription  of  these  garments  by  Herodotus  (ii.  81).
Among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  fringes  were  sel-
dom worn  except  by  women  (Pollux,  vii.  64).  We
find,  however,  a  long-sleeved  tunic  with  fimbriae
at  the  wrists,  worn  by  lulius  Caesar  (Suet.  Jul.  45 ;
«f.  Clatus  Latu8).  Of  the  manner  of  displaying
them  the  best  idea  may  be  formed  by  an  inspec-
tiuu  of  tbi;  annexed  illustration,  taken  from  a  small
22


bronze,  representing  a  Roman  lady  who  wears  au
iuner  aud  an  outer  tunic,  the  latter  being  fringed,
and  over  these  a  large  shawl  or  pallium.


FlmbidaA. (From  an  KncieDt  bronxe.)

Among  barbarous  nations  the  upper  garment
was  often  worn  with  a  fringe  by  men.

Finanoe.  See  Aerariuh;  Fiscus;  Moneta;
PoRTORiuu;  PuBLiCANi;  Telonab.

Fbiitorea. See  Aorimensores.

Fire,  God  of. See  Hephabstub  ;  Vulcamus.

Ffre-Brlgade. See  Vioilkb.

Flre-Enginea. See  Sipho.

Ftxinianiu  Symi^uMitia,  Caeuub.  The  author
of  a  collection  of  a  hundred  riddles,  each  consist-
ing of  three  hexameters,  intended  for  use  during
tbe  Saturnalia.  Tbe  diction  and  prosody  are  cor-
rect, though  tbe  work  is  probably  as  late  as  tbe
fifth  century  A.D.  The  title  of  the  book  is  Aenig-
mata.  The  text  is  to  be  found  in  Wemsdorfs
Foetae  Latini  Minaret,  vol.  vi.,  and  there  is  a  com-
mentary in  the  edition  by  Henmann  ( Hanover,
1722).  See  Paul,  De  SgmpoHi  Aenigmatie  (Berlin,
1854);  and  the  translation  into  Freuch  by  Corpet
(Paris,  1H68).

FirmXcna  Matexnna.  (1)  luuus.  A  Sicilian,
tbe  author  of  an  astrological  work  iu  eight  books
{Matkeeeot  Libr%),&innhed  A.ii.d&4.  It  is  a  complete
system  and  defence  of  utitrulogy,  conceived  iu  the
Neo- Platonic  spirit,  and  hostile  to  Christianity.
It  coutaiuB  the  earliest  known  mention  of  alchemy
(iii.  15).  Tbe  work  is  monotonous  in  diction,  and
hazy  in  its  reasoning.  The  editio  prinoepe  appeared
at  Venice  in  1499.  A  critical  edition  by  K.  Sittl
was  in  1892  auuounced  as  in  preparation.  See  M.
Bonner  in  the  Revue  de  PhUologie,  viii.  187 ;  and
Dombart  iu  the  Jakrb./iir  Philol.  125,590.  (2)  A
Christian  writer  of  about  the  same  period  as  the
preceding,  who  wrote  De  Errore  Profanarum  Re'
ligionum  in  346  or  347  a.D.  Nothing  is  known  of
the  personality  of  the  author,  whose  diction  is  rbe-
torical  but  plebeian.  Good  editions  are  those  of
Bursian  (Leipzig,  1856)  and  Halm  (with  Minucius)
(Vienna,  1867).

Flnuiun.  A  town  in  Picenum,  three  mites  from
tbe  coast,  where  there  was  a  strongly  fortified  har-
,  hour  (Castelluni  Firmauum). (Mela,  ii.  4.)


FIKMUS


674


FLAGRUM


Pinnus  or  PinnitUL  One  of  Iboeo  cpheueral
RoTnaii  L'ui|M.-rors  kuown  in  bistorj'  by  the  name  of
tjrntuta,  becaaw  they  were  tisiirpt*na  of  ]M)wer
QDilur  legitiinato  sovereixna.  He  vraa  bom  in
Sflviicia  in  Syria,  and  owned  ext«ntiive  poa«esaioiift
iu  Egypt.  L'rge<i  on  l>y  tbe  ini|K*tiiotiity  anil  love
of  change  inM^-uliar  to  tliu  E^'yptiiiii  Gi^eekH,  b«
neizetl  npon  AIe:cAn<lria,  aud  .-iKHiiniiM]  thu  tillu  of
Aiifipistiis,  ouc  of  hisobj(;ct»  boiu};  to  aid  Ibu  cause
of  Zcnobia[q.v.)wbohadaliTuulybv(<neoii(|ueredby
Aurelian,  but  whose  power  waa  still  nut  completely
overthrown.  Aurelian  marched  against  (Irmmi
with  bis  nqiinl  rapidity,  defenti'd  biin,  took  bini
prisoner,  and  inflicted  on  hini  the  punishment  of
%hv  criutt]<A.U.  273).  Flninis  is  deMhbed  as  bnvinj;
hcfv  of extraonliiinry  Htatnre  and  strength  of  body.
His  aspect  wua  so  forbidding  thai  bo  iditaioH^l  in
derision  the  Hurnainu  of  Cyr.lopa.  Hi8  life  was
written  by  VopiMins.

Fiacilea. See  tJLAOiATORES.

FlscellUB.  That  part  of  the  chain  of  the  Apen-
nines which  Heparates  the  Sabines  from  Ficenum
(Plin.  li.  y.  vi.  Vi).  Honut  Fiscellus  was  reported
by  Varro  to  l>e  the  only  spot  in  Italy  in  which  vrild
goats  were  to  be  found  (Varro,  li.  It.  U.  I).

Tiacns.  Tht*  emperor's  private  pnne,  as  di»-
tiugninhed  from  the  public  treasnry  (Mrarium).
It  was  instituted  by  Augustus,  and  wan  nndcr  tho
excluaive  control  of  the  emperor.  The  chief  sources
fh>m  which  it  was  replonisbed  werti  thu  entire  rev-
enues of  the  imiHTinl  jirnvinceH,  the  pn>dnc«  of
uucluiined  estates,  and  of  eutiliscatious.  The  main
Itemi  of  tJsoal  expcnditnre  were  tho  army,  the  Hect,
and  war  material,  the  salaries  of  officialH.  the  pro-
vision of  com  for  Rome,  jtoatal  commnoication,  and
the  public  buildings.  For  the  onieials  who  atlmin-
l*t«red  the  fiaous,  see  Fkocl'Ratur  ;  see  alao  Akra-
iut:.v.

Fiasi  Die*. See  Dies,  p.  513.

Flab. See  Diaetktica  ;  Virrrs.

Flatuoa.  An  instrument  nscd  fornunmlng  down
pavements  and  tfareeliiiig-floors  and  the  fonndations
of  buildinjis  fCato,  It.  It.  18,28),  and  also  for  driving
piles  (CaoB.  If.  O.  iv.  17).

FlattUa.  Properly  a  reed,  a  Pan's-pipe  (avpty^ ;
then  a  water-pi|M3  (o-wX^r),  nnually  made  of  lead,
but  iu  the  villa  of  Antoninus  Pins  of  pnre  silver  (cf.
Sliit.  ,sf/r.  i.  5. 48).

FlabeUum  iyinis,  ^isiStof). A  fan  <Tereni.  Ettn.
UL  5, 5U). The  fan^  of  the  Oret'k  and  Roman  ladies
were  made  with  tbi^  Ichvch  tif  iliu  Uttns  [ilant,  of
peacock's  feathent  (Fmp.  ii.  24, 11)^  or  mmn  exjieu-
fiive  niatrtrial,  painteil  in  brill-
iant colours  (Mart.  iii.  Htf). They
were  notcouBtruct4*d  t^  open  and
shut,  like  onrs,  but  were  stiff,
and  bad  a  Ion^  handle,  the  most
conrenieut  form  for  the  manner
in  which  they  were  nsed — vii.,
for  one  iwrwui  to  fan  another,  a
Fisbella  (davo  aUvayii  being  employed  for

the  piirpottr.kiiown  ns^ahrlligt-r
(Plant.  Trtii.  ii.  iai»).  The  left-hand  figure  in  the
Illustration  rcprescutb  a  fan  of  lotus  leaf,  from  a
Pompeian  painting:  the  right-hand  one,  of  pea-
cock's feathers,  from  a  painting  dlscoTorcd  at
Stabia.  See  Uzanne,  Lt»  Orttement4  de  la  Femme
(Paris,  1693).


./IP


FUcoiu,  A.  FERSirs. See  Pemius.

Flaccua,  Fulmus.  Tho  name  of  two  dintw-
guishL-d  families  in  tho  Fnlvia  and  Vateria  genua.
Many  of  the  members  of  both  famitira  held  tlM
highest  otHces  in  the  State;  but  the  l»e«t  knovo
are:  (1)  M.  FuLvit'8  Tlaccvh,  the  friend  of  tke
Oracchi,  cousnl  in  H.C.  12.%  and  one  of  th«  tnoa*
vira  for  carrying  into  execution  tho  agrarian  k*
of  Tib.  Oracchuf.  He  waa  slain,  together  with  C.
Gracchus,  in  n.c.  121.  (Seo  Giuccars.)  (2l  L
Valkiuts  FI.ACCC3,  consul  in  d.c.  100  with  M*-
rins,  when  he  took  an  active  port  iu  putting  do«s
tho  iUHurrftctiDu  of  Siiinrniuus.  In  ux.  >?6  be  wu
ehoaen  consul  in  place  of  Marius,  but  was  p«i
death  by  his  soldiers  at  the  in<«tigation  of  Ki
(3)  Calpuknii'k,  a  rhctoriolan  of  the  time
emperor  Hndrinn.  lie  is  the  author  of  lift>-4w
drclttmatwHen,  nsually  printod  with  those  of  ^nia*
tilian.  (See  QtrixriUANl'i*.)  (4)  C.  VaUWIS
Flaccus,  a  native  of  Padna,  who  lived  in  the  lliae
of  VeMpaHinn,  and  wrote  the  Ji'^onattlKti,  an  ss-
tiniMbed  heroic  poem,  in  eight  bouks,  on  the  Aigo-
uautic  ox|MMlition,  which  is  extant',  and  of  wUck
the  1>est  e4lilionM  are  those  of  Wa^cr  (GottiapOt
ld05),  Thito  (Halle,  l^H^:)),  Schcukl  (Berlin.  lH7li,
and  Biihrens  (Leipzig,  li^.S).  The  poem  in  s  (n*
Imitation  of  Apollnnins  Rhndins,  and  is  iu  My]»
animated,  rhetorical,  and  rich.  (3)  GitA:(li.'^  Sm
Pafiru^s.

Flaccna,  M.  Vkriucs. See  Verkius  FuctTS.

Flacona,  Q,  HoKATlve. See  Horatiiv.

Flaccna,  Sicvtrtt.  A  proreaaioual  ugrimftmr
of  till'  timn  of  Nrro,  the  anthor  of  a  Ueattse  Dr
Cantliriiinibttx  Agroram.  |Mtrt  u(  which  bu  bM
pn>servi>d. See  AGRiMr^soREjt.

Flagnun,  dim,  FlageUum  ifuitnt^).  A  "tafor
scourge,  made  with  a  great  nund>er«f  knott«^l  and
twisted  tails,  tike  the  nnmerons  fi^eleni  of  tbc  |»It-
pna,  which  are  cons«.'<inontly  de»ignal«sl  by  tbf
same  name  (0\*id,  Met.  iv.  367).  It  was  chkij
cmployeil  for  tho  punishment  of  slaves  (Jar tI
476:  Hor..«ar.  i.  2,  41).  but  also  as  a  driving  whip,
in  tlii-eHhing  grain,  for  self^paDialinieut  M  thr
priests  of  Cybel^.aod  in  theconteetA  of  glulislon.
aa  in  the  illuitration  below. It  is  characteriW


FUgvBnra.

by  the  epithet  horrihih.  In  aome  eaaet  even  pn>-
dQc«d  death,  and  the  nature  of  the  wortod  caiiwJ
by  it  is  always  specified  by  wonls  wfakli  sf*
desrriplivft  of  cutting,  snch  as  mrrf^rf.  ■«««¥,  irfi-
drre,  etc.  Tho  lltigram  was  frwincntly  kw»rt^
with  bones  or  heavy  bits  of  bronrr  iatrrpttfo^^^
or  even  fbmiahod  with  hook'*,  in  w-fairh  caM>  it  «i*
called  Scorpio.  A  whip  with  a  single  laid)  «■»•
known  as  tcMtico.  A  scourged  slave  wa*  itylnl
fiagrio. Daring  the  Saturnalia  (q.  v.)  the  tconrr


FLAGS


67fi


FLAHININUS


was  pnt  away  under  the  seal  of  the  master. See
Servus.
Flags. See  Signum  ;  Yexillum.

Flamen  (from  fiare,  one  who  blows  or  kindles
the  sacrificial  fire;  or  from  the  root  of  JlagrOf  to
bam).  The  special  priest  of  a  special  deity  among
the  Romans  (Cic.  D&Leg.  ii.  6).  There  were  fifteeu
flaminea — three  higher  ones  {flaminea  maiore^  )  of
patrioian  rauk  :  these  were  the  Jiamen  Dialia  ( of
lupiter),  Martialia  (of  Mars),  and  Quirinalu  (of
Quirinos).  The  remaining  twelve  were  flaminea
minorea,  plebeians,  and  attached  to  less  important
deities,  as  VulcanuB,  Flora,  Pomona,  and  Carmenta.
Their  ofiBce  was  for  life,  and  they  coold  be  deprived
of  it  only  in  certain  cases.  The  emblem  of  their
dignity  was  a  white  conical  bat  (apez)  made  out
of  the  hide  of  a  sacrificed  animal,  and  -having  an
olive  branch  and  woollen  thread  at  the  top.  This
the  flamiues  were  obliged  to  wear  always  ont  of
doors — indeed,  tbe^ni«M  Dialia  had  originally  to
wear  it  indoors  as  well.  They  were  exempted
from  all  the  duties  of  civic  life,  and  exclnded  at
the  same  time  from  all  participation  in  politics.
In  course  of  time  they  were  allowed  to  hold  urban
offices,  but  even  then  they  were  forbidden  to  go
ont  of  Italy.

The  flamen  Dialis  was  originally  not  allowed  to
spend  a  night  away  from  home ;  in  later  times,


Coin  of  a  FteUMD  lUrtlslla (Spanbetm.)

nnder  the  Empire,  the  pontifex  conld  allow  him
to  sleep  oQt  for  two  nights  in  the  year.  Indeed,
the  flameu  Dialis,  whose  superior  position  among
the  flaniens  conferred  npon  him  certain  privileges,
as  the  toga  praetexta,  the  atslla  ouruUa,  a  seat  in  the
Senate,  and  the  services  of  a  lictor,  was  in  propor-
tion obliged  to  snhmit  to  more  restrictions  than
the  rest.  He,  his  wife,  their  children,  and  his  bonse
on  the  Palatine  were  dedicated  to  this  god.  He
mnst  be  boru  of  a  marriage  celebrated  by  confar-
reafio,  and  live  himself  in  indissoluble  marriage.
If  his  wife  died,  he  resigned  bis  office.  In  the  per-
formance of  his  sacred  fauctions  he  was  assisted
by  bis  children  as  oamiUi.  (See  Cauillus.)  Every
day  was  for  him  a  holy  day,  so  that  he  never  ap-
peared withont  the  insignia  of  his  ofllce,  the  coni-
cal hat,  the  thick  woollen  toga  praetexta  woven  by
his  wife,  the  sacrificial  knife,  and  a  rod  to  keep
the  people  away  ftom  him.  He  was  preceded  by
his  lictor,  and  by  heralds  who  called  on  the  people
to  stop  their  work,  as  the  flamen  was  not  permit-
ted to  look  npon  any  labour.  He  was  not  allowed
to  set  eyes  on  an  armed  host ;  to  mount,  or  even
to  touch,  a  horse ;  to  touch  a  corpse,  or  grave,  or
a  goat,  or  a  dog,  or  raw  meat,  or  anything  unclean.
He  mnst  not  have  near  him  or  behold  anything  in
the  shape  of  a  chain ;  ooneeqneutly  there  must  be
no  knots,  but  only  clasps,  on  his  raiment ;  the  ring
on  his  finger  was  broken,  and  any  one  who  came
into  bis  bonse  with  chains  mast  instantly  be  loos-


ened. If  he  were  guilty  of  any  carelessness  in  the
sacrifices,  or  if  his  bat  fell  from  his  head,  he  bad  to
resign.  His  wife,  the  JUtminica,  was  priestess  of
Inno.  She  had,  iu  like  manner,  to  appear  always
in  her  insignia  of  office — a  long  woollen  robe,  with
her  hair  woven  with  a  purple  fillet  (tutulum)  and
arranged  in  pyramidal  form,  her  head  covered  with
a  veil  and  a  kerchief,  and  carrying  a  sacrificial
knife.  On  certain  days  she  was  forbidden  to  comb
her  hair.  The  chief  business  of  the  flamines  con-
sisted in  daily  sacrifices ;  ou  certain  special  occa-
sions they  acted  with  the  pontifices  and  the  Vestal
Virgins.  The  three  superior  flamines  offered  a
sacrifice  to  Fides  Pnblica  at  the  Capitol  on  the  Ka-
lends of  OctolMr,  driving  there  in  a  two-hoi-se
chariot.  During  the  imperial  period  flamines  of
the  deified  emperors  Mere  added  to  the  others.
See  the  illustration  under  Apex.

Flamlnia  Via. See  Viae.

FlaminXoa. See  Flambn.

Flaxnii^nQS.  (1)  Titus  Qcnfcnus.  A  distin-
guished Roman  general,  made  consul  b.c.  198,  before
he  was  thirty  years  of  age,  and  had  the  province
of  Macedonia  assigned  to  him,  with  the  charge  of
continuing  the  war  against  Philip,  which  had  then
lasted  for  two  years,  withont  any  definite  snccess
on  the  part  of  the  Romans.  Iu  bis  first  campaign
be  drove  Philip  from  the  banks  of  the  AoUs,  and,
among  other  important  movements,  succeeded  in
detaching  the  Acbaeans  from  the  Mace4.1onian  al-
liance. In  the  following  year  Flamininus,  being
confirmed  by  the  Senate  iu  bis  command  as  pro-
consul, before  commencing  hostilities  afresh,  held
a  conference  with  Philip  on  the  coast  of  the  Maliao
Oiilf,  and  allowed  him  to  send  ambassadors  to
Rome  to  negotiate  a  peace.  These  negotiations,
however,  proving  fruitless,  Flamininus  marched
Into  Tbessaly,  where  Philip  had  taken  up  a  posi-
tion, and  totally  defeated  bitn  in  the  battle  of
Cyuoscephalae,  in  a  spot  brokeu  by  small  hills,  be-
tween Pherae  and  Larisaa.  The  Macedonians  lost
8000  killed  and  5000  prisoners.  After  granting
peace  to  the  Macedonian  monarch  on  severe  and
humiliating  terms,  Flamiuinns  was  continaed  in
his  command  for  another  year,  B.C.  196,  to  see  these
conditions  executed.  In  that  year,  at  the  meeting
of  the  Isthmian  Games,  where  multitudes  had  as-
sembled from  every  part  of  Greece,  Flamininus
cansed  a  crier  to  proclaim,  "  that  the  Senate  and
people  of  Rome,  and  their  oommauder  Titus  Qninc-
tins,  having  subdued  Philip  and  the  Macedonians,
now  restored  the  Corinthians,  Phocians,  LfOcriaus,
Euboeans,Thessalians,AchaeaQs,etc.,to  their  free-
dom and  independence,  and  to  the  enjoyment  of
their  own  laws."  Burets  of  applause  followed
this  announcement,  and  the  crowd  pressed  forward
to  express  their  gratitude  to  F^amininns,  whose
conduct  throughout  these  memorable  transactions
was  marked  by  a  wisdom,  moderation,  and  liberal-
ity seldom  found  united  iu  a  victorious  Romait
general.  He  was  thus  the  means  of  prolonging
the  independence  of  the  Greek  States  for  half  a
century  more.  In  the  following  year,  B.C.  195^
Flamininus  was  intrusted  with  the  war  against
Nabis,  tyrant  of  Lacedaemon,  who  had  treacher-
ously seized  upon  the  city  of  Argos.  The  Soman
commander  marched  into  Laconia,  and  laid  siege
to  Sparta,  but  met  with  a  brave  resistance,  and
at  last  agreed  to  grant  peace  to  Nabis  on  condition
that  he  should  give  up  Ai^os  and  all  the  other


t-LAMIKIUtj


67ii


FLAVIL'8  VOPISCUS


(iliiccs  which  lie  had  inaarped,  aod  restore  tUijir
lanils  tu  tlie  (lt'«cenilaitt«  nf  tlie  Mcsseoians.  Hit
inotivos  for  ({"'"tiiig  jwuce  to  Nabis  were,  lio  Haul,
|MTtIy  to  jirovcnt  l.lm  di'^tTUCtioD  of  «>iitt  of  tlio
iiiiMt  illiulrioiitt  of  the  Greek  oitiftf^aiid  partly  the
^^e:lC  piiipanitious  which  AiitiochuH,  kiti(;i>f  Syria,
wan  then  making  on  the  coast  of  jSnia.  Livy  sug-
gests, as  another  prnliahlc  rcnaon,  that  KlamiuintiH
wished  to  tenuiiiate  the  wnr  hioidclt',  uud  oot  to
give  time  to  a  new  cimsnl  to  sti|)erso(Le  hiiu  and
n'«i>  the  bonoiirs  of  the  victory.  The  Seuatc  con-
finiied  the  peni-i>  with  Xabis,  and  In  the  following
year,  li.u.  VM.  Flainininus.  having  tK^ttled  the  af-
fairs of  Grwce.  prepared  to  return  to  Itnlj'.  Tlav-
ing  repairi'd  tu  Coriiilh,  wht.<n<  iii'>ptilatiotiH  frani
all  th(*  Oi'uchiii  citiivi  h.-id  atwvnihh'd.  he  took  a
friendly  luave  of  lliem.  withdruw  hi*  garrinond
fn>iii  all  tlii-ir  eities,  and  left  them  to  tlie  enjoy-
ment of  thoirown  freedom.  Oureturuiug  to  Italy,
both  he  and  his  soldiers  were  received  wilh  great
dernonstnitioiisof  joy.  and  the  Senate  decreed  hiin
a  triumph  for  three  day^.  Befote  the  chariot  nf
FlaniiDinuH,  in  the  colehratinn  u(  this  triumph,
Hppi'tii'ed,  among  the  Loatagefl,  Demetrius,  sou  uf
Philip,  and  Armuues,  son  of  Nabis;  and  in  ibe  ivar
fulliiuvd  th(*  Human  prisnnent,  who  hail  Imh*!)  tuAil
as  (4lu.v*«  Ui  tliH  (ireekii  by  Haiinibu]  dnriiig  IIih
tiecoud  Hiiiiie  War.and  who^a  liliorultnii  riamlni-
nus  had  obtained  froui  Ihe  gratitude  of  I  he  (Jreciau
Sltttej*.  Tbi5  AcIiaeaoH  alone  are  said  to  have  liber-
ated 12<X),  for  nhoni  (hey  paid  100  tnleuts  (about
$11U,(X>0I  as  coiD]tensatiuu-iuouey  lo  their  masters.
In  theyear  B.C.  lH;{,Flamitiiuiis  was  sent  to  Prusias,
kiugnf  Bithyuia,upou  the  niigructous  mission  of  de-
manding thtf  pfi-KHu  of  ?Ianriil>al,  then  in  bis  old
age,  uiid  a  rvPngee  at  the  ciinrt  of  PntsiaM.  Tlio  mon-
arch waj<  prevaiU'd  upon  to  vinhite  IIih  claims  4»f
hoHpitality,  but  the  Carthaginian  pravented  this
Ifnachery  by  dtwtmytiig  himwclf  wilLi  ]>oL»i>n.  In
tile  yoar  n.c.  16^,  Klamininus  wan  made  augur,  in
the  room  uf  V.  (?IaiidinB  deceaaed  (Livy,  xlv.  44),
after  which  he  in  uu  lougar  uicutiuucd  iu  histor)'
(Pint.  Fiamin.).

{'i\  LuciL'8,  brotlier  of  the  prec«diug,  com*
manded  the  Uomaii  Heot  during  the  Ant  cam-
paign of  QninctiuK,  and  scourtMl  the  coaata  of
Euboea,  Corinth,  and  other  dixtric^ta  at  thai  liiue
allied  or  Hnhji.-cl  to  thu  king  of  Macedonia.  Uti
won  nftrrwards  oxpulkd  from  the  Heuate  by  Catu,
when  cuuBur,  fur  haviag  put  to  death  a  OuUic  pria-
ouiu-  to  gratify  a  favourite  of  his  (Plot,  flamiti.}.

Flaminius.  (1)  Gail'9,  cousnl  for  th'e  tlrat  time
ill  u.u.  'i'i',i,  wlit^n  he  gained  a  viotorj'  uver  the  Iu-
auhrian  GuuIh;  and  c«mKir  iu  220,  when  he  exe*
cnl«d  two  gn«at  works  which  bore  ht»i  name — vir.,
the  Circus  Flaminius  and  the  Via  Flaminia.  Iu
his  second  consulship  (217)  he  was  defeated  and
elaiu  by  Uaiittiha),  at  the  battle  of  the  Lake  'I'rasi-
menus  (Livy,  xxi.  57 ;  63;  id.  xxli.,  etc. ;  Polyb.  ii.
32,  etc.)'  (2)  Gaius,  a  son  of  the  preceding,  was
cHrtile  aedile  in  b.c.  196,  when  he  diatrlbutod  great
qiianlitiiM  of  grain  among  the  people  at  a  iinmiual
price,  this  grain  having  been  given  him  by  the
Sietliatis  as  a  memorial  of  gratitude  to  h'm  father,
who  hail  govoruod  thorn  with  much  integrity.  He
vrsut  pi-ueior  iu  ll*:i  and  cousul  iu  1^3,  when  h«  de-
feated Ihe  Lit^nrians.

riammeaitl Makers  of  Itammea. See  Flaja-

HELM.

Flamme^lam. See  Flammbum.


(R-*l


riamiiK-uin [RulM


Flammeum.  dim.  Flammedlum.  The  Duuriige
veil,  worn  by  a  Kiunaii  bride  un  her  wed-
d]t>g-<lay.  It  was  of  a  brilliant  yellow
•-<dour(Pliu.  //.  .V.  xxi.2'J),  like  a  flaiue,
from  \vhi(;h  cireumstance  the  iiatoe
arose ;  and  of  hu'ge  diineusiouit,  suffi-
cient to  cover  the  whole  pvraon  from
head  to  foot.  Daring  the  ccre-mony
it  was  worn  over  the  head,  to  shield
the  downcBJtt  looku  of  virgin  tnode«ty
(LucMtn.  ii.  3(31 ),  as  exhibited  iu  the
aunexml  Hgure,  from  a  Roman  nmrlde,
representing  a  bride  (ttupta)  at  her
wedding;  and  was  so  retainpd  until
she  arrived  at  her  new  home,  when
nho  was  itnvtiiled  by  ber  husband;  aa
is  exemplified  by  the  fellowiug  tignre,  a1»o  from  t

Rum  an marble,  iti
which the bride  It
seen  sitting  nureiM
upoD  a  conch,  but
witli  the  flaitinieiun
still on bcr  ibonl
den,  and  exhilfiiioft
a  very  natural  $»
I  ore  uf  feminine  laod-
fttty,  or  n'gret  for  tfcf
loss  of  her  old  fnen6
nud  companions.  8w
NUtkimomi;!!.
FlanatiFoua  Sinua. A  gulf  lying  betwMo  hdtia
and  Liburnia,  in  the  Adriatic. It  was  aim  ealt'ri
PolaticuKi  Sinus,  fnuu  the  town  of  Pola  in  iu  vicin-
ity. The  namu  Flanatlcua  was  derived  from  tbi
adjacent,  town  of  Flaoona. The  miKlem  aineil
th«  Gulf  of  yuaniaro  (Pltu.  //,  X  tti.  I9|.
Ftavia  DomitiUa. See  Domi-ulla.
Flavla  Qena. Celebmted  u  the  boase  to  irhiek
the  emperor  Vespaai.iu betoogod. Doring  Ih*
later  period  of  the  Ibnnan  Empire  the  aamc  Fla-
vins descended  from  uni*  emperor  to  another,  Coa-
stantins,  the  father  of  Con:«tantiiu-  the  Great. beinf
the  liPHt  iu  tlu'  w;rii.-M.

Flavian  Empeixu-a.  A  name  applied  apeeiftcal-
ly  to  three  Kouian  emperors — Veopasiao,  Tiiak
and  Domitiau — as  holongiug  to  the  m/M  Fltti'
(Suet.  IVKp.  1).

Flavianum  Ina.  See  tuRutPRCDKSriA.
Flavlus,  GsAKfS.  The  secretary  t«>  the  cesMT
Appius  Claudius  Caecns,  and  memorable  for  hiflaf
made  public  cenain  teclmicalitiea  of  legal  ^
ceduro  that  had  previously  t>een  known  to  tk*
patricians  alone.  Theiw  were  the  acftoan  ltfi»,ii^
rules  of  the  Calendar,  tbfl  /^rmulae,  etc.  H«  "*
made  a  senator  by  Claudius,  and  was  cnndostdil*
in  B.C.  no^,  a  choice  which  mo  disguslnl  the  |iilT^
ciaiiH  that  the  grratt.*r  part  of  the  unbles  Util  w^'
their  Luyignia — Ihv  gold  rings  and  phalerar.  T\»-
viitM  met  their  coiiteruptnuus  irrutuieuL  with  pftt
cuulufiss  and  hnuteur,  and  a  number  of  aiienkiM
are  preserved  of  thi»  rivalry,  .S«*  Plinr,  U  S
xxxiii.l;  etc. /Vo. War.  11:  Lixy, ii.W;  (WI.tU !>

Flavlaa.  A  brother  of  the  German  patxioC  Ar-
miuiiis  Iq.  v.)  and  adistingnistaod  officer  in  UmS''
mau  army  rrac.  dmi.ii.  9).

Flaviaa  Fimbria. See  FnuifUA

Flaviua  loaephua. See  losErnvs.

Ftavius  Voplacua Bee  VoriBCLa.


FLAVUS


677


FL0RU8


Flavua.  (1)  L.  Caesbtius,  a  tribtine  of  the
people,  deposed  from  bis  office  iu  b.g.  44  by  Julias
C'nesar  for  baviug  removed  the  crowns  from  Caesar's
statues  aud  for  iraprisoniDg  a  persou  who  had  sa-
inted Caesar  by  tlie  title  of  rer.  At  the  next  elec-
tion for  consal,  Flavas  received  many  votes,  aud
for  Ilia  defiant  benriag  towards  the  dictator  en-
joyed a  considerable  popularity  (Snet.  Caea.  79, 60 ;
Pint.  Caes.  61;  Ant.  12).  (2)  Subrius,  au  officer
in  the  Praetorian  Oaards  who  took  an  active  part
in  Piso's  conspiracy  against  Nero  in  a.o.  66  (Dio
Cass.  Ixii.  24).

Flax. See  Linuh.

Fleet. See  Classis  ;  Navu.

JHeatLj  -See  Piaetbtica;  Vicrus.

Flevtuh,  Fleiito.  "-/See  RuJCmja.

Flora.  The  goddess  of  fiowers,  and  a  very  an-
cient Italian  deity,  being  one  of  those  said  to  have
been  worshipped  by  Tatins.  Her  festival  was
termed  Floralia,  and  was  celebrated  at  the  end  of
April  aud  beginning  of
May.  It  greatly  degener-
ated, however,  in  the
coarse  of  time,  aud  be-
came so  offensive  to  par-
ity as  not  to  bear  the  pres-
ence of  Tirtuons  charac-
ters. The  story  of  Cato
the  Censor  iu  relation  to
this  festival  is  well
known  (Val.  Max.  ii.  10).
The  Romans,  who  in  gen-
eral displayed,  great  cru-
dity ill  the  legends  which
they  invented  for  their
deitieSiSaid  that  Flora  had
been  a  oourtesan,  who,
having  acqaired  immense
wealth  at  Rome  in  the
early  days  of  the  Republic,

FTOHL (r>»m  «  Mcfent ^«^  '*  *"  *^«  ?««'*»  ^^
auuuei)  pie,  on  condition  of  their

always celebrating her

birthday  with  feasts  (Pint.  Quaest.  Bom.  35;  Lac-

taot.  1,  24). Flora  being  an  ancient  Latin  deity,

-was  addressed  by  the  title  of  Mater  (Cio.  ta  rerr.

V.  14 ;  Lncret.  v.  738). In  later  times,  Flora  was

identified  with  the  Oreek  Cfalorts. See  Horab.

noralia  or-  Floralea  Lndl  A  festival  which
wan  celebrated  at  Rome  in  honour  of  Flora  or
Chloris.  It  was  said  to  have  been  instituted  in
B.C.  238,  on  the  occasion  of  the  dedication  of  a  tem-
pleto  Flora  by  the  aediles  L.  and  M.  Pnblicias  in
the  Circns  Maxiuins  {C.  I.  L.  i.  392),  at  the  com-
mand of  an  oracle  in  the  Sibylline  Books,  for  the
purpose  of  obtaining  from  tbe  goddess  ber  protec-
tion of  the  blossoms  (Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  $  286).  In
the  consalship  of  L.  Postumius  Albinns  and  M.
Popilins  Laenas  (b.c.  173),  it  was  made  an  annual
festival,  at  the  command  of  tbe  Senate,  by  the
aedile  C.  Servilius  (BSommsen,  ^m.  Miinzw.  p.  645),
as  the  blossoms  in  that  year  had  severely  suffered
from  winds,  hail,  and  rain.  By  degrees  it  was  ex-
tended to  six  days  (April  28-May  3).

Tbe  celebratiou  was,  as  usual,  conducted  by  the
aedilee,  and  was  carried  on  with  excessive  merri-
ment, drinking,  and  lascivious  games  (Mart.  i.  3;
Sen.  Epitt.  96).  From  Valerias  Maximus  we  learn
that  theatrical  and  mimic  representations  formed


a  principal  part  of  tbe  various  amusements,  and
that  it  was  customary  for  the  assembled  people
on  this  occasion  to  require  the  actresses  to  ap-
pear naked  on  the  stage,  and  to  amuse  the  mnlti-
tnde  with  indecent  gestures  and  dances.  The
last  day  was  devoted  to  a  beast- bunt  in  tbe
Circns,  but  there  were  no  races.  Similar  festivals,
chiefly  in  spring  and  autumn,  are  in  Southenk
countries  seasons  for  rejoicing,  and,  as  it  were,
called  forth  by  tbe  season  of  tbe  year  itself,  witb-
ont  any  distinct  connection  with  any  particular
divinity;  they  are  to  this  day  very  popular  in  Italy,
aud  in  ancient  times  we  find  tbem  celebrated  from
tbe  southern  to  the  northern  extremity  of  Itnly.
(See  Anthbsphoria,  and  Jnstin,  xliti.  4.)  The
Floralia  were  originally  festivals  of  tbe  country
people  (Preller,  Rdm.  Myth.  379),  which  were  after-
wards, in  Italy  as  in  Greece,  introduced  into  tbe
towns,  where  they  naturally  assumed  a  more  dis-
solute and  licentious  character,  while  the  country
people  continued  to  celebrate  them  in  their  old
and  merry  but  innocent  manner;  and  it  is  highly
probable  that  such  festivals  did  not  become  con-
nected with  the  worship  of  any  particular  deity
nntil  a  comparatively  late  period.  This  wonld
account  for  the  lata  introduction  of  tbe  Flurnlia
at  Rome,  as  well  as  for  tbe  manner  iu  which  we
find  them  celebrated  there.

Floreutia.  The  modem  Firenze,  or  Florence;
a  town  iu  Etruria,  sprung  from  tbe  ancient  Fie-
sol^,  and  subsequently  a  Roman  colony,  situated
on  the  AmuB  (Aruo).  The  Florentini  are  men-
tioned by  Tacitus  {Ann.  \.  79)  as  sending  a  deputa-
tion to  Rome  in  a.d.  16.  Its  greatness  as  a  city
dates  from  the  Middle  Ages.  See  Perrens,  Biitoire
de  Florence  (1877-80) ;  Yriarte,  Florence  (1882).

Floras.  (I)  L.  Annaeus  (iu  one  MB.  called
lULiuB),  a  Latin  historian,  who  was  born,  accord-
ing to  tbe  common  opinion,  in  Spain,  but,  as  others
maintain,  in  Oanl,  and  who  wrote  iu  the  reign  of
Tnyan.  He  was  still  living  in  the  time  of  Hadri-
an, and  is  perhaps  tbe  same  individual  to  whom,
according  to  Spartianus,  this  emperor  addressed
some  sportive  verses.  Florns  has  left  au  abridg-
ment of  Roman  History,  entitled  Epitome  de  Geatit
£omaNorum,  divided  into  two  (iu  some  MSS.  four)
books.  It  commences  with  tbe  origin  of  Rome,
and  extends  to  a.u.c.  t^,  when  Augustus  closed
tbe  Temple  of  lanus,  a  ceremony  which  had  not
taken  place  for  206  years  previous.  This  work  is
based  not  merely  upon  Livy,  but  upon  many  ear-
lier historians,  no  part  of  whose  works  any  longer
remains.  It  is  less  a  history  than  a  eulogy  of  the
Roman  people,  written  with  elegance,  but  at  tbe
same  time,  in  an  oratorical  style,  aud  not  without
affectation.  Oftentimes  facts  are  merely  hinted
at,  and  events  are  passed  over  with  a  fionrisb  of
rhetoric ;  while  the  declamatory  tone  which  eveiy-
where  prevails,  aud  the  concise  and  sententious
phrases  in  which  Florus  is  fond  of  indulgiug.impart
au  air  of  formality  to  his  writings,  and  render  tbem
monotonous,  and  sometimes  obscure.  Florns  like-
wise commits  many  errors  of  a  geographical  nat-
ure, and  on  many  occasions  is  defective  Iu  point
of  chronology.  His  text  has  reached  us  iu  a  very
corrupt  state,  aud  abounds  with  interpolations.
The  epitome  was  very  popular  in  tbe  Middle  Ages.
Tbe  best  edition  of  Florus  is  that  of  Jahn  (1852),
revised  by  Halm  (Leipzig,  1854).  See  Heyn,  Dt
Floro Hietorico  (Bonn,  1866); Bizos,  Flori Biat,


FLOWEHS


679


FOEDEUJiTAE  CiriTATES


etc.  de  i'ero  .VrtiNinr,  Jetaft,  .Scri/iti*  (Piiriii,  l(?7tjl;
and  uii  tliH  atylu,  Kgun,  Itr  Floru  UUt.  EiumiWHta
Taril.  Imitatitir  (^Miiiwlci,  iH-fli  ),  niiil  Thiiiii^,  Dr
Fluri  FAoctittone  ( FniiikHU»Uiii,  It^l).  Flortis  itt
IMMKibty  iiloHtical  with  tliv  utitlitir  nf  a  hcIjuoI
tbeiue  uu  VvrgU,  uf  which  th»  iutrodiicttuu  hn«
bceu  iircscn'etl.  uud  U  priulcd  in  HdIu'm  ftUlimi
uf  the  epitome,  Aud  with  Lhe  puvt  uu  whuiu  lla-
ilrinu  cracked  the  jckc  preserved  by  Spnrtiaiiii*
{iiadr.  16).  'J'bi»  Fiorus,  honcver,  is  called  rm-
l-lliH  tit  one  MS-  Sw  K.  MlUhT.  Dr  /'.  Annio  Floro
Porta  (Berlin,  !«&:»),  at)d  Eysweiiliardt,  Umirian
miff  FhritM  ^R^rliii,  If^nSi).  {H)  lruL'8,  a  poet
<>r  the  tiuiu  uf  Horace  (A>i«/.  i.  3;  li.  S).  (3)
URSSIL'h  or  CKsnud,  n  |iri>citralnr  of  Iiidoea,
A.D.  64-65,  wh»»e  oppn'Miioii  wnt*  thr  chief
cause  of  the  Jewish  revolt  in  60  (Tacit.  Hiat.
V.  10).

Flowero. See  HtiltTt.'*.

Flowers,  Cit)i>i>KBS  or.  SecCuumts;  Flora.

Flute. See  Tibia.

Focol^.  A  covering  for  the  throat  (/aufYwJ,
MMnBtiiitcN  drniiVii  aUo  o%er  the  enni  i.Mart.  iv,  4IJ.
H  wua  made  uf  tvuul  and  \M)t*ti  hy  inttnn  and  deli-
cate penoiii).  ItH  u-iie  by  othem  wiw  regarded  na
etfemiaate  (Hor.  Sat.  it.  3,  !^).

Focna,  dim.  FootUua  (itrria:  taxofia,  rV^npif,
Aiui.  t'irxdptot/)  A  tireplnce;  a  heailh;  a  linizier.
The  flrcpiace,  while  M-rving  all  the  raquiremeurn
of  onliuary  lift-.  ]HiMte>.*t4!d  a  saovd  eharacter  both
among  the  Grcelui  aud  RoumuK.  lu  the  primitive
Greek  house  the  iV^u/iu  ntood  nt^aiust,  or  uear,  the
buck  wall  nf  the  ^t'yujjoy,  the  kitchen  and  liviiig-
nwni  of  the  foaiily;  in  the  more  s)>iicionB  dn'otl-
iiilfs  of  a  later  Bj;e  it  was  transfetTed,  with  other
oltjet'ffc  of  dumiwtic  worwhip,  to  a  Ktiiall  privnie
ohaiiel.  vuilltnl  fui  AS  In  reftuinble  thi*  TbolnM,  the
doiue-jthapml  itrria  of  the  State.  The  u-ull-ktiowi)
tlM^  uf  the  honrtli  ii.'^  n  («a)ictimry  for  Miippliauts  oc-
ctiro  «a  early  ati  Huinw  (Oil.  vii.  L'st-liW;. See  Do-

Among  the  Botnann  the  fitx*placo  Man  dedicated
to  the  Larea  of  ench  faniilyil'laut.  Juf.  ii.  ti.  16);  a
ooD»ecr»tion  which  did  not  interfere  with  its
bonii^ly  iiM«8.  On  letttivuls  the  hoiiHewife  decors-
UkI  lhe  hi^rtli  »ilh  ^arland»>  (Ovid,  Trint.  v.  5, 10):
&  Woollen  fillet  wnH  ttoinctiinefl  addml,  nor  were
animal  HacriScHx  unknown  (Fropert.  v.  6,  \~G).
The  phratie  pro  artr  ft  /on*  <fxpre)MH*d  attachment
to  all  that  woa  niOAl  dear  ami  vencniblo  (Cic.
y.Jj.  iti.  40,  (  94).  At  Home.  to«),  the  iiro^roiw*  of
wealth  and  rcHitemeiit  led  to  the  retuoval  of  the
focnis  and  Peiiatc«  to  an  inner  apartiuont  (Mar-
qnunlt.  Prieatl.'iM).  In  the  Poropeian  hoUHea  we
see  the  alrium,  now  become  a  iviH'ptioii -room,
wlorued  with  a  fouutaiti  and  a  niarhlo  table  (mir-
ft&MfHiM ),  but  no  lunger  with  a  hearth.  See  La-
ra ilk'm.

.The  focoB  was  nsually  a  Rxtare,  constructed  of


stmie  or  brick, nnd  elevated  afcw  iuchea  above  ibf
jiroiiiid.  It  was  altui  fretiuently  luaile  of  bruuA:,
vai'ioiiHly  ornamented,  and  could  then  lie  cant'd
froni  room  to  room.

The  (tinall  portable  hraxier  'or  chafiag-diBb,
callcil  foculmi  or  «<r'yii|>u>c,  wan  i-jiiiuriully  nwd  in
nacritices;  and  the;  name  nanu-  was  applird  to  tli*
hollow  or  ftrt'-pnii  at  lhe  tup  uf  on  altar  tLivv.ii.
12;  Cic.  yVu  Domo,  47,  ^  l*J:i ;  nee  Ahaj.  The  mot-
able  fociiK  or  foculua  was  also  cmployeit  iu  tW
kitchen  (Plnut.  Vap4.  iv.  2,  @&;  Juv,  Ui.'iGS),  and  Av


TneaM  from  CMrtf. (Brilltli  Uoacvni )


nroaw  FmI  from  Pooipeil. (OT«fttsek.|

keeping  things  hot  waa  bn>nght  tutu  tli«  ilioiBi-
Tooni  (Sen.  £/».  76,  (  231  See  CaldaIUL'M,  sikI  (Ik
iiliistrntioii  nnder  Avthei'Sa.

Fodina. See  MnALi.i'ii.

Foederatae  Civitates.  Foederitl  SoofL  h
extending  hi^r  inHiif  tice  and  doiuiaious  beyond  (lie
seven  billc,  Rome  foUnwed  two  alternative  connri.
One  W8»  to  conchidi'  a  treaty  of  alliauce  wilt_*
comDiunity  lietween  whieh  and  herself  Ibeie
previonsly  been  no  relation ;  the  other  was
I  dncc  such  coDimauity  to  complete  snbjertioR
concitic^t  or  enforced  HnrTender(Livy,  xxsiv.l7;i*.
^>;  vtii.2l.  Where  there  was  a  treaty  of  alltnn
(faeiluiti,  the  allied  commnnity  was  deartitMi  bf
thetemmpreltxed  to  this  Article.  At  first,  of  cootw.
Hiich  nllius  were  exclusively  Italiau;  In  ]iantrulv
the  Socii  and  Lmini,  who  forced  on  the  .Sucnl
War,  B.C  ^>,  though  no  town  which  hiul  tiliUiuid
the  Koman  civila-t,  or  whirh  wiin  a  Rotnsn  urliUin
colony  (see  Ooij>,xia).,  vcns  fuiitl  to  he  foetlunli
But  even  Intig  Iwfure  Hint  war  Konie  hnd  xltitcltfd
nlliett  (o  hi-DH-lf  by  Irciitv  outride  Italy,  Untictatv
governed  on  the  rvpnhlii-an  piinriple  ami  foreip
princes  (e.g.  I'lolrumens  Philuili-lp)iit:i,  ill.  7TX
Dlo  Cass.  147  :  and  Micro  of  Syraciii»e,  a  year
Polyb.  i.  Itj).  After  the  exteDsioii  of  the  ~
inipertnni  into  thn  provinces,  two  kinds  of  fi
jHipnlt  nrcivttateti  have  to  l»e  distiiigiiislieil;  Ihiw
^^  htMie  territory  lay  within  the  l>ound»  of  a  RnoiU
province,  and  those  which  were  genuinely  feiTifB.
The  latter,  however,  after  the  subjectiun  of  tkt
ki!iK»  of  Macedoii  anil  Syria,  were  constantly  W-
coming  mere  tribute^imyem  to  Route  {IJvy,  xlii.4;
xlv.  13. 44),  and  as  a  general  rule  bad  t^t  be  ooBlmt
with  concealing  their  practical  vaiiaalaf*  (S«lt
Tujf.  14)  ttmler  the  thtti  disgaise  of  *' fiends  ud
allies  of  the  Rotnnn  pM>ple  "  {Caue.  B.  0. 1.  %.^  43:
iv.  la  ;  vii.  :il ;  Cic.  Pro  U^e  .VdnJ/in,  Ti.  13).

The  foetlem  were  of  three  kinds,  stipuhirin^
niwcly  for  frietidhliip  betwren  the  coutrnctiiifc  pat-
ties,  or  for  ivciprocal  hiwpitslily,  or  for  oiihiarj
subvention.  Tlmao  of  (he  tirst  kind  (potyl).  iii-
32;  Livy.  xxxviii.  3d)  pruvidiKl  that  thetnoSul*
should  not  engage  in  war  with  one  unoih«r  witb-
out  lint  nnikitig  every  attempt  at  an  ainiakble  art*
tJemeui  (e.g.  the  treaty  with  Alba,  l)iony«-  iii-3l.
and  coulaiiied  regubittons  as  to  the  soJoDrnoft^'
oittzcDs  of  each  on  the  territory  of  thw  other,  swl
the  uieasiue  of  ligal  protection  thry  should  eigKj
(e.g.  Cailhage,  Polyb.  iii  S^;24i. Oihei  tenw  u


fnsile^H


m


FOEDUS


679


FONS


such  treaties,  especially  when  coucluded  after  a
war,  are  exemplified  by  those  with  Carthage  after
tbe  Sicilian  aud  Secoad  Punic  Wars,  with  Philip
of  MacedoD,  and  with  Antiochus.  Treaties  of  the
second  kind,  which  hargaioed  fur  greater  intimacy
between  the  two  States,  are  exempHBed  by  that
with  the  Aedui  (Caes.  B.  G.  i.  31).  Those  provid-
iag  for  military  assistanoe  varied  with  the  power
aud  emiueuce  of  the  allied  Stat« ;  sometimeB  they
placed  the  parties  on  an  absolute  equality  (Livy,
xxxir.  57) — e.  g.  those  with  Cameriuiim  and  Hera-
clea,  with  the  AetoIiaus,tb6  Jews  (losephus,  Ant.
lud.  xii.  10,  6),  and  Rhodians;  in  other  cases  tbe
»ociw  was  subordinated  to  Bome,  being  reqnired
to  "respect  her  mi^esty"  (Cic.  Pro  Balh.  16,  35;
Dig.  xlix.  l&f  7, 1) ;  it  remained  free,  bnt  practically
was  at  Eome's  orders,  as  a  client  at  those  of  his
patron,  though  the  Romans  admitted  their  obliga-
tion to  afford  full  prolectiou  (Livy,  xxx.  42),  and
included  tbe  socitu  iu  their  own  treaties  with
neighbouring  peoples  (Polyb.  iii.  23  foil.,  xv.  IB ;
Livy,  xxx.  37,  xxxviii.  11,38).

The  couditiou  of  the  socii  and  foederati  was
originally  one  of  tolerable  independence,  subject
to  the  obligation  of  fomiahiug  a  contiugent  to  the
Roman  army;  bnt  it  was  continuonsly  depressed
by  the  iucreasing  power  of  Rome,  and  the  result-
ing discontent  outmiuated  in  the  Social  War,  at
the  termiuation  of  which  the  Leges  lulia  aud
Plautia  Papiria  brought  the  Roman  civitas  within
tbe  reach  of  all  who  were  domiciled  iu  Italy  (see
CnTTAS),  from  whose  territories  this  class  of  com-
munity DOW  disappeared.  Ctvitates  foederatae
seem,  however,  to  have  acquired  the  benefits  of
these  statutes  only  ou  condition  of  becoming /nh-
dut  (see  below).

There  were  also  foederatae  civitatee  in  most  hi
tbe  provinces,  their  treaty  of  conrse  being  anterior
to  tbe  formation  of  the  province  itself;  thus  there
were  three  in  both  Sicily  and  Baetica,  and  others
io  Asia  Minor ;  Athens,  Rhodes,  and  Tyre  were  also
federate  towns,  aud  Cicero  {Pro  Scauro,  44)  regards
it  as  a  dishonour  to  Sardinia  that  in  all  that  island
there  was  no  town  which  "  was  free  and  united  by
friendship  with  tbe  Roman  people."  These  feder-
ate towns  in  the  provinces  enjoyed  certain  privi-
leges not  shared  by  the  ordiuary  provincial  town.
Their  citizens  were  exempted  from  payment  of  the
land  impost  (vectigat),  and  perhaps  firom  some  of
tbe  other  ordiuary  taxes  of  tbe  State;  and  they
poHsesaed  avrovo/uo,  the  independent  control  of
their  own  affairs,  with  some  measure  of  legislative
and  judicial  power,  excluding  tbe  authority  of  the
provincial  governor;  bnt  this  perhaps  was  more
theoretical  than  practical,  especially  when  a  Ro-
man army  came  their  way  (Pint.  Pomp.  10).  It  is
hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the  foederatae  civita-
t«8  were  forbidden  to  embark  on  any  independent
foreign  policy.  They  were  &ee  to  adopt  the  civil
law  of  Rome  in  whole  or  part.  Thus  even  before
the  Social  War  it  was  not  unusual  for  tbe  Socii
and  Latini  to  adopt  Roman  laws  into  their  own
system.  In  such  cases  the  State  which  adopted  a
Roman  statute  was  said  in  earn  legem  fundus  fieri  ;
but  of  conrse  it  did  not  thereby  obtain  for  its  citi-
zens any  privileges  with  respect  to  the  Roman
State.

FoedoB. See  Foederatae  Civitatks.

Foentu. See  Fen  us.

FolliaL  dim.  FoUioiUiu. (1)  An  inflated  ball  of


leather,  no  doubt  originally  the  skin  of  a  quadru-
ped filled  with  air.  Tbe  Roman  games  of  ball,  of
which  Marqnardt  reckons  five,  are  described  under
PiLA.  The  follis  van  the  largest  as  well  as  the
lightest  and  softest  ball  in  use,  as  the  pila  was  the
hardest,  the  paganica  being  intermediate  between
the  two  (Mart.  xiv.  45 ;  cf.  vii.  32).  According  to
Marquardt,  the  follis  might  be  either  filled  with
air  (Kf»'i7),  or  lightly  stuffed  with  feathers;  but  this
is  perhaps  a  wrong  inference,  as  the  plumea  port'
dera  folHt  (Mart.  iv.  19)  may  simply  mean  "light
as  a  feather";  aud  it  is  only  the  paganiva  aud  pHa
which  are  expressly  stated  to  have  beeu  so  stuffed.
It  was  not  tbe  same,  however,  as  the  tightly-blown
modern  football;  it  was  much  more  like  a  child's
ball,  so  soft  that  it  could  hurt  no  one,  and  bence  is
recommended  as  a  gentle  exercise,  fit  for  small
boys  and  old  men,  but  to
which  iutenee  would  not
condescend  (Mart.  xiv.
47).  The  folHcuIua  {to
<PovX\ik\ov  KaXoiintvov )
is  said  to  have  been  in-
vented by  one  Atlicus  of
Naples,  a  teacher  of  gym-
nastics {iratioTpiffijt),  for
the  benefit  of  Pompeius
Magnus  (Atheu.  i.  p.  14
foil.).  Augustus,  who  was
Folk*  (mm  .  Coin  of  Oor-  J^tber  delicate  in  health,
diuui  III.)  took  to  It  comparatively

early  in  life,  soou  after
the  Civil  Wars  (Suet.  Aug.  83).  For  tbe  folUa  pugi-
latorius  of  Plautns  (Bud.  iii.  4, 16),  see  Cohycus.
(Becker-Goll,  tiallua,  iii.  171  foil.).

(2)  An  air-cushion  or  mattress  (Lamprid.  Elagab.
25).

(3)  A  pair  of  bellows  {(ftva-a),  consisting  of  two
boards,  with  an  air- valve  {parma),
united  by  a  skin  of  ox  or  cow  hide,  so
as  to  form  a  machine  similar  to  what
we  now  use,  as  shown  in  the  annexed
figure,  from  a  terra -cotta  lamp  (Cic.
.V.  D.  i,  20 ;  Pers.  v.  11). Bellows,  also

j  made  of  goat's  skin  (foUes  hircini),aTti
mentioned  by  Horace  {Sat.  i.  4, 19).

(4)  Under  tbe  later  Empire,  follis
was  tbe  name  of  a  small  debased
coin.  In  tbe  absence  of  a  better
currency,  lai^  snms  had  to  be  paid  in  this  coin-
age, which  for  the  purpose  was  done  up  in  bags,
also  called  foUcM,  analogous  to  the  *'  purses  of  pias-
tres "still  used  iu  reckoning  in  tbe  East.  The
nomber  of  coins  that  went  to  a  bag  was  probably
5(X},  and  its  worth  -A  of  a  aolidua,  or  about  $0.25.
From  this  the  folhs  became,  under  Constantiue
and  his  successors,  a  "money  of  account,"  which
was  used  in  reckoning  gold  and  silver  as  well  as
copper  (Euseb.  S.  £.  x.  6,  $  1;  Cod.  Theod.  vi.
2,8).

Fona.  (1)  A  spring.  (2)  A  fountain.  Orna-
mental edifices  were  erected  by  both  the  Greeks
and  Romans  over  natural  springs,  such  aa  the  tem-
ple of  ErechtheuH  at  Athens  and  of  Poseidon  at
Mantinea  (both  over  salt  springs),  that  of  Salmacis
at  Halicarnassns  (Vitrnv.  ii.  8,  ^  12),  and  that  of
the  so-called  Grotto  of  Egeria  near  Rome.  (Cf.
Vitmv.viii.3,  $7;  Plin.  fl.  A:  xxxvi.$  154,)

At  Rome,  also,  a  good  proportion  of  the  water
brought  into  the  city  by  the  aqueducts  was  de-
voted to  the  public  fountains. Of  these  there  were


FollM.  (Rich.)


F0JJTEIU6

Ittie  /(ifii«  ((Minds  onvfterroini)  ami  thr
MffMN. A)jri|^|>ii  nli>nr  U  fmUl  to  bnve
oonstruoted  700  taeua  aud  5iK>  iMUentt». FuiinUiiii)


titrMl  KouuukiU. (I'uiuikvib  I

were  ftUo  used  in  the  atria  of  honjies  [spo  DoMfsl,
■lid  tbe  1>a8)iis  exliiliiti^d  n  }^at  vnrioty  »f  ornn-
metit,  scntpttirnl  and  ntliBrwiMi>.  On  the  Mnntc
CaTallo  »t  Rome  Ih  a  fumituhi  mjirifieiilin};  tlio
coIuhhbI  figiirt!  of  »  riv«r-guii.  pt'rhnjm  t)i«  Khini>,
wbicb  poiini  a aCruam  into  a  busiii  uf  t^rauitu


SUltMB  at  a  FdvuUid. (ratnpftl  )

tweuly-fteveu  feet  iu  diainel<?r.  Tbere  art*  olber
exofUeut  exuiuiiles  in  Ibe  Capitoliue  Mu»enin,  nod
tbi)  reltubrattid  groap  of  Ibe  Fariiefte  Bull  (q.  v.)
prubiibly  odco  adorned  a  funiilnin.  St>me  of  th«
fuilDtain-stjituuUv^  nre  of  the  thiest  artitttic  work-
innuship.  .Set'  .Stioglitz,  Jrchavl.  d.  Ituukunttt  ii.  pt.
2,  pp.  Tti,7U;  MiddI«ton,  Jiemain*  of  Annent  Rome,
it.  pp.  .129,  341f,  :ViO.  351  (Loudou,  It^i),

FonteiUB,  CapTto. See  Capito.

Ponteiuft,  Mahci's.  Propraetor  in  Narbont^se
Gaul,  between  B.C.  76  and  73.  accused  iu  69  of  ex-
tortion in  bia  pruvincv.  and  defended  by  Cicero  in
un  <)r.'itinn,  part  r>f  wbirb  in  pxtant.

Fontos. The  Roman  god  of  sprioga,  bod  of  la-


FORCEPS

nils  and  Iiirnrua. He  bail  an  nitnr  in  RoDic  nii  ibe

Inniciiliiin. A  fi[M»cia]  fentival,  tbe  KouitnalU,  ku

bebl  ill  hi.H  boiioiir  on  tbe  I3lb  October,  at  wfaith

garlandH woi-o llirou-n iulo tbo springa,  ami

laid  round  tbu  wells  (Vnrr.  X.  L.  vi.  "£!).

Pood,  and  Diink. See  Ckna;  DiAmrnci.

Foola. 8i-v  MoKlo.

Fcola,  Teast  of. See  Forxhcuja.

ForcelUni,  Kridio.  Adistiugnmbed  Jtaliis
lexicograpbtir,  boni  near  Padaa,  Angu&t  Sitb,
li^'H.  Buing  of  biiuible  par^ntAgc,  be  bad  feir
opportunities  for  early  tmiuing,  no  thnt  be  tu
of  maturo  age  wbeii  be  began  a  conree  of  ml-
vanced  stndj  in  tbe  pbilolngical  tteminary  uf
Pa<lnn  ninler  Facriolali  (q.  %'.).  Hitt  grvat  abA-
ity,  zeal,  and  tnduHlry,  however,  aoitn  gave  bin
au  bnnonrabin  rank,  mi  tbat  bo  waa  ap|>oinl«l
»u  nHftistaiit  lobiH  teacber,  wltb  whom  his  name
id  in.t4iparalily  luwociatc'd  in  their  joint  wofk,
the  great  Lntin  b^xicon  {Totiu*  Lat%n\tAl\i  Ul-
"j  icon)  wbotK!  voin|deliou  waa  tu  great  part  iloe
to  tbe  untiring  labour  of  Forcrtlini.  Nute-
b<Hik  iu  hand,  he  read  throngb  not  only  ibe
entire  body  of  Latin  literature,  btit  al«o  the  wliole
rtOlerttoii  of  inHrriptinriK,  tnrliulittg  Iboae  on  ritiiu
and  niL-dalft,  and  IbiiH  {.-ompib-d  Lli«  most  roiii|irr-
buuKivu  and  valuable  voeabular^'  uf  tbe  langnag^
tbut  bad  ever  been  made,  with  both  tbeUreck  aoil
the  Italian  equivalent  of  every  word.  Tbe  tusicua
appeared  in  1771  in  -I  vols.,  tbr«e  yeoia  after  Par*
cellini'd  death,  wbicb  oc<iiirred  April  4tb,  I76K
B^^ideN  thi>4  mflftNiim  (>;;««*.  Forc«>llint  had  asaiMflt
liiH  iiiatttvr  in  tbe  preparation  of  tbe  w>-rallci]  CaK
pine  Vocabulary,  and  from  1794  to  1731  wu  Pnv
fesftor  of  Rhetoric  in  the  acminary  at  Cenada.  ^
Lexicon.

Forceps.  Tongs,  pincera,  ntppera,  or  plierK
UM-41  in  antiquity  for  rarioua  pnrposea.  (1)  A  fAU
ai  tongs  {wifpaypa,  Btpfuttrrpit)  for  taking  bcaMt
metal  out  of  the  lire,  or  holding  it  nixm  the  oiittl;
need  by  sniit.be,  and  therefore  attribnto'1  to  VhIcm
and  the  Cyclopes. (See  bfcus.) fi}  Jlm  a  lurgKit


Pordpea fBlftniMf ,  |

a,  ft.  «nd  t.  tnai  vmn-imlnniica;  e,  ttoat  the  alur  uf  Vstnu  a
r«il;  d,  tUim  a  bu  rtll«r;/  fhua  aa  onftaal  af>«  la  tl»  ZB'^
kluavum.

inntninieut,  a  fnrreps  f  Xo^i'r,  Hippoer.  I  8ev(nl
H]iecinienH  found  at  Pompeii  are  ftgnrvd  ni>^*
CnmritoiA.  0)  In  military  language,  a  tenaJtl^:
in  VI  bich  sense,  bnwever./»r/i<r  tamora  nae*l(AaiBi-
>larc.  xvt.  11, 4  'ij. Sw  FoRrut.


FOSDiaDIA


681


FORTUNA


Fortiei,  Bbeara. (From
«  gem.)


Fordioidla  or  HOTdiddia.  A  festival  celebrat-
ed in  Borne  in  houonr  of  Tellus,  goddesB  of  tbe
earth,  on  15th  April See  Tellub.

Forantnni  or  Fereotmn.  A  tovn  in  Apniia,
snrroniided  by  fertile  fields  and  in  a  low  situation,
according  to  Horace  {Carm.  iii.  4, 16).

Fores. See  Ianua.

Foxfs^  dim.  Foifiofila  (^^I'r,  dim.  ^oXtfiiov).
Shears  (Serr.  in  Verg.  Aen.  viti.  453),  used  (I)  in
shearing  sheep,  as  represented  in  tbe  annexed  illus-
tration, vrhicta  is  taken  from
a  carueliau  in  tbe  Stoscb
collection  of  antique  gems
at  Berlin;  (2)  in  cutting  hair
(Schol.  in  Enrip.  Ore*t.  954) ;
(3)  in  clippiug  hedges,  myr-
tles, and  other  shnibs  (^niXi-
trroi  fivpftuf&¥tt,  Hierooles,  op.
St«b.  Serm.eo,  p.  415).

In  military  manoenvres  tbe
forfex  was  a  body  of  troops  arranged  in  tbe  form
of  a  y,  HO  as  to  receive  and  overcome  tbe  opposite
body,  called  a  cvara*  (Gell.  x.  9).

In  architecture  tbe  term  ^XiV  denoted  a  con-
structiou  which  was  probably  the  origin  of  the
arch,  consisting  of  two  stones  leaning  against  each
other  so  na  to  form  an  acute  angle  overhead,  as  is
seen  in  tbe  ruins  of  Tiryus. See  p.  117.

Fori. Gangways. SeeCiRCt's;  Navis.

Forica  (doKos),  generally  in  tbe  plural  ForXcae.
A  set  of  public  water-closets,  like  the  cabitteU  d'ai-
tance  of  French  cities,  and  put  at  the  disposal  of
tbe  passers-by  for  a  small  fee.  Tbey  were  farmed
ont  by  contractors,  as  we  learn  tram  Juvenal  (iii.
38).  See  the  anecdote  in  Theopbrast.  Char,  14.
The/oriau  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  tbe  pub-
lic nrinals  {dolia)  set  at  tbe  street  comers,  and
whose  contents  were  sold  to  the  laundries  for
bleachiug  clothes. See  Fl'llo.

Fork. See  Furca.

Fomw,  dim.  Fonnflla,  Formslla  (tvwos).  A
pattern,  a  mould ;  any  contrivauce  adapted  to
convey  its  own  shape  to  some  plustio  or  flexible
material,  including  moulds  for  making  pottery,
pastry,  cheese,  bricks,  and  coins.  Several  moulds
for  use  in  cookery  are  among  the  kitchen  nteusils


K*


VofB*,  UooM  for  Cola*.


fonud  at  Pompeii.  Tbe  moulds  for  coins  were
mode  of  a  kind  of  stone  which  was  indestructible
by  beat  (Pliny,  H.  X  xxxvi.  $  168).  The  mode  of
pouring  into  them  tbe  molten  metal  for  casting
the  coins  will  be  best  understood  from  tbe  preceding
illustration,  which  represents  one  side  of  a  mould,
engraved  by  Seroux  d'Agincourt.  For  tbe  moulds
used  in  casting  terra- cottas,  see  Ectypus.  Tbe
shoemaker's  last  was  also  c Ailed  forma,  formula,
and  tentip€ltium,and  in  Greek  Kokoimvs  (Plat.  Symp.
191  A).  Tbe  spouts  and  channels  of  aqueducts  were
likewise  styled /omiae.
Fonnello  Alphabot. See  Epigraphy,  p.  607.

Foxmiae  (Mola  di  Gaeta).  A  very  ancient  town
in  Latium,  on  the  Via  Appia,  in  tbe  innermost
corner  of  tbe  beautiful  Sinus  Cnietanns  (Gulf  of
Gaeta).  It  was  founded  by  the  Pelasgic  Tyrrhe-
nians, and  was  the  fabled  abode  of  Lamus  and  tbe
Laestrygones  (Horn.  Od.  x.  61).  Near  this  place
were  numerous  villas  of  the  Roman  nobles;  of  these
tbe  best  known  is  the  Formiannm  of  Cicero,  in
tbe  neighbourhood  of  which  be  was  killed,  and
whose  remains  are  still  visible  at  tbe  Villa  Marsa-
na.  The  hills  of  Formiae  produced  good  wine
(Hor.  Carm.  i.  20, 11).

Fonnlannm.  A  villa  of  Cicero  near  Formiae,
and  in  whose  vicinity  be  was  murdered  by  order
of  Antony.

Fcnrnttla. See  Actio  in  tlie  Appendix.

Foxnocalia.  A  Roman  festival  held  in  Febru-
ary iu  honour  of  Fornax,  tlie  goddess  of  ovens.  It
was  said  to  have  been  foinided  by  Numa,  and  may
be  described  as  a  thanksgiving  for  the  earliest  en-
joyment of  the  newly-gathered  com.  It  was  held
in  tbe  Forum  by  the  Curiae,  or  ancient  nuions  of
kinsmen,  under  tbe  superintendence  of  tbe  Curio
Maximus,  or  president  of  the  mastera  of  tbe  curiae.
Com  was  baked  in  ovens  iu  tbe  ancient  fashion.
All  who  missed  tbe  festival  were  called  fools
(atalti),  08  being  supposed  not  to  know  which  was
their  curia,  and  had  to  make  an  offering  at  tbe  so-
called  Feast  of  Fools  {gtultorum  feriae)  on  the  17tb
February,  the  day  of  the  Qniriualia.  See  Pliny,
H.  N.  xviii.  8 ;  Ovid,  Ftuti,  ii.  513-532 ;  Varro,  L.  L.
vi.  13 ;  Festus,  s.  v.  JStuttorum  Feriae.

Fornax  (xd^ivor),  dim.  Fomacttla.  (1)  An  oven
or  kiln  fur  baking  pottery.  (See  Fictile.)  (2)  A
smelting- fnmnce  {fornax  aeraria).  (3)  A  lime-kiln
(fomax  calcaria).  (4)  Tbe  furnace  of  a  bath  {for-
nax baliHei). See  Balmkak.

Fornax.  A  Roman  goddess,  who  presided  over
baking  the  corn  in  the  oven  (fornax),  aud  who  was
worshipped  at  the  festival  of  tbe  Fomacalia  (Ovid,
Fatti,  ii.  525).

Fornix.  A  vaulted  arch  or  vaulted  chamber,
such  as  were  common  at  Rome  below  the  level  of
tbe  sidewalks,  and  were  so  frequently  used  by
prostitutes  that  the  name  fomicaria  ^  meretrix
(Tertull.  De  Anima,  35). See  Merktrix.

Forpex.  A  pair  of  curling  irons;  the  word  is
sometimes  treated  as  a  mere  corruption  of  for-
ceps. But  the  derivation  from  peeto  is  obviously
appropriate;  and  it  seems  to  have  been  an  old
word  (Cat.  S.  B.  x.  3)  revived,  like  many  others,
by  late  authors  (Sidon.  Apoll.  £pUJ^.xv.  184).  See
Caxjuuistrum.

Fortnna  (Jvxn)-  "^^  goddess  of  good  Inok,  wor-
shipped ^m  remote  antiquity  in  Italy. Her  cul-


toB  was  ftu|itMirt4sl  to  have  been  introdnced  into
Bonw  b^-  Kiirg  Svrviiiti  TttlU us,  popularly  believed
to  be  bur  fitvonritt'  and  conlldniit.  He  vean  twid  to
liiivcfi>iiii<l«'d]it>ro1di'>Mt  Hiiiictriurioff,  lu),  forinatuice,
iliat  of  Font  Furttiim,  or  lucky  clituicr,  on  tlitf  right
bdtik  of  tliti  Tilmrbt'low  Kuine.  To  tlii«  s  pil^im-
ago  was  made  down  tlie  river  by  land  niiil  wator
nil  tbe  anniversary  of  its  foandutiou  (Juue  36).  Atn
tiruo  went  on,  tlio  n'orsbip  of  Furtnna  became  oue
<it'  ibe  nioat  popular  in  Italy.  Slic  was  vrorbliipped
nl- a  great  iinniWr  of  (tlirinca  under  various  titles
given  accnrdtng  to  the  viiriouBcircnniMaooeBof  life
ill  n-hicli  lier  intlneuce  waaarippowed  to  baveeftect.
Tlii*H*»  IitW»  were  Forttim  Primigrnia,  who  deler-
niiues  tint  de«tiny  of  tlie  child  at  its  hirtli ;  For-
tana  Pnbliri§  or  Populi  Rinnani,  the  Icilulary  t^oil-
desa  of  the  State;  Fortitna  Caemrig  or  Juj/kb/h,  the
protectress  of  the  emperor;  Fortunu  I'rirata,  or  of
family  life  ;  Forluna  Falrida,  J'lcbi-iti,  Fi/urttria,  of
tbe  diflereut  orders,  clnt>8«-s,  and  families  of  tbe
popnlntion:  /or/imn /.ibmiin, of  children  ;  Virgina-
/ic.uf  maidei]»:  iUn/^i-ii,  of  wotneu.  Furtuaa  Firi'
lis  viiu)  the  Ki^ddess  uf  woman's  happiuedtTiD'mar'
ried  lift*, of  boj-M  and  of  ytinths,  nlio  de<Hi'nted  to
her  tim  timt  r.iittin)rH  nf  their  benrdii,  calling  her
fi\nii  tUin  Fortitna  HarlmUt.  Other  epilhelH  of  For-
tuna  wore  Victris,  ur  givur  of  victtH'j- ;  <  'Qaxprratrir,
or  preserver;  Dux  or  Vomrji,  the  header  or  utu-nil-
ant ;  Kcdur,  who  bringn  nafi:  hunie;  TntnquHla,
the  giver  of  ]»ruN|M.'nma  voyngL-^n.  This  Fottiitia
wiut  woi-sblpiitid  with  INirtunua  in  the  harbtmr  uf
RoDie.  There  were  also  Fortuua  Bonn  and  Mala,
good  and  evil  Fortune ;  lilanda  or  thitterin);,  Oh-
Mrijit4'nt  or  yieldini;.  Utihia  or  dniihlfti],  ViHrattt  or
entii'iiif*.  lirei'vi  or  tickle,  and  J/cmeiix  or  cuiialant.
Trnjiin  at  hiMt  fioind-
wl  i)  Hi>rcial  tcinjde  in
Iter  lionoiir  an  the  all-
|KTvndin^  power  of
ilio  \rorh].  Ilt-re  an
utiiiual  sac-riticc  waa
oflVri'd  to  her  ou  New
Yeui-'s  Day.  lu  works
of  art  she  wn8  repre-
wuted  %nth  the  same
attributes  a«  the
Greek  Tvx*i  («ee
TvcHKj.  Fortuua,  in
her  general  cluimc-.trr
as  a  giMldcRft  of  Xat-
iire  and  of  Fate,  ha<L
:tii  nneicnt  and  celebrated  tompliC*,  in  which  oraclM
wort-  dellverL'd,  at  rraencstiS  and  Antiniti. See

I'UAEXESTK.

FortuuAtae  Inaftlae  or  FoTtnnatonim  Inattlao

ia\  Tfciv  /i<iKu/^bi»-  v'qa\n).  "The  Inlands  of  the
Blessed."  The  early  Greeks,  om  \\v  Ic^aru  fnun
Homer,  plaet-id  the  Klyuiau  Fields,  into  nhich  fa-
vounil  U^roeM  piuwed  wiLhont  dying,  at  the  ex-
tremity of  tbe  earth,  near  the  river  Lkipamis.  (See
CJeoi.icapuia).  lu  poems  later  than  Hoiuer,  nn  isl-
and i(iK|M]keii  of  as  their  abode;  and  though  its  po-
■itiou  wiut  of  course  indefinite,  the  poet«,  and  the
genera  pliers  who  followed  them,  placed  it  beyond
tbe  pillaiK  erf  Hercules.  Hence,  when  the  Cauary
anil  Mudeira  J^lands  were  discoveretl  in  the  ocoau.
(ilf  the  we>it  coast  of  Africa,  tho  uainn  of  Fortu-
nnfae  Insnhie  was  applied  to  them.  Seu  El.VHii
Oaui'I.

Fortunatianiu. (  L )  ATtuva,  the  Mitbor  of  a


Amiiairt,  oolii  vt  tlii*  gtni  Itutlia.
m>iii  Uerbanl,  A>*t.  BiUim.  taf!
Iv.  3. 1. 1


manual  ou  metres  {Af  Jtilii  Fortunatiant)  d«Tf-
cated  to  a  yonuf;  Bomnii  who  bad  wiked  fur  r
work  on  the  metres  of  Horace,  which  this  dudbsI
specifically  treats  near  the  end.  It  is  drawu  fron
Cacsitiet  Bawils,  Iiiha,  and  probably  from  Mmf
Greek  Hource.  It  baa  Uhhu  tallied  by  Keil  in  hi*
Crainmatioi  Lctittt,  vi.  278,  aud  separately  (Halle,
1685).  (2)  C.  Citiiut'B,  anthor  of  a  t«xt-lNK«k  un
rhetoric  in  the  furtu  of  a  catechism.  The  cblef
sources  are  Quiutiliau  and  Cicero,  Tbe  text  »(
this  work,  whiofa  is  iu  three  bwiks,  can  lie  foand
iu  Halni'a  Jlhelorici  Latini  Minorrt,  pp  79  fi-ll.

FortUL  A  small  town  of  tbe  Sabin«6t  near  Uh
junction  of  the  Himella  with  the  Tiber.

FortiluB.  A  smnll  book-caae,  differing  from  th^
armnrium  (q.  v.)  iu  not  being  stationary,  bat  ea<>ilr
portable  (Suet.  Jug.  31).

Fonuu. A  word  which  6nt  aignilletl  an  D;>rn
space  (area)  before  any  bnilding,  especially  ticfor?
a  sepulchre  ( Pest.  a.  r. ). It  ia  no  doubt  own-
nected  with /oris,  and  so  means  any  place  "eat  of
doors." Tbe  charactvrintic features  nf  a  Ruman
fortmi  tveri',  thai  it  was  a  levcllri]  «|HU:*e  of  ^nitiiJ
of  un  oblong  fonn,  aud  suTTouudeil  )iy  btiildiiigK,
houiieH,  temples,  basilicas  or  porticoes  (Vitrov.  T.
1,  '■!). The  foriiui  at  Pompeii,  now  complctelT  er>
cavatcd  and  showing  very  bandnonie  arehitectiinl
suirouudings,  affords  a  good  general  notion  of  itit
usual  appearance  of  these  placea  aud  tbe  wav  titej
were  laid  out. A  forum  was  oHgiually  used  us
place  where  justice  was  ailniinisten'd.  and  wbctt
};o<hIn  wer*"  exiiiltited  for  Bale  (Varro,  L,  L,  v.  145)-
On« muKt  aeconliiigly iliKtingniHh I*etwe*^  two
kiiicbi  of  fora,  of  which wuue  wpre real  market-
places, while others  were plac<«  of  meeliiip  for
tho  popular  awtcmhly  and  for  tho  court*  of  justice.
iMrrrautih-  buMine.HH,  however,  wiw not  altO|
cxrluded  fniui  the  latter,  aud  It  wa«  cHjiecia
baukent  aud usurerH  who  kept  their  fthotM
biiihliikgs  and  portic«M."s  by  which  they  wen  iB^
rounded. The  latter  ktud.i  of  fora  were  sonvUiM
called /ora  iudicialin,  to  disliugiiisb  them  frow  llw
uicrv  market -plains.

Amonf*  the  fora  imlinaiia  the  modt  iniporiul
w:w  (he  F'ORl^M  HoMANnM,  which  wan  wmplj
callpd  Forum,  an  long  aa  it  w.i»  the  only  one  «f  K»
kind  niiieli  exiRted  at  Konie.  At  B  lute  |>crM«f
the  Hepnhlii'.  and  duriuj;  thr  Kuipire  nbrn  ndiff
ft/ra  iHriicirt/ifi  were  built,  the  Forum  Ki'U'*'"'"
was  distingni^bed  from  them  by  the  epitbMAi^'
or  mttJjnuiK.  It  wa.**  nitunted  Itetweeii  the  Pal»tlii',
the  riipitoline.  and  Die  (jiiiniml  lhlU,and  \t»'i-
teat.  WHS  neven  iti^rra  I  Vumi,  li.  Jt.  i.2l.  It  **•
originully*  a  swamp  nr  niarnb,  but  ww*  said  tn  li><*
Ih'cu  ftlluil  up  by  Riuniiluit  nnd  TatiuH.  ami  mIii^'
Ihi-ii  Net  apart  as  a  place  for  the  iidniiiiiKtmlii*"  ^
jiidttcr,  fur  the  aiuwm1ilio»  uf  the  {wNipli*,  ami  M
other  kindH  of  public  biiHineMt.  Ii  waa  drwne4  ^
the  construction  of  the  CInnca  Maxitna  inlbs*!"*
of  the  last  kings.  {See  Cioaca  ;  Emismwitl)  I"
tlio  larger  m^'Iiso,  as  nppUed  to  the  wbala  vtlW
sniTounded  by  the  three  hilU  jnut  nnmi-*!,  llif  Fi^
rum  included  the  C'nniitinm.  or  tbe  open  plscp  «
assembly  for  the  curiae  (Varro,  /„  L.  v.  laol  in  *l"
centre  of  the  Foriiui  proiwr.  Aurieut  r«»ti»  "''*
HI)  elevated  platfiirni  \jiuggrMlam),  fmai  wbirli  •'"
orators  addrcaseil  the  people,  and  «hicb  dpn»"i
their  uHmo  from  the  eircuuiMtancc  thai,  anei'l"
subjiittatiou  of  Latium.  the  ftidei  of  the  pbifonn
Were  adorned  with  tbe  beaks  (rMtfot  of  tb*>Kbtp«<i'


jiisnw-
>  tufl^


FORUM  6

the  Antiatea  (Livy,Tiii.  14).  In  sQbseqnent  times,
when  the  curiae  had  loet  their  importance,  the
.accnrate  distinction  between  Comitium  and  Fomm
likewise  ceased,  and  the  Comitia  Tributa  wer«
sometimes  held  in  the  Ciroos  Flaminins;  bat  tow-
■ards  the  end  of  the  Repnblic  the  Fornm  seems  to
have  been  chiefly  used  for  judicial  proceedings,
-and  as  a  sort  of  Exchange.  The  orators,  when  ad-
-dressing  the  people  from  the  rostra,  and  even  the
tribunes  of  the  people  in  the  early  times  of  the  Be-
pnblic,  used  to  &ont  the  Comiriam  and  the  Curia ;
but  C.  Gracchus,  or  perhaps  C.  Licinius,  introduced
the  custom  of  facing  the  Forum,  thereby  aoknowl-
■ftlging  the  sovereignty  of  the  people.  In  B.a  308
the  Romans  adorned  the  Fomm,  or  rather  the  bank-
-eiV  shops  (argentariae')  around,  with  the  gilded
«hieldB  wh*ich  they  had  taken  from  the  Samnites:
-and  this  cnstom  of  adorning  the  Fomm  with  these
•shields  and  other  omamenta  was  snbseqaentlj  al-


18  FOBUU

28).  Down  to  the  latest  times  of  the  Republic,
the  Fomm  was  the  usual  place  where  funeral
games  were  given ;  on  these  occasions  it  was  tem-
porarily enclosed  with  Trooden  railings  (Clo.  Pro
Se9t.  58, 124). See  Cancblll

The  ancient  stmctnres  in  the  Fomm  were  re-
stored by  Theodoric  in  the  sixth  century  A.D.,  and
dovm  to  the  eighth  century  the  original  level  was
unchanged ;  but  during  the  Middle  Ages  the  mag-
nificent edifices  of  ancient  Rome  were  used  as
a  quarry  from  which  ehorches  and  secnlar  build-
ings drew  their  building-stones,  marbles,  colnrons,
and  eren  their  lime,  which  was  derived  ^m  burn-
ing the  ancient  marble  in  kilns.  Still  more  eagerly
were  the  bronzes  appropriated,  so  thkt  it  is  not  sur-
prising that  so  few  works  of  art,  comparatively,
have  survived. .  In  the  eleventh  century,  the  Fomm
was  covered  with  the  towers  and  fortress-walls  of
the  mediaeval  nobles,  and  the  ultimate  demolition


Plan  of  Iho  Imperial  Font  (1893).


-ways  observed  daring  the  time  of  the  Ludi  Roma-
iti,  when  the  aediles  rode  in  their  chariots  (ten$ae)
in  solemn  procession  around  the  Forum  (Livy,  ix.
40).  After  the  rictory  of  C.  Duilius  over  the
-Carthaginians  the  Fomm  was  adorned  with  the
celebrated  Columna  Ro^trata  (q.  t!).  In  the  npper
part  of  the  Forum,  or  the  Comitium,  the  laws  of]
the  Twelve  Tables  were  exhibited  for  public  in-
speclion,  and  tTwas  probably  in  the  same  part  that
in  B.C.  304  Cn.  Flavins  exhibited  the  Fasti,  written
-on  white  tables  (in  alio),  that  every  citizen  might
be  able  to  know  the  days  on  whiclx  the  law  allowed
the  administration  of  Jnstice.  (See  Dies.)  Be-
-sides  the  ordinary  bneiness  which  was  carried  on
in  the  Forpm,  we  read  that  gladiatorial  games
were  held  in  it  (Vitruv.  v.  1, 2),  and  that  prisoners
4if  war  ana  faithless  colonists  or  legionaries  were
;)int  to  death  there  (Livy,  vii.  19;  i:i^84;  xxviii.


of  these  covered  the  ground  with  a  layer  of  rub-
bish to  which  fresh  deposits  were  continuously
made,  especially  when  uew  buildings  were  reared
and  new  streets  constructed.  The  result  is  that
the  original  level  is  now  in  some  places  fully  forty
feet  below  the  surface.  %  From  the  Middle  Ages
doiri}  to  the  present  century,  the  site  of  the  Fomm
was  called  Campo  Vacciuo.  Its  desolate  area  was
given  np  to  the  buffaloes  and  oxen  of  the  peas-
antry, to  the  scattered  workshops  of  the  meaner
artisans,  and  to  the  few  ruined  columns  that  pro-
trudea  from  the  mbbish  as  a  melancholy  reminis-
cence of  its  former  glories.  Such  investigations
and  excavations  as  were  first  made  nuder  Raphael
(especially  in  1546-47)  were  undertaken  solely  in
the  search  for  works  of  art,  and  the  trenches  were
soon  refilled  J  bnt  in  the  present  century,  more
scientific  research  began. In  1803  the  Arch  of


FORUM


FOBUU


Sepiiniliut  BcvoriiH  (seu  page  11^),  iu  1813  ttie
Culamu  of  Pbocos,  and  in  It*l6~19  tliu  CapiMiiie
litll  with  lis  temples  wcro  dititutfricd  liy  C'arlu
Fca.  SubBc<|ucutIy  to  lfi3b,  tliu  UusUicn  lulio
was  in  part  rocovorcd  hj  Cauiuu,  uud  since  1871,
wbeD  the  Itallaa  goveruiueut  occupied  Roiu«  as
the  capital  of  Italy,  the  vork  of  excavation
luw  bvvu  puHb«d  uitli  vigour.  Tli«  Tvuiples  of
Ciutlor,  Caettar,  FnuHtiiia,  Vospnsiaii,  eta,  tli»
Airiiiiii  Vestae,  aitd  tbe  nwt  of  ibe  Baailica  have
been  exbiiiued,  beaidea  a  goo4l  part  of  Uie  adjacent
atnwta.

Ill  ib(^  ]H-riMl  between  luliuii  Ca«s&r  aud  Tnijan
the  live  imperial  funv  wciv  i^rcet«d.

(I)  Tbii  tirst  of  tbftfu,  and  the  aecond  foram
imUcinr'tnm,  via»  biijit  by  the  dictator  Cawiar
out  <>f  tlib  dimila  of  the  Gallici  War,  and  waa
called  KdKiM  Caesakih  or  luui.  Tbe  site
clittMMi  was  f\o«iit)i>tmlly  cnm-ded  aud  valuable,
jiiiiiR-diatitly  to  tlif  nurtln-nrtf  i»f  tbe  Fiiriim
RoiDumiMi,  uud  a  hiiiiilred  luiltioii  se^tvrrceH
($4.(>W,(Kmj  were  paid  for  it.  Tito  levelling  of
tliu  ground  cont  large  addilioiiul  ttnntit;  in  the
ocatre  stood  the  luiigutticr-iit  Tt^niple  of  VViinti
GeiK'lrix,  the  tutelary  gi»ddess  of  Ciu'-sar's  faiuily,
which  he  liad  rowrnl  at  tlie  battle  of  Phuritalia
(Suet.  hit.  2(i).  Nothing  uon-  rcrnainH  of  this
Forriui  but  ti%-u  half-bnnod  iirclien.

(y)  The  FoitCM  AriiLsTi,  the  next  in  date.Htood
hack  fn)ni  tfae  Forum  Inlli  iu  the  Aaiiio  dirr^tioii.
Tlie  central  area  waa  occnpifd  by  the  tenipic  of
Man*  Ullor.  coninn'iiK'rating  Ibe  battle  of  Philippt.
thoiigli  it  \\i\n  not  lit]i<«hH4l  until  forty  yeam  later,
and  de.lirated  in  B.C.  2  (Veil.  Pat.  ii.  109.  ^  «).
AugU!>tiM  farther  adorned  bi»  Fnnim  with  fltatuest
of  the  niostdiHtiiigni^hed  men  of  Ibe  Kepuldic,  and
issued  a  decree  tliat  only  tUe  iudit-ia  publiva  aud
tbe  tortili9Hia  iudkum  slionld  take  place  iu  it
(Suet.  Juij.'^  aud  :U).  After -the  Foruui  Augusti
had  severely  sutTered  by  tire,  it  waa  restored  by
Ha<lrian  (Spart.  Vtidr.  19).

(3)  Tbe  FoKL'M  I'alis  was  huilt  to  enclwe  the
Temple  of  Peace,  tledicared  by  Vespasiau  a.dT"75.
It  conimeiiHirateil  the  cSiiNe  of  the  civil  warn  which
had  tllletl  the  Hbnrt  reigtiK  <if  Galba,  Otlio,  and
VitelliuR,  tbe  nndi.>i|i(ilfd  antlmrity  of  the  emperor,
and  the  taking  of  .Fi>riLsalt'm,(Siiet.  Prip.  9;  Dio
CiUM.  Ixvi.  15).  Accoriliug  to  Pliny  {fT.  .Y.  xxxvi.
4  1CI2)  the  tbrL-e  tiiosl  macniliri'iit  building!*  in
Romi--  were  the  BaKilica  u(  raulUiK,  the  Forum  of
AuguntUH,  and  Vespasiaii'f*  Teiiiplu  nf  peace.  Tbe
site  n'as  to  the  soutbeast  of  the  i'oruiu  i>f  Augus-
tus, bnt  did  not  quite  join  it,  a  wide  street
from  the  Subura  to  tbe
Fonim  Romannin  being  left
between.  Thin  narrow  ntrip
afterwards  becnine  the
Forum  Truuifitorium  of
Nerva.  There  are  no  Re-
mains of  the  Temple  of
Peace.

(4)  Tbe  situation  of  the
FOHL'M  OF  NkRVa  has  lieen
alreody  indicateil.  It  waa
eallnl  TRA>'8iToRf('M,  on
account  of  the  liighway
which  ran  through  it;  or
pAU^liim,  froai  cimtaiu*
ing  a  Teniplu  of  Mitiervu.
The  (WO  Corintbiau  col-
aiQDS,  burieil  t<i  nbmit  half


their  height,  aud  now  called  Culonuacer,  be)
lo  tbii  temple;  part  of  the  outer  wall  of  the
rn  also  extaut,

{&)  The  Foht'M  Tiiaiaxi  waa  probabljr  tbo
most  magoilicent  of  all.  It  occupied  a  laige
space  between  tbe  Capiioliue  and  Quiriual  Htlh,
the  latter  of  which  was  cut  hack  to  a  height  ttt
\iH)  Roman  fi-et,  as  shown  tty  the  inscriptJoQ  an
Lhe  Colutiin  of  TrHJiin.  The  eutruiice  waa  at  tbe
lowftr  or  MUithern  end,  where  a  triniapbal  anb.
sannoiiiiied  by  a  statue  of  Trajaa  in  a  «ix-horv>
chariot,  divided  it  from  the  Fornm  of  Augnfrim.
The  ojiou  space  was  surrouiide<l  hx  a  ilouble  niw
of  {Kirticud,  and  oidargeil  by  four  enormous  u|>«n<
or  semicircular  exteusious.  one  ul  which  can  slill
be  tracefl  iu  the  slope  of  the  tjiiirinal.  In  ti»
ceutre  stood  the  llasilica  I'Ipia,  which  (illi  Xtit
gTvater  part  of  the  modem  Foni  Traiaiio:  beyuwl
it  waa  a  clointeretl  court  (alniinil  Harroandioc
the  celebrateil  eohiuin  which  Iwars  Tnijaii's  aanir,
aud  llaiiked  by  two  librariee — one  for  Greek,  tit*
otliirr  for  Latin  M8S.  At  the  upirar  en<l  it  **t
closed  by  the  Temple  of  Trajan,  dtnlicateil  by  hi»
Kuccejwor.  Tbe  splendour  of  the  Foruui  Tmtaiii
gruatly  impressed  the  later  Roiniuis.  Aniiuituins
Marcellinns,  In  au  account  of  a  vinit  nia<Ie  to  Bihro
by  the  emperor  Constantius,  describes  a  gut'KT  i>f
that  ]iriiJce,  a  Persian,  as  amazed  by  tbi»>  gtmi
work,  "so  exqnistie,"  says  the  historian,  "(Imt
the  gods  themselvcfl  would  And  it  hard  to  reAue
their  jylrairatinn"  (xvi.  U).

Different  from  these  fors  were  the  unnKmu*
markets  at  Rome,  some  of  them  reaching  liack  lo
a  very  high  antiijnity.  The  most  im|)urlaut  ns*
the  Foituu  UoAiui'Ai,  or  cattle  market,  i»ri-u[iTiti|C
A  large spucc  between  the  Velahrnm  aud  tbsTili^
the  notion  that  it  derived  itn  iiainu  fnmi  thesut»<'
of  au  ox,  whencesoever  imported  (Ovid,  Fatt.  \i
•1771,  eau  hanily  he  right,  lU  it  was  almost  cottaui'j
so  named  long  before  statues  were  ipltvilDced  >l
Rouie.  Others  which  took  their  names  tt^.di  iIk
goods  sold  iu  them  were  the  Fonrja  OiiToRJiH
and  FiBCA'roRiUM,  for  ri^etahlea  and  tiib,  Sri-
RirM  for  piga,  CrpRDlxiH  or  Ocpfcui.iARim  ft»
dainties.

Of  tbe  Fornm  Komaiium  the  bearings  sixl  <li'
mMisionn  fonn  une  of  the  mont  <lispnted  pottiCi  at
Roman  tojHigraphy.  The  cxravations  at  Pi»uip«t,
however,  havo  <ipi-ned  the  Forum  of  tbst  citft
tbe  renuiiii.s  of  which  are  siifhL'iently  prencrTcd  Ii
enable  nx  1-u  tritcn  Ibe  gnintid-plans  of  the  JVX^-
ous  edlflecB  snrrmiudiug  it,  and  to  anign  wve
probable  use  to  eaoh  of  them; and  viU  thu


I


FOkUM


ma


POBDM


ttl


IC


P(


Dotiim  of  I  bo
ecuf  these  iilac4.'s^
thu  luBtiiMT  ill  wliicb  they
lidotit.  The  central  area
:d  witL  large  b()tiarp  flogs,
dell  the  baBCH  fur  inaDy
I  Mill  nniniii.  atid  niir-
sd  by  a  Ihthc  roNttinaile
NtoriKt>,  backf  [)  liy  u  r;iiiK«
;?iuuH  Km)  lofty  ItniMiuga
iiid.  Thu  [iriucipul  ru-
in Uiruugli  uii  an'lin'ay

0  <A>,ou  tUe  luwur  trud  of
iDexed  plau,  aad  by  tbt^
f  a  temple  of  the  Conn-
order (  B  I,  8iipposefl to

leen  dedicatnl  to  lupiter.
le  opposite  flaok  of  this
i  i»  anntber  entrance  iuto
'orutn,  and  by  it«  Hide
iiblic  prison  {carcfT)  (c),
ich  the  boiiBH  of  two  men
vttvni  an  tlivir  IvgN  were
Adjacent  lo  tbU  in  a
hallow  bnildiiig  (t>),  irith

1  entraiiettft  from  tU«  eol-
b,  snriuised  by  tbe  Ital-
rchneologifetH  to  Imvo
.public  Kranarr(horf-^i>(m),
iHtt  bnildinc  m  another
«bf  the  Corinthian  onler

diratud  to  Vouiis,  lu  conjtKiturvd  fruni  nti  in*
toil  foniid  on  tlM  H|Hii.  It  MandH  in  an  area
(•dby  ablntik  wall  and  fteriHtyln.tn  which  the
{Mil  enlraritiv  iti  in  a  aide  Htted,  abutliit^  on
unim,  and  Oaukitig  tbo  buoilica  (F),  beyond
.  thcTO  are  three  privuto  Iioiim^s  ont  of  tli«
icl«  of  the  Koriim.  The  fartlicr  or  soiithorn
if  thu  »f|uare  i»  occupiud  by  thr««  pub-
LflcHB  (o,  a.  It,  nearly  Bimilur  to  one  uitoth-

tbeir  plintt  nud  diuienHionR.  All  tbeite
deoora)«d with  (.-ohiniiiA  mid statneH,  frag-

of  which  were  found  u^wu  tbe  Uuor; but


(UJ


4.;


El


■■■ir


X •


tti


CJ^


B  ;


TJ 'J


r?


f rr"


Plu  of  the  Fonin  u  fompell. jRlEb.i

there  are  no  stiQlcieut  gronnds  for  deciding  the
iiBBA  fur  which  thf^y  were  deHtined.  The  lintt  id
merely  coigeetnr^d  t»  have  lietsn  a  council  chnin-
bcr  ieitriti);  the  x^eond,  thu  treaaury  (onutrium);
and  tbo  lattt,  uuother  curia,  ileyoud  thMw  is  an-
other dtreet,  opening  on  thn  Furum ;  and,  tnm-
ing  tbe  an^le,  are  the  rtiniiiius  tif  ii  H4|itiirc
bnildiug  (K>,  for  whioh  ito  Hatlnfactory  ut*:  can  bu
HU}[(;««ted.  The  npacu  behind  is  (}C<;upicd  by  tbe
NiteB  of  three  privuu*  honses.  The  next  olject  is
a  Inrjce  plot  of  p-otiiid  iL),  tiiirrutindMl  by  a  colon-
nado  {portictu)  uud  a  cloieter  {cri/pial,  and  decor-


RMWrattOB  •!  fbs  Norlb  ^iJv  of  tUx  >'orum  >(  t\>mp«ii. (Orertwck.)


m&D  calleginm  or  compiiny  of  priviitM,  twelve  in
uumlier,  and  so  ciUlod,  Hrcoriliii^  lo  Vnrru  {L.  L.
V.  (i<5),  frvm  oftrrinjj  publii:  sacrificfH  for  the  frrlil-
ity  of  tbe  ticltlA  (rirra).  TliL-ir  cxtrtritic  iintiquit.v  \»
prwved  by  tlii'  logcrnl  wliicli  refers  tbeir  iufitittittuit
to  Romulus,  (if  wboni  it  i»  snid  that  when  bin  inirKQ
A«ca  Ljirantlft  lout  one  of  lt«r  twelve  BoriH,  bc>  al-
lowed bimaclf  to  be  adopted  by  her  in  bis  plac«*,
aud  c&ll(^d  bimsclf  ftad  the  retn»iiiin)(  eleven
"  Kratroa  Arvnles"  (Gell.  vi.7).

Tbe  olBce  of  the  Fnitrt-H  Ar%-alrH  wiih  fiir  life,
and  was  not  takuii  Bwuy  rvcti  fntm  un  eiiilo  or
captive.  They  irnn>,  oh  ii  badge  uf  af1ire,ii  rbiip-
leC  of  ears  of  com  («picro  eormm  \  fiutcui-d  un  I  Ikmt
vrttb  II  white  band  {infuUt\  iriiii.  H.  N.  xvili.
9^  TbeM^  puHtu)]j;t^H.  with  a  Minglo  reference  iu
JriinnciuH  Felix  (  Oct.  "£» ),  comprise  all  the  extant
uoticos  of  the  Fratreit  Arvales  in  the  ancient  writ-
ers. But  the  discovery  of  a  large  number  of  in-
•criptioua  baa  placed  the  locality  of  their  wuictnary
b«*youd  a  doubt,  and  baa  thrown  n  flood  of  light
on  their  oonstitntioti  and  ntrenioiiiHl  na  well  lu  on
that  of  other  Roman  prieNlhnod!!.  In  ibr  Vigtm
Ctvearelli,  at  a  phive  culled  AtTogu  rAiiiiio,  on  the
Via  PorliienHiH,  inwriptioiift  npi»ii  fttone  tablnlH
have  been  found  at  intervabi  from  11)70  to  tbe  pres-
eac  time,  which  MitUcieutly  idoutify  tliat  Hpot  as
the  grove  of  tbo  Dca  Uia  where  the  chief  festival
uf  Ibo  Ar\'ale«i  wna  held.  Uy  the  end  of  the  1a«it
century,  nixty-fteveu  dooumenta  bad  l^ecIl  tvcov-
ctMl,  aud  tliL-ae  were  publiithed  with  a  viilnahle
oomntentary  by  Mariui  (Rome,  179!>  i.  In  1H(^
more  sysl^^matic  excavationu  were  iittdertakcn
with  the  aid  of  fiindH  Bnpjdtiil  by  tbtt  King  and
Queen  of  Fruxaiu,  aud  the  penults  were  given  to
tb»  world  by  Heiisen  iu  tbo  woi-kn  mcu(iuti'i-d  at
the  end  of  this  artiile.  We  Lave  now  the  avta  of
oiuetyniix  auunal  meetinf^H  of  the  colk'gt>,  ranging
in  date  fmni  a.i>.  14,  the  hwt  year  of  Augustus,  to
^I,  in  tbe  rcigu  of  Gordian  :  iM'^ideit  a  number  of
fragrneuls  fonnd  ot  various  times  it)  Rome  Uttelf.
From  thcM  we  are  able  to  form  a  clear  idea  of  the
officers  of  the  college,  the  ccrenionici  they  per-
formcil,  and  the  moilu  of  filling  up  vacancies  in
tlieir  lK«ly.  g^imeof  thewi  miniite«of  proreedingM,
tbcy  may  be  cuIUhI,  are  mut^li  fidb-r  than  others,
nio«t  important  l>eiiig  that  of  'ilH,  the  rtr«t
yvar  of  Elagnbalnit,  which  inclndea  thu  celi'braliitl
Hytiiu.  Tlie  pa««age  iu  V'arro  iH'ing  the  only  tneu-
tioQ  of  the  Arvalts  that  dates  frtMU  republieau
limeB,  it  is  a  highly  probable  conjectnre  that  thiH
may  have  been  one  of  the  obsolet*'  or  tmlf-forgot-
teu  oolle,  eovcnd  of  whirh,  wr*  know,  wkxv  revived
by  Angnutns.  Tbe  t^avrificinm  thne  IHur  in  luat  is
Darned  in  tbe  law  nf  Condtniitinn  aud  Contftaat),
about  3^6,  which,  in  the  intert-nt  of  the  public
aaiiiwiueut,  |irovided  for  the  ntuiiilvnauce  uf  ancb
teiuples  OM  luul  giiiiies  coiitiect<.'d  with  tbeui.  Ill
3t^  by  a  decree  of  (imtian,  the  di^Htnbli^hmont
of  all  pagan  wonthips  was  completed,  and  their
reuiaiuiug  en<Iowmenti4  contiecated.

The  regular  nnniber  of  brethren  was  twelve;
the  attendance  at  the  nnnual  nieetinga,  an  nhnwn
by  tbe  iuscriptionn,  rarir-d  )»ctw<'cii  three  and  nine.
An  exception  occnnt  early  in  I  ho  reign  of  Nero ;  iu
the  year  57  twelve  Fnilnw  met,  exclusive  of  the
emperor,  who  wua  alno  a  ntt-ntber  according  to  thu
iavarinble  prarticr.  and  in  ibis  instance,  it  would
appear,  a  Muperuumerary.  From  the  time  of  Au-
gUBtuH  it  had  become  usual  to  nppoiut  princes  of
tb«  imperial  family  as  extra  memhcni  of  the  most


offic

K fom
H the  I


dignified  priestly  iNdleges  fOio  Ca»».  U.  20).  V'acaii-
cieH  an  they  ocrnrrcd  wpni  (tiled  up  by  ro-o]dation,
originally  fn^e,  but  nndcr  thu  i-nipire  nbually  cou-
trolltnl  by  an  imperial  rrscripL  iudiraling  tbe  per-
doii  to  be  eletliHl,  liko  the  ruage  {frlire  of  mmieru
times.  For  the  purjiotttt  of  an  eleetiiiii  the  brelli-
ren  met  on  the  RununoUK  of  the  maijintrr  in  tliei
Kegia,  tbe  temple  of  Inpiter  Htator,  that  of  Ulvus
lulias,  or  latterly  in  the  temple  of  roiicord;  and
the  votes  were  givm  iu  writing  {per  Inlx'llai).
Tbe  nowly  elected  member  waa  eoleuiuly  admitii^l
liy  tbe  -maf/iitUT,  for  which  the  phrntw  used  i;t  uH
narra  rantt.

Like  moHl  Roman  cnf/ryio,  tlusArvales  had  their
]>rcHi(l)ug  ottteer,  called  matfiater,  cleet4>d  ainnudly
iu  the  grove  nf  tlii>  I>ea  iJia  on  the  sf^ond  or  great
day  of  the  May  festival,  but  not  coming  into  ofliee
until  the  17th  of  Iteeember  following:  a  StitHruti'
Uh»ii  primiit  ad  Saturnaiia  uvutida  is  tbe  olY-rt'Cor-
ring  formula.  Tbe  promaffinUr,  wlio  acted  in  tlio
a1»fifMiReof  tlu':  mi<}/*fer,  appears  to  have  been  nom-
iniit«:d  by  him  for  an  indetinite  [leriod,  and  wad
not  a  iTgidarly  elected  odiiMir  <>f  the  college.  Next
iu  importance  to  tbe  maffi»li-r  waA  the^mf-ti,  elect-
ed aouDally  u^iou  tho  sante  tiecasioii  to  a^miil  in
the  iaorificea;  h«  ronld  alui  Iw  repre«cut4Hl  by  a
pFdjSameN.or  by  a  member  without  that  title  ijni
r\er  fUtminin  funtjfhatnr.  Either  of  these  dignitiea
WH«  often  conferred  by  way  of  compliment  on  the
cmpomr,  wlut  tmnulty  diNchargrd  it«  tbitiPs  by
deputy,  and  i-ilbcr  nitght  be  ri--idec|ed  in  (oiiMreu-
live  ycem  or  after  an  interval.  There  \\v\x,  biv-
sides,  fonrjiu/ri  ingemii  patrimt  W  miifririii,  MeHriro.
ram  filn  Ccalled  also  CtimilH).  who  walteil  on  the
brotlireu  during  tbe  sucritieial  feast,  and  shared  it
themselves  wtting  ou  caihtiirm;  while  their  elders
reclined,  llie  cnllcgo  hatl  also  its  stnlT  of  ser-
vants; some  yerrt  pnbl\ci,  assigned  to  its  nw  by
the  emperor  and  reckoned  ua  belonging  to  hin/a-
mil'm,  an  aetiituH*  iu  charge  of  the  sacred  precinct,
and  ItMily  the  cttlo(or€9.

The  principal  duty  of  the  Arvales  wa»  lo  celo-
bnite  a  three  days'  festiviil  in  linnour  of  the  Dea
Dia,  HnpjKJwd  bvMariiii  to  be  Ceres,  but  iiow  iden-
tilied  with  Ops.  Tins  ft-pitival  wan  Hometimes  held
on  the  XVI.,  XIV.,audXin.,sot]ietimes  on  the  VI.,
IV.,  and  HI.  Ka).  luu.— i.e.  on  the  17th,  19th.  and
'.iOth.or  the  'i7lh.  29th,  aud  3(»th  of  May;  in  either
inHtariee.  it  will  In;  seen,  with  a  liye-day  betweeti
Ihe  first  and  seconti  feast  days,  while  the  thinl  im-
mediately followed  the  secoml.  The  precise  time
was  fixed  in  the  Jauimry  of  each  year,  and  solcmu-
ly  pruclaimcil  by  the  inngiHU-r  t*v  bis  depnty  from
the  temple  of  Conconl  on  tlte  tMivus  Capilolinits.
The  iL'stival  undoubtedly  belonged  to  tbe  ordLT  of
frriae  totnfptirof,*yT  those  fixed  by  proclamation.
On  the  liiiit  and  last  of  the  thive  riays  the  college
tiLut  in  Rome,  usually  at  the  huuHu  of  the  mag\itirT,
but  sometimes  also  mi  I'tifatio  in  lemptu  Diniruiti ;
olt'eretl  fruit«,  incense,  and  wine  at  sunrise  to  ibo
DcaDin;  anointed  bcrstatuc;  bathed, aud  cbaugeil
the  prarlrxia  in  which  they  bad  sacnficerl  fur  a
white  diimer-dre(w(flibMwi  crnatannm  :  ef.  Syntiie-
M8).  Itetween  dinner  and  de»>ert  (»uro<(i  prima
aud  mcNtia  Mecundn  bellariorutn)  they  rose  from
tiible,  reclined  im  Ukore  magniticent  couches  thau
those  of  the  trifliHiam  (  toraUbim  HfgmrHlatiii ),  re>
[leated  tbe  offerings  of  wine,  int-ense,  aud  first-
fruits  {/ni!f€$  Hhattie)'.  then  divided  thu  heUariaf
aud  received  each  mau  a  gportala  or  peniuinlte  for
attendance. This^  in  the  period  from  Trujan  to


FE.\rRtS  AKVALES


tko  Aittotiiiiea  imnnul^d  to  lOO  deuarii,  tbe  buys
mcciviuf;  *23;  in  tbr  intpoTtsriiiheil  ttmiM  at  IUh
tbinl  cruUir^  it  wm*  t\*duceil  to  25  di'itorii  fur
iDMuben  of  tbe  mlle({e.

Ou  tbe  Mcund  d.iy  of  tlu>  ftfOMt,  which  waa  tbo
iBflKt  important  of  tbr  Ihtvi-.  the  Arvnle^  UMnetii-
hled  in  tbr  f^mvc  of  IK-a  Via  Hlrttmly  di^MCi-Uietl.
Tbe  croTc  iDcladod  b  ctti-'tui  fur  g»iii<;!t  uud  nuvt-rul
MHplaSi  MUong  which  tbc  CaeKnitMtin  tii'  ortficu/ii
•f  4nfiad  MB|M'njrft  uid  thu  TvtraAtyliini  aru  iiinit-
iBMMd.  Tb«  sicri^cra  nere  begnii  early  iu  tbc
4ft]r  bj  tbe  wnfUttr  or  his  ili>ptity,  noting;  alone;
k«  fine  oflec«4l  two  yonng  pigH  in  unler  to  cxiiinte
^•iraavnidablcdrMK'nition  of  tbp  (Uicrcd  grovfhy
the  itwoftb^axe  iu  pruuine  aud  fidling  it,  then  a
wbito  beifer  <rdo<Mi  hoitoraria)  ii«  a  victim  to  the
Hem  Dia  benelil  In  tho  furiMionu  hp  nun  juiuvil
by  h'w  colludes,  who  lirpakfaKtird  on  tho  nlTiTinKv
alivady  wadf,  and  then  prociMNlod  tu  fTvah  C4>rc-
nM>nie«.  Tboy  Mt'ritic4>d  a  fat  Ininb;  uiado  at*
oferiiig.  not  further  ibMwribcd,  with  earthenware
poia  plaMd  on  a  table;  sent  out  two  of  tbeir  nuui-
bM  to  collect  j^iiiA  of  corn,  probably  from  the
eraird  ooUeote*!  at  tbo  temple  doors,  passed  them
on  to  0)te  another,  receiving  tliem  iu  the  loft  bund
and ytvilig  with  the  right,  aud  finaHyhaudiiiKtliem
to  tba  attenilai)t«:  placvd  the  oJlac  ou  tbe  altar,
«h1  lb«ii  threw  them  away  that  they  might  iiol
be  used  again  (this  in  the  pnibahle  explaiiHtion  of
tbr  obacni^  phnute  olla»  preniH  »uNt  vtvttiit  aperlig
■vr  WirKm  iactarfrHut) ;  and  Atmred  j»anet  lantxaU,
fi>lU)w«'d  by  tunii(»8  and  annther  vvgctablu  tiiyn-
Irrioosly  described  ylHmemnlia  cum  rapinit).  '\'\\c
iaami  wen*  now  iinoiuteil  (the  phirul  litutt  is  uiwfl
hen  only,  Aud  M><'ins  to  refer  to  Accn  Liireutia  ami
lbt>  l*>*a  liiit  ns  (ti?]»arate  (tiviiiitics) ;  tbe  Icraplv
WAS  vleAUMl  of  all  but  the  priotitR,  ninl  tho  dooi^
•but.  Xb*'i>  «'lb  their  tiinie*  girded  np  for  the
daUM,  laKing  wiiHen  copie*  of  tlio  furninla  fnim
tbvir  ittlcuduntA,  and  dividing  right  and  left  into
two  iKMlir*.  they  pniet-eded  to  rocito  tho  bvrnn
which  had  made  the  name  of  Knitre^  Arvalt-sckMii-
tvlwltUjE  *">'  WKVrfoie*  ctuti  tiu-cimti,  lihellin  icnTp-
ft«tt*irM#M  titmrindenta  tripodavfrunt  iu  rerlMX  httec}.

Tho  toxt  here  given  Is  Ibut  of  Moramsen  (HUt.
U  *ttlt  Kng.  iniiis. ),  with  vhich  those  of  Prellcr
(JH^  Hftk.  |K  4'^)  Olid  Maniuardt,  after  UiicLeler
^  faJM  tniutt-  Hohuch:  Aral,  li^ti },  agree  in  tbe
uiaiM.  A  rtido  Satuniinn  metre  iti  di»ccrnible  Iu
lb*  h>  lUU :

RiMi^  Um*.  larat*.

Nm*  Nm  rn*.  Uartfwr,  aliu  incurrore  )ii  |iWnM.
Ailwr  ni.  Orv  Mar*'  lliurn  ulll  Bla!  bertwr!
-^mmi  ftlv*nif>  wlrocaclt  camriun.

UhM  tlATtWat lUVBlO

lA  MvMMwuV  rondoriiig :

^  f^tm  (vmlniim)  ntnu  tncamro  tn  plarrti
■  M^riaMiaM'  itetlTvetiim  to  comt  upon  iheantiU).

jtmt  Van).

t*Ai'  MaU!  Btat  |llie  gnmadj).


am.


Each  of  tbe  first  five  lines  wan  repeated  thrteo.
triuiHite  live  Itiuea  in  the  iuscHptiuo,  but  proUabljr
aix  wiire  intended.  There  aiv  other  iudicati<iu»uf
niintakew  on  the  part  of  the  stouccneter.  C^iio-
mentH  on  the  text,  etc.,  will  lie  foiiad  iu  Murini.
Atli  r  ^fonumtnti  dei  /Vurc/h'  Aruili  tHunie,  1795';
Henzen,  .'^rari  r*(  Bmco  ."^o«  «/e(  J-'t-aUlli  Amii
iKtime,  IHIJH);  iil.  Avla  FYatrHM  ArraUmm  (Berliti.
1H74);  thi*ror/p.  InMcripl.  tfli.  vi. 'JWl-'^lll*:  W.inU-
worth,  friiffmi-Htx  and  .V/imwrn*"  tt/  Eari$  ImU*
(London,  1^74);  Monnuw^n,  flu*/,  o/  R*tnr,  i.  pp.  173
foil. ;  Marr|uai-dt,  vi-  4*-W-44:*;  Allen,  St<mna*U  of
Karlif  Laii»  (Uostou,  18NJ).

After  the  recitatiou  tbu  doors  trere  thrown  open
and  the  aervicc-bookft  band«d  back  tn  ihv  sttetid-
antit;  and  tbe  brt.>tbreu  now  prooeoded  tu  the  rlrr-
tion  of  n  MagiHter  aud  a  Flauien  for  tho  eooiinic
yciir,  fttllowcd  l>y  tbe  distribution  of  the  apviitU
and  of  nM08.  Next  eamu  ractti  In  tbe  circna  of  the
grove,  in  which  biga*;  qtadrhjar,  and  df^vltorn  an
mentioned :  the  Uagifiter  or  bin  deputy  presided
at  tho  gnuie4<,  hahit«d  in  the  n'ciMJifiM  <«oe  Sici-
nil'm),  aud  gave  away  the  prizoa.  Tb«  btvifan!>D
then  returniMl  to  Kmue  and  dined  togetber,  UmisU^
in  the  houMi  of  the  Magi.ntcr.

Of  the  other  functions  of  th«  I-Vatrew  ArvalcA  a
short  accotmt  will  be  aufficleut. Whenever  Iron
was  hrunght  int«  the  grove,  ns  for  cntting  tb^  in-
ftfriptions  for  the  acla.  or  the  Inppiug  and  felting
of  the  tTee«t  lalrea^ly  montioned),  there  wen  aatii-
licett  ob  fermm iitatuiH,  and,  when the  work  wa*
done,  oh  ffrrttm  rlatum. When  tbe  treea  fell  froo
dceay  or,  wonw  still,  were  Htnick  by  lightuinp,  and
when  replatiting  waa  utnlertakon.  still  more  m1*
enin  fincriliees  («iioretitNri7iii  niuiuiu)  CTerv  oA'eit^iNl
tbeKpot. The  ArvaltwalMi  met  for  the  numtrnpiOii
or  soleum pruuunncing of  vowk for importaul
evenlfi  iu  tbe  imperial  family — the  birthday, mar-
riage,  illueHS  or  recovery  nf  the  eni|>en>r,  biB  apHbj
out  for  or  returning  IVoni  avrioafi  nndert.akiiigi,llw
cnnliuement  of  an  emptros,  et^. Tin-  Amlian-alii
i  q.  v. ),  according  to tbe  mo5t probable  ojiiuttfn,
"ure  tMiIirely  neparate  from  tJio  fniictions  of  tlw
FratrvM  Arvalta).

Freadmen. See  LiitKim.

Fregellae.  The  nnMleni  Ceprano ;  a  town  "'
tbe  Volbi'i  on  the  Liiin  iu  Latlitm,  comiurml  ''T
tbe  r-fomaUK.  aud  colonized  in  B.C.  ^.

FreeeaBe,souietime8calted  FRBOBi.UkX.  Ait*"
of  Ktrni-ia,  on  the  coast  between  Alsium  ainl  l^
Tiber,  colonized  by  tbe  Komana,  B.C,  345.

Prentanl.  A  Samnite  people  dwolliug  ud  tbf
coaat  of  tbe  Adrtiitic,  from  the  river  Bagnuon  tbe
north  (and  Hub»0'C|uently  almoAt  na  far  norlb  a*
from  the  Atonms)  to  the  river  Frento  ou  the  sooih.
from  which  they  derived  their  nam<K  Thty  sub-
mitted to  the  Kouians  tn  ii.c.  'Mi,

Frento.  Tbe  n)t>deni  Forlore ;  a  rirw  ia  lulj.
forming  the  houndary  Itetwocn  the  Fnotoot  M<1
Apulia,  ami  falling  into  the  Adriatic  S«a.

Prenum  (j^aXiwic).  A  hor»e'«  bridle.  ronplliraC*
as  with  us,  the  bit  {trromof)  and  rrio*  a*  wrfla*
the  head-fltall.  Xeuophon,  in  bin  trpatit-*  i*"  ^
Eq.  <vi.  $  T),  describes  the  rnrb-bit  aa  haviii|i  sb»rf
pricklea. See  iUuatraiiou  on  opposite  page.

Frloae. See  ZoruoRi^s.

Frigidarium. See  Balnrar.

Friaii A  people  in  Germany  iubablting  (^


FfirriLLCs


AaelMit  Bnnute  Bridle (BiiUsli  Muicuni.)

«J^|pt  from  tbe  cut  mouth  of  tite  Khiiie  to  thv
Aasisin  (Einft),  and  cotvrmiuouA  uti  tlie  noutli  nitlt
tbe  Unicteh.  TWy  were  alHos  uf  the  Kouiuub  b«-
foru  A.i>.  "■ta,  wlieu  the  oppreasiou  of  lite  governor
Oleuuiiift  led  to  ttwir  nn'o]t,  and  Ibey  were  iievicr
again  Kiibj^ct  to  Rohib  (Diu  Catts.  lir.  '.{2;  Tiic.
Amn.  xiii.  &4).  lu  the  fiftb  ceutiiry  tliey  jniiifd
tbe  Soxous  aud  AugU  (q.  v.)  in  tbeir  invaHioii  of
Britain.

PzitiUaB  (<ptfi6s). A  dice-box. See  Tesseha.

Frogs  OF  AaisTOPHAKKS.  See  Batracrak  in
<be  ApiKriidix.

FrontAl^ See  Ampyi.

ProntiDaB,  SKXTt's  Ifuus.  A  Roman  writer
and soldier,  bum abunt a.i>.  40,  mut goviinior


»  FRCMKNTAiaAE LEGES

adopted  aoo^Mirruh  Auitflius  and  Liirinu  Veriis,
wboM  eoUfldUM  and  adertion  he  gaiued,  an  in
ptDVwl  by  Umir  lettern.  After  being  ism^nl  (a.V.
14^),  FVonro  vrtut  ajipointed  to  u  govcrninDnt  iti
Aaiu,  wbicb  hi»i  bad  lirallb  jirrvented  him  from  till'
ing.  His  leiiniiiig  and  vonvt-ntntion  nro  iiientionvd
wilb  praiiie  by  Aulus  OvUiuH,  the  lii>4torinii  A\t'
pian,  and  others  of  bia  couteniporarie«.  He  dittd
in  the  reign  of  Mnrctis  Anrelius,  at  nil  advanced
age.  I'ntil  this  century  we  ha^l  nothing  of  rrou*
to's  works,  except  frugnionts  of  bis  treatise  l*e  Ifif-
/rrtittia  I'trborum,  lieing  n  vociibnlnry  of  tbe  bo-
cnlted  HyDouymB;  but  in  1815.  Angela  Mni,  hav-
ing discovered  in  the  Ambroaiaii  Library  at  &libin
a  tnilim|i8eHt.  MS.,  on  wbii'li  bad  been  nrtginiilly
written  some  Icttt-rn  of  Krunto  t^i  b(»  two  [tiipibi,
deciphered  tlie  text  wbt-n-ver  ihe  writing  nfts  not
eiitin-ly  obliteratMl,  utid  published  It  with  lioteB.
Ir  bapiteiied.  by  niitguLar  good  fortune,  that  Mai,
UtMug  nomc  ycni-a  nfter  appotut4.-d  lihniriau  of  the
Vatican,  diseurered  in  another  paHmpm^Mt  volume
mnoiiier  purt  of  Frunto'^  letterH,  witlt  the  iiimwent
of  MarcuH  Aureliiis  nud  Verus.  Both  thu  volumes
c'fline  originiitly  frotii  the  monastery  of  St.  CoLnm-
bonuH.  at  Bobbiu,  tbe  monks  having  written  tbem
over  witli  tlie  Artit  nf  Ihe  Fimt  Council  of  Chiilce-
don.iind  it  had  hapi^nM  ihut  nnc  of  the  vnliiinwt
wii*  traiiBtVrTed  ti»  Mihin  and  tlic  other  to  Rome-
Mai  pnlilitbtHl  the  whob-  iti  s  new  edition  ^Rome,
ie-23  and  l^-lfi).  The  M8S.  bav<^  bwn  Mibw^nomtly
collated  by  I>u  RiiMi  (rrviHion  by  Nabvr,  I.4-ii}7.tg,
18tW).  Tbesc  lettern  an-  very  valuabU',  a>*  tbrow-
iug  additional  light  on  tim  age  of  the  AnloniiieH,
eoiitirudng  wbaT  we  know  of  the  exccllenr  charac-
ter uf  Marouti  Anrelii)«,  and  aiM>  tdiouing  Iih  coj-
iMigue  VeniB  in  a  more  rnvonrnblc  ligiit  than  be
had  been  viewed  bitfore.  Two  or  tUrre  nhort  epi»-
tlr.sof  AiituiilnnK  PiuK  are  also  interesting.  There
are,  benidoK,  many lettem of  Fnmto lu varioutt


of  Briiaiu  a.D.  75-78,  where  lie  ili«lingni«hed  ,  fj-jpuJa.  nouie  of  which  are  in  Greek.  FftJiilu'ft
himself  by  tbe  couqnest  of  the  Hiliirctt.  He  wii«l(,tylL'  in  exceaaively  inaniieml,  monotonous,  and
tUe  Mtlior  of  two  trcati)t(^.s  that  an:  Rtill  extant j^daiitic;  be  mixes  Latin  ami  Gi-eek  in  n  niara-


I

I

I


— oni!  uii  Ihe  art  of  war  and  another  on  the
Kumau  aqiiediicta.  He  waa  nominated  Curator
Aquaruiu,  or  Snpcrintcitdeiit  of  tbe  A<|iitMlnct«,
iu  97,  aud  died  in  iut>.  His  military  troatiite  is  in
three  books  i Straff yematon  Lihri  Trtni,  aud  wa»
pablinbed  as  a  supplement  to  anntber  work  now
lost,  which  related  to  the  tbenry  of  war.  To  the»t'
three  books  n  fourth  book  ban  Iki'ii  added  by
■uaie  unknown  writer,  on  whicli  nee  the  dinHcrta-
tion  by  Fritze  iHalle,  1i:?j^).  The  iTvatise  on  aqne-
ducta  (/ir  Jifuii  I'rbiM  Homar)  ii  in  two  iMioks,  and
coDtaiiiH  many  valuable  liiHtoricul  notices.  Fl'o^-
menlH  of  a  treatise  on  gromatics  fsee  (iuuMATlCl)
have  aUo  descended  to  na.  The  lirst  comidctc
edition  of  FrontiiuiH  was  that  of  Kcnehen  (Am-
8t«rdani,  16(!1|.  A  good  text  ia  that  of  Dedericb
(Lt'ipzig,  IH5f>).  The  priuci|>al  edition  of  the
Slratp0emaia  ( with  uote^)  is  stllL  that  of  Oudendorp
(3d  ed.  Leipzig,  177l>),  liitely  re-edit«d  by  Gtuider-
mann  ( Leipzig.  It^s^t:  of  the  Ite  Aquin,  that  by
DcdtTirh  (with  notes  and  n  Gemiau  versions.  Set*
Lauciaui,  'fopograjia  ii%  iiona  Jiitioa,  etc.  (Rome,
IBeil}.

Fronto,  M.  CoRA*GLii^a.  (11  A  Latin  writer,  born
at  CirtB,  in  Africa,  of  an  liaUuii  fantily,  »1>out  a.u.
100.  After  Ktndying  in  Ids  own  rxiuntry,  bo  caiue
to  Rome  in  thu  reign  of  Hadrian,  and  acquired
great  repnraliuu  qh  a  rlietorician  and  griLmmuriaQ.
Aotoninim  Piux  a]»i>oiiited  him  preceptor  to  his  two


ronic  fitsbiou  ;  and  iihowH  hinx^elf  to  be  a  conceited
prig.  He  was,  however,  an  admirer  of  tbe  early  Ro-
man literalnro  aud  a  man  of  upright  aud  indfiteii-
dent  character.  See  Droz,  Itr  M.  C'trn.  Fronlonh
InstittitioHf  Oratoria  (llesan^oik,  18H5);  and  on  tho
diction,  tho  treatioe  of  Ft  iube  (Stettin,  1885).  (2)  A
native  of  Emiwa.a  rhetorician,  who  lived  ut  Rome
in  tbe  time  of  Alexander  Sfvcnifi.  He  tnugbt  elo-
tiueiicD  also  at  Atlen«,  and  was  the  rival  of  ihe
tic«t  Philostratus.  The  critic  Lougiinitt  was  bts
nephew.  Up  hiut  left  two  epignims  on  points  of
grauimnr  (Jacobs,  ,4nth.  Graec.  iii.&6;  xiii. -RMJ.

Fmcttis. See  Uet'fipRrcTua.

Fruit,  GuDs  OF. Soo  Hoiiak;  Pomona;  Vkr-

TVMSL'8.

Framentaiiae  Leges.  From  the  earliest  timea
the  ttiipply  of  ct>rn  at  Rome  was  considered  one  of
the  dniiiw  of  the  govenimeut.  Not  only  w.-w  it
exjwcted  tliat  tbe  government  shonl*!  takn  rare
that  the  coru-market  {antwnti)  wiim  pniperly  sup-
plied, but  likewise  that  in  all  wasons  of  scarcity
it  slionid  puTcbase  corn  in  the  surrouuding
countries  aud  sell  it  to  tbe  |>noplo  at  a  ino«lcrate
price  (Livy,  ii.  0,  34  ;  iv.  Id,  r»2;  x.  IL  etc. ;  xxvi.
40).  This  price,  wliicb  is  spoken  of  aa  annona  re-
tii«,  could  not  rise  mnch  without  exciting  formi-
dable discontent;  and  Ihe  adniinistratiou  was  iu
all  siicb  casei)  coniiidered  to  bave  neglected  one


J


KRL'lIHNTAiUAE  LEGES


690


FRITUENVAKUE LEUE:^


of  ita  moot  iiuiwrtADt  duties.  Tbo  ttuperiuteu-
deiirn  nf  tlii>  irorn-timrki't  l)el4iii};eil  in  onliiinry
tlniHH  Id  till*  HHililff*;  Inil.  wlii'ii  (ireiit  ML'ari'ity  jirf-
vailiHl,  an  «xtrut>rtliuary  ut)ic«r  wan  a)>)Hiii)tt;<t  Tor
tho  piir|M>ne,  imdL'r  tlio  tttlu  of  PraufiMtua  Audouati
(Livy,  ii.  a7,  G;  iv.  la,  H).

Wiib  the  docuy  of  iigricnituro  iu  Itjity,  tlia  gov-
eruiueut  hiul  to  jiay  atiU  further  att«utitju  to  th«
supply  uf  eoru  fur  the  city.  lu  additioti  lo  thin,
iiu  infiiK^ut  popul&tii^ti  gmtluuMy  iticreused  in
Roin<>,  which  couhl  ttoi  piirtrhaMe  C4»rii  even  at  the
ni<iilt!iriit<^  pri('4*  at  n-hiuli  it  w&h  tiHiuiIly  ^ohl,  and
who  deinandrd  lo  b«  ft>d  at  tht;  expnimn  of  Uw
Slattf,  Kven  in  varly  tiiueo  it.  hud  been  ntiiial  Tiir
tbo  8tatv  oil  cvrtuiii  ucuutimiN,  nail  fur  uualthy
iuilividimis  whu  vritihed  tu  obluin  pupiilurity  uiul
iultticiiue,  to  iiiuke  uciuiHiuiial  dutialiuim  id'  cuni  tu
thti  pe«>iile  (MuiiiuiKCti,  tlom.  IliiL  ii.  :t7'2).  Rut
such  douatioiift  were  oidy  t-'iutiial ;  aud  it  waa  not
till  the  year  u.c.  I'^  that  tbe  tinit  legal  provisiou
wu  made  fnr  supplying  the  poor  at  Uonic  with
com  at  a  price  ronch  belnw  it^  market  value.  In
that  year,  C.  8eniproriiiis  Grarchim  brought  for-
ward tho  firat  Irxj'rumcntarui,  by  which  each  citi-
leu  ws«  eutltlrd  to  receive  every  month  »  certain
i|Uai)tity  <»f  wlient  {frxtivum)  »t  the  price  of  0}  atwe^
(nlH>iit<  9t>.(Nil)  fi^r  tlic  iiitidins,  which  wan  t^pml  to
nearly  i  jM^ek  Kngli.sh  (cf.  Mouniijten,  Dit:  riimijichen
Trilun,  p.  179,  ii.  4,  and  p.  1^*2,  ii.  18;  Llvy,  £j>it.
ti(>;  Appiun,  Jl.  C.  i.  '^1) — only  a  trifle  inoro  than
half  tbo  market  price.  It  luiiat  uut  bo  auppoaed
that  each  pi.^rsoa  was  allowed  t'O  receive  aa  much
ae  be  pleaded  every  month ;  the  quantity  must  uf
oonr^e  have  been  fixed,  and  was  probably  ttve
muilii  monthly,  aa  in  later  tiiuuH.  Thin  quantity
wna  given  only  to  fatheni  (if  families;  hut  it  was  j
nut  eunlined  Ut  the  po4vr,  fur  every  citixeii  had  a'
ri)|;ht  to  it,  whether  ho  were  rich  or  poor  (tiritim, '
Cic.  7'uoc.  FMitj}.  ui.'iO,4H\}  aud  even  Pia<s  who;
had  )>eeLi  coiiitiil,  applied  fur  hU4  share  at  tho  diit-
tribution  (Cic.  I.  l-.).  It  appoant,  however,  from
the  anecdote  which  C'tc«:ro  rvlututi  about  Pino,  that,
each  tiitizeii  hud  tu  apply  in  pemuu,  a  regulation
which  would  of  it»elf  deter  um»t  uf  the  ricb.  The
«xaniplc  that  bad  heiru  set  by  Gniechutt  waa  too
temptitig  not  to  bu  fuiluwed,  altliuugh  it  emptied
the  trenttury  aud  ut  the  name  time  taught  the
]K)or  to  become  .State- pauiiers  iuHtead  of  depend-
ing upon  their  own  exertions  for  obtaining  a  liv-
iug.  It  thuacrowdcil  the  city  with  au  idle  popula-
tiiiu.

Tbe  deiiiugogue  Apuleitw  Saturuiuus  went  Htill
further.  In  B.c.  KXI  he  bruiight  forward  his  Lex
Apuleia,  by  whioli  tbo  State  was  to  sell  com  at
i  of  an  ae  for  the  uiodiiiM.  Tbe  city  quaeittor
(^.  Caepiu  pointed  out  that  the  treasury  could  uot
bear  sncb  au  expense  {cf.  MumiiiHeu,  (lv»ch.  d.  r<im,
MUnjnetven,  p.  560),  and  the  moHt  vitplent  opponi-
tiou  iras  offered  to  tbe  measure.  It  ia  doubtful
whether  it  ever  pastH-d  iutu  a  law;  aud  it  is  at
all  eveut*  certain  that  it  was  never  carried  into
execution.  The  Lex  Livia,  which  waa  propuited
by  the  trihuue  M.  Livius  Dnimns  in  B.C.  91,  was
likewiw  never  carried  into  etfect,  as  it  was  au*
□ulted  by  tbe  Senate,  together  with  all  his  otb>
er  lawH,  as  passed  in  opposition  to  the  auspices.
Of  tho  pruvisious  of  th  is  Lex  Fritinputaria  wo  have
uo  account  (Livy,  Epil.  Ixxi.  I.  About  the  same
time,  either  shortly  before  or  shortly  after  the  Lex
Livia,  tbe  triluine  M.  Octavius,  suiip«irte<l  Uy  the
aristocracy, hruught forward the Lex Octavia,


I  which  modified  the  law  of  Uracchna  to  son
tec  I,  so  tliiut  tbe  public  treasury  did  not  «nfl
I  nineb.  He  prohably  either  raised  ibf  prir«  oftlie
icorii,  or  diminislie^l  the  uumber  of  nK>dii  which
each  citizen  was  entille^l  U»  receive  (Cic.  Jtrut.6iy
"Mi).  Sulla  wont  Ntill  fdrtlnrr,  and  hy  his  Lex  C«jr-
tu-lia,  n.c.  ni,  ilid  away  altognlher  with  thnte  di»>
Iribiittoun  uf  corn  (Sail.  Hint.  Fratjm.  i,  45,  1),
Kritz).  Kul  tbr  Hi-naiti  wHui  found  it  inexpedieit
lo  depriro  tho  people  uf  their  customary  la
as  tho  pitpnhir  (larty  began  to  increase  in  pofl
and  it  was  aoe-onlingly  at  tho  desire  of  tho  !
that  the  consuls  in  h.c.  73  hrougbt  forward  tE
Lfx  Tereutia  Cassia,  which  was  prohably  only  s
renewal  of  the  Lex  .St-mpronio,  with  one  or  two
additions  rospeotiug  tbe  manner  iu  which  tb«
Htute  Wits  to  obtain  the  curu.  Tho  law  enacted
that  uac-h  Roman  citizen  should  receive  fi  niodii  a
month  at  the  price  of  6^  luwes  fur  each  modioL
Occasionally  cxTnionllnary  dlstributiouti  of  com
were  made  in  virtue  of  deercea  of  the  Seuale.

All  the  tffff«  /rumeutariav  that  have  b«ea
hitherto  meutioDC^l  bn«)  sold  corn  Xo  the  pecpln
although  at  a  price  much  helow  what  the  Stale
had  paid  for  it;  hut  as  the  jgreat  party -leaden
tnwanls  the  close  of  tho  Kepubtic  were  ready  to
]Mirchaso  the  support  of  the  jieople  at  any  sacnlire
to  the  8tat4>,  the  dj^tribiition  uf  CJ>ni  liecaitie  a(
length  quite  gr.ltuilous.  Caesar,  in  his  coiwtil-
ship,  ac.iiy,  bad  threateuwl  U*  make  it  so  (Cic.  Jrf
Jit.  ii.  VJ);  aud  this  threat  was  carried  into  exs-
entiou  iu  tho  followiug  year,  d.c.  58,  by  the  Lex
Ctodia  of  thi^  tribuuA  Clodius.  Tbe  eoru  was  tkiu
iu  future  distributed  wlibont  any  paymoDt;  sod
the  abolition  of  the  paymeut  cost  tbo  Stale  a  fifth
part  of  its  revenues  (Cic  Pro  Sett.  ^  5a,  wilfc
Sehul.  Bob.  p.  301,  etlOrelli).  In  bc.  67,  Vom\»j
receivBil  by  the  L«t  Cornelia  Caecilia  the  suiieriu-
tendeuco  of  tlin  corn-market  (rara  ammonae}  furi
peri<Ml  of  (ive  years;  but  no  alteration  wad  mad*
in  the  di-strlbntiou  of  com  by  virtiiu  of  this  BMa»-
ure.  At  thift  time  the  disiribntion  nf  com  raiut
have  cost  the  State  nearly  93oi00,00l>  a  year.

Tbe  consequences  of  such  a  system  did  not  m-
capo  tbo  penetration  of  Caesar;  and  accord injrljr,
when  master  of  the  Kumau  world,  he  molveilia
remedy  tho  evils  attending  it,  us  far  as  b«  «■
able.  He  did  uot  venture  to  abolish  altogelbT
these  distributions  of  cum,  but  he  did  thi*  tiett
best  thing  in  his  power,  which  was  the  reductjunof
the  uumher  of  recipients*.  During  tho  Civil  Wan
nuubm-s  of  |>er»omi  whu  luul  no  claim  tu  llie  Ro-
man frauchise  hud  aettleil  at  Kome,  iu  ordrr  to  ob-
tain a  share  In  the  distributions  of  roru.  Tlie  dnt
thing,  tben.'fore,  that  Caesar  did  was  to  h.tr«  >"
accurate  list  mnde  out  uf  all  the  com-receiven,
and  to  exclude  from  this  privilege  every  penoa
who  could  uot  prove  that  he  was  a  Bnunan  citiwo-
By  this  measure  tbe  320,000  persvus  who  bad  ^
viously  received  (he  corn  were  at  one*  redaced
t-o  IfiO.OOO.  Having  thus  lessened  the  nural'*
of  corn-receivers,  b^  enacted  that  this  niiiatwf
should  uot  he  exceeded  for  tho  futnn*.  and  thU
vacaucies  which  occurred  by  death  HtiunM  )••'  iiM
lip  every  year  by  lot  by  tho  praetor  urbauo»  '^-d*^
L'aes.  5&;  Dio  Casa.  xliii.  Ul).  It  is  fiirtliT  "X*
ceediugly  jirobable  that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  v*f*
was  uot  gic<H  even  to  these  1&0,(NK),  but  sold  M*
low  price,  as  had  heeu  the  case  ut  au  earlier  !■"
nod;  and  that  it  was  only  to  the  utterly  dr4tii>iu>
that  tho  corn  was  supplied  gratuiloasly ;  Uw  1st'


clBM  of  persona  wera  rtiruisbed  with  tickets.

''called  fcwrrao  N«mni«rt(ic  or  /rumen  far  toe  (Saet.
f}ftat.  \\\.

The  UBefitl  reji^lalions  of  Caesar  fell  into  neg-
lect after  his  death,  and  the  nnmher  of  corD-re-
cel%'i?rw  waw  wwii  iucrejwed  beyond  the  limits  of
150,000,  wbicb  hml  Iwfd  fixed  by  tbo  dictator.
ThJH  we  learo  from  t\w  Monuiiu'iitiiin  Aiicyraintui,
lu  which  Auguatus  (^  U))  t<iiimierati>H  t1itt  n  umber
of  pcraons  to  whom  be  bad  given  oougiiiria  ill  dif-
ferent times;  aud  there  cau  be  no  doulit  (but  Ibc
rei-eivets  of  the  cougiaria  aud  of  tbu  imblic  com
wer«  the  aame.  Thus,  iu  B.C.  44,  and  on  the  tliree
foUoiriDg  occaaious,  he  distributed  the  cougiaria
tu  '250,000  persons:  and  in  u.c.  5  the  number  of
recipients  hod  amounted  to  320,000.  At  lenRtb,
iu  B.C.  2,  AiigiinltiM  reihireil  Ibe  luimber  nf  rerigv*
ienis  Ui  000,000,  and  mnen-cd  many  nf  CiU'nnr'H
rKgiilationMfSuet.  Opiut'.  40;  Uio  Ca*w.  Iv,  10).  ThH
L-hk-f  rcgulutioUH  of  AugnHtiiH  Hocnt  to  buve  l^-en  :
(1)  That  every  oitizeii  Mhould  reci^ivH  motilbly  n
certain  <|uatitity  of  corn  ([trobably  5  ititHlii)  uu  tbu
payment  of  a  certJiiu  HtuaU  num.  As  the  iiriinbtir
of  recipients  was  fixed  by  AiiKiii^tnii  at  20O,0<.>0,
there  were  consequently  1^,000.000  modii  dtstrib-
uteil  every  year.  Ofca-Hion.illy,  in  w^ajiiHis  of  Hcar-
pity,  or  ill  onler  to  rnnfer  a  pnrticnlnr  ftivonr.  \m-
KUHttus  niadi'  tliuite  diKtribiitiiiUFi  wholly  grntnitotiH;
they  then  b«<.-nme  cougiaria.  {%  Thiit  tboHu  who
were  complutely  indigent  nbntitd  rt-'i-i*ivc  Iho  i-iirn
g^ruluitouHly,  bh  IiiliuK  Cut'sur  bail  dcittrmiued,
and  sboiibl  be  funiiKbed  for  the  purpoM  with  tti*-
werae  nittntaanae  or  fruateHtariae,  which  entitled
tbem  to  the  oom  without  pavment  (Suet  Oclav.
41).

p The  •y«t«!m  whirh  hwi  been  establinhed  by  An-

^nstnswu  followed  by  his  successors  ;  biitns  it  was
always  one  nf  ttio  tintt  maxims  of  the  State  policy
of  the  Ronmu  emperor*  to  prevent  any  disturbance
in  the  capital,  tln*y  frenuently  lowered  the  price
of  the  pulilic  corn,  and  frequently  tUhtribnted  it
gratuitoiiHly  ail  A  congiarinni.  Hence  tlm  cry  of
Ibe  popnian*,  ^i*nn  ct  rirrenta*.  No  emperor  veiit-
~^to  alKtlish  tbo  public  discribiitioits  of  coru;
St  that  ho  dared  do  waa  to  rnibe  tbo  price
hick  it  waa  sold.  Whou,  therefore,  wc  tlnd
stotetl  iu  Dti>  CassiuB  (Ixii.  18)  that  Nero  did

"»w»y  with  the  distributions  of  corn  after  the  btini-
iug  of  Kome,  we  oauuot  understand  this  literally,
but  must  snpiioHo  that  he  either  niised  the  price  of
ihe  conimmlity,  or,  what  is  innr*''  probablt*,  oblige4l
lh(»»«  iHM)r  to  pay  for  it  who  h.-ul  [ireviously  nv
rereirod  it  gratuitoutily.  The  caro  which  ihe  em-
uerorH  took  to  koop  Kome  well  HU[>plied  with  coru

|U  freqneully  referred  to  in  their  coiuH  by  the  leg-
ttiiltt,  AnnotM,  Vbcrlat,  AbunJAiMiiOf  Libtralita*,  etc.
We  tiud  in  a  coiu  of  Nerva  the  legend  pMnti  ttr&a-
ttaeffHmtnto  coHttilnlo  (Eckhel,  voL  vi.  p.  400).

la  oouree  of  time,  the  sale  cf  the  corn  by  the
State  seems  to  have  reased  altogelber,  and  the
divtributiou  be-caitie  altogether  gratuitous.  Kvttry
corn-receiver  was  therefore  uow  provided  with  a

lle»»frat  or  ticket,  and  this  tessera,  u-bou  ouce  graut-

Hd  to  him,  l>ecamu  his  properly.  Hence  it  cauio
to  pMS  that  lie  was  not  only  allowed  lo  keep  the
teaaera  for  life,  but  oven  to  dlspotte  of  it  by  sale,
and  bequeath  it  by  will  (iJiif.  v.  1,  oS;  xxxix.  1,
49;  xxxix.  1,  87). Every  oltizou  Uriug  iu  Rome,

L«Ten  frvedmen  and  criminals  (Sen.  tte.  lienrf.  tv.
6,  3)r  wa«  competent  to  hold  a  tessera,  with  the
Aeplioo  of  senators.


TMatrae  PmtnraurlM (RIcIl)


Another  change  was  also  introduced  at  a  later
period,  which  rendered  tbo  boimty  stitl  mora  oe-
ceptable  to  the
peoide.  lustoad
of  distributing
the  corn  every
month,  wbeateii
bread,  calli-d  «ir-
nona  cirtoa,  troH
given  to  tbu  people.  It  is  nm-ortuiii  at  what  time
this  change  was  intriMlnced,  but  it  kci-iiih  to  have
been  the  custom  before  the  reign  of  Aurelian  (a,i».
'.iT0-'i275),  OB  it  is  related  of  this  emperor  that  on
bis  return  fix>m  bis  eastern  ex|>ei]Sliiin  he  dinlrib-
iiled  among  the  people  n  larger  (|tiniitLiy  of  bn-iid,
and  of  a  ditVeretit  form  from  that  which  bad  been
iMunlly  givpii  (Vnpisc.  Aurri.  llh;  Ztmim.  i.  61).
The  bread  was  baked  by  th^  jtintorrn,  who  delir-
ered  it  to  the  various  dejiotM  in  the  city,  fniiii
which  it  waa  carried  away  on  certain  dnyi4  by  tbo
liolclem  of  thtt  tejuterau  (Orelli,  tuacript.  no.  335M).
Them;  depots  had  stc)»i  igrailun)  leading  to  tliirm.
whcncn  the  bread  waA  cidleit  panU  gradiliK  ;  iinil
there  were  the  stricteHt  regulations  that  the  bre-iul
shonld  only  be  distributed  from  tbeso  stepH,  and
should  never  be  obtained  at  tbo  baker's  (CimI.
Theotl.  xiv.  17.  :*,  4).  When  t'onstaiitint'  Irann-
ferred  the  seat  of  gnvernment  to  Constantinople,
tbo  Kynten)  i>f  gnituitons  di«tributioii  of  bread  wiia
alno  traiiKfern-d  to  that  city;  aud  in  order  to  en-
ciinriigi'  tUi''  buibling  of  Iicminiw,  all  hoiiseboldera
wen«  entitled  lo  »  nhuru  of  the  imiierinl  bounty
iZoHini.  iii.  '^'2).  The  diAtribntiou  of  br^>a«l  at
Rome  WHS,  however,  Ktlll  coiitiniiC'il.

Fnimentaril.  n:.  ntgotiaiorm.  CorU'dcnlcrs  or
cuni-nierchaiits  (Cic.  De  Off.  iii.  13,  }  r)7  ;  Livy,  iv.
VI).  The  latter  patwage  shows  their  unpopular  it}*
in  times  uf  si'arcity;  they  were  liable  to  the  totmo
charges  of  •' fore«talliiig  and  regrnting"  aa  the
Athenian  triron-o^ai,  and  as  the  coru-dealers  of
mwlcnt  times  until  the  present  century.  On  the
fruuioutarii  nf  the  legiuud,  Hoe  Legio.

Frumentatio. See  Fhi'Mentaiiiak  Leues.

FnisYno.  Now  Frosinone;  a  town  of  tbo  Her-
uici  iu  Lntium,  and  HuliHequently  a  Roman  (Hilony.
It  was  celebrated  for  its  prcKtigieH  and  |K>rtenU.

Puoentis,  Pucentla. See  Alba  (I).

Puclnua  Lacua.  Now  the  I^go  dl  Celano  or
Capiatrauo.  A  birge  lake  in  the  centre  of  Italy
and  in  the  country  of  the  Marsi,  abnnt  thirty
miles  in  circnniferetife,  iiit<i  which  all  the  moun>
tain  Ht reams  uf  thu  Ajwnnines  How.  As  the
waters  of  this  lake  frt-igneutly  inundated  the  sur-
rounding cuuutry,  thu  emperor  ('luudius  cou-
.•itructcd  an  eminnaruim  or  artiliciul  cbanuel  fur
carrying  uQ'  the  waters  of  thu  take  into  the  river
LirJs.  This  emissariura,  which  is  nearly  perfect,  ia
almost  three  miles  iu  length. See  Ksiimsakivm.

Fncus  (^vKot).  A  general  term  to  signify  the  cos-
metic wbii:h  the  fireek  aad  Rmjuin  iMliexeniployeil
in  painting  their  ebeeka,  eyebrows,  and  ntber  parts
nf  tbt'ir  faces.  The  practice  of  pairFtiug  the  face
was  very  general  among  the  trreek  ludies,  and
probably  <iamu  into  fjishion  in  cuusequeocc  of
their  ntnlentary  mode  of  life,  which  robbed  their
coi[]iplL-.\ionii  iif  their  uaturat  freahiie«8,  and  in-
ducetl  tbem  to  have  recourse  to  artificial  means
for  restoring  the  red  aud  white  of  nature  (Xen.
0€Con,  10,  ^  10). The  practice  was  uf  great  antiti-


PL'FU  CANINIA  LEX


ffomtn  fslntlnK  Iter  ru*
(TIiutJiUcIii).


itity,  niid  iras  probnlily  <1rF<t  ii)trx»1iic«d  *iiiong  tlio
Aiiiiilic  Imiiaim  from  tlii?  Kjutt,  wliore  the  ciutoui
b»H  pri'vnilr<l  fntm  Mir  csirtifHt  times.  The  reiteD]-
lilanro  Wtwpffij  thfl  Tlobrcw  jinch,  *' point."  aiitl
(jivKttt,  is  ]ir(ibubl.v  not  iicL<iil«iititl ;  the  coiiitectioii
in  ttcx'cptfil  by  Mitso-Aniolt,  tbv  cirigiiml  meitti-
ing  of  bntb  word«  being  Msa-weed,  from  which  au
iilkaliiifl  dj-o  TTUA  prttpored.

Tbv  ladies  at  Acliimd  did  not  nlwayn  paint  their
faces  when  at  home,  bat  oDly  when  tb«y  %Yeiit
abnwd,  *n  wished  to  ap{»e«r  beautiful  or  captirut-
iiiK-  Of  tbiH  ne  Iiave  an  exauiplo  iu  the  N]>eevb
of  Lysine  on  th«  murdeifof  Kratusl.heiies,  iii  wbirh
it  iu  related  i^  17)  Miat
the  wife,  ni)  leaving  her
liDHbaiid  to  visit  Ikt
paramour,  paiuted  Ikt-
M;tf  icf.  AriHtopb.  l,ft*.
Uy,  Atx-/.tf7d. /Vwt.lo:U;
Plut.  Aleib.  39).  In  ur-
der  tu  produce  a  fair  com-
pti>xiou,whiteicadi^i^tr
Aoi-,  rvrwjia}  waw  em-
ploycil  (Alexis,  fr.  %,  17
M}.  In  order  to  givu  a
bluomiuK  tinge  to  thi<
checks,  '*  rouge  "  waa  pre-
pared from  vugetjible
rudst  (Arlstoph.  Lyx.  48).
Anciout  cosnicticH  were
not  always  free  fVoin  noxious  dnigx:  and  besirles
'ytftfivSiotf,  already  nieutiinied,  tvd  Iciwl  ijitX-rus,  iwiwi-
um)  iiud  miuftral  ulkslr  [rirprtv,  Att.  Xn-fiw)  wpre
f>iRp|oyed.  Thi)  iittiial  woni  fnr  applying  paint  is
*trrfn[ii<T6ai,  *' to  nib  in,"  wlieiico  th«  dyi^a  tlieui-
selvcH  are  callwl  fyrpiftfiam  {I'Int,  Crat^g.  24).  The
*yo-brow8  and  ryulids  w«re  ittaiiiud  black  with
arlftfia  or  arifi^i^,  atibiKm,  a  dillplinivt  of  autilDu-
ny,  which  is  stitl  employed  by  the  Turkish  liidie-i
for  the  same  purpose.  The  eye-brows  were  like-
wisii  aiaiiied  with  lia-iiaXov,  a  preparation  of  wMit
(pf.  Jur.  ii.  93  foil.).  Ladies  who  used  paint  were
occasionally  lietmyed  by  perspiration,  tears,  etc.,
of  which  a  ii  ninoron»  picture  is  given  by  Xenophon
{Okoh.  10,  fr  f*;  <f.  I'biut.  MmI.  i.  3.  119).

Among  the  Ii«>Huiiis  the  art  uf  painting  tbe  c^tui-
plescion  wiu  carried  to  a  Htill  greater  extvnt  than
among  the  Greek-s ;  and  even  Ovid  did  not  dlstlaiti
to  write  a  ponm  on  the  subject  (.1  ..I.  iii.  20fi),
though  the  gcnuineneiw  of  the  fragment  of  the  J/t-
tiicamtna  Faciei,  ascribed  to  this  jioet,  is  doubtfuL
The  Koman  ladies  oven  went  ao  far  as  to  paint
with  blue  tlie  veins  on  Iho  temple,  aa  has  been  in-
ferred fnnii  rroptTiiiis  (iii.  11,  9,  L.  MllUer).  The
favourite  rotigi^  was  from  a  kind  of  niuaa:  anoth-
er was  jntrjiHriiifum.  a  mixed  conipoeitiim  (Plant.
JUonl.  I.  3,  104).  The  ridicnUius  usti  of  putehi^H
(tpUnia),  which  was  L-ommou  among  the  lCi;g!is1i
liiw  in  tbe  reign  of  Queen  Auuu  and  the  early
0«oige8,was  not  uuknown  to  the  Uomau  L-idiea
(Mart.  li.S9,9;  viii.M.iJ;  x.'H).  The  mureeffem-
inate  of  the  mate  sex  at  Rome  alAOomployeil  paint.
Cicem  speaks  {In  Piaon.  II,  ^  'ii)  of  the  cfruMatae
bnvcac  of  his  enemy,  tbe  counnl  Finn.

On  a  Greek  vase  (Tiscblwin,  /Cngrtinnriif,  ii.  581
we  aec  the  Sgnro  of  a  woman  vngnget)  in  pnl'
ting  the  paint  upon  bor  face  with  a  finiall  bniHb
<cf.  Uuttiger.  Sabina.  i.  ^4  foil,.  &I  foil.;  Ilvcker-
Ooll,  CharikU*.  i.  'J61  foil.;  Gallmw.  iii.  IIM
foil.).

rofia  Canlnla  Lvz. See  Lkx.


PueitiTariuo. 8m  Sunnn.

Pugitlvue. See  SeRvl^s.

Fulcra.  The  euds  of  the  Inunework  on  wbicii
th+t  pillons  of  a  couch  or  the  cushions  of  a  chuir
wore  placed,  resembling  the  hcail  of  a  tnodem
sofa.  They  are  invariably  ornameuted  with  inlaid
brouzt^  st>uM-limes  of  the  rtcliest  kind,  and  stv
summuntcd  br  brunxe  ornaments  often  rcprecent-
ing  the  head  aud  Hbr)nlderK  of  a  mnio  or  ass,  tuni-
liig  aiileways  and  backwards,  willi  ears  pnt  down
and  a  vicious  cxpreaeion.  For  the  head  of  iii#
ass  is  sometimes  substituted  that  of  a  boy,  or  ibc
bead  oufl  neck  of  a  goose.  The  lower  pan  i>  dec-
orated with  a  mnud  boss  from  wbirb  sfmo^  •
bust  of  a  geniuM  in  full  relief,  or  of  sonie  youthful
divinity,  such  ns  Bacchns  or  nercules-  The  frsoie-
work  to  which  these  nmammits  are  att*cbed  is  de-
«;rilied  in  Juvenal  (xi.  £Kl-9rt).  The  yraiiw /sJcn
is  meutionrd  ib.  vi.23  aud  clsawhere.  8ce  W.C.F.
Anderson  In  rhe  CloMical  Rtt'uit  for  18dU,  p.  3£2;
aud  tbp  article  Lkctiih.

FuIgeiitiu8,FA]tu>PLANCiADR8.  ALDtingmir
muriun,  a  iiutivc  ofCarlhagu,  nhu  wrote  towards
tbe  end  of  the  lifth  century  a.d.  His  works  in-
chide,  uiiioug  other  things,  an  allegorical  inteipm-
tation  of  the  anciout  mythology  iu  thre«  books
{Mt/tholoffi^f),  the  furui  of  wbicli  reminds  one  o(
Marlianns  Capella(q.v.);  an  allegorical  expoatttua
of  tbe  Aeneid  {reryiHana  i'vntiutnlia),  an  explaaa-
lion  of  strange  and  anti<)iiated  words  illuatrated
by  forged  citations  (Kxftotitio  Sermoni*  .JNtiqw):
aud  a  sort  of  universal  hintorj'  t/>r  .-IrtatihuJi  J/irs-
tlii,  (ifivbivh  fourteen  hiaiks  are  extant.  Ttn"  pUn
!■>(  this  hist  work  is  ibe  abnunl  one  calletl  \tiin-
ypn^tftarot  —  that  i»,  iu  the  rtwjtoctive  books,  nu*
h'ticr  of  the  alphabet  iu  surcewion  remains  uueu-
ployed,  a  fact  which  i»  duly  announced  at  ibo  be-
ginning and  close  of  each  iKKik.  Of  the  drst  tfarw
ivorks,  Iho  text  is  ])riutv<l  in  thn  edition  nf  ihs
Mylhogmftki  Latimi  by  Sraveren  (Leydeu.  17421.
The  /'c  Aftatibum  has  been  edited  by  Reifleracbeid
(Urestan.  l«i<3-«M).  See  Zink,  Vtr  Mj/thohf  /'■!-
geuliut  (WHrzburg,  li?67).

FuUo  iyvn4>tvt  or  xfii^fvc).  A  fnller  or  laiis-
dryiuan.  The  fuller's  trade  waa  one  of  tbe  m>M
important  ami  most  widely  extended  in  Orwk
ami  Kouiau  antiquity.  It  embmcetl  all  the  prw-
esACB,  now distributed among ditfereut trstK


UunU  PsInUuiC  tmta  lbs  Fulloaica,  l^mipnU |i>nwtacfcl

uecounry  for  converting  tbe  rough  web  into  uoooib
cloth,  the  chief  material  used  by  the  anrlmta  fi
cl«>thing.  It  waN  aUo  usnal  to  seud  rlolhee  to  Ike
fuller  for  cleaning  aud  working  np.  Cloihre^'l'A
sent  to  he  cleaned  were  et.impeil  with  tbe  M


FULLONICA


eai


FULVIUS


in  piu  ur  tnititilis  lill('<l  with  wnrm  irater  aud
Bii1»8taiic«s  which  iwpanit«(l  the  fat  Iroiu  theui,  as
iiriiiH,  nitreiauilfitllpr'ovnnh.  Sitnp
wiiM  not  known  befi>r«  the  tiuie  of
I'liiiy,  who«iM>akH  nf  Aupo  (q.  v.liisa
(Tallic.  iuv^ntiui)(//.  .V.  xx%'iii.  fi  191).
If  thti  object  was  tu  full  lliv  weh
and  mnhs  it  thicker  niu)  Htniii};nr,
the  aaoM  prooesa  was  gone  thmugh,
aud  the  cloth  wft«  theu  beatt-u  wiib
rods,  washed  out  in  cleau  watt^r,
driiKl,  curded  with  a  kind  oftbiHlU*
or  with  the  skiu  of  a  hedgehuK,  fn-  Ttiiio  (From  a
mif^ated  with  sulphur,  rubbt-d  in  ij"ni'e«n  fwini
with  fuller's  earth  to  moke  it  whit-
er and  Btronffer,  and  liually  drp«Hei1  by  bratihiog,
shearing,  and  pressing.  Tlie  fuller's  earth,  wboo
well  mbbenl  in,  prcrr))t<*d  th«f  rli)tli(!s  fmin  boootn-
ing  8oi1e<l  tcK)  Honn,  and  frvBlieoed  np  the  coloiira
which  the  8iilphnr  hiu\  dfjitroywl.  dome  freacoea
preserved  on  the  walU  of  an  ancient  fuller'a  shop
at  Pomiieii  givo  a  clear  notuni  of  the  different
prorewni)*.  Tho  fntlunrd  at  Ruino  formed  one  of
tho  oldcAf.  guild)!.  Likft  all  muchanics,  tb^y  wnr-
ahippnl  Mim^rva  aa  ttntir  tnlWary  giuldctw,  and
took  a  prominent  part  in  her  cliluf  ftftttivaO,  tUv
Qninr^natrns.  8ue  Scbutlgeu,  Jntiifuitatva  'Fritn'
roe  et  FHltoniae ;  Bcvkniatui,  IIi»t.  of  JHVcntiono,
Tol.  ii.  pp.  Vi  full.  (e<t  Bobu);  BUIuucr,  Teehml.
Mini  TrrmiMvl.  i.  pp.  167  foil.

PuJlonXca. A  fnllor'a  shop. See  FciXO.

Falmenta  \,Kdatrvfia).  An  extra  thick  solo  for
Um  nhm-  or  vandal  freiiiieiitly  liMd  to  iitrreaM)  The
height  i'f  the  wearer.  They  were  raado  of  cork
(Pliny.  iJ.  \.  xvi.  13).

PalTta  Oena.  Au  illustrionB  fAtnily  at  Rome,
tho  branches  of  which  were  those  nf  Ciirviia,  Nobi-
lior.  tlaccus,  PnetitniN,  Maximum,  Centnmalna,  etc.

PalTla. (It  A  woman  of  gcNid  family,  but  loose
character. She  diHcloned  to  Ctcuro  the  detulls  of
the  conspiracy  of  Catiline,  which  (the  liatl  tearnud
from Qaiuius Ciiriint,  wUow nilstresti  she was
(Sail.  Taf.  S3). (3)  A buM,  ambitious woiuan,
at  Bnt  tho  wife  of  ClMlhiH  I^ilcber  (q.  v.),  the
deaiagogtie,  and,  after  his  denib,  of  Marcus  An<
toniiin  the triumvir. She t'lm cauiu into iii>
tict)  un  the assassination  of  Cbxlini*,  when,  li]iv>
ia^  caused the i::orpsu to ho brought into (he
veatiliulc  of  her  dwelling  and  having  a-tscnihlcd
the  populace,  she  caused,  Ity  her  tctni au<l  laa-
gn:ige.  a  violent  ontbrcak. Some  years  after  ihici.
On  having  become  the  wife  of  Antony,  she  touk
an  active  part  in  the  proscriptions  of  her  huslutncl,
ami  is  said  to  have  evpii  sjicrificed  to  her  own  rcn-
geituce  aeviTuI  iinlividaaln  who  had  givtm  her  of-
fence. After  th«  head  of  Cicero  was  brought  to
Antony,  sliu  look  it  on  her  kiiucs,  brokL*  forth  into
itiBtilts  lo  the  chnrncCer  of  the  tlcad  orator,  and
then,  with  liendisli  inalice,  pierced  the  tongue  with
ii  gulilen  needle. Having  been  left  at  Home  by
Antony  during  the  war  againnt  Hnittia  and  Caa-
siaN,  she  became  all-powerful  in  that  city,  named
the  praetors  at  her  own  pU-iisure,  sold  the  goveru-
mrnt  ufthe  provinces,  and  erei)  dccre<'d  a  triumph
tu  LuctiUr  the  brother  of  Antony,  who  ha«l  no  claim
Vfhatever  to  one. When,  uftitr  the  huttlu  uf  Plu-
Uppi,  Autony  VHittfd  the  F.iMt  tt>  regulate  affairs
in tbaC quarter.  Fulvia.  irritated  by  his  iuter-
coarw  with  Ckopatra,  tried  to  induce  Oetaviauum
I  to  take  op  arma  agaiost  him. Not  succeeding  iu


thix,  she  took  them  up  against  Octaviaiius  himself,
in  conjauction  with  her  brother-in-law  Lucius^
who  now  professed  open  opposition  to  the  illegal
power  of  the  Triumvirate.  After  very  bold  and
apiritetl  efforts,  however,  oh  her  part,  she  wa»  be-
slegett  with  her  bn>ther-iu-law  at  Pcriisiaandcotu-
]»ell«<l  Iu  surrender  to  the  power  of  Octuviauas.
Fulvia,  afltT  (bis,  retirvd  tti  fin*«'Ct',  and  n-joined
her  huHband,  bnt  wan  oultlly  tvceivoil  by  hint.  8be
died  at  tiicyon.  in  B.C.  IU,  llimugh  ebiigrin  and
wouuded  pride,  as  wim  hrlicvrd,  at  bur  huF^band's
attachmeut  lo  Cli^uputni  (Veil.  Palurc.  ii.  74  ;  Plut.
JhI.  :  id.  Cic).

FxtlTiua.  ft)  L..  CL'RVTfl.  Coiiaal  Id  the  year
B.C.  3,W,  and,  six  years  after,  master  of  tho  liorso
to  the  dictator  L.  Aeiuilins  *Livy,  viii.  :W;  ix.
ai).  (at  M.  CfKVis  PaetTni'S.  Consul  in  place  of
T.  Miunciiu,  B.C.  31)5.  He  took  the  city  of  Hovjn-
nrim,  in  the  country  oftbe  Samnites  (I'ivy,  ix.  44).
(8)  Cs.  PaktTnis.  Conwnl  h  c.  aW.  Ibt  gained  a
mcmonihlo  victory  over  the  Sanuiites  m-ar  Rr>vin-
num,  and  enjoyed  a  triuinpli.  Tlin-ii  years  iifter
be  eanicd  on  snctTcasfnl  operations  in  Ktrtiria  as
proprootor  (Livy,  Ix.  44;  xv.  91).  (4j  Hka.  Par-
tTvuh  NdHiMoiE.  Consul  lit  n.c.  255,  along  with
Aemitius  I'aulus  Lepidu^.  These  two  comuntuders
sailed  for  Africa  after  tho  ovcrtUrow  of  Rc-gulua
by  the  Cartbagiiiiaus,  gained  a  naval  vict4iry,
oompelled  the  foe  to  raise  tho  siege  of  Clypea,  and
carried  off  an  immense  booty  from  the  Carthagin-
ian territories.  Tliey  were  shipwnM-ked,  however,
oil  their  letnni  to  Italy,  aud  of  SCM)  vessels  only
elgiily  wpni  saved.  (5)  Q.  FLACCfS.  CounuI  in  B.C.
2:<T,  2^4.  212.  and  209.  Ffe>  dt^featod  Hanii.i  near
IJovinniiiu,  and  laid  >tiegu  to  Capua,  which  suircu-
denMl  to  him  after  tb«  lapmi  of  a  year.  The  con-
quered were  treated  wiilt  great  cruelty.  (Set!  ("a-
PUA.)  Sonic  lime  subsequent  to  this,  he  uiarcbed
against  the  Hirpiui,  Lncaniaiis,  and  other  imlions
of  Italy,  who.  alarmed  at  the  severities  indicted
ou  Capua,  anrremlured  to  him  tho  garrisons  which
ba«l  l»eeu  placed  in  their  cities  by  Hannibal
(Livy,  xxiii.  21;  xxiv.  2»;  xxv.  2).  (6)  M.  No»l-
Urtit.  Praetor  in  S])ain  B.C.  IKl.  Ho  carried  the
Roman  iirtns  to  the  Tiigus,  making  binmclf  mas-
ter iilso  of  Toletiim  (Ti'ledo),  lip  to  that  period
rlwrneil  imju-egiuiblo.  Having  obtaiin*d  the  con-
siilxhip,  in  ii.c.  1*),  lie  was  itilrusleil  with  the  war
in  Ureece,  during  which  he  took  Anibrnuia,  tra-
vcrsetl  l^piruB  as  cotiquei*or.  aud  reduced  to  sub-
mission  the  islnud  of  Cephallcuia.  Two  years  af-
ter this  be  was  sccused  before  the  Senate  of  having
nialtriMitoil  the  allies  of  the  Ijoman  people,  hat  waa
acquitted  of  the  charge,  aud  received  the  honour
i>f  a  iriumpb.  In  the  year  179  ho  was  elected
censor  along  with  Aemilius  Lepidns,  his  bitter
fi>o.  Appreheudiiig  injury  tu  the  Statu  from  their
known  enmity,  the  leaders  of  the  Senate  adjunMl
both  individuals  to  lay  a&lde  their  dilferunceM  for
the  good  of  their  country.  A  rccoucUiation  ac-
cordingly took  place,  and  nothing  occurred  lo  dis-
turb these  friendly  feelings  tliiriiig  the  tvst  of
their  Joint  magistracy.  FulVius  raised  mauy  pub-
lic strncturea,  a  basiUca,  a  forum,  etc.  He  also
coustmcted  a  port  at  tho  mouth  of  the  Tiber
(Livy,  xxxiii.  42;  xxxv.  7:  xx.  22,  etc.  I.  Hia
friendship  with  the  pnvt  EniiiuH  and  other  lit-
erary men  is  well  known,  aud  caiuted  Cato  the
Cenwjr  to  criticise  him  severely-  (7)  Q.  FlaccI'S.
Praetor  DC.  Ifti.  He  took,  in  this  cai'acity,  the
city  of  Urhicaa  in  farther  Spain,  aud  defeated  the


1

J


KUMAUIL'U


au


FUNUANUS


CeltlUerl  In  the  Ijattlp  of  Kbura,  kiUiug  iu  tliis  And
in  another  encoauter  3r),(KH)  ineu.  Ou  bis  rcturu  to
Botue  be  received  a  triumph,  and  in  the  aaue  year
(170)  the  consulship,  lu  B.C.  174  he  was  elected
ct^iiHoruliMig  with  Pottthniiiius  Al)>iiius.  Theoe  twu
cenHiirs  were  the  HthI  tliut  paved  the  Hlreetn  nf
Borne,  B.C.  174.  The  U4>xt  y<Mir  he  built  a  (t'lupl^
to  Fortunt*,  and,  to  adoni  it,  carriud  utT  a  lurgt'  \n>r-
tion  of  the  marble  tiles  from  the  'IVuiple  t>f  the
Ijuiuian  Juno  in  Lower  Italy.  The  Seuute  coui-
pellcd  hiu  to  restore  tbetie.  The  popular  accoitut
jiinde  Iiim  to  have  buoQ  deprived  v(  rcortou  for  tbiii
net  of  Hiivrilege.  an  he  counuittcd  mtk-ido  soou  after
(Uvy,xxxix.r>fi.40;  xl.  16;  Veil.  I'aterc.  i.  10).  (H)
M.  Flaccl'm.  Consul  ».c  V&.  He  seconded  the
proj«_'ctH  of  TiheriitH  Unicclius  to  obtatii  fur  the
Stntra  of  Itnly  the  rights  of  citijuinHhip.  Jieitif;
art4>rwardN  wiit  agaitiHt  the  GuiiIh,  he  def«ated
them,  and  obtained  a  triumph.  Four  years  kii1»-
ec(|iieiitly  he  became  involved  in  the  extrerno
niuiieiircH  uf  the  Grarchi  relative  to  tlie  agrarian
law,  and  iierinhrd  iu  uii  affray  which  anme.  See
Oiuociiirs.

Fumaiium. See  ViNCM.

FunallB.  A  taper,  luted  in  the  name  luauuur  an
a  torch  (>ee  Fax),  hut  miule  of  papyrus  and  other
librous  plants,  twisted  like  a  rope  aud  iinu'urcd
with  pitch  oud  wax.  It  wska,  indeed,  lat  Autiputur
'fleecribes  it,  **a  light  coatwl  with  wax" {JnUi.  rat,
vi.249).  At  the  Sattirnalia,  Cnuales  were  presented
by  clieotA  to  their  patrons,  and  vrere  lighted  in
honour  of  8jitTirM,  Mometinies  on  other  uecOHionH
<Cic.  Ve  Off.  iii.  VUJ.  Tlie  nputer, /una j«,  denotes  a
sort  of  chandelier  for  holding  torches  (Ovid,  JIfef.
xii.  247).

Ftmalis  EqnuB  inapdatujnt,  iTfijtatf>opos).  An
outrigger  to  a  chariot  drawn  by  horses  abreast  of
each  other  (Stat.  I'keif.  vt  ASH}. When  the  chariot


««*****


.^


C^


Ftmdltar


fuD^ls  EqunB. IGiBtroL)

liftd  four  horses  attached,  two  outriggers  vcre  add-
ed, ouu  ou  each  side  uf  the  yoke-horses  (iuffalri).
and  called  respectively  livslrr  and  ntMiuhr  (Suft.
Tib.  G).  The  Daine  fuxariiu  is  also  used.  Sco
leidor.  Orig.  xviii.  35.

PanambiUiis  {  trxotvoQants).  A  rope -dancer.
Tlie  art  of  dooeiug  on  the  light  rope  waa  carried
to  u  great  perfection  among  the  RonntUM  as  it  is
with  IIS  (Terence,  Utci/r.  pro!.  4 ;  Hor.  I^ptnL  ii.  1,
210;  Jav.  iii.  77;  xiv.  265,  27*2,  with  Mayor'M  uott'i.
If  we  may  judge  from  a  tteriew  of  paintings  dincov-
enxl  ill  the  excavatiima  at.  Hcrcniancum  the  [wr-
funuera  placed  theniselves  in  an  ondleae  variety
of  greoeful  and  sjiortive  attituden.  The  euipentr
M.  AureliUH,  in  coii»«qimnce  of  the  fall  of  a  boy,
caused  fealher-heda  iculcilrne)  to  bu  I&iil  under  the
rope  to  obviate  the  danger  of  such  accideut«  ( Cap-
itol. .V.  Ant.  Phil.  Vi).  One  of  the  meet  diflicult
«xp1ott3  was  rnuniiig  dovu  the  rope  (Suet.  AVro,
il)  at  the  conclusion  of  the  pcrformaoce. tier-


Ilcp«-dKiiean (From  a  paiouttg  bi  Htrovlueam.)

ntaiiicuK  aud  the  emperor  Galba  attempted  to  ex-
hibit elcphaute  walking  on  the  rope  iPlln.  if.  K
viii.  i  5  ;  Suet.  Galha,  fil. See  Saltatio.

FimariuB  Equna. See  Fi'naus  E^cu^

Funda  {tK^vtiovri).  (11  A  sling  for  diwha
stoncK,  or  leaden  plummeta  iglaudM) — ft  va
commonly  u^d  in  warfare  by
tha  Spaniards,  Persians,  Egyp-
tians, and  other  foreign  na-
tions; and  also  occasionally  )>y
the  Komanft,  as  is  shown  by
the  aniii-xi^d  illustration,  rcpre-
iientiiig  a  litimau  soldier  iu  the
iimiy  of  Trajan,  from  the  col-
umn erected  in  honour  of  that<
emperor  ( Plin.  H.  S.  vii.  37;
Verg.  Oeorg.  i.  309).  (2)  (a^-
fpt^Xrjirrpav).  A  castiug-net ;
employed,  like  onr  own,  for  tak-
ing fish  iu  rivers  (Verg.  Geotg.
i.  141 :  .Sen-,  ad  1. ;  Isiilor.  (h-ig.  xii-  5,  2);  botsp-
pareiitly  caat  from  behind,  aud  over  the  rigkl
shonldiT,,  instead  of  h*?ing  discharged  from  tli«
left  .slmulder  aud  in  front  of  the  pemou  (brw"l"|
it,  jui  ift  now  the  practice.  (3)  A  bag  or  f»dk
Hlting  over  the  shonlders.  for
the  couvouioncc  of  carrying
money,  or  any  othiT  small
articles  (Macrob.  Sat.  li.  4l ;
probably  so  called  hecause,
with  the  straps  ivhlch  fast-
ened It,  it  had  the  appear-
ance of  a  Hiing,  as  nliown
by  the  ADuexed
illustration,  r^^f,^

from  tuo  device  ^

ou a bronze lamp. (4)  (0^o&l«1-
TTwXt'f ). The  hoacl  of  A  riug— that  i»,
Fund*.  jRiBh.1  '^®  ^^  '"  which  the  gem  is  aet  aort
which holds it  as a  sling  does  iu
Ntone  ;  more  especially  so  called  when  tbe  settins
is  tninNpan'ut  (Plin.  H.  -V.  xxxWi.  37,  42).

Fondinna.  A  Like  near  Fundi  iu  Italy,  vbkb
discharges  itself  iuto  the  ftledilerran^an.  Accord-
ing to  Pliuy(i/..V.  xiv.  6),  the  IdcuH  Fuudooiu*)'


yUKDI


cigtDAl)>-  called  Amyclanas,  from  the  city  of  Amy-
elae  in  ita  Ticiuity.

Fnndi  The  modem  Foudi ;  an  aiitieut  tovru
iu  T^tiam  on  tbn  Appiu  Vim,  at  tho  licad  cif  ii  nur-
niw  bay  of  th«  tiea  riiuiiing  a  rnimiile ruble  way
iuLu  the  laiid,  called  tbe  Luuiis  FuudaiitiK.  Thi>
surrotinditig  i-uuiiti-y  jiroduced  good  wine  (Mart,
xiii.  113).

FandltoreB  [/undo,  "■  sling '^).  Th«  light-
anned  sliagere  in  the  Rnmaa  army.  They  were
nsnally  raised  by  recrnitini;,  or  contributed  by
>•  the  allies. See  ExKKCiiTd ;  Fitmia.

■ FundUa. A  evl'dif-*ac,  or  bliiid-alley  (Vami,

■x.  [..  V.  M5).

Fanua.  A  fiiiieral,  so  termed  because,  iu  aiicimt
tiinua,  the  Romans  vi^m  Lurifnl  by  torch  light,
twiHted  ropes  ^/unatia)  smt^ared  irith  pitch  being
carried  by  (be  muurners  for  the  purpose  (Isidor.
Urip.  xi.  2,  34 ;  Douat.  ad  Tereiit.  Jirrfr.  i.  1, 1*1).
Uudor  thia  title,  it  is  here  inteudod  to  givu  an  ac-
cuiiut  of  the  burial  rites  of  the  Oreekn  and  Ro-
uiaiit*. The  tuiuba  will  he  explained  itk  the  article

SBI'L'LCKLM.

(1)  Gkekk.  The  Greeks  nttachtftl  great  iuiiwr-
tance  to  Ihn  burial  of  the  dead.  They  beli«Ted
that  sniiU  cniilil  not  e'utcr  the  F.lysian  Fields  till
thrir  bndif>H  bad  biteii  buriml ;  aud  accortlingly  w«
lind  the  Hhatle  n(  F]]i«nor  in  the  Odgttfi/  (xi.  (jH,
etc.)  earup((lly  iiuplnriiig  OtlyMseus  to  bury  his
body.  Sii  Ktniug  was  tbi»  feeling  among  the
Greeks  that  it  was  uousidered  a  religious  duty  to
throw  earth  apou  a  dead  botly  which  a  pereon
might  happen  to  find  nnburied  (ilor.  Carm.  i.  '2^.
%) ;  sud  BiuoDg  the  Athenians,  thnN«  childnMi  nhu
were  released  from  all  other  «bligatiitii»  to  iiii<
worthy  parents  were  novorthelees  iMitnid  to  bnry
theru  ( Aosch.  c.  7'iwarck.  $  14).  The  neglKct  of
burying  one's  relatives  is  frequently  mnittoiied  by
the  orators  as  a  grave  charge  ngninnt  tliL-  uioiul
cliiiract^r  of  a  man,  since  the  hnriiil  uf  the  b<Kly  by
the  relatioitH  of  the  deiul  was  nn iHtdi-iiHl  a  rclig>
ioHH  duly  by  the  universal  law  of  the  Greeks.  The
commuu  exprosHiouii  fur  the  fuuero-l  rites,  rn  &i-

Kiiui,  vofUfta or >>o^({''ipfvH,  trfmrTt^Koma,  show  that

the  dead  had,  as  it  were,  a  legal  aud  moral  claim
tu  burial.

At  the  momeut  of  death  the  eyes  aud  mouth
were  cl»sed  by  one  of  thow  pr4<sfiit  (I'lut.  t'hurfl.
II^>.  According  to  l^ucian,  Iho  nboUis  to  serve  as
Charon's  fare  whm  at  onat  plaet-d  in  the  mouth
or  the  corpse.  This  l>o1u  was  alitn  called  liavaxt}
(Husycli.  B.  v.).  The  custom  is  first  nientioned  by
AriNtophauea  (Frcgt,  139),  aud  does  not  ai){M>ar  to
have  beeu  in  use  at  a  very  early  date.  Conilrma-
tion  uf  the  practice  is  givi^n  by  antaal  discoveries,
for  coius  are  ftequently  found  in  (>riti-k  tumbs,  and
ID  some  between  the  t«etb  of  I  hi-  nkcletuu.  The
body  wus  tbeu  washcil  (Kiirip.  i'kufH.  \'A\^.  16C7),
anointe<l  with  peirfutiieA,  and  idathed  iu  rich  gar-
ments, genf-rully  while  in  colour.  These  wviv
buried  or  bnrtied  with  the  bo<ly.  bnt  the  number
of  them  was  limited  by  a  low  of  Solon  (PIuL  Sol.
21).  A  wreath  of  tiowers  was  placed  upon  the
head  (  Earip.  I'hotn.  1632 ).  GnlthMi  wn-utTia,  iu
imitatiou  of  laurel  or  otlu-r  foltage,  weru  Kumc-
linu-M  used,  and  have  been  found  in  graves.

The  corpse,  thus  prepared,  wa»  laid  out  (itpoOf
trtt,  TriioriSftrSai)  on  a  brd  (tfAi'vij),  which  appears
to  have  beien  uf  the  ordinary  kind,  with  a  pillow
rmt<fidXai<ti')  for  supporting  the  bead  and  back


(Lys.  c.  £ralo»th.  $  18).  By  a  law  of  Solon  it  was
ordered  that  the  npoBttris  should  take  place  inside
the  house  (Lex  ap.  Dcmoeth.  c  Sfacart.  |>.  1071,  $
02).  As  among  the  Romans,  the  feet  were  tunicd
towards  the  door  (  Honi,  //.  xix.  31*2).  Vases
of  a  ai>ecial  kind  {X^Kvdoi),  probably  conlainiug
p«.'rfume8.  were  placed  beside  the  body  (Ar.  Ewl.
1033, 53.-I).  Tbi-se  vasee  were  also  bnried  with  the
eofBii,  and  a  largo  number  of  them  have  been
found  In  grav(*8  iu  Attica.  A  few  of  them  are  in
the  ordinary  black  and  red  flgored  styles,  but  the
greater  iiumbvr  are  of  a  &|>ecial  ware  of  great
l)eauty,  manufactured  for  funeral  pcrposes.  In
this  ware  the  ground  is  white,  and  sceucs  are
paititeit  upon  it  iu  bright  colours,  in  a  freer  and
less  rigid  style  than  in  the  vn-ws  with  rc<l  or  black
fignrps.  See  E.  Pott  ier,  HtHih  niir  Ie»  f^ylhm  Blanea
AtU»iue»,a  lirpr^mmtationM  Funerairet  (PariH,  lf^83);
Benudorf,  GrieMmhe  und  ncUitekt  t'awtibildtT  (Ber-
lin, 1669);  and  the  article  Vas.  A  honey  cake
(fitXtTovrra),  intended  as  a  sop  for  Cerberus,  was
also  plaucHt  by  iIlc  side  of  the  corpse  (ArJaloph.
Lgs.  Wl).  Before  ttie  door,  a  vessel  of  water  was
placed  idpHdirtat/),  in  oi-der  that  persons  who  had
been  in  the  house  might  purify  themselves  from
the  pollution  of  fleath  by  sprinkling  water  on  their
Itersons  (Fiirip.  Air.  ^).

The  UKsr  relatircH  nf  th«  deoeaseil  asMiuibled
ritniid  the  \»>A  on  whidi  he  was  laid,  and  uttered
lund  lauiriitattunN.  Although  more  violent  signs
of  grief  wero  forbiddcu  liy  Solon  (Pint.  Nw/.  21),  wo
lind  that  Luctun  (/>r  Lurtu,  V2)  nteiitiuns  as  uecom-
|inuinicnlH  of  the  TTfu'tdttrit,  uot  only  groaning  aud
wailing,  but  also  beating  of  breasts,  tearing  of
hiiir,  laceration  of  cheeks,  reuding  of  gnrmeots,
and  spriukliiig  of  a^bes  upon  the  head.  It  was
perhaps  with  the  object  of  limiting  the  time  for
those  excesses  of  grief  that  Solon  ordained  that
the  burial  should  take  place  on  the  day  after  the
iTpu^fcrir,  before  suurise,  aud  that  Plato  (Lrgrs,  sii.
LViO  A)  declared  that  the  npoStirti  should  not  lust
longer  than  was  necessary  to  hIiow  that  death  had
rfiilly  takon  place.  It  appears  that  Kingers  w*re
hired  tu  lead  the  mouraing  chnnt  at  tlie  wpaSta-ts
(Lneian,  !>*■  Luctu,  *iO).

The  accompanying  illustration,  representing  the
iTp68t<rts,  is  taheu  trttm  Pottier. The  cor{>se  lies


Tba  wpMtwit. (From  a  QnA  nm.)

upon  a  coach,  and  is  covered  with  a  rich  garment.
The  head  alone  is  UDveilcd.  aud  is  surrounded
with  a  flilet  Iratvia).  Two  female  figures  stand
beside  the  conch,  with  gestures  of  grief  One  of
them  carries  a  tray  or  basket,  across  which  two
fillets  are  laid.  Other  fillets  are  placeil  acnl.^■^  the
couch.  In  the  b,ickgr<>und  is  a  uiirror,  or  fan,jter-
haps  intended  for  the  keeping  away  of  Hies  (cf.  Dio
Cass.  Ixxiv.  4,  8).


KUNUfl


M6


KUNUS


fi^


Tbt  h^ofHi- [t'ron  a  sUnped  lem-cMU  plaqoa  foond  al  tto  Plm««K)


TIii^  fuinTnl  (iKt{>npu,  tK^ipfiv)  took  |>lnc*'  legal-
ly, as  ha«  lic*u  already  remuikeil.  on  the  tiny  fol-
luwiug  tbo  tr^»i5«rif.  It  luiglit,  however,  bo  put
off  wvorul  iliiyn  to  allow  ol"  the  arriral  of  di*taut
(VicutU  <Pliit.  Timol.  aU|.  The  early  moruhig  was
tlie  osiwl  time  (Flut.  /.fffw,  xii.  dGif  A).  Tbe  bier
was  bonio  citlK-r  by  hlveA  bearers  (i-rKpfX^upm,  Poll.
vii.  1951,  ur,  iu  cases  where  it  was  deolded  to  bon-
(Htr  the  deul,  by  specially  sel«cl«d  citizeua  (PItit.
Timof.  391.  Tiie  men  walkwT  lieforo  the  (;oiin*«
and  tbu  women  behiiul,  and  it  apiiearM  Hint  uiiiNi-
ctiiiis  were  bireil  tu  pl»y  uuniriiriil  tnues  uti  tlw
(lute  and  siuu  dirgett  (flp^i/oi)  at  tho  tKiftnpii  a^  well
an  nt  tbu  rrf)ud«a-i(.  Thown  who  accom)miii<td  tho
funeral  ■wore  ni«nriitiiK  narintinU  of  u  hlaek  nr
dark  colour  (Eiiri|i.  J^r.  427).  Thu  head  whm  ilIwi
nhaved  ur  the  hair  nit  an  a  sign  of  urief  f  Hoin.  Od.
tv.  197:  //.  xxiii.4fi,  i:t5,  Ul.UO;  Kioii.  7iiii«.  i.Hll.

RepreHenTatinim  of  tlio  tKifxtpu  nre  rare.  The
forej;oiiig  illiiHtratiou  re)trcseiit«  a  st.-imped  t«rr»>
cotta  j>lfliiiit'  foutid  at  tlio  Pirfleus  (in  tUe  collec-
tion of  M.  Kayet,  Votn-oi  t'linebre,  No.  75).  The
coriwe  licH  upon  a  conch.  The  hew)  m  bare;  the
rest  of  the  body  corcre<l.  The  conch  is  placed
npon  a  car  drawu  by  two  hoiM's,  tlicitigb  nmleH
were  ofteucr  lined.  SlourniTH  ai*eoriipuiiy  it  with
ge«lun!B  of  grief.  A  reinak  arteiidaitt  cnrrieA  upon
ber  bead  a  vtutMel,  pmhably  lo  m^rve  for  lihaticnm.
Another  altemhuit  plays  upon  the  double  tlut«.

It  wan  tbe  custom,  at  Athena  at  niiy  rate,  to  bold
public  fiinerKlit  for  thucw  who  had  fuUon  in  war.
Thucydides  (ii.  34)  describes  with  some  miuiiteuciis
the  proceed)  [igii  usual  ou  such  occnmous.  The  npu-
Bttrit  of  the  botics  took  place  on  u  platfomi  (or  per-
haps in  A  booth  or  teut)  erected  for  thti  piiri>u6e  in
•omo  public  place.  On  tlie  day  of  the  fnui>KlN,
cofflns  of  cypreas  wood,  one  for  eaeb  trilw,  wmt?
carried  n\H}ti  wagons.  Each  co0ii  contained  tbe
booee  of  the  members  of  the  tribo  to  wUi4:U  it
was  assigned.  An  empty  crouch,  adurued  as  for  a
funeral,  "waa  borne  iu  thi'  procoAsiou  to  represent
those  wbose  bodies  had  not  been  found.  The  pro-
cMwiou  was  accompanied  by  any  citizens  and  nliens
who  wished  to  attend,  and  by  wonieu  who  were  re-
latwl  to  those  who  bu4t  fallen.  In  (ireece,  ftmi'ral
orations  were  prononnced  only  at  pnblio  funerals
of  tbe  kind  described,  not,  as  at  Rome,  over  indi-
viduals, even  tbongb  theT*  were  spcciallj  distin-


gniffhed  (Diem  lUl.  v.  17).  This  cnslom  seeilH  to
have  ariNen  about  the  time  of  the  P^niiaii  Work
In  oUier  respectH  the  pnirwUne  at  a  ptiblic  fuiieml
docH  not  seem  to  have  dilVer«d  from  that  in  iiw  kl
priviitc  burials.

In  NpiLc'  of  tho  statement)  of  Luclan  ilh  L*ctt,
SJl)  that  th(i  Gitwfks  biinii'«I  their  dead  and  the  ?«■
sians  buried  them.  It  i»  ctTl,iin,  both  from  titcrsij'
evidence  nntl  also  from  the  excavation  of  tdinlMt
that  Imming  ami  bnryiug  were  both  pracliiwd  li;
the  Oroeks.  The  word  Baimtv  \»  nse^l  of  the  bsr
ial  of  the  uslieA  after  oretnaiiun,  but  KnrurnTnir
refen  only  to  tho  )>nrial  of  an  nnlmrncil  body.
We  hear  of  bnrial  also  noioii};  the  Spartans  tTliL
Lye.  37  ;  Tbnc.  i.  134).  luiluuier  there  is  ttonwit-
tiou  of  any  burial  without  burning ;  but  tu  gmm
at  Mycenae,  skeletons  have  been  fonnd  wtiieli
(ilioweil  no  trart«  of  fire.  Evidence  both  of  bon-
ing and  bLtrying  has  been  found  in  graTMofk
later  date  in  many  porta
of  the  G  reek  world.  See
Uenuuuu-Uliimuer,  Vri-
rataltrrth.  p.  375.

The  pile  of  wood
(irvpa)  upon  which  the
body  was  burned  was
sometimes  erected  over
the  grave  in  which  the
ashes  were  to  be  buried.
There  is  a  full  dctsrrip-
tinn  of  cremation  in  the
Hunieric  period  in  Ilwd
{xxiii.  161  full.),  where
Adiilles  celebrates  the  funeral  of  Pntrvirla&  Tb»
pyre  was  made  a  hundred  fe«t  in  lengtli  ap<i
breadth,  and  tbe  bodies  of  sheep,  uxeu.  h<>nM.
diigH,  and  twelve  Tn>Jan  captives  were  plncMi  ep""
it.  Honey  and  perfumeti  were  also  poured  h(kio'1
before  it  was  lighted.  Wheu  the  pyre  had  Uarati
down,  the  remains  of  tho  fire  were  <|ueurb«l  "i'^
wiiic,  and  the  rvlutives  and  frieiidrt  collectetl  tl»
bouc«  or  ashes  (//.  ssiv.  791 ).  The  rvmami'  Ibu*
collected  were  pl^iccd  in  a  reci?placle  ioiii*Iiu»f»
of  ^'old,  but  generally  of  a  letia  prociiMis  tnsterul>
and  buried.  A  description  of  these  rvceptocktl
of  the  other  articles  placed  in  the  tumb,  sod  of
tho  tomb  itself  will  bo  found  in  the  article  8xro

CRUM.


FooDtml  Pyis,


Wben  bodies  were  barietl  without  previous
oreinniioo,  tliey  were  generally  itlaccU  in  coffiiifi,
wliicb  were  called  liy  Tiiiionn  names,  oh  trapoi,  vvt-
XiK,  Xtjtmi,  \dpifaKte,  Upoirai,  thougti  some  of  thnite
uMiiies  were  aUo  applied  t<i  tbc  nms  in  which  the
biineH  wpfH  cullect«4l.  For  fnrlber  in  forum  I  ion
upon  thiH  iK)iijt,  see  the  flrliclo  Sei'L'LCHI*m.

ItutniMUnlc'ly  after  the  funeral  was  over,  tlie  rel-
ativcH  parttNik  iif  a  fuast  \*ticb  w»a  callMl  ntpl'
itivpov  or  vtKfu'i^iiitvnv  (Luciaii,  Ih  Luctn,  24).  It
was  the  onfttom  that  this  fou^t  mlionlil  lie  t;iven  at
the  house  of  the  ueareet  relative  (DuuioHtli.  Dr  Cor.
p.  321,  J  355X


FntMinl  BftBiiaoi. iFrora  a  burallel;  Jformord  OaMi.t

Other  cerenioiiii's  wvrv  iirrft>rnieil  on  the  tliinl,
the  niotb,  anil  thu  thirticrh  ilayn  nftfr  the  funeml,
an<l  were  c«tk*(l  rexprcilvely  TfHrn,  tvara,  and  r^i-
ii«tic  or  rptoKoitt  (Poll.  viii.  t4fi(.  The  rites  od
lh«  thirtieth  tiny  (Toll,  i  Ht;,  iij.  lOS)  included  a
repetition  of  the  rtitlt-ral  fpiifct.

It  wu  also  thu  custom  to  brluf?  offerings  to  the
tomb  on  certain  ilajs  in  each  year  (Pluto,  I)e  I^g.
IT.  717  E).  HunKlottnt  mentions  that  thoae  aimnnl
sMiifices  to  the  ilcad  wem  ciillrd  ytviina  (iv,  2fi),
from  which  it  is  iTiforri-d  that  tliey  were  ofierwl
on  the  birthday  of  the  decciuied  (cf.  Diog.  Laert.
X.  lf<).  The  uauie  rtxtia-iu  w-jin  nl»»  Ufted  iu  tho
same  ueuse.  The  cereinotii»«  which  were  per-
formed at  these  ittatecl  inttr\-alH  might  be  used  at
aiiy  other  time,  if  forsouie  rea»on  it  vrim  necessary
to  appeaw  the  departed  Hpirit.  Tho  word  ivnyi-
{uv  wan  riscd  for  (he  set  of  ofioring,  tvnyiamna
for  the  thinKH  ntlrred  en  tl>(*He  oecanionR.  TIk-m)
couitiste^l  of  libations  (^oni)  of  wine,  oil,  milk,
h«ney  mixed  with  water  or  milk  CAe«ch.  Ptra.  fiOU
fell.),  which  were  pourrd  upon  the  gronnd  (ydwo-
TiH,  Aewh.  I'rm.  621 1.  lilalmrate  ban(piets  were
■ODietinieit  pn^pamt,  hnmcd  in  hunuiir  of  the  deorl,
tod  barlediu  a  trench  (L.xic'm\i,  Char.2ii).  Wreaths


were  also  plnce<l  upon  the  i^rare-stoues,  and  tliey
were  anointed  with  perfiimeti.

The  period  of  nitturning  varied  in  length  at
different  places.  At  Athens  the  rfluvcds  seems  to
have  ended  it  on  the  thirtieth  day  after  the  fu-
neral (Lysia*.  Pe  Caettr  Eral.  $  14).  At  Sparta  It
lusletl  luiiy  eleven  ilnVB  fPlnt.  Lye.  27).

Certain  miefial  ri  tew  were  hiwmI  i  ii  particular  esses.
A  BpenrwdH  carried  in  frouiof  the  iHKlyttf  any  person
who  had  died  A  violent  death,  as  a  symbol  of  the
revenge  wliich  wna  to  follow  the  murderer  (Kurip.
Troad.  1144).  In  the  case  of  thoee  who  had  rom-
mlttetl  snicide,  the  hiiud  which  hod  done  rbo  ileed
was  cnt  off  and  bitric«l  separately  (AetK-hiti.  ia  Cit».
f  244).  Certain  eriniinaU,  who  wito  put  to  dt-alh
by  tho  State,  M-ere  uImi  depriveil  of  hnrinl,  wliirh
wail  coniddered  to  be  an  additional  pnnifthnieiit
(Pint.  Thtm.  •^;  Thnc.  i.  134).  The  IxxlieH  of
tfaofte  pi^rxonft  wlm  had  l>oen  siritcb  hy  llghtniitg
were  reganied  a*  tmcred  iU^tm  vtKfioi} ;  they  were
not  bttrii-d  with  others  (Eurip.  Supi>l.  tiXi),  but
uanally  on  tlie  si>ot  where  they  hul  been  strrick
<Artenii4l.  Oueirotr.  ii.  P.  p.  146).

It  lins  been  already  mentioned  that  iu  the  public
funerals  of  thotw  killed  in  war.  an  empty  rom^h
wB«  carried  in  the  procession  to  reprtimjnt  those
whoM*  bodies  had  not  been  found.  In  other  ra«es,
where  a  person  wom  ttnppo^ed  to  be  dead,  though
his  bmiy  was  not  found,  fuuentt  rite«  were  per-
fonncd  for  him  (Eurip.  Hrl  VM\  foil  ).  If  sncli  a
person  was  afterwards  found  to  be  alivu,  he  was
considered  impure,  and  was  not  allowed  to  enter
temples  till  certain  rites  hod  l»een  performed.
'These  rites  consisted  iu  a  symbolism  of  birth  and
the  ceremonies  connected  with  it.  The  itvrtpo-
mrrfios  or  i'fmpv^ozfios  w-as  washed,  wrap|>ed  in
Bwaildling  clothes,  and  fed  with  milk.  Having
,been  tbns  born  ngnin  into  life,  be  was  freed  front
his  iuii'urity  (Pint.  Q.  R.  5).

(2)  Roman. — Among  (he  Koiaaiis  hImo  rhe  burial
of  tho  deml  wait  a  nioKt  ftolu3iiu  duty.  It  wom  in-
cumbent upou  any  ono  who  found  an  nnbnried
boily  at  least  to  cast  earth  upon  it  three  times
(Hor.  Od,  i.  *ii^).  If  no  funeral  rites  had  been  per-
formed, the  aoul  of  the  dead  uiou  conld  not  be  re-
oeiveil  ninnng  the  shoilefl,  bat  waudereil  homclesa
npon  the  earth  (Tertull.  fte  Anim.  ,'M3J.

A  near  relative  of  the  dying  person  caught  llio
liwt  breath  iti  his  month  (Verg.  Arn.  iv.  (>*4).  Am
Koun  aa  he  wa«  dctul  IiIm  eyes  were  cIommI  hy  one
of  those  present  (Lueuu.  I'kara.  ill.  740).  Then  fol-
lowed, tho  coHciamatio,  variously  explaineU  as  (1)
a  cry  in  art'ivtilo  mitrtit,  which  se«ms  probable
frxim  Propertlua  (v.7,5«;  cf.  Ovid,  2Vw(.  iii.  3,43j;


M

1^^^^^  ^mS

ll

m

iW  Jj^'j^  \

^^^^M>3

ol

i

ifcjE^i?

Sb

Pm

1

Thv  OwrftJPMtfD.  rtr  UmenUtioa  for  ihc  dc«d (Prom  a  Roman  relteCJ


FUXUS


G98


FCNCS


(S)  tliu  recull  uf  the  dc-ad  tiy  uttcriiig  htH  or  bor
uaiuc  tlirve  tiiucH,  iu  order  tu  aHccrtuiu  Xha  fact  of
deiitb  if  tbere  wa»  un  iiuswer — u  custom  still  iu
use  nt  the  death-bed  uf  ii  Pi»|»p  ;  (III  lui  commonly
iiiiilrrHti^Dd,  tlie  lamentntjoa  for  tbe  di'uil  wbeti
thwi-R  wan  1H1  hinder  niiy  ]inv)il>ility  of  donlit.  Tbe
itiiiiiritfni  niiHwl  nijwntedly  tbp  name  of  tbe  de-
4-i-j]iMi-d,  vitli  bind  criKH,  and  exelaniatioDH  ttitcb  M
i-alr.  (Iaiciui,  Pham.ii.sa^  CatiilliiR,  ci. ;  Ovid,  .VW.

Till)  biMly  ivMit  (bun  wanbril  iritb  wnnn  water
and  atiuiiiteil  with  iMTfinnvs  and  spictvt  (I'vi-m.  iit.
1U3).  Ttiat  tbiti  tiMik  (dace  aftur  tbu  cutivlamatiu
in  leanicd  from  Amniianiis  Marcellinuri  ;xxx.  Id).
The  cor|MC  wa«  then  cintlied  either  tn  the  toga
(Jtn-.  iii.  17'J  with  Mayor's  not*),  or  in  tbe  Btflto
rubea  of  any  otfirc  whiob  had  been  held  hy  tbo
deoeiue^l  (I-ivy,  xxxlv.  7  ;  Polyb,  vi.  Ki).  The  gar-
inenls  iu  which  the  corpse  waa  clothed  wpro  Konie-
tiniuH  it}»1cndid  and  contly  (ve»tr9  pHrpnrfar,  Verg.
Avn.  vt.  221  ;  pretiosacy  Val.  Max.  v.  5,  4).  FirciniiH
oruauKMits  \v«m  uftcn  added.  Riugx,  f»jr  ('xaoiidn,
arfi  ofu'ii  fiumd  in  gravr-tt,  and  we  luarn  from  Pi-<>-
|i«niuB  (iv.  7,  9)  that  thoy  M'ero  som«ltincs  buniod
with  tbe  body.  Klowcrs  woro  alau  used  for  the
ndoriimoiit  of  tho  coach  ou  which  the  corpse  waii
laid;  and  a  oeasor  [acerra]  was  placed  bee<ide  it
(Fe«t.  Epit.  p.  Id).  Tbe  foUowiug  itluatratiou
froDi  a  Roman  relief  in  tbe  Laterau  Museum  i  Ban-
meiBter,  p,  S39i  repreeout*  the  (ectufi  /mtebrin,  on
which  tbe  corpse  of  a  woman  lies  diwssed.  Two
women  niouruer»  {jirar^me)  tttand  behind,  and  by
their  liide  a  man  in  the  act  of  putting  a  garland
on  the  U'ad  of  tht>  corpse.  On  each  Hide  of  the
/«r(u<>  /Hucbriii  i»  a  torch.  On  the  b-fl  side  i»  a
woman  bluwiug  the  tliitc,  and  above  anotlicr  with
folded  hands;  on  (lie  right  »ide  itit  thri^  women,
wearing  the;ii//cti«  (ptubuhly  mauumittod  slaves);
below  la  the  faudly  of  the  deceased.  Among  tbe
Uouaiin,  aa  iiunnig  the  Greeks,  it  waa  cnstomary
to  place  a  »ni:ill  coin  in  the  month  of  the  deceased,
for  the  iii]riH>se  of  puytiig  Cbarou's  iMuwago-mouey.


Tha  I«rtiu  Ftmebrli. ttAtmn  MttMUm.  Romn.)

This  Is  alhided  to  by  Juvenal  (iii.  267)  and  Proper-
tins  (iv.  11,  7!,  but  not  by  earlier  writers.  Coinit,
however,  bavd  been  fnninl  in  gravea  of  an  earlier
dattj  than  the  Stictind  Piiiiii;  War  (C.  /.  /..  i.  p.  57);
and  in  graven  at  Praenest^.  dating  from  the  tbin]
century- B.C.,  cuinv  were  ^tctually  found iu  the


Qionlbs  of  the  slccletoua  {€,  I.  L,  L28}. In  im-
perial times  tbe  practice  waa  common.

Tho  preparations  neceflaaty  for  the  due  layiag
out  of  the  body  were  performed  by  the  poU'iKtiam
(Plant.  Ann.  v.  it,  601,  who  probably  took  the  c«t
nf  the  dead  man's  rac<>,  from  wliicb  the  wax  imM$v
wnK  made,  to  he  kept  in  the  atrium,  of  the  hotue  liy
liiH  deHCendaiit5,  and  UK4.>d  in  fnneral  pmceMiotuin
a  way  slmrtly  to  tie  descrilMtd.  The  pollitmtvr  wm
furuiahed  by  tin*  \ihitiHari\iit  or  nndrrtaker,  wIh)
entered  into  a  eontract  for  coudni-ling  the  vbole
funeral.  The  latter  got  bia  nauit^  fmni  the  tact
that  he  cxerciMHl  hi»  hiisinetia  at  the  teniiilc  <n
grove  of  Libitina,  tbe  goddeiu  of  corpaM  aud  fu-
nerals {Pint.  >'wm.  12,  $  1;  Quctat.  Horn.  Hk
Deaths  were  al»o  registered  at  this  temple  |Sn«t
yi-r.  39),  and  tho  ofi'iring  called  Inear  LHhUm*
made. See  Lt'CAJt

Wh[?n  tbe  body  had  been  thus  prrparrd
adorned,  it  was  laid  nf>on  a  conch  of  state,
ally  in  the  atrium  of  the  bnnsc.  with  the  feet
anlii  (he  door  (Pers.  iii.  lOTi).  Ortti>ide  tbe  ili
the  hnuHe  were  ptaeeil  branchen  of  rypremor
(Serv.  ad  Jm.  iii.  G4),  for  the  pnrp4.«e  of  waniiR):
thoHt^  who  might  bo  polluted  by  outeriog  n  how*
in  which  was  u  corpse.  The  eyprcas  was  apiar-
ently  imly  need  by  those  of  good  podition.  We
ani  told  by  Ser\-io8  (ad  Jrir.  v.  04)  that  (he  cocpr
lay  ill  state  for  seven  days  before  burial.  Thii
[■im  ciidy  have  been  the  case  in  exceptional  or-
ciiniAtanrcH,  when  aume  form  uf  embalming  vu
nitf;d.

Funerals  were  conducted  by  tho  Cunily  of  tb»
deeenftcti  {/uhh*  priratutn  ),  except  in  cam  wbfff
a  public  funeral  (/HMutfjiut/icHM)  waa  voted,cJttMr
by  the  Senate  (Cic.  J'hii.  ix.  7 )  or  in  proTiocul
towns  by  the  fhvtiriomii,  as  a  uiark  uf  honoar  «
re&iiect  to  tho  deceased.  This  honour  tru  fvi
ill  tbe  oaae  of  foreign  kings  who  died  iu  Italy
(Val.  Max.  r.  1,  I);  aud  men  who  had  fillM
iu  the  service  of  their  countrj-  (Val.  Mix.  v.  ^
10).

A  piihljc  invitation  wa«  given  tn  all  itnj
funerals  by  a  heruhl  {praectr). H«nce  the
fumu  indicerCffuHun  indirlivtitH  (8net.  /tii.64;  Oc
Dc  Lrg.  ii.  24,  61). The  fonnnia  of  iovttatnin  U*
been preaervcd: "Ou-fs (:^uiiu.<t (.et" luuv

KXBKqt-IA&.  QUlBrs  K»T  COMMOUIM.  in£  UM  TlX
PUS  EST.  Ol-LUS  KX  AEDlBfS  KITKRTt'K-"  (fat
p.  SS4  d,  34.)  Tranuiaticiutti  /hhvm  is  lucd  for  u
uncereuiutiiouB  burial  (f$uet.  Xcr.  'Si).

In  ancient  times  all  fnuenilHtook  place  by  nigM
[Serv.  ad  Aeu.  xl  143);  in  later  limes  only  ilxM
of  children  (Serv.  1.  c. ),  aud  poor  people  «b<M
itJi^aiiN  did  not  admit  of  sufficient  display  f<ir  ttrt
day-limo  (Marl.  viii.  75).  The  lorcb^  will*  wbiHi
fuueroU  wcro  always  accompanied  wen*  proUWj
»  relic  of  burial  by  nighl,  thongb  no  dvabt  tbtj
alHi)  (MTAi-d  for  lighting  the  pyre.

AiJ  opportunity  for  the  display  of  splendour  "•
given  by  the  funeral  proceesion,  and  wad»o  Iir^lf
mted  by  fxuniliesuf  wealth  and  position  thai  sumpt-
uary laws  to  regulate  snch  e:citcu«««  are  toaoi
among  the  Tables  uf  the  Docetnriri  {Cic.  IM  Jjff-
ii.  23,  W)  and  the  enactments  of  Sulta  |  Plat.  ^'^^
35).  The  order  of  tbe  funeral  proccMion  vis  r4'
uUled  by  tho  dt^itttiator  or  dituiffnaUMr.  wboM  s(-
teiidauta  were  drc4»ed  in  black,  i  The  ordft  ti
which  Ibe  variout*  part!>  of  the  procession  oaaie  i>
nn<>erlaiu,but  it  is  generally  snpposed  that  al  ttas
head  uf  it  were  the  tnnsictans  («ifiriM«a),  who  us^


.pbrtl^H


FCNUS


fiao


Ft'NUS


uf  tuhae,  tibiae,  and  comma,  Tbe  tiumWr  of
Hbieinen  was  by  tbe  Tirelvc  Tableft  liuiiteU  to  ten
( Cic.  Ite  Ijfg.  ii.  '£i,  59  |.  Tbcn  rollowt-tl  ( at  aiiy
kle  in  earlier  timctt)  tbi>  monitiiug  womt-ti,  called
tarjicae,  wbu  Sftu^  tbo  nenia  or  lf»iiH»,  a.  liHiiinifil]
W%  ill  praiKo  of  tbe  tloail  man  |Cic.  /Jr  Z^j).  ii.  24,
Then  followetl  in  some  ctUH;»  dancrrn  au<l
tfjni  (Sucl.  7«/.  84),  trho  won^  allornd,  uk  at  a
lHMU)|ih,  frcw  llccntM*  of  joaiiiig.  We  leiini  fnjiii
Suetouiii»  (!>«/».  19}  tbat  it  wu«  tbe  cuittoui  for
tb«  archimimuH  to  wear  a  miwk  in  tbe  lik«D«uui  of
lh«  decaaBBd,  to  imitHtu  bis  Hi>eecb  aiid  luanuent,
and  eren  to  wake  jawtd  at  biit  «zptiii«e.

Tlie  mo«C  atrikiag  {mrt  of  tbo  procession  was
prubably  formed  by  tbe  imngiHt-a.  It  in  aaid  by
Polybiiis  {v\.  &3)  tbut  thu  ima^iHr;  or  wax  niAska
re|ire«entiaj;  distinguixlied  niicMtton  of  tbe  de-
c«iUM!il,  weru  brougbt  out  from  their  reatinn- place
iu  tbe  ti/riMM,  and  eucb  vau  worn  1<y  ii  niun  uboHeu
to  reaeinblo  oh  nuarly  aa  purtHibbi  tbn  pemou  whom
be  wan  iiupiKWiHl  to  rt-preHcnt  and  i-li>tht-d  in  tbf
fireitit  oftbeofHce  wbirb  tbu  protiity{)c<>f  tbcnuittk
bad  beld.  Each  rode  npoii  iv  ubai'ttil^iuid  wuh  hc-
mnipanied  with  duo  pomp  uf  lictorn  attd  other  iii-
Kignia  of  bint  otUc:f!.  Tbtitt  all  the  distiiiKUubed
aDccfltom  of  tbe  dead  man  wore  present  in  effigy
at  bin  funeral.  If  he  was  of  good  birth,  muiiy
families  to  which  be  wus  relutwl  wen^  repreneuted
by  tboir  \matfi»«M  (Tac.  Jnn.  itt.  76),  and  the  aclniil
DiimWr  wiM  Miaieliine«  very  gi-eut.  At  tbe  funeral
of  MarcollttH  there  are  said  to  have  het-n  tiOfli  (Serv.
ad  Acn.  vi.BOS),  Sometimes,  as  a  special  boiiotir,
spoils,  crowns,  and  other  reconls  of  victories  and
triimipiis  were  carried  before  the  bier.  The  pro-
cession wus  also  Bwellod  by  tbe  slaves  who  were
liberated  by  the  will  of  the  deceased,  all  with
ahoni  benils.  wearing  tbe  pHUun  (Liry,  xxxviii.
&£|.  The  bier  itself  was  sometimes  carrieii  by  these
liberated  slaves  (Pern.  iii.  KNij ;  or  in  tbe  case  of
emperors,  by  magistrates  and  Ki.nmtoret  (Suet.  Jh0.
IW)).  The  iKKly  was  placed  uncovoroil  on  a  bier
or  OtfDch  l/errtntm,  Itrruo  ),  which  in  greut  fnncruls
was elaborately ilecorated i,15net. lul.  H4). In

FOB  cases,  probably  when  decay  had  begun  to
iAgnre  the  featnrcA,  the  Tmly  was  placed  in
coffin  {capulug),  and  a  waxen  representation
WJHifiei)  was  exposed  to  view  instead  (Tac.  Antt.
iii.&).

In  tbo  burial  of  the  poor  and  of  slaves  of  contBe
this  pomp  was  absent.  Hired  bearen  (vfaiiUhneg),
■Lx  (Mart.  tL 77, 10)  or  fonr  (id.  viii.  75, 9)  iu  num-
ber, carried  the  body  in  u  simple  wooden  coffin  ur
bier,  which  was  not  buried  with  the  body  (san-
iapHa,  Mart.  it.  81).

Tbe  relatives  of  tbe  deceased  followed  behind
the  bier,  dressed  in  moamiug.  Tbe  sons  of  the
deeeased  had  their  bends  veiled,  while  tbo  daugh-
ten  went  auoovered  and  with  dishevelled  hair
(Plat,  ^utievt.  Eom,  11).  Monniing  was  shown  by
Tery  much  the  same  signs  as  In  nindem  times —
viz.,  try  the  absence  of  adorinnent  and  lliu  wuariug
of  blat-k  garnietilB  (Juv.x.  ^'i;  Prop.  v.  7,2t< ;  Tac.
Amu.  iii.  2;  pullua,  Juv.  iii.  213J.  Under  thu  em-
perors while  s«ems  to  have  beeu  substituttwl  for
black  aa  the  mourniDg  colour  for  women  (  Pliit.
Qmutmt.  Horn.  tjG;  8tat.  SUr.  iii.  3,  'S).  The  women
were  also  in  the  habit  of  crying  aloud,  looriug
tbeir  hair  and  laoeraliiig  their  cheeks  in  the  fu-
Demt  procession  itself  (Prop.  iii.  13,  '^1.

Iu  this  order  the  fuueol  train  proief-ded  to  the
Pomm. Tlie.re  it halted iMsfote  the  Rostra,  tbe


wesrent  of  tbo  imagine*  took  their  neats  upon  curale
chairs,  aud  the  hHttnlw /nnrbrii*  was  pniuounocd,
generally  by  a  ueiir  rulalive  of  the  dt*ceast'd  (Polyb.
vi.  Th!),  though  in  the  uaMe  of  n  /hiih«  puhliium
this  ftiiiction  might  be  aligned  by  a  «<fNwfM«roH-
wallam  to  one  of  the  magistratefi  (l^uiut.  ln»tH.  iii,
7.2).

Fivm  the  Forum  the  proccAsion  nioved  on  to  tbe
place  of  huriniiig  ur  burial,  which,  according  to  a
law  of  tlw  Twelve  Table**,  was  obliged  to  be  onl-
t!iide  tbe  city,  though  sitecial  exc-eptioUH  were  some-
tiuie>«  mule  (Cic.  he  Ar^f.  ii.2:!.  f>d).  BtUh  burning
und  burial  were  iu  use  among  the  Komans.  Cicero
(J)r  /.fj/.  ii.aa.Wi)  and  Pliny  (//.A',  vii.  ^  1H7)  both
bold  the  view  that  burial  was  the  mom  ancient
cnstom.  Pliuy  further  says  that  bnruiug  was  in-
troduced because  it  was  found  that  the  bodies
of  tbooe  kilted  in  distant  coiinlries  and  buried
there  were  dug  up  and  scattered  by  the  enemy.
It  iH  roiiji-ctnred,  however,  thnt  tlie  change  ww>
partly  Imnigbt  uliout  by  motives  uf  httiilth  aud
coiiVDidirticc.  In  certain  families  the  jfrm^ticc  of
burial  was  krpt  uji,  iii'ter  Iniruing  ha<l  K-cuuio
geuunil.  .Snlta  woq  the  lirst  of  the  Conielii  to  W
burned.  The  reason,  accwrdiug  to  Cit^-ro  and
Pliny,  uf  the  departure  from  tbe  custom  of  lii»  fam-
ily was,  that  he  feared  lest  his  own  bout-s  kImuiUI
receive  the  same  treatment  ns  be  Imd  given  to
tho8L>  of  Marins.  In  later  times  bunitng  became
far  mure  eonimon  than  burial,  though  the  latter
wuH  nlways  listed  in  the  case  of  children  who  died
bufure  tley  Iiad  cut  their  teeth  (Pliu.  II.  X.  vii.  73;
Juv.  XV.  140),  itiid  in  lliu  case  of  those  nbo  bud
been  struck  by  lightning.  It  seems  also  that  jht-
hons  of  the  ]KH>rc4t  cliwses  were  always  bnrierl.
After  the  introduction  of  Christianity  huriul  again
came  into  nne  insU-ud  of  burning.  The  view  that
burini  wus  abler  than  crcmution  is  continued  by
some  HoKian  cnstonis.  According  to  poiititiciil  luw,
the  eiuteiilial  part  of  the  fiiuend  ceifmnTiy  wuh  the
canting  of  vurth  upon  thu  fnce  of  the  corpse  (Cic.
De  Leii-  ii.'^f,  f>7}.  Again,  when  a  body  wns  t»  be
burued,  it  wus  the  custom  to  cut  off  some  iKirlion
of  it,  called  ax  retei-tiim,  which  was  sub»e4tn>eutly
buried  (Kest.  KpU.  p.  Hi^i.  Uy  this  means  tbe  new-
er and  more  convenient  method  wns  adopted,  while
the  uncient  rcgnlatiou  which  prescribed  burial  was
still  carried  out.

The  rcmuiiiiug  rites  varied,  according  as  the
body  wus  to  be  bnritd  or  bnrueil.  In  the  cose  of
burial  the  body  was  placuti  in  the  gnivo  cither  on
the  bier  ou  which  it  bud  been  eurrii'd,  ur  in  a  sar-
copb;iguB.  Numcmns  objei^t^  were  mImi  placifd  iu
the  grave.  (See  Skpi'U.'RL'U.  }  The  cerrnnmies
which  followed  had  the  double  object  of  making
the  grave  a  locu»  rrtitjioimf,  and  of  purifyiug  tbe
family  and  house  which  hud  been  deliled  by  tbe
presence  of  a  corpse.  Earth  was  thrown  ujHfU  the
face  of  the  dead  (Cic,  7>r  Leg.  ii.  '£i,  07 },  a  pig  was
sacrificed,  aud  an  offering  wus  mode  to  the  Lares.
Tbe  day  ou  which  these  sucrifices  took  idace  was
uall»*d/(T»ar  dmir.aJai  (Fest.  Kpil.  p.  70).  A  funeral
feoHt  calltHl  ailiverniitai  was  also  held,  uppurpnily
on  the  day  of  tbo  fuueral.nud  by  the  gruvi!  i  Vurr.
aj>.  Non.  p.  4**,  8).  The  jieriod  of  monniing  lusted
nine  days  inueeHiiiale),  though  it  is  nucertaui
whether  this  perii>d  was  reckoned  from  the  day  of
death  or  the  day  of  bnriol  (Serv.  oH  Atv.  v.  64).  At
the  end  of  thin  pi-riod  a  earr{/iciitm  «ove«(iinlf  was
olfcred  t^i  the  dead,  ami  a  rrnd  novetniialit  was  held
i,Tac..lwii.  vi.5».


FUNUS


700


FURCA.


Tbv  liitriiitit;  nf  n  btxlf  Miuctinicfl  took  place  at
tilt  npoi  w'licre  tbe  aslieo  were  to  bo  intcrr«il.  In
(bis  case  tbe  fuueral  pile  (rvf/\iti,pjirti)  wax  erected
ttTer  tbe  trencli  vrbicli  wila  H)ib»ie4iiiiMitly  m  Im*  tbo
gnive  (  bii«liim  ).  Tbe  bcwly,  huwevrr,  wiis  i»fl«ii
biiriH^tt  at  n  placf  iifiir  tb«  iiioiiiiiiieiit,  H|H4cri»lly
destined  fur  tbia  purpoFH^,  tinfrinuM,  ngtrina  (Fettt.
Epit.  p.  :ftj).  The  pyi-u  WHS  built  .of  wo<m1,  in  the
fortn  of  an  allar  [Vcig.  Aeu.  \\.  177).  A  law  of  tbe
Twelve  Tabli's  orderrd  tbat  it  iibould  not  bo
fuiiootbed  with  »ii  uxo  (Cic.  Pc  Ley.  ii.  23,  ."»!*  1,
Pyres  were  «)iticiinn-s  paiolc4l  (,1'lii).  //.  .V.  xxxv.
'  4y),  and  cy press- trtTCS  were  placed  in  front  {Ovid.

i«t.  ill.  13,  21).  On  the  top  of  tbe  pib*  tbr-eorpw
'VAfi  pbiL-etl.  witli  the  couch  on  n-biuli  It  bad  bveii
farried.  Many  Tbiiij;^  were  placed  on  tbe  pyru  by
tbe  reliitiniia  and  mourners,  ttncb  as  clothes,  nmia,
oniAiniMila,  bunting  nl^tK  and  apparalii»,  licintCM,
d«»gN,biul»(PIiii./r;M'»(.  iv.2).  Il  wiia  alKOhpritikleil
with  perfiiinrtt.  ijiiinD,  niid  »picej4.

The  pyre  waa  lighted  by  oih'  of  tbo  relatives,
witb  face  tunn-il  away  (Verg.  Am.  vi.  *AJ4).  When
it  woa  burned  down,  the  ({Inwitig  oijbos  were  cx-
tiilguiabed  with  water  or  wine  (Verj;.  .4en.  vj.  iSfl^
ThoM  who  hail  taken  part  In  the  funeml  uttered
a  last  farewell  (Verj;.  Jfir.  ij.  W-IJ  and  depsirted,
while  tbe  tu^areHt  Tvlativen  reinaiiiwl  to  eollerl  tbe
botiea  niid  iuthcit  nlieii  they  wen^  dry.  Thin  wan
probably  done  an  a  vn\c  on  the  duy  of  the  fnueni).
Tbe  bones  were  sprinkled  witb  wine  (Ihouyb  it,  is
not  certain  that  this  sprhikting  is  to  be  aeparated
from  that  ini^iitioned  al>ovc),  dried  with  a  linen
cloth,  and  placed  iit  iin  urn  or  box  witb  {terfiinios
■ml  apicea.  The  utti  was  then  placed  in  tbe  aep-
nlcbre.

It  haa  already  been  mentioned  that  if  tbe  body
wiuj  burned,  the  uh  refiictiim  was  buried  aeparat«Iy.
The  eert'nioniun  of  the /rrine  limicaltt  were  used,
■a  in  tbucoHe  uf  tlmlnirial,  ineluding  tlip  thmwiug
of  earth  upon  the  retnaiuH  iift.be  dead  (Ctc.  fie  !,eg.
ii.  3U,  G7 ).  It  doeti  not  appear  at  what  moment
tbia  waa  douo;  but  tbo  ulijrot  of  it  wan  \m  cotine-
crate  the  plae«  of  burial,  to  taake  it  a  loc\t»  rciitjio-
IH«.  After  tbe  bunea  and  aaheti  of  the  dei^eaM^d
had  been  placed  in  tbe  uru,  the  peraoiut  g>re.<teiit
were  tbrice  sprinkled  by  a  pricat  with  pure  water
(tvm  a  branch  uf  olive  or  lanrel,  for  the  purpose  nf
purilieation  (Verjj.  Aen.  vi.  Ifti!:)');  after  which  they
were  ditmiiBMud  by  tbe  prar^ca  or  some  other  pcr-
Hou,  by  tbe  Moluuin  wonl  Hicft,  that  ie.  ire  b'tW.
lu  the  caKu  of  burning,  the  practicea  voiiuected
with  tbe  niUcrrniMtn  and  the  norcndiale  seem  to
bave  been  tbe  luinie  na  in  tlm  raNu  of  burial  (see
abitv«>.  Wbeu  Ibune  who  bad  aoeutiipanjed  the
funeral  returned  home,  they  underwent  a  pnrifira-
lion  called  tiij^tut.  which  conniNted  in  being  wprin-
klotl  witb  wat«r  and  stepping  over  a  Hro  (Keat,
p.  aj.  It  wa«  then  also,  perhaps,  that  tbo  bouao
wan  Bwept  with  a  special  kind  of  broom  (Kcat.
p.  .V,  H.  V.  Everriatoi-).

In  the  caw;  of  important  funerals,  scenic  or
glailiatorial  es^bibitioUH  w<-re  often  given.  (See
Gi^lHAToitEe.1  Scenic  exhibitions  were  leas  com-
mon :  bnt  the  Oidaaealia  tt>  the  Atlrlphm:  uf  Te-rnnce
Btatea  tbat  that  ptay  wiu  perfomicd  at  the  l»d\
fuKfbm  of  Aeniilins  Tanlhis  in.c.  1G(J),  and  we  are
iiifrirmed  by  Livy  that  Ivdi  tctniei  au  well  as  glad-
iatorial eombata  wore  oxhibit4?d  at  the  death  of
T,  Flamininus  Ib.c.  174).  There  were  also  distribu-
tionn  of  fond  {rUrtrationn)  and  public  banqnets
Ipnet. /u/.ytjj.


It  remains  to  give  some  account  of  tbo
ri  tea  performed  at  tbe  tombs  in  honour  nf  tbo]
Certain  days  Id  February  (13tb-^laii  wore  mi  apan
aa  rfiw  partntale*,  or  parrutal'ta.  Tlie  laat  of  tbt**?
daya  waa  apectally  known  an  feralia  (Ovid,  FutU.
ii.  SHI*).  The  cereiriuuteH  perforuierl  at  this  tinir
are  de«t<-rtl>e4  by  Ovid  t  Kim/J,  U- ^^^  foil.).  Qfitt-
ings  to  the  Maucs  {infcriat)  were  brvugbt  to  tUn
tondt.  These  conaisted  of  wine  and  milk,  boncy
and  oil.  the  blomt  of  victima,  especially  uf  blucL
nhe4-p.  pigs, and  ratt]e< Arnob.  vii. !20>.  vanonii (ruiu.
bread,  salt,  and  eggs  (Jnv.  v.  fti).  Tbe  tomb  «»
adornwl  with  wreaths  and  flowers,  e*pecinllyrx»w
and  violela  (Ovid,  1.  c. ).  A  (Deal  wa«  alao  eat«n
at  tbe  grave.  A  trtfl'uuum  funrbrr,  intended  »f-
pareutly  for  this  pnrpone,  won  found  at  Pompfii
and  in  rcpret^enteil  in  the  accompanying  tllastn-
tion. During  the diet  parrnlalta t<rmplo8 wen


fa&mal  ItldiolUBL (Faupelt-l

abut  and  marriages  forbidden  (Orid,  fiwri.  ii.  £67
foil.),  and  the  magiatrates  laid  aaide  the  tnnjriia
of  their  offlce  (Lydiia,  thu  J/rn*.  iv.  iM).  The  lenwi
parentare,  pftrmtttlio,  were  al»o  applitv]  to  Mnirlsr
ritea  performed  i>n  other  days  of  ibe  year,  sucb  M
the  day  of  1>Lrtb,  death,  or  burial  of  tbe  pejiton  1»
be  honoured.  Bperial  dayn  were  also  apprapriaM
to  roaes  and  violets  (rotalio,  ro^aria,  rMoJia,  rwla-
tio;  Plin.//.  .V.sxi.UD-
BlBt.luORAl'RT. —  Kefercnces  moy  I*  maAv  l»
Feydoan,  Hiatoire  rfr«  I'eaffet  FtiMfbt'es.  nlr.  (pHris,
I^i6).  For  tbe  Greek  oaagea.  see  Bccker-fmll,
rhnriklet,  iii.  114-167;  Hermann-Uliliuuef.  /Vim'-
altcrth.  ])p.  'Ml  foil.;  and  Graves,  Uuriot  Ciufau
Iff  the  AHcitmt  Grwka  (Brooklyn,  l«t|).  For  il»
Iloman  nnage^,  see  Becker -Gdll,  GaUuM,  lit.  i'l-
M7 ;  and  Msrquardt,  Priratlehcn,  pp  34tV-3Hf..

For  ((pitfi).  A  thief;  hnmoruualy  eatle<l  "a
man  of  throe  letters  "  {hoMO  trium  HItrrarum,  Plait
Au( ii.  4,  46). Sec  FURTL'M.

Fnrca  iS'iKftavov).  (1)  A  two-prong«l  fork. »
bay-fork,  pitchfork,  etc.  (Verg.  Ueorg.  i.3G4).  Tba
naaie  is  also  given  tun  6eeb-fork  (Petroo. S&l.aa'
to  any  forked  prop  or  stay — e.g. for  vioe*  (Verj.
{itorg.  ii.  'i!:>^) ;  for  planks  <Livy,  i.  'JS>\ :  for  flahloif'
nets  (Pliny,  H.  .V.  li.  ^  0).  Table-forks  were  ti.<
uaed  by  the  anoienle,  who  l«ok  their  tom\  fnnn  the
plate  with  their  hngertt, except  in  the  caae  of  nbril-
iiiib  and  eggH,  for  which  they  bad  ii  Mirt  of  raai-
bination  fork  and  spouu.  (See  C'rxa.  p.  313,
Corr.EAR-1  The  dimiuutivfl  Fcrciixa  denoi
sntaller  fork,  but  attll  a  large  one  uccortling  to
notions.  (S)  ^Va  an  Instrument  of  pun  iahmenl./irt*
means  a  contrivance  sonietbing  likn  a  yoke  pa?*-
ing  urontid  the  back  of  the  neck  and  duwu  t^f"!!
arm.  This  tbe  eriminul  or  slave  worv  while  beoiji
whipped  tbntngh  tbe  Ktm^ta — whence  Fl'sd*"**
is  an  expreRHiou  equivalent  to  our  *' ga1la«r^>bin)*
iPIiint.  Amphil.  i.  1,  I3o,  and  oftmO.  (31  Tbe  «m«1
if  nlw)  n«ed  of  tbe  gibbet  or  gatlown  iPanl,  /'if.  Jd
{4 )  (iTT^piyf ,  imipiy^l.  The  part  of  a  earnagr-paW
whivb  faatcn8  into  the  axle.


ant-


FURCITLAC  CAUDIN'AK


701


UAUII


FuicQlae  Caudinae. See  Caudium.

Foriae. See  El'Hknidks.

Piirtl  A  family  wliivh  migrated  from  MediiUia
in  Lsliuni,  auU  vaaie  to  8ettl«  ut  Runiv  iimler  Kuiu-
tiliiH,  suil  WON  admitted  aiiiou^  tbt>  ]mtriciuuK.  Ca<
iuitlaA<i|  V.)  wuft  iif  this  fnoiily.aud  it  was  he  who
firHt  raiMd  it  to  ilistiiictioii.

Farina.  An  «arly  LHtiii  goddess,  wlinsp  nstixs
in  thu  time  of  Varro,  wuh  known  to  very  few  (Vnrr.
/-  /-.  V.  3j.  There  wan  n  savrcd  grove  of  tbi«  god-
fleAM  tH\Y(iii(1  thn  Tiber  (in  which  Gain»  Grncchns
was  itlain  ),  nnil  this,  with  the  similitude  of  the
iinme.  led  Cirero  and  others  to  identify  Knriaii
with  ihe  Furies  (Cie.  X.  D.  iii.  18).  The  Furiualia
nreru  colchrated  on  tlic  25th  of  July.

FtuluB  BibaclUtu. &ee  QiUACt'LUt*.

FtimuB  {irryiis}-  (I)  An  nvpn,  nsnally  a  haker's
ovt<ii  (Plaitt.  Can.  ii.  5,  1).  (iM'e  P18TOU.}  (3)  A
haker'tt  nhup  (Hor.  Sal.  i.  A,  :J7).  (Swi  PisTOli.)  (3)
A  hot<air,  or  vu]>uur-bulh,  lui  diMtiiiguiKhi-d  IVoni
balneum,  which  i.t  u  warm  water  hath.  84:e  Hal-
neae.

PuitnnL  Theft ;  the  robbery  of  morablo  tblDgs,
though  furtum  could  beeouimitted  withuiit  actual-
ly carrying  off  the  object,  aa  in  the  case  n(  a  thing
de)K>6ited  {depo*it»m},tho  unlawftiL  use  of  which
was  fnrt'Um.  Furtum  was  either  mattifrttuni  or
not,  the  former  wlien  the  thief  was  caught  in  the
act.  It  was  callwl/MrfHni  roii(r;)lvm  wheu  a  stolen
object  waK  found  in  a  jierMin'H  jMNMeiuion ;  aiiit  if
a  {M-rNun  gave  to  a  third  jienuin  stolen  goods,  tli(<
third  person  could  hnug  at)  uctiu/vrli  obtati  agaiuat
the  pror.  The  iHini-thciieut  for /urfsm  tHani/eatux
was  eapHalia — i. e*.  afl'fctiug  utic's  m/i«f  (cj.  v.).  A
thief  killed  while  committiui;  rubbery  ot  night
was  held  by  the  Twelve  Tables  tii  be  lawfully
killtMJ :  but  iu  the  daytiaie  he  could  be  killed  only
nbeti  he  resisted  with  a  deadly  weupuu  ((e/uin).
SSet-  Ki.nrics  Dikk.

Piiactna  (rpiaiMi). A  trident,  i.  e.  a  large  fork


h


with  several  branches  (usually  three)  emjiloyed  by
fisbermen  in  spearing  iwh.  It  wj«  (he  symbol  of
Xt'plnne  lis  the  god  of  thu  ocean.  By  the  class  of
gladiators  kmtwn  as  rt-fjarii  it  was  used  as  a  weap-
on. See  Glai>iatures.

FDBtlbaiua A  kind  of  sling. See  Kt'NDx.

Ptiatuarium  {$vXoKonin).  A  punishment  indfct-
ed  ii|»un  wtliliei  for  desertion  or  other  seridUti  nf-
fences,  in  wbieh  the  otTiMider  was  beaten  to  death
with  heavy  stiuks  {/uAtes)  Uid  on  by  his  comrades
(Livy,v.ti}.

Fuaus  (orpaKTat),  A  spindle ;  usually  umdi-  nf
a  slick  uboui  twelve  juehes  in  length,  aud  u^M
with  the  disloff  (oo/ii»),  fur  twl»tiitj;  or  Kpinniug
the  fibres  of  wool  or

dai iuto t  b  read  ^

{Pliny,  ff.  A';  %i.  27;  _ /^

Ovid,  Mft.  vi.  22).
GoldeD  spindles  were
M'ut  toladicftof  muk
(lIcrtMl.  iv.  UWi.  In
the  rural  dintriol«)  of
Italy,  women  were
forbidden  to  spin
wlicn  they  were  trnv.
elling  on  fool,  Ihe
act  being  considei-ed

of  evil  umen  (Pliny, \  j  (fl!'',^''""- y^j

if. -V.  xxvlii.6)  The
distaff  aud  spindle,
with  the  wool  aud


thread  upon  tbem,  wuman  wiiii  nifiaii  wid  :'i>iiidift
were  carried  in  bri-  '^^^J  "'  "'"  ^■■'"""  ''-'I**'*''".
dal  pnicfisfiionM ;  and

witlinnt  the  wool  and  thread,  they  were  often  sus-
pended by  woDiei)  as  ofleriugs  of  religious  grati-
tude, esj>eeial1y  in  old  age,  or  on  re]iii()uisbi[ig
the  constant  une  of  thom.  Thoy  were  most  fre-
quoDtly  dedicated  to  Minerva,  the  patrouess  of
spinning,  and  of  the  arts  connected  with  it.  The
spindle  was  kept  iu  the  calathuti  (<{.  v.).


6


O,  aa  a  aymbol.

IM  GftUUC.  — r=  ra'tos,  ywpovfrias  (♦T).
P=5  (A'=SO  ^=5000  |rP  =50,000  (deoimal
t«in).
y'—'^  y—  3tH». See  A  BACL'S.

Ik  Latin'. — G  =  C>aleria,  Ouiti,  Gallica,  geaer,
G<--uius,  geus  (in  Africa),  ceDturia  (C*.  i.  L.  xir.
227ri).

G^Gaiua  (instead  of  the  ueaal  C  —  rare),  cf.
Orelli,  Inscrifit.  iCT,  IGfKi,  4060. See  Gaius  ;  GaiA.
K G'U-N  =  Genius  ilomini  nostrl.
K 0-F:=Karum  rartutu.Gemiua  fellx  (legio).
^ G-H'L=rgeniHS  huin«  loei.
G-M  =giMiiiis  inunicipii.
G  P-K-Kz=:t{i!niu  pitpuli  Koiuani  felicitor.
G-K=:(ientiatii  Kavti.
(;-S=:Genunnia  itujwrior.

0«bae  (rtij^ai I.  (1)  A  city  <if  Persia,  in  the  prov-
iCe  of  Persis,  placed  by  Ptolemy  southeast  of  Pa-
r^ada.  on  thu  cuntiues  of  Canuania.  (2)  A  city
Kogdiaiia,  Honlhwcst  of  Cyrvschata.  Gabac  was
iite>  uf  the  llrst  places  to  which  the  exploits  of
lexauder  gave  celebrity  in  that  country. It  is


»


the  same  with  the  Gabaza  of  Cartiiis  (Quiut.  Cart.

viii.4, 1).

Otabftli  (radaXfif).  A  people  iu  (lalllfl  Arinita-
nica,  whuHf  chief  town  was  Auderituni  (Aut^rleux
or  Javoux)  (CflCft  B.  G.  vii  75).

Oabfilaa.  A  word  said  t^o  he  formed  from  the
Hebrew  Inugungc,  and  equivalent  to  the  Lalin
crux  (q.  V.) :  a  ci-oss  or  stake  upon  which  crimi-
nals were  impaled  (Varr,  ap.  Non.  s.  r.  p.  117);
whence  the  same  word  is  also  used  to  designate
a  worthless  fellow,  or  one  who  deeerred  impale*
meut  (Capitol,  ifncriu.  11).

Oabflta.  A  particular  kiud  of  dish  fur  tabU-
ser\'ice,  in  fashiou  at  Rome  duriug  the  tiutu  of
Martial ;  hut  respecting  its  characteristics  noth-
iu}{  i^  known  (Klart.  vii.  4^ ;  xi.  'M).

Oablana  {rafiiarfi)  or  Oabien^  (Va^tijyft).  A  dis-
trict of  the  Persian  prnviuc«i  of  Siisiauft  (q.  v.),
west  of  Mount  Kagros.

Oabli  (Tatiiot).  A  Iowa  in  Latium,  nn  the  La-
cus  Gahinun  btitwccn  Konie  and  Praenestt^,  a  col-
ony from  Alba  Longa ; and  the  place,  acconling


UADtNA


702


GAEC3


to  tratlition^  where  Rnmiilns  and  KouinB  wore
brottglit  np.  It  W08  tAken  l>y  Tarqniuiaa  Super-
bun  by  stratagem  (Livy,  i.  53,  r>4),  ami  wns  iu  niiris
In  tlie  tim?  of  Aiign0tti».  Ir)  i  tn  neigfa  Wiirbooil  ai-e
the  atotie  quarries  fnnii  irliicli  »  p»rt  of  Rome  vraa
built. The  iiiuilm-ii  name  ia  CuMti);1luue.

Oabiiu.  TliM  iianie  of  luno,  Wi(r8biji|>e4l  at  Ga-
bii  (Vcrfi.  Am.  vii.  *wa).

Gabinia  I*ex. See  Lex.

OlibiJliti%  At.'Ll.'8.  A  tritHitii)  of  the  jilobw  in  n.c
00,  nlieii  he  carri«il  a  law  coiifurriiig  ujKiti  Piiiii|ii*y
tlw  Cdtiiniaml  of  thr  war  n^iiiiiJit  thci  pIrnl4-H ;  nuil
conniil  in  r>H,  wbnn  ho  look  part  in  the  banifthnit'nt
of  Clcm-o.  In  tho  .vt-ar  57  he  went  t-o  Syria  as  pro-
cODsiil,  aud  restored  Ftoleiuy  Anlofes  t«  tho  throue
of  Egypt,  iu  op^>o6ittoii  to  n  decree  of  the  Scnat«.
Ou  his  rotiirn  ro  Komc  ia  M  be  was  accused  both
of  maiettaa  and  the  rrtiurN  rfpftwtitlarum,  for  the
illegal  receipt  of  10,000  tAl«nt»  fnnn  Ptolciiiy,  and
naa  defended  by  Cicero.  Hi.'  wne  cundetnued  {in
the  latter  charge,  and  went  into  exile.  In  the
civil  war  \w  fou^^ht  on  the  nU\e  of  Caeear.  Ho
dii*d  a)H)nt  b.c.  47.

Oabinua  Cinctns. 8ec  Tooa.

Oadftra  (Wt  riifinpai.  A  largi*  furtitied  city  of
PalfMliriir.  Mitiiated  on  an  t-astern  tribntary  of  tho
Jordan.  Venpaiiiau,  iu  bia  lint  caiupai^u  iu  UalilL<«,
to(»k  it,  slaughtered  tbo  iuhabitauls,  and  burned
the  city  (losepb.  if.  J.  iii.  7  4  !)•

Oades  (Semitic  gndir,  "a  hedge,"  "Btoefcade";
TO  rdftfipa).  The  nimlum  Cadijt ;  a  very  nncient
town  in  llispania  Haeticn,  founded  by  the  Phwnt-
einiiH,  and  fine  nf  tbt^  chief  i»ml4  nf  ibnir  cnininerce
in  the  went  nf  Knrn|>r,  Hituated  nn  »  suiall  inland
of  the  Mamn  uniiie  (Iula  de  Ixhiu),  separated  from
the  mainland  liy  a  n.-irrow  channel.  Herodotus
wiys  (iv.  8)  that  llii-  island  nf  Erythia  was  done  to
Oaileira;  whence  cnoHt  1at«^r  vvriiem  snppo^eil  the
inland  <if  fJ.'ules  to  be  tlie  saniu  aa  the  Qiythicat
iitlaiid  of  KrytbLu.  from  which  Ht.>rcuteN  carried  off
the  oxen  uf  tK'tyoa.  It6  iiihabitaiitx  received  the
Komau  frauchise  from  lulius  Caesar,  and  &tral>o
meutiooii  a^  u  Mrilciuf;  proof  uf  its  wealth  aud  im-
portance that,  iu  the  census  takeu  under  Angus*
tUB,  tiailes  \yn»  the  residence  of  some  500  etpiitea —
a  number  greater  than  in  any  town  nf  Italy  excejrt
Patavium  (Pm1na).  Gade«  wtu  allied  with  Rome
ill  the  Second  Punic  War  (Livy,  xiJtii.  8).  Th«
city  waa  rich,  luxnrioim,  and  imuural.  Ita  dauc-
>Bg  tfirls  vith  their  lascivious  diinceti  uro  often
npokcu  of  it)  Roman  literature. See  Saltatio.

Gadfly. See  Oestkus.

Oadltauum  Fretum.  Now  the  Strait  of  Gib-
roUur. See  Abvla;  Calpb.

OAdltaniu  Sinua. \ow  tho  Bay  of  Cadiz.

Oaea  (Patal.  The  (truck  gmldeaa  of  tho  earth.
Acconling  to  Heaiod  aho  came  into  being  after
Chaos,  and  bionght  forth  of  herself  the  Sky  lOv^ja-
yat),  the  munntaitis,  aud  the  St'a  [HovrorX  By  Ura-
nus nhe  was  mother  of  the  Tit-aus,  Cyclopes,  and
Hecntoncheircii.  From  the  hloocl  of  her  mntilated
husband  aprang  tho  Eriuye*.  Giant-a,  aud  Melian
nympbs ;  to  Poittus  she  bore  Nereus,  ThanmaH,
Pburoya,  Ceto,  and  Gnr>-bia.  Other  teiTiblo  be-
ings, Huch  lUf  tho  giautH  Typhuu,  AiitnenH,  aud
Tityns,  weru  her  olTspring,  aa  also  the  autochtho-
nes or  abnrigiues,  such  as  ErechtheuH  and  Cecm[»ft.
Iu  Homer  she  is  invoked  with  Zens,  the  Sun,
Heaven,  and  Hell  as  a  witucM  to  oaths,  aud  wa>t


worsliippetl  with  the  nacrificAof  a  black  lamb;  tet
Mho  wn»  rxpccially  honourisi  aa  the  inolhrr  nf  all,
who  uouriHbf'H  ht-r  L!reatur«--t4  and  |iours  rich  btc»-
ings  upon  tlieni.  Iu  Athens,  iu  particular.  >br
wiiM  worHliipirtMl  sm  (tou/jor/wH^r,  or  the  uouriftbw
of  children,  and  at  the  same  time  oa  the  godilcM
of  death,  who  Niimmons  all  her  creatarea  back  to
her  and  hides  tliem  in  lier  iMisotii.  8hc  was  IwD-
oupmI  alno  aa  the  primeval  prophetwm.  especially
ill  Delphi,  the  oracle  of  whirh  wa»  at  first  in  her  '
potHPaainti  aa  the  ]h>w<x  who  tcut  forth  tJ>s  vs-
poiint  which  inspired  the  seer-  The  cotreepond'
iug  Rouuiu  gmldefUt  wa«  TcUus  fq.  v.).

Oaeauin  (yat<rnv).  A  very  strtmg  and  vrij^htj
Javelin,  which  ap)>car«  tn  have  been  niaile,  botli
head  aud  stock,  uf  solid  iron  (Pull.  vii.  Ivi4i),  tuiil
to  have  been  employed  aa  a  misMtle  rather  ibao
tis  a  spear,  each  wanior  rarrj'ing  two  as  bis  com-
plement (Varr.  ap.  Non.  s.  v.  p.  &5!>).  The  neajmn
W.18  of  Gallic  origin  (Verg.  Jrn.  viii.  G69);  tliongh
it  was  sometimes  neieil  by  tho  Romans,  the  Ihe-
riaiiSf  the  CarthaginianM  (Livy,  xx^-i.  6),  and  tbo
Greeks. t>ee  Ha.sta.

OaetuUa  <ramn/Xio).  The  interior  of  Nortbem
AfHca,  aonth  uf  Matirvtaitia.  Namidia,  and  the  fa-
gion  bonUring  ou  the  8yrt«8,  reaching  to  tli«  At-
lantic Ocean  on  the  weat,  and  of  very  iadefiiiit*
extent  towards  tho  east  and  aontU.  The  pun
Gaetnii  were  not  an  Acthinpic  (i.  e.  Nugroi,  bat  s
Libyan  race,  and  were  most  probably  the  mucm-
tors  of  the  Berbers  (Ritter,  A-rdtrNnrftr,  i.  pp.  lOM
foil.).  Cossns  Leutulns  brought  the  GaelaliiM
ander  Roman  rule,  receiving  for  thia  a  triampli
and  the  snnuimc  Gaetnlicus.

Oagae  (rdyin)  A  town  on  the  coast  ofLyct^
whence  came  iiiiantitics  of  Jet  (yoyon/t  AiAf.
(iayaten  Uipis\  still  called  Iu  Gumiaii  gsgat  fPIto.
//.  X.  xxxvi.  19  J  34).

Oagatea  lapia. See  Gaoar.

Qaimuk  A  Goth,  the  minister  of  the  fftupenf
Arcaitins  fmni  :t9U  to  401.  He  ancoMded  the  N>
nnch  EntnipiuH,  wIioku  death  be  had  centn*e^
and  mum  after  revolted  against  the  imperial  u-
thority,  uniting  his  forces  with  those  of  bis  cons-
trynian  Tribigild.  He  then  rcecivwl  freui  il»
weak  ArcadiiiH  the  titleof  Uominundiug  Genrrslof
the  Komau  Annies,  and  practically  becatuf  en-
pcror,  but  was  slain  in  a  cuudict  with  the  Hih

(A.D.  401).

Qaiaford,  TlinHAS.  A  diatingiiished  rluncil
•■tcholar,  boru  at  llford,  England,  iu  177y.  H»
litndietl  at  Christ  Church  College,  Oxford,  wliew
ho  took  his  degree  iu  1604.  After  publisbiug  u
elaborato  edition  of  the  fsrAirirfioN  of  Heph"'*'
tion,  he  was  inaile  Piiblin  Examiner  (1910),  ui
in  Ibll  Kegiuiii  l»rofeiwor  of  Greek.  From  Ifltfw
1847  lie  was  rector  of  the  parish  of  Westwell,  i»^
from  ISni  wa«  Dean  of  Chrlpit  Chnrch.  He  dW
in  1^55.  Among  the  most  valnuhle  of  his  clt*^
cal  pnhlicatiouK  are  an  edition  of  the  /Viae  Onw*
MiH»rt*  (1H14-20),  BuidaM,  i  vole.  (lKM>,of  the  ^
i»o/(fj/iri/Mi  J/iif/Riim  (IfMHi.  of  tho  Scriptorta  LtAti
RH  Metrii^ir  iXtSTt),  of  the  Paronuio^apki  0*«^
ai<16>.  of  St^baeus  (IKK),  of  IlerodotuK  (lt«<t.o'
Sophocles  (1^^),  and  of  Kuwbina  (ItfiS).

Oaitu,  Ooia.  A  praenomeu  rery  cfRDSton  it
Rome  to  both  aexee.  (On  the  name  see  F.  D-
Allen  in  Harvafd  Slaiif*  in  Clat*.  PlllalfJ*
iii.pp.71-W  [1M91]). C(the  old  form  ofO*,lalt«


DAtaral  ponition,  dennt^d  the  name  of  rhe  malot
and  whrn  irrnrBCit,  that  of  the  fvmale ;  thnu,  C
vfOA  rqntvaluiit  lo  Gains;  bnC  D  to  Gam.  Female
pnu!iiutiiiiin,  ivhicb  wnrc  nmrki^l  with  :iti  iiirrrled
capitnl,  nrn-,  hnnuvir,  early  diKtiM^d  aiiiortg  thu  Ri>-
Diaiis.  The  cuauini  nfier  this  wn.*,  iti  catm  ihcm  vran
ouly  Due  dnugfater,  to  name  tier  after  ihc  tjtn/i.  If
there  were  two,  to  distinguish  them  by  nttiior  niu)
mimor  added  to  their  names ;  if  there  were  more
than  two,  they  were  diatiugiiiftbod  by  their  imm-
brr,  Prima,  Srciinda,  etc.  Thus  we  ba\'e,  in  tbe
finrt  cose,  Tidlia,  the  dBn^ht«r  of  Cicero ;  Inlia,  tbe
(lati^ht^r  nf  Cac«iir;  and  in  the  second,  Conieliu
Miiinr,  Coriirlia  Miniir,  etc.  (Seo  NuMEN.)  Gains
au4l  Gaia  nro  thv)  typical  iinniPN  of  IiuHbnnd  iukI
wife  in  Roman  ii8ago;  and  at  wcddini^  tlm  bricU-
gT«mm  and  bride  were  callccl  re«p«cLiv<j]y  Gaiutt
and  Goia  (cf.  Festtu,  s.  v.  Gaia ;  aud  the  warriai^o
fnnuala  prononncod  by  the  bride,  Chi  («  Gai»B,tgo
Goia),

G«las.  Ooo  of  the  moat  accompIiHheil  pnift-sti-
orsofKoiuuu  taw  and  writers  (in  tluitdiibject.  Hu
wiM  a  uattrc  of  the  Aitiatiu  pntvincuii,  and  Hpent
bis  days  in  Bome  nnder  Hadrian,  Autiinimui  Pins,
aud  Marcus  Anrrliua  (about  A.D.  1 10-1^0).  Kin
irritingB  were  uumeroni;  but  we  |>oeaeu  in  a  tol-
erably coniph-te  form  notliing  but  his  In»titutwnr9,
ur  iiitrudiictiiiii  to  the  privatA  law  of  the  KomnnK.
Thift  waa  diNcovenK)  by  Niebnhr  in  1H16  on  a  pal-
imjiw^t  of  the  tifth  centnry  at  Verona,  having  be-
fore been  known  in  qnotattuuii  only.  The  work
18  iu  four  books,  thu  lirMt  of  whicli  trt'aUt  of  tbe
family,  the  ciecond  and  third  of  property,  and  the
fourth  of  Ic^al  procedure.  Popular  and  tiit«lligi-
ble  without  being  iiuperticial,  it  woa  a  favonritA
hzud-bouk  of  law,  mid  wrrcd.  aa  a  fouudatlou  for
the  iHtt'iluHone*  of  Justinian.  As  a  Jnriiit  GiiiuH
belongs  to  tho  coDBervati^'o  school  of  iht*  Sabini-
ani.  (See  Ateil's  Cai'itu.)  The  tlrst  04titiu»  of
Gairw  wma  that  of  Gosclien  and  HoUweK  (Dorlin,
18S0>,  the  third  edition  being  reviswl  by  Lach-
nano  (Itcrlin.  1841f).  The  Inwt  text  is  now  that
of  Htiwlike  In  the  Tflnbner  series  ;  while  transla-
tionft  into  Knglisli  wUh  commontaries  have  b#«n
Buule  by  Abdy  aud  Walker  (CaniUridge,  IW70),  E.
Poste  (Oxford,  1875),  MulrUead  (Edinburgh,  leSO),
and  MeATs  (Loudou,  IStS).

Oaitu  Caeaar. See  CALiauuv.

0«]aeBiu  (raXaltrot)  and  Oalesns.  A  river  in
the  Bonth  of  Italy,  now  the  Galeso,  flowing  into
tlie  Gulf  of  TnreDtum  thrniigb  the  meadows  where
the  sheep  grazed,  whose  wool  was  i*o  celebrated  in
•ntiquity  (Livy,  xxv.  \\).

OalanttUs. See  Oauxtuias.

0«latea  (roXurfiu,  "the  milk-wblte'O.  A  itea-
nymph,  duughter  of  Kerens  and  Doris.  Acccrding
lo  a  Sicilian  story,  which  the  poet«  Philoxeuus
and  Theocritns  have  made  famous,  Hlie  was  pnr-
soed  by  the  tmcouth  man8t«r  Polyplieuiits  (q.  v.),
being  henwlf  in  lore  with  the  I)eautifnl  Acint.  The
Jealons  giant  crushtnl  Acih  with  a  rock,  and  the
nymph  changed  her  Ix-loved  into  thu  Hicilian
river  which  bears  hii*  name.  The  legend  of  Acis
and  Galat«a  has  be«n  a  favourite  theme  in
English  lit«mturv.  Adaptations  of  it  are  to  be
fuond  to  Ga}''s  Ac\f  and  Calatea,  J.  S.  Blackle's
Galatea,  Proctor's  Death  of  Acit,  H.  Bnchnnan's
Folypkeme't  Pattion,  and  Anotiu  Dobson's  Tale  of
Potjfpheme.


oiiftua. (Kaples  Mumobi.)

Oalatla  (raXiirinV  A  country  of  Asia  Minor,
composed  of  parts  of  Phrygia  and  Cappaitocia,
and  hounded  on  the  went,  south,  and  sonthea-it
by  those  countries,  and  on  thv  nurthpiuit,  north,
and  northwest  by  Pontiis,  Puphlugunia,  and  Rt-
thynia.  It  derived  its  name  fnmi  Its  inhiihitauts,
who  were  Gunls  that  had  iuvo4led  und  settled  in
Asia  Minnr  at  vitriauH  periods  during  tha  third
century  B.C.  Ttipy  fl|>eedi1y  overran  ull  Asia  Mi-
nor within  tho  Tnuriis,  and  exavtetl  tribnte  fruin
Its  varinUH  princes;  bnt  Attains  I.  guluwl  a  c«ni-
plete  victory  over  them  (B.C.  *i30),  and  compelled
them  to  Hcttlo  ilown  within  tbe  limits  of  th«  conn-
try  thenceforth  called  Galatia,  and  also,  on  nc*
count  of  the  mixtnro  of  Greeks  with  tho  Celtio
inhabitants  whieh  npeeilily  t<Kik  plac«,  Graeco-
Giilatiu  and  Gallogi-aocia.  Tlin  people  of  Galaiim
adopted  to  a  great  ext«ut  Greek  habits  aud  man-
ners  and  religions  ohsorroDce*,  but  preservbd  their
avrn  langunge,  so  that  oven  in  the  fonrth  century
A.D.  Jernrne  says  that  the  speech  of  tho  Galatiaua
n-semblcH  the  local  dialect  of  the  Treviri  in  Ganl.
Tlioy  retained  also  their  -political  divi(»ious  and
forms  of  government.  They  consisted  of  three
great  trilim  —  the  Totlstohogi,  the  Trrtcmi,  and
the  Tectosagcs — each  stibdividetl  into  four  jiarts^


Colo  ol  GalatlA,  wim  tba  heut  of  Baoimi  ««ip»rar-

callcd  by  the  Greeks  rrrpa^jytai.  At  the  head
of  each  of  these  twelve  tctrarchies  was  a  chief
or  totraroh.  At  length  one  of  the  tetrarvhs,
DelotBTUs,  was  rewarded  for  bis  scr^'lcca  to  the
Romans  in  tbe  Mithrhlntio  war  by  tbe  title  of
king,  together  with  n  grant  of  Pontnn  and  Arme-
nia Minor:  und  after  the  death  of  his  eocceiwor,


Ain>-uta4,QElatia  was  mode  by  Aagostna  n  Roman
province  (B.C.  26).  lUoiily  importaut  cities  were:
In  lliv  MMitbwest,  Petwinus,  the  eapitul  of  the  Tolia-
tob<i<|{i ;  iu  tliB  oeiitro,  Anvyra,  the  cnpitui  of  tlie
Tuctuaogi'H;  and  in  thr  nurtlii'ant.  Taviiim,  tlio
eapilal  of  ihe  Tmcmi.  Kruiit  tlin  K)iiHtlp  o(  St.
Paul  to  ttiu  (lolNtiuuN  wu  h'urii  tliiil  tW  CliriK-
iiuii  cbtircbi^H  iu  (lulutiu  i-miHiHtt-il  in  gn^iit  |mrt
of  Jewish  uouvcrti*. SeoTlucrr.v,  Uhl.drH  (iauloia.

Galaxlus  (raXti^ias).  A  sniatl  hvlm-  in  BmviiEa,
nnir  wbicU  Htood  tbo  temple  ofAiioUu  Ualuxiu^.
Tl)f  name  in  (tori^*eil  from  the  fact  tbat  it8  wati^n*
W.-IV  nf  tbo  colour  of  milk  (yciAn),  doe  to  tbe
oUiilky  nature  of  the  aoil.

Galba.  <Ij  SKitmi^s,  »ii  orator  anterior  to  Cic-
ero. Wbll«  bnliliiij;  t]m  gnveniment  of  S|Hiitl,  ho
treurlinriiiiftly  niiiriltred  :10,00I>  LiiBit:ini»nH.  Hav-
ing been  accuiMjil  for  tbi.**  by  Cat«  tb«  Ceitsor,  be
wns  about  to  bo  coDdeuiiiud,  when  he  wrought
D|mD  tbo  fculiuga  of  tbe  {H.-opto  by  ninbraciujj  be-
fore tboio  biH  tn*u  sons,  utill  qultu  young,  an  act
vliich  8avo«l  biui  {Clc.  Orat.  t.  5'J).  Ja  tlic  yt'ar  B.  c.
144  he  waa  consul.  (2)  ((Ait's  St'U^riiTS,  a  Uouiaii
lawyer,  father  of  the  emperor.  Ho  wiut  consul  in
A.u.2:f.  (:l)  SRRViUFi  Siii-PiciiiR,  boru  In  tbo  relgii
of  Auj;uHtu8,  of  a  patrician  family.  He  Ben'o^l
with  disliurtiou  in  Germany,  and  vrtin  afterwanU
pntcuHMul,  firttt  in  Africa,  and  Hiib^ii-rimmtly  iu  Hik-
pauia  Tarraconensis,  in  which  ofli{:4;  ho  gained  a
reputation  for  Jaxtico  ami  moderation.  He  was
still  ill  Spain  wbeu  IiiliuH  Viiulex,  tho  procoiiNiil
of  IJp|M)r  Gaul,  ro«o  agaiuat  Nero<  Galba  joineil
Viudex,  and  Otho,  governor  of  LimitaniD.  followed
hi«  example.  Tbo  n^soutblcd  multitudes  Kalnttnl
tialbn  an  emperor  and  Auguntm*;  but  lie  declarotl
tbat  he  was  acting  only  as  tbe  tieiitenant  of  the
Seuale  and  j>cople  of  Rome,  in  okUt  to  put  nu  end  to
the  disgraceful  tyrauny  of  Nero.  Tbo  Pn»etoriau
Guards  soon  aft«r,  hariugrevoUcd  ugaiTnnt  Nero,  pro-
claimed Galba,  and  tbo  Sviiute  ackuowliHl^c^l  him
MS  eiuiHiror.  Galba  Iiastetiud  fnim  Spain  lu  Bumu,
wbero  hD  liuguu  by  f.Hl)iiig  to  iict^uunt  those  favour-
ites of  Nero  who  batl  cnricbud  Lhumselvos  by  pro-
Bcriptious  and  eontiacutiuiis  and  by  the  extraordi-
nary prodigality  of  tbul  emp^'ror ;  but  it  was  found
that  most  of  tbcm  bad  nirejuly  dissipated  their
ill-gottou  wealtU.  Giilbu,  or.  rather,  tbe  intimates
wbu  governed  him,  tbeu  proceeiled  against  the
purohuers  of  their  properly,  and  vonllHcatious
became  again  tbe  unler  of  the  day.  Tbo  new
enipPHir,  at  tim  samu  timo,  uxi'rciHiMl  great  par-
siriony  in  lits  adniiuiHtratiou,  uiid  tMidoavonnnl
to  unforvti  strict  ditioipUuu  aitiuug  tbo  soldiers,
who  liiid  born  uhiuI  to  the  prmligulity  and  license
of  tbe  previous  ivigu.  Being  past  seventy  years
of  age,  Galba,  ou  this  aud  other  accounts,  soou  be-


camo  tbo  object  of  popular  dislike  atid ridicule,
and  revolts  against  bini  broke  out  in  varinu.iqiiar
tors,  otiveralof  wliieb  were  put  dotrn  and  pnni&tiMl
severely. Galba  thonght  of  stn'ugtbvning  lumself
by  adopting  Piso  LiriniauuH,  a  youug  patririiui  of
conNiderable  iH^rsonnl  merit,  as  C'licsur  uud  bin  sue-
ci-Nsor  ;  uiMUi  nliich  Olbo,  «  ho  bati  ux|MX^ted  to  be
tbu  objert  of  Iuh  choice,  fonnvd  u  couspirocy  aint)U)[
till'  Guardis  who  pri>cluimed  bim  em))erur. GsIIib,
iinubk'  to  walk,  caused  himself  to  bo  rorried  id  i
litter,  hoping  to  Happress  the  mutiny  ;  but,  at  iLe
u]>pearunce  of  OtboV  armed  partiMiUH,  bin  fuUuv-
ors  left  bim,  and  oven  the  litter-Wai^rs  threw  tlu
old  man  down  and  ran  away. Soniu  of  the  legino-
ariesooiue  up  aud  put  Galba  to  de-ntb,  af)>cr  areiga
of  only  abveu  mouths,  connting  from  ibu  limenT
Nero's  deatJi, <v.»- CiS. Gnlba was Miveuty-tfi
yeare  old  wlion  be  wa«  taken  ofT. He  vm  uu-
ceeded  by  Otbo  (8uet.  Galba;  Tae.  1/ul.  i.4foll;
Dio  Cass.  Ixili.  29,  Ixiv.  1  foil.).

OalA  (yoX^). Probably  a  siiecles  of  weasrl

See  I-'AEI.t.S.

Oaiea  [Kfjovos,  poet.  Knpvs,  Krj\'j().  A  bclmrt,
raN(|uc.  The  helmet  was  originally  raa4leor6kinnt
lentber,  wheuco  is  supposed  to  Imvn  arisen  itn  ip-
pellutiou,  Kvpt't],  meaning  profierly  a  lK>lm«tuf  doe-
skin, but  applietl  to  caps  or  lielmetA  mode  of  tlie
bide  of  other  animals,  not  nocetMurily  worn  m  >^
ttiouT  {ravpiii,  KTiiit},  Horn.  II.  x.  iM,  ;C(5;  luyfl■^
Orf.  xxiv.  aSO;  Herod,  vit.  77;  galea  /(ipiss,  m-
pert.  iv.  II,  19),  and  ovcli  to  thoso  which  wen?  fii-
tJiely  wf  bronze  or  Iron  {Od.  xvlil.  S77).  Tb*  tr»th-
<>ni  basis  of  the  helmet  was  also  ver>'  comuAil;
KtrL-ngClicued  and  adorned  by  the  iMlrlttton  nfel-
Ib^T  l»Toi)W  or  gold  ill.  xi.  ;i.'i*2).  !Ielmets  vUA
bad  n  metallic  biuiis  were  in  Latin  projtorly  i-alM
rriHio'ffrs  (Tac.  Oerm.  G),  although  tbe  lorns  ^'m
atid  ms«ja  are  often  confoaoded  A  casque  (ofiii
fouml  at  Pompeii  is  preserved  in  tbe  oollectiaa  u
Goodrich  Couri  in  EugUud. The  pexfonlioasfor


Hdm«U iFrom  tbe  rotlMtlAO  si  Gooiricb  CmH)

the  lining  and  exterior  border  are  visible  tUof
its  e<lgo.  Among  the  niatorials  u.M.-d  for  the  UauiS
of  belmete  were  felt  [jrlXoi-,  //.  K.  2(i5;  and  «[»!■£*
{Aristot.  H.J.  V.  16).

Tbo  helmet,  especially  tbat  of  skin  or  iMthtfi
was  sumottmes  a  mere  cap  confonned  to  thf>iJut<t
of  tbe  head,  without  either  crest  or  any  olh*T«n*
ment.  In  this  state  it  was  probably  nsod  io  boni-
ing  (gafta  rotatoria,  C.  Nep.  IMI.  iii  8).
and  waa  called  KarmTvi,  iu  Latin  rwi»-
The  preceding  tlliistiation  shows  snri*
auiple  of  U  no  worn  by  Diomedr  In  «  «»»Q
Greek  bronxe,  which  is  also  in  tin-  "''^
led  ion  at  Goodrich  Court.  Tbe  ad(liii)Ki<
by  which  the  external  appeMaUM  of  (^
btlmet  was  varied,  and  whioh  Hf<r«l
both  for  omamect  and  prvt«<clJon,  ""W
the  following  :  (ll  The  <^oi;,  i»hith  wM
either  single. double  (d;j^t(^X»i,A<'^*^*'
or  quadruple  (rrrpdi^Xor),  ll  ha»  ^"^^
held  tbat  the  (ftaiXat  was  tht-  projeruot
jteak  of  the  heJmet. Acoonltug  t»  ti»'


Tiew,  Trrpa^aXos  U  iulinitt«dly  unintelltgilile,  and
il  i»  certain  that  tbe  (ftoXot  naa  a  ricj^e  of  mntal,
afturwunlii  cjiUed  naiyot  {Buttmanu),  which  nervwl
ji»  a  «ii[t{tort  lor  the  citM.  Iiiht.-iuceji  incur  where
thfirc  are  tM-o  or  uiore  ^iich  iiili;ri*.  In  the  illus-
tration V>«li>w,  fi'oiii  a  ^t^m  with  the  Iteail  of
Aibeud  Furlheiioa,  tUc  <l>a\ot  arc  repretKUtcd  by


Helmcta {Frniii  g««B.1

«  Sphiux  and  twu  I'eyui.  (2)  The  faelmot  thm
ailoniiil  woB  vcrj'  couiimiuly  Biinnourit«d  by  thu
i^ittfil  (fri#(a,  Ao<^>.  which  wan  often  of  liorse-hait
(Tmrnfpiv,  limo^dfTtta.  hirauta  iuba,  I'roptni.  iv.  XI,
IH),  anil  mufU'  h<i  ak  t<t  took  iniposiiiK  ami  terrible.
The  Iiclini't  often  had  two  or  even  three  prests  (,cf
the  illHstmtioei  iilwve  with  the  hpjMl  of  AtbeniS,
baviiij;  a  bi'liut't  with  a  tripl«  cromt).  In  the  Ro-
man aniiy  nf  hitor  titnw  thr  cnwl  B«rv»Ml  not  ouly
for  oniatiif'iil,  hut  ulw>  tu  iliNLiiij^uisb  tbu  cniiluri-
•ooa  (Veget.  ii.  13).  Tlie  auiiexod  illuatratiou  from
a  part  of  a  centnrioii'>i  tomb,
from  Petn>ufll,ahowH  the  trauK*
veme  oroat.  (3)  Tbo  two  cbeek-
piecei  (  fcir«il/iW',  wapaycatft'Sjt ),
which  wf^re  iiittinlly  attacbcil  tu
tbr  helmet  tiy  )iiug«s.  so  a»  to
lie  tin«il  lip  and  down.  They
biul  buttons  or  tit-a  at  their  cs-  .,  ,
trciniticH  for  fastening  the  bel-
met  on  the  head.  A  itt.ra)>  (iiuott'il  under  the  wear-
er's chin,  in  the  oanw*  of  the  Ilomerio  helmet  </f.  iii.
371),  hnt  Hi>pareully  obeek-piecea  were  not  uiova-
blc.  (4)  The  1>enver,  or  vi»or,  a  peuiiliar  form  of
which  l«  Hnp]Kmed  to  have  heou  the  avXiuntt  rpv-
(fiaXtut — !■  u  the  |H!ifonite<I  1>eaTcr  (Horn  IK  x\.
riSuh  Tbo  gtadiatont  wore  be]met«  Aomt^what  a{
Hlhia  kind  (jitv.  viii.  'iU3),  and  speeimeun  uf  thutn,
~hot  ntiliko  tho«e  worn  iti  tbo  3i]i<blU!  Ages,  have
■•eeu  fuintd  at  PoiD)Kiii. See  tbo  illuBtrntioQ  to

(■LA1IIATOKE8.

OaJeiiQB,  Cl^VnU's  (KAaviioc  ruAij^dt).  A  ce!e-
bmted  Grcok  physician,  Iwmi  at  PwrguniuM  aliont
A.l>>  151.  ni»  fatht-r  gav**  liiin  a  lilx-ral  edncattoti.
Uis anatomical  and nu-dieal Hliidieti were  com*

■■iCDoed  nndiT  ButyniH,  a  ceUOiratcd anHtomint ;

nfttratnnicuK,  a  diM-iple  uf  the  Hippooratic  8cbool ;
and  AcAi-brion,  a  follower  of  the  Kmplricii.  Afl-er
the  death  of  his  father  be  travelled  to  A.lexandrin,
at  that  time  t lie  most  famnns  Heboid  of  tnodlcine  in
the  world.  His  studies  were  so  ctuccciwfully  pur-
•tted  that  be  was  publicly  invit«d  to  return  to  bitt
native  country.  At  tbo  agf*  of  thirty-fnur  h«>  9«t-
(letl  at  Rome,  whorr  hii»  ci-'lchrity  be<rnni«  ku  great
from  the  »ucoe««  of  bin  pnkctiui>,und  inoix>  e^Hpecial-
ly  from  bin  griutt  knowledge  of  luintorny,  llmt  he
i)iii<'kly  drew  upon  btm)M?tf  thi>  jealoimy  of  all  the
Koman  pbyttioiaUB.  lie  became  ithysician  to  the
emprntr  Miucns  Anrcliu«,  aiid  at  t))i>  M>beitattoi)
nf  iimny  pbilosoplters  and  men  of  rank,  be  com-

•is


uieuced  a  conne  of  lectures  ou  anatomy;  but  the
Jealousy  of  bis  rtvala  quickly  compelled  bim  to
diseoutiuue  tbeni,  and  eventually  to  leave  Rome
altogether,  being  in  daily  fear  of  otstiiMination.
Mauy  particular  of  bift  lif«  may  Ik*  guthcred  from
bi»  UMH  writings;  itoibing  \s  kiinwn,  huwt-ver,
alxint  tbo  t^^riml  of  bJH  n-inni  Ii'kih*  u«  >vo1I  as
that  of  liiA  death.  All  that  can  ^h-  1eariie«I  in  mere-
ly that  be  was  «tiU  Uvlug  in  the  relgu  of  Septimlna
Severn  6.

(jalvn  vftta  a  most  pri^litic  writer.  Tbougli  aev-
eral  of  bin  works  were  dc»trt»yi-d  ia  the  conliugra*
tion  of  bis  ilwelling,  and  otbeis  by  the  lap»e  of
tima,  Hiill  tbe  following  pn>dnctioii%  tpf  liiit  now
exiat  In  jiriut :  {ll  Eigbty-three  tn'atises,  the  gen-
uluciieH  of  which  iit  now  well  eHtabliahed.  (ti)
Nini'tiwit  of  ralber  dniiblfiil  origin,  (3)  Forly-6ve
that  are  certainly  Kpnhouit.  (-1}  Nineteen  frng-
nn-iilH,  more  or  les*  exteiinive  in  nix*'.  (5)  Fifteen
cumumiitarien  on  The  workit  of  lllpp<H-ratc«.

Among  tbu  pnidui::tioiiM  of  tialen  thai  an^  of  a
pbitoMjphivol  eharucter  may  bt;  i-nnmcrated  the
following:  A  tivatise  ugaimd  Favirriniut:  a  dis-
sertation on  tbc>'  o]iin)ciiiH  of  IlippucratcA  and
Pluto;  u  eomnKitilary  on  tlie  Timaeiifl  of  Plato,
and  several  diseounu^s  on  Dialecliett.  Hac  DlcU,
L>e  Vraienx  Jlittoria  I'hiloaopha  (lionu,  \li'V).

Ojierative  surgery  in  the  de|iartnieut  of  bis
pnifeatnion  wbicb  is  lejust  inilebted  to  him;  and
yet  even  bore  be  Inm  left  Home  iiiomimentH  of  hia
bnldtiecfl  and  ingenuity.  H«  hoa  described  mi-
nnlely  an  openilion  performed  by  bim  n^Mtu  the
cheat  of  a  young  man,  by  wliinb  be  perforated  the
hreaat-bono  and  laid  ban;  tlie  heart,  in  order  1i>
give  vent  to  a  collection  of  nmtter  seated  in  the
thorax.  The  itiibject  of  ulcers  is  bandb-tl  by  bim
very  Hcicutilically  in  his  iMiok  I)r  Mrthtdn  Stcdrt-
di  lOfpairrvTuc^  M/^oftos),  His  ctrmmeiitaries  on
Hipiwerates  show  bis  aciinaintunce  with  fracl-
nres  and  dislocations.  The  subject  of  hygiene
('YTifira)  he  treated  at  great  Iciigtb  in  a  work  con-
sisting of  six  books.  Ilin  treatise  Dt  Facultatt
Jtimriftonnn  (lUp'i  Tptifpity  Htvi'iiittws)  contains
very  important  observations  on  t  he  nainre  of
foods,  and  funuHlies  an  exposition  of  bit  npiiiiuii
on  (be  subject  of  dietctict^  Materia  Mediru  and
PUurwaey  apfiear  to  have  btwu  Ihe  olijects  of  bis
particular  Atudy.und  iKith  are  handled  by  bim  in
fteveral  of  bis  works.  IIir>  treatise  Hr  t'omjmvUii/nf
Meiiicamenlorum  Smfrttittm  LfH'on  (n«^i  ^wditriaK
*ap/i«icu>c  rvv  Kirrii  Twrrrn'f)  coiitairm  a  cnpKnis  liHt
of  jdiarmaceutical  preparations.  Of  all  bis  worka,
none  was  lung  so  nnicb  ntudird  and  conuueuted
upon  as  the  one  en  til  led  Ari>  MrilUvi  (Tt;^i/ii 'Itrrpincii),
n  general  oiittlue  of  mvdicintt.  In  soventl  works
be  gi  ves  utj  elaborate  system  of  the  arterial  puloef,
wbiob,  as  usual  with  his  doctrincH,  was  taken  up
by  all  subsecjueiit  writers;  and  abridged  eximsi-
tio[i8  of  it  may  be  found  in  Philar^tus,  PhuIuh
Aogiueta,  Actiiarius,  Khazes,  and  Avicentis.  The
best  c<litloii  of  Galen  is  that  of  KUbu,  W  vols.
(Leipzig.  ie21-1833).  See  Uiuemberg,  Z>r*  Con-
HttintiiHceii  ^r  iiatien  (Paris,  1B41);  the  epitoum  tu
English  by  Coxc  (Pbibideli>bia,  lri<46);  Derdoe,
Oriifin  and  Grotfth  of  Ihe  Uenliitg  Art  (Londuu,
IHHHi;  and  the  articles  Chikukuia  ;  MF.DlcniA.

Oaleomyomachia  (rnXfo/it'o/inj^jo).  ''Tlie  fiat-'*
lie  of  the  (.'alH  and  Alice:''  a  poem  written  in  tbe
mock-heroic  vein  by  a  Greek  tnouk,  Tbeoilorus
Prodromus  (q.  v.),  who  lived  iu  tbe  twulOh  cen-
tury A.l>. it in  in tlie  nmin  imitated from tbo


GAtEOTAE


706


GALLI


Ualoma  (Ha
ClKiul.Cii^ra-
•hL  p.  lUUl.


peeado- Homeric  Bulmchoniyoinachia  (q.  v.). An
edition  nI  it  watt  piitiUHbi-tl  by  Ilgeti  (Halloj  1796).

Oaleotae. See  Galrl's.

Oftlepaua  (rnXr^^ir}.  (1)  A  towu  in  Macodoiiia,
on  till?  Tornriaic  OuW  (Ht-rud.  vii.  122).  ('i)  A  colo-
ny i>f  Tiinso!*,  (Ill  tbb  I'uaat  of  Tlirac*!  (Tbiic.  iv.  lOT),

OalerlcQJum. iyo*-  GAi^ftt'H.

OaleriuB  Maximi&uua. 8co  Maxuiuxus.

OaleriuB  TrachaiuB. Si-o  Tkachalls.

Oalerui  ur  Oaletum,  (liiii.  Oaleiictilum  (prub-
ably  Cdiiiiected  with  yttha,  auil  cu  with  yakifj).
Originally  n  cap  o(  Hkiii  or  lur,  lil-
ting c](»H!  to  tlie  lifjid.  wiini  liy  niH-
tio  (Vcrt;.  iford.  1*^2),  buiiter*  (Orat.
Ct/nrg.  'Mi\,  trlicif  it  iH  uf  l>adger-Hkiii).
g^'iatiaMtH  in  tbv  italuuslni  C<i  kt^up  lln-
bair  clejin  (Mart.  xiv.  fiO},  ami  by  ibt*
old  itdiabitaiilH  of  Laliiim  iiintt-jul  of
a  lielmet  ( ViTg.  .lew,  vii,  Gr*8;  cf.
Cui><»).  Kor  tbw  galeras  worn  by  va-
rious priesta — e.  g.  tlie  Pontilicfs  Salii  and  Flnmi"
lios  and  lli<>  albotfiilentH  ur  icfhuji  ijalerua  of  tbct  Dia-
liti — we  Apkx.  Tim  wnrd  ih  iiImo  applied  tu  a  wig,
the  enip/i  capiU'i  ul'  Ovid  (J.  A.  \\\.  H'>5  ;  cf.  CaLIKN-
DRLk;  Coma)  ;  nutn  nut  i>iily  from  vanity  ur  to
C4>iiL*L-al  bablncHM  (Siit-t.  OM.  1'3),  but  fur  tbu  saku  tif
disgiiiHi;  by  ]u*uliigaU:d  uf  botli  M-xett  in  tbcir  not--
turaul  rainldcB  (Jiiv.  vi.  l'.W,  nitb  tbe  »cbul.);
nud  on  tbo  stage  ua  part  of  tUo  uiakc-up  (tiabl
and  Koner,  Otb  eti.  p.  Ifil).

Oaldstu. Se«  0Aiai»t.i8.

Oaleus  (r(iX«ut:).  That  i»  "  tbo  tlzanl/*  son  of
Apollo  and  TlioiiiiKto,  tVoni  uboia  tbc  (jalrutae,
a  family  of  Sicilian  soothsaytM^,  derived  tlieir  ori-
gin.  T]io  principal  tt«at  of  die  Galeolae  watj  ibo
town  of  llybia,  wbiob  was  beiico  called  Qaieotia
or  Galoatio.

Oalllaea  (rnXiXai'a,  ftom  tltc  Hebrew  tfaW,  **»
circle"  or  "circnit''),  A  Cflb'brated  eouiilry  of
Paltftttinu.  funnirifr  the  iiurthem  divi»ii>ii.  Icms-
pbna  {HfU.  lad.  iii.  'A)  divider  it  into  Upper  and
Lower,  and  U«  »tateH  that  the  limita  of  Qalilei!
were,  on  tbo  suutU,  8uniuri»  and  ^tcythopolia  to
tbe  Ituod  of  Jordan.  Il  contained  four  triben —
luactiar,  Zebnluu,  ^apbtUaii,  and  Asber — a  part
also  of  Dan,  and  part  of  I'eraea,  or  tbe  country
beyond  Jordan.  Upper  Galilee  waa  mouutainons,
and  waa  called  Ga1ile«  of  tbs  Gentiles  from  tbe
heathen  tiaiiuns  esrabtiHbed  there  who  were  eua-
bleil,  by  the  mumitainoittt  Jiatunj  of  the  country,  to
maintain  themftelveit  against  alt  iiivadere.  Slrabo
eQuuirnite6  anioiig  its  inbubitani-s,  Egyptians,  Ara'-
bbuj»,  and  I'lKBuicianH.  Lowtir  Galilee,  wbiob  eoii-
talued  the  tribes  i.>f  Zebnlon  and  Aaber,  was  adja-
cent to  tbe  Sea  of  TibcriaH  or  Lake  of  Geuuesarotb.
Galilee,  according  to  losepbua,  was  very  populous,
ootitainMl  204  cities  and  towim,  and  paid  31X1  tal-
entH  in  tribute.  It«  principal  city  waa  Cae-Ksren
Philippi.  Tbe  iuhabitauts  of  Ualilaea  were  very
iuduHtrious,  and,  being  bold  and  intrepid  HuUUerK,
tbey  bravely  rcaistcd  the  uatlona  around  tbeui.
The  Jewa  of  ludaoa  regarded  tbem  with  umcb
Donteoipt.  Their  latignage  was  a  comipt  and  itn-
polishtKl  dtateot  of  fSyriac,  with  a  mixture  of  other
languageB.  It  waa  probably  this  corrupt  dialect
that  ted  to  tbe  det«ction  of  Petor  oh  une  of  Christ's
diM^iplea  (Mark,  xiv.  70).  The  Havionr  was  called
aGatiteau  (Matt,  xxvi.OU},  because  be  wuh  brought
ap  at  Nazareth,  a  city  uf  Galilaea ;  aud  as  bia  ajioa-


priecd

1


ties  were  naoatly,  if  not  all,  natires  of  this  pror*
incc,  they  also  are  calleil  Galileans  and  "meuof
Galilee"  (Acts,  i.  11).  See  Merrill,  GaliUt  la  Ht
Time  of  Vhrint  ('ill  eil.  1*^),

OaUnthiaa  {TakivOidsU  '^^*  i"  I'^ii".  Oalanthis.
Daughter  of  Proetiis  of  Theliea,  and  a  friend  L'f
Alcinen^.  When  Alcmetn5  wum  uii  tbe  ]>oiut  of
giving  binh  U*  HeraeleH,  and  tbe  Moerae  and  lU-
lliyae,  at  tbe  ruqueHt  of  Heo^,  were  endeavofiHni;
to  delay  the  birth,  Galiuthiaa  anddeuly  ruoheil  ia
with  the  false  report  that  Alcij)eN6  ba«l  given  hirth
tu  a  Huu.  The  hostile  goddesses  were  so  sarpri6«il
by  this  infoi'uialion  that  they  drop)>ed  their
Thus  the  chiirui  was  broken  and  Alcnieufi  wi
abled  t«  give  biriU  to  Heracles.  The  deluded
detunes  avenged  the  deception  practiced  upuu
liy  inelatnnrphnsingGalintliiaK  intua  weasel(y«Xff
Hecate,  hi»wever,  t«Mik  pity  iipun  her  aud  nude  bet
her  attendant,  and  Mi^raclMa  aftHrworda  erected  I
aanctuary  to  her  (Ovid,  Met,  ix.  IfOti).

Oalla.  (l)The  wife  of  Cont^lantiiis,  son  ofCos-
etnntiuit  Chlunnt.  .She  was  the  mother  of  Gallsi
Caesar.  (*2)  The  ttecoml  wife  of  Tbeodosiui  tbt
Great,  (3)  Placidia,  daughter  of  tbo  preeedin;
by  Theodoaius.  When  Alaric  took  Rome  In  A.t>.
410,  abe  fell  into  bis  hands,  and  four  yean  later
was  married  by  Ataulplius,  king  of  the  Goilii
'  Upon  hitt  death  she  was  returned  to  tier  conali;,
I  ati<l  in  417'niarried  Cotistanlins  III.,  by  n  hoai  tls
had  the  enipunir  Valentiuian  III.  iJuring  Ihn  mi-
nority of  her  son  she  was  i-egettt  of  the  We«(«n
Empire,  dying  about  Itio  year  4r>0.  See  Giblwa.
Dtflinr  and  Full,  chaitters  xxxi.,  xxxiii.,  xxxv.

QallaeoU  (KiiXXawin).  The  couutr>*  of  tbe  Gsl-
laeci  or  Callaeci  in  the  north  of  Spain,  betveen
the  AKtnrcK  and  the  Ditrius  (Uio  Caaa.  xxxTti.5}).
ItH  iuhabitaiitH  wi-m  »uine  of  the  must  niicivilim)
ill  Spain.  They  wt-rc  ilcfeated  with  grvat  »lao|fc-
ter  by  D.  BiutiiB,  cuuhiiI  B.C.  13d,  wbu  ubtaitiedut
conseqaence  the  snmaiue  of  Gallnucua.

GaUerjr. 8ee  Cavka  ;  Poirncoa.

OaUey. 8ee  Naxis.

QalUL See  Ckltak  ;  Gaixia.

GkdU  (riiXXot,  in  pont-Uomau  authors  only).  Tl*
eauucli  prienta  of  Cytwl^S  or  the  Great  Mother,  n  In**
wonihip,  BO  far  as  it  can  be  traced  bisi.(irican5,  lii4
!  its  original  scat  in  Pbrygia  (Maruior  Parium,  i^
|C.  Milller,  froffn.  i.  544,  where  it  iit  platwl  nadir
(be  reigu  of  Erich thoiiius,  king  of  Attica.  %-C.
1506;  Strabo,  x.  pp.  409,  472,  xii.  p.  Uu,  wk«l»
the  names  Ki>i3Ai;,  AiyivfArjvi,  etc,  are  said  to  1*
derived  from  Phr>'gian  localities;  KvffAijria^^
TOTTov,  Diod.  liL  58).  Tbe  Phrygian  laugnagv  9»
Indo-European,  as  appears  from  the  extant  iiuoHp-
tiona  (Kawlinsou's^rro<f.  vol.  i.  App.68tf):  atidtb<!
wonhip  of  Cybeli^  bos  been  thought  to  be  alw  Indo-
Ennii»eau  ;  Avestan  names  have  been  Umeed  in  >t
—  Berecyntas  =  BtTftat :  CorylMUit«o=  <?«?««••*
(Labatnt  in  Itrr.  -VamiJrw.  Beige,  1863,  p.  9961.  OtbPr
nainc»,  however,  are  ofdiKtiuctly  Semitic  atnuttifs:
Rhea  perhaps  =  the  Babylonian  Ki  ( Mulita  ur  Mj-
Utta),  and  Nana  more  certainly  =  tlie  Bahylonistt
.V«a<i,  m'Nleru  Syrian  A'ani.

The  origin  of  the  name  of  Galli  is  nut  nhaolotcly
certain,  but  it  was  doubtless  a  native  Pbrrglvi
word;  of  course  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  tti*
Galatae  or  GaiiU,  whose  fir»t  api>eaninc«  Id  tbe*B
coantries  dates  only  from  B.C.  278.  There  i»  00
reason to reject tbe tradition which doiVM


GALLIA


707


GALUA


it  from  a  river  in  Fhrygia ;  there  were  two
small  rivers  called  GalhiB,  both  tributaries  of  tbe
Sftugarins,  aud  tbe  one  which  flows  by  FessiQUs
must  be  meant,  whose  water  was  fabled  to  cause
this  particular  form  of  religions  madness  (Ovid,
Fast.  iv.  363;  Plio.  H.  JV:  v.  $  147,  li.  $  2fil,  xixi.
$  9).  A  form  gallantes,  as  if  from  gallare,  "  to  rave
like  a  priest  of  CybeW,"  is  cited  from  Varro  (ap.
Non.  p.  119,  5).  In  their  wild,  euthusiastic,  aud
boisterons  rites  the  Galli  recalled  the  legends  of
the  Corybantes  {q.  v.).  According  to  au  aucient
custom,  they  were  always  castrated  (apadonea,
temintareSf  Bemiriri,  neo  riri  nee  /eminae),-  and  it
would  seem  that,  impelled  by  religious  euthnsi-
asm,  they  perfomied  this  operation  on  themselvea
(Ovid,  Faat.  iv.  237 ;  Plin.  H,  N.  xi.  $  261,  xxiv.  $
165;  Martial,  iii.  61,  xi.  74 ;  Juv.  vi.  512  foil. ;  Ca-
tnll.  Attia). See  Rhea.

OalUa.  An  extensive  and  populous  country  of
Europe,  bonuded  on  the  west  by  the  Atlantic,  on
tlie  north  by  the  Insula  Batavorum  and  part  of  tbe
Rhenns  (Rhine),  on  the  east  by  the  Rlieuns  and
the  Alps,  aud  on  the  sonth  by  the  Pyrenees.  The
greatest  breadth  was  600  English  miles,  but  much
diminished  towards  each  extremity.  Its  length
was  from  460  to  620  miles.  It  was  therefore  more
extensive  than  modem  France  before  the  Revolu-
tion, though  inferior  to  the  Empire  under  Napo-
leon I.  Gaul  was  originally  divided  %raong  the
three  great  peoples — the  Belgae,  the  Celtae,  and
tbe  Aqnitani.  The  Romans  called  the  inbabit-
aute  of  this  country  by  one  general  name,  Gallt,
while  the  Greeks  styled  them  KcXrai.  (See  Cel-
taS.)  The  Greeks  called  the  couutry  itself  Ga-
latia  (raXari'a)  and  Celtica  (KcXtik^).  Of  the  three
great  natious  of  Gaul,  tbe  Celtae  were  the  most  ex-
tensive and  the  Belgae  the  bravest.  The  Belgae
and  Celtae  were  of  like  blood,  though  differing  in
temperament,  the  Betgae  being  more  staid  aud  less
impulsive  and  vivacious,  while  tbe  Celtae  ebowed
tbe  mercurial  disposition  of  the  modem  French.
Tbe  Aquitaui,  on  tbe  south,  were  of  a  different  (Iberi-
an) stock,  unlike  the  rest  of  the  Gauls  both  physi-
cally and  temperameu  tally,  being  dark  of  complex-
ion, less  sociable,  and  somewhat  less  intelligent,
but  more  tenacious  of  purpose  and  enduring —
traits  which  still  mark  the  inhabitants  of  the
Basque  provinces  to-day.  The  Celtae  extended
from  the  Sequaua  (Seine)  in  the  north  to  the  Ga-
mmna  (Garonne)  iu  tbe  south.  Above  the  Celtae
lay  tbe  Belgae,  between  the  Seine  and  the  Low-
er Sblne.  They  were  intermixed  with  Germanic
tribes.  The  Aqnitani  lay  between  the  Garonne
and  the  Pyrenees,  and  were  intermingled  with
Spanish  tribes.  These  three  great  divisions,  how-
ever, were  subsequently  altered  by  Augustus  (B.C.
37),  who  extended  Aquitania  into  Celtica  as  far  as
tbe  Liger  or  Loire ;  the  remainder  of  Gallia  Celti-
ca above  the  Liger  was  called  Gallia  Lugdunen-
siH,  from  the  colony  of  Lngdunnm  (Lyons) ;  while
the  territory  towards  the  Rhine  was  added  to  the
Belgae  nnderthe  title  of  GaluaBbloIca.  Lastly,
the  south  of  Gaul,  which,  from  having  been  the
first  provinces  possessed  by  the  Romans,  had  been
styled  Gallia  Provincia,  was  distinguished  by  the
name  of  Narbonensis,  from  the  city  of  Narbo
(Narbonne).  This  province  was  also  anciently
called  Gallia  Bracata,  from  the  braoae  or  trousers
worn  by  the  inhabitants ;  while  Gallia  Celtica
was  styled  Comata,  from  the  long  hair  (coma)
worn  by  the  natives. These  four  great  provinces,


in  later  ages,  were  called  tbe  four  Gauls,  and  sub-
divided into  seventeen  others.

As  far  back  as  one  can  penetrate  into  the  histo-
ry of  the  West,  we  find  the  race  of  the  Gauls  oc-
cupying that  part  of  the  continent  comprehended
between  the  Rliine,  the  Alps,  the  Medit«rrauean,
the  Pyrenees,  and  tbe  Ocean,  as  well  as  tbe  two
great  islands  situated  to  the  northwest,  opposite
tbe  months  of  the  Rhine  and  Seine.  Of  these  two
iatands,  the  one  uearor  the  continent  was  called
Atb-in, "  Whit«  Island"  (cf.  the  remark  of  Pliuy,  H.
N.  xiv.  16,  Albion  insula,  aic  dicta  ab  albia  rupibua
qtias  mare  alluit").  Tlie  other  island  bore  the
name  of£r-iii,"Isleof  the  West"  (from  EiroTlar,
"the  west").  The  continental  territory  received
tbe  special  appellation  of  Galltachd,  "  Land  of
the  Gauls."  From  this  word  tbe  Greeks  formed
raXort'a,  aud  from  this  latter  tbe  generic  name  of
FaXarot.  The  Romans  proceeded  by  an  inverse
method,  and  from  the  geuerio  term  Galli  dednce<1
the  geographical  denomination  Gallia.

The  population  of  Gaul  was  divided  into  fam-
ilies or  tribes,  forming  among  themselves  many
distinct  communities  or  nations.  Oftentimes  they
united  together,  in  their  turn,  and  formed  confed-
erations or  leagues.  Snch  were  the  confederatious
of  the  Celtae,  Aedui,  Anuorici,  Arverni,  etc.

The  Ganl  was  robust  aud  of  tall  stature.  His
complexion  was  fair,  his  eyes  blue,  his  hair  of  a
blond  or  chestnut  colour,  to  which  he  endeav-
oured to  give  a  red  or  flaming  hue  by  certain  ap-
plications (Pliny,  H.  X.  xiviii.  12;  Mart.  viii.  33).
The  hair  itself  was  worn  long  (Diod.  Sic.  v.  38).
Tbe  beard  was  allowed  to  grow  by  the  people  at
large;  the  nobles,  on  the  other  hand,  removed  it
from  the  face,  excepting  the  upper  lip,  where  they
wore  thick  moustaches.  Tbe  attire  common  to  alt
the  tribes  consisted  of  trousers  or  bracae  (Armoric) .
These  were  of  striped  materials.  They  wore  also
a  short  cloak,  having  sleeves,  likewise  formed  of
striped  materials,  aud  descending  to  tbe  middle
of  the  thigh.  Over  this  was  thrown  a  short  cloak
or  aagum  (aae,  Armorio ;  cf.  laidor.  Orig.  xix.  34),
striped  like  the  shirt,  or  else  adorned  with  flowers
and  other  ornamental  work,  and,  among  the  rich,
superbly  embroidered  with  silver  aud  gold  (Verg.
Aen.  viii.  660;  Sil.  Ital.  iv.  152;  Diod.  Sic.  v.  28).
It  covered  the  back  and  shoulders,  and  was  secured
under  the  chin  by  a  clasp  of  metal.  The  lower
classes, however,  wore  in  placeof  ittheskiuof  some
animal,  or  else  n  ^ick  and  coarse  woollen  cover-
ing. The  offensive  arms  of  the  nation  were,  at
first,  hatchets  and  knives  of  stone;  arrows  point-
ed with  flint  or  shells;
clubs ;  spears  hardened
in  the  fire,  and  uamed
gaia  (in  Latin  gaeaum,
in  Greek  yaio-oy  and
yat<ro£ ) ;  and  others
called  cate'ia,  which
they  hurled  wbileon  fire
against  the  enemy.  For-
eign trafiBc,  however,
made  them  acquainted,
in  process  of  time,  with
arms  of  iron,  as  well  as
with  the  art  of  manufacturing  them  for  themselves
from  the  copper  and  iron  of  theirown  mines.  Among
the  arms  of  metal  which  thenceforward  came  into
use  may  be  mentioned  the  long  sabre  of  iron  or  cop-
per and  a  pike  resembling  the  halberd,tbe  wound  in-


Head  of  OftoL (VIUs  Amendola.  y


GALLIA


708


GALLIA


tlicti-<lUy  wliich  wa«c(>tuii(lon<d  mortal.  Fur  a  lung
tiuif  tbe  Tniiwul[iiue'  aa  w«li  us  tlio  Ciaulpiue  war-
riore  of  the  Gnllic  tthca  bad  rejected  tlie  use  of  de-
fi.'ii8ire  armour  as  incouBiBtetit  witli  triio  courage,
and  a  point  of  lioiioiir  bnd  indticod  tbem  eveu  tn
Bl.ij]*  (»tf  tlii'ir  vi'fttnK'UtB  «ihI  ciigugc  naked  wltb
llir  (mi.  Thia  pi'tijiidiuo,  Imwever,  vras  nlniost  en-
tirely t'fl"ncwl  in  tbt'  seconi]  century  wUeii  the  niili-
tAry  Ro«tuiuu  of  Rome  and  Grettco  formed  n  diujznlar
comliiiintion  witb  tlieiiueient  nrniy  oflbeOiinl.  To
II  helmet  of  inelul.  iifgrvaterorleas  vulneneeonling
In  r  be  fort  niie  of  the  warrior,  were  attaclied  the  boms
of  an  elk,  hnllalo,  or  stag;  'nhile  for  tbe  rich  there
woj*  a  beadfii«!e  rcpivcenting  wime  bii-d  or  savage
Wtwt.  tbe  whole  being  enrtnoinited  by  a  buucb  of
fwitherw,  which  gave  t»  the  warrior  n  gigaotie  ap-
peamnt'e  (Dioii.  8ie.  v.  W).  Simitar  figure*  were
iithii  hell  li>  their  bnckbim,  which  were  loug,  qnad-
riin)-nbir.  J4nd  painted  with  the  brightest  colonra.
A  btiL-kler  iiud  oaMiiie  afti<r  tbin  nioilfl,  a  eninua
of  wrought  luetal.  lifter  the  Oreek  unil  Himiaii
fttshion,  or  n  cont  of  uinil  formed  of  irmi  riiigH,  sf-
tfr  tbe  muniu-r  of  Gaul  iVarr.  J..  L.  iv.  'Hh  :  au
ftiionnous  sabre  hauging  on  the  rigbt  tbigb,  and
«n»peDded  by  cliaine  of  iron  or  brass  from  u  belt
gHtreriiig  with  gold  mid  silver,  and  a(b>nie(l  with
rorni ;  a  collar,  bracelets,  i-iiigs  of  gulit  aronnd  the
arm  ami  on  the  niiddlt*  finger  (Pliny,  xxxiii.  1) ;
iroiiaers;  uoajrum  hanging  frvtii  thu  shoulder:  uud
long  red  moustacbua — auab  was  ttfi  Gallic  wnr-
rior.

Hanly,  daring,  iinpetnouR,  Ixini.  an  it  were,  for
martini  achievenitfniM.  llie  Callic  race  potwRAHcd,
&t  tbe  same  time,  an  ingeiiioiiH  and  iictive  tnm
of  mind.  Tbey  wui-e  not  slow  in  e»|nnlliiig  tbtir
PiKcuician  and  Grecian  iDtttruct-ont  in  the  iirl  of
niiuing.  The  same  superiority  to  wbieh  tb«  Spati-
ianlH  hart  attained  in  tempering  atfwl,  tbo  Ganla
uninired  in  the  preparatiou  of  bras*.  Antiiiuity
ntutignH  li>  them  the  hononr  of  various  iis^fal  tu-
vi>ntiiiiitii,  wbicli  luid  liitberto  escnpwl  the  cArlier
ntvilixatiou  of  the  Eii-st  and  of  Italy.  Tbe  process
<if  tinning  wa«  di/wovered  by  the  Bituriges;  that
of  venoeriirg  by  the  Aedui  (Pliuy,  H.  .Y.  xx.xiv.  17),
The  ilyes,  toKi.  uf  Giinl  were  not  without  reputa-
tion (Pliny,  viii.  48}.  In  agriculture,  tbo  wbe«.l-
plnngli  anil  boulter  wero  ftallir.  liiHcoveriea  (Pliny,
II  .V.  xviii.  IS;  xviii.  11),  With  the  OanlR,  t-tKj,
<irigiaiitc(l  tbo  oiu])toyiucnt  of  uiarl  for  enriching
the  soil  I  Pliny,  xviii.fi  foil.).  The  obeeHtu  of  Mount
LoKiTe,  nmoug  tUoGabali;  tbone  of  NeniauHnB;  and
two  kinils  made  nmoug  the  AlpA,  became,  in  time,
tnnoh  iKiQglit  aft«r  by  the  inhabitanta  of  Italy
(Pliuy,  xi.  4i>).  Tbe  Gauls  also  prepared  various
kinds  of  reniient4-d  drinks,  such  as  barloy-be«r,
vailed  frrrlnia  (Pliny,  xxii.  1&);  and  likowise  an-
•■tber  kind  of  beer,  miMle  from  com,  and  in  which
honey,  camin,  and  other  iugredieiits  were  inin-
gle<i.  fSeo  Cekvjsia,)  Tbo  fmtli  of  beer  was
finployfMl  as  a  nn»ftu«  fur  leuvt-iiing  bread  :  it  wiis
used  also  as  a  cosmetic,  ami  the  (taUio  women  fre-
iliirntly  applietl  it  Ut  the  fac«,  under  the  l>el iff  that
it  impHi-teil  a  fi-esbneas  to  the  complexion  (I'Hny.
xxii.  i^>.  It  was  from  Ihe  Greeks  of  Mnssilia  that
thoy  learneil  tlie  pi-oce««  of  making  wine,  as  well
as  the  culture  of  Ibe  grajw.

The  dwellings  of  tbe  Gauls,  spocions  and  of  a
round  form,  were  constnicted  <if  posts  and  bnnllc-s,
and  covered  with  clay  lioth  within  and  without;
a  large  roof,  composed  of  uak-MliiugU-M  and  stubble,
or  of  straw  cut  and  kneaded  with  clay,  cu%ei^the


whole  (Vitrav.  t.  I),  tjanl  cuntaiu*Ml  both  op«Q
villages  ami  cities  :  the  latter,  nurtunuded  by  walU,
were  defended  by  a  system  of  fortidcal  ion.  of  which
wc  tiud  uo  example  vlsowlicrc.  Cueear  gives  a  Ae-
scHplioD  of  these  rumpurta(A.  G.  tH.  i^). ToUu


BMtonttoa  of  Vtn  of  HoraMtais. fDtirv?-)

north  and  east,  among  tbe  more  oarage  trihi^
there  were  no  cities  properly  so  ciilleil ;  tb«  ioliab-
itants  resided  for  the  most  part  in  l&t^go euclwon*,
formed  of  trunks  of  trees.

It  wa9,  an  has  been  already  mnarkcil,  tu  nii,
and  in  the  arts  applicable  to  war,  that  tlw  geouu
of  tbe  Gauls  displayed  itself  to  most  advanti^
Thi»  people  uia<le  war  a  regular  profesuoa,  wl^
the  management  of  arms  lieoame  their  favnaritf
employment.  To  bave  a  lino  martial  mien,  toi*^
tniu  for  a  long  jieritHl  strength  and  agility  of  bodr,
was  not  only  a  point  of  honour  for  indiTidnnlslqii
a  duty  to  the  State.  At  regular  inlerrnln,  ih-
yonug  men  went  to  measure  tbi-ir  Kin;  by  a  ginll'-
deposited  with  the  chief  of  (be  village,  atiil  tlK**?
whose  Rorpntence  exceeded  the  ofllcial  HlnnilaM
were  severely  rrprimauded  as  idle  and  iuten)|>rT
ate  persons,  and  were,  bcsidee,  puuisbed  "itb  *
heavy  tine.  In  preparing  for  foreign  ex^>editi•a^
n  chieftain  of  acknowledged  valour  geoenllj
formed  a  email  nrmy  aronnd  him.  cousistin;,  fat
the  niotnt.  part,  of  odventarers  and  volnuteen  v^
bad  llocki-d  to  his  ntaudard ;  tbese  were  to  nUat
with  him  wbftlever  booty  might  be  obtained  b
iutreninl  wnrs,  liowpvnr,  or  d^fennive  ones  iifiu;
ini)>OTtAnce,  IotIpa  of  inf>n  were  forcibly  taiiif-
and  severe  puDisbmenta  were  iuOicivd  on  iIk  i*-
(factory,  such  as  the  Iom  of  ncMva,  earn,  on  tjt.  f*
some  one  of  the  limbs  (Coeo.  B.  O.  vi.  4V  U»T
daugei'ons  crisis  arrived,  the  supreme  chief  vn-
vcnwl  au  armed  council  (Cae»./*.fi.v,6Pi.  AHp'''
sons  able  to  bear  arms  were  com{telU<d  to  «icir1<^
at  tbe  place  aud  day  indicated,  for  the  jtarpat'^
delibenitiug  on  the  Hitiiarioii  of  the  cqDntn-."f
eleiitiug  a  eliief,  and  of  discussing  the  plan  of  ruu-
paign.  It  way*  expressly  provided  by  law  tbai  ■'<*
i  iidiv  idual  xvho  came  last  to  the  placv  of  Tvudrii'""
Abould  bw  eruflly  tortured  in  tbe  prcwticeof ''•"
OMsembled  uiulliiude(Cac!i.  If.  (i.  v.66i.  Thisfvinu
of  OAseuibly  was.  however,  of  rare  occurrenw,  a"^
was  only  resorted  to  iu  the  lost  extremity.  N"'
tber  tnHrmtties  nor  age  freed  the  Gallic  nohl^hnE"
the  iieceBsity  of  accepting  or  seeking  niili"u^
commands.  Oftentimes  were  seen,  ut  tbe  lirul "'
the  forcM,  chieftains  huary  ami  almost  pufocl^l'^l
by  age,  who  could  even  scarcely  retain  thfir  *»'•
on  the  bortM'  which  supported  thero  (Ilirt  /I- "■
viii.  lii).  This  i^>pte  would  have  Wlirwil  tb*'
tbey  dishononrtMl  their  aged  warrittn  by  tii>li>"4(
tbeoi  die  elsewhere thau ou  tbo  6rld  of  hfinU


tiALUA


7(l»


GALUA


^o  tbe  f«rociiy  at  iho  uttnok  and  tn  the  violtmcf
tbo  first  shock  went  milncvil  nearly  all  tLt_'
military  l«otu-ii  of  the  (tauU  uii  \vv*<l  grouuil  atui
It)  pit-cbctl  liRttlv.  Ill  ttiu  moiiutaiiiutia  rogiuus,  oo
the  other  liaii<l,au(lcH{«cial),v  iu  tbc  vast  aud  thick
f«rfst8  of  the  North,  war  had  a  close  rescuibloHce
tn  the  cLaae:  tt  waH  prosecuted  iu  aiuall  jiarties,
Uy  ambiiiNradee  aud  ail  sorle  of  stratagfUiH;  aud
dngH,  trained  up  t4>  [Hirsiit;  men,  travked  nut  and
aiiit^i  ill  eiiuiiaeriiiK  the  foe  (8>itiiiH  Etal.  x.  77;
Oviil,  iltt.  i.  533;  Mart.  iii.  47).  A  Gallic  arnij
generally  carrieil  along  with  it  a  ninltitiide  of
obariottt  for  tbo  baggage,  wbicb  emhuiriuuted  its
march  (Hirt.  li.  (i.  viii.  14 ;  C'aeu.  H.  il.  i.  51).
Cacb  nrorrior  Ixtm  a  Imtidle  of  htmw,  put  up  tike
a  uick,  on  which  hv  won  accimtonicd  to  ttit  in  tbe
eucauipuieiit,  or  even  iu  ihv  litiu  of  batllo  while
wailiug  tbe  signal  to  ougngo  (Ilirr.  B.  G.  viil.  15).

Tbe  Ganla,  like  other  iiationH,  fur  a  long  |>erirMl
Were  in  the  habit  of  killing  iheir  prisonen  of  war,
either  by  vrucifixtou,  or  by  tying  theiit  to  trccx  tu
a  mark  for  llieir  we-iiponit,  or  by  cnnttiguing  theiii
to  tbe  llamcs  amid  crael  rites.  L«mg  prior,  how-
ever, to  tbe  stcotid  century  of  our  eva,  thetw  bar-
bajon»  pmcticeM  wrre  laid  Buido,  and  tUo  oaptivea
of  trauiwlpine  uatioUK  ha«l  uothing  to  fear  but  aer-
vitudc.  Another  rtistom,  uot  leM  suvugi',  that  of
ciittiug  oft'  tho  bcodit  of  tlieir  vlnin  eneniieM  ou  tbe
64rM  of  battle,  vrm  not  slower  in  d i nap] >eii ring.  It
was  long  a  Ketthnl  rule  iu  all  M-ant  that  the  vieto-
rioiis  anny  Hhonld  pooiwtiM  itttelf  uf  Kucb  tropbieii
Its  these;  the  eomnion  Hohlicn  tixed  them  on  tbe
poiutM  of  their  M|K>an(,  the  horHenien  irore  tbom
wspeodod  by  the  huir  from  their  boi-i*ej» ;  aud  in
Uiift  way  tbe  conqnerora  returned  to  their  lionieo,
making  the  air  n>Boinid  nitli  their  triumphal
sbuuts.  Each  one  then  baatelied  to  nail  up  tbeite
Ititleuuti  tcstiiuouials  of  hlti  valour  to  tho  gat<i  of
hi»  tlwelliug:  aud.  ua  tbe  sauio  thing  watt  duiir
with  tbe  trophiett  of  tbe  chose,  a  Gallic  village
horc  a  strung  reaembtauce  to  a  cbamel  •  bonne.
Carefully  eaibaliiied  and  »atnTitt«(l  with  oil  of  ce-
dar, the  beads  of  hostile  chieftains  and  of  famous


Tootti  uf  OkIIic  Ctilvr. (Mut^«  4«  Clutiy,  Porhtl

ftrrtors  were  depoAiteil  iu  large  cnfTorti,  aud  ar-
rsxif^eil  by  their  posseasor  acconliug  to  the  date  of
acqiiititiou.  SomeTimcs  theskiitl.  cK^a»»fdand  set
iu  g*ihl  or  silver,  MTved  as  a  cup  in  llie  temples,  or
circulated  in  tbe  festivities  of  the  batiKpiet,  and  tlie
^iie«t«  dntuk  out  of  it  to  the  gIor>'  of  tlie  victor  and
Ui«  triumphs  of  their  country.  These  tierce  and
hrutal  nmnners  prevailed  for  n  long  period  over  the
wbolu  of  Gnul.  Civtlteatiou,  in  its  onward  march,
abolishisl  them  by  degrect.  until,  at  tbe  comiueuce'
oiuiit  of  tbe  second  centnry.  they  were  coiiHued  to
Ibe  savage  tribe*  of  the  Xorth  and  Vi'est.  It  was
there  that  Fo<4idoninn  fmind  tbeiu  still  existing  in
1  their  vigour,  wheu  this  sight  of  su  many  hnmnu


heads,  di«flgured  by  oatngee  iuid  blackened  by
the  air  aud  the  rain,  roused  iu  him  miugled  euio-
liouB  of  horror  and  i.li6guMt.

The  GauU  uflVete<l,  as  more  mauly  iu  its  ehurac-
I«r,  a  fitroiig  aud  rough  tone  of  voice  (Diod.  81c.  v.
31).  They  couverse4t  but  little,  and  by  ineaus  of
short  aud  concise  pbnwes,  which  tho  coiislaut  use
of  luetapbors  aud  hyperbules  rendered  (ibscuro
aud  almuHt  unintelligible  to  strangers.  But,  when
onoe  aiiiHiate<l  by  dispute,  or  incitad  1iy  somelbilig
that  was  ralciilated  lu  iiilen-st  or  arouse,  at  the
head  of  ;iruiieH  or  in  political  atMeinhlies.  (bey  ex.-
pre^neil  tbcmmrlves  with  copiousness  aud  Uuency.

The  (iauls,  in  guuvral,  were  accused  of  drinking
to  exceM — a  habit  which  took  its  rise  both  iu  the
gtoasueits  of  their  luanuL-m  aud  iu  the  wants  >>f  u
cold  aud  huiuiil  climate.  Tbe  Masslliau  and  Ilal<
iao  tnulers  were  itot  slow  in  funiisbiiig  the  necoa-
sary  means  for  the  indulgence  of  this  vice.  Car-
goes of  wine  foiiud  thvir  way,  by  means  of  tho
navigable  rivers,  into  The  very  benrt  of  tho  coun-
try. Drink  was  also  conv«yu<l  over  hunt  iu  wagons
(Diod.  8ic.  T.  ift>).  About  the  tirst  century,  how-
ever, of  our  era,  dnuikeuuesM  began  grattually  to
disappear  from  among  tho  higher  classes,  and  to
be  eonllneil  tu  the  lower  onltrs^  at  least  with  tba
nations  of  the  South  and  East.

Milk  iind  the  desb  of  aitimnls,  es|>eeinlly  that  of
swine,  formed  tbe  principal  fowl  of  the  Gaulfk
A  curiotiH  accouut  of  their  repasts  is  given  by  Po-
sidoiiius  {ii/j.  Atheii.  iv.  [i.  Hi).  After  au  eic*'smvo
iiidnlgeucu  iu  the  pleasures  of  tbe  haiKpiet,  they
loved  to  Seize  their  arms  and  <tefy  each  other  L^
the  combat.  At  first  it  was  only  a  sportive  en-
conuter;  but.if  either  part^' chanced  tohewouud-
(h1,  pa««iou  got  Ko  far  the  better  of  them  that,  uidesa
separated  by  their  friends,  they  continued  to  en-
gage till  one  or  tbe  other  af  tbeni  was  ttluin.  Hit
far.  indeed,  did  tliey  carry  their  contempt  of  dnitb
and  their  ootentations  display  of  eoiiriige,  that  they
might  bo  seen  agreeing,  for  u  certain  tium  of  money
or  for  Ml)  many  measures  of  wjne,  to  let  Iheiiiselvea
lie  slaiti  l\v  others;  mounlttd  on  some  ebvated
place,  they  distributed  tbe  liijuor  or  gidd  anmug
their  must  intiumte  friends,  and  then  rpclining  on
their  bucklers,  presented  their  throats  to  tht>  Kwurd
<Po8idou.  I.e.).  Others  made  it  a  ponit  itf  hfiiiotir
uot  to  retire  from  their  dwellings  when  fulling  in
upon  thorn,  nor  from  the  dames,  nor  from  the  tidrH
of  ocean  and  the  iuundations  of  rivers  ;  and  it  is
to  this  foollali  daring  that  the  GauU  avtvd  ibi-ir
fahnlcms  renown  of  being  au  impious  race,  who
lived  ill  open  war  Mith  nature.

Tbe  working  of  mines,  .ind  certain  moDopolies
et^oyed  hy  the  beads  of  tribes,  bad  placed  in
the  bands  of  some  individimU  eunminne  oupital;
licuco  tbe  reputation  fur  opuleurc  which  Gaul  en-
joyed nt  the  period  of  the  Knumn  invasion,  aud
even  still  later.  It  was  the  Pern  of  tlie  aucieut
world.  The  riches  of  Gaul  even  passed  into  a
proverb  tlosepb.  il.  28:  Pint.  Cum.,-  Snet.  Cum.,
pIc).  PonidoniuK  makes  mc^ntion  of  a  cerlalu
Lueru  or  Luer  (\ovipfiot,  Poaidon.  up.  Atben.  ir.
p.  13;  .\ou>ior,8trab.  191),kingof  tbe  Arvcrui,who
I  caused  a  shower  of  gold  and  silver  to  descend
upon  the  cntwd  as  often  as  he  appeared  iu  public.
He  also  gave  untertuinmcnts  in  a  rude  style  of  bar-
barian itingniliceuce  ;  a  large  Kpace  of  grouinl  woe
euclo!»ed  for  tbe  puvpuse,  aud  cisteniH  wert;  dug  in
it,  which  were  tilleil  with  wine,  mead,  and  beer.

Properly  Kjwiiking,  there  was  nn  domeitlic  ttlilou


GALUA


710


galujl


or  famll.r  intercoiii^e  aiitoug  tlio  GnlHc  iintiouit; '  |mrlM  nf  Gaul  Hmns  held  tliin  nnprcnniry:  Pmnhi.
tli6  ivtiiiien  were  beld  in  <1opc>ti<lcuc«  nnd  &ervi-  I  ihe  gud  of  iIih  uinuntutiiii  iT^ivy,  xxi.  .V);  IVl  or
tud«.  The  hUHbaiid  bad  the  po^er  or  life  aud  |  Uclcw,  the  ttuii  -  gml,  tbw  Gallit'  A|iollo  (Anwn.
il«alb  ovor  bU  wifu  as  woU  as  over  bis  ofi'spring.  |  ('arm.  U);  Tt]ulat««,  tliu  Gallic  Hbtuiim,  pretidioK
Whet)  a  person  of  high  rank  siiddeol^  died,  and  j  over  the  useful  arts  and  cumniL-rcu  (Miuuc.  Fel.3it;
iLc  cause  of  hia  dc&lb  was  not  clearly  a6oertn)ue<l,  |  Lactaot.  Ifir.  Inal.  i.  'il>;  OguiiuH,  reprc^utcd  m
hit  irtfe  or  nives  (for  pidygnuiy  was  practised  '  leadiiix  a  train  of  caiitivcs  bj  cbaui»  uf  gohl  and
mmoDg  the  ricb)  were  e«ir<«d  and  put  to  tbe  tor- '  atuber  proceeding  from  bta  mouth.  t.vpilSiug  the
ture :  if  the  Ifiist  HUt4]>icioti  was  excited  of  tbeir  power  of  elutjuencc;  and  Anlneiina.  the  j^ihIiImi
having  livxiii  privy  to  his  death,  Ibu  rictiuis  ji^r-  of  the  fomtlH.  TheM  df^ilie-s,  iis  wn9  iinrnral.  w«n
inh^l  iu  the  niidht  uf  the  fluuieM,  after  the  ino«t  idnntilitMl  by  Caeiiar  with  the  grals  of  fbr  (Uniu
frightful  punishments  (Coes.  Jt.  O.  vL  VJ).  One  syKtHni  (Cae«. /J.  fr.  vi.7j.
eiialuiit.  however,  shows  that  even  then  the  cuu-
dition  of  woinei)  had  undergone  some  degree  of
uieliorntion :  this  was  tbe  uonimunity  of  goods
hetweea  husband  and  wife.  The  children  re-
luaiued  under  the  care  of  tbeir  mother  until  the
Hge  of  puberty  (Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  18).

Among  Honic  natintiM  of  Bvlgic  Gaul,  where  tbe
Rliiiio  was  an  object  of  supi-mtitiouH  adortition,
a  cnrloua  custom  prevailed  ;  the  river  was  mode
tlie  Dieaus  of  testing  the  fidelity  of  the  wives.
When  a  husband  bad  douhia  respeetiug  its  pater*
utty,  betook  the  new-lHtru  infant,  jdiiced  it  ou  a
board,  and  exposed  it  Co  the  current  uf  the  stream.
If  tlie  plank  and  its  helpless  burden  llonted  safely
upon  tlje  waters,  tbe  result  was  deemed  favoura-
hli>,  tind  all  tint  father's  NUHpicions  went  disHipnled.
If,  on  the  contrary,  the  {ihtnk  began  to  sink,  the
infant  periabed,  nnd  tlic  pareut's  suspicious  were
con  firmed.

GOVEKSMKNT  AND  KbUUIO.V. — TwO  privileged
orders  rnled  in  Gaitl  over  the  rest  of  tbe  population
— tbe  priesln  and  tbe  nobles.  Tbe  people  at  large
were  divided  into  two  classee — tlie  inhabitants  of
the  country  and  the  r««i<itents  of  cities.  Tbe  for-
mer nf  Ihese  conKtitiitetl  tlw  tribes  or  clients  iip-
perlAinitig  in  nnhli>  fntnilieH.  Thn  client  cultivat-
ed htK  patron's  dnmainN,  followi'd  liiH  standard  in
war,  and  wiif  bunud  to  iltfrvnd  btm  with  his  lif«.
To  abaudiiu  [hh  pulntn  iu  the  hour  of  peril  was  ru-
gartled  as  Ihi-  blaeki.-sl  of  crimes.  The  residents
uf  cities,  on  the  other  hand,  found  themselves  be-
yond the  c(jntn^>l  uf  this  system  of  clientship,  and,
conaeqnently,  enjoyed  grtiater  freedom.  Below
the  Diana  of  the  people  were  the  slaves,  who  do
not  appi^ar,  however,  to  luive  heeti  at  any  time
very  nnmerDiiH.

Whi'ii  we  examine  attentively  tbe  ebaraoter  of


Thv  (icwl  Tmaa (Gsdn.  Rttig.  OaMl  pi  I.)


This  rcsemhinnco  between  the  two  syrteiMrf
religiLiu  changed  into  identity  when  Gnuh  mi1>)<v*-
od  to  the  dominion  of  Rome,  had  felt  fur  hum
the  facts  rehiTive  to  tla^  religions  belief  of  Uaul,  years  the  inljnence  of  Roman  ideas  Itwulbm
we  are  led  to  rL-cogriize  tbe  existence  of  two  that  the  Gallic  polytheism,  hoDOurcd  and  QivoolW
clu»fli»(  of  ideas,  two  nysteuis  of  symbols  and  super-  hy  the  emperors,  ended  its  career  h>  becomta^  f-
stitiuiis  entirely  distinct  from  each  other;  iu  u  tally  merged  in  the  potytbeiMn  of  Italy ;  wblk.Mi
word,  two  religions — one,  altogether  reiisotiiible  in  (In*  other  hand,  nniidisni.  its  mysteries,  its  iVw-
itrt  chnracter,  bawMl  on  tbe  ]M4rHontlicatio]i  of  niit-  trine,  and  its  pritvitbutMl,  were  ntterly  proeerilMil-
uriil  phenometiA  nnd  reeall  Ing  by  ilx  forms  much  of  i  8t<e  Dkuidae.

the  poiythei-im  ofGi^ece;  the  other,  fonndnd  on  I  Hkneral  HlflTORY. — Tbe  bistnrj'  of  Giinl  41-
a  nnit4*rtal,  metji])byMica].  mysterious,  and  sneer- '  videa  itHelf  naturally  into  fnnr  periods.  Hif  finl
dotal  piinthoisin,  pretwutiug  at  least  a  snpertieia]  I  of  tbesii  compriscH  the  movi-nirnts  of  tlie  Otllk
eoiiforuiity  with  the  religions  of  the  Kant.  Tbin  '  tril»ett  while  yet  iti  their  nommlic  state,  Koo*  «f
latter  has  received  the  name  of  Umidinm,  from  the  races  of  the  \Vest  ever  passul  through  a  atan
tbe  Druids,  who  were  its  tirst  foiuiders  ami  agitated  or  brilliant  career.  Their  oontw  •'ii>'
priests;  the  other  system  hits  been  called  the  braced  Knrope,  Asia,  and  AfVtca;  their  nam«  a
Gallic  Polytheism.  (S*ee  Dkiiuak.)  Dniidism  |  recordeil  with  terror  iu  the  annals  of  almoAi rrtTf
was  said  to  have  been  eNtabli>fbLMl  in  Ganl  by  Hens  !  nation.  They  biirnetl  Rome ;  tbey  wrcAled  Mw^
or  Hesus,  a  warrior  ami  Isw-giver  who  vrua  tmh-  !  donin  from  the  veteran  legions  of  Alexander;  tb*J
aeqnently  deilied.  The  iHiiytbeiatie  «y.Htfiu  which  forced  Tliprmopylae  and  pillaged  Delphi:  t^7
prevaik^,  mon*  especially  in  Southern  Ganl,  was  !  then  pnwerdcHl  to  pitch  their  teiitti  on  tbe  |tlaJM
funditnientally  liko  that  of  the  Grei;kii  and  Hnmans  j  uf  the  Trond,  in  the  broad  parks  of  MiletuA,  <»
thcmaelvfU).  In  Us  UhI  of  deities  Were  Tiimnii,  the  hordrcK  uf  tlm  Saiigartiis,  and  thoM'  of  ibr
the  god  nf  thunder,  the  Gallic  Zeus,  though in Nile. They  besieged  C'artbagv,  menaced  Metapkui


GALLIA  BRACATA


711


GALUA  CISALPIXA


aod  Dombered  amoog  their  tribntAries  the  most
powerfal  monarcha  of  the  East ;  thej  foanded  in
Upper  Italy  a  powerfal  empire,  and  in  the  bosom
of  Fbrygia  they  reared  another— Galatia,  which  for
a  long  time  exercised  it-s  sway  over  the  whole  of
Lower  Asia. See  Gaultia.

During  the  Second  Period — that  of  their  seden-
tary state — we  see  the  gradaal  derelopmeut  of
social,  religions,  and  political  institntions,  conform-
able to  their  pecnliar  character  as  a  people ;  in-
stitutions original  in  their  nature,  and  a  civilization
fnll  of  movement  and  of  li&,  of  which  Transalpine
Oanl  ofFetB  the  purest  and  most  complete  model.
One  might  say,  in  following  the  animated  scenes
of  this  picture,  that  the  theocracy  of  India,  the
feudal  system  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  the  Atheni-
an democracy  bad  met  on  the  same  soil  for  the
purpose  of  contending  with  each  other  aod  reign-
ing by  turns.  Soon  this  civilization  undergoes  a
change ;  foreign  elements  are  introduced,  brought
in  by  commerce,  by  the  relations  of  neighbour-
hood, by  reaction  from  snbjngated  nations.  Heuoe
arose  and  multiplied  a  variety  of  socitU  combina-
tions. In  Italy  it  la  the  Soman  inflnence  that  ex-
erts itself  on  the  manners  and  institntions  of  the
<SanlB ;  in  the  south  of  Oaul  it  is  that  of  the  Mas-
silioto ;  while  In  Phrygia  one  finds  a  most  singular
compound  of  Gallic,  Grecian,  and  Phrygian  civili-
zation. To  this  succeeds  the  Third  Period  in  the
history  of  the  Gallic  race^that  of  national  strug-
gles and  subjugation.  By  a  singular  coincidence,
it  is  always  by  the  Soman  sword  that  the  power
of  the  Gallic  tribes  is  destined  to  &U ;  in  propor-
tion 9E  the  Soman  dominion  extends,  that  of  the
Oaula  recedes  and  declines.  It  would  seem,  in-
deed, that  the  victors  and  the  vanquished,  in  the
battle  on  the  banks  of  the  AUia,  followed  each
other  over  the  whole  earth  to  decide  the  ancient
quarrel  of  the  CapitoL  In  Italy,  the  Cisalpine
Oaols  were  reduced,  bat  only  after  two  centuries
of  obstinate  resistance.  When  the  rest  of  Asia
bad  submitted  to  the  yoke,  the  Qalatae  still  de-
fended against  Borne  the  iudepeudence  of  the
East.  GanI  eventaally  fell,  but  through  complete
exhaustion,  after  a  century  of  partial  conflicts  and
Dine  years  of  general  war  under  Caesar.  Finally,
the  names  of  Caractacus  aud  Galgacns  shed  a
splendour  on  the  last  and  ineffectual  efforts  of
Keltic  freedom.  It  is  everywhere  an  nneqnal
•conflict  between  ardent  and  undisciplined  valour
on  the  one  hand,  and  cool  and  steady  perseverance
on  the  other.  The  Fourth  Period  comprehends  the
organization  of  Gaul  into  a  Soman  province,  and
the  gradual  assimilation  of  transalpine  manners
to  the  customs  and  institutions  of  Italy — a  work
«ommenoed  by  Augustus  and  completed  by  Clau-
dius. See  Thierry,  Hittoire  de»  Oauloit  (1827,  last
e*l.  1872) ;  the  Stcueil  de«  Hutoriena  dea  Oaulet  et
de  la  France,  edited  by  Bouqnet  and  others,  26
vols.  (1738-1885);  Marin  de  Tyr,  La  Franoe  atant
Otar  (Paris,  1865) ;  De  la  Forte  Maison,  Lea  Franca
<Paris,  1868);  Godwin,  S\at.  of  France,  vol.  i.  (New
York,  1860),  the  best  account  of  ancient  Gaul  in
the  English  language;  Martin,  Hiatoire  de  France
(4tb  ed.  1865) ;  Fauriel,  Hiatoire  de  la  Gaule  M4ri-
dionalt  (Paris,  1636);  Coulanges,  HiatiAre  dea  In-
stitutionea  PoUHqnea  de  VAftiAenne  France  (Paris,
1877) ;  and  the  authors  cited  in  the  articles  Celtab
and  Druidak  (q.  v.).

Oallla  Bracata. See  Gallia.

Oallia  Cisalpina. "  Gaul  this  side  of  the  Alps,"


with  reference  to  Some,  a  name  given  to  the  north-
ern part  of  Italy,  as  occupied  by  the  Gallic  tribes
which  had  poured  over  the  Alps  into  this  extensive
tract  of  country.  It  is  also  called  Gallia  Citb-
RIOR.  Livy  assigns  to  these  migrations  of  the
Gauls  as  early  a  date  as  b.c.  600.  Having  secure-
ly established  themselves  in  their  new  possessions,
they  proceeded  to  make  farther  inroads  into  vari-
ous parts  of  Italy,  and  thus  came  into  contact  with
the  forces  of  Some.  More  than  two  hundred  years
had  elapsed  from  the  time  of  their  first  iuvasion,
when  they  totally  defeated  the  Soman  army  on
the  banks  of  the  AlHa,  and  became  masters  of
Rome  itself.  The  defence  of  the  Capitol  and  the
exploits  of  CamiUns  (Livy,  v.  47  foil.),  or,  rather,
if  Polybius  be  correct  (ii.  16),  the  gold  of  the  van-
quished  and  the  dangers  which  threatened  the
Ganls  at  home,  preserved  the  State.  From  that
time,  the  Gauls,  though  they  continued  by  fre-
quent incursions  to  threaten  and  even  to  ravage
the  territory  of  Some,  could  make  no  impression
on  that  power.  Though  leagued  with  the  Sam-
nites  and  Etmscans,  they  were  almost  always  nu-
successful.  Defeated  at  Sentinum  iu  Umbria,  near
the  Lake  Yadimonia  in  Etruria,  and  in  a  still
more  decisive  action  near  the  port  of  Telamo  in
the  same  province  (Polyb.  ii.  19  foil.),  they  soon
found  themselves  forced  to  contend,  not  for  con-
quest, but  for  existence.  The  same  ill  success,  how-
ever, atteuded  their  efforts  in  their  own  territory.
The  progress  of  the  Soman  arms  was  irresistible ;
the  Gauls  were  beaten  back  from  the  Adriatic  to
the  Po,  from  the  Po  to  the  Alps,  and  soon  beheld  Bo-
man  colonies  established  and  flourishing  in  raauy
of  the  towns  which  had  so  lately  been  theirs.
Notwithstanding  these  successive  disasters,  their
spirit,  though  curbed,  was  still  unsubdued ;  and
when  the  enterprise  of  Hannibal  afforded  them  an
opportunity  of  retrieviug  their  losses  and  wreak-
ing their  vengeaqce  on  the  foe,  they  eagerly  em-
braced it.  It  is  to  tlieir  zealous  co-operatiou  that
Polybius  ascribes  iu  a  great  degree  the  primary
success  of  that  expedition.  By  the  efficient  aid
which  they  afforded  Hannibal,  he  was  euabled  to
commence  operations  immediately  after  he  had  set
foot  iu  Italy,  and  to  follow  up  his  early  succese  with
promptitude  and  vigour  (Polyb.  iii.  66).  As  long  as
this  great  commander  maintained  his  ground  and
gave  employment  to  all  the  forces  of  the  enemy,
the  Gauls  remained  nnmolested,  and  enjoyed  their
former  freedom,  withont  being  much  burdened  by
a  war  which  was  waged  at  a  considerable  distance
from  their  borders ;  bnt  when  the  tide  of  success
bad  again  changed  iu  favour  of  Borne  and  the  de-
feat of  Hasdmbal,  together  with  other  disasters,
had  paralyzed  the  efforts  of  Carthage,  they  once
more  saw  their  frontiers  menaced ;  Gaul  still  of-
fered some  resistance,  even  after  Carthage  itself
had  been  obliged  to  sue  for  peace;  but  it  was
weak  and  unavailing ;  and  about  twelve  years
after  the  termination  of  the  Second  Punic  War,  it
was  brought  under  entire  subjection  and  became
a  Soman  province.  Uuder  this  condition  it  con-
tinued to  receive  various  accessions  of  terri-
tory as  the  Bomans  extended  their  dominions
towards  the  Alps,  till  it  comprised  the  whole  of
that  portion  of  Italy  which  lies  between  those
mountains  and  the  rivers  Magra  and  Subicon.  It
was  sometimes  known  by  the  name  of  Gallia  To-
gata  (Mela,  ii.  4  ;  Plin.  iii.  14),  to  distinguish  it
from  Transalpine  Oanl,  to  which  the  name  of  Gal-


Itn  Conmtn  was  »p[ilic<l  (Cie.  Fhil.  vih.  9).  The
pptthft  Tugatu  allucUn  tu  tliu  rigbti  ft'  citizenship
onnf«rre(I  uii  tlio  uativeH  oC  the  coniitry.  The
lonruK  of  CiMiliiiiio  Gaul  obtaitieil  the  jirivileges
of  Lotiu  eJtieH,  and,  coDiieqtientt.v,  the  right  of
we»riDg  the  Konion  togn,  by  a  Inw  of  PnmjiuitKi
Stnibo  (Amod.  Com.  in  Or.  in  /'ifon.  p.  490),  about
B.C.  Si

AcoordinK  to  Polyhtns,  CisalpinA  (iniil  wiim  iii-
olnded  ill  the  tiKiire  of  a  triaiiglp,  wlitcli  had  the
Alps  aud  Apeuninea  for  two  of  itd  niileM,  uml  the
Adriatic,  as  fnr  hs  the  city  of  8eii»  Gntlicn,  for  the
biwe,  Thifi  is,  hnnrever,  lint  a  nmgh  Hketch.  (See
Italia.)  PolyhiusdescrilicH  th«  country  m  abonnd-
iug  ill  wiiic,  corn,  and  every  kind  of  grain,  and  in
fine  woul.  H«r<If)  of  ««!□«,  l)oth  for  pnbltc  ond
privnTo  snjiply,  weru  bred  In  its  foroAts  ;  and  sneh
was  the  abnndftiico  of  proviaioQH  of  every  kind
chat  travcllera  when  at  au  inti  did  not  find  it  nee-
eaaary  to  agree  on  the  price  of  any  article  which
they  required,  hut  paid  sn  mnch  for  the  whole
amonut  of  what  was  furiiishetl  them;  and  thiit
charge,  at.  tho  highest,  did  not  exc«ed  half  a  Ko-
nan  as  (Polyb.  ii.  15).

Oallla  Comlta. See  Gallia.

Oallia  Togata. See  Oallia  Cisalpina.

0«UUi  Trauaalpina.  A  itamo  ginm  to  Gaul
rrn|ker,  to  diHtitiguish  it  from  Gallia  Ciaalpina.

OfllUcae.  Gallic  Hhora,  tin*  French  galochet,
EtigliHU  tjolanln-i.  Th«y  were  Low  shoos,  not  reach-
ing qiiitti  fto  high
a« thu aiikk*.  had  ' ^/

oue  or  more  thick ^^^dWvu
alliiv- ^^^Tj

r.all>.


(Prom  *  nrrofihagaa,  VDh
ABendflla,  Rotne)


6olos,  aud  small  it]>'
|ier  leather,  which
waa  entirely  open
over  Cb«  front  of  the
Inatep,  like  the  modem  golosh  and  the  rigbl-hund
figuie  in  the  illustration;  or  Laced  in  front,  and  fiutt-
eued  by  a  ligature  round  the  top,  as  in  tlto  li'fi-
band  example ;  whence  they  are  ctaaned  auiuiig
the  »ott*ie  by  the  Latin  writers,  to  dLstiiignihh
thetn  from  the  regular  nirn'i,  ntiirb  were  cloMt-tit-
tiug  high-IuwH  that  c(iiuplut«Iy  uiivelo|>ed  the  foot
and  aiiklt!.  Tiify  wi>nt  itartially  adopltnl  at  Koaio
bttfuru  Ihi!  age  of  Cica^ro,  ami  wi-ru  worn  with  tbo
fareniri  ;  but  itwib  a  Htyle  of  drctut  wiu  reganled
as  inducoroim  ami  ojiti^nationat  <C{c.  Phil.  ii.  Ul>;
ficll.  xiii.  'Jl).  Under  the  Empire  thoy  came  into
mora  common  nwi,  and  vtvin  made  fur  all  claf>fH's.

Oallieuua,  PfBLifs  Licinh.s  Valeiuanis  Eo-

NATll's,  Aho»  i)riliri:ui[icrurValiTriaii,nia(IrCacKar
and  colleague  to  his  father  in  a.i>.  *JS3.  He  defenUMi,
iu  a  great  battle  near  Aledioliiniim  (Milan),  the  Ale-
manni  and  other  northern  trilx^s  which  had  made
an  imiptiou  intj»  Upper  Italy,  and  gave  evidence  on
that  occasion  of  his  pernonnl  bravery  nnd  abilities.
He  was  also  well-infoTmed  in  literotnre,  and  was
both  an  orator  and  a  poet,  winning  some  distinction
by  an  epithalaminni.  When  Valerian  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  PtTBiaim,  a.d.  260,  Gatlienus  took
the  reitis  of  guTrriimcnt,  and  w;im  xckituwledgrd
as  AiignsliiA.  He  apprars  to  have  then  given
biniiielf  np  to  dnbanohcry  and  the  coin]>any  of
profligate  i>enion8,  neglecting  the  interesta  of  tlie
Empire,  and  taking  no  painn  to  effect  the  release
of  bifl  father  from  the  banl  captivity  in  which  he
dieil.  The  barhuriau!i  attacked  tlie  Empire  on  ev-
ery side,  revolts  broke  out  iu  various  provinces,


where  sev4.-nil  commandora  aaMimrd  the  lUtc  nf
emperor,  nhilo  Gallimns  was  loitering  at  Boom
with  his  faviiiiritus.  Yet  now  and  then  be  mk-miciI
to  awaken  from  hln  ton""'  '^^  'he  news  of  the  ul-
vance  of  the  invader*;  and,  patting  himself  it  ll>c<
hi-ad  of  ibe  legious,  ho  defeiited  lugenuus,  wbn  liul
usurped  the  imperial  title  in  lllyricnm.  Umllieniii.
disgraced  his  victory*  by  horrible  criielties. Uean-


Oaninm.


time  Probu*,Aiire1iana»,and  other  able  com marnkn
were  utrennoufly  9Up]H>rting  the  honour  of  tbeBa-
man  anmt  in  thnKnsi,  where  Otenatus  of  PaltDfn
acted  n<«  a  useful  ally  to  tho  Komaiiit  agatatt  Ibo
Peninim.  UHuriierit  arose  in  Egypt,  in  the  Ginli,l>
Thrace,  in  almost  every  prctvincn  of  the  Eibi'ibv
from  which  circunifttatice  this  period  has  been  MtN
thu  Heign  of  the  Thirty  Tyrants,  At  last  Aun«-
Iiifi,  a  man  uf  olmcnro  birth,  sonic  say  a  Dhhs
Hhepht'rd  originully,  but  a  brave  Boldier,  nsttpro-
clainieil  emperor  by  thu  troopa  in  lll,irtrani.  en-
tered Italy,  ttiok  poueaainn  of  Mediulatniui.  mA
even  marched  against  Rome  while  tiniliruiif  a»
abHeiit,  Gallieuita  retnrntitl  fiuickly,  repalaetliB-
reoliia,  aud  drfcate<l  him  iu  a  grrat  baUk^  sor
the  Addua,  afler  which  thu  usurper  fthut  htnailf
ti]i  in  Mfiliulannm.  Here  he  was  Inrsiexe*!  l")
Gallieiins  :  hut,  during  the  siege  ia.d.  WJ?),  ibe*»-
pcror  was  niunlered  by  conspirntors  lAiirel,  Tirt.
33;  Eutmp.  ix.K;  Trebell.  Poll.  UalUen  ,  Z"U*r«.
xii.  *M  foll.X  The  reign  of  Gallienux  i«  menmnlil'
for  the  plogne  that  sw<*pt  over  the  Empire.  I'liniig
its  height,  it  is  Kiiid  that  there  wen*  r.(KK)  tlralli*
daily  in  the  city  of  Koine;  while  tlir  pii)mUt»<ii
of  Alexandria  waa  diminished  nearly  two  llim'*
The  phigne  wan)  followed  by  a  geuorol  ratuiiK*'

OalUua.  A  fi>wl ;  a  chicken.  Of  the  (Hffrnii
HlwoicK  of  domeatic  fowls.the  most  im|Kjrtani  •'■''
galfiuae,  which  were  divided  into  three  cU«»r«
ia)'jotlinar  riltaticae,  the  common  chicki-D;  iM^'-
fiwdfl  .4/ricamip  or  .Vwwirffwv,  the  same  proJ*'*'*
with  the  tt.€\myt,i&tt  of  the  Gre4>ka ;  and  ici  ?•"'
Mflc  rwsfira«.  The  last  ware  fonnd  in  great  »^""*
dance  in  the  Insula  GalliDaria,  but  it  is  m  di(B<"''
to  detenniue  from  the  descriptions  tniicniiil'^l  *"
us  what  they  rwally  wen?,  that  it  is  uncertain  wli'^di-
er  they  ought  to  l>eregardeil  as  pheaAanta-aarcl-
legged  partridges,  as  wood-gronse,  or  aa  ■oaM*<r^
cies  of  game  different  from  any  of  these.  The
Africanaf,  olwaya  scarce  and  dear,  wer*  tr'a*'^
almost  exactly  iu  the  same  manner  as  p««<«c^
and  never  became  of  importane<>  in  the  &n»*'-
The  ruaticae  are  lUtle  spoken  of  except  as  nt^MU


GALUNAKIA


71S


UAJLLUa


•of  curiosity,  and Coluuiella declares that  tbey
wonid  not  brcod  iu  coiitiucmcut.

AiuoDK  tbe  bre&iU  celebrated  for  fighting  were
tUe  Taniigriau,  tb^t  RbodiHU,  nitd  tbe  Cbalcidian  ;
Imt  tbe!M>  weiv  not  \hc  intMtt  |krot)table  fur  the
niArkvt.  Thv  |H>int8  of  :t  good  biiru-yurd  fowl  ar«
minutely  described  by  VArn^  ColuaifHo,  and  Pal-
la^ltUH.  Some  wt-if  ptirmilted  lo  roam  ubout  (ra-
gat)  diiriug  tlie  day,  und  pick  up  wbat  tbey  could,
but  tbe  greatiyr  number  vreru  constantly  nbnt  up
{vtamBae)  iu  a  ponltry-yacd  {^aUinariuiH,  upvt&oHu-
tTKtlow),  nrhich  WM  an  eucloMMl  court  [»acptum)  nltb
Ji  wnnn  lupMit,  Atn;wed  witb  Hand  or  AsbvA  wbvre-
in  tb«y  inigbt  burrow,  aud  curi'rod  ovpr  witb  a
n«t.  It  contain>.-d  ban-bouiu!M  {tsxT^at),  to  which
tbey  fftinyd  at  uighl  and  rtKwted  uinju  pulus
atretched  across  {perticav)  for  tlicir  convniiieuce,
<ieat«  (cM&i/iaf  for  tbc>  liiyiiig  bens  U>iiig  oonatruct-
fd  along  tbe  walls.  Tbe  wbule  e«tabimbujfiit  wiui
under  tbe  control  of  a  {wultryniau  itirturias  vuatua
|4>r  t'uratvr  >/airtnariti§).

k Chickens,  when  fattened  for  sale,  were  shut  np

Hu  d:irk,  narrow  cribs,  light  iiud  motion  bclug  nu-

fiivourable  to  tbe  process;  or  each  bii-d  was  swung

sepnrittely  lo  a  basket,  witb  a  suialt  bole  at  each

•end,  one  for  tbe  bead,  the  other  for  the  mmp,

aud  bedded  upou  tbe  softest  b»y  or  rhatf,  but  so

vraiuped  in  space  ibat  it  could  not  (tini  ruiiin<1.

Id this  state  it  vtAo  L-raniiued  with  nbi-at,  titj>

*eed,  barley-meal  kneaded  witb  water  into  small

luinpit  {titritiidaet,  aud  ctber  furinaeooua  foo<l,  tbe

o|>eratiou  reqniriug  from  twenty  to  tweiity-liTo

duvs  (Varr.  iii.  9;  Colnm.  viii.  a,  etc.,  Vi;  I'lio.  U.

LX.  X..  i  40  foil.  ,  Pallad.  i.  in,  -Ht).

■ Oallinaria. (1.)  An  iitilnnd  otf  tbe  coast  of  Li*

Huria, celi'brnleil  for  tbe  nittnlHT of  it«  lums,  nbenc«

PU  Dame  (Varro,  It.  R  iii.  St,  17). <V)  ^tt.VA,  a  for-

«st  of  ploetrses  near  Cumaa  in  Campania  (Cie.  Ad

fam.  ix.  23).

OmllizuiTiam  {opvi8o^o<xKCiov).  A  i»oultry-yard.
%ce  Galun'a.

■t OaUio,  U'viT7». (HA  Roman  rhetoriclniir  the
rvieud  of  the  eblor  ^neca,  whose  sou  be  adopted.
He  was  pnt  to  death  by  Nero. (2)  The  sou  of  tbe
«Ider  Seueca,  adopted  by  tbe  preceding.

Gallius,  QtnxTL'e.  A  Rumun  who  stood  for  the
pnif  tomhip  in  B.C.  G4.  As  a  tHHiiIt  of  the  elontioiii,
lie  wan  occulted  of  LrilMJVy  by  M.  Calirliiw,  aud  (Jp-
fended  by  Cicero  iu  an  uratiou  of  whiub  only  frag-
ments remain.  He  was  praetor  iu  D.c.  4>3,  anil
prenidcd  at  the  trial  of  C.  ComoUns.  His  imn,  Q.
(lallins,  was  praetor  iu  B.C.  43,  aud  was  put  to
death  by  the  Hccoud  I'riumvirate.

Q-aUoeraccia. See  Galatia.

O-aUow^s. Sec  Ckcx.

Oaliua  (raXXasi.  A  river  in  Galatia,  falliug  into
tbe  ^iauKariua,  near  PeHiuos.  From  it  tbe  priests
of  Cybel6  are  oaid  to  bare  obtained  their  naue  of
Gulli. 8ee  Gaixi  ;  Rhea.

Oalliia.  Suti'tcrr^  CI)  A  disliiignisbed  orator,
was  praetor  n.c.  16!),  luid  coukuI  int>,  when  be  fought
against  the  LigurtauN.  Iu  l(>^  tin  ncrviid  t\»  triliaue
ef  the  noldiers  under  AcniiliutirauhiH  in  Mnccdouia,
and  during  this  compnign  predicted  an  eclipse  of
tbu  inuoo.  ('J)  C.  CoKNKLiL'b,  was  iHirn  at  Fonim
lulli  iFnfJas)  in  Gaul,  of  pmM  parcnts,'aboat  b.c.06.
H«  went  to  Italy  at  an  early  sge,  and  began  hJs
■car«er  as  a  poet  when  he  was  alwnt  twenty  years
fage.  He  had  already  attained  considerable  dis-
28*


tinctiou  at  the  time  of  Caesar's  death,  44  ;  and  upon
the  arrival  of  Octaviauua  iu  Italy  after  that  event,
Gallns  embraced  his  party,  and  soon  aci)uired  great
inlluence  with  biui.  In  41  be  was  one  of  the  tri-
umvirs ap]ioinie(l  by  Oetavianns  to  dislribnte
lands  in  the  north  of  Italy  among  his  veterans,  aud
on  that  occasion  be  afforded  protection  to  tbe  in-
babitantA  of  Muutun  and  to  Vergil.  He  afterwards
accompanied  Octavinuus  tu  tbe  battle  of  Actinni,
.11,  and  coniiuandcd  a  dulachmcnt  of  tbe  army.
After  the  battle.  Gallns  wan  twnt  witb  the  army  to
Kgypt,  iu  pursuit  of  Antony;  and  when  Kgypt  was
ins<le  n  Konmn  province,  Ovtaviauus  appointed
Galliis  the  liral  pivfect  of' tbe  province.  He  re-
mained in  Kg:>*pt  for  nearly  funr  years;  but  he  in-
curred at  Ifiiglb  the  enmity  of  Oetavianun,  tbrvngb
tbe  exact  nature  of  bis  ofTenco  is  uncertain.  Ac-
cording fo  stvire  iiccounts  be  spoke  of  the  eini»eror
in  an  nffeusive  and  insulting  nninner;  be  erei'tivl
niiuieronsHtfttnee  of  himself  in  Kgy]»t,  aud  bad  his
own  exjdnils  inscribed  on  tbe  pyramids.  The
Senate  deprived  him  of  his  estates,  and  seut  him
into  eiile;  whereupon  be  put  an  end  t"  Lis  life  by
falling  u|>ou  bis  own  Kwonl,  B  v.  27.  Tlio  iutiinnte
friendship  existing  bi-tween  Gallns  and  tin*  uiottt
eminent  men  of  the  lime,  as  A«iiiiu«  Ptdlio,  Vergil,
Varus,  and  Ovid,  and  tin?  high  prniiw  they  U'stow
upon  him,  prove  that  be  was  a  iiiati  of  great  intel-
lecLual  |tirwers  aud  acquirements  Ovid  (7VU/.  iv,
Iu,  h)  assigns  to  him  the  tirst  plnce  among  the  Ro-
umn  elt^giau  poets;  and  wc  know  that  be  wrote  a
ciitlection  of  elegies  in  four  books,  tbe  priaci|>al
subject  of  which  was  bis  love  cf  Lycoris.  (See
Vergil's  Tenth  Gclogtir.)  Diit  all  his  pretlurtions
have  perished  ;  for  tbe  four  epigrams  in  the  Latin
Anthology  attributed  to  Gallits  could  not  have
been  written  by  a  c;ontemporai7  of  Augustni),
Gallus  tniiislnled  into  Latin  the  poems  of  Eupbo*
riou  of  Cbalcis,  but  th)!4  tninHlatiun  is  also  lo^tt.
Some  criticM  attribute  to  him  tbe  \Hwax  Cirit,
usually  printed  among  tbe  works  of  Vttrgil.  8ee
Volker,  De  C.  tiulli  i'ila  et  ScripliM,  pt.  i.  (lionn,
ItMD),  pt.  ii.  (Klberfeld,  1844);  A  Nicolas,  ftr  la
Tic  cl  dts  Ouvraget  Jv  C  Oailua  ( Parts,  L^I  ).
His  atory  is  made  tbe  basis  of  the  famous  work
of  W.  A.  Becker  on  Roman  antiquities.  See
Bkckkr.  (3^  TKKBUNtANiM.  A  Homau  emperor,
who  rcigiKxl  A.Ti,  yf»l-'i.M.  His  full  iiame  was  O.
ViBiffl  TRKHONUSrs  Gaixits.  Hp  Served  under
Deeius  in  the  campaign  against  the  G<itbs,  251,  and
tH  said  tu  havi>  contributed  by  bis  treachery  ti>
the  disastronn  issue  of  thu  butllu,  which  pnircd
fatal  to  DeciuHand  bis  sou  HemuniuH.  Gullus  was
tbeiTupou  elected  emperor,  and  HuHliliauuH.  tlie
sarviving  son  of  Uecius,  was  nominated  as  his  col-
league. He  purchased  a  |>eace  of  tbe  (ioths  by
allowing  them  to  retain  their  plucider,  and  promis-
ing them  a  tixed  aunnal  tribote.  In  'J53,  the
Gtotbs  again  invaded  tbe  Roman  Empire,  but  they
wore  driven  back  by  AemiUanus,  whose  troops
proclaimed  him  emppror  iu  Moesia.  Aemilianas
thereupon  marched  into  Italy  ;  and  Gallus  was  pat
to  death  by  his  own  soldiers,  together  nith  his  son
Volusinnns,  before  any  collision  bad  taken  plare
between  the  opposing  armies.  The  name  of  Gal-
lus is  associated  witb  notbiug  but  cowardice  and
dishonour.  In  addition  to  the  misery  produced
by  tbe  inroads  of  the  barbarians  during  this  reign,
a  ileniUy  ]>estilenco  broke  out  in  S63,nnd  continued
its  ravages  over  every  part  of  the  Empire  for  6f-
teen  years.


UALLUS


71*


UANYilEUES


GaUtu  (oKtKTap,  aXixTpvav).
not  uicutiooed  iu  tbc  earlier  Greek  writers.  Iiat
round  li^urcd  OD  the  silver  coins  of  Satuotlirnce
and  Hiniem  in  the  sixth  century  u.c.  Atheuacus
■ays  that  it  was  iutrodaceil  iuto  Greece  from  Per-
sia. Thp  cock  was  ti!*eil  by  the  OrMeks  iti  diviwn-
tion  (see  ALKCrRVOMANTiA  ),  jind  n-a«  carefully
bre*l  by  both  the  Oreekn  and  Koninn*  fnr  ti;tthting.
(See  Alkctryom\chia  ;  Vk\atii»nks.)  Tho  finest
j^ame-cocke  wvre  bre«l  nt  Kliodes  and  Taoa^a.
The  cock  was  sacred  to  Mars  and  to  Aesculapius,
Kox,  aud  the  Lares.

Oambllng. Sec  Au^.

Oamelia  ( yofujXia ).  A.  feast  uccompaniod  by
offcriiigfl  fjivcu  by  the  fntber  uf  a  bridi^givom  ur
by  the  bride<;rooru  himself  to  the  nieuiber»  uf  his
pbratry,  or  rather  to  the  oiVfiot  among  the  phra-
tores,  ou  which  occasion  the  bride  was  iutrtxluced
to  and  enrolled  amoii^  the  phratores  (Uarpocr.  a.  v.
rf  tit  Toir  tpparopas  €l(rayuy^  ri^w  yvvaiKuy.  C(.
Etgm.  .}f(tff.  p.  'iiO.  5i>  fnll.).  Thi»8  she  became  a
sharer  in  her  Liisbatid'a  nacra.  Thij*  ceremony
pn>l>ably  took  plaoo  in  the  mouth  of  Gamelioii
(MuDiDUCU,  Ueortul.  p.  34-1).  Iu  Momuiseu's  opin-
ion there  is  110  ditfereuco  iu  nieauiu^  between  ij
yttfxijXia  uud  rt't  yafiiiXta.

OameUon  (rafArjAiuv).  The  sercnth  tnonrh  of
the  Attic  year,  answering  to  the  last  half  of  Jaa-
unry  and  the  tirst  half  of  February.  Ita  o&rliur
uaiue  was  Ar)»-m'aiir. See  CALENliA.Klt'M.

Qamos. Sec  Luui.

Gam6ri  [ydfiopaO. See  Geomuiu.

Oamoa  iyafint}. See  ifATKlMUML'X.

G-audaiYdae  irciv^rf^/Aui)-  Oandaritae  (Taviapl-
Tot],  or  Oaud&xae  [ravhifxtt,  Skt.  Oaudhiirasi.  An
Indian  people,  in  the  uiiddle  of  the  Pnnjiib,  be-
tween the  rivers  AcesiueH  (Cheriab)  and  Ilydrautcs
(Raveei,  whosw  king,  at  the  tinte  of  Alexander's
invasion,  wrus  a  <^nuHiu  aud  namemike  of  the  cele-
brated Porus.  From  them  the  Afghan  city  of
Kandahar  gct«  itH  iiante.

Oanea.  A  low  eating-honso,  generally  used  at
Rome  for  imirioral  puri»OBe«, See  CiCPKNA.

Oangarldae  ( rnyyapiBat ).  A  people  near  the
mouths  of  the  Ganges.  Ptol-
emy assigns  th«-ni  a  capital,
called  Ganga  R«^gia,  on  I  ho
western  side  of  the  Ganged.
The  Gangaridao  went  allii-K  uf
the  Prasii,  who  lay  m^irer  the
Inilna  lowarda  the  uorthwoHt.
The  united  forces  of  thetio  two
nations  awaited  the  army  of
Alexander  on  tho  other  side  of
the  Hypbasla;  but  report  made
theu  bo  formidable  in  numbers
and  valoar  that  the  wearied
and  olamied  Maceiloninns  re-
fUN'd  to  cross  the  stream,  in
Spile  of  all  the  efforts  and  re-
laoDtflraiices  of  their  king  {Jus-
tin, sii.  3;  Q.  Curt.  ix.  2;  Verg.
Otorrj.  iii.  ^).

Ganeea  (ntyyrjc,  Iiid.  Gosjpf).
A  famous  river  of  Inilia,  which,
in  th»  laiiguagH  of  Hindustan,
In  calkd  Pad  da,  and  Is  also
named  Bnrra  Gang  d,  or  the


Dtlea^u
lad  mV


The  cock :  a  bird  Great  River,  aud  OaugA,  or  (he  river,  by  way  of
cmiueuce;  aud  heuce  the  Kuropean  name  of  tho
Mircacu  isderiveil.  The  .Sanskrit  name  of  the  Gati-
geB(Piulda)  signifieii"  foot."  because  the  Itrabiuitu,
in  the  ri«Afla- /'uruRu,  make  the  river  lo  fle«
from  the  great  toe  of  the  left  foot  of  Vishnu,
the  preserving  deity.  This  mighty  strenni.iogptb-
er  with  tho  Brahmaputra,  wlio-iiH  twin-nifttct  it
has  been  denominated,  has  itfi  twiurce  in  the  vast
uionnlaius  of  Thi)H-t-  This  river  was  unktiown
to  Hermlotna,  as  he  does  not  meiilion  it,  tbongb
it  liecame  famous  a  centnrj-  ofterwanla.  Ita
source  was  for  a  long  {Niriud  invl»lvf^d  in  oh-
aeurity.  A  snr^'cy,  however,  was  made  by  the
Aoglo-Indlau  goferuuicut,  aud  it  woa  fonnil  to
iasne  in  a  aniall  stream,  under  tho  name  of  Bbagi-
rathi,  from  under  a  ma^a  of  perpetual  snow,  se-
cnmulatcd  ou  tho  southern  side  of  the  Himalaj-ab
Mountaina.  It  is  computed  to  be  16^7  mih
]eugth,  aud  at  Ave  huudred  miles  fn>in  it«
is,  during  tbo  rainy  seoaou,  four  miles  broad  i
sixty  feet  deep.  Its  principal  tribntaries  ow  thf
Jnmua,  the  Jahuavi,  and  the  Brnhuutputra.  Tb»
whole  number  of  streams  which  flow  into  U  h
eleven.

The  uame  is  alxo  a|>pli<Hl  by  the  aucit>ut  nriloa
to  a  large  uity  on  the  Gauges  at  ltd  great  bead
townnis  the  eaitt,  perhaps  the  satuo  as  Allohaharf.
See  IXDiA.

O-angetTcus  Sinua  (KuXiroc  TayyTjrutot).  No*
the  Bay  of  Beugal,  iuto  which  the  Ganges  fall"
(Ptol.i.  13,  M)-

Ganera  iTayy(m).  A  cily  of  Pnpblagcnia,  dmt
the  bonleii!  of  GuIatiiL.  In  the  time  of  King  IMn-
luniH  (([.  V.)  it  was  a  niyal  residence,  and  uuderlbr
Empire,  thf  i-iipilal  of  Paphtngunio.

Ganjaneda  iVavvttijha). i^<e  IIkbb.

Ganymedes  (rnn'^f;8ijt).  Tha  wm  of  Trat,kill|
of  Durilaiiiii,  brother  of  Ilua  ami  Asaaracus.  A»-
eonllng  to  Homer  he  waa  carried  away  by  the  |^
Un  bin  lieanty,  to  be  the  cup-bearer  of  Zeos,!
one  of  the  itninortals.  In  tbc  later  legeod  Ir  b
carried  away  l)y  Zena  himself  in  the  shape  pf  •■
eagle,  or  by  the  eagle  of  Zeus.  To  make  anrihl*
to  liiti  father,  Zens  presented  him  with  four  imwiS-
I  tol  horses  for  bis  chariot. Gnnyroofles  wm  iAv-


GAOL


715


GAZA


wards  regarded  aa  the  geuins  of  the  Bources  of  the
Xile,  and  the  astroDomers  made  hiui  ioto  the  con-
stellation Aquarius.  The  rape  of  Ganymede  was  rep-
resented in  a  group  by  the  sculptor  Leochares  (q.  v.).

OaoL See  Cabcer.

Oarftma  {rapafit]). See  Oaramantks.

Oaramantea  (rapt^uirrts).  The  snuthenimoBt
people  known  to  the  auciunts  in  Korth  A&ica,
dwelt  far  south  of  the  Great  Syrtis  iu  the  regiou
called  Phazauia  (Fezzaa),  where  they  bad  a  capi-
tal city,  Garama.  They  are  mentioned  by  Herodo-
tus as  a  great  people  (iv.  183).  He  tells  a  number
of  curious  things  about  them  and  their  country —
that  the  land  is  fertilized  with  suit,  that  their  oxen
have  horns  bending  so  far  fonronl  as  to  compel
them  to  walk  backward  as  they  feed,  etc.  Fur
other  notices,  see  Plin.  H.  ^.  v.  5,  (  8 ;  Mela,  i.  8.

0«rdena. See  Hortus.

Oarginua  Bfona  (to  rdpyapov).  The  modern
Monte  Gargano;  a  mountain  and  promontory  in
Apnlta,  on  which  were  oak  forests  (Hor.  Carm.  ii.

GflTgaphia  {rapya(f>ia).  A  valley  near  Plataea,
with  a  fountain  of  the  same  name,  where  Actaeou
was  torn  t6  pieces  by  his  dogs  (Ovid,  Met.  iit.  156).
The  fountain  of  Oargaphia  watt  situated  abon  t  a  mile
and  a  half  distant  from  Plataea,  on  Mount  Cithae-
run,  towards  the  Athenian  frontier  (Herod,  ix.  25).

Gku'gftra  (ra  Vdpyapa).  The  southern  summit  of
Mount  Ida,  in  the  Troud,  with  a  city  of  the  same
name  at  its  foot  (Hom.  It.  viii.  48).

Gargettaa  (rapyTrror).  A  deme  of  Attica,  on
the  northwest  slope  of  Mount  Hyuiettns;  the
birthplace  of  the  philosopher  Epicurus.  See  the
monograph  by  Young,  GargettM,  on  Attic  Deme,
in  the  Cla$Bioal  Studies  in  Honour  of  Henry  Drialer
(N.  Y.  1894).

Oargllliu  Martlalia.  A  Roman  writer,  who
flourished  iu  the  third  century  a.d.,  niid  wns  the
author  of  a  gnat  work,  based  upon  Greek  and
I^atiu  sonrces,  on  ogricultnre  and  veterinary
science.  Considerable  fragments  remain,  dealing
with  the  treatment  of  cattle  {De  Cum  Bourn)  and
the  medical  uses  of  herbs  and  fruit  (Medidina  ex
Soleribiu  et  Pomi$),  These  fragments  are  found
chiefly  in  the  fonrth  book  of  the  so-called  Plinins
Valerianoa  (q.  v.).  The  chief  sources  of  Martiatis
were  Dioscorides,  Galen,  Hippocrates, Aristotle,  and
CelsuB.  The  fragments  of  the  treatise  De  Cttra
Bourn  were  edited  by  Schuch  (Donanescfaiugen,
1857) ;  see  also  Rose,  Anecdota  Oraeea  et  Oraeco-
latina  (Berliu,  1870).

Gflritea.  A  people  iu  Aqnitanii^  neighbonra  of
the  Ansel  (Caes.  B.  G.  iit.  37).

Ghurlanda. See  Corona.

Qaimantla  or  Gflraznantla.  A  nymph,  mother
of  larbas  by  lupiter. See  Verg.  Aen.  iv.  198.

Ooimenta. See  Clothing.

OoTTvt. See  Domus,  p.  545.

Ghuma  {yapov).  A  sauce  made  of  the  blood  and
entrails  of  nsh  salted,  and  resembling  caviare  (Plin.
H.  X  xxxi.  (  43 ;  and  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  6.  46).

Oanmiiia.  Kow  the  Garonne,  a  river  of  Oanl,
which  rises  in  the  valley  of  Arran,  to  the  south  of
Bertraud,  among  the  Pyrenees,  and  falls  into  the
Oceanns  Cantabricus,  or  Bay  of  Biscay.  The  gen-
eral oonrae  of  this  river,  which  extends  to  about


350  miles,  is  northwest.  It  unites  with  the  Du-
ranins  (Dordogne),  below  Bnrdigala  (Bourdeaux).
According  to  Julius  Caesar's  division  of  Gallia,
the  Garumna  was  the  boundary  of  Aqnitania,  and
separated  that  district  from  Gallia  Celtica.  This
river  is  navigable  to  Tolosa  (Toulouse)  (Mela,  iii.3).

Ganuxuil.  A  Gallic  people  in  Aqnitania,  on  the
Gammna.

Gatea See  Ianua  ;  Porta.  ,

Oatheae  (ratfcat).  A  town  in  Arcadia  on  the
river  Gatheatas. (Pansan.  viii.  34.)

Oaagamela  (ra  ravyaftrjXa).  A  village  of  Ausy-
ria,  in  the  district  of  Aturia,  and  about  500  stadia
from  Arbela  (Arrian,  vi.  1).  The  decisive  battle
between  Alexander  and  Darius  took  place  near
this  spot  in  B.c.  331 ;  but,  as  Arbela  was  a  cou-
sidernble  town,  the  Greeks  chose  to  distinguish
the  conflict  by  the  name  of  the  latter.  Gauga-
mela  signified,  iu  Persian,  "  the  house  of  the
camel,"  aud  is  said  to  have  been  so  called  becanae
Darins,  the  sou  of  Hystaspes,  having  escaped  upon
his  camel  across  the  deserts  of  Scythia,  when
fetreatiug  from  the  latter  country,  placed  the
animal  here,  and  devoted  the  revenue  of  certain
villages  for  its  maintenance  (P\at.  Alex.  31).

Qaulua  (ynuXdr).  A  large  full-bodied  vessel
nsed  either  as  a  goblet  (Plant.  Bud.  v.  2,  3*2),  a
milk'pail  (Hom.  Od.  ix.  223),  a  water-bucket  (He-
rod, vi.  119),  etc.

GaulOB  (rai/Xoff).  (1)  A  small  island  adjacent
to  Melit^  or  Malta,  now  called  Qozo  (Pliu.  H.  K.
iii.  8).  (2)  Another  below  the  south  shore  of  Crete,
now  called  Qozo  of  Candia,  for  distinction's  sake
from  Gozo  of  Malta.

Gfluma  Mona  or  Oanranna  Mona.  A  volcanic
range  of  mountains  in  Campania,  between  Cuniao
and  Neapolis,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Pnteoli,
producing  good  wine,  and  memorable  for  the  de-
feat of  the  Samiiites  by  M.  Valerius  Corvus,  b-C.
340  (Livy,  vii.  32, 33).

Oaoaftpo,  OanaAp^  and  Oaoaftpam  (yavtrainjs).
A  woollen  cloth  with  a  long  nap  on  one  side,  but
smoother  on  the  other,  used  by  both  sexes  for
clothing,  as  well  as  for  table-cloths,  napkins,  bed-
covers, etc.  (Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  73 ;  Ovid,  J.  ^.  ii.  300 ;
Mart.  xiv.  152).  The  name  is  also  used  of  wigs  of
light  flaxen  hair — a  colour  much  admired  by  the
Roman  ladies. See  Cauendrum;  Coua.

Oanse. See  Coa  Vestis.

Oaza  (rafa).  (1)  One  of  the  five  Philistiue  prin-
cipalities, situated  towards  the  southern  extremity
of  Canaan,  about  sixteen  miles  south  of  Aacalon,
and  a  small  distance  from  the  Mediterranean.  Its
port  was  called  Gazaeomm  Portns.  As  the  name
of  the  city  of  Gaza  appears  iu  the  firat  book  of
Moses  ( X.  18 ),  Mela  must  of  course  be  mistaken,
who  says  it  is  of  Persian  origin,  and  states  that
Cambyses  made  this  place  his  chief  magazine  in
the  expedition  against  Egypt  (Mela,  i.  11).  It  was,
however,  an  important  and  strougly-fortified place,
as  being  situated  so  neiu*  the  bonlers  of  that  conn-
try.  Alexander  took  and  pillaged  it,  after  it  bad
made  a  powerful  resistance  for  the  space  of  three
months  (Arrian,  ii.  27 ;  Qnintus  Curtius,  iv.  6).  An-
tiochns  the  Great  sacked  it,  and  it  was  several  times
taken  from  the  Syrians  by  the  Maccabees  (losephns,
Ant.  lud.  xiii.  21).  It  was  afterwards  subjected  to
new  losses,  so  that  St.  Luke  states  (Jc(«,  viii.  26)
that  it  was,  in  his  time,  a  desert  place. The  town


GAZE1TE


716


OELON


NTHM  Hubetequoutly  called  CoDStantia.  It  in  uow
termed  by  tbu  Arabfl.tibuzzch.  The  aucient  uoiDe
iu  Hebrew  si^itfics  "stroDg."  ['it  A  city  iu  tbe
Feraiau  proTiuce  of  Sogdiana.  It  n-as  oue  of  the
MTeu  cities  tliat  rebelled  agaiiisl  Alexauiler  the
Great  in  n.f.  :WH.

Gazette. Urtt  Acta.

O*  (r^). .See  GxMU.

Oebenna  Mona. See  Cebrnita.

Oedroaia  ir<ap«Kria).  Tlif  farthMt  i>rovinc«  of
the  PtTMiao  Eaipiro  on  the  »i)iittiejt»t,  and  one  af
the  Hiihdi visions  of  Ariann,  liouinli-<l  on  the  went
l>y  C:iriiiauia.oii  the  Dort.1i  by  Driiiigiiinii  ami  Am*
cboMia,  tm  the  eaat  by  India,  or,  n»  the  country
about  tbfl  lower  course  of  the  Inilnn  wan  called,
lodo-Scytbia,  and  on  the  »onth  by  the  Marc  Eryth-
raeuui,  or  lodian  Ocean.  It  :•>  kiiowii  in  liii>lory
chiefly  tbrongh  the  distrum  sntfereil  for  want  of
water  by  the  anny  of  Alexander  in  pnuiiif;  through
it  (Arrian,  Antib.  ri,  84).

Gela  llVXn  or  TiXi}).  A  city  on  tht>  Huuth  coaHt
of  Sicily,  on  a  rivor  of  the  uinie  namu,  fouudfd  by
RhiNliaiiH  from  Lindue,  and  by  Cretans,  B.C.  WO.
U  Koon  obtniuod  Kreat  power  and  wealth;  atul,  in
fif^a,  it  fonndwl  Aj;riKentiiiu.  Gelou  transported
half  uf  its  iiihabilunts  to  Syi-acnoe:  the  place
}iradually  fell  intii  decay,  and  in  the  time  of  An-
frnstns  was  not  intnibitcd.  The  poet  Aeschylus
liied  ln-re. See  Geuis.  i

GelanoT  <rcX<tiw^).  A  deacendnnt  of  Inachns,  I
king  of  Arg^w.  Whi-'u  Dannilet,  Ukewi(«3  a  descend-
ant of  luiK'hiiH,  caiijit*  to  Argiwt,  and  laid  claim  to
the  sovereign  {Hivrer,  the  citiiietitt  were  donUtfnl  in
-vrhoae  favonr  they  slionld  decide.  While  they
wpre  hesitating,  a  wolf  fell  npon  the  eattlu  whicli
vri'Tvi  feeding  bi-foi-e  the  city,  and  killml  the  bull
who  vcan  dL'fending  them.  The  citi/enn  regarded
thin  aM  a  Hlgn  from  heaven,  and,  itilt-Tpreting  the
wotf  aa  meaning  l>anaU>t,  they  cointwllcd  Oulanor
to  retire  in  his  favour.  (.Scl-  I>AXAUg. )  In  the
J^uppliixt  of  AosohyluH,  Pelasgna  in  king  of  ArgOK.
Ho  gircft  Uanails  a  firicndly  welcome,  and  defends
him  against  the  aons  of  Aegyptun.  Unt  he  is  van-
qniahed  by  thein,  retires  fntm  the  sovereignty
Hpotitaiieounly  iu  favour  of  the  strauger,  and
loaves  the  comitrj-.

0«ld(lba.  The  modeni  Oelb,  below  Colonla
AgrijipiiiH  (Cologne),  a  fortified  place  of  thu  tlbii.
ou  the  HLiuc,  ia  Lower  Gennauy  (Too.  Biat.  iv.  S6,
etc.),

OelUa  Oeiu.  A  plebeian  gens  at  Rome  of  Saui-
nitic  origin.  To  it  helongeil  the  generals  Getlius
Statins  and  Gellius  KgnaliuH.  ( Setf  Kunatii.  )
The  chief  brunch  of  the  ItelJii  at  Rom**  bore  the
name  Pubiicola.

Oelliua.  (I)  Cn'.  An  eurly  Roman  historian,  a
conteuKporary  of  the  Gracehi.  IIU  history  of  Rome,
ihongli  lost,  in  freqneutly  qnotod  by  thn  ]»U'-V
writers.  {^)  Ax.'iA'8.  A  Latin  grainmarian.born  at
Rome  In  the  early  part  of  the  Becoud  century,  and
who  died  al  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Marcus
Anrelina.  We  have  Imt  few  particulars  of  hi»
life,  though  it  is  known  that  he  studied  rhet-
oric under  Antoniiis  luliatias  and  Snipicius  Apol*
linaris  at  Rmne,  and  philiMtnphy  under  Favorinus
at  Atbenn,  and  that,  on  his  n^tnrn  ro  Rome,  while
still  at  an  early  age.  he  wan  madtf  oue  of  the  cen-
tumvin  or  jud(ie«  in  civil  eanses  (.\W.  All.  xW.  '21.
Gt'lliiift  has left iMibind hini  one  work,  entilleil


yoctet  Attime,  "Attic  Kighln.'' It  woa  writt4n,te
bo  informs  ns  In  the  prufocc,  during  (be  wintei
evenings  iu  Attica,  t-o  amuse  bia  children  in  their
honrs  of  relaxation. It  appears  frt>in  his  own  Ac-
count that  ht'  hud  lieen  accnatomed  to  kecpaoom-
moiipluci!  iHiok,  in  n  hich  be  enterml  wbatrvoT  lie
board  iu  cunreiKiiiiuu.  or  Uhot  with  iu  hi«  piirate
reading,  that  apjieared worthy  of  rememhnuiea.
Iu  com[WRing  bis  SoelrM  Jttitar,  be  fwem*
to  have  copied  the  contcntti  of  his  cotunion]^
Uonk,  with  a  littlv  alteration  iu  tbe  language.
without  any  attempt  at  claaaitlcation or  arraan^e^
ment. It  iu,  iu  fact,  a  hnge  acrap-book  contaiDiD^
aiiecduteti  atul  arguments,  bi(«  of  history  and  pieces
of  poetry,  and  diiwertatioim  on vartuus  |H>inl4  tti
philuHophy,  geomulry,  and  grammar. Amid  oinrb
that  is  trilling  and puerile,  it  gives infuniiatiaa
ou  many  suliji'Cts  n-latiiig  to  aiilifiiiity  of  abtcb
we  uiUKt  othetwiso  have  he«*u  igQurant. It  is  rti-
vidtrd  iuto  twenty books,  which are  still  extant,
excepting the  eighth  and  the  Qr^t |Mirt  of  ilie
preface  to  the  whole. Of  tbe eighth book,  lli«
tahle  uf  ouuteuts  has  come  down. He  DietitltMU,
iu  the  courlusinn  nf  his  }>n*ra(.'c,  his  inlt^ntitm  of
(MiiitLiintiig  tliM  work,  uhich  purpost'  li«  ptultahlf,
hi>wev«r,  UL-ver  carried  into  effect. Thr  style  at
AutuHGelliuH  is  in  general  un6t  for  inittaliou. It
his  fotidiiuAs  for  archaisms,  be  is  ofteu  uarried  tM
far,  and  iniroduces  too  man;  forma  uf  cxjireMJM
from  the  earlier  comic  |Kiela,  whom  ho  seenu  umw)
anxitHiH  to  take fur  bis  models  iu  thU  resppri.
That  he  invented,  however,  any  new  tenm  tiiw-
self  seems hardly prolmbl*'. Flis language,  »
fact,  1>p)nngs to tbp  Aii-caltM African Atjle  of
Latiiiity.  with a  mingling  of  archaic  fotuni  auH
those that are characteriHlic of tht> jilelfeUD
speech. (Si'c APRICaX I'kriod np LAtTXITV:
Bkhmo Pi.KUKll'!*.) TliL' Ktaudnnl iiliiiuoA  «f
Anhis  Gelliiifl  are  thoNi>  of  Currio  i  Part».  1^);
Qronovius (I^yilnn, 1706; revised by LVmn'l'.
1762);  Linn  [Guttingcn,  1^34);  and  M.  Ilcrl.t  ifrc
lin,  1883;  smaller  ed.  Leipzig.  IHHtn. The  A»<<"
Jtticae  has  been  translated  iuto  Kngtiab  by  Belw
(Loudon, l.HOO) ; into Freurb by r>e ChaaflWBV
Flambart, and Biilsium iParis, IHIH); and  t»»
Gerniitn  by  Weiss  (I-^-ipxig,  ISTii). For  a  vali»U»
analysis  of  tbe  Xoctri  Jtticar,  and  a  crilioilet'i'
mat4<  of  Gullius,  see Prof.  Nettlcahip'a  £bM9>  <"
LotiH  Liln-aturr  (Oxfunl.  IHtjG). Ou  the  laagut^
s<te  Gorgea,  Ih  QuihuMtam  S«rmoHi*  GttL  I'ivftitU
tibut  <l{alle,  1HE13); and  Cooper,  JSrrmt  FUtd**
(N.  Y.  IH96).

Oalon  (rAui').  (t)  A  native  of  Getn  ia  ^h
who  rose  from  the  station  nf  a  pri%Tilecili«ii  t**"
snprenie  ruler  of  Gela  and  t^yracniio.  He  vaide-
Hcended  from  an  aucifiil  fnuiily.  which  origtBUl^
came  from  Telos,  nti  islaud  off  the  coast  of  Ctfi*>
and  scttli'd  at  Grla,  when  it  was  Untt  colotiiM^^
the  Khoiliaim.  During  the  time  thai  HipportiH"
reigned  al  Gela  (RC.  49^-491),  Gelon  was  ■ppt'i™*'
ed  commander  of  the  cavalry,  and  greatly  distin-
guished himself  in  the  various  wars  which  Hii'poc-
ratea  carried  on  against  thn  Grecian  citiwi  in  S*wilj.
On  the  death  of  Hippm-nites,  who  fell  iu  ItfUtl*
against  the  Sicnli,  Gelon  soized  thu  supreme  ]>c**i
(B.C.  491).  Soon  afterwards  a  mon*  sph-udid  pr**^^
iu  his  way.  The  nobles  and  landholders  lyon'^P'*'
of  Syracnae,  who  had  l»eeu  driven  from  the  cttjbj
an  iiiKurreeiiou  nf  theii-slavoa,  supported  by  tb»
reflt  of  the  people,  applied  to  Gelon  for  a*«i*i*ici
This  crafty  leader,  gl.idly  availing  biHMcU  U  llx


UELONI


717


tiEHaCA


Dnity  of  extending  liiu  doinitiioiis,  m&rclicd
Bto  wtiu'ti  lie  wu  Admitted  by  tliv
i{B.c.  At<>),  wbo  liad  uot  Ibe  uieatis  of
inidnble  ati  oppoueut  (Herod,  vii.
L).  Having  thuit  becuiite  uaater  of  Syni-
«>  a|>}Mtintt*d  \\\s  brother  Hiero  g<tvenior  of
,ud  exertet]  all  his  eiidfavoiira  to  promote
Mperily  of  hia  new  acquiHilion.  In  ord«r  to
le  tlie  iM>paIatiou  of  Syracuse,  bo  deatroj'ed
ilia,  Aiul  rt^iiiuveil  all  litt  iubabitaut«,  to-
with  a  threat  unuiber  of  tbeeitizoiMof  Gela,
fuvourite  city.  By  bia  various  couqueAia
I  great  abilit)t^tl,  be  Itecaine  a  very  pcn-orful
)h;  and  tberefore,  when  the  (ireekH  expected
on  nf  XerxeA,  auibawtadnnt  were  sent  by
yracnite,  t^i  secure,  if  [HWMible,  bie  iLssiHt-
t  the  war.  (iejan  iiroinieed  to  Hend  to  their
>liDndr«d  trtrerneA,  twenty  tbounand  beavy-
troops,  two  tltoii8An<l  cavalry,  and  mx  tliou-
Ight-nrnted  troo)>s,  iirovidt^l  tb*!  nupronic
nd  werv  given  to  biiii.  Tbiit  offur  iK'iiig  iu-
tly  rejected  by  the  IjOceibuMnoniau  and
nn  ambaNiadoni.  Cielon  sent,  occonling  to
itn»,an  inilividnal  named  CiidimiH  to  Delpbl,
^at  trcnttnres,  and  with  ordent  to  prettetit
n  Xencee  if  lie  proved  victorious  in  the  coni-
ur  (Herod,  vii.  157-164  ).  This  statenient,
sr,  waa  denied  by  tbe  Byracnsane,  who  said
elon  woald  have  usaisttMl  thu  Cireeks,  If  b*^
t  Iwen  prevented  by  an  invasion  of  the  Car-
ians.  with  a  force  amounting  to  thre«^  hun-
lonsand  men,  under  the  commaud  of  llaniil-
LTiis  great  army  was  entirely  ilefeatwl  near
I  by  Gelon  and  Theron.nionBrcb  of  Agrigen-
D  the  same  day,  according  lo  HiTodntiLs,  on
the  battle  of  Salaniis  was  fought  ( llurud.
»  full.).  An  account  of  this  ex]ie4lition  is
veu  by  Dimlorus  Siculus  (xt.Sl),  who  states
e  battle  between  GelutJ  and  tbtt  Carlltagin-
as  fongbt  on  the  same  day  att  that  at  Tlu^r-
le.  There  Meeius.  iudeed,  t<»  have  he*'ti  a
-  undemlandiiig  lK.'tw«ou  Xeries  and  the
f^itiiaiiH,  iu  accunlauce  with  ubii-h  the  latter
I  attack  the  Greeks  in  Sicily,  while  the  Per-
auarch  waa  to  move  down  upon  Attica  aud
lopoDoesos.

u  appears  to  bare  used  with  moderation  the
wbivli  he  had  autuiml  by  rtoleuce,  aud  to
>ndeareil  himself  to  llm  ByimnuMaiJiN  by  his
overtiment',  and  by the  Bticiiiiragitnient  hu

0  commerce  and  the  finu  arts.  Plutarch
that  the SyracnsaiiiH  would not  allow  Ihm

1  to  l>e  defltroycd  together  with  tbow:  of  the
tyraiiln,  wlmii  Timolrnu  became  mswiter  of
y  (I'liit.  Timul).  He  die4l  B.c.47t^,  and  was
IcA  by  bjBbrotJw»rHiero(Ari8tot.iV/i(.  v.  12).
'be  ton  of  Hiero  II.,  king  uf  Syracuse,  who
'fore  his  fiither.

3ni  (rtXttvoI).  A  Rcylhiio  ]icopIe,  dwelling
tsatia  Astatica,  to  the  east  of  the  river  Ta-
k»)  (Herod.  Iv.  lOtJ).  Their  chief  city  waa
mlouna.

mras  (r<^ii^f1.  A  Rhmlian  astronomer  who
aed  ahont  B.c.77,aiKl  wrott;  an  extant  work
ityi}  €tt  ra*ai«);i<va),adi'JM:rijitive  treatment
aeotary  aatmnomy.  The  text  is  given  in
's  edition  of  Ptoleuiy  (Paria,  1819).

>topoei  (^fXdn-oTTofoO- See  Parasiti.

una  0<iBot). A  pracions  stone. The  art  of

[  gems  waa  learned  by  the  Greeks,  at  an


early  periotl,  from  the  Egyptiaus,  who  had  prac-
tised it  from  reniott^  anti<]uity.  The  Acthiupians
used  engraved  »tone«  as  coins  (Xi'tfui  iyyr^f'Kvfuvat),
and  engraved  seals  may  have  heen  usc«]  for  luousy
in  Greece  prior  to  the  invention  of  coinage.  (See
Nl'Ml8.MATic8.) At  Hrst  the  cutting  wns  only  coo-


i'bvDiciui  (irm. (Kmg  C'Vltcctioo.)

cave,  the  gems  being  set  in  rings  and  oaed  as  seals.
The  subjects  are  usually  hnuiau  or  animal  forms,
especially  lions,  hulls,  and  horses.  The  oldest
Greek  gems,  nnmhors  nf  which  have  l^et-n  found
at  Mycenae  and  lalystis,  are  bean-shaped  ("lentic-
alar'')  or  pehhle-shaped  {" glandular "},  differing
thus  from  the  cylitidere  and  scanba  of  Assyria
aud  Kgypt.  Cameos  or  stunea  carreil  In  relief
first  came  into  use,  it  woold  aeem,  iu  the  time


juper,  la  visniu  Csbl-

DCL)


Tbo  Htrozxl  UcdoM,  I))-  Solon.
(Ch>lcMlAcr.  la  Briliiili  Uu>
Mimt  OttblDcL)


of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  were  tuetl  as  orna-
meiita.  For  cameos  prooloas  stonea  of  various  col*
ours  wore  use^l,  cspcoinlly  the  onyx.  The  layers
of  the  stone  were  so  treated  that  the  figures  stood
out  'vividly  on  a  dark  ground.  Mneearcboa  of  &a*
mo«,  the  father  of  the  philosopher  Fythagoraa
(abunt  B.C.  tiOO)  is  the  oldest  Greek  jeweller  whose
name  has  eoiue  down  t^)  us. Iu  the  fourth  ceiitu-


Gsnis  tna  Ponpsil (Ksplcs  MaMom.)


GKUMA


Tin


GKMMA


ry  B.C.  ilit  mmi  ocle^mted  inaator  whb  PyrcoteU-s,
tlic  only  iirtidt  wlinm  Alc^cnixler  tlie  Great  woiilil
allow  to  rut  tii«  likvnetvt.  In  tlii'  nge  of  Au^riiatua
vrv  bear  of  DioNCc)ri(li5»(.  wim  tut  th*  cmi«M'i>r>  like-
new*  oti  a  alone  wlilcli  wii/t  iim>i1  an  a  nt-iil  iiy  tl>v
ctnoceeiliiig  CiieMitm.  Thv  Etni^cuuh  iiiiil  Khuiiuih
tottk  tip  Iho  art  very  cnrly.  )>nt  ni'Ter  attained  tlii^
«nme  pcrlVction  as  clie  Grtelut,  impui'ting  gcni»t
largely  front  both  Greece  and  Kgypt.  The  Marnb
or  Itei.'tle-abaped  (zcihb,  so  little  valued  by  the
Greokft.  were  intensely  ndinirml  by  flie  EtniBcnuG.
wbi>*M'  ,trt  ill  w>  many  rus{>ects  exbibils  Egy|<tian
cliurnotoristiL'tf.


Cimcaa, (Nkpl«ii  Uu«'iim./

Tbe  fosbiou  of  making  cotlectinn»  of  iH-nntifitl
gems  nroee  a«  eurly  its  tli»  first  riMitiiry  ft.r.  Tliv
inta^tiikB,  r>r  cut  i^UuifH,  Imvr  cimir  duvvii  to  im  in
greater  iinml>*r«  Ilmn  miy  of  tlifi  mnniim<:ntj)  of
aiivienl  art.  TIikrc  wbic-b  Iw-'Umged  t*i  tbt?  ad-
vatu'etl  |teiitMlit  of  htyle  present  examples  of  tbc
riioNt  lieitntifiiL  wurkmniisUtp,  the  most  original
conipuaitloii^  and  tlu'  most  interesting  snHjects,
tliu  lutti^r  being  mainly  taken  from  mythology.
Among  the  renuiiuln^  Givek  cnnit-os  au  important
plncf,  liutU  fur  MZti  and  beauly,  niiiet  be  given  to
(be  GonzagA  Cameo  in  St.  Petersburg,  Tliia,  it
bM  lieuii  cnnjeeture^l,  repreMnt^  the  Xnini  of  Ptol-
emy PbiladelpbtiH  and  ArMinof^,  bin  »\f>tvr  and  wife ;
Ibongli  it  more  probably  conimemorattfR  Nito  iiud
Agrtppiua.  Tlit^  largest  and  moi^t  Aplciulid  of  tbe
camiMm  Tvbicb  bavc  come  down  from  tbc  Hi'man
periitd  are  tbose  at  Vicojm  and  Purist,  repii-wnt-
ing,  in  gronp:*  and  tigntett,  tbe  family  of  Aiignntiis.
Goiiut engraved  niili  hTinioroiiitdesignN  n-«<re  called
ffrjflli.  I  See  Antji'HII.i'8,>  Tliese  usually  com-
binwl  half  a  dowMi  incongnioiiH  forms  nrrongcil
into  tbe  BeiublancB  of  sutiie
well-known  iibject,  and  oe>
cnMi'Mmliy  ^viib  a  bidden
mi'Utiing.  Tbii»,  tbe  uceom-
pairying  example  from  n
gem  hi  Ibe  King  Collection
la  mntle  up  of  a  wolf,  a
boar,  and  a  lizanl  no  blemled
an  to  form  a  b^lmet,  tbe  em-
blems rettj>eptively  of  Mant,
Minerva,  ami  Mercnry.

Wliole  ves*»eU  xverf  Bonie-
time.'i  niadtfof  .nitigle  Nloiies,
and  adorued  willi  relicfH.  An  instance  la  tbe  Man*
tunn  Vase  now  at  Urunitwick,  *>i  iticbe.t  Itigli,  2i
Indies  tbick,  couaiftting  of  u  Hiugle  onyx.  The
lid,  handle,  and  bii»u  aro  of  gold.  Two  parallel
linw  of  gold  divide  tbe  surface  into  tbree  parts,
the  middle  one  of  wbicb  baa  twelve  fignre?*.  repre-
Henting  the  festival  of  the  TbMmopboria,  in  three
gronp«  ;  while  the  highest  mod  lowest  are  adorned


l^m


Orylltih iKilij:  I'-ollwIii


With  leaves,  flowers,  oats  of  corn,  ft-nit^,  bnll»*
hea<Ts,  and  other  objoctEt  conoected  with  the  win-
sbipofL)cmeler,  Wurksofthisklnd  weir«oiitetiur«
made  nf  coloured  glau.  Tbe  mo»r  celebra1^d  iii-
Nlanre  nf  this  Kort  is  tbe  Portland  Va»e.  fonnd  tilled
with  iiHbeK  ill  llie  tomb  of  Alexauiler  Heveni».atiil
now  in  ihif  Hrilihb  Mnsetim.  ItM  height  i»  abmit
10  iucbett.  The  material  ia  a  dark  bine  trtmit|HU-
ent  gluMt;  with  beantiful  rolicfa  tu  ffhitu  o|taqnc
enamel.

HertKlottia  (vti.  ti!?)  speaks  of  a  sharp  stone  as
being  Uited  in  eugritving  getUB.  Many  of  tbe  ait-
cieut  gemB.  espei-ially  tbose  ttsvd  as  coins,  veiv
eugraverl  with  obsidian,  of  which  kuives  vrre
made.  A  niiiinte  metal  dink  willt  »  Hharp  tnlsf
and  workfil  by  a  ilhll  wah  nsed  iu  rntting  lfi«
deeper  parltt  of  tbe  |palterti.  (Cf.  Pliuy,  £f, -V.  xxvii.
7*i;  and  .Murray.  Humlhuok  of  Greek  .lrrA«rwl(»yji,
pp.  147-I4>i).  A  sort  of  emery -powder  (Hwyrin  uu*
euiployeft  to  charge  tbc  tooU.  The  iTuntaf  of  ills-
uiondH  and  fragnients  of  otirncitu  were  useil  »
diamond-points.

Pornome  nuconutof  tbu  t^xtraordiuary  iirofiuixn
4if  preeionn  Ktoni'ti  in  tbe  East  ami  among  tin
HnrcptwtrH  of  Alexjtuder,  eee  Diod.  Sic.  xviii.  %:
Atben.  xi.  p.  7hl ;  Strab.  xr.  p.  T16.  and  other  p»-
sagcH  <|tioted  by  Krause,  J'ftrffotrlrii,  p.  113.  Th-
extravagant  luxury  of  the  Komana  of  iIm:  £iii)ii>v
rivalled  that  of  tbe  Dtadocbi.


■lODjrx  Ftas^itn  [mi^frbfCaDiavl)

Pearla  and  emeralds  were  tbe  (avonrite  «(«>••
of  the  Komaiw.  lulius  Caour  gave  Son  ilia.''*
mother  t)f  Bnitu»,fl  pearl  worth  6,000,i)ih»  wsi'f^
(JWO.tHM)}.  The  famon^  pearl  which  CleopsHra z^*
Mjlved  aud  drank  wa#  oae  of  a  pair  set  in  car-ririf*
and  worth  lO.OOO.OOU  •e«t«rce»(*40ti.(HKl),  Cb"'''"
Ae>(opu».8ou  oft  ho  great  actor,  in  imitation  of'"
feat,  did  the  same  thing,  snatching,  howe?fr,  tlw
gem  from  the  ear  of  Caecilia  Metellft.  a  beaii'^  '^^
tbe  tlay.  Cotigiibi  wore  poarls  uii  his  shoe* ;  ?»""
bad  (liem  ttprinkled  overltix  Wd-eovering».  P'"*
ti'lls  bow,  at  a  weilding  party— a  rather  luwl*^
r»ir— Lollia  Paulina,  ibe  wife  of  ColignU  *••
covered  with  pearls  and  emeralds  which  »lf**
in  alternate  rows  on  ber  hoad.  n<'ck.  and  to(^
and  of  which  tbe  cost  \yd»  iO.WXifiOO  •«««*
I  $1,6(I0.0IHI ),  iw  she  proved  by  sbowing  to  IiimUw
receipted  billsfort^em.  *' Pearls,"  besaysiHUi^
er  place,  "are  the  quinteaaence  of  exlrava^u'*-
Clandius  used  an  emerald  a»  au  eye-gbui  «ilk


GEMMA


719


GEMMA


The  GentOK  AngustcK,  mt  Tfeii&&.


Auguitua  and  Ltvia  racelving  nrusuB  and  TtberluB  on  their  return  from  ihelr
Vlndelic  and  KfaKetlan  campatgni. (SirdooTx,  Vienna  CablneL)


which  to  watch  the  circus  games.  The  opal  waa
aIbo  iDDch  aclmireil,  and  Pliny  telU  how  oue  Nouius
was  proscribed  by  Aiituny  the  triumvir  so  that  be
might  be  robbed  of  a  luagDificeDt  opal  in  his  pos-
sesdioii.  Pliuy  also  speaks  of  the  ruby  (carbun-
culua)  and  the  amethyst  as  much  esteemed.  (See
Amkthystus.)  The  anoieiits  perhaps  knew  of  the
diamond,  but  could  not  have  properly  valued  it,
siiifje  the  art  of  polishing  and  cutting  it  was  not
learned  uutil  it  was  discovered  in  modem  times
by  Benjuier  of  Bruges  in  tlie  fifteenth  century.
(See  Adahas.)  Besides  being  woru  in  rings,  gems
were  set  in  armillae  or  braoeleta  in  mauy  forms,
iuclnding  spirals  and  bangles;  iu  montJia  or  neck-
laces of  consecutive  rows,  one  found  at  Pompeii
having  seventy-oue  peudauts;  aud  in  ear-rings.
(Se«  Inauris.)  Jewels  also  profusely  adorued  the
drinking -cups  used  at  bauqnets,  aud  the  dainty
little  boxes  of  gold  and  silver  used  by  the  ladies
in  the  mysteries  of  their  toilets.

As  might  be  expected,  there  was  a  large  traflSo
in  imitatiouB  of  the  precious  stones,  executed  in
both  paste  aud  glass,  aud  with  much  fidelity.
Pliuy  (ff.Kxxxvii.  197)  speaks  of  "glass  Jewels  iu
cheap  rings  "  for  the  lower  classes ;  and  there  exist


P»I«M.

The  ronlnnd  Vtac.


(BrltiBh  Hueeum.)


to-day  at  Rome  collections  of  these  imi-
tntions  which  cauDot  be  distiugnisbed
from  the  genuine  stones  by  the  eye.
(See  ViTRUM.)  The  stone  most  sue-
oessfully  copied  was  the  emerald,  but
we  hear  of  counterfeits  of  the  ame-
thyst, ruby,  and  sapphire.

This  passiou  on  the  part  of  the
wealthy  for  precious  stones  was  nat-
urally favourable  to  the  growth  of
miueralogical  knowledge.  Pliny  quotes
a  large  number  of  \vrit«rs  ^Yho  had
treated  of  gems  between  Tbeophrastus
and  himself.  Some  of  these  writers
seem  to  have  bad  a  personal  knowl-
edge of  India.  Pliuy  devotes  the  final
book  of  his  Shtoria  Katuralie  to  gems,
regarding  them  as  the  most  perfect
works  of  nature.  The  book  consists
of  an  historical  introduction  ($$  1-5);
of  an  account  of  tho  most  important
gems,  arranged  by  colours  ($$  &-54);
aud  au  account  of  minor  gems  iu  al-
phabetical order.  The  book  concludes
with  a  few  geueral  instruotious  for
detecting  fraud.  This  book,  which  is
the  best  representative  of  ancient  science  in  this
branch  of  mineralogy,  shows  us  that  the  nn-
cieuts  were  remarkably  close  observers  of  gems,
availing  themselves  of  all  methods,  short  of  chem-
ical analysis  aud  other  iusti-nmeuts  of  modem  phys-
ical research.  Moreover,  iu  the  case  of  precious
stoues,  minuteness  of  observation  was  stimulated
by  the  desire  of  guarding  against  or  of  committing
a  fraud  {H.  K.  xxsvii.  $  li^  foil.).  Besides  a  mi-
nute study  of  colours  of  gems,  frequently  illus-
trated by  Pliny's  felicitous  comparisons,  the  tests
enumerated  involve  a  study  of  weight,  consisten-
cy (corpus),  hardness,  conductivity,  transparency,
diffractive  power,  fiiction,  taste,  aud  smell.

There  are  uo  traces  in  Tbeophrastus  uf  magical
properties  attributed  to  gems.
Id  Pliuy,  the  doctrines  of  the
Magi  are  frequently  quoted,
but  usually  with  ridicule.
Some  of  the  medicinal  virtues
of  gems  apparently  accepted
by  Pliny  may  appearlittle  bet-
ter than  the  doctrines  of  the
Magi.  But  while  Pliuy  is  not
iu  a  positiou  to  criticise  the
alleged  virtuesof  gems  applied
as  medicine,  he  consistently  re-
jects their  eupernaturnl  pow-
ers under  other  couditioua.
The  magical  system  is  seen
fully  developed  iu  the  Lithica  of  Orpliens.  (See
AuuLKTUM.)  This  poem  claims  to  be  a  statement
of  the  magic  properties  of  gems  made  by  the  seer
Theodamas  to  the  poet  Orpheus.  The  work  is
generally  assigned  to  a  time  subseqiieut  to  the
edict  of  Coustautius  against  magic,  iu  a.d.  357,
aud  not  long  after  Valens,  although  Krause  {Pyr-
golelea,  p.  6)  ascribes  it  to  the  flftb  ceutury  B.C. ;
aud  King  dates  it  "at  least  as  early  as  the  second
century  B.C."  The  latter  scholar  gives  au  Eng-
lish verse  translation  {Preciout  Stones,  p.  375).

Much  confusion  and  uncertainty  exist  as  to  the
true  nomenclature  of  gems.  Both  iu  ancient  and
moilern  timvs  there  bos  been  considerable  loosenetw
of  usage  ns  to  the  meaning  of  names. In  many


InUgllo.  with head of
Aftica. (KtOK  Collec-

liOD  )


UEMONIAE


710


GENirs


iustauces  where  llie  ancient  wont  exists  in  tniMlern
langna^e,  it  denotes  »  ittoiin  entirely  tlifTereut  from
tbnt  ongiunlty  signilied.  For  example,  trmriptipos
19  ccrliiinly  the  Uipit  Uiiuti,  nu<l  ha«  uo  connection
with  the  sapphire,  n'htch  was  cnlle4t  ht/acittthtiB.

5>c«  KrniKte,  t'firffQfcle^,  o<ter  die  f(lle»  Strme  dvr
Jf/ff»  (Hallo,  1854>);  Lciiz,  Mitierahitie  drrnUrn  firic-
rhrtt  HHfi  Itomcr  (Oollm,  IHil);  C.  W.  King,  .Vnfwrnf
tlinlurtt  o/  I'rreioua  SU}nci  and  Gcmv,  and  of  PrtdoHt
Mrtah  I  Luiiiloii,  IfffO) ;  id.  Hatttl-hovk  of  En-
grurrtl  Gftna  (London,  lUOO);  id.  Antiqae
iitmn  and  fiin^mLiUHlon,  lifJ'S):  ilitlflleton,
TAtf  Eut/rared  Omia  of  Clo«aical  TimfM  (L<in-
doD,  IA>1);  Bllimuer,  Technologie,  iii.  '^iT
(Leipitig,  l?75~c<7):  Murray,  Uand-bouk  of
Otvrk  Jrchacoluffjt,  pp.  4(M)«,  146-173  (Lon-
don, 1693^;  iiiid  an  article  in  ITarprr'a  Maga-
airtf  for  1879.  vol.lix.  pp.  5-'>2-&41.  On  the  n«e
uf  getns  iu  riiigH,  mm*  ANi'i.t'<«'r  uii  tbu  art
of  gera  ongruviiig,  tte*  ScaUTI'Ra.

G«znoniae  (uc.  acalac)  or  Oemonii  (ho.
graihi«).  A  llij;hc  of  at«ps  cut  uut  of  the
Aveutine,  down  nbich  the  boilie;!  of  criiu-
iuals  slniiigled  iu  the  pri&oti  werv  drHff^ed.
and  uftem'anla  thrown  into  the  Tiber  (Vul.
Max.  vi.  .1,  3). See  Carcer,  p.  278.

0«nXbniii  or  CenSbum.  The  modern
Orl^aiin;  a  town  in  n»Uiii  Ln^diinenMis,  on
the  iK>rth  hank  of  the  Li^etis  (Loire),  the
chief  town  of  the  Cininten,  siib»eqiiently
calletl  Civitoa  Anrelianonim,  or  Aiirelia-
□en^iH  rrbfl,  whence  lt«  inodcrrt  naiue.

Q^naTunl,  A  {wople  in  Vindeliciii,  the  in-
habitunta  of  tW  Alj)ine  valley  im>w  culled
Valledi  Nod,  subdued  by  Drattua  (HoT.Carm.
iv.  U,  in).

Oenesia. See  Vvsvb,  p.  697.

0«neftiuB,  lu^RpHUS.  A  ByzAntine  historian
who  wrote  (nboot  A.l>.  940)  n  liintory  of  the  em-
perors from  A. It.  613  to  8W>.  E*lition  by  Laclimanu
(Bonn,  iJ^i).

Gtoofitiix.  "The  mother,"  a  name  used  by
Ovid,  OH  n  title  of  Cybel^,  in  the  place  of  ma-
hT,  or  magna  mater;  but  il  in  better  known  an  a
BQrname  of  Venos  (Lncret.  i.  I),  to  whom  Caeanr
dcdicQtod  a  t«mple  at  Komo,  aa  tho  mother  of  the
Julian  i^''ui).

0«iietyUitt  (rfwn.XXir>.  A  namo  applied  to
AphriHlit^  as  protecting  births,  and  uIho  to  her
CDmi>nnioiiH  (r«fm'XAi'^<f).

0«nATa  or  0«nava.  The  modern  Geueva;  the
lant  town  of  tbt<  Allolirogc8,  on  the  frontiers  of  the
Helvctii.dituated  on  the  south  bank  of  (he  Rhone,
at  ihu  ajHit  where  the  river  dows  out  of  the  La-
cus  LeuBunus.  There  was  a  bridge  here  over  the
Khone. iCacft.  B.  ti.  1 6.)

0«iiiu>  ("creator,  beRetter,"  from  gi^o).  The
Italian  |>eoplett  regarded  the  (reuitia  as  a  higher
power  which  crenteH  ami  nmiutains  life,  assists  at
the  begetting  and  birth  of  every  individual  man,
determines  his  chnruclvr,  tries  to  intluencc  his  des-
tiny for  good,  at-contpanicM  him  through  lifn  as  bin
tutelary  spirit,  und  lives  on  in  the  Lares  after  hia
death.  (See  Lakes.)  As  a  creative  principle,  the
GeniuA  is  attanbt^d,  strictly  8ii«aking,  to  tho  male
sex  only.  Iu  tbe  caao  of  women  bis  place  is  tak-
en by  luuo,  the  personification  of  woman's  life.
Thus,  in  a  house  inhabited  by  a  man  and  his
wife,  A  Genius  aud  a  Inno  are  worshippeil  togeth*


er.  But  in  common  parlance,  it  waa  uaniil  to  •peal:
of  the  Geuiua  of  »  hunnc,  andto  thiftOeuiuMtliF  mar-
riage bed  (/rr/M^r^ffiiiuJw)  was  sner^d.  A  umu's birth-
day wasuaturaliy  thehoruluy  of  his  atteudant  Ocu-
ius,  to  whom  he  ollered  incense,  wiue,  garlaiidk.
cake8,everythiug,inshort,bnt  bloody  sacrificea,  aud
in  whose  honoar  he  gave  himself  up  to  pleasure  autl
enjoyment;  for  the  Genias  wishes  a  man  to  haii'e
pleaanre  \x\  the  life  that  he  hna  given  him. Heui.-c


^^^l


Ueniiu  uf  Wise, il^>iu|>eU]i  Monic  i

the  Romans  spoke  ofetijoying  one's  self  ulodnlg
one's  Oeniuft,  aud  of  rennuciatinu  as  BpltUlgT
(Hor.  C'arJM-  iii.  17,  U  ;  Pers.  iv.27).  Men  iworel
iheir  Genius  as  by  their  higher  aelf,  and  I>t  lh«
Genius  uf  ]ierHons  whom  they  loved  and  iMnHiaivl.
The  philosophers  originate<l  the  idea  of  a  nuui  Iiit*
ing  two  Genii,  a  good  aud  a  bad  one  ;  but  ia  tlw
liopular  belief  the  notion  of  the  Oe&iua  was  Ui**
of  a  good  and  beneficout  being.  Families  socie-
ties, cities,  and  iK-oples  hatl  their  Oenias  u  ««lt
as  individuals.  The  Genius  of  the  Roman  peofb
{fttnitta  Fuhlicua  or  Gn%a»  Populi  Jiomani)  itoitil  ii
the  Fomm,  represented  iu  the  form  of  a  beanM


GENNADIUS


721


GENSERIC


All  erowueil  with  n  dindcm,  a  coniucopia  in  hie
'"Hjctit  liaiiU,  nml  a  M:e[»tn!)  in  bis  K-ft.  An  nnniia]
.•acritice  wan  offered  to  him  on  tho  ytti  of  (Jctolmr.
L'udvr  tho  Kmplru  Ihu  (*i?uiil.s  of  Augustas,  the
foaiider  of  tbts  Eiujiire.  niiU  of  the  reigninj;  ctniier'
or.  were  pablicly  wurHhi|t)M!d  at  the  sjtine  time.
Localities  also,  mich  an  open  Hpiiccs,  stw-rts,  Uaths,
jtud  theAtrea,  had  lh«ir  own  G«nii  (IiiMr.  Orell.
343,  1007).  These  w«rt'  ntmnlly  r<'pre'«'iiteil  iiiiiU-i'
'  ibe  form  of  Miakes;  and  bencu  ilip  comruou  hnliii
of  keeping  tame  snakes. S**v  Aniji  in.

The  GrvekB  also  bad  a  Hiuiitar  In-Iit^f  in  Genii,
calling  thpm  inifiOV*t,  or  rln«>iuonM.  of  whom  Hesind
mentionH  thi>  nomUT  an  ItO.OCI,  who  are  iLppointed
to  b«  thH  niiiiiHt«r!i  of  Zon«  nml  the  gtianliauM  of
lOHU.  Hi-  n*K:ii'di4  tlit^m  im  Ihe  bouIb  of  the  right-
eous. Ptiidur  speaks  of  a  ytvidXtos  Saifiay,  which
Heemn  to  Iw  exiictl>  the  ei((iivakMit  of  the  Koinati
Qeiiiiis. Stt  DaEMuX.

Ofizmadiua.  A  presbyter  uf  Marseilles,  who
ia  the  tifth  centnry  A.l>.  continued  St<  Jerome's
li»t  of  eccltMiiMticAl  writ«ra  (riri  iltHatret).  !$ee
RlEhtiNVMrs.

OennetaB  {ol  ■yiyt'tfTiii). The  Athi'Ojiau  torm  for

the  meiaherH  of  the  'MH)  atictt^iit  families  tyim/tu),

thirty  of  which  lowle  u|»  one  of  the  twelve  ififia-

Tpi'at  of  the  four  ohl  Ionic  triUeti. Th*u«e  faTnitieM

conauitett  (if  Home  thirty  bon^ett,  who  niferreid  tlieir

origin  and  name  to  a  coiuiuon  auCuHtor,  and  oli-

verved  a  common  worship,  with  Hpociid  prtt.-«it!i  to

sai>eriiiluiid  it. The  (ihj«cl»  of  this  worship  wohi

ZeiL*  Hcrkfios  (the  god  of  boiiM'  and  homo),  Apollo

PatniOkH  i^b|0'Hl  of  tUti  fumily^  thu  heroes  of  the

raniily,  :in<I  <riht.T  tntelary  duitien. In  case  a  family

worship  ruM)  to  the  diguiry  of  a  state  ceremonial,

the  prie«t]y  ofltce  remained  hereditary'  in  the  fam*

ily  iytvpai. If  there  were  no  nearer  relatious,  the

members  of  the  ycVca  had  a  law  of  inheritance

which  they  ohaerveil  amon;;  theniwlvea. N[aiii-

tnined  hy  tbetw  religions  nnd  legal  tio«,  the  ytVfae

and  the  tPtntrpUti survived thu old Ionic  trilx-it,

aft«r  tht)  alxdition  of  thu  lattvr  by  C  lint  he  m-?*.

The  president  of  the  yivva  MiiperinrendMl  the  cir-

rolment  of  new  mcmhera  into  it  at  the  feast  of  the

Apatnria,  the  occasion  on  which  tbo  new  memlwrs

of  the  tppoTfiiai  were  also  cnrolle^l. (See  AI'ATU-

RiA.l A  citizen  who  did  not  belong  to  a  yrVrai

vuiild  only  become  a  nieraber  of  one  by  ndoptian,

and  under  oertaln  conditioua. Sco  riiitAritiA.

0«aa  (from  the  root  oen  of  gtito  =^ gignv).  A
Roman  family  in  the  widest  iwotM  of  the  word,
de«4-'*^nded  un  tbo  inalu  line  from  u  voiuiiion  au-
C€!»tt(>r.  and  therefore  beuring  a  couimou  naiue.
8o  long  an  the  ]>alricianfl  were  tUo  ordy  citizens
with  fnll  rights,  there  could  of  cour»e  be  uo  geutea
UOt  patrician.  The  oldest  gentcH  belonged  to  the
trihe't  of  tbo  Latin  ICamuiMt  and  the  Sabine  TiCios.
Bestdea  theae  there  were  the  gentes  bt-longing  lo
Cbe  Albau  families,  bronght  to  Rome  by  King  Tul-
)na  Hoetiliuti;  and  embtHiieil  by  the  other  gentee
in  the  commnnity  an  a  tliiid  tribe,  tbo  Liiceres.
These,  the  nioMt  ancient,  weif  called  ^i^nfr'^  niniffrcr
«a  dtstttigniMliL-d  fmnt  the  rifiitm  minoren.  wliich  iu-
ctndcd  the  plobeiauM  whom  TarquiuiUH  PntKuit
raiaed  to  the  rank  of  patricians.  There  were  In
later  times  instances  of  plebeian  g'cu  tes  being  raised
to  patrician  rank ;  but  these  became  rarer  and
rarer,  so  that  the  number  of  patrician  gentes  was
Unally  much  reduced.  During  the  last  years  of  the
Aepnblio  we  hear  of  only  fourteen  atill  In  exiat-


enoe,  iuctndiug  thirty /nmt/iw  (or  familica  in  the
narrower  sense).  Many  large  gvnt€-«  were  divided
into  bouses  intirjKt}  who  li;ul  a  comruou  cognomen
in  addition  to  the  name  of  their  gens;  thus  Ibe
geuM  Cornelia  included  ih«  Coriielii  MalngineiiM^K,
Cornulii  C'oBsi,  CVruelii  Scipiones,  L'oruelii  Kiifnii,
Cornulii  Leutnli,  Coruelii  IJolabelloe,  Cornelii  Ce-
thegi.  Coniclii  Uinnae,  Cornelii  Bullae.  Aiming
the  plubeia!>»,  as  among  the  imtricians,  thofamilia
naturally  de\eIopixl  into  a  larger  circle  of  relation-
ship; but  gentes  iu  the  old  senso  were  not  formed
by  the  ]>rocesa.  Thringh  the  plebeian  had  bis
gentile  nnme.und  aftt-rw.inls  bis  fOj^iioMen,  he  had
not  the  real  imt  gmliimuia. .See  lV8.

All  grntilen,  or  mt^mber!^  of  a  gens,  had  a  right  to
its  ooinmnti  pro{M>rty,  which  iiirlnilMl  a  common
bnrial-plare.  They  aUo  had  a  tiMttamcnlary  law
of  tbt^ir  own  which  laHtcd  on  into  the  trnjtenal
|Hirii>d.  When  a  inembi^r  of  ii  gcnn  died  n'ilhinit
heirs  of  hii)  body,  the  next  to  inherit  ( na  in  the
caitf!  nf  the  plebciani)  were  the  agnati,  or  gentilt*
on  the  male  side,  who  could  prove  their  ridatiou-
bhip:  failing  these,  the  j^^afffM  divided  the  inherit-
ance. The  c^kiistenco  of  this  law  rendered  it,  in
old  times,  necessary  to  obtain  the  con»en«uti  of  the
Nvhole  gens  in  caaea  of  adoption  and  testamentary
becjuest.  Another  cnnsoqnence  of  it  was,  that  it
was  the  duty  of  tbo  gmiihn  to  provide  a  ciiralor
for  insane  \mrmmn  and  NpendthriftH]  and  a  guurdian
fur  minora. 8e<i  OrRATDR.

Every  gous  had  its  meetings,  at  which  reaolu-
tiouH  were  passed  binding  its  individual  membem
iu  matters  affcetlng  the  gens.  Jt  was  a  decree  of
the  gona  Matilia,  for  instance,  which  forbade  any
cuie  of  ite  menibcrs  to  bear  the  praenoiueu  Marcos.
Ah  every  familitt,  whether  patrician  or  plebeian,
bad  certain  sncrirlces  which  it  was  bound  to  per-
form, so  had  ever)'  gens,  as  a  larger  (tr  extendtwl
famiUa.  All  members  of  the  gens  were  entitled,
nnd  indeed  bonrid,  to  take  part  in  the  micm  t/ettli'
Jicia,  or  common  woi-ship  of  thu  gene.  These  mirra
(■c'jtsed  to  exist  with  the  extinction  of  a  gens;  and
if  a  member  of  a  gens  left  it,  tbiR  right  and  duty
also  came  to  an  end.  It  shonld  he  atliled  that  cer-
tain public  religions  services  were  aKsigned  to  par-
ticular geutt's,  that  of  Hercules,  for  instance,  to  the
gentPinaHa.  See  ?lt(miinM!ti,/i<mi«rA<'M  Slanttrtrht^
iii.  i.  pp.  l.V-*2y;  Becker,  Hnntlhurh,  ii.  I.

Qenafiric  (more  correctly  Oaiaericb).  A  king  of
the  Vandals,  was  the  illegitimatesunofGndtgisohis,
succeeding  his  brotltei*  tlonderic  in  A.b.  4'iO.  In
the  same  year  he  left  Bpain,  which  had  been  partly
coiitpiercd  by  tlic  Vaiidalit,  and  crosiMrtl  over  into
Africa,  at  the  suiicilation  of  Iloniface,  governor  of
tliat  province,  who  bad  been  induced,  by  the  arts
of  bis  rival  AcMmh,  to  rebel  agaiimc  Valentinian
III-,  em|ieror  of  the  West,  lit^niface  soon  repented
of  the  step  he  had  taken,  and  advanced  to  meet
the  invader.  Itiit  his  repentance  came  too  hite.
The  Mo«)ra  joined  the  standard  of  Gonseric,  and
the  powerful  Mcot  of  the  Dountiste,  who  bud  Wen
bitterly  attJicked  by  the  Catbnlics.  agisted  him
against  their  adversaries.  Ikmiface  wa»  ilvfeatcd,
and  obligeil  to  L-ctire  into  Hippo  Kegins,  where  be
remained  till  he  obtaiued  a  fresh  supply  of  tmopit.
Having  vcutnred  upon  a  aecoBd  battle,  and  being
again  defeated,  he  a1>andoned  the  province  to  thu
barbarians,  and  sailed  away  to  Italy.  Hippo  Ke-
gius  fell  after  a  siege  of  thirteen  months,  and  wiia
sackeil  with  an  almost  infernal  fur}*,  wbicli  laid
waste  indiscriminately  ohnrches,  delda,  and  bouses,


GENTILES


7St


GEOQIUPHU


auil  oaritcd  for  the  name  of  Vaiulal  the  enduring
iufauiy  wliicb n proverb can confer. A  (wnce
was  coiicIiideU  Imtwevii  G«useric  and  the  Emjwror
of  till'  We^it,  lij-  wlik'li  nil  Africa  to  tbe  west  of
CtirtliAge  was  ceile<l  to  tli«  Vandals. Tbis  peac«,
bowever,  (lid  not  Iour  continue,  »ud  ibe  cityof  Car-
tbnF;o  was  t.ikfn  by  the  Vamlals,  by  sni'innse,  a.h.
439. The  Ennwrnrs  of  tbe  West  and  East  made
(jre/it  prpparations  for  tlio  recovery  of  the  proviuRe,
but  an  alliance  vrbich  GiTiiM>rie  uiadB  with  AttllAt
kinK  «r  tU«>  Hnns.  <<lft<ctnany  MM:nr«d  biiti  agaiiut
tbuir  attviuptii. Getisoric'a  next  object waa  tbe
formation  of  a  uaval  {Kxvcr. Au  imuiciifre  unniber
of  fibips  n'urc  built,  and h\A  iIuuTh  ra%'aged  ibo
shores  of  Sicily  and  Italy, {tie*:  Amia.) Invlr^^l
by  the  empre«a  Kiidoxia,  bo  o.iiled  u;)  the  Tiber,
A.v.  455,  and  vtcrinitted  bis  Mildiei-s,  for  Ibe  apaco
of  fonrieen  days,  tu  pillage  Rome, lu  a.d.  4(3U  hu
destroyiHl  the  fleet  whii-h the  enipenir  Mnjoriati
bad  i-<>tlect«d  for  the  invaaion  of  Africa:  and,  as
bia  power  iiicreaHe<l,  hit4  rava^ett  became  more  ex-
tensive. The  island  of  Hartlinia  xvoh  contgiicretl,
and  Spniti,  Italy,  Sicily,  Orevoe,  KgypI,  anil  .\!^ia
Minor  werp  phindured  every  year  by  the  Vandal
pimtvs. Loo,  tho  emperor  of  the  Ka»t.  at  lur-t
resolved  lo  make  a  vtgorouM  cflort  for  thi>  rtictiv-
«ry  of  Africa. A  great  army  wiu  aMunibled.  und
Ibecontmnnd  %vtis;iciven  to  Ilasjliciis. lie  landed
at  Bona,  and  at  Hnil  met  trith  eonsidernble  nnc-
CKO,  but  wiwt  at  U'ngtli  obliged  to  retire  from
the  province. After  tliiw  victory  Geuocric  met
irith  no  further  oppo^iiiinn,  bnt  remained  ntnli"-
tnrbeii  manter  uf  lite  »ea  till  Imm  death,  wliicli
huppeneil  AJx  477. Ho  was  snccectled  by  hiH
aon  Hnnneric. Geuaeric  was  nti  Ariau,  aad  is
aatd to have persecuted  tbe Catholic)*  iritb
jjreat  cnielty  (Froeupins,  Ifc  Jlelt.  f'aml.  :  Gib-
bon, Decline  und  I''all,vilim».  X3ixiii.-\sxvi.).  See
Vanuau.

Qeutlles. Fersous  belonj^ng  to  tbe  same

t/ciii. Sec  GESH.

GentUicium  Nomeii. See  XuMEN.

QentinB.  A  kingof  the  lUytiatiB, allied  niih
Per^-rifi,  King  of  Miicedoniiii,  and  eon-iuered  by
the  Komani^  under  AnioiiiH  Gallns,  B.C.  1^*7.

G«aua.  Thu  modern  Gcuoa,  a  thriving
couimercial  tonn  it]  Lignria,  sitnuted  at  the
Vitrcuilty  of  thu  Ligmian  Gulf  (Gnlf  of  Genoa),
and  »ubH«<|Ucnlly  a  Konian  mitiiicipium.  For
niiniu  time  during  the  Second  I'uuic  War  It  wa.t
held  by  Mago,  the  Carthaginian.  The  plniie  had
uo  political  importance  lu'foi*e  the  Middle  Agew,
when  it  was  called  Janua.

Oeuncia  Oena. A  patrician  gens  nt  Rome,  of

which  the  chief  families  Iwre  the  names  Aveo>
Cineiisis  and  Auguriuus.
Oeuucia  Lex See  Lrx.

Qeunaus.  A  river  iu  Greek  Ill>Tia,  north  of
tbe  i^psu.<<)  (Livy,  xliv.  30).

OeograpUA  (  ytuypa^tia  y.  Tim  world,  us  con-
ceived iif  in  the  It'md.  is  a  round  plain  encircled  by
ft  gn>at  river,  Octauus — not  tbe  Atlantic,  of  which
Homer  M>ems  to  have  no  kimwiodge  at  all,  hut  a
piiroly  mythical  atrwmi.  The  sky  is  a  groat  eon-
caTu  roof  propiwd  up  by  pillars  which  the  mighty
Alios  (q.  v.f  upholdtt.  On  the  large,  tlat  disc  of  the
earth  is  a  sort  of  belt  or  zone,  of  which  Humcr  ap-
peaiB  to  bav«  a.U«tiuU«  notion. It  includes  Greece,


for  which,  hovrevcr,  he  bos  no  collective  ttauir,
since  with  him  Hellas  denotes  only  a  district  of
Thessaly  [Jliatl,  ii.  6t^3).  Acaroania  and  Epimsan
not  lueutioned  by  uamo.  On  the  north  of  rbe
Aegean,  the  Tliracinnn  are  known,  iucludinj:  tbe
Paeouiaus  along  the  Axinsiii.  ci&i').  Iu  Asia  Miuor,
tbe  topography  of  the  Tn^wl  in  familiar  to  tb«-
]H)et ;  Lydia  Is  meutione^l  as  Ma«^>iiia;  while  his
refei-ences  to  tbe  interior  4if  Asia  Minor — Phrygia,
Faiuphylift,  etc.^are  vaguely  inde6uit«i.  Of  Ihf
Aegeau  ialaitda,  Crete,  Rhodes.  TeuMlos.  Imhni^
Samotbrace  (Baiuo«),  I<esboa,  and  Lemno*  are  specif-
ically uieutioncd.  Boyoud  this  belt,  Homer  kDo«6
litlli;  or  nothing  of  the  vorld.  Iu  the  North,  tbr
lutlk-fed  nomatls  are  noted  (xiii.a);  in  the  Sontb.
the  Aethiopett,  "remoie&t  of  meu."  are  ludicated
Near  the  bauktt  nf  Oceauus  dwell  the  Pygmlea.
Tbe  Egyptian  Thebes  (ix.  3H1)  aud  isidon  iri  9^i
occur,  and  the  wonl  "  Pfaa^nJciau "  n|)|ieat«  onw
(xxiti.  744).

The  Offjusry  represents  a  innre  extended  gwv
gnipbical  knowledge.  Chios  is  menlioncd;  soil
tio  are  Deloa.  the  Dorians,  Ithaca,  and  Sicily.  Tbe
I'htuniciaiis  are  now  well  known;  the  Aelblopt*


A  ^

Th*  World  orrftntlBjt  lo  Kottinr

are  tjo\r  clearly  detlued  and  dindcd  into  tw"  •*>
tions,  the  eastern  and  tbe  western.  Scytia  w'
CharybdiB,  the  Lot  us- eaters,  aud  the  PhwaflW
are  new.  All  this,  however,  in  hary  and  obwiff-
(See  .Tebb,  ZTofNer.  ch.  ii,  [Glasgow.  l'*?« ).)

Tb«>  PhiiMiieiaiiH  and  their  kinsmen, the Cirt^
ginians,  by  their  commercial  enterprifM>,  didai^b
to  eecnre  a  knowledge  of  the  coast  of  Afric«.uxl
sailed  westward  us  far  as  the  Canaries.  HewdoW
speaks  of  them  aa  circumuavigating  Afrtok  ^
fomocis  voyage  was  that  of  Hanno  (q.  v.i,  th«f^-
tbijginian,  who  seems  to  have  goiio  licyuml  vli^'
is  now  Sierra  Leone.  But  geographical  stodf  ■<*■'
geographical  literature  took  their  riM,  like  b'^tun*
eal  literature,  among  the  Ionian  Givcks  of  A<>>
Minor.  Their  extensive  cnmmeroe  and  tbvnic-
tivity  in  founding  cidouie*  «n1a<)^  th«!ir  p»«-
graphical  horizou.  Ttie  neceaalty  was  ibn^fi-hnf
utilizing  and  reconliug t-ho  kiiowlrdgr  alrtvl;


«ci|uir«(l  for  the  (uirimHie  »f  iliiieovftriii^  tlm  ft>rin
4iud  coiifttitiition  of  tlm  earth.  The  Hrftt  stieliipt
«t  outlining  a  ninj> of  rlit>  w»rlil  wii«  nia«le  by  Ari»-
tffjgonm  or  MiletUH  about,  n.c.  TkjO.  HtH  kiiisuian
HecalniMut.  one  uf  the  writ^jrs  culled  \iryoypa(pfti.
■who  HimrinUwl  ftUmt  lifty  yearn  Inter,  corrected
«n<l  enlnrgMl  thiti  inaji  and  addud  a  coaiuieotary.
<8ee  LoTtOGKAPni.  I  TliiB  couimeiiUry.  of  whicb
only  ftnfnnfintK  are  preserved  in  quoraiiotm,  is  iht
oU\e»t  pu-cv  of  purely  jn'0};rapbi*'nl  writing  |u
<Jn.*«k.  Tlie  geivgniphicol  cliapters  in  the  liistory
<if  HerodoUiH  (  about  B.C.  450)  citni|H«xisat«  tis  to  ii
Cfrtnin  exifiit  fortbe  Lohs  of  tliis  work,  and  of  the
other  workH  of  the  Xo^«7i><i<^o(  nn  Uiittory  ntid  gi>-
ot;rapby :  buttbey  treat  only  the'rnstci'iihalfof  ibe
then  kiinnii  world.  Il  becniui>,  iiidooil.  fn  tbe  nb<
ace  of  a  regnlar  Irodicioii  ufgi-ogmpbical  ftctenc«,


u  usual  thing  for  hintnriniiis  tti  iiiscit  gimj^rftpbiral
diMiuirtitiuuH  into  tlieir  workk.  Ttio  wiiting))  of
Tlincydi'cleH,  Xeiiopliou,  C't*.■^iail,  EplioniH,  Tb«o-
piiuipUH,  Tinmeui),  and  otlibnt  dunu  to  tUo  lime  of
FolybtuH,  afford  exftinplea  of  this.

TliD  iirst  porely  goograpUienI  work  which  has
come  down  to  us  lo  a  complete  state  is  the  t'rnpiux
{Ut^iir'Kfivt),  beartog  the  nomoofScytax,  written  in
thellrBt  part  of  tbe  fourth  coutury  II. c.  Iti»ndeM.Tip-
tinn  of  tilt*  coa«t  i>f  llie  Mediterranean  8eA.  About
tbe  Kaine  time  tlie  aHtrononier  KntloxiiH  of  Ctiiduh
luade  a  great  lulvHiict?  in  tbv  theory  of  pbyKioal
geograjiby.  It  was  he  who  firat  adduced  luathe-
niai  iral  pniof  of  the  aphorieal  shape  of  the  earth,
which  ha<l  b«eu  aasertwl  before  bis  time  by  Pytbag-
oraM.  Tbe  division  of  the  globe  into  Are  zones
(two  frigid,  two  teiuperatc,  niid  one  torrid)  is  also


GEOGRAPHIA


7Si


<iE(XiR.VCHIA


diutoliim.  About  B.C.  3:HP,vtbcM  orMaMHia(M»r-
M{llMi)«xploreit  towardi.  tUo  uorthwcttt  as  far  a*  tbo
aortberu  ami  uf  tha  Britbli  UUudK  and  the  coaiU
of  the  Gormau  Uceuu.  About  the  eiamt-  tine,  the
eampalguB  of  Aloxiui'dcr  tUc  Gtcat  opouMl  u\*  Asia
as  far  oa  ludU  to  (iiuuk  reHcarcli,  Nojirclitia  tuiute
R  report  of  exceptional  value  ou  Ijia  coast  voyage
from  the  IndiM  tn  tlie  EuphnUea  AH  tbese  Uitt-
coveriea  were  embiwliifl,  aWut  B.C.  '^'.if),  in  a  now
map  by  Dic»eiin!bu>t  of  MesHana,  n  ilisciple  ot'  AriH>
totit*.  Hf)  was  tbo  fii'nl  ttchulur  wlio  treatvd  physi-
cal ((tM>gra[tliy  in  a  »cientiti<]  tnaiiiit<r.  Ho  rk>«8iiuie<l
the  exiaU'iice  uf  a  Houthcni  tn>iniHpIien>.  and  made
aa  estiiuato  of  the  varth'«  circiiiijft.'n''i»ce,  to  which
he  gave  the  exaggerated  tueasa rente ut  of  4U,000
miles.  Hia  utap  reiaaiiied  fur  a  luDg  tinw  the
staadanl  work  of  the  kind.  The  soathern  and
eastern  parts  of  India  were  still  further  npeue<l  out
under  Alexntidt^r'H  6ncee»)»ors.  in  couwqneuce  of
the  campaigtiv  of  the  SeloitcLdae,  and  aeveral  Jonr-
ueyn  wen*  iiiidortaken  by  anibaasadonr  among
which  that  nf  Mega«the»f«  nhonld  he  meutiooed.
The  cviuui»rcial  expeditions  of  the  Ptolemies  re-
8ult<Ml  in  frefih  knuwtedjj|;«  of  the  coasts  of  Arabia
and  ICa«t  Africa.

The  t\rat  person  to  arrange  the  mass  of  geo-
graphical mj)t-{>ria],  hitherto  collected,  into  a  really
aoientiHo  syiitem,  vrtui  tli-atosthenea  (q.  v.)  of  Cyre-
u<!i  (about  B.C.  'i7&-17o).  He  found  his  mattKri&U
in  the  rich  collections  of  the  Alexandrian  Library,
Alexandria  being  then  the  central  point  of  the
commerce  of  the  world.  He  was  fully  eqitippe<l
for  his  task  by  his  acquirements  both  in  physical
science  and  mathematics,  and  in  history  and  phi-
lology. He  L'udeavnured  for  the  first  time  to
eatiinattf  the  earth'n  rirciimferencu  by  a  niiuuture-
nient  of  dugrees  cnrnin)  tint  uvt^r  a  Hpace  nf
liftiHin  degreeM  of  latitude,  tbuugli  the  Imperfec-
tion uf  hia  muthiKl  Itroiight  out  t^iu  largo  a  quan-
tity. The  nnnii?  of  lliiijmrchus  of  Nicaea  (about
B.a  140)  niarkM  a  eonNidemble  Mivanct;.  Ho  may
be  cjilLed  the  founder  of  niathoiiuitioal  geog-
raphy, as  ho  npplifiil  gfM^gniphtcal  lougth  and
brcwUh  to  determine  the  poaitinii  of  places  on  the
earth's  surface.  Ho  al!M>  superseded  the  rectangu-
lar and  eqiiitliBtarit  pntjection  of  parallels  mid  me-
riilians,  hitherto  used  in  ma[)s,  by  »  pnijcvtion
which,  with  few  modi 6 cations,  is  identical  with
the  one  now  in  use.  The  paralh-U  were  rwpn--
sentixl  by  sugineiits  of  a  circle,  the  meridians  by
straight  lines  or  cnrres,  corresiKiudiug  with  tho


i<taM^


portion  of  surface  to  he  rppre8eat4>d.  drairn  at  din-
taticos  corres|Hinding  to  the  actual  distanees  ii«
the  sarliice  of  the  globe.  The  ««tinuit«  of  tb«
earth's  circumfvnMic-e,  which  wa«  accejitecl  as  «>r<
reet  down  to  the  tenth  century  a.Ik,  was  tluit  «f
Posidoiiius  of  Apamt;u  i  about  a.r.  90).  Taking
an  his  basis  the  ineasuretueut  of  the  shortest  ili»-
tUDce  from  Alexandria  to  Rhodes,  hn  broaght  out
the  result  as  4^^  geographical  miles,  or  too  lltUs
by  nearly  one-»ixth.

Only  fragments  remain  of  the  writings  of  these
getigrapherH,  und  others  cout«mponiry  with  them;
bat  we  possess  the  great  work  of  .Strabo  of  .Vnis-
i«ia, liutshed about A.D.  tiO,  the most importaiic
monument  of  descriptive  geography  and  ethnolo-
gy which  has  come  down  fn>ui  Greek  anti<|ailf.
Thaoks  to  the  Roman  o^mqnest,  he  was  in  a  prM-
tion  to  give  a  more  accurate  description  of  ilm
West  than  his  predecessors. Up  to  this  time  all
that  the  Romans  bad  done  for  geographical  re-
search was  to  open  up  Western  Euro|>e  and  Xortb-
em  .Africa  to  the  CJreek  »ctenti«t«.  An  immenseserr-
ice  was  rendered  in  »cienco  by  Agrippa,  mider
direction  of  Augustus. He  meaeiin-d  and  iudi
ed  on  a  map  the  distance  between  thu  statin
tbo  great  military  roads  and  along  the  ooutoof
the  Roman  Empire,  thus  contributing  euonnMial;
to  our  knowledge  of  ancient  topography,  siiil  lay-
ing a  foundation  for  our  maps.  These  data  furuol
the  basis  of  a  dcw  map  of  the  world,  which  vu
first  set  np  in  Rome. Xumerous  copies  wero  pndh
ably  taken for  the  larger  cities  of  the  Etn^
and  smaller  portable  oneti  distributed  aaong  tli»
military nnd the adniini<4trative aBlcDrs. Il  ><
pnibably  upon  cupias  of  this  kind  that  the  Utttn-
ha  and  the  TabuU  PeutiHfferianM  an  baud. Sm

InSERAKIA.

Ill  thu  tint  euEilury  A.D.  tnncli  waa  nddsd  t»(,*'
ographical  knowletlgo  by  the  expetlitioos  of  Uie
Roiuaiis  into  the  interior  uf  North  Africa  aiitl  i^
North  of  t:uro[iti.  About  A.t>.  5U  ApoUnDtu)  "f
Antioeh  explored  India,  going  beyond  the  Po'ijil*
nnd  possibly  as  far  aa  the  Ganges.  The  moans*
portunt  literary  wnrks  of  the  Romans  w  ft^i-
raphy  Iieloiig  to  this  periml.  These  art"  (I'  ih*
coinpeudiuin  uf  Pompouiiut  Mela;  (3)  the  i^f^
graphical  buoks  of  Plitiy  the  Elder's  great  euc^''''''
}uii-dia  {Hinturia  Xataralis),  iiti  uncritical  eowpl-
latioii,  but  the  only  rcpn-MCiitattre  we  have  "t  ^
uumWr  of  lost  works;  and  (^)  the  (irrmnnta  oiTx-
itns,  an  oasay  mainly  of  au  ethnogmphic  chsfKf  r-
The  last  grcjit  niiiLriliu'i«>
made  to  geographical  •t'wtif*
in  antiquity  i*  Ibr  wort  o(
the  Alexandrian  uAtrouoiD^
Ptolemy  (nbonl  X-U.  ^'^^
Tills  coiisisi«  mainly  pf  Ii»i*
of  the  places  marked  <>»  l*"
current  luajHi  which  I"*
makes  bis  aulilorilie^''"''
their  latitude  and  I.mgin"'*"
After  Ptolemy. Ihr  g«'{!ii»|"li
ical  literature  nf  tlir  Ijrwi*
nnd  Rinnans  nlik^-  liM  U"'''-
iiip  lo  show  but  ctHupiUI'*"'*
anil  I'xtnirts.  TowTU^U'l"'
i-nd  tif  the  Hixth  oenlBTi
8 1  e  p  h  a  n  n  H  of  Byutilt»
couipiUil  a  dirtinnary  "'
geogrnpby,  which  is  *>'"'
able  for  the  quantity  uf  i"'


UEUMOUI


725


UERASA


aattou  taken  from  the  oMlt  and  lost  writingft
rliich  it  tiUibodicA.  Tlie  buck  vf  Ftiuttuuioti  (abuitt
A.P.  ITo)  is  Viiliiuble  M  bearing  uu  tlm  »p«rial  lo-
]H>]|(ra|)by  of  Gre«ce.  C'o«iiuuii,  calleiJ  ludicopleus-
t«»tr  wrote  iD  tbe  reixn  of  .Jiistiui.-iii  a  wuik  called
TitpoffraphUi  (.'An«(jnH(t,Kiviiigaii  account  of  ludiu.
lu  it  occurs  the  Rnl  luvtiliuu  by  uiimf  of  Cliitm.
Sei-  Bllubury,  ITinlurff  uf  Ancient  fi€t>ifraphjf,  2  vnlw,
(1883);  St.  Mania,  ffift'tirt- de  G^graphir  ;  Rwne,
iirnijraphica  i\^\)',  Scbmidl,  Zmr  Gritehickle  ttrr
grftt/ruphitrhen  LUIeratKr  bei  Grtechen  und  Ji6meru
il-*"^);  BergtT,  Octckichlf  dtr  teiaaenacha/H .  ErA-
kmnde  Wi  tien  Gritvhtu  (l!r>9li;  aud  Antichaii.  Lit
Grande  Vn^ngt^  dr  D^^rfrtrt  He»  JnciVni  (IcOl).
Tlie  remains  of  the  Orografihiiri  Grarci  hfinarpt  are
eilited  bv  C.  Miilter,  i  voI«  iPariis  l8Si);  the  Gto-
yrajihi  Liifiiii  by  Ricae  (Frankfurt,  li^fr).

Geomdri  iytvfioftot't.  Id  many  Doric  Stnti^a,  par*
ttctilartr  iu  Syriuintw,  a  term  denoting  the  terri-
Uirial  ariHtocracy :  but  in  Ath<>ns  it  wan  ajiplied
til  tbu  landed  couiuiuualty.  diNtinguiKhed  fnini  the
EifiraTptiiH,  or  oobli'H,  un  the  uufs  xide,  and  tho
£ir}fitovpyiH.  on  tbo  other. See  Solon'ian  Coxstt-

TITION

Oeopouici  lyfotirni/iicoi').  Ttie  ancient  writers  ou
nunculturt; ;  fur  iiidtance  lainonf;  the  Clreeks),  the
philusoptKT  Oemocritiifl,  nml  in  tai«r  tinif^A,  Xeno-
|itioD,  iu  bin  Ot€oaomicu».  No  other  Greek  works
nf  the  kinil  have  t-onic  duwii  to  ua,  except  the  col-
lection caUiMl  Geopoaica.  This*  couaifttft  of  cwouty
iKMtkK,  and  r»u-
t^kiiiM  ex  t  raciH
fruiu  writcnt  of
the-  tiioAt  widely
«lit>tai]t  |>eriod?!i.
Tho  compiler  was
jx  Bithyuian,  Ca»-
«iatiii!(  fill  HH  n.H.
vrbit  lived  alintit
th^  middle  of  llie
^iith  cvuturj  A.D.,
And  uuderlauk  the
work  at  the  nng-
jftmtloa  of  llie  eiu-
-peror  Coiislantiuc
VIL  Be  based  it
apon  a  eiillection
•of  extriictM  Diaile
"by  a  corlHin  Viu-
fluniuK  AiiatttliuH.
Agriciilture  was
held  iu  hi>;h  es-
teem by  the  iio-
maas.aiid  theKti*'-
j«3t  wa«  iu  const-
•^ueuce  a  fai'tmri  !«>
^uewith  their  men
4if letters.  Auuui-
b«r  of  their  works
on  it  hove  come
HflavTU  to  na :  the
Bfm  liuMticii  of  tlie
elder  Cato,  a  sioi-
itur  work  by  tbu
eiicy  clopAedic

cholar, Mari'iis

ereutiua  Varro,

Gtvryii-a of

ferjtil ;  aud  after
brirtt (hp writ-


iugH  of  CuIumelU.  Qargtlins  lUrtlalis,  aud  Palhi-
dius.  The  Gettrf/ica  of  Vergil  are  in  venw;  as  is  oua
b{>ok  of  Colnmella.  See  Ueckh,  Ve  Gfopr/Hitomm
CodkUiM  Maituacriptit  (lbd6). See  ScHirroajcs  Rei

RL'STJCAE.

Oeorglca  (yi^pyiKo).  The  title  of  Verifil'apwin
ou  hiitilviudry. See  Vergilius.

Oflphyrael  ir«^f/M(utX  Au  Athenian  ftimlly  to
which  llarnioiiniH  and  AriittogitoD  belonged.

Oepldae.  A  Goihic  people  who  fought  under
Attila,  nixl  nfterwanis  HUtltHl  in  Dacia,  on  the
hank«  of  ilin  Dnniilm.  They  were  oouqttered  by
the  Langoli.-Hnli  or  Loraharila

0«raerae  iyniutpmf.  The  fonutain  prienteiutrs
who  took  }iart  iu  the  AutheAtcria. dee  Dionvsia.

Geraeattui<r«,)a«rToc).  A  promontory  and  har-
bour nt  Ihe  southern  extremity  uf  Kuboea.  with  a
Celebrated  temple  of  Poseidon  (Thuc.  iil.  3).

Oeranea  <r<f>u»-f  «i).  A  nin);v  nf  mountains  rnii-
ning  along  the  westttni  const  of  MrgitriK,  t«rmii-
nating  in  the  pniumntory  Olniiae  in  the  (^onnthlaa

territory  (Time.  i.  105).

Oezfinoa  (yipavns). A  dance. Se*  HvroitcHKMA.

GtorAaa  tVtpairai.  A  city  nf  Coele-Syriu  (I'tol.
V.  15).  about  tliirly-fivfl  niilfs  enet  of  the  Jordan.
The  historical  notices  of  thiit  place  are  very  ficanty,
yet  the  uxtent  and  magnidconce  of  the  Axit<ting
ruLusiihDw  ic  to  have  been  onco  a  great  aud  wealthy
city. It«  site  is  now  called  DJerash,  and  there  are


GERGIS


7M


GERMANIA


reniaiUM  of  iwo  tlieatrec,  two  Iarij;i>  triiiplpsQudfive  the  cli'anng  of  the  soil  uiiil  the  ilraiiiiug  of  Ibr
or  six  sumller  oneti,  a  fonim,  tn-i>  line  liHtlu,  u  tri-  awnnips  linve,  hitico  the  i\ajn  of  tbe  Kodibq  Eiupitr.
umptialjtrcli,  a lAr^ftMv^tsn'oir.nndtwu bridges.  Soe  oatiflidcrably  moditlfil  the  rlinmto  of  tbe  country.
Thonisou,  Thf  Land  ami  the  BotA,vn\.  ill.  (N.Y.  1866). '  The  wooded  motiutaioB  of  Son  them  Germany  vpre
O^TKia  (rf>y<f»  or  Oergltha  <t«  rifryiBa).  A  city  |  "»"»lly  called  Silrae  by  tUe  RomaoB.  the  iu.»t  &.
.•f  Dimlauia  iu  Troae^  a  Bettleuient  uf  the  ancient  |  "'o"»  *»'"S  ^^^  Hercyuia  Silva  or  Hercynnw  Sal^
Teiicri.  and,  conwjquently,  n  towu  of  ven-  great  *"»'  ind'xling  the  moderu  Schwarzwald  or  Block
nntiiidily  (Herod,  iv.  122). OergiM,  aoconiinR  to  1 1'""*'- ^''^  0''p"^«HHieTIiUnngerwnKl.tbeEri


Mimiit  Ida  (Dion.  Hoi.  i.  55),  aiid  at  olhura  Gcrgi- 1  The  ptMjple  whom  the  Roinaua  called  Oemmfii
thin.  were  a  branch  of  the  Teutonic  r^ce,  and  aro  linrt

nientioued  iu  history  in  the  fonrth  cennirj-  a.il
i^he  name  is  of  uDCcrtaia  ctytnology,  being  b;

some  derived  from  a  Keltio  root,  uieaninK  "ti*


Oergovia.  A  fortilied  town  of  the  Arvenii  in
Onul,  Hituitted  OQ  a  hi^h  nud  inacceMiblo  hiU,  we^t
or  soiithn'est  of  the  Elaver  (vVllier),  probably  iu  the
ueif^hbonrhood  of  the  modern  Clermont.

Oermani. Sco  Geelmaxta.

0eniuuiia  (Vepfutvia).  The  Konnm  name  fur
tbe  territory  bonudcd  on  the  west  by  the  river
Rbeuus  iKhiue);  on  the  east  by  tbe  river  ViHliila
and  the  Carpatei)  (Ciir^>athinn)  Monntains:  on  the
«oalh  by  the  river  Hister  ni  Dannbinu  (Danube);


HhouCeta"  (i.  e.  {iorjv  liyaBoi),  by  others  trotu  a  m»-
'  ^(fd  Keltio  root  uieauing  "  ueigbbotuv/'  and  Ij
olbiira  ftiini  tliB  German  grr,  gurrr  —  i,  e.  ifnr,
=  "th»  narrior-f.''  Tacitnii  (Utyn  [  (icrutamia,  ii
ihut  thi>  uam6  Gt'nnani  veaa  applit'd  tu  the  Tuugri,
the  lir^t  German  peoplo  to  crotui  tlio  Kbiuc,  idiI
a|»|wa!-M  tf^i^vi'  bi'cu  trxtendcd  iu  it*  um>  by  llir
Ganlif  tu  tl^  whole  race. The  uainu  Tuutuues  *m


O  £ H M A X


%


MV^MtYT


_•-«•"


aerntaiiift. iKkport.)


and  on  the  north  by  the  German  Ocean.  The  north-
em  nud  iu>rlhH.-uit(>ni  partH  of  Gallia  Betgica  were
alsK*  cidled  Germania  Prima  and  Geiuiania  Sk-
crxPA  niuli-r  thu  Eaipire,  in  contrast  to  which
Germany  Fnnwr  «:im  Htyled  Gbkmania  Magna.
GRi).MANtA  IlAiuiAnA.  and  Gi^r.maxia  Trassrhe-

N.VNA.

Thi<  Rniuau  writers  describe  it  as  a  dnsary
wastfi,  covered  for  the  most  part  with  denw  for-
cBt*  and  moraM8e<i.  and  subject  to  heavy  fni»t«  and
almost  contiDnono  cold,  ho  that  it  in  pmbabU  that


not  the  generic  name  for  them  in  thr  liuir  ufilte
Romans,  tint  'm  the  base  of  tbe  moderu  apf^ll*-
tion  DetttMh;  the  same  with  the  Gothic  Tlitii^.
"  the  people."  The  modem  French  naoie  for  the
Germans,  J/?cM(i»rf»,  is  derived  froTu  the  natw  of
tbe  tribcfl,  whoforniwl  n  league  on  thf  npperRhin*
nndor  the  api>eUntion  Alemaiini  or  AUmanni  IdUr
Manttvrl

The  Gernian»i,  lliongh  having  no  common  tiaMt
reganli'd  (hrnisplvcH  a«  having  a  common  •Ir-Mut
from  MannuA,  thu  first  man,  aou  of  the  god  TuiMO


GEHMANIA


137


UKUIANIA


Ihfxtnnus  nan  fuliled  to  bavo  hod  three  soot,  frOB
ivbom  sprang  tlie  three  great  Goniiaii  peopln^
tlto  iBtaovoucA,  iDgBeroDcs,  niiil  the  llermiuoDes.
The  firyt  of  thtfue  nro  the  people  with  vrbom  the
Knninns  wri*  nftvnctit  l»maght  inlo  contact,  since
tbey  huM  both  bnukn  of  tlia  Rhine.  SntHlivision^
of  this  racp  were  the  Ubii  (near  Colngne);  the  Usi-
l^t^ti,  T4^nct«ri,  Sicuiubri,  and  llrnctvri  (from  the
LiptM'.  to  thu  Kubr);  <be  CUniti  or  Catti  (llosoe).
Buil  the  Hiitavi  iij.  v.).  Famous  gmiipH  i)f  rb«  In-
gaevouea  nen-  tbe  tVinii,  tbu  Ch»iii;i,  uml  the  Obu-
nisei,  along  tbu  Xortli  fi^a  and  the  bauks  of  ihi'
Weser  and  tbu  Ems.  The  most  nniucrona  of  tht'
three  gn-at  tlivisioDs  were  the  Hcrininuiies  in  L'eii-
irftl  Germany,  extending  to  tbe  enat  an  far  as  the
Vistula  and  the  Carpathians.  Tbcy  tncUided  the
[lowerfnl  Sncvi  (t«  whom  Wlongfd  the  Miircotnan-
nl  of  Bohemia  and  the  .Semiinnc.i  of  Draiidenhiiri,').
tbe  Hennnnduri  of  tbo  ThUrtngerwahl,  the  Lmu-
hardi  nr  Langtibardi  at  th^  uimitb  nf  rbH  Kll)«,  the
Vaudali  alung  the  upper  bank-i  of  the  luime  river,
ibe  Herrilt  vrest  of  tbe  ViMtida,  and  tlie  Qiiadi  in
what  H  now  Munivia.  See  ItrittHel-,  lVuhngil;e  drr
DeuttekrH  in  dmx  roH  Taritun  hearrhricbrni'm  fMniie
{Stuttgart,  1^7) :  and  tbe  accitnipanying  map.

Tbu(teriuuui  were  a  staltvarl.  vigorons,  auil  war-
like race,  with  long,  blond  hair,  fresh  couipleiions,
and  bine  eyes,  living  in  wooden  btit-ji.  which  they
often  shared  with  their  cattle,  and  engaging  iu  the
chasH  and  in  tbe  fiertv  jtiya  of  warfare.  Thoiigb
violent  anil  often  cruel,  they  wetv  nnt  given  to
treachery,  but  were,  as  a  rule,  kindly  and  boHpila-
lile.  CbaslitT  >vuM  highly  eKti'emcd  in  wnnien  aikI
was  ruivly  lacking  nuiDiig  tlmni.  Tin;  wife  watt
(vbolly  aubjcct  tu  the  buHbauiI.bnt  wax  treated  with
great  ct>n  side  rat  tun  by  bini  anil  ciniMiltvd  in  tbe  iin-
liortant  affain)  of  lire.  Tin-  rhililren  wero  breil  up
10  be  hardy  and  endarlng,  Uw.  boya  being  t.ingbt  at
au  varly  ago  the  use  of  weapons.  The  majority  of
tba  people  were  ftiw  (JMr/rnui),  though  there  wau  a
second  cIbm,  described  by  Tacitus  aa  liberd  iU'ti,
A.  8.  fot'O,  who  bad  uo  political  rights,  and  a  third
olasB  composed  of  slaves  (utrri)  who  were  either
priaoDers  taken  in  war  or  those  |»eitsons  who  had
been  sold  for  debt.  Some  tribes  bad  kings,  and
there  wax  a  small  br^ly  of  tiobles  {tmbiltis).  All
freemen,  however,  were  wjunl  in  re«pect  to  Ibeir
]H>liticftl«(iuality,  the  only  difference  lietween  them
Wing  in  the  amount  of  tbe  blocMl-money  {A.  S.  ircr-
jiltl)  imposed  as  a  Hue  for  tUo  killiug  of  a  king,  a
noble,  or  an  ordinary  titye-Nuiui.  The  flpecial  priv-
ilege of  tbe  famous  warrJora  of  tbe  tribe  was  to
Hj^fihtr  around  them  bands  of  yonng  men  emulous
'pTUIb  fame  uf  their  chieftains  {priHCiptt\  Sncb
hands  are  called  byTaeituii  comilalut,  and  contain
tbe  germ  of  tbe  later  feudal  system.  Tbe  central
governing  Ixnly  was  tbe  general  assembly  of  the
freemen  in  arms,  they  coiMtituting  tbe  ciri/o*  or
nation.  The  king  was  elected  from  tbe  nobles,
and  did  not  succeed  by  tiiberitanre.  The  divi-
tions  of  the  people  were  banlly  t«rritorial,  but
correBponded  to  tbe  ctiTisions  of  the  armed  buRt.
Tlie  pagH$  and  ricae,  of  which  the  Roman  histori-
ans Hpeak,  were  iu  reality  divisions  of  tbe  jvcople.
At  tbe  time  when  Caesar  wrote,  tbe  GerraonB  were
iu  a  state  of  transition,  pOKNing  from  the  nomadic
to  au  agricultural,  eettlvtl  condition.  Iu  Tacitus,
tbey  bare  entirely  ceascrl  to  be  nomadic,  but  have
become  attached  to  a  dvtinite  territory.
Aa  to  the  religion  of  tbe  Germans,  the  Notices
at  have  reached  ua  are  scanty. Tbe  chief  deity


Brod  ot  jlDCKitit  G^mufi (Bauma'Klrr  >

vfas  Wotau,  the  same  aa  tbe  Scandinavian  Odiu,
the  god  of  tbe  sky  and  the  air,  deligbtiug  iu  war-
fanji  and  the  chat^e,  and  repreaent^.-d  as  riding
n[Kin  a  wliito  borse.  Douar,  the  Scanilinavian
Tbor,  the  god  of  thunder,  was  identifieil  liy  tbe
Kumanti  with  Hercules  and  afterwards  with  Inpi-
ter.  A  tbinl  ileity  was  Tgi'  or  Ziii,  the  god  of  war,
regarded  by  Tacitus  as  Mara.  A  ^odilesA,  Nertbns,
waa  worshipped  by  the  tribes  along  the  Baltic,  pre-
siding over  marriage,  the  honseholil,  the  children,
and  the  realm  of  tbu  dead.  She  is  the  same  as  the
Saxon FriaorFrlgg.aniltbeFraukiab  Hulda.  There
were  also  three  fatal  stslers— two  fair  and  benefi-
cent, one  dark  and  umlign  ;  besides  giants,  elvea,
and  dwarfw.  After  death,  the  brave  were  believed
to  euter  Walballa.  The  prieata  were  very  inflacu-
tial  among  the  Germans,  offering  sacrificea,  and
predicting  the  future  from  tbe  ueigbiug  of  horses
and  the  flight  of  birds.

HiSTOKY. — The  Germaufl  first  appear  in  faiatory
in  the  campaigns  of  the  Cimbri  and  Tentoncs  (B.C.
1131,  the  latter  of  whom  were  undonbtwlly  »  Oer-
mnnio  people.  About  fifty  years  nfterwanls.  Ario-
vistns.  a  German  chief,  croiMwl  the  Rhine  wiib  a
vast  bout  of  Germans  and  subdued  a  great  part  of
Gaul ;  bat  he  was  defeated  by  Caesar  with  great
slaughter  in  B.C.  53  and  driven  Iwyond  the  Rhine,
Caesar  twice  croaaed  this  river  (in  ^ii>  and  G3),  but
made  uo  permanent  conqocat  oo  the  «a.itorn  bank.


GKRMA.VIA


728


GERMASICDS  CAESAK


In  ttie  reign  nf  AnKUHtuN,  hif)  step-iwin  DniAnR  car-
ried on  war  in  (Jcnnnny  with  groat  imccess  for
fonr  years  (ll.C.  12-9),  awl  penctrntccl  aa  for  an  tlio
Elbe.  Id  tbi>  countc  of  hift  »i>crution»  be  cut  a
canni  lmtwo«n  the  Y(w«l  nnil  the  Khtne.  luiil  Uiiilt
no  less  thnn  fiflv  forts  alou^  the  hitter  river.  On
h'm  death  (B.C.  i>),  his  brother  Tiberins  ttiii-oeeded
to  the  conintitiid :  iiiu)  nndor  bini  the  cunntry
lietw(«eu  the  Khiii<!  and  the  Vi.tiir^H  (WeAcr)  was
entirety  Rubjugatetl,  and  Ae<?n)pd  likely  to  heconie
a  Roniaii  prnvinro.  lint  in  a.u.  9,  the  ini|MilUio
and  tyrnnnicnl  condnct  nf  the  IJoiuan  {roveruor
Qninrlilins  Varus  ]imvnkc>d  a  general  iiiKurrection
uf  tho  vnrioni}  German  trilK's,  headt-Hl  by  Annin-
ins  (q.  v.),  tbo  Cheni$can,  who  had  binisulf  be^n
a  aoUlter  of  Rome,  and  fnr  his  bravery  had  Ixseu
made  a  knight.  Vanui  and  his  legions  were  en-
ticed into  Ihe  Tentidiiir^  Forest,  wh«re,  in  the  nar-
row defiles,  thnOennuns  fell  nimii  them  ui til  iuipet'
aons  fury,  w  that  tlicy  were  defeated  and  destroyed.


-<*'


SiipIMMil  Bnu  orAnnhilaa (CtpKolim  MiwMm.|

and  tbo  Bomans  Inst  alt  thuir  confjnests  oast  of  the
itbiue.  (See  VARue)  The  dofuat  «f  Varus  was
avengwi  by  the  suoceaafnl  canii>aigua  of  Genuani-
niB  (<{,  v.),  who  would  iirobably  have  I'ecovureil  tliu
Roman  dominions  oast  of  the  river,  bad  nut  tbe  jeal-
ousy of  Tiberius  rocallod  him  to  Bom«  iu  aJ).
Kh  (Sec  Kiiokc,  Die  Krif^isSge  dea  Gervtamcun  iu
I>eutK-/ilainl  [llerllQ,  li^].)  From  this  tltae  the
Romans  sbam^oned  all  fnrther  attempts  to  con-
qner  Genoany;  Imt  in  ooniioqnence  of  the  civil
dtHfiennions  which  bnike  out  there  soon  afl^r  Ibu
fiepiirtnre  <if  Tiberius,  they  wt-re  enabled  In  oblaiu
jH-aceablu  pos«ie«KiuD  of  a  largo.  porTimi  of  8ontb-
wvHtern  Gernniny  between  the  Rhino  and  the  Unii-
nhfl.  to  which  they  gave  the  name  nf  the  Agri  De-
cumutea  (q.  v.).  On  thn  death  of  N'ero,  several  of
(be  tribe*  in  Western  GenDany  Joined  the  Batavi
in  their  inBurrectinu  against  the  Konmns  (A.O.  69-
71). Pomitian  and Trajan were f*nx«d  to  repel


the  attacks  of  various  Geimaii  clans ;  but  io  tl
reign  of  Antouiuus  Pius,  the  Marcumnnni,  joiui!*)
by  other  tribe«,  made  a  more  fonnidable  attirV
npon  the  Koniaii  dominions,  and  evc>ti  t)ireiit<-itHi
ihe  Kmpire  with  deMtruetion.  Fur  thirteen  v«iu>
Marcns  Anreliuit  with  didicnlty  held  in  eheck  Ibr
vast  honlea  of  barbarians,  who  were  striviuie  lit
overwiielin  the  Roman  line^^  of  defence,  wbidi
coniprlstM)  powerfnl  furtre«se«  and  a  great  nail.
remains  of  which  >ire  Mill  U>  be  necu  iu  Sontbrni
Gentiany.  Around  these  forts  sprang  iip  iowiik.
such  an  Vindoliona (Vienna) and  Iuvavunii!^bltnr)ti
in  fbe  P!i«t,  and  Mugiintiaenni  (Miiyenret,  Colonia
Agrippiiiii  ^Cologne),  Argentoratuni  (.Stras^hur);)
nn<l  HoniiB  (Bonn)  iu  the  ne^^r.  Fnun  thin  lime  tlw
Romans  were  often  called  n)Mtii  to  defeud  the  U'tl
bank  of  the  Rhine  against  their  dangerous  uti^-
Imhi r», ('»iiecially  against  the  I  wu  jKiwcrfnl  euufrdri-
auipsofthe  Alenianniaud  Franei :  and  in  thrroiinli
and  lifih  cent n^ie^thc9^ienn^n!(nlltained  po»«jaioii
of  some  of  the  fnir»?st  pn>vinc<?«  of  the  Empirt.

The  itifinenee  of  the  Gemiantt  upon  the  Romau
was  great  and  continued  U>  increase  as  time  nrnl
on.  Large  unmhers  of  the  northern  wnrricni'ih
lisled  iu  the  legions  uven  as  early  as  the  limrsT
Iiiliiis  ami  Angnstns  Cne.><ar.  and  grailually  ilw
whole  Miiiiy  becante  penneated  with  (lemuui  cus-
toms. Elrnnner  even  n:gards  the  history  of  (b«
later  Kmpire  as  the  history  of  a  cnntinnal  roodwi
hiftween  the  Germans  and  the  AVestem  Ib«nin
elements;  and  has  maaaei)  a  great  nnmbernf  run-
ons  and  striking  facts  to  siip|Htrt  his  view,  SreW
I)r»(»fhf  HrvhtgfffitrliiflHi',  I pp.3^-%>(LFi|»Ki^,l'itCl

Tiie  tiolhs  founded  a  givat  Germanic  kinplowiD
the  fourth  century;  the  Hnr:*iindianneniir|iierH)llir
n  hole  of  the  valley  of  the  Rhone ;  and  the  VaniUb
swept  over  Spain.  (Sett  GoTIII ;  VlXDaii.)  Tht
Wt>st  fioths  crossed  the  D»nulie,  jwineirsleil  InK
Iluly,  and  under  Alaric  captured  Rome  itself.  In
the  tit'th  century  they  coi:qnered  8«)Utberii  (iiii
and  nenrly  the  whole  of  Spain.  In  the  InvuM
of  tho  Hnnn  under  At tila,  the  Goths  fotiitht  scMtal
him  with  the  Roman!*,  muting  him  at  CttAloiuiAO
451),  and  wmn  after.  Odoacer,  chief  of  the  ibnlL
became  luaster  <if  Italy  in  4Tli. See  Oiioacxii

Bl»ui>QlLArtiY. — The  sixth  iHwk  of  CaeMr,  f>r
lirllu  Gailico.  and  the  GerM«inia  of  Taritm  ipT*
the  earliest  accounts  of  the  Getiuau*..  Tbr«  a*
admirably  summarized  aud  dlsenseed  by  Htubb*
iu  his  CtmatHuiional  titvtorj/  o/  A'njiaa^  i>  ff
K-h7  [Ojcford,  1><7M  Standard  treatises  sis  At
following:  Leo,  Forlatinurn  iiber  dit  OwW*
dta  dtulacktH  Foltct ;  Suzeubeim.  Gtfkickit  4"
deut9elnni  i'otk»,  3  vols.  at:<t>&-^);  Lewis.  ifuOH
of  On-manif  (1874),  based  on  the  work  of  D.  WiOn;
Arnold,  Jntiit'delmiifrn  nnd  tVamdemngeit  dMWAfr
StUmme  (IffJ^)]  Peuke,  hie  Jlrrkvi^  dtr  Itntmtn
(ISiil);  Oxaimm,  tru  Omnaim  arant  Ir  €kntti»-
ni»»ie(lR72);  Wnit?:, /VMlarAr  l>r/a**»sjfjjfP»(*f<**.
vol.  1.  3d  ihI.  (1*«>;  Bah»ib,  Die  often  ««»«>»
a^'O) ;  Geoflroy,  Rumr  rl  /# i.  Barbara.  2d  ea..l?J4i:
Lebmaun,  i>.  I'olk  d.  iSuchen  toh  Ciuor  In*  ToaU*
<.1:^S);  adulter,  Ortchiehte  dn  thuUekfn  fa/ib,  llib
ed.  ( lo^-l).  See  also  C.  Kiagslejr,  Raman  and  7(«ia«-
2ded.(lH(?7).

Germania.  A  vulnabb*  nionogropli  tty  TnfiiiU-
descriptivti  of  ancient  Goruiany  aud  the  tiennsBs
See  Gkkhanu  ;  Tjicrrvs.

0«rniAnIcua  Caeaar-  Tbe  son  of  Nero  Clindiu
Druans,  adopted  sou  of  his nude  Tihcciu%  and


t»ou  of  Livin,  tbe  wife  of  AiigtiHtuii.  boru  u.c.
In  A.r».  7  lie  Itecame  iiiiii*8tor,  Hve  yean  he-
\he  legnl  age ;  ntid  in  ibo  imutc  yeor  itervi-il
distiuctiou  iu  tlie  war  ftgaiuHt  the  Panuoni-
Ind  DalniatiuiiH.  In  the  yunr  11  lie  accom-
d  Tiberius  in  bis  CAmpaigno  againnt  (be  Git-
f  who  wert)  fliielied  witb  the  pride  of  their
t fsplnit in annihilating thu Roinnu lit-

of  Vara*; Imt.  itfUir  a  fen-  Ufsiiltorj-  iiifur-

bB  returntid  to  Rtinie.  In  a.d.  U,  liowtnrr,
W  (lut  in  civuiiuaud  of  «ig1it  !i<j;totiM  rtlafioti-
I tbo Rhine. I-le  won  (irst called iiiKiii to

a  funtiidablt:  revolt  of  tbu  Roman  lru»|)H,
»tt  the  death  of  Augiuttun  ninliniMl  fur  in-
td  pay  and  a  ftborter  turni  of  M^rvicti.  Tact
Brnineu,  aiittod  to  fp:eat  affability  of  dr-
pr,  an  tbo  part  of  (tennnnlciiK,  made  Inni
iu  bj«(  ttisit,  and  be  becanie  thf  idid
D>',  thoiigli  for  11  long  tiiuu  tUi>  dtHjitfoc-
aldered  and  at  tiuicn  t^tvtko  <iiit  into  o|Hin

DO.  At  last,  howt-vrr,  a  c^iin|iaigii  againitt
kltfuijr  vaa  begnn.  <ifr(iiiiiiiruii  cruMMHl  the
(and  fell  upon  tbo  btiDtilt^  Miii-mi,  laying  waNtti
ierritory  for  lifty  uiilr!>i  and  npuring  Dtiittiur
fr  8CX.  On  his  return  bo  routed  the  forn)i<lablu
luftbcBructcri.tbcTubantefl.andtbeL'sipttte*^,
rfed  to  block  hi»  way.  In  a.d.  lij  hu  attacked
latti,  tools  their  chief  towu  l&Iattiuiu),  and
id  the  foe  vrith  tbo  samn  nnspariiig  aeverity.
oAcrwardA,  be  took  iiriwtner  Tbusticlda,  the
tlic  nifo  of  ibe  (ivrniau  bcr4»  ArniininH.  She
kvguant  at  thi<  time,  nnd  bvr  hnnbatid,  iiifuri-
it,  her  cupliirv,  rouM<d  np  not  only  btH  on  n  ih.'o-
1^  Chcnisci,  but  all  thi'  m-ighbouriug  trib«a,
Urlcd  bis  forces  d[kiii  the  Kuiuaiis.  Near  ih^
Liurg Forest,  where  Ijlencbml the hones of

aiid  h\H  legions,  (jcrniauii.'ns  again  met  the


UKKMANICUS

GvnuanK.  The  contiict  was  long  and  doubtful.
The  Kontanit  finally  prevailed  over  Ibe  undisci-
plined valour  of  the  bHrbartan  hoMts;  y«t  no  an>
certaii)  wan  thr  n-nult  that  the  victors  docidnl  to
rutirti  to  tbu  Rhine,  tThieb  wan  donr  amid  cou-
tiuniiuH  ttglitiiig.  Ill  the  next  ytrar,  with  a  [)<>till&
of  KHM  vi>i*ft«;U,  be  undertook  anothi'-r  cnnipaigir
on  the  lower  Kbinu.  A  great  battle  waH  fouglit
on  the  plain  of  Idistavitttis  (near  Hausberg),  iu
whi«-b  Anuiuiiis  and  hi«  warrloi-a  were  utterly
routed.  Anninius  himself  only  escaped  by  illa-
giiifiiug  hilt  [lersoD.  It  was  on  the  occasion  of  this
battle  that  eight  eagles  were  seen  hoveriug  over
the  forest,  "Come!"  cried  Germanicus  to  bis
rroopH,  "  Follow  the  binls  of  Rome,  your  own  di-
Tinltifis!" — ati  exhorratinii  that  eseited  the  conr-
age  of  till?  li>gions  to  the  highest  pitch.  I^nlor,
he  uuoe  more  deviutated  the  country  of  the  Marat
and  the  Catti.

In  A.D.  IG,  Tiberius,  who  was  jealoas  of  his  grow-
ing fame,  recalled  him  to  Rome.  The  whole  )Kip-
nlation  poured  out  to  meet  him,  and  on  the  *^iih
of  May  he  celebrated  bis  triumph  with  grent
nplendonr,  TbiiHiietda  being  led  along  the  Via  Sacra
araotig  the  captiven.  8oon  afterwards,  (iermanicaa
vroa  placed  over  the  I-2a^t^^l  Provinces  with  th«
highest  I mpcr in m  :  hnt  Tiberius  ewt  Cn.  Pt'w  in
comnmnd  of  Syria,  pmhaUly  with  secret  instrnc-
tiouti  to  thwart  and  endtarrasa  Germanieuw  in
every  ptwdble  way.  Piao's  wife  Plancina,  also,  a
haughty  and  im|ieriuu8  woman,  was  incited  by
the  ex>empi«SB  Livia,  mother  uf  Tilierinn,  to  an*
noy.  in  innumerable  petty  ways,  the  uoble  wife  of
Uermaiiicus.  Agripplna,  who  had  been  bis  compan-
ion ill  all  lii&catnpnignit,  (Hid  whose  ijiOiience  had  vu
one  occaaion  even  quelled  a  revolt  of  the  nuldlery
<Tac.  ^nri.  i.  41).  As  was  to  he  uxjiectud,  a  hitt-i^T
quarrel  suon  arose  between  (Jurinauicns  and  Piso,
and  when  (iermanicns  fell  ill  in  a.d.  VJ.  rnmotira
that  Piso  had  |M>iftonojl  hint  were  rife ;  though  Ger-
manicnft  himself  .attributed  his  illness  to  sorcery.
H  is  tUath  t-iKik  place  on  OatuberUtb  of  tl*e  sauieyear.


Agnin'tn*.  wtFf  or  G«nn«ulr)w.
floiue.)


OERONTIIRAE


780


TocitUB  gnys  tbmt  tiis  bixly  hni-v  tio  Diarks  of  poi-
tum  (Jnti.  ii.  73f,  Never  Lml  Rome  wore  deeply
laiueitteil  the  deati)  of  ftu  illiistrimis  Bon.  HU
Jilwru)  views.  iiiio»tei)tntiotia  ilcintaiioiir,  atid  kiiiil
lienit, (.-uiuliiuetl  witli  connige  anil  itiilitary  gtMiiiis,
iiiadt!  tliu  wholu  peojile  lii»  ndiiitivi-it.  UiiiiMiitl
lioimiirH  were  granted  to  hiui  on  bis  death — a  piil>
lie  loaib,  n  trintii{^bat  arcli.  and  the  insertion  of
htM  name  in  the  Saliaii  Hymus.  Ho  left  six  chil-
ilrvii,  among  vrboui  were  Gains  iCaligoln),  and
Agrippitm,  the  uii>tlier  of  Nero.

DrstingiiiBbed  aft  niiiFh  for  culture  aafor  niUitary
accotnplinbuieuts,  be  was  an  orator  and  author  as
well  as  a  general.  Ovid,  who  dedicat«<l  to  him  (he
aet^ond  edituui  nf  Iuk  I'anti,  jiraiAHM  liin  ptMtry.  Hii*
pani|diniHii  of  thn  i'harnomrna  itf  Anitus  in  725
lineM,  and  thrnu  fragtu<>ntM  (346  linen)  uf  a  pant-
phroitfi  of  the  8UU1H  writor'»  Praguostira,  Mtill
snrvivt-.  They  arr  n-uiarkablu  for  luuniin^,  coni-
mniid  of  mi'tn.',  and  a  pleaMini;  wtylo.  Thf  Phar-
nomeua  in  dediratud  to  TilH^nuN,  and  di-scribod
by  the  autliur  hluisirlf  as  tho  wurk  of  a  Iteginncr.
TbejMi  poems  ased  erroneonsly  to  be  attributed
to  IVimitinn,  who  did  not,  however,  take  the  title
<if  tierrnanicns  imtil  he  was  emperor.  Three  col-
lections of  BcholJn  upon  them,  by  no  means  with-
out value,  hare  also  sorvived.  The  best  edition
of  the  Jratea  of  Germanicus,  with  the  scholia,  is
ibat  of  BreyaiR  (Berlin,  1867).  Sre  Bennfort,  Bitt
dc  Cnar  HcrmaHiraa  (Leyden,  1741);  Beiili^.  TiWre
r.l  V  Heritage  ri'  Auganlf  (1^0);  and  Hiifer,  Feldzug
fir»  (IrrmiiHiruM  im  Jnlir  Ifi^lrtSTi).

C}«routlirae  (rtpi'ivBpm).  A  tovu  of  Laootiia,  to
the  north  nf  Htiloit,  fuunde<l  by  the  Achiieiius  long
1>efore  the  invasion  of  the  Dorians  and  the  Her-
avlidue,  uud  stubae^aeutly  colonized  by  the  loiter.
When  PanKani»H  vtiiited  Laeuniu,  he  found  Gcron-
thrau  iti  po!.HL-)uiuti  of  tbu  KleuLbcni-Laconen.  It.
€oniaii)c<l  A  temple  and  grove  of  Aiv»,  and  another
temple  of  Apollc  (Pansan.  iii.  '££).

0«iTa  (ra  rippa).  One  of  the  chief  cities  of
Arabia,  and  a  gn:>at  emporium  for  ihB  Inide  of
Arabia  and  India,  oti  the  northeast  cooat  of
Arabia  Felix.  Tbo  inbiibitants,  called  Qerra«i,
were  said  to  have  be«n  originally  Chaldaeaua  who
were  driven  out  of  Babylon.

Oerr«e  (yippov).  Anythinx  made  of  wicker-
work; hencL< tritlun, trash I  Plaut. Epiil. U.  2.

G«iTbl  (Vippoi).  A  people  of  Scythta,  in  vho«e
country  the  lioiyithcnos  rises.  The  kings  of
ficythiii  were  bnncd  in  their  territories  (Herod.
iv.  71 K

OexThuB  {rippot).  A  river  of  Scythia,  wbioh
flowed  iowarda  the  ecu  and  fell  ioto  the  Hypacris
<Hend.iv.66).

0«riUiis. A  portor. See  Baicxuh.

Oenula  {yipuvtria  ;  a  council  of  old  men,  yipov-
Tts).  The  supreme  deliberative  authority  among
the  Spanaus,  according  to  the  rotistitution  of  Ly-
curgna.  It  consisted  of  twenty-oigbt  men  of  at
leaftt  BiXly  yetirs  of  ag^-,  calh-d  yipftvtts  (Viio(or«»),
elected  by  the  pnldic  assembly  fur  lifi-.  Tlu;  meet-
ings of  the  Gerusia  va-n-  j>rcsidcd  over  liy  the  two
kings,  who  bad  the  right  of  voting.  The  unmTier
-of  the  eonticil  therefore  aiuounted  to  thirty.  It  m  as
Iheir  duty  to  deliberate  lioforehnud  on  all  impor-
tant affairH  of  Slate,  and  to  prepare  preliuiinar}-


resolutions  npon  them,  to  lt«  xoUA  upon  by  tl»
public  owtembly.  They  ha<l  lUso  Juhwlictiou  in
the  case  of  all  offences  which  were  punishable  \n
death  or  Idsh  uf  civil  right«.  They  out  in  jikI^-
nieut,  if  uecewuiry,  even  ou  the  kings,  in  latrr
times  asMiciuting  the  ephora  with  theui  in  lli:«
frinetton.  Their  authunty,  like  that  uf  the  kin^.
suffered  counidorablo  restriction  at  the  hands  uf
tbo  ephors.  They  had  a  similar  position  in  tbe
Cretan  oonstitntion,  according  to  which  only  tbf
nienibcni  of  tbe  highest  magistracy,  CAlled  the  tM-
fUH,  or  regulators,  could  enter  the  coancil,  and  tbt
only  after  a  blameless  term  of  administration.  Sn
BniMdt,  OriecAi>cAe  GeKhichie.  i.  94-1^:  Gnie.
HiM.  of  Greets,  ii.  pt.  ii.  ch.  vi.;  Arnold,  Thucfii-
de»,  i.  App.  ii.  in  later  eilition.

Oer^on  iTrifn/vv)  or  OerySnes  (ri7/»«in7c).  A
giant  with  three  bodies  and  [K^werfiU  witigB,iba
Mvu  of  CliryRaor  and  Callirrhor.  Ht?  dwelt  id  ik
ittland  of  Erythia,  lying  in  the  ocean,  in  tli«  ox-
trenie  west;  and  niis  tbe  poM^essor  of  n  brnl  of
red  cattle,  wnt^ihinl  by  the  »<li(tphcnl  Kurytiou. and
A  two-beiuled  dog  ranf<l  Ortbrux.  It  waso&eof
tlie  twelve  Inboum  of  Heracles  to  carry  off  ttm«
cattle,  and  after  a  violent  contest  to  olay  tbf
pursuing Gcr>'on with his arrows. Bee  Hu-

AC'l.EH.

Oeatier.  Joiiann  Mattkia?.  A  German  rW
(ticnl  i4cliolar,  born  at  Kotb.  April  9th.  1691,  H'
Mludicd  philology  at  the  Univnniity  of  Jeij«.aiKl
after  receiving  hid  degree  became  librariMD  si
WoiniQr(1715),  afterward^)  tilling  tbe  offices  uf  Ric-
tor  of  the  Gymuasinni  at  Ansbnch  {I729),auil  Km-
tor  of  the  Thomas  .Scbm>I  at  Leipzig  (1730).  At
tbe  Thomas  School  he  had  for  his  colleagDn  Er
nesti  and  Joliaun  ^ebantian  Bach.  \V^u  tlie
UuiTerBityofGottingeu  was  fouiide<l.  be  wuciiM
to  the  chair  of  Bbetoric  in  that  iustitutiuii.artioi
also  as  librarian. He  died  at  Gottingeo.  Au^

yd,  17)^ ,

Him  publishoil  workit  include  an  edilioa  of  tlM
fhilirpatrh  ascril^ed  lo  I.iici»n  (1714^,  of  tti«  5m^
tf?rfB  AVi  JiuMlhae  (*id  eil.  177.1),  of  Quintilian  (173^'.
of  Claudian  ( 1759),  of  the  younger  Pliny  (ftltd.
1770  ),  uf  Horace  (  ad  ed.  1772 ),  and  uf  the  Oipkk
Hyama.  See  Erncsli,  OpHfrula  Oratorvt  (17flB);
and  GStdHiftr  rrofmaarm  (ItfT^K

0«Bori&oain.  The  modern  Boulogne;  t  pon
of  the  Moriui  in  Gallia  Bvlgica,  at  which  perM»
usuaJly  embarked  to  crow  over  to  Britain  (U'l*
iii.  2).  It  wiis  aubne(ineutly  called  Bouoola,  wliraw
its  mo4leru  name.

0«at« RomaaonuiL See Notkls  and  ^

UANCK8.

Qeatatlo.  A  part  of  an  omamenial  gaidiw  m
pleasure  -  ground,  di\-idi!<l  into  shady  walks  umI
vistas  of  liufllciciit  extent  for  tlw  proprietor  fttid  l>"
gtitista  to  be  carried  about  them  for  exercise  iffspiJ
auquiu  (/ec(ica). See  Pliny,  Eyimt.  v.  G,  I" ;  ti- 17. 13-

a^Btloulaiia.  A  pantomimic  actt«M,  who  a-
prcfwed  tb*-  character  she  had  to  peiwoat*  bf
daiiciug  nnd  mimetic  action  of  tbe  baoils  snil  fC
(Gcll.  i.  5,  2).

0«ta,  SEPTIM1C8.  The  brother  of  Caracall".  I>J
whom  he  was  assaaainaUKl,  A.li.  912. 1^  C'aU*

CAI.LA.

Oetae  \Tirm).  A  Thracian  people,  called  D'**
by  I  he  Romans.  Herwloius  (i  v.  %)  and  ThncydiJ*?
place  them  Muth  of  tbe  Utei  ^DauuWi,  n>-at  ill


moiitlis;  but  iutbetimeofAloxaudertlie  Great  tliey

iwult  hryiiiK)  tlUA  river  ntid  D«rth  nf  t\w  Tribnlli.
OhoBt-stories. See  NnvKi^  axd  Komancks.
OJbbet Soe  Catx.

Oig. St-e  Cwii^M.

Oigante«  (Viyayrtt).  In  lioiiRT  ttie  Gigaotes
arc  a  niM  ntul  gifcaiitio  rnco  of  aborigines,  kina-
nicu  of  the  gndd,  as  am  the  C^'clopes  ami  Pboen-
ciatis.  With  th^rir  king  Enrj'medon,  tbcj-  are  ilc-
•troyed  for  Iheir  wirkiNliioftfl.  Tlt'^iioil  ninkes  ibcio
tlie  8otis  nf  Gaf^n,  Hpniiig  fruiii  tlin  bbHxI  of  tbv
inutilahMl  UraiiUH.  Neither  llnttiiHl  iiur  HMnior
knAvr  anything  of  th«tr  Atnigglu  wiih  the  goiU
(Gi^fanUtuiaehia),  tbo  story  of  wbicb  ftccnis  to  b«
a  rcfloctiou  of  the  myth  of  tbo  Tilaus  nud  tbt-ir
contest  with  the  gods,  aad  to  b«  a<wociated  with
local  legends.  The  two  nrc  oft«ii  coiifntMHl  by
later  poeta.  The  plare  of  the  rontest  was  Pblegra,
or  the  place  of  burning;  and  Phlegm  yvas  always
localize*!  in  volcanic  regions.  In  tbe  fnrUvr  stone-n
it  is  on  the  Mnri'douian  ptioiosula  orpiillcni^ :  Hiid
In  later  tiniCH  on  the  Pblogrsean  plainit  in  Cnm-
pAnia  beiwecD  Ciunau  and  Capua,  or  again  at  Tar-
tMsaa  in  Spain,  hed  on  by  Alcyoucus  and  For-
phyriou,  thoy  barlcd  rocks  and  burning  truoks  of
trees  against  hvaTon.  Bnt  the  gods  called  Hera-
cles to  their  assistance,  a  prophecy  having  warned
them  that  tUey  would  be  unable  to  destroy  the
giants  without  tbe  aid  of  a  mortal.  Ueracles
fdew  not  only  Alcyunens,  but  gavn  the  others,
whom  the  gocis  hatl  struck  clavrn,  their  death-blow
with  bis  arrows.  As  Kticetadue  wam  dyiug,  AtUe-
u*  threw  the  island  of  Sicily  ntwu  him.  Polylwtes
was  bari«Ml  by  Poaoidon  uudtt-  the  island  of  Nisy-
roa,  a  piece  of  tho  island  of  Cos,  which  Poseidon
bod  broken  off  with  bis  tridc-nt,  with  all  the  giants
who  ha<l  Dud  there.  Uesidt's  tho»e,  the  futlowing
nuDware  given  among  othon:  Agrins,  Kpbialtf»,
Pallaa,  Clytius,  £ur>-tUH,  Hippolytus,  Thuuu.

Id  tbe  oldest  workn  of  art  the  Giants  are  repre-
•ente^l  in  biimao  form  uiul  eijnipped  with  armonr
and  sivears;  bnt  in  conrse  of  time  their  atlribiite«
liecauie  terrifto  —  awfnl  faces,  long  bniiging  hair
and  Ward,  the  skins  of  wild  aninmis  for  garments,
trauks  of  trees  and  clubs  for  weaiHitis.  In  tbe
latest  reprmvntatioiis,  but  not  before,  their  bodies
Mid  la  two  scaly  auakes  instead  of  feet,  as  in  the


StAnt  la  CouDici  vfttli  An«tii's iSomaii  rnlier  in  Tait<:ui


illustration.  In  tbe  Gigantoniachia  of  Porgnions,
the  grniulest  represeiilatiou  of  tbe  subjocl  in  an-
ti'tnity.  we  find  a  great  variety  of  forms;  some
qtiiie  kntnan,  utherv  wiib  snakes'  feet  and  power-
ful  wings,  others  with  still  bolder  comhiiintiuns  of
shape;  homo  an'  nukiHl,  some  clothed  with  skins,
some  fully  armed,  and  olhem  slinging  stones.  See
ilayct^lUc  Gigautm  undTli/nwrH (Leipzig,  16^);  aud
the  arlicloa  I'Eitr.AME.VK  Soiiuri  ltK»;  Titanu.

Oigantomactiia. See  Gigaxtes.

QigODua  iri>&>»>nfl  A  town  and  pnmiuntory  of
MaetM|i>ui»  on  the  Thermaic  Gulf.

OUdo.  A  Moorish  chief  who  governed  Africa
for  several  yearn  nuder  tbe  VVesteni  Empire,  but
iu  A.D.  397  became  a  snbjcct  of  tbe  Eastern  Btn-
piie,  of  which  Arrmlins  was  then  tbe  head.  He
was  taken  prisoner  by  Stilicho,  acting  for  the  em-
peror Honorius,  and  banged  biniHclf  in  despair  In
A.i>.  398.  The  Latin  ]>o>et01utidiunus  has  made  this
war  the  subject  of  a  [Kiem  [lie  liailo  Gildoiiicc).
8w^  Cl-AVDlANrS.

Olmlet See  Tf.brdra.

Oinglj^muB  {ylyyXii^ios).  Literally,  a  joint
which  niovcM  in  u  siK^ket,  like  the  elbow;  thence
a  binge  (Xeti.  Eq.  xii.  6),  the  action  of  wbich  re-
somblea  that  of  fl  joint  in  the  human  fraiii>t4. The

0^


cabinets  of  antiquities  contain  nmrerons  speci-
mens of  tbeae  contrivances,  framed  in  the  diflorent
)iattenis  in  nse  at  thin  day,  nnd  nf  all  sizes.  Of  the
two  exantples  here  given,  (be  first  is  from  Pomjieii,
tho  other  is  preserveil  in  the  British  Museum.  The
Lntiu  name  in  not  met  ivith  in  any  Bnman  writer,
and  consequently  reqnirosanthorily ;  bnt  theGreek
one  is  undoubted.

Oingras  (yiyypdr). A  6fe  or  llnte. See  TiBIA.

Oirgillua.  The  roller  turned  by  a  windlass,  id
order  to  raise  water  from  a  well
by  meiuis  of  a  rope  and  bucket;
a  coutrivauoe  precwoly  similar  to
thoAO  nsod  in  many  country  places
at  the  present  day,  as  shown  by
the  annexed  example  fW>m  a  mar*
ble  sarcophagus  of  tbe  Vatican
Cemetery  (Isiiior.  f-tritf.  xs  iri).

Oiaoo  or  Oiago  {rltrKuif,  riv-
Kttv).  (I)  The  son  of  Ilamilcar,
defeutMl  and  killed  in  tbo  battle
of  Himrm  (».c.  4r*0).  ('2)  Tbe  son  of  Hnnuo.  who
nnsQCcessfully  opposed  Timoleon  after  the  latter
bad  ronted  the  Carthagitiiaus  at  the  Crimissns  in
D.C.  339.  (3)  A  commander  of  the  Carthaginian
garrieon  at  Lilybaeum  at  the  close  of  the  First
Punic  War.  In  a.c.  ti-Jl  ho  was  eeize<l  and  mur-
dered by  tho  mnttijous  mercenary  trooiw  with
whom  the  CarlliHginiau  govenimeul  hod  sent  Uim
to  ti«at. See  Caktuaue.

OitiiLdaa  (rinddar). The last  8purtan  artist
of  any  distinction,  ilourishiug  about  B.C.  516. He


Rich.)


ULABRIO


TBI


GLADIATORES


niiletM  tlu' tMvcnIWtl  Bntzeii  Honw  of  Atheo^at
pmtii. lie  wtJti  siiinc  *li'*tiucti*m  an  a  jMwt.

Olabtio,  Masu>  Acilus.  (11  C»D»nI,  n.c.  191,
wheu  he  tlefeact^d'Aiitiuchus  at  Tlicriii()|iylan.  ('i)
Praetor  urbAiiiiH  io  TO,  wIihii  lu;  [mt^iili^d  iit  the
tnipeiwliinent  of  Vuritfi;  nud  roasiil  in  <>7,  and
eiil<>^i]iitiutl,v  the  MiKTAMiir  of  L.  LiicnlliiA  in  the
cummatid  uf  lUo  war  ugaiast  Mithrtdntes,  in
which,  howtvLT,  ho  was  aajwrweded  by  On.  Fom-
poy.  (3)  The  Hon  of  the  preceding.  Ho  was  one
of  CMsar'ti  liontenaiita  in  the  Civil  Wan<.  He  woa
twice  defended  by  Clu«ro  ou  cajHl-al  nhiirgef),  and
acqnlucd.

aUdlatorea  (jwvofidxai).  PcrMiiH  who  fonght
with  Hwoi'ila  {tiladii)  in  tbii  ctrcu»,  the  furnni,  or  in
later  tioitig  in  tho  amplnthcntrt*,  for  tho  Htnutu-
meot  of  the  Roman  people  tQiiintil.  Devlam.  SChf).
Thi*y  are  said  to  have
bwtti  tiittt  exhibiteil  by
tho  EtniHcans,  und  to
huve  had  tlieir  uritEio
froui  thv  ciint^Hu  of  kill-
ing tlavcfi  »tid  cAptivoH
at  the  fnncral  pyrw*  of
tho  deccaard  (Tertuli .
De  Si,ev!ap.  19 :  Scrv.  tut
Verg.  Aett.  \.  r>19).  A
Ahnw  of  gladiatont  was
called  wuuhk,  and  the
person  who  exhibited  it,


BsfiiaamuL (Fnm  an  Kn-


the  t:tiitor,niiHcrtttor, or  tIomiNU^,\y\io  wiut  honoured
dnriiig  tlie  day  of  cxhiblttau.  If  »  private  peratni,
with  the  insignia  of  a  tnoK'^trato  iKlor.  iii.  S(i).

Glatlintnn  wen;  tlrst  exhibited  iit  Rome  in  B.C.
•i(34,  in  the  Forum  Boariuni,  by  Mareus  and  Dpci-
tniis  Bnitna,  at  the  fitnerul  of  thfii-  father  (Vnl.
Max.  ii.  4, 17).  Tliey  were  at  firtit  conlined  to  public
funerals  {baainariv],  but.  afterwards  fought  at  the
funerals  of  nuiMt  persons  of  ooniH'qneiice,  and  even
ut  tboBV  r»f  women  (Suet,  /ui.  ytli.  Private  per-
(Mjns  snnietinioH  left  it  Hum  of  money  in  their
will  to  pay  the  expuuaes  uf  sncb  au  exhibition  at
their  funemlM  { Hor.  Sal.  ii.  3,  84).  Combats  of
gladiators  were  aUo  exhibited  at  outertniiimeuts
by  tho  degrmled  nobles  tjf  (.'aitupaiiia  (Sil.  Ilal.  xi
fil),  though  not  at  Korae,  m\A  ciipeciiilly  at  public
fedtivuici  by  the  aetlilcH  und  other  mu^ietrates,  who
Munetiinus  exliibltcd  imiuensu
iiundient  with  tho  view  of  plca<i-
ing  the  peoplp.  (Stw  Aeihi.es.)
Under  tho  Empire  the  passioD  of
the  Keiiians  for  thin  amu<vrucnt
rote  to  ita  greatest  height,  and  the
number  of  gladiatorit  who  fought
on  »unie  occa&ioiiit  appears  aluiost
Incredible.  After  Trajan's  triuujph
over  the  X>aeian8,  there  were  nmre
than  lU.OOO  exhibited  (Dio  Cass.
Iiviii.  15).

Gladiators  consisted  either  of
captives,  slavea,  and  condemned
ninlefnctors,orof  freebori)  citiecua
who  fonght  voluntarily.  Of  tbo«e
who  ivvre  coDdemned,  Home  were
aaid  to  Iw  condcnineil  ad  gladiunif
)u  which  ca*o  ibey  were  obliged
to  be  killed  at  least  withiu  iiyear;
and  othei'H  ad  luditm.  who  aiiglit
obtain  tbrir  diacharse  At  the  end
gf  three  yeont. Freemen  w1u»  bi*-


Cflme  gladiators  for  hire  were  called  ttuttoreti,
and  their  hire  naetoratncntam  or  gladiatnhnm
(Suet.  Tih.  7X  They  bImo  took  an  oath  ou  «iit«-
ing  ujiou  tho  service,  Kiniilar  to  that  wliicU  n
preserA'ed  by  Petrouius  (117);  In  vrrba  Eumtifi
Mcramfttlum  iwrorimNB,  «ri,  rincir*,  vtrhrrari, /rr-
foyue  necari,  et  quia/uid  aliud  Enmotput  iuuuiml,
lamqmim  Injilimi  gludiatoiTS.  tlomimo  cur/<0(-rt  ni-
ittflsftMr  rrliffiottMime  addtcimHs.  Even  nmter  llw
Republic,  fVeeboni  citizens  fonght  an  gloitiotan
(Livy,  xxvili.  21),  but  tbey  appear  to  have  be-
longed only  to  the  lower  orders,  and  the  pror»-
«ion  was  cousidcre*)  degrailing  fcf.  Moniniden,  ('./.
L.  i.  14ly),  though  t-J  some  it  had  many  altractiflm.
Under  the  Empire,  however,  lioth  knights  and  mb-
ators  fought  in  the  arena  (8nct-/ui.  39;  AmgM:
»r.  12),  and  even  women  (Huet.  M»wi.4);  a  practiec
which  was  at  length  forbidden  in  the  timoof  Sere-
rns  (I>ir)  Cawt.  Ixxv.  16).

Ohidiaton*  were  kept  in  sehooljt  ( ludi  t,  when'
tbey  were  trained  by  pcr»onA  called  itittiataf, Tliv
whole  body  of  glaiIiut^>K  under  one  tanUta  w
frequently  called  famUia. Tbey  si>roetim«s  irrn
the  property  of  the  lanuitat,  wht»  let  tbctD  onttu
[icrsons  who  witihed  to  exhibit  a  show  of  gladiiton:
but  at  other  times  belonged  to  ritixcat),  wbo  kr(>l
them  for  till*  piiqtose  of  exhibilton,  aiid  Mt^ap<l
favittat  to  iustruct  them. Thus  Spartacui  )>].t,i
belonged  to  the  school  of  Letitulai  at  Capua  iFlw
iit.  6),  and  Caesar  had  ouo  at  the  «uuc  place. IV
mitian  built  four  Jndi  at  Rome,  and  there  i*"
Heveral  othera  in Italy  and  tho  proviuced. V*
.  iinntber  of  gladiators which any  ciliffo  IR<|;I>>
keep  was  limited  by  the  Senate  In  b.lMS*(Si»'1
M.  lOi,  but  Cfiliguladid  away  with  the  restrirtw"
(Uio  Cass.  lix.  14  ). The  Miperinlendenct'  ft  id'
Indi,  which  belonged  to  (he  omperorw.  was  ititn*'
ed  to  a  person  of  high  rank,  called  cnrntor  st  ^'v
varator. The  arrangements  of  w  Ivdn*  y/triftrt'*"**
aro  now  known  to  us  from  one  excavated  tU  Pm-
pcii. 8eo  Ulnstration  on  next  page.

The  glodlatoni  fonght  in  thew*  Hohotd»willi''w'*
en  swords,  eallwl  rndm  (Suet.  Cnl.  xxxiLM).  On*!
attention  was  paid  to  their  diet,  in  order  to  iin
crease  the  strength  of  their  bodies,  and  thi-j"  «>*•
fed  with  Donrisliing  fo<«I,  called  y/rtrfiaterld  Mf***-
CJladiators  were  oomctimes  rxbibitod  at  llie  f>^
uoral  pyre,  and  sometimes  in  the  loruiu,  btiUBW


niadlaton. )OT«rb«rk )


requeutly  in  the  ampbttbeatre.  (800  AMntiTUEA-  I  suroetimeH  given  (Suet.  Claud,  ai).  Old  gludia-
Rt'M.)  TLe  iwriwuj  who  wiw  to  cxbil»it  0  show  of  I  tor»,  and  Bometimon  those  who  had  ouly  fought
;ladiAttfrs  puhlishfid  some  dftjn  bvforo  tbo  i->xhibt-  I  for  a  short  tinu-,  wen'  diHchurgcd  from  (he  &vrvii-o


GLAOUTOR£S


QUAUUTOHES


ioii  bilU  [librlli),  coutoliiiiig  tho  Dumber  aud  some-
iiiins  the  names  of  thoM  who  wore  ui  lli;ht ;  a.  g.
a  I'ompeii  we  hnve  (C.  I.  L.  iv.  Il«)):  A.  SrUT-
ni  C'CltTI  AEIIIMM  FAMILIA  (iUlOIATORIA  PC03CA-
IIT roHPKIlH PklU. KaI- Il'X. VKXATIO «T  \'KLA

tstnrr ;  wid  siuitlor  notioea. Wheu  tb«  da;  camo,


rompem  namMSln  tar  OtodiKton. lOri-rU'clc.  ^


Bity  were  led  along  the  artMin  in  prooeMrion,  and
niaicbL<d  by  [luirs;  nnd  Ibnir  Hwurds  were  exam-
iiit-il  by  the  editor  Ut  m-a  if  thry  Moru  mifficiently
jfburp  iHiiPt.  Tit.  0).  At  Ant  thtirc  wan  a  kind  of
taliam  battle,  caU»d  prarluMio,  iu  which  tlivy  fought
with  wooden  swordd,  or  tbi^  like  (Hen.  JCpiat.  U7).
and  ofU'rwnrd&  at  the  souud  of  thti  trumpet  the
rval  battle  begnu.  When  u  gbtdintor  was  wound-
ed, the  people  calU'd  out  "  II»hct  1"  or  "  Iloe  hn-
bet '."  and  ihe  one  who  w;is  viin<)ni»bed  lowered  bis
annH  in  token  ofHuhmiwiou.  His  fnte,  however,
dependent  uimui  the  pf4tplu,  Avbo  turned  up  their
tbambH  if  (buy  wiithud  hlui  to  be  killed  (Hor  Ep.
i.  IH,  66;  Jnv.  iii.  'X),  aod  onleivd  him  to  rec-eive
Ihf  MWord  i/rrruiH  reriprre),  which  gladiaton*  imn-
ally  did  witb  the  greatest  flnnncsa.  A  rt^liuf  hiia
tief  o  discovered  at  CacillargnoH,  showing  a  eom-
tNit  l>etween  a  Samnitc  and  a  rrHaritia,  with  four
ftpi'ctatorif,  uuc  of  whutn,  »  woman,  in  holding  up
her  thniubtt.  Theru  in  no  rlear  evidence  tbni  the
wish  thai  men:y  sboutd  lie  Hbown  wiw  expressed
br  prc«Ming  down  the  Ibnmbfi (Pliny,  fi.  .V.  xxviij.  J
25  IK  Ijorely  to  the  poiuti ;  this  wnH  iiidirntnd  nitb-
er  by  waving  haudkercbiefa  (Mart.  xii.  29,  7).  If
the  life  of  a  vatiqiilsbed  glndiator  wan  HparR4l,  lie
obtained  bis  di'whnrge  for  that  day,  wbicb  was
'•ailed  mUoi"  (Mart.  xii.  Sl^t  7);  mid  beiicu  in  iiti  ex-
pibiliuu  uf  gtudiiitora  vine  misriont .  the  livus  of  the
fwuquered  wt-re  never  spared.  This  kiudofcxli)-
bition,  however,  was  forbidden  by  Augustus  (Suet.
Jug.  4.5).

PalmM  were  usually  given  to  Ibe  vietorious  gbld-
fators,  and  heuue  a  gladiatur  who  had  frequently
cnn<inercd  i«  enlliHl  plurimarum  pnlmarum  giadia-
Br  (Cie.  Pm  Hn»r.  Anirr.  vi.  17); iiioiifv  alto  was


|pr  (Cie.  Pm


by  the  editor  at  ihr  riMjue^t  of  the  people,  who
prweuted  eneli  of  (heui  with  u  rudis  or  wtKiden
nword  ;  whetn^e  tlwac  who  were  diachniged  were
eallmi  ritiliitrii  (CIc.  Vhit.  ii.  •29,74;  Hor.  A>.  i.  1,
2).  If  a  [»or»ou  was  fn-e  ltefort>  he  i<iil.ered  the  In-
dus, he  ij«cflme  on  bis  diw!burge  frvu  again  ;  aud
_  if  he  bud bt'eu  a slave,  he

ruturniMl  to  the  same  condi-
tion  again,  uulesshe  reccivirtl
-Z ' tho  oap  of  freedom  (pif/r«»).
^  , A mnu,  however, who bad

i'^j  been  a  gindiiitor.wus  always
considered  to  have  disgrac4Ml
himself,  and  consequently  i(.
apt>ear8  that  be  rould  not  oI>*
I  tnin  theei|UeHtriuu  t-niik  even
^  _^;  if  be  afterwards  ai-i|iiired
MiiRicieMt  pn»iM'rty  t<t  enlitlii
him  to  it;  ami  a  slave  who
bad  lu'cn  sent  into  a  luiliia
nnd  there  roanninilled.  mere-
ly ueqnirad  the  status  of  a
prrfff7'iHUM  drditiriua.  See
l>Ki>iTirii.

HbowH  of  gladiators  were
atHdiitbed  by  Coustautioe,
bill  Bp]H-ur  notwithstaudiug
lu  bavL-  been  generally  ex-
bihIltM)  till  the  time  of  Ho-
uorius,  by  whom  they  were
(inally  suppressed.

Ii  lad  hit  orn  went  d  i  vided
Into  did'ereot  rhoiuteM, acettnl-
iug  to  their  arms  and  different  mode  of  fighting,  nc
other  clrcninsIanoeB.  Tlie  nannvt  of  the  mo«t  impor-
tant of  these  elassesanigivcii  in  alphalwtical  order;
.\MH<tfntfaf  (Cic,  Jrf  Fam.  vii.  10)  wore  helmets
without  any  aperture  for  tho  oyes,  m  that  tliey
were  obliged  to  fight  blindfold,  and  thus  pxritwl
the  mirth  tif  the  spectaton.  They  are  generally
bidieved  to  have  foiigbt  on  horseback,  hut  this  is
ileiiic'd  by  Orelli  {/«jipr.*i'>77)  and  Fri«dliinder;  the
name  cjimiot  be  derived  from  o^uffiJTTjr.  It  is  per-
hiijw  Keltic  with  the  meaning  ''blind-tighter''
(WhiUey  fitukea,  in  Jeadeiay,  Feb.  0.  lSe&},


CbM  MT^i


Aadabau*


(Prom  tlw  Anpbillimuv.  primpftll )


BHttuarii  were  those  who  fought  on  the  funeral
pyre. See  iltustratiou,  p.  738,

Calrrrarii  was  tho  name  given  to  gladiators
when  tbcydid  not  tight  in  pairs,  hnt  when  ewvernl
fought  together  (Suet.  Jng.  iTt).

DimacJtaeri  appear  to  have  been  an  called,  Iw-
eiuise  they  fought  with  two  swords  (Artcmid.  it
yW;  On:Ili,  /#t»cr,  arv»4).

Ktfniie*  were  thiiw  who  foaght  on  horseback
(OrelU,  Inter.  25G9.  2577).


GtADIATORKS


784


GLADIAruiil-::^


Emttdarii  fniijfht  (Voin  chnrioTii  {eMuedit),  like  the
Gaiild  ami  Brttonn.  They  am  frequently  mcu-
liiined  in  inHCi-ijitious  (OrcUi,  'i^tGH,  *JtV4,  utc. ;  of.
Prtitiu.  45).

tlicaUii  were  tbi>so  niuler  tlie  Kinpiro  who  were
trniutMl  and  HappurtM  from  ilo  fitcnt  (Capitol.
Gord.  33).

Iloptotnacki  Appear  to  hnve  been  tbone  who
fonKlit  in  »  i'oinpluC«  Rnit  of  nriuoar(8aet.  Csl.35;
Sfart.  viii.  74).

T.nqHriirii  were  tUoso  who  used  a  not»Q  {laqueuM)
tu  cntcb  their  adriTiuines  (laid,  xviii.  dTi).

Mrriiiiaiii  were  (Lose  who  fonybl  iu  ibc  middle
nf  ibe  day,  after  coiubata  witb  wild  beaatw  hod
takeu  plauQ  in  the  uioraing.  Tbeso  K^adiatora
trerc  very  lightly  aruied  (Suet.  Claud.  34).

Mi/nuilloHr*  nm  naid  to  hnvn  bfeii  ho  i-jiIImI  from
their  bnvin^  tbo  iningo  of  a  HHh  (murmur,  fio^fiC'
poi)  oil  llieir  lielmotA  (Fcst.  ».  v.  JieHarii).  Their
ATttm  wcn^  like  those  of  the  Oauld,  oiul  thoy  did
not  differ  maeh  from  the  kind  called  (lalli.  They
were  umially  matcbeil  with  tbe  rctiarii  or  Thraci-
AUH  it.'ic.  i'Ai'f.  iii.  lH,  31;  vii.  ti,  17;  Jnv.  viii.  tiOO;
Suet.  Cat.  33.  Bom.  10).

Ortlittarii  vviwt  the  iiume  applied  to  all  the  n*gu-
lar  }(lndiatoi-it  who  ftin^bt  in  pair»  in  tbe  onlinary
way  (Suet.  .-/«</■  45,  Cal.  26j.

PrmluJalirii  wvtv  Hueb  HH  were  tleu^aiHlcd  by  tbu
p(H)p1e  f'roai  tbc  editor,  iu  additiuu  to  those  who
were  exhibited  (Sen.  Epiet.  7).

rrovorotore«  fought  with  the  SamoitM  (Cio.iVo
Sett.  C4.  134),  bat  we  do  not  know  anything  rfr-
Bpectiiig  them  except  their  name.

Hetiarii  carrietl  only  ii  three-p<unted  lRiii.'e.  called
trittrtm  or/iMcino,  a  dagger  (Viil.  Max.  i.  7,  f),  and
a  net  [rrtt\  whicli  tliey  endeavoured  to  throw  over
tbi^ir  adverKarie8,  nod  then  to  attnek  them  with
the  fuitciua  while  they  were  entlingleil. T)n*  reti-


^


(tHmi  whs  dressed  in  a  short  tuulc,  and  worv  notic-
ing on  hia  hend.  If  he  mi&sed  bis  aim  in  thmw-
iiig  the  net,  he  betook  biiu»elf  to  flight,  and
endravourcii  to  prepare  bis  net  fur  a  second  tut,
wliilc  bia  adversary  foHoweil  him  round  Ibe  areni
in  order  to  kill  him  Ivt-fore  be  could  make  a  wo
attempt.  Wi*  ailvftrMAry  was  ohually  a  ivrufig
a  mifrmillo  (Suet.  Cal.  30,  Claud.  M  :  Orelli.i
Iu  the  following  illupilintion  a  combat  in  n-'prnwut-
ed  between  a  retiaritta  aud  ft  mgrmilto;  tbo  firmer


Borjhw"?  tiUA\*\OT  [^  of  ApiBlM. (Loutt*)


has  thrown  his  net  over  the  bead  of  the  laUrr.imi]
is  proeeM^iug  to  attack  him  with  I  lie /ii«rti)«.  Tlw
InHtMta  HtanrU  liebind  the  rcliariut.

Stitnttiten  were  so  calle*l  liecniise  they  wcrannnMl
in  the  same  way  as  that  pe«iple.wiili  a  b^lniet  with
a  high  crest  (Jnv,  vi.  'iV>),  and  wepe  partmiUdj
disltiignisbed  by  the  oblong  tculum.

Sccutorea  an  aapposetl  by  most  writcra  te  t*  w

called  liecanee  tbe  secNitrr  in  his  combat  niili  llie

retiariitu  pursued  the  latter  when  hr  fuilfl  i»  «-

curing  biin  by  his  net. Oth4>r  writers  iblak  ilial

Ihfiy  wer»  the  canif  as  tlic  «M/fffo«i(irii.  menl»fl«1

by  Martial  (v.  34),  who  were  gladialon  snbttilalrJ

in  tbe  place  of  those  who  wei-e  wearied  or  «rn

killed  (Snet.  (.■«;.»);  Jut".

HH?.  with  the  Schel.viii.Jtti^

If  tbe  old  reading  in  a  Idi*

of  CicetYi'n  ( J<i  Jtt.  vii.  14)  i»

correct,  Iiilius  Caesar  bad  m

less  than  WO  nerituTT*  iu  las

ri^fti^  at  Capua;  hut  vft  ]itoI»-

ably  ought  to  tvod  M'«(orSB

Instead  of  ttruturnm.

,SHppo»itieii>  Bee  ^<KirlWr«.
Thra*t*  or  Tkrtm  ■»«
armed,  like  the  TIirkIui.
witb  a  round  shield  orbncl:-
ler  (Fcst.  B.  V.  TJinHm),  u-J
a  short  cur\'ed  sworl  ui  ^i-
ger  {nca.  Suet.  Cat.  3V>, « lirb
is  called  fa\x  tnpin*  l>f  J***
reunl  (viii.  SOI),  auil  wow
grcax'es  on  Ix,ilb  legs.  T^fJ
were  usually  niat«li«d,ai  «)•
ready  slated^  with  the  "^

rrlitea  hod  light  spun
(Ovid,  /ft.  45).

Pflitiiings  of  glBdlstMi»l
combats,  as  well  as  of  iW  slt>'
er  sports  of  tbe  ampliiiliefltw
were  favonrite  sul'jwt*  «"i*
the  Roman  artiau  iI1iof>
B.  y.  xxxY.  ^  58).  et»fnl
s  t  a  t  n  e  a  of  glodiatsr*  hv*
oome  down  to  uf,  wlikli  iW
higldy  ndmireil  as  «urtl»"'


GLADIATORES


786


GLAD  I  US


art ;  of  these,  the  most  celebrated  is  the  athlete
by  Agasias  of  the  Borghese  Collection,  now  in  the
Museum  of  the  Louvre,  and  the  Dying  Gladiator,
iu  the  Capitoline  Musenm.  The  latt«r,  which  in-
spired the  famons  stanza  in  Childe  Harold,  is  now,
however,  regarded  as  a  woanded  Oaul.  Gladiato-
rial combats  are  represented  in  the  bas-reliefs  on  the
tombof  Scaanis  at  Pompeii,  and  illustrate  in  many
particulars  the  brief  account  which  has  been  giv-
en in  this  article  of  the  several  classes  of  gladia-
tors. These  bas-reliefs  are  represented  in  the  follow-
ing illnstratioiiH  from  Mazois  {Pomp.  i.pl.  32;  and


his  hand  to  the  people  to  implore  mercy,  while  the
latter  apparently  wishes  to  become  his  enemy's  ex-
ecutioner before  receiving  the  signal  from  the  peo-
ple; but  the  Xanwta  holds  him  back.  In  the  oth-
er combat  a  myrmi/Io  is  mortally  wounded  by  a
Samnite.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  right  arm
of  every  figure  is  protected  by  rings  of  armonr^
which  the  left  does  not  require  on  account  of  the
shield.  See  Lipsias,  Saturnalia  (1675)  and  De  Am-
phiiKeatro  in  Qraev.  Thwaur.  vol.  \x.\  Friedtaiider,
Sittengeschichte,  vol.  ii. ;  Wallou,  Hi$toire  de  VEbcIo-
rage  (Paris,  1879) ;  and  the  article  Venatio.


GUdlkton.


Overbeck,  Pompeii,  p.  165).  The  figures  are  made
of  stucco,  and  appear  to  have  been  moulded  sepa-
rately, and  attached  to  the  plaster  by  pegs  of
brouze  or  iron.  In  varions  parts  of  the  frieze  are
written  the  name  of  the  person  to  whom  the  glad-
iators belonged,  and  also  the  names  of  the  glad-
iators themselves,  and  the  number  of  their  vic-
tories. The  first  pair  of  gladiators  on  the  left  hand
represents  an  equestrian  combat.  Both  wear  hel-
mets with  visotB,  which  cover  the  whole  face,  and
are  armed  with  spears  and  roand  bucklers.  In
the  second  pair  the  gladiator  on  the  left  has  been
wounded ;  he  has  let  fall  his  shield,  and  is  implor-
ing the  mercy  of  the  people  by  raisiiig  his  bauds
towards  them.  His  antagonist  stands  behind  him
waiting  the  signal  of  the  people.  Like  all  the  oth-
er gladiators  represented  on  the  frieze,  they  wear
the  tubligaculum  or  short  apron  tied  above  the
hips.  The  one  on  the  left  appears  to  be  a  Tuyrmillo,
and  the  one  on  the  right,  with  an  oblong  shield
(gcttum),  a  Sanuiite.  The  third  pair  consists  of  a
Tliracian  and  a  mj/rmillo,  or  Samnite,  the  latter
of  whom  is  defeated.  The  fourth  group  consists
of  four  figures ;  two  are  McuUtre$  and  two  retiarii.
The  aeeutor  on  his  knee  appears  to  have  been  de-
feated by  the  reHariua  behind  him  ;  but  as  the  fua-
cina  is  uot  adapted  fur  producing  certain  death,
the  other  $ecuUyr  is  called  upon  to  do  it.  The  re-
liaritu  in  the  distance  is  probably  destined  to  fight
iu  his  tnru  with  the  surviving  aeeuUtr.  The  last
group  consists  of  a  myrmillo  and  a  Samnite ;  the
latter  is  defeated.

In  the  second  illnstration  two  combats  are  rep-
resented. In  the  first  a  Samnite  has  been  con-
quered by  a  myrmi/Io;  the  former  is  holding  up


Oladlatoiliun.  The  pay  given  to  a  freeman
who  trained  and  served  as  a  glatliator.  See  Livy,
xliv.  31,  and  the  article  Gladiatorbs.

Qladlua  ((i0or ;  poet,  aop,  ifmayavoy).  A  sword,
by  the  Latin  poets  called  enns.  The  ancient  sword
had  generally  a  straight,  two-edge«l  blade  (ii/i0ii-
Ktt),  rather  broad,  and  of  nearly  equal  width  from
hilt  to  point.  Gladiators,  however,  used  a  swonl
which  was  curved  like  a  scimitar.  In  times  of
the  remotest  autiqnity  swords  were  made  of  bronze,
but  afterwards  of  irou.  The  Greeks  and  Romans
wore  them  on  the  left  side,  so  as  to  draw  them  ont
of  the  sheath  (xoXfor,  vagina)  by  passing  the  right
hand  in  front  of  the  body  to  take  hold  of  the  hilt
with  the  thumb  next  to  the  blade. Hence  Aeschy


Greek  Swords  and  ScabtMnU. (Gobi  utd  Koner.)


Ills  tllstlugQUbos  tbc  omij-  of  Xencoa  by  ilir  de-
tioiniitfttioii  of  ftaj^aipott>vfittf  ^Svot,  tilliitliiig  to  tlie
obvious  differenoo  hi  tlii^ir  jippenrnticn  in  cottse-
•inenro  of  the  itm*  of  tliv  ticina«e  itul«U(1  of  the
ftwnnl. See  Acinacks.

Tlic  eArly  Grppks  iiumI  n  wry  Hhort  nwonl.
Ililiicmt«>s,  v\in  ninili>  Viirintis  itii[iniV(-ti)fnlM  in
iiruiniir  about  it.c.  'I'Mt,  tluDblMiI  Iih  leiifjlli,  ho  tliut
an  imn  fiword  foniid  jn  ii  toiuli  ul.  AlbiuiH,  iiitti  rt>[»-
rciMriitt'il  by  HikIwi-II,  w.'w  twu  feet  \\\t:  iiicbt-n  long,
iii<-biiliiii;  tb<*  b»:iilln,  wbinb  wom  abM3  of  iron.  The
Kiuuaii  HWDnl.aN  nnn  (bit  citne  al»u  witb  their  ntb-
vx  iyfCvus\\e  wi-iijiotiK,  v!u»  lurgrr,  braviur,  anil  mure
formitlabb:  thmi  tlto  (iro«U.  Its  Iciigib  gave  occa-
HJoii  111  tbo  Jokv  of  Lcutubis  n|Hin  bis  fton-tii*lnv,
who  \va»  of  very  low  (tlHtiire,  "  Wbo  tie<l  roy  snri-
iu-law  to  his  sword  r*  To  (bin  Roman  sword  tbc
Greeks  Applied  tbc  term  <rirtitfry,  wbicb  wws  the
nnme  of  ii  picco  of  wo<id  of  the  Kuiiie  form  iiatid  in
weoviiij;.  {See  Tei-A.}  Tbe  ancient  nritihh  aword
wjir<  Htill  larger  tbnu  tbe  Roman.  The  priuuipal
ortKiineiitntion  of  rbe  Hword  wan  bustoned  upuD  the
bill. See  Capulus.


L  HADuinviil  or  Ul  [llrrlan  Soldier,  rbaad  u  BlBgm. 3.  fimb-
bard |1iilit}-eiicv,  G«riiutiy,)

(iladiut  \»  ftnrofttDies  ttaed  in  a  wide  seiiso,  so
as  to  ini'liuU*  jiutiiif  {t\.  v.).  In  tbo  n?piiblicau  jtc-
riml  of  Home,  tbe  glodiiiH  wart  worn  by  umgii^
Iratcs  only  wbeu  exercising  military  comniiiiKl.
rndt-T  tbe  Kiupire  it  waa  one  of  tbr  iiisigiiia  of
ttie  emiM;ror  nud  of  those  oouiinatuil  by  him.  The
iuM  plitdii  is  the  ri^'bt  of  criminal  JtiriMlictinu  con-
feiTfHl  by  the  emiwror  on  provincial  goveruors.
8orAitMA;  Maciiakka  ;  MucKu.

Olana  (tuAv^dlt).  A  large  Ioa<b)n  slug  or  pinm*
met,  tiuat  in  a  luonUl,  and  nsed  instead  of  «  stone
to  \m  dlucbnrgcd  from  a
sliug  (Liry,  sxxviii.  S»>,
21.  iW).  Tbe  illnstrntion
repreMsnts  an  original
Ibiind  at  tbe  ancient I>a-  "'•^

biciim ;  tbe  lettern  vtH  are  tor  Jlrmiter,  "Throw
Rteiidily,"  or  Feri  Koma  (  Imtcript.  OtbU!,  4932),
*-8trikt*,  O  Romer  Others  have  been  found  in
Orwce,  inscrilH-d  with  tbe  Ogure  of  a  thuodertiolt,
4ir  AF.ZAI.  "Taketbiit."


Q-laphjh«  (rXotfivpo).  A  mi^rrcflf  of  Marem  At>>
Toiii  iiK  w  lio  jilaee<l  her  Mm  Arcbelailtt  on  r  bu  tlin'riw  tf
CapiuuitHtia  as  a  favour  to  bcr. iDio  Can.  xUx.3e.)

Olaas. See  Vitrum.

QIauc6  irXavKTj).  11}  Ose  of  tbe  Nereidf«,ibe
natiie  Glaao^  being  only  a  person itlcAt inn  »(  ik(
color  of  tbe  (Wa  (-yAuvicvc)-  (i)  Daughter  of  CriM
of  Corintb.  altfo  oalteil  Crellva. Sac  Crkox.

O-laudas  (rXavicmr).  <1)  An  lUyriait  kia;  vht
fnliglit  against  Alexander  tbe  Cirvat  in  n.c.  3S.
In  'Mt3  h«  ofl'ereil  a  refoge  to  Pyrrbiis,  lh(?n  an  m-
funt,  and  refuaed  to  give  him  up  to  CajMUitkr.
Nine  years  later  be  invailml  Kpirnn  and  plAMd
PjTi'hiis  on  tbe  thmue  of  that  country.  8n  Pri-
RHCM.  (2)  An  Aegioetati  niattmry  wbo  AoariiM
I  n  n.c  4J^  He  made  a  bronKe  chariot  aud  >tUM
of  Gelou  t<i.  v.>,

Olaucon  (rXavxaiv).  Tbc  brother  of  PLkto.  »h»
maki-H  htm  one  of  tbe  speakers  in  his  dialugii«  TV

/irpaf/liru,

G-lauons  (rXuDKot).  (1)  A  sea  deity,  profaaUf
only  uuuther  form  of  Poseidon,  whoso  son  be  ii^
aiyonUng  to  some  Hcconnti^.  Like  tbe  auiiw
godx  in  general,  he  had  the  gift  of  pnipbw^;  uA
we  find  him  appearing  lu  the  .Vrgunanta  (ApoO.
Rb.  i.  1310  foil.),  and  to  Meni'laiiR  iBurip.  Ontt
354]  foil.),  and  telling  them  what  bad  happmtd.nt
what  wa«  to  happen.  In  later  limea  saikm  «m>
coiiriniially  making  re|>urt»  of  hia  sootliM^f
(Pausaii.  i'x.  'ii).  Some  said  that  bo  dwelt  vltb
tbe  Nereides  at  Delos.  where  be  gave  t»8|)otw»t«
all  wbo  sought  tbein.  Ateording  to  otbent,ben*-
ited  eiicb  year  all  tbe  i-tlen  aud  coa«ls,  witb  s  trua
of  mousters  of  the  deep  («i7ria),  and.  uuMeii,  fw*-
told  in  tbe  Aeolio  dialect  all  kinds  of  evil.  Tb*
linlierniei)  watchetl  for  bis  apitniach,  and  eD4rti»-
oured  by  fii^tlnj^,  prayer, and  fumigatioMiukWt
(lie  rnin  nilh  whieb  bis  propbeoy  menMMd  thr
frnita  and  eattle.  At  times  be  waa  aem  aff
tbe  unves,  and  hia  boily  apjiRared  oovefMl  viA
tnniwH'lx,  neaweed,  and  ntouee.  He  waa  beanlvviT
moru  to  bununt  bin  fate  in  not  being  able  (o  A
(Plui.  t{tp.  X.  611).  This  loDt  ctrcuuuitauer  rtlM
to  the  uommou  legendary  history  of  Qlaucan.  H»
wait  II  tiahenuan.it  is  said  (Pausun.  I.e.;  Ottitif'^
xiii.iN)4  foll.).of  AnibiMlon,  in  Itoeolbi.  atworrinit
oue  dny  the  lisb  which  be  had  cuugbt  aud  llixt<«-
ou  tbe  graas  to  bile  it.  ami  then  to  jump  iatoiW
H«*a,  lii^  ciirionity  iociteil  bim  to  taat*'  it  alM-  let'
tnediMtely  on  his  dt^ng  so  be  follownl  iIh-'iT'S*'*
pie,  and  tlinn  beuame  A  sea-giM).  Anolticr  wo^U't
made  bim  to  have  obtained  hia  immortaliti  ^7
lurtling  the  grans,  which  bud  revived  a  haf»  l»*
hud  run  down  in  Aetolia,  He  wax  ali">  **tA  "■
have  built  aud  ateered  tbe  Argo,  anil  to  I'*"
been  niade  a  god  of  the  sea  by  Zeus  iliirilig  'i"
voyage.  An  acoonnt  of  tbe  at<>ry  of  y»  1"**
for  Heylla  will  be  fonnd  under  Scrux  9w
Giidecken,  GtarnhM,  der  J/errMtfoH  (Gfilltnro,
|H60|.

(2)  A  son  of  Sisyphus,  king  of  Coiinib.  \^y  Mfi*
\\&,  tlie  dnngbtor  of  Allan,  iHim  at  Pulniap.  »  ''1
lage  nf  Boeotia.  Acninliug  to  one  account,  b*
ri'Alraiurd  his  marea  from  Iiaviug  iul'rrcoan'  v'l'
tbc  siallioUK;  uiion  wbtrh  Aphn>dil^  inapir«<i^
former  wiib  wich  fury  that  ihey  tore  hu  Unl?"
pieces  aa  bo  returned  from  the  game*  "liich  Adrw
tiubadcelel>rat<'dln  hononrorbit.faili»r. AnntWt


6LAUCUS  SINUS


787


GLYCON


TOTsioD  of  the  Btory  makes  them  to  hare  mn  mad
■after  eating  a certala  plant  at  Potniae  (Etymol.  Mag.
a.  V.  noTvidits;  Hyg.  Fab.  250;  Verg.  Qeorg.  hi.
268).

(3)  A  son  of  Minos  and  FasiphaS,  who,  when
a  child,  punning  a  mouse,  fell  into  a  vessel  of
honey  and  was  smothered.  His  father,  ignorant
-of  his  fate,  consulted  the  oracle  to  know  where  he

was,  and  received  for  answer  that  there  was  a

-three-colonred  cow  in  his  herd,  and  that  he  who
could  best  tell  what  she  was  like  conld  restore
his  son  to  life.  The  soothsayers  were  all  assem-
bled, and  Polyidus,  the  son  of  Coiranus,  said  that
her  colour  was  that  of  the  berry  of  the  briar,  green,
red,  and,  lastly,  black.  Minos  thereupon  desired
him  to  find  bis  son ;  and  Polyidus,  by  his  skill  in

-divination,  discovered  where  he  was.  Minos  then
ordered  him  to  restore  him  to  life;  and,  on  his  de-
claring bis  incapacity  so  to  do,  shnt  him  up  in  a

-chamber  with  the  body  of  his  child.  While  here,
the  soothsayer  saw  a  serpent  approach  the  body,
and  be  struck  and  killed  it. Another  immediately

-appeared,  and  seeing  the  first  one  dead,  retired,

.and  came  back  soon  after  with  a  plant  in  its
mouth,  and  laid  it  on  the  dead  one,  which  inatant-

Jy  came  to  life.  Polyidus,  by  employing  the  same
herb,  recovered  the  child.  Minos,  before  he  let
him  depart,  insisted  on  bis  communicating  his  art
to  Glancus.  He  did  bo,  but  as  he  was  taking  leave
he  desired  his  pupil  to  spit  into  his  month.  Glan-
cus obeyed,  and  lost  the  re(K>llection  of  all  he  had
learned  (Apollod.  iii.  3. 1). Hyginus  makes  him  to

"have  been  restored  to  life  by  Aesculapius  (Poet
Aatron.  ii.  14).

(4)  The  grandson  of  Bellerophontes,  and  son  of
Hippolochos,  prince  of  the  Lycians.  With  his
kinsman  Sarpedon,  he- was  leader  of  the  Lycian
auxiliaries  of  Priam,  and  met  Diomedes  in  the
nSl^e.  The  two  chieftains  recognized  each  other
-as  friends  and  guests  of  their  grandfather  Bel-
lerophontes and  Oeuens,  and  exchanged  armour,

-Qlancns  parting  with  his  goldeu  suit  for  the  brazen
arms  of  Diomedes.  When  the  Greek  iDtrenchmeuts
were  stormed,  Glancus  had  reached  the  top  of  the
wall  when  he  was  put  to  flight  by  an  arrow  ^ot
by  Tencer.  He  protected  Hector  when  wounded
by  Achilles ;  with  Apollo's  aid  he  avenged  Sarpe-
don, and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  struggle  for
the  body  of  Patroclns.  He  finally  met  his  death
at  the  hand  of  Aias.

CHancua  Slnua.  A  gulf  of  Lycia,  at  the  head
of  which  stood  the  city  of  Telmissus  or  Maori,
whence  in  ancient  times  the  gulf  was  sometimes
also  called  Binus  Telmissius.

Oloaaa  (yXwo-tra)  and  Q-loaeema  (yXttttrtnjiia).  In
the  language  of  text -criticism,  a  "gloss.**  The
word  underweut  a  gradual  development  of  mean-
ing, which  may  be  described  with  brevity.  By  the
earliest  Greek  commentators  aud  editors  of  texts,
yXairtra  denoted  any  word  in  an  author  that  re-
quired definition  or  explanation.  Such  were  (a)
archaisms;  (&)  &ra^  \ty6fuva  and  uewly-ooined
words ;  (c)  provincialisms ;  (d)  barbarisms ;  and  (e)
technical  terms  (cf.  Arist.  Poet.  21,  $  4-6 ;  Bhet.  iii.
3,  2 ;  Quint,  i.  6).  In  editing  or  transcribing  a
text  it  was  usual  for  the  editor  or  transcriber  to
define  the  y\&tr<ra  by  writing  opposite  to  it  iu  the
margin  the  more  familiar  synonym  {Snofia  Kvpuw).
'The  t«rm  yXmo-o-a  soon  came  to  be  applied  to
-the  pair  of  words — the  word  in  the  text  and  the
84


definition  iu  the  margin — the  two  being  ngardad
as  constituting  a  single  whole.  Finally,  the  ex-
planation aloue  was  called  a  yXaaaa.  With  these
glosses  begins  the  history  of  lexicography;  for  col-
lections of  them  began  to  be  mode,  and  published
separately  as  glo$aaria  or  glossaries.  Sach  was  the
compilation  of  the  elegiac  poet  Philetas  of  Cos,
whose  collection  was  the  first  attempt  at  au  Ho-
meric glossary  (cf.  Susemihl,  Geachichte  d.  grieck.
Lit.  in  d.  alexandr.  Zeit,  i.  p.  174  foil.).  We  know
of  glosses  as  early  as  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  for  De-
mocritus  of  Abdera  is  said  to  have  written  a  trea-
tise Utpi  'Ofiffpov  ^  'Opdotiriajg  km  rXatra-aav.  (See
Lexicon.)  Glosses  soon  ceased  to  be  purely  lexi-
cal, and  from  definitions  became  commentary —
geographical,  historical,  philosophical,  or  philo-
logical— according  to  the  taste  or  purpose  of  the
gloBsograpber.  When  these  explanatory  glosses
are  fairly  brief,  they  are  usually  styled  acholia
itrxoXia) ;  when  long,  they  constitute  v7r0fi.vTfft.aTa
or  regular  commentaries,  such  as  the  Alexandrians
wrote. See  Alexandrian  School.

The  principal  glossographers  among  the  Greeks
were  Philetas  (aboot  B.c.  390),  Zenodotus  of  Ephe-
sus  (about  B.C.  380),  compiler  of  rXucrtrai  'Ofajpueai  ;
Aristophanes  of  Byzantium  (b.c.  200),  whose  glosses
are  partly  preserved  by  Pollnx;  Diodorns,  Artemi-
dorus,  Kicander  of  Colophon,  Aristarohns  of  Sam-
othrace,  Crates  of  Mallos,  Zenodotus  of  Mallos,  Did-
ymus  Chalcenteroa,  Apollouius  Sophista  (about  b.c.
20),  Ifeoptolemns,  known  distinctively  as  6  yXaa-
aoypa<jiot ;  Apion  (at  Borne  under  Claudius),  Kro-
tion,  Pamphilns,  Aelius  Herodianus,  Pollux,  Phr>'-
nichns  in  the  second  century  A.D.,  Ammouius  of
Alexandria  in  the  fourth  century,  the  famous  He-
sychtus  (q.  v.),  Photius,  Suidas,  Zouaras,  and  the
author  of  the  Etymologicum  Magnum  (q.  v.).  Of
the  Romans,  Anrelins  Opilius,  Aelius  Stilo,  Yarro,
YerriuB  Flaocus,  and  Featns  deserve  especial  men-
tion. Of  technical  glosses,  those  on  the  legal  com-
pilations of  Justinian  are  very  important.  Of
these,  two  famous  compilers  were  Cyrillus  and
Philoxenns.

See  Matthaei,  Glossaria  Oraeoa  (1774-75) ;  Va-
ter,  lAtteratur  der  Grammatiken,  Lexica,  und  Woi-
teraammlungen,  etc.  (2d  ed.  by  Jiilg,  Berlin,  1847) ;
HUbner,  EncyclopMif,  pp.  37-40 ;  Lowe,  Prodro-
TOos  Corporie  Glossariorum  Latint»-um  (1876);  id.
Gloasae  2i'ominum  (1884) ;  and  (now  in  preparatiou)
the  Corpus  Gloatariorum  (by  the  Royal  Saxon  Soc.
of  Letters).  Ou  the  legal  glosses,  see  Biener,  Ge-
tchiokte  der  Novellen,  pp.  225  foil. ;  and  for  Biblical
glosses,  the  article  "Gloss"  in  McClintock  and
Strong^s  Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical  Literature,  vol.  iii.
See  also  in  this  Dictiouary,  the  articles  LEXICON  ;
Scholium  ;  Textual  Chiticisu.

Oloaaaxinm. See  Globsa  ;  Lexicon.

aiota  or  Clota.  A  river  of  Britain,  uow  the
Clyde,  falling  into  the  Glota  Aestuarium,  or  Frith
of  Clyde.

Olycfea,  also  dim.  Olycerltun.  "Sweet  one,"
a  favourite  name  of  Greek  and  Roman  courtesans.

Olyoexiua.  Head  of  the  Western  Empire  for
one  year  (a.d.  473-74),  but  dethroned  by  the  East-
ern Court  in  favour  of  Inlins  Nepos.  Glyoeriua  later
became  Bishop  of  Salona  in  Dalmatia.

Olyoon  (rXvK»v).  An  Athenian  artist,  who
probably  flourished  in  the  first  century  b.c.  He
executed  the  famous  colossal  statue  of  the  Faruesa
Hercules,  uow  at  Naples. See  Heracias.


ONATIA


738


GOKOlAN'Ca


Onatia. Sco  Egsatla.

Gnidus. See  Cniuus.

Onipho,  M.  Antokius.  A  Rouinii  rlietorician
of  Gallic  birlli  (u.c.  1 14),  wlioso  school  at  Rome  was
attondpd  by  Cicero  (Suet.  Gramm.  7).

Onomic  Fo«ta. See  Epos.

Otiotnou  (yiw/ittv).  Tlie  index  or  pin  on  a  flon-
diol  wbich  marlu  the  Lour  by  the  aliudow  it
CASto  ^Pliny,  fl.  y.  ii.  f  74 ;  Vitniv.  i.
6,  6). .S<«  IToRoi/imuM.

OnomttcHrvtuTTixoC).  Aroligionftsect
'wbicb  Hoiirlslicf)  in  tlio  first  contniy  of
the  Christini)  era.  In  the  Now  Testa-
ment, yvucrir  donotcs  thn  profound  Ap-
preciation of  CbriHttan  truth;  with  the
Gnostics  it  means  a  wort  of  transcend  en-
(JnetuoQ,  lal  and  niyBtic  nndorHtanding,  which
''^IbmdM^  (WW  and  knew  llio  alI*-gori(w  nud  siib-
Jlntlam.|  tieties  wbirb  tboy  pruf»t«ed  to  find  in
ttiu  sacred  writings.  Tboy  L-laimcd  a
kinship  between  all  the  ndigioDs  of  the  world,
and  asserted  their  possession  of  stweiol  tradittoua
from  certain  of  Christ's  disciples,  and  the  gift  of
prophecy.  The  sonrcoa  of  Gnttstici^m  were  throe
— Greok  idealiam,  Oriental  pantbetsiu,  and  Chris-
tian revelation,  and  it  was  always  a  heresy  of  the
leaniwl  rather  than  uf  Ibo  nniMes  wbuui  itti  ttubtle-
tiee  rBi>clIed.  The  fmir  jwints  iijion  which  nearly
all  the  GiirtMlicB  ii^rnt-d  were  oh  foUowa  :  (t)  God
la  iiicouipreljuuMible  ;  {^)  Matter  iH  eternal  and  an-
tagonistic to  (tud  ill  that  it  coudiliouij  and  limits
the  divine  efficiency  ;  (S)  Creation  is  the  work  of  a
Deniiurgus.  cither  subordinate  to  God  or  perhaprt
actually  opposed  to  him;  (I)  The  human  uatui-e
of  Christ  was  only  a  deception. See  Ak«n.

Gnosticism  reoched  its  highest  imint  A.ii.  150,  af-
ter whicli  it  rapidly  declinod.  Its  iuiportanco  is  to
he  fniiud  in  the  fact  thnt  il^i  arbitrary  treatment  of
tbi'Scriptnres  forced  theChiirch  ton  more  thorough
study  of  the  historical  trailition^  nud  to  e-stablisb
the  principle  thnt  notliing  is  to  be  regarded  aa  true
Chriiitianity  which  is  nrit  hIiowii  to  Iw  de-rived  from
Chriflt  and  bin  aptistlfji.  See  Mattnr,  ITitfoire  Cri-
tique dn  /iM»jrftrifinif  (3il  oil.  18KI);  Khi);,  Thf  flnoa-
tif-A  and  thrir  ttmiaiH*(l>i7S);  and  Man»ol,  ThsGnoa-
tit'  IfereAia,  edited  by  Lightfoot  (1875).

Gnosuo,  OnosBiu. See  Cnossus.

Qobr^aa  (Fw^f^vAf ).  A  Persian,  one  of  the  eev-
eu  noblemen  who  comtpired  against  the  naurper
Sinenlis. See  Darm's.

Oold. See  Alkum  :  Ncmismatics.

Gold  and  Ivory 8c«i  CiiRVSELEroANTiNA.

Golden  Ass.  Bee  AruueiL's ;  Ll'CIaxcs  ;  Nov-
els A.NU  KuMancbs.

Oolden  Veraeti  (tnri  x/*^"'^'*-  ^  name  given  to
a  number  of  gnomic  Aayiiigft  that  have  comedown,
InulitiouiUly,  fi-om  the  Pythagorean  pliilosopher*.
often  expressed  oliscnrely,  and  containing  much
that  is  of  later  date  Ibaii  that  of  their  professed
origin.  They  contntn  the  condensed  morals  of  the
older  epics  (neo  £lt»i),  and  embody  the  teavhingK
of  practical  virtue.  Tlicy  are  printed  at  the  end
of  Gottling's  e<litlou  of  Ilei,iod  {'id  cd.  Gotha,  184:t).
See  Dkuocratbb  ;  Pythagoras.

Oolgl  (FoX-yot).  A  town  in  Cypms,  of  uncertain
site,  a  .Sicyonian  colony,  ond  «ne  of  the  chief  seata
of  the  worship  of  Aphroflil^^.

Gomphi  (VufKput). A  town  in  HcHtiacotit  iu


Tfaessaly,  a  strong  fortreas  on  the  oonfltiei  i
ms,  commanding  the  chief  pass  between  Tha
and  Epirua.

Qompbna  {yofuftot).  Properly  a  Oivek  ir«ri,
which  aigniOes  a  large  wedge-tthaped  pin  (SctwiL
Ari.Htoph.  Ep.  468;  Tertnll.  JpoK  1:2)  driven  be.
tween  two  objL<etA,  to  increane  the  flnaDen  iv
tightnem  of  contignouA  membeni^  whence  the  ume
tunn  waa  adopt«<l  by  the  Kounana  to  designate  the
large,  ninud  -  headed,  and  wedge  -  shapod  utoacs


r


-Ji


m^-


Gomplil. (roBipeil.t

which  they  nsed  to  place  at  iuterrala  botween  thf
ordinary  curb -stones  boandiog  the  fbot'puhnr
trotfoir.

Oonataa  (roi-orac). One  of  the  Antigocil ^

AXTIGONUS.

Oonni  (rdiToO  er  Gonnaa  (rivyot).  A  stmtifilj'
fortilied  town  of  the  Pt^rrhmibi  in  The»)aly,on  lit*
river  Penens  and  at  the  entraiioe  of  the  vale  of
Tompd  (Herod,  vii.  IS8).

Gordiaet  or  Gordyael  (Vopiivalot).  MoontaiH
in  Arnitiiia,  where  tin-  Tigrin  risoa.

Oordian  Knot See  Goiwirs.

OordianuB.  (l)MARCt:sA.vn>NrxtTsAnuciTC^
A  Roman,  born  during  the  reign  of  the  fini  Au-
touine,  of  one  of  the  moat  illnstrionti  and  wealttif
families  of  itome,  and  who  made  himself  Terj  |>ip-
nlar  daring  his  qnaoatorsbip  by  his  tnnaifietm
and  the  large  sums  which  he  spent  in  prondlnic
games  and  other  amaaements  for  the  poopls.  ll'
also  onltivated  literature,  and  wrote  MfNil
poems,  among  others  one  in  which  be  uulsbwW^
the  virtues  of  the  two  Autoniues.  Being  ^
trnstetl  with  the  government  of  sereral  protjaM
he  conducted  himeelf  in  snoh  a  manner  m  v
gain  universal
approbation.
Ue  was  procon-
sul of  Airica  in
A.D.'^7.  When
an  iuBurrec-
tioii  broke  ont
iu  that  prcv-
inc:e  against
Moxiniinufi,  on
aoconut  of  his
exactions,  and
the  insurgente
saluted  Gurdi- '
anus  aa  emper-
or, he  prayed
earnestly  to  be
HXcuHcd.oti  ae-
countofhisage,
being  then  poet
eighty,  and
to  be  allowed
to  die  in  peace;
but,  the  insnr-  Tba  Etdet  GoMiuai tCkpoototlU*^'


GORDIANUS


789


GORGIAS


gen  t8  tbreateoiug  to  kill  him  if  he  refused,  he  accept-
ed the  pei-ilous  dignity,  naming  his  son  Gordianus
as  his  colleague,  and  both  mode  their  solemn  entry
into  Carthage  amid  nnlversal  applause.  The  Senate
cbeerfnlly  confirmed  the  election,  proclaiming  the
two  Gordtani  as  emperors,  and  declaring  Maximi-
nuH  and  bis  son  to  be  the  enemies  of  their  conntry.
Meantime,  however,  CapellianDs,  governor  of  Mau-
ritania, collected  troops  in  favoar  of  Maximinus,
and  marched  against  Carthage.  The  yoanger  Gor-
dianus came  ont  to  oppose  bim,  but  was  defeated
and  killed,  and  bis  aged  father,  on  learning  the  sad
tidings,  strangled  himself.  Their  reign  had  not
laated  two  months  altogether,  yet  they  were  great-
ly regretted,  on  account  of  their  personal  qnalities.
(2)  M.  Antonius  Africanus,  son  of  Gordianus,  was
iustruoted  by  Serenns  Samoniooa,  who  left  him  bis
library,  which  consisted  of  62,000  volumes.  He  was
well  informed,  and  wrote  several  works,  but  was
rather  too  fond  of  pleasure,  which  latter  circum-
stance seems  to  have  recommended  him  to  the
favour  of  the  emperor  Elagabalns.  Alexander  Se-
yems  advanced  bim  subseqnently  to  the  consul-
ship. He  afterwards  passed  into  Africa  as  lieuten-
ant to  his  father,  and,  when  the  latter  was  elevated
to  the  throne,  shared  that  dignity  with  him.  Bnt,
after  a  reign  of  not  quite  two  months,  be  fell  in  bat-
tle, at  the  age  of  forty-six,  against  Capelliauns,  a
partisan  of  Maximinns.  (See  Gordiakds,  1.)  (3)
Marcus  AstonInus  Pius,  grandson,  on  the  moth-
er's side,  of  the  elder  Gordianns,  and  nephew  of
Gordianus  the  younger,  was  twelve  years  of  age
when  be  was  proclaimed  Caesar  by  general  accla-
mation of  the  people  of  Rome,  after  the  news  bad
arrived  of  the  death  of  the  two  Gtordiaui  in  Africa.
The  Senate  named  him  colleagne  of  the  two  new
emperors  Maxiums  and  Balbinus,  but  in  the  fol-
lowing year  (a.d.  SStJ)  »  mntiny  of  the  Praetorians
took  place  at  Rome,  Balbiuns  and  Maximns  were
murdered,  and  the  boy  Gordianus  was  proclaimed
emperor.  His  disposition  was  kind  and  amiable,
but  at  the  beginning  of  hia  reign  he  trusted  to  the
insinuations  of  a  certain  Maurus  and  other  freed-
uen  of  the  palace,  who  abused  his  confidence,  and
committed  many  acts  of  injustice.  In  the  second
year  of  his  reign  a  revolt  broke  out  in  Africa,
where  a  certain  Sabinianns  was  proclaimed  em-
peror, bnt  the  insurrection  was  soon  pnt  down  by
the  governor  of  Mauritania.  In  the  following
year  Gordianus,  being  consul  with  Clandins  Pom-
peianns,  married  FuriaSabinaTranquilliua,  daugh-
ter of  Misitheus,  a  man  of  the  greatest  personal
merit.  Misitheus  disclosed  to  Gordianus  the  dis-
graoefnl  conduct  of  Hanrus  and  his  friends,  who
were  immediately  deprived  of  their  o£Boes  and
driven  away  from  court.  From  that  moment  Cror-
dianus  placed  implicit  tmst  in  his  father-in-law,
ou  whom  the  Senate  conferred  the  title  of  "  Guard-
ian of  the  Republic."  In  the  next  year,  news  came
to  Rome  that  the  Persians  nnder  Sapor  bad  invad-
ed Mesopotamia,  had  occnpied  Nisibis  and  Carrhae,
entered  Syria,  and,  according  to  Capitolinus,  had
taken  Antioch.  Gordianns  opened  the  temple  of
lanus,  according  to  an  ancient  onstom  which  had
been  long  disused,  and,  setting  ont  from  Rome  at
the  head  of  a  fine  army,  marched  through  lUyricnm
and  Moeaia,  where  he  defeated  the  Goths  and  Sar-
matians,  and  drove  them  beyond  the  Danube.
Gordianns  presently  crossed  the  Hellespont,  and
proceeded  into  Syria,  delivered  Antioch,  defeated
the  Persians  in  several  battles,  retook  Nlsibis  and


Carrhae,  and  drove  Sapor  back  to  his  own  domin-
ions. The  Senate  voted  him  a  triumph.  In  the
year  after,  A.D.  244,  Gordianus  advanced  into  Per-
sian territory,  and  defeated  Sapor  on  tbe  banks  of
the  Chaborae ;  bnt  while  he  was  preparing  to  pur-
sue him,  Philippus,  an  officer  in  the  Gnards,  who
bad  contrived  to  spread  discontent  among  the  sol-
diers by  attributing  their  privations  to  the  inexpe-
rience of  a  ttoyish  emperor,  was  proclaimed  by  the
army  bis  colleague  in  tbe  Empire.  Gordianus  con-
sented, but  soou  after  was  murdered  by  Philippus.
Gordianus  was  about  twenty  yeus  old  when  he
died.  His  body,  according  to  Eutropius,  was  car-
ried to  Rome,  and  he  was  numbered  among  the
gods  (Herodian,  vii.  10  foil. ;  viij.  6  foil. ;  Eutrop.
ix.2).

Oordlnm  (Topitovy  also  Topdltioy).  The  ancient
capital  of  Phrygia,  situated  on  the  Sangarins;  the
royal  residence  of  the  kings  of  the  dynasty  of
Gordins,  and  the  scene  of  Alexander's  celebrated
exploit  of  ontting  the  Gordian  knot. See  GoR-

DIUS.

Gtordlns  (r(fp8(oc).  An  aucient  king  of  Phrygia,
and  father  of  Midas,  hut  originally  a  poor  peasant.
Internal  disturbances  having  broken  out  in  Phry-
gia, an  oracle  informed  the  inhabitants  that  a
wagon  would  bring  them  a  king,  who  would  put
an  end  to  their  troubles.  Shortly  afterwards  Gor-
dins suddenly  appeared  riding  in  his  wagon  in  tbe
assembly  of  the  people,  who  at  once  acknowledged
him  as  king.  Gordins,  out  of  gratitude,  dedicated
his  chariot  to  Zeus,  in  the  acropolis  of  Gordinm.
The  pole  was  fastened  to  the  yoke  by  a  knot  of
bark ;  and  an  oracle  declared  that  whosoever
should  untie  the  knot  should  reign  over  all  Asia.
Alexander,  on  bis  arrival  at  Gordinm,  cut  the  knot
with  his  sword,  and  applied  the  oracle  to  himself
(Plot.  Alex.  18).

Oordyen^  (TopSwjvrj)  or  Cordaen6.  A  moun-
tainous district  in  the  south  of  Armenia  M^jor,
between  the  Arissa  Pains  (Lake  Van)  and  the
Gordyaei  Mootes  (Mountains  of  Kurdistan).  Its
warlike  inhabitants,  called  Gordyaei,  or  Cordueni,
were  no  doubt  the  same  people  as  the  Carduchi
of  the  earlier  Greek  geographers,  and  tbe  modern
Kords.  The  Gordyaei  Montea  separate  the  valley
of  the  Tigris  from  the  great  table-land  of  Iran.

Qorgd  (T6pyr)).  Daughter  of  Oeneus  (q.  v.)  and
sister  of  Deianira,  both  of  whom  retained  their
original  forms  when  their  other  sisters  were  met-
amorphosed by  Artemis  into  birds.

Oorgiu  (ro^i'ar).  (1)  A  Greek  sophist  and
rhetorician,  known  as  "the  Nihilist,"  a  native  of
Leontini  in  Sicily.  In  B.c.  437,  when  already  ad-
vanced in  years,  he  came  to  Atbeus  on  an  embassy
from  his  native  city,  to  implore  aid  against  the
Syracusans.  The  finished  style  of  his  speaking
excited  general  admiration.  He  was  successful  in
the  object  of  bis  missiou,  and  immediately  returned
home;  bnt  he  soou  came  back  to  Athens,  which
he  made  his  headquarters,  travelling  through
Greece,  like  the  other  sophists,  and  winning  much
popularity  and  profit  from  a  large  number  of  dis-
ciples. He  survived  Socrates,  who  died  in  399,
and  ended  his  days  at  Larissa  in  Thessaly  in  his
hundred  and  fifth  year.

His  philosophy  was  a  nihilistic  system,  which
is  summed  up  in  three  propositions :  (a)  Nothing
exists;  (fr)  If  anything  existed,  it  could  not  be
known;  (o)  If  anything  did  exist,  and  could  be


GOSOO


740


GORTTy


known,  it  rotild  not  be  romtnnitirated.

Ue  dt^clineil  to  aMoiinjii  tlui  nniiio  nt  twipli-

iBt,  preferring  tbnt  of  rimtorician, H«

lirofeasetl  not  Cm  tvui'li  virliii-,  but  tbii  art

nf  pfirxniiHion: in  otliitr  n'ordfi,  tii  f^ivi^

Ills  ditK-iiiloH  ftticb  abnohitc  readiiio«)4  in f/^r//t

fipenkiiig,  that  tUey  sbould  b*^  able  lo

Ciinviiice  tbi^ir  bcaR*re  iudcpendoiitly  nf

nny  kiion-ledf;u  of  ibc  subject. Be  did

nor  fuiiiid  bift  luatruction  on  any  definite

rhft«rif»! Bvatecu, bnt  j:a%-e  bie pupils

i4|:iii(hird  paaia^e^  uf  literature  In  Icnrn

by  lte»rt  and  iniilate,  prat'ti^ing  tbcni  in

tbf  a[)pliciilinn  nf  rbehjritid  figun-s. He

appfitred  iu  jhtshui,  ou  variouB  twcasionti,

lit  l>i'lpbi,0]ynipia,  andAtbenn,  witb  nnjd-

el  »ptH-chei«  wbicli  he*  aftcrwurda  piibiibh-

(hI. It  inimt  W  riruiL-iiibcrcd  tbat  it  was

Oor^inH wbti Tiansphintud rhetoric to

Gri-<rCr.  and vbi>  liidi^od tii  disuse tbe

Attic  dialect  UH  llie  Literary  li)ikgnn<;e  of

pnwtf. Ther<*  retiniin  two  norku  nMcribed

to  tiiin,  b)it  not  f^eiinine  —  tbe  bii-cnlli.>d

Apolo/j!/  of  Palumnin,  and  tliA  Fmomiuni

tiN  Helen. Sih^  tbe  article  by  Htniinsliirk in  tbo  |

Jthfinisrhvn ,Vu»euiH for If^tiO,  pp. CfM-BSR',  aud  |

Bln««,  Jtli^chf  It<^rtd4tamk<it.  pp.  44-7*2.

(21  A  <In>ek  rbetorician  of  tbo  seroiid  lialf  of  the
firi^t  century  li.c. II»  was  tutor  to  t]i«  younger  I
Cicero,  and  was  tbo  author  of  a  troati^  on  the  I
figures  of  speccb,  -which  is  in  part  pro^rrved  in  a
Latin  paraphrase  by  RntiUus  Ltipa». Sec  RuTi- ,

UVU  LCI'L'B.

Oorgo  (I'oj>yii)).  The  wife  of  I^onidan.  king  nf
Spiirta.  A  tine  repartee  of  bent  j&  giveiu  by  Plu-
tarch. When  A  woman,  n  stranger,  obsen'ed  t4)
her,  "  Vou  Spartuii  wauien  iiro  the  only  one*,  tliat
rnlo  men,"  ulie  rupliwl,  "  True,  for  wc  are  the  only
miesthat  gire  birth  to  m©n"(Plat.  Lacott.  JpQpktk.u

Oorgo  tr»ffyai\.  The  capital  of  ttie  Choraamii
in  BHctriana.  It  is  supposed  to  correspond  to  tbo
moilcni  Urgheuz.

Oorgo  (rojjyu).  Homer  makes  mention  of  the
terrible  bend  of  tbo  Gorgou,  a  formidable  luoUHter
(Odjf6a.  xi.  ^i).  Tbia  head  in  :i  terror  in  Iliideti.  aud
in  the  aegis  of  ZeuH.  ITe^iud  ^iwuktt  of  three  Gur-
gons:  Sthenu  (Val<<ria,  the  mighty),  Enryalt'  (Lati-
volvn,  the  wtd«- wandering),  and  Medn»a  (Giiberria,
the  ruler).  They  :vru  tho  daughlt'i-M  of  (he  agnd
een-goil  Phorcys  and  Coto,  »nd  Kistura  of  the  Oraiae.
(See  CUAIAZ.)  Thi-y  dwell  on  the  farthest  nboro
of  Ocean,  iu  the  ueiKhbonrhood  of  Night  and  of
the  Hesperules.  Tlit^y  are  awful  being»,  with  bair
and  girdles  of  snakes,  whutie  look  tnniH  the  bo-
bolder  to  stmic.  They  aie  also  ii(ivu  reprewMite<l
wilb  gnblfu  wingH,  brazen  rlaM'ti,  and  uuormuiift
teeth.  Tkli'diiHa  Ih  uinrtal,  bnt  the  iither  two  im-
mortal. When  PurM^UN  rnt  olf  Medutui'u  head,
Chrymaor  and  the  winged  horw  Pe^nana,  with
whom  she  vtas,  with  cbibt  by  PoMiidou,  sprnug
fiirth  from  the  streaming  hlom).  The  head  was
given  by  Pcriteuti  t«  Alhetio.  who  set  it  in  her
nhiehl.  Heracles  received  a  lock  of  the  Lair  from
Athi^ne  as  a  present.  When  endeavouring  to  per-
snade  Copbalus  of  Tegea  to  take  part  in  his  expe-
dition against  Uippouoiin  of  Sparta,  tba  king  roj*-
fPMuted  tliat  he  feared  an  attack  from  bis  enuuiieH
tbo  Argives  in  HenicleH's  absence.  Heracles  ac-
cordingly gave  to  8ten»i>6,  the  daughter  of  Cepba-
In",  the  lock  of  Medusa's  hair  in  a  braten  am,  bid-


;^c


;^  -"


.bl


w^"^


Bonilanlni  Mvduso. (Uly|i((illii'k.  Muuivb  |

ding  her.  in  case  (he  enemy  approaebed,  \o  s*en
her  hi^id  and  hold  it  three  tiiueA  over  the  tiIU
fi<r  tbe  mere  aspect  of  it  would  tnrti  the  euemr  to
flight.

In  couMqueuee  of  the  l>«1ief  in  this  powtt  rf
the  florgon'M  bead,  or  G4>rgimei(»n,  to  paralyw  toi
terrify  an  enemy,  the  Greiiku  carved  imagM  of  ii
in  its  most  terrifying  fomiM.  not  only  od  ailDoif
of  all  Horte,  especially  shiL-blH  and  bn-n^tpUtOilxi
also  on  walls  and  gates.  Thus,  on  tbe  noutb  wtll
of  the  Atlieniau  Acropolis,  a  targe  gilded  Got^wm-
on  was  set  on  an  aegis  (Panuan.  i.  til,  f  41.  In  Ai
popular  belief  the  Gorgon's  head  wa«  al»o  «  nmn*
of  protection  agninnt  all  enchantment,  wbrlbrrx'
wottl  or  act,  ami  wt?  tbiis  lind  it  thnnigliont  (ifwi
birttory  employe<l  as  a  powerful  aiiiulct,  om)  idteo
carved  with  graceful  settingw  on  decnrativp  furti-
tnro  and  coHtly  onianientB.  Bui  the  Greek  siii*!*
with  their  innate  senso  of  beunty,  knew,  <t»i>
the  case  of  the  Gorgon,  how  to  give  ade^fatte ex-
pression to  the  Idea  which  lay  at  the  riM»tef  ifc*
story.  The  story  said  that  Mednsa  hnd  beenafi"
maiden,  whotte  Itixnriatit  hair  hnd  Iwen  latnii  t?
Atbeii^  int»  snakeH  in  ivvenge  for  ihedesKnil"*
uf  her  sanctuary.  Aeconlingly  tbe  lieadof  Mciliui
is  represented  in  works  of  art  with  a  cuimtciUM*
of  tuuebing  beauty,  nnd  a  wealth  nf  h*irwr«M
with  siiake».  Tbe  face  wu»  imagined  a*  itM^i"
the  stillness  of  death,  and  thus  bearing  the  ]»'**'
to  turn  tlie  liviug  to  stoue.  Thi>  nnmt  lifSirtiW
sur^'iving  instance  of  this  concepiinu  is  lb*  B**"
dauini  Medusa  now  at  Mnnich.  The  sli*7  i^J''"
duHa  lias  HUggestiHl  several  fine  bitji  of  Eii|t»«
vprw,  nniiing  tbeni  D.  G.  Rntuetti's  Aaiiecla  J/wf
aud  Hake'M  Hiinnel,  Thf  /n/ant  .l/rrfiuM.

Oortyu  (TopnV)  or  Oort^na  {ri>,yn-ra). Au
cicnt  city  in  Crete  ou  the  southern  shore  «f^
island^  aud  situated  on  the  banks  of  t1i4'  n
tbueus. liy  its  twD  birboum.  Metalluui  »'»^
na,  it communicated with the »ea Here
temples  t-o  Zeus,  Ajiollo.  and  Artemi!);  ao<l
the  fountain  of  SanruH  nna  a  spring  oieTli
u  palm-tree,  a  spot  which  tradition  dt>flsrc<l
the  Mcenu  of  tbe  lovett  uf  ZeuH  and  KuripiCt
Xext  to  CuossuM,  Ctortyn  wa*  the  moat  jw'
town  of  Crete,  and  lietween  tboee  two  eili»»
.  existed  an almost conttuunus  fend. TinJ*'  ^*^


GOssypini


TU


rtRAHATUS


ans,  Gortjn  Upcaiuo  tbe  capiUl  of  the  JftlAud.
Ile<&4,  »n  uri'baic  iiitfc  rip  lion  wa«  Toiiud  on  the
t  o(  tiortyit,  Uy  Hal1ilii-rr,  in  the  bed  of  a  mill-
iBHiu.  Two  fiii^uiviits  of  tbe  name  inscription
d  bi>eii  {irevioiisly  fnnnil.  tliu  new  discorcry
tkiug  a  ytructically  coui{>Iet<>  record  of  a  collco-
b  of  lnsv»  regnlatiug  tbe  iirivnt«  relatione  of  tbc
>)>lo  of  the  city,  wttb  rcgaitl  to  BUch  siibjoctd  a»
leritADce.  adoption,  lieireiMiea,  marriage,  and  di-
rce,  Ttie  inAcriplinn  in  r«;;arde<1  an  a  little
flier  ilian  the  year  B-c.  4iH).  See  Morritmi,  The
r  Cofte  of  (he  Crrtnn  Gwrlyna  (ItWiiJ  (loxt,  tnin»-
Ion,  nnd  comniKutary) ;  and  Simon,  Znr  Intchrifi
1  (iurtyn  (Vienna,  ieft6).

Ooasypium. Tbe  cottou-tTc«. See  Carbasus.

Oothi.  Ootthl,  or  OoUionea  (in  Ihcir  own  lan-
ajje  UuTAXH  or  GtTiis).  A  powerfnl  northern
tiou,  who  acte<i  an  important  part  in  the  over-
*ow  of  tbe  Rvmun  Empire.  The  name  Gotlii,
Ootbv.  ap[>eHnt  (irat  in  history  in  the  thinl  (;eu-
7,  and  it  wom  then  iirted  hy  the  Roman  wrttcni
vytioiiymiMiH  n'itb  tbe  uinre  uiiriunt  uiih  of  fietao,
i«ople  who  livvil  on  tbo  banks  of  tUt"  Jowei-  Uan-
e,  uuar  tbo  hborea  of  tho  Knxiue;  but  tbo  ideo-
f  of  the  two  races,  though  maintained  by  Jakob
imm,  in  now  generally  rejected.  The  old  Scan-
lavian  tradition  in  the  Kddas  makea  their  chief,
in  or  \Vo4teo,  to  have  come  from  tbe  banks  of
I  Diiienter  to  tbe  shores  of  the  Baltic  many  cen-
iefl  befere  the  ChriHtian  era.
Ibtrnt  tbe  mtildleuf  the  thinl  ceittnry  of  our  ttra,
tGotba  am  recorded  to  have  ortMHed  tbe  DnieHter,
{to  huveU*>TaAlatt!d  Diu^ia  jukI  Tbmt-e.  Tbv  L-in-
lor  Detinfl  IuhI  bin  life  in  uppo»ing  tlifiit  in  MofKiii
Du'<i51),  nAer  nhiub  btit  »iu-cc!utnr  Uulluo  imlnccd
tm  by  iminry  t'li  withdraw  uj^nin  to  tiIt^ir  iild
■lllDga  on  Lbu  DnicMtur.  Tbry  then  Hotrni  to  biivo
MdeAStward.nnd  to  hari^  occupied  tbe  conutry
int  the  Cimoieriau  lJ*iftporu«,  whence  tbey  nailed
ilMi  tite  Enxine,  occupied Trebizond, nnd  ravaged
Chynia.  In  the  yoar  'Jti9  they  landed  in  Mitce-
nio,  but  were  defeated  by  the  emperor  Clandiim
,  hence  styled  Gotbicns.  Three  ycurn  after,
■Srltan  gave  np  Daria  to  »  trilx^  of  r!otb»,  who
e  believed  to  have  Iwf-n  tin*  Vioigntbii  nr  Wl-rI-
D  Uothit,  wbilu  tliimii  who  ravaged  Ania  Minor
tre  the  OatnigothH  or  Ka>ttem  (Jotbs.  This  dia-
detinu  of  tlie  rai'e  into  two  grand  divigiui)»  np*
MlH  abuut  this  time.  Under  Constantino  1.  the
^ti  from  Docin  invaded  Illyricnm,  Imt  were
tolluil.  Constantino  II.  afterwards  allowed  a
*t  of  theiti  to  S4-tt1e  in  Mof-Nia,  who  snent  to
W*  Mioti  aftrr  rnd)r:i<;(Hl  Chrt^lianity,  an  il  was
t  thfiu  that  lIphiliiM  iWultilii)  tntn.<ihiteil  tbo
fiptiin-fl,  alMiiit  the  niiddt*;  nf  the  fuurtli  crntnry,

•  tho  dialect  culled  Mooso-()otliic.  About  tbo
'^  3T5,  tbe  Uuns,  coming  from  tbe  East,  fell  npon
fOstrogotlis.  nnd  drove  theni  njioii  the  V'ieigotbs.

•  Wfr«>  hving  north  of  the  Ihiniibf.  The  latter,
"8  liard  pre(*sed.  iniplorwl  permiKaion  nf  the  Ro-
^  couimandiT  to  bo  allnwrd  to  croan  that  river.
I  K^ko  ifhelter  in  tho  territory  of  thn  Empire.
P'*>tiiper»r  Valeus  cnuHentwl,  and  u  vimt  nuilti-
P  of  tbem  were  allowed  to  ituttlu  in  Moi-hih,
P*  won  afterwanla  they  quiUTelled  with  the
frian  antboritios,  iuvtuled  Thrace,  nnd  defeated
P  Vill«l  Valens,  who  came  to  oppose  them  I  a.i».
^'  From  that  time  tbey  oxereisifMl  great  inliii-
tce  over  tbe  Byzantine  ronrt, either  as  nllies  mid
•Ktnarien,  or  HH  fonnidable  enemies. Towards


the  end  of  the  fonrth  contnr^*,  AInric,  being  choe«n
king  of  the  Visigoths,  invado^I  Xortbern  Idily.  but
wiU)  defeated  by  Stilicbo  near  Verona  |a.i>.  40S).
Mc  came  again,  however,  about  six  years  after,  and
plnudered  Uonio  (A.D.  410).  His  snccesaor  Ataul-
phns  lAtJiwnlf)  mnilo  pence  with  tbe  Empire,  and
n-piiired  to  the  sonth  of  GanI,  where  the  Vinigolbd
fonndtnl  the  kingdom  of  Tonlonse.from  which  they
aflerwardtt  p»Mfd  into  Spain,  where  a  Visigothio
ilynatity  reigned  for  mon*  than  two  centnrieB,  till  lb
wa8Con(|iieriHl  by  tbo  Moom.

Meanwhile  tbe  OHtn»gotlm  or  Eastern  Gotl]B,ivb(>
bad  settled  in  Pannonia,  after  the  deAtrnction  of
the  kingdom  nf  the  Huns,  extendi!  their  dominion
over  Noricnm,  Kbnetta,  and  lllyrieiiin.  and  nbnnt
the  year  4^  they  invaded  Italy,  nuder  their  king,
Theodoric,  and  defeated!  Odoncer.  king  of  the  Ho-
nili,  who  had  aaHnmed  the  title  of  bking  of  Italy.  »
title  wliich  ThrwHloric  then  t<iok  for  himnelf,  with
the  contiont  of  tbu  Etutterii  vmiKTur.  Tbeodoriu
wo.'o  an  able  prince:  bit*  ndgii  was  a  (leriod  of  rertt
for  Italy,  and  his  wise  adminiHtmtion  did  nnich
towartia  healing  tho  wonndsof  that  conntry.  Rut
bis  nncoeflsors  degenerate^].  And  tbe  tjolbtc  doioiii-
ton  4iver  Italy  butted  only  till  [h')3,  when  it  wa8  over-
thrown by  Narxee,  tbe  general  of  Jnstiuian.

Kroni  thin  time  tbe  Gotbs  tignrt;  no  longer  a«  a
power  in  tho  history  of  Western  Enro]>e,  except  in
•Spain.  Their  name, bowaver,  is  found  perpctnate<l
long  after  in  Hciuniinavta,  where  a  kingdom  of
Gotha  existed  nntil  the  twelfth  ctmtnry,  dintinct
from  Sweden  Pn>|wr,  until  botfi  cnjwun  were  unit-
ed on  tho  bead  of  Charle«  Hwerkemon  {a.d.  Ilfil),
who  assumed  tbo  title  of  King  of  tho  Bwuden  and
the  Goths.  It  is  probable,  howovcr,  that  the  (ioth-
land  of  tiwcdcn  is  etymologicaUy  not  "  the  land
of  I  be  4  JotliH,"  but  "  tbo  land  nf  tlii>  GntitJ","  a  dis-
tinct though  kindml  pnoplr.  An  Ohtrogolbir  peo-
ple also  Hcttled  the  Crimea  in  tbe  fonrth  cejiinry,
so  that  the  (leninsnla  wai  oftlcially  styled  Gothla
hy  tbo  Greek  Church  down  to  th<>  c-ighteL-nth  ccu-
tnry.  In  175D,  tho  Jesuit  Moodorf  k-nrucd  fnnn  *
native  of  the  Crimea  thai  his  coiintiymen  spokt*  a.
dialect  bearing  somo  likeness  to  Gennan.  7'he
Gothic  hingnage  is  now  classed  with  tbe  Scandi-
navian iu  the  "KasI  Germanic  group." See  Ikikk

ECHOPEAN  LANliDAOKS.

On  the  early  history  of  tho  Ooibt*,  coiwnlt  Im-ilo-
nis,  De  Gttar\tm  aivr.  (Jothortim  Oriffiuf  rt  Jtrbua  G^-
»tit;  Isldoru8,CAronirM>N  6'o/A(i>rtt»i ;  and  Procopiua,
ite  Hello  Gotkico.  The  first  two,  however,  aro  not
to  he  trusted  implicitly  when  they  treat  of  the  re-
mote genealogy  and  origin  of  tbe  Gothio  rac«.  StM
H  Bradley,  The  Gvthe  (ISA*).

OothinL  A  Celtic  jxtople  in  tbe  southeast  of
Oeriuany,  Hubjeut  to  the  (jrmdi  (Tao,  (Jerm.  43).

Gothooes. See  GOTlll.

Gown, See  Palla  ;  Stola  ;  Toga.

Orabatua  {KpdSarov  or  Kpatifiarns,  the  KrenoU
grahaiu  A  small  low  eoucb  or  bed  of  the  commonest
description  (Cie.
Die.  ii.  63;  Verg.
.IfnrrJ.  ft),  nnch  H6
waN  ummI  hy  poor
|>«oplc,  having  a
mere  network  of
cords  stretched
over  the  frame  (Loci  l.>^f.Ti.  13;  Gerla«U.Petron.97.
li,to  8npi>ort  tho  mattress,  precisely  aarepi-eeented
by  tbe  annexed  illnstration  from  n  tvrra-cotta  lamp.


Gnbttu. <RkU)


GMOCBVS


742


GRACCHUS


Oracchum.  (U  Tihkhus  S»L\ii'itOMi:s.  the  fa-
tliur  of  ilie  Urncchi,  mairifd  CMniellii,  ilmipliItT  nf
Scipiu  AflicRiiii»  t)ie  KIder.  Ht*  Hivil  \vhjln  lii«
eou8  were  young,  having  twice  filled  the  tiflice  of
cousn],  aud,  according  to  Flntarch,  olitnitivil  two
triaiuphs.  He  was  ct-nsor  in  B.C.  169.  A»  a  wuldiiir
he  carried  on  var  with  distinction  agnintit  the
Caltjheri  in  Spain  (n.c-  IHl)  »tiil  the  Sardinians
(17*).  He  had  twelve  nlnhh-rtn  by  Cornelia.  Afttr
the  dmih  of  hfir  hiifthnn<l,CorurHa  mfnacd  all  otlem
of  innrriftge,  und  devoted  berseli'  to  tlic  charge  and
eduoftfioii  of  her  children,  who,  as  Plutnrch  talln
na,  wcr*  lesa  the  inheritors  of  manly  virtno  hy  being
ajirnQg  from  the  nobloKt  blood  in  Rome  than  thfy
•view  its  iM)Bsc«»ois  from  thu  oart'fol  nurture  of  ihvir
mother  Cornelia  ( Pint.  Oracrh. ).  r^)  TmKRIUfl,
aider  son  of  the  preceding,  wan  horn  li.c.  Kkt.  Ti-
berius Berv(>d  bin  firnt  ciuiijiuign  iu  Africa  under
bis  nncle  Scipio,  find  having  oblninod  the  office  of
conial's  quaestor,  wo  find  him  next  nnder  Manci-
nils,  lbs  unfortunate  commander  in  the  Nnmnn-
tiue  War.  }li»  nunie,  which  the  Nnmantines  re-
tted from  reDiembering  bis  fnther's  virtues,  is
fthl  lo  have  procured  the  t^^rms  under  which  M;*d-
•vlnUB  obtained  safety  for  hin  amiy  ;  but  the  Sen-
Hte,  on  his  retirni,  was  »o  nnich  diRpleiiAcd  nt  the
uufavourable  natnr«  of  thniw  couditinim  thnt  it
rt-solvwl  on  giving  np  all  the  principal  ofncinrii  to
the  Xumantinna.  Ry  the  gnod-wtl),  however,  of
the  popular  aauiubly,  iDHiienced,  aa  it  would
iiMtn,  by  the  Boldlors  and  their  oounootions  in  the
lower  claases,  it  was  decided  to  scud  Mancinns  as
the  real  criminal,  and  to  &pare  the  other  offlcere
for  the  sake  of  Gracchus.  Treatment  of  this  iiat-
nre  was  likely  to  rouse  Gracchus  nguinat  tlie  Sen-
ate, and  make  him  the  friend  of  tlu^  poor  ;  and  ac-
cordirgly,  in  three  yeara  afterwards,  we  find  him
b(*ginuiug  hiR  short  career  as  a.  political  agitator.
I(t>  WHS  elected  tribune  of  the  people  B.C.  lUS,
and  immediately  b^'gan  to  attempt  the  revival  of
llin  Lieinian  Itogationa.  {8t'R  AgraiUae  Lrqes  ;
HooATtoNKS  LiciNiAE.)  In  HO  doing  he  appean^  to
have  had  in  view  the  two  grand  principles  whieh
that  law  involved— namely,  the  employment  of
lYcemeu  In  prt'fercnco  to  Klavca  iu  cultivating  the
iioil,  ond  cKpecially  the  more  geuenilly  recog-
nized principle  of  the  e^jjuitable  division  of  the
public  land.  Three  cominiM#touerB  were  appuint-
e<l  to  enperiutend  the  wurbing  of  the  new  law
which  Gracchus  had  propo»eil,  if  Plutarch  may
be  trusted,  with  the  flppri>v»I  of  nome  of  tiie  mosC
eminent  itet-Kons  uf  the  tiuM:.'i,  ainung  whom  were
Mticiuft  Scoevola  aod  Crossns  the  orator.  Such
general  lutercHt  was  excited  bj  tfao  qnestlon,  that
crowds  arrived  from  all  parts  of  the  country  to
support  eitlier  aide ;  aud  there  appeared  no  doubt
which  way  the  matter  would  go  when  left  to  the
tribes.  The  aristocracy,  however,  Wfciired  the
veto  of  M.  Octftviiis,  one  of  the  trihmics,  and
tliereby  quatihod  the  proceedings  wbeucver  the
law  was  brought  ou,  which  violent  mode  of  oppo-
((itiou  led  Gracchus  to  exercine  hla  veto  on  other
qi)e»iioiis,  stop  the  supplier,  and  throw  the  gOT-
erntuent  into  the  most  complete  helplessnesa.

Thus  far  the  contest  bail  been  constitutional;
bnt  now,  Graeehuf*,  irritated  by  continual  oppo»i-
tton,  inviteii  Octavius  to  pro|H>Ke  hit«  [Gracohus'»]
ejection  fnun  the  oAicc  of  tribune;  and  on  his  re-
fuMil,  plt'tiiling  the  utter  uselessnuas  of  two  men  so
dilTcrent  in  Mrnlimcnt  holding  the  same  ofltpe,  he
put  the  question  to  the  tribes  that  Octaviiis  lie


ejected.  Wheu  the  flret  seventeen  out  of  ihflUr
ty-flvp  trilM>s  had  voted  for  it,  GniechiiJ>  a];aib  in.
pIorM  him  to  i-esign  ;  atui,  ou  his  eulteAt)  {im>t.
ing  nnsncccMifu],  polled  another  tribe, couftriliitiuj;
a  majority,  and  sent  his  oOlt'ers  to  drag  t>.tATiaii
from  the  tribuuc'M  ehuir.  The  Agroriau  Lav  km
forthwith  passed:  nudGracchii»  himMlf,  hislirotl)>
er  Cains,  and  his  father-in-lnw  Appiue  i'lowUtu,
were  np[iointcd  the  couimiMiouer>.  IJut  the  Sin-
ate,  to  show  their  optiitoii  of  the  whole  procerdlaj.
withheld  from  him  the  usual  allowance  for  a  [iiililit'
otficer.  While  thiugn  were  in  this  state,  Attala^
hing  of  Pergamns,  lH)<iue»thiMl  his  kingdoai  ami
treaHurcji  to  the  Homan  people;  and,  to  eutuiKt
his  own  popularity,  Gracchus  pro|KMicd  to  ditlda
the  tn-aiture  among  the  reciptenta  nf  land  aadv
the  uew  Ian*.  ti>  enable  theni  to  st4H;k  tbeir  dnii^
uiid  to  commit  the  miuiagemeut  of  the  Ititi^-
dom  of  PergamuB  to  the  popular  asseaibly.  Thii
brought  matters  to  a  greater  pitch  of  distnul
than  ever.  Gracchus  was  accused  by  one  sraitv
of  aspiring  to  tyranny,  aud  by  another  of  hariti^
violated  the  sanctity  of  the  tribnoitian  offiM  io
deposing  Octavins.  On  this  (Kiiut  Orocchne  atiow
to  justify  himself  before  the  people,  but  his  e|i|i»-
nent  wenieil  to  have  gained  an  advantage  so  ^ntf
as  to  tndncu  him  to  |Ki8tiK>ue  the  assembly.  VTlm
at  last  he  did  make  his  defence,  it  restwl,  imn-
larch  ifl  RorT<!Ct,  on  falne  analogies,  ami  on  kxtii-
ing  the  iiuentiuu  of  the  inviolability  of  a  poblia
oflicor.  At  this  juncture  Gi^acchns  iweuu  to  km
tromblod  for  that  iwipulority  which  oloas  i»r
sorred  him  from  inipenchment ;  and,  lest  ti  sbonid
fail,  endeavoured  to  secure  his  own  reulwtkn  ti
the  otnce  of  tribune.  The  other  pariy  bod  it
murred  as  to  his  eligibility  to  the  uftico  two  ytts%
in  sucoeasioii,  and  on  the  day  of  etertiou  tliis|M^l
oooQpied  the  assembly  till  nightfall.  Nelt  iwm-
ing,  a«DOmp:inied  by  a  crowd  of  parliiHins,  he  «»l
i  to  the  Capitol;  and,oDheariug  thai  t hi>  Sptitl« bat
IdetcrmiDed  to  op|H>se  him  by  force,  anticd  I115M-
lowoK  with  staves,  and  prepared  tochuir  tlicCsjn-
tol.  At  thi.4  juncture,  PnbliusSeipio  Nji^ics, tutnujt
in  ruin  called  ou  the  consul  to  lake  nieasnra  tut
the  safety  of  the  State,  issued  from  the  Tenplatf
Kaith,  whore  the  Semite  hod  assembled,  fdlovri
by  the  whole  uobitity  of  Itooie.  lie  put  the  unit  Io
dight,  seized  their  wea]K>us,  and  sttackitl  oU  vbn
fell  iu  his  way.  About  three  hnudu'-d  pcrtahBd|SHl
among  the  slaiu  was  Gracchus,  who  was  kilM  ^J
re|M>nle<l  blows  on  the  head,  ii.C.  133  (Pint  Jl^
<lraccJi,\  See  Mominseu,  Uiat.  of  Somr,  rol.  H^
92~\'Hi  (AniericaD  ed.  letis).  (Si  GAtrs,  nu  af»
years  younger  than  his  brother  Til>firias,au«lstlu*
death  was  left  with  Appius  Claudius  as  aanunMB**
vr  for  carrying  ont  the  Agrarian  Law.  BjrlbtdMM
of  Appius,  and  of  Tiberi  us's  saoceasor,  LicitiimCia*-
ttus,  tbo  agrarian  commission  oousiated  uf  Fnlno*
Flaccns,  Papirius  Carbo,  and  himself;  bat  tic  tf
fnkined  from  taking  any  port  iu  public  atfslnK
more  ihaii  ten  years  after  the  death  ufTiWnnK.
Uuriiig  this  time  the  provisioimof  bis  bmltn'r'^  !a*
were  carried  ont  by  Carbo  and  Ftaocas;  hnt  Gs)i»
doea  not  seem  to  have  l>egi)n  lib*  career  a  au
indepeudent  political  lender  until  the  ^vu  9.c-
V£X,  when,  on  his  return  from  Sanliuia.  ntitn  b*
had  been  for  two  years,  he  was  clcetetl  trihnw*^
the  people.  Ilis  first  act  was  to  pnjpow  t«
laws,  one  of  which,  directed  against  the  dogli^
tribime  Octavins,  di.>ti]ualided  all  who  haA  b(«
thus  degraded  from  holding  any  lUBgisttaey;  *^


I


GRACCIICS


74S


GRACCHI'S


tbe  other,  having  in  riew  PompUiiiii,  a  promiuent
opimueut  of  tbv  i>upu]ar  party,  deuotinceil  the  bau-
lAbmeut  uf  a  Ruuihu  oitueu  without  trial  aa  a  riu-
lAtinii  nf  tbe  Riiiiiati  Ihwh.  Tbe  lintt  woh  ii«v«r
Carrie*!  LbniiigU:  tu  t)i*r  Imttrr  was  :ulib>(1  a  thini,
by  "trhicb  PoiiipilioM  wuti  baulsbwl  fruiu  Italy,  or,  ac-
«anliti|;  tu  Ivt^biiical  phraeeolog'y.  iulcnlictvtl  rmui
firo  ttiiil  wiitcr.  Tbi-i*e  m«aeurea  were  folluwud  by
obbriB,  by  wbiob  bu  aimed  at  eatabUrtbiiig  h\»  owu
jioptilarity.  Ouoof  tbcoi  was  a  poor-law,  by  wbitU
a  monthly  (lUtribiitioD  of  corn  waamade  to  I  be  peo-
ple at  an  almost  nominal  price.  (See  Fkcmkma-
UAE  LKCiES-)  Tbe  effect  of  tbia  law  wan  to  maka
tbo  pnpnlntion  of  Ilnnie  paupnra,  and  to  nttnict
nil  Italy  tn  partalcp  of  the  b<iiiiiity.  Nuxt  o&me  ot-
gaiiic  cbHng<>«,  nn  tb«y  would  now  bu  called  ;  aud
of  tbe«e  tliu  mont  important  was  tbe  tramtfcitiucu
of  lli«  jndicial  ]K>wer  from  tbu  Monatora,  wholly  ur
ill  part,  to  tbo  vqneatriun  order.  Tbia  lueaauru,
according  to  Cicero,  worked  well ;  but,  iu  weigbing
hit*  opinion,  wo  must  rcmombor  hia  partiality  for
tbe  ei;uifi'*,  and  odd  to  tbia  tlie  fact  that  liia  enlo-
gice occur  in  an  advocate's  a|>e«ob  (/it  I'rrr.  Jri.  i.)-
Qmcchna  now  poauwaed  unlimiu>d  power  with
the  popnloce ;  and,  at  tlie  end  of  tbe  year,  not
more  than  ten  randiilates  for  the  aflicu  of  tribune
having  appearetl,  he  vfw*  again  oiL-«-ti«d.  HIh  koc-
ond  tribniirsbip  vras  iiioNlly  uniployi^d  iu  puKaillg
laws  nwpi-ctiug  tht<  colon ilih,  in  M'hicb  matter
the  uriatocrntic  agent,  Living  Urnsua,  outdid  bim;
and,  having  won  tbe  couHdouco  of  the  people  by
his  apparent  dieintei-extedness,  v.>ntnred  (tjeing
himsalf  a  trtbuue)  to  interpose  his  veto  to  one  of
<3raocbn8'e  meamree  The  appointment  of  Gmc-
cbne,  soon  after,  to  tbe  offlt-e  of  r<immiiwionnr  for
pUuiting  a  colony  near  Carthago  n;muvcd  him
from  the  aceuea  of  bi^^  pi>|)nlarity  ;  and,  mioti  aflvr
bis  retnm,  »  pntposul  wim  iniiile  tn  rei»eal  tbu  very
luw  which  he  had  bt-en  ongiigM  in  carrying  ont,
relative  to  tbe  colony  In  Afiiea.  This  law  was
not  bis  own  meaMure,  but  that  of  otic  Rnbrins,  an-
other of  tbe  tribunes,  aud  waa  one  of  Iboso  ouact-
menta  which  hod  alienated  from  Oracchns  the  fa-
vour of  tbe  people,  it  having  been  repreaented  by
bis  opponents  as  an  inipiona  act  to  build  again  tbo
n  all*  of  Carthage,  which  Scipio  bail  solontnly  de-
Tot«d  to  perpetual  desolation.  <[Jrarphit4  wok  now
^  private  pefHCin,  his  second  trihnneflhip  having  kx*
^ired  ;  hot  yet,  as  Hucb,  be  opposed  tbo  propoKi*
tion  to  repeal,  and,  nnfortuuately  for  liim»e]f,
■nnit«<l  witl)  M.  Fnlvjns  Kl.iccus,  one  of  the  com-
misHioncra  of  tho  Agrarian  Law,  and  a  man  wIiom
oharaQt«r  woa  respected  by  no  party  in  tbe  Kepub-
Ho.  The  reputation  of  tiracchus  had  already  auf-
lered  from  bin  connection  with  Fulvlus;  aud  now
he  took  part  with  bim  iu  deftiguft  which  could
bo  consideriMl  as  nothing  Iosh  tbiiu  treasouable.
-Charging  the  Senate  wilb  spreading  false  re|H)rtj«,
ill  onler  to  alamt  the  religions  scrnples  of  the  peo-
ple, the  two  popular  leaders  n8semble<l  a  nuoierouH
iiody  of  tbeir  partisans  ami<.-<I  witli  daggern,  aud,
being  thus  prepared  for  violence,  they  pioueeded
to  the  Capitol,  where  the  people  wore  to  nie«t  iu
ordcT  to  decide  on  tbe  rcpoal  of  tbo  law  of  ICnbri-
us.  Here,  before  the  buaiueiw  of  tbe  day  was  yet
Wgnn,  a  privatu  citizen,  wbo  happened  to  be  en-
gagiMl  in  offering  a  sacrifice,  was  niurdei'ed  by  the
partisans  of  Kiilvins  Hn<l  Umccbus  for  sonm  wi>rds
■or  gestures  which  they  regardetl  lut  iusnlting.  This
-outrage  excited  n  general  alarm  ;  tim  awtembly
broke  op  iu  conatcnuicion ;  and  the  popular  loud-


era,  after  tryiug  in  vain  to  gain  a  hearing  ftxym  tbo
{leoplo,  while  they  diaclaimed  tbe  riolouoe  com-
mitted by  their  followers,  had  no  other  counit:  left
than  to  wilhdniw  to  tbeir  own  lionies. There  they
conrerteil  plarin  of  reniKtance,  wbicli  wens  oonsid-
vTvt\  liy  the  people  ait  un  open  relielliou  against  the
gowrnmi'nl  of  the  country. The  cotiNut  OjiimiiiK,
exxiggemttng,  jH-rhajMi,  tbu  alarm  whieb be felt
from  the  latu  outrage,  bujttily  Hummonerl  tbe  S«'n-
ule  together ;  the  iMMly  of  the  niiinlcrcd  man  was
exiioscd  to  the  view  of  the  people,  and  tbe  Capitol
was  secured  at  break  of  day  with  an  armed  force.
The  Senate,  being  informed by  Opimius  of  tbe
stat«  of  affaim,  proceeded  to  iuvest  bim  with  nb>
Kolnte |>ower  to  act  in  defence  of  the  common-
wealth, in  tbe  uHuiit  form  of  a  resolution,  "that
the  coiiHul  should  pnivtdo  for  the  safety  of  the  Re-
public." At  the  flame  time  OmcchiiH  and  Fidviits
woru  summoiLcd  to  ap|icar  brforo  tbe  Se.tmtr  to
answer  for  tbe  mnrder  Liid  to  their  charge. In-
atoad  of  obeying,  they  occupied  the  Aventiuo  Ilill
I  with  a  iHMiy  of  their  partisans  in  armti,  and  invit-
etl  the  atavea  to  join  them,  promising  tbom  their
freedom. Opimiiis,  followed  by  the  senators  and
!  the  members  of  the  equestrian  order,  wbo,  with
.  their  dependants,  had armed tbomselvra  by  bin
directions,  and  arcompaniod  by  a  IkhIv  of  regular
soldierH,  ndvuui'i-d against the n'lHdn,  wbo had
madu  two fniilliwH  attiMiiptM  at ni-gutialion,  by
scnditig  to  tbo  ronhitl  tbc^  son  of  Fulvina. In  tbe
meautioie  the  couducl  of  Gains  Gracchus  was  that
'  of  a  man  irrcsolnte  in  tbe  cnnr»e  whirl) he  pnr-
I  Bued,  and  with  too  much  regard  for  his  country  to
engage  heartily  in  tbe  criminal  attempt  into  which
;  ho  had  suffered  bimwlf  to  be  drawn. Ho  had  left
^  his  bouse,  it  is  saiA,  iu  his  ordinary  dn»»;  he  had
j  atrewly  urged  upon  Fulvins  to  proitose  tbe  terms  of
j  a  couipmniise  to  the  Senate;  and  now,  when  the
Aventiuo  was  attacked,  he  took  porMomlly  no  part
I  in  tbe  action. Tbo  content,  indeed,  waa  sttaa  over.
j  The  rclMsIa  were  presently  dispcrftcd. Fulvioa  waa
dragged  from  tbo  place  to  which  ho  had  ded  for  rcf-
j  ugc,  aud  woe  put  to  death;  while  Gracchus,  6utl-
I  iug  himaelf  closely  pnraned,  fled  across  tbe  Tilwr,
and,  taking  shelter  in  a  grove  sacred  to  the  god-
dess Furrina,  was  killed,  at  bis  owu  desire,  by  a
si^rvant who Inul accompanied his  llight. His
head,  together  with  that  of  Fulvhw,  wa«  cot  off
and  carried  to  the  consul,  in  order  to  obtain  tbo
prico  which  bad  been  avt  upon  liotb  by  a  proclo-
matiou  tsHued  at  the  bogiuniug  of  the  conllict;
and  tbo  bodice,  as  well  as  those  of  all  who  had
perished  on  the  same  side,  were  thrown  into  tbe
Tlb^r. In  addition  to  this,  the  houses  of  Orac-
chns aud  FulviUB  were  given  up  to  plunder,  their
property was confincaled, and even the wife
of  Gracchus  was  deprived  of  her  dowry. It  la
said  that iu this sedition there  pcrisbctl  alto-
gether of  the partltiAUH  of  tbe popular  leaders
about  :UKK),  partly  in  tbe  action and  partly  by
summary  executions  afterwords,  uodor  tbe  ooo-
aura  orders.

There  U  little  doabt  that  Oracchn»  aimed  at
monarchical  power,  but  mauy  writers,  among
them  MomiUHen,  justify  his  purpose  on  tbe  ploa
that  nn  ab»oliil«  nmnaroby  is  a  lens  evil  than  an
absolute  oligarchy  such  as  that  which  exi^ited  at
Rome  in  tbe  second  century  B.C.  See  Moninisen,
Hiit.  of  Eomt,  vol.  ii.  pp.  127-160  (American  cd.

ICdlW).

(4)  SEMFKOKIC6,  a  Roman  noblemau,  banished


ORACES


744


GKAFFITI


to  Cercinn,  an  island  r»ff  tho  com!  of  Africa,  for  hU
adnlteroiis  iutercourse  witli  Inlia,  tliu  daiigliter  of
Aiigiistue.  Ait«r  on  exile  of  fmiri  ten  years,  Im  vrae
put  to  death  by  a  jiarty  of  «uMi«rB  sent  for  that
{iiiriiose  by  Tiberin«  (Tac.  Ann.  i.  53).
Graces. Soe  Charite»!;  Gratiae.

OtadivuB.  Aiiopitliet  ufMarH  (■!.  v.)  and  Qftaal-
ly  derived  from  gratUur,  as  though  "the  strider."
Prof.  Miuton  Waireu  anggcsts  an  alternative  deri-
vation from  granfi-in,  graud-ire,  with  rcfcreuce  to
growth  ( Jwf  riwiH  Juumal  of  I'MJoloy^,  iv,  71).

Oradua.  (1)  A  8<?t  of  tiLHl-tttejis.  contiistiiig  of
several 8lair«  (Varro,  L.  t.  v.  10e\  which were


Ondu (From  Out  ruicu  Torgat


See


ivqnisito  fur  ascending  the  highest  conches.
Lr.cTTS.

(2)  A  flight  of  steps  leading  to  the  jtrcnaoM  of  a
temple  (Cie.  Ad  Att.iv.  1).  In  Greek  templea  there
wi-re  usually  hut  three  ati^ptt,  hut  Koman  orchitfcta
addt^U  a  dozen  or  more,  dividing  them  into  several
flighta.  The  number  of  stops,  however,  waaalways
nnereu,  ao  that  a  person  ascending,  and  commeuc-
iug  with  the  right  foot  (ptt  dextet-),  might  {dace
the  same  one  on  the  topmost  ^lep  when  he  entereil
tho  porch,  to  enter  with  the  left  foot  being  Ul-
oneued  (Yitrav.  Hi.  4.4;  Peintn.  30).

0)  The  Beats  ou  wblvh  the  8}>ectators  eat  in  a
theatre,  amphitheatre,  or  circus. See  Ampjuthe-

ATItUM.

(4)  Tbe  parallel  ridgi>H.  like  ittepH,  on  the  iuNido
of  a  dice-box  (/rifiJfNJi  I,  fur  the  purput^.'  of  mixing
thedi<-c  when  nhaken, and
giving  them  a  disposition
to  rotate  when  oast  from
it  (Ansou.  Pro/eta.  i.  88).

(5)  A  studied  and  femi-
nine arrangemeut  of  thu
hair,  when  artificially  dis~

posed  in  parallel  wares  ti^„,  ,„  .  ^.c*  box  ,lUcL,
or  gradatuiiiit  nsiug  one

over  the  other,  like  steps  (Quint.  sH.  10.  47),  the
aame  as  now  tcrmctl  "crimping.''  Nero  is  said  to
have  bxt  hiw  head  always  dreued  in  this  manner
(8uet.  .Vfto,  &1);  and  a  statue  representing  that
empitror  in  the  character  of  Apollo  Cithara-duH
(given  under  Nbro)  baa  the  hair  parted  in  thu
centre,  and  regularly  crimped  on  both  sides,  liko  a
girl's.  (C))  A»  a  measure  uf  length  (jUj/ia),  the  graduM
was  hoU*  a  pace  ipas$uM),  and  coutained  ft^  feet,
Grrek  and  Boman  respectively.  The  Greek  ff^fM,
therefore,  was  rather  more  and  the  Ei>niau  gradus
rather  loss  than  3^  feet  KngUsh.

Oradua  Cognattonls. See  Coonatio.

Oraeae  (Ppautt).  ''The  old  womeu,"  daught«fs
of  rhoreys  and  Ceto,  imd  three  in  nnmber —
IVpbrt'do,  Enyo,  and  Dtno,  aUo  called  Phorcydes.
Tbey  hnd  gniy  hair  fnnn  their  birth,  aud  only  one
tooth  and  one  eye  in  common,  which  they  lior-
rowetl  from  i*ach  other  nhcu  thry  needed  thetn.
See  UesiMl,  Throg.  tfTO.


Graecla. Tho  Boman  natna  of  Hellas  or  Oi
See  llKLi-4gi.

Oiaecia  Magna  <^pr  Oraecia  Maior. A  name-
given  to  the  liiatricts  in  the  Minth  of  Italy  inhab-
ited by  the  Greeks. This  name  was  never  xisfd
simply  to  indicate the south of  Italy; it  was
always confined  to the  Greek  cities and  their-
territories,  and  did  not  include  the  snrronnding-
districts  inhnbitetl  by  the  Italian  triWs. It  np-
pears  to  have  been  applied  chirHy  to  the  cities  on
(he  Tarenlino  Gulf — Tarenlnm.  Sybari*.  Cmton,
Cat! Ionia,  Siris  (Heniclea),  Mi-taiNintum,  Locri,  snd
Rhegium;  hut  it  also  included  the  Grrck  dtics-
ou  tho  west  coast,  snob  as  Cumae  and  Neapolts.
Htrabo  extends  tlie  appellation  even  to  the  Greek
citieh  of  Bicily. Bee  Lenomiaot,  La  t}m»de'(iffft,
3  voU.  (Paris,  1881) ;  and  the  article  Itaua.

Oraecoatiala {  rpatKotrratrtt ). Professor  Miil-
dleton  detines  the  GrnecostasU  as  a  plutfunn  in
tho  FornQi,ou  which  foreign  ambaKsailum  sttMMl  to
hear  the  speeches  from  the  Rontra  or  Comitinni,
like  the  Diplomatic  Gallery'  in  Lht^  Arauricau  Sen-
ate and  House. The  GriiocoqtuHiH  got  its  iiauiufrMo
the  fact  that  the  first  envoys  thus  bunoun-dwcn
Greeks  fnim  Muiwiilia  (Maraoillea),  aa  stated
tinus  (xliil.  5,  §  10). Cicero  apeaks  of  it  as
place  from  which  disorderly  persons  often  inlB^
rupied  tho  debates. It  appears  to  bavo  oecnpinl
a  difleront  place  before  and  after  tbe  ^econ»lr•^
tion  of  the  Forum  by  Inline  Caesar. It  is  ami-
tioned  by  Varro  (t.  L.  v.  $  1K>)  as  of  f>tono,  ssd
standing  to  the  right  of  tbe  Curia — -this  statement
referring  to  the older stmcturo. Arrhaeologiil*
foniiprly  tTgardml  the  t^'mi  aiidvnoltug  tlicforeipi
emluissy  at  Rome. 8«e  Runi, /i^osir  find  Oke  Csa-
fOfjjia.pp.  $4, 107, 123;  Monimsen,  Hittnri/ of  Sm*,
\.  p.  577  (American  ed.  l^iii*\\ MidJU'Um,  J?/w*m
of  Ancient  Romt,  i.  pp.  337,  2&6  (Loudon,  l«W),  ftr.l
cf.  tho  atticlc  FORITI.

Oraeviua  (Gbarfx),  Jouaxx  Geoko.  A  Genutu
clasbical  fccbolar  who  was  bom  at  Xanmbnrg,  Jm-
nar.Y  '49,  IC^i.  Ue  stndied  law  for  a  time  at  Uip-
zig.  but  by  the  influence  of  Gronovius  was  ledti
remove  to  Oeventer,  where  he  turned  his  attentwo
to  literature,  attending  lectures,  also,  at  Auuter-
dum.  ou  hiatury.  In  lt>'>^  he  became  tbesuoMMor
of  Gronovtim  at  DeveutHr,  aud  in  1661  was  etlM-
lo  the  University  of  Utrecht  as  ProfiasMr  of  Bs-
qnence,  to  which  chair  in  1G67  waa  attaehed  tli»
dnty  of  lecturing  on  political  history.  He  rpfty«i
calls  to  the  Univereitiee  of  Heidelberg,  LryiJrt.
and  Padua;  but  accepted  a  pension  from  Lw'"*'
XIV.  of  France.  He  died  January  U,  1703.  H*
eilited  the  works  of  Cicero  (1(><I,  foll.l,  ainl  ^^
published  editions  of  Jlesiud,  Callimachas,  laMiiu
(I6t^),  CatnlliiH,  Tihullus,  Pn>pertius,  Soel
(1C74),  and  Fhu-iH  (16(>0).  He  is  lieAt  known,!
ever,  by  his  Jihesaarat  Antiquilalum  lie
in  twelve  vols.  (1689).  8eti  L.  Miiller,
der  c/a««.  PhiloUfgit  in  dem  SttderUtmdtu^  pp.  441
(Leipzig,  ISG9).

OrafiSti  (plnral  of  the  Italian  graffito,  "a  •rntcV
ing").  A  nruue.  used  of  the  inscription?,  ilni^^i">^-
aud  MrrawU  found  upon  the  wall^  dnorptwi*.  v'''
lara,  and  IouiIm  of  Rome!,  Pompeii,  and  utlicr  ^^^
cient  cities.  Thry  are  tho  work  of  iiUfn"— wi
boys,  slaves,  louugers,  etc.  —  aud  arc  vnluslil
giving  au  insight  iuto  the  daily  life,  babiti,i
thoughts  of  the  common  people,  as  well  as  \
log,  at  Limes,  vabiable  biota  a«  to  the  natni


tiRAFFMI


748


GRAFFITI


llie  popular  lillglliiili  (Sch  Seituo  Plebeiv9.)  j  th«wam  since  there  are  lontc  list«  of  iinrios,  retbe.
They  are  usually  seratchwl  wUli  mma  mliarit  in-  ,  etc, and  alpbalivU  repeated  again  nad  again,
«tranient — fnr  insUticr,  a  b/i/m*,  or  written  with  An  interrstiny  firaffilu  in  thai  ro|irejteiiU'd  in
ciharroal  or  red  rhiilk— and  are  of  Ihi;  most  varied  j  the  prrcrdiiig  illuslralion.  It  wm  lirat  pnhlihhvd
-characl^^r,  an  niit^ht  he  exiiccted.  in)niprii«iu(;  iinr>-  i  by  Farhrr  Oarnicci  in  l-^j?,  und  in  now  in  llic  Kir-
[.iCionft  from  ihc-  \fOtita.  doggerel  verhCA,  insulting,  j  chnrian  .MnnuNiu  of  tht^  .lL-*init  C'rdlegc  at  Hontt*.


I


fonnwi,  and  ofl<Mi  obscene  words  md  fipireA,  rari-
cAtnres,  popular  catoliwonU. and  noiatory  effusions,
in  each  of  the  three  Inngnnges  ronrnmn  in  Boutbern
Italy — Greek,  Latin,  and  Oscau.  They  are  often  of
■&  more  wrioiu  clinmcler,  intended  ns  handbills.
•Of  this  class,  we  flmi  advLTtieeraciit-**  of  plays,  elec-
'lioo  notices  public  an  no  nn  cement);,  and  admoni-
tions to  servants.  The  fnlluwinii  is  an  example  of
.IlieiMditicalffrnJllo.-  A.VKITIVM  FIRMVM  AED.
•HJ.V.F.D.R.P.V.O.V.  F.  PILIi:KKPI
FACITE  {Jutum  I'tttium  /Vmum
^rdilem,  oro  ro*  /aeiatit,  iHgnnm  rt
yublifa  rirtim  oro  ro^./arite pilicrfpi,
/iicilc .'),  an  appeal  to  tht^  pHicrtyi  ot
hall-playersofthecitylo  rally  round
■a  kindred  spirit  nud  friend  nf  »|Kirt.
Many  quotations  fmni  thi!  piwts
appear,  Ovid  and  Propertinm  being
jrreat  favourUeiv,  but  only  one  com-
plete line  from  Vergil  is  found
-ninoDg  the  gragiti  collected  by  Gar-
nicci.  Of  the  poetic  (luotations  from


Apparently  it  lielongH  to  the  thinl  century  a.D.,  and
IN  in  ridicule  of  a  penton,  one  Atrxamenos,  who  is
repr*'»ented  as  wiirshipping  acrncitiwl  llgnre depict
«d  with  the  head  of  anatw.  Bcnrath  isMcrawIed  iu
Greek  the  8enteucc  .WESAMENOZ  IKBETK  [2E-
BETAI]  eEON,  "Alexnmentta  worshiiw  (his»  Owl."
It  was  fonnd  iu  one  nf  the  subtermueau  chnnibers
of  the  Palatine  in  1656.  8oholara  arc  not  wholly
agrtwl  a«  to  the  anhjecc  of  thi<i  caricatare,  some
Iwlierlug  it  to  be  a  hiospheniouii  reprt»-
Rentation  of  Chrixt,  while  others  think
it  refen  to  Anubis,  the  jackal -hcatlvd
god  of  Kgypt.  Prof.  Lanciaiii  in  his  An-
citnl  Home  in  tht  Li^kt  of  Rerent  fA»caV'
eritM  I  IVMlou,t8Ht^)  mentions  an  interest-
tuf;  collection  of  graffiti  discovered  In
li^  oil  the  walln  of  an  ejcubitoiiun.  or
Btntion-Uotnte,  and  made  by  the  Koman
iwlioeuteti  when  off  dnty.  These  can
1««  seen  in  the  AititaU  delV  Imtituto  for
186U,  edited  by  Heuzeu.


Ihe  Aentid,  the foUowiog  (i.  H  is  LhEOR^^^rill  CWOXXO  DO  f  6.0  L^BOR  A\//
inleresling  as  throwing  lighten  the  .^  X>  d  or.  r  1>  1  f-rW  T  N  / ^

valgar  pronunciation  of  the  letter  F  J  l/J^^ut/S*^  J  ^  5^  1  \  y

K: ALMA  VILVMQVE CA^O  '^  /

TLO — • Occasionally  a  line  from


OnilUe  tnm  ihs  Pauutw,  Soaa


«ofii«  poet  is  altered  to  suit  the  puqioses  of  the
wril«r,asthe  following:  CANDIDA  MH  DOCVIT
MORAS  ODIS.SE  PUELLAS,  evidently  a  variation
■■f  the  Proiwrtian  line:  Cgnlkia  we  docuit  ranfaa
«Mfu«e  /;«<-//(»,  and  intended  to  flutter  Mime  blonde.


Another  welt-exocnted  drawing  fn>ni  the  Pala-
tine walls  is  that  given  above.  It  repri<seDrs  an
ass  Inming  a  mill  with  the  inscriptiou,  LABORA
ASELLE  QVOMODO  EGO  LABORAVI  ET  PRO-
DERIT  Tlltl  {"  Toil  oa.  little  aan,  as  I  hare  done,


Alove-quarrelbetween  Virgiilannd  herlovcrTertinn  l  and  mnch  good  may  it  do  yon  T),  powiibly  written
in  indicated  by  the  following :  VIRGVLA  TERTIO  by  a  slave  who  bad  be«n  made  to  do  a  turn  at  the
^VO:  INDECE\8  EH. There  arc  many  allusions mill  (pittrintim)  as  a  punishment  (ef.  Ter.  Andr^  1.


to  athletic  and  gladiatorial  games.  One  Epaphraa,
wboBe  name  often  appcan,  is  told  that  he  "  doesn't
know  how  to  play  baU  "  <EPAPURA  PILICREPVS
NON  K.S  I,  and  some  friend  of  Epaphras  has  drawn
■aline  tbrough  the  last  three  wonls.  8cliooMmys
liavv  kcratcbed  their  ieseons  by  way  of  practice  on


CMT^fAtnn  at  tb*  Cmofliioft


2.  2i^). Thn  subjoined  graffito,  which  resembles  the

attempt  of  a  modern  school-boy,  is  from  tlii*  bar*

racks  at  Pompeii,  and

wu  execnted on the

barrack  -  wall with a

piece  of  ivd  chulk  by

a Roman soldier. It

earicatnree  one  Nonius

Maximus,  whose  name

appears elsewhere oit

the  uanio  walls  couple*)

with Inanlting  words,

and  who  wat  probably

a  oeuttiriou wboae

•trictnoaa bad made

blta  anpopnlar.

Another  Pompeian
wall- caricature  refers
to  a  fierce  towu-aud-
connlrt-  Aght  in  the
amphitheatre  between
tbe  Pompeiaiu  and  Nu-
ceriana,  aa  the  reenlt  of  which  Nero  forbade  the
Pompeians  to  opuu  the  amphitheatru  for  a  period
of  ten  yean.  The  graffito  represents  an  armed
man  d<tsceuding  into  the  arena  beantig  the  palm
uf  victory,  while  on  the  other  sides  priMoerisbuag
draggcfl  away  in  boncU.  The  legend  in  the  comer
gives  a  cine  to  the  meaning  of  the  caricature.  It
raada: CAMPANI VICTORIA \T?A CVM NV-


GnlDlu  Is  Cbstk  trom  fMnpsH.


CartCBiors  ftom  ttw  Oaler  Wtlt  of  «  Privau  Housa (PomiMtli.


CERIXIS  TERISTIS  ("Campttumna,  yoti  «nff«red
in  tliB  victory  as  well  oa  tho  Nuccriftus!")

Tbc  first  notice  of  this  class  of  itiKcripttoDS  ap-
poarcit  in  tbe  Journal  i/«  FouHle*  for  October  IBtli,
I7C6;  and  in  ITJi  tbu  G«rmiiu  urchatiolDKitit^  Murr
pnblielie^  at  Nun^niberg  a  collection  oSijraffiti  that
hod  been  tran»tcrib<-(1  fur  bim  by  a  fri«n<l  A  sup*
plement  to  tbis  api>vai-iHl  im  17UCt.

The  lirat  good  cultection  pnbliHhed  was  that  of
Bishop  C.  Wotdswortb  in  1837,  ctiuHiBtiug  wUoJlj
of  graffiti  from  Pom-
peii, and  r&printcd
in  liiit  Mitrflianiea
io  1879.  A  lar/;e
untnber  of  tbem  in
Latin  are  giv^n  in
the  f'orpiu  Ituvrijt'
fjoHHin  Latinarnm,
vol.  tv.  (ed.  Zanj*^
uieUtor),  under  the
title  Jnacriplianen
I'arietariac  i'ompti-
anae,  HtrvnlaHcnan,
ct  Siablavae,  and  in  Ominta  rrom  Pompeii,  r»pr«Mtillnf
the  suppienientary  [J*  ''Sf ''  '*"  **^'  "^'
valuiuR. Insorip-

tionn  in  Oncan  wilt  be  found  in  Piorelli's  ln$crip-
tionnm  Oacarum  A}>ographa  (IftM).  Sp«.  also,  Gur-
rncci,  drajpti  th  Pomji^i  (riiri».  I>*5t>);  Pnrton,  Cari-
caiurt  (N.  Y.  IrryH) ;  and  thu  articln  Pompeii.

Grain,  Pubuc  DisxRiBfTioN  ov.  See  Kkcmen-
TAJUAE  Leges.

Orallae.  A  pair  of  stilts  osed  by  acton  in  per-
floiijitiug  Pan  or  the  satyrs  ou  the  Rotuau  stage
(Kest.  s.  V.  ijraUatorea),

arammar. Bee  Grau uatica.

Oramznftteas  (ypa^^orruc).  The  Greek  word
for  a  writer,  (jecrotary,  or  clerk.  At  Athens  the
officiubi  hud  iintn»rons  clerkn  attached  to  them,
who  were  paid  by  the  State  and  l>eloDged  to  the
Itoorer  oIsM  of  citi/fliw.  But  there  were  severaJ
higher  officials  who  bore  the  title  of  grainiuatHiH.
TTie  Bonli^,  or  Seuate,  for  instance,  cbo«»>  one  of  Ha
mcml>cra  by  show  of  hands  to  Iw  its  clerk  or  sec-
retary for  one  jRar.  Uis  doty  was  tfl  keep  the
archives  of  the  Senate.  80,  too,  a  necretorj'  was
chosen  by  lot  from  the  whole  number  of  senators


for  each  prytaoy  to  draft  ill
resolntiouB  of  the  Senate.  (See
PRYTAXI8.)  nii  name  b  than-
fore  generally  given  lo  the  de-
crees next  to  that  of  the  presidmt
and  the  proposer  of  the  decree.
The  name  of  the  graDimattfoa  of
the  fir»t  prjMany  was  also  gireo
with  that  of  the  arcbon,  as  a
means  of  maikiug  the  yeor  with
luore  accnracy.  At  the  meetings
of  the  Ecelesia,  a  clerk,  elecud
by  tbo  people,  had  to  read  oat
the  necessary  docnnients.  The
ufhce  of  the  dvTtypatfftli,  or
checking  clerks,  was  tif  still
gi'eater  importance.  Tbo  om-
ypa<jtfvT  of  the  Senate,  elected  at
Ural  by  show  of  bands,  hut  sAer^
wunlq  by  lot,  bad  to  take  ao-
count  of  all  business  alTeotinf
the  financial  admiuietritii'n.
Tlie  ayTiyf>a<Ptvr  of  tho  admiD-
istration  had  to  make  ont,  and  lay  before  the
pitblir,  a  general  fltatvmcni  of  income  aud  ei-
puiidititm,  and  exercised  a  certain  amount  of  cob-
tnd  iiviir  all  finaticiial  oHicluls.  lu  the  Aetolia.11  aud
Arliaeun  leagues  the  gnLmmatcus  was  the  higfaeit
officer  of  thu  Irague  after  the  alraleyi  aud  hippmrtM.

OtammatiCca  {ypaftfiorixtt,  liUeratura).  (Ij  Iv
GitKKCK.— Tho  term  ypafifianxri.  in  the  sdentiflo
House,  iticluded,  iu  antiquity,  all  the  main  philolog-
ical branches,  graniniar  jiroiwr,  lexicography,  pros-
ody, the  lower  and  higher  criticism,  antiquities
— everytbiiifi,  In  sliort,  necessary  to  the  umlcr-
standing  and  explanatiou  of  y/xi^^uiro.  or  the  tn>ae-
ures  of  liternture,  whether  their  form  or  tbfirutt-
tv<t  he  in  question.  It  was  tirst  dovclo|Msl  ititoA
special  science  during  the  Ataxandrian  Age,  Ib
Alexandria  and  Pergamum,  where  the  great  Ubn-
ries  gaTo  ample  opporiiiuity  for  philologtral  gtnd-
ies  ou  the  scale  ubovu  iudic.itf<l.  It  was  the  tt*-
toratiou  of  tho  text  of  the  Homeric  poems  anil  lb*
explanation  of  their  words  and  contents  fhtt  pti'
niarily  exorcised  the  minds  of  the  scholars.  (%■
Alrxandkian  School.)  Hesiod,  the  lyric  p<iH^
tbo  dramatists,  and  certain  prose  writers  ih'xt  rv
gaged  their  attention.  The  progress  and  •'>
msiit  <if  philology  is  marked  by  the  uamrw  <-i  ..
dutuB  (about  B.C.  ^^),  AristophaneA  of  Hviiaucims
(260-183),  and  Aristarchus  fatwut  170).  the  ilir»*
chief  representativeti  of  the  Alexandrian  Srh»nl-
To  these  in nst  bo  added  Cratfs  (almui  1  fln>,  tli^  li***
of  theK(.Oiof)l  of Porgamns,aud t1'>  nii^ftlM

Alexandrians. The  name  of  .\  ->  (h-  ▼•<

represents  the  highest  point  of  phil>'i  ' i"-

ing  aud  criticism  in  antiquity. He  n  ''

er  of  the  celebrated  sohool  of  Anstan  '  *

coutiuned  to  exist  and  to  maintain
rnpted  tradition  down  to  the  (irnt  c<'"^ '
imperial  age. IIi!>  disciple,  DlotiysiuH  I
the  oldest  manual  of  grammar  thsi
and  his  work  compiled  for  the  nse  01
at  Rome  (T«';^»^  rpo^^aru^)  becniin'
all  BiibH(>t|ueut  grammars  and  ^s
tnritw  either  in  the  original  "r
lions. Yram  it,  through  tl  ■ >
came  most  of  the  trchuicnl  -
mar. <Scc  Diosy»il-m  T.
however,  originate  tbe^-


the  titae  of
si>oecli,  tlw
p^fMi). AHatotlA
ap$pop),  and  conji
^ramtiiariuiiH  git's  lix  —
iiiictioii,  |iroper  tmmu i
krifiiarrhas  imlaed  tte
-ert>,  article,  eoiijiwli— .  f
■erb  {twifiptjfutif  partiai|A>
frpoBitrtt). Tb*  Qmakm,  «W
ee  in  Homer  aH
EDew  of  the  eight  pan*  tf
if  it  two  lineaCnMrfL  LU&:
lODtaiuB  theiD  alL Br&r  ;
he  Inter  Aril
Kini  uboijt  [IX1.6S.
lAtion  of  the  By:
cMdoe  of  ypntipimmj  ^hA
ilt  it  coD0aed  ilHlf  «
euse  of  the
ombiDed  witli
ind  i  uto  the  mmfjm  «f
itid  special  grwpa  4f
icholars  of  tlw  ~
abont  A.i>.  150)^  «fe»
vbo  endparonni  I*
[tamnsar  to  a
ina,astill
)f  Che  latter  ft
aier  KTani
■ritingnof  the
pr*li*n«iTe.
ID  later  extivetk.
bad  ooaatated  maiaif  «f  <
rai)  or  vtraBge
Dlos^a.) BatuitiM
eiKe  of  t  lie  nriTiaf
Ijou  tamed
itBsge  uf  the  Attae
iMlletirj  M

IrPolltix.  U.uimmtw$imt.ma
pniod  belanp  Baf*aMlM>»
wbioli  ia  thm  mAf  mmq/k
iect. Atbenaew,  at  41k
Wuttiry.  wrote  a
tsiinuiblo  Taluir  to  tbe  aTirtwB «(
Longinn*,  wbo  died  a.*.  S3,  aiin  ^
he  last  couHdecaUe  MihMlar  ^  iAi*>
lie  later  graww riiMi  «aMaMad
oinpiliDg  KXtKbcu&un  (br  ffMC*-
(3) AT  ItoME.— AA«f  fiir  aucv
butury  B.C.  a  lifd;  J«l«s«Ht  «»  i
raniru  and  U»  aUkijr «/
b  bud  beeu  exeiLtd  \ry  £h«
tiors  g<  ^'<^'i  by  Cr&Lr»  itf
I  Rome  OS  ambeeaattor  •  a^c.  IfiV
r  rcpiito.  each  a«  AttisM  aii4
•ullna  8tiIo,  a  meariM*  irf  'J.
rbo  wan  aotivt^x
h«ae ntudiee  villi
rnrds  knuwD  of  ih*-  |«nau
i^e  niaiu)>  tu  Arlto*  (itU<
f  the  great  enrjclofiaiidia
o,  Cicero'*  conUm^nmi
Uh  mark  on  eve«j-
|«art  li.  and  biN  vfltimp
i;b  ibt  followiojc


Cai'Mir  wu


-  {rp7yo/>w)0- 0)  Saniamed  Kazian-

ttsually  called  Grbgorv  Nauaxzkm.

in  a  Tillage  ncarNniianitiis  iu  Cappa-

,v  \>.  'J^.  and  iir»»Hccnl<-d  Uis  slndi*-*  nt

L-rt  lie  earned  ft  great  reputation  for  liia

J.'  of  rhetoric,  |»liilfi§opby.  and  niiitli»Miii*t-

:.,.ug  his  fi'lhiW  studeot*  wm  Juliati,  the

.  .ij|.eror,  and  Baail.with  the  latter  of  whom

u.icil  a  modt  intimate  frieii(l«hip. firegory

iucd  at  Athens  about  six  yearn  j3oU-:iOCt.  and

returnod  home. Having  received  ordluaiioD,


GRANIC03


748


UBEEK


breadtb  nf  rnodern  Scotland,  from  Loch  Lorooad  to
6tODeh&Ten.  T!ie  range  is  now  civllcd  tliP  Grani-
pi«n  Hills,  and  the  nunH*  i»  derived  I'lmii  tlm  Mniis
OrampiiiH,  wbivli  is  niPntiuinMl  lir  Tnritits  nt  Ilif
■IHtt  where  Galgncus  n-.-iil(?d  I  lie  iL)i]>nta('liorA|*rtt!-
olft  ( J(;ric.  211).  Snnie  scholars  defend  Guaitius  as
the  proper  form.

Oranlcua  (rpaviKos).  A  Bnmll  river  of  Mysia,
rising  iu  Monnt  Ida,  and  falling  into  the  I'mpori-
tie  (Sea  of  Mariuom)  »nMl  nf  Priapiis  ;  mftiKtmble
aa  the  Bcetio  of  the  victory  of  Alexander  tlin  Great
aver  the  Persians  (U-C.  tl^U)  {Arriait,  Kxp.  Ahx.  i.
13),  and,  in  a  less  dei^H-,  for  a  viutiiry  of  Lucullue
OTer  Mithridates,  ii.c.  73.

OraniUB  Iiiclniinus.  A  Roman  historiau,  nho
jirobalily  floiirtohed  in  tlie  secoud  ooiitury  a.I>.  Ho
wa.H  ttu>  aiitbor  of  a  work  of  somo  forty  hooks,
conipiltxt  iu  the  stylo  of  annate*,  ending  with  the
death  of  Caesar.  Some  considerable  fragments
have  been  found  in  mmlern  times  of  boftks  xxviii.-
xxxvi.,  covering  the  history  of  the  years  B.C.  163-
173.  Liciuianus  was  fintt  edited  from  a  uodex
ill  the  British  Museum  by  Pertz  (Herliu,  |H57).
See  Madvig,  KlriNf  philol.  Schri/let*  ( Leipxig,
1875).

Gkanlla  (Vpavova).  A  trihatary  of  tlie  Daunbe
In  Soiiiheast^rn  Ocrmaity.

Oraph6  (yfintjfi^). &ec  Visrk ;  Judicial  Frock-

DURK.

Oraphiarlom  (  also  Qraphlarla  Theca  ).  A
akeath  or  case  for  holding  th«  grapkinm  (<|.  v.)  or
atitMt,  used  for  writing  on  tablets  (Mart  xiv.  20;
6uet.  Claud.  35). See  Wkitimo  and  Writinu  Ma-

TKKIALH.

Oraphia  (y^njut). Siw^  PrcrrtiA.

Oraphium  (ypatfiiov).  A  sharp-]>oiDted  iostra-
ineiit  uj»lfl  of  iron  or  bnmze,  iisci<d  for  writing  on
modem  tablets  covered  with  wax.  The  accom-
panying Illustration
shows  the  grapbiiim  shut
(the  top  ligiire)  and  o()en6d
(the  bottom  lignre)  (Snet.
Com.  82 ;  Catig.  38).  It  is
some  eight  inches  in
length. 8ee  Stilus.  GrapUium. iRicb.)

araaaatores. See  Latrocinicm.

Oratiae. The  Latin  name  for  the  Graces. See

C'lLVHIIKS.

Oratlanus.  <t)Tbe  oldest  sod  of  Valcntlniau  I.,
eucci-'ediug,  after  his  father'a  death,  a.d.  375,  to  a
ahare  of  tbe  Westeru  Empire,  having  for  his  por-
tiou  GauJ,  Spain,  and  Hritaiu.  His  brother,  Vul-
entiuiau  II.,  then  nu  infant  under  five  yeant  of
age,  hail  Italy,  Itlyricum,  and  Africa,  under  the
^urctiunship,  boW4<ver,  of  Gralianus,  M-b<>  whs
therefore,  in  reality,  nder  of  all  tbe  West.  His
Muclo  Voleua  htvtl  the  Empire  of  tlio  East.  Grati-
auus  began  his  roisri  by  pniilsbiug  severely  vari-
ous prefects  and  other  offieers  who  ha<l  committed
acts  of  uppression  and  cruelty  during  his  father's
reign.  At  the  same  time,  through  some  insidious
charges,  Count  Tlieodosiiis,  father  of  ThetKlositis
the  Great,  and  one  nf  tbe  most  illimtrioiis  men  nf
his  ago,  was  beheaded  at  Carlbage.  In  the  year
37H,  Valens  perished  in  the  battle  of  Ailrianople
against  the  Goth.",  and  GratlanuH,  who  was  hn.'*-
tcning  to  his  assistancit*,  was  hardly  able  to  save
Constantinople  from  falling  iulo  the  hands  of  the
enemy. In  coDsequence  of  the  death  of  bis  uucle,


Gratiauns,  fniding  himself  ruler  of  tbe  whole  Rf<-
man Empire  during  the  uiiiiurity  nf  bis  broilitr
Valfiiliiiisii,  rnlled  to  liim  yniiitg  'I'hendasiua,  who
bad  dtHtiiigiiiHluHl  bimwif  in tho Rnman  annJM.
(rmtiauns  appointed  him his  colleague,  a  choin
eiiually  creditable  to  both and forttiuale  for  tliv
Empire,  and  gavr  him  the-  pruvinci-n  of  the  Eist.
Grntiaiiutt  now  returned  to  Italy,  but  wa.s  iddigrd
soon  after  to  hasteu  to  lllyricum  Ut  the  aiwistatuf
of  Theodusius,  and  reiiellcd  the  Goths,  wlm  vnr.
threatening  Tlirace. Thence he  was  fitrred  to
marnb  to  tbe  banks  of  the  Khinc,  to  Hght  iJm
Alemaiini  and  other  barbarians. Having  retnmsd
to  Mediolaiiuni  in  the  year  381,  he  bod  to  defend
the  fronlirrs  of  Italy  from  other  triW*.  who  wan
advaneing on the side of Rhaetia. Grntiaim
showed  himself  stem  and  unyielding  towanls  tbr
remaiiiB  of  the heathen wmTtbip. At RuTor  tw
overthrew  the  altar  of  Victory  and  er>nliisi.'nteil  tb»
property  iLttflcbed  to  it,  as  well  as  all  thni  wbidi
belonged  to  the  other  jtricsts  and  the  vestals. He
nlflo  refused  to  assume  the  title  and  iiisjguia  of
Poiilifex  Maximns,  a  dignity  till  theu  catuiilcml
as  annexed  to  that  of  emperor. These  tneararw
gave  a  final  blow  to  the  old  worship  of  tbe  Eb-
pire  ;  and  aUhimgh  the  eeuators,  who,  fur  the  nwfl
part,  witre  still  attachetl  to  it,  sent  him  a  dc|ii
tiou,  at  the  heMl  nf  which  was  Symmacbas,
cotild  not  obtain  any  mitigation  of  his
In  the  year  3^,  a  certain  Maximus  revelt«d  ta
Uritniu,  aiid  was  proclaimed  ciu|icn>r  by  tbe  sel-
diers,  to  whom he  promised  to  re-estHblLnh  iV
temples  and  tbe  old  religion  of  the  Empim. Of
invaded  Gaiil,  where  he  found  uumenms  partisuS'
Gmtiiinns  adviinced  to  meet  him,  but  was  fanak-
en by  most  of  bis  troops,  and  obligeil  to  bssten
tdwanls  Italy. He  was  seized  at  Lngdnnntn.  >i»d
put  to  death  by  the  partisans  of  Slaximmi. H»
was  little  more  than  twHuty-fonr  years  of  flge,ud
Ijad  reigned  about  eight  yean*. (3)  A  nsorprrwlis
atisunicd  tbe  imjKTial  pnrple  in  Britain  (a.i*. 40rv
but  was  murdered  by  his  troops  in  a  few  niiwlta
He  was  succeeded  by  Constautine. See  CoSfUS-
■n.Nt:H  i'.i}.  p.  405.

Orattiua.  A  cootemporary  of  Orid  (ct  Orid,
ex  PoHt.  iv.  16,  34)  and  the  author  of  ao  (OtWi
poem  on  the  chase  (Cftgetica),  of  which  SX  brl-
amelei>t  are  extant  and  five  fragments.  Frmu
allusion  in  the  fortieth  line,  Grattius  is  witliint
good  reason  regnrtled  by  some  ax  a  natii't  of  Fi-
krii,  nud  hence  is  often  styled  Fauscus.  TIw
poem  has  been  edited  with  a  oommentiry  1*5
titeru  tHnlle,  1833),  and  revised  by  HaupL  (U'j'-
zig,  l*^). Tlie  bcdt  text  is  that  of  Bahrtus  (Un*-

zig,  iJ^TO). Sec  CVNEGETlCA.

Oraviacae.  An  ancient  city  of  ErriitU,  aoli^
to  Tonpiiiiii.  and  coloni/ed  by  tbe  Roinus  %£.
I^.  It  was  situated  in  the  Marr-iuma.  aod  it»  >tt
wa»  uiiheultbfnl,  whence Tergtl  calls  it  istmjwM'
Grflriirar  {Acn.  x.  164).

Greece. See  Reu.aa.

Ore«k,  ProQunolation  of  Three  i'lSttni
metluxls  I'f  proiioinicing  Greek  have  been  tj^
lowed  in  rlii<  sclinoU  nf  America  and  Cng1u«L
Tliey  may  be  oall.-d,  respectively,  the  EBgIi*b
melh<Kl ;  the  Reiicblinian  nr  modem  Greek  iivtl>'
<mI  ;  and  tin-  EraMinian  nn-thftl,

I.  The  Enousii  MFTtn^i^  gtve«  tbe  letteis  »liwi
ordinary  English  sounds,  but  follows  Hit  l^i"
rules  of  accoDt  (accenting  the  ponuU  if  it  itlon|


GREEK


749


GRECiOBIUS


quantity,  but  otbcrffiiM!  tbe  Aiitepcnalt).  Tbis
DetboU  ii  still  correut  iu  Kaglaud.  but  baa  aluivet
disaiipeared  iu  tbc  Uuitcd  Suites.

U.  The  Revcuunian  muthod,  callt^l  sftor
RcDchlin  (q.  T.)t  a  great  scbolar  of  lb«  rift««utb
ceutur>',  wbi>  woa  uuu  uf  its  earlit^t  a«lvocateM.
aims  tu  follow  tbe  iirunuuciutiuu  of  tbe  iittidvrit
Greeks.  Of  tb«  vowela,  ij,  v,  ft.  oi,  aud  tu,  all  bave
tbe  Buuiid  of  i  in  mavhine  ;  ai  ia  prououDced  mucli
Uk«  a  in /ate,  Iu  tbedipbtbongsau,  <v.  i^i,  and  wu.
V  is  prmioiiiiced  like  r  wbeu  tbe  dipblbong  stjktids
before  a  vowel, or  9,y,i,(,X,ft,v,p:  otberwise  like
/.  ir.  K,  r,  after  aa«alit,  arc  proDotiiiced  like  b,  g,  d.
;(faa«tbet'(roM>iiDdftofOrr[nanrA.  d  ispronoaiiced
like  fA  infArii,jyiike  r.y  like rAiuGeniiiknacA,( like
EDglifth  s.  It  boB  been  argtied  that  iieliolani  ongbt
to  agnw  to  prnnniincf^  Gnvk  uA  tbe  Oru«k(*  of  tu-
Hay  pronounce  it,  but  tnauy  cbatiget4  and  comiit-
tiotis  bave  crept  in  durlni;  the  ceulurtea  aiuce  tbe
daasicAl  pcrioil;  mi  ttmt  tbu  proiHiticiatioii  wbieb
provailfi  tu  Atbeun  ut  preMout  dillera  widely  from
tbat  uf  nuci«t)t  times.  Tbts  uietbod  baa  tbere*
fore  fouud  few  ndbereiMs  in  EuKlnud  or  America,
tbongU  it  boa  been  »irougl.v  advui-uted  by  a  uuiu-
ber  of  cmioeut  men.

UI.  TlIK  ERA8MIAN  METHOD,  first  pro|HM(Kl  by
Krasmiift  in  a  Uuuioruti-i  dialoguB  publiHbed  at
Baale  iu  I52ti  (we  Wlow)^  is  tbe  one  ^vbicb  i»  now
prevalent  in  Ih45  United  fitatvM  aud  on  tbe  conti-
uent  of  Eiimpr.  tbungh  wiilt  various  uiuditica-
tioiiH.  In  tbe  I'niloi  .Slates  (lie  ordinary  prouuu-
ciatiou  ia  as  foUuvrs:  a  like  u  in  fulher ;  i;  like  a
in  fate  ;  «  like  f  in  met ;  t  like  i  iu  machine;  u  like
0  Iu  note;  o  tbe  ftamo  soaud,  but  sborter;  v  us
FreocU  u  or  Uemiau  0  ;  ai  like  ai  in  ai»lr. ;  it  like
ri  in/rright  (ov  more  oft4>n  like  ei  in  hrighl);  oi  like
oi  iu  boil ;  vt  like  mi  iu  ^tii't ;  av  liko  oh  in  out ;  <i>
like  eu  iu  /end  ;  ov  like  ou  in  «on/>  ;  ^ ,  9,  ^  like
a,  7,  w.  Tbe  consonaDta  are  proiionnred  as  in
£ugli«b,  except  that  y  is  always  bant;  before  a
palatal  it  is  prououuct-d  likt;  n  iu  mu-ioun ;  (  like
dj  ;  6  like  /A  in  (Aiit  (ii»t  Like  (h  In  thit);  n  nevtv
like  *;  T  never  aspirat^I;  ^  llko  (k'minn  ck  in
ocA.  Tbe  written  accent  is  followefl  iu  prouuu-
oiatiou.

We  have  so  fnr  been  descriliiuK  tbe  methiHls  of
proDnociatiou  generally  fnllowml  by  miKlern  whol-
am.  How  the  ancient  Greeks  pniumuiceil  is  very
difficult  to  determini*,  but  on  many  potut«  u  toli>r>
able  de^ee  of  cortuinly  cun  be  arrived  at.  Wlinn
tbe  comic  (Hiets  trauM-ribed  tbe  cry  of  a  sbuep
with  j:^^,  ^7,  it  is  piniii  that  ii  was  nut  prouounced
like  r,  or  17  like  i  iu  mnehine,  as  in  modem  Greek.
80,  too,  V  cannot  have  been  pronounced  like  f  in
machine,  as  is  seen  frocu  tbe  deHeription  of  the  two
aouuds  iu  Dion.  Hal.  {Comp.  xw.  ^),  and  from  tbe
cxiatence  of  the  diphllion);  vt.  It  in  probable  tbat
V  originally  rec«iveil  the  Kouud  of  00  in  haot,  latrr
tbat  of  French  m  (Germnti  ri),  and  not  until  tlM^
nintb  or  tenth  century  of  i>iu'  cru  the  ttound  of  i  tu
ji«rrAiitr.  ai  and  ot  were  true  dipbtbnngul  sounds
nntil  a  late  i>eriod  (at  ■=  ak-ee  ■=.  i  m  pine  ;  m  =  o-ec
^  01  in  boil,  uearly).  <t  was  ut  (irst  a  true  diph-
thong (<-f*^e  in  fre,  nearly  1;  aWut  B.C.  4(W  it
oamo  to  be  tbe  simpli*  Monnd  of  ri  iu  rein  ;  aud  not
till  much  lat^r  wax  it  sounded  liku  ei  iu  »ri:r,
uu  and  tv  wen.*  true  diphthongs  (uA-ou  and  f-00).
ov  waa  ongioally  a  ilipbthougal  sound,  but  later
asBunied  the  souud  of  uu  m  yaulh.  vt  waa  proba-
bly like  French  ai  in  Ivi.  In  the  su^callad  im-
[>l>er  dipbtboQgs,  a,  .v.  y.  tbv  t  wuh  pmbably  pro-


nounced until  alwut  tbe  second  ocntttry  s.c,  when
it  became  silent,  and  was  often  omitted,  even  in
writing.  Of  the  consonants  ff,  which  in  modem
Greek  has  tbe  sound  of  r,  was  reckoned  a  mute  by
tbe  ancient  Greeks,  ami  lu-ncv  must  have  beea
sonndetl  as  iu  English.  Tbo  KSiue  argument  provca
that  y  and  d  received  their  KiigHsb,  rather  tbiiu
their  modem  Greek,  sounds.  But  y  Iwforu  pala-
tals had  tbe  sound  of  n  in  uNxiui>«.  cr  was  pro-
uouuced  like  &  in  tinkj  except  before  middle
uiutes  aud  liqaids,  when  it  was  prououuced  like  t
iu  air.  (  had  tbe  sound  of  »H  or  tri,  as  is  seen  from
such  comiMJUuds  as  'A6iiva(t  (for  'ABrfimv-dt),  and
fi-om  tbe  fact  tbat  the  preposition  trvv  losc<s  v  l>e*
fore  (,  jnst  as  before  or,  tm,  etc-  Tbe  ospiralva  <^,
)(,  $  were  proLounewl  «*(  two  sounds  (j'-A,  k-h,  r-A),
as  in  Englittb  uphill,  hlovk-houjif,  hnthaimt.  This
cunclu.Hion  is  drawn  from  ltu>  fact  tUiil.  tlieHe  cou-
Honuiits  were  clussed  oa  mnt«s  and  tnit  as  spiruuts.
Tbe  ancient  consouant  calleil  di^iamtiia  or  vau  [f)
waa  probably  prouuuiiced  like  Kuglisb  tr  rather
than  r,  aa  the  atroug  r.souud  would  uot  have  dift-
api>carud  ho  quickly  or  completely  as  tbe  digam-
madid.

The  accent  iu  ancient  Greek  couBisted  in  a  rais-
ing of  tbe  pitch,  and  not  in  the  Htross  or  dunitlon
itf  the  sound.  UhI  tbe  Intti^r  element  wuii  iuUIihI
nt  the  period  of  tbe  decay  of  tho  1anguAg«,  and  tbe
Greeks  of  to-dny  make  all  acceuttMl  voweU  long
and  all  nnucconieil  vowrls  short.  WIicm  this
change  took  place  can  be  det«nuincd  only  ai»-
pnixiuintdy,  but  it  must  havn  ht-en  during  Iho
Alexandrian  purlud  and  before  the  begtunitig  nf
our  era,  aa  may  be  gathiCred  frnni  some  of  the
rules  of  prosody  observed  by  such  poets  as  Bab-
rins  aud  Nonuiis.  Tbe  ditferenee  between  high
pitch  aud  low  pitch,  according  to  Dioiiysiiis  of
HalicaruaBaas,  amounted  to  almost  a  tiith  (Dion*
Hal.  Comp.  56).

UlBLIOORAFIIY. — Erasmus,  l>e  Hn:ta  ImHuI  Grar-
Hqm!  Sermonit  Pronunciationt-  (Basle,  152!!^);  Seyf-
farth,  lie  SoniM  f.iilerarum  fir.  (Tyeipxig,  18i4i;  A.
KircbhnIT,  Stndien  xiir  OfMchirhte  dai  ijrirrh.  Alpha-
heh  (Iterlin,  I[?77);  K.  Zacber,  JMe  Au«»prarhr  iir$
(tritrh.  iLeipy-ig,  1***).  More  valuable  Ibsn  any
of  these  in  F.  Illass,  The  I'ronMnciatiuH  a/  A-ni-nt
Cmk,  translatcil  by  Purton  (  Cumbridgo,  1H1N> ).
Jdatcrial  for  this  article  has  been  fk^ely  ilrawn
from  the  latter.

Qre«D  FactJotL See  ClRCCS,  i*.  356.

Oreg&raa,  NlcRrHuRliH.  One  of  the  most  im-
IHirtant  Byzantiui'  liiHtoriaus,  bom  about  a. l>.  VHKt,
and  died  abuut  Kl^U.  His  principal  work  is  enti-
tled Hittoria  UgeaHtina,  in  thirty-eight  hooks.  It
bugiua  with  tbe  capture  of  Con^tautiniiplu  by  the
Lutiua  in  I'AM,  aud  extends  to  1350.  It  has  heeu
edited  iu  part  by  Schopeu  (Bonn,  l(«M)).

OregorianuB  Codex. See CooBX  GnRoofti-

ANV8.

Oregorius  fl^jj^opwc).  (1)  Snninmed  Nazian-
ZKNCtt,  and  irsnally  calle<l  Gkkuuuy  Nazean/rm.
Me  was  born  iu  a  villngn  near  Nazianzus  in  C'liitpa-
docia  about  a. It.  li^,  and  protiocuted  his  studieM  at,
AtbeuH,  where  he  earned  a  great  reputatiou  for  his
knowledge  of  rbet^rric,  pbiloNopby,  and  matheuuit-
icH.  Among  h'w  fellow  students  was  Julian,  tbe
future  emperor,  and  Basil,  with  the  latter  of  whom
be  formed  a  moat  Intimate  friendobip.  Gregory
remained  at  Athentt  about  six  years  1350-354)),  and
then  returned  home. Having  receive*!  ordination^


GBEGORIUa


7B0


URIUH-S LAW


be  coiitiiiiii'd  to  reside  at  h'aziauzns,  whcra  lio  iIIh-
obnrputl  liiti  duticH  aa  a  pKAbyter,  aiid  naaiMleil  Iiik
fatlior,  ^vbo  wna  biabop  of  tUa  to^u.  lit  a.d.  lXf'2
lie  na»  attaociated  with  his  father  io  the  biMhojiric ;
but  after  the  death  of  the  latter  in  374,  he  refased
to  continue  llishnp  of  \aziAii/iiK,  ua  he  waa  averse
to  pnlilic  life  oiid  fund  nf  wilitan'  raeditation
After  living  some  years  in  retirumenl,  he  van  anm-
moDed  to  Constantinople  in  379,  in  iirder  Ut  defend
the  orthodox  faith  agniiiHt  the  Arinnifi  and  other
heretics.  In  3^  ht^  van  niadu  Binhop  of  Conntan-
tiuople  by  tht^  etn|>»r(ir  Theudunitifi;  hot  he  n;-
eipied  the  oHlco  in  tliu  fulloning  year  (.Itdl),  and
withilKw  altogether  fVoni  publio  life.  He  liTcd
bt  aitlitudo  at  bis  pat<^^uat  estate  at  NazianEtis,  and
died  there  in  liA*  or  :t9(l.  His  extant  works  are
about  45  orations  or  eermonH,  'ii'.i  letters,  and  4V7
]>ut>uiB  of  a  very  varied  description,  compriHtiig
faymns,  prayers,  epitaphs,  opigranis,  etc.  Ilh  din-
couraes,  thongh  siimetimeH  really  r-hxpnint,  arc
generally  little  more  than  fnviuirablo  Kpc-ciinons
of  tlie  rlirtoric  of  tlio  ri'IiikiIh,  more  eiinii'Ht  than
CfaryMMtuin,  hnt  h^w  attractive.  The  llenetlietine
fidition  WM  published  at  Pans  U77d-I84'2).  Sec
the  mouographH  by  Ulhnaau  (Kug.  trauti.  1851) ;
and  by  A. IJeuoU  (Paris,  1876).  (2)  NYtusKNls,  bish-
oiiofN'ysHa  in  CappatlociaT^va«  the  younger  brother
(if  Ha»il,  and  watt  bora  at  Caeaarea  in  Cappadocia,
abtint  A.n.331.  lie  wa«  made  bishop  of  Nyssa  abont
37*^.  and.  like  his  brotlier  Basil  and  their  friend
Oreyory  Naxienxen,  wan  one  of  the  pillare  of  ortho-
doxy. He  died  soini  aft*r  A.n.  '.VM.  IMtv  hit*  broth-
er, lie  waa  an  eiuiiibut  rhetunciau,  though  his  ora-
tory often  offt[-iHlH  by  itn  extravagance.  Hi»  workH
are  printed  in  Mignc'n  /'nrrci/oi^Ni,  vols,  xliv.-xh'i.
(3)  tityled  Thaumatukuui^,  from  hia  miracles,  wait
born  at  Neocaeeaiua  in  Capi>a(Ioc{a,  of  heathen
pareiita.  Ho  waa  converted  to  Cbrlsiianity  byOri-
gen  about  a.1>.  234,  and  Hobsequently  became  the
bishop  of  Ilia  native  ton'u.  He  died  about  the  year
265.  His  celebrated  'iLKdtcrts,  or  cnufesaiun  of  faith,
if  a  snmnmn,-  of  the  theoluj^y  of  Origen.  It  is  said
to  have  beon  divined  by  him  thn>ngli  a  revelation
from  theVirgiu  Mar^'and  the  AjHistle  John.  Other
treattaca  of  doubtful  authenticity  are  allrihuted
to  him.  His  workn  arc  prinletl  in  vtd.  x.  of  the  Pa-
triotic collection  of  thu  Abb<5  Migiie.  See  Hysaol,
Grej/oriuM  TSaumalurgui:  tein  Lcben  iiHd  »piMe
iSchri/trn  (Leipzig.  ItfOUt ;  and  Ilaruaek,  X^ffj/inen-
gexchifhli',  vol.  i. (Freiburg  iui  Breisg.  188**).  (4)  Of
Toi'iw.  called  "the  Father  of  Kraukinh  History,"
was  liorn  at  Arvema  (Clermont),  alwut  a.d.  540,
his  bapliiuunl  name  bt^ing  Georgias  Florentiufi.
Hu  bvcauiu  Biahop  of  T<iurs  in  57^,  and  after  tbu
death  c'f  Cliilperic,  whom  Gti'gorj-  calls  "  (be  Nero
aiul  tia;  Herod  of  our  timea,''  and  by  whom  be  woo
much  harnsse*!,  he  enjoytid  general  esteem  and
connideratiou  down  to  the  end  of  his  life  In  694.
Hi-  in  l>e«l  known  by  bi«  HiJtIoriae  fire  AunaliHiH
tyttMcorHtu  tibri  X.,  ubioh  is  the  chiuf  aathorify
for  tb<<  history  of  Gaul  iu  tha  aixtii  century*,  begin-
ning with  ail  epitonifl  of  univeraal  history,  and  de-
veloping the  narrative  with  greattT  fulaeas  aa  he
]>ro«^t.-eds.  In  it  tin-  author  showft  Uimatdf  unskilled
iu  literary  cun){HJNition,  and  his  Latiuity  ia  tf.}i€-
cially  interoating  an  a  apouinieu  of  the  grwlual
blondiug  of  tho  cImbIo  Lntiu  into  the  rustic  Latiu
from  which  the  Romance  languages  emerged.  His
worki  are  printed  in  vol.  Ixxi.  of  the  Abb^  Migue's
collection.  There  is  a  French  trauslution  by  Bor-
aier,  "i  vola.  (IBit^-^l),  and  Jacobs,  3  rola.  (1661).


Ki'o  LoboU,  Grrgor  wa  Toura  aad  •eia*  Zeit(3dAl
ln09};  Pattisou,  E*iay*,xo\.  t.  (Icv9);  and  oa  lii*
language,  Bouoet,  Lt  Latin  de  Or^otn  6«  Tauft

(iflai).

Gridiron. See  CiiAncCLA.

Oiimin'a  Lavr. The  peculiar  type  or  cbarachv
oC  the  Teutonic  lauguage»,  distinguishing  tliooiw
a  clasB  from  the  other  Indo-Knropeau  laaguij^
is  promiueutly  detenuiueil  by  a  general  change  Id
the  proDuneiatiou  of  those  couBonauta  connnculj
known  as  mutes  or  explosives. The  other  coumk
naula  remain in general unchangtMl,  thus:  i  ta
Kng.  Hi»ir,  I^t.  noruK  ;  m  iu  Eng.  Name,  Lot.  nomttt ;
r  in  Eng.  aerr,  LaC.  ager  ;  I  iu  Kug.  light,  Lat.  fu;
tc  in  Eug.  in'//,  Lat.  velit;  y  in  Bug.  pokr,  Lat.j»-
gum;  h  in  Kng.  xrtvn,  I>at.  tcptem  ;  hut  the  eiplo-
hivoe  (k,  I,  j»,  J,  d,  b,  gh,  dh.  bk)  occupied  ao  proou-
□eut a place  in the mechauiam of the  iiareni
speech,  one  or  more  of  them  Appearing  iu  nIoMnt
every  woitl,  that  the  cbangca  which  they  unil>;r'
went  in  passing  into  the  Teutonic  form  could  not
fail  to  impress  upon  tbe  Teutonic  langnagM  a  dlf
ttnct  utark  of  individuality. The  credit  of  fitH
discovering  the  uniformity  of  theae  cbaogM  it
largely  due  to  a  Daniiih  srholar,  Itaamiis  Krirtlii
Kask  <17c:^-1Kt2),  but  the  fonnulation  of  tkem  IB
the  shape  of  a  geucral  law  and  the  exbihilinuof
the  ]9iiniUe!iam  contained  iu  the  wrimd  or  llij;b
(^rnian  shifting  ore  the  work  of  Jakob  (jhniB
(17t*5-16(>3),  llrat  made  public  in  tho  second  erfilimi
of  the  lirat  rolumo  of  hia  lyetit§el>«  iitammi^
(|J^32>.

I.  Thr  Grneral  Tritoxic  or  first  vbiftisf.
Tlie  nn»Hl  essejitiul  facts  nru  thf  followiug:


(1)  Iitdo-Enropcon  gh

dk

hh  bccWM

Teutonic t(j|)

did)

«(»>

(2)  ludu-Kurupean  <7

d

b becooM

Teutonic k

t

J*

(3)  Iiido-Knropean  k

t

p beoooM

Teutonic A

i6

/

(I)  Tbe  Indo-European  voiced  aapiratea  (jiA.
AJI*|  repr-etwnt  an  exphwinu  of  voice<l  breath  fullowal
by  an  after-pnfT;  the  pronunciation  of  dk.t^g.wttj
be  cnuh-ly  illtiHtrattrd  by  the  Honnil  ofd-k  ia  m*'-
hUl.  Tlieiui  MHiuda  pametl  readily  and  very  catl|
into  the  affricaiat  gi.,dd  (cf.  di  in  the  prratiaci*-
tion  of  Kng./).  bb,  which  double  aoundx  wentkn
tuiitiod  into  the  pure  spiranta  *:,ff,S.  Tbefintof
Ihcao  (^)  ia  tbe  voiced  form  of  Gerniau  cA, and  e^iw-
alcnt  to  tbe  Moilem  Greek  nie<lial  gamma,  anil  but
lie  produced  by  driving  voiced  breath  ov«  tbf
tongne  set  nearly  iu  tbe  jHwition  for  EngliiJi  y.  Tb(
sound  </  lies  between  KngUnb  th  in  thru  aud  z  lt>i>
asMrr.  Finally,  9  may  lie  prwlnceil  by  pnioomif'
iiig  English  r  with  tbi^  iwo  lt|ia  iuAt«-adof  nilblli*
under  lip  ami  upper  leetb.  Tbes«;  three  spirviti>
J,  rf,  H,  bccamo  qnito  generally  chauged  to  Twerf
explosives  or  meiliae  (>;,  ri,  "b)  in  the  Weat  G«naii>>
dialects  (i.  o.  nil  except  Scandinavian  and  Golblei,
though  the  Hjiirants  ;  and  t  (r)  rvniained  mcHiiU*
in  all  but  the  High  Gennun  dialectA;  eotiirul
Eug-  lof/,  day  with  Germ.  Ir^frn,  ta^,  and  i*Jt-
ramt,  havr  with  GL-rm.  mhr,  habrm.  With  Ih*  bb-
deretanding,  therefore,  that  ij,  d,  h  rvprncnt  ouBi'^
timen  apirautn  and  sometiuiea  exptosifCA  ve  tuaj
set  theformula.lDdo.EuroneaniaA.dA.Afc^TeBlcW^
(/,  (f,  b.  The  regular  cnrrespoadence*  in  tbe  e  "^
ianguagoa  are  as  follows :


^1

GRIMM'S  LAW

I.-I. BMHkhi.

Gr.

LbL

Ttutou

pA h
dh dft
bk bh

0

<t(d)

jimp1««:
rit CirMk.

Utbi

TeutoDlc

761


GBIMM'S  LAW


Coih. Bat-

flMmnd-ygotnte jiqif  (AVmaprjfanii ffoott

tdkati,c*iuvity 5»of,  wngoo teko vrir/a way
<fAd-. set. make  !&riKa,^i  /Cvt gadept  deed

WrfiWra, widow  ^I'df os,  bik-VieW  ritiHa leidittco  tddow
blidrali,  b«am *f>fpw  /rra hniran \>ear

,  iief
'  lore


lubkgdti, Avaimn


tmbet limhH


(2)Th«*  Indo-Eur«(wan  voiced  exploei^'eadufdMH")
}ieci>ui«  voictfluss  (tiMinrH).  Ttie  lubial  b  was  evi-
dently A  rara  aoDnd  in  Lndo-Kuro|>i>aD,  aod  a«  an
iuttlal  80DDd  it  fteems  not  to  have  existed  at  alt.
The  foUowiiig  are  the  regular  cotreapoudonccH:


I


Indu  Cun>p.

0

d
b


S«tukrLL

J
d

b


GnwlL

y

It


lM\a.
9
d
b


k
t

p


XxAinplea:
swuknt

jdnaa-,  nee
^^H-,kuee
djra-,  posture
dd^a, ten
rt'tla.  I  know

LiiLrtti.
dMbun,  deop


Onick. Utta.


Tratoolc.


aypoc
otda


(retina

genu

ager

deecpi

ridfo


Goth.
kuni
knia

taihuH


Kn«.
kin
A'ltM

ten


di¥}ts  detp

(3)  Tlie  Indo-Karapeiin  voiceless  esplosiTeB  {tt-
MHpa)  bcvoruf!  voiceless  ft^ttrants:


I


k
I
P


S«oel:r>L
F
(

P


lirtrlL  Ulin.

«  f

T  t

V  p


Sxamplee :

8MakrtL


Greek.


T^Ua.


Twtoulc.
h

Pith)
/

Truv>Bie


{TflH-.diij;

attkv,  t'ighl

trdyan,  tlire«

Mr(U<ir-,  brother  tjtpAruft

fad;  foot  voCt


KiHoy


Europ.

Sftiuknl.

Onwk.

IjiIIu- T»ul(itatc.

f

fc(r)

ir,  r,  K

qa,  c Air

9

sU)

;s.«.T

ff  M  (P).  9 kw

gk

9k{Jh}

*.*.x

9"  (r),/ ytr

Golh  KiiK

r^ini^ ftiriirfji  keitHd

ocIO ahtdn  eiijht

trts jfcrew  tfirrc
f rater  brufi*tr  brother

pf« fatHn  foot
ficrm

wfpdf-,  graud»ou  (Wffv8<t)  n<*j^v n«^Jf>  nephew

In  the  interest  of  tttiiiplificfttion  we  bave  tlins
far  omitted  all  mention  of  another  Indo-Euro]«rau
acrieH  of  K"Hiim.lM,  iucliided  iu  tie  Kruup  known
oa  Telnni  or  back-(;;iittnralfi,  and  whi^'h  r<hnw  in
Oreek,I.^iu,Celtic,  and  Teutonic  a  laliial  devnlnp-
nieni.  The  most  cbaract«riittic  curreMiKindvutsHB
4ire  the  followiDg:

r

In Sftiiskrit the pnlntaU  t;j,jh  api>e;ir  lieforc
Towela  which  tcrrr in ludo-Eiinipran  f,  i,  «*. In
■Orpek,  IT,  (8,  <ft  appearwl  helbro  o-voweli!,  and  I.-E.
,M,r.  I ;  T,  8.  S  appeared  before  e-voweln  (t  also
-lieforo  i-TQWoIs). In  Latin,  qy,  g»  (r)  appt-ar  iu


general  l»ofure  rowels  (except  u):  /(<I.-E.ffA)
before  r. Exouiples :

SAOfkni.  Oraak  Utta  Teat«iki

GvUi.  Rug.

jlrd-,who  frd^rvi  whcDoe  quod kvan  vko

Wentr.  folloWB Cfra^uu  artfunr MtifhcaM  arr

ydmalifCOinea tiaiim  rrniu f^iwnn  conr

jir«<-,  alive  (^fto<)  rfrita ^i'ma  quitk

gharmd-,v>Mnt.\i  dtpfiit  formua ^earmjntt  inii-Mi

.Lllbno.

«MyiM,snow vi'^tsoc.) Hirii((^<u,)  «iiiNtr«  ffloir

The  apparent  excB|itioim  to  the  law*  stated  may
lie  chietly  inminsrizeil  under  the  following  heads:

I.  Diwiiniil.'itioii  of  IntliKEuropcnn  iiftpirateK  in
Sanskrit  and  (Jnwk.  In  (Jreek  it  took  place  after
the  voiced  iu*pirale»  Lad  hecouic  voirelewt.  thus:
I.-E.  rfA-*/i>8anskr.  d-rf*.  Or,  r-C.  Teuton.  d-A;
cf.:


iBdo-Banp. Suukrit


fih.>dhfmi
bhrntth-

bhfidh-

Mrndh-

dkij/h-

bh'ighi'


ttddhilmi
hftdhfiti

bdmikH-

dik-

bahd-


(ira«k.

TtBfJfU

iti  i/6opai

VIvSfpuS
Ttijfav


((iuttOo )

auabiudaa
bidja  n
bifir/iiN
drigan

nna.  buog


ef.  Grasauian,  Kukni  Zeitgchr.  xii.  t-I  foil.

2.  Sliiftiug  of  k,  t,  p  checke4l  by  preceding!  spi-
rant iit  the  cowbtualions  I.E.  »Jl',  kI,  up  and  Teuton.
A/ « I.-E.  if)./'  (<I.-E.pO:  cf.  Lat. >ij«ri«,  Ootb.
Jtskn  ;  Lat.  stare,  Goth,  tlondaii ;  Lat.  rcrlnn,  Gotb.
yaShtti;  Gr.  lari,  Gotb.  i«t;  L»t.  npuere,  Gotb.  ir;*n-
tran;  Lat.  Nocft«  (f^enit.),  Goth,  itii/ira;  Gt.  K\iim}t,
Goth.  Miflut;  Lat.  raptxa,  Golli.  haj'tt.  Heo  Bnig-
mann,  Cowpar.  (iramm.  i.  $  fiSA.

3.  Interctnirige  of  mediae  and  tenues  and  of  me-
diae and  a8piraU>8  in  Indo-European,  especially  at
iho  end  of  rm>t«.  This  dnaliaui  wa»  probably  duo
originally  to  the  characl^ir  nf  the  followiui;  conso-
nant. So  ore  to  Iw  explainoi],  e.  g.  Gr.  KvSftrip.
O.Eiig.bn/tM  ;  Gr.a<rTf^i;f,O.H.G.«/anij>/on;  Gotb.
tdiknu,  teihaUf  ate.

i.  The  pbenomena  diseussod  under  artiele  Vek-
nkb's  Law  (q.  r).

II.  TiiK  UiUH  GeiLMAN  or  second  tthiftlng.  This
aflfecls  only  a  ]»ortion  of  tlie  West  Germanic  dia-
lects. It  began  in  the  Bfth  century  a.d.  In  the
extreme  Montli,  affecting  most  powei-fnlly  the  dla-
leclH  nf  the  IjD'mbanlfi,  Allenuins,  Bavarians,  and
Bonlhern  F'rankM,  but  Irwing  tt.H  force  hd  it  spread
towarilH  thi^  norlh  (cf.  Rmuiie.  Paul'Itraunr^g  Britr.
i.  1  full.).  The  froutier  belwoeu  the  present  High
German  and  Low  German  dialccttt  la  fonne«l  with-
out any  reforeuce  to  the  older  dlatoetal  diviHionH
l>y  the  linal  bait  iu  the  shifting  of  the  tenuee.  The
rlialects  which  change  initial  t  to  ta  (i),  medial  and
final  t  to  n,  medial  p,  k  to  /,  ch  are  High  Gernian,
tlie  others  Low  Genuan.  This  frontier  crosses
Germany  fnun  west  to  east.  Its  conrse  is  approxi-
mately indicate!  by  a  line  drawn  from  Aix-la-
Chapelle  thraugb  Diiaseldorf.  Stegen,  Cohm-I,  Mag-
deburg, Lilbl>en,  FUrstenberg  (sotith  of  Frankfurt-
on-Ihe-Oderj  to  the  Slavic  language -frontier  at
Hirnbaum  on  tht;  Wartbe.  The  mo«t  pn)miiieiit
featnres  of  this  second  nhifling  may  t)e  exhibited
by  a  conipariftou  of  the  suuihIh  concerned  At  ihey
at  present  stand  iu  English  and  modem  German.
Tbe  English  retains  these  Miuuda  apjiroxinmtety  iu
their  original  West  Gerni&nic  values.  Tbe  modem
Gernmn  as  a  nurmalizeil  standord  language  ooott-


GHIPUCS


7E8


ORONOVIUS


piea  in  itti  adoptiou  of  Ibe  results  vf  nliiftiug  »' being  tipped  up  to  a  certain  angle  if  uecusary.


midillc  jKi-sition  betwoiiti  tliu  Hutith  (icnuau  dia-
lectH  which  shiftMl  nuwt  mid  the  iiurthcni  which
Hliift«4l  leiwt.  Thu  aecuiul  aliifliug  affected  the
detitalH  nifiKt  radically.


Eng1i«b

riuitial


t


'jcnnMin. J
[After  vow.  cA  at


t b h d f


KxanipleB  :  (1)  Eng.  *ypW,  Germ.  kaU  ;  Eiig.  gake^
OvTTa.Jock  ;  Eug.  break,  Germ.  bi-evkeH.  (2)  Eiig.  tr».
Germ.  tehH  ;  Eiig.  taieti,  Gt-nii.  xiickoi;  Kiig.  keart,
Gi!rni.  kcrt ;  Kng.  bite,  Germ,  bein^rtt ;  Kiig.  ([oat.
Germ.  gru«.  (D)  Kug. /tafA,  Gciui.  p/ail;  Kng.  ultfjj.
Germ,  nvkla/en.  {A)  Kiig.  gird,  G^na.  gUrteu  ;  Kug.
gkoHl,  Grrin.  geiat ;  Kiig,  ilay,  Germ,  tag  :  Kug.  koney,
Genu.  Aoitij/.  (5)  Kug.  dead,  Germ,  tot;  Elig.  drink,
Gvrm.  I rin ken  ;  En^.  deed.  Germ,  that;  Kng.  6rMd,
Germ,  brot  (6)  Eng.  blood,  Germ,  hlui ;  Eng.  lort,
Germ,  lieftcn.  {*)  Eiig.  Atrnif,  Oenii.  JWm ;  Eug.
keatk,  Germ,  kfidr ;  En^.latigk,  Gvnii.lacJieH;  Eug.
mii/ht,  Germ,  mafkt.  (8)  Eng.  Ikat,  Gerni.  daa  ;  Eug.
tkoni.  Germ,  dorn  ;  Eug.  trefA/r,  Germ,  tciddtr  ;  Eiig.
Mr*A,  Genu.  frdf.  (9)  Eng. /orrf,  Genu. /wrt;  Eug.
fioor,  Germ.jiMr.

For  treatment  nf  the  WcKt  Genu,  donihlo  cou-
Booanis,  gg,  dd,  ftK,  kk,  it,  pp,  etc.,  cf.  WilmanuH,
X^eubcAe  Grammatik,  H  ^"i,^.  ~f>>  <^;  Brngmauu,
ComjMtr.  Grammar,  L  H  ^^,  ^>^.  ^*^

Refereace  may  be  ma<te  to  Urngmoun,  Kletn^ntfi
of  tke  Comparatire  Grammar  of  the  Indo-Germanic
Language,  i.  H  342-344,  374-376, 3iW-aD5, 439-444,
527-&4l(Eng,trau8l.N.Y.  1867);  WilinauuB,/>fw(«cAf
Grammatik.  i^  17  foM.;  Klafie,  PanVti  Orundriaitder
gmn.  I'hiM.  \.  pp.3:i4foll.;  Behaghel,  Paui^  tlrand-
rui9,  i.  pp.  5$l  M]. ;  Btaudt,  lirrman  Grammar,  ^^
4117  foil.,  and  Amer.  Jimrn.  Philol.  i.  14G  foil.  ;  Skeat,
Prittciplra  of  Knglith  Ktgmologg,  Grut  eerieu,  vhs.
vii,  viii.

Orlphua  {ypiipot}.  Literally  "  a  Det  ;**  then  any
iulricate,  pnxzUng,  or  "  catch  "  queitiou.  A  riddle,
euigiua  (Gell.  i.  4, 4J. i!^-  Aemgma.

Oroma.  TIio  mcnsuriug  imitruiueut  URed  by
laDd-KorvoynrH,  who  were  from  it  called  gromatici.
See  AaiUMKNi^OHUU.

Tho  gromu  iti  repre«euted  ou  tbe  gravestoue  of  a
gromatietm  fouuil  wmie  yean  ago  at  Ivrea  (Roosi,
Groma  «  Squadro,  lffi7,  p.  43).
The  design  i«  not  in  porepco-
tive,  but,  if  alluwaueuB  bo
uioile  for  the  ii]rxf>ortcuoe  of
tho  artutt,  it  explains  fairly
well  tbe  nature  of  ibo  iDiitru>
meut.  Two  email  plnuks  croes-
iiig  oue  another  at  right  auglea
are  suppnrttHl  on  a  colnmn  or
post  (ferramrnttim).  Plum-
meta  (probably  four,  thongh
tbeiv  are  only  two  in  tbe
mounmentt  are  auapeiided
from  the  plaiika  to  guide  tbe
operator  in  aecuriug  a  rertieal  position  of  tbe
column,  and  a  borizoutal  for  the  croas -  pieceH.
Tbe  ttcuall  circles  at  tbo  point  of  seotiou  in  tbe
drawing  may  represent  a  hole  iu  tbe  ceutttinatluu
of  the  column  for  tbe  operator  to  look  through,  or
a  large  bole  in  the  cross-pieces  to  allow  of  their


Groinn. (Prani  A  (ni**-
KtoDV  St  Irraa. )


The  ]att«r  is  the  more  likely,  for  in  that  caae  tbe
cDutiuuatioD  of  the  columu  would  aerve  aa  a  rap-
port to  prevent  tbe  cross  from  falling.  lo  any
case  it  obstracta  tbe  view  along  tbe  planks.

The  use  of  the  inatmuient  is  obrioaa.  It  is  in-
temted  to  guide  a  surveyor  in  drawing  real  or  im-
aginary lines  at  right  angles  to  ofte  another,  nan
eepecially  iu  fixing  the  cardo  (or  north  aod  sonth
liue)  and  decumatius  (or  eattt  and  west  liD0)eaKn-
tial  to  the  urientalioit  iif  any  trmplum  or  to  tbf
laying  out  of  a  Rimian  camp. See  CaiTTHA.

^omatlci Laud -meosarera. See  Agumex-

QronoTiua  (Gronov).  Tlie  name  of  ttiree  dit-
liiiguislied  Dutch  clawtical  scholant.

(i)  JoiiAXN  FitiEORicn,  btiru  at  Hambug, Sep-
tember *.Wtb,  1613.  He  studied  at  Bremen  and  it
the  b'uivenities  of  Leipzig,  Juua,  and  Altdorf, aAcr
which  he  spent  M>me  time  la  travel  iu  both  Frasn
and  Italy.  In  1&43  be  became  Professor  of  Bbct-
oric  and  Htsior)'  at  Doventer  in  the  NetberianiU,
and  iu  1658  snccveded  Duniel  HeiusiuB,  at  L<-yiUii.
as  Prufewur  uf  Greek.  He  died  at  Levdeo,  Decem-
her88lh,  1671.

He  edited,  with  comraeniariee,  Statins  (IffiiSV
Plautnn  (1064),  Livy  (1645),  Pliny  the  Elder  (1089V
Tacitus  11673),  the  trage^lies  of  Seneca  (IGtill,  And
pablifihcd  separately  variona  notes  upon  Pboedmi
8cneco,Bud  other  authors,  these  being  sabsequcot-
ly  incorporated  with  the  works  of  his  more  dii  ~  ~
guished  son.  Avaluahlo  contribution  to  tbe
of  unmiamatics  is  tbe  treatise  Zh  Se*tartiit,  in  fiar
twoks,  which  appeared  in  1613.

{•i)  Jakob,  sou  oftbeprecetliug.lHmiatDcvfnW,
October  20th,  1645.  He  early  diBlinguislu-'I  hinwlf
lit  Leyden,  and  iu  1666  visited  England,  vbcrv  ke
became  iiitiniate  with  Caaanbon,  Pocoek,  and  Pl■^
son.  While  in  England  he  H|»«nt  several  monllutB
collating  a  nnml>er  of  rare  3ISS.  at  the  IJniverBtlk*
of  Oxford  and  Cambridge.  Soou  after  bcdaeliiwd
a  profcM^onihip  at  Devontcr,  and  in  1871  visilfd
France,  where  he  made  thoacquaiutanceofaaMSof
ttii^grcHfeMtscbularHof  that  country.  lutbabUl*-
ing  year  he  travelled  in  Spain  and  Italy,  aocepltnf
iu  the  latter  conutrj-  a  chair  in  the  IJnivcrsiij  •*
Pisa  offered  him  by  the  Grand  Unko  of  Tuwaiiy.
Uesigning  this  at  the  end  of  two  years,  he  n>tsn>Al
to  Leyden,  where  he  soon  after  aooepti'd  ttie  pr*-
few-sorship,  which  he  held  Iu  the  end  of  his  ll/»>,(^^
dining  (wveral  calls  fmra  foreign  anivcrnitie»,«il
paiwiug  hi>)  liiuu  iu  congenial  work,  tboogli  utM
embroibxl  iu  literary  quarrels,  iu  which  be  tm-
lained  Ilia  part  with  extreme  violenoo  of  toapc
and  a  reinarkahle  power  of  vitn|wrfttiTe  wtnilitr
He  dic4  October  SUt,  1716.

His  most  important  work  ia  bii  TktMum*  J*-
iuiiiUatum  Grattarum,  in  thirteen  vols,  folio  lUf-
den,  lC9d-l7ihi>,  reprinted  at  Venice  (ITM-^n'-*
work  modelled  on  the  great  Tkesaunu  Jnti^it^*'*
liomotiorvm  of  Oraevius  (q.  v.).  He  also  brooplil
out  uew  etlitiouH  of  the  authors  edited  by  his  tk-
ther,  and  hinwelf  edite<l  and  aunolHleil  MocroWs^
(1670),  PolybiuH  (1670),  Tacitus  (1721),  CieerollWV
Animianos  Maroetlinua  (1709),  Minucliis  Y'l^
(1707),Gclliufi(1706),Herodotua(171.'>),C»bes(ir
the  poems  ascribed  to  Mouetbo,  the
of  Gorlocos,  tbo  Lexicon  of  Harpocraiioa,
publishing  a  great  uninber  of  pampbleta,  tliMri^
diaconrses,  etc.


GBOTE


768


GRonus


(3)  Abraham,  bod  of  the  preoediog,  was  bom  at
Leyden  in  1694,  and  died  there  in  1775.  He  was
for  a  long  time  librarian  to  the  University,  and  is
known  by  his  editions  of  lustinos  (1719),  Taoitns
(with  his  father,  1721),  and  Mela  (1732).

Orote^  Georok,  the  distingnished  historian  of
Greece,  was  born  at  Clay  Hill  In  Kent,  England,
Kovember  17th,  1794.  Educated  at  the  Charter-
honse,  be  did  not  enter  one  of  the  nDiversitiea,  bnt
connected  himself  with  a  banlEing-bonse,  in  which
he  remained  'for  thirty-two  years,  devoting  his
leisnre  to  literary  and  political  parsaits.  In  1823
he  began  the  special  studies  necessaiy  for  an
exact  and  critical  knowledge  of  Greek  history,
and  in  1846  pat  forth  the  first  two  volumes  of  the
great  Hittorif  of  Oreeee,  the  twelfth  and  last  toI-
nme  of  which  appeared  in  1866  (4th  ed.  London,
1872).  It  begins  with  the  earliest  period  and  car-
ries on  the  narrative  to  the  end  of  the  generation
contemporaneous  with  Alexander  the  Great.  It  is
notable  for  its  accurate  geographical  details,  for
the  spirit  and  vigoor  of  its  passages  descriptive
of  martial  exploits,  and,  above  all,  for  its  obvious
purpose  of  showing  tbe  elevating  and  inspiring
influence  of  freedom  upon  human  activity.  In
this  last  respect  the  history  of  Grote  has  been
called  a  Liberal  history  of  Greece,  as  that  of  Bish-
op Thirlwall  is  undeniably  a  Tory  history.  Each
chapter  is,  in  a  way,  a  monograph  in  itself,  and
the  work  as  a  whole  is  one  of  the  greatest  master-
pieces of  hist-orioal  research  that  have  ever  been
put  forth.  It  was  followed  by  Plato  and  the  Other
CompoHioM  of  Soerattt,  3  vols.  (London,  1665) ;  and
ArUtotle,  edited  by  Bain  and  Robertson,  2  vols.
(London,  1672),  forming  a  sort  of  supplement  to
the  Hittaiy.

In  1862  Grote  was  elected  Vice-Chancellor  of
the  University  of  London,  and  in  1866  President
of  the  Coancil  of  University  College.  lu  1869  a
peerage  was  offered  him  by  Mr.  Gladstone,  bnt  was
declined.  Grote  died  June  16th,  1671,  and  was
buried  near  Gibbon  in  Westminster  Abbey.  His
life  was  written  by  his  wife  (1673);  and  a  good
critical  review  of  hie  work  as  an  historian  by  Pro-
fessor Bain  in  the  remarks  prefixed  to  the  edition
of  Grote's  minor  works  (1673).

Orotafend.  The  name  of  several  archaeologists
of  distinction.  (1)  Georo  Fribdrich,  born  at  Mfln-
den  in  Hanover,  June  9th,  1775.  He  was  educated
at  Mflnden,  Hfeld,  and  the  University  of  Gottin-
geu.  In  1797  he  became  master  in  the  Gottingeu
Gymnasium,  and  soon  after  wrote  his  treatise  De
Pangrapkia  (1799),  which  led  to  his  being  made
Pro-rector  of  the  Gymnasium  at  Frankfort-ou-the-
Maiu,  and  soon  after  Co-rector.  In  1621  he  was
called  to  the  rectorship  of  the  Gymnasium  at  Ban-
over,  which  he  held  until  1849.  He  died  December
15tb,  1653.

In  1623-24  Grotefend  revised  Wenck's  Latiu
grammar,  and  followed  this  publication  with  a
smaller  grammar  for  the  use  of  schools  (1626).  His
Bndimenta  Linguae  Umbricae,  eight  parts  (1835-36),
is  an  attempt  to  explain  the  remains  of  the  Um-
brian  dialect  (see  Uhbria)  ;  and  soon  al^r  he  put
forth  a  similar  work  relating  to  the  Oscan,  Budi-
menta  Linguae  Oacae  (1639).  In  1840-42  appeared,
in  five  parts,  his  work  Zur  Geographic  und  Oe-
tchiehteron  Altitalien.  He  will,  lv>wever,  be  longest
remembered  by  his  brilliant  work  in  discovering  a
clue  to  the  decipherment  of  the  Persian  cnneiform


inscriptions  that  had  so  long  defied  all  attempts
at  elucidation.  Grotefend  comnmnicated  his  dis-
covery to  the  Boyal  Society  of  Grottingen  in  1800.
The  points  that  be  was  the  first  to  establish  were
(a)  that  the  Persian  inscriptions  contain  three  dif-
ferent varieties  of  cnneiform,  so  that  the  decipher-
ment of  one  would  give  a  cine  to  the  decipherment
of  the  others ;  (ft)  that  the  characters  of  the  Persian
cnneiform  are  alphabetic  and  not  syllabic ;  (o)  that
they  must  be  read  from  left  to  rigbt;  (d)  that  the
alphabet  consists  of  forty  letters,  including  the
signs  for  long  and  short  vowels.  These  discoveries
laid  a  solid  basis  for  the  work  of  those  wbo  followed
and  who  finally  solved  the  remaining  problems.
The  details  of  the  methods  that  led  to  his  disoov-
eries  are  given  by  Grotefend  in  his  Neue  BeitrOge
eur  ErlSutemng  der  pereepolitaniechen  Eeilintchrift
(1637);  and  Xeue  BeUrdge  zur  Erl&uterung  der  hahy-
lonitchen  Keilintehift  (1640). See  CuNXiroRM.

(2)  Karl  Ludwig,  sou  of  the  preceding,  was
bom  at  Frankfort,  December  23d,  1809.  He  stud-
ied at  Gottingen,  and  held  a  post  In  the  Soyal
Archives  of  Hanover  from  1653.  He  died  October
27th,  1874.  His  chief  work  was  done  in  numis-
matics, epigraphy,  and  history.  He  published  Die
MUnzen  der  griechieoheHj  parHueehen,  und  indoskg-
thiechen  KSnige  von  Baktrien  (1839) ;  Imperium  Bo-
manum  THbuHm  Deteriptum  (1663);  Chronologitche
Anordnung  der  atheniedien  Silbermiinxen  (1672) ;  and
a  number  of  historical  papers  in  the  Zeitechrift  de»
hiatoriechen  Vereine /Ur  2fiedertach»en  (1650-74).

OTOtlna,  Hdoo  (Huio  van  Groot).  A  Dutch
scholar  and  Jurist  of  great  distinction,  horn  at
Delft,  April  10th,  1683.  As  a  boy  he  was  extraor-
diuarily  precocious,  entering  the  Uuiveraity  of
Leyden  in  his  eleventh  year,  having  already  be-
come well  known  for  his  skill  in  Latiu  versifica-
tion. At  Leyden  he  studied  under  Joseph  Justus
Scaliger,  and  when  only  fifteen  years  of  age  edited
the  very  difficult,  and,  in  fact,  eucyclopffidio,  work
of  Martiauns  Capella  (Leyden,  1599).  After  a  year
spent  in  travel,  he  was  admitted  to  the  doctorate
in  law,  and  entered  upon  regular  practice  as  an
advocate.  Though  uunsoally  successful  iu  his  cho-
sen profession,  he  still  reverted  to  letters,  and  iu
1600  edited  the  remains  of  Aratus  with  the  versions
of  Cicero,  Germanicus,  and  Avienus.  He  also  wrut«
mnch  excellent  Latin  verse,  and  three  dramas  in
Latin,  one  of  which  {Adamua  JSxut)  is  thought  to
have  fnmished  a  number  of  suggestions  to  Miltou
for  his  Paradiee  Lott,  In  1614  he  edited  the  Phar-
talia  of  Lucau,  of  which  edition  a  recension  was
published  by  Usener  at  Qreifswald  in  16^.  Later,
he  put  forth  au  edition  of  Silius  Italicus,  and  a
celebrated  translatiou  of  the  Anthologia  Graeoa
Planudea.  In  1657  be  composed  Annalee  et  His-
toriae  de  Bebue  Belgieie,  an  historical  work  of  much
value,  and  recalling  by  its  terse  and  pointed  style
the  Latinity  of  Tacitus.  He  is  best  known  to  the
world  at  large,  however,  by  his  remarkable  treatise
De  lure  Paeia  et  Belli  (1625) — a  work  of  profound
and  searching  scholarship,  which  long  reuiatued
the  standard  authority  on  international  law.  To
describe  his  stormy  career  as  a  theologian  and
statesman  would  he  beyond  the  scope  of  the  pres-
ent work. He  died  at  Rostock,  August  29th,  1645.

Few  men  have  shown  so  great  an  aptitude  for
so  many  fields  of  intellectual  labour.  He  was  pro-
foundly learned  as  a  classical  scholar,  uniting  ele-
gance to  aocoracy.  As  a  theologian  he  was  prob-
ably the  most  soundly  critical  exegete  of  his  age.


GKOVE


7M


QUTTUS


An  able  nnd  acntclilstorlau,  a  pl]ilosophc^r  of  depth
and  iiigeiinity,  an  iudiicntiftl  and  original  atntes-
uian  aud  diplomat,  a  pact  of  much  dIfttincIioD,  nnrt
aJiiriBC  vrliu  will  always  rank  among  the  greatest
ill  ilic  Liatory  of  juriBprndenco— no  wonder  that
au  amazed  contemporary  atylcd  him  "a  moDatej*
of  leamiug."

Till'  fullest  Inog^phy  of  Grotins,  with  a  com-
plete list  of  his  works,  is  that  of  Leliumiin  (Delft,
1737),  There  is  also  m  goml  life  of  tiiiu  in  Englinh
by  C.  Bntler  {London,  IK^}.  ^e  L  Milller,  GtMrh.
4.  vlam.  i'hilol.  in  dfn  Sir/iivlandeH,  p.  3H  (Leiitxig,
1869);  and  PUkul,  I'hilolofj.  SckrifUlellrrfe-cikon,  s.  v.
"  Orotiiut"  (I^ipzig,  l;i42).
*  Orove. See  Ltxus.

Omdll  A  people  in  Gallia  Belgica,  subject  to
the  Nftvii,  north  of  the  Scheldt.

Onuueattuu.  A  town  in  the  interior  of
LucaniOf  on  the  road  from  B«uoveiituin  to  Her-
aclcn.

OryllL Sec  A^•TU'H^.lIS ;  Gemua.

Gryllua  (rpvX^ot),  The  elder  rod  ofXenophoa,
wh»  fell  at  tlie  battle  of  Mniittnea,  H.c.  36*^,  after
be  liod,  according  to  some  acooinitH,  given  Epami-
Douilas  Ills  inortul  wound  (Pauiuiu.  x.  €,  11).

Oryneum  (Vpvvttav)  or  Qrynaa  (rpiiveia).  One
of  tbe  twelve  cities  of  Acolis,  situateit  on  the  coast
of  Lydia,  near  the  Dortheru  confines,  oiul  north-
west  of  Cym«i.  It  was  celebrated  for  the  worship
of  Apollo,  who  thence  derired  the  surname  of  Gry-
aetiB  {Verg.  Eckig.  vi.  7^ ;  J<-n.  It.  345).  The  tem-
ple of  the  giKl  wat)  remarkable  for  its  size,  and  for
the  beanty  of  it»  white  iiuirbU'.

Oiypa  1ypi/>{(r)  or  Oryphiu.  A  ^flin  ;  a  falin-
lotui  aniinul)  villi  tiic  boily  of  a  Itoii  ai^l  thi.^  lit^ad
iirid  wiug8  of  »n  eagle,  dwelling  in  ihe  Rhipaeau
Mountains,  Iwlween  the  Hyperlmreaiif*  ami  tlm
une-eyed  ArimoNpi  (q.  v.),  and  guarding  the  gold
of  the  north.  The  ArimaHpi  mounted  ou  bor««-
back,  aud  attempted  to  steal  tUo  gold,  and  beuce
aroMj  the  hostility  betneeu  the  horbe  and  the  grif-
fin. The  belief  iu  grlHSiiA  coiuc  from  the  l^aaC,
where  tUey  are  mentiotied  among  iLe  fabulona  an-
iuiaU  which  guanled  the  gold  of  ludia  lllerod.  ilL
116;  tv.  13J. See  Avblm.

Guard. Sert Cai^tka; Prabtoiuani  ; Vioi-

G\iheT]i&crihiBi(in}Saktoi').  A  rudder :  originally
tiottiitig  nioD)  that!  a  large  nur  with  n  broad  blade,
«ither  faMtuiied  by  braced  (/Mnes,  (tvyXai)  outride
the  igimrtt'rH  of  the  ves-
sel or  paHsed  through
an  aperture  in  the  bul-
warkr*.  Later,  it  was  fitr-
tiiohed  with  a  croRs-bar,
which  iwrved  as  a  tiller,
tike  the  left-hand  Hgiire,
from  a  Pouipeian  paint-
ing. Its  difierent  parts
were  distiugiiiidied  by
the  following  iiauiCH:
ANKfi,  the  liH  nd  Ic,  <j  ;
€taeun,the  Hliafi,  b;  ;>iti-
Hd,  the  blade,  c.  The
word  is  frequently  used  in  the  plural;  becanse
the  ancient  ree«oU  wure  cotnmonly  fnniiHhod  with
two  rudders,  one  on  each  quarter,  each  of  which
had  ite  own  helmunau,  if  the  vcMel  watt  a  large
one;  but  were  both  managed  by  a  lungle  steers-


Oub«ni»caU. (Pomp^ll )


man  when  it  wbb  small  enough. 8e«  GniEKXi-

TOR ;  Navis

GubematoT  (Kv^tpvTiTrfs).  A  helmsmaD  or  pi-
lot, wlio  i^nt  at  the  stem  to  steer  the  Te«iel  (Ck.IM
Sfn.  'J)t  gave  ordere

to the  rowers,  and  v*^j

direoteil  the  uauage-
tuent  of  the  hh  lis
(Verg,  Aen.  x.  1^18;
Liican.  viii.l'J3).  Be
vtun  next  iti  i;om-
niatid  tothoiiiaj;i/i/«7
and  immediately
above  the  prorrta.

Gugemi  or  Gn-
berni.  A  pe<>jde  of
Germany,  who  cross-
ed the  Rhine  and
settled  ou  its  left
bank,  Iwtweeii  the
Ubii  and  Hatavi.

Guild. See  COLLEQILM.

Guluaaa.  A  Numidiau,  second  son  of  Minti
and  br^itliitr  to  Micipiia  and  Mastaiiahul.  fla
a  Moij,  riaiued  Matutiva. See  Icgcktila.

GuBtatio.  Any  kind  of  delicacy  taken  us  rel-
ish or  Mtimulant  to  the  appetlt«  before  a  QVal  {P^-
tnni.  31,  :n). See  CeNa,  p.  313.

GuBtatorium.  The  tray  ujton  which  a  yatinti*
(<(.  V.)  was  servml  up  ;  ofteu  made  of  valuatilf  nu-
terials,  and  lineil  with  tortoJae-shslI  (Pvtron.  Mt
xxxiv.  1 ;  Pliu.  Kp.  v.  6,  37  ;  cf.  Mart.  siv.  *ii

Gattaa.  Drops,  in  architecture,  utied  prineipsl-
ly  Tinder  the  triglypbs  of  the  Doric  order,  in  il"


GabmtAtor (From  a  hwitiW
round  u  pvtwlt.i


^


umiM. iRtd^]

architrave,  and  nnder  the  taenia  (Vitmv.  iT,3^4V
as  iu  the  alwve  example;  but  aomcttmes  abo >f-
plied  under  the  mutules  of  the  order  fYitrur.  i^-
3,  6).  They  are  shaped  like  the  fruMrn  of  r>M».
aud  represent  the  drops  of  water  which  distil  tm^
above,  aud  tiang  in  pendent  drops  below.
Outtonea. See  Gorm.

Gutttunlum  {irpoxoot).  A.  waters
jug  or  ewer ;  employed  especially  for
pouring  water  over  the  hands  befure
and  after  meals  (Fest.  s.  v.).

Guttua  (Xi]Kt/Soti.  A  vessel  with  a
narrow  month  or  neck,  from  which
liquids  were  poured  in  drojvs  {ffHltar);
hence  its  name  (Varr.  L.  L.  v.  124  Mt.
Varro  goes  on  to  say  that  for  pouring  out  vim  «<
the  banquet  it  had  been  sn[iersiMled  by  the  tpi^^
and  cyathuf;  bnt  retained  its  place  in  MCtilw'
libations,  especially  of  the  domestic  sort  (nc-  ^'■
I.  G,  11>J,  with  Oreili's  note).  The  guttu*  «»  ^
the  plainest  shape  aud  materials;  it  dift'rreil  fn^a
the  capU  (also  nsed  in  sacriHces),  rpuhyti;  >'"
Nrceiis  in  being  without  a  handle ;  and  was  tiMiili*


OrABUS


7S6


GniNASIUM


STfe  -


Calif. (Sriitih  MutcuiiL)


I|pott«Ty. It  was  to  coinmoQ  um  aa  ah
,  whetbor  at  tal)I«  (GcU.  xvii.  H,  ^  5),  or  at
ath(Juv.iii.363).
ftnu  (rufljmc). A  RtnAtl  i»1aiid  of  the  Arcbi-

0,  classed  by  Stepbauiis  of  Byzautinin  among
irantde);,  bat  Iiolougiug  ratbor  to  the  Cycla<
It  lay  aouthwest  of  Andros,  off  the  coast  of

1.  Hm  wretched  aud  poor  n-aa  this  barren
Ikidk  inbabited  only  by  a  few  lishermen,

tb«y  depute<I  one  of  tbeir  nnmber  tf>  wait
Augutitus,  then  at  Corinth,  after  the  battle
?tiuni,  tn  petit  inn  tbiit  tbeir  taxtw,  wtiicb
uted  to  150  dmnbmaB  (nbiml  $25),  mi^^bt  be
lUhed,  OM  tbey  wuro  unitble  lu  raise  mtiri(
loo.  Tbia  iHlatid  bucniue  nnbiwKinently  oo-
ia,iia  the  Hpot  to  wliich  cHininubi  nr  HUH[)CCt-
Bmu  were  banirthod  by  oHvr  of  ibc  Ronmn
MCt  (Jiiv.  ).  7^;  X.  70).  Th«  modcru  tiaine  ih
ira.

es  (PvijtV 8ee  tivoES.

gaeua  Laous  (rvyain  xifivrf).  A  itnian  lake
dia,  iiurtb  of  8ardi»  (Herod,  i.  93).
sea  (rvyiff).  more  correctly  Oyes  (Ti/r^r).  A
f  Uranus  and  Gaeu,  represeuted  aa  having  a
red  Itaiids.  He,  with  his  brotberft,  made  war
Bt  the  goda,  aud  waa  aflerwnnlti  puuiahcd  in
.nut.  6«eCOTTt'8;  GiaaxTEs  ;  Titanes.
ge*  {rirfjt).  A  Lydian,  to  whom  Candaules,
of  the  country,  Hbuwud  Inn  wifr  with  her  pr-t'
xpodod.  Tbu  latter,  buviiig  dincuvnrcd  IblH,
a  iuccuMKl,  ultbuiigb  fthu  cuiirvaled  ht-r  an(i^*r
9  time,  that,  calling  (iygefi  aftorwards  into  her
DC«,  abe  gave  him  his  choice  either  to  oubiuit
ftant  death,  or  to  slay  ber  bushaud. Oyges

the  latter  alternative,  married  the  qnouu,
Mcended  the  vacaut  throne,  about  6^  years
D  the  Christian  era.  He  was  the  first  of  the
inadae  wbo  ruled  in  Lydia.  He  reigned
r-eigbt  years,  aud  dlatiugulshed  himself  by
r«f(en1a  which  be  made  to  the  oracle  uf  Del-
9erod.  i.  8  foil.).  The  wife  of  Candanles  above
ioned  was  called  Nyssia,  according  to  He-
ttion.  Tbe  story  of  Roaaiuund,  queen  of  the
>nnle,  as  related  by  Gibbon,  1>ear8  an  exact
iblauce  to  this  of  Candanlea  (cf.  Schtosser,
rnrcAicAfr,  vol.  ii.  pt.  1,  p.  ^i).  Plato  relates
ions  legend  respecting  this  tiyges,  which  dif-
tesentinlly  from  tbe  acconnt  given  by  Herodo*

He  makes  him  to  have  been  originally  one
le  shepherds  of  CnncJaules,  and  (o  have  de-
led into  a  chasm,  formed  by  heavy-  rains  and


an  earthquake  in  tbe  quarter  where  ho
ttiring  his  tlocks.  In  this  chasm  he  dia
many  wonderfnl  things,  aud  partionlarly  a  bra-
Ken  borne  having  doors  iu  it,  through  which  be
looked,  and  saw  within  n  corpse  of  more  thoa  mor-
tal size,  having  a  golden  ring  on  it«  tinger.  This
i-iitg  be  took  otr  and  reascended  with  it  to  the  sar-
farf!  of  tbe  earth.  Attending,  after  this,  u  meet-
ing of  Ilia  feLlnw-Nhepbenln,  wbo  used  to  asKemble
oncn  a  month  for  the  pnr}K>se  of  transmitting  an
acconnt  of  tbeir  docks  to  tbe  king,  bo  accidental-
ly discovered  that,  when  be  tiiruvd  thn  I>ez«l  of  the
ring  inward  towardit  himnelf,  he  became  inviHiblo,
aud  when  he  tamed  It  outward,  agaitj  visible.
Upon  this,  having  caused  b  I  nisei  f  to  be  cboiwn  in
the  number  of  those  who  were  sent  on  tlirH  occn-
sion  to  the  king,  bo  murdered  the  mouai-ch,  with
the  aid  of  tbe  queen,  whom  be  previoufly  corrupt-
ed, and  BM-ended  the  throne  of  Lydia  (Plat.  Dr  Itrp.
ii.;  cf.  Cio.  UfOJf.  iii.  tf).

GylippUB  (ri^Xiimoc^  A  Lacedaemoniau,  sent,
B.C.  41-1,  by  bin  countrymen  t«  assist  Syrncnse
against  the  Ath«nianii,  which  bo  effected  by  the
overthrow  of  Niclon  und  DenmnthiMM^s.  He  after-
wards  joined  Lytuiuder  off  Athens,  and  aided  him
by  his  advice  in  the  capture  of  that  city.  Lysan-
dcr  scut  bim  to  LactMlaoninii  with  the  money  and
spoiln  which  had  been  lukiMi,  tbe  former  amounting
to  15(H)  talents  (B.C.  44)4).  Hut  Gylippuh,  unaldr  to
resist  the  temptation,  uniw'wed  the  bottom  of  the
bags^  thus  leaviug  tbe  seals  untouched  at  the  top,
and  abstracted  aiK)  taJenUt.  His  theft,  however,
was  discovered  by  means  of  the  memomiidnm
contained  in  each  bag,  aud  to  avoid  prmiHlimcnt
he  went  into  voluntary  exile  (Plut.  Xiciae;  Diod.
Sic.  xiii.  IfW}.

OytunaaUrohes  {yvfivaoiopx^v). See  GruxA-

BICM.

OynuuMlaxobla {yviufaampxia). fiee  LiTt'R-

Qymuaalam  {yv^vaaiav).  Oymnastica  were
thcnigbt  by  the  ancients  a  matter  of  such  impor-
tance that  this  part  uf  t^dncatinri  alone  oceupieil
as  ninch  time  and  altetitioii  aa  all  the  others  put
together;  uud  while  tbe  latter  uecetwarily  ceased
at  a  certain  iwriiKl  of  liff,  gymniuiticM  continued
to  be  cultivated  by  perHouH  of  alt  ages.  The
wonl  "gymnastics'' is  derivL-d  from  yu^iwit  (naked),
becaumt  the  penious  wbo  ]>erfunui'd  tbeir  ezerciscn
in  public  or  private  gyiunn«ia  wvni  uichur  entirely
naked,  or  merely  covered  by  the  short  j^irMv.

The  great  partiality  of  the  Greeks  for  gym-
nastic oxercises  was  prndnetive  of  infintte  gooil.
It  gave  to  the  body  that  healthy  and  Iwautiful
development  by  which  thf^  Greeks  excelled  all
other  nations,  and  which  at  the  same  time  im-
parted to  their  minds  power  and  elasticity.  The
plastic-  art  also  ninst  have  found  its  first  auA  chief
nonrishnient  in  the  gymnastic  and  athletic  |ier-
fonuances.  Respecting  tho  advantages  of  gyro-
nasties  in  a  medical  point  of  view,  see  Atuletas;
Mbdicina.

Gymnastios,  in  tbe  widest  sense  of  tho  word,
comprehended  also  tho  agonistic  and  athletic  arts
((iyuvioT-tK^  and  affKrfrtKTj) — that  is,  tbe  art  of  those
who  cotitcndod  for  the  prizes  at  tbe  great  public
games  in  Greece,  and  of  those  who  nnule  gymnas-
tic performances  their  professimi.  In  a  niirniwor
sense,  however,  the  gymnasia  had,  with  very  few
exceptions,  nothing  to  do  with  the  public  contests,


GYMNASIUM


TIM


f?VMNASlUM


"hut  mm  plMM  of  exeroUto  fur  tlio  purpooc  of
■treilgtteilitig  and  improTiitg  tliu  buily,  or,  in  ntb-
er  tvufiIk,  plnocit  fur  phyHical  ethicatimi  and  train-
in  ({ ;  autl  it  In  ohiefly  in  tliia  }iuint  uf  view  that
they  will  bn  coiiBiilerod  in  thiH  article.

Oymuastic  cxerciBc*  amoug  the  Greeks  teem
to  have  been  as  old  as  tbo  Gi'eek  nation  it«elf,  B«
may  be  iDforred  from  the  fact  that  gyiunastic
coQt«6t«  arc  meutioned  in  luauy  of  tho  earlieat  le-
geoda  of  GreciaD  story ;  bat  they  were,  as  might
be  suppoaed,  of  a  nido  and  mostly  of  a  war-
like character.  They  were  •jeueraily  held  iu
the  open  air,  and  in  plains  near  a  river,  which
affi)r<l«td  an  opiwrtnniiy  fur  awiimning  and  bath-
ing. The  Attic  leg«Qd«,  indeed,  rvferred  the  reg-
ulation of  gynmaatica  to  TheMiis  (Pausan.  i.  3U,
I  3),  but  according  to  Galen  it  Hvema  to  have
boon  about  tho  time  of  Oliathouos  that  gymnaa-
tics  were  reduced  to  a  regular  and  complete  sys-
tem. Great  progrese,  however,  must  have  been
made  as  early  as  the  time  of  Solon,  as  appears
from  Mnno  of  his  lawg  which  are  niention*^<l  be-
low. It  wa«  about  tho  Mune  period  that  the
Greek  towns  began  to  buUd  their  regular  gyniitti-
Kia  aa  places  of  exercicio  for  the  youug,  with
baths,  and  other  conveniences  for  philoMophvn
and  all  pemons  who  aought  intelkctual  auuise-
ments.  There  was  probably  no  Greek  town  of
any  Importance  which  did  not  poflHeM  its  gynum-
sium.  Iu  many  places,  such  aa  Kpheeu*,  Hie-
ntpolis,  and  Alusarjdria  iu  Troiut,  th«  remains  of
the  ancient  gyuinuttia  have  been  diHccivere<l  ID
modern  timoH.  The  oldest  remains  are  thoao  of
the  gymnasium  at  Olympiii,  which  can  not  bo
earlier  than  the  end  of  the  fmurth  century  u.c.
(liolticher,  Olj/mpitt,  p.  'Myi  foil.).

Atbcits  po»se.i6cd  throe  gi^at  gymuiMJa — the  Ly-
ceum (.\ijic(ioi>),  Cynosarges  iKwoirapyts).  and  the
Academla  I'XKadqftia),  to  which,  iu  later  times,  sev-
eral ftiunller  onen  were  a<lde^l.  All  places  i>f  This
kiud  were,  on  the  whole,  built  on  the  same  plnii,
though,  from  the  remains,  as  well  as  from  the  de-
Hcriptions  still  extant,  it  is  uvidetit  that  there  were
many  difleititic*.*8  in  their  detail.  We  have  no  de-
tailed account  of  a  gymnasium  of  tho  bvet  period.
The  most  complete  description  of  h  gymnasium


iger  tiMB
uflu. ,^M

BOM I^^H


which  we  powwes  is  that  given  by  VitniviuB  {t.
11),  which,  however,  is  very  obsonre,  and  at  tb«
Kiiiue  time  defoctive,  iu  ku  far  hm  many  paibi
whi[!h  Mocm  to  have  been  eMeutial  tu  a  gyinuati-
niu  are  nor  nieucioned  in  it.  Of  the  DunieroBs
plans  which  have  been  drawn,  that  of  W.  Mewioo,
in  hih  translatioD  of  Vitnivius,  may  bore  be  given
with  a  lew  alterations,  although  some  of  the  de-
tails are  open  to  criticism.

The  peristylium  (0)  in  a  gymnasinm,  which  Vi-
tmviuR  iucorrctctly  calls  palaestra,  is  in  the  form
of  a  square  or  oblong,  :ii)d  i^  two  stadia  (I'iOi)  fwt)
in I'ircnniferenrp. It  cnnsiKts  iif  four  pnrtirnca.
In  tliffe  of  thoni  (A  It  C)  ftpacrlons  cxedrae  with
seatt)  were  erected,  in  which  phttocophcni,  rhelo-
riciaua,  and  others,  who  delighted  iu  intfllfreiaal
conversation,  might  assemble. A  fourth  porlicA
(E),  towanls  the  soath,  was  double,  so  that  tlw
interior  walk  was  not  exposed  to  bod  weaibcr.
The  double  portico  contained  the  fullowiug  apirt-
ments: The  Epbebeum  (P).  a  spacious  hall  witii
Hcnts  in the  middle,  and one-third longer  tfasa
broad,  ilnttiiied  for  tho  exercises  of  youfhu.
the  right  is  the  Coryceum  (Q),  uwd  for
with  the  sock  (nttpuxot),  perhaps  the  naoM
which in  other  caaoa  was  called  A|HMlyieriiUB;
then  came  the  Conisterium  (Hi  adjoining,  when
the  body  was  sprinkled  with  duKt;  and  next  I*
the  Cottisterium,  In  the  returns  of  the  panici*.i*
the cold  bath,  Xovrpof  (1). On the left  of  Ibe
Ephebeiim is the Elaeotheslnm,  where (lerw*!
Were  aiioinl«d  by  the  aliptae  (K). Adjotiiine  tiM
Elaeothexium i» the Frigidariiim (.L>,  or man
probably  the  Tepidarinm,  where  there  was  a  liil^
warm  bath. From  thence  is  tho  eutraaco  lotba
Propuigeum  (M),  on  the  returns  of  the  portiw:
near  which,  bat  more  inwani,  brhind  thoplacsar
the  Krigiilariuni,  is  the  vaulted  sudal«iry  (X),  in
length  twice  its  breadth,  which has  on  ibe  n-
tuniiK  tho  LacoDicum  (0)on  one  sitle,  and  oppuaM
the  Laconicuni  the  hot  bath  (P), These  aw  the
more  eMcnttal  and  primitive  part«i  of  a  gnnnui'
U1I1. But  in  the  time  nfVitrnvius  impnrlaut  td-
ditiotiH  were  made  to  it. Ou  the  outride  Oatt
porticiies  are  built:  one  (Q),  in  passing  oat  bam
tho  i»eri«tyle,  and,  on  the  right  and  left,  the  rw
fltndial iK>nicoes  (R,  S).  of  which thv  one  (SI
that  faces  the  north  is  moide  donblo  and  of  pnt
breadth,  the  other  (R)  is  single,  and  so  desigifd
that  in  tho  parts  which  encircle  the  walls,  and
which  ailjoin  the  columns,  there  may  be  nutriiciii*
for  paths  not  lees  than  ten  feet ;  and  the  tiii<M)>
is  so  excavated  that  there  may  be  two  ^Uf*-  *
foot  and  a  half  in  descent,  to  go  fiMm  the  wMp*
to  the  plane  (R),  which  plane  Hhould  not  b«  ltii>"
breadth  than  twel ve  feet ;  by  this  means  tba« *li*
walked  about  the  margins  in  their  ax>paiil  wvM
not be  aonoyetl  by  those  who were  exeniinil
thenuelTes. This  |>ortico  is  called  by  the  Gtvki
^voTor,  because  in  the  winter  Beaaon  th»  athle***
exurcised  themselves  in  these  coTered  sSailia  TU
ivtrnit  had  groves  or  plantations  between  tUI"^
porlicoe«,  and  walka  between  the  trees,  with  «•*•
of  siguiuo  work. Adjoining the  ^trrur  iHl  *"*
double  portic<t  (8(  are  ibe  oncovetrd  walk*  ll^''
which  iu  Greek  are  called  rr<^Af>n^id(i,  to  nbicli
the  ntbletAo,  in  fair  weather,  went  fnmi  th*wiiil«-
xystiis  to  exercise. Beyond  the  iyi*triN  i«  'If  *""
diura  (W),  so  large  that  a  mnltiludenf  n.Hhl-iK'iM
have  sufficient  room  to  behold  the  ■  '*

athJotoe. In  this  description of  \  "■''


importADt  parts  of  otlicr  Oreak  gj-tniiuU  (the
Apmljterium  and  tbe  Sphneriateriuni)  are  not
metitionod.

The  Greeks  bestowed  f^reat  c»rc  ujMm  th*  ont-
vftnl  and  iuword  splendour  uf  their  gvmiiuiin,  aad
•domed  tbctn  with  the  statoea  of  gods,  heroes,  tic-
lorft  ill  tbe  pablic  games,  and  of  einiueut  men  of
evoiy  class.  Hermes  wan  the  tutelary  deity  of
tbe  gymiiasia,  atnl  his  stntue  was  oouMqaently
seeu  in  most  of  them.

The  earliest  regnUtions  which  wp  poNWjwi  con-
cerning the  gymnasia  arc  cuutained  ill  tbelavrnof
Solon.  One  of  tluvte  Iuwk  furtiad<>  all  udiiltt  to  en-
ter a  gymDaainm  ilnring  the  tlnio  that  lioyit  were
taking  their  ejerclws,  and  at  the  festival  of  the
Hennae*.  The  gymnasia  were,  accortling  to  the
•awe  law,  not  allowed  to  be  o|tencd  bvfun''  snurise,
and  were  to  be  that  at  sanset  (Lex  a/>.  Aesohin.  e.
Timtirch.^  12).  Another  law  of  Solon  excluded
alaves  from  gymnastic  exercises  [Aescbiu.r.I'isiorch.
b4  13S ;  Plat.  :ivloti,  li.  Boys  who  were  children  of
BU  Atbentan  citizen  and  a  foreign  mother  (mii^ot)
were  not  admitted  to  aoy  other  gymoasium  but
tbe  Cynosarges  (.Pint.  Them.  1).  Some  of  the
laws  of  Solon,  relating  to  the  managenipnt  and
the  siiperinteudence  uf  thti  gymnasia,  gbow  that
be  was  aware  of  the  evil  consequences  which
tbeae  lustitntiona  might  produce,  nnleas  they
were  regulated  by  the  fttrictost  rules.  As  we,
however,  tiud  that  adults  also  frequented  tbe
^mnasia,  we  must  supiwso  that,  at  least  an  long
as  the  laws  of  Solun  were  in  force,  the  g^'mnaaJa
were  dlTided  into  diflfereiit  parts  fur  |>prsonH  of
different  ages,  or  that  iMTsons  of  different  ages
took  their  exercise  tit  differiMit  tinifii*  of  the
day.  In  the  time  of  Plato  the  salutary  regu-
lations of  Bolon  api>ear  to  have  Ik^ii  no  longer
observed,  and  we  lind  )>ersons  of  all  ages  vis'
iting  the  gymnu.iia  (Plal.  /><■  ifrp.  v.  ]>.  4.Vi ;  Xen.
Sjfmpot.  2,  ^  18).  Athens  now  potwewted  a  number
of  smaller  gymnasia,  which  are  Noniettmes  called
palaestrae.  In  which  iientons  of  all  ages  used  to
a««emhle,  and  in  whioh  even  the  Hcrmaea  were
celebrated  by  thi*  boys,  while  formerly  thif*  so-
lemnity had  been  kept  only  in  the  grfal  «yiii-
naaia,  and  to  the  cxctuAion  of  all  adults  (Plat.
Lif0.  p.  300).  Those  chaugctt,  and  the  laxity  in  the
superintendence  of  these  public  places,  canned  the
gymnasia  to  differ  very  Ittik''  from  the  schoi>U  of
ibe  athletae ;  and  it  is  perUupa  partly  owlug  to
this  cirrumstance  that  writers  of  this  and  HultHe-
jnent  times  tiso  the  wonlH  gyinuoMiiim  and  p»t»eft-

L  indiscriminately.  But  K.  K.  Hermaun  { Vrii'ataU.
\  36)  seems  to  have  proved  that  the  gymnasium
^as  never  used  for  a  place  of  trainiug.

Married  as  well  aa  nnnmrried  women  were,  at
Athens  and  in  all  the  Ionian  Htai«fi,  exclinlcd
from  the  gyainuia ;  but  at  B|>arta.  and  in  somt?
other  Doric  States,  maidens,  dressed  in  tbe  short
riTwy,  were  not  only  admitted  tm  s]»ectatont,  bnC
iJao  took  part  in  the  oxerci!*eM  of  the  youths.  Mar-
ed  women,  however,  did  not  frequent  the  gym-

ain.

Respecting  the  soperintendence  and  administra-
tion of  the  gymnasia  at  Athens,  wo  know  that  So-
lon iu  his  legislation  thought  Ihem  worthy  of  great
attention;  and  the  trausgrcMion  of  some  of  bis
la^vs  relating  to  tbe  gymnuia  was  puiiishe<1  with
death.  Mis  laws  mention  a  magiatrate,  called  the
Oymoosiorch  (yv^iHicriap\or  or  yvft»aaidp)(rjt),  who

iraa  intrusted  with  the  whole  management  of  the


gymnasia,  and  with  everytliiug  connected  there-
with. His  oiBoe  was  one  of  the  regular  liturgies,
like  the  eboregia  and  trierarchy,  and  was  attend-
ed with  cousidcrable  expense.  IJe  had  to  maiu-
tain  and  |tay  the  persons  who  were  preparing
themselves  for  the  games  and  contests  in  the  pub-
lic festtvais,  to  provide  them  with  oil,  nud  ]>erbaps
with  the  wrestlers'  dust.  It  also  devolvwl  upon
him  to  adorn  the  gymuasinni  or  the  place  where
the  conteHtH  took  plave  iXeii.  De  Rep.  Athen.  1,  ^
13),  The  fiyniiianiarcli  wan  a  real  magistrate,  and
invrAt<.Ml  with  a  kind  of  JuriNdii.:tion  over  all  tboiw
who  fnipientrd  or  wore  connected  with  the  gyni-
nusia ;  and  bin  jx^iwer  neunm  even  t«i  have  extend-
ed beyond  tlic  gymuoaia,  for  Plutarch  (.ilmatur.  o.
9,  iMc.)  Hlati'S  that  ho  watchcil  and  controlled  the
condoot  of  the  ephebi  in  geucml.  Ho  had  also
the  power  \o  remove  from  the  gymnasia  teachers,
phitusopbors,  and  sophists,  whenever  he  conceived
that  they  exercised  an  injurious  iuflnence  upon  tbe
young.  Another  part  of  his  duties  was  to  conduct
the  solemn  games  at  certaiti  great  festivnle,  esjie-


Uoxer ^nrMdeo.)


daily  the  torch-race  (Kafiitait)<^fiia),  for  which  h«
selected  the  most  diatinguisheil  among  the  opbebi
of  the  gymnasia.  Tbe  numlipr  of  Gytuuosiarcba
was,  acconling  to  l.ibaiiiuH  on  Demosthenes  (o.
Mid.  \i.  fill) )  tA-n,  one  from  every  tribe.  They
seem  to  have  nndertakeu  their  official  duties  in
turns,  hut  in  what  manner  Is  unknavrn.  Among
the  external  dihttnctions  of  a  Gymmuiiarch  were  a
puride  cloak  and  white  nbocs  [Plut.  .-tatoii.  ',\S\.
In  early  times  the  oflice  of  Gymuaaiorch  lasted  for
a  year,  hut,  under  tbe  Komnn  emperors  we  lind
that  Kometimes  they  held  it  only  for  a  mouth,  so
that  there  were  twelve  or  thirteen  Oymnasiarcba
in  one  year.  This  office  seems  to  have  been  con-
sidonMl  so  great  an  honour  that  even  Roman  gen-
cralti  and  omporcirs  were  ambitions  to  hold  it.
Other  Greek  towns,  like  Athenn,  hud  their  own
Gymnasiarchs,  hut  v(i'.  do  not  know  whether,  or  to
what  extent,  their  duties  diflered  from  the  Athe-
nian Gymnasiarchs.  In  Cyren£  the  oflice  waa
sometimes  held  by  women.

An  office  which  is  vmi  mentioned before  the
time of  tbe Roman emperors,  but  waa never-


GYllNASIUU


7K


UYUNASIUM


m


^desB  decitlodly  conoMted  with
the  gj^uaaia,  1b  tbat  of  Cosinetee.
lie  bad  to  arrange  certain  giinies,
to  register  the  uniues  aud  keep
tbo  liata  of  the  epiiebi,  and  to  tnaiti-
tain  order  and  discipline  antong
them.  He  van  astiiiated  by  an  An-
tiuMinetes  and  tno  liypocooinetao.
Tbia  officer  appears  only  after  tfae
reorgauizatioii  of  iho  gymnasia  in
tbe  second  century  B.C->  wbeu  they
served  also  as  places  for  intellectual
iDBtniction. See  Educatiox,  p.  572.

An  office  of  very  great  imiior-
tanco,  in  an  edocatiouul  point  of
view,  was  tbat  of  tbe  Sopbronistae
(o-M^poKurrai).  Thoir  province  was
to  innpire  tbe  youib  wttb  a  love  of
ffttH^pocn/*^,  and  to  protect  tbi»  vir-
tue against  all  injurious  iuf1iRiuc«a.
Id  early  times  tbeir  number  at  Atb-
ens  was  ten,  one  from  every  tribe,
with  a  salary  of  one  dracbma  per
day  (Etytn.  Mag.  s.  h.  v.).  Tbeir  duty
uot  ouly  required  tbem  to  be  prea*
eot  at  all  tbe  games  of  the  epbebi,
but  to  watcb  and  correct  their  con-
duct wherever  they  miKht  meet
tbem,  both  within  and  without  the
gymuuaium.

The  itiHtnictiona  in  the  palaentrae,  aometimes
attarliKcl  tt)  gyn)»a«ia,  wurts  ^ivf^n  by  tbe  Oymnan-
tae  (yKiiiviiffrai)  and  tbe  Pae<lotribae  (naiiaTpiliai) i
at  a  latut  period  Hypopaudotribae  wern  nilded.
Tbo  Facdotribes  was  required  to  pusacw  a  knuwl-
edge  of  all  tbe  various  cxerciaee  which  were  per-
formed by  the  gyninUAlu;  the.  Gyiniiastes  waa  tbe
Bnpt-riiir  teaiilter,  and  waK  exprcteil  to  Icnnw  t!ni
physiological  effectA  and  iii(lut;nceH  on  thi^  conati-
tutioo  of  tbe  youths,  and  therefore  atiaigued  to
each  of  them  those  cxcrciaes  whi<:U  be  thought
most  suitable.

Tbe  anoiDtiog  of  tbo  bodies  of  the  youths,  and
strewing  tbem  with  duat,  before  they  coiniuenced
their  exercisea,  as  well  as  the  regulation  of  their
diet,  was  the  duty  of  the  AUptae.  (See  ALirrjLE.)
These  men  sometimes  also  acted  as  surgeuus  or
teacbera.  Oaten  mentiuns  among  ibe  gymnastic
teaebera  a  tr<f>aipnmKus,  or  teacher  of  tbe  various
games  at  ball;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  in
souc  caaea  particular  gamea  may  have  been  taught
by  separate  persons.

Tbe  gamcft  and  exorcises  which  were  performed
in  tin;  gymuaaia  sfiem,  on  the  whole,  to  have  l>eeu
the  Bonic  throughout  Greece.  Among  the  Dorians,
however,  they  wore  regarded  chiedy  as  i  nstitiitions
for  hardening  tbe  body  and  for  military  training;
among  the  loniaiis,  and  especially  tbo  At.beniun«,
they  hiul  an  atlditinual  and  higher  object,  namely,
to  give  to  the  body  and  its  movements  grace  and
beauty,  and  to  make  it  the  basis  of  a  healthy  and
aouud  mind.

Amuug  the  games  wo  may  meution :  (1)  Tlie
hall  (  iTt^ipitrit,  iT<}iaipofia)^ia,  etc. ),  wbicb  wos  iu
nniveraal  favour,  aud  was  liero,  in  Greece,  as  at
Rome,  played  iu  a  variety  of  ways,  as  appears
fnim  tbe  words  aW/ipo^tc.  iiTi<rKvpot,  <p<uviirfla,  Or
Apnairroif,  etc.  Every  gymnasium  contained  one
large  room  for  tba  ptirpose  of  playlug  at  ball  in  it
{tF<PatpttrTTiptatf). (2) naiffiv tXKuoriria.  dtrXxv-

tnivdot  or  did  ypoftfiqs,  was  a  game  in  which  unu


>^-


) t


y.


Tbo  WreeUera (UflUl  Otlteir,  Plonaoa)

boy,  holding  one  end  of  a  rop«,  tried  to  pull  tlie
boy  who  held  its  other  end  across  a  line  marksl
between  them  on  the  ground.  (3)  The  top(^>iAf
^<>0i£,  po^oi,  or^D^iXoc),  which  was  as  oomoMiii
an  aniu»timent  with  Greek  boys  as  in  oai  sitd
days.  (4)  The  TKvrakiBou  which  was  a  game  witk
live  stones,  wbicb  were  thrown  up  from  the  upptf
part  of  the  baud  aad  caught  iu  tb«  palm.  >&l
SxaTr/pdn,  which  WAS  a  game  in  wbicb  a  rope  v»
drawu  tbrougb  tbe  upper  part  of  a  traeor  A  pMt
Two  boys,  one  on  each  side  of  the  poat,  ttmiDC
their  bocks  towards  one  another,  took  bold  of  th«
ends  of  the  roi>o  and  tried  to  pull  each  oth»  tip
This  sport  was  also  one  of  the  amnacmeats  at  tU
Attic  Diouysia.  These  few  games  will  soffleo  S»
show  the  character  of  the  gymnastic  sports.

The  more  iuijKtrtaut  games,  such  as  nnaiti|
yhpopoi),  throwing  of  the  SiVxof  aud  tbe  iE»r.
jumping  and  leaping  [A^,  with  and  wltbaus
(iXTTJ^fs),  wrestling  C  naXi? ),  boxing  (  frvyi*^ ).  I**
jiaucratinm  (iru-yKponoi',  irf'rra^oy,  "Kap-mh^o^sii^*
dancing  ( Qpxw^^)i  ^^-y  ^ro  described  in  sepsf^
articles.

A  gymnasium  waa,  as  Vitmviua  obserrot,  iioi  a
Roman  institution,  aud  Diouysiusof  llolicsraaw*
iAnt.  Horn.  vH.  70-72)  exprcwly  states  tbsl  tb«
whole  ayavuTTixf}  of  the  fiouian?,  tboagit  it  iM
practised  at  an  early  period  in  the  Ludi  Uuinii
wiu  introduced  among  the  Romans  from  Gvetf-
Their  attention,  however,  to  developing  wi'
strengthening  the  Iwdy  by  exercisea  was  eooiMtf'
able,  thotigb  oitly  for  military  parpoeee.  Tbsnf'
ular  training  of  boys  in  tbe  Qretdt  gymtkostki  w
fureigu  to  I^man  mannon,  and  eren  bidd  Id  oak-
tempt  (Plut.  Quaar  Som.  40).  Towards  tha  nxl
of  tbe  Kepublic  many  wealthy  Bomons,  who  bad
ac<tniied  a  taste  for  Greek  manners,  nsed  toatU"^
to  their  villas  suall  places  for  bodily  exsnii^
sometimes  called  gymuaala,  aotuetimea  pal■«•tI■^
and  to  adorn  them  with  beautiful  wwks  if  u**
Tbe  cuiMror  Nero  was  tbe  first  who  bniU  a  jnUie


UVMNASTES


7fi9


GliTHIUM


lymoMium  at  Rome  (Snot.  .Yrr.  131;  nnotber  wu
rncted  by  C<uumrHlua  (Herodiaii,  i.  l'i,AU  But  al-
hoagli  tlivse  itiHtitntiona  vterv  intfadetl  to  iiitro-
.ace  Orcek  ^ymuiuitica  aimiug  tbc  Il4)ii)unA,  >'(!t
h«r  oever  gftiii«l  any  great  tiii|H>rtatic«,  oh  th«
iMgiiificeiit  thuriuae,  auipbitbeatrett,  auil  other
oloMal  boiMiugs  had  always  greater  cbanas  for
he  Romana  tlian  the  gymiiaaia.

8ce  Burett«,  Hutoire  de»  Athlittt,  in  the  Mem.de
Acad.det  Itmcript.  i.  3;  G.  Lobkcr,  IHt  (ij/mHatttk
tr  UclltncH  (Miinater,  ICCIS);  Wachsmiith,  i/rf/cn.
Utfrth.  vol  il  p.  344,  ot«.,  Sd  ed. ;  Mflller,  I>oricr,
r.  S,  $  4,  etc. ;  Decker-Goll,  C*rrriJt/M,  ii.  2I.V25I ;
ra/fiM,  iti.  168-168;  and  csi^ectally  J-  n.  Kraiioc,
Ne  fiymnaMtik  »,  Agouititik  dcr  Hrlhnen  (Leipzig,
Ml);  and  Dittctibergvr,  T/it  Eithebi*  Atliriti  (ib.
B63).  Tha  bititorira  uf  Hlucalion  atnung  the  ati-
iMltB,  ••peeially  that  of  Oraaberger,  likewise  cuii-
niu  mueb  naeftil  iuformation  on  the  subject.  8ee
.tblbtak;  Education.

Ojnunaatea  (yvupatrnjt). See  GTWXASifM.
Oymnaatlca. Sev  Atiii.etak;  Gymnabium.
lOrnmeaiae  {rvfiyrjaiat  vijtroi). See  Baleakes.

■Bymnaaii  or  Oymnfttea  (yvfivfjtrttH  or  yt/ii-iTrrf).
■hiia  of  boiid-alaves  nt  Argos,  who  may  be  com-
Ded  Tritb  tbo  H«lota  at  Sparta  (Stcph.  Byz.  s.  v.
toe ;  PoUnx,  iii.  83).  Thoir  name  («hon-s  that  thoy
Itended  their  masten)  on  tnilitary  st-rvicc  in  the
4iacity  of  liglit-ainied  tr«t)iw,  lint  no  partLciilan
re  ktidwn  about  thrni.
Oymndtae  {yvpiv^rai).  A  iiniuo  fur  tho  difTiTRnt
tri»  of  sluu-p- tthuiitura  ciii|>loyed  in  tbii  Gn-«k
rtniea  sinou  the  Persiau  Wurt4,  in  place  uf  thtt
l{bt-annod  alavcs.  It  was  only  afttr  the  oxpe-
itlon  of  the  Ten  Tbousaml  that  they  came  to
mil  au  easeutial  part  of  a  (.Ireok  army.  Tboy
ere  geoerally  rocrnitcd  from  the  bmbaronB  na-

Ewbo  ncre  specially  diHtingiiiahod  in  the  nse
irtlooJar  miwilea.  The  arclwn  (roftirnt),  for
uco,  were  generally  Crvtann,  tliu  Hlitixera
tf^pliaf^irm)  Rhodians  and  Tlicrwiliann,  while  tho
tvelin  nieu  (droKntrroi')  wrni  t»ki-ii  fiiim  tbo  Kntui-
elleiiio  iMipulatiiniA  in  the  tvctit  of  (irocce,  uoco-
ly  tbe  Aetuliatis  and  Acarnauiuiiit.  The  comoion
laraetcristic  of  all  these  troops  was  the  absence
r&Il  dpfensivu  weapoua.  It  was  aiucng  tho  Looo-
leinuuiaua  that  they  were  iiiti-odiiced  latest.  Aloi-
jdcT  the  Great  bad  a  corps  of  20<X)  nf  thuni,  with
hiob  he  opened  his  cantpaigin  ngaiiiKt  the  Per-
■na.  Half  of  thiwn  were  Hptmnnrn  and  the  other
ilf  arilxTs. See  Exr.kciTLS.

Oymnopaedia  {yviA^virmSia}.  A  great  fnitivul
sld  at  Sparta  from  about  the  6tb  to  the  10th
'  Jul}'  ill  htinour  of  Apollo,  Artemin,  and  Leto
'auaaii.  iit.  11,  $  7).  It  was  an  exhibition  of  all
luda  of  accoiupli-tbtncutji  iti  gymnafitic8,  music,
id  duiciug,  givou  by  b(iy4,  yontbs,  and  men  for
le  beneUt  of  the  citizeim  and  of  tho  nnmerons
rangers  who  flocked  to  .Sparta  for  ths  occaflion,
id  were  iKwpitably  eiitcrtniiitMl  tbuto.  Old  bach-
urs  irenf  cxcluiled  from  the  fiMtiv)tic«(8vbomaun,
Mtuj.  i.264,Ei)g.  traiiKl  ).

OynmoaophUtae  ( rviivoaotfuarai ).  "  Naked
tge«."  A  xiuini-  ({ivcii  by»the  Gr««k  writers  to  a
irtain  cluwi  of  Indian  aACetk'S  bolonginR  to  tho
tate  uf  the  Brahmiae,  and  wbo,  in  accordance
the  preraleot  belief,  theaght  that,  by  snb-


jecting  tho  body  to  enffertuga  and  privatiaiis,  and
by  M-tthdmwing  from  all  iniereourse  with  luaii-
kind,  thoy  could  effect  a  reunioQ  of  the  i^rlrituol
naturu  of  man  with  the  divine  esaeaoe.  UoHt  of
these  aaccticM  diapeused  almost  entirely  with  tbe
nati  of  cl<»t1i«H,  and  maiiy  of  them  weut  entirely
naked.  Heiico  tbe  name  applied  to  them  by  the
Greeks.  Many  of  thcae  hermita  appear  in  former
times  to  have  studied  tbo  abstract  selciices  with
great  sncccss,  and  they  bav?  always  been  con-
sidered by  tbe  orthodox  Hiudns  aa  thu  wiaest  and
bnlieat  of  mankind,  Tbe  Gyniuowjihista  often
hnrned  themsetres  alive,  as  Calanus  did  in  the
presence  of  Alexander  (Arrian,  Anah,  vii,  It^;  Plut.
AUjc.  65  foil. ;  Diwl.  Sic.  ivii.  1IJ?J.

OynaecomtiB  (ywouewwrirX See  DoMt'S,p.539.

Oynaeooafimi  (yvyaiKov^ftot).  MagiMtrate«  in
mauy  Greek  Slates,  wlio  exercised  a  cenaunship
over  the  conduct  nf  women  and  to  Home  extent  of
men  alsf>,  esiwcially  tho  young.  At  Sparta  therti
were  Traifinft'-fuii,  but  not  yuvaucovtifini.  The  fnr>
reat'hiiig  Spartan  discipline  brcaght  both  m>xiia
alike  Qudcr  tho  control  of  the  authorities,  and
Hiich  A|M>c:ial  ofHcers  may  not  bavo  been  nKiuired.
Aristotle  mentions  them  as  a  well-known  institu-
tion iu  two  passages  of  the  Politica  (iv.  Vi  [15],
$  9;  vi.  5  [8],  $  13),  and  each  time  observes  that
they  were  characteristic  of  aristocracies  rather
than  of  oligarchies  or  demncracies — a  rvmjirk
which  alone  is  almost  auHlcient  to  prove  that
they  did  not  exist  at  Athena  in  bia  tiiuf.  We  tind
tbem  at  Cha«rronea,  S.vracuse,  Andauia,  and  at
Gauibreion  near  Pergamnm.

They  weru  associated  with  the  Areopagus  ta  the
maiuteuauco  of  public  decency  and  tho  enforce-
ment of  sitmptuary  laws.  They  Hi3|>erinten<]ed
even  the  mectinp*  of  friends  In  tbuir  private
bouaca  —  o.  g.  at  weddiuga,  and  on  nihcr  festive
occaHioiis.  Mciaings  of  thiit  kind  were  not  allowed
to  consist  of  more  tliiLii  thirty  penfons,  and  the
yvvaiKvvofiot  had  the  ri^Ut  of  entering  auy  house
and  Aeudiiig  away  all  the  giiesta  above  that  num-
ber. They  also  controlled  the  ecccntricitioa  of  fe-
male attire  ;  xvomcii  who  went  unsuitably  dressed
iu  public  were  liable  to  a  tine  of  IDOO  dnicbiuas,
and  these  lines  werii  reciirdcil  on  a  tablet  sus-
|Miitde<l  to  a  plane-tree  in  the  Ccramicua  (Harpocrur.
-•t.  V.  oTi  xtXitit;  HesycbiUfl,  s.  v.  nXiiravaf).  Tbe
tinmber  of  thcte  otHcers  and  the  mode  of  their
appointment  ari>  alike  unknown.

Oyndea  [TviAtjr).  A  river  of  Asayrio,  rising
in  the  country  of  tbe  Matieni  (in  the  moiintainH
of  Kurdistan)  and  Uowhig  into  tbe  Tigria,  cele-
brated through  the  story  that  Cyrus  the  Great  drev
off  its  waters  by  360  channels. See  Herod,  i.  li&.

Gypaoplaatea.  One  wbo  takes  oaiita  in  pluator
uf  Puri.t  {yifpunm). See  Cossiod.  f'ar.  Ep.  vii.S.

Oyrton  or  Ojrrtona  {Tvprutv,  Vvpravfi).  An
ancient  towu  iu  PelasgiotiB  m  Theasaly,  on  the
Ponens.

QjTthmm  {TvBiov,  VvBtlav).  An  ancient  Henport
towu  of  Laconia,  situated  near  tho  head  of  the
Lacouiau  Gulf,  BOtithwe^t  of  the  month  of  the
river  Eurotas.  In  the  Second  Persian  War,  tbo
Spartan  fleet  was  stationed  bore,  and  here  the
Athenians  nndiTTolmides  burned  tbo  Spartan  ar-
senal in  1I.C.  455  (Thuc.  i.  lUd).


7fi0


UAD£8


H,  ns  a  srmliol

Ix  (iiitKK.^M  =i}fM'^ai,  fin€pAv,  inAf  (C  I.  G.
S7RL>I  Stpas  (il).  :U>13).

Ix  Latin. — H  =  li»lict  (Iiabftna),  liie  (and  it«
i'oi-itisi,  llcrrn,  hiumo.  Iii^ru. H  H  :=hertH]e«.

H'A  :=  liercnlaiiKiiH  Atignatatis.

U-B  =  liotuD  bitinm.

H-C^hic  Rou(tituf(,  Hifipnuia  Citerior,  honoris
cnnsn,  Loooro  coiitontitB,  linrrparins  cnhnrtis,

H-F  =  bercs  fecit,  tiouestis«iiua  femina,  boaore

ftlDCttlS.

II-I  =norcn1ce  invicttii*.

lIL  =  ltaev  lex,  bir  locim.

HM=hr>c  niomiiiientuiti  (very  frequent),  ho-
DC-Mta  aiissiotie.

H-P^licrcs  posuit,  liic  pnHituH.

H-V  =  HercttlM  victor,  lioiior«  atttu.

H-B-K:=1ioniliil  boDO  fecit.

H  UQ  =  liic  bouo  quiosost.

U-D-S  =beres  tie  aiio.

HE-F  =  hercsvtu8  fecit.

H  EP^liic  ettt  positus.

HET  =  berede8  ex  testamento.

HUO=(mi)  liac  lejie  oiiorltliit.

H-L'R=(aute)  banc  It-geni  nigiilain.

H-M-V^liuti(;>atae  nieuioriae  vir.

H-N-C  —  HiiiiMi&iu  Nova  Citcrior.

II-p-C  =  l]ert!s  puDeiidiiin  curavit.

U-P-R=lioetua  poi>nli  Kontaui.

II  AIR  =  tifiDore  accepto  iuipciisam  reliquit.

II'B'M'F chores  bene  merunti  fecit.

H  K  N  S  ^  bereJem  ext^nim  uon  acrinetur.

II'M-I-A  =  liuic  mi  lilt)  men  to  Ituu  nctua.

H8-B-Q  =  bio  situs  b«nc  quieaear.

HS-0-li  =  bic  situs;  ossa  imue.

HVVS  =  Herculi  victori  vatum  solvit.

HA-8F-C  chores  a  »o  facinudum  oiiravit.

H'CECEI)  Q:^bic  couilito&  est;  ciuerea  cl
bene  quiescuut.

H-C-S-P'P  =  faoaore  contentus  sua  pecouU  pv-
allit.

U-L-D-M-A^haic  locodolue  maluR  abosto.

I[-L  S-H-N-S  =  bic  locus  aepultnrac  horedem  uon

IILT-C-S=;buDC  locum  tcsispllavit  curii  miii*.

H-M-A'H-X-P  =  1joc  uiouamertttitu  nd  beredce
noil  p«rtiiiebit,

HM-DM-A-B*M-M'C  — bnic  nHmuineuto  doliw
liialiiy  ulit-sto,  bvuu  ii)«reiiti  iiUMiinriHe  causa.

il-M'SiS'H'N'S  =  buc  muiiumeutuiii,  eive  iwpuU
citing  lieredeiu  uuii  Heqiiotiir.

H'0-T'B-QT^liic  oaua  tibi  beuc  qiiiescnut.

H-8E-fi-TT-L  =  liie  situs  est, sit  tiM  leiTa  levin.

H'S*ETFIHKC  =  bic  situs  tst.  titiiliim  fl«ri
iiiMit,  bere9  fuoinndum  curavit.

HS'H'ANL— bi>o  nojuilcrum  beredibus  aba-
lienaro  aon  licet.

H  V-O-BQ  —  hi«  volo  oosa  bene  (|uie«oant.

ll-V-S'B-L'U-D-D  =  bouore  udus  samptiu  iv-
iiiisit,  liico  dato  decreto  deciiriomiui.

Habena.  (1)(7vieu).  Mu«itl,v  In  tho  plural.  Reins
for  driving;  heuce  ^vioj^as,  n  chnrioleer  or  driver.
(i)  {pvrnyatytvt).  A  lialtt4r.ro|W  (Aminiaii.  xix.8. 7).
(3»  The  slicots  of  a  sail — i.  e.  the  ropeg  by  which
the  tower  ends  of  the  aail  are  braced  or  slacked


(Val.  Flace.  iv.  679).  (4)  The  word  in  alno  nwdis
gHuei-al  of  niiy  htrap  or  thong,  aa  tht?  »tru|i  of  a
apear  (aee  Amekti'M  I,  tbo  thouf;  uf  a  haiidal  (GpU.
xiii.  HI,  3),  uf  a  btrlmet  (Vnl.  Klarc.  vi.  'Jtio\  ibt
tbong  of  a  whip  (Ovid,  tier.  ix.  Si),  and  iu  uudi-
ciiie,  a  bandage  (!:3uet.  Jup.  dO).

Badea  ('A^iji). Accordiug  to  the  belief  ^ll^
rent  auiung  the  Greeks,  the  world  of  the  dead.<it
th»>  alHxle  of  Hadeji,  with  ita  wide  doon,  va*  in
tlie  ileptbii  of  the  earth, In  the  UrfyMcy.  ■!•  en-
tmuc«-  and  outer  court  were  on  the  weeleni  side
of  the  river  0.i'i:>aijiui,  in  the  ground  ttacrcd  to  Pl^
ac|)buu(f,  with  itn  gnivr  uf  barren  willnwe  aoiJ  \iBif-
lani. Here  wuk  Ihi;  bnmi*nf  the  Cimmeriaus,  veiled
iu  ilarknuiu  uud  clouil,  whrro  the  snn  never  sbilM
TliiH  crjurt,  and iudutil thr biwcr  world  id  pn-
eral,  ta  a meadow  of  aHphodel.  an unattnctire
wi«d  of  dreary  aspect  usually  platit«d  on  gram
The  nctiial  abode  of  the  iubieiraueau  poven  ii
Erebus  {'EfMtiot),  or  the  iuii»enotrable  daikuew
Iu  later  times  entrances  to  the  lower  world  wm
imagined  in  ntber  places  where  there  were  caviTB-
oas  bollnws  which  looked  as  if  they  led  ioto  tlw
Itowels  of  the  nartlt. Such  places  were  Hermtoo'
aiul  Iht!  pniiuoutiiry  of  Taeuanim  in  the  Pelopra-
uej>iu8,  Koraolea  i>n  ilm  Eiixiiie,  and  Comae  ia  litJf,
where  the  mythical  Cimmerii  were  also  loealind.
Tbo  lower  world  of  Homer  ia  iulenteet«d  by  gmt
rivers  —  the Styx,  Acberou ("river  of  «oe"),
Cocy tus  (**  river  of  wailing  "i,  a  branch  of  tb*  8(jt,
Phlugethoa  auil  Pjriphlegettion  I" rivers offinl.
The  laat  two  unite  and  join the  walen  of  tb
AcberoQ. Iu  the  po»i'lloaieric  legend,  tfaeMrlrfii
are  represented  as  surrounding  the  fnfenial  T^
giuuH,  and  auother  river  appL-ars  with  thi>in,  llul
of  Lrf-th4^,  or  dbliviou. In  the  waters  orLctb^tbt
soiiU of  the dead di-aiik forgeifiilncss  of  tbdr
earthly  existence. The  lower  world  once  tan-
coived  as  separated  from  the  upper  by  these  rivrn-
tbo  idea  of  a  ferryman  arose. This  waa  Clitf»
(q.  v.),  tbo  son of  Erebus  and  of  Kti,  a  glooBf.
snlleD  old  man,  who  took  the  souls  ia  his  bo*'
acroiM  Acheron  into  the  realm  of  ishadows. Tb
sonls  were brought  down  from Iht*  tipjier  wnrM
by  Hermes,  aiul  paid  the  ferrymnn  an  oboluj.  vtiich
was  put  for  thii4  purpose  into  the  moutbft  oflb
dead, Cbarou  bad  the  right  to  refuse  a  patrtf
to  souls  whose  bodies  had  not  been  duly  imftti.
(See  Fl'Nlft,  p.  ew.) In  Humer  il  l»  tlie  tftnt*
themselves  who  refuse  to  receive  any  onr  to  wlxm
funeral  honours  have  not  be^n  paid. At  ttie^
lies  IhedogCerberuii,  sonof  Tj*7>bflun  and  Ecbwb*
He  is  a  terrible  monster  with  thrw:  he»<U,  M'l
mane  and  tail  of  snake*. He  is  frifodly  to  Ibt
spirits  who  enter,  but  if  any  one  tries  to  «Ktl"
he  aeizM  him  and  holds  him  fast.

Tlie  gfaosta  of  the  dead  were  in  ancient  litw*
conceived  as  incorporeal  images  of  llii-ir  fiinnrr
selves,  without  mind  t»r  consi-ioustifM.  k  lb
Oii_v«>cy  the  seer  Tiresias  is  the  onlj  oue  wli«r  lui
ret-aiued  his  conncionsneM  and  judgmeut.  nnil  vhit
as  an  exoeptioual  gift  of  Pcrvepfaou^.  Bat  titrj
have  the  power  of  drinking  the  MttoA  of  aniiMlik
and  having  done  so  they  recover  their  conwMO*-
ness  and  power  of  speech. The  soul.  ib«t«forv.»


HADES


7£1


HADRLOi'CS


nut  oouceircd  as  entirely  aanibilnted.  The  gbosta
rrliiin  itio  outer  form  of  their  tmdy,  and  foUuM-.
Imt  iiiiithictix'ely  only,  what  wjw  tlieir  fsvaiihtc
pumiit  In  life.  Orion  in  Homer  is  still  a  bnnter.
Minns  sirs  in  judgement,  oa  when  nlivc.  FerhapN
the  pnnishmentit  intlicteil  iti  llomnr  nt)  Titytin,
Tantahis,  mid  Siisyphnw  (Ixiun.  th«  DuDaidtf-t,  Piri-
tfauUs,  and  otbcni  belong  to  o  later  atory)  tiboiild
b«  r«g»rd«4l  hi  IbiM  1iK:bl.  The  [teiiuItieH  inflivtisl
on  them  in  the  npiwr  world  inny  1m;  iix^rvly  truus-
f**iTtMl  by  Homer  to  their  giiOBtly  eii«tonCB;  for
the  idea  of  b  seiiMibte  piinifthnieiit  is  not  uonaiateDt
with  that  nf  nil  nnconseiouscoDtiDnAnce  in  buiii(|:.
It  niiifir  tic  rr^ruembered,  at  the  ttame  time,  that
Hotuer  isevenil  times  lueulions  that  tbc  Erinyes
poiiiftb  perjurer!!  after  deutb.  It  must  bo  cou-
eladed,  then,  that  the  ancient  belief  is,  in  tbU  in-
fttance,  found  side  by  side  with  th«  Inter  and  gen-
erally received  idea  that  the  dead,  even  without
drinking  blood,  preeerveil  their  C(>iiaeJoutint<tMi  and
|»ower  of  Bitewrh.  Couiiefl*;d  with  it  is  thy  uotioD
lb»t  they  bavM  tbu  power  of  inHaeni^lni;  nieu's  life
oil  eurtb  in  various  ways.  The  moHt  aDcient  be-
lief ktiowM  nothing  of  future  rewards  of  the  right-
t*oitM,(ir,  iudtH*d,of  any  coiupk-l4iM.>paration  between
the  Jn'ftt  mid  the  unjust,  ur  of  a  judgment  to  make
the  uecenMiry  awardn.  The  juilgea  of  the  dead  aw
ill  the  later  leKetjtL  Minos.  Klimlnnmntbys,  Aeacns,
nnd  Triptuleiuus.  It  whs  a  lat«r  age,  too,  which
Iraiiiiferred  t^lysium  iiuil  Turtanis  to  thu  toner
warld^ — tlysiani  at  thi>  abode  fif  tlm  b1»uw*d,  iiiid
TartnniH  nn  thnt  nf  thc"  damni^l.  In  the  earlier
belief  Ihi-w  regioun  ha*!  nothing  to  du  with  tbu
realm  *>(  HatleN.  Tha  uani«  Turtarns  (To/irapoc)
was  in  Inter  tiine*  often  apjdied  to  the  whole  of
tbo  lower  world.  The  hpirits  of  those  who  hod
lived  a  life  of  averngc  uit-rit  were  imagined  as
wandering  nn  tbu  a<^ph(>del  meadow.  See  in  Kng-
liflb  literature  the  E/th-  of  Iliiilet,  by  Lewis  MorriB,
&iid  Adi-M,  King  of  Hell,  by  buchnnnn.

In  general  icmntiC  be  said  thnt  the  ancient  ideas
of  a  fbtnre  life  wcro  always  snbjeet  to  ooiiMidernble
cbangM,  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  doctrineH
taught  in  the  uiyftteries,  and  the  repreHrntntinns
of  |H>eta,  philosophers,  Bcnlptors,  aitd  pnintere.
(See  PoLTONOTi"s.)  TIk'  h"-'"*'™!  tendency  was  to
multiply  the  terrnni  of  Hadi-s,  et-iKrially  nt  tbr
gates  and  iu  Tartarus.  (For  the  cleitiejt  of  the
lower  world,  seu  EtTiEKiDEs ;  Hades;  Perseph-
OKE-I  The  Greek  bolieftt  on  the  Kiibject  found
their  way  to  R<ium  through  tbi'  inmtrnment-nlity
of  the  poets,  e«{>ectally  Vergil;  but  tbcy  did  not
entirely  Huppiaut  tht^  national  truMiious.  See
Alger,  friticnt  Uittor^  t>f  the  Doctrine  af  a  Future
Zi/e.  with  anexhaiistiv«hib1to^r.tphy  of  tbu  subject
(10th  ed.  Boston,  1^*0) ;  Ettig.  .Ichrrunliai  (Leipzig,
IHlll);  and  the  articlfls  Larks;  Larvak;  Manka;
Mania.;  Orccs.

Hades  ('.Xfi^jft;  Attic,  "Atfl»;r  or  aHift  [oi8^p] }.
In  Greek  mythology,  the  sau  of  Crouus  and  Khea,
who  received  the  domiuion  of  the  lower  world
at  the  divifiion  of  the  universe  after  tbo  fall
of  Croons,  his  brothers,  Zens  and  Fo^eidon,  being
made  lonbt  respectively  of  the  iiky  and  sea.  With
his  queen  Feraephon^  he  held  sway  over  the  otb*
er  powers  of  tbo  infernal  regions,  atid  over  the
gboslH  of  the  dead.  The  symbol  of  his  tnvtitible
empire  was  the  helmet  timt  made  men  inviitible.
This  was  given  t«  him  by  the  Cyclopes  to  aid  him
iu  the  battle  of  the  gods  with  the  Giants,  tlrig-
iually  be vea/>,  to all uppearanoe,  conceived as


bringing  down  the  dead  himself  to  the  lower  world
in  his  chariot,  or  as  driving  them  down  with  bis
btatl';  but  in  the  later  belief  the  ofljre  of  conductor
of  souls  tK>loiigcd  to  Hermes.  Hades  is  the  enemy
of  all  life,  heartless  and  inexorable,  and  hated,  ac-
conlingly,  by  gods  and  men.  8aoritlce  and  prayer
are  of  no  avail  with  him,  atid  ho  is  therefore  only
wnrahipped  on  exceptional  occasions.  But,  like
rerseplion^,  be  wan  snmetiniM  represented  in  a
milder  light,  being  called  Pinto  (nXoirrvi',  nXoDros),
or  tbv  giver  of  wealth.  This  liecaum*  it  U  fmm
tbo  depths  of  the  earth  that,  corn  and  itfl  ntti^ndunt
blessiugii  are  produced.  Aa  old  as  Hesiod  is  thA
advice  to  the  ploughor  to  call  upon  Zens  of  th»
lower  world,  as  i%'etl  as  upon  LViineter.  He  is  mlM>>]
styleil  Polydectes  and  Polydegiuon,  a«  receiving  I
last  all  men  in  bis  realina.


'?^X-


BsdM (Psksso  Cblffi,  Rome.)

Tlie  most  celebrated  of  the  myths  referring  Uf
Hadrn  is  that  of  the  rape  of  Pernepbon**,  In  works
of  art  ho  is  represented  as  n-senitiling  his  brothers
Zens  luid  Potieidon,  but  with  gUHMiiy  features  and
hiiir  falling  over  his  brow,  the  key  of  tlio  infernal
world  in  his  hand,  and  tlifi  dog  Cerberus  at  his
side.  SumetLuicH  hii  appeoi-a  as  a  god  of  agricalt-
nre,  with  a  cornucopia,  or  a  two-pronged  pickaxe.
The  plauts  socrod  to  him  wore  tbo  cypress  and  tb«
narcissus;  black  sheep  were  offered  to  him  in  sac-
rifice. When  mortals  invoked  him,  they  struck
the  earth  with  the  hand.

By  the  Romans  Hades  was  idetitifted  partly  witb
Opcus,  partly  with  I)is.

Hadrauum  ("Aflpavov).  A  town  of  Sicily,  near
Mount  Aetna,  having  in  itd  vicinity  a  river  of  the
name  of  Hadrauas.  Icwas  founded  by  Dionyaiua
^Diod.  Sic.  xlv.  ■Hi).

Hadria. See  TIadriaticcm  Majib,

Hadrfanopblia  CASpuiKoiroXic).  TIih  lundern  Ad-
rianople.  A  tiMvti  in  Thrace,  on  the  right  bank  of
the  Hebnis,  xituated  in  an  extennive  plain,  foaud-
cH  by  the  emperor  Hadrian.  In  the  Middle  Ages
it  ranked  second  to  Constantinople  alone.

Hadrianua,  Pcours  Af.uus.  (I)  A  Roman  em-
jKror,  bom  at  Rome  A.D.  76.  He  loot  bis  father
when  ten  years  of  age,  and  bad  fur  his  gnardiana
Trajan*  who  won  his  relation,  and  CornelioB  Ta-


HADRUNU3


768


llAURLANUa


tlaiiim,  n  Romnn  kiiisht.  Ilis  futbt.'r't)  name  wn»
Acliim  Hadriauus  AfiT.  It  in  r.mji-«Ttun-'(!  lliat
tlio  fiuruonie  of  Afi^r  was  ({ivBii  tlic  liiLI«r  tHH>niiM<
bo  lind  It'on  governor  of  Afrii^»,  mid  tliat  lie  i&  tho
(taaio  lladriuuns  xrhn  (itil.  tliu  umrtyr  Leoiiliuft  tu
death  at  TriiHilis  in  tin;  rciKii  of  Vedpaaian.  Ba-
driau's  father  v-a»  Tnijiiii'H  Ih-Ht  nouHiii ;  fur  be  woa
1h«  sou  (if  Tlliiia,  tUo  rtistcr  of  Marcas  iri]>iiiB  Tra-
Jauiis,  th«  eiu{tenir  Trajaii'ii  father.  Koilrluu  he-
gna  very  earl.v  t<i  ftorvo  in  the  army,  aud  ivoa  tri>


Coin  of  Hjulrlao.

1)Dne  uf  a  legion  brfore  Domitinu'ii  death.  The
forcfn  in  Lower  Mot-aia  cIh-wh^  him  to  con^ratnlate
Trajan  upon  his  being  adoptwi  hy  Nt-rva,  and  it
was  be  that  ac<iiiainl«tl  Trujan  with  the  Hret  news
of  Ncrva's  death.  He  nigained  the  emjioror's  fa-
vonr,  which  he  bad  almost  entirely  lo«t  by  bis  ex>
tmva^nul  fxjienses  and  the  debts  which  he  had  in
coimeqnenee  incarrcd,  and  dnally  nianied  Trajan's
^ratidnirc^,  tiabiua,  chiefly  through  the  aid  of
Plotina  the  cuipresa.  His  fiiibscqtient  riac  was  rap-
id, and  ho  was  the  companion  of  Trnjnn  in  most
of  bin  L'X]»LMlitiODB.  ne  particnlnrly  dintiu^niHlicd
himself  in  the  war  against  the  Diioinus,  and  wa.s
sMccenBively  appointed  praetor,  Boveruor  of  I'au-
uonia,  and  cou^ul.  The  orations  be  composed  bir
Tmjan  increased  his  fntne  i  Spurt,  flaiir.).  Af-
ter the  siege  of  Atn^,  in  Arabia,  Trajan  left  him
id  coDimaud  of  hi«  army,  and  wh<*n  lip  found  his
death  approacUriiK,  ndoptcd  liim,  althoiiKh  the  re*
alley  of  tbitt  adoption  is  diKpnttsd  liy  sonio  authori-
ties,  who  attribute  his  tdwation  to  tlm  iutri]^ies
of  Plotiua,

On  the  death  of  Trajan  ho  aflsnnied  the  reins
of  govonuueiit  (X.D.  U"  ),  witb  the  corienrrence
of  the  Syrian  anay.  The  fSetiat-o  readily  rati-
fletl  the  act.  The  first  care  of  Hndriaa  waa  to
make  a  peace  with  the  Persians,  and  to  restore
all  the  provincea  Just  taken  from  them,  making
tha  Euphrates  the  bitundary  of  the  Romau  Empire.
He  had  then  to  turu  his  atteutioa  to  certain  re-
Tolls  and  iusnrreotions  iu  Egypt,  Libya,  and  Paleii-
tine  :  and,  after  ([iiickly  c-onrlnding  a  jK-ace  with
the  Partbians,  retunied  to  Koine,  a,i>.  118.  The
Scuate  decn^ed  him  a  triumph,  and  bouonrud  bin
with  Uw  title  of  Pat«r  Patriae ; but  ho  rofuaed


both,  and  rerjnired  that  Tr^aii'«  image  sbonld  tri-
umph. He  sought  )K>piilariiy  by  a  repeal  of  fif-
teen years  acoumnlatiou  of  arrears  of  poblic  deln,
by  a  vast  reclnctioii  of  taxation  generally  aiul  by
immense  largestK-s  to  the  [ieopli>.  He  was  )f«*
generona  to  certain  senators  aceus*d  of  a  plot
against  him,  four  of  wb»Tn,  although  of  coasolar
rank  and  iutimateo  of  Tr^jau,  be  cauaetl  to  be  pat
to  death.

A  year  after  hie  rcitum  to  Rome,  Hadiiau
niundiHd  agaiust  the  Alani,  the  Sairantians,  anil
the  Tlacians,  but  showed  a  greater  dr«ln>  to  makf<
iwacti  with  the  barbarians  than  to  extend  the
prowess  of  the  Boman  arms.  This  policy  has  been
uttributcd  to  envy  of  the  fame  of  bia  wariitii'
pri>decoatior ;  but  a  dne  oousideration  of  the  anbtr-
queut  history  of  the  Empire  will  oiuply  ju8tif>'biro
against  the  imputation  ;  fur  it  had  reached  an  ex-
tent which  rendered  all  iucruatM*  to  ite  liuiit9  a
source  of  weakuewi  nithor  than  of  strengUi.  Ha-
drian waa  an  .-letive  and  ineesaant  traveller,  visitiug,
every  province  in  the  Empire,  not  siniply  to  lo-
dttlgQ  bin  oiiriottity,  but  to  iuHiKxit  the  attuiuiittta-.
tioit  of  govern  invu  I,  reprew  abnaea,  erect  and  ra-
piitr  public  cdilictiii,  and  cxeroiso  all  the  rigilaao*
of  prnMJiial  Hxuniinntion.  (See  Dilrr,  Vk  Itritn  Jet
A*uMii-it  UadrioH  [Vienna,  1*^1]).  In  *J).  lit',  be
paasf-d  over  from  Gaul  to  Britain,  where  be  caned
a  wall  to  be  built  from  the  mouth  of  the  Tyne  \a
Solnay  Frith,  in  <irtler  to  secure  the  ifnman  prur,
iiiccs  from  the  incuntioim  of  tlie  Caledonians.

Like  Trn.ian,  lie  Hveil  familiarly  witb  bin  frimdi,
but  was  mncb  more  Buspii-iouH,  and  would  noi  rt-
pose  in  Ihrm  tlir  Kftnie  conlidenre.  When  at  Uim
he  rultivatiid  all  kinds  uf  literature,  cunirnMlf
witb  learned  mm,  and  giving  and  receiving  iitf>«-
uiation  in  tlieir  aooiety.  Hadrian  had  onrr  ti;;ua
to  visit  the  East  to  repress  the  Partbians,  wIm)I>wi1
little  regard  to  treatiuti.  On  hia  return  bt>  [>at*nl
the  winter  at  Athens,  and  was  luitiated  in  tb«Elva-
siniai)  )Iyslerie.s.  He  published  no  t>diet  aguni*t  tb
Christians,  yet  they  neveithele*s  anfferetl  cuniiila-
able  persecution,  nulil.  u|h)u  the  reuon»tr»K«  of
(juiulratiis,  bishop  of  Athene  and  Aristtdett.  aii
incut  Christian,  be  ordered  the  ponwtnliin
ceiUM*:  but  no  credit  is  due  to  the  nnantlinriiedi
sertion  of  Lampridins  that  be  thongbl  of  bni
a  temple  tit  the  Suvinur,  His  treatment  uf
Jews,  on  the  other  baud,  wa-*  extremely  l«W«i
though  ample  provocation  bad  been  giv»  ^}
that  turbulent  |R'opIe,  for  they  bwl  raised  diMu^
anoea  towards  the  end  of  Trajan's  reign,  fbirli
were  not  completely  f|iielled  until  the  mx'od'I  n*'
of  Hadrian.  Bat  now  a  more  fonuidab)*'  Nuar*
rection  broke  out  under  Uarcocbcbas  |":^>tiofi
Star"),  who.  though  a  rob)M>r  by  profeotiw.  hi''
given  himself  out  as  the  Messiah.  It  lequii^'
war  of  tliree  years  to  reduce  the  revolt«l  J***!*
complete  Bubjectiou,  and  after  this  was  aeoou-


ValUm^


* ' « ' '■*


Map  of  HwlniD'i  Wall,  irlil)  ttw  cbW  SuiIodk (AA«r  Cnllln^irood  Bmc*,)


UAUIUANL'S


763


HADKIANL'S


plUlii>d,  tlicro  TTU  Bcareely  auy  iudignity  that  wiu
iiol  iudictud  oa  tlie  cou<]uered  nation.  Jenisaletn
wftft  rebuilt  tiniler  tliu  new  title  of  Aelia  Capitoli-
no,  uniting  the  fotuilj  name  of  the  viuiwrtM:  with


(Briliatk  UaMUOL)


the  Boman  stiruamo  of  Jtipiter;  nuti  In  the  exMD-
itou  of  bis  plan  Ilatlriaii  sttidioiuly  profaned  all
(be  plM«a  wbicb  bad  been  most  revered  by  botb
Jfltrs  and  CbriatiaiiB,  wbom  he  soems  to  have
oonfonudwl  toj^etlier.  He.  built  a  temple  in  bou-
our  of  Iiipiter  Cai>itolinnH  ii[>o(i  the  inoiiiiUiiii
wbere  bad  stood  that  of  the  truo  God  ;  plaoeil
a  marble  bog  ii[M>n  thnt  gzte  of  the  oity  which
tooketl  tonuttlH  Betbicbcm;  erected  iu  tli«  place
where  Jenntt  va»  crncittcd  a  fitatuo  of  Vciiiifi;
uid  iu  that  where  be  rose  fh>iu  the
dead,  au  iniage  of  Inpiter.  Iu  the
(rot  to  uf  Bethlehem,  where  the
kvionr  wafl  tmrn,  be  rHtabliBbed
worship  of  Adonis.  Tin;  .Tewb
wore  also  forbidduu  the  very  itigbt
of  Jernudem,  which  thoy  were  not
permitted  k>  enter  save  on  outi  day
in  the  year — the  aauirorsory  of  tlir.'
destruction  of  the  city.  After  tbi>
DOQcln«ion  of  the  Jewish  War  Ha-
driiui  retnmed  to  Italj*,  where  a  lin-
^riiiK  illness  pnt  a  »top  to  bli^
niMwttlfMl  mode  of  lif^,  artd  event-
aally  terminated  bin  existence.
Having  no  children  of  bin  own.  Ha-
rtri»n  llrst  adopted  for  bis  huccohmoi
L.  Colouins  Oonimndn»,  more  f^tnier-
nlly  known  by  the  name  of  Vcrun,
to  which  lufit  hfi  pm1ixi-d  that  of
Aelius  after  bin  nduptinn  by  the
smpemr.  Voruit,  however,  who  vaa
rennirbnbli'  for  notliing  but  bis  ex-
Deesive etfeniiuaey  and debaoclieil


mode  of  life,  died  soon  after,  and  Uadriau  made
a  very  oxt^llout  scloction  in  the  p«rM>D  of  An-
toiiinn*.  (8»e  AxTONixrs  Pirs.)  Uadriau  died
nut  lung  after  at  Ilaiac,  a.i>.  13tj,  in  the  sixty-
third  year  of  bid  ugu  utid  the  twenty-second  of
bis  reign.  Ilia  disorder  was  the  dropey,  &uiu
which  diHeose  bJB  suflerlugB  were  ao  great  w  ap-
parently to  affeot  his  rtinson.

Hadrian  waa,  in  general,  a  juit  and  able  ruler,
yet  there  were  timet)  wbuu  fai>  iiliowed  liiinHelf
revengeful,  suBpiciouH,  uud  cruel.  His  treatment
of  bin  wift-  8»biua  doea  nii  honour  U*  bis  uiemury,
bis  ]KUiiiiiin  fur  Antinoiia  (n.  v.)  tuiuts  it ;  wiiilc  his
i'xei'iinive  superstition,  to  which  even  that  favourite
fell  B  victliu,  entitles  him  to  a  largo  measure  of
1'oatp.Tnpt.  He  was,  iu  fact,  a  poonliar  chnracter,
full  of  poriKtoies— witty,  pedantic,  droll,  dull,  iui-
pulsive,  sociable,  Bnspioioos,  morbidly  self-cou-
scione,  and  persevering  in  nothing.  The  greater
portion  of  the  RoDiautiap|>ear  to  have  formod  a  just
estimate  of  his  character  long  before  his  death,
and  it  was  with  dillicully  thai  Antoninus  i:ould
iibUitu  fnim  the  Senate  the  usual  cunpliuieut  of
liQving  him  ranked  among  the  gods.  Their  droad
of  the  soldiery,  by  whom  Hadnun  was  greatly  be-
loved, apitears  tn  have  conquered  their  reliictjinee.

Hiidrian  did  much  towards  restoring  and  im-
proving the  uity  of  Ri»me.  He  also  erected  a
splendid  temple  to  Tmjau,  a  tcntple  to  Venu.H  und
Romn,  and  llie  great  Mansoleinn  in  the  district
Iwyiitid  the  Tilter,  now  known  as  the  Castle  of  8t.
Angrlo.  tn  this,  be  and  a  ninuber  of  bis  succes-
Hont  wen<  buried.  For  an  illuNtiaclou  of  It  see  tbu
artinle  Makholeuh.

Hndrlau  wrote  several  works.  Ho  was  foud  of
entering  the  lists  agaiuet  the  poets,  philosophers,
aud  uratora  of  the  day,  and  Pbutius  mentions  sev-
eral doolamatiuus  of  the  emperor's,  wTitien  for
sQch  ooea^ous,  as  stilt  existing  in  his  time,  aud
not  devoid  of  eleganoe.  Uadriau  composed  a  his-
tory of  his  own  times,  which  be  pnblisbed  nnder
the  imrne  uf  bis  freediiiaii  Phlegon  ;  and  Doritbeus
the  grftmmnrlau  made  at  a  sul}fu>i]uent  jteriml  a
colIectioD  of  his  decisions  and  resorlpta.  All  that
we  have  of  bis  productions  at  the  preaent  day  are
Bome  speeches,  decrees,  and  (Greek)  epigrams,  and
nu  epigramnmtic  address  to  Ids  soul,  written  a


[lADRUTICUM  MAHF.


76t


HALICAltNASSlTS


ahnrt  (itue  before  bis  ilt!atl],aiui  tviuarkable  fur  it»
beauly.  It  siigj^sttnl  to  Pc>ih!  bin  "Vital  spark  uf
beATPtily  t1atne,"a.nil  rnim  aa  follown:

"AnlRiDlk,  v-kful*,  blADilula,

Quit*  nunc  Abi1>la  lu  loco.

K«c.  mirtea.  d»bi«JocM?"

(9pftrt.  Batlr.  ^y.)  See  GrrgoroviDB,  Qt$tiHchte  dee
MMmt*  l/ailrianuv  (l^-^l).

(9l  A  philoHitpber  nt'  Tyrv,  \vl)i>  HtiiiliiMl  iiiiiler
Uonulev,  ami  binglit  rhetoric  ^iTlur  liiiu  at  Ath-
ens. He  was  alno  aecretary  to  thu  eiuperor  Com-
modilH  {ayTtyiMrf>fit  ruv  iwtaroXaiv ).  Ho  illvil  at
Rome  aft-cr  baviujj  attuluL-tl  tbe  ngc  of  t-ighty
years.  Tiifru  uru  uuly  frugiuciitit  romaiutug  uf  the
works  uf  ibis  writer.

HadilatXcum  Mara. The  Adriatic  Sea  (o  'Ai-
pias).  properly  called  by  tbtt  Roiuaus  M&kk  Slpe-
RCM  or  Uppt^r  Sea,  as  oppOMd  to  the  Mare  Iiifeniiii
orTyrrbfuiao  Seu. The  Rumaii«  alw>,  Iti  imitation
of  the  Qrecks,  used  the  fuiuitjiue  furm  Uadhia  ov
Adiua. The  Adriatic  oeparatcd  Italy  from  Illy-
ricuui,  Dalmatia,  aud  Epirue,  aud  ia  couoectud  at
its  soutbvrn  extroiuity  with  the  Ionian  Sea. It
wan  first  explored  by  the  I'hocavaiis  of  the  Greeks  j
(lltTod.  i.  llx]>. The  ancient  nrriters  frequently  '
Apeak  of  It  as  dreaded  by  sailonj  for  ite  buddeii !
•tomu  (  Hor.  Carm.  i.  3,  15; iii.  9,  S^,  etc, ). The  ;
natue  is  derived  from  the  Etniiican  city  Hatha,  at '
thu  tnoiitb  of  the  Piidiis  (Po).

HadrnmStam  or  Aflnunetam  <  'Altpovfirpw).
A  Uuuriabiug  city  founded  by  tbo  Phfrnicinns  in
North  Africa,  and  tbe  cupitut  of  Bycazvcia  tiiidcr
the  Uomaus.

Haemon  (AifKuf).  (1)  Tbe  eon  of  Pctaa^s  and
Cither  uf  Thossalos,  from  whuin  tbe  ituuieut  uaiiio
of  Tbesaaly,  Haemonia  nr  Aeinunia,  was  belicvud
to  be  derived,  Tbe  Roman  piwts  frrqiientily  two
the  wljective  HaeionniriN  nn  eiitiivaltMit  t«  Thc«»a-
lions.  (tJ)  Son  of  GrriMi  of  Thetios,  and  in  bivc
with  Atitigou^.  H<*  kilhid  bini-self  on  heariug  that
sbe  bad  been  coDdomued  by  bis  fattier  to  ix  en-
tombed aliTo.

Haemonia  (Ai^ovia). See  Hakmon.

Haemus  (A'^ofV  Tbe  niiHlen>  Halkaun.  A  lofty
ran^e  of  niouiituiuiK  Aeparatiug  Thrai-e  aud  Moesia.
The  pasH  over  thent  inost  nitcd  iu  anti^tuiry  was
in  tbo  western  jiart  uf  tbo  range,  called  Hiicci  or
Succoram  Augusti.ie,  hIao  Porta  Tntimii  (Siilu  Der-
bend),  between  Philippop«li«  anil  Srrdica.  Tbu  fal>-
nlons  origin  of  tUu  range  in  tbat  HoeuiitH  and  his
wife  Rbwlopi^  were  cboageil  into  moituTaias  for
daring  to  coll  tbomsolvea  Zeus  and  iler6  (Ovid,
itrt.  vi.  87).

Haeree. See  Hekes.

BagnuB  ['Aypois).  A  deiuu  uf  Attica,  west
of  Pacunia,  aud  beloogiug  to  tbe  tribe  Aconiaa-
tis.

Hair. See  Coma.

HairdresaerB. See  Tonsor.

Hairplna. See  Acus.

Halae  (AXai). (1)  Halab  AkaprenIdes  ('A/ni-

t^viftts).  A  deme  of  Attica  behinging  to  Ibe  tribe
egelL  It  served  as  tbu  barlmtir  of  Bruuroii  aud
poMCWScd  a  temple  of  Arleuiis.  (2)  Hai^e  Akxo-
MU>E8  iAl$vylSftU A  dume  of  Attica  buluuging  to


tbe  tribe  OMropis. It  was  sitnated  on  tbe  we»(-
urn  euast. (Slf  A  town  on  the  Opuutiau  Galf.

HalcyGud  or  AIcy5ae  ('.^Akvoi^).  <1)  A  Pl«i«d,
daughter  of  Atlas  and  Pleioin?,  and  beloved  by  Fo-
seiilou.  {2i  Pangbter  of  Aeolus  aud  Enan-le  nr
Aegiale',  and  wife  of  Ceyx.  Tbey  lived  wi  happily
tbni  tbey  were  presuuiptuoos  euongb  to  cull  each
otbi^r  Zeus  and  Ucr^,  for  which  Zens  tuetaumt-
pbosed  them  into  birds.  Others  rvlnte  thai  Ceyi
perished  in  a  sbipw^^ek;  that  Alcyone,  fur  grief,
lhre%v  herself  into  the  sen;  nnd  that  (be  £oil»,  unl
of  ruuipassiou,  changed  the  two  lut'O  birds.  It  km
fabled  that  dnring  the  seven  days  Itefore,  and  m
many  after,  the  shortest'  day  uf  tbe  year,  while  llw
female  birtl  was  breeding,  there  always  |ii«Tai)ed
cnlniH  ul  nea  —  hence  our  uxpreission  "haloron
days."  For  the  uhu  of  tliiH  myth  iu  Euglitih  liter
aturo,  nca  F.  Ttinnyaon's  haU-i/unc;  £.  W.  tinne,
Alcyont  {a  Kounet  iu  dialogue);  uud  Mrs.  Prwtuo^
Atcifone.

Hales  ('Mi)«).  (11  A  river  of  Ionia,  near  CoJo-
plion,  famous  for  the  colduesa  of  its  water.  13}  A
I'lver  iu  the  islaud  of  Cos.

Haleas  or  Alaeaa  ("AXm^n).  A  lovin  on  lt»
northern  coast  of  Sicily,  ou  tbe  river  Huleiiti.
founded  by  tbe  Greek  uivrcuDaries  of  Archoiiidrs
a  oliief  uf  tbe  Siouli,  and  originally  called  AJICBO-

NllUON,

Haleaua.  A  chief  of  the  Aumncans  and  Omua.
the  son  of  a  soothsayer,  and  an  ally  of  Ttirnn".
slain  by  Evaodcr.  He  came  to  Italy  from  Arp*
iu  Greece,  whence  be  in  called  Aga^lero»ouio^
Atrides,  or  Argolious.  He  is  said  to  hare  fMintM
Falerii  (Serv.  lut.  Verg.  Aett.  vii,  TS3),

Half-unciala See  Palarckirapht.

Halla  ttWuil The  SiMitlan  Asseiubly.

Halia. .See  Hkliua,  p.  7dO.

Bbliacmon  ( 'AAuix^MK).  Tbe  modrm  Vistrtu.
An  important  river  in  MaeeiluDin,  risitig  Id  ihf
Tyniphiu-un  nminitnioH,  forming  the  bonmUiy  i*-
tweuu  Kurdaea  ami  I'leria,  and  fulling  inlii  tlK
Thermaio  Gulf.  Csesar  iucorrwtly  makes  it  tlw-
boundary  between  Macedonia  aud  Tfaeesaly.

Haliartua  ('AXlapros).  An  ancient  tnwn  in
Uoeoiiii,  south  of  tbe  lake  Copals,  deslroyerf  '■?
Xeixes  in  bis  invasion  of  Greece  (  B.C.  *:^ ), bul
rtftcm'iinls  rebuilt. Under  its  walls  LywuuUxM

his  life  layfo.

Haliaa  ('AXiac).  A  district  on  tbe  euMt  of  Aif**
lis  lietweeu  Asin6  and  Hermiou*?,  so  called  beeiiw
tlshiug  was  tbe  chief  ocrnpatiun  of  its  inhsbttal'li'
Their  town  was  called  H.iliae  or  Halies.

HalicamaasuB  <'.AAiKa/)Ki(ri7or ).  Tbe  Modini
BuUrnni.  A  celebrated  city  of  Asia  Miunt,  »!*•*
iu  the  Bonlbwestuiu  part  of  Caria,  ojipiwitc  t"tl»
island  of  Cos.  It  was  founded  by  iKirisne  ftwi
Trecreu.  'Witb  tbo  rest  of  the  «)n?t  <>(  A*i»  Mi-
nor it  fel]  under  the  domiuiou  of  tbe  Perwar«iSt
au  early  period  of  whose  rale  Lygdaniis  made  !"■'*
self  tyrant  of  tbe  city,  and  founded  a  dyuvty
which  lnste<l  for  some  generations.  HU  tlanjbtrr
Artemisia  assisted  Xi-rxes  in  bisex)>editlouajp^D**
Greece.  Halicarnaasna  was  celebrate<l  f<ir  th»
Mausoleum,  a  magnificent  edifice  whirb  Arl^mt*'*
U.  built  a»  a  tomb  for  her  hnsband  Maiisolw  (■.C.
3521,  and  which  was  ailonicd  with  th»?  work*"
Ibu  most  eminent  Greek  Mtilptor*  i>f  tbe  tff'
(See  AKcurrecTUiu.) FngiDenta  of  ihese  will'*


UAUCVAE


:«6


HAMILCAU


»,  whicb  wt'rtt  tlincnvered  iMiilt  into  the  wallH

'  the  citwlel  iif  Badrum,  are  tinw  in  thu  Bhtittb
Museum.  llalioarDBSMta  waa  the  binhplaoo  of
tho  hUtoriaiis  HerodutUB  and  Dion^vsiuii.  See  Kew*
toil,  Ducovfrica  at  HaUcam<tmii$  (leWtWia).

HalicJ^e  ( 'AAixi'in ).  A  town  in  the  northweat
of  Sictty,  betweifii  Etitellu  aud  Litybucuin,  long  id
the  pos!fo»si(m  of  the  Carth»j(ininii».

Hallmua  ( 'AAi^C'c ).  A  deiue  uf  Attica,  a  little
aotiiU  of  Atheos,  aud  belongiDg  to  the  tribe  Leontis.

Balipfidon  ( ' AAifredof ).  A  platu  near  the  Pirae-
ns  in  Attit-n,

Halln-hothlus  ( 'XkiftpnBios ).  The  son  of  Posei-
don and  Kiiryt^,  who  attRinptrd  tn  violate  Alc:]>p<f,
daughter  of  Area  and  A^ruiiloR,  hut  wna  slain  by
Ari'f.  Ares  was  hmiight  to  trial  by  }'osetdon  for
Ihit  manler,  uti  th>>  hill  at  Athetut,  which  wan
hrui.'<>  cidlc<l  An^opaguK,  ur  Hill  nf  Arcs.

HallQaa  ('AXiobcra).  Now  Korari ;  an  island  iu
the  Argulic  Gulf.

Halizonea  ('.\A(Cuv«r).  A  people  of  Bithynin,
■wilh  a  capital  oily  Alyb6  (II.  ii.tf5ti).

Halm,  Karl.  A  di-stinfcntnlied  classical  scholar,
bom  at  Munich  in  11^09.  Hk  whn  educated  at  thp
1'iiiverKity  uf  &[iiiiicti,aiid  fnini  IKJJ)  to  1^^-19  tnitfrlit
iu  Si>rii*r  aud  Hiidainar.  In  l^4*J  ho  wiw  tiuidf  Rec-
tor uflhc  MaxiiuiliaiiH  tiyuiiiiuiiiiii  ui  Munich,  atid
tu  l9iiG  Professor  of  CIa»t»ii;al  Philnlogy  iu  thu  I'ni-
Tersitj'  of  Mnuich  and  Director  of  the  Kfiyal  Li-
brary. He  died  at  Miiiiirh,  October  KUh,  HjMa.
His  principal  works  are  rriticnl  edittans  of  Cicero
(1B4.V56),  Qniiitili.in  (I'^fl-^-dy),  Cnmeliiis  NVpos
(1871);  Cicfim's  OmliiiriR.  with  aconam-iilary  (l(^-lo-
1848),  aud  wlrctcd  onitiou»  (18.'i4-«ifi):  Ihii  fables
of  Aesop  in  the  Tcnbner  wiriu*  ("IriSii) ;  FInriii»(l854) ;
And  Tacttns  |2<1  nd.  1(^!1).  Anuiujj;  his  shorter  trea-
tiw^M  are  tho  TATlionr»  Stoltennm  I IFMI— 4'2);  a  rata-
logno  of  the  Fathiint  of  the  Lntiu  t'hnrch  <18fi5);
and  a  most  Taluable  catalogue  of  the  Library  at
Mnuich  (1««-S1).

Hftima  (uXfiri), See  Pextathlox-

Halmydeasua. See  SALAivuKssfS.

Halmj^ria  {'\Xnvpit,  sc.  Xinijvi.  A  bay  nf  Moesta
f'U'nifd  by  the  sontheni  niontli  nf  the  Dauiibe.
l'jM>n  it  waA  Rituatetl  a  town  of  the  same  name.

HaloimSaas  ('.\X0vc7a-tir),  and  Halonfiatuf'AXo-
Kijtfiisf.  An  island  of  the  Ai'na*-an  Sea,  off  the
eonst  of  Thessaly.  aud  east  of  .Sciathos  aud  Pepa-
rethns,  with  a  town  nf  the  ttanie  nnino  upon  it.
The  po*i(«e«sinn  of  this  island  occiisioiieil  k^****
di»pnt«ti  between  Philip  and  the  Athenians:
there  is  a  speech  on  this  subjoct  anionjj  the  ex-
tant orattoDH  of  DcmostiieueB,  bat  probably  written
by  He^esippue.  8eo
Piuuprub.

Haloa7dn6 (  A\v

av^ifqi.  "Sea-lioni."
An  I'pilhet  applied  to
Thetis  Rud  to  Apliro-

4i\l6.

Balterea  iAX-njf^ts).
Heavy  weij-hta  of
£totie  or  lead,  like  our
dniub- bells,  ititendeil
to  iucrease  th<t  mus-
cular esertion  of  gym-
nutie  exerciHcs,  being
lield iu each liand juiu«t«  mui  lutcrM. (tuut.)


while  leaping,  niTiniMg, dancing,  etc.  (Mart.  vii.B7;
.\iv.41i).

Haltmtium. Bee  ALtncnuM.

Balua. See  Ai.us.

Hal5f^ous  ('AXvKor).  A  rtror  in  the  aontb  of
Sicily,  flowing  into  the  sea  near  tleraelea  Minoo.

Halya  ('AAi^r).  The  uii>dL>ni  Kizil-Imialc,  i.  e.
"Ked  Kiverj"  the  (treatust  river  of  Asia  Minor,
rising  iu  the  Anti-Tanru4  range  of  uiouutaiiis,  ou
the  borders  of  Armeuia  Miuor  and  Pouttis,  and
after  tlowing  through  Cappadocia  aud  Oalatla,
and  diriding  Paphlagoniu  from  Pontiis,  falling
into  the  Euxine  Seabelwi-en  SiiK>p6  aud  Aniisna.
In  early  tiim-s  it  divided  the  Itido-Eiiropean  rncea
which  pmipled  the  wuateru  part  of  A>ii.i  Minor
from  the  Semitic  (Syn»-Arabian)  ract-M  of  tin*  rest
of  southwest  Asia;  aud  it  separated  the  Lydiaa
Empire  from  the  Medu-Persian  (Hero*l.  i.6).

HamadryAdea  ( Aftaipvnlitt). St^o  Nvmphae.

Hamaxa  lo/ui^n). See  CvKRVfi.

Hamajdttia  ('A/^(tror).  A  small  town  on  the
coast  of  the  Troad. Seo  SMtXTiTF.rs.

Humucobli  {' .\na$i>&iof).  A  people  in  EnmpesD
Sarmatia,  iu  the  m'ighlioiirhoud  nf  the  Pains  Mne-
otls,  were  a  nonmd  men,  an  their  name,  "dwellers
in  chariots,"  signifies.

Hamilcar  ('A^iXxar).  (1)  A  Cartbagiuian  gen-
erul,  son  of  Mngo,  or,  according  to  others,  of  Han-
no,  conquered  by  Getoii,  In  Sicily,  the  same  day
that  Xerxes  was  defeated  at  Salamls.  Herodotus
(vii,  165)  states  that  he  was  never  seen  either  liv-
ing ordejul  after  the  battle  in  which  bis  amiy  waa
defeated.  Acciiidiug  to  Polyaenus,  however  (i.  27,
*2),  Qelun  desti-oyeil  hiui  by  a  stratagem  while  sac-
riliciiig.  |2)  Bnniauied  HliiiDANL'^paCiirthaginiaD
gi-iieral  of  considenible  talent.  Perceiving  his  fcl-
liiw-citizt'us  to  bo  greatly  disqnteted  at  tlie  jintjecta
of  Alexander  of  Macedon  (B.C.  332),  ho  b«tnok  liiui-
self  to  that  prince,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  pene-
trate his  ilesigns,  aud  give  his  couutryniun  time-
ly notice  of  theni.  After  the  death  of  Alexander
lie  retuniod  to  Carthage,  where  he  was  put  to
death,  ou  false  accusations  of  I  reason,  as  the  rcc*
uuipeuse  of  his  devotion  lu  his  cunutry  (Jnst.
xxi.  &).  (3)  A  Carthaginvau  general,  in  the  tima
of  Agathi>cles,  tyrant  of  Sicily.  He  eame  tu  Iho
succour  of  Syracuse  when  besieged  by  that  iisnrjKr.
Being  gniu<?il  over,  however,  by  I  lie  gold  of  Agalh-
ocles,  he  prevailed  on  the  Syraciisang  to  make
l>eace,  and  favoured  by  his  inaction  the  schemoK
of  the  tyrant.  The  Carthaginian  Senate  cou-
ilemned  him  to  lose  his  head,  hut  he  died  at  Syra-
cuse. D.C.  311,  before  the  saulenoe  could  be  mado
pabliu  I  Just.  xxii. '.2).  (4)  The  sou  of  Giscon ;  a
Carthaginian  general,  sent  into  Sicily  about  n.c.
311,  to  oppose  the  progress  of  Agathocles.  On  bis
arrival  he  gained  a  victory,  which  opened  to  hint
the  gates  of  several  large  cities.  In  attemiiliug  to
make  himself  master  of  Syracnae,  dnriug  the  ab-
setioc  of  Apithocks  in  Africa,  he  was  taken  pris-
oner and  put  to  death,  d.c.  309.  ( 5  )  Surnamed
Harca,  the  leader  of  the  popular  party  at  Car-
thage, appointed  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  the
First  Punic  W.ir  (U.c.  247)  to  the  ooniinaud  of  tho
Carthaginian  nmues.  Ni>  particulars  havp  been  pre-
st-rvcd  respecting  his  early  life  or  the  time  of  his
birth;  but  it  is  learned  from  Nepos  {Hauiit.  I)  Ihut
he  was  veiT-yooug  when  he  obtained  tho  command.
He  ravaged  with  his  fleet  the  coast  of  the  Urn tt  ii  uud


nAMMEU


7«A


HANNIBAL


Ibo  Epiwpliyrian  Lorriana,  and  oftprflrards  seized
upon  a  >»troii(j  fortress  in  Sicily,  which  was  aitii-
alod  iK'twwn  Eryx  and  Pauorniim.  In  this  place
be  CDiilinnnl  fur  H<>nn;  years,  with  very  little  BUp-
port  fhitn  iho  Cartha^niai)  govemiuent;  and,  al-
though the  Ruuians  worv  inoHttvnt  of  aliiiDst  the
whulo  of  the  ittlatid,  they  weio  luiable  to  dihlotlgo
hiiD.  Ho  freqiieutly  ravaged  the  southerD  fcosts
of  Italy  as  far  an  Ciiiuac.  and  defeated  the  Roman
troops  Id  Sicily.  On  one  uccaalon  be  t»ok  Kryx,
which  he  held  titl  the  couehiaion  of  the  war.  The
Botnan»  at  leuj^lb  fitted  out  a  tleot  to  cut  off  all
couinninicatioii  between  Haniib;ar  and  CarlhRge ;
thft  Cnrthagitiinn  tleet  sent  to  hi*  aasistAUce  was
defeated  by  the  Rotiinn  cousnl  Lntatins  Cntulus
(B.C.  241),  and  tlie  Carthaginians  were  ohligeil  to
fine  ffir  peace.  This  was  granted  by  the  Romans;
and  Hiiuiilcar  led  hU  trui>j>H  from  Eryx  to  Lily-
baeiiiu,  whence  they  were  conveyed  to  ADica.  Bnt
a  Dew  danger  awaitud  Cartlin^^.  The  Carthagin-
ian treanun,'  was  exhansted  ;  and  it  waa  proposed
to  the  tnvops  that  they  shunM  relln(|niHh  n  part
of  the  pay  which  waj*  dne  to  tliem.  The  Hoidii-n*
rejecteii  the  j)mpowil,  appointed  two  of  their  ninn-
l»er,  Spendinfl  and  Matho,  commanders,  and  pro-
ceode<l  to  enforce  tliL'ir  demands.  B«in<;  joined  by
many  of  the  native  trihcs  of  Africa,  they  dt^feated
Hanno,  the  Carthagininii  general  sent  against
thent,  and  bronght  Carthage  to  the  brinfa  of  rnin.
In  tbc<w  doHpcrate  circnmstances  llamilcnr  was
appointed  to  the  cnmnmnd,  and  at  length  succoed-
ed  in  istihdning  them  after  the  war  had  lasted  three
year4  anil  fonr  months.  After  the  end  of  this  war
Haniilear  watt  sent  into  Spain  (B.C.  S3^).  Ho  ro-
matued  in  Si>ain  nearly  nine  years,  dnring  which
time  In:  extended  the  dominion  of  Cnrtbagc  over
the  iiunthcrn  and  eastern  i>nrts  of  that  ciinutry.  He
fell  in  a  battle  against  the  uatii'cM  |it.c. '2^29),  leav-
ing three  sous,  Hasdrubal,  Mago,  and  Hniiuibal.

The  abilitios  of  Hamitcar  were  of  the  highest  or-
der ;  and  be  directed  all  the  energies  of  his  mind  to
diminish  the  power  of  Rome.  Pulybiua  states  his
belief  (Uk.  iil.)  that  hia  aduiinistratiun  would  soon
have  produced  another  war  with  tbe  Romans,  if
he  had  not  been  prcvente<l  by  the  disorders  in
which  his  country  waM  iuvulved  through  the  war
of  the  mercenaries.  Hainilcur  watt  snccee^led  in
bis  comtnHinl  in  Spain  by  his  son-in-Iuw  Hasdru-
bal, who  niiist  not  be  confounded  with  Hasilrnbal,
the  brother  of  Hannibal.  Soo  Polyb.  i.,  ii.;  Corn.
Mep.  UamiJ.  3,  and  the  strikiug  picture  given  iu
Flaubert's  novel,  SaJummbS.  (G)  A  Carthaginian
general,  sou  of  Bomilcar,  conquered  by  the  Scipios
(B.C.  'iU>)  when  bcsief^ing  Ilitingis,  iu  llispanla  Bae-
tica,  along  with  Haadrubnl  ami  Mago.  He  is  sup-
posed by  some  to  be  the  uanie  with  the  Uamilcar
who,  fifteen  yeant  nftf-r,  »t  the  hen4l  of  a  body  of
Gauls,  took  and  sacked  Placentia,  and  was  di^-
feaUMi  and  slain  beforo  Cremona.  Others  affirm
that  ho  was  takou  prisoner  three  yennt  later  in  a
battle  fought  near  the  Miucius,  and  sorvrd  to
grace  the  victory  of  the  cou'iuoror  (Livy,  xxiii.  49;
xxii.  10;  xxxii.*23;  Pliny. //.  X  iii.  I).

Hammer. See  Malleus.

Hamper. Svv.  Curbis.

Homus  {ityKurrpovi.  A  flsh-houk,  made  by  the
ancicnta  iu  shapes  precisely  like  our  own.

Hand,  FEiici^rAXD  GorruEir.  A  German  clas-
aical  «ebolnr  bom  at  Plaueu  in  Saxony,  17f^.  He
was  Professor  of  Classical  Philology  at  the  Unirer-


sity  of  Weimar  (iei0-17>,  and  in  101?  was  Inns-
ferred  to  the  UDi%er8ity  of  Jena  an  Profeaww  ttt
Greek  Literature.  In  the  same  year  he  was  made
Anlic  Counsellor,  and  Con-rrctor  of  the  philological
seminary.  He  dietl  at  Jena  in  IHal.  He  is  hcAt
remembereil  by  his  treatise,  iu  foar  vols.,  De  Ptr-
ticutis  J^tini*  Commentarii  (Leipzig,  133^-45).

Hanging  Oardena. See  HORTtrs.

Hannibal  {'Aypl&as,  equivalent  in  Pnnte  to  jrnt-
tla  lSaaU«;  cl  the  Biblical  UannUh. (ll  The  Hm
of  Cisco  who  iu  B.c.  400  aidetl  the  Segestana  aeatnkt
the  Seliiinntines. He  took  Selinns and  Hinivra,
bnt  died  in  406  while  1>esieging  Agrigentnni. (.3)
Son  of  Cisco,  the  commander  of  Lilybaeum  ai  the
close  of  the  First  Punic  War. He  was  bestcfed
iu  Agrigentum  by  the Romans  iu B.C-  263,
broke  through  the  lines  and  escapeiL He  nt'
the  coast  of  Italy,  waa  defeated  by  Dnilins
and  failed  in  the  defence  of  Sardinia  (^!5!)).
soon  after tilalu by  bis  mutinous soldiers.
Son  of  Hamilcar  Barca  (see  IIamiltak),  and
in  B.C.  '.247. At  the  age  of  nine  he  went  l»
with  his  father,  who,  previous  to  bis  de;
took  his  son  to  the  altnr.  and,  placing  his
on  the  sacritice,  mode  him  swear  that  he  frouM
never  l>c  u  friend to  the  Romans. It  dcM4  wA
appear  how  long  llanulbal remoiaed  in  Spain,
but  ho  was  at  a  very  early  age  asaoclotcd  "lllk
Hasdrubal,  who  sncceeded  bin  father  la  the  ra»-
mand  of  the  Carthnginian  army  in  that  connti}.

On  the  death  of  HasdrnlutI,  B.C.  331,  h«  a\y
taiuL'd  the  undivided  oommand  of  the  army,  vmI
quickly  conquered  the  Olcadee,  Vacoaeaas,  Cur^
sians  and  the  other  Spaui^h  tribes  that  bad  ii«i
been  sulHlned  by  Hasdrubal.  The  inhabitautH  of
Sugnnliim,  alarmed  at  his  suceese,  sent  maxengrn
to  R<jnie  to  iufurni  the  Romans  of  their  danger.  A
Roman  embassy  was  accordinglysent  to  Haunili*!.
who  was  passing  the  winter  at  Carthago  Nn\ii.to
announce  to  him  that  the  iudependeoeo  rifSagio-
turn  was  goarauteed  by  a  treaty  between  th«C»i-
thaginians  and  Romans  (coocladed  B.C.  2d6)i  tf^
that  they  should  consider  any  injary  done  te  Ik*
Sagnntines  aa  a  declaration  of  war  against  llieB>-
selves.  Hannibal,  however,  paid  no  regard  t»ll>i*
remonstrance.  More  than  twenty  years  hail  eU|*J
since  the  termination  of  the  First  Punic  War,^Ill^
iug  which  i>eriad  the  Carthaginians  had  nxofrn^
their  strength,  and  had.  obtained  posses^ioQ  nf  lb*
greater  part  of  Spain  ;  and  now  a  favouraWf  "T*"
portunity  had  arrived  for  renewing  lb©  war  wiiJi
the  Romans.  In  B.C.  310,  Hannibal  took  SagoDtan
(q.  T.)  after  a  aiege  of  eight  months,  and  eaip^7»
the  winter  iu  making  prepanilions  for  lb«  iB'**
Hioii  of  Italy.  He  Gnt  provided  for  the  wcnnty
of  Africa  and  Spain  by  leaving  au  anuy  "f  ftl"'"^
16,000  men  in  each  country.  The  army  in  .Vfi'-f*
consisted  principally  of  Spanish  troops,  anil  iW
in  Spain  of  Africatis,  under  the  command  of  bi*
brother  Hasdrnhnl.  He  hod  atrwidv  reoci"^
prumisea  of  support  from  the  Oanls  who  inhJiMi™
the  north  of  Italy,  and  who  were  ouiiona  f>  ^
liver  themselres  from  Roman  domiiiatioa.  H>t*
iug  thaa  made  every  necessary  preparation,  h***
out  from  Carllmgo  Novo,  late  iu  the  springflf^t
2le<,  with  an  anny  of  80,000  foot  and  rijWO  t""*-
In  his  march  from  the  Iberns  to  the  Pyrcii#«^
was  opposed  by  a  great  nnmlier  of  the  trtfi'*
trihea,  but  these  were  quickly  defeated,  tl**"^
with  loss. Before  eroaaiiig  tho  Pyr*oee««  Ih>  k»


HANNIBAL


707


HANNIBAL


Hanno  to  secnre  his  recent  ooAqnests  with  a  de-
tachment from  his  own  army  of  11,000  men.  He
sent  back  the  same  namber  of  Spanish  troops  to
their  own  cities,  and  with  an  army  now  rednced
to  50,000  foot  and  9000  horse  he  advanced  to  the
Hboue.

Meanwhile,  two  Homan  armies  had  been  levied :
one,  oonnDanded  by  the  consul  P.  ComeliiiB  Scip-
io,  was  intended  to  oppose  Hannibal  in  Spain ;
and  a  second,  under  the  consal  T.  Sempronias,
was  designed  for  the  invasion  of  AfHca.  The
departnre  of  Bcipio  was  delayed  by  a  revolt  of
the  Boian  and  Insnbrian  Ganls,  against  whom
was  sent  the  army  which  had  been  intended  for
the  invasion  of  Spain,  under  the  command  of  one
of  the  praetors.  Scipio  was  therefore  obliged  to
remain  in  Rome  nntil  a  new  army  could  be  raised.
When  the  forces  were  ready,  he  sailed  with  them
to  the  Ehone,  and  anchored  at  the  eastern  mouth
of  the  river,  being  persuaded  that  Hannibal  mnst
still  be  at  a  considerable  distance  from  him,  as  the
country  through  which  he  had  to  march  was  diffi-


BuuibaL (Von  Fklke.)

cnlt,  and  inhabited  by  many  warlike  tribes.  Han-
nibal, however,  quickly  snrmonnted  all  these  ob-
stacles, crossed  the  Ehone,  though  not  without
some  opposition  &om  the  Gauls,  and  continued
bis  march  up  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  Scipio
did  not  arrive  at  the  place  where  the  Carthagin-
ians had  crossed  the  river  till  three  days  after-
wards ;  and,  despairing  of  overtaking  them,  ho
sailed  back  to  Italy  with  the  intention  of  meeting
Hannibal  when  he  should  descend  from  the  Alps.
Scipio  sent  his  brother  Qnaeas  into  Spain,  with
the  greater  part  of  the  troops,  to  oppose  Hasdru-
bal.  Hannibal  continued  his  march  np  the  Ehone
till  he  came  to  the  Isara.  Marching  along  that
river,  he  crossed  the  Alps,  descended  into  the  val-
ley of  the  Dora  Baltea,  and  followed  the  course  of
the  river  till  he  arrived  in  the  territories  of  the  In-
snbrian Oanls.  See  Troger,  HannibaVa  Zug  (Inns-
bruck, 1978) ;  Bachheister,  HannihaVt  Zug  Uber  die
Alpen  (Hamburg,  1887).

Hannibal  completed  his  march  from  Carthago
Nova  to  Italy  in  five  months,  during  which  time  he
lost  a  great  number  of  men,  Mpeoially  in  his  pas-


sage over  the  Alps.  According  to  a  statement  en-
graved by  his  order  on  a  column  at  Laoiuinm,  in
the  country  of  the  Bratii,  which  Polybius  saw,  his
army  was  rednced  to  12,000  Africans,  8000  Span-
iards, and  6000  cavalry  when  he  arrived  in  the
territories  of  the  Insnbrian  Gauls.  After  remain-
ing some  time  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Insnbrians
to  recruit  his  army,  he  marched  southward,  and
encountered  F.  Cornelius  Scipio  on  the  right  bank
of  the  river  Ticinns.  Id  the  battle  which  ensued
the  EomauB  were  defeated,  and  Scipio,  with  the
remainder  of  the  army,  retreating  along  the  left
bank  of  the  Po,  crossed  the  river  before  Hannibal
could  overtake  him  and  encamped  near  Flaceiitia.
He  afterwards  retreated  more  to  the  south,  and  in-
trenched himself  strongly  on  the  rigbt  bank  of
the  Trebia,  where  he  watted  for  the  arrival  of  the
army  under  the  other  consul,  T.  Sempronius.  Sem-
proniua  had  already  crossed  over  into  Sicily  with
the  intention  of  sailing  to  Africa,  when  he  was  re-
called to  join  his  colleague.  After  the  union  of
the  two  armies,  Sempronius  determined,  against
the  advice  of  Scipio,  to  risk  another  battle.  The
skill  and  fortune  of  Hannibal  again  prevailed ;
the  Romans  were  entirely  defeated,  and  the
troops  who  snrvived  took  refuge  in  the  forti-
fied cities.  In  consequence  of  these  victories,  the
whole  of  Cisalpine  Ganl  fell  into  the  hands  of
Hannibal ;  and  the  Ganls,  who,  on  his  first  arri-
val, were  prevented  from  joining  him  by  the  pres-
ence of  Scipio's  army  in  their  country,  now  eager-
ly assisted  him  with  both  men  and  supplies.

In  the  following  year,  B.c.  217,  the  Romans
made  great  preparations  to  oppose  their  formida-
ble enemy.  Two  new  armies  were  levied.  One
was  posted  at  Arretinm,  under  the  command  of
the  consnl  Flaminins,  and  the  other  at  Ariminum,
under  the  consnl  Servilins.  Hannibal  determined
to  attack  Flaminius  first.  In  his  march  southward
through  the  swamps  of  the  basin  of  the  Aruns,
his  army  suffered  greatly,  and  he  himself  lost  the
sight  of  one  eye.  After  resting  his  troops  for  a
short  time  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Faesulae,  he
marched  past  Arretium,  ravaging  the  country  as
he  went,  with  the  view  of  drawing  on  Flaminins
to  a  battle.  Flaminins,  who  appears  to  have  been
a  rash,  headstrong  man,  hastily  followed  Hanni-
bal; and,  being  attacked  in  the  basin  of  Lake
Trasimenns,  was  completely  defeated  by  the  Car-
thaginians, who  were  posted  on  the  monntaius
which  encircle  the  valley.  Three  or  four  days  af-
terwards, Hannibal  cut  off  a  detachment  of  Roman
cavalry,  amounting  to  4000  men,  which  had  been
sent  by  Servilins  to  assist  his  colleague.  Hanni-
ble  appears  to  have  entertained  hopes  of  over-
throwing the  Boman  dominion,  and  to  have  ex-
pected that  the  other  States  of  Italy  would  take
up  arms  against  Rome,  in  order  to  recover  their
iudepeudence.  To  win  over  the  affections  of  the
Italians,  he  dismissed  without  ransom  all  the  pris-
oners whom  he  took  iu  battle ;  and,  to  give  them
an  opportnnity  of  Joining  his  army,  he  marched
slowly  along  the  eastern  side  of  the  peninsula,
through  Umbria  and  Ficenum,  into  Apulia;  but
he  did  not  meet  with  that  oo-operation  which  ho
appears  to  have  expected.  After  the  defeat  of
Flaminins,  Q.  Fabins  Maximus  was  appointed  dic-
tator, aud  a  defensive  system  of  warfare  was  adopt-
ed by  the  Romans  for  the  rest  of  the  year.

In  the  following  year,  B.oi  316,  the  Romans  re-
solved npon  another  battle. An  army  of  80,000


UANNIBAUAN'US


769


HABMOO10S


i.hi8  great  diversity,  lie  forced  all  of  Ihem  tu  ac-
knowledge otieautborilY,and  to  yield  oliedieiiootu
-one  f^tnrnaiid.  And  tliis,  too,  lie  ncctMnpliabiHl  in
thv  tnidtftof  vrrii'  varied  rnrtuiie.  How  tiigb  nti  well
■atijndt  an  ojtiuion  luiiat  these  ttiiiigs  cniivey  to  lis
-of  his  ability  in  wnr!  It  iiinybe  affirmed  witb  cou-
Ildpijce  tbiit  if  be  bad  timt  trieil  bis  strniigih  in  tte
niber  parts  of  the  world  and  bad  comn  la.tt  to  at-
tack tbe  KoDDBii*,  be  conld  saarcely  bavc  failed  In
auy  part  of  hU  dealgn"  (Polyb.  iii. ;  vii.  8,  9;  xiv.
16:  Livy.  xxi.  39;  Xcpos,  Ilatmiball

See  Henuebert,  ITintoire  tPAHnibat  (Paris,  1870-
7i?);  Church.  Carthage  (London,  1866);  Kriimb-
ItolSfi).  Alptnuhcrgang  tl.  ttanmbal  {VTVtu\en,lSfi}',
Btaiasiat.  JnniAnl  en  Cattle  (FariH,  It^4):  I>e  Van-
4wtoourt.  Hi»t.  ties  Campat/nr*  tTAnnibat  en  Italie,
3  vola  (Milan,  1612):  Ferrin,  La  ifarc^hv  (FAnnibat
du  Ptfr^A-»  an  Z'^,  witb  map  (Paris,  I8tf7);  I>odKu,
UaiiHibal  (New  York.  1491);  Mommiwn,  flui.  of
Aomr,  vol.  ii.;  and  tbe  nrtioles  CiUfKAE  ;  Cartha-
-G<j  ;  Pl'sic  Wars;  Scipio.

HanniballaDua.  TheaoDofConat&ntinsCIiloniB
and  Tbe«>durA,  and  hence  bulf-bmtber  to  Constan-
tiue  tbo  Great,  by  whom  be  wa^  put  to  dpatli  in
A.D.  337  with  the  other  nveiulK'ni  of  tbn  Flnvmn
botue  wboae  existeuoe  wum  nnppoiwMl  to  menace
tb«  iDteneta  of  tbe  new  AugualL  See  Constan-
Tfirua.

Hauno  ('Awftiv.  meaning  in  Funic  "murciful"
or  "mild"). (1)  A  cumniatider  »ent  l>y  (be  Cartba-
fCinianaon  a  Toyage  of  colouiiuttion  and  diac-ovcry
along  tli«  Atlantic  uoaet  uf  Africa, llais  exi^edi-
tion is  geuerully  HnppoHed  to  bave  tAken  place
abuat  B.C.  570. Oail,  however,  places  it  between
B.C.  G3S and  530. On bis rotnrn to  Carthage,
Hanno  depoMited  an  oucoiiut  of  bis  voyage  in  tbe
temple  of  Moloch  (Crontis). A  translatioD  of  this
account  from  the  Pnnic  into  the  Greek  tongue  hat
come  down  to  »s. The  title  of  the  Greek  work  is
aM fulloWB  : Svvtawi^  Kapj^ij^oi'iiwi'  BairiXittCt  Hfpi-
■aKovv  xiav  intip  ras  'HpaxXtovt  Xrr/Xos  .\t^VKi>f  r^f
r^r  M<^v.  iv  Ka\  'AviofjKtv  iv  rw  rnv  Kpovov  Tt^Uvtt.
*"Tbe  Voyage  of  llnDuo,  commander  of  the  Car-
tbHginians,  round  tbo  partii  of  Libya  beyond  tbe
Pillars of  Heracles,  which bo  deposited  in tbe
(einple  of  Cronos." With  regard  to  tbe  extent  of
Hjoast  actnally  explored  by  this  expe<lition,  some
remarks  bave  lieen  initde  in  nnother  article. (Hee
Africa.) The  Pi-riplti*  was  translated  into  Eng-
Usb  by  Falconer  (1797). Sue  Mer.  M£mo'\re  nur  le
Piriplr  ^ Bnnnon  ( Pari.s,  IdtjH) ;  and  Autictmn,  Lra
GrandM  Voyaget  de  D^ourertta  des  Ancient  (Paris,
IriOl). (2)  A  Carthogiulsn commander,  who  as-
pired to  the  sovereignty  of  bis  native  city. His
~^eiUgn  was  discovered,  and be  tborenpon  retired
to  >  fortrees,  with  'iO,lX)0  armed slave-s,  bnt  was
taken  and  put  to  death  with  his  soit  and  all  his
relations  (Just.  xxi.  A). (3)  A  coinmuiKLer  of  the
Carthaginian forci'S in Bicity  along  with  Bomil-
-car (D.C.  310). lie  nun  defeated by  Agatboclcs,
although  he  bad  4.'>.000  men  under  his  orders,  and
bis  opponent  only  about  14.fK)0 (Just.  xxii.  C}.
(4) A  Carlbagtntun oouinianiltT,  defeateil by  the
Romans  near  the  Aegoiles  Insula'^  (B.C.  242). On
bis  return  borne  he  wan  put  U>  death. (5)  A  lead-
vx  of  the  faction  at  Ciirtbage  opposed  to  tbe  Barca
fnniily. Ho  voted  for  surroudoring  Hannibal  to
the  foe,  after  tbe  ruin  of  Saguutuni,  and  also  for
refusing  owistauce  to  that  commander  after  the
atUe  of  Cannae  (Liry,  xxi.  3,  xxiii.  12). (6J  A  Car-


thaginian, who,  wishing  to  pass  for  a  g<id,  trained
up  S4>me  birds,  who  were  taught  hy  bim  to  repeat
tbe  words,  "Huuuw  is  a  god"  (Aeliau,  Var.  H\»U
XV.  32).

Haplograpfay,  also  ralloil  Idpograpby.  A  com-
mon err<^rfnnnd  ill  classical  M.SS.  by  which  a  letter,
syllable,  or  word  wblnh  slionld  lw>  written  tvioa  is
written  only  once.  Thus  decuB  often  appears  where
tbo  copyist  intended  to  write  de^tciu,  dieit  where
ho  meant  didiMt,  etc.  It  is  the  opposite  of  Ditto-
gmphy  (*j.  v.) See  Tkxti'ai,  Ckiticish.

Har. See  HoRtrs.

Harena. See  AreKa.

Harlot 8«e  Mbkhtkix.

Baima  CApitn),  A  small  place  in  Boeotia,  near
Tanngra  (//.  ii.  49D).  It  got  its  name  tnulilionally
from  the  chariot  iiipfia)  of  AdraMtns,  wbiub  broke
down  at  this  place;  or,  according  to  others,  from
thu  fact  that  the-  chariot  of  Ampbiaruus  (q.  v.)  was
here  itff allowed  up  by  the  earth  (Fausau.  ix.  19, $  i).

Harma  (iSpptn). See  Cl'KRt-s.

Harmamajca  (■tp>^>ia^). See  CuKRUS.

Harmfltua  (' Apfj-aravs).  A  city  and  promontory
on  thu  cooHt  of  A<-olus  in  Asia  Minor,  ou  the  north
side  of  tbo  Sinus  Klalticus.

Hannodiua  ('A^^dioc).  An  Athenian  who,  to-
getber  with  AhistcmsIton  ('.\^i<n-07itTo»v).  became
the  cause  of  tbe  overthrow  of  the  Pimiatratidae.
The  names  of  Hannt>ditis  and  Ariatogiton  were
immortalized  by  thu  gratitade  of  tho  Athenians.
Aristogiton  was  a  citizen  of  the  middle  class;
Haruiodius  a  youth  di.ttiugiiisbed  by  the  comeli*
ncMs  of  his  iwrson.  They  woro  both  perhapa  re-
motely allied  to  one  another  by  blood,  and  were
united  bj'  ties  of  the  closest  intimacy.  The  youtb
bod  received  an  outrage  from  Hippnrcbus,  which
roused  both  the  msuDtment  and  tlu^  fears  of  bis
friend,  lest  Hijiparchua  should  abuKo  bis  power  to
repeat  the  insult.  Hut  Hipparcbus,  whose  pride
had  been  wounded  by  the  conduct  of  Harmodius,
cout«nt«4l  himself  with  an  aU'ront  aimed  at  the
honour  of  his  fatxiily.  By  his  onlers,  the  sister  of
HnrmodiiiH  woa  inviteil  to  take  part  in  a  proces*
sion,  as  IxiarLT  of  one  of  the  tuicreil  vessels.  When,
however,  Hbe  presented  benu-'lf  in  licr  festal  dress,
tiho  wiw  pnUiely  rejeclm),  and  disniissed  as  iiu-
wortby  of  the  honour.  This  insnlt  stnng  Harmo-
dius  to  tbe  (|uiuk,  and  kiiidleil  the  indignation  of
Aristogiton.  They  resolved  to  ungage  in  the  des-
perate eutorpriso  of  ovurthrowiug  tJie  ruling  dy-
nasty. They  cotumunicatod  their  plan  to  a  few
friends,  who  promised  their  assistance;  bnt  tbey
hoi»e4L  that,  as  soon  as  the  lint  blow  sboold  be
strnek,  tbey  would  Iw  Joiued  by  numbum,  who
would  joyfully  seize  the  op|>ortunity  of  rocovoHng
their  freedom.  Tbe  oonspimCors  tlxed  on  tbe  fes-
tival of  the  Fanntbenaea  as  tbo  most  couvenieiit
season  for  elfociing  their  purpose.  This  festival
was  celebrated  with  a  procession,  in  which  tbe
citizens  marched  ariiied  with  sowars  and  shields,
and  WHS  the  only  occasion  ou  which,  in  time  of
peace,  they  could  assemble  under  arms  without
exciting  suspicion.  It  was  agreed  that  Harmo-
dius  and  Aristogiton  should  give  the  signal  by
stabbing  Hippios,  while  their  friends  kept  off  bis
guards,  and  that  tbey  should  trust  to  the  general
dutpositiun  iu  favour  of  libci'ty  for  the  further  suc-
Icoss  of  their  uuderLftking.  When  tbo  day  came,
I  the  conspirators  armed  themselves  with  daggers,


J


ilAKHODIUa


770


IIAIUIUNIA


lY


^


BATTnodtni  uiil  ArMofciton. (OoplM  In  the  N»plM  Unwiini.)


vhioh  they  oouceotcfl  iit  tb>n  myrtte-boagbs  tbat
were  carriwl  on  thiftoccaeion.  Biitw]»ile  Ilipptas,
nnrroiuidtid  by  hin  giiarda,  vrna  in  tlie  Cernmicus,
directing  thb  ortlur  of  Ibe  procMMiiui,  one  of  tbe
cousprratiini  vrwt  oWrved  to  go  up  to  biui^  for  be
waeeaiiy  uf  ncci^w  l'>  nil,  ami  to  vntvr  into  familiar
flODvenutioii  with  biin.  Tbe  two  fri«?inla,  on  »*•«-
ing  this,  coikcluded  tbat  tlioy  weni  butmywl,  and
tbat  tbey  had  no  hope  loft  bnt  of  reveu^a  Tbi-y
iuatoutty  roshcd  into  tbo  city,  and,  meeting;  Hlji-
parcboB.  killed  him  lj«fore  bis  gaards  could  come
up  to  his  aasistaiicp.  'I'lieso,  bowerer,  arrive<l  in
time  to  avenge  hisdf.ith  on  Ilarniodiiis.  AriatoRi-
ton  WKuped  fur  tht*  nioinijiit  tbrough  the  crowd,
but  waa  aflerwanlit  taken,  Wln-n  tbe  news  wiw
brrmgbt  to  Hippia«,  iMHt«»(l  of  procewliiig  to  the
8c«n«  i>f  bi&  brotber'a  tnnrder,  bo  advaiit:*d  with  a
oomposeU  couiiteuauee  towards  tbo  ortued  proces-
aiou,  wbicb  was  yet  ignorant  of  tbe  event,  aud,  m
If  ho  bod  some  grave  dibconrae  to  nddresa  to  them,
desired  tbeua  to  lay  aatde  tbclr  weapons,  and  meet
him  at  an  appointed  plnce.  He  then  ordered  his
guards  to  seize  tbe  artntt,  mid  to  search  eYei*;  one
for  tbo»e  which  be  might  have  concenled  ii)Kin  his
per(H>n.  All  who  were  found  wiili  daj-gei-s  went
■rruBted,  togelbur  with  tbonu  wlioin,  on  any  other
{pTuniids,  he  sufpt^eted  of  diftalfcK^tion.  Aridlogituu
was  pDt  to  death,  acuordiug  to  some  anthorH,  after
torture  had  been  applied  to  wring  from  him  the
names  of  his  accompli^ea.  It  is  said  that  he
avenged  himself  by  accTining  the  tracst  friends  of
Htppius.  The  mistress  of  Ariutogiton,  oite  Leaena
{q.  v.),  whose  only  crime  w;u)  t-o  bavtj  Iwen  the
object  nf  bis  affection,  nnderwent  tbo  like  ireat-
ment.  She  was  afterwards  celebrate*!  for  the
eonntauty  with  which  she  endured  tbe  most  cruel
torm&Di«  (Uerod.  V.  o5;  vii.  IVJ;  Thuc.  i.2U;  vi.  54
foil.). These  events  took  place  io  B.C.  514.

After  tbe  expahtiou  of  Hippias  the  tjrauuicides


jtalUM


received  almo«t  heroio  hononn.  StatOM  wait
erected  to  them  at  the  public  expense,  and
namea  never  oeaaed  to  be  rt'peat«d  with  a<F<i
ate  lutmtratitin  jn  tbe  popniar  songs  of  Atbfff
which  aaitigiied  them  a  place  iu  Ihe  [slandaoftbe
Blessed,  by  the  side  of  Achilles  aod  Tydidc*:  snl
wlitn  an  orator  wiMbnil  to  suggmit  tbn  idnacftlM
highest  merit  arid  of  tbe  noblest  aenrieea  to  lb»
caufio  of  Ubi«rty,  btt  never  failed  to  raniind  U>
bearers  of  Harmoilins  and  AriHtogitoo.  No  ibrt
waa  ever  calleil  by  tbeir  namea.  Plutarch  has  pn-
served  a  reply  of  Aotipbo,  the  orator,  to  Dkwfiiw
the  elder,  of  Syracnse.  The  latter  had  asked  tb>
(inestiun,  which  was  tbe  finest  kind  of  bmnaif
''That,"  replied  Autipho,  "of  wfaieh  the  stalUM
of  RnrmixliiiH  am]  AriHttigiton  were  mode.'
loHt  biH  lift*  in  conMyptPiire.  Their  slatnea,
by  Auteuor  and  net  up  in  the  Agora,  wers
away  by  X*«rxeH  when  bo  took  Athens  io  B.&4^
bnt  were  restoroil  by  Alexander  tbe  firfat.

Haimonla (' Apfiovla). Tbe daughter  of  An*
and  Aphrodite,  and  wife  of  Cadmus. iSee  CiD-
Mca.) At  ber  marriage  all  the  gods  wen  prewsl
ou  the  Acropolis  of  Thebes,  and  offered  ber  iMt
wedding-giftJi, Cmhnns  gavit  her  a  costlygarrocBt
and  a  nucklace,  tbe  workmanshiji  nf  Hepba^atoi,
wbicii  he  bad  received  from  ApbnMlite,  or  (aeot*4-
iiig  to  another  aocouut)  from  Knnipa. Theae  giA>i
so  the  Rtory  nms,  had  evcrywhem  the  fatal pr(^
orty  of  stirring  up  atrifu  and  bloodshed. It  ■>•
with  tbcui  (bat  Polyuices  corruptcil  Kripbyl'.  wl*
drove  her  hnsband  Ampbiarails  tu  hiit  de.-^triicli<"i  lo
tlieTbebauWar.andwaamurdered  in  revenue  I'lli"
M»\  AlcniaBon. It  waH  for  tbeir  sake  that  Alcm*'*'''
and  Pbegi'ns  and  bis  Mms  were  stain. (Sep  AU*'
MAEoK ;  PnROEra.) The  jewels  werv  at  I«n|(tli  tk-
posited  by  the  huiih  of  Alcmaeon  in  the  laacltui?
of  Delphi. Acconling  to  a  later  story,  Pli*.'"™'
a  leader  of  the  Phociaus  in  the  war  afainat  Pbtlip


UARU03TAR


771


HARPYIAE


of  Maceilon,  carried  off,  amoug  other  treaanres,
the  necklace  of  Harmonia,  aud  gave  it  to  his  mia-
tresB,  the  wife  of  AristoQ  of  Oeta ;  but  ber  yoangest
son  set  fire  to  the  hoose  in  a  fit  of  madDeas,  and  the
mother,  n-ith  the  necklace^  was  consnined.

Haimoatae  {ApiuMmi,  "  regalatora  ").  A  board
coDsiatiug  of  twenty  members,  at  Sparta;  prob-
ably a  kind  of  higher  police,  whose  duty  it  was  to
maintain  a  saperviaion  over  the  districts  inhabited
by  the  Perioeci.  After  the  Pelopouneeian  War  the
name  was  given  to  the  oflBcials  who  were  sent  into
the  conquered  cities  to  command  the  garrisons,  and
to  see  that  the  oligarchical  constitntion  was  main-
tained.

Hotpa.  A  harp,  with  a  carved  back  in  the
form  of  a  sickle  (.ipmj,  falx),  like  the  annexed  ex-
ample, from  an  Egyptian  paint-
ing. (See  Venant.  Carm.  vii.  8.
63,  in  which  passage  it  is  ex-
pressly distinguished  from  the
lyre,  and  as  an  instrument  used
by  foreigners.)

£[arpagla  (ra  'Apimyrla),  or
Kaipa^nm  ('Apn-ayioy).  A  small
town  in  Mysia,  between  Cyzions
and  Priapns,  the  scene  of  the  rape
of  Oanymedea,  according  to  some
legend^  ^^ ^"^'"^^

Hazpflgo  and  Haxpftga  (dpiroyij).  A  book  or
grappling-iron  used  in  domestic  economy  for  tak-
ing meats  from  the  caldron,  drawing  np  pails  from
wells,  etc. In  war,  books  of  huge  size  {fnreae


Bronze  Bupigo  or  Fteab-book. (British  UoMaiD.)

manut)  were  need  by  the  Romans  in  grappling
with  hostile  ships  (Floras,  ii.  2),  and  were  said  to
have  been  invented  by  Pericles  (Plin.  S.  N.  vii.
$57).

Harpttgns  CAfitrayos).  (1)  A  noble  Median,  who
is  said  to  have  preserved  the  infant  Cyras.  He
was  afterwards  one  of  the  generals  of  Cyras,  aud
conqaered  the  Greek  cities  of  Asia  Minor.  See
Ctrus.  (2)  a  Persian  general  of  Darius  I.  who
made  Histiaeas  prisoner. See  Histiakus.

HarpUna  ("ApiraXot ).  ( 1 )  A  Macedonian,  ap-
pointed by  Alexander  the  Great  snperintendent  of
the  royal  treasnry,  with  the  administration  of  the
satrapy  of  Babylon.  Having  embezzled  large
Hums  of  money,  he  crossed  over  to  Greece  in  B.C.
3S4,  aud  employed  his  treasnres  iu  gaining  over
tbe  leading  men  at  Athens  to  support  bim  against
Alexander  and  bis  vicegerent,  Antipater.  He  is
aaid  to  have  corrapted  Demosthenes  himself  (Arr.
An.  iii.  6, 19),  ss  well  as  Demades  and  Cbaricles,
the  son-in-law  of  Pbociou.  He  failed,  however,  in
his  general  object,  for  Antipater,  having  demauded
his  snrrender  from  the  Athenians,  it  was  resolved
to  place  him  in  confinement  nntll  the  Macedonians
shonld  send  for  bim.  He  succeeded  in  making  his
escape  from  prison,  and  fled  to  Crete,  where  he
was  assassinated  soon  after  his  arrival  by  Tbim-
liron,one  of  bis  own  officers.  (2)  A  Greek  astrono-
mer, who  introdnced  some  improvements  into  the


cycle  of  Cleostratos.  Harpalas  lived  before  Meton
(q.  v.).

Rarpalj^A  fApiraXvin}).  (1)  Daughter  of  Har-
palycus,  king  in  Thrace,  brought  np  by  her  father
as  a  warrior,  on  the  milk  of  cows  and  mares.
After  his  death  she  became  a  robber  in  the  forest,
being  able  to  outran  horses.  She  was  at  last
snared  aud  killed  by  shepherds  (Hyg.  Fab.  193).
(2)  The  daughter  of  Clymenus  and  Epicast^.  She
was  seduced  by  her  own  father,  upon  whom  she
afterwards  revenged  herself  by  killing  ber  younger
brother  and  serving  him  np  as  food  on  tbe  father's
table. By  tbe  gods  she  was  changed  into  a  bird.

Barpftaa  ('A^ao-a).  A  city  of  Caria  on  the
river  Harpaaus.

Hazpastam  {Apira<rr6v). A  ball. See  Pii^.

Haipisua  {'Apwaaos  ).  ( 1 )  A  river  of  Caria,
flowing  north  Into  the  Maeander.  (2)  A  river  of
Armenia  Maior,  flowing  sonth  into  the  Araxes.

Harpina  ('Apirwa)  or  Hazpinna  ('A^»>va).  A
town  in  Pisatis  (EHs)  near  Olympia,  named  after
a  daaghter  of  Asopns.

Harpoorfttaa  (AptroKpanjs). See  Horus.

Harpooratlon  ( ' ApTroKpariiov ),  Valrrics.  A
Greek  scholar  of  Alexandria,  who  lived  probably
in  tbe  second  century  a.d.  He  was  the  author  of
a  lexicon  to  the  ten  great  Attio  orators  ( Htpi  rStif
Af'^fwi*  rwv  Ac'ko  'Pi^pttv,  or  briefly  Ac^ixdc  ruv
Ac'iea  'PiTrd/Mtv),  which  has  survived,  though  in  a
very  fragmentary  form.  It  contains,  in  alphabeti-
cal order,  notes  on  tbe  matters  and  persons  men-
tioned by  the  orators,  with  explanations  of  the
technical  expressions;  tbas  forming  a  rich  store
of  valuable  information  on  matters  of  history,  lit-
erature, and  the  constitution  and  Judicial  system
of  Athens.  Saidaa  and  tbe  author  of  the  Etj/molo-
gicum  Magnum,  borrowed  largely  from  Harpocra-
tiou.  Modern  editions  are  those  of  Bekker  (Ber-
lin, 1833),  and  Dindorf  (Oxford,  1853).  See  Boysen,
Dt  Sarpoorat.  Fontibu$  (Kiel,  1876).

Hazpjlae  ('Apirvuu).  The  Harpies  were  origi-
nally the  goddesses  of  the  devastating  storm,  sym-
bolizing the  sadden  and  total  disappearance  of
men.  Homer  only  names  one  of  them  (11.  xvi.  150),
Podarg^,  or  "the  swift- footed,"  who,  in  the  shape
of  a  mare,  bore  to  Zephyraa  the  horses  of  Achilles.
In  Hesiod  ( Thtog.  267 )  the  Harpies  appear  as
winged  goddesses  with  beaatiful  hair,  daughters
of  Tbaumas  and  Electra,  sisters  of  Iris,  with  the
names  of  Aello  and  Ocypetd.  Iu  the  later  story
their  uamber  increased,  their  names  being  ASlto-


Hupy. (Pftlnted  T«m  from  Tel-DereDDcb  of  i.a  660.)


BAKPT  XONXHENT


772


HAii^ORUDAL


pun,  OcjtboC,  Kicotlioe,  uoH  Cela«Qo.  Tbe;  arc
than  KimapntMl  a*  balf-tiinln,  batf-mftideas,  and
■a  ■Ipiriu  o(  mlM-birf.  In  the  story  of  the  Atgo-
■wits,  for  iostaDce,  tbey  torment  Phineas  br  carry-
ing off  and  pollnting  faia  fttorl  till  tliey  ar»  driven
off  by  Calais  and  ZetM,  and  eithrr  killMi  or  ban-
ialied  to  the  island  nf  tli«  Strvpbadw,  whore  tlioy
■re  bound  hy  an  oath  to  remaio.  8«o  Verg,  Jen.
iii  211-244.

HArp7  Monoment  A  remarkable  work  of
Lyciau  art  discovere^l  in  li^.l8  on  tlir  acropolis  of
Xanibod  in  Lyuia  l>y  Sir  C.  FellowoA,  and  now  div
{kuiied  in  Ibo  Britisb  Murwiini.  It  datrs  from
nltuiiC  ux.  500,  and  is  a  reoUtij^iilar  tvwvr  msu\p  of
a  ungld  block  of  liroeatoan  with  a  flat  roof  directly


VMtVJ- (Frou  the  HMXTf  Uoniitn6lil>

lindar  wblflh  in  a  ftiette  of  white  marble,  twenty-
oiio  tfiv't  from  tbo  ground,  re|>re»eutiiit;  (probably)
tbp  MarpitfA  carrying;  off  the  dan;h;htert)  of  Fanda-
r«tw  (Hum.  t>*i.  XX.  78  foil.).  Fur  a  fuller  deocrip-
itun  mid  oriliciatn,  we  Conxe  in  the  Archiiolog.
Z»il*-9  (or  14G9,  p.  ^,  and  Perry,  Orerk  and  R<nnan
HeHlpture  (ISfSt.  pp.  111-117.
Barrow. S««  Crates;  Iupex.

Rurudea  or  Charudaa.  A  |Hropte  in  the  army
of  Ariovtstufi  (<|.  V.)  at  tlm  tiiiiu  of  his  (lofuat  by
Ga«^r  {ll.C-  58>,  TUoy  are  bulievod  tu  have  come
trow  the  Cintbrio  Cberson^ae  (Jutland).

Rarundo. See  Calamus.

Baraapex.  An  Ktruncan  M>otb»nyer,  wboae
riUK'lioii  it  vTM  to  intvriirct  the  dirine  will  from
thtt  niilralU  of  Mu-riticial  victims,  to  propitiate  ibo
aiignr  of  the  gotln  an  indirated  by  liglitniiig  or
ullii'f  marvvls,  and  tn  titterprot  their  •tJgnifH''Hnce
aooordlug  tu  ICtrnttcan  foruuiUu.  Thin  art  hnd
long  boon  pm(itl»Hl  in  Etruria,  and  wait  referrt^d
to  a  illvino  origin.  lu  th«  tionr.>»e  of  the  republicnti
aro  >i  fiinnd  ii  Umiw  in  the  private  and  public  lifu
of  llio  UoiniinN,  winning  it«  way  as  the  native
pHtvlhoiidH,  inlriifttod  witli  siniilar  functioiis,  last
IM  iwpiile,  From  the  time  of  the  kings  to  the  end
of  (lit*  lit'pnblle,  batiiHpictoe  were  oxpremly  sum-
minttMl  iViun  Etruria  by  decr«e«  of  the  Senate  on
Ibit  iH'Diirrenoe  uf  pro«ligies  which  were  not  pro-
vided  fxr  It)  (he Ponttflcal and  Sibylline  Books.


Tbeir  biinluese  was  to  ititer|iret  tli»  sign><,  to  amt-
taiu  what  deity  demanded  an  expiation,  ntid  to  in-
dicate the  nature  of  the  necesaary  ottering.

It  then  lay  with  tbe  prieste  of  the  Roman  ptt-
ple  to  carry  out  Ibeir  instnieiion*  Their  knovl-
edge  of  the  etgtis  given  by  lightning  was  on\j
npptietl  in  repuldirnn  Ilonie  for  tbe  purpoee  of
averting  tbe  oineo  port4!iid«l  by  (be  flarji.  (See
PcniAL.)  But  nnder  the  Empire  it  was  aim  use!
fur  couiinlting  tbe  lightning,  either  keeping  it  off
or  driiwitig  it  down.  Krum  almnt  the  time  nf  ihr
Pnnlo  Ward,  hani^pices  Wgan  to  aollle  in  Rotms
and  were  employeit  both  by  private  iudindoik
and  state  nfflcinis  to  ascertain  tbe  divine  wiQ  1^
<' XII  mi  nation  of  tbe  liver,  gnll,  heart,  lHDgii,and
i-iinl  of  HiirriHoial  Ttctims.  Tboy  were  ccpeeiklk
eon»nlttHl  by  goneraln  when  going  to  war.  Tl>ir
erieiice  was  get)t.'r.'illy  hrld  in  bigli  esteem,  biii  thr
('t».vt  of  hnniepictw  who  t4Kik  pay  for  their  Servian
did  not  enjoy  so  good  a  rvpulution.  Claisltal
aceros  to  have  Ifcen  tbe  Drat  emperor  who  iiisIJIM-
ed  a  regolar  cottegiun^  of  Roman  haraapleea,  mb-
sistiog  of  sixty  members  of  equestrian  nink.swl
presided  over  by  n  harwpri  murimuM.  for  ilie  rrf-
nlnrserriee  of  the  Slate.  Thi«  collegium  contianel
to  exist  till  the  beginning  of  the  fiflb  contary  i.D
Sco  Fnindeen,  nitruspicra  (Berlin.  1^^);  Boadif
Leclercq,  Uintoirr  rfe  la  IHrinntion  dam  VAwtiq^Ui
fonrvoltt.  (PanH,l'?71>-il^2l;  and  tbe  artieleaAfon;
DlVINATIO.

Baadrttbol  ( 'Achfmv^ai^  meantog  In  Fau^
"(whoso)  help  ds)  Bonl").  {\)  K  CarthagiiiiM
general,  son  of  Mago,  who  8acce<*ded  Lu  tbe  tiilM
and  glor>'  of  bis  father.  It  was  under  bis  condir*
that  the  Carthaginiantt  carried  tbe  warintoftar-
dinia.  Fti'riK'eivtHl  in  that  island  awouiulwlncb
caused  liift  death,  h.c.  420  [  Jost.  six.  1 ).  1 2 1  Son
of  tbe  prece<liug,  made  war  upon  tbe  NnauiUaH)
and  freed  Carthage  fmm  tbe  tribute  eb*  had  ksaa
cocnpclUtl  to  pay  fur  being  permitted  to  estabftab
benelfuM  the  coast  of  Africa  ( Jn»t.  xix.  !ti-  (3)
A  sou  of  Hanuo,  aent  into  Sicily  at  the  bead  of  i
powerfol  army  to  oppose  the  Romans.  H«  wm
defeated  by  Metolltu.  the  Roman  procoofal,  a.C
351.  Uaadrnbal  lied  to  Lilybaenin,  bat  «m  cm-
demned  to  death  by  his  eonntrymen  at  bant.  (-1)
8<?n-in>law  of  Uumilcur,  distiuguiivhftd  hlouilf  ■»•
der  tbe  onlert  of  that  general  in  tbe  war  with  Vtt-
midia.  On  the  death  of  his  father-in-law  Ih  «•«
appointed  coinniaoder,  and  earricd  on  miliiarf
ojteratious  in  Hpain  during  eight  yean.  He  in-
duced the  grraior  part  of  that  ronntry,  aod  ff-
erned  it  with  wiiidum  »ud  prudence.  He  fo«n4«^
Carthago  Nova  (Cartbngena).  Tbe  Rxmaux,  wiith
ing  to  put  a  stop  to  his  sncoessM,  mads  •  tnatt
with  Carthage,  by  which  tbe  latt«r  bomid  haiMlf
not  to  rnrry  lii^r  nmiK  beyond  tbe  Ibem.  Bsf
drubal  faithfully  otiserred  the  terms  of  lUt  MB^
puct.  He  wa-s  slain,  u.c:.  220,  by  n  stars  wb«v
muster  hL'  ba*l  put  lo  dfath  (Livy.  xxi.  9;  P«ljk
iL  1,  13,  iii.  12,  X.  10;.  (5)  Son  of  llamikar,
brought  from  Spain  large  reinforcemvnl*  for  bi*
lirnther  Huiinilml.  He  crossed  the  liarrler  uf  tiM
Alps,  and  arrival  in  Italy,  but  the  con^nL*  Lirin*
SuliiiHlor  HUd  damlins  Nem.  having  tnU<rteptnl
Ihe  Inltem  which  he  bad  written  to  Hsunlhal.  iii

forming  hini  of  his  arrival,  attackml  '■■■: -^  '■'■

river  MetauruR,  nnd  gave  him  a  cn

D.C.2W. Huedrubal  f«ll  in  tlie  bad.. ,

of  his  tn>o|>«. The  Romans  luet  about  HOW
and  made  5400  priHonent. The  beail  xf  lla«l


HASTA


778


HAUPT


I  Mveretl  from  liU  body,  and  waa  tlirowu  •  few
'  dfty«  afterwards  into  the  eamy  of  llaiiuLbal.  Bcfor«
uttcmptiuK  to  (Mit«r  Italy  by  litucl,  lIiUMlrubal  at*
U;inpt«il  tu  cruM  tbo  hua  frum  Spain,  but  waa  db-
fouttiil  by  thu  Boiuan  governor  of  Santiuia  (Livy,
xxi.  '23;  Poly.b.  li.  U,  (6)  A  Cartba^iiiiau  com-
nmmler,  win  of  Giwon,  wlm  coiiirnaiH3e<l  tlie  fortea
of  liitt  country  in  SpAiu  diiriuf;  thu  time  of  Hanni-
bal. Beiug  (tecondfd  by  8y[ibns,  be  ufturwards
carried  on  the  war  a^iiist  the  Kotnantt  in  Africa,
bnt  waadefiMit«d  by  Soipio.  Ho  died  D.C. '.JtHilLivy,
xxiv.  •II,  xxix.  35,  xxx.  5).  (7)  A  Caitbagiuian,
sQi^amed  "the  Kid"  (AanfMt),  an  op]K>neDt  of
the  Barca  faction,  lie  advtse<l  bis  couutrynicu
to  make  peace  with  tbi*  Uouians,  and  cenfinred  tbn
ironical  laugh  of  llatiiiibal  in  the  Cartbaginian
Senate,  after  thu  peace  wan  concludMl.  (H)  A  Car-
tliagitiian  gentrnl,  vho,  dnriiig  the  siege  of  Car-
tbagift  by  the  Boaians,  ctunnianded  an  army  of
2(*,000  men  without  tbu  walls,  with  wblch  he  kept
conataully  haraasing  the  beaiegers.  l^tiiig  com-
pelled at  last  to  take  refuge  with  bin  furcca  within
the  city,  he  took  cotniuaiid  of  the  place,  and  for  a
long  time  bravely  withstood  the  attacks  of  tbe
RomanN.  After  the  capture  of  the  city,  ho  n-lireii
with  tbo  Roman  deecrters,  who  had  no  <inarter  to
ex|wct,  into  the  temple  of  AeecnlapiuH  iu  the  cita-
dvl,  reaolved  to  bur>'  hiraM-lf  unilcrr  ita  mine,  tak-
ing with  him,  at  the  Muno  time,  hi«  wif«  and  tno
young  aouH.  At  length,  however,  having  secretly
left  the  temple,  he  threw  himself  at  the  feet  of
Bcipio,  ajid  supplicated  for  life.  8cipio  granted
his  reqaest,  and  showed  him  as  a  snppliant  to  the
deserters  in  the  temple.  Thtwe  desperate  men,
after  venting  against  biui  a  torrent  of  reproaches^
set  &re  to  the  temple,  and  perisbed  amid  the  tlaniM.
Hia  wife,  when  the  fire  was  klndliugf  displayed
herself  on  the  walls  of  the  building  in  tke  rioheat
attire  she  cimld  procure,  and,  having  iipbraideil
her  husband  for  IiIm  cowanlice,  nlew  h«r  two  sodh,
and  throw  hersulf,  with  them,  into  the  bumiug
pile  ( Appiau,  BeU.  Pun.  13U.

Haata  ((vicot,  waXrov).  The  luuce.  Iu  the  earlier
history  of  the  Bomao
army  the  lirst  four
clasaes  nuder  the  Ser-
rian  constitution,  and
in  later  limes,  thu
Iriarii,  or  biuduiutti
rank,  wuro  armeil
with  this  weapon.
I  See  L  E  G I O. }  At
length,  however,  tbc
pilam  was  introduced
fur  the  whole  infan-
tryof  the  legion.  (See
PlLt'H.)  To  deprive
a  soldier  of  his  hanta
waM  vtiuivalunl  to
tlograding  him  to  the
rank  of  the  relHet,
who  were  armed  with
javelins.  A  blunt
basia  with  a  button
at  tbeend  (hatta  pura)
continued  to  be  used
in  later  timmi  as  a
vtlitary decoration.

The  spear  frequently

had  a  leathern  thong  ^,^^  AraenUiaL (Fiwn  sn

tied  to  the  middle  of  Ktroscao  vmo


the  shaft,  which  was  called  JrynvXt]  by  the  Greeks^
and  amfnlum  or  atHtncntum  by  the  Romans,  and
whiuh  was  of  atwiiitnnoe  iu  throwing  the  s]iear.
Tbo  javelin  to  which  the  oyKvXrj  was  attached
waa  calk-d  futrtiyicvKov  (Poll,  i.  136;  Xeu.  Antib.  iv.
2,  ■}  VH  ;  Vorg.  Jen.  ix.  665).  The  precwling  6gure,
taken  from  Sir  W.  Hamiltoii's  Ktrntcan  fatta  (ill.
pi.  :U),  repreM^nt«  the  amenlum  atta<'h«d  to  the
hjiear  at  the  centre  of  gravity,  a  little  above  the
middle.  The  ammlntm  Mided  to  the  effect  of
throwing  the  lance  by  giving  it  rotation,  and
hence  a  greater  degree  of  steadiness  and  dlrect-
UDJw  in  Its  course.

Tbu  basta  was  employed  la  many  symbolical
ceremonies.  The  frlialif  (q.  v.),  for  instance^
hurled  a  blood -stainiMl  haata  into  the  enemy'a
territory  as  a  token  of  declaration  nf  war,  and  if
a  general  devuteil  his  life  for  his  army  be  stood
on  a  baata  while  repeating  the  neoe«sarj*  formula.


R-TT'^


Hm^k  Wftrrtorwtib  Speam (Hope.)

The  hasta  was  also  set  np  aa  a  symbol  of  legal
ownership  when  the  censor  farmed  out  the  taxen,
when  state  property — booty,  for  instance — wna
iM>]d ;  at  private  anctiona  (bunco  called  Bubhanta-
tionta),  where  it  wan  the  ancient  equivalent  of  our
red  Qag,  and  at  ttio  littinga  of  the  coart  of  the
renlumi-iri^  which  liad  to  decide  questions  of  prop*
orty.

HaatatL See  £XEKC1TV0.

Hat. See  CxraiA  ;  PKTAfiirs ;  PuxKue.

Hatchet See  Am.-ia  ;  SRCURia.

Hatzla  <"Arp«i)  and  Adria  {'AtipUi).  (I)  A  city
of  Cisalpine  Oani  Iwtwceu  the  months  of  the
Padus  and  the  Atheals,  and  still  caUe<l  Adria.  It
was  of  Greek  or  Etruscan  origin.  I'i)  A  city  iu
Pioenum  about  five  miles  from  the  Adriatic:  Sea.
It  is  now  called  Atri.  It  was  nun  of  the  eighteen
Latin  colonies  which  remained  faithful  Lu  Rome
at  the  time  of  Hannibal's  invaaiun  (Polyb.  iii.
88).

Haapt,  HoiuTK. A  Germau  claanioal  acholar,


HAUTON  TIMORCMENOS


774


H£CAT£


bom  at  Zittnit  in  Saxony  iu  ld06,  and  odiicatcd
Bt  tlio  Uiiiv«rKity  of  Leipzig  uudor  G.  IleniianD.
Latvr  lit  loctiirod  as  n  privat-doctnt  at  Leipzig,
being  tnailu  extmordinnry  profcMor  in  1^-11  and
unliuary  profeotior  !□  1843.  In  lt^8  lie  wati  dia-
iiiiased  fmtn  biH  chair  an  liaviug  (diarwl  in  the
rrtvoUitiniinry  luoTonifllita  uf  tlial  year,  but  iu  1853
liu  was  callcMl  to  Berliu  toBUcoeed  bin  friuiid  Lnch-
luanii. He  diiKl  iu  1^4.

Besides  a  iinmlicr  of  works  ou  Gcrmatiio  litAra-
tur«  and  pbilnUigy,  Hnupt  pubtlabed  QnacjilioiteM
CntulliaHae  (l^tlT);  a  inouugrapb  on  tbc  Epiceitiou
Orim  (|rU9);  an  nditimi  uf  tbtf  llaUeuUcan  oud
t'^HrgfHrA  of  OrattinA  and  NKiueniauuti  (1K18);  od-
ditioDB  to  Lachmauu'A  o1>8«rTntion(i  on  t\wi  Iliad
Ud47);  a  reoeDfliou  of  Hennauu's  Uiou  Hud  Mosclnm
(m49),  and  of  hia  Aescbyluo  (14^J;  an  «ditiun  uf
Horace  (IS&l);  a  school  edition  of  the  J/rbinior-
phatti  of  Ovid  ( 1S53) ;  a  mouograpb  on  Calpnrniiw
and  Nemosianus  (Ir^);  a  small  text  of  CatuUiiH,
Tibiillus,  and  Propei'tius  (tS53):  an  edition  of  ibi;
firrnuiHm  of  Tacitns  (l«i5>:  of  Vergil  (1858).  Hi«
OpuHntla  wrre  collected  and  edite<l  by  Wilainowitz-
MuUeiidoi-ff  (ld76>.  S«e  an  appreciative  paper  by
Prof.  Nettleabip  iu  bis  Ltcturen  and  Kittaga  (Oxford,
1880).

HautoQ  Timonunfinos. See  Terestius.

Head-dress. Sco  Coma.  ;  Ikfvla  :  Mitra  ;  Rk-

DIMICCLUM; VlTTA.

Hearse. Him;  Kfxrs;  Plai-stbum.

Health. Set-  Kocrs;  Vesta.

Heating  An-augeznauta. See  Doutrs ;  Focva.

HeM  ('H^ij).  DHUgh(er  of  ZeUH  and  Her^,  aud
goddesH  of  etornul  yontb.  Sbe  wa«  roprcKcntcd
aa  the  baiidmiiideu  of  tlio  gOiU,  J«r  wboni  »h<?
pntirti  nut  tbi'ir  n<xtAr,Jind  tbu  counorl  of  Hi'ntelcJt
after  bis  apotlu^win.  HIil'  wan  wiu»hip[H^  nitb
HvinclcFt  ill  Biryon  aud  PbliuH,  L'n|H;cial]y  ninlur
lKi>  (lamo  tiauymeild  or  Dia.  Sbe  was  reprcoeuted
oa  froeiiig  mou  from  cbaina  and  boudJi,  and  her
riteB  wore  celebrated  wUb  tiurcstraiued  raeirinieut.
The  Komans  identified,  Uob6  with  Invciitas,  the
porsonificotioo  of  youthful  oiauhood.  As  rcpre-
eeutiiig  the  etemnl  youth  of  the  Roman  State,
luventas  had  a  cbupel  on  the  Capitol  iu  the  /Wnt
ctmrt  of  tbe  Teni^de  of  Minerva,  nnd  iu  biter  times
a  temple  of  her  own  iu  the  city  (Livy,  v.  &4).  It
Ti-aa  to  Inpiter  and  IiiTentJia  that  boyw  ottereil
prayer  on  tho  Capitol  \rhou  they  put  ou  the.  lotfn
HrJIif,  putting  a  pioco  of  moucy  into  tbcir  trea»-
nry.  Two  fluo  |>ocn)H  in  KugUsh  arc  fluggvsted
by  the  myth  of  Hob6— oue  the  Fait  of  UeM.  by
Thomas  Moore,  aud  the  other,  Hebt!,  by  James  Boa*
Hell  Lowell,

Hebraei. See  Iudabi.

Hebron  (Xf^jjwv  and  'Kffpif).  A  city  in  the
south  of  ludaea.  the  first  capital  of  the  kinjtdom
of  Uavid,  who  roi(;ned  tbcie  for  seven  aud  a  half
years  ns  king  of  Jnduh  only.

HebroB  ('E^pot^.  Tliu  niodern  Maritza:  the
principal  river  in  Tbruco,  rising  in  the  niuuutnitis
of  Scomios  aud  Rbodopt^.  and  falling  i[ito  the  At-
gaeSD  Sea  uear  Aecos.  after  forming  by  another
branch  an  e»tuary  called  Stentoris  Lacus.  The
HebniH  was  oeI(^brated  iu  Greisk  legends.  Ou  its
banks  Orpheus  was  torn  to  pieces  by  the  Thmciau
Koinen;  and  it  is  frequently  uienlioiied  iu  connoe-
tiuu  with  lliB  worship  of  Dionysus.


rerauuL


HebQdae. See  EarciAK.

Heoa&^  CZKcupyt]).  <1)  A  Hyperboi-eau  mtai-
en,  dangbter  of  Ooreas.  She  was  one  of  those  mhn
introduced  the  iroi-ahip  of  Artemis  into  IftloK
(V)  An  epithet  often  applied  to  Artemis  as  beini;
I  onf*  who  ffriicle  her  works  from  a  dislancv,  wfaitli
is  the  lueauitig  of  ibe  word.  The  niawnliue  fonn
{tKatpyot)  i»  in  like  manner  applied  la  ApoUo.

I  Hec&l£  ('EK^tj).  A  poor  old  woman  who  liat-
:  pitably  received  Tbesoos  wheo  he  bad  gout  uotta

hnnt  the  Maratboniau  bull,  aud  offered  to  Zeota
I  AscriBce  for  the  wfo  rctuni  of  the  hero.  As  ibe
j  died  bwfon*  his  rotiim,  Theseus  decreed  that  tbs

I>eopl«  of  the  Attic  tetrapolts  should  offer  a  uni-
'  lico  to  her  and  to  Zens  Hecaleuns. See  TiiESEr8>.

Hecalesia  ('KicaA^trtoi'  UpAv).  A  festival  ai  Atlb
euN  in  honour  of  Zens  He4.-nle«tus.  It  was  inrii-
tnted  by  Thorteus,  iu  cumuiemoratiou  of  the  kiod'
uess  of  Ilecalt^  towards  hlui  when  he  was  going
ou  bis  adventure  against  the  MaratboniaD  ball

HficataeUB  {'KKoraiot).  <\)  A  Onwk  efaronirlrr,
boru  of  a  noble  family  at  Milelnts  about  B  c.  5i"A
Id  his  youth  he  travelled  widely  iu  Knropc  it-I
Asia,  as  welt  as  in  Egypt.  At  the  timv  of  tbu  IuqI-
au  revolt  he  was  in  his  native  city,  nud  gave  ha
conulrymeu  the  wisest  counsels,  bat  in  vain.  Afkr
the  suppreasiou  of  the  rising,  be  succeeded  lijbii
tnct  aud  managempnt  iu  oblainiug  some  allrria-
liuu  of  the  linnl  mvusuren  a<1opteil  by  the  PeruiuL
Ho  died  about  -nfi.  The  nneient  crilies
him  u  high  place  among  the  Greek  biAturlaa(|
preceded  Herodotus,  though  pronouncing
ierior  to  iho  latter.  His  two  works,  of  wbichMl*
fragmeuts  n>malu.  were;  ia)  A  de*»crl|)tioD  of  tb«
earth  { ntpioiot  V^s  or  nfpiiJTT/onp  1,  which  w»
nincb  consulted  by  llerodutns,  and  was  aiifMlwit-
ly  used  to  correct  the  chart  of  Anaximaodsr.  Il
wns  iu  two  parts,  one  relating  to  Europe  md  tk
other  to  AHitt.  Kgypt.  and  Libya.  (6)  A  tiMlw
on  Oret*k  faldes,  entitled  rivtaXtyyim,  or  frnMlv
ffira,  and  uImo  'lirropiai,  in  four  books,  on  tbf  pmf-
ical  tnuliliusu  of  the  Greeks.  The  fhigroenticf
HuentaeUM  have  been  edited  by  Klauimn  (
1831)  mid  C.  and  Th.  MUller  (Paris.  IMI)
Schiiffcr,  lleatiaifu*  (1885);  and  the  urticlr
oiiApHi.  (2)  An  Abderite,  a  contcminirarj  of  AIm-
atider  the  Great.  He  wns  a  phlloaopber,  critic
and  gniumiarian,  and  probably  was  the  antbor  of
a  liiMiory  of  the  Jews  citeil  often  by  losepbaa

Hecit6  {'Kkotti).  a  Greek  goildeas,  tboa|b  per
hapM  of  non-Hellenic  origiu.  She  was  nnkuswa  lo
Homer,  but  iu  Hesiod  she  wiu  Ibe  only  daughter  rf
the  Titan  Peracs  anfl  of  Aaterio,  the  sisUr  of  L»la
She  stood  high  in  the  regard  of  Zciu,  fmui  wIh*
abe  bad  received  n  share  in  the  hcaveu,  cadh.  tui
ocean.  She  was  invoked  at  all  saniUcM,  fertJw
could  give  or  withhold  her  blessing  in  daily  ii^  >■
war.  in  oontestsun  the  sea,  in  the  buutiog-fieM,ii
the  education  of  children,  and  in  the  teudipg  i^
cattle.  TbuA  she  npiieared  as  a  iieraouiflestisn  rf
the  divine  |>owcr,  aud  was  the  instmntent  thranf^
which  the  gods  effect«-d  their  will,  tbongli  i3>md>
selves  far  away.  In  later  titoca  she  vaa  confuie'
with  rei-scjihou^,  the  qaeen  of  the  lowei  myrW.*
aasociated  with  ben  Sometimea  she  was  ngupM
as  [be  gudtbsaa  of  the  looon  (Scleni^t  or  as  Artna'*)
Hometimvs  abe  was  identified  with  foretgn  ^^
of  the  same  kind.  Being  conceivtHl  of  asaicoddw
of  night  liitd  of  the  lower  worbl.  she  was,  u  t^


man


HECATOHBAEA


775


HEcrroK


ireiit  (in,  transfonned  ioto  D  deity  of  ghoBtn  and

iSmgic. SUm  was  ropntieutcN]  n»  liutintiiiK  crovs-

I  vaya  and  ifraves,  acrrnnipanivfl  by  tbv  dugs  of  tlie

Styx,  witl)  tlic  spirits  of  t)i«  dvait  and  tnK))jM  of

apcctral  foniis  in her  train. Sliu lunt poiverful


iCtiucl,  itmtfitm  Riintnum.  roL  L  lar  SL|


aid  to  nil  ma^cal  iiiraiitatioriB  and  witches'  wnrk.
All  niirliantiTs  and  cnchaiitrowies  vftins  bor disciples
And  prot^A;  McMli<d.  in  [inrticulnr,  vena  n'sardpd  as
li(*r  votary,  ftho  won  vromlii[iiH>d  in  |>rivali>  und
in  |>ublic  in  many  plocpa — for  iniitnnrn,  in  8amo<
«lirace,Tliessa1y,LeiiinoH,AtIienit,aDd  Aegiua — and
liwl  a  eelebrat0d  temple  near  Strntouicea  in  Caria.
H«r  inugM  were  set  uji  i»  tlio  front  of  bouites  and
by  the  road-side,  with  altars  in  front  of  tbom  and
-a  roof  above  tbem.  On  the  last  day  of  tbe  month,
which  witu  sacred  to  her,  offerings  wore  uiade  to
her  in  tb*icm»«way8  of  etgH,  fish,  and  onions.  The
rictjntn  ftacritked  to  her  were  young  dogs,  black
-«wea,  and  bouAy.

In  works  of  art  she  is  nsaally  portrayed  in  tbre«
forma,  reprcwnted  by  three  statiiei*  tttandtng  hack
"to  back.  Each  form  has  itd  special  attributes —
-torebos,  keys,  Anffnon,  snakes,  and  dogs.  In  the
Oigantoraacbia  of  Pergonmni  she  appears  with  a
different  weapon  in  her  three  right  hands — a  torch,
4  Hword,  and  a  lance.

Becatombaea  VEKitrnftffata).  (I)  A  festival  oele-
bratcil  in  bonunr  of  Her6  by  the  Argtviv  aitd  peo-
ple of  Aegjna.  It  rooeivod  its  name  fmm  fVortif
4ind  Srtvr,  Iwing  a  sacrifice  of  a  hundred  oxeu,
wbtch  wwrn  alwayH  nffwrrd  to  the  go<Ides8,  and  the
iflcah  distrilinted  among  the  pw^rest  oitinf^ns.  There
wen  alao  public  gaiuet*,  finit  inHtitiitt^l  by  Arcbt-
nns,  a  king  of  Argo«,  in  which  the  pri7.e  wan  a
•hirld  of  brass  witli  a  cnnvii  of  myrtle.  (2)  An
anniveni»rr  sacriSct;  called  by  tbiK  nanm  in  Lu-
■coiiia,  and  otTtrred  for  the  |irL'Hi;rvatii>n  tif  the  hun-
•dred  towns  which  onoe  dourishcd  in  that  comitry.

Hecatombaeon  CKKnTOfii^ntniv].  Tbetirst  month
iu  the  Attic  year,  correspouding  with  ttif  last  half
of  Jnly  and  the  first  of  Angiist.  The  SjMirtatiH
called it  'Etearoti}i4Cs (Arist.  If.  A,  v.  II,  2.) See

Hecatomb^  (/xorti^i;!.  A  word  whose  orig-
inal ni^iintu^  was  a  sacrifice  of  a  hundred  oxen:
lint  iu  rnrly  tiniM  it  wa4  applied  generally  l^i  any


great  saorifloe,  without  any  idea  either  of  osen  or
deflnite  number.  Mr.  A.  Piatt  in  tbe(Kng.)  Journa/
of  Pkihhii}/  for  l^i.  niakea  tKart'tfttit]  to  mean  orig-
inally one  iix  in  t-arb  bnmiriHl. 8(w  KAnRiFiru'M.

BeoBtomnoa  rEKurn^vcut).  A  king  uf  Caria,
the  father  uf  Mausolus  and  Arleniisia.  See  AM-
tbmisia;  MAt-»t«.rs.

Hecatompftdon. .See  Pus;  Templum.

Hecatomphonia  (ro  fVoro^^owa,  from  itcaruv,
*'aliniidrfd,";ktHl  (ftavtC^," lokiU").  Afcolentu  sac-
liBoe  off'iTfd  by  the  Messenians  to  Zens,  when  any
of  them  bad  killed  a  hundred  enemies.  AriNTouic-
ncs  is  Niid  to  have  offered  up  this  sacritlco  three
timcn  in  the  cmrHo  of  the  Mewenian  warsagainot
Hpuria  [pHiiHan.  iv.  ID).

Hecatomp^Uia  (Eicaro/iiroAir).  An  fpithet  given
to  Crt'io,  frtiui  the  hundred  cities  which  it  once
contained  (Horn.  11.  ii.  6i9).  The  same  epithet  was
also  applied  to  Lacouia.  The  greater  part  of  llieiw.
however,  were  probably,  like  the  denHM  of  Attica,
not  larger  tliau  vilbiges.

Hecatompj^Ioa  t  iKOToftrrvXot.  "  H  u  n  d  r  e  d-
gated").  (1)  An  epithet  uf^eo  applied  to Tbeltes
in  Egypt.  Bee  Tiif.bak.  C-i)  A  city  of  Portbia  near
the  centre  of  the  country  and  once  the  capiral.

HeoBton  {'Ekotuv).  A  8toie  pliiliwoplier  n^f
RtindeH  who  studied  nnder  PanaetiU!!  stul  wmte
nuniurouH  works  now  Ifwt.

Hecatoncheliea  {' Eximiyj^ttp^t,  "the  hnndnMl-
handed  ones'').  Iu  llesiod  these  are  three  giants,
each  with  fifty  arui«  ond  n  tinndrecl  hands,  sons  of
IJninns  and  tim'a.  Tlicir  nam^  are  HrlareAs,  Cot-
tUH,  and  Gyes.  Uwiiig  to  tbeirhosttle  attitndc  to
him,  their  fnlliiT  kept  them  impri»oned  in  the  bow-
els of  ibe  earth;  hut  on  the  advice  of  Qaea,  the
gwls  of  Olympus  dninmoned  tliern  from  their  pria*
on  to  loud  assistance  Hgainnt  the  Tituus,  and,  after
their  viutury,  set  them  to  watch  the  Titans,  who
bad  boHi  thrown  into  Tartanu.  Homer  mentions
llriareta,  called  by  men  Aegoenn.  as  ibe  sou  of  Po-
seidon, and  mightier  khan  his  father  (/f.  L).

Becatonnesl  ('Yjcarun^trnt ).  The  Hundred
Iniundx ;  t  be  name  of  :i  group  of  smnl!  itlnnda
Iwlween  l-esbon  and  the  ruaat  uf  Aeolia  (Herod,  i.
l."!!).

Hector  ('Kirraop).  The  son  of  PrlaiD  and  Hecu-
ba and  the  most  valinot  of  all  the  Trojan  chlefM
that  fought  against  the  (Greeks.  He  ninrried  An-
droniaoh<^,  daughter  of  Ention,  by  whom  ho  bo-
cnnifl  the  father  n{  Astynnax.  Hector  was  ap-
pointed commuudrr  of  all  the  Trojan  forces,  and
fur  a  long  iienod  provost  tbu  bulwark  of  his  native
city.  He  was  nut  only  the  bravest  and  must  pow-
erful, but  ahtu  the  most  amiable,  of  liiit  conntry-
uKMi.  and  particularly  distingtiished  himiwlf  in  bin
euntlii'lN  wjtb  Aiax,  Diome4l<<,  and  many  other  of
the  nnwit  fnrmidiible  leailera.  The  fates  had  de-
Crt>ed  that  Troy  Hlionid  ii«ver  Ite  de«tn)yeil  n«  long
Oh  Heotur  lived.  Tbu  Greeks.  tberelun<,  after  the
death  of  Patroclus,  who  bad  fallen  by  Hretor's
hand,  made  a  powerful  effort  uudur  the  command
of  Achilles;  and,  by  the  inlerventiou  of  Athene,
who  assumed  the  form  uf  DeTphobns,  and  nrgcd
Hector  to  encounter  the  Gri*ciau  chief,  contrary  to
the  rt-moiiHtrauccs  of  Priam  und  Hecuba,  their  ef-
fort was  crowned  with  success.  Hi'etor  fell,  und
his  death  accomplished  the  overthrow  of  bin  fa-
ther's kingdom.  The  dead  Imdy  of  the  Trojan  war-
rior was  atlAfbi'd  to  the  chariot  of  Achilles,  and


I


I


HeglaJL S4M)  }lEUKtJlA».

Baliulaa.  (It  EiANiia.(DASlEL  Hkins),  a  diatin-
^uiftlicil  SL-liolnr  *>f  tlit^  (ui-trallcMl  "Dutch  Reuais-
Miice."  He  was  born  at  (Jliein,  Jmm  9th,  IWO.
lu  IWA  he  eotorcd  the  lIiiiTeniity  of  Kraiiakou  to
p«rfwt  himself  iu  Greek,  huvini;  alrendy  won  no-
tire  by  hia  scbolanthip.  8u«)ii  aflcr  he  iwttled  at
Le><Iiui,  where  be  spent  thu  WMimindor  of  his  life,
aasocint^'d  nith  such  inou  an  Joseph  .Si^iUiger,
DiMiza,  and  Panluii  Merulu.  In  lij4>-i  he  was  iuiuIb
Profwwor  of  I^lin  at  ihi?  Univorsity,  in  IWTj  Fro-
fcWKtr  of  Ontck.  and  in  ltXJ7  University  Librarian.
He  diwl  at  iha  Habile,  Febniary  25tb,  H>56.

Hji4  workH  itH-liidc  editions  uf  SiliuM  ItnlicMtH
(1600),  Hesiod  (1603),  Theocritas,  Bion.  and  Mus-
chun  (1604),  Horact*  (1610).  Aii*.fotle  and  Sonuu*
(1611).  Terence  (1618),  Livy  (Kvitt),  Ovid  (1929),  and
the  Kpiatolae  of  Ju6(;pli  StaliKer  (HV27).  He  also
publiEthL-d  tbreo  vohinicn  of  original  Latin  poenia
—Iambi  (UiOat,  Elegiatf  {imi],  IWmata  (lOOf.)— nnd
poenw  iu  Dutch  and  Lutiu  (1604}.  Sue  L.  MUller,
<r«pcAieArr  rf.  claM.  Fkilolo(^e  in  dcit  Xtedcrlanden,
pp.  Sa  foil.  (UipziK,  1(^69).

(2)  IliH  aod  N'lKouuu  was  also  a  scholar  of
tunch  diMtinrfiou  (born  1020,  died  lGc<l].  He  Kjmnt
the  greater  part  uf  his  life  in  travel  for  the  {mrpnse
of  itiidyiug  and  oullatini;  claHnical  MSS  He  pnU-
llshed  editiouB  of  Ovid  (1652;  :k1  otl.  1661),  I'ater-
odIiis  (1G78),  atitl  Valerius  Flaccus  (16t^).
Heir. StTn  Hf.kk-s.

Helciaiiua.  One  nho  tows  a  veaacl  agaitiHt  the
•trcaui  by  a  low-liue  ikttciitfti)  (Mart.  W.G4/£i),  as
fhowu  by  the  annexed  illuBtnitiou,  which  repre-
wota  a  Tesael  Ia4leu  with  com  and  oil  ttiwed  by
two  grotesque  fifjuren.


I


(From  m  UoMlr  rnnnil  at  LerldK,  Spain.)

Helfina  ('EAt'tn;).  (1)  Thi;  iK-autifnl  daii;:ht«r  of
Zi-UN  111)0  I^da,  the  wife  of  Tymlan-oH  of  Sparta.
8Iii"  wasKittliTof  Ihu  DioHCuri  anti  of  Clytaeniiit-Ktra.
The  post-Homeric  story  represented  her  na  carried
off,  while  stil)  n  maiden,  by  Tliesens,  to  the  Attic
fortress  of  Aphirtnne,  whore  she  bore  him  a  dan>;li-
ter,  Iphigenia.  She  wosftfterwanlsset  fre«  by  hnr
brothers,  who  took  her  back  to  .Sparta.  She  was
wooed  by  a  nnnilwr  of  snitors,  ami  at  len/jtb  gava
her  hand  to  MvinelallK,  by  whom  she  hncanm  tho
mother  of  om-  chihl,  Herminiic^.  Iti  the  abstnro
of  her  boKband  »he  wan  reduced  ami  curried  away
to  Troy  by  PaHft.  tJie  aoii  of  Priam,  taking  with  hi-r
great  treasarv*.  Thin  was  the  origin  of  the  Trojun
'War.  The  Trf»j(iu9,  in  spite  of  the  calamity  sho
bad  brought  upon  them,  iovcd  her  for  her  beauty,
ftnd  refused  to  restore  her  to  ber  huabaiid.  She,
bowerer,  lamented  the  folly  of  her  youth,  and
;eame<l  for  her  ttome,  her  husband,  nnd  her  ttangh-
ter.  After  the  death  uf  Pans  she  was  wedded  to
Delphobnn,  awiiiited  the  Greeks  at  the  takinfi  of
Troy,  on'l  Wt rayed  Deijihobus  into  Menelaiis's
haudn.  With  MeuelnUs  she  linally  returne<l  to
25*


B«lmi  md  Fuia. (N^ilet  Hntenm.)

Sparta  after  eight years'  wamlcriug,  and  Uveil
thenceforth  with  him  in  happiness  and  concord.

According  to  another  story,  mainly  cnrreut  itfter
the  time  of  Steoichorns,  Paris  carried  off  to  Trny
Dot  the  real  Helen,  hut  a  phantom  of  her  created
by  Hvrtf.  Tho  real  Helen  was  wafted  through
the  air  hy  Hermes,  and  brmigbt  to  King  Pnv
tans  in  Egypt,  whence,  after  the  deittriiclinn
of  Troy,  tihu  wan  taken  home  by  Menelails.
(See  Herod,  it.  112-120.)  Afr.Hr  the  ileath  of
Mcnelaiis  nho  ^vuR,  according  to  onn  ntorr,
driven  fn>m  Bparta  by  her  Hti:)>-(tonN,  and  tied
therenpou  to  Kliodes  to  her  frieml  Polyxo,  it  ho
hanged  her  on  a  tree.  Another  truilition  ii:p-
resented  her  as  living  after  death  in  weillock
with  AnhilU'H  cm  the  islanil  of  Leiic^.  She  waa
worMhipped  an  iIir  giwidejfs  of  beanty  in  a
"Iieeial  sanctuary  at  Tliernpm*  in  Iju-ouih,
where  a  feHtivul  wan  heltl  in  her  honour.  She
waN  also  iuvokul,  like  lier  hrothcra  the  Dio-
Mcuri,  as  a  tulc-Iary  dotty  uf  sailora.  (Hoc  I>lo-
flCi:TU.)

In  the  Jliad,  Helen  is  apparently  regardeil  im
one  who  is  not  responsible  for  tho  ruin  that  she
works,  two  passages  seennng  to  imply  that  she
was  carrie«l  off  by  force  (ii.  Sofi  anil  ;JJKI),  In  the
Odyunry  she  is  al»o  excused  by  the  fact  that  she
Hind  becnu.it3  a  god  has  so  willml  it.  (Cf.  Odnas.
xxiii.  222).  Mr.  GlaiUtonu  in  hin  Homeric  stndies
even  regards  Iter  as  not  only  a  ty]>e  of  womanly
lovoliness,  but  of  idiiLOHt  Christian  penitence  as
well  I  The  story  of  Helen  h:u<  receix'ed  a  splemlid
sotting  in  tho  genius  of  poets  of  evf  ry  age.  8he
is  tho  most  fauions  woman  of  all  anli(|uity.  In
Goethe's  Fautt  (pt.  ii.)  she  is  allegorically  iurru-
ducc^l  OS  typifying  the  classical  spirit  of  beauty.
In  English,  see  the  Hetlenict  of  Walter  Savago
Landor,  Tennyson's  Drt^im  of  Fair  FTowra,  and
Andrew  Lang's  poem  Helen  of  Troy,  with  the  ap-
pended essay.

(2)  Flavia  IrLiA,  conminiily  known  in  ecclesiaa-
lical  hiKtory  by  the  name  of  St.  Helena,  the  first  wife
of  Cou»tautiutt  CUlorQfi. She  wiu;  bum  of  obscure


UELKN'A


778


HELICONUOI


parents,  ill  ariUage  called  Drcpaniun.iD  Bitbynia,
■»vhiclj  vena  aftcr^raTds  Taiseil  by  ber  aou  Coiistaii-
tiiie  to  tliB  nmk  of  n  city,  umier  tbe  iiaioe  of  Heleii-
iipuliM.  Her  IniBband  CouBtikiitiutt,  on  Iwiiij;  tniule
Cai<«ar  by  Diocletian  and  Maxiinimi  lA.n.  *iSH),  re-
pudiated Helena,  and  lunrritK)  Theodora,  danghtcr
■«if  Maxiiiiian.  Helena  withdrew  into  retircniont
tibtil  licTHon  Coiialantine,  baviiigbei:Dnieeni|ierur,
called  tiifi  inotber  to  court,  ami  gu\o  bcr  tbe  titlii
of  AiiffUKta.  lie  aUoKii))vbt.-d  ber  with  bir}(CKnuis
of  money,  wbiub  abc  (-miiloyed  in  buildiiiK  and  «n-
flowlug  cbarchoi«,and  in  relieving  the  poor.  AlwHit
A.i>.  3S5  sbu  mt  ont  on  a  pilgrimage  to  PaKt«tliio,
and,  having  explored  tb«  aito  of  .Jtsni»jkleni,  she
tbiuigtit  tliat  slie  bad  ditwovered  tbe  M-pulubru  of
JeKni>.,  and  altio  tbe  crow  on  which  be  died.  With
it  sbo  in  said  to  have  fouud  the  cn)weti  of  tbe  two
thieves,  and  to  have  leunied  which  was  tbu  true
»tHe  by  the  miracle  it  wrought  in  restoring  to  htmltb
n  iick  perHoii  to  nhoMs  bedsiilc  it  wus  caiTic^].  i^he
bnilt  a  cbnrcb  on  tlit-  spot  supposed  to  be  that  of
the  Holy  Sepulchre,  which  has  continued  to  bo
venerated  by  that  name  to  the  prewnt  day.  Site
also  bnilt  a  church  at  Betblehom,  in  honour  of  the
nativity  of  the  Saviour.  fVoni  Palestine  she  re-
joineil  her  aon  at  Nifomedia,  in  Bitliynia.  where
^he  expired,  hi  the  year  S27,  at  a  verj-  advanced
age.  She  is  nuiubeivd  by  the  Roman  Church
among  the  t)aiut«,  and  her  festival  i»  August  IHtb.

HelSua  {'KXivt}). A  deserted  and  rugged  island
in  tbu  Aegean,  opposite  to  Tlioriciis,  and  exteml-  !
ing  from that parallel to  tiinnium. It  reoeivod  |
its  name  from  the  circutustaucc  of  Paris  having'
landed  on  it,  ii«  was  said,  in  company  with  Helen,
when  thoy  were  fleeing  from  Sparta  (Pliny,  //,  .V.
iv.lA;  Meln,ii.7). Strubo,  who  foltowH  Artemido-
ins,  conceived  it  to  be  the  Cmuae  of  Houier  (II.
iii.  444). rUuy  calls  it  Mochs. Tbe  modern  uamc
is  Maurunisi.

HelinuB  ('i'lXd'uc  I. A  famous  fioothaaycr,  sun  ,
of  Priam  find  Hecuba,  awl  tbe  only  one  of  their  I
enUH  who  oiirvived  tbo  aiogo  of  Troy. He  was  so  i
ehagrineil,  nctording  to  some,  at  having  failed  to  ^
obtain  Helen  in  ninrHage  aftiT  tint  death  (»f  Paris  I
Chat  he  retireil  to  Mount  Ida,  and  wait  there,  by  .
the  ad^Hce  of  Calebos,  anrpriMHl  and  carried  away  ,
to  tbe  Orocian  camp  by  OdysMns. Among  other
preiliotions,  HelenuA  declared  that  Troy  could  not
betaken  u(ilcs*Phiioctete«(q.v.»could  bo  prevailed
to  quit  bis  retreat  and  repair  to  the  Kiege. Aftvr
the  dcAtruction  of  Troy,  he,  t«goth>er  with  Audrom-
aoh^,  fell  to  the  abure  of  I'yrrhus,  wbo«e  favonr  lie
eonoiliated  by  deterring  him  from  sailing  with  tbe
Text  of  theOrveks,  wbc»[a«  be  foretold)  would  be  cx-
)MMt4Hl  to  u  severe  tempe»t  on  leaving  tbe  Tn>jau
shore. Pyrrbus  not  only  niaiiifeste<l  his  gnititudc
bygivici);  him  AndrotuaidH5  in  marriage,  but  nomi-
11.1  red  him  oitbiHsiirceBsor  in  the  kiiigiUmiofKpirns,
tij  the  exchiniun  of  bin  own  sou  MoIo^kuh,  wIih  did
not  ascend  tbo  throne  until  aflur  the  death  of  Hel-
cuu». A  son  !iame<]  Cestrriins  wan  tbe  ofl8i)jing  of
the  union  of  UelenUM  wieh  Andromacb^JfVerg.  .^fu.
iii. 294  foil).

HelepOlis  (A*iro^tcl.  Literally,  "dentmyer  of
cities;"  the  name  given  to  an  engine  invented  by
DentetriuH  Poliorcetes  (q.  v.)  for  lH'«ieging  fortitied
placeH,  consisting  of  a  squura  tower  placi'd  upon
wheels,  and  nin  np  to  the  height  of  nine  Htories,
each  of  which  waH  furnished  with  machines  for
battering  and  dischnrgtog  projectilcn  of  cnonuons


hxze  and  weight  (Diod,  Sic.  xx.  4'?.  Dl ;  Vitmf
2i;  Amniiun.  xxiii.  4,  10|. See  I>F.>teT]Ut.sp,4

Heli&des  ('ll\iaA«{)  and  Heliftdae  ('HXitiaoil-
(l)Tbe  danghlerR  of  Helitis  (the  ^Suu)  audClyment
They  were  thirc  in  iiumbtT — Lampelid,  PharthuM,
and  Pboelwi ;  or  f>f.\t:n,  futr.ordiuj;  to  Hygiim»—
MenqM^,  Heli(^,  AegW,  I^m|ieTi6.  I'hoeb*^,  Aethrii,
and  Dioxippt^.  They  were  so  afflicted  at  thcdi
of  their  brother  Pbaethou  (see  FtLACTiiuN)
they  were  changed  by  tbe  gods  into  poplars.
tbuir  tearpt  Into  amber,  on  the  banks  of  tbe  rivet
Po(Ovid.  Jfi*/.ii.a41);  ll^g.Fab,  l&l).  (2)  Childrw
of  HelioH  and  the  nymph  Khodus.  They  wen
seven  in  number,  and  were  fablctl  to  have  Iind
the  tirvt  inhabitants  of  tbe  islaud  of  Rhoiles. Su

Hellaea. See  Dicabterion  ;  Dicastbs.

Heliaatae  CHAiocrrai). See  Dica^ns.

HeUc6  ('EXi'xi;).  (I)  Another  name  for  tbo  Urai
Maior,  or  "GrcaiOT  Bear.^  (See  AncTo^.y  (Z^Om
of  the  chief  cities  of  Acbaia,  aituatDd  on  the  Dhoti
of  the  S^iiuiijCorinthiacns.  ncarBnra  iHennl.  i.H<^
It  wan  c-elebraled  for  tbe  temple  and  worhhip  uf
Poseiilon,  tbeiifH>4^All<Ml  Heticoniim.  Hen<,aliui.tli>
general  meeting  of  tbe  loniam*  was  convened,  vbllf
yet  ia  (he  [losseasion  of  Aegialns,  and  the  featinl
which  then  took  place  is  snpp<iMHl  to  have  rmt
bled  that  of  the  Paulouia,  which  tbey  iDstlnttd
afierwiu>l«  in  Aniii  Minor  (Pausan.  \u.'Mi.  Atr^-
memlousiudnx  of  the  sea,  canned  bya  vjuleot  Mrth-
rpmkv,  overwhelmed  and  couiplotely  dcitiniyol  Hrl-
ic^  two  years  before  the  battle  of  Leurtra,  n  ('-PI
The  details  of  this  catatttropbe  will  be  fonml  iii
Pausnuios  (vii.  24)  ajul  Aoliau  (ZTtVf.  Jatm.  si.U').
ErntoBtheucs,  as  Strabo  re|>orl8,  Iwliold  lb*  «»«
of  this  ancient  city,  and  be  was  assured  by  Mil-
on  that  the  bronze  stAtno  of  Poseidon  was  Mill
vLSkble  beneath  the  waters,  holding  an  hip|>i>c«iB-
pun,  or  rten-boiiw,  in  bis  baud,  and  that  it  famri
a  dangeniUK  shoal  for  their  vusaela.  T«n  tboti-
sand  workmen  were  afterwards  Kent  by  tbi*Acliw-
aiiK  to  recover  tbo  dead  bodies,  but  without  tnt-
ce>i«.

HeUcon  ('EXiKuf).  (1)  A  fomotu  rooaatain  in
Biicotia,  near  the  tinlf  of  Corinth.  It  was  uenA
to  Apollo  and  the  Muses,  who  were  theocc  olM
UelicoDiades.  This  mountain  woa  famed  (at  tb"
purity  of  its  air,  the  abundance  of  its  wal«T,  it«
fertile  volleys,  tbe  density  of  its  shades,  and  tl»
beauty  of  the  venerable  tre«e  which  clothnl  >l*
Hides.  Oi)  tbe  summit  was  tbe  grove  of  tbe  VutMi
where  these  divinities  hail  their  statues, and  when
also  were  tttatues  of  Ai^tlloand  HenDt!>s,of  BMCkw
by  Lysippus,  of  Orpbenx,  and  of  famous  pueti  ud
musiciaus  ( Pauiuu.  ix.  :tti  }.  A  little  Vdow  tbr
grove  was  the  fountain  of  Agauipj)^,  Tliosomw
Hippocreu£  (q.  v.)  was  about  twenty  stoflia  abof*
the  grove,  tt  is  said  to  have  burst  forth  yUen  ti'
horse  Pegasus  struck  his  hoof  into  the  gnmivt
(Fatuan.  ix.  31),  whence  its  nnme,  tinroLi  yf»»-
These  two  spring!*  supplied  two  «mal1  ri^ws
named  Olmiiu  and  Permessns,  which,  after  miUiof
tboir  waters,  flowtxl  into  the  lake  Copals.  n«tf
Huliartus.  Tlie  modem  name  of  Helicon  ia  PalW'
ovoiini,  and  of  HipiKvcren^,  Kryo[>eg»ili,  ot  "fii
S]>riug."  (2)  A  river  of  M;u'-t'douia.  near  Diarn.  tbt
same,  according  to  Paiisania«  ( ix.  M)  i,  trltb  tbe
Haphyrus.

Belicoai&deB. A  name  given  lo  tbeMoiettfi<B


HEU0CAMINU8


779


IlEUOS


heir  fabled  rvsideiiw  on  Mount  Hi*lieoD,  whicli  wa*
irrfd  to  thein  (Lticrpt.  iii.  1(^0).
HeliooanuDQB.  Hee  DOMUS,  p.  M)2.
Heliodonw  (HXif^a^pop).  <I)  A  Gre«k  port,  fitim
»iLimi  sixtoou  hexauichrs  are  cit«<l  by  Stobaens
[Serwi-  i»8),  contaiiiiiiK  a  dcecriptimi  «f  tliiil  part
Itf  Campania  siluatnl  between  the  Liicrine  Lake
%aA  PntfoU,  and  where  Cicero  h-id  a  couutry  re»-
klencc.  Souie  mippowi  biiu  U)  have  lieen  the  same
With  the  ilintoriciaii  Hetimloms  uietitiiined  by  Uor-
mev  {Sat.  i.  5.  2),  as  one  of  the  comimiiions  of  his
JoiiTDcy  to  BrondiBium.  {2)  An  Athenian  phyiii-
«ian,  of  whont  Gaicii  nmkv«  nitntion,  Bud  who  alwi
■vrotradidHctiepoeni.uudortbetitleof 'AtroXiTUta,

.luHlitiuHtiou/'  of  which  Oaleo  cites  aeveu  b«x- 1
ttmetfira. (3)  A  native  of  Larissa,  who  left  a  trcn-  I
tine  ou optics,  tinder  Uic  title of Kt<pa\aia  tS>v  I
'Oirrucwi-.  which  ia  ncarcely  anything  more  than  an
abridguont  of  lh«  optical  work  aacribed  to  Euclid,
lie  cites  the  optics  of  Ptoleoiy. The  time  when  he
iflimrishod  in  nucertain  ;  fmni  tb«  luaunvr,  however,
in  which  he  apeake  of  TilieriuH.  it  is  probable  tlial
lie  livwl  a  long  time  after  tliat  emperor. Oriba-
■ius  ha»  I'reservfrd  for us  a  fragment  of  nnothur
•work  of  Uoliodonis,  wbiph  tn-i»t*  of  th«  KoxXt'ar,  a
ninnhino  furnUhcd  with  a  scruw  for  drawing  wat^rr.
<4i  A  Greek  romance-wrin^r,  who  watt  born  at  Kmesa
In  Pb«i-«uicin.  and  (louiinhwl  under  the  emiierors
'IlModoainH  and  AiciuUus  nt  tbe  cloae  of  the  fourth
«euturv. He  wa»  raiaod  to  tho  dignity  of  a  Idshop
of  Trices  in  Tbeaaaly. Holio<loniH  is  best  known
aa  the  author  of  a  Greek  romauce,  entitled  \l6to-
mcu.  buing  tlie  hi»lury  of  TlnaKenes  and  Chariclea,
Ibe  lattrr  a  dauRbterof  a  king  of  Aethiopia. It  is
in  trn  books. This  work  wa«  unknown  in  the  West
until  a  Holdier  of  Aimpiwli,  under  tbe  Margrave
Casiinir  of  Brandoiibnrj:,  awlMting  at  tbe  pillatfc
of  the  library  of  Malthian  Corviona,  at  Bnda,  in
ISaGJicing  attracted  by  the  rich  biudingof  a  niati-
Tiacripl ,  can  led  it  off. He  wild  the  priae  afterwartU
to  Vinncnt  Obaopa«ue,  who  published  it  at  Basic
in  1634, This  was  the  celebrated  rouiiiiice  of  Helio-
d<.ni*. P«tetry,  battles,  piracies,  and  recoKuitions
fill  up the piece; there is no picitiire of  tb«
miud,  no  attempt  at  character-drawins  carried  on
with  thtidHveiopnient  of  the  action. The  lucidetita
point  to  no  particular  era  of  society,  altlnnigh  one
way  perreive,  from  tbe  tone  of  sentiinent  throtigh-
*ta{.  that the  struggKi hatl commenced between
ihe spirit of  Christianity  aud the  gruasness of
pagan  ldi>lBtry. Egypt  is  neither  ant-iout  Kgypt.
iior  the  Egypt  nf  the  Ptolrmies,  nor  the  Egypt  of
the  RomauV Arheus  Ib  neither  Athena  free  nor
Athens  conquered— in  short,  there  isnoijidivldiml-
ity  either  in  the  places  or  pontoiia;  and  the  vague
pictures  of  the  French  r«iDances  of  the  seventeenth
<entnry  give  scarcely  a  caricatured  idea  of  the
model  from  which  tbt-y  were  drawn. Various  edi-
riont*  have  iHtrn  pubiishcd  of  the  roumuce  of  Holio-
«loniH. Tho  best  are  those  of  Btkker  (l^'iS)  and
Himohig.iu  his  Kroliei  .'iirijitorc*  (IHSC). There  is
nn  Engliiih  translation by  Smith  (Ixjndon,  1360).
See,  also,  Unulop.  //wfor.v  of  Fiction,  pp.  I'^'H*  (M
«1. 1845),  where  an  analysis  of  the  novel  is  given ;
CliAQviu,  Iw  Romtnciera  Green  ft  LatiHt,  eh.  vHl.
(1862):  Kobdo,  At  griwhiticht  Homan  (ICT6);  and
the  article  VovELS  ANti  Romances.
Heliognbaitu. See  EijcOADALUS.
HeUopfiUs  CHXiowroXit). (D  A  famotis  city  of
Tlgypt.  "tiialed  a  Utile  to  the  east  of  the  ft|>ex


of  the  Helta,  not  far  from  modwu  Cairo. In  He-
brew il  is  styled  On  or  Ann. lu  the  Septuagint
it  is  rallM  Huliopolis,  or  City  of  the  Snn  ;  in  Jciv-
mlnh (xliii.  13),  Betth  Shemlra^i.  e.  domtm  anlin.
Henalotus  also  uientions it by  this  name,  and
apeJiks  of  its  inhai»itftnts  as  being  the  wisest  aud
lumt  ingenious  of  all  tbe  Egyptiaus  (ii.  3). Ac-
cording to  Berosus,  this  was  the  city  of  Moses. It
was  also  a  place  of  resort  for  all  tbe  flreeks  who
visited  Kgy]»t  fut  iuatmction. Hither  came  He-
rodotus, PlaUi,  Eildoxns.  and  others,  aud  secured
much  of  tho  learning  which  they  afterwards  dis-
seminated aiuuuR  their  own  countrymen. Plato,
in  particubir,  resided  hen*  three  years. Manotho
(tj.  v.).  the  hiHtoriau,  wna also  here  aa  a  prieat. Tbe
city  was  built,  acconling  to  Strabo,  on  a  long,  ar-
tidoial  mouud  of  earth,  so  as  to  be  out  of  rvaoh
of  the  inuDdatioUH  of  tbe  Nile. It  liad  nn  oracle
of  Apollo  aud  a  famous  Temple  of  tbe  Sun. In  this
U'niple  was  fed  and  adored  tbe  saerml  ox  Mnovis,
OH  Apis  was  at  Memphis. This  city  was  laid  waste
with  ftr«'  and  sword  by  Candiyses,  aud  its  chapter
of  priests  all  sUughtvred. Slrab*.  saw  it  in  a  tie-
serled  Hlfttc  and  shorn  i>f  all  its  ftplendour. Hi;-
lioiwilin  was  famed  also  for  ita  fountain  of  cxrclleut
water,  which still remains,  and  gave  risi:  tu  the
sobs«4|uent  Anihic  name  of  the  place,  Ain  Shems,
or  the  Fountain  of  the  Suu. Tbe  unalern  name  is
Malareieh,  or  euni  water. A  solitary  obelisk  of
r.-d  gninite  is  all  that  remains  at  the  present  day
of  Ibis  onec  celebrated  plarxi ; and  the  two  obe-
liska  known  lu  "  Cleopatra's  Ni»«lle.fi'*  were  origi-
nally  bnmght  from  Heliopolis  to  Alexandria. (P«e
AI-EXaNPRIa.) (2)  A  celebrated  city  of  Syria,  thir-
ty-live miles  northwest  of  Damascns,  and  southwest
of  Eni«sa,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Oroutes. lis
Onici&n  name,  Heliopolifi  ('HXiowrDXir),  "City  of
the  Snn,"  is  merely  a  trauBlation  of  iho  native
term  Baalbek,  which  appellation  the  ruins  at  the
present  day  retain. [Soe  illustration  on the  fol-
lowing l>age.] Hcltopolia  was  f»m»'<l  for  its  Tem-
ple <if  the  Sun  (Baal),  erected  by  AnUuilnas  Pius,
though by the natives now aarrilwd to Solo-
mon ; and  the  ruins  of  this  celebrated  pilo  still
attest  its  furniftr  magnilit:ence. Of  these  the  nnait
notable  are  the  Great  Temple,  a  rectangular  build-
ing aOO  feel  by  lt>9,  with  a  iM-ristylo  of  Tvi  Corinthian
coltimus;  a  smaller  tciuide  called  the  Temple  of
Inpitor ;  and  a  circnlar  building  of  line  pn»portion«
long  aswl  as  n  Greek  Cbnrch. Heliopolis  was
made  a  Roman  colony  by  Inlius  Caesar,  and  ww
garrisoned  nndw  Augustus. T^ator  it  was  piUagvd
by  tbe  Anibs  and  by  Tiniur  (A.J).  1400),  and  since
tiiat  time  has  gnidnally  diicayed. It  is  now  only
a  wrelthoil  hamlet  of  a  few  hundred  inhnblUuta.
Sen  Wood  and  DawkiiiM.  HutHM  of  JtaalSfc  (1767);
Caaaas,  IVt^ofl*-  I'iUorrMtfue  rfr  ia  .Syn>  (l'^**)!  ">**
RtuiaiL,  jl/tww«  de  Phiiticie  (1W4).

HeUoe  ('HX«w).  In  Greek  mythology,  tbe  8nn-
god,  son  of  the  Titan  HyiHrinn  (whose  name  lie
bean*  in  Homer)  and  the  TiUness  Thea ;  broth-
er of  Seku^  (tho  Moon)  and  Eos  (Down).  The
poets  apply  the  nanw  Titan  to  blm  in  partic-
ular, as  the  offspring  of  Titans.  Ho  is  rvpnsuut-
c<l  as  a  strong  and  beanliful  god,  in  tl»e  bhwm  of
youth,  with  gleaming  eyes  and  waving  looks,  and  a
crown  of  rays  upon  his  head.  In  tho  morning  lie
rises  from  n'lovolybay  of  tbe  Ocean  iu  the  farthest
East,  where  the  JElblopians  dwell.  To  give  light
t)»  goils  and  men  be  climbs  the  vatdl  of  bt-aven  hi
a  chariot  drawn  by  fnnr  snow-white  horses,  lirc«t


1I£LI0S


TSO


HELLAKICUS


ing  tiK^t  uiiil  lire  ;  lliuir  tiniiios  are  Eouft,  ActbinpK,
Bmn(4*,  ami  Sleroiit*.  lu  tlio  uvfiiiug  ho  aiiik«
viitU  liin  chiirinC  into  tlii'  Octuin,  itii<l  M-liiltt  lie
eloe[)s  is  csrriiMl  round  alimg  tlie  oortUorn  border
of  the  earth  to  the  Kaitt  agaiu  in  a  goldeu  boat,


Iila<'r!t,  nninti};  wliich  may  be  tnetitiuDpil  Ccirinil*
and  EUh.  Tlie  ialtiud  uf  Rtiodeo  ww  utilinrlr  coo-
seLTatwl  tit  liim.  Horn  an  iuiduaI  festival  fAXui^
van  held  diii-iug  the  (tummcr  iu  bis  bononr,  wiib
chariot- racing  mud  contests  of  miuic  and  gxmoi*-


^"^^


^^^


*";


•r?^  -^


-f>-


L^


Toiiii'lv  Bl  HrliupuliE


shaped  liko  a  bowl,  the  work  of  Helihaestiis.  He
is  caUi'd  Pbai'tlitiii^  fmin  tho  briUinnt  light  that
IiD  difl'iiAflK;  liH  is  tlm  A11-w;ur  (I*aiK>)it(-ji),  liroaniw
hia  ray«  penntrato  i»vi!ryw]n'n>.  He  U  rt'vcalor  nf
all  that  is  douc  ou  earth;  it  la  bo  trho  told  He-
pbai-stns  of  Iho  iutriguu  of  Arc«  aud  A]tlir04ltt-<$,  and
8howt>d  IXiuiutor  who  had  earned  off  hordaiightflr.
He  woa  accordingly  iuvoked  as  a  witnesu  to  outbs
aud  ftoleoin  pro teatat rone.

Ou  tho  island  of  Triuacria  (Sicily)  he  had  seven
flocks  of  sheep  and  seven  herds  of  rati1f*i  fifty  iu
each.  It  was  Ids  pleasiirf,  i>u  his  daily  jiinmi'y,  to
look  down  upon  tlieiti.  Thf  ir  uuttilH^rN  wcro  not  to
beiucrL-asedordiuiitiiHbed;  fur  if  thia  wasdoue,  bis
wrath  was  turrible.  (See  Odyssrcs.)  In  the  70CI
ahcup  aud  oxen  tho  ancioiita  recognized  tho  700
days  and  nights  of  tho  Itiuarycar.  The  flocks  were
tended  by  I'bai-tfaiisa  (tlio  godde«s  of  light)  and
LunipctitS  (the  goddess  of  iihiuiitt;),  bin  daughter  by
Ncatsm.  By  the  ocean  Nymph  Ptrn^  or  Porsela  he
wasfftther  of  Aei'teK.Ciix'f',  and  Pasipltae,  by  Clyme-
uo  tbu  father  of  Phai-thoD.  and  AugOAM  was  allM
Bccouttted  his  son.  His  children  had  the  gleniniug
eyes  of  their  father.

After  the  time  of  Euripides,  or  tlu>reabout«,  the
all-«eeing  Sini-g<Kl  wa«  idcntilied  with  Apollo,  the
god  of  prophecy. Helios  was  worshipped  in  many


tics ;  and  foar  cousocratecl  boivea  were  tlirow n  iuts
the  aea  oh  a  lUicrifiec  to  him.  In  u.c.  2Td  a  coImkI
bmnze  iiljilur  by  C'ban-H  uf  Ltndus  was  rnwtrdio
him  At  the  entrance  of  the  harbour  of  JEbmlrs.
(See  Colossus.)  Herds  of  red  aud  white  cjiiIp
were,  iti  many  places,  kept  in  bis  honour.  Wbite
auiiuals,  aud  especially  whit'i  boraea,  were  mumil
to  hira  ;  among  tho  birds  the  cock,  and  snoiif
trees  the  white  poplar.  &ee,  in  English  hli-ratBt*.
tbb  poem  by  Keats,  BifperioH,  and  the  lir«i  Iwok
of  W.  e.  Laiidor's  Gebir.

The  Latin  iK>et«  identiflnl  Helios  with  llw  ^
bine  deity  Sid,  who  had  au  ancient  plaMuf""'-
»hip  on  the  Quirinal  at  R«nue,  aud  a  pnblir  aerifiie
ou  thu80)  of  .August;  but  it  waatbe  inti-otlaotii)ii<if
tbL>  ritual  of  Mithras  which  tirat  brought  the  Tonhip
of  the  sun  into  prominence  iuBonie. SeeUtOBUb.

Hell. Hee  Hades.

Hellanloua  (EXXdyudr).  Ouo  of  tho  Greek  ^
gngraphi  or  rlirunic-lrnt,  lioni  at  Mitylfuil?  in  L**"
bos  about  n.c.  41H1.  He  is  Aaid  Iu  have  llinl  tiU
the  age  of  eighty-five,  and  to  bavo  gone  uu  ariUiiX
until  after  B.C.  406.  In  tho  course  of  bit  li>i>(;  I'f''
he  composed  a  scries  of  works  on  getwslwgj'*^^'*'
rography,  and  chronology,  of  whivb  the  (Hgiw'"**
ai«  collected  by  C.  and  Th.  MUUer  (PariK  IfHlv


UELLAKOPICA£


TBI


HELLAS


flo  WM  tbe  ftnt  writer  vrbo  Rtlomptnl  to  introduce

I«  systctniatic  obroiiologicnl  arraiiigement  iuto  the
trHititioiiol  iMhodfl  of  Gi-c«k,  and  *»\wcial\y  Atlie-
iiian,  bifitory  aud  iiiyibology.  Hi»  theories  of  the
4iiicieut  Attic  thrwoology  wt^n;  accepted  down  to
^liu  time  of  EmtoBlbebw*  Uj.  v.). See  LooOGRAPHl.

HeUanodIoae('EXAa»«dt«a4).  JiulKeiiin  theOlyiii'

■  piiin  and  Neinean  Oaiiien,  See  Nhmka  ;  Oi.VMPIa.
Hellaa  ('KXXii; |.  A  iinriie  oriKinalty  given  t^i  a
-ilUtrict  and  city  of  Theiviuly  in  the  diviiimi  Thtlii-
-«tia  (Hon).  //.  ii.  6H4),  tlieti  fnrtUcr  uxteiidiHl  to  the
wbolo  of  Theiwaly,  and  llually  adopted  an  a  gen-
-eral  appellatioti  for  atl  Greect'. tlfllus  In  n  iwitin-

ttula,  tbe  easternincwluf  the  three  that  proji'rt  from
t\te  •OiltU  of  Eumtie  into  the  Med i term tienii  8*>».
Ita  weeleni  coant  \a  rough  and  inoiintainouH,  \rbile
jtfl  eastorn  shores  abound  in  gnlfx,  bay^,  and  har-
14100114.  From  this  geogniphica]  raiii«e  Greere  for  a
Joug  time  know  little  ur  nolliing  of  Italy  ami  the
|\Ve8t,  liut  sustained  very  close  relations,  jMilitical
mid  comtuercial,  with  tbe  countrica  of  ANta  Minor
I  —a  fact  of  immense  ImiKtrtnnce  iu  bor  historical
development.  Because  of  bor  long  lino  of  coast,
Bhe  first  receirod,  in  great  meaHure,  tbe  cpiickon-
ling  which  come4  from  immigratinn  and  tbe  con-
tact with  nenr  ideiiA  that,  inevitably  folio vvn ;  ro
Itbat  Greece,  largely  by  reason  of  her  pbyoicAl  con-
itruation  and  position,  moat  readily  re»i>oQdod
>  tbe  iiifl»otici<H  of  oriiMital  culturij,  and  thua  b«-
eadM  Cbeeradle  of  Euro[»ean  civilization.

HelbiB  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  the  Onlf  of
Toriutb.  which would have  completely severed
them  were  it  not  for  tbe  unrrow  Iiithnins  of  Cor-
inth. This,  until  it  was  cut  by  the  modern  canal
i(AuxiiBt,  189^>,  uuitt.'d  tbe  sonthcni  division  (Pohn
[  ponueAiu)  with  tbe  uortbern  (Hellaa  Proper). Ilel-
k  us  a  whole  is  marked  otf  from  tbe  rc>6t  of  Eurotw
'by  ft  monntain  chain,  au  extension  uf  the  Balkans,
known in ancient  times  an tltu  HiienniN. Fkiiu
this  range  ran  tbe  idiaitis  fnim  nurlh-noribwuHt  tii
fututh-sMiitheast,  which  form  the  Kkeletuu  of  Giiivce.
What  may  be  caUml  the  backbone  of  the  country
in  the  range  that  tintt  Heparates  Illyria  from  Mace-
donia and  Epirua from  Tbeissaly,  and then cou-
titines  down  tUroogb  Ibo  whole  peuiusula. The
most  important  HinKle  chain  ia  Tiudua  (7111  feet  J,
with itM  branch  Othrys. Various siuglu peaks
are  Olympus  in  Thi'ssaly  (IW-V)  ftwf),  Omhh,  Pclion,
'TyniphreHtu-H  ("WW  fe«t).  PaniaswuH  (HiDSl)  fi-el.),  aud
Helicon,  all  in  Tli<llaii  Pnipi-r;  with  Cylleut^,  An>-
^H^iniB,  and  KrymanthuM  ijl  the  PelojMtnueHUit,  whose
^b  two  important  npim  are  the  TuyguLna  ami  Paruon.
'^'Tbo  Ionian  Iitleiii,  Con-yra,  Cuphallunia,  Leitcas,  and
KacynthiiN,  ofl'  the  western  coast,  fullow  tbe  same
direction  an  the  mnuntiun  ebuimt  of  tLu  Pelopon-
^B  vcHiu  aud  tbe  mainland.

^r  The  rivers  of  Greece  are  small  Btreania,  little
tuoTo  than  brooks,  flowing  nniially  wnilli  or  weal.
Ill  Hellas  Prt>per  them  nni  four  principal  rivui-s,
all  having  their  Honnitt  im  MuniiL  Lacmou  of  tb*a
PindiiH  rangi*. Thu  Aoiiri  tiown  into  the  Ailriatic,

■  llie  PiincoH  and  Haliiicmon  into  the  Thermaii:  Gulf,
and  tbe  AuhidotlK  into  the  Gulf  of  Patrae.  In  the
Pelupouutriiu!!,  tbe  ini|H>rtant  streams  rise  near  the
north  of  TaygetHH,  the  Eurutas  dowing  sutilti  aud
K  H)c  Alpheus  west.

^P The  Hellenes  were  a  braiiob  of  tbe  fiuuily  to
wbicb  most  of  the  European  peopb's  belong,  aud
which  is  variniwly  described  an  Aryan,  Indo-Ger-
■  Qiiauic,  and  Indo-KiirajH-un,  wIiomc  origiual  borne  is


uncertain,  being  by  some  placed  iu  Asia  and  by
otbeni  iu  Euroi>e.  (See  Ixiw*  - Ei'RorKAN  Lan-
guages.) It  is  generally  held,  however,  that  the
original  luhabitauts  of  Greoce  entered  it  from  the
uorib  at  a  very  remote  jwriod,  probably  during
the  8tone  Age;  that  Ihey  were  in  tbe  nomadio
stage  of  development;  and  that  they  came  on  in
snecessive  waves  of  imniignttton,  each  of  which
pushed  farther  sotitli  the  jieople  who  htul  already
precedei]  it.  Even  after  the  wlxde  of  Hellas  hail
been  covered  by  tl«!So  early  irilH;^,  succeeding
wavea  followed,  overnprcading  tbe  territory  nccu-
piml  by  others.  Such  a  wave  of  later  imtnlgra-
tion  was  that  which  is  known  to  the  legendary
historians  as  "the  return  of  the  Ilernclidae."
(See  HkracuDak.  )  This  pn'ssnre  from  l>ehiDd
bail  the  eA'ect  of  driving  out  ninuy  who  liad  settled
in  Ibe  niaiulimd  into  the  adja<>ent  i»land«,  and  ul-
timately to  far  distant  lands,  Hnch  as  tbe  coasts  of
Afia  Minor,  Sicily,  the  shore  of  the  Kiixine^  and  the
north  of  Africa.  Hellas  in  itx  wider  sense  is,  tliero-
fori',  to  be  undenit(H)d  of  the  ntiited  soltlonR-uta
of  Hellennt  iu  all  parts  of  the  then  known  world,
ottd  it  was  it!  this  seusc  that  the  Helleuea  them-
oelres  nnderstotxl  it,  since  to  tbem  tbe  word  al-
ways  hail  an  ethnic  rather  tbau  a  territorial  sig-
nificance. The  iiume  'KXAqfts  In  Homer  refers
only  to  the  ThcH;4allan  people  Dientioned  above;
and  in  fact  ttio  Homeric  poems  have  no  general
designation  for  the  Greeks  as  a  whole.  Tbey  are
called  Danai  {^avami,  Argivi  {'Apytifn),  and  Aehaei
('Axnioi),  and  it  was  not  mucii  before  the  time  of
ilerodotns,  Tbncydtdes,  aud  Bcyinx  that  the  terms
'EAXiiir  and  'EAA^vtr  received  their  full  extension
of  meaning.  The  Orientals  spoke  of  the  Greeks
as  *'Iftuians";  the  Italians  called  them  GraccI,
from  one  of  the  ancient  tribes  of  Kpirus,  the  Vpai-
Kui — a  word  older  than  *EAAr;w<,  hut  dlsuiM.-il  and
thou  revived  by  8oph<wk-B|  according  to  Eustathiiis
(otf  Horn.  n.  p.  y90, 14  ;  ef.  HwHycb.  i.  p.  854  ;  Steph.
Kyz.  s.  b.  v.;  and  Tzctzea,  mcIiiiI.  U»  Lycopliron'a
JItsaHdra).

On  tho  Groclc  langnnge.  see  Dialecth;  od  tbe
art,  SCO  Ajecihtkctuha  ;  Caelatuiia  ;  Picrt'KA  ;
STATUAltlA  AKt» ;  ou  the  relfgioti,  see  Mysti^ia  ;
BfvTiioi.^>()iA ;  Rkugio.  A  brief  deficriptioti  uf
each  of  the  divisions  of  Greece  will  be  fVninil  un-
der their  respi-ctive  titles.

The  time  which  elajiM'd  front  the  appearance  of
the  Hellenes  iit  Thessaly  to  the  siege  of  Troy  ts
nsnally  known  by  the  nnme  of  the  Heroic  Age.
Thucydides  informs  ns  (i.  4)  that  tbe  comoience-
meut  of  Grecian  civilization  is  to  bo  dated  frum
the  roigQ  of  Mimw  of  Cret<>,  who  acipiired  a  naval
power  and  cleared  the  Aigean  S^a  of  pirates.
Among  the  niont  eelebrutcd  heroes  of  this  period
wet«  Betlerojdiuu  and  Pi^rsens,  whose  adveutnitw
were  laid  in  the  East;  1*heseus,  tbe  king  of  Ath-
ens; and  Heracles.  Tradition  also  preservi^  tbe
account  of  cxpi^litions  UDdertakcn  by  several
chiefs  united  together,  sutdi  as  that  of  the  Argu-
nants,  of  the  Seven  against  Thebes,  aud  of  the
siege  of  Troy. See  TiidiAX  War.

It  is  learned  from  Thttcydidrit  (i.  |9)tbat  the  popu-
latiou  of  Greece  was  iu  a  very  iinsettlcil  state  for
some  time  after  the  Trojan  War.  Of  Ihe  varinns
migrations  which  ap|iear  to  have  taken  place,  the
most  important  in  their  const-tiueuces  were  those
of  the  Boeotians  from  The-«HaIy  into  the  country
afterwaiils  calk-d  Jlofotin,  and  of  the  Dorians  iuto
PeIr>|>ouni-si]ei, At  about  the  same  period  the  west-


HELLAS


783


HELLAS


era  MNWt  of  Ahja  Miiiiir  nan  i-oI<Miiz(Hl  by  lliv
GreAlu.  Ttm  &)ici»nt  iiibuliilantjt  uf  Hqi;oMu,  wIki
liiul  liceu  ilrivoi)  uut  of  tlioir  Iiniiun  by  the  tiivu-
Kion  (if  tbc  lioeotiauK,  Wj^etlmr  wilb  ikhihj  Aru-
liaiis  (whruco  it  liax  acquired  Olt*  iiamo  of  the
A^ciNnn  migmt ion)  left  lloeotiaaod  settled iiiLeflbos
mill  ibe  north n-estoni  comet  of  Aiiin  Mioor.  Tbey
wore  not  long  ■.ftMrwiinlm  followed  by  tbe  loiiiaim,
who,  liAviiig  befii  ilriviMi  from  tlieir  iUmhIo  on  tbe
<*(jrinlb^i)  Oiilf,  bail  takon  rofii>;e  ia  Attic-a, whence
tboy  eniigrattil  to  Asia  Elinor  ami  Holtlcid  on  tbe
Lyiliiiti  ruoHt.  The  fHiiirliwt-Niern  X'i^rt  of  Iho  waint
ufAnia  Minor  wan  jiIao  riilnniztxl  nt  iiboiit  tlio  nimie
pcrioil  by  Doi'ianH.  Tha  Qiimbornf  (imok  noIunieH,
conaidcriDg  the  extent  of  the  luotbor  country,
was  very  great;  and  tbe  rcadinf-'sa  witb  xvbicb
the  Greeks  loft  their  bomcs  to  Mttlc  in  foreign
buids  forms  a  remarkable  featoro^of  their  oa-
tionol  character.  In  the  sereiith  centnry  before
Chri>it  the  Greek  (Mjloiiies  Uwk  anotWr  direction  :
Cyruni^,  iu  Africa,  wiih  futinded  by  the  inbubitatils
of  TLora,  and  tho  coasts  of  Sicily  aud  the  aontberD


pari  of  Italy  be<'amc  Ktudilwl  with  no  many  Gxrt\
citit*H  that  it  auqiiirvd  tho  name  nf  tbe  Grval,
or  (jiuat^^r,  Greoco  (Majjna  (iraecia).  (Ou  the  Mtil^
niiMit  of  the  Grwk  citicH  ia  Soothcni  Italy,  aea
Lnnomiaut,  La  (irande  Grice^  3  vola.  [Paris^  ll£l].)
Tkn  two  States  of  Greece  wbieb  atiaiucd  thu
greatest  bistorical  celebrity  were  S[Mirta  and  Atb-
eus.  The  power  of  Athens  was  of  later  growth;
but  SpartA  had,  from  the  time  of  the  Dorian  coa-
qiie^t,  taken  tbe  lead  among  the  PcloponncQJaa
StatoSf  a  {wsitiou  which  ahe  maintained  by  tht
comiuesl  of  tbu  fertile  country  of  Muuenia,  11.C.
fi88.  Her  Hii(ieriority  wan  i»niliably  owing  to  llw
nature  of  her  |»olitical  inntitritionH,  which  are  taxi
to  have  been  tLccd  uu  a  fimi  baaia  by  ber  celebrat-
ed lawgiver  Lycargus,  B.C.  8iM.  At  tbe  bead  of
the  uatiou  wore  two  hereditary  kings,  bac  thtit
power  was  greatly  limited  by  a  Jeolooa  arisuxn-
cy.  Her  terriiorics  were  also  iuoreaaed  by  lbs
conquest  of  Tegea  iu  Arcadia.  Athena  roM  t«  In-
]>ortance  only  in  the  century  preceding  tho  IV^
siau  Wars;  but  even  iu  this  perioil  her  power  vas


Lnugliuda a IS*>i


tram U Oremtwifh


Chlix


M  A  a  £

MiMMIIt


1 » «! '1


A  e  II  A  e  V  j-


:C


AfMlrtl^.^*'""''.


- -%.


'^-sm.


CyparUal


■S  V


«TCIIM I.'


'dSi


I


T*— ""V  T*


,rt*'


'* Looyltiwto  K—t W ftcwi


If  Bp  or  Aooieal  Oreooc.


HKI-IAS


7SS


HELLAS


not  mor»  than  a  ninicb  for  lUo  Ittllo  StatcH  of  Mo-
gariff  and  Aegiua.  Tlie  city  was  luuj;  buroascd  by
iutcruol  GODiuiotiouH  till  tho  tiitiu  uf  Sulou,  d.c.
504,  wbo  woa  clioscu  by  hla  follow -oitizent  to
fiuDiv  a  lion-  coutttitntioii  aud  a  uow  code  of  laws,
to  vrbicb  luiicb  uf  tbe  futui-e  j;rvatiieK9  of  Atbous
u)U»t  be  ascribed.  Wv  liavv  already  seen  tbat  tbe
kindly  form  of  jjuverumeiii  watt  prevaU'iit  iti  tbe
Heroic  Age.  Kut,  during  llie  [lerlnd  tbat  <>la|me<]
beti^eeii  the  Tn>jati  \V:ir  »iid  the  Perttiuii  iiiv.-i-sioii,
beredilary  pulitiral  iKiwt-r  wun  iilK>liMhvd  in  nhiiont
all  tbetitvuk  Statist,  nitb  tlu<  «]ci;ei>liou  uf  8]t:itta,
aud  a  ruimblicaii  form  of  govcniiUiMtt  establiHbeil
iu  ita  Mt«ml.  In  studying  tbo  bintory  of  tbu  Onjuks,
PD«  ntutit  bear  iu  iiiitid  tUat  altiuiat  wcry  olty
foriuctl  Au  iiidcp«udcut  Siato,  aud  tbat,  wiih  the
exception  of  Atbeus  and  ^purta,  wbivh  exivcted
obcdiedcti  from  Ibe  otbcr  towun  of  Attica  and
Laeoiiia  r<^{M;ctivoly,  tbere  wim  bardly  any  Slate
which  possessed  more  than  a  feu'  miles  of  terri-
tory. Frei|ueiit  want  lietweeti  CheuitMilveit  were
tbo  almoat  niiavoidable  coiiaeqitcoco  trf  Ibi!  oxiitl'
eoceof  Aoniaiiy  siitall  Slatf^s  nearly  e^inal  in  power.
Tbe  evils  whirb  aiov-  fmni  iIiih  coiiditiuii  of  things
were  partly  remedied  by  tbo  iiidneiicM  of  tbo  Am-
pliictyoulc  Coitnuit  and  by  tbn  religions  games  and
fe»tlvnU  which  wtre  beltl  at  Hxi'd  purioils  in  dif-
ferutit  partd  of  Ctret^cc,  and  during  the  cvlchration
of  which  no  warn  wern'  ejirried  on.  In  the  sixth
ecntnry  bffore  th«  ChriBtian  era,  Greece  rapidly
advanced  iu  knowledge  aud  civilization.  Lilcra-
tnrc  aud  tbe  (!ue  artH  were  already  cultivated  in
Athena  under  the  aiiitpicra  of  PiutHtratuB  and  hiit
ttviis ;  and  the  priKluetti  of  remote  coiintriea  were
iutrodtice-d  iirto  Orei'ce  by  tbe  merchauls  of  Cur>
intb  and  Aeglna. See  Commerck.

Thlit  waa  tbo  most  8plendtd  puriwl  of  Grecian
biatory.  The  Greeka,  iu  their  reHtatauce  to  the
PeraiauB,  aud  tbo  part  they  took  in  tbe  burning
ofSardts.  B.C.  499,  drew  upou  them  the  veugenoce
of  DariuB.  After  the  rednctioij  of  tbe  Aaiatic
Oreekfl,  a  Peroinn  army  was  sent  iiit^  Attica^  but
was  eutirely  defeated  at  ManitLou,  B.C.  49*},  by  the
AtheuiuoH  uinlur  Miltimb'H.  Ten  years  afterwanlH
the  whole  power  of  iba'Pei-Miiin  Kmpire  waa  di-
rected agaiuNt  Greece;  an  immeuMe  army,  lud  in
liervon  by  Xcrxea,  advanced  an  far  an  Attica,  ami
rroeived  the  Mubwiasiou  of  ul muni  all  tbe  Grvciun
8tate«,  with  the  exception  of  Atbemi  aud  Sparta.
But  this  expedition  aUo  failed  ;  tbe  rei>ilttu  tieet
wan  dcatroyett  in  the  batltes  of  ArtemiKium  and
Salomis;  and  the  land  forces  were  cutirely  defeat-
ed iu  tbe  following  year,  H.c.479,at  Plataea  iu  Boe-
otia.  Sparta  hail,  previous  to  tbe  Peraiari  inva-
sion, beeu  reganUtl  by  the  other  Greeks  as  the  flrst
power  in  Greece,  and  accordiugly  she  obtained  the
Kipreme  ciimniand  of  the  army  and  fleet  in  the  Per-
stan  War.  But,  during  the  course  of  this  war,  tbe
Atheuiatin  had  made  gre-ater  sacrillces  and  had
shown  .1  grt^ter  di-greo  of  connige  and  patriotism,
Ml  that  after  the  battle  of  Plataea  acoufederacy  was
formed  by  tbo  Grecian  States  for  carrj-iug  «m  the
war  against  the  Pc-rsiaus.  Sparta  waa  at  first
placed  at  tbo  head  of  it ;  but  the  alliea,  diDguated
with  tbo  tyranny  of  Paasaniaa  (q.  r.),  the  Spartan
commander,  gave  the  supremacy  to  Athena.  The
allies,  who  consisted  of  the  iuhabitauts  of  the  isl-
ands and  coaets  of  the  Aegeau  Sea,  were  to  fiiruish
oontribntiuns  iu  money  aud  shijis,  and  tbe  delicate
taakof  aa8«e«ing  the  amount  which  each  8tftt«  waa
>,to  pay  waa  aiinigucd  to  Ariatidea. The  yearly  eon-


trlbiition  waa  aDCtled  at  460  talunta  (aboaC  9543,-
^tH)),  aud  Deloa  waa  ehoHu  aa  thu  common  treaa*
ury.  The  Athcuiau»,  under  the  command  of  Cinmu,
carried  on  tbewiir  vigorously, defeated  tbe  Peraiaii
fleets,  aud  plundered  the  maritime  proviucea  of
the  Persian  Kiupiro.

Duriug  this  period  tho  power  of  Atboua  rap-
idly increas<^;  eibo  posaeawd  a  succeaHion  of
rliHiingiiished  statesmen — Tbemlstucles,  Aristidi-a,
Cinion,  and  Periclea  —  who  nil  c<iutrilmted  to
the  advancement  of  her  power,  though  dill'ering
iu  their  imlitieol  viewB.  Her  uniritiuie  greattiexs
waa  fonnded  by  T lie mlHt odea,  her  revenues  were
increased  by  Perielej*.  niid  her  geuenil  prospeiily,
in  oonueotiou  with  other  causes,  tended  to  pro-
duce n  greater  degri'e  uf  culture  than  exialeil  iu
any  other  part  of  Greece.  Literature  was  cnlti-
Tateil,  and  tl»e  arts  of  architecture  aud  suulpture,
which  were  employe<l  to  ornament  the  city,  were
c.'irrie*)  t<i  a  degree  of  excellence  that  has  never
since  l>e«u  tturpassetl. See  AlllKN'AK.

While  At  houDW»e  advancing  in  power,  Sparta  had
touiaintaitiawaragaiuHttbeMeaaeuians.whougain
revolted,  and  were  joined  by  a  great  nuudH.M'<)f  the
Spartau  slavea  (n.c.  4(il-456).  But,  though  Sparta
made  no  efforts  during  this  jwHihI  to  re«tniin  the
Athenian  power,  it  was  not  lu'cauKe  hIu^  naiited
the  will,  but  the  means.  These,  however,  wotti soon
fumi.«hed  by  tbe  Atheiiianx  tliemsolves,  wbo  be-
gan to  treat  tbe  allied  States  with  great  tyranny,
Biul  to  regitrtl  them  aa  aubjecta,  and  not  aa  iude])eu-
deut  States  in  alliance.  Tbe  tribate  waa  raised
front  4CtO  to  600  lalenta,  tbe  treasury  waa  reniuvcd
from  DeloH  to  Athens,  and  the  dcciHion  of  all  im-
portant suits  waa  referral  to  the  Athenian  cuurta.
When  any  State  withdrew  from  the  alliance,  ita
citizeuH  were  cousidui'ed  by  the  Atheniann  as  reb-
els, and  immiKliutely  rf^ducud  to  nubjeciiuu.  Tht*
dependent  States,  anxious  to  tbnnv  nil'  the  Albiv
niau  domiuioii.  e'utrcated  the  asaiatance  of  S|mi'La,
and  thus,  iu  conjnnctioii  with  other  cau^ejt,  arose
the  war  hetweeu  Sparta  aud  Athens,  which  la&tctl
for  Iwenty-aeveu  yeani  (B.C.  431-4(14),  and  is  usu-
iilt}'  known  aa  tbe  Peloponue«ian  War  (i|.  v.).  It
tenninateit  by  again  placing  Sparta  at  tliH  boud
of  ull  Greece.  Socm  after  the  cuuclusiou  of  this
war,  Sparta  engaged  in  a  c^uiteMt  with  tiie  Persian
Kmpiru,  which  laaled  from  B.C.  4(X>  to  'JiH.  The
(tpleudid  Mucci-eaes  which  AKettilatis,  the  Spartan
king,  obtained  over  the  Persian  trtropa  iu  A.tin
Minor,  and  tho  mauifc»t  weakness  uf  tho  Persian
Empire,  which  hod  beeu  already  shown  by  the
snccesafnl  retreat  of  only  ten  Ihousaiid  Greeka
from  the  very  heart  of  the  Persian  Empire  (rm
Xunoi'HON),  appear  to  have  induced  Agesilalla
to  entertain  the  denigii  of  overthrowing  th«  Per-
sian monarchy;  bnt  be  was  obliged  to  retaru  to
bis  native  country  to  defend  it  against  a  powerful
confederacy,  which  had  bei^u  formed  by  the  Corin-
thians, Thiibikna,  ArgivOM,  Atbeuinus,  aud  Tlieeaa-
Ifana,  for  tbe  purpoHo  of  throwing  off  the  Spartan
dontulon.  The  confederates  wen;  not,  however,
SQCceMfuI  in  their  attempt;  and  the  Hpart^tn  su-
premacy was  again  secured  for  a  brif  f  period  liy  a
geueral  peace,  made  B.C.  3ri7,  uHually  known  by
the  name  of  the  peace  of  Antalcidas.  Teu  years
afterwards,  tbo  rupture  between  Theben  aud  Spar-
ta began,  which  led  to  a  genei-aS  wur  in  Greece,
and  for  a  short  time  gave  Tliebcs  the  bcgemouy
of  Hellaa.  The  greatnoas  of  Thebes  was  priuei-
pally  owing  to  the  wiadom  and  valour  of  two  of


4


HELLAS


m


HELLAS


hvr  aons — Peloi>idas  aud  ICpmninondn^.  Atler  the
death  fif  Epainiiioiidas  at  Ihe  battlu  nl'  Mantiuca,
B.C.  3G2,  ThebeA  agaia  sank  to  \is  fonnor  obMn-
rity.  Tb«  Spartiin  supremacy  van,  however,
irhoUy  destroyod,  atid  lier  power  still  further
hutublcfl  by  tho  rcatoratioii  of  Mctsseiiia  to  itide-
pendeoM,  B.C.  360.  Froni  th«  conclititiuii  i>f  this
war  to  the  roign  of  Philip  of  Mitcedoii,  Ore«c«  re-
inaiDcd  without  auy  ruling  |>ovi*or.  It  ii«  only  nec-
essary here  to  meiitiou  the  part  which  Philip  took
ill  tht>  Bucred  War(<{.v.),  which  loatefl  ten  ycars(li.c.
3Gfi-346),  ill  which  he  appeared  as  the  defender  of
Che  Amphictyouic  Council,  and  which  terminated
by  the  conqiiebt  of  the  Phoctane.  The  AthcDians,
urged  ou  by  Uemofitbeues,  made  an  alliauce  with
the  Thebans  for  the  purpose  of  rc<aitjtiiig  Philip;
but  their  defeat  at  Cbaeronea,  u.c.  'Mfi,  secured
for  the  Macedouian  king  the  eupremacy  of  Greece,
lu  the  same  year  a  cuugresB  ufGreciuii  States  was


ruling  power  iu  Greece.  The  Aetolian  and  Achaean
leaguoji  wore  formed,  the  former  B.c.  Sff4.  the  latter
B.C.  'i-il,  for  the  purpose  of  resisting  the  Macedo-
nian kings.  Mact^doiiln  was  conquered  by  the
Konianx  B.C.  I^.and  the  Greek  Stat4«  declared  in-
dejwndent.  Thi8,  however,  wa«  nierely  nominal;
forthey  only  exobangetl  the  nilenf  the  MacMloDian
kings  for  that  of  th«  Kouiun  people;  and  ia  B.C.
146,  Greoce  was  reduced  to  the  form  of  a  Roman
province,  called  Achaua,  though  certain  cities,  such
lut  Athens^  Delphi,  and  otbera,  were  allowed  to  hare
thernukof  free  towns. ,  The  history  of  Greece,  from
this  i>eriod,  forms  part  of  that  of  the  Boman  Em-
pire. See  RouA.

Greece  was  overrun  by  the  <>oths  In  a.P.  a67,
ADd  again  iu  a.d.  39U,  under  Alaric :  and,  after
being  occupied  by  the  CriisndcrH  anil  Venetians,
at  la.it  fell  into  the  hanrltt  of  the  Turks.  «>u  the
couquest  uf  Couatautiuople; from whou  ii  wat


CouBtry  about  Attaoni. (P'rom  tlie  p«tatiBf  b;  A  d«  Cnnoo.)


hehl  nt  Corinth,  in  which  Philip  was  chosen  gen-
eral-iu-chief  uf  the  Greeks  in  u  projected  war  against
the  Pensiati  Kinpire;  but  bis  aasaMinatiou  in  b.c.
336  oaoaed  thiH  enterprise  to  devolve  on  his  sun
Alexander. See  Aucxasder;  Maceikixla.

The  conqnests  of  Alexauder  exteuded  the  Gre-
cian iuQuence  over  the  greater  part  of  Asia  weitt
of  the  ludtu.  After  his  death  the  dominion  of  the
Kast  vraa  contested  by  Iuh  generals,  uiiil  two  pow-
erful empires  were  pennanoutly  (M^tabliNhed — tlcit
of  the  Ptolriuiea  in  Kgypt  and  tlio  Soleiicidae  in
Syria.  The  dominions  of  the  early  Syrian  kings
i-mbrac^d  the  greater  part  of  Wesleni  Asia;  but
iheir  Euipiro  was  soon  divided  into  various  iudo-
))endent  kingdoms,  ancb  as  that  of  Bactria  mid
Pergamns,  in  all  of  which  the  Greek  language  was
ftlHtkeu,  uot  merely  at  court.,  but  to  ii  ronhiiIer»bIe
rxlent  in  the  cities.  I'Vom  the  death  of  Alexitnder
to  the  Kuman  cotiqneet,  Macedon  remained  the


again  liberated  in  li?38.  See  tbe  articles  AtB»-
nae;  UV7.ANTINIM  Imperivm  ;  6rAKtA:  MACt-
DONiA ;  and  the  following  works  of
—  GbogRAPHY:  Wonlsworth,  Grrrrf  THe^  _^
UMorioif,  and  Drueriplitv  (1882);  To«er.  Lrttwrm
OM  the  Groffraphg  of  (Iretrr  (1^4);  Btirsiaii.  0*»f-
l^lihie  rfr«  ''rircArit/iiNd.  3  voltt.  (1H6d-73);  ii»h^,
llatablfv  onit  Sludief  in  Grenx  (187S);  E.  Ctirtioi^
Peloponncmn,  3  voln.  (ISM);  CUrk,  Pi'/opoasmw
iXSbS) ;  Lacroix,  Lei  laUs  de  la  GrM-  ( Ifthlj.  Hlfc-
TORT :  ThirlwnlJ,  But.  of  Greecr,  U  vote.  (M  eA
IKiii) :  Grote,  Ilht,  of  Grtect  ( to  b.c.  300),  IS  Tok
(iJ^O);  K.  Curtina,  hist,  of  Greece  lEng.  tnina  bt
Ward,  5  vols.  lH68~7a) ;  Cox,  HUi.  of  Grt«et  i,to  thr
death  of  Alexander  the  Great);  id.  Tk4  Jthnitt
Empire  (l(<77i:  id.  Grrrln  amd  PrrtUns  OW*)*
Proysen,  G«cAi(*/e  rfe*  nrllmismys,  6  vnls.  (lOT-
Vrftr*);  Cnrteis,  lihr  uf  the  ^fafriiuuinm  Emp^rt
(lt*7e); Lloyd,  J jf  of'PrricU*  (I.-T.-..; H^rtil


HEtL£


785


UELOTAE


Orieehrnlaiid  «.  S.  Htrrtchaft  der  Homer,  3  vols.
(1)^5};  Siabaffy.  Tke  tirtrk  JTorld  under  Itoman
Suag  (IKN)):  Freeioaii. //i»torjf  of  Federal  GurtrH'
went  in  Grrrct  {id  ed.  18tf3);  Datickor,  Ui»t.  of
Ortvcf  (Kug.  trann.  by  Aleyne,  1883 ;  last  Geniiaii
editinu.  HW5).  ChboSOLOCY:  Clinton,  Fimii  Hfl-
U-nici.  :i  vols.  (1834-^1);  Pot*ir,  Zfittafeln  rf.  gne-
ckincken  (irtckichtf  {\?^).  lNGENER.iL:  Paparrigo-
poiilfi,  fftptoire  dr  la  CirUiftitioa  HrlUnitfvc  iPartM,
I87e);  Ddriiif:,  HW/ax  (Fniiikfoi-t,  1876) ;  l-Vlton,
Or*«y,  Anrirnt  and  J/orf'>rN(B(i«t<iti,  IWWl) ;  Gilliert,
Orttl  Cottntitulioual  JntitiuUicii  (Eug.  traiiB.  lH9rO;
Gull,  KHllnrbilder  aua  IlrtUia  Mud  Rom,  'i  vols.
ai:^8);  Gnhl  aucl  Kouer,  Tkr  Life  of  the  Grrrkt
And  ^niiiM,  riilly  illu»itrii1«(l  (Kiig-  trans.  1877;
laat  German  e<t  1893);  Vuii  iMilke,  UtUat  mid
It*>m,  richly  iiliiHtrated  (Eiig.  Iraiis,  1888);  Sch5-
luttun,  .4utiquitirs  of  Grwvc  (Kiig.  trans.  1880);
Overbt^k,  (Irgchichtf  der  ffrieclti»cken  PIa$lik,  3
vols.  (l83»>-82);  Purry.  Orcek  and  Kontau  Sculpt-
urt  (18tti) ;  UltJitmur,  Ttchnologie  mud  Trmtinot-
ogit  der  Getcerbe  und  KSitate  ba  GritckeH  und
B/fmfm.A  rols.  (1875-86):  Malmffy,  Social  Life  in
Grtee*l\aslvi\.  lilft^).  On  recent  artbooolngicu)  ili»-
«Civ«n(i8,  setf  P  Gardner,  JNVtr  Chaplrra  in  Grvek  Bit'
t«Tg  (S.  Y.  and  Loudon,  181^).

HeU<l  ('FJ1X7). See  Piniixr's.

HeUen  C'tAXrif).  Tlie  mythical  flntwAtor  »f  the
UvlleneH.  Hq  was  tbo  fton  of  Z^his  uiid  Dortpp6,
hnsband  of  Orevlft,  and  father  of  Acolns,  Doriio,
and  Xtinthiis,  From  bis  tivn  sodh,  Aenliiit  and  Do-
ras, tfari  AMiltans  and  Dorians  rJnimed  descent ;
and  from  tlio  two  sons  of  Xanthns  (AcIiaeUH  and
lont  traililiun  dttrivcs  tbo  Achiiuuim  and  loniuim.
Hrllvo  i«drKcrihcd  oh  reigniug  uv«r  Phtbia  iiiTboiH
«aly Sep  Hf.ujv.s.

Heil£nes. @ee  Hellas.

HeUenlca  ('EXXtjftxd).  An  blHtorical  treatise
Xeuopbuu  U|.  v.),  il«aling  with  the  period  of
i>rly-«ighC  yean*  invceding  i\iv  battle  of  Mantinra
I.C.  363).  An  ii  begins  when'  th«  history  of  Thii-
fdlde«  (q.  T. )  eud<t,  tho  tint  part  \»-  somotimes
Blled  the  "  Pamlipomona  of  Tbiicydidt*."  The
^eltenien  ia  in  m<ven  bmikd,  and  in  written  in  a
J-,  Mtniewliat  nntuteresttng  atytr.  Separate  eill-
ona  with  notes  are  those  of  HaiUttine  (bkfi.  i.  aud
ii.,  181)7);  Breitcnhacb  <1863);  BiichwnscbUtz
<1K76) :  and  Uowdall  (bk.  i.  1890);  of  bks.  i.-iv,  by
Mnnatt  (Boston,  IrtHfl),  and  \'.-vii.  by  B«;iinett  (Dob-
ton,  lrt92).  A  lliip  KiigliMh  vewiou  U  thai  of  I)a-
k>-D8  lo  bis  trauKtutluu  of  Xunopbon  (1893).  See
Xkxopuon.

HaUeuotamiae  ('EXXi)iwo;iim).  The  name  of
a  board  uf  u-11  members,  elected  annually  by  lot  aa
controllerH  of  the  fund  eontribul*'d  liy  the  mom-
bers  of  the  Athenian  confcdemry,  TIia  ireaanm
was  originally  dejiOHited  at  DuIom,  but  after  u.c.
461  wiut  tranttfurred  to  Atbcnti.  Tbc  yearly  en n-
tribiitionM  uf  the  cities  owning  the  Athenian  su-
pn-inney  auiuiiiited  at  tlrst  to  400  talriita  (hodib
$542,800} ;  during  the  I'eloponnesian  War  they  were
increased  to  nearly  13U0  talents  (tl.I^U.OOO).  S«e
Delcm,  Comfedickacy  of.

BelleBpoDtus  {' liXKi^avovrot).  (1)  Now  tbo
T)ar(lniiullt»,  the  lung  narrow  (itrail  wliich  juius
the  Proponlia  (Sea  of  Marmora)  witli  the  Aegean
Sea.  Its  length  is  some  fifty  miles,  aud  its  width
Taries  rrom  six  nt  the  uppvr  end  to  one  or  loss.
The  imrrowest  part  in  between  the  ancient  oities


of  Sestns  and  Abydiu,  where  ]>ander  ia  said  to
have  swum  across  to  Tlsit  Hero.  (Sco  Leaxokii.)
Here,  alf»o.  Xeriea  (q.  v.)  cronsed  ou  his  bridge  of
)>out«.  The  name  'EXXijirTmyrot  fSoa  of  Ilellfi)  was
derived  from  the  tnytli  of  Ilell^:  on  which  see  the
ariiole  Pnnixrs.  (2)  Under  (he  lioman  Empire,
the  nanio  Hellespoutus  was  given  to  a  province  in
the  norlbeni  part  of  Mysia,  with  Cyzicus  ibr  its
capita],

Hellomfimun  CEXX({;iriw»).  A  waport  toirti  of
the  Acarnanians  on  the  island  of  Lencaa.

Rellopia. See  Ei.U)PIa.

Belm. Si!e  GuDKKXACi'LrM.

Helmet SeoAiiMA;  Gai.ka.

Helonu  ('EXupaO  aud  Helonim.  A  town  on
the  eastern  coast  of  Sicily,  south  of  Hyraouse,  at
the  mouth  of  the  river  Helorue.

Heloa  {ro  'KX07).  (1)  A  town  in  Laconia,  on  the
coast,  in  a  marshy  sitnation,  whence  its  name
(  fXor  =  moreb ).  It  was  commonly  aaid  that  the
S[Hirtao  slaves  called  Uetotos  ( EtX»T«{ ),  were
originally  the  Achaean  inhabitants  of  this  town
whri  wer«  redooed  by  tbo  Dorian  oonquerora  to
tdavery.  (3)  A  town  or  district  of  Elis  on  the  At*
pheUB.

Helotae  {EiAwrai),  and  Helotea  (ErXwrfc).  The
Hi-lot4  or  bondsmen  of  tbu  Hpartaua.  TUh  com*
Dion  account  of  the  origin  of  this  claaM  is,  that
tbo  iuhobltouta  of  tbo  maritime  town  of  llulos
were  reduced  by  Sparta  to  this  Htato  of  degrada-
tion, aft4?r  an  insurrection  agniiiHt  the  Dorians  al-
ready estahlisbwl  in  power.  This  ^^xidanation,
however,  rest«t  merely  oit  a»  etymology,  and  that
by  uo  meann  probable.  Tho  word  KtXwf  is  prob-
aiily  a  derivative  from  i\tlv  in  a  pa«sive  sense,
aud  conw«}ueiitly  means  "a  prisoner" — a  deriva-
tion known  in  anciojtt  times.  It  seenin  likely
that  tliey  were  an  aboriginal  race,  which  was
subdued  at  n  very  early  period,  and  which  imme-
diately powted  over  a«  slaves  to  the  Doric  conquer-
on*,  lu  N|>eaking  of  the  condition  of  the  Helola,
their  po1iti<^al  HghtH  and  their  personal  treatment
will  bo  i-onttidered  nmler  difli^ront  boadfl,  though
in  fact  the  two  siibjecta  are  very  nearly  connected,

Tbe  firat  were  doubtless  exactly  dclincd  by  law
and  custom,  though  tbc  exprestiinns  made  use  of
by  aiii^ieut  antborii  are  frc()iiei)tly  vagno  mid  am-
biguous. '■  They  were,"  says  Ephorus,  "  in  a  i«r-
taiti  point  of  view  public  slaves.  Tboir  pot»oa«or
could  neither  lilterate  them  nor  sell  thooi  beyond
the  bonlem."  Fmm  this  it  is  evident  that  they
were  considered  as  belonging  properly  to  the  Statu,
which  to  a  certain  degree  iwrmiUed  tbem  to  be
possessed  by  individuals,  re«erviug  to  it«elf  the
powerofeufmuchising  tbem.  But  to  soil  tbem  out
of  the  country  was  uot  in  tbe  power  oven  of  the
State;  and  sucb  an  event  seems  never  to  have  oc-
curred. It  is,  upon  tbo  whole,  most  probable  that
iudividuals  bad  no  power  to  soil  tbem  atall.aa
tboy  belonged  chi«dy  to  the  landed  property,  and
this  wati  inalienable.  On  these  lands  they  hod
certain  fixed  dwellings  of  their  own,  aud  particular
«er\ict's  and  |mynieiits  were  prcsscrilwd  to  tbem.
Tliey  paid  as  rent  a  flxi-d  meiMJuro  of  corn ;  not,
however,  like  the  Perioeci,  to  the  State,  but  to  their
masters.  As  this  quantity  bod  buen  defmitidy  set-
tled nt  a  very  early  i>eriod.  tho  Holot«  were  the
IicrsouB  who  profited  by  a  good,  and  lost  by  a  ba<l,
harvest,  which  must  have  teen  to  them  an  on-


HCLOTAE


7S»


HELVETII


coil  rage  men  t  to  iuilustry  and  good  hnsbandrj'.
HS  would  not  bnve  Iieeii  tlie  ca*e  if  tlie  [iroflt  niiil
loss  bad  merely  Htrcct«<l  tb«  Iniidlordt*.  In  fart,
by  tlu8  nieaiiR,  a»  m  pniveil  I>y  tho  nccoiints  nv
Bpe«tiiig  the  Spai*tan  iiBriciiltiirp,  a.  careful  niiiti-
vation  nf  tlio  soil  was  ki!(it  up.  By  mcnim  of  the
neb  prwlnrti  of  tb«  tainlH,  and  in  pjirt  by  phiintrr
obtaint'il  in  aar,tbey  rollflnlm)  »ci)iip<iibiralibi  pr(>[i-
erty,  to  Ihv.  attatiitni;nt  nf  wliich  atinoHt  rvrry  iic-
COAK  was  closed  to  ttio  $pni-ta.nH.  Tbc  cnlllvatioii
of  tho  land,  bowovcr,  wod  not  the  only  duty  of  the
Ucluts;  tboy  alao^  at  the  public  ntcaU,  nrtuiidcd
upon  their  raflst-ew,  who,  nccordiug  to  tho  Lnce-
daemoniaii  principle  of  a  community  of  property,
matnally  lent  them  to  one  another  (X^a.  Jttp.  Lac.
Ti.  3;  Aristot.  I'ol,  ii.  i,  5).  A  large  uiimbcr  of
tbein  was  also  ctitplnyod  by  the  Stiite  in  public
works.  In  the  th^ld  the  Helots  never  served  as
hoplile.%  exci'pt.  in  (•xtranrdinary  cmom;  aitd  tlKnii  it
waH  tbo  geiicnil  practice  afttfrwanW  t«  give  them
th«tr  liburly.  Thirt  Kcems  Hiiit  to  havu  occiirntd  un-
der Brasidna  iti  B.e.  i'M.  {C'f.  Tbuc.  iv.  SO,  vit.  VX)
On  other  occaeitma  they  ntlfudt'd  the  ifgiiliir  army
an  liglit-armed  troops  (^iXciO;  anil  tliut  tticir  inmi-
hers  wei^  very  considerable  may  h«  seen  froio  the
battle  of  Platoea,  in  which  MHX)  Spartans  were  at-
tended by  35,000  Helots.  Although  they  did  not
share  ihe  bouoii  r  of  the  heavy-aniKxl  solil  iers,  tht-y
were  in  turn  exposed  to  a  loan  degree  nf  danger;
fur,  while  the  former,  iu  olutie  rank,  receive^I  the
onset  of  the  enemy  Tvitb  npear  and  nliiuld,  tho  He*
lots,  aruiod  only  with  tboirslingH  and  javoliuft,  were
iu  a  uionicut  either  before  or  behind  tho  ranks,  aa
TyrlnvuM  Accurately  deM>riWtt  the  relative  (lutie>tt
of  ihc  light-aruiod  Htildicr  lyt^y^f)  and  the  hoplito.
Sparta,  in  her  better  days,  is  never  recorded  to
have  unucceitHarily  sacrifice<l  tho  lives  nf  her
Helots.  A  certain  niimlwr  of  thcci  wero  allotted
to  eftidi  Spartan  (HcmO.  is.  Si*;  Thuc.  iii.  B).  At
the  battle  of  IMataea  this  number  \rag  tu'veit.
Those  who  were  a»»igiic<l  to  a  single  master  wen)
probably  called  cj^irtTT«p»s.  Of  the«e,  howevei*,
one  in  particular  was  the  sovv.int  (fftptiwiiiv)  of  his
naater,  as  in  the  story  of  thi;  blind  Hpartan,  who
was  conducted  by  bis  llolnt  into  the  thickest  of
the  battle  of  Thcnnopylae,  and.  while  tho  latter
lied,  fell  with  the  other  herocA  (Horod.  vii.  3291.  It
appears  that  the  oiher  Helot**  wcro  in  the  flehl
placed  more  iinmcdiately  under  the  command  of
tho  kiug  than  tho  rest  of  tho  army  (IIiT(m1.  vi,  80.
Hi).  In  the  fleet  thoy  conii>osed  the  large  nnit^s
of  the  sailom  (Xuu.  Hint.  Gr.  vii.  1, 13),  in  which
Hcrvico  at  Athuim  the  inferior  citixctis  and  slaves
were  emphiyed.  It  is  a  matter  of  much  greater
difficulty  to  fomi  a  clear  notion  of  tho  troattnent
of  the  Helots,  and  ol"  their  manner  of  life ;  for  the
rhetorical  spirit  with  which  later  historians  have
embellished  their  views  haa  been  productive  of
much  coDfusioii  and  misconception.  Myron  of
Friend,  iu  his  accoautof  the  Messcninn  War,  drew
a  very  dark  picture  of  Sparta,  and  eudeavoured  at
the  end  to  fthihr  Ibo  feelings  of  hin  renden  by  ado-
Bcription  <if  the  fate  which  the  conqn«n>d  under*
went.  "TliB  Helota,"  says  be,  "perfonn  for  the
SpartauH  every  iguomiuions  Bervic«.  They  aro
com]>elIod  to  wear  a  cup  of  dog's  skiu  (Kvvij),  to
have  a  covering  uf  rfhucpN  skin  {/ii^Sipa),  and  are
Mjveivly  beaten  every  year  witboDt  having  cotn-
raitted  any  fault,  iu  onler  that  they  may  never
forgot  they  are  ftlaves.  In  addition  to  this,  those
ouoDg  them  who,  cither  by  their  stature  or  their


beauty,  raise  themselves  above  the  condition
slave,  are  condemned  to  denth,  and  (be  m.
who  do  not  dextrny  (be  mn.'O.  manly  nf  them  in
liable  to  pnniMiment."  Uyrou'a  NlalpnieutM,  hnw-
(>ver,  are  to  \te  received  witli  conKidf*mble  cantJon.

Plutarrli  rclatot  (Xyciir'/.2H)  that  the  Hebil»  vpfe
i-omiiollcd  to  intoxicate  fbcmsolvi!fl,and  to  perform
indecent  dancOM,  aa  a  warning  to  the  8itartan  yunih.
YcL  Helot  women  diaeharged  the  ofllco  nftiurw^  in
the  royal  palnce«),  and  donbtteas  obtained  ibealfrt-
tion  with  which  the  atten/lauts  of  early  yonth
wcro  houonred  in  ancient  times.  It  is,  haweTut,
certain  that  the  Doric  laws  dul  not  bind  fterratilft
to  strict  temiH?rance ;  and  lienco  exampks  of
dnnikeiineas  among  theia  miglit  well  have  srrreU
as  a  means  of  recnmmcnding  i*oI>riety.  It  was  alau
an  eatablished  regiihition  that  the  national  inB|p
and  dunces  uf  8parta  were  forbidden  tn  the  Hekiu^
who,  oil  the  other  band,  hul  sonic  extravagant  nad
laavivloua  dances  pocniiar  to  thenisclvea,  vhieli
may  have  given  Hso  to  the  above  report.

It  wa«  tho  curse  of  this  bondage,  which  Plsio
terms  the  hardest  in  Oi-ceco,  that  the  «]avt!*  aban-
cloned  their  masters  when  tboy  btuod  in  gmilrst
need  of  their  assistance;  aud  beneo  the  Sporiaiu
were  even  compelled  to  ntipulato  in  treallos  for
aid  Jigaiust  their  own  aubjecta  (Tbuc.  1.  lis,  v.J4;
ef.  Aristot.  Pol.  ii.  6,  2).  A  more  favnurablv  swlr
of  the  spartan  system  of  l>ondagr>  is  swn  in
the  fact  that  a  legal  way  to  liberty  and  rib-
zentibip  stood  open  to  tho  Helots.  The  oianv  is-
tenuediatc  steps  socm  to  prove  (he  eiietenc*  if*
regular  mmie  of  transition  from  the  oue  rvtik  to
tho  other.  Tbd  Helota  who  were  eateemed  wetlfajr
of  an  esjMicial  conhdenco  were  called  ajrycioi:  lite
atprrtu  wens  probably  Tclea»ed  from  all  scniix.
Tho  Stoirovtoyairat,  who  servetl  iu  tho  fle^ta,  n-
scmblnl  probably  (be  freeilmen  of  Atticd,  «bct
were  called  "  the  out-dwellers"  (of  x^f^^  olMitrtti-
Whou  they  received  their  liberty,  they  al«o  o^-
tained  pennission  to  dwell  where  (hey  wiiW
{  Thuc.  iv.  c^i,  V.  34 },  ami  probably,  at  the  «uk
time,  a  (lortion  of  laud  was  granted  theiti  vritliuot
the  lot  of  their  former  masters.  After  they  bml
been  in  possoMiioii  of  liberty  for  some  time.  Um)*
appear  to  have  l>een  called  vrafia^w2«ip  (Thac.  vii.
5ti),  the  Dumlwr  of  whom  soou  came  near  to  that
of  the  citizens  (Pint.  Ji/cf.  6).  The  pi^MMC  vt
fi60aKti  were  Ilelota,  who,  being  brooght  tip  to-
gether with  the  young  Spartans,  obtained  frwdom
witliont  the  righto  of  citizenship.

Tho  number  uf  tUo  Hehita  haa  been  estiinatnl
by  K.  O.  Milller  and  Schomauti  oa  havuig  biH
sDuio  235,000  at  the  time  of  the  battle  of  PUl
as  against  an  rsttnmtcd  total  population  of  XW,
or  41Xi,i.tOO  fMilller,  Iforiant,  vol.  ii.  p.  30  foil,
trans).  See  Thirlwall,.ffM/.  of  Ore«*,  i.  SM^St
Gilbert,  Staattallcrfk.  i.  31-36;  aud  tho  artid*
Ckvitria.

Helveconae.  A  people  iu  Qennoiiy,  ItvtvMo
the  V'iaduH  aud  the  Viatula,  south  of  th«  Bngii
and  north  of  the  Uurgundionca,  reokoiuxt  t>j  Tw-
itus  among  the  Ligil  (iirrrn.  43).

Helvetia. See  Hblvetu.

HelvetU.  (EXov^um).  A  nation  of  Oaal.con-
quere<l  by  Caeoar.  Their  ooaotry  Is  generally  sni»-
posetl  to  hare  answered  to  modem  Switzerland:  Im<
ancient  Helvetia  waa  of  leaa  extent  than  moHmi
Switzerlanil, being  iKiuudod  on  the  norl  h  by  tlir  Rti*^
uuiiandI'acnsltrigautinua,orLaketifCoDiitaucr;oii


tbeaonthby  the  BiiodBuiuauil  ibi' Lacns  LctQniinaa,
or  Lake  of  Geneva ;  and  on  the  west  by  Monslnrns-
aa»  (Juraj  iCnw.  S.  G.  i.  «tc. ;  Tan.  Hut.  i.  67,  l»).
The  ctiief  tuwii  of  tiie  Ilelvntii  was  Aveiitiouiii,
uow  Aveocbea.  Tlmy  were  divided  iuto  fmtT  patji
ur  caotoDs,  of  wliirh  the  diuimm  of  only  tmi  aru
kuowu — tilt*  I'apis  TiK"nnu«  (llie  tnoHl  itn{Kirtatit
pagiiHi  and  tlio  PngiiH  (VironJ  Wrbigoniis  (I'rbi-
gBDiis).  It  must  bt;  iit>t4>d  that  the  iiHtiiti  Hdvcitia
is  A  parcly  mo«lori]  one — the  country  bclug  <t]M>ki^u
of  in  anciout  timoc  aimply  a«  Ager  Uelvt^tionmi.

Tbe  Uelvotii  tint  appoar  in  bitttAiy  during  the
var  betweon  tbo  Komans  ami  ttio  L'inibri.  In  li.C.
107  the  people  nf  the  Pagns  Tignriinis  dofeate^l  the
BotSAU  consnl  Casiiins  Ixtnginns,  niiile  otherH  of
tbe  race  mvaileil  Gaul  and  Italy,  ffbartnj;  in  tliu
defeat  inflicted  on  tlieCiaibn  by  MariuH  and  Catii-
\nn  in  M.c.  101.  In  tlie  year  M,  thry  iittenipte<l,  on
tbe  adrioo  of  Orgotorix,  an  n«lvi*iic  chief,  to  mi-
grate to  Gaul,  but  vcrv  defeated  aud  drivtiu  l>ack
hy  Caesar;  after  which  the  Koinnns  plautod  colo-
Dica  Jo  these  territ^iriea,  with  tbre«.'  fortrc«cH>8  ut
Arcutieuui,  Vindonisea  (KuDig^fi-ldtiu),  and  Nutio-
doiium  (Niuu).  Under  tbe  later  euiiMTors,  tbe
country  of  the  Helretii,  >ivith  that  of  tbo  Seqnani
aud  Raunici,  fonued  the  pruviuce  kuowu  aa  lioxi-
uia  Seqiiauurum.  See  Momutseu,  Vie  Schweis  in
rim.  Zrii  iZiirich,  liiTtA).

Helvia.  Mother  of  tbe  philosopher  Seneca
(q.  v.).

Helvidiua  PiiMua. See  pRisc'rs.

Helvil.  A  people  iu  Qaul,  between  the  Rhone
and  Mount  Cebcuoa,  which  separateil  theui  from
tbe  Arverui.  They  were  for  a  loun  time  subject
to  Mnwilin,  but  nfterwardii  belonged  to  the  pruv-
hiee  of  Gallia  NurbuDeuain. Their  country  pru*

reed  good  wine.
Helvina  CiiuuL See  Ctsyx.
Helvlua  PertXnaz. See  Pkktixax.
Hem^ra  (rnUpa). See  ViKn.
Hemerodrdmi  (ijfupoipofuM). Traiucd  runnorB
employt-'d  an  cuuriera  iu  the  Greek  Htatea,  and  uited
to  carry  the  official  tidtugs  of  important  events.
They  were  capable  of  perfomiiue  remarkably  long
dititancca  iu  a  veiT'  short  space  of  time;  on  which
see  Uerod.Ti.  105;  Plut.  Jri«(.  SO. Tboy  ar«  alao
osUed  iffttpoffKoiTM  (HenHl.  vii.  Ir3).
HttmeroacfipL Bee  Hemer(iD1<umi.
HemicliiynuL See  Statks.
Hemlooncltu. Half  a  coitgius See  Cosoiua.
Hemicyclium  {ijftucvKXiov). (1>  A  Heiuicircular
[cu%-e,  HUtltcieMtly  ^rge  to  admit  of  aereral  peraona
iting  in  it  at  the  aaum  time,  fur  the  enjoymcut  of
tual  couverae. The  aacienta  couBtruet«d  aneh
in  thcirown  pleaBure-grouDda(Cic. />«  Jm.  1;
IdoD.  £p.  i.  1 ).  and  also  as  public  scata  iu  diflereut
]>art8  of  a  lowu  for  tbe  acconiuiodation  of  the  In-
babitantfl  (Snet  CiVdinm.  17). (2)  A  nnndial  nfsim-
ple  coo>it ruction  invent«il  by  Beroaua. 8ee  HoBO>
ijfWirM.

Hemina  f^^i'm). A  meaaore  of  capacity,  con-
tiiiiiiti^;  half  aaextarius  iFeatiu,».  v.Bbenia.  Faan.
fhr  fond.  ST) ;  whence,  alflo,  a  vcaael  made  to  coa-
lain  that  exact  qaantily  fPera.  1. 1S9>
Hemina,  Cas.->ii-4 8c«  Cuacs.
HemiobdluB.  HemioboUoSL See  Obolcs.
BemioUa  (qfuoXiai A  particular  kind  of  ahtp
ijeli.  X.  35),  used  chiefly  by  the  Greek  pirate*


IIENIOCUI

(Arriau,  Jatift.  jii.tj,ri};  coutttrucird  in  mwU  a  man-
ner that  half  of  its  side  was  left  free  tr\>m  ruworo*
iu  order  to  fomi  a  deck  for  lighting  pnrpuaeo.


r


BotalolM. 1RM.I

Hemlpodioo. See  Pku.

Hemistater. Hvo  STATBlt.

Heinaterhuya,  Tibriui's.  ullun  Npokeu  of  under
the  Lutiiiizod  tunu  lli:>isrKi(ilU»lCH.  A  Unlch
classical  scholar  Uoru  ut  Groiiingt'u,  January  '.>lh|
lGd&.  He  wna  educated  at  the  Uuiventliictf  nf  Uru*
uingeu  aud  Leydeu,  euteriuK  tla*  fotiiicr  at  the  age
of  tlfteeu,  and  bfing  appuiiited  FruruttHor  of  M»lli>
enintic4  and  Fhiluaopby  iu  AmKl4.'rdiiui  at  Ibn  »uu
nf  tiinet4'en.  In  I7(lt>  lift  broiigbl  out  aii  tuliiiou
nf  the  OttomntiliritH  of  F'o]lu\  whlttji  hml  IhhMI
iM-guu  by  LtHleiliu,  but  woi*  mi  mortilicd  by  tlio
eriticisDi  madi^  ujmu  it  by  Kiubaril  Ilmitluy  (•(■v.)
n»  to  refuse  to  open  a  Greek  b>Hik  fur  uiontbfi.  In
1717  be  woA  eoUod  to  tbe  chair  of  Greek  ut  the
Univemity  of  I->aneker,  and  from  I73y  dlttoh firmed
the  duties  of  a  profeasor  uf  htiii^iry,  beiuK  tram-
ferred  to  Leyden  iu  1710. Hedietl  Aiu-il  7th,  I7ti(t.

His  chief  works  are  editions  af  the  Cutltn/uia
and  Timon  of  Lnciau  M7US);  of  the  f'lulat  uf
ArlstopbuueH  (1744);  auuulatlouH  on  Xenophon  of
£phu«QS<laat  cd.  1784);  ed.  Pollux  07"<>)l  »  Latiu
traua.  of  the  Bird*  of  Arintuplninos  in  KuKlei'ii  «di'
tiou ;  befiiilcJt  notes  uoutribuled  to  Knie«ti'a  C'ul-
limachufi  and  to  IturuiauirM  Fi»iH<rttun.  Kev  tbo
Kulo^ium  <if  Ifubiikeii  (17H1M,  the  ^upjilrmrnla  Ah*
ftotatiomn  ad  ICulu^ium  (IjcyiUm,  ltf74),  and  L.  MUller,
Oc$eh(chte  d.  ctaaa.  Philafogie  in  den  jVfMler/onrfm,
pp.74-«8  {Uipzig.  I'ifiy).

Hen. Sco  Gali.i?(a.

HendSka  (ol  'EvitKa,  "The  Eleveu").  A  term
opplied  al  Athens  to  a  bnnd  cuiuiHting  of  leu  ineiu*
bem,  choBtu  by  lot,  and  their  iteurelury.  'I'belr
duty  was  to  Muperioterid  the  priwiiis,  nn^eive  ar-
rested priwniere,  and  cjury  out  the  tteuteiicrN  of
the  law.  The  capital  sentence  wim  nxxcnled  by
their  eubordiuates,  Tbny  also  had  jieiial  jurlMllc-
tion  in  tbe  ciuw  of  delitKjneiitt  dincoveriMl  in  the
act  of  coninilttlug  ofrcuce*  puuisbablc  with  dnath
or  imprisonment.  If  they  pleaded  guilty,  Ihn
Eleven  intlicted  the  puniabment  ftt  ODce;  if  not,
they  instituted  a  judicial  inquiry  and  pre«Mled  at
the  decision  nf  the  ciuw.  They  ha<l  the  nunw  power
iu  the  cttso  of  enibeKKleroeut  of  confucaled  pro|»<
erty,  of  which  they  hod  lista  in  their  poMteMsion.
Uudcr  Dumetxius  Flulereus  they  received  the
name  of  poftoitfCXiuui. 8o«  llenujuiu,  5foa/aa/(rrlA.

HanAtl  (E^irroi).  An  aootent  people  iu  Fapb-
lacvuia,dveUiug  ou  the  river  Panbaulo*,  fonglit
«m  the  alda  of  Pirlaa  ftS»lB«t  the  Greek*,  hut  ha<l
dlaeppMred  before  tbe  hlatorlul  UntM.  They  wnra
regafded  by  mauy  aocieat  wrltara  m  tbe  aatmlan
of  I  lie  Vwiell  Iu  Italy. 8m  ViPlin.

Henidolkl  CHnovet).  A  p*o|ria  hi  Cdehla»  norih
of  tbe  Pbaala,  aotoneaa  u  pic


HENNA


788


HEFIIAESTI'S


Henna. Sec  Exka.

HephaestXa  {' H(jnuaTia).  {!)  One  of  the  two
^iriiM:t)iikt  tiiwDrt  ju  tlic  inland  of  I^criinort,  th&  other
iMiiiij;  Myrina  dlt-rod.  vii.  140|.  ci)  A  dt'uio  i>f  At-
tica belonging  to  tho  tribe  AcnmuntiH,

Hephaestia  {'UiPm<rrna\.  A  festival  nt  Alliens,
€clrltrah't|  nnnimlly,iti  honniirof  Hi'|iliaestiis.  See
LA-Mi>Ai>i:i>iic>inA.

HephaestlSdeB InaUlae. See Ajiduae In-

St-LAE-

Hephaestioa  (H<tH2tcrrlav).  (I)  A  Maeetlonian,
celuljrntcd  ns  the  frieml  of  Aloxantler  the  Great,
Mith  whom  be  hail  been  l}rungtit  tip.  lie  iltett  at
Eclnttnnn,  B.C.  325,  to  the  great  gritif  of  Alexander,
vfhn  ordered  nionrniug  for  him  tbrongliont  the
wlmht  Eitiiiire.  (9)  A  Greek  soldier,  a  nati%'e  of
Alexnnilnii,  nlm  flourished  nl)nni  the  middle  of
the  aerond  centnry  A.D.,  itiid  was  tutor  to  the
«mprror  Vernn  befoiu  his  accession.  He  wrote  a
work  on  pro«mly,  in  forty-eijKht  bookit,  which  he  Bt
flret  Abridged  into  eleven  hooks,  thm  into  three,
and  Hnnlly  into  one.  The  linn)  nbridgmeut,  called
a  nianniil  on  metres  {'Eyxtipi^iov  irf/>t  Mirfitov),
bns  come  down  to  uh.  It  given  no  mare  than
a  bare  sketch  of  prosody,  witliont  any  attempt
at  theoretical  oxplanntiou  of  the  fitL'ttt^  hut  it  is,
oeverthelcM,  of  itnmt'nse  vatne,  Kinee  il  \h  the  only
complete  treatiw  oriGriM'k  jimsody  whicli  hassnr-
vived  from  antitjnity,  and  ijnotes  verses  fnini  the
lost  poets.  Attached  to  it  is  a  treatise  on  the  dif*
ferent  fonns  of  poetry  and  compoKitinn,  in  two
inoamplete  versions.  The  niannal  has  a  preface
by  LonginuM,  and  two  collections  of  scholia.  It
hiiM  liFfiu  eilit4>d  by  Guitiford,  Trith  noteA  (la«t  od.
ia'.fi) ;  anil  Iiy  W.-xliihal  (IWfi).

HephaftBtium  ( '  HiJKiiirrinv).  A  n&nie  giren  to  a
region  in  the  extreuiity  of  Lycia,  nuar  PhiiM-lis,
from  which  liri;  iMimd  when  a  bnruing  toreh  was
applied  to  tlie  surface.  'J'his  was  owing  tu  the
naphtha  with  which  the  soil  was  iuipiv^nuted
(Sen.  A>i«f.  79).

HephaeatUB  ("IIi^hkttoj).  In  Greek  niythnlogy,
the  goil  of  lire,  and  of  llie  artw  which  n»;i:d  tire  in
the  cXL-cntiou.  Kotteher  pitiposcs  various  deriva-
tion!! of  the  name — fconi  6^i)  {utttw),  "  a  lighting,"
or  from  the  root  uf  ffxiivu,  '■  to  shiue."  He  was  said
to  be  the  .wn  of  Zena  and  Her^,  or,  uc-c4>i-diiig  to
HesicMljOfthelaKeroiiIy  Ik-iug  ngly.  ami  lame  in
huth  feet,  bis  mother  was  {isliamedofliini,  and  thrt^'W
biui  fi'^tiii  Olympus  into  the  ocean,  where  he  was
taken  up  liy  Kuryuom^  and  Thetis  and  concealed  In
a  Hubt'trranenii  cavern.  Here  h*>  remainiyl  for  nine
years,  and  fti.tbiiniL-d  a  unmlier  of  exiiuisite  works
of  art,  among  thvui  a  goMcn  throne  with  invisible
chains,  which  be  sent  to  his  mother  by  way  of  re-
venge. She  aat  down  tu  it,  and  was  chained  to
the  seat  so  fast  that  no  one  eould  release  her.
On  this  it  was  resolvfd  to  call  Hephaestus  back  to
OlytitpuN.  Aivs  wirttied  to  force  him  hack,  btit  wa«
frightein'dofri>yhi*«l<r"ther  wiihflrebnuids.  Diony-
«UH  at  length  snccecdrd  in  making  hitn  drnnk  and
bringing  him  back  in  tliU  condition  to  Olyuipns.
Bnt  he  was  destined  to  meet  with  hi.**  former  luck
u  second  time.  Then*  came  a  qnarrcl  between  Zens
atid  Ucr<5,  and  llepluiestn«  took  his  mother's  part :
wlicreopon  Zens  seized  him  liy  the  leg  and  hnrlwl
httn  down  from  Olyinpns.  He  fell  upnn  the  Island
uf  Lemnos, where  the  Sintinns,  who  tben  inhabited
the  islaudj  Uiok  care  of  htm  and  finally  revived


him.  From  this  time  Lemuoa  wan  his  favon'
iCu  abode.  His  lamene.<w  wa?*,  in  th<?  Utrr  stnrjr,
attributed  to  this  fall  (Horn.  II.  1  51»0  foil  ).

Tbe  whole  story — the  aojonrn  of  Hi'phaestna  iu
the  cavern  onder  the  sea  anil  hix  ftrndneM  (nr
Lemnns — in,  in  all  ]irotNibility,  baiHHl  njwtn  volcanie
phetmmena — the  snbmarine  activity  of  vnlcank
tires  and  the  natural  ft\atnres  of  the  islauil  of
Lemnos.  Here  there  was  a  volcano  called  Mos^cti-
Ins,  which  was  in  activity  down  to  th«  tine  of
Alexander  the  Great.  The  friendship  existing  t«y
tween  DioiiysnsAnd  Hephaestus  may  be  eipltUiwd
by  tbe  fact  that  the  best  and  linext  winei  are  gro«B
in  the  volcanic  regions  of  the  $outb.


'553


:'X


\


i)


Rephmuixa. larooM  3tslu«  tn  Brltlab  Mutual

As  a  master  in  the  produotton  of  beantlfal  uni  bt-
cinating  works  of  on.Hepbaestns  isiu  ihtlliaiihf
husband  of  n  Charis,  and  in  (he  Orf)r««r<y  of  Aphi»
dii<f,andinHesiodof  Aglaea.  {SevCllAKlTU.)  Tb(
9tory  ofhis marriage  with  Aphrodite  was  uot,n|iiur'«
outly,  widely  known  in  early  autifinity.  Throeth
his  artistic  genius  he  apiwarit,  and  nnvt  especlill;
iti  the  Athenian  Atory,  oa  tbe  intimate  frieu')  u(
Athen45.  In  Homer  he  live«  and  works  ea  Ul;"i-
pUH,  where  he  makes  palaoe«  of  brass  for  biiUMlf
and  the  otber  deities ;  bnt  he  hn^  a  forge  alvo  on
Mount  Alosychlns  in  L«^mnos ;  the  later  star>  cite'
him  one  under  Aetna  in  Sicily,  and  on  tbr  wietnl
island,  or  inland  of  Hepbaestn-i.  in  the  I.ir^iH  t»l-
ands,  where  he  is  beanl  at  wo:  ■  '^

ions  the  Cyclo|>os, All  the  nm  '"i


HEPTANOMia


789


HERACLES


wbicli  appear  io  tlie  storiea  of  fi^oda  and  heroes —
the  at.'gii«  uf  Zeus,  tlic  tmui  ot  Achillea,  ibe  Kifptru
of  AKumeuuou,  tlic  fatii)  iiecklHcie  of  HaiTmiiiia,
vb0  tirc-bmithiuK  ImlU  nf  Ae<=tf«,  cLe  golden
toTcbbeareni  in  the  pnlnce  of  AloinoQs,  anil  others
— were  Bttribntod  to  the  art  of  Hvphaestiiii.  To
help  hi«  lanienvM  ho  nmilo,  according  to  Homer,
two  golden  iii»id<<uA.  tvtth  tbp  powttr  uf  inormn,  to
lean  upon  m-bcii  lio  walked.  He  vroa  much  wor-
Kbip|H*d  in  T^nmoft.  whi'n*  there  watt  an  atinnal
fcu^tiviil  iu  Uiv  buiionr.  All  Awn  were  jiiic  out  for
nine  dayH,  during  ubirh  riteM  of  utont'Tneut  and
parillcAlion  vterv  iierfonued.  Then  fresh  flru  won
brought  on  a  tuicrfd  ship  frtjm  Drlutt.  the  fires  were
kindled  again,  and  a  uew  life,  us  the  Bnyiiig  woul.
began.  At  Athens  he  was  wurshipiwd  iu  the  Acnd*
emy,  in  connection  with  Aiheni^  and  Proiuethoua
(q.  v.),  Iu  OvtoUer  the  smiths  and  smelters  cele-
brated the  Xa\jc(in,  a  fva^t  of  metal-workers,  in
his  Uuuuur  and  that  of  Athen^;  at  tho  'Atrarovfyta
aacri&cea  verv  offvred  to  Lim,  amouK  «ihtfr  ^ixIm.
ae  the  iB^ver  of  lire,  and  ton-liPS  wftu  kindled  and
hymns  w«re  sung;  at  the  'Ht^itrrtut,  riually,  tJiero
WB8  a  torch>race  in  hiti  honour.  The  Ureeka  fre-
quently  set  small  dwurf-like  images  of  Hephaestus
near  their  fireplaces.  In  works  of  art  he  Is  rep-
rt?«ented  as  a  vigorons  man  with  a.  beard,  equipped,
like  a  smith,  with  hammer  and  tougs:  bis  left  leg
is  sfaorteoeil,  to  show  bis  lameness.  The  Homons
identified  him  with  (heir  Vutcanus  <i|.  v.).

Heptan6mis  ('Eirriu-o^tr).  Middle  Egypt,  od«
of  the  three  divisions  of  the  country.

BeptapJ^Ioe  (tmtmv^ot).  "  Seven  -  gated."  A
rinmt;  of  Thclw^  in  Il^ifolta,  distinguishing  it  from
the  Egyptlaa  Tholies,  which  is  calltMi  "bandred-
gatwl"  (^caTdfi]n>Xo<|.

Hera. See  Keri^.

Heiaclea  CH/xixXfio).  A  name  given  to  more
than  forty  l^iwiis  in  Enrujw,  .Asin,  Africa,  and  the
islanda  of  the  Mediterranean.  TJiey  am  supposetl
to  have  derived  thin  iiumu  from  HerarleH,  and  to
have  either  been  built  in  honour  of  him  i>r  plucod
under  his  protection.  The  most  famous  of  tbcnc
places  were :

Ik  Gheecb. — (1)  A  city  of  Klis,  near  the  contra
of  the  proTJuce,  to  tiie  southeast  of  Pisa,  near  the
oitnfluence  of  the  CyllipruH  nnd  .\lphens.  ('i\  A
city  of  Acarnania,  on  the  shtiru  of  the  Ionian  Ufa,
aud  opposite  the  island  of  Camus.  (It)  A  city  of
£ptrus,  on  tbe  eonfluus  of  Athamarita  and  Molos-
•)»,  aud  near  tbu  suurcca  of  the  Aras.  (4)  Ltn-
CCsns,  a  lowu  of  Macedonia,  at  the  foot  of  Iho
Caudavian  Mountains,  ou  the  contlues  of  Hlyria.
Its  mjus  still  retain  the  name  of  Erekli.  Mention
is  made  of  this  town  in  Ca«sar  (IS.  C  iii.7i)).  (5)
SiXTiCA,  the  principal  town  of  ttm  Sinti  in  Thrnce.
We  ore  tnfomieil  Sty  Livy  fxl.  24)  that  Demetrius,
the  sou  of  Philip,  was  here  imprisoned  and  nmr-
dered.  Maunert  thinks  it  the  same  with  the  Itera-
clea  bnilt  by  Amyntos,  the  brother  of  Philip,  {(i)
Tkac-hinia,  a  town  of  Thenwaly,  founded  by  Ihc
LacediKmouiaus,  and  a  colony  fruui  Tnii:h is,  about
B.C.  4'<ft>.  in  the  sixth  year  of  the  PeloponueHiuu
War  i,Thnc.  iii.  9i). It  was  distaut  about  sixty

ulia from  Thermopylae und twenty from  the

lason,  tyraut  of  Pberae,  to<ik  possession  of

I  city  at  ouu  i>eriod,  and  caused  the  walls  to  be

iJletl  down  (Xen.  Uitf.  Or.  vi.  4,  37).  Hernelca,
aver,  again  arose  from  its  niins,  and  Wcame


a  flourishing  city  nnder  the  Aetolianit,  who  somtv*
times  held  their  general  conucil  within  its  walls
(Livy,  XXV.  5).  It  was  taken  by  the  Konmu  consul,
Acilius  Glahrto,  after  a  long  aud  olistinate  siege
(Livy.  xxxvii.  24 ;  Polyb.  x.  42).

In  Itai.v,  Gaul,  etc.— (7)  A  city  of  Lacania  in
Italy,  and  situated  between  the  Aciris  and  Siris.
It  was  founiled  by  the  Tarehtini  after  the  destruu-
tioii  of  tbu  ancient  city  of  Kiris,  which  stood  at
tho  mouth  of  the  latter  river  (b.C.  428).  This  city
is  rendered  remarkable  in  history,  as  having  beea
tho  seat  of  the  general  council  of  the  Greek  stat«s.
(S)  A  city  of  Campania,  more  eommouly  known  by^
the  name  of  Hercnlanenm.  (U>CaccahaI{1A,  a  city
on  the  confines  of  Italy  and  Gaui,  in  Narboneusia
Secunda.  It  was  situated  on  the  coast,  to  the
sonth  of  Forum  Inlii.  (10)  Mlvoa,  a  city  of  Sicily
on  tbe  southern  coast,  northeast  of  Agrigentum^
at  tbe  month  of  tbe  river  Camicns.  It  waA  founded
by  Minos  wtieii  he  pursued  Doednlus  hither,  and
WHS  subset) ueiitly  ca1le«l  Heraelea  fmiu  Heracles^
after  his  victory  over  Eryx — so,  at  least,  said  the
fables  of  the  day.  Some  authorities  nmke  the
origiual  name  to  have  been  Macura,  aitd  Minos  to
have  bceu  not  tbe  founder  bnt  the  conqueror  of
tbe  plaee  (Mela,  ii.  7  ;  Livy,  xxxiv.  35).

la  Asia,  Africa,  etc. — (11)  Pu.vrlcA  (HpaxKtta
nfirruv).  A  city  on  the  coast  of  Bithynia.  about
twelve  Bta<lta  from  the  river  Lycus.  It  was  fouoded
by  a  colony  of  Megareuna,  alrengthenoil  by  sonio
Tauagreans  from  R^Mxitta;  the  numbers  of  tha
former,  however,  ho  predomtnatt*d  that  the  city
was  in  general  considereil  us  Doriii.  This  place
wiia  fumed  for  iU  naval  poner  and  its  conseqnence
among  the  Asiatic  Htales.  Jlcmuou  i::omposed  a
history  of  the  tyrants  who  reigned  at  Ueraclca
during  a  spotro  of  eighty-fonr  years;  but  we  liuvo
only  now  tho  .-ihridgment  of  Pliotius,  whieh  is  c<Mi-
flnnod  by  incidental  niiticcH  contained  i:i  Aristotle
(Polit.  vl.  S).  (12)  A  city  of  Aeolii.at  the  entrance
of  the  Qulf  of  Adramyttiiim,  opposite  Mitvl«n>6.
(13)  A  city  in  southern  AoolJs,on  the  seacoast,  near
Cnmoe.  (14)  A  city  of  Curia,  on  the  seacoast,  near
the  month  of  the  river  Latmos,  between  Miletus
aud  Prieui^  (Ptol.  v.  10).  It  was  called,  for  distinc-
tion's sake  (totu  other  places  of  the  same  name,
Hrraclka  Latmi.  |ir»)  A  city  of  Syria,  in  the
district  of  Cyrrheslica,  northwest  of  Hicra|K>lia
and  northeiwt  of  Beroea.  near  the  confines  of  Co-
niiigentJ.  (16)  A  city  of  Lower  Egypt,  situated  iti
the  Delta,  to  the  northeast  of  the  Cauopic  mouth
of  the  Nile.  (17)  HEnACLEUPOLia  Magna,  a  city
of  Egypt,  iu  the  Heracleotic  noine,of  which  it  waa
ilii!  ca]Utal  The  ichneumon  waa  worabippeil  here.
( IH )  UekacxkofOus  Pakva,  a  city  of  Egypt»
southwest  rif  Pelusium,  within  the  Delta.

Heracleopfilla  {'HpanXtoinraXic).  (1)  ParVA
(i;  fttKpd),  called  Seturon,  a  city  of  Lower  Egypt.
(2)  Magna  (ij  fityaXr}},  tho  o&pital  of  tho  Xuuoa
Heracleupolitee  in  >tiddle  Egypt  identical witb

Henielwi, See  above.

Herftcles  ('HpuxX^i:  Latin,  TTERct'LKs).  Hera^
cles  is  not  oidy  one  of  the  oldest  heroes  in  tbe
Greek  mythology,  bnt  the  most  famous  of  all.
Iude«d,  the  tradiriotm  of  similar  heroe«  in  ottier
Greek  tribes,  nud  in  other  nations.  eMiiecially  in
the  East,  were  transferred  to  Heracles ;  so  that
tbe  scene  of  his  achievements,  which  is,  in  the
Homeric  poems,  confiueil  on  the  whole  to  Greece,
became  almost  coextensive  with  the  known  world  v


HEBACLES


HERACLES


and  the  ntnn*  of  HemclfM  wm  the  richest  aud  most
cuinprBlu'Usivo  of  all  the  heroic  mytbs.

Hvnic1»s  tviu  boi'ii  iu  Tliobe*,  mid  was  the  eon
fif  Zriisby  AIcineiK',  the  wiff  ofAiiiiihitryoti,  wbosc
forui  tilt*  gin\  n8siinitMl  w)iil<>  ht;  was  iibM>iit  iu  thr
\tat  agMiutit  the  Tulrbtti.  Oii  tim  day  which  he
»bouhl  have  Iweii  burn,  Zc.uk  n.nnniincud  to  tbo
gods  time  n  dosccndant  of  I'enwuH  wan  aboni  to
«eo  tbe  light,  who  would  hold  Hwnj-  over  nil  tho
PerHeidsc.  HcM^  c>ntnni)>;ly  indticed  h«>r  consort
to  rnittinn  iii-j  wnrdfi  with  an  ontb.  &bt>  hotted  thu
ntibom  Koti  as  tho  Mim  of  her  rival,  aud  h<*iit.'i?  in  ber
«apucll>-  115  the  gnddcM  of  I'liildbirth  ciiummI  the
qne«n  of  !jtbL*ni<liit(  of  My<'t^ua*',  n  diwcieiidaut  of
PvrM'iia,  to  givv  liirlh  iireninturrly  to  KuryHtbeuii,
while  nhv  jKwtpouod  the  birth  of  Heniclc<8  for  sev-
en days.  Henco  it  vriu  that  Heracles,  with  his  gi-
gantic  strciigtli,  came  tato  the  scn'ice  of  tbo  weak-
er Kitrysthons.  ]lL>r6  punined  bitn  with  ber  bntrud
dnring  Ibe  whole  of  bi»  natural  life.  He  and  his
twiD  brother  Iphiclee,  tho  6on  of  Arapbttryon,
were  hardly  born.  Avheii  tbe  goddess  seat  two  ser-
pents to  their  cradle  tn  destroy  iheiu,  Henicles
svized  them  and  strangled  theiu.  Tbe  child  grtiw
lip  to  be  u  strong  youth,  and  was  taught  by  Amphi-
tryon to  drive  .%  chariot,  by  Autolycns  to  wrestle,
by  Knrj'tUH  to  shoot  with  tbe  bow,  and  by  Castor
to  nso  tbe  weapons  of  war.  Cbtron  iustrncied
him  in  the  sciences,  Khadamanthus  in  virtue  and
wisdom,  Enniolpua  (or  according  to  another  ac-
count, Linns)  in  innsic.  When  Linns  attempted
to  chastise  biiu,  Heraotes  slrnck  bim  dead  with
bis  liite.  Amphitryon,  accunlingly,  alarmed  at  his
untamable  temper,  sent  bim  to  teud  his  6ooks  on
Mount  Cillinenin.

It  wuH  at  this  time,  acrr>rding  to  the  .Sophist
Prmlicns,  that  the  eveut  nccorrcd  which  ocoa-
sioiied  tbe  fable  of  the  "Choic*^  nf  Horacle9"(Xen.
M^n.  ii.  'i\.  Heracles  was  meditating  In  solitude
us  to  the  path  of  life  wbicli  he  should  clioo.se,
when  two  tall  wouieii  appeared  Imfiire  htm — the
one  called  Pleasure,  tlm  other  called  Virtue.  Pleaii-
nre  pitmiised  him  :»  lifft  iif  enjoyniPiil.,  Vlrrne  a  life
of  toil  crowned  Ijy  glory.  He  decided  for  Virtue.
After  destroying  the  wavagL-  linn  of  Cilhaerou,  he
returne<l,  in  Win  eighteenth  year,  to  Thebe«i,  aud
freed  tbe  city  from  tbe  tribute  which  it  had  been
force^l  to  pay  to  Er-
^itiU!«  of  Orchoujcuus,
whose  lieraUls  be  de-
jtrived  of  their  ears
and  noses.  Creon,
king  of  Thebes,  gave
him,  in  gratitude,  bis
ilangfater  Megara  as
wife.  But  it  was  not
long  bofore  tbe  Del-
phic oracle  comniaiid-
«d  hint  to  enter  the
service  of  Eur}'»th*Mi«,
king  of  Myccime  and
Tirytjs,  and  perform
twelve  tasks  wliiuh
beskoiiht  impose  ii|H)n
bim.  This  was  the  hn-
mlliation  whii-h  Hei'fi
had  iu  store  for  him.
Tlia  onicle  promised
liim,  at  the  same  time,
that  he  should  win
«temal  glory,  and  in-


deed immortality,  and  change  his  present
Alcjiens  (from  hitt  paternal  grundfuthtrr)  or  A.1
(fruu  oKkJ),  "streugtir')  for  Heracles  ('*renoinwd
thmngh  Hcr^").  Nevcrtheles*,  lift  fell  into  a  fit
uf  madness,  in  which  he  shot  down  the  three  chil-
dren whom  Megara  had  borne  him.  Wbeu  heated
of  hia  insanity,  be  catered  into  the  aerrlce  of
EurysthetiH.

Tbe  older  story  says  nothing  of  the  exaci  mun-
ber  (twelve)  of  the  lnboarv(^fXm)(»f  Heroclea.  Tbe
unmberwas  apparently  invented  by  th«*  |>oet  Ptan-
derof  Rhodes,  who  may  have  had  iu  bis  eye  tli«  mo-
testsof  tbe  Pliu-uician  god  Uelkart  with  the  tweirt
hostile  beasts  of  the  Zodiac.  It  was  also  Pisandor
who  (irst  armed  the  hero  with  lUu  elab,  and  tbp
skin  taken  from  Ibe  lion  of  Citliaeron  or  Neiaea
Herncles  was  previously  represented  a«  canyiaf
bow  nud  arrows,  and  the  weapons  of  a  Hoiurir
hero.

Tub  twblve  labours  op  Hrraclbs  were  bb fol-
lows: (l)The  contest  with  tbo  inrnlnerable  Hon
of  Xemea,  the  oft'spring  of  Typhon  and  Echidaa
Heracles  drove  it  into  ite  cavern  aud  sti
it  in  his  artus.  With  the  imiw  net  ruble
which  uotbitig  could  make  any  iniprewiou
beast's  own  claws,  he  clothed  himsulf,  the  jsn*
covering  his  head.  (2)  TI»e  hydra  or  walar-suske
of  l^rua,  also  a  child  of  Typhon  aud  ^elikhii.
This  niouster  lived  m  tbe  marsh  of  Lema,  flcir
Argos,  and  was  so  poisonous  that  its  Tery  bRttli
was  fatal.  It  had  nine  beads,  one  uf  which  "«
immortal.  Heracles  scared  it  out  of  its  lalrwitb
huruiiig  arrows,  and  cnt  otf  its  bead;  bnt  for  ev-
ery head  cut  off  two  new  ones  aroae.  At  leugili
IidniiH,  the  charioteer  of  Heracles  aud  «ou  nf  bu
brother  Iphictes,  seared  the  wounds  with  boniu^
brnnds.  Upon  the  immortal  head  he  laid  a  bear?
mass  of  rock.  Ho  anointed  bia  arrows  with  the  mon-
ster's gal  I,  so  that  henceforth  tbe  wounds  they  inAirt'
ed  were  incurable.  Enrystheus  rofnsed  to  aceqit
this  as  a  genuine  victory,  alleging  tbe  amstaooe
ollVrexl  by  Tolails.  (^)  Tim  Imhu-  of  ErymaatliBa
which  infested  Arcadia.  Ht>rsrlea  had  been  eoB*
mamlcd  to  bring  it  alive  to  Myconae,  »o  lie
it  into  an  oxpanse  of  snow,  tired  it  out,  and  a
it  in  a  noose.  The  mere  sight  of  tbe  hi^ut
EnrysthGus  Into  such  a  panic  that  b*-  ulnnk  swif


U£BACLES


m


HERACLES


»


into  n  tub  utiduTgroiiiiil  aud  bid  tbo  hero,  In  rat-
are,  to  dhovr  tbe  pruuf  of  hi»  aobtcvcnieuU  oiitftiile
tbe  city  f;al«t.  (Ou  tisc  contcitt  with  tbo  Coiilanrs
wliicU  Ileraclnft  bad  to  undLTf^o  ou  bis  way  to  tbe
chMe,  Ko  ThuLI's  0.11(1  C'HiKiiN.l  (4>  Tlie  hind
of  Mount  Corj'ueu,  betwevu  Arcadia  aud  Ai-buia.
AuotbiT  nccniiiit  loc-ulizea  lh«  ev«ul  uu  Muiiiil
Ma«nnh)H,  :ind  tipnAkn  nf  Ibr  Mai>iiitli:iit  bind.  Iln
bornd  were  of  ((<>bl  iirid  itn  lioofK  of  bnuw,  and  it
bud  beon  dcdicatinl  to  ArtumiH  by  th»  Plviad  Tay-
gfstfi.  Heraclt-Qt  wiut  to  toku  ibc  bind  alive.  Ho
ffdbin-ud  ber  fur  »  wbulu  yeat  op  to  tbe  Miuite  of
tbe  l«t«r  iu  tbe  couutry  of  ibe  Ilyperboreauu.  At
iciigtb  Hbc  retnrued  to  Arcodiit,  wbere  be  ironiided.
JMT  with  ou  arrow  on  tbe  bnuks  of  the  Lodoii,  aud
wcaugbt  ber.  15)  Tbe  biriln  tbai  iufetfted  the  lake
of  StymphnloH,  in  Arcadia.  Thew  wi-m  inaii-eat-
ing  niiHialerR,  with  (■Inns,  wingH,  and  beaka  of
Irraiw,  and  featbeni  that  lltey  nbnt  nut  like  armwit.
Heracles  scarMl  llivtii  with  a  bntxvii  rattir,  and
«ucc«e«1rd  in  killing  part,  and  driving  away  the
raiti  wbtch  nettled  on  thn  inland  of  Aretiait  iu  the
Black  8ra,  to  lie  frifHitt^'"'*!  away,  after  a  bartl
light,  by  the  Argouanta-  (0]  HiTftcles  waa  com-
manded to  bring  bnine  for  Admetc.  tbe  daughter
of  Earj'ttthemi,  the  girdle  of  Hippolyt*.  f)nceti  of
the  Amazons.  After  many  adventures  he  landed
aC  Tbfuiiscyrn,  and  fonnd  the  qncen  ready  to  give
np  the  girdle  of  her  own  accord.  Rut  Ilcriv  spread
a  raniour  among  the  Ama]H>n8  that  tbeir  queen
was  in  danger,  and  a  tierce  battle  tonk  placu,  in
wblcb  Henolee  slew  Hippolyt<<  and  many  of  hrr
follnwerri.  On  bU  return  he  kIhw,  iu  tbo  nelgb-
iMtarbnml  of  Troy,  a  Aca-roonHivr,  to  wbuM)  fnry
King  I.aonit>dou  bad  irlferod  up  bin  daughter  Ui*u-
one.  Laomedou  refuaed  to  givo  Hcraeli^a  tbe  iv-
vrard  be  had  pmmiseil,  whereu)>on  the  latter,  who
was  basteuing  to  return  to  MycoiMUi,  threatened
liim  with  future  vengnauco.  iticv  LaomEDon.  )
<7)  Tbe  fann-yard  of  Augeatt,  king  of  Klin,  in  whleb
lay  the  dung  of  three  tbouitand  tattle,  was  to  be
cleared  In  a  day.  H«TacleK  completed  tbo  task  by
turning  the  rix'eivAlphiMiMaiid  PeneuA  into  the  yard.
AugeAs  now  contended  that  lIiiracb-8  wan  only  act-
ing on  tbo  comaiidMton  of  KuryHtheutt,  anO  on  tbi«
pretext  refuitud  him  biapromiiie^l  reward.  Hemcleit
slew  biui  afterwanls  with  nil  Iuh  imiis,  and  thcro-
upou  fuondeil  the  Olympian  (laniHH.  {^.e  Ar'GUA^}.
(H)  A  mml  linll  biMl  lieen  tieiit  up  from  tbe  sea  by  Fo-
•eidou  to  ravage  the  island  of  Crt't<<.  iu  rercngo  for
tbe  diaobedience  of  Miuos.  (See  MiNO».)  Hernr1e{«
was  to  bring  him  to  Myooiiae  ativo.  He  caught  tbe
bull,  crowwd  tbe  soa  on  bu  back,  threw  him  i»ver
his  neck  and  carried  bini  to  Mycenae,  whoro  he
let  bim  go.  The  animal  wandered  aU  through
tbe  PelopoiinutiUH  and  ended  by  iafeeting  the
neigh bonrliootl  of  Maratboti,  whem  be  wrh  at
length  idaiti  by  Tbesens.  jU)  Dioinedea,  a  son  of
Area,  and  king  of  the  Uistonea  in  Tbmce,  had
•oaie  mares  which  be  used  to  feed  on  the  tiesb  of
tbe  Btraugcrs  landing  in  tbe  couutry.  After  a  se-
vere struggle,  Ueraclee  overcame  the  king,  threw
his  body  to  the  marea,  and  took  them  olf  to  Myce-
nae, where  Euryvtbeua  let  them  go.  (10)  The  oxen
of  Oeryonea,  the  aon  of  Chryaaor  aud  the  ocean
uynipbCallirrho^.  OeTyoneewii»agiautwitli  three
ImhUum  aud  mighty  wiiign,  whii  dwelt  on  tliM  iKlaod
of  Krylbea,  iu  the  fartli«Mt  Went,  on  tlie  Imnlers
of  the  Ocean  atream.  He  had  a  herd  of  red  cattle,
which  were  wmtcbod  by  the  Mbepbenl  Kurrtiou  and
bis  two- beaded  dog  Ortbrmt,  the  ofTHpring  uf  Typbon


Hcr«c4c«  au-l  Hull. (Kruo  >  iMU-ralicr  m  Ui«  VKticu.)

and  Kcbidnu.  Iu  qucat  of  tbeso  cattle,  Ueraclca,
with  many  adventures,  posscU  through  Kuropo
and  Libya.  Ou  tbe  bouudory  of  both  continents
he  set  tip,  in  memory  of  his  arrival,  tbe  two  pilbira
which  lifur  his  name,  and  at  length  reached  the
Ocean  slream.  Oppressed  by  the  rays  of  the
neighbouring  huu,  lie  aimed  his  bow  at  the  Sun-
god,  who  itinrvelled  at  his  courage,  and  gave  him
bin  gulden  bowl  to  erooa  the  Ocean  tii.  Arrived
at  Krythi'a,  lieraulea  alew  the  sbi^phenl  ami  liis
dog,  aud  drove  ufT  the  r'uttle.  Iileuoeliiis,  who
tended  the  bcrtls  of  Hadivi  hi  the  neigbonrhoutl,
brungbi  news  to  GerynneH  of  what  bad  happeueil.
C>er>'ones  hurried  iu  pursuit,  but  aftitr  a  fierce  cou-
te«t  fell  before  the  arrows  uf  lleraclea.  Tbe  hero
rctut-ucd  with  tbo  cattle  tbnuigh  Iberia,  Oaul,  Li*
gnrio,  Italy,  aud  8icily,  meeting  everywhere  with
ucw  adventures,  and  leavitig  behind  bim  tokens
uf  hia  presence.  At  the  mouth  of  tito  Kbune  he
had  a  dreadful  struggle  with  tbo  Ligyes ;  hi»  ar-
rows were  esbausceil,  and  he  had  arink  in  weari-
ness upon  his  knee,  when  Zeus  rliiued  a  shower  of
innnnicrahle  stoue-s  from  heaven,  with  which  be
prevailed  over  hitt  euemies.  The  place  was  ever
after  a  stony  desert  plain,  and  was  identillcil
with  the  Campus  I^apidosus  near  MiuMilia  (Mar-
seilles!, (iiee,  further,  CaCI:(*  ;  Ekyx.)  Heracles
bad  made  tbe  circuit  of  the  Adriatic  and  waa
jtiKt  nearing  Greece,  when  Hen!^  seut  a  gadfly
iinil  acattercd  the  herd.  With  nincb  toil  he  wan-
dered  through  tltci  tnouutaius  of  Tbraco  na  far
us  tb«  IlelloHpout,  but  then  only  succeeded  in
getting  together  a  part  of  the  cattle.  After  n  dan-
gerona  adventure  with  the  giant  Alcyoneus,  he
succeeded  at  length  in  retumiug  to  Myceuao,
where  Enryslbeud  ofiered  up  tbe  cattle  to  Hertf
{A[HdlcHl.  i.  G,  L).  (11)  The  golden  ap|duN  of  tbe
llesperide-s.  (Sco  HEfiPKRit>K«.)  Heracles  woj^  ig-
norant where  the  gardens  of  the  Uesporides  werv
to  be  found  in  wliioh  the  apples  grew.  He  ac-
cordingly repaired  to  tbe  nymphs  who  dwelt  by
the  Eridaiius,  on  wbtpae  counsel  he  snrpriaed  Ke-
rens, tbo  otnniscient  god  of  the  aea,  and  compelled
bim  to  give  an  answer.  On  this  he  Journeyed
through  Libya^  Egyjit,  and  Ethiopia,  whore  he
slew  Autaeiis,  BuhiriN,  and  Emathiou.  (See  uu-
der  tbeso  titlea.)  He  than  oroHMed  to  Asia,  poMsed
through  the  Cuucjisum,  where  he  set  ProuiutheuH
free,  and  on  tbrongh  the  land  of  the  Hj'iterboro-
aua  till  be  found  Atla.s. FoUuwing  the  couuhoI


4


UEKACLES


7»


U£KACL£S


of  Pn)iiit<tlitiiK,  he  »ciit  At]M  tn  briai;  tlip  a|i)>les,
UU(1  ill  liit*  abseijco  bore  thu  lifavcutt  for  liiiu  on
his  slionldors.  Atlas  i-ctiinied  iviili  ibeni,  bat
df^oliDed  to  take  bis  burdtrti  iipou  bin  sbonlders
again,  protniMUg  to  carry  tlie  npp1e«  to  Enrys-
tbens  bioisclf.  lleraclca  conHeiited,  niul  aekc^l  At-
las to  tako  tbe  bardou  uiily  a  niunient,  wbilc  he
adjusted  a  cuflbiou  fur  his  bead ;  he  then  hnrHod
off  with  hia  prize.  Another  scconiit  n-preseiils
Huravk'HUHtflayiiiK  tbf  oerjMsiit  Ladoti.wbuisiianliHl
tbu  tree,  and  pliitkiri^  the  :ipp1i-M  biuisolf.  KiiryM-
tbeiiK  preaeiitei]  him  with  tbt>  apples;  hededicnt^id
them  to  Atheii^f  whu  re»torud  them  to  their  place.
(lU)  Lattt  lie  brought  tho  dug  Corbcrua  tip  from
the  lower  world.  Tbia  waa  the  hearicst  task  of
ulL  Coudnctfd  by  Hermes  and  Atheiid,  he  de-
Bccudcd  into  UadeH  nt  the  promontory  of  Taenn-
tuut.  lu  HadcH  bf  aet  Thtrseus  free,  aiid  iudnced
the  priui.'e  of  the  infernal  reRiuim  to  let  hito  t^iike
tbe  Aog  tn  tht^  reabiiA  of  day,  if  mily  he  cmild  do
so  withont  titning  liiH  weaponn.  Ht-racleH  Ixmud
the  iH^ast  iiy  tho  mew  Ntrength  of  arm,  aiul  cur-
ried him  to  KiiryHtheuH,  and  took  him  bank  uffain
iutn  lljub:ri.  While  in  Ibr  upper  world  tho  doj;,
in  bi»  di»i;uHt,  npat  upon  Ihc  ground,  caiiain^  the
poJHoiiuun  bc-rb  atroiiiU-  to  spring  np.

lIiK  tankH  nure  now  umh^d,  and  ho  rutiirned  to
TiinlmH.  HIh  Hrst  wife,  Megara,  he  wedded  to  hifl
faithfnl  friend  IoIaUs,  and  then  journeyed  into
Oechalia  to  King  Kurytas,  whose  daughter  lolC  ho
meaut  to  woo.  The  king's  son  ]phitu»  favoured
hia  snlt,  but  Eur,vtua  rejected  it  with  couteoipt.
Boon  after  this  Autolyous  stole  some  of  Knrytua's
cattle,  and  he  accused  Ueraeloa  of  the  robberi'.
Meanwhile,  Herauloa  had  rescued  Aicestis,  tlio
wife  of  AdioetUH  Iq.  v.),  from  death.  Iphitiia  met
Heracles,  Iwgsed  bim  to  help  hint  iu  looking  for
the  dtolou  cattle,  and  accompanied  bim  t^i  Tiryns.
Here,  after  boepitably  entertaining  him,  Heracles
threw  him,  iu  a  tit  of  niailness,  from  the  Unttle-
mente  of  bis  stronghold.  A  hea%'y  Hickuetw  was
sent  on  him  for  this  niiiriler,  and  Heracle-s  pr»ye<l
to  tho  god  of  Delphi  Ut  heal  him.  Ajiollo  rejcctoil
him,  wheren|ion  Heraeh-s  attempted  to  carry  away
the  tripod.  A  conflict  eui^iied,  when  Zciih  parted
the  eombataQta  with  his  lightning.  The  oracle
bade  Heracles  to  hire  himself  out  for  three  years
for  three  talcnta,  aod  pay  the  money  to  Enrytnn.
Uenues  put  him  into  the  service  of  Omphal'^,
queen  of  Lydin,  dangbter  of  Inrdaniis,  and  widow
of  Tmolus.  Heracleit  wasdegradrd  to  female  drndg-
ery,  was  clothed  in  sofL  raiment  and  set  to  spin
wool,  whtle  the  i|ULii*n  assumed  tbu  lion  skin  and
the  olnb.  The  time  of  service  over,  he  undertook
an  uxpudition  of  vengeance  against  Laomedon  of
Troy.  H*i  laudefl  on  the  eo:uit  of  the  Troad  with
eighteen  shi|)«t,  manned  by  tbe  bolde&t  of  heroes,
such  us  Ti-'lamon,  Peleus,  and  Olcles.  Laomedon
auececded  iu  surpiisiug  the  gnanl  by  the  ships
and  iu  slaying  Olcles.  But  tbe  city  was  stonuei)^
Telamon  being  the  firvt  to  rlimb  tbe  wall,  ami  Laom-
edon, with  all  his  hoiih  t^xeept  Podarces,  was  slain
by  the  arrows  of  HwrocIivH.  (See  PRlAMt'8,1  On
bis  return  Her^  iwnt  a  tempest  npon  him.  On  the
island  of  Cos  he  bad  a  hard  coufiict  to  undergo
with  EarytioD,  tbo  sou  of  Pttseidou,  and  bis  sous.
Heracles  was  at  lirst  wounded  and  forced  to  lly,
but  prevailed  at  length  with  the  help  of  Zeus.

After  this  Atbi-nt  suumioued  the  hero  to  the  bat-
tle of  the  godi*  with  the  giants,  who  were  not  to  be
VDOqaishod  without  bis  aid. {See Gigaxtes. )


Then  Heracles  retnrued  to  the  PcIo|H>iiuc«ua,1
took  vt;iigeaiire  on  Aiigeas  and  on  Xeletis  of  1
los.  who  bad  refused  to  purify  bim  for  ibr«  mnnler
of  Ipbitns.  (See  Ai'GBA8;  Muliunidajc;  NcLEr^;
pEKlhVMBNUS.)  Iu  the  buttle  with  the  Fylianslw
Went  HO  far  as  to  wound  Hades,  who  bad  come  up
to  their  assistance,  Hippocouu  of  Sparta  aod  bis
nutQeroos  sons  he  slew  io  rercuge  for  their  mf^
dcr  of  Oeouas,  a  eon  of  his  maternal  nncle  Lie

irius. In  this  cuutest  bis  ally  was  King  Ce|ri

of  Tt'goa,  by  whtiMt*  ninter  Ang^  lt«  was  father  nf
Telepliiis.  Cephens  with  his  twenty  sous  wera  left
dead  ou  the  field.

Heracles  now  won  as  hia  wife  Detanira,  lbs
daughter  of  Oeucns  of  Calydon.  (Sec  AcilKLori)
He  remained  a  long  time  with  his  fatber-in-Iaw.  and
atleugth.witb  bin  wife  and  bis  sou  Hyilns^bepSHtd
on  into  Tniebis  to  the  hospitality  of  his  friend
Ceyx.  At  tbe  ford  of  (ho  river  Kveuus  he  encodi-
tero^l  tbe  Centaur  Nessus,  who  had  the  right  uf
carrying  trnvellurs  across.  Nessns  remainei]  be-
biiidiiiid  nttempteil  t4.t  dn  violence  toDelanira,apw
which  llnracleHshot  him  thmngh  with  bis  potMHied
nrrowfl.  The  dying  Centaur  gave  some  of  hi«  Id-
fcclrd  blood  to  Deianira,  telling  her  that,  sbonM
her  bnsband  be  nnfaitlifnl,  it  would  he  a  tOMamf
restoring  htm.  HeracleN  had  a  etubhorn  cootfsl
with  Tbeodamu,  the  king  of  the  Dryoftes,  kilM
bim,  and  took  his  son  Hylas  away.  He  iIms
reached  IVachis,  and  was  receiveil  with  the  friend-
liest welcome  by  King  Ceyx.  Next  he  ataitMlbs
tighc  with  Cycuas(q.  v.),  who  hail  cballeDgedhln
to  single  combat;  and  afterwanls,  at  the  roqsMt
of  Aegimius,  pdnce  of  the  Dorians,  utKlertoiik  a
war  against  tbe  Lapltbae,  and  an  expedttiaa
of  revenge  against  Enrytus  of  Oechaluk  Bt
Btonued  tbe  fortress,  slew  Eurytus  with  hi*  tout,
and  cnrrir<l  otV  Jo](^,  who  had  formerly  been  deotad
bim,  as  his  prisoner.  He  was  about  to  offer  s  •Mieri-
fice  to  his  father  Zens  on  Mount  Cenaeum,  vbtn
Deianira,  jealous  of  Iol<f,  sent  him  a  robe  staiuel
with  the  hliMHl  of  Nossus.  It  had  hardly
wann  npon  his  hody  wbon  the  dreadful  poJbual
gau  to  dcvonr  his  flesh.  Wild  with  augamb,  1
hurled  LicliaH,who  brought  him  the  robe,  iuio  tlif
sea,  where  he  M'as  changed  Into  a  tall  L-liif.  lotbi
attempt  to  tear  otl'  tho  robe,  he  only  tore  off  pieen
of  his  llcsh.  Apollo  bade  him  be  carried  to  1
top  of  Oeta,  where  be  had  a  great  fnueral
bnilt  up  for  hi  m.  This  he  ascended ,  tbm  he  |
lole'  to  his  son  llyllns  to  be  his  wiff.  and  bad*
Poeus,  the  father  of  FbiliKtetw,  to  kindle  the  pyn^
Acconling  tounntherstory,  it  was  Phil»ctet(u  biai-
self,  whom  •Heracles  preeentcd  with  his  how  aa>l
poisoned  arrows,  who  performed  this  ofHcu.  Tlx-
flames  hud  hardly  started  up,  wheu  a  clouO  d*-
scendetl  frum  the  sky  with  thuuder  and  ligbtiilflX.
aud  carried  the  son  of  Zeua  up  to  hoaveut  w)i«ie
he  waa  welcomed  as  one  of  tbe  iuimorlalsi  Bttt
was  reconciled  to  hioi,  and  he  waa  wedded  Mbtt
daughter  Hebe,  tbe  goddeesof  eternal  youth.  Their
children  were  Alexiares  ("  Avorter  of  the  Cana'i
and  Anicetns  ("the  luvinciblH"),  thn  naraea  mem-
ly  personifying  two  of  the  main  qualities  for  wbKk
the  hero  was  worshipped.

vVbout  the  cud  of  Heroeles  nothing  is  said  in  Ik*
Iliad  hot  thst  he,  tho  best-loved  of  Zoos^  sods,  did
not  escape  death,  bat  was  overcome  by  fJtIr.  au*l
by  the  heavy  wrath  of  Here.  In  Ibc  OdytKjr  bit
ghost,  in  form  like  black  night,  walks  in  ihelo<*^'
world  with  his  bow  bent  aud  his  arrowa  radj,


HERACLES


796


HERACLES


'wbile  the  bero  liinuipir  dwells  among  the  itatnor-
laln,  tlio  btivbuud  of  HvIm:.  Kor  the  livea  of  bis
ofaiUlreii,  and  the  end  iif  EiirrMthenit,  w«  IIylluS.

Heracles  wan  wnntbipiinl  |i»rtly  ii«  a  hero,  to
whom  iii«ti  bmii^ht  thu  orditiary  Itbalious  and
ofTeringM,  and  partly  att  un  Olympian  deity,  an  iin-

'  mortal  uiiong  the  immortnlfi.  lititiu'ilJAtdy  aOtxr
bis  apotbooai*)  hU  fnttiKla  offered  «a«riQc<-'  to  linn
at  th«  place  of  biirning,  nnd  his  worship  n.pr*-iid
from  thence  tbrongU  nil  the  tribes  of  Htlla*.  Dio-
mna  the  son  of  ColyttiiN,  an  Atheiiraii,  is  said  lo
have  been  the  first  who  paid  him  t!ie  bononrA  of
an  initnort-al.  It  vrim  he  who  founded  the  gyni-
nasiani  calleil  Cytmsarges.  tivur  the  city.  TbiA
gymnaAiiint.  thi^  sanctuary  at  Murathon,  .ind  thn
teinplo  at  Atheu-i  were  the  thro4>  miiMt  vetiernhte
■brines  of  tIeracl«H  in  Attica.  Dionnia  gave  bin
DAtoe  to  the  Diomeia,  a  lucrry  festival  held  in
Athouft  in  hoDonr  of  Horaclcs.  F«aats  to  Heracles
(HpwiX*ta),  with  athletic  contests,  were  celebrated
to  many  places.  He  was  the  hero  of  labour  and
Btmggle,  and  the  patron  deity  of  the  gyiauasium
and  tbe  palaeslm.  From  early  times  he  was  re-
garded as  lmviri)r  infliitnttsl  the  Olympic  Games;
as  the  foiitidttr  of  the  Olympic  MincCnartes  and  the
Olympic  trncw,  tbe  planter  of  tho  shady  groves,
aad  the  0n(t  comfietirnr  and  victor  in  tbe  uontesla.
Dnring  bis  earthly  lifu  tio  had  been  a  helper  of
gods  and  lucu,  and  Liad  flet  tho  earth  free  fn>ni
mouHtera  and  rascals.  Accordingly  he  wao  in-
voked in  all  the  perils  of  lite  as  tbe  BavioDr(o-a)r7^l
and  the  averter  of  evil  \dXi$Uaitas).  Men  prayed
for  bis  protection  againut  looiisls,  flies,  and  noxious
wrpents.  He  wim  a  wtiiidtrer,  and  bad  tnivellt-il
over  the  whole  world;  thuiefore  he  woh  <uille<I  on
am  the  guide  uu  murclit^  and  Journeyii  {fjyefxoytos).
lu  another  character  hn  vtim  the  glorious  conqueror
(«aXXiw«or)  who,  after  lii»  toils  arc  over,  enjoys
hia  rest  with  wine,  fuanting,  and  music.  Indeed,
the  fable  reprciwntjt  him  at*  having,  in  hi.s  bocirs  of
repose,  given  as  ittriltiiig  prtxkfli  of  iiiL>xhutiHtihle
bociily  power  om  in  hln  ntniggleH  and  contests.
Men  liked  to  think  of  him  as  an  enonnons  eater,
capable  of  devonring  a  whole  ox ;  a«i  a  Initiy  h<H>n
companion,  fond  of  delighting  tiitnself  utid  otln-rs
by  playing  the  lyre.  In  Rome,  an  Hercnleu,  he  was
ooapled  with  the  Miutes,  and,  like  AjkiIIo  elseivbere,
waa  worshipped  as  Moi^rra^rTTjrillercnhMi  Ml] snrnut),
or  maalor  of  the  MuHen.  ^On  the  connection  bo-
twetm  Heracles  au<l  the  MuseH,  see  KlUgmann  in  the
Commfilationcs  in  llonortm  Tk.  MommffKt,  p.  "AiS
[IISTT'].  and  I^obeck,  /'Aryw.  4:ti;i|.  Under  Angustiis,
MarcinsPhilippns  hnilt  a  temple  to  himut  Honieas
Uerculen  Musarnm  (Suet.  Jut;.  30,  with  PecU'v  note).
After  his  labours  ho  was  itnppoAed  to  havd  l>e«u
fond  of  hot  baths  (Bi'ttfttii.)  which  were  ucconUugly
deeoiodsacrefl  to  him.  Among  trees,  the  wiltl  oli>e
and  whito  [toplar  were  consecrated  to  him;  the
poplar  he  was  belieTcd  to  have  brought  tcom  dis-
tant conntries  to  Olynipta.

Owiug  to  Che  Inflneuce  of  the  Greek  coloTiies  in
Italy,  tbe  worship  of  Heracles  wax  widely  dilfiised
among  tbe  Italian  tril>eK.  It  attached  ilm-lf  to
local  legends  and  religion;  the  conqueror  of  Caciti«,
for  instance,  was  originally  not  Heracles,  but  a
IKtweKnl  shephenl  called  Gamnos.  Again.  Heni*
cleM  came  to  be  identiEled  with  the  ancient  Ituliati
deity  Sancns  or  Oitis  Fidins,  and  vian  regarded  as
tbe  god  of  happiness  iu  home  and  tii*1d,  industry
and  war,  as  well  im  of  trnth  and  honour. Hih  altur

I -was  the  Ara  Maxima  in  tbe  cattle-market  (Forum


BoarinmS  which  be  was  believed  to  have  erecu<d
himself.  (See  Cacus.)  Here  they  dedicated  to  hint
a  tithe  of  their  gains  in  war  and  i»eace,  ratilled
solemn  treaties,  and  invoked  his  name  to  witneMs
their  oaths.  He  ha«l  maiiy  shrines  and  sacriUces
in  Rome,  corresponding  to  his  varicma  titles,  fkiitr
(Conqiieror),  furietu*  (ITn conquered),  Ctmlog  (Gaar-
dian),  Dtfenuor  (Defender),  and  otbera.  His  rites
were  always  performed  in  Greek  foahion,  with  the
head  coveivd.  It  was  in  his  temple  that  soldiers
atid  gtmliators  were  accustomed  to  bang  up  tbelr
arms  when  their  service  was  over.  In  the  stone*
quarries  the  labourers  hiul  their  Hercules  ^xarius


^y


.A


K


/^


^i


X.


t'


TAYr/OM


A


V


PsTDese  H«rciU«a (NspMs  guanuB.)

(HercaleB  of  the  Stone).  He  was  called  tbe  fa-
ther of  LatinuH,  the  ancestor  of  the  I>atinB,  auid  to
him  Uto  Koiuan  geus  of  tbe  Fabii  traced  their  ori-
gin. The  ancient  family  of  the  Fotitii  were  said
to  have  bveit  conimiiuiioned  by  tbe  gml  iu  perbuu
to  provide,  with  the  assistance  of  tbe  Pinarii,  for
his  HacriAces  at  tho  Ara  Maxima  (Livy,  i.  7.1.  In
H.c.  310  tho  Politii  gave  the  service  into  the  bands
of  the  ttvxi  puhUci. Before  a  year  bad  passed


^


HERACLUKU3


7M


U£BACUTUS


llio  lluiiridfaing  family  biul  becutuc  complotoly  ex-
tiuut.

lu  works  of  art  H«>ni<'1cw  is  repriwentwt  as  tliP
ideal  of  uiRDljr  tilrcugtl),  with  full,  well  knit,  aod
tnUMuUr  limbs,  Borioun  uxprtwiiuii, » iMirlinf;  l>enrd,
aburt  ueok,  and  a  licud  Hoiall  itt  [)n>|>nrtion  to  tlie
lliuba.  His  eqiiipuieut  ict  g(i:uerally  liio  rliil>  and
tbe  lioti'tt  frkiu.  The  ty)M!  ujipcur)!  to  liiivn  Imuui
mahily  Hxcd  by  Lyaippus.  Tbe  Kanieiw  Hri-urilnn,
by  tbe  Atheuiati  Olyvun,  in  probuLly  a  copy  iif  nito
by  Lysipitnit.  HariU'lM  in  porlTuyed  in  re]>(Mo,
iBaiiing  (111  luH  rliib,  ^rtiich  in  onvereil  with  the
linu's  Hkiii.  (8«e  FaRXf-9k  HKRCCLKtt.)  Tlio  Hor-
acloM  of  tbe  Athenian  ApollouiiiH  (q.  v.),  now  only
*  torn),  is  uqualiy  t:cl«brBt«l.  8«i  Vogol.  JTercule*
teeundum  Graecoram  /"(wton,  «tc- (Hallo,  1830) ;  antl
Roacb»r,  Amfiihrlichtm  Lr-xikoa  d.  griech.  und  rOm.
Mglhalogir,  a.  b.  V.

BeracUanuB  CHpaxXunmv).  An  officer  of  the
«inp«r<»r  HtmoriuB  who  put  Stilioho  to  death  in
A.D.  406,  anil  got  the  govenimvnt  of  Africa  as  his
reward.  After  Herving  against  Alaric  nu<I  the
U8tirp4)r  Attains,  whom  Alariu  hjul  mado  emperor,
HtTacliauiiit  revoltotl  and  invaded  Italy.  Tltft  at-
tempt was  unaiicceHsfiil,  and  on  bin  r«tnra  tn  Car-
thagu  be  wat  tbero  put  to  duntb  by  onlur  of  Hoiio-
rilu,  ill  A.if.  4VA. 8tio  8tiliciio.

HeraclSdae  ('llpaxX«t$ai  )■  A  name  given  in
anci«nt  legend  to  a  powerful  Aclmeau  race  or
family,  the  fabled  dosccndaut-s  of  H(3racloa.  Ac-
ctirdiug  t<>  cbc  acconnt  of  Ibo  aiiciout  writers,  tbe
cbildreii  i>f  Heracles,  after  the  death  of  that  hero,
btfiug  iiersecnted  by  Eurysthous,  took  refngo  lu
Attica,  aud  tbero  defeated  aisd  slew  th«  tyrant
at  tlie  Suirouian  Rock,  uear  tbe  Sarouic  Gulf.
When  tbuir  enemy  bad  fallon,  they  roainDed  pos-
AMsion  of  tbeir  birthright  iu  tbe  PeloputineituA;
but  they  bad  not  long  eitjuyod  tho  fniiU  of  their
victory  before  a  paatileiiee,  in  which  they  recog-
nized the  linger  of  heaven,  drove  Ihem  again  into
tixile.  Attica  again  affDrdcd  tliem  a  rutreat.  When
their  ho[ie!t  hatl  revii-ed,  an  mnliigimiis  oracle  en-
couraged them  to  believe  that,  after  tbey  had
reaped  their  third  barvi^st.  they  should  tlnil  a  pnw-
pentUK  pawago  tbrongh  the  Inthmns  into  the  land
of  tbeir  fiithonit.  Il^ttt,  at  the  entrance  of  tbe  Polo*
potineiins,  they  weru  met  by  ibo  united  forceft  of
tbe  Achoenun,  Ionian»t,  and  Arcadians.  Their  load-
er HylliiH,  the  eldcut  (ton  of  Heracleflr  proposed  to
ilecifle  tbe  qnamtl  by  i«ing1o  combat;  and  Echo-
iiiuii,  king  of  Tegeo,  wan  selecled  by  tbo  PelofHiii-
nesian  i-onfederat4M  an  their  cbanipiou.  Hylhis
fell;  aud  the  Heraclidao  were  bonnd  by  tbe  terms
«f  the  agreement  to  abandoQ  tbeir  enterprieo  for
A  hundred,  or,  according  to  some  aocouiitd,  for
nfty,  yuaro.  Yet  both  Cleodoens,  son  of  Hyllns,
null  bis  graiidHon  Aristomachus,  renewed  tlio  at-
tempt with  no  better  fortuoo.  After  Ariolomacbnt)
bad  fallen  in  battle,  the  ambignous  oraclo  was  ex-
plained to  bis  souH  AristodemuH,  Teiuenuii,  and
C'rospboutoi);  and  tbey  wure  aiwured  that  the  time,
the  third  generation,  ha«l  now  como,  when  they
should  accomplish  tbeir  return;  uot,  however,  as
they  had  expected,  over  tbe  guftrd€>d  Isthmus,  bat
across  tbe  moiitb  of  the  western  gulf  from  Nan-
pactQS,  where  the  opp4«ito  shores  are  parted  by  a
obaanel  only  a  few  fiirluiigs  broad.  Tims  encour-
aged, with  the  aid  nf  tbe  Dorians,  Aetoliann,  and
Iiocriaus,  rhey  crowiod  the  strait,  vanquished  Ti-
(uiTnenns,  son of  Orestes,  nitd  divider!  tbe  fairest


portion  of  the  PoloponnMns  among  tbem.  (Bw
UoKis.)  Kor  the  historical  significance  of  thii
legend,  sec  Hkiajl^  Kor  tbo  plaj'  of  Knripides  m
tbesnbjeetof  tbe  Ueraeliitac,s««  ECBiru^ES,  p.638.

Heraclides  <  'HptucXti^s). (I)  Sartuuned  PoktT-
CV8.  A  Greek  pbilonopber,  bom  at  Heraclea  in  Pan-
tua  about  B.C.  3^-<0. He  came  early  t4»  At  bens,  when
he  Iwaime  a  disciple  of  Plato  nud  Aristotle,  and
hiul  made  a  reputation  by  about  B.C.  340. He  vh
tbo  nntbor  of  some  sixty  worka  nn  a  great  varis-
ty  of  subjects — philosophy,  mathemali(!«, nmoc
grammar,  poetry, political and literary history,
and  geogniphy. He  vaa  u  learned  and  interat-
ing  writer, but aoniewbat dctlcicut in critical
powor. There  are  a  few  froj^ients  of  bU  work*
remaining,  besides  an  extract  from  a  book  on  oun-
stitnliouB  which  Ijearm  his  name,  edited  by  KSIef
(nnllt>,  1804),  CorauB  (Pariit,  ld05),  and  Muller. Soe
Deswert,  T)e  Herarlide  ruHtico  (Xonvain,  1830),  and
V.  \V.  Schmidt,  De  Heraclidae  PowbrJ  etc  Dialofu
J)eptrdUi$  (Breslan,  18G7X (3)  A  Syracnsau,  Uw
son  of  Lysimaobus,  and  one  of  tbe  getiorals  wbes
Syracoso  was  attacked  by  the  Athenians  in  ac
415. (3)  A  comniaoder  of  the  mercenary  tmipi
under  the  yontiger  Diouysina  at  Syracuse. Ua
sdlKtoquuntly  jotneil  Dion  in  expelling  Dioofriiti,
and wuM  biinH«]f  aNsuHsinated  in  B.r.  354. {i\  A
physician  of  Tarentum  who  flonrisbrd  in  theaec-
oud  century  D.c.  and  wrote  on  Materia  Medio.

HeracUtua  {'HpaieXtme).  (1)  A  Greek  pliU«n-
pbor  of  Eplicsns,  who  lived  abont  n.C.  SH^-Gh,
during  tbe  timeof  tbe  tirst  Persian  domination  ovtr
bis  native  city.  As  one  of  tbe  last  of  tbe  family
of  Aiidroclus,  tbe  deecendant  of  CodruH.  who  kad
founded  the  colony  of  Kpbe^ns,  Ueraclitos  had
certain  honorary  reg-nl  privileges,  which  b*  r»-
□uunced  in  favour  of  his  brotlier.  He  likeniM
denliued  an  invitation  of  King  Durins  to  «'isil  lai
court.  He  was  an  adhensnt  of  the  aristixaacjr.
and  when,  aftor  tbe  defeat  of  the  PutBiana,  tlie
democratic  party  came  into  jHiwer,  be  vitltdn*
in  ill-liumuur  to  a  secluded  catate  iu  the  counUy.
and  gave  himself  np  entirely  to  his  stndies.  In
his  later  years  be  wi-ote  a  i>bilosopbical  trtaliM^
which  he  d^poKtted  iu  tbe  temple  of  Artemis,  inak*
ing  it  a  condition  that  it  should  uot  be  publisbnl
till  after  bis  death.  He  was  buried  in  tbe  mar]
place  of  Kphttsns,  and  for  eeveral  centimea
tbe  Epbceians  coutiuued  to  engrave  bia  imago
their  coins.

Heroclitas  waa  one  of  tbo  anbtlewt  of  all  ibc
metafibysicians  of  Greece,  aud  bis  importance  at  a
philosopher  lie«  iu  the  fact  that  bo  waa  the  fuandei
of  nn  independent  metaphysical  system  wbidi
sought  to  oltviato  tbe  diftlcnity  of  overcoming  UN
contradictions  between  tbe  one  and  tbe  phenulMOsl
many.  Hingrent  work '*0n  Naliin>"(a<^  4Mrf«r)i
in  three  iMioks,  wua  written  in  the  Ionian  dialeet^awl
is  thf.  otdejit  monument  of  Greek  pm«e.  Cooaider
able  fragments  of  it  have  come  down  lo  as.  Tbe
language  is  bold,  hnrah,  aud  tigurative:  the  «tyl<
is  so  careless  that  the  syntactical  relatious  iirib*
wortle  arc  often  hanl  to  perceive;  and  tbe  tbntiftbu
are  profound.  All  this  mwle  Heraclitus  so  ill
a  writer  that  he  went  in  antiquity  by  ths  ni
"  tbo  Olwcnre"  (A  ffKoTttWit),  and  Lncretins  st^
bint  on  tluH  ground  (i.  63d-644\  Fn>n)  bin  gl
view  of  life  be  is  often  oallod  "  the  Wc<«piug
loMopUer,"  as  Democrittw  i»  koown  aa  ''tbe  I^ugh-
iug  Philosopher." Cf.  Juv.  x.flB  foU.


I  sum


I


Kiion-Itslgc,  ticconling  to  H«raoJitas,  !•
tipuu  perceptiuu  by  tbo  avnttm.  IVrfcut  knftwl-|
vi\ge  IB  ouljr  given  to  the  gtKls,  bnt  n  jtriiKtrw  iii
kuoirl«lj;e  is  poeoible  to  niru.  Wiiwitiiu  coiiHistH
in  tlie  recognition  of  tli«  iiit*IliKeiic«  wliioli,  hy
meant)  of  Itiv  wurli]-»i)ii),  (fiiiiles  tlie  iiniTerae.  Er*
er)-tliiiig  is  in  uti  etunial  Uiix  {miyra  p«i);  uoiliiiig ;
tlierefore,  not  nxcu  tlio  world  in  *t«  nionicatu-j'
funti,  nor  the  aoA*  tbumHclvt-ii.  ciin  c«CAim  final  tie-
stmctioii.  Tlie  n1tiuiat«  principlt^  int4>  wbicli  hII
cxistoi)c«  is  rtwolvable  i8  (ire.  Ah  lira  cliiuigiw  dod-
tiiHinlly  into  wiit«r  anil  tlj«ii  into  eartli,  ho  eartb
cbiing<.Mi  lisrk  to  watiT  and  water  ajcaiu  to  6re.
Tbo  world,  tht-'rcforv,  aro«o  front  tiro,  and  in  alter-
■intiiig  periwis  in  rtwiU'ed  A^Ain  into  lire,  to  form
iliwlf  alien'  urit  of  thin  olcmeut.  Tlio  itirisiou  of
unity,  or  of  tho  dirine  original  Bre,  into  tbe  nmlti-
]dicity  of  opposing  pbononiona,  is  "  ihc  wAy  duwiw
\vnrd«,"  nod  the  oonitc4|uciK-«  of  u  war  and  a  Htvifu.
Ilanudoy  and  praco  Uiiul  bitck  to  unity  t>y  "  tlie
way  tipwardu."  Nature  \»  (H>nfltaittly  dividing  and
uniting  herself,  «o  that  the  multiplicity  of  oppo-
t)ii<-«  d<>«8  not  deMtmy  thu  nnily  of  the  whole.
Tbe  existence  of  tbeao  op{)OHit«s  dvpcnda  only  on
the  difference  of  tbe  tniilioii  on  "tiie  way  up-
wanls''  from  that  on  *'  the  way  downwarda"  ;  all
things,  therefore,  nre  at  once  identica.1  and  not
Identical.  The  principlw  of  the  nniver**  in  "l*e-
coming,"  which  inipliett  that  evi^rylhiug  in  and,  at
tbe  asniQ  time,  la  nut,  w>  Gu-  as  tbe  same  relation
is  couflcrnod.

Tbo  letter*  aecriUed  to  HeracUtus  are  Apnrioufi.
Sec  Bvrnays,  Heravtilta  (lloun,  m4t^);  id.  IHt  hera-
klitiKken  Brif/r  fltcrliii,  tS5i)) ;  Laaaalle,  Die  I'hi-
liMiophir  Iterakleita»'  df%  ItHtikelti,  3  vola.  (Berlin,
18St^> — tho  moAt  cxbauativo  muuograph  on  the
philosophy  of  Heraclitns;  and  &cbn»tt'r.  Jlerai-tH
r*ppi  Ephe«H»  (Leipzig,  1M72).  Tin*  fragnifliiti*  of
Ueraviilns  were  ««llted  and  puhlidhMl  in  Kngland
iu  1^77  by  Bywator. .Hf«  Piim.()«4>phia.

(3)  Ati  Acailcniic  pliilosopbiir  of  Tyre,  whoao  trea-
tla«  Iltfii  'An-iOTtf^  Htill  cxintH  and  hatt  bcun  edited
by  Wvat«nuann  (Hnnmwick,  1843).

Horaea  i'Hpaia).  A  town  in  Arcadia,  on  tUv
right  bank  of  the  AtpbuuK,  nuar  the  iHjnk-rH  of
Klia.

Heraea  (rd  'Hpala).  A  festival  held  at  Argim
every  five  years  in  hononr  of  Ht^r*?,  the  gtiddenn  of
the  ooautry.  Tlie  pritxttt^iw  <>f  Iler^  drove  in  a  car
drawn  by  vbltc  oxen  to  the  Hcraenm,  or  tcniplo
of  the  goddeM,  aitnated  between  ArgoH  and  Myco-
nni^.  Meantime  the  people  marched  ont  in  procea-
sioD,  the  fighting  men  in  their  arms.  Tbore  waa
a  great  sacrifice  of  oxen  {iKaTu^i^q),  foUowod  by  a
geaeral  Bacrificial  bantpiel  and  gamen  of  all  MoriHL
A  ipecial  featnre  of  ihtmo  wu."*  a  cunttait  in  tbrtiw-
ing  the  javelin,  while  ninning  at  full  H|M>ed,  at  »
ahield  aet  up  at  the  end  of  the  coume.  The  victor
r«reive4l  a  crown  and  a  shield,  which  be  carried  iu
the  linal  prouewioD.  Like  feaata  were  held  at
Aegtna,  Samoa,  Elis,  Cos.  Athens,  and  other  place^t
(Hornianu,  Gottfwi  Alterti.  $  51,  n.28X

Heraei  Montea  (ra  'Upaia  &pri\  A  range  of
monntaina  in  Sir.ily,  running  from  tho  ceutre  of
the  ialand  aontbcant,  and  ending  in  the  promon-
tory Pa«bynuui.

Heraetim('Hputov).  Tbe  name  given  to  any  tem-
ple of  Here,  that  nl  Argiw  Iwing  tbo  miwt  fauiuua
Haralda. See  PiiARi'o,


HEBCt'LEL'M

Herald  •  StafE, See  CADUors.

Berblu  ('Kfi^tra).  A  town  in  Sicily,  Dorlh  of
Agyriiiin,  iu  the  inonntainn,  tbe  residence  of  the
tyrant  Arcbnnidei*.

Hercalaneum  'HpdrXfuw).  (1)  A  town  in  8am-
nium.  ('i)  A  city  of  Campania,  on  the  (xiaMl.  tim]
not  far  from  N<*apolta  (Xapleaj.  The  farm  IlERCt'-
LANfM  iff  nuMleni.  Nothing  in  known  rcitpeeting
the  origin  of  Tlfrenlnuenm,  exr<-*pt  that  fabulous
accouiita  iiHcrihed  its  fuiindation  to  Hercules  on  bis
return  from  Spain  (Dion. Hal,  i.44).  It  maybe  in-
ferred, however,  from  a  pasaage  iu  Strabo,  that  tbe
town  was  of  great  antif|uity.  It  may  he  reaannably
conjeelnred,  too,  that  llemulaneum  was  a  Greek
city,  bnt  that  its  name  waa  altere«l  to  suit  the  Lat-
in or  Owau  pniuuneiation.  At  fn-tiit  it  was  only
a  fortrwHa,  which  waa  aaoeessively  occupieil  by  the
Osci,  Tyrrlicui,  Pclaaf^,  BaainiteB,  aud  lastly  by
tbe  RiiuiaUK.  Being  sitnatv^l  close  to  the  sea,  on
elevated  ground,  it  waa  exposed  to  tbe  sonthwest
wind,  aiid  from  that  circumntauce  waa  reckoned
particularly  hraUhfnl.  We  leam  fnim  Velleinn
Patercnlus  tUiit  Herculaneum  Hufferwl  conHider-
ably  daring  the  civil  warn  (cf.  Flitnis,  i.  16).  This
place  u  mentioned  alwi  by  Mida  (ii.  4).  Ovid  like-
wise noticea  it  under  the  name  of  IJrbs  Hcrculeu
(Mel.  XV.  711).  HL'rculaueuw,  according  to  the
cnnunon  account,  was  uvorn  helmed  b,^  an  eruption
of  VcMUviiis  in  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Titus,
A.u.  79.  Pompeii  aud  Btabiae,  which  stood  near,
sbarnl  the  same  fiitn.  It  in  pn<uible,  bowevt>r,  that
Oie  subversion  of  ilercnhinenul  wsh  not  mutden,
but  pmgresMive,  sinco  Ht-iieca  riieutititm  a  pnrltui
demolition  which  it  HiiittaiuL>d  from  an  eartlKprnke
(Xat.  Quaeal.  vj.  Ij.  After  being  buried  for  more
than  sixteen  hundred  years,  these  cities  were  acci-
dentally iliwrovered — Tlcreulaireuui  in  1719,  by  la-
bourers in  d«o[inning  a  well :  and  I'ouipeii  some
years  after.  It  appears  that  Herctilaneiim  is  rii
uo  part  leas  than  forty  feet,  and  iu  Hume  parlH  one
hnndred  ami  twelve  fy«t  below  the  surface  of  the
ground-  Little  was  done  to  exhume  th«  city  nntil
173l^,  when  mime  regular  excavations  were  made.
Above  the  city  staud  the  two  modern  villages  of
Portici  aud  RcKina  in  the  suburbs  of  Xapleo;  and
to  tbe  fear  of  uudenuinlug  their  buildings  is  da«
the  fact  that  so  much  of  tbe  ancient  city  is  still
beneath  tbe  earth.  The  chief  ediflce  of  Hereula-
neiim  thnt  Iuia  been  disinterrutl  is  a  fine  theatre,
built  only  a  short  time  before  the  eruption  and
capable  of  acconnuodating  t^lOO  ]»ersons.  Part  of
the  Fomm,  a  colonnade,  two  email  temples,  and  a
villa  have  also  beeu  recovered,  besides  niins  of
baths.  Mauy  other  valuable  remains  of  antiquity,
such  as  busts,  maunscripte,  etc.,  have  been  found
iu  tbe  ruins  of  this  ancient  city,  aud  are  deposited
in  the  Mnseo  Xiusintude  at  TS'apb-s.  See  Bari^,  ITrr'
culaiifum  €t  PampiH,  S  vols.,  with  BOO  phil^-s  (Paris.
IKJ7-40);  Comparetti  aud  De  Petra,  la  VUfa  Krcn-
lauew  liei  Pitoni  (Turin,  1(^3);  tbe  workti  men-
tioned iu  t^irchbeim's  Bibliography  of  t'omptH^
Hcreulancum,  and  ^ilabiat  (Naples,  ld91);  and  tbe
articles  Pai'TKI'^;  P<»mpeii.

HerctUea.  [l)See  IIeilvclks.  (2)  Aaon  of  Alex-
ander tbe  Great  by  Barsin^,  tbe  widow  of  the  Rho-
diaii  Monn)on,  and  nuinlere<l  by  Polysponihon,  &.C.
31(1.

BerctUea  Muaarum. Sue  Hkracxbs,  p.  71)3.

Herculeum.  (IJ  Pkomostokium.  a  promontory
ill  Che  Urnttiorum  Ager,  forniiug  tbe  most  southern


UEKOULIS  COLt'MMAE


7M


H£K£


angie  of  Italy  to  the  «>iist,  iioir  Capo  S|>ai*tirc]Ut>.
i'i)  Freiitm,  llin  Rtratt  nhirti  fnriiiM  tliei  ccmmurii*
cation  iMitwt^eu  tliu  Atlantic  anil  Mfilitvrniui-'an.
8«->»Abila:  C.ALPi:'.  Coumnae  HEKCtus.

HercUllB  Colnmuae. See  Colcmkak  Hkkcu-

HerctUia  Monoecl  Portus. See  MonoKCi's.
Hcrcfllifl  Portus. Kto  Co»a.

Hcrcynia  Silva,  Beroyniua  Saltos,  Bercyni-
nm  Xugum.  An  ^xu-iisive  rang»  of  monnluimi  in
Germany,  corereil  with  foreatfl,  dewcribitl  by  Ca«-
Mar(A.  W,vi,24,26)»sniMeilay»*juiinii'y  in  brewlfh,
and  more  than  Kixty  dayn' JQornny  in  iKitgtb,  ux-
tending  vmi  from  th(^  ti^rrit^riiid  of  the  UelvetH,
NemviuH,  uihI  Raiiraci.  imralU-l  to  the  Danube,  to
the  fruntiora  ut*  the  Daciaus.  Under  this  gcnprat
name  Caesar  appears  to  bare  inoludetl  all  tli«
moDDtaiua  aud  for«et«  in  the  sonth  and  centre  uf
(jermauy.  The  name  is  etill  pre»f rved  in  the  mmE-
ero  Uarz  aod  Erz. See  Obkuania.

Berdonia.  A  town  in  Aimliu,  destroyed  by
nanoibal.

Bet6  (lonte^flfi;,  aud  in  Attio,'H/Ki:  the  name
ia  often  connected  with  tlie  Latin  h/ra ;  but  ou
this,  Boe  CtirtiuH,  p.  119).  In  Greek  mythology,
the  queen  of  heaven,  eldest  daoRbter  of  Cronus
and  Rbea,  sister  aud  lawful  conwirt  of  Zi-us.  Ac-
cording to  Huuier,  she  waslimngbt  up  in  licir  youth
by  Oceanus  and  Tethys.  But  every  pIiM!«  in  which
her  worship  was  localized  itHRcrted  that  she  waa
bora  there,  and  brought  up  by  the  Nymphs  of  the
dUtrict.  She  is  sjiid  to  have  long  lived  in  secret
intimacy  with  Zeus  before  he  publicly  acknowl-
edged bcr  Hs  his  lawful  consort.  Her  worshippers
cekhmted  her  marriage  (Upos  yapx)  iu  the  spring
time.  Iu  the  oldest  version  of  the  story  it  took
place  in  tbu  Inlands  of  the  Blessed,  ou  the  shore  of
the  Ocean  stream,  where  the  golden  apple-tree  of
tbu  Mus|kerides  apmng  up  to  eeMirate  it.  Rut  this
honour,  too,  was  chiinieil  Ity  i*very  place  where
Her^  was  wonthipped.  According  lo  one  local
story,  Zeus  obtiiiuinl  tbo  love  ef  HertS  by  t+tealth,
in  the  fonu  of  a  cuckoo.

Her£  seems  originally  to  have  symbolized  the
femiuino  aspects  uf  the  natural  forces  of  which
Zeus  is  the  raaseuliue  representative.  Hence  she
is  at  ouce  his  wife  and  his  sister,  tih«reH  his  power
and  his  bouojrs,  atiit,  like  hiui,  haH  authority  over
the  pheuom»>na  of  the  atmosphere.  It  is  hhe  who
sends  clouds  aud  storms,  aud  is  mistress  of  the
thunder  aud  llgbtniug.  Ucr  handmaids  are  the
Hun»e  ur  goddenAos  of  the  seoscni,  and  Iris,  the  god-
dess of  the  rainbow.  Like  Zens,  men  worship  ber
ou  mouutains,  and  pray  to  her  for  rain.  The  udiod
uf  snu  and  rain,  wht^ib  wakes  the  earth  to  renewed
fertility,  is  symbolised  as  the  loving  union  of  Zeus
aiul  Hen^.  In  the  same  way  a  conflict  of  the  winds
i«  n^preseuted  as  the  consequence  of  a  mairimunml
quarrel,  uHually  attributed  to  the  jealousy  of  Her^,
who  was  regarded  as  the  stem  protectress  of  hou-
ourablo  marriage.  Heuce  arose  stories  of  Zeus  111-
treaiing  his  wife.  It  wiis  said  that  be  scourged
her,  upd  hurled  Hephaestus  from  heaven  to  earth
when  burr;>'iug  to  his  rnothrr'H  luutistaitce;  that  iu
auger  for  her  |>ersecutiun  of  hl«  mm  Huriicles,  he
hung  her  out  in  the  air  with  golden  chains  to  her
arms  ami  an  anvil  on  eatdi  foot  (/(.  viii.400).  Thent
were  also  old  legends  which  spoke  of  Her^  allying
herself  with  Athei)6  and  Fiwctidou  to  bind  Zetut  lu


chains.  Zeus  was  only  rescued  by  the  giout  AeK**^
ou,  wbomThetis  called  to  his  oaslnlauce.  The  bjittli
of  Athene  was  said  t«  have  enraged  Hert^  to  suck
a  pitch  that  she  l>eeame  the  mother  of  Typbou  lir
the  dark  powers  of  tbu  iiifrmal  regions.  In  ^t*
this  couslaut  resistance  t^i  the  will  uf  Zeus,  and
her  jealousy  aud  hatred  of  her  consurl's  paramonn
and  tbeir  children,  e«|H;cialIy  Hcraclc»,  become  iu
the  poets  a  standtUK  trait  in  ber  character.

lu  spite  of  all  this.  Homer  repreaenu  ber  as  the-
most  mi^cstic  of  all  the  goddesses.  The  other
Olympians  pay  her  royal  honours,  aud  2eas  treats
ber  with  all  respect  aud  coufldes  all  bis  designs  to
her,  though  not  always  yielding  t»  ber  demands.
Sbe  is  the  si>ot1ees  and  uncorruptible  wife  of  the
king  of  Heaven  ;  the  mother  of  Hepbaeatus,  Ana,
Hel>^,  am)  llitUyia,  aud  indeed  may  be  called
only  lawful  wifti  in  the  Olympian  court.  Sbe
accortliugly,  before  all  other  deititv  the  goddess
marriage  and  the  protcctreM  of  purity  iu  married
life.  Sbe  is  represented  as  of  exaJt«d  but  seven
beauty,  and  appears  before  Paris  as  oompetiog
with  Aptirodit^  and  Athene  for  the  prise  of  love-
liness. In  Homer  she  is  described  as  of  lofty  stat-
ure, large  eyes  {$oSnnt),  white  anna  (XriMtirXfMt),
aud  beautiful  hair.  On  women  she  confers  bloum
aud  Htnnigth  :  she  helps  tbe.m,  too,  iti  the  danjpr-
ons  hour  of  childbirth.  Her  daugbten  Heb^  snd
Ilitbyia  personify  both  these  attribute*.

Iu  earlier  timee  Hei^  was  nut  everywhere  recog-
nized OS  the  consort  uf  Zeus;  at  the  primitive  un-
cle of  Dodoua,  for  instance,  Diou$  oceupies  tliit
position. The  Peloponnesus  may  be  legardet)  u


n


LV


Head  at  Rtri.


V-


iNsplta Sappoeed  to  b«  frora  m  1


the  earliest  seat  of  ber  worship,  and  in  tiic  Pelo-
pimnesus,  during  the  Homeric  |>eriott,  Argiw,  Myce-
nae, aud  Sparta  are  ber  favourite  seats.  Of  ilw-e.
according  to  the  poet,  she  is  the  paesiouale  clism-
piou  iu  the  Trojan  War.  In  later  times  the  wor-
ship of  Herd  was  struugly  localized  in  Argtw  aud
Mycenae.  At  Argos  she  took  the  same  cumBiand-
ing  t>oeLtiou  aa  Atheu^  at  Athens,  and  the  yearwa*
dated  by  the  names  of  ber  priestesses. Uetwcsa


I


I


tlieite  cities,  at  the  foot  of  Monnt  RiiIkwo,  wm
•ittiatcd  t)ie  HflrAfliim  ('Hfiainy ),  n  tetnpln  liulil
ill  (ircaC  lionoiir.  (Biru  Herara.)  At  Curtnth  .shn
wiu  the  ([oildcMui  tif  thu  iu.-tti]toliii.  At  Klia  a  ^ur-
nen(  was  oflbnHl  bur  uvury  Qvr  y«;ani  by  nixttwii
Indieii  choMn  for  th<!  purpose,  mid  nmidoiiti  Uulil
a  race  in  licr  bonour  on  the  raco-coiirf*e  at  Olym-
pin.  Uoeotin  htul  its  feast  of  tliP  Daedata  [f\  v.);
Stuatm  its  Inrge  and  uplenilid  tample,  built  by
Pol.voriiteB.  Tlie  ctickoo  wns  iiacred  to  her  oh  Hip
tiieim<nj(cr  of  spring,  the  iwiwon  in  wliirli  nha  wan
wedded  to  Zniw;  so  worn  thu  puncock  and  thit  cron,
and  nnu)n{{  frnitn  thu  poiuugrauat4!,  Ih»  Kynibtil  itf
wr-dd«i)  luvo  and  fniitfiilnuiw.  Kecatuniba  were
offered  Co  hor  in  sacriflce,  as  to  Zens.

Ill  works  nf  art  sbe  is  repnscuted  aa  seated  on  a
thniiii'  in  n  full  ro1)«,  pnvertng  the  whole  lignrf.
On  her  head  is  a  sort  nf  diadem,  often  with  n  vitil ;
tlM  exprewiiin  of  tlie  face  in  lutvere  and  niaj«Htit,
tbe  eyes  targe  and  wide  upon,  an  in  the  Hnmi-ric
deAcription.  Tb«  ideal  typo  of  Honf  nra^  found  in
the  atatno  by  Folyclitits  iu  th«  teinplu  at  Argoa.
This  was  a  coloxsal  image,  in  fculd  and  ivory,  rep-
resentiug  the  };;oddes!i  on  ber  throne,  her  crowu
adorned  with  figures  of  the  Graces  and  tbe
SeatuHiH,  a  pomegmuat*?  in  one  band,  and  to
the  other  a  M'epti-u  wtlh  tbt<  nuckcNi  on  the  lop.
Tbe  Faruoae  Here  al  Nupleti,  ami  the  Ludn-
visi  luuo  iu  Koiue,  are  copies  of  this  work.  Thi-
Kooiana identtikMi Her^ with tbeir owo Inno

Heredltaa Hec  Hehks.

Hezaunia  Oena.  A  plebeian  houM  at  Rome
originally  Hauuiilu.  The  Horeunii  wore  the  pa-
trons of  tbe  Marii  Cl-ivy,  ix.;t).

HerAnniaa.  (1)  Sexkcio,  a  native  of  Bpain,  and
a  »L*nHtor  and  f]iiae8tur  at  Rome  under  Doniitian.
His  contempt  for  public  honouni,  bis  u]»rigbl  char-
acter, and  bis  adminition  of  Hulrrdiiis  PriHcnn,
uhnjte  life  he  wrote,  tniuhi  hini  hntcfnl  to  the  em-
peror.Aod  fanned  biiu  in  boactMised  of  high  treason.
He  was  eondomnod  to  death,  and  hi»  work  burned
by  tbe  public  cxooutioner  (Tao.  Agric.  3 ;  Pliny,  Ep.
iii.  33).  (2)  The  father  of  Pontius  tbe  Samuite
{nmmauder,  who  advised  his  nan  either  to  gtvs
frefKlom  to  the  Romans  ensnared  at  the  Camlino
Pass,  or  to  exterminate  them  all  jLiry,is.  1  foil,).
^3)  Oairts,  a  Roman,  to  whom  a  trcatine  on  rhntorio
in  fonr  bonks,  aacribi'd  hy  Minte  to  Cicero,  in  ad-
The  trc^atiite  tn  riueHtiou  in  generally  re-
gwvled  aa  not  hartn^;  beou  written  by  the  Konian
orator,  hut  either  hy  Antonins  Croipho  or  <j.  Cnnii-
licinH,  nsually  cited  simply  as  the  ''  Auctor  ad  He-
rennium."  See  W.  W.  Fowler  in  the  Jour.v/  Phi-
lology, I.  197;  Kronhert,  Df  Ithrt.  ad  ffrrevnium
(Konigshorg,  1873);  and  thu  article  CoRNtricius.
(4)  See  MOI>E0TINUS.

Herea.  An  heir.  (I)  Gheek.  At  Athens,  if  a
pemon  died  intestate,  leaving  8«n»,  all  of  eqnal
birthright,  and  none  of  thvin  disinherited,  the  aonn^
iuherited  the  property  in  equal  parts  {iaofuufHii),
thu  eldest  probably  reeeiving  the  same  sharo  aa
the  rent.  If  there  wore  danghtersi.  they  vvurv  pix>-
vtded  for  by  dowries  given  by  the  brother*,  which,
in  caae  they  were  divorced  or  childless  after  mar-
riage, wcDt  back  to  the  remaining  heirs.  Oirla  so
doweretl  were  called  (Vt'irpiHicoi.  This  wns  a  uiatter
of  usage  aud  not  of  formal  law.  If  a  niau  had  no
aons  of  bis  own,  he  UHually  adopted  a  sou  to  con-
tinue Ibo  family  and  the  religions  worshlpcounect-


ed  with  it.  (gee  Adoptio.)  If  bt^hiid  daaghter!i,he
would  tn.irry  one  of  them  to  the  adopted  Min ;  in
thin  caMB  thu  chief  share  of  the  inheritance  wmild
fall  to  this  married  daughter  aud  her  husband,  the
rMt  noeiviug  dowries.  If  there  were  only  daugli-
tenaarviviug,  the  sitccessiou  itaased  to  them.  In
such  a  cose  the  next  of  kiti  hail  a  legal  right  to
one  of  the  heiresHai  ((V>(<cXi7^)otl.  and  conh)  dennuid  to
marry  ber.eveii  if  she  had  niairied  Home  one  else  be-
fore receiving  the  inheritance;  and  poor  heiresses
(B^trtrat),  on  the  other  baud,  had  a  legal  claim  on  their
nearest  of  kin,  either  for  marriage  or  for  a  provisinn
suitable  to  Ibeir  eircunistances.  (See  Kpiclerhs.i
If  a  man  had  married  an  heiress,  he  was  himiul  hy
cust^iD  and  tradition,  if  he  had  sons,  lo  name  one  as
heir  to  the  property  which  had  come  with  his  wife,
and  thus  to  reMt4»re  the  bouKP  of  I  be  maternal  grand-
father. Children  hnrn  out  of  wedlnrk  were  illegjt-
imatti,  and  luul  no  claim  on  the  father's  E*stal«.  If  a
man  died  intestate,  leaving  no  heirs  eilher  of  his
body  or  adopted,  his  ueiircsl  relations  in  the  male
line  Inherited,  and  iu  default  of  these,  thtrso  in  the
female  line  as  far  as  the  children  of  ftrst  conninH.
Atir  one  thinking  be  bad  a  legal  claim  to  the  in-
h<Tit;tnce  made  an  applicutiou  to  tbe  arehon  Uj
band  it  over  to  htm.  The  appttriition  was  posted
np  in  public,  ami  rernl  out  in  tlie  ffkilowing  I'^cle-
sia  (AMenihly).  Thu  question  wa«  thpu  iisked
whether  any  one  disputed  the  chiiui,  «r  raised  a
counter-claim.  If  not,  the  archoii  OKHigiied  Ihe  in-
heritance to  tbe  claimant;  otherwibtu  the  inalter
was  decided  by  n  lawsuit.  Even  aAer  the  tusign-
mentofan  inheritance,  it  might  bedispated  in  the
lifetime  of  the  holder,  and  for  five  years  after  his
death.  The  claim  of  the  neareat  relation  to  an
heiress  was  in  the  name  way  Imlged  with  the  ar-
ehon aud  ratitted  before  the  Assembly.

(M)  Roman.  If  a  RomsD  died  iutebtate,  leaving
a  wife  and  children  of  bis  body  or  adopted,  they
were  bis  heirs  («»i  krredca).  But  this  did  not  ap-
ply to  married  danghteni  who  ha<l  passed  into  the
manut  of  their  husbands,  or  tbe  children  who  had
been  fi-eed  by  eiuancipation  from  the  pulesfai'  of
their  father.  If  the  man  left  no  wife  oi-  cbildi^eu,
the  apiali,  or  relations  in  the  male  line,  inherited,
according  to  tbe  degree  of  their  kinship.  If  there
were  no  agitcti,  nud  the  man  wns  a  patrician,  the
property  went  to  his  gens,  Tlie  cogaati,  or  rela-
tions in  the  female  line,  were  originally  not  en-
titled to  inherit  by  tho  civil  law.  But,  as  time
M-iMit  on,  their  claim  was  gradually  recognised
more  and  more  to  theexeluhiou  nf  ibe  aynati,  until
Ht  last  Justinian  entirely  abolished  the  privilege
uf  the  latter,  and  sulMtitutcd  the  principle  of
blood-relationsbip*  for  that  of  the  civil  law.  Ves-
tal Virgins  were  regardw!  aa  entirely  cut  off  from
the  family  nnioti,  aud  therefore  could  not  inherit
from  an  intestat-i^,  nor,  iu  case  of  their  dying  intes-
tate, did  the  property  go  to  their  family,  but  to
the  Stale.  On  the  other  band,  unlike  other  wom-
en, they  had  unlimited  right  of  teatameutary  dis-
position. If  a  freednmu  died  inteatate  and  cbihl-
IcMs,  the  paironuB  aud  his  wife  hoA  the  fint  claim
t«)  inherit,  then  their  children,  then  their  aynali,
and  (if  the/iafronux  was  a  pntrieian)  then  hts  gens.
In  later  times,  even  if  a  fretHlmun,  dying  childless,
left  a  will,  the  palrotiuti  nnd  his  sous  had  claim  to
hnlf  tbe  ]iro]H!rty.  Augmitus  made  a  uumber  of
provisious  in  the  matter  of  freedmen*»  inheritance.
The  civil  law  made  it  compulsory  on  a  man's  $ui
her*de$  to  accept  an  inheritaDce  {htrcditatem  adirt)


HERILLUS


7W


HERMANN


whelljer  left  li)'  will  oriiol.  But  as  the  deblA  wore
taken  uvt-r  with  the  proiH-rt.v,  the  edietHiH  of  the
praetor  allowed  the  hetnt  tu  doclitic  it.  .i  fortiori,
no  other  peraoiia  Qnuietl  in  th«  trill  conld  be  uom-
pclletl  to  accept  the  legacy. See  TesTAMKXTt'M.

Ufrea  nfcnvarius  wan  »  tilxve  of  the  testtttor.
who  miule  tiiiu  bt<ir  litnl  librr  »t  the  Hanie  time.
He  waK  thus  heir  by  i[ue(>«sity,  tiectiniiiif;  wv  with-
out any  action  of  bici  own,  by  the  mere  ojieratiou  uf
the  law.  Iftttttgtatorknew  hiui»L'lf  tobe  inaolreut,
Ue  aoniutiiuui  uiaile  a  Mlave  his  heir  tu  avoid  the
ignominy  attached  to  &  person  whose  property  wa8
sold  to  pay  hie  debts  (Oaius,  ii,  154,  etc.}.  Tbi* prop-
erty of  such  an  heir,  acqnlred  after  his  maunmis-
lioa,  was  not  liable  for  the  debts  of  the  deceased.
Au  Inaolveut  luherituuce  was  called  damnoaa  kere-
dila».

Hem  ex  aiwii  wjut  the  pliraae  iiseil  to  desoribe
one  whit  wan  M>le  heir.  811  A«rM  ex  dotlrante,  an
heir  to  threo-i|UBrterH  of  au  eetato  (Suet. /uf.  Kt);
kerfu  tx  parlr  aexta,  to  the  sixth  ;  ex  parte  dimtdia,
to  the  half,  etc.

See  Hunger.  Daa Erbreckt ;  aud0an3,£><i«  Erbrcchi
in  ipeltgetchichtlicher  Entvicketung.  4  vols.  (Berlin,

HeilllTU  ("K/^iXXor }.  A  uatire  of  Cartbaffe,  a
Stoic  pbiloBophor,  the  dittciple  of  Zeno  of  Oitiuni,
ihoaghditfvriiij^from  liini  iti  various  point«  of  doc-
trine. Ho  held  that  the  chief  gtunl  ia  knowledge
itTTurrijfir}),  a  notion  attacked  by  Cicero,  <8eo  Diog.
La«=rt.  vii.  IG&  foil. ;  Cic,  Joadem.  ii.  4'i;  De  Fin.  ii.
11, 13  and  often).

Hermae  ('Kp^T),  and  dim.  Herrnfili  (ipp-i^ia).
Pillars  which  tfrminntt-d  gcwL-rally  with  a  head  of
Heruifs.  In  the  earliest  tiniea  IIenue8  (in  whose
wnrship  the  iiiunl>or4  ]dayed  agrcat  parl)Wft«  wor-
-■jihipp^d,  especially  in  Arcaiiia  (Pansan.  viii.  4,  $  4),
under  the  form  of  a  wmplo  qnndrnngnlar  pillar  of
marble  or  wowl,  wiih  the  oiKiiiHcant  mark  of  the
male  sex.  .\sart  lulvauccd,  (he  pillar  was  anrinonnt-
ed,  tint  with  a  beanled  head,  and  afterwards  with  a
youtbfal  hmd  of  the  god. H<-rme9  being  the  gud


HftlTDM-plIllinL (I'ompitll.)

of  tratBo,  roadu,  and  boundarlea,  anch  pillars  were
erected  to  him  in  the  streets  and  Bqnnre*t  of  towns ;
in  Attica  thpy  were  also  erected  along  the  country
roadaasmile-xtones.  Sfmiettmest  hey  were  inwcribed
with  apothegma  ami  riddles;  somivtimes  also  with
insoriptlona  in  honour  of  thorn.*  who  had  fonght
bravely  for  their  country  (Domosth.  Lrpt.  112;
Aeacbin.  Or.  'A,  }  IKJ).  In  Athens  there  was  an  e»-
peeimlljr  large  number  of  them  ; in  the  inarkot-


place  to  the  northwest  of  the  Acropolis,  the  Her-
nuie,  erected  partly  by  private  individnals  aod
partly  by  corpu  rat  ions,  formed  a  I^tig  c4>lonuad«
extending  between  the  Hall  of  Pai(itinp»(»rToa  bw-
X1A7  )  and  tbe  Koyal  Hall  (urmi  3«><7iX((oc ).  Ac-
cordingly, the  latter  waa  (tojiietimtw  called  the  Hill
of  tbe  Hennae.  When  the  heads  of  other  divioi-
ties  (anch  ;ui  Alhenij,  Hetaclea,  Eros)  were  placed
oa  Hiich  a  pillar,  tt  was  then  called  Hermalhetia,
Henneraclca,  or  Hermeros.  At  Komo  tbe  Uermw
were  Dsed  in  tbe  decoration  of  honsca  and  rilloi,
and  also  as  posts  for  tbe  omamontal  railings  of
gardens.  Great  numbers  have  beoii  prcM^n'od,  aud
are  now  to  be  seen  in  the  Enroi>can  ntuaeams.

Hermaea  C^pfaia).  A  festival  celebrated  at
Cytlonia,  in  the  island  of  Crete,  at  which  tbe  atarca
enjoyed  couiplela  freedom,  and  wtro  Halted  u|iao
by  their  uiaaters,  the  unagu  Hnggestiug  tbe  Rouao
Saturnalia  (q.  v.).  Other  feasta  in  honour  of  Htf*
mea  were  held  at  Athens  in  tbe  gymnasia,  at  Pb»>
neos,  TAnngrn,  Pcllene,  etc.

Hermaeum  or  MercoiU  Promontortoin  ('E^
fia'ia  axpa ).  (  1 )  On  the  soutboni  shore  of  Crete.
(2)  A  promontory  of  Sardinia,  on  the  western  slior*,
H  ti  ttle  to  the  north  of  Boaa,  now  Capo  della  Caeca.
(3}  A  pmmonlory  of  Africa,  in  tbe  district  tcap-
tana,  now  Cape  Bon.  It  lay  oppo(tit«  Lilybarnin
in  Sicily(PoIyb.).29).

HenuagSraa  ('Epftoydpar).  ( 1 )  Of  Tenmoe,  a
distinguished  Greek  rhetorician  of  the  time  of
Cicero,  belonging  to  the  Rbodlan  acbool  of  cratorr
(Quint,  iii.  1,$  16).  (S)  A  Greek  rbetorieiaD,  sat-
uanieil  Carion,  who  taught  rhetoric  at  Roow  fai
tbe  time  of  Augustus  (Quint,  iii.  1,  f  18),

Hermann. See  Aiunvios;  Gkrh&nu.

Hermann.  (1)  Jouank  GorrrniED  Jakob.
distiiigiitNhcil  Gemtun  cloasical  philologist,  txitu  it
Leipzig,  November  38, 1772.  He  studied  Ian-  uid
literature  at  Lvi)>zig  and  Jena,  and  aft«r  acting  so
prirat-doc^nt  at  I.ieipzig  for  four  yeara,  he  becaow
ProfesHor  Extraordinarins  of  Philosophy  (a  lliat
iniirersity,  occupying  flubt^■qnently  tbe  cbair  of
Eloqncnce  (1803).  and  of  Poetry  (lJ«9).  From  L8M
he  condnoted  tbe  philological  seminary.  He  (tied
December  31,  1S48.

Hennann  was  a  scholar  of  great  ongiuality
research,  and  his  presentation  of  the  resalta  arri'
at  was  remarkable  for  vigour  and  directness.
is  especially  noted  for  tbe  new  principles  dove|np«d
by  him  in  the  study  of  classical  prosody  ami  Ortek
grammar,  with  regard  to  the  former  uf  wfaiob  bo
eDdearonred  to  establish  a  pbiloaopbicol  theor;
based  upon  the  categories  of  Kant.  His  metrical
views  will  bo  found  in  his  disaertations  Df  .Vriris
Graecorum  et  Romantfrum  Poi'tarun  (Leipzig,  1'9S);
Baudhurk  der  Metrik  (1798);  Elemmla  iHKirimM
Metrirae  (IHIG);  SpitoiM  Doctrinaf  Vctrion^  (lf?14
4th  ed.  IdW));  and  Df  Metrie  I'imdari  in  Heyae^
edition  of  Pindar  (1817),  HIh  grammaliciil  thrones
are  set  forth  in  bis  treatise  hr  Kmmdanda  Rationt
Oraecae  Qrammatime  (180U,  and  in  hisauhotarioni
on  Vigiet'a  De  Oratcof  iMctioni^  Idiotifmii  i!(*W;
4th  ed,  1*W).  and  Libri  ir.  rfe  VartifuUi  or  ( le31)-
Ho  also  edited  the  Uccuba,  Hvrcutfa  Fmrem.»,  Bat-
chftf,  SuppIireM,  Alvrwti*,  and  ton  of  EoripldM;
Aeschylus  flt69);  Soph«>cles  (completing  tbe  edi-
tion begun  by  KrfunU),  the  Clonds  of  Aiistnphsttea.
tbe  TVinamiiiu*  of  Pltiitus,  tbe  /'ocd'oo  uf  AritUr
tie,  the  Homeric  Hymns,  the  Leuoon  of  PbatitM,


*


BXf[MANU13[8


7M


HERHES


and  Bioa  and  MobcUub.  Ob  tb«  sigtiilicaiice  or
mythology  bo  wrote  a  treatise,  De  ^fytilolo^ia
UratcortitH  Antifinii-sima  (lr^}  aud  tho  Brir/e  Uher
Bomtr  und  HnwdnM,  tlie  latter  in  mllabtinitiuii
with  Creozer  (Heidelberg,  1418).  In  hitt  Opumcula
(8  vols.  1827-1876 )  be  treats  of  a  wido  range  of
topirA,  tritli  broadtli,  force,  anA  originality.  Seo
tbe  mciaoirs  by  Jabu  in  tUe  Hioffr.  AnftSizc  (Leip-
zig, 1849),  K5cbly  (It^-I),  aud  Buraiau,  Gtackickie
der  vlatt:  PhiMogie,  etc.,  pp.  b7t>  foil.,  606-(^  (Mu-
niob,  1883).

(S)  Karl  Fkieubich.  A  claseical  scholar  boni
at  Fmiikfort,  August  4,  IHOI.  He  whk  ediiratiMl  nt
Jlifidelbcrg  and  Leipzig,  and  after  HpiMidin;;  kuiuu
time  in  Italy  ( IH^ ),  wm  apiKiiutnl  Proftwu)r  of
Classirjil  Philology  at  the  Utiivereity  of  Marburg
in  183:2.  lu  1840  be  accepted  a  call  to  Gottiugcu,
whore  he  died,  January  «*,  1856.  His  principal
works  are  hLi  Lfktbuch  tier  gricehitchtn  Antiquild-
tfm  (1841;  Gth  ed.  lt*J2):  Geachichtc  uhtf  'Sj/stttn  der
pliiUmi»ckfn  I'hilu-iphitf  (1839) ;  aud  CuUnrgtitdtich'
te  der  OricciKH  u»d  Hiimer  (1857).

Bennanubia  ("Ep^vov^it).  The  aou  of  Ofliria
and  N'uphthiti,  n>prescutC4l  aa  a  human  huiiig  with
a  Jackat-head.  |Cf.  Amituib).  Ho  symhotizea  tho
Egyptian  prioathood  (Dtud.  1.  IH,  87).

Hennaphrodittia  ('Eppr^^odtrof ).  In  Greek
mythology,  tht^  Min  of  Hennes  and  Aphrodite,  bom
ou  Mount  Ida,  .itid  t^iidowrd  with  tho  beauty  of
both  deitiu).  When  a  gmwn  yonlb,  ho  \v»m  bath-
ing in  the  Carinii  fountain  of  SnlmactK,  uitd  the
uyuiph  of  tho  fountjiin,  whose  love  he  r(<JL>cted,
praycil  the  gods  that  she  might  he  ludiiwolubly
united  with  him.  Tbe  prayer  watt  atiKweretl,  and
a  being  »praiig  into  exiHteuce  which  united  tho
qualitit^s  of  male  aud  female.  The  fahlu  pn)bably
aro6«  from  the  iuctiuation,  prevalcut  in  tlio  Eaat-
em  religious,  t-ownrd«  conftiging  tho  attribnten  of
both  (fexen.  In  CypruM,  for  inot-unce,  a  maMi-uliue
A])hnKlitu8]  clad  in  ft'miiU;  attin*,  wna  wonihippod
by  tho  side  of  the  goddeiwt  Aphtmlit^.  Figures  uf
benuaphrodites  are  common  in  art,  one  of  tho
Gneat  befog  the  Sleeping  llennaphrodite  in  tho
Muiteo  delle  Termo  at  Itome.  Le«8  modent  repre-
Bcntations  are  given  by  Clarac  (pi.  606  foil.).  See
Milller,  ArthSol.  dvr  Kunvt,  ^  128  n.  S,  39*2  n.  2.

Hennarohna  ( 'Eppi^;^oc ).  A  rheUmoian  of
Xlitylen^  who  b^'caino  a  diHcipl«  of  Kpicums,
and  linally  Huccoedud  hiin  uh  bend  of  the  soIhwI
about  B.C.  370,  A  letter  of  KjHcuriiN  to  tiini  ik  prn-
nerved  by  Cicero  {lie  Fin.  ii.30),  Hia  philuiuiphical
wnrkM  UTD  loHt. Him  Diog.  Lavrt.  x.  17,24.

Hennas  (Epfiat).  Tbe  author  of  a  fAuioua  trea-
tise entitled  Uottiqv,  or  "The  Shepherd,"  ODoo  of
great  repute,  so  that  it  was  reiul  in  the  oburebes.
The  work  i»  dividod  tnt«  Ihreo  books — I.  Vitionts;
U.  Afandata;  III.  SimililudinfA.  Its  object  is  to
rebnko  the  worldlinuMH  t>f  prufoHned  (JbriittianB
and  Ui  exhort  Hinnvni  to  r(;poutanr.e.  I)y  aome,
Hcrmaa  boa  been  Identifieil  with  the  Hennaa  of
St.  Faiil'H  Kpintle  in  the  liomnna.xvi.  14;  but  the
present  belief  places  him  in  tint  second  century.
It  was  preser\'Kd  only  in  a  Latin  translation  eii-
titleil  Paator  until  1847,  wbpu  lyAbbmlio  discov-
ered un  Kthiopic  Tcrsiou.  Since  then  a  great  part
of  tho  Greek  text  haa  beeu  recovered  fruni  various
iwmrecs,  and  in  1890  a  codex  containing  lliu  whole.
The  parlier  (»reek  text,  comiiiled  fi-oui  tho  Codex
SiuaiticuM  and  an  Athoa  MS.,  hua  beeu  edited  by

ilgeufeld  (1888),  who  also  edited  tlie  I>atin  rer-


sion  I1B77).  There  is  a  good  edition  of  the  (Sreek
aud  Latin  toxta  together  by  (Jobhardt  aud  Hor-
uack  (1877).  See  Zahn,  Vaa  Hirl  dct  Hermat
(I8G8);  Salmon,  lutrodnetion  tti  ike  jYeir  Teaiamcnt
(4th  tHl.  1889);  aud  the  Juhitt  Uopiina  Uniccraitg
Circular,  iit.  75  aud  iv.  23.

HermatheiUL  A  sort  of  statue,  raised  on  &
sqnan^  pc^tcstal,  in  which  the  attribatcs  of  Hermes
and  Atbcu6  were  bleiulcil. See  lleaMAE.

HertneQAUtioa.  The  same  as  exegesis,  a  term
technieally  UMid  of  the  iuterpretation  of  »  text
from  the  study  of  critical  materials  such  an  inau-
uscriptM,  eilitions,  aud  quotations.  Tho  wonl  la
from  the  Greek  ipftijyfvta,  "  to  interpret."  See
Textuai.  Criticism.

Herznea  ('Kp^^t;  Ihir.'Kpttas).  The  son  of  Zens
and  of  tbe  Naiad  Maia,  daogliter  uf  Atlas,  [uinio-
iliately  aAer  his  hirtli  upon  the  Areadlaii  moun*
tain  of  Cyl1on<^,  bu  garu  proof  of  his  chief  char-
acteristics — invoutivcncsM  and  versatility,  united
with  fuAoiuattou^  trickery,  aud  ounuing.  Born  lu
the  morning,  by  mid-day  bo  bad  iuveuted  tho
lyro;  in  the  evening  bo  atole  Jifly  head  of  cattle
from  bis  brother  A]mlIo,  which  he  hid  so  skilfully
in  a  cave  that  they  could  tint  be  foutid.  After
these  explntts  he  lay  down  ipiietly  in  Iiih  erudlc
Apollo,  by  means  of  his  pmphetic  power,  discov-
ered the  thief  and  l-ix>k  tlie  otlender  to  Keus,  who
onlored  tlin  cattlo  to  bo  given  up.  Hermes,  how-
evrr,Ho  delighted  bis  brt>tber  by  his  playing  on  tho
lyro  that,  in  exchange  for  it,  he  atlowol  him  To
keep  tho  cattle,  reeigued  to  bUn  the  gulden  cttntf
of  fortune  und  of  ricbes,  with  the  gift  of  prophecy
iu  ite  humbler  forms,  and  fnmi  tb.*!!  time  forth  Ihv
camo  his  best  friend.  Zeus  made  bis  son  herald
t-o  tbo  gods  and  tbe  guide  of  the  dead  iu  Hades.
Id  this  myth  are  contained  allusions  to  several
attributes  of  the  god.

In  many  districts  of  Oroece,  and  especially  iu
Arcadia,  tho  old  sent  of  bis  wunthip,  Hermes  was
reganleil  as  a  god  who  btrstowed  the  blnssing  of
fertility  ou  tho  pafltnrrtt  and  henU,  and  who  waa
happiofit  when  tipeuding  his  time  auiong  shepherds
aud  dallying  with  Nymphs,  by  whom  he  bad  num-
berless cbildreu,  including  Pan  aud  Daphuis.  In
maoy  places  ho  was  considered  tho  god  of  crops,  and
also  as  the  god  of  mining  and  of  digging  for  buried
treasure.  His  kindlinewn  to  nuiu  is  also  shown  in
his  being  the  god  of  roads.  At  entss-roads  in  par-
ticular, there  wero  rained  in  Ins  honour,  and  r.alliHl
by  bis  lumu),  not  only  heaps  of  stoneit,  to  which
every  passer-by  added  a  stoue,  but  also  the  quad-
rangular pillars  known  as  Uermae  (q.  v.).  At  Atb-
ouB  these  last  were  set  up  in  tho  streets  and  open
apooes,  and  also  before  the  doors.  Every  unex-
pected find  on  tbe  road  was  called  a  gift  of  Her-
niea  (ep/wiiov).  Together  with  Atbon^,  he  cscorteil
and  prot<*ctod  lionsis  iu  perilous  en teiiJ rises,  and
gavH  them  )iruili)iit  cuunselH.  Ho  took  special  do-
light  in  men's  dealings  with  one  another,  in  ex-
change and  barter,  in  bnying  and  Belting;  aud  iu
all  that  is  won  liy  craft  or  by  theft.  Thus  he  wo*
the  pnCnui  of  trade«pt»>ple  and  thieves,  and  was
himself  the  father  of  Aiitolyous  (t\.  v.),  tbe  gruiiteat
of  all  tbioves.  He,  loo,  it  was  who  cudoweil  Pan-
dora, the  first  woman,  with  tbe  fucnlly  of  lying,
aud  with  Haltering  discuumo  a]id  a  uiiifly  Hpirit.
Uu  account  of  bis  uimbleucAs  and  activity  be  was
the  messenger  of  Zeus,  and  knew  how  to  carry  out
his  father's  commands  with  adroitness  and  oun>


U£KU£S


Ma


HEIUtES  TRISUEGISTUS


iiing,  nil  ill  tlie  slaying  of  Argo8  (the  guard  of  lo),
froni  frbioh  he  derivexi  hU  epithet  of  Argoa-slayor
CApytKfuimjs).  A^niii,  as  Hertues  wait  the  aaorl-
iicial  herald  of  the  goda,  it,  traa  itu  ioiportant  part
«f  the  doty  of  hvralds  V>  aK^ist  at  sacnBccs.  It
wan  un  thin  acminit  that  tht!  jiriRHtly  ractt  nf  the
KiipvKte  cUtrniftd  him  oh  thti  lit-ml  nf  llieir  family.
{&CO  Elecsixia.) Strength  of  voicu  and  excel-


,'b


Butoe  of  HermM fC4pliollDe  Uueram,  ftomc)

lenco  of  memory  were  HtippoBed  to  lie  derived  from
him  ID  bis  cBpMity  of  hemtd.  Owing  tn  hix  vig-
onr,dcztenty,and  peraonnl  charm, h«  nt]i»  demued
tlif^  god  of  gytnniuttic  nkiil,  which  ntiikcn  uivu  strting
ami  liundiMinio,  and  tho  (utpiirial  pati^ii  of  Lmxiiig,
runuitig,  and  thmwing  tbodincutt;  in  lhi«  capai'-
ity  thn  palavntmr  and  gyninaMia  wore  Mlcrcd  to
biin.  and  particular  feoMtR  called  Hennuea  \rerv
lledicatcd  to  hioi.  He  was  the  discoverer  of  mil-
«ic  (for  liipaides  Un*  lyro  lie  iuveuteii  the  shepherd's
pijte),  and  he  w.-ih  aUn  tlie  gnd  of  wise  and  clever
dini'cHimi'.  A  l»t«r  ag4<  miidc  hint  evt^n  tlie  invi>nt-
or  of  Inttent,  tignri«,  uiathetualic-H,  aud  aMtroncmiy.
Hr  was,  lirsidrH,  the  gwl  of  hlwp  and  of  dn-'uniH :
with  line  toniili  nf  liia  utaA'  he  cuuld  close  or  o|m;ii
the  ryoH  of  mortals;  Iiuiicv  tliu  custom,  hofurt?  go-
ing to  HlcK!p,  of  offering  him  the  lout  libation.  As
be  wa«  the  gnido  of  the  living  on  their  way.  hu  he
was  nlao  tho  condnctor  of  the  ii»nl»  nf  th«  dead  iii
the  nother-vtorld  (^t>;(oiTo^iruf),  vid  wa«  as  much


loved  hy  the  gods  of  tho«e  regioua  Aa  by
ahovo.  For  this  reaaou  saorificea  were  offen
hlui  in  tlie  eveut  of  deaths.  Honuae  weie  plj
on  the  gravea.  and,  at  oracles  and  iucaotatio
tbe  Aew\,  he  woa  hoiinured  %a  beloiigiug  to  the
lowpr  wiirld ;  in  gftneni),  be  was  arconnted  Itw
iritirniiMliary  betwiten  tlio  upper  and  Inwpr  worbU.
HJH  womhip  early  Hpread  throughout  the  wliolf
of  Uroecu.  Ah  he  vean  bom  in  the  fnnrth  maatli,
tbe  number  foar  won  Haernl  to  htui.  In  Argon  tbr
fourth  month  was  uame«l  ufti^r  hiiu,  and  in  Allwat
be  waa  hunonre<l  with  sacrtlice»  un  Ike  foartb  nf
every  uiunth.  His  altars  aud  iuiagea  (mosilyi
pie  Ilenoae)  were  in  all  tbe  streets,  tborongb'
ami  opitn  spaoeit,  and  also  at  tbe  entraiiw  i
palatvilra.

In  art  he  ih  rKprt>4U>nled  in  the  widely  rsTjriiij:
charat-'torM  whirb  he  uMHnmt*d.  aa  a  shrpherd  iiitli
a  singh;  aniuiul  from  bin  llnck.  aa  a  nii«e]n<'viiiu
littlu  thief,  as  tin--  god  of  gain  with  a  pnnv  in  liM
hand  (aee  illuHtrution),  with  a  Kirigtl  an  patrmiof
the  gymunitin,  at  ulbei  times  with  a  lyrr,  Iml
ofteiiest  of  all  ns  the  messenger  of  Ibc  gods.  H*
wo-H  poii rn yml  by  the  greatest  scolpton,  mcb  u
Phiibfut,  Pnlyiditna,  Sropaa,  and  Praxit«1«a,  wbuw
llHrm«w  with  the  infant  Diunyttntt  was  di«pf>T«m)
in  1877,  in  the  l«Diplu  of  Her^,  at  Olympia.  It  i>
tn^mlioiiod  by  PauituniaH(vi.  19, 1),  anil  in  ilrM-riM
by  Trvu  in  hiit  HrrmcM  mil  dcm  l>uiMji»Mknakt
{Berlin,  1678).  In  the  older  works  nf  nrt  be  if-
pottTH  as  a  beanled  man  <8ee  ilInKtnttiuD,p.M0};
in  the  later  onea.  he  is  fotiud  iu  a  gmeeful  siiil
charming  attitude,  na  a  slim  ynnth  vith  tnai[iiil
featnrcK,  indicative  of  intellect  and  good-vilL
HiH  imnal  attrilnttiui  arv  wingii  on  his  goldra  «a-
daln  {iriSiXa),  and  a  Hat,  broad  -  brimmed  fail  (m
pRTAdt'S),  which  in  later  timea  nas  oniBllWBt^d
with  nings,  UN  was  a]»o  his  staff.  This  laat  (^rilStot.
KTipi'Ktittv,  imfncrua)  was  ongtoally  an  eodiaiiUr'i
wand,  a  Hymbiil  of  power  that  pmdnroa  aeallb
and  proAperiiy,  and  uUo  an  umhlfm  of  inflwoce
over  the  living  and  the  dead  (sno  C&DUCEVs),  ]vl
even  in  early  times  it  waa  regarded  ■•  a  bff-
ald's  staff  aud  an  emblem  of  peoccfDl  intercosna
It  cousisttHl  of  tbre*^  shoots,  one  of  which  fonnsl
the  handle,  the  other  two  being  intertwined  at  tbe
top  in  a  knot.  The  place  of  the  latter  was  aftff-
wanls  takru  by'Hrrpenta;  and  (hits  nrow*  oiir  ordi-
nary tyjH.'  of  herald'H  Ktaff.  By  the  Romans,  Ha-
mcs  was  idimtitleil  with  Merenrinsh)-  v.).  Forei-
amplcA  of  the  myths  of  Menm»(  in  Euf^lisli  liten-
tnre,  see  Slielley's  Homeric  //ywa  1o  J/frcurf,v>A
KeatsH  (M/-  ti>  Maia.  with  some  tloo  poaaajs  i»
the  f'romfthcnji  linund  at  tho  former  poet.

Hermea  Triamogiatua  ['Kpftijt  TpurfUytorvi
Thi-  GiTt'k  iiumi-  for  the  Egyptian  gotl  Thitli.l*'
gardrd  a»  tlm  author  <if  civilization,  the  invnil^r
nf  writing,  of  art,  noieuce,  and  religion.  Tin'  **'
cred  canou  of  the  KRvptions,  in  forty-two  !
dividi?d  into  six  sections,  conatitutitig  an  Pticy
poedia  of  general  1<>aming,  was  a«crib<N]  tai
under  the  iiiimo  nf  the  "  flermetie  ilonka."
treat  of  ndigtun,  and  of  the  art«  and  scie
hioroglyphica,  astronomy,  roedicint*,  malh^n
ctwmugraphy,  etc.  The  date  of  tlu>  comp
of  thin  canou  is  not  known,  but  it  is  ciideutlf
latr,  an  the  induence  of  IleUcnio  cutturr  and
tho  Nuo-Platouic  philosophy  ia  oleuly  tzaoeaUA
The  Greek  and  Lutiu  texts  of  tbete  bonks  mM
only  in  frngmNitJi  galhenw)  frtim  Stohoeoa,  TTtil.
LootantiuH,  Suidaa,  and  otbera. Tbe  Kben  P*|i5*


\


IIKUMF.SIANAX


HEllMUOKNE:}


I


i


I

I


ms  Oti77}  i»  ri'^iinleil  mm  un«  of  Uio  medical  lK>oks
of  (bo  ewHtts.  StH>  >f^iiarti,  livrmtM  Driemitfuh
(1866); and Pi«t«Gliiiiaiiit, flrrmtn Trimme^UtM

HenneaiSnax  f  Ej>>ii^(ruif n^.  A  Qrwk  elegiac
jioel  i>r  ColophiMi  ill  Itiiiia,  who  livod  iu  the  time
^•r  Alt'Xtmilvr  the  tlrput,  al>»iit  B.C.  'X^h  nnil  wa.**  a
M^linlur  »iid  fririid  nl'I'liilvtas.  llu  cinniKM**!]  rrntic
«Iegiiii  In  llii>  stylo  of  tboiM>  by  bin  cninpntriut.  Au-
llinocbiiit.  Tbu  Ibruc  liookti  t'outattiiiif;  bin  com-
|MMtti<i(iH  bt'  fdlitbtl  U'^mltHm  (Afovriofl,  after  bin
iiiifdn-sM.  A  fmyiueiil  tif  iiiiit*ty-t-if;bt.  liiicK  nf  lb«
ibini  lio(tk  biM  tMH>ii  |in*jw>rvi-d,  in  w)ii<-b  U)v<^-
Mlurioit  i)f  fHtiL't«  mid  tvittv  iiinii  fntin  OrpbtMiM  down
|u  Pbiletiis  ni-u  ttvati^l  in  a  ratlivr  diM.-oiincctit1
matiurr,  Itiit  not  without  spirit.  Tlit'it-  are  edi-
liotis  by  H«rtuatin  {Oittiarula  Artidvmirn,  iv,  |i.!2:{9>,
hy  luicblllallr.lt^V  <!>'•)  Kv  Hnil<v  (L.oti<lnii.  1KI9).
Bergk,  lie  Hermnianaeti*  Etegia  (Marbnrg.
•>■

Hermetic  Booka. Svo  IlKUMKn  'riil>4MF.r>I»il>>.

Hermiaa  i  't'.pfiiat  nr  'EpfMiar;.  1 1)  A  M.vsinii  vit-
iiiicb,  tyrnui  of  Ahmm.  and  tbu  frii'tid  anil  [lairoii
of  Aritttiiitlv,  who  nuirried  bia  atlopli-d  ilangbti*r
Pyibiax.  In  h.c-.  :{44  Kenobu  wu  sei-/«(1  by  ilcntur,
tbv  Uruck  g<;iit?ral  of  tbc  king  of  roruin,  aiid  by
him  sent  to  the  I'cmiun  court,  wbtTO  ho  wua  pat
Kkdfiath.  (S**c  Diofr.  I^tVt.r. :t :  Di(Ml,  xvi.  5si.}  I'J)
A  CbriKlinn  wnt4T  loirnntH  tbc  rbktte  of  tbe  fwc-
ttnd  rrulnr>-,  a  nalivn  of  Gabttia,  ivbo  has  left  a
•bort  dilironrMt  tu  riilictilc  uf  tb<<  piigaii  ]>biloM>*
J)bi*m,  euiitb>d  Mafrvpfuts  ran*  t^at  ^lAnn-ii'^wi'.  Il
B)ipe>urs  to  ht  uu  imitation  of  a  diMinirM-  of  Tati-
aii'ft.  bnl  it  iit  un  ifiiitation  by  u  man  of  ability,
ili^  ridiiMilcrt  ibn  niiiit  of  bunnoiiy  tbiit  jirevniU
MUiong  tin*  Byeti-ms  uf  Iho  Unn'k  philiMMtpberi*,
nbich  in  ihc  uiititMj  of  all  rbcMr  BjieciilatiouH  being
crowudl  vritb  no  positive  re»ult-

Beimiuia  0«n8.  An  :iniriiMit  p:itriciiiu  family
at  Rome,  one  of  wIiiimp  ntuniberif,  T.  Ilerniiiiius,
kept  tbi!  bridge  \>itb  Horutitin  Coctett  a^aiuiit  the
anuy  ofPontcua. See  HoltATlcs.

Herminiua  Mona;  The  niodeni  Sierra  da  la
Eittrella:  tbe  chief  mountain  iu  Lnsitania,  aoutb
of  tbe  I>nrini«. It  Ik  miniu  7000  fvut  in  hoigbl.

Henni&n^  ^'E^/iwiyij).  A  tonu  on  iIir  ea«tfni
oua!>t  of  Argulia  ou  a  bay  clerivinj;  it«  naniv  (Ib-r- .
uiiuiiicns  Hiuits)  from  the  town.  It  wim  oiiKiuAlly
fouDiltid  by  tbe  Dryopes,  auci  wom  toti^  a  llonrieth-
iug  ciiy,  famous  for  its  temple  of  Ih-mtricrCtbuain.
It  beluuj^ed  to  the  Arhiiean  Ijeugiit*.

HennlOni  {' Epftiovr}}.  Tbo  only  ubild  of  M«iie-
ItiiiH  iiDtl  lleU'D,  ;uid  niiirried  to  N'c'OptulunuiJt,  tbo
aon  of  Ai'billes,  immediately  on  her  father'ii  return
fruui  Troy,  in  fnlflluieut  of  a  itrnniiM-  he  bad  luudo
Iberc.  Acctmlin);  to  u  )>o«tt  -  Hoiuenc  tradition,
»be  hail  Imwmi  previously  pmniiwil  to  Orestes  (q.  v.),
n-bu  claimed  berou  the  ^niiiod  of  bin  prior  right ;  anil
on  liiM  tibiiiii  bviii^  refiiited  by  N'eopIiiteiiiiiH,  killcil
luN  rtvAJ  with  his  ovTti  hands,  nr  at  any  laU*  ntnseil
bin  dentil,  at  Delphi.  Orestes  touk  Heruiiuutl  to
biH  lioine,  ;(ud  bad  by  her  a  iton,  Ti^ameiniit.

Henuifioea.  A  diviNJon  of  tbe  jwripte  of  Gcr-
tnuuin,  wbirb  inebidtTd  the  8iievi,  llenniiudari,
Cbutti,  mid  Cln-'Misci. t>r<<  Okksiama.

Heimloolcus  Sinus.  A  Imy  nii  ilie  ei>iu.t  uf  Ar-
got in,  ocir  ll<-iiiii<iii<>. It  i»  utiw  llK'tiiilf  of  CaatrL

3i:


HermlppUB  Ci^ptttinror).  ( 1 )  A  Ure«k  povt  uf
tbo  Old  Coiuody.  an  ebler  ciiiit<<D)porary  of  ArU-
tophaiira  and  a  bitter  op|M>iiunt  of  P«riclM  (Pint.
Perid.  33,  Xl),  wbo«e  iiiiMlreiw,  Aiipasia,  he  prooe-
cnted  on  u  charge  of  atheism.  Only  a  few  frag-
ments of  bis  dramas,  as  altMi  of  lii»  lil>ellons  iauiblc
p<ti'm8,  after  Archilocbiis'it  niaiiner,  have  been  pre-
M-rvcd.  They  are  remmkable  for  tbfl  eievemeaH
of  tbeir  style.  They  are  collecttHl  by  Mcineke,
fVrtjsf.  Com.  lireec.  1.  i-p.  iNi-99;  11.  a«M17.  («)
Of  8mynia,  a  dijitiiif;niKhe4l  philoAOpber,  Ibe  aii-
tlior  of  a  grout  biographical  work  (BioO  freQiieully
tinotiil  by  later  writora.  lie  Honrushed  abont  tbo
year  H.C.  SOO.

Bennocrftt«a  {' ZppuKpun^t).  One  of  the  ftyra-
en-Hjiii  gi'iieruls,  when  tbe  Athcniaun  attacked  tjyra-
riifte,  II.1-,  A\A,  \\v  wuh  liaiiiebed  by  tbc  8yracii-
MnA  <41it},  aiKl  having  endeavoured  to  eSaei  hia
icht^iralion  by  foroe  of  arms  and  with  the  aiil  of
the  Persian  natrap  Phnriiat»azui«,  was  liliitu  in  407.
Jfe**  Pi:i/»l'aXNEsiAN"  Wak.

Hennodoma  \'V.^^f^6hmpot).  A  philosopber  tif
KpUe«iis,  who  iH  nalil  to  have  iu»«i«teil.  km  interpre-
ter, (be  Kouiuu  (l«cemvii-«  In  tlio  composition  of
tbe  Itrst  ten  tables  of  laws  which  hail  been  colleut-
ed  in  Greece  (B  c.  A»\)  (Cic  T«*c.  v.  U«>).  "  An  an-
cient tradition  meotioas,"  says  Nivbubr,  "as  an
auxiliary  tn  the  Decemviri,  in  this  ooile.  Uerniodo*
rua,  au  Kphesian,  tho  friend  of  the  KUgc  llcracll*
tua,  whom  hiH  fellow  •citizens  had  batdahMt  bo-
eamw)  hf  tilled  them  with  shame,  and  they  desired
to  bo  all  vu  an  e«|^uulily  in  protligiti^  of  cttnduot.
It  cannot,  indeed,  b«  woll  explained  bow  this
story  could  have  been  iuvoutetl,  for  whicb  noth-
ing hut  n  celebrated  name  cotihl  hiive  givet]  occo-
aiKiU,  wbilc  that  of  Ilerniotlornh  iippears  to  bavo
been  known  to  the  Gr<'<ekN  (lieiinte-lves  only  by  the
haying  of  hit*  frivml.  On  thin  gnniiHl,  tho  naming
of  tbe  statue,  which  was  inscribed  am  his  at
Rome,  may  pass  fur  gt-nnino."  Soe  TWEtVE  Ta-
ni.R!4.  {;£)  A  na(ivl^  of  fjalamis,  the  architect  of
the  Temple  uf  M^trn  in  tbe  Klaminian  Circas  at
Uuine. •

HertuoeSuea  ('^.ppoyivTjs).  (I)  A  Greek  rbetn-
Hi'iau  of  Tamus  iu  (.'ilieia,  i.vbo  flonriHheil  in  tbe
Diiddte  of  the  »ecoud  century  A.n.  He  eiiinR  to
Koriie  ibt  a  rhetorieiun  uh  early  a»  hi»  lifl'eenth
year,  and  excited  universal  ndminiliini,  eH|Ht'ially
on  the  part  of  the  eni)ieror  Uaicun  Aiireliun.  In  hia
twenty-fourth  year  he  lost  bis  oteniory,  atiO  never
reeuvereil  it,  thongb  he  liveit  to  a  grejjt  age.  Af-
ter bis  dejitb  h\n  heart  is  Maid  to  Uave  Itecu  fonnd
to  \w  etivered  with  hair.  Hi.i  work  on  ibotohc,
wbirb  still  i>xtHls,  enjoyed  a  remarkable  pfipnlnri-
ty,  and  was  fur  a  long  time  tbt^  princi|iAl  b-xt-book
of  rhetoric;  it  wh»  atno  eintomiziMl,  and  was  the
subject  oi  nuincrou*  commentHrieH.  Tbe  work  it-
self t'OD&ists  of  live  sections:  ti-}On  points  at  Imtie
in  legal  eannes;  (ii.)  Ou  the  art  uf  discovering  ar-
giiraenis;  (iii.l  On  the  various  fonns  of  oratorical
fclylp;  (iv.)Oii  political  nnitions  in  pnrticiitar,  and
oil  thu  art  of  eloiitieiit  anil  eflTt^-tive  speaking:  (v.)
Tbe  last  section  coiiMiHiK  of  rlieloricnl  exercieos
{MpoyvpvacrpaTa),  which  wi<n<  cu^t  into  a  fmih
fonn  by  Aphtboniun.  ami  traiiMlateil  intt>  Latin  by
Priwian.  wilb  the  tide  l*raet^€rcHamc«ta.  It  is
print'T-d  in  Halm's  iiUrturrM  Lat'tni,  \\.  561.  8ee  llup-
picbler,  lie  t/mntirtcin-  I'mifffmnanmalmm  Scrtptart
\\ffSi).  ('•)  MKU.MiiiifcMi:»  TiiiKixti'M.  (Se*>  TinRt^
Lirs.) (3)  An  iiicbitecl  of  Alitliaiidii,  who  is  »aid


])t-:KMl>U£NIANas


1 1  ERODES


tu  liiivo  (iL'viiHH)  tlio  wi-calliHl  [meitilu-diplenin  (»rm
of  t«tii])Ii'. Set;  Tkmplum.

H«nuogeniiBUB.  The  latrMl  Riininn  jtirist  of
w)tnii)  tilL^  rii«;e8t  oontahia  any  cirntioii,  mid  who

tloill'iMllOlt  ttlM^Ut.  A.D.  HOO.

Hermolaus  ('Kp^Xaor).  A  Muccdottiiin  yoiitli,
a  pag<'  i)f  AUixiiinl*tr  tin?  (Jrcat.  Ho  ronni'il  u  l'Oii-
*|>inn'v  ugiittiiit  tlic  kiiin'«  lifu  In  n.c.  ^27.  Imt  tlic
jtltit  viiM  <lisc<ivcrt'(l,  untl  [Ii.-rtnn|iitlft  huiI  liiit  nc-
rouiiilk'ce  wi'rc  st^MU'il  lu  dvaili  liy  tliv  Mitccduiii-
UII8.  Tli<«  rt-nson  for  IiIh  plot  wiim  a  tlt-^ii-e  tn
ftvenjte  bituself  nii  Altfxiiiider,  wlio  liiid  «nlt*rL'iI
hill)  t»  lin  whippfd  fitr  Klnyiiig  n  \viM  lK>ur  in  n
hnoting  vxpuditioti  withotiL  wuiliiii;  to  give  Lhv
kiug  th(]  honour  of  thit  Hnti  lilnw  (Q.  Citrt.  viii.

Hannonthia  ('Fp/xuftfic).  Thn  chittf  town  of
tlio  N'onioH  HiTiiioiiTliitis  uii  thi*  vrenUira  bank  nf
the  Nile  ill  Tppur  Egypt,  near  Tlu<bcA.

Hennopdlis  f 'K^/wiwoXir).  "  City  id*  I!«ruit*H."
(I>  Pahva  (i;  fiiKpii),  n  i-iiy  <jf  I-dwci-  Egypt,  Htt«nl
apon  tlip  canitl  Tv]ii<;li  rninifctcil  ilio  Cniiupif
lii-ai)eh  of  the  Nile  with  Lnkc  Manwiti^.  (tJi  MACr-
NA  (ri  fjry»iX7i,  «ti  rtllt^itMit  city  in  MiiMli-  K;iypl,
stiiiiitiiig  un  tll(^  wcM  liuiik  of  ilm  Nilt^,  u  lltllo  lif
low  the  C011H1108  nf  ITpjiei-  Egypt.  This  pliu'«  wai*
(iuiU'iiH  fdf  ilM  worehip  of  Aiiiibi!-  (q.  v.J  tiv  IIl-iiiiu-
[luhiM ;  and  was  llif  sncred  l>nrial-pln(x>  of  Ihe  illi^.

HermoUmus  {'flpfioTtfior).  A  native  of  Clnzo-
lUfiiUL- :  :i  pUiloftOpber  of  the  Ionian  school,  of
whom  nmuy  Dmivrlft  wore  toliJ.  Triiditii>ii  reprc-
wutL'd  him  as  a  person  gifti'i)  with  u  power  Uy
which  ULs  sonl  cunld  leave  U'lH  hudy,  and  ki>  bring
liiin  (itlin^s  of  iliMtiiril.  uvLjita  with  wointerfnl
speeil.  At  l»Mt,  hid  (<iu>niieM  biiriiod  Iiim  biMly  in
the  nbst^iii-n  of  Iuh  miiiI,  rUnn  putltug  an  end  U*  him
mid  to  his  wiiiidt'tiiigri  (Pliny,  //.  .V.  \ii.  4Sl.

Hermnnduri.  One  id  tbo  mixst  powtx'fnl  iia-
tioiiH  of  Gttrniauy,  bvlongtug  to  the  SuevLc  race,
and  dwelling  Lotwccn  llie  Main  and  the  Ilnti-
iiImj.  Tboiigb  lung  1I1C  allies  of  tho  HoiuauM,  lliey
Ht  lotigtii  joinod  the  MiileoDiaimi  aguiu^t  tbu-iu  lu
the  reign  of  Marcns  Anrelina.

HenniiB.  (1)  ('Kp/ioi-).  A  large  river  in  Asia  Mi-
nor, riniitg  in  Mount  Dinilytiivin'',  and  after  llowing
through  the  plHiii  of  San)it<,  fuUing  into  tlio  IJulf
of  Siuyniu,  butweeii  Siuynia  and  PUoeura.  It
formed  the  boundary  ht-ttvouii  Atioliu  and  loaia.
('4)  (rb  'tpftot).  A  deme  of  Attica,  beluiigiiig  to
the  iribc  AciuimutiH,  ou  the  road  froiu  Alhtfiis  Co
EletiKiii.

Hemlcl  A  people  in  Latitini,  belonging  to  the
Subiue  race,  who  iiibahitod  the  nnMintaiiu?  of  the
ApeiiiiiDeti  b{l^4^etl  the  laku  Fiicinns  and  the  riv-
er T]-eru8,  aud  werr  boiimlcd  on  thi*  iiorlli  by  the
Mar»i  and  Aeqiii.  unil  on  (Im  »inith  by  tlio  VolbCi.
Their  rJiief  towii  vcat-  Auagnia.  TIn-y  were  u
brave  and  warlike  jieople,  aud  bxig  offered  a  for-
luidiiblc  tetiistuuec  to  the  Romans,  who  tlually
formed  a  league  with  them  on  equal  t^nns  in  thf
third  eoiiBulahip  of  Sp.  Lawiiw,  n.c.  4Hi.  The>
were  fiuuUy  subdued  by  the  lionians,  B.c>  306.

Hero  ('Hpa>). Hett  UKANIiEM.

Hero  ("H/Mitv).  (1)  A  native  of  Alexandria  and
disciple  of  Ct«eibius,  who  tlonrUheil  nbont  B.C.
125.  He  plari'd  engineering  and  hmd-Hnrveying
nn  II  licii^ntifir  biiNio,  and  won  eelebmted  at-  a
ntechaniciaii,  and  luvtuiled  the  hydmnlje  ebx-k,
the  niocbiue  calleil  '*  ibe  tonntaiii  of  Hero,"  and  a


foreing-pnmp  iiwmI  ru«  a  6re-4'n)^ne.  fSffc  CTBmnCA
ilACtllNA,)  lie  enjoyed  n  high  rrpitrjitiori,  and  is
ntciitioued  by  Gregory  Nazinnzea  with  Ktlclid  aoil
Ptolemy,  lie  in  now,  however,  priiii-ipallv  kui
hy  some  rvinaiiis  of  Inn  writiiign  on  nmehaal
His  extant  writliigfi  are: la)  "(>u the  Miu^bl

Called  the  ChiroballiMra"  {\rif>o/ta\\i€rrpai-  Kan-
fTKiV'i  Kill  a-vfiftrrpia);  (h)  "Bflrnlrus"  IHii/wiXxtK),
a  treati»R  on  the  raising  of  heavy  weightA.  nliich
h  mentioned  by  Pappus,  imd  was  foniid  by  ftoliiii
ill  Arabic :  (c)  "  Belopoeir:^. "  (RrXoiriMlKa),  a  tivii-
ti»f  on  the  niaiinfartiire  of  darta;  (d)  "On  Putn-
matii:  Maehiinii"  (nptvpurrtKa).  In  thin  work  U
the  tiriit  and  only  notii'e  among  the  ancient  uni*
erxof  the  application  of  Kteaiii  oa  u  moving  )Hiwcr.
There  is  an  English  translation  by  (ln.vuwiM)J
(London,  I'Sil ).  (e)  "  Ou  the  Coustriiction  of  A»lo-
niata*'  ^Htpi  \vTOfuiToiruifjTiK»i'),  contained  10  llie
ilath.  Vetem;  it  describes  a  Dnoiber  of  small  tdk-
chines  and  mechanical  toys.  (/)  "On  Diopthos,''
t'loni  which  Heliodorna,  a  amthomatictau  wlio
llonrisbed  ttftttr  the  t-otniut*uceueut  of  the  Cbru-
tian  era,  has  left  :m  extract,  {g)  yttrpuid,  cini^itil-
iiig  of  geoinetrieal  anil  tngononielrieal  prulilemt
iiJid  HoliitlotiK.  Orlier  ivorkH  of  |]erf>,  now  In^i.are
niontioned  by  Pappti-o,  EnlociiiH,  Meli(>ili>ri)M.  tic.
[(cro  dcftcribcti  the  thoodoUtt%  the  eycluiueler,  and
the  steam -engine;  uud  iltscnB«t.-.s  the  eo'tiiic  bl
gravity.  His  Works  have  been  edited  by  F.  Htillwli
(Berlin,  l?Sli4).  Seo  the  treatise  on  llem  l»y  T.  H.
Mania  (Paris,  1854);  anil  the  account  in  fiolf*
Short  Hinlory  of  Malhcmatkg  (London.  I'*?^),  i^
Of  C'UiHtantinople,  commonly  railed  the  fontif^n.
who  lit  KUppoMisl  to  bavo  llouri(<hed  nitont  A.ii  900.
In  a  work  attributed  to  him  (ou  Geode-Hy).  be  )>r»i<«
that  tbe  preeeaftiun  of  the  cqniuoxeit  hud  prutliu:F<l
jwven  degrees  of  elleet  ftiiiee  the  time  of  Pt'tleiuy.
im  that  he  uiiiiit  have  lieen  ulniut  TiW  yean  litl«r
than  Ptolemy.  TUe  writings  of  Hero  the  Yihiiikw
relatv  to  warlike  machines,  tacticii,  and  piuttical
geometry,  i'^)  A  mathematician,  who  douriilied
about  the  uiifldle  of  tlie  lifth  century.

Herodaa. Kee  HKRoyifAH.

Herodea  ('Hpwd^r), (1)  SiiroamtHl  niK  Ukeai
and  AsjCAiJiNlTA,  Hecond  son  of  Atillpiiier  the  hln
maeAu,  wan  btirii  u.c.  71,  at  Aseidou,  in  Iiitlm-ik
At  the  ugu  of  iwenty-tive  be  wim  uoule  by  Ui»fi-
ther  governor  of  tiuHlee,  aud  dialiugiiixbMl  liiai-
self  by  the  Hiipitressiou  of  a  band  of  robbers  niul
the  exeention  of  their  leader. Ue  was  HniiiiDDunl
befuiTi  the  .Sauhedrini  I'nr  having  done  thin  by  hi*
own  authority,  and  having  put  the«e  men  to  iloath
without  a  tiial ;  hut,  tlinuigb  the  strength  of  hi*
party  antl  tlic^  unal  of  his  friendi>,  be  r-scapetl  (cu-
Biire, He  at  llrsl  embraced  the  porly  of  llniln*
aud  Com!  11 A ; but,  after their  death,  recouciNil
himaelf  to  Antony,  who  appointed  liim  and  rit.v
sael  tetrurchs  of  Inihiea. In  B.C.  40  the  Parthimi
invitded liiilaeu, ami plaeeil AntigonuK  on tlie
throne,  making  Hyrcjuuix  uud  PliaMnH  pn>«<>itf-n,
lleroil  esra|H!d  to  Rome,  when*,  tiy  tll^  inlliifi*^
of  Antony,  ha  waa  appoiuteil  king  of  the  Ji>%ttk
But the  Roman  geuuratti in Syria  iu->iHi<-d  Itim
very  feebly,  aud  it  was  wot  till  ibe  end  of  the  ytta
B.C.  38  that  Jerusalem  was  lukeu  by  8(>«iiim. TU
comiuoDcoment  of  llerod'a  rvigu  datcH  from  tlii«  fol-
lowing year. In  the  year  3S  he  bad  ruarried  Uati-
nniu<fi,  (he  granildanghter  of  HyrcuniM,  ho|Miig  to
HtrengiluMi  his  power  by  this  match  with  the  A*-
uionu4tan  fnmily,  whivh  wu  very  popular  in  lu-


HliKOUKS


Roa


HERODKH


^^  Oil  ascMiilitit;  llit-  ttiroiir  Il^rud  oppointetl
Duol  of  Babylon  bighiir'tciit,  t»  the  excliisioii
of  AriHtubaliiA,  the  bMihcr  of  MariBiniU'.  But  l>i<
Rnrin  fniinfl Itims4>lf  <>iiiii)H-ni>i1.  tiy  tlii' Piitn'Mlk'M


k


.^:


SHIK


<.oiu  uf  El«n>J  ttw  Crc«i


iif  Mjtrtamiie  aihI  Mie  arlilicee  of  hor  inotlu!ir  A)i*x-
■ndni,  lu  (]e|>OH(;  Aiiunvl  niid  HpiHiiitt  Ai-iHlobitlim
in  hia  place. Xot.  loiif;  AJtcr,  Uuvvitver,  AriHlobii-
lus  wmA  MHtrctly  piif  lo  tlciith  \>y  t\n^  ctitiimauil  of
Herod. AluxaiHliii  liuviuK  itifaniiril  C'ti^oj^iUra  of
th(!  iiiurdur,  IIihimI  wan  AiuimitMivd  to  uiiftwvr  Ihti
at-ciiiMttiuii  belong  Aiilouy.  wliom  lie  paciQed  by
HlHrral  bribcit. Whtrii  st'ttitig  out  t»  tuei^t  Auto-
iiy.  ho  hixl  (;otT)[untHli'd  bm  linitliL<r  .lowpli  to  put
Uariamiic  to  death  iti c^tw li<* Kbonld li*5  con-
deniiivd,  that  ahf iiiit;lit not fall itiUt Autoiiy'H
p»>«-rr. Findtu};,  on  liiM  i-flurit,  tliat  bit  bnttb«r
ha4t  n^vealcd Ibis  order  to  Mariiidinc.  HrriMl  put
him  to  dcalb. In  ibt)  civil  war  t>i'l,M'«4<ii  Octiivinti
auil  Antony,  Henxl  jo'iiu'd  tbu  latlcr,  and  nnd<'r-
tmik.  at Urn  romuiand,  a  cajii|>nit!ii a;;ni(iHt  tha\
AnibiaiiM.  whom  liu  dufeated. After  tlio  battlr  of  i
Actinni,  be  went  t**  nn-ft  fVlnviiisi  iit  Kbo(Ic!«,  bav- 1
iD([  first  put  to  death  Uyn'Hniifi,  who  bad  bwcMi  r*^- .
leased  by  tbe  Parttitano,  and  bud  placed  binifwlf  i
under  Herifd'i)  prot«c1ioii  wiriui  yearn  b«for«. Hi'/
also iiQprisotied Mi)riamn<> aud Atuxaodra.  com- {
Diauding  their  kwpers  to  kill  tbem  upou  receiving
iul«lligBnr«  of  Iiih  dt^alh. Oi'tavitM.  however,  rv-  '
reived  biui  kindly,  and  rt-iiiHljited  bini  in  jiitt  king-
itoiit. On hi»  rttturii,  )l:jriatnii<'^  reproathrd biiu  '
wiLb  bis  intuiitionft  totvurda  Ikt,  wliieb ithe  bad
agaiu discovered. Tbii>t  led to  iin  eHtrangemi^iit .
iK-tneen  flcrod  and  bis  (|iieiMi,  which  was  urtfully
inci-eoiMMl  by  bis  nist^r  Salomi^,  ti  II,  qu  one  occaaiou,
eiimKed  at  a  new  affront  b*^  bud  received  frotu  Ma-
riaiuu6,  Herod  assembleil  nouic  of  bin  friends  and
atrriised  ber  of  ailultery. 8he  was  eondfiunei)  aud
rxt'Outed. After ber death Ht'ri)d Huffennl the
ilt'e|M>At  remorw,  and  nbut  himself  up  in  Haumrta,
u-lu-rt'  be  wnj*  seized  with  uu  illness  which  nearly
|»ruvod  fatal. Ju  the  year  tt.c.  ^>  b«<  put  to  ilealb
the  aotis  of  Uabatf,  tiiu  last  priucct«  of  thu  Anrno-
iiacau  family.

Hb  now  openly  disn-ganlcd  tho  Jeiri&b  la-v.
himI  iotrotliicvd  Roman  cumtonib.  He  particularly
Hhocked  tbo  people  by  ert'ctitig  a  stately  theatre
aud  an  aiupbitbuati'u  in  .leruHalein,  in  tbH  latter
itf  tvbicb  bu  eulebrateil  gnuien  in  hunonr  rif  Au-
KuatttH.  Ti«n  rneu  conspired  against  biti  life,  but
were  detected  and  executed  with  tUu  givatent
rruelty.  To  i*ecurQ  himself  againat  reboUtou,  be
TortiHed  Samaria,  which  he  named  SebasttS  (ef]uiv-
alunt  to  the  Latin  Augusta),  and  he  built  Coexa-
rua  and  other  cities  and  fortrei^sca.  In  the  year
ac.  17  bu  began  to  rebuild  Ibe  It-miile  at  Jerusit-
tern.  The  work  waa  uuuipleled  in  iMglit  years,
lint  tho  decorationn  vurti  nut  lliiiHliM  for  niiiny
years  after  (Jtdin.  ii.  20t.  Herod'tt  power  and  ter-
ritoriea  coiititiuetl  to  increast.*,  but  tho  latter  part

fhia  reign  wiw  distnrbetl  by  tlie  nujst  violent  din-


fiousiniiM  in  his  family,  of  wbioli  a  ndnut«  tuMiuMiit
Ih  given  by  Ingtepbus. Ik  died  in  March,  B.C.  4,  In

the  thirty-fouitli  year  of  his  reign  and  th»  tteven-
tieib  iif  his  age.  lofiephus  relates  llial,  sburily
(»>fiire  bin  death,  be  tthut  up  many  i>f  the  principal
men  nf  the  Ji>niMti  nation  in  the  Hip{MMlronie,  eoni-
innnding  hi<t  ntNter  Snlouii^  to  put  Iliein  to  death  aa
Hoon  an  ho  expired,  that  he  might  not  want  tuouni-
eri».  Tbey  were  released,  however,  by  Salomfi  npoii
Herod's  tientll.

The  birth  ofCbrij-t  took  place  in  the  last  year
i>f  Hen>d'M  reign,  four  years  earlier  Ibaii  the  era
fmiuwhich  Ihe  common  system  of  chronology  dates
Ihe  years  A.l>.  (bmeph.  Jnt.  tuil.  xiv.  17  foil.,  xv.  1
foil.,'  xvi.  I  foil.;  Jtetr  /ifrf.  i.  17,  ete.),  It  waa
Herod  of  trhom  Angtistns  MiitI,  after  he  biul  beard
t>(  Ihe  fonnorV  having  put  to  death  bi«  own  Hons,
Alexander  aud  Aristidtului*,  that  be  wiutld  rather
be  IlercKrs  liog  (vy)  than  his  mm  [vlov),  puinitng
u]Kin  the  aiuiilarity  of  Lbn  two  term.-',  ami  alluding
Kt  the  KHute  timo  to  the  avetniou  with  which  tbo
hog  was  n'gariled  by  the  Jews  >|Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  4).
It  woa  this  king  wlio  ordered  tbu  uiotuwcre  of  the
childreu  at  Betblebcm.

(3)  AacHKLAf*.  A  Will  nf  Herod  the  (ireat,  wlnt
Buccoedod  bis  father  and  w:is  made  I'tbiiiirrb  of  lu-
daea,  Samaria,
aud  Idiimnea  by
Augustus  Caesar
<B,c.  3)  In  A.i».
7,  bu  wever,  for
bia  misgoTerii-
mont.  he  wm  re*
moved  from  his
office  and  baDiahed  to  Nienna  in  Gnul,  whei-n  he
died.

Oi)  ANtlPAB,  a  mm  of  Herod  the  Great,  whom  hii»
fathei-,  in  his  first  will,  declared  his  sTtcrcwor  in
the  kingdom,  but  to  M-houi  be  afterwards  gave
nu'rely  the  nKim  of  t«(rarch  over  Galilee  and  Fe-
raea.  while  be  appointed  his  other  f*on  ArrlielaUs
king  of  ludoua.  Antrpas,  after  being  cortHrined  in
thejw!  territories  by  Augnettis.  married  the  dungh-
ter  of  Anitas,  king  ot' Arabia.  He  divnrrtnl  her,
however,  .\.n.  'Xi,  that  ho  might  uiarry  bid  sister-
iii-Iaiv  Heruilias.  the  wife  of  his  brother  I'hilip.  wha

WH  Htill  living,
John  the  Haj>-
tisl.  exi-luirning
ngai1l^^  thiri  un-
ion, was  seized,
and  f^nlNSoqiient-
ty  behoadefl.  Af-


CoId  oT  ArdirlsuR


A,


Cala  iif  Ucroil  .VutipoiL


terwords,  A.t>  :K),  Herodias,  being  jeiilons  <>f  tiie
prosperity  uf  Wr  brother  Agrippa,  who,  from  a
private  jierson,  ba<l  become  king  of  ludnea.
persuaded  her  btisband  Herod  Aiilipaa  (o  visit
Rome,  and  tu  desire  the  saaie  dignity  from  Tibe-
riiJH.  Agrippu,  beiiig  apprised  of  bis  design,  wrote
lo  the  omperor.  ai:reuaiug  Autipas  of  being  impli-
cated ill  the  affair  of  Seiauiis,  upon  which  he  wfti<
baaiitbed  to  Lugduuuui.  in  (>aul.  This  is  Ihe  An-
lipaa  who,  being  at  Jerusnleiu  at  tho  time  of  tlio
Saviour'tt  sufftiriug,  ridieule^l  Josns,  whom  Pilttt4>
had  sent  to  him,  dreseed  him  in  mo^^k  altin>,  and
Beut  him  back  to  the  Roniuu  governor  as  a  king
whose  ambition  gave  him  no  umbrage.  The  year
of  his  death  is  unknown,  tbnngb  it  is  cf>rlain  that
be  aud  Herodias  endtnl  their  days  in  exile,  ueconl-
ing  lo  losuphns,  in  Hjiain.  (4)  Aaiiirf  A  I.,  son  of
Aristobithm  anti  Berenirt^.  aud  iiraudson  of  Ilcnid


IIERODIANUS


MM


IIEKOOOTIIS


the  Orviil.  Mu  waa  rilnrati'il  nt  Rntiin  witi)  tlie
fiiliin*  t:iii)ii<rc»r  CMuuiliiiM,  and  DnitiiiH  tlio  Mtn  nf
Tibrriiia.  Having  yivuMi  uOViiuu  hi  TilHTllUi,  llfl  WM
tlinit^h  iiitu  )>risiiri ;  liiil  Culigulu,  nn  IiIh  iiccr«»init
(jLti.  117),  Bet  him  at  [jlterty,  aiul  gavt-  liitii  ilio
tntmruhics  of  Abilene,  ItHlnnaeu,  TnieUouiliH,  uiul
AiiniiiitU.  Oil  tbe  death  of  Coli^illa  hi  -II,  A^iik-
lWtirhn  was  at  thr  time  in  Knine,nMtiiil4.><l  Utaudius
ill  ^aiiiiiiK  iHiiuM'ssinii  of  tlie  Kiiijiire.  As  n  rewui'd
fiir  tii.-*  wTvires,  Iiidapa  nnd  Samaria  were  aunex«4l
tu  hiK  diiiiiini(iii8.  His  gnvnnimpnt  wan  mild,  and
lie  niiA  «-\t'(>rdiiigly  popiilur  aniinig  the  Jftws.  It
waa  }iriihably  tn  incrraM-  this  pitpiilnrily  that  be
caiiM-d  the  npiiHth^  .Innu-M  tn  )mi  behn.-ulf'i'l  and  PeW-r
to  be  cast  littn  ]m-Ihiiu  (A.n.44).  Thu  niaiiti«r  of  Uih
dentil,  nliivli  ti>ok.  |ilui%  at  CaeMnriia  in  thi.-  oauic
year,  Is  i-eJattil  lit  AeU,  xii.  lly  lits  wife  CypruH  bo
had  n  con  Asri|ipa  and  thtvo  dnngbtcrt* — Ucrvuici^,


luiu  or  UcroO  .\|ri|>jia.

Msrisniii^,  ntul  Dnisilla.  <r>}  Son  vf  Agrifiim  I.,
WA8  educated  ni  llie  4-oiirt  of  ClandiiiH,  and  at  tin*
time  uf  bJH  fatbfir'H  death  wju*  ftfViint4^»?u  yean*  tdd
Cluiidiiis  kept  bim  ut  Ruuie,  and  itctit  CiiMpiUH  Fa-
diiM  a^  pcix^iii'att:!!'  of  the  kiugdoia,  which  thus  again
biM.'uiiiu  11  liuiuaii  itroviiii:e.  On  the  diiatb  of  Hei-u-
d(«,  kiug  of  Chalcia  (4?'),  biit  littli^  princi|>Dlity  wam
given  to  AgripfiA,  M'hd  itiibM-q neatly  rece)\'ud  an
ileceiuiiou  of  tcrritotn,'.  Jlefiiio  the  outbreak  fif  llie
war  with  tUe  JtititiiuiM,  Agrippa  iiLteinple<l  iu  vulii
to  dittauadu  the  Jews  frutii  rebelling.  He  sidtil
with  the  Konians  in  tho  war,  and  after  the  capt-
lin*  (if  Jenirutleiii  h^  Went  with  hitt  Kister  Bere-
nice to  Koine,  and  died  in  the  nevetitieth  year  of
UiA  age,  A.fj.  lltO.  It  WUA  bcl'ure  ibii^  AgrippA  tliut
the  ajHutle  Paul  made  biH  deft-nee.  a.i>.  (>0  (Acta,
XXV.,  xxvi.).  (tj)  ATTlcua  (in  full,  Tibekius  Clait-
i>it*8  Artlcrs  Ukrodbs). 8e«  AmcvSr  IIkro-

Rerodlanus  ('Upwiuifoi).  (I)  The  author  of
1111  extant.  biHlory,  in  the  Uret^k  language,  uf  the
{{■•man  Kinpirt^,  in  eight  hiKikit,  fii>in  th«  de^itb  of
Maiinn  AnielinK  to  the  cnniinencenient  of  the  reigti
of  GurdianUM  III.  (A.D.  ItM^-'/SS).  He  nbaeH  thai
the  cveittJi  doftcrilio^]  by  him  tiocnrrtMl  during  the,
period  of  biH  own  bfe,  which  Hrrre»  tu  lix  hin  date,
but  of  the  di'tailii  of  hit*  career  nothing  in  kuoiru.
Hfl  tH>ciiiK  to  bavc  uiadi:  TbuuydideM  his  inoilel,  and
hitt  narrative  \»  ubaraeteri/.ed  by  Hobriety,  impar-
tiality, and  in  general  by  aceiintey.  }V\h  Htyle  irt
good  in  Hpite  nf  niiniemiiK  Lattnisnix.  Theie  arr- '
^ditiiiiiN  by  Bukker  (IttTiG)  and  MundelMoliii  (1^1).  |
See  Krvuzer,  Dr  Hrrtnliani  P'jlii,  etc.  (1861) ;  and;
on  tlie  latigtiage  and  style,  tlie  tmatltM;  of  P.
Scliiuidt,  /JiV  Si/Htuj-  dra  IJi»torikrr»  Herodian,  pi.
i.  (lrtl*l>;  pi.  ii.  <ld9:»).  i'->>  Aei-us.  A  celebrated
grmnnianau.Hon  of  A)Hi|bmin8  Dyst'olun,  and  u  ua-
tire  of  Alt- xandria,  from  which  idace  he  weut  to
Uoine.  where  Im  Kiu'iired  llm  faviHir  of  the  uni-
jiemr  Marcun  Aiit-elitis,  to  wluiiii  hA  dedicnttid  hlN
wtM-k  on  proMMly  {KaBoXixif  npotrvHa),  in  Iwcitty-
Oiw  books. Hi*  rvpntutiun  iu  antifpiity  uita  Tcry


great,  no  that  Priscian  »tylcB  hint  marimm*  amflnr
arlh  tjriimmalirttr.  Of  his  iinuieruim  wurka,  vuiy
fmgtnentnry  selertiooa  nun  exist,  largely  In  vit«-
Itontt  in  other  gnimmnriaiit*.  TlieM*  ore  enniuerst<H|
hy  Fnbric-iiiH  (  JUht.  liratr.  vi.  pp.  1£7r  full ),  Amt
Ltlited  by  Leiitz,  with  indexes,  in  'i  voU.  (L«i)<zi|;,
1^0).  See  Li'hrn.  Hfrodiuni  Srri/ttu  Tria  {Kou'i^-
bei'g.  1848):  Hiller,  i/tnuitiutir»  Hrrodia hot  (hi<tia,
IHWi) ;  HilganI,  A'jwr/iM  ex  tAbris  HfrodinHULi-ip-
xig.  1847);  ti\n\  iiU'[t\iuit.  Uf  Ucroiliatti  Trohniri  lH«-
hrlnhgiit  iStfilA-ibnrg,  l**yi.

HerodTcuB('Hp(>dtKncl.  (1)  A  nabylouiaii  gram-
iiiai'iaii,  a  follower  of  ('rntea  of  MnlluM,  and  a  vio'
lent  opponent  of  the  Mbool  nf  AriHlan-buK,  againil
whose  fulloweiit  bo  wrote  bu  epigniiu  tlint  is  pn^
(torvvd  iu  the  Greek  Anthology  (Jacobs,  Ji(A
Gratv.  ii.  p.  ii\).  He  wrote  a  work  on  Comedy,  en-
tit1e<l  Ktafi^Jlovntva,  Hin)  variuati  lliiacellatiiei.  |?i
A  Thrurian  pliyKirian,  who  woa  one  uf  tbe  ]imv|>-
torN  of  Hi|tiMiL-r»te«.  He  srema  tn  have  limi
Kniiing  the  lli-ttt  to  iuisi»l  ti|ioti  the  gnrnt  ttapor-
tanne  of  HyMleiiintic  exereine  in  prvwrvinp  llw
h.-altb. See  Plato,  Pnttn^.  9  20.

Herod&tUB  {'Wpn^arot).  (li  A  eelebiatei]  i\nA
}it«i|ortuu,  bom  at  HuliLarnawni^t  in  Carta,  H-C-itM
iCliiitou,  Fa»U  Hrllrnici,  vol.  i.  p.  'jy,  ad  eil.).  He
wits  of  D(M-iau  extraclioi),  and  of  a  dislimiiwbetl-
fmiiily.  Hin  father  waii  imuied  Lyxe»,  h)»  inolber
Khueo  or  Dryo.  Puiiyusitt,  an  eminent  epic  |«»li
whom  !iu>uie  rHiik  nrxt  tu  Hunier,  was  lits  nwU
either  by  thu  niotber'N  or  father'^  aide.  Tlif  (Mih
of  hit*  life  uro  few  and  doubtful,  exc«pt  rm  fur  u
we  eau  gather  ihetn  from  his  uwti  works,  ^o*
liking  the  goveriiiueut  of  Lygduuii«,  tli**  gmiKh*'!-
of  Qneeu  Artetui»fia,  who  woa  tyrant  of  HaIirAn>»
Hii»,  HerodotiiH  ivtired  for  a  beaMm  to  the  ivlainltf
SainoHfWbertr  he  inlaid  to  havetnltivatitl  lhei<»iir
dialect  of  the  Greek,  which  vea»  the  1nngua|»UMii'
prevalent.  IIef«re  be  was  thirty  yearn  of  *fp  V
joined  w  iiuiiilterof  bitf  fellow -exile*  in  an  atleiiipl
which  proved  niic'i-eiwfnl,  to  fX|iol  Lygdanti*  !!•'
tbe  batiiKhineiit  of  the  tyrant  did  not  give  tnu>'
ctnillily  to  HAlicarnaasn»,and  Het'iMlotiits  wbolriv-
self  hud  bccoiiie  an  object  of  diiilike,  again  led  Id*
native  country  and  vinitcd  Athens,  where  lie  nia^
tb«  acqtiulntauce  of  many  uf  the  brilliant  wril«i>
of  tbo  time.  Of  tbow,  Sophocles  booauic  hi*  Inli-
mato  fheutd,  and  wrote  a  jmetn  in  litu  bonoar  in
B.C.  440,  a  Inignwiit  of  wliieh  in  pretierved  by  ('It-
lArcb  (See  Hniiiia,  Hophohle*'  HmrkMrngnt  jm  Hm*-
dot  [1(^5]).  Kuti«binB8tate8  that  bereceiTnlalAtk-
enH  luuny  public  uiarkBofdistincliuu.  As  Atln^iii"
citUoiiHliip  won  not  open  tu  him,  be  joioed,  aa  ili>
naicl,  u  colony  which  the  AtheDiuiis  Rent  t»  Thoni
iu  Southern  Italy,  about  u.c.  443.  He  is  utd  !■
have  die^l  in  Tbuni,  and  to  have  been  bnried  in
tbe  market-place.

Herodotiui  in  re^ganled  by  many  as  lh«  fstbo
of  profane  history,  and  Cieeni  </>  /^.  i.  1)  ealU
him  hinloriae  patrrui ;  by  whieh,  hownvor,  noth-
ing more  luiitt  be  meant  th&u  IhnI  be  i«  lti«  lint
prufuuo  biKtoriun  whose  vi-ork  itt  diftlinguiftM
for  its  linitthcd  forni,  and  has  come  down  lu  ui<a-
tire.  Tlma  Cicero  hiinHelf,  on  another  of^-adliia,
speaks  of  bim  as  the  ouo  i^si  firiNcr/M  ^rwm»  h**
(gcriheiniii  ortinril  (fki  Oral,  ii  Vil;  while  UlifflJ-
siiiiH  of  llalicarnaHDUh  liaM  given  us  a  list  af  bud^
historical  writers  who  preeedmi  bioi.

Herodotus  presents  bimself  to  oar  coiiKidAratina
iu  two  |M)tutJt:  Its  n  traveller  and  oltM-rv^r,  ai»l  >■


IIEKOIHJTUS

an  liintoriwi.  TIk*  ost«nt  of  hia  travels  tuiijr  bv
iMOcrtniiivd  prvtty  clearly  from  bis  hintory ;  bat
the  order  iu  wliicli  ho  visited  each  place,  and  Unj
linif  of  klit  viBil,  caiiiioi.  he  df  U-niiiued.  TIio  hlory
(if  liiti  rt-iuliu;;  liw  work  at  the  Olympic  Game*,  on
which  ncoaaiuii  he.  it*  wuiil  lo  haVK  ivr«'iv*Ml  itiiiviir-
in\\  a|t(>laii!K',  ami  t«i  have  hail  Ihr*  itiiiiieH  nf  x]u\  uiiif
Muwn  ^ivmi  t»  tlm  uiito  hooktt  of  liiit  hiHtory,  Iiam
iHWti  dispniviid.  Tlio  »t«ry  is  fimmh'd  ii|hiii  u
nmall  pircc  l»y  Liicinii,  entitled  "  HomdotiiH  or  Ai!-
tiuit,"  vrhirh  Hppari'titly  waH  iiol  iiitfiidiHi  by  thu
writer  htiiiaelf  an  an  hi)<l4iriral  truth:  and,  in  ail-
tlitioii  to  thin,  lIiToilotiiit  wa»  only  abt>ut  iwouly-
eight  ycara  old  {Siii"l.  «.  v.  BovnuftiAijc)  «heii  Ii«  in


^m  THI


Mid*  to  hitVH  nrad  to  tlif  nitHctiLlilral  Grcckn  at.
Olyiii|tia  a  work  nhiL-h  wan  thi;  imult  nf  jmunL  itx-
UMinivu  inivi-lliiig  aud  reacLii'i-h,  and  \vIitt.*U  buan
iu  every  part  of  it  eridunt  niarkft  of  the  huiift  of  a
man  (if  matiin*  age,  Thn  Olympic  rerilatirfii  in  not
eveo  alluded  to  hy  Pliitariili,  in  hin  treatim  »it  tho
•*  malignity"  of  HerwIoliiH.  Fiirtliermorf,  it  im-er-
tain  thttt  the  division  of  liiK  work  inU>  IhioLh  wittt
not  known  t^i  nerodotntt  hitimplf,  hut  wan  prohalily
dun  to  thn  Alfxandriaii  gmmmiiriaiiH.  It  in  tir-it
mentioned  by  Dioihiru^  SiculiiH.  At  a  latur  )H*riiicl
HtrnidotiiH  read  Iiik  luKlory,  an  vsc  art*  ii]fornit-«l  by
Plutarch  and  Kniu'hiuN,  nt  the  Pauathimaean  r^xll-
val  at  AthiMif.  afid  tli<'  Atlu'iiinntt  ure  ^nid  t<i  have


HKHODOTL'.S

'  presented  htm  with  tlit>  uim  of  teu  tulenta  fur  tho
inaiiii«r  in  which  lie  ha<l  K^mkeu  of  the  derds  of

I  their  nation.  The  aceomit  of  this  second  rrcita-
tiou  tnay  be  true,

With  a  simplicity  which  <'liaracteriz*«H  his  nhole
work.  Hi*nMlotiiK  uiakeK  tin  dtHplay  of  tlw  gr^at  ex-
l«<iiL  of  hiK  Iravt'lH.  Ho  freiinrntly  a%t>idH  saying
in  escpreMt  t*>['niM  tliiit  In^  wim  at  a  place,  bnt  li»
nm-H  wohIh  H'hii-b  an?  as  concln^iiM-'  aft  any  )M<Htli%'i<

'  sratvnicnf.  IIi<  tlfHcribfri  a  thing  lu  standing  be-
hind thu  diiot  (ii.  lrl-.fl,  or  on  tlif  tight  hand  a»  yon
enter  a  (eiiipic  (i.^l):  or  ho  wiia  told  noniething  by

'  a  pei*M)n  iu  a  ]>articnlnv  jilaco  (ii.  'Jr*};  or  lit*  n»v»
ottier  wonl«i  e<|nally  hignilicnnt. In  Africa  lie  vIh-

I  il*>d  Kgypt  l«e<'  Hildinger,  IHr  (iijjfjttiarjtr  Fomchtinif
Hmuiuf'M  [ViiMiiia.  IM7;1]},  Cnmi  the  roam  of  tin-
Mtidileiranean  t4>  Elephantine,  the  M>uiheni  r\-
trumity  of  the  Mnuitry  (ii.  U9) ; nod  be  tnividhnl

.  wontwanl  as  fur  iiMCyren^(il.:K.tHI),unil  [imUibly

I  farther. (.See  N'Mimann,  .Yorrht/n'jlra  ntitb  llrrmiot

|[1899]).  In  Attia  he  vixite^l  Tyre,  Uabylon.  Bi-hn-
tan»  <i.  9t*),  Nineveli.and  vrobuhly  Btisa  (v.  52  foil..
vi.  1I9>.  He  ulso  travelled  to  vaiioaH  piirt««tf  Ania
Mlnor.antl  probably  wfftil  aH  fur  hh  ('<>U-hiH(ii.  |l>-l>.
In  KnH)|H'  ho  vi^ile^l  :i  hirgi^  [mi't  of  Tile  country
along  the  Uhii'k  H<iii,  bctufvn  the  monlha  of  the
Daniilie  aud  the  Crlnioa,  and  Wfiit  MJine  dinlutiie
into  the  iuterlor.  lie  (^fenis  to  have  e\fliuliic>d  the
line  lif  tho  march  of  Xerxes  from  the  ilelJeH)>ont  to
Atticii,  and  certainly  bad  seen  nnmenum  places  on
t.tiis  route.  He  was  well  ncqtiainted  with  Athetia
(i.  9K,  V.  77),  and  also  with  Delphi,  Dodoim,  Olyin-
pia,  Dolcitt,  and  nuiiiy  other  phiceH  in  (Jret-ee.  Tlml
lio  had  visilod  noine  parts  of  8i>nLherti  Italy  iM>b-nr
from  hiH  work  (iv.  91),  v.  44).  Tlie  munlion  of  lliette
plac«'N  in  HiilUcieut  to  show  that  he  tntiNt  hiiv*;  mh^ii
many  mure.  (Sf«  llildehninilt,  Ih  lliiirrihui'  Urrv
iloti  KHfttimvia  rt  .Ij'ricanin  f  Li-ipxiu,  18^:*;*].)  8o
wide  anil  varied  a  field  of  obitervation  Inis  rarely
been  preM>nted  to  a  traveller,  and  utill  innrr  rstrely
toaity  luttiirian  of  either  ancient  or  nuMlerii  time**;
jind,  if  wf.  iraijtiot  atllmi  that  thu  niiihor  ntidertjiok
hi>*  Lriivi>1.-t  with  a  view  to  <:ollectiug  mulerJrilH  for
till*  great  work,  a  HiippoHttioa  which  Is  fur  fnun
imprubuhlti,  it  is  certain  that,  without  mo-h  advau-
tagL-tt,  lie  ej>nld  never  havu  wiitten  it,  and  thai  bis
traveU  iiiiihL  have  siiggrwltitl  mneh  ihijiiii y,  and
snpplie<l  mnny  valuahlu  faet»,  which  after»atds
found  a  jilnce  in  his  history.

The  nine  liooks  of  Heruilolns  ci>utuin  a  great
vaiiery  of  matter,  l.lio  unity  iif  which  is  not  per*
i-rikiitl  (ill  the  wholo  work  has  heeii  thoi<t»nghly
(•Kainiiii'd;  and  for  this  nioson,  on  a  JirMt  periiMil,
(he  hiMtut'y  is  Mildoni  well  iinderHttKKl.  Bnt  Ihti
sabject  of  thai  history  was  eonccived  by  the  antlior
both  clearly  atid  coupreheusively.  His  iiini  was
to  combine  a  general  bisu^ry  of  the  (treektt  iind  the
barbarians  (i.  o.  those  not  Greeks)  wiih  the  history
of  the  warn  betwi-en  the  Greeks  uud  IVrsiaiis.  Ao-
nonlingly,  in  the  exerntiLin  of  Ins  nmiii  tank,  be
T.rarcM  the  conrso  of  Hvenln  from  the  time  wimti  the
Lydian  kingdom  of  CroeHiis  fell  before  the  iinn^  of
Cyrus,  the  founder  of  the  Persian  munarcby  iB.c.
o4(J),  to  the  capture  of  HeMtus  <  ac.  47H  ),  mi  event
nhici)  completed  the  li-inniph  of  the  (irccks  over
the  Persinus,  The  great  aubjeut  of  hin  work,
which  is  comprised  within  the  sjiace  of  sixty-eight
years,  a<lvances,  with  a  lingular  ptogiess  and  tridy
dramatic  (Irvi'lopmenl,  from  the  litwt  weak  and  «)■•
vidod  cflforlM  i>f  tlit'  On^ekR  to  resist  Asiatir  num-
l>ers,  to  their  uoimt  us  a  nation,  and  ihi'ir  Anal  let-


UKKOUUTUS


MM


HEKUNUAS


uiiiplt  ill  llif  riiciiiiirnlili*  Uatlli'M  or  TliririiHi|i>'bw,
Sttlamitt,  Plutiicu.ttiiil  Myciilfi.  Hut  vtiiU  thUi  Miib-
^t,  vvliicU  liiu  a  coiit|>lrtt;  niiity,  wrll  iimiiitaiiied
from  )U  coniMit'^tic-cnioiit  tn  it«t  cIohc.  tlie  uutlior  liu
iiirerwmvu,  cunfiinuAlily  tn  his  KODtrnl  parpuM,
anil  liy  wiky  ofMCCUAJoniil  iIigrcwstoii.HkvttiboHof  the
VJiriuiiH  ji^ojilit  ait<l  t>oiiiitrie«  n-hirh  Im  had  visited
ill  bi»  wi«lc,-t*xtcinlivl  trnvtiK  Tlic  inoro  one  cou-
tctii|>Iiit4;s  the  dit^ciiUy  of  tliiiH  cninliiiiiiig  a  kintt
uriiiiiveniAt  Iiistiiry  with  »NiiliNtniiti»l  uml  ilmtiiivt
liaiTuti\e,  tbv.  niorw  uiio  ninst  A<linin>,  nut  au  much
till-  art  of  the  hiatoi-ian,  a^  Ihm  hn|i|)y  |mwfr  of
brthgpng  togulher  and  arrnnginj^  Iiim  uiuttiriaU,
which  vraa  the  roaiilt  of  the  fuluestt  of  hiit  tufui-uia-
tinii,  the  tlistiliotneos  of  bia  knowledge,  auil  bin
clear  coufMrption  of  the  subject.  Tbeao  uumeruuit
digrcatiioiiA  itr«  among  the  tuost  raluable  parte  of
bis  work ;  iind,  if  they  bad  beeo  omitted  or  lost,
barmi  iiidt-cd  would  have  been  niodero  iDvestiRa-
ticiu  ill  the  field  of  aiicipnt  history,  ovi?r  which
tliu  tabuiir  nf  tluH  oiih  gr<<nt  writer  oow  cbroWB  a
ulcar  and  utoady  li^ht.  1'lip  aneodotw,  also,  that
aparklo  thmiigti  Iuh  pn^rfn  atv.  fa«cinatiti(!  in
their  variety  uml  iu  thn  illiiHtraliiitiH  thoy  alTurd
of  ibti  life  ami  manni^m  of  the  age  that  he  dr^
BuribiM.

The  atyle  of  Hiiroilotiis  is  nimplf),  pleasiiif;.  aud
liif^bty  ^jictnivMiitt-:  ofr«n,  imli^Hl,  jxieiical  both
in  expreasioii  and  MMiliini>i)r.,,iiid  lioarin^  evidmit
marks  of  Ikplougiug  to  a  pcrioil  when  proAP  coui-
|io«it4oii  bad  uot  y«t  bccomo  a  finiahed  art.  That
h«  was  a  close  Rtiidont  of  HoinLT  is  evidout  in
every  psge  of  the  history,  aiuco  bio  pbrasas  and
ezprcMiioiis  Bri>  t>verywhere  coloured  hy  the  Ho-
meric influence.  Hence,  Dionyeius  of  Halicaruaa-
BiiH  ralU  him  'O^irjpoi'  Ci^ut^e.  and  Longinas  /ttwor
'OfiiJtuKtararos.  So  (•mcefiil  and  winning;  waa  his
Htyle  thai  AtheiiaviiH  dL'aor)l>es  hira  ax  6  fAtXtyyjpi't,
His  information  isupimreiitly  tliu  rt*8ttU  of  bis  own  i
exiMrience.  In  physical  knowledge  be  was  sonii*-
wbnt  bcliiud  the  .-^uieiico  of  even  bis  own  day-  He  '
had,  nodoitht.  rc(lectx;clou  political  ((iicslions;  l>nt  {
lie  seeniH  to  have  foruicHl  his  opinions  mainly  from  I
what  be  hiniKolf  hud  obinerved.  To  pure  philo- 1
sopbical  speciilutiuns  lie  had  mo  ini'liiiation,  and
there  is  not  a  tracts  of  snub  in  bin  wrilingH.  Me
bail  a  Ktroog  religions  fi^<eliiig  bi>r<lering  on  snji^r-
stitiou,  tbongb  «ven  here  h**  clearly  diHtingiiisheil
the  grons  and  absunl  from  that  which  van  reaMin-
able.  He  F<cenis  to  have  vieweil  the  luaniicrs  and
cnatomN  of  all  nations  iu  a  umre  truly  philodophi-
cal  way  than  many  no. railed  pbilo«opbent,  eon*
alderlug  tliein  all  a»  vanoiis  forms  of  social  exist*
ence  under  which  happinesiH  niigbc  bo  found.  He
treat«  with  raspn-t  the  roligtous  oltservanoe*  of
«vury  nation;  a  deoisivo  proof  of  his  great  good
sense.  Until  lately  tbero  waa  a  strong  tt-udeiicy
lo  exflggemto  the  cretlulity  of  llermlotns;  lint  a
fuller  knowledge  of  the  tonntries  de»cril»wl  hy
him  has  justifttid  many  of  the  statement's  once  n-
ganled  as  almonl.  Muivovvr,  a  distiuciiun  niiiMt
he  drawn  belwecu  the  things  he  tells  of  his  own
knowledge  and  those  wliich  )t«  merely  relates  as
having  been  told  bim  by  other  ]>ersons.  Tb«  ex-
qaisite  lines  (jnotod  by  Prof.  Merriam  in  bis  intro-
dtictiuQ  an'!  nundiTfiilly  drMcriptive  uf  the  wbolc
tout)  aud  spirit  of  Hrru<lotu»  :

'■H*  «r»  ft  niM  old  mui  stxl  ohprltlied  mucb
Till!  k<.-IrIiI  tUrk  Eft.vi)'  °t>  '>'■  >plrll  laid;
And  with  H  mnnoiiN  a1o>)nrnc«  wonid  touch
Pvnm  ■!  ttiai  tuveo  of  tbe  4mA.


fipglc  roDianl^c  wonb  liy  bim  wrrc  Ihrown
At  ^TP*^  <^''  '"""  '"'<'  liluw.  wtth  ■  jinnrT
L'kr  Itist  t>r  vltiflKiK  sunltclil  sftor  fbuwcf
Kiniilint:  llw  cvom  of  liilU  Ut4  >MmMrtDC  ««
Me  ti-*tvl  111*  ffuds  aod  b*n>M  sod  siWlc*  tow
Tbiii  Kclio  nncbt  not  faosr  id  t*T  Ilgbt  nxtm"

Plutarch  ncciised  Herodotno  of  partiality,  sod
oomposed  a  tniatise  nn  what  he  termed  th«  "i^t»-
fiilness"  of  this  writer  (Jl<pi  r^s  'Vlf/otivrav  Ka
(ftias),  taxing  him  with  injustice  tawardfld
Thehaiis,  Coriiithiiins.  ami  Greeks  in  genenil{4
the  whole  niooogmph  is  weak  and  frivolous.

Herodotus  bad  planiMNl  to  write  a  work  on  A*-
Syrian  history  (i-  l**i  l"^)-  **"*  whether  or  uot  l»
ever  carried  ont  bis  iui-ention  is  nut  koown.  A
life  of  Homer  baa  been  oomoiouly  aacribMl  to
Herodotus,  and  appeora  )u  sotne  etlitioos  of  his
history;  hat  it  Is  now  deemod  spnrions.  See
Schmidt,  Tir  Ilerodott^a  quat  ffrtur  Htb  Bomtri,
2  pta,  (1874-75).

Manusoiupts. — Of  forty-six  MSS.  contoiniog  a
whnl«3  or  a  pnrtinii  of  Hermlotns,  live,  which  an
of  «ii|Kirii)r  age  and  excellenre,  form  the  baaiA  uf
the  aorepted  text.  Thnew)  rvpresent  two  "{amy
lies,**  to  luir  of  wbiiib  belong  the  Codex  Flnrcnli-
nns  or  Mediceiis  t)f  the  Laurvutian  Lihrafj:  at
KlnreuiH^,  dating  from  the  t«utb  ecutury,  a  Ciidex
Kmuaunx  uf  the  elrvi:nl.li  century,  ami  a  BrcoiMl
Cmtex  PlnrentiniiN.  Jilso  of  the  ulisventh  oeatnT.
To  thA  other  family  belong  a  t.'odex  ParisliiBh
)>eauliful]y  written.of  tbe  thiri'eonth  ceutur>',MMl
a  third  Codex  Komnons  of  tbo  fonrtwTnth  reutorj,
Itieking,  buwovcr.  tbe  Fifth  Book.  Of  tbii,  slwv
the  text  of  tb<«  First  Book  lias  l»ceu  considrrmhljr
altered,  possibly  in  order  to  adapt  the  %vork  to  tlia
use  of  schools.  An  account  of  the  MHi^.  i»  pfen
by  8teiii  in  his  edition  mentioned  Wlow.

UlBLUMiRJkl'lIY. — The  erfifio  prtnPefM  of  Hefwio-
tns  is  that  of  Aldus  (I602>.  Staiidanl  critical  edi-
tioits  are  those  of  Sflhweiglmiiser,  5  vols.  (StnN*
burg,  1^416} ;  Qaisfoid  (Oxford,  i^^ifr,  8t«io  (Ucrlto.
I8fi9);  and  Dietscb  fLeipxig.  1^41.  Good  cen-
lUfiitaries  ant  those  of  Hiilir  in  I..aliu  ( Lelpii)[i
18.'>ti;;  HIakesley  (London,  1854);  Stoin  iu  Ocnou
(Berlin.  1H77),  and  Kawlinsuu  (London.  1;^);  idM
Abicht  in  German  ilrS76).  Kuglish  translslimii
have  been  rowlo  by  Rawlinsoii,  4  vols,  (ifd  «d.  l8S!k
aud  O.  C.  Macanlay,  2  voU.  (Loudnn.  li^&O).  A  vil-
uable  Lcjictm  IJermiotaim  is  that  of  Scbweigbsuicr
( Loudon,  !l!d  cfl.  \>*24).  Very  useful  are  tbe  uppes-
dices  to  Prof.  Sayce's  eilitiou  of  Bk*.  I. -HL  (Lon-
don, 1883).  Oil  tht>  dialect,  see  Abiebf,  Cr^rrakkt
Uber  dm  hrrodolrincheu  IMalrct  (  3d  ed.  LeipDji.
1674);  and  Merzdorf,  ^>uuMtio«M  {rrammatktu  ii
DiaUeto  ilei-odolM  (Leipzig,  Ir^h).  l^rein's  tntio-
ditetion  on  tbe  dialect  in  his  schi>ol  e«liriau  ic  al-
mtnible;  alaoSinylb  in  his  AntMilm  iimii  ImjUvtm*
of  thf  Grftk  irt«lti'h  (1H94).  On  the  sttiirc*'*  of  lb
history,  se«  Ibe  monographs  of  Panofsky  (IHG&rauil
K.  W.Nitzsch  (1H71I.  Ou  bis  travels,  mm  Uw  woKi
already  cit-ed  iti  the  text.

[2)  A  physician  of  Tarnns,  of  tbe  empiric  H-bw)!,
ami  sucee»si>r  to  Meiioilui  us  of  Nicomwlia.  A  ««tk
of  his,  entitled  **  The  Pbyuciau,"  ia  menliouHl  iff
Qalen.

Heioa See  Uebo.

Heroudaa  { '  HfKuvJtos)  or  Herodaa  I '  Hp«J(acl-  A
riretik  writer  of  iambics,  nho  Hvml  probably  at  C«*
in  the  third  century  b.c  .and  of  wbooe  \rT»r*Uitt#
was  kuown  before  the  recent  diseuvery  aiaoligtbs
papyri  in  tbe  British  Museum  ufa  MS.  coutalBUi|


UEBOON


«07


UKKOS


Bveii  poems. Previous  to  ibis  discovery  ibore
*eii»t«<l  only  U>u  fpiotntions  from  him  (ooo  in  inin-
bic  tliiui'-ter  niid  uiuc  in  ch«li;imbic*tt,  Ave  i>t"  whirli
are  fuuud  iu  tbu  British  Miu*euin  MS  ,  aitiil  Nt^rvt-d
to  ideulify  lb«  aulbor,  wi  Uin  nmim  ik  nut  them!
givf  11 Tbetii.'!  i<>evpii  cumplcto  poptDH  iMiiitAiii  fiuiii
8&to  1*^.1  liiibsaptroe,  and  nrr<  ciilith;d  (1)  ri/KiKvuXir
7 Maorpoiros,  "Tbe  Alatcbniakei or  the  (Jo.bi>-
tw^ea;"  (2>  Uofrnj^wrttiv,  "  The  Timp;"  (:i)  Ai^ii- |
o-KoAor.  *'Tbe  Sobootmaster :"  (4)  'AtrmXtjiri^  ovari-  j
Bi'ttra*  Kui  dvata^uvaiu,  ''  A  Visit  t"  Awlrpitm;*'  (») ,
ZTXurtnroi,  "The  Ji*a)oits  Woman  ;"  (H)  ^iXid^ovirat
ij  'lfiia(fwirai,  '*  ArtVctionaU!  Frirnds,  or  the  Couli- :
dant<*«;"  {H^Kvrtvs  {1\  "Thn  Cobbler." TbetiUeej
of  twn  m«n>  poeina  uro  found  in  tho  MS.^'Ei'i)-
svuif,  "  The  l>rcani ;"  and  'AiroirT)<m(^i\(uvai. "  Ladies
^t Bifiikfast." Tb«  poems  iire  diflficnlt  to  ivad,  I
bounding  in  words  fnniii  hitherto  only  in  H<'ny-
' chins,  and  conTninin};  Mime  thfit  ate  (.'nliruly  un-
known. Many of ihe.m: Htrtiii};<i vocables are
probably the  rranlt  of  rnpyiNlft' rrrorx, having
btwu  written  in  Egypt  wht.'iirr  I  bo  MS.  cumf,  while
ot'bf^rH  are  duubthriw  ci>llot^uiaUMni».

Th<->  prvvioiihly  (^xtAnt  IVaRinentfl  of  f  It^rondascan
mpe  found  ill  Moiueke's  t'eterarum  I'ttetarun  f'holi-  i
hlHfrt,  apiHfndi'd to  Liu-iinmiin's Uahriun  (Berliu,
^845). Thft  rei-tMitly  4tiMrcivt<rMd  pnpttiM  ha\«  bttoti
piibliHbtfd  ununifiidcd  with  autoty|M<  fuL-similes  of
tho  MS.  by  thu  TniHt*<eH  uf  tbL>  British  Mnseuiu,
and  colhilfd  by  F.  (J.  Krtiyou  (London,  IHyil). Au  :
cditiiiii  with  a  Iranalatiuu  iutu  Latin  and  a  mont
adiuirahio index hits been piibliabed by Prof. .
BUcbi'ler  uf  Bonn  (Iti'Ji). Au  impruvcil  text  with  i
short  notes  by  Bntherford  appean^d  i>iniiilcaiieon»- 1
ly  with  Mr.  Ktfiiyoii'tt  tt^^xt. Thf.'  liitrnt  edition  is
that  of  Crusins  (Ijidpzi^,  Ir^M Valuable  tHtilion
by  MviMter  in Brr.  drr  mAVAa.  ileivltivhle  rfri*  tt'iM.
(Leipxig,  1HU3).

BeT6oo  i^p^v). The  shhue  uf  a  hero. See


I


Hero^SUs  i'Upamv  ii6\is\  or  Haro  CHfsat).  A
city  iu  liOWiT  F.jjypt,  Mlandiu);  on  tbti  btinler  of  th*;
deanrt  east  of  Ih**  Di-lt^,  tipiin  the  canol  coniiecliiig
the  Nile  with  thu  ^^irKtern  head  of  the  Red  Sea,
which  was  railed  from  it  Sinus  Herm>iK>]lticn8
(KoAiror  'Hpuw).  The  country  about  it  is  cousid-
«red  to  Ik<  the  Goeheu  of  the  Bihlo.


The  Krytbraeai)  Sibyl.


HerophUtf  (  H^o^iAfj).
See  ijluvLLA.

HerophQus  ('Hpo^/iiAoc).  A  celebrated  physi-
cian, a  native  ol*  Cbaleedon,  of  the  fiimily  of  Ihe
AMcl4<[iiades.Hud  a  diseipte  of  Fraxagoras.  l[<>ropU-
ilus  lived  under  Ft^ik'tiiy  Soter.aiid  was  c«)titenti>o-
niry  with  tbe  philoHnpber  Di'idoniK,  and  the  rvlf-
brnted  physician  Kriu<it<tra[iis,  with  mUoso  name
bis  own  is  eonitnifuly  luwvociuttMl  iu  Ibe  bifftury  t>f
ariatoniirnl  scii'iu't*.  Ah  u  pliyMiciun,  IIcmphiluM  't»
nieiitioni'd  with  pniiM'  by  both  the  ancient  and.  tb^
early  inwleru  writers,  (tiilm  »iiy!>  thai  he  eairied
auatuiiiy  to  the  hi^bciit  drjpxre  u(  \Hn(fvtuut. Willi

Ijaacli  zeal,  iodccd,didtIeropbiluspuniue  this  so ieuce,
but  be  in  Ktid  to  have  dissected  700  sitbjects,  and
It  was  ut;aiutt-  liira  and  F.rnMlstrntUH  that  tho  eharge
ras  lirst  matU  of  havlni:  t'n'(]iieihtiy  openud  living

'criininDla  that  tbt^y  mi;;ht  di«-'over  Hip  secret
siuiogft  nf  life  fCeUiis.  t'tar/.).  From  the  pefuiiiir
advantoi^es  wliich  tbr  HoluHd  <>(  Alexandria  pre*
senteil  by  thin  nnthorixed  dtsseetion  uf  tbu  liniiian

.body,  it  gniued,uitd  for  many  ceuturies  preserved.


tbe  first  repiiintion  for  luMlical  edtiuation,  no  that
Ammiaiina  Marei'lliniis,  who  lived  about  B.50  yearn
after  ils  rslahliahment,  nays  that  it  wiin  MulBvient
to  weure  credit  lo  any  pbyftieiaii  if  be  cuubl  aay
thill  hi-*  had  Mtndied  at  Al(--xiiniliia  lAmui.Marc.
xxii.  IC ).  Heniphilun  made  j^real  discoveries  in
anatomy,  and  Fallopiiis  calls  him  *'ihe  cvaus^Ust
of  aiialomist-K."  Ho  is  to  be  rpt;arded  a»  the  in-
ventor of  patholo^ieal  annlomy,  baviufj  l>e»n  the
limt  that  thought  of  upeuiiiK  tlio  bo<lies  of  men
after  death  in  onler  lo  nHC«-rtain  the  nature  of  the
malady  wiiah  bad  caused  their  diitsolnliiin.  Ula
priiieipul  diac^rveries  have  ivferencu  to  tbe  iturvoua
systeut,  which  he  aekuowlvdged  as  the  Heat  of  Ibe
seiisatious.  The  description  which  ilerophilua
gave  of  tbe  b|-ahi  itself  was  far  superior  to  those
of  previous  aiitbors,  lie  aUo  noliot^d  tlifl  lacte.ala,
lliou){b  lin  wan  iint  aw.ire  of  rhfir  use.  He  (loiiiled
out  that  Ihn  ItrMt  division  of  thtt  iuteHlinal  canal  is
never  mom  than  Mm  bremllb  of  twelve  lingers  in
length,  and  from  this  faet  proptMu^d  for  it  a  name
(iitaUfKaSaiirvXr}  rut^ecrtc),  Ibe  Latin  form  uf  wlncli
(daudcHam)  is  stilt  applied  to  it.  liedescribe<l  with
great  exaetiiess  tbe  organ  of  sight,  and  gave  to  ila
various  memliranea  the  iiutnes  which  have  still,  ia
a  great  meaMun>,  reinaiiipd  tn  them.  He  n|iHrat4Ml
on  the  catarat-'L  by  extrai'ting  the  (TyHtalliiie  hu-
mour. Hurophilus  watt  the  lirst,  iiIno.  that  hud
correct  iioliuus  retipectiug  tbe  pul(>e,  of  uhicb  bia
master,  Fraxagoras,  bad  taught  biu  some  of  the
value  as  a  means  of  dlscriaiinating  diseases  (Galen,
iiei>«f./'s/«.ii.p.y4;  Pliiiy,  fl.  A'.xi.yT.xxix.  I).  It
was  he  who  tiret  showed  that  paralysis  is  an  alToc-
tiou  of  the  nervous  system.  His  vnmmentary  on
Hippocnitea  Htill  exislM.  All  his  other  works  ara
IokC  S4'e  Marx.  De  Hrrnpbili  Vitu  (fiuttingeu,
1640);  BerdtM*,  Origin  and  Urmclh  uf  Ihf  llrjtVing
Art  (London.  Xt^'S);  aud  the  articles  Cbircroia  ;
Medicjna.

HeroB  (rjpue.  "a  hero").  In  Homer,  a  descrip-
tive title  given  to  princes  and  nobles,  but  also  ap*
plied  to  men  of  mark  sprung  from  the  peopk-.  He-
siod  reserves  tbe  name  fur  nmrtuls  of  divine  origin,
who  are  therefore  known  um  dHiuig^Mlfi.  Miitiy  of
tliiuie  hu  plurt-H  on  lh»  iHluuda  nf  the  Hlu(UH<tl,
wberv,  under  the  sovereignlj  of  t'rouii**.  they  lead
a  life  of  hajipiuesM.  iiesiod  makes  no  allusion  tii
the  iutluence  of  hcroett  upon  tho  life  of  man,  or  to
tho  wor^llip  due  to  them  in  consequence.  But  in
later  times  this  belief  spread  throughout  the  whole
of  Orcccr.  Tbe  heroes  are  in  most  resjiecta  like
nicu  and  suHer  death;  but  death  pnis  tlieiii  iu  a
more  exalted  rank,  and  they  then  h;ive  power  to
do  mem  good  as  well  an  barm.  The  imwt  distin-
guished warriors  of  prchistorie  tliu<«  were  ac-
counted beroet*,  being  generally  regarded  ns  tbe
ofl'spriiig  of  gods  by  mortal  women  :  to  their  souls
another  destiny  was  accordingly  assigned  than
tlist  allntt^l  to  (he  sonis  of  niorlals.  But  even
aiming  the  hero™  of  old  time  there  were  some
who,  without  being  ('hildren  of  Hie  goils,  never-
theless HO  dtstingiiiMhi-d  tlieunwlve>t  by  their  virlne
that  they  appeared  lo  ]>nriieipatu  in  the  divine
nature,  aud  therefore  to  deserve  a  higher  dis-
tinction after  death.  Even  iu  later  timew  such
men  were  not  unknown,  when  persimages  recent-
ly deeefwed  were  actually  exalted  to  the  ranks  of
heroes,  an  in  the  case  of  Loouidas  at  Sparta,  and
Harniodins  and  Aristogitnn  at  Athens.  Tbe  found-
em  of  colonies  and  cities  (d^x^*'"**  '^i<n'm)  were
especially  cuusidmred  worthy  of  worship  as  heroes  ;


i


l[KlH).STKArL'S


MM


mWIODUS


wben  the  trtie  rouip«U'r  vcan  tiiikiiowu.  tlieii  mhdu
Bpjiniprintf^  \wm  won  iwliH'If^ii  jriHrniil.  Kurniprlv
tlinre  wt-ra  many  KUi-h  lirtttiniiH  linmm ;  tn  thin
oliuui)>i'0{M>rly  )M>Ioiif*»l]  lint  tiriilaraiiot^Htni-Hiif  l\w
nobin  and  prifntly  fuitiiliHH  uf  Allicu  uiiil  tlii!  ri>iin<t-
ers  of  pariicriliir  nrtn  hiuI  tradt-K,  iih  DmiliiluH.  Ti-i|t-
tolemuit.  etc.  Miitiy  lu^roiw  nf  liiHtoricul  iitiiMt  mtit
origioslly  k<'*1d<  who.  ill  coiii-m*  uf  tiiiin,  weiv  lU-
veBt«d  of  (lieir  priuiitive  dignity.  There  vrna  no
ton-n  or  diHtrict  of  Gft-cfe  in  wliicli  a  host  of  lic-
rnc«  wiw  not  worsliippMl  I>y  tho  miXpi  of  the  biglirr
(iiviiiitieo  ;  many  nK  Hpecial  inU-lary  npiritj*  of  the
country,  oiliBrK  oh  tliv  hi-nwn  of  tbt'  coutitry,  n»  the
nintienri  at  8|mrtii,  thi>  A<>iu-id:iH  at  Aegtntt,  nml
TlivuL'UH  in  Attica.  ThpRi  wrtv  ffNlivalN  in  their
hononr  cvi<ry  vvhi-it>,  iiiMnv  of  tht-ni  ttmiill  and  nnini>
jiurtaiit,  (uid  only  ui-lehritttMl  in  n  ifstriLifsl  cirdr,
iithnrHubm'i'Vcd  by  Ihe.  Hlute  lui  fi-HlivaUor  Ihf  pi'o-
I»1p  it)  jji'norfil.  and  not  at  nil  inft-Tior  in  wciilth
i>r  (tqni|Mn<'iil  U\  chL>  moi>t  iuiportnut  fei((iriil*(  in
hoiKinr  iif  till-  gods.  Tliis  vcns  ospccinlly  th*'  cnw
with  tlm  hitroi'H  of  lb**  pimiitry.  Many  hpro«8
(«.  jj.  Adrawliin,  Thftfeiis)  bad  nbrinp-s,  known  ns
H«n»a,  whirh  wore  genrrally  irn'ct«'d  owr  their
(fravi'j*  iHonHl.  v.  (77).  Thn  nllan<  of  brrtx'S  weni
luwiT  tluin  llxiNti  of  t;od!i,  aiul  worn  coutmunly  ilf
»iginitcit  Httcrilirtal  hTartlm;  thry  wen;  ginierally
on  a  Irvol  with  th(;  g^nMiitd,  and  an  the  wfAt  sido
— the  iTgion  of  the  iieth<T  worhl — were*  provid-
ed with  a  bollow.  intct  wbi(-b  tlu^  libntions  wcro
imitrcd.  J..ike  oflcriiigft  to  the  dead,  theRo  fonoittt-
(m1  of  honey,  wiiie,  water,  milk,  oil,  nnd  blood  which
had  he«ii  rIihI  by  Hni-riflt-ial  victims :  tht*  fli*Hh  of
the  aninialH  narrilirrd  wiw  bttrncd.  In  the  period
of  deradftice  it  lircanir  ciiNlonniry  to  trt-al  the  liv-
ing tvilb  brniir  Iioiiimii'h,  Hnidi  hrinonra  went  paid
Ut  the  Spartan  Lynaiider  by  the  towns  in  Ania  Mi-
nor, antl  went  iitterwunlH  at'oordi^l  U>  kingM — f.  g,
to  AutigoniiH  antl  his  hoii  Lk-uicliiiitt  At  AthcQEi.

The  (JrMik  ijfMat  in  wmd  aa  an  equivali-tit  of  the
Latin  tlirut,  a»  applied  to  tboMe  who  ouco  werti
mortal,  and  heuco  oppoiied  to  (/rti«,oi)o  who  was
from  the  tinst  a  god.  It  is  therefore  used  of  ihi*
deilled  Kmnau  emi*enir*. flee  A»*ornEt>sis.

HerostrStos  Ciifii'tarfHrraf }.  An  Kphi-Hian  wim
0ot  tirt!  to  the  Temple  of  ArteniiH  at  Kphcillia  oil  the
Mmo  night  that  Alexander  the  Cn'at  waK  born,  B.C.
3&6,  in  order  to  iniinnrlnlise  liiinMdf.  Thn  KpheHJ-
■iiH  ponaed  a  deerei-  ronilenining  hi.s  naiiu-  to  oh-
livioij,  but  OM  might  iiutnrally  bi*  eipected,  iliis
uuly  increiwcd  his  uotoriety,  and  made  liim  uion-
■IvDuhitely  certain  of  the  attaitmieut  of  biH  object
(I'hit,  J^w.  :t:  Val.  Max.  viii.  H,  5;  Gel!,  ii.  tJt.

Her»6 CEfitr*})- Sw A«kaiiu;8; CecKOini;

EKKCMTUKt>i.

Herailia.  Due  of  thu  Sahinv  woiu«t)  carried
away  by  tlic  Romans  at  the  celebration  of  the
Coneiiinliu.  Hlie  na»  given  In  KomtdnK  an  u  wife,
mod,  after  biM  deulh,  bveann?  her»e1f  a  tlivinity,  nn-
der  tliH  name  of  Horn  (Yonth)  (L>ivy,  i.  |] ;  (iell.
sEiL  ^;  Fhit.  Itomui.  14).  Othein  make  her  the
wife  of  HodtiM  Hoslilitn),  grandfather  of  king  Till-
ItiH  Hostilins  of  iiomoiMacrob.  iSal.  I.G)i

Hertha.  A  goddew  woi-shipp«d  by  the  nnrifiid.
GunnanR,  lUid,  according  to  Titeitns  (fiVrui.  4U),  the
Ramo  with  the  earth.  She  wa<)  snpposed  to  take
part  in  bnmau  affAii-s,  ami  eveii  8omctime«  to  conio
among  iiiortaU.  She  bail  a  (tarred  grove  in  an  tsl-
*ud  of  the  ocean,  and  a  chariot,  <:ovenMl  with  a
veil,  etanding  in  the  gnive  and  eoniM-^rated  to  ber


MTviee.  \Vhcuever  it  wax  kuown  that  Uie  f^
\ic»M  hi)d  ik<.«eendeil  into  tbiH  ber  Minctiury,  Itrr
ear  wan  got.  rewly,  cowh  were  yoked  to  il,  and  lli«
deity  wan  carried  nmnnd  in  tile  covervd  Teliidt>.
KeHtivlty  n>igiied  in  every  place  which  the  ^•
doMH  honnnivd  with  her  preMciiec :  wars  cei
amiN  \\v.r*i  biiil  a.side,  aud  |»eacfl  and  hurmoDrl
vailed,  until  the  prieHt  drclaiiMl  that  the  go
wnH  Mitt-d  with  bninan  Miciely,  and  oure  mgn  n-
closied  bnr  within  the  temple.  The  isUnd  Diei-
tioried  by  Tncitus  ik  snpptwed  by  many  tn  harr
been  that  of  Ki'igon,  in  the  Haltic.  while  nthen
have  placed  it  in  the  Northern  Ocean.  8ee  Kb-
bus,  Ite  t>Ki  lUrtha  (AngKbnrg,  iM^'i).

Hertill  or  BilUl.  A  |K>werfiil  rieMiiun  race,  ttliirli
was  said  to  have  come  origtualty  from  ^»nd(imi».
It  »ita<:-k<il  the  Koiiniii  Empire  on  imdecliue.  L^b-
dur  (he  M>tninunil  tif  Odo»t;er,  who  ia  tuiid  to  tavr
been  :tii  Mernliun.the  HeruU  destroyed  the  1V»t-
ern  Knipire,  A.H.  476.

Hesiddus  ('Htri'oJtor).  A  celebrnt«rd  (.ireek  \in^\.
snppOMed  to  have  been  Iwrn  at  Asera  in  Ik^-niu
(Op.  ft  l)  IKH  foil.).  Ilin  father,  If  wrrin*.  linil
migrated  (o  Ascra  in  consoiinflnce  of  bi«  pumit.
and  n*Hide(l  at  the  latter  place  for  Mine  lii»p,
though  without  obtaining  the  rtghlji  ofaciliirn.
Still,  hnwe%'er,  he  left  at  bin  death  a  considcnlilr
pi-ii[MTty  to  hifi  two  Mm*,  HchitKl,  and  a  yoanjpT
one  iiniiiod  PcrAe.s.  The  brothera  divided  the  ni-
lierit^nce ;  bnt  Pcrei*».  by  uieaoB  of  hrihe«  t<i  llw
jndgea,  contrived  to  defraud  his  elder  brollirf.
Heaiod  thereupon  migratc<l  to  OrchomeiiiM,  •"
(jitttting  anppoHes,  antl  the  harah  cpitlietii  wt<Mi
ho  applies  to  his  native  village  were,  in  ill  pf"^'
ability,  prompted  by  rvHentment  at  the  wniig
which  Ut'  had  KofTered  from  the  A^craeaii  jtidp*.
Fnnn  a  piuMage  in  the  )iro(<m  to  IiIm  Thrtt^otj.  it
him  been  infviTtid  that  IlectitMl  was  literally  a  »lvf-
herd,  aud  tended  hltt  llocks  on  the  *ido  of  Ilrhn*
He  was  evidently  burn  in  oii  humble  stuliuii,  auI
wnA  himself  engaged  in  rural  pnr)iuit»:  ami  thi*
perfectly  accoints  with  the  snbject  of  tlw'  ]►«•
which  wa«  unantuioatdy  aw.'ribe<l  to  hiui— nanwlt,
the  It'orkt  and  />«jf*  ("Epyo  koI  'Hf*V^«i),  whieh  ii*
colln'lion  of  ri'llections  and  prei-eptn  nOaiinit  t"
hiKbandry  and  the  regulation  of  a  rnral  buutcboM
interwoven  with  fable)*, aliegorieii,  etc.,  fonnins.w
h:u  bi^n  Maid,  "a  Hoeotiau  fihepherdVcnieiHlat'
The  only  lulilitiiiual  fact  that  can  be  gathtn-U  fiv*
HehimVa  writlugs  is  that  be  went  over  to  the  iilMi
of  1:^11  boca,  on  occasion  of  a  iiootical  Ci'utetit  at  Cbti-
ci»,  which  formed  part  of  the  fniienil  gamw  initi-
tntetl  In  houonrof  AmpbidaniuK:  that  heolilaiual*
tripod  at*  the  priiie,  and  comtecrainil  il  to  tli«  Mb**
of  Heliron,  This  latter  (tfliwage  h  f>u»\tpr\fii  I'JF
Wolf;  bnt  it  rtwioH  to  hove  formed  a  port  of tk
poem  fmm  tinio  immemorial ;  and  it  may  nnt  W
nnream)nuble  to  infer  its  HUlheutieily  fmin  Ih'
tradition  respecting  au  ima(;^uary  cotilv«t  beiwi"
Ho]Dt^r  and  lleniotl.

The  following  legendary  accoaat  togivoD  »•'"
the  manner  of  He^lod's  death.  He  t!i  Mid  tu  l*^
C(nihiill4;d  llie  oracle  of  Didphi  a*  lo  hl»  fuliif*
dHNtinle.s,  and  the  Pylliia  direetiil  1dm.  in  n-Hf'
to  shun  the  gmve  of  Neineau  Zens.  Mure  lliei»
death  awaited  him.  Thciv  were  at  Artjo*  a  tt«-
pic  aud  a  bnwon  st^itne  of  2mm;  and  H*«i«l-
believing  this  to  be  the  fatal  spot,  directed*  h**
couTfle  to  Oenoe,  a  town  of  the  Locri ;  bnt  ttw
ambiguity of  the orarh* had dci-eived him.  f«r


IllC^-SIUUt'S


thin  pliu»  aImi,  b,v  obHoiin'  rv|tort,  was  MMJivd  to
tho  itnmo  (jod.  !!»-'  wns  here  the  ffneat  of  two
Iti'ol litirn.  It  bnpiiont^l  tluit  tlietr  Mister  Clyiiittn^
wa*  violAted  in  \h**  n\iiht-j\uie  by  tlm  iM*rw>n  wlio
liiul  a(.'i'oiii)ni[iie4l  FfeMiiMJ,  luiil  ]inii)ir«l  liitnwir  in
tvniHt^pieiicH  lit'  llii)  oiitnipt.  TlitH  ntiiii  llicy  .i(--
<-orctih};ly  rIhw;  mikI,  hiiNtinf^riiifi;  t.lir  t-oiiiiivaiit'j>
4tr  H«MitHl,1(ill4Hl  him  &!»<>.  fitul  tUi-ew  biti  body  'uiU^
lliv  wii.  The  niiu'ili'r  i4  mu\  to  hitve  hecn  dotcctcil
l>y  tlie  Mignf^ity  uf  llcaiml'rt  itog;  thoagU  Ity  aouie
il  id  frJateil  that  his  roqise  vas  ljroujc;ht  li>  the
fthort:  by  a  couipany  uf  ih<)i>hiu9,  at  the  nioiueiit
Tbni  the  i>ei*|ile  were  ceh'brntirkt;  tb<:>  fetitiral  iif
t'oM-iiluii.  The  1k)i1j  of  Metiiw]  was  ret'o^iiized,
rhi*  hiiti)i.o!i  of  thi'  immloriTH  wpw  raz»*il  to  ilie
roiiiiibitiuii,  »iul  thi'  iiiiinliTT'i-H  t  hem  selves  ca»l
into  the  twa.  AtiothL'r  riccotiiit  ittiittw  theui  to
hnve  bifii  coiimuuetl  by  lij;h(tiiiiK :  n  third,  to
huvc  bf4>ii  overtaken  by  n  teni]irAt  whik'  L-Hcji|iiug
to  1^'i'cte  ill  a  tl.<hiiij{-lKint,  and  to  huvc  poriitbcU  in
I  ht?  wreck.

The  oaly  worlu  tbiit  reiiiaiii  iittder  tho  uniue  of
lleniort  arc:  {l.) 'Kfrya  Kin  'Ufitpat  ("Works  and
Diivh");  iW.i  ^oytatin  I"  Thennoiiy ''j  ;  (iti.)  'AwttIs
'HfifiKkiovi  ("The  Shiebl  nf  Hera^-U** "  )■  The
U'ttrLn  liKti  />riy«  (whiiOi,  .i(rronIiiig  to  PaiiMiniM,
thi*  liowitiantt  rfgsrtlwl  n*  the  only  ({^""iin'  pr"-
iliiclioii  of  He?4iod)  is  eiilii'ely  ouciipied  wilb  tb«'
t*vi.'iit«  of  cominoii  life.  Tlie  (meiii  ooufiHtn  of  aii-
VKii  ^veii  Ity  IlfNind  to  bin  brother  IVritct,  on
siibjoctM  relating  for  tbc  inont  part  to  ngricuhnrt;
itiul  the  }{iMKTiil  condnrt  of  life.  The  object  of  tbo
Dl-Kl  |M)rttou  of  the  piM'Ui  is  lo  intpiove  tlie  i-Imriie-
ler  and  biibttft  of  perHex,  fuid  ti>  iiuite  biiti  |o  a  life
•if  iaiMtur,  UM  the  onl>  Mitun-e  of  jieniiaiient  jniMt-
iH-rily.  Mythinil  niiiTnlive.'*,  fitbU-ti,  dvMtriiiiionN,
Hitil  moral  npoplitbe^ni".  pHitty  of  a  prt»verbial
kind,  are  ingt'ni<ia8ly  rboneii  »iu1  eoiitbiiietl,  mi  nn
to  illiiatmle  and  eiifur(.^e  the  priiicijiti]  idea,  imd
MTved  sui  a  iiioilel  foi'  Vrrgi)  in  bin  firurtiicn.  In
the  »ccoiid  part  lleMJiMl  iihow.i  IVntej*  the  miiccci*-
«ioii  in  wbich  his  Inborin^  mniit  fnUow,  il'  he  dvter-
iiiiiieM  t^  lend  n  life  of  indiiKlry.  Thi!  jioet  tqu-nkit
of  till'  time  of  life  when  a  mini  ithoidd  iimrry,  nnd
biiw  he  fdinuld  bwk  otti  for  a  wife.  He  reiwrni-
niends  all  tt»  beur  In  iiiin«l  thai  Ibe  immoiiiiL  jfods
WMtcl)  over  tlte  lU'tintiH  of  mi-ii ;  in  nil  iiilereourM!
witb  oiImtn  Ut  keep  the  tongue  front  idb-  nnd  )ii(>-
vokiuK  womIk,  nnil  to  pieMTVe  ii  c«-rtitiii  purity  itud
mie  in  the  commonpst  «»ccnrrem;fM  of  every-day
life.  At  the  name  time,  he  niven  many  eiirioitH
preempt*,  whiob  rctM-nibli-  itneenlotal  riilex,  with  re-
f«pert  to  the  decornni  to  be  utiwrved  in  m-1^  of
w<irtthip,  and  M-bicb,  iioireover,  have  niticb  in  euni-
1IIOII  with  the  MVinlMilie  nileM  of  tbu  ]*ythii}{or''i*n!'.
that  MrieriliRd  a  Hpiritiml  imjiort  io  Diatiy  acts  of
<iiflinary  life.  Of  a  very  Aimihtr  nntuiv  in  the  hiKt
|nirt  of  the  puein,  which  lR'iiL»of  the  dayson  which
it  is  expedient  ot  inexpi^lient  lo  do  ibin  or  that
bn«tiiewt.

The  7'A<v»j7oMy(Otoyo>'in)eonHiHl«i>fuu  aveount  of
'he  nrigm  of  tlw  world,  inelinling  the  biriL  uf  the
CodM,  and  inakea  nw  of  itnineiMnx  ]M'r>ionilt>eationM.
Kven  n»  esuly  a»  the  lime  of  Paiisaiiiat*  ^viii.  ]!■,  ix.
'Mi  it  wnti  doiibted  nlielher  Ilt-HiiMt  wao  netually
tlie  antltor  of  thiM  piM-ni.  lhoti);U  ItH  j^i^ntiinene^M  in
rxpnwily  a--wurled  liy  UerMotits  (i).r>3),  and  all  the
internal  evidence  iit  Iti  favour  of  thtM  view.  Av-
inlinK  to  lleniiann,  it  in  a  Hpecies  of  m/Utti/r,
Tiued  liy  the  uhiiiti  of  kevernl  ihioiiipi  nn  Ibe  Miltie
lijii'>l-,  and  niiiiih  hn»  botui  etfei-ted  by  the  Miinv


eopyists  or  trnmimnriiiiix.  The  Thfogo»if  \»  inter-
eKtin^  n.4  lieini;  the  tiiont  ani-irnt  itioiiomrnt  tbiil
we  have  of  tin*  (ireck  ntylbolo^y.  When  we  con-
sider it  iLH  a  |KM^tit,  \%e  find  no  c<iiii]iu)iilioii  of  bd-
eient  tinien  no  Htamped  nith  a  rude  Hiuipti«:ily  of
rbantcter.  It  iH  without  luiniiionft  order  ot^  ar-
niiigeiuent,  aboiindu  with  dry  detuil-s  and  only
•leeiubiually  rises  lo  any  purticiilar  olevsttlou  of
liiiicy.  It  exU>biti4  that  cnide  irrugnlnrity  and
that  mixture  of  mennneK».  and  grandiMir  whiob
uhnractcriKe  a  Htrong  but  iincultivated  gonhiit.
The  ceiisnrc  of  Qiiiiitilian  that  "  Ilentixl  rtti«>Iy
!>oiirK,  nnd  a  ^reat  (iiirt  of  bini  is  oeetiiiieil  in  mere
niinieii,"  in  nndoiibtedly  merited.  The  Henteare
jiiMt  qnoted,  howi'Ver,  n'ferK  plainly  to  ibe  Thfivj-
OHH  alone,  while  the  fnllotrihg  M>rnis  exrliiitivejy
applicable  to  the  IVorIc  i Ntf  Itnt/i :  *'  Yet  he  in  diH-
TingotHhed by  uitefnl  KC^uterices  of  momlily,  ami

!  an  ndinirablo  swcetiies^  of  diction  and  oxjircMioii,
and  he  di-servfe  tbo  pnim  iu  the  middle  ntyle  of

I  writiug.''  The  pottage  i-etatitig  to  the  battle  of
ihe  tfodtt.  however,  ciin  not  surely  be  clawed  amou^

,  (he  H)iveilueiiH  uf  the  middle  style. Thiti  paiutnge,

I  together  witli  the  eomhnt  of  Zeus  and  T.vjdioena,
astonisltes  tim  reader  by  snddi'n  linrsts  of  rnthii-

I  siaftin,  for  which  the  prolix  auil  nerveless  nnrrativo

I  of  the  general  pM^ui  b»s  little  prepamd  him.  Ma-
Inift'y  biM^ukn  of  it  as  having  "a  nplendid  rmsh  and

.  tbundur  about  it/' and  even  as  "far  superior  in
ronocption,  though  inferior  iu  exeention,  lo  the
battle  of  the  godti  In  the  Uiml.''  Milton  has  bur-
rowed some  8ugg«stj>t>us  fntin  iheM.-  dewriplionii;
and  the  arining  of  the  .Messiah  fur  battle  in  PitrO'

I  ilinc  LoitJH  ubvionsly  imilaled  from  tTfe  nuignilleent
picture  of  Zeus  siinimoning  uU  the  tfrri>rs  of  bin
omni]iotenee  for  ilie  extirpation  oftbe  Tiljtns.

We  hfkve  »lso,  iiuder  the  iiami^  of  Ilertiod,  ii  frag-
ment of  4H()  lines  fn>in  a  poem  entitled  the  'H^n-

'  ynvia  or  tlic  genealogy  and  buttory  of  the  demigods,

'To  tills  )M>eni  s'liav  iiiiknowii  rhnpsodiHl  Imlm  iit-
tarhed  a  piere  on  thn  combat  betnoen  lleraelea
and  UycnuR,  contitining  a  deneriptinu  of  the  hero's
shield.  It  is  from  this  part  (hat  the  fragment  in
ipiestion  hears  the  tillc  of  tbe  ShieUI  of  tlfraele*
('.\cririr  'H;mkX*»vc). Modem  erities  think  that  to

,  the  Hfroot/ottyof  Hfniod  iM-loiiged  two  wurks  which

I  are  cite^l  by  tbe  aueients — tbe  one  nndi-r  the  titlft
of  Calalurfiir  of  ir»ttiri*  (KnroXrrynf  Vvvmnisv'S,  »  sort

i  of  ttreek  Debrett,  giving  the  history  of  tlioao  iiinr-
lal  woiui^n  wbo  bad  lit-conie  the  mothers  of  deiiii-
giids,  riud  tite  ntber  under  the  tltlu  of  the  MtyaXni
'HnJiK,  SO  nnme^l  be^iuitsc  tbe  bisttiry  of  vAch  wom-
an or  liendne  meiiliouei)  Ihereiii  eommeneml  witb
tlie  wolds  r\  nitj  {"  or  siicli  Hs'').  There  itn<  koIioUa
on  llesiod  by  Pioebis,  .Iidiji  Tstflxes,  Moschopnlns,
and  .)ohii  FmluKpathaiius;  hut  the  euriimeiilarr
by  Ai'istopbunes  of  Ityznntinni  is  lost.  Txetxes  b.-iH
also  left  a  life  of  the  poet,  wbieb  is  printed  in  nach'N
e4)iiiuu  of  llesiod.

Tlie  editiii  printTjiit  uf  Hmioil  appeared  at  Milan
in  149.1.  Oilier  menioralde  editious  are  those  of
(;ai8ford  (1814-'.MI\  Lebra  (14<i*2),  tVbomunn  {l>-4Hf>,
KiHH-hly  (1878),  and  I'iek  (ifii<7);  and  n Kb  explanti-
tory  itolen,  iIiom;  of  Palev,  in  Koglihh  (Irftil),  nnd
<»r  (tottling  (1843)  and  Flacb,  in  Latin  {lt!7ii). The

^  fnigmenis  are  collecte<1  by  Markscbefful  (Leipzig.
1840).  There  in  nn  English  prose  Iranalatiou  of
llestml  witb  Cnlliniaebus  nnd  Thenguis  in  tlio
llohn  Librar>  ;  and  a  spiriliMl  venie  translation  by
KItoii. See  iiImo  K/ucb's  nionogniph  on  Ihe  h>ii>

1  gunge  uf  He>iud,  lh:r  Hinlrfl  »/*■•  HfiwlHti  ||*C(it;


I1R8I0N&


8I«


llESTiA


mid  cm  tli«  oiyt1ii)1r>f*y,  Grnppe,  IHr  grieck.  Kulte
and  MifthffH,  i.'5t)7-tim.

Heai&n^  ['Htruivt]).  Tlic  daitghtcrof  Lnomcdou,
king  of  Td)J',  Hiid  of  Li'n<:'i|>i)(.  Uy  licr  dentil  «lie
wns  tn  apiiense  tlie  wi'utli  of  Postiidoii,  who,  on
nccoiitit  ot'  Iter  fiitlirr'i)  bronkiiig  bis  xvord,  wm  dov>
utating  tbe  land  witli  u  murino  iiinitHtcr.  Hern-
cleH  dcstroyiy)  the  iiionstor  auil  set  tbe  mnideii
f nw ;  l>nt  LnoniiMlon  wiiihfd  t«>  bieuk  bis  proinitie
to  tlie  bcro,  and  to  deprive  biiii  nf  bis  8tipiil(it«'d
pa.viiiptit.  Heniclfts  biok  Troy,  hIcw  Lmiint'doii
and  his  fiiitis,  and  gav»  Hi'«ioit^  to  kiit  txtiujiEuioii
T«laiui>n,  to  wbuiii  ttbo  buro  a  kuii,  Teiictir.

Besperia  {'EtnMpla).  The  WnHtorn  Land  (fmiii
t<rir*pu\\  re/iiier),  <li«"  imiii«  (•iveii  by  ihv  Gnwk  poetK
to  ItJily,  IjecniiHH  il  lay  wiwt  of  tjrewce.  In  iiiiila-
tioi]  of  tU(>ni,  ibi!  KoiEiaii  poftii  gave  Ibe  iiaint^  of
HfNprria  to  8pain,  \rtii<:b  tbt>y  Hniiu-t t ttii:»  uallm]
Ulttinu  Hu»)MTia  (I lor.  Carin.  i.ll6, 4)  to  diHliiij^oiab
it  fniiii  Italy,  nhicb  thi>y  iic:caiijuiialiy  called  Hen-
pcria  Magua. Sue  ItaLIA.

BoBpeifdes  ('Etrn-f^idf  r)-  "The  Wratcm  Haid-
6118,"  tblct!  cH'K'bratiiil  nyuipbH,  wlioae  genealogy
ia  diflyivutly  given  by  various  writcn*.  According
to  Hi-HiiK)  (  Tiiru;/.  215),  Ibcy  vera  the  danglil«nt  of
Nigbt,  witlioiit  a  fatl««r.  Diodornm,  on  the  olbti-
band,  njaUi-tt  tbuiii  to  bavo  had  for  t]i«ir  pareiitH
AtJaa  aud  Hc-Mpcriu,  daugtiter  of  Heaixinm  (Diod.
tiic.  iv.  "it).  Ill)  account  which  ia  followed  by  Mll-
tuu  in  bis  Comu*  (961  |.  Otliers,  boweviT,  to
uaimilntt!  tbeni  to  tbcir  nvigbboura  the  Ot'aiae
■ml  OurgonN,  cjdl  thr  HfHpiM-idii»  the  offspring  of
Phorcya  and  Coto.  Apolbniins  giv»«  their  uaiiiee
OH  Ai'gli*,  Hcapi-ni,  and  Krythvl^  (iv.  1447 ) ;  wbil«
Apollodoi'in^,  who  iiicivaMt's  thu  nuiubt'r  to  fonr,
calla  thcrii  Aegli>,  Kr.vthca.  HiMlia,  and  Arptbiisa
(ii. 5,  II).  Hi^Miud  niakt-s  tbi-iti  to  Iiav«  cUvelr.  "be-
yuud  thti  bright  ocean,"  uppimitu  to  whcro  Allan
Hrowl  HupporLing  the  beavcnN  {Tkeuy.  b\B]  i  and
wheu  Atlas  bad  bcun  fixed  att  a  monntain  In  the
exttvuiity  of  Lil»ya,  tbe  dweliiji);  of  Die  HcHpt-hdcfi
vriis  nsiially  placed  in  Ima  vicinity,  iliongli  Home
set  it  iu  the  couiiti'y  of  the  Hypcrtton-anH  (Ap()llo4l.

I.C.).

Acoonliiigtii  tbe  leguud,  when  thu  bridal  of  Zen^
aiHl  He)v  took  pLiiee,  the  dill'eivut  didliea  oanie
Trilb  utiplial  presentii  lur  the  latter,  and  among
tbetu  the  goddeas  of  Kavth,  wild  bnuichcn  bnvliig
goMeu  apples  groniiig  on  tlieio  (Hyg.  A»r/.  Js-
IroN.  ii.  '<i).  Heie,  greatly  admiring  1Ii«m<,  lie^gLHl
of  Earth  to  plant  them  iu  her  ganlens,  m  bieb  ex-
t4*iiiled  an  f:ir  an  Ktonnt  AiIiin.  The  IIeH)H>rides,  or
daiigbl«rH  of  AllaN,  were  direi'ted  lo  wntch  llieKe
treea;  but,  aM  tliey  were  Mtinuwlmt  remiHH  in  di.s-
ebargiiig  thin  duty,  and  frequently  jjlnoked  off'  tbe
appleti  theiiiMilveti,  Herd  Mtul  thither  a  largo  tter-
IMMit  to  guard  the  precloiii*  fruit.  TliiK  monster
wan  the  otl'opringor'J'ypUon  and  Kcliidna.  and  had
a  hiiiidreil  beadet,  no  that  it  never  slept.  Ai^eord-
ing  to  Plsiiiider,  Ihv  name  of  the  n-ptile  iran  Lndon.
One  of  Ihii  tunkH  iiapont-d  ii|ion  lleraelcK  by  Kiiryn-
tlieUH  waM  to  bring  tiim  Motne  of  tliiK  gohU-it  fruit.
For  thu  legend,  »i«e  HKItACLEii,  p.  701.

Hesperldam  InatUae. See  Hespkiiu'm;  Hxi»-

PRItlDK^t.

BeBpeiiB. S«e  Bhukmcc-

Heeperlum  {''E<mtpiov,  'ti<riripov  xtpat  I.  The
otoduni  Capn  Vorde  or  Cape  Roxo,  a  beaitlimd  on
the  west  coast  of  Africa.  »n«  ■•iie  of  ilie  farthest


point«  along  thai  ooiwt  tu  nbirh  the  knowledge  it
thu  uneienta  extended.  At  a  day's  jonrney  tntm
il  wai*  a  group  of  ihlaiHU  caDo^l  Hcfi|>«ridQui  Ismh
lae,  wrongly  identified  by  some  H'ith  tlie  Korluak-
lae  lubnlae.  They  ore  either  (be  Cape  de  Vcnjf
ialanila,  or,  ntoru  probably,  the  Uisnagos,  at  th«
muutb  of  ihe  Kio  Gnuide.

Heaperius  Slnna.  A  bay  oit  tUe  westeru  ama
of  Africa.

HeapSruB  {'E<rir*^().  The  evening  rtnr,  win  of
At^tiiieuti  and  Koe  (Aurora),  of  C'e)difiluH  ajid  Ed«,
or  of  Atlas.  lie  was  also  regarded  nit  Ibe  luinie  m
thu  nioniing  Hiar. S«a  Lt'ClKRit.

Heatia  (itrria). See  Focus.

Hestia  ('Eox/n  ,-  Ionic,  'Itrrii]).  Tbe  goddew  »t
the  heart li,  wli  ich  Ik  tbe  cmldeii)  of  tbe  M*t  tied  b'lUK.
$be  waadeenieil  tbo  fuiinder  and  niaintaincr  nl'lli»
family  and  tbe  State,  of  civic  conconl  aiMl  of  jiub-
lie  un'eretice  for  llie  gotln.  Shu  iraa  tbe  dangblsr
of  CrontiK  and  of  Khea;  sister  of  Zeiix,  I'oMtiilfMi,
HmU'jt,  HenS.and  Dentuter;  oneof  the  twelve  Olym-
pian deiticM.  frinii  Ihe  re«t  of  wlioni  sbe  waadiNUn-
gniabed  by  Ibe  fact  tluil.ati  Ibe  al»iding  gmlduicif
tbe  bouNfhold,  »\u*  never  left  Olyiupnti.  In  Uontei,
althongh  tbe  sanctity  of  tbe  henrib  Is  indeed  m-
ogiiized.  Its  yet  yto  find  no  mention  of  the  gwl-
d<*a«.  It  i(t  a  matter  of  disciiMion  whetliet  lltit
wait  by  iiceidcnr,  or  becauxe  in  that  {wriMl  tlie  per
Honiticntion  of  the  worship  of  the  beartb  lud  it)<<
attained  its  foil  perfection.  Having  Itrcii  wonni
by  Apollo  and  Poneidoa,  tdio  took  an  oath  ■>(  ft-
petniil  virginity;  ao  Zens  gninlod  her  tbo  biiuoiti
of  being  %vor»bipped,  ati  a  fnlclary  godiln*.  >i
every  hearth,  in  linaian  babitalions  lu  well  m  h>
the  temples  of  the  gods,  atid  of  being  calletl  b>
mind  aiuid  libalioim  at  Ibu  lieginniug  and  end  «(
every  HacHtlcu  ami  every  festal  eutertaiumnL
Hence  it  wan  that  every  luicrilice
begun  and  ended  with  a  liltution
to  Hestia,  ao  tliut  ahe  hud  a  sbnre
in  all  fenliviiies;  and  in  every
prayer,  as  well  ikt  in  all  tbe  pub-
lic forniH  of  Nolfmn  oaths,  her
name  waHiveited  bcfon*  llit^niinie
of  any  othur  gial.  Ja>(t  a(»  in
Ibu  home  her  coiiHecraled  biuirlb
formed  tbe  central  |Miiiit  of  lam-
ily  life,  at  which  I'miiily  fvstivalit
were  celebmt«d  and  where  Uilb
fltrangure  and  fngitivcii  found  a
Inrnpitsblu  asylum,  so  also  in  the
prylanuiini,  or  t<iwii  ball,  when'
the  Maei^-41  tire  was  ever  burning,
lirr  benrib  wan  tin*  centre  of  thu
life  of  the  cily,  indcpi^J  tif  ibe
wholo  State,  anil  of  thu  eolonira
wbiob  had  gone  forth  from  it.
litre,  an  repn.iiiei)lailve  of  the
$tale,  the  inKliest  ofllcials  saeriliceil  tn  lier.jatf
as  in  every  ])rivale  liotipw  tbe  father  or  nmthtff  "f
the  family  prf)vidt<4l  for  bi^r  worship.  Here  alw>
were  held  Ihe  public  dt'lilii'i'ationK,  and  tik'  ptihln'
Uaiiqiict  given  lo  deaerving  cilizrna  and  to  fomp
ambussadoiH.  Hitlier  iv|iaired  all  wlio  l»c->uiDf!lit
the  protection  of  the  Stale.  Hence  aUo  tlir  e«l-
onist^.  bonnd  for  distant  ftbon-M,  look  tbe  fin*  {-f
tlie  ]iiiblic  health  of  their  new  comniuuily'  1"
Monu  reejioctK,  tbe  centre  of  tbe  religions  life*'
Greeec  waa  Ibu  tllii  no  Ihe  hearth  of  Hestia  in  lb"
l>elpbic te.mplo,  Mburu  was tbe  •arrvii Oft^oW


UESTIAEOTIS


811


HKYNB


ItiiLVul),  whtob  tho  Greeks  oonniilcred  tu  bo  tlie
^central  poiDt  of  tlut  iiiUuttitml  viittli.  Hesliu
iitttiiilit  ill  cItMM'  cciiinfMrtiou  uitli  7a:iih  ns  th»  gtiiinl-
lou  of  tlit>  law  of  boApitnlity  utid  tif  tlu-  oalti.  8ljo
wiM  »1m>  initclt  nMw»'jat<!il  with  ll>(^mieh  ami  ufrvn
invokfil  ill  fiinjiiDctirtti  with  liiiii ;  McAtm,  an  tL«
l!ii<l(l<>«it  ol'  <|iiu't  diMii(.-<iticii.y,  ami  lEorniew;,  as  tLe
rrxllr-Hfi  ^<k1  v(  tniilt*  on  t1i»  pulili<-  Htntcts  nnd
i-(ki«)k,  n-iM-t-Mfiittiig  tK.-tw«H'it  tlicni  (lio  two  prinvi-
pul  vurit'lirx  of  Inininit  lilr.  AvronliiiK  to  a  view
tbiit  un*TwunlM  Imtjuiio  nirrfiit.  iirMlrr  tln^  jiiflii-
trricRut'itiiiluMiiiliri^t  ami  tnynlit-M,  h)i«*  whh  rvganl^d
an  |»TSoniryiiig  tlit<  i-iirlli,  uh  tlir  lixctl  M<nlre  of
tlif  world,  mill  vttvt  idcnlillt'd  ntlli  DetiiL^tcr  mid
Cybeli^.  Tliu  com?8|ioii(liiig  lU-ity  miioiig  rbe  Ki>-
luaiis  WM  Vc«lu<<|.  v.).  Tlic  Btutiicti  plitcvd  in  llu'
lirytaoea  repreoeuteU  lier,  in  acooritaiioo  with  hiT
iiKtnre,  as  a  belof;  with  ijnivu  nnd  yvt  K^iitli'  ex-
immsion,  oittiuK  or  statutiiiK  in  au  uttiiiide  nf  ri'Ht,
witb  a  BWptru  aa  bvr  attribtit<<.  Sliv  ia  iivver  rc|)-
nMMiilvd  M  nude,  wti^iivv  pvrbu[>«  so  fvw  eitiitiiLii
i»f  licr  have  lip**ii  foiiiid.  Tlii*  tmtttt  tTvltihrutt^l  of
b«r  t^xidliiif;  KtiitiifH  ix  ktiuwri  att  lliti  Viwta  tiiiiHti-
uiaiii,  ill  tim  Turluiiiu  uoUi-ctiou  at  Komc,  and  ua-
cribud  CdiijwoturaUy  to  CalaoiiH — a  forui  rolwd  iu
^uijilc  dru[>i^ry,  with  bair  miadonuMl  ami  wea^il]^
a  ^  vil ;  ber  ri;;ht  baud  Kuts  ou  her  hi|>,  and  bcr  li^ft
hand,  which  )h  pointing  upwards,  onco  held  a  lun^
Hlafl'  OS  her  sceptre.  It  repreiieuta  the  eai'tier  Greek
oonceptiou  of  dirinity.  ntistt-re  and  rigid,  yet  state-
ly nnd  iiii|itMing,  hlcnrlinj;  Kttnplicity  niid  eievority
nilli  ;;nu-i>  and  i«ndi^ni4^Hfi. Set*  Premier, /Tdfid-

»yfnlH  iTUbingun,  l^lvl).
I  HeatiaBotia  {'KtrrtntiTts).  (1)  Acconliug  Ui
BCrabo,  that  portion  uf  TbeHuily  which  lie:*  ueur
PiuduM,  and  lietwci'ii  that  mountain  and  Upper
Mftcvduiiifi.  Thill  dislriet  wa«  originally  the  vonn-
try  of  the  Dotlann,  who  are  ntntetl  by  iEernilotiiH
(i.  fiti)  nud  otburs  to  have  oucc  oci_'U]Med  tlio  n'giuim
orPindus.  Sec  THKf«»tAi.iA.  (i)  Or  Ki^^tiaka.  A
ilittrict  of  EhImm'h,  whotui  inhabitanli  an-  HUtd  to
buve  |HH>ided  the  ThesAidiaii  Hestiat'iJtitt.

-  Heatlieifl  (c'oTiawiK).  A»iMJCif«of  lilnrgy  which
■Don^iated  in  K'^''''^  a  fpitxt  lo  one  of  tho  triliftt  at
^Athens  by  tiuuie  pei-sou  bi^Ioiiging  to  the  trihv,  who

»tM  knowu  aa  iartarotp. See  Ilarpocration,  s.  v.

itrrtiiTtap.

Be8Us> A  deity  among  the  Oiintit,  tla*  sjinie  a«

Uars  of  tlic  Koinnnx  ( I.ti4-aii,  i.  Wb). Lnctantiiiii

\^lHr.  limt.  i.  21)  writea  the  nante  Urnvus.

Haajclliiia  ('lltrvxtof)'  tD  A  Greek  gi-nmimiriun
uf  Alvxaudriii,  who  lived  proljHhty  tuw  iinl^  l\n^  end
•>f  the  fourth  century  a.u.  He  composed,  with  the
afwiKtauee  tif  thL'  ^^o^k»  of  earliei'  ]c:iico;;ra|ilieni
(citpeeiully  the  UtpiffrytintyTfTtv  of  DiogeiiiaDim|,  a
lexieuii  (rXcifrirm),  which  butt  come  down  lo  an  in
II  very  CHMifniM-d  forni,  Iittt  ift  n»ver(helt^«M  among
the  nioiit  iin[Kirtunt  HonifuM  of  our  knowbtdgu  uf
the  Greek  hingiia^e,  and  throws  luiicb  light  on
the  interpn-tation  and  criticisiu  of  Greek  poet^,
omtuni,  bi^toriaua,  and  physicians.  Kditions  by
AIlM^rli  aod  KnLnkeii  (Leyilen,  IT-lti-tiG),  with  nd-
ilittunti  by  Schou  (Leipzig,  l7£Ki) ;  and  by  M. Schmidt
(5  vid».  li:J08-Cl).  The  Cliristiau  glosses,  which  are
inteiiiobKioiiN,  bavci  befti  wparutely  edilrd  by
Kmesli  il*i[»/.ig,  ITKi).  See  Ranke,  Dr  I.tj.  ffmych.
t'tvo  Oriijine  (Qticdlinbiirg,  1631). (2)  A  Milesian,

Jle«lllln!»lrifl,  who  liveil  about  A. D.&40,  and  wrote
OHomattiam  or biognipliy  of  ilbistrions men

li.  by  OrcUi,  l?Mtl),  and  a  ChroNiroM  f»r  nyn*i|isi«


of  aniveiwiil  bintory,  in  six  {>art«,  be^nniiifr  with
Bebm,  the  alleged  fonndcr  of  tho  Aiwyriaii  SUiie.
and  ending  witb  the  death  of  tli»  Ryxanrlne  eoi~
littnir,  Anaatasin*  f.  (a.i>.  &IH).  The  latter  work  is
bitit..  See  Knunhachiir,(irutniriiiii der bffzaMtinUthen
Literattir  <iu  I.  MUller'a  Bandbuch,  vol.  ix.),  pp.  110
foil.

Hetaerae  {iralpail Sw  Mkmktuxx.

Hetaeri  {tTaipot,  "  comnwlcB  ").  The  draignatioD
of  all  ftee  Moccdoniaim  wbn  wirt*  ready  to  join  in
tUe  defence  of  their  country  ;  HMpecially  tim  noide-
men  who  composed  the  heavy  cavalry,  an  con-
tniAted  with  the  infantry  (ir<f*rai/Mt)  of  the  royal
gtmnl.

Hetaerlae  (^ai^rint).  The  common  name  in
Greece  for  nit  oaiuKiiationN  having  any  particular
object,  but  cbielly  for  political  clnba,  often  of  »
Mcret  cbanicter,  for  the  udvancemeut  of  certain
ioteretita  in  tbi3  Htate.  In  many  cnspx  their  nit^m-
bers  only  ainietl  nt  iiMiftting  our  annthrr  a^  randi-
dateafor  public  ofllccor  in  lanMiiitx  ;  but  iii;caAion-
ally  they  also  workeil  for  the  victory  of  tlicir  party
and  forucbaiige  iu  the  coustitntiot]. Hce  Kiianom.

Hetricflium, A  l^^wu  of  the  Itnittii.

Hetmria. See  KTitt.'KlA.

Hexaemgron. Si>e  PRACONTltJS.

Hexaph6ram. See  Lectica.

HexapdUa See  L>uiu$;  Lkbuos.

Haxaat^loa. A  (ttnipluor  like  bnilding  having

six  columuM  in  front- S**e  Trmi-hm.

Heyue.  CmtisTiAX  Gorrijiu.  A  Gennaii  cbn«i-
ca1  mHiolar,  born  at  Chemnitz  in  Saxony,  8e[itetnlN-r
25,  17^9.  His  father  was  a  poor  weaver,  and  for  »
iiiimbdrof  ycarMllio  Bon  struggled  with  puvtirfy and
disappointment,  being  aomi^timce  reduced  alimiHl
to  avltial  Htarvatiea.  In  17fi:t,  however,  he  M^viiriHl
the  {toaition  of  uiidur-elerk  in  llit^  Hrlihl  Library  at
Droadcn,  and  before  long  publinbed  an  i^liiion  of
Tibnllas  ( ITWi ),  anil  one  of  the  Enchirution  of
EpictetuK  {1T;')6),  worktt  which  won  for  him  the
notice  of  the  great  Dutch  scholar  Unbukm  of  Lt-y-
deu.  The  Si-ven  Years'  War  occurring  at  this
tinnr  iiiifoitmiately  threw  Heync  out  of  employ-
ment, ami  rcdncfd  him  to  his  former  Htniilit,  bin
only  H<nirce  of  inc<mie  being  the  hack-work  which
lie  did  for  tbo  bookaellen*.  TIiIh  period  of  want,
however,  was  ISnally  endix)  by  hiH  nppointmLMit,
thiinigh  the  favour  of  Kuhuken.  to  the  cbair  of
Elo(|ticnce  at  the  I'niversity  of  Gutlinguii,an  oflieo
,  which  he  buld  until  bis  death,  and  iu  which  Iuh
j  profound  KclnditrHblp  and  stiuiulnliog  IcetnicK
'  rais«^d  tlm  n.^pntalion  of  Gottingru  to  an  umpie»-
'  tioned  pre-eminence  among  tlie  nuivendlies  of
Genuauy.  U  is  ttaiil  that  bo  tnnued  and  Hciit
forth  inui-o  tliiin  130  prufe«MirM.  He  dieil  on  July
U,  181*2.  lleyne's  pnncipal  workn  an<  Ink  pfiiiion
of  Vergil  (-1  vol*.  1767.  new  ed.  183(m);  of  I'indar
077:t),ot  AHlwb»rnK(I7CS,2(led  ItK«),and  oflb«
liiad  in  eight  V(dt4,  Wr^ifi).  il«  a\»o  put  furlh  a  num-
ber of  tranK]iitton*<  of  the  riaaaiee;  six  vuIiuuch  of
inivcvllnnies  in  bin  OpHHcula  J<'a<frM{call7K>-le!l'J):
uiid  bt'tween  "OOO  and  HOOO  book  reviews  in  Ibe
iiim\H»}tr  Gclehrtr  Aniriifrn,  of  which  lie  was  the
editor  for  more  than  thirty  years.  His  life  has
been  written  by  biaHon-in-law  Kr«n>n  (Gnttingen,
lHi:i).  1^  also  Carlylv,  MiBwttamet,  vol.  ii.  and
Rurtiiiiii,  Of»chifkte  tirr  c(a»w.  t'hilologie,  pp.  47(»-
.VKXMuiiicb.  1883).


KlltKltNIA


«l«


HlHbAfOUS


Hibeniia  (  ul^i ciilU'it  Ieru4,  Ivwtta,  hihI  Iu-

vema  ;  'UjtVT),  'U/M-ic  vrjativ,  'lavfiivia  !  Ki'llir,  Kri).
Tlin  aiit:iciil  imtm-  nf  In-liiiiil,  wliicli  ih  Miid  tu
liiivo  ItiH'ti  ilorivHl  fi-i)iii  thi.'  muin!  of  ide  curly  itt-
liiiliilADt«  of  its  kuulImtii  r-oflpii,  tilt*  Ii)v»*rtii  CloCtf>-
rot),  lb  is  tiiiMitiniiiMl  ill  tlio  )mi>)i(l<>~Orpliic  pm^m
mi  tlifi  Argniiuiitic  cxpfilititin  (lliii'  llfAl,  atnl  by
AriAlutlt^  {He  .Vfiiirfd.  :il,  who  OiMKTilwt  it  as  1>''"K
hi  the  ncfjin  Iwymul  tbu  Pillunj  of  }ifrfJi\fti.
tttmbti  tia\H  lluit  it  U  Itio  riilil  tn  W  Eiiorc  Itmii
Itiirely  habitable;  \vliiire»«  Mulu  HpeulcH  iifitM  brrb-
nffp  nx  HO  rich  an  to  cm\t*o  ibit  niMli*  in  tmt  iiiilil
tliey  burst  with  it.  Roliiius  mrMitiiniH  [hu  fiirt  tliat
thcro  nrc  no  snakes  in  tli»  iHlniiil,niMl  picliirfs  the
iiiUabitaute  lut  bo  wm-tlke  tbal  on  the  birib  ol'  n
luslo  child  the  mother  pluceH  the  lintt  bit  of  fm»d
in  its  month  on  the  point  uf  a  KWf»nl.  Ptirlemy
i;irra  the  names  of  the  lii'crH  aixl  pi-uuiunt-oriea,
Jtntl  ilf>!tvrib«-fi  tlie  nnlliuo  of  the  I'oiiRt  witli  Bur-
prttting  ai-fiimi-y.  l|i>  iiUn  iiniiips  the  priiti'ipiil
tribe?!  nf  t\u'  iHlMiiil — thf  Vxnnieiiii  in  UUti*r,  the
Nnffnatae  in  Conimii^bt,  l.bp  L'tenii  in  >liiii)tlcr,
niicl  tho  Bri(;iiMt<^  ami  nthptx  in  TjoiiiHt«r.  On  tUe
eirnsit  vrufc  Iwu  Iowiin — McunpJA  anil  Kbbinii  (lltib-
liii).  Th^  HiMiiaiiH  niixlc  no  attiiinpt  to  r(ini|a«r
tht*  iHlnnd.  thuu){h  tlh-y  )i>''">'d  hiiinn  kiiixvliMJgi-
of  it  fruin  the  Hrilinh  tiadi^m  who  vi>i(i'il  ilH  couHt.

Hlcesia  'Witriny.  OneoftheAeulttii- Iiitt)iliie(q.v.l.

HtcStaa  ['Uirat  or  'Ixtriji).  (I)  A  Syrsciiwtu.
conteiuporary  with  the  younger  DioaysioH  and  Ti-


inoltHHi.  lie  WNM  nt  tin>t  a  Iriuml  nf  Llimi,
whniff  ilratli  (U.C.  ;ij.1)  tiiN  uifr  Arcit^  ami  bia  n4
Aribtniiiach(S  plaiy?il  tlteinwlvua  under  the  cbiv  af
Ilii-ctnrt;  Init  be  was  pi>n*nu4t«'tl.  iintwith«taii(UBg,
tn  coiiwnt  to  tbiMr  ()i-Ktnir[iun.  A  few  yi*ar<i  liunr
he  iM.tcanti^  tyrant  of  l>fonliiit,  Hu  carried  ou  mat
AgninKt  the  yonn«;er  Dioiiyrtiui^  uhoin  he  dcfratcd,
Aiul  had  niiule  tiiniitclf  muHt«r  of  thr.  wliole  ctty,
flxenpt  th«  islaud  citaib-l,  wlicn  Tiniok'on  laitilnl
in  Sicily,  n.O.:i44.  Hit^ctaH  ibeii  np)MkM'd  TiuKilnm
and  rnlb-41  in  the  aid  of  the  CaribiiKtU'n'i*-  ^'■it  be
was  <lefeftt«d  and  pnl  t«  denlli  by  Timoleon.  m*.
'X&  or  Xti*.  {•£)  Tyrant  of  Syrncii«>.  during  th*-  in*
trrvnl  Itctwot'n  the  reign  i*f  Afntlbocl<*K  nwl  that
of  ryrrhnu.  Hedefi-atwl  riiintiat.  tymnl  of  Affri-
gfutinn,  and  wa»  hiniocir  def*Nit*'il  by  I  he  Cjirtlw-
ginian^.  After  a  reign  of  nine  yiu»n»  ^B,C.  SUHfTSV
he  «!W  expelli-d  from  S^rradose.

HlompsaJ.  |ll  Sun  of  Micip***,  ktiig  of  \nmid-
ill,  and  >;ianiUwja  of  MaainiH^n,  nninlrrwl  bj  lu
gnrtba,  soon  aft^^r  the  death  of  Micipt^a,  B.i'.  11^.
(i|  King  of  Nnmidia.  grandwrn  or  gn-at-gruinlMin
of  MusiniK^ia,  and  fat  her  of  J  nba.  He  ap|icnrv  to  haw
revei%'ed  the  nnvereignry  of  part  nf  Numtdil  ifln
the  .IngnrtbinH  War.  Hn  naa  rxpelleil  from  hi*
kingdom  by  Cn.  Dondtliia  Attenobarbn*.  flie  lead-
<^r  of  the  Marian  pJirly  In  Africa,  Unt  wan  mili^nt
by  Pomiioy  in  HI. Hiempttal  wrote  Rome  wi>rk*m

I  rhu Fnnic language,  which  are  cil«d  by  Ralliirf

I  ittujnrtkn,  17).


*>^^


fJsS*


SJ-J"


'  -^.


>->.  ,


•^m^


Vtra  or  Uw  Phryftan  RtMBTMH  (torn  Uw  Ctty  OUn


Hiera. (!)  Sep  Arouaie  Isw'*

t^Alc. (*2)  8ee  AkuaTSS.

HierapJUis  CtrpcriRJUr).  (1)^
fity  of  Great  Phrygia.  near  th*
Maennder,  and  an  early  ftrnt  of
rinictianity.  mentioned  in  8t.
P»iirn  KptHtle  to  the  t'olnaaiaiM
(iv.  13).  Hem  f'ybrU  «*•
irnr^bippcd.  EpictriiiA  was  ■
naliro  of  Hiern  poll*,  fi)
Formerly  llAMnVcf.  (  Bmp^tuX
a  city  in the tiortbea«t  of


I


I


I
I


I


Syria,  oae  of  llw  clil«f  tteatu  of  the  wontbtp  ol  As-

Hieratic  'Wrltiag. See  tilKKuoLYPUIfs.

Biero  (Upttf).  (I)  A  Hioilion  wbu  huockwIimI  lii»
lirfttiicr  (jtiloii  OB  tyraut  of  Syracuse,  B.c.  4Tt^.  Hf
c<imiuitto4l  niMiy  actfluf  violeitetf.eiicoiiniKtttl  n]mvh.
mil  k*>[)t  1%  ntcrcouary  fjiianl  arouml  hU  )ivrs»ii.
Ifu  hom  fiiiiliiliotiH  tif  vxtcutlhiK  bin  tloiiiiiiion.  anil
bix  nltciiijits  jtrnvcd  KUCcetMfiil.  AL'ttT  llii<  iluiilli
«f  Tliervii  uf  Aj^r(jL>iitiiD),  Hit-n*  tlt^fcatoil  bm  win
TbraitydacaH,  wbo  wimMMHi  nro-rwiinlHrxpfUfil  Ity
hm  roQiitrytnen.  Ifu  toirk  Numi»  »iitl  ('ittiinu,  mtil,
biiviiij;  ilru'vii  nxrny  lli«*  iohabiluiilH  tVoiii  IhiUi
townv.  Ffi'lacwl  thvui  by  Synu-iisan  mui  \'vUt\Hni-
IK'SJAii  fiilmiifllM,  Hi-  rb}ttip-<I  tbo  iiiitiM>  t>r('Atiiiiit
to  Avtnu,  uml  iw  Iiiiiiju'lt' ivfuinunt  ibr  lillc  of  Attt-
tiHHiui  (Airvnioc>.  Huviiig  jiMiivd  liU  Herl  tti  Hint
nl'  lbt>  |H-iipbi  of  (.'iiniAf,  bi*  hiiccihsIriI  ill  cIcariliK
tbe  Tyrrlifiiiiiu  SeA  oftbe  KtniNcan  aod  otbcr  |>i-
ratt^tt  wbi>  iiiluetfil  ir.  Mi:*  cbarlota  r(>iH'nt<'<lly
won  tbc  prize  nt  tbc  Olyitipiu  lianuM,  ami  l)ie  Mio-
rL-HH  oil  tbune  occu-sioiik  formcil  rbu  tUt>iii<>  iif  nev-
rnil  iif  tbt;  ntlL*fl  of  I'ltulnr,  who  wim  bin  ^iicHt  aitil
fm-iitl.  Afw?byl(i8,  Siniouidets  ltaccby)iib.>it,  and
E|Hc-b4nrinn  wen*  iil«>  well  rwi'ivi**!  nt  Ibf  t-mirt
tif  Hii'm,  wbti  wi»«  finiil  of  tilt;  M>ci<*ty  id'  Iriiniml
niPii.  IliN  tuliiiiiH'y  witb  SHiuiniib>«  in  tliu  Aiib.jfL'l
«>f  Xi'iiit|iboti'N  ili:tli>f{iii>  I'litillfd  h'piav.  Hier»
ilioil  at  Cataiiu,  B.t*.  4ti7,  ami  wiui  Hiicci^cdtHi  by
liiH  lirntbcr  Tbratiybtibi!),  wlio  bad  all  Wis  fiiiilts
wjtboiit  any  of  hU  gowl  qnalitic;!,  and  wim  at
liiHt  ilrivifii  ttvfity  by  tilt*  SyriMTUsaint.  wbu  re-
nton-d  lliL'  fiiivemiueiit  to  tbu  (.-ouiDiuuweaUb
(Diiid.  Sifi.  x\.  4H  foil,).  C^i  Tbi-  Hf;4.'ot)d  of  tbo
tiaiQH.  Mm  of  Ilicrnfles,  a  wealtby  citizt»n  tif  Hyiii-
vitiM*,  ami  a  duHt'iiinlaiit  of  (ivbtn,  diftfin^iiiHbeil
hiuifwlf  iu  early  life  by  bin  brillmnt  t|iiaLiiii>->,  anil
wrvc4l  \^itll  diittiavtinii  uIn>  itnili>r  Pyrrbii.i  in  Iiim
Sicilian  airupai^iiH.  Aft^ir  I'yrrlniH  b;id  mubb-iily
Bt»anduni?(l  Sicily. tb«iSyraiMwan«  found  tli<*nisi!!vi-ji
Ibroatvut'd  on  oiic  mIiIo  by  tlio  Carllia^iniaiiH  und
on  tbt*  oilnr  by  tbt*  Maim>rtint>.s,  n  hand  of  <'iiiii|iu-
rian  iiii*n-pnarit>fi,  nbo  lnul  tivai-lti-ioiihly  lakun  \»n*-
iM^«i«i»ii  of  MvKMina.  Tlie  HynicdHUii  troops,  beiii<;
ill  wiiUl  iif  a  trtidty  lender,  clnwo  Hieru  by  a4Tlii-
tiialioii,and  tbi«  tiuinit*-'<  mid  citiziMis,  after  sonn^di--
liiiir.  laliliod  tbo  idxiiw,  ll.c.  '^'i.  After  variolic
Biiccf!«>tfnl  oporatlou!*  HHainst  ibe  Miinirrtint^K,  Ill-
pro  rBtHrn**d  l»  Syraca»e,  wlier^,  tlin>nj;li  Hiti  in-
ihlencr'  of  L4*p(ine4,  ltt8  fiitbvi'>in-law,  ;i  b■allill^
iiiati  aiiKiii}!  till*  ai'iHlorralir  luirly,  Im  wuk  pio-
ctainii^l  kiiiK.  IK'-OTO.  8linrrly  aflrrwardM  iUi<  Ma-
iiii-rlint'H  at  Mi-M^ana  <|0:in>-llfd  with  iIih  (.'urlbii-
f^inlanx,  "lio  bud  niun:i^<>-d  to  nitrixlmi-  a  giirri<Min
into  lb«!>  ciliMlfl,  mid  drove  (Ikiii  out,  upon  wbit'b
tlie  C'artli»K>iiiaii'*  itivitod  Hii-vo  to  join  liin  foTvvn
to  llioins  in  ordt-r  to  drivi^  ibi*  Matiii>iliii«-«  m\l  of
SJrily.  flturo  bavin);  aMwnted.encitniiK'd  ninliTlbo
watH  of  Mi*H)>anu  uu  uin.'  Hide,  and  tbb  C'artbattiii-
iaiiM  hxcd  tbuir  carap  on  tbu  otli^r,  while  tlndr
Htpimlroh  yuanleil  tlu-  Htrail.  Tbn  MaiiirriiiH'M,
uieaitwbiU',  bad  applieil  to  tbc  RnniatiH  for  HKAJNt-
aiic«,  clainiiot;  a  (mininon  origin  witli  tboin,  att  betn;;
«lL-t»ct:iidrd  fioni  Mam,  calle<l  Mainorx  tii  tim  Oihciui
]au};naK*^ ;  and  lioin*  «agorly  wrizt-d  tbi.H  oppurlil-
llity  of  obUiiiint;  a  ftioting  in  Sicily.  Tlit-  coniMil
AppiUH  Cla;uIinM  luMrcbtMl  to  Kbt-Kioui,  ami,  bav-
iii^  roiilnved  to  paMH  thc-Nlniit  in  Ibe  ni};lit  tiiioli-
iwrved  by  tbo  Cartbaginiaii  cniittcrx,  be  Hiirpritted
Hinro'H  camp,  roiitwl  tlie  sotdjari,  and  iddif*4<)d  the


luuimrcb  bimwif  U*  sovk  safety  in  Rigbt.  Tbo
fODsnl  ti4>xt  at(a<;kMl  (bti  Cartliaglninii  eantp  nitli
tbn  Haine  Hiii!<.;e)t>«,  and  tbi-s  wait  ibe  Itnglunlug  uf
tbu  Firwt  Funic  War,  B.i'.  'iK>.  In  thu  followtug
ytiar  Ibr  KoinaiiH  took  'I'miioinenliiui  aud  C'alatin
and  udvHnet-tl  |o  tbu  walitt  uf  Syrauuw;,  \\  ben  111-
vro  HUcd  for  |»t'a(-e,  wbicb  bu  obtained  ou  condition
of  paying  lint  tideiitM  of  xdvvr  and  ftup[llyin^  tbe
Kouuin  iiniiy  wltb  [iroviniunef.  He  pmictindly  fiit-
Hllrtl  bix  eii};at;euieniK,  n-tiitiiuiii;!  failbfitl  to  Itomo
tlnrin^  llie  wljole  of  tbe  war.  and  li\  Uit*  tiiip|dies
WiMof  gre.al  M-i'vien  to  tbe  Koniaii  nniiiea,  04t|toeitll-
ly  during  (be  tonj;  wiogex  of  Atcr<Kenli>in  and  [Jly-
t)a«;iini.  Hiero  wam  iiududetl  in  thv  ]wai>o  btttwt^cii
Rottio  and  Cartbagu,  by  wkioli  bui  territories  wora


I'oiH  tif  llirm  It,

Mctirvdtobiui,  aud  be  nMiiained  in  Menditblp  wiih
botli  8tBt(w.  He  ev«ii  nwilsitMl  Cartliugv  at  a  very
critical  moiU'POt  by  fteiidiii^  lier  Mnptdted  of  provi-
Hiotiit  dnriiij;  tbe  war  wliirb  idie  bud  t>i  Mimtain
a^taiiiHl  ber  ineiTenarieK.  Tbe  [H<riiHl  of  |H>ace
wbicti  ela[Mwd  bKtn'04>n  thv  end  of  llie  Firxt  and
tin*  be^iniiiiiK  of  the  8ucuiid  Funic  Wiit'!i,  from  n.c,
'i41  to  '2IH,  was  inOHt  glorioai)  for  lIi<-ro  and  iiioHt
pnmpi-prits  fin  Syraruite.  Cuinineicu  anil  a^rii'iilt-
lite  Ibinristit^it,  and  wi-iUcb  and  popnlation  in-
creaAcd  to  an  extraordinary  degree.  Hiero  paid
purticniar  attention  to  tUo  udtniinittratioii  of  iba
iinancrs.  and  niaile  wiws  reRniatioiiH  for  tbe  col-
leotinn  of  the  titli"  or  tax  on  ]«nd,  wbicb  ii*-
inaiiied  iti  force  lbroii(;lKiiit  Hictly  Ion;;  after  bin
time,  and  an;  nn-nlinnutl  witli  praiiK  by  Cicvm  ivt
ibe  Irj'  flia'oniai.  Hiero  ilitrodni'iil  Ibe  rnKloiii
of  farniiii>;  oal  tbe  lax  Kvery  year  by  mielioii.
He  embiilliHiied  and  Mlren;;tbenHl  SyracUHe,  and
Liiil[.  birgi'^  HbipH.  Arcbinn-deA  lived  under  Mirio'N
ivi^n.  Wlieii  tbo  Second  Funic  War  broke  onl,
Hiero  cuiitiutu-tl  true  to  bw  Homau  alliance,  auil,
aller  tbe  Tra:<ini4^ii.au  defeat,  bo  atnl  a  tteet  Ut
OHtiit  wiLb  provlKiiiii!t  and  otbet  giftn,  aiiil  ii  bixty
of  li]{bt  LriKipH  to  tbc  aHaintance  of  Rome.  Ho
lived  ki  s<.-«  tbe  battle  r)f  C'anniK'.  after  wbieti  Idi
f>oii  Geloii  i'ltibraced  ibe  jtart  nf  tbe  (.'ni'lbiitiliiiaiiK.
fieinn,  buvvever,  died,  nut  witliniit  nnnpivion  of
vio]i<iicu,  and  Hiero  blmMdf,  Immii^  pant  iiinely
yearn  of  age,  vtidnl  bio  dayt  kooii  afieLNvanln  {nx:
*JIfi),  leaving  tliu  eivwu  to  bis  grandfton,  Hlvroii-
ymuM.

Hiero  i'Uiioiy  7  TfpovKJtoe).  A  dialogue  of  Xeli-
opbou  Ustwoen  Kiug  Hiero  aud  tbc  poet  !Siinoni<ieii.
S«iparat«editiona  by  Ilreit45ubacb^lti47),and  Ilutden

Hierdotea  ('UpoKXijt).  (1)  A  rbeloheian  of  Ala-
ttandn,  in  L'aria,  who  lived  in  tbe  brj^iniiing  id'
tb<>  lint  century  before  tbe  Cbrixtian  era.  Iln
excelled  in  wbat  Cii:eR>  termed  tb«  AMatic  Htyle
nf  eloqiieiioe  iC'ic.  Ov  tjrnl.  li.  5i3,)  (2)  A  lawyer,
who  uride  a  work  on  veterinary  meilirinr,  ad-
dr^-iMnd  to  CAMMiauiiA  Uaiuiiia.  of  ^vbtrh  tlin-o  ebu|»-


UIBKODULI


»U


HlliHOULYriill>


ters  nre  pi'Mervvd  in  llin  8ixt««iitb  book  of  the
"GcoiHUiica.'*  (See  Gkoponicl)  (3)  Styled  "  Ibv
grain  I  lilt  rtiku/'  fur  rliHiinrtiou'tt  itakv  frvin  Iho  plii-
Itmoplier  of  tlio  »ainR  ^an)•^,  a  Greek  writer  »ni>-
powil  to  Imvo  Ittwii  ctint«iiiiM)inry  x\ith  Jiistiiiiaii,
but  of  wliniii  iiiii<  ibiiig  »t  KuiBl  in  curtain — tbaL  bt*
was  iiiirerior  ut  ihw  tutiih  century.  H«  inmiKweiJ,
iitidfT  tlio  lillo  of  2iWitS7/xor  ("TravfUiiix  Coiii-
pAiiimi''),  a  de8cri|ition  of  tbu  sixty-nmr  iiri»viin!tHi
timt  fonrx'd  llio  Byzantine  Kiii}niv  uiid  of  ilii<  riticM
«i1niil<>i|  ill  Ihciii.  K<1.  Uy  Fiirtli(--y  (Huiliii,  lS(i4j).
(■Il  A  \tiw  Platoiiisl,  who  tiiMirislied  at  Alrxnudiin
niHint  tlm  niiddlo  uf  tl)E>  Dftb  coiitiiry  a.p.  Ho  Iiok
loft  a  commentftvy  on  tbe  Golfleii  Verscfl  of  Pyrb«K-
•HIM  ami  a  Ireatittu  xii  Ptuviileiicv,  Dedtiny,  and
i''rrt!-will.  Tlio  aim  of  Hiorocli-n  \n  to  nhovr  llie
iigrcomt'iit  wliich  »'xUt»*  In  n'hptTt  of  tht'ne  dor-
trJiuvi  brtwci'ii  PliUo  iiiid  AriHtotlo  and  to  ri>fiitM
tUo  ftyit|i-iiiM  of  K|iiuiinu  and  tbo  Htoics.  W*!  b:ivu
only  extracts  from  ibis  luilei-  work  uiado  by  Pbo-
tiiiK  and  an  abridguiout  by  au  unknown  band.
Stobai-'its  has  [irL'aurvtfd  for  us  fruj;mt;ntji  of  a  work
of  Jlivruv1o6  on  thi'  nrorflUip  of  Mn?  ^■'<Ik  and  of
ttovonil  otbfr  iirodnvliaiiH  of  bi^.  Tlicre  exiHta
stso.  inidur  lbs  iiiiiue  of  llicrocles.  a  I'oIU'cJtion  of
aniiiKiii}(  nTi<>cdnt«>H  {  Atrrtta,  Fatvfian  ),  Kivinfi  an
arronnt  of  the  ridittiiloiiH  artioim  and  HiiyinKH  of
lH)ok  -  litariu'd  mvu  and  iiiiduiitd  (  a )(oXaa-TiKoi  ).
Ainoii^;  tlii'.ni  art;  to  bo  fuuiul  tbe  ongiindK  of  xev-
enil  |itx>f«>«M.-dly  modurn  Juki's,  and  tbcy  fnrnJKli  a
model  for  tliv  ttnitnueraUlc  (iunniin  vritticisiun  at
tbttoxprnsoof  tbe  (ypk'al  Heir  l*ri>fes*>r.  The  beat
ediiion  of  tUf!  foitunontary  ou  t  bo  Golden  Versos  and
of  tbu  fnigineiilit,  etc.,  is  tb»t  of  Wnrron  (London,
174"i).  (&)  Aprvfoctof  Ilitby!iin,  and  afterwards  of
Alvxandrin,  wlio  is  sAid  hy  Laotaiitinit  to  bave  been
tli«  |irineipnl  adviser  of  the  perswjntion  of  the
CliristiauA  iu  the  reign  of  Dioolotian  (Lactant.  /ii«f.
lUr.  V,  2;  Jje  Morte  I'crtec.  17).  He  also  wrot«  two
works  against  Christianity,  pntitled  A«»yoi  ^XuX^-
6tit  *r/jA(  Toii  Xpurruii'oit  ("Tnitb-Iovinn  words
to  l\i«  CliriHtians"),  in  wliirb,  acconling  to  IjBC-
tanliim,  lie  t-iidfavoiirrd  li>  hIiow  tb»t  tb>^  8f;ript-
uroA  overtUrotT  tbetuaelvea  by  tbe  ooiitradicttona
with  wbicb  Uiey  abound.  Hit  alitu  itiviled  Paul,
Petur,  and  the  other  diocipk'o,  &h  propagntora  of
faluebood.  He  endeavoured  to  de»tn>y  l.h«  effect
of  Ibe  Saviour's  utimcle^,  tboiigb  lio  did  not  deuy
tbe  tnitb  of  tbeiii.  He  aUo  aimi;d  to  show  that  lik«
tbingii,  or  even  ^renter,  bad  been  iloiie  by  Apollo-
uiari  of  Tyann.  See  tbt>  rbapt«r  on-  AjxdloninK  of
Tyuiia  ill  Dyer'n  HoHm  in  firffne,  pp.  '^7-'266  (Lon-
don, l-'Ol),  and  FrofuaMorGildentliMVnVeMny.

Hierodali  {IfptiiavXai,  "  leuiplu  servantH'').  Tbe
name  for  all  wbo  were  vloscly  connected  witli  the
■service  of  u  sanctuary,  and  e(>i>eeiBl)y  auch  aa  vectv
bound  to  perform  certain  aervicen, obligations,  and
duties  to  tho  name,  and  iu  part  lit^e<l  as  a  kind  of
bondmen  upon  iit*  land.  We  find  tbcm  forming  »
roiiHiderabte  population  in  Axin:  c.  g.  nt  Comiina
in  Cnppadocia.  Iliere  were  more  tbau  tiOOO  of  them,
wbo  with  their  d«'»t<'eiidantB  belonged!  as  alavt*H  to
tim  goddem  called  Euyo  \>y  the  Gre«k(t.  They
itiTved  liA  laboiirvrH  on  tbe  ej4tale»  of  the  temple,
niid  pt-rfiirnie^l  tbe  bnmblesi  oftices  n*  bewerw  of
wimhI  and  drHWere  of  water. See  AF.niTt'rs.

The  Delphic  sanctuary  of  Apollo  had  nimilu'
ininifitnintit  from  a  ver>~  early  date,  an  bad  also  the
t'emple  of  Aphn>dit<S  on  Mount  Kryx  in  Sicily.  In
Ibe  t^nie  nmiiner  Aphrodite  of  Corinth,  in  lh«
tloiiriMliiiig  tinioi*  of  ibiit  city,  bad  over  KHHi  ^iilit


detlieatc'd  to  her  serviw.  They  addm]  brillJAn«y
and  ln»tn*  t<>  her  worship,  luid  living  a«  prostitulM
paid  a  portion  of  th^ir  earnings  to  the  j^iMldewM
trilmt*-. K<e  Mkiirtkix.

BieroglypbiCB I'ttpoyXutfuKa,  »e,  yp^i^MOTi)  «
Hieroglypba  (in  Kg>'ptian,  enlle*! Srfrr  khan  «r
"iiivine  wonU"). Piciure«  of  ohjei-ta  iim-iI  tors-
press  either  sonnds,  wohIh,  or  idea« Hiero^lx-plui
have  lieen n»ed  by  several nations  aiitong  thfRi
tbu  Mexican  Aztecs,  but  the  word  is  ofteiM<»t  cm;^
phiyed  of  tbi*  srslem of  the  aiieient  l^gypi
Their  iuveiilion  in  Eg>"pt  was  aseribe*!  if  t\>«
Thoth. Pliny  the  Elder  8|>ciik^  of  Menoti  an  their
inventor. TIk-iv  in  no  eviileni^c  that  any  uf  tlw
i*jir1y  Greeks  ficipiiti'd  nn  nndrrKlamling  of  llMfu,
bnl.  Pliilo  in  Iuh  Vila  Mvfn>i»  miva  that  Maew«roa)il
ri>iid lb«ni. In  Kgypt  Iliey  nrre  uni%fr»ally  rn-
pluyod  hy  tlio  edncaied elnwu<>i,  but nt-tr  praeli-
cally  a  niy&tery  to  the  |K'U|dc  &t  ^otfLc^  whenoe  a
belief  in  their  diviue  origin  prevailed. iVaioen-
tUH  of  Abdera  (B.C.  4ttO),  iu  a  work  now  Imi,  de-
nctihed both the hieroglyphs  of Kgypt aitd  ibr
A&Hyriau cniieirorni;  untl  under  the  (irevk  lulfO
of  Egypt  (ufter  B.C.  30(tt  considernMe  attention  wii
p»id  to  tho  hingnage  and  lllfnitureof  tbe  eoaulrj.
ITnder tbu RomatiK,  CbaereuHin,  librarian in  tlv
Si!i-a|ieiim, eotnpilod  a  itielionary  of  hiemglr|ilu.
and  they  are H[iokeu  of  by  Dtudunix,  8lra1w,  Twi-
tos,  Ammiait  1IH MareelliuuM,  IiilriiM  V^ilerins,  ami
Itiu niivelisl Heliodonitt  (abunt  a.P.  4(10),  i.liu  In
his  rouiunee .-fr'Aiupiea,  de»t-ri)n-*M  n  leltur  nrillru
in  bierr>glypbii  by  (jueeu  Cuudaci^. CIcuicuftAlri-
andrinns  (a.d.  311)  is  tbe  tint  writer  to  spcAk  ef
(he  twofold nature  of  tbe  bieroglyphH,  whidi  br
divider  into  pbonetie  and  synibolie  characten-

After  the  sixth  reiitnry  A.I>.  all  knowMf^s
them  was  lost  nntil  about  the  bcgiDuiiig  ^
neveiiteenth  century  when  tbe  lenntcd  Jesuiti  Alk-
ana^ins  Kircher,  ende-avonred  to  iolerf*^^  ii*f-a^
hut  had  little  succe^  owing  to  hie  tb«.'<ory  thai  the
aign»  were  purely  ide«igr»pbic..  Thai  they  umb
at  Icjwt  partly  phonutic  wiut  luwerted  hy  Zorjpi  tli
1TH7,  and  a  cf-rtaln  cliio  t4>  their  deriphemi>>ut  v»
foQml  iu  1799  by  the  discovery  of  tbe  celebrated
Ko8Ctt.a  Stone  during  the  N'apoleouie  oceupftW"
of  Egypt.  This  is  a  alab  of  bhiek  bosiilt  MiiwnM
with  (1)  hieroglyphics;  (3)  demotic  (enchorial,  t^nr-
sive),  and  (3)  tjreek.  It  gives  n  diM-rv**  of  tbe
priests  of  Memphis  in  honour  of  Ptolemy  V.  TV
labour  of  ninny  sc-liolnrs  was  devoicil  to  lli«  •Uiif
of  these  inscriptions.  Dr.  Young  in  1^1"  panll
pniveil  that  the  cbanirtei-ft  were  al|>hulw'fi(-,  a
wurely  euiUblisbed  lo  1822  hy  tbe  Pn>nch  fli
ChompolHon,  who  lued  for  comparison  ttu  itiKiil
tlou  found  on  an  obelisk  ot  Fhiliie.  Ills  nctJiu^
were  subsequently  used  and  biHdi»c4»Tfne*lar):'t|
ext«[idod  by  RoMclliui,  Salvolini  (  lt<S),  Lc|mi»
iIh;^),  uud  more  recently  by  BuiiM-jt,  l>e  Rott/^
Birch,  Clmbait,  Unigsch,  nud  otbers.

Hieroglyphs  nreeitlier  ideographic  impraaeDtiqE
ideat)  or  phonetic  (reprrsenling  sonudsX  ^^
iiolic  signs  are  f(»ind  dating  hnck  at  least  a«  etrlr
Hs  B.C. 3800,  and  are  paiity  alphabetic  and  parti;
sytlabio.  There  are  found  iu  the  eorlipat  blMTf
glyphic  writing  24  alphabetic  aignn.  In  all.  titan
are  about  t7(H)  dilTrivnt  hienigl.t  pbic  rliaraBtfn>
Many  of  them  are  nsMi  a^  de term i nut tves,  that  iiU
signs  wbit'h  aid  iu  determining  the  mrantng  ufib'
phonetic  sy III Udn  nbich  Imvi*  precepted  thflin-  Ttia*
after  the  plionelie  nigiis  for  "  dog,"  it*  plarctd  a  pM*
are  of  a  <U>g;  aftor  thoiw  for  "  irevs"  Ibe  ptf(un>


■ni]


TItP  RottPtUi  8Ui»« iBiilMi  Huwum  )


H^4tf  a  tron,  etc. Alwtrnet  uX^m  are  vxpreanetl  l>y

^^  siiiiitt  fi;g;nn«  wbicli  fiyiiilioli/o  (ln'tn  or  (li«tint»«  tint

nUjnelA  wllicU  pusttfwt  aiitl  illilKlruto  (lii^lii. TIiiih,

^^  "ji'.v"  i»  pictiin-vl  ill  n  iiiiiii  dniichif;;  "cntft"  l»y  a

^k  Jackal,  etc. Iklaiiy  of  tlinso  il(*l«n)iinntiv4«  gt't.  to

^»  be lar);«l,v  coiivi>nlini)iiI,  an wliow  nil actioiit*  of

nmviii};,  Ktntsiliitg.  oriitrcteliiiig  arc  ni^'nitli-d  liy  iV,

nriginslly  irji resenting  two  If^gs. Thrri;  are  abutit

150  of  iltcMt  <leti*rniinativo  signs  in  all,  and  tb«7

iiiivc  tlieir  fellows  in  the  cniieifurm  H,v«tetii  of  iLe

•  AwtyriaiiB.  In  tho  cnneifonn,  lufwereT,  the  dftter-
tiiiuntivM  precoil?  tlic  wonl  uimI  in  Egyptian  fol-
low it.  Tlio  Kgyptian  dctenninntivca  are  aloo
more  imiuerotis  and  ofu^nvr  n»eil  ttiuit  tlio  Anoyr-

Tliem  are  two  ciinife  or  nuiuuig  forma  of  tlie

■  faientglyplip. The  firNt.  which  i§  known  an  the
■kieralic,  wliii-h woj*  very'  exleiisiv«]y  used,  being
foiitid  in h'giil  ami  govt-rnnienlnl  diK-iimcnts,  nc-
•roitiiltt,  ill  nrarly  all  hoolkq  and  ritiinlK,  aiid  in  pn-
^B  vat«4 iiccounti« and iniMnorninla. It^  nhanict4.>n$
^p  Wfn*  ftiwcr  in  nnnilMKr  than  ihc  liicroglypIiH  proper,
and tht^ vocnlic coinplriiivntit  nf  thr ciniKonunis
are n*gnl»r!y iMiiployi^rt lo prttvotit. nnOdt;iiity.
^p  For  n  H|(eriinvn  of  hiutalit^  nriting,  see  ttie  urtiirN*
HAK<)Vm:A,p.28.

^T xiio  wcoiid  curftivo  form  i«  known  nn  tijo  drino-

tic,  lifted  a*  early  iw  tlio  nixtli  rciitnry  B.C..  and  coi»-

tmningdown  lo  tlm  iliinl  oentnry  a.i>. It  wii»  tlit-

liuit  nalivi*  form  "f  writing  (o  Kiirvive  in Kgypt,

jintl  wiiH  grudiitilly  Hnp{)liitil>-(1  Uy  tin*  chanirtcrMot'

<(lir>  Givok  uliitiithct  ininitlnreil  liy  the  (!liri>ttini)M.

J(  iippniini  (Ml  III*-  iin»ettn  8tuiiii  nido  l)y  itido  with

tlH<  liiemglypli.i. A  speciinon  of  tt  wilt  be  funud

•oil  p.  4<M.

^L The  langnngo  of  thpt  hlt^mglyphK  In  IwKt  n-pi*o-

^Ki(>nt<>il  by  tlll^  C'oplii-,  which  n-nNed  lo  Iw  Hpitkctt

^Biiliont  a  century  ago,  but  in  whii;h  thir  fuTvicen  of

^Vflio  Kgyplinii  C'liriKtiann  nn^  itlilt  cimdTirtvd. Tho

Coplit: forniH ttri> largfly thoso of  the ancient

Kgyptini).  tnodifinl  by  phoiu-tii:  dpcay.

Hirroglyphfl liiivi' liccu I'mind ttiscribrd upon


gnnite,  porphyry,  baiwlt,  utd

sutitI»toitv;  and  cut  or  carvitd  on

wimmI  jiiid  pliMt<?r. Thftv  wpro

a1»o  wnlliMi upon  ptipyma  andl

bather. (S«>e I'apyhub.) Jn

writing upon pnpyrnH,  n n^cd

pen  {ijaah)  wjih  viiiploypd. Tho

coIoitiTi nii»l lined  w«T<^ lilack.

reil, and green,  iinil the iuka

wi*re  held  when  in  iimi  in  a  sort

of  wooden  or  ivory  piilotie,  with

lioles  hollowed  out  of  it  bm  nv

repiathw. On  ttto  Atii  pnpynift

m  llin  RHliKh  MtiKciuii,  (hirleen

cidoiim  am  employed.  Tberhor'

lU'teiaaro  written  either  iu  hor-

iuiiilul  Itnm  or  in  perpendicular

r'ohmiiiM,  and are read in the

I  in  wliirh  lite  pictures  fuce.

\.i,pnABirr.

On  the  Ktihject  of  the  hinro-

glyphicj*,  nv«  Itirvh,  /iifrWicfion

to  the  Study  of  tkr Hirro'jlffiihic$

(London,  lt^t7);  Briij>Firlt,  fiyam-

tmiirr  l><fmntitjitt  (IWrVut,  1855);

Biihsi'ii.  Aflffp(*« Plnce (  vol. v.

lt¥S7). TImrft  are  dirttonuriea

of  hi«troglypliLt-ii  by Hiixli  and

Pierrot, and in Gt'rninii by

I*rtig«li. See  also  B«*rgfr,  HtMloire  tie  VKrritnre

dauB  i'AuliquM  (Paris,  IHUI),  and  Taylor,  The  At-

phabift  (3  Vols,  London,  IH*1). A  very  full  iicconnt

of  tho  RtMdtta  Stoiio  in  given  in  Biidgu*«  work  Jlu

.l/ifMMy  (London,  189^11.

Hieronsntea  ('upoftavrtia). See  Divixatio.

Bieromenia  iitpontjria).  The  Qreek  term  for
IW  holy  ttiiie  of  tlm  month — i.  f.  that  portion  of
earli  iimiilli  which  wa«  kept  a»  a  festival.  It  dif-
furvd  in  tlrtt  m^v^rul  iiionthti  iicettnliug  to  ihu  num-
ber and  duration  of  the  fenttvalH.  During  thin
time  there  watt  a  8U8)>6»8ion  of  all  bimiui-vw  and
even  of  lawsuits,  and  execntioUH  and  wurrnnta
were  in  abeyance;  in  short,  everj'thing  that  wtis
likely  to  iiiteinipt  the  aoivcrs>nl  peace  and  the
celebration  of  the  festival  was  net  n.iide.  For  tho
grvafcr  fKiwta  a  "  truce  of  God  "  was  proclnlined.
See  KKKCllKltaA.

Hteromuemou  {Uponifjjfiiav).  Tho  twcordor  or
oClicer  in  cbaiijo  ofHiirri-d  bn»in08s  at  the  iiu*<;lingq
of  the  Atiiphiclyonltr  Council. 8ee  AMPiiicTVONKJi.

Hidroa. ^ec  Hikro.

HieronJhaauai'Ifp&ii'n^ork.  (1)0f  Cardta,  accoin-
pnni^'d  Ab'XHiicli'r  the  (iiv.it  to  Ahia.  and  aftei  the
death  of  that  inoiiareh  (  hx'.  H'i^)  served  under  hia
conntrymnn  Kiiinr>nf>A.  He  nfl^'nvnrdft  tbiiHht  iin*
drr  Antignium,  hiK  mm  Denit^lriuH,  iind  grandson
Antigonim  Gonataii.  lie  aiirvivud  Pyriliiis,  and
died  at  the  jidvunctil  iige  itf  ll>4.  HinroiiyiiniH
wixit<*  a  history  of  the  eventa  fi-om  the  death  of
Al(*xanilcr  to  that  of  Pyrrliiic,  if  lott  lat4<r.  (9)
King  of  HyraciiHv,  nnceeedisl  bin  giundfnlhur,  Hi-
eron  IL,  D.C.  *iHJ.  at  fifteen  years  of  ago,  and  was
iim<iiK.<iimt«^d  after  ii  short  reign  of  only  ihiiteen
moutliN.  (II)  Of  Ithodes.  II  I'eripnteiic  philosoplicr,
ami  a  iliMciplo  of  AriAtolle.  (-1)  Saint  Joroiue,ot)a
of  tlio  Iwst  known  of  the  Chrtstiau  I*'athens  bora
at  Biridon  on  the  iMirilers  of  Dalinatia  nbont  a.D.
.'140.  Hit  t'ull  inuno  waA  Et.'HitlllL'S  Hir.ltoNf Mt*9
S^iriiKONirs. As  a  boy  be  studied  Greek  ami  Latin


lllKKOl'MANItS


4IM


U1K1U>SUL\MA


rliut*>t'i<-  Niiil  |i|iiliiHi»pliy  iiiiili*r  Afliuft  iJiiiiatiiH  :it
Koine,  n-livn)  bi^  wuh  biiptixetl.  Aft^-T  rehiiliiig  in
<ittiil.  he  M-ltli-tl  m  AipiiliNi  iu  A.l*.  :I7U,  utlli  hXH
Ineiid  KiitiiiiiH.  From  'J74  to  ^78  lit^  lived  iti  llii-
Uesert  of  Oialoifi  iiiiilvi'^foittj;  p^-iiiuivu  unil  sluily-
iiiK  ttiu  Utibntw  JaiiKOdx*^.  In  :t7l)  lie  wuAiuIiiiilleil
tu  till*  prii^stliunU  nt  Aiitiut'li,  wlicn)  ho  wns  the
friend  <>f  (irvKory  Nanxiiiuzi^uiitt.  In  •'iS:2,  in  \<r1iich
y*'ttr  lit'  viHii*?il  Home  ainl  iM-'camn'  (wori'liiry  to  Trtpc
UaniQMMit.  Im  bt'};iiti  hit*  (^nsit  vt*rKii<n  itf  thu  Biblo
inlu  Latin,  known  att  tlio  VttlgaU',  nnih'ititkfii  Ht
tlw  pnpt^^N  nM|iii'*t(.  Fn)ni  it  ]iiij;iiistic  |ioinl  of
vinn*  thill  vcraion  itt  of  very  p^'al  inteix'wt,  us  i-.on-
taiuin;;  many  lexioit  itnil  ^runniinliuMl  foniis  nul
fiiund  ill  thu  uladHiciiI  Inni^iiM^tS  hut.  ]iccnliar  Iu
the  |Kipuhli  Kfivei'h  {Arrmo  filrhrinv}.  In  ^<^  hu
lixfd  liU  rtflidoncn  at  Mi'thlidivni.  tvliitluT  two  iio-
hle>  Roniau  lailii^n,  I'uula  and  brr  daiighlt'r  Knxto-
ehinm,  folluwtMl  bini  iind  foiiiirk-d  I'unr  i?onvt<tilM,
one  of  wliich  JcMxnnu  liiintiflf  pjvt-rnml.  Ili>  died
Sp)it.  %,  430.  His  writingK  roinprtH^,  iH'kidc^s  thti
Vnl;;at«f  Uittcn),  tr«aliMW,  and  t'(iuiinenlane«  on
Ibi.'  .Srri[itnr(>«.  Ini|Kirtant  in  h\»  tmnslation  uf
the  Clirnniclu  of  EuschinH  (_({.  v.),  wliit-h  ln'  reviwjd
und  eul»r^«M),  bringint;  it  down  (*>  ilic  year  a.i*.
37t^.  A  eoDipleto  edition  of  the  workM  of  St.  Je-
rome ii4  that  nfVaUar8i  (Veroini.  lT^-4'i),  rt'prEntnd
by  Mi^tne  in  ti  vols.  (PariM,  IB^.*!).  See  the  special
workH  by  ^ot-klor  (Uotitu,  IHO^),  Cntts  (LotuWn,
1»7H>,  anil  Orwlzer  <Pari»,  ISflG).

ffierophanteB  (iffxitfrnyTrfK,  "discloser  nf  SttOlv^l
IhiiigK^')  Tin*  i>>ii>^f  printit  in  lb«  ElenNtninn  MyH.
t*rif«. See  Elki-hinia.

Rleropoei  (itftonoioi,  ''man:it;«ni  of  the  Karri-
ficen'').  TliH  (irrek  lertil  fur  rtirtain  nlTiriali>.  who,
beKidcH  hiivinij  Iht^  euro  of  the  Ku-rlfict'D,  liad  abo
tbv  i>iip**rintt<ndt-iK'(*  of  thi*  eK.'otioinic  di-tailr*  of  the
aauctiiary,  anil  tln^  ehargeof  the  money  and  treaH-
ureM  of  the  temple.  In  .\tb?iitt,  beHide.H  Hiich  ofli-
ciaIh  attjtetied  to  the  .stivenil  teinpleii,  Iheiv  wiut  a
l>ourd  of  U!i\  uieii.  yearly  appointed  by  b>i,  who
hod  to  attend  to  the  relebralion  of  the  extraonll-
uary  mid  ipiiniincnnial  HExerilieeM,  the  roHt  nr\Tbicb
was  defrayed  by  the  public  IreaHiiry.  Anoilicr
ooltefio  of  thnni  or  U'n  hteroiitiei,  ap)ioiutM  by  the
Arritpn^iM,  suiverinteiidei)  the  aacrificoa  ofTensl  to
the  Knmeiiide«t  by  the  Slate.

Hieroacopfa  {'upofTKOTria,  ''vtowhif;  the  wicri-
fico**!.  A  form  of  divination  by  nieanii  of  the  vm-
trails  uf  uneriliced  beuata. See  Mantike.

HleroBoIjh^na  {ra  'ItpoavXufia).  .Ifrn»uleiH,  a
oeltfbratetl  city  of  I'ulettltue,  the  capital  of  Inilaeii.
Tho  hietor]^-  of  Abraham  mentioiLs  that  3tip|ebixe-
dek,  kin^  of  Salem,  cnnie  forth  to  ineot  him  when
he  returned  fn>ni  ibe  Htatif^hter  nf  th«  kingit  (f^n.
xiv.  it^.),  Hiid  it  IniH  hern  pmerally  iinppow4  that
thiH  i^leiii  wuN  till*  orijcinat  of  the  rity  which  wv
Btv  now  r4ini)iileriii}:.  It  in  more  ei<rUiin.  however.
that  when  the  IhineliteN  etitenfl  (7uiiaan  lliey
fnntid  the  place  lit  thiioociipation  of  thr^.T(!lHmit(i4.
a  tribe  desc«ndei|  from  JebiiH.  a  «oii  of  C'auaan,  and
tli«  city  then  iMiie  the  mime  of  Jobna  or  Jebn»i
(Joab.xv.t):!,  xviii.^i.  The  lower  eitywati  taken
and  Inirne*!  by  the  children  of  Jndali  (Jnd.  i.  ri)
after  iho  death  of  Joshna;  but  the  JehiiKitea  had
BO  itrouifly  fortitieil  thenii^elveff  in  the  npper  city,
OD  Mount  Zion,  that  they  maintained  theniaelvr^
In  iHMsewnion  of  it  till  the  time  of  l>nvid.  That
monaroh,  afl«r  hiH  nuven  yeatM'  rnle  over  Jndah  in
Hebron,  beeuine  kiti;;  of  :ill  larael,  on  u-hicli  ho  ex-


pelled the  Jelnniileft  from  Mount  Kion,  ami  mliil-
liahed  liere  tlw  tnelropolin  of  hix  kinj^iloiu.  Thr
eity  now  look  the  niiuie  orJeruaali'm  (Yeruahuldiu),
a  icrni  which  ilenot«(i  "ihe  abode  uT  peace-.'  tir
(aeeuitltn};  lo  .mother  derivatioa )  "Ihe  people-  ><l
|H.'uco  "  ((iesteninet,  tJfbr.  Ltj.  i*.  v.l.  Yakut,  tlir  Ma-
haniuiMlun  Beograjiher,  (jivca  other  foruu  ol  tli»
nnuie  {L'rhltatlum,  rriahulum,  and  Shallatu).  IV
■Septna^int  vemion  give«  'UfKivtraXi'ifi  a*  the  fima
of  the  Mnnie,  while  by  the  ttreek  a  ml  Koiiuio
wrileni  the  place  it  ealled  ilienwolymu.  At  prm-
ent  IhiH  fity  in  known  thron};lioiit  Weateru  Aita
by  the  Arabic  nntnn  id'  KUKndx,  whiuh  aigclfln
"  The  Itoly." Sew  <'aI»VTIS.

JeniHalein  w:ih  hnill  mi  i«vveral  liillH,  the  lar;:f^l
of  \^liivh  wiih  Moniit  Hioii.  which  fmnu-d  tlieMJiilh-
tirii  ]iart  of  the  eiiy.  A  valley  townnU  the  ii«iilli
iwpHnit«d  thtfifrnni  Arru,  theF««reuni1  or  tower  niy.
on  the  east  of  wliieh  wn*;  Mount  Moriab.  the  mI«
of  Ibe  Temple  of  .Solomon.  Northeast  of  Mount
Moriah  wa«  the  >foiint  of  Oliw;*,  on  the  »Dutli  vr»«
the  valley  of  lliiiimni,  and  at  the  north  Mount  t'al-
vary,  the  weiie  of  C'hriBt'»  ci  uniAxion.

PiiJK'tiny  u\v\  thei'arlierhi»lory  uf  IhiscelrbrilDl
city,  >Ht  ftilly  ileluileti  in  Ihe  ijcriptan^a.  we  ri.iiD<-
to  the  memorable  |i«rio4l  of  ilM  rapture  bdiI  dr-
strncriou  by  Titus.  The  data  of  Ibia  event  wim
ttic  ^Lh  of  September,  ad.  70.  niiriiii;  lhiitiiip|C»
and  eaptnre  1.U10,(HW  peiiMins  are  K»id  ii.  h.n.  pt-
ialied,  and  d7.iX>D  to  have  been  luaiU-  r  '•'I

aflenrartts  either  s^dd  for  alavea  or  <  > ,  !■■

fury  of  wild  l>eaat».  In  faol,  the  inipiiUlioii,  imi
oiilyof  .Teni»alem.biil  that  of  the  adjaeeul  diklni-ji
— many  who  had  taken  refii^e  in  the  cily.iuimiiba
hail  aMHembled  for  ihe  fen^t  nf  nnleavened  hrva^l—
had  bi-eu  ahnt.  up  by  the  Kiiddnn  rorinalion  of  tlir
MJep-.  The  ardent  Keal  of  (he  Jewish  iialiou  U"
Mieir  hidy  rily  and  temple  Mion  euilBed  both  to  l<*
npiiu  rebuilt ;  but  Ircsli  romniotious  i-KUipe)!"*!  ll>r
emperor  Hadrian  ti>  interfere  and  ii>'  '>■>

.Jew  shiinhl  irniain  in,  lu  even  appn>ji  :»-

Kfileui,  on  pain  of  tleath.  On  ihn  i-iuun  ot  lliitir
temple  th<-'  flame  emiiuror  caiued  a  letople  iu  Uftu-
(Mir  of  Inpiler  <*apitoliiiu»  to  lici  ereeie^l,  and  tli'
imace  of  a  hog  to  lie  eut  in  atoiio  over  tbi>  fitr
leaditif;  to  Dethlehem,  iv  a  ctanding  in«ull  la  tlw
rcliffiou.t  ft-elin};M  <if  liuH  nnfortuiKite  pi-opl*.  Tlw
name  of  the  rity  wan  aUo  chaiijjed  to  Aelta  Cafi'
loliiia,  the  liml  pari  of  the  iinnie  alhuliiic  to  llir
family  uf  thr  Koniuti  emperor.  The  inon*  lacacrfni
('hri»tiaua  were  penuilled,  honvvrr,  to  (wSabHili
IhenuelVMi  within  the  walN,  ami  Aelia  becanivlk
M.'at  of  a  floiirifihiii;;  cbiir<.'h  ami  bishopric.  Tlif
hitter  name  became  afterwardd  thr  onllnury  naii*
uf  the  city, and  .leriiaaleui  hecame  nearly  ohwlH'
I'pon  the  amensiou  to  the  throne,  howevrr,  of  llf
ChriHtiun  emp«ror»  the  earlier  uame  revivwi  Jr-
niHJtlem,  thuM  reHtoretl,  was  much  lew  iu  routjUM
than  Ihe  am-ient  city,  Honut  8ioa  anil  br«rllw
heio^  exehidiil.

The  following  dMtcriplion  of  .TernMileui.  a*  ii
appeared  Just  before  the  aie^o  by  Tiiaii.  1*  tnkti.
with  a  few  altorationa.  from  Dean  Miluian  \Hi*-
tori/  of  the  Jew»,  vol.  iii.  pp.  17  foil.):  ■■.JrtiiMil'-m.
at  this  period,  wa«  forlilled  by  ihr»e  tvallft.  •<•
all  thow)  i>ailB  where  it  waa  not  aiirrmimtrd  \*)
abrupt  and  im|Hu»ablfl  ravines;  tbnn  tl  had  b<ii
one.  Not  (hat  tbene  walla  atiKal  du«  withtn  ih><
other,  each  iu  a  narrower  eirrle  niutdbj;  roiitid
Ihe  whole  city;  but  eiieb  »f  the  inurr  widU  ir-
feudeil one of  tlie  ttevoral quailem mU* *hkk


I


HIKKOStlLVUA


SIT


HlKMlAULrMA


|<tlie  eity  wfts  divnlMl,  or,  it  itii|[bt  Im  aliiitnit  8am1,
Mie  of  tlio  Kepatitt4f  citiua.  Since  the  (lays  in
which  Daviit  Usui  hiiilt  Lis  vn[»ititl  on  the  ni^ei)
hfif^htN  of  Hion,  great  aUcratidiM  ha<l  tiikt^n  placr

'  ml  Jpvanaiem.  Thitt  eniiiwnce  wiw  NtilL  occujiicd
hy  tho  iipiwr  cily :  luit,  in  ndilittiiii.  timt  tlio  hill
nf  Miirinh  wim  taken  in,  o\\  which  th«  tt'tnpio  AtiHxI.
IliL'ii  Anra,  which  whk  <>ri}:(iml)j-.  althongti  a  {>Art
oftho  Kjtnif  t*i(l):v,  fw'|)iinitc<t  1>y  u  di-cji  cUibiiti  from
Mt>ti»h.  Thin  chnxm  wan  iihiumt  cntii'cly  HIIimI  tip,
ami  the  lup  iif  Ai-ni  lovrllttl  l»y  the  AMiMuin.'ati
printTH,  M>  lhat>  Acra  ami  Muriiih  wvru  iititti-Hl,
thtMigh  on  the  ttulo  uf  Acm  thf*  triiipiti  prt'^iented  u
forttiiiliilile  fnint,  coniu'cCrU  by  lun'tTral  biiilges  or
ruiiftewayit  with  tlif  lower  city.  To  tht^  Huntb  tbo
height  ot  tsioii,  the  up[>er  city,  wan  wpninteil  Iram


Tlth*  wall  begau  ut  the  tower  of  Hippicns,  wbiek
ntiMHl,  it  iKviiM,  oil  ik  |n)iiit  at  tho  cxtreiuu  cunicr
of  Mount  Sioii,  It  ninut  have  tro««Mr«l  tliu  wrfUmi
month  uf  the  vaUey  tif  TyropoLHiiLOinl  nin  direcily
north  to  tlie  toner  of  rHcitliina.  ThL-  wall  then
hiirr>  towanU  thi^  tnoiiiinit'nt  ot'  II<-K'Uii,  run  hy  ih«*
royal  pnveniM  of  tho  FnU»M''»  Mumttnciil.  ami  iv;i(*
t-arriotl  into  the  valley  of  Kodroii  or  .Tchimhaphat,
where  it  joined  tho  old  or  itiner  wall  iiiHlt-r  tlii^
temple.  The  wall,  however  tt  fell  ehort  of  Agrip-
[lii'n  design,  wiin  of  fuiinidemMe  tilrrrij^tk.  Tbi*
ntoiit'H  wen*  Xi  feet  loii|;,  ho  tiolid  aa  not  eaaily  U*
be  shaken  Ijy  bntteriuj»  eit^inen,  or  ninlenuincd.
Tbe  Willi  WHH  17^  feet  linMul.  It  had  only  heeii
uarrieU  to  the  same  height  by  Agrippu,  but  it  had
bei!D  hastily  run  up  by  tbe  Jewa  to  ;t&  feut ;  on  it«


*£


V ■  ■ '■


'^^tm-'r


fcsest


~VP


n-*


cffl


"^1


iA-


-^  » . «.


'W^


S>  ►,


^^


, ;- .,  «-  "


I


Tiflw  of  Jfroialtm.


\\m  h»wur  by  a  ravine,  which  luti  rifthfc  tliruagli
Jeraaaleiu,  culled  tbe  Tyn))>oe4.>n,  or  the  vutley  of
the  ehcl^Aemnnj;erH;  »t  tlii-  ed;;«  of  ihiH  ravine,  uti
I'Oth  siileH,  the  Htrt'eta  Muddeuly  broke  oR,  lh4Mi>;h
tbe  wnlia  in  wnnu  placed  uiimt  have  i-roHMrd  il.  atnl
it  was  bridged  in  more  than  one  place.  To  ilie
north  uKtemlod  a  considt>nd>le  aiibnrb  called  Utrze-
tho,  urihe  uuw  city.  Tbe  fii'ftt  oroator  wnll  eneoni-
paiwed  Uczetha.  AK^ippa  the  Fii'nt  IiikI  iiit\.'iid(-d
to  make  Ibiit  wall  of  extrnordiitni-y  Htreugtii ;  but
be  hail  desible<l  from  the  work  ort  tlie  intiTfert-nci-
uftbe  Uoniann,  wlin  went  to  have  fore»een  Itml  lliiM
rerraetory  city  wonld  licreafter  force  them  to  tjvkc
up  armn  H){aiiiiit  it.  Mit<I  tbin  wall  beeu  built  iic-
uordinK  bo  the  pl:t>i  of  A^ripptt,  the  city,  in  the
opinion  of  lotM-phm*.  uoulil  liavelieen  impregnable.


top  stood  battleiuenta  \\\  feet  Iii^li.  iitul  pinnacW
5J;  so  the  wbtde  wiui  ueiirly  40  feet  Iiigli.  The
■wenrid  wall  began  at.  a  gate  in  |bp  old  or  inner  one,
rallied  rie.nnatb,  the  gate  i>f  the  gardens ;  it  tnter-
Mfcied  the  litwer  city,  and,  having  Rfriick  uortb-
wanl  for  »iin)e  diHtauce,  Inrneil  hi  tbe  east  and
joined  the  northwctit  corner  "f  tho  tower  of  .Kn-
forda.  The  Antoiiia  otooil  at  'he  imrtli^vcKt  rorner
of  tbe  temple,  and  was  sepanited  lV><iii  lt«-/elha  by
a  deep  ditt^b.  which  probably  profeiled  ihr  wlmlt-
norlliern  frmit  of  the  tem]>le  iih  well  as  uf  the  An-
tonia.  The  old  or  inner  wall  wa^  that  of  ^uttk.
Starting  from  the  Honlbwenlem  porlieiM  of  tbe
temple  to  trhieb  it  wa»  united,  it  run  ahing  tbe
ridge  of  the  Tyiopoeoii.  ptiHMed  tlrat  the  Xyiitn«,
then  tho  council-bonM*,  and  aloilted  un  the  tower


HlKmUMH.YMA


H18


HIBBOSOLTMA


I  mA I


ITi|>|iiciiK.  whonn*  lite  itortheni  ixnll  spi-nii;;.  Thtf  melt  way.  Tin*  nlit>lc«  hciphl  of  the  tow»r  vmt  140
old  wjiU  (lifti  ran  Mnnlhvrnril  tlirtiiifrli  Betliso  in  fcot ;  tlir  tmvcr  it««ir52|.a  ilnep  tnnk  or  rraffrrwr
till'  ;*iitr  cif  llip  K.ssriic».  nil  nlniif;  tlit'  rl<1);<?  of  the  35.  twn  Nlnrira  of  clmmlKrx  43]-,  ImtllpineDU  mi
viiilr>'  fif  HiiiiKim,  iiltm  r  tin*  [mol  of  SiloHni,  tlitMi  piiiiiai-liw  b}.  PliiiAai'lun  mm  a  wiliil  nqnon)  ofTO
fjiRfn'unl  n;;!iiii  to  llio  |i<m>I  uf  .Solomiiii,  Mt  un  (fi-t.  It  iva«  fiiimiutidi-il  by  a  pnrtiou  17^  (mI
ihroiigli  Opiin.  firiiliiiVily  a  tlcop  gtiMi.  U  rhi'ii joiuM  high,  di^ri'n'lc^l  hy  bn*Uf)twurkB  niiil  liiOworko,  oad
llie  eaxttTu  purlieu  of  Ibc  tviiiplt*.  TIiub  thore  i»l>i»ve  the  p*vrtioo  wiw  miollier  tower, <Uvitl«l  into
w«r(?,  it  mifibt  iHi^ni,  four  tljstinvt  towiw,  rnch  r»'-  Infly  rliiimUrrs  niid  hntliK.  H  wa«  inMns  rk-bly
iliiirin;;  II  fsa'piirntc  HiL!);e.  'l'hi>  tinpliiro  i>f  the  ttntt  nninnieiilfil  llian  the  nf«t  tvilli  Itntth^mviit^  mm]
n-Hll  only  opriip<l  Beu<tli»;  the  t'orlilicit ioi)-s  nf  tin*  ]Hiiiiaf:l('M,  nn  tliiit  iti«  wlmlv  lieii<lit  tvas  (i1kiv«  167
lioi'tlH^ni  part  of  the  ti.'liiple.  tlie  Antniiia,  and  ilin  ffct.  It  looked  frntii  a  dintaucr  likf  the  tuli  pliiintf
MH'oiid  ^\:ill  Nritl  di<feride<l  the  uthrr  ■[[lurtei'K.  The  of  Alexandria.  Marmiiiiie,  thoii^rh  not  etjiiAl  Hi
M-{:oiid  mill  fon-ed,  i>iily  a  part  of  llu*  lower  city  clevaliiiri,  wait  taoi^  liixiiriuiihly  tilled  op  ;  it  vm
\MiH  Won  ;  llie  Mtntn^  roekdyinh  rilotlel  of  Autoiiia  Itiiill  of  ftolid  wall  35  fert  lii|;h,  and  of  ihe  mhui
mol  I  he  tt-niph>  i>ii  uiio  Iiaud,  and  .Siuo  on  the  other,  vcidth  ;  ou  tho  nliolo,  irith  the  iip)M<r  elinndM-rsit
wi-i-e  not  ihe  leant  weakeuftl.  The  whole  circuit  was  nboiit  76J  feft  high.  TLpm-  hifiy  i<>«.-i>  nf-
of  iheat-  walls  uOH  unanlt^d  with  towers,  built  of  .  peaitMl  still  higher  from  their  i»itnniioo.  'Thrj
the  ftaine  holid  ina<^iiry  » ith  tho  rc^t  of  tho  walls,  ,  wen  built  on  the  old  wait,  which  ran  alooi*  ilir
They  were  Xi  fwt  broad  and  35  high:  but  nbovc  steep  brow  of  Sion.  Their  niaaonry  wa*  jitrfwi.
tbia  height  were  lofty  chamlters,  and  above  those  ;  They  were  bnill  of  white  marble,  ctit  in  bhiclu  3S
ngiiin  np|M>r  rtMtnis  and  large  tanks  to  receive  the  feet  long,  17^  wide,  H^  liigh,faa  fitted  that  ibe  i»«-
i-ain-wuttT  Hrt>iul  llightx  ttf  HlepH  led  up  to  theni.  '  en*  Heeiiied  hewn  aiit  of  the  solirl  fpiarry.  }Uf,k
Ninety  of  thette  towei-tt  Mtood  in  the  litHt  wall,  14  in  above  the  whola  eity  riwu  the  temple,  nniting  tli«
the  hcctuid,  and  (lO  in  the  third.  Tlie  inlervaln  bo-  cotutnatiding  Htrcngtii  of  a  citadel  with  the  ii|tliui-
tween  this  lowerH  were  almnt  '.Kid  fe«t.  Tho  whole  i  dour  of  a  wtcrvil  edifica.  Aeeordiiig  to  IiMcpliiu,
olrtuil  uf  rhv  city,  acvordin;;  to  I<i«M!phn»,  was  33  Ibo  cHpIaiiadoou  which  it  ktood  Imd  be4«u  coiuitlfr'
dtadiu,  rulher  more  than  4  miles.  The  must  uaog-  ,  ably  eahiigud  by  ihc  uccntimlation  of  frub  mA
liillceiit  of  all  Iheiiie  towent  wan  timt  of  Pttephina,  ^Ince  the  days  of  Solomon,  particnhirly  oti  Ihoui
opposite  lo  which  Titnn  encamped.  It  wa»  l*.£;fi  i  side.  It  uow  covered  a  M)iiai'oof  a  fnrlongoit
feet  high,  anil  connnanded  n  iiohlu  view  of  the  (tide.  Solomon  had  fncod  the  pnM:ipitons  ftiJoi
wlmlt*  ctaintry  of  Indea,  to  the  border  of  Arabiii,  the  ruck  on  thu  ea^t,  and  perhnpH  the  Kouih,  villi
And  to  the  M-H. Ir  w:u(  an  iK'Ingnn, An«wering  tn hiig«!  hloukH  of  stoii«;  the  other  »ide0  liken  iw  hail

licenbniltnpwidi
perjtendiriiUi
whII.^  to  *n  t^ttti
hoight.  Tbm
walla  iu  tw  |Mit
were  lower  tbu
:Wf  cubiu  (OB
feet ),  bat  tbtir
nhold  height  «u
not  Be«D  Kseffl-
iog  uD  th«  m*-
eru  and  porbAp
IIt«)toiitberi(>i<lnb
ju?  tin?  earlli  *»
hraprwl  up  to  til*
le\i'lofth»itKf>*
tiftharity.  *iW
Af  thu  MloiiMtw-
|i)oyed  iO  tbl*
viotk  wervTOW
Fliiarc. Od  tbii

gt;;ulltic  foiilKb-
tioii  ran.  on  iwdt
fnmt,  a  »ti*H
and  lofty  w»ll
without,  wilbini
-ItftcioiiB  d«>nW»
lH>rlicoorcloi»t*
5'^i  feci  htwA
M)p|H)rt«d  by  I*
colntuii»,  « !>■'''
upheld  a  cellius
of  c«inr,  of  iW
mofct  extimiit*
worktnau»h>^
Thr  pillars  »♦«
eu  tire  bUfk*
lienn  out  of  (^"^
marble,  i>filn0l<'iC


J^^-y-  i'


^i>':iai;;r4


rt*TJ


Vmw  oI  tlic  laUirlor  »r  JmmtRm


tills  wait  tlic  tower  llippiciis,  and  follou--
ing  tlic  old  wall  Klood  thotie  of  PhiiwU^luit  and  Maii-
«mn^,  built  hy  lleriHl.and  named  after  hi»  wifo  and
hiabrothernod  friend. ThrMc  were  ittupeudonti,  even ."^
as  workit  of  Herod, llippions  woa  sqoare,  ■4;l|  feet '■ '


IIIEROSOLYMA


lllKKOSULYMA


Wlti(t>IK<'l!».4^  ft>«l
lti<;li,  OiilltcMiiill)
-niili'  tlu-  iM)rtirt>  or
f|i»i»iter  wan  triplit.
T  li  194  iiiiii4traiit>l*)
ImU  but  uiiti  ^iite
Jo  tlie  rant,  our  to

Im*  north,  two  to
totitb,  I'unr  to

die  WMt ;  one  of

ttrsv I  oil to  I  ho

ttiliioe,  nno  to  the

i'l  t.r,  (itin at Iho

ornor  to  tht^  An-

Diiia,  one down

DwnnU  thv  giir-

■ena. Tllti oiicn

\iTis  wi>rr  pavrd

'nitb  varionsiiilaUI

innrhloe. B«Mvecn

ttJlifi  outer  roiirt

|f  tlieGeDtileaaiid

bo  Decoml cnnrt
tlie Itiru4:'lit«8

kit  mils  of  vtoiie,
1)11 1  nf  lii^aiJlifiil
Work  III  a  II  Hhi  ji,
mthvr  iiioio  thiiu
5feft  Iiij^h.  Aloii^i
thi*a«,  nC  re^iil;i[
iiitcrvalf*,  B to •! li
pillitrs,  irith  in
MLTtptions  io  11''-
hreiT.  Greek,  and
LHiiiiitTuniiiig  all
bt  r  »  ti  g  »  r  H,  ami
P^e  w  K  who  vrere
niirleait,  frotii  rn-
ivnng  into  the
Holy  ('on  rt b*^

>i>ii(l.  All  oHmit  of  rotirteen  st^ps  1«d  to  a  tor-  ,  Hnpnration,  a  low  wall  whinh  iliriiTeil  the  priests
raco  17^  feet  widr,  litrvninl  whirh  mHfi  tlin  wall .  from  the  Ihiiu-'IUum;  iii^ar  iblH  nttHiil  tin;  ^ri'at
<if  the  ionwr  oonrc.  TUis  ««!!  npiii'^rtn^d  on  tbi^  ]  brazcii  altar.  Beyond,  thft  tftniplrt  ii-wdf  rt-an-d  its
ontttide  70  feet,  od  tbc  itiside  43| ;  for,  besiilp^  Klittcriiif;  front,  l*!!*.*  porch  or  ]>n>pyloii,a«cnr4liiig
the  0804*111  of  14  Hto|M  to  the  terrace,  there  won'  to  tlie  tlesigii  nf  t)iL>  luMt,  or  Ilcrtiir8  temple,  ex-
A  more  tip  lo  tho  gate«.  Tlio  iiiiior  court  hnt\  tciidp^l  ton  niurli  greater  widtli  than  tlin  temple
i»n  RUt**  or  opening  to  the  west,  but  fonr  on  ih<^  itwlf.  In  addition  !<»  tin*  formerwidrli of  lOrifeet, it
north,  und  fonr  on  (he  Boiith,  two  to  tlm  cjuit,  omt  bud  rwti  wiiigM  of  ItS  fi-rt  nich,  mnkiiig  in  the  whole
of  which  wan  for  the  women,  for  whom  n  portion  175  fci-t  Tin-  gn-at  giUii  of  this  liwt  qimdmiiBle,
of  the  iiioer  court  WHA  Hrt  H|iarl,  Hud  lie) Olid  n-biLli  to  nhich  Ihi-rc  wns  iiii  um-crir  of  twcUu  HtcjM,
flifv  raigbr  not  Hdraiice;  to  ihiH  tlii^y  biid  lu-ri-m  nii»  ridU-d  thiit  of  Nii-aiior.  Thf>  gatrvviiy  tower
likewise  hy  ouc  of  the  nortberu  iiiul  one  of  the  '  wa.s  13*^J  foet  high,  -13^  wide ;  it  bml  uo  doors,  hut
»oittlierr)  gates,  whifli  wera  rat  apart  for  ibeir  nun.  ibf  front  was  covered  with  gohl,  arid  rhroiigb  ite
Arunnd  this  court  ran  atiotber  splcudid  range  of  spaetouBnroh  wasst'en  the  Uolden  Gate  of  thu  tern-
porticos  or  cloistvrH  ;  the  coUiinns  were  quite  eqiml  pie,  glittering  with  tlie  Kniue  precious  metal,  with
in  l>eauty  and  workiuauithip,  ihough  not  iu  Bi»>,  to  .  large  pUtesof  which  it  wnsftbet'ted  nil  over. Ahove

koMc  of  the  onter  portico, Jfine  of  tiiese  gales,  or. Iliist  gate  hung  the  nrhthratcd  gulden vine. This

atber,  gatjowiiy  tower**,  were  vi('lity  adorned  with ex1raonUn.-Lr>'  piece  of  workinaiiHhi]t  had  hnnches,

mh\  and ^ilrer,  on  (he  diHipN,  the  (hior-pnstM,  and arrordiiig Io Iost'pliii»«,  iih l.irge a^ a man. The

die  linttdii. The  doon*  of  eiicb  of  the  nine  galcx Kuhhtiifi  add  tliat.  '  like  a  true  iiiitund  vine,  it  grew

Vv-m  521  feet  high,  and  half  that  bn^u^lth. With- gn-uter  and  gn:riii«T:  men  would  hi<!  offei-ing — Aiune,

B,  the  gateways  woreoSJ  fe«t  wide  unddee|i,  wUh  gold  to  make  n  leaf;  some,  a  grape;  wmie,  ahiiuch;
~r(M>ms  on  each  side,  so  that  the  wboi^^  lo^iUe*!  like  and  tUefto  weru  bniig  np  n[uut  it :  and  mi  it  waa  in-
lofty  towers;  the  lic-ight  from  The  base  to  the  kwm-  creasing  continually/  The  temple  itj«elf,  e£cept-
mif  was  70  fe«t.  ICacli  gateway  liatl  Two  lofty  pil-  iiig  in  the  cxt«msion  of  the  wings  of  the  propyloti,
tars  31  fei't  in  circumference.  But  n  bat  excited  |  was  pn>hahly  the  same  in  its  tlimeniiiniiN  and  dls-
the  grcatcKi  mlmiratioii  was  the  tenth,  usually  trihntion  with  that  of  Sohnuon.  Il*<  roof  hod  be<-n
ralleil 'the  Bpaiilifiil,' gate  of  the  temple.  It  was  set  all  over,  on  the  outside,  with  nlinrp  golden
of  (^orinihian  hraMMorthe  liiiest  wnrkmaiiKliip.  The  spikes,  to  prevent  the  birdt  fnim  netllitig  on  and
iglit  of  the  lltniitiful  Gate  was  rGlf.  iln  doorft  7A  ,  defiling  the  rtHif,  and  the  ixnU-n  were  Klill  aheeieil
et. Within  iImk  ([iiadraugle  theru  Wiia  a  fnnber .  with  plnleA  of  the  itauie  hptendld metal. At a


GoMiin  Ostc  of  lenmkm.


HIKBOSULVMIlANUai iriNEKAItll  .\1


»w


iUHOXxy


(liHtntii'f  llir  wliol*-  li-iiiplc  hmlii'il  lilrnilly  like  ii
irHMiiititiii  iirNiintv,  fiTtli'il  with  |;m|iI<'|i  [>iuiliicli*)4."
8rt>  Itvniinl  iitnl  Va]uitH-,  .fvrtfiatrm  (t&lfil,  Lniulnii,
IH8H) ;  ami  Wanvti  niid  C'uinlrr'n  Jvrumahm,  witli  n
lillB CUllfiClioil of I>lttlCS (1(**4>. TIlH work Uf  fj*'

Stniii^p,  J'olfHlinr  tiwrfcf  iMr  Mo»lem»,  giveit  a  vulii-
ablt^  r^0uiiio  ol'  tbc  Anibic  aiitliuritic<»  regurtliiig
the  city.  On  lb«  toinplt*,  aw  Ik*  Vogllc,  /^  Tvmplv
tit'  JerHni hai .

Hierosolymitanum  Itiiierarium. Seo  InXR-

KAIEIA.

HiurosyliaB  Oraph^  {UpwrvXias  >/jo^;).  An
nctiuii  ill  tlitt  AltiMiinii  cinirtii  ilin'cttnl  ugiiiiiht
tHii?  niiii  I'lilibiil  u  trtnpli'  llVm.  r. /^nAk/.  |i.  131)^,

Hi^waymau. Bi>l<  Latiii>.

Hilaila  I'tXtifita).  i\)  III  (ireccf,  any  tiny  h  Acn-
soii  of  n-jiiiping.  {•£)  At  Krtiiif.  mn'  nf  tIl<^  /eriet
ntuiiivr  helil  Marrli  aTilh,  in  Imnnnr  nf  Cybelf*
(Macnib.  Sal.  i.  Ul,  ^  7). Spw  Rhka.

HUarius.  |1)  A  Chriittiaa  uritfi  boiit  ut  IVii-
lior»  (ifpngnu  pxreiitn.  He  uum  fUviPtl  liiNbiip  M'
IiIh  imlivv  it1ac4>  iit  A.r>.  :ifi(>.  In  :t54i,  U'm  Htniiig
polemit^H  agaiitHt  tbc  ArinuH  Iril  tt>  Iijk  bitiiiKlirntMit
bj  CoUHtaiititit^,  wlio  Bll(»wt'(I  liiiii,  Iiowcvcr,  i«  i-t"-
turn  fiotn  Plirygia.  tbu  i>tiic-r  of  Iiik  t-xjlr,  huO  iv-
Httnic  hi»  ctOir«.  lie  (lii>il  in  :tti*:<.  Him  \vi)t'lit  ri>ii>
Hist  of  )tolrliiic-H  iigaiust  tbu  Ariiinn  Itnd  it«bliVft;4rH
l<>  ibe  i'iu|HTor.  Tlie  brt*!  etliltoii  of  bix  woik;*  \»
that  uf  Coiilniitc^l  t>4l.  1-H44-45I.  For  bis  lift;  hvo
Caxeiiov«'H  .S7  HiUtry  <i/  /'«i(i>»ii  (ISiSJ).  i*^)  BisU-
it|iuf  Arflnltf  (Arlet*)  from  a. l>.  4'.^  to  449.  He  wrote
the  lilt?  of  HimornliiH  iind  ii  (v\x  otbcr  works.

BUarotragoedia  i  iAn^inr/iii-yMillm,  *'  i-itinir.  trng*
edy  ").  A  »liecie«  of  ooniedy  in%'onli'tl  by  RMnlhun
of  Tareniinii,  und  cunHiHiiug  uf  :t  truvi>Aty  i>f  trn^iu
IbeiiifH. Si'tr  Kiiixtiion;  Trarokdia.

HUdeafaeim,  Tkkasube  of.  A  nunib<?r  of  AiiwV.-
iiig-vt'Hit«]it,  idiitfi',  ;iiid  cottking-Mt*;iiKiln  of  i^ilvcr.
inwtl  of  tbeni  cinboHmiil  in  high  ri'lirf,  fonnil  nt
Hildrtibeiiii  in  IHtiH.  Tb^'Ht;  iiiigH>rtant  |imditi'tH  of
Kolimii  aiX  i>f  tbi*  tjnic  »f  .\ng(lKliii<,  iii-i;  now  dr-
IHiHiled  ill  ibti  llcritu  MiiM'tiui.  Tlioy  (trububly
btibiiigcil  to  tho  CabU'  M-rvici'  of  nouiu  wi-allby  Rir-
limti,  and  bud  liueii  bitldoii  in  tbo  groiiinl  by  Gtir-
luanK  who  bad  taken  tht-in  a»  tlm  Kpuil-i  of  victory.
ArtislJcjilly  tbt*  inoxt  ini)iortiLril  |iiert>tt  arv  a  bowl
flhaiwcl  likt>  a  bt-mund  ^i-awfiilly  duroratixL  t-xtur-
iially  wilh  itmbtr*t()ni*H  aixl  lignruji  of  fUJldn-n,  and
four  inagaitit;trrit'  8auvvr)«  divor^ttil  with  a  gilt
MiuorvH  HfUtod  on  it  i-ock,  and  liall'-lungtb  dgntrn
of  tbt*  yniiiig  IltrrcnUig^  itlayiiig  the  m*r]H>iilH,  of
Cybele.  and  of  Attiit;  al»i>  two  cnjie  iidornod  with
mMk»  and  all  kindH  of  emblems  of  the  wnrshiii  of
Bacclinti.  fS<?o  WietwliT,  lUm  hildrmhvimcr  Silhrr'
JH tid  {lioiiu,  IHyHi,  and  the  art  iclt>  C'akLatuiu..

HiUoTlonea.  Aicorditig  to  Pliny  {If.  X.  iv.  27),
a  gi^neral  tt.'nu  for  the  iiihabitantft  of  Svandinn-
via.

Himation  (i/mrto»>).  Part-  of  the  outdoor  Atcsn
of  ttfrckt*  of  frp«  birth,  woni  ovi^r  (ho  ;t'iT<>>i',  and
reaching  al  It-aHt  a»  far  an  Ibf  knect,  It  was  an
oblong  pit-'coof  dn))Mfry,  out-  iMid  of  which  wh»  tintt
thrown  over  Ibo  Ml  itlioubler.  th»<o  bnuiglit  for-
ward and  lu^ld  font  \iy  tbo  1t>n.  arm:  the  garnimt
was  then  drawn  over  tbc  Hhonhlcr  to  ijit;  right
Hldo  ill  6och  a  mannLT  that  tbc  right  side  wan  rom-
plelcly  ooverttd  up  to  the  BhouUkr,  according  to
tlie  more  elegant  fatiliioii. Otberwiso  ic  yrnnl  «ii


BkmulkiB. tSUiiLolUrt

ixnll


nndt*r  the  right  iinn.  ami
left  Tb«  right  nboiildur  fX-
jioat'd.  Wumfii  wore  tin-
bimuitoii  in  iho  Kinot-  man-
ht'r,  but  (uiniR  drnw  It  over
llu'  head.  M>  vn*  to  l«*avf
only  tho  fiivi>  \iNiblt>.  S«m-
fiiuiMYR;  Paluitm:  Tiii-

Him^ra  ('l^>t).  (I  i
Now  Fiaiao  .SuUo;  ou<*  of
the  ]>rim?iiMil  rivera  in  tin-
Honth  of  Sicily,  at  one  liuit
tbo  boniidary  bi'twcen  thv
t«)rrilurk»  of  lln^  Conba-
gininmi  ami  Synirnsatih,
rcvuivcs  near  Emm  the
wat^^^r  of  a  Halt  itpring,  and
bpuce  has  nail  watiT  an  far
an  i(K  month, rit  A  smalb'r

'  river  in  the  north  of  Sicily.

,  Uowiug'  into  thv  sen  Ik--
twwn  Ibe  towns  of  Himfiit
anil  Tbpnuae.  I'ii  A  ct^h-
brated  Grvek  <.ity  on  the

'  north  coubt  of  Sicily.  w(«»l
of  thit  month  of  the  river
Hinii-ra (2), watt foitndfU

I  by  thi^  (;b.iluidian*tof  Zaii-

I  do,  B.C.  t)4»^,antl  aftftwaitbt
recfivpil  Uorinu  M-ttlei-s,  80  that  the  iiili«1»il«i>fii
Hpoko  a  mixLil  dialect,  partly  Ionic  (ClialriJiMX
and  partly  Doric.  In  u.c.  4U9  it  wan  taken  hyihe
Cai'thaginiaus,  and  woa  lovelh'd  to  th«-  ktonixl.  It

I  wae  never  rebuilt;  but  on  tbo  oppiwittf  Ituuk  kI'
the  river  IliiiH*ra  tbc  Carthaginian*  fi>tind(^  a  u"

I  town,  which,  from  a  nann  mc<Uciual  spntig  In  itt
iiKiglilionrhoiMl,  was  called  TlitKMAE  (Terfititiil

■  Tbu |HM!t SteHichorn>!t was Ik>i*ii at tbc  wicinil

I  llijut-ni,  and  tb*-  tyrant  AgntboeUvt  at  ThiTiuar.

HimeiiuB  n^<f>iof).  A  Greek  HophiAl.  bflni  it
Pi'iiHa  in Hithyiii.%  aliont  a.u.  tll'j,  and  ffduailf<t

I  ar  AtheuH,  n-bere.  after  extending  hU  koowlnliJf
by  travi-lling,  lir  liccume  a  toncher  of  rhrton*.
An  buch,  he  wa«  >*»>  KurcoKitftil  (hat  he  reeeivnl  tlw
riglita  uf  citin'nttbip  and  berame  a  iiicnibi'i  iif
the  Areopugua.  Among  biN  piiptlit  woni  Ba«il  tb<*
Great  and  (iregory  of  XaxiaiiTinN ;  for,  ii1IImj«cI>
biiii.'.tdf  a  pagan,  nevertheless,  like  Lilnuiim,  W
exhibited no animomty  aguiiutt CbrtsiiitiA. II*

I  %\:i»  Mimninned  to  Antioch  by  Julian.  *iid  »t
puiiilfd  bir«  private  »*efretary. Ou the  eniji^M'*

UliNiih  (;WS).  lie  returned  to  hict  earlier  uccujMiit'"'
ut  AtbeiiN,  and  Ibcro  died,  after  l>evomin(;  Idintl  I"
titn  olil  age,  abmui  :Hi.  Of  hih  Hpeeclu-s  and  "l"^-
IjiuiatioiiM  t^^l'nty-flnl^  exiHt  in  a  rompb'd*  fu^"'
tiMi  iu  fnignn-niA,  and  tbiriy>«ix  in  lb"  Huaioism
and  exeei'pis  pn^ftotveil  by  Pb«>tiiu.  Hi*  a>>I'  ^
ornate,  liirgid,  and  overladen  wilh  erudition.  Hf
owen  hiH  s(H-eiiil  importjiuco  wdely  to  llio  fftct  lli»*
hift  hiieei-he*  .conrain  nniterial  for  the  hi»t«rj  *>'
the  events  and  of  the  monncra  of  hi»  llow. 'H"'

cnmpli'te  work t*  of  Himerin.f  have  ln-t-n  edtt«l''?
Weinsdorf  ^Gottiiigru,  171*tl)  and  Dtlbitrr  (Ir48t.

Him«i^Bi'l^f;)or).  The  perBonilkaliouoriout:-
iiig  and  dt^Mtiv,  and  ooiiipatiioii  of  Kr**^  (t|,  v.w

Himiloo  (eqiiivnlent  in  Pnnie  (o  tjHtU*  ViVnm*.
"the  favour  ofMilear'^  The  Gii-ek  htriri  w'lp*V
K<av.  The  name  of  nrvcral  Cnrlhaginianv  {\\  ^
Carthaginian  cfmimaoder.  who  i*  -wild  l>y  Pbnf  lU.


HINDUSTAN


m


lilPPElS


G7)  to  have  been  coDtemporory  with  Hauuo  tbe
navigator.  He  was  sent  by  bis  government  to
explore  the  northwestern  coast  of  Europe.  A  few
fragments  of  this  voyage  ara  preserved  by  Avienns
{Ora  Marit.  \.  90),  in  wliich  the  Hiherni  mid  Albioni
are  mentioned,  and  also  a  promontory,  Oestrymnis,
aiid  islands  called  Oestrymuidea,  which  are  usnally
considered  to  he  Cornwall  and  the  Scilly  Islands.
<2)  A  Carthaginian,  who  took  Agrigentnm  in  406,
and  commanded  in  the  wiirs  with  Dionysins  I.,
tyrant  of  Syracuse,  B.C.  405-36$.  Himilco  was  an
able  and  successful  general.  He  took  Gela,  Mes-
8aua,  and  many  other  cities  in  Sicily,  and  at  length
besieged  Syracuse  by  sea  aud  land,  hut  was  finally
tiefented  by  Dionysiaii,  who  burned  most  of  the
Carthaginian  vessels  (Diod.  Sic.  hks.  xiii.  aud  xiv.).
Hamilco,  in  his  despair,  ended  hts  life  by  voluntary
Htarvation.  (3)  A  supporter  of  the  Barcine  party
at  Carthage  (Livy,  xiii.  12).  He  was  sent  by  tbe
Curthagiuiau  government  to  oppose  Marcellus  iu
Sicily  (Livy,  xxiv.  35  foil.,  xxv.  23  foil.).

Hindnatan. See  India.

Hinges. See  Cardo.

EELppagrfltae  {UnrayptTai).  Tlie  three  ofQcers
chosen  at  Lacedaemon  by  the  ephors  to  command
the  horsemen  who  formed  the  body-guani  of  the
kings.

Hlppilna  (rd  'lirfrava).  A  town  in  tbe  north  of
Sicily  near  Panormns.

Hipparcbna  {imapxos).  The  Greek  name  for
a  commander  of  cavalry.  (St5e  Hippris.)  In  the
Aetolian  aud  Achaean  Leagues,  this  uame  was
borne  by  an  officer  charge<l  with  other  fnuctions
besides,  who  was  in  rank  second  only  to  the  orpa-
TTfynt.

Hlpparcfaus  ['imrapxos).  (1)  A  son  of  Pisis-
tnitns.  (See  PisiSTRATlDAK.)  (2)  A  Greek  mathe-
matician, tbe  founder  of  scientific  astrouoniy.  He
was  boni  at  Nicaea  in  Bithyuia  about  B.C.  160,
lived  chiefly  at  Rhodes  aud  Alexandria,  and  died
about  B.C.  120.  He  discovered  the  precession  of
the  equinoxes,  settled  more  accnrately  tbe  length
nf  the  solar  year,  as  also  of  the  revolutimi  of  tbe
moon,  and  tbe  magnitnde  aud  distances  of  tbe
heavenly  bodies.  He  placed  mathematical  geog-
raphy on  a  firmer  basis,  by  teaching  tbe  applica-
tion of  the  latitode  aud  longitude  of  the  stars  to
marking  the  position  of  places  on  the  surface  of
the  earth.  He  i«  also  regardetl  as  having  invent-
ed trigonometry.  In  plane  trigonometry  be  con-
structed a  table  of  chords  of  arcs,  which  is  prac-
tically the  same  as  one  of  natural  sines ;  and  in
Bplierical  trigonometry  he  bad  some  methods  of
solving  triangles.  Of  bis  nnmerous  writings  we
poiwess  only  his  commentary  on  the  PkatHomeHa
of  Endoxns  and  Aratns  and  a  catalogue  of  1026
fixed  stars.  The  famons  Almatjenl  of  Ptolemy  (M«-
yitmi  ZviToftr)  is  founded  on  the  writings  of  Hip-
parchos.  See  Ball,  HMort  Hint,  of  MathfmaticH,  pp.
79-81,  90  (London,  IUSS).

HippSxis  ('Iwirapts).  A  river  in  the  south  of
Sicily,  now  Cititiariiia.

Hlppaimoates  tlwwapfAtxrnjsh  A  leader  of  the
Spartan  cavalry. See  Hippkis.

Bliq>Sfln«  Clmraaot).  A  native  of  Metapon-
tum  and  follower  of  tbe  Pythagorean  doctrine.
He  is  said  to  have  excelled  in  tbe  application  of
matliematical  principles  to  music,  statics,  and  men-
surntion.  Incommwi wirhcrUersof tbesamc sclinol,


be  beld  that  fire  was  the  originating  cause  of  all
things.  He  taught  also  that  the  universe  is  finite,
is  always  changing,  aud  undergoes  a  periodical
conflagration.  In  consequence  of  bis  having  made
known  the  sphere  consisting  of  twelve  pentagons,
which  was  a  secret  of  the  Pythagoreans,  he  is  said
to  havo  been  drowned  as  an  impious  pei-son  (Diog.
I^aert.  viii.).

HIppeia  (tmrflr).  The  Greek  term  for  horsemen
and  knights.  (1)  Among  the  Athenians,  the  citi-
zens whose  itroperty  qualified  them  for  the  second
class.  (2)  Among  the  Spartans,  the  royal  guard
of  honour,  consisting  of  300  picked  yonng  men
under  tbe  age  of  thirty,  who,  iiltliongh  originally
mounted,  afterwards  served  ns  heavy-nmieil  fmit-
soldiera.

Tbe  cavaliy  of  Athens,  which  was  first  formed
after  tbe  Persian  War,  and  then  consisted  of  300
men,  from  the  time  of  Pericles  onwards  consisted
of  1200  men — viz.  200  mounted  bowmen  (Ifnroro-
$oTai),  who  were  slaves  belonging  to  the  State,  and
the  tdOO  citizens  of  the  two  highest  classes.  Thoy
were  kept  together  in  time  of  peace,  aud  careful-
ly drilled  ;  at  the  great  public  festivals  thoy  took
part  in  the  processions.  They  were  commanded
by  two  timapxoi,  each  of  whom  had  five  <^vXai  un-
der him  and  superintended  the  levy.  Subordinate
to  these  were  the  ten  <f>v\apxoi  in  command  of  the
ton  phylae.  Both  sets  of  officers  were  drawn  from
the  two  highest  classes.  It  was  tbe  duty  of  the
council  to  see  that  tbe  cavalry  was  in  good  con-
ditiou,  and  also  to  examine  new  members  in  re-
spect of  their  equipment  and  their  eligibility.

The  number  of  horsemen  to  be  despatched  to
the  field  was  determined  by  the  decree  of  the
I>opnlar  assembly.  Every  citizen-soldier  receiver!
eqnipment-money  on  joining,  and  during  bis  time
of  service  a  subsidy  towards  keeping  a  groom  and
two  horses ;  this  grew  to  be  an  annual  grant  from
the  State,  amounting  to  forty  talents  (flO,400  in
intrinsic  value),  bnt  regular  pay  was  only  given
iu  the  field.

At  Spai*ta  it  was  not  until  n.c.  404  that  a  regu-
lar body  of  horse  was  formed,  the  cavalry  being
much  neglected  as  comparetl  with  tbe  infantry.
The  rich  lirnl  only  to  provide  liorses,  equipment,
and  armour ;  for  the  actual  cavalry  service  in  time
of  war,  only  those  unfitted  for  the  heavy-armed  in-
fantry were  drafted  oft'  and  sent  to  the  field  with-
out any  preliminary  drill.  In  later  times  every
fiopa  of  heavy-snneil  iiifautry  seems  to  have  bad
allotted  to  it  a  ;iopa  of  cavalry,  of  oncertain  nnm-  •
ber.  By  enlisting  mercenaries  and  introducing
allies  into  their  forces,  the  Spartans  at  length  ob-
tained better  cavalry.

Tbe  utility  of  the  Greek  citizen-cavalry  was
small  on  acconnt  of  their  heavy  armour,  their
metal  helmet,  and  their  coat  of  mail,  their  kilt
fringed  with  metal  flaps,  their  cnisses  reaching  to
the  knee,  and  their  leather  leggings.  They  did
not  take  sliields  into  action,  As  wenitons  of  of-
fence they  ha/1  the  strnigtit  two-edged  snonl  and
a  spear,  used  either  im  a  lance  or  n  javelin.  Slio«--
iiig  of  hoiws  was  unknown  to  the  Greeks,  as  vran
also  tbe  use  of  stirrups.  If  anything  at  oil  was
used  as  a  saddle,  it  was  either  a  Mddle-cloth  or  a
piece  of  felt,  which  was  firmly  fastened  with  girths
under  the  horse's  belly.

Tbe  Tliessalianswere  considered  the  Iwst  riders.
Cavalry  became  really  important  fi>r  the  first  tinn^
in  the  Macedonian  army  undtT  Philip  niid  his  son


HIPHAS


9ti


HtVi'OCRATES


Aloxiiiiilt:!'  ili<?  (ir«^t.  AUliiiitgli  ill  uurl'ier  titties
ihe  nnniber  uf  ltont(;mL>n  in  tln)  Onrek  ftircoti  waa
only  \cry  biubII,  in  tlH^  unity  wliicli  AlexitiiiltT
luarclied  into  Asia  they  fomtotl  nearly  a  sixth
part  of  tliu  iiilaiitry.  Tliu  Mucwloniiui  cavalt}'
was  divided  iiif-u  boavy  ami  liglil,  butli  coualtiting
of  aquatlrous  (tXai)  of  ati  uvernge  Jitreugtb  of  *200
iDDii.  Of  tilt!  Iicavy  cavalry  tlto  cboii-cst  tronps
welt*  tbe  Mawtloiiinii  and  TIiciMalimi  bonwiiieti,
tiniifd  ill  llic  Greek  fimbinn,  who  wave  an  furuiida-
blu  ill  iiiiHlniijjIit  OH  ill  NJtit;Ut  coiiilmt;  in  nnler  and
tllitcipliriH  Mit^y  far  KiiqtOiuw'il  llio  detiw  !U|Ii:uIi-(iiih  of
tlw  AHJulic  cavalry,  and  evt'ii  in  attacking  tliu  iu-
fautry  uf  tlm  eiK>iiiy  tliey  lind  ^eiiurully  a  dt<rtHivw
i.'flV.>vt.  Tli«  lifjlit  cnvalry,  which  woa  t'liuHlitiittsd
ulidvr  Uif  iiiiinr  of  n-^Spu^m  (itkiriiiiHbci'H),  coii-
■iixt«il  of  Mari-diiiiiaii  (raf»tr<ro<p6iioi,  su  eallud  from
thti  nariaia,  a  lancK  fnitn  fonrlreii  to  nlxteeti  fui-'t
litiiR  (Polyb.  xviii.  12),  and  of  Tbraciaii  horsemen.
Tbn  bynvy  trtvalrymwii  liiid  cat-li  a  inoiioted  spr-
vaiit  iiud  pnibiibly  a  l«il  bor»ji  fur  tlic  tnuiHport  of
bn>;};iige  and  foiTige.  In  tbij  time  after  Alt-xnnder
tliMie  onnio  into  existence  ^vbat  ncrn  called  tl.e
T^rcHiini  equittit,  or  lii;{it-ariued  8]H<ariiien,  with
two  laimeM  each  {b.c.  lihi,  Livy,  xxxv.  '26, 29). Sc«

EXKItCITt'8.

Hlpplas  { 'Itnrias).  (1)  A  Cinwk  Ko^duHt  of  EIih
and  A  von  temporary  of  Surrati>H.  H«  tainjjht  in
llio  (owns  of  Gri'ucp.  o»|M*tially  at  Albuiiti.  Hi-
bad  tlw  lulvanta^c  of  a  itrodi-'ioiiH  niHOiory,  and
was  4l»>eiily  voi-swl  in  all  tbt;  briiriituf(  of  Iiim  day.
He  attt!ni|ittd  literature  in  4.'%**Ty  I'orui  which  wu»
then  extant.  He  al»o  made  tbu  tint  attempt  in
tbe  cunipoEtitUta  of  dialog; tit'^.  In  the  Iv^o  I'lii*
tunic  ilialotfiies  nattipd  aft«r  htm  (tlippian  Maiar
and  Hippiat  ilinor),  lie  in  n^prt^4(ttiit«*<)  sm  axcen-
(lively  Viiiti  mid  arro;{aiit.  Soo  tlii)  uMidy  l)y  Osaiin
ill  the  lihfiN.  iluttum  tor  I^4;(,  p.  4t*5  foil,,  and  1'.
Lrja,  r>er  Sopkiat  Ilippiait  {\rf9;i).  {"H  A  mm  of
PiKiHtrataa. Sea  Pl6l6TitATl i>ab.

HippTcou  (Imruciii',  kc.  tmifiiov}.  A  Grark  na-aH-
111  r  of  diHtaiirc,  equal  to  four  ntJidia.  or  alioiil  24'.ti
Kii^littli  feet.  AL'OordiiiK  to  Pliititrch,  it  was  men-
tioned til  till!  lan'H  of  Solon  (t'Int.  Sot.  'til  Seu
nii'i'ouitOMi'tj ;  Staiuum.

Hippo  Cimnin').  (1)  Hirpi>  KKGiLiSt  »  city  on
tbu  coast  of  Nnuiidia,  uitcv  a  royal  n'^idi-niM-,  and
afttTvrordfl  celebratt-Hl  as  tho  bUboprir  of  tSl-  Au-
giisiiiio.  i'i)  Hzi'tHj  l>:AicitiiYTi!S  or  ZAitiTt'.s  mow
•liisertn),  a  city  on  tlie  north  ei*ast  of  tb«  Ciirtlia-
j{iiiini)  ti-rritory  west  of  L'riciL  (.t)  A  town  of  the
Caqietani  in  HiHi»uijin  TorracouoUftitj,  south  of
Toletinn  (T*iUm1o).

Bippobfltae  ( Iinradorni  ).  "Tliu  fewb-m  of
lionwA."  Tho  naiiic  of  rlu-  nobility  of  Cb^ilris  iii
Enboea^correspomling  To  the  Ijrrrttf  in  utbei-tireek
8tiitu8.  On  tbe  cuiiqiie«t  of  the  L'hulcitliaDH  by  ?bu
Atlifliiiaiis  ill  H,('.  5(K»,  [beuo  lljpiioliulau  were  de-
prived of  their  lamltn,  and  4UtKi  Athenian  elernchl
itcnt  to  l-aki!  piwHciwion  of  them  (Hi-nid.  v,  77,  vi,
l(X»;  Phil.  I'rricl.  iW;  Acliaii.  T.  //.  vi.  I  ;  Grote,
eh.  31,  iii.  145).

Hippocampaa  {'timfMeofnros).  A  fahiilaiis  ani-
mal, having  tbo  fore -quartern  and  bnly  of  a
horse,  btit  (utding  in  (be  tail  of  a  liib,  like  the
fullowin;,'  illudtration,  from  n  Pompciaii  paint-
ing, wliich  the  povta  and  artitttti  of  antiquity
commoiily  attach  f«  the  marine  ear  of  Neptune


and the  TritotiH.
h.  V.  p.  120.


See  Naov.  out!  IauU.  op.  Urn.


"^


HlppocBni))u& (l*unipelui  pajntlns.)

Hfppoceutaiuiia  (imroietvravpas).  A  lion«-«««-
tanr,  bidf-luTM?  iiikI  half>mau  (L'ic.  A'.  D-  ii.  2),  tu
oiiyKtsed  to  tbe  tiub-ceutanr,  half-man  and  Liilf-fi>b
^i}^S\'OK^yravpos),  under  wUieb  form  tbe  giants  wlio
waged  war  against;  tbe  gmlo,  were  tvpre&ratcd
(AikiIUkI.  i.  U,  1). See  CENTAriti'it.

Hippocodn  i'linroKotitf).  Tlie  von  uf  Obalonuf
Hpaitainidof  thciiyinpli  Batra.  Hedn*veht«bn>th-
cm  TyudaieiiH  and  Irariiin  from  home.  AJVerwanli,
in  eouMM]tien<M!  of  biH  Nbiying  tht^  yonng  Orfiniiit, i
kinaiiian  of  lleuirb-H,  be  himrndf,  with  hiw  tuntty
sons,  woa  hlain  by  IIcrach-M  in  Alliani^n  with  KtD)[
Cepheua  of  Tegiia.  Tyiidanin«  wa«  theirby  it-
atorcfl  to  tbe  inboritauco  of  his  father'^  kingdoai.

RfppocrStea  ('IwinMpaTijt).  0)  llin  father  il
Pinlfiti'iitnH,  the  Athenian  tyrant.  (S)  A  fimiiMi*
Greek  pbjuician,  was  bnrii  in  the  islatid  of  t*n«(«
ancient  wtat  of  tbe  wor»bipof  A«<:lepins).  iiliiigtii.c.
400.  He  wan  tbti  koii  uf  Ilernclidiv)  and  »f  Phte-
iiattft.)*,  anil  sprang  fnmi  the  race  of  (he  A^-lc)"*-
dae,  a  jiriextly  family,  who  in  the  coiirw;  oi  Uuw
lia<l gathered  and  pretw;rve<l nicdtcal UadJtimi*.


which  werw  aeeretly  bumled  down  froiu  (atber  I"
Hou.  Like  many  of  the  A^elcpiadae,  he  |irwii«^
bib  art  while  tmvelliiig  in  diflrrent  pafU  "*
(Jreece,  Ho  ia  Muid  to  have  bc«n  at  Athene  «t  '^
time  of  thti  PebqioniieMiati  War,  and  to  bavi*  Uli<"
advaiitu)*e  of  the  inatiuetion»  of  tlm  ^ipiiiil*  ^cr*
giaa  and  Pnaliutta ;  l>i<mnurituH  uf  Afulrta  U  nl**


HIPI'OCKr.NIi


JJfiS


HII»Kmi«»MlTS


Qauit^il  UM  tiiio  uf  hiH  leuclicrx.  Tlui  viUiiu  Iir  hiiti-
Miir  ttct  u\>oti  (tliituMtjtliic  H<Iiicatiou  i»  prnvril  by
his  remark  ttiut  "  ti  )ibiluMj|iliJu  pliyHii'iiiii  rt-M-iii-
bleu  u  goii."  Tutranln  tbL-  i-iiil  ol' bin  lift-  hv  liveU
cbiedy  iii  Tliessaty  niiil  on  the  JHland  of  TbruHM.
n«>  <lii;d  about  n.c*.  :t77  inr  latter)  in  the  Thessalinu
Kai-ima,  wbi^m  bia  tnnili  wn^  tn  bp  seifn  t»  late  an
tlin  seconil  voiitiiry  a.ii.  All  ThmiiiL;!!  bis  louj*  lifi*
hit*  activity  wiis  iiiici«^i.Hiii;;  in  itn  t>fl'i)rtK  t«  iuci-eaiM;
tbr  lUiHiiitit  of  1114  kiiflwlrtlijd  mi  all  9iibjei;tH,  by
Udth  pnintira)  mill  llu'ur<;tii'iil  iiivr^tigatintiH,  iitifl
liix  iinu-tirat  kiiuwlcilj^r  wiih  as  great  iih  bin  tb<*<><
r«ti(*ftl.  Siifiui  uf  biN  fnigiiii-iilM  iiiiil  (>{iigraiiiiiiutir
ilicia  bnvu  ptuwed  iiiti>  rhi-  lircniiiin^of  nil  titm',  oh,
for  instance,  the  fauiiiiiH  Htt.viii}:.  "Life  Ia  abort, aiul
Art  18  loii);.''  lie  woM  thu  foiiiidvr  of  ibi-  »ch<>ol  uf
ft  acieiititlc  art  of  hcnliug,  nnd,  as  jii  the  cum!  of
Homer,  iiiiintToii^  uritiitgs  of  iidkii'^trii  aiitUu»Lii)*,
pmceediiiff  frxtm  the  schoul  wlucb  folK»\reit  liiei
8y8teiii,  VffT*s  iittribiit«d  tn  liiui.  Sevcuty  •  Iwu  I
workii,  greut  and  siimll,  in  tht-  loiiit:  ami  ultl  Attic  |
dialects,  bi>jir  biH  iiaiiie,  uiiil.  iippaivntly,  fui-int'd  i
A  »iiit;lc<  coUtMlioii,  cvnii  lH^fi>r('  Ebt^y  came  tnul«;i'  i
ibutiUMMidvnitioiiof  ibuci-iLicNiif  AlRXauilriu.  But  '
it  is  cltfjir  that,  »n  tlio  uiiciotitn  tbi'm!M'>lvuH  wrrt* '
uwiuv,  uuly  a  small  purtiuu,  whicli  l-uu  ]io  lonK*.'!- ,
b«  pivcitwly  di'llued,  ivatly  bolurigH  to  biin.  It  in
bigtity  |>robabtti  that  bitt  m-arest  n>laliuu»,  who
were  alao  (litttingaisbed  physiciaua,  cantribiited
llieir  Hlinro  t*3  tho  polluctiuu,  and  tbiil  it  r<iiilu)iiti
workM  by  lii»t  80iih  ThesHulim  and  Drai'oii,  hit  unif
in-law  Polybus,  and  his  two  yruinlMiiiH,  Mit>  winrt
«>f  Tlu-usaliiH  mid  Dntoou,  whit  Itoiti  bin  uwii  iiaiiif.
The  bc^t  kuown  uf  tbetw  wurkH  :irii  (he  aphnriHiiirt
('.\<f>opKTftoi),  which,  ill  aiitiijuLty  aii<l  in  iiitMliit-val
time«,  noru  bold  in  high  c-Htct;ni,  uiul  havu  Uvcu
freely  oommuutcil  uii  by  (iruck--*,  l{oinii:n!>,  ami
Arabw;  Ibc-y  coiuinb  uf  sliiirl  Miiiti-uci'fi  iiiioii  (hit
uaturu  of  illtie8i»«!t,  tUcir  KytuptoiiL<«  and  ltI-hos,  atid
tbulr  Uual  Imuu.  One  of  bin  trt-atlHeM  (17(^/1  'Xipav.
'XdoTvp,  T6v»av\,  u'liich  is  of  };i<iit>rii1  iitt4;ri-rtr,  and
is  iu  all  rtssi>evI,H  aiium;;  tlit*  li(.-at,  i^  tliut  on  Uiu
iiiflueiive  uf  ibe  uliniafe,  the  water,  uiid  thu  con-
tifjiiratiou  of  a  cuitntry  u[iun  tin)  )>hy«ivHl  and  in-
ttilU-ctual  lif<-'  uf  it8  inbubirunti}.  In  iht-  M^coint
|MMtit>nuf  tbiB  nurk  art"  I'onnd  tliu  tirNt  br;^inniiigM
of  a  com|>arutlve  vthuugraphy,  \vliii:h  at  unci;  »ur-
lirisc  u»  by  thu  Bcntcttes.1  ami  IntolliKfnn'!  of  it^
t)ba«rvatiun,  luid  Httriii-is  iitt  by  tb(^  simplicity  and
elouriiesdt  uf  ilii  Hlyle.  Many  Hiit-ieiit  jihyiiieiuim
wrote  comuieiitaijiw  on  the  works  of  llipjKicrat^K,
tbe  most  celvbrated  Iwiu};  thoKM  of  Galen.

The  lirttt  t-dttion  of  tliu  (ireek  text  of  Hippocia-
tea  is  the  Aklinv  ( Wtiicf,  U/iG).  Thu  beHt  icxxtent
vditiuMK  ate  iIium;  of  I.ittrf^,  with  u  Frviich  tiaiiHin-
tiuu,  lOvuls.  trsi*ls,lr':CI-OI),niid  that  uf  £riiiui'iu9>.
with  a  Laliu  vetTiou  (Utrvclit,  IHr>9-li5).  A  k«mmI
Cngllsh  tnuiHhiliitn  Ik  that  by  AduiiiFS,-^  voU.  (ISAd).
Bee  Berdof,  Itrufin  and  (iruirth  of  thf  IhnliHtj  Art
(Loudon,  ltfiU),and  the  urtiele  }1i:l»iiina.

Hlppocrfin6  ('Ir-naKfiiivrj  or  ' [mrovKfiijvf),  "  the
fnni.tuin  uf  the  stcr d  ").  The  fonnt  of  tlio  Miiwn,
whicli  was  Htrnck  nut  of  Moniil  Iteliron,  in  Bih'ih
tia,  Ity  tb(^  hoof  uf  the  wintjud  8tc«d  IV^taitiiN,  Sen
Ut'KAK ;  I'KGAsna.

Hlppodanieia<iinrod(i/i(ui,  »c.  Sirfo).  An  adjec-
tive derived  frnm  the  name  of  the  architt'ct  IHp-
IMKlatuiiM  of  Miletus,  who  is  duid  to  liavu  botMi  titc
fin>t  of  the  tJriM'ks  who  bitilt  whole  cilit^s  on  a  reg-
oImt  uix-biti'ctnral  plan  ;  and  hence  the  word  iff  ap-


plied to  Hneh  eltiex,  sad  (o  thu  pnblic  plar«8  and
buildings  iu  them.  Thu  I'lnwuN,  for  i'xaiiiple,  waa
denij^uud  by  Hi]>[MMl»iiiUM,  and  its  market- plure
was  ealitd  ImrtiAii^fioc  aynpiu  Itnroflafttla  ay.,  or
dimply  r;  'imroiafitia,  IlippcHlumiis  lloiiriNhcd  dur-
ing the  8erond  half  of  the  tifth  century  B.C.

Hippodamia  {'linioSuti4ia).  (1)  A  diin^hter  of
Ot-iinni»iiN,  kiii^  iif  i'ttui,  in  KIih,  who  married  I'e-
Ui[iti,  Kon  uf  Taiiialnst.  (Heu  PKLtiPA,  wliere  the  full
U'f^fnd  in  Ktveu.)  (tf)  A  daiigliter  of  AdrantUH,  ^'*^ti
of  Arguti,  who  married  Fiiilboibi,  king  of  thn  Lapi-
thuf.  The  festivity  whieb  prevailed  on  the  day
of  hor  inarriaKe  was  iuterrupiuil  by  the  vtideiu
conduct  of  the  Oeutaurs,  nbicli  led  l4i  tbeir  con-
vict with  the  Lapitbou.  (See  Ckntauiii  ;  I.api-
TUAK.) (11)  8ee  BitlHbTH.

Hippod&mUB  i'lwnitikipuii).  A  (^rnek  architect,
Ihimi  ill  Milvtnx  in  the  t»econd  half  of  the  llfth  een-
tiiry  u.c.  Ho  was  the  Drst  itiveutor  of  a  system
of  layiii){  out  towns  on  f^itmetrical  principles^
carrit-d  out.  uudcr  his  ilirection,  iu  the  luyluf{  out
of  the  Piraetitt  (i|.  v.),  the  harbour- town  of  Athens,
and  also  at  thu  building  of  Tliiirii  (B.o.  413)  and  of
Kbodcs  (-lOS) ;  it  was  aWi  iiiH'd  in  stibsrqnent  times
in  ihf  foiitiilatioti  of  new  towns.

Hippodr6tntiB  (Iirrr  Jd/>o/io().  The  name  by  which
Ih©  (jirccks  dft-iKimtcd  Ilic  plarn  apiffopriated  to
the  hor**-riice,H,  both  id*  chariots  and  of  sinjjle
horses,  which  foriaed  u  part  of  their  games.  Tlie
wonl  waM  aliui  applied  to  thu  races  themselveH-

The  niiMle  uf  tlghtJiig  fmm  chariois,  as  ileserilmt
by  Iluuicr,  involves  the  necessity  of  nmch  previous
practice;  and  the  funeral  games  in  bouoiir  of  P:k-
troclua  present  ns  with  an  example  of  the  chariot-
race,  ueeuitying  the  first  nnd  most  intportaut  place
in  tboai^  games  (11.  xxiii.  262-650).  In  thiii  vivid
ileacriptiuii  the  nature  of  the  contest  and  the  ar-
rangviuuntK  for  it  are  very  clearly  indicated.  Tberu
is  1IU  airtillcinlly  constructed  hippodrume;  biic  ati
existing  laiiilumi'k  or  momiuu-iit  (o-^^n)  is  cho-Miu
an  tlte  gojil  (Tfitfui),  lonnd  whirl)  tlio  chariots  hml
to  pass,  leaving  it  on  the  left  band,  and  so  retiii-u-
ttig  to  the  U reek  ships  4>u  the  sea-shore,  fioui  whieU
tliey  had  started.  The  »airse  thus  marked  out  was
so  long  [h»t<  the  goal,  whicli  WHS  the  stomp ufu  trve,
coiihl  only  be  clearly  seeu  by  its  having  twu  white
stones  leaning  against  it,  uud  that,  as  the  cUariot«
return,  the  siwciators  are  uucertaiu  which  is  tint
(4^  foil.:  the  p;issage  fnriiirthes  a  precedent  for
blotting  at  a  lio['»e-r;(ce,  485).  Tim  gn»ind  is  a  luv>
el  plain,  but  with  its  natural  iiie(|uulilies,  which
alt)  sntbcient  to  make  (he  light  chariots  leap  front
Ihi!  grotinti,  and  to  threaten  aii  overthrow  where
the  earth  was  broken  by  a  winter  t^fireut,  or  A
collision  in  the  narrow  hollow  »ay  thus  fonm-d.
Thu  chariots  were  live  in  number,  each  with  two
horses  and  a  single  driver,  who  stoisl  upright  tu
his  chariot. See  Cl'HKtls.

Ill  a  nice  of  this  nature,  success  would  obvious-
ly depend  i]nite  as  iiHUih  on  tlie  ronragu  and  skill
of  the  driver  as  on  the  spee<l  of  the  butves.  At
stalling,  it  was  necessary  mi  to  direct  the  borsch
as,  ou  the  one  baud,  to  avt^id  the  loss  of  time  by
driving  wide  of  the  straightcst  courF«r,  and  on  the
other  not  t<>  incttr  the  rLtk  of  a  collirtiun  iit  tlie
crowil  of  chariots  imr  to  make  so  straight  fur  tbe
goat  as  to  leave  insufficient  room  to  turn  it.  Here
was  the  eriticul  point  of  thu  race,  t^i  tnrn  the  goal
as  sharply  as  ]K}«s)hlc,  with  thu  nave  of  the  near
wheel  almost  grazing  it,  and  t^*  do  this  safely:


HIPPODROMUS


N4


HlPPODROlWrS


verr  nft«ll  the  driver  wa*  burei  tlirown  out,  :iit(l  i  uti*  miglit  iilnrt  ffitlioilt  coiiriisioii  ntnl  on
l\vf  dinriot  bmkt'ii  iti  ptectw. There  whs  iitiullirr  i  irniis. It  is  now  to  Iw  aeeu  kotr  tbe^i''  roiiditj

dntigtTHt  thin  (Miiiil,  wltifli  ilewrvpn  pjtrticiilaj  iiiv  j  wi-r«  anlititleil  iu  the  hljipmlnmii'  lit  01>-m|>ia.'3
tkf  IIS  (:otiiu*fU-<l  with  Ihi*  »rr:itiK<iriiciitM  i>f  tlm wLiioh  tho  tiiily  deHcriplion  vre  \»mf»:w  is  it)  two


liili)>i>(lrotitc  of  LiU'r  limw*. At*  ih«  hotht^  is  eaitil^

wiiri'i),  it  t*nii  ririiilily  Wt-  itiHlcrHtuud  tliul  tb«  noiftf

itiKl  cninh  of  nmiiy  i'h»ri<it!*  liitiiliig  \hf  goal  (»■

{Ti'ihvr,  with  Ihc  »<!•

tlilioiiiil cuiiftiHiiiii

I'lvjih'fl  by  1  hi*  «ver-

Ihnnv nf  wjiue of

thfiii, would so

fi'ightvti Bomi- i>(

ibr honH-> OB to

iiioki'  them  iiiiiiiaii-

Hgciible ; mid tlii"

id  V  X)ir<^  snly  n*-

li'rrrd  t4i  l>y  HnmiT.

Atltiillg ttlP illlliT

iliHiiiit4>rH  to  which
the  o»iii[it' ti  torn
weru  liable  were :
Ibo  loHs  of  the
wliip;  ihei-einges-


piiiwagt-K  of  PiiiisBiiiuA  ( V.  iri,  (  4  ;  vi.  HO,  H  foil.).
The  folhiwing  is  the  ^rniiml-plaii  wbirh  Hirt
(J)].  XX-  Or.  f^)  hiM  ilniwn  out  fruui  the  deMiiptwn


ED.,


■rg?:^'-"


A


^


Oraund  plu  of  Ui|>)io>lroine  ai  Otymplo. (HirLI


<-Hp)ii};  from  tbc  hands;  the  brooking  nf  (he  |KtIe;
the  light  chariot  heiiig  o%'erttiriied,  or  the  driver
thruw*u  out  of  it,  lhrunf{b  the  ronKhnrsH  of  the
)^iiiid,ur  by  iipglecliit;;  to  baliinre  the  body  pn>p-
orly  ill  tiiriiiti(C  the  pi-il  ,  and  tiw  lii'iii;;  mnt*
pRllKd  lo  f^ive  way  tJi  a  boblt^r  driver,  for  fe»r  of  a
i-idliHiiHi  ;  lint  it  wan  iMtiHidurod  futil  phiy  to  Ijike
Mitch  an  advantage.  Ttiu  prir.v.i*,  an  in  the  other
Uiinii'ric  );uiuiN4,  were  orHnbnlaiitJal  valiir,  ami  onr
for  each  eoiupfiitor.  The  chttriutoi-r  a<'ciiiM-Ml  of
funl  play  wax  rei)iiiri*d  lo  luy  lui4  hand  ii]>oii  Iuh
lionu^fl,  and  to  swear  by  J'ojit'idoii,  thi;  patron  d^ity
of  the  mcc,  that  he  wan  fjnillleiM.  Tlii.<i  do«crip-
lloii  i»  fthowii  by  the  followiit};  illiistiiiliou  from
nu  antique  Greek  vnae,  in  which  i!i  ikK-ii  the  gtm)
M  »  mom  Htoue  poAt,  with  a  ftllet  woiuid  vound
it;  the  form  of  the  rhitriol«  and  the  atlitnde  uf
(ho  drivrm  ix  wtdl  Htiown;  each  liaa  fonr  homeH,
H»  in  tliv  rnriieHt  Olympic  thurint-nire ;  and  thi!
vividnenn  uf  the  icpres^'iitatinn  18  inrri'aHcd  by  tbn
LiitrtMlnctioii  of  (111-  tm-idetil  4tf  a  hi)i><e  having  got
loiH^e  from  the  first  cbariui,  tliv  driver  of  whicb
Mtriveu  to  retain  bin  ploeo  with  the  4ith6nt(l'auofka,
Rildcr  ttHlikcH  Leben».  pi.  iii.  No.  10).

In  no  other  writer  is  there  a  description,  at  once
no  vivid  and  eo  minute,  of  the  Greek  cbariot-
niL'o  OM  thia  of  Ilomer'e ;  and  it  may  Ite  safety  att-
mimed  that,  with  a  few  poiiW^t  of  difference,  it
will  give  an  equally  k<-H"'  <'''^'*  **^  '^  chnriot'-race
at  Olyiupia  or  any  oilier  of  the  ^n-at  k'""*''*  "f  1^*
ter  tiiuea  The  ebiuf  poiulH  uf  dillerence  wnn^  the
fjivuliT  eunipactii(.-H»  of  the  coiirtte,  in  order  tliiit  a
large  body  of  »pi-clators  iiii^bt  view  tliu  race  wilh
con  VI- 1  lie  I  ICC,  and  the  greater  iintnber  td'  ebariot-s.
The  tUitt  of  tUtise  conditions  iiivulviil  the  necetk^i*
ly  uf  making  the  rftc«  rouBitit  trf  ttoveiul  double
lengtUn  of  the  coume,  iiiateuil  of  only  one ;  the  tioc-
ond  rL'quireil  Home  arrangement  by  which  the  char-


of  PnueaniM :  A,  B,  (be  side* ;  C,  tlw  ronoded  en^l
of  the  hippodrome,  with  raised  aeatn  for  tb«  fpec-
tators  (the  dotted  line  D  rf  is  tbo  ixis  of  the  ft^
nr«) ;  a,  place  of  honour  fur  the  tna^intralOH  auil
mii^ictaiiH ;  /j,  side  diM>r,  i>erliapfl  foi  the  ex)t  of
ilifuiblcd  r.bnnot«and  linrwN;  r^  aealH  fur  the  Hel'
lanodirae,  the  jndgeH  of  the  gnmnH ;  if,  pnocifHil
eiLlrnncn,  curri>Npundiiig  to  ihn  jtortn  trimmpkatu
in  a  Konniii  i-jrc-int;  !>,  the  Atartiiig-placei  c,  il«
iipiix  ;  /.  If,  iln  eurved  nidi^s ;  A,  f,  etc.,  up  to  L  tta-
tiunii  uf  tliu  chariotH,  iheir  ilirL-ctimiN  couvergms
lowardM  the  point  K;  K,  G,  the  gnala,  or  tunnog-
poittH  ;  II,  the  Hpinn ;  p,  p.  itmall  intDrvalu  lietvim
t)io  spLua  and  the  goalii;  7.  tW  winning  Mtte:  ■-
dolphin  need  an  a  Mgual ;  n,  ullnr.  with  engle  M
bigiiitl ;  u,  o,  u,  portico  of  Agnaptnr*.

The  general  form  of  t  he  h  1  p|M>drunie  was  au  nl*'
long,  with  a  nemicirculur  cnit,  V-,  and  wilh  Ibe
right  Hide,  A,  Humewlnit  lunger  than  the  Iril.  H.
for  a  reasiin  lo  bo  Mtnied  preMMitly.  Tbfl  riftht
Hide,  A,  wuM  formed  liy  an  nrtiticinl  iiiound:  tlw
left,  B,  by  the  natnralHloiKt  of  a  bill.  The  hw"
uf  the  fonrlh  t^ide,  U,  wan  fonunl  by  the  potUoa
of  Agnapttis,  HO  called  fiYim  it«  bnilder.  At  tlii*
end  of  the  liip|K>droiiie  wh4  the  eturttng'[ili»
Cn<^tfrtr).  iu  tlio  form  of  the  pn>w  of  a  )»hip,  triti)
it«  apex,  e,  towanU  the  area,  and  each  of  iu
more  than  400  feet  long.  Along  iKith  of  tbcae
n-ere  tttullii  (oix^pira)  for  the  chaiiot«  abont  t"
like  the  varnrrfu  in  the  Roman  circmt :  and  ii
in  like  arrangemout  nf  these  Htatlu  that  the
liartty  of  the  Greek  Atarting-plnoo  couniMte*!-  Ac-
cording to  the  view  which  we  follow,  the  fl»lh
Mere  80  arrnngeil  ait  that  the  pole  of  each  chirio'-
while  standing  in  iU  Mtall,  wotf  dircotnl  toanM-
nial  point  K,  at  whieb,  iwt  nearly  a«  potiible. <*''
chariot  onght  to  fall  into  ita  proper  cnttrw.  A*
ihi«  point,  E,  wa«  ucceasarily  on  the  right  lid*  "^


i


Ber  to  turn  tlx-  i;i>:il  uii  tlio  Icf(  linnth,  I  The  tlmriotn,  tliiih  rtUirt*?)!,  tiad  to  (iium  (werat
8|ioiuliiigHtulUuii  eci4*li  i!iiil«  ntMii  re*  titn(*fi  n)iiu<l  ivt\i  gtuiltt  {vvinrai).  llii>  (liKtini'tJnu  1h>-
iluiref1t4)bceciiiii)i<itaiitrromllioa|)4-x.r(aM  willfiri'ii-  tneeii  ivliich  is  i>tit>  of  the  ilifBcuU  ihi'iuIm  in  tho
eiitly  be  »ecD),  uiid  of  cuiui>i>  skUo  fruni  tUi^  (luiitt  K,  I  clfHcriptiuu  of  FaiisniiKts.  On  Lbu  nholu,  it  micuih
it  fotlowifi  that  thr*  hiiM<ol'tho(i^Ai-«ia  luiiMt  have  been  1  uioMt  probable  that  the  otii*  M'hieh  he  il<*8GrLhi'«)  an


I
I


perpend ir It hir  tu  the  li[l<^  L  r,  auil  therefure  oblique
to  tbeiUtiaDd:  and  this  is  the  reason  wby  themtle
A  wmslon£«r  than  the  »id«  U.  Tbc  cnrvature  of  the
flide«i>rih«a}tbt'ftiiiy,j7,isiiconjt.>cttir»]arraiiKcmeut,
Basil lufil  ;i»  l1i:it  which  wuo  probably  udopletl  to  (i^ive
more  Hpaeu  t<»racb  diuriulal  Hlurtiuj;.  Tlw  fnuitnf
each  fttall  Uailaronl  drawn  arnitw  it,  and  ttii^  ncctw-


bnviiig  n  bronxe  statue  of  Hippo<lanieia  b<ddiii|;
out  the  victaHa  HUet  as  if  sbuiit-  to  eronn  P<.'h>|Mi
nitli  it,  wttH  the  on«  nearer  to  the  ttphnU,  and
abreaatoflhe  winiiiuK  line,  F;  and  tliat  the  otb-
ur,  G.  round  nliirh  th<<  vburinlu  nuwie  their  firvt
tiini,  waa  thai  whirlt  PuuHnniuM  c-alls  "Turaxi]>-
pON,  thH  terror  of  Ihu  Uui-HCn." TbiH  waa  a  muiid


sarj'arrniiipoiiienta  were  luadL'TurU-llin^  thi-w^fonbt allar,  dedicated  to  Turaxippux,  who  wai«  Hup|N>w-d


fall  at  the  right  ni(>inuiit».  On  Ibe^igllalbei1l(;g)%■ull
for  the  race  In  begiu,  the  cordti  in  front  of  tin-  two
extreme  8tallM,h.  A,  n  ere  let  fall  i)tniidtuni-oUHly,nnd
the  two  chariots  .started;  then  tbuHc  of  the  next
pair:  and  to  on,  each  pair  of  chariots  being  IIIht-
atml  at  th*-  preciite  monieiit  when  tborw  \shk-h  had
alrBJuly  Htart^d  nanif  alin'iiMtof  Ihnir  iMiaition  ;  nriil
when  all  the  rhariotM  foniied  an  evf  n  linn  abrpiiKt
of  the  apex  of  tbi;  ajihrtin,  c,  it  waa  a  fair  nlart.
This  amugenieut  of  lU»  aphnfin  naa  the  inventinn
of  tbe  atatunry  Cleoetna,  uiid  wu.-*  iioprovird  by
AriBt«ktef).  perhaps  the  fuuioiis  painter.

Precisely  the  same  arraiiK«Dteuta  wt?re  inaite  for
atari  in (be race  nf  single  horoen (xtXiTm) ;


to  Hlrike  a  aniMruutnral  t«rror  into  llii<  Iioi-kcm  aa
tliey  poaaetl  ibu  apot,  and  whom,  tbea'fbre,  thi<
ehnrioteL-n  Miught  to  propifiaU-,  befoiti  llie  rucL*
Iregan,  by  uD'nring  sacrilicea  and  making  \owa  ni
this  altar,  raunanias  gives  vavioua  aecounta  km
to  who  thia  Tanixippiia  w»b  ;  tu>me  inoileni  suhol-
arn  talcp  the  word  for  an  itpj»i<II;itioii  iif  I'oNHidiiti
?fi[ipiuA.  Ili>  waa  Nintilurly  b»noiirfd  in  thn  lath-
mian  hipputlnmiH.  At  Ninncn  thrrti  woa  no  auoh
htm>,  but  above  Ihi!  tiiruing- point  of  tbe  couiiu*
thvre  wum  a  brighc^red  rock,  wliicli  was  Hiij>{H)m;d
h>  frighten  Hie  honwa,  Tlu-n;  av<*  acvi-rai  vuac-
puitttiugH  iHi  wliirh  rhariot»  or  aingle  horaea  arc
exhibited!  turning  tht>  goal,  wlaeh  is  repreaenteU
an  a  Doric  or  IouIl-  eoltnun. (Sen  Fu-


Ram  burae.


vlucMM  U  amamtu,  /Ui<tcisr


l7»rM  fm


and  in  both  cnaes,  as  in  the  race  descrilwd  by  Ho-
mer, the  stalls  were  asaigned  Co  llie  roiuiielirors
by  lot.  How  many  tdiariots  iiHually  Mhirletl  can-
not be  d4?t4^rndiUMl,  but  that  the  niinilHT  wa^  lurge
is  pn>ved  by  thn  irull-knocvn  ntttry  that  Ali^ibiiuleM
.atuue  (tent  to  one  race  tM^vuu  vlmriutx.  Sujilibek-H
%{JiUrt.70l-7i^i  Tneiitioufi  ten  ehuriutH  aa  ruDuhig
rat  once  lu  tho  Pytbiau  ]j;Amea;  und  thu  unuibL-r
at  Olyuipia  vras  no  doubt  gmitc-r  than  at  any
of  the  other  games.  This  is  probably  the  reason
fthy  the  arrangetnenta  of  a  stjirting-plac-e  were  so
much  wore  eomplioated  in  the  (Jret^k  hippodrome
than  Ihey  wero  iu  the  Riinum  rircu)*.  (See  Cdtri'H.j
Altoiit  the  Mtntre  of  the  triangular  urea  of  the  ujikr'
aia  there  woa  au  altur,  H,of  mngh  briek.whivh  wu«
ploalci'ed  afresh  bcfure  ench  fcttttval,  hurmoniiled  hy
ftbrouze  eagle  witUoutotretobcdwiugB;  aud  above
the  ap«x  of  the
mpkcsi »  was  a
bronze  dolpbiu,
m.  As  ibe  signal
for  Uie.  rac«  Ut
liegiu,  the  i':tgb!
was  made  u>  iH»ur
mloft,  so  aa  to  hu
aeeo  by  all  the
Bpeotatorv,  aud
the  dolpbiu  sank
,  lo  the  ground.


Then;  is  nu  authority  )»  the  nccoaut
iif  r»uAaniaa  fur  thu  oounecting  wall,
il.lM-twt'en  tbcgonia,  nordr>eslicstnt«
that  the  winning  Hue,  7,  waa  nmrkcd
out  as  a  white  line;  but  these  drlnils
are  inserted  from  the  analogy  of  the
Komon  L'ircus. So  ali*o  ifi  the  obIii{iw
posiliou  of  the  line  of  the  g<ialH,.iK  com-
pared with  the  axis  of  the  tignm :  of  odurw  tho
greultwt  spa[;e  whs r«.!i|iitred  at  K,  whrrt^  the  vhaiiota
weri*  all  nearly  abro;uit  of  «acli  »lhi;r.

RtmiK-rting  the  dimmaiouH  <if  tin*  Olympic
IlippiHlninii!  t]i4ire  \n  tio  |m*et!u'  iTirormatiuii  ;  but
fnirn  the  tetigth  of  thb-  uicaanru  called  rTnTixuf  and
on  otliL-r  giHtnnd*,  it  seems  probable  tbiit  the  dia-
taucts  from  the  starting  pi  ace  to  the  goal,  or  i>er-
ho|is,  rather,  from  one  goal  to  the  other,  was  two
stadia,  so  that  one  dtnible  coiir»p  woh  four  stailia.
How  many  such  double  courses  made  up  tho  wbulu
race  is  uot  known,  The  width  nuiKt  Imvn  b»vn  al
least  its  great  as  the  length  of  L*aeh  aide  of  the
itphrtiM — UHinidy,  mori'  ibiLli  41KI  fe»t.

The  chief  p«iiul» of  »litU*rviice  between  theOrf*nk
hippodrome  aud  tLjL>  Uomati  ciivus  are  the  smaller
width  of  the  latter,  as  only  four  cbartot«  rau  at


RafiF  of  Sinfin  Hnnni. (rnaaflEaV


IMPPOLVre


826


HIPrOTOXOTA


ohL-i-.  mill  tiio  tlifTrn-itt  «rraii|;pnii"i]i  of  the  cflifcrM,
Tbi*  pftiudpi  lit  vv-)iii-U  tlif  (llyinpicT  hontc-ractwrerc
tuatitllti'd  ai-fi  lUKlitiuufil  iiinU-r  Olymma.

Anioii^  tliti  Koiiiuii^  llif  trnii  wnn  uIhu  ii|i]>lio<l
111  ail  eiicloMxl  hpaco  loi-  viiling  ihkI  driving  in,  nt-
tuelietl  l»  n  frRrdfii  ov  vill.i,  and  plwntwl  with  inws
(Pliny,  FpiMt.  v.  (i,  H  »£',  '■«  I  M«rt-  xii.  fiO,  &,  witli
Pali'j*!!  imrp). S-flCiitci's;  CfiiRi't*,

HippolJ^td  ('ifnroXiVij).  (I)  Queen  nf  thr  Aiii:i-
Knns,<la)ii{liti^r  of  All-Hand  of  Oln^rn  ;  hliiiii  In  bnt-
tic  by  Hft-aclea,  when  ho  w<.*ut  at  tho  bUhlln)^  of
EnrynIhuiiH  to  fctcli  ihe  (,'irdle  given  lier  by  Aros.
(8do  llEitArLKs.)  In  »ouu>  accuuntA  she  '\»  suid  l^
hftv*  Iwi'ii  niurricd  to  Tbcwfua,  and  to  hftvo  liccn
till*  imitlier  uf  llippolytns  {(\.  v.).  fi)  Or  Astvua.-
MlA,  wife  nf  Ai^adtDB,  wlio  fell  in  lovo  with  PoleiiH.
He  ti'ii't'M'd  lii'i'  |ir(>puKtilt«,  nnd  wa&  iu  cnuseiiuunct.'
mrcuMil  l>y  hor  M»  Aoii»tUR.  fihr  whh  HiibscipuMitly
slain  liyPi'lcns. Simi  ArAsrr^K:  PrLKrK.

Hlppoljh^ua  ('IirTTiiXtPT(iw)- TUu  Joseph  of  da*'-
aical  iJUTiilnrc.  a  wm  of  Tliescns  and  llippulyl*^,
or,  acuiniIinjT  li»  utiiors.  itf  ThwaenB  and  Antiai)**.
TfaetM-tiH,  afltT  ihe  deulb  of  Iiia  lintt  «ife,  nuirrird
Phaedra,  tim daii<;lit«r of  Miiuw nnd NiHl4>r  of
Ariadtil^. Thin  priiirt^H-s was  wii7.iiil  with  :l  rrini- '
iual  aRVcMimi  for  ihi*  mhi  of  the  Auiazou,  &u  alloc-
tiun  pnidnoi-d  1>y  tho  wrutL  of  AphroditiJ  nguiiiat
Hip[K>l,vtii»t  for  iio};1ecttn^  bur  divinjly  and  for  do-  i
voting  hinmi'lf  hohdy  to  ihti  wtrviee  of  Artcmin  ;  or  [
elae  ugiiinnt  Phaedra  am  tho  daii;;hter  o(  Piiaipha^  .
(q.  V-X Daring  (hu  abtieiicv  of  Theiieiis,  the  qiieeu
niadu  advauces  to  her  ati'i>-t«ni,  whiidi  veto  iiidig-  I
unntty  rejeeled. Fillwl  with  fpar  antl  hate,  uii  Ibii  '
rutnrii  of  lii-r  husband  8hcnrciiHr-d  HippulyinKufnn
atU<Mipt  ou  b«r  Uunoiu'. Wilboiil  K'^'i"^  theyoatU  ,
an  up|u>rlnuity  of  cloariiig  biriii>t<lf,  (be  uionurvb,
Cftlliiiff  t4>  niiud  that  powidou  ba<l  promised  him  '
tliv  fu-iionipli.shinent  of  any  Lbrvii  wi^bim  tlmt  b(^
nii{[ht  form,  cnr»c4t  and  iniplurvd  dcMtriictiou  on  '
his  sou (nmi tbv  god. Ak  Hippolytuii,  leaving  <
Troezen,  uiu  diiviug  hi.t  ehariut  along  tbe  e»ett- j
flhorp.  !i  n)oiiHr«r,  wnr  by  Pottpidon  from  the  deep,'
t*rriti«l  tiiH  hiint«H  ;  they  burst  away  in  fury,  hei-d-
IciSM  nf  tbcii'  driver,  danbc^d  the  chariot  lo  piecett,
oud  dra^^i^d  :tl<>ng Ilippolytus,  fiilangled  in  ttiu
reins,  niiti}  bi:  diud. I'buedra  eiuknl  bvnlayti  by
ber own bund ; and Tbew^nH, vvtu'n too laii',
1earnt>d  lb«^  iuiu»cpticu  of  hin  hou. KuiipiiU-H  baa
fuonilvd  liiti  trugfdy,  Itifpoli/lua,  on  tbi.t  niibjr-iT,
bnt tbi? Ie;:('nd a»Mniio^» a Houiewbat ditferi'iit
shape  with  biin. Aeeordlnf*  to  i]u'  plot  nf  bin  pbiy,
Phardra  hangH  bemelf  in  de>iji:tir  wlii'n  »hu  firiiK
that  tditi  iHMli^iiled  by  bt^ntl-t'p-Kou,  iiudThtheeus,  on
his  return  from  hiiitravflH,tindi4,wh»u  taking  dowu
her  vorpM',  a  writing  itttai'bcd  lo  ii,  in  which  Phae-
dra accnwd  HippolytnR  of  buviiig  utu-mpted  her
liDUour- Afcordiitg  to  another  legend,  Aescnlapiuit
rtjKtori-il  llijipolyliiB  lo  life,  i»iid  Artemis  transport-
»il  him,  under  tbe  name  of  Virbiua.  lo  Ilaly,  wliere
be  w»K  \voi>itiip]»ed  in  tbe  grvtve  of  AritMH. (Sco
Vlknus; ApolIiKl.  iii.  10,  3j Tbe  «t-ory  of  Hi\i-
polytiiN  forms  tliu  Hiibjecl  of  a  play  by  Euripidcd
witb  tbut  litti-,  of  a  Latin  tragedy  by  Scooca,  and
I  he  /7j«/iv  t)f  Kiieiue.

HlppomSdon  {'JirmrfuHw).  A  son  of  Arislom-
uelniK  iind  Mytbidiee,  was  one  of  tbe  seven  chiefs
that  wont  against  Thebe«.  Hf!  wac  killfHl  by  1m-
mariirt,  win  of  AeiiHliid,  or  by  Isntaens  (Apollod.  iii.
*J;  AoM-h.Stjjt.A'Jii:  Pmisan.  ii.  36).

Hippom£nea  i' Itr-n-»^tV>}r ). (l).S«ii  of  MugitreUM


and  grral-grandnon  of  PoMcidon.  Hc>  {■oii<|iii'rnI
Atalatit^  in  a  foot-rocv.  (8ee  AtaLavTa.'i  (?)  A
deticiMidant  of  Cudrtia,  the  foartli  mid  liul  uf
the  di-'rrnnial  arohonn.  IiiceiiMid  at  tb«  barhsroiu
pnniHliment  wbicii  ho  inflictwl  on  hts  lUngliliT
nnil  lior  parHiiiour,  llie  Allic  nohlea  deiHMed  him.

Hippomol^i.  or,  umrv  uurrectly,  Bippemol^l
{'imrrjtiaXyoi).  A  people  of  Scythia,  who,  m  tbe
naniL*  iinpurtA,  lived  ou  tbe  milk  of  mnres  (Dionji.

I'rrU/t.  :«iy).

Rlppdua.  A  goddewi  who  pn-vidiil  uverliofsos.
Her  statues  n-ero  placed  in  IiorweH*  Mtahlra  CJdt.
viii.  I.'jT).

Hipponax  {'Imt^va^).  A  (>reek  iambic  poel
of  Kphi'sitN.  who  about  tuv.  540  was  1»ui^hed  tit
C'luzojuonao  by  Atbeaugorua  and  Cotuaa.  tyrautt
of  Ink  nnti%'«  city.  At  ClaKoniL'nae,  two  »ea1pton(,
UnpabiH  (Hur.  A]f>orf.  vi.  14)  and  Albeuia.  made  lb«
UlL[e,lhin,ngly  poet  ridiculous  iu  caricature;  bulbe
aviMiged  biniftelf  in  Hiii-'h  bitter  iambic  vurfies  thjl,
like  Lycaiiibee  and  biii  dangbler,  who  were  psn»-
ciittMl  byArohilo{:baB(i|.v.),theyhuuged  tlieiuaelv««.

'J'Jje  lM]rle«i{iie  character  of  the  po«iU8  whieh  lir
irotiipo»ed  in  tbe  lunio  dialect  found  an  appropriale
t'orin  in  liis  favonril«  metre,  whirh  wna  pmbabl;
iiiventud  by  liinisclf.  Tbift  metre  is  knowu  ao  tbe
rhiiUaittbiiM  ("thv  baltiug  iambua"),  or  Ihe  Ktmn*
("  limping'*),  from  ita  having  a  B]>ondoi<  or  trnclKc
in  tlie  bust  place,  instead  of  tbe  iiKUtil  ianibir  fi>ol.
fie  isaUoHuppoMed  lo  have  been  tbe  lirnt  to  priHbuv
piirodie«  of  epic  po«tr)',and  iu  bid  satire  he  aputi
neilberbisowit  parents  uor  tbe  ifods.  Of  hiM|Mmut
we  have  only  a  few  fragiuenls,  irhieh  i»re  eolWclnl
by  Kerj^k  iu  his  Portae  Lyrici  Graed  (4tbed.  18^0-

HlppDuious. Sec  Calua:^.

Hippooiam. See  ViKO.

Hipponotla  I'be  original  naiueoriVdleroplniB.
who  cliaiiigeil  it  on  sluytug  the  Curluibian  Uellenu
See  Ki;t.Lr.mn*Ho\

Hlppoperae  Ctwirnrrintai).  Saddle -bagH.  'Ftu
AppL'Udagl^  to  tbe  ftuddio  icphi^tpiiim)  was  iaa<t«  of
k-atber  or  nutanucd  hide  iKest.  ».  v.  J[tM/yar), uhI
»eem6  riciC  to  have  changed  its  foi-ui  ami  A|tpMr-
ance  in  ancient  or  modern  times.  It*  proparl<iti>>
name  wa«  hiaaccium  <Petron.  Hat.  31.  Ut,  wbicli  j^n
origin  to  higacria  in  Italian  and  hfnarr,  hw»t  to
I'reurh.  By  the  Ganla,  sudd]e<lN^  wnre  ciJM
hulyar. See  Buloa.

HippotSdea  ( 'iwimralhji).  A  dou  of  II  i  p|iot/4,  iwl
lienrc  =  Ai-'oluK.  From  him  ibe  Aeoliao  InauliMin
called  Hippotadac  Itcgunui  [Ovid,  JM.  xiv.;^>-

EUppdtea  I '  [frfrr.7-71, 1  (1)  Tho  father  of  Ae«l«
(q.  v.l.  1,2)  Son  of  Pbylas  by  n  dangbl^r  of  I«W*
and  benee  a  great-grunils4>M  of  Herarlrs.  Hi*  *"
bnnislieil  for  ten  years  Itecnuso  of  htK  baviug  kill'*'
tbe  prophet  Canius  during  tbe  invaAioa  of  ilif  IVlc
poi]iieBiiH  by  (lirllunielidac.  A»nncxpialluitr»rlNi*
murder,  the  .SpiirlaiiK  am  said  to  have  ivattlilitliMl
the  fi-tvlivnl  of  the  Cnmea  ((|.  v.).

Hippothoou  ('lirfToJ^Auv).  An  Attic  bero,Mnol
Poseidon  and  Alopi^,  dangliter  of  Cerryoa  Afi^
him  one  of  llie  Attic  tribes  was  called  K i piiOtboSo-
tis lie  bad  a  sbritie  at  Athens.

Hippothotia  ('Ibtto^om).  Son  of  Certyon,  w*
father  of  Aepytuet,  king  of  Arca<li&.

HippotoxSta  (ijnruTof  onjtl.  A  nKiUDled  ajcbw
('Hirt.  B.  A/r.  \^) :  iu  moat  caiaM  chAractetUtir  ^
foreign  naliouB,  as  Ihe  Syrians  (Cam. /(  ('  Ui-K


iiirprs


817


HldPANIA


Pi*ryi»ii8  <  llcniJ.  ii.  49),  etc.;  bnt  men  thus
eqiiip|H'il  apiH'Ar  to  liuvp  bcon  nsnd  nnionff  tbc
lij;lil.  Iiurnp  nf  tlir  Orei^kH  ^Anstiipti.  Jr.  1179k,  and
of  the  Rumaiitt;  nt  Ivtmt  unilir  ihi^  Kmiiin-.

Hlppys  {of  Rhvgturo). Oiio  of  tko  Urevk  Logo-
Taiibi  («|.  v.).

Bin  or  Alexandria.  A  (own  of  Ahia  in  Baliy-
pltia,  ditiiHted  on  a  lake,  n  Hlinrt  ilihtiiucv  from  llir
rn  l»ank  of  the  Kiiphrntps.  It  vroii  llitt  r»ti>
enMi  of  a  dytniNiy  of  rnlrn  (ttj4<  Aluniuniliirii,
vlio  aided  the  IVrsians  and  Partliinn!)  agniust  the
~  i>man<t.

HiipXiil  A  8Hnniit(*  iwnjilc,  dwelling  iu  (bt<
luiiitli  i>f  8ititiiiiiiin,  Ix'twi'tcii  Apiiliii,  LiiL-iiiii:i,  itiid
t'aiiiimiiiji.  Tli»-iri:liieriowu  \\:i»  Ai-oulaiiiiui.  Tliu
naim*.  llii-iiini,  in  na'iA  to  have  Imcu  derivi'd  fhtin
tliu  KaliiuL^  hirpum,  "u  WOlf."

Hirtiua,  Ai'LUS.  A  friend  of  Cnfwar,  nnd  ono  of
liitt  companions  in  amis  iw  in  politics.  In  b.c.  hfi
lie  wns  C'liesflr's  lejjatt"  in  Oaiil,  wa>t  praetor  in  40,
and  consul  in  -IU,  n  iif n,  lu-liiig  for  Odaviaii,  ho  df-
ft-atetl  Antony  at  Mntiiiii.  llt>  coniphMtMl  CncMir't*
I  umittfutarii  dr  Hrllo  iiulliru  hv  adding  nil  oif^lith
IxHtk  (Snrl.  Inl.i>(>\.  Aci-orditig  to  the  dk'dir^tioti
til  Ooint-liiiH  KnUiiiH  piviixi-d  Iu  Ihnt  Ixink,  tic  ruti-
l*-niphilrd  the  continimtion  uf  (.'ai-nai'N  afrrcninl  of
Mbi*  Civil  War  tu  CuoKnr'it  dcatb.  This  inifririuii
Ote  nc^'iTcnrrictl  ont,  um  he  fril  in  l)attU>  at  Miitiim,
April  27,  n.c.  43,  wImmi  In;  wns  ooiimiI.  Of  the
lhrc«  works,  the  UeHnm  Aleiamtrinum,  litttum
Afrii'amum^  nnil  Jirlium  nUpanirHM,  wliit'li  have
come  dovn  to  nn  nith  (^ai'Har'H  ooninn'titaries,  the
flnit  may  have  been  wrill^-n  hy  him.  Of  the  other
two,  it  has  heeij  conjecliirrd  that  they  were  roni-
|>ose<l  at  bin  mi|nvKt,  iu  pniptLnitiini  for  hi»  inlend*
ed  work  on  military  roniuiundors,  ami  that  havinj;
l»eoii  found  nt  liiK  death  aiiiimi;  bin  papent.  they
w«re  ad<I«d,wich  bifi  own  ivHlitigs,  to  tbu  wurkN
of  Cafwu-  bituAelf.  A  »hurt  letter  of  Hirtiini  to
Cicero  is  found  In  Cic.  J(f  .K^xv.ti.  flo  is  known
to  have  written.  M  Cnosar's  instigation,  an  anuwor
to  ('iceru's  jtanL'gyric  on  Cato  [Cic.  Aii  Alt.  xii.  40.
I.  41.  4.  44.  I.  4y.  :J,  47.  »). 8oe  CaesaM.

HIrtulfiiaa.  An  able  fteneral  under  Sertorius
ill  Spain.  Ho  fell  at  Italira  in  D.icttca  (B.C.  78),
ronttMl  by  the  troops  of  Metellns.  8ee  6l>RTOKtL'!!>.
Hlsp&lia,  iiiub'e  rnn-l>  Hispal.  The  modern  S«v-
Hi-,  a  t<n^n  of  the  Tiirdelaiii  in  llispnnia  Uaetica,
r>iiiidetl  hy  the  I'liieniciant^,  and  8itnate<l  on  the
eft  bank  of  the  Itaetis,  and  id  reality  u  seajmrt,
tor.  altlionjrb  5I>0  stadia  I'rotn  the  sea,  thu  river  is
navigable  for  the  biij^iitt  ve^wds  np  In  the  town.
Uj/nder  Ibe  Komans  it  hjw  iin  iinporinnt  place,  with
lie  iiuniu  ll'UA  RouDla  or  KnMt-i.KNsiK.  ami  wuh
nrtiaitm'^l  in  size  by  Coitliiba  iConlovai  ami  (•a«te.s
June.  I'lnlcr  the  tiotlis  and  VaudaU  it  was  lli*)
ebirf  town  in  the  ftoiitb  of  Spaiu  ;  and  under  tlie
Arubn  the  capital  of  a  separate  kin^^dnm.

Hiapaola {'\<nravla). An extvtifeive eonntry.

formiuK  B  kind  of  {leiiinsnla,  in  the  Houthw<-&t  of

Kumpe:  the  tn<Mlerii  Spain  and  I'mtiijial. It  «««

bounded  on  the  norlh  l>y  the  I'ynMiees  and  Sinns

C-anlflVirienn  ui-  Bay  of  Itihruy,  on  (he  wkhV  by  the

Allnntir,  on the  HoiiTb by the  Atlanlie. Fii'tniii

—liercnleiini  or  Strait  of  Cibraltar.  nnd  ih^^  3it«'di-

■erranean,  which  last  Utnuds  it  nts^i  on  the  ^ant.

^By  llu!  Kuunins,  Spnin  wns  n-prewnted  by  the  11^-

tin>  of  a  woman  with  n  rabbit  at  her  side. The

Snmans  )iorrowi-d  the  name  Hisjuinia,  appending


their  own  terininulion  to  it,  from  the  Phnpnieians.
throii^b  whom  Ihey  Ot-itt  be<;uiiie  aii<tUaintod  with
llie  ronntry.  Tlio  tliei-Us  eiilled  it  'l^fj^ia  (Lflt.
Iberia),  Init  nltache^l  at  dittereut  puriMls  difler-
out  ideoH  to  the  name,  I'p  to  the  time  of  the
Achaean  l.ea);iir  and  their  more  intimate  nciinainl-
anec  wiib  tlm  Romans,  tbey  iiiidcrslnral  by  this
tinuie  a  II  t  be  M-u-i.-imNL  fnnii  tbo  Pi  llarN  nf  Heixnles
to  the  nioiitb  even  of  tliu  Hliodaniix  ( Kbone )  in
(iaul  y  Polyb.  iii.:l7  ].  The  const  of  Siiaiii  on  ilm
Atlantic  they  called  Tartcjwis  <Herod.  i.  103)  Tlie
inU'rior  of  the  ronntry  ihey  t^^rraed  Celtic^  (K«A-
nK^>,  a  name  which  they  ap]>lied,  in  fnet,  to  the
whole  northwestern  port  of  Knrope,  The  Greeks
ill  after-apMi  nnderstood  by  Iberia  the  whole  of
Spain.  The  name  Ilieria  is  derived  from  the  Ilwri
("l^r^fKr  I  of  wliimi  the  Clreeks  bad  Intard  as  one  of
the  niuHt  {iiiuerlnl  mttioiiH  of  the  conntry  Tbo
Koinan  |hh.-is  called  the  euniitry  lli's)a;ria  ITIiiimu
I'ur  a  iiKtp  of  llittpanin.  »*e  the  article  riioviNX'tA.

'I'iie  origin  of  the  ancient  population  of  Spain  is
alto;;ether  iiueerlaiu,  Tlie  ll>eri,  according  to  t'to
ain-ieiii  writerK,  were  di\  iiled  into  six  tribes;  tlio
I'yni'teM,  (ibites,  Tartexsii,  Elbysinii,  Mastieni,  and
t'alpiani.  Diodonis  Siniliis  (v.  ^1  fidl.)  menlions
the  iiivanion  of  Spain  by  the.  KellH,  Tliti  IlH-ri
made  war  against  tbeiii  \\>r  ri  long  linn;,  but,  after
uii  olistinate  resistnnec  on  the  part  of  the  natives,
the  two  peopU*  entered  into  nn  agreeuient,  arcorri-
itig  to  wbicti  Ihey  were  to  posseju  the  country  in
riniiniini,  Vwiw  the  Kame  tnune.  ami  remain  forever
nriitfd  ;  wieli.nayH  the  name  historian,  wat*  the  ori-
gin of  tlin  (Vltiiieri  in  S}>ain.  Them;  warlike  peo-
ple, cuiitinneM  DiiKliiiim,  were  eiiually  I'oniiidnble
Nil  4'u%aliy  aiitl  infantry:  bn*,  when  thu  boi-su  had
brokeu  (ho  enemy's  lankH,  the  iik-ii  diKnniniilecl
and  fought  on  foot.  Their  dri'Ks  ruiiHisti.'d  of  a  i»ii'
ijuiii,  or  coarse  wuuUan  mantle ;  they  wore  greaves
made  of  hair,  nn  iron  bi'lmet  adornetl  with  a  red
feather,  a  round  backler,  and  n  hrond  two-edged
(twnrd,  of  *»  fine  a  tem[>(>r  as  to  pierce  throngb  iho
eneitiy'K  armour.  AUhmigb  they  htmNted  of  idean-
liiierut  in  biitli  their  fmxl  and  dn-Hs,  il  wan  not  nti-
lOiiial  for  tbeni  l4i  wash  tlu-ir  let-tb  and  bodies  wtlih
nrine,  a  runtum  u  liieb  they  cuiinidered  favoorable
to  bealth.  Wine  was  brought  into  tbo  country  by
foreign  nuTchauts,  The  land  was  cfiimlly  distrtb-
nted.  and  the  harvests  were  divideil  anumg  all  the
uitixens;  tl)e  law  punisbiy)  nitli  deatli  the  persiin
who  apprnpriateil  more  than  his  just  share.  Tliey
KjH'riiicfd  human  victims  t»  their  divinities,  and
the  priests  pnHendrd  to  reaiL  fiilure  eveuls  by  In-
s|NH'ting  tbo  eiitniil^.  At  i-very  fall  inoiin  (hey
eclebniliM)  llie  frntival  uf  a  gml  n  itlioiit  n  luimo;
from  this  eircuinataoee,  their  reli^uu  ba«  beea
conaideiiHl  a  sort  of  deisii).

The  IMiietiicians  went  the  lintt  |M>iiple  who  tmlab-
lished  c-(dimit'.i  on  the  roust  of  S)>aiik.  Tiirtv.-iMiiH
was  ]>fi'hapH  the  most  anrieiil  ;  at  a  later  jtetitHl
llvey  founded  (Jades  (Ciullzl.  TJi**y  carried  nn  (here
a  veiy  liii'rative  trailc,  iiitismncb  as  IhoooDiitry  waa
luikuown  to  other  nations;  but,  in  time,  thu  Ubn-
diaiiR,  the  Satniuns.  the  I'hoeaeu IIS, and  other  (irtnfks
established  settlements  on  diltemnt  ]>iirt»  of  tho
coHst.  Carthage  iiad  been  fonnded  by  the  I'btrni-
eiaiis:  hut  tiie  inhabitants,  regiirillcss  of  their  c<in-
neelion  uith  that  [leople,  took  p^MuutKNion  nf  tho
Phieuician  HtutioiiH,  and  coiujuered  the  whale  of
niarilimi'  Hpaiii.  The  governnienl  tif  these  people
was  still  iesusiippotuiljle.  The  Cartliaginians  were
imahlc  to  form  any  friendly  iitterconrHu  with  tbu


IJISFANIA


«2a


lltSTION


R]iaiiinr(TM  in  the  iutrrior.  Tlii<  nitii  of  Ciirtlia^^
I»ii,vnil  the  WHj  for  iikw  iu  vmlt-n*,  uiiil  H|m~iii  watt  fon-
Htilrn^l  n  litiiuaii  iti"«viiu'«  two  enitiiriL-N  iH-fon?  tlic
Cliritdiiiii  rra.  TUimo  wliu  bud  \ttvn  tin-  ulHt^it  lir^
I'uiiie  iiiOMters  of  the  Spauinnls  ami  the  innniierK,
viititODtH,  nDil  even  Iiingtiiigt^tir  (lie  enii(]iierore  wt're
hitrodnciHl  into  ilii>  |H'iiiu9tiIn.  Itiit  Kome  pniil
(te^irly  for  lier  ronqiie«i ;  tlie  north — or  iho  [ireR-
#tit  OW  Castile,  Arn>»o!i,  nnil  C'atMliiniii  — wiin  con-
Hlantlj'  in  a  state  of  revolt..  Tho  monnlnineerK
((hook  o(t'  (111-  yoUr,  ami  it  wni«  mit  hi-foir  the  n^igl>
of  An^iifiliiN  lliat  till-  country  was  nliully  ttuli-
f1m>4l.

The  itettinniil.i  wim  ttipii  divide)  hiro  Hispania
ClTKRlon  and  Hispama  L'l.rKKinii,  Ilispiinid  Cile-
rior  WflK  nlnn  onllt-<l  TAHKAfONKSsis.  from  Tiirnico,
it«  eii|utiil,  and  extentled  from  the  foot  of  the  i'yv-
enet'i*  to  the  mouth  of  the  Dnriiis  fr>onro),  nn  the
Atlantic  shore;  coiniwhrndinR  all  the  north  of
.SpHii).  together  with  tltr>Miuth  aHfarasn  liufMlrnwii
Ixdow  Ciirihago  Nova  (Carl hn^eiin), ami  roniiniieil
in  an  n1ilii(neilin9rlion  loHa);im:4titii-ik<S;i]u]MUii<-u^,
ou  the  IinritiH.  IIi»i|iania  Klii-iior  wjik divided  into
two  |»ro*infe*ii  Buettca.  on  the  south  of  Spain,  he-
tveeii  thu  Auao  (C>nudinni()aml  Citerior,  nndnliore
it  Lusitftiiio,  coiTwifHimlin*!  in  a  greHt  degree,
though  not  eotirely,  to  Portngnl.  In  the  age  of
DliKiletiun  and  Conetnntine,  TarrnconenHiH  ivan
Bubdivideit  into  a  provinre  tonanis  the  limitn  of
Baotica.and  mljaceiit  to  tlip  Mcditerrnnran,  i'iilh;il
CiirtliagtniensiN,  fnim  it>4  eliief  rilr  Carthago  NnVH,
and  another,  north  of  Luftitaitia,  cnlletl  (■Jtllneclu
from  the  Callalci.  The  province  of  Lu*itania  was
partly  i>co[ded  by  llie  OyuetCR  or  Cynesii.  The
Ccltici  {wsscjwed  the  laud  between  the  Amu  anil
the  Tagns.  Th(«  Lnf>it«ni,  a  imtiun  of  frpelM>nten«.
were  isettled  in  the  middle  of  Estremadnra.  The
part  of  Baetioft  near  the  MediteiTnnenu  was  peopled
by  tbo  BtMtnli  Foeni.  The  Tnrdnti  inlmbitcd  tlio
ttborett  of  the  ocean,  ni'ur  the  mnntli  of  the  TiaetiH.
The-  naeliii'i  dwelt  »n  the  Miitile»  Mariaiii,  and  tlm
Turdelaoi  inhabited  iho  HOiitluTU  ntopu  iif  the
Sierra  d«  Aruc-eua.  The  last  ^woplc,  woiw  enlight-
ened timu  atiy  other  in  Uiietica,  wore  skilled  in
difiervut  kiuiU  of  industry  loug  before  their  neigh-
bours. When  the  Ph(pniciaii»  arrived  on  their
cooaltt,  eilver  w;ih  ho  eiunmiui  anion;;  them  that
their  ordinary  ntensils  wi-n;  made  of  it.  Tlie  pKio-
plo  in  Galluecia,  a  hiilMliviKion  ttf  TiirnteonenMin,
wfiffi  the  Arlabri.wlu)  derived  their  nauu;  from  Mic
pnuniiul4iry  of  .\rtabrHni,  now  t'aiw  Fiiiistcrro;
the  I-traoari.  hIioso  ebief  town  wan  Hrnoarn,  the
protieut  llrngn ;  ond  laittly  the  LuccnHPfl.  the  eapi>
tal  of  whose  eoiintry  wn)>  Lucns  Angiioti,  now  Lugo.
ThcMe  tribes  ami  tvmw  others  fornn-d  the  nation  of
the  C'rtlhiiei  or  Cnlhieei.  The  A»ttin-n.  now  the
AstnrJHiie,  inhahiti-d  the  bnnkK  of  rht-  AMinjiH,  or
the  ronnlry  on  the  eaut  of  the  Oalhieciiin  muiiii-
taiuH.  Their  eupital  wiw  AKiurica  Angnsta,  now
Astorga.  The  Vftrea<-i,  the  leai*r  bnrbarans  of  the
CVlliberiatiB.  eullivuted  thip  country  ou  the  eaat
of  the  ABtiires.  The  (ieree  Cantabri  iweiipied  Iti»-
I'jiy  and  part  of  Asturian.  The  Vascones,  the  an-
ccHtont  of  the  present  Gft«i'ou8,  were  settled  on  (he
north  of  the  Utenis  or  Ebro.  The  Iiu^etHut  wurfi
sealteiTid  over  the  Pyrenaeaii  deeliritje^  nf  Aragon.
The  Ilergetes  resided  in  the  cnnnlry  round  I^tridik.
Ah  to  the  ronnlry  on  the  e&Mt  of  lliCM^  trilicfl,  the
irh4de  id'  Cataloniji  wan  |kei»)ihMl  hy  the  Ceretnni,
JiidigeteH,  Ausetatii,  Cosetani,  and  othen.  The
lamU  on  the  Nouih  of  the  Kbru  were  itihabltc<l  by


lan,^H

.  Kin


the  Anrvaei  ntid  I'eleiiduue*:  the  fotTiirr  Kt>rr  *i
ealled  from  the  river  Areva;  they  wert-  nettlrd  in
tbe  ueighbonrht>od  of  Arevola,  uihI  in  the  pioTiDoe
of  Kegovia:  the  tatter  pottMN^ed  the  high  pluiuMiif
Soriii  aud  Moneayo.  The  Bpact:  between  themuoik-
tniiiK  of  .\lbanu-inii  and  the  river  waN  {leoplnl  l>y
the  Kdelniii,  one  of  the  must  powerful  tnl>e«(if
Spain.  The  llercaonew,  who  wen>  not  le.«A  forui-
dable,  inhabiteil  an  exI^iiHive  iliiitriet  WlneeU  tl|l^
upper  .fnrar  and  the  lower  Kbro.  The  ronnlry  of
the  Carpetnni,  or  the  tipacn  from  the  (tnadiana  )••
the  Somo-Hierra,  forniH  at  present  the  an-hie[iiiru-
pal  mm!  of  Toledo.  The  people  on  the  Miuth  of  ibr
liMt  were  the  Oretani,  bclncen  the  (luadiana  ami
the  Montea  Mnrinui ;  and  the  Olende^.  a  small  irlbr
near  the  eouHnenec  of  the  tfabhel  and  Jnear,
IliHpnnia  t^'arthnginiensis,  a  subdiviaiou  of  T»m'
eoiicnHis,  WHS  inhabited  by  two  tTibra:  the  B*«rt-
tuni,  in  the  centra  of  Mnreia,  and  the  Conteittiiiii.
who  ]H>sse4fsed  thn  two  bank?)  of  the  Se^ira,  near
the  HhoreH  of  the  Mmliterraiiuan.

Ifuder  the  HomaiiN  all  the  iirta  uf  Latin  ri
tiim  tImiriNlird. Latin  wasHpoken  by  Iheedm
and  nmny  of  iho  great  writers  of  (be  Silvi
were  Spaniards— Martial,  Senei-a.  (^umlilian,
can,  Siliris Italieiis,  Columella,  i'onipnnini
nn  i\\so Pnidentiiis  and lsidont» in later  titiMa.
The  emperor  Trajan  wnjt  ofSpantnb  birth.

Tlie  different  rriWit  wem  ronfoniidml  wbde  tkv
Roiii,-in>«  governed  tho  t-iiuntry;  but,  iu  the  heglu-
iiing  of  Lbe  liftli  rentnry,  the  Aiievi,  VaodaUiorf
VlMiifothH  invaded  thn  PeniuKula,  and,  niixiogirilk
the  Kelt*  aud  Ibortaiis,  produn-^l  the  dirterenl  rmm
M-hieh  Iho  etkuologiat  atill  obserrr^  in  tipain.  Tlw
tir»t-menlluiie«l  people,  or  Snevi,  dcaoetuM  tkr
Dm  iua  under  the  leailoraliip  of  Ertucrir.  and  dt(m>
IJniga  fur  the  capital  uf  tJieir  kingdom.  Ui^iiNenr
led  hirt  VaudaU  to  the  centre  of  the  peniaNnU,wil
fixed  hi»n;jddeuceatToletnra  iTi)ledo);  but  fifto-x
yearti  had  not  eln[wed  after  the  iHittlrniral  ■•Mb''
burbai-<iU8  honle  uben  Tli«M!orir.  cnu<)uenNl  k*
Chivif*,  ohandoned  T»d<iHa  (Toiibm^fce).  piuwtnlwl
into  Spain,  and  coni]K'-lled  the  VaudaU  to  t!j'  »■■■■
Afiiea.  During  the  ohorl  jtcriod  tbat  the  Viinl»l»
remained  iu  the  i:uuulry,  tbo  oucieut  prtiviuM"*
Boelica  wan  aillvd  Vandatnnia,  aud  all  iIk  c*»t<i>-
try,  from  tlio  Kbro  to  the  Strait  orCibnilur.  »t^^
mitted  to  ihcin.  The  ancient  CeltiU-iiau*  *•»
had  M>  long  renittted  the  Romuus,  made  tbrl>  tw
struggle  for  liberty  or  indejK-ndencit;  theyjiel'l"*'
without  ^^siHtallee  to  their  new  imuier*.  IVi*«r»
and  privilegett  were  the  iwrtion  of  the  Uotliir  ta»
and  the  title  of  Ayo  drl  Cwia,or  "win  of  thetloib'
which  the  Spaniards  changed  luto  kiHalgif,  Uf^n"
the  title  uf  a  uublu  or  •  free  aud  powrrfal  m*"
among  a  people  of  alsvea.  A  nninl*er  of  petty  w'l
almost  iodepundeut  Stalej*  wen*  formed  hy  il"
chiefs  of  the  cuuijUeriug  tiibea;  but  the  haiim*  "'
freemen  acknowledged  a  liege  lord.  Spain  •"'I
Portugal  were  thlin  divided,  nud  the  feudal  ijsl'ii'
establifibed.

Sec  Diiuham.  Il'ftoty  of  Sjtaim  awd  /Wtiftt*
voI«.  (I^.tidon,  1832);  Murlaun.  Tke  Ornrnd  Bttttt
of  ■</>(iiii  from  Ike  AVir/w*!  Jfiwe*  (Eog.  CiMifc  1*1
Stephens,  L^oudon,  HKWt.  a  very  vnbi»bfe  ««%".
Ktmi'-y.  //wtoire  d'Enfrngnr,  9  vld^.  {pjiri*.  I«3»-M(;
and  llUbuer,  Lc  Jrnueolo^jia  th-  F*pana  iltarwl***
IS*'}.

See  ISTKR.


Hiater.

HUtiou  liiTTiorK


A  Mil. SvA  XaVB.


r


UlSTOKIA

flutoria  (itTTOfna,  "iiivestigatioir'),  I.  Okkrk.
— Tlie  L'uiiipt>Miti<ni  nf  liiHtury,  ami  Inilt^tl  t>(  all
funiM  of  [iKHw  rorii)K»titton  iiinonj;  the  <.Jr(!*k»*,  orij;-
iuulcil  witli  thr  IiiiiiaiiM  tif  Ania  Minor,  n-hi>  iilnti
ci-futtHl  (lit;  «!«»}«,  iLc  »'Ii'jry.  »i"l  ioinbir  pw^trr.  It
WHS  aiiitiiig  ttiviii,  ill  tlif  itixlli  i'«!iiiiii-v  li.c,  thai
(lie  Lupirgmptii  ( q.  v, )  iii«(U>  tlit-ir  iiiiiK-Hmrici'.
Tbcjw  writers  trcat«il  the  luuttiriaU  Hnpitlii-d  by
fuinily  traditions  and  local  Icgcuils  iiiaaiylowhich
j;railnttlly  AppniAcbed  utore  and  more  to  prooe,  hut
witborit  any  uttiMnpt  at  oiitical  iuvestigalioii  or
lwi(^utitic  nn'iiiif;emt'iit.  The  moat  important  writ-
ers in  Itiid  Btylc  mid  also  itn  latest  ivpresentfttivea
^»■^«ro  Hrcat-aeiiM  ol"  AliU'tno  nnil  Ilellaiiicns  of  L€s-
1m>b.  The  liitt^T  wa»  ■  coiiltimpurary  ul"  IlLTiNlotus
of  HulicnrnaHHim  (about  u.l',  'I'TLV- l'J-1),  calle^l  by
Cicuro  tijp  Futlinr  of  Hiiitury.  Hin  wurk,  also
iVTitlctl  iu  thti  Ionic  dioJ^rt,  watt  foinuli'd  it]MUi  a
vast  collection  of  bixturical  and  gfogrtipliiritl  iita-
lehul  gathered  iu  lii^texteusi  vc  travcltt,  mid  tbntnj^h
the  resesrchos  of  mauy  years.  Tliiit  uuim  »f  infur-
matioik  be.  with  ^reat  Art,  mouldetl  into  a  liomo-
KeueouB  work,  the  It^adin^  Iheniu  of  wbicli  is  thi-
t»tru(;gU'  of  the  Ureeks  aKninst  tbo  barharinuM.
TLt)  uurratt%'tf  Is  simple,  but  always  attroctivo.
Sen  HERotMiTr**.

Tlw  line  of  hintorianK  who  wrote  in  the  Attin
dialect  18  headt?d  by  tlnj  Athenian  Thin;ydide*<,
whufw  hiHtory  of  the  PebuMintn'man  Wnr  in  a  nias-
terpier<-  uf  the  &nl  oitlcr.  noble  alike  iii<  Ktyle  niKl
ill  matter.  A  coutiuiuitioti  of  Tlini\Ydidei«  won
written  by  bis  countryinan  XunopUon  [aliont  nx'.
43t-3oIi)  iu  his  Ucllenicn.  In  hi*  JiicibirJiJa,  Xriio-
phon  described  tbo  foinnns  retri'ut  of  the  Ten
TlinuMaiiil  iu  a  style  whiuli  won  fur  him  Ibe  iinme
<if  "  the  Atti**  lipH."  Ill  Ibc  Cfirvpitrdiu  bo  givcj*  u
Ificturr,  mncb  idealLze«l,  but  not  witlioiit  ii  foundu-
liou  of  faet,  of  tho  bialory  of  ihe  Pei-sian  Cyrim.
Hi«  coiitcniporar>'  Cteaiaa  of  Cuidiis,  writing  in
liMiic  (jifH-k,  introduced  bis  coniitryineu  ti>  the
fonniil  liiotory  of  tbo  Pwrsiau  Kiupire.  At  the
MiitiB  tiiiio  FliilifitiiH  of  SyRu'ii^e,  an  intitalor  of
TbticydideH,  roiii|iiU>d  Ibn  liiHtury  uf  Sriily  from
the  eurtie»t  timed  down  to  bin  unii  hi  Ihit  Hecoiul
lialf  of  tbo  fonrck  eeiiliiry  u.c.  np[»ennMl  (wo  cele*
bralcd  Uiittoi-ian»,  TheojioiupoH  of  ChioH  and  Kpbo-
rusof  Cynit^.  Itolb  diseipleM  of  the  rbutoi-k-ian  Isot:-
latcs.  Tlio  cbief  work  of  TheofionipoH  wiw  a
historj"  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  from  his  accensioo  to
liiA  dvatli.  Kplioni.4,  in  a  ^reiit  work  embracing
tho  whole  eoiirMf  of  eveiilJt  fnini  llie  invasion  of
the  PelopouiieHUK  liy  t[iP  Xeraelidae,  lo  ii  c  :i4;'i.
wrna  tbu  lirMt  writer  i^liio  at(tiinptvd  a  iinivtirMat
lii«tor>'.  To  this  period  belong  tbo  iiniiieronH
clirouicles  of  Altie  biKtory,  called  Atlhiilcn  <8c«
ATTlds. )  111  the8«,  comparatively  littlo  re^iutl
wob  paid  to  style — le«8,  certainly,  than  was  paid
by  Cbe  hi^torianu  just  mentiouic^  as  8ucc«ediug
Xeuophoii.

Tbr  {H?ri(Kl  of  AlexniHler  the  Great  and  bb  Bnc-
ceiworH  vraA  very  fertile  in  biHtorical  writing.  One
may  uieniion  CalliMtbeucs,  AritttobuliiH,  Chares,
Ou«wicritus,  (Jlitarchntt,  and  Hiorouyinuti.  wlio  nnr-
rntml  cfti)tcin|M>rary  .events  iu  a  style  somctiin«tt
pluiii  and  aiinpln,  and  Homotiuies  rhetorically  ox-
aftgerat«d.  This  was  the  ago  of  the  Sicilian  Ti-
niaeiiA,  whofte  great  work  on  the  liiHtory  of  bis  na-
ti\c*  island,  iu  «ome  forty  ImokH.  won  biui  litde
recognition,  but  who  tiiniplitied  (;liri»n<ilogy  by  in-
tHMliiiitig  tin*  nu'tbod  uf  i-eebiiniiig  by  niymjiiiulM,
and  ihiiH  CHlablibbed  a  hunting  i-liiim  on  the  grati-


tndo  of  biatoriaiift.  Among  the  bettor  bistoriea
nhoiild  \te  uained  also  the  great  work  of  Pliylar-
chtis  laliout  it.c.  210),  wbicli  began  with  the  luva-
ititMi  of  the  Pelopoiiiie-suft  by  Pyrrbns,  and  ended
with  the  detith  of  C'lcomeneH.

The  Alexandrian  scholar  KnitOHtbuuutt  eonfernKl
a  great  ttoou  on  Hciontific  hist-orical  investigation
by  bin  alt4>mpt  lo  jdaco  i-hmnology  ini  tbo  firm
fuiindatiou  of  mathenialicH  and  antronuuiy.  Hla
Inhoni':*  were  euutiuned  by  ApolloduruH,  whoeie
Chruttita  was  the  mtwt  iui]M»rtaut  work  on  eliro*
iiology  prodnceil  in  niititjuiiy.  This  was  a  brief
enumeration  of  the  most  important  cTcnto,  from
tbc  taking  of  Troy  ihy  him  atwigued  to  the  year
B.C.  llii*3)  down  it*  bin  own  time  iux.  144).  Only
iHotnteil  fraginen(fl  of  the  birttories  written  aft«r
Xenophon  bave,  in  tin*  greater  nninWr  ul'  itiKlaiu-en,
come  down  to  iim  ;  but  we  Intro  a  roiiHiderablu  pjirt
of  the  work  of  INilybius  uf  Megalopolis,  who  died
iiboiit  I'i^.  Thi.s  wnn  a  genirral  bixtory  of  the
known  wurlil  from  the  beginning  of  the  8ccoud
Piuiie  War  to  the  destrtiL-llon  of  (.'arlhnge.  Iih
hiyle  bus  u(>  juM  claim  tu  artintic  merit,  but  itit
cuntoiitH  make  it  one  of  tliR  most  reijiarkable  of
auciciit  Uni'k  biiitories.  Abuut  the  ycnr  ii.c.  40,
tbe  ^^icilia1)  writer  IliodoriiH  compiled  a  valuable
general  hi.'!((>ry  fnnn  the  worUn  of  (jri^-k  innl  H<»-
nian  wriU'Di  now  lout.  Of  thiM  u  conniili'rable  part
fitill  rentainn.  Ni^'idaiiH  of  DanniwuH,  wln>  lived  a
little  tnt4^r,  wai  the  author  ol  a  great  gtMieral  bis-
tory,  in  144  botikH,  of  n  htidi  we  have  t-oiiKiilerahle
fragmenlA.  DiouyHina  of  llnlicarnuHMini  cunipuHod,
a  few  yt>ars  bnforo  Chritit,  hi*  Homan  Archatolonti
('HMfiniK^  'Afij^flioXayia ),  alntDt  half  of  which  linH
survived.  This  was  tbo  history  of  Kome  finm  the
earliest  period  down  to  the  l-'irst  Pnnie  War.  It
waH  wriltcii  with  ta»te  and  care.  In  the  second
half  of  Tbo  tiret  ccutnry  a.h.  the  Hebrew  Io»ephu»
wrote  a  work  on  Jewiab  arcbaeolugy  and  a  history
of  the  JewisU  War.  At  the  beginning  of  th«  nec-
oud  century,  Ptntnrch  of  CLoeroiipji  proiluced  Ids
faitcinattiig  liiograpbieH  of  fannniH  CireckN  and  Ro-
maiiH.  Ill  tilt!  eouTKe  of  the  tiami>i  ecntnry  ap]H:atvd
tbo  Anahtt»iu  ot  Alexander  tho  Great,  written  after
tbe  Iwflt  authorities  hy  Annan  of  Nieomedin.  the
Slraf*-f/fiHtifa  of  the  Macedonian  Polyar nns,  a  inini-
ber  of  i;xam]des  of  military  stratJigenis  cotleet-ed
from  older  writent;  nnd  a  part  ot  the  Komun  his-
tory of  the  Alexandrian  Apyian,  edniograpliically
arranged.  At  (htj  l»igiiiiiing  of  tin-  third  eeiilury
I>io  OaHHiiiK  of  \iea(>n  iroiiceiveil  and  I'ScentfM]  liia
great  work  on  Koinnii  biKlory,  which  Iioj*  iiiiforrii-
iijttely  come  down  to  iih  iu  a  very  mutilated  forni.
HiR  younger  coutemporarj-.  llcrudianus,  conipoaed
in  eight  books  an  iniei-ettting  history  of  tho  Coe-
fUUft,  which  still  survives,  from  the  death  of  Mar>
cua  Anrelins  to  Gonlian  (a.i>.  Irt0-23!i).  Ancient
chronology  i»«  nnirh  indebted  to  th«  (.'hrouictn
(XpovtKa)  of  KiiMdMiiR,  biNliop  of  CaoHan-:i.  This
woM  written  ill  the  fourth  4:eiitnry  a.d.,  and  only
Anrvivo!)  in  f|uotations  and  nu  Armeiiiaii  traimla-
llou.  Among  Inter  wriiern  we  may  mention  Zosi-
niuii  (in  the  second  tiiilf  of  the  Mxlh  eenltiry),  tbe
author  of  a  history  id'  the  Uoinun  emperors,  from
Angnstiis  to  aj».  410.  For  a  bibliography  of  tbe
great  writei-s,  wi-  tlm  sepurnte  artielcH  in  this  dic-
tionary. The  fraguicnts  of  (heir  lo^t  works  will
ho  fiiiind  in  lln-  //Mtwriforwwi  f.'nipr.  FratimrHia,  vii.
by  C.  and  Th.  Miilli-r  fur  the  Diilot  nerirK.  .'i  roto.
(Piiri-t.  18iiH-74i.  Tbe  text  of  the  minor  hiKtnriaii^
in  edited  by  L.  Dindorf,  'i  voU.  tlx-ipnig.  1N7«-7I).


IHSTOItU


830


IIISTRIO


11.  R't^lAN.—Tltf  iM'ijiiMiiiiifh  iif  Roman  liistcir,v
(liita*  ri'iiiii  itttoiil  it.c. 'AM).  Tliv  fomi  of  couipofilioii
tviw,  riiitil  rlic  tint  lialT  «if  tliu  llnti  L-miriiry  b.c.,
almoHt  exrhivivxly  rliiit  of  uniinU  UiHNtttr^i,  mill
tliu  litMlnriilTlH  pri^vjollH  l«)  tlint  {"^i'i^mI  itn>,  iu  coil-
Nt'(iilt>nt'<<,  iifn:illy  niuiitioiit'il  iiii<l<;r  tlio  Irrni  "  a»-
ualtKlo.'*  Tiiey  t'otiltih^t]  Itit'tiiMilvus  4'Xrltisivvly  lo
tliu  liisUirr  of  tlieir  country  in  il-i  wulrtti  t>xh-iir,
from  llitr  ttarlirnt  limi-s  ti»  tlniii-  o>vti.  Iti  l:iUrr
tiiiit'H,  liiit  iMi(  till  iti(rii.  Koiiinii  tiii>roriiiiiH  iniiioi-
touk  to  write  on  tlio  cveitt«  ofapt-rial  pt-riodit^  ^•'»-
emlly  on  tlioso  of  their  own  time.  At.  tin^t  ilip.y
vvToi*  ill  (jrtrk  only.  Anionp  llio  ({Veatcsl  of  tliew,'
aiiriali»t5  at'i^  Fniiitis  Pictor,  L.  I'liiciiiis  AlinKnitiis,
C.  Aciliiin,  aiul  PosinniiUR  All»inn«.  The  flrst  an-
nalist to  write  ill  Latin  wa«  Cato  tliu  Ci-ii»iir  (H.(.'.
IM)  in  litn  Originen,  now  iiiifortnnatoly  liMt.  Hiti
PXiiDiplo  wu  folluwctl  by  CaAMitiH  Ili'iiiJnn,  L.  Cnl>
litiriiiimPiKn.StMiipriniinHTtKlitaiiuM.aiiil  inanyotti-
rm.  Tlio  varly  niiiialiHtic  wrili^nt  of  Lnlhi  liuti  un
Htylt*.  It  i<4  nut  until  ttiu  kiiowloilgo  of  (■re^'k  lit*
eraliitv  and  tliv  ileveloptuiMit  of  style  linil  readied
a  liiglu>r  titn(;v  in  Itie  sccotul  half  of  tbu  socond
century  b.l'.  ttiat  one  Hnds  any  attempt  at  j;ocd
writing.  In  llie  nge  of  Cicero,  good  prow  was  «t
last  attained,  and  many  nuni  of  dintliiction,  siicli
an  Varro,  AtticiM,  IlortBimiuw,  and  Cicero  liiui»plf,
wrulc  liiNtorii,'al  worki*  and  ineiuotni,  Soinv  v\tu
Koii{;l)t  to  iucludu  foii'ijjii  l)iNtory,nM  watt  tlii>  ca«e
with  f*.  CoriKdIiiH  NL-pOH  in  Ms  well-known  colloc*
lion  uf  biu{{raplileH  eirlitlvd  De  Viris  Itluiitribus.
The  tii»grft]>bi*-'s  whi\;li  remain  aru  uioslly  tliosu  of
uon-KouiMii  goDcraU.  ]nltua  Caesar  and  SiilliLit
aur)Hu*.s  all  tbe  otlicr  bi^torical  writers  of  this  perl-
(xl  both  in  form  and  matter.  8allii»t  is  an  imitator
of  Tbiicydides,  and  the  Bnit  Hoinitii  liist-oriaii  who
CUD  lay  any  rlalm  to  dnislied  exeontioti.  Thi>
ath«r  historians  of  tbu  time  wtiose  workH  have
oome  down  t«  iib  are  Aulnit  MirliiiH,  who  contiiiui'^t
Cai^Har'n  iMinniienlartHH,  and  llm  unknown  aiitliori
ol  the  Ali'xandrinn,  Afriran,  !iiid  SpiuuHli  Wurs.

Tbe  Aii}{iiKtan  A^e  produi.ed  llu:  Hoinaii  biHlory
of  Livy,  a  work  us  ri-uiarkuhk-  lor  ilst  uouipn'turii-
Rivenena  an  lor  itn  dt'li>;liifu1  litemry  I'miKli.  Thi;
grenti;r  part  of  It  Ik  unluippily  lost.  The  lir-»t  ;;lmi-
cral  hi.Htory  written  in  Ljitin,  by  TrDK"i>  I'onipcius.
bvlontiTH  to  the  Hume  penod,  but  is  prtwenred  only
in  an  epitome  by  IriHtiniiN.

Tlic  lirsl  century  a.ti.  wan  fruitful  in  historiral
Iilerutnn>,  hut  only  a  fi'rtani  number  of  MorkH
luivc  r^iirvived,  iucludinj;  a  Hbort  Kkt-luh  of  Houian
hiNtory  by  Vi'IIimiih  I'ulercuIitM,  wirn-li  in  iiiidnly
animated  by  the  udnhttiug  Hpirit  uf  ibc  i-4Mirf ii-r;
ti  eollnctioiL  of  historical  unecdotex  by  VakTiuH
Mttximntt;  a  very  rhetorical  history  of  Alexander
the  {ireal,  by  if.  CiinhiH  Itiifiitj ;  and  n  number  of
iuHtnni-es  of  military  ftlrntn^eniH  by  liiliiis  Kntnti-
nas.  'i'lie  j^TRitt  limtory  of  (he  Hmpire  i'oiiipri.v><t
ill  tbt^  AunalfA  and  11  tutor iae  of  TacitiiH,  <ni«  of  the
iiioKt  important  nioniimtjntd  nf  Roman  lilemtiire,
wiiA  written  partly  in  the  tirHt  and  partly  Iu  the
fwvond  eentury  a.d.  Datiiii^  from  the  beKiuutuf;
of  the  Mrciind  reiilmy  a.d.  xvo  have  tbu  liven  of  the
Iwelvu  ('aeMunt,  by  C  Huotouius  Tninqiiillus,  and
the  panegyrieal  occuuut  of  Roman  history  by  Flo-
niM.

After  this  poriixl.  SuetnniuH  bnvumeM  the  ntiwlel
<tf  historiaufl.  and  tlieir  favourite  Bubject  in  the
d^iiugs  of  the  emp(?n>r.H  ami  of  the  imperial  court.
Thrsc  lost  writiugH  were  lite  nmiu  ituurcex  uf  the
Butoriu  AttgHitv,  u  colltR'tiuu  of  biographies  of  the


empiTorc  from  Hmlrian  to  Nontcrian  (A.i>  11"-'i''4k
abounding  in  {lerMfiml  itetuiU  often  w.'HiHluton4  aiM
dt»tctn4tinf;.  (See  Al'Ut'sTAK  llifrniiUAEJ  For  tlw
history  of  the  fourth  c«utury.  tbe  exeelfetti  work
of  .AminianiiH  Marcellinuv  (inrvivr«.  At  ihiti  limr,
wriien*  be(;an  to  content  thcniwdviw  with  merrl.*
opitomiziiii;  and  revi«in(i  the  iMKik^  of  their  giwiirr
preih'ceswotw.  Anion;;  the  authors  of  hiatorieol
iftimiimrieii  of  thin  liurt  are  ViipiAcnit,  Kutropine,
OroHiu»,  Ht.  Jerome,  and  CiiMxiiMloniM.  There  nra
valuable  ttpeeiul  hiHtorien  by  loi-dania  (relatinj^  in
(lie  Uothh),  and  by  flreijory  of  Tonrs  (relating  ta
tlic  Fniiiks).

8ce  Peter,  Zur  Kritik  drr  Quelttn  tt.  Stt.  Hml  Gt^.
ifchirhU  (Halle,  I^TUl  ;  VosslQS,  l>e  H'mtaricit  Lniini*
(U-yilen.  1(S7;  9d  ed.  Itwl):  Sehiifcr.  i^urlk-HkuHir
<J.  jrnVrA.  MNr/  riim.  flenchicbtc,  vfi.  by  Nis»en  (Lei|e
r.i(;.  1H?%);  and  llui  rhaplerH  on  Roman  litejatora
in  MiiiintiM-n'M  HitUirtf  nf  Ra\nt.  The  frni*mriini
of  hist  htHtoricat  work.<i  are  collated  by  11.  Ivier  lO
his  Hittorii'orum  JlomaHorum  UrUtjniae  ( l.eipx%
\fS7^),  ni)d  Hinttirioomm  Horn.  Fraijmrala  (l.etpxJ|i;,
V9SS).  For  bihliogruphioM  of  the  great  writerii,  *m
the  ii]>ecial  articles  iu  this  Dlctionanr.

Historla  Au^sta. Sn  AtQL'tfTA-K  lli^^im^s

SrRIPTi"iRl'.M,

Hiatoria  Miscella. See  PAt'LUB.

Historla  Naturalia. See  Punu's.

HiBtorlae. See  TAriTi:s.

Histrlo  (irmMCfiiri^c).  An  actor.  (l}(tltRRK.  Tb»
sti'iw  by  which  vrroKpivnfiai.  iiroKpir^t  ue(|niml  ilcir
dramatic  ineauing  bare  been  variiutHly  triKiil.
The  primitive  sense  of  "answering"  (i.  e.  of  tlw
iiuiuk  repartee  of  dialoj^ne  between  the  A£t4>raii'l
the  c-lioniK — vnvKpinadw  imptving  a  more  nmiy
and  iiittUntanetins  reply  than  airrjKft!vta&M\  »vnn
tjiiite  snnkifut  fi>r  the  ]iurpose  (Poll.  Iv  IKtl.

It  iHxhown  iu  the  artieles  ClKiicrsaiul  |lT4>xrfiti
t)mt  the  (>rrek  drvma  oi-i><inu(t'il  in  thi*  rlifinit
which  at  the  fe»>livulH  of  DtonvNUH  dniirj^l  xnmtril
httt  altar,  und  that  at  timt  one  person  dctadivl
hiuiM-lf  from  the  cimrnii  anil,  with  miinrtti-  gtii'
iirrn.  rt'luled  his  story  either  to  tbe  chonii'  or  m
conversnlion  with  it,  [f  the  story  LIiuh  nclrtl  f-
qtiireil  more  than  one  |)crsoii,they  wen*  all  rrprr-
Hentet)  in  succession  by  tbe  an  Die  chorenleh  Tht*-
piH,  who  w:lh  regarded  in  antiquity  as  the  itiviiitor
of  tragedy,  vriv.  tbe  limt  lo  employ  an  ■rterdtilux^
fn>m  the  ehoniH;  the  hitler  ntill  look  the  mml  tm
]Kir1:iiit  part  in  Ihu  ]H*rformancr>,  but  hwt  mmt-
thing  of  its  original  rbiiracter  by  bcc'oniinieiiii  in'
terloculor  in  Ihe  tlialogiie.  Ae»rhvln»  tUneffln
adtled  a  second  actor,  ko  that  the  artmn  mut  tlv
dialogue  became  indcpemleut  of  the  chonu,  aii4
the  dramatist  at  Ibesame  time  ha^l  auopi>iirt'iii>t)
of  showing  two  jierwms  in  contrast  with  •uieliolla't
on  the  stage  (Arint^it.  /'wf.  4,  $  I(i>.  $opbocl»
tmsk  llip  Biial  Ntep  by  adding  a  tliird  iu-tor(Ari*l"-
I.  e.) ;  and  towards  ihe  clo.w  of  hln  eureiT,  A«cli}'
)us  fuiuui  it  nccetMiftry  to  follow  the  example  »'li»»
yoimgcr  rival,  and  to  intrtxluce  a  thitil  afloi,!*
ts  seen  in  the  JtiamrmHOH.  Vhurphori.  ntiil  £•»*■
unlet  (Poll.  iv.  lio).  ThiK  nnmbei-  of  three  vtU-n
was  uIno  iulopted  by  Kuripidew.  and  iviuaiiH^  *'■'
limit  Kcan'ely  ever  exceeile^I  in  any  lin^'k  i1rtfli».
at  iLiaMt  ill  tragetly.  In  comedy  n  wimewhat  emt"
licensu  wait  luken ;  and  though  Crntinmi  kfjrt  I"
IbB  n:gular  Ihroe  iierfonnem,  ArtHtophaoe*  Mitiw-
timee.  and  notably  in  the  Tknmophariatmaar.r'^
ployed  a  larger  iinmber.


MJSTRIO


ai


Hisruui


Sitnio  real  or  appiircTit  pxceplioim  tn  tlii8  rule  in

tra^rdy  b»v»  Iwnti  k«<ciil,v  dinniwiHMl,  ami  ilciiiBtiil  a

k  Blliirt iidlicv. Fnr iiistaiicr,  tlit' Fromrthrnn in  u

pi^cr  fur  two  actorn,  yet  in  tlir  ujiotiiiig  rci>iki  tlitirr

I  Kn>  four  pcnwtiA  itiioii  tlio  jilagt^ — Prniiii'thctiH.  He-

i  pbtu.>stud,  aiMl  itie  nlU-gurical  K/Ktror  autl  Bt'ci. But

'  But  duc«  not  Hpeab,  aud  unite  acton  wi.-re  au-

qucstiouably uot reckoned ; while Pi-onit'ilufns

biriiself,  tbere  can  be  no  dnul>t,  wa-s  represented  by

a  RiRaiitic  \*y  rtK""i  "  ■*"  contrived  that  an  actor

standing  behind  th»  pirtnriid  mountain  cmld  sjieak

thmngh t)i« niiiHk. Xn priilatfniiiitt  could hii%'i>

biNin  fX^H^rt-fd  ti>  Hubniit  to  tli»  n^Ktrainl.  of  nnt-h

an  Atitliide  throughout  thir  whole  of  the  play, lu

say  luiihingof  thueatastropbont  thoeiul,  wht;n  tbti

i-ockK  fall  asunder,  uiui  ProinetbeuH  itt  dashed  dowu

L  into  Tartarus"  (Doualdmui,  Thtatrc  of  the  Gr<vt#,

■  Tth  (nI.  p.  ii*!). lu ilif  Chot'ijhori  Acachylus  bud

^  three  actor»,  but  in  IHX)  foil,  a  fourth  ikh'tds  re-

<|iiired,  wben^  Pyladeo,  who  has  Ix-on  piesciit  nio«t

of  the  time  as  »  DUiie  actor,  be(;ii)H  To  Apeak. The

notion  of  tho  Srb<iti.'i.st  tbnt  <hn  uiicfnjr,  i^lin  ban

only  just  quittvd  tho  MAgv,  n'appcarH  fttt  Pyla-

dcd,  U  Ktit^ctud  by  A.  MUllcr  on  the  ground  that

Ui«  aoCor  ba8  not  hod  time  to  ehaugo  hia  drenii. It

may  be  remarked,  bowever^  that  the  Ureuk  tnt*;ic

actor,  ill  onlei-  to  aasuiuo  another  character,  bad

ouly  to  ehauf;e  an  upper  ^nrnietit,  a  m.i8k,  and  T>er-

haps  a  wig. There  were  none  of  the  minute  toilet

»cpe«sorie8  of  tb« inoflern "niake-up,"  and the

operution  may  havr  Iwtui  got  tlintufj;li  n-ilJi  unu'h

gnuliT  rapiility. O»o^^  luon*,  in  Ili4>  Ot-diftnn  nt

Colouua,  a  fourth  aeior  must  bo  aiuumexl  uulewi  the

part  of  TbcsoD«  tn  divided  amoug  all  three  |M->r-

furmers. The  former  alternative  is  8up)H>rled  by

rCO.  MiUIer</ii>>.  on  Kumfn.-p.  l^)aud  A.  Mtlller

\\\u  175, 1).  4) ;  the  latter  hy  K.  Y.  Hermouu  iUr  lJi»'

tributionr  I'trnrHnrum  inter  UUIrii>He»  in  Trofioivliit

(Vra^rM,  Marburg.  11^40,  p.  4:i!)  and  D<nia1(l»i>n.  w1h>

IobserveH  that  "iho  tiiaMk  and  ttio  uuifurniity  of
tragic  derlaniation  would  mukc  it  iwenHy  for  tno
actorH  l<i  represent  one  pati aa  for  one  actor  to
■luttaiu  several  cbaractent ''  <p.  'il&^  ii.>. The  terms
WaftacTKiiyiof and napa)(Ofir]yr}fiii here  come iu fur
explaiittliou. The  usual  nwnmug  i^f  irapa)iopf)yt}fui
1b  of  courw'  a  HulK>ntinato  r.luiniH  or  trtffns  j^opuf.
but  the  Mtalf^uieul  Ihiit  the  wurd  vtiih  aliiu  applied
to  the  |)nrt  taken  by  a  fourth  »L*tor  nwta  only  on
the  authority  of  t'ul'lux  (i\.  tOU.  110),  where  then;
I is  alinofit  certaiidy  miuo  eoDfusioii  iu  the  text. It
^LIh  more  likely  that  a  supennnuerary  who  spoke  a
^B4«w  word!*  only,  tinch  iih  thn  rhildren  in  Iba  Mrdra,
^■ftr  tbe  ahove  ciKeH  of  n  fourlli  aetor  lining  rrquirNl,
^B  was  ciUIih)  ita(iuaMf{i/t(i».

Tho  tliK-e  regular  uct-ont  were  dii4tiuguiHlied  by
ilie  locbiiieal  uauivtt  uf  irp<aTayaviirTT}t,  fit^Tt[^ay^l^•
ntrr^T,  i>nd  rptrtrywviffTiJc,  ludicaliug  tfa«  more  or
les*)  prominent  part  each  had  to  play  iu  the  dninia.
Ct-rtaiu  convetitioual  means  wore  also  devitted,  by
wbieh  t  lie  spectatorM,  a«  houu  i\»  an  iirlor  appeuretl
ou  tbe  Hijigi*,  went  etiuble«)  lo  judge  whieb  part  lie
was  going  to  pei-forui ;  thiiit  the  [trotagonint  regu-
larly came  from  a  dMtr  in  lbi<  eentro,  tbe  iluuterag-
tiiiist  from  one  on  tbe  rijibl.  and  Ibo  tritngonidl
fnitii  a  door  on  the  left -baud  eide  (Poll.  iv.  1^ ).
The  protagonist  naturally  uiiderl<M>k  the  character
hi  which  tbe  iolareet  of  the  piece  w»«  intended  to
centre;  uol  always  the  title- r^Ie,  uittess  it  were
that  of  Iht^  real  hero  or  heroine.  It  in  true  that,
ill  BIX  out  of  th»  )«even  extant  playit  of  Sophmdeit,
I tbe  Litlo-rAlo  in  oIjmi  tlie  leoiliug  part;  but  in  the


4

I


^  CrrgphontfM  and  {hHomaiin  of  Euripides  tbe  tllle-
I  i-^le  WOA  only  ii  thinl^cbiKs  part,  and  as  audi  was
'  taken liy  Aesebinc!^  (  Item.  /**■  for \t.2r^,  f  !«)).
The  ciuiJeL'tiire  ik  almi  unfninidtwl  that  tbe  prntag-
I  ouiHt  waA  always  the  principal  iu(viM>uger  (nvw.
Xort,  or  again  that  ibo  uarralive  of  u  death  (e.g. of
Mippolytus  or  I'eiitberiH)  wu(»  ueci.'AtiaNly  aMHigin>d
t4t  tlie  actor  of  the  deail  man'i  part  (K.  F.  nenuaiiii,
op.  eit.  \t.'J'-i). It  in  au  iugeiiiuueibiit  ratber  fanciful
unlitni  of  K-  O.  MIlller'H  {tiriech.  LU,  ii.  ^7)  thai  the
dcuterHg«mixt  regularly  took  sympathetic  purt«  as
,  a  friend  of  llie  ben>  or  heroine,  whereas  the  Iritag-
'  oiitNL  wax  generally  "an  tnntigator  who waa  the
I  caiinuof  like  HUlfci'itigM  of  the  prrttAgouint,  while  he
himself  wah  the  least  enpable  of  ileplb  of  feeliitg
or  sympathy;"  in  jxtpnlar  language,  that  he  was
the  "  villain  of  tbe  ])iece." ThiA  is  supptirted  by
'  tbe  recorded  faet  that  Craou  iu  the  JntiijUHr  was
I  a  tritagoiUHt's  part,  and  by  an  arrungeiuent  of  the
characters  in the  Ore-stean trilogy  of  Aei^rhylus
which  giveti  the  part  of  Clytacmnestra  throughout
'  (o  the  trilagouint. It  in  a  fact  nut  without  sigiiifi-
eance  that  the  thirty-two  exiaut  irageilieA contain
,  DO  "hero"  who  in  also  a  "villain,'"  like  itat-ht'lh  or
Jiivkard  Ibr  Third;  but  tbe  titles  of  lost  plays  «liow
an  IrioH  of  Aescbylns,  an  JrriiiiN«  and  uii  Jirfum
of  Sophncleit;  and  it  would  seem  that  (lie  villain-
hero,  though rare,  %vaAt  not  altogether  nnkiiowu.
It  is  Hiift^r  to  say  with  DtmahlHon  that  tini  M-eoud
and  third  (wrfornierN  "mhmu  to  have  ilivided  the
other  charnrlerH  hutweeii  tliem,  leKS  according  to
any  fixe<l  rule  Ibnn  in  obedience  lu  the  directions
of  the  poet,  who  was  guided  by  the  exigencies  of
his  piny." As  on  the  mnderu  stage,  parts  were
written  for  partienlar  ador.'i; a  proof  that tlie
author,  uotwitlistaiiding  the  many  cnnrentionat
reialrictionik  impocied  by  tlie  ancred  cbar.icter  of  the
Attic  drama,  bad  some  inUiience  over  tbe  cbolc^'  o(
his  actor>.

The  [lumber  of  fini>eruiiuienine«  was  unluniltxl.
They  wtae  iihually  silent,  but  HOinetimes  Hpoke  a
few  wonlR,  I'Hpccially  when  a  fourth  inteilocutor
was  required  as  above;  in  wbicli  coi^  the  speaker
was  occasionally  placed  Iwhiiid  the  j^renei*,  ov  shel-
tered from  view  by  the  ebonis,  Ibat  the  limit  of
ibree  actors  mtgbi  not  Iw  cditruitivcly  vtulaled.
PerrMtns  of  rank  and  dignity  always  came  upon  tbe
stage  Htiilably  attended,  jtmt  a.<t  no  Athenian  lady
or  geiilleniaii  in  n;al  life  went  out  without  at  leant
nun  sluvo:  the  body-gnards  of  royal  peniouat;eii
were  a  couapicuous  feature,  so  that  fittfiniptiiiot  or
I  iopv<ti6pitut  hecnmo  an  equivalent  to  Kuit>*\i'  irpoirm-
iroc,  and  in  one  or  t  wo  instauveH  (the  opening  hc«ii«
of  the  Onlipuii  Tt/rannuu  and  probably  that  of  the
JcAoi-niaNN )  we  liavo  a  regular  "sluge-mob''  of
citixeu-i  like  those  in  JhUhh  Caraar  aud  HUhvlm
Tell.

The  acting  of  female  cbaract«r«  by  men  wan
greatly  assisted  by  the  use  of  masks;  there  was  uo
neei)  to  u.tsigii  stich  parts  to  beardleM  vonthn,  as
in  Eiiglatid  in  the  SbnkeMpearian  tiuies.  In  early
days  the  dramatic  poetH  tbeiiiHclveM  acted  in  their
own  play»,  and  duubtleHM  um  protngonisls.  Of
AcBcbylus  it  is  further  reeordwl  Ihiit  ho  wiis  bin
own  ballet- tuasler,  aud  trained  his  cboni»eH  to
■laucu  without  the  aid  of  a  profeetsional  opxiirrofSf
iiiiTKaXos  (Ath.  i.  'il  ef.  Sophocles  appoarefl  ouly
ivi'u-v  on  the  sl^ige ;  as  Tbamyria  hi  the  play  of
that  nuiue,  accompanying  a  »4>iig  on  the  Hihoru,
aud  as  Namticaa  playing  at  ball,  in  the  IlX^vrptac
be  then  gave  up  acting  on  account  of  tbe  weak-


HlSTKfO


Cnvti  imni  «rMi  An«ient  Tti«si»

nsM  of  bis  Toicr. After  IiEh  time  it  l)pc»iiie  itsr«p-

tiiiiiiil  forth*  iMiet  tftlM"  alftii  at»  fii^tnr-  Ai'ifltyliib,
who  siH'iiiH  to  1i:ivu  iHMtii  usually  phttagouisi  in  Iuh
««A'ii  plays, <Miipl«»y*=*l  Cli^aiitltir  a«  IiiM  duutcragoniht,
mill  HubHeqiH'iiCly  (uft(.'i-  tbo  iiitrii<liii-tloii  nf  a  tliinl
flclorl  My»iiiiHriisiuitrilaK«iii*tt  i  I'it.Arxoh.  p.  a,  1.75
Piml.).  C)iM<l>-iiii>ltrr<uu<lTt«p<ilfuiiih  wereainiilarly
muMH-iHtcil  witli  tSttpliiKrlejt,  anil  CopliiiMiphoii  nilli
Kitripidett.  Acturrt  souietiDit'^  rvceiviKl  eriorinuiiit
salaries.  ncca«tni)»Ily  iik  iiincli  a«  :t  t.-iVnt  ($11 8(1)  fi»r
Iwit  ur  ovcii)  mio  iluyV  p<'i-fiiiiiiiiii(*c(rif1l.  vi.  !>,  ^  2).
No  pociivl  Hti^iiin  utiiiL-liiid  t<>  iIil>  uclur'tt  nalHitg
Corn- Nop.  Pniff.  r>).  lJiH(iii(j»ii»lifd  Athoniuu  citl-
eiiH  Mppttiirrd  on  tliv  uta^v  a»  amateiii-s,  aud  tlic
rAIi-  nf  rt  TfM.Tayiinrta-njs,  uotwitlictoiidiiic  tlie  RHir-
rilixiH  :(iid  i^xu^Ki-ruted  iiircetives  of  L)i'iuo«tbeuv«,
did  not  detrarl  fruiii  Attseliinett'  pohition  m  &  sol-
dit-r  and  orator.  Had  flcntrs.  buwc^cr.  to  whatever
Klatiua  iu  litV*  lliry  bi-loiigr^l,  wvw  not,  on  tliiit  hc-
voiiiit.  spnred:  diKplcafiiini  whk  tdiowu  )iy  wliist-
liny  or  liis*.ing  (av^jiTTttv,  rx-nioHlIi.  Dr  <Vjr.  p.  3ir>,  ^
2(if»);  oiiotlior  word  in  Bnftniit'iy,  pntbably  dmiotiti^
iipTi>iir  aguinnt  tlu'  author  ratliur  tliuii  tlie  nctor.
t'ur  the  tbrowiiig  of  fruit  or  iiiitM  in  tbentnut,  and
M>metiiDi<«  pvoii  of  stoiien,  i-f.  [AiuitH-.")  r.  AMb.  }
■^l;  DfnHwtli.  De  Cttr.  p.  :114,  $  '4Gi.  Un  tbo  olliur
liiind,  thi>  practice  nf  eucuflug  (avdit)  is  iuferre*!
from  Xcn.  ^ywp- 1*,  J  <■

At  a  laUT  time,  wli(;ii  Ur«i>«e  bod  lost  ber  iiide-
]m;u<Iuiic(!,  vrc  tind  r«-^iilnr  triwjM  of  nvt^tra,  wbo
W4*ni  eltbcr  sUtiouary  in  partiuulnr  ton-nn  of
(froi;c«,  or  wamlercd  fnuii  pliw;*'  to  plac*",  and  eu-
IjaKcd  tbeidst'lvfu  wbwrttvwr  fbi'y  found  it  uioKt
]irotltBb]e.  Tlii\v  fonuml  rcgitbir  oouipuiiiv»  or
j^nildA  ((rv»«^(>  »itb  their  own  internal  or>cani/a-
tion,  with  th*'ir  cinimion  oflicer*.  proiwrty,  an<l
iMirra.  Tht-n!  arc  n  nuinlwrof  iiiHfriptiinis  belong-
in;j  to  wiich  coiupfliiios.  Tbey  tnn  be  Ihil-imI  at
AtliiMm.Thebes,  AiKo»,Tt*»H(.  Cyprntsand  Hbfgiiiiii.
Hut  IliPM!  actons  arv  gt-noruHy  «poki*ii  of  in  very
ruutvinptuonn  tennit;  thoy  wero  pi*rbu]is  in  hoiuu
vuiwH  ftlavefl  or  fn-eilinen.  and  ibitir  pay  was  wtrnf-
iiiutts  MB  low  wt  M'V*-ri  diHcLniUH  ($1.2^')  for  a  pttr*
fui'Uiuiice  (Luvtan,  Imromrn.  '^).  Tbu  language  of
I.iiciitii  muKl.  bon'evcr,  bo  rpceivud  with  cnntinn.
He  hart  evidently  eonfum-d  the  old  (iri'flc  cKttniat^j
urtliopruf4->»eii>n  with  the  nnicli  lowfrKoninn  mirof
lii»  own  tiuit,*;  iiDd  in  onr  pasaago  (Apal.h)  writes
mt  tboiLgU  Poliis  and  AriviMdunms,  fre«<  (Irvcke  of
tbe  bigbtfit  consideration,  bud  been  liablu  to  the
inn  rinfarum  in  hietrioiicv.


On  Ort^ek  actors  iit gLMiPrnl,  vf.  Mw
fVr.  JJl.  cbnp.  'W  ;  l>»uaid»ou.  Thfalrr  of  ikt
lirtvk-M.Hh  I'd.,  book  iii.rliiip».  l,*i;  Utxkt-t-
fWill,  f'karikif.  iii ia&-2il0;  and  f)i[»^UIIy
Alb. Mlltlfr, Itiihttrtiallrflk. in Htrrnianif
BlilniniT,  t  '^'  I'l*-  l''>-l'^;  ou  the  "guiIJi
of  ttie  artisti*  of  Uioiiysns,"  ^  'id,  pp.  :tll^li
iii) KtiMAN. Tbv  woid Ai»tri*<»rt,  bj
wbicti the Ktmiun actoi's were  called,  u
naiil  to  have  bft?n  formed  froni  ihr  Ktrw*
can  hiflrr,  wbii-b  Mignitied  a  Im/io  oi  danccf
(Livy,  vii.  y). Tin*  origin of  wt'oir  rejtir-
KcntalionH  at  Konie  Iioa  Ikwii  rRlutftl  ninlr
CosioF.islA. The iJUiac hi»triu tbeoe«foi-
w'iinl  lost  the  HigiiiticaCiou  of  a  dnni-^r,  uitd
wan  now  upp!it:d  to  the  Hvtors  iu  tb«  dnint.
Only  ihi.^  Alfllann«  (t\.  w)  uml  ejodia  wn
pla>'f4l  by  (reoboni  Koinaiin,  while  tbc  reg-
nlnr  drama  was  left  to  tbc  bistrioDOk  nbw
formed  a  distinct  cIhm  of  penjous.
In  tbc  times  of  I'lnutus  and  Tervnce  w^  Hud  tii#
wtors  giithured  ialo  a company  (  pivj,  ro/rrr*  ,i,
under  the  «:ontro)  of  a  uianagrT  K'oiwiiiK*  yrfji*,
alno  called  ni-for  in  a  teebnicnl  HeiiM',  tbongb  orfif
in  of  cuurrwr  uUv  a  Kyiionym  of  hittrifH. U  •!!•
through the nianngrr Ibat a iiiiijoi^lnite nlio
win*  giving  games,  of  wbicli  »l»ge-pla>»  fnniirti
n  part,  engaged  Ihu  M>rvice«  of  a  couijtaDy. hn-
tiis,  who  wu praetor in the year  of  Cat«ir'«
death,  tried  to  regain  tbc  popnlnrity  bo  hail  loti
Minnigh  the  luunler  by  giving  the Lndi  A[»1U-
iniretti  with  nnneuiil  splondunr;  aud  h<i  went  nit  llw
way  to  Naples  to  negotiate  with  acton*,  who  •wtn
to  bavt  Imen  Gnn-ka.  lM-«idea  gctitng  bis  fl
to  iiM*:  tbeir  inlerc-Mt  in  h'm  Whalf  (I'Int.  Iln
8o  ill  iniperial  timeo  a  public  hingor  i»  Niiil
rrHtitrr prartiiribun  (.Inv. vi.:i7!)). The  payjwmni
wa!t  on  aa  varie*!  a  scale  as  in  modem  riiae*. Id
tbe  first  centary  of  the  Empire  an  ordinary  Ktor
(♦ecnii  to  have  received  live  deoarii  and  hi»  fnol
(.Sen.  A>.  fti,  ♦  7); while at an earlier  prri"«l
"etwra"  like  Roscinn  and  Aeeopnct,  the  contMKt*'^
raries  and  friends  of  Cicero,  made  ample  forlnwt.
Cicero  tells  ns  that  Roocinttconbl  bavr  boni>nnil>ly
made  0.000,1)00  neHteruei*  ($J40,00rt>  in  ten  yeanliad
111*  chosen  to  do  mi  (  t'ro  JIohv.  Com,  H,  f  23);  And
Pliny  givi>a  half  a  mtUiou  (190,000)  aa  bia  inuul
eamutgM. The  tradition  pnMwrveil  by  MacfoUut
( Sat.  iii.  14,  H  U-y-i)  is  that  Bu«cius  alone crMlnd
I'KK)  denarii  ($170)  for  every  day's  |i«ffcinMaw;
while  Aesopus  left  a  Fortnne  of  20,000,000  ««ft|cte(»
<|800,000),  acipiired  wlely  by  bis  profpsMoo. TUl*
WM^  afterwanltt  »(}nandcred  bv  hia  sou  (iltv-  Utt  a
:5,  a:wy

It  in  clear  from  the  wonlti  of  Livy  (vii.  3)  Utft
the  bititrionea  were  not  citizeua;  that  they  kbk
not  contained  in  tbe  triboSf  uor  allowed  tn  b^*-
listeit  oa  eoldiera  in  tbe  Rotuan  legion*;  ital  IkiL
if  any  citizen  entered  tbe  profeasion  of  hidtnc.b'-
on  this  aceonnt,  was  excluded  from  hi»  irilir.  Tb*
hintriones  were  tbi*reforo  tiMially  eillier  fiecdnwn.
forcignent,  or  Blaven;  the  latter  spectally  Mlnrai'^
for  the  Htugu  to  llieir  nm«tfr*!i  profit.  Kveii  if  •>*
j;rriNJ,  tbey  were  legally  in/nmrt  (Edict.  ^^pI•fl^
IHff.  :l,2, 1 ;  cf.  Cic.  Pe  ICrp.  tv./r.  10  mjt.  Ang.  thCir.
Ih-i,  ii,  Vi),  and  M>cially  i>i  low  eHiinmlion  (Cic.  /^
Artk.  5,  fy  III;  Corn.  Nep.  Fi-ur/.A:  Snrt.  71»  ^^
AesojMis  aeeiuH  to  have  been  u  fr.  '  <>>■'

Claiidiau  gens; btil KoaL-ius^  tbe .i  >"

of  Cicero,  wan  certainly  inffcumt*,  uml  jiii)l>.tlil}  it
good  birlb. .SmIIji  jruvc  biiii  tbe  j;uid  ring  of  "iti*


nil  wxta

ii  mMH


HISTRIO


«n


IlOUl£KL\S


Comic  Actor (ProDi
an  EDgnvcd  Rt&g.)


trimn  rank. Towarda  tbe  cUwe  of  the  Republican
period,  a  few  men  of  position  and  Greek  culture
raised  themselves  above  tbe  prejudices  of  tbeir
coiiiitrymeu,  and  valued  tbe  persou  uo  less  tbau
tlitf  genius  of  great  artists. Wbeu  Caesar  foi-ced
LalMrios  (q.  v.),  a  knigbt  advanced  in  years,  to
appear  on  the  stage  in  his  own  mimes,  be  was
thonght  to  have  exceeded  the  powers  eveu  of  a
dictator,  and  bis  victim  took  a  dignified  revenge
(Mtici-ob.  Sat.  ii.  7,  $  3  foil.). Under  the  emperors
men  of  equestrian rank  often  appeare*!,  with  or
without  compnlsion  (Snet.  Avg.  43;  DJo  Cass.  liii.
31 ;  Suet.  1*16.35);  and  this  circumstance,  together
with the increasing influence
of  Greek manners,  tended to
improve  tbe  social  position  of
the  actors. At  the  very  begin-
uini;  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  it
bml  become  necessary  to  check
the extravagant compliments
paid them (Tac.  Amh.  i.  77).
Their  legal  status  remained  tbe
same as roganU in/amia  and
exclusion  from  office;  eveu  pro-
vincial honours  are  denied  them
in  the  Lex  lulia  Muuicipalis  of
B.C.  45,  where  they  are  coupled
with  gladiators  (C.  I.  L.  p.  123) ;
tbongh  inscriptions  show  that  tbe
rule  was  not  always  enforced  (Orelli,  2i)25). But  the
old  law  was  now  somewhat  modified,  by  which  j
the  Roman  magistrates  were  empowered  to  coerce  '
the  histriunes  at  any  time  and  in  any  place,  and  i
tbe  praetor  had  the  right  to  scourge  them  (iuu  rir-  I
fiarum  in  hi»trioHe»). Augustus  entirely  did  away  j
with  the  iu»  virgamm,  and  limited  the  interference  ,
of  tlie  magistrates  to  the  time  when,  and  the  place  '
where  {l»di  tt  tcaeHa),  the  actors  performed  (Hnet. .
Ang.  45). But  he  nevertheless  inflicted,  of  his  own  !
authority,  very  severe punishments \\\Hi\\ those
actors  who,  either  in  their  private  life  or  in  their
conduct  on  the  stage,  committed  any  impropriety.
After  these  regnlatlons  the  only  legal  punishments
that  conld  be  inflicted  upon  actors  for  tmprn|>er
conduct  seem  to  have  been  imprisonment  aud  exilu
(Tac.  Ahh.  iv.  14,  xiii.  28).

The  corapetittun  of  the  actors  for  public  favonr
was  carried  to  extraordinary  lengths,  and  stirred
up  factions  like  those  of  the  Circus.  If  not  as
early  as  the  time  of  PUotns  himself,  yet  at  the
time  when  the  existing  Plautine  prologues  were
composed  (probably  about  B.c.  150-100),  we  find
partiaaoship  (aiiMtio)  in  full  operation  (Plant.
Poem,  prol.  37  foil.).  At  first  palms  and  inexpensive
t-rowus  of  gold  or  silver  tinsel  were  the  reward  of
|M*po1arity  (Pliny,  H.  X  xxi.  \  6>;  afterwards,  under
the  Empire,  presents  of  money  and  rich  garments  :
(Juv.  vii.  243  with  Scbol.).  There  waa  a  regularly
otiganized  and  paid  elaqme  (the  (A<a(ra/«i  opertie  of
Tar.  Jmm.  1. 16:  cf.  Mart.  iv.  5,  ri);  and  over  and
above  that  the  backers  tfamt»re»)  resorted  to  act-
ual violeDce  and  even  blmMlsbed.  Hence  Tiberias
OD  one  occasion  Conod  himself  obliged  to  ex(iel  all
hiaUionea  from  Italy  (Tac.  .4»».  iv- 14) ;  but  they
were  recalled  and  patmnize«l  by  hi!*  sn^cetMor.
Tlw  «Bpcnws  as  a  mle  tolerated,  v>metinteH  eii-
eoaragad,  and  oecaaionally  cheeked  the  *:xt:t-mf.n
0l  the  atmgfb.  We  read  of  the  emi>eror'4  priv;»te
wamtgaaAm  wh»  ftirtomtA  dariai;  dinner-time
(8Mt..Jii|0u74)h  sad  were  sooietim^^  allow^rd  al-c*
t»  llr*  *^  tti*  tiMMm  feelbre  the  (leople. TIh:


practice  of  giving  inimiKlerate  sums  to  ucttirn  wm

■  reetrict«lbyTib»'rius(Tao..4ss.l.7Ti  8net.  m,S4ti

again  by  M.  Ann^Hus,  aud  by  Alexamler  Hevenin.

!  Aurclins  onIaini'<l  a  maximum  payment  of  live  ontt't

'  l925.5t))  to  each  actor,  and  that  no  rttilor  shonhl  i>x-

,  ceetlthesnutoftenanmdSl);  thlMmusl  mean  thai

there  wert)  to  l>c  ctlilorrH  in  niunlH*r  equal  In  half

the  actors,  for  it  cannot  bo  thought  that  ho  reduced

the  actiirs  t«  two  for  em*h  perfiiriusnce. The  re-

:  strictions  of  the  Gri'ek  N(i(gi>  an  to  ihe  nuniWr  of

actors  never  prevailed  n|K)ii  the  Itonniu.

Hobgoblin. See  l.AKVA.

Hodopoei  (oltomnat). I'nlilie  otHeials  nt  Athens,
charged with Ihe  rant  of  the nnuls  (Phot. Lrr,
M.  h.  v.).
Hoe. Avo  Lnio;  Mauka.
Hogahead. Kee  Duijim.
Holoaphyratou. Matte  of  Itentuu  metal,
Homerlo  Question. Ki'e  Homkiu's.
HomerXdae. 8i4t  IIomkih-h.

Homenia  {'Ofiripos).  The  uni-ient  Greeks  never
doubted  the  hiHt^n-icnl  exiKfence  of  Homer.  Iln
was  to  thcni  "the  iKiut"  (h  noitjTriv)  In  a  speelal
sense,  but  they  kin^w  nothing  of  him  as  a  iH^rson.
Kight  Gn;ek  bingraphies  of  liini  are  Mttll  extant
one  under  the  iiuine  of  JMntarch,  another  falsely
ascribed  to  Hentdotus  —  hut  none  of  thimi  have
any  historic  value ;  m\iiii^^  tbnin  belong  to  the
Christian  era.  The  early  Greeks  had  no  mom
interest  in  literary  biography  itinn  the  Knglish
contemjwraritiH  of  (;hauc4)r,  and  hiter  generutifUiN
HUppliiMl  the  lack  of  knowledge  from  vague  trndj-
tion  and  fn>ni  unctTtain  indications  In  the  works
attribiit«d  to  the  jioet.  They  did  not  require
scientific  accuracy  of  statement,  ami  enjoynd  n
guml  story  tfNi  well  t^  qneNtion  its  trntb.  A  large
variety  of  manifestly  fictitious  genealogical  tn-4-N
is  presented  for  Homer,  in  many  of  whieli  he  is
brought  into  some  connection  with  HesifMl.  Home
made  bim  a  descendant  of  Oriili»ns,  He  wns  called
by  HfHne  Melesigenes,  as  the  Mm  of  the  river  giMl
Meles,  near  Smynia.  Gtbers  called  him  Mwiouldes,
either  as  the  mm  of  Mwmhi  or  tbe  mm  of  Mwonin
(Lydia).  A  well-known  epigram  eniphaslKiwi  rliM
uncertainty  with  reganl  to  his  birthplace.  More
than  M!v«-n  cities  claimMl  him  as  their  own.  Htnnr.
thonght  he  was  twrn  at  Hniynia,  anil  near  that
city  a  grotto  was  shown  in  which  they  said  he
composed  bis  jutr.mn.  Himoindps  (Frag.  Kt)  called
him  a  Cbian,  donblless  partly  on  the  strength  irf
the  verse  in  the  Hymn  V>  Iteliau  AjKdlo,  17tf,  rv-
{ftXfit  atrrfp,  MKti  fi«  \itf  J»t  iraiiraXottrtrn,  whi/'b  is
quoted  by  Tbueydides  (iii.  I(M>— n  verse  which  at
least  snppr»rted  the  fK>pular  lielief  in  tlie  jutttt'n
blindneas.  The  great  cririe  Arif«tarf:hns  thought
him  an  Athenian,  basing  his  argimientJt  nfxm  char-
acteristics of  tbe  Uftt^fijff  t\'i»\fr.l,  Arist/irl^mns
of  Xysaa  bfrlieverl  hirn  U>  !•*■,  a  H/iman,  heearixe  of
the  similarity  of  rf-rtain  Mitjutku  fMnUtmm  with  tho«e
de^erilxrd  by  tlte  \HM-t.  Others  would  inakean  Ith-
acan  of  liini.  Gther^t  thonght  him  an  Aegjptinn,
Lucian  callefl  him  a  Babyloitian,  but  i\imht\»:m*  in
merry  jest.  Tt  wait  TRwrvM  forao  Knglish  sehol^r,
however,  f*  sngge>tt  thAt  if  Homer'i  name  were
Tf.%i\  iMkckwards.  in  Hebrew  style,  OMHK>2  wouM
f»e«om*  2fJPJ{MO,  whi^h  was  only  another  f«*rm
for  Hf^lomon ;  tlin«  the  Homertc  pA*;mN  were  aa-
rrilted  to  the  H^hr^w  king.  He  waa  generally
artMiimed  to  have  lived  aVint  a  eentnry  <ft  a  eeu-


lIO.MKKtJS


8M


HOMEBUH


tnry  iind  ii  half  afior  tin*  Trojan  Wiir  (»< .  IISS).  |
OllicPi  m:nli'  liiiii  rtonrisii  atmiit  nc  1*7(1. lie  wan  i
net  lvvH<'p'ilt>tii^|ii.M)  m'l  iiuin*  tliaii  fnnr  Iiiiinln'(I
yiiui-M  Wr<in-  liift  tiiiiu.  Ill-  n.r,  fl-Tl). Thti  rliiin-:h  (ii-.
tht>P4,  OIi'iui^iiM  AU'xitiulriitiiH  and  Tatiari,  iiK'HiK'd  '
to  set  the  <luU>  of  biH  birth  as  Im«  as  |>i»«>il>l«).  In
onltT  tu  itiixtnh)  tlieir  claiiii  that  tliu  wimIuui  of
Hif*  Greeks  wiw  ilprived  fruiii  tbe  Hebrews.

fivliolnrv  nil  lon^jer  nsk  wboro  Hnmor  was  bom
tir  when  he  li%'wl,  l»nt  in  wliat  re;jioua  niiil  tribes
nf  Grcecp  epic  jmetry  wiw  i>*irfect«il,  :ind  iu  what
veiitrnies  tlir  tlind  ami  Odifsnei/  ivneived  tbt^ir
|in*gHi)t  fiinn.  N<il<  tliat  all  wnntii  t\miy  thai  luiy
{Miitt  Htiini-r  i!Vi>r  livisd  to  whom  \vt^  uvuy  t[w  Iluut
or  OJgttejt,  or  butU,  bnt  nil  »iitbuutic  lufui-iuatioii
regunliu^  him  has  {wrifibe^l  bevond  rucitvury.  E^'cti
Eu  bis  puum»  bis  pononiitity  is  kc|t[,  uutirely  iu  the
tiAokgronnd.

Thf*  meikiiiiis;  of  the  name  Honiur  i»  uncertAiu.
Many  xtorles  woro  invented  to  liccunnt  for  it  na
iiiomiiiis  "u  hostagt)."  Half  n  century  ui;u  it  was
explaiuad  mn  "  ttif  iiniU>r"  {Afiov  upnpi'o-ca)),  and
tbils  it  WM  maiiti  to  sufiniiii  thn  vi<nv  that  the
|KieuiK  ni'u  only  a  cougtuiuurutioti  of  dltttiuct  And
tiide|)«adtiiit  lays.  Gcot^^;  Curtius  idio<iT<Ml  tbat.ao*
eordiug  to  analogy,  tbo  uumo  should  moan  "thu
iiultcd/*  not  "ibo  uniUir."  The  plural  'O/^jjikm
vroald  then  bo  nse<l  of  the  in(Mub«rs  of  a  ^uild
of  poot-8i[ij;er^.  TIim  neit  generation  wonld  be
'Ot*rjpi&at,  and  from  tliiii  pnlvotiyuiic  uu  attsiunp-
Uoii  was  made  of  an  orij^iiial  "Ofitjpos. This  pro-


^^''


*N


: '.  /:


tde&l  He»4  u(  Hoinc-r. (Suib  Soocl  Ritoce,  PntaaUiu.!

wm  haji  l>pKn  playfnily  lint  fairly  illiistrat^Hl  by  tbe
Siiccei4.siuii  ill  KnjftiNli :  "  felliiws  "  loft>tpni\  "  the
fplliiws'  guild"  (ontffjlSui ),  "tbo  I'ullows  jf"iltl*^
<'0^r)jiifda(l,  wliicb  biHt  oiwnmcM  a  Mr.  FkIIowk
COfitjfiot)  fM  iu  founder.  But  very  poHslbly  t^hp
uamohad  nothing  to  du  with  tbu  prnfiwtiou  of  Httng.
Homer  wnfi  to  rlio  early  Greekfi  the  persoiiificn-
ttou  of  epic  poniry.  All  tbe  old  epic  poems  were
Bttrilmteil  to  him,  an  all  great  acbievcmetita  wnre
KWiigned  to  Heracles— not  nuly  what are  extuit.


bnt  also  what  are  known  an  tbo  ryclii-  puoma:  the
Ci/jiria  (ni  Kvjrptu,  in  eh-vrn  IxHikK,  of  the  jndg-
iiMMiti  of  Pari!*,  ibo  miK>  nf  llrlru,  and  other  event*
which  iiumiMliiitfly  prrrednl  the  Tnijiui  War — m
ei'ilH'd  by  oiherx  to  StiminiiM  of  CyiirnK),  Ibe  AttAio
/*!«  and  lUiipfftia  {_\t0tonit,  In  lU'e  btnikfi,  of  tlir
nrrivul  of  the  jVoiazoas  and  tbe  Ai'Clu<>piaii  M<ini-
non,  the  defence  of 'I'rny.anil  tbe  tleoftl^f  Ai'bille*;
and  'iXi'oir  nffurts,  in  two  books,  offtbe  di*vii,*«  irf
tbo  wooiloti  horfM«  aud  tbe  rapin|p  u(  tht*  ril,'[
— (loniTrtlly  aArrllMiit  ti»  Arrtiiins  of  Milrtn*;,  lli^
FAitlr  Iliad  {'WiAi  WtKpa,  in  four  biHik*.  in  whirk
Pliibn^Li-t4iK  iind  AcbillrN*  win  XiHipIidi^mtiii  ymtr
brought  to  tbe  help  of  the  Groi^kft — by  I^'M-bcA  of
Milyleii^),  tbe  Xu»ti  (Nootw,  iu  five  biMka,  of  titf
odi'entnros  of  the  Greeks  ou  tbcir  letiirn  tt»m
Troy — by  Agiafl  of  TrooEcn),  and  tbo  Trfr^iM
(Tr^Xryfii'ia,  in  two  books,  ft  soft  of  conctnsion  \^
tlic  r«loryoftbe  t}d>/«»rt/ — by  Eugammon  ofCyrentfi.
When  Ae*«^hylii8  said  ihat  Wis  lrnge<lir«  wec^
but  criunbii  iVom  the  nrb  I'eaHt  of  llouer  (Acbrn.
viii.  !{47  K,  rat  tUTov  rpayMHas  Ttftttj^if  finat  fktyi
Tvtv  'Of^ffftav  ttry«i\at¥  lifiirvMv),  lie  pntbably  had  in
luiiul  not  only  tbt>  IHatt  aud  Chfyiwy,  biil  i(l«o  llif
other  poeuw  of  the  Trojan  eyole,  from  wbieh  ln»
borrowed  snggestioDs,  as  isMjeo  from  Ibu  titles  uf
bis  plays,  tlerodotus  was  tbe  6rtit,  m  fur  u  i*
known,  to  deny  tbe  Homeric  anibor»bip  «f  th»
Cf/priiu  This  he  did  (ij.  117)  on  tbf  gumml  of  llif
iiicunnisteiicy  that  the  poet  of  tbe  Cgftritt  mail"
HariH  reneli  Troy  on  tlie  third  day  fr<tm  S|i»rla,
whiEo  tbe  tKwt  of  the  Iliatt  repre^ii(>td  him  s»
driven  on  a  duvions  coarse  to  Sidon;  and  the  his-
torian Kttnarkft  that  nowhere  hIm'  dori*  H'mipreou-
tradiot  biuisolf  '[aviiaftjj  aXX^  avtiritinTf  i»vrvwt
Tbneydidcs  (iii.  lOj)  oeeaiB  to  have  aekmiwlwijril
or  nssnmiMl  tlu^  Homeric  authorHbij)  of  the  sn-ctlW
Homeric  Hyniiis.  Pluto  and  Xenopbon  mroii  "ir
Iliad  ami  iMUjUHf^  when  they  upeak  of  ffpiiitr ;  liui
Aristotle  (A'uv/m.  £'M.  1141  a)  t|iiot<-»  from  ttie  Jf«^

earlioHt  Aloxaudriait  editor  of  Homer.  Zriiudniui^
MoiDii  to  have  oMigued  to  him  only  the  /fiatfutd
CWjwry.

Among  tbe  minor  |>ot^inH  of  Hotner  are  geatfalli
placed  tbo  //ymna,  Uultlr  »(  lAe  /V«{|i  diwf  Jfio-
{^UT^m'^ti^v^^i\\ia),  Jmit  {iraiyvioS,  and  Marfil'^
Tbo  //ymii«  arc  not  bymus  in  the  modern  wbm of
the  t^rm;  they  are  rather  epic  than  lyrlo.  Tbfj
nnmher  thirty-flnir  in  nil,  biil  ton  ore  brief,  tiatia^
only  three  to  nix  lines  each.  The  ftwt  fmi.  te
Apollo,  were  connlud  as  one  nntil  the  critic  Hlwa-
keu  In  1741'  convinowl  scbolnn*  that  the  fimt  *■"
ill  praiiie  of  Dclian  ri7H  verm's)  and  tbn  mknihJ  </
Pythiuii  Apollo  i'AGS  verses).  Tbe  Inlcst  fdiuircn-
4leav'in)r<i  ag.iin  lo  ibow  that  (he  two  am  nisply
parts  of  oiif.  The  ihinl  Hymn  (fi*)  reree»)  wlU
of  the  birth  of  Hcnnen  and  the  exploitu  dihI  irJclii
nf  tlie  new-boru  bnbr:  bow  be  found  a  Itifla^
nnil  invented  the  8«'von-«tiingcd  lyre  {'^i^fl'*
how  Uv  stole  tlieeultb'nf  A[i<dli>  nnd  (hen  tnturiMol
to  bih  crn^lle,  ttimlty  uppt<!uiiig  Apolln's  wtnlb  l>f
the  gift  of  the  lyre.  Tbin  .-iiitl  |bi>  i^ne  iinmciiintv-
ly  following  arv  distinctly  M-ciibtr,  not  rrli^it<tti^
in  tbcir  ebiuncter.  Tbe  fimrth  H\mn  ["SXi  venr*)
tells  of  Aphrojlitd  niul  her  love  fur  AiicbiBe*.  Tl»
Mfth  Uynni  il95  verses),  to  Demetcr,  has  a  ravtr
Aei-ioiiH  lotirt  than  the  preceding.  Jt  iM^emx  It  bai'
bfM!n  inteiidtil  to  state  the  mytbicsil  fmitwlAtio*'
fur  ibt!  KleiiHinian  My*it«riu».  It  tells  how  P»r-
itupliouiS,  Deuietttr's  dungbter,  was  corriol  off  by


HjuIm  db  ftbe  watt  plitekiiig  dovrera  ("  tieitwlf  a  fair-
er flower"),  and  of  tin?  discouAolutv  wamU-rliigit  of
ttio  niuthcr  in  scurcU  uf  licr  (lHU;;*)itfr  until  nbo
fonud  u  (ttiiiiiornry  lionic  ut  EloimiH:  on  hordrpjirt-
iire.  tlietice  :i  IkuiiiIi''  wan  built  in  Iilt  honour,  iiiul
ttl  liwl.  the  liiothi*r  »lid  <lnii};ht4-r  wore  illiitml.  No
niieof  tlieulher  Hynius  hii»uioru  thun  nixty  viTses
Th<',v  ure  "  intn)diictii>nK,''  proeniK  [itfMtoifuu),  iu-
r  Ceiidiil  to  Im!  Munj;  buCont  thf  rbuii)f4HU)<t*M  rfC'ital
*  at  M>mc  other  Iny  (porhnpu  ikt.  8on)«  rhnttHodic  con-
lewl),  a»  a  wort  of  '■gD»f«  before  meat" — in  lh«
•Ainu  »[)irit  »hich  iitatle  ovvrj'  Gret'k  fcMltvily
Hcrod  to  Koniv  divinity.  No  external  eridcnco
existK  for  tbu  tluic  of  Ihfnc  IfynuiM.  They  cunt niii
innny  Homt-ric  foniiuInH  onil  tat;;»  of  vvi-Bva  whii'h
^ivn  all  nnttqiu*  Ihivnnr  t'veu  to  what  is  coniprira-
tivcly  niodorii.  Partu  of  tho  po«tii8  may  go  back
to  II  ivtnot«  nnti<iHity;  tbu  llyniu  t**  I>enit«t4.M-  may
havo  bt-iMi  ct>ni]H>HC4l  abmiC  n.c.  (£>0;  iiiorv  tt(it«
from  the  ttfib  ami  sixth  cfiitnritM.  Afl#r  thu  (lAh
ctnitury,  tlifr  inlcrrcat  in  epic  rt'cilations  vcua  wt
alight  that  those  procniH  n'onhl  not  he  cotiipOAvd.

The  Ifatrachomgunidl^ft  is  a  comic  epic  pttcni  of
3U3  verBf!),  giving  a  burlesque  account  of  tbc  bat-
tle l>«two«n  tbtf  frogs  and  mice,  wbou  Pnlf^ohctik
{^triyvadut),  kin^  uf  (bo  fivgs,  cansHnl  the  dcalh
of  Criinib-etnatchcr  (S'i;fO(>mif ),  a  proinisiLiK  younK
mniinp,  inviting  biiii  uml  buaiiu^  him  uii  bis  back
to  visit  bin  homo,  bnr  iJCMfititit!  him  in  the  midst
i>f  tlici  waturti  on  tlic  appr<*iich  nf  a  wntci-snake.
Thu  Alory  bt  cuiniKiHed  with  liiimnnr  and  Mnne  in;;p<
nuity,  but  in  a  li;;ht  production.  It  wan  liM-rilit'd
to  Figreo,  i*on  uf  LygdntniH  ami  m*phi!\v  of  tlit^  Ar-
lamiaift  who  diHtingniehfd  ht-nirlf  in  thu  buttlu  of
Salntuis;  but  if  it  vrerccnnipofled  by  hiiu,  it  wna  in-
terpolated and  worked  over  latrr.  Very  putMibty
It  WfIB  couipU«ed  iu  till-  Ah-xainlrian  |H*riiHl,  in
mockery  of  the  ruvivitl  u(  fpic  piM-try  afirr  (he
AtHleDt  Hpirit  wait  loitt.  The  cpi(;initirt  and  J^titft
arc  «ntirply  titfit(;uilicniit,  both  in  qiinntity  and
qnaiity.  The  only  ouo  of  any  note  Ibt  the  auswtr
of  Arcadian  HnhcrM  to  thn  question  as  to  their
Inck:  "All  (hat  they  took,  tli^y  k'ft;  what  rbcy
did  not  tak*',  they  br*Mtj;ht  with  Ihrni "  (&iro-'  <Xo-
fu¥,  AnTii^ird  '  dra  li  oiix  tXofity  (f>rp6fiftT0n).  The
^JUargilrw  wan  a  comic  poem  of  ruiiNidcrabli*  fame
tin  Biiliqnily,  part  in  dactylic  hrxanivliT  and  part.
Iln  iunibiu  iriim'ter  viTHe,  with  (he  Miory  of  a  stupid
littdpyot},  bashful  felluvv,  who  had  nil  maDucr  of
ridicnbmti  adventure*  and  uttiMuptcd  many  thiugs
which  were  beyond  his  powers.  As  long  as  critics
ntv  uul  agreed  as  (o  what  works  aie  rightly  attrib-
iitol  to  Chaucer,  and  even  as  to  the  authorship
of  a>»mo  id'  the  plays  which  bavo  Im:><!I)  oachbed
(o  8bakefi{N>iire,  no  one  can  womb-r  that  little  is
known  nf  tb»  history  of  Iho  iiiciLiiHbnla  of  Greek
|Hietry,  coni[MtH4t4l  In  the  iraaghiativH  age,  long  be-
fore llic  classical  )>erio4l.
I  The  Iliad  and  tbo  Odjfimrtf  coittaiu  tho  atory  of
rpurta  of  the  Trojnn  cycle  of  myths.

The  Jtiad  opens  with  a  scene  iu  the  laut  of  the
t«u  years  of  the  Sicgo  of  Troy,  niid  the  action  of
|the  iNieni  ruutiiinci«  for  only  seven  weeks.  With
uat  ingenuity  {as  it  would  siTom)  Just  enough  !»•
eidental  indications  iint  givoii  of  Uio  ejtrly  history
of  the  war  to  supply  (he  iiwdcd  batilK  for  an  tntel-
iigeiit  apprcciatiou  uf  tbu  story.  As  Honice  says,
Homer  ttm/tfr  ad  ceenittw/tatinat  tt  in  mrdiait  m,\
MOM  »tcu9  ac  uolan  audUi^rrm  ra^il.  The  Judgment
of  Paris  ami  the  ansignnn'iit  of  (he  prize  of  beauty
^■Su  tii©  lioddesN  of  I.ovr  jii-f icferrfd to  in the


m?'

Pit


J  t«u
H«he
■gnia

1  r>ltl»


Homeric  poems  but  oaee,  and  that  In  a  doubtful
passage,  xxiv.  29, 30.  Paris  (his  Greek  nuine  Alex-
under  is  more  frequent  tu  the  poems),  the  voluptu-
ous siui  of  Priain,  king  of  llios  (the  later  lliniu),
ill  the  Tn'jttu  laud,  uu  the  southwestern  sboie  of
the  HL-Ilespout,  bod  sailed  to  Lactslat-moti  :unt  car-
ried away  Helen,  the  beautiful  wife  of  Mi'iiebiils,
the  king,  anil  niany  of  her  piwscssions.  In  order  lo
avenge  ibis  iiir^nlt  and  to  recover  the  woman  and
her  Ireasrires,  Mcnehiiis  and  his  brolh<'r  .\ganu*in-
tioii,  king  of  Myc<-iiiu-,  gathered  an  army  ul  AoIin,
ami  with  IIHO  ships  (and  |H-rha|nt  lUU.OIN)  luent  nut
sail  for  the  plain  of  Troy.  For  ten  years  they
L>e»iegc  the  city.  They  bring  with  thcni  no  »ii|h
plies,  and  speml  much  of  their  time  in  making
fomys  on  the  neighbonilng  di*>(ricts  ami  more  for-
mal cxiH-'ditions  ugaiimt  thu  adjoinin^towus.  Thu
captured  men  ai'c  slain  or  tf4>ld  to  dixtniit  islands;
the  women  aie  kept  as  slaves.  The  Tnijuiis  are
not  closely  barred  witliiii  their  walls,  but  they
are  unable  to  cultivate  their  llelds  and  arc  obliged
to  send  their  treasures  to  tbeir  neighbours,  ht  unler
to  buy  provisions  antl  to  hire  mercenaries.  The
loss  of  men  does  not  secoi  to  have  been  very  great
on  either  side  in  the  early  years  of  the  war.  At
the  opening  of  the  ltiitd,AVi  old  priest  of  A]K)1ln,
Chryses,  coinee  to  the  <ireek  camp  to  raiiHoia  his
doughter.  who  had  l»een  cuptnrwl  by  tho  t!ireeks
and  given  as  a  ffrirM  o(  honour  lo  Againcmnnu.
The  king  refuses  thu  refinest,  ami  Apollo  iivenges  V
the  slight  to  his  prif^Mt  by  sending  a  peHltlence
npoit  the  Greek  camp.  After  nine  days  un  ll^sem•
biy  of  the  army  is  called,  and  tho  seer  Culcluis  ile-
Clares  the  cause  of  the  god's  anger.  The  rnde  Inu-
gnuge  used  by  Achillea,  the  mightiest  of  the  Gn^-k
warriors,  arunscs  the  wi-ath  of  Agamemnon,  and  u
qmirffe]  follows.  AetiilleH"NnlkN  in  bis  tent,"  while
his  motliiM',  tbu  goddens  Thetin.  peisuadrs  Zens  to
grant  victory  to  the  Trojnn  anus.  The  action  of
the  Ili/tfi  inchi<les  only  four  days  of  battle.  Iu  the
tir»t,ii.-vii.:t»(),  neither  side  gains  any  great  advan-
tage; In  the  second,  viii.,  the  tide  uf  batllo  often
turns  and  the  giKis  interfew  again  and  again,  but
at  last  thu  Trojans  drive  the  foo  to  their  t-itnip,
and  bivouac  im  the  plain,  near  (he  Grerk  wulrb-
lin-s.  In  ilie  Ihird  day  of  battle,  xi.-x  viii..  the  Tnn
jans  break  iiiUi  the  Greek  ciimp  and  begin  to  srt
tint  to  the  tiei-t ;  but  nh  soon  as  AehlllcH  Aces  the
dickering  flfime  he  wnds  hlii  comrade  Patroclus
with  his  Myrmidons,  enjoining  opim  hiui  lo  drive
the  Trojans  from  llie  camp,  but  not  to  attempt  (o
capture  the  city.  Pa(rocliis  forgets  the  warning
(if  his  chief,  and  (tiled  with  the  spirit  uf  the  eoni-
bat  pi-esses  on  too  far;  Apollo  strikes  hint  (the
only  instance  iu  the  poeum  of  such  direct  iuierfer-
nncti  <if  a  divinity),  and  Hector  slays  him.  Acliil-
leji  now  Iwcomes  more  angry  at  Hector  than  he  had
been  at  Aguiu^muon,  and  takes  an  active  part  iu  thu
fourth  day  of  battle,  xis.-xxii.,  in  which  bo  driven
the  Trojans  in  coufusion  iulo  their  city,  and  slays
Hector.  The  twetity-third  hook  is  devoted  to  (be
funeral  games  iu  boiiunr  of  Patroclus,  in  accMnl-
ance  with  the  curious  ancient  cnntoin  of  lituuintiDg
the  dead  with  horse-races  and  foot-races  and  ron-
tests  ill  wrestling,  boxing,  putting  (lit*  shot,  nml
shooting  the  bow.  In  the  ttrcnty-foiirth  iMtuk  old
Priam  comes  to  the  Greek  eamj*  and  ransonis  the
body  of  Hector  from  Achillas,  who  bore  uppeurs  in
a  gender  miKsI.  The  pttera  uloses  very  simply:
'■TItils  these  were  htiay  with  the  buHal  of  Hector."
AIt«rtlio  action  of  the  Itiml,  tbe.lethiopinnMcm-


HOIUBUS


UOUERt'S


lion  I'ODK'S  nitli  liin  men  to  the  lii'lii  of  Troy,  wliile
rbiln<;lc'tvi)  wttli  Iliii  buw  of  IlfraclcH  anil  Neoi>ln-
Iciuus.  tho  Hoii  of  Acbillos,  altrr  b'm  fatber's  denib,
cuiiiu  to  uid  tlio  Grct'kii.  Tlic  nlliunce  of  tho  Ania-
zuiiH  with  l\iv  Tr«»)aiiJi  i<i  not  mKutioiK'il  in  the  iiu-
i-nis  Dil.vswiin  plans  the  Woodou  IlorM',  by  which
Ihu  ricy  its  rnplon-d.  Atbcii<*'s  wnith  in  kiiiillod
jiguhiHt  tho  lirfcbB  hy  lb«ir  c«mdnct  att«r  the*  t-ap-
liiru  of  tho  city,  nud  nbe  nrixlit  iipou  them  a  ntunur
u  hich  HcnttttDf  their  tifultt.  Mt^'uclaOtt  i^  iltivvit  to
t.'relf  :iMil  Eitypt,  ami  with  Helen  ivacbuH  hi«  lnnm-
ill  Spiirtn  only  in  th«  eighth  year  of  tlu«ir  \v.iii<iei-
ilig.  t^klyesoUH  in  dri%'eu  lint  t«  tho  Iniiil  of  tlie
lutUB^nttira.  then  to  tho  island  of  the  CyclopvH,
whero  Kilyphemus  stnyM  and  devours  ^\x  of  hi&
riininide^  (,Aud  is  blinded  by  him),  thence  to  the
land  of  thi>  LneHtryKt^uians  (wbeio  all  but  one
«>f  his  nhip«  are  deatroyed),  and  to  Circe'it  inland,
wheru  liu  piiMu'S  a  year,  lie  then  \istt~i  I-ladeK,  in
itnler  tu  fiin^iilt  ihe  rohI  of  (lie  hit  ml  'I'IihIuiii  nimt,
TeirfMiaM.  In  Mad*'.'*  )it>  kpch  I  he  nhmle  of  his  tnnili-
vr  and  thttsu  nf  niiiiiy  nf  lhi<  Cimek  lutrofN.  On  hi.t
raturii  tilt-  duiif;ci-M  of  Si^ylln  and  ('luiryhdiH  nw
mei.  HiH  couiradcM  ithiy  iiui-  of  the  uaulo  of  the
Kun,  and  their  boat  is  wu-ektrd.  OdyMM-iiH  hiiiiM-lf
is  borne  To  the  inlund  uf  tlio  M-ft-iivni]ih  t'aly)i!tii,
who  eatvH  foe  him  tenderly,  and  would  make  liini
hnmortitl  niid  her  biislmiid.  Tho  flccne  of  the  Oil-
S^ifji  opens  in  the  tenth  year  after  the  close  of  the
V  Trojiiii  War  nnd  the  twentieth  after  The  depnrtiire
«f  OdysseUH  from  hia  home  on  Ithnun,  He  ban  heen
ent  so  long  thnt  no  cxi>ectotloii  is  euterlained
'  his  retnni.  His  home  is  fllliKl  by  nioro  than  a
hundred  yniinK  l»'ii>(^^'*i*'<^*=l> '''■t^^i'  ^**  ^*''i  the  hand
«jf  IhiT  faithful  and  prudent  wife,  Peuelopt^ ;  nnd
tliiiN  to  Im-coiui'  the  kin^:  of  tho  realm.  Tho  kuiI-
«k's«  Atlii'iif^  piticH  Ody-isena,  who  in  weary  of  hi^t
Hojoiint  hi  tho  grotto  of  C-alyitso  and  loU|;in;;  for
hih  home,  and  )w»cni-os  the  decre4<  of  Z«tis  for  his  re-
tntn.  Meanwhile  she  HtndM  hJH  son  Teleinachnti
to  Nestor  and  Mt^nelaiLs,  a^kinf;  for  tidin(|rtj  of  hiB>
father.  OdyMftciis  sitts  out  from  Calypso's  ihland,
ci^hteeu  duyV  Mill  to  the  wcKt,  lint  aa  ho  ap-
proaches (jreece  he  is  wreekwl  by  thfl  son-ffod  I'o-
aeidou,  whose  son  I'olyifheniiis  lie  had  blinded,  and
is  oast  on  the  »hore  of  the  rbiteiiriaus  lidcntitied
l»y  tho  ancients  with  t'oreyru,  the  mwlcni  Corfu),
Vi'liu  convey  hiin  to  his  home.  Finding  hi*  palactt
ID  Iba  p(HW>8sion  of  haughty  Kuitorii,  he  returns  in
tlie  gniBo  of  H  beggar,  but.  with  the  tiolp  of  his  sou
and  two  faithful  scrvnnts  land  Alhcni^)  he  aluys
the  suitorv  and  ii^gaiiis  his  kin^dum  and  faithful
wife.

The  action  of  the  fMjv«M^  eovors  only  hIx  weeks
— lew  even  tbau  that  of  tho  J  Had — yet  the  events
of  tho  ten  years  of  wandering  are  compriaed  in  the
stories  which  are  put  tutu  the  mouth  of  Nestor,
Meneluils,  and  Odysseus  himself.  This  device  of
iutnHluciug  a  full  nceuuut  of  CTeuta  which  are
ni>t  included  in  the  time  of  the  proper  action  of
Ihe  poem  was  f<dlowwl  by  Vergil  in  his  aerannt
of  tlie  captiiiv  of  Troy  <aH  Uild  by  AenejiM|,  and  by
Mill4>ii  in  his  aeeouut  of  the  war  in  heavc'ii  (told
liy  liiiphae]).  Many  matter*  which  are  merely
tonehed  upon  in  the  poem  were  discussed  more
fully  iu  the  lesser  epic  poems,  and  the  (inestion
has  been  raided  whether  thcM?  brief  naeotions  in
tbo  Iliad  and  Otlf/imcii  were  .-illunionB  to  the  fuller
necuiints,  already  familiar  to  the  hearer,  or  rather
were  the  fnritfiil  genua  wbicli  were  later  devel-
«tped into  tJie <'iii>ria,  the Xoati,  etc. In  soino


eases  the  latter  alternative  set* ins  rcrttiiii — e.  r.
oil  the  death  of  Hector,  his  wife  Aitdnitmu'li^  d»
Hpairs  of  safety  for  herstdf  and  her  soti  Adtyaiiai ;
"be  will  either  accompany  her  into  slavery,  of
-Miuie  Greek  will  seize  him  by  the  unu  and  hurl
liim  from  the  wall."  This  teems  to  have  suggMi-
ed  tu  n  later  poet  the  detailed  descrtptiuu  of  sncb
a  death  for  the  bny.

The  iiiHtienoe  of  tho  Ilompric  poeruA  u|iun  the
Gii'eks  was  very  great. Pindar  wiyn  that  Odys-
seUH  had  initre  fame  than  lie  diwt<rv*sl  lu'canw*  at
the  8Weel-vntce<I  Homer  (.Vrm.  vii.SW.  t'yit  ftt  »X*'i»'
tXrrofuii XoyAf 'oivtrtTiat 1) irdBai' 6ia rok  Afivttif
ytviaff  'Ofiijfiov). Herodotus  (ii.  Sltf  even  aMert*
that  Homer  and  HcsimI  lixeil  the  tbeogony  uf  ik*
Greeks,  distributing  to  the  gods  their  epiiliriA,
arts,  and  bononrr>. Appeal  was  made  to  the  Ho
nieric  poeius  to  settle  questions  of  precedeiir«>  ami
of  title  to  terriloiy. Tbetve  iMielus  wcr**  in  larjpj
uipnHure  tlti*  bii.iis  of  Iho  Griwk  yiuitirs  •xliiciiliuii.
A  fnigiiient  ttf  u  play  of  AriKt^tpbuneM  tt-'raif.mif
Hliowrt  i\fiui  father  (■xanitiitng  lit.t  m>ii,  lit  pnite  bu
diligence in  nchoul,  on the uu-.iiiing  of  r«rtatu
oltMolct-e  Hunieriu  wonU:  ri  icaXnixrt  Ki'ipvfiLtia ;  ri
KaXavtT Ofitirrjvtk Kafitft^ai III the fii/iujtO»ium of
Xenophon  {lii.  5),  Niceratns  »ays  that  hi»  fslhtf.
Lbo  notod  Athenian  generiil  Nicios.  in  his  druire
to  make  a  goml  man  of  him.  compelU'd  him  I'l
lenni  all  the  poems  of  Homer,  nnd  tiiat  he  onU
re|H'iit  the  entire  lUtuI  anil  <M}i»»fit  froiu  inemnr}'
At  tho  Panatheijaic  festival  from  the  time  of  Sclim
early  in  the  sixlli  renlnry,  for  at  Iro^il  two  hiiii'
dred years the revitation of portions of  IW
Homeric  poems  had  a  prominent  place  (LyeurjC'
LeMTaten,  Ilhi). The  Platutiic  dial(>)cae  /ws  n-inirti
11 1'onvursation  between  Hocrutcsaml  the  Kplirtutn
rhapsode  Ion.  who  visit'i  Athens  nflei  takiug  ibr
prixe  ill  the  Homeric  nH'ttalion  at  Ep)diiiiru*.uiJ
expects  the  .naniB honour  fioiu  the Paiialliw"^
fetilival. Thin  Ion  waa  a  Homeric  Ri»oeiidi*l;  U
claimed  no  nnnHiiol  familiarity  with  lle^iiMl  himI
ArehihK'hus.  hut  iiAHertcd  that  no  one  wjiiolW
him  a.<i  an  iuterprat^-r  of  Homer. ^»cli  inrn  ujU-
iirally  magnilied  their  ottice  and  nprewnlrtl  t*«
poet  as  the  teacher  of  much  occult  wiiwlotu— ilvd*
Ing  in  liiH  works  the  best  niu)tiio<t  fnr  wur  aud  ~
peot-e.  for  the  state«iinin,  the  philo«4>pbfr,  si4
goneral. K%-en  .\ri»t«>i>lmnes  repn-'*"'-  \.--tl»i
Mm  wiyiiig,  "  Knun  what  liiisdivine  li  "^

bis  fame  except  from  his  most  oxl'-  '"^

tions  with  n'gard  to  tactics,  bmre  ilewla.  sini  »*•
arunng  of  nn^n  I"  (/'Vus»,  1*04.  6  6i  Stlot  'Owfc|*',
anil  Tftv  Ttfiijy  no!  xXroc  Sa)^tv  )rX^»  roiJi'  ori  Xt'^*^
i^iba^tv  Ird^fir  aptriti  oitXiatti  av^piaf)-  Thr<*<'t<)*
of  Horace  are  familiar :  at  I*raenest«  he  read  ■(!>"
Homer,  who  tanglit  what  was  base  and  whst  *»
honourable  nmre  fully  and  better  than  lb«  ^toif
Chrysippiis  or  the  Academic  philosopher  Cnuii''*
{Kjtiiit.  i.  a.  ],  7V(MV*Hi  Mix  ticri}ilorrm  . .  -  r*l<fi;
qui  f/uitl  »il  pulthrnm,  ynid  turpr,  quid  sliJ»,  f»"
tnt»,\plf^nittii  ar  HtrtiuH  Ckrjfiftfti  rt  (.'nm^orr  *f*"-
Plato  (tlrp.  X.  Tiliy  c)  refiiten  the  view  that  U'-o*''
hiul  special  wistlom  in  regard  to  "wars,  gi-wral-
«Lips,  mlinini-itration  of  citie«.  and  tlie  rdm-jii w"
of  men,"  thus  showing  tlie  prevalem-e  of  Ihut  IitIk'

According  l«  an  nncerljtiu  story,  Pytltspcr**
was  Kjiid  to  havH  seen  Homer  in  linden,  ftiiifrnii4>'
tormiints  in  return  for  his  statemeniii  iiboiii  tbf
gods.  But  the  first  definite  eritirism  of  flonat
so  far  OS  is  known,  waa  that  of  Xenophiuii*  [f^^l
7),  at  the  close  uf  the  sixth  century  ii.c..  thai  K«>-


i


HOMEKL'S


837


IIciMKkUS


met  jiiiil  Ht'MKKl  uttriliiit4'i1  to  tli<>  f;*'*''^  nil  ticliotiH
wbirh  Brc  regajilfil  att  tilianirfiil  by  iiiPii.  I{«nicU-
titM,  Xt'iiopbaiK^H*  coiitciiiiKirary,  vrotilil  bavc  Hi>-
uivr  di'ivtMi  friHii  tbi'  nHi»i<.-til  eoutoitte.  Pluto,  in
H  hU  iicpublic  (ii.  377  tl-iii.  'KH  ci,  enters  into  a  \\e-
^r  tnilcti  i*X!Uiiiuati<»ti  of  tbv  iiiMrul  cHVct  exerted  by
llie  H<^>iiieric  poriiiH,  and  dtolareti  that  tlie  yniittm
wbo  are  ill  proceM  of  trninitiK  to  \te  the  Kitanltaiitt
of  bis  idNil  State  uiiiftt  not  l»e  reiideml  iui|Mi)t]»
by  bfartDg  wbut  wuiiUl  df^mtU*  llio  K<^bt  in  thrir
pyHs;  Iwtt  tbeyHlioiild  fi'arilfatli  iniii-t>  Ih.-iii  dt'fi'iit
nnd  tlij;bt,  tb(*y  niiinl  not  tivur  Zfim  latiicntiii^  tbi>
ileatli  of  SaqM'duii  {If.  xvi.  -Cti  foll.i,  ;iiiil  Arliilli'K
devlarhi^  lliat  bt*  would  rntliHi'  iwrvt'  a  iioor  tnan  on
eonh  tliiiti  rule  over  nil  tbi>  dt-ml  in  llic  lioim-  of
Hiiden  (Oi(.  xi.  4H^  foll.t;  ihcy  must  not  Vic  Iiiiigbt
iiiKubordiuattoii  iiiiil  iiiHolcuct?  to  oumiiiuntliii};  otli-
cvvt  by  hearin;;  AcUilte^  cull  A^atueiunou  u  cowiml
(/f.i.'i*^):  iind  tbeynitiKt  not  lenm  tuKive  frf^rpin
tn  lb<>ir  piiwiioiiH  frnm  the  wi\ntnnnr»!«  of  7^n»  (It.
xiv.  ;{14  foil.)  nnd  fmni  OtlvKNt-iiN'  eiijnyiiifut  nf  food
iiud  drink  (<>r(.ix.rttoll.),  'l'lHiK,ii1|bnii)jr1i  with  niui-li
iTgr*"!  Iiecant*  of  litA  obi  ri>g«nl  nnd  aflTtK-tion  fnf
tb«  jHMtl,  tho  workn  of  Ilnnirr  anr  not  nllowcd  in
Plftto'ii  ideal  Btiitt;.  Tbi?  ivatlrr  Ih  nt  ii  toiw  to  know
bow  M'lioutdy  lia  in  to  unilpt'Al.ind  IIh-ki^  wohIk  of
llic  |diiloNnplii!r,  nbu  lit  fund  of  rlini-hin^  iin  iir^^n-
uwnt  or  giving  u  higher  literary  Havour  to  a  «eii-
tencc  by  a  qihttatioii  frnm  Ilie  "  innpired  ^Miet."
Allegory  vsa  Blready  employed  in  ibo  intt-rivretn-
tion  of  the  moat  offereivo  pitiMutgo^,  but  Plato  snyt*
that  the  yonng  pirrson  cnnnDt  dii^ingni«b  between
irhat  ia  nllegoriral  and  what  i^  iint  (Bep.  ii.  378d).
Ill  the  PharHnm  i2A'.i  a)  hr  playfully  Hngge^ts  that
the  iH>rt  may  bavr  lopit  Imh  uigbt  bifcauMs  of  lii»

■falw  •tatemenlit  witb  n'ganl  to  tho  gnd-H.  Pin-
Tarcb,  ill  his  treatlwori  "  How  a  yonng  nmn  nIiuuIiI
ntiidy  poftTy/'rnaltPft  a  foniial  r«'ply  to  Plain  witli-
(iiit  naming  hiui,  urging  that  tb<*  yvirng  should  bv
tangbt  to  diHcriuiinato  bt-tween  what  in  admirable
In  it-Helf  and  whut  Ih  an  nilrninible  imitation  of  the
«lieii»lve  or  oven  baiw.  The  rlii'torician  Zolbmiu-
ceivrd  tbc  nickname  of  IIoui>t-r'H  Scourge  COnijfio-
fitiart()  because  of  liiii  severe  eritieiKnis  uu  the
]H>tt ;  but  th«t<'  wen^  nit>aiit  very  likely  merely  ah
II  paradox,  jiiMt  aa  oilier  rtietorii'iiuiM  tibowed  their
ingfnnily  in  maiiiLainiiig  the  girill  of  Hoerat««. the
innocence  of  Uuairis,  antt  tlie  advautag<'H  of  fev«r
»nd  vermin.

The  old  Greek  rnintiientariea  inrhoUa,  ir^^oXui)  on
Hnmrr  mealion  eilttioaH  by  AaTiinHi-bii!i  of  Colo-
]»b<Mi  ( himw^lf  an  epic  piN't,  »  cuntem|inrary  of
Plato),  and  by  Aristotle,  wtio  nii-t  Nflid  to  have
prepareil  an  edilinn  expn>itnly  for  the  n>i<e  of  bix
di*tingni)(beil  pnpil,  Alexander  the  tirt-at  ll'hit.
Ales.  8).  Alhi'iiiiin  (tcho«d-m;i«(iTrt  pn<pared  altM«
lists  of  o^Mndete  llomerir  wonln.  The  critiea]
stndy  nf  lIonuT,  however,  began at  Alexandria.

I  In  c«nmection  witb  The  gixrat  Ubntry  and  "  Mn-
IKnni"  whieb  were  eHtabliNlied  hy  tho  Ptolemien.
Tliew  kinga  of  Kgypt  had  altnnilaiit  n1eali^  with
which  to  enciMirage  the  artH  and  Huienceei,  and
dvsired  by  tho  help  of  Ore^k  clvilizatiDn  to  break
down  the  barriers  which  existed  between  the  dif-
ferent raoei*  of  their  sniijects  and  to  exalt  their
kingdom.  They  gutben-d  men  of  litcrar)-  talent
from  all  landn  nnd  tiot  apart  a  portion  of  tliu  pnlaco
for  o  great  library.  Stronuon>i  efforts  were  made
to  neoure  copies  of  all  works  of  ("{reek  Uteratimi,
and,  in  faet,  of  all  litenilntv,  iticlnding,  aecording
I  the  fitory,  the  Urtek  translation  nf  the  Hebrew


Scrlptnrea.  In  the  linic  of  Ptolemy  Pbihidelpbiia
(who  n-igned  it.r.  28f»-2-l7l.  the  library  wan  naiil  tu
eoiitaiii  400,flOO  vo1nmt»s  (rolln) — prrlia[m  i^inal  to
nltout  40,00()  modern  octavo  volumes — HUcb  a  eol-
lectiun  aa  had  never  existed  b^^'fore.  It  potMeKsmt
vopieaof  Houier  frnm  Marseilles,  Cbiut)  (the  Dent  of
the  Houieridav),  Kinojw  on  tht?  lllat'k  Kea,  Argori,
Cyprus,  t'rete.  The  Houieiic  fioeins  formed  tbi^
c«[itre  uf  the  literary  sludtefl  of  the  AleXAiidriau
Kcbolarti.  The  lirat  rarefnl  editor  and  tevitier  of
rtiH  Homerin  text  waa  KenodnliiN,  the  earlieat  nf
lliH  libi-ariaiiH.  \\v  had  liefnrt*  liini  i-opieHof  Iha
|H>em!*  with  vartatioiiN  which  extended  over  whole
venies  and  r.lHUKtw,  ux  Well  as*  to  words  and  foriits.
A  crilLcal  pi-ocrdar»i  wan  neeeasjiry.  Kveu  tbc
•laniu  nminiHeript  must  bavo  hIiuwii  imtrked  innni-
sistenciesof  ^raminutieal  forms.  Tht-  timl  erilieal
edition,  in  the  iialiin'>  of  the  ease,  iiiiist  have  been
an  cx;iviiiiient.  The  (Mlitorfan  hare  had  no  fixed
pi-iiiripIf.H  witb  reganl  to  the  forninlinn  of  words
and  the  eliariirteri»tic»  of  the  Hninetic  diaUnn.
ZenodotiiH  is  ihi^ight  to  hnve  l>t>4>n  the  Hr.st  to  di-
vide the  Hind  and  t]ii>  iMtfMMfi/ t^tu'h  into  t wen ty-fonr
liookN.  In  earlier  tmirs  tbisdiviHion  wiis unknown,
Kti,  for  exiimplc,  Hrrodotn**  (ii.  Ufit  npenkn  of  Hiarl
vi.  2W9-Ti92  as  #V  ^nfttftlftif  lipifrrtif}.  Aeli'an  ( I'aria
/iint.  xtii.  14)  wrilvH  in  iletail  of  thin  unoient  euK-
lom  of  referenee  by  the  unbjfict  of  eaeh  particular
|Hirti(Hi  of  the  pocDiH.  The  ancient  titles  arc  pre-
!ierx-«il,  thnngh  with  some  pnutibhi  tnancnnirtea
and  no  dollnite  anlhority,  ur  the  Iteadingx  of  tbo
bonkt*  in  ordinary  editions  of  tho  p4Kun)t.  The  di-
vision into  books  liecame  neciwtary  at  this  partic-
ular tittle,  beriiniMi  then  parchment  was  iephiee<l
by  papyrns  as  the  ordinary  writing  materiHi.  Tbr
eompanitivrly  frail  papyriiB  was  not  suited  fiir
long  rolU.  Hene<>  the  works  of  Plato.  XHimphoti.
Thiieydidwi,  ami  HermlnMis  went  divided,  also.
Zenodolns  Acenin  to  have  eompoM^d  no  rouimeu-
tary  to  aeeompany  bis  edition  of  the  poems,  but
tradition  preserved  his  views  of  certain  ]>iuisag(ts.
He  waanot  ted  to  rejector  change  for  gramtnatli-al
reasons,  but  eeems  to  have  been  guided  in  many
rUaiigesnitherby  asenseof  pr*tpriety.  Thna  be  re-
jected II.  [ii. -124,  where  Apbn>dit<^  ttwik  acbMirnnd
set  it  for  Helen,  for  the  goddeas  to  dn  menial  M*r-
vi«e  was  airp(ir«t  iu  bis  eyes;  veOMw  //,  i.2f*-".tt}  uera
nnworthy  ofukiiig;  in  //.  i.'ifirt,  where  Nentorwtys,
"[  have  l»een  associated  with  better  men  lliaii
yon  ''  iapfiovip  ij<  wfp  v^if).  ZeiuMlotns  read  "  than
We'*  (^fuv),  in  ordfr  to  make  the  expression  more
coarlconn.  lint  I  be  work  of  this  critic  is  touting
to  hononr.  and  it  is  at  prcseut  fashionable  in  Minm
(ptarters  to  praiso  biui  at  tbu  exiranac  of  Aris-
tarebns.

The  etlitioi]  of  ZcDoiIotus  formed  the  baaia  of
that  of  his  sncoesaor,  Anfit4>phane6  of  Byzantinm,
H  little  lifter  B.<'.  '.£00,  who  is  noteworthy  ait  the  first
to  introduce  to  giMicral  ii.40  the  marka  of  jiecentua-
tiun  niitl  the  signs  of  quantity,  winch  nro  nttlt  in
u.'M'. His  chief  work  was  in  lexicogrupliy.

rutniestionalily  the  greatoAt  of  the  literary  crit-
ic* of  Alexandria  was  Arisurchufl,  win*  wns  I>oru
In  the  island  of  8amothrace,  bnt  cnme  to  Ale^san*
drift  and  studied  under  Aristophaiie>i,  xvlioni  he
sticcended  in  the  enre  of  the  library.  He  prepareil
two  rfr\'is«d  editions  of  the  Humeric  text,  with
critical  marka  in  the  margin,  nnd  wrote  eight  ban-
dnil  IraetH  on  many  sn1>j(H_-ts,  largely  connected
with  our  poet.  He  fnunded  a  schtad  of  critics
which  continued  active  until  the  tiine  of  tbe  early


HOMKKUS


HOMEKL'd


Rornnn  empenrif.  Many  of  Itis  notes  ImTP  Iwon
preserved  Ut  u»  in  tbe  Grcs*k  (trlio)in.  ami  prove
liiii  IcnTiitiig  niul  hiK  riinlioi).  The  watchword
Biiil  I>nt.tl(t-cr}'  of  his  scbooL  wiu  analog}/,  opposed  to
the  rivftl  bcIhioI  of  tlic  Stoic  C'riitrs  iit  PcrKaiiMiiii,
who  wiiH  inoiv  ftfre  in  the  uiUniMtion  of  ftnomalien
iu  t1lt<  crMlHlnioticiti  of  HL'ilterit-t'H  niitl  ill  lliti  fniiDa-
tioti  nixl  nii'jitiJM}:  nf  wonU.  Cratcn  iiKliilgt-it  in
allegorit-al  iiilcrprt'tuliMii.  p:i,\'iiig  little  attcnliori
t4>  griiniiiinticnl  8Mi<lii>j<,  rimI  ninkiti}*  Hnnicr  n  phi-

upliprutitl  an  oniKtr,  wbil«  Ariatarcliim  maHnmri)

tii^crviitivo  anil  fwlMtr  iu  liis  vions.

Thi>  Liable  of  our  itcholiu  tu  the /fiarf  is  an  cpitouif
mmle  nltont  a.l>.  300,  of  four  works.  Of  thL-8c  the
Mioflt  importutit  wub  a  work  by  Didymua  (vallml
\aX.KiyTMpm  tiiu)  Bt^iXioKtidns  from  his  iiti%  eitritvl
itidMstry  and  litvrary  proiluctivitj),  of  the  time  of
Augtitjtti!*,  ill  which  Didyiuiis  ninied  ut  ^i^'iiig  a
hill  rL'|Kirt  uf  tliu  rKiiliuf|rK  of  llie  mlilioiiH  of  AriH-
tarchiis,  ill  HO  far  an  tliuy  variiMt  fn>in  otlii'nt.  XfxL
Id  iui]>orlauc«  wan  a  work  by  an  earlier  iroiiteiniio-
rary,  Ari»toiiicii8,  who  LMiileavuiin;(l  to  ex|>lnin  Ihu
use  of  the  critical  aigiiK  of  AriHturtjhtiM,  anil  tlm
I«a84»iit!>  for  tbt'ir  i-uiplnymeut  iu  each  cafw.  Lew
full  nurl  iiDportaiit  wei-n  (Lu  extructa  from  a  Irea-
tiiu)  by  Herodiuu  ou  Accoiituatiou  fij  'iXmxjj  D/m-
o^iia}  and  oue  ly  Xicanor  on  Puiictiiatiun  (lltpi
iTtyfiift).  Tlie  epitome  of  thfstf  fonr  works  bus
Kiiflenid  fuerioiiB  Ioaki's  in  its  tmnHfttsnioii  to  the
]ire8i'nt  time,  anil  ron»i(1eriih|p  iKlilitiutini  matter
of  little  value  and  atithnrity  liaM  betm  iuliled.
The  rnmponerit  ]>nrtn  of  tlirio  yibolia  biivci  brt-n
CHrt'fiilly  :in:dy/r<l  and  Sfparii4e<l,  imd  ftrliulant  no
lnii|{«!r  Hprak  of  tbc  Htateiiieiil  of  the  NclioliuNr.  lint
uf  that  of  DidytmtK.  of  Nit:auor,  elv.  The  extant
fteliidia  to  the  (td\/Mfy  are  fur  leaa  cxlonrnve  and
iiit|)orcaut  ibau  those  to  the  Uiad.

The  Homeric  text  of  the  SJSS.  doca  not  itcem  to
be  bo  distinctly  under  the  coulrol  of  the  text  of
AristnrchiiB  oa  was  to  bo  expected.  In  many  par-
liculara  it  differs  from  his  editions — so  widely  that
it  ftecniR  that  the  viijgate  text  was  only  indirectly
and  Kli;;ht1y  intiiicni.T4l  by  bis  Mork.  Many  schol-
ars now  repaid  the  n'Ktonition  of  the  AriHtanilieaii
text  as  the  nlliinnte,  or  nt  \vh»1  tbe  iinmediatu,
aim  of  Homeric  IfXt-eriliciHm.  Hitt  Bekker'H  edi-
tioii  of  l^&d  attempted  to  present  tbu  text  lut  it  wiih
sang— not  us  it  stood  ia  tbe  old  MtsS.— iubcrlitit;
the  lost  rait  where  the  editor  bulieved  it  bad  once
iKren  pninouuccd.  Ikkker  had  been  proiieded  by
a  wholly  iiiiseitMitLlie  attempt  of  the  same  kind  in
1820,  by  K.  ray'it-'  Kni;ibt,  who  inserted  vau»  n  iib
more  xcal  than  discretion,  printing  as  the  title  of
the  IHad  /IA/IA3J,  and  Tydens  as  TtfJ^li.f'S,,  but
who  with  many  abniinlitieti  had  many  idt^aa  which
have  been  conlinniMl  by  imMlt'vii  inveHlinalioiiH.
Itekkcr  haslH-fti  followed  by  ntlicrs,  notably  Naiick,
who  bits  made  u  ficjuiitilic  edition  of  Honiei  siicb
as  Im  belii'vcit  the  ikM'Uih  to  have  been  before  tin*
Tonus  were  »iibject«-il  to  later  Attic  inllnencc.

That  the  llunierie  text  of  Plato  and  Artsl4)l1e
n'an  not  exactly  like  that  of  the  preitent  day  is  ex-
tremely probiiblc,  but  these  M<em  to  have  ijnotei)
W>  freely  that  exact  inferetices  are  difticull.  The
view  that  Ihey  (piotetl  from  tnetnory  Ih  sIretigLh-
«nei]  by  the  fact  that  ttach  of  the  (wo  makes  a
cnreU^s"  reference  to  the  Homeric  story:  Plato
< /frji.  iii.  40')  e)  s]>cakM  of  Enrypylus  where  he
iiieMiis  Macbaon,  coiifusihg  two  aimilar  ineidcuts
in  the  same  l>ook  of  tbe  /(iflrf  (;xi.fi:W-1>II.H2*J  84j<1;
and  Aristotle (.Ytc^w  A'fA.  li.llOli.a  31)  puis  into  the


mouth  of  Ca]yp«o  a  command  of  OdysaetM  whirb
wa4  given  in  acconlauce  with  advice  nf  Cire<  yOd.
xii. tJld).  In  the sumnicrof  1^1 1 be  Bri i \*\\  Mtistnni
publivbed  a  collation  of  several  very  ancient  pupy-
riift  text6  of  tbe  Hind,  coDtatihng  fragineiila  of  m>t-
eral  hundred  lines.  With  the  exception  nf  tunor
Ihret)  derails,  tbe  moat  important  teacbinxof  thi^f>
MSS.rOtie  of  which  is  fiotii  the  very  bct*iiin)u)t  of
mir  era,  is  tliat  the  ordinary  texts  of  to-day  at*
rnlber  more  nmirate  and  intidlii;ibln  than  tlnow
of  Ino  thousand  yeant  iiffi*,  but  cerlain  ven*^*  inav
not  have  been  recogiiizptl  as  Hoiofric  then  wbidi
are  in  mode^rn  texts.

Tor  the  lust  ceutiiry  the  vexed  and  cver-biiruiwg
Hoiuerii]  Question has Iteeii with rr^ant  to  th'
componition  and  ohKiuul form of  tbr llooirric
p«>enis — whether  they  were the crcatious  nf  oiw
IHM<tic  K^iniusur  Lbe  reiuiiatil«of  theflonssof  niauy
bariis;  whether  their  r4impi>Niliun  was  organic  or
atoniii;; wlmtlnr  they  can  be  emnparcd  with  Vt-r-
jtil'n  Acnrid  and  Milton's  Pantdi^r  Lont,  or  whether
they were at tirwt only »borl,  Mrattered sou;;*,
grouped around central jH-nMniageA and  evratJi,
and  gradually  ilevflnpi^l  into  buiger  porms  with
unity. Tbe heat and length of  tbr diiirutiAiiiii
have  mode  clear  the  fact  Ihiit  tbe  queHtioa  in  diffi-
rnlt,  and  no  hypotlieais  has  been  preM>nleil  free
from  grave  objeetions. .Scholars  are  tiiore  nearly
agreed  than  half  a  century  ago,  however Prob-
ably no  one  who  has  a  right  to  an  opinion  on  ih«
Mibjeet  now  holds  to  the  strict  unity  of  the  poeQw
in  tho  old  nenw — that  all  of  the  IHad  and  *'rfjf»(wji|
was  t-oni[Hwed  by  one  man — yet  coini^iarnlirtlt  fpwf
would  deny  a  eerlaiti  unity  in  the  poem>i,  hnwevi-l
it was  Kecured. The ancient AlKXandriuns litd
their  .Separatist.^  ( ;yu/n'(rwTrf  ),  Xeno  and  HcllAUt-
ens,  who  denied  that  the  Od^9»ty  was  compnAcd  bjr
the  author  of  the  liiad,  and  Peiizoniini  in  IQM
ealk-d  attention  to  the  late  nscof  »rt(ing  ttt  ii(«r-
ary  purposes. The  great  Bentley  in  lTi:i  t>ald  ifast
"Homer  wrote  a  sequel  of  songs  qimI  iba]i«odia
to  be  sung  by  himself  for  small  earnings  and  nonl
cheer,  at  festivals  and  other  days  i»f  lueninMat;
the  lUad  he  made  for  the  men.  and  tho  UdifMmis  bt
the  other  sex. Tlieac  ItKiito  songs werw w«t  mI*
lected  together  in the  form  of  an  epic  pocrai  til)
about  five  hundred  yean*  after." A'ico  of  Naph*
in  17^  cxprustMMl  his  view  that  Huinej  nover  td-
isted— that  he  whs  thb  porsoniticnlion  of  the  urly
tsougn  of  the  Greeks. Kobert  Wood,  ia  -Jn  Jiutf
OH  the  Oriffiaul  Oe«iH»of  Homer  (1769),  declnrvl  tit*
Iwlief  that  lbe  art  of  writing  waa  not  known  to
Homer. But the  luodeni  discussion  of  tlw  H*
iiieric Qnestion dates fn)lii tbe fniUfiamrn*  fi
Hnmcrum  of  Kriedlich August  Wolf,  pnbliiliert  *■>
I7l<r>. The  Prohgometia  oiciled miiuh  att»ntioB,
and  pn>bably  has  had  greater  intlneni-«<  Ihaii  an;
Mlhttr  Work  ou  tho  melboda  of  hiHtorical  and  (iliio-
logicul  study,  although  its  ideiut  wen-  not  wlioll*
nijvel. The  poet  Herder  and  the  philolngi*!  Uvyvt
ejicli  claimed  (hat  his  thunder  bad  l>ii<ii  iiti>l<-fl>
The  Imok  owed  its  great  snccesa  largely  to  itackat
and  attractive  presentation  of  the  ((ui>ji<cl,  and  it
lit  mure  valuable  now  for  its  luetbod  than  for  iit
particular  arguments. Wolf  planned to  gire  a
critienl  history  of  the  Homeric  jkn-his  ilir»ugb  *ls
l>cnods,ihe  first  i>f  which  extended  frr>in  (be  cuia-
position  of  the  piM;ms  {about  D.v.  950,  ariwnliui:  l*>
tiiin)  to  lbe  age  of  rLsi»lralns,  tyratti  of  Athpu*  iti
the  sixth  century  B.C.  who.  according  t«  an  uocer-
Iwtii  tradiiion,  l\nt  collevti-d  and  nrrangml  tbmiiu


I
I


I


tlifir  jiri-»t"iit  fnnii  ;  tho  iwcoml  prriod  rxt4>nde<l
tVniii  PUUtl'ntmt  til  Xcnmlntlie,  tlic  fiirlkut  of  tlio
Alrxaudriaii  vriticH.  Wolf  imvrr  f'i>in|)lt'U><l  lux
iviirk  buyuuil  llirm.-  Ctrnt  twit  )irriiHli«.  Hi<  iilt4'in|it>
4*il  to  hIiow  (a)  ihnt  tliu  >Ir>tni<rir  pi«iiiM  weni  not
coinniitted  to  wHtint;  hy  tint  puot.  but  were  iii-
triiHl«cl  to  tbe  nii'iuory  of  tla*  rlmiwuilvo,  who  were
gaiberoii  tu  ftchoiiU,  lik«  tbo  Hebrew  propbeto;
tbiiK  before  the  po«mK  were  wrilt'Vii  ihey  vevm  ex-
jiDttCil  to  Diaiiy  and  uniutentinual  c1ian};e>i — fi'uiii
livpMi  of  mirtiiory,  nud  from  a  tjintier'i*  deeire  to  ini-
pn»ve  n  piuu»8gu  or  suit  it  iiiorf  perfoctly  Ut  n  h]w-
ciiil  iH'cssioii.  Writing  was  iiiikiMiiwii  in  Gn't-i**"
ill  HninerV  tinir,  niid  r»n  oIiiah  of  rtta^lum  PxiMitMl
for  whuiti  a  poiiui  HhuiiM  bit  written,  {b}  Aflur  tb«>
IHMitiM  ha<l  baeu  ci>niiuitt«d  tu  n-riliii^,  iiiau^'  mon>
ailditiDlia)  chaDgt^N  tterc  made  iu  tbem,  iu  urdur  to
remoTt!  incouaisteiicJeo  nud  to  give  thciu  tbo  |ki1-
iah  of  au  a^e  Adv>tiii!i;d  iu  viiUiiro  aud  poetic  art.
ic)  The  Hind  mid  Otls»»eg  hi  their  pii»eiit  forni  ure
diiu  iitd  to  the  poetic  ceiiiuH  of  Homer,  biit  to  tbe
iiitidli}^iice  of  a  later  ii(>e — lit  llie  united  ed'urt.t
•of  PiMxlratiiM  and  tbr>  p<>el8  of  hix  eiiiirt.  (if)  The
•■>ii^8  theiiiMelvtiM,  of  wliioh  tbe  JUm\  niiil  (AfyAOfy
Aie  roiiipwieil,  arn  not  by  tbe  mmie  jxKit.  TIlcm-
]ii!»t  two  tlioHest  weiu  never  publicly  disciishcd  by
Wolf  ill  detail.  He  only  urged  llial  if  tbe  pwma
were  uot  tu  bu  comiiiltied  ti>  writing  at  ilie  lime
when  they  were  c«iniponed,  th^  M»iiga  were  not
originally  purtti  i>f  one  long  work;  no  one  would
liavH  thought  of  niitking  h  poem  whieli  could  not
jlte  rend  nnd  which  waM  too  long  to  ti«  HUiig  or  re-
:«ittKl  at  a  Kingle  Hitting.  A  bund  uf  uiiiuu  would
be  vuliieleMM  bi^tweeii  liiyit  whirli  were  to  Iw  unng
in  no  ri'gnlur  order  on  dillvivnt  ociuteioiiH.  Tbe
Homeric  pttvintt  niiituentionuUly  piutw^HH  a  rertnin
unity  beyond  what  iH  finiiid  in  Hi'Miixl  or  in  tbi<
lat-v  poet  Qnintun  SinYmn>-»r>.  but  thin  nnity  nitiHt
Im  dne  U*  tbe  editors  of  the  I'iiiMiniteun  ago.  DIh-
orepaneieH  are  found  wbUdi  could  nut  oevnr  in  a
attigle  poem,  but  luiglit  vury  wull  be  overhwked  in
tbe  coitibinRtion  of  iudtf pendent  layii.  Entire
^bapsn^ltes  (e.  g.  Ilmii  s.)  mh-hi  to  be  dne  to  Konie
■<ilher  than  the  jhwI  of  tin-  gn-attr  part  of  tbo  Uia'l.
The  views  of  Wolf  wwre  received  with  tnteii»e
interest,  but  with  vuiied  appiovat.  The  poet
Bvhiller  said  that  tlie  niiin  was  a  barhariiin  who
would  tear  aMiiiidcr  the  Homeric  poems  nnd  be-
lieve tliat  they  were  put  tugether  long  after  their
4-ompusiliuu.  Uoetlie,  while  at  Hrst  nn  cuthu-iia.s.
tie  U4]uiirer  of  the  I'rnlf^omcna.  BOon  declared  that
liu  believed  in  the  unity  of  the  tlind  more  heartily
i\iAn  ever.  On  tbe  whole,  however,  the  work  of
Wolf  waa  convincing,  at  Icanl  in  large  purl,  to
mofit  Kcbolam  yf  Oeiniany,  Theologiuns  n-eeived
it  witb  BiMJCtnl  intcrei*l,i'n  aceonnt  \*i  the  ap]diea>
itiohM  itf  WulfK  prineiplea  to  the  study  of  tbe  Old
Tetttaumnt.  But  a  reiietiou  took  place.  Opiio*
iieniN  urged  that  the  uso  of  writing  in  Greece  was
jnaeh  earlier  than  Wolf  claimed;  but  tbey  made
the  fatal  cuuceiutiun  that  eticb  long  poems  would
be  lin{M>M»ible  without  the  aid  of  writing.  Both
aidea  eluiuied  too  much.  Writing  was  c-ertttinly
known  iu  Greece  earlier  than  Wolf  allowed,  lint
uus  not  ni«d  fur  vxlcntiive  literary  purjMwes  until
Jung  after  the  time  alleged  liy  bin  oppuiieutM.  The
|»owur  of  the  hnnuiii  niunuiry  to  i-etain  aecuratuly
long  |K)euM  liud  been  uuderrated.  The  external
arginneuta  ngaiiml  the  originitl  nnily  of  the  Ho-
■ncrie  |K>ema  have  yiidded  rather  than  atlvanred
uce  Wolfs  time. The  evidence  in  mippoit  of  the


rttory  of  Ihe  work  of  Pisistrntmi  in  collecting  and
urrnnging  (he  ^ratlei-od  Hoineriu  poemK  \h  consid-
ered weak,  aa  well  ujt  that  fitr  tbe  exiiit43Mce  of
MebaidH  of  rlmiwml iHt*  riirren^ionding  tn  the  nvhoota
iifthe  proplietH.

Only  u  beginning  bad  been  made  of  the  attenipt
to  diHjtrove  iho  unity  t>f  Ihe  Homeric  p<H*niK  fn»»i
interinil  ovidenee  who'll  Lnchiinumi,  of  Bt'ilin,  in
IrCtT,  a|ipliu4l  to  the  Hiad  the  nnnlyHJs  whiob  had
Iwen  applied  not  ranch  earlier  to  the  yibihntjfit-
lird.  He  net  to  work  to  discover  coulradietioiiK
and  iiicontiistpucies  wliicb  would  indicate-  the  dif-
ferent authonihip  of  diffei-enl  parts.  Tim  diseuft-
iiioii  of  the  nnily  of  fclie  ]>in'nm  wan  conducted
mainly  on  his  principlet  fi>r  half  a  century,  and  no
one  no  :  laya  tttrfM  on  the  external  evidence,  one
way  nr  tbo  olber.  Ju  the  Itntt  book  of  the  Iliad
he  dett^rnliued  an  original  lay  (1-^7),  complete  in
itself,  and  t wo  indrpi-ndeut  and  ineonftistent  cou-
linnatiooB  (4atMih!:  and  348-429.  495-611).  Tbe
hegiuniug  of  the  M.M'nnd  honk  (he  siiyH)  cannot
have  bt-eii  pjirt  of  the  Kiiine  lay  as  the  c1im«  of  tbe
lin<t  book;  at  the  chwe  of  hook  i..  Zeun  »i1ee|k8,
with  Hera  by  bin  side,  while  ui  the  beginning  of
book  ii.,  ZeuN  cannot  ideep  and  has  an  interview
with  the  Drvain  God.  In  \%hieh  be  tdltt  much  that
be  would  uot  have  Hera  know,  tu  tin-  third  day
of  battle,  which  begiiift  book  xi.  1  ami  tumtinnea
thruagh  book  xviii.  S4Q,  tbe  snu  couicn  txiire  to
Ihe  zpuitb  (at  xi.  r^  and  xvi,  777,  nearly  4t«lO
ven«»  later).  The  twenty-tbinl  bo<ik  of  i]ic  Iliad
ciinunt  have  lH*-en  intended  to  follow  iniinediulety
n|N»ii  the  Iwenty-Becond — the  one  ending,  '*TIin»
iihe  Hpake  i«cepiiig,and  the  women  gioaned  in  re-
HpoiiHu,"  nliile  the  next  Itegins,  "Thus  tbese  went
gnianing  throughout  tbe  city.''  Following  nncli
indications,  Liichnmnn  marked  nut  tbe  l>oiindarii-H
of  oighleeii  distinct  lave  in  the  Hiad.  Ki'tclily,  fol-
lowing iu  I^chtnanirH  foolHte|w.  published  in  1851
an  ediliuu  of  the  Iliad,  in  Nixtecn  lays  (omitting
hookNX..xix.-xxtii.,uud  p.irti«  of  Homeotheis) — not
agreeing  wilh  I.iu-buiann  in  the  divisions  so  well
tin  ill  tliv  niiinlier  of  Ihu  tKHiga,  The  advoctitoo  of
rbe  lliet»ry  that  the  Homeric  poem»  arc  but  a  con-
glomeration of  inde}iendeiit  luyH  have  not  succeed-
ed in  coming  tu  eiHiuntial  agieement  with  rvgai*d
to  the  original  »oitgH.  Their  lintw  of  cleavage  do
not  agree.  Contradictions  certainly  exist:  Otlyn-
ttenti'  iiair  is  blonde  (Od.  xiii.  4:11),  but  black  lOd.
xvi.  170)  Diorued  atid  O^lyKseits  are  (teriointtv
woiiiided  and  ri'tire  fnun  the  conlltct  {II.  xi.  3<JU
foil.,  4'ijrt  full.),  but  Iwu  dnys  Inter  take  part  iu  the
guuies  in  bunonr  uf  PatrtKiluB— OdysMens  wreelllug
witbTeliimuniau  Ajax  {//.  xxtii.709|,  and  winning
tbe  prize  iu  the  foot-race  ( //.  xxiii.  776).  Mont
uott.-d  of  all  iH  the  viustt  of  PylufmeiieM;  Ac  is  nlaiu
nt  tl.  v.  57l>,  but  fulluwH  the  cor|i8e  uf  his  aun
from  tbe  battle  (//.  xiii.  55HX  Some  uiconsiKleu-
ciev  may  he  considered  ns  tritles  about  which  the
poet  did  not  concern  bitnscir;  be  was  coinpo»iug
for  beariirn  rather  than  for  critical  readcis  who
cun  turn  backward  and  forwuni,  and  compare
statemeitle.  Other  incoiibiatenricfl  may  have  bt^eu
caused  by  iut'er|iuhtlions;  the  incident  of  1';  lae-
mcne«  in  //.  xiii.  Go8  may  have  iM^en  ailded  by
a  Inter  poet  in  order  to  give  increased  ptilhos  tu
the  scene.  Po,s.«ildy  the  Homeric  GreukH  wer«  not
soniiioh.  distnrbi^l  a:*  some  modems  at  such  incon-
sistencies. Similar  discrepnucies  are  found  iu  Ibe
worka  of  Vergil  and  other  poet».

In  \'*4'&,  tlie  historian  Gnite,  declaring  thai  "  the


IIOMKKCS


840


IIOMiCltLtS


TtltfB  tliHt  a  ]HK-iii  114  nn  rviiil  it  gren'  out  of  iiIooih
nut  originally  desifpiud  for  llie  placf^  \vbicb  ihey
now  occujtf,  involves  ns  in  new  nnd  iiiextncaltle
(lininiltiPA  when  we  snek  to  eluoidatii  t'itfapr  llie
hiimIii  of  roalpsctiuoo  or  tlie  ilegrce  of  exiNtiii};  iini-
ty,'^  pntiHi.-ieil  tilt!  tli«ory  that  the  preMtnt  Iluiii
wiut  miule  iii>  l>y  ttie  couiUinatiuu  of  an  original
IHatl  (b<)4pkH  ii.-vii.,  ix.,  X.,  xxiii.-xxiv.)  witli  uu
AthiUnd  <  l>ooktt  i.,  viii.,  xi.-xxii. )-  This  hitter
pofui  ou  tlir  WiiiiU  of  Acliillr'.t  gives  all  that  i»
"really  nrcuiM;iry  lo  coinplt'tc  tlie  progrmnniu  in
tlie  opeaiu^  pntvtn  of  tUt;  ik>giii.'^

In  IWt*.  l*i-ofc*>«ir  (tfiltli'g  of  Alwrdiwn,  following
id  Grotv^s  fout(tttf]iM,  ik'olami  lliat  "the  Honiiiric
curpnB  of  Hiad  iin<\  fMi/wnrfi  fnlU  iwunilur  into  two
great  »ecliotis,  on  llii'  iMif  hnnd  tliB  .-frAi'/riW,  iiiiil
on  the  other  tlio  iion-Acliilleul.  phi  the  Olyaacy."
"A  }MW:t,  whr>  is  iiIho  tUi>  iLiilhor  of  the  Otlyi*')/.  Iihh
•MigraftuU  on  ti  utoiv  nni-iciit  ))0(iui,  the  ArhUMd,
aiileiitUil  uutl  vigoniutt  ■'HpliiiK^i  of  hit*  own,  truUH-
fonniuf;  nnd  enlarging  it  into  lui  Jliad."  Thin
vieH'  vviM  niniiitiiincd  by  tnniiy  in(llcai)on<«:  Achil-
les in  inun'  geiitlii  in  tbv  Oilyiwtenn  bu^kit;  lleUtn  in
not  nientionuii  in  the  Jchilind ;  th<.*  dog  iit  more
bonounHl  in  the  OilywKan  hookM,  tb«  ht>nv  in  tln^
MhUleid,  etc.

Organic  developmeitt  fmni  n  brief  epic  {WMn
wan  claimed  for  the  OdnnKg  by  KiiThliolf  of  Berlin,


^wMrMaHtiinnlateil  th<MnveNligiiti»n  of  niclii^lonnil
soiirreaand  of  tbi>  nge  of  iht- OhI  Tcudtmrnl  Sciipt-
u res,  so  thfi  niotbiKl  of  the  iT<;i*iit  annlysi"  of  Hip
PcntHtpni:h  bat  lM*rn  »p)ili(<il  to  tb<^  Huuieric  |Mirnn.
Wihintowiix  iTJiTtM  LHi'binaun'M  layM  a<«  bi'ing  fni^-
ineutft,  untiiuOligiblu  when  se|»arato<1.  He  Iiosm
hih  work  upon  tbut  of  Kirchbotf',  yet  rejects  nninj
of  the  lutler'a  vidwa.  Mc  follon-«  bitn  in  pnithtg
the  (MjfAM-j/  iu  the  front  of  the  discnftslon.  t'liiil
Ktrebhufl',  no  t»chular  hod  aerioiMir  attt^inptnl  (Iw
criticiil  direction  of  this  poem,  of  which  lb*-  «•
liBtic  [>Inu  wiutuutdoobted.  TwoofWilamowilr'n
cottelnMluiiHnru  that  the  Ttlriiiarhia  ^(/d.H.U~i\  ^nSt
vmn  euni[io8pd  in  Asia  Minor,  and  that  the  fWyury
\vji«.  briMight  into  itw  pn^Acnt  form  In  lifvcre  piii[i*-r
—  I»roltaMy  near  Corinth  or  iu  Enbooa.

'nit>  Ilonirrir  (juoAtioQ  is  clearly  fntl  nf  dilticn)
lirH.  No  theory  htm  bc«n  propowd  which  ni<^u
with  general  neceptance.  The  pncius  donlith-**
conlAinagreat  ruitMuf  wry  ancient  malorial  Tro-
fe«uior  IVrcy  OardtitT  writes,  in  bis  \nr  Chaptfrr
in  <inrl-  Bixtnnj  (If^J),  "There  is  a  broad  Inup  di-
viding inythieal  front  political  Hid1a.H,  a  line  wblt*))
suenitt  to  coincide  with  tbo  great  bnrnk  oiatle  in
the  eonlinnity  of  Hellas  by  the  Dorian  invoftion.
.  .  .  Tiio  Homeric  j>oetry  may  bovo  bcvo  rtdocpTl
t4i  form  alter  the  nplendonr  of  itie  Ionian  o*>'t
Achaean  chiefa  had  paased  awttf.  ...  Id  nsiug  Itw


_i_


B«nlEP<>  I'Miirru*  or  tlio  Secooil  Ceatsr;  i%.c. (//.  xilv.  OQS-'OlL)


in  \f<i%  He  coui^idera  the  r>riginal  part  to  be  the
old  Hrtnn*  (Nuotos)  of  OrfjMCHJi.  uf  jnst  lytK*  verses;
to  this  simple  story  whn  added  a  lunger  nUiry  of
35(Mi  verses,  Darrstitig  the  adventures  of  OdytMeas
Mfl*-r  his  return  to  Itboca ;  atill  later  wi-re  added
(TIA**  verse*!)  the  Trhmarhiu,  or  accuunt  uf  the
Journey  of  TeleniacliiiH  t<^  Pylns  and  8intr(it,  llie
ex|i«rienceH  of  OdyK«4>i)s  in  Pliaeacia,  and  blH  nd-
Tentiires  in  the  cave  of  Polyphemna,  in  the  i&land
of  C'irc<t,  In  the  realm  of  Hade«,  etc.

Christ  of  Mtniieh  publiahed  in  1&8-1  aq  editiou
nf  the  limd  in  which  bo  divided  the  poem  into
forty  lays,  and  indicated  by  the  use  of  four  ditt'er-
ent  Btyle«  of  tJreek  type  bis  view  of  the  relative
ordiT  of  conipo-iitiori  of  the  diffennil;  parts  of  the
potMo.  IrnnuHlintely  after  the  lirsl.  iHKik  he  phircs
the  eleventh,  the  Bravery  of  Aganiumnon,  beli«v-
Ing  thai  the  Jiitonnc<liato  iHioks  were  composed
After  the  |>oet  saw  xvliat  a  rich  veiu  he  bail  struck,
and  to  what  a  iriHgnilicunt  growth  bis  germ  might
Ih<  developed.  l\v  hokU  that  most  of  the  poem
proves  a  poet  revolving  a  gi'e«t  plan  in  fab  miad,
aud  arr.inging  the  part*  to  funn  a  whole.

Vini  Wilaniowitz-M<M-lleinlurfrpiibli<i1ied  in  18^4
an  imiHirtatit  work  on  this  Kulijec),  liumrrinrhf
irM(er«urAR»i/rir. dedicated  to  the  well-known  Itib-
liual  scholar  \VrULaiis«>n. Just  as  WoIPh  I'role-


w.nnv  of  Ifomer,  we  do  not,  of  ronrte,  niMen  tln^
Uu;  Honieric.  iKieiuM  bad  a  ttinglc  anflior.  Bill  •'*
do  asoi-rt  the  nnltquity  of  tltoMc  |HM-mii.  Uftvff
rellecta  the  pre-hiatoric  age  of  (itvem  n  t/'tlf  ••
does  Herodotus  Ihe  Greece  of  tho  Persian  Wjtfi.
or  I'linannias  the  Gn^ece  of  the  n^  of  the  .^uto'
Tiines,"  The  poet  ducH  nut  profem  to  bavr  *>">
Priuur's  Troy  ;  he  is  clearly  ponsclonii  thai  he  l»-
linigs  lo  a  degeiierntii  agie,  and  that  be  in  dr|MiT)-
ent  on  tint  uiiiw»  for  his  informatinn.  No  one  *»r]t-
poM*  that  the  poemtt  are  an  ncrnrnti*  rPcor»lef»
particular  war.  The  recent  excavation*,  hrtwe*"*t
estublisli  the  fact  that  at  Myct^nae,  tliv  b"iiie  *f
(be  llcuieric  Agamemnon,  nud  on  Ibe  ■hi>n"»f  •'•*
Hellespont,  the  homo  of  the  Honierir  Pi tsui. ■''*'''
at  \\\^  same  )iei'iod,  dourisbing  from  alHituni'.  IC-^
til  ulmnt  B.C.  IftCHI.  ritiea  of  wealth  ■•>■■'  ■■■■""  "f
stniilarcnituro. A  war  lietween  tbf  -  I'

may  have  suggenti-d  the  Homeric  -.i..:  .  ..  •■'•'
means  nn  inipiiKsihility  The  details,  boweifi
and  perhatw  Wt-ry  name  of  n  pentoti,  are  ibi*  W»
the  iKiet's  iinnginntion.  The  view  that  ihe  |»wii*
were  essentially  in  their  present  cnndirion  Wiai*
the  liistorical  period  in  Oi-eece  began,  ««rly  ib  tbt
eiglilb  century  a.v.,  is  nioderatc

This  Homeric  dialect  is  nrtitieial — that  i*.  sorfi
MS  waA  never  spoken  by  nny  Ottwk  tril«*. U  <»»■


I

I

i
{


tain.n  inittiy  Biiciciit  elrtiiriilA,  tint  in  far  fn'tn  hoine
thu  anci^Hi4»r  tif  all  tin'  liiler  binlitricul  ilialccl>.
It  ii>  nut  evi-ii  the  Boiin-»  of  thv  Attic  or  loiiic  ilin-
9iH.-tt^  The  Aeolic  i>iviiu>lit  in  it  In  mt  Ktroiif;  »t  t^i
■ii^^gcKl  to  Fick  thv  vi«<w  tlml  |Ik'  ohler  ]»nrlM  of
JiliL*  |HHMiiB>wen*  I.HHII [K>fw«l  ill  th<«  AeotiotliHifri  iiinl
I'in'fTe  iiftertrunle)  lniiiMlat«.-«)  iritu  Ibal  uf  t.h<>  Iuiii«.
rlbf  furtntilftic  chHractcr  uf  many  <»f  Iht  AtMilif
wurd»  an<l  phnuw-is  tlf  hlr•■^^  namlter  of  Homeric
pmper  itiiintvi  r<>unil  in  hiHttirical  linieeln  Noithctii
GreBc-e,  the  traditions  nith  rcgiinl  to  the  m-hIa  ut*
tlie  Pieriiiii  Mn»AM,  uin\  tlir  iiiuniiui-nc«  girim  tu

»4ha  ThLiuutliiin  bfCo.  Aoliillif!*,  make  proliahio  (he
■vip^v  that  t'|»ic  |H*e>try  wa»  flr»t  uiiltivatcil  by  tbv
Auoliuna  in  Nortbfm  (»roetH«,  but  vriw  at'terwitnU
bruiiffht  to  iHTlVrtioii  by  thn  ToniaUH  in  Ai^in  Minor.
The  dialect  certniuly  imlicat<*rt  a  long  coiinw  of
dt'vebipnieut.  ObBoli-tt-  wc»nli  ;in<l  foniitt  wei«
relniniHl  by  tbir  piM^t^f  in  ct-rtiitn  ciMiuevliuua  aftt-r
I  hey  lioil  Lweii  ilr(ip]H-'it  from  thv  oriliuiiry  i4)h;cc1i
of  th«  ppoplc.  LVrtttin  lute  fonna  npivcar  in  the
onlinary  IcxtH  iii  snUlctent  nnni1>er  tn  HiipgeHt  t<»

■  r;ilcT  tlm  theory  ihiit  the poems  were  hrotigbt
iiitti  their  prutrnt  I'orui  in  thti  ago  of  IVricleN  tit
AthriiH;  but  niont  of  the-^e  fomiB  can  be  «xpl»tiiei1
i^ivfily  lut  the  work  of  a  careless  c<>pyist,  who  xnb*
atitntei)  u  form  which  ho  bvard  ever)*  day  for  nnu
wbieh  \vn.sfonnd  only  iiiohl  |M»emf» — jiiHtUM  a  half-
rditcuted  niaii  would  do  l4»-d»y  in  iropying  the  works
^Lof  C'lmnrer,  iinlesH  ho  wen>  Hppirinlly  warned  and
^^rain(«l  tn  be  ai-cnmlo  in  this  luattor. If  the  llo-
jiieria  ptH-iuH were tbotonphly  worked over,  re-
^atnpi'il,  ill  rhe  time  of  Solon  or  of  Forirle»,  nonie
^^«)ear  traco  wonhl  have  1>oen loft  of  the  culture
^■nnd  piditical  relationn  of  that  time. A  ntroiig  in-
dim  t  ion  of  the  falftity  of  the  Bt«>ry  thut  Pici'4lrrttii«
gatheri'd  the  poeniR  ami  eaiified  iiiterpolntionH  tu

Ilk'  made  to  tbo  glory  of  Athonn,  in  the  niinph-  fori
that  Athena  ia  no  iiiHignilirniit  in  tbo  fliutl  and
OduMt-y.  If  the  unity  of  tliM  (hnmiik  were  n-ally  due
tui'iHititratiiH.  and  be  oidered  the  poel»>  uf  hiti  court
to  in»ert  piMiiu^PH  »hiuli  would  botionr  AlheiiH.  no
«lioidd  fun)  gn'uter  ili»liiii*tioii  given  t»  Athenian
hernt-H  and  nmrc  inyttm  of  the  Attic  cycle.  'I'ho
tni>  iir  three  vrineH  af<«i;{ned  l>y  the  ancient  criticn

■  to  Aihi-nian  intLTpolalorH  arc  absolnloly  irlfling.
Fni'tiinniely  t  he  Homeric  puennirj'i^/,  uven  I  hough
»eholurM  have  not  Nett.1eii  tlm  qneMliou  when  and
how  tlieyenme  inio  being.  PeMtrnctive  eriticisni
bait  not  been  iilde  to  diMtnrb  the  fact  that  they  re-
nntin  the.  gn>ateal  epie  i^Mtenitt  llie  world  ha«  seen —
adniirrd l»y  many  ages  and ]>eopIcs  of  dift'erent-

■  civilizalioiK*.  They  fetand  unrivalled.  In  coni-
])avii>uii  wilh  llieni  the  vaJtt  epim  of  India  arc  an
MhajteleHH  an  the  Hindoo  idolH.nnd  are  in  tbeir  lux-
uriance like  to  a  tmpicnl  jimgle;  while  the  work
tif  Vorgil  and  *if  MilU>n,  uho  take  Homer  bk  their
uioster,  19  nrlitii-ial  iind  luiuatnral  in  comparison

Ivilh  Ilia  — tilt*  "elean-st-iMiuled  of  men."  ■'.  *

ItlHl.iix^nAPHY. — The  bettt  JUS.  of  the  lU^d  is
Veiietun  A,iHiw  in  the  libniry  of  San  Maroo  at  Ven-
ice, written  in  the  eleventh  reutnry  on  riiT  large
Jeavi-x  of  parL-hment.  The  beJ>t  M8.of  tbti  tMifMny
i»  CiMlex  llarleiaiine.  lutw  in  tbo  Britimh  Miim>uiii,
wrillen  in  the  Ibirlwiith  century  on  100  folio  leaves
<if  parchment.
The  best  inlrtHlnction  tn  Homer,  with  a  deltgbt-
fnl literary ila%our, in Pi-ofewsor .Iebb'» llomrr

I^lrt*T). Thin  ireata  of  lii.-  geiwral hterary  cliar-
,^-iertt)tics  «f  the  iKiemn,  the  lloineriu  worhl,  Ho-
kDuT  in  aiitii|nity,  and  the  Homertu  question.
L


For  the  llonieric  iiueMtinn,  w**'  Wolf.  /Vv/ejiomrMrt
nd  H»m*nim{.\l\Kt)',  Larhmanii. /{f'/riieAfaii^rii  iibrr
fJomrr^  J\ian  \ l^t7. 18ti5) ;  Klrehhofl'.  tiit*  homaiwlu
(Mymur  hmW  ihn  KnWthnitg  tli?59. 1'*7'.>i;  On>te.  //in-
Inrtf  aj  Gxtrcf,  vol.  ii.;  Iteddes,  I'rohlem  e/  thf  Ilo'
mrrir  l^nrmn  '.  Irf7rt) ;  Bonilz,  ftritfin  of  the  ffomrrif
/*i>ejiM(ISi^)):  WiIamowitz-Moolletidortr,//i>M(TrweAr
rMfrriMcAilN^rN  (|SA|^.

The  bext.  critieal  eilition  of  the  |M>rmn,  wllU
brief  ni>te»,  i»  that  ofXanck.  'i  vols.  (IH7'4-79);  tbi'
uiofft  complete  critieal  appamniN  for  the  Hiaii  is  in
the  edition  of  La  Uoehe  (li^:{),and  for  the  thtntinrf/
in  thee<liti«ti  of  I,mlHiebU^''ftM:  thehi-st  exegetiiiit
citmnietitary  m  that  of  Ann-is- Heiiizei with  (Jermnn
notcK.  in  twelve  pai1»,  of  dillerent  tlate*  -  three
partb  att  yet  pnlilwbed  with  Engltsb  noltw);  the
bout  complete  eiiiiinn  nf  the  ItiatI  wilh  Englinb
iiotM  is  that  of  U<af,  3vo|fi.(|f->^ilt-rsil);  the  heat  edi-
tion of  the  Iklifitrit  nith  English  noieti  in  that  nf
Hayumn,3volN.(|Nl)tV-j^2>.  t'onvenientt^'Xloditiouh
are  thooe  of  Dindorf-Hentze  anil  C.'antr.  both  pith-
litihed  nt  Leipjfig  The  most  complete  lexicon  for
Homer  is  the  l^sicwt  Hamrricittu  of  Kbellng.  17(10
pag.'»<l?'71-e*6);  aduiirnble  is  the  indrs  Jfomtntim
of  Gehriug  ( 1*^1 ) :  Keep's  AiltenrivthV  Homrriv
lUftionur^  (It^I)  i.t  capitally  eimvenient ;  more
elnlHtrate  than  the  last  metiitoned  in  Capelle's
irifrlrHiMch  iihtr  rfic  (ietlichlf  tie*  Uomerni  Hud  dif
Hnmrridrn  (Ii*H9».  The  liest  work  in  ilu  depart-
nieiit.is  M(i>iri>'<t  Hvtnrrir  tirammnr  lie"*!!.  IHKI  i.

Kor  Hoiuerie  antiiiuilitw.  tn'n  HuehbulT:.  //ome-
fiirr**  tlrniifH.  'i  volt*.  (187l-Ki);  Helhtg,  Pat  h^imr-
rinvlit  Kft^K  'tuv  den  DritJcmHlrru  rrkihrf  (IHH4,  l^W);
Inghil-iuui,  tiattrria  Omcrica.^  vols.(ISW);  Amler-
son'n  Eligelniiinu's  I'tcUtrial  AHun  In  Unmrr  (IH^*^.
For  SrbliemannV  work  in  connertiiui  with  Homer,
nee  Sebnohbordl.  Schl'truniHn''  AV'vii'o/Jph*  \1m9Ii
and  (t»rUne^^  .Yew  i'hutilern  im  Hretl  Uinlnrs  I  IHiW).
TIte  old  (ireek  CMunnentnint^  (.Srliolin)  are  jinb-
lished  lieNt  by  IliiMbnf  ami  .MaH^iM,  H  viiIh.  (IKVt-
lH87)t  for  their  illiiHd-alion,  Mte  l.i-hr»'  He  AriAfar-
rki  .stHdiin  IJumeriri*  y'M\  til.  IHHd).  and  Ludwieh'H
Aritlarrh*  JtumrriKchr  TijtkrHik(\f^4-r3).

Very  many  t  rauHlnliiHiB  linve  hi-e.u  made,  and  dif-
ferent taitteii  will  like  (lillei-ent  iraindaiioiifi.  See
Matthew ArunUlVosMiy  ftii  Ti'itiiMlatiui/  Jlomn:  The
translutionn  of  Clnipnuin  and  I'ope  ure  elnsHies  in
their  May.  Within  the  lu«t  few  yeant  Iwn  gotMl
priMe  traiiHlaliniiH  of  the  OdfftMjf  have  appeared  -
one  by  I'uliner,  the  itther  hy  Rntelier  and  Lang.
That  of  the  Hi»d  by  Idling,  Leaf,  and  MyerK,  ■«
not  (to  good.  W«ir!*ley's  vente  ih  t-iyoyed  bj*  Mime,
and  Bryant's  by  ntliept.  Leaf  }iiih  pnbliKlied  a  f  itw
paniim  (o  Ihr  /fiuif  (IH^i],  and  Arnlirw  l^aitg  a  work
entitled  limvn^aHd  tXe  Hpic  (I81K1),  in  conDCCtlou
with  th«ir  versiflUtt.

Homoiol  (o>io<iw.  "peer»"). A  name  given to

the  .Spurt  iatae  (((.  v.)  in  alhiKion  to  their  having

exjual  iMililiejil  rights  wiih  one  another  (Xen.  Ihtt.

I  iii.  3.  f))  :)» ojipOM-d  to  the irn-oftf ■■n>fr.  whoso  po-

6ith>ii was in «otnc respects  aubordiuate. See

tiPAHTA.

Honi'016  (O^iiXijt.  lI}A  lufty  innnutain  in
The«HiiIy,  near  Teiiipi^,  with  a  sjinetnarj"  of  I'an.
{'2)  Or  lIoMiit.it'M  i'nuuXutv).  A  town  In  Magne-
sia in  ThesHaly.  at  the  ftHit  of  Mount  Ossu,  near
the  IViieiiM,

Honor  or  Hoiioa  The  iwraonitlcatton  of  hon.
mir  at  K<nite.  t4i  wbtan  tenipleft  were  hnilt  Itoili  hv
MaivelltiM  (U.c.  '21*2)  and  by  Mnrinti  <».< .  tOl),  eloMt


IIUNURAIUI  LUUI


tU2


llONOHlUt«  KLAVIL'S


to  tlie  tcnijiles  of  Virtue.  Marccllnti  also  bnilt  otif;
to  Vii  tiiA  ;  and  tbe  two  deities  aru  fnM)iieiitJy  nii-ii-
tioiied  together.  IIoiMir  ikiid  VtrtiKian.'  r«pres«iit«4l
ou  coins  aA  yniithl'iil  fignres— Hunor  wtrariiiK  a
l)a.r'le«r  obaplvt,  aud  Virtns  a  Leltuet.  See  ViH-
TCS.

Houorarii  LudL B<-o  Lrni.

Houorariam  lua. Hw  EluCTtTM.

HouoiQSi.  (I)  A  term  UHtsl  uf  any  onmplimont
or  bdiiuur  i:uur<.'rtv<l  by  tbe  Rtinian  Stannic  ur  any
ptiblic  bi)dy  (L'ic.iVo  /7oJtc.  tf6,  li4 ;  Jrf  **dJi«.  i.  9,
14).  (S)  A  c:uiuiub(fliiu  ui  i-uiik  in  tlie  army  (Caen.
S,  C.i.77).  (:i)  TucliDically  ibt?  iianK>  denotes  »c-
tnal  inaj^iHtratf!!* »  hf  ther  nf  tbi-  I'opnbm  Rnmaimi,
tlie  i'lflw,  in-nfii  niiii*iri)mlity,rxFliHltrig.  however,
tb«  (ifUof  tir  iudrj,  wijiitnr,  aiwl  prii^Ht  ^MomtDSen.
Staalnrecht,  i.  p.  H),  nnd  {Miwtibly  ibu  principaiu*
(q.  v.).  Tbu  iu»  kottorum  v,i\n  »  part  iil'  tliv  rijtbtn
of  iiiiu  wIh>  n-uH  a  (wei  i-itizcMi  and  iiiigbt  lii*  witb-
lirbl  wbiTU  all  llir  ullit-r  rights  ivfiT  gniuttil  (Tar.
Ann.  xi.  *£{).  (Svn  Muxi'S.)  (4)  Vhthuii  hoHorum
ii  un  cx)iiT88tou  of  Kuniaii  oflit^iul  lift!  whicb  may
lie  d<?fluoiI  ai4  tbe  career  of  pnliHc  service  tlironslj
fvliiL'b  a  (-itizpii  u)n!it  ptuw  before  attaining  to  tbe
pnsitinn  nf  tbe  bighesr  miiU.  In  the  early  Kotuan
Kepiiblio  there  exi«(ed  in  an  iiifnnnal  wny  a  prin-
ciple of  official  promotion  by  wbicb  tboee  wbo  bad
held  inffrior  niBRiHlrarieit  weni  nndeniliwMl  to  Ite
rilit^ible  for  liij^ber  ptmilton):)  aflnr  tlir  bipsii  of  a
nerlain  iiit^irval  uf  time  (Call  int.  Dig.  50,4,  14,  ^|.
Tbe  onl»r,  crrttit  anttt  magittratuam,  \i\  vbJcb  the
varlonA  luagistracieA  «hon1d  bo  bold,  was,  liow-
ercr,  fonually  detinwl  in  b.c.  I^*)  Iiy  the  Lex  Villin
Annalia.  Tbe  eiirsva  honorum  than  legitlly  deter-
mined consisted  of  tbo  ()iiae«torahip,  ennile  aedile-
ship,  pi-aetombip,  coDsiilnhip.  A  preliminary  mili-
tary service  of  ten  yeara  was  reqiiireil  before  the
career  nf  magiatmoiea  uould  be  begnn.  Since  en-
ndtnient  by  tbe  censors  t^iok  place  at  tbe  oensns
next  folUiwittf;  the  attninnn'iit  of  the  age  nf  tteren-
teen  years,  allowin;*  for  tlie  ten  years  uf  military
aerviee,  w«  may  pliiee  the  earliest  age  at  nltirh  the
qiiaestorship  conld  be  licld  as  iwenly-i-igbt  years.
All  interval  of  al  toaat  two  y«-ars  \f  iii^  required  be-
twcf^n  the  buliliiig  one  office  and  the  folloning,  do
that  tbe  aeilileHliip  uonld  be  held  at  thirty-one
yeum.  the  pmetorKbip  at  lUirtv-lonr.  and  tbe  cuu-
ttulitliip  nt  thirty-Keveii.  Sini-e  the  holding  of  tbe
onmie  aetlitenliip  was  optional,  the  pnielorKhip
might  directly  follow  the  ipiaeslurship,  and  tbe
cou^nUhip  luiglil  titns  bu  rencbe<l  al  thirty-fonr
years.

The  principle  of  an  orHo  Aonorum  found,  how-
ever, its  moist  important  application  in  the  dcvel-
opniuiit  of  the  impertul  goveriiuiont  nnder  Augiift-
ins  anil  liis  siiccejuutrs.

Ill  tbe  Imperial  )H*riod  tbtiit)  were  tbroe  careen
of  onieial  Mtrvico  The  rvpnblicau  tnagiHtracieH
fornimi  tbe  vur»mi  hMUui'uii  for  those  of  seimtorial
rank — t.  e.  senatoiH,  immii*  of  seiiatovH,  or  (hose  raim^l
to  aemitorial  rank  by  iIil<  eiii)H.>tiir,  all  piir*)M^s»>ing
tbe  rer|uisit4'  property  of  one  tiiiUiini  M'Hlvrcen.

To  u  select  body  of  llie  kuigbtft  illvetited  by  lltu
emperor  with  mciutwrMliip  iit  tbe  eqiivslnan  troop
thniiigb  the  t!onferrii)g.of  the  kiii<'lit's  h<M-se,  irere
atudgiictl  tbe  olllces  of  admiuiatraiion,  tbu  various
pmcaralomhips  and  prae/ecturae  which  formtHi  tbo
equestrian  rwridui  A^nnurMW.

To  tbe  commonalty  vraw  aBsignc<l  tbe  aubordi-
nate  offioes,  civil  and  military.


SKKATimtAL  Ct'RSL'S NOKOBITM.
I Prelimiiiiiry  Nerrien.

(a)  AiiMiial  teniim  of  ono  of  a  gi'onp  ofniiuur

ollieuH,  known  as  riijinUviri :  Ininitlr
mjMfii/i>,  (riNuirtf-  MOHCfafu,  fNtfiraffrrir
rJuruNi  cartiBdaram,  dtcrmrtr  tttttibn
iHiiiciiinii:

(b)  A  ^rar'h  Aervicc  a*  rrjfrana*  mitilmm  tali-

cluriun.
11.  Quacatonthip— at  tveuty<6ve  ynuik.

Intenal  of  at  li'aat  one  year
HI.  Aedileship  or  tribunate  of  the  pleba.

Interval  nf  nt  least,  one  year.
IV.  Proctorship  —at  thirty  years.

Interval  of  at  leant  two  yean.
V.  Consulship.

A  patrician  being  inrligible  for  the  tribmwt*
of  the  plebs  or  the  plclK-iau  aedilcstnp  conld
paaa  din*ct1y  from  the  qnaestorahip  to  Ibr
praetoi'sbip.

EfJtJKaTKIAN  Cl'KSCa  UUXOftUM.

1.  PreUminary  service.

(a)  Military  service. No  spe^rial  tnililarTWr
vice  agipoars  to  have  born  rvgiilotl)  r*-
quirpil,  altbongh  Cloiiditia  drt«rinii>»4
apori three ]KMitiona — {\)  prarftettn
tohortit;  i^i)  praefrctura  atot ;  (31  tri>»-
NU(M«  Ir^ioniM; ani] these  Irra  mitiltM*
Hjtifntreu  beoaino  the  usual  prehminarjr
aervic«  in  the  Hccoml  century. la  tba
inacripliona the trihunatm* re^uIiHy
holds  the  second  place.
(J)  Civil  service. Through  the  refonaa  «'
ilwlrian.  training in  state  aflain  wi»
recfigiiized  as  equivalent  to  anrrlet  la
the  army— «,g.  llio*e  who  had  wmdi*
ar/pocdfi  fUci  or  ah  rommentarii* pMtfitti
pratiorio  were  eligible  for  the  proe«n-
torahipB  and  praefectnresi.
II.  ProriiratorsbitMi  of  various  kiiMla  and  gndia
UI.  Praefectnrae.

The  highest  ofllcea  open  to  those  of
•equestrian  order  given  iu  aacendlng
weiv;  prarferttira  clatwiti,  prarffttun  ftfi'
fum .  pitu/rrlura  annonnf,  prar/rrtur*  Jftr*^
praifrviura  prttttorio.

OFFICIALS  or TUB  TlIllCli  C1.AM.

Thcae  weiv  of  great  number  and  Turieiy,  bf'"^
niailo  up  mainly  of  Muhonlinat«s  offirnn  of  *'''
minislration  in  Komo  and  tbe  prwiur<.>%atlcH(l'
nuts  of  public  oflieinls,  officers  of  the  anay  w'
tbe  fleets,  magistrates  of  tbe  colmitjie  aii<1  m>k-
nictpin,  und  the  offlvera  of  tbe  collegia.  Tli"  »•
scriptioiis  bIiow  tbat  these  snlMndiuati'  oAiw
were  nrruuged  in  a  c«r«a#  koHor*im  oa  the  "aa""
principlo  prvvailiug  In  tbe  Muaturial  aud  (qnrr
triaii  vHran*.

Stf  T.  MoiiiNIKen,  Kiimixciin  StaaUrrtiit,  \al  l>
&23-677;  and  O.  Htmchfeld,  L'nUrtmchmufrm  4$f
drm  (lebietr  On-  roiaiiicArN  \'nieaUttn$»i9ftkkkt*t^-
i.  V40.

Hoooria. 6ie  AmLa.

Honoiiua  Flavliu.  A  Roman  rm|temr  of  lb*
West.  A.D.  :C>.'i-42y.  the  becond  M»n  of  TUwodcw*
tbe  Great,  During  his  mmorily  the  able  *flllicb»
Was  regent,  but  in  4(H  was  chnrgwl  with  tirt"
•on  iiud  put  to  ileatli.  In  the  reign  of  Hoaorink
AIaric(it.  v.)  t^Hik  anil  plnndereil  Kome  i4IU^,«fa<l»
tbe  enqicTor  Iwl  a  life  of  ea»a  at  Ravetina,


^


UONOS


»u


IIORATIUS


NT
§


-■jPi


Cuiii  of  ttie  KiuiKTur  Buuiinwc

Bonos. See  Honor.

Bood. 8«e  Cuci'U-fs;  Mitra.

Hoop. Hvi!  Tiioc-iius.

Hoplitae  tAirXtTat). Huuvy-antitHl  Nul<lit>ni. 3cc

EXKIfllTllS,  p.  t'A9.

Boplomftchi  (,6ir\oftaxoi). Set  QladUTORKS.

Hora. 8cu  DtK«.

Borae  ('Q/rat).  Tlic  guilUe«»eii  uf  order  iii  uut*
Hpe,  wlj"  cuiiHM  iL*  MKOMODR  to  change  in  llioir  tv^-
iilurcoiirNu,aiul  all  tliiu|i;s  ti>  come  into  bpiiij;,  Itloti-
■MMii,  ami  ri|wii  al  tlu^  ai>|M>in|Ml  tiiiif.  In  liomor,
wbo  giv^s  tlimii  iiuillii^r  ^t'liualo^iy  nnr  iihiix-m,  the;
[«r«^  nmiitioiieil  na  hiiiHlmnMlLMiH  ii(  7.vnn,  intruHUil
with  the  guarding  ol'  the  gntvM  of  huAVi'ii  iiiiil
Olympus — in  nthnr  words,  with  uatt-liing  tbtj
cIiiimIh.  HcsimI  calls  them  the  daiighlurs  of  Zvuh
mul  Themis,  who  watch  OTcr  the  tield  op^rntioDM
of  iiiankiiid  :  thuir  iiiiincd  are  EiiiiomiA  (<J<)0[1  Or>
tier),  I>ik<^(JiiHttco).  1111(1  Iren<^(  Peaces  I, iinnioft  wliiuh
show  Hiut  l\w  diviiiitiuM  of  the  three  nrdiiinry  sea-
sniiH  of  the  wurhl  of  iiutiire — Spriu);,  fiinntuer,  and
Winter — am  »\mi,  iih  daiij^htera  of  Themis,  ap-
pointed to  siiiirriiitend  tlir  iii<>r<i1  world  of  huinaii
life.  This  IR  eapiicially  the  case  with  Dik6.  wim
ill  the  KoddesH  wtiii  presided  over  legal  order,  and,
UIco  Thetiiitt,  was  eothrmied  by  the  aido  of  Zouh.
Aooording  to  lleBicid.  ahe  ininiediiitely  ncquuiutB
biui  wuU  all  iiiijnht  jiidiciiil  decti>ionH,  tto  that  he
Day  puuiiih  them. In  the  tragio  poets  she  is  inou-


her  hetrothed,  one  of  the  CnriMtii.  uiid  for  re-
I  proacbtng  him  with  the  deod  hy  which  shu  bad
I  lost  her  lover. See  HoRATim.

Horatia  0«ns. One  of  the  most  ancient  of  thf)
patrician  (gentry  at  Rome. See  HoRATll')).
BoratU. See  IIwRATirs

HoratiuB.  (1)  The  iiiiiue  of  three  hravo  Roman
brothers,  who  fi>n};hi,  accnrding  to  the  old  Konniii
legends,  ^ainKt  the  Onriatii,  three  Alhan  hrotJu'i-x.
about  607  yennt  Uefon*  tlie  uommenceineiit  of  oitr
enL  Untiial  acts  of  violence  committed  hy  tlio
citizens  of  Rome  and  AIha  hail  given  risi^  to  a  uar.
The  armifw  were  drawn  np  against  each  other  at
the  K«>aNa  Clnilia,  where  it  was  agre^-il  t<>  avert  a
battle  liy  a  combat  of  three  brothers  on  either  side
— namely,  the  Hnratii  and  Cnriatii.  It  is  eviileiit
that  wc  have  here  types  of  the  ivio  nations  regaitl>
ed  oa  aiaten  and  of  the  thn^e  tritiet  in  each.  In
the  fint  ooset,  two  of  the  Hnratii  were  slain  hy
tbetr  opponents;  but  the  third  brother,  hy  Joining
mldrens  to  valour,  obtained  a  victory  ovrr  all  his
anUigonists.  Pretendiiij;  to  Ity  from  the  lii-dd  of
battle,  he  separated  the  tlireo  Cnriatii,  and  then,
attacking  them  one  by  one,  slow  them  ttuccessivo-
ly.  Ah  he  retnnied  triumphant  to  the  city,  his
sist«r  Horatia,  wlio  had  been  betrothed  to  one  of
the  Ctiriiitii,  met  and  reprouehed  her  brotiicr  bit-
terly for  having  tdaiii  tier  inlemletl  bnnband.  llo-
ratino,  inconned  nt  thix,  -ttabbed  his  «iHtor  tn  the
hi^rt,  oxrlainiiug,  "So  [xTinh  every  Koriiau  wom-
an who  iM'wailf*  a  foe."  For  this  lunrder  he  was
a<]jn(lged  by  the  dnnmvin  toW  t<coiirged  with  »tv-
envl  ttead  and  hangint  oii  the  aotTnnwil  tree.  Hora-
tiuH  appe.ile<l  to  his  peers,  the  bnrghers  or  popn-
tu»  ;  and  his  father  prononneed  him  guiltless,  or
he  wonld  have  puuittbed  him  by  the  paternal
power.  The  popiilus  aciinitteil  Horatin»,  hut  pre-
scribed a  Bymboliciil  punishment .  With  veiled  head,
led  by  faia  tather,  Uoratiu^  paaaod  under  a  yoke  or


The  HorM  bringiD^  Wedding  GllU  lo  Pvkoa \V*Wtt  m  (b«  Louvm.)


tinned  with  the*  Krinyes,  and  am  a  divinity  who  is
rulentVtM  and  ntern  in  exaetiiig  pinii«hinent.  (Ktv
iciTltAlfA.)  At  Athens,  two  Home  were  bononnxl
-Tballo,  the  godileat  of  the  tt<iwei-Kof  ttpring:  an<l
'ar]>o,  the  goihless  of  the  frnits  of  snmtner.  \ev-
■_rthele»«)  the  Horae  were  uWi  n.TogniKed  as  four
1m  inimlMT,  distingnishe«l  hy  the  altribTites  of  the
■easont^  They  were  represented  iis  dpUeate,  joy-
ons,  lightly  moving  creiiiiire»,  ad<»rnrd  with  tlow-
m  and  fniits,  and,  like  llie  tlraccs,  often  ossoeiat-
ed  with  other  divinities,  •iiicli  a.<>  Aphr<>iI)t^,Apollo,
«nd  Helios.  Ah  the  flora  HpiHinlly  p'presenting
spring,  we  have  Chloris.  tin-  wtfo  of  Zepliynis,  and
gotldflM  of  Dowers,  identit)<Kl  by  the  Itoniaiis  with
Floni  {f\.  v.).

Boratia. The  sister  of  llie  [Innilii.  killed  by
ir  anrviviiig  hrolber  for  detiloriiig  the  denlh  of


^wr  »)


gibl>«l — tigithim  tororinm,  "sisters'  gibbet." (Sm
Livy,  i.  Sfi.) (i)  CocvKS. See  Coci.BS.

(3)  QiilSTfs  HoRATlt'ft  KLACncs,  a  eeh'hrnted
Roman  p<»et,  Ikini  al  Voniisia,  IJeeember  Hth.  B.<'.
fl.'i,dnrinR  the  eonsnisliiii  of  L.  Anrt'lint  Colt-n  und
L.M»iiliiiH  Tot-qinitn.s  (farm.  Hi. '21. 1 ;  Epo<t.  I3.<>).
His  fathrr,  who  wan  a  freedmnu  of  the  lloratian
fiimily,  had  giiiiic<l  considenthle  pro]H*rty  rn*  a  ot-
netor,a  nnme  applied  to  the  servant  of  the  nioiiey-
bmkerK,  who  attended  .it  wilett  at  anrtinn,  and  col-
lected the  money  from  the  pnrchaHent  [S^t.  \.ti,i^).
With  tbi'Me  tfiiins  he  piire|].*)jied  a  farm  in  iIih  neigh-
boni-ho<MlofWnnfia,on  tliehatiksof  thcAntidns.  In
tliix  place  Honu'i^  appears  to  have  lived  niitil  hin
eleven!  bortwelfth  year,  when  hisfather.ilistuiifi  lied
with  the  eonntry  schoi>l  of  Flavins,  removed  with
liiK  son  to  Rome,  where  ho  was  plarrd  under  thi*  cum


noRATurs


Mi


HORATItrS


-  ^o


Uonnm<'ni  nf  ih«-  Hunilll  ntiU  ruii*lll {Vtiii  >'»lkn  I


of  a  ccleUmtcil  tcaoljcr.  Orl)iiiiin  Pniiilltiri.  of  Botn-
venlitiu,  ^Yllll»e  IHv  hatt  hvcu  wiitti'ii  by  tiiieUiDiiiM.
AflfT  fli  inlying  I  lie  nucient  I.ntiti  poote,  Horart'
SciiiiiiTil  tlie  lirork  taiigiingc.  Ho  iiIm)  iMi,^i>ye(l,
dnrtug  tlie  cnuiifii  of  his  t'<lucatioii.  tUt*  ndvice  niid
aofiifitiiiicu  nf  liiH  ffllher.  wliu  appears  to  likve  been
a  Beii8il>]e  iiiaii,  and  wlin  is  nieiitioned  by  Imh  ami
with  thp  grt-atefit  enlffin  ami  ivsjwct.  It  is  prob-
atile  that,  ooun  after  he  Liid  iiAftuna'd  tht;  tofja  ririiin
at  lilt'  njfe  nf  eevent'et'ii,  he  went  to  Atla^nt*  to  piu-
atie  hin  Htiu1it'.<(,  nhc-rv  ]ie  a|>|H'»rH  tfi  liavv  leniiiitied
till  thi:  liri>;ikiii};  (tiiL  nf  Dip  (.*ivtl  Wiir  during  (be
fieritni]  trininvii'Hip.  In  tliiH  nnit^st  hcjniiUHl  tbi-
army  of  Itrtiliin,  \v:im  jironiotpd  1«>  thp  rank  »>f  mil-
itary trilmno,  und  wah  jiivMcnt  al  tin-  Ualtlf-  of
P)iili|ipi,  IiIn  ttiglit  fnun  u  hirli  \ic  i?o!npai*t.'M  to  a
ainiilar  act  nn  thf  |i»rt  uT  ihe  (!n-i-k  \tutil  Alcat-iiH.
Tliouyh  tilt"  lifi-  ttf  Hurat-e  wi**  Kpiin^d  l»y  Iht*  im-
perial i>nrly,  lii>  ^^;^tt■^naI  properly  al  Venusia  was
cinillncaTi'H.  and  h«  wpaireil  in  Knine,  witli  tin?
hope  iif  rilitiiiiiinu  a  living  by  liis  liri'iiiry  i'Xit-
(ions.  Sitiiie  III'  lii.s  ]>ncni9  ii1tra(!l«^(l  t1ii>  tmlin*'  of
Vpfffil  and  VnriiiH.  n  hu  intrfMlnrtMl  liini  to  Mai>rf>-
nnH,  and  tlit*  littfrnlity  of  thiit  NtatiMniaii  qnti'kly
rclifvril  tin-  pcwl  rrnni  ull  pi-rnniary  iliftii-iiltivk.
Fruni  tliiK  i-^cntfnl  cpimb  thf  rimt;nl  nf  his  life
tliUM^il  mi  ill  a  HiiMintli  iiinl  ^rnflt-  cniii'Mr.  Satii^
ficfl  with  tht-  ctaii potency  wUich  hi^  patron  had
h(Mitowe4l,  Horace  ilecliuod  the  affen*  luado  Uini  by
An(!n«tn»,  t'>  tak<?  him  iiitc  liis  ttorvive  an  private'
nwndary.  and  Mt^'ailily  resisted  thw  tcmplatinn
thns  held  «ut  of  rtKJni;  In  weulth  nnd  pnlilical
cunHidiTnliiin  ;  iulvuntnjiHs  whirh  wuiild  bavH  1h'l<ii
dearly  piin*haHril  l>y  tliv  xiirrificr  nf  hirt  iii(l»]K>n-
flcin*.  That  he  wim  rrally  iinlrpimtb'ut  in  tin-
noIth'Ml  H<>iiH«r  nf  the  wni-d.  in  frci-dum  nf  llion};lil
and  artinn,  ift  rviilriu'tMl  by  thai  tK-uutifiil  L^pi^tle
li.  7)  to  Mawcnus.  in  whicli  In-  Mtates  that  if  the
faviiiir  <d'  hiH  ]tairim  is  to  In*  HiTured  by  a  n1a%-iMh
rpiiinieiatimi  nf  hiH  own  hatiLta  anO  fHelJnpt,  Im'
will  At  nnoe  Ray  furewell  ti>  furtinie  and  weluonif
jHiverty.


Knt  long  aft«r  hU  iiitriMlin-li«>ti  tn  Mnn-rnii»  tW
jnnrnt-y  U*  Hrnndi><itun  t^Htk  plnce  {fiat.  i..')}.  ntHi  >lio
^ift  of  liiH  Sabine  rarin  i^^mn  fnllowed  Rfudrn^i
ImleprndL-nt  by  the  Iwnnty  nf  )(,v'r(7iia.4.  hif,U  m
the  fav'uir  of  Anguslim.  courted  by  tlir  prmiilHtl
pnlrii.-iai)»  id  Rom**,  and  bloaacd  in  rhe  rii('it<Uiii|t
of  h\n  brother  poett«,  Vergil, Tibiillu9,  and  Vaniii.il
is  (liHlcuU  to  conceive  a  «t»te  of  more  ix'rfwl  icm-
poral  felicity  than  Horace  mn^t  have  ri^nvnl-
Tbin  happincm  von  tirrtt  iw.*rioiisly  iuterriipi''<l  ky
the  death  of  Verj;i),  which  wajs  shortly  «Ufci*c*W
by  tbut  nfTibiilbiH.  Thi-tw-  luKMt>^  niiial  liu)r*Qnlc
(le/fply  iiiln  bin  mind.  The  atilemu  tln>ii»tu  ainl
HerionH  HtiidicH  nliicti,  in  the  (intl  epiMlI(*  nf  hi*  ftt*'
b»Hik.  hu  dechireH  nhall  heneBforwanl  iK'fiipj  la*
liiue,  wt^re,  if  w«  may  jmlge  from  ihe  six-nnd  <*p*-
lie  of  the  Heeom)  iMHik.  coufirined  by  th<w  miI
wariiiiiKx  nf  the  fiail  tenure  nf  existcnw.  Tiw
severe-it  blnw,  however,  which  Hoiace  had  Iw"
cnnnlcr,  was  iiilliricd  by  the  deaUi  id  bis  rirl)
friend  ami  tM>st  piilnni
Maafeinut.  Me  bail  dr-
rlan'il  that  ha  cnnid
never  Kiirvive  the  Uma
of  one  \vlio  wait  "part
uf  hiM  (tuiil  "  iCarnt.  it.
17, 5),  »u(l  his  pR'ilic-
tinii\vaHV<Titloil.  The
(Itiath  of  the  pwi  (PC-
cnrred  only  a  few
u'l-ekH  after  that  nf
lii.H  friend.  Mil  tli«"i7ih
nf  Nnvemlwi-,  II.C.  8,
wlien  he  hud  nearly
cnniplelrd  hiJ4  llfty-
eiiiblh  >eiir.  lli>  iriiiaina  wtMv  dr|MMleil  wst  W
tbtme  of  Maeceuait.  on  the  Ccriniline  Hill.

When  al  Rmne.  Hnrare  lived  in  a  •mall  wiO
phiinly-furiiiiihi^l  laanainn  on  Ibn  l-^ipitline.  VMtrn
be  left  the  city,  he  either  Iwloitk  biin-elf  to  hi*.  («■
bine  fiinii  or  him  villa  at  Tibiir.  Ibe  mtidern  Tivnii
When  ill  the  country.  BM  the  nhJui  Hi-iu'd  htm,  l*"


Umuh  MtiMiiui  I


\'


J^gl^


uotilil  oiiliei'  fttiuly  tiaril  or  liu  liixuriotit>ly  idle.
Tlic  i^uiitr)'  wa«  liis  ruvuuriUi  nbiMie,  Ami  dure
ho  displayed  all  th«  gouial  niinpliclty  of  bii
DKtiire.
I  If  wo  inny  Vw.'li<"ve  Hnrn^'e  liiniKrlf,  liii*  itwn
prcferoncfl  was  U*t  »  couiiiry  lift?;  utii)  wuni*  of
till'  trni'Ht  poetry  tliat  liu  itv«r  wrotu  ik*als  with
tliriin'H  tlntwii  from  hi»  !i>vo  of  nirA)  ncenen —
t)itf  |M-ii<x-fiil  ii)vuiIoff»  of  AptiDa,  1 1)11  Itaittlii-
ttiaii  fuiniuiiti,  l)i«  cattle  nvnliii^  in  t\w  llirkcr*
ing  aliatU'  tIiron<;Ii  tliti  lung  Hiiiuninr  ufl4>rii<Htii,
tliu  Mivxta  by  tlie  brook 'Hide,  titf  coul  vuilM  uf
tlir  fonvir  ((liulcs  witb  tbo  yiMiit^  ilc^'V  browoitig
atDon^  itio  tKVH.  HiN  own  htMitoly  (ubU-h  nit>
fleli;;lif folly  svt  fortli  in  the  piMWAjijoH  wltero
bo  ti*llH  of  hiH  eittiog  nl>ont  the  flr*'  nt  evon-
iii^  n'llh  hin  niitic  oeiKhbrnini,  exrlmnjriiiK
I  Btorit—  nnil  craokintt  Jokes  over  the  nit-llow
win**.

Honiru  in  iltwtrribvd  an  -ihort  and  hUiiiI,  hu
that  Aii^iiKtiui  rallird  him  on  bis  rnqtututivy ;
of  u  miller  tiuick  temiwr,  y^t  easily  placnrod;
■ud  fiivvu  lo  eaao  niid  the,  l^tijoyinunt  of  the
goml  things  of  life.  TbiiC  diniNxtitiou  ik  |ht-
feolly  it*flot'led  iu  his  ^^rLcla^f).  ivIiil^i  oiiiliudy
a  Keiilid,  If  not  very  dtnrK^  piitloHvpliy  of  life,
aud  a  ^ikI  fteiisv  whlvb  rl)bl>ed  li^piu'irvauinni
of  itn  Bcltieihui.-iM  and  .Sluiciam  of  ita  aouniiHHi  and
•evinily,
I  TIm*  priMliirtiotitt  of  llonirn  iirf  dividiHl  ttito
'  Oilet,  Kpudi-it,  Hiilin'H,  and  KptMtlex.  The  K|»-
otiMi  iKpiMlit  :ini  llio  i^urlU'Nl  of  Iiih  wnrkM,  and  an*
wrilU-ii  in  vuriotis  fonuH  uf  iuiiibio  and  dactylic
,  vene.  Tliry  wviv  not  publi)tti*.-d  an  a  collecliun
[  DuUI  B.t'.  29.  Qltvr  (he  iiublicaltuii  uf  his  lirnt  biK>k
k  of  SMiircn  {Sermanra},  which  had  appvui-fHl  about
I  Ibi*  yrar  B.C.  '.Vt,  dotUcntt-d  to  Maert^iias.  At  ahitiit
t  Uittr  of  thn  publjcaiiuu  of  tht)  Epodr'M  appeanil
tHrconil  book  of  Satiivs.  Tb«  (Xles  {t'ariniHui
'were  witu«_'ii  iu  part  att  early  a*  B.C. '4a,  but  thfii"
forionl  itppearauce  Jii  three  t)iM>ks  is  to  b43  nj^i^iw^l
to  till*  yt'Hr  B,c.  '^i  or  tlierenbonts.  Thew  tliret*
bookn  w«n3  also  iVdicated  to  Maecenas.  Follow-
ing tlntni  rnnie  a  rontiiniatimi  of  tliu  Satirvs  in  a
new  fornr.  that  of  liMtcrs  iwldiT'f»s*H(  i^au'li  tr»  ;i  Kijtgh;
|K:rN()ii,  ami  uaUimI  KpiHrti^h  yKpinlnlar).  TIiivmo  am
in  two  botikfi,  tho  tlmt  fiavliig  lifrcn  publlAJted  kooii
after  Ihi^  Unit  piibUcaiiuii  of  the  OM*,  ami  ttio  wp-
oud  Mot  I'ttg  bcfiiro  tho  poet's  death  in  B.C.  H.  In
B.C.  17,  tho  t'armeit  Saet^alarf  or  Secular  Hymn  wtv<
I  c^'UiiMisotl  at  the  reqae«t  of  Augustus  for  the  cfl-
ebnitiun  of  tbo  Lndi  ^aeetilaree  (q.  v.).  Ftonu^i'^
]tken'i>t«,  btMMf^  in  a  way  the  Pcmt  Lanrrat^t  (if  An-
frn*<tits,  rtdi'lirated  Ihn  victories  of  thn  pm]M'riir'H
stMpiuinH. TilHMiti»<  iDiiI  Unn^tiM,  in  )4f<vi>ni1  new  OiIi-«,
which  ht>  piibIi>thiHl  with  n  iinniltcr  of  nlhero,  aa  a
fonrth  book  of  Otlta  in  B.C.  III.  The  fatiioiu  bit
of  lituruty  ctiliciHrii,  the  Epiitula  ad  Pitmnft,  nsn-
ally  known  oh  the  Jr«  I'ocUra,  and  perhaps
tinflnitihrd,  ih  of  uocertaiu  date,  bnt  '\.b  to  be
aaaJKnod.  with  cuach  probability  to  the  year  B.C.
90.

f  Horace,  as  a  poot,  does  not  show  the  iuspiratioo
jwd  GfUt  that  would  rank  him  with  Ihe^rpiit  maa-
tera  of  lyric  verse  —  Pindar.  Ah-AeH«,  Sappho —
whom  ho  imitates;  and  ht>  i»  himM^lf  tboroii^'bly
uwatH  of  his  own  ^loetic  nmitatioiiH.  When  hv  at-
tumpCH  (he  lliglit  of  tlie  Theban  eagle  and  when
I  |be  wricvs  In  his  r6tf  of  Poot  Lanrtuitc,  be  is
/"never  at  hiti  be.it :  but,  tikt-  Tennysoii,^!  his  offi-
cial rerae,  invariably  auggests  a  x>enH>»  ill  at  eauo


.\ii|{ii-l>i<i  4iii<t  Ills  rrifDdv (Prom  ■  whII  )>iiinilikj{  frnni  lbs
rivlvc  of  ih«  rRoara,  dlnntrvrtol  Iti  1'3T  )

over  a  perfuuctory  task.  His  temperament  and
tiwtvK  ntiirked  r>nl  for  him  a  far  dilfiTent  Nphere,
in  which  he  \*  iniinitiihli*  When  he  getft  away
from  battlcH  and  triinnphH,  and  lefoils  nud  heroea,
and  th«  whole  niaehinery  uf  Olympns,  and  tartia
to  the  familiar  wortd  in  which  he  tivps,  he  plays
with  a  luOMter  hand  n[jun  tho  chnrdn  that  vibrate
in  the  breast  of  all  niKu.  Tendrnietw,  lintnonr,  a
lively  and  pieturesqiie  fancy,  a  Hympalhetii:  love  of
external  nature  in  lier  familiar  njipertn,  a  keen  in>
*\fi,\\i  into  hnman  nature  in  tlNvaryiiij;  moods — all
theaenrehis  in  a  high  de{;ri'e.utMl  joined  with  I  hem
isanniideivnrreiilof  occaftionalrnelaucboly  thai  not
infr<"*|iiently  touches  the  «onrce  of  tears.  In  thoso
(Mcji  where  he  deplrts  the  lighter  nido  of  love,  lhu
genial  interrourNe  of  t'rienilt4,  and  natural  Rct-iif.«ry,
or  in  whirl)  he  Mctt*  forth  his  amiable  philoKopliy  of
life,  hi*  in  quite  iiiiiiiitalde.  WonK  cannot  do  Jtistice
t«tthv  exr|idnitu|Hdi.sh  of  Imh  verwe,  the  erinpnesnaud
torso  vigunr  of  hiH  phirL<ies,  and  the  perfeet  ehoiee
of  wonls,  which  Petronins,  iu  tho  following  i-en-
tury,  oliaracteri»'d  uh  Horatii  mriotii  frUnlat.
He  hoH  lilted  I  he  page.n  of  nnHleni  literature  with
a  hoKt  of  sparkling  uptgramt,  phraw'S,  and  ]iiovcr-
hiul  lines — "jt'«elK  five  wonU  limg" — ^nioie  nn-
nieroun,  in  fact,  than  those  [hat  hare  heeu  taken
fixim  all  thu  n:Ht  of  Ijklu  ItC^inilnni  put  together.
Ku  other  writer  in  any  hitignuge  so  ahoundH  iu
pregnant  phrases.  Mis  t'^rpr  dirm  is  an  epiUima
in  two  words  of  the  whole  practical  tenehing  of
Kpicnreanism.  IJirt  nil  dc^f/mmflum,  txxistt^il  out
'of  its  context,  has  almost  iHieonie  nu  Kuglish
I  phrase.  !^,  too,  the  expressions  ivntuU  t'lanco —
damno^a  tjuid  moh — nwifc  viuo  itfJIile  rura» — yro«f
eqnilrm  uedct  atra  rura — iton  umntM  moriiir — scsi/wr
nraruti  rijrl — napert  audf — nil  udmiruri — tub  indioe
lig  rul  —  dinirvli  membra  paet«r  —  and  u  hundred
utiiers.

It  is  in  his  Hatirea  and  F.piatles  that  the  trne
Horace  is  roost  clearly  s«cn,  freo<l  from  the  uueoiu-
fortablc  trappings  nf  the  grand  stylo,  aud,  oa  it
were,  chatting  at  ease  among  his  friends.  Here
he  most  winuingly  t«ts  forth  his  shrewd  arx)  kind-
ly views  of  men  and  Ihings,  laughing  good  •  lin*
inouredly  ut  the  fuiblos  of  hU  friends  and  at  hia


-


I

I


HOKATIUH


MC


lIORATIUa


own  »n  \\iA\,  likf*  Tlmi:kpra>',  esc«pt  that  in  the
lautfli  «>f  Hur^L-u  tlieru  is  no  subacid  toue  of  t^vfti
m  pivtfii)flo<l  eyiiioiHtu.  Tlic  wbol»  teiioiir  of  liis
tcaebing  ia  inodtraTloi) — the  medioorila*  uMrea,  llic
modMK  ifl  rcftiM— whicb  lie  iiroiwhfs  iuve«!«antl,T
alike  to  ibe  aiubitiou^,  tbu  i>]euHiirflo\-iug,  ntiil
tbo  |iliiUieio|itiur.  Not  cvvu  virtue  itu'lf  In  to  br
Iiiir^riitil  bi'yiuHl  wlmt  ia  rea»oiialili>.  'Thin  in  om-
fMiiitiuUy  tbe  jihiJo^ipliy  of  "gowl  fonu."  of  tbf
itiiiii  of  tUo  wiirlil,  oiilivptu'il  by  n  hfliini'  of  hiiEnoiir
tliitt  is  fiital  alilcu  tJitbe  futiaticiKtii  of  tbe  "cntiik"
himI  llii'  pri;;^t!*i*'>  >*<»tttrnt>i(y  of  tbtf  Pliilislinn.  It  ia
lilt!  |iliitoiio|iby  of  tliK  mvim-»};a  iniiii,  aiul  it  ex-
lilaiiLt  tlic  coiiHtiiiit  popiilarily  of  Llonu;e  in  nil
ii]l;im  and  nit  iiHtioiiM,  unit  the  fiujt  tlint  be  is  to-
■lay.  at  tlie  i^nd  of  tbi;  ninct(>«ntb  cetitnry.  tbo
most  niodf^rn  writer  that  literature  cau  sbow  ns.
Tie,  moiw  Iban  iiity  otiier.  makes  antiquity  live  for
uis  again;  ami,  Bt.rippiiig  off  tbe  aiiperlicial  i)iA'i>r-
(<nce!i  of  time  niiiL  pIa(M>  and  laiisna^o,  tla'sbtui
n[H}it  till'  uiintl  a  convtotiou  of  the  OMential  unity
of  tho  prraent  mid  tbo  pant.  IIu  in  thns  tbe  roost
bnm»]i  tif  nil  ibe  clawtiu  writ«rM,  ami  tbv  uae  wboao
wit  »utl  niMlniii  linger  ill  tbu  mind  of  tbe  innst
idle  HtiuliMii  Ion;:  aftur  the  IttieH  of  Acxt'liylua  and
Vergi]  and  uvuii  HiMia-r  bavo  been  forgotten.  Hunco
we  ilnd  bim  lulinired,  tniuslated,  uuU  imitated  by
meu  of  ttuL'b  difTi-^ruMl  typuit  o^  Pope,  Uyruii,  Olad-
Htoue,  and  Kitpino  Kiuld.  Hici  tiearettt  repreaeota-
tiveiu  Kuirliiib  lituratiiroisPu|Jc;  bitt.aaSIr.Uaok-
ail  Well  BayH,  lo  au^fceHt  a  true  parallel  we  must
tiiiite  in  tboii^bc  tbe  excelluiice  of  Pope  and  Qniy
nitb  the  eitiy  wil  nnd  rnltnred  gnic«  of  Addionti.

Krom  nn  eiirly  diite  HoriKw's  (uwniH  were  nswl  in
Roman  NcbooU  iut  a  text-book,  and  v%'ere  expounded
by  Roniitu  scholars,  ewperially  by  Acron  niid  Por-
pbyhon.  Hik  use  hh  a  acbnol<text  bna  |>er|>etii.-ited
tbr  order  in  n-bicb  bis  works  are  iion-  always
printed,  ttiat  bi'iuf;  tbe  order  in  wbicb  tbe  Roman
Ncboid-hoyK  n>ad  tbum.  As  Homer  bna  been  cou-
timionsly  [H>[Hilar,  there  exist  a  very  Irtrge  nuitilier
of  MSH.  tabaut  250)  of  Ibe  text — lume,  buwever,
older  Iban  tbo  ninth  cvntnry  a.d.  The  oldetit  ia
tbe  Cudox  UenK'U<tis  (deiiutetl  an  B),  writlvu  in
Ireluml.  Tbia  ia  incomplete.  A  nepanife  source
of  Horace  is  represented  by  tho  Codex  Blaudiuius


^^X


^


^


m


Sa


Q.  Bantlu*  n»<vus. (Fiona  «  Gen  j


{l''rfu»HsgmtiM  or  \"(,  in  p.irt  collated  by  Cra<)nliM
par<ineH  ile  C|rna()ae«)  ut  BInnkenl>erg,  bnt  tit-
8lroy*Hl  abont  1666.  (See  CRfgull'S)  Tbr  l»M
n>prp»eiitativo  of  this  "family"  is  probably  tW
CmieX  QtitliiinnH  (G),  dating  from  dir  )i'Br  ilTrfi
Tbu  Iloniliati  MSS.  aiv  euumeralvtV iu  Keller  anil
Holder's  preface.  /

JliBLKMiKAPriY.-'Tbe  nUHo  }*rtm<xp»  of  Horvcf
ia  aaid  lu  li;tvi<  iip|M'.are4|  at  Militn  in  1470. Ureal
Mlitiona  are  thoMv  of  l^niliiiUM  <L«ydeu.  I«i61,  rv^
printed  at  Paris  in  l&ti7,]&79,  l&^,nnd  at  t'oblentz
ill  1829); (.'niqiiiitattirat  printed  ittt  a  vtlnde  at  Aut'
werp,  I5TH); HciuaiiiH  (Lejden,  ItiPJ): the  Rn-at
H|H>cb-uiakiiig  »ork  of  BeiitJey  (Cninbridf:^,  1711,
reprinted  at  Aiii>li-i-dsni.  XIX'S,  and  lately  ut  Brr-
liii.  IriH^KI): Wakeliebl  n^omlon,  1790;  Orelli  atxl
Hailer  (1850-:^;  lust  ed.  Berrni.  ISBS  foil);  Diltoi.-
burger  flt^t);  Xanrk  and  KrUger  (Leipzig,  ItAS):
SchUtz  (Berlin,  l*«M<li: Kiessling  (Bcrliu,  »rt-
IS88): tbf  text alone  by  MeineUe  U^'rltn,  ltS4);
Keller  aud  Holder  (Li-ipeig,  ]K>4-T0t;  Baopt  aud
Vablen  (4tb  ed.  UipKig,  1^1):  I..  Mnller  (l^t  *^.
Cliitago,  18^2); with illuAti'ationB  frani  genia,  bj
King,  text  by  H.  A-.1  Mnnro  (London,  li^tiS);  French
coinmenlnry  by  Waltx  (Paris,  1*71;  Knglihh  eoa-
meutari<>8  by  Maclvane  (Louduu,  !N10»;  WickbAn
[vol.  i.  Odes  aud  Kpodes,  1874; voL  it.  Satirni  and
EpiatleH,  l^U l^parute  ediduiiHaro  tb<e«i  uftltr
Odi'B  by  I'age,  with  nn  oil'-  hand  couimnilary  o^
much literary merit  (4th ed.  Loudon,  IHtMj,  muiI
Wickbam  (2il  ed.  London,  14^7);  of  Uie  8stirea  tr|
Palmer (LuudoD,  iHKlland  L.MUIler  (Vienna,  1^1;;
of  ibe  Kpintlea by  WilkJUK  i:id  «d.  London,  I.'^tSX
Hbiit-kbitrgh  (C'anibridge,  IHKHt,  L.  BlitUer  iVjcboi,
lHd3);  of  ibu  SatirvH  ami  KpiKlli'M  together  lir  Kirk-
land,  after  KieHNling  (KimIoo  and  N.Y.l*<lCI(. Vw
Aril  Pitrtira  in  iKlitnl  M-parate1y  by  llufmartii-Fr^H-
katup  (Lrydeu,  li^&)  and  Albert  (Paria,  l7Kll,iiii'l
diacnpwHl  by  Weiawenfida  (Gorliti,  lCVO>,  ami  Boiiiii"
[Turin,  IfiSeX

No  tranalaiion  of  Horace  dof«  any  kind  of  jtuiirr

lo  tbo  original,  tboagh  some  of  the  iiuitatiuo*  Id

Hngliah  by  Pu|>o  arc  very  clever. There  ate  tia»*-

lationa  by  Sir  Philip  Oatiriu,  by  Profrtt^or  ^uDit>|^

ton  (in  voraol,  by  Sir  Theodore  Martin  (Od«  m^

Satires),  by  Clark  (Odes),  by  Sargent  (OiU'Kr,iiii<l!^T

Htepben  De  Vere  (selected  Otlea  and  Kpc«ili«)—

tbe  last  two  iu  1898. There  i»  a  fntj  prm

translation  by  Lonsdale  aud  ]..ee.

The  life  of  Horace  haa  lieen  written  in  Eiif
liith  l>y  Milniaii  (IKr>.t)  and  Hovenden  {KJ}',  id
Ciermau by L.  Miiller (18K)); in Kn-ixL  ^1
Walckeiuier, 2 vola.  ( 1858 ).  and Ih^'t  Wikti*
(Iti56);  in Italian  by  OneMolto  <Padu.i,  1^1
A  valuable life  of  the  poet by  Kuelnnimi  h«
come  down  to  ua  with  iH>iue  dimrfditalik  in-
ter p>olaLiona,  ta  the  MSS.  of  the  poet. Valnalilt
crtiiciam  of  Horace  will  }te  found  iu  Tfuflcfk
Charaklrri»tik  dr*  ITurat  (I-eipziK,  lH4'il;  Cttt-
lacli.  Lthm  umi  JUvhluug  dr»  //crri.- (Ba«h-.  I'^ll
Wriwenfela,  Horas (Berlin. IrW^  ( ; ^'oifl, /'*'
l^hrniiitrithril  dr»  Ilitro:  (Meinaen,  l!^6t^l;  Itcck,
HorAz aU h'uuatrirlilrf  nmd  rKilni>vpti iMal'ii;
IHT6t; Weise,  iJr  Huntlio  Phih*i>v}*iitt  (Collnirf;,
ISSh : Maier,  I).  philmitpU.  Standyvnk*  (In  Hitnt
iKrvniaier.  li^l^t^):  and  ^M>llH^. /icrntun  I'efit»/tJk
Auffutlan  Age:  i/omiY  i lcU2).

The  scholia  to  Horace  have  l»et'ii  ediled  by
Fabricius  (Baale.  16,Vi»,  with  ndditiuiiH  b)  Panljr
(Pragne,18riHaud  ltC7).aiid  by  HanlbahKerlia,
1864-66). SeetbeaccoimtMfthe*cUuhab^  I'm-


I


I


fier  (Dorue,  1463).  Tlicn>  is  a  lexicmi  to  Horace
l>j  Kircb  ('iil  rd.  Hnuover,  187^)),  On  llie  latignagL',
■utc,  or  iluritcc,  i»t*e  £me6ti'b  Cldris  Huratiana  ('id
«n1.  Tjvipzi;;,  li:':iri) ;  Barta,  Sprachiithe  A'tudUit,  <ftc.
iLiiiz,  ]R?9  mill  li^l);  Ilnbviiicltt,  jmfc-rfift>n  hei
tivrtu  (Egi-r,  IrfiS'ij;  WjiIik.  lh.'M  yaiiatiottn  t/f  la
lAiaifMr  rt  de  !n  .Wtriqnc  tfOvuici;  etc.  (Kuri*.  1^');
fiml  tliL*  iiitmitiit;tji>ii  in  KivkliDid'H  fttilioii  nf  tUa
Satires  ami  EiiiallvH  (1H93|.  On  Httnicv  un  u  itatir-
iut.wc  R.  Y.Tyrrell  in  iJrrmathrna,iv.'J5S;  iA-LttttK
Pofhy  (lS\K>i;  aud  tliu  iirticlc  8aTIIU.

Hordlcldia. Bee  Fuiiuicidia  ;  Tkllvi^,

Horestl  A  {K'ngile  of  Scotlniid,  in«utioiied  by
Tucitiifi.  In  Agricitlii'i*  tiniB  ihey  *m)«iii  Io  liavo
U'cii  the  iribabilautH  nf  wbut  ih  now  Au^jub  (Tao.
Jgric.  M).

Horistae  (apurrai).  OfHrialH  at  Atlieiu  anil  anme
4itlicr  places,  e.g.  UbifM,  (tIiuhu  duly  it  waa'to  settle
Iroiuidariea,  esiwcially  of  Hiicrvd  iireuinctH.

Honni*da» Sec  Sassanwak.
Horn. Sc«  CoitNt'.

Horolostam  (itpaXoyioi').  A  uanm  given  to  rnri*
nuH  hinlriiniHiild  by  meaiiq  uf  wliich  tbu  ancients
mifasiired  llio  tini(i  of  tlm  day  and  night.  Tho  eur-
Iie«t  and  Himi>Iest  lion^1<>|ria  of  wliirli  Miiintiitn  it»
tDade  were  tMilled  iroXot  and  yvufitatf.  Her<Mlotiin
{ii.  109).  wbo  ascribes  their  iuvLMition  to  ttiu  Baliy-
loiiiaofl,  iDeQlioDh  tlie  irrjAoc  uud  yvuifutm  om  i\vi>
diatitict  inatmiuenid.  Holli,  bovrcvcr,  divided  [be
d«r  ioto  tweWe  parts,  aud  were  a  kind  of  sou-


c.  17;  i>om».  a.  tiall.c.  9).  In  later  times  (lie  noma
gnomon  ^aa  appliMl  to  any  kind  uf  sniidiiil,  and
ut)|M)cia1ly  to  ita  linn;ei-,  wbicb  threw  tho  i^hudow,
Biid  thus  poidtisl  U*  the  hour.  Even  the  clepaydra
is  m>nic^tiriie»  tgtlled  gnomon  (Allien,  ii.  p.  42).

The  gnomon  was  «\  identty  a  \ery  imperfect  tii-
striinieiii, uud  it  ^«a»  inipoMibU*  to  divide  the  day
into  twelve  eipial  spaces  by  it^  Ttie  ira\ns  or  ^Aio-
Tpintiov,  on  the  other  band,  Mrenis  to  bavu  been  a
more  perfect  kind  of  sundial ;  hnt  it  nppcnrn,  uev-
erthelestt,  not  to  have  been  mucb  iiaed,  aa  it  ih  but
seldom  nieutioued  (AiiHtoiib.  ap.  Hull.  ix.  4t>).  It
conHiHteil  of  a  baniii  {Xmavit).  in  (bu  itiidilln  of
wbicU  the  peiiK'iidiculur  stall'  or  linger  (ym^dic)
was  erected,  nod  iu  it  the  twelve  parts  of  tho  day
were  marked  by  lines  (Lucian,  Lexiph.  A).

Another  kind  of  borologiutn  wa.4  the  clrjMtfdra

(KXi^itipa) It  deiivcd it« nnuiu from icA('irT<t»'

and  fSw/j.UM  in  it«  original  ami  ainiple  fomi  it  con-

sisted  ofa  vesiMl  with  several  little  openings  (rpv

TTTfftara)  at  the  bottont,  throiigb  which  the  \%'ater

jcnutaiiieil in it escaped,  as it were,  by ettealth.

Thin  instriinieiit  »*etMU8  at  Ural  to  have  been  uwd

,  only  for  the  pnrpoMt  of  niea«itring  the  time  dnring

'  which  i»cnuMiH  wi^re  allowed  loH(ieak  in  the  eunrta

I  of  justice  at  Athens. The  time  of  itx  invention  or

introduction  ix  nut  known;  but  in  the  age  of  AriH*

^  to|>haneM  (ttve  Jehttru.  ii^^j)  tt  Hp|H>arH  t'l  hav»  been

'  in  common  use. Ita  form  and  eonttlttictioii nnty

'  hp  w'en  very  elearly  from a piiHnage  of  Alialotle

(  PrvbirHi.  xvi.  dj. The elepajdra  waa a  hollovr

I  globe,  probably  eomewbat tlat  at  tbe  top  part,


I


<li;il.  The  ytiwuMv,  whieh  wu«  aUo  called  arm-
;yrtov,  wan  the  mora  tample  of  the  two,  and  prob-
ably I  be  tnore  ancient.  It  conslated  of  a  iflalt'  or
pillar  standing  periwndicninr.  in  u  pliu'e  expound
to  the  snn  t9Kui$tipov\  to  that  tbi>  length  of  it^
tthadnw  might  l>e  ennily  iiM.-4frtiuii«d.  The  shadow
of  the  gnomon  w:im  iiiea.i<nrpd  liy  feet,  whieh  WDm
probably  murkrd  on  t!i(-  plai-e  where  the  nhfidow
fell  (Poll.  i.73).  The  gnouinii  in  atuiont  without  e\-
eeplion  mentioned  in  e«)iiiiis'tioii  with  the  HtlTfOf
or  tho  balli;  anil  Ibe  liiuc  for  the  former  wna  tvw-
anN  Hiinsft,  or  at  tho  time  when  the  ahjidowof  the
gnonioii  measured  ten  or  twelve  feet  (Arintoph.  f.V-
clfnAViH,  with  the  Scbol.;  Foil.  I.  c  ).  Tin*  longest
ehadow  of  the  gnomon,  at  Kimrtse  and  HiniM't,  wan
twelve  feet.  Tlic  time  for  bathing  wan  when  the
^uiuuu  threw  a8bnili>w  of  mix  fiet  (I.neiau.  t'rojuMi.


whet's  it  had  a  abort  neck  (avXns),  like  that  of  a
bottle,  through  which  the  water  was  poured  into
it.  This  niwniiig  might  lie  rliwed  hy  u  lid  or  flap-
per (itMfta),  to  pivvent  the  water  running  out  at
lii«  bortuiii.  The  e)e]>Mydra  which  Ari»vliirle  bod
in  view  waa  probablj'  iiol  of  glaiis  or  of  any  Irana-
paivnt  nmterlal,  bnt  of  bninze  or  braM8,  ko  that  it
eonld  not  be  iteen  in  the  clepaydru  irnelf  what
ijtiautity  of  water  had  eKcniMMl.  Ah  the  time  for
H[H'akiug  ID  the  Athenian  conrla  waa  thus  innia-
uivd  by  water,  the  oratora  frequently  uao  the  t«rm
Cfimp  instead  of  (be  time  nlluwed  to  them  ((Vru  (*fi^
vftari,  IVniiintb.  He  t'orfui.  p.  274,^  litlt).  Aewlitiiee
(<■.  Ctmiph.  <jL  \\n  I,  when  denei'iliing  the  onlcr  in
whiL'h  the  nevural  ]>artteM  were  alloweil  to  speak,
Kiiys  that  the  lintt  nater  was  given  to  the  aeunntir,
the  M-eond  to  the  aectiseil,  and  the  tbii'd to  tho


HuuouxauM


MS


IIOKOUX>It*M


Jili1);»ia.  An  rK[>pcial  m(Mc«t  (d  /^'  ^M/if  wiw  Aii-
jmiiittMl  in  (bi.-  cmirlH  for  tfio  iiurponv  of  wntchiiij;
tlin  cle|in>'<lra,  anil  hl<>|iptrig  it  nlifii  lUiV  ilocii-
lurrit*!  nerc  nrtwl,  wlirirliy  Hi«  Mpi'ukiT  wiim  iiiter-
niptcd.  Tliu  tiiiio, nnd  co[)iH--(|iii*iitl,v  llii'  tpiniitily
iif  wntcr  Allon'ccI  to  a  vpuakcr  <lv])«ii(lt<il  iipun  ttip
iuportnuci^  of  the  I'liae;  iiud  vrc  ari<  iufoniiiKt  that
ill  n  ypaipr)  iraftafrpiirStias  tbo  wator  altowcil  Uv
Riu'h  party  diuoiiiitei]  toelevcu  ampborau(Ae(icliin.
/>r  Fal«.  l^g.  }  li(i>,  wlien>a8  iu  trials  conceniiiiK
till)  rislit  of  inlt«rilau(-o  otily  one  HDiphora  wiui  al-
IuwihI  y  Ui-uio^tli.  V.  Mncart.  p.  I(i5*i,  {  H ).  Thoge
nelionH  tti  wliirli  tint  tiiiif  was  ttiii8  iiieaMurvil  to'
tliD  Ap<!ftki'i-M  art)  rallpil  l>y  Pulliix  (viii.  llit)  fiitini
jrpnt  viotp:  olbvrsare  t^riuiMl  ftUat  Ainv  Cittrot,  itiid
in  tlioho  iliv  hpciikiTN  vtftv  not  tied  down  U*  ;i  cvr-
tiiii)  space  of  liuH-.

TIh*  elcpHVtInt  nsett  in  tlio  voiirtMofjiislici',  Imw-
ever,  woh,  pntpeilyopCAlciiig,  nut  u  )loItllll^illlIl ;  but
nnaller  O1I08,  luadt-- ut' ^lam,  and  of  tliL-natin-  Hiiiiple
»tni<!tnn-',  w»*n»  uudoubiMlly  iimhI  very  rjirly  Iu
fiiniitifH  for  the  piirpoM-H  of  onliiiiiry  lifL',  and  for
divldili};  tloMlay  into  twflvtf  t-tpinl  partx.  In  tli«se
^laMfi  i<lepsydi-at«  ihtf  tliviKimi  into  twtdvv  pnrl«
niiiHt  liitvB  Iweii  Tiflible,  oitti(>r  on  Ibn  ^Iiish  globe
ll(*i.-lf,  <vr  it)  tbe  baiiiii  into  wliivb  tlu^  n-ater  IIi>Tred.
Tbc«e  iimtriiincut-j'.  bownvor.did  not  wbow  thfl  limol
ipilte  correctly  all  tbc  yenr  round:  fii^^t,  bpcniiMt
Ibi^  WMlcr  riiu  out  of  tliG  clepftydiiv  wnnctiiiioN
qnlckvr  and  noatotimejc  ntoiTcr,  accordiox  to  Ihi:
dittt'i-ent  ti'inprrnturc  of  tho  wator  d'bit.  (Jtineri.
\at.  7i't  aiul  (Mwondly,  bcctrntw  Uiv  length  of  tbi?
lioiin«  viiried  iu  tliM  dinv-rfnl  w>tiH>)ii-i  nf  ttiio  year.
To  miuuve  tbo  second  of  tbt'^e  dt^fi-rtH  I  bo  itiKido
of  tbe  clt-iMtydra  wn«  coven'd  with  a  coat  of  wax
durini;  tbu  »1iorler  diiyH,  iinil  wbi'ii  tlii-y  becnuw  i
loirgi^r  ibu  wax  wan  gradually  t:tki<n  away  again
{Aen.  Tnct.  l:  'H,  ^  IV).  Plato  it  enid  to  buvf  uhlmI  !
a  vvKTfftiyiiv  iijmXdytnv  in  Iln^  nlmpo  of  a  \nr^e  cli'i>-  !
Hydra,  wliicb  iitdical^-d  tbo  bourx  of  the  nij^lit,  and
iu<«*niH  to  bnvc  Ut'cii  of  a  c-miipliruteil  tttnictniv.  '
Tld<i  itistaiicc  »howH  that  at.  un  «'arly  pcrtoil  im-
provniiifntfl  worf  uaaile  ou  lbi<  old  and  ^i^lp]c  dtp-
aydrn.  Hut  all  lliewc  impruvfUHMits  wure  ciizelled  ,
by  tlie  ingfiiiooJt  invt-ntion  of  Ctveibi««  (t|.  v.),  a  (
«<lubruLed  iiiallrcMtaticiuti  of  Ali*\iiiu1ria  (  about  I
B.C.  IflTi).  Il  id  called  dipoXoyioi'  i/SftuvXiKuv^  aud  is  I
describwl  by  Vilniviioi  <ix.  ii).  Walwr  \y:w  itiado !
to  drop  upon  wb«elM  wbiob  w»!re  llnreby  lnnn*d.
Tbo  regular  inovL'uiuut  of  tb*->Htj  wheels  watt  uoiti-
uiuuicated  to  a  »tuiall  hIjiIoc,  wbicb,  ^-adiiully  Hh-
iug,  poiutit>d  \v  jtb  a  liMlu  »lick  to  tbe  hotii'v  ntnrkod
ou  n  pillar  wbii'b  was  uttacbcd  to  tlii;  uiocbtuiinui.
It  iudicat'e4l  tbu  hours  regularly  tbronghout  ibe
yvar.  but  »tilt  rutpiiriMl  to  bu  often  uttcniled  to  aud
rvgulated.  Tbiti  uompUcated  rleptiydni  i>e>eui(i
nnvtrr  to  Iiavp  <-nin<>  iiito};«iipral  iihx,  and  uaa  pro)>-
nbly  found  only  in  tln^  bonsf^N  of  vi>ry  ut^alrhy  per-
MouA.  Till'  Hiuulial  4tr  ^mtrion^  aud  u  Hiniplt>r  kind
of  clupdj-drH,  on  tliH  otbrr  baud,  wurn  iniicb  UMed
dowu  to  n  very  late  jwriod.  Tb«  twelve  partM  of
the  day  wore  uot  duHigUBlt'd  by  tbe  name  £pa  until
the  tiiur  of  tlie  Ali-\au<lrian  nHtronouiera,  and  oveu
then  the  ttid  uud  va^uc  divisious.  destribtHt  iu  the
article  Diics,  wern  preferriKl  iu  tbe  atfaini  of  c^iiu-
uHui  lift'.  At  tlu^  time  of  the  geojirapber  Hippar-
ebuH,  huwever  (alK)ilt  U.c.  Unl) ),  it  lioenis  to  bnve
Ifoen  very  couimoi]  to  reckon  by  bonnt.

There  in  Ktill  existiu);,  though  in  ritiuH,  a  lior-
ological  building,  wbirb  iH  one  of  the  inoMt  iiitor-
eating  luoniinioniM  at  Atlienn, U  iH  tbo  ittnicture


'  foruu-rly  ciilUd  Ibi*  To«vr  u[  tbv  WiimK  but  uow
liuowu  as  tbu  iloix>I<i};i(^al  Mouuuiontof  Androuiciw
Cyri'heati'S.  It  tfi  expressly  callfl  huruloginm  by
Vanx)  (/f.  it  iii.f>,H7t.  Tbia  building  is  inllyda-
(ttriliMl  by  VitniviuN  {i.  6,  ^  4),  and  itie  following
illiiHtratiou  dhows  Ha  gnunHl-]>tan.  Fur  the  eleTa-
tion  Hn>  the  ortidp  ANi>KONicUS.


.../


RtDDud  plan  oniiit  niirolacicAl  MooaiDVDt  of  Andnwic
CyrTlMWlM  ftl  Albvos.

The  8trncttii-«  ia  netagoual.  with  il«  focca  to  ihr>
poinlaof  tbeconipaitit.  Ou  the  uortheaj^t  and  nortti-
w««t  HidM  are  dialylo  CoHntbian  porticos,  f[irln]>
ai-oeas  to  the  interior;  aud  to  tbu  aoutb  wall  i*
nftlxfd  a  Hort  nf  turret,  fonning  tlirpe-(]uart<"r«'if  n
rircle,  t<i  rouluin  tin*  ciKtt'ru  wtiioh  dupplied  vmier
to  tbf  clepsydra  in  the  interior.  On  thr  fliiritmit
of  tbtibuiidiugwaa  a  bronze  figure  of  a  Triton,  lioltl-
ing  n  wand  iu  bi^  band ;  and  Hum  figurv  liinirH  m
a  pivot,  mi  that  tbo  nund  always  jwiutrd  aU»<>
that  aiile  of  the  building  which  fari^d  tbe  niiipl
then  blowing.  The  diivctioim  of  the  M>t  L>ral  fjicr*
wore  iiidiraled  by  liguieB  of  the  eight  ftmU  '•>•
the  friez.i'  of  the  eutnblatnro.  On  the  pUia  w*Ji
below  the  entablature  of  eavh  face,  line»  are  *(iil
vittiblu  whii-li,  with  the  gnouioue  that  litiHNl  uni
atxtve  tlieui,  foTuifd  a  (M-riett  of  Buudinls.  lie  tlif
ceidri'  of  (be  iuteriiir  id' I  he  buihling  was  a<.ii-|>*!F'
dra,  the  reumiiiit  of  which  ar^  p>till  visible,  ainlar'
aliown  on  the  plan,  wImti'  lh«  dark  Iiuph  i*prr«pi*t
tho  chauuol*  for  (b«  water,  wliieh  wan  Rnin'Unl
from  the  turret  on  the  Miutb,  and  e»ea|H>d  by  ilj"
bole  iu  the  centre.  Tbruc  other  Albeuian  tiomio
gla  are  extant,  one  in  the  luouutueut  of  TbniMt  llu.
aaotlier  that  of  Phaedrua  iu  the  Britixh  Mniciuii
(C,  I.  G.  ^"H),  a  third  in  the  theatre  of  Uioii>Mia,  W-
aidfs  othvr»  fnuu  dilVerent  ]>arta  of  OtvMa.

Thr  llr»t  ImrtdogiuDi  with  which  tlw  HomaM
b<H:anui  ai'<pniii)led  wan  the  nundtal  (totonu
or  huruhtf^ium  «rrir>rilPrrrNm),  and  was,  aceonliaCi
auuie  writera.  brought  to  Romo  by  Papiiiu**  <'iin
twelve  yearn  before  the  war  with  PyrrbiiK  and
placed  before  the  teuiple  of  QulriniM  (Pliny,  U.  .V
vii.  $  liVi).  Varro  ataleil  that  it  wan  bmngbl  tt>
Konu'froui  Catiua  iu  tjicily.at  the  titiie  id' the  FiimI
Pnuic  War,  by  the  aousul  M.  Valerius  Mi-Mcib.aiK^
erected  on  a  columu  behind  the  Kikstia.  Unt  ifaii>
Kolahnni,  Iteing  iniulo  for  a  <lif}ereut  latitude,  diil
not  hIiuw  the  time  at  ICome  comvtlj'.  N'iurry-nitu>
yearn  afUTwarda,  the  ceuHor  Q.  Marein»  rhilip-
piiH  erected  by  the  nide  of  tbo  old  aidariuBi  a  iir«
une,  wLieli  wax  uion*  can-fnlly  reffulatcd  anioidiug
to  the  latitude  uf  Koaie. But  as  sundials  ho*-


HOBOLOGIUH


849


HOEOLOOIUU


«v«r  perfect  they  might  be,  were  nseleu  when  the
sky  was  oloady,  P.  Scipio  Naaica,  in  his  censorship,
B.C.  159,  established  a  ptibliu  clepsydiit,  which  iu-
dioated  the  hoars  both  uf  day  atid  night.  This
clepsydra  was  in  after-times  generally  called  »ola-
rium  (Cic.  De  N.  I),  ii.  34,  H7).  The  word  hora  for
hour  was  iotrodoced  at  Rome  at  the  time  when
the  Somana  became  acquainted  with  the  Oreek
hoTologia,  and  was  in  this  siguification  well  knuwn
at  the  time  of  Plantns  (P»eud.  1307).  After  the
time  of  Scipio  Nnsica,  sereral  horologia,  chiefly
solaria,  seem  to  have  been  erected  in  various  pnb-
lic  plooes  at  Rome.  A  magnificent  horologium
was  erected  by  Angnstas  in  the  Campus  Mar-
tins. It  was  a  gnom»n  in  the  shape  uf  an  obelisk ;
but  Pliuy  {B.  If.  xxxvi.  $  73)  complains  that  in  the
coarse  of  time  it  had  become  iucorruct.  Horolo-
gia of  vnrions  descriptions  seem  alHO  to  have  been
commouly  kept  by  private  individuals  (Cic.  Ad  Fam.
xvi.  18,3);  aud  at  the  time  of  the  emperors,  the
wealthy  Romans  nsed  to  keep  slaves  whose  special
duty  it  was  to  auuonuce  the  hours  of  the  day  to
their  masters  (Jnv.x.  216,  with  Mayor's  uote;  Mart,
viji.  67;  Petron.26).

From  the  namber  of  solaria  which  have  been
discovered  in  modern  times  in  Italy  (thirteen  hav-
ing been  discovered  iu  the  neighbonrhood  of  Rome
alone),  we  must  infer  that  they  were  very  general-
ly used  among  the  ancients.  The  following  illus-
trations represent  one  of  the  simplest  horologia
which  have  been  discovered;  it  seems  to  bear
great  similarity  to  that  the  inveutiun  of  which
VitraviuH  ascriltes  to  Berosns.  It  was  discovered
Id  1741,  on  the  hill  of  Tnsculum,  and  is  described
by  Zuzzeri  (Venice,  1746),  and  by  G.  H.  Martini,  in
his  Abkandlnng  von  den  SoHnenukren  der  Allen,  p.  49
(Leipzig,  1777).


Horologlaiii. (From  Tusculum.)

The  following  illustration  shows  the  same  sola-
rium as  restored  by  Zuzzeri :


Tbe  nme  reMored.


I  The  breadth  a«  well  as  the  height  (A  O  and  P  A>
I  are  somewhat  more  than  eight  inches,  nud  the
'  length  (A  B)  a  little  more  than  sixteeu  inches.
Tbe  surface  (A  O  R  B)  is  horizontal.  S  P  Q  T  is
the  basis  uf  the  solarium,  which,  originally,  was
probably  erected  upon  a  pillar.  Its  side  (A  ij  T  B>
inclines  somewhat  towanls  the  basis.  This  in-
jclinatiou  was  called  tyxXifta,  or  incli»atio  aolarii
and  eacUma  itHCciaum  (Vitrnv.  1.  c),  and  shows  tUu
latitude  or  polar  altitude  uf  the  place  for  which
the  solarium  was  mode.  The  angle  of  the  enclima
is  about  40^  43',  which  coincides  with  the  latitude
of  TuHculnm.  In  the  bo<ly  of  the  solarium  is  the
almost  spherical  excavation  (HKDMIFM),  which
forms  a  double  hemicyclinm.  Within  this  excava-
tion the  eleveu  hour-lines  are  marked  which  pass
through  three  semicircles  (H  L  N,  K  £  F,  and  I)  M  J).
The  middle  one  (K  E  F)  represents  the  eqnatur,
the  two  others  the  tn>pic  liii^  of  winter  and  sum-
mer.  The  curve  representing  the  summer  tropio
is  somewhat  more  than  a  semicircle,  the  other  two
curves  somewhat  smaller.  The  ten  middle  parta
or  hours  iu  each  of  the  three  curves  are  all  equal
to  one  another;  but  the  two  extreme  ones,  though
equal  to  each  other,  are  by  one-fourth  smaller  than
the  rest.  In  themiddIe(G)of  thecurve(DKHNIJ),
there  is  a  little  square  hole,  in  which  the  gnoniun  or
pointer  must  have  been  fixed,  aud  a  trace  of  it  is
still  visible  iu  the  lead  by  meaus  of  which  it  waa
fixed.  It  must  have  stood  iu  a  perpendicular  posi-
tion upon  the  surface  (A  B  R  O),  aud  ut  a  certain
distance  from  the  surface  it  must  have  turned  iu
a  right  angle  above  the  spheric  excavation,  so  that
its  end  (C)  exteuded  as  far  as  the  middle  of  the
equator,  as  it  is  restored  iu  the  last  illustration.

Clepsydrae  were  nseil  by  the  Romans  in  their
camps,  chiefly  fur  the  purpose  of  measuring  accn-
rately  tbe  four  watches  into  which  the  night  was
divided  (Caes.  B.  G.  v.  13).

The  custom  of  using  clepsydrae  as  a  check  upon
the  speakers  in  the  courts  of  justice  at  Rome  is
said  to  have  l»een  introduced  by  a  law  of  Cn.  Pom-
peius,  iu  his  third  consulship  (Tac.  De  Clar.  Orat.
38),  who  adds,  before  thut  time  tbe  speakers  had
beeu  nuder  no  restrictions,  but  spoke  as  long  as
they  deemed  proper.  Bnt  there  is  some  inaccuracy
here,  as  Cicero  in  B.C.  70  (In  Verr.  i.  9,  25)  speaks
of  his  legitimae  home;  iu  B.c.  63  {Pro  Hab.  Pcrd.
%  6)  his  defence  is  limited  to  half  an  hour ;  and  iu
B.C.  59  {Pro  Ftaae.  33, 82)  six  hours  are  allotted.  At
Rome,  as  at  Athens,  the  time  allowed  to  the  speak-
ers depended  upon  the  iniportauce  of  the  case.
Pliny  (Epiat.  ii.  11)  states  tbat  on  one  important
occasion  he  spoke  for  nearly  Ave  hours,  ten  large
clepsydrae  having  been  granted  to  him  by  the
judices,  but  the  case  was  so  imirartaut  that  four
others  were  addu<l.  (Cf  Pliny,  Epint.  vi.  2.)  The
law  of  Pompoins  only  limited  the  time  during
which  the  accuser  was  allowed  to  speak  to  two
hours,  while  the  accuseil  was  allowed  three  hours-
in  the  case  of  prosecutions  de  vi.  It  is  clear  from
the  case  of  Pliny  {Epiai.  iv.  9)  and  otliers  that  thin
restriction  was  not  observed  on  all  occsNions.  An
especial  officer  was  at  Rome  as  well  on  at  Athens,
appointed  to  stop  tbe  clepsydra  during  the  time
wlien  documents  were  read  (Apul.  Apolog.  i.  and
ii.).  See  Kmesti,  De  Solariin,  iu  his  UpHMCul.  Phi-
lulog.  el  Crit.  pi>.  21-:U ;  Wopcke,  DisguigUioHeit
Arch.  Math.  Circa  Solaria  Ffterum  (Berlin,  1642);
Becker-Goll,  Gallmt,  ii.  pp.  4(17  foil.;  and  especially
Marquanlt,  Priratl.  pp.  370  foil.


iioitu8(X)pua


«M


nORTUMMUB


Horoscfipos. A  boniMwiie. See  Astronomia,

Borreuiu  [iaprttw,  (rirrx^i-XtiKfiov,  ajTodT)Kf]).  (1)
A  };iiuiitr,v,  enpM.'ially  at  Hoiiut  ii  (iiiblic  griiitnry,
ill  wtiicb  Kraiii  won  ittuivtl  iiL  the  uxpi^iiNit  <if  ibu
StnttA  lor  iltitribiitiui)  M  tUe  pvupb.  ^A^^ti  Fucmkn-
TAKiAG  Lkgem.)  (2)  A  wurebouH  or  Fiiurpbuiifte
wbt<rv  aiiylliiiiy  uii};lit  bn  itrponitMl  fnr  »tif«--U(M>p-
iug.  TliUMu  \vt-re  Litiiiii)t)ii  iit  Konit*  iimb-r  llio  Km-
|iirt<,  iiiitl  vcurv  iitwil  l*i>r  (be  otora^c^  of  MTiiritivft,
iiiiiut\v.  Kondtff  etc.  {i'Qii.  iv,  24,  'I;  /'ij^.  i.  1^,  3t.
Kfi'[jf!ni  "f  litirrra  in  uilbiT  oMiw  uf  tb«  word  v/»rv
riilk-il  linrrcurii  ui  rtliri  ex  Aorrt'ix.

HorBe-races. Svv  CiHCus;  tliPPODROMUS.

Horta  or  Hortanum.  Nuw  <)rt«;  h  towu  in
Ktrnrifl,  »(  the  jiiiiulioii  of  itio  Xar  aiul  ihc  Tiber,
84>  ciill<Til  from  llie  Etniftcari  go(li)ea»  Hi*j*la,  wIiom
temple  Hi  Rniiiu  Ahva}^»  ceiuniiied  oyeu.  (Of.  MUl*
kr,  hit-  i:tnn>lfr,  ii.  p.  hi.)

HortSlas, See  Hoktknsiuh  (S).

Hortator  {xfXftJOT^;).  On  )ionrd  ship,  tlio  offl-
cer  nlm  jjuvf  utlt  tbii  L-bniit  (B#X«ii(T/ia),  vvhi<?h  was
atiugor  plii.vcil  to  iiiiiku  tin-  rowers  kwp  iliostrfiko,

atid,  a-^  it  were,
encourage  them
at  their  work
(Ovi.l,  Met.  111.
eiO:  ef.  Verg.
.*/■«. V.  177;  Sel^.
ad  ft>r.),  whvlio«
tho  itiiine  (Kfl/rf
fiortatitr  remigtt
hovtarirr,  PInul,


l»t  H  <liiy  piMs  wiihiHit  HpfukiiifT  in  the  Forum, or
preparing  liiiitMilf  t«>  appear  on  tb«  morrow  ;  of.
luiitiuies  \m  did  btith.  He*  extM.'! I«d  piu-ticutarly
ill  th«  ai-t  uf  dividing  h\»  Aubjrct,  and  ui  tbcu  rc^
itiiflliiK  il  i>i  a  himiiiuiiti  ctiauiHir,  Hiluptiii){,  at  llw
!iiiiuc  tiiuti,  even  boiiiq  uf  the  iirgiiiiicuta  which  had
bvuii  iirKcd  itKaiiiBt  blm.  His  dieliou  was  ttubli>«
elegutit,  and  rich;  hiH  voice  ntntug  niid  pleasing;
hiK  gi«Biiir««  oor^fitlly  HindUMl."  Tb«^  c<lnqii«u«
'if  Hikrt«ii(itiis  Tfoiild  MN*iii,  in  favl.  tu  b»v«  Imwh  of
the  »botry  dpecies  nallml  Asiiitic,  wbirh  th>iinsl)ed
ill  the  Grr«k  rolniiitM  uf  A«ia  Minor,  ami  woh  iu-
iiiiilely  more  florid  and  oriiiiiiienlul  than  tb«  ora-
lory  of  Athenw,  or  eveu  of  Rboden,  beiug  fuU
nf  brilliant  tboughlH  and  H|tarkrri)(;  exprtmiona
This  glowing  atylu  of  rhetorie.  tliungh  deficient  in


Honnlor (Fruiii  lliu  V«iK»n  VcigiM


Mrrv.  iv.  *2.  5).  \\^  wit  oti  tin*  Rttrrii  of  the  veswel,
with  M  iriiiit'be.irn  in  his  hand,  which  be  lifted  to
bent  the  time,  as  represoiitet]  in  the  above  illua-
Iratiou.

Borteoaiau  The  daiigltter  4tf  the  tirator  Hurteti*
»iiii>  (([.  v.),  who  iiibcrilrd  lier  fjitln'r'n  eliHiiience.
When  tile  tneuilwi'H  uf  thu  Ei^i^coud  Triunivirute  hud
inipoiwd  a  heavy  tax  iipciii  the  Kuiuiiii  niatnins  and
lie  ouo  fif  the  other  wjx  dured  lu  i-npuiise  theif
canae,  Hortviisiit  appeared  ba  tlieif  iiilvociite,  and
uiade  eH>  iible  a  Hpeeeh  tlmt  a  hir;;e  portion  of  the
burden  w;is  reiuove<i  (Vul.  Max.  viti.  3,  :ti,  Thia
faarangne  wa«  extant  in  QiitniniuirH  tiinu,  who
Apciikf*  "fit  witli  praise  iQiiiiil.  i.  I,  ^).

Hortenelua,  (iriNTfy.  (!)  A  felehrated  orator,
who  bt^gan  to  distingiiisli  himself  hy  his  ehtipicnce
iu  IbL-  Uuuinn  Fortimattheageof  iiiiiele«'n.  He  wu«
boru  nf  n  ]ilel)eian  family,  li.c.  114,  right  years  be-
fore Ciceni.  He  Hei'ved  at  lii'Kt  ns  a  ■■tiiiLniim  hoI-
diei*.  and  afterwitrdu  iia  ntt1il.iry  tribniiJ',  in  the
Social  War.  In  the  rxniTesi  heiwuen  MaiiitH  nnd
Sulla  ho  i'tMiiaiiic«l  tiijiitrul,  and  was  one  uf  the
twenty  qitiieHtiiri)  vHrablisUcd  by  SiiUii,  He  after-
wurdit  obtained  in  siieirewtion  the  offiveti  of  aedile,
pr»t!ti>r,  nnd  fH>iiHul.  As  uu  orator  he  for  a  long
time  »<Liarc4l  the  reputation  of  Cicero;  but,  na  hi*
«trations  am  lust,  we  can  only  Judge  of  him  by  the
account  which  Lin  rival  givea  of  bid  abilities.
"Nature  had  given  liini,"8ayii  Cicero,  iu  bia  Brutut
(8H).  "bo  tt]dendii|  a  meimiry  tlmt  he  never  had  any
iKwd  of  t-otiiMiillii)g  to  writing  anydiv't^niirKe  which
be  bad  tlioii^ht  ov«t;  while,  after  biH  opimnent
liad  fiiiiKli<-d  N[H-akitig,  he  eoiiht  recall,  word  by
word,  not  only  what  the  other  bad  NAid,  but  aWi
tlio  iiutboritieM  wliirh  had  been  eitcd  agaiiiHt  him-
nulf. Tlta  tndasLry  wait  indefatigable. He  never  |


OViN'iv:


i^Sj^ \-^


HorteMlna (rilU  AltMni,  Boniii.  I

liolidity  and  weiglil,  wiia  not  itnsintable  in  ajo'itif
man  ;  and,  tieiiig  further  recotiinicud<^4J  by  a  lirAti-
tifiil  cadence  of  i>erioflH,  met  witli  great  appUtiMt
Unt  HortvuniiiN,  KA  he  advanced  in  life,  did  uot  ntr
reot  thia  exiiburauce;  mid  hia  aomewbat  uwilr^
tattle  ill  iihraaeology,  which,  even  in  hi»  ear)tMrt
yeiin*.  had  oeeaitionnlly  exciteil  lidicnle  kiiimi|!
the  Henntora,  being  now  totally  incouaiatuut  »i>li
liiH  advanced  age  and  dignity,  his  repnialleu  In
(.-ouMiqnetire  waned.  Puanibly.  Uhi,  from  bts  >)»-
L-liiiing  health  and  atrength,  wliich  grrntty  TimIpi)
iu  blit  latter  yvant,  lie  may  imt  liiive  liced  abh
t«  give  it«  fall  effect  to  that  showy  riirtnnc  in
which  he  h*ul  indalged,  A  constant  tnotliarlis
and  Kwelliiig  in  the  Jawa  greatly  inipHin<<1  his
powers  of  clocittion  aod  utteranrp,  and  lier-iuiie
at  length  »o  severe  a»  to  accelerate  bin  «>tid.
A  few  nioiitba,  however,  before  bis  death,  nhirb
happened  in  B.C.  &0,  he  pteailetl  for  lib  nejilw*
.Monsal.i,  wlio  wiw  arcn.«e<1  of  illegal  eaiivamiiiXi
and  acipntt^^l  more  in  conse^inem-e  of  ilui  rtec*
liouH  of  hi»  uncle  than  the  Juttice  of  his  rniiaa.
So  discreditable,  indet-d,  wan ibe  case  eatermad


I


»


thrtf^  tbongb  tlie  siwech  of  ITiirt<mt.iim  hn*!  Wph
Diiirli  aitiiiimil.  he  wah  iTreivftl,  ok  entrrhi(*  tlic
tticatro  iiti  llin  folliivtiit^;  iliiv,  witli  Imul  lilHM-n
(Cic  Jrf  i'liiN.  viii.  2).  Tim  i«ik*<?cIi,  |it)m<VHi',  n*-
viveit  nil  tliv  mtiiiiriition  of  ttiti  i>tililu;  lur  Iiih  oiu-
torii'itl  tuU'tlttt,  iiiitl  edtivititM-d  lhi:)it  tlt»l.,  liMil  he
p<iiwciiM*4l  I  111-  «iilite  |wnM;VLTiiiir<>  um  Ciroro,  hr
would  iiitt  liavo  bveii  itift-riui'  w  tliut  urulor.

It  a|t|tt'iii'K  rruiii  Mucrvbiii.s  ttiab  IIurK'iiHiits  van
iniicli  ruliciilpil  by  his  cnntemporarieft  on  account  of
bin  nnv>4Mf>(l  KPfilMn<().  In  iilfuuliiiK^  hi<i  ImniU  wirt'
riMiKitniit ly  in  mnl  ion,  whfin-n  h«  wjw  nftvu  tittncked
by  hift  ml riTRiirirR  in  the  Koniiu  far  ntwrnblinK  iiu
actori  mill  <in  »iip  or-caiiinn  bn  n>ci*ivi>il  from  bin
oppniii-nt  llir  iip|H'.11nlinii  nf  nioiiyHiu,  tbt;  iiiinM*  of
n  ci'li'hnilcti  iliin<'iii;;-j;ir1  I  Aiil.  Oi-ll.  \.a).  'Vlw  uct-
nrH  AfMipiiii  iiiitl  KiiNfiii.s  frciitieiitty  utUtiiUiMl  bis
p]fn<liii;;»  til  ciitcb  hiN  grKliitx-H  atiil  linllnti^  thcni
nil  ibii  firage  (Tiil.  Max.  viii.  !()>.  Sui^h,  iiKhi-tl,  wan
hU  cxtTtion  iu  aclioD  that  it  wim  commonly  Raid
tlini  it  oiiUI  not  be  drtcraiined  vhi^thcr  people
went  Ut  henr  or  I'D  koo  biui.  Likv  I)t^mnBtliene«,
be  seli'ctcd  anil  pnt-  on  b)»  drv^s  with  the  most
Htndi«d  rnre  and  ncittiipM^.  lit*  i^  s.iiil  not  only
ti>  linvp  prenrmti^rd  bi^  j*rHti)re.s,  hut  i\\w>  to  hare
iiiljiiHti'il  tbfi  fnldti  of  hilt  tii);ji  iH'fort^  n  mirror
vvhrii  aUnnt  In  )*»  to  tlir  Ki>inni.  }if  so  Jirrantind
IiIm  ^owii  tliut  tbi*  folilH  did  imr  full  by  fbitnco,  but
won*  fiinnrd  witli  gr<^ar  emi''  by  ln^tp  nf  n  knot
caivfnily  tied  and  citnofaled  by  blA  rulw,  whicb
nppiirotitly  flowed  carclesaly  aroniid  bini  (Mncrob.
^1.  iii.  t'A\.  MiicrobinR  nl»o  records  a  st^ry  nf  bis
inititntiii^  nil  nrtioit  uf  ctamuj^eft  ngaiii^t  u  perM>n
who  hail  jo<illi-d  btni  nlillu  walking  in  tltin  eluho
ral4'  dn-MH,  iind  bud  rnflted  bis  to|;n  whi^n  he  wim
nlrant  to  iippt-iir  in  public  n-itli  litit  drapery  a«]jiiHt-
i*il  Hriiinlin;;  to  liiN  fiLvnnnb*  jirnui|ri'tiipiit.

HorlnixiiiH  stood,  for  thirttreii  yciin*,  nt  ibv  heiid
uf  tb«i  Koiiinn  bar;  and  brin>;,  in  4:oime<iiii*iici^,
etiKnffi'd  durini;  that  b>n^  pci-inil  tm  nini  Hide
or  utbvr  ill  every  ciu*e  of  itoji'ortniM'*-,  he  stKm
aiuuMM'd  an  dDoniuuis  rorliinv.  Hv  liveil,  ItNi,  vt  itli
a  ina^iiiticcucf  mi h'n ponding  to  bin  wenllb.  His
honw*  at  Rome  formed  the  nnclciis  of  tbo  imperia)
pnliice,  which  was  eulRrgctl  fmm  the  timi^  «f
Anj;itf*li>B  to  that  of  Nero,  till  it  ntMirly  covered
the  whole  I*iibitine  Mount  and  braucheil  over  oth-
er hills.  (Rt^  TALATirM.)  liesiden  Iii«  niuiiNion
in  Kimte,  lii>  possetwvd  vilbiK  at  Ttiiwiilniti,  Hiiiili,
mnl  LHiiri-iitniti,  when*  he  was  uccustotni-<1  to  give
tlte  mo»t  uleuaiil  hihI  eluboratc  entertainineiilH.
Ilib  olive  pIntilulionK  he  is  Hai<l  to  bnve  rej^nlarly
niniKivncd  with  wine;  and, on  one  occasion,  tliiring
the  beartuK  of  an  iiiipnrtiint  case  in  which  lie  was
eii(;a;teil  Willi  Cic<-n>.  lie  bi'ggc<l  the  latter  to  change
with  him  the  previoiiidy  nrruiigcd  order  of  plead-
ing, M  bi»  wan  obliged  to  gr»  to  the  cntiiitry  t"  pour
wiiii^  on  a  favourite  plaiip-lree,  wbii-li  grew  near
bi>«  Tiiscnlan  villa  (Macmb.  Saf.  iii.  13).  Notwilh-
Htandiiig  thin  profnffion.hin  Ui-ir  found  no  h-M  ihnii
10.tXHJ  ciutks  of  wine  in  liin  celbir  after  hit  ileulb
(I'liiiy,  //.  A*,  xiv.  14V  B<'>tideM  hi»  taste  for  witje
and  fondm-tM  for  plantAtions,  bo  indulged  in  a  putt-
fiinii  for  pictures  and  li»>b-pond».  At  lit»  Tn»cu]ftii
villa  be  bnilt  a  ball  foi  tb<.-  i-ercplion  of  n  painting
of  the  expedition  of  1  lie  Argonanta,  by  the  paint«r
OydioR,  which  co^t  the  Kiim  of  m.OOO  sestereee.
At  bi»  conntry-seat  near  Baiili,  on  tbo  i»ea-shorpi,
be  vied  with  I<ucii1ln»  and  PhilippiiK  in  the  extent
of  biH  tinb'pondn,  whit-li  were  eonHtnieletl  ut  an
imukeiiAL'  cusl,  mid  m)  fitrmeil  Ibut  Iho tide  Unwed


into  them  (VniT.  II.  It.  iii.  3);  yet  such  was  his  ro-
hictanru  tmliintiiiKb  the  supply  that  when  he  gave
entertaintikenlN  at  Hanii  be  genenilly  Hent  Ln  the
neighbouring  town  of  fnteoli  to  bny  tbe  IihIi  ;  Aiul
Varro  iIpvIhivh  llizit  a  frieud  conid  more  easily  get
llin  ehariiU-mnies  nut  of  bin  stable  than  a  mullet
from  liirt  pondM.  He  wa*  more  aiiximiM  uboiit  thu
welfare  of  hix  tiab  ihiiii  the  health  of  his  staves,
and  U'Sii  HolicilntiA  that  n  iNiel^  nervaut  uiiglit  iiuL
lake  what  was  iintit  for  bioi  than  that  biH  lish
might  iMit  drink  wiil^r  which  tvas  nnwbniraome.
It  in  even  said  ( I'liny,  //.  .V.  ix.  Cm)  that  he  was  sn
]>iiMHinimtetr  fond  of  n  |iiii-tirtilar  htmprey  a»  to  shed
tears  for  il.i  untimely  deiitb.  At  his  Lanrenliin
villa,  Horteimins  had  a  wniHled  park  of  fifty  arrus
enram passed  with  »  wall.  Tliis  t'lirloMiire  hu
ealled  a  ntirsery  of  wild  bensti,  all  of  which  cnmo
for  llicir  fond  at  a  certain  Imnr  on  the  blowing  of
a  Imrn.  Sec  1-V)m.\th,  //urfen«ju«  (London,  1H79).
(■J>  Son  of  tbe  prifcediiig.  called  also  IloitTAH'H.  a
disiipaled  iktsou  who  fonght  oii  Caesar's  sido  in
the  t^Mvil  War  In  B.C.  U,  alter  Caesar's  death,  lio
joined  Unit  lis  and  put  to  death  C  An  touiiis,  broth-
er of  the  trinmvir.  After  the  battle  of  Pbilippi,
llortnliis  was  himself  tiikeii  and  slnin.

HortTU  (itTiiror).  A  garden.  Onnleiis  UDiotig
t)ie  niiciciilH  were  nstially  of  a  strictly  ntililariun
nhararter.  Kven  the  myibioal  garden  of  AlcinuiiM,
dejieriliod  in  tbe  fhitiHnej/  (vii.  Il*2-I3<)i,  is  diviileil
into  a  friiit-gardcQ,  a  viiiorard,  and  a  kit-cbeii-
gardcn,  with  no  nieiitioii  of  flowcrt;  And  when, hi
later  timcM,  dower -gardens  arc  sjmkcii  of  (e.g.
Kfjwovt  4L'uidtir,  Aristoph.  Are»,  ll>Gt>>,  tliey  are  prot».
ably  gardens  in  which  (lowers  were  cultivated  for
proHt.  The  »iic!ient8,  in  fact,  Imd  much  less  luve
uf  laiidAcii[ie  lieaiities  than  the  nimdeiiis,  and  »oTiie
of  their  ganleti  Hrmiigeiuetitx  M-eni  shocking  lo
modern  taste.  I^tngns  {Vanloralin ,  \\.  3)  dejieritMM
a  gai'den  in  which  flowers  were  iningled  with
fruits;  and  Plntjirch  says  that  the  Waiify  of  roMut
and  violets  itt  t^nhniiced  by  planting  thuni  sido
by  side  with  onions  and  le^-kt!  Thti  siibtirb'*  of
AtlieoM  abounded  in  markot-gardeiis,  » liii^b  sup-
plied tbe  city  with  bolh  flowers  and  vegi>titb]eA
(Pliny,  //.  jV-  xxxvi.  \ti).  I'lato  speaks  of  IxMks  on
gardening  (AfiN.  p.  311)  K).

Hotnan  ganlens  are  described  in  two  letters  of
(ho  Younger  Pliny  (ii.  17;  v.(;i.  fnmi  which  it  iip-
pears  that  they  wore  nitber  prim  and  fnnniil  id
their  plan,  with  regnlar  walk^  [aruhuiaHovm)  UikhI
bycbts«dy-clip|»eil  hedges  nf  lHix.yew.atKl  cyprrtwi;
attd  diverailied  with  stiilnen,  p,\rAtniils.  and  suui-
mcr-lioiises  {HiartarX  As  in  mnitein  Italy  iind  iu
France  ainler  l.,oni?i  XV..  wi  at  Knnic  (be  irwB
and  sbrnbs  were  often  cut  into  lignres  nf  nnimnls,
ifhips,  letters,  and  grot4^Sf|ue  foniiH  [um  '<i/'t/ii-i<i)^
so  that  tbe  regular  name  for  an  oriiuuienfnl  ganlen-
er  is  tojiidWua.  (Cf.  Pliny,  H.  X.  xvi.  1-IU;  xxi.6H;
xzii.  7G.)  Tbo  priiieipid  tlnwera  known  In  the  aii-
einnts  weru  the  utno.  viuli't.  croetis,  uaix:iMtUH,  lily,
iris,  {M»{>]iy,  amaraiitb,  and  glailiohis.

ConservatoritM  with  wintlows  closed  by  §pecu-
taria  (windows  nf  tale)  ore  mentioned  by  the
writers  of  the  tfrst  centiiiy  A.t>.  <Mnrt.  viii,  14  and
(W;  S*en.  ApiiMKi;  Pliny.  fc>i«r.  ii.  17),  Colnmella
speaks  of  forcing- bouses  for  grapeii  and  melons.
For  flowers  in  private  lionsew  see  LXuMUH.

Ornamental  gardens  were  called  rihtiaria.  The
regular  natnc  for  a  ganleiier  is  rult^r  Morl^mm,
ri/icM«,  riViiftii'tirs,  and  loftiarius.

HoitTi'S  PKN'Mt.is  is  a  term  meaning  (1)  a  hang-


lumt's


«N


IIVA1>E.'4


klj^A.  terraceil)  gariU>fi  (Kft)  BAitVLnNi:  aiitl  <S1
B  nUDB  lik«3  tiiir  I'mmt'M  I'ur  uivIoiim  uml  curriiiibi-nt,
and  iiHed  for  foiriDg  vegetables  Hiiit  rniibt.  Hit.-
I'liny.  n.  .V.  x\x.  GA.

Horua  {^QfMis,  ERyptUn  TIar).  An  Effyptinn
1^1.  lilt!  nnii  (if  Oi^iriit  aiitl  IkIs.  At  the  cleatli  uf
liiit  fiitltri'  lin  vTiui  Hiill  »  rliiM,  1)iit.  'wtieri  bn  hatl
jcrunrii  ti»  lie  a  Ktiiln-m-t  yfnttli  ^Hu^v»'r —  i.  p.
"  utrtiiigiT  llorim"),  Ih-  Dvnrt^Hnip  anil  r»p[iii'e<]
Typlinii,  thi!  inunlrmr  of  \\\»  fuiliiir,  iifl^r  a  vnia-
bat  lasting  over  many  dayn.  and  hatidnd  tiiin  nvrr
tn  I«i«,  who,  however,  let  liiin  n»>  Tive.  By  tin-
Kgj*ptiniiH  lio  waa  de«uio(I  tlio  vii:U>tiuitA  };<itl  uf
ligbt.niio  ovcreaiuc  durkDew*. » Inter,  and  drimglil,
iiiid  was  idoutitWd  with  AjKdlo  hy  tlit?  TtifL-kif.  He
IK  tiftfu  rt-prwMsiitod  with  iln>  lu-ml  of  u  ^palT<l«■-
hawk,  wtiich  was  tuicred  to  hitn.  Mr  miint  l>e  diit-
tinpiiiiihi'd  fn>tn  ii  yniiiijit-r  Ilorni*,  tli*'  HarpocratKH
nf  tlic  (;rf)«k8  (in  K^fvptiaii  Harpecltniti  —  i.  e.
"Har,  tilt*  OliLId"),  wlio  wa^  riTdivcd  by  Ww  from
Osirid  ill  tlie  iiudni^r- world,  and  ix  thit  rcprvsoritjt-
tivc  of  lite  wiiit,or-«nii,  and  nlrxi  tlu'  una)j;i*  of  early
vog«t4ition,  and  thm-fori-  idcntitw'd  with  I'riapiin
(q.  v.^  StaliirM  repn'Hi'Ut  liiiti  ax  ;l  iiiLkcd  1<"V
with  hi»  tliijit^r  r>n  hJH  inniith.  Mii^niidtfrhtaiHlitig
thi:>t  nytiibnt  of  rhtldhood,  rlin  (iretfkft  niadr  Inrii
the  gcwl  of  Kiloiirfi  and  Socrecy.  AHorwardH,  in
tliP  time  when  niysfcries  wore  Iti  vogue,  his  wor-
fthip  wa»  wiiUdy  oxtouded  amonf{  the  Greeks,  iiud
al!K>  among  the  RniDaiiH.  Set-  tleanregnrd,  Lf»  Di-
fiiiil/'  Egyjtlieunf^  {Pnrin,  iHGrtj;  and  I8t8.

HoBtia. A.  victim. See  SAciuFicifH.

Hoftti]i&.  Now  Otttftlia;  a  Hmall  town  in  Gal-
lia UiKnlpina,  oil  till*  Pii,  and  on  tlie  road  from  Mn-
titm  Vi<ronii;  thn  hirtbplat^e  of  (N>rni<linM  Xepiw.

HoBtiUas,  TlTLLi-s. See  Tutxis  IlonrnuiM.

EoBtia. Si-i-  H<>.sfiTli:M  in  Apptndix.

Bostiua.  A  Koman  \hh:i,  perliaptt  u  cuntetnpo-
rury  of  I^iiciUiiH  tlii'  naliriHt.  Ilo  wrote  a  pot-in
on  the  [."tiiaii  War,  wliii-h  linik  plane  in  D.c.  174.
Son»>  fr»>;ni<rntit  of  tluH  have  rea<;hi-d  our  time,
llusttioi  wrote  nli*4>  iiir'trical  annubt.  after  tbe  tuan-
iier  uf  Enitius. See  livrgk,  Kt.  JSckr.  i.  S52.

Hotels. l*ee  Cavih^na.

HouDda. Hee  Cakih.

Hour-glaaa. See  lluKoLuuiim.

Bouae. He©  DoMit*.

Hoaae-breakers. i<ee  EFFRACTOR.

Housebold  Oods. Hee  Lakes  ;  Pknates.

Houae-reut. 8ee  DuMUS,  p.  Ml.

Hunnfirlo.  King  of  the  Vandals  in  Afrien  <A.n.
477_4K4).,«nceee4linji  liii*  father  (.ienaerie.  Hin  pei^n
ia  iiiemuralile  fur  liiH  pHriwcnlioii  of  the  C'hriatiaitK.

Htrnni  (Ovvifm,  Xoin^t).  An  A^iatie  |M-'op1e  who
dwelt  for  Roirio  uvuttiriett  in  the  pluiim  of  Tarlary,
and  were  fonnidabln  to  the  Chineite  Empire  long
Iwfnrr  they  were  known  t«i  the  RoniunH.  I|-  wan
agniiiBt  Ihein,  in  fact,  that  the  fainoiiit  ChineM4>
wntl  wait  built.  A  portion  of  thi-  nation  cnMuwx]
into  Knroi»e,  lUitl  wen-  allowed  by  VateoH  to  settle
in  Tbrnpe,  \.l*.  ITTfi,  ruder  tlieir  king,  Attila  {A.t>.
4:i4-4ri3>,  they  ilevii«tated  the  fairest  portions  nf
the  Kinpira;  bnt  a  few  years  after  AttiU'a  death
their  power  woa  completely  destroyed  by  the
Ttirhs.

Tilt'  HnuH  wern  pndiably  retnotoly  dctoended
from  the  Hinng-nn,  n  rn<'«  nf  Tnrkisb  ("Tnrani-


aTi  ")  fttiiek.  Ihongli  fable  di^lnn^d  them  1o  h*'
u^Mpring  uf  the  8eytliian  wilebi-H  and  the  nneli
and  infernal  npiritN  with  whom  (Io-m)  wi(rhe»cao-
Hoiied  in  ibi-  dewrt.  Tliey  an-  ilefM-ribt'd  da  be-
ing dark.  Minuted,  and  iineoiilh,  with  Mhrlll  yoIcm.
Like  the  Mou^oliaus,  they  were  n  rne«  of  l>or*e-
man,  fighting  with  bone-lipped  javeliDH  and  witli
slingK  and  Iaesoe«.  Tln-y  ate  loeal  iie^irly  raw,  and
herl)s  :  and  wore  the  hides  of  w  ild  beasts.  l?e«<  De
Gnignes,  H'mioire  OMralc  rf«  //««*  (Xt^i);  NfO-
munn,  />ie  VHlktr  dra  niidliihru  IttiHstautt  ('2d  ed.
Irt56);  Thien^.  Higtoirr  iV.llliln  (4th  ed.  |r*T4);
anil  Kowortb,  in  lbi<  JaurHal  nf  Ike  AmtkmpttftH/i-
ral  Jmlitiitr(Fjne^iih\  for  1H72-74.
Hunting. See  Vexationks.

Hyaciuthia  (ra  'YaKiydm), A  fralivAl,c<<lebrated
for  three  days in the siimnn-i-  of  eaeb  year,  at
Amyclae.  in  honour  of  A|Hitlo  and Win  nnhapti)'
faroiirito  Hyaeynibiis  (ij.  v.). Milller  ^iven  nlrong
reasons fur  snpiHMing that ihe Hvacinthia  mm
origiiinlly  a  festival  of  Deinetcr. Like  utber  foli-
Tals  in  honour  of  natnn*,  the  fe-stival  of  the  llfk-
einthiii.celebratril  by  the  Spartans  at  Amyclae  fur
111  roe  dnyN  in  July,  down  to  the  time  of  the  Remtn
oiitperors.  wiw  connfleti><l  witb the  expn'swion  •>(
grief  at  Ilii«  dentil  of  vegetation,  of  joy  over  llr
liarvcKt,  and  of  ebeerfnl  trnnt  iu the  re-awskeii-
ing  of  nature. Ou  the  tintt  day,  which  was  itrdi-
cated  to  silent  nioDrtiing,  sarntlee  to  (he  dew)  nw
offered  at  tin*  grave  of  HyaeinlhuH,  wbteh  was  an-
der  Ihe  statne  of  Apollo  in  the  temple  at  AnijcU*.
The  following  day  was  spent  in  public  rejoirtni;
In  liuuonr  of  Apollu,  iu  wbieh  all  the  populace,  )<■-
ehidiog  the  slaves,  took  part. Tbey  went  In  trw
ta]  prouettsioii  with  ohorusoa  of  Niitging  buyi  twt
;;irls,  secompanied by  hups  and tluleN  tw  lU
temple  of  Apollo,  where  gaiaes  and  cou]petilii*ii».
»aeritice8  and  eiitertHiiunent'^  to  one  auullin  bmX
plare,  and  a  nibp,  woveu  by  Iho  Spartan  wkokii.
was  offcri'd  1*1  tliH  god.

Hyaciuthua  i ' YiiKic^or).  (1)  Son  of  Kiaj;  AmjrU*,^
of  Amyelau  in  Laeonia,  and  of  Diunicdi's.  If
btdoved  for  bis  beauty  by  Apollo  anil  '/.r^yU
As  Apollo  was  one  day  teaebiug  the  Itoy  iv*
play  at  ipn>its,  on  ilie  banks  nf  the  river  Kiiwlws
the  winil-goil  in  his  jnalonsy  drove  Ihe  qiioil  •^'<l)i
sneh  violence  against  the  head  of  Myiicinthiull'ii
tbe  blow  killed  him.  From  his  bliMMl  ApnlkicAuwl
a  dower  of  till!  HHiaf  naniH  to  spring  np,  nilli  tin-
nxelamation  of  wixi,  AI,  AI,  marked  upon  lU  \'*'i-
als.  (Set^  Aux.)  Hyacintbius  like  Aduini.  i»  >
IHii'Miniiliealiuii  of  vegetation,  wbieh  tloiirinb>^  l"
llio  iipring-tinie.  but  is  seorched  and  killed  l>>  dw
glowing  lieat  of  tbe  summer  sun,  wbleb  Ik  ftyttiUil-
ixeil  by  tiie  quoit  or  discus.  (3)  The  ttower  i^niug
from  the  bltxHl  of  Hyaeinthns,  d«M:rilKHl  m  lltf
oldp-T  {loets  as  dark  but  later  as  rather  lifilit;  *«
that  several  ttowen*  have  l>oen  inclnded  under  tbt
name. (It)  The  Jacinth,  or  perhaps  tbu  tappldrv.

HySdes  ('YdArc).  According  t«i  some,  the  daiicb*
tePH  of  Atlas  and  sinters  of  the  Pleta<lee.  Th**  (■eat
ittH-ointts,  bowp\-er,  mako  I  hem  to  have  l»e«i  the
nymphs  of  DikIoua,  to  whom  Zens  eotiRdftl  lb«
nurture  of  Baielms.  FhenKsydes  gives  their  usmea
:w  Ambrosia,  CoronlSi,  Endora,  Dioni^,  AesnU,  aiid.
Polyxo.  Hesiod,  on  tbe  other  band.  i-hIU  Ibem
I'baesuln,  Corouis,  Cleca,  Fbaeo,  and  Kudora.  Tbe
names  generally  given  to  the  aevon  stars  an-  Am-
brosia. Kndoni,  Piwiil*^,  Coronis.  Polyxo,  Fhyio,  au^
Divue  or  Tliyen*'. The  Hyndei>  wont  aboni  with


3*  '•• m


iirALoa


Sq3


iivuRArLua


thi'lr  diviut.'  cliargt,  eommutiicnting  lii»  diwf.vt^rj-

to  uiauttiiid,  iiutil,  (teiiij;  clinMid  -nith  liiin  Jiitu

be  »ca  by  Lycnrgus,  Zciiti,  id  conipiuMiou,  raisr**!

beui to  Ibe  «kies  niiil trnuitfoi-iiictl tbMii into

Acounliii); tt> Iho inort* I'oniTntm ]i*p!ii(l,

evpr, tliH HyniU'H,  having Ituil tUvit  btxtlitT

jyas,  who  wiim  killuil  by  a  boni  or  litiii,  nr,  am  Ti-

tineuM  fuiyH,  by  utt  att]),  were  mi  iliiicutiM)tate  nl  hi»

flealb  thai  lUf^y  piavil  unay  ari<l  tlicd  ;  ni)d  nftvr

I'dcath  tbfy  were  cliuiifieil  into  stars  (Hyg.  Fnh.
192)  Thu  Htura  cnneU  llyadL-a  (YdBts)  dorivoil
Uicir  imnitr  from  t-fiv,  "tuuiake  wet,""to  Tutn,''  Im;-
cmise  tbeit  suttinx.  ut  Wlb  tlio  evening  anil  morn-
itig  twilight.  Tras  for  the  lirei.<k(f  aihI  ItomaitH  a
snro  pre«ufii*  nf  xrttt  iiini  Hfiniiy  wiiathrr,  tbii^r  t\yu
|ierio(Ia  fallintc  n>!t{M>i>liTt>)y  in  thf  UltiT  liiilf  i>f
April  iiiid  N<>vrtiib4>r.  lionicv,  with  a  duiiblu  aIIii>
Miou  to  bulb  fHbln  an<l  physical  plH'iiouicna,  calls
lliR  KlarM  in  ipiextinn  Irintrn  I/jfadoM  \Curm.  i.  3, 14).
Tbn  Ktimaii  writ'fi»  twiiiu-t i hu-m  call  tlictMi  stars  by
tbc  uKiiu-  orfluciiluf.  "  little  piK»-"  ^*»'  n'bicb  vpi-
tbt^t  Pliny  uHsignit  »  Mingiilur  ilL-tivatiun.  Accord-
in);  to  thift  writer,  tbe  Koiuiiiii  tarmci'M  iniMutik  thu
ct3'IUido)Lv  nf  iho  (jrtvk  name  llyailen,  mid  dn-
(Inrod  il,  not from i!((i',  "  to  rnin/' but rniiii Ct-.

I*'n  w)w*'  {Pliny,  ^i. -V.  xviii. 'Jti). It  Im  ni«r«  pnib-

P«bli<,  luMvtVfr,  tbnt  8urnla«  woh  thu  ijIiIi'mI  Kt}-
maii  niitiK',  ^ivrn  Imforv  the  (]r(.fk  apjtcllutiuu
UHK  kiitnMi,  nnd  to  b«  roinpanKl  with  oiir  IKip-
iilar  afitrnnninit-id  trniiii  nnch  as  "  thu  iJippci',"
■'Charlu*('ji  Waiu,"  utc.  Isiiionia  derives  thi*  tt-riu
Biicnlso  frcini  tiuceuM,  in  the  mmisa  of  "moist-
ure" or  "wet"  (a  *uceo  fl  pltiriia,  I^'idnr.  Oriff.  iii.

'7lt),  nn  etymology  irhicb  liw*  found  itH  way  into
mail}- lotiT work*). Some |;ranimari»iit>, iiRnin,

^pou};ht  todfrivu  the  naiiio  Hyttd4>H  from  tht?  Greek
t  iipbilon  ),  iu couat;<|Ufncc  of  the rcK'nddanco
W'hicii  the  clatter  of  f>tJ)r8  Itenrs  to  that  letU-r,
Tht^  Hymles,  in  the  ^elential  HplH'n\  an^  at  tbe

tbrad  of  thfl  BdII  (r'lri  roO  (iovKpavov).
HySloa  (vaXot). GlanH. Si;o  VlTKUM.

Hyanip&a  ('YrifLwito  i.  f>iit-  of  the  two  lufly
rm:kM  « bicli  ruBti  |H^rpendit'nlurly  fi-oni  Wbiiid
Delphi,  iind  oblaiuei)  for  FarnaiwiUH  llie  epithet
of  iiKvitvfpos,  or  tbe  two-beaded  (Kniip,  I'tiftfu.  'i34  ;
llciTtd.  viii.  :W|.  Tbe  idher  was  culled  >'iin]>lea.
It  vioB  from  tbene  elevattMl  cro^s  that  culprits  and

Kiu:rili'j;ii>ns  criminals  worn  Iinrled.  Seo  pAHNAtii'
l>.
HyampfUls  ( 'Yu/iiroAic).  A  tvwn  in  PhiK:i(i,eust
f  the  CVphiNoiH,  nt*ar  Cleonae,  futindml  by  lliu
Hyaiile»i.  It  wan  liittt  de»>troyi^)  liy  X»*rseji,  luid
afternardti  rebuilt  to  he  ilu«troyo«l  again  in  part

Bby  Philip  and  the  Ainpbiflyoni*.
Hyantes  ("Yo^f  s ).  Thu  aiicieut  iuhubitfuit«  of
Bovotia,  from  wbieb  voiintry  tliey  were  exiiellod
b;  the  CadmeauH.  Part  of  tbe  llyuute«  uiuiKnited
to  PlMtrin,  wb»Te  they  founded  Ilystinpolia  and  part
to  Aetolia.  The  iM>PtH  use  the  adjective  llyaiitiuri
an  eipii^  alenl  to  IttHsjlicnti.

Hyas  ("Yar).  Tbe  aon  of  Atlaa,  and  father  or
brother  of  tbe  TIy.ide«  (q.  t,),  and  said  to  be  tho
ancestor  of  the  HyantCH  (q.  v.).

Hybla  ('YdXtj ).  Three  towns  iu  Sieily.  (  1  >
M.xioit  (^7  ntya\t}),ftn  the  KoiitberD  slo>)e  of  Moiiut
Ai'liKV  and  on  ibc  river  SyiDuetbiiH,  rtas  ori|{inully
a  town  of  the  ^ienll.  (3)  MiNUK  (^  tiitffi),  after-
wardii  called  Met^aia.  i:il  IJeraP.a,  in  tliM  Honlh
of  the  Jutland,  on  I  hi*  mad  from  Syi-aeiiM^  tft  Agri-


gentiliii.  It  in  dnulitfiil  frotii  wbicb  of  tliette  tbren
plueeK  thu  Hyblaeau  houey  ciuue,  bo  fnupienlly
iti'-ntiinieil  by  tbe  poete.

Hybreaa  (Y^pratr).  (1)  A  Carian,  a  uallve  of
Myla«n,  who  vtM  well  known  as  nii  orator  in  the
time  of  M.  Antouiiis,  tbe  trinnivir.  (VI  A  Cretnu
lyric  poet,  tbe  author  of  a  drinking-song  preM-rved
in  AthmiaenBaQd  edited  bvGritfenbuo  (MulbunHetii
19»l).

Hybreofl  Oraphtf  (.Cffpttts  yftatprit.  In  Attic
law,  »  criminal  proax^cntiou  for  OAoault  or  personal
violence  of  any  kind.  In  it  any  |M:n»lty  mi^hl  W
demanded),  and  ii>  extreme  cunes,  death.  The  com
was  tried  before  a  IIt'!ia»tic  totirt.

Hyccjlra  (tm  "Yicicapat.  A  town  of  the  Hii'uni  on
tbo  north  coast  of  Sicily,  west  of  Paonrmus,  uikeii
by  tho  AtbeniatiB,  and  it«  iuhabitantaauld  as  slaves.
B.C.  415.  Anioag  tbo  captives  was  the  benatifnl
Timaudra,  tbemistreaaof  Alcihiailesand  tbe  moth-
er nf  LaiN.  Tbe  place  was  saiil  to  got  its  name
from  the  lirtb  ^koi.

Bydaxnes  ('Yiiipi^r).  One  of  tlie  neveii  Per-
HiaiiM  who  cotinpirod  agaiiut  the  Magi,  B.C.  oifl.

Bydaspea  {'Yiatrmft ).  The  mtKleni  Jbcluni;
tbe  northcnimofft  of  the  live  j^at  trihutarieH  of
tbe  Iiidnti,  which,  with  the  Iiidn^  itnelf,  water  the
great  plait)  of  northern  India,  which  in  hninideil
on  the  nortb  by  tbe  Himalaya  range,  and  wbieh  in
now  called  tbc  Piii\jab — i.  e.  Qve  rivera.  The  Hy-
daM)>cti  falU  into  tbe  Ace!*inc«t  (CberAb],  which  it-
Holf  falU  into  tbe  Indus.  Tbe  epithet /«/!*»/»«»»,
wbieh  Horace  applies  to  tbe  llydiupes,  refers  to
the  uiurvellonn  atorieH  ritnvnt  anumg  tbe  RomatiM,
w  bo  knew  iiexttonothin;;Hltont  India. See  India.

Bydra. S<m>  IlRiu.(:t.E!;,  p.T'JO.

Bydraotei  (y&ftaiartis).  A  tribntHi-^*  to  tbe  In-
dno),  DOW  tho  Jtavi.  Strnbo  and  t^ninin.o  <.'iirtiii9
call  it.  tlie  ilyiirot<*»  or  llyaroti*.

BydrauIuB{t/d^vXo().  A  \\aler-orgai).  .Veeurd-
ing  to  Athcn.'u^ufi,  it  whh  tbc  invention  nf  Cleitibiiix
t)f  Alexjindria  i«i.  v.),who  evidently  took  the  itieaof
bis  organ  from  the  syrinx  or  Pandcau  pipcM.  a  mn-
sieal  iiiittrnmcnt  of  the  highest  aiitiipiity  among
tbe  (iit-t^kit.  His  object  lieitig  to  employ  a  row  of
pipits  of  great  size,  and  capable  ofeniit  ting  the  most
powerful  as  well  as  the  Hoft«st  nonnds,  ho  contrived
tlie  iiteans  of  adapting  kcvH  with  levers  (ifyxui't-
rritoi),  and  with  jwrforated  MlidirHfTrti^ora)  to  ojK-n
and  Hbiit  tbe  niotitliH  of  the  pi|H>h  iy\auT(raKr>fui),  u
Ktipply  of  wind  lieing  oblailiiNt,  wllliuut  intiTmJH-
Hiiin,  by  Ih-IIowh,  in  which  the  pressnra  of  water
perforineil  the  name  part  which  is  fnltillcd  iu  tbe
inndcni  organ  by  a  weight  (Hero,  Sfiirit.  'Jii*).  On
tbiti  acconnl  tlio  iustrniuent  invented  by  Ctenibins
nun  eullL'd  tbe  w,iter- organ  <  L'9fjnL;Xir.  viftai/^tKair
o/^ni^k-,  Heron,  .S;«ri(. ;  hfidrauiica  wacAiiia.Vilrnv.
X.  li:  hjtdraulun.  PVuiy .  IT,  X.  ix.  ^  H  :  Cic.  T'^r.  Iii.
IH,  ^  4:t|.  It  Ik  de.icribMl  in  an  epigram  by  tbo  em-
liernr  Jtiliaii  (Bmnck.  .i«(i/,  ij.  -li':!  =  Julh.  I'lil.  ix.
IlfB),  who  muntiotiK  the  swift  litigiM>  of  tbe  per-
fonut>r,  but  not  tbe  water- 1h.-IIow»;  and  more
clearly  iu  the  lines  of  (Jiundiaii  (De  Mitrtl.  Thcod.
t'oHK.  itlO-3191.  We  have  hero  the  keys,  the  iii-
iinnicrable  pipi^i  of  inetnl,  tbe  lever  as  large  lu  a
beam  whJeb  sets  the  water  in  molion.  Its  pii>e«
were  partly  of  bronze  (;(<tXx<i4  dpoupa,  Julian  ;  Kr^ye*
nfua.  Claiidiau),  and  partly  of  nicd  ifd'iMttMtt,  JnlianV
Tbe  number  of  its  stu^M,  and  cnuMipiently  of  lis


UTLAS


mwa  nf  pipe*,  varied  from  one  to  eight,  to  tbat
TtTtiillian  (iV  Jmaia,  14)  dcscriltes  it  with  rcAsnn
nit  nil  oxcfO'ilingly  com  plicated  instrtinifut.  Wi;
nrr  ittill  in  the  dark  oa  to  tbti  cxaci  part  pittytti  by
the  wat«?r,  which,  Iwsides,  (iirist  have  i^iidewd  the
iiifltninicnt  iiinch  Icisr  porULbtc.  As  invt<iilL-il  liy
Ctrffiliiiis,  the  orgaii  wns  donlitlew!  hydrntilic  :  but
tlir  rpigmm  of  .liilinu  ninitn  nil  inenliiMi  of  tho  wn-
tnr.  and  pnihnlily,  in  hitor  liniPN,  the  nietThunitttn
wiiH  Himpllliml  and  Lb«  hoUowH  bluwn  directly  by
the  |>t>ditl,uK  in  Ihv  niiKlvru  barinouium.

The  organ  w»it  well  lulApltrd  to  gratify  tlio  Ro-
man |Hiuplr  lu  (hi!  splfiidid  (^ntt'rtainmmitA  pro-
vidwl  for  thcni  by  thucm|tcrora  and  utbcropiileut
pnrooiiH.  Nt'ni  wOA  vury  curiinin  nboiit  organs,
>i«th  in  rcgiird  to  their  innsicul  eflWjt  and  thnir
nmchauiHtn  (Suet.
.V(T.41,54).  Acon-
loniiRte  rojn  of
rhiHfiniKTorintliP
British  MiiKcnni
(wiv  ilbifttrntion)
fthouH  n  Hiuall  or-
gau  with  u  Mprig
nf  laiu'cl  on  otto
aide  and  u  uian
Hlandiug  ou  thu
other.  The  gener-
al form  uf  Uio  ur-
^un  is  alto  ok-arly
L'xhihited  in  a
poeiu  by  I'nblilins
Poqibyiins  Opiaiiannit,  tleiicribiiig  thu  infftrumenl,
Hud  c(Mnpos(Hl  of  vonws  an  conHtnicted  aa  to  ahow
both  Iht!  biwcr  port,  which  contAinod  the  hclIowH,
till-'  wiinl-cfaest  whioh  lay  oi>on  it,  nud  over  this
thi*  row  of  twenty-nix  pi|M!».  Theiw  are  represent-
tnl  by  twenty-six  lincf*.  which  iufieaxB  iu  length
iiu'h  by  one  leller.  nnill  Ihe  Inat  line  is  twice  as
long  ns  the  first  (Wennwlorf,  I'ottm  Lai.  J/ih.  vol.
ii.  pp.  394-413).

Therr  ntn  be  little  donbt  that  v6pav\ris,  kgdmntn
«r  hf/iiroHlfM,  deiiotpM  ibii  nrgniiint  (Snet.  A>r.  M;
Fetrou.  /fat.  36). sjee  MrsiCA,

Hydrjia  (Xipia).  Tho  uicdurn  Hydra;  a  Mmil)
iHland  in  the  Golf  of  ITorinioui?,  oil'  Argulia  (Ho-
rixl. lit.  59; and E.  Ciirtiiia,  Pehpottnetrnt,  ii.  |t.

Hydria  (vipia).  (Ij  A  vemnl  for  holding  water.
1^1  A  balluting-urn  In  the  Attic  luw-euurta.  (See
felTKLlA.) (3)  A  L-iiiemry  nrn.

Hydriapboria  (C'^/>wi</)o,>ia).  "The  carrying  of
ti  wiil«T-|nil,'' «  M'tviee  perfnrnnit  by  the  ivive*  of
resident  Hlu-uit  al  the  ranathouaea  (q.  v.  |, See

SCIADEPUOKIA.

Hydrom£li  ufi,j.l^»Xij. St-e  ViNTM.


^


(>Tgiui,  from  a  mln  of  Nna.
lUnUili  HuHiim.l


Hydruutum  or  Hydrua  (YdftoOt). The  tnodorn
f>lrant4». Onu of the moNt aircteiit towna of legemN,  Hyhieuft  fell  in  tb<>  fight  agaiuNt  the  ■'■{>■-


Calabria,  altauted  on  the  BontbeoAt  t-onHt,  iie»r  n
niuuutain  of  the  oaino  nuine.  It  biid  a  gm*)!  bar-
Itour,  fttntt  (vhich  )>(--muns  frvtinently  i-ni«»ed  over
to  K))ini«.

Bysiea  {'Yyitia}.  In  Gn'oh  niylholugy,  the
goddem  of  Health,  daughter  of  A«<:lepiiiH  lAescu-
lapiua),  with  whom  nho  i»  often  wornhippeil.  In
worliH  of  art  tihe  Ih  i-eprcbeiiteil  by  hta  Hide,  a»  u
niaidni  of  kindly  aspect,  with  n  8eri>eiit  to  wliuin
Mhe  18  giving  drink  fmni  a  Mincer.  An  the  giver
uf  mental  health,  ftbe  Ia  aouietinitss  confnited  with


AtlMutf  Hn^ea  (At;tich.  KimcH.  &£.>). Hy  iIk-  Kn-
luaiM  ah*  wu  identified  w  itb  Saloa  (q-  v.).

Hyglaua. ( I )  Gaii's  Iuuvs. A  crlnbratw!
gntitiin;iri:in. Ilw  Ih  nH'nlioned  by  Snrinniiiia  oa  a
iialivo  of  Spain.  Ibnngli  nnioft  bavt^  Hnp|MMril  liim
an  Alexandrian,  and  |o  have  l*eeu  brought  ta  Rutur
After  the  cnptnrrt  of  that  eity  by  Ca(r«»r. Hygiuos
waM  a  fr4^*dmaii  of  AngUHtns  Caesar,  and  wiujiat
hy  tbat  enii»eror  in  t-hargo  of  tbn  library  on  the
Palaliiio  Hill. (Se<!  BiBl.loTyitCA.) lie  iilao  gave
iiiittniction  to  nuinerouM  pnpila. IlygiiiiM  na»  inli-
malely  atqnaintwl  with  Ovid  and  oilier  writermf
the  day,  and  wom  Ntiid  to  ha  tb<*  imitator  of  Cur-
nelina  Alexander,  a  Greek  granininrian. Soinp  oii]!-
pofie  him  to  have  beon  thu  fnitbleM  frif*nd  ^f  it  Imiqi
Ovid  rnniplainn  in  his  Ibi: IUk  wnrkn,  which  w'*ti'
nuiiiemnv.  are  frequently  quoted  by  the  aneieate
with  great  mapect. Ilir  principal  »iirn  appear  tii
have  Utrn: (n)  De  Situ  Vrbium  ttalirnntm;  (ft)  Or
TV-ui/iNu  FamHiiM;  (c)  Itr.  Clatiw  fiiiu ;  (if)  fV  /W-
prirtatibufi  fieoritm; («)  De  IHU  I'cnatihuM ;  tf)  &
commentary  on  Vergil;  (g)  A  treatiim  on  Aifricolt-
nre. The^e  are.  all  loat Those  whiuh  are  ••xlant,
and  are  ascrilied  to  Hyginun,  were  poambly  writifo
by  another  individnal  of  the  saioe  name. Tbr**
aru:  (<i)  Fahtilarum  Liba;ti  collection  of  777  falilm,
taken  for  the  nuwl  part  from  Gni-ian  minr<^e»,  niiil
enibnicing  all  the  uiotit  inii>ortiint  Irgt-ndn  of  an
liqiiiiy. It  i«  written  in  n  very  inferior  fttylr,  lini
!M  Htill  of  great  importance  for  the niytbo|iip«i.
Text  by  Sebuiidt  (Jena,  IffT'i),  and ace  Ihc  j>it\*r
by  WollHiD,  Zur  Krittk  ron ffyg.  t'nbtlit,  iu  ih
Fhihto^us,  X.  Mi. (b)  Ih  Attrato$ia,  alao  eiM
focHca  Atti-onamia. This,  like  the  prtvion*  wort,
ia  in  prooe,  and  ronnintn  of  fonr  book*,  being  [wril/
antronomical  and  matheniattcal^  partly  iiiytIi»l<)S>-
calaud  pliilosophical  in  Itachumcter.&iueeit  pvM
the  origin  of  the  CutuMerlstua  areonliiig  r«  Uf
legi'ndK  itf  (be  pnetM. The  prot^iu  of  the  work  («
nildrc-uted  to  a  rprlnin  (jnintna  Fabiiis. TliL<t«<irk
in  written  in  a  vandi^Hii  manner,  but  itt  very  iP\\M-
tiuit  for  nbtnining  a  knon  li^dge  of  nnrieut  i*ln4i-
omy,  and  for  a  rorrect  nndentlnndiiig  of  llip  J'Urt*
Text  by  Bnutc  (  Druwleu.  1H75),  and  see  I^'l^cH>
edition  of  the  6'afa«ln-isiNi  of  Eratonlbeim  (IWrii".
1378]. (2)  A  grotnatic  writer  of  whmn  noiliiiiii  •*
known,  but  to  wlmm  arc  often  aserilied  imt  wt-rl*
—one  on  legal  l>onndarie»  (/V  lAmitibnn  Ctimi^it*-
mrfiji),  and  one  on  rar<lnimetntinii  {ttr  MuniUai^**
t'aalrorHm)f  though  they  ore  really  hy  IW"  iliffromi
writem,  as  the  l;itign»ge  shows. They  sn»  tw  Iff
OKHigncil  to  the  third  reiilury  A.n. The  tnt  l»  tii
lie  ft'und  in  tbn  Ltii-hniaiiti-IIndQrir  ediltoiu  uf  thr
.lf/r»wt«-n«orr«  (llerlin,  lM4t*).
HykaoB  Kinga. 8ec  Akgviti  s,  p.  iM
Hylaeua  ('VXaloc,  i.  e.  **ih«  \Vo<Mlni.-in**|- TUo
qame  of  an  Arradian  centaur  who  wah  aUiu  ^
Atalanta  when  he  piirxned  ber. AcconlingHiwaw


lbi«e.  and nccoidttig  to  iither«  ho  vcaa  one  <»f  llx'
centanrN  ttlMin  by  lU-melrM.

Hylaa  ('VXor  >  Son  nfTheoduinn*..  kiiigaf  lli-
Dryopes,  and  lln-  nymph  Mi-nmlitV.  Mr  wm  •
favourite  of  Ili'rnclen,  whom  be  iwwtnqianlfd  mi
the  Argonantic  exiiedilioii.  When  H»-racW  il"*-
enil>arked  npon  the  roa>4l  uf  My)<ia  to  cut  binu«l(
n  frenh  our,  Hylaa  fidlowed  hiin  to  draw  water fmm
u  fontiLuiu,  wlioi»e  nyniptm  drew  the  yonth  (leva
into  the  water.  The  Argonant*  huving  gone  on
their  way.  Ilaraclegi,  with  his  siilerV  M>n  Pulypbt^


(


I


I


UYLfi


866


UYMNL'S


inas,  reDiained  bebind  to  seareh  for  him.  On  fail-
iug  to  flud  him,  he  did  not  lieave  uutil  be  had  taken
hostages  from  the  Mysiana,  aud  made  them  prom-
ise that  they  would  produce  the  boy  either  dead
or  alive.  After  that,  the  iuhubitauts  of  Cios
(fonuded  by  Polyphemus  and  afleiwards  called
Prusias)  coutiuually  sought  for  Hybw,  and  sacri-
ficed to  biui  every  year  at  the  fniiiitain,  thrice  call-
ing him  by  uame.  The  story  of  Hylao  suggested  a
song  of  Thomas  Moore's,  aud  is  the  subject  of  a
poem,  H^la$,  by  Bayard  Taylor.  See  Calverly's
translation  of  the  thirteenth  idyl  of  Theocritus.

Byl4  ('YX7)  and  Hylae  ('YXai).  A  small  town
in  Boeotia,  sitnated  on  Lake  Hylio^,  which  was
called  after  this  town.

Hyliaa.  A.  river  in  Brottium,  separating  the
territories  of  Sybaris  and  Croton.

Hyllo^  (ij  'YXuc7  ^ifunf). See  Htle.

ByUciu  (*YXucor).  A  small  river  in  Ai^golis  near
Troeceu.

Hyllna  ('YXXor).  The  son  of  Heracles  and  Dela-
uira,  and  husband  of  lol^.  When  he  and  the  rest
of  the  children  of  Heracles,  at  their  father's  death,
were  pursoed  everywhere  by  the  enmity  of  Enrys-
thens,  they  at  last  found  succour  from  Theseus,
or  his  son  Demophon.  When  Eurystheus  drew
near  with  bis  army  to  oomi>el  the  Athenians  to
give  them  up,  Uacaria,  daughter  of  Heracles,  freely
offered  herself  up  as  a  sacritice  for  her  brethren,
who,  aided  by  the  Athenians,  defeated  the  enemy,
Eurystbens  being  slain  as  a  fugitive  by  Hyllris
himself.  Having  withdrawn  from  Attica  to  Thfs-
saly,  Hyllos  was  adopted  by  the  Dorian  prince
Aegimius,  whom  Heracles  had  once  assisted  iu  the
war  between  the  Lapithae  and  the  Dryopes,  under
promise  of  his  abdication  of  the  royal  power,  to-
gether with  a  third  part  of  the  kingdom.  Thus
the  nile  over  the  Dorians  passed  to  him  and  his
descendants.  When  comniauded  by  the  Delphic
oracle  to  attempt  to  conquer  the  kingdom  of  Eurys-
tfaeus  immediately  after  "the  third  fnitt,"  he  en-
deavoured after  the  lapse  of  threo  years  to  iuva<te
the  Peloponnesus  by  way  uf  tlm  Isthmus.  Ho
was,  however,  Tepnlse<l  by  Atreus,  the  successor  of
Eurystheus,  and  fell  in  single  combat  with  Eche-
Dius,  king  of  Tegeo.  It  was  in  the  "  third  genera-
tion "  after  him  that  the  souh  of  his  grandson
Aristomachus  —  viz.  Temenus,  CrcHpliontcs,  and
ArtstodemUB — at  last  conquered  the  Pt-lopounesutt,
which  was  then  nnder  the  rulu  of  Tisamenus,  son
of  Orestes. Sue  Heracudak.

Hyllna  ("YXXot).  A  river  of  Lydia,  falling  into
the  Hermus  ou  its  north  side.

Hymenaeaa  (' Y^Vator)  or  Hymen  ( 'Yfttfy).  Th«
Greek  gttd  of  marriage  and  of  the  marriage-song
named  after  him.  He  is  sometimes  described  as
the  son  of  Apollo  and  a  Mnsu  (either  Teriwiehor^,
Urania,  or  Catlioi>^),  who  hail  vanitihed  on  his  own
wedding-day,  and  was  consequently  always  sought
for  at  every  wedding.  He  is  also  described  as  a  son
of  the  Thessalian  Magues  and  of  the  Muse  Calliopt;,
and  as  beloved  by  Apollo  and  Thamyris;  or  as  the
son  of  DiouysuB  and  Aphrodite,  who  lost  his  voict;
aud  life  while  singing  the  nuptial  song  at  the
marriage  of  Dionysus  and  Ariadn^.  According  to
Atlio  tradition,  he  was  an  Argive  youth  who,  in
the  disguise  of  a  girl,  followed  to  the  feast  of  De-
meter  at  Elensia  a  young  Athenian  maiden  whom
be  loved  wlthont  winning  the  consent  of  her  par-


ents. Hymeuaens  and  some  of  the  niaidens  who
were  celebrating  the  festival,  were  carried  utf  by
pirates,  whom  he  afterwards  killed  in  tliuii-  slf^p,
and  henceforth  became  the  champion  of  all  wtnuen
and  danisels.  In  art  he  is  represented  like  Ei-us.
as  a  beautiful,  winged  youth,  only  with  a  moi-e
serious  expression,  aud  carrying  iu  his  hand  the
nnirriage  torch  and  nuptial  veil.  The  marriage-
song  called  Hgmenaeua,  which  is  meutioued  as  ear-
ly as  Homer  (//.  xviii.  493),  was  sung  by  young  men
and  maidens,  to  the  sound  of  flutes,  during  the
festal  procession  of  the  bride  from  the  honse  of  her
parents  to  that  of  the  bridegroom.  In  character
it  was  partly  serious  and  partly  humorous.  The
several  ports  always  ended  with  an  iuvfwation  of
Hymeuaens.  (See  Catullus,  61  and  6S,  with  tlit?
reudering  by  Sir  Theodore  Martin ;  aud  the  article
Epitualamil'H.  )  Ou  the  Roman  god  of  weddings,
see  Talabsio.

Hymettoa  {'tfufrTot).  A  mountain  in  Attica,
about  three  miles  south  of  Athens,  celebrated  for
its  marble  and  its  honey  (Herod,  vi.  137).  See
Athenab.

Hymniis  {y\ivoi).  In  general,  an  invocation  of
the  gods,  es[>ecially  in  the  form  of  an  ode  sung  by
a  choir,  to  the  accompauiment  of  the  cithara,  while
I  they  stood  round  the  altar.  For  the  so-called
Homeric  Hymns  (to  Aphrodite,  Hermes,  Demeter,
etc.),  see  the  article  Homerus.  For  wedding
hymns,  see  Epithalauiu.m.  For  the  Orphic  Hymns,
sec  Okpheuh.  Many  of  the  Pindaric  odtis,  written
in  lyric  measures,  are  to  be  classed  as  vfwot.  (Cf.
Aristoph.  Eq.  530.)  Famous  amoug  Greek  hymns
is  the  noble  hymn  to  Zeus  by  the  Stoio  Cleanthes
(q.  v.). See  MusiCA.

Iu  Latin,  examples  of  hymns  iu  the  older  senrw>
.  are  the  songs  of  the  Salii  {carmina  SaUar'ta),  sung
by  the  priests  of  Mars  (see  Salii);  the  hymn  of
the  Arvnl  Br(>threu  (see  Fkatrks  Arvalrs);  the
hymns  composed  by  Horace  {carmen  saeculare)  for
the  Ludi  Soecnlares  in  B.C.  17,  und  sung  iu  honour
I  uf  Diana  and  Apollo  (si>e  LuDt  SAEcutAKEiii) ;  and
I  some  of  later  date,  like  the  poem  called  Laus  Her-
cuUh,  iu  i:!7  hexameters,  by  an  anonymous  author
(see  Bahrens  in  the  Xf.ue  Jahrbiichcr  fur  Phxlologie,
etc.,  105,  52.  003);  the  Il^mnn*  Claudii  ad  LuHam
{I'uet.  ImI.  M\».j  ed.  Btthreiis,  iii,  163);  and  the
purodic  hynui  to  Pan  (id.  iii.  170).
I  The  early  Christian  hymns  in  Greek  and  Latin
are  interesting.  Of  those  in  Greek,  only  a  com-
paratively few  are  written  in  the  claHsiu  metres —
e.  g.  those  by  Clemens  AlexandrinUH  (about  a.d.
*230),  Englished  by  Dr.  Dexter  in  his  "  Shepherd  of
[Early  Youth;"  Gregory  of  Nanzianzus  {a.d.  3fiO).
Synesius  (A.n.  400),  and  Sttphronius  (A.D.  6*.29).
Others,  and  i-Hpeciitlly  those  used  by  the  EiiHtern
Churuli,  ar»  strongly  Oriental  iu  stylt!,  due  to  the
constant  study  of  the  Jewish  PsaUer.  No  authors
of  Lutin  liynnis  are  mentioned  earlier  than  a.d.
3*25,  the  date  of  the  Council  of  Nice.  ScK>n  after,
however,  two  great  hymuologistM — St.  Hilary  and
St.  Ainbrose — appear,  both  in  the  fourth  century,
followed  by  Prudentins  (a.u.  350-410),  wliose  pncms
in  lti60  i-euehed  a  sixty-tliinl  edition  ;  St^dnlius  of
the  same  period  ;  Venantins  Fortunatiis  (a.d.  530-
609),  and  Gregory  the  Great  (a.d.  540-604).  Some
of  the  most  uiagniAcent  of  the  Latin  hymns  aiv
of  unknown  authorship.  Such  are  the  famous
Out,  Creator  Spiritus.  popularly  ascribed  to  Charli*-
niiigne,  but  really  of  earlier  «late ; the  hymn  Ih'-


HTPACTRia

giliiiiiig  rerhutit  I>fi,  Deo  Sainm  ;  nitd.  nlKivft  iill,
tlin  HiiUIiiuA  Die*  Irat,  \\\v  t|eH|iiiir  of  traitHliihini,
which  U  i»n»iii  ullril>iiiv4  i^j  Tliomatt  nf  ('elano,
lull  on  iiu  surv  aiitliunty  iMittiitiUo.  Hf/mnnlof}iitikr
FortMhnngm,  \.  ]t\t.  1-2-1).

Tliir  Lniiii  hfiiiim  nie  iiiti*riMiliiif*froin  a  tiiigiiis-
lii'  iiiul  tiK-thcnl  atniiilpuiiit,  lut  usually  rcvorling
ti>  tli«  oltltT  nnil  luuii'  iiatiintl  »ccpritniil  syaltin
■  if  prosinly  iiiHtoud  of  prewtrviiig  the  artiiicia]
ami  niip^kpiiliir  liiotJuirtiuiiH  <ir  Myllahii?  igimiility.
Aniiiii^  tIic  couimon  iirujdf,  in  Hmmi-  folk-soti^f^
(n.  n.  thv  »{>tiK»  of  the  Hnhlicrx  iit  tlii^ir  harraokH
»ii<)  finriti};  ihe  trinuivhtt,  iht^  chants,  sprllH,  am]
nniwry  (ioiikm},  the  nreeiiliial  sytttvai  titill  »nr-
vivL<il,uni),ji>i  ill  |li«  iMstruclioHcit  of  Coiummliaiiim,
wriUcii  in  tJiu  thiifl  rcuiury  a.d.,  the  iiopulai'
9*y8liMii  a<iniptiini'H  inaile  itit  way  wmt  Into  writ-
teu  UterBtiiri'.  Il  miii  nariiral  that  th^  L'lirlKnan
hyiuns,  bcin){  c4m)|i<isc-il  uux  t'<ir  ihc  leuiiitnl  aud
fuHli<liuiiM,  hut  ror  Ihit  ronitniiri  poople— for  |im-
vinL'iaU  and  iion -RuniaiiH — nhouhl  avHit  tliein-
aelvea  of  the  far  fh^nr  range  allowed  by  thi^  Iwxw
Un-»  of  accent.  Tbuti  8l.  AiiKiiHtiiio,  vivt>n  in  tht<
tillti  of  one  of  his  |iHftlm»  (Fmlmiu  contra  I'orirm
I>otiali).  lilinWB  bis  desire  to  c«ca|H9  from  llie  rigid
ivHtrlotioiu  of  the  AiigtiHtan  |)n>iMt<ly  —  in  other
wonts,  to  write  n  fdM/iriim  and  iinl  a  varmm.  In
IIm'  later  hyrniifi,  ntniiy  iitotiicai  iiiK«uititi^a  an-
i])lrodne-(Hl,  Htioh  an  the  so-caltod  Ivunine  ami  other
ihyiDt'N  (MH^  Lkonini  Vkismis),  of  whicli  a  Ko*'d
ikccoiiiit  will  \w  found  in  the  iutrodndinn  niid
itotc*  to  Archbbthoti  Tnsiich's  Sacred  Latin  Poflrjf
(Lttmion.  18T-I).

For  tbu  Gi'«'ck  (Mirisiiau  hyaiiiB,  see  Christ  and
Paratiika's  Antholottia  (irarva  Canuinum  Chn^li-
ttuorum  iliul]:  f-'haltu-Id'.t  //vmk«  of  tlir  Kuntrrn
Oreei-  Vlir\«tiau  /'<»r/i  (IfCti)  -llii>  fiirnn-r  <;ii  iu;>  (Iim
«ri|;ii)iil  U'Xl  and  tli«  Inltei-  thn  Kn^liHh  ivudin};;
:uhI  Petra.  Ihjmnograyh'ie  dv  V^tfliar  -  Grerifue
(1867);  Annitfla  Sur-rii  Ittr^ilfi  (Parin,  l^fTtt).  On
tlip  Latin  liymus,  hw  the  work  tif  'i'rouL-li  already
ritt'd:  Cimliiml  NVwmm'K  Odrmiitu  hrrlrfuietlriiii);
I>ii  Mrril, /'(M^iVrt  PopHlairei  Latinv«  {lt*4\i);  Moni;,
y/ifmni  Z,«fini,;t  vols,  (ia53-55);  and  DnIfieldlltftWf.

Thi:i-e  IK  a  dictionary  of  Hynirtolo;;y  by  Juliuii
(ItWtS).  On  the  verBidualimi  of  tin-  Clirif«(inn
Itymua  (tisnally  trochaie  and  iaiiiUii!  nn'livs  with
a  H|K>ci;il  pivfrreiice  for  the  iiiinbir  diniHli>r,  witli
rhyme  and  freqnent  alliterutioii }.  iwy  ScbinTli,  />/■
iWiih  J.atiiiae  lihjfthmtH  ri  itimi*  (1851):  Hhinrr,
Orr  iariih.  IHmctt^r  hei  den  t'hriatt.-lal.  Upmucndich-
trrn  rfrr  rorkaroUng.  Ztit  i  Vieuiiu,  h'rTtJl;  id.  />i>
altCMlfn  lat.-fhritlL  GkifthmtH  i  Vii.*iuia,  If??!) );  and
the  aiiirU-  Rhyme.

Hypacjf-riB.  Hypaoftria.  urFacftria.  A  river  in
Etiiopvun  8iunijili:i,  dowiii^  thn>ngh  th4>  coniitry
of  till'  nuiuait  .SrytliiaUM  uinl  falling  into  the  Sinns
<.'iirviuik'H  in  Ihe  Kiixint*  Sea.

H}rpaea. i^fee  i^'r<iKctiAi>K»  I.\»rLAE.

Hypaepa  ('Ywama).  A  city  of  Lydia.  un  ilu<
)tontli»rii  8lii[tr  of  Mniiiit  T[ii<dni«,  uear  tlie  north
bank  of  rlie  C'nyli'r.

HypaetliraJ  Temple.  A  tttinple  not  covered  by
a  mof.  and  iti  form  uxiiiilly  dL-cawlyle.  See  Dorp-
fi'ld  ill  the  MUthiihtntjrn  if.  ilrulnrhen  arrkaol.  /nut.
xu  Athen  fur li^l,  E>p.  3m-344 ; and tlm iiitich-

Tkmplcm.

HypSnn  (jtt  'Yirafa)  and  Hyp&n^  (  Yrdyr}).  A
town  ill  Kti>  iM'Ionjjiiig  Inlbr  ^I'calh'd  PfntAiio]i«t.


HVPATIA

YpiolB  i'Ynavit).  The  niodcni  Bojj;  *  river
in  Eiiii>iwBn  .Sarmatio,  fniling  into  die  HtixitiK  H^
w«'»tof  IIm-  Korysthoncs  (Herod,  iv.  17,  etc. |.

Hypaapiatna  iviratrfrifrrnt)  The  Bhteld-I)eam»
in  the  (ireek  nnny,  who  follnned  the  heavy -urrurd
warriors  and  carriud  a  |>i>rlion  of  their  bnrdcnaoui«
eqiiipuieiit,  princijmlly  the  nliield,  the  iieo«a»ar>
bn:;^ll|;•^  and  the  usual  proviai<iii  for  thnw  daya
Aiuoiii*  the  .Maci><loiiian.'4  the  lij^ht  iufaitlry  were
so  called  to  diittinuuiNh  them  from  tht"  heavy  tfuf
"Kayytrat  (8ee  lIi>rUTr_''l  and  the  ftTehtrr-B.  They
wore  a  i-oiiud  felt  Imt  (!»e«  0AI7itlAt.  u  linen  jrrkiii,
mill  liad  a  loii^;  da^itjer  and  a  »hort  hand-pikr.
Tliev  were  u  ittuuding  Imdy  of  &iHM  oieu,  and  In
war  foni)e<l  the  king'n  botly-guunl. 8ee  Exkrl'I-

TfS.

BypSta  (rtt  'Yfl-ura)  A  U.twii  of  the  AeiiiaiiM  in
Tlie^-itl>,  »our.b  nf  the  S|ieri'hen»,  nhoM  inhabit'
iiuiH  wrre  iiotnriiiiiB  for  witchcraft.  It  ii  now
Kc«ptttra(Turk.  Itarmjikl.

Hypatia  CYnnrin). A  mathemiittriBii  nf  AIbx-
nndrin,  daughter  nf  Theoii,  and  still  more  eelchrat-
ed  than  her  father. Hhc  wsu  horn  about  the  end
of  the  fourth  eentnry. In  her  •stiidieo  she  ap|tli«d
hei-self  in  pnrtieiilar  to  rhe  philoAopby  of  Ptat^i.
Following  thf>  example  of  her  master,  blie  rcMlv^
to  add  to  h<?r  information  liy  trnrelling;  and,  Iirt-
it)g  rrairhfd  AthrUK,  attendeil  there  the  lertnmof
tbeabh>Hl  inntruvtorH. On  her  return  to  her  naltre
fity,  tihe  wa«  Invited  by  The  mogistrattw  to  give
lectaro«  in phibinophy,  and  Alexandria )>ebe)d  a
woman  aacce«>d to that long  lino  of  ilhuinuiu
teocbors  which  bud  rendere<t  its  nchoul  one  of  tbr>
iiioBt  celehrutcd  to  the  world. She  wiis  an  Eclec-
tic; hilt  the  exact  sciences  lorined  the  basis  of  all
her  intttructtoii,  mid  Hbe  applied  tbeir  iletnoiutfa-
tiuiiM  to  the  principles  of  the  itpecniative  scieocea
ShM  numbered  nmong  her  difK-ipb'w  many  celehTalwl
men,  among othere Synesius.  aftrrwnnts \mhof
of  Ptoleinftl»«,  who  pretMT\'ed  during  Iiin  whtje  Itf#
IIh'  iiioxt friendly  feelings  towiinU  her,  althonjb
h1)c niiiHtantly refused U>  hecomi>  a oonvert  to
C'hriHiianily. Hypatia  nniti^d  to  a  nuinenliitP  in-
t^dlect  many  of  the  altractinriKi  and  all  the  virti^*
ofher  ftex. Ilerdrefui  wn»  n-inarkiibk*  foi  ilAsini-
plieily;  her  comlnei  was  nlwiiyn  alN>Te  snapiriflo:
and  she  knew  well  how  to  e^miiM-l  the  re»t«wl  f'
tlioisc  nf  her  anditors  who  felt  the  iuUnciice  nflwr
ebarms. All  iilea  of  marriage  was  constantly  i*-
jecte«l  hy  her  a»  thrtmiening  to  interfere  with  l»<*r
devoMon  U>  her  favourite  stodiea. Oro«il«»,p"-
ernor  of  Alexandria,  admired  the  talent*  of  H*p"-
tin,  and  fitninetitly  liati  reconnw^  to  hvr  fur  ^vier-
Ite  WAi*  dehiroils  of  represwing  tlle  loo  urdrut  nnll
of  St.  Cynl.  who  aaw  in  Ilypati/i  one  nf  the  jirin-
oipnl  supports  of  pagaoitni. The  partiisan^  itf  tbt
hi8liup,oi)  their  aide,  beheld  in  the  mensurwof  tb*
governor  the  resnlt  of  the  cxiunsola  of  llypAlia;
the  moKt  faimticul  nf  their  tiiimhor,  in  Murdi,  A o.
415,  aeix(H)  upon  Hypatia  ws  ithe  \v:tn  proceetling  !•>
her  Hchool,  forctni  her  to  dewend  from  her  rltari-
ot,  and  diitgged  her  into  ti  ueighhtniriiig  rh<i(vb,
nlieiv,  Hti'ipjK'd  of  her  viwltnenia,  aUv  waa  put  le
dKuth  liy  her  brntal  fuea. Her  hody  ima  liackni
lo  i>i«cc>s  with oy)4ter-(^hell>),  and the bloody  it-
nmins  were  dragged  tbroagh  tko  utrocta  aud  Bnat-
ly  biinic>d.

The  works  of  Hypatia  wvre  luat  iu  the  bttniiDg
of  Mw  Alexandrian  Library,  lu  the  uuiuWrofllteie
were  a  conini'-ntdry  «n  rMnphaiilua,  au  AMtotHHiii-


I


I


(


UYPATODORUS


867


HYrODEMA


cal  Canon,  and  a  commeutary  on  the  Conies  of  Apol-
lonins  of  Perga.  The  very  names  of  ber  otber  pro-
(lucthins  are  lost.  The  Greek  Anthology  contains
an  epigram  in  praise  of  Hypatia,  attributed  to  Pan-
luH  Silentiarius.  Canuu  Kingsley's  historical  ro-
mance (London,  lKt3)  baa  done  much  to  make  her
name  familiar  to  English  readers.  8ee  the  ex<
Itaastive  monograph  on  Hypatia  by  Heche  in  the
Philologus,  XV.  435  foil.  (1860).

Hypatoddnu  ('Yirorbdwpor)-  A  Theban  sculp-
tor, who  floarished  about  B.C.  372.

Hyperbfilos  ('Yirf'pySoXor).  An  Athenian  dema-
gogue in  the  Peloponnesian  War,  of  servile  origin.
In  order  to  get  rid  of  either  Nicias  or  Alcibitides,
HyperboluH  called  for  the  exercise  of  the  ostra-
cism. Bnt  the  parties  endangered  oonibined  to
defeat  him,  and  the  vote  of  exile  fell  on  Hyperbo-
liis  himself — an  application  of  that  dignilied  pun-
ishment by  which  it  was  thought  to  have  been  so
debased  that  the  use  of  it  was  never  recurred  to.
Some  years  afterwards  he  was  murdered  by  the
oligarchs  at  Samos,  B.C.  411  (Thnc.  viii.  74).

Hyperborei  ( 'Yirrp0op(o(,  lit.  "dwellers  beyond
tlie  north  wind").  A  people  of  Greek  legend,
whose  existeuce  was  denied  by  some  uf  the  an-
cients, while  others  endeavoured  to  define  their
position  more  precisely.  They  were  said  to  dwell
far  in  the  North,  where  the  sun  rose  uud  set  only
once  a  year — a  fancy  dne,  perhaps,  to  some  dim
report  of  the  long  arctic  summer  day.  Tlie  fruits
of  the  earth  ripened  quickly  with  them  ;  th«y  lived
iu  unbroken  happiuesti.  knowing  no  violeuce  or
strife,  and  reacheid  thu  nga  of  a  thousand  yeava;
any  who  were  weary  of  life  casting  themselves
from  a  sacred  rock  into  the  sea.  Tlic  myth  is  con-
necteil  with  the  worship  of  the  god  of  light,  Apol-
lo, who  during  the  dark  wiuter  was  supposed  to
visit  them,  as  his  pricj^tly  people,  in  a  chariot
drawn  by  swans ;  returning  to  Delphi  for  the  sum-
mer. There  was  a  tradition  in  Delos  that  iu  ear-
lier times  they  used  to  send  to  that  islaud  the
ftrst-fmits  of  their  harvests  by  way  of  Dodona,
Thessaly,  and  Enboea.

Hyperborei  Montea.  Originally  the  mythical
name  of  an  imaginary  range  of  mountains  in  the
north  of  the  earth.  It  was  afterwards  applied  by
the  geographers  to  various  chains ;  as,  for  exam-
ple, the  Caucasus,  the  Rhipaei  Montes,  and  others.

Hypereaia  (Yirtpta-irj).  The  more  ancient  name
of  Aegira  in  Achaia,  Pausanias  (vii.  26)  relates
the  story  which  accounts  for  the  subsequent  change
of  name.

Hyperia  {'\w4ptia).  A  fountain  of  Thessaly,
placed  by  some  in  the  vicinity  of  Argos  Pelasgi-
cum,  while  others  think  that  it  was  near  Pherae.

Hyperidaa  ( 'Yn-r/>«i'dvff  and 'Yn-rpt'd^r).  One  of
the  Ten  Attic  Orators,  bom  almnt  b.c.  390,  son  of
the  Athenian  Glancippus.  He  was  a  pnpil  of  Plato
and  Isocrates,  and  won  for  himself  an  important
position  as  a  forensic  and  political  orator,  altbongb
his  private  life  was  not  unblemished.  A^  a  8tBt«8-
nian,  he  decidedly  shared  the  views  of  Demos-
thenes, and  was  his  steadfast  ally  in  the  struggle
against  the  Macedonian  party.  It  is  true  that  he
i^erwarda  (b.c.  324)  took  part  iu  the  prosecution
of  DemoatfaeneB,  when  accused  of  having  taken
bribes  Drom  Alexander's  treasurer,  Harpalua,  and
that  he  contributed  to  his  condemnation  on  that
chaige. After  the  destruction  of  Thebes  by  Alex-


ander (335)  it  was  only  with  difficulty  that  he  and
Demosthenes  escaped  being  given  np  to  the  Mace-
donians. After  the  death  of  Alexander  (323)  he
was  the  chief  instigator  of  the  Lamiau  War,  at  the
nnfurtnnate  conclusion  of  which  he  and  Demos-
thenes (who  had  l>een  reconciled  to  one  another  in
the  meantime)  and  other  patriots  were  condemned
to  death  by  the  Macedonian  party.  He  fled  for
sam-tuary  to  a  temple  in  Aegtna,  but  was  dragged
away  from  it  by  force,  and  by  order  of  Autipater
put  to  death  at  Corinth  iu  323.

Of  the  seventy -seven  speeches  which  were
known  to  antiquity  as  the  work  of  Hyperides,
only  a  few  fragnieuts  wei-e  known  until  recent
times ;  but  in  1847,  in  a  tomb  at  Thebes,  in
Egypt,  extensive  fragmentH  were  found  of  hi»
speech  against  Demosthenes,  together  with  a
speech  for  Lycophron,  and  the  whole  of  hia
oration  for  Eiixenippus.  In  1656  there  was  a.
further  discovery  in  Egypt  of  an  important  part
of  the  funeral  oration  delivered  in  322  over  those
who  had  fallen  iu  the  siege  of  Lamia.  In  IB89
M.  Eugene  Revillout  announced  the  purchase  .by
the  Louvre  of  a  papyrus  containing  portions  of
the  first  oration  of  Hyiwrides  against  Athenoge-
nes  (Serue  des  £tudes  Grecgne*,  Jan.-Mai-ch,  1889).

Though  the  speeches  of  Hyperides  never  attain
to  the  force  and  depth  of  those  of  Demostheues,
nevertheless  they  were  valued  highly  on  account
of  the  skill  of  their  construction  and  the  grace  and
charm  uf  their  expression.  They  are  the  proiluc-
tlons  of  a  practical  pleader  who  is  thoroughly  in
command  of  all  his  powers,  and  who  is,  above  all,,
an  accomplished  man  of  the  world — slightly  indo-
lent, witty,  refined,  with  a  delicious  fund  of  irony,
of  perfect  taste,  entertaining  and  urbane.  He  is,
oratorically  speaking,  to  Demosthenes  what  Lord
Salisbury  is  to  Mr.  Gladstone.

The  text  of  Hyi>eri(ies  is  edited  by  Blass  in  the
Teubner  series;  and  there  is  a  good  e«lition  of  the
orations  for  Lycophron  and  Euxeiiippns  by  Bab-
ingtou,  with  fac- similes  of  the  MSS.  (Cambridge,.
1853).  The  best  account  of  his  oratory  is  that  of
Blass  in  his  Aitische  Beredsamkeit,  iii.  2. 1-72  (1877).
See,  also,  Hager's  QuaMtione*  Hyperideae  (Leipzig,
1870);  Cafflanx,  Ht/pMde  (Valenciennes,  I860);.
Jebh,  The  Attie  Oratora,  ii.  pp.  381-92  (London,.
1876)  ;  and  Bohnecke,  Demosthetiea,  Lykurgoa,  Hg-
perides  und  ihr  Zeitalter  (Berlin,  1874).

Hyperion  ( 'Yirtplav).  One  of  the  Titans,  father
nf  the  Snn-god  Helios,  who  himself  is  also  called
Hyperion  in  Homer. See  Titanbs.

Hypemmestra  {'rirfpfirffarpa).  (l)The  only
one  of  the  daughters  of  Danatls  who  spared  her
husband,  Lynceua.  (See  Danaus.)  (2)  Daughter
of  Thestins  and  Enrythemis,  wife  of  OTcles,  and
mother  of  Amphiaraiis.

HjrperoSn  ( wripyoi' ).  The  upper  story  of  a
Greek  house. See  DoMUS.

Hyphftaia  (*Y<^<r(r),  Hypftaia  {'Yiratris)  or  Hy-
p&nla  C^iravis).  A  river  of  India,  now  the  GhaiTa,
falling  into  the  Acesioes. See  Hydaspes.

Hjrpioa  ("Ymoc).  A  river  and  mountain  in
Bithynia.

H3rpiioa  {'Yirvov). The  god  of  sleep.

Hypocaustum. See  Balnear.

HypocrYtea  (imoKptrffs).  An  actor.  See  His-
TRIO.

Hypodema  {vnoirffia). S<'«'  Cai^ckcs.


HYPOUAKUH


llTSTASl'es


Hjrpoeaenm. Sec  Domi's;  Sepl'lokuh.

HypoDdmtia. !^e  Emihsarium.

Byporchema  (  inropx^tta  ).  A  *|»eci«8  of  lyric,
<'IioruI  Miiig  ill  livoly  iltytlimit;  iu  Kiibjoct  vns
fieiicrally  gay,  anil  cnninlnctl  iinitntivt^  daiine
Diiivptnnnta.  Like  thi<  pittiiim.  ilx-w!  rttural  04lr>»
w«n^  moHtly  nniig  tn  liononr  of  Apollo.

HypoBceniom. Sm  Tiirathcm,

Hypotheca. Sws  I'lGXia.

HypoEoma  (iirb^u^). Bfo  Kavis.

HypMu  ('Y^f ).  A  river  of  Sicily  fiUliog  ioto
the  CriiiiMi^.

HypMua  ( *Y^f  vi).  A  kdii  of  PetucUii  and  Crrlltui.
He  wiiH  itiug  of  tbu  Lapillinr  (<[.  v.)  uiid  f»t)H-^r  of
Cyrrui^.

Hypslclea  ('Y^inXijt).  Au  Mtronnmor  i>f  AIojc-
Auilriii,  who  llouriiihed  ntiiUrr  Plolcmy  1*1i.vms>ii,
hImmiI  n.c.  140.  IIo  id  coDAiilei'cd  hy  wtme  to  linvt<
i)i«ii  I1h>  aiitlior  of  till'  fuiiiteciitli  book  nppiMulcd
to  Euclid's  EkmfHli>,  in  which  lie  disnimiwd  tho
TVgiTlariudidA.  No  one.  however,  dispui^M  hiaclaiia
to  a  small  work  eiiliHed  tltpi  T17C  TWf  ZatSitan  'Afit-
<f}opat,  ill  wliicli  lie  )riveH  a  luptliiul,  fur  from  exact,
of  cal(;nlnting  the  riAiiig»  of  eiich  sign  or  iKirtioti
of  iLe  cf  liptic,

Hypsipj^l6  ('Y^iirvArj).  Daughter  of  Thoas  of
L«i]lH>s.  The  Lciiiiiian  wninon  bud,  from  jealousy
«f  their  Thraoiaii  iiinids,  killed  all  tlut  men  of  tho
island;  llypeipylS  alone  spared  her  father  Tlinau,
having  l^eeu  tlie  menns  of  aiding  hini  flight.  When
tlie  Argonatil8  landed  at  I^eiinioH  and  united  with
ibe  wiiinen.  RypKipylt^  horr  tnln  hhiih  to  Tiutoii — -
EnneUM,  n'lio  in  Homer  figtireh  aa  king  of  I^niiiiiH
ami  parries  mi  irudft  with  ilic  tireekH  before  Troy;
and  Thoni<  (uIho  i^ailed  DeipIiiluH  and  NeltrophoniiM},
who  J8  KonietiinBs  deAerilved  a»  a  sun  of  Dinnyxut*.
'When  the  newHofhcrfitther'Honcape  wa«  niuioitred
among  Iho  I/enniiun  women,  Hyiisi]»yl6  wr*  forced
to  lt(-e  for  her  life,  and  waA  captured  by  pirates,
who  Nohl  Iter  to  Kycnrgus  of  Nemea.  There,  an
the  ntime  of  OpheltCK,  the  infant  Hon  of  the  king,
■he  accideiilnlly  i-anxed  Iiih  death  hy  a  Hnake  (nee
p8rVBK  Against  Thkbrs),  and  wat  exp>t»»^•1l  to  the
greatest  danger,  from  wliicli  Hhe  wa«  only  re«eiiftd
hy  the  intrrvi-nlion  of  her  houu,  who  wci-«  (tent  to
licT  niil  by  Dloriyftiis.

Hypsus  j'YiJ^nc't).  A  town  in  Artadia  on  a
nionntftin  of  the  niiine  name.

Hyrcania  (YpKayia).  A  prfivinee  of  tlie  aiicii-nl
IVrKOtn  KMt]^i^<',  on  lUexonth  mid  Hoiithenst  sbon-t^
of  the  CaHpian  or  Hyreimian  Hen,  and  aeparnled  by
loonntain^nn  the  west,  Honth,  and  eiuit  fn>in  Media,
Panltia,  and  Margiana.  It  tlonrii^hed  inoat  niMler
the  Parthianft,  whose  kiiiga  ofYen  resided  iu  it  diir*
ing  1)11"  mimmcr.

Hyrcanum  or  Hyrcanium  MarA. Sue  Caspium

Hyrcanus  {'YpKafus).  (1)  Iuasnks,  prince  and
liigb-]>riost  of  tha  Jew»,  m',-w  |ho  son  and  snccoiwiur


of  Simon  Macealinens,  tbo  restorer  of  the  indepon-
deiire  of  Iiidiiva.  lie  snecm-ded  to  hii  fAlhoT^*
power  B  c.  1:^,  and  died  in  IU6.  Alibongh  Ite  did
not  lUBiimo  the  title  of  king,  he  may  be  regarded
us  the  fonnder  of  the  monarchy  of  Iitdaea,  which
continued  in  his  family  till  Ibe  aoorHHton  of  lleroil.
(2)  High-priest  and  king  of  the  JewR.  wiu  the  rld>
est  son  of  Alexander  lannneus  and  hi«  wife  Alox-
aiidra,  and  was  fri<i|nont]y  eiigngetl  in  war  witli
his  brother  Aritttubnlii'i,  wbv  uius  however,  taken
to  Borne  oa  a  prisoner  by  Ponipey  in  n.c.  ^1.  Hyr-
canua  wua  put  to  death  by  bis  Dacoescmr,  Herod,  in
B-c.  30.

Hyila  {'Ypia).  (1)  A  town  in  Bneotia  tioirTann-
gra. {"i)  A  town  In  Apnlio. (3)  A  eily  in  Culabrw.

Ryriaus  Cfpitvs}.  (1)  An  Arcadian  tnouaivli,
for  whom  Aganieden  and  Trophoniiis  constnieted
a  trt>a«iiry.  The  ntory  about  Ibis  trea«nry  ntM*!])-
blcM  the  one  told  by  Hi-DMlutns  u>>  i'H)  of  thti
treasury  of  the  Egyptian  king  Kliain|>hiiiitua.  lo
tliecounlrnctionof  the  treasury  of  IIyrien&,Aganie-
tleit  and  Tntphonins  ci>ntrived  lo  place  one  stuitr
in  nnrh  n  mauner  that  it  conid  bo  tjiken  away  out-
Hide,  and  thus  foi-med  an  (entrance  to  Ibe  tTen»iiry,
willmnt  any  one  perceiving  it,  Agamede*  siid
Tmphnnius  now  conntantly  robbed  the  treasury;
and  the  king,  seeing  that  locks  niul  M-al«  w«-re
nninjun'd  while  bis  treasures  were  roTtslanlly  de-
eri'MBiiig,  set  Imps  to  cntrh  the  thief.  Agiimrdes
was  thiiHensunred,  and  Tiophoniiia  rnt  off  hinlji'ad
to  avert  the  diaeoVL>ry.  After  (his  Trophonttis  voa
immediately  swallowed  np  by  the  earth.  On  Ihti
spot  there  was  afterwards,  i  n  the  grove  of  Lebadro.
the  cave  of  Agamedes  with  a  trohiiun  by  the  ftitlv
of  it.  Here,  ulso.  was  the  oracle  of  Trophouina
A  tradition  tneutiotied  hy  Cicero  (  Tu»c.  \.  47)  »iat«*
that  Agamedes  aud  Trophonttis,  aft«r  building  the
temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  prayed  lo  the  god  (0
grant,  thetn  iu  rewanl  for  their  labour  what  WM
best  fttr  niiMt.  The  gml  iiniiniseil  tn  dn  so  on  a  cer-
tain day,  and  whiui  the  day  came,  the  two  bmlbets
died.  (Si  A  |>oaMant  of  Hyria  in  Ibteotia.  wb«M
tiHine  Ik  connected  uilb  the  legend  of  the  birth  of
Orion. H(-e  Orion.

HynniuS  ('Y/i^iVi}}.  The  daughter  of  VeWov
(or  Nyel^ns),  wife  of  Phorhoo,  and  tnotberof  Arlni.

Hyrtfictta  ("YpmitM).  A  Trojau,  to  whom  Prinm
gave  biH  own  first  wife  Arisha  on  marrying  Heeo-
ba.  Homer  makes  him  the  father  of  Asi(ts«*lt^
ll>rtacidies.  Id  Vergil,  Nisus  and  Hi|)iMKo£o  are
ul»o  represented  as  sous  of  Hyrtacua.

Hysiae  {'Yoiaiy.  (1)  A  town  in  Argolta,  south
of  Argos,  destroyed  by  the  Spartaos  in  the  Pclo-
)H)nii€Hiati  War.  ('Z)  A  town  in  Bocotia,  eatti  of
Phitneai*,  called  by  HeriNlolus  (r.  74)  n  drnius  of
Atrii^a,  but  probably  belotigtng  to  PIntaeae.

HystaapCfl  ('Yfrratrvrit).  (I)  Kuther  of  the  Por-
I  idaii  king,  l)ar)U»  1.  Hi-  had  been  Mitrnp  of  Petite
'  niidiT  (.'anibyses.  ^  "i  )  Tlie  non  of  Unrius  Land
'  Atossn.  Me  eonimanded  a  forue  of  Barlriaus  aud
,  Sacne  iu  the  army  of  bis  brother  Xerxea,


a  bios Qlf Q53 M55


v.;


Stanford  University  Libraries
Stanford,  California
