_ siu.ir  No.

Q.  4 o U.2J


liar/ on  In' bran


yo  /////a


y/u  Yy  v/  / f/.  t ////

/v  /yy/ryy  /u  ///


yy  yyyy  y,


I


/?  .//?  s?


J>  z


As^Ar.


yuA

4^yy  ^ ^ ^ =

-?&r  *&*-*-  yy*y  s&ue*/**~


&fyS


7^*.


S/C*s  <2-


&Z2 y^-sr*,  **  ^ ^

y^yy-y^sy.  y^44  y^ryy^^^yy

AA y.  y^ky  y AAy>  A^-  //S.

j^skey  . Ayy-  y4  As  *


y^y*z7 yA' yy^y


, yA^yy'yA/-


'y.


* y


'y  ^-A-


•^yy~y<r


A


*Zy  yZ-  y y sytyr  *

y^  /4yr'Jyy.


^y^'^f-iP ^ '.'^'''^y  ^ 'c'^  g^y^u. — .


y/y.


A A s*



AAsyA yj  yt  A*A  Ay^y.  yy,  y y^^Jr  A '/.  y>.

A?.


1


i ^ i j

•»  W 'i

Vt  , f .

1 H &

Hi  Q I $ -1 1 1


^5


*


i



0


r


i


t


f


aA

Declaration  of  egregi-

ous  PopifhImpoftures,to  with 'draw  the
harts  of  her  cS\d  aieslies  Subic  its from  their

allegeance,  and  from  the  truth  of  Chriftkm  Religion

profejfed  in  England,  "pader  the  pretence  of
catling  out  deuils.

Practised  by  edmvnds  , alias

iVeflon  a lefuit,  and  diners  Romifh

Priefts  his  wicked  affociates.

iVhere-vnto  are  annexed  the  Copies  of  the

Confessions,  and  Examinations  cf  the  parties  themjelues,
which  were  pretended  to  be  poffeffed,  and  difpoffeffed,
taken  vf>on  oath  before  her  <JM  aieHies
Commiffioners,  for  cmfes  £ ccle-

{uliicaH.  '


AT  LONDON

Printed  by  lames  Roberts , dwelling  in

Barbican.  I <S  o 5,


£-&>  The  Argument  of  the  feue-

rall  Chapters,

1 THE , occafion  of  publifhing  thcfe  wonders,by  the  comming
into  light  of  the  penned  hooke  of  Miracles.

2 The  fit  time  that  the  Popifli  JExorcifts  chofe  to  aft  thefe  mira
cles  in.

1 The  places  wherein  thefe  Miracles  were  played.

4 More  fpeciall  confiderations  touching  their  choyfe  of  places.

5 The  perfons,  their  Difciples  pretended  to  be  poffefled,  and  dif*
poflefted.

6 Their  wayes  of  catching.and  inueigling  their  Difciples.

7 Their  holy  pretences  to  make  their  Difciples  fure  vnto  them.

8 Their  meanes,  and  manner  of  inftrufting  their  Schollers.

9 Ofthefecrets,  and  ftrange  operation  of  the  holy  chayre,  and
holy  potion.

10  Touching  the  flrange  names  of  their  dcuils.

1 1 The  reafons  why  fomtime  one  deuil  alone,  fomtimes  an  io©,
fometimes  a thoufand  are  cart  out  at  a clap.

1 2 Of  the  fecret  of  lodging,  and  couching  the  dcuill  in  any  part
of  the  body  that  the  Exorcift  pleafe.

15  Ofdiflodging,  rowfing,  and  hunting  the  deuil  by  the  dread-
full  power  of  the  prefence,  approach,  & bodily  touch  of  a prieft.

14  Of  the  ftrange  power  ota  Catholicjue  Priefts  breath,  and  of
the  admirable  fire  that  is  in  a Priefts  hands  to  burne  the  deuill.

5 Of  the  admirable  power  in  a Priefts  gloucs,  hishofe,  his  gir-
dle, his  fhirts,  to  fcorch  the  deuill.

1 6 Of  the  wonderfull  power  in  a Priefts  albe,  his  amice,  his  ma-
niple, his  ftole,  to  whip,  and  plague  the  deuil.

17  Certaine  cjueftions  aunfwered  , concerning  the  Church  of
Rome,  her  making, and  accumulating  yet  more  dreadfull  tooles,and
Engines  for  the  deuill.

3 8 Of  the  dreadfull  power  of  holy  water,  hallowed  candell.Frair-
kineenfe,  Brimftone,  the  booke  of  Exorcifmes,and  the  holy  potion,
to  feald,  broyle,and  to  fizle  the  deuill.

1 9 Of  the  aftonifhablc  power  of  Nicknames,  Reliques,  & Affes
cares,  in  affliftmg,  and  tormenting  the  deuill.

20  Of  the  dreadfull  power  of  the  Crofle,  and  Sacrament  of  th«
Altar  to  torment  the  deuil,  and  to  make  him  roare.

2 1 Of  the  ftrange  formes,  ftiapes,  & apparitions  of  the  deuils.

2 2 Of  the  admirable  finall  aft  of  expelling  the  deuils, and  of  their
formes  in  the  departing.

33  Of  the  ayme,  end,  & mark  of  all  this  peftilent  tragaedie.


TO  THE  SEDVCED


oliques  of  England.

(***)  • v

S Educed  & difvn/ted  'Brethren , there  he  two  grand  wit-
ches in  the  world, that  feduce  the  foules  of  the  fimple,  &
lead  them  to  perdition  : Lying  wonders , and  Coun-
terfeit zeale.  The  power  ofthefe  two,  the  Jpirit  ofCjod
• hath  mofl  Imely  expreffed  vnto  vs , one  in  the  per/on  of  Si-
mon Magus  the  Sorcerer,  who  with  his  lying  wondersdoad
fo  hewitchedthe  fimple  people,  as  they  followed  him  with  this
acclamation:  This  man  is  the  power  of  the  great  and
mighty  GOD.  The  other  in  theperfon  offome  of  the
Corinthians.,  who  by  the  feigned  zeale  of  the  counterfeite
tsTpo Ties  ',  were  bewitched , and  carried  from  S.  Paule^  the
true  and  blejfed  zsdpoflle  of  our  Sauiour  Chrifl.  Thefe  two
witching  powers  hatte  many  yeeres  fvnce  combined  and  vnited
themfelues  in  the  Tope  of  Thorne,  and  his  difciples,  who  take
Vpon  them  the  foueraigne  power  of  our fauiour  (fhnfl , with
authority  to  commaund  vncleane  jpirit s , and  to  make  them
obey : and  doe  pretend fuch  a burning  holy  zeale  vnto  you,  a s
that  they  regard  neither  the  pleafures , profits , nor  prefer-
ments of  this  world , nay  not  theyr  owne  liberty,  and  Hues, but
doe  offer  them  vp  both  as  a facnfice  for  your  foules  confla-
tion. Thefe  are  mighty  powers  to  fwayyour  iudgements,and
affe Elions  from  vs  vnto  them.  Now  if  it  J hall  appeare  vnto
you  as  cleerc,  as  the  light  of  the  funne , that  thefe  powers  be
feigned,  and  counterfeite  in  them , and  that  they  be  in  truth
nothing  els,  fane  the  mills,  and  tllufons  of  Satan , to  dimme

2 the


T o the  feduced  Catholiques

the  ey  of  your  vnder&anding , and  bewitch  your  ajfcEhons  to
doate  vppon  theyr  impious  fuperftition,  what  canyon , or  any
ingenious  Jpirits  doe  fajfe , then  bewaile your  feduced  mifaf-
fell  ion  vnto  vs , and  to  account  them  as  the  grand  Imp  oft  or  s>
and  enchaunters  of  your foules  ? And  that  this  may  be  cleerly
manifetted  vnto  you,  l befeechyou  in  the  bowels  of  our  b faf-
fed Saviour,  to  fat  openyour  eares  & eyes  to  this Jhort  decla-
ration: to  perufe  and  read it  with  a ftngfa  ey , and  impart  tall
affeliwn , and  if  it  fball  not  moft  persficuoufly  appeare  vnto
you, that  the  7 operand  his  [pints  he  fendeth  in  here  amongji
you , do  p/ay  Almighty  fod7  his  fonne,&  Saints  vpon  a ft  age,
do  make  a pageant  of  the  (Jhurch,the  bfajfed  Sacraments ,the
rites  & ceremonies  of  religion,  do  cog  & coine  deutls,  Jpirits,
& foules  departed  this  life, to  countenance  and  grace,  or  face
out  their  defperate  abhomimtions , then ft  and  dijvnited,  and
difaffecled  as  you  doe . It  is  hot  ih  any  man  ( Icofejfe)  tofeefa
thofi  diuine  beames  of  burning  zeal f that  were  in  S . Paule,
whowijljed  himfelfe  Anathema/^ his  binfmen  according
to  the  flefb : yet  a man  of  Ionas  [fir  it  I can  eaftly  name , that
would  moll  gladly  be  caft  into  the  fea,to  calr/ie  this  tempeft  of
opp  option  rifen  here  amongfl  vs , and  of  Iercmies  de notion,
that  doth  pray  for  a fount aine  of  t eares  to  bewaile  the
lamentable  blindnes  of  his  owne  nation , that  men  as  you
are,  borne  free  of  an  vnderTlandwgfpirit , and  ingenious  dif-
poftttonsfljould  fo  bafely  degenerate ,as  to  captiuate your  wits,
wils , & Jpirits,  to  aforraine  Idol  (full,  compofed  of  palpable
filhon,  and  diabolicall  fafeination , whofe  enchaunted  chalice
ofheathenijh  drugs , Lamian  fuperfhticn,  hath  the  power

of  Cl\TQt%,and  Medaeas  evpyo  metamorphofe  men  into  ajfes,
bayards,  (Sr  fame.  Is  it  not  their  owne  brand  they  haue flam-
ped  onyourforheads , that  England  hath  beene  alwayes  good
ajjeto  the  7 ope l . ■ • . \

Who  doth  not  bewaile  the  fely  doating  Indian  Nation,  that
falls  dewne  and  performes  diuine  adoration  to  a rag  of  red
cloih  ; and  the  befitted  zAigyptians, that  kiffed  with  earnest
de  notion  the  z/Ijftc  vppon  which  the  Idollfafate , and  the

lymph  a-


of  England.

lymphatic  all prieSls  of  Baal,  that  launced  theyr  prone  flefh
before  an  Idol  of  wood  ? Would  God  your  bewitched  dotage
were  not  as  palpable,  and  more  lamentable  then  theyr st  that
fall  downe  & adore  a morfell  of  bread,  that  kjffe  dr  clip  with
religions  demotion  the  Popes  toe,  for  bearing  the  feigned  cotin -
terfeit  of  our  Sauiour  on  earth : performed  with  the  right
(Egyptian glofe, non  Pape  fed  Petro^non  afinx  fed  dex,
this  honour  i s not  to  the  Pope , but  to  S.  Pef  er,  not  to  the  ajfe9
but  to  Iiis.  Tour  Topes  beeing  proclaimed  by  your  orrne  O -
rachfls  to  the  world \ one  to  be  an  t/ffe,  another  a Fox , ano-
ther a Wolfe,  v • . . < *.  * •

What  people  ,but  you, were  euer  fo  bewitched \as  to  be  borne
in  hand,  that  a houfewas  carried  in  the  ayrefrom  Pa  left  in  a
to  Lorctfo  : that  a painted  Image  in  a wall,  doth  worke  as
high  miracles,  as  euer  were  performed  by  the  eternall  fonne
ofCjod  : that  the  prints  of  S.  Frauncis  flripes , the  tayle  of
our  Sauiour s A(fe,the  milke  of  our  blejfed  Lady  are  this  day
to  be  feene : and  thefe  grace/ejfe  jdltlejfe  gulleries  either  to
be  belie  ued,  or  count  enaunced,  by  men  of  wit , understand-
ing, and fpirit , fuck  as  are  this  day  many  in  the  Ifomijh
Church  ? If  you  aske  me  the  caufe , what  can  it  be  but  this ,
that  G od  hath giuen  them  ouer  to  the  fpirit  ofillufion , to  be -
licuc  vnfauory  lies,  for  refufing  in  their  pride  to  embrace  the
pure  naked fyncentie  of  the  Cj off  ell  of (f hr  ill.  He  that  fits  in
the  heauens.  Almighty  Cjod \ with  his  Angels,  and  Saint jp  do
laugh  thefe  mifhapen  monSlers  to  fcorne.

exfW  who  can  but  bleede  in  hart , to  fee  you  as  farre  be-
witched on  our  impofturifing  renagadoes,  that  come  frefh  fro
the  Popes  tyring  houfe,  masked  with  the  vizard  of  holy  bur-
ning zeale.  Fir  ft  it  may  pleafe  you  to  obferue,  that  the  wifer
grauer  fort  of  the  do  keepe  themfelues  warme  in  theyr  (f l of-
fers at  home , and  doe  feede  themfelues  fat  with  the  fpoiles
of  your  confufion.  Thefe  lighter  fuperfluities , whom  they  dif-
gorge  amongSl you,  how  they  play  the  Tats , and  Moahsy  ei-
ther trenching  themfelues  in  the  mines  of  your  labyrinths  at
home , or  maskpig  in  your  gold  andfiluer  abroade  in  the fa-

. isf  y fhion


T o the  feduced  Catholiqucs

Jhion  of  great  Potentates  , vntill  Cjods  reuengefull  arme  doth
vneafe  them  to  the  view  of  the  world,  & then  they  fuffer  the
mild  flroke  ofiudice  with  a glorious  orientation  ,as  you  in  be-
guiledfimplicitie  doe  imagine  for  theyr  conceited  religion  i
but  as  the  wifer  fee , the  fate  did  alwaies  know,  and  is  of  late
publifhed  m theyr  own  writings,  for  high  & odious  treafons  :
and  prof e fed  by  their  owne  tJMaiflersjhat  haue  made  them
after  their  own  images,  to  be  of  a fpirit  of  contradiction  to  our
Gouernours  and  Prince:  and  it  u wondred  at  bythcmfelues,
confidering  theyr  treafonable  machinations  that  her  High -
neffe,  and  the  fate,  haue  carried  fo  mtlde , and  mercifull  an
hand  ouer  them,  & that  any  one  of  them  is  left  aliueto  Itbell
againH  the  admirable  lenity  of  her  Afaie  flies  gracious  pro-
ceedings. Wherein  be  ye  Well  a fared,  that  if  the  fword  ofiu -
ftice  were  drawne , and  inflilhd  according  to  the  waight  and
meafure  of  their  deteftable  dejignes,  that  fewer  of  the  would
come  ouer,  and  that  this  couey  of  night-birds , would fhrowde
thefelues  war  me  vnder  the  gentle  wings  of  theyr  holy  fat  her
at  %ome.  But  admit  ( as  you  conceiue ) that  they  died  for  the
credit  of  their  conceited fuperditton : what  did  Lucians  Pc-
regrinus  lejfe,  then  offer  himfelfe  in  fire  at  Olimpia/tfr  the
credit  of  his  fafcinationi  What  did  /Efculapius  vppon  the
hill  /fifna  to  get  himfelfe  a name , but  cafl  himfelfe  head -
long  into  the  burning  flames  ? What  doe  the  Indian  priefts
' at  this  day  , but  facrifice  themfelues  for  the  count enouncing
of  theyr  aiabolicall  incantation.  It  is  no  new, nor  flrange  thing
for  the  authors , and  maintamers  of  foils  > and f allions  in.  all
hmdes,  to  die  with feeming  fhew  of  glorious  refolution , CDoe
but  fenoufiy  recount  the  quality  of  this  fugitive  generation,
& fee  what  pious  refolution  can  lodge  in  theyr  breads.  What
are  they  afore  they goe  ouer  but  dife out ended , ruinate, ftig-
maticall  refufe  people : of  a f odious , ambitious  y exorbitant
corner fation  abroade,  exploded , or  cunningly  difearded  their
owne  Societies  where  they  liued  : and  how  ghodly  & pried-*
ly  they  demeane  thefelnes  here  amougdyou  at  theyr  returne ,

I referrejeufor  demondation  to  this fbort } and perfficuous
v-; . •,  < : z . decla-  ‘


of  England.

declaration.  Wherein  yon  may  plainly  fee , if  yon  doe  not  wil-
fully hoodwinke your  owne  eyes , that  the  holy  pretendedhote
z,cale  of  the  fiery  fpintsfrom  rRgme,  is  the  meer  Heathemfh
tughng  0/Bells  priefls,  to  deuour your goods , lands,  & patri-
monies >t  he  rights  of  your  posterity  ,and  aunctent  monuments
cfyour  name , to  defraude your  children  oftheyr  bread,  and
caufe you  offer  it  to  impure  dogs , to  enrich  theyr  owne  Cloy -
flers,  (folledges,  & Churches , with  the  fpoyles  of  your  def-
lation, to  defile  your  chafl  houfes,  pollute  your  tender  virgins,
depraue,  and  inueigle  your  owne  wiues  lying  in  your  bo foms,
efpecally  by  that  poy/onable  engine  of  hypo  critic-all  Confejfi -
on,  and  finally  to  offer  you  vp  as  a pray  to  that  Ullonfler  of
Tfome,  the  head  of  all  vnnaturall  and  deteUable  rebellion .

c sAnd  that  this  declaration  might  be  free  from  the  carpe,
and  cauill  ofill-affefted , or  difcompofed  fp ints,  I haue  ailed -
ged  nothing  for  materiall , or  authentic  all  heerein  , but  the
exprejfe  words , eyther  of fome  part  of  the  Miracle  booke,
penned  by  the  priests, and  filed  vpon  IJgcord, where  it  is  pub-
lique  to  be  feene,  or  els  a claufe  oftheyr  confejfi  on  who  were
fellow  aElors  in  this  impious  dijfimulation . Whofie  feuerall
confejfions , and  conteflations  ( the  parties  beeingyet  lining)
are  heere  publifbedin  print,  that  the  world  may  be  a witneffe
of  our  integrity  herein . zsfll  which  had  beene  long  ere  this
offered  to  your  equall  confideration , but  that  the  Miracle*
booke  came  but  lately  to  hand3&  the  getting  offoure  chiefe
D dtmoniacki  together,  befides  many  more  affislants , beeing
perfons  of  that  quality  and  condition , was  a matter  of  fome
paines,  and  trauell  to  effeEl.

If  the  forme  and  phrafe  be  diFtafling  to  fome  clowdy fpi-
rits , as  too  light , and  ironicallfor  one  of  my  prof effi on , let
the  matter  be  my  Aduocat,  that  draweth  me  thereunto,  and
the  manner  my  Apologie  a little  too:tru$Ung  I may  be  excu-
fed  to  iefl  at  their  idling,  that  haue  made  a teH  of  God,  and
of  his  blejfed  Saints  in  heauen . If  I haue  wittingly  falfified
or feigned  any  thing  out  oft  hat  booke  of  wonders,  (jod  doe Jo
to  me,  and  more , for  dooing  them fo  much  wrong : but  if  all


To  the  fcduced  Cathol'iques

be  truly , and  authentically  fet  downe,gtae  GO*D  hisglorie}
his  Church  her  honor yy our  Soueraigne  her  allege ancey your
Brethren  theyr  due  affeftion,  and  the  Pope , and  his  iagltng
companions , their  deferued  deteslation . And fo  I leaue yon
to  the  proteftor  of  all  truth , and  the  reuenger  ofallfaljhood \
and  hypocrtticall  diffmulation •


Yours  in  Chrift
S.  H.


Page,  i,

A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture  in
cafting  out  of  Deuils.

CHAP.  i.

The  occajtoH  of publifhing  thefe  wonders,  by  the  com -
mtng  to  light  of  the  penned  boohe
of  Miracles.

A Bout  fomc  three,  or  foure  yeeres  fince,  there  was
found  in  the  hands  of  one  Ma.  Barnes  a Popifh
Rccufant,  an  Englifh  Treatifc  in  a written  hand,
fronted  with  this  Latine  fentence,  taken  out  of
the  P fa  lines,  Vcnite , et  narrabo,  quanta fecit  (Dommm  am-
mo, me<e,come  and  I wil  (hew  you,  what  great  things  the
Lord  hath  done  for  my  foule . Which  treatifc  when  we
had  perufed  vppon  this  holy  inuitation , we  found  it  a
holie  fardell  of  holy  reliques , holy  charmes , and  holy
confecrated  things,  applied  to  the  cafting  out  of  many
thoufands  of  deuils,  out  of  fix  young  perfons,  3 . young
men,  and  three  proper  young  maides,  accomplifhed  by
the  meancs  of  Fa:  Sdmunds, alias  WeHon,  a principal  1 Ic-
fuit  of  his  order  in  thofc  times,  5c  twelue  fecular  Priefts,
hisreucrend  aftiftants.

The  names  of  the  parties  fuppofcdto  bepoflefted,
were  thefe,  CMarwood,  feruaunt  (as  hath  beene  enfor-
med)  to  Ma.  <ssfnthony  Babington , Will:  Trayford , atten-
dant at  that  time  vppon  Ma:  SdmundPeckham,  Robert
Maynie  Gentleman,  lately  before  come  out  of  Fraunce:

Sara  Williams,  Fnfwood  Williams , two  fifters , and  Anne
Smith,  all  three  meniall  feruaunts  to  Maifter  Peckham  a-
forefacd.  The  names  of  the  Aftors  in  this  holyCcme-
die,  were  thefe,  Sdmmds)  alias  WeHon  > reUor  chon , of

e - • vbfi  B.  whom)


page ;2*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

who  you  haue  heard  afore,  Ma:  Cornelius ,Ma:  rDibdale,
Ma:  Thomfon,  Ma:  Stemp,  Ma:  TyrrellMa:Drylaud,Maz
Tuhce,  Ma:  Sherwood,  Mx.fVinkefie/d,  Ma:  udfAxt

'DakjvSyMx  Ballard,  and  fame  other  bcfidcs,  that  were
daily  commers,  and  goers.

This  play  of  facred  miraclcs,was  performed  in  fundry
houfes  accomodate  for  the  feate , in  the  houfe  of  the  Li
Vaax  at  Hackney  , of  Ma:  Barnes  at  Fulmer , of  Ma:
Hughes  at  Vx bridge,  of  Sir  George  Beckham  at  Denham,
and  of  the  Earle  of  Lincolne  in  Chanon  Row  in  London;
The  time  chofen  to  a&,  & publifh  thefc  wonders,were
theyecres  8y,  and  86,  ending  with  the  apprehenfion,
and  execution  of  Eallard,  and  Babington,  and  the  reft
of  that  impious  conform  ■

And  becaufe  the  gentle  Invitafor  of  vs  to  come,  and
fee  his  wonders,  when  wee  come  to  fee  them , himfclfe,
and  his  a&ors  doe  play  lea  ft  to  be  feene , it  hath  becne
thought  meet,  to  fend  for  him,  and  as  many  of  his  play?
fellowes,  as  Tiburne  will  giuc  leauc  to  come,  to  conferrq
further  with  them , touching  this  myfticall  play  \ whe-
ther the  partes  haue  bcene  handled  handfomlic , and
cunningly  , or  no : what  the  fcope  of  the  Author  Ed»
wands , and  hisaflfociates  was  in  this  wonderful  pageant,
and  whether  good  decorum  haue  bcene  kept  in  a&ing
the  fame.  Whcreiti  (I  rouft  tell  you)  forae  paines  haue
beene  taken  by  fome  in  authorise , for  the  finding  out
of  fuch  agents,  patients,  and  afliftants,as  haue  furnifhed
the  ftage,  and  in  bringing  them  to  fay  their  parts  fo  per-
fpicuoufly  on  the  ftage,  as  that  euery  young  child  may
fee,  who  beeis,whatheemeanes,  and  whether  his  part
tends.

Marwood,  and  Trayford , cannot  yet  be  found , it  is
thought  they  are  conueyed  beyond  feas,  (as  fome  other
of  theyr  play-fellowes  fhould  haue  beene)  for  telling  of
talcs.  The  other  foure  poftefTed  haue  come  to  light,
and  vppon  gentle  conference,  haue  frankly  > and  freely

advowed.


in  calling  out  of  Deuils:  pagejg.

advowcd,and  haucfealed  it  with  their  voluntary  oathcs,
taken  vppon  the  holy  Euangclifls,  that  all  in  effeff,  that
palEed  between  them,&  the  Prieiles,iu  this  wonderous
poflefsion,  and  difpoflefsion,  was  naught  clfc  faue  clofe  ,

packing,  cunning  iugling,  featefaUEood , andcloked
difsimulation . One  of  the  reuerend  Priefts,  who  was
himfclfe  a principal!  a&or  in  this  holy  legerdemaine,be~
ing  examined,  hath  contefted  with  the  confeflion  of  the
other  examinats,  touching  the  vnfoldingofthisfacrcd
packe.  All  whofe  feuerall  examinations , confcfiions,
and  relations, touching  the  beginning,  proceeding,  and
finifhing  of  this  tragicail  comedie,  wee  haue  thought
tneetc  adverbum  to  publifhin  print,  that  all  men  may
fee  wee  haue  dealt  truly,  and  finccrcly  heerein,  and  that
all  may  hkewife  fee,  quanta  fecit  Dominusy  (according  to
the  faying  of  that  Latine  fentcncc  prefixed  to  the  dif-
courfe)  how  great  things  the  Lord  in  his  mercie  dooth
by  courfc  of  times  rcueale,  of  that  man  of  finne,  of  the
myftcrie  of  iniquitic , and  of  thofe  reuerend  iugling
Pricfts,  his  difguifed  comedians.

Wherein,  that  euery  perfon  may  appearc  in  his  owne
proper  colours , the  dcuill  in  his,  and  the  deuils  char-
mers in  theyrs,  that  euery  part  may  be  confidered , how
Well  it  hath  beenplaied,  and  what  a&or  hath  beft  defer*
tied  the  plaudrie,  oxfetfpendite,  for  his  good  a&ion,  and
Wit,venite9  et  narrabo , come  and  fee  it  f#  out,  in  the  fa-
crcd  robes  out  of  the  holy  wardrop  fro  Rotne,thcir  ho-
ly attire,  theyr  holy  reliques,  their  confccratcd  creatures,
abeyr  own  fpcccb,  a& ion,  & fafhion,  & thus  it  begins.

CHAP.

ff  The  time  when  the  Popijh  Exorctfis  chofe  to  atl
thefe  miracles .

^He  Politikes  maxime  of  vfing,  and  plying  of  time*
hath  becnc  fo  well  pra&ifed,  3c  plyed  by  his  Holincs
Rome,  and  his  holy  ciuc,  as  that  little  time  hath  been
..  1 B a - toft,


page, 4*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

loft,  wherein  fomething  hath  not  bcenc  attempted  a-
gainfl  herMaiefiie,  and  the  kingdome,  finceherfirfl
comming  to  the  crowne,fo  this  prefent  time.  I will  one-
ly  point,  at  thofe  former  tiroes ; as  I coroe  along  to  our
time  of  this  tragedic  of  deuils.

Her  HighnefTe  was  no  fooncr  come  to  the  Crowne,
but  <J\farie  then  wife  to  the  K.  of  Frauncc , was  decla-
red  in  Paris  to  be  the  lawfull  of  England,  and  the
. armes  of  both  her  Maieflies  kingdoms,  England,&  Ire-
land,werc  commaunded  to  be  fet,  in  va(is,et  tayctibus  re -
gijs,  et  reliquisvtenJUibus.  The  popifh  Bilhops, lately  be-
fore depriued  in  the  fecond  yecre  of  her  Maieftics
raigne,purpofed  tolofe  no  time  , when  prefentlv  after


m cen~


1567.


1>69'


their  faid  depofition : ylericjue  eoru  excommicat
Juram^aduerfus  reginam alio fj^nomllos  ad  h then  dam  cenfu -
ermt.  If  was  no  long  time  after  this,  whe  it  fhould  haue
been  a Canon  fet  down, in  the  Counfcll  of  Trent, by  the
inftigation  of  his  Holmes  Agents  there  prefent:  de  Eli*
zabetha  harettca  declaranda , if  the  Emperor  had  not  in-
terpofed  to  flay  that  courfe.  It  was  time  well  plyed,whe
the  fame  his  Holmes  contriuing  her  Maiefties  vtter  de-
ftruflion,  (as  appeares  in  the  life  of  Pius  j.  published  in
Italian)  and  drawing  the  king  of  Spaine  info  the  fame,
hee  fent  ouer  one  %obert  Godolphi  a Florentine , vnder
the  colour  of  Mcrchandife,  hethcr  into  England, to  ex-
cite a rebellion,  & furnifhed  him  with  1 yoco.  Crownes
towards  the  fame : by  whofe  cunning  perfwafion , the
Noble  men  in  the  North  parts  beeing  rifen  in  Arraes,
forth  commeth  the  Popes  'Built  blanched  with  a fayre
goodly  face  of  p&ftorall  zeale , and  louc  to  the  Catho-
lique  religion,  excomunicating  of  pure  deuotion  (God
wot)  the  Queenes  Maieftie,  and  difeharging  her  fub-
ie&s  from  their  allegeance  vnto  her : beeing  indeede
naught  els,  faue  a deuilifti  Engine,  to  ftrengthen  the  re-
bellion : which  beeing  difTolued,  and  the  heads  thereof
difperfed,  the  time  was  plied  on  Oil!  with  confolatorie

Letters,,


in  carting  out  ofDeuils*

Letters,  written  from  the  Pope,  containing  matterof
new  comfort,  and  encouragement  to  the  Duke  of  Nor -
- f°tke>  the  clofc  defigned  head  of  that  rebellion , by  his
intended  manage  with  theScottiJh  fhteene.  Forces  were
promifedto  befent  ouer  with  all  fpeedefrom  beyond
teas,  to  the  ayde  of  the  fai  dtDuke,  vnder  the  leading  of
yitelli , appointed  to  that  office  by  name  from  the  king
of  Spaine,  the  comming  of  which  forces, the  ‘Duke  him
felfe  did  flay,  by  lofing  his  head.  And  lead  the  King  of
Spaine  ffiould  quaile  in  his  princely  defignements  a-
gainfl  this  kingdome,  in  regard  of  his  infortunate  fuc-
ceffc,  Saundcrsy  (thePopes  darling)  eggs  him  on  with  a
frefh  a{Tault,to  keepe  the  Spanifh  Engines  in  worke,  al-
ledging^|is,as  his  maine  battery  to  caufe  the  King  to  be
dooing,  that  the  whole  flatc  of  Chriflendome  ftoode
vpon  the  hote  aflayling  of  England!

Neither  was  it  long  time  ere  this  vigilant  champion
had  gained  time  againe , by  obtaining  of  his  Holmejfe,
men,  mony,  and  munition,  with  which  hce  came  with
open  armes  into  Ireland,  like  a Furic  from  Hell : and  in
his  vaine  hopes  had  dcuoured  that  kingdome , for  the
vfeof  his  holy  Father  the  Pope  forfooth,  and  for  his
young  Maifter  the  Popes  Nephew . Where  he  brea-
thing out  his  furious  Ghoft,  as  a pledge  of  his  wicked
attempt,  Parfons  the  Popes  Minion  enterfaines  the
time,  with  a new  coyned  plot , comming  into  England
vpon  no  meaner  errand,  then  to  continue  the  depofing
of  her  Maieftie,  and  the  fetting  vp  of  another  Prince.

The  wife  efpying,  and  circumfpeft  implying  of  the
aduantage  of  thefe  times : you  fee  from  what  heads  and
founfaines  of  holinefle  they  came,  yet  none  of  thefe  is
the  time,  that  doth  confort  with  our  catting  out  of de  nils,
we  haue  now  in  hand.  Ours  is  the  time,  when  hi %Holi:
the  King  of  Spaine,  and  Parfons  theyr  Entelechie , were
plotting  beyond  the  feas,  for  the  deliuery  out  ofprifon
of  the  j^rpf  Scots}  by  forcible  attempt . Which  aftion,

B 3 after


page, 5,

15  72*
1/77.

1/77*

1/8O0


pag e,6*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impoflure

after  mature  deliberation  beeing  caftvpon  the  Duke  of
Qtufefiie  the  faid  Duke , was  the  bufily  preparing  his  for-
ces for  England , for  the  fuddaine  effecting  of  the  faid
attempt.

I omit  how  Charles  Paget  plyed  his  time , in  com-
' ming  fecretly  into  England , to  follicitc  the  Earle  of
Northumberland  to  dmers  trecherous  attempts.  How
F r auncis  Throgmorton  plyed  his  time  at  the  inftigation
of  Mendoza,  in  bufily  founding  of  Hauens,  for  the  fafe
arriuall  of  the  Cjuifian  forces.  How  Do&or  Parry  plyed
his  time,  in  enforminghis  confcience,  for  the  fuddaine,
and  defperate  numbering  of  the  Qucenc : (for  there
was  no  time  fpared,  no  meancs  vnaflaied,  no  deuife  vn-
thought  vpo,  no  perfon  vnatteropted,  euery  of  that
holy  hellifh  aflociation,flriuing  to  win  the  garland  from
other,  by  hauing  his  hands  foonefl,  and  deepeft  dyed  in
her  Maiefties  blood)  and  I come  to  the  time  when  the
Cjuifian  exploit,  grewe  towards  the  prime,  and  was  on
foote  for  England.

Which  ftratageme,  beeing  infpired  by  the  Pope  in-
to Par fons  > by  Parfons  into  Edrrmnds,  alias  Wejlon,  a Pro-
uinciall  of  the  order  of  Iefuits  for  that  time , refiding
heere  in  England : betweene  Parfons , and  whom,  as  bc-
tweene  two  Intelligences , in  a fuperior,  and  an  inferior
fphaere,  there  was  a mutuall  communication  of  all  mat-
ters of  import,  and  by  the  fame  Edmunds  beeing  brea-
thed into  the  breafles  of  all  theyrfubordinates,  and  de-
pendants heere  in  the  Land,  it  cannot  be  cocciued,what
a fpirit,  life , and  alacrifie , the  whole  Popifh  bodie  of
Traytors  (halfe  dead  before)  did  fuddainly  conceiue,
howcuery  limb,  member,  and  ioynt  of  that  holy  bo-
die did  beftir  it  felfe , to  be  feruiceable  to  this  holic  dc-
figne.  ButFa:^hfo#aboueall,whofc  head  and  hart,
were  fo  bigge  with  the  Guifian  attempt,  as  hee  thought
his  time  come,  to  aduaunce  the  banner  of  Ignatius  for
suer  heere  in  England, by  making  himfelfe,  & his  order

famous


in  calling  out  of  Deuils*

famous  by  fome  notable  exploit:  and  it  becing  Gods
permidiue  prouidence,that  this  popifri  body  .copiled  of
fo  many  horrible  6c  deferable  fteafons,  (hould  be  who-
ly  jnfpircd  from  the  fpirit  of  his  Holi:  6c  of  hell , Weflon9
as  a limb  of  the  fame  body,  mooued  with  the  fame  fpi-
rit, choofes  to  eternize  himfelfe  from  the  power  of  hell,
by  cafling  out  deuils.  Wherein  hce  beftirs  himfelfe  fo
fpritely, and playes fuch  a deuill-prize  at  theL .Vaax
bis  houfe  in  Hackney,  with  fuch  a wonderfull  applaufe,
as  Array,  Parfons  Ape,  a runnagatc  Prieft,and a notable
Tolypragmon  heere  in  our  ffate,meetes  with  Ma:  Tyrrell
newly  come  from  beyond  feas,  and  vaunts  with  a bigge
lookc,  that  Fa:  Weflon  had  fhewed  fuch  a foueraigne
authority  ouer  hell,  as  the  deuils  themfelues  fhould  con-
fefTc  theyr  kingdom  was  ncere  at  an  end.  And  the  fame
Array , was  fo  full  fraught  with  hope,  and  confidence, in
the  Spamjh,  and  Giujtan  attempt  then  in  hand,  as  his  firft
Congee  was  in  Maifter  Ttrrels  earc  at  theyr  entring  into
Paules,  bidding  him  to  be  of  good  checre,  for  that  all
things  now  went  very  well  forwards.  The  King  ofSpaine
(quoth  he)  is  now  almoH  in  readme ffe  with  his  forces  for
England,  it  flandeth  vs  now  in  hand  that  be  Priefls , to  far-
ther the  Cathohejac  caufe , as  much  as  poffibly  in  vs  lyeth .

Paget,  and  Morgan , two  principal!  limbs  of  this  po-
pifh  body,  being  acquainted  with  the  aforefaid  plot,  6c
fearing  that  the  Guifes  attempt,  by  dcliuering  the  Scot -
tifh  Qucenc  by  open  Amies,  would  fparklc  abroad  be-
fore it  were  ripe,  and  fo  rccciue  a check  by  our  Englifh
forces,  before  it  cametothepufh,  caff  about  in  theyr
braines  for  a fhorter  way  at  home : "Ballard  the  bloodie
Pricft  is  dealt  withall  to  pricke  on  Babington,  Tilney , and
the  reft  of  that  afpiring  popifh  band.to  attempt  a defpe-
rate  truculent  a<ft,  by  laying  violent  bandesvppon  her
Maicfties  facrcd  perfon. Which  whilft  it  was  in  hamme-
ring, the  Catholiquc  Priefts,not  caring  by  what  meanes
they  effc&ed  theyr  trecherous  defignes,  fet  themfelues


page;7.


A loyall  ge«
neration  of
Pricftes.


As  is  lately
con  felled
byFa:P.  in
his  Apology


page, 3,


Cap.  I?#
flag:  dae-
mon.


A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture
on  worke  on  all  hands,  with  working  of  wonders  by
difpoflcfling  ofdeuils:  vnto  the  a&ing  of  whofe  mira-
cles, Babington  and  his  conforts,doe  diuers  times  repaire
to  Sir  George  Peckhams  houfe  at  Denham , with  fourc  or
fiue  Coaches  full  at  once.  And  this  new  tragedieofde-
uils  had  his  time  ofrifing,  and  hisfatall  time  of  fall,  with
the  true  f ragedie  performed  vpon  Bab:  and  his  compli-
ces, for  thcyr  deferable  treafon.  The  peftilent  drift,  8c
pernicious  courfe  of  this  deuill-workeyou  (ballhcarc
ofheereafter.


CHAP.  3.

y The  places  wherein  thefe  miracles  were  plaid.

' - * • f ■ ' ' i , * * ft  J • k

J T hath  been  alwaies  the  ill  fortune  of  this  holy  order
of&xorcifls,  that  the  profcfTors  of  it  haue  been  repu-
ted errand  Iuglers  and  Impoftors,  yea  (oraetimes,  by
the  greateft  prote&ors  of  thcyr  owne  religion . A great
man  told  <JWengus:  that  if  there  were  fiftie  Exorcifts  at
once  (landing  before  him , hec  fhould  deeme  nine  and
fortic  of  them  for  no  better  then  Impoftors,  and  Afen-
gus  (as  feemes ) was  afraid  hirofelfc  (hould  haue  made
vp  iuft  tale.  Wherefore  the  Maifters  of  the  Art , haue
fo  warily  deuifed  theyr  rules,  and  canons,  as  a man  may
fee  they  labour  to  preoccupatc  mens  minds  for  fearc  of
fufpition,  which  giues  the  greater  occafion  to  fufpeft
them  the  more.  .

Mengm  his  caueat  of  declaring  places  not  meetefor
exorcifme  is  this  : Dr&cauere  debet  Exorcifla  quantum
pot  eft,  ne  abfc^  graui  necejfttate  exerceat  hoc  officium  adiu -
randi  damones  in  dormbus priuatis , ne  detur  occafto  Jean-
dahpuftl/ts.  His  pofitiuerule  for  the  place  appointed  is,
Sed  debet  exorcizare  in  Ecclefta , vel  tn  alio  loco  Deo  dicat o
velalicui fantto.  His  reafons  againft  priuate  houfes,  and
for  Churches, or  at  lead  confecrafed  places  are:  firft, that
bceing  doone  publiqudy,  the  weaker  fort  may  haue  no

occafion


in  calling  out  of  Deuils.

©ccafiontofufpe&thcaflionoffraude.  2.  Turn  quia  in
domibus  priuatts,  vt  in plurtbus,  ad font  muliercs  , quarum
consortium  debet  fummopere  ab  exorctttis  vitari  > ne  inci -
dantin  laqucum  dtaboli : that  is^  becaufe  in prmate  houfes,
there  are  commonly  fome  women , whofe  company  the  8xor-
cifls  ought  to  decline  JeaH  happilie  they fall  into  the fnares  of
thedeuiLL  3.  Turn  quia  ibifunt  mult  a turpia  y tacendapo -
tins,  quam  hie  infer  enda  : that  is,  becaufe  in  fuch  houfest
turpitudes  be  committed , meeter  to  be  ftlencedjhen  heere  to
be  named.  4.  Turn  quia  8 cclefa proprie  eft  locus  deputatus
vbi  Euergumeni  debent  exorcizari : that  is  , becaufe  the
fhurch  is  properly  the  place  appointed  to  that  aBion,  where-
in the pojjejfed ought  to  be  exorctfed.  And  what  need  thefe
cautious  rules,  to  auoyde  fufpition  of  iughng , turpitude ,
and  women,  if  nothing  were  amide  ? Auricular  confef-
fion,  is  an  hoiie  aflion  of  more  priuacie , folirude,  6c  fa-
miliarity with  women,  yet  becaufe  no  man  (without
reafon)  may  fufpect,  but  that  all  is  wel  between  a ghofl-
Jy  father,  and  his  ghoftly  child,  there  be  no  rules  made
of iuglmg,  turpitude , or  women  in  that  myfticall  function*
Sure  all  is  not  well  in  this  exorcifing  craft,  that  iugling^
turpitude , and  women , muft  be  fo  precifely  auoided.

Indeed  wheras  in  his  1 7.  chapter  fa:  Mengus  difputcs,
that  though  exorcifing  ought  to  be  done  in  the  church,
yet  thedooresofthe  Church  may  beclofe  fhut  about
them : his  fatherhood  giues  vs  iu£i  caufe  fo  fufpeft,  that
though  he  would  feeme  to  haue  it  publique , touching
the  place,  for  a feeming  fhew  of  auoyding  iughng,  tur-
pitude, and  women , yet  he  can  be  content  by  fhutting  the
doores,  to  haue  it  priuately  done : or  fuch  onely  let  in,
as  the  Exorcift  bell:  liketh.

Sec  the  pra&ife  heereofin  the  iugling  Exorcifisat
Taris,  anno  iy99»  who  to  make  a (hew  of  auoyding  of
that,  which  they  onely  intended,  iugling  deceit , they
. muft  haue  theyr  Minion  Martha  Brojfler  exorcifed  in  a
Chappell forfooth;  but  yet  with  fuch  a wane-eye  caft

C.  vpon


pagc)9.


*


Page.tf.of
that  booke*


page,io*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

vpon  the  fpeftators,  as  there  comming  in  amongfl  the
reft  one  (. Marefcot  a Phyfician , a man  they  did  not  af-
fe&,  Seraphin  the  holy  Exorcift  cries  out  with  a loudc
voice,  if  there  he  any  heere  that  is  incredulous , & mil  trou-
ble Martha  Broflier,  the  dentil  mil  cany  him  away  in  the
aye.  Wherefore  yec  fee  it  was  very  wifely  prouided  of
MenguSy  to  haue  an  eye  to  the  doorc : the  like  ill-fauou-
red  accident  fell  out  amongft  our  holy  crew , at  theyr
. principall  Theatre,  Sir  George  Hechfams  houfe  at  Hen -
hamy  where  for  want  of  hauing  a watch  at  thedoore,
there  comes  in  one  Mar  Hamhden  o fHambden,  who, be-
ing one  of  the  incredulous  perfons , that  F.  Seraphin  co-  ~
plainer  of  afore,  and  efpying  theyr  bungling,  and  vfing
thefe  wordesin  deteftation  of  theyr  iugling:  I fee  this
‘See Frif-  dealing  is  abhominahle : & / maruaile  that  the  houfe finketh
woods  Co-  notforfuch  rvickednes  committed  in  it : and  fo  departing
ifefs:  vtterly  difeontent : this  incredulous  fpeftator  fo  skared

our  holy  a&ors  with  feare,  that  they  llunke  out  of  the
houfe  euery  man  his  way,  as  a dogge  that  had  been  bit-
ten by  the  tayle,  and  leauing  theyr  patients  alone , gaue
the  deuils  an  otium , or  Icaue  to  play  for  that  night.

Now  let  vs  looke  in  a little  amongft  our  twelue  holy
Exorciftes,  or  rather  twelue  holy  difciples,  and  Fa:  We-
tton  theyr  holy  head : who  though  they  be  not  a work-
ing, yet  by  this  time  they  are  whetting  theyr  tooles : and
let  vs  fee,  how  warily  they  haue  put  in  vre  theyr  Maifter
< 'JMengus  his  canon , of  choofing  a Chappell , or  holy
publique  place  to  exorcife  in , for  feare  of  fufpition  of
iugling)  turpitude , and  women.  Firft,  it  doth  not  appeare
% that  they  a£ted  any  of  theyr  wonderous  difpoffeflions  in
any  Church,Chappell,  or  confccrated  place,  as  F.  Men -
gus  had  appointed  them : except  happily  they  flipped
into  fome  Noble  mans  voide  houfe  in  London : which
fioufes,  in  regard  of  theyr  owners  callings,  being  aboue
reach  of  authority,  are  commonly  now  adayes  the  fanc-
suaries  for  Popifli  treafon } confiftories  for  plots  of  re-

belli-


in  cafling  outof  Deuils*  page,i  I *

bellion,  and  Chappels  for  all  Romifh  loathfomc  abho-
mination : not*  that  the  Noble  men  themfelues  are  pri*
uietofuch  meetings,  but  theyr  corrupt  houfe-kcepers
much  in  fault  for  entertayning  fuch  guefts : and  yet  the
owners  themfelues  not  altogether  free  from  blame , for
making  no  better  choife  of  thofe/o  whom  they  commit
that  charge.

But  it  appearesnot  (aslfaid)  that  they  met  in  any
chappel,or  holy  place  at  all : but  the  chief  places  of  their
folemne  meetings,  were  the  L.  Vaux  his  houfe  at  Hack ^
ney , necre  London,  Maifter  (jar diners  houfe  at  Fulmer,
M^Hugbes  his  houfe  at  Vxbridge>  and  Sir  (Jeorge  Pecks
bams  houfe  at  ‘Denham:  places  very  fitly  accommoda-
ting theyr  holy  intentions.  Fir  ft  for  theyr  capacitie,  bee-
ing  able  to  receiue  the  holy  troupe  , & theyr  traine  (for
they  remoued  bagge , and  baggage,  as  your  wandring
Players  vfe  to  doe.)  Next,  for  theyr  fccurity,thc  owners
beeing  truftie  tried  fure  cardes , and  commaunders  of
theyr  neighbours  adioyning,  if  any  fufpition  fhould  a-
rife : and  then  for  their  fituation,  beeing  remote  and  fe-
clufe  from  ordinary  acccfTe.

At  the  L.  Vaux  his  houfe  at  Hackney , was  the  prime
grand  miracle  performed,  by  the  grand  Maifter  of  the
craft,  Fa:  W?/?<?»himfelfe,  vppon  one  CtTanvood,fe r-
uant  to  Babington  the  traytor : where  a wonderful  thing
fell  out.  Fa:  lVeHonl  at  the  very  firft  encounter  with  the
deuill,  ftunted  the  deuils  wits,  and  the  deuill  being  once
put  out,  could  neuer  hit  in  againe,  but  vntruffes,  and  !n  ^ cwng
cries  out  >0  me ftultum , infanum , et  infalicem : Ofoohfb , trad,  vpon
mad,  and  mi/erable  deuill  that  lam:  which  put  all  the  record. page
whole  company  of  fpc&ators  into  fuch  aftonifhment,  Zt
as  there  was  a confufed  fhout  made  of  weeping,  & ioy,
for  this  foyle  of  the  deuill.  And  the  Epilogue  was  this,

O fathoheamfidem,  o infenfatos  hxreticos : O the  Catholic!^
faith,  ofencelejfe  hareticks , that  could  neuer  lcarne  the
feace,  to  share  a deuill  from  his  wits.

C z At


page5i2*t  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

At  Fu/merhouCc  there  were  no  great  miracles  done,
onely  the  groundes  of  theyr  Art  lay  de  fare,  and  a little
trying  of  their  fooles,  whether  their  tew  would  holde
or  no.

At  Vxbrtdgethty  lay  but  two  or  three  nightsat  the
mofl,  and  yet  the  place  was  graced  with  a punie  mira-
cle,or  two.  Tibdale  the  Prieff  had  his  wench  fet  fa  clofe
vnfo  him  in  the  way  thether,  (for  auoyding  turpitude  8c
women)  as  fhe  felt  her  felfe  to  burne,  & could  hardly  en-
dure the  heate  of  the  holy  man . Tray  ford  crycs  out  by
the  way  water,  water , as  the  Frier  did  that  by  Abfolon  in
Chawcer  was  fealded  in  the  toote.  And  thus  were  theyr
Iournalls  towards  Denham, where  the  Court  flayed:  the
hangings  were  tricked  vp,  the  houfes  made  ready , and
the  greatefl  part  of  the  wonders  of  this  comedie  was
performed.  Their  harbinger, and  hofl  both,  in  all  thefe
iournies  (for  the  owners  of  houfes,  and  theyr  families,
{fill  left  theyr  owne  houfes,and  made  all  clecre  for  thefe
holy  comedians,  as  is  vfed  to  be  done  towards  thecom-
ming  of  a Court)  was  one  £dm:  Peckham , an  excellent
purueior  for  fuch  a canape  5 one  of  a very  ruinate  eflate,
an  intemperate  difpofition,an  vndeane  conuerfation,&.
a man  fa  deeply  engaged  to  this  holy  band,  as  that  him-
(elfe,his  wife,  his  concubine,  and  his  whole  familic  Iiued
wholy  at  their  charge.This  is  the  man  that  flil  furnifhed
the  camp  with  all  kind  of  luggage,and  pleafing  prouifi-
on  : that  fcourcs  the  coafls,to  fee  that  all  be  cleere , that
lookes  to  the  frufles,  and  fardels , that  no  iugling  (licks
be  left  out : the  (acrid  of  thefe  holy  myfleries , playing
himfelfc  flue  or  fix  parts  in  this  comedie : fhe  harbinger*
the  hofl,  the  fleward,  the  vauntcourrier,  the  (acrid,  and .
thePandar.  And  this  (hall  fafficc  touchingtheirplaces
ingenerall:  more  fpeciall  confiderationsof  the  fame,,
you  fhall  heare  in  the  chapter  enfuing. .


in  cafling  out  of  Deuils.


page,!?.


CHAP.  4.

y tjfyfore  fepcciall  confederations  3 touching  their  choifee

0/places.


\7  Jno  vendihih  non  opux  eft  hedera  . WeUon,  in  regard
of  his  owne  fame,  needed  nothing  more  then  ordi-
mrie,  to  commend  him  in  this  admirable  fcience : but
his  12  difciples  being  but  punies,  and  newly  entredby
him  into  the  fchoole  of  legerdemaine,  ffoodc  in  needc
of  fome  grace,  and  commendation,to  bring  themfelues
into  culfome : therefore,  like  wife  retaylcrs,  they  chofc
vnto  themfelues  places  of  aduantage,  to  aduaunce  their
profeflion.  Where  it  is  to  be  obferued,  that  whileft  the
chiefe  of  the  Popifh  holy  body  heere  in  England  had
their  heads,  harts,  and  hands  full  of  pra&ifes  of  treafon  \
fome  other  Priefts  there  were  that  beftirred  themfelues,
as  faft  in  imploying  all  their  wit,  and  skill,  about  getting
into  their  hands  huge  mines,  and  mafTes  ofgold,  bluer,
and  treafure  ( called  by  the  Artifans  in  that  royfteric
Treafure  T rouve)  fuppofed  to  be  hidden,in  diuers  hou-
fes,  woods,  6c  plots  of  ground  heere  in  England : whe-
ther to  furnifh  the  heads  and  leaders  of  the  confpirators
for  their  holy  feruice,  they  had  in  hand  againft  her  Ma-
ieftie>  and  the  (fate,  or  to  enrich  their  owne  cofers,  I
leaue  it  to  conie&ure.

For  comparing  ofcthis  treafure,  there  was  a eonfocia-
tion  betweene  3 or  4 priefts,  deuill-coniurers , and  4 difeo-
uerers s or  Jeers,  reputed  to  carry  about  with  them,  their
familiars  in  rings,  and  glafles,  by  whofe  fuggeftion  they
came  to  notice  of  thofe  golden  hoards . The  names
of  the  dijeouerers , or  Jeers } were  thefe : Smith , %ick[ion , .
Cjoodgame,  and  lames  Phifemck.  The  names  of  the  deuill-
coniuring  priefls,  for  fome  reafons  I forbeare : and  two*
of  the  places  (amongft  many)  wherein  they  dealt  were :
Denham,  and  Fulmer,

C h


Tota*


page,  1 4)


See  the
booke  of
miracles.
Page,i6,


A declaration  of  Popifh  itnpofture

Touching  Denham  the  Gentleman,  chiefc  owner  of
the  Manor,  tefiifieth  that  the  4 Jeers , or  impoftors,  had
borne  him  in  hand,  that  there  was  great  fioreo  fTrca-
fure  T rouve , hidden  in  his  (aid  Manor , and  appointed
him  a night  ccrfainc,  when  to  digge  for  the  fame,  which
time  they  kept : and  that  himfelfe  with  diuers  of  his  fer-
uants  being  prefentf  there  was  nothing  found,  but  olde
empty  earthen  pots.  And  concerning  Fulmer  he  fame
Gentleman  tells  vs  alfo , that  the  impofiors  aforc-faid,
departed  from  his  houfc  to  Fulmer  . But  the  pennerof
thefe  miracles , remembers  more  difiin&ly,  both  the
yeere,  moneth,  and  day,  when  they  went  thither . The
22  oiOttober^nno  84.  there  came  3 coniurers  toFuU
?#*r,vpon  a Thurfday(faith  he)and  there  remained  wor-
king in  their  Arte,  vntill  the  Tuefday  following.

V pon  occafion  of  the  pratt  itioning  of  thefe  cofeners,
and  deuill  coniuring  priefi s for  money,  was  phancied  a
conceife,  and  from  phancie  grew  rumours,  and  tales,a-
mongff  the  common  fort  (as  vpon  any  Height  occafion
offuch  mattcrs,haue  vfedtobc)  of  fpirits,  deuils,  and
bug-beares,  walking,  and  haunting  thofc  places,  and
boufes  where  the  coniuring  had  beene.  Sara  Williams,
one  of  (heir  patients,  faith,  That  Jhee  had  not  beene  long  at
Fulmer,  but  jhe  heard  fay,  that  the  houfe  wai  troubled  with
fpirits . The  penner  of  the  miracles , as  if  he  meant  to  fcarc
vs  with  the  very  noyfe,  reports  vs  the  manner  of  the
Hobgoblins  in  a very  tragicall  fWe.  The  whole  houje
(faith  he)  was  haunted  in  very  terrible  manner , mole  Fling
all  that  were  in  the  fame , by  locking , and  vnlocking  ofdores ,
tinckling  amongfl  the  fer-jhouels , and  the  tongesjrathng  vp*
pon  the  boards , fcraping  vnder  their  beds , and  blowing  out
the  candelSy  except  they  were  halowed . And  further,  that
thefe  ill  mannered  vrehins,  did  fo  fvvarme  about  the
priefis,  in  fuch  troupes,  and  thronges,  that  they  made
them  fometimes  to feveat , as  feemes,with  the  very  hcafe  of
the  fume,  that  came  from  the  deads  nofes.  Ma;  Maynie


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.  pagCji?*

a pittifull  poffeffcd,  dothaffirme,  that  within  a day,  or
two  after  his  comming  to  Denham,t he  maid-cookc  fold
him,  that  there  was  great  walking  of  fpirits  about  the
houfc,  and  that  diuers  had  bcene  greatly  affrighted  by
them.  And  if  you  will  not  beleeue  thefe , beleeuethc
dcuill  himfelfein  his  Dialogue  with  Dibdale , crying  in  Page,
his  deuils  roaring  voyce,  that  he  came  thither  for  Money,  tU€  D?OK  Gt
Money.

And  if  you  happen  to  wonder , why  I called  thefe
houfes  of  ‘Denham,  and  Fulmer , in  the  beginning  of  this
chapter,  aduantagiousvnto  our  holy  impofiors,  confi-
dering  Fa:  C JMengus  his  rule  of  places  for  cxorcifing,  ci-
ted before,  that  they  mud  be  confecrated,  halowed,  or
holy  places  at  lead: , you  will  wonder  fomewhat  more,
when  you  heare  Fa:  Thyrsus  preferring , that  at  any
hand  before  the  holy  workes  ofexorcihng.the  ill  affec-
ted party  be  begun,  firffand  aboueall,  fopurifie,  and
exorcife  the  place , that  the  houfe  being  cleanfed  from
thofe  troublefome  haunting  companions, that  dot  make
men  fweate , the  holy  worke  may  proceede  the  more  fa-
cile, and  with  better  fucceffe.

Where  by  the  way  you  are  to  obferife  out  of  learned
Thjraus  his  70  Chapter  De  locis  infettis  : the  whole
courfe  hecreof,  that  is,  of  exorcifing  the  places.  W hich
muftbe  performed  by  thefe  $ holy  works : Diuimaux -
tty  imploratione : pfalmorum  gradualism  recitatione:  leUio-
ne  Euangety : thurificatione : et  conclufione  . Hy  calling
vpon  (fod,  the  bleffed  virgin  Mary,  and  the  Saints : by  fay-
ing ouer  the  1 s graduall  Pfalmes : by  reading  ouer  the  Gof-
pell  of  S .\ohn, concerning  Zacchxus  chming  vp  into  a tree;
by  holy  fumigations:  and  the  Epilogue  of  the  whole  worke.

Thefe  be  the  hue  holy  fcare-dcuils,  which  our  Exorcifls
fhould  haue  vfed , to  haue  driuen  the  deuils  from  the
houfe.  And  hcere  I mud  needes  fhame  my  felfe,  and
lay  open  vntoyou,  the  fhallowneffe  of  my  wit,  that  is
not  able  to  diue  into  the  bottom  of  this  (acred  myfferie:

why


page,i6.  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

why  abouc  all  other  Gofpels,  the  GofpellofS.  Iohny
touching  Zacch&m  climbing  info  a tree  , fhould  hauc
fuch  a potency  to  fright  a deuilloutofa  houfe.  Whe-
ther there  be  any  hidden  antipathic  between  the  nature
of  deuils,  and  a Sycamore  tree,  as  was  between  Scaliger
and  a Rat : or  that  the  deuill  bare  a fpight  to  the  tree,
for  helping  low  Zacch&us  to  fee  ourSauiour  pafleby:
or  that  the  deuill  had  himfeife  fome  mifchance  out  of
the  tree  : or  that  our  Sauiours  dinner  at  Zacch&us  houfe
was  drefled  with  the  wood  of  that  tree : or  els  his  crofle
for  haft  made  of  that  tree,  Oedipo  opus  eH,  I am  at  a full
point,  Andifl  fend  you  to  , to  vnridlethcri*

die,  I doubt  you  will  laught  at  him,  as  you  doe  at  me.

Howfoeuer  it  be , our  holy  Exorcifls  vfed  neythcr
that,  nor  any  other  of  the  hue  terrors , to  flight  the  de-
uils  from  F ulmer  > nor  Denham,  but  were  content  with
theyr  conipanie,  and  fell  to  theyr  worke.  And  heerein
they  (hewed  a part  of  theyr  greafefl  skill  of  legerde-
maine.  Firfl,  this  fabulous  rumor  of  the  houfes  haun-
ted with  dcuils,  did  blanch  ouer , and  blaze  theyr  Art
the  more  of  catting  deuills  out , and  fo  brought  them  into
•credit.  Secondly,  if  they  had  read  the  Gofpell  touching
Zacchaus,  and  skared  them  away , they  had  wanted  de-
uils to  furnifli  out  the  pageant.  Thirdly,  it  bred  a rc-
uerend  opinion , and  an  admiration  in  all  that  came  to
fee  wonders,  at  the  vertue,  and  holinefle  of  the  Priefls,
that  durft  walkevp  and  downe  amongfl  thethickeft
fwarme  of  deuils,  and  neucr  a deuill  fo  hardy  as  to  touch
an  haire  of  their  beards . Fourthly,  it  ferued  their  pur-
pofes  excellent  well  to  couer  their  bungling,  iugling,  8c
legerdemaine,  in  that  the  feruants  of  the  houfes  hauing
their  phancies  opprefTed  with  the  conceit  of  fpirits,and
deuils  haunting  in  euery  corner  of  the  houfe,  they  were
fo  diftrafted  with  feare,  as  they  had  vfe  of  neither  wit,
nor  will,  to  doubt,  or  looke  into  their  packing.

And  by  this  you  fee  our  punie  Exorcifls,  as  young  as

they


in  cafling  out  of  Deuils*
they  be,  (hewed  more  wit,  and  skill,thcn  either  Mengus
their  Mailer,  or  Thyrdtits-  their  prompter , in  picking
out  thefe  places  of  Hobgoblins,  to  make  the  dages  for
their  Comedy,  and  not  offering  fird  by  holy  fumigati-
onSjto  fcare  the  vrehins  away.  One  doubt  1 haue  more,
wherein  I mud  craueyour  gentle  affidance.

Some  curious  head,  more  nice  then  needes,may  pick
at  a moafe,  and  askc  mee  two  or  three  quedions  out  of
this  narration,  Fird,  whether  a man  may  be  a coniiuer,
forcerer,  or  Enchauter  5 that  is,enter  into  league,friend-
fhip,  and  familiarity  with  the  deuiil,  as  the  priedes  that
coniurcd  for  mony  at  'Denham  did,  and  yet  be  accoun-
ted a ghodly  ConfefFor,  a reuerend  father , and  an  holy
pried  dill  ? A fimple  doubt  God  wote.  Syluesier , Boni-
facm , and  fome  other  Popes,  haue  beene  errand  deuill-
ceniurers,  and  yet  theyr  holinede  not  an  halfepeny  the
worfe.  This  fimple  quedionid  mud  vnderftand,  that
God  hath  tied  the  fpiritofholines  with  fo  (ure  a chaine
to  S.  Veters  chayre,as  that  let  the  Pope,or  any  popeling,
be  an  Ethnick,  a Turke,  a Saracen,  or  a deuiil,  hee  can-
not auoide  it,  but  by  fitting  in  that  chaire  he  mud  weare
out  his  holinede,  and  be  holy  ft  ill.

Secondly,  if  he  would  know  how  it  comcth  to  pafie,
that  the  famous  Thynm  hauing  laboured,  and  fweat  fo
much  to  fet  downe  all  the  caufes,waies,  & meanes,  how
wicked  fpirits  doe  come  to  haunt  houfes,  and  hauing
by  the  dexteritie  of  his  wit  found  out  twclue  waics,  this
way  of  haunting  houfes  after  coniuration,  is  none  of  his
twelue : vve  mud  tell  him,  that  our  Exorcids  are  not  of
bis  old  plodding  fafhion,but  of  the  new  cut,  & filch,  as
you  (hall  find,  (by  that  time  you  haue  them  a little  hotc
in  theyr  worke)  will  fet  C JHengtiStJhyr&w,  and  Sf  renter
to  fchoole.

Thirdly,  ifhee  tell  vs  by  the  rules  of  that  blacke  Ma-
gickc  Art,  concerning  coniuring  vp  of  fpirits,  that  the
Coniurers  great  art,  and  indudrie,  is  not  fo  much  in  rai-

D.  fing


page, 17.


page;i8*  A declaration  of  Popifh  itnpofture

fing  vp  a fpirit,  as  in  commaunding  him  downe  againe,
and  that  ifhee  cannot  lay  him  downe  quiet,  theArtift
himfelfc,  and  all  his  companie,are  in  danger  to  be  forne
in  pceces  by  him and  that  hee  is  fo  violent , boyflrous,
and  bigge,  as  that  he  will  ruffle,  rage , and  hurle  in  the
ayre,  worfe  then  angry  God  Aolus  euer  did,  and  blow
downe  fteeples,  trees,  may-poles,  and  keepe  a fell  coyle
in  the  world.  And  vppon  this  will  be  queftioning,  how
it  happened  heere,  that  our  haunting  fpirits  at  Denham,
and  Fulmer , rayfed  by  the  blacke  Art,  did  not  ruffle  and
rage  in  the  world,  as  thofe  coniured  fpirits  vfe  to  do,  but
did  put  theyr  heads  in  a bench-hole  for  a twelue  month
together,  till  thefe  holy  good  men  came  to  theyr  work  ?
I mud  tell  him,  that  our  haunting  fpirits  were  of  a more
mild,  ealme,  and  kinde  difpofition , louing  the  compa-
re of  wenches,  and  holy  prieftes  5 and  for  theyr  (faying
fo  long  about  the  houfc,  as  Rats  about  a Barne,  wee  fay
they  did  that  kindly , expe£Ving  the  priefts  theyr  holie
Maifters  to  come  tofet  them  a workc.  And  fo  theft
quiddities  being  fatisfied,  I hope  I may  proceed.

CHAP.  y.

y The  pztCons  pretended  to  hepojfejfed,  and
• difpeffeJfecL  .

A Fter  that  our  holy  order  were  refolued  of  their  ho-
ne wonders  of  cafling  out  deuils,  & had  both  time
and  place  fit  for  theyr  purpofe , a meane-witted  man
would  aske  the  queftion,  that  young  Ifaac  did  of  his  fa-
ther in  a much  holier  caufe,Z>*  heere  are  all  things  ready y
hut  where  is  the  facrifice  l The  time  is  heere  fitting , and
the  places  prepared,  but  where  are  the  pofTcffed  par-
ties, vpon  whom  thefe  miracles  mud  be  (hewed  ? The
young  gallant  in  the  comedy  thought  it  an  impofiible
matter,that  his  Sycophant  lhould  be  furnifhed  at  a daies
warning,  both  with  money,  & a Merchant  to  cofen  the

* « Baude*


in  caftingout  ofDeuils*  page, 19.

Baude : and  his  Sycophant  chceres  him  vp  thus : conji-
iijt  dolijj  coptam  flrnttam gefto  w peclore  me  cum . And  fo
was  it  with  our  cunning  Comedians  5 they  had  a world
of  deuifes,  to  get  themlelues  patients , readie  coyned  in
their  budget.  Trulfie  Boger  iheLeno,  had  his  hookes  EIm:Peck~
fo  fweetly  bay  ted,  and  his  fprindges  fo  artificially  fet  in  ham.
euery  haunt, and  glade,that  he  wasalwaiesfure  of  either
a Gudgin,  or  a Woodcocke,  to  furnifh  out  a feruice.  It
is  a common  ground  with  them  (as  with  all  other  con-
fpirants  , in  any  badde  pra&ife  or  fcience)  not  to  deale
with  any.,  that  are  not  in  fome  degree , or  other  obliged
vnto  them.  Afarwood>Ma:  zsfnthony  Babingtons  man  the
tray  tor,  the  firft  fubieft  , whereon  the  grand  miracle  at
Hackney  was  plavd,  is  not  now  forth  coming,  as  I gefle*
for  feare  of  his  telling  tales  out  of  fchoole . And  if  one
fhould  kindly  aske  Fa:  Wefton  in  his  eare,  what  is  be-
come ofhim,  that  hec  might  be  fpoken  withall,  I fup-
pofc  of  his  modeftie  hee  would  fooner  blufh,  then  tell.

This  a&or  played  his  part  extempore  there  on  the  ftage
with  a verie  good  grace  5 and  if  hee  had  now  the  good
hap  to  be  conferred  with-all,  I doubt  not  but  he  could,
and  would  relate  (as  other  his  cue-felloweshauc  done)
how  hee  came  to  that  facility  in  his  part,  who  were  his
prompters,  his  dire&ers,  his  teachers,  and  who  did  help
him  put  on  the  deuils  vizard  on  his  face.  It  may  fuffice,
that  it  is  (aid,  he  was  Anthony  Babington  his  man.

Trayford the  young  Gentleman  forfooth,  wasofMa:

CPeckhams  priuities , or  priuie  counfell  if  ye  will , the
Leno  his  owne  HypodromoSy  fworne  true  to  thePanfofle,
young  maifier  of  the  May  dens,  feruing  in  the  nature  of
a refrefher,  to  furbufh  ouer  his  maiilers  brayed  wares :
one  that  couth  his  a&ions , and  motions  fo  readily,  and
exprelTed  them  Co  liuely  in  the  feeane  of  pofleffion,  as
Sara  Williams  his  play-fellow,  had  almoft  forgotten  her  In  her
part, and  marred  the  play  •,  fure  I am  fhe  confeffeth,  that  minapQU,
fteloued  the  young  deuill  too  well.

D z Ma:


page, 2o


See  his  exa
min;


Ed:  Peek-
ham.


A declaration  of  Popifh  impoflure

Ma:  CMaiuie,  by  birth  a Gentleman  , by  education  a
Catholique,  one  that  had  fuckt  fro  his  mother  the  faint
ofRomifh  contagion,  was  by  her  conuaycd beyond
Scas,ere  he  was  14  yeercs  old,  and  for  his  deeper  groun-
ding in  Popiffi  fuperftition,  being  maintained  2 yeercs
in  the  Seminarie  at  Rhemes,  entred  himfelfe  into  the  or-
der of  the  Bonbommes . But  Chortly  lcaft  his  fraternity,  5c
cameouer  into  England:  where  his  brother  Ma  \Iohn
hauing  married  Ma  .Beckhams  filler,  5c  he  accom-
panying his  brother,  fomtimes  to  Ma.  'Beckhams  houfe
at  Denham, h\\  eft-foones  in  acquaintance  with  this  ho-
lie league  there:  and  feeing  arnongfl  their  focietieno
Bonhomes  at  al,but  wares  of  a much  lighter, and  pleafan-
ter  glofle,was  the  moreeafily  allured  into  the  holy  com-
bination, and  beingonce  entangled,  could  not  get  out
againe,but  of  a metamorphozed  Bonhomme,  became  an
excellent  deuill-comedian : though  now  ye  may  per-
ceaue  the  Gentleman  doth  rue , that  euer  he  did  fet  his
footeon  theffage.  This  man  had  bonds  enow  about
him,  to  make  good  his  trull,  and  fidelity  to  the  holy  a£
fociation  : education,  religion,  affiance,  and  befides,
to  feme  kinde  ffie-dcuils  ofthat  order,  no  vnkind  affec-
tion.

z/Lnne  Smith,  attending  at  times  vpon  Miflris  Beck?
ham  (a  maid  when  Ihe  came  to  the  lcaguc)of  1 8 yeercs
of  age,  nulled  vp  in  the  true  rites, and  ceremonies  of  the
Popifh  fafeination , and  fo  an  affecl ionafe  profelyteto
that  Mimick  fuperffition  (it  being  the  oncly  religion  fo
catch  fooles,children,and  women, by  reafon  rt  is  naught
elfe,  faue  a conceited  pageant  of  Puppits,  and  gaudes)
fliec  was  firll  feazed  vppon  by  olde  Harpax , the  Lem,
graund  probationer  of  the  deuils  female  in  the  play,  by
the  meanes  of  her  filler,  one  lAhce  P later ,his  fwcct  Mi-
flris forfooth : Ihee  was  dire&ed  downe  to  Denham,  for
her  better  inffruflion  in  myllerie  of  poffeflion,  and
thence  after  an  a&c*  or  hope  of  probation,  Ihe  returned

to


/


in  calling  out  of  Deuils*

to  London : whence  Hie  became  Stamp  the  Prietts  pe-
culiar, to  be  conuayed  againe  to  Denham,

Sara  Williams  (a  mayd  [when  Hie  came  to  the  league
borne  at  Denham,  not  aboue  i / yeeres  olde,  when  dice
enfred  thefe  facred  mytteries)  an  appendant  to  thefa-
milie  of  Sir  George  Peckloam  of  Denham , one  of  a very
good  perfonage,  fauour,  and  wit : fhee  was  a long  time
managed  to  be  brought  to  the  lure,  and  for  her  better
aduauncement  in  her  maitters  eye , fhee  was  made  mi-
ilris  Peckhams  chamber-mayd  pardie:  the  pleafing  parts
fhe  brought  with  her  to  the  campe  were  much  enuied,
and  eyed  by  thofe  naughty  haunting  deuils,  that  would
blow  out  her  except  it  were  hallowed . The  poore

wench  was  fo  Fayrie  haunted,as  die  durft  not  goe,efpc*
daily  to  Ma : Dihdale  his  chamber  alone.  But  you  fhall
heare  her  owne  confcfiion.

Frijwood  Williams , fitter  to  Sara,  (a  may  de  when  Ihee
came  to  the  league)  about  1 6 yeeres  old  : a plant  of  the
fame  foyle,  and  a hanging  to  the  fame  Iioufe,  her  father
Jiauing  beene  Sir  George  Beckhams  man . Shee  was  fent
downe  to  Denham  vnder  colour  of  vifiring  her  fitter
Sara,  whom  fhe  heard  to  be  ill  ateafc,as  alfb  to  be  help-
full  to  miftris  Deckham  about  the  poflefled  : Vnder
whom  ttiec  was  admitted  to  be  attendant  in  a place  of
veuerfion  5 who  had  not  been  long  within  the  compatte
of  that  holy  circle , but  flhee  was  difeouered  to  haue  a
tang  of  pofleflion  . Shee  kept  her  feene  at  her  cue
with  her  fellow  play-deuils,  fo  long  as  at  the  laft  (he  got
fuch  a pinch  of  Tom  Spanner  in  the  darke  ( one  of  the
haunting  crue)  that  the  raarkes  of  it,  were  many  dayes
after  to  be  feene.

Here  you  mayperceiue,  in  whattermes  the  patients
on  both  fides  with  their  holy  Maittersftood,  how  the
deuilsofboth  kindes,  hecs,  and  (hces , became  combi-
ned together, by  the  cunning  Leno  hismeanes,and  were
fofarre  engaged  each  to  other,  and  to  the  whole  band,

J D 3 thae


Page,2l


Sec  herer<
amina:


page,22,  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

that  they  had  as  good  play  their  parts  well,  and  hauc
good  cheerc,  good  ftore  of  gold,  much  making  of,  and
other  gentle  pleafing  curtefies  for  their  paines,  as  by
ilepping  afide,  to  fpoyle  the  play,  & to  blot  their  ownc
reputations  befides.

We  might  now  proceede  towards  the  prefenting  of
fome  ofour  A&ors  vpon  the  Rage, but  that  old  doating
Mengm,  vppon  pure  fpight  to  hinder  our  fport,  hath
dropped  out  a dry  thred-bare  rule , forged  in  his  own
braine:  A caueat  of  auoyding  fufpition  forfooth  : telling
vs,  that  we  hauc  marred  all  in  our  holy  play  of  deuils  at
firft  dafh,  for  taking  vpo  vs  to  exorcife  young  wenches,
beeing  flatly  againft  the  Canon  of  that  facred  Science,
which  is  this  in  his  booke,  Si  malier fit,  qua  exorcizatur9
fit  valde fienex:  We  mufl  not  exorcife  a woman  except  fhe  be
old.  To  this  Canon  wee  aunfwer,  that  Mengus  fpeakes
like  an  olde  worne  Exorcifl , whole  marke  is  out  of  his
mouth  : his  rule  hath  many  faults  and  infirmities  in  it.
Firft,  it  is  againft  the  maxime  of  charitie , that  biddes  vs
doe  good  vnto  all:  and  what  greater  good  can  be  to  a
young  maide,  then  to  eafe  her  of  a deuill  ? Secondlie,we
finde  by  experience,  and  the  confeffion  of  our  young
demoniacks,asyou  heard,that  our  exorcifing  priefts,  be
of  a very  hote  temper,  and  fierie  complexion  , fo  as  but
touching  the  young  wenches,  they  cry  out  that  they
burne,  this  were  verie  dangerous  for  an  olde  dry  wo-«
roan, leaft  fhee  fhould  take  fire.  Thirdly,  this  would
much  abate  the  credit,  and  cuftome  of  Mengus  his  own
profefiion,  for  we  find  not  an  old  woman  in  an  age  to
be  pofTefTed  by  the  deuill : the  deuils  of  our  time  in  this
Horizon  louing  more  tender  dainfie  flefti.  And  indeed
it  would  be  a J£a<ere , handfomly  interlarded  with  Obs,
av\d  fols , why  all  both  Popifti,  and  other  deuils  which
begin  to  fwarme  prety  well  in  thefe  dayes,  beare  fuch  a
fpite  to  young  Lads,  but  especially  to  young  girles,  and
roaides , that  they  ordinarily,  or  not  at  ail  vexe  any,  but

fuch.

i *


In.cafHng  out  of  Deui!s.r  page, 25.

fuch.  But  I leaue  that  to  the  profound  Maiflers,&  pro-
fcflorsof  this  holy  hellifli  fcience.  Fourthly,  Mengus
{hewed  no  wit  in  teaching  this  rule : for  there  be  certain
a<flions,,motions,di(lorfionsf  diflocafions,writhings,  tu-
blings,  and  turbulent  paflions  fitting  a deuils  part,  (to
make  it  kindly  exprefled)  not  to  be  performed  but  by
fupplenefle  of  finewes,  pliablenefle  of  ioynts,  and  nim-
bknede  of  all  parts,  which  an  old  body  is  as  vnapt,  and
vnweldie  vnto.asan  old  dog  to  adaunce.  It  would  (I
feare  raee)  pofe  all  the  cunning  Exorcifis,  that  are  this
day  to  be  foud,  to  teach  an  old  corkie  woman  to  writhe,
tumble,  curuet,  & fetch  her  Morice  gamboJcs,  as  Mar»
tha  Urojjier  did.  Th  zk  amts  decrepit  a,  be  afim  ad  Ijram
to  this  geare : and  therefore  their  Patron  Mengtus , may
weare  the  eares  himfelfe,  and  leaue  thefe  (lagers  out.


CHAP.  6.

ff  Tkcyr  routes  of  catching,  and  tnueigling  thejr

difctples 9


^pHe  gift  ofdifccrning  offpirits  fpoken  of  by  S.  Van  4
being  (as  it  is  fuppofed)  ceafed  in  Gods  Churchy  it
becommeth  a point  orhigheff  difficultie  in  the  old,  and
new  exorcifing  crab.,  by  what  meanesa  man  (hall
come  to  be  certaine, whether  the  partie  affe&cd  be  pof*
fefledjor  no.

Learned  Thyr&ui  difeourfeth  touching  the  fignes  of
pofleflion  in  three  large  chapters  de  doemoniacis . Firft  he
faith,  that  neither  the  confeffion  of  the  partie,  nor  his
fierce  behauiour,  nor  his  brqtifh,  and  barbarous  voice,
ijor  his  terrible  countenaunce,  nor  the  priuation  aimofl:
of  all  his  vitall  fun&ions,  nor  his  difeafes,  and  pangs  in-
curable in  phyfick,  nor  the  hauing  the  deuill  oft  in  ones
mouth,  nor  for  a man  toconfecrate  himfelfe  tothede-
uil,  to  be  prefently  fnatcht  away  by  him,  nor  the  reuea-
iingoffecret  matters,  nor  the  knowledge  of  ftrange

langua*


Chap,223

25,24.


I


page,24*


Wefton

Tu&tf.


A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

languages, nor  extraordinary  ftrcngth,nor  all  the  fignes,
that  appeared  in  fuch,  as  werefpoken  of  in  the  Gofpcll
to  be  poflefled,  are  fufficient,  and  vndoubted  fignes,  &
rules,  that  the  partie,  in  whom  they  appeare , is  indeed
poUcded.  And  then  going  along,  and  naming  other
{ignes  vnto  vs,  he  puzzels  himfelfc  pittifully,  and  leaues
his  Reader  in  a wood.

Our  late  popifh  Exorcifts,  haue  ccrtaine  new  deuifed
fignes  of  their  owne  obferuation,more  fitting  the  times,
and  effe&uall  for  the  gracing  their  gracelefle  profeffi-
on.  Theyr  Empcricall  fignes  be  thefe . i,  If  the  partie
affefted , cannot  for  burning  abide  the  prefence  of  a
Catholique  pried.  2,  If fhee  will  hardly  be  brought  to
blefie  herftlfe  with  the  figne  of  the  Crofl'e.  3,  If  a cafc
ket  of  reliques  beeing  brought  her,  fhee  turnc  away  her
face,  and  cry  that  they  ftinke.  4,  If  S.  Iohns  Gofpel  be-
ing put  in  a Casket,  and  applied  vnto  her,  fhe  rubbe,or
fcratch  any  part  of  her  body,  and  cry  it  burnes,it  is  an  e-
uident  demonftration , that  the  enemie  dooth  lurke  in
that  part.  /,  If  fhe  can  hardly  be  brought  to  pronouce
thefe  words,  Aue  Maria,  the  mother  cfG  O D,  and  moft
hardly  the  Catholique  Church.  <5,  If  a Casket  of  reliques
couered  with  red,  doe  feeme  white  vnto  her,  7,  If  fhee
tumble,  and  be  vexed,  whe  any  goe  to  confedion.  8,  If
fhee  haueafhiucringac  Mafic,  p,  If  fhee  fleere,  and
laugh  in  a mans  face.

But  our  holy  Tragedians  heere  had  haft  of  theyr
{port,  and  therefore  they  would  not  ftay  the  trying  ofa-
ny  fuch  curious  fignes,  but  cooke  a fhorter  cut.  C Mar*
wood,  fVeftons  patient,  beeing  pinched  with  penurie,  8c
hunger,did  lie  but  a night,  or  two,  abroad  in  the  fieldcs,
and  beeing  a melancholicke  perfon  , was  feared  with
lightning,  and  thunder,  that  happened  in  the  night,  8c
loe,  an  euident  figne,  that  the  man  was  pofiefled.  The
prieftsmuft  meet  about  this  pittifullcreature.£^W^
muft  come,  the  hohe  £haire  muft  be  fctcht  out,  the  holy

budget


iir.cafting  out  of  Deuils.  page, 2? ♦

budget  of  facred  reliques  mud  be  opened,  and  all  the
enchaunting  myderics  applied  about  the  poore  man*

Ma:  Maynie  had  a fpice  of  the  Hyflerica  pa/fio^s  feems
from  his  youth,  hee  himfelfe  termesittheMoother  (as
you  may  fee  in  his  confelfion)  and  faith  , that  hee  was
much  troubled  with  it  in  Frauncc,  and  that  it  was  one  of
the  caufes  that  mooued  him  to  leauc  his  holy  order
whereinto  he  was  initiated,  & to  returneinto  England.

For  this,&  for  Ieauing  the  order  of  Bonhommes , fee  here
an  euident  fi^ne , that  Maynie  had  a deuil : vvhatfoeuer
heedid  orfpake,  the  deuil  did,  and fpake in  him  : the
horfc  that  he  rid  vpon  to  ‘Denham,  was  no  horfe,but  the
deuil  .*  Cfyfayniehad  the  deuils  in  liuery-coatesattending
vpon  him : and  all  this  tragicall  out- cry , for  Ieauing  his
order, and  a poore  paflion  of  the  Mother, which  a thou-
fand  poore  girles  in  England  had  worfe , then  euer  Ma:

CMaynie  had.

Before  I come  to  their  women  patients , I mull  tel!
you  a tale,  that  I haue  heard , which  happily  hath  but
too  authentical!  records  for  the  nature  of  a tale.  There
was  an  holy  man,  who  had  more  then  a months  minde
to  a daintie  peccc  offlelh,  that  was  oft  in  his  eye,  and  by
glofes  and  gifts,  and  Court-tricks,  had  as  much  as  hee
defired.  This  holy  man  was  a fetter  to  an  exorcifing
cruc,  and  to  make  his  game  as  fure  to  the  holy  aflbeiati-
on,  as  he  had  done  vnto  himfelfe,  he  tels  his  fwcct  Cref*
pda , that  himfelfe  was  much  troubled  in  minde  in  hesf
bchalfe,  and  fhould  get  no  quiet  to  his  confciencc,  till
they  had  both  confefled  themfelucs  to  an  holy  Catho-
lique  pricll  5 which  when  fhe  had  done,  the  filly  Conie
Was  caught : fhe  was  feazed  vpon  for  brayed  wares,  and
was  enforced  to  become  aprimda^nd  to  follow  the  ho*

He  Campe*  Heere  is  no  morrall  ( gentle  Reader)  and
therefore  let  vs  haue  no  application.

sstnne  Smith  was  fomewhat  more  affe&ed  with  that
hyflericall  humor  of  the  Mother,  and  came  to  London
. £.  . out


page,  26.


Miracle
booke.
Pag,  10,


.tookehcr

Ccnfels.


A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture
out  of  Lancafhire  to  her  filler  for  phyfick : where  mee-
ting with  the  common  badger,  orkiddicr  for  dcuils,
Ma:  Feckham , at  the  L:  Staffords  houfe  in  London,  (be
was  marked  out  for  the  Court  of  pofleflion,  and  by  dc-
uife  was  fent  downe  to  the  holy  hote-houfe  at  Denham,
where  after  fhe  had  faded  a little  of  the  difciplinc  of  the
holy  chaire , her  heauing  of  the  Mother  proued  a mon-
flrous  fliee-deuill,  and  flic  was  chaire-hauntedjfo  long,
rill  fhee  was  faine,  for  her  better  cafe,  to  vfe  fwathing
bands  for  three  yecrcs  after.

Sara  Williams , had  a little  paine  in  her  fide  (and  in  an
other  place  befide)  but  becaufe  that  was  not  enough  to
difeouer  a deuill,  flic  was  Cat-bitten  too . That  is,  once
feeking  for  egges,  in  a bufh  by  a Woods  fide,  and  a Cat
leaping  out  of  a bufh,  where  fhe  had  lycn  a-{lccpc,Sara
was  feared  with  the  fodaine  leaping  of  the  Cat,  and  did
a little  tremble,  asperfons  fodainly  moued  with  fearc
vfe  to  doe : Lochecrc  a plaine  ca Cc,Saraes  Cat  was  a dc-
mll,  and  fhe  mud  be  Cat- hunted,  or  Pricd-hunted  for
this  fight*.  ...

Fidd:  Williams  was  deuiil-caught,  by  a very  drange
meanes . Shee  dwelling  with  Midris  Feckham , and  be-
ing one  day  in  the  Kitchin,  wringing  out  a bucke  of
cloathes , T>ihdale  the  Pried  came  into  the  Kitchin,
where  die  was  a wafhing,and  tapping  her  on  the  flioul-
der  told  her , that  her  Miflres  looked  for  her,  to  whom
{he  aunfwered,  that  fhe  had  almofl  done  wafliing,  and
then  fhe  would  goe.

Prefently  aCccr  this,  fhe  lifting  at  a tub  of  wafer, which
floode  there  ready  filled,  to  be  vfed  in  her  wafliing,  her
feete  flipped  from  vnder  her,  the  Kitchin  being  paued,
and  hauing  a flirewd  fall,  did  hurt  her  hippe,  with  the
griefe  whereof  flic  was  condraincd  for  2 or  3 dayesto
keepe  her  bed.  Here  begins  the  deuil  from  the  Kitchin.
Into  her  chamber  comes  the  louing  cruc  of  pittifull  dc-
uiH-catchingPricds;  they  bemoanc  the  miihap  of  her


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.  page,27,

hippc  forfooth,  and  after  fome  other  kinde  ceremonies,
they  fidi  out  of  her  at  length,  that  /lie  had  beenc  fome-
timepad  troubled  with  a paine  in  her  fide.  Ah  Sir  the
cafe  is  plaine : thefc  two  put  together , her  hip,  and  her
fide  make  vp  a iud  deuill, & a monflrous  one  foo,com-
pounded  ot  two  fuph  diflimilar  partes  I wecnc.  But  wil
you  fee  how  ? It  was  the  deuill  that  tripped  vp  Ftdds
heeles  in  the  Kifchin,and  gaue  her  the  fhrewd  fall.  And
why,  would  you  guefle  i The  wicked  fpirit  could  not
endure  her,  becaufe  fhe  had  wafhed  amongd  her  buck
ofcloathcsacatholicjuc  prieds  fhirt.  Ieftt  A Faria  • And
a worfe  thing  in  it  then  fo : bui  1 will  giue  the  records
Ieaue  to  fpeake  it  for  me . I trud  you  will  nor  looke  for
any  other,  after  this  dangerous  fall  on  the  hippe,  but
that  this  fhould  prouearcall  polfeffion,  as  indetdeit
did.

Young  Tray  ford the  fixth  pafient,being  a boon- com-
panion, asfcemes,andlouing  wine,  and  women  well,
(asappcarcs  by  the  declaration)  had  enflamed  his  toe,
and  at  fome  times  felt  a fpice  of  the  gowt : a plaine  cafe
( as  the  nofe  on  a mans  face)the  young  man  had  a deuill,

^nd  mud  be  coniurcd  all  ouer  for  his  wicked  toe.  Now
what  a wofuil  taking  arc  all  thofe  poore  creatures  in,
that  haue  about  them  by  birth,  cafualty,  or  mifcap  any
clofe  impcr,ache,or  other  more  fccret  infirmity  ? when
a paine  in  a maides  belly,  a ditch  in  her  fide,  an  ache  in
her  head,  acrampcin  her  legge,  atincklingin  her  toe,

(if  the  good  Exorcid  pleafe)  mud  ncedes  hatch  a deuil,
and  bringforth  fuch  chairc-worke,  fier-»  worke,  and  de-
uill- workc,  as  you  (hall  heare  heereafter?  And  what  a
dcliration  is  this  in  our  graue,  learned,  and  famous.  Col-
ledge  of  auncient  renowmed  Phyficians,to  vn  dertake  a
long,  codly,  and  painfull  courfe  of  dudy  in  thofe  ex-
cellent worthies  of  learned  times  (falen,  Hippocrates^ni
the  red,  and  to  fpend  their  money,  drength,  and  fpirits,
in  fearching  the  treafurie  of  Nature  : let  them  cadier

E z thofe


page, 28^  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

thofe  olde  monuments  of  Ethnick  prophanc  learning*
and  turne  Wifard,  Seer,  Exorcift,  lugler,  or  Witch ?
let  them  turne  ouerbutonenewlcafc  in  Stronger,  A 7-
dcr,  C^Tengus,  or  Thyrsus,  and  fee  how  to  aifcouer  a dc-
uillin  the  EpilepfiejMothe^CrampCjConvulfion, Sci-
atica, orGowt,  and  then  learne  afpell  , an  amulet,  a
periapt  of  a pried,  and  they  fhall  get  them  more  fame,
and  money  in  one  week,  then  they  doe  now  by  all  their
painfull  trauaile  in  a yeerc.

It  is  a very  poorc  bay  te , as  you  may  fee  by  Trayfords
gowtiefoe,  where-out  our  hungry  Exorcids  will  not,
rather  then  faile,  nibble  a deuill . And  if  I be  not  much
deceaued,  I haue  heard  it  credibly  reported  by  fo me,
that  haue  caufe  to  know,  that  the  Popes  Holines  him-
felfe  may  be  deuill-caught  by  this  trick . For  it  is  credi-
bly auouched,that  this  fweet  natured  Clement  the  8, with
vfing  too  much  fome  fweet  fawce,  is  molcdcd  with  the
gowf.  Now  what  a £)u<zre  would  this  proue,  if  a Lyn*
cent  Exorcid  fliould  difcouer  a deuill  in  his  Holines  foe  ?
Howiwould  the Scotifls,  and  Thomifts  belabour,  and
trick  the  deuill  with  quedions  in  the  Popes  toe  ? Firft,
whether  his  Hoi : being  necedarily  inuefted  with  the
holy  fpirit  of  God , can  poflibly  admit  of  a deuill , no.
Then  grauntingby  way  ofadmittance,that  his  Hoi: may
be  poffefled,  whether  his  refolutions  be  fo  be  taken  for
the  Canons  of  Gods  holy  fpirit,  or  the  maximes  of
the  deuill : and  lad  ly, if  the  deuill  may  lurk  in  the  Popes
toe,whether  his  wife,holy,  fweet  babes  with  beards,  that
haue  kitted  his  toe,  haue  killed  the  deuill,  yea  or  no  in
his  toe : but  my  wit  is  too  fhallow?to  found  thefc  deepe
profundities : I mud  goc  on,  and  tell  you,  what  farther
siewcs  from  Denham.


The  'tv

i / : l . . 1 1 • . . ..

) % .


page,  29,


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.

CHAP.  7.

y Their  holy  pretences  to  make  their  Difciples fure

vnto  them.

Y°  a will  wonder,that  thefe  vifards  being  fo  bare,and
made  all  of  brownc  paper,  fhould  euer  ferue  the
turnc  fo  make  a maskc  for  a dcuill,vnriH  you  hearc  how
handfomlythe  glcw  of  holy  church  doth  make  it  hang
together,  and  how  it  is  Pitched  vp  With  packthreed  of
holy  deuotion.  If  their  patients  be  Catholiques,whora
they  fet  their  hookc  for,a  lime-twigge  of  a ruflh  wil  ferue
the  turne  to  catch  them,  hold  them,  and  fatten  them  to
their  tackling  : but  if  their  Conics  be  Protettants,  and
fuch  as  goc  to  Church , then  fome  holy  ceremonies  for
good  fa fhion  fake,  mutt  be  folemnly  vfed,  to  combine
them  the  neerer  vnto  their  holy  Fathers,  that  the  band
and  knot  may  be  the  furer  betweene  them  for  vnfying
againe,  and  to  bring  them  fo  lye  betweene  the  fweete
breatts  of  their  holy  Mother,  the  Romifh  Church;  that
the mammaday*  which  (hall  be  giuen  them,  may  doe
them  the  more  good.

Heereyouare  tovnderttand,  that  all,  orthemoftof
Vs  Protettants,  are  forfooth  in  a moft  wofullcafc:  for
the  moft  of  vs  already,  without  the  helpe  of  either  paffi-
on  of  the  Mother,  Sciatica,  Gowte,  Cat-biting,  or  hip-
ping^according  to  the  Romifh  Kalendcr,arc  plainly,  5z
really  poflefted  with  deuils.  In  fo  much  as  the  reuerend
Thyrcttts  difputes  it  very  profoundly,  pro,  & con.  and  capt  iS.
foylcs  a whole  ehap:with  this  learned  problcmei'LVmw
heretici  fint  vere  a damombus  objeffi ? Whether  P rote  Hants
( whom  he  termes  Haretiques )be  truly  pojfejfed  with  deuills.

Where  firfthe  fayes  for  vs,  that  wee  haue  magmm  con -
iunclionem,  vel  comunionem  cum  TDamombm  : Great f el -
low/hip,  and neere friendjbip  with  the  deuil.  2 Guamplu-
rimi  cum  diabolo  egermt  f vel  ab  eodem  tanquam  magiflro

Ej'  JhOl


i


page,  30*  A declaration  of  Popiflh  impofiure

fita  dogmata  acceperunt . That  very  many  of  vs  haue  dealt
with  the  dentil,  and  haue  receaued  our  principles  of  no  other
maifler,  then  the  detail:  And  thefe  reafons,  he  fay  th,will
eafily  perftvade  fome  to  thinkc,  we  haue  a&ually  deuils
in  deede.  But  he  for  his  part,  of  pure  good  will  vnfo  vs,
will  thinkc  that  wee  are  not  to  be  accounted  properly
pofTefTed  • Propterea  quod verain  ipfsjigna,  qua  obfefos
produnt , defiderantur . His  reafons,  that  moouehim  to
fbitflcc  fp’wejl  of vs^rc,  becaufcwee  doe  not  tumble,
wallow^  foame,  hpwle,  fcrickc,  and  make  mouthes,and
mops,  as  the  popifh  poflefled  vfe  to  doe.Loe,  doth  not
the  good  man  deferue  you  fhould  giue  him  a bribe,  for
fo  mildly  concluding  his  aphorifme  on  your  (ides,  that
you  are  not -to  be  faid  to  be  really  pofl'cfTed : but  onely
to  deale,  f alkc,  make  league,  friend/hip,  and  familiarity
with  the  deuill.  But  our  1 2 Apoftolicall  Exorcifts,and
Weflon  their  head,  in  their  deeper  in-fight,  and  experi-
ence of  vs  Proteflants,  haue  long  fince  fet  oldc  Thyratu
Cofchoole,  and  bidden  him  turne  ouer  his  booke  to  an
other  Jpafc : for  they  plainly  fee,  teach, and  auouch,that
the  greateft  part  of  vs  Proteflants, are  po  defied  in  deed.
Sara  tVilliams  faith  in  her  depofition,  that  it  was  an  vfuad
faying  with  the  ‘Pnefls , that  many  Proteflants  were poffef-
fed.  But  Frifwood goes  furthcr,&  fayes  in  plaine  termes.
That  the  Pnefls  in  talking  of  the  Proteflants , bane  affirmed
efthem  in  her  hearing , that  the greatefl fhare  of  them  were
pojfefed  with  deuils . I could  wifii>  that  whilfl  our  Exor-
cifis  are  in  this  good  mood  to  fay,  and  auouch,  that  you
haue  deuils : and  you  in  your  good  moode,  for  hearing
them  fofay,that  you  had  fome  1 2 of  their  holieft  Exor-
cifts.amongfl  you,  and  Weflon  their  champion,  to  trie
whether  they  could  coniureadeuilloutofyou,  or  you
coniure  them, for  faying  you. haue  the  deuil.  But  1 pray
you  in  the  meane  while  help  them  out  of  their  mufe, for
they  are  forely  perplexed,  to  think  vpon  that  day,whcn
England  fball  become  Catholique  againe,  how  the  Ca-
i.:,\  ' tholiques


in  carting  out  of  Deuils*  page, 51*

tholiques  rtial  be  peftered  with  workc  in  carting  out
deuils  > byreafon  of  the  infinite  number  o£vs  protec-
tants, that  hauing  deuils  in  vs , mull  come  into  theyr
handling.  Our  bands  (fay  they)  {hall  then.be  fall  of  chair  c~
workc  indeed.  And  verily  as  many,  as  be  young  women,
andmaides,and  markein  the  courfe  of  this  Horic  the
kind  handling  of  <tAnne  ,Fid,  and  Sara  (three  proper
young  maids)by  the  Do&ors  of  the  Chayre,  and  withall,
fhall  obferue  well  the  manner  of  the  Chayre , theyr  holy
brimftone,  holy  potion,  and  the  reft  of  that  holy  geere,
wil  (I  doubt  not)  be  much  delighted  with  the  contem-
plation of  that  day , and  rather  then  faile , hartily  both
wilh  andpray,  that  all  theyr  holy  works  may  grace  7*-
burue,  as  they  haue  worthily  deferued,with  newholy  rc-
liqucs,  before  that  day  coroe.

Well,  howfoeuer  you  like  them,  or  theyr  holy  chaire ,
this  is  theyr  thcoreme  hire,  and  found  , that  the  greatetf
part  of  Proteftants  be  pofiefted.and  fo  they  proceeded
with  Anne , Fid,  and  Sara . Who  before  they  becam  en-
tangled in  then*  holy  gmnes,  were  proteftant  maydes,&
went  orderly  to  Church.  Mary  after  that  they,and  their
Lenohkd  Caught  themwith  cat-biting,  hipping  , and
crosbiting  (as  you  haue  heard)  & that  they  had  brought
them  with  their  Syren-fongs  fo  belieuc,  that  fome  wic-
ked fpirit  had  lyen  a long  time  lurking  in  theyr  bellies*
and  theyr  fides,  why  then  theycnchaunt  them  a/re/h
with  this  lamentable  dolefull  dittic : That  theyr  harts  doe
bleede  for  for  row , to  fee  them  in  this  pittifull  wofullp  light  t
being  in  Sat  am  pofiejjton,  that  they  burne  with  bowels  of  to -
miferation,  and  companion  of  theyr  dtflreffed  eft  ate, that  they
would  ft  end  theyr  beFl  ftirits^tnd  lines  to  doe  them  any  good:
cnely  one  little  thing  is  a barre,  that  hinders  the  influence  of
all  dinine  grace , and  favour  vpon  them,  and  that  is  theyr  re -
Ugion , which  they  mutt  fir  FI  abandon , and  be  reconciled  to
the  Pope,  or  otherwife  all  theyr  holy  ceremonies  are  of  no  a*
wuk.  And  heere  beginnes  thcittyoly  pageant  ip  peepc
ir  • into-


pagc^zij  A declaration  of  Popilh  impofture

into  the  flagc.  Firfi^  they  fell  Frifrrood , and  Sara,  (as
yoiunay  fee  in  their  confeffions)  chat  theyr  baptifmc
they  had  rcceiued  in  the  Church  of  England,  mull  be  a-
mended,  in  regard  it  wanted  many  rites,  ceremonies.  Sc
ornaments,belonging  to  the  baptifme  of the  Church  of
Rome..


In  their
bookeof
Cafes  for

fngbad.


Heere  lAllen  and  'Parfons  will  con  you  little  thankc
for  fo  little  fetting  by  their  rcfolution  in  cafesforEng-
land.  Their  wordiare  thefe:  Ceremonut  omtj]<£  baptijmi
in pneris^cum  poffknt  commode fuppleri.debent  ynon  antem  id.
faciendum  confidtmhs  inijs , qttt  Jmt  prottectiori* 1 atatisj
ne  inde  nafeatur fcandalum , ant  opmo,  prior em  baptifnum
non  valuiffe . Your  Ceremonies  (fay  your  two  Gods  )
may  be  fitly  played  vpon  the  baptifmc  ofchildrcn,  but
vpon  an  adultus  not  fo : leaflaftronceit,  oh  fcandaic  arife
thereby,  that  the  former,  baptifme  fhould  not  bfcofit
felfe  good,  zslllcn  and  Tar  Jon,  determine  Frifivood  and
Saras  EngUih  baptifme  good  enough  , without  your
goodly  ceremonies  florifhed  ouer  their  heads , and  yet
you  muff  be  dooing  in  fpigbtof  them  both  . Your  ira*
plements  were  ready  for  the  purpofe,  and  it  fitted  your
deuill-worke  better,  and  foyou  cfleemed  net  tsdlleno*.
Tarfons  a pinne.  And  in  goodfooth , you  might  afwcll
hauc  kept  thefe  goodly  Ceremonies  in  your  budget,ex-
cept  you  clccrly  meant,  to  raockc  almighty  God,and  to
make  the  facrament  naught  els,  faue  a rattle  for  fooles,
babes,  and  women,  to  make  (port  withall.  In  my  opini-
on, there  was  neuer  fori  ft  mas-game  performed,  with
nroe  apifh,  indecent,  flouenly  gawdes,  then  your  bapti-
sing, and  fuper-baptifing  ceremonies  are.  Your  puffe,
your  crofTe-puflfe?your  expuffe , your  inpuffe  vppon
the  face  of  a tender  infant , beeing  the  impure  [linking
breath  ofafoule  impure  belching  fwainc,  your  enchau-
ted  fait,  your  charmed  greafe,  your  forccrifed  chrifmc,
your  lothfome  driuell , that  you  put  vppon  theyr  eyes,
cares,  nofes,  andlyppes,  are  fitting  complements  for


in  calling  out  of  Dcuils:

bjnch  pynch , and  laugh  net : coale  vnder  candle JUche : Trier
%ufh  : and  reo-penny  hoe . Which  arc  more  ciuilly  a&ed,
and  with  lefle  foulc  foyle,  and  Iothfome  indecorum , then
your  fpattring,  and  grea  ling  tricks  vpon  the  poore  in-
fant: and  yet  old  doting  Bellarmtne  blurres  three  whole
leauesofpaper*indifplayingthe  banner  of  this  ridicu-
lous trumpery * telling  vs  a long  tale , that  they  came
from  tradition  of  the  Church : when  we  can  afwcl  tell,
as  hec  can  his  Aue  Marie , from  what  fniueling  Pope*
what  drunken  Frier*  what  Heathenifti imitation  they
did  all  £>roceede.

But  fee  thefe  popifti  guegawes  a£ed  vpon  Frifwood
hcrfelfe.  Firft outcomes  the  holychatre , and Frifipood
the  new  babe  is  placed  very  demurely  in  it , with  a cloth
vpon  her  head,  and  a crolfe  vpon  it.  Then  in  comes  the
prieB  attired  in  an  Albe,  or  a Cope  with  a candle  in  his
hand,  (or  elfc  he  is  Anathema  by  the  Counfell  of  Trent)
and  after  the  performance  of  a whole  anticke-futc  of
CrofTes*  hceapproches  very  reuerentlyco  Frtfwood in
the  chay re.  Then,  as  herfelfe  in  her  confeffion  deferibes
it*  he  firft  charmes  her  in  Latinc,  then  he  puts  fait  in  her
mouth,  fpittle  vppon  her  eares,  and  eyes*  and  annoinfs
her  lippes  and  her  nofe  with  oyle,  and  fo  God  and  Saint
Frauncisl, aue  the  young  childe  : in  fteade  of  Frifipood^
chriftening  her  by  the  name  of  Framcts , becaufethat
Saint  had  fuch  afoueraignecommaund  ouer  the  birds
of  the  ay  re,  that  his  name  for  it  wo*  made  communicable
both  to  hee , and  Jhee : and  Sara  was  chriftened  by  the
name  of  c JMary.

Suppofenow  (gentle  Reader)  that  Friftvoods Mtithef
had  come  fodainly  in,  and  feene  the  Prieft  with  his  can-
dell  in  his  hand , and  his  Cope  vpon  his  backe*bufie  in
his  enchaunting  Latinc  charme,and  with-all  had  efpied
her  daughter  Frifipood  mulled  in  her  ebaire  of  eftafe*
With  a cloath,  and  a Crofte,  and  her  other  facred  gearc*
1 wonder  what  ftie  would  fodainly  haue  thought : whe^


page,;?.


PaSe>34»  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

ther  fhe  would  not  haue  beene  much  amazed  at  this  inA
fernall  incantation,  and  haue  imagined  that  a ghoftii^
fleede  of  Frifwoodi  had  beene  coniurcd  out  of  hell . Bu$
if  Hiee  had  had  the  hart  to  haue  fpoken  vnto  Frifwoodg
and  to  haue  called  her  by  her  name,  and  fhe  Should  fo-
dainly  haue  depped  out  of  her  enchaunted  chairc,  and
hauefaid,  that  her  name  had  not  beene  Frifwood , but
Frauncis,  verily  they  would  haue  takenherforaghoft
in  deede,  or  haue  feared  chat  the  Pried  had  enchaunted
her  out  of  her  wits.

But  flay,  what  hall  ? For  after  thefe  new  transformed
creatures  had  their  cefemonies,  and  rites  done  vppon
them,  and  were  framed,  falhioned,  and  attired  for  their  !
parts,  and  were  ready  for  the  chaire,&  the  flage,no  man
abroad  could  be  admitted  to  either  fight,or  fpeech  with
them : intus  res  agitur , they  were  now  myflicall  crea-
tures, and  mull  attend  their  facred  clofe  myderies  with-
in. cydll mutt  be  mum : Clum,  quoth  the  farpsnter  yC\um
quoth  the  Carpenters  wife  y and  Cluxn  quoth  the  Friar •
iYoufhall  be  more  thoroughly  confirmed  by  Frifwood
her  felfe,  touching  this  poynt , who  faith  in  her  exami-
nee her  cx>  nation,  T hat  neither Jhee,  nor  her fitter  Sara  did  fee  either
^rnina:  father  or  ?nothery  being  in  the  fame  Towns  ,all  the  while  that

they  were  in  theyr  hands  : neyther  would  they  fuffer  their
father  or  mother  to  fpeake  with  them , though  they  defir ed  it
many  times:  an  ft  that  her  mother  growing  into  fame  earnefl -
tfeffe,  and  hard  fpeech  with  the  Exorcitts , becaufe  fhe  could
not  be  permitted  to  fee  her  daughters , the  prietts  did fhake
her  of  with  angry  words,  faying,  thatfhee  had  as  much  needs
to  be  cxorcifedas  her  daughters  had.  A man  would  now
verily  perfwade  himfelfe , that  there  game  was  fare  fetg
and  needed  no  more  watching  5 and  yet  yce  fhall  fee  a
nayle,  or  two  driuen  in  more,  to  riuet  the  frame  more
fare.  ^

After  her  new  chridendome,F^in  her  examination
hithj  that  before fhe (kould  come  to  receive  the f acr ament % '

they


in  calling  out  ofDeuifs,

they  toldher , that  (bee  muft fir  ft  vow , andpromife  by  the
vertue  of  that  holy  jacr ament , that  {bee  would  euer  after-
wards hold  the  religion  of  the  Church  of  Rome , and  neuer
(roe  againe  to  any  of  the  P rote  slants  Churches , nor  neuer
reade  the  Englt/h  feruice , or  the  Enghfh  Bible , or  any  other
JLnglifh  bookes  written  by  the  Protestants,  in  matters  of  reli-
gion. And  this  vow  (as  ihee  faith)  is  ordinarily  made  by
all  that  are  reconciled.


CHAP.  8.

. ff  Their  weaves  and  manner  of  inflr titling  theyr

f chollers ,

TK^Hen  they  haue  brought  in  theyr  Conies,  and
' made  them  as  fure,  as  flefli  and  blood  can  make
them,  haue  enchaunred  them  with  their  coropaflionate
deuotion,  haue  engaged  thcravnto  their  ghoftiie  Fa-
thers, haue  fafeinated  them  with  their  (oiemne  incanta-
tion , haue  initiated  them  into  theyr  Church  by  their
new  mock-Chriftendome,  haue  confirmed  them  with
their  facraments,  and  haue  bound  them  by  vow , neuer
toforfake  theyr  ghoflly  communion  : then  begin  they
to  reade  them  Lc&ures  by  rote,  in  their  fchooleofle-
gerderaaine,  and  to  acquaint  them  with  their  parts,they
haue  in  hand  to  play.  Wherein  the  good  coceit  of  rheir
fcholler  to  apprehend  her  leflon  well,  to  carry  in  minde
what  her  Mailer  hath  faid  ouer,  to  apply  it  to  her  owne
cafe,  and  to  put  it  handibmly  in  vre,  is  a little  required.

Fir  ft,  they  omit  no  occafion,  at  all  times,  in  all  places,
when  they  be  together,  & their  fchollers  by  their  fwcet
lide,to  talkeof  the  ftrangeneffe  of  pofTeffion,  of  the
wonders  they  haue  feene  in  pofTefIion,of  the  many  mar-
uelous  pofTcffions  they  haue  been  at : and  the  Echo  in
all  meetings  is  Hill  poffeflion.  Then  they  fell  ouer,  and
ouer,  how  wonderous  flrangely  the  parties  pofTefTed,
whom  they  haue  dealt  withall,  haue  been  affe&ed : and

F a they


pages'.


page,  3^


See  her  ex-
amina ;


A declaration  of  Popifli  imp©fture
they  fay  ouer  very  trcatably,  particularly,  and  diftin£Uy,
the  whole  Catalogue  of  the  a<ftions,  motions,  paflions,
perturbations,  agitations,  geftures,  tumblings,  difcorti-
©ns,  deformations,  howlings,  skrikings,  vifions,  appa-
ritions,changes,  alterations,fpeechcs,&  railings,thaf  the
parties  pofTefTed  haue  vfed,and  praftifed  in  theyr  feuer-
all  fits.

Heare  Sara  Williams  theyr  fchollcr  report  her  ownc
lefTon  in  thefe  words.  It  was  the  ordinary  cuflome  of  the
pnefles  x to  be  talking  of  fuck,  as  had  been  poffefied  beyond
the  feas,  and  to  tell  the  manner  of  theyr fits , and  what  they
fake  in  them : alfo  what  vglie  fights  they  faw  fomtimes,  and
at  other  times  what  toy  full  fights : and  how , when  reliques
were  apply ed  vnto  them , the  parties  would,  roare : how  they
could  not  abide  holy  water , nor  the  fight  of  the Jdcramcntjior
the  annointed  Priefls  of  the  (fathohque  churchy  nor  any  good
thing : how  they  would  greatly  commend  her  dicky  * how  the
deuills  would  comp  lame,  when  the  'Priefls  touched  the  par-
ties, that  they  burnt  them , and  put  them  into  an  ext  reams
heate : how  fometimes  they  could fmell  the  Priefls . Kecre  is
her  lefTon  read  ouer : and  marke  the  fchollcr  how  well
fhe  conned  it,  and  made  application  thereof.  'Ey  the  [aid
tales , ((aid  fhec)  fhee  well  per  ceiued,  how  fhee  might pleafe
them , and  did  frame  her f elf e accordingly  , at  fuch  times  OS
fhe  well  percemedjt  was  theyr  intent  that  fhe  fljould fo  doe .

Heare  Frifwood, Saras  lifter  repeate  her  lefTon  by  harf^
that  her  good  Maifters  had  faid  ouer  fo  her , when  fhee
came  firft  to  fchooleftfer  words  are  thus.That  the  priefls
would  be  often  talking  in  her  hearing , of  cert  nine  women
that  were  poffefied  beyond  the feas : how  the  deuill  in  them
could  not  abide  the  holy  potion, nor  the  burning  of  hallowed
bnmfione  , nor  the  applying  vnto  the  of  holy  rehquesyior  the
prefence , or  touching  of  Cath:  priefls,  nor  holy  water, nor  the
holy  candle , nor  the  ble fifed  facr ament : but  would  ft  art  at  it,
and  fay  they  burned,  rage , and  raile  againfl  the  Priefles , &
commend  vpon  euery  occafion  thofie , that  were  the  Prote -
. * - - ft  ants i


•

in  calling  out  of  Deuils*  Page, 37,

flams.  See  how  in  time  (lie  could  her  leffon  by  hart,and
profited  in  this  godly  fchoole.  By  this  meanes  Jhe  learned^

(as  fhc  faith)  what  to  fay,  and  doe  when  the  priejls  had  her
in  hand:  that  is,  to  Jlart  fometimes , when  they  brought  re-
luju.es  vnto  her,  to  pretend  that  Jhe  could  yiot  endure  the  pre-
fence  of  the  facr ament.  IVlarrie  Fnfwood  beeing  a fchol-
ler,  not  ofthequickeftapprehenfion , did  not  con  her
leflonbyhartthefirft  day,  (which  cofi  her thefetting
on  in  the  holy  chaire  for  her  dulnefTe)  but  it  was  fome  fix
or  feauen  weekes,  ere  fhc  found  their  meaning,  and  then
(quoth  fhee)  I began  to  find  theyr  iuglmg , and  how  that  my
felfe  faying  this  or  that, fake  nothing , but  what  I had  tear -
ned  of  the  Priests.

Heare  ss4nne  Smith  report,  how  fhee  learned  her
cue,  to  come  into  her  fits.  Thcfe  are  her  words.  She  had
been  told  by  diners  (as  fhe  confefleth)  how  others  had  been
troubled,  viz:  how  in  theyr  fits  they  were  greatly  tormented:
how  they  could  not  endure  thepriefles  to  come  neere  them:
how  when  a TrieU  did  lay  his  hand  vppon  any  part  of  them ,
the  faidpartie  would  be  fo  hote , as  though  it  would  burne  the
to  the  bone : how  the  deuill  in  them  would  raile  vpon  the  (fia-
tholiques , and  greatly  commend  the  Proteflants : and  many
other  fuch  things .

Heare  Ma.  CMaynie  theyr  chicfe  fcholler, relate  how
by  degrees  hee  grew  to  his  perfection  in  the  iugling
fchoole.  Firfl  (faith  he)  beeing  at  my  L.  Vaux  his  houfe
at  Hackney  at  dinner,  in  the  dinnertime  there  was  much
communication  of  the  late  pofjejfion  , and  difpoffeffion  of  one
Marwood  by  certaine  Priefts , and  chiefely  ( if  Ido  not  for-
get my  felfe ) by  (JMd.  Edmunds : the  tales  which  were  told
of  that  matter  feemed flrange  vnto  mee,  as  what  extraordi-
nary Jlrength  he  had  in  his  fits,  how  he  roared  like  a Bull,  <3c
many  other  filch  things,  ssffter  this  beeingat'Dznhzm,
the  women  of  the  houfe  came  vnto  me,  and  reported  vnto  me
the  manner  of  the  fits  of  the  two  pojfejfed  in  the  houfe,  defen-
bing  them  in  fuch  fort , as  I was  much  amazed,  therewith .

F3  • Then.


page^S.  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

'Then  they  permitted  me  to  haue  acceffe  vnto  Sara  Wil:  whe
fie  was  in  her fits , and  enformed  mee  hkewife  of  the  marine f
how  fie,  and  others  had  been  troubled : and  when  l hadlear •
nedtheyr  humour , andpercetued  as  well  by  the  refl , as  by
mine  owne  experience , what  would  content  them , 1 framed
my  felfe  accordingly .

Loc  here  the  Captaine  of  this  holy  fchoole  of  leger-
demaine  tells  you,  what  was  the  highcft  point  lobe
learned  in  this  fchoole,  and  what  was  the  perfe&ion  of
a fcholler,  of  the  higheft  forme : to  wit  , to  frame  thcra-
felues  iumpe  and  fit  vnto  the  Priefis  humors,  to  mop,
mow,  iefi,  raile,  rauc,  roare,  commend, 6c  difcommend,
and  as  the  priefls  would  haue  them , vpon  fitting  occa-
sions (according  to  the  difference  of  times , places,  and
commers  in ) in  all  things  to  play  the  deuils  according-
ly, as  Ma:  Afayniehccte faith,  and  his  other  play-deuils
afore.  As  cuery  fcholler  in  this  fchoole  had  the  wit,and
good  grace  to  frame  himfelfe  betimes,  to  the  bent  of  his
holy  Maifter,  and  to  a&  his  feates  kindly,  roundly,  and
artificially  at  a beck,  fo  was  theyr  proceeding  with  him,
or  her  more  gentle,  and  mild.  For  if  he  could  once  read
his  lefion  in  his  Maift ers  eyes  and  face,  what  needed  any
other  hard  horne-booke  to  beafe  about  his  head ; but  if
he  were  dull,  and  flow,  vnto  this  framing  himfelfe , and
rouftheere  his  lefion  many  times  faid  ouer  by  hart  by
thePrieft,andyetcouldnotlearnehis  cue,  orelfenot
perfe&ly  remember  his  feuerall  changes, and  key es,  why
thenhee  muft  tad  of  the  difeipline  of  the  fchoole,  to
rouze  vp  his  fpirits  better,6c  caufe  him  entend  his  geare
Well  5 6c  that  was  the  difeipline  of  the  holy  chatre , (wher-
ofyc  fhall  heare  anon)  fuch  a difeipline,  as  by  that  time
it  had  been  tailed  foundly  but  once,  or  twice,  I fuppofe
the  deuill  himfelfe  (if  he  could  haue  had^  the  fence  ofif,
chat  thefe  poore  fchollers  had)  would  rather  haue  cho-
fen,  to  haue  roared,  fomed,  6c  wallowed,  and  haue  tur-
ned him  into  all  fhapes , as  the  priefls  would  haue  him,

then


in  cafting  out  of  DeuilsT
then  euer  to  haue  endured,  the  courfe  of  the  fame . But
his  chayre  could  not  be  (pared,  for  many  goocj  offices,
and  therefore  of  that  more  at  large  heercaftcr.

CHAP.  9.

ff  Of  (be  fecretSy  and firange  operation  of  the  holy
Chair  e,  and  holy  Potion.

C Alueprifcd fide  s tripodis,  faith  the  Poet  to  the  enchan-
k ted  feate  at  De/phoj , which  was  fo  famous  for  the
holy  infpirarion  of  the  God  Apollo , that  his  Prophcfefle
could  giue  no  Oracle,  except  fhee  were  placed  oucr
that  facred  ftoole . We  haue  heere  in  hand,  a more  fa-
crcd  enchaunted  feate,  which  was  fo  potent,  and  of  fo
vaiious  vfes,and  offices,  fo  our  holy  Impoftors,as  with-
out it  they  could  fhew  few , or  no  wonders,  or  miracles
at  all.  And  that  is  the  bleffed  chayre,which  I eft-foones
mentioned  vnto  you,  which  ferued  them  to  more  good
purpofes,  for  their  holy  legerdemainc,  then  euer  the
chayre,or  fword  at  De/phos  did  Apelloes  priefts.  I fhould
doe  you  wrong,  if  I fhould  not  firft  deferibe  this  bleffed
Engine  barely,  and  nakedly  vnto  you,and  there  repeate
you  the  manifold  commodities , and  delights  of  the
fame.

. You  fhal  haue  Fidd : and  Sara  the  reporters  of  it  vnto
you,  who  by  reafon  of  their  wofull  experience,  haue
bell  skill  to  doe  it.

zsft  the  end  of  the  firfl  Afajfey{(di\th  Fidd:  Willi:)/^r  e-
tserfhe  faw,  which  was  faid  by  Ala:  Dibdale : hee  told  her ,
that  now  they  would  maJ^e  triattj&hat  was  in  her . And  there -
vpon  jhe  being  perfeElly  welly  and  telling  Alai  Dibdale,  and
the  re  si  as  much  y yet  they  would  needes  haue  her  fit  downe  iyt
a chayre , which  jhe  did . T hen  they  began  to  binde  her  with
towells,  whereat  jhe  greatly  meruailedy  and  was  there -with
call  into  a great  fear as  not  knowing , what  they  meant  to
doe  with  her : being  in  this  cafe^Ala;  Dibdale  began  to  reade

m


page,  ?o


See  her  ex*
amim


page,  40*  A declaration  of  Popifti  impofture

in  his  booke  ofExorcifing : and  after  a good  while,  feeing  no
other  alteration  in  her , then  the  tokens  of  feare,  which  en-
creafed  by  reafsn  of  his  words , and  dealings , then  they  vrged
her  to  drinkeabotte  apinte  ofSacke,  and  Sallet-oyle,  being
hallowed,  andmtngled  with  fome  kinde  offpices : when [ht e
tatted  this  drinke, which  they  termed , an  holy  potion,  it  did
fo  much  dtflike  her , that  Jhee  could  drinke  but  a little  of  it  at
once , her  ft  omacke  greatly  loathing  it , and  then  the  Triett
faid : all  that  came  from  the  deuil,  who  hated  nothing  worfe ,
then  that  holy  drinke : fo  as  fhe  was  held,  and  by  very  force
caufed  to  drinke  it  vp  at  diners  draughts . Heere-vpon  Jhee
grew  to  be  very  ficke,  and  giddy  in  her  head , and  began  to
fall  into  a cold  fweat  : verily  then  beleeuing , that  ( as  the
Priett  faid ) it  was  a wicked fpirit , that  caufed  her  to  be  in
fuch  cafe : whereas  afterwards,  when  fhe  better  had  confide -
red  of  their  dealing  with  her,  fhee  eafily  perceaued,  that  the
drinke  they  gaue  her  was  fuch , as  might  haue  made  a horfe
^ ficke.  This  was  the  firft  part  of  the  chayre-worke,  and

t^e  fecond  was  Tweeter  then  this . W hen  her  ftoraackc,
head,  and  veines,  were  full  of  the  holy  drinke,  then  to
take  brimflone,  and  burne  it  in  a chafingdifh  of  coales,
and  by  force  to  hold  downe  her  face  ouer  the  fume.
Which  broyling  with  brimflone  Ma:  C JMaynie  confef-
feth  he  faw  fo  butcherly  pra&ifcd  vpon  Sara  JVili.as  hee
had  feene  her  face  after  it , looke  more  blacker,  and  fwarts
with  the  fume,  then  any  chimney- fweepers  did.

Now  I prefent  vnto  your  imaginations,  Sara  Will:  fit-
ting  bound  in  a chayre  (as  poorc  wench  fhee  often  did)
with  a pinte  of  thi % holy  potion  in  her  ftomacke,  working
vp  into  her  head,  and  out  at  her  mouth,  and  her  eyes,
nofe,  mouth,  and  head,  fluffed  full  with  the  fmoake  of
holy  perfume,  her  face  being  held  down  ouer  the  fume,
till  it  was  all  ouer,  as  blacke  as  a flocke,  and  think  ifyou
fee  not  in  your  minde,  the  liuely  Idaa  of  a poore  deuill-
diflrefled  woman  in  deede.

And  hcerc,  leafl  good  Father  CMengns  fhould  fake  it
" " in


— \


in  cafting  out  of  Demist  page,4V

in  ill  part,  that  wc  leaue  him  out  of  this  deuillifli  workc,
who  had  his  grcateft  part  in  preferring  the  perfume
for  thechayre*,  you  fhall  firft  heare  his  Dos  touching
the  bill  for  the  holy  perfume : and  then  I (hall  be  able
to  giueyou  a perfeft  rcceite,  to  make  an  horfe  poffefi-
fed.

After  his  holy  benedi&ion,  Page,  173  4 Flag:  Damon?
this  is  his  perfume.  Accipiatur  Sulphur  fij  alb  arnim^ & c&ta
Take  bnmflone,  AfTa  fetida,  Galbanumji’.Iohns  Wort,
and  Rue.  All  thefe  things  being  hallowed , according  to  their
crone  proper , and peculiar  benediElion , muH  be  cafl  vpon  the
fire,  and  the  fmoake  thereof  applied  to  the  nofethnlls  of  the
pofeffed . Now  you  haueyour  full  number  of  fimples,
fake  your  whole  bill,  topoffciTc  a horfe  with  adcuilh
Take  a lufty  young  ftond  horfe,  and  tye  him  with  a big
trope  to  a Smiths  forge , take  the  holy  potion  compoun-  m
ded  of  Rue,  Sacke,  Drugges,  and  Sallet-oyle  Ana
more  then  a pinte,  put  it  with  an  home  downe  into  the
horfes  throat,  that  done,  fake  Briraftone,  AJfafatida,

Galbanwn , S.  Iohns  Wort , and%ue , burne  them  all  toge-
ther, vpon  a chafing- difh  of  coales , apply  the  fmoake
fo  long  to  the  nofethrils  of  the  horfe,  till  you  haue  made
his  face  with  the  fmoake,  lookc  as  blacke  as  the  Smith :
and  ifthe  horfe  doe  not  fnort,  flyng,  fome,curuet,  and
take  on  like  a dcuill,  you  may  pay  the  Smith, for  his  ho-
ly drinke,  and  take  the  horfe  with  you  for  your  paincs*

There  is  neither  Horfe, nor  AfTc,nor  Dogge,  nor  Ape,
if  he  had  beene  vfed,as  thefe  poorc  feely  creatures  were,
but  would  haue  beene  much  more  dcuillifhly  affe&ed
then  they . Neither  is  any  man  liuing  (as  I fuppofe)  of
that  mortified  patience,  who  would  not  be  much  mo-
tied  with  indignation , to  heare  the  feely  maides  com-
plaineofthevfage  of  that  holy  infcrnall  crue.

Firft,  Fidd:  Wtlliams  complaines,  as  ye  haue  heard  in
her  relation,  That#  made  her  giddy , audcasl  her  into  a
cold  fweat,  That  it  caH  her  into  a rage 3 and  caufed  her

g*  sc


/


page,42


*


A declaration  of  Popifti  impofture

to  ffeake,  fhee  wifi  not  what . It  did  Jo  intoxicate ,

benum  her  fences , as  in  one  of  her  fits,  where-into  they  had
call  her  by  their  holy  potion, brimfl  one, there  were  two
needles  t hr  till  into  her  legge,  by  one  of  the  Tr  tells  ( whereof
in  an  other  place ) and  [he  will  it  not  f, ill after [hee  had  reco-
vered her  fences . 4,  For  her  complaining  to  them  of
their  inciuill , & inhumane  vfage  of  her  by  their  potion
and  perfume:  They  bad  her  to  the  chayre,  and  fo  pla-
gued her  with  both,  as  being  there-with  wonderfully ficke,
fhe  fell  into  a [wound . j*.  It  was  fo  loathforae  a thing  to
the  beholders,  to  fee  the  holy  potion  giuen  vnto  them,
that  diners  G entlewomen prefent,  didweepefor  pitty,to  fee
them  goe  to  their  geare.  6 , She  was  fo  haunted  there-
with, a ndgrew  fo  weary  of  her  life  by  this  meanes : asjhee
tried  aloude  vnto  her  vncle,  whom  (bee  heard  by  chaunce  on
the  other  fide  of  a garden  wall  1 O good  Vncle  Joe  Ip  e me  from
hence  , for  lam  almoll  billed amongfl  them  heere  already ,
and J hall  not  line  ,if I continue  heere  long.  7,  Being  grown
to  great  weakenes,  arid  almoft  defperate,  (Lee  told  the
pricils  plainly,  at  the  end  of  one  of  her  fits,  where-into
they  had  catt  her,  by  their  drinks , (libber- fawces,  and
brimftone,  that  iffhee  had  a dentil  in  her , they  had  bell  to
cafl  him  out : For  (quoth  fhe)  if  every  on  torment  mefoct-
gaine,  dijpatch  we,  if  yon  Ushotherwife  I will  certainly  by  one
wearies,  or  other,  get  away  from  you,  and  will  tell  my  friends
of  all  your  proceedings,  and  dealings  heere , both  with  me, and
others . Thus  farre  Fidd  Williams : and  was  Sara  her  fi-
tter, lefle  beholding  to  their  holy  potion,  holy  brimttone,
and  the  chayre?  let  her  fclfe  tell  you,  who  hath  beft
eaufe  to  remember.

Firfi,  fhc  faith,  [bee  dooth  not  remember  every  feuer all
time , when  they  bound  her  in  the  chayre , but  they  troubled
her  very  often,  (praying  God  to  forgiue  them)  and  affic-
ineth,  that  when  {he  came  to  the  chayre,  [be  was  fo  vfed,  as
that  enery  time,  if  [he  might  have  had  her  choyfe,fhee  would
rather  have  chofen  to  have  ended  her  life , then  to  have  gone

into


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.


into  it.  Secon  dly,  that  if  at  any  time  fhee  was  pafl  the  vfe
of  her  fences , it  was  by  reafon  of  the  holy  potion,  they  com -
pelted  her  to  take.  Thirdly,  that  flsee fell  into  the  paffton  of
the  trembling  of  the  hart , onely  vpon  grief e of  their  bad  v*
fane  of  her ,&  that  thorough  that  paffon,fje  did  diuers  times
/wound . Fourthly,  that  they  vfed  their  holy  brimflcne  fa
7mch>  as  the fhnke  of  it  neuer  went  out  of  the  chamber.  Fift-
lic,  that  foule  holy  potion , made  filch  an  imprcflion  in  her
phancie : and  the  loathfomnes  of  it  did fo  JHcke  in  her  mind,
as  yet  to  this  day  fhe  cannot  endure  the  tail,  nor  fauour  of  any
thing  that  was  m the  fame . In  fo  much,  as  about  three
yeeres fince,  fbe  feeling  a pangue  officknes  in  the  Afarket  at
Oxford  , fome  of  her  neighbours  at  vnawares , gaue  her  a
little  Sacke:  which  asfoone  as  fhe  perceaued,fljee fell  to  he
very  ffcke  vpon  it,  and  was  c entrained  to  lye  there  all  night .
The  offence  of  the  Sacke  being  the  onely  grief e that  floe  hady
after  (bee  was  recouered  of  her [aide  pangue . Sixtly,  they
Would  holde  her  nofe , and  face  perforce,  Jo  neere  ouer  the
fmoake  of  brimflone, feathers, and  fuch  other ftmkinggearey
that  the  very  paine fhe  felt,  caufed  her  to  crie , and  fcritche
very  lowde , and  to flrnggle  as  much , as  poffibly  fhe  could yt  ill
her ftrength  failed  her.  t one  time Jhe  was  fo  extreamely

affixed  with  the  faiddrinke , that  her  fences  went  from  her,
and  fhe  remained  in  a J wound : and  after  that , her  head  was
fo  giddie  with  the  potion,  and  her  fences  fo  troubled  with  the
brimflone fmoake,  as  fhe fpake,  and  babied  many  idle  faohfb
words.  Seauenthly,  their  chaire,  potion,  and  brimflone
perfume  grew  fo  hatcfull  fo  her  filler  Field,  and  fo  vn-
tolerable  to  her  felfe,  as  vpon  her  fillers  fuggeftion,  fhe
attempted  torunnefrom  thehoufe,  and  to  wade  through  a
brooke , halfe  a yard  deepe  of  water.

Thus  much  Sara  Williams.  And  did  Ma:  Maynie, their
prime  profelTour  efcape,the  chayre,  the  brimflone, and
the  blefTcd  potion  ? That  had  beene  great  pitty,the  de-
uill,  alias  Weflony  loued  him  much  better  then  fo . Of
Whom  Ma:  Mayme  complaineth.  That  he  was  conflrai-

G 2


page,  43<


page,44*  A declaration  of  Popifri  Impofture

tied  by  him  to  drinfe  mott  loathfome  draughts  of  fuch  con -
fcElions,  as  he  had  ready  for  him  . And  that  fometimes  they
burnt  fuch  abhommable  finking , and  violent  things  , hol-
ding  his  nofe  by  force  oner  the  fmoake3cts  I thinkfcpioth  he)
would haue  made  an  horfe  mad.  But  in  another  place,  he
tells  vs  a fhrewder  tale  of  JVeslon , that  holy  deuill,  tou-
ching this  deuillifh  potion.  Cjodknoweth  (faith  he)whe-
ther  Wefton  fuppofed  I would  hane  taken  fomccourfe , to
haue  fbortned  mine  orene  time , as  constrained  by  fome  fort
there-vntOj  by  the  great  weakened  and  we  (trines  of  my  life .
Is  this  an  effect  of  your  bleffed  loathfome  potion,  to
driue  Fidd,  Sara,  and  Ma:  CMaynie,  info  a loathing  of
their  owne  liues : and  to  enter  into  adefperate  rcfolu-
tion,  touching  fhortning  the  fame?  Then  holy  gentle
ckuils,the  Maiftcrs  of  this  deuil-tragedy,let  me  aske  you
a queftion,  but  it  (hall  be  in  your  eare,  that  the  Catho-
liques,  who  hold  you  for  holy  ghoftly  fathers,  may  not
heare : How  many  drarames  of  this  holy  potion  had  you
giuen  to  the  wench,  that  you  wote  of,  whom  you  ex-
orcifed  fo  long,  till  fhec  fell  from  off  a paire  of  ftayres,
and  brake  her  necke,  whether  for  felling  of  tales,  or  that
you  feared  after-claps;  it  is  very  probable, you  had  filled
her  head  full  ofyour  holy  perfume.

zsfnne  Smith , was  yet  in  a farre  better  cafe,  then  thefe  z
for  fhe  confefleth,  fhe  was  fo  gently  tyed,  and  hampe-
red, in  the  holy  chaire,  that  fhe  was  compelled,  for  three
yeeres  fpace  after  fhe  was  releafed,  tofwadlc  herbody3
for  the  very  forenes  fhe  felt  of  their  holy  hands.

Gentle  fpeftators,  we  haue  held  you  fom-what  long,
ere  our  play  begin ; but  now  you  fee  the  deuils  are  come
vpon  the  ftage  in  their  proper  colours,  Belzebub,  alias
Weflon,  and  his  1 2 gracious  afliftants : For  if  the  deuils
themfelues  fhould  haue  deuifed  a deuillifh  potion,  to
haue  intoxicated  poore  creatures,  & caufe  them  to  play
the  deuils,  they  could  not  haue  inuented  a more  potent
potion  then  this . Lucian  tells  a talc,  that  the  paflengers


I


in  calling  out  of  Deuils.  page,  4?*

tohell  arc  made  to  drinkc a draught  of^potiorv,  that
makes  them  to  forget  all  they  hauc  (aid,  or  done  in  their
life : ouxftygian  Impoftors  goe  farre  beyond  thatflygian
lake,  for  they  haue  compofed  a potion,  that  brings  not
only  a priuation  of  wit?Jfl»emory,and  fences,  but  makes
their  patients  to  fcritch,  nimble,  and  roare,  like  the  dc-
nils  in  hell.  And  this  (good  man  deuill-whipper  Men*
gw ) asfeemes,  is  the  myfterie  of  your  fweet  compofc,
to  fume  a deuill  out  at  a mans  no fe,  like  the  fmoake  of
Tobacco  ?

Whereas  your  prefeript  is  compounded  of  thefc  de-
licate fimples,Brim(lone,  Ajfa f<x.tidaiGatbanumi  S Johns
Wort , and %ue\ Porphyrie , & Iamblichus , men  acquai n-
ted  with  the  nature,and  difpofition  of  deuils,  afore  your
whip  had  ere  a Bring  to  it,  doe  affirme,  that  thofe  forci-
ble violent  fauours , and  (linking  odours,  are  the  very
delicacies  for  deuils,  and  allettiues  to  their  nofes . And
that  the  deuill  would  not  vouchfafc  to  come  giue  his
Oracle  at  the ftatua  at  Dodona , vntill  he  were  wooed  by
thefc  delicious  perfumes  • Thofe  deuils  of  that  clime,
are  belike  of  an  other  temper,  then  thefc  vnder  your
Iafh,  orelfe  let  me  tell  your  riddle:  you  neuer  meant
(good  man)  tofeareout  a deuill  by  thefe  filthy  fumes,
but  to  fcare  poore  foules  into  the  fafhion  of  deuils,  by
thefe  peftilent  fumigations.

CHAP.  io.

ff  The ftrange  names  of  their  deuils .

O w that  I haue  acquainted  you  with  the  names  of
x the  Maifter,  and  his  tweluc  difciples , the  names  of
the  places  wherein,  and  the  names  of  the  perfons  vpon  *

whom  thefe  wonders  vyere  fhewed : it  feemes  not  inco-
gruent  that  I relate  vnto  you  the  names  of  the  deuils*
whom  in  this  glorious  pageant  they  did  difpofiefle.'

G 3 Whereas


page,4<5>  A declaration  of  Popifh  impoflure

Wherein,  we  may  call  vnto  Porphyrins  fProc/tts , lambfi-
cn4,  and  Trifmegiftus,  the  old  Platonicall  fc£f,  that  con-
uerfed  familiarly,  and  kept  company  with  deuils,  and
defire  their  help  to  expound  vs  thefe  new  deuils  names:
and  to  tell  vs  at  what  folemne  fe<$>  and  meeting  in  hell,
thefe  deuils  were  dubbed,  ancrnalowed  with  thefe  new
Grange  names.  It  cannot  be  but  our  holy  deuill-crue
had  furely  met  with  Menippus^roddiitriing  himfelfe  new
come  out  of  hell : ad (nm  profotindo  Tar  tart  emiffns  free*:
Elfc  they  could  neuer  haue  beene  fo  deeply  fighted,  and
acquainted  with  the  Mufter-booke  of  hell . Or  elfe  it
may  feemethat  our  vagrant  deuils  heere  did  take  theyr
fafhion  of  new  names  from  our  wandring  Iefuits,  who
to  difiemble  themfelues,  haue  alwaies  three,  orfoure
oddc  conceited  names  in  their  budget:  or  els  they  did
fo  plague  the  poore  deuils  with  theyr  holy  charmes,and
cnchaunted  geare,  and  did  fo  intoxicate  them  with  their
dreadful  fumigations,  as  they  made  fome  fo  giddy-hea-
ded, that  they  gauc  tbcmfelues  giddy  names,  they  wifi
not  what.  Or  elfc  there  is  a confederation  between  our
wandring  Exorcifts,  and  thefe  walking  deuils,  and  they
are  agreed  of  certainc  vneouth  non-fignificant  names,
which  goe  currant  amengft  themfelues , as  the  Gipfics
are  of  gibridge , which  none  but  themfelues  can  fpcll
without  a paire  of  fpettades.  Howfoeucritis,  it  is  not
amifle  that  you  be  acquainted  with  thefe  extrauagant
names  of  deuils,  Icaft  meeting  the  otherwife  by  chance,
you  miftake  them,  for  the  names  of  Tappers , or  Iug-
Icrs.

Firft  then, to  marfhall  them  in  as  good  order,  as  fuch
difordcrly  cattell  will  be  brought  info , you  are  fo  vn-
derffand,  that  there  were  in  our  pofTefted  y.  Capfaines,
See  the  or  Comaunders  aboue  the  reft  : Captaine  Pippin , Mar~
booke  of  woods  deuill,Capfaine  Pbtlpot , Trayfords  deuil, Captaine
Miracles*  Maho,  Saras  deuil , Captaine  eTModti,  Mttynies  deuill,
and  Captaine  Soforce>iAnne  Smiths  deuil.  Thefe  were

not


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.  pagc,47

rot  all  of  cquall  authorise, & placc^but  fome  had  more,
fomc  fewer  vnder  theyrcoinmaund.  Tippin,  Marwoods
deuill  wasa|Captainc,  (marry, either  caffierd  for  fome
pare  of  bad  fcruicc  hee  had  done,  or  elfe  a male-content
(landing  vpon  his  worth)  like  fome  of  our  highPunti-
lios,  feorned  to  fort  himfelfc  with  any  of  his  rankc  , and
therefore  like  a mclancholick  Priuado , he  affefts  C JWar-
wood  to  lie  in  the  fields,  and  to  gape  at  the  Moone,  and
(o  of  a C&fiirs  humor,  he  raignes  in  tJMarwood  alone.

Captainc  Philpot , Trayfords  deuill,  was  a Centurion,
(ashimfelfe  fels  you)  and  had  an  hundred  vnder  his
charge*  Mary  he  was  (as  feemes)  but  a white-Iiuercd  dc-
uill,  for  he  was  Co  haftie  to  be  gone  out  of  Tray  ford,  for
fcarc  of  the  Exorcift , that  hee  would  fcarce  giue  him
Icaue,  beeing  a bed,  to  put  on  his  breeches.  The  names
of  ther  punie  fpirits  call  out  of  Tray  ford  were  thefe,/1///-
Co%  Smolkin,  Hilho , Hiaclito , and  Lufhe huffe-cap : this  laft
feemes  fome  fwaggering  punie  deuill,  dropt  out  of  a
Tinkers  budget.  But  Htaclito  may  not  be  flipped  ouer
without  your  obferuation : for  he  fcorning  a great  while
(as  the  Author  faith)  to  tell  his  name,  at  lafl  heaunfwc-
red  mofl  proudly,  my  name  is  Hiaclito,  a Prince,  & Mo * Bookc  of
narch  of  the  world.  And  beeing  asked  by  the  Exorcift,  Miracks.
what  fcllowcs  he  had  with  him : hee  faid  that  hee  had  no
fellowes , but  two  men, and  an  vrehin  boy.  It  was  little  befee-
tiling  his  (fate  (I  wis)  beeing  Co  mighty  a Monarch , to
come  into  our  coafls  fo  skuruily  attended , exc  ept  hee
came  to  fee  fafhions  in  England , and  fo  made  himfelfc
priuatc  till  the  Exorcift  rcueald  him : or  els  that  he  was
of  the  new  Court  cut,  affc&ing  no  other  trainc  the  two
crafie  fellowes,  and  an  vrehin  butter-flic  boy.

Soforce , zSfnne  Smiths  po{Tcdenf,was  but  a mufly  de-
uill «,  there  was  neither  mirth,  nor  good  fellow fhip  with
him,  affe&ing  fo  much  fullenneflc,  as  he  would  hardlie
fpeakc.  Yet  as  all  melancholike  creatures  vfe  to  haue,h$
had  areftie  tricke  with  him.  For  whether  Alexander  the


page, 43


Booke  of

Miracles.

Pa&e>42»


A declaration  of  Popjfh  impofturc

Apothecarie  had  put  too  much  fa  Fatida  in  the  fu-
migation for  the  deuill,  or  had  done  the  dcuill  fome  o-
ther  fhrcwdturne  with  his  drugges,  fure  it  is  that
lexander  the  Apothecarie,  riding  one  day  towards  Lon-
don, to  fetch  more  Priefls  to  ‘Denham , his  horfe  fell  a
plunging,  and  ^Alexander  came  downc : and  returning
to  ‘Denham,  hee  conflanrly  affirmed , chat  it  was  <s Anne
Smiths  deuill,  that  playd  the  lade  with  him.

rJModu, Ma:  A/aynies  deuilfwas  a graund  Commaun-
der,  Mufler-maiftcr  ouer  the  Captainesofthefeauen
deadly  finnes : fliton,  cBernoni  Hilo , Adotubizanto,  & the
reft,  himfelfc  a Generali  of  a kind  and  curfeous  difpofi-
on : fo  faith  Sara  Williams , touching  this  deuilsacquain-
tance  with  Miftres  T later,  and  her  fifter  Fid .

Sara  Williams  had  in  her  at  a bare  word , all  the  devils
in  hell . The  Exorcift  askes  C JMaho>  Saras  deuil,what  co-
pany  he  had  with  him , and  the  dcuil  makes  no  bones,
but  tels  him  in  flat  termes,  all  the  devils  in  helL  Heere  was
a goodly  fat  otium  this  meane  while  in  hell : the  poorc
foules  there  had  good  leaue  fo  play : fuch  a day  was  ne-
tier  feene  fince  hell  was  hell : not  a doore-  keeper  left,
but  all  rouft  goe  a maying  to  poore  Saras  houfe.  It  was
not  kindly  done  of  the  deuils,  to  leaue  the  poore  foules
behind,  efpecially  going  to  make  merry  amongft  theyr
friends.  But  what  if  the  foules  had  fallen  a madding,  or
maying  as  faft,as  the  deuils , and  had  gone  a roming  a-
broadcamongfl  their  good  friends , had  not  this  (trow
we,)  made  a pretie  peece  of  worke  in  hell  ?

And  if  I mifle  not  my  markes , this  DiBator  zJModft
faith,  hee  had  beene  in  Sara  by  the  fpace  oftwoyeercs,
then  fo  long  hell  was  cleere,  and  had  not  a deuill  to  caft
at  a mad  dogge.  And  foothly  I cannot  much  blame  the
deuils  for  flaying  fo  long  abroade,  they^had  taken  vp  an
Inne,much  fwceter  then  hell:&  an  hoftefle  that  wanted
neither  wit,  nor  mirth,  fo  giue  them  kinde  welcome.
Heere , if  you  pleafe , you  may  take  a furuay  of  the

whole


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.'  pagM9*

tyfroJe  regiment  of  hell : at  lead  thechiefe  Leaders*  and
officers,  as  we  finds  them  enrolled  by  they r names.

Fir  ft  K'tllico , Hob , and  a third  anonymos , arc  booked  Bookc  of
downe  for  three  graund  Commaunders,  cuery  one  ha-  Miracles,
uingvnderhim  300.  attendants.  Pa£c»34*

Coronell  Portirichio  had  with  him  two  Captaincs,  &
an  hundred  affiftants, and  this  he  affirmes  to  be  true  vp-
pon  his  oath  taken  vpon  the  blefled  facrament,  &fhen
you  mull  bclieue  him  : an  admirable  new  way  to  make
the  dcuil  true,  and  cock-fure  of  his  word , to  offer  him
in  oath  vpon  the  bleffcd  facrament,  and  then  dog  with
a fiddle.  But  the  deuill  is  like  fome  other  goodfeliowes
in  the  world,  that  will  not  fweare, except  he  allow  rhevr
Commiflion  that  tenders  him  his  oath : and  Cornmiffi-
oners  for  the  deuill,  are  onely  holy  Exorcifts , and  then
it  muft  be  the  facrament  of  the  Mafie  to  , elfe  1 wis  it  is
not  all  worth  abeane.


F rater  etto  > F liber  digib  bet , Hober didance , 7 "ocobatto
were  foure  deuils  of  the  round,  or  Morrice , whom  Sa-
ra in  her  fits,  tuned  together , in  meafure  and  fweet  ca-
dence . And  lcaftyou  fhould  conceiue , that  the  deuils
had  no  muficke  in  hell , efpecially  that  they  would  goe
amaying  without  theyr  muficke,  the  Fidlcr  comes  in
with  hisTaber,&  Pipe,  and  a whole  Morice  after  him,
with  motly  vifards  for  theyr  better  grace . Thcfe  foure
had  forty  affiftants  vnder  them,  asthemfclucsdoe  con-
feffe*


Page  eed.


Lttfhe  Iollie  / ettkirt,  (an  other  of  Saras  Captaine  deuils
names)  by  his  name  fhould  feemt-  to  be  foreman  of  the
motly  morrice^  hee  had  voder  Him, faith  himfelfe,  foirty
affiftants,  or  rather(if  1 STiifl'e  not)he  had  beene  by  fome
old  Exorcift  allowed  for  the  Mafter  fetter  of  Catches,
or  rQundeSjVfed  to  bolimgby  Tinkers,as  they  fit  by  the
fire  with  a pot  of  good  Ale  betweene  theyr  legges : Hey
%oUy  Ienkiny  I fee  a kn?*Uf  a drinking  et  cat.

‘Delicti tin  other: Captaine,  or  viccnarie in  Sara , ha-

H.  “in§


page,  fo#  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

tting  vndcr  him  twenty  aflirtants,  feemcs  by  his  Englifti
name  to  b cyeoman  of  the  Sprucerpto  fee  the  deuils  mot-.
ly  vifards,  after  they  were  foiled  with  Brimflone*  and
fweat,  to  be  brufht  vp,  and  keptfweet,  neafe,  & cleane.
Thefe  were  the  Officers,  or  Commaunders  names,  that
had  taken  vptheyr  lodging  in  Sara  Williams , now  the
many,raG:ality,or  black-guard  of  hell*  were  God  knows
how  many  in.  her : for  all  were  there  fag,  and  ragge,  cut
and  long* tayle,  yet  diuers  of  them  it  pleafcth  theholie
Exorciflto  comrnaund  theyr  names  to  doe  them  fomc
grace,  others  he  lets  goe  out,  leauing  no  names , bur  an
ill  fauour  behind  the.The  names  of  fuch  as  the  Exorcift
thought  good  to  fauour*  were  thefe*  Vu ffe,  and  <Turre%
the  two  fat  deuils*  that  had  beene  coniurd  vp  for  mony,
anno  84*  and  would  not  home  to  hell  againe*  till  good
company  came  for  them.  LuJIte  Dick?e,  Corner  d-cappe9
Nurre , Wtlktn,  Helcmodton , Kelltcecam.  Thefe

were  like  th c Sporades  invialattea , hauing  neither  oft
fice*  order,  nor  ranke  5 all  thefe  were  Saras  deuils.

C ‘Maho  was  generall  Difiator  of  hell : & yet  for  good
manners  fake*  hce  was  contented  of  his  good  naturet®
make  fhew*  that  himfelfe  was  vnder  the  check  of  CWo*
dti%  the  graund  deuil  in  Ma:  LMaynie.  Thefe  were  all  in
poore  Sara  at  a chop,  with  thefe  the  poore  foulc  frauai-
led  vp  and  downc  full  two  yceres  together  \ fo  as  during
thofe  two  yceres,  it  had  beene  all  one  to  fay,  one  is  gone
to  hell,  or  hee  is  gone  to  Sara  Williams : for  fhee  poore
wench  had  all  hell  in  her  belly . And  had  had  it  Bill  fo
this  cfay  for  any  thing  we  know*  if  it  had  not  pleafed  Fat
We  & on,  and  his  fwclue  holy  difciples,  to  hauc  deliuered
her ’of  that  deuil-childe . But  of  this  you  $iall  hcare
thereafter : now  1 may  proceed.

# CHAR

-V


incaflingout  ofDenils.

CHAP.  ir.

f The  redfons  why  fometime  one  dentil  Alone,  fometime)  An
too,  fometimes  a thousand  are,  caU  out
at  a c/ap.

V Oti  haue  formerly  heard  of  the  names  of  the  Pricfts,
grauncf  reftors  of  this  Comedie,  and  lately  of  the
names  of  the  deuils,  their  Cue-fellowcs  in  the  play :
good  order  feemes  to  require , that  1 fhould  marfhall
them  together,  as  birds  of  a feather : but  I choofe  rather
to  violate  good  method,  & put  my  felfe  vpon  my  Rea-
der , then  to  offend  our  deuid-maslix  by  fuch  an  vn-
pleafing  combination  ♦ Now  bccaufe  foroc  may  won-
der how  it  commeth  to  pafTc,  that  hell  in  this  Mile  was
broken  vp,  & that  fuch  millions  of  deuils,  like  Herrings
inabarrcll,  were  packed  vp  in  Sara  Williams,  and  the
reft,  and  fometimesone  alone,  fometimes  fixe,  fomc-
tiraes  900  were  caft  out  together,  and  yet  C Maho  with
a million  of  afliftants  left  {fill  behind : this  contairics
many  myfleries,  as  fit  to  be  learned,  as  the  reft.  We  will
confider  thefe  two  heads  a funder,  for  the  worthincs  of
the  matter : firft,  why  thefe  deuils  are  faid  to  be  fo  ma-
nic 5 next,  why  fometimes  one,  fometimes  many  are
faid  to  be  caft  out  at  a time.

Inthefirft.ourholy  dcuill-charmers  haue  the  vantage
of  Tinkers,  and  Surgeons  by  much : For  thefe,  the  one
hath  his  certaine  number  of  holes  to  mend , and  the  o-
ther  his  certaine  number  of  fores  to  falue,  and  when  he
hath  done,  except  by  fome  prety  knack  in  his  budget,
he  can  multiply  one  hole  in  foure,  and  the  other  draw
one  fore  into  fixe, he  is  in  danger  to  be  out  ofworkerbut
our  holy  budgetters  hauing  to  deale  with  deuils,  inna-
| lure  inuifible,  and  in  number  innumerable , doe  wifely
prouide  fo  many  to  be  packed  vp  in  one  patient  foge-
•her,  as  except  hell  it  felfe  be  drawnc  dry.  they  can  ne-
tt* uet


Page,?!.


page,52


A declaration  of  Popifti  impofture

tier  want  worke.

Sara  JVi/kams  was  apafiertt,  that  pleafed  their  hand-
ling well,  and  therefore  fhec  wasfurnifhcd  with  all  the
dcuils  in  hell  at  a clap  *,  fo  as  if  Hercules  himfelfe  had
beene  in  this  hell,  there  had  becnc  worke  enough,  both
for  him,  and  his  club.  The  calling  a deuill  out  o fSarat
was  like  the  drawing  of  a bucket  of  water  out  of  a Well,-
it  made  the  deuill  (pring  the  quicker,  and  like  to  cutting
of  one  of  Hydraes  heads,  which  made  fcauen  more  to  a-
rife  in  his  place.

This  ground  muQ  be  well  layd,and  this  principle  wel
conned  by  all  the  profedours of  this  black  Are,  that
they  be  fure  of  hell,and  dcuils  enow  in  the  party  at  firft  t
which  being  not  well  aduifed  of  by  feme  fimple  witted
men  of  ours,  late  probationers  in  thisfcience , they  were
enforced  for  enlarging  their  worke  , to  bungle  it  out
wofully,  and  to  fay  that  the  deuils  they  had  caff,  did  re-
bound backeagaine,  and  fo  made  them  new  worke  to
begin  againe*,  which  by  this  prouifion  of  thrumming  in
dcuils  at  the  fir ff, might  moff  eafily  haue  been  auoyded*

Secondly,  this  dcuice  of  an  huge  many  of  dcuils  to  be
in  one  party,  ferued  them,  as  a (heifer  againft  what  wind
or  weather  fo  cuer,  If  the  parties  they  had  in  handling*
grew  weary  of  their  occupation,  as  loathing  their  drugs*
fearing  their  tortures, and  hating  their  cofenagc  andfa
were  like  to  breake  from  them,  and  fo  tell  tales  out  of
Schoole,  they  had  (by  this  deuife)  their  cuafion  at  hand*
There  were  yet  many  deuils  in  the  party  forfooth,  and
it  was  not  he,  or  (he,  thatfofaid,  but  the  deuill : foas  if
he  faith  any  thing  in  opening  their  legerdemaine,  hec
fhali  be  pofleffcd  as  long  as  he  hues  5 and  then  may  h$
fay,  and  fwearc  what  he  will,  for  hee  (hall  be  no  more
credited,  then  Pippin  their  deuill,  and  that  which  would
anger  any  poore  foule  at  the  hart,  what  fo  euer  he  doth,
or  faith,  it  mud  not  be  he,  that  fo  doth,  or  faith,  but  the
deuill.


. ..  in  calling  out  of  Deuils,  page,?}.

Let  poore  Sara Williams  giue  you  inftances  of  this.  Kcadchcr
She  grew  fo  farre  difeontented  with  their  holy  potion,  and  examin:
their  chayrc,  as  fhe  begins  to  fpeake  bugs  words  , and
fell  themfie  would  complaine:  the  prieffo  had  their  ward*
word  ready:  it  was  not  Sara,  but  the  dentil,  that  fofpake,
bccaufe  he  could  abide  no  Catholique  pricfls.

She  attempts  to  take  her  heeles,  and  runne  away  from
them,  the  common  voycewas,  it  was  not  Sara,  but  the
detail : fhe  did  not  runne,  but  was  caried  by  the  deuill.

She  fmiles,  and  it  mud  not  be  fhe  that  fmiles,  but  the  de-
mll . She  wecpcs,  and  fhe  was  borne  downc,  that  it  was
not  her  fclfe,  that  wept,  but  the  dentil:  fo  as  fhe  faid,yfo
was  at  her  wits  end \ fearing(as  feemes)fo  much  as  to  mut-
ter, hum,  orfpit,  forfeare  thepriefts  fhould  make  it
not  of  her  owne  fpitting,  but  the  deuils.  This  deuifeis
inflecde  of  all  the  Orators  in  the  world,  to  free  them
from  imputation,  and  to  fecurc  their  iugling : for  fay  a-
nie  thing  drafting  to  them,  and  to  their  holy  crue,  ye
(hall  be  furc  to  haue  the  deuill  put  vpon  you  for  your
labour,&  they  haue  feueral  fpirits  to  command  for  their
bayards,  to  bcare  their  feuerall  fardles  of  crimes . Tell
them  that  they  are  Impoftors , and  deferue  to  be  bran-
ded on  the  foreheads  vyith  the  Character  noting  their
trade : Loe,fay  they,  it  is  not  you,  but  the  fpirit  of  male-
diction. Put  them  in  minde  of  their  deuill  daliance,with
Fidd,  and  Sara  IVdliams : it  is  not  you,  but  the  fpiritof
luft.  Note  their  factious  ambition  in  feeking  foueraign-
tie,  & commaund : it  rs  not  you  that  fo  fpeake  of  them,
but  the  fpirit  of  pride : and  not  onely  words,  and  fpee-
cbes,fuch  as  they  liked  not  well,  but  euen  a£tion$,moti-
x>ns,  icftures,  and  cariageof  the  body,  if  it  make  any
thing  againft  their  lewd  iugling,  fhallbe  branded  with
no  other  ftampc,  then  the  deuill.

You  may  fee  a prety  peece  of  this  puppet-play,  (ant!  SecM
foiudge  of  the  ref!)  a&ed  betweeneMa:  Mujnie,  the  copfeG.
dumbe  AcIqTj  and  Wetton  his  Interpreter,

. H3  Mar


54.  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofiure

Ma:  c JMaynie  the  A<dor,  comes  mute  vpon  the  dage,
with  his  hands  by  his  fide,  and  his  haire  curled  vp . Loe
heere  (cries  IVetton  the  Interpreter)  comes  vp  the jpirit  of
pride.  Sodainly  the  mute  A&or  cries  out,  Ten  pounds  in
the  hundred,  that  voyce  (cries  fVeflon ) is  the  voyce  of  the
fpirit  0/auarice.  Maynie  makes  a fcornful!  face,  and  that
is  the  jpirit  of  Enuic . He  bends, & knits  his  browes,  and
that  u the  jpirit  of  Wrath:  he  yawnes,  & gapcs,and  that  is
the  jpirit  0/Sloth.  Thus  JVeston  in  Ma:Maynies  face  rea-
des  you  the  deuils , that  are  the  feauen  Authors  of  the
feauen  deadly  finnes:and  as  many  deuils(if  he  liO)can  he
fhew  in  any  Proteflants  face  at  any  time  he  pleafes  5 all,
or  mod  of  vs  in  his  opinion,  being  really  poffefled  with
deuils.

For  the  fecond  point : why  (bmetimes,  a deuill  alone,
fometimes  an  100,  fometimesa  thoufand , arc  blownc
out  at  a clap  5 there  are  two  waighty  reafons  attending
that  deuife.  One  is  to  aduaunce  hecreby  the  reputation
of  forne  man  of  efpeciall  note , and  credite  amongft
them,  who  mud  be  their  Hercules,  to  confrole  with  his
club  the  raonder  maider-deuils  of  greated  potencic,
and  commaund . Euery  plodding  pried  could  cad  out
art  vrehin,  or  boy  deuill,  the  rafcall  guard  that  attended
Prince  Hiachto : but  <JModu  the  Generali  of  Styx,  with
his  feauen  Colonels  vnder  him , the  feauen  maifterfc  of
the  feauen  deadly  finnes,  mud  be  a monder  referued  for
JVeFlons  owne  club,  and  none  but  his . And  whereas
cucry  fidling  Exorcid  in  his  holy  coniuration,  did  vfc
the  holy  amice  •>  tVe Hon  for  the  folemnity  of  the  adIion3
and  his  better  grace,  mud  come  vpon  the  Oage  more
folemnly  adorned  with  the  holy  Albc,or  an  holy  Cope,
and  other  confecrated  geare . And  the  deuill  many
times  of  his  owne  good  nature,  or  elfc  vpon  fome  fpeci-
all  acquaintance  betweene  him,  and  the  pried,  exprefly
tells  by  whom,  and  by  no  other  he  will  be  cad  out : and
then  he  alone  mud  begotten  to  come!  and  (to  make  the

< - deuill


in  carting  out  of  Deuils*

deuill  no  Iyer)  he  mud  gippc  the  Gudgin,  and  hit  the
Woodcocke  on  the  bill,  and  the  other  feuruie  crucof
Exorciffs  muff  hold  him  the  candcll.  Learned  Thyratts
tel \sv$,page,6y  9 de  Damon  : that  the  foule  deuill  that
pofTelfed  one  Afalacbiay  had  vowed  he  would  not  out,
till  Fa:  Benardme  were  gotten  to  come,  who  no  fooner
appeared  , but  the  deuilfhewed  himfelfeaman  of  his
word : for  hee  fiinkes  clofely  away , like  a dogge  at  the
fight  of  a whip.

Afecondvfe  they  haue  of  this  huge  difference  of  ca-
lling out  fotnetime  one  alone,  fometime  a whole  milli-
on of  deuils,  farre  more  palling,  and  precious,  then  the
former.  And  that  is,  to  grace  by  this  drift,  and  to  blaze
the  vertuc  of fomc  new  Saint,  and  new  grecnc  reliques,
as  yetnotgrowne  intocredife  in  the  world:  Marie  it
muff  be  efpecially  offuch  a Martyr,  or  Saint,  of  whole
vertuc  and  fan  ft  i tie,  there  is  greateff  caufeoffufpition
abroad,  whether  the  good  man  were  a flyc  luglcr,  ora
holy  roan  in  deede.  And  thisfufpitious  Saint,or  his  cart
rclique^fhall  workeyou  a wonder  beyond  God  his  for-
bid cleane.

It  was  fufficient  for  the  gracing  of  ^wp/dwamongfl
the  Catholiques  in  England,with  whom  he  was  in  efpe-
ciall  reputation,  that  his  girdle,  which  came  from  Ieru -
falem , & was  worne  at  Tyburne,  fhould  at  the  firft  touch
ofthc  party  poiTefTedJlunt  the  deuils  wits.  Whcre-vp-
pon  WeTlons  acclamation  to  the  Speftators,  was  this :
T efles  eflote  clanffimipatris  Campiani  Martyriycuius  hie
vel  rmnutiffimtts  funiculus  t ant  us  tilt  faces  miferat:  Beare
witnesj  charge  you  y of  the  mott  worthy  Afar  tyr dome  of  good
Fa:  Campion,  whofe  fmple girdle  hath  cafi  the  deuill  into
fitch  a heate . Marie  for  that  Ignatius  their  founder  hath
many  enemies  in  the  world, and  is  lately  called  into  que-
Qion  for  a graund  cheatento  grace  this  C JHonfigniori  and
to  bring  him  into  credite,he  muff  doe  tranfeendent  mi-
tedesj  (trained  vpon  fuch  a key,  as  our  blcflcd  Sauiour*

and


page,  f>\


page, f <5


A declaration  of  Popifh  impofhire
and  his  holy  Ap:  neucr  came  neerc . And  for  this  pur*
pofe  to  divulge  this  Founders  deitie,  there  is  compofed
a Diarie  of  all  his  diabolicall  ( I meanc  hvperbolicall)
wonders,  done  by  that  worthy  Mountebankc,  both  a*
liue,  and  dead  ?

FirH  for  his  better  credit , the  deuill  himfelfe  pro-
claimcs  him  to  Fa:  'BaptiHa  Terufo  for  a Saint  in  hea-
uen,  and  I truH  you  will  notdoubt  of  it , fince  it  comes
from  (o  holy  an  Oracle,  as  the  deuils  own  mouth,  and
therefore  I wonder  the  Pope  doth  fo  long  (land  out.
At  CMaurifca  hee  lay  8 dayes  in  a traunce , without  all
(igne  of  life,  faue  the  beating  of  his  hart : in  his  prayer,
hefaw  Almighty  God,  and  his  fonne , Handing  by  him
with  hisCroffe  vpon  hisfhouldcrs.and  hee  heard  Al-
mighty God  commend  him,  and  his  company , to  the
prote&ion  of  his  Sonne.  Thus  farre  agree  Fa:  Ignatius^
and  the  deuil.

At  Sena  the  deuils  durH  not  looke  vppon  his  pi&ure,
but  hung  theyr  heads  in  theyr  bofomes  for  very  pure
(hame.  His  pifturc  in  Malaria  Cc ared  away  a deuill : his
pi&ureinpaperat  CMadena,  pinned  clofely  vppon  a
wall,  skared  away  a whole  troupe  of  deuils  out  of  foure
women  pofleffed  : the  bare  pronouncing  his  name  at
ifowe.skafed  out  2 legions  of  deuils.  A peecc  of  his  coife
that  hee  wore,  heales  a woman  of  the  phrenfie : a peecc
of  leather,  that  he  vfed  at  his  flomack,  cores  the  plagues'
a pcece  of  his  hayre-cloth,  purges  an  holy  Nunne  in  the
fpacc  of  a yeere,  of  1 00.  Hones : a pecce  of  a relique  of
his,  dofe  fhut  in  a boxe,burnes  a deuill,  ^nd  makes  him
to  roare  the  bredth  of  a chamber  of:  a peece  ofa  relique
caH  info  the  fea  calmes  the  waues,  and  flilfj  the  windes.
But  the  bare  fubfeription  of  his  name  in  amorfel  6f  pa-
per paffeth  all  the  reH.This  written  in  a patch  of  paper,
& brought  vnto  the  partie , heales  the  tooth-ache,  the
erampc,the  gowte,  the  Sciatica,  the  Leprofic,  theskur-
»ic  s,  and  bccinglayd  vppon  the  belly  ofa  woman,  that


in  calling  out  of  Demis.'  page,  f7,

hath  endured  her  painc  of  trauaile  two,  three,  orfourc
dayes,andispaft  all  hope  of  life,  takes  away  her  painc,
facilitates  the  birth,  and  recoucrs  her  life.  A fweet  pro-
tecting Saint  to  that  fweet  fex,  the  fyllablesof  whole
name  are  ofmorc  potcncie,  and  failing  health,then  the
facred  fyllablesof  the  blcHed  name  of  our  cucrblefted
Sauibur  was  eucr  read  to  be  of.  Speftatum  adm/jfi  rifum
Uneatis . Is  it  not  a wonder  abouc  all  wonders,  thata-
ny  man  fhould  looke  vpon  thele  Antick  wonders, with-
out a wonderous  laughter : hie  nebulo  magma  eft,  ne  me -
tuas,  this  foule  wonder- maiftcr  is  too  full  of  wonders, e-
Her  to  be  good.

CHAP.  12.

Of  the fecret  of lodging^and  couching  the  dentil  in  any
part  of  the  body  that  the  Exorcifi
' plcafeth,

T^He  great  skar-buggs  of  old  time,  as  Hercules  and  the
* reft, had  a great  humour  (as  the  Poets  faigne)  to  goe
downc  to  Stjx}  and  to  vifit  Hell,to  fc ePluto,  and  his  vg-
lie  ghofts,  and  to  behold  the  holes , and  dennes,  where
hee  lodged  his  blacke  guard.  Our  holy  skar-deuils,  if
they  had  liued  with  the , would  haue  eafed  them  of  that
paincs : for  they  would  haue  fhewed  them  hell,  and  dc-
nils  heere  aboue,  and  haue  carried  them  with  a wet  fin-
ger to  their  cabines  and  lodges : and  you  ftiall  find  very
deepe,  and  waighty  reafons  of  this.

Mercurie  prince  of  Fairies  had  a rodde  giuen  him  by
Jupiter  his  Father,  whereby  he  had  power,  not  onelic  to
raife  vp,  and  driue  afore  him , what  ghofts  hee  pleafed,
but  alfo  to  remaund,  and  (till  with  the  fame  rod,  as  ma-
ny as  hee  lift.  The  holy  Romane  Church  hath  as  po-
tently armed  her  twelue  Worthies  of  hell , and  fVetton
their  Blacke  prince , as  cuer  luptter  did  armc  his  fweet
fonne,  giuing  them  a power  not  onely  to  call  vp,  driue,
and  pufife  out  with  theyr  breath, as  many  deuihas  they

L plea*


page  A declaration  ofPopifh  Jmpoftiire

pleafed,  but  alfo  to  control],  cap,  lodge,  Sc  conch  them
as  ftil  as  a curre  at  the  found  of  his  Maiftcrs  whippc  is
couched  vnder  a fable.  By  that  time  I haue  opened  you
the  caufes  and  fecrefs  of  this,  and  haue  fhewed  you  their
feuerall  lodges  and  formes,  I doubt  not,  but  you  wil  be
able  to  tel  me  more  newes  from  hell.

It  is  a poynt  in  the  blackeart  ofdeepeft  skill,  and
power,  not  to  raife  a fpirit , but  to  be  able  to  rule , and
couch  him  fafely  and  well : and  in  this  holy  infernal  fei-
cnceof  cafting  out  deuilsT^^w  tells  vs,  that  deuilsbe
not  all  of  a nature,  quality , & fife,  font  e be  rvatry,  fome  ay -
rie,fome  fierie , and fome  fatiour  of  the  earth : the  tvatry  and
ayrie , doe  tafl  oftheyr  element , and  be  eafily  mooued,  the fie-
rie, are  more  fierce , and  the  earthy , like  melancholiche  men,
more fitllen,  not  eafily  centroid . See  this  exemplified  as
clcerly  in  our  patients,  as  the  nofe  on  a mans  chin.

Soforce , zsdnne  Smiths  dcuill , was  a fallen , and  filent
fpirit  (fo  fhe  herfelfc  records  him)  and  could  hardly  be
gotten  by  all  dreadful  coiurations  fo  much  as  to  fpeake»
Captaine  Maho  in  Sara , was  of  a fcl , Sc  furious  moode,
and  many  times,  when  he  was  hunted  vp  into  her  body,
grew  there  fo  vnruly,  and  outragicus,that  the  Exorcifts
feemed  tofeare  leaft  her  bowels  would  burft.Then  was
all  haft  made  to  get  him  downe  againe,  which  fomtime
was  done  with  good  feeming  toile,  difficultie,  Scfweaf,
that  when  it  fel  out  pat,  as  the  deuil.  Sc  the  prieft  would
haueitjt  bred  in  the  poore  fillie  fpe&ators  a wonderful
admiration  of  the  dignitie  of  the  priefthood,and  power
of  the  Catholiquc  Romifh  Church.

Sara  their  apt  fcholler,  afted  this  feene  commcndably
well : where  after  a fore  skirmifh  between  the  Exorcift,
and  the  dcuill,  or  Sara,  and  the  Prieft:  the  deuillwas
with  much  a-doe  commaunded  downe  info  her  footer
but  in  an  another  feene  fhee  hit  the  needles  eye,  where
after  a hote,and  fore  encounfer,all  the  fpirirs  with  much
ados  being  commaunded  togoe  downe  into  her  left

footCp


in  cafling  ont  of  Deuils*  page,?9.

/bote,they  did  it  with  vehement  trembling,  andfha-
king  of  her  leg,  to  the  great  admiration  of  many  of  the
Banders  by,  feeing  the  power  of  the  CathoiRomifh
Church  : the  partic  crying  that  her [hooe  would  not  be  a-
blc  to  hold  them  all:  heere  this  aft  of  lodging  the  deuil
bad  a plaudit  e in  the  midft  of  the  play.

Secondly,  who  can  but  mate  his  wit  with' wonder,
hauingnomore  wits  then  one,  and  Rare  out  his  eyes
with  amazement,  hauing  but  two,  to  fee  the  poore  de*
uil  brought  into  fuch  a faking,  and  to  fauour  fo  rankly,
lying  at  vntrufle,  that  he  would  faine  begone  out;  and
foal  fee  the  tyrannical  dreadful  power  of  an  cnchaun-
ting  Pried,  by  his  remaunding  might,  to  keepe  him  in
(lil  in  fpight  of  his  nofe,  and  to  coramaund  him,  for  his
more  difgrace , to  fake  vp  his  lodge  in  a homely  place,
of  which  you  foal  hearc  heereafter , if  it  be  not  too  foule.

Would  not  fome  tender-harted  body,  inpurepitfie  of
the  deuils  cry,  fake  of  the  prieft , and  let  the  poore  deuil
be  gone : as  I haue  heardof  a good  nafurcd  gentleman
at  Tarijh-garden , that  crycd,  take  off  the  dog  for  fhame,
and  let  the  poore  Beare  alone.  Pittiful  Htachto , would
rather  then  his  life , for  pure  feareof  theprieft , haue
flunkeouf  of  Trajford  bchinde,  but  it  would  not  be,  he
muff  be  Bayed  vntilhee  had  his  payment.  YcaCMaho
himfelfe  was  taken  downe  fo  low  with  the  deuil-fquir-
ting  potion,  that  he  would  haue  giuen  all  the  poynts  at
bis  hofc  to  be  gone : and  ^Dibdale  would  none , but  co-
maunds  him  to  his  lodge,  vntil  the  Brimflone  by  fome
dreadful  enchautment  were  made  hoteenough,to  fcald
his  breech  foundly:  heere  this  lodging-power  was  more
dreadful  to  the  deuil,  and  aftonifoable  to  the  people  by
ods  then  the  difpofleffing  was.

Thirdly,  this  commaund  to  lodge  would  at  no  hand
be  fpared,for  by  this  they  made  fure  to  haue  a deuil  rca-
die  at  a trice  at  all  affaies,  to  furnifh  out  the  ftage : who,
becingfafe  lodged,  they  caried  about  with  them  from

1 a place


pagc,6o


Sec  the  re-
cord.


A declaration  of  Popifti  impofturc
place  to  place,  as  the  Iuglers  vfc  to  carry  a Bee  in  a box,
or  an  ape  in  a Bring, or  puppifs  in  a pageant,to  fcjuealc,
skip,  and  tumble,  wherefoeucr  they  pitch  downe  theyr
trude.

You  dial  hcare  an  a&  of  this  puppet-play  performed
betweene  a pried,  and  a wench , as  it  is  depofed  vppon
oath,  for  a tad  of  the  red.  There  was  a pried  not  many
yccresfincc  in  Lancafhirem  the  habit  of  a gentleman
who  carried  about  with  him  (as  Tynkers  doc  their  bit-
ches) a wench,  pretended  by  the  pried  to  be  poflefled:
this  wench  at  cucry  fafe  dation  (where  there  was  con-
courfe  of  fimple  people,  the  founders  of  miracles ) hee
prefents  to  play  her  pranks,  and  his  fafhion  was  this.
When  it  was  a full  Court,  out  brings  he  his  Mattachina ,
and  places  her  in  a chavre,  and  then  appVoching  de-
murely to  her, takes  her  by  the  toc,and  then  dialoguizes
with  the  deuil  according  to  his  pleafure.  The  end  of  the
dialogue  between  the  pried,  and  the  deuil, is  a remaund
of  the  deuil  to  his  lodge  5 which  (to  auoyde  mquarn,  and
intuit ) I hauc  prefented  you  in  both  theyr  perfons,
fpeaking  fweetly  together.

Pri:  / commaund  thee  to  goe  to  the  place  appointed,  and
that  thou  doe  not  hurt  her  in  thy  going  downe,  nor
make  her  ficke  in  body , nor  minde .

Wo:  Fie  vpon  thee , hee  is  in  my  knee .

Pri : / commamd  thee  to  thy  place  appointed \ thou  dam -
tied  fiend.

Wo:  Oh,  hee  is  in  my  great  toe .

Pri:  Cjoe  to  the  place  appointed  thou  damned fiend.

Wo:  Oh,  he  is  in  my  toe  next  to  my  little  toe .

Pri:  Cjoe  to  the  place  appointed  thou  damned  fiend.

Wo:  Oh  fie  vpon  htmy  he  is  in  the  toe  next  the  great  toe,

Pri:  / commaund  thee  to  goe  into  the  dead  of  her  nayle:
With  that  the  deuil  gaue  a rufh  vp  into  the  womans
body,  as  though  hee  Would  hauetorneherinpeeces:
(hen  the  pried  coramaundcd  him  to  goe  downe  damned

fiend


in  cafting  out  ofDcuils.  page,5l4

fiend  as  he  was , otherrvife  his  Indie  would  damne  him  inta
the  bottomlefe  pit  of  hell:  and  with  that  the  woman  con-
fefled,  that  the  dentil  was  in  the  place  appointed.  Then  the
prieft  charged  him  that  he  fhould  lie  there , till  the  next
txorcifme  to  be  holden  by  him%  or fome  of  his  brethren .

I doe  verily  fufpett  this  wonder  was  a<fted  fomewhat
necre  Cjothamy  and  that  the  fpe&ators  were  the  pofteri-
tieofthem,  that  drowned  the  Ecle:  that  neueran  vn-
liappy  fellow  in  the  company  (hewed  fo  much  vnhap-
pie  wit,  as  to  offer  to  take  a knife,  and  pare  away  the  dc-
uil,  lying  in  the  dead  of  the  nayle , and  throw  him  info
the  fire,  forafling  his  part  fo  baldly:  but  I nothing
doubt,  but  the  deuil-maiftcr  prieft  would  haue  had  an
eye  to  this,  lead  he,  or  fome  of  his  brethren,  at  the  next
cxorcifme  holden,  fhould  for  want  ofa  deuilhauc  fpoi-
led  a good  play.  And  would  not  this  haue  fpighted  any
deuil,to  be  thus  hardly  handled  by  a prieft,  to  be  turned
out  of  his  warme  neft,  where  hee  cabined  in  the  wench,
and  to  be  lodged  at  little  eafe  in  the  edge  of  her  nayle,
next  to  wind,  and  weather,  where  hee  muff  lye  for  a
skout,  like  the  Sentinel  in  a watch,  and  fuffer  cuery  boy
* to  play  bo-peepe  with  his  deuilfhip,  and  he  not  able  to
ftirreeyther  out  orin.  O that  Will  Sommer  had  come
to  this  pleafant  bargaine  befweene  the  Exorcift  and  the
deuil,  how  handfomly  would  he  haue  belaboured  them
both  with  his  bablc,for  playing  theyr  parts  fo  handfom-
lie.

But  this  was  but  a pedling  Exorcift  of  the  rafcal  crue,
who  wandered  like  a chapman  of  fmal  wares , with  a
wench,  and  a frufte,  beeing  ncuer  free  of  his  companie.

Our  wardens  of  the  fcience  had  a little  more  art  to
lodge  theyr  deuils.  Such  an  art  of  lodging  they  had.  and
fome  of  theyr  lodges  To  obfeure,  and  refray  te,  as  none
but  a prieft,  or  a deuil  could  euer  haue  fented  it  out.

Some  of.thefc  deuil* lodgers,  in  Sara . and  Fid , without
a preface  of  deprecation  to  your  tnodefly  I mud  not

I 5 once


page, 62,


Mcngus,

Hag.Dxm:


A declaration  of  Popifh  impoftnre
once  name,for  feare  of  check  from  your  chaft  earcs,and
a change  of  colour  in  mine  inke  and  paper,  at  fuch  vn-
couth  termes . I will  onely  leape  ouer  this  kcnnell  of
turpitude,  with  a note  of  vnfauorie  fmels,and  remit  you
to  that  claufc  of  Sara  Williams  relation,  who  as  a woman
hath  touched  it  as  modeftly,  as  fhe  can,  giuing  vs  to  vn-
derftand , by  her  timorous  declaration,  that  our  holy
order  haue  a ticket  from  his  Hols  of  Rome,  to  harrow
hell  it  felfe,  and  be  neuer  the  worfe.

It  was  wifely  cauteled  by  the  penner  of  thefc  fauory
miracles , in  the  end  of  his  booke,  why  Sara  being  a
feely  young  innocent  wench  of  idyeercs,  fhould  be
more  dcuil-haunted , then  any  of  the  poflefled  men  :
there  was  a pad  in  the  firaw,  the  poore  man  would
faine  haue  out  . But  a Sceptike  will  make  an  other
£hure  to  our  holy  order  to  foile : how  it  comes  to  pafle,
that  wee  rcadein  auncientpoifeflions  ofold,  ofmoorc
men  to  be  poflefied,  then  women, and  now  in  thefe  no-
uell  vpftart  miracles  from  Rome,  Bill  it  is  the  ill  hap  of
more  women  to  be  haunted,  then  men.  This  fore  be-
ing falued  with  a little  blefTed  oyle  from  Rome  5 an  o-
ther  doubt  wil  arife,  what  the  caufc  is,  why  our  holy  or-
der hauing  vnder  their  holy  hands,  not  onely  Fid,  Sara ,
and  csSwe  Smith , women,  but  Trayford,  Marwood , and
Ma.  Maynie , that  were  men,  there  is  no  mention  at  all
of  common  lodging,  and  couching  the  deuil  in  a pecu-
liar part  of  the  body,but  onely  in  the  wenches.

Let  vs  goe  to  old  Lockwood,  zJMengus  their  maiflcr,
& loke  vpon  his  Canon, for  couching,  & lodging  of  the
deuil,  and  happily  we  may  thence  pick  oucfomeEng-
Jifh  to  this  purpofe . In  the  feauenth  formidable  exor-
cifmcofhis  deuil-whip:  his  Canon  lyes  thus.  Si  ester -
mmenus  non  fuerit  liber  atm , et  tamen  vrgente  necejftate
dvmittenda  fit  coniuratio , tunc  precipe  omnibus  fpiritibus  rc-
tuanentibus  in  cor  pore,  eos  cogendo  vt  re  cedant  d capite , et
corde3  et  fiomachoi  et  dej cedant  ad partes  inferiores  corporis .

Heerc


’


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.  page,  6 5*

Heere  you  haue  the  Canon  for  lodging  the  deuil,  that
you  be  fure  to  lodge  him  not  in  the  head,  nor  ftomack,
but  in  the  inferiour  parts.  An  excellent  prouifo,  tea-
ching vs,  that  the  deuil  is  of  the  nature  of  a cup  of  new
ftrong  Sack,  that  cannot  hurt  a man,  if  it  be  kept  out  of
his  ftomack,  and  head . But  old  Lockwood  knew,  what
he  did,  in  aligning  the  inferiour  parts  for  a peculiar
lodge  for  the  deuil.  This  was  the  trayndfent,  he  knew
hisdogges  were  old  fiierf-by  at  this,  this  was  the  haunt
they  would  not  be  halowed  of.  Let  Sara  Williams  be  my
Interpreter  for  the  reft  : Sometime  ((be  faith)  they  lodged
the  detiill  in  her  toe,  Jometime  in  her  leoge , fometime  in  her
knee . Sometime , c^r.Let  the  deuil,and  his  holy  charmers  Sec  her  ex«
make  vp  the  reft.  examin;

Fie  holy  Fathers  fie,  is  this  the  trailed  fent  you  fb  gree-
dily purfue  with  full  crie,  and  open  mouth?  Is  this  the
game  you  hunt,  called  gayning  of  foules  i Is  this  the
haut  you  queft  on  in  Italy,Spain,&  England?Is  this  the
foile  you  fent  fo  hotely,  that  neither  Sea,  nor  Land  will
make  you  at  a fault , but  that  you  call  vpon  it  Bill,  ouer
hill,&  dale,through  thick,  and  thin,  and  make  good  the
chafe  through  Colledges^loyfterSjPalacesJioufes.-yea
cueninto  hell  it  felfe,&  thence  ftart  the  deuil,  and  hunt
him  a frefh,  and  lodge  him  with  Sara  Williams , in  fuch
mufeSjConny-beries,  and  holes,  as  the  poore  deuil,  but
for  yourhote  purfuite,would  ncuer  haue  come  in  ? It  is
wel  that  you  quit  the  deuil  with  gaining  of  fome  Bore
of  foules  for  hell,  elfe  can  I not  eafily  fee, how  you  could
readily  make  him  amends.  It  is  high  time  to  call  of  from
this  vnfauory  trayle.  Alack  poore  honeft  deuil , in  this
cafe  farre  more  honeft,  then  theprieft,  that  would  not
downe  into  his  lodge , without  much  adiuration,  toy-
ling, and  fweat : was  it  any  meruaile,  confidering  he  was
to  be  commannded  into  fo  vnfeemcly  a lodge.


CHAP,


I

page,64+  A declaration  of  Popiflrt  impofturc

CHAP.  13.  I

ff  Of  diflodgittg,  routing,  and  hunting  the  dentil,  by  the
dreadful! power  of  the  prefence , approach, and  bodily
touch  of  a Prtefl.

^Hcy  that  delight  in  hunting , being  men  of  qualify,  £
x and  fort,  when  they  would  enferfaine  their  friends
with  that  pleafing  fporf ,doe  vfe  to  hauc  an  Hare-finder,
whofetting  the  Hare  before.,  doth  bring  them  fpeedily
to  their  game.  The  Company  was  many  times  great,
and  the  (hangers  of  note  , that  reforted  to  fee , <3c  won-
der at  this  courfing  of  the  deuill,  and  it  was  accordingly
prouidedby  the  Hunt-maifiersof  the  game,  that  they
had  a deuil  ready  lodged  againft  any  folemne  hunting
day,  that  the  fpeftetors  might  not  be  delayed  with  te-
dioufnes,  before  they  came  to  their  paffime.  Thus  all
being  feared,  and  (landing  at  gaze  for  the  game,  the  {
next  office  was  to  fiirre,  and  rouze  the  deuill,  that  rhe
people  might  behold,  how  he  would  befiirre  himfelfc.
Vnfo  this  they  haue  many  potent  Engines,  & mcancs,
fomc  whereof  had  the  ability  both  to  courfe,  and  expcll
the  deuill : but  of  thefearefull  a&  of  expelling  I meane
notheeretofpeake,  butonelyof  their  various  power—
full  vertues  of  rouzing,  chafing,  and  chafing  the  de-
uill.

Thefe  dread  full  fuper-infcrnall  powers  doe  flow  ei-
ther from  the  pricflsowne  perfon,  or  hisadiunfts.  In
his  perfon  we  confider  his  bodily  prefence,  5c  approach
towards  tHe  potfclfcd,  his  breath,  his  touch,  his  parts.
Hisadiun&s  are  either  belonging  to  his  perfon,  as  his
hofc,  his  gloues,his  girdle, his  coyfe,his  rags*,  or  comon
to  his  office,  as  holy  water,  holyoyle,  the  holy  candell,
hallowed  brimflone,  the  holy  potion,  Aucmaries,  inuo-
cation  ofSaints,  the  holy  Crofife,  the  dole , the  amice,
the  bluffed  Sacrament;  and  the  corporall  prefence  of

our


In  catting  out  ofDeuils.
our  blcfled  Lady.  Of  thefe  infernall  whips,  according
to  their  fcuerall  dignities,  and  worth.

For  the  full,  we  are  to  vnderfland,  that  it  is  otherwife
bclwcenca  Pried,  and  a deuill,  then  iris  betwecncan
Hound,  and  an  Hare  : For  an  Hare,  if  fhe  be  formed,
will  lit  Cure, though  the  Hound  doe  trayle  neere  her, and
call  hotly  on  the  lent : but  the  deuil  Hands  in  fuch  bo-
dily feare  of  the  prefence  of  a Cath:  pried,  that  as  foone
as  ho-comes  in  to  the  roome,  where  the  podeded  is , he
begins  fometime  to  flartle  , and  if  hee  approach
neere,  he  rages  as  he  were  mad . Nay,  many  times  hee
wilhnot  endure  his  prefence  at  all,  (notvvithdanding  wc
reade  that  the  deuill  is  fo  bold,  as  he  dares  to  come  info
the  prefence  of  Almighty  God)  but  he  skuds  out  of  the
polfeded,  as  foone  as  euer  he  hcarcs  but  tydingsofthe
priefls  comming.

Cjordtams  the  Emperour  had  a daughter  poffeded
with  a deuill,  and  hearing  that  they  had  lent  for  Tryphon
to  come,  and  exorcifethe  mayd,  the  deuill  did  not  en-
dure forfooth  to  lookc  him  in  the  face,  but  frudesvp,
and  away,  ere  the  holy  man  could  come . Some  day  till
the  Exorcid  be  come  within  view,  fearing  (as  feemes)
cofenage,  lead  for  one  another  fhouldcome:  and  ns


page,


Thyrse.iSi*


foone  as  he  fees  by  his  nofe,  that  it  is  his  good  Maifler  in
deede,  he  flips  clofely  away,  without  taking  anv  Ieaue.
Thus  did  a whole  legion  in  a young  man  ferue  Bifhop
tsfrno/phus:  jQutmoxvifo  Arnolpho  epifeopo  difee  (Jit,
faith  Tbyr&tts:  no  looner  had  the  deuil  deferied  his  good
face,  but  he  was  gone*

Some  punie  rail)  deuil  doth  flay  till  the  holy  pried  be
come  fome- what  neere,  as  info  the  chamber  where  the
demoniack  doth  abide,  purportng,  as  feemes,  to  fry  a
pluck  with  the  pried,  and  then  his  hart  fodainly  failing
him  (as  Vernas , when  hee  faw  bis  enemie  C/wias  ap-
proach) cries  out,  he  is  tormented  with  the  prefence  of
the  pried,  and  fo  is  fierd  out  of  his  hold^  to  his  greater

K.  difgrace.


/


Pagc>  66.  A declaration  of  Popifti  impoflure

difgrace.

This  is  an  huge  vertue  in  a prieft,  that  caffs  fo  farre
©ffrwedoe  not  reade  that  thed^moniacksin  thcGofpcl,
did  euer  thus  skud  from  our  Sauiour  Chrfff  *y  bat  that  is
to  little  purpofe . God  needed  not  fo  much  to  grace  his
fonne,  who  by  the  power  of  hisDminity,  was  able  to
manifeft  himfelfe,  to  be  the  power  of  God:  but  our
Exorcifts  being  deemed  in  mod  places  of  the  world*
for  no  better  then  iugling  mates,  there  is  great  rcafon
pardy,  they  fhould  be  graced  with  more  gracefull  mi-
racles, then  euer  were  accomplifhed  by  our  Sauiour
Chrifh

This  frighting, and  tormenting  power  in  prefence  ofa
prieft,is  not  giuen  equally  to  al  a-like,as  the  deuils  them-
fclues  are  not  all  of  a pitch.  If  he  be  an  old  fturdy  deuil!,
& Hand  out  the  priefts  prefence,  then  as  the  priefi  hath
this  tormenting  power  in  more  cfpeciall  meafure,  and
approaches  in  perfon  neerer  to  the  pofleffed,  the  more
is  the  deuil  in  the  party  afflitted,  and  tormented.  Tray*
fords  deuil  being  a tough  weatherbeaten  fpirit,  was  no*
much  moued  at  the  prefence  of  Stamp  the  prieft,  who
bad  this  tormenting  power  as  feemes  but  remiffis  gradt*
bus.  But  when  Edmunds  came , and  had  inuefted  hira-
fclfe  inhis  holyroabes*,  heare  how  the  deuil  fared,  in
Edmunds  ownc  termes : I abet  facer dos  ita  vbi  eratfacris
tndntus  veFhbus , ante  fe  tnfrtnum  conttitui  • Edmunds
commanding  in  his  facredgeare  to  bring  in  thedemo-
niack,  and  fet  him  in  his  prefence.  And  markc  what
followed : Hie  ille  toto  corpore  contrcmifcercyet  horrere,  ct
■ashsare  capit . Inftantly  began  the  poflcflcd  to  trem-
ble, to  haue  horrour,  and  rngc  thorough  out  his  whole
body  . This  the  deuil  fuffered,  at  the  meerc  prefence  of
Edmunds , not  oncly  before  any  dreadfull  Exorcifme
were  thundredagainft  him,  but  before  any  word  was
fpoken  by  the  Iefuit.

Dibdalc  the  prieft  remoues  from  Hadley  to  E ulmer


in  calling  out  of  Deuils*  pagc,67«

in  the  night,  and  caries  his  trincket  Sara  behind  him  on
a horfe : fhee  felt  her  felfe  fo  tormented  with  heare,  fit*
ling  behind  him,  as  flic  had  much  adoc  to  be  kept  from
falling  from  her  feate.

Hcere  theobieft  wasneere,  the  power  wrought  the
flrongcr,  but  you  /hall  fee  this  power  extended  it  felfe
much  farther,  then  thus.  Trayford comes  behind  plod*
dingvpona  lade,  and  this  tormentinghcatefrom  the
pcrfonofthepriedrcaches  vnfo  him:  hec  feltfuch  an
exceeding  burning  in  his  head(faith  the  Authour  of  the
miracles)  as  he  cryed  all  the  way  as  he  rode  water,  water,
and  yet  we  find  this  rcmouc  was  the  8,  or  9,  oFNouem-
her,  when  men  doc  not  commonly  furfet  of  heat.  This
fpritc-tormenting  vertuc,  is  fo  top  ful  in  the  body  of  a
pried,  and  of  fo  potent  an  a&iuity , as  many  times  it
runnesouer,  and  many  times  iflues  from  his  perfon,  as
beames  doe  from  the  funne,  without  his  ownc  priuiric,
or  fence.  Andit  hath  not  the  qualities  of  Stygian  fire  a-
Jone,  to  fcoreh,  burne , torment , and  fugate  the  deuil,
but  it  hath  a power  Antiperifhan  befides,  to  repel,  and
bandie  backe  the  deuil  into  his  kencl  againe:  and  this
without  any  a& ion,  moti6,or  intendementofthe  pried:
fo  as  a pried  may  baffle  a deuil  dandingdone  Ail,  with*
out  Airring  hand,  ormoouing  a Foote.  This  bcfelto
Hdcho,Trayfordsfncakingdcml:  who  finding  his  cor*
uer  grew  too  hote  by  the  bodily  approch  of  the  Exor-
cifl , would  fainc  to  refrcfli  himfelfe  haue  come  out  at
Tray  fords  mouth  peeping  ouf,&  finding  the  priefls

mouth  approching  fomewhat  nccre , fuddainly  bolted
backe  againe,  as  a cony  from  a net,  and  was  fainc  to  flip’
out  elofely  at  his  right  eare , in  the  fafhion  of  a Moufe.

Thi sDibda/e  the  pried  neither  knew,  nor  dreamcd,that
be  had  reuerberated  the  deuil  with  the  direful  power  of
his  holy  hellifh  mouth, but  Sara , T ray  fords  deuil*  felow,

(aw  the  attempt  of  the  deuil  to  come  forth,  faw  his  ban-
die backe  againe  > and  faw  his  going  out  at  Trayford?

K & eare

W*  v_  , -*r


page, 68*


A declaration  ofPopifaimpofture

care  in  the  fhape  of  a Moufc,  and  difcoucred  the  true
caufe,  why  hce  came  not  foorth,  for  the  neereneffe  of  the
priefls  mouthy  to  the  mouth  of  the  poffejfed.

Now  if  any  man  wil  aske  me,  how  it  conics  to  pafTe,
that  any  deuil  could  flay  in  the  body  0/  any  party  pof-
fefled,  whom  the  priefls  did  vifit,cofidering  this  fright-
ful fcorching  heate,  that  ifluing  out  of  the  bodie  of  the
prieft,  did  feald,  and  torment  the  deuil , when  the  pried
drewneere,  and  did  make  him  to  tremble,  quake,  and
rage,  as  you  heard  in  Marrvoods  deuil : I aunfwer , that
the  dcuils,  as  you  haue  heard  out  of  Thyrsus , w ere  not
all  of  a temper,  and  conftitution  alike , but  fome  could
endure  thefe  fcorching  flames  of  the  priefls,  better  then
fome.  Next,  the  priefls  had  not  thishel  fire  all  in  a de-
gree, but  fome  burned  the  deuil  neerc  at  hand,  fome  a
farre  off,  according  to  the  proportion  of  hell  fire , that
was  in  the  prieft  : and  thirdly  the  priefls  did  many
times  by  their  foueraigne  power  of  prieflhood , hold
the  deuil  in  by  force,  for  his  greater  torment,  andma-
nifeflation  of  the  power  of  the  Romifh  Cath:  Church,
and  firfl  did  foaft,  and  broyle  him  wel  with  they r owne
hel  fire  within  the  body  of  the  poffeffed , and  then  did
lay  cart-loades  offire,  and  Brimflone  vppon  his  backe,
and  fent  him  to  be  broyled  1000.  veeres  in  the  pit  of
hdl.  ...  ' .

Th eLancafhire  deuil  in  the  wandering  wench  , of
whom  you  heard  afore,  cries  out,  that  hee  was  fealded,
and  tormented  by  the  prieft , and  defires  hec  might  be
gone : the  prieft  fells  him  he  fhal  not,  but  that  he  would
torment  him  ftihand  when  he  had  Co  done,  lodged  him
(as  you  haue  heard)  in  a moft  dangerous  defperat  place*
Now  it  may  be  wondered  by  fome  plaine  witfed  folkes,
how  the  body  of  an  holy  prieft  doth  catch  fuch  a fire,
that  all  the  parties  poflefied  did  ftil  complainc  they
burned : and  this  burning  was  fo  fore  in  Fid , andJViJV*,
as  the  marks  thereof  are  at  this  day  to  be  fcenc.  -

i Thefe


In  calling  out  of  Deuils:  • page, 69.

Thefe  quedionids  mud  be  fent  to  the  Cath:  Church
to  fchoole,  to  learne  to  belecue,  and  to  make  no  curious
(peculations : and  furc  it  is  without  doubt,  that  a fell-
burning  heafe  they  had  in  theyr  bodies  indcede,and  the
neerer  they  did  approch  to  Fid,  and  Sara, the  more  they
felt  theyr  heate:  yet  not  to  let  any  reafonable  man  goe
• away  vnfatisfied,  wee  wil  take  a little  paines  to  open  the
cafe.TiueitiSjthat  this  deuil-burning  heat  in  theprieds,
could  not  beany  elementary  fire:  for  that  no  element
can  efFeduate  beyond  his  owne  Sphxre , andadeuill
hauinsiinhis  nature  no  elementarie  combination,  it  is
not  poffiblc  hec  fhould  receiue  from  any  element  any
fcnfible  impredion.  Much  lefie  can  it  be  in  the  power
of  any  naturall  innate  heate , to  torment  a deuil , for  it
fits  not  to  calor  naf.iuui%  to  feald,  or  broyle  at  all.  A carle-
fiial  heate  lead  of  all  can  it  be  conceited,  for  that  his  in-
fluence is  fweet,  and  helpful,  tending  to  generation.

Thereis  but  a fourth  fire  left , and  that  is  the  fire  ofhel,
which  beeing  difputed,and  refolued  by  deepeDiuines,
to  be  neither  natural,  normixt  of  elementary  conditi-
on, but  the  coales  ofGods  wrath,  and  feareful  indigna-
tion, if  they  cary  in  theyr  bodies  an  heate, that  doth  vex,
and  torment  a deuil,  wherefoeuer  they  finde  him,  it  can
be  no  other,  then  the  heat  ofhel:  for  what  other  fire
can  vexc,  and  torment  the  deuil?  I would  be  forie  they
fhould  be  concluded  of  fo  hellifh  a difpofition  : it  is  far
better  to  take  it , as  Sara , and  all  the  red  of  her  fellow
Comedians  doe  contcll : that  all  was  a Stygian  comedy
to  make  filly  people  afraid.  A ficr  indeedc  fhefelt/roin
thefpritly  power  of  the  Pried,  but  it  was  of  a more
gentle,  £cpleafingimprefIion.  And  for  that  other  part,
that  fhe  phved,  feigning  that  (he  was  burned  , and  tor-
mented at  t he  prefence  of  a Catholique  pried:  that  had
fhe  learned  from  the  wile  prompting  of  her  skilful  mai-
flers  the  pncffo,who  did  dil  harpeof  that  firing  in  their
ordinary  narrations  offlrangc  pofltfiions  beyond  Teas,

K 3 that


4 ' »


pagc,7o.  A declaration  of  Popifh  impoflure

that  the  po(fe(fed  could  not  endure  the  prefence  of  a (fathi-
lique prsefl, which  fhe  as  an  apt  fcholler  obfcrued  for  her
cue,  anda&editascomly,  and  gracefully , asyouhauc
heard.  Thus  much  of  the  power  of  theyr  bodily  pre-
fcnce.

CHAP.  14.  '

gT  Of  the firange  power  of  a Cath:  Priefls  breath  %and  of  the
admirable fier  that  is  m a Priefls  hands , to  burne
the  deutlL

Jp Lime  in  his  naturall  florie,  tells  vs  of  ccrtainc  people
that  doc  anhelitu  oris  enecare  homines  : Kill  men  with
the  breath  that  comes  from  their  mouthes . Scaliger  re-
counts a whole  linage  of  men,that  could  0 culls  fafetnare:
bewitch  with  their  eyes,  though  they  did  not  touch.
The  Leno  in  the  Comedy,  is  noted  to  be  of  fo  Aronga
breath,  thathec  had  almoft  blownc  downe  the  young
gallant,  that  floodc  in  his  way : but  the  Poets  tell  vs,that
hell  hath  a more  deadly  breathing  then  all  •,  fo  as  if  a bird
doe  by  chaunce  flic  oucr  the  Stygian  flood,  fhe  is  quel-
led with  the  fmc11,and  falls  downe  (lark  dead.  We  haue
hcere  to  acquaint  you  with  a breathing  company  of
priefls,  that  for  potency  of  breath,  doc  put  downe  Til -
me,  Scaliger , the  bawde,  hell,  the  deuill  and  all : For  the
deuill,  who  canwcl  enough  endure  the  loathfomco-
dours,  and  euaporations  of  hell,  is  not  able  to  endure
the  vapour  i (Tiling  from  the  mouth  of  a prieft*  but  had
rather  goe  to  hell,  then  abide  his  fmell.

Now  what  a monflrous  coylc  would  fixe  or  feauen
ignimmoHs  priefls  kcepe  in  hell , if  they  fhould  let  loofe
the  full  fury  of  their  blafts,  as  *s£olus  did  vpon  the  Sc  a,
and  diflend  their  holy  bellowes  in  confort  amongft  the
poore  ghofls.wcre  it  not  a plainc  dangcr,that  they  were
likely  to  pufFc  all  the  dcuils  out  of  hell  ? CMengtu  the
Canonift  for  hel,giucs  vs  a rule^that  if  the  dcuil  be  flub*

burne,


in  carting  out  ofDeuils*  Page,7U

burne,  & wil  not  obey  the  formidable  exorcifme  of  the
prieft,  then  that  the  prieft  foal  os fmm  quam-proxime  ad
tnergumenum  admouere : bring  his  mouth  as  neer  to  the
poflefleds  mouth,  as  he  can , and  by  that  time  the  deuil
hath  tailed  on  his  breath,  if  there  be  any  life  in  him,  hee
Vvil  be  glad  to  ftirre.

Heere  now  you  fee  the  reafon , why  Tray  fords  deuil
rebounded  at  the  dint  of  the  Priefls  breath , and  was  fo
glad  to  get  him  out  at  Tray  fords  right  earc  like  a Moufc,
rather  then  he  would  come  out  iump  againfl  the  priefls
mouth.  The  little  children  were  neuer  fo  afrayd  of  hell
mouth  in  the  old  plaies  painted  with  great  gang  teeth,
flaring  eyes,  and  a foulc  bottle  nofe,  as  the  poorc  deuils
are  shared  with  the  hel  mouth  of  a priefo
Take  an  example  from  Sara  Williams  of  the  vigorouf-
nefle  of  their  breath  , Jhee  lay  ( faith  the  penner  of  their
miracles)  past  all fence  in  a traunce , [seeing  utterly  berea-
ved of  all  her  fences  at  once , the  priefl  no  fooner  came  neere
hery  butjhe  difeerned  him  by  the  fmeli  Was  not  this  (trow
you)  a iolly  ranke  fmel,  that  was  able  to  awake  a poorc
wench  out  of  a trauncc?  Verily  thefc  doe  out- fmel  the
deuil  by  farre.  For  though  the  deuil  hath  (as  is  com-
monly reputed)  a fel  ranke  fmel,  yet  I neuer  heard  of  a-
ny,  that  could  difeerne  a deuil  by  his  fmeh
The  like  foucraigne  fmel  is  in  the  facrament  of  tbeyr
Mafic,  for  Sara  could  ahvaies  (faith  our  Authour)  verie
ixattly  reckon  up  how  many  had  communicated , by  dtfeer -
mngthem  ly  theyr fmeR,  But  for  this  they  may  haue  an
caffe  euafion , happily  they  had  beene  fo  deepein  the
Challicc,  as  a quick  fentedman  might  hauc  fauoured
them  a far  off  without  helpe  of  the  deuil . Their  breath
which  is  nothing , but  ay  re  exhaled  from  theyr  lunges,
beeingas  you  fee  of  this  affrighting  power  ouer  the  dc»
nil : what  may  wee  deeme  of  the  power  of  theyr  holic
hands,  ifthey  comeonce  fo  be  applyed  to  the  deuil  ?

Firft,  theyr  holy  fingers  had  in  them  the  fame  diuine

power*


Pages72*  A declaration  ofPopifhimpofture

power,  if  notin  an  higher  meafurc,  that  wee  read  to
haue  beene  in  our  Sauiour  Chriff  , with  a bare  touch  of
theyr  finger  without  any  other  ceremonie  vfed  by  our
bleflcd  Sauiour  in  like  cafe,  they  refiored  hearing , and
figh'  to  theyr  patients  beeing  blind  and  deafe . So  hath
the  Miracle-CAtaitter  cleerely  fet  downc,  that  Sara  be-
ing bereaued  of  all  her  fences,  as  in  a rraunce,  the  Exor-
cift  toucheth  her  eares,  and  eyes  wuh  his  finger,  and  flic
fees  and  hearcs.

This  is  but  a flea  biting  to  that  which  ( Ignatius  his
great  grand- childe)  Edmunds  exploited  with  his  holy
hand,  Inpiter  armed  with  his  dreadful  thunder,  ncuer
made  hel  fo  to  crack.  Heare  it  thorough  the  Iefuits  own
trumpet,  as  himfelfe  hath  proclaimed  it  to  the  world#
fix  dum  exorcifmos  in  choare  mamtff  importer e capiti,cum
ilie ftatim furere,  in  a/tum  erigi , mambas  pedrbu/que  elabo •
rare,  facer  dotis  manum  depellere  , emma  complex e vocibus ,
iur ament  is. male  dibits  blafphemis  . Edmunds  had jcarcely
begun  his  adiuration , & layd  his  hand  on  IV]  ar  woo  ds  head,
/ but  he  prefently  falls  into  afurie,  fir  etches  out  his  body, beats
with  his  feete , and  hands  ,/natches  at  the  priefls  hand , makes
all  to  ring  with  crying,  fwearing,& blafphemmg.  T his  was
wel  roared  of  a young  dcuil  for  a praludium  fo  the  play,
vppon  the  bare  touch  of  Edmunds  hand . But  marke
when  the  deuil  grew  hole  with  the  continuing  of  this
holy  tricke,  and  of  hell  {Edmunds  hand)on  his  head  flills
Sacerdos  off c mm  repay  at  manum  in  capite  tenens,x  he  prieft
falls  a frefh  to  his  worke  , holding  fill  his  hand  on  the
pofTefledshead  . Now  begins  hel  fo  worke.  Hicnoua
tragoedia^  inufitata  voces,  & verba  in  omnium  auribus  info -
nant.  fluid  non  venitts  , ddtmones  (inquit)  et  tu  Pippin c
(quod nomen  er at  infeftdntis  dotmonis)  non  vindicas?  nihil
opts,  nihil  auxilij  in  inferno  rchqui  eft  ? auferte  :ito  miferum ,
flammis  tr  adit e,  fin  minus  communem  hanc  contumeliam  vos
non  vultu,  ant  non  pot  eft  rs  vindicare , turn  iacula,oladij,cul-
iri  confodite  me , ignis ,pebUs9  canes  ? main  conjumite,  bDo-

mm


in  cafling  out  of  Deuils*

tmu  non  corruts  ? netjue  iebifceni  me  vuh  terra  abfcrbere
tiec  de  c&lo fulmen  altquod  peffundare  ? Quis  hoc  to  lev  arc,
quit  tantum  mcendium  pati , quis  ita( vti  rmlle  vngmbus )dtf-
cerpi  vnqua  vifus  etthhzK  is : Heere flr tinge  tragicall  exc/a^
muttons  filled  all  our  eares  . "Demis  why  come  yee  not  l and
thou  Pippin  ( which  was  the  name  of  the  tormenting  deuill)
doofl  thou  not  reuenge  my  quart  ell  l is  there  no  ayde>  no fuc*
eour  left  in  hell  Take  mee  miferable  caytife,  and hurle  mee
into  the  infernall flames:  but  if eyther you  will  not , or  cannot
right  this  dsfgrace}  then  you  launcesyfwords , and  kniues  dajh
thorough  me : fire>  dogs,  plague,  mifchiefe  con  fume  me}houfe
fall vpon  me>  earth fwallow  mee , hghtningfrom  heauen  de-
vour e mee : who  can  beare  my  burden  l who  can  endure  my
he  ate  ? who  can  be  thus  tome  inpeeces , beeing  rent  wit  ha
thoufandnayles  l Who  would  not  think  that  hcc  heard
Hercules  fur ens , or  *s4tax  flagellifer  newly  come  from
hell  i Was  euer  Prometheus  with  his  Vulture,  Sijyphus
with  his  flone,  Ixion  with  his  wheelc  in  fuch  a cafe?
Did  euer  theGod-gaftring  Giants,  whom  Iupiter  ouer-
w.helraed  with  Telton  and  OJfa , fo  complainc  of  theyr
loade  ? Or  Phaeton  fo  bellow  when  he  was  burned  with
Jupiter s flames,  as  poore  Cfrfarwood heere  bellowes,and
roares  vnder  Edmunds  fierie  flames, and  all  with  the  onc-
ly  touch  of  his  head  with  his  Ignatian  hand  ? Was  it  not
by  diuine  Oracle , that  his  maifters  name  fliould  be  Ig-
natius, when  his  difciple  caried  fuch  an  vnfupportable
waight  of  hel  fier  in  his  hand  5 Will  not  his  hand  be  an
excellent  inflrument  for  Lucifer  \n  heI,to  plague,broile,
and  tormenthis  infernall  fiends,  that  hath  fuch  a fiend-
tormenting  power  heere  on  earth  ? Now  here  pittiful!
tJWarwood* oc  on  in  his  direful  notes.

tsfpage  (inquit)  manum  illam  cum  omnibus  dammjs*
Take  away  that  dreadfull  hand , in  the  name  of  all  the  deuilt
in  hell . Vt  me  vexas  et  torques , nunqmm  fine  cruciatibus
fine  incendio  ejfe  patient  l How  doofl  thouvexe , how  doofl
tbou  wring  tne  l thou  art  never  but  plaguing  me  with  tor-

h*  ment


P*ge,7$<


Pagc>74/  A declaration  ofPopifh  impofture

merit  and  fire : Then  cries  he  out  of  his  heady  his  hearty  his
bowels , his  bones . Manum  tamen  non  dimittit facer  do  s : Tet
'Edmunds  would  not  be  moued  to  remit  bis  hand : but  be-
gins  a new  chafe . In fequitur  manu per  tergum,&cet.  He
fur fues  the  dentil  downe  along  his  backe,  his  reines , his  clo fie
parts3his  thighest  his  legges,\(\ q*>  ad  falos,  doveme  to  his  ankle -
bone : Thence  he  fetches  him  backeagaine,  withatSV/-
furrare,do wne  his  knee, his  belly. his  breaft,his  neck,anc3
there  grafpes  him  round  about  the  neck,  with  both  his
holy  hands,  which  cart  the  deuil  into  fo  flrange  an  ago-
nie,  and  paflion : as  Edmunds  himfelfe  breakes  forth  in-
to an  exclamation : Deus  imort alts  quanta  turn  tile  paffeus
fuit  l nec  mille  homtnum  hnguas  explicare  pojjfe  exiflimo.
Good  God  ! into  what  a paffton  was  he  then  call?  not  the
tongues  of  a thoufand  men  ( l imagine)  can  expreffe  it.

A little  taft  of  fhc  inexplicable  agony  he  giues  vs  by
this,that  the  fweat  that  flowed  from  Marwoods  face, was
an  fuch  current  flrcames,as  it  was  the  office  of  one  man,
fo  fland,  and  dry  them  vp  . Digitus  Ignatij  esl  hie : this
was  the  finger  of  Ignatius  deuil  indeede,  to  teach  ayong
Popifh  Rakehcll  fo  cunningly  to  aft,  5c  feigne  the  pafc
fions,  and  agonies  of  the  deuil  \ that  the  whole  compa-
re of  fpe&ators  flialby  his  falfeillufions  bebrought
anto  fuch  commiferation,  and  compaflion,  as  they  fhal
all  weepc,  crie,  and  exclaime,  as  loude  as  the  counterfet
deuil  5 and  the  end  and  plaudits  of  the  a£f,  muff  be  this.
O Cathohcamfidem ! O fidem  (fatholtcam,  verefdem,fanc -
tam^eallamyCperatricem fide:tu  damonibus  terribtlisyinferno
formidabilis , tibi  cedunt  caterua,  legiones  damonum  contre
mifeunt  ad  tuas  voces , tuas  voces  infuperabiles  fugiunty  hor-
rent, & te  audire  nolunt . That  is : O the  Cathohque faith ,
O the  faith  fatholique,  truly  faith , holy,  pure , powerfull
faith : Thou  art  terrible  to  deuils,  formidable  to  hell , troupes
fubmit  to  thee  Regions  ofdeuils  doe  tremble  at  thy  voyce,they
filie  from  thy  vnrefislable  commaund , they  quake , and  dare
mt  abide  thy  found.  Now  by  that  time  Sara,  and  her  play-

fellowei


in  calling  out  ofDeuils*  ~ page^f.

fcllowes  be  come  vpon  the  ('age,  & haue  told  youjiow
they  were  burned,  and  handled  Iikevvife,  I doubt  nor,
but  you  will  helpe  their  p Undue  with  an  O to  : O diabo-
hcamfraudem ! 0 frandem  diabolic  am ! O diros  aSiores ! O
wept  os  fpe&atores !

Sara  was  content  to  play  the  flie-deuil,  touching  your
prefence,  and  approach,  and  to  grace  you  with  an  Oh  /
hnrne3  oh  I cannot  abide  the  prefence  of  a (fatholique : mary
when  you  came  neerer  , then  in  manhood  you  Ibould  1
offer,  or  ilie  in  roodefly  fuffer,  as  to  hunt  her  with  your
holy  hote  hands  , fhc  could  in  her  woman-hood  hauc
beene  content  you  would  haue  forborne  : but  that  way
lay  your  game,  and  therefor*  there  was  no  remedy,  but
you  would  haue  your  hunting  fporf.  Your  game  being
by  hote  chafe  embofted,  did  commonly  take  foyle,  and
there  you  let  him  lodge , and  hunted  him  a frefh  vpon
the  old  foy  le,  and  counter  too , which  none  but  Curres
of  an  impure  fent  wil  doe.

Sara  faith, you  began  with  your  fiery  hands  at  her  foot,
and  fo  vp  all  along  her  leg*,  fo  her  knee , her  thigh,and
fo  along  all  parts  of  her  body : And  that  you  followed
the  chafe  fo  clofc,that  it  could  neither  double, nor  fquat,
but  you  were  ready  to  pinch.

, VVas  thisafayre  chafe  for  holy  anointed  priefts  to
make,  efpecially  with  thofe  holy  hands,that  had  inflant-
lie  before  celebrated  the  holy  Mafle,blefl*d  the  chalice,
made  (as  they  fuppofe)  a new  God,eleuated  the  Hoaft,
bandied,  and  deuided  the  very  body  of  Chrift,  to  bring
the  fame  holy  hands  piping  hote  from  the  Altar  to  the
chayre,  where  Sara  fate  at  Mafic,  to  feize  with  the  fame
bands  vpon  her  toe,  flip  them  vp  along  her  legge,  her
knee,  her  thigh,  and  fo  along  all  parts  of  her  body,  till
you  came  neere  her  neck,  and  by  the  way  with  the  fame
boly  hands,  to  handle,  pinch,  and  gripe,  where  the  de-
yil  in  his  blacke  roodefly  did  forbeare,  fill  you  made  her
crie  oh : and  then  you  Co  cric,  03that  oh  is  the  dentil , Now

L&  the


page  ,76*  A declaration  of  Popifh  Impofhire

the  great  deuil  pinch  you  all  for  me , and  that  I may  fay
without  malignity  5 for  I vvel  know  he  dares  not:  you
are  fo  deuil  holy  all  ouer,  head,  hart,  and  hands, that  the
deuil  dares  not  come  neerc  you : and  therefore  you
ncede  not  to  care  a ru/h  for  either  deuil,  or  hell,  for  you
wil  either  with  your  holmes  make  holy  both  the  deuil,
and  hell, or  make  him  cric  0/^when  you  come  there  with
your  holy  pinch.

Fid  Willtams  doth  complaine  (lookc  in  their  owne
confeflions)  that  with  your  holy  hote  burning  hands,
you  did  hunt  the  deuil  counter  in  her  too : and  did  toc-
burne,  fhin-burnc,knee-burne  bcr,and  fo  forth,  till  you
made  her  crie  oh : for  they  were  the  fweet  paire  of  your
holy  deuils,that  were  alwavcsin  chafe.

And  hcere  we  fee  the  caufe,  why  Trajford  was  foone
difpatched  of  his  deuil  after  a bout,  or  two,  and  was  ne-
wer deuil  hunted  from  toe  to  top,  with  your  holy  hotfl
hands:  nor  Ma: CMayntc  was  neucr  troubled  with  this
pinching  fport  : but  Sara,  and  Fid  ftueklong  in  your
fingers,  or  your  fingers  about  thenn  and  eucr  & anone
they  were  at  the  holy  chayrc,  and  this  diflodging,  cour-
fing,  and  pinching,  the  deuil  was  fhli  in  their  Parkes*
Alack,  the  poore  foules  had  no  woife  deuils,fhen  Tray*
ford  and  Mayme  had  : for  Mayme  had  the  foueraigne
Ttittator  of  hell  in  him  5 but  their  walke  was  faire  for
your  courfe,  their  game  pleafing,  their  fute  hote , your
fent  fuller:  and  therefore  no  meruaile,  though  your
dogges  being  curres,  did  hunt  ryot  fo  often  after  this
fallow  Deare.

Andheerelmuft  remember  you,  that  you  were  fo
fierie  hote,  andfo  fharpe  fet  vpon  this  game,  that  you
forgat  your  Maifters  ,C Jrtenyus>  Thyr<ms>S])rerjger,Nidery
and  all  t and  did  as  fchoole-boyes  doe,  when  theyhauc
an  otium  to  play,giue  a fhowt,andfor  half  of  their  fport^
cafifatchcl,  bookes,  and  paper,  behind  at  their  heeles.
For  in  your  graund  frobato , when  Sara  at  my  L.  Vaux


in  cafting  out  of  Denits.  page,  77#

liis  houfe , was  to  receaue  her  folemne  graund  exor-
cifme,  and  fo  be  quit  the  Courf,this  high  day  being  held
forherfinall  quietus  eft:  where  you  Ihould  haue  had
fpeciall  regard  to  haue  dignified,  and  graced  cuery  holy
Engine  in  his  due  order,  and  place,  feruiceable  to  this
great  worke,  (as  the  Amice,  the  Albe,  holy  water,  holy
candell,  the  Crofle,  Brians  bones,  and  your  Ma:  Men*
gtts  his  Formidable  dcuil-whip  aboue  the  reft ,)  you  ha-
iling Sara  your  game  fet  fairc  in  her  forme,  for  ioy,  and
ftiowt  ofyour  fport,  could  not  abftainc,  but  like  Lycur -

fus  his  Hound,that  hauing  an  Hare,and  a kitchin  pot  fee
>oth  before  him,  left  the  Hare, and  ranne  to  the  pot, and
thruft  in  his  head  vp  fo  the  eares : fo  you  hauing  in  your
♦ hand  your  MaiCfrfengus  his  dreadfull  booke  of  Exor-
cifinc,  cntituled  worthily  Fufits , fugafiageHum  damo-
mm : the  cudgel,  the  whip,  and  the  flight  of  rhe  deuil:

(loe  the  furious  force  of  your  Eerie  hcate ) threw  Men-
gus  your  deuil-whipper  away,  and  ranne  vnto  Sara,  and
with  your  burning  hands  eatched  Sara  by  the  foot,  and
fo  fired  the  deuill  along , till  you  made  him  flip  out,
where  on  man  muft  name.

Now  a few  queftions  I muft  foyle,and  then  I wil  pro-  See  the
ceede  to  your  holy  geare.  i.  It  may  be  asked,how  your  booke  ot
hands  came  fo  holy , as  to  Pnine  at  the  top  of  your  fin-  mirai  C5*
gers,likc  vnto  the  funne.Whcrin  you  fhal  heare  a peecc
of  a Dialogue  betweenc  Fid,  and  Ma:  Maynte , theyr
Captaine  fchoHer : who  fitting  by  Fid  his  pue-fellow,
and  a prieft  hard  by  them:  did  affirme,  that  vnto  his  fight
the  priefls  finger,  and  thumb,  dtdjhine  with  bright  nes,  espe-
cially on  the  inner  fides : wherc-vnto  the  prieft  aunfwe-
red,  that  it  might  well  be  fio,  becaufie  (quoth  he)  they  were
anointed  with  holy  oyle,  when  I was  made  prieft.  At  which
words  Fid  laughing,  and  calling  Ma:  tJMaynie  diflera-
bling  hypocrit  * the  prieft  faid,  It  was  not  Fid,  but  the  de~
uill,  that  did  fio  laugh,  and  rayle . Hcere  you  fee  a plain  c
ycafon^  how  the  priefts  hand  comes  (hining,  andboly*

L 3 and


pagejS  i A declaration  of  Popilh  impofturc  .

& hath  this  pinching  holy  quality  in  if, to  caufc  a wench
cry  oh,  and  hce  that  wil  laugh  at  thisrcafon,  may  hap  to
catchadeuil.  2,  If  any  curious  merry  head  wil  de-
inaund,  what  needs  the  Amice,  the  Albe , holy  candle,
holy  crofle,holy  brimflone,#™*#/  bones,  the  facrament
the  erode,  Sake  Bogina , S.  'Barbara , Cfrlengvs  his  de-
uil-whip,  his  deuil-club,  his  fray- deuil,  and  the  reft  of
that  infernal  rable,  fince  the  onely  holy  hands  of  Ed-
munds the  Iefuit  alone,  hath  power  alone  to  roufc,  hunt,
chafe,  baffle,  broyle,  & tofte  the  deuil,  and  to  make  him
to  roare,  that  hel  it  felfe  did  quake,and  tremble, skudde,
and  flye  from  his  holy  hand  alone,  more  fearefully,  and
ghaftfully  then  euer  poore  Moufc  did  tremble,  and  flic
from  the  fight  of  a glaring  Cat.

To  this  I aunfwer,  that  as  all  ftarres  doe  not  partici-
pate alike  the  light  of  the  funne,  fo  all  holy  priefts  doc
not  receiue  alike  the  influence  of  this  he!-tormcn(ing
fire,  but  as  they  come  neerer  to  that  Forts  caloris , Origo
luminis,  Oculus  call  Ignatius , the  fountaine  of  this  holie-
deuil-drmingheate,ashis  name  dooth import,  (as£V-
mrnds  his  grand-child  did)  fo  are  there  more  potent,and
abundant  beames  of  that  miraculous  fire  communica-
ted vnto  them,  able  to  fry , and  broyle  all  the  dcuilsin
hell : and  as  they  ftand  farther  off  from  the  pure  raies  of
his  hell-fiering  face,  fo  they  are  as  the  Moone,but  fpot-
ted, and  fprinckled  with  this  fatanicall  flame.  3,  If  this
vvil  not  content  you, but  you  wil  purfue  me  with  quefti-
ons  ftil,  and  know  why  Edmunds,  Dibdate , and  foroe  o-
thcr,who  had  the  deuils  plenty  of  this  deuil-frying  heat
in  theyr  holy  hands, did  not  difpatch  the  deuil  quite,and
fire  him  out  of  his  denne  at  once  with  theyr  holy  hands
alone : but  elongated  their  worke,&  tooke  in  the  Albe,
the  amice,  holy  candle,  holy  hoft,  and  all  the  loufie  ho-
ly wardrop  to  aflift  in  the  holy  worke : I aunfwer,  this
was  theyr  good  nature,  to  fake  in  thole  petty  imple-
ments, and  to  doe  them  fome  grace , that  theyr  mother

; ;l  holy


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.  Page>79#

holy  Church , whofe  hangings  they  are , may  thanke
them  for  theyr  labour,  efpecially  confidering  they  grow
now  adaies  fomewhat  fully  for  want  of  cleanc  vfe.  And
laftly,ifthey  fhould  haue  difpatched  haftily,much  good
huting  fport  had  been  loll,  the  pleafure  had  been  fhorr,
the  a&ion  by  facility  would  not  haue  been  fo  admirably
efteemed  *,  the  holy  Church  had  loft  theyr  applaufc,and
the  grace  of  the  a<ftion  by  fodaine  quick  paflage,  would
haue  receiued  much  eclipfe,and  diminution . And  fo  I
proceed  to  view  their  holy  implements,

CHAP.'  if.

y Of  the  admirable  power  in  a^riefts  gloues,  hU  hole*
hu  girdle,  his  flirt,  to fcorch  the
dentil.


Q Entle  Reader,thou  muft  not  meruaile  to  heare  thofe
fupernaturall  powers,  fpoken  of  before,  to  haue
beene  lodged  in  the  bodies  of  holy  priefts : confidering
that  as  the  plague  doth  infeft,  and  hang  in  implements
and  garments,  and  the  leprofie  vpon  walls,  and  beames
of  houfes*,  fo  wee  finde  thofe  powerful  vertues , which
fhewed  themfelucs  apparantly  in  the  conftitution  of
the  Priefts,  fo  transfufe  thcmfelues,  and  inhere  as  effec-
tually, in  the  priefts  gloues,  theyr  hofe, theyr  girdle, their
fliirts,  their  ragges,  their  patches , yea  in  the  water  that
fome  of  their  powerful  hands  had  been  waftied  withall.
So  as  thefe holy  companions,  if  they  hadbeenemefa-
tnorphofed  into  Fifties,  as  Flyffesfo lowers  were  turned
into  fwine,they  would  haue  proued  notablegood  Cod-
fifti,  of  who  the  Fiftiermen  report  there  is  no  part  with-
in them,  nor  without,  that  is  bad.

A little  I doubt  mee  old  Thyraus  is  fo  blame,  who
painting  a whole  chapter  with  the  glorious  parts,  and
qualities  of  an  Exorcift,  intituling  his  difeourfe  cDe  con~
ditionibus  SxorciHarum ,hee  is  filent  in  this  Maifter- quai-
ling


pagc,So*


Page, 1 2.
of  the  .
booke  of
miracles*


A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture
Iitie  infixed  in  the  temper,  and  mould  of  a Pricft,  or  re*
ceiued  from  his  fplcndent  vn&ion,  that  he  fiiould  baue
this  dreadful  fire,  to  burne  out  a deuil,  and  fo  by  conni-
uencie  doth  fmother  it  in  his  garments,  and  implements
too.  Thyraus  was  of  fome  warry,  and  earthy  conftituti-
on , and  likely  dooth  cantle  all  Exorcifts  by  himfclfe.
Sure  I am,  we  findc  them  as  liuely,  quick , and  mightie
in  operation  in  theyr  exteriour  ornaments, as  in  theyr  in-
teriour  complexion,  8c  therefore  we  muft  not  do  them
that  wrong,  to  bury  them  in  obliuion.

cJlfabo, Saras  chiefe  deuil, with  much  adoe  was  com-
pelled to  tel  his  name:  and  thefirft  word  heefpake,  was
out  of  Saras  hand  > then  was  one  of  the  priefls  gloucs  ta-
ken, and  put  vppon  her  hand , CMaho  durft  not  abide
it,  but  went  his  way  ftraight : and  hee  was  fo  skared,  as
we  do  not  finde,  that  euer  he  came  there  after.  It  feemes
he  had  ftepped  rhethcr  only  to  grace  the  priefts  gloues:
for  you  hauc  obferued  , that  her  hand  was  none  of  his
ordinary  haunt : or  els,  if  he  could  not  endure  the  gloue
by  reafon  of  fome  Tenting  quality,  the  priefls  hand  had
left  behind  him,  wee  may  imagine  the  prieft  had  bcene
vfing  his  hand  holilv , and  well:  when  it  fauoiired  fo
ftrongly  that  the  deuil  could  not  abide  it.  And  now  it  is
not  without  great  caufc  as  you  may  fee,  that  our  Cathos
Gentlewomen  hcerc  in  England  doc  hold  infuch  decre
efteemeour  wandring  Cath:  priefts , enriching  them
with  guilt  rapiers,  hangings,  girdles,  Ierkins,  and  coyfes
more  befeeming  a noble  man,  then  a iugling  Impoftor
fo  weare,  if  they  receiue  no  other  pofTeffiue  kindnefle
(whereof  wee  all  fee  they  be  no  niggards  of  theyr  ftore)
yet  this  recompence  at  their  pleafurc  they  may  enter-
taine,  to  haue  a precious  payre  of  priefted  gloues , Co
fprightly  perfumed,  with  the  pure  odour-fpicing  from
the  hands  of  a hotc  ghoftly  father,  as  they  may  vfe  for  a
fore  preferuatiue  again!!  any  fparrow-blafting,or  fprite-
blafting  of  the  deuil.  This  precious  odour  againft  a

deuil,


in  cafling  out  ofDeuils."  page,  Si,

deuil,  that  dooth  continually  iflue  from  their  annointed
complexion,  dooth  not  onely  afeend,  info  theyr  vpper,
and  extend  it  felfe  into  theyr  vttcr  ornaments,  as  into
their  gloues  * but  it  defeends  alfo , and  diftils  into  theyr
inferiour  habit,  and  for  want  oFa  fit  receptacle,  is  rcadie
many  times  to  drop  out  at  their  hecles.  Dtbdale  Saras
ghoftly  Father , had  of  his  fatherly  kindnefle  lent  his
ghoftly  child  a payre  of  his  old  ftockins,  that  happilic
had  feene  Vemcefi c %ome)(i le  as  a fpiritual  token  of  his  page, f , mi-
carnall  kindnes,doth  wearc  them  on  her  legs : fee  thys  raclebookc,
odoriferous  vertue,  in  what  exceeding  mcafure , it  had
difeended  downc,and  filled  the  very  frames  o f'Dibdales
hofe.  Saras  dcuil  had  been  very  turbulent,  and  ftirring
in  her  body,  and  was  to  be  dcliucred  downc  to  hisbafer
lodge,  he  paiTed  quietly  downe  til  he  came  at  her  knee,
and  comming  downc  hil  too  faff,  flipt  ere  he  was  aware
info  Saras  legge,  where  finding  himfelfe  caught  within
the  priefts  hofe  becing  on  her  legge, he  plunges  & tum-
bleslike a Salmon  taken  in  a net,  and  cries  harro  ho, out
alas,  pul  off,  pul  off4,  offin  all  haft  with  the  priefts  hofe,  ,
or  els  he  muft  marre  all,  for  there  he  could  not  ftay : 8c
all  haft  was  made  accordingly  to  eafe  the  poorc  deuil  of
his  paine,  and  let  him  lie  at  his  repofe : and  was  not  this
a goodly  ginne  to  catch  a Woodcocke  withal!,  & caufe
him  to  ftiootc  out  his  long  bil , and  cry , O the  vertue  of
the  priefhood,  6 the  power  of the  Cathoiicjue  Church, when
they  faw  with  their  owne  eyes  the  hofe  haftily  fnatchcd
off,  heard  with  their  owne  long  cares  Saras  deuil  cry  oh,
beheld  her  legge  quiet,  when  it  was  bare  without  the
houfe : & obferued  how  reucrcntly  the  priefts  touched,
handled,  and  bellowed  the  hofe , when  it  was  of,  and
with  what  eleuation  of  their  eyes  to  hcauen,  theyfini-
ihed  the,  wonder.

I cannot  but  wonder  that  in  the  heate  of  theyr  zeale,

!oue,and  admiration  of  the  holinefte  of  the  priefts,  the
(pc&atorsdidnotrunnc  .vppon  them  at  once,  as  the  .

Al»  dausJ**


page,  82,  A declaration  of  Popifh  irnpofture

daughters  of  Scam  the  lew., did  vpon  the  Exofcifts*,  and
of  pure  holy  zeale,  rend,  fnatch,  and  feareoffall  their
holy  apparel  from  off  their  backs,  eucn  vnto  their  bare,
and  catch,  and  carrie  away  fome  a pcecc  of  the  Prieft s
coatc,  fomearaggeof  the  amice,  fome  a patch  of  his
breeches,  fome  a corner  of  his  fhirt,  and  lay  them  vp  in
an  holy  casket  for  relicjues , againft  a raynie  day  ♦ The
priefts  themfelues,doe  full  deuoutly  casket  vp  as  home-
Page,<f,i-  lie,  and  brayed  wares,  as  thefe  God  wote.  Heere  make
bidem.  you  no  doubt,  but  all  more  then  comely  haft  was  made,
to  pull  off  SDibdalrs  hofe , that  the  deuil  might  quickly
cabin  in  his  lodge  *,  for  there  was  the  deuils  couert, where
they  were  faid  to  rouze  him,when  they  came  to  the  next
hunt,  with  their  fiery  holy  hands,  which  was  not  long
intermitted  (as  the  wenches  doe  wofully  complainc)the
priefts  hauing  a ranke  itch  in  their  fingers,  to  be  fidiing
atthatfport.  . •.

You  are  next  to  be  informed,  that  this  deuihkilling
vertue  did  not  lye  in  the  priefts  head  onely,  as  the  poy-
fonof  an  Adder  doth  \ nor  yet  in  his  taile  alone,  as  the
light  of  a Glbw-wormc:  but  was  vniuerfally  diffufed  o«
iter  all,  and  eucry  part  of  his  body,  and  fo  transfufed  in*
to  all,  and  euery  part  of  the  apparel,  that  came  ncere  his
SeeBdm:  body.  Camyians  girdle  that  he  wore  (as  feemes)  at  71- »

lu&a;.  burne,  (and  I wonder  how  they  milled  the  roape,  that
embraced  his  holy  nccke)  being  cnritched  with  an  out-
landifh  grace,  that  it  came  from  Ierufalem>  (as  Fa:  Ed*
murids  tells  vs,)and  had  there  girded  about  the  fcpulcher  2
©four  Sauiour  Chrift,fihal  tell  you  ftrangcr  newes,  then
Dibdales  jiocMms  did.

A iMtthvwds  deuil  being  a ftiffe  refty  fpirit,  of  kin  (as
feemes)  to  a malt-horfe  offVare}  that  wil  not  out  of  his
way  : had  becne  coniured  at  Hackney  by  Stewp,  and  o-
ther  pricfts,by  the  fpace  of  a moneth.  Mcngus  his  club,
bis  whip,  his  fcare-deuil,  had  bcene  many,  and  fundry
•times  allayed,  the  inuocation  of  the  blefTed  Trinity, ma-

• . nyv


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.  page,  8

ny  times  vfed,  Mtjfa  de  fpintu  fandtoy  (Edmunds  owne
-words)  celebrata  : A chotfe  A'/ajfe  of  the  holy  Cjho'ft  had
beene celebrated, dxca6f\i\\i\\faiiaW  Exorcifmes  had  been
thundered  abroad,  Hie  tamen  mhil quicquam [entire  vifits

efl:  The  fallen  fpirit,  Teemed  not  to  care  for  it  a rufh.

But  when  Edmunds  came  in  accepto  biffino  quodamfuni*
cttlo,  cjuem  tpfe  Edmundus  Campianu i femper fecit ge  fid-
bat,  07-  in  [acrtficijs  vtebatur  (quem  Saluatoris  fep  tile  hr  urn
vtnxijfe  Hierofolymis  folebat  dicere,)  hunc  Sacerdos  ad
latus  applicuit : Ad  cuius  contaftum  hie (lattm  trepidare , et
cont  urban  c cep  it,  dolor em^  etus  prefentia  in  altam  corporis
parte  concejjiffe,  qua  tile  re  perffiefla  eneroumennm  ejje  ma-
nifeflo  deprehendit.  T along  in. his  band, a cerfainc  filken
twiff,  which  Fa:  Campion  did  alwayes  cary  about  with
him,  and  vfed  it  at  the  celebration  of  the  Maffes  and
which  he  often  (aid,  had  beene  at  Icrufalem,  and  girded
our  Sauiourstombe:  applied  the  fame  gently  to  Mar-
woods  fide  5 at  the  touch  whereof,  he  prcfently  began  to
tremble,  and  turrooile,  and  the  paine  of  his  fide  fhifred
into  a new  place,  whereby  8 dmunds  difcerned,that  Mar -
wood  was  a D^moniack  in  deede.  i ,i  t

What  a wonderfull  Saint-maker  is  Tyburne  by  this,
that  in  a quarter  of  an  houre  fhall  mifereate  a Saint,  ^
whofe  girdle,  or  twirt  (prouided  it  be  worne  by  the  old
Saint  at  the  gallowes)  Thai  put  downe  at  fearing  of  a de-
uil  y<Jldengus  his  club-deuil,  whip«*deuil,  fcare-deuil,  the
Maffe,  the  inuocation  of  God  our  Sauiour  Chrift,  the
holy  Ghoft,  and  all  ? 1 doe  very  much  meruaile  there
were  neuer  flrange  miracles  performed  by  the  wood  of
thofe  trees,  confidering  it  hath  beetle  bleffed  by  force  of
their  facred  bodies,  & bedewed  with  their  laft  fpritefull
breath , which  haue  power  to  infufe  their  foueraigne
vertue  into  more  remote  obie&s , and  into  things  of  as
hard, and  repugnant  a confirtence  • It  (eemes  they  haue
changed  courfes  with  the  transfufion  of  miraculous
vertue/unagined  by  their  idle  braines,  to  iflue  from  our

M z bleffed


Pagc, 84*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

bleffed  Sauiour,  at  time  of  his  death : whofc  coatci,  that
he  wore  at  hisblcfied  padion , thy  leaueas  bare,and  na-
ked, without  any  power Full  miraculous  vertue  at  all,  &

. beftow  all  his  diuine  influences  vpon  the  holy  Croflc :
Contrariwife,  thefe  communicate  all  the  riches  of  their
miraculous  graces  vpon  their  girdles,  and  domes : and
leauc  nothing  for  the  poorc  gallowes,  to  grace  them
withall.

But  this  holy  potcntgirdlc  is  notthus  barely  left : You
fhal  hcare  Edmunds  gracing  it  in  an  higher  ftraine.  7*4-
tris  etiamGzmpifacrum  ilium  jumculum  ad latus , & os
vnus  excircumtt  antibus  admomt:  quin  tile  iterum  vehe~
menter  execratur>  el  deteflatur  omnes  eiufmodi  res,  ore  dif»
cerpit , mandit  denttbuSy  conduit , damoni  commendat  illam
rem , qua  tantam  ei  mo[eHtam  faceret , taut  urn  excruciaret%
corpori , & anima  ad  omnia  extrema  perpetienda  caufa  effet .
One  of  the  by- ftanders  takes  father  Camptan  his  (acred
girdle,  and  with  it  touches  the  mouth,  and  fide  of  the
pdTelTedjhe  againc  curfeSj  and  detefts  all  manner  (uch
geare,  he  tearcs  it  with  his  mouth,  bites  it  with  his  teef  Jr,
(pits  vpon  it  amaine  > wifhes  the  deuil  take  that  ill-fauo*
red  thing.that  troubled  him  fo  much,vexed  him  fo  fore,
and  was  rhecaufc  of  his  extreame  torments,  both  in
body, and  rain de.

Now  take  with  you,  I entreafe  you,  a fhort,  and  fweet
Dialogue, betweene the  Iefuit,  and  the  deuil.  Sedqutd
nam  ( inquit  Sacerdos ) pejftme  damon,  fat  ere  ver state  ( non
quod  ego  abs  te,  qui  mendax  ab  initio  fuitti,  verit at em  vo/o
dtfeere ) quid  sTlo  funiculo  it  a torqueris , qui  vel  fortijftm 4
quetf  mundi  tarn  facile  contemnis  ? vnde  ergo  venit  ? Wic-
ked fiend  (faith  Edmunds ) come  on,  goc  to  now,  & tell
true  (not  that  bdefire  to  learne  truth  of  thee,  that  haft
beene  a Iyer  from  the  beginning)  what  is  the  caufe  thou
art  fo  crudly  tormented  with  this  girdle,  who  dooft  not
care  for  flic  potenteft  thinges  that  are  in  the  world  ?
whence  thcnprocecdeth  this  ? Thus  farre  Edmunds  the


in  carting  out  of  Deuits.'  page,8J

deuil  fewer : now  hcare  Edmunds  deuil  Iunior , QX  Mar-
wood,  Edmunds  ghoH  ? Hierofolym a (inquit)  bent  nouit3ad
quern  pertmuit  •>  T iburnus  non  ignorat  ( qui  locus  erat>  vbi
fator  ipfe  Camp:  martyrio  coronatus  erat.)  TumSacerdos
tiffanies  compellatiteffes  inquit  estate,  paths  Camp,  clarif-
firm  martyhj , cuius  hie  vel  rmnutijftmus  funiculus , quern  'ipfi
priusin  vita  nunquam  vtderant , tantasilli  faces  mijcrat,

Icrufalem  (quoth  the  deuil)  knowes  whofe  girdle  it  is.
rTtburne( the  place  where  Fa:C*#*/>:reccaucd  his  crowne
of  marry  rdomcj  is  wcl  acquainted  with  if . Heere  £d-
mundscoMs  aloudeto  all  the  Handers ‘by  > bearewifnes
iny  maiHers  of  Fa:  Camptans  moH  glorious  martyrdom,
whofc  fmalleft  cord,  which  before  that  time,  they  had
neuer  feene  with  their  eyes , hath  caH  the  deuil  into  fuch
an  heate.

See  heere  three  moH  graue,  and  authentike  witnefTcs
ofa  Romifh  Saint : Ierufalem3  Ty burnt,  and  the  dcuil.

And  the  poore  gulls,  that  held  the  candell  to  the  dcuil,
called  in  for  the  fourth,  to  make  vp  a mefle . Campians
Saintfhip  had  been  in  a fairc  taking,  but  for  the  gallows,
and  the  deuil  \ and  would  it  not  doe  any  man  good,  to
be  thus  Sainted  from  hel  ?

And  now  the  dcuil  was  a Sainting , and^that  his  hand
was  in,  it  was  much  ouer-feene  of  Edmunds  the  Prefen-
fer,  that  he  did  not  namehim,  Story , Felton , Sommerm\e3
tsfrden,  Parrie,  Sc  Lopez, 5c  the  reft  of  that  Saint-Tray  ■*
torly  crue,  whom  Ttburne , and  the  dcuil  were  as  famili-
ar with- all,  as  with  S.  Campian  I wis  5 and  knew  as  wcl
the  caufes,  motiues,  and  end  of  their  Saint-ihipsalikc:
the  deuil  himfelfe  hauing  beene  the  Author,  & infpircr
to  them  all,  an<f  therefore  no  doubt  but  he  would  haue
beene  as  kinde  to  them , as  to  S.  Campian  5 and  the
more  the  meric r,&  the  greater  lhouf,&  applaufe  would
haue  beene  of  the  holy  Traytorly  rout , that  were  loo-
kers on,  and  the  Echo  thcfhriller  when  they  cried  : O
&atholtcam fidem  ( O fidem  fat  ho  beam ! and  if  they  be  not

M3  alrea^


page,  86.  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

already  fainted  with  the  deuil,  (as  I trull  if  they  be  dead,
God  gaue  them  better  grace,)  but  if  they  be  liuing,  and
(land  as  lewdly  affe&ed  to  thefe  diabolical  cofenages,  as
heere  they  did,  when  they  held  the  deuil,  alias  Edmunds
thecandel:  if  is  to  be  hartily  wifhed,  they  were  fen t to
the  Creator  of  the  Romifh  Saints , Ttburne  their  foro-
nator,  by  him  to  be  conuayed,  where  Gods  mercy  fhal
defigne.

But  the  clofc  of  thist)ialogue  betweerie  Edmunds,  8c
the  deuil,  or  the  deuil  Edmunds , and  Edmunds  the  deuil,
for  he  played  both  parrs  himfelfe,  is  the  prefied  of  all*
Campians  dreadful  girdle  had  Co  heat  the  deuil,  and  in-
toxicated his  braine,  as  it  made  the  deuil  to  cry  out,  as
youhaue  heard,  O mejiu/tum  et  infehcem , qtii  ifta  dice-
rem ! O foole,  and  wretch  that  I am , for  faying  thus
, much  ! Heere  you  fee  the  deuil  was  cleane  gone,  and

confcfTcth  himfelfe  to  be  out  of  his  wits . And. this  was
but  an  admotion , or  touch  of  the  girdle  5 what  would
thisfacred  twill  haue  done,ifit  had  girt  the  deuil  abouf,
as  it  girt  our  Sauiours  T omb  at  Icrufalcm : verily  it  can-
not be  imagined, what  hel-work  it  wold  haue  wrought:
the  deuil  had  certainly  become  a bedlamitaf  the  lead,
and  then  his  keeper  would  haue  had  fome-what  adoe|
the  club,  and  the  whip,  and  all  muft  haue  walked.

Meanc  while  Cnmptans  Saint-fhip  comes  of  a faire
houfe,and  hangs  by  a goodly  three- fold  threed.  For  the
deuil  heere  now  when  he  dubbed  him,  and  proclaimed
him  a Saint,  is  in  Edmunds  cenfure  a !ier,in  his  own  con-
feflion  a foole.and  by  imputation  a deuil : and  fo  he  was
created  by  a deuil,  a foole,  and  a liar : ^pd  thefe  three  in
one  was  none,  but  Edrmnds  alone,  the  Author,  A&or,
and  penner  of  this  play,  who  deferues  as  worthily  to  be
crowned  at  Ttburne , for  this  foolilh,  fond,  impious  dia-
bolical fafeination , and  to  be  proclaimed  from  hell  for
an  infernal  Saint, as  cucr  Campian.Sc  his  complices  did.

* 1 haue  their  fhirt  behind,  as  the  laftfcruice  to  the  de-
t < uifc


in  carting  out  of  Deni!?*  Page,S7#

uilsnunchion . Which  becaufeitis  not  fo  cleanly,  as  I
couldjwifrijfW  (the  Laundrcfle  to  thefc  deuils  incarnat)
ilhal  ferue  in  this  difh  . Fid  was  wafhing  in  niiliris  PecJ^  jicr

hams  kitchin,  a buckeof  foule  cloafhes:  amongft  the  cxamm;
which,  was  one  of  the  prieft- Exorcirtsfhirts:  the  deuil
comes  fneaking behind  her,  trips  vp  her  heeles,  and  pit-
ches her  on  herhip.and  vpon  that  aduantage,takes  pof-
feflion  of  her  (as  it  feemes  by  the  flory,)  for  from  that
fall  fhe  grew  to  be  poflefled  : And  wote  you  why  the
deuil  playd  her  this  vnmannerly  fneaking  tricke . The
M tracle-maker  fels  vs , it  was  bccaufe  fhee  was  wafhing
out  a foule  fhirt  of  one  of  the  priefls,  and  what  further
matter,  their  examinations  may  with  lcflc  offence  to
your  modefty  report^  then  my  felfe.  I proceede  to  their
pricfUy  attire.

CHAP.,  1 6.

Of  the  wonderjull power , in  a Priefls  <*sFlbc>  his  amice ,
his  maniple,}]  is ftolet  to  whip , and  plague
the  deuilL

He  Heathen,  who  faw  not  God,  and  things  intelli-
gible with  a clecrc  eye , but  with  the  owle-lighf  of
nature,  and  glirnfe  of  theyr  owne  difeourfe , did  deemc
offpirits,  .and  deuils,  that  they  were  aerea  fubftantia,  of
an  ayric  patible  fubftance,  or  els  that  they  were  the  fpi-
ftts  of  naughty  men  departed  this  life  . - According  to
theyr  dimtne  conceit  they  had  fuperftitious  deuifes  3 by
facrifices,  and  charmes,  placandi  manes , and  imperandi
both  5 fometime  to  pleafe  them/omtime  ro  commaund
them,  as  you  may  fee  by  Virgil,  and  other  Poets, in  <*y£-
veas^nd  Thefeus  defcenfions  info  hel . Their  pleartng,
and  foothing  their  angry  d&moncs  was  by  facrifice  .*  their
controling,  checking,  and  commaunding  them,was  by
charmes,  fumigations,  execrations,  lights , facred  veft-
snents,  and  feeptersof  their  confecrated  priefts.

Our  Papifme,  the  corruption  of  thefincerc  wor/Lip

of


• - •

pagc,S8?  A declaration  of  Popifri  impofturc

ofChrift,becing  naught  els  but  a perfeft  apifme,  and
imitation  ofGentiIifme,&  Hethcnifh  fupcrflition,doth
naught  els  but  play  oucr  all  the  toyes,  tricks,  and  frunv*
perics,  of  Ethnick  fuperftition  againe : cfpecially  in  this
matter  of  fcaring,torraeting,&  affixing  of  the  deuil,not  -
only  with  the  body,breafh,fincl, touch,  but  with  the  or-
- dinary  apparel, as  hofe,gloues,girdIe,fhirf,&  as  you  fhal
now  hear, with  the  exterior  ornaments  of  a facrcd  prieft,
as  his  amice, his  albcjiis  Oole^and  the  like.

The  difference  bctwecnc  a Pagan, & a Popifli  prieft,
as  I take  it,  is  this,  that  the  one  doth  ferioufly , and  in
good  fadneffc  perfwade  himfelfe,  that  his  halowcd  per-
fon,charmes,  and  confccratc  attire  , as  his  feepter,  his
crowne,  and  Albc,  doth  awe,  terrific,  and  depcl  the  dc-
uil  indeed : the  other  doth  not  in  earncil  fo  thinkc,  or
drearae,  but  doth  know  the  cleane  contrary,  that  there
is  neither  vertue,  ability,  nor  proportion  in  any  of  thefe
gewgawes,  to  moue  or  fill  the  dcuil  no  more, then  there
is  in  a white  fheet  to  ftare  a fober  man  5 but  dooth  onely
of  impious  policic  aft,  fafhion,  and  play  them,  ad  terro -
rem  incuttendum , &fuc»m  faciendum populo , to  gull,  ter-
rific, and  amaze  the  fimplc  ignorant  people,  and  by
bringing  them  info  an  admiration  of  the  power  of  their
prieft-hood,  the  fanftitie  of  theyr  attire,  andfhediuine
potcncie  of  theyr  Romi/h  Cath:  church,by  this  meancs
to  enchaunt,  5c  bewitch  their  innocent  fimplc  foulcs,  Sc
fo  fo  offer  the  vp  for  a pray  to  their  great  Idoleaf  Rome, ♦
Sec  TtrrellfStempy  and  Tbomfon , three  Reftors  of  this
See  Tirrels  dcuil  tragaedie  doe  put  off  theyr  Romane  vifards,  & tel
exam:  vs  iumpe  as  much.  It  was  theyr  good  nature,  or  rather

aad  Fid?,  . Gods  good  grace,  they  fhould  deale  fo  plainly  with  vs:
but  we  need  not  be  beholden  fo  them , for  this  neccfla-
rickindncffeoneiote : for  by  that  fimcall  the  parts  of
this  trag^die  hauc  been  afted  on  the  Rage,  you  hauc  nc-
uer  a child  of  tenne  yeeres,  that  is  a looker  on , but  will
fee,  and  difcerne  their  grofTe  packing,  rude  bungling,

} and


in  calling  out  ofDeuils*  P*ge»39'

and  palpable  iugling  fo.  apparantlie , as  hee  wil  dare  fo  *
rake  the  deuil  by  the  viiard>&  play  with  the  fooies  nofe,
and  cry : away  with  the  pridl,  and  the  deuil , they  haue
marred  a good  play.

We  are  now  come  to  their  hunting,  and  chafing  the
deuil  with  their  holy  attire.  In  a wel  forted  cry  ofhouds,
the  dogs  are  not  all  ofa  cjualitie,  and  fife : foinc  be  great,  .

Tome  of  a midie,  fortic  of  a low  pitch  : fotne  good  at  a
hotc  chafe,  feme  at  a cold  fpnt : fome  fwift,  and  fhalow,
fotne  flow  and  fure : foine  deepe  and  hollow  mouthed,
fome  verie  pleafant,  and  merrie  at  trade.  So  is  it  in  this
conforted  kennel  of  hell, and  in  thefe  direful  engines,  &

Machines  of  the  Romifh  Church,  to  roufe,  chafe,  and
torment  the  deuil.  The  bodie,&  hand  ofa  facred  prieft,
yee  fee  are  greater  torments  to  the  deuil,  then  hel . His
girdle,  gloues,  and  hofe,  they  arc  the  deuils  fcorpions,&
whyps  (as  ncereff  vnto  the  origen,and  fountaine  it  felfe)
but  his  exterior  ornamenfs(though  ornaments  of  his  o&
fice,  as  his  A mice,  his  Albe,  his  ttole : yet  beeing  more
remote, and  fo  participating  the  vertuc  of  the  prieff,buC
in  wcake  degrees)  be  in  this  deuil- hunting  fport, in  dead
of  little  beagles  to  fill  vp  the  cry  •,  and  yet  by  your  leaue,
fomefime  they  giuc  the  deuil  aihrewd  pinch,  and  ther-
forc  they  be  worth  the  whittling  out,  and  not  to  be  left
in  the  Popes  kennel  at  home.

It  is  not  a light  argument  of  the  facrcd  power  of  an
tsfmice  againtt  a fpirit,that  the  reporter  of  the  Miracles
tolls  vs  s thataprieff  layditvpponJWvirfacetopreucnC  p ,

illufions : and  that  a fpirit  puffed  at  if, and  could  not  cn~
dure  to  let  it  alone.  It  had  as  feemes  a choaking  quality
to  fuffocat  a deuil : and  indeede  Luflie  Dicke,t hat  deuil,
for  all  his  luffier  parts,  had  endyred  a fhrewd  chafe  by  a
long  exorcifme  a little  afore , and  fhewed  himfelfea
luffie  ffout  deuil  ofa  large  winde , and  latting  breath,
that  hee  funke  no  focmer  , and  nowe  beeing  cleane
fpent  and  lying  at  bay,  it  was  but  an  hard  part  of  the

N.  prieft,


page, 90,  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

* pried,  when  he  found  him  panring,  6c  gafping  for  ayre,
after  fo  hote,  and  fore  a chafe,  not  to  breathe  the  deuil  a
little,  but  to  come  vpon  him  with  a fuffocating  csfmtce,
to  quel  him  out-right.

Now  'Sara  tels  vs,  that  it  was  fhe  her  felfe,  that  puffed
at  the  holy  e. Amice , as  becing  none  of  the  fweetefl.  But
• who  was  liked  to  know  bed,  whether  fhee,  or  thejdeuil
puffed  ? I hope  the  pried,  who  knew  the  deuil  as  readi-
ly by  his  puffe,  as  the  deuil  did  him  by  hisfmel . The
pried  (hewed  a good  wit  in  taking  the  deuil  fo  foone .
This  holy  relique  lay  pent  for  want  of  a grace  from  the
deuil, and  the  deuil  beeing  brought  fo  low, had  nothing
but  a puffe,  or  a worfe  ayre  to  vent  vpon  it.

The  holy  <5W<?  was  brought  three  or  foure  times  vp-
pon  the  dage,  and  (hewed  it  (elfe  an  zsfntidtmontacli  of
fpccial  account,  manifefling  it  fclfeto  be  a true  imple-
Sce  Ed-  tnenr,and  hanging  of  the  deuil-quelling  church.  Fird  it
munds  ferued  in  the  nature  of  a ftop-deuiL/m  Fa  lEdmunds  own
tra£t:  hand, who  after  he  had  belabored  the  deuil  with  his  holy

hands  \r\to  Marwoods  head, and  finding  his  hands  heauy
with  the  maflie  waight  of  vertu.e,that  was  compared  in
them  : he  took  the  facrcd  Stole ,6c  wound  it  about  Afar-
iwoods  neck,  and  fo  begirt  the  deuil  in  sJAfarryoods  head,
where  the  deuil  fay  fo  pent,  by  the  vertue  ifluing  out  of
the  blefFed  Stole, ashe  flared, fumed, 6c  fomed,as  he  had
beetle  flarkc  mad,  and  in  the  end  wasfqucafed  out  with
pure  violence,  as  water  out  of  a fquirr.

Page,  14.  The  Miracle-mafler^t  Is  vs  of  an  heroical  combat  per*

formed  betweenc  Maho,  andthepriefl,  during  feauen
hourcs  loiig,  when  Alaho  the  deuil  (landing  Vpp'on  his
guard,  wouldnot  come  in  . He  was  fummotied  by  the
. prieft  firfl  with  club,  then  with  hrs  whip,  with

holy  wafer,  Salde  'reqt'n'a,  Aue  warm,  the  great  Heralds
for  hell \ CMkho  flodde  out,  fill  the  priefl  prepared  him
felfe  (faith  the  Author)  to  affli&him  with  the  Stoic,  and
tlien  he  camcin/and  yeefded  to  parly;  or  dialtfgtie  with

''  the


1


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.*  page>9i«

the  prieft,in  a milde,  and  temperate  voyce . See  the  po-
wer of  the  CatholiqueRomilh  church,  whofe  feelieft
ragge  hath  power  to  change  the  deuils  roaring  note,  6c
to  caufe  him  to  fpeake,in  a milde  moderate  key.

This  bleflfed  implement  hath  in  it,  as  you  fee*  a fling-
ing cord  for  a deuil , more  then  iJMengw  whip:  and
how  was  the  poore  deuil  then  rent,  battered,  and  torne,
may  we  deeme : when  for  not  telling  his  name , he  was
cnioyned  vntrufTe , and  to  take  quietly  flue  lafhes  with
the  Stole, fkithal  which  was  worft  of al,&I  am  fure  went
mofl  againfl  his  ftomacke,  being  an  haughty  fpirit)  was
commaunded  to  kifle  the  rod,  and  to  fay  ouer.  With  a
lamentable  trembling  voyce  iy  Auemaries , flue  for
our  Ladies  fiue  forrowes,  fiue  for  her  fiue  ioyes,  & fiue
for  her  fiue  glories.  And  all  this  the  deuil  mofl  dutifully
performcdjlikc  a dutiful  obedient  fonne  to  his  curfl  ho-
lie  Mother,  the  holy  church  of  Rome . But  heare  you
fellow  Comedians : heere  you  had  like  to  haue  fpoi-
led  the  play,  for  you  belaboured  your  Fid,  your  fellow
fhe- deuil, with  your  Stole  fo  hard,  as  fhe  whined  indeed,
and  in  choler  had  like  to  haue  pulled  off  her  deuils  vi-
zard, and  fhewed  her  owne  face , and  to  haue  told  the
Spe&ators,  that  fhe  was  'Fid,  your  kinde  fidler  in  deed,
and  no  he-deuil,  God  wore,  & that  /he  knew  the  time,
when  you  would  haue  laboured  her  more  kindly*,  for
fhe  felt  this  flole- whipping,  three  or  foure  dayes  after:  Seeker
and  had  the  marks  of  it  vppon  herarmes  longer  to  be  exanu
feenc . But  fhe  remembred,  you  would  finde  time,  and
place,  with  kinder  vfage  to  make  her  amends,  therefore
fhe  was  content  for  once  fobeare  if.  '

Latet  anguis  in  herba : a man  would  little  fufpe£f,when
he  meetes  with  the  Amice,  the  Stole , and  fhe  UWaniple,
wound  vp  in  a little  casket,  that  there  were  fuch  blackc
hel-mettal  within  them,  to  excoriat,  and  lancinafe  a de-
uil: and  it  grieues  me,  Iconfefle,  when  I fee  our  little
children,  when  they  haue  them , how  they  in  a natural

Ns-  chil-


page ,92.  A declaration  oFPopifh  impofturc

childifb  indinft,  doe  take  the  for  fit  gawd cs  to  trick  vp
their  babies  with- all : and  thcmfelues  doe  put  them  for
fport,  fomc  vpon  their  ownc  fingers,  fomc  vpon  their
breads,  fomevpon  their  foreheads:  and  a little  I mufc
when  I fee  it  (confidcringthe  infufed  diuine  vertqe,  in-
herent in  this  facred  gearc , to  difeouer  , manifed,  and
torment  the  deuil)  how  it  commcth  to  pafTe  that  we,  8c
our  children  being  in  Edmunds,  and  the  Catholiques  a-
pinions  all  of  vspoflefTed , that  rhefe  potent  Engines*
doe  not  fhew  forth  their  manifeding , tormenting  vir-
tue in  none  of  our  little  children,  & caufc  them  to  tum-
ble, foame,  and  fpeake  fudian,  as  they  doc  in  theyr'
owne.

To  this  may  be  aunfwered,  that  we,  and  our  children
be  out  of  their  church,  and  fo  out  of  the  fph^re  of  the
a&iuitic  of  thefe  holy  Iewels  2 and  then  that  this  is  not  a
feated  fixed  vertue  in  thefe  nouels,  but  a mouingtrnn-
fitiue  grace,  that  goes  out,  and  in,  in  them,  like  a fhirrle
in  a Weauers  loome . But  Sara , and  Fid  doe  furnifh  vi
with  an  apter,  and  fuller  aunfwer,then  both : that  is, that
Wc  arc  notidonea  fubietta,  not  fit  matter  for  thefe  deuil-
powers  to  work  vpon, till  we  haue  been  at  their  fchoolc,
and  haue  learned  to  fpel  our  horne-bookc,&  the  CrofTc
rowc  with  them : For  they  thcmfelues  at  fird,  were  no
more  moued  with  an  Amice,  and  a Stole,  then  they  were
with  a dift>clouf,and  a malkin,til  they  had  taken  out  an
holy  leflon  out  of  the  prieds  play  bookc$,and  then  they
fck  an  hcate,  that  they  wid  not  of  before.

It  is  a currant laic  of  Achilles , that  his  mother  Thetis
dipped  him  in  the  Sea,  all  but  his  heele,  & fo  made  him
impenetrable  againd  the  point  ofany  wcapon.Our  ho-
lie  Exorcids  haue  furely  beene  plunged  in  the  Riuer
Styx , in  their  holy  attire : for  they  haue  neither  fpcckof
their  body,nor  ragge  belonging  vnto  them,but  it  is  hel-
proofe,  and  deuil-proofe  altogether  5 and  that  which
Achilles  had  not,  it  hath  befidesa  power  dcftru&iuei


r


in  carting  out  of  DeuilsJ  page,  95

and  trium pliant  ouerhel,  and  the  deuil.  The  Priefls
poorc  Maniple  that  an  ignorant  Landrefle  would  fcarce
Iiaue  bellowed  the  wrincing  vpon,  put  about  Trayfords
peck  (faith  the  miracle- founder)  baricadoed  vp  the  de-
uil in  Trayfords  head,  that  he  durrt  not  flirre , and  there
he  floode  fo  diflreffcd  for  want  of  prouant , that  with  a
penny  Moufe-trap  you  might  hauc  caught  him  with-
out a bayt  at  Trayfords  right  care.

Thefe  priefts  difements  being  feuerally  fo  many  in-
fernal ferpents  and  Scorpions,  to  fling,  and  bite  the  de-
uil : what  would  you  fay,  if  you  fee  the  poore  deuil  en-
• Cured  in  them  altogether,  and  entangled  in  this  facred
geare,  as  C JWars  was  in  Vulcans  net?  How  pittifully,ima-
gine  you, would  he  look,fo  fee  himfelfe  fo  prieft- bitten,
as  tALfofs  Foxe  was  flic-bitten  ; and  how  would  hee  Page.*? I
winch,  skip,  and  curuet,hauing  fo  many  fiery  needles  in
his  skin  at  once  ? In  this  woful  plight  the  (wonder-wri-
ter) prefents  him  to  your  view , telling  you,  that  for  en-
creafeof  his  torment  , they  flripped  Sara  of  her  gar-
ments, and  put  vppon  her  body,  all  the  prierts  imple-
ments at  once  5 and  then  how  they  tricked  Saraes'dcui],
being  adorned  with  their  prieflly  robes,  let  the  deuil,  or  See  her
Sara  tell : I hauc  other  Cod-fifh  in  water,  that  mufl  not  cxam:
be  forgotten.

CHAP.  17.

Certaine  questions  aunfrvered , concerning  the  Church  of
'Rome  her  making,  and  accumulating  yet  more
dreadfull  tooles , and  engines  for
the  deuill .

*T*Here  is  no  good  natured  man  (aslthinke)  that
X fliould  heare  of  thefe  various , and  dreadfull  whyps
fpoken  of  before,  to  beinflifled  vpon  thedeuils  backe
inaficrieconfort  at  once,  but  would  hauefomc feeling
gemorfc  of  the  paincs  of  the  deuil,  and  fay  with  the  wo-

N 3 full


page, 94*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impoflure

full  man , mne  non  eft  nous  plaga  locus : there  is  no  free
place  left  vppon  the  deuilsskinne  for  any  new  lafh.  But
when  this  good  natured  man  fhal  heare  of  the  more  va-
rious, and  more  direful  not  whips, but  fcorpions,flings,
and  fiery  ferpents  of  the  holy  Church  : the  blacke  gloo-
mie  armour,embellifhcd  the  thicke  fmoake,  & va-
pour of  hell  5 the  fwords, darts,  and  fpeares  of  fire, pom*
ted  with  grifiy  death,  that  the  Church  doth  arme  her  in*

. » fernall  fouldiers  ( the  Exorcifls ) withalf,  again!!  the
princedome  and  power  of  hell , hee  will  cry  out  with
( JVLarwoods  tormented  deuil,  terra  dehtfceyne  fentiam  illas
plagas,  earth  fwallow  mee  vp , before  I come  neere  the  *
fcorch  of  thofe  flames.

And  thefe  are  in  a blacke  row , as  they  ftand  in  the
blacke  Miracle  booke,  holy  wafer,  holy  candle,  halo-
wed  frankenfence,halowed  brimflone,  the  potion,  the
crofle,the  facrament,  reliques : the  pi&ureofan

Alfe  burnt  in  fire,  nicknames  to  the  dcuil,thepi»fljureof
our  Lady,  Aue  Maries tfalue  %eginaes , the  prefence  of
S.  Barbara , and  the  prefence  of  our  Lady : which  you
mull  read  oucr  very  filently,  leaf!  the  deuil  hearing  the
names , you  heare  him  prefently  roare  vppon  you  for
feare.

The  Poets,  to  flrike  vs  with  a terror  of  the  torments
of  Styx,  doe  prefen  t before  our  eyes,  the  three  Eumeni -
des  fillers,  the  Furies,and  tormentors  of  hell , with  black
vgly  vifages,  grifly  with  fmoake , with  whips  of  blood,
and  fire  in  theyr  hands,  theyrarmes  gored  with  blood:
and  a huo-e  bunch  ofa  thoufand  fnakes  crawling  down
theyr  haire.  Let  me  prefent  you  an  Exorcifl,  armed  by
the  Church  at  all  poynts,  to  encounter  hell, and  the  de-
uihyou  wit  laugh  the  Eumenides  from  of  the  flage.  Firft
I mud  fet  him  before  your  view  ( as  hee  is  in  fhew ) a
thumbe-annoinfed  priefl,  accomplifhed  in  his  holy
geare,  in  his  albe,  his  amice,  his  maniple , and  his  ftolc :
now  imagine  him  as  he  is  indeed,  and  as  you  haue  heard

• .of


in  calling  out  of  Deuils*  ‘

of  him  for  hel : his  body  a piller  of  burning  brafle , his
hands  flames  of  fire,  his  gloues,  his  girdle,  hishofc,  his
(hirt, lumps  of  fea-coalcs  of  hell : his  amice,  his  maniple,
and  his  Hole,  ftrearaers  of  fcorching  fmokc , the  facra-
ment  of  ^ore-blood  in  one  hand,  the  erode  of  tormen-
ting coales  in  the  other : fproutmg  out  noly- water  with
his  mouth,  breathing  out  fire,  andbrimllone  at  his  no-
ffrils,cuaporatingfrankinfenceat  his  eyes,  thepifturc
of  an  afle  burning  brimly  at  his  earcs,  his  head  crawling
with  dead-mens  bones:  the  pi&ure  of  our  Lady  Raffl-
ing at  hisbreaft:  nicknames  of  fire,  and  blood  running
Vpon  his  backc,  aue-marief,  and  falue  Regimes  fparkling
downetohisheelcs : what  a little  hcl  doe  you  imagine
walking  vppon  the  earth  ? And  ere  you  flirre  your  ima-
gination, doe  but  imagine  him  a little  fuither , walking
in  our  London  flreets  a little  before  day  light, what  time
the  Chimny-fweepers  vfe  to  make  theyr  walke,and  cry-
ing in  hisjiellifh  hollow  voyce,  hay  ye  ere  a demlto  druse*
hayyee  ere  a wench  to  fire  ? hayyee  ere  a hoy  to  difpofeffe?
Whaf  afearctrow  yee  would  the  fpirit  be  intoheare
young  hell  thus  roare,  and  how  would  belabour  to  get
out  at  the  parties  breech,  as  Htachto  did  at  Trayfards , be-
fore hee  would  dare  to  looke  this  hell-mouth  on  the
face  ?

Heere  now  comes  in  a bundle  of £)H<zres3  that  fleppe
ouerour  way, and  will  needes  haue  parlic  with  vs  ere  we
go  any  further:firfl,  whence  deriue  thefe  fierie  weapons
theyr  vigor, and  flrength  of  goring  the  deuil*  which  you
call  the  publiquearmes,  andenfignes  of  the  Church?
To  this  1 aunfwer,  that  thefe  publrquc  weapons  of  holy
Church,  that  you  haue  heard,  feme  haue  their  flrength,
and  power  of  themfelues,  as  the  facrament,  and  the
Crofle : fome  of  the  inftitution  ofjioly  Church  , as  ex-
orcifmes , aue-maries , falue  Regimes , &c,zt.  fome  from
the  conferuation,  and  halowing  of  the  Church  to  thefe
potent  ends,  and  effects : as  holy  water,  holy  candle^ho-

•'  ly

- ' *


page, 9s'-


ge,^  A declaration  of  Popifh  impoftnre

ly  brimfione,  holy  Frankcnfencc,  and  the  holy  potion,
nick-names,  and  chc  Afics  cares.

And  if  hecrcuppon  a wil  demaund,  ad  quid

perditio  b*c  ? what  needes  the  holy  Church  to  open  her
Armorieforhei,  andmufierouc  her  fiery  weapons  in
fuch  troupes,  and  throngs,  confidering,  thatcuery  one
oftheyr  thumbannointed  priefis  (as  yec  hauc  heard)
doth  at  his  holy  vnflion,  receiue  this  hcatc,  and  fire  into
his  hand  and  his  body,  by  the  oyle  of  his  thumbe,  wher-
by  he  is  able  with  all  his  holy  implements,  that  hang  vp**
pon  his  backe,  to  fire  out  the  firongefi  deuil  in  hel,with
his  ownc  proper  hands , & his  hotc  holy  geare : as  Ed-
munds did  C Marvpoods  deuil,  and  ‘Dibdalc  did  fire  Mal:9
out  of  Sara  with  his  fiery  engines : this  I fee

doth  not  wel  obferue.

I haue  touched  before , that  though  euery  priefl  be
indeed  annoynted  with  holy  oyle  on  his  thurobe^nd  by
that  oyle  doth  receiue  in  that  deuil-burning  heatc,  that
doth  dilate  it  fclfe  through  his  body,  garments,  and  all.*
yet  becaufc  euery  priefl  doth  not  bring  his  thumb  pre-
pared, and  cjualficd alike, but  fomchaue  a Millers, fome
a fouters,  fome  a Colters  thumb,that  wil  not  take  in  oyle
wel,  and  then  fome  fiand  remote,  and  a fquint/roro  the
funne  of  light,  and  miraculous  heatc  of  Fa:  Ignatius,  the
Miraclc-maificr,  it  falls  out,  that  theyr  burning  glaflcs
doe  not  fo  readilie  take  fire,  and  their  dcuil-worke  by
their  holy  hands.  & holy  geare,  doth  not  alwaies  fortu-
natly  fuccecd.  Yca,it  falls  out  many  times  by  your  leaue*
that  the  fubieft:  where-vppon  they  fhould  worke  being
indifpofed,  as  not  well  managed , and  prepared  by  the
priefi  (as  what  fire  can  burne  where  the  matter  is  not
combufiible,  andoftouch)  the  priefis  fire  isfiriken,&
no  great  combufiion3dooth  enfue : and  thisfeemes  the
* caufe  there  was  fo  little  fire- worke  between  Anne  Smithy
and  them : and  fometime  the  priefis  powder  it  felfc,  for
want  of  good  looking  to, is  danke,  and  then  though  the

firokc

*


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils,  page,

ftrokebe  good,  no  great  fparklcs  doe  arife.

It  was  therefore  wifely  forefeenc  by  the  prouidence,
and  deepe  infighc  of  theyr  kinde  Mother  theyr  holy
Church,  to  prouidc  them  copus Juccedaneas,  feconding
and  ffcfh  fupplics  of  fire-wor  kes ; that  if  their  ownc  fire
doe  faile,  they  may  light,  and  fire  it  againe  at  the  Chur-
ches holy  candle.  Yea fomehmes they  light  vpponfuch
a laxe,  watry,  andreumatickc  deuil,  that  hec  fquirts  out
the  priefts  fire,  the  holy  brimftone,  holy  candle, and  all :
and  goes  laughing  away.  This  is  when  they  are  too  bu-
fie,  and  imprudently  apply  theyr  fire-worketo  oppo-
fitely,  and  dire&ly  againft  the  deuils  fpouting  place : 6c
then  there  is  no  way  but  to  windevp  all  their  holy  trin-
kets in  a capcafe,  and  to  ayre  them  handforaly  againe  at
the  next  pitch  fora  deuil.

If  the  Sceptick  wil  pry  higher,6cdemaund,whcnce  the
Pope,  6c  his  confiftory  doe  borrow  that  diuine  power,
toconfecrate  wafer, candle,  britnftonc,  Frankincenfe,
potions,  Exorcifmes,  nick-names , and  afles  eares,  and
to  fublimare  theyr  nature,  6c  pur  into  them  fuch  a fiery
fcorching  flame,as  fhal  turne  the  info  fcrpcms,and  fcor-

Eions,  to  bite  and  (ting  the  deuil,  and  to  fire  him  out  of
is  hold,  as  men  fmokc  out  a Foxe  out  of  his  burrow  ;
thefe  beeing  of  theyr  ownc  nature,  and  infhew,  filly
poorc  ftuffc  to  hold  fuch  diuine  facultie  in  them  ? This
is  a fauciequeftion,  and  deferues  to  be  aunfwered  with
fcorne.  But  becaufe  wee  wil  giue  reafon  of  all  that  pro-
ceeds from  that  facred  head  5 wel  may  his  holmes , and  his
Chapter, doc  as  much  as  S.  'Veter  did : for  as  for  our  Sa-
uiour,  and  his  holy  Apoftles,  wee  neuer  read  that  they
halowed  candle,  nor  dealt  with  nick-names , and  Afles
tares,  in  cafting  out  deuils,  but  of  'Veter , by  your  leaue,
there  lies  a tale,  and  that  is  this,  as  TbjrtHs  doth  tel  it  out
of  one  Martinus  a Saint.

Stmon  the  Sorcerer,fent  vnfo  Veter  the  Apo-

ftlccertaine  deuils  in  the  likenes  of  dogges,  todeuoure

O.  the


97«


page,  9$.'  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

the  blefled  Apoflle  S.  Peter  being  taken  on  a fuddaine,
not  looking  For  fuch  currifh  guefts,  (as  beeing  belike  at
dinner)  confecratcs  on  a fuddaine  cerfainc  morfels  of
bread, and  throwes  them  to  the  dogge-deuils3and  by  the
power  of  that  bread,  they  were  all  put  to  flight.  And  is
not  this  a faire  tale  of  Simon  and  his  hel-dogges,  that
would  haue  fnapt  vp  S.  Veter , but  onely  for  a foppe  of
bread  2 and  is  it  not  a faire  flrong  thred  to  hang  a whole
cafllc  of  fire-works  vpon  ? Martin  hath  a black  braine,
conceiting  bul-bearcs,  and  black  band  dogges  of  Saint
Peter , Ergo  the  Pope,  and  his  Church  haue  authority,
and  power , to  confecrate  and  hallow  water,  oyle,  fait,
wax,brimflone,  frankenfence,  porions,  Exorcifmes,
nicknames,  and  afles  cares , and  to  put  in  them  a fcor-
ching  fire  to  findge  the  deuils  beard  Becaufe  the  confc-
quencc  is  fo  validous,  we  wil  lookc  a little  info  tbefe  ho-
ly fire.works,  but  very  fparingly,  and  curforily,  for  hoi*
ding  you  too  l6ng,  in^hefe  vnfauory  perfumes.

CHAP.  1 8.  1

ff  Of  the  dreadfu.il  power  of  holy  water , halowed  can  dell,
Eranhincenfe , BrimBone}the  hoohe  of Exorcifmes , and  the
holy  potion,  feald,  broyle , andtojizle
the  deuill,

< J F you  look  vpon  the  bare  face  of  thefe  holy  Engines,

you  wi!  fake  them  for  very  trifles,  andtoves:  but  I
muft  fay  vntoyou  in  good  fadnes,  as  the  wife  Orator
of  Romcfaid  ofomiffion  of  like  trifles  in  another  fence?  V'J
Ittis  minutijs  concidit  rejp : Tfomana : the  common-weale
of  Rome  fell  by  omitting,  and  neglefting  thofepettie
fhinges : fo  ifhs  minutes  conflitit  Ecclef:  Romana  : the
Church  of  Rome  hath  becne  founded,  pillard,&  prop-
ped vp,  onely  by  thefe  gawdes,  trifles,  and  toyes : fo  as
Anthony  fold  frajfus,  when  hee  had  caried  a caufe  by  *
affe&ing  the  people  with  his  gefturc,  and  teares,  nifi pu-

1 . ' " ens.


' in  cafting  out  of  Dcuils.  page

eris,  et  Uchrymis  vfus  ejfet , ptnas  dedtjfet  . But  for  little
boyes, and  the  Orators  famed  feares,  his  Client  had  loft
ihe  day : wee  may  truly,  and  plainly  tell  the  Church  of
Rome,  ni[t  ndotijs,  trtcis,  cd- pup  pis  vfaeffet9p<znas  mm  diu
dedtjfet : If  it  were  not  for  puppcts,ape$-faces,&  gaudes,
with  which  fhc  allures,  maskes,  and  difguifes  the  poore
feely  people,  fhe  had  long  fince  fung  the  doleful  fong,
mentioned  in  holy  writ  :Defolatione  magna  defolata  eft,

& turpitude  etus gentibus  reuelata  : That  is,  fhe  had  /ten
cleane  dejolate , her  turpitude  had  heene  opened, to  the  eyes

of  all  the  world .

It  is  a point  ofhigh  fapicncc  in  the  Church  of  Rome,

Co  choofe,  and  felc&  out  thefe  poore  bafe,and  impotent
Elements,  as  water,  oyle,  candel,  and  the  reft*,  for  her
champions,  torraenfers,  and  monfter- beaters  of  de-
tiils.  Firft,  for  that  thefe  elements  be  obuitius,  eafie,  and
common,fo  as  a deuil-Comedy  may  be  plaid  in  a ehira-
nies  end,  with  an  halfe  peny  worth  of  coft . Next,  for
that  eucry  kitchin-maide.  Hob, and  Iohn,  doth  wel  fee,
and  know,  that  a fpoonful  of  water,  a curfie  of  oyle,and
a candels  end  can  haue  of  themfelues  no  power,  and
ftrength  *,  to  fcald,broy!e,or  torture  a deoil : now  when
this  good  Hob,  Ioho,  or  Side  dial  bring  a fpoonful  of
Water,  a curfie  of  oyle,  or  a candels  end  to  the  prieft,and
he  flial  erode,  bldlc,  andchaunt  ouer  if  a few  broken
words : and  then  prefently  after,  Hob,  Iohn  , and  Side
fhal  fee  the  very  fame  water,  and  candels  end  applied
towards  the  nofe  of  a fuppofed  Demoniack  wench,  and
then  fhal  thinke,  they  heare  the  deuil  to  roarc,  fume,  &
tremble,  is  it  any  mcruaile  that  the  poore  Conies  doe
ponder,  and  cric  out.  O Catholicamfidem ! Ofidem  Ca -
tholicam  ! 0 the  (fatholiejue  faith ! O the  power  of the  faith
(fatholiejue ! Many  deuifes  they  haue  to  grace  thefe  pup-
pets, andtoyes,  for  the  gayning,  and  winning  thisap-
plaufe,  and  acclamation  of  the  people,  which  is  one  of
the  chiefe  ends,  where-vnto  the  aftors,  and  Comedians
cj  O2  avme*

0

I


pagc,loo#  A declaration  of  Popifti  impofture

aymc.  Firfi,  it  mufi  befoa&ed,  and  nandfomly  con-
ticyed,  that  it  may  fecmc,  and  appearc,  that  as  the  dcuil
cannot  abide  the  name,  the  approach,  the  fight,  the
fm.el , the  breath,  the  touch , the  apparel,  or  the  orna-
ment of  aCatholique  priefi  (which  is  one  of  thedc-
monftratiue  fignes  of  a dcuil  in  the  party  : ) no  more
mufi  the  deuill  abide  the  fprihklingof  holy  water,  nor
Booke  of  *hc  approch  ofan  halowed  candle.This,^™?/  fhe-dcuil
miracles,  affed  wel  in  the  beginning  of  her  parf,crying.^^  with
page.  14.  fo0iy  watery  holy  candle , and  the  Crojfe , they  make  mine
eyes fore .

The  next  grace  we  find  of  this  holy  element,  is  to  al-
lay,  and  mitigate  the  force  of  the  deuil, and  to  bring  the
partie  out  ofan  extafie  to  her  felfe  ♦ This  Sara  perfor-
med very  laudably  to , being  in  a very  firangc  fit , part
hearing,  feeing,  fmelling,  and  all,  after  three  draughts  of
holy-water,  fhe  came  vnto  her  felfe : and  therefore  the
Page.25.  Author  tcls  vs,  that  the  ordinary  remedies  to  be  applied
in  a fit,  were  holy  water,  reliqucs>and  the  Croflc.

And  fee  the  wonderous  Antipathie  betweene  this  fa-
cred  element,  and  the  deuil , if  it  come  neerc  the  deuils
nofe,he  findeth  it  firaight,firfi  by  the  finch  for  you  mufl
remember,  that  all  this  confecrate  holy  geare  haue  one,
and  the  felfe  fame  fmel  5 as  the  church,  the  priefis  body,
his  neather-ftocks,  and  all : that  is,  fuch  a ranke  Tenting
■ • fauour,  that  as  foone  as  they  come  neere,  the  deuil  ferns

them  ftraight,  and  cries  out  oh . So  faith  the  miracle-
blazer  that  there  being  fo  final  a drop  of  holy  wafer  put
into  Saras  drinke,  as  no  mortal  man  could  difeernethe
tafi  5 as  foone  as  it  came  neere  Sdrafhz  writhed  her  face,
and  bad,  Haue  it  away.  And  two  glaffes  being  brought
her,  one  of  confecrate,  the  other  common  water,  this
xanke  fauour  was  fo  validous,  and  firong,  that  it  fented
through  theglafle,  and  firokehcr  on  the  nofe,  fo  as  flic
pointed  direttlyto  the  halowed  glafle^  1 , Whereas
water  of  it  owne  nature  is  refrefliing , and  comfortable

to


in  cafling  out  of  Deuils.1  page*I6l

to  the  eyes : your  holy  water,  hath  a piercing  pernicious
quality,  foas  the  deuil  complaincs  atfirft  fight , as  you
heare,  that  it  makes  his  eyes  fore  : and  indeede  you  wa-
tered him  fo  much,  that  you  made  him  ftarke  blind,  fo
as  hee  could  not  finde  the  way  out  of  Sara , but  foyled
himfelfe  like  a beetle,  where  hcfrould  not  hauc  come.

And  the  noter  of  thefc  gay  miracles  faith , that  Sara , or
her  deuil,  became  a fprinkler  too,  (fhe  had  been  fo  long
amongft  priefts , as  fhe  was  entered  into  their  holy  or-
dcrs)and  that  fhe, or  her  deuil, by  the  pure  vertue  ofholy
Water, made  a deuil  let  goe  his  hold  vpon  Tray  fords  lege*
where  he  was  faft  feafed,  in  the  likenes  of  a T oadc  and  Page.27^
that  free,  or  her  deuil  likewife,  with  a few  fprinckles
of  the  fame , made  the  deuil  that  came  fo  Trayford  into
his  chamber,  in  the  likenes  of  an  Englifr  Minifter,  and
Was  dilTwadfng  him  from  the  Catholique  Romifr
church,  to  betake  him  to  his  heeles,and  for  haft  fo  leap
out  at  the  window,  without  faking  his  leaue . I fee  your
church  vvil  entertainc  he-Exorcifts,  and  fre-Exorcifts
both,&  Saras  deuil  for  a neede,for  an  exorcift  too : and
yet  the  poore  wench,  or  the  deuil,  that  by  the  vertue  of
holy  water,  could  fcare  away  two  deuils  from  Trayford ,

(one  in  the  likenes  of  a Minifter,  the  other  of  a Toad : )

- had  not  the  grace  to  befprincklc  herfelfe,  but  kept  her
deuils  ftil . Marie  this  was  of  no  ill  meaning,  be  fure,
they  were  referued  for  your  owne  fingring,  krnde  indi-
giting  holy  priefts.

And  is  it  not  great  pitty,that  all  this  faire  water  frould
be  fpoiId,&  tainfed,with  one  crap  of  a word,dropt  out
Sara  flnce : that  all  this  holy  water  grace,  was  (as  all  the
reft:) bare  coggery,6cdeui fed  ad  ornandam  fcenam>\o  fur-
nifh  out  the  play,  and  to  bring  into  requeft  againc  thefe
old  water  glafles  of  the  church, that  for  want  offale,had
fioode  fo  long  on  their  fr  elues,  as  they  grew  fully,  and
naught.

Let  not  good  father  Edmunds  be  difeouraged  for  all

Pj  thifc


page,io2*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

this,  for  he  fhal  be  beleeued  neuer  the  worfc  5 who  in  his
learned  treatife,  prefixed  to  this  Diarie  of  miracles  (tou-
ching the  power,  and  cuftorac  of  the  Romifh  Church/
for  difpoflefling  of  deuils)in  enucleating  the  diuinc  ver-
tues,  powers,  and  dignities  of  things,  confecratcd  by
holy  Church,  for  commaund  ouer  details,  fets  out  holy
water  for  his  graund  champion  , to  encounter  all  com-
mers : telling  vs  that  worthy  memorable  ffory  of  Saint
Macarius , for  demonff  ration  of  all : who  by  the  onely
fprincklingof  holy  wafer  did  remorphize  an  olde  wo-
man,that  had  been  turned  into  a Mare.The  miracle  had
beenc  ftronger,  if  fhe  h^d  been  turned  into  a horfe.

And  yet  I truft  you  wil  not  fay,  but  that  this  holy  wa-
ter was  (Irong  enough  thus : for  Circes  drench  could
doe  little  more,  that  turned  V/yJfes  men  into  Swine:  and
yet  that  was  fame  to  be  taken  downe,  ere  it  could  doe
the  feate  5 this  onely  befprincked,  did  turne  a Mare  into
a woman  againe.

Lucians  oyntment  I confcfTe  (that  he  got  a little  of  by
peeping  in  at  a creuifc,  and  fpying  the  Witch  annoynt
her  body  withall,)  came  ncere  the  force  of  this  forcible
water  of  Rome,  For  Lucian  tels  vs  himfelfc,  that  by  that
time  hee  had  annointed  himfelfe  aH  oucr  with  that  cn-
chaunfed  oyle,  he  was  turned  info  an  AfTe,  and  that  hee
fb  liued  by  the  fpace  of  fix,  or  feauen  yeeres  in  the  fhape
of  an  Aflc.vnder  very  cruell  maifterslthat  whipped  him
forc,asvnder  a Gardiner,  a tyleman,a  Corier,and  fuch
like: and  that  at  laft  hee  was  metamorphofed  into  the
fhape  of  a man  by  eating  of  Rofes.  What  would  a little
of  that  Afle-making  oyle  doe,  if  it  had  the  good  hap  to
be  bleffed , and  fuper-charmed  by  his  BleflednelTc  at
Rome?  y

Well,  this  holy  wafer  of  Rome  had  as  fayre  a difeent,
as  that  Lucian  oyle,  for  that  did  come  from  a Witch  of
Tkeffaha,  and  this  holy  wafer  doth  come  from  the  witch
of  ‘Detfhos,  of  whom  the  Roman  Poet  faith  thus. Spar-
J i Q * git


in  carting  out  ofDeuik*  Page,io$

jit  aqua  captoj  luSIrali  Grata  facer dos  : whence  Kama
Pomp  thus  the  grand  forcerer,  6c  the  Popes  grand  foun-
der of  holy  trinckefsfooke  it : and  of  him  the  Romans
Wifard  Pope  Sixtus , or  Pope  Alexander  begged  it,  6c
hath  left  it  for  an  holy  deuil-  whippe  to  his  deerc  mother
Church.  . '

And  hcerc  I mud  needcs  confefic  a flippe  of  my  me-
mory, (as  who  can  beareall  thisdrcadful  hel-gearcin
his  head  without  a furchargc)  that  before  1 had  recoun-
ted you  the  wonderful  powers  of  this  qua  fortu  to
feald  out  a deuil, and  make  a woman  of  a mare, I fliould
haue  acquainted  you  how  the  Miracle-minter  in  his  mi-
racle booke  doth  folemnly  tell  vs,  that  the  deuil  himfelfe
did  folemnly  proclaime  from  hel,  that  there  were  fourc
dreadful  deuibfeourges  in  the  prieds  holy  budget : holy
water,  balowed  candle,  frankcnfence,  and  the  booke  of
Exorcifmes:  whereby  you  may  plainly  fee,  that  with
theyr  intoxicating  potions,  they  had  confounded  the
deuils  wits,  and  made  him  as  wife  as  goodman  Buttons
boy  of  Walthamx  who  hauing  bccne  vfed  to  be  beaten,
fometime  with  birch,  fometime  with  apple-tree  twiggs,
fometime  with  Willow,  fells  his  Maidcr  wifely,  that  of
all  three  apple-tree  was  the  word,  whereby  his  Maider
knew  how  to  ding  him  the  more  foundly . And  what
needs  now  any  more  wier-Jrawing , and  prophaning
of  holy  feripture,  for  the  founding,  6c  crediting  ofyour
enchaunted  water  ? it  hath  the  fame  warrant  of  his  foue-
raigntie,  as  Camptan  had  of  his  martyrdome,  hel,  6c  the
deuil,  ip  fa  dixit , who  you  know  doth  not  vfe  to  faile.

* But  Sara  Williams  tcls  vs,  that  die  faid  no  fuch  thing,
and  that  the  prieds  themfelues,for  the  better  gracing  of
ihofc  foure  holy  fcourges,  were  the  deuils  Heralds,  and
did  proclaime  them  in  her  narae,or  the  name  of  the  de-
uil, and  fo  put  it  downe  in  theyr  Miracle-booke  as  the
deuils  owne  words.  As  they  were  faine  at  euery  turnc,
in  her  fits,  pageants,  and  traunces,  to  help  out  the  deuil
s*  • m


page,io4*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture .

in  her  part  becing  oft  non  plus,  and  many  things  falling
in  better  extempore,  to  grace  the  play  withall , then  that
which  was  meditated  and  fetdowne  in  her  part.  And
therefore  they  would  often  fay,  and  write  downe,  that
Saras  deuil  faid  thus,  and  fo,  where  none  but  the  prieft-
deuil  himfelfe,  who  played  three  parts  in  one,  forntime
the  pried,  fomcrinies  the  deuil , fometimes  the  deuils
prompter,  or  Interpeter  (as  the  puppets  haue  alwaies
a mimicall  prolocutor  to  tel  what  they  meane)  faid  one
word.

And  why  might  not  they  fo  keepe  the  ftage  ful,  cog
in  a deuil  when  they  lifted,  as  gamefters  cogge  in  a Die:
when  sAga^arim  the  Iefuit  tcls  vs , that  hee  hauing
brought  from  Rome  certaine  halowed,  holy  graines,  &
hauing  giuen  them  to  his  holy  children  for  their  feuerali
neceHities  and  wants , they  by  misfortune  loft  the  faid
graines,  and  he  comforts  his  holy  fhriuelings,his  ghoft-
ly  good  children,  telling  them  in  honeft  termes , that  a
little  prety  peblc  ftone  taken  vp  out  of  a gutter  , would
(erne  the  turne  euen  as  well,  fo  it  were  receiued  & kept,
with  humility,  and  deuotion.  But  our  holy  tragedians
were, as  feemes,  afraid,  that  thefe  old  brayed  gearc(holy
water, halowed  candle,  and  frankenfence)  would  not
hold  our,  and  play  their  parts  wel , and  therefore  they
thought  good  to  cry  them  out  of  hand , as  they  vfe  to
cry  Mackcrels,when  they  arc  afraide  of  fmelhng . This
fcarc  was  very  ncedlelfc,  for  as  you  fee  holy  wafer  in  this
deuil-pageant  hath  acquit  it  felfe  wel , efpecialJy  in  the
miracle  of  the  Mare : fo  you  fhal  fee  holy  candle,  fran-
kincenfc,  and  the  reft,  play  theyr  parts  no  worfe  : for
they  were  all  deuil-  whippes  of  the  maker,  of  a ftaight
ftocke,  cleanecorde,  & furetwift,as  true  and  wcl-knot-
tedftuffe,  as  euer  WaAesmjll  did  afford.

You  fhal  haue  holy  candle  play  his  part , in  the  Au-
thour  his  owne  phrafe  and  pcnning.for  his  better  grace.
The  whole  hopfe  at  cDenham)  faith  the  Miracle-maker,
3-  ' was


IncafiingoutofDeuilsT  jf>age;io?<

#a${o  “haunted  withfpirits,  that  a maydc  could  oof  ca-
tic  a candle  lighted  in  her  hand , excfpr  it  were halerved.

No  raertiailc  though  the  candles  went  out  fo  thickc
iK  cDenham:  for  there  the  deuils  kept  theyr  afts  in  tent -
kris  fothicke  with  the  poore  maids , as  Sara  confeffcth
(be  durd  not  goe  to  Dibdales  chamber  alone , for  fearc
of deuil-puffing^s  little  gelling  by  his  vnholy  handling,
he  had  becne  an  holy  pried.  Yet  the  baudy  Poet  tells
them,  that  fomtime  a little  candle-light  doth  not  amide
at  that  deuil-worke,  and  therfore  not  amide  inferted  by
the  Author,  that  an  halowcd  candel  ibould  fometime
burne  before  the  deuil.

But  in  an  other  pafTage,  the  miracle-notcr  tels  vs, that
the  deuil  puffed  at  the  holy  candel,  as  hard  as  he  could,
and  could  not  get  it  out:  this  Sarafonh,  was  puffed  in
by  the  penner,  to  puffe  vp  a part  for  the  holy  candel  to
play : But  I am  verily  of  opinion,  that  the  deuil  puffed
indeede,  and  that  the  prieds  had  a iud  fcantling,  6c  fizc
of  the  deuils  breath,to  know  how  drong,and  deepc  the
deuil  was  able  to  puffe,  and  when  hee  puffed  his  bed :
themfelueshauing  often  out-breathed,  and  out-puffed
him,  as  you  haue  formerly  heard : and  therefore  they
knew,  howto  hallow  a candle  fbhigh,  and  tofucha
pitch,  as  the  deuil  with  all  the  breath  in  his  belly,  fhould
not  be  able  to  puffe  it  out . And  why  not  as  eafily,  and
with  as  good  a grace , as  to  hallow  a candel,  to  fuch  a
fublimitic,  abftraft ,&  quintefTcntial  nature , as  doth  this
day  burne  before  the  bleifed  (brine  of  our  Lady  at  j4r-
TM  , without  fading  or  diminution,  without  rcceauing
any  adition  of  matter,  tofeedc,  and  preferue  the  light,
except  nutriment  oncly.  It  was  no  great  difgracc  to  the
dcuibpuffe , that  could  not  blow  out  the  holy  candel,
being  happily  fupported,  by  the  holy  candledick  of  the
prieft.  -

But  you  mud  be  enformed,  of  a farre  greater  foyle,fu-
Sainedby  the  deuil,  at  the  bands  of  a young  child,  by

P.  the


page, I o?


, A declaration  of  Popifa  impofture  •

the  vertueof  this  holy  candel, holden  in  his  hand.Heare
the  Mirachft  report  it , in  his  ownc  gracious  Idiomc;
Sara  being  fet  tn  a chaire , (bee  raged  more  then  ere  (hee  did
before , especially  at  the  p re fence  of  an  infant , holding  a holy
eandell,  cry  mg  oft  with  terrible  voyceyand  countenance  Jyotlt
eate  thee , but  the  child  nothing  abated  thereat,  yeas  brought
to  hold  the  candell  to  her  nofey  and  to  put  him  to  filence  • O


Catholicam  fidem ! O fidem  Catholtcam  ? that  haft  fuch  a
chcck,and  foueraignty  ouer  all  the  power  of  hell,as  that
thy  priefts  leadc  about  deuils  after  them,  as  men  leade
Beares  by  the  nofc,  or  lack  an  Apes  in  a firing,  and  en-
dueft  thy  young  Infants , with  fuch  heroical  magnani-
mitie,  as  they  dare  play  with  the  deuils  nofe,  and  crie
lackdeuill \ hodeuHl,  blow  out  the  candell  deuilh  and  the
poore  deuil  ftands  like  a mute  in  a blacke  fan&us,  with
a bone  in  his  mouth,  and  dares  not  fpeake  one  word.

The  two  next  dcuil-fcourgcs  proclaimed  from  hef,
were  Frankincenfe,  and  thebooke  of  Exorcifmes : the
former  whereof  though  it  pleafed  you  not  to  grace  with
any  (pecial  miracle  accomplished  alone , hauing  many
new  initiats  to  aduaunce,  that  (food  you  in  more  fteadt
yet  to  (hew  that  your  deere  Mother-church  did  not  be-
ftow  her  blcding  vppon  fuch  a iewel  for  naught , you
gauc  him  his  due  time,  order,  and  place, and  marfhallcd
him  very  honourably  according  to  his  difeent,  fomfime
with  the  powerful  potion  , femetime  with  brimftone,
fometime  wirh  holy  water,  fometime  with  holy  candle,
fhewing  vs  by  the  worthines  of  his  companion,  that  hee
was  none  of  the  rafeal  cruc.

Indcedc  you  needed  be  the  leftc  careful  for  this,  by
reafon  it  is  alwaies  of  worth  very  fufficient  to  grace,  and
aduaunce  it  felfe,  both  in  regard  of  the  antiquity,  as  alfb
of  the  honourable  difeent  thereof,  asfpringing  from  no
meaner  ftemme  then  the  three  Kings  of  Cullen  y that
brought  it  with  gold,  and  Mirrhe,for  a prefent  vnto;our
Saiuour  Chrift.  And  therefore  it  hath  bcene  worth  the

keeping*


in  calling  out  of  Dcuils.  page,ic>64

keeping, &efteeme  in  your  Mother-church  eucr  fince,
and  hath  receiued  her  dcere  motherly  blefling , by  con-
fccration,  and  benediction.

And  fo  wee  find  that  your  holy  Mother  hath  lay d her
holy  hands  vppon  gold  likewife,  and  confccrated,and
blcflcd  that  amiable  mcttall  to,  whereby  it  hath  had, and
(hewed  as  much  power,  ouer  deuils  haunting  houfcs,
walking  in  Churchyeards,  andfpeaking  out  of  images,
as  Frankincenfc,  holy  candle,  and  holy  water  haue.  But
little  did  thofc  three  good  Kings  of  Cullen  know,  what  a
powerful  rich  prelent  they  had  brought  vnto  our  Saui-
our,  whe  they  prefented  him  with  Frankincenfc, as  little
deeming  of  fuming  any  deuil  in  theyr  way,  or  profuga-
ting  a deuil  from  the  body  of  our  blefled  Sauiour.  But
your  eyes  pierced  farther  the  thefc  3 .Kings  could, (not-
withflanding  it  is  generally  accouted  they  had  eye*  fight
enough,  as  comming  from  the  head,  and  fountaine,of
wifcdome,  vndcrftanding , and  wit, ) and  you  clcerely
faw,  that  the  Egyptian  priefts,  perfuming  theyr  two

frand  Idols,  Jfis3  and  O fir  is,  with  this  holy  fmoakc , and
caring 7#/^  proclaime  of  theyr  Images  at  Rome,  in
cmnibus  vicuftatutfaEl&i  ad eas  thus  & cerei,  that  they
halowed  them,  and  theyr  Altars  with  frankinfcnce,  and
eandle : you  haue  very  wifely,  deuoutly,and  heathenilh-
ly,fmoaked  your  Altars,  your  images,  your  Churches,
your  vefiments,your  reliques,your  beades,your  bookes,
your  breeches  with  this  perfume,  for  fearc  of  dcuil-bla-
(fing \ and  therefore  you  needed  not  vppon  our  deuil
Theater  to  grace  it  with  any  new  wonder.

The  fourth  feareful  whip  halowed  out  of  hel,  was  the
bookeofExorcifmes:  which  though  Stemp  theprieft
• (hewed  Sara  a little  corner  of  out  of  his  pocket , when
he  was  new  come  from  London  to  rDenhami  felling  her
he  had  brought  her  Maiff  er  a whip, and  that  Sara  knew
it  as  wel  by  the  crofTes,  & figures,  as  a begger  knew  his
di(h,or  an  old  curre  a kitchin  whippe  by  a corner  of  the

ftcale.


page,lo3*  A declaration  of  Popifli  irapofture

ftea!c,it  had  beene  fo  often  (hundred  vpon : yet  we  f?m!
in  our  tragedie , that  this  plaid  not  the  mofi  tragical!
monfler- part, nor  did  not  the  greatcfl  wondcrs,ancftbat
vppon  very  Wife,  and  important  confiderations.  Firfl
this  bookc  was  pc ut fort  is  eejmsfyatio  yuiftpe  fupremo  vU
at  Olympia ♦ It  had  play d fo  many  worthy  parts,  and  ca-
ried  away  the  garland  fo  oft.in  all  the  Lifls/Turnanbcnts,
and  Iufls,  withthe  deuilj  that  it  needed  no  new  h paanf.
to  be  honoured  with-alk

Secondly,  it  hath  hanging  on  it  all  the  fealcs , and
(lamps  of  holy  popes,  for  many  hundred  yceres,  with
all  their  potent  benedi£lions:  and  it  hath  had  the  deere,
and  louing  mothers  bleffing,  with  priuiledge  of  birth-
right, and  priority  of  honour  befides,  and  therefore  it
might  wcl  (land , and  breath  a while  without  any  new
addition,ortitle  ofaduauncement . Thirdly,  it  ferued
wonderous  aptly  , ad  terrorem , etfluporem  tncutiendum
populo : in  (leede  of  thunder,  and  lightning  to  bring  /*-
piter  vpon  theflage,  by  thefc  dreadful  frightful  Exof-
cifmes,  thundring,  clapping,  and  flalhing  out  the  aflo-
nifhing  of  Gods  names Jehomb>  Tetragrammatoni  Ado -
mi , and  the  reft : to  amaze,  and  terrifie  the  poore  peo-
ple, and  to  pofleffe  them  with  an  expeftation  of  fome
huge  monfler-deuil  to  appcarc.Who  (landing  at  gaze,
with  trembling,  and  feare : hearing  the  huge  thunder
crackeof  adiuration  fhe  abroad,  and  no  deuils  to  roare$
and  then  feeing  the  Exorcifl,in  a rage  to  throw  away  his
thunder  booke  behind  him,  and  hunt  the  deuil  with  his
owne  holy  hands,  andinflantly  hearingthc  deuil  rouze
out  of  his  cabin,as  a Lyon  out  of  his  denn;  &bellow  out
with  his  roaring  voyc ctOh,ob,  ohj  bttmcj burnef  fcald>
lbroyley  I am  tormented:  This  mud  necdcs  make  the  *
poore  Madge  Owlets  cry  out,  in  admiration  of  rhepo*.
wer  of  the  potent  prieflhood.  O Catholicampdem ! O p -
dem  (;atholicam . O the  Catbolique  faith  i 0 the  porter  of
the faith  Cathokquci


Brim*-


in  cafting  out  of  Deiiifs.  page

Brimftonc,  and  the  holy  potton , needed  no  Herrauld
from  hell,  to  proclaimc  their  potency,  and  might : for
where  fo  euer  they  went,  they  caricd  hel  before  then*
both  for  vgly  blackncs,fraoake,fcorching,  broy  ling, and
hcate  : As  you  may  fee  in  the  poore  flie-deuil  Sara , that
bore  in  her  face  the  very  IcLta  of  hell  imprinted, & bran-
i ded  in  her  jay  thefe  dreadful  fumigations.  For  the  force,
vfc,  and  application  of  this  Engine,  I referre  you  to  the
tenth  chapter : not  that  you  muff  think,  that  the  loath-
fomc  hcllifh  potion  of  Sacke,  Sallet-oylc,  and  Rue  ma-
ftied  together,  and  by  force  poured  downc  intoher  fto-
tnacke  a full  pint  at  a time  5 did  of  their  ownc  natural
qualities,  fume  vp,  and  intoxicate  her  brainc,  as  Tobac-
co > Giniper , and  Henbane  mingled  together  would
doe : or  that  the  owne  vnkind  fulfomnes  ofSack,  Oylc,
and  Rue,  did  diftemper  her  ftomacke,and  enforced  her
Co  ft raine,  vomite,and  crie : or  the  peftilent , choaking*
fluffing,  pernicious  fume  of  Brimftone,  filling  her  eyes,
mouth,  note,  and  fcorching  her  with  the  coales,  & fire,
til  ffie  looked  as  blacke  ashel  mouth  * did  of  their  ownc
proper  force,  caufe  her  to  crie,  fcritch,  and  howlc : for
what  hellifh  Butchers  would  cuer  put  a poore  wench
toFuch  paine : but  you  are  to  imagine,  that  thefe  loa-
thing , intoxicating,  piercing,  broyling,  choaking,  qua-
lities were  fufpended  in  their  proper  fubiefls,  by  the  fo-
aeraigne  confecrating  power  of  the  kindc  mother
church  of  Rome , that  thefe  confecrate  Engines  made
the  poore  dcuil  in  Sara,  to  tremble,fu  me,  vomit, ft  raine,
fcritch,  and  roare , by  the  pure  vertuc  of  the  kind  chur-
ches fweet  benedi&ion.  And  hoping  you  wil  be  thus
kindly  affefled  for  their  fakes,  who  wiffi  you  as  wcl,  as
they  did  Sara,  and  would  v(e  you  as  kindly,  if  they  had
you  in  their  fingrings,  as  being  perfwaded,  that  you  are
all,  & cucry  each  one  poflefled  with  deuils : I wil  fpend
no  time  toentreate  you,  but  proceede  to  my  farther
casks.

Pa


C HAP,.


page,  ii ol  A declaration  of  Popidi  impofturc

CHAP.  19.

4JT  Of  the  aft  omfh  able  power  of  Nicknames , Rdiques , and
tyfjfes  eares , m affhtlmg,  and  tormenting
-•*  the  deuid,

0-yr..j4  i,  !^r  II  f ft  * if*  t **  ' id  ‘

\A7  Hen  a Lyon,  a Fox,  and  an  Afle  were  met  toge-
* * ther  in  pilgrimage,  it  was  much  wondered  at  by
the  common-wealth  of  hearts , what  that  confociation
incant,confidefing  the  dirtimilitude  and  difparitie  of  the
bcaiflfcSo  When  a man  fhat  meefe  with  thefe  three  in  a .
rankeyReliqucs,  Nicknames',  and  Afles  eares,  hec  may
perhaps  miife  at  this  vnequall  combination , but  when
hee  rtiall  vnderftand  quo  iter  vna  capiunt , whether  they
bend theyr coutfe  fo  Jouingly  together,  anddhalbc
aduertifed , that  rhey  march  hand  in  hand  in  an  equi-
page to  fee  vpon  a dcuil,ro  afflift,  torment, and  cart  him
out  of  his  hold,  he  wil  mufe  much  more.  This  gentle
mufer  mufVbe  put  out  ofhisdumpcs,  by  taking  out
hisfirrt  pfirrierlerton,  Ignorantia  caufarumgenuitadmi -
rationem  S It  is  nothing  but  ignorance  of  caufes,  that  is
the  mother ofad miration  5 and  therefore  when  we  hauc
inrtru&ed  this  admirator  in  the  fccret  caufes,  and  prin-  1
ciples  of  this  vnfeernely  connexion,  we  fhal  eafe  him  of  ij
his  labour, & caufe  his  wonderment  to  ceafe.

The  mainc  ground  pillar,  and  principle  of  all,  is  the
botfomlerte  deifie  ofthe  holy  Church  of  Rome,  who  as
* (he  is  able  to  make  Gods  of  bread;  Saints  of  deuils,  and
to  place  them  in  heauen,  fo  is  fhe  as  able  to  change  flies
into  Serpents,  fleas  info  Scorpions , Nicknames  info
whips,  Afles  eares  into  fcourgesi  to  chaflife,  and  chafe
away  all  the  deuils  in  hcl . So  as^bat  thefe  two  Nick-
names, and  AfTesearc*,  areindeedebuttwocryflal  loo-  ]
king  glafles,  wherein  you  may  behold  liuely  reprefen-
ted  vnto  you,  the  authority,  and  diuine  prudence  ofthe
holy  Romifh  Church : Authority  in  choofing  out  fuch

\ • ilia-


•;  incaftmgout  ofDcuils.  page,  ill*,

{hadowes,  and  Nrhiletfies,  fo  control!  the  principalities,
and  powers  of  darknes  $ prudence  in  Telexing  the  bafe,
and  ridiculous  things  of  the  world,  to  confound  all  the
Vvifedome,  and  policy  of  the  dcuil.

1 am  therefore  in  gentle,  and  kind  wife,  fo  aduife,  and
entreate  you,  that  you  vfe  thefe  looking  glafles  careful-
lie,  and  aright,  thorough-out  the  whole  courfc  of  this
our  admirable  blacke  Arte,  and  thatyou  meafure  not
our  proceedings  heerein,  by  the  fcalc  of  fence,  vnder-
ftanding,  or  wit,  iudging  of  things  according  to  their
ownc  nature,  qualities,  and  formes,  for  fo  wee  maybe
thought  to  haue  dealt,  not  onely  childifrly,  and  ridicu-
loufly,  but  many  times  impioufly , and  blafphemoufly
to  5 but  to  efteeme  of  things  vied,  and  imployed  in  this
admirable  fcience,  according  as  they  arc  improued,  fu-
blimate,and  aduaunced  by  the  authority  of  holy  church
of  Rome,  and  according  to  the  fecrets,  and  myfteries  of
the  Arte.

As  for  example,  what  man  iudging  according  to  wit,
vnderftanding,  or  fence,  can  imagine  that  a Witch  car*
transformc  her  felfe  into  the  likenes  of  a Cat,  a Moufe,
or  an  Hare : and  that  free  being  hunted  with  Hounds,
in  the  forme  ofan  Hare,  and  pinched  by  the  breech,  or
whipped  with  fcourges,  in  the  fimilitude  ofa  Cat,  the
fame  pinch  or  marke,  fra!  be  found  in  the  breech  of  the
Witch,  that  was  before  made  by, the  Hounds  in  the
breech  of  an  Hare,  andyet  fralyou  fee  this  fencelefle,
witlefle,  and  brainlefle  conccifc, verified,  6c  made  footh
in  the  praftife  of  our  holy  coniuring  cruc,the  thing  be-
ing really  afied,  and  performed  indeed.

Lookc  in  Fid  Williams  Depofition,  and  there  you  fr  ah
Unde,  that  the  whole  Quier  of  our  twelue  holy  priefls,
hadafolemnc  affembly  at  the  whipping  ofa  Cat,  and  4
did  whip  the  Cat  fo  long  in  a Parlor  at  Fcnham,  til  free
vanillied  out  of  their  fight*,  and  fending  next  day  to
Bnjhief  to  fee  in  what  cafe  the  Witch  vvas,  whofe  fpirir


page, 1 12


Megus  fuft :
doemon  :
exorcif:


«;  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

they  had  Cat-hunted  ouer  night,  the  Witch  was  found
in  child-bed,  and  her  childe  newly  dead  * Whereby  it
plainly  appeares,  that  the  whippingof  the  Cat,  fo  it  be
done  by  Catholique  priefts,  is  no  ieft,  northe  hunting
of  the  Witch  heere,  no  fabulous  apprehenfions  but  a
good  Catholique  footh,  agreeable  to  the  maiedie,  gra-
uitic,  and  wifedome  of  that  venerable  holy  Church.

And  fo  vvil  you  iudge  likewifc^of  nicknames, 6c  Afles
cares,  by  that  time  I haue  fticwed  how  grauely , andre-
ucrcndly,  the  holy  Church  hath  fet  them  vpon  the  dc-
tails  head : and  how  by  her  foueraigne  authority,  and
commaund,  (he  hath  made  him  to  wcare,6c  bearc  them
in  fpite  of  his  fuming  nofe.  Fird,you  fhal  haue  the  Ca-
non,  andconditution,  as  I finde  it  fet  out  in  CMengtef,
the  Licentiate, 6c  authorized  M aider  for  Hel  $ and  next
the  pra&ife  of  the  Canon, by  our  i2.holy  legates, accor-
ding to  the  conditution  of  their  decrc  mother  Church.

The  Canon  for  nick-naming,  and  rayling  on  the  de-
uil,  runnes  thus  in  CWengw  his  fourth  Exorcifmc,  of  his
dreadful  dcuil  club*  If  after  the  Mafie  celebrated  of  the
holy  GhsCiy  Signing  the  p ojfejfed  with fine  fignes  of  the  Crojfe,
jpr inkling  him  with  holy  water, innecating  ouer  him  the  name
of  the- Father,  Sonne,  and  holy  GhoH , which  Auc  maria  ,and
thundering  out  the  potent  Exorcifme,  armed  with  all  the
dreadful!,  and  aEloniJh  able  tytks  of  God  $ the  dentil [hew  hint
felfe  refraUarie,  and  will  not  depart , nor  exprejfehis  name,
turn  funt  in  eum  dicenda  improperia  : then  you  muCl
come  vpon  him  with  as  many  nicknames,  as  you  can  poffiblie
deuife . Now  if  you  wil  learne  fo  nick-name  the  deuil  in  J

print,  and  cum  privilege  s vnder  the  fignet,  and  fealeof
the  holy  Church  at  Rome : take  heere  a meffe  of  nick-
names,  as  they  are  drcflfcd.and  ferued  in  from  the  Popes
Maifter-Cooke,  and  fealderfor  hel : and  let  hel  it  felfe
be  raked,  you  fhal  neucr  finde  the  like : Audi igitur  tn~
fenfate,falfe, reprobe : damontm  magifter,  miftrrima  crea •
tterajentatcr  homnum Receptor  malornm  augehrurnfallase

v.;;  antvu*

v


tn  cafling  out  of  Deuils.  page,  1 1 5,

animaru,  dux  heretic  or  up  titer  mendacijfiatue,  hefltalisyn*

Jiptens^  ebriofe,  pr&do  infernalis,ferpens  ini  quiff  me  Jupe  ra*
paciffmefus  macrafiimeltca,immundiffnna>beflta  Scabiofa9
beflia  truculent  iff  may  beFlia  crudelis y beflia  cruenta , beflia
omniu  befliaru'beflialiffmafiritusAcheronttneflintus full *
ginofefintus  Tartaree:That  \%,Heare  therfore  thou  fence*
lejfefal/e  lewd ftrit,  maifler  of  deuils,  mtfer able  creature,
tempter  ofmenfleceauer  of  bad  Angels , defrauder  offoules ,

Captaine  of  Her etiques  father  of lyes  fatuous %beshaltNinnie%
drunkard,  inf  email  theefe,  wicked ferpent , rauening  Wolfe s
leane  hunger- bitten  impure  Sow,feely  beafl , truculent  beaflp
cruell  beafl, bloody  beaflfeafl  of  all  beafisjthe  mofl  befhall,
Acherontall jpirttfmoakie  firttfTar  tar  ecus JpiritAs  not  this
pretily  wcl  rayled  of  an  olde  Mother  Church,  that  hath
nereatoorh  forage  in  her  head  5 but  hath  liued  theft
feauen  hundred  yeeres,  and  more , of  pure  milke  ofour
Lady  ? Clap  on  heere  the  Canon,  for  the  long  AfTcs
eares,and  feare  them  to  the  deuils  head,  with  a little  ho-
lie  fire,  and  brimftone,  and  let  vs  fee  how  the  fccly  hun*
ger- bitten  Serve -detail  wil  lookc  • Hie  exorcifla  preijeiat
tmaginem  piflam  in  ignem : Heere  take  the  piflure  of  the
deuill,  that  you  haue  drawne  in  paper , and  cafl  it  into  the
fire : and  what  turmoyle  thefe  wrought  in  hcl,  our  holy
Exorcifts  by  their  praftift,  are  preft  to  tel  you.

Heare  the  Miraclift  report  it , who  himfelfe  was  an
A ft  or . The  Priefl  hauing  placed  Sara  in  a chayre : he  co -
maundeth  the  deuill to  tell  his  name : the  deuill  aunfwered
Bon-iour  and  began  to  make  a few  offleaking  French : the
Ex  or cill  then  retailing  the  deuil , and  calling  him  A fie  in  the
Trench  longue , he fayd,  lam  no  Ajfe , / will  not  be  mocked,

This  was  a fober  reply  to  the  Afle,without  much  adoc#

But  when  e JMaho  trifled,  & mocked  the  priefl  in  Sara,
and  would  by  no  dint  of  adiuration,  be  brought  to  tel
his  name,  heare  the  Miracle-teller  againe.  The  Fxorafl
feeing  the  deuill  thus  to  trifle,  and  that  hee  would  not  tell  his
name,  for  abating  his  pride ) caufed  to  be  drawne  vppon  a


page,H4t  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

peece  of papery  the  pitture  of  a vice  in  a p/ajy  and  the fame  to
he  burned  with  halowed  brim  Hone , whereat  the  dent  l cryed
out  as  beeinggrieuoufly  tormented.  No  meruaile,when  hee
had  a paire  of  vices  cares  clapt  red  hote  to  his  head, with
the  foader  of  holv  brimflone.

• a *

Heere  haue  you  both  rule  and  pra&ife  of  this  tormen-
• ting  the  deuil  with  nicknames,  and  glowing  eares  .*  now
we  mud  a little  for  our  benefit,  obferue  the  fweet  docu-
ments, that  doe  flow  out  of  this  nicknaming  vaine.  Firfl
wc  fee  by  Mengws  her  proloquutor , that  our  holy  mo-
ther church  beeing  in  her  lafl  breath,  hath  not  lofl  her
lungs,  but  hath  both  breath,  and  flomacke  at  will,  and
dares  fpeake  more  luflily , and  fwaggering-hke  to  the
deuil,  then  eucr  Michaell  the  Archangel  durfl.  For  hee
hauing  an  oppofition,  and  contention  with  the  deuil, &
the  deuil  playing  (as  feemes)  the  part  of  our  fwaggering
old  Mother  with  rayling,  and  reuiling  termes,  durfl  not
reuile  againe,  but  oncly  prayed  G O D to  rebuke  the
foule-  mouthed  fiend.

Secondly  wee  fee,  that  our  Catholiquc  priefls  deuils*
flood  in  more  awe  of  Nicknames  , and  the  paper-vice
then  they  did  of  the  dreadful  names  of  our  bleffed  Sa-
uiour,  or  the  high  and  aftonifhable  titles  of  almighrie
God : whereby  it  is  apparanf,  thattheold,  andaunci-
entway  of  calling  vppon  the  Name  of  lefus  ouer  the
poflefTed,  at  whofe  bleffed  Name  wee  read  the  deuils  in
the  poflefTed  did  tremble  and  quake,  is  an  obfolete,  an-
tiquated way  with  our  holy  Mother-church , and  not
woorth  the  naming : and  that  her  deuils  be  new  vpflart
fpirits,  of  the  queynt  cut,  that  fland  vpon  theyr  reputa-
tion , for  feare  leaft  theyr  fellow  deuils  in  a quarrel!
fliould  take  them  by  theyr  long  eares  in  he!.

Itwasaprety  partin  the  old  Church-playes,  when
the  nimble  Vice  would  skip  vp  nimbly  like  a Iacke  an
Apes  into  the  deuils  necke,  and  ride  the  deuil  a courfe,
and  belabour  him  with  his  woodden  dagger,  til  he  made
- him


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils:  page,u$\

him  roare,wherat  the  people  would  laugh  to  fee  the  dc-
uil  fo  vice-haunted. This  a&ion,  6c  pafTio  had  fom  fem-
blance,by  reafon  the  deuil  looked  like  a patible  old  Cm-
dont  with  a payre  o i iiornes  on  his  head,  6c  a Cowes  fay  1c
at  his  breechjbut  for  a deuil  to  be  fo  vice-haunted, as  that
he  fhould  roare,at  the  pi&ure  of  a vice  burnt  in  a pccc  of
paper,  efpecially  bceing  without  his  homes,  6c  tayle,  is  a
paffion  exceeding  al  apprehenfio,but  that  our  old  decrc
mother  the  Rorniib  church  doth  warrant  it  by  Canon.

Her  dcuils  be  furcly  fome  of  thofe  old  vice-haunted
calliered  woodden- beaten  deuils,that  were  wont  to  fre-
quent the  ftages , and  haue  had  theyr  homes  beaten  of
with  Mengtu  his  clubbe,  and  theyr  tayles  cut  off  with  a
fruart  Iafh  of  his  flinging  whip , who  are  fo  skared  with
the  Idta  of  a vice,  6c  a dagger,  as  they  durfl  neuer  fince
looke  a paper- vice  in  the  face.

Or  if  you  wil  needes  hunt  vs  into  a demonflration  to
let  you  plainly  fee,  how  a morfel  of  paper  burnt,  with  a
vices  long  cares,  fhould  enforce  a deuil  toroare:  re-
.member  I befeech  you  y£/ops  couragious  Lyon,  lying
in  the  Hunters  nets,  after  his  frefh  wounds,  how  he  roa-
red at  the  nipping  of  filly  ants,  biting  him  on  the  bare.

Was  there  euer  Lion  in  our  deuils  cafe, before  he  comes
Co  be  vice-bitten  with  a peece  of  burnt  paper ,fcalded  all
ouer  with  holy  water,  burnt  with  the  erode,  feared  with
Aue  mariesy  rent  with  reliques,  torne  with  the  flole,  bat-
tered with  the  aroicc,  flung  with  the  maniple,  whipped
from  top  to  toe  with  exorcifmes , and  beeing  thus  ex-
coriated, and  all  ouer  raw,  a burning  vice,  with  the  leafl
drop  of  brimflone  falling  vpon  his  bare,  would  make  a
flout  Lionly  deuil,  I weene,  for  to  roare.

For  his  ill  bearing  of  Nicknames , I mufl  needs  fake
the  deuils  part : for  though  that  I could  haue  wifhed,hc
had  borne  thofe  contumenes,and  indignities  with  a bet-
ter aequanimity  6c  gracc,for  that  none  but  children,and
fooles,are  diftempered  with  nicknames, and  taunts : yet

Q jz  confi-


page*H<?.  A declaration  of Popifln  impofture

confidcring  rhe  deuil  looked  into  Denham  houfc,  as
Prefto'/is  dogge  looked  info  his  neighbours  doore,  of  no
malicious  intent  to  eate  any  Chrittmas-pie , but  to  tec
how  Chrijlmas  went : and  feeing  a play  towards,  5c  that
they  wanted  a deuil,  was  content  to  make  one  in  the
play,  and  to  curuef,  foame,  5c  tumble  with  a very  good
deuils  grace.  Now  when  he  was furbatted^r  weary, and
could  no  motewoe  penny  ho , to  be  come  vppon  with
fuch  drange  nicknames  for  his  good-wil,  as  Bedlam
could  ncuer  fpit  out  worfe,  and  be  called  Ninny , drun-
kard, /cabby  beafi,  beafl  of  all  beaftes , 5c  hungerbitten fow,
efpecially  the  Exorifts  bceing  pleated  for  want  of  better
recreation, to  play  all  C hr tftmas  games  with  thofefowes,
as  laugh , and  lye  downe , and  my  fotv  hath  pigd,  and  the  de-
uil bccing  but  a prompter,  and  candle-holder  to  that
fport  *,  would  hauc  mooued  impatience  in  a right  well-
flayed  deuil.

And  withall  to  deaTe  plainly  with  the  deuils  to, and  to
tell  them  of  theyr  oucr-fight  with  their  dcuilfliips  good
leaue : it  is  a folly  to  be  laughed  at  by  fome , and  to  be
wondered  at  by  many , that  any  deuils  in  heldiould  be
fo  ftarkc  mad , as  to  come  in  the  Exorcifts  way,  to  ap-
peare  within  his  circuit,  or  to  erode  his  walkc  > confide-
ring  thatzSEacus,  inosy  and  l^adamanthue, the  three
Iudges  of  hei,  be  nothing  fo  inexorable,  nor  in  any  part
fo  cruel!,  tyrannicall,  and  tormenting  ouer  the  deuils,  as
our  Exorcifts  are, who  carry  about vpon  theyr  backs  the
whole  Panoplie  of  hd,Styx,Phlegcfon,Cocytus  5 clubs,
bats,  whips,  fcourges,  ferpents , fcorpions , brimftone,

J coales,  flames,  befidcs  the  bottomlede  power,  that  cue-

ry  Exorcift  hath,  (euery  one  hauing  (as  teemes)  a priuic  *
key  to  the  bottomlede  burning  pit,  to  let  out,  5c  in,  ac-
cording to  theyr  liking)  to  multiply  the  torments  of  hd-
fire  vpon  any  deuil,  vnto  immenflty  of  weight, and  infi-
nity in  perdurafion  .*  take  but  a little  fay  of this  from  the
jparlie  be* vmne  ‘Dtbdale  and  the  deuiL


• The


in  calling  our  of  Deuils*  Pagc,H7

The  deuil  was  a little  Colli-mollic , 3c  would  not  come
off.  Dibdale  laies  vpon  him  bv  his  foueraigne  coinaund,
and  his  priuic  key  to  hell,  20000.  yeeres  torment  in  the
deepeft  pit  of  hel,  with  fire,  and  brimftone  on  his  back,
and  for  the  multiplication  of  his  paine,  and  torment
which  hee  had  in  hel  before,  hec  teh  the  deuil  it  fhal  be
fifteen e hundred  times  as  much.  Now  then  let  vs  make
vp  our  auditc  but  at  geiTe,&  caft  in  a grofie  fum , how
many  legions  of  deuils  haue  been  thus  ferued  by  all  the
Exorciftsin  the  Romane  Church,  fince  theyr  firft  crea-
tion, and  commiflion  for  hel , and  what  an  huge  heape
ofmillionswilthis  make,  of poore  tormented  deuils,
flacked  vp  top-ful  in  hel,  with  twenty  thoufand  yeeres
torment,  and  that  fifteene  hundred  times  doubled  vp-
pon  them,  and  all  thefe  lye  yelling,  and  grinding  theyr
teeth  in  hel,vnder  this  immenfity  of  weight  of  torments,
and  thefe  innumerable  chaines  of  darknes,  that  the  Ex-
orcifts  haue  layd  vpon  them.  *

And  thefe  theyr  fellow  deuils,  friends,  and  compani-
ons, our  Chriftmas  deuils  hccre  in  Sara,

Smith , mud  needes  know,  & daily  fee,  and  behold  with
theyr  eyes, and  heare  with  theyr  eares, their  moft  lamen-
table efface : and  for  them  for  all  this,to  come  out  of  hel,
where  they  were  fifteene  hundred  , and  twentie  thou-
fand times  in  better  cafe,  and  to  (land  in  our  Exorcifts
walke,  and  meetc  them  at  T ulmer , Hackpej,  or  T)enhamt
are  they  not  iuftly  ferued,  to  haue  a volley  of  nicknames
difeharged  vppon  theroi  and  to  be  tricked  vp  in  the  vi-
ces coate  with  long  eares , and  fo  to  be  fcntbackeinto
hel  to  theyr  fcllowcs,  to  be  tormented  equally  with  the,
and  this  torment  of  aduantage  aboue  all  the  reft , to  be
mocked,  floufed,and  ieared  at  by  theyr  fellowcs,  and  fo
be  taken  by  the  coat,  & eares,  for  not  hauing  thus  much
wit,  as  by  other  deuils  barmes,  to  lcarne  to  beware  ?

I come  now  to  the  third  champion  muftered  in  this
worthy  ranke,  with  nicknames,  and  Affes  eares,  Sc  that

Qj


pagCjii8»  A declaration  of.Popifh  impofture

is  holy  reliques,  which  march  Iait  of  the  three, notin  re-
gard of  theyr  vnworthinefte,  but  in  refpeft  of  theyr
worth.  For  thefe  three  woorthies  in  thisblacke  field  a-
gainft  hel,  nicknames,  &c.  arc  thelaft,  and  final  ranke,
of  our  infernal  campe  , excepting  the  two  maine  Stan-
dards for  all,  the  holy  Crofie,and  the  blefled  facrament,
which  are  yet  to  difplay,  and  then  you  Hauc  your  Army
royall  for  hel.  And  the  order  of  our  infernall  batfaile,is
the  old  auncient  order,  obferued  by  the  Romans,  who
placed  their  Triariosh^^  vnto  whofe  lotitneuer  came
to  fight,  till  the  day  grew  dangerous , and  the  vittoric
very  doubtful . Semblably  the  worthieft,and  moft  ap-
proued  ranke  of  our  Triarij  againft  hel,  are  nicknames,
afies  eares,  and  holy  reliques,  which  are  drawne  vp  into
the  vant-gard,  and  front  of  the  battaile,  at  a dreadfull
pinch,  when  holy  wafer,  holy  candle, the  amice, the  ma-
. • niple,  fheftole,  exorcifmes,  tAuemaries , and  all  haue

retired,  and  in  fome  fort  haue  abandoned  the  field : and
the  deuil  Rands  ftrong  at  fhock , and  giues  not  an  inch
of ground.

Thefe  dreadful  tormenters  for  hel,  we  haue  heere  in
hand,  are  not  the  auncient,  famous,  renowmed,  glori-
ous reliques , iewelled  vp  in  the  Popes  Propitiatorie  at
Rome  (as  the  facred  violl  of  our  Ladies  milke , a peece
of  S.  Paules  breeches,  and  chaire , the  fayle  of  the  A fie,
whereon  ourSauiour  rode  to  Ierufalem,and  the  reft)
but  our  reliques  heere  vfedforthe  moft  dreadful,  and
tyrannical  tormenters  of  the  deuil,  were  natiue  home-  *
bred  reliques,  fprung  out  of  our  foyle,and  fo  moft  like-
lie  to  be  ofgreateft  force,  and  commaund,  againft  the
deuils  of  our  owne  Horizon,  Which  (as  wee  finde  them
recorded,  and  aduaunced,  in  the  golden  legend  booke)
are  the  thumbs,  bones,  and  ioynts,  of  the  three  worthy
Champions  fent  from  his  Hoi:  and  from  Hel , for  fire-
worke  heere  in  England,  about  anno  82,  Q 'oitam , Brian,
and  Cmpidn : who  for  haynous,  and  vnnatural  treafons

againft


MlHMKMHi


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.  page,  1 19

againft  our  Soucraigne,  and  the  Bate,  were  executed  at
Tiburne , canonized  at  Rome,  and  Sainted  by  the  dc-
uils  owne  mouth  from  Hel:  as  you  haue  formerly  heard
of  (fampian , and  now  fhal  heare  of  Brian  in  the  deuils
ovvnevoyce:  as  the  Miracle-father  hath  recorded  it.

Exor:  I charge  thee  to  tell  me  whofc  hone  this  is  . Deuil.

It  is  Brians  hone : hee  is  a Saint  indeede , hee  never  came  in
Tvrgatorie,  Loe  heere  Brian  as  fully  fainted  from  hel  by
the  deuil , as  S.Campian  was : and  what  timorous,  feru-
pulous  Catholique  can  now  make  any  doubt,  but  thefe
be  infernal  Saints,  coofidcring  Maho , the  Prince  of  hel,
bath  heere  dubbed  them  with  his  owne  mouth  ? Now
for  the  grace  that  the  deuil  fhewed  vnto  thefe  new  Hel-
created  Saints,  of  the  deuils  owne  making,  and  to  their
hellifh  reliques,  you  may  be  fure  it  was  not  meane . Let
the  Recorder  of  hel  report  you,  who  was  both  mouth,
and  Notarie,  for  the  prieBs,  & the  deuils.

By  often  invocation  of  the  hie  fed  Trinitie , of  our  Saviour
there  prefent  in  the  hleffed  Sacrament : by  often  calling  vpon
the  hleffed  virgin , with  falue  Regina ; and  by  calling  on  all
holy  Martyrs , especially  hleffed  Fa:  Campian,  with  the  reft
efthe  Martyrs , that  had  fvffered at  Tiburne,  and  by  apply-
ing of  their  holy  reliques  junto  the  aff tiled  body : Fraferetfo,
Fliberdigibet,  Hoberdicur,  Cocabatto,  with  four  tie  afft -
fonts,  were  expelled . Heere  you  fee  our  bleffed  Sauiour,
and  the  T rinitie,  are  winged  out  afore,  in  the  forelorne
Hope,  as  oflittle  va!ue,and  account.  And  the  dreadful
kilcowes  come  behinde,  with  especially  Tiburne  , and
reliques  blafedin  their  banner,  and  thefe  doe  the  dread-
ful feate  vpon  the  deuils  of  the  round . Wc  neuer  read
in  all  the  Miracle-booke,  that  the  deuil  trembled  at  the
name  of  our  blefled  Sauiour : but  Brians  bone  being  ap-
plied (faith  the  Author)  and  S.  Cottam  being  called  vpon  t
the  devil  avnfwered  in  a trembling  qviuering  voyce  $ thou
pjalt  not  have  thy  prayer.  And  he  was  fcarccly  to  be  vnder-
floodc, the  poore  deuil  chattered  his  teeth  fo  fore.  What

then


page,i2o*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

then  /hould  I tel  you  o ffiampians  thumbe,  put  info  Fids
mouth  *,  Brians  bone  pinched  hard  fo  Saras  bare  legge,
as  hard  as  a prieft  could  hold  if,fhe  great  old  rufty  nayle
crammed  into  Fids  mouth,  amongft  an  handful  of  o-
thcr  choaking  rcliques,  what  wonders  they  wrought
with  thefe  poore  fhe  deuils:  howthefe  made  them  fa
vomite^fcritch,  and  quackle.,  like  Geefe  that  had  fwalo«
wed  downe  a gagge  ?

Hearc  Fa:  Edmunds  for  all : like  Julius  Cafiargtht  cora-
menter  of  his  owne  worthy  explores,  in  his  tnonfter-
miracle,  a&edvpon  CMarwood*

Hie  patris  etiam  Camp:  corporis  quadam  reltquU  nitrified
vfferunt : vt  omnia  omnium  Jenfiuum  organa  dijfolui  fibi , et
dififipari  viderentur  : mod'o  enim  oculos , moddo  aures , turn
linguamfibi  dine  Ik  abr'tpi  exclamat winter  quos  etiam  cm -

ciatus  infolito  vomitii , it  a vt  etiam  vifeera  de  ore  eijeere  pu~
taretur , vexatus  efl . That  is  : Heere  certains peeces  of
father  Camp:  body,  did  wonderfully  burne  the  dentil . sydll
the  organs  of  all  his  fences , feeming  to  be  broken , and  rent  a-
funder , crying  out  one  while  his  eyes,  one  while  his  eares , one
while  his  tongue  was  rent  out,  and  rent  into  peeces,  and  be -
fides  other  excruciations , hee  was  tormented  with  finch  a
Jlrange  vomit e,  as  though  he  would  hane  fined  out  his  very
entrails,  and  guts.

Heere  the  dcuil  was  on  the  racke,  by  the  vertue  of
Camp:  relique : now  hearc  his  comming  downe.  £xtre~
ma  tamen  omnium  ( qua  Ians  deo  fit ) omnibus  mifierantibns  .
& pra  mi  fericordia  lachrymatibus , ipfio  etiam , Edmunde,
Edmunde,  clamante , liber atus  eft . That  is:  Lafl  efaHs
, (thanks  be  to  God)  all  of  vs  pit  tying,  and  weeping  for  re -
morfie , Marwood cryingout,EdccxMVi6s^dts\m6s,hewas
quit  of  the  demil.

The  found  had  beene  harfh , and  the  period  not
worth  a point  5 if  it  had  runne  thus : O Chrtfle , Chritte,

O Saluator,Saluator.  O Chriffo  Sauiour,buco  Edmund,

6 Edmund  falls  with  a goodlyer  grace.  Very  wifely  furc  s

As


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.  page,  ni.

As  who  would  fay, that  our  Exorcifis  cucr  meant  to  doc
God,  our  Sauiour  ChriR,  or  the  holy  GhoR  fo  much
honour,  as  to  caufc  any  one  deuil,amongR  all  the  deuils
in  hel,  that  they  had  in  hammering, once  to  name  eyther
God,  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  or  the  holy  GhoR.  Thefc
(I  trufi)  neede  no  grace,  nor  honour  from  the  deuil
but  thefc  Tt^^efemideuils,  fainted  from  hel  (Brian,
tyttam,  and  Campian Jwerc  the  Gods,  that  Rood  in  need
oftheir  holy  helping  hand.

And  hcerein  I commend  their  wifcdome, in  choyfe  of
their  reliques  very  much.  FirR,  in  that  they  tooke  frefli
greene  new  reliques,  that  were  not  antiquated,  and  out
of  date.  For  reliques  (for  oft  wee  fee)  worke  like  an
Apothecaries  potion , or  new  Ale  : they  haue  beft

* Rrength,  and  verd  at  the  firfl  $ and  therefore  Camptans
girdle,  now  like  old  Rubarb,  begins  to  allay.  Secondly,
for  that  if  they  had  brought  of  the  olde  renowmed  re-
liques fro  Romc,fom  vnRayed  body  would  haue  made
queRion,  whether  they  had  becne  Saints  bones  indeed,
or  rather  the  bones  of  dogges.  Cats,  or  Rats,  or  elfe  of
an  old  Sow : efpccially  now  we  haue  learned  Aga^arim
holefome  rule.  Thirdly,  our  deuils  being  home-deuils,
and  our  Saints,  fainted  heere  from  hel : it  was  no  reafon
that  forrainc  reliques,  fhould  obtrude  themfclues  into
others  pofiefiions,  & rob  them  of  the  honour,  that  they
worthily  deferued . But  the  laR,  and  beR  point  of  their
wifedom,  is  this : that  we  fhould  haue  had  fome  fcruple
of  the  Saintfhip  of  Brian , Cottam,  and  Camptan , if  wee
had  not  heard  them  thus  folemnly,  lowdly,and  ceremo-
nioufly  fainted  from  Tiburne,  hel,  and  the  deuil.

Heere  I had  concluded  this  part  of  the  Pageant,  but
that  Sararivpsme  by  the  care,  and  tells  me,  that  I haue
forgotten  a fpecial  point  of  relique-feruice,  and  points
me  to  her  depofition,  which  when  I had  turned  my

• booke,and  reade  ouer,  I pointed  at  her  againe,and  wil-
led her  to  pen  that  point  her  felfej  and  therefore  thus

R.  fire


. page, 122

See  her
exam;


, A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

fhe  tcls  her  ownc  tale.  '•  t -

±At  one  time  (faith  fhe)  when  it  began  to  be  with  me , af-
ter the  manner  of  women f the  Pr  lefts  did  pretend^  that  the
dcuill  did  reft  m the  mo  ft  fecret  part  of  my  body  : where -
vppon  they  dent  fed  to  apply  the  r cliques  vnto  that  place  ?
Good  God,  what  doe  we  heare  ? or  is  it  but  a dreame  ?
orhaue  weearesto  heare  fuch  impious  vnnatural  villa-
nie  ?

StCampian,  S.rBriani  S.deuil , or  fainting  deuil  helpe
out  with  this, for  I am  at  a ftand.  Reiiques  to  that  place  ?
It  is  able  to  poflefle  a man,  with XJMarwoods  fury,to  cric
out,  terra  dehifee  , infer  num  abforbe . Earth  gape,  and  hell
fwallow  filch  deuil-faints,  fuch  deuil- reiiques,  fuchde-
uil-prieftsand  all . Was  it  euer  heard,  that  any  heathen
durlleuerabufe,  the  vileft  thing  confecrated  to  their  I-
dol-deuils,  in  fuch  execrable  manner?  Holy  Saints,ho-
lie  reiiques,  holy  priefls,  holy  deuil  that  made  them, and
moued  them  to  this . It  was  no  meruaile  they  made  fo
much  haft  with  the  deuil,  to  Saint  their  Champions,
Campian,  and  his  crae  from  hell,  and  to  deifie,  or  hellific
their  reiiques*,  fince  /hey  were  to  be  applied  to  fuch  a
diabolical  teruice,  as  the  deuil  himfelfe  without  fuch  a
rclique,  could  neuer  haue  accompliftied : nay,  wee  ne-
uer  reade,  tha/  the  deuil  durft  abufe  any  thing  confe-
crated but  in  fhew,  to  anyfo  defpicable  imploymenr.
Tibttrne  doth  blufh,  that  bare  the,the  deuil  doth  fhame,
that  made  fuch  deuil-faints, and  hellifh  reiiques*,  and  yet
the  priefts,  the  confecrators,  deuifers,  andapplier$,doe
fhew  their  bare  hel-burnt  faces , without  blufhing  at
all-  Diris  detsoueo , c fraftores,  & jpeflatores . Sol  pro-
ceeds, * ' ‘

CHAP.


page,i2$.


in  calling  out  of  Deuils,

CHAP.  io.

f Of  the  dreadfull  fewer  of  the  Croffe , and  Sacrament  of
the  ssfltar , to  torment  the  demll,  and  to
make  him  roare .

1 t * .it  * . \ t

A S farreas  the  holy  Fathers  doc  deeme  of  the  Croft,
^ ^ fo  farre  doc  weafFeftionatly  embrace,  and  efteeme
of  the  fame,  as  an  honourable, and  rcuerend  monument
in  our  Chriffian  profeffion.  But  the  common  enemy  of
mankind,  not  brooking  any  moderation,taking  aduan-
tage,  of  the  procliuity  of  our  nature  vnto  fuperflition,
hath  fo  farre  bewitched  the  minds  of  feme,  as  they  haue
brought  into  the  Chriftian  Church,  that  which  Tertul-
iian  dooth  fo  much  proteft  againff , in  the  name  of  all
Chriftians  flauroUtrian,  a performing  of  diuinc  honor
before  a pccce  of  wood : then  which  the  Heathen  neuer
did  performc  more  before  the  ftatue  of  Inpiier: and  an-
other branch  likewife  fpringing  fro  the  fame  roofe,  that
is yftaurepo'ifan,  a feigning,  counterfeiting,&  damping  of
(ignes,  miracles, and  wonders  to  be  done , not  onely  by
the  Croffe,  but  by  the  expreflion , and  fignification  of
the  fame : after  the  very  fame  fafhion,  that  the  Heathen
did  Fabuloufly  imagine,  anddeuife,  ff range  fountaines
of  delicacies  to  flow  from  the  home  of  Iupiters  Goat.

Thefe  two  fuperflitious  delirations  haue  made  vs
partly  odious,  partly  ridiculous  to  the  prophanc  Hea-
then people.  Lucian  found  this  doting  numor  betimes,
in  fome  Chriflians  of  his  time,  and  makes  himfelfe,  and
the  world  fport  with  it,  as  he  did  at  the  fancies,  and  ex-
orbitances of  all  other  religions : telling  vs  a tale  of  one
gucrates,  who  had  a ring,  made  of  a peece  of  old  Iron,
which  had  fometime  beene  a peecx  of  an  Iron  croft, Sc
that  ring  was  an  amulet  againft  all  malignant  fpirits.
And  blind  Thyrzusthe  Tefuit , repeats  the  fame  ruffie
talc  of  the  ring,  as  if  fcoffing  Lucian  had  meant  nothing

R a but


page, 124*  A declaration  of  Popifti  impofturc

but  (both.  But  hce  may  as  good  cheape  afFoord  vs  the
tale  of Eucrates,  as  hec  doofh  (he  (lory  ofS.  Margaret:
who  with  the  bare  figne  of  the  Crolle  afrighred  a dc-
wil,  that  was  commingvnto  her  in  the  forme  of  a great
Dragon.  Or  that  of  Martian,  and  f niton,  who  with  the
figne  of  the  Crofle  , went  vp  and  downe  killing  of  fer-
pents,  as  Hercules  did  Monfters for  that  of  the  old  man,
who  fpying  an  Afpe  in  die  bottom  of  a fountaine , did
front  the  entrance  to  the  fountaine  with  fo  many  fignes
of  the  Croife,  as  hee  went  downe  to  the  bottom,  filled
his  pot  with  wafer.and  returned  from  the  Afpe  without
any  harme  : or  that  of  Bifiiop  Sabin , who  hauing  poy-
fon  mingled  in  his  cup  by  an  Archdeacon , who  meant
to  make  him  away , figned  himfelfe  with  the  Crofle,
drunk  off  the  poyfond  cup,  & felt  not  the  leaf!  grudg-
ing or  diftemper  after  the  fame.  I doubt  the  Pope  his
Maifter  would  hardly  belieue  him  in  this , who  would
giue  fomc  good  (tore  of  crownes,  fo  be  fecured  by  crofi.
fies  from  the  danger  of  poyfon.  I doe  not  fee  poyfoning
any  where  fo  rife  as  in  Italy  , and  cfpecially  at  Rome,
where  Crofles  are  not  dainty.

And  what  becomes  of  that  goodly  auncicnt  Poem
made,  and  fungin  honour  of  the  Croife  ?

Jsla  fiios  fortiores
Semper  facit,  et  vitlores :

Morbos fan  at,  ct  languor  es :

%eprimit  damonta .

That  is,

The  Crojfe,  in  battaile  is  a flrield.

Which  who  fo  beares,fhll  wmnes  the feldl
tsfgainfl  difeafes  tis  a fell:
t/i charme  againU  the  power  ofheH.

* j.  \ * • 4 ■ i ■ > > . .

It  is  very  great  rcafon  they  fliould  doe  it  diuine  ho-
nour, called  Latria , and  fweat,  and  fpit , and  clamor  in
. theyr  Sorbone  for  the  fame,  fince  they  giue  it  the  diuine
v ! . *,  fupcr«


in  calling  out  of  Deuils.  page,i2f

luprcaiue  power  of  our  blefled  Sauiour.  For  what  di dt
our  Sauiour  heere  on  earth,  or  what  could  he  do  more,
or  what  did  he  adorne  his  ownc  Jftylc  withall  to  S.  Iohnt
(ending his difciples vnto  him,  to  know  whether hcc
were  Chrift : he  faid  no  more  then  this : Joe  backevnto
John,  and  tell  him  what  you  hauefeene , and  heard : how
that  the  blind  fee , the  lame  go e>  the  deafe  heareyandvnto  the
Jlmple  U thegojpell preached . And  dooth  not  this  bring  vs
plainly  within  compadc  of  the  heathen  challenge,  that
wc  b tlignei  dei  cnltoresy  worfliippers,  and  feruauncs  to  a
ivoodden  god  ?

Our  deuill-comedians,  whofe  ayme  was  (as  you  fee )
by  playing  ouer  all  the  trinkets , toyes , Sc  pedlars  ware
of  the  Popes  holy  budget , and  by  gracing  them  with
fomefeeming  quality  againft  the  deuil,  to  aduaunce  the
credit,  of  the  Catholiquc  church,  and  to  bring  into  ad-
miration theyr  owne  perfons,  and  pi ieftly  power , that
fo  they  might  catch  the  poore  Gfldgins,  they  fidied  fo
induftrioufiy  for*  left  out  no  old  ceremonie,nor  Engine
of  the  Romane  Church,  that  had  any  name,  or  reputed
faculty  that  way : and  therefore  they  mufiered  the
Church  ftandard  amongft  theyr  fierie  troupes, but  they
did  aduaunce,  and  adorne  with  moc  miracles,  their  new
rcliques , and  theyr  owne  proper  perfons , theyr  hands
theyr  gloues,  theyr  flockings,  theyr  prieftly  ornaments,
as  theyr  amice,  Hole,  maniple,  and  albc , then  they  did
the  old  approoued  coate-armour  of  the  Church  : and
that  vpon  a right  wife  ground  j in  regard , that  thefe  did
more  properly  , neerely,  and  effeftuallv  worke  for  the
magnifying  of  themfelues,  and  theyr  prieHly  authority.

Therefore  the  holy  CrofTe  was  often  prefented  on
theflagc,  but  neuer  with  that  acclamation,  and plauditc ,
that  their  other  forenamed  holy  implements  were.  The
firft  honour  the  Miraclill  doth  beflow  vppon  it, is  this  t
that  it  ferued  to  difeouer  Sara  to  haue  a deuil , in  that
Chcc  could  hardly  be  brought  to  figae  herfelfc  with  the

"3


page,i26„  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

ffgne  of  the  Crofle.  Next  it,  holy  water  at  a pinch,whcn
it  would  not  got  downe,  part  Saras  mouth  into  her
throat,  but  ftucke  in  the  way,hcr  throat  was  figned  with
the  crofle,&  then  it  flipped  down,  as  eafily  as  a draught
of  Ale.  It  feemes  that  holy  water  was  old  j for  you  fee
when  it  was  frefh,  the  deuil  himfelfe  was  not  able  to
come  within  the  fmell , but  leapt  out  at  a window  for
haft  to  be  gone . Thirdly,  it  reftored  fpcech  to  Sarah,
when  it  was  loft.  Sara  could  not  fpeake  (faies  the  Recor-
der) till  the  priefi  hadjigned  her  throat  with  the  croffe.  Sara
was  now  a fcholler  of  fome  ftanding  (as  fhec  faith)  and
knew,  when  her  cue  came  to  fay  oucr  her  geare.

Fourthly,  Sara  knew  a pcece  of  the  croffe  by  the
fmell,  and  that  might  (he  doe  right  wel,  for  they  kept  it
See  her  ex-  fo  fwcet  in  a boxe,  (faith  Sard)  that  fhc  muft  hauc  had  a
amina.  fhrewd  pofe,  that  fhould  not  haue  found  it . Fiftly,  it
brought  Sara  to  herfelfe  when  fhec  was  in  a frauncc,or
opened  her  eyes  when  fhee  was  broade  awake.  Yet  old
JEd/nundsbcttowcs  more  grace  vpponit  alone  then  all
thefe : for  when  he  had  hunted  vp  the  deuil  info  C JPfar-
woods  head  with  his  holy  hands,  meaning  fobarricado
him  there,  that  the  people  might  fee  him looke out  at
CMarwoods  eves,  eares,  and  nofe,  as  a prifoner  doth  vfe
to  looke  out  at  an  yron  grate  :hec  fignes  LMarwoods
throat  with  the  figne  of  the  Croffe , with  this  holy  ad-
juration , hie  Chrifh  hmen  eft , hos  limites  ne  tranfeende  .*
this  is  Chrifies  owne  limits  fee  thatyee ftep  not  ouer  this  line:
and  yet  as  feemes,for  feare  the  deuil  fhould  haue  aduen-
tured,  to  put  his  foote  ouer  the  line,  hee  claps  on  the  fa-
cred  maniple  to,  & winds  it  about  his  neck,  that  if  there
were  neede , the  Croffe  might  call  fo  his  good  neigh-
bour, to  helpe  flop  the  thiefe.  For  thefe  holy  hunting
Engines  were  better  managed,  then  our  ordinary  cry  ext
hounds,  that  wil  flie  out,  euery  one  ftriuing  to  leade  a-
way  the  chafe,  and  leauc  his  fellowcs  behind : our  hun<*
ting  dogges  had  beene  managed  to  flay  for  each  other,

that


in  cafting  out  ofDcuils.  page,  127

that  the  cry  might  be  ful,  and  that  one  might  help  out
another  at  a dead  fault.  And  thus  they  difmifled  the  ho-
ly erode  the  flage,  wirhout  any  great  alarum  , or  found
of  the  common  drum  : Enters  the  holy  Sacrament  vp-
pon  their  dage,  deformed  by  thefe  hell-monders  into  a
moft  deferable  Idoll  of  the  made,  with  a farre  more  fo-
Icmne  grace,  (worthy  of  a far  better  place , if  thefe  mif-
creants  had  not  playd  fo  long  with  hei-fmoake  ,*that  it
had  put  out  thevr  eyes  cleane)  but  they  that  haue  playd
with  God,  Chrid,  and  the  holy  Ghod,  the  deuill  muff
giue  them  leaue  to  play  with  Chridcs  blefled  inditution
to. . I fay  they  prefent  it  with  great  pompe,  in  regard  of
the  thrife  glorious  date,  impioufly,  blafphemoully;  and
chimerically  conceited  by  them  to  be  in  royall  perfon
within.  Such  a monflrous  metamorphofis , as  Homer,

TindarttSy  Hefiode , nor  all  the  fabulous  Grecian  wits  put
inaroafladurfl  neuerfaine,  forge,  or  dreame  of  any
their  defpicable  gods,  that  any  God  fhould  be  made  of
amorfell  of  bread.

This  new  molded  mafle-Idoll , laughed  at  by  fome,
loathed  by  many,  detefled  of  all  pious,  and  ingenious
(pints,  that  haue  not  intoxicated  their  wits  with  that  en-
chaunted  Babylonian  chalice*)  wanting  wifnefle in  hea-
uen,  and  becing  hifled  at  on  earth,  mud  be  brought  vp-
pon  our  deuil-flage,  to  be  graced,  honoured,  and  con-
firmed from  hell.  And  the  fame  deuil,that  fainted  fom-
f ictn , an d'Briatt,  mud  with  the  fameblacke  breath  , and
foole  mouth,  dcifie  this  bread-Idoll,and  make  it  a God.

And  that  it  may  be  a perfett  Chimera,  compounded  all
* of fi&ion,  and  fantaflicall  imagination  •>  the  fmoake,  the
fire,  the  dench,  theroarc,  hell , and  the  deuill  mud  be
cogged,  feigned,  and  playd,  to  help  out  with  this  infer-
nail,  and  diabolical  1 fafeination.

Would  it  not  caufe  men,  and  Angels  to  wonder,  at
‘the defperate boldnesof the  Ethnick  Romifh Church,
thatflaould  dare  fo  impioufly,  and  blafphemoufly  to

pro-


page,  123


Tilman:
Do  mirac.*
Eucharift:


, A declaration  of  Popifh  Impoftnre
prophane  fhc  moft  facrcd  reuerend  Supper  ofour  blcC>
fed  Sauiour,  whofe  end,  and  Edcnce  is,  to  be  taken,  re*
eeaued,  8c  eaten,  as  the  bread  of  life, the  ftrengthjhealth,
and  fvveetc  comfort  ofour  foule : all  whofe  diuine  ener-
gic,  power,  and  vertuc,  is  to  thereccauer  onelyj  the
promife  of  life  to  the  worthy  receauer,  the  menace  of
death  to  the  vnwprthy  receauer*, all  mat  ter,  forme,  effett,
and  eifd,  direfted  to  the  receauer.To  difguife,difformc,
and  monfter-like  to  mifhape  the  nature  of  this  thrice
bleded  communion,as  to  make  it  a Monfter-Engine  of
all  prodigious  fignes,,  cogged  miracles,  and-grode  Hea-
theniih  conceited  wonders,  and  to  blaze  this  their  he!-
lid  impiety,  before  the  eyes  of  all  the  world : they  baue
compiled  a booke,  containing  no  ltfle  then  foure  and
fortiefeueral  chapters,  treating  oncly  *De  miracttlisvcA
Sacramenti.  Sci.  Euchariftiae.  That  is : Of  the  Miracle  s%
that  the  venerable  Sacrament  ofthefacred  Eucharift  hath
performed : transforming  the  nature  of  the  bleded  (up-
per, into  a prodigious  monfter  of  wonders.  Some  of
the  heads  of  which  Chimara,  for  afample  of  the  reft,  I
wil  point  out  vnto  you.  (ftap,  /.  De  pradto  ab  infeftatione
rnahgnorum  jpirituum  liber ato,  per  oblationemfacnficij  cor~
ports  Chrijh.  Of  a Farme  houfe  freed  from  the  haunting
of  bad  fpirits,  by  celebrating  the  Made.  Cap.  2.  De  Sax-
oniae  Duce  , quifub  facrificio  Mijfa  zndit fyeciem  elegants*
pueruli  in  Euchariftia.  Of  a Duke  of  Saxonie , who  at  the
time  of  the  celebration  of  the  Made,  fa  w the  forme  of
an  elegant  young  child,  in  the  Eucharift.  (ap.  s.  *De
quodam  cuius  vincula  folueb ant ur  tempore , quo  pro  illo  offe -
rebatur  facrificium  mifta . Of  one  whofe  fhackles  feloflf^
at  the  time  when  a made  was  faid  for  him . Cap.  6 . De
Baraca  Nauta  per  faint  arem  hosltam  EuchariflU  a nan*
f r agio  liber  at  0 . Of  one  'Baraca  a Mariner,  that  by  the
Eucharift  efcaped  a fempeft.  Cap.  20.  fguomodo  Saty-
rus  diui  Ambrofij  frater,  EuchariHtam  collo  appenfam  ha* '
bens,  innaufragio  incolnmis  fernatur . How  one  Satyruss


4

in  carting  out  of  Deuils*  page,  129

S.tAmbrofe  his  brother  was  failed  in  a (Lip*  wrack , by
hauing  the  Eucharirt  hanging  about  his  nec Uc.Cap.  29.
j'  SDe  tuchanflia , qua  a terra  fuapte  virtute  jubhmata  per
|i  aeraferebatur  ad  altare jbidcmcj^  in  jpecie  venafttjfimi  pueri
apparuit . Of  the  Eucharirt  flying  in  the  ayrevnro  the
Aln$>  and  there  appearing  in  the  forme  ofamortbeau-
l tiful  child.  Cap . 36.  ‘De  hoftia tertio  ab  altart dimmtus pro -
iefta,  eo  quo d amice  ejfet  contaminata . Of  an  Oaft  thrice
skipping  from  off  the  Altar,  by  reafon  it  was  defiled  by  a
9 little flie . Enough  for  a tart,  the  whole  tunne  is  of  the
fame  liquor,  colour,  and  fang . And  who  would  after
this  deeme  CMahomet  an  Impoflor , for  carying  the
Moonc  in  his  pocket,  and  mounting  vp,  when  hee  was
dead,  thorough  the  ayre,  vnto  the  roofeofa  Chap-

I Pel1  ?

Heare  our  owne  Miracle-monger,  and  his  crue,  how
handfomly  t hev  a<rt  this  mafle-monrter  from  hel . Firrt,

Saras  6e uil  Andes  the  Communicants  that  had  beeneat
maffe,by  thefmel.  The  Romainc  Church,  and  her  im-
plements arc  of  ono,  and  the  fame  perfume,  that  doe
out-fmelthefuminglake,  fpoken  ofin  the  4S?pccalipss
nay  hel,  the  deuil, & all.Next  the  bleffed  Sacrament, was
prefent ed  in  a Pix : heere  Saras  deuill roared  like  a 'Bull:

It  fhould  haue  beene : bellowed  like  a Cow , for  hers  was
a fhe  deuil.  Heere  the  real  prefence  is  roared  out  by  Sa-
ras deuil . Then  Saras  deuil  was  brought  vnto  the  Al-
tar, at  the  time  of  eleuation,  and  could  not  behold  the
Sacrament,for  the  brighfncs,tbat  fhined  about  it.  Heere
the  glorious  prefence  of  our  Sauiour  in  the  Sacrament
isfpied  out  by  the  deuil.  At  an  other  eleuation  Saras
deuil  could  not  abide  to  looke  vpon  the  Sacrament, and
when  fhee  looked  vp,  fliee  could  fee  nothing,  but  the
prierts  fingers.  Heere  is  an  euident  demonrtration,  that
our  Sauiour  was  there  prefent,in  that  he  made  the  hoafl
to  vanifh  out  of  Saras  deuils  fight.

When  nothing  would  doe,  the  prefence  of  the  Sacra-

S.  mens


page>l  50*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

mcnf  made  Maho  tel  his  name,  controlled  him,  calmed
him,  couched  him,  as  quiet,  and  gentle,  as  a dogge  vn-
derabench,  zJMaho  Saras.dc uil,  being commaundcd
tokidethe  blefTed  Sacrament,  durd  not  difobey,  but
kided  it  very  reuercntly,  as  children  kifTe  the  rod.  The
deuil  being  commaunded  to  take  his  oath,  vppqpthc
blefTed  Sacrament,  he  durd  notrefufe,  but  fwore  very
deuoutly,  that  he  would  tel  his  name,  and  be  gone : and
yet  like  a falfe  rake-hel,  periured  himfelfe,  and  flayed  a 1
fill : and  when  hee  diould  be  brought  to  his  booke  a-
gainc,  he  fwore  he  would  breake  his  owne  nccke,ere  he
would  fwearethe  fccond  time,  and  for  feare  ( as  feemes)
that  the  deuil  fhould  make  away  himfelfe,  Sc  fo  the  play
be  mard  afore  the  plaudite,  they  let  him  alone.

Thcfe  are  demon(lrations,by  dedu&ion  from  the  de-
tail, ofour  Sauiour  his  real  prefence : but  wil  you  heare
the  deuil  put  you  out  of  doubt,  by  his  owne  authentical
adeueration.  Dibdale  the  pried,  put  his  finger  info'  Sa»
ras  mouth,  and  bid  the  deuil  bite  if,  if  he  durd  2 the  de-
See  he?  V tail  aunfwered,  faith  the  Miradid,  that  it  had  touchedth*
zxAim  Lord.  ButSara  fels  vs,  now  fhehath  put  off  her  deuils
vizard,  that  had  fhe  not  doode  more  in  feare  of  a boxe
on  the  eare , then  of  any  Lord  there,  fhee  would  haue
made  fo  bold,  as  to  haue  had  a fnap  at  the  prieds  finger*
Saras  deuil  was  brought  by  a new  commaund,  to  kiffc
the  Sacrament  more  furc : And  being  asked,  what  hee
had  kiffed’iie  aunfwered,  ThebodyofffhrtFl,  and  that  it
had  eyes  in  it.  Hecre  you  haue  the  deuils  owne  fedimo-
nie,  whatneedcs  any  morewifnes,  and  yet  if  you  wif
haue  it  fuller : heare  Saras  deuil  againc,  when  the  priefl  \
holding  him  the  blefTed  Sacrament , and  bidding  him
to  adore  his  Lord,  and  God : the  deuil  aunfwered  ma-
iepartly.  He  is  thy  Cjod  indeede : and  if  thou  doe  not  beleeuet
cut  it  with  a knife tand thou pjalt  fee  it  bleede.  Was  not  this
part  wel  played,  to  proue  the  eyes , the  body , the  blood
of  our  Sauiour  in  the  Sacrament,  from  out  of  hell.

Were-


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils,  page,  i JI

Were  it  not  great  pitty,  this  deuil,  hel,  and  oath,  fhould
be  cogged , and  not  a true  deuil  indeedc  ? For  what  a
great  deale  of  labour,  cxpence  of  candel , beating  of
braincs,  forging  offarhers,  counfels,  & authorities, wre-
{ling  of  Scripture , falfifying  of  Authors,  coyning  of
wonders,would  this  one  Comedy  fpare  ? If  you  wil  not
bclceue,  that  our  $3uiour  is  in  the  Sacrament,  goc  to  Sir
George  Peckfams  houfe  at  Denham , or  my* L ,'Uanx  his
phoufe  at  Hackney,  and  aske  the  deuil,  who  faw  our  Sa-
uiours  eyes  (as  hee  fayes)  with  his  owne  eyes,  touched
him  with  his  finger,  kiffed  him  with  his  mouth,  and  to
make  if  paft  doubt, tooke  his  oath  vpon  the  Sacrament*
that  it  was  true.  Or  elfe  trie  if  the  argument  wil  not  run
in  better  moode,  and  figure  thus.  The  very  fame  deuil,
that  Sainted  Tlrian,  and  Campian  at  Ttbnrne:  that  pro-
claimed himfelfeva  Dotrefa  Ninnie,  and  a mad  foole  aC
Hackney : that  had  the  AfTes  cares  clapt  clofe  to  his  head
at  ‘ Denham : hath'faid,  roared,and  fworne  fo,  therefore  it
is  true.  Or  elfe  thus.  The  fame  Edmunds, & his  tweluc
holy  difciples,  that  haue  feigned  a deuil  Trag^die,  for-
ted  it  into  a&es,  and  feenes,  furnifhed  it  with  hangings,
fet  vp  a ilage  of  forgerie,  replenifhed  it  with  perfonated
actors,  adorned  it  with  fi&ious  deuifes,  dreamesu  ima-
» ginations,  and  ridiculous  wonders,  haue  cogged  a new
hel,  new  deuils,  new  roarings,  new  oathes,new  kifles  to
coggc  our  Sauiour  into  the  Sacrament:  therfore  you
may  be  cock-fure  to  finde  him  there.

CHAP.  2r.

eg  Of  the  ftrange formes,  fhapes,  and  apparitions  of
of  the  dentils.

T T is  a queflion  moued  by  Scaliger : Why  men  of  a me-
X lancholick^  conflitntion  be  more  fnbiebl  to  feares, fancies,
and  imagination  of  denils , and  rvitches , then  other  tempers
be  ? Hil  aunfwcr  is,  qnia  ab  atra  bile , atri  & fnligmofi ge~

S 2 ncrantnr

y . -i


l]i4  A declaration  of  PopiPn  impofture

nerantur fyiritus^m  cerebrum  pwgtint  turbulent  is  phantajf
matibusy  becaufe  from  their  blacke  Sc  footy  blood,gloo-
mie  fuliginous  fpirits  do  fufne  info  their  braine , which
bring  blacke,  gloomy,  and  frightful  images,  reprcfenta-
tions> and  fimilitudes  in  them,  wherwith  the  vnderflan-
ding  is  troubled,  and  oppreft.  Men  of  this  duskic,  tur-
bulent,and  fantaHicall  difpofition,  asnhey  arc  very  fliffc
in  their  conceit,  abfolute  in  their  owne  apprehenfion,
* extreame  violent , and  peremptory  in  their  refolution,
(which  al  grow  from  the  earthy  dry'ftiffeneflTc  of  the  di-
fcurfiue  melancholicke  fpirits,  that  doepoffeflc  theyr
braine)  fo  are  they  fo  full  of  fpeculations , fanfies  , and
imaginations  of  fpirits,  and  deuils,  and  thofcfo  Chime-
ricalland  (Irange,  as  the  Philofophcrs  old  aphortfme  is,
cerebrum  Me  lane  ho  hcum  eft  fedes  d&monum,  a melancho-
licke braine  is  the  chaire  of  eftate  for  the  deuil.  And  an
other  aphorifme  they  haue  founded  on  experience,  nul-
lum magnum  ingenium  fine  dementia , there  is  no  great  wirs
without  fomc  mixture  of  madneffc . Iohn  'Bodm  the
Frenchman,  is  a perfect  lehta  of  both  thefe,  who  beeing
in  his  younger  yeeres  of  a moll  piercing,  quicke,  fpecu-
latiuc  wit,  which  grew  of  a light,  (lining,  and  difetirfiue
melancholic  in  him,fell  (as  Hermogenes  the  mirror  ofwit
did)  in  the  midle  of  his  age  to  be  a pure  fot . The  caufe
whereof  is  the  cooling,  and  thickning  of  his  melancho-
licke blood , and  the  fpending , or  going  out  of  that
lightfome,  a£Viue,  and  Riming  fpirit , which  the  heat  of
blood  in  his  youth  did  better  mainfaine.

This  man,  though  during  the  prime  of  his  wit  he  was
ofamoft,  pregnant,  ripe,  and  fubtile  difeourfe,  yet  his
wit  beeing  deepe  vvoaded  with  that  raclancholick
blacke  dye,  had  his  braine  ve ramfedem  dstmonum , the
theater,  and  fporting  houfc  for  deuils  fo  daunccin : for
he  hath  in  his  braine,  fuch  ftrange  fpeculations,  fantafc
sues,  and  theoremes  for  deuils,  as  a man  may  fee  a great
deale  of  madnes  mixed  with  his  great  wit.  For  he  holds


in  carting  our  of  Deuils.  pagc,t

that  deuils  may  transforme  themfelues  info  any  fliape  of
hearts, or  fimilitudc  of  men^and  may  eate,  drinkc,  and
conuerfe  familiarly  with  them,  and  may  haue  the  aft  of
generation  with  women,  as  they  pleafc.  And  not  that
onely,  but  that  a Witch  by  oyntments,  & charmes,  may
transforme  herfelfe  into  the  fliape  of  any  bead,  bird,  or
fi(h : that  flic  may  fiie  in  the  ayre,  that  fhc  may  dcpriuc
men  of  their  generatiue  power,  that  Hie  may  transferre
corne  out  of  one  field  into  another,and  may  caufe  haile,
thunder,  and  winde  at  her  pleafure . And  hec  defends
lycanthrofia , and  die  change  of  VlyjJes  men  info  fwinc
by  the  Witch  Circe  , to  be  reall , and  true  : and  abouc
all  fels  that  vnfauory,  melancholicke , ridiculous  tale  of
an  Eo-^e,  which  a Witch  fold  to  an  Englifhman,  and  bv
the  fame  transformed  him  into  an  A lie,  and  made  him
her  Market-mule  three  yeeres,fo  ride  on  to  buy  butter :
and  how  that  at  lafi,  fhee  remorphized  him  into  the  na-
tiue  rtiape  of  a man  againe.

This  mans  cerebrum  meUncholicum , is  a notable  forge
for  our  popirti  Ethnicks,  to  hammer  a motly  deuil  out
of.  But  they  haue  more  auncient,  and  authcnticke  re-
cords for  their  Night-owles,thcn  this  : as  namely,  that
canonicall  ftory  in  Virgil!y  of  Crete fay  <?y£neas  his  wife:
how  <t AEnea*y  flying  with  Anchifes  his  father , and  Creiifo
bis  wife, thorough  the  flreefs  on  7>^,beingall  on  a light
flame,  loft  his  wife  (renfet  in  a crowde,as  he  polled  tho-
rough the  Citty,  and  how  that  (reiifa  appeared  to  him  •
in  her  ghort,  as  ts£neae  went  out  at  the  gafe,&  fold  him
that  fhe  was  dead,  and  was  become  one  of  the  walking
nighf-ghorts,  bidding  him  to  fake  his  father  a yfuchifesy
and  fhift  for  himfelfc.  This  is  a mod  redoubted  record
of  the  walking  of  womens  ghofts . And  for  the  appea-
ring of  bad,  and  hurtful  fpirits  in  vgly,  andmonftrous
formes,  they  haue  their  prefident,  and  original!  in  the
hiftory  of  Afar:  Bruttes,  who  hauing  put  all  his  Army  in
a readmes,  for  the  laft  fatall  field c to  be  fought  betwixt

S 3 him


page,  134  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

him  and  ssfugujlus, and  beeing  alone  at  his  bookc  in  the
deepc,  and  filcnt  night,  fuddainly  he  hcarcs  a great  ru-
ffling in  the  roomc,  where  ffee  fate , and  cafling  vp  his
head,  fees  a foulc,  ougly,  mondrous  fhapedghod  Han-
ding afore  him  : and  asking  it  angcrly  , jQuis  tu  ?Deus
aut  dtmon  f what  art  thou?  a God  or  a deuil?  The  shod
anfwers,y/s7#  mains  t ms  genius,  I am  thine  euil  angel:  the
Capt:  askes  fiercely  again,  gt*  quid  me  vis?  6c  what  dooft
thou  heerc  ? the  ghoft  fayes,  eras  Philtppis  mevidebis , to
morrow  I wil  meet  thee  at  the  fields  of  Philippi:  the  cap-
taine  anfwers  refolutely , videbo}  lie  meet  thee : 6c  fo  falls
condantly  to  his  booke  againe,  not  bidding  it  God
night.  Brutus  recounts  this  [peElrum  to  CaJJius , his  fel-
low in  Armes,and  CaJJius  per fwadcs  him,  that  it  was  but
adreame.  But  out  of  this,  and  fuch  like  Hcathenifh
dreames,  what  a world  of  bel-worke,  deuihworke,  and*
Elue-worke,had  we  walking  amongd  vs  heere  in  Eng-
land, what  time  that  popifh  mid  had  befogged  the  eyes
of  our  poore  people  ? How  were  bur  children,  old  wo-
men, and  maidcs afraid  to erode a Churchyeard , ora
chree-way  leet , or  to  goe  for  fpoones  into  the  Kitchin
without  a candle  ?and  no  marueile.  Fird , becaufe  the
deuil  comes  from  a fmoakie  blacke  houfe,  he,  or  a lewd
frier  was  dill  at  hand,  with  ougly  homes  on  his  head,
fire  in  his  mouth,  a cowes  tayle  in  his  breech,  eyes  like  a
bafon,  fangs  like  a dogge,  clawes  like  a Beare , a skinne
like  a Neger,and  a voyce  roaring  like  a Lyon*  then  boh,
or  ohy  in  the  dark  was  enough  to  make  their  haire  dand
vpright.  And  if  that  the  bowlc  of  curds,  6c  creamc  were
not  duly  fet  out  for  1 \o bin  good- fellow  the  Frier,  6c  Stjfe
the  dairy-maide , to  meete  at  hinch  pinch , and  laugh  not ,
when  the  good  wife  was  a bed,why  then,either  the  pot-
tage was  burnt  to  next  day  in  the  pot , or  the  cheefe
would  not  curdle,  or  the  butter  would  not  come,  or  the
ale  in  the  fat  would  neuer  hauc  good  head.  But  ifa  Pee-
ter-pennj,  or  an  houzle-egge  were  behind,  or  a patch  of


in  calling  out  of  Deuils:  page^f^?

tyth  vnpaid  to  the  Church  ( Iefu  Maria)  the  ware  where
youwalkcfor  fcarcof  bnll-beggers,  fptrits,  witches , vr -
chins  ,8  htesfags  fairies  ,Satyrsy  Tans,  Tames  ,Syluans,Kit  See  Scots
with  the  candle fUcke,  Tritons,  Centaurs,  Dwarfs,  Giants , bookeof
impes, Calcars,  coniurers, Nymphs, changlings,fcritchowles , Witches.
Incubus  the  fume,  the  mare , the  man  in  the  oahejoelrvaync,
the  fire-drake, the  puckle, Tom  thumbe , hobgoblin , Tom-
tumbler \ Boneles,  and  the  refl:  and  what  girle,  boy, or  old
wifard  would  be  Co  hardy  to  Rep  ouer  the  threihold  in
the  night  for  an  half-penny  worth  of  muRard  amongft
this  frightfull  crue , without  a dolen  auemaries,  two  do-
fen  of  erodes  furcly  (igned , and  halfe  a dofen  Pater  no -
filers,  and  the  commending  himfelfe  to  the  tuition  of  S.

Vncumber,  or  els  our  blefi'ed  Lady }

Thefe  be  the  Popes,  and  his  holy  Legafs,  and  thofe
of  his  holy  million  , and  commiflion  from  hell  their
frightful  crue,  theyr  black-guard, with  which  they  work
wonders,  amongRa  faithlefle,  fen celcilc  generation  :
thefe  fhoutc  about  them,  attend  them , and  arc  of  thevr
guard,  and  trayne,  wherefoeuer  they  goe , or  walkc,  as
Styx , Phlegeton , and  the  Eumenides  doe  guard  zTEacus
in  hell : with  thefe  they  worke  their  wonders,  making  I-
snages  tofpeake,  vautes  to  found , trunks  to  carry  tales,
Churchyeards to fwarme, houfes to rufh,  rumble,  and
clatter  with  chayncs,  high-waies,  old  graues,  pittes,  and
woods  ends  to  be  haunted  with  lights,  owles , and  poa-
kers  5 and  with  thefe  they  adrad,  and  gaRcr  fenceleife
old  women,  witleffe  children,  and  melancholike dot-
trels, out  of  their  wits.  w

Thefe  MonRer-fwarmeshis  Hoi: Sc  his  helly  crue  haue
feraped,  and  raked  together  out  of  old  doating  heathen
HiRoriographers,  wifardizing  Augurs,  impoRurizing
South-fayers,  dfeaming  Poets,  Chimerial  conceifers,&
coyncrs  of  fables,  fuch  as  pufic  vp  our  young  gallants
with  bigge  lookes,  and  bombaR  phrafes,as  the  booke  of
Lancelot  du  Lake,  (fits]  of  Warwick?  > The  LPCIirrour  of

, Knight*-


page,^*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

Knifihthoode , Amadis  d<  Gaule , and  fuch  like  «hcir  Le-
gends*, out  ofthefe  they  conceit  their  monftrous  (hapes,
vgly  bug-beares,  hydeous  apparitions  of  ghofts : our  of
thefe  they  conforme,  their  charmes,enchauntmcnts, pc*  *
riapfs,  amulets,  characters,  waft  coates,  and  fmockes  of
proofe,  againft  hayle,  thunder,  lightning,  biting  of  mad
dogges,  .gnawing  of  Rats,  againft  botches,  biles,  crofc
biting,  fparrow-blafting,Owle-hunting,  and  the  like.

Out  of  thefe  is  fhaped  vs  the  true  Id&a  of  a Witch,  an
olde  weather-beaten  Croane,  hauing  her  chinne,  & her
knees  meeting  for  age,  walking  like  a bow  leaning  on
a fhaft,  hollow  eyed,  vntoothed, .furrowed  on  her  face,
.hauing  her  lips  trembling  witb-the  palfie,  going  mum*,
bling  in. the  ftreetes,  one  that  hath  forgo  tfe  her  pater  no -
fiert  and  hath  yet  a fhrewd  tongue  in  her  head,  to  call  a
drab,  a drab . If  fhee  haue  learned  of  an  olde  wife  in  a
chimnies  end : Pax,  max,  fax,  for  a fpel : or  can  fay  Sir
lohnofGrantamscuxfc , for  the  Millers  Eeles,  that  were
ftolne : All  you  that  haue  fiolne  the  Millers  £e/fj,Laudatc  r
dominum  de  cadis:  AndalL  they  that  haue  confuted  there-
to, benedicamus  domino : Why  then  ho,  beware, looke
about  you  my  neighbours  s if  any  of  you  haueaftiecpc
fickeof  the  giddies,  oranhoggeof  the  mumps,  or  an
horfe  of  the  ftagger  s,  or  a knauilb  boy  of  the  fchoolc,or
an  idlegirlc  of  thcwheele,  or  a young  drab  of  the  fill-
• lens,  and  hath  not  fat  enough  for  her  porredge,  nor  her
father,  and  mother,  butter  enough  for  their  bread  j and
(be  haue  a little  helpe  of  the  Mother f>tlepfie,oi  Cramps
to  teach  her  role  her  eyes,  wrie  her  mouth,  gnalh  her
teeth,  ftartle  with  her  body,  holdher  armes  and  hands
fhffe,  make  anticke  faces,  gime,  mow,  and  mop  like
an  Ape,  tumble  like  a Hedgehogge,and  can  mutter  out
two  or  three  words  of  gibridg , as  obns , bobus.and  then
with-all  old  mother  Nobs  hath  called  her  by  chauncc,
idle  young  hufwife,  or  bid  the  deuil  fcratch  her,  then  no
doubt  but  mother  Nobs  is  the  Witch : the  young  girle


in  carting  out  of  Deuils*  Page,  i

is  Owle-blafted,  and  pofleffed : and  it  goes  hard,  but
ye  flial  haue  fome  idle,  adlc,  giddic,  lymphatical!jillunii'*
nate  dotrcl,  who  being  out  of  crcdife,  learning, fobriety,
honefty,and  wit  ,wil  take  this  holy  aduanfagc,to  raife  the
ruines  of  his  defperate  decayed  name , and  for  his  better
glory  wil  bc-pray  the  iugling  drab  > and  caft  out  Mcpp
chedeuil.

They  that  haue  their  braines  baited,  and  their  fancies
diftempered  with  the  imaginations , and  apprehenfi-
ons  of  Witches,  Coniurers,  and  Fayries,  and  all  that
Lyrophatical  Chim&ra:  I finde  to  be  roarflialled  in  one
ofthcfefiucrankes,  children,  foolcs,  women,  cowards,
fick,  orbtackc,  melancholicke,  difeompofed  wits.  The
Scythians  being  a warlike  Nation  (as  Plutarch' reports)
neuer  faw  any  vifions.

The  frightful  fancics,and  fond  gaftful  opinions,ofa!l
the  other  dofrcls  arife  out  of  one  of  thefe  two  rootess
weakenes  of  wit, or  vnrtayedncs  in  religion . Horace  the
Heathen  (pied  long  agoe,  that  a Witch,  a Wizard,  and
a Coniurcrwcrcbutbulbcggcrsto  fcare  fooles  ; wri-
ting thus  to  one  that  had  fo  much  wit,  as  to  difcerne  a
poled  fheepe,  from  a parlous  bcaft. "

S omnia , terrores  i^IagicosjniracuUyfagat,

Notturnos  Lemur es,  portenta ^ Thejfa/a  rides4

That  is,

‘Dreame  s,  and  Magic  all  affrights,

Wonders , Witches , walking  jprtghtsy
What  Theffalian  Hags  can  doe y
• tsdll  this  feemes  a iefi  to  you.

And  Geojjry  Chaucer , who  had  his  two  eyes,  wit,  and
learning  in  his  head , (pying  that  all  thefe  brainleflc  i-
maginations,  of witchings,  poffeflings,  houfe-hanting,
and  the  reft,  were  the  forgeries,  cofenages,  Impofturs,
and  legerdemaine  oferaftie  priefts,  and  leacherous  Fri-
ers, either  to  naaske  their  venerie,  or  to  eoritch  their  pur-

T.  a fc  $i


page,  13$,  A declaration  of  Popifli  impofture

fes,by  felling  their  Pope-trumpery  (a s Medals,  agntudei,
Tie  fed  beadesfioly  water , halowed  Crofes,  periapts,  amu-
lets , fntockl  of  proof e , and  fuch)  at  a good  rate  j as  who
would  not  giue  foundly  fora  Medal  defenfiue  againft
the  deuil  ? writes  in  good  plainc  termes  of  the  holy  Co-
uent  of  Friers  thus:

For  there  as  wont  to  walken  was  an  Elfc,

There  walketh  now  the  Limifor  himfelft :

In  euerj  hup?,  and  vnder  cuery  tree ,

There  nis  none  other  Iucubus  hut  hee .

I ; *?  1 • *f

Now  fee  our  holy  Com^dian^?  if  they  haue  not  dref-
fed  their  Denham  deuils,  after  the  old  Romainc  fafhion,
fit  to  amaze  Will Sommers  with-all.  Heare  the  graue  Mi-
raclift , how  aunciently  hee  attires  the  deuil  for  Sara,
Shee  had  beene  dtuers  times  affrighted  with  vgltc  vtfeons.
You  fhal  neucr  heare  a prologue  to  a Popifri  poifcilion,
but  it  begins  with  that  ftyle.  Jhe fate  by  the  fre Jome -

See  the  what  late  with  an  other  mayde  of  the fame  houfe , being  both
b eginning  jn  a y^adines  to  goe  to  bed,  they  fell  into  a Jlumber,  and  drou -
"min* thus  b *he fire?  there  approached  neere  vnto  them  three
Cats,  making  a terrible  noyfe,  and  fprawling  about  this  young
mayde,  one  of  them  leapt  ouer  her  heady  and  an  other  crept
betwixt  her  legges : (by  nFMelleus^nd  tJMengns  his  rules,
this  might  be  a pried  in  the  likenes  of  a Cat : their  hunt
was  all  that  way)  whereat  fl?ee  fodainly  looking  behind  her :
(as  hauing  beene  vfed  to  fuch  creeping  Cats,)  fie  beheld
a flrange  huge  Cat,  of  the  bignes  of  a MaFhffe-dogge, flaring
in  her  face,  with  eyes  very  great,  and  bright,  to  the  bignes  of
afawcer.  Heere  is  a right  priefls  Hobgoblin,  or  Tom
Spanner  in  the  darkc.  And  wil  you  heare  Sara  her  felfe
vneafe  you  this  bugge:  Lookeinher  depofition,  fh*e
was  looking  for  Tgges  in  a bufi  by  her  Maiflers  houfe , and
fodainly  a Cat  leapt  out , whereat  fie  gaue  a flartle : and  this
Cat, by  this  prieftly  power(0  Catholicamfdem) is  fodain-
lie  Hobgoblinizd,  and  hath  gotten  a ftiape,  as  bigge  as


in  cafting  out  of  Deuifs.  page,  139

* (JlfaFliffe,  and  eyes  as  bigge  as  a fawcer : O monflrous
Catholicjuc  faith,  that  canft  turnc  ordinarie  Cats  in  a
moment  into  Maffiftcs.  Youfhal  hauc  them  rancked
together,  as  they  came  from  the  Popes  tyring-houfe :
that  ye  may  fee, which  dcuil  you  like  beft,  to  fet  the  A f-
fes  eares  vpon.  *s4t  fupper  the  Cat  afore -f aid,  was  turned
into  a doqge,  of  two  colours , blacke , andgreene , and  there -
with-all , a Spaniel  bayed , ( and  therefore  Maho  was  cer-
tainly come.,)  <ssft  another  time  the  dentil  came  downe  the  pa©Cilo.
chimney  jn  a Winde/zW  blew  the  afhes  about  the  chamber :

Sometime  he  appeared  in  the  likenes  of  a Man  : fometime  of
a Bright  thing,  that  fau  vpon  our  Ladies  image : fometime
in  the  likenes  of  an  Irifh  boy,  with  a blacke  curled  head:
fometime  of  a great  Black  dogge  : fometime  he  came  flying
like  a S parr  owe , with  a Woodcocks  bill : fometime  like  a
T oade,  with  a nofe  like  a Moale : fometime  like  a Moufe :
fometime  like  a Miniffer : fometimes  like  an  Ey,  without
a head  : fometimes  like  a Ruffian,  with  curled  haire : fom-
times  like  an  Old  man ,with  a long  beard : and aboue  all,  he
came  in  with  a drumme  3 and  feauen  mot ly  vizards,  daun -
ting  about  the  chamber  . This  was  at  the  L.  ZJaux  his
houfe  at  Hackney , to  conclude  their  holy  Chriftmafle,
with  the  deuils  motly  mummcric.

And  which  of  all  thefe  ffial  we  choofe  to  weare  Men -
gus  his  Afles  eares  ? The  Hedge-jparrow  is  furniffied  al-
ready with  the  Woodcocks  bill:  the  Toade  is  preferd  to
weare  the  Adoales  nofe : the  Ruffian  with  the  curled  haire,
would  fwagger , the  Irifh  curled pated boy% would  likely
runne  away  with  them : wee  had  beft  referue  them  for
Edmunds  the  Miraclifts  ownc  wearing  5 for  fancying,
cogging,  6c  faigning  fuch  comly  cafes,  and  faces  for  the
deuil , wher  of  Sara  faw  neither  hide  nor  haire,top,tai!e,
norfhadow  ; except  the  motly  vizards,  which  happily
ffie  dreamed  of  in  a ChriQmafle  night , hauing  feene
Maskers  in  the  day,  and  feafted  thepriefts  highly  next
day  with  this  faigned  relation.  The  reft  arc  all  of  the

T z dcuil-


pagc;i4^  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

deuil- priedsownc  deuifing,  and  therefore  he  may  (alec
his  Maiftcr  OWengut  long  eares,to  make  vp  a ful  fuit.

CHAP.  22.

if  Of  the  Admirable  finall  aSl  of  expelling  the  deuil/ , and  of
thetr  formes  in  theyr  departing .

T T is  a rule  in  L Mcngus,  the  demll-mafhx,  and  Thymus
A the  deuilUvarnifher , that  the  deuill  which  is  fo  be  dif-
poflefled,  mull  be  commaunded  to  goe  out  in  a vifiblc
forme,6c  for  theeuidenceof  his  departing  be  enioynd,
to  cracke  a quarrie  in  (he  glade  window,  or  to  blow  out
a candle ; which  beeing  two  fuch  fupernaturall  aftions,
as  by  a contorted  confpirator  with  the  Exorcift , with-
out the  helpc  of  a cherry-done,  or  the  fuddaine  puffe  of
a wenches  breath , or  the  fwinge  of  her  fleeue , cannot
cleanly  be  conueied,  it  is  no  maiuell  though  they  be
made  a demonflration,that  the  deuil  is  furely  gone.The
penner  of  our  deuil- tragedy  hath  notforgotte  to  kcepe
good  decorum  in  this,  for  hec  hath  fancied,  and  feigned
diuers  well  feeming  formes, and  fimilitudes,  for  his  dage
deuils  to  weare  at  their  taking  their  leaue.

The  fird  deuill  that  was  dideifed  was  Swollen , Tray -
fords  fpirii,  whom  dVrrv*  efpied  ( faith  the  Mirachd)  to
goe  out  at  Tray  fords  right  earc  in  the  forme  of  a Moufe ,
and  it  made  the  poorc  wench  at  the  fight  of  the  Moufe
almod  out  of  her  wits.  The  next  deuil  difpofiefied  was
Hilcho  at  Vxbrtdge , who  appeared  (faith  our  Authour)
to  the  po  fie  (led  parties  at  his  going  our,  hkje  aflame  of
firey  and  lay  glowing  in  the  fire  in  Trayfords  fight,  till  he
had  a new  charge.  The  third  was  Hdberdidance , Saras
dauncing  deuil:  who  appeared  to  the  patient,  like  a
whirlwind, tu rning  round  like  a flame  of  fire, 6c  his  voyce
was  heard  by  a Cooke,  as  hec  flew  ouer  the  Larder*
Captaine  Filpot  went  his  way  in  the  likenes  of  a fmokc ,
turning  round,  and  fo  tooke  his  way  vp  into  the  chira-

nty.


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.  page,  141*

ney.  Lufly  Dickers  feemes Jdid  flippe  a button  in  one  of
his  turnes  aboue  ground : for  he  went  out  in  a foulcvn-
fauory  flench.  Delicate , and  Lufly  lolly  lenkm  went  our,
one  whirling  like  a Jnake , the  other  in  a vapor  not  verie
fweet.  Lufly  Huffcap pe  w ent  out  in  the  likenes  ofa  Cat.

Ktlhco , Hob , and  the  third  Anonymos , all  Captaincs,went
out  in  a wind.  Purre  went  out  in  a little  whtrlewmd.  Fra
teretto  in  a {moke.

Maifter  LMayrne  had  in  him  (as  you  hauc  heard)  the
Mairtcr-deuils  of  the  fcauen  deadly  finnes,  and  there-
fore his  deuils  went  out  in  the  forme  of  thofe  creatures,
that  haue  neerell  refemblance  vnto  thofe  finnes : as  for
example  5 the  fpirit  of  Pride  went  out  in  the  forme  of a
peacecke(foxfooih)  the  fpirit  of  Sloth  in  the  likeneffe  of
an  *A{e:  the  fpirit  of  Snuy  inthe  fimilitudeofa  Dog :
the  fpirit  of  gluttony  in  the  forme  ofa  IVoolfe . But  it  is
to  be  wondered  at,  that  Generali  C JWahot  at  the  lafl,and
mod  dreadfull  exorcifme  of  all,  when  hee  was  expelled
with  2200c.  yceres  torment  layd  vppon  his  backe,  hee
llunke  out  without  any  fimilitude  at  all*  And  more,  an
ordinary  Reader  will  wonder,  that  CMako,  beeing  Die -
tator  of  hell , is  faid  in  the  Legend  of  Miracles , and  fo
noted  by  Sara , to  hauc  chofen  fuch  a ftrangc  part  in  Sa-
ra for  his  pafifage  out , as  I dare  not  name  : and  yet  de-
uils, comedians, and  their  reporters  may  haue  licence  in
all  Courts  to  call  all  things  by  their  name.  And  indeede
heere  lyes  the  wonder  ofall,confidering  that  that  name-
lefle  part,  the  deuils  port-gate  in  Sara , was  the  prierts
quell  and  haunt, which  they  had  hunted  fore,  had  crof-
fed,  rccroflcd,  and  furcrolfed  with  their  holy  hand$,had
facred , or  (cared  with  application  of  their  reucrend
flrong  reliques,  and  other  their  potent  holy  parts,  ( as
you  hauc  heard  poorc  Sara  herfelfe  confertc:)  the  deuill
fhould  once  dare  to  come  neere  that  part,that  had  been
harowed,  (I  would  fay  halowed)  and  enriched  with  fo
many  precious  Iewels  from  Rome : but  you  (hall  finds

T 3 the


page;i4<%  A declaration  of  Popifti  impofture

deuil- prieftsownc  deuifing,  and  therefore  he  may  fatec
bis  Maifter  Offengus  long  cares,  to  make  vp  a ful  fait.

CHAP.  zz.

ff  Of  the  admirable  flnall  aft  of  expelling  the  devils , and  of
thesr  formes  in  thejr  departing .

T T is  a rule  in  l Mcngus,  the  demll-mafhx,  and  Thymus
A the  deutlUvarnifher , that  the  deuill  which  is  to  be  dif-
poflefTed,  mud  be  commaunded  to  goe  out  in  a vifiblc
formed  for  theeuidenceof  his  departing  be  enioynd,
to  cracke  a quarrie  in  the  glade  window,  or  to  blow  out
a candle ; which  beeing  two  fuch  fupernaturall  aft  ions,
as  by  a contorted  confpirator  with  the  Exorcift , with-
out the  hclpc  of  a cherry-ftone,  or  the  fuddaine  puffe  of
a wenches  breath,  or  the  fwinge  of  her  fleeue , cannot
cleanly  be  conueied,  it  is  no  maiuell  though  they  be
made  a demonftration,that  the  deuil  is  furely  gone.Thc
penner  of  our  deuil- tragedy  hath  notforgotte  to  keepe
good  decorum  in  this,  for  hee  hath  fancied,  and  feigned
diuers  well  Terming  formes, and  fimilitudes,  for  his  llage
deuils  to  weare  at  their  taking  their  leaue.

The  fir  ft  deuill  that  was  difieifed  was  Smolkin , Tray -
fords Cpirit,  whom  dVim  efpied  (faith  the  Miraehft)  to
goe  out  at  Tray  fords  right  eare  in  the  forme  of  a Moufe t
and  it  made  the  poorc  wench  at  the  fight  of  the  Moufe
altnoft  out  of  her  wits.  The  next  deuil  difpofietfed  was
Htlcho  at  Vxbndge , who  appeared  (faith  our  Authour)
to  the  poflefted  parties  at  his  going  our,  lik.e  aflame  of
fire , and  lay  glowing  in  the  fire  in  Trayfords  fight,  till  he
bad  a new  charge.  The  third  was  Hdberdidance , Saras
dauncing  deuil:  who  appeared  to  the  patient,  like  a
whirlwind, turning  round  like  a flame  of  fire,&  his  voyce
was  heard  by  a Cooke,  as  hee  flew  ouer  the  Larder,
Captaine  Filpot  went  his  way  in  the  likenes  of  a fmokc ,
turning  round,  aod  to  tooke  his  way  vp  into  the  chim-
ney.


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.  page,  144

ncy.  Lufty  Dkke{ as  feemes Jdid  flippc  a button  in  one  of
bis  turnes  aboue  ground : for  he  went  out  in  a foulcvn-
fauor'y  flench.  De  It  cate,  and  LuFly  lolly  lenkm  went  out,
one  whirling  like  a fnaks » the  other  in  a vapor  not  verie
fweet.  Lu£ty  Huffcappewent  out  in  the  likenes  ofa  Cat.

Kittico,  Hob)  and  the  third  Anonymos , all  Captaincs, went
out  in  a wind.  Purre  went  out  in  a little  whirlewind . Fra -
teretto  in  a {moke.

Maifter  OMaynie  had  in  him  (as  you  hauc  heard)  the  •
Mairtcr-deuils  of  the  fcauen  deadly  finnes , and  there-
fore his  deuils  went  out  in  the  forme  of  thofe  creatures,
that  haueneerert  refemblance  vnto  thofe  finnes : as  for
example  5 the  fpirit  of  Pride  went  out  in  the  forme  of  a
peacecke(b orfbothj  the  fpirit  of  Sloth  in  the  lilcenefl'e  of
an  tsfffe:  the  fpirit  of  Snuy  in  the  fimilitudeofa  Dog:
the  fpirit  of  Cjluttony  in  the  forme  of  a Woolf e . But  it  is
to  be  wondered  at,  that  Generali  C JWaho,  at  the  laft,and
inort  dreadfull  exorcifme  of  all,  when  hee  was  expelled
with  2200c.  yceres  torment  layd  vppon  his  backe,  hee
llunke  out  without  any  fimilitude  at  all.  And  more,  an
ordinary  Reader  will  wonder,  that  CWaho,  beeing  Dic-
tator of  hell , is  faid  in  the  Legend  of  Miracles , and  fo
noted  by  Sara,  to  hauc  chofen  fuch  a Orange  part  in  Sa-
ra for  his  paflfage  out , as  1 dare  not  name  : and  yet  de-
uils, comedians, and  their  reporters  may  haue  licence  in
all  Courts  to  call  all  things  by  their  name.  And  indeede
heere  lyes  the  wonder  ofall,confidering  that  that  namc-
lefle  parr,  the  deuils  port- gate  in  Sara , was  the  prieHs
quert  and  haunt, which  they  had  hunted  fore,  had  crofi-
fed,  rccroficd,  and  furcrofled  with  their  holy  hands,bad
facred , or  feared  with  application  of  their  reucrend
flrong reliques, and  other  their  potent  holy  parts,  (as
you  hauc  heard  poorc  Sara  herfelfe  conferte:)  the  deuill
fhould  once  dare  to  come  neere  that  part, that  had  been
harowed,  (1  would  fay  halowed)  and  enriched  with  fo
many  precious  Iewels  from  Rome : but  you  (hall  finds

T 3 the


page,l 42*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

the  Authour  noted  that  part,  and  afligned  it  for  (JWdhfi
the  deuils  paflage,  vppon  very  fage,  and  prudent  confi-
deration.For  they  had  kept  fuch  rcucl  rout  thereabouts,
as  they  thcmfclucs  gaue  out  to  fuch  as  were  futers  to  Sa-
ra, (asyoureadeinher  depofition)  that  they,  and  the
deuil,  ( O fidem  Catholic  am ! ) had  taken  fuch  order , as
marry  her  who  would , Jhe Should  ncuer  haue  child.

But  to  returnc  to  our  fimilitudes,  and  deuil  vifagesa-
gaine  , the  Miradfc-minter  dealcs  heere  with  thefe
formes,  and  faces  of  deuils , as  Sofiaxn  Amphitryo  dealt
with  the  battaile  v\Tehbo'us%  who  ranges  two  maine  Ar-
mies, deuides  them  into  fquadrons,  wings , and  flanks,
and  makes  them  meete,  and  encounter , and  none  but
himfelfe  alone  is  vpon  the  flage.  And  indeed  it  is  good
decorum  in  a Comedie  , to  giue  vs  emptie  names  for
things, and  to  tell  vs  of  flrangc  Monflers  within,  where
there  be  none.  When  a manheares  of  thefe  frightful
fimilitudes,  wherein  the  deuils  are  conceited  to  depart,
as flames , whirlewinds  ,fnakes , cats , fire,  and fmoake , hce
would  imagine  the  fpe&ators  fhouldbemuch  gaflred,
and  skared  at  the  going  out  of  the  deuils  in  thefe  fearc-
ful  formes,  and  that  the  chambers  and  roomes,  where
the d^moniacksand  the  company  are,  fliould  be  fha-
ken  with  the  whirlewind,  fcorched  with  the  flames,and
foiled  with  brimfloneand  fmoake,  and  that  the  aflem-
bly  fhould  tremble,  to  fee  the  deuill  whirle  about  in  the
fimilitude  of  a fnake,  as  a fire- dragon  fpoutes,  & whirlcs
intheayre:  but  at  our  gentle  deuils  departure,  there
was  neither  fhapefeene,  nor  wind  heard,  nor  motion
felt,  nor  flames,  nor  fmoake,  nor  whirling  fire-fhake
perceiued  at  all,  and  therefore  you  muft  heedfullie  ob-
ferue,the  Authoursclaufcalwaies  annexed,  (a sisfmen
to  a mafie^vnto  the  end  of  the  fentence : Asfeemed>  or
appeared  to  the  poffeffed.

So  as  theout-cafling  of  thefe  vgly  deuils  vifards , lyes
thus.  The  priefts  doe  report  often  in  their  patients  hea-

ring,

-v  ' # *


in  caftingout  ofDeuik.  page, 14$

ring  the  dreadful  formes,  fimilitudes,  and  fliapes,  that
the  dcuils  vfe  to  depart  in.out  of  thofe  poflcfled  bodies,
which  they  haue  dealt  with-all  beyond  Seas:  and  this
they  tell  with  fo  graue  a countenance, pathctical  fermes,
and  accommodate  action,  asit  leauesa  very  deepeim-
preflion  in  the  memory,  and  fancic  of  their  attors : fo  as  *

| when  it  comes  to  their  cue,  fo  play  the  fame  part  ouer,

( as  namely,  when  after  dreadful  adjuration  the  dcuil  is
(aid  to  goc  out)  then  doth  the  Exorcifl  very  foberly  askc
the  party,  in  what  forme  or  fimilifude,  the  dcuil  appea-
. red  vnto  him  at  his  departing  : and  he  hauing  conned
his  leflon  of  formes,  and  fhapes  before  from  the  prieft,
lights  vpon  fome  fuch  forme,  and  fhape,  as  he  hath  re-
ccaued  from  the  prieft  . And  then  the  Echo  is : Thanks
to  the  bleffed  virgin , and  the  whole  ffhner  of  he  auen . And
if  theExorcift  doe  fufpett  the  wit , or  memory  of  his
fcholler,,  as  being  nothing  perfeft  in  his  Kalenderof
formes, he  wil  not  flick,  fo  prompt  him  by  his  queftion
(being  afore  an  Auditory  of  Romifh  guls,whofc  braines
fwarme  with  bul-beggers)as  to  aske  him,  if  the  dcuil  did
not  depart  in  fuch,  or  fuch  a forme  5 and  then  thcador
cither  for  fearc,  or  flatterie  of  his  good  maifler  dares  not
but  fay  yea.

Another  rule  you  mufl  learnein  aCom^die  wel  ac-
ted, and  conuaied  for  the  deuil : that  the  demoniacks

~ v

befbneerely  placed  (yet in  feueral roomes)  each  too-
ther, that  one  may  heare  without  benefit  of  Midas  long
cares,  what  is  faid  vnto,  or  by  the  other  5 and  fo  the  fe-

cond  may  be  yare  and  ready , to  take  his  cue  and  turne

. of  the  former,  and  put  to  a little  of  his  ownc  wit,  for  the
better  gracing  the  wonder.  Or  elfe  if propinquitie,and
fifnes  of  the  roomes  wil  not  ferue  , for  one  fo  be  the  o-
thers  Parrat,  and  Echo , touching  the  fhape*  let  the
fhape  be  handfomly  agreed  of  by  the  deuil-  afters  be-
fore, or  elfe  prouide  a miflris  Plater , for  an  intelligencer,
orintcrcurfitor  betweene  them,riiat  may  in  a trice  relate

to


page, 1 46


A '


Page  t:
booke  or
Miracles*


, ' A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

T rayfords  chamber,  and  to  fprinckle  him  away,  but  that
itfeemes  he  came  rudely  in,  without  by  your  ieaue.

The  holy  Croflc  put  to  flight  a whole  Quier  of  Pup-
pets , that  appeare  daunting  the  Morrice  at  the  end  of  a
gallerie  $ and  diflolued  them  fo  c!cane,as  there  appeared
neither  flame,  fmoake , nor  ill  odor  from  them : and  this
wonder  was  accomplished  by  Sara , for  Sara  (faith  the
MiradiA)  figning  her  felfe  with  manyfgnes  of  the  Crojfe,
the  deuils  in  the  hkenes  of  Puppet  Syvamfjed  out  of  fight,
Heere  our  wonder  like  Amphttryos  goblet,  begets  an
other  wonder  Ail.  Sara  by  Crofies  puts  to  flight  a whole
Croupe  of  Puppet- dc uils , and  yet  the  dcuil  within  Sara
cared  notfor  the  Crofles  one  iote  . Thcfe  (as  feemes)
Were  butpunie  vrehin  fpirits , that  for  want  of  good
cheere  at  Denham  houfc  were  pined  , and  made  feeble,
before  the  Exorcifls  came  thither*.  But  Pur  re  was  a fpi-
rit  ofa  tough  mold,  and  in  rcafonablegood  plight:  hee
held  the  Exorctfl  good  facke,  til  at  Iength(faith  the  Re-
porter^)' often  inuocation  of  our  blefied  Lady, and  the
whole  company  of hcauen,  with  Aue  mariesy  and  other
Ant  hemes,  of  our  blefied  Lady,  efpecially  Salue  Regina,
Purrewas  caA  out.  Here  Church  Anthemes , as  you  fee,
caried  away  the  bucklers,  in  expelling  the  deuil  . Sarat
the  deuils  fwcct  dauncing  fchoole,  had  chofen  amongft
all  the  heaucnly  Quier  S.  Barbara  , for  her  patroneffe,
and  Saint : who  pitfying  her  poore  Client^  feeing  all
the  deuils  ofhelin  the  poore  wench,  and  c JMaho  theyr
commaunder,  came  downe  her  felfe  fromheauen,  to
/hew  her  grace  flic  had  there,  and  that  Saints  may  come
from  heauen  a deuil-hunting,  if  it  Aand  with  thdir  good
pleafure,  and  afliiming  the  office  of  an  Exorcifl  into
her  owne  hands,  cafls  out  tJW ahoy  the  black  Prince.

LMaho  fakes  this  as  no  faire  play : and  therefore  him-
felfe  complaincs  of  it  in  hisDialogue  with  Dibdale : that
a woman  had  catt  him  out  before.)  vpon  her  owne  feaHiuall
day*.


* t


This


in  rafting  out  of  Deuils*  page,  147

This  is  no  meane  office,  you  may  before,  nor  of  little
moment,  2nd  waight,  when  the  glorious  Saints  of  hea-
uen  come  downe  to  difchatgc  it : nay  you  fhal  fee,  that
for  the  dignifying  of  this  coniuring  profeflion , and  to
(fop  the  mouthes  of  all  carping  obloquutors,  our  blef-
fed  Lady  her  felfc  vouchfafed  to  grace  it  with  her  pre-
fence  in  her  ownc  proper  perfon,  and  to  come  in  (fate,
with  a princely  trayne  of celeflial  virgins  attending  vp-
pon  her : whom  the  deuil  in  fcorne  calls  by  a by-name,

\ Saffron- bagge\  Loe yonder(cr\c$  the  deuil  to  the  Exorcift)
comes  Saffron- bagge ,with  her  company  eftripping-mayds ,
thou  canft  doe  nothing  without  her . And  the  Mirade-mai-
fler  flicks  not  to  tell  vs,  thatfhee  played  theExorcifls
part  too,  in  helping  of  Sara . csffter  a long , and  painfull
combat  (faith  he)  Sara fayd  Somewhat  cheerefully : now  our
hleffed  Lady  hath  knowne  my  needet  and  hath  ho/pen  me :
for  the  deuil  was  gone  out.  And  it  fhal,  Itrufl,  be  no
difparagcmcnt  to  our  Lady  in  this  cafe,  to  haue  a Am-
ple word  in  (hew  matched  vnto  her  highnefle,  which
with  the  very  (bund,  pronunciation,  and  name  had  the
fame  vertue  in  expelling  a deuil , that  her  owne  graci-
ous prefence  in  proper  perfon  had : and  that  is  in  the
Creede,  neither  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  God  the
Sonne,  nor  God  the  holyGhoft,  nor  the  name  of  the
virgin  C JMary  (which  as  you  fee,  is  notwithflanding
dreadful  to  the  deuil)  but  the  bare  naming,  and  pro-
• nouncing  of  this  word  (fathohque  alone  : with  the  foun-
ding of  which  fillablcs  onely,  Sara  (fayth  our  Author)
did  put  to  flight  all  her  pernicious  deuils . So  as  this  word
in  the  Creede  is  as  deepe  a deuil-coniurer,  as
cuer  Mengm  was.

Thefe  feueral  Champions  (as  you  fee)  doe  feuerally
triumph,  and  ereef  their  feueral  Trophies,  with  fpoiles
of  feueral  deuils.  But  it  falls  out  fometimes,  that  the
graund  Prince  ofdarknes  doth  combine , and  vnifehis
forces,  calling  to  hisayde  his  Leaders,  Colonels,  and

Vs  Cap-


P*gc>l4^  A declaration  of  Popifh  impoflure

Captainesfor  hel,  as  Hiachtoy  Helcmodian , and  the  reft,
and  pitches  a maine  field : fo  as  his  forces  ftand  ftrong
againft  any  one  ofthefe  alone . Then  hcarc  the  Gene*
ral  ofour  ghoftly  Camp,  how  he  marftials  his  bands,&
troupes,  againft  the  front  of  hel . cBttt  the  blejfed  Sacra-
ment being  brought ,inuocation  made  to  our  blejfed Lady, and
all  the  ^uier  of  heatteni  by  the  bclpe  of  Auc  marics,  Saluc
Reginaes,  and  calling  vpon  the  blejfed  Martyr sy  and  apply-
ing their  holy  reliques , especially  of  Fa:  Camp:  Fa:  Brian,
and  the  refl , that  had  beene  martyred  at  Tiburne , hell  it
felfe  quailes , the  deutls  roare , and  the  ^Prince  with  all  his
affittantSy  and commaunders }are finally  cafl  out,  Thefe  arc
the  troupes,  that  preuaile  againft  principalities,  powers,
dominions,  and  all  the  kingdome  of  dar£nes : thefe  la-
ded Mahoy  and  C Modu  (the  two  Generals  of  the  infernal
furies)  with  fire,  and  brimftonc,  and  bamfhed  them,for
a final  doome  , to  be  tormented  in  the  bottomleftc
pit  of  h elk

And  thus  dofed  vp  our  worthy  Author  his  woorthy
tragi^die,  with  the  con fu (ion  of  the  great  Maifter-de-
uils,  and  the  confolation  of  his  pittifull  pofiefled  cap-
tiues , and  that  loude  famous  acclamation  of  the  fpec-
fators,(9  (fathoheam f idem ! O fidem  Catholkam  / But  the
lamentable  Chorus,  and  Nuntios  of  this  trag^die  (Mai-
fler Maynte  gentleman.  Fid  Williams , Sara  JVtlltamj ,
Anne  Smithy  and  Maifter  Tirrell)doc  tell  vs  another  talc,
ending  this  deudl  tragedie,wkh  their  own  tcarcs,fighes,
exclamations,  and  hideous  out- cries,  againft  the  deuill-
priefts,  the  coggers,  coynei  $,  mynters,  and  adors  of  this
wicked  lewd  play.  Who  were  not  content  to  play  Ma -
hoy  zn&lModu,  the  grand  deuils  themfelues,  to  play  at
• bo  peeps  with  Almighty  God,  our  bleffed  Sauiour,  his

holy  Angels,  and  blciTed  Saints  inheauen , prefenting
them  on  this  feigned  Theater,  and  making  them  to
fquca!c,pype,  & tumble,  like  puppits  in  a pageant  after
their  oyvne  impious  falhion,  and  to  prophane^nd  pro

ftimte


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.  page,  1 49

ftitute  the  bleffed  Sacrament , making  it  a Pandar  to
their  foute  and  monflrous  lufl , but  partly  by  flattery,
partly  by  feare,  partly  by  the  bond  of  violated  chaftitie,
partly  by  their  lothfome  potions , arid  vnnaturall  fumi-
gations, brought  them  into  the  fyne  dirtimulation  with
themfelues,  and  to  aft  the  chicfe,  and  principal!  parts  in
their  diabolicall  legerdemaine : and  when  they  had  once
masked  them  in  theyr  popifh  nets,  and  gotten  them  in-
to theyr  holy  ginnes , they  did  fo  vnmanly , fo  vn«
prieftly,  and  fo  vnnaturally  vfe  them , as  the  deuil  him-
felfe,  if  he  had  beene  indeed  in  prefence,could  not  hau«
vfed  them  worfe.  x

And  thefc  mifguifed  bewitched  creatures,  now  of
better  remorfe,  doc  tell  vs  that  the  frufiing  vp  of  theyr
iugling  flicks,  winding  vp  theyr  Pope-budget & pac~
king  vp  their  Romane  pedlarie  grew  from  another
caufe : which  was,  becaufc  they  vnderftood  by  fome  of
their  Sentinels,  that  their  iugling,  packing,  and  legerde-
maine  did  peepe  out  abroade  in  the  Country  , & occa-
sioned diuers  opinions,  and  conflruflions  of  the  fame,
whereby  prefent  danger  to  theyr  perfons , and  flage*
robes  was  like  to  enfue.  This  mooued  them, to  let  Ma-
ho  the  deuil  flinke  out  of  Sara  in  that  homly  manner  as
you  hauc  Heard  , that  they  might  (though  vneleanlie)
riddc  theyr  hands  of  him.  And  now  I pray  you  obferue
howfutably  to  theyr  former  affaires  they  forted  tbem-
felues  thence.

It  is  thefaffiion  of  vagabond  players,  thatcoatt
from  Towne  to  Towne  with  a trufle  and  a caft  of  fid-

9

dies,  to  carry  in  theyr  conforf,  broken  queanes,  and  GW-
nimedesy  as  well  for  their  night  pleafance , as  their  dayes

Eaftirnc  : our  dcuil-holy  confort  at  theyr  breaking  vp
oufeatT )enhamy  departed  cuery  prieftfuted  with  his
wench  after  the  fame  good  cufiome.  Edmunds  the  Ie-  Scctlielaft
fuit  (faith  one  of  their  cwne  coucy)  had  for  his  darling  end  of  Fids
Miflris  Crej^ , e^j fane  Smiih  was  at  the  difpofition  of  examine

V I Ma;


o,  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

Ma:  ‘Dryland,  Sara  Williams  of  Ma:  Dibdale , Mif!  rifle
Ss4ltham  of  Cornelius  , and  Fid  Williams  of  Ma : Leigh*
And  was  not  this  a very  feemely  Catholicke  comple-
ment trow  you,  to  fee  a Fidler  and  his  cafe , a Tinker  &
his  bitch,  a Prieft  and  his  Leman,  a deuil  & his  damme,
combined  fweetly  together  ? I truft  our  deuils  would
neuer  make  fute  to  goe  into  any  herd  of  fwine , fo  long
as  they  had  fuch  kinde  tender  cattell  to  pofTeffe,  difpof-
feffe,  repoffeffe,  and  furpoffeffe  attheyr  plcafurc.  And
* this  in  the  holy  dialed  is  called  gaining  offoules : fcilicet
for  the  dcuilL


He  end  of  a Comedie  is  a plaudite  to  the  Authour,


and  Aft ors  *,  the  one  for  hisinuention,  the  other  for
his  ^ood  aftion:  ofaTrastaedie,  the  end  is  mouin*  of
affeftion,  and  paffion  in  the  fpeftarors.  Our  D&mono-
foiia,  or  deuil- fiftion, is  ‘Tragico-comadia , a mixture  of
both,  as  tslmphitryo  in  'Plautus  is : and  did  by  the  good
inuention,  and  canage,  obtainc  both  thefe  ends . Firft  ic
had  a plaudite  often  j 0 Cathohcam fidem ! and  O that  all
the  Proteflans  in  England  did  fee  the  power  of  the  (fatholtci ^
Church:  and  it  mooued  affeftion  with  expreflion  of
teares.  (JWarwooddid  tumble,  foame,  and  rage  fo  liue-
ly,whenhee  was  touched  with  Campians  girdle,  as  the
guild  fpeftarors  did.  w'eepc  fo  fee  the  iugling  knaue,  in
fuch  a fuppofed  plight.  But  our  Romane  Authors,  Ed»
murids,  and  his  holy  crue  (his  fwelue  holy  difciples)  the
plotters  of  this  deuil-play,hada  farther  anddeeper  ends
which  by  this  impious  deuifethey  had  afehieued  pre-
tie well, and  that  was(after  the  Popes  dialeft)  the  gaining
offoules  for  his  Holines,and  for  Hell,  the  bewitching  of
the  poore  people,  with  an  admiration  of  the  power  of


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.  pagef.Vl,

theyr  Romifh  Church,  and  prierthood  , by  thefc  cogd
miracles , and  wonders  5 and  thereby  robbing  them  of
theyr  fay  th  towards  God,  and  theyr  loyahicto  -theyr
Prince,  and  reconciling  them  to  the  Pope,  the  Monrter
of  Chrirtianitie.  And  for  the  obfayning  of  this  mainc
marke  and  end,  they  vfedtwo  chicfe  fubordinate  ends.

The  one  was  to  bring  in  the  deuill  ontbertage  (tho-
rough the  whole  courfe  of  theyr  frag^die)  as  the  father
of  vs  all,  and  as  the  founder,  prote&or,  and  fauoui  er  of
vs,  and  of  our  mod  Chrift  ian  profeflion.  The  other,  by
caufing  theyr  deuils  to  fpeake,  a& , and  behaue  them-
felues,asan  hortile  and  fworne  enemy  to  them , and  to
theyr  Romifh  fuperrtition.  Which  the  befotted  people  .
concerning  as  the  very’  true  voyce  of  the  deuill  indeede,
were  brought  to  phancie  and  imagine  ofvs  all,  as  of  the
grand  children,  and  heircs  of  Satan,  and  of  hell,  and  to
efteeme  of  them,  as  of  the  children  of  light,  and  the  vn-
doubted  heires  apparant  to  the  celefliall  kingdome  of
heauen.  In  this  theyr  bewitched  conceit,  they  were
brought  to  renounce  theyr  duty,  loue , and  allegcancc
to  theyr  naturall  Soueraigne,  and  eofweare  theyr  fealty
and  obedience,  to  the  vnnaturall  monrter  of  hell.

Vnto  the  atchicuing  of  this  impious, and  trecherous
defignc(namely,  the  reuolt  of  the  befotted  people  from
their  Prince,  and  the  mort  Chrirtian  Religion , by  the
pure  profeflion,  and  fwearing  theyr  obedience  vnto  the
Pope  of  Rome)  they  fpared  no  perfon , no  condition,
no  calling,  no  profeflion  in  either  our  Church, or  com-
mon weale,but  abandond  them  all  in  theyr  deuil-come-
dietothebottomlefTepitofhcll.  And  that  the  7.  hor-  Pagc>42*
ned  Babylonian  heart  might  appeare  in  his  liuely  orient
colours,  to  be  he  that  durrt  ope  his  blafphemous  mouth
againft  the  AImightie,&  his  Saints,  his  accurfed  brood
heere  doe  that  in  the  affumed  feigned  perfon  of  the  dc-
uil, which  the  deuil  hirafeife(though  a fpirit  of  blafphc-
mie)  neucr  dared  to  doe ; that  i$;to  cur fe*  Sc  blafphcmc5

6 hcl-  •


B choice
your  loyall
Priefts.
Page, 45.


page,  15- » A declaration  of  Popifh  impofturc

(6  hellifh  impietie,  my  hart  doth  tremble  at  the  found)
the  nioft  beloued.thricc-blefled  annointed  of  the  Lord,
the  facrcd  perfon  of  our  dread  Soueraigne , making  her
Boc-ke  of  no  °dlcr  in  this  deuillilh  trag^dic , then  the  deuils  prin»
Miracles,  cipal  darling.  Hcarc  the  deuil,or  Edmunds  in  the  deuils
perfon  (who  yet  draweth  his  breath  from  the  beames  of
her  princely  mercy,  who  himfclfe  accurfed  to  the  pit  of
hel)  in  his  ownc  dialed , if  your  Chriftian  cares  dare  to
hcarc  that , which  thofc  Popiftr  mifereants  dare  pro-
daime  vpon  their  ftage.

Oh  (cries  C Maho  thedeuil  in  Sara)  yonder  conmeth
Sajfron-bagge  (meaning  our  bleflcd  Lady)  (hee is  comet*
he/pe  thee : but  (bee  cannot  away  with  a principal!  perfon  in
this  l^ealme,  and  therefore  I cannot  away  with  her.  Hecre
the  play-dcuil  is  conceited  fo  to  loue  the  Queene,  as  he
muft  needcs  hate  our  Lady,  for  not  louing  her  Maic-
ftie.  And  to  expreffe  his  dcuilfhips  good  wil(forfooth)
vnto  her  Maieftie  : on  S.  Hughes  day  hee  threatens  the
Exorcift,  that  he  would  goe  ring  for  the  Queene:  and
in  another  fit  tels  Dibdale  in  a rage,  that  he  would  goe
to  the  Court,  and  complaine  of  him  to  the  Queene, and
caufe  his  bead  to  be  fet  vpon  £0^#  . In  another

fit  hee  cryes  out  of  Sara  in  a loude  voycc  , (jodfane  the
Page, 7,  Queene,  and  her  Mimtters,  exprefting  his  deuilfhips  not

onely  good  affeflion,  but  zealous  deuorion  fo  her  Ma-
ieftie,  and  her  Clergic.  But  that  which  fhewes  their  dia«
bolicall  impiefie,  and  opens  the  treafury  of  their  hearts,
fraught  vvirh  treachery,  and  treafon,  they  folemnly  pre-
fent  the  deuil  in  Sara  vpon  thevr  flage , roaring  out  *an
oath  touching  her  Maieftie  in  this  wife,  bymytrotb-fljeis
mine,  and  the  Queene  of  heauen  beeing  called  vppon,
?^gc  7. ibi:  hee  fayd  aloude,  another  Queene  is  my  Queene . O detc*
(fable  Romifa  villany ! et  tamenviuunt , and  are  at  this
day  plotting  a new  inuafion  to  (et  vp  a new  Queene,
who  haue  and  doe  thus  defpcratly  blafphcme  God,  and
the  King.

And


See  Saras
cxamin:


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils,  page^ST

And  is  hcrMaiefties  Court  more  beholden  to  this
Romifh  hcllifh  Conform  then  her  Maieftics  facrcd  per-
fon  ? Hearc  C JModu,Mayvies  deuil,  vaunting  in  his  deuils
Voycc,  vponS.  Georges  day  , ihathe  would  goe  brave  it  Page,  43.
out  at  the  Court  : for  they  were  all  his  friends . This  is
the  gentle  quittance,  your  holy  rcnegadoes  doe  returne  *

you,  for  the  fauour,  or  conuiuencie  which  they  finde,in
that  her  Maieftics  Lawes  are  no  more  fcuerely  execu-
ted againft  them.  They  bring  you  home  a placard  from
his  hcllifhnes  at  Rome*,  to  aflurc  you,  that  you  are  all  in
league,  and  amity  with  the  deuil.  For  fo  the, deuil,  or
Edmunds  doth  proclaimc  you  from  hel,or  Rome.

Thofe  famous  renowmcd  Worthies  of  herMaicfties
priuie  Counfel,  whofe  bodies  fleepe  in  peace,  and  their
foules  (as  I truft)  repofe  in  Abrahams  pleflcjd  bofome  \
how  our  infernal  tragedians  haue  diftuibed  their  reft,
prophaned  their  happy  memory,  violated  their  tombs,
and  called  forth  their  fpirits,  like  the  Witch  of  Endor ,
making  them  tennis- bals , for  their  deuils  fo  bandy  on
their  ftage  5 take  a true  view  of,  in  the  palfage  of  a Di-
alogue betwecne  the  Exorcift,  and  the  deuil.

Tonder  (cries  the  deuil  in  Sara)  nodding  her  head  to-
wards one  part  of  the  chamber)  fiands  fuch  a one  (whom  Page.  3 2,'
he  had  named  before)  full  of  deuils : and  Leicefter  at  this
prefent  houre  \ even  now,  now , vnder  the  right  arme  of  that
one  (before  mentioned)  and  all  the  (fourt  are  my  friends*

Then  went  he  forward  with  hisfpeech, naming  certaine
perfons,  and  faid,  that  they  are  now  gone  fo  the  deuil :
and  amongft  the  reft,  named  'Bedford already  departed,
and  that  his foule  is  even  new  with  me  in  this  chamber,  and  Page.  43.
fo  pajfed  on  his  talke}  and pxffed  on  to  matters  oftreafon,  and
therefore  they  are  not  to.be  mentioned . Thusfarre  theyr
owne  Recorder,  in  his  owne  fweet  termes . And  were
not  thofe  matters  of  treafomvttered  by  tbe  deuifftrange  *
matters  from  hel  trow  ye,  that  thepenner  dqrft  not  cor
mit  them  to  writing,  hauing  written  fq  much,  touching

X-  our


page, if  4*  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture  '

our  moft  (acred  Prince,  her  Court, and  Counfcl  before,
as  the  deuil  himfelfe  durfl  not  infpirc  more  into  his  pen?
And  who  doth  not  fcele  this  palpable  legerdemaine,  at
his  fingers  ends  ? The  deuil  fpeakes  treafon  againfl  the
Prince,  and  (fate,  for  the  winning,  and  gaining  of  Sub-
lets from  her  Maicfiie  to  the  Pope,  and  making  them
become  traytors,  by  his  trcafonable  perfwafions  5 and
this  (lands  for  good  Romi(h  Rhetorick,and  popifii  Di-
uinifie,  whiled  it  was  fpoken , andaftedby  the  Popes
Orator  the  deuil  : and  the  deuil  (hewed  himfelfe  an
abfolute  powerful  fpeaker,  for  hisgraund  maiderthc
See  Fids  & P°PC : enchaunting  by  his  fweet  eloquence  y 00,  or  as
Maynics  ^their  ownc  difciples  confefle  vpon  record,  foure,or  fiuc
exam:  thoufand  foules  in  a (hort  time.whom  hee  wonne  from

the  Queene,  and  reconciled  them  to  the  Pope  by  this
welacled  trag^die  . And  might  the  deuil  fpeaketrea-
fon  fo  aptly,  didinftly , and  elegantly  on  the  ffage,that
it  enchaunted  the  harts,  and  affeftions  of  the  pooic  be-
witched people,  and  chained  them  to  fhe  Pope  : and  is
Page  2 not  this  fweet  enchaunting  treafon  to  be  mentioned  ia
wry  ting?  £htii  caufam  nefeit?  You  were  afraid,  good
deuil- tragedians,  to  be  fainted  at  Ttburne,  for  this  fweet
enchaunting  treafon,  vttered  by  your  proloquutor  the
deuill  : and  it  mud  be  committed  to  none,  but  your
fwornc  new  profely tes,  that  knew  how  to  keepe  it  from
ftragling  abroad : whom  you  haue  by  this  one  fentence
of  your  wife  Orator  the  deuil  manteled  in  the  fame  de-
gree of  horrible  vnfpeakcable  freafons  with  your  felues,
rot  onely  for  concealing , and  entertaining  treafon  not
to  be  mentioned,  or  fpoken  for  the  abhominafion  ofitj
but  for  yeclding  tbemfelues,  their  faith, and  fealty  to  the
Pope  *,  the  true  end,  and  ayme  of  all  thofc  vnfpeakable
treafons.  Etcjuis  hie  d&mon?  And  who  was  the  deuil,
tbebrocher,  herald,  andperfwader  of  thefevnuttcra-
ble  treafons , but  WeHon  the  Iefuit,  the  chicfe  plotter,
and  chearch-impodor,  Dibdale  the  pried,  or  Sttwf,  or


in  calling  out  ofDeuils,  page,  iff*

all  the  holy  Couey  of  the  twelue  deuililh  comedians  in
their  feueral  turnes : for  there  was  neither  dcuil,  nor  vr-
chin,norElfe,  but  themfelucs,who  didmetamorphoze
thcrafeluesincuery  fccne,  into  the  perfon,  eyther  of
the  dcuil  himfelfe,  or  of  his  Interpreter  , and  made  the
deuils  names  their  Puppet,  foiqueakc,  pipe,  and  fume
out  what  they  pleafed  fo  mfpire,  And  thus,-  as  the  dcuil  Page  45
would  haue  it , by  a deuililh  inconfidcrate  claufe  infer-
ted,  that  the  dentil jpoke  treasons , not  once  to  be  mentioned:
haue  you  proclaimed  your  felues,  and  your  yooo  new
adherents,  for  vnfpeakeable,  vnutterable,  deteftable
Tray  tors,

Thceftatcofour  Cleargie,  they  haue  adorned  with  a Page  .
Special  grace : The  dentil  appearing  vnto  Tray  ford  (fay  th  .
the  Miraclift)  in  the  hkenes  of  an  Englifh  Minifter,  and
dtftvadmg  him  to  leane  the  Cathoftcjue  Remijh  Church,  &c.

This  was  a ligne  (fay  they)  of  our  efpccial  fauour  with
the  dcuil,  in  that  he  pleafed  rather  to  put  on  our  habitc,
then  thevertments  ofa  Catholique  Romifh  Priell : and
yet  all  circumftances  confidered,  this  was  no  great  fauor
done  vnto  our  profeffi6n,in  regard  their  holy  geare  was
too  hote  for  the  deuils  wearing,  A futc  of  purgatorie
fire  had  beene  much  eaficr  for  the  deuil , then  an  Albe,
or  veftment  ofthat  confecrate  attire.  But  a greater  ar-
gument of  loue,  and  mutual  good  affcflion  is  the  libe-
ral commendation,  which  Saras  deuil  doth  very  frankly
bellow  vpon  our  CWimfters, affirming  by  bis  deuils  ho-
neQie,  that  hee  likes  them  well , and  that  they  be  much
better  then  the  Catholique  fomijh  priefis . Which  the
poorc  Ideot  fpe&ators  tooke  to  be  footh  indeedc , and
deemed  vs  to  be  too  great  in  the  deuils  bookes,  euer  fo
be  good.  And  aboue  all.  General  Maho  being  flraight-
lie  charged  by  the  ExorciUjto  tel  his  name,  he  Handing
vpon  his  diflatorfhip,  tels  the  Exorcill  plainly,  that  hee
cannot  commaund  him  , but  that  the  Englilh  Minillers  Page  44*
rmy.  What,  and  their  wines  too  ? quoth  the  Exorcill :

X 2,  Marry


page>i55  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofturc

. LMarty  thou  a wife  too,  quoth  the  deuvl.  Loc  hcrcfgood
gentle  Conies,  that  come  to  weare  the  Woodcocks  bil)
you  hearethc  deuil,  alias  CDihdale  plainly  tel  you,  that
the  EnqjiJJj  Mtniflers , and  their  marrying  of  wiues  come
both  out  of  hel,and  are  the  deuils,  alias  Dthdales  ownc
counfel  to  the  pried,  and  fo  cannot  be  good . But  hun-
ting, nipping, & crof-  biting  a prety  wench  on  the  bare :
eroding,  recrofling,  furcroding  her  with  priedly  hote
holy  hands, per  honefta,&  in  honefia : giuing  her  fuch  a
Catholique  clofe  pinch*  that  you  make  her  crie  oh,  and
poffefling  her  with  a ftiee  deuil  vppon  the  fame ; after-
wards difpofleding,  repodeding,  and  fuper-podeding
heragaine,  til  the  poore  wench  is  fo  handled  amongft
See  Saras  * you,  as  the  deuil,  and  you  giue  our,  Marrie  her  who  will,
examina:  Jhe  can  neuer  haue  child:  This  is  but  his  Holmes  owne

hunt  and  chafe , for  his  holy  hellifh  difciples , in  which
Catholique  fport  the  deuil  himfelfe  making  one,  he  can
take  no  iud  exception  there-vnto.

After  the  deuils  gracing  ourfeucral  callings  by  his  de-
uillifti  commendation,  he  mull  needes,  of  his  good  na-
ture, fpeakefomething  infauourof  our  religion  to,  c-
fpecially  in  behalfe  ofchofe  points,wherein  we  haue  op-
podcion  with  the  Church  ofRome.

P,^e  1 7 Fnd,  therefore  for  his,  and  our  better  credit  the  deuil
tels  the  pried,  that  himfelfe  is  an  hereticyue , and  that  here-
Jie  came  fir  ft  into  England,  in  the  raigne  of  King  Henry  the
eight.  Thatta  teaches  the  ^Protcflants,  to  call themfelues
Page, 2 $•  Cathohejues : His  good  deuildiip,  caufed Sara  to  weepe for
her  father , and  mother , hecaufe  they  went  to  the  Engltfh
Churches , andfcls  theExorcid  very  kindly,  tha t young
children , though  they  want  vnderftanding3mufi  he  kept  from
the  Church : hecaufe  they  may  he  plagued  for  fo  going,  for
their  parents  fault  syhatfuffer  them  togoe . Heere  we  mud
fuppofe,  that  the  deuil  had  taken  fo  much  oftheprieds
blefled  potion,  (Sacke,  Galhanum,  and  Rue)thathe  was
tJMaudelen-drunkf) and  in  his  kindc  drunkenne$;of  pure

com-


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.  Page,  ^7

compaflion,  and  good  nature,  doth  rcueale  thus  much
againrt  himfelfe,  to  haue  children,  and  good  folkcsfa-
ued ; For  being  fober,  and  in  his  right  wits,  youfhalby
* and  by  finde  him  in  another  key.

Sara  was  tempted  (forfooth)  to  fay  fir  ft  that  there  was  p ,
no  Purgatory.  This  was  a fore  temptation  indeede,  to  *
wifh  Sara  to  fay  that  fire  was  not , whereof  there  is  not
onefparkleto  befeeneinall  the  bookeofGod:  which
fire  the  pillers  of  Gods  Church  haue  alwaies  held  for  an
Heathenifh  dreamed  a Platonick  fi&ion,whofe  coles,
brands,  & skorching  flames  haue  becne  purgatiues  for
mens  pur fes,houfcs,&  lands,  & haue  annihilated  more
mettall,  and  euaporated  it  info  fmoake,then  all  the  con-
ceited fireworks  of  our  Chymicall  Impoftors  haue
done.  And  here  I fcarc  the  deuils  braine  was  a little  too
much  heated  with  the  fmoke  of  holy  brimflon,  & grew
foniewhat  adle,in  aduifing  Sara  to  goe  about  to  put  this
enchaunted  fire  out  of  peoples  heads : for  that  the  con-
ceited opinion  of  this  imaginarie  fire  hath  brought
•more  footy-foiled  foulcs  into  hell,  in  a fancied  hope  of  a
purge  after  this  life,  which  they  can  neuer  meete  with-
all,  then  any  one  cheating  deuife  befides  in  all  the  Popes
budget.

Saras  fccond  temptation  was  to  fay , the prieFl /aide  paCrCj  ^
naught  in  faying  of  CMaJfe}  A ChMmzs  temptation  after
the  dcuil  was  wcl  whirled.  This  was  a pretty  gul  of  your
merry  Chriflmas  deuil,  asyour  felueshad  gulled  Sc im-
poflured  the  world.  Forwhatcan  be  greater  glee,  and
pleafance  to  the  dcuil,then  to  behold  you  the  Archiug-
. lers,  and  Impoftors  of the  world,  toputdowncin  this
craft  the  Sorcerers  of es£gypt,  the  Heathen,  CMahomet
and  all.  To  fee  you  firff  iugle  with  Almighty  God,  and
our  blefled  Sauiour , and  then  with  all  his  faints , tur-
ning his  mod  blefled  inflitution  into  a maiTe-monflcr,
a Chimera  of  puppets,  & gaudes.Approching  vnto  the
holy  celebration  like  SBacchana/l priefts,  with  a flole,  aa

. X3  albe,  * .


pagC,i)  8.  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

albe,  maniple,  an  amice,  a tunicle , and  fuch  phanfafli-
call  attire : putting  vppon  the  bleflcd  inftirution  of  bur
Sauiour,  a {oxxime'Baby  Ionian  name  of  a mafsc : making
it  a night  catch,  or  round  to  be  chopped  vp  betweene  a •
boy  & a pried : peruerting  the  nature  of  the  holy  com-
munion, to  a priuate  nunchion  for  a pried  alone : feue-
ring  thofc  two  mainc  pillcrs  of  our  foules  comfort , the
body  and  blood  of  our  Sauiour , and  renting  them  in
funder,  which  God  had  fo  neerely  conioyned-:  making
the  reuerend  celebration  a pageant  of  moppes,  mowes,
equations,  crouches, and  ridiculous  geOicularions : eua-
cuating  the  power  of  that  perfeff , and  abfolute  oblati-
on of  the  body,  and  blood  of  our  Sauiour,  by  a quotidi-
an imaginarie  oblation  of  a facrifice  withoutT>lood:offe-
ring  vp  in  a blafphemous  conceit  the  body  of  our  Saui-
our, which  fittcth  for  eucr  at  the  right  hand  of  G O D,
giuing  it  for  the  dead,  which  our  Sauiour  did  to  and  for
the  lining  receiuers  onely  : and  aboueall  facriledge,  and
heathenifh  blafphemie , offering  vp  our  Sauiour  vnto
God  his  father  thus  > befeeching  him  that  he , with  a mercu
See  the  full  pleafant  countenauncc , will  behold  the  offering  vp  of  his  .

mifiall.  onely  begotten , and  liuing  fonne  Chrift  Iefus,and  that  he  will

accept  the  fame,  euen  as  he  accepted  Abels  offering,  and  the
facrifice  of  Abraham,  4^0/Melchifedech  the  high  priefti
Heereby  facrilegioufly  making  your  felues  not  onclie
the  true  Melchtfedech  (an  honour  appropriat  vnto  our
Sauiour , by  the  faying  of  the  holy  Ghofl  ) but  mod
blafphemoufly  intruding  your  felues  as  Mediators , not
onely  betweene  God  and  man , butalfo  betweene  Al-
mightie  God,  and  his  fonne  5 befeeching  him  to  accept
of  the  oblation  of  his  fonne  with  a pleafant  comtenamce  (O
Page.  2.  helliff  blafphemy)  at  your  intercejfon  !

Thirdly,  Sara  was  tempted  by  the  deuil  to  fay,  the
bleffed  facr ament. was  bread , and  not  to  be  adored.  This  was
an  old  potent  temptation  indeed.  The  bleffed  Apoftle
^ was  thus  tempted  xy  oo.ycercs  agoe,  to  call  it  expreflie

W by


• *


in  carting  out  of  Deuils.  page,  159

by  the  name  of  bread > and  to  will  vs  to  remember  by  the
breaking  of  it,  that  it  was  none  other  but  bread.  Platoes  .

Id&a of  an  effence  fublifling  in  nature,  without  exi-
flence  in  indiuiduall  fubrtances(long  fince  hifled  out  of
the  fchooles  for  a fantarticall  fi&ion)is  nothing  vnto  this
Popifh  brainrtek  imaginatio:thaf  the  colour, forme, raff,
fauour,  and  dimenfions  of  bread  (hould  fubhlt,  & exift
reall  obiefts  to  our  fences,  without  the  fubrtancc,  & na-
ture of  bread  : that  all  thefefenfibleaccidents  fhould  be
made  pendulous  in  the  ayre,  like  Archimedes  Doue,or
els  ftript  from  their  proper  fubrtance,  and  adhere  to  an
indeterminate,  vagrant , vnbounded  beeing  : which  all
the  fubtile  wits  of  all  the  Eagle-eyed  Schoolemen  in  the
world,  could  yet  neuer  chriflen  with  a name.  Thefe  are
the  Italian  Mongers’,  hatched  of  theegges  of  fchoole
Crocodiles*,  the  winding  Terpentine  wits  of  prophane
vncircumcifcd  fpirits,  that  take  libertie  to  themfelues  to
dcfcant  vpon  Almightie  God,  vpon  his  bcloued  fonne,
and  his  blefled  inftitution  , as  they  defcant  vpon  k&ccei-
tie , nihileitie , and  all  thofc  conceited  fchoolc-tricks.

Our  Sauiour  Chrirt  I fuppofc  would  haue  had  fome-
whatadoe,to  haueinrtru&edhis  tweluc  holy  difciples,
at  the  firft  celebration  of  the  fupper,  in  this  Lecture  of
flying  formes,  and  vagrant  fubftanccs : and  if  our  Saui-
our had  told  S.  Peter  y that  the  bread  which  he  brake  &
gaue  him,  was  no  true  bread  indeed,  but  the  accidents
of  bread,(who  could  not  conceiue  of  leuen,that  our  Sa-
uiour mentioned, but  he  thought  of  houfhold  bread)  it
would  haue  caufed  him  to  mooue  many  odde  quefli-
ons,  and  haue  troubled  his  braines,and  hindered  his  de-
uotion  much  in  that  reuerend , and  facred  a&ion.  But
our  Sauiours  blelfed  difciples  were  but  grofia  capita  to
our  fubtiliated , fublimated  new  fpiritsof  the  Sorbon.

The  blefled  Apofllc  Sain ilohn,  did  thinkc  hec  had
brought  an  argument  of  good  aflurance  to  the  Icwcs,
when  he  beganne  his  Epiftle  thus  $ That  which  wee  haue

feene ^ *


page,i6o+  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofture

feene  with  our  eyes , handled  with  our  hands , and  beene  con*
uerfant  withall>the  Lord  of  life:  which  if  he  had  written,
to  a quirking  Sorbonift  or  a fcoffing  Lucianift,that  had
his  braine  puffed  vp  with  this  theorie  of  formes , hec
would  fay,  the  Apoflie  wrote  like  a good  plaine  Iohn  a
nodsiforthofeaccidentsoffpcech,  fauour,  proporti-
on, and  feeling  might  be  in  mdtuiduo  vago , in  a wande-
ring Hobgoblin,  that  had  no  fimilitudc  ofnature  with
the  Lord  of  life.  Verily,  neither  this  new  coyne  of  con-
ceited formes),  nor  the  imagination  ofany  Idolatrous
adoration  was  once  in  theyrvndcrflanding,  whorecei-
ued  the  bleflcd  facrament,  leaning  one  vppen  anothers
breaft,  and  therefore  this  temptation  was  as  auncienfas
the  originall  infhtution,  that  the  facrament  was  breads  &
not  to  be  adored.

Fourthly,  Sara  was  tempted  by  the  deuill  to  thinke
that  our£ngliJh  Adimtterswere  as  good,  as  the  priefls.  If
thedeuilhad  not  tempted  Sara  to  this,  hce  had  beene
much  too  blame : for  he  beeing  one  of  their  chorus,  and
a principal  a&or  in  their  play,&  fo  familiar  with  all  their
iegerdemaine,  did  well  fee,  that  if  hell  if  felfe  had  beene
raked  (as  they  fay)  and  13  of  the  dcuils  mofl  deuilifh
MiniQers fetched  from  thence, they  could  not  haue  paf-
fed  JVeSlon , and  his  tweluc  deuilifh  tragedians,  in  any
degree.  Di(fcroblers,  iugleis,  impoflors,  players  with
God,  his  Sonne,  his  angels,  his  faints:  deuifersofnew
dcuils,  feigned  tormentors  of  fpirits,  vfurpers  of  the  key
of  the  bottomlelfc  pit,  whippers,  fcourgers , batfoulers
of  fiends,  Pandars,  Ganimedeans,  enhaunfers  of  luff,  *
deflowrers  of  virgins,  defilers  of  houfes,  vnciuil,vn  man-
lie,  vnnafUrallvcnereans,  offerers  of  theyr  owne  mafle
to (uppofed dcuils,  deprauersof  theyr  owne  reliques,
applying  them  to  vnfpcakablc , detcfiable , monfirous
• - deformities : proflituters  of  all  the  rites,  ornaments,  and
ceremonies  of  theyr  Church  to  impure  villanics:  pro-
phaners  of  all  parts  of  the  feruice,  worfhip,  and  honour
.'H  ...  x * t>’  ''  of


in  cafting  out  of  Deuils.  page,i6i«

of  God:  violators  of  tombes,  facrilcgious , blafpbc-
• nicrs  of  God,  the  blelTcd  Trinitie , and  the  virgin  Ma-
rity  in  the  perfon  of  a counteract  dcuill : feducers  of  fub-
ie&s,  plotterSjConfpirators,  contriucrs  of  bloody  & de-
tcftable  treafons,  againll  their  annointed  Soueraigne :
it  would  pofe  all  hell  to  fample  them  with  fuch  another
dofen.

Fiftly,  Sara  was  tempted  by  the  deuil  not  to  fay  her  Page  4.
prayers  in  Latine , becauje  Cjod  had  not  fo  commaundedy  but
tn  £ nglijhy  asjhe  had  learned  of  the  tjdd  imfter , in  her  mo-
thers hotife  : Deerely  beloued  brethren , the  Scripture  mo-
ueth  vs  in  [undry  places  [humbly  to  acknowledge , and  confejfe
cur  manifold finnes>  and  rvickgdnes : God  fane  the  fhteene,
and  her  <JMimslers.

Arc  not  thefe  mens  faces  forely  (corched  with  the
flames  of  hcl  fire,and  their  confciences  feared  with  thofe
hote  burning  coales.that  dare  publifh  this  defperate  im-
pietie  to  the  world,  that  the  confeffion  of  our  finne$,ac-
cording  to  Gods  holy  wil,  and  fatherly  admonitions  in
the  Scripture,  (which  is  the  firft  beginning  ofourwor-
fhip,  and  fcruice  of  almighty  God,  appointed  and  efta*
blifhcd  in  cur  publique  forme  of  prayer  in  the  Church)
is  the  deuils  temptation  ? Was  it  euer  heard  of  before,
fromeyther  Heathenift,  or  diuine,  that  the  deuil  did
tempt  any  , humbly  to  acknowledge , and confeffe  his  firmes,
before  almighty  God.  Which  are  the  expreffe  words  of
our  feruice  booke , derided  by  thefe  hellifh  Impoftors,

. and  fathered  vppon  the  deuil?  What  are  our  faith,  our
hope,  our  charity,  ourzeale,  our  worship  of  almightie
God,  but  Pharifaical  cloudes,  and  wandring  ftarres,  ac«
curfed  of  God,  without  frue,and  vnfaigned  humiliation
going  afore  ? And  what  fhal  become  of  their  much-
commended  mortification,  penance,  affli&ion,  and  ta-
wing of  the  body,  to  bring  it  into  due  obedicnce,vndcr
the  gouernment  of  Gods  holy  fpirit , or  in  what  order,
andranke,  fhal  wee  place  thefe,  if  deie&ion  of  minded

Y.  and


page,  162,  A declaration  of Popifhimpofture

and  humiliation  of  (pint,  the  acceptable  (acrifices  vnto
God,  be  the  cognifanccs  of  the  deuil  ? Blinde,  and  dc-
fperare  malice  cares  not,  what  it  fpeakes,fo  it  may  fpeak.
For  that  addition  , infeorne  and  fuperbious  contempt
annexed  by  you,  vntoour  publique  prayer,  God /ana
the  Queene , wee  doe  glory  in  it , and  pray  vnto  God,
fromthebottomeofour  harts,  that  wee  long  fo  pray*
It  dcmonflrateth  plainly  to  the  world,  with  what  fpirie
you  are  led,  namely  by  the  fpirit  of  Satanical  pride,  and
defperate  difobedience,that  dare  referre  that  pious  loyal
prayer  to  the  dcuiL

Thus  hath  the  deuil  (forfooth)  fpoken  in  fauor  of  our
Prince,  her  worthy  Counfailors,  her  renowmed  Cour-
tiers, her  learned  Minifters : in  fauor  of  the  Sacraments,
and  publique  feruiceof  almighty  Cod,  cfhblifhed in
our  Church:  now  let  vshearc  the  fame  deuil,  as  you
haue  prefented  him  on  the  (lage , pleading  for  your
Church,  and  patronizing  your  heathenifh  fupcrflition,
and  diabolical  inuentions  in  the  fame.  Dibdale  to  the
“Bookc  of  deuil  .What  fajeft  thou  to  the  virgin  Cfi/Tary?Y)c\\\\.Oh,{bec
Miracles  had  no  origtnati fane,  I had  not  a bit  of  her , neither  wtthm,

page. 1 6.  nor  without.  Heerc  you  fee  a plaine  blafphemy  of  the

Church  of  Rome,  that  could  neuer  before  bewarran-
. ted  by  Scripture,  reafon,  nor  auncient  Father,  that  any
(except  the  vnfpotted  fonne  of  God)  (hould  be  borne
without  original  fume,  now  warranted,  and  (lamped
with  the  (ignet  of  the  deuil  for  good,  namely,  that  the
virgin  <JMary  was  borne  without  finne.

Dibdale  .*  What  fayefl  thou  to  Gregory  the  thirteenth  f
Fage,i5V  Deuil.  Oh , he  is  a Saint  in  heauen , he  neuer  came  in  Pur-
gatorie . This  fauour  the  deuil  beflowcs  on  that  Pope,
becaufe  he  had  beene  a bountiful  founder, and  benefac-
tor, to  the  Englifh  renegadoes,  and  a mod  peftilent:
deuifer  againft  the  life  of  our  Soueraigne : who  for  this
good  feruice,  was  caried  on  the  dcuils  backe,  asfeeme s?
flp  oucr  Purgatorie  into  heauen.


Dibdale


f

I


in  carting  out  of  Deuiis.'

Dibdale.  What fayeH  thou  to  Brian  ? Came  he  into  Pur-


page,T65


gat  one}  Deuil.  0 h no,  he  is  a Saint  in  deede,  he  is  in  he  a-  Fagc.43.
uen  .‘This  man  was  one  of  the  arch-tray  tors,  that  came
ouer  with  Varfons , and  Caspian , with  fpccial  defignes
oftreafon  from  the  Pope:  and  therefore  the  deuil  ought
him  a fpecial  good  turne,  5c  could  not  requite  him  bet-
ter, then  to  enroll  him  amongft  his  Saints.

Dibdale.  What  fayeH  thou  to  the  hie  fed  Sacramant  of
the  sAltar  l Deuih  It  is  the  very  body  of  (fhriH  cut  it.  Page  17.
andthoujhalt  fee  it  hleede . It  had  beene  an  cafie  expe-
riment to  haue  fried,whether  that  the  deuil  would  haue
beene  true  of  his  word : but  Dibdale  had  an  euafion  rea-
die  twined  for  this : and  that  was*,  Heewould  not  entity
for  tempting  his  (freator , It  was  no  tempting  of  God,  to
aske  counfel  of  the  deuil  touching  the  Sacrament : but
it  had  beene  a fore  temptation,  to  haue  made  proofeof
the  bleeding , and  yet  there  was  no  man  of  good  fence,
but  would  rather  haue  giuen  credit  to  his  eyes,  if  he  had
feene  it  to  bleede,  then  to  the  deuiis  bare  affirmation  in
fo  waightya  cafe*  But  whom  fhouldthe  children  of
lyes,  coggerics,  and  Impoftures  beleeue,  if  theyfhould
Hot  beleeue  their  father,  the  graund  father  of  lyes  ?

We  (ton.  What  fayeH  thou  to  Campianswr^,  whence  Weftons
hath  it  this  vertue,  beingafeely  twiH , toaffhH , intoxicate , Tra&atof
and  amaze  thee  ? D euih  Ierufalem  nouit,  Tiburmu  nouitt  ood.
lerufalem , and  Tiburne  can  tell  you.


Thus  farre  the  worthie  dialogue  betweene  Dibdale
and  the  deuill,  wherein  are  many  points  of  high  5c  pru-
dent confideration.  If  we  may  be  fo  bold  with  his  deuil-
fhipsgood  leaue,  wee  would  gladly  aske  a queflion  or
fwotfirlt,  why  cutting  (hould  make  the  facrament  fo
bleed,  and  not  breaking  doe  the  fame , if  the  body  of
our  Sauiour  be  really  there  \ For  veines  becing  the  vef-
fels  of  blood,  there  is  fluxe  of  blood  caufed  as  well  by
rupture  of  a veine  caufed  by  violence,  (and  for  the  raoft
part  in  greater  aboudance)  as  by  direction  of  the  fa  megp

Y z And


page, 1 64#  A declaration  of  Popith  lmpofture

And  againe  I imagine , that  (according  to  theyr  raoft
monftrous  opinion)  our  Sauiour  had  been  in  the  Sacra-
ment, as  the  foule  is  faid  to  be  in  the  body : that  is*,  to -
tns  Ch:  in  toto  facr ament  o,  et  totus  in  eptalibet  parte  facra -
mend.  So  as  whether  you  cut,  orbreakc  the  fecramcnt
* after  confecration,  the  part  that  you  diftribute,  doth  co-
fainc  whole  Chrift , and  cucry  part  of  him  5 then  can  no
incifion  deuide  our  Sauiours  body3andcaufe  it  to  bleed,
no  more  then  cutting  of  an  armccan  deuide  the  foule.
1 fcare  his  deuilfhip  was  too  fuddaine  in  this  refolution
of  bleeding,  or  els  that  his  wits  were  troubled  with
finoake.

Secondly  I wonder  (confidering  the  deepe  wit,  and
policy  of  the  deuil)  how  it  ftandeth  with  his  wifedome,
to  rcfoluc  Co  cleare  &ea(ily  on  the  Romifh  Catholicks
fide,  all  the  deepeft  matters  depending  betweenc  vs  and
them  : confidering  ( as  Edmundsy he  dcu]\sprwado)2f&:»
meth)that  Profeftants  be  all  friend  to  the  deuil , 8c  Ca-
tholicks  his  fworne  enemies.  This  is  to  weaken  hirofelfe
and  his  forces , and  to  caufe  his  friends  to  forfake  h?s
colours,  and  flievnto  his  enemies  *,  as  wee  find,by  thefe
his  temerarious  refolutions,  hee  loft  4 or  /oco.  long-
bild  birds  at  a clap.  Either  all  is  not  well  with  the  deuill
in  his  wits,  or  els  the  prieftshadfo  fealdedhim  in  the
breech,  as  hee  durft  doc  no  other . And  what  a ftrange
aduantage  hauc  the  Romifts  of  vs  Proteftants , that
haue  gotten  them  two  heads,  whereof  neither  can  erre,
a Pope, and  a deuill  ?

The  deuih  aunfwers  8c  refolutions  here  to  cafes  pro-
pounded by  the  priefts,  are  diuinc  Oracles , farre  pafc
fing  the  old  Oracles  hee  was  wont  to  make  in  ssfpollos
Temple  at  Delphos , or  the  Trophonian  denne : for  they
were  mixed  with  aequiuocafion  (the  new  Iefuitical,  and
olddiabolicalltricke)  but  thefe  arc  clcere,  dire&,  and
plaine.  Dibd:  Whatfayeft  thou  to  the  Sacrament  of  the
r Deuil.  It  tithe  very  bod]  of  fir  ill  ^ cut  it  and

thou


’ in  calling  out  of  Deuils.  page,  16J

thoufbalt feeit  bleede.  And  heerein  the  deuils  headfliip
furpafteth  the  Popes  headfliip  by  farre : for  the  Popes
hesd-peecc  may  ake  with  Grong  wine , Girring  c holler*
or  Grong  poyfon  *,  and  his  Holines  roufl  haue  a counsel
called,  and  he  mult  be  placed  in  his  ConfiGorian  chairc
(as  C alphas  in  the  fcate  of  the  High-  pried)  ere  hee  can
prophccie  certainc  and  right \ and  it  mufl  be  incaufisfu-
damentalibus  fdei  to : and  then  he  flial  fpeake  truth  whe-
ther he  wil  or  no,likc Balams  Afi'e  : but  the  deuils  head-
ship ncedes  none  of  thefe  moleGations,  foletnnities,  nor
exceptions.  His  cenfure  is  m attu  vltimo,  ready , quick,
cerfaine,  found, infallible,  cleerc,  admitting  no  interpre-
tation. Who  being  alwaies  ready  at  hand  to  comaund,
by  Metious  his  whip,  his  club,  or  his  deuil-bugge,  or  an
ExorciGs  holy  hands,  more  potent  then  all  thefe,  and
hauing  his  raile  wel  fizled  with  brirnGone,  or  fcaldecf
foundly  with  holy  water  afore,  what  a good-yecre  needs
all  this  leuel  coyle,  & Girre,  for  determinations  of  coun-
fels,  refolutions  of Popes,  allegations  of  Fathers,  depu-
tations of f\ ubtilijfimus , angeltcts,  Seraph  tens  doll  or  ex  or-
dtne  minorum,  that  doe  cramp  mens  wits,  & turne  them
•eut  of  their  fockets.<far  your  fubttliffmus  ^angehcijfmius  ,
SerapbtciffimusDottorthe  deuil:  and  tisno  more  then
thus.  Exor : Dentil,  what  fayeft  thou  to  the  IPope  f Is  hee
tsfntichrift,  or  head  of  the  Church  ^yea  or  no  f Deuil.  Oh
vo,  he  is  the  head  of  the  Church . Exor:  May  hee  excom-
municate 'Trinces , and  dine  si  them  from  theyr  crotvncs  ?

De:  Oh  he  may , he  may . Exor:  Hath  hee  the  temporall
fword  dir  ell  ly  or  no?  and  is  hee  Rex  regum  of  the  worlds
and  all  the  Emperors y Kings , and  Princes  his  Lieutenants ,
to  place , and  di/place  at  his  pleafure  ? De:  Oh  they  be  all  his
vaffals .Exo:  May  the  Iefmtsf  his  fpirits)m  ordine  ad  De-
ism cog,  lye,  aquiuocate , adulterate , murther  ,ftab,  poyfon
Chrifltan  Princes,  for  aduauncing  the  Popes  Monarchic
the  King  of  Spain  e,  or  no  ? De:  Oh  they  may  doe  what  they  '
lift  in  ordine  ad  deum.  This  is  a Ihoruut.  tis  but  an  Oh#

Y 3 for


page, 1 664  A declaration  of  Popifhimpofture

fora  preface,  and  the  reft  is  an  Oracle : and  fo  all  the
grand  cafes  for  cither  Church,  or  Common-wealth  arc
difpatched.

And  if  they  want  deuils  in  Italy,  to  cxorcife,  and  aske
Oracles  of:  let  them  come  but  ouer  into  London  in
. England : and  wee  haue  ready  for  them,  Darrells  wife,
Moores  Minion , Sharpe,  Skelton , tuans , Swan,  & Lewis  \
the  deuil-finders,  and  deuil-puffers,  or  deuil*  prayers:
and  they  fhal  Hart  them  a deuil  in  a lane , as  foone  as  an
Hare  in  Waltham  forreft,  that  fhal  nick  if  with  aunfwers,
as  dead  as  Wettons,  andDihdales  deuils  did.  And  wee
dial  as  eafily  finde  them  a route,  rable,  and  fwarmc  of
giddy, adle,  lunaticke,  illuminate  holy  fpeftators  of  both
fexes,  but  efpecially  a Siftcvnity  of  mimpes,  mops,  and
idle  holy  women,  that  fhal  grace  CModu  the  deuil,  with
their  idle  holy  prefence,and  be  as  ready  to  cry  out, at  the
mowing  ofan  apifh  wench,  and  the  lowing, or  bellow-
ing of  a brainleffc  empty  fellow:  O the glory  of  Cjod:  O
the  power  of  prayer  : as  the  Romifhguls  did  troupe  a-
bout  Sara , Fid , and  ssfnnc  Smith, and  cry  out  at  the  con-
juration of  the  Exorcift : O the  fathohcjue  fayth ! O the
power  of  the  fayth  Catholique  . Hac  temp  or  a,  hi  mores .
Thefeare  the  times,  w herein  we  are  ficke,  and  road  of
^B^ohin  good  fellow,  and  the  deuil,  to  walk-eagaine  amongft
vs : and  (I  feare)  the  latter  times , wherein  lying  fignes,
faigned  wonders,  cogged  miracles,  the  companions  of
Antichrift,  fhal  preuaile  with  the  children  of  pride,  gid-
dines,  and  misbeleefc.

We  doe  not  afleuer,  that  the  deuil  cannot  fay  a troth,
or  that  he  hath  not  fome-time  proclaimed  the  truth : we
know  he  cried,  and  faid  to  our  Sauiour  Chriff,  We  knew
thee, who  thoti  art , the  holy  one  of  God:  wherein  he  fay  d,
and  cried  truly  : but  this  was  vponcoaft ion,  from  the
mighty  hand  of  God,  andnotvpponcpeftioning,  and
dialoguizing  with  the  deuil,  which  we  neuer  jead,  that
ey  ther  our  Sauiour,  or  his  holy  difciples  did . Nay,  wee


in  calling  out  of  Deuils*  page,  167

fee  that  our  Sauiour  checked  the  deuil , fo  faying  truly
of  him,  and  commaunded  him  to  hold  his  peace,  as  not
acceptingofany  witnes , or  teftimony  from  the  deuils.

If  Edmunds , and  his  twelue  dcuilifh tragedians  could
indeede  haueconiured  a deuil:  (as the  deuil  of  deuil
there  was,  but  the  cogging,  comuring  knaucs  them-
felues)  that  would  haue  giuen  teftimonie  to  the  prayer s3
Sacraments , and  feruice  of  God , eftablifhed  in  our
Church,  (as they  faigned  UWodu  their  deuil  to  doe:)
we  would  haue  difdained,  and  rcie&edhis  teftimonie,
as  our  Sauiour  Chrift  did.

But  fee  JVettons  great  wit,  the  Author  and  contriuer
of  thisdeuilhfport.  When  the  cogge-dcuifl  fpeakes  of
vs:  O that  is  our  difgrace,&  confufionrwhen  hejfpeakes
ofthcRomifh  church,  and  the  bleeding;  of  the  Sacra-
tnent:  O that  is  Gods  oracle,and  their  triumphant  exal-
tation. O defpicable  heathenifn  beggerie,  to  goe  a beg-
ging  good  wordes  and  credit  from  the  deuil.  And  loe
hcere  (good  Chriftian  Reader)  plaineGentilifme,with-
outweltor  couer.  The  Gentiles  beeing  forfaken  of
God,  and  giuen  vp  into  a reprobate  minde,  did  refort
vnto  theyr  Oracles,  toaske  other  counfels , and  refolu-
fions  from  the  deuil \ and  what  doe  ourRomifh  Impo-
ftors  leflc,  or  in  other  fort,  then  (/reefteSy  Alexander , Pyr~
rhus , and  the  reft  of  the  heathen  Captaines  did?  Let
fome  fubtile  Sorbonift  giue  mee  an  effentiall  difference
betweene  them.They  asked  the  deuil  queftions  5 fo  doe
our  priefts : they  asked  about  matters  of  their  common-
weak  5 our  priefts  doe  more:  they  aske  about  matters  of
"God,  and  the  Church,  they  tookc  the  deuils  word  for
a graceful  diuine  fauour  vnto  them  $ fo  doe  our  priefts :
they  accounted  the  deuils  anfwer  as  the  oracles  of  God  5
fo  doe  our  priefts : It  is  the  body  ofChrifl , (cries  the  de-
uill)  cut  ity  and  thou  Jhalt  fee  it  bleede.  Why  now  tis  cock,
or  deuil-fure,  againftallthc  Proteftantsin  the  world  s
except  the  difference  be  this;  thedeuill  neuer  aunfwe-


page,  1 68*  A declaration  of  Popifli  impofhire

red  the  heathen  Captainesin  any  matter  of  import,  but
in  amphibologies  and  clowdcs , for  feare  of  becing  taken
tripping  in  a lyc  : our  Romift  deuils,  doe  giue  tneir  an-
fwers  bare-faced,without  any  circuition,  or  aequiuocati-
on  at  all : and  therefore  our  Romift  deuils  are  fure  the
fonnes  of  theyr  fweet  Sire  the  Pope,  and  the  darlings  of
theyr  deere  mother  the  holy  Church  of  Rome . But  6
lamentable  defperation  of  the  church  of  Rome ! When
King  Saule  for  his  difobcdience , was  depriued  of  the
good  fpirit  of  God,  and  had  a bad  fpirit  fent  from  God,

* to  haunt  and  afflift  him,  and  that  Almighty  God  in  his
heauy  difpleafure,would  neither  aunfwer  him  by  Vriin%
Thttmmim,v\ox  rcuclation  from  heauen : he  then  in  a de-
fperate  mood  goes  to  the  Witch  at  Endor , to  aske  coun-
fel  of  her.  Jih*td dids  ? What  fayeft  thou  to  my  fate  ? The
loathforaeabhominations,  andEthnike  Impofturesof
the  Church  of  Rome,  where-with  they  haue  gulled, and
made  drunken  the  Kings  of  the  Nations  , being  by  the
piercing  glorious  light  of  the  Gofpel  difplayed,  and  vn-
couered  to  the  open  view  of  the  world ; and  that  church
for  her  whoredomc  being  depriued  of  the  holy  fpirit
of  Almighty  God,  and  giuen  ouer  to  the  fpirit  of  dark-
nes,  giddines , and  lugling  deceitc  •,  hauing  now  ney-
ther  teftimonie  from  Gods  diuine  Oracles,  nor  brea-
things from  that  heauenly  cleare  fountaine,nor  prefence
of  holy  Fathers,  to  countenance  their  monftrous  defor-
mations j doc  in  a defperate  fury,  and  hellifh  refolution,
refort  vnto  the  Oracles  of  the  deuil,  and  would  con-
iure  vp  from  hcl  the  Prince,  and  power  of  darknes,  to
be  their  proloquutor,  and  to  grace  them  with  a won-
der.*

Heare  their  lamentable  voyce,  fraught  with  defpairc,
cjuiddici-sl  Prince  of  darknes,  what  fayeft  thou  for  our
Mafic  ? What  fayeft  thou  for  our  Sacrament  of  the  Al-
tar ? And  now  (good  Reader)  obierue  the  fop  of  hcl-
. lift  refolution,  and  the  gulfe  of  difoairc : wherein  the

Romift


in  cafting  out  ofDeuils*


page, 169


Romifh  church  is  plunged : when  neither  God,  Angel,
nor  deuil,  can  be  gotten  to  fpea Ice  for  them  (for  hccrc
was  neither  Angel,  S.  S. Barbara,  nor  deuifnor

fpirit , in  all  this  faigned  trag^die,  as  we  haue  let  you  to
fcc,thorough  the  whole  courfe  of  the  fame  ) O lamen-
table dcfolarion  ! fVefton , and  his  twelue  Prieds,  doc
play  the  deuils  thcmfclues,  & all  to  grace  from  hel,  (be-
ing now  forfaken  of  heauen  ) their  pope , their  MafTe,
their  Sacraments , their  Medalls,  their  Agnus  Dei  , their
charmcs,  their  enchauntmcnts,  their  coniurations,


r cliques , their  hellifti  forccries  : et  prattaluit  bee  petes  tas
tenebrarum : This  power  of  darknes,  played  by  the  chil-
dren of  darknes  preuailed , to  the  gayning  vnto  his  ho-
lincs,  and  to  helf  foure  or  fiuc  thoufandlbulcs,  and  that
in  a. very  little,  andfhort  time.  VVhofe  heart  wilnot
bleedc  for  pitty,  and  his  eyes  gufh  out  with  teares,  for
companion,  of  our  blinded,  befotted,  bewitched  poore
Nation  ? The  rather,  when  he  fhal  cad  his  eye  vpon  the
maine  worke,  fhape,  and  end,  of  all  this  deuillifh  de-
tiifc , which  was  this.  One  of  the  chiefe  impediments,
that  haue  hindered  from  time  to  time,  the  defignments
of  the  Pope,  the  King  of  Spainc,  and  their  agents,  a-
gainft  her  Maiedie,  and  this  Kingdome,  hath  beene  the
want  of*  a fufficicnt  number  of  CathoJiqucs  hecre  in
England,  to  affid  them : for  the  fupplying  whereof  his
Holmes  hath  from  time  to  time  fet  on  worke  all  his
indruments  of  hell.

When  the  Lords  in  the  North , were  to  take  vp  armes
againd  her  Maiedie,  and  the  dafe,the  Pope  denounced
his  Excommunication  againd  her  , and  againd  all  that
(hould  take  her  part : and  fent  his  Prieds  hither, not  on-
lie  to  intimate  vnto  the,  what  the  Pope  had  done  there-
in 5 but  likewife  to  follicite  as  many  Catholiques,  as  they
could,  to  vnite  themfclues  in  drengthening  that  rebelli-
on •,  alluring  them,  that  they  were  abfolued  from  their
duty,aadallegcance,  and  that  they  were  bound,  vnder


Z.


pains


Pagc>17°»  A declaration  of  Popifh  impofhire

painc  of  the  Popes  difpleafure,  and  ofincurringthclike
cenfure,  if  they  fhould  refufe  fo  to  doe . And  Saunders
is  confident,  that  if  there  had  bcene  fufficient  notice  in
x time  of  the  faid  excommunication,  the  number  of  the
Catholiques , that  would  haue  taken  part  with  the  faid
Earle,  would  haue  bcene  fo  great,  as  that  her  Maicflie,
with  all  the  forces  Hie  could  make,  could  not  haue  been
able  to  haue  withftoode  them.

At  what  time  the  fecond  attempt  (as  I haue  touched
in  the  beginning)  by  force,  was  in  plotting  betwixt  the
Pope,  and  the  King  of  Spame.for  the  fending  ouer  into
England  of  the  Duke  of  Cjutfe:  [Saunders  being  gone
about  that  time  into  Ireland,  toanimatc,  and  affiftthe
Traytor  <rDefmond%  and  likewife  to  incite,  and  allure  her
Maiefties  fubie&s  there , to  take  his  part ) the  feare  of
want  of  fufficient  affiftance  heere  at  home , did  greatly
perplex  them : where-vpon,  about  the  yeere  i /8o,and
a little  after,  many  more  priefts  (and  fome  Iefuitsalfo)
were  fent  into  this  Realme,  then  at  anytime  before,  to
labour  by  all  meanes  poffible,  for  the  with-drawing  of
her  Maiefties  fubie&s  from  their  duty,  and  allegeance,
•by  reconciling,  & vniting  their  harts  to  her  mortal  enc?  J
mie,  the  Pope . To  which  purpofc,  if  were  hard  to  re-
count  their  falfe , and  alluring  enticements , by  exclai-
ming without  all  ciuil  modefty,  and  truth , againft  the
do&rinc  of  the  Church  of  England,  now  eftablifhed  t ''
by  deprauing  her  Maieffies  gouernracnt,aiid  the  whole
eftafe  of  the  Realme,  in  moft  barbarous,  and  outragiou*
iinueftiues,  and  libels,  and  by  terrifying  of  fome,  & per-
verting of  others,  with  ft  range  reports  of  the  ftrength*
and  preparation  of  the  King  of  Spainc,  and  the  Pope,
ready  foinuadc  this  Land.  About  this  time  alfo  their
Sraffique,&  merchandizing,by  pardons,  medals,  graines*
CrofTcs,  Agnus  dries,  was  exceeding  all  meafure,  where-
with they  deluded , and  inucigled  many  of  the  fimplcr
fort  o But  all  thefe  dcuifes  notwithftanding,  either  for
. o • ‘ v • that

m - *.  \ '


in  cafting  out  ofDcuils*  1

that  the  number  they  laboured  for,  did  not  fo  encreafe,
as  they  defired,  or  that  the  Iefuits  had  an  ambitious  dc-
fire,  to  caric  away  the  garland  from  the  reft  of  their  bre-
lhren,and  companions  in  this  feruice.  Fa:  fVeftott, then
the  Proutnciall  of  all  the  Iefuits  in  England,  deuifed  this
hellifh  trick  of  cafting  out  deuils:  by  the  which  they  fo
preuailed  , as  they  gayned  in  a ve$y  fhort  fpace , fourc
or  yooo  to  be  reconciled  to  the  Pope . And  fuch  was
at  that  time  the  zcale,or  rather  fury  of  thefe  new  gayned
Profelytes , and  the  elder  fort  of  Pharifaical  hypocrites,
fo  kindled,  and  enflamed  with  the  admiration  of  the  di-
uine  power,  which  they  fuppofed  to  be  in  thefe  priefts,
as(bcfides  the  large  contributions, which  they  gaue  the)
no  meruaile  if  they  would  haue  followed  them  through
thick,  and  thin,  fire,  and  water,  purgatorie,  andhel,  to
afTift  any  forrainc,or  domcftical  power  againft  her  Ma-
ieftie,  and  her  Kingdome  . I wifti,  and  earneftly  pray
for  thefe,  gulled,  deluded,  bewitched  poore  foules,  that
they  may  now  at  laft  lay  their  hand  on  their  harts,or  that
God  would  open  their  harts , to  loath  thofe  defpicable
Impoftures,  and  returne  vnto  the  truth  : afluring  them
felues,  that  neuer  any  true  religion,  did  aflift,  and  credits
it  felfe  by  fuch  diabolical  diftiraulation.


FINIS.


Z.2.


/


? age,  171


\ -


pagc,i72


THE

Cop  iesofthefeue-

rail  Examinations , and  confefsi-

# '

ons  of  the  parties  pretended  tobepoffef-
fed,  and  difpoffefled  by  Weft  on  the  Iefuit,  and
his  adherents:  fet  dovvne  word  for  word  as
they  were  taken  vpon  oath  before  her  Maiefties  Com-
diflioners  for  caufes  Ecdefiafticall , and  arc  extent
vpptm  Record  in  the  fame
Court .


- £.


Page  17?.


*>■■■■■■■■'  'll  ■ mm>  >■»■■■■  m ■ " i ■ n>

The  examination

of  Sara  Williams , taken  vpon  her
cat  by  the  24.  of prill  1 6 oit  before

the  Lord  Bifhop  of  London , Ma:  Do&or
Andrewcs,  Deane  ofFVeftminfter,  Ma:
Doctor  Stanbep,  and  Ma:  Dodtor

(JMountford,

(•■•)  ■


TH  E beginning  of  the  hittory  taken  with  Barnes
bceing  read  vnto  this  examinate,  how  fhe  began
firft  to  be  polfefTed , bceing  about  the  age  of  1 $
or  1 6 y ceres , viz:  how  (bee  had  beene  fitters  times
flared  with  vgly  vifion s : how  fitting  one  night  late  by  the fire ,
three  terrible  Cats  fprauled  about  this  examinate:  how  one
leapt  ouer  her  head , another  crept  betweene  her  legs : how  a
ftrange  huge  (fat  as  big  as  a MaJhffe^  flared  vppon  her  with
eyes  as  big  as  a faucer : and  how  afterward  the  fame  wicked
Jpirit  met  her  in  the  likenes  of  a Cat , commiug  out  of  a hol-
low tree , as  jhe  was  feekjng  for  eggs.  She  faith,  that  all  theft
things  thus  written  of  her,  arc  mod  falfe : and  that  fhee
greatly  wondreth , that  any  naan  would  fo  write:  onely
fhefayth,  that  froraa  child  flie  could  neuer  endure  the

Z 3 figfa


The  booke
of  miracles
extant  vpoa
record.


page,  174*  The  examination  of

fight  ofa  Cat.  And  that  when  fhec  dwelt  with  Maifiet
CMaynie  at  Denham,  (which  was  about  a yere  before  (he
went  to  Mifiris  Peckham)  fhee  walking  one  day  in  a
wood  by  the  houfe,  and  looking  forfomc  Hennes  (as
ihee  remembreth)  fhee  efpyeda  Cat  comming  out  ofa.
hedge,  which  did  fearc  her  greatly,  and  made  her  to
tremble,  and  fhake,  (<as  fhec  often  doth  when  fhccisa-
fraid)  but  fhefayeth,  that  fiie  was  the  more  feared  then,
bccaufc  file  was  alone.  This  tale,  fiie  thinkcth,fiiec  fold
firfi  to  her  Mifiris,  & afterwards  to  certaine  Priefis,  and
further  faith,  that  if  any  Priefi,  or  other  Catholick  hath
beene  the  author  of  thofe  words , before  read  vnto  her,
they  haue  falfiv-contriucd  them,  as  fhethinketh,  vppon
the  occafion  of  the  faid  Cat.  For  fiic  denieth,  that  euer
file  h^l  been  vfed,  before  fiic  fell  into  the  priefis  hands,
to  be  affrighted  with  any  vgly  vifions , or  that  euer  any
Caf(to  her  knowledge)did  either  leape  ouer  her  head,or
runne  betwixt  her  legges,or  that  fiie  heard  any  fuch  ter-
rible noyfe,  or  that  fhec  euer  faw  any  Cat  as  bigge  as  a
mafiiffe,  with  eyes  as  broad  as  a faucer*

Shee  faith,  that  when  fhee  came  to  Fulmer , to  dwelt
with  Mifiris  Peckham , which  was  abou 1 Aftchaelndas  (as
(he  remembreth)  fhee  had  not  beene  there  long  before
£he  heard,  that  the  houfe  was  troubled  with  fpirits,  fo  as
eucry  noyfe,  and  thing  that  fhec  heard  or  faw,  did  fearc
her.  ' ' •

Shee  further  faith , that  the  tale  read  vnto  her  out  of
the  faid  booke , concerning  her  leauing  of  her  fupper,
beeing  greatly  afraid , the  12  of  Ofiober,  Anno  iy
is  mod  falfe  : as  that  fhe  perceiued  beeing  at  J upper  a puffe
of  wind  comming  in  at  the  doore , that  fhee  faw  a dog  of  two
ctillours , blacke  and greene  : that  therewith  a Jpaniell  of  the
houfe  bayed  once  ;■ that  fhee  this  examinate , was  then  pulled
.by  the  eyest  that  the  thing  that  pulled  her  by  the  eyes , went
into  her  mouth,  and  reHingat  her  hart , burnt  her  intolera-
bly : and  that  therevppon  fie  caH  away  her  knife , andwould

- - * cate


Page  20,


Sara  Williams;  page,I7S.

(Ate  no  more  meate  for  that  time.  At  the  hearing  of  thefe
things  read  vnto  her,  llic  vfed  thefe  words  *,  O lefusthat
any  bodj/bould  report  fo  of  me.  That  which  happened  at
that  time,  was  as  folioweth.

She  faith,  that  becing  at  fupper, there  was  great  thun-
der and  lightning,  & that  there  hapning  one  great  flafh
of  lightning,  and  a great  clap  of  thunder,  thedogges
therewith  ran  out  of  the  hall  barking.  And  herewith  fhc
confcfleth  that  fhc  was  greatly  afraid,  left  of  her  fupper,
and  grew  to  be  fickly  after  it.  And  more  then  this  fhee
denyeth  to  be  true , and  maraaileth  that  any  fhould  be
(o  wicked,  as  to  write  in  that  fort  of  her.

She  further  faith,  that  after  her  comming  to  Miflris
Peckham , (GOD  hauing  done  his  part  for  her)  diuerfc
snen  did  attempt,  to  offer  herfome  iniuryj  and  that  a-
inongd  the  reft ,fhe  was  very  loth  to  goe  info  any  place,
where  Ma:  ‘jyibdale  the  pried  was , not  knowing  him
the  to  be  a pried.  Infomuch  as  when  her  Miftris  w ould
fend  her  with  water  to  his  chamber,  or  vppon  any  other
buflnes,  and  Hie  /hewing  herfdfc  vnwilling  therc-vnto,
they  told  her  afterward,  that  out  of  doubt  it  did  proceed
from  a wicked  fpirit,  that  was  then  in  her,  that  /he  could
not  at  fuch  former  times  well  indure  to  be  in  Ma:  Dib~
dales  comparer,  or  to  goe  into  his  chamber,  he  beeing  a
pried,  as  afterwards  /lie  perceiued.

Concerning  her  Miltris  mouing  of  her,  to  blefle  her-  Page.  Ur
. fclfe  with  the  figne  of  the  crofle , sbee  faith , that  when
she  came  to  dwell  with  her,  she  taught  her  to  blefle  her
felfc  in  Latinc,  and  at  fome  words  to  make  a crofle  on
her  forhead,at  others  on  her  belly,  at  others,firfl  on  one
ihoulder,  and  then  on  the  other  /houlder,  and  with  the
* lad  words  vpon  her  bread.  This  prayer, and  manner  of
ble/flng  h'crfelfe  she  faith,  that  beeing;  dull  folearne , it
was  a good  time  before  dice  could  doe  it  tightly . So  as
when  her  Midris,  and  Ma:  Dibdale  willed  her  to  blefle
hcrfclfc,aad  to  vfe  the  figqes  of  the  crofle  * shec  becing

very


pag€;i7 61  The  examination  of

very  cuil  at  eafc  that  night  after  the  lightning,  she  could
not  eafily  hit  vpo  the  words.  Alfo  fhe  wel  remembrefh,
that  in  faying  the  Crcedc,  (he  (fumbled  at  the  word
tholicke  Church . Othcrwife  she  faith,  that  all  thefc  parti*
culers  are  mod  falfc,  as  that  Jhe  could  not  abideCM.  Dib-
dales  pre fence for  burning  efpec tally  when  he  laid  his  hand
vpon  herdifeafed place : that  she  should  fay , her  Matter
had  commaunded  hery  that  Jhe  Jhould  not  blejfe  herfelfe  with
the  figne  of  the  croffe , or  that  [he  could  not  indure  a casket  of
rehques , or  that  shee  eucr  fo  much  as  dreamed  at  that
time  that  Jhe  was  pojfeffed,  or  that  the  dentil  was  her  UVfai*
tter , or  that  shee  euer  faid , our  Lady  did  not  lone  her , or
that  our  Lady  was  with  her,  and  chid  her, and  faid Jhee  lotted
her  not . Tbefe  things  she  faith  she  verily  belieucth  fo  be
falfe,  & that  it  was  very  euil  done  of  them,  whofceuer
they  were  that  writ  them.

She  alfo  faith,  that  thofe  things  arc  moft  falfe,  which
Pagc,i2.  arc  wrjtfcnf0  hauebeene  vtteredby  her  vpon  the  17.  of
Offobcr,  as  that  Jhe  Jhould fay  that  her  father,  mother , &
friends  yv  ere  in  a damnable  cafe  by  going  to  the  Church . For
at  that  time  she  this  exam : was  not  a rccufant,  nor  di£
liked  going  to  the  Church  : or  that  shee  affirmed  fha lit
was  dangerous  for  little  children  togoe  to  the  Church.  Shee
further  faith,  that  about  this  time  they  began  to  giue  her
things  to  drinke,  which  she  could  not  endure,  for  that
she  perceiucd  they  made  her  ficke,  as  holy  water  offen-
ded her  becaufc  it  was  fait : and  at  fuch  times  she  fayrb,  •
thatthey(Ma:  Dtbdale^nd  fuch  others  as  wereprefent)
would  fiy,it  was  not  Jhe  that  difliked  thejbut  the  denil tn  her .

Further  fhe  faith,  that  within  about  a fortnight  (as  she
remebreth)  they  preuailed  with  her  to  make  heraRo-  ^
mifh  Catholick.and  then  notwithff  aoding  the  deuil  was
in  her,  as  they  faid , yet  they  caufed  her  to  receiue  the
bleffedfacrament,  as  farre  as  fhee  remembreth.

Page.  13.  Shee  further  faith , that  in  the  booke  concerning  the
fights,  which  arc  pretended  that  she  should  fee  at  mall#,

. * all


Sara  Williams,  page* 177

all  that  therein  is  fee  downc,is  moft  falfc,as  tha xjhe/hculd
fee  a blacks  man /landing  at  the  door e , and  beckningat  her
to  come  away : tha t /he  could  hardly  looke  vp  in  the  ele nation
time : or  that  Jhee /aw  nothing  then  but  the priefis  fingers .

But  she  faith,  that  she  doth  not  certainly  know,whethcr
she  told  them  any  fuch  thing,  or  no : confeffing , that
she  did  very  often  tell  them  thofe  things,  which  were
vntruc,  after  she  percciucd,  how  she  could  pleafe  them.

Alfo  she  faith,  that  it  is  likcwife  very  falfc  that  is  writ-
ten of  her,  as  that  she  should  vppon  the  3 o of  O&ober
fie  the  hkenes  of  a IVrenne  vpon  the  top  of  the  priefis  fingers.  P*2C  z4*
This  examinat  further  hearing  the  report  but  of  the
booke  how  it  is  faid,  that  [he  was  troubled  vpo  All  Saints
day,  fhe  faith,  she  doth  not  remeber  the  particuler  times
when  they  bound  her  in  the  chayrc,  and  applyed  theyr
reliques  vnto  her.  Butaddeth  that  they  troubled  her  ve-
ry often,  praying  God  to  forgiuc  them,  and  faying,  that
when  she  came  to  the  chayre,  she  was  fo  vfed,  as  that  e-
uery  time  (ifshc  might  haue  had  her  choice)  she  would
rather  haue  chofen  to  haue  ended  her  life , then  to  haue
gone  into  it.

And  concerning  her  dumbnes,  and  coldnes,  that  Jhee  p
c-ould  not  fpeahe  till  they  hadfigned  her  throat  with  the  figne  a **

of  the  crojfe , & applyed  holy  reliques  vnto  it.  She  faith  that
she  doth  not  remember  any  fuch  thing , but  thinketh  it
is  altogether  vntrue.  At  the  leaf! , if  at  any  time  she  were
part  the  vfe  of  her  fences , it  was  by  reafon  offuch  wa-
ters and  drinks,  as  they  compelled  her  to  take : and  that
if  she  were  at  any  time  filent,  and  did  afterwards  fpeakc,
it  was  not  tecaufe  they  had  figned  her  throat  with  the
figne  of  the  erode,  or  applyed  holy  reliques  vnto  it , al-
beit she  confelTeth , that  whatfoeuer  shce  didorfpake,
they  would  eucr  expound  it , as  they  lift  thcmfclues,  Sc
fey  it  was  done  or  fpoken  by  vertuc  of  holy  water , and
other  confecrated  things.

Further,  touching  the  report  of  that  which  is  preten-  Page  2 3

'A  a.  ded


r «-<


page.178.


The  examination  of


ded  to  haue  beenc  feene , and  fpoken  of  by  this  txami-
natc  vpon  tsfli Soules  day  after  dinner : she  faith,  shcc  is
alhamcd  to  heare  fuch  things  to  be  written , God  al-
mighty knowing  that  they  arc  very  falfe.  And  this  shce
affirmeth  (she  faith)  as  in  the  fight  of  Almighty  God,  &
would  fo  fay,  if  all  the  prieds,  that  were  there,  were  here
prefent.  And  she  further  affirmeth,  that  slice  is  well  ad-
uifed , that  shce  neucr  faw  any  deuill  in  the  forme  o fa
man  that  fhould  depart  from  her,  when  shee  vfed  thefe
words  as  is  pretended  , (redofanElam  ecclejiam  Catholi -
cam.  Almighty  God  forgiue  them.

She  further  faith,  as  concerning  the  byrd  mentioned
Page  14.  (he  booke : she  confeflcth  that  a bird  came  fuddainly
flying  in,  whereby  she  was  feared,  and  drookc  it  with
her  beades , and  that  the  bird  did  afterwards  ( beeing  a
Robin  red* breaft)  efcape  out,  beeing  on  theflooreafa
hole  in  the  boords,  there  beeing  light  to  be  feene,  and
wide  lathes  vnderneath  vnmorterd,  fo  as  the  bird  might
eafily  efcape.  But  for  the  red,  shee  faith  that  it  is  mod
falfe,  as  that  a blacke  man  fhould perfwade  her  to  breaks  her
necke  downe  a patre  ofjlatres,  and  another  time  to  cut  her
cwne  throat  wtth  a knife  3 and  that  (he  few  the  forme  of  a
rough  dog  vppon  the  communion  table , or  that  there  was  any
grunting  in  her  like fwyne,  or  croaking  like  a to  ode , or  that
jhe  euerrece  'tued  her  fight  by  the  prie  ft s fingers , or  by  theyr
breathing  vpon  her. It  pittieth  (she  faith)her  hart, that  any,
that  pretend  fo  haue  any  confcicncc , fhould  fo  write  of
her.

T ouching  the  report,  that  Jhe  Jhould  affrme , that  one  of
the  feruaunts  in  the  houfe  was  fore  haunted  by  the  enemtey
(meaning  as  shce  thinketh,  Ma:Trayford)  and  that  Jhee
could  neuer  abide  the  light  ofhimfecau/e  of  a thtng  that  fol-
lowed himt  (he  faith,  it  is  vcterly  vntrue,  adding  that  shee
was  fo  farre  from  difliking  the  fight  of  him,  as  that  dice
rather  thinketh,  she  loued  him  too  well.

Page,i  Concerning  the  ceremonies  ofbaptifine  mentioned, fhe

. . v *\  faith,


Page  x f.


Sara  Williams*  page,  179...

faith,  that  the  prietts  did  perfwadc  her,  that  her  bap*
tifmc  could  not  auaile  her , except  she  alfo  were  parta-
ker of  their  ceremonies,  which  were  holy  oyle,  holy  fait,
and  holy  fpittlc,  assheremembreth  . The  fait  they  put  ;
into  her  mouth,  and  with  their  fingers,  wet  ey  ther  with
fpirtle  or  oyle,  did  touch  her  lips,  her  nofe,  her  eyes,and
her  eares , as  she  thinketh  , and  in  the  meanc  time  she
had  a Chrifomccafl  ouerher  head, being  ofhalfe  an  ell
ofholland,with  a croffcin  the  midftofit.  At  that  time
they  changed  her  name  from  Sara  to  Mary, whcrc-vnto
she  was  the  more  willing,  becaufe  they  told  her,  there
was  neucr  any  Saint  was  called  Sara}&  the  name  of Ma~
ne  pleated  her  better.

She  alfo  faith,  that  neythcr  by  the  feeling  or  fmellmg  of
4 Pneft}fhe  eyther  receaued  at  any  time  her  hearings  fight  t
neuer  hauing  bcene  hetherto  blinde  or  deafe,  (she  than-  ^idem.
keth  God)  oncly  she  faith,  that  through  their  euil  vfage
of  her,  she  grew  to  be  troubled  with  the  paflion  of  the
hart,  becaufe  she  conccaucd  very  great  griefe,  by  theyr
bad  vfing  of  her,  and  that  through  the  faid  paflion,  she
hath  diuers  times  fwounded . At  which  times  vpon  her
rccoueric,  they  would  vfually  fay,  that  she  receaued  her
fight, and  hearing,  and  other  fences  againc,  by  the  ver-
lue  of  their  reliques,  and  touching  of  her . And  at  that
time  she  partly  belceued  them  : but  fince  hauing  beene
diuers  times  troubled  in  that  fort,  fince  she  was  married
(as  her  husband  knoweeh)  for  the  which  she  may  thank
the  faid  priefts*  she  hath  by  Gods  goodnes  recouercd
her  health  againe, without  any  of  the  priefts  helps, wher-
by  she  now  perfwadeth  her  felfe  in  her  hart, that  she  was
then  greatly  deluded  by  them.  She  further  faith,that  she
wel  rcmembrethjthat  IShuTr ay  fordone  night  did  teeme
to  be  greatly  troubled,  and  afterwards  did  pretend  to  be
fodainly  wel,Ma iDibdale  the  prieft  hauing  catched  him
inhisarmes:  but  shevtterly  denieth,  that  she  euerfaw
any  Moufe  offering  to  come  out  of  hie  mouth , or  after  going

e/f  a,  2.  out


page,  iSo.  The  examination  of

cut  At  his  care>  or  that  the  Priefts  mouth  did  hinder  the  de-
mitfrom  comming  out  At  CATa:  T rayfords  mouth . Thefc
things,  she  faith,  are  all  fained,  and  falfc,  and  farther  ad-
deth,that  she  wel  remembreth, when  she  was  with  them,
they  would  tel  many  things  of  her,  which  she  knew  to
be  falfe,  but  durft  not  fay  any  thing  againfl  them,for  of-
fending of  them.

Where  it  is  laid,  tha  tone  deuill per  [waded  Afa:Tray~
Page,  z9»  ford,  to  bane  hanged  himfelfe , and  that  another  moned  this
fxami  to goe  out  at  (JMafe  time  , and  that  fhe  thereby  hin-
dered CMa:  Travfords  vngraciotts  furpofi . Iefus  haue
mercy  vpon  me  (quoth  this  exam:)  what  wickednes  is
this  ? God  is  my  Iudge,that  it  is  moQ  falfe*

Alfo,  she  faith,  that  it  is  a shameful  vntruth,  where  it
is  reported  of  her, that  Jhe  by  crying  vpon  Cjod.and  her  blef
fed  Lady,  and  by  casting  holy  water  vpon  Ma:  Trayford,
made  the  demll to  leaue  his  hold , hauing  (as  the  book  faith)
in  the  hkenes  of  4 T oad,  catched  him  by  the  leg .

Touching  the  child  Qeorge  Beckham,  fhe  confefletb,
that  one  time,  the  priefts  holding  of  her  hands,  he  did
beatc  this  Examinate  with  one  of  their  Stoles , pittifully
about  the  face,  in  fuch  fort,  as  fhe  did  not  loue  him  eucr
fincc ; For  though  the  Stole  could  giue  no  great  blow,
yet  it  made  her  face  to  fmart  exceedingly . But  this,  fhe
faith,  was  at  ^Denham,  and  denieth,  that  for  ought  fhee
lenoweth,  or  remembreth,  he  euer  kept  the  demll  from  her
at  Vxbridge,  eyther  with  holy  water, or  holy  candelL
Thus  much  alfo  of  Hobberdidamce  (as  it  is  in  the
bookc)  fhe  wel  remembreth,  and  fa’Hh,that  her  Miftres,
as  they  were  at  worke,  had  told  them  a merry  tale  of
Hobberdidamce , that  vfed  his  cunning  to  make  a Lady
laush : which  tale  fhe  this  examinate , doth  very  wel
yet  remember,  6c  therfore  is  fully  perfwaded,that  when
the  priefts  did  pretend , that  the  fpirit  was  gone  out  of
her,  and  vrged  her  to  tel,  what  name  it  had,  fhe  affirmed
it  to  be  called  Hobberdidamce*

There


Page.  1 2.


Page,  31,
Ibidem,


Sara  Williams*  page,iSl

There  heins  reade  to  this  exantinafe,  out  of  the  fame
booke,  the  pretended  names  of  diuers  fpirits,  which  the
priefts  gaue  out,  that  they  cad  out  of  her , and  that  the
faid  prices  deliuered,  whilft  they  were  in  her,  as  Luftie
DickjKtIltco,  Hob , Corner  cap  } PuffeyTurre,  Frateretto , Page.  55.'
Fliberdigtbet^  Haberdicat,  Cocobatto , Maho}  Kelltcocam,

JVilkjn  , Smolbin , Nttr , Luftie  tolly  lenkjn , Port  eric  bo ,

Pudding  of  Thame,  Pour-dteu,  rBomoHriMotubizantoi  Ber -
non , Delicate , this  exam:  faytb  , chat  there  were  very
ftrange  names  written  vpon  the  wals  at  Sir  George  Peck^
hams  houfc , vndcr  the  hangings,  which  they  faid  were
names  of  fpirits . And  addeth,  that  (he  perceauing  dil,
that  when  they  faid  it  was  the  deuil,  that  fpake  in  her,  &
that  they  would  needes  haue  her  from  time  to  time,  to
giue  it  fomc  name,  fhe  to  content  them,  did  alwayes  de-
uife  one  name  or  other,  and  verily  thinketh,  that  fhee
came  necrc  fome-times  to  fome  of  the  names,  which
were  written  vpon  the  wall,becaufe  die  had  often  heard
them,  and  faith,  that  they  runne  then  in  her  head.  And
flic  further  thinketh,  that  the  priefls  themfclues  did  fet
them  downc  in  better  order , then  fhe  did  vtter  them.
Butamongft  the  reft,  (lie  faith,  that  the  name  ofAFabo
came  into  her  minde  5 for  that  fhe  had  heard  before  her
vncle  reade  the  fame  out  of  a booke , there  being  a talc
therein  of  c JVTaho.

The  talc  of  Lully  Dicl^  mentioned  in  the  faid  book,
fliee  faith,  is  fet  downc  falfly,  euen  as  he  that  made  the
book  lift.  The  Amice  thcrin  mentioned  , was  a cloath,  pagc  ^
that  the  pried  had  put  ouer  his  head,  when  he  went  to  ibidem.  *
Made,  which  did  fignifie  the  cloath,  where- with  the
Iewe*did  blindfold  Chrifl,  and  faith,  it  is  likely,  that  if
they  did  lay  it  ouer  her  mouth,  die  might  blow  itvp,
lead  it  fhould  dop  her  wind  . And  for  the  other  fpec-
ches,  fhefaith,  it  may  be,  thatwhen  they  vrged  her  to
aunfwcr  thofc  quedions , fhe  aunfwercd , as  it  came  in
her  minde  accordingly  • And  for  the  Oinke  of  brim*

A a.  3.  fione*


t


7


page,iS2  The  examination  of

flone,  flic  verily  thinketh,  it  may  be  true,  for  that  the
chamber  did  Ail  flinke  ofir,  they  vfed  it  fo  much.  That
page, 54.  w hich  is  reported  of  her  in  the  faid  bookc  of  three  Cap -
taine  deut/j,  that  fhould  goe  out  of  her  earesi  hauing  entry
one  of  them  300  with  them , which  this  exam : fbould  haste
felt,  in  diners  parts  of  her  body . She  faith,  it  is  an  abhomi-
nable  vntruth,  and  that  flie  meruaileth,  what  they  that
fo  haue  reported  of  her,  fhould  meane , in  that  manner
fo  abufe  her  a poore  wretch,  that  ncuer  meant  them  any
harme . Touching  that  which  is  written  of  the  preten-
pagC),  ^ ded  fpirit  named  Pttffe, as  that  hejhouldfay  yponS. Hughs

Ibidem*  day , he  would  got  ring  for  the  fdueene : She  verily  belcc-

uethjthat  cyther  thofe  words  haue  beenc  dcuifed  by  the
writer  of  the  bookc,  or  elfe  that  if  flie  this  exam:  vttered
them,  it  was  becaufe  flie  heard  them  fpcaking  of  ring-
ing  that  day,  in  honour  of  the  Queene,  and  knew  that
thereby  flic  fliould  pleafc  them . For  (as  partly  before
hath  beene  touched)  flic alwayes  framed  her  felfe  to  vfe
fuch  words,  as  flie  thought  would  content  the  Priefls*
And  where  there  is  mention  madc,tha tjhejhouldfayyhat
fptrits  haue  beene  rayfed  vp  by  a Comurer  to  keepe  money ;
She  confeflcth , it  may  be  flie  might  vfe  fuch  fpeeches,
becaufe  flic  had  heard  talke,  that  there  had  beene  con-
iuring  about  the  houfefor  money  . As  touching  that
talc  of  the  xviij.  of  Nouember,£<w  Purrc  was  caB  out  of
her,  how  [he  wcu  bound faB  in  a chayre,  and  how  the  Crcjfo  :
Fa° e,  5 ^ . being  layd vpon  her  head:  did fo  burne  the  deuill , as  that  fhee
thought  it  would  haue  burnt  out  that  part  of  her  head , which
it  touched:  She  aunfwereth,  that  all  of  it  almofl,  is  eyther
falfly  dcuifed  (as  flie  pcrceaueth  a number  of  things  arc
in  the  faid  booke)  or  elfe  that  it  may  be  that  flie  her  felfe  j.
did  then  pretend  fomethingof  it  to  be  true  , Butfliee
doth  not  now  remember  it.  For  flie  faith,  there  were  Co
many  things  done, and  folong  hnce,as  flie  thinketh, flic
cannot  remember  a great  part  of  them : oncly  flie  ad*
dethj  that  ihc  cannot  forget  her  binding  in  a chayrc  ma-
nic


Sara  Williams.  pagc,!?^.

/uetfmes.  The  manner  whereof,  was  as  followcth.

When  the  priefts  were  purpofed  to  make  the  wicked
/pirit to  fhew  iiimlelfe  in  this  examrand  to  expel  him(as
they  faid)  they  would  caufe  her  to  be  bound  faftina
chayrc,  and  then  giue  vnto  her  a certainc  drinke,  which
as  (he  remernbreth,  was  a hallowed  drinke, confiding  of
| Oyle,Sack,  Rue, and  fome  ocher  things,  which  are  now
out  of  her  rainde.  But  this  fhe  wel  remernbreth,  that
looke  what  (he  moll  diflikcd^and  hated,  they  would  fhl
compel  her  to  take,  pretending  that  it  was  not  /he,  but
the  dcuil,  that  difliked  it . And  although  fhe  knew  that
therein  they  did  abufe  her , and  that  few  women  there
are,  that  would  not  indeedcabhorrefucha  drinke,  yet
/he  durft  not  but  fee  me  to  yeeld  vnto  them,  but  indeed
they  did  compel  her  fill,  allcdging  that  whatfoeuer  fhe
(aid,  or  did  againfi  it,  it  was  the  dcuil  that  did  it,  and  not
/he,  whereas  in  verydeede,  (he  tookc  fuch  a diflikc  at
that  time  of  thofc  things , as  yet  to  this  day  she  cannot
endure  them . In  Co  much,  as  about  three  yceres  fince,
this  exam:  hauing  a pangue  of  fickncs  in  the  Market  at
Oxford,  feme  of  her  neighbours  gaue  her  Sack  at  vna-
Vvares  vnto  her,  which  as  foone  as  she  perceaucd,  she  fel
to  be  very  fore  fickc  vpon  if,  and  was  conBrayned  to  lye
there  all  night:  the  offence  of  the  Sac ke  being  the  one-
lie  griefe  she  had , after  shec  was  recouered  of  her  fayd
pangue.

At  fbmc  times  alfo  they  would  burne  brimflone  vo-
der her  nofe,  at  another  time  feathers,  and  diuers  fuch
loathfome  fmels,  which  they  faid  were  hallowed, & then
they  would  with  very  maine  firengrh, though  she  flrug-
led  very  much, bend  her  face  iu/1  ouer  the  fmoke, which
was  by  the  burning  of  the  faid  brimflone  , and  other
things  in  a chafing-dish,  which  they  would  hold  fo  neer
hernofc,  as  fometimes  befidesthe  fmell,  the  very  hcate
would  trouble  her.  When  she  was  thus  ho!den,she  faith,
chat  the  very  paine  she  felt,  caufed  her  to  cry,  and  fcrich

very


page,  184.  The  examination  of

very  Ioude,&  to  druggie  as  much  as  poflibty  she  could
till  her  ftrength  failed  her.  At  one  time  shec  was  fo  cx-
■ treamcly  afflifted  with  the  faid  drinks  and  fmoke,as  that
her  fences  went  from  her, and  she  remained  in  a fwoune
as  afterward  it  was  told  her  : vpon  her  recouery,  she  rc-
merabreth  that  the  priell  faid,  that  the  deuil  did  the  goe
dovme  into  the  lower  part  of  her  body , and  that  com-
monly when  her  ftrength  failed  her  fo , that  shee  could
flruggle  no  longer,  they  w'ould  fay,  that  then  the  deuill
grew  quiet.  Atfuch  times  when  she  cried,  they  would
(ay,  it  was  the  deuill,  and  not  Jhee,  that fo  cried*  When  she
was  in  this  taking,  and  fo  bound  in  the  c’hayre,  her  head
beeing  giddy  with  the  faid  drinke,  and  her  fences  trou-
bled with  the  fmoake , she  doubteth  not , but  she  Ipake
many  idle  and  foolifh  words,  which  the  prieffo  would
expound  as  they  thought  good , which  shee  doth  now
perceiuc especially  by  hearing  thofe  things,  which  are
writtenofher  in  the  fame  bookc.

As  touching  the  fit , that  it  is  faid  shee  had  vpon  the
1 y.  Nouemher , she  faith  that  it  may  well  be , that  shec  v-
fed  hard  fpcechcs  againft  the  priefls  in  the  heate  of  her
griefc.  And  she  wcl  remebreth  that  diuers  timcs,fhougIi
she  was  loath  to  difpleafe  them , yet  when  they  handled
her  fo  extreamely , shee  did  fometimes  vfc  fome  hard
words  towards  them , and  threatned  to  complaint  of
them.  And  then  their  common  faying  was , that  it  was
the  deuill,  and  not  {he  that  Jpake , bccaufe  he  could  not  in-
jure any  Cafholick  pried.  Her  filler  Frauncis  beeing
then  in  the  houfe,  and  feeing  how  badly  shee  was  vfed,
did  diuers  times  perfwade  this  exam:  to  fleale  away,and
goe  home,  and  complaine  how  she  had  beene  handled
by  the  faid  priefis.  ’ ; . \ .]  ,

At  one  time  shee  wasfo  vexed,  as  indeedc  shee  ranne
away  towards  a little  brooke,  that  was  not  pall  halfea
yard  deepe,  meaning  to  haue  runne  through  it  „ ajijd-fc
tohauecfcapedfrom  them,  thinking  that  they  would

not


Sara  Williams*  page,

not  haue  followed  her  through  the  water.  But  they  cat*
ched  her  before  shec  came  to  the  brookc  # for  they  wat*
ched  her  fo  diligently  at  all  times,  as  they  would  not  fuf*
fer  her  to  goe  out  of  their  fights . And  their  pretence
was  for  fo  dooingi  leaft  she  ffiould  haue  made  away  her
felfe : which  she  faith  (she  thanketh  Godjshec  neuer  in-
tended, but  oncly  to  haue  becne  deliuered  out  of  theyr
hands : whereas  she  faith,  it  is  very  likely,  that  they  had
fuch  a watchful  eye  ouer  her,  leaft  she  should  efcape,  as
fearing  she  would  complainc  of  them.  At  the  fame  time
she  ranne  away  as  before  is  exprefTed,  one  of  them  that
ranne  after  her,  which  was  her  Maiftcr  Ma:  cPeck}pAm>

(as  she  remembrerh)  gauc  it  out,  that  she  was  carried  a-
boue  ground,  and  the  priefts  affirmed, that  the  deuil  did
fneane  at  that  time  to  haue  drowned  her . And  it  is  not
vnlikely  this  exam:  faith,  but  that  shee  herfelfe  to  plcafe
them,  did  confeflc  afmuch . Her  pretended  carying  in
tbeayre,  was  made  amongftthem  a kinde  of  miracle,
whereas  this  exam:  doth  know  it  to  be  a lye,  and  dooth
pcrfe&ly  remember,  that  she  ranne  indeede,  asfaft  as
she  could,but  for  any  flying, it  is  a meer  fable : although
at  that  time  she  was  content  to  footh  them  in  it.

Concerning  the  cafting  out  of  her  of  Capfainc  Fr d-
teretto , with  all  his  company  ofeuil  fpirits  (as  is  preten-  paoe
ded  in  the  booke)  vpon  the  2 1 of  Nouember,  fhe  faith,  -
that  it  was  the  ordinary  cuftome  of  the  priefts  to  be  tal-
king of  fiich,  as  had  beene  pofiefled  beyond  the  Teas,  Sc
to  tell  the  manner  of  theyr  fits,  and  what  they  fpake  in
them  t alfo  what  vgly  fights  they  faw  fomtime$,and  at  o-
ther  times  what  ioyfull  fights , and  how  when  reliques
were  applied  vnto  them , the  parties  would  roarc : how
they  could  not  abide  holy  water,  nor  the  fight  of  the  fa-
crament , nor  the  annointed  priefts  of  the  Catholique
Church,  nor  any  good  thing.  But  how  they  would
greatly  commend  filch  as  were  hereticks,  & many  fuch
things  befides  fhe  hath  heard  them  report,  as  how  the

B b.  deuils


page,i8<5#  The  examination  of

deoils  would  cotnplaine  that  when  the  priefts  touched
the  parties,  that  they  burnt  them,  and  pur  them  into  an
extreame  hcate,  and  how  fomtimes  they  could  fmel  the

Erieft.  Thcfc  things  (she  faith)  she  now  remembreth  by
caring  thofe  things  which  are  written  in  the  bookc  of
her  felfe , and  confcfleth  that  by  the  faid  tales  thee  well
perceiued  how  shce  might  pleafe  them , and  did  frame
herfelfe  accordingly  at  fuch  times,  as  (he  well  perceiued
it  was  their  intent,  she  should  fo  doe.

Alfo  shee  well  remembreth , that  at  one  time  they
thruft  into  her  mouth  a rclique,  being  a peece  of  one  of
£ampiom  bones,  which  they  did  by  force , /hec  herfelfe
loathing  the  fame,  it  beeing  as  she  thinketh  againft  na-
ture to  haue  a bone  of  a man  put  into  ones  mouth.

As  touching  the  pretended  trouble,  that  shee  ihould
pagc  2$,  haue  vpon  the  of  Nouember , shee  faith,  that  there
were  fo  many  fuch  fpeeches  amongft  them,  as  she  doth
not  herfelfe  rcmember,whether  any  fuch  things  were  at
that  time,  otherwife  then  as  before  shee  hath  confefTcd.
Alfo  she  faith  that  it  was  no  meruaile  though  they  made
her  talke,  after  they  had  giuen  her  the  blejfed potion  they
fpcake  of.  And  touching  her finiltng , shce  confefl'eth
that  when  she  was  well , if  shee  did  either  fmile  to  her-
felfe , or  vpon  occafion  of  fome  fpeech  that  shce  had
heard,  or  at  other  times  if  for  griefc  fo  confiderhow
she  was  dealt  withall,  she  fometimes  wepf,as  oft  she  did,
they  would  ordinarily  (when  they  thought  good)  fay,it
wasthedeuil  that  did  fo  fmile,  or  weepe:  which  put
this  examinate  almoft  to  her  wits  end,  defiring  nothing
more  then  to  be  rid  from  them . Shee  alfo  further  faith,
that  (he  well  remembreth  how  one  time  walking  in  the
garden  with  one  of  the  priefts,who  led  her  by  the  arroe,
becaufe  fhe  was  weakc,  (he  beganne  to  complainc  vnto
him  of  her  hard  vfage , and  told  him , that  (hee  verilic
thought  they  did  her  iniury,  and  that  (he  was  not  trou-
bled with  any  wicked  fpirits  in  her  more  the  they  were.

Where-


Sara  Williams*  page,  187

Whereupon  he  caft  his  head  afi de,  and  looking  fullic
vpon  her  face  vndcr  her  hat,  TVhat  (quoth  he)  is  this  Sa-
ra , or  the  dentil  that  Jpeaketh  thefe  words  ? No,no , it  is  not
Sara,£*/  the  deuil.Knd  the  this  examinate  pcrcciuing  (he
could  haue  no  other  reliefe  at  his  hands  , fell  a weeping,
which  weeping  alfo  he  (aid  was  the  weeping  of  the  euill
fpirit.  By  hearing  of  that  which  is  written  ofher , fhee
faith  (he  reraeinbreth  thefe  Rories,  which  £hee  thinketh
she  fhould  not  orherwife  haue  thought  of.

As  touching  the  report,  that  Maho  (bould  bid  her  pray  pagC  ^
vnto  him  as  to  a Saint  %and  tell  her  that  it  was  but  madnes  to
. become  religious , or  to  vfe  penance  towards  her  body : alfo
that  the  prtefl /aid  nought  in  tJWaJfe : and  that  Jbee  this  ex -
aminate  mufl  pray  as  the Tarfon  taught  her  at  her  mother st
Deerely  bcloued  brethren,  the  feripture  mooucth  vs  in
fundry  places,  God  fauethc  Quecnc  & herMiniRcrs,
that  Jbee  musl  not  pray  in  Latino , becaufe  Cjod  had  not  com -
tnaundedherfoto  pray.  She  this  examinate  faith, that  shce
doth  not  remember,  that  eucr  she  vfed  thofc  words,  but
rather  thinketh  they  are  deuifed  by  him , that  writ  the
booke.  Howbeit  she  confcfleth  it  may  well  be,  that  she
did  vfe  them  vpponfuch  occafionsasthey  gaueher  by
theyr  ownefpeeches,shec  beeing  alwaies  ready  (as  shce
hath  (aid  before)  to  (peake  Sc  doe, as  she  thought  might
pleafe  them.

Furthermorc,c6cerning  the  pretended  vifton  of  things
like  puppets  at  the  end  of  a gallery,  she  faith,  that  she  verily
belicuerh  it  is  all  fained  by  the  writer  of  the  booke,  or  by
fome  that  gaue  him  directions  Co  to  write.  For  she  faith,
she  dooth  not  remember  any  one  part  of  if,  but  yet  dare
not  vppon  her  oath  affirme,  that  shce  told  the  prieft  no
fuch  thing : for  it  might  be  that  shee  dreamed  offuch  a
matter,  and  that  she  told  the  priefts  of  the  (aid  dreame,
who  haue  made  fuch  a matter  of  it.

Againe,  that  which  is  written  to  haue  been  fpoken  by
her  vpon  the  Thnr/day}  as  though  she  vnderftood  fbmc  &

B b z Latins,


page,i8S.'


THc  examination  of


Pagt.38

ibid;


Latine  words : shee  well  remembreth , that  at  one  time
the  priefts  were  talking  of  fome  fuch  things  to  thofe,
that  were  prefent,  as  though  this  examinate  vndcrftood
Latine,  which  they  faid  was  the  euill  fpirit  in  her : but
she  then  knew,  that  therein  they  faid  vntruly , and  faith
that  shee  perceiued , they  made  what  they  lift  of  any
thing*  For  the  word  Saffron-bag,  it  may  be  (she  con fef-
fcth)that  shec  vfed  it,but  she  doth  not  remember  it.

Likewife,  where  it  is  faid,  that  fhe  oft  threatned to  rai/e
the  tonne,  and  country  againfl  the  priefls,  and  to  caufe  theyr
heads  to  be  fet  on  London  bridge , and  threatned  the  Exorctfl
to  coplaine  on  him  to  the  ffueene:  fhee  faith,that  they  who
haue  fo  written  of  her,  may  fay  what  they  lift.  She  doth
not  thinke,  although  she  was  oft  angry  with  the  priefts,
that  she  durft  vfe  fo  hard  words  of  them,  as  fo  threaten
them  with  hanging.  And  touching  her  roaring,  it  may
be,  if  they  mcane,  that  fhe  cryed,  when  they  had
her  in  a chayrc,  or  gaue  her  the  holypotion , andburnt
brimftone  vnder  her  nofe , that  they  fay  truly  s but  for
roaring  like  a Bull,  she  faith  it  is  falfe.

As  concerning  that  which  is  pretended  fo  haue  hap-
Page,  19*  red  vnfo  her  vpon  S.  Barbaraes  day  ,she  verily  belieueth,
that  the  Priefts  might  wifh , that  all  theProteftants  in
England  did  know  the  power  of  the  Cathohcke  Church  :
but  she  doth  not  remember  that  she  faid  fo  herfelfe.

And  touching  her  coate  that  was  pulled  off,  fhe  well
remembrefh,  that  it  was  a new  gowne,  which  her  mo-
ther had  giuen  her, being  laced  vpon  the  fleeues : which
being  a good  prety  fairc  gowne,  the  Priefts  did  pretend
that  fhe  was  proud  of  if,  and  therefore  rook  it  from  hers
and  putting  vpon  her  an  old  gowne  (ftie  knoweth  not
where  they  had  it)  beftowed  hers  ffee  knoweth  not
where,but  (he  could  neuer  fee  it  after.  But  tha tfbejbould
fay  her  gowne  was  naught , and  full  of  fpirit s : fhe  beleeueth
itisvntrue,  or  that,  if  they  put  any  of  their  confecrated
attire  vpon  her , that  fhe  fhould  crie,  I burne7 1 burne : fhee

belie-


P*ge4f.


Sara  Williams.  page,i89«

belceueth  that  fhe  did  it  oncly  to  plcafc  them,  knowing
that  she  felt  no  more  burning,  by  any  of  their  consecra-
ted things,  then  she  did  by  the  reft  of  her  owne  appa-
rel!.

Likewife,  as  touching  thofc  things,  which  are  repor-  c
ted  to  haue  beene  vttcied,and  done  by  this  exam:  vpon  a°
thcxviij.ofNouember:  she  faith,  that  she  doth  not  re-
member any  one  part  of  the  pretended  vijion  of  a Ladie%
Accompanied  with  Gentlemen  all  booted , that  Jhould  offer  her
to  be  A Lady , tfjhe  would  go  c with  them , nor  of  the  dogge  of
two  colours , that  Jhould  terrife  this  exam:  from  yeelding  to
her  motion : but  Hie  remembreth,that  they  would  often-
times bring  the  Pix  with  the  facrament  in  it , for  her  to
kifte,  which  she  did  alwayes  very  willingly,  and  confef-
feth,  that  she  bclecued  the  Hoft  in  the  Pix,  to  be  the  bo-
die  of  Chrift,  and  that  it  is  therefore  very  likely,  if  any  of
the  priefts  did  askc  her, what  fhc  did  kifte  5 that  fhe  aun-
fwered,  it  was  the  body  ofCbrift.  But  she  meruaileth  why
they  write , that  the  dentil  Jhould  fay , it  was  the  body  of
Chrift : and  thinketh,  that  the  priefts  would  neuer  haue
caufed  her  to  kifte  it,  if  they  had  thought , that  it  had
been  the  deuil,  that  then  had  kifled  it,  and  not  this  ex-
animate.


She  remembreth,  that  she  did  fearc  the  cornc-cham-
ber,  (that  the  booke  fpeaketh  of)  in  Sir  fjeorge  T’eck?
hams  houfe*,  bccaufe  the  report  amongft  them  was,  that
there  had  beene  corimring  there  for  money . And  as
touching  the  reft  of  that  long  difeourfe,  which  was  read
Vntoher,  how  Jhe  Jhould fay , that  all  the  Court  were  her
friends  3 that  the  Parle  of  Bedfords  foule  was  in  heljthat  the
JEngltJh  jMmifters  had  power  to  caft  out  deuils:  she  faith,
£he  doth  not  remember  any  part  of  it.  But  acknowled-
ged, that  for  as  much  as  it  is  faid  in  the  faid  booke,  that
she  was  conftrained  to  take  the  holy  potion, which  shee  fo
much  defefted , and  other  their  flibber-fawccs,  and  that
they  burnt  briraftonc  vnder  her  nofe , (he  verily  think-

B b.  3.  etbg


Page, 430


pagc,i9o.  The  examination  of

eth,  she  might  vttcr  much  tittle-tattle,that  now  flic  can-
not call  to  mindc . And  amongft  the  reft  meruailetb,
that  any  prieft  would  write  or  fay,  that  cucr  hecaufed
the  dentil  to  take  an  oath  vpon  the  blejjed  Sacrament . And
whereas  if  is  reported,  that  now  this  fpirit,  and  now  that
(pirit  went  out  of  her*,  she  faith,  it  might  be,  that  they
then  faid  fo,  and  that  she  this  exam:  was  contented  they
fhould  fay,  what  they  lift,  as  now  she  pcrccaucth  (as  she
faith)  that  they  haue  written.

She  further  faith,  that  whilft  she  was  at  Denham , one
RtchardLMayme  being  there  alfo,  pretended  himfelfe  fo
be  poflefted , and  the  Priefts  had  dealings  with  him.
This  Mayme  did  behaue  himfelfe  in  the  prefence  of  the
priefts,  as  though  he  had  beenc  a Saint.  It  was  meruai-
loustoconfider,  what  dcootion  he  did  pretend.  One  .!
time  being  at  Maffe,this  examrdoth  wel  remember, that
at  the  eleuation  time,  he  fcl  downc  fecretly  backwards,
and  lay  a while,  as  though  he  had  beenc  in  a rrauncc.
And  when  he  came  vnto  himfelfe  againc,  he  faid,  that
the  glory,  which  he  faw  about  the  Altar,  did  ftrike  him
into  that  traunce . But  for  all  his  pretences,  this  exam:
faith,  that  he  was  but  a diflemblcr,  and  a man  bur  of  a
lewd  difpofition  . He  would  needcs  haue  perfwaded
this  examinates  fifter,  to  haue  gone  thence  with  him,  in
the  apparel  of  a youth,  to  haue  beenehisboy,  and  to
haue  wayted  vppon  him . Hee  dealt  with  this  exam:  to
haue  confeffed  her  felfe  vnto  him,  faying,  that  he  had  as
good  authority  ,to  hearc  confeftion$,as  any  of  the  priefts
had.  Alfo  he  vrged  her  this  exam:  diuers  times,  to  haue
ycclded  to  his  carnal  defires,  vfing  very  vnfit  tricks  with
her.  There  was  alfo  a very  proper  woman,  one  Miftrcs
F later,  with  whom  this  examrperceaued,  he  had  many
allurements,  {hewing  great  tokens  of  extraordinarie  af-
fection towards  her . By  which  his  courfcs  she  percea*
ucd,  that  he  was  very  wickedly  bent.  Of  all  thefe  things
concerning  the  faid  (JWajnierthis  exam:  enformed  Ma:

‘Etbdale,

9 "


Sara  Williams^  page,  191*

fbibdal f,  & (old  him, that  out  of  doubt  be  did  but  coun-
terfctallhisholines,  and  that  except  he,  and  the  reft  of
(he  pricfts  tooke  heede  to  themfclues,  he  would  in  the
end  bring  them  tp  forae  trouble : where- vpon  Ma :Dib-
dale  was  very  forric , that  cuer  he  had  had  any  dealing
With  him.

She  further  faith,  that  at  fuch  times,as  they  pretended,
that  she  had  fits,  which  was  eyther,  when  she  had  any
fit  of  the  mother  (where-with  she  was  then  troublcd)or
when  she  had  beenc  conftraincd,to  drinke  their  holypo -
tton : or  when  she  was  otherwife  cuil  at  eafe,  by  reafon
oftheirbad  vfagcofher,  they  would  in  the  end  (when
they  were  weary  with  dealing  with  hcr)fay,that  the  wic-
ked fpirits  were  gone  downe  into  her  legge,  and  fomc-
times  into  her  footc,  and  that  they  fhould  reft  there  for
that  time.  And  againe,  when  they  tooke  her  in  hand
the  next  time,  they  would  begin  to  hunt  the  deuil  from
the  foote,to  bring  him  vpwards  of  purpofc,  as  they  faid,
to  caufc  him,  when  they  had  him  in  her  head,to  goe  out
of  her  mouth,  earcs,  eyes,  or  nofe.  And  the  manner  of
their  hunting  ofhim,was  to  folow  him  with  their  hands
(as  they  did  pretend)  along  all  the  parts  of  her  body.

At  one  time, when  it  began  to  be  with  this  exam:  accor-
ding to  the  manner  of  women,  (asfince  she  hath  per-
ceaued)  whereby  she  was  much  troubled, the  priefts  did
pretend,  that  the  deuil  did  reft  in  the  moft  fccret  part  of
herhody.  Wherc-vpon  theydeuifed  to  apply  the  re-
liqucs  vnfo  it,  and  gaue  her  fuch  fliber-fawces,  as  made
her  (as  she  was  perfwaded)  much  worfe  then  otherwife
she  thinketh,  she  should  hauc  bcene . At  fome  times
they  would  caufe  a maid,  that  ferued  the  Lord  Vaux,  to
apply  the  reliquesvnto  the  place:  the  which  their  dea-
ling with  her(shc  faith)  she  doth  now  loath  the  memory
ofit.

Furthermore,  this  exam:  faith,  that  after  she  was  deli-
ttcred  out  of  (he  pricfts  hands,  and  that  they  had  no  fur-
ther


page, 192  The  examination  of

ther  dealing  with  her,  vpon  pretence,  that  she  was  pot
(cfTed,  she  hath  timers  tiroes,  being  in  fpccch  withMa:
Taxly  but  her  cfpecial  friend,  faid  vnto  him  to

this  eflfe& : Iefus  Ma:  Taxly  I meruaile,  what  Ma:  Thb-
daley  & the  other  pricfls  meant  to  deale  with  me,  as  they
did : I am  fully  perfwaded,  that  I was  neuer  at  any  time
more  poffieffed,  then  they  themfclucs  were,  and  yet  you
bauc  heard,  how  they  haue  vfedme.  And  he  fhaking
his  head,  would  wil  me  to  be  contented,  feeing  the  mat-
ter was  paft,and  that  I fhould  trouble  my  head  no  more
about  it, and  fajing,that  he  was  very  forrie  for  it, and  that
he  hoped,  they  had  repented  therafelues  for  dealing  (o
with  her.  Why  but  would  this  exam:  fay,  tel  me  I pray
you  Sir,  what  you  thinke  of  it,  whether  wasIpofTcfled,
or  no,  in  your  opinion.  And  (hi  he  would  giuc  her  no
other  aunfwcr,  but  fhaking  his  head,  wil  her  to  be  con-
tented, feeing  all  was  now  paft.

She  further  faith, that  the  firft  time  that  the  priefls  be-
gan to  haue  dealing  with  her , one  day  they  had  giuea
frcrcerfaine  things  to  drinke,  that  had  made  herverie
fick,and  being  in  that  refpeft  troubled,Ma:  Stamp  com-
ming  fro  London,  viewed  with  a Hearing  countenance
this  exam:  in  the  face,  and  faid  vnto  her,  as  though  he
bad  fpoken  vnto  a fpirit  within  her  : ts4h  Sirra3 1 haue
brought  a thing  for  you : I haue  a whip  in  my  pocket  that  mil  .
bridle  thee , At  that  prefent  she  vnderftoode  him  nor,
what  he  meant,  but  within  a while  after,  hee  pulled  a
book  out  of  his  pocket, which  was  of  Exorcifmcs,which
was  the  whip  he  meant.  Shealfo  wcl  remembreth,  that  j
the  reft  in  the  houfe  told  Ma:  Stamp,  how  greatly  shec  -
bad  bcene  vexed  all  that  day,  and  that  they  faid,  it  was  1
bccaufe  the  fpirit  was  afraid  of  that  booke,  which  hec  I
brought  with  him,  and  the  deuil  knew  that  it  was  com-
ming.

Whilftfhe  was  in  the  priefls  hands  at  cDenham,  one
Haines  was  a futcr  vnto  her,  and  although  Ma;  j UibdaU
" com-


Sara  Williams,  page,iSf

commaundcd  her  in  no  fort  to  cntcrtaine  him , yet  her
fitter  bringing  vnto  her  a blacke  let  ring  from  him,  as  a
token,  she  put  the  fame  vpon  her  little  nnger,which  be-
ing fome-what  too  little,  caufed  her  finger  to  fwel,  as
now  (he  beleceueth : And  thcre-vpon  this  exam:  in  her
confeffion  acknowledging  that  shcc  had  receiucd  that
ring  from  Haines  contrary  10M21  Dtb dales  commaun-
dement,  they  faid  it  was  the  dcuill  vnder  the  ring , that
caufed  her  finger  to  fwell : and  wetting  her  finger,  and
making  erodes  vpon  if,  they  pulled  of  the  ring  by  little
and  little,  and  faid , thatif  came  of  by  vertue  of  thofe
erodes,  the  dcuill  hauing  no  longer  power  to  keepe  it
on.

This  examinate  alfo  further  remembreth,  that  corn-
ining  towards  London  from  Hackney  in  a Coach  with
Ma:  Dibdalc , shee  efpied  in  the  way  a ragged  Colt,  and
beeing  the  firft,  that  shee  had  cuer  fecncTo  ragged,  shee
asked  Ma:  Dibdalc,  what  it  was  ? And  he  (aid  it  was  the
deuill : which  put  this  exam:  into  a great  feare,  whereas
fincc  she  hath  feene  twxnty  fuch  ragged  Colts,  and  is
therefore  fully  perfwaded,  that  Ma:  cDibdale  did  abufe
tier,  in  faying  the  Colt  she  then  faw  was  the  deuill.

She  alfo  faith,  that  one  Sherwood  a prieft , while  (hee
W as  at  'Denham,  an  dtyed  in  her  chaire , would  vfuallie
pinch  her  by  the  armes,  afld  necke,  and  hands,  and  the
places  thereupon  remaining  blcwjhc  and  the  reft  would
fay,that  it  was  the  deuil  that  had  fo  pinched  her.  At  fuch
times  as  this  exam;  when  he  fo  pinched  her  did  coplaine
of  it,  and  reproued  him  for  it,  they  would  fay  It  was  the
deuill,  and  not  this  examinate , that  fo  reprooued  him*

Of  this  iniury  she  hath  complayned  to  Ma.-  Dibdafebe-
ing  well,  and  hee  woulcHay  vnto  her,  that  hee  waTiurc
Ma:  Sherwood  would  not  vfc  her  fo,and  that  fhe  was  de-
ceiucd,  in  that  fhe  thought  fo  of  him.

She  alfo  further  faith,  that  shee  well  remembreth  that
ihe  could  neither  doe  nor  fay  any  thing , but  when  they

C c.  lift,


0lge,i94*  The  examination  of

lift,  they  would  fay,//  was  tkedeuiS.  At  fome  tiroes  when
£he  was  well,  ifeompanie  came  in,to  whom  they Tneant
to  (hew  any  thing,  they  would  fakeocca/icn,  to  peepe
in  her  face,  & vfe  fuch  foolifh  words  vnto  her,  as  might
make  her  to  laugh.  And  if  /he  did  but  fo  much  as  laugh
vppon  that  occaGon,  or  looke  away,  turning  her  head
from  them,  they  had  then  enough,  //  vat  the  dew/(they
would  fay)  that  Lwghed tx  her,  and  then  fometimes  shee
muft  to  the  chavrc,  and  at  fome  other  times,  they  would
coniure  the  fpirit,  as  they  chd  pretend  , comraaundmg
him  to  goe  dc^vne  into  her  body*  and  be  quiet.  And
when  this  exam:  held  her  peace,  which  was  when  they
fpakc  no  more  to  her , then  they  would  fay,  the  fpirit
was  gone  downe.  At  thefc,  and  fuch  like  times,  when
they  gauc  her  nothing  to  make  her  ficke,  fhc  found  her
felfc  no  worfc,  then  fbee  was  before,  but  was  content  to
footh  all  what  they  faid.

Shee  further  fay  th,  that  a maide,  that  came  from  the
Lord  Vanx\  was  appointed  at  rDenharnlb  keepe  this  cx-
aminate,  who  did  alwaics  tel!  the  priefts , what  fhcc  this
exam:  cither  did  or  fpakc,  and  of  herfelfe  would  alwaies
tell  this  exam:  that  it  was  the  dcuill  that  fo  did,or  fpake:
when  this  exam:  did  very'  well  know,  that  shee  did,  and
fpake  at  fuch  times,  according  as  she  was  wont  to  doc,
before  she  came  to  the  priefts  bands.  By  reafonoffuch
her  bad  dealing  with  this  exam:  fhee  this  exam:  did  not
loue  her,  and  talking  of  her  hard  dealing  with  her,  shee'
this  exam:  faid.  she  had  thought  qpe  day  fo  hauc  thrufl
her  dowoe  the  ftavres.  And  heereof  the  priefts  made  a
great  matter, but  did  nor  blame  this  exam:  for  it, becaufe
(asd^ylaid)  rtvasnotjhe , hntthedeml > that  meant  to
haue  :hruft  her  downe  the  ftavres.

Alfo./he  faith,  that  if  at  any  time  she  did  belch,  as  of-
tentimes sfie  did  by  reafon  that  shee  was  troubled  with
a wind  in  her  ftomacke,  the  priefts  would  fay  at  fuch
limes,  that  then  the  fpirit  began  to  rife  in  her.  Whereas

_ diucrs


*s


Sara  Williams#  page,  19?

d'mcrs  times  fincefhe  hath  bcene  likewife  troubled  with
fuch  wind  in  her  flomack  and  rifting , and  thereby  per-
cciueth  that  they  (aid  vntrely , w hen  they  faid  that  that
wind  was  the  deuil.  But  as  fliec  faith , if  they  heard  any
croaking  in  her  belly,  (a  thing  whereunfo  many  women
arc  fubieft,  efpecially  when  they  are  fatting)  then  they
would  make  a wonderful  matter  of  that.  One  time  shec
remembreth,  that  fhee  hauing  the  faid  croaking  in  her
belly,  or  making  of  herfclfe  fome  fuch  noyfe  in  her  bed,  •

'they  faiclit  was  the  deuill  that  was  about  the  bedde,  that  •
fpake  withthevoyceofaToade,  and  therc-with  they
feemed,  as  though  they'  wire  greatly  afraid.  But  this  ex-
animate, though  shee  knew,  there  was  no  fuch  caufe  of
theyr  feare,  if  they  were  indeed  at  all  afraid , as  they  did
pretend,  yet  did  fhee  let  them  alone,  and  faid  nothing
vntothem.

She  further  faith, that  one  night  whilft  this  examinate
Was  in  bedde , there  was  a feraping  in  the  corner  of  the
chamber  about  the  feeling,  as  if  it  had  been  the  feraping
of  a rat,  whereupon  fome  that  were  in  the  chamber  ran
forth,  faying,  it  was  an  euill  fpirit,  that  made  that  noyfe.

And  Ma:  Cornelius  a priefl  becing  in  the  next  chamber,
came  prefently  foorth  in  his  gowne , with  his  booke  of
Exorcifmes  in  his  hand,  & went  info  the  corner,  where
the  noife  was.  There  he  began  to  charge  the  deuil  vpon
paine  of  many  torments,  that  he  fbould  depart.  Hee
flung  holy  water  vpon  the  walls*  and  vfed  fuch  earneft
fpeeches,  as  this  exam:  was  very  much  afraid.  Howbcit
/he  faith,  ’fhe  well  obfcrucd,rhat  for  all  his  fpeakings,and
fprinckling  of  holy  water,  the  noife  did  not  ceafe,  till  he
bad  knockt  with  fome  thing  vppon  the  feeling,  where-
by fhe  iincc  hath  verily  thought , andf  flill  dooth,*that  it
was  either  a rat,  or  fome  fuch  thing  th^f  made  the  noife,
and  not  the  deuil.  #

She  further  faith,that  fhe  neuer  dreamed  in  the  night,
but  fhe  did  tel  the  priefts  of  it  in  the  morning,  for  it  was

Cqz  theyr


,pagc,i96.  The  examination  of

their  commandemenf,that  flie  fliould  fo  doe.  And  fuch
her  dreames  (he  hath  learned  by  their  fpccches,  to  call
them  vifions.  Of  thefe  vifions  they  would  make  of  the,
what  they  thought  good . Whereas  this  exam:  confef-
fetb,  that  diuers  of  them  were  fuch  toyes , as  came  into
her  head  being  wokcn,and  that  fhe  mcruailed,how  they
could  make  fuch  matters  of  them.

This  exam:  further  faith,  that  oftentimes  when  flic
was  wel,&  that  the  priefb  vpon  her  laughing, or  words,

• . would  fay : It  tvm  not  /be,  but  the  deuUL , (he  diiverily  fu-
fpe&,  that  they  did  not  fay  truly  therein,  & that  fhe  was
not  at  all  poflefled  : marric  flie  confcflcth,  that  being
young,  and  vnexpcrienced,  when  they  came  vntoher  ■
in  fo  deuoute  a manner,  with  their  holy  veflures  vppon
them,  with  holy  water,  holy  candels,  and  with  the  Pix$
hauingthefacramentinit,  and  prayed,  as  it  feemedfo
earneflly,  fhe  did  then  alwayes  fufpeft,  that  there  was
fomething  amifle  in  her,  as  fuppofing,  that  otherwifi
they  would  neuer  haue  dealt  in  that  (bit.  But  afterwards
when  fhe  was  wel  againe,  fhe  had  eucr  a great  defirc  to
be  gone  from  them,  being  verily  perfwaded,  that  then
flie  fliould  be  weh  .

She  further  faith,  that  except  it  were  at  fuch  times,  as
by  giuing  her  the  holy  potion,  and  burning  brimflone  *-«
vnder  her  nofe,fhe  knew  not  oftentimes  what  either  fhe

did, or  fpake.  The  greafeft  feare, which  flic  had  at  other  -

times,  when  they  vfed  their  Exorcifme,  was  leaf!  they
meant  thereby  to  coniurc  vp  fomefpirir,  they  kept  fuch
* a ftirre,  and  made  mention  of  fo  many  names,  which

they  faid,  were  names  of  fo  many  fpirits.

Whereas  in  the  afore-faid  booke,  there  are  a number
of  thftigs  reported  of  this  exam:  what  flie  fliould  doe,
fee,  and  fpcake  in  her  fits,  flie  verily  thinketh,that  (fomc
foolifh  things  of  her  o^ne  deuife  excepted)  fhe  neither
did  fpeake,  nor  pretended  to  fee  any  thing,  but  in  fuch
fort,  as  fhe  had  heard  the  priefts  report,  that  other  wo-
men


Sara  Williams.  . Page  I97

nienbey.ond  the  Seas  had  done, feene, and  fpoken : Ac-
cording fo  which  reports,  (he  this  exam:  being  in  the
pricfls  hands,  did  frame  her  feife  to  doc, and  fpeake,and
report  fhc  faw  this,  and  that,  as  fhe  had  heard  of  them,
that  thofe  parties  did , that  thereby  free  might  pleafe
them.

Concerning  the  reports  in  the  faid  booke,  that  this
exam:  ft  oh  Id Jee  vpon  (fhriTlmas  even  at  night, after  twelve  Page  r.
of  the  cloche  , when  Mafies  doe  begin,  viz:  great  beames  of
lightning , to  proceedefrom  the  Sacrament , as  tthadbeene
feme  beames  fttning  out  of  a cloude : that  vpon  Nervy  eares
day , fte  ftould  fee  fire  to  flaft  m at  the  window, and  a browne
doggy,  as  big  as  a Bullockj  that  the  Sonday  after  the  Sacra-
ment being  refer ued , and  lying  vpon  the  patten,  fte  could  not
fee  it,  for  a great  brightnes : and  that  at  the  fame  time , the
Priefl  feemed  to  be  c loathed  in  flitter,  that  fioode  by  the  pat-
ten : She  this  exam:  aunfwcrcth,that  fhc.is  perfwaded  in
her  confidence,  they  be  allvntrue  reports  of  her.  For
ihe  faith, fhe  doubteth  not, but  that  otherwife  fhc  Should
haue  remembred  fome  of  them,  as  wcl  as  Hie  hath  done*
other  things  in  the  faid  booke . Oncly  she  confefleth,
that  she  hath  heard  fuch  things  reported  of  %ichard
Maynie , that  lie  should  haue  fuch  fights : but  furc  she  is,  #
lliencuer  faw  them.  ^

Concerning  the  weport  of  her,  that  fte  ftould  fay,  that  p ^
the  bleffed  Sacrament  was  but  bread : that  there  was  no  **
Purgatorie : that  the  feruice  in  England , being  in  Engltft,
was  as  good  ar  the  other  in  Latine : and  that  fte  ftould  com-
mend fome  tJMiniflers : She  faith,  that  it  may  wel  be,that
flic  hath  asked  fome  quefiions  touching  the  Sacrament,
Purgatorie,  and  the  tnglifh  feruice,  and  that  she  hath
fpoken  wel  of  fome  Minifiers : but  she  is  fully  perfwa-
ded, that  when  she  demaunded  fuch  quefiions,  she  did
it  of  her  feife,  to  beinftrufkd , and  that  it  was  notth#

. deuil,  that  fpake  fo  in  her.  Alfo  she  faith,  that  when  she
commended  fome  Minifters,  she  faid  therein  truly,  and

Cc«  3«  thag


C 9


page,  198


The  examination  of


Page.*.


Page.  3*
Ibidem#


that  she  thinketh  there  arc  of  them , as  there  are  of  the
priefb,  fome  good,  and  fome  bad.  •

Where  it  is  reported  of  this  exam:  that  vpon  the  third
day  oflanuarie , [he  fhould fee  (fbrtil  in  proper  forme , when
[he  receaued  the  Sacrament : that  [he found  eafe  of  the  paine
in  her fiomack^  by  the  application  of  a holy  relicjue : and  that
[he  flung  away  her  beades , faying  to  the  Priest,  fie  on  you  :
She  faith,  that  she  wel  remembreth,  that  one  offending
her,  she  threw  her  beades  at  the  party,  but  she  denieth,
that  euer  she  receaued  any  cafe,  by  applying  of  any  holy
reliques  vnto  her,  for  ought  that  she  perceaued,  how  fo
euer  the  priefts  haue  reported,  or  that  she  euer  faw  any
fuch  thing.when  she  receaued  the  Sacrament : but  thin-
keth that  the  Author  of  thebooke  hath  deuifed  it  of
himfelfe , marric  she  faith, it  is  not  vnlike,  that  she  might
wel  enough  fay.  Fie  vpon  fome-of  the  prieft s,  both  be-
caufe  there  were  of  them,  thatvfed  her  hardly,  and  for
that  she  knew  wel,that  they  difliked  not  fuch  words*,  be-
caufe  they  would  fake  occafion  therby,  to  shew  to  thofe
‘that  were  prefent,  that  the  deuil  could  not  endure  a Ca-
tholiqucprieft*

That  which  is  reported:of  her,  of  the  fourth  of  Ianu-
arie,  as  touching  the  booke  of  Exorcifme,  she  faith,  that
she  knew  that  booke  very  wel,  from  any  other,  both  by
the  Letter  itfelfe,becaufc  she  can  re*dc,and  by  the  great
number  oferoffes,  which  arc  in  many  places,  a great
number  of  them  together  . And  no  other  knowledge
foe  had  of  any  fuch  booke, although  it  be  giuen  out,that
she  knew  the  booke  of  Exorcifme , being  lapt  vp  in  a
paper,  before  otherwise  she  faw  it.

Where  it  is  faidjhat  this  exam : jhould  affirm e there  were
foure  fcourges  ofdemls,  viz:  the  booke  of  Exorcifmes , holy
water , the  holy  candell , and  hallowed  Frankinfence,  Hi  e doth
not  remember, that  she  termed  them  fcourges,bur  faith,
it  is  like  enough  that  she  faid,  that  the  deuil  could  abide
none  of  thcni,bccau(e  the  pricfls  had  cold  her  fo.

; < As


Sara  Williams*  page,

As  reaching  that,which  is  written  of  this  cxam:of  the
fifth  of  Ianuary,  that  being  .exorc:fedyfheevfed  many  idle  1 a£c,<*
words : that  {he  prated3  and feoff ed,  cur  fed,  and fung,  called
for  a piper : when  the  Priefl  bad  the  dentist  ell  him  his  name ,
he  {hould  make  aunfwer  in  her , Pudding  of  Thame:  all
which  is  faid,  to  haue  beenc  fpoken  by  the  fpirit  in  her  j
she  faith,  that  she  might  fpeake  fuch  words,  when  her
head  was  fo  troubled,but  she  doth  not  remember  them.

And  for  the  T adding  of  Thame,  she  faith,  she  hath  oft

heard  it  fpoken  of  ieftingly , when  she  was  a child*

•And  where  it  is  faid,  that  she  should  affirme,  that  the
dcuil  could  not  tarry  in  her  legge,  or  footers  he  was  co-
maunded,  becaufe  of  her  hofe  which  had  been^vvorne
by  a vertuous,and  godly  priefi  : she  confefTeth,  that  in-
deede  she  ware  a pavreof  Ma:2)f^/^nethcrftocks,
and  thinkefh  it  not  to  be  vnlikely,  that  when  vpon  oc-
cafion,  she  faid,  that  the  hofe  she  ware  , had  beene  Ma:
Dibdaless  but  thatfurther  hearing  fomeof  thepriefts
lay,  that  was  the  caufe,  that  the  deuil  would  not  remaine
in  her  legge,  or  foote  (he  did  fay  as  much  her  felfc.

Concerning  that  which  is  written  of  this  examinafe  of
the  6.  of  Ianuary , that  after  confecration , J bee  faw  in  the  ^a2c  f
(fh  allice  a little  head , as  it  were  of  a child:  that  fhee  Jhould
call  for  dyce  to  play  with : that  fhee  {hould  fee  two  at  either
corner  of  the  isfltar , gltslertng  like  finer : that  fhee  {hould
tell  a tale  of  a Mummery  ythat  came  into  the  chamber yvhere
fhee  lay : that  fhee  fcoffed  at  the  Sacrament : that  a propper
man  ina{hort  blacke garment , girt  about  him , hauing  the
refl  of  his  apparrell  alfo  black e,  and  long  haire  turned  vp,al-
fo  great  ruffes flarched  with  blew ft  arch : that  fhee  complai -
nedy  that  the  priefl  s hand  burned  hery  & that  his  breath  t or  -
mented  her : fhee  faith  fhee  remembreth  no  part  of  all
thefc.  What  flie  might  fpeake,when  her  head  W2S  frou-.
bled  with  their  drinks,  fhe  hnoweth  not,  but  (he  dooth
not  remember,  that  euer  fhe  faid, that  fhe  faw  fuch  a lit-
tle head  in.a  chalice, or  that  if  fhe  had  feene  it, (he  (hould


page, 2oo,  The  examination  of

euer  haue  forgot  it.

Page,  f ♦ Whereas  alfo  if  is  (aid  of  her , that  there  appeared  vnto

Ibidem.  her  in  a fit  the  faid  6.  oflanuary  a Mummery  coming  in  At

the  doore  with  a bright  eye  before  them:  a drumme  foundings
and fixe  in  number  with  motly  vizards,  which  daunced  once
about  her.,  and fo  departed.  She  aunfwercth,  that  (he  belie*
ueth,  that  it  is  but  a made  tale  by  forae  of  the  pried s,  or
that  if  (he  told  any  fuch  her  felfe,  it  was  but  a drcamc,or
fome  fuch  thing , as  (hee  had  before  heard  ofamongft
them,  it  bceing  Chridmas.  . . {1

Alfo  as  touching  the  reporf  of  her , that  fbee  knew  a •
Pa(*e  f . peece  of  the  holy  (roffe  by  the  fine  ll : that  a prieFl  put  his  fin*  -

ger  into  her  mouthy  and  bad  the  deuill  bite  it  if  hee  durFl,  and
that  the  dentil  in  this  examinate  fhould  aunfwer  , hee  durFl
not  bite  it,  becaufeit  had  touched  the  Lord : (hee  faith  (hcc
well  reraembreth,  that  (he  heard  them  falke , that  they
had  a peece  of  the  holy  Crofle , but  (hee  dooth  not  be-  * l
lieuc,  that  (hee  knew  it  by  the  fmell,  vnlefle  it  had  beene
Tweedy  kept,  and  that  fhe  might  fmell  the  fauour  there-  jj
of,  when  it  came  neere  her.  And  furtherfaith,  that  it  is
not  vnlike,  but  that  fhe  refufed  to  bite  the  prieds  finger,
for  if  it  had  beene  M aider  Dibdales  finger,  (he  knew  he
was  very  likely  to  haue  giuen  her  a box  on  the  care , if
ihec  had  bitten  it . And  it  might  be  alfo , that  (hee  faid
fhe  would  not  bite  it,  becaufe  it  had  touched  the  Lord , (hec
being  then  wel  acquainted  with  thofc  things : but  whe-
ther she  did  fo  or  no,  she  doth  not  now  remember.

Whereas  it  is  faid,  that  in  one  of  her  fits  fhe  wasfenceleffe
^3£c  f • the  fame  day,  vntill  the  bleffed  Sacrament  was  applyed  vnto

one  of  her  cares , and  that  then  fhe felt  a cold  wind  to  come  in
ett  one,  and  a hote  ayre  to  gee  out  at  the  other : sheeanfwe-
rcth,  that  she  remembreth  no  fuch  thing : as  neither  an-
.other  report  of  a vifion,  she  should  haue  that  nighr,of  a
whole  bench  of  deuils.  Although  she  confedcth,that  as
her  manner  was,  the  mod  mornings  shcc  would  tell  thie
one  tale,  or  other,  or  els  (as  she  faithjr  how  fhould  they  *

haue


Sara  V VilliamsT  page,  2oi

f fiaue  had  writing  workc,  but  she  remembreth  not, whe-
ther she  told  them  this  tale  or  no.

That  which  is  reported  to  haue  been  done  by  her  the
feauenth  of  Ianuary,  as  tha tjbe Jbould  (asjbe  thought ) let  pagC
her  besides  fall  downe  to  the  ground , becaufe  they  feemed  to
burne  her  handt  whereas  the  deutH threw  them  direttly  vpon
the  is4ltaryand ftrooke  downe  the  corner  of  the  Chalice : this
exam:  remembreth  no  fuch  thing , but  meruaileth  that
thedeuil  durft  meddle  with  herbeades,  becaufe  they
were  hallowed.

Where  it  is  faid,  that  the  fame  day .this  examinate  or  (as
they  pretended  ) the  deuill in  her  , was  unwilling  to  adore
the  ble fed facr ament,  becaufe  of  the  bnghtnes  of  it : that  at
the  fecond  elenation  Jhe  Jbould fayy  I will  not  be  ble  fed : <esft
Pax  domini  fit  femper  vobifeum,/ will  none  of  that : osft
Agnus  Dehqui  tollis  peccati  mundi,  tniferere  nobis,  vp»
pon  thee>  and  not  vppon  mee : At  the  offering  of  the  Pax  to
hjjfe : it  ftinketh : when  the  prieH faidy  Domine  non  fura
dignuSyW  betweene  the  receiuing  of  both  kmds : I will  not
receiue.  This  exam:  faith, that  the  priefls  had  taught  her
the  Erojifh  of  the  Latine  words  before  mentionedib  as
she  verily  thinketh , that  shec  was  not  vnlike  to  fay  as  it
is  reported  of  her,  when  she  heard  thofe  Latine  words.

But  she  thinketh  thofe  things  falfe,  that  are  reported  of
her  to  hauc  beene  done  by  her,  the  8 of  Ianuary,  as  that
fbee  (bould  talke  to  the  ExorciH  in  French , whereas  shee
knoweth  very  few  words  in  French , but  fuch  as  shec
heard  amongfl  them,  as  rBoniourt  or  two  or  three  more.

* As  touching  the  long  reports  of  this  exam:  how  Jhe
Was  handled  the  ninth , and  tenth  dayes  of  Ianuary,  viz:
amongft  many  other  things,how  the  demllwas  remooued  Fage,io.
mt  of  her  hands  by  the  putting  on  of  the  ExorciH s glouesi
how  Maho  the  chiefe  deuill  (that  was  pretended  to  be  in
he#)  who  had  two  thoufand  deutls  at  his  commaundement ,
had  beene  in  England  eUerpnce  kin (r  Henry  the  eyghts  time:
how  the  faid  Maho  Jbould  tell  the  ExorciH . that  if  he  would

HD  d,  cut


pagc,2o2f  The  examination  of

cut  the  facr ament  with  hU  knife  hee  Jhould fee  it  bleed:  and
that  he  the  fayd  Maho,  could  not  choofe  but  be  tormen-
ted at  the  offering  of  it : how  Maho  did  fir  ft  fwearevpon  the
bleffed  facr ament , and  kifed  it , and  then  vppon  the  booke  of
exorct/mes,  and  then  fyft  that  likewife : how  this  examinate
was  vexed , when  the  priefls  laboured  with  theyr  holy  hands ,
and  by  touching  of  her  with  facred  rehques , till  they  had
brought  Maho  into  her  belly : (he  aunfWereth  with  many
feares,  God  forgiue  them,  that  thus  did  abufe  me,  there
was  neucr  I thinke  poorc  foulc  fo  dealt  with.  And  after-
wards for  further  aunfwer  flic  faith,  that  itappeareth  by
the  booke,  that  the  faid  tenth  day  of  Ianuary,  they  gaue
Jicr  the  holy  potion,and  burnt  brimftone,and  Frankin-
fcnce  vnder  her  nofc,  which  did  fo  trouble  her , asflicc
thinketh,  that  flie  might  fpcake  flic  knew  not  what, and
they  likewife  write,  and  report  of  her , as  they  thought
good,  and  as  fliee  percciued  they  had  done,  by  the  reft
flie  had  heard  read  vnto  her  out  of  that  booke.

She  further  faith,  that  beeing  at  the  L.  Vaux  his  houfe
at  Hackney y he  priefls  a little  before(as  flie  remembreth)
that  shec  was  exorcifed  in  the  chayre,caufed  a woman  tty
fejuirt  fomthing  by  her  priuie  partsinto  her  body, which
made  her  very  flek.  She  was  fo  vfed  once  or  twice  more
at  Hackney > and  once  at  Dexhamy  whereby  she  knoweth
as  she  faith,  that  she  fuflained  very  great  hurt.

Furthermore  she  faith,  that  the  lafl  time  chat  shce  was
exorcifed  at  Hackney , the  priefls  gaue  if  out,fhat  the  de-
uill  departed  out  of  her  by  her  priuicfl  part.  And  vpora
her  marriage  fome  of  them  fold  her  husband , that  shce
would  neuer  bring  him  any  children,bccaufe  as  they  af-
firmed, the  deuill  had  torne  thofc  parts  in  fuch  fort , as
that  she  could  not  conceiue,  which  shce  thanketh  God
preuefh  to  be  falfe,  for  shce  hath  had  (as  shee  faith)  fiue
children.  But  shee  faith  by  hearing  the  booke  read,  that
is  wrirten  of  her,  shee  hath  called  many  things  fo  mind,
and  doth  perceiuc  that  shce  bath  bcene  very  badly  deale

with*


Sara  Williams.  page,2oj

with.  And  further  shee  faith , that  after  shee  once  came
co  be  voder  their  hands,  they  vfed  the  matter  fo  with
her,  as  that  she  neuer  durft  doe  any  thing,  but  what  [he
thought  did  pleafe  them : fo  as  the  longer  she  continu-
ed with  them,  the  more  they  wrought  vpon  her,  be-
caufe  she  had  learned,  what  words  did  beft  like  them, as
her  rayling  againft  priefts,  and  commending  of  Prore-
ftants,  and  fpeaking  of  many  vaine,  and  fooiifn  words,
whereof  they  would  make  what  they  lift . Likewife  she
could  tel  how  to  feed  them  with  vifions,  faying,she  had
feene  this, and  that,  when  she  had  feene  no  fuch  matter,
but  onely  fpakc  to  content  them.

Befides,  in  Chriftmas  time4here  was  gaming,  and
mumming  at  the  L.  Vaux  his  houfe,and  as  she  faiih^hc
Caw  the  mummers  d refled  with  their  vizards:  whereby
she  learned  to  falke  offuch  things , when  they  faid,  the
(pirit  began  toafeendoutofherfoote : that  is,  when  he
began  from  time  to  time  (as  they  fay)  to  trouble  her.

Againe,as  before  she  faith, that  whiJft  she  was  at
bam>  she  told  Ma:  Dtbdale,  that  shexverily  thought,  she
was  no  more  poflefted.thcn  any  of  them  were(mcaning
the  reft  of  the  priefts. ) And  likewife  as  she  perceaued
three  or  foure  yecres  after,  by  Ma:  Yaxley es  words,  and
(baking  of  his  head,  when  she  complained  vnto  him,
how  she  had  been  dealt  with,  that  he  himfelfe  did  think
no  otherwife  of  her : fo  she  this  exam:  as  wel  at  other
times,  whilft  she  was  at  Denham , as  afterwards  manie
times  ftii  thought , but  now  (as  she  faith)  by  hearing  of
thebooke,  they  haue  written  of  her,  read,  she  is  not  on-
lie  fully  perfwaded,  that  she  was  neuer  at  all  poftefled,
but  fcetn,that  they  hauc  written  of  her  moft  abhomina-
blie,  and  villanoufly,  and  she  prayeth  God  to  forgiue
them,  faying,  that  she  needeth  not  to  wifh  them  worfc
hurt,  then  hath,  or  wil  come  to  them,  for  their  falfe,  and
difletnbling  dealing  with  her.

Whilft  this  exam : was  in  the  priefts  hands  at  Denham^

D do  2.  (lie


page,  204  The  examination  of

she  wel  rcmcmbreth  (as  she  faith)  that  one  Ma:  'Babir.o.
/ton,  and  diuers  other  Gentlemen  were  there  . Alfa  Ma:
Edmunds  the  lefuit  was  there, or  at  the  Ieaft/uch  a man  as
they  called  hiEdmundt,  who  was  a chiefe  man  amongft
them,  and  ouer  the  reft  (as  she  hath  heard. ) Likewise,
she  faith,  that  there  were  many,  both  men,  and  women,
that  came  thitherto  fee  miracles  (as  it  was  giuenout,)
who  were  daily  reconciled . She  alio  rcmcmbreth,  that
the  prieils  would  fay,  that  thofe  who  came  thither , and
Would  not  be  reconciled,  were  in  great  danger, whereas
if  they  would  fubmit  themfelucs , and  reconcile  them-
felues,  then  the  deuil  fhould  haue  no  power  of  them.
The  number,  she  faith,  that  vpon  thefe  occafions  were
reconciled,  "was  very  great . It  was  an  vfual  faying  with
the  priefts,  that  many  Proteftants  were  potfefled , and
that  if  they  were  once  reconciled,  the  deuil  would  shew
- himfelfe  in  them , and  they  brought  her  this  exam:  for,
an  inftancc , faying , that  til  she  was  reconciled,  the  de-
uil  was  quiet  in  her.  Whereas,  she  faith,  she  wel  know-
cth,thac  she  was(she  thanketh  God)  as  free  from  the  de-
uil pofiefling  of  her,  til  she  fel  into  their  hands,as  any  of
the  priefts  were.

After  the  pricfls  gaue  ouer  the  exorcifing  of  this  ex-
am: she  was  at  their  dire&ion  conuayed  from  place  to
place,  for  almoft  foureyeeres,  and  maintained  for  the
mod  part  at  their  charges,  fauing  fo  much  as  she  had
for  her  paines  in  thofe  places,  where  she  remained.

When  this  exam:  should  he  married , Ma:  Taxly  the
priefl  told  her  a (lory  of  Tobias  fanne,  and  wifhed  her,
that  many  wife,  she  should  refraine  from  the  company
of  her  husband,  for  the  firft  three  nights,  whif  h counfel
(she  faith)  she  followed,  being  wholy  at  that  time  ruled
by  him.

She  further  faith,  that  if  Ma:  Etbdale  had  liued  but  a
moncth  longer,  she  this  exam:  had  not  bcene  heere,  to
haue  bcene  now  examined  of  this  matter  • For  he  was

# i

' . fv  ‘ , pur-

* ' - ' V > • -*


Sara  Williams*


page,2of


purpofed  (as  he  faid)  to  haue  fent  her  beyond  the  Seas,
that  she  might  haue  beene  a Nun . And  to  that  end  he
had  prouided  fourty  pound,  parr  whereof  was  inMa:
Taxlyes  hands , and  part  in  her  owne.  But  after  Ma:
‘Dibdales  death,  that  which  this  exam:  had,  jMa:  Taxley
tooke  from  her,  andpromifed  her  husband,  when  she
was  to  be  married  fourty  pound,  whereof  notwithdan-
ding  he  neuer  receaucd  aboue  hue  pounds,  as  she  thin-
keth.

Againe,  she  faith,  thatwhilft  she  was  in  their  hands,
she  had  bluer,  and  gold  giuen  her  of  thofe,  that  came  to
fee  her,  which  she  dil  gaue  to  Ma:  ‘Dibdale,  becaufe  he
perfwaded  her,  that  she  might  not  haue  it  her  felfe,  for
that  the  dcuil  thereby  would  tempt  her,  & doe  her  hurt.
When  he  the  faid  Dibdale  was  afterwards  executed,  this
exam:  had  of  his  a purfc  full  of  gold,  which  he  left  with
her,  wherc-with  Ma:  Alexander  a pried  being  acquain-
ted, she  this  exam:  by  his  commaundemcnt,  ddiuered
it  vntohim.

She  alfo  faith,  that  by  one  Hodgshtns  meanes,  a Pur-
fuiuant , she  was  a little  after  Ma:  Dibdales  death,  com-
mitted to  prifon  at  Oxford  for  recufancie,  where  she  re-
mained about  xiiij.wcckes . At  what  time  Ma : Yaxley
<aufcd  diuers  to  make  earned  fute  for  her : .much  veni-
fon  (as  she  hath  heard)  wasbedowed  vpontbe  Schol-
ars, and  at  the  lad  ihe  was  called  before  a Doflor , and
after  fome  fewe  fpeeches  deliuered.

About  nine  or  tenne  yeares  fince,  this  exam:  w'as  fent
for,  by  two  Indices  of  the  peace.  Sir  Anthony  Cope,  and
Ma:  Doily  to  be  examined , partly  about  thefe  matters
ofpofTeflion  . But  she  neuer  did  confefTc  awordvnto
them  of  it.  At  other  times  alfo  she  hath  beene  exami-
ned,but  difciofed  nothing.  When  vpon  thefe  occafions
she  was  at  any  time  in  trouble,  she  was  fill  maintayned,
and  her  cods  borne  by  theprieds  meanes. She  alfo  faith,
«hat  becaufe  she  would  confcfle  nothing , she  was  very


D d.  3 *


much


pagc,2o5:  The  examination  of

much  made  of.  It  was  ord marie  with  the  priefts,  to
charge  her  in  any  wife,  that  if  she  happened  at  any  time
Co  be  examined, she  should  neuer  take  any  oath;  for  that
was  veric  dangerous,  and  told  her,  that  then  she  might
fay  any  thing,though  it  were  vntruc,  to  excufe  her  fdfe.
They  alfo  warned  her,  to  be  very  careful,  what  she  faid,
and  in  no  wife  to  confelfe  any  thing,  that  might  touch
'any  prieft,and  doe  them  any  harme,  faying,  that  if  she
did,  the  dcuil  would  furely  pofTefTe  her  againe : becaufe
thereby  she  should  diihonour  God,  and  his  Priefts,  and
be  a Dander  to  the  Gatholiquc  Church . And  they  told
her  an  example  ofa  woman , that  afteraprieft  haddit
pofleffed  her,  she  dealt  amifle,  and  there-vpon  the  de-
nil  came  into  her  againe,  and  continued  in  her  fo  long,
assheliued.  And  fo  they  faid,  he  would  deale  with  her
this  exam:  if  she  did,  or  confefled  any  thing  againft  the.
But  notwithDanding  she  now  faith,  that  shcc  is  very
glad  she  hath  difeharged  her  confciencc,  and  vnburdc-
ned  her  minde  of  thefc  things,  by  telling  the  truth.  No-,
thing  doubting,  but  that  Almighty  God  wil  pardon
her,  in  that  she  yeelded  fo  farre,  fo  be  in  fuchfortabu-
fed  by  them , and  that  heereafter  the  deuil  shal  neuer
haue  power,  by  the  perfwafion  of  any  priefts,  or  other
perfons  what  fo  eucr,  to  draw  her  to  fuch  wicked  cour-
ts heereafter.  .


THE


/ G '


l


page,  2o7


^ The  examination  of  Frifmod

alias  Frauncis  Williams,  taken  vpon  oath

the  fecond  of  March  1598,  but  augmented
and  repeated  the  1 7.  of  May  1602.  before  the  Lord
Ttjhop  of  London,  Maifler  Y)  oRor  ssfndrewes  Deane  of
Wellminfler  , Ma:  Doftor  Stanhop  ,.and  Ma:
Do&or  Swale,

SHce  faith,  that  about  1 7 yceres  fince , fhee  becing
then  about  17  yceres  of  age,  ferued  onMiflriffe
Teckham^ he  wife  of  Ma:  Edmund  Teckham,  dwel-
ling then  at  Denham  in  Tuckfngham-fhire . This
Miflris  Peckham , was  the  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  Iarret
in  Lancajhire,

Thccaufcofthis  examinats  feruing  the  faid  Miflriffis
Teckham  was , for  that  this  exam:  filler  Sara  Williams,
(that  likewife  ferued  her)  was  then  in  the  hands  of  cer-
taine  Priefls,  who  faid  fhe  was  poflefTcd,  Atthattimc
alfo  one  Tray  ford  maiffer  Peckhams  man  was  there  like-
wife  in  the  fame  cafe,  with  this  exam:  filler.  By  meanes
of  thefe  troubles  there,  this  examinats  father , being  Sir
Cjeorge  Peckhams  man  , father  to  the  faid  Ma.  Edmund,
ihee  this  examinafe,  as  now  fhee  verilie  belieueth,  was
thought  a meet  perfon , to  be  enter  rained  in  the  houfe,
as  one,  who  they  thought,  would  kcepe  all  theyr  coun-
fcls,  howfoeuer  they  fhould  dcalc,and  pra&ife  with  her,
or  any  other  in  that  place.

This  exam,  further  faith,  that  as  fhe  remembreth,  the
diflinfl  time  of  her  comming  to  ferue  Miflris  Peckham ,
was  about  3 or  4 daies  after , that  fhee  the  faid  Miflriflc
Peckham  came  fro  Fulmer  to  Denham,  withall  her  houf-

bold,


page,2o3


-

. -The  examination  of

^ • * -

hold,  bringing  with  her  the  laid  two  pofTeficd  partief,as
it  was  then  pretended.  Vpon  this  examinafs  firfl  enter-
tainement,  many  priefls  reforted  to  Denhamyndcr  pre-
tence to  caQ  the  deuils  out  of  thofe  perfons.  Amongfl
them  all  one  Ma.  Edmunds  a Icfuic  was  the  chiefc , that


bare  the  fway,  and  gauc  directions  in  thofe  matters,  and
Ma  .Thbdale  was  the  next,  who  tookc  efpeciall  paines
in  their  cxorcifings.  The  names  of  other  priefls, that  re-
forted thether,  as  farreas  fheeremembreth,  wercthefe:
Ma.  cDrtland  Ma.  C Midleton , Ma.  Yaxley , Ma.  Sher-
rrood , Ma.  Stampe,  Ma.  Ttrrell,  Ma.  Thomfon,  Ma.  Thu-
lice,  Ma.  Cornelius 3 Ma.Brtmme,  Ma.2fa/fcn/,Ma.  'Blacky
man,  Ma.  Greene,  Ma.  Emerson.  There  were  bcfidcs  .
thefc  a great  number,  whofc  names  fhe  hath  forgotten,  ■
that  reforted  thether.  And  many,efpccially  of  the  youn-
ger priefls  that  were  lately  come  ouer,  did  not  tell  theyr
names,  at  the  lead  this  exam:  did  not  know  rhem.

Vppon  her  firfl  comming  toDe»/^w,andfo  forfiue
orfixeweekes,  this  exam:  heard  much  in  the  houfeof
her  filler, and  Ma.  Trayfords  fits : and  it  was  not  long  af-
ter her  Millris  coming  from  Fulmer , before  one  Mar-
•wood  was  brought  to  Denham, and  then  fhortly  one  Ma:
BJchardtJHainy,  who  both  of  them  did  pretend  fbem-
felucsto  be  likewife  potTcfled.  Ma.  Ballard  the  Pried
brought  the  faid  Cttarwood thether , and  in  hiseompa-
nie,  there  came  twelue  or  thirtecne  as  (bee  reraembreth,
viz.  Ma.  Babtngton^  Ma.  Ttchl/urney  Ma.  Dun^Az.Cjage,
Ma.  Ttlny  > and  the  mofl  ofthc  refl  that  were  executed  ~ |
with  Ma.!M^0}  the)'  came  thether  in  fourc  orfiuc
Coaches.

When  this  exam:  firfl  came  to  Miflris  Peckham,  fhee
bad  before  cuer  vfed  to  goc  to  the  Church,  but  then  the
priefls  laboured  to  perfwade  her  to  the  contrary.  The
parties  thar  dealt  with  her, to  that  purpofe,  in  the  begin-
ning, were  Ma.  Edmund  Peck  ham,  and  one  Alexander
an  Apothccarie,  but  fince  apriefl*

About


Frifwood  Willtamsi  . page, 209

About  the  end  of  the  faid  $ or  6 weekes , the  priefts
beganne  to  pra&ifc  with  this  exam:  to  make  her  bclieuc
alio  that  fhc  was  pofTefTed.  The  manner  whereof  was  in
this  fort.  Shee  becing  wafhing  of  clothes  in  the  Kitchen
at  (Denhami  maifter  ‘Dibdale  the  pried  came  in,  & clap-
ping her  vpon  the  fhoulder,  told  her  that  her  miftrifle
looked  for  her.  To  whom  this  examinate  anfwered,that
(he  had  almoft  done,  & then  (he  would  come  vnto  her.

Prefently  after  this  examinate , and  one  of  her  fell owes
hauing  filled  a tub  of  water , to  rince  theyr  clothes,  this
exam:  lifting  vp  the  tub , her  feetc  flipped  from  vndcr
hcr.thc  kitchen  bceing  paued.and  hauing  a ihrewd  fall,
did  hurt  her  hip,  with  the  griefe  whereof  she  was  com-
pelled to  keepe  her  bed,  for  two  or  three  dayes.

Kcereupon  maiflcr  Ltbdale  comming  to  this  exam:
told  her,that  it  was  a wicked  fpirit,that  gaue  her  that  fal,
and  faid,  that  the  caufe  that  moued  the  fpirit  Co  to  doc.

Was  for  that  shee  had  washed  his  the  faid  maifler  CDtb-
dales  Od\rty  which  the  wicked  fpirit  fooke  in  cuill  part,
bccaufe  he  was  a Catholique  pried,  to  whom  the  deuill
could  not  endure,  that  any  kindoes  should  be  fhewed.

And  for  that  alfo  the  fame  his  fhirt  was  fouled  with  the
fweat,  which  came  from  him  , in  raking  paines  to  exor-
cife  the  parties,  fuppofed  to  bepoflefled,  He  did  alfo  at
the  fame  time,  and  afterwards,  likewife  dealc  earneftlie
with  this  examinate,  to  perfwade  her  to  be  a Catholick,
and  from  the  time  of  her  faid  fall , ceafed  not  to  fell  her,
that  she  was  pofTefTed  $ and  fo  did  the  red  of  the  priefts,
that  rhen  were  there*  The  faid  maiflcr  Dibdale  did  vrge
her  to  be  aduifed  by  him, promifing  that  iffo  she  would,
she  fhould  rccciuc  great  eafe,and  comfort  therein.

Shea-fo  faith,that  vponoccafion  of  fpccch  with  mai-
fler  Vibdale,  of  the  ache  of  her  hip,  he  entred  into  a fur-
ther examination  of  hcr,if  she  had  not  before  that  time,
felt  forac  paine  in  her  body,  And  slice  confefling,  that
ioBMBKS,  she  had  a paine  in  one  of  her  Tides  $ Ah  quoth

E c he,  *


page,  21  o+ . - The  examination  of

he,  I thought  euen  To;  outofqucflion , you  are  po faf-
fed, and  fo  haue  beene  for  a good  while , the  painc  you
fpeake  of,  proceeding  from  the  (aid  fpirit.

. Thus  labouring  with  this  exam:  to  make  her  to  be-
lieue, that  shcc  was  pofiefled,  they  told  her,  that  before
they  could  doe  her  any  good,  she  tnuft  needs  become  a
Catholique  * and  at  the  length , by  telling  her  that  shee
was  in  (fate  of  damnation,  and  out  of  the  Church ; and
that  fhc  mud  belieue  the  articles  of  the  Crccde,  where-
of one  was , that  shee  ought  to  belieue  the  Catholtcjnc
Church , which  was  (as  they  faid)  the  Church  of  Thorne,
Ihce  did  yeeld  vnto  them  to  be  reconciled,  as  she  think-
eth  thev  terme  it.

0

At  the  time  that  this  exam:  was  thus  become  a Ca-
tbolique,  the  pricfls  told  her, that  her  baptifme  rccciucd
in  the  proteftants  Church  muff  be  amended,  becaufc  X
wanted  many  ceremonies  of  the  Catholique  Church,
And  thereuppon  they  vfed  fuch  things  as  they  thought
good,  to  make  her  baptifme  perfefi.  They  caff  a white
cloth  oucr  her  head,  with  a crofTe  vpon  if,  & vfing  cer-
fainc  words,  they  put  fait  into  her  mouth , and  did  an-
noint  her  Iippes,  her  nofe,  her  eyes,  and  her  cares  ♦ At *
- that  time  alfo,  they  caufed  her  to  change  her  name,  fo  as
she  beingjYvhen  she  was  chriftned, called  Trifwood,  from  '
that  time  forward,  shee  hath  been  called  Trauncis*  They  j
told  her  diners  tales  of  S.  Trauncii,  that  he  was  fo  holy  a
man,  that  he  might  commaundthe  birds  of  the  ayre  to
come  vnto  him,  and  that  therefore  his  name  was  made  .
common  both  for  men,  and  women.

Shee  further  faith,  that  after  shee  had  kept  her  bedde  '
two  or  three  daies,  (as  before  is  mcntioned)fhcdid  (not-
withftanding  her  faid  hurt)  follow  her  bufines,  as  wcl  as
shee  could,  though  she  halted  This  her  fo  halting,  the
priefts  ftill  faid,  that  the  deuil  caufcd  if,  and  after  oroif-
•f  ed  no  occafion,  to  tell  her  of  the  painc  in  her  fide , and
annotating  her  hip,  did  alwaies  fay,  that  it  was  the  deuill
• > T that


Frifwood  William?:  # Pagc2ir;

that  lay  there;  till  at  lad  this  exam;  began  (Specially  af-
ter she  was  a Catholique)  to  thinkc  they  faid  truly , and
that  she  was  indeed  pofTefled.  Although  (as  now  slice
faith)  shec afterwards  perceiued,  that  shee  had  neuer  a-
ny  other  trouble, after  her  hip  was  well,  but  now  & then
a paine, as  she  was  wont  to  haue  in  her  fidc,which  painc
doth  dill  continue,  beeing  a griefe  of  the  fpleene,  as  the
Phyficians  tell  her  5 for  eafe  whcrcof,{hec  is  commonlic
let  blood  once  a ycere.  And  for  any  other  vexation,  or
griefe  whilft  she  was  vndcr  the  priefts  hands,  shee  fay th
shec  had  none , but  fuch  as  they  procured , by  theyr
drinks,  and  perfumes,  and  other  bad  vfage  of  her.

Furthermore  shec  faith , that  within  a while  after  that
she  was  a Catholique , the  priefts  told  her , that  accor-
ding to  their  promife,  they  would  now  try,  to  make  her
well,  and  to  rid  her  from  the  wicked  fpirit.  The  manner
whereof  was  as  followcth.  At  the  end  of  the  firft  Mafle
that  euer  she  faw,  which  was  faid  by  maider  Bibdale,  he
told  her,  that  now  they  would  make  triall  what  was  in
her;  and  thereupon  shee  beeing perfe&ly  well,  and  tel-
ling maidcr  Bibdale , & the  red  as  much,yet  they  would
needs  hauc  her  to  fit  downc  in  a chayre,  which  shee  did*

Then  they  began  to  bindc  her  with  towels,  whereat  she
greatly  raeruailed,  and  was  there-with  cad  into  a great
feare,as  not  knowing  what  they  meant  to  doe  with  her.

Beeing  in  this  cafe,  raaifter  Bibdale  began  foreadvpon
his  booke  of  Exorcifmcs,  and  after  a good  while/eeing
no  other  alteration  in  her,  then  the  tokens  of  fcare,  (for
she  cofelfcth  the  fame  increafed  by  reafon  of  his  words,
and  other  his  dealings  with  her)  then  they  vrged  her  to
drinke  aboue  a pint  of  Sack,  and  Sallet-oyle,  bein®;  hal-
lowed, and  mingled  with  forae  kind  offpiccs . When
she  faded  this  drinke,  which  they  termed  a holy  potion,
it  did  fo  much  diflike  her , that  shee  could  drinke  but  a
little  of  it  at  once,  (her  domacke  greatly  loathing  of  if.)

And  then  the  prefts  faid  , all  that  came  from  the  deuill,

E e z , who


page, 2i2, , The  examination  of

who  hated  nothing  worfe,  then  that  holy  drinke . So  a?

{ he  was  held,  and  by  very  force,  caufed  to  drinke  it  vp,
at  diuers  draughts  • Hecrc-vpon  (as  i he  faith)  flic  grew
to  be  very  ficke,  and  giddie,  in  her  head,  and  began  ter
fal  info  a cold  fweatc,  verily  then  bclcemng,  that  as  the
priefls  faid,  it  was  a wicked  fpirir,rhat  caufed  her  to  be  in
fuchcafc:  Whereas  afterwards,  when  fliee  better  had
confidercd  of  their  dealings  with  her,  (he  eafily  pcrcca-
tied,  that  the  drinke  they  gaue  her,  was  fuch,  as  might
haue  made  a horfe  ficke.

Againc,  (he  faith,  that  being  thus  in  the  priefls  hands*
from  a little  before  ChriftmaSjtil  two  or  three  dayes  be-
fore Whitfbnday  following, (he  was  often  abufed  in  thi*
manner:  andat  fometimes  when  flie  was  bound  , (a*
isbeforefaid)  and  had  drunk  the  holy  potion  ful  fore
againft  her  wil , they  would  burne brimflone  in  a cha-
fing-difli,  and  hold  her  nofe  by  force  ouer  it : by  which
jneanes,  fhe  nothing  doubteth  , but  that  flie  did  com-
monly grow  into  fi>me  great  outrages,  & fpakc  flie  can
no t tel  now  what.

There  was,  (as  flic  thinketh)  a difeourfe  made  of  her
fits,  by  fome  of  the  priefls,  the  which.ifshe  could  hearer
she  fupppfeth,  she  should  remember  many  more  things  'i
then  now  she  doth : But  shee  cannot  forget  (she  faith)  j
that  many  times, she  did  complaine  of  hard  dealing, vfed
towards  her  in  her  pretended  fits , and  how  iniurioufly
they  dealt  with  her,  by  giuing  her  that  loathfome  drink,  * !
andburnins;  brimflone  vnder  her  nofe.  Where- vnfo
the  priefls  would  commonly  giue  this  aunfvver,  eythcr
it  was  not  fbe>  that  [pak*%  but  the  dentil \ or  otherwife  when  f
she  was  fo  wel,  that  they  could  haue  no  pretence,  fo  to
fay , then  they  would  bid  her  be  contented,  and  tel  her,
that  she  should,  by  that  meanes,  merit  heauen,  8c  gainc
a crowne  of  glory . And  they  would  fland  much  vpon
this  lafl  rcafon , in  (hewing  how  much  this  exam:  had
merited  at  Gods  hands , when  any  by  feeing  of  her  in


Frifwood  Williams?

her  fits,  and  the  Prieds  dealings  with  her,  were  recon*
tiled.

She  further  faith,  that  the  priefls  would  be  often  tal-
king in  this  exam:  hearing, of  ccrtaine  women, that  were
poflefled  beyond  the  Seas  : how  the  deuils  in  them
could  not  abide  the  holy  potion  j\w  the  burning  of  hallo-
wed brimdone,  nor  the  applying  vnto  them  of  holy  re*
liques , nor  the  prefence,  or  touching  of  Catholiejue
prieds, nor  holy  water, nor  the  holy  candcl,nor  the  blef-
fedfacrament,butvvould  Hart,  fay  they  bumcd,rage,  6c
raile  againd  the  prieds,&  commend  vpon  eucry  occafi*
cn  thofe,  that  were  the  founded  Protedants.

By  this  meanes,  this  exam:  faith,  for  her  felfe,(and  she
thinketh,she  may  fafely  fo  fay  for  her  fider,and  the  red,)
that  she  learned  what  Co  fay,  and  doe,  when  the  prieds
had  her  in  hand : that  is,  to  dart  fome  times,  w hen  they
brought  reliques  vnto  her : to  pretend  that  shec  could
not  endure  the  prefcncc  of  the  Sacrament,  and  many
things  befides : as  if  the  treatife  of  her  may  begotten,
wil  appeare.  Howbeit,  she  faith,  that  after  fome  fixe  or
feauen  weekes,  although  at  the  fird,  she  didnotmarke
the  prieds  doings,  nor  greatly  obferue  her  own, yet  then
she  hegan  to  finde  their  iuglings,  and  how  she  her  felfe,
in  faying  this,  or  that,  fpakc  nothing,  but  what  she  had
learned  of  the  prieds.

The  chiefe  reafon  rhat  (shethinketh)  moued  her,  not
to  mark  them  at  the  fird,  was  the  good  opinion  she  had
conceaued  of  them  , being  newly  reconciled : and  yet
as  shec  faith,  when  shee  faw  before  that  time,  into  what
cafe  they  had  brought  her  fider , she  thought  that  they
vfed  her  not  wel,  & perfwaded  her  to  runne  away  from
them.

This  exam:  further  faith,  that  shec  wel  remembrefh,
how  one  time  Ma:  Sherrrood  told  her,  that  one  Mar
Bridges  had  gotten  one  of  his  mothers  mayds  with  child,
and  bad  her  tel  him  of  it, when  he  should  come  next  thi-

E c.  3 ther?


page, 21}


page, 214.^  . The  examination  of

iher,  and  (hat  this  exam:  was  troubled ♦ Where-vpori
she  faith,  that  accordingly,  as  foone  as  she  faw  the  faid
Ma:  Bridges,  being  her  felfc  in  health,  and  no  way  trou-
bled ,&  in  the  prefence  of  Ma:  Sherwood \ Goe  to,quoth
she,Ma:  Bridges,  you  haue  gotten  your  Motherschara-
ber-mayde  with  child,-  and  make  no  confcienceof  if.
Which  words  were  no  fooner  vttered  by  her,  but  Ma:
Sherwood  tookchold  ofthero,  faying  \ Yea  firra,  canfl
thou  tel  that,  thou  shalt  be  conftrained  to  tel  more  a-
none  ? And  thus  he  faid,  pretending,  it  was  not  this  ex-
am: but  the  deuil, that  vttered  thofe  words.  Hcerc-with
Ma,  Bridges  was  greatly  amazed,  and  afraid,  and  much
fpccch  was  of  if,  as  ifit  had  been  fome  great  miracle.

The  (aid  Ma.  Sherwood, as  this  exam:  (aith,at  one  time,
as  she  was  tyed  in  the  chayre,  did  thru#  a pinne  into  her
fhoulder,  and  die  there-with  crying,  and  faying,  what
doe  you?  O faith  he,  hearc  you  not  the  deuil,  >vhathec
faith?  No,  quoth  this  exam:  it  is  not  the  deuil,  but  my
felfc,  that  fpake  vnto  you  ♦ But  he  ftil  affirming,  that  it
was  the  deuil,  this  exam:  could  not  be  bclecucd,  and  Co
it  was  reckoned  amongft  them.

Againeshee  faith,  that  in  one  of  the  fits,  wbere-inta
they  cad  her,  by  their  holy  potion, and  brimdonc,  there
* were  two  needles  thruft  info  bcrleggc,  by  fome  of  the
prieds,  (as  she  is  now  perfwaded  in  herconfcience,)  and
vppon  her  comming  to  her  fences , finding  a paine  in
the  place,  where  the  needles  were,  (he  complained  of  if,  i
and  would  haue  put  down  her  hofc,  to  haue  fcene,what
her  legge  ayled  *,  but  the  prieds  would  in  no  wife  fuffer
that,  but  prefently  they  got  holy  reliques,and  tycd  them
about  her  legge , affirming  that  the  paine  was  procu-
red, by  the  wicked  fpirit,  and  could  not  be  cafed,but  by
thofe  reliques . When  they  had  fo  tycd  them  about  her
legge,  they  charged  her  in  any  wife,  not  to  touch  them;
but  yet  notwithdanding  this  exam;  faith,  that  being
greatly  troubled  with  paine,  & defirous  to  eafe  her  felfe,

•'  flic  1


Frifwood  Williams,

(he  did  now  and  then  attempt  toflacken  the  reliques,
being  eyed  too  hard,  (as  flie  thought.)  At  what  time  the
prieffs  ftil  watching  of  her, as  that  fhe  could  do  nothing,
but  they  would  fee  her , they  did  blame  her  for  tou-
ching of  the  reliques,  bad  her  let  them  alone,  and  faid,  ic
was  the  deuil  that  tempted  her,  to  touch  them.

The  cuftome  of  the  priefts  was,  as  this  exam:  faith, to
appoint  a fet  time,  when  they  meant  tohaue  anvfo*
lemne  Exorcifmes,  and  then  this  exam:  was  one,  when
(he  was  in  their  hands,  that  for  the  moft  part,  muft  goe
to  the  ehayre . After  that  the  faid  needles  had  beene  in
this  exam:  legge,  from  the  fore-noone  the  one  day,  vn-
til  eleuen  of  the  clocke  the  next  day,  fhe  was  brought  vp
into  a gallerie,  the  Sermon  being  finifhed,  and  a great
number  there  prefent . At  her  coramingin,  and  com-
plaining oftheforen  rs  of  her  legge,  theprieftsbad  her
be  of  good  cheere,  and  faid,  they  would  fee  if  they  could
hclpehcr:  Where- vponMa.  I)ibdaley  (as  fheremem-
breth)  (aid  vnto  her,  GocFrauncis^  fit  downc,  and  put
downc  thy  hofe : which  /he  did, and  then  Ma .Stamp*  a-
nothcr  pried,  when  her  hofe  was  put  downe,  came  vnto
her  very  rcucrently,  and  with  druers  ceremonies  vntyed
the  reliques,  which  were  about  her  legge,  which  being
taken  away,  he  looked  vpon  the  fore  place,  and  hand-
led it  gently , and  in  the  end  thrufting  downc  with  his
fingers  the  skin,  and  flefh,  where  one  needle  ftuck  fo.as
the  fame  appeared,  he  called  vnto  him  thofe  that  were
prefent,  and  faid  vnto  them  : See  what  the  deuil  had
done,  and  fo  pulled  it  out . Then  feeling  her  legge  a
little  while  longer.and  vfing  his  fingers, as  is  before  men-
tioned, healfo  difclofed  the  fecond  needle 5 which  the
people  that  were  prefent  beholding , were  in  a great
maze,  cfpeciallyto  hearc  what  Ma.  Z)ibdatey  and  Ma.
Stamp  made  of  the  matter : how  they  faid, it  was  the  de-
nils  doing,  and  much  other  fpeech  to  that  effect . A«
foonc  as  the  needles  were  taken  forth^his  exam:  was  ca-

ried


pagc,2if


\


\6 ♦ The  examination  of

ried  dovvne  againeoutof  the  gallcric,  and  feeling  her
leg  very  wel  eafed  , it  began  to  amend  euery  day  more,
and  more,  which  they  faid,  was  by  reafon  of  the  holy
water,  wherc-with  they  wafhed  her  Jcgge,  when  they
pulled  out  the  needles.

She  further  faith,  that  the  pricfls  had  acuftome,  to
thruft  certainc  things  into  the  mouthes  offuch,  as  they  >}
faid  were  pofTeded  , vnder  pretence  ofreliques . And
fine  wel  remembrerh.  that  at  one  time,  when  fhe  began
to  be  troubled  with  her  drink,and  brimftonc.thcy  tbruft
into  her  moqth/omeof  the  faid  relkjues : Whereof  this
exam:  complained,  and  faid,  why  doc  you  put  thefe  fiU
thie  things  in  my  mouth  ? Ah,  cjueth  they : hark  how
the  deuil  cannot  endure  thefs  holy  things.  Afterwards
when  this  exam?  put  them  out  of  her  mouth,  then  they
asked  her  what  relieves  they  were?  and  (he  told  them.
This  is  a peece  offuch  a man,  and  this  of  another.  And
at  one  time,  they  put  info  her  mouth,  a peece  of  fampi*
ons  thumbe.or  his  finger,  (he  remembretb  not  whether*
When  this  exam:  at  this  time,  and  folikcwife,bothfhe,
and  others,  at  other  rimes,  did  name  thefe  rcliques,  and
fhewed  their  diflikc,  to  haue  the  puuntotheir  mouthes,
the  priefis  would  bidde  the  people  that  were  prefent
marke , bow  the  dcui!  knew  all  holy  rcliques , of  what
Martyrs  they  were,  and  how  hee  could  not  abide  them  t
whereas  this  deponent  faith,  that  Both  fhe , and  thereft
that  were  dealt  with  as  (hee  was . did  know  all  thefe  re*
Jicjucs,  that  the  pr lefts  had  rhere*  hsuing  the  fight  ofth£
almoll  euerie  day,  and  hearing  the  pried*  tell  of  whom
they  were.  So  that  as  foone  as  this  exarainate  faw  any  of
them,  C he  could  name  them  very  readily,’ and  fay)  This
isfueh  a peece  of  Father  Campus  this  of  MshSW»m|
this  of  maiflef  Brian  j this  of  maifter  Ccttm  5 this  of  mi-
flris  Clithero  5 and  fo  ofa  great  number  morej  which
% fhe  hath  now  forgotten.

At  another  time  alfo,thi$  exaroinarc  wel  remembreth,

* that


Frifwood  Williams.  p3gc,2l74

that  the  priefts  filling  her  mouth  with  rcliques,  they  c5*
ucyed  in  with  them  a big  ruftie  naile,  as  /he  is  verily  per-
fwaded  in  her  confcience , fo  as  when  they  pulled  out
the  reliques,  fhc  was  almoft  choked  with  the  nayle,  and
much  ado  they  had  to  get  it  out.  They  made  her  mouth
there-with  to  bleed  , and  affirmed  to  the  people,  that  it
came  out  of  her  ftomackc, by  vertue  of  the  faid  reliques.

Againe  fhc  faith,  that  becing  in  fpecch  once  with  mai-
fter  DtbcLtle  concerning  maid  cr  Rtchard Mainy , he  told
her  diuers  things  of  him,  what  wonderful  fights  he  faw
about  the  Altar,  and  the  facrament  at  Mafle  time.  And
further  faid  vnto  her , that  if  fhee  would  fay,  when  fhee
was  to  be  exorcifed  in  the  chaire,  at  the  bringing  of  the
Vix  vnro  her,  (as  the  manner  was)  that  fhee  faw  the  bo-
die  of  Chrifi  there  in  a great  brighfnefle,  fhee  fhould  by
that  mcanes  greatly  glorifieGod.  And  therevppon,  as
(he  confcfleth,  fhe  faid  as  he  aduifed  her,  at  her  next  ex*
orcifing,  and  a great  wonder  was  made  of  if,

Shce  further  faith,  that  becing  brought  vp  with  her
mother,  fhee  had  learned  to  fing  by  hart  certaine  (jene-
#dPfalmes,  6c  that  being  vnder  the  prieffs  hands, when
now  and  then  forgetting  her  felfe,fhe  fung  any  of  them,
as  fhc  fate  at  work,  the  prieffs,  5c  fo  others  in  the  houfe,
when  they  heard  her,  would  earned ly  blame  her  for  if,
and  fay  one  to  another,  Doe  you  not  heare,how  fweetly
the  deuil  fingeth  thefc  Genem  pfalmes.

Alfo  fhc  faith  , that  when  the  prieds  had  drawnehcr
to  be  of  their  Church,  as  is  before  mentioned,  and  that
fhee  fhould  come  to  receaue  the  Sacrament,  they  fold
her,  fhemudfird  vow,  andpromife,  by  the  vertue  of
that  holy  Sacrament,  that  fhee  would  cuer  affer wards
hold  the  Religion  of  the  Church  of  Rome  > and  neuer
goc  againe  to  any  of  the  Proteflants  Churches,nor  euer
reade  the  Englifh  Seruicc,  or  the  Englifh  Byblc,  or  any
other  Englifh  books, written  by  the  Profedants  in  mat-  ^
ters  of  Religion . And  this  vow,  fhe  faith,  is  ordinarily

F f.  raade,.


page, 218:


The  examination  of


✓


made,  by  all  thaf  are  reconciled.

She  alfo  faith,  that  fhc  hath  often  times»heard  fome  of
theprieftsaffirme,  that  it  was  an  ordinary  thing  with
the  deuil , which  was  in  Ma:  C Jltaynie,  that  when  they
rhefaid  priefts,  haue  demaundedofthe  deuil,  (preten-
ded to  be  in  him)  why  he  troubled  fhc  Catholiques  with
imprifonment,  and  many  daungcr*,  whiled  the  Protc-
flantsliued  in  pleafurc : his  aunfwerwas,  that  the  Pro-
teftants  were  his  already , and  that  he  troubled  the  Ca-
tholiques, becaufc  he  would  draw  them  to  himfelfe,  and
snake  the  Proteflants  if  he  could : adding  that  he  would
neuer  haue  troubled  lob  ashc  did,  if  he  had  thought  he
could  not  haue  made  him  to  curfe  God . Thiscxamr
alfo  faith,that  /he  her  felfc  hath  heard  fom  of  the  priefts,
and(as  {he  thinketh  Mar  Edmundi)zske  Main y that  que-
ffion,and  he  the  fad Mainy  Co  to  haue  aunfwered  them.
Alfo  fhc  faith,  that  the  priefls  in  talking  of  Proteflants,
haue  affirmed  of  them  in  her  hearing,  that  the  greateft


i


fhare  of  them  were  pofTefTed , and  that  when  England  1
fhould  be  againe,  as  it  had  beene,  the  dcuils  would  then
fhew  themfolucs  in  them , and  they  fhould  haue  theyr
hands  ful  of chaire-worke,meaning  their  exorcifings, to  |
cafl  them  out.

At  one  time,  fhe  faith  fhe  wel  remerabrcth,that  Ma:  1
(jreene  comming  from  beyond  the  Seas,  brought  with
him  certaine  graincs , medals,  and  gnus  dei  ^and  <j
that  feeing  the  priefls,and  others  make  fo  great  account
©f  them,  fheefaid  to  Ma:  CjYeene , Good  Lord,  what
meane  you  to  make  fo  great  a-doe  about  thefc  things  f ?
What  is  that  waxe  better  then  other  waxe  ? or  that
bugle  better  then  another,whereofyou  may  buy  a great
number  for  a penny?  Where-vpon  Ma:  Greene  faid*
it  was  the  dentil , and  not  fhe,  that  fpake  tbofe  words . But
fchis  exam:  told  him  againe,  that  (hec  fpake  thofe  words
• her  felfe,  and  that  fhe  mcruailed,  why  they  laboured  fo
carncftlyj  to  make  both  her,  and  all  others  beleeue,  that

what'


Frifwood  Williams*  Pagc;  2I5>

whatfoeuer  /he  or  they  did,  or  fpake,  it  was  not  /he,  nor
they,  but  the  deuil : but  he  perfifted,  and  faid,  it  was  the
deuil  indeedc,  and  not  /he,  whatfoeucr  /hec  thought  to
the  contraric.

This  exam:  further  faith , that  one  Alexander  an  A-
pothecarie,  hauing  brought  with  him  from  London  to
'Denham  on  a time  a new  halter , and  two  blades  of
kniues,  did  leaue  the  fame , vpon  the  gallerie  floare  in
her  Maifters  houfe.  The  next  morning  he  tookc  occafi-
on  to  goe  with  this  exam:  into  the  faid  gallerie,  where
flic  efpying  the  faid  halter,  and  blades,  asked  Ma:  Alex -
a nder  what  they  did  there  : Hee  making  the  matter
Orange,  aunfwered,  that  he  faw  them  not,  though  hee
looked  fully  vpon  them  $ fhe  her  felfe  pointing  to  them
with  her  finger,  where  they  lay  within  a yard  of  them,
where  they  floode  both  together . No  (quoth  this  ex-
am:) doe  you  not  fee  them  ? and  fo  taking  them  vp,faid,
looke  you  hcere : Ah  (quoth  he)now  I fee  them  indeed,
but  before  I could  not  fee  them : And  therefore  faith  he,

1 perceaue  that  the  deuil  hath  layd  them  beere,  to  worke
fome  mifehiefe  vpon  you,  that  are  poffefled.

Heereuppon  maifter  Alexander  fold  the  pricfls  what
a ftrange  thing  had  happened , and  a great  fearch  was
made  in  the  houfe,  to  know  how  the  faid  halter  6c  knife
blades  came  thether : but  it  could  not  in  any  wife  be
found  out , as  it  was  pretended , till  Ma.  Cfttainy  in  his
next  fit  faid,  as  it  was  reported,  that  the  deuil  layd  them
in  the  Gallery,  that  fome  of  thofe  that  were  poflefled,
might  either  hang  thefelues  with  the  halter,  or  kil  them-
fclues  with  the  blades.  .

Now  this  exam:  further  faith,  that  Zbee  herfelfe  did
efpy  the  end  of  the  halter,  in  tnaifter  Alexanders  poc-
ket, the  night  before  /hee  faw  it , and  the  blades  in  the
Gallery,  at  filch  time  as  he  drew  out  of  his  pocket  a ccr-  >
taine  boxe  of  Wafer-cakes  for  Maffes.  Whereby  Zhee  is
fully  perfwaded,  as  /he  faith, that  he  the  faid  Alexander,

Ff.  2.  war


pagc>22cv  Tlie  examination  of

was  himfclfe  the  deuil,  that  layde  the  halter , and  knife*
blades  in  the  laid  Gallerie,  and  as  foe  faith,  (he  told  mai-
ler as  much,  when  the  fearch  was , how  they

fhould  come  thether.  Whereat  maifler  Dtbdale  beeing
much  mooued,faid,  it  way  not fbe  but  the  dentil ,that  fpakc
fo  vnf  o him, of  maifter  a. Alexander . And  for  this  her  re-  j>
port, and  fpeeches,  fhe  felt,  as  fhee  faith,  (omc  fmart  af-
terwards, For  within  a day  or  two  after  they  had  her  a-
gaine  to  the  chayre,  and  did  vfc  theyr  exorcifmes  with
her,  the  manner  whereof  was  (bmething  ftrange  vnto
her*

They  had  in  a readrnes  the  pi£hire  of  an  AfTc,  and  of
the  deuil,  and  of  Ma.  Fox,  as  if  hee  were  writing  the
booke  of  Martyrs . The  Affe  (they  (aid)re(emblcd  this
examinatc $ and  the  deuill  within  her  (being  a malicious
lying  fpirit,  that  fought  to  (launder  thedooings  of  the
Cathohque  prieffs)  betokened  Ma.  Fox>  who  (as  they
laid)  had  beenc  a malicious  Iyer.  They  had  there  alfo  a
long  girdle , made  of  whipcord  ( as  fhee  remembreth)
it  was  fall  of  knots,  & termed  S.  Peters  girdle : this  gir-
dle was  hallowed,  and  being  lapped  into  foure  doubles.
Was  like  a whip,

Thefe  things  beeing  thus  readily  prepared,  this  exa*  \
minate  was  bound  full  fore  againft  her  will  in  a chayre:
They  compelled  her  to  drinke  the  holy  potion,  whereof
fhee  made  fiuc  or  fixe  draughts  $ they  burnt  brirnftonc
vnder  her  no fe  , and  withall  the  faid  three  pictures  one
after  another.Thcy  pulled  off  her  gowne,and  whipped
hervppon  the  armes  with  the  holy  girdle,  pretending
that  they  meant  thereby  to  hunt  the  deuill  out  of  heri
They  gaue  her  fiuc  blowes,  in  remembrance  of  the  fiuc
wounds  of  Chrift  :andfeaucn  in  honour  of  the  feauen
Sacraments,  and  three  in  memory  of  the  blefled  Trim-
tie,  andffieknoweth  not  now  how  many  more.  With
thefe  blowes  fhee  beeing  conftrained  fo  cry  out , they
faid,  it  waj  not  fief  but  the  dentil  within  her  that  fo  cryed,

bccaufc


r


Frifwood  Williams?  page,  221

becaufe  lie  was  not  able  to  endure  the  vertuc  of  that  ho-
ly girdle.  But  this  examinate  faith , that  howfoeuer  the
deuill  fared,  fhe  well  knoweth , that  fhee  bare  away  the
fraart,  and  that  her  arnics  were  blacke  almoft  a moneth
after  with  the  blowes.

The  prieft  s alfo  (fhee  faith)  had  another  cuftome  : At
the  end  ofeuery  exorcifme,  they  would  fay  that  the  fpi-
rit  was  gone  downc,  fornetimes  into  the  footc,&  (bmc-
times  into  the  great  toe  of  the  partie  exorcifed . And
when  Grangers  came , before  whom  they  intended  to
worke  fome  great  matters , they  would  bring  the  partie
againe  to  the  chayrc,  and  beeing  bound  therein , they
would  begin  (as  they  faid)  to  make  the  dcuil  fhew  him-
felfc,  which  they  did  with  this  exam:  in  this  fort . The
Exorcift  hauing  a relique  in  his  hand,  as  a bone,or  fome
fuch  hard  thing,  would  grafpe  her  by  the  legge,  & aske
her  if  fhe  felt  any  paine  that  fecroed  to  prick  her,  St  this
exam:  confefting  (as  the  truth  was)  that  fhe  felt  a paine,

(the  faid  bone , or  hard  thing  in  his  hand  hurting  her
fhrewdly:)  Ah  (would  the  Exorcift fay)  now  he  begin-
neth  to  ftirre.  Thus  would  the  Exorcift  goe  pinching
of  her  legge  twice,  or  thrice,  before  they  came  to  her
knee,  and  then  they  would  wring  her  indeed  fo  hard,  as
that  flic  fhouldfometimesfcreech,  and  fornetimes  ftarf.

And  then  the  Exorcift , and  the  reft  of  the  priefts  that
were  prefent  would  fay , now  the  fpirit  will  vp  inro  her
body,  you  fhal  hearc  more  of  him  anon  . And  haft  was
commonly  made  at  fuch  times  to  giuc  vs  the  holy  po-
tion, which  beeing  fo  lothfome  a drinkc,diuers  Gentle-  *

women  feeing  it  giuen  vntovs,  haue  wept  for  pitty  to
fee  vs  compelled  to  take  it . But  the  priefts  would  tell
them  that  there  was  no  remedy  for  otherwife  > except
the  ftrength,  and  force  of  the  wicked  fpirit  were  there-
by abated,  there  was  great  danger,  that  hce  would  tearc
theyr  guts,  and  inward  parts  in  pceces,  as  hec  was  amen-
ding vpwards  to  goe  out  of  them.

This


page, 222


, The  examination  of

This  exam:  faith,  that  when  ftiec  had  wcl  confidered
of  the  priefts  dealing  with  her,  and  how  all  the  troubles
flic  had,  was  by  rcafon  of  their  intollerablc  drinks,  per-
fumings,  and  pra&ifcs  with  her,  where-with  her  body
was  brought  to  great  weakenes  j flie  grew  to  fotnc  more
boldnes,  and  did  now  and  then  (pcake  her  minde  fom-
what  plainly,  though  it  booted  not  : for  they  would
fay,  it  was  the  deuil  that  vttered  it,whatfoeuer  it  was,that
this  exam:  fpake,  if  they  difliked  it . She  wel  remera-
breth,  that  fitting  at  her  woike  one  time,and  Ma:  Sher-
wood fitting  alfo  by  her  looking  on  a booke,  she  this  ex-
am: being  very  angry  in  her  minde,  to  confider  how  (he
was  vfed,  and  with  him  in  particuler,  for  thrufiing  a pin
into  her  shoulder , and  for  diuers  other  his  hard  vfages
towards  her,  faidvntohim^  that  shee  very  greatly  mer-
uailcd,  how  he,  and  the  reft  durft  deale  with  her.  Sc  the
reft,  as  they  did  : adding,  that  if  she  this  exam:  or  any
other  should  coroplaine  of  them,  they  would  certainly
all  of  them  be  hanged.  For(quoth  she)  how  many  of  the
Queenes  fubie&s,  haue  you  drawne  from  her,  by  thefe
your  pra&ifes  heere  ? Heere-with  Ma:  Sherwood  was
muclMnoued,  and  went  to  the  priefts,  to  acquaint  them
with  her  words.  Some  of  them  (as  she  hath  hcard)wcre
of  opinion,  that  it  were  be  ft  to  put  her  away  from  her
Miftres : but  Ma:  Dibdale  liked  not  that  counfel, fearing
(as  shebeleeueth)  that  shee  should  haue  difclofcd  theyr
dealings.  For  thefe  herfaid  fpeeches,  shee  was  within
three  or  fourc  houres  very  hardly  entreated  $ Ma:  Sher-
wood^ and  the  other  priefts,  returning  vnfo  her,  put  her
in  minde, what  she  had  (aid,  and  told  her  }That  it  wm  not
Jhe%  but  the  deuiil%  that  vttered  thofe  words,  and  therc-
vpon  had  her  to  the  chayre,  and  with  their  holy  potion,
and  brimftone  fo  plagued  her, as  being  there-with  won-
derful fick,  fliee  fel  (as  shethinketh)  into  a fwound.

Shee  further  faith,  that  whileft  thefe  matters  were  in
hand  at  ‘Denham,  there  came  very  many  thither,  from


tune.


■ Frifwood  Williams^  - page, 225

time  fo  time.  The  Catholiques  would  bring  with  them
fuch  of  their  friends,  as  they  durft  cruft,  being  Protc-
ftants,  of  purpofe,  to  draw  them  to  the  Romifh  Religi-
on ♦ And  she  certainly  knoweth,  that  there  was  a very  ^
great  number  vpon  thofe  occafions  reconciled  5 fome-  ^
times  an  hundred  a wceke,  at  the  leaft . Marrie  at  one
time,  she  remembreth,that  one  Ma:  Hampden  o£  Hamp-
den (as  she  thinketh)  being  brought  thither,  by  Ma:  £d-
rvardisfjhefield,  now  in  prifon,  as  shee  hath  heard,  did
greatly  deceaue  the  priefts  expc&ations,  and  put  them
into  a great  feare . The  manner  was,  she  faith,  of  thofe
who  were  pretended  to  be  poflefled,  when  anvProfe-
ftants  came  in,  to  commend  them  greatly , and  to  raile
vpon  the  priefts : in  fo  much  as  Ma:  ^JMainj,  when  he
faw  Ma:  Hampdeny  did  prefently  falutc  him,by  the  name
of  his  fellow  Iuftice,and  vfe  filch  other  words  vnto  him,
as  when  he  heard,  how  they  were  expounded,  hee  was
greatly  difeontented  with  them : and  there-vpon  fpea-
king  aloude,  faid  thus  in  effcfl  vnto  him,  that  brought
him  thither  (as  farre  as  she  remembreth)  being  her  felfc  x

then  prefent . £00 fen  Ned,  I had  thought  you  would  haue
brought  mey  where  / (bould  haue  feene  fome  godline syana\ not
to  haue  heard  the  detiill  $ but  this  dealing  I fee  is  abhomina *

Me,  and  I meruaile>  that  the  houfe finketh  not^for  fuch  wic-
kednes  committed  in  it : andfb  he  departed.  With  thefe
his  fpeeches,  the  priefts  were  greatly  amazed,  6c  fearing
the  worft,  got  them  away  for  that  night.

Furthermore,  she  faith,  that  perceauing  many  things
were  falfe,  that  the  priefts  fold  fo  thofe,  that  came  vnto
them.for  the  better  confirming  of  her  iudgement  there-
in, she  dcuifed  (of  her  felfc)  this  tale.  She  told  them, that
being  in  bed , there  came  a morrice-daunce  into  her
chamber,hauing  thefe  perfons  in  it,aman  with  a Taber,
and  a Pipe,  the  Earle  of  'Bedford  that  was  dead  before,

(but  one  that  the  priefts  did  greatly  hate)  and  fomeo-
thcr  noble  men  alfo  she  named,  who  are  now  out  of  her

memo-:


page,  224  The  examination  of

memory  ! all  thefe  she  told  them , after  they  had  daun-
ted about  the  table  in  the  chamber,  went  out  againeas
they  came  in.  When  the  priefts  had  this  by  theend,thcy
made  great  matters  of  it,  termed  itavifion,  and  told  it
the  Catholiques  for  a very  truth}  whereat  this  exam:
laughed  in  her  mindc,  but  durft  not  gaine-fay  it,  and  fo
it  went  amongft  them  for  a currant  vifion . And  fhee
thinketh  in  her  confidence,  it  was  eucn  as  true,  as  the  reft
of  their  reports, both  of  this  exam:  5c  of  the  others  there,
that  were  pretended  to  be  poftefled.

Alfo  (hcfaithithat  there  was  a notable  deuife  amongfl
the  Priefts,  to  haue  it  thought,  that  the  wicked  fpirits
came  into  this  exam;  and  her  lifter,  by  wrtcheric . Ma:
Richard  L^iainy  before  mentioned,  being  the  notablefl
counterfeit  (as  she  thinketh)  that  cuer  the  priefts  had  in  '
their  fingers,  faid  in  one  of  his  fits,  or  rather  the  deuil  in
him  (as  it  was  pretended)  that  one  good-wife  White  of
'Bttfbie,  had  bewitched  this  exam:  and  her  faidc  filler.
This  good- wife  White,  was  commonly  talked  of  in  the
Country  to  be  a Witch : the  faid  Main)  alfo  fold  the  oc-
caljgn,  how  they  were  bewitched  . There  were  (as  it
wa^retended,  that  the  deuil  faid  in  Mainy)  cerfaine
catfel  bewitched  in  ‘ Denham , fome  two  or  three  yeeres
before,  which  could  not  be  eafed,  except  the  two  fpirits
which  troubled  them,  were  fent  into  two  Chriftian  bo-  1
dies}  andthere-vpon,  quoth  hee,  todeliuer  the  catfel,  4
fhefentthofe  two  fpirits  into  this  exam:  fifter,  and  her
felfe.  When  the  priefts  heard  thefe  words,  theyfeemed
to  coniure  the  deuil  in  Ma:  <JWainy,to  bring  the  witches
{pirit  (whereby  she  wrought)  thither  to  Denham . And
the  night  folowing  this  prank  was  played  by  the  priefts.*  5
They  had  gotten  in  the  night  a Cat  amongft  them  in
the  Parlor , which  they  faid  was  the  witches  fpirit . A-
bout  the  whipping  of  this  Cat  they  pretended  great
paines,  and  that  they  whipped  her  fo  long,  til  at  the  laft
(he  vanifhed  away  out  of  their  fight . Afterwards  they

gaue

>


Frifwood  Williams*

gauehout,  thatoutofallquedion,  the  Witch,  whiled
they  were  whipping  of  the  Cat,  was  greatly  vexed,  and
therc-vppon  they  fentameflcnger  to  rBttJhiei  to  fee  in
what  edate  the  Witch  was,  who  at  his  returnc  reported,
that  when  hcc  came  t oBuflnc,  hee  found  the  Witch  in
child-bcd,and  that  her  child  was  dead.  When  the  priefts
heard  this  report , fee  (quoth  the  prieds)  to  thofc  that
were  prefenr,  how  it  falleth  out  to  be -true  that  we  told
you,  the  whipping  of  her  fpirit  in  the  likencs  of  a Cat,
was  the  caufe  that  her  child  died : yea  (quoth  this  ex-
am:) is  that  true  ? Why  then  you  are  murderers : where-
at the  prieds  were  moued , but  they  knevy  how  to  aun-
fwer  mat,  as  they  did,  in  faying,  that  it  was  not  fbe,  but  the
deuilim  her,  that  vttcrcd  thofc  words.  Of  this  whipping
of  (he  Cat  there  was  great  fpeeches , and  many  that  be-
lecucd  them,  wondredatit.  The  meflenger  that  was
fen t to  rBtifhie> hearing  what  a meruaile  they  made  hcere-
of,  became  a recufant, being  at  that  time  a ProtcOanf.

There  was  alfo  another  Orange  thing,  that  happened
at  Denham,  about  a bird.  Midris  Peckham  had  a Nigh-
tingale which  she  kept  in  a Cage,  wherein  Ma:  Libdale
tooke  great  delight,  and  would  often  be  playing  with  if;  *
This  Nightingale  was  one  night  conuavcd  out  of  the
Cage,  & being  the  next  morning  diligently  fought  for,
could  not  be  heard  of,  til  Ma:  Mainies  dcuil  in  one  of
his  fits  (as  it  was  pretended)  affirmed,  that  the  wicked
(pirit,  which  was  in  this  exam:  fider,  had  taken  the  bird
out  of  the  Cage,  and  killed  it  in  defpife  of  Ma:  Dibdale .
And  further  he  told  them , that  the  birds  necke  was  bro-
ken,and  did  lie  vndcr  a Rofemarie  buffi  in  the  Garden :
where-vpon  three  or  fourc  going  downe , and  finding
the  bird  there,  they  made  a great  wondermentof  if,
whereat  this  exam:doth  verily  beleeue,that  cyther  Mai-
ny  had  killed  the  bird,  and  laid  it  there  himfeife,  orelfe
that  this  exam:  fider  did  it,  and  had  told  C J^tainy  of  if  5
for  she  faith,  that  her  fider,  Zz  Mainy  were  very  great.

G 2:.  Alfb


page,  2264  The  examination  of

Alfo  this  exam:  faith  , that  if  the  ftory,  she  had  heard
hath  bcene  written  of c Jfttainyes  fits,  could  be  got,  there
would  appeare  very  many  notable  praflifes  • Ma:  Ed-
munds the  Icfuit  was  the  chiefe  man , that  dealt  with
t Jtfainjt&L  hath  wriften(as  she  hath  hcardja  great  booke
of  them.  This  Edmunds,  as  hath  beene  faid  before,  was
a chiefe  man,  and  therforc  whereas  the  reft  had  but  their
Albes  on  when  they  exorcifcd  any , he  commonly  had
vpon  him  either  a veftmenf,or  a cope.  She  wel  remem-  **
brcth,that  the  faid  dM ainy, fitting  vpon  a time  by  one  of
the  priefts,  affirmed , that  vnto  his  light  the  priefts  fin-
ger , and  thumbe  did  ffiinc  with  brightnes , efpecially
on  the  inner  fides:  where  vnto  the  Prieft  aunfwered,
that  it  might  wel  fo  be,  becaufc  (quoth  he)  they  were  a-
noinfed  with  holy  oyle,  when  I was  made  Prieft.  At
which  words,  this  exam:  laughing,  & calling  Ma  .Mai*
ny  a diftembling  hypocrite,  the  prieft  faid,  that  it  was  not
Jhe , but  the  detail,  that  did  fo  laugh,  and  raile.

Furthermore,  this  examinate  well  remembrefh,  that
Ma.  %tchard  LMainy  being  exorcifed  in  the  prefence  of
a hundred  people  at  the  leaft,  on  S.  Georges  day  in  the
morning,  the  priefts  affirmed,  that  feauen  deuils  did  the
fhew  themfelues  in  him,  by  fuch  geftures,and  fignes,  as
declared  them  to  be  the  Authors  of  the  feauen  deadlie
finnes.  This  examinate  faith,  thatfhe  hathalmoft  for-
gotten tfie  geftures,  but  fhe  will  fet  them  down  as  necre
as  her  memory  will  ferue  her.  The  faid  maifter  C Main}
beeing  bound  in  the  chayre,  did  lift  vp  his  head, looking
highly,  and  made  geftures  with  his  hand,  as  though  hee
were  tricking  vphimfelfe*,  whereupon  the  priefts  faid,
that  the  fpirit  that  was  comming  vp  then,  was  Pride , as
it  appeared  by  the  faid  geftures . Afterwards  the  faid
UWainy  beginning  to  gape*  andfnort,  the  priefts  faid,
x that  the  fpirit  that  then  rofe  vp  in  him,  was  Sloth.  Then
hee  fell  to  vomiting,  and  the  priefts  laid , that  the  fpirit  _[-
that  then  rofe  was  gluttony t and  dxunkennes  • Againe,

he


Frifwood  Williams.  Page  227

he  the  faid  C JMainy  talking  of  purfes,  and  thus  much  in
the  hundred,  and  of  the  Forfeyting  of  this,  or  that  leafe,
the  deuil  that  then  was  rifen,  the  priefts  called  (fottetouf-
neffe.  And  thus  the  priefts  and  hee  went  through  all  the
deadly  finnes.  The  fai 6 Main?,  or  the  dcuill  in  him , (as
was  pretended)  coroending  the  Proteftants  for  his  good
friends,  becaufe  they  had  all  the  faid  feuen  deadly  finnes
in  them,  but  railing  at  Catholiqucs,  for  that  they  could
not  endure  them, but  did  cuer  and  anon  cut  them  of  by
confeflion.

The  fame  day  alfo  fiiee  well  remembreth  two  things,
that  Ma.  Mainy  fpake  of,betwixt  his  descriptions  of  the
faid  feauen  deadly  finnes.  Oh  (quoth  hee)  this  is  a great
day  of  pomp e at  the  fiurt,  I mil  flay  no  longer  amongfl  you
raj  kail prtefls , hut  mil  go  thether  amongfl  my  fellorves : they
all  loue  me  there , / am  theirs , and  they  are  all  mine , or  to
this  eflfctt.  Alfo  one  Robert 'Bedell oicDenhami  beeing  a
very  zealous  Proteftant,  was  buried  the  fame  day:  in
that  forenoone  there  happened  a ftormc,  whereuppon
Mainy  pretended  that  the  deuil  fpake  to  this  purpofe  in
him,  viz.  Now  they  are  about  to  bury  Bedell,  and  becaufe
he ferued  mee  all  his  life  time , I am  fending  of  him  into  helL
At  which  words  many  that  were  prefent  wept , and
prayed,  that  if  it  were  pofiible,he  might  be  faued.  This
roatterwasfovrged,  and  talked  of,  as  afterwards  they
. drew  his  wife  to  become  a Romifh  Catholique , andfo
she  died.

This  examinate  further  faith,  that  one  4nne  Smith , a-
feout  the  Chriftmas  the  fame  ycere , came  to  fDenham,
where  fhcc  had  remained  but  a little  while  before  the
priefts  had  got  her  into  their  hands , and  faid  ihee  was
pofleffed . T ouching  this  woman,  a number  of  things
hath  bcenc  written  of  her,  as  this  examinafe  hath  heard,
all  which  this  exam:  faith, fhe  verily  belieueth  in  her  co-
fcience,  (as  alfo  of  all  the  pra&ifes,  & tales  of  the  priefts.

Couching  both  this  examinate, and  all  the  reft  with  who

G g.  % they


page, 228.  The  examination  of  .

they  dealt)  that  they  were  altogether  knaueries,  & meet
inuentions.  io  decciue  the  people , by  procuring  an  ad-
miration of  theyr  prierthood,  and  thereby  to  withdraw
her  Maiefticsfubie&s  to  their  religion.

Shec  well  remembreth  (as  she  faith)  that  at  one  time,
Ma.  Tdibdale  charged  the  deuill  in  t^me Smith  ('as  it
was  pretended)  to  fpeake  vnto  him , and  aunfwer  him
to  that  which  he  demaunded : but  notwiihftandmg  she
held  her  peace.  Then  he  commaunded  her  to  fpeak/in
the  name  of  the  Father,  the  fonne,  and  the  holy  Ghoft,

Si  by  the  vertue  of  the  holy  Sacrament  5 but  yet  (he  was
filenf.  Hcerewith  Ma:  Dtbdale  growing  to  be  more  car-  .
nert,  charged  her,  (or  the  dcuil  that  was  pretended  to  be
in  her)  to  fpeake  to  him^y  the  power,  and  vertue  of  his
holy  prierthood,  and  then  (he  aunfwered  him.  Whcre-
vpon  this  exam:  being  prefent  (aid  to  maiftcr
Why  rJMa.  Dibdalc,  is  there  more  vertue  inyourprieft -
hoody  then  in  the  bleffed  Trmttj  , and  the  holy  Sacrament  ?
And  hce  aunfwered,  that  though  hec  were  but  a fimple
man,  yet  it  pleafcdGod,  for  the  honour  of  his  Church,
to  (hew  by  this  raeancs  the  power  of  the  priefthood.

Againe  this  exam:  faith , that  after  (he  perceiucd  the  *
deceit  which  the  priefls  vfed,  (he  would  rather  then  her
life,  haue  gotten  from  them  : but  (he  was  fo  watched.  Sc
fo  were  the  reff(fhe  meaneth  the  other  women)  as  they
could  by  no  meanes  efcapc  out  of  their  fingers.  Theyr
pretence  was,  Icaft  the  deuil  fliould  caufc  the  to  drownc
or  kill  rhcmfelues . But  this  exam:  is  perfwaded  in  her
confcience , that  the  truth  was  why  they  kept  them  (b
ftraighrly,  lcart  going  home  to  their  fricndsjhey  fliould
haue  difclofed  theyr  di(Iimulation,and  falfe  pretenfes,of
carting  deuils  out  of  thofe,  who  were  as  free  from  them,
as  fhemfelues.  This  exam:  and  her  firter,  did  not  fee  ei-
ther Father,  or  mother, beeing  in  the  fame  townc,all  the
while  that  they  were  in  theyr  hands  5 neither  would  they
fuller  either  their  father  or  mother  to  fpeake  with  them,

though


Frifwood  Williams*  p3ge,2^9

though  they  defired  it  many  times.

At  one  time  this  exaimnate  remembreth,  that  beeing
sn  the  Kitchen  garden  at  Denham,  fhec  heard  a noyfc  in
her  vnckles  garden  on  the  other  fide  of  the  wall,  & fup-
pofing  that  her  vnckle  might  be  there , (he  cryed  out  as
loude  as  fhec  could,  vnckle , vnckle , who  beeing  there  by
chauncc,  and  hearing  ofher,  knew  her  voycc , & asked
her  what  fhec  would  haue , oh  (quoth  fact)  good  vnckle
helpe  me  from  hence,  for  lam  almoft  killed  already  amonojl
them  heere , andfhallnot  line  if  I continue  heere  long,  Vpon
this  occafion,  this  examinats  mother  came  to  haue  fpo-
ken  with  her,  but  (he  could  not  be  fuffered.  The  priefts
told  her  that  her  daughters  were  bewitched,  and  pofief-
fed  with  wicked  fpirits,  and  that  they  were  thereby  caft
away,  if  they  did  not  helpe  them  by  their  authority,  (ay-
ingjthat  therfore  /he  theyr  mother  might  by  no  meancs
fpeake  with  them,  vntill  they  had  dcliuered  them  from
the  (aid  wicked  fpirits.  With  this,  & fuch  like  aunfwers.
they  fent  away  theyr  mother  diuers  times  weepings
howbeit  (he  faith,  that  at  fbmetrmes  her  mother, not  co-
tented with  ehofe  aunfwers , would  grow  tofome  ear-
neftne(Fe5and  hard  fpeech  , becaufe  (hee  could  not  be
permitted  to  fee  her  daughters.  And  then  the  Priefts
would  (hake  her  of  with  angry  words,  and  tell  her,  that
fate  herfelfe  had  afmuch  neede  to  be  cxorcifed  as  her
daughters.  And  at  one  time  }A\fa\s  Katherine  fa&i  ft r-
ued  Miftris  Peckham  beeing  prefent , when  the  priefts
and  her  mother  had  fuch  fpeeches,  told  her,  that  if  the
priefts  did  well , they  fihould  dcalc  with  her,  as  they  did
With  her  daughters.

After  this  exam:  had  beenein  the  priefts  hands  for  a
fortnight  or  three  weekes  before  Chriftmas  (asshee  rc-
membreth)  vntill  after  the  Afcenfion  day  next  enfuing,
and  had  long  percciued  their  coofening  prafrifes  with
her,  and  thereupon  being  growne  to  great  weakened,
andalmoft  cWperate,  shee  toM  the  priefts  plainly  at  the
. Ge  % end  \


page, 2.3o*  The  examination  of

end  of  one  of  her  fits,  whercinto  they  had  catt  her  by
their  drinks,  (libber- fa  wees,  and  brimttone,  that  if  shee
had  a deuill  in  her , they  were  beft  caft  him  out,  for  (qj
fhee)  tfcueryoH  torment  mee  fo  againe  ( dijpatch  mee  if  you
ItFl)  otherwife  I will  certainly  by  one  meanes  or  other , get  a-
way  fro  you, & tell  my  friends  of  all  your  proceedings,  & dea-
lings here  both  with  me,  Mothers.  Heere-vpon  Ma.  Dtb-
dale  willed  her  to  be  content, and  faid,that  the  next  time
they  hoped  to  difpofi'ette  her  altogether : and  accor*
dingly  within  three  or  foure  dayes  after,  they  had  her  to
the  chaire,  and  there  vfing  her,  as  they  had  done  many
times  before,  when  fhee  came  to  her  felfe  againe,  they
told  her,  that  now  the  deuil  was  gone,  and  (he  was  de-
littered.

This  exam:  farther  faith,that  the  maner  of  the  priefls,  %
was  to  fay  often-times,  that  they  had  cafl  out  this,or  that
deuil  out  of  the  parties:  but  (hi  when  they  liO , they
would  take  a final  occafion  to  fay,  that  yet  there  were
fbrne  other  deuils  remaining  within  them.  And  this  ex-
aminafe  faith,  that  (he  doubteth,  they  would  haue  dealt
fo  with  her  at  that  time  too , but  that  there  began  to  be
great  fpceches  in  the  Country,  about  the  priefls  doings
at  Denham  : in  fo  much,  as  diuers  auncient  Catholiqucs
themfelues  did  vttcrly  diflikethem,  and  flieprictts  them
felucsgrew  to  be  afraid.  Howbeif,when  thisexamrwas
thus  at  foine  quiet,  yet  they  would  not  fuffer  her  to  goe
home  to  her  father  , and  mother , but  carried  her  vp  to
London,  & placed  her  there  with  a fare  friend  of  theirs,
one  Mittres  White : and  fo  they  dealt  with  this  exam:.

' fitter,  not  differing  herfo  fee  her  parents,  almoftfor
foure  yeeres  after,  as  this  exam:  remembreth.

Alfo  (he  faith,  that  when  the  prietts  thought  good  fo
meddle  no  more  with  her,  they  caried  her  to  London,
and  placed  her  with  one  Mittres  Dorothie  White , as  hath
beene  faid,  a recufant , who  then,  and  fince  hath  beene
fo  beneficiall  vnto  them , as  that  (hee  hath  cleane  ouer-

thrownc


Frifwood  Williams.  page  231

throwne  her  (late,  and  vndonc  her  children.  The  caufc
why  they  placed  her  there  was,  (as  Hie  verily  thinketb)
lead  beeing  amongd  her  owne  friends,  fhec  might  dif-
dole  theyr  bad  dealings  with  her.

It  was  not  long  after  this  examinafe  came  to  midrifle
White , but  that  one  Harrington  growing  info  acquain-
tance with  her,  did  afterwards  marry  her , as  fhee  belie-
ucth.  The  marriage  was  in  the  Marfhalfca,  whereafter
a Made,  one  Lifter  a pried  (as  fhee  remembreth)  then
prifoner  there,  vfed  certaine  Latine  words,  whereby
they  faid  she,  and  the  fame  Harrington  were  married  to-
gether . There  were  prefent  there  flue  or  fixe . After
which  time  the  faid  Harrington  liued  with  this  exami-
nate  at  times  for  the  fpace  of  about  4 or  / yeeres , fhec
notwithdanding  continuing  her  feruicc  with  Midrifle
White.

After  this  examinafe  had  kept  company  with  the  faid
Harrington  for  about  4 yercs,  she  grew  to  be  with  child,
and  thcrevppon  went  fird  to  her  fottcnm  Oxford/hire,
and  then  to  her  parents  at  Denham . Beeing  at  Denham,
she  was  prefented  for  a rccufant,  and  thereuppon  com-
mitted to  the  gayle  at  cs4lcfbury.  At  her  beeing  there  in
prifon , Ma.  Harrington  wrote  a Letter  vnto  her  within
three  or  foure  daies  (as  she  remembreth)  after  her  com-
mitment, the  effeft  whereofwas , that  if  shce  were  exa-
mined who  was  the  father  of  her  child,  she  should  lay  it
vpon  fome  that  was  gone  beyond  the  Teas  for  a fouldier,
but  in  no  wife  to  fay  it  was  his : and  the  rather  to  per-
fwadeher,hefignified  vnto  her,  that  it  was  not  onelic
hisaduife,  but  likewife  the  counfaile  ofMidri % White
her  Midris,  and  Maidcr  Blackman  a pried.

With  this  Letter  this  examinafe  was  greatly  mooued,
and  then  calling  to  mind  how  shee  had  bcenc  vfed  at
Denham, and  afterwards  kept  at  Midris  Whites  from  her
friends : and remembring alio,  how  the prieds  were  c-
ucr  wont  to  perfwade  her,  that  she  should  ncucr  fpcake

any


page,2j2.'  The  examination  of

any  thing  as  touching  her  poflefling , or  difpoflcfling,'
that  might  furne  to  theyr  difcredite,and  to  the  difhonor
of  the  Church  of  Rome,  Hie  this  examinatc  beganne  to
fufpeft,  that  the  religion  that  the  priefts  profefied , was
like  vnto  themfelues.But  the  mofl  principal!  thing  with
the  reft  that  made  her  fo  to  thinke , was  another  poynt
in  Ma.  Harringtons  Letter,  wherein  hec  perfwaded  her,
that  if  [he  e were  examined  vpon  her  oathy  it  forced  not , the
Church  did  dtjpence  with  heryfo  as fhee  might  aunfwer  what
jhee  thought  good  notwithflandmg : becaufe  afi  oath  did  not
' bind  her  to  confejfe  any  thing  that  might  tend  to  the  dtjbonor

of  theyr  prieflhood \ or  of  the  Cathohque  Church .

When  this  exam:  was  firft  brought  before  the  Iufli-  ;
ces  at  ^lefbury,  (he  confeflcd  that  (he  was  reconciled  > j
and  fhee  is  verily  perfwaded  , that  if  the  faid  Letter  had
not  come  vnto  her  afterwards,  and  mooued  her,  as  is  a-
forefaid,  notwithflanding  all  the  abufesoffred  her  at
Denham,  Hie  had  cofinued  (hi!  a wilfullrecufant,though  ]
it  had  cofl  her  her  life.  Marry  vpon  the  occafions  before
mentioned,  this examinate  hauing  bethought  herfelfe  I
better,  defired  to  fpeake  with  old  Ma.Pigot  of  Doder*  j
fall,  a Iuflice  of  peace  in  'Buckinghamjhire , vnto  whom
fhe  fignified  who  was  the  father  of  her  child,  and  that
fhe  could  be  contented  to  alter  her  courfe  of  life,  & goe  i
fo  the  Church  againe,  as  before  fhe  had  done.  Hereup-
pon  Ma.  'Pigot  tooke  this  exam:  in  his  Coach  with  him
to  Sir  Iohn  Goodwins , where  file  found  the  L.  Grey , and
diuers  others,  before  whom , after  fhee  had  fubmitted
herfelfe,  as  fhe  had  done  to  Ma.  Pigot , fhee  was  fent  to  ]
the  Court  by  the  L.  Cjrey , with  two  of  his  feruaunts  to
the  Lord  Treafitrer . Ac  her  comming  fo  the  Court  fhe
faith  fhee  was  examined  of  diuers  matters  before  the
Lords  of  the  Counfell,  concerning  her  knowledge  of
fundry  priefts,  and  Iefuits,  and  as  touching  one  Stottgh -
*0«,whowasa  notable  fpy,  that  carried  ouer  young
maids  and  boyes,  to  be  Nunnes,  and  prieils,  & brought

ouer


Frifwood  Williams,  page,2j5

cuer  Letters  as  occafion  ferued,  and  continueth  (as  flice
thinkefh)  the  fame  trade  ftill.

Afterthatthis  exam,  had  beene  at  the  Court  abcuea
wceke,  and  examined  in  that  fpacc  three  or  foure  times,
the  feruaunts  of  the  faid  L.  (jrey  remaining  there  ftill,  it
pleafed  the  Lords  of  her  Maiefties  Counfelfto  fend  her
backe  with  them  to  the  Lord  ayfnderfon^ c to  writ  theyr
letter  to  his  Lord(hip,rhat  he  fhould  fend  for  this  exam:
father,  and  notoncly  to  deale  with  him , to  fee  that  this
exam:  went  to  the  Church, according  as  fhe  had  promt-
fed,  but  alfo,that  there  might  be  no  further  proceeding
in  law  againft  her,  in  relpeft  that  flic  had  beene  recon-
ciled : the  which  direction  the  Lord  ssfnderfon  did  ac-
complish, fo  as  this  exam,  continued  at  her  fathers  vntill
theycerc  1/94.

After  this  examinate  had  remained  thus  with  her  fa-
ther, about  three  or  foure  moneths , the  faid  Ma.  Har -
rington  came  vnto  her,and  told  hcr,hehad  beene  all  that
while  beyond  the  feas  j and  keeping  company  with  her
againe,  as  a man  ought  to  doe  with  his  wife  * fomcrimes
at  Denham , and  fometimes  this  exam:  comming  to  him
to  London,  hee  allowed  her  after  the  rate  of  about  20
marks  by  the  yeere.  She  likewife  faith , that  when  mai-
fter  Harrington  fufpc&ed  this  exam:  to  be  with  child,  he
put  an  hundred  pounds  into  one  Ma.  Fits  his  hand  to
the  vfe  of  her,  and  her  child  if  flic  had  any.

This  exam:  further  faith , that  within  about  a yeere
after  that  the  faid  maifter  Harrington  had  come  from
beyond  the  feas  (as  hee  pretended)  and  kept  companie
with  her  as  his  lawfull  wife , hee  was  apprehended  for  a
prieft,  and  firft  committed  to  the  Towre , and  then  to
the  Marfhalfea.  Bceing  in  prifon,  this  examinate  had  a
warrant  from  Ma.  Toung  to  goe  vnto  him  5 and  at  her
comming  vnto  him  he  wept,  and  faid,  that  if  bee  might
for  fhamc,  hee  would  take  another  courfe  then  hee  did.

He  cry  cd  her  mercy  for  the  abufe  offred  vnto  her  > and

H h.  pro*


page,2$44  The  examination  of

promifed,  that  if  (he  would  be  content,(lie  (hould  neuet
want.  Howbeit  (as  she  was  enformed)  he  told  fuch  Ca-
tholiques  as  came  vnto  him , (who  had  vnderftanding
that  this  examinatc  did  challenge  him  for  her  husband)
that  shee  this  examinate  did  greatly  (launder  him,  6c  vt-
terly  denied  that  euer  hee  was  married  vnto  her,  or  eucr
kept  company  with  her  as  men  doc  with  theyr  wiues*
Whereupon  all  fuch  Catholiques  as  heard  thereof,  did
greatly  rate  this  examinate  for  challenging  of  him  to  be
her  husband,  and  (aid  shee  did  belie  him,  and  that  it  rvas
the  demli  that  caufed  her  to  raife  that  (launder  of  hin^be-
ing  a Catholique  pried.

She  further  faith,  that  the  faid  Harrington  being  con-
demned, and  executed  the  1 8 of  February  1/93  (as  (he
remembreth)  she  married  againe  with  %alfe  'Dalltdorvne
a Smith  in  Holborne,  the  20  of  Ianuary  1 $9 4 as  shee
thinketh.  And  hauing  receiued  herfelfe  the  faid  hun-
dred pound  from  Ma.  Fits, her  husband  ‘Dallidorme  had
it  all,  except  it  were  fomc  6 or  7 pound,  which  she  had
(pent  before.

This  exam:  further  faith,  that  many  times  fincc  shee
hath  conformed  her  felfe, many  priedshaue  greatly  bla-
med her,  vftng  words  to  this  effeft  vnto  her,  viz.  They
hauetoldcher,  that  they  wondred  how  shee  could  be
brought  to  goe  to  the  Engli/h  church , confidering  the
great  power  of  the  prieflhood,  and  of  the  holy  rchques
of  the  Church  of  Rome.  To  whom  this  exam:  hath
fometimes  aunfwered,that  she  was  well  before  she  came
into  theyr  hands , and  Hill  fo  continueth  shee  thanked
God, and  thereupon  hath  defired  them, that  they  would
deale  no  more  with  her,  but  let  her  alone.

When  shee  hath  thus  aunfwered  them,  they  haue  of-
ten faid  to  her,  that  it  was  the  deuill  for  a certaintie,  that
dill  hunting  of  her,  did  perfwade  her  fo  goe  fo  the  He-  *
retiques  Church  5 & that  if  they  had  thought  she  would
haue  taken  this  courfe , they  would  ncucr  haue  difpof-

fefled


Frifwood  Williams^  page,  2$f

(cfled  her . To  whom  this  examinate  by  way  ofaun-
fwer  hath  replied  5 A raurren  take  you , I was  well  c-  ,
nough  before  you  dealt  with  mee,  and  To  haue  beene  e-
uer  fince you  left  me.

Shcc  further  faith,  that  fince  shce  was  firfl  examined
before  the  Lord  Bifhop  of  London  in  March  1 yp8,  di-
uers  priefts  haue  vrged  her  greatly  that  shee  should  fay
nothing  againft  the  poflefling , or  difpofleffing  vfed  at
Denham , cither  concerning  her  felfe,  or  any  other,  bid-
ding her  aunfwer,  that  beeing  then  young,  fhe  had  for-
gotten all  thofe  things : and  threatning  of  her,  that  if  she
confelfcd  any  thing  again!!  the  holy  prieflhood , or
power  of  the  Church  in  cafting  outdeuils,  she  should
be  burnt  for  an  Heretique,if  eucr  the  world  changed.

The  names  of  the  priefts  that  haue  thus  dealt  with  her,
both  before  fhec  was  called  for  to  be  examined  before
the  Lord  Bifhop  of  London, and  fince(at  the  leaf!  fomc
of  thcm)are  Ma.  Shenvood^Aa.  Cjerrardy  Ma.  'Blackntan,

Ma.  Iohn  Greene,  and  Ma.  William  Enter  ton.

This  exam:  alfo  faith,  that  about  fourc  yeeres  fince,
st  happened  that  her  husband  in  a fray  killed  a man,
whereupon  fhe  was  compelled  to  borrow  fen  pound  of
miflris  White , to  be  vfed  in  her  husbands  bufinefle,  cer-
taine  priefts  thought  then  , that  they  might  peraduen-
ture  haue  drawne  this  examinate  vnto  them  aeaine,  and
fo  reforting  vnto  her,  namely  (as  she  remembreth)  mai-
fter  Blackman , maifter  Cjreene , maifter  Wells , with  two
or  three  other  priefts , whom  she  knew  not , they  told
her,  that  her  falling  from  the  Catholique  Church  was
the  caufc , that  the  dcuill  had  made  her  husband  to  kill
the  laid  man.

Of  late  alfo  fhe  faith,  that  one  Terry  feruaunt  to  roai-
fler  Roper  that  lieth  in  Southampton-houfe challeng-
ing her  for  that  she  had  reucaled  where  her  After  Sara
dwelt,  (aid  that  she  played  the  Ferret,  and  fought  many
mens  hues,  that  it  was  pittic  she  liued , and  that  it  were  a

Hh  z good


page^jtf*  The  examination  of

good  deedc  to  fhoote  her  through  with  a pi  ft  oil  as  (he
goeth  in  the  drccts.  Howbcit  this  exam:  faith,  that  fhee
neuer  meant  any  Catholique  in  England  hurt , (fome

Erieds  excepted)  who  haue  dealt  hardly  with  her.  But
eeing  now  vpon  her  oath  to  fpeakc  the  truth,  (hee  ho-
peth  that  no  honed  man  or  woman  will  be  angry  with
her  for  difeharging  her  confcicnce : adding.that  if  it  had
not  been  (o  long  ago  fince  she  was  in  the  prieds  hands,
(he  could  haue  deliucred  many  moe  things  as  touching
their  bad  proceedings.

Shee  further  faith  , that  the  prieds  at  theyr  departure
from  Denham,  tooke  euery  one  thence  his  woman  with
him  Ma:  Edmunds  the  Iefuit  had  for  his  darling  midris
Crejfy  then  a widdow,  who  was  a daily  gued  there,  and
one  that  did  contribute  very  much  both  to  him,  and  the
red  of  the  prieds:  zsfnne  Smith  was  at  the  difpofition
of  Ma.  rDriland:Sara  Williams  of  maider  cDihdale:m\{[x\s
Alt  ham  of  Cornelius,  and  this  examinate  of  Ma.  Leigh  a
pried  likew  ife.

S r*  t I * X jjj

/

‘ f\

THE


t


The  examination  Anne  Smith,

alias  Atkjnforj)  taken  by  vertue  of  her
oath,  the  12  of  March,

S'  He  faith,  that  dwelling  with  one  Ma:  Bold  at  Bold*

. hall  in  Lancajhtre , the  yecre  that  the  Earle  of  Leice -
fier  went  into  the  Low-Countries,  (he  was  ficke  of
a difeafe  called  the  Mother,  that  (he  then  hauinga
lifter,  one  zAlice  V later,  that  boorded  at  the  La:  Staf-
fords, was  fent  by  her  Miftres  to  her  faid  fifter  at  Lon-
don, the  faid  La.  Stafford  then  lying  at  lute  bridge,  where
{he  remained  (as  fhe  faith)  about  a yeere,  vfing  the  help
of  Phificke  for  the  faid  difeafe . She  faith  that  Ma:  Ed -
tmmd Peckfam  did  boord  at  the  (aid  La.  Staffords,  from
about  the  Chriftmas  that  this  exam:  came  to  London,
till  about  Eafter  following,

Shee  faith  further , that  about  three  weekes  before
Chriftmas  next  enfuing,  her  fifter  being  aduertifcdby
the  (aid  Ma:  Beckham,  that  Sara , Sc  Will:  Tray  ford  were
poflefled  at  his  houfe,  (he  (her  faid  fifter)  went  thither,
where  finding  the  manner  of  their  troubles, (he  concea-
led, that  this  examinate  was  likewife  poffcffed,  as  they
were.

There-vpon  (he  faith,  that  vpon  the  Chriftmas  eucn,
Ihewent  to  Denham  vnto  her  fifter,  where  (hce  found
Tray  ford,  but  he  did  not  make  any  (hew , as  though  hee
werepofleffed,  but  did  waite  orderly  vponMa:  Beck-
ham his  Maifter,  and  Sara  was  then  gone  to  the  L.Faux
his  houfe,  being  caried  thither  by  one  Dtbdale  a prieft.

After  (he  had  beene  at  Denham  about  a tnoncth,  (he
attended  vpon  Miftres  Beckham,  to  a churching  in

Hh.  km


pagc^S,  The  examination  of

tawTowne,  where  (he  faith  her  forc-faid  difeafe  d;d
trouble  her,  and  hkewife  being  then  rccouered,  it  tooke
hcragaine,  as  (he  was  going  homewards,  wherc-vpon
one  White  a pried  that  vfed  much  that  houfe,  was  fent
to  London  for  Cornelius  another  pried, (who  kept  at  Sir
John  tsfmndetts  m CLarkeimeU)  by  the  m canes  of  her
(aid  fitter,  who  told  this  exam:  that  (he  was  furely  pof-
fefled.

When  her  fitter  (aid  fhe  was  pofTefiedjttie  this  exam:
denied  it,  and  fo  (he  did,  when  the  faid  Cornelius  catte
vnto  her  * She  faith  that  the  faid  finelsw  comming  to
Denham  the  fame  day  at  night,  that  bee  was  fent  for,
brought  in  his  company  one  Stamp  a pried,  Thomfon  a
prictt(as  she  fhinketb}<3c  one  Chnslopher  Tulice  a pried,
with  Midres  Crejfej,  Ma:  Gardner , and  his  wife.

The  day  after  the  prieds  came  vnto  her , they  tooke
vpon  them  to  cxorcife  her  from  morning,  till  towards
night,  and  then  left  her.

She  faith,  that  befides  the  difeafe  of  the  Mother,  (bee
grew  to  be  ficke,  andreceaued  Phyfick  by  Do&or  Gnf -
fishes  prefeription  at  Alexander  the  Apothecaries  bands*
but  not  recouering  her  health  thereby,  after  about  two
moneths , her  faid  fider  procured  her  to  be  fent  to  Mi*
ftris  LMamy  in  Channon  %ow , with  whom  (hec  was  to
dwell  about  the  be^innin^  of  Lent.

She  continued  with  Ma:  ( -Matny  in  the  Earle  of  Last*
cclnes houfe  in  flarmon'RoTP , til  after  Eadcr  weeke.  In
which  time  she  faith,  onely  EUka:  Cahhrope  (as  thisex-
am:  remembretb)  dwelling  likewifc  with  Midres  Mai*
trjy  was  fuppofed  by  the  prieds  to  be  potteffed,  and  be-
ing there-vpon  remoued  to  Ma:  CMdwyes  owne  houfe
in  Greenes  Adei^  there  she  was  exorcifcd,  vntil  she  died
♦there.

She  further  faith,  she  was  prefenr,  when  Masnj  did
counterfeit  himfelfc , that  he  should  die  vpon  the  Good
¥tvU]  $ he  the  Cud  Ul&iny  the  lying  at  the  Earle  pf  Lm»
t ' colnet


Anne  Smith*'  page,!??

colncs  houfe,  againft  which  time  a great  number  came
thither,  to  fee  him  depart.

The  faid  Mainy  came  to  her  Miftres  houfe  (/he  being,
his  After)  about  a moneth,or  flue  wcekes  before  Eaftcr  j
arid  eucry  Friday  the  (aid  Matny  did  pretend  himfelfc  to
be  wonderfully  tormented,  and  when  he  was  recouped
out  of  his  traunce,  he  would  vfe  to  fay,  he  had  beene  in
Purgatorie : and  there- vpon  gaue  it  out,  that  he  should
die  on  Good  Friday , and  goc  immcdiatly  to  heauen,  ha-
iling beene  already  in  Purgatorie.

Shce  faith,  that  all  the  faid  Lent  she  continued  with
Mift:  LMainj,  she  was  ftil  euill  at  cafe,&  that  the  priefts
that  came  thither , did  ftil  endeuour  to  perfwadc  her
that  she  was  poflefTed : faying, that  she  muft  beleeue  the
therein,  that  she  was  poflefTed,  and  that  they  could  help
her,  and  not  otherwife.

The  priefts  names,  as  sheremembreth,were  Ma;^r-
nehus,  Ma:  T)rylandt  Ma:  Ttrrell,  Ma:  Stamp,  Ma:  Tu-
la Ma:  Ballard .

Shefarther  faith, that  about  three  weekes  after  Eafter,
the  faid  priefts  ftil  continuing  to  perfwade  her,  that  she
was  poflefTed  , and  that  ifshec  beleeued  fo , then  they
would  helpc  her : she  this  exam:  continuing  to  be  euill
at  eafe,  and  hoping  by  their  meanes  to  be  helped,

ixelded  to  fay,  that  she  thought  she  was  poflefTed, ther-
>y  to  fee,  if  fhc  might  be  helped  j although  all  the  while
Ihe  had  a conceite  m her  felfc,  that  she  was  not  poflef*
fed.

She  further  faith,  that  whileft  she  did  withftand  the
priefts  faid  perfwaflons , affirming  that  ihee  knew  shee
was  not  poflefTed,  they  fold  her , tt  was  the  demll  within
her , that  caufed  her  fo  to  fay.

When  shee  had  thus  ycclded  vnto  them,  Ma  .Stamp
caried  her  to  T>enham,  accompanied  with  one  Harris
Ma.  sJMawyes  roan.

She  faith,  (hat  about  fixtcenc  dayes  after  the  faid  Ea-
fter,


PaSc>24°  The  examination  of

fter,  this  exam:  and  Eliza:  foltbrope,  being  both  (ickei
and  fuppofed  by  the  priefts  to  be  poflefled^her  Ma:  left
them  both  in  the  Earle  of  Lincolnes  houfe , and  went  to
Babmgtons  houfe  the  fraytor  in  Barbican : and  the  third
or  fourth  day  after  this  exam:  was  caried  to  Denham  (as
afcrc-faid)  where  fhec,  and  all  the  houfe  were  maintay-
ned,at  the  common  charge  of  the  priefts^  that  reforted
thither.

At  hcicomming  to  Denham,  they  toolce  in  hand  to
exorcifc  her,&  continued  that  courfe  with  her  til  Whit*  j
fontide : about  a fortnight  after  Whitfontide  (as  she  re-  I
membreth)  certaine  Purfuiuants  came, and  fearchcd  the  '
houfe,  & finding  there  Ma:  Dryland  the  prieft,  and  1
other  men,  viz?  ^Alexander  the  Apothecarie,  Snythen  \
Wells  (after  executed  in  Holborne ) and  lames  Stanboror* , \
Ma:  Peckhams  man,  they  caried  them  to  prifon,  Icauing  :<
this  exam:  and  two  other  women  in  the  houfe.

She  faith,  that  the  reft  of  the  priefts  when  thePurfiu*  J
Uanfs  came,  were  gone  with  Fid,  and  Sara  Owen,  alias  ]
Frauncis>  and  Sara  Williams ,as  this  exam:  hath  been  en*  J
formed.

It  was  Sonday  when  the  Purfuiuants  caried  the  (aid  \
parties  to  prifon  $ and  vpon  the  Monday  after  the  fiid  j
Drylands  man  caried  this  exam:  to  London,  where  fhee  *|
Was  placed  that  night  by  Ma:  Maryne , at  one  sAlexan*  ]
ders  houfe  in  a little  Lane,  going  out  of  Thames ftreete,  ]
and  is  (as  now  she  is  enformed)  betwixt  Lyons  key,  and  1
SBillingfgate  f

Shce  continued  atthefaid  ^Alexanders  houfe  about  1
feauen  weekes,  her  charges  being  firft  defrayed  by  the  I
faidMa i Maryne,  and  afterwards  by  Ma.  Porrnd,  late  \
prifoner  at  Wijbitch 3 her  acquaintance  with  Ma.  ( JWd*  J
ryne  grew  at  Denham , and  with  Ma.  Porvnd,  at  the  faid  '
Alexanders  houfe.

Ma:  Pownd,  in  refpeft  of  the  charge  hee  was  at  with
ker  at  a Alexanders , paying  ten  (hillings  a wceke  for  her  \

boord,


Anne  Smithy  page, *41

boord,  remoued  her  thence  to  miftris  Lowes  ioNew*
ington  in  Surrey : where  remayning  not  paft  three  or
fouredayes , the  faid  Pownd carried  her  to  his  Mothers  f(
houfe,  oneqaiftris  Powndy dwelling  in  the  fame  Towne,
where  (he  remained  til  Ma:  Pownd  was  fakcn,which  was
vpon  the  day  when  bon  fires  were  made  for  'Baking*
tons  apprehenfion,  viz:  the  1 y of  July.

The  faid  miftris  Pownd  was  of  her  (onncs  Religion,
wherc-vpon  after  he  was  apprehended,  (he  had  no  ioy
to  (fay  there , but  was  caried  thence  by  one  Ma:  good*
wans  dirc&ion  vnto  miftri \Leicc$lera  dwelling  in  Fleet -
fireete^t  the  figne  of  the  dogges  head  in  the  pot : where
Ihee  had  not  remained  aboue  two  dayes , but  vppon  a
fcarch  was  taken, & committed  to  prifonfor  recufancie,
where  (he  remained  about  a moneth,  and  then  efcaped
thence.

In  this  meane  while,  viz:  from  Whitfontide  before
fpecified,  rDikdalclLowe,  and  zsfdams,  were  apprehen-
ded, and  being  arraigned*  this  exam:  was  brought  by
maifter  Youngs  meanes,  whileft  (he  was  prifoner, to  giue
in  euidencc  againft  them  at  their  arraignment.  The
caufe  why  she  was  brought  to  giue  in  cuidence  againft
them  was,  for  that  maifter  Young  hearing  her  name,  did
examine  her,  whether  she  was  not  one  that  did  pretend
her  felfe  tobepofiefledat  Denham,  with  whom  SDib-
dale3znd  the  reft  of  the  priefts  had  dealt,and  thereupon
examined  her  touching  her polTe (lion,  and  thedeuils
dealing  with  her : and  particulerly  of  a pecccof  a knife,
which  the  priefts  faid  came  out  of  her  body.

This  exam:  was  prifoner  in  BridewelU  where  the  faid
fid  was hkewife prifoner  with  her:  where  this  exam:
found  fuch  fauour , as  hauing  the  liberty  of  the  prifon
by  maifter  Youngs  appointment,  and  thereby  being  tro-
tted with  fbmc  keyes,  (he,  and  Fidby  her  meanes  efca-
ped thence,  taking  with  them  the  Matrones  girlc,  which
gide  by  the  (aid  maifter  SPownds  dirc&ion^  was  fent  into

lit,  Hamp-


page>242*  The  examination  of

tfamppoire , and  placed  with  his  Mother,  who  had  4
houfe  in  the  (aid  County,  and  did  then  lie  there.

After  flic  was  cfcaped,fliee  was  placed  by  Ma.  Pound*
direction  firfl  in  Cow* lane , then  by  her  mothers. fneancs
with  the  French  Embafladors  wife, where  difliking,  (he
was  by  maiflers  Pounds  meanes  placed  mapoorc  wo-
mans houfe  by  the  AfarJhalfeay*Ti&  then  againe  with  his
mother,  and  then  going  to  the  White-Lyon  to  fee  mai-
ftcr  ‘Pound,  with  her  miftns,fhe  this  exam:  (whilfl  they
two  were  talking  together)  going  to  maifler  Simpfons
chamber  a prieft,  was  againe  there  apprehended , and
committed  by  maifler  Toting  againe  to  Bridewell, where
flice  remained  about  21  weekes,  in  which  time  the
Queenc  of  Scots  was  beheaded

Shec  was  difeharged  out  of  'Bridewell  by  maifler  Sew
crettry  Walpnghams  meanes , at  the  futc  of  maifler  Dale
a Merchant  in  Graciom-Jlreet , and  then  remaining  with
her  mother  a while,  was  placed  with  the  faid  La .Staf*
ford,  with  whom  flice  dwelt  about  two  y ceres,  viz, till
flic  was  married.

She  faith,  that  whe  firfl  she  fellinto  the  priefls  hands,  j
fhee  was  about  1 S y ceres  of  age , and  that  shee  is  verily  |
perfwaded  flie  ncucr  was  pofTefled  with  a wieiced  fpirit,
(for  the  which  flice  thanketh  Almighty  God  from  the
bottom  of  her  hare)  but  verily  fhinketh,  that  she  was  vc-
ric  much  abufed  by  the  faid  priefls,  in  that  they  did  per-
fwade  her,  (as  is  before  expreffed)  that  flice  waspoflefc
fed.

Befides,  fliec  faith,  that  where  if  wasgiuen  out  by  the
priefls , that  a peece  of  a knife  came  out  of  her  mouth
when  she  was  in  one  of  her  fits,  she  then  was  fully  per-
fwaded, that  they  faid  vnfruly  therein,  although  at  that
time,  being  wholely  addi&cd  to  Popcric,  she  did  reuc-
rencc  them  very  much,  6c  durfl  not  contradiff  them.  ,

She  further  faith , that  when  Cornelius  did  firfl  begin
lo  exorcife  her,  the  roaaner  thereof  was  this : She  being
V wd&i


Frifwood  Williams.  page  243

wel,  and  in  perfect  memory,  and  at  that  time  not  trou-
bled with  her  former  difeafe  called  the  mother,  Come-
hut , and  (he  refl  fet  her  in  a chayre,  and  bound  her  fad
with  towclls  : then  Q$fnc^  hauing  ended  a short
fpccchjor  Scrmon(thc  efFeft  whereof  she  doth  not  now
remember)  which  was  made  before  diec  was  bound  in
the  chayrc,  and  being  in  his  Albe,  and  hauing  a dole  a-
bout  his  neck , began  to  rcadc  his  Exorcifmcs,  where*
at  this  exam:  doth  now  remember  , that  dice  began
greatlie  to  diiucr  and  quake , being  then  ffrooke  with  a
great  feare,  as  though  the  deuill  would  greatlie  torment,
and  teare  her,  becaufe  they  had  fo  bound  her.

Befides  Ghee  faith  (which  did  encreafc  her  feare)  (he
had  beene  told  by  diuers , how  others  had  beenc  troub-
led, viz:  how  in  their  fits  they  were  greatly  tormented,
how  they  could  not  endure  the  Pricfts  to  come  neere
them : how  when  a pried  did  lay  his  hand  vppon  any
part  of  them,  the  faid  part  would  be  fo  hote,  as  though
it  would  burne  them  to.the  bone,  how  the  deuii  in  them
would  raile  vpon  the  Catholiques,  & greatly  commend
the  Protedants,and  many  other  fuch  things  they  repor-
ted, which  this  exam:  hath  forgotten.

She  further  faith,  that  die  was  then  fo  zealous  in  Po-
perie,  and  had  fuch  an  opinion  of  the  faid  prieds,  that
if  dice  could  haue  gotten  vnder  the  Altar- doath,  with  a
erode  in  her  mouth, 6c  a candel  in  her  hand, die  thought
her  fclfe  fafe  from  the  deuii, . When  dice  was  cxorcifed
the  fird  time , and  fo  afterwards  being  bound  in  the
chayre,  where  diee  feemed  dill  to  be  wel,  notwitbflan-
ding  their  Exorcifmes,  then  they  would  pretend  to  giue
her  fomewhat,cither  to  comfort  her  domacke,  (die  fcc-
ming  to  faint  through  feare)  or  to  difclofe  the  deuii,
which  was  hallowed , and  was  very  loathfome  to  her  to
take.  This  hallowed  medicine,  as  die  remembreth,  had
Rue,  and  oyle  in  if,  and  was  vgly  to  behold,  fuch  as  die
thmkcth  they  could  not  haue  taken  themfelues . Alfo>

Ii.  2.  die


page, 244*  The  examination  of

fhe  faith,  they  would  bur nc  brimftonc  vnder  her  noft,
which  shec  faith,  would  greatly  trouble  her,  and  as  shec
fuppofeth,  did  take  away  her  fences  from  her.  Thus
she  faith,they  dealt  with  her,  as  flic  fuppofeth/ome  fiuc
or  fixe  times.

She  further  faith,that  they  did  bind  her  fo  fad  at  thofe
times  in  a chayre,  as  they  almoft  lamed  her  armes,  and
fo  brufedall  the  parts  of  her  body,  with  holding,  tying,
and  turmoyling  of  her, that  foe  was  fo  forc,fhc  was  com-
pelled afterwards,  by  the  fpace  of  three  yeeres  to  fwathe
her  body.

She  further  faith,  that  now  fhe  prayeth  God  for  the
prieffsthatbealiue,  that  God  would  forgiue  them  for
dealing  fo  with  her,  and  is  very  hartily  forie,  that  euer
fhe  came  into  their  company.

She  further  faith,  that  vpon  Wcdnefday  in  Whitfon-
weeke,  whilft  fhec  was  at  Denham  , there  came  thether
maifter  Sahjbury  that  was  executed,  Ma:  Iohn  Ger -
rard,  and  Ma:  George  Peckham.

She  alfo  faith, that  /he  thanketh  God  fhec  ncuer  faw
any  thing  that  might  terrifie  her , but  onely  the  priefts
when  they  were  exorcifing , that  fhe  neuer  faw  any  vifi-
ons : and  whatfoeucr  they  write  oraffirme  of  her  tou-
ching any  fucli  matter , shec  affirmeth  that  they  are  all
fained,  and  vntrue.  And  she  adderh.that  fhe  meruaileth
that  they  should  fet  dovvnc  any  thing  of  her , that  shee
fhouldfpeakein  her  fits,  confidering  that  if  wasgiuen
out,  the  fpirit  that  was  in  her  was  a fullen,  and  dumbe
_ fpirit,  and  would  not  therefore  be  brought  to  aunfwer
the  priefts : and  that  the  (aid  fpirit,that  was  fuppofed  to
be  in  her,  was  fuch  a one,  the  deuil  that  was  in  eJWainy
(who  was  named  C JModion)  did  affirme,  as  many  repor-
ted.

This  exam:  further  faith,  that  fhec  being  prefentby
Ulfainy,  when  he  was  in  exorcifing,  afterthatsheethe
firft  time  had  been  exorcifed  by  Cornelia*  Edmunds

the


Anne  Smith.  page, 24?

fhelefuit  did  askc  the  deuil  in  Mainy , whether  she  this
exam:  was  poflTcfTed  or  not  $ and  the  deuil  aunfwered
that  she  was.  Then  quoth  Ma;  Edmunds,  how  chauncc
he  could  not  be  brought  to  fpcake  this  other  day,  when
she  was  exorcifed  ? He  the  faid  deuil,  as  she  then  fuppo-
fed,  aunfwered,  that  the  reafonwas,  becaufe  thefpirit
that  was  in  her  was  fallen,  and  dumbe . Then  they  de-
maunding  of  his  deuil,  what  was  the  name  of  the  fpirit
that  was  in  this  exam:  he  aunfwered  Soforce  • And  this
Was  betwixt  Chriflmas, and  Shrouctide.

She  further  faith, that  it  was  a common  thing amongft
them,  to  giue  out  word$,as  though  Protcftants  were  all
poflefled  5 and  there- vpon  the  priefls  would  askc  fome
chat  were  pretended  to  be  poflefled, or  the  deuil  in  them
(as  it  was  fuppofed)  whileft  they  were  exorcifing  them,
why  they  did  not  trouble  them  before,  whilft  they  were
Protcftants.  And  the  deuil  would  aunfwer,  that  there
was  no  reafon  for  them  fo  to  doe , becaufe  the  Protc-
ftants  were  theirs  already.

Shcfurthcr  faith,that  after  the  time  she  was  out  of  the
priefts  hands,  her  former  difeafe  of  the  Mother  did  di-
tiers  times  take  her,  and  continued  with  her  as  before  it
had  done,  vntill  being  married  fhe  had  children . Since
which  time,  she  hath  beene  rid  of  that  difeafe,  she  than*
keth  God.

She  further  faith,  that  shee  wel  remembreth  the  mor-
ning when  Alexander  the  Apothccaric  was  to  goc  to
London  to  fetch  more  priefts,  the  day  before  this  exam:
wasfirft  exorcifed,  his  horfe  prauncing,  and  flinging  of
himdowne,  he  returned  backeagaine,  and  conftantly
affirmed,  that  the  wicked  fpirit  that  was  in  this  exam:
had  caufed  his  horfe  to  fling  him : whereat  when  this
exam:  laughed,  he  the  faid  ZAlexander  affirmed,  that  it
was  the  demll,  that  laughed  at  him.

li.  3.


THE


page,  245.'


The  confefsion  of


^•r


The  confefsion  of  Ma.  <iAn*

tbonie  Tyrrell  Clerke  , written  with  his

owne  hand,  and  auouched  vpon  his  oath

the  1/  of  Iune  1602.

(•••)

Iuers  interrogatories  beeing  propounded  to  this
exa ruinate,  cocerning  the  pretended  cafting  out
of  dcuils,  by  mailer  Edmunds,  alias  TVetton  a Ie-
fuit,  and  certaine  other  Seminary  priefts,  in  the
yeeres  iy8/,  and  at  Hackney ,cDenhami  and  other

places , and  as  touching  likewife  theoccafions,  or  in-
ducements that  mooued  them  at  rhat  time,  ro  take  fuch
matters  vpon  them,  hcc  hath  fet  downc  his  aunfwcr  as
followeth,

I will  firft  anfwer  to  the  circumftance  of  time,  which
Is  heere  propounded  vntome.  Imthcyecrc  i$ 8 4 1,  &
John  Ballard  priell,  (fince  executed  with  Ma.  'Babwgton,
and  the  reft)  comming  together  from  Rome  through
Burgundy,  found  there  a great  prefle  of  fouldiours,  and
were  aduertifed,  that  they  were  to  ferue  vnder  the  Duke
efguife.  When  wee  came  to  %oane>  wee  heard  then  di-
rc&ly,  that  the  (aid  preparations  were  againft  England,
The  fame  yecre  (as  I remember)  Ma.  Brighton  a Scot-
tifh  Tcfuit  was  taken  at  the  fea , and  after  brought  into
England , who  by  occafion  of  certaine  writings  which
he  had,  was  driuen  to  confcfle  at  large  ( as  1 haue  beene
informed)  what  rhe  whole  plot  was : and  how  far  both
the  Pope,  v. id  the  King  of  Spaine  had  ingaged  them-
fducs  in  it  Hereof  I doubt  not,  but  chat  fundry  Catho-
* vliques


Ma:  Anthony  Tyrrell  page, 247

liques  in  England  had  fufHeient  notice  from  beyond  the
Teas, and  efpecially  Ma .Edmunds,  alias  Wellon the  Ie-
fuit,  who  was  then  the  chicfc,  as  maiftcr  (jar net  (as  I
fake  it)  is  at  this  prcfcnt,  and  therefore  could  not  be  ig-
norant offuch  important  matter*,  wherein  principall
. men  of  his  owne  focietie  were  engaged.

Not  long  after  my  coming  into  England  in  the  yeere
ij*  8y , tnaifter  ^Martin  jyfray  a pried,  meeting  with  me
at  the  end  of  Cheap/ide,  as  1 was  turning  to  enter  into
Taules  Churchyard,  tooke  mee  by  the  hand,  and  whifc
pering  me  in  the  eare,  bad  me  be  of  good  cheere , for  that
til  things  went  now  very  well  forward.  The  king  of  Spayne
(quoth  he)  is  now  almost  ready  with  his  forces , to  come  into
England \and  we /hall  be  fare  to  heare  fome good  newes  ther -
of  very Jhartly : wherefore  it  flandeth  vs  now  in  hand  that  be
priefts , to  farther  the  Catholique  caufe , as  much  as  po/Jibly
in  vs  lyeth,ox  to  this  cffefV.  And  this  was  the  (late  of  that
time , nourifhed  (I  well  perceiued)  with  great  hope  of
(ome  great  alteration,  by  the  meancs  before  exprefied.

About  the  time  of  maifter  tArayes  aforefaid  com-
munication with  me,  mdxfttt  Edmunds  > alias  Wefton,  had
lately  (as  it  was  reported)  cad  a deuill  out  of  one  ( Jiiar-
wood : whereupon  he  the  (aid  roaifter  *Aray>  at  the  time
, before  mentioned , did  highly  commend  vnto  mee  the
cxorcifmes  of  Fa.  Edmunds , laying  that  hee  (the  faid  Ed-
munds) would  make  the  deuils  themfelnes  now  confejfe , that
theyr  kingdome  was  neere  at  an  end.  Vpon  the  pretended
difpofleflion  of  the  faid  ( JVtarwood , (undry  other  priefls
mooued  thereunto  (I  am  perfwaded)  by  the  inftiga-
tion  of  maifler  Edmunds  t or  for  that  they  meant  to  (hew
theyr  zealcin  imitating  of  him , did  take  vpon  them  to
exorcifc,  and  cad  deuils  out  of  diuers  perfons*  viz.  Sara
and  Erifwood  Williams  ^ William  Tray  ford  y *sfme  Smithy
Richard CMainy  y and  Elizabeth  (falthrop , whofcncckc
was  found  broken  at  the  bottome  of  a payre  of  flayres
! (as  the  brute  went  then  araongd  vs  ) V Vhen  I fa  w thi*

courfc^


'

pagc;248>  . . The  confefsfon  of

courfe,  I liked  if  well , and  was  my  felfe  an  Aftor  In  k,
and  did  well  perceiue,  that  it  was  the  matter  whereat
Ma.  Aray  had  aymed,  when  he  told  me,  that  itfioodevs
Tnetts  in  hand  to  further  the  Cathottque  canfe , as  much  of
fojfibly  wee  could.  And  indeed  our  proceedings  therein,
had  for  a time  wonderftill  fucccfle.  I cannot  in  my  con-  '
fciencc  efteeme  the  number  fewer;  that  in  the  compafTe
ofhalfe  aycere  were  by  that  mcancs  reconciled  to  the
Church  of  Rome,  then  S hundred  perfons : foinehauc
faid  three,  or  foure  thoufand.  As  touching  the  feuerall
manners  of  dilpoflcfring  the  faid  parries,  andoftheyr
fits,  traunccs,  and  virions , diuers  difeourfts  were  pen-'
red,  amongft  the  which  I my  felfe  did  penne  one.  Ma.
Edmunds  I ike  wife  writ  (I  am  perfwaded)  a quire  of  pa-
per of  Ma.UMainyes  pretended  virions.  For  he  thought,  I
as  it  Teemed , to  haue  wrought  fomc  great  matter  by
him/but  was  .drfappoimed  very  ridiculoufly , To  as  I
thinke  the  faid  virions  will  hardly  come  to  light.  There  |
was  alfo  a Treatifc  framed  to  proufc  firft , that  in  former
times  diuers  had  been  poffejfed.  Secondly,  that  Chritt  hath
left  to  his  Chur  Co  tertaine  remedies  for  the  difpoffeffing  of
' fitch  parties . Thirdly,^*#  in  the  catting  out  ofdemls , there
hath  beene  great  vfe  of  application  to  the  D&moniacks  of  ho*
lyreliques . In  profecution  of  thefirftparf,  amongft  o-
ther  points  the  Author  fheweth , that  Cj  O £> permttteth
feme  to  be  poffejfed,  that  thereby  the  fait hlejfe  Athettts  may
leame , that  there  is  both  d God  and  a dentil:  and  that  the
faith  of  the  (fathohque  Church  3mayatfo  be  confirmed  by  the
power  left  vnto  her  in  catting  out  of  deuils.  In  the  handling
ofthcfccond  point,,  hee  tryumpheth  againtt  the  Prote -
ft  ants,  faying  that  for  all  theyr  reformation  vrhfch  they  talke
of  to  be  fo  neere  the  order  of  the  Primitive  Church,  yet  they
are  net  able  either  to  difeerne , who  are  pojfjfed amongtt
them , nor  how  to  giue  the  remedy.  The  third  part  is  hand-'
led  more  largely,  to  the  great  aduauncemeiit  & power
of  Rcliqucs#  As  for  holy  water : that  $,  Macarius  thereby
* £iu;c3  . - cured


Ma:  Anthony  Tyrrell*  page, 249

cured  a woman,  who  by  CWdgicall  encbauntment  feemed  to
be  turned  into  a CMare.  Like  wife,  how  S.  Peter  hallowed
bread , againsl  the  affault  ofeertaine  devils  which  were  fent
by  Simon  Magus  in  the  hhenes  ofdogges , to  demure  him .

For  the  power  of  prieflhood,  there  is  an  example  alled-
ged  of  S.  Martin , how  he  putting  his  fingers  into  the  mouth
of  a Damoniac'kejhe  detail  durH  not  bite  him, though  he  bad
him  to  bite  him , if  he  had  any  power fo  to  doe . There  is  al-
fo  mention  made  of  the  vertue  of  the  blcffed  (acrament*
of  holy  oyle,-and  of  the  bones  of  Saints.  The  vfeofall
thofe  things,  was  very  frequent  in  the  cxorcifing  of  the

1>artics  poflefled.  Infomuch  as  wee  omitted  not  the  re-
iquesand  bones  of  Ma.  (fampian , Ma.  Sherwin,  Ma,

Brian , and  Ma.  Cottam,Xo  haue  fome  little  tcftimonic  by
implication  from  the  deuill,  to  prooue  them  holy  Mar-
tyrs.

If  I be  not  deceiued  , Ma.  Sdmunds  alias  JVeFlon,  was
the  Author  of  this  booke,  and  the  examples  by  him
alledged,  were  brought  of  purpofe,  to  giuc  the  more
credit  to  his,  and  our  proceedings  with  the  faid  parties
before  mentioned.  And  indeed  he  was  not  therein  de-
ceiued, for  wee  that  were  priefts , were  thereby  greatlie
magnified  by  Catholiques,  fchifmaticks,  and  weak  pro-
teftanfs*,  the  two  former  bceing  confirmed  in  the  Ro%
mane  Catholickc  faith  , and  the  third  fort  therevnfo  re-
conciled , as  hath  beenc  before  mentioned  ♦ And  that
cannot  be  denied,  but  that  in  the  courfc  which  wee  held
with  the  faid  pretended  D^moniacks,  many  occafions
were  giuen,  and  aptly  taken , to  fcornc  and  deride  the
orders,  & fcjuice  now  eftabli/hed  by  her  Maiefticslawes
in  the  Church  of  England.

Likewife  I muft  confefle,that  the  courfc  we  hcld,was
fo  pleafing  to  fuch  as  faw  it , or  were  informed  of  it  by
thofe  that,  they  trufted,  as  it  prooued  very  gainfull  vnto
vs  all  that  were  priefts : wee  had  out  of  queftion  procu-
Kd  vnto  our  felucs very  great  fauour,  credit,  andrepu- ,

K k.  tatioHj,


: - ✓ -

page^Jo,  The  confcfsion  of

tation,  fo  as  it  was  no  meruailc , if  foroc  young  Gentle-
men,  as  Ma.  Babmgtony  & the  reft,  were  allured  to  thofo
ftrange  attempts  which  they  tooke  in  hand , by  maiftet
\ Ballard , who  was  an  Agent  amongft  vs  • They  faw,  as
they  fuppofed,  (for  both  maifter  Babington^  and  diuers
of  his  company  were  oftentimes  at  the  exorcifings)  that
we  had  a great  commandement  ouer  deuils,  which  pre-
Mailed  greatly  with  them,  as  I think.  It  would  haue  been
a very  ftrange  thing  (lam  perfwaded  ) that  wee  could
not  haue  wrought  men  at  that  time  to  attempt : which
was  prudently  fbrefeene  by  Fa.  Edmunds  of  purpofe  (as
I am  refolued  in  my  confcience)  fo  prepare  the  harts,  Sc
minds  of  Catholiques  by  thole  praftifes,rhat  when  fuch
forces  as  were  intended , ftiould  haue  come  into  Eng-
land, they  might  haue  been  more  readily  drawn  by  him,

' and  vs,  to  haue  ioyned  theyr  forces  with  them.  And  this
is  that  I can  fay  concerning  the  occafions , or  induce-
ments, that  fuch  matters  were  taken  in  hand  at  the  time
articulated.

; Now  as  touching  the  fubftance  of  the  generall  in*
tcrrdgatory  it  felfe,  I haueperufed  the  feuerall  examina-
tions, arid  confeflioris  of  Sara  Williams  , and  Fnfwood  '
her  fifter,  of  <• s4me  Smithy  and  of  Tiichard<JMawy  gen-  \
tleman,  and  am  fully  perfwaded , that  they  haue  depo-
fed  the  truth  in  fuch  poynts  whereof  they  were  exams-  ,
ned,beIbngingto  theyr  pretended  poftcflion^iSc  di/pofc  -
Icflio.The  effeff  wherofiSjthat  they  were  drawn  by  our
cunning  Carriage  of  matters,  to  feeme  as  though  they
had  beenepo  (felled  ? when  as  in  truth  they  were  not,
neither  were  thereany  of  the  priefts  ignorant  in  my  co*
fcience  of  their  diflimulation,northe  parties  themfehies
(asf  now  it  appeared))  ’ of  our  diflembled  proceeding
'iwith  thera?*^«  - 7 J \

After  I had  beene  my  felfe  firft  at  one  of  theyr  cxaiU
cifings,  if  Was  rhv  chadncc  to  he  that  night  with  maifter

Tkomfin  a prieft,  and  a great  Atlor  in  thote  matters,  a*  ~
,}x'M  d his-


v Ma:  Anthony  T yrrell*  page, .251

his  chamber  by  the  Spittle : and  falling  into  fome  con-
ference about  it,  Ivfed  fome  fuch  words,  as  though  I
doubted,  whether  the  party  were  actually,  and  really
poflefied.  For  I my  felfe  being  not  acquainted  with  a-
me  plot  deuifed  by  Fa:  Edmunds, or  any  other,  fpakc  my
minde  fomc-what  more  plaincly,  then  I perceaued  Mas
Thomfon  wel  liked  of.  His  aunfwer  vnto  me  was  in  ef*
fe&,  that  he  being  my  friend , did  earnestly  rvifb-  me  to  cafl
forth  no  fuch  jpeeches , whatfo  ester  I did  thmke.  For  (quoth
he)  the  matter  is  itsdged  to  be  fo  by  Fa:  Edmunds,  and  fome
others  that  are  Pnefis . Bejides  fuch  Catholiques , as  haue
beene  prefent  at  fuch  fits,  haue  receaued it  for  a truth,  that
the  parties  are  pofjeffed,  zsFnd  although  I for  my  part  trill
not  make  it  an  article  of  my  (freede , yet  I thmke  that  godlte
creduhtie  doth  much  good,  for  the  furthering  oft  he  (fatho -
Itcjue  caufe , and  for  the  defacing  of  our  common  enemies ,and
their  proceedings : or  to  this  effett . Not  long  after,  alfo
talking  with  Mr.  Stamp,  attheLo.  Vaux  his  houfein
Hackney,  concerning  thefc  matters,  and  demaunding  of
him  ferioufly  his  opinion, what  he  thought  of  them  : hi$
aunfwer  was , that  they  were  things  of  fuch  importance , as
Would  further  the  Catholique  caufe , more  then  all  the  bookes
that  had  beene  written  of  late  yeeres,  about  the  controuerfes
in%eligion  with  the Protettants : with  which  aunfwer,  I
Teemed  to  reft  contented,  becaufe  I faw  thereby  he  was
not  willing  to  enter  into  any  playner  courfe  with  me.

I would  not  haue  this  my  confeflion  further  exten-
ded then  my  meaning  is,  I doe  not  take  vpon  me  either
direftiy  or  indirefty.  to  oppofe  my  felfe  fo  the  three
povnts  of  the  Treatife  before  mentioned,  which  are
flrengfhened  with  fome  authorities,  both  of  the  Scrip-
Cures,  and  of  the  auncient  Fathers,  and  Writers . How
be  if,  as  I account  it  prefumption  to  denie  all  thofe  Hi-
ftories,  as  touching  the  cafting  out  of  deuils  in  the  Pri-
ininue  Church,  fince  the  Apoftles  times*,  fo  to  beleeue
all  that  is  written  thereof,  I hold  it  a point  of  great  rnad-

Kk.  2,  nes,


pagc,^52  The  confefsion  of

nes,  and  I doubt  not  but  the  founded  Catholiques  in
Europe  are  of  my  opinion.  For  be  it  true  that  is  alledgcd
in  thefaidtreatifeofS.  Awbrofe^  that  he  neuer  heard  of
any, that  could  counterfeit  himfclfc  to  be  a D^moniack,
yet  later  experience  hath  taught  vs  the  contrary . And
indeede,the  artificial!  skil  confidered  wherc-vnto  priefis
haue  attained , it  is  a very  eafie  matter  to  bring  a young
girle,  or  a youth,  to  doc,  and  fpeake  thofe  things,  which
the  Exorcifis  can  readily  colour,  and  interpret*,  as  if  it
were  both  done,  andfpoken  by  dcuils,  that  did  poflcflc
them.  But  yet  this  I wil  fay,  and  giuc  it  for  a rule  to  all
Catholiques  heercafter , that  wil  not  purpofely  fuffer
thcmfelues  to  be  deluded : let  them  but  mark  diligently
when  they  are  prefent  at  any  fuch  a£fion$,what  the  par*
ties,  pretended  to  be  poffcfTcd,  doe  ey ther  a£t,or  (peak,
and  then  they  shal  perceaue  nothing,  but  may  very  well
be  diflembled,  or  otherwife  vttered  in  great  difiemper,
procured  by  loathfome  potions,  and  violent  fumigati-
ons. And  they  shal  be  very  wel  armed  againfi  all  fuch
deceites,ifeuer  it  be  their  haps  to  heare,  or  read  the  con-
fcflions,  and  examinations  of  the  parties  before  mentio-
ned. Marrie  they  muft  keepe  their  owne  counfel : For
I am  perfwaded,  that  if  any  shall  feeme  to  be  a curious
beholder  at  fuch  times,and  a mouer  of queftions,he  shal
not  be  any  welcome  guefi  vnto  them.  Hecreof  any  may
be  further  aduertifed,  that  wil  take  the  paines  to  rcade  a
Martha  lkfle  Frcnc^  Treatifc , of  a * counterfeit  Demoniack  at
Broflier,  Paris, and  how  the  Exorcifis  could  in  no  fort  endure  the

' queftions,  & doubts, that  were  propounded  vnto  them,
when  they  were  at  their  work,  but  pretended  that  fuch
curiofity,  and  want  of  faith  did  greatly  hinder  them  in
their  proceedings:

There  will  be  many  exceptions  taken  to  that,  which
heerc  I haue  deliucred  vpon  my  confcience,  toproue
that  the  faid  parties  pretended  to  be  pofiefied,  were  not
counterfeits,  as  that  fome  things  fell  out,vvhich  were  not

poftiblc


Ma:  Anthony  Tyrrell*  page,  2f  3

poffible  to  be  difTembled  ♦ The  chicfe  obic&ion  wil  be
as  Couching  a peccc  of  a knife , in  length  about  two  in-
ches, and  a halfc,  which  was  faid  to  come  out  of  the  bo-
die  of  Anne  Smithy  hauing  beene  conuaied  into  her  be-
fore, as  it  was  pretended  by  the  dcuil.  And  to  dcarc  the
matter , the  deuil  was  made  (forfooth)  to  (hew  by  Phi-
lo(bphie,that  he  was  able  to  doe  fuch  a thing : for  to  this
cflFcft  it  was  giuen  out, that  the  deuil  should  reade  vs(as  I
may  ter  me  it)  a Le&ure : I am  as  you  know  by  creation a
/pirit,  and  have  lofl  no  part  of  my  knowledge , and  cunning
in  the  fecrets  of  nature,  and  that  I can  dijfolue  any  Iron  or
hard  matter  at  my  pie afure  into  a liquid  fub  fiance,  and  fo  I
did , and  poured  it  into  her  porredge , which  fhe  eating,  f wal-
lowed 'up  the  knife  in  that  liquid fub  fiance,  and  the fame  be-
ing fo  in  her  body  J reduced  it  into  the  artificially  me  which
before  it  had.  And  thus  much  you  may  beleeue  (quoth  the
deuil)  if  you  be  but  Phtlofophers , or  fo  this  effect.  Wher-
vnto  for  aunfwer  as  the  truth  is,  fo  farre  forth,  as  I know
or  beleeue . Firft  as  the  peece  of  the  knife  came  out  of
her  mouth,  without  hurting  of  her  (if  it  came  out  of  her
mouth  at  all,  and  that  there  were  not  a fhift  of  legerde-
maine  vfed  to  make  it  feeme  indeede  to  thofe  that  were
prefent,  that  it  came  out  of  her  mouth)  fo  might  it  be  ta-
ken forth  againe,  hauing  beene  put  into  her  mouth  by
the  Exorcifr  himfelfe,  for  ought  1 know,  as  fome  of  the
faid  parties  haue  acknowledged, that  the  Exorcifts  foro-
times  would  fhruft  bigge  bones,  and  peeces  of  reliques
into  their  mouthes . Amongft  the  which  Frifwood  Wil-
liams depofeth,  that  as  (he  verily  beleeueth  , they  thruft
a ruftic  naile  into  her  mouth,  and  afterwards  pretended*
that  it  came  out  of  her  body « t,  ^Anne  Smith  hath  de-
pofed,  that  she  is  fully  perfwaded,  that  they  haue  repor-
ted vntruly  of  the  faking  of  a peece  of  a knife  out  of
her  mouth . Howbeit,  (hce  faith,  (bee  durft  not  at  that
time  contradift  them : but  it  is  needcleffe  for  mee  to
aunfwer  this,  or  any  fuch  like  obie&ion . For  the  things

Kk.  3.  arc


The  confefsion  of~

arc  in  themfelues  fo  ridiculous , as  I thinlce  no  man  will
be  To  mad,  as  to  take  vppon  him  to  defend  them . And
when  wee  our  felues  that  were  aftors  in  thofe  matters,
thought  wee  had  wonne  our  fpurres,  yet  diuers  aunci*
ent  priefts,as  Maifler  Heywood.M^txTiolman^AMti
%ednut»,  and  fome  others  hearing  of  the  courfe  we  held,
did  (hake  their  heads  at  it,  and  /hewed  their  great  diflike
of  it . Likewifc  the  grauer  fort , that  were  then  imprifo-
ned  at  Wijbtch , were  greatly  offended  thcre-with  (as  I |
haue  beene  credibly  informed)  and  faid,that  howfoeuer
for  a time  wee  might  be  admired , yet  in  the  end  wee
would  thereby  marre  all , and  vtterly  diferedit  both  our
felues,  and  our  calling  * Where*  vpon  wee  the  younger
fort  of  the  Seminarie  priefts,that  were  then  dealers  here-
in, thought  our  felues  hardly  dealt  with  by  them,  and
that  they  did  but  enuie  at  the  comendation,  which  they
faw  wee  daily  gayned , themfelues  being  no  aflors  a-
mongft  vs*  But  now  I fee, that  the  faid  auncient  Fathers
bad  beene  acquainted  of  likelihood  with  fuch  deuifes
beyond  the  Seas, and  were  greatly  greeued  to  haue  them
brought  into  England  : notwifhftanding  Ma :Edmundst
and  the  reft,  would  needes  proceede  (as  is  before  in  part
exprefled,)  and  haue  thereby  to  their  perpetual  fbame,
made  them  true  Prophets.

I haue  my  felfe  before  confeffed,  that  my  pen  is  in  the
bookc,  that  was  taken  with  Ma:  'Barnet,  wherein  I layd
together  thofe  things,  that  Sara  Williams  was  pretended
to  haue  done,  and  faid  in  one  of  her  fits  at  Hackney , the
i o of  Ianuarie , fome  things  whereof  I faw,  and  heard
my  felfe,  others  I receauedbv  peece-meale  ofMaiftcr
Thom  [on,  Ma:  Thulice , and  others,  and  layd  them  alto-
gether, with  the  beft  skill  I had,  to  make  them  feeme
(Iran^e,  and  wonderfull  . For  although  both  my  felfe
(as  l faid  before)  .and  fo  I thiukc  of  the  reft,  did  know
fbatall  wasbuf  counferfeite,  yet  for  as  much  as  weper-  iv
ctauiedjChat  thereby  great  credit  did  grow  to  the  Catho-

♦ hque


Ma:  Anthony  Tyrrell.

Jique  caufe,  and  great  diferedit  to  the  Protedants,  wee
held  it  lawful!  to  doc,  as  we  did.

Shortly  after]  had  fiifl  conformed  my  felfe  to  the
date  of  the  Church,  edablifhcd  heere  in  England,  and
there*  vpon  difclofcd  many  things  to  the  late  Lo.  Tret*
furer , concerning  fundry  very  pernicious  defignments
again!]  her  Maieilie^  and  this  dates  I fell  againe  to  my
old  courfe,  by  the  perfwafion  of  fomc  of  my  auncient
acquaintance  that  were  prieds,  hauing  had  fmall  time
to  ground  my  felfe  by  dudy,  thereby  to  defend  my  faid
conformitie.  I was  no  fooner  come  to  my  old  byace,but
they  foone  drew  mee,  for  the  good  of  the  Catholique
caufe,  to  fay  that  all  in  effett  was  falfe  that  I had  before
confefled.  Although  not  long  after,  the  treafons  did  fo
breake  forth,  and  were  fo  fully  confefTed  by  'Babtngtori
himfelfe , that  not  oncly  that,  which  I had  reported  was
iufhfied  by  them  to  be  true,  but  a great  deale  more  then
cuer  I knew,  or  dreamed  of.  Likewife  I hauing  defec-
ted in  fome  part  the  folly  of  the  faid  cxorcifings,  it  is
fcarce  credible  how  earned  the  faid  prieds  were  with
me,  to  avow  them  againe  for  matters  of  verifie.  Where-
vnto  for  the  reafon  before  mentioned , I did  willingly
yceld,  nothing  doubting  but  that,  if  God  fhould  once
againe  fo  draw  his  grace  from  mee , as  that  I fhould  be-
come to  be  as  then  I was  (that  is,  wholy  addi&ed  to  po-
pery, as  1 tru!f  in  his  mercy  hcc  will  neuer  doe)  I fhould
be  as  ready  againe  to  deny  all  that  new  I hauc  affirmed
vpon  iiiv  oath, as  I was  before.  For  the  generall  conceit
amongd  all  the  prieds  of  that  order  is,  that  they  may
deny  any  thing,  which  becing  confefled  doth  turne  to
the  difhonour  of  the  Catholique  Church  of  Rome.  Be-
fides,  thev  haue  other  obie&ions  that  ferue  theyr  fumes,
as  that  the  Magidrates  in  England  are  no  competent
ludges,the  Queeneherfclfe Handing  excommunicate*
and  that  therefore  the  examinations  taken  before  them,
are  of  no  validities  bind  theexarainat$,but  that  all  that


Page  2)7


/


page^fa.  The  confcfsion  of

they  Joe  confefle,  is  tanquAm  cor  am  non  Mice.  A num-
ber of  other  £hift»  they  haue , which  I doe  not  now  re-
member.

The  Apoftolicall  rule  is , that  euitl  Jhall  not  be  doone
that  good  maj  come  of  it,  but  they  doe  not  account  it  euill
(as  I verily  thinke)  to  calumniate  the  Proteftants  by  any
deuife  whatfoeuer3  that  may  carry  any  probability  with
it,  nor  make  any  confciencc  to  tell,  and  publifh  any  vn-
truthes,  which  they  thinke,  becing  bclicued,  may  ad-
uaunce  and  promote  fuch  poynts  and  matters , as  they
fake  vpon  them  to  defend/or  the  honour  of  the  church
of  Rome,  and  dignitie  of  their  priefthood.

cl Anth:  TjrrelL


-


■■■  ■■■—


THE


f

f? ' ■


iu


* 91


«


page  2f7.


5-fc?  The  confelsion  of  Richard

Mainj  Gentleman , written  by  himfelfe,

and  auouched  vppon  his  oath  the  fixt  of
lunc.  i 6 o 2.

('••)

TH  E faid  %ichard  C Jlfainy  had  read  vnto  him
fomc  parts  of  a difeourfe,  or  two,  written  by  ccr-
tainc  Seminary  priefts  of  a pretended  poifeflion,
and  difpofleflion  both  of  himlclfe , and  of  cer-
tainc  others,  viz.  one  Marrvood,  Trayford%Sarayfk  Fran-
cis Williams  two  fillers,  and  *s4nnc  Smith . Thele  parties
were  faid  to  be  poflefied,  and  difpoffelTed  of  many  wic-
ked fpirits.  The  priefts  that  dealt  with  them,  were  di-
tlcrs , but  the  efpeciall  men  that  had  RichardUWamy  in
hand,  were  Ma.  Edmunds  the  lefuit,  alias  Wetton,  £orne-
bus,  and  one  Dihdale , men  wholy  at  the  deuotion  and
direction  of  the  faid  Edmunds.  It  was  in  the  yeeres  i / 8/
and  1/86,  when  thefe  ftrafagems  were  executed.  Such
dealings  as  they  had  with  the  faid  CMarny,  were  at  Den -
ham,  at  one  Ma.  Fittons, two  miles  from  Windfore3 and  at
the  Earle  of  Loncolnes  houfe  in  Channon-row, where  Iobtt
sJMainy  his  brother  did  then  remaine.

Ofthefcmattersthefaid  C Mainj  beeing  demaunded
diuers  queftions , defired  that  hee  might  haueleaue  to
aunfwer  them  after  his  owne  fafhion,  and  not  to  be  tied
•o  the  order  of  the  faid  demaunds,  for  that  hee  thought
he  could  fet  downe  thofe  things  which  hee  remembred,
more  plainly  to  his  owne  vnderftanding,then  otherwile
he  fhould  be  able,  if  he  were  bound  to  follow  the  order
propounded  vnto  him  by  the  faid  demaunds*  And  that
Which  he  hath  let  downe  is  the  difeourfe  following,  not

LI  much


page,2)8


9


/


The  confession  of

much  difagrceingfrom  the  order  of  the  interrogatories
miniftred  vnto  him.

And  hath  Ma.  Edmunds  & the  reft  of  the  priefts  thus
dealt  with  mee  ? I am  very  forry  for  it . It  might  haue
beenefufficient  for  them , to  haue  prs&ifed  thevr  pur-
pofes  vpon  me  and  the  reft  , youthes  and  almoft  girlcs,
although  they  had  not  published  the  fame  to  the  world.
But  of  likelihood  theyr  glory,  and  our  diferedit  were  (b
ioyned  together,  as  the  one  could  not  ftand  without  the
other.  This  courfe  whereunto  they  haue  therby  drawne
me,wil  procure  me  great  difpleafure  (I  know)  amongft
my  friends,  and  worke  me  much  hinderance  in  my  pri-
uate  eftate  : but  what  remedie  ? Beeing  called  by  pub-
lique  authorise, and  enforced  by  vertue  of  mine  oath  to
deiiuer  the  truth,  I cannot  fee  how  with  any  confciencc
I can  deny  tbofe  things,  which  I find  to  be  truly  layd  to
my  charge , and  could  neuer  haue  beene  thought  of,  if
their  writings  had  neuer  come  to  the  Magiftrats  hands.
The  particulers  which  now  ofneceftjty  I mull  deiiuer,

1 was  purpofed  to  haue  concealed  from  all  men  liuing,
although  heeretofore  in  generall  termes  I haue  beene
driuen  to  fay  fomewhat  of  thefe  matters.

. About  14  yeeres  fince , the  Lords  of  her  Maiefties
moft  honourable  priu^  Counfell,  {Henry  Earle  of  Dari  |
by  being  one)  hauing  g ^ten  fome  notice  of  the  preten-
ded pofleflions,  and  difpofteflions  at  the  places  before
mentioned , and  that  I was  one  of  the  parties  that  had
beene  dealt  with,  did  write  their  letter  vnto  Ferdinando
then  Lord  Strange  to  examine  me.  It  feemeth  they  had
beene  informed  that  I fhould  publifti,  howlwaspofc
felled  with  cerfaine  wicked  fpirits , and  of  them  difpok
fefted  by  fome  priefts  of  the  Catholique  Romanc
Church,  and  that  I fhould  take  vpon  mee  in  companie
where  I came,  to  iuftifie  the  fame4So  as  being  called  be-
fore the  faid  Lord  Strange,  he  demaundedofmc,  whe-
ther I had  giuen  out  fuch  fpeeches.  Hee  examined  mee

vpon


Richard  Mainy  Gent:  page

vpon  my  oath , and  my  aunfwer  was  according  to  the
truth,  as  I was  perfwaded  in  mine  ownc  confcience,and
as  farre  as  my  memory  did  ferue  me : viz.  that  I was  ne-
tier  poflefled  with  any  wicked  fpirif , nor  had  reported
any  fuch  thing*,  and  that  I wasfo  farrefrom  iudifying
of  it,  that  I was  fully  perfwaded , that  in  all  the  courfes
which  the  prieds  fooke  with  me,  when  they  pretended
that  I was  pofiefled,  there  was  nothing  but  deceit,  falf-
hood,  illufions,  and  iuglings.  This  was  the  efFeft  of  my
aunfwer  at  that  time,  if  my  memory  doe  not  muc  h faile
me,  and  thereupon  I was  by  his  Lordlhip  difmifl'ed.

With  this  aunfwer  (I  fuppofe)  the  Iefuits  were  long
fince  acquainted,  which  hath  greatly  already  hindered
me,  & alienated  the  harts  of  fome  of  my  deereft  friends
from  mce.  And  the  fame  aunfwer  that  I made  then  be-
fore his  Lordfhip,  I mull  now  make  againe  to  the  (iib-
ftanre  of  all  thole  quefhons  which  haue  been  demaun-
ded  of  mee , viz.  that  I was  neuer  podeded  with  any
wicked  fpirif,  otherwife  then  all  other  finners  are,  but  e-
uer  as  free  (I  thanke  G O D)  from  hauing  any  deuils  in
me,  as  cither  Ma.  Edmunds  himfelfe,  or  any  other  of  the
Prieds  that  had  to  dcale  with  me,  for  ought  I know.

This  aunfwer  I thought  would  haue  beene  fufficient
to  haue  fatisfied  all  thofe  things  which  arc  obie&cd
againd  roe,  but  I am  vrged  with  fundry  paiticulers,  and
therefore  I mud  of  necedity  yeeld  to  the  cleering  of  my
felfe  in  them,  and  yet  no  otherwife  then  the  truth  requi-
red. When  I was  about  1 3 yceres  old,I  was  fent  by  my
mothers  direction  to  Rhemes  in  Fraunce , where  there
Was  then  an  Englifh  Seminary : the  intent  of  my  mo-
ther, and  other  of  my  friends  was  (as  I thinke)  to  haue
had  mee  to  haue  been  a pried.  I remained  in  "Rhemes  a-
bout  two  ycres,  and  was  there  maintained  with  my  mo-
thers exhibition  6c  allowance.  Towards  the  end  of  the
faid  two  yeeres,ofa  childifh  curiofitic  I entred  into  the
©bferuanccs  of  certaine  religious  men  , termed  in  that

L 1.  2 court-


P age, 260;  The  confefsion  of

country  Bonhommes , or  fratres  minimi , and  became  a
young  probationer  amongft  them.  This  order  was  dc«
tlifed  by  Fraunces  de  Paula, who  is  canonized  for  a faint,
of  whom  there  is  mention  made  in  the  Romane  breutary^
as  hauing  his  place  appointed  in  the  Kalcndcr  on  the
fccondof  Aprill.  There  hisoffice  & courfc  oflifeisfet
downe,  and  briefly  deferibed.

After  I had  remained  about  a quarter  of  a yeere,  or
fomewhat  more  in  this  probation,  I was  fent  by  the  Rec - jj
tor  ofthehoufe  with  fomc  other  of  my  fellowes,  ro4he
houfe  of  the  Tdonhommes  at  cParis,  where  I had  fcarcely
_ remained  a quarter  of  a yeere  but  I grew  weary  of  that
profeflion.  Their  rules  feemed  vnto  me  to  be  too  ftritt
for  me,  and  their  diet  beeing  nothing  but  fuh , I began
to  diflike  it.  Befidcs , I had  a difeafe,  wherewith  I had
been  troubled  before  I went  out  ofEngland,rhat  tooke
xne  there  againc  \ and  thereupon  I gaue  ouer  that  order
altogether.

About  that  time,  there  was  a proclamation  publifhed
hccre  in  England  (as  I was  fold)  that  all  Engltfh  gentle-  i
men,  and  others , fbould  repair e home  into  they  Country
within  a certaine  time , vpon  danger  of  her  Maietties  dif  j
pie  a fur e , and  Ioffe  of  theyr  goods  and  lands , or  to  that  cf-  [
fc& . Whcrcuppon  I was  perfwaded  by  fomc  of  my
friends,  that  (aw  my  courfe  of  life  there , hauing  giuen
ouer  my  fludie,  to  returne  home  againe 5 and  the  rather,
for  that  I had  fomeland  left  vnto  mcc  by  my  father.
Leaning  therefore  Paris,  I tooke  my  iourny  homeward
by  Roane  towards  Diepe  where  I tooke  (hipping,  and
landed  at  %ie.  At  my  arriuall,  the  Maior  offering  vnto
mec  the  oath  of  her  Maieftics  fupremacy,  Iwillinglic
tooke  it,  and  afterwards  repayred  of  mine  owne  accord
diligently  to  the  Church  , and  (eruice  of  God  eftabli-
fhed  in  England  by  her  Maieftics  lawes.  I continued  in
Suflex,  Kent,  and  other  places,  from  Cjoodfnday  (the
time  of  my  arriuall)  vntill  it  vvas  towards  zAlhallontidc

following*


Richard  Mainy  Gent:  Tage  2 6 1

following,  which  timelfpent  as  other  young  Gentle-
men did,  with  whom  I fell  acquainted,  vnfill  through
metre  ncceflity,  hauing  then  no  part  of  my  liuing  in  my
hands, I was  contained  through  want  to  repaire  to  my
brother  Iohn  Mainy  at  London,  vpon  whom  I did  fora
while  cfpecially  relye.  . .

1 had  not  beene  long  in  London,beforc  it  was  my  hap
to  dine  at  the  L.  Vaux  his  houfe  with  my  faid  brother,
cy ther  at  Hackney,  or  Hogfdon , (I  doe  not  wel  remember
whether)  his  Lordfhip  was  not  then  at  home,but  the  fa-
ble was  kept,  and  entertainment  giuen  by  his  fonnc,and
daughter . In  that  dinner  while  there  was  much  com-
munication of  the  late  pofleflion , and  difpofleffion  of
one  tJWarwood, by  certaine  priefts,and  chicfely  (if  I doc
not  forget  my  felfe)  by  Ma:  Edmunds.  The  tales  w hich
were  told  of  that  matter,  feenied  ftrange  vnto  me,  as
what  cxtraordinaric  ftrength  he  had  in  his  fits : how  he
roared  like  a Bull , and  many  other  things  were  then
mentioned,  which  now  I haue  forgotten  ? While  my
chiefe  continuance  was  in  London,  I rode  fometiroes
with  my  brother  to  Denham , the  houfe  of  Sir  Cjeorge
Peckham , and  in  the  patifh  of  Denham,  (he  hauing  mar-
ried Sir  (jeorge  rPeckhams  daughters,  and  the  whole  fur-
niture of  the  houfe  apperfayning  vnto  him,  as  part  of
his  dowric  with  his  wife.)  At  that  time  al(o  he  kept  fer-
nants  there,  I went  likewife  fometimes  to  Denham  of
mineowne  accord,  and  remained  there  fome  two  or
three  dayesatatime.  It  fell  out  hardly  with  me  (asnow
I perceaue)  that  I came  to  London  about  Alhallonfide
before  mentioned  : for  then  there  was  nothing  in  effeft
»n  the  mouthes  of  Catholiqucs,  but  of  the  cafting  out  of
deuils.  A little  before  there  was  much  to  doe  with  the
laid <JWanvoodi  as  I finde  by  the  flory  that  is  written  of  *>y
liim,  * beginning  Sr  at  cjuida  inuenis,  &c.  Immediatly  af-  ^ .

ter  (as  alfo  it  is  plaine  by  an  other  flory,  which  I am  en-  tant  vpon  "
formed,  was  taken  with  one  Ma antes)  there  was  at  iccord,

L 1»  3*  Hoi-


page, 262.


The  confefsion  of


r • mi- if. i
-r.


Hollanfide  great  bufinesat  Fulmer  with  Trayford , and
Sara  Williams.  And  fuch  were  then  rhofe  times.as  now
Ivnderfiand,  and  did  then  partly  findeby  experience*
that  a fmall  occafion  was  matter  fufficient  for  the  priefis
to  worke  vppon  , to  charge  any  one  that  they  liked  to
deale  with,  that  he  was  poftelfed.

Itfeemeth  alfo  by  that  which  is  written  in  the  fayd
booke  taken  with  Ma:  Barnes , and  by  fome  other  talcs
which  I haue  heard,  that  the  priefis,  or  fome  for  them,
vndcrftanding  that  I tookc  no  courfe  to  be  a priefi,  and
how  I had  left  the  B onhommes , 8c  how  I had  been  trou-
bled with  my  former  difeafe  at  Paris , and  how  after  my
returnc,  I had  behaued  my  felfe  youthfully  amongfi  o-
ther  Gentlemen  5 gauc  it  out  that  I was  furely  pofiefTed,
and  afterwards  to  make  the  fame  good,  haue  pubhfhcd
in  the  fame  booke,  the  tefi imonic  of  the  deuil  himfelfc,
as  it  is  pretended  $ whereof  anon.

Vpon  this  report  I could  doe  nothing(as  I am  enfor-
med)  but  itwasfaid,  that  the  deuil  did  direct  me  in  it.
In  fo  much  as  when  I rode  to  Denham  my  felfe  (as  is  be-
fore exprefted)  it  was  giuen  forth,  as  I perccaue,  that
the  horfc  I rid  vpon  was  a deuifand  that  1 had  deuils  at-
tending vpon  me  in  liuerie  coafes,  by  that  which  1 find
written , and  reported  of  me : there  was  neuer  young
Gentleman  (1  think)  more  abufed  then  I haue  been.

After  fome  time  fpent  at  Fulmer  by  the  priefis  with
the  faid  Trayford,  and  Sara  Williams , they  came  all  of
them  with  Ma:  Edmond  Peckfam,  and  his  wife  to  SDen+
ham  (as  it  is  mentioned  in  the  (aid  booke)  8c  I not  kno-
wing at  that  time,  what  reports  were  brufed  abroad  of
me,  reforting  thitherfas  I was  wont)fell  into  their  fnares,
which  I would  furely  haue  auovded,  if  poflibly  I could
haue  fufpevted  , that  they  would  euer  haue  dealt  with
me,  as  afterwards  they  did.

At  my  Commirtg  thither  amongft  them,  I was  kindly
vfed>  and  lodged  in  thefurthefi  part  of  the  houfc : the

other


jii


Richard  Mainy  Genr:  page

other  chambers  Were  then  fupplied  with  other  gueOs
that  I knew  notof,vntiII  a mayde  in  the  hou(e,who  had/
beene  my  brothers  Cooke,  did  tell  rnc  of  them.  V pon
the  comming  of  Ma:  Edmond Peckham  to  'Denham,  my
brothers  feruants  departed,  and  left  the  houfc  to  him  (as
Ithinkc)  except  it  were  this  mayd,to  whom  i was  much
beholding  for  her  kindnes  towards  me.  Within  a day
or  two  after  this  my  coming  to  Dmham,  the  faid  maid-
Cooke  bonified  vnto  me , that  there  was  ^reat  walking
of  fpirirs  about  the  houfe,  6c  that  diuers  had  been  great-
lie  affrighted  by  them  . The  firff  night  that  I came  thi-
ther (as  I remember)  I was  fome-what  euili  at  eafe,  and
whether  this  report,  that  did  forne-thing  aftonifh  me,
did  make  me  worfe  or  no,  I cannot  tell : but  I grew
worfe,  and  worfe,  in  fo  much  as  my  old  difeafe  at  a very
wicked  time,  did  there  take  hold  of  me.  r

The  difeafe  I fpakeof,  was  a (pice  of  the  (J^/other*
where-with  I had  beene  troubled  (as  is  before  mentio-
ned) before  my  going  into  Frauncc : whether  1 doe
rightly  fermeirthe  Mother  or  no,  I know  not : but  it  is
wel  knowne  to  the  Phyhcians  in  London,  that  be  aliuc,
and  were  then  of  any  name, that  my  eldelf  brother  Tho-
mas cMztrf  Hzd  the  fame  difeafe,  and  that  he  died  oif it*
and  Ma:  Edmond  Peckham  (as  1 haue  beene  credibly  en*
formed)  was  likewife  troubled  with  it.  When  I was  lick
of  this  difeafe  in  Frauncc,  a Scottifh  Doff  or  of  Phyfick
then  in  Paris , called  it,  as  I remember,  Vertigtnem  capitis*
Itrifeth  (as  he  faid,  and  I haue  often  felt)  ofawind  in
the  boftome  of  the  belly,  and  proceeding  with  a great
fwelling,  caufeth  a very  painfull  collicke  in  the  ftomack,
and  an  extraordinary  giddirtes  in  the  head  ♦ With  this
difeafe  I am  Hill  once  in  foure  or  fiueyeeres  troubled,
and  I doe  greatly  fufpeft  that  it  wil  end  roe,  as  it  did  my
brother. nans  scisd  itrfi  f/)lo fit

I began  no  fooner  to  be  troubled  at  Denham  (as  is  be-
fore faid)  but  as  now  I perceaue  the  prietis  had  that,

^ 1 which


page,2644  The  confefsion  of

which  they  looked  for.  The  women  of  the  houfe(whofe
names  I doe  not  now  remember)  that  came  to  help, and
attend  me,  told  me  firfl,  as  my  brothers  maid  had  done
before,  how  greatly  the  houfc  was  troubled  with  fpirits,
and  afterwards  that  there  were  two  poflefled  in  the
houfe  with  deuils : the  manner  of  whofe  fits  they  deferi-
bed  vnto  me  in  fuch  fort,  as  I was  much  amazed  there-
with . Whether  thefc  women  were  required  by  the
Prieftsto  tell  me  thefe  things  or  no,  I know  not:  but
fhortly  after  Ma:  ‘Dibdale, and  Ma:  Cornelius  two  priefts
eomming  vnto  me,affcr  fundry  queftions,and  fpeechcs
vfed  with  me,  they  fell  to  be  of  opinion  (as  it  feeroed,
and  fo  told  me)  that  I was  poflelfed  with  a wicked  fpi-
rit.  I fay,  (as  it feemed)  for  I am  fully  perfwaded  in  my
confcience,  that  they  knew  wel  enough,  that  neiiher  I,
nor  any  of  the  reft  before  mentioned  were  indeede  poC*
fefled : but  that  they  did  pretend  fo,  to  worke  thereby
fuch  matters,  as  they  had  propounded  vnto  tbemfclucs,
whereof  for  my  part  1 wii  no  further  iudge.  Of  this  my
perfwafion  1 hauefomc  reafons,  by  that  which  Ifindc
written,  & depofed  by  others  to  that  purpofe.

When  I fir  ft  heard  them  fay,  that  I was  pofTcfTcd,  I
told  them  that  I doubted  not,  but  that  they  were  decca-
ued  therein.  1 acquainted  them  with  the  nature  of  my
difeafe,  and  how  long  I had  beene  troubled  with  if : but
they  perfifted  in  their  opinion . For  that  time  lcauing
me, they  came  fhortly  vnto  me  againe^and  began  where
before  they  had  left : then  they  fold  me  what  extraordi-
nary ftrength  I fhewed  in  one  of  my  pangues,  which
znoued  me  litle.  For  the  nature  of  that  difcafe,is  to  caufc
ones  belly  to  fwel  in  fuch  fort,  as  two  or  three  are  nota-
ble (vfing  any  good  diferetion)  to  keepc  downe  the
wind,  that  fecketh  to  alcend,  as  it  is  very  wel  knowne  to
thofe,  that  haue  feene  ey  ther  a man  or  woman  in  that
£r,  and  as  it  is  likely,  the  priefts  themfclues  knew  by
their  experience  in  Ma;  Edmond  Peckham,  who  was  ve-

rie


V


Richard  Mainy  Gent:  page  l6$

tic  oft  troubled  with  it  (as  is  before  exprefled.)

Diuers  other  reafons  they  vfed  vnfo  me,  to  caufe  me  .
to  fufpeft  the  word  of  my  felfe,and  thefe  as  I think  were
fome  of  them : they  put  me  in  mindc  ofgiuing  ouer  my
fludy  beyond  the  Seas , of  leaning  the  courfc  I had  be-
gun with  the  BonhommeSy  & of  my  more  youthfull  con-
uerfation  fince  my  returne : thefe  and  fuch  like  poynts
they  vfed,  as  arguments  to  conuincc  me,  that  I was  poC-
fefTed . But  I replying  for  my  felfc  as  I could,  and  tel-
ling them  what  a diferedit  it  would  be  vnfo  me,  to  haue
it  reported  of  me,  that  I was  poflefled  with  a deuil,  and
how  it  would  be  a blemifh,  and  a difgrace  vnto  me,whi-
left  1 liued : they  made  little  account  thereofiaying.thac
it  was  a leffe  diferedit,  and  not  fo  hurtful! for  a man  to  haue
to ooo  death  in  him, then  to  haue  committed  one  deadly finnez
and  to  this  purpofe  they  alledged  a place  out  of  Saint
j4ugu$ime( as  farre  as  I remember.)  Bcfides  they  reafoned
with  me,  to  prouc  it  the  fafeft  way  for  me,  to  fubmit  my
fclfe  fo  their  trial!,  whether  I were  poflefled  or  no : for
that  (as  they  faid)  ifthedeuill  were  notinmec,  I could
take  no  hurt  by  theyr  triall,  whereas  if  I were  poflefled,
it  could  not  but  be  very  dangerous  vnfo  mee , that  the
deuill  fhould  Hill  continue  in  me.  By  thefe, and  fuch  like
incanes  they  perfwaded  mcc,  to  yecld  my  felfe  to  be  di-
rc&ed  by  them  for  the  triall  of  my  eftate.  When  they
had  me  at  this  point,  then  they  permitted  mee  to  haue
accefle  vnto  Sara  IVtlhams  when  flic  was  in  her  fits,  and
informed  me  likewife  of  the  manner,  how  fhec , and  o-
thers  had  beene  troubled.

This  courfe  held  with  me,  they  drew  me  fo  confefli-
on,  and  to  promife  that  I would  goe  no  more  to  the
Proteflants  Churches : affirming  that  they  could  doe
me  no  good,  vntilll  was  become  againe  a member  of
the  Catholique  Romaine  Church . After  I had  beene
at  one  or  two  of  Saras  fits,  and  fubmitted  my  felfc  (as  is
before  exprefled)  a pangue  of  my  olde  difeafe  taking

Mm.  hold


page,  2 6$l  The  confefsion  of

hold  on  rac , Ma:  Dibdale  affirmed  publiquely  to  the
company,  that  then  it  was  apparant,  chat  1 was  polled
fed.  Vpon  my  rccouerie  he  told  me,  that  by  applying
of  holy  reliques  vnto  my  belly,  hee  had  compelled  the
wicked  fpint  to  giue  me  eafe : whereas  I neucr  found
benefit  by  any  fuch  things,  but  was  eafed  (as  I had  been
at  other  times  before , when  the  fit  of  the  Mother  left
me)  by  bending  of  my  body  forward , which  is  a caufc
of  breaking  of  wind,and  confequcntly  of  apparant  cafe*
And  heereby  (as  I am  perfwaded)  I was  at  that  time  ea-
fed, & not  by  any  reliques.  Within  a day  or  two  after(as
I remember)  they  told  me,  that  it  was  ncccflary  for  me
to  be  exorcifcd : where  vnto  although  I was  loath  to
yeeld,becaufe  I had  feene  their  manner  of  dealing  there-
in eyther  with  Sara,  or  Frauncis  Williams,  who  by  this
time  was  faid  to  be  all  fo  poficfTed , yet  I had  fubmitted
my  felfe  fo  farre,  that  now  it  was  too  late  for  me  to  draw
backe.  All  things  therefore  being  in  a readines,  and  I 'm
good  health,  and  no  wayes  troubled  with  my  difeafe5
they  bound  me  fad  in  a chayre,  and  fell  to  their  Exor-
cifraes  with  much  folemnity,  and  (hew  of  great  deuoti-
om  Then  they  vrged  me  to  drink  a very  vnpleafant  po-
tion, which  troubled  me  greatly  5 in  fo  much  as  I defired
them  to  vntye  me,  and  giue  me  leaue  to  lye  downe  vp-
pon  my  bed : but  they  regarded  not  my  words,  or  ear-
ned entreaty,  faying : It  was  the  dettill,  and  not  my  felfe
that  defired  fuch  red,  thatfo  he  might  not  be  diflurbed
in  me.  At  other  times  when  they  had  me  bound  in  fuch
like  manner,  befides  the  faid  drinke,  they  vfed  to  burne
brimdonc  vnder  my  nofc,  and  fome  other  things elfe*
which  vexed  me  exceedingly . What  I did,  and  fpakc  at
thofe  times,  I doc  not  now  remember : by  that  which  I
fee  they  haue  written  of  t JWareeood,  Tray  ford,  of  Sara,
& Framed  Williams , I doubt  not  but  many  things  baud
beene  reported  of  me,  which  are  vntrue.  Itisnotvnlike
but  chat  when  I found  my  felfe  fo  entangled  with  them*

‘t.i  . " as


J


■i

. J


Richard  Mainy  Gent:


page


as  that  I could  not  rid  my  felfe  from  them , I did,  and
(pake  many  things  which  wereinconuenient,  & where-
of I think  I Ihould  be  afhamed,if  I did  remember  them*
For  after  I had  learned  their  humour,  and  perceaued  as
wel  by  the  reft,  as  by  mine  own  experience, what  would
content  them,  I framed  my  felfe  accordingly,

Whileft  I was  thus  at  Denham  with  them,  I was  neuer
almoft  fuffered  to  be  quiet : but  eythcr  I was  to  be  exor-
eifed  my  felfe,  or  vrged  to  be  with  Sara , or  her  lifter
Frattncts,  or  kept  priuately  in  my  chamber, and  one  way
or  other  tofled,  and  turmoyled  by  them,  till  at  thelaft
after  fundry  Exorcifmes,and  much  further  trouble  pro-
cured by  their  drinkes:,  & violent  fumigationSjthcy  gauc
it  forth , that  they  had  caft  one  deuil  out  of  me : but
with  fuch  intimation  , as  might  breede  a fufpition  that
there  were  fomc  other  left  in  me . By  this  time  Chrift-
mas  drew  neere,  and  whether  it  was  for  that  they  meant
to  deale  with  Sara  at  Hackney , or  for  what  other  caufe
they  knew  beft,  they  gaue  me  ouer  for  a while,  and  fenc
me  to  Ma iFittons  by  IVind/or , where  Ifuppofe  they
thought  I fhould  be  wcl  looked  vnto,&  ready  afterwads
when  they  Ihould  fend  for  me.

I remayned  at  Ma:  Fittons  till  after  the  end  of  the  holy
dayes  (as  I remember,)  and  being  free  from  their  vexa-
tions, did  folace  my  felfe  with  merrie  company,  as  the
time,  and  occafion  ferued . In  fo  much  as  fome  gaue  it
out,pcraducntureby  the  priefts  procuremenf,tbat  I was
{fill  poffefted  with  a merry  deuil : and  others  faid,that  if
I were  polfcffed  indeede,  it  could  not  otherwife  chooft,
but  that  he  was  a deuifthat  was  not  much  troubled  with
tnclancholly,  or  to  that  effect.  Of  thefc  reports  I heard
nothing  my  felfe,  whileft  I was  at  Ma:  Futons , for  if  I
had , they  would  much  haue  abated  the  edge  of  my
mirth, which  they fpake  of.  But  nowitismeete  to  be
confidcred , how  notably  they  iovned  their  matters  to-
gether . It  greeueth  me  much  that  I am  conftrained  to


Mm.  2,


dcalc


pagc>268


The  confefsion  of

deale  in  thcfe  matters  thus  farre,  but  yet  I fee  that  if  this
occafion  had  not  fallen  out,  Ifhouldncuer  hauefoweli
difccrned  their  dealing  with  me.

Although  they  gaue  it  out,  that  they  had  cad  a deuil
out  of  me  (as  is  before  mentioned)  and  arnongd  many
other  reafons  had  alledged,  that  the  deuill  entred  into
me,  becaufe  I gaue  ouer  the  order  of  the  rBonhommejy  8c
further,  becaule  fomc  might  peraduenture  fufped,  that
notwithdanding  all  that  they  had  either  done  or  faid  of
me,  yet  all  the  difeafe  that  I had  was  but  onely  the  Mo-
ther, now  they  haue  a deuife  to  cleere  all  thefe  poynts3as
it  is  apparam  in  the  faid  booke  fo  often  before  mentio-
ned. On  Monday  the  tenth  o£  January , Sara  Williams
is  pretended  to  haue  a meruailous  great  fit  at  Hackney,
and  amongd  many  other  fpeechcs  which  the  pried  that
cxorcifed  her  then  vfed , hee  commeth  at  lad  to  thcfe :
"There  is  one  (faith  hee  to  the  deuill  as  it  was  pretended)
that  hath  the  Mother , what  fayefi  thou  to  him  ? The  der
uill  zunfjvetethyhatis  a Mother  indeed.  So  hcereby  they
would  make  it  plaine,  that  it  was  not  the  Af other  t hat  I
was  troubled  with.  But  the  pried  goeth  forward  faying,
was  there  any  Jpirit  caJl  out  of  him?  and  the  deuill  aun-
fwered,  yea  a little  oney  hut  to  no  purpofe . So  as  now  they
haue  afufficient  tedimonie,  that  I was  difpofleffcd  of
one  deuill  whild  I was  at  ‘Denham.

Furthermore, it  is  pretended  by  Saras  deuill, that  there
remaincth  dill  in  mec  the  Prince  of  all  other  deuils,
whofc  name  fhould  be  yJA/Lodu , which  gaue  them  mat-
ter enough  to  worke  vpon  againe  with  me . But  yet  all
doubts  were  not  cleered , and  therefore  the  faid  pried
demanded  this  quedion  of  Saras  deuill : fame  the  prince
Modu  (faith  he)  into  him  to  bring  him from  the  houfe  ofS .
Frauncis  de  Paula  his  order  l Tea  in  troth  (quoth  the  de-
tail.) And  thus  they  thought  they  had  fufficiently  iudi-
. fied  all  that  they  had  reported  of  him , asappeareth  by
.the  faid  booke.  But  all  this  notyvuhdanding,  I am  more

- and


Richard  Mainy  Gent:  page,  269

and  more  confirmed  hcereby,  in  my  former  opinion  of
their  bad  proceeding  with  mee , and  the  rather,  becaufc
(as  I ara  informed)  Sara  Williams  vppon  her  oath  hath
denied,  that  euer  fhec  vfed  any  fuch  fpecches  of  mec,  as
farre  as  (he  remembreth.

When  the  (aid  priefts  had  difpatched  their  bufines  at
Hackney,  they  then  returned  towards  mee  , vppon  pre-
tence to  cafi  the  great  Prince  LModu  (as  I fuppofe)  out
of  mee.  I bccing  at  Ma.  Ftttons  (as  is  before  faid)  it  fell
out  that  by  reafon  of  good  company,  Idauncedthat
night  fo  long,  that  I cafl  my  felfe  into  a very  great  fweat,
and  was  weary.  Afterward , whether  before  I went  to
bed,  or  when  I was  in  bed , I doe  not  well  remember,  I
had  a fit  of  the  Mother , as  I haue  had  before,  and  often
times  fince  vppon  fuch  violent  exercifes . It  happened
that  this  night  fom  of  the  faid  priefls  that  were  at  Hack?
itey,  (as  I thinke)  came  fo  Ma*  Fittons  , who  hearing  of
my  fit,  faid  it  was  no  meruaile , for  it  was  confeffed  by
the  dcuill  in  Sara , thatl  had  the  Prince  of  many  deuils
in  me,  or  words  to  that  effeft.  Heereuppon  in  the  mor-
ning one  Midris  AnneCMore  a gentlewoman,  waiting
vpon  Midris  Fitton  came  vnto  me,  and  told  mee  with
weeping  eyes, which  of  the  priefls  were  come  that  night
to  the  houfc,  and  what  they  had  reported  of  mee,  and
how  much  I was  dcceiued,  in  that  I thought  my  felfe  to
be  troubled  with  nothing  but  the  Mother.  I aunfwered
her  (as  if  (he  be  aliue  fhe  can  well  beare  me  wifnes)  that
I knew  very  well,  whatfoeuer  they  faid,  that  the  Mother
was  the  onely  difeafe  wherewith  I was  vexed,  and  that  I
was  free  (I  thanked  GOD)  from  the  polTeffion  of  anic
wicked  fpirit.

All  the  while  they  wrought  vpon  me  before,  I found
no  other  trouble  in  race , but  of  mine  old  griefe  when  I
had  it,  fauing  fuch  paine  as  they  cafl  mec  into  by  theyt
drinkes  and  perfumes.  And  when  they  faid  that  the
deuill  was  cafl  oat  of  mee , yet  I found  my  felfe  neither

Mm3  beeter*


page,27a  The  confcfsion  of

better,  nor  worfe,  which  caufed  me  to  thinke,  that  thoft
things  were  mod  vntrue  which  they  reported  of  me.

I was  fo  confident  hecrein,  that  the  better  to  colour
(as  I thinke)  their  future  proceedings  with  me, they  fent
to  a Phy  fician,one  Do£tor  Griffith,  who  gauc  me, as  it  is
faid  fome  Phyfickc . But  through  their  information  (as
I am  perfwaded)  the  condufion  amongft  them  was, that
there  was  no  naturall  caufe  of  my  difeafe  : and  fo  there
was  no  remedy,  but  I muff  needes  be  pofleffed . Then
it  was  thought  meetethat  Ifhould  be  caried  backea-
gainc,  whether  to  Denham , or  to  Channon-row , I doe
not  wel  remember,  but  rather  (as  I conie&ure)  it  was  to
Denham.  And  for  as  much  as  the  report  was,  that  the
fpirit  fuppofed  to  be  in  me,  was  the  Prince  of  all  the  de-
uils,  which  were  in  the  parties  pofTeffcd  5 Ma:  Edmunds
the  Iefuif,  and  chiefe  of  all  the  pried  s,  that  had  to  dealc
then  in  thefe  a£tions,  was  thought  the  meeteft  man  (as  I
fuppofe)  to  encounter  with  him.  After  that  time,fo  far
as  I remember, none  of  the  priefts  had  to  dcale  with  me,
but  himfclfc,  he  was  my  ghoft ly  Father, and  to  him  (as  it
isgiuen  out)  I reuealed  many  things.

When  he  had  the  managing  of  thefe  mat ters  with  me,
there  was  very  great  refort  to  the  place  where  we  were,
and  a very  extraordinarie  expectation,  (as  I haue  heard)
of  fome  ftrange  cuent  to  fall  out.

The  courfe  which  he  held  with  me  was  much  more
rigorous,  then  at  any  time  before . When  hee  had  me
bound,  if  I did  not  frame  my  felfc  in  cuery  thing  to  his
contentment  (as  fometimes  being  angry  with  his  vfage
ofmc  I thinke  I did  not)  then  he  would  fay,  thedeuil
was  obftinate  in  me*  In  which  cafe  fometimes  I was
conft rained  by  him  to  drinke  moft  loathfomedraughts
offuch  confections  as  he  had  ready  for  me  : andfon>e-
times  they  burnt  fuch  abhominable  (linking,  and/vio-
Jent  things,  holding  my  nofeby  force  ouer  the  fnioake  5
as  (I  think)  would  make  a horfe  mad . No  man  (I  fup-
pofe)


Richard  Mainy  Gcntr

pofe)is  able  fo  endure  fuch  a perfume  without  extreame
torment.  He  dealt  thus  hardly  with  me,  as  I chinke  vp-
pon  pretence  that  the  great  Prince  of  dcuils  that  was  in
me,  would  not  otherwife  be  tamed . I haue  feene  them
fometimes  fo  perfume  Sara  Williams  with  fuch  lyke
fmoakes,  as  her  face  hath  looked  blacker,  then  euer  I
faw  a chimney  fweepers . Which  heates,  and  finels  to-
gether with  their  potions,  did  make  her  to  falkc,&  rage
as  if  Hie  had  beene  mad  . And  the  prieils  would  make
fome  vfe  of eucry  thing  fhe  faid : and  fo  I thinke  I may
by  her  edeeme  of  mine  ownc  cafe, when  they  had  made
me  in  effeft  mad,  no  naeruaile  though  I fpake,  8c  fared
like  a mad  man.

- Being  thus  dealt  with,  I became  very  weake,andfick-
Bic  ♦ Little  raeate  that  I tooke  would  endure  with  me  a-
boue  an  houre  or  two,  and  I was  at  my  wits  end,  what  I
fhould  doe.  The  bed  meaner  that  I could  thinke  of  for
mine  ownc  eafe,  was  to  frame  my  felfc  in  fuch  fort,  as
might  be  moil  agreeable  to  MaiEdmuvds  liking : which
(hen  I began  to  doc  with  fome  extraordinary  care.  I o-
mitted  no  occafion  to  goe  to  confeffion , none  (hewed
more  zeale  at  Made  time,  then  my  felfe : at  the  eleuati-
on  I pretended  to  fee  extraordinarie  light$,as  if  they  had
beene  the  Sunne  beames,  and  that  the  fame  did  fo  ado-
ni(h  me,  as  fometimes  I would  fall  backwards,  when  I
was  kneeling,  as  though  I could  not  endure  the  glitte-
ring of  fo  glorious  a fight : whereas  I protefl  before
God,  I ncuer  faw  indeede  any  fuch  light,  or  was  ado-
nifhed,  but  therein  I did  as  I had  heard  the  prieds  re-
port, that  both  Frauncis,  and  Sara  Williams  had  done
before  me.  And  I doe  verily  thinke,  they  told  me  the
fame  to  no  other  end,  but  that  1 my  felfe  (hould  put  the
fame  in  pra& ife . For  I found  my  felfc  very  apt  to  fol-
low fuch  examples : and  doe  fuppofe,  that  any  being  in
that  cafe,  that  I,  and  the  red  were,  would  a(Tay  to  fpeak.


and  doe  m jhey  (hould  be  cnformed,that  others  in  their


page, 271


1


page,272*  The  confefsion  of

eftate  had  done  or  fpoken.

Of  my  faid  pretended  adonifhmcnts,  Ma:  Edmunds
would  make  large  difcourfes  concerning  the  prefence
of  Chrift  in  the  Sacrament.  And  where  it  is  reported  of
mein  writing,  as  thefe  things  lad  mentioned  arelike-
wife,  that  I did  pretend  to  fee  a glidering  light  come  fr5
the  thumbs,  and  fore-fingers  of  the  priells  at  fundry
times : I cofifefle,it  may  be  that  I haue  fo  affirmed,  ey-
ther  for  that  they  themfelues  haue  asked  me,  if  I did  fee
no  fuch  thing,  or  elfe  haue  told  me,  that  the  red  in  my
cafe  had  feene  fuch  lights,  whereby  I was  induced  to  fay
as  much  of  my  felfe  : whereas  indeede  whatfoeuer  I
faid  thereof,  was  altogether  vntrue . For  I neucr  faw  o-
ther  lights  about  their  thumbs  or  fingers,  then  fuch  as  is
ordinarie  to  all  other  mens  hands,and  fingers.  The  co«
lour  of  the  pretence  of  fuch  lights  (as  1 remember)  was,
for  that  the  prieds  thumbs,  and  fore-fingers  are  anoin-
ted with  holy  oyle(as  I haue  heard)  when  they  arc  made
prieds , and  becaufe  they  doe  with  them  at  Made  time
handle  the  body  of  Chriff.

Eurthermore,I  found  it  did  well  content  Ma.  Edmunds
and  the  red  of  the  prieds,  that  I ffiould  fometimes  rayle
* very  carncdly  both  againd  him , and  the  red  of  his  fel—
lowes  then  prefent,&  generally  againd  all  prieds.  And
that  I ffiould  on  the  contrary  commend  as  carncdly  the
feruice  of  the  protedants , the  Magidratcs , the  Mini*
ders,  and  the  chiefed  in  authorise.  So  I knew  that  Sara
Williams,  and  the  red  had  done,  and  fb  I did  my  fclfe.n©
doubt  as  artificially  as  any  of  them , if  not  in  better  fort.;
For  wee  all  knew  how  they  would  expound  them  for
theyr  owne  glory,  in  that  the  deuils  (as  they  pretended)
could  not  endure  them : and  to  the  great  diferedite  of
the  other  fide,  becaufe  the  deuils  extolled  them  as  theyr
louing  friends.  And  certaine  it  is  that  the  Catholiques
that  were  prefent  to  my  vnderdanding , did  fake  great
contentment  by  fuch  our  (peechcs , and  their  expofiti*
V * ons


Richard  Maitiy  Gent:  page,  27$

onsofthem.  By  this  my  readmes  to  doe,  andfpeafcc
vvhatfoeucr  I found  that  Ma.  Edmunds  liked , I efcaped
fomctimes(asIthinkc)theyrlothfomedrinkSj  and  in-
tolerable fumigations.

After  foine  time  thus  fpent  with  mee  at  Denham,  (as  I
fuppofc)  I was  carried  to  the  Earle  o tLincolnes  houfe  in
1 Channon-row , where  my  brother,  and  his  wife  were  as  I
remember:  I was  then  not  pad  16  orizyeercs  oldas
farre  as  I can  geffe , and  therefore  (to  fpeakc  a little  in
mine  ownc  excufe)  no  meruaile,  all  circumffances  dulic
confidered,  that  I was  drawnebv  the  cunning  pra&ifes
of  the  faid  pried  s,  into  thefe  dilfembling  courfes  which
now  I vtterly  diflike,  and  deteft.  I am  fully  perfwaded,
that  there  is  ncuer  a youth  in  England,  were  he  of  neuer
fo  ripe  and  pregnant  a wit,  but  if  he  fhould  fall  info  the
hands  of  fuch  prieds,  he  would  in  a fliort  time  be  fo  be-
witched by  them,  as  that  hcc  would  be  foonc  drawne  to
ftoope  to  their  lure,  and  doc  as  I did.

When  I was  going,  and  come  to  Channcn-ron> , I was
very  much  grieued  and  in  fcare  (as  far  as  I remember)
oftheyr  further  proceedings  withmec.  For  I was  then
brought  to  fuch  weakencs,  as  I was  fcarce  able  fo  goe  a-
lone,  vnlefle  I werevphcld.  We  were  no  fooner  come
thether,  but  that  there  was  great  concourfe  of  many  Ca-
tho:  to  fee  (as I thinke)  thecuent  of  things:  efpecially.
bccaufe  Ma.  Edmunds,  a roan  of  great  account  amongft
them,  was  the  oncly  dealer  in  efFeft  with  me . By  thofe
things  which  I find  written , and  reported  of  mee , and
which  I had  otherwife  forgotten  of  my  felfc,at  my  com-
ming  to  fliannon-row,  I did  pretend  fome  traunccs,  and
in  them  to  hauc  fundry  vifions,  into  which  courfe  I was
led  (as  I am  fully  perfwaded)  by  fome  fpeeches  of  the
priefts,  whom  I had  oft  heard  talke  how  Sara  Williams ,
anddiuers  others,  had  many  times  certaine  traunccs:
wherein  they  lay  as  if  they  had  beene  fencelcfle , and  in
them  had  fundry  vifions,  which  vppon  theyr  rccouerie
^ ' -N11.  they


page, 274*  The  confefsion  of

they  did  vfoally  fell  vnto  the  pricQs , and  diuers  others,
whereupon  I verily  thinke , that  the  firft  Sunday  after  I
came  to  (Shannon-row,  (as  aforefaid)  I fained  my  felfe  to
be  in  a trauncc,  and  afterwards  told  Ala.  Edmunds  many
tales  of  my  beeing  all  that  time.in  Purgatory,  and  what
I had  feene,  and  indured  there . I alfo  told  him  at  that
time  (as  farre  as  I remember)  thatlperceiucd  by  one  of
thevifions  which  I then  had,  howl  was  euery  Sunday
to  hauethe  like  traunces,  and  vifions  about  the  fame
houres,  vntill  Cjood-frtday  next  enfuing , and  that  then  I
(hould  depart  in  a trauncc  out  of  this  life , and  got  im-
mediacy into  heauen.

There  are  diuers  things  further  reported  of  mee  as
touching  thefe  my  pretended  traunces,  and  vifions,  (as
that  after  I fhewed  my  felfe  to  be  recouered , I did  fore-
tell of  great  afflictions,  and  perfections , which  (hould
happen  to  the  Catholicjues  in  England , and  of  fundry
fuch  matters)  but  whether  they  be  true  or  no , I doe  not
remember.  If  I vfed  any  fuch  words , either  Ala,  Ed -
munds,  or  fomc  of  the  reft  induced  mee  thereunto,  by
(ome  of  their  leading  questions , or  I had  heard  them  be-
fore fpcake  themfelues  to  that  effcCI : or  elfe  the  report
is  altogether  falfe , and  deurfed  by  themfelues  to  ferue
theyr  owne  turncs : for  of  my  felfe  I doe  not  belieuc
.that  I had  any  apprehenfion  of  any  fuch  matters.

It  is  written  alfo  of  mee , how  after  fome  other  of  my
pretended  traunces  and  vifions,  I vfed  diuers  times  to
fall  info  flrange  exclamations,  making  the  company  to
belieue,  that  1 faw  Chrift  himfelfe,  accompanied  with  a
number  of  Angels  in  fuch  a corner  of  the  chamber,  and
at  other  times  the  virgin  CTWary,  attended  with  a trayne
of  blefled  virgins,  and  that  thereupon  my  manner  was
to  vrge  them  that  were  prefent,to  fall  dowrte  vpon  theit
knees  to  worfflip  them,  and  to  pray  vntothem.  Thefe
things  I doe  in  fome  fort  remember,  and  doc  partly  be-
lieue them  to  be  true,  becaufel  well  remember, that  vp-

pon


Richard  Mainy  Gent:  page

pon  my  (aid  motions  , and  vrging  of  them , both  Ma.
Edmunds , and  the  reft , did  vfually  lift  vp  their  hands,
now  in  this  corner,  now  in  that  corner,  and  prayed  vp-
pon  theyr  knees,  with  tlieyr  hands  holden  vp,as  though
Chrift,  and  the  virgine  C Mary  had  bcenc  there  indeed.
Whereas  I doe  faithfully  avow  it,  that  I neuerfaw  any
fuch  fights,  but  did  therein  frame  my  fetfe  to  doe  as  I had
heard  by  the  priefts  and  others,  that  SaraJVtlhams , and
the  reft  had  done  before  mee.  And  I doe  belieuc  that
JVla.  Edmunds  himfclf$knew  as  much,  and  that  hee  did
but  feeme  to  worship , (as  is  before  exprefted)  thereby
to  induce  the  reft  of  the  company  fo  to  doc.

It  feemeth  that  Ma.  Edmunds  hath  written  along  di£
courfc  of  about  a quire  of  paper,  of  all  my  faid  preten-
ded traunces  and  vifions , and  it  may  be  likewife  of  all
the  reft  of  the  proceedings  held  with  me,  cyther  by  him
iclfe,  or  the  reft  of  the  priefts : if  euer  thatbooke  come
to  further  light,  fo  as  any  in  authority  doe  take  notice  of
it,  I will  be  ready  (if  I be  called  thereunto ) to  giue  my
aunfwere  truly  to  all  the  parriculers , (o  farre  foorth  as  I
fball  remember  In  the  meane  time,  as  touching  all  my
pretended  vifions  in  generall,  (of  my  fufferings  in  Pur-
gatory, and  the  reft)  they  were  all  feigned  by  mee,  fo
pleafe  Fa:  Edmunds , and  it  may  be  to  gaine  to  my  felfe  a
little  foolilli  commendation,  or  admiration , becaufel
faw  how  the  Catholiques  that  heard  of  them,  and  were
prefent  at  many  of  my  fond  fpecches,did  feeme  to  won-
der at  me,

When  (jood-friday  came , there  was  great  refort  to
the  faid  houfe  where  I was : and  of  my  bebauiour  that
day,aprieft  (I  perceiue)  hath  written  at  large . Of  my
felfe  I fhould  haue  remembred  little  that  did  happen  at
that  time  , but  beeing  vrged  fo  aunfwer  fomething  to
that  which  is  written  of  me,  I will  firft  fet  downe  the  au-
thors owne  words.

Lying  (faith  he)  that  day  vpo  his  bed,  he  made  ( as  it  were )

Nn  z a


pagc,2?6*  The  confefsion  of

a folemne  exhortation , and  telling  the  Catho liquet  prefent  t
that  Ins  home  was  now  cowe , hee  willed  them  to  continue
conttant  in  their  profeffiony faying  that  they  were  yet  to  in*
dure  the  hunt  of  many  p er fe  cut  ions , howbeity  they  that  per -
feueredvnto  the  end,  fhould  be  faued:  and  fo  falling  from  his.
exhortations  vnto  prayer , he  defined  all  the  company  to  pray
with  him : whereupon  hee  began  to  recite  the  Letanie,  and
they  that  were  prefent, followed  in  amfwering  of  him,  euery
pcrfon  prefent  beeing  mooued  to  great  de notion . Thus  con*
timing  for  a while , he  then  feemed  fyfali  into  a flumber , and
after  that  into  a traunce, which  indured  aboue  two  homes  \fo
as  many  that  were  prefent , did  verily  beheue  he  would  neuer
bane  awaked  againe , but  in  the  fame  haue  giuen  vp  the
ghofl.  ^At  the  iaff , of  himfelfe  hee  did  awake  y fetching  a
great figh,  and  agroane , and  then  vfed  thefe  words : My
time  is  not  yet  come  : our  blefled  Lady  hath  appeared
vnto  me,  and  told  mee  that  I mud  liue  longer  yet : for
that  God  hath  referued  me  for  a further  purpofe  to  doc
more  good,  and  f o tell  of  drange  wonders . 'With  that
there  began  to  be  a great  muttering  among  the  company  {ma-
ny greatly  mer nailing  what  this  fhould  meane . Whereuppon
Fa:  Edmunds  made  an  exhortation  to  thofe  that  were  pre-
fent, and  told  them , that  he  thought  it  conuenient  to  prolong
the  time  no  longer , but  to  fall  to  exerctfng  of  him , whereby
they  fhould  perceiue,  whether  all  were  true  that  hee  had  re - ,1

ported  vnto  them , or  whether  it  had  beene  the  enemy  that
fought  to  delude  them.

• Thus  farre  the  pried,  whofe  report  (I  thinkc)  is  true
in  fubdance,  though  peraduenture  he  may  erre  in  fomc
circum  dance : but  my  memory  is  not  fo  good,  as  chat  I
am  able  to  controll  him  in  any  particuler,  and  therefore
I wil  let  it  paflc  as  it  goeth . The  fault  is  not  mine,  that
thefe  things  are  thus  pubh/hed  . What  rnoued  me  to
pretend  that  I fhould  dievpon  Good  Friday,  I cannot
fee  downe  d;re<5tly : but  fure  I am  the  deuife  was  boyiflb,
and  feolifh,  and  very  futabie  (as  1 thinkc)  to  die  red  of

my


Richard  Mainy  Gent:

sny  procccdings3bcmg  greatly  befotted  by  thcm,as  may
appeare  by  my  whole  couife,  and  by  their  dealings  with
me.  As  farre  as  1 can  gefle  my  fimple  drift  therein  was,
that  when  it  fhould  beapparant,  that  I had  lycd  vnto
them , they  would  for  fhame  bauc  then  difmiffed  me
from  them  : for  there  was  nothing  in  the  world  that  I
defired  more.But  I found  I was  deceaued  in  my  fimple
plot,  6c  doe  now  perccaue  by  the  faid  priefts  words, that
Ma:  Edmunds  was  prouided,  how  to  falue  the  matter,  if
the  worft  fell  out.  God  knoweth  whether  he  fuppofed,
that  I would  haue  taken  fome  courfc,  to  haue  fhortned
mine  ownc  time  againft  that  day, as  conftrained  in  fomc
fort  there-vnto  by  the  great  weakcne$,and  indeede  wca-
rines  of  my  life, where-  vnto  he,and  the  reft  had  brought
me : but  I wil  judge  the  beft  . This  oncly  I perccaue,
that  when  he  found  my  fimple  plot,  he  was  ready  to  in-
finuate  to  the  Catholiques  prefent,thac  out  of  doubt  the
report  that  I made  of  my  death , was  but  an  illufion  of
Sathan ; and  this  mud  be  made  manifeft  out  of  hand  by
an  Exorcifme : for  as  the  faid  prieft  hath  in  writing  re-
ported (although  I my  felfe  had  forgotten  it)  being  a-
gainc  exorcifed  in  the  prefence  of  all  the  company,  be-
fore they  departed  I (hewed  no  fignes  of  any  diftemper,
but  rather  of  great  deuotion,  and  piety : whereby  Ma:
Edmund ) colle<fted,that  out  of  all  queftion  it  was  Sathan
in  me  that  faid  I (hould  dievpon  Good  Friday,  andfo  the
company  departed  very  well  fatisfied  . If  he  had  giuen
meat  that  time  his  holy  potion,  and  perfumed  my  noftj
with  brimftone,  Ajfa  fatida,  and  1 know  not  what  other
vile  fmell  (as  before  he  had  done)  I (hould  not  furcly
haue  beene  fo  quiet : but  he  had  another  drift,  as  wel  it
appearcth.

From  the  faid  Goodfriday , for  ought  I remember,  vn-
till  the  three,  and  twentith  of  April  (w  hich  was  then  S.
Georges  & ay,)  ^AtvEdmunds  fuffered  me  to  be  quiet,  I
diinke  now  to  gather  fome  ftrength,  and  imagined  rhea

Na3»  tha*


Page  277


page, 27  8.  The  confefsion  of

that  he  would  neuerhaue  troubled  me  further.  But  it
4 fell  out  that  a day  or  two  before  Saint  Georges  day  (as  it

fhould  feeme)  that  I had  againc  a fit  of  the  C jifother,
whcrc-vpon  they  tookeoccafion  tohaue  mein  hand-
ling againc,  for  as  they  faid  Modu  the  Prince  of  deuils
was  yet  in  me:  and  now  they  pretended  (as  Ircmem-
ber)to  do  the  beft  they  could  to  caff  him  out  of  me,that
fo  I might  be  rid  for  altogether.

Ma:  £dmundst  and  the  reft  dealt  with  me  at  this  time
very  extreamely,  and  I muft  confefte  that  in  hope  to  be
116 w difpatched , I bent  my  felfe  (as  farre  as  poflibly  I
could)  to  faine , and  affirme  euery  thing  that  I pcrcea-
ued  they  expe&ed  at  my  hands*  But  what  I then  did  or
faid,  if  I ftiould  hauc  beene  tortured  vpon  the  rack  (had
I not  fecne  what  was  publifhed  in  writing  of  me  at  that
time)  I could  not  now  haue  remembred  fo  many  parti*
culers.  After  that  Ma:  £dmunds  had  exorcifcd,and  per-
fumed me  (as  often-times  he  had  done  before)  the  dcuil
that  had  lyen  fecret  long  in  me  (as  the  writing  faith)  be-
gan to  appearc.But  I wil  fctxlowne  the  effeft  of  the  faid
priefts  reports  as  touching  this  matter.

By  commaundement  of  the  Exorcifl  (which  was  Ma:
Edmunds ) the  deuill  in  A fa:  Mainy  confe fifed  his  name  to  he  -
Modu,  and  that  he  had  befides  himfelfe  feauen  other  jpirits ,
all  of  them  Cap  tames,  and  of  great  fame . There-vpon  Ma:
Edmunds  commamded  that  euery  one  of  the  feauen  fhould
come  vp  in  their  degrees  one  after  another, and  to  declare  his
name  by  his prtncipall  quality.  Then  C Jlfa:  Mainy  by  the  in*
ftigation  of  the  fir  FI  of the feauen , began  to  fet  his  hands  vnto
his  fide,  curled  bis  hair e,  andvfed  fuch geFlures,  aszJMa:
Edmunds prefently  affirmed , that  that  fipir it  was  Pride*
lie  ere-  with  he  began  to  cur  fie,  and  banne , faying:  What  a
poxe  doe  I heere  ? I wil  ftay  no  longer  amongft  a com-
pany of  rafcall  Priefts,  but  goe  fo  the  Court,  and  braue
it  amongft  my  fellowes,the  noble  men  there  aflcmbled.
t/fnd  then  after  Ma:  Edmunds  had faid}  that  heef jewed

him -


Richard  Mairry  Gent*  Page>279

himfelfie  thereby  to  be  the [pint  of  Pride : he  went  downe  a -
game,  and  UWa:  Mainy  became  very  quiet,  and  fell  to  his
prayers . But  Ma:  Mainy  could  not  tell  one  word  ( as  he  re-
ported) of  any  thing  that  had  beene  then  /aid,  onely  he  affir-
med, that  he  had  all  the  while  felt  a great  paine  in  his  body .

Then  Ma:  Edmunds  did  proceede  againe  with  his  Exor -
ctfmes,  and fuddatnly  the  fences  of  Mainy  ivere  taken  from
him , his  belly  beganto  f well \ and  his  eyes  to  flare , and fud-
datnly cryed out , fen  pounds  in  the  hundred,  he  called for
a Scriuener  to  make  a bond , [wearing  that  hee  would  not
lend  his  money  without  apawne . C JWa:  Edmunds  de-
maunding  of  that  deuill , whether  he  were  the  fame  that  had
fpoken  before,  hefaidno  . Tut  yet  affirmed , that  hee  was  a
good fellow  , and  a companion  of  his  , and  one  that  bare  as
great  rule  in  £ ngland  as  any  other  deuill . There  could  be  no
other  talke  had  of  this  Jptrit , but  ofmony  , bargaining,  and
vfury : fo  as  all  the  company  deemed  this  deuill  to  be  the  au-
thor 0/Couefoufne{Ie,?wr  expetting  any  tnttruttion  there-
in from  Fa:  Edmunds,  asdfter  a while  this  deuill goeth
downe  as  the  other  did.  C *Ma.  Mainy  recouereth  his  fences ,
falletk  to  his  prayers,  and  erelong  Cj^/^Edmunds  begin-
neth  againe  his  £xor  ctfmes,  wherein  hee  had  not  proceeded
farre,  but  vp  commeth  another  fpirit,finging  mott  filthy  and
bauay  fongs : euery  word  almott  that  hee (pake,  was  nothing
‘ but  ribaldry  . They  that  were  prefent>  with  one  voyce  affir-
med that  deuill  to  be  the  author  0/ Luxury.  Sind  Ma.  Ed-
munds beeing  not  able  to  endure finch  lewdfpeeches , com-
maunded  him  to  be  filent , and  to  get  him  downe  forthwith  a-
gaine.Tbe  deuill  obeyed : Ma.  Mainy  recouereth,falleth  to
ins  prayers,  and  afterwards  Ma.  Edmunds  goeth  forward
with  the  resl.  zsfnd  thus  he  did  proceed,  till  he  had  raifed  vp
all  the  feauen  Captaines,  and  compelled  them  to  [hew  them-
felues  as  the  other  had  doone . Enuy  was  deferibed  by  dif-
dainfull  lookes,  and  contemptuous  Jpeeches.  Wrath  by  furi-
ous gettures  , and  talke  as  though  hee  would  haue  fought.

Gluttony  by  vomiting : and  Sloth  by  gaping  and f nor  ting.


page,2So  The  confefsion  of

as  if  hee  had  bee ne  a Jleepe.  Afa,  Mainy  at  entry  time  reed*
tiering  his  fences  t and falling  to  prayer  as  he  had  done  before .
tsdfter  thefe  feanen  detnls  had  thus  /hewed  them/elues,  and
were  againe  at  refl  in  Afa,  Mainy , it  feemedgood  to  Afa,
Edmunds  to  try  what  he  could  doe  with  Modu  their  prince
and  Captaine.  He  beginneth  aoaine  his  exorcifmes , and  con-
tinued the  fame , till  after  a while  the  faid  Modu  rofe  zip  a-
gaine,  and  asked  Ada.  Edmunds  how  ftee  liked  his  7.  Bre-  j
thren  before  metioned , who  had  appeared  one  after  another  l
(tAnd  furthermore  hee  fell  a curfing , and  faid : A pox  on
you  all  For  popifh  priefts.  My  fellowes  the  proteftants
can  make  very  much  of  my  faid  Brethren,  8c  giue  them
good  entertainment,  bidding  them  welcome  whenfoe-
theycomc  : but  you  feuruy  priefts  can  neither  abide
them  your  felues.,  nor  fuller  them  to  be  quiet  whenfoe-
uer  you  are  conuerfant . Heereunto  Afa.  Edmunds  aun -
fwered , that  they  would  be  enemies  both  to  him  , and
them  all  during  their  hues,  z/fnd  comm  aunded  both  him%
and  the  refl  of  his  companions  for  to  depart  out  of  Afa.  Mai*
ny,  vrging  them  with  fuch  fe  uer  all  adiurations  , as  are  fet
downe  to  that  purpofe  in  the  booke  of  Exorcifmes,  JVhilfl  he
was  thus  proceeding  with  him , he  required  Modu  by  the  au-
thority of  his  Erie  ft  hood , and  power  left  by  (fthriH  in  the  Ca-
tholicjue  Romane  Church  , to  tell  him  truly  concerning  thefe
viftons  that  appeared  vnto  Mainy : with  that  the  deuid  tn  '
Mainy  fell  out  into  a great  laughter , faying  that  it  had
doone  him  very  much  good , that  he  had  coofencd
fo  many  priefts,  and  made  all  the  company  for  to  wor-
ship him : For  (faith  hee)  all  that  time  that  you  and  the
reft  feemed  to  pray  vnto  Chrift , and  vnto  Saffronbag , it
was  I,  and  all  my  copany  that  you  worfhipped*  Heere*
with  LAfa. Edmunds  be  eing  greatly  mooued>defiedhimt  &
faid  that  they  had  no  intention  ofworfbipping  him  : and  that
if  any  were  fo  deceiued,  it  was  of  ignorance,  and  that  his  tor-
ments fhould  be  the  greater  for  fo  intolerable  an  tllufion.
Then  CMa,  Edmunds  began  againe  his  exorcifmes  with

great


Richard  Mainy  Genr:  page

frent  earneflncs  ,and  all  the  company  cried  out  vpon  God , the
tie  fed  virgin , 5.  George,  and  all  i he  company  of  heaven  to
helpe , and fuccour  them  in  that  holy  attion , Jo  as  both  that
Wicked  'Prince  Modu,  and  all  his  company  might  be  cadi  out
of  A/a:  Mainy.  tsfnd  accordingly  Cjod  heard  their  prayers ,
for  Jhertly  after  they  were  all  c aft  forth,  and  that  in fuch  fort
as  A/a:  Edmunds  dtreEled  them : which  was  ghat  every  de-
mil  fhould depart  in  Jome  certaine  forme r reprefenting  either
a beafl , or  Jome  other  creature  ,that  had  refemblance  of  that
fane,  whereof  he  was  the  chiefe  Author . JVhere-vpon  the
jpirit  of  Pride  departed  in  the  forme  of  a Peacock,  The  jpi-
rit  of  Sloth  in  the  likenes  of  an  Afle  ; the  jpirit  tf/Enuie  in
the  pmihtude  of  a Dog  : the  jpirit  of  Gluttony  in  the
forme  of  a Wolfe  : and  the  other  devils  had  alfo  in  their  de-
parture their  particuler  hkenejjes  agreeable  to  their  na-
tures•

Hctherto  the  Author  of  the  faid  Treatife , though  in
fome  more  words,  yet  to  this  effeft  . Concerning  the
which  report,  the  world  mud  needes  beare  me  witnes,
if  euer  it  come  to  their publique  view,  that  I haue  great
caufc  to  blame  them , for  making  of  thefe  things  com-
mon, which  were  wrought  by  themfelues  in  priuate,  Co
much  to  my  diferedite.  My  charity  fhall  deferue  very
great  commendations  as  1 thinke , if  I doe  not  hereafter
feeke  to  be  reucngcd,both  vpon  Ma:  Edmunds , and  the
reft,  that  haue  thus  dealt  with  me . But  to  the  matter  it
fclfe  as  I am  required  ♦ It  is  very  likely  that  vpon  Saint
(jeorges  day  here  mentioned,  I railed  againft  the  priefts,
and  fpakc  of  the  Court,  as  that  time  gaue  occafion.  But'

I doc  verily  thinke  that  I vfed  the  faid  fpceches,  as  being
led  vnto  them  by  fome  words  vttered  cyther  by  the
priefts,  or  by  fome  in  the  company,  and  that  they  had
fome  farther  drift  then  I doc  know  of,  in  appoynting
that  day  for  their  dealings  with  me.

And  touching  my  dcJajbingofthe  faid  feauen  deuils
by  fignes,  and  geftures,  fignifying  the  feauen  deadly

O Oc  Knncse


page,  2&*  The  confcFsion  of

finnes.  I doe  wel  remember  that  1 vfed  fbree  fuch  like
geftures  to  that  end , but  I am  perfwaded  that  they  are
hecre  Ctt  downp  in  farre  berter  fort  then  I did  a&  them,
as  their  vfuall  manner  was  in  reporting  of  any  thin^rhat^
wasdoneeyther  by  me,  or  any  of  the  reft.  They  would
make  a fairc  tale  of  any  thing , though  it  were  ncuer  fo
Ample,  that  any  of  vs  did  orfaid.  But  for  mine  owne
part,  how  I fliould  be  able  to  deferibe  the  faid  finnes,
though  it  were  neuer  fo  Ample,  I cannot  direftly  aun-
fwer,  This  onely  I think, and  am  perfwaded  in  my  con-
fidence , that  what  I did  therein,  1 was  cy thcr  led  vnto  it
by  fqmc  of  the  P rie  ft  $ wilm&utsg  questions)  or  elfc  I had
beenetold  before , that  others  in  my  cafe  had  deferibed
fuch  dcuils  bv  fuch  geftures,  that  did  fignifie  fuch,  and
fuch  Ennes,  For  being  not  then  fully  xvi  j.  yeeres  of  age,
as  I take  it,  I doe  not  thinke  that  any  fuch  things  would
cjuer  hauecome  into  my  head  , if  1 had  not  bcene  cun-
ningly  inftrufted.

It  feemerh  ftrange  vnto  me,  when  I remember  diuers
thingsconcerning  thefe matters,  as  I may  fay  of  my  fclf,
fol  haucbeene  informedconcerningthereft,  that  ey-
tber  bad  bcene,  or  were  then  in  my  cafe.  Wee  were  ne-
wer fuffered  to  be  quiet : few  nights  efcaped,  but  cither
Miftris  ‘Teckfjamvihtn  flic  was  prefent , or  Miftris  P la-
ter, orfome  other  of  the  women,  where  we  remained,
would  he  with  vs , eythcr  to  bring  vs  newes  feuerally,
what  each  of  vs  had  done  or  faid  apart,  when  we  were
exorcifed  the  day  before  : or  elfc  to  tell  vs  ftrange  tales,
whichthey  faid  they  had  heard  of  feme  of  the  priefts,
concerning  diuers  things  which  had  becne  done,  and
fpoken  by  fuch,  as  had  beerve  poftefTcd  in  other  Coun-
tries : whether  they  did  thus  by  the  dire&ion  of  the
priefts  or  no,  I cannot  tcilr  but  I verily  beleeuc, that  wee
all  of  vs  learned  thereby todoe  many  things*  which  o-
therwife  we  /houldneucr  haue  thought  of . And  whe-
ther I learned  from  them  the  skill  I bad  to  doc  the  ge-

, - * fturcs


RichardMainy  Gent:  page,  285

flurcs  before  mentioned,I  know  not, it  may  be  I did.

And  as  I aunfwer  to  this  point,  fo  doe  I vnfo  that  o-
tber,  as  touching  the  dcuils  fuppofed  fimilitudes  in  their
pretended  departing  out  of  me . Eytherit  is  altogether
f*ife,and  dcuifed  by  themfelues,  or  elfc  they  led  me  to
fay  fo  by  their  queftions.  As  if  they  asked  me , whether
Pride  did  not  depart  from  mein  the  hkeneffe  of  a Pea*
cockpit  is  very  probable  that  I faid  he  did . And  fo  of  all
the  reft,  or  otherwife  they  fold  fomc  in  my  hearing,  that
fuch  dcuils  did  vfe  to  depart  from  fuch,as  they  pofleffed
in  fuch  kindc  of  formes : I pray  God  forgiue  them  for
all  their  bad  dealings  with  me . My  chiefe  comfort  is,
that  as  I faid  in  the  beginning,  lam  fully  perfwaded  that
I was  neuer  pofTeffcd,and  that  all  I did  or  fpakc,I  did  if,
andfpakcitmy  fclfe,  being  fometimes  enforced,  and
fometimes  induced  fo  to  doe , as  before  I haue  mentio-
ned . And  alfo  that  the  moft  of  thofe  things  which  are
written  of  me,  are  eythcr  vtterly  falfe,  or  greatly  altered
in  the  telling.  And  that  the  priefts  themfelues  that  dealt
arcof  right  fo  beare  the  blame  for  that  which
eyther  I or  any  of  the  reft  faid  or  did,  that  might  giue  a-
ny  iu  ft  caufe  of  offence,  eythcr  to  her  Maicftic,  or  the
ftate  heere  in  England.

Vpon  my  fpeeches  before  mentioned  fo  the  Lord
Strange  % the  priefts,  and  others,  efpecially  thofe  that  fa-
uour  Ma:  Edmunds  as  I thinke,  did  giue  it  out  that  I was
ftin  poffctfech  And  I doubtnotbutifatany  timethey
vnderftand  of  this  my  confeflion,  it  wil  be  faid  that  now
1 haue  many  dcuils  in  me . I had  forgotten  to  fet  downc
how  I haue  had  a long  time  an  ache  in  one  of  my  knees,
which  I thinke  I got  whe  I was  a child  by  a cold,&  how
when  I fold  the  priefts  of  it  firft,  they  vfed  that  for  one
argument  to  proue  that  I was  poffefled  : faying,  that  it
was  very  likely  that  the  deuil  kept  about  that  place,  Alfb
I fearc  I fhall  be  troubled  with  my  old  difeafe  as  I haue
before  faid  * So  as  if  they  fhall  determine  to  hold  on  fo

Oo.  2.  wicked


page,:S4  ’ The  confefsion  of,  kcl

wicked  a courfe,  they  are  like  to  haue  the  fame  cattles  to
lay  that  I am  dill  polTellcd,  that  they  had  before*  Bull
hope  they  wil  not  dare  to  prcluroe  to  haue  any  further
dealing  with  roe , and  that  God  will  deliuer  me  from
them  • And  this  is  all  I can  lav  to  all  fuch  points,  and
matters  as  haue  beene  propounded  vnto  me*

T^tchard  L/l&wy.


FINIS.


Errata.

p Age  f,  line  17, for  continue,  readc  eontriue.

Page  1 6 , line  6 , tor  Rat,  r cade  Cat.

Page  io,  line  3 6,  for  hope,  readc  two.

Page  9Si  lioc  35,  tor  confcruation,  reade  confccraoen.


« '


*


B-

‘


7


l

t,  ■ :


.

*


of  'SwAh  1

|f&j

